LETTER I. 
To Mr. • • • ♦, Merchant in London. 




[OURS of the I3tb instant, covering two 
IhUs, one on Messis. R. and D. value 
;f 478 lOf. and the other on Mr. * * * *, 
value ;f 285, dtdy came to hand, the 
former of which met with honour, but the other 
has been trifled with, and I am afraid will be 
returned protested. 

The bearer of this is my friend, therefore let 
him be yours. He is a native of Honan in China, 
and one who did me signal services when he was 
a mandarine, and I a factor at Canton. By fre- 
quently conversing with the English there, he has 
I. B 



2 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

learned the language, though he is entirely a 
stranger to their manners and customs. I am told 
he is a philosopher, I am sure he is an honest 
man; that to you will be his best recommenda- 
tion, next to the consideration of his being the 
friend of, Sir, 

Yours, &c. 




Letter ii. 

Lond. From Lien Chi Altangi w * * * *, 
Merchant in Amsterdam. 

Friend of my Heart, 

\A Y the wings of peace rest upon thy 
dwellings and the shield of conscience 
preserve thee from vice and misery : for 
all thy favours accept my gratitude and 
esteem, the only tributes a poor philosophic wan- 
derer can return ; sure fortune is resolved to make 
me unhappy, when she gives others a power of 
testif3nng their friendship by actions, and leaves 
me only words to express the sincerity of mine. 

I am perfectly sensible of the delicacy with 
which you endeavour to lessen your own merit 
and my obligations. By calling your late instances 
of friendship only a return for former favours, you 
would induce me to impute to your justice what I 
owe to your generosity. 

The services I did you at Canton, justice, hu- 
manity, and my office bade me perform ; those you 
have done me since my arrival at Amsterdam, no 
laws obliged you to, no justice required, even half 



THR CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 3 

your fkvours would have been greater than my 
most sanguine expectations. 

The sum of money therefore which you privately 
conveyed into my baggage, when I was leaving 
Holland, and which I was ignorant of till my 
arrival in London, I must beg leave to return. 
You have been bred a merchant, and I a scholar ; 
you consequently love money better than I. You 
can find pleasure in superfluity, I am perfectly 
content with what is sufficient; take therefore 
what is yours, it may give you some pleasure, eveil 
though you have no occasion to use it ; my happi- 
ness it cannot improve, for I haVe already all that 
I want. 

My passage by sea from Rotterdam to England, 
was more painful to me than all the joumies I ever 
made on land. I have traversed the inmieasurable 
wilds of Mogul Tartary; felt all the rigours of 
Siberian skies ; I have had my repose an hundred 
times disturbed by invading savages, and have 
seen without shrinking the desert sands rise like 
a troubled ocean all around me; against these 
calamities I was armed with resolution ; but in my 
passage to England, though nothing occurred that 
gave the mariners any uneasiness, to one who was 
never at sea before, all was a subject of astonish- 
ment and terror. To find the land disappear, to see 
our ship mount the waves swift as an arrow from 
the Tartar bow, to hear the wind howling through 
the cordage, to feel a sickness which depresses 
even the spirits of the brave ; these were unex- 
pected distresses, and consequently assaulted me 
unprepared to receive them. 

You men of Europe think nothing of a voyage 



4 THB CITIZEN OF tHE WORLD, 

by sea. With us of China, a man who has been 
from sight of land is regarded upon his return with 
admiration. I have known some provinces where 
there is not even a name for the ocean. What a 
strange people therefore am I got amongst, who 
have founded an empire on this unstable element, 
who build cities upon billows that rise higher than 
the mountains of Tipartala, and make the deep 
more formidable than the wildest tempest. 

Such accounts as these, I must confess, were 
my first motives for seeing England. These in- 
duced me to undertake a journey of seven hundred 
painful days, in order to examine its opulence, 
buildings, sciences, arts and manufactures on the 
spot. Judge then my disappointment on entering 
London, to see no signs of that opulence so much 
talked of abroad ; wherever I turn, I am presented 
with a gloomy solemnity in the houses, the streets 
and the inhabitants ; none of that beautiful gilding 
which makes a principal ornament in Chinese 
architecture. The streets of Nankin are some- 
times strewed with gold leaf; very different are 
those of London : in the midst of their pavements, 
a great lazy puddle moves muddily along ; heavy 
laden machines with wheels of unwieldy thickness 
crowd up every passage ; so that a stranger, in- 
stead of finding time for observation, is often 
happy if he has time to escape from being crushed 
to pieces. 

The houses borrow very few ornaments from 
architecture ; their chief decoration seems to be a 
paltry piece of painting, hung out at their doors or 
windows, at once a proof of their indigence and 
vanity. Their vanity, in each paving one of those 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, s 

pictures exposed to public view; and their indi- 
gence, in being unable to get them better painted. 
In this respect, the feuicy of their painters is also 
deplorable. Could you believe it? I have seen 
five black lions and three blue boars in less than 
the circuit of half a mile ; and yet you know that 
animals of these colours are no where to be found 
except in the wild imaginations of Europe. 

From these circumstances in their buildings, and 
from the dismal looks of the inhabitants, I am 
induced to conclude that the nation is actually 
poor ; and that like the Persians, they make a 
splendid %ure every where but at home. The 
proverb of Xixofou is, that a man's riches may be 
seen in his eyes ; if we judge of the English by 
this rule, there is not a poorer nation under the 
sun. 

I have been here but two days, so will not be 
hasty in my decisions ; such letters as I shall vrrite 
to Fipsihi in Moscow, I beg youll endeavour to 
forward with all diligence ; I shall send them open, 
in order that you may take copies or translations, 
as you are equally versed in the Dutch and Chinese 
languages. Dear friend, think of my absence with 
regret, as I sincerely regret yours ; even while I 
write, I lament our separation. Farewell. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 



LETTER III. 

Ftom Lien Chi Altangi^ to the care of Fipsihi, resi- 
dent in Moscow ; to be forwarded by the Russian 
caravan to Fum Hoam^ first president of the 
Ceremonial Academy at Pekin in China, 

|HINK not, O thou guide of my youth, 
that absence can impair my respect, or 
interposing trackless deserts blot your 
reverend figure from my memory. The 
farther I travel I feel the pain of separation with 
stronger force ; those ties that bind me to my 
native country, and you, are still unbroken. By 
every remove, I only drag a greater length of chain. 
Could I find ought worth transmitting from so 
remote a region as this to which I have wandered, 
I should gladly send it ; but instead of this, you 
must be contented with a renewal of my former 
professions, and an imperfect account of a people 
with whom I am as yet but superficially acquainted. 
The remarks of a man who has been but three 
days in the country can only be those obvious cir- 
cumstances which force themselves upon the ima- 
gination : I consider myself here as a newly created 
Being introduced into a new world ; every object 
strikes with wonder and surprise. The imagina- 
tion still unsated, seems the only active principle 
of the mind. The most trifling occurrences give 
pleasure, till the gloss of novelty is worn away. 
When I have ceased to wonder, I may possibly 
grow wise ; I may then call the reasoning prin- 
ciple to my aid, and compare those objects with 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 7 

each other, which were before examined without 
reflection. 

Behold me then in London, gazing at the stran- 
gers, and they at me ; it seems they find somewhat 
absurd in my figure ; and had I been never from 
home it is possible I might find an infinite fund of 
ridicule in theirs; but by long travelling I am 
taught to laugh at folly alone, and to find nothing 
truly ridiculous but villainy and vice. \ 

When I had just quitted my native country, and 
crossed the Chinese wall, I Oeuicied every deviation 
from the customs and manners of China was a de- 
parting from nature : I smiled at the blue lips and 
red foreheads of the Tonguese ; and could hardly 
contain when I saw the Daures dress their heads 
with horns. The Ostiacs powdered with red earth ; 
and the Calmuck beauties tricked out in all the 
finely of sheep skin appeared highly ridiculous ; but 
I soon perceived that the ridicule lay not in them 
but in me ; that I falsely condemned others of ab- 
surdity, because they happened to differ fix>m a stan- 
dard originally founded in prejudice or partiality. 

I find no pleasure therefore in taxing the English "" . 
with departing from nature in their external ap- 
pearance, which is all I yet know of their character ; 
it is possible they only endeavour to improve her 
simple plan, since every extravagance in dress 
proceeds from a desire of becoming more beautiful 
than nature made us ; and this is so harmless a 
vanity that I not only pardon but approve it : A 
desire to be more excellent than others is what 
actually makes us so, and as thousands find a live- 
lihood in society by such appetites, none but the 
ignorant inveigh against them. 



8 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

You are not insensible, most reverend Fum 
Hoam, what numberless trades, even among the 
Chinese, subsist by the harmless pride. of each 
other. Your nose-borers, feet-swathers, tooth- 
stainers, eye-brow pluckers, would all want bread, 
should their neighbours want vanity. These 
vanities, however, employ much fewer hands in 
China than in England ; and a fine gentleman, or 
a fine lady, here dressed up to the fashion, seems 
scarcely to have a single limb that does not sufTer 
some distortions from art. 

To make a fine gentleman, several trades are re- 
quired, but chiefly a barber : you have undoubtedly 
heard of the Jewish champion, whose strength lay 
in his hair: one would think that the English 
were for placing all wisdom there: To appear 
wise, nothing more is requisite here than for a man 
to borrow hair from the heads of all his neighbours, 
and clap it like a bush on his own : the distributors 
of law and physic stick on such quantities, that it 
is almost impossible, even in idea to distinguish be- 
tween the head and the hair. 

Those whom I have been now describing, affect 
the gravity of the lion : those I am going to des- 
cribe more resemble the pert vivacity of smaller 
animals. The barber, who is still master of the 
ceremonies, cuts their hair close to the crown ; 
and then with a composition of meal and hog's lard, 
plasters the whole in such a manner, as to make 
it impossible to distinguish whether the patient 
wears a cap or a plaster ; but to make the picture 
more perfectly striking, conceive the tail of some 
beast, a greyhound's tail, or a pig's tail for instance, 
appended to the back of the head, and reaching 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 9 

m 

down to that place vdiere toils in other animals are 
generally seen . to begin ; thus betailed and be- 
powdered, the man of taste fancies he improves in 
beauty, dresses up his hard-featured (ace in smiles, 
and attempts to look hideously tender. Thus 
equipped, he is qualified to make love, and hopes 
for success more from Xhe powder on the outside of 
his head, than the sentiments within. 

Yet when I consider what sort of a creature the 
fine lady is, to whom he is supposed to pay his 
addresses, it is not strange to find him thus equipped 
in order to please* She is herself every whit as 
fond of powder, and tails, and hc^'s lard as he : 
to speak my secret sentiments, most reverend Fum, 
the ladies here are horridly ugly ; I can hardly en- 
dure the sight of them ; they no way resemble the 
beauties of China: the Europeans have a quite 
different idea of beauty from us ; when I reflect on 
the small footed perfections of an Eastern beauty^ 
how is it possible I should have eyes for a woman 
whose feet are ten inches long. I shall never 
forget the beauties of my native city of Nanfew. 
How very broad their faces ; how very short their 
noses ; how very little their eyes ; how very thin 
their lips ; how very black their teeth ; the snow 
on the tops of Bao is not fairer than their cheeks ; 
and their eye-brows are small as the line by the 
pencil of QuamsL Here a lady with such perfec- 
tions would be frightful ; Dutch and Chinese beau- 
ties indeed have some resemblance, but English 
women are entirely different ; red cheeks, big eyes, 
and teeth of a most odious whiteness, are not only 
seen here, but wished for ; and then they have such 
masculine feet, as actually serve some for walking I 



lo THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

Yet uncivil as nature has been, they seem resolved 
to outdo her in unkindness ; they use white powder, 
blue powder, and black powder for their hair, 
and a red powder for the face on some particular 
occasions. 

They like to have the face of various colours, as 
among the Tartars of Koreki, frequently sticking 
on, with spittle, little black patches on every part 
of it, except on the tip of the nose, which I have 
never seen with a patch. Youll have a better 
^^ i4ea of their manner of placing these spots, when I 
iPS have finished a map of an English face patched up 
to the fashion, which shall shortly be sent to en- 
crease your curious collection of paintings, medals, 
and monsters. 

But what surprizes more than all the rest, is, 
what I have just now been credibly informed by 
one of this country ; ** Most ladies here, says he, 
* have two faces ; one face to sleep in, and another 
to shew in company : the first is generally reserved 
for the husband and family at home, the other put 
on to please strangers abroad ; the family face is 
often indifferent enough, but the out-door one 
looks something better; this is always made at 
the toilet, where the looking-glass and toad-eater 
sit in council, and settle the complexion of the 
day." 

I can't ascertain the truth of this remark ; how- 
ever, it is actually certain, that they wear more 
clothes within doors than without ; and I have 
seen a lady who seemed to shudder at a breeze in 
her own apartment, appear half naked in the 
streets. FarewelL 



THEWgpZEN OF THE W^^LD. ii 



t -.. 



LETTER IV. 
To the same. 



[gi t^y e aa a 



^; m 



HS English seem as silent as the Jaia i' / 
Jj^yet vainer than'the inlmbitants of 



•^; 



Upon my arrival I attributed 
that reserve to modesty, which I now 
find has its ^dJBhi in pride. Condescend to address 
them first, mt^joyx are sure of their acquaintance ; 
stoop to flattery, and you conciliate their fiiendship 
and esteem. They bear hunger, cold, fatigue, and 
all the miseries of life without shrinking ; danger 
only calls forth their fortitude ; they even exult in 
calamity ; but contempt is what they cannot bear. 
An Ei^lishman fears contempt more than death ; 
he often flies to death as a refuge firom its pressure ; 
and dies when he fancies the world has ceased to 
esteem him. 

Pride seems the source not only of their national 
vices, but of their national virtues also. An 
Englishman is taught to love his king as his firiend, 
but to acknowledge no other master than the laws 
which himself has contributed to enact. He de- 
spises those nations, who, that one may be free, 
are all content to be slaves ; who first lift a tyrant 
into terror, and then shrink under his power as if 
delegated firom heaven. Liberty is echoed in all 
their assemblies, and thousands might be found 
ready to offer up their lives for the sound, though 
perhaps not one <tf all the number understands its 
meaning. The lowest mechanic however looks 
upon it as hli duty to be a watchful guardian of 



.1 ■ .- 



It THW^ tlTlZEN OF THE •00RLD, 

his countiy'b freedom, and often uses a language 
that might lieem haughty, even in the mouth of the 
great emperor who traces his ancestry to the moon. 

A few days ago, passing by one of their prisons, 
I could not avoid stopping, in order to listen to a 
dialogue which I thought might aflfoid me some 
entertainment. The conversation Wt earned on 
between a debtor through the grateoThis prison, a 
porter, who had stopped to rest hb burden, and a 
soldier at the window. The subject was upon a 
threatened invasion from France, voA each seemed 
extremely anxious to rescue his country from the 
impending danger. ** For my party cries the pri- 
soner, the greatest of my apprehensions is for our 
freedom; if the French should conquer j what would 
become of English liberty. My dear Friends ^ liberty 
is the Englishman's prerogative ; lue must preserve 
that at the expence of our lives ^ of that the French 
shall never deprive us; it is not to be expected that 
men who are slaves thetnselves would preserve our 
freedom should they happen to conquer : Ay, slaves, 
cries the porter, they are all slaves, fit only to carry 
burdens every one of them. Before I would stoop 
to slavery, may this be my poison (and he held the 
goblet in his hand) may this be my poison — but I 
would sooner list for a soldier." 

The soldier taking the goblet from his friend, 
with much awe fervently cried out, // is not so 
much our liberties as our religion that would suffer 
by such a change: Ay^ our religion^ my lads. May 
the Devil sinh me into flcanu% (such was the 
solemnity of his adjuration) if iSk$ French should 
come over^ but our religion would he utterly undone. 
So saying, instead of a libation, he applied the 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORDD. 13 

goblet to his lips, and confirmed his sentiments 
with a ceremtNiy of the most persevering devotion. 

In short, everf man here pretends to be a poli- 
tician; even the &ir sex are sometimes fomid 
to mix the severity of national altercation, with 
the blandishments of love, and often bec(»ne con- 
querofs by more weapons of destruction than their 
eyes. 

This miiversal passion for politics is gratified by 
Daily Gazettes, as with us at China. But as in 
oars, the emperor endeavours to instruct his people, 
in theirs the people endeavour to instruct the 
administration. You must not, however, imagine, 
that they who compile these papers have any actual 
knowledge of the p<^tics, or Uie government of a 
state ; they only collect their materials firom the 
oracle of some coffee-house, which oracle has him- 
self gathered them the night before from a beau at 
a gaming-table, who has pillaged his knowledge 
irom a great man's porter, who has had his infor- 
mation from the great man's gentleman, who has 
invented the whole story, for his own amusement 
the night preceding. 

The English in general seem fonder of gaining 
the esteem than the love of those they converse 
with : this gives a formality to their amusements ; 
their gayest conversations have something too wise 
for innocent relaxation ; though in company you 
are seldom disgusted with the absurdity of a fool ; 
you are seldom lifted into rapture by those strokes 
of vivacity which give instant, though not perma- 
nent pleasure. 

What they want, however, in gaiety, they make 
up in politeness. You smile at hearing me praise 



14 THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

the English for their politeness : you who have 
heard very different accounts from the missionaries 
at Pekin, who have seen such a different behaviour 
in their merchants and seamen at home. But I 
must still repeat it, the English seem more polite 
than any of their neighbours ; their great art in this 
respect lies in endeavouring, while they oblige, to 
lessen the force of the favour. Other countries are 
fond of obliging a stranger ; but seem desirous that 
he should be sensible of the obligation. The 
English confer their kindness with an appearance 
of indifference, and give away benefits with an air 
as if they despised them. 

Walking a few days ago between an English and 
a Frenchman into the suburbs of the city, we were 
overtaken by a heavy shower of rain. I was un- 
prepared; but they had each large coats, which 
defended them from what seemed to me a perfect 
inundation. The Englishman seeing me shrink 
from the weather, accosted me thus: ^* Psha, man, 
what dost shrink at? here, take this coat; I donU 
want it; 1 find it no way useful to me; I had as 
lief be 7uithoutit" The Frenchman began to shew 
his politeness in turn. ** A/y dear friend,^* cries 
he, ** why wont you oblige me by making use of my 
coat; you see how well it defends me from the rain; 
I should not choose to part with it to others^ but to 
such a friend as you^ 1 could even part with my skin 
to do him service,^* 

From such minute instances as these, most 
reverend Fum Hoam, I am sensible your sagacity 
will collect instruction. The volume of nature is 
the book of knowledge ; and he becomes most wise 
who makes the most judicious selection. Farewell. 




THE CmZEN OF THE WORLD, 15 

LETTER V. 
To the satne, 

HAVE already infonned you of the 
singular passion of this nation for poli- 
tics. An Englishman not satisfied with 
finding by his own prosperity the con- 
tending powers of Europe properly balanced, de- 
sires also to know the precise value of every weight 
in either scale. To gratify this curiosity, a leaf of 
political instruction is served up every morning 
with tea: When our politician has feasted upon 
this, he repairs to a coffee-house, in order to rumi- 
nate upon what he has read, and increase his 
collection; firom thence he proceeds to the ordi- 
nary, enquires what news, and treasuring up every 
acquisition there, hunts about all the evening in 
quest of more, and carefully adds it to the rest. 
Thus at night he retires home, full of the impor- 
tant advices of the day. When lo ! awaking next 
morning he finds the instructions of yesterday a 
collection of absurdity or palpable falshood. This, 
one would think, a mortifying repulse in the pur- 
suit of wisdom ; yet our politician no way dis- 
couraged, hunts on, in order to collect fresh mate- 
rials, and in order to be again disappointed. 

I have often admired the commercial spirit which 
prevails over Europe ; have been surprised to see 
them carry on a traffic with productions, that an 
Asiatic stranger would deem entirely useless. It 
is a proverb in China, that an European suffers 
not even his spittle to be lost ; the maxim, how- 



x6 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

ever, is not sufficiently strong ; since they sell even 
their Lies to great advantage. Every nation drives 
a considerable trade in this commodity with their 
neighbours. 

An English dealer in this way, for instance, has 
only to ascend to his work-house, and manufacture 
a turbulent speech averred to be spoken in the 
senate ; or a report supposed to be dropt at court ; 
a piece of scandal that strikes at a popular man- 
darine ; or a secret treaty between two neighbour- 
ing powers. When finished, these goods are baled 
up, and consigned to a factor abroad, who sends 
in return two battles, three sieges, and a shrewd 

letter filled with dashes blanks and 

stars * * * * of great importance. 

Thus you perceive, that a single gazette is the 
joint manufacture of Europe ; and he who would 
peruse it with a philosophical eye, might perceive 
in every paragraph something characteristic of 
the nation to which it belongs. A map does not 
exhibit a more distinct view of the boundaries and 
situation of every country, than its news does a 
picture of the genius, and the morals of its inha- 
bitants. The superstition and erroneous delicacy 
of Italy, the formality of Spain, the cruelty of 
Portugal, the fears of Austria, the confidence of 
Prussia, the levity of France, the avarice of Hol- 
land, the pride of England, the absurdity of Ire- 
land, and the national partiality of Scotland, are 
all conspicuous in every page. 

But, perhaps, you may find more satisfaction in 
a real news paper, than in my description of one ; 
I therefore send a specimen, which may serve to 
exhibit the manner of their being written, and 



INTRODUCTION, xv 

there are numbers ready to assure the public 
that this was all no novelty to them or the 
learned ; that Cardanus or Brunus, or some 
other author too dull to be generally read, 
had anticipated the discovery. Thus, instead 
of uniting like the members of a common- 
wealth, they are divided into almost as many 
Cactions as there are men ; and their jarring 
constitution, instead of being styled a repub- 
lic of letters, should be entitled, an anarchy 
of literature." One rubs one's ^yt& as one 
reads ; one asks oneself under one's breath 
if it is of our day that the satirist is speaking. 
No ; it is of the reign of the second of the 
Georges, before Grub Street was turned into 
Milton Street 

Literature, in its different aspects, plays 
not a small part in the lucubrations of Lien 
Chi. Two of the best letters are devoted to 
a whimsical description of the vagaries of 
some of its humbler professors, who hold a 
Saturday Club at the " Broom" at Islington ; 
others treat of the decay of poetry ; of novels, 
and "Tristram Shandy" in particular ; of the 
necessity of intrigue or riches as a means 
to success. Nor are art and the drama 
neglected. The virtuoso, who afforded such 

b 



xvi INTRODUCTION, 

a fund of amusement to Fielding and Smol- 
lett) receives his full share of attention ; and 
in the papers upon acting and actors, Gold- 
smith once mpre displays that critical com- 
mon-sense which he had shown so con- 
spicuously in "The Bee.'* Travellers and 
their trivialities are freely ridiculed ; there 
are papers on Newmarket, <m the Marriage 
Act, on the coronation^ on the courts of 
justice ; on quacks, gaming, paint, mourning, 
and mad dogs. There is a letter on the ir- 
reverent behaviour of the congregation in 
St Paul's ; there is another on the iniquity 
of making shows of puMic montmients. Now 
and then a more serious note is touched, 
as when the author is stirred to unwonted 
gravity by the savage penal code of his day, 
which, "cementing the laws with blood," 
closed every avenue with a gibbet, and 
against which Johnson, too, lifted his sono- 
rous voice. / ' 

" Scarce can our fields, such crowds at Tyburn die, 
With hemp the. gallows and the fleet fupplyv" — 

he sang in " London," anticipating his later 
utterances in " The Rambler." Goldsmith, on 
the other hand, crystallised in his verse the 
raw material of which he made his Chinese 



INTRODUCTtOJir, jrru 

philosopher the mouth-piece. Several of the 
best-known passages of his two longest poems 
have their first form in the prose of. Lien Chi. 
Indeed, one actual line of " The Traveller," 
^ A land of tyrants, and a den df slaves," 
is simply a textual quotation from ^TheCitizen 
of the World." 

But what in the Chinese letters is even 
more remarkable than their clever raillery of 
social incongruities and abuses, is their occa- 
sional indication of the author's innate but 
hitherto un<Usdosed gift in the delineatioii <^ 
humorous character. Up to this time he had 
exhibited no particular tendency in this direc- 
tion. The little sketches of Jack Spindle and 
" my cousin Hannah," in ^ The Bee," go no 
farther than the corresponding personifica- 
tions of particular qualities in the "Spec- 
tator" and " Tatler," and they are not of the 
kind which, to employ a French figure, " enter 
the skin" of the personality presented. But 
in the case of the eccentric philanthropist of 
"The Citizen of the World," whom he chris- 
tens the " Man in Black," he comes nearer to 
such a definite embodiment as Addison'^ 
" Will Wimble." The « Man in Black " is 
evidently a combination of some of those 



xviii INTRODUCTION, 

Goldsmith family traits which were after- 
wards so successfully recalled in Dr. Prim- 
rose, Mr. Hardcastle, and the clergyman 
of "The Deserted Village.'' The con- 
trast between his credulous charity and his 
expressed distrust of human nature, between 
his simulated harshness and his real amia- 
bility, constitutes a type which has since been 
often used successfully in English literature ; 
it is clear, too, that in the account of his life 
he borrows both from his author and his 
author's father. When he speaks of his un- 
willingness to take orders, of his dislike to 
wear a long wig when he preferred a short 
one, or a black coat when he dressed in 
brown, he is only giving expression to that 
incompatibility of temper which led to Gold- 
smith's rejection for ordination by the Bishop 
of Elphin ; while in his picture of his father's 
house, with its simple, kindly prodigality, its 
little group of grateful parasites who laugh, 
like Mr. Hardcastle's servants, at the host's 
old jokes, and the careless paternal benevo- 
lence which makes the children " mere ma- 
chines of pity," "instructed in the art of 
giving away thousands before they were 
taught the more necessary qualifications of 



INTRODUCTION. xix 

getting a fiartbing," one recognizes the en- 
vironment of that emphatically Irish house- 
hold on the road from Ballymahon to Ath- 
lone, in which Goldsmith's own boyhood had 
been spent. 

Excellent as he is, however, the ^ Man in 
Black," with his grudging generosity and his 
''reluctant goodness," is surpassed in com- 
pleteness of characterization by the more 
finished portrait of Beau Tibbs. The poor 
little pinched pretender to fashion, with his 
tarnished finery and his reed-voiced, simper- 
ing helpmate, — with his coffee-house cackle 
of my Lord Mudler and the Duchess of Picca- 
dilly, and his magnificent promises of turbot 
and ortolan, which issue pitifully in postponed 
ox-cheek and bitter beer, — ^approaches the 
dimensions of a masterpiece. Charles Lamb, 
one would think, must have rejoiced over the 
reckless assurance which expatiates on the 
charming view of the Thames from the garret 
of a back-street in the suburbs, which glorifies^ 
the " paltry, unframed pictures " on its walls 
into essays in the manner of the celebrated 
Grisoni, and transforms a surly Scotch hag- 
of-all-work into an old and privileged family- 
servant, — "the gift of a friend of mine, a 



XX INTRODUCTION, 

Parliament man from the Highlands. Nor 
are there many pages in Dickens more peren- 
nially humorous than the scene in which the 
^' Man in Black," his inamorata the pawn- 
broker's widow, and Mr. and Mrs. Tibbs, all 
make a party to the picturesque old Vaux- 
hall Gardens of Jonathan Tyers. The inimi- 
'table sparring - which ensues between the 
second hand gentility of the beau's lady and' 
the moneyed .vulgarity of the tradesman's 
relict^ their different and wholly irreCoricilable 
views of the entertainment, and the tragic 
termination of the wh9le, by which the widow 
is baulked of "the waterworks " because good- 
manHers constr^ her .to sit out the wire- 
drawn roulades and quavers of Mrs. Tibbs — 
these are things which age cannot wither nor 
custom stale. If Goldsmith had written 
nothing but this miniature trilogy of Beau 
Tibbs, — if Dr. Primrose were uninvented and ' 
Tony Lumpkin non-existent, — he would still 
have earned a perpetual place among English, 
humorists. 

Something of this, undoubtedly, he owed 
to the fortunate instinct which dictated bis 
choice of his material. The forerunner of 
Dickens, — ^the disciple, although he knew it 



INTRODUCTION. xxi 

not, of Fielding, — he makes his capital by his 

disregard of the leigning models of his time. 
Declining f/^ coi<>/*» ^||g ^i^^^^^i-e. fr^rr> »i%^ 

fashionable abstractions of Sentimental 

vQDJ^gaal Hig^ ^*^t hm. tnme aside to the 
moyinji^j^ various^ -BWya]tS9l9HI?^-SaMWil®" 
classy fioro whose lankis nriginality has. 

;iot xtfj^ff^ ^'^'S^tfi iftF^S^*'™ ^^ ^^ 
Of th^^'^ad "knowledge an3'eaq)eriebc^ ; 

of/ those be had seen but little. Upon tlve 
other walk, his^laboi^ might have been as 
forgotten as the Henry, of Richard Cumber- 
land or the HenrieUa of Mrs. Charlotte 
Lennox. But he took his own line ; and 
in consequence, Beau Tibbs and the pawn-« 
broker's widow (with her rings and her green 
damask) are as much .'alive to-day as Par- 
tridge or Mrs. Nickleby. 

Austin Dobson. 

Ealing, W., 
Jufy^ 1891. 



[The first of Goldsmith's Chinese Letters appeared in 
John Newbery*s "Public Lejiger** for 34 January, 1760. 
They came out abont twice a week, but until the- appear- 
ance of No. IV, the series were not numbered. They were 
continued until 14 August, 1761, their forthcoming re- 
pttbUgation, revised and corrected, "in two volumes of the 
usual 'Spectator' size," being announced by a final note. 
They were ultimafely issued, "Price 6s. bound," with a few 
additional letters, on Saturday, i May, Z76S. The pub- 
lishers' names differ in different copies, some having John 
Newbery only. The date of tlie second edition is not given by 
Goldsmith's biographers, but an advertisement in " Lloyd's 
Evdiing Post," 5 May, 2766, states that a French translation 
had then "gone through four Impressions." An edition ap- 
peared at Dublin in X769, and a "third edition," the title 
of which is exactly reproduced on the opposite page, fol- 
lowed in Z774. Upon this, the last with which Goldsmith 
can possibly have been concerned, the text of the present 
volnmes is based.] 



[OfigiHai Title-page.] 

THE 

CITIZEN of the WORLD ; 

O R 

LETTERS 

FROM A 

CHINESE PHILOSOPHER, 

Residing in LONDON, 

TO HIS 

FRIENDS IN THE EAST. 

In TWO VOLUMES. 

VOLUME THE FIRST. 

The third EDITION. 

LONDON: 

Printed for T. Carnan, and F. Newbery, Junior, 
at Number 65, in St. PauPs Church Yard. 

MDCCLXXIV. 



THE EDITOR'S PREFACE/ 



m m 



{HE schoolmen had formerly a very exact 
way of computing the abilities of their 
Saints or authors. Elscobar, for in- 
stance, was said to have learning as 
five, genius as four, and gravity as seven. Caramuel 
was greater than he. His learning was as eight, 
his genius as six, and his gravity as thirteen. Were 
I to estimate the merits of our Chinese Philosopher 
by the same scale, I would not hesitate to state his 
genius still higher; but as to his learning and 
gravity, these I think might safely be maiked as 
nine hundred and ninety nine, within one degree of 
absolute frigidity. 

Yet upon hb first appearsmce )iere, many were 
angry not to find him as ignorant as a Tripoline 
ambassador, or an Envoy from Mujac They were 
surprized to find a man bom so far firom London, 
that school of prudence and wisdom, endued even 
with a moderate capacity. They expressed the 
same surprize at his knowledge that the Chinese 
do at ours. ^Unv comes it, said they, that the 

1 [ug., GoUUmith's Preface.] 
' Le Comte, VoL i. p. azo. 



xxvi PREFACE. 

EuropeanSt so remote from China, think with so 
much justice and precision ? They have never read 
our books, they scarcely know even our letters, and 
yet they talk and reason just as we do. The truth 
is, the Chinese and we are pretty much alike. 
Different degrees of refinement, and not of dis- 
tance, mark the distinctions among mankind. 
Savages of the most opposite climates, have all but 
one character of improvidence and rapacity ; and 
tutored nations, however separate, make use of 
the very same methods to procure refined enjoy^ 
ment 

The distinctions of polite nations are few ; but 
such as are peculiar to the Chinese, appear in every 
page of the following correspondence. The meta- 
phors and allusions are alf drawn from the East. 
Their formality our author carefully preserves. 
Many of their favourite tenets in morals are illus- 
trated. The Chinese are always concise, so is he. 
•Simple, so is he. The Chinese are grave and 
sententious, so is he. But in one particular, the 
resemblance is peculiarly striking : the Chinese 
are often dull ; and so is he. Nor has my assistance 
been wanting. We are told in an old romance of 
a certain knight errant and his horse who contracted 
an intimate friendship. The horse most usually 
bore the knight, but, in cases of extraordinary dis- 
patch, the knight returned the favour, and carried 
his horse. Thus in the intimacy between my 
author and me, he has usually given me a lift of 
his Eastern sublimity, and I have sometimes given 
him a return of my colloquial ease. 

Yet it appears strange in this season of panegyric, 
when scarce an author passes unpraised either by 



PREFACE, zzrii 

his friends or himself, that such merit as our Philo- 
sopher's should be ibxgotten. While the epithets 
of ingenious, copious, elaborate, and refined, are 
lavished amongthemob,]ikemedalsat a coronation, 
the lucky prizes fall on every side, but not one on 
him. I could on this occasion make myself 
melancholy, l^ considering the capridousness of 
public taste, or the mutability of fortune; but 
during this fit of morality, lest my reader should 
sleep. 111 take a nap myself, and when I awake tell 
him my dream. 

I imagined the Thames was frozen over, and I 
stood by its side. Several booths were erected 
upon the ice, and I was told by one of the spec- 
tators, that Fashion Fair was going to begin. 
He added, that every author who would carry his 
works there, might probably find a veiy good re- 
ception. I was resolved however to observe the 
humours of the place in safety from the shore, 
sensible that ice was at best precarious, and having 
been always a little cowardly in my sleep. 

Several of my acquaintance seemed much more 
hardy than I, and went over the ice with intrepi- 
dity. Some carried their works to the fair on 
sledges, some on carts, and those which were more 
voluminous, were conveyed in waggons. Their 
temerity astonished me. I knew their cargoes 
were heavy, and expected every moment they 
would have gone to the bottom. They all entered 
the fair, however, in safety, and each soon after re- 
turned to my great surprize, highly satisfied with 
his entertainment, and the bargains he had brought 
away. 

The success of such numbers at last began to 



( 

] 



jotviu PREFACE, 

operate upon me. If these, cried I, meet with 
favour and safety, some luck may, perhaps, for 
once attend the unfortunate. I am resolved to 
make a new adventure. The furniture, frippery 
and fireworks of China, have long been fashionably 
bought up. I'll try the fair with a small cargo of 
Chinese morality. If the Chinese have contributed 
to vitiate our taste, 1*11 try how far they can help to 
improve our understanding. But as others have 
driven into the market in waggons, V\l cautiously 
begin by venturing with a wheel-barrow. Thus 
resolved, I baled up my goods and fairly ventured ; 
when, upon just entering the fair, I fancied the ice 
that had supported an hundred waggons before, 
cracked under me, and wheel-barrow and all went 
to the bottom. 

Upon awaking from my reverie, with the fright, 
I cannot help wishingthat the pains taken in giving 
this correspondence an English dress, had been 
emj^oyed in contriving new political systems, or 
new plots for farces. I might then have taken my 
station in the world, either as a poet or a philo- 
sopher, and made one in those little societies 
where men club to raise each other's reputation. 
But at present I belong to no particular class. I 
resemble one of those solitary animals, that has 
been forced from its forest to gratify human curio- 
sity. My earliest wish was to escape unheeded 
through life ; but I have been set up for half-pence, 
to fret and scamper at the end of my chain. Tho* 
none are injured by my tage, I am naturally too 
savage to court any friends by fawning ; too 
obstinate to be taught new tricks; and too im- 
provident to mind what may happen : I am ap- 



PREFACE, 



XXIX 



peased, thongfa not contented. Too indolent for 
intrigue, and too timid to posh for fiivoor, I am — 
But what signifies what am I. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, ty 

distinguish the charactets of the various nations 
which are united in its composition. 

Naples. We have lately dug up heie a curious 
Etruscan monument, broke in two in the raising. 
The characters are scarce visible ; but Nugtsi^ the 
learned antiquary, supposes it to have been erected 
in honour of Ficus, a Latin King, as one of the 
lines may be plainly distinguished to begin with a 
P. It is hoped this discovery will produce some- 
thing valuable, as the literati of our twelve acade- 
mies are deeply engaged in the disquisition. 

Pisa. Since father Fudgi, prior of St. Gilbert's, 
has gone to reside at Rome, no mijrades have been 
performed at the shrine of St Gilbert ; the devout 
begin to grow uneasy, and some begin actually to 
fear that St Gilbert has forsaken them with the 
reverend fiither. 

Lucca. The administrators of our serene re- 
public, have frequent conferences upon the part 
they shall take in the present commotions of 
Europe. Some are for sending a body *of their 
troops, consisting of one company of foot, and six 
horsemen, to make a diversion in favour of the 
empress queen ; others are as strenuous asserters 
of the Prussian interest ; what torn these debates 
may take, time only can discover. However, 
certain it is, we shall be able to bring into the 
6eld at the opening of the next campaign, seventy- 
five armed men, a commander in chief, and two 
drummers of great experience. 

Spain. Yesterday the new king shewed him- 
self to his subjects, and after having staid half an 
hour in his balcony, retired to the royal apart- 
nent The night concluded on this extraordinary 

I. c 



i8 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

occasion with illuQiinations, and other demonstra- 
tions of joy. 

The queen is more beautiful than the rising sun, 
and reckoned one of the first wits in Europe : she 
had a glorious opportunity of displaying the readi- 
ness of her invention, and her skill in repartee 
lately at court. The duke of Lerma, coming up 
to her with a low bow and a smile, and presenting 
a nosegay set with diamonds, Madam, cries he, / 
am your most obedient humble servant. Oh, Sir, 
replies the queen, without any prompter, or the 
least hesitation, /*« very proud of the very great 
honour you do me. Upon which she made a low 
curtesy, and all the courtiers fell a laughing at the 
readiness and the smartness of her reply. 

Lisbon. Yesterday we had an auto da fe, at 
which were burned three young women accused 
of heresy, one of them of exquisite beauty ; two 
Jews, and an old woman, convicted of being a 
witch : One of the friars, who attended this last, 
reports, that he saw the devil fly out of her at the 
stake in the shape of a flame of fire. The popu- 
lace behaved on this occasion with great good 
humour, joy, and sincere devotion. 

Our merciful Sovereign has been for some time 
past recovered of his Aright : though so atrocious 
an attempt deserved to exterminate half the natioxL 
yet he has been graciously pleased to spare the^ 
lives of his subjects, and not above five hundred 
have been broke upon the wheel, or otherwise 
executed upon this horrid occasion. 

Vienna. We have received certain advices that 
a party of twenty thousand Austrians, having 
attacked a much superior body of Prussians, put 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 19 

them all to flight, and took the rest prisoners of 
war. 

Berlin. We have received certain advices that 
k party of twenty thousand Prussians, having 
attacked a much superior body of Austrians, put 
them to flight, and took a great number of 
prisoners, with their military chest, cannon, and 



Though we have not succeeded this campaign to 
our wishes ; yet, when we think of him who com- 
mands us, we rest in security : while we sleep, our 
king is watchful for our safety. 

Paris. We shall soon strike a signal blow. We 
have seventeen flat-bottomed boats at Havre. The 
people are in excellent spirits, and our ministers 
make no difficulty in raising the supplies. 

We are all undone ; the people are discontented 
to the last degree; the ministers are obliged to 
have recourse to the most rigorous methods to raise 
the ezpences of the war. 

Our distresses are g^reat ; but madam Pompadour 
continues to supply our king, who is now growing 
dd, with a fresh lady every night. His health, 
thank heaven, is still pretty well ; nor is he in the 
least unfit, as was reported, for any kind of ro3ral 
ezercitation. He was so frighted at the afl^ of 
Jbamien, that his |>hy8ictans were apprehensive lest 
his reason should suffer, but that wretch's tortures 
soon composed the kingly terrors of his breast. 

England. Wanted an usher to an academy. 
N, B» He must be able to read, dress hair, and 
must have had the small pox. 

Dublin. We hear that there is a benevolent 
subscription on foot among the nobility and gentry 



90 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

of this kingdom, who are great patrons of merit, in 
order to assist Black and All Black, in his contest 
with the Padereen mare. 

We hear from Germany that prince Ferdinand 
has gained a complete victory, and taken twelve 
kettle drums, five standards, and four waggons of 
ammunition prisoners of war. 

Edinburgh. We are positive when we say that 
Saunders McGregor, who was lately executed for 
horse-stealing, is not a Scotchman, but bom in 
Carrickfergus. Farewell. 



LETTER VI. 

Fum Hoamy first president of the Ceremonial Aca- 
demy at Pekin^ to Lien Chi Altangi, the discon- 
tented wanderer; by the way of Moscow, 

[HETHER sporting on the flowery 
banks of the river Irtis, or scaling 
the steepy mountains of Douchenour : 
whether traversing the black desarts of 
Kobi, or giving lessons of politeness to the savage 
inhabitants of Europe; — in whatever country, 
whatever climate, and whatever circumstances, all 
hail I May Tien, the universal soul, take you 
under his protection, and inspire you with a supe- 
rior portion of himself. 

How long, my friend, shall an enthusiasm for 
knowledge continue to obstruct your happiness, and 
tear you from all the connexions that make life 
pleasing ? How long will you continue to rove 
from climate to climate, circled by thousands, 




THE CITIZEN OF THE IVORLD. tt 

and yet without a friend, feeling all the incon- 
▼eniencies of a crowd, and all the anxiety of being 
alone. 

I know 3^oa reply, that the refined pleasure of 
growing every day wiser, is a sufficient recompenoe 
for every inconvenience. I know you will talk of 
the vulgar satisfoction of soliciting happiness from 
sensual enjoyment only, and probably enlarge upon 
the. exquisite raptures of sentimental bliss. Yet, 
believe me, friend, you are deceived ; all our 
pleasures, though seemingly never so remote from 
sense, derive their origin from some one of the 
senses. The most exquisite demonstration in 
mathematics, or the most pleasing disquisition in 
metaphysics, if it does not ultimately tend to in- 
crease some sensual satisfaction is delightful only to 
fools, or to men who have by long habit contracted 
a £dse idea of pleasure ; and he who separates 
sensual and sentimental enjojrments, seeking happi> 
ness from mind alone, is in izci as wretched as the 
naked inhabitant of the forest, who places all 
happiness in the first, regardless of the latter. 
There are two extremes in this respect ; the savage 
who swallows down the draught of pleasure with- 
out sta3ring to reflect on his happiness, and the sage 
who passeth the cup while he reflects on the con- 
veniences of drinking. 

It is with a heart full of sorrow, my dear 
Altangi, that I must inform you that what the 
world calls happiness must now be yours no longer. 
Our great emperor's displeasure at your leaving 
China, contrary to the rules of our government, and 
the immemorial custom of the empire, has pro- 
duced the most terrible effects. Your wife, 



\ 



aa THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

daughter, and the rest of your family have been 
seized by his order, and appropriated to his use ; 
all except your son are now the peculiar property 
of him who possesses all ; him I have hidden from 
the officers employed for this purpose ; and even at 
the hazard of my life I have concealed him. The 
youth seems obstinately bent on finding you out, 
wherever you are ; he is determined to face every 
danger that opposes his pursuit Though yet but 
fifteen, all his father's virtues and obstinacy sparkle 
in his eyes, and mark him as one destined to no 
mediocrity of fortune. 

You see, my dearest friend, what imprudence 
has brought thee to ; from opulence, a tender 
family, surrounding friends, and your master's 
esteem, it has reduced thee to want, persecution ; 
and still worse, to our mighty monarch's dis- 
pleasure. Want of prudence is too frequently the 
want of virtue; nor is there on earth a more 
powerfiil advocate for vice than poverty. As I 
shall endeavQur to guard thee from the one, so 
guard thyself from the other ; and still think of me 
with affection and esteem. Farewell. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 23 




LETTER VI I. 

Fr^m Uen Chi Altangi^ to Fum Hoam^ first prta- 
dettt of the Ccnmonial Academy at Pekin^ in 
China. 

Tkt EdUor thinks froper to mequmimi the rtadtr tkmt 
tJU grtatat ^mrt of tke/oUovmtg letter seemM to him to be 
littU mart than a Hu^tody qf ttn t e n ce§ borrowed Jr^m 
Com/ndus, the Chinese philosopher, 

WIFE, a daughter carried into cap* 
tivity to expiate my offence, a son 
scarce yet arrived at maturity, resolving 
to encounter every danger in the pious 
pursuit of one who has undone him, these indeed 
are circumstances of distress ; tho' my tears were 
more precious than the gem of Golcon«b^ yet 
would they &11 upon sudi an occasion. 

But I submit to the stroke of heaven, I hold the 
volume of Confucius in my hand, and as I read 
grow humble, and patient, and wise. We should 
feel sorrow, says he, but not sink under its op- 
pression ; the heart of a wise man should resemUe 
a mirror, which reflects every object without being 
sullied by any. The wheel of fortune turns in- 
cessantly round, and who can say within himself I 
shall to day be uppermost. We should hold the 
immutable mean that lies between insensibility and 
anguish ; our attempts should be not to extinguish 
nature, but to repress it ; not to stand unmoved at 
distress, but endeavour to turn every disaster to 
our own advantage. Our greatest glory is, not in 
never falling, but in rising every time we fall. 



04 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

I fancy myself at present, O thou reverend dis- 
ciple of Tao, more than a match for all that can 
happen ; the chief business of my life has been to 
procure wisdom, and the chief object of that wis- 
dom was to be happy. My attendance on your 
lectures, my conferences with the missionaries of 
Europe, and all my subsequent adventures upon 
quitting China, were calculated to increase the 
sphere of my happiness, not my curiosity. Let 
European travellers cross seas and deserts merely 
to measure the height of a mountain, to describe 
the cataract of a river, or tell the commodities 
which every country may produce ; merchants or 
geographers, perhaps, may find profit by such dis- 
coveries, but what advantage can accrue to a philo- 
sopher from such accounts, who is desirous of 
understanding the human heart, who seeks to know 
the men of every country, who desires to discover 
those differences which result from climate, re- 
ligion, education, prejudice, and partiality. 

I should think my time very ill bestowed, were 
the only fruits of my adventures to consist in being 
able to tell, that a tradesman of London lives in a 
house three times as high as that of our great Em- 
peror. That the ladies wear longer clothes than 
the men, that the priests are dressed in colours 
which we are taught to detest, and that their sol- 
diers wear scarlet, which is with us the symbol of 
peace and innocence. How many travellers are 
there, who confine their relations to such minute 
and useless particulars ; for one who enters into 
the genius of those nations with whom he has con- 
versed, who discloses their morals, their opinions, 
the ideas which they entertain of religious worship, 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 95 

the intrigiies of their mmisters, and their skill in 
sciences. There are twoity, who only mention 
someidleperticii]an,whidicanheof noreal use to 
a tme philosopher. All their remarks tend, neither 
to make themsdves nor others more happy ; thej 
no way contribute to control their passions, to bear 
adversity, to inspire true virtne, or raise a detesta- 
tion of vice. 

Men may be very learned, and yet very maer* 
aUe; it is easy to be a deep geometridan, ov a 
sublime astronomer, bat veiy difficult to be a good 
man ; I esteem, therefore, the traveller who in- 
structs the heart, bat despise him who only indolges 
the imagination ; a man who leaves home to mend 
himself and others is a philosopher ; bat he who 
goes from coantiy to coantiy, goided by the blind 
impulse of cariosity, is only a vagabond. From 
Zerdosht down to him of Tyanea, I honour all 
those great names who endeavoored to anite the 
world by their travels; such men grew wiser as 
well as better, the farther they departed from 
home, and seemed like rivers, whose streams are 
not only increased, bat refined, as they travel from 
their source. 

For my own part, my greatest glory is, that tra- 
velling has not more steeled my constitution against 
all the vicissitudes of climate, and all the depres- 
sions of fatigue, than it has my mind against the 
accidents of fortune, or the accesses of despair. 
Farewell. 



96 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORU>, 



LETTER VIII. 

From Lien^ Chi Altangi, to Fum Hoam^ first pre- 
sident of the Ceremonial Academy at Pekin, in 
China, 






OW insupportable ! oh thou possessor of 
heavenly wisdom, would be this separa- 
tion, this immeasurable distance from 
my friend, were I not able thus to de- 
lineate my heart upon paper, and to send thee 
daily a map of my mind. 

I am every day better reconciled to the people 
among whom I reside, and begin to &ncy that in 
time I shall find them more opulent, more chari- 
table, and more hospitable than I at first imagined. 
I begin to learn somewhat of their manners and 
customs, and to see reasons for several devia- 
tions which they make from us, from whom all 
other nations derive their politeness as well as their 
original. 

In spite of taste, in spite of prejudice, I now 
begin to think their women tolerable ; I can now 
look on a languishing blue eye without disgust, and 
pardon a set of teeth, even though whiter than 
ivory. I now begin to fancy there is no universal 
standard for beauty. The truth is, the manners of 
the ladies in this city are so very open, and so 
vastly engaging, that I am inclined to pass over 
the more glaring defects of their persons, since 
compensated by the more solid, yet latent beauties 
of the mind ; what though they want black teeth, 
or are deprived of the allurements of feet no bigger 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 97 

than their thumbs, yet still they have souls, my 
friend, such souls, so free, so pressing, so hospi- 
table, and so engaging 1 have received more 

invitations in the streets of London from the sex iq 
one night, than I have met with at Pekin in twelve 
revolutions of the moon. 

Every evening as I return home from my usual 
solitary excursions, I am met by several of those 
well disposed daughters of hospitality, at different 
times and in different streets, richly dressed, and 
with minds not less noble than their appearance. 
You know that nature has indulged me with a 
person by no means agreeable ; yet are they to6 
generous to object to my homely appearance ; they 
feel no repugnance at my broad ij|u:e and flat 
nose ; they perceive me to be a stranger, and that 
alone is a diffident recommendation. They even 
seem to think it their duty to do the honours 
of the country by every act of complaisance in 
their power. One takes me under the arm, and 
in a manner forces me along ; another catches 
me round the neck, and desires to partake in 
this office of hospitality; while a third kinder 
still, invites me to refresh my spirits with wine. 
Wine is in England reserved only for the rich, yet 
here even wine is given away to the stranger ! 

A few nights ago, one of these generous crea- 
tures, dressed all in white, and flaunting like a 
meteor by my side, forcibly attended me home to 
my own apartment. She seemed charmed wilh 
the elegance of the furniture, and the convenience 
of my situation. And well indeed she might, for 
I have hired an apartment for not less than two 
shillings of their money every week. But her 



a8 THE CITIZEN OF THE IVORLD, 

civUity did not rest here ; for at parting, being de- 
sirous to know the hour, and perceiving my watch 
out of order, she kindly took it to be repaired by a 
relation of her own, which you may imagine will 
save some expence, and she assures me that it will 
cost her nothing. I shall have it back in a few 
days when mended, and am preparing a proper 
speech expressive of my gratitude on the occasiop : 
CeUstial excellence f I intend to say, happy I am in 
hamng found out^ after many painful adoentures, 
a land of innocence^ and a people of humanity : 
I may rove into other climes ^ and converse with 
nations yet unknown^ but where shall I mut a soul 
of such purity as that which resides in thy breast I 
Sure thou hast been nurtured by the bill of the Shin 
Shin, or sucked the breasts of the provident Gin 
Hiung. The melody of thy voice could rob the 
Chong Fou of her whelps, or inveigle the Boh that 
Uves in the midst of the waters. Thy servant shall 
ever retain a sense of thy favours ; cutd one day boast 
of thy virttu, sincerity^ and truth, among the 
daughters of China. Adieu. 



LETTER IX. 
To the same, 

HAVE been deceived ! she whom I 
fancied a daughter of Paradise has 
proved to be one of the infamous dis- 
ciples of Han ! I have lost a trifle, I 
have gained the consolation of having discovered 
a deceiver. I once more, therefore, relax into my 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 99 

fonner indifference with r^^ard to the Englith 
ladies, they once more begin to appear disagree* 
able in my eyes : Thus is my whole time passed 
in forming conclusions which the next minute's 
experience may probably destroy; the present 
moment becomes a comment on the past, and I 
improve rather in humility than wisdom. 

Their laws and religion forbid the English to 
keep more than one woman, I therefore concluded 
that prostitutes were banished from society ; I was 
deceived ; every man here keeps as many wives as 
he can maintain; the laws are cemented with 
blood, praised and disregarded. The very Chinese, 
whose religion allows him two wives, takes not 
half the liberties of the English in this particular. 
Their laws may be compared to the books of the 
Sybils, they are held in great veneration, but sel- 
dom read, or seldomer understood; even those 
who pretend to be their guardians dispute about 
the meaning of many of them, and confess their 
ignorance of others. The law therefore which 
commands them to have but one wife, is strictly 
observed only by those for whom one is more than 
sufficient, or by such as have not money to buy 
two. As for the rest, they violate it pubUdy, and 
some glory in its violation. They seem to think 
like the Persians, that they give evident marks of 
manhood by increasing their seraglio. A man- 
darlne therefore here generally keeps four wives, a 
gentleman three, and a stage player two. As for 
the magistrates, the country justices and squires, 
they are employed first in debauching yoimg vir- 
gins, and then punishing the transgression. 

From such a picture you will be apt to con- 



30 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

elude, thftt he who employs foar ladies for his 
amusement, has four times as much constitution to 
.spare as he who is contented with one; that a 
Mandarine is much cleverer ditn a gentleman, and 
a gentleman than a player, and yet it is quite the 
reverse ; a Mandarine is frequently supported on 
spindle shanks, appears emaciated by luxury, and 
is obliged to have recourse to variety, merely from 
the weakness, not the vigour of his constitution, 
the number of his wives being the most equivocal 
symptom of his virility. 

Beside the country squire, there is also another 
set of men, whose whole employment consists in 
corrupting beauty ; these the silly part of the fiur 
sex call amiable ; the more sensible part of them, 
however, give them the title of abominable. You 
will probably demand what are the talents of a 
man thus caressed by the majority of the opposite 
sex ; what talents, or what beauty is he possessed 
of superior to the rest of his fellows. To answer 
yon directly, he has neither talents nor beauty, 
but then he is possessed of impudence and assi- 
duity. With assiduity and impudence, men of all 
ages, and all figures, may commence admirers. I 
have even been told of some who made professions 
of expiring for love, when all the world could per- 
ceive they were going to die of old age : and what 
is more surprising still, such battered beaus are 
generally most infamously successful. 

A fellow of this kind emplojrs three hours every 
morning in dressing his head, by which is under- 
stood only his hair. 

He is a professed admirer, not of any particular 
lady, but of the whole sex. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 31 

He is to suppose every lady has caught edfd every 
night, which gives him an opportunity of calling 
to see how she does the next morning. 

He is upon all occasions to shew himself in very 
great pain for the ladies ; if a lady drops even a 
pin, he is to fly in order to (nresent it 

He never speaks to a lady without advancing his 
mouth to her ear, by which he frequently addresses 
more senses than one. 

Upon proper occasions he looks excessively 
tender. This is performed by laying his hand 
upon his heart, shutting his eyes, and shewing 
his teeth. 

He is excessively fond of dancing a minuet with 
the ladies, by which is only meant walking round 
the floor eight or ten times with his hat on, a£fect- 
ing great gmvity, and sometimes looking tenderly 
on his partner. 

He never affronts any man himself, and never 
resents an affront from another. 

He has an infinite variety of small talk upon all 
occasions, and laughs when he has nothii^ more 
to say. 

Such is the killing creature who prostrates him- 
self to the sex till he has undcme them ; all whose 
submissions are the effects of design, and who to 
please the ladies almost becomes himself a lady. 




3a THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

LETTER X. 
To the same, 

HAVE hitherto given 3rou no account 
of my journey from China to Europe, 
of my travels through countries, where 
Nature sports in primeval rudeness, 
where she pours forth her wonders in solitude; 
countries, from whence the rigorous climate, the 
sweeping inundation, the drifted desert, the howl- 
ing forest, and mountains of immeasurable height 
banish the husbandman, and spread extensive de- 
solation ; countries where the brown Tartar wanders 
for a precarious sift>sistence, with an heart that 
never felt pity, himself more hideous than the wil- 
derness he makes. 

You will easily conceive the fatigue of crossing 
vast tracts of land, either desolate, or still more 
dangerous by its inhabitants. The retreat of men, 
who seem driven from society, in order to make 
war upon all the human race ; nominally profes- 
sing a subjection to Moscovy or China, but without 
any resemblance to the countries on which they 
depend. 

After I had crossed the great wall, the first 
object that presented were the remains of deso- 
lated cities, and all the magnificence of venerable 
ruin. There were to be seen temples of beautiful 
structure, statues wrought by the hand of a master, 
and around a country of luxuriant plenty ; but not 
one single inhabitant to reap the bounties of na- 
ture. These were prospects that might humble 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 33 

the pride of kings, and repress human vanity. I 
asked my guide the cause of such desolation. These 
countries, says he, were once the dominions of a 
Tartar prince ; and these ruins the seat of arts, 
elegance, and ease. This prince waged an unsuc- 
cessful war with one of the emperors of China ; he 
was conquered, his cities plundered, and all his 
subjects carried into captivity. Such are the efiects 
of Uie ambition of Kings ! Ten Dervises, says the 
Indian proverb, shall sleep in peace upon a single 
carpet, while two kings shall quarrel though they 
have kingdoms to divide them. Sure, my friend, 
the cruelty and the pride of man have made more 
deserts than Nature ever, made 1 she is kind, but 
man is ungrateful 1 

Proceeding in my journey through this pensive 
scene of desolated beauty, in a few da}^ I arrived 
among the Danres, a nation still dependent on 
China. Xaizigar is their principal city, which, 
compared with those of Europe, scarcely deserves 
the name. The governors and other officers, who 
are sent yeariy from Pekin, abuse their authority,, 
and often take the wives and daughters of the in- 
habitants to themselves. The Daures, accustomed 
to base submission, feel no resentment at those 
injuries, or stifle what they feel. Custom and ne- 
cessity teach even barbarians the same art of dissi- 
mulation that ambition and intrigue inspire in the 
breasts of the polite. Upon beholding such un- 
licensed stretches of power, alas, thought I, how 
little does our wise and good emperor know of 
these intolerable exactions ! these provinces are too 
distant for complaint, and too insignificant to 
expect redress. The more distant the government, 

I. D 



34 THE CmZSN OF THE WORLD. 

the honester dioiild be the governer to whom it is 
entrusted ; for hope of impmiity is a strong induce* 
ment to violation. 

The religion of the Danres is more absurd than 
even that of the sectaries of FohL How would 
]rou be surprised^ O sage disciple and follower of 
Confucitts 1 you ^vdio believe one eternal intelU* 
gent canae of all, should you be present at the bar- 

/ barous oefemonies of this in£&ttiated peof^ How 
would you -deplore the blindness and folly of 
mankind. His boasted reason seems only to l^ht 
him astray, and brutal instinct more r^;ularly 

-^ points out the path to happiness. Could you 
think it ? they adore a wicked divinity ; they fear 
him and they worship him ; they imagine him a 
malicious Being, ready to injure and ready to be 
appeased. The men and women assemble at mid* 
night in a hut, which serves for a temple. A priest 
stretches himself on the ground, and all the people 
pour forth the most horrid cries, while drums and 
timbrels swell the infernal concert After this dis- 
sonance, miscalled music, has continued about two 
hours, the priest rises from the ground, assumes an 
air of inspiration, grows big with the inspiring 
daemon, and pretends to a skill in futurity. 

In every country, my friend, the bonzes, the 
brachmans, and the priests deceive the people ; all 
reformations begin from the laity ; the priests 
point us out the way to heaven with their fingers, 
but stand still themselves, nor seem to travel to- 
wards the country in view. 

The customs of this people correspond to their 
religion ; they keep their dead for three days on 
the same bed where the person died ; after which 



THB CITIZEN OP TUB WORLD. 35 

they buiy him in a grave moderately deep, but 
wiUi the head still micovered. Here for several 
days they present him different sorts of meats ; 
which, when they perceive he does not consume, 
they fill up the grave, and desist from desiring him 
to eat for the future. How, how can mankind be 
guilty of such strange absurdity \ to entreat a dead 
body already putrid to partake of the banquet ? 
Where, I again repeat it, is human reason I not 
only some men, but whole nations, seem divested 
of its illumination. Here we observe a whole 
eoimtiy adorii^ a divinity through fear, and at- 
tempduig. to feed the dead. These are their most 
serious and most religious occupations : are these 
men lational, or are not the apes of Borneo more 
wise? 

Certain I am, O thou instructor of my youth I 
that without philosophers, without some few vir- 
tuous men, who seem to be of a different nature 
from the rest of mankind, without such as these 
the worship of a wicked divinity would surely be 
established over every part of the earth. Fear 
guides more to their duty than gratitude : for one 
man who is virtuous from the love of virtue ; from 
the obligation which he thinks he lies under to the 
giver of all ; there are ten thousand who are good 
only fron^ their apprehensions of punishment. 
Could these last be persuaded, as the Epicureans 
were, that heaven had no thunders in store for the 
villain, they would no longer continue to acknow- 
ledge subordination, or thank that Being who gave 
them existence. Adieu. 




^•U'r^^ 



V v..*'^>; 



36 TMS CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

LETTER XL 
To the same, 

[ROM such a picture of Nature in pri- 
meval simplicity, tell me, my much re- 
spected friend, are you in love with 
fatigue and solitude? Do you sigh 
for the severe frugality of the wandering Tartar, or 
regret being bom amidst the luxury and dissimu- 
lation of the polite? Rather tell me, has not 
every kind of life vices peculiarly its own ? Is it 
not a truth, that refined countries have more vices, 
but those not so terrible, barbarous nations few, 
and they of the most hideous complexion ? Perfidy 
and fraud are the vices of civilized nations, 
credulity and violence those of the inhabitants 
of the desert. Does the luxury of the one produce 
half the evils of the inhumanity of the other? 
Certainly those philosophers, who declaim against 
luxury, have but little understood its benefits ; they 
seem insensible, that to luxury we owe not only 
the greatest part of our knowledge, but even of 
our virtues. 

It may sound fine in the mouth of a declaimer 
when he talks of subduing our appetites, of teach- 
ing every sense to be content with a bare suffi- 
ciency, and of supplying only the wants of Nature ; 
but is there not more satisfaction in indulging those 
appetites, if with innocence and safety, than in re- 
straining them ? Am not I better pleased in en- 
joyment than in the sullen satisfaction of thinking 
that I can live without enjoyment? The more 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. yi 

various oar artificial necessities, the wider is our 
circle of pleasure; for all pleasure consists in 
obviating necessities as they rise ; luxury, there- 
fore, as it encreases our wants, encreases our 
capacity for happiness. 

Examine the history of any country remarka|>le 
for opulence and wisdom, you will find they would 
never have been wise had they not been first 
luxurious ; you will find poets, philosophers, and 
even patriots, marching in Luxury's train. The 
leason is obvious ; we' {heii only are curious after 
knowledge when we find it connected with sensual 
happiness. The senses ever point out the way, 
and reflection comments upon the discovery. In- 
form a native of the desert of Koln, of the exact 
measure of the parallax of the moon, he finds no 
satis&ction at all in the information ; he wonders 
how any could take such pains, and lay out such 
treasures in order to solve so useless a difficulty ; 
bat connect it with his happiness, by shewing that 
it improves navigation, that by such an investiga- 
ti<m he may have a warmer coat, a better gun, or 
a finer knife, and he is instantly in raptures at so 
great an improvement. In short, we only desire 
to know what we desire to possess ; and whatever 
we may talk against it, luxury adds the spur to 
curiosity, and gives us a desir^ of becoming more 
vidse. 

But not our knowledge only, but our virtues are 
improved by luxury. Observe the brown savage j 
of Thibet, to whom the fruits of the spreading ■. 
pomegranate supply food, and its branches an 
habitation. Such a character has few vices I 
grant, but those he has are of the most hideous 




38 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

nature, rapine and cruelty are scarce crimes in his 
eye, neither pity nor tenderness, which ennoble 
every virtue, has any place in his heart ; he hates 
his enemies, and kills those he subdues. On the 
other hand, the polite Chinese and civilized Eu- 
ropean seem even to love their enemies. I have 
just now seen an instance where the English have 
succoured those enemies whom their own country- 
men actually refused to relieve. 

The greater die luxuries of every country, the 
more closely, politically spealdi^, is that country 
united. Luxury is the child of society alone, the 
luxurious man stands in need of a thousand difife- 
rent artists to furnish out his happiness ; it is more 
likely, therefore, that he should be a good citizen 
who is connected by motives of self-interest with 
so many, than the abstemious man who is united 
to none. 

In whatsoever light therefore we consider luxury, 
whether as employing a number of hands naturally 
too feeble for more laborious employment, as find- 
ing a variety of occupation for others who might 
be totally idle, or as furnishing out new inlets to 
happiness, without encroaching on mutual pro- 
perty, in whatever light we regard it, we shall 
have reason to stand up in its defence, and the 
sentiment of Confucius still remains unskaken; 
that we should enjoy as many of the luxuries of 
life as are consistent with our own safety^ and the 
prosperity of others^ and that he who finds out a 
new pleasure is one of the most useful members of 
society. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 39 

LETTER XII. 
To the same, 

fROM the funeral solemnities of the 
Danres, who think themselves the poli- 
test people in the world, I must make 
a transition to the funeral solemnities 
of the English, who think themselves as polite as 
tbe]F* The numberless ceremonies which are used 
here when a person is sick, appear to me so many 
evident marks of fear and apprehension. Ask an 
Englishman, however, whether he is afraid of 
death, and he boldly answers in the negative ; but 
obierve his behaviour in circumstances of approach- 
ing sickness, and you will find his actions give his 
assertions the lie. 

The Chinese ore very sincere in this respect ; 
they hate to die, and they confess their terrors : a 
great part of their life is spent in preparing things 
proper for their funeral ; a poor artizan shall spend 
half his income in providing himself a tomb twenty 
years before he wants it ; and denies himself the 
necessaries of life, that he may be amply provided 
fat when he shall want them no more. 

But people of distinction in England really de- 
serve pity, for they die in circumstances of the 
most extreme distress. It is an established rule, 
never to let a man know that he is dying : physi- 
cians are sent for, the clergy are called, and every 
thing passes in silent solemnity round the sick 
bed ; the patient is in agonies, looks round for 
pity, yet not a single creature will say that he is 



40 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

dying. If he is possessed of fortune, his relations 
entreat him to make his will, as it may restore the 
tranquillity of his mind. He is desired to undergo 
the rites of the church, for decency requires it. 
His friends take their leave only because they 
don't care to see him in pain. In short, an hun- 
dred stratagems are used to make him do what he 
might have been induced to perform only by being 
told ; Sir^ you are past all hopes ^ and had as good 
think decently of dying. 

Besides all this, the chamber is darkened, the 
whole house echoes to the cries of the wife, the 
lamentations of the children, the grief of the ser- 
vants, and the sighs of friends. The bed is sur- 
rounded with priests and doctors in black, and 
only flambeaux emit a yellow gloom. Where is 
the man, how intrepid soever, that would not 
shrink at such a hideous solemnity ? For fear of 
affirighting their expiring friends, the English prac- 
tise all that can fill them with terror. Strange 
effect of human prejudice thus to torture merely 
from mistaken tenderness ! 

You see, my friend, what contradictions there 
are in the tempers of those islanders; when 
prompted by ambition, revenge, or disappoint- 
ment, they meet death with the utmost resolution ; 
the very man who in his bed would have trembled 
at the aspect of a doctor, shall go with intrepidity 
to attack a bastion, or deliberately noose himself 
up in his garters. 

The passion of the Europeans for magnificent 
interments, is equally strong with that of the 
Chinese. When a tradesman dies, his frightful 
face is painted up by an undertaker, and placed 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 42 

in a proper sitaaftiao to receive oompany ; this is 
called Ij^mg in state. To this disagreeable spec- 
tacle all the idleis in town flock, and kam to 
loath the wretdi dead, whom they despised idien 
living. In this manner yoo see some who would 
have refused a shilling to save the Ufe of their 
dearest friend, bestow diousands on adorning their 
pntiid coqKe. I have been tcdd of a fellow, 
who grown rich by the price <rf^ blood, left it in 
his will that he should lie in state, and thus un- 
knowing^ gibbeted himself into in£Euny, when he 
miglit have otherwise quietly retired into oblivion. 
When the person is buried, the next care is to 
make his epitaph; they are generally reckoned 
best which flatter most ; such Relations therefore 
as have received most benefits from the defunct, 
discharge this friendly office ; and generally flatter 
in proportion to their joy. When we read those 
monumental histories of the dead, it may be justly 
said, that ail men are equal in the dust ; for they 
all appear equally remarkable for being the most 
sincere Christians, the most benevolent neighbours, 
and the honestest men of their time. To go through 
an European cemetery, one would be apt to wonder 
how mankind could have so basely d^enerated 
from such excellent ancestors ; every tomb pre- 
tetids to claim your reverence and r^ret ; some 
are praised for piety in those inscriptions who 
never entered the temple until they were dead ; 
some are praised for being excellent poets, who 
were never mentioned, except for their dulness, 
when living : others for sublime orators, who were 
never noted except for their impudence ; and others 
still for military achievements, who were never in 



4» THE CtTTZEN OF THE WORLD, 

any other skirmishes but with the watch. Some 
even make epitaphs for themselves, and bespeak 
the reader's good-will. It were indeed to be wi^ed, 
that every man would early learn in this manner 
to make hb own ; that he would draw it up in 
terms as flattering as possible ; and that he would 
make it the employment of his whole life to de- 
serve it I 

I have not yet been in a place called Westminster 
Abbey, but soon intend to visit it. There I am 
told I shall see justice done to deceased merit ; 
none, I am told, are permitted to be buried there 
but such as have adorned as well as improved 
mankind. There no intruders by the influence of 
friends or fortune, presume to mix their unhallowed 
ashes with philosophers, heroes, and poets. No- 
thing but true merit has a place in that awful 
sanctuary : the guardianship of the tombs is com- 
mitted to several reverend priests, who are never 
guilty for a superior reward of taking down the 
names of good men, to make room for others of 
equivocal character, nor ever profane the sacred 
walls with pageants, that posterity cannot know, or 
shall blush to own. 

I always was of opinion, that sepulchral honours 
of this kind should be considered as a national con- 
cern, and not trusted to the care of the priests of 
any country, how respectable soever; but from 
the conduct of the reverend personages, whose dis- 
interested patriotism I shall shortly be able to dis- 
cover, I am taught to retract my former sentiments. 
It is true, the Spartans and the Persians made a 
fine political use of sepulchral vanity ; they per- 
mitted none to be thus interred, who had not fsdlen 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 43 

in tiie vindication of their country; a monument 
thus became a real marie of distinction, it nerved 
the hero's arm with tenfold vigour; and he 
fboght without fear, who only fought for a grave. 

FareweU. 




LETTER XIII. 
From the same, 

AM just returned from Westminster- 
abbey, the place of sepulture for the 
philosophers, heroes, and kings of 
England. What a gloom do monu- 
mental inscriptions and all the venerable remains 
of deceased merit inspire 1 Imagine a temple 
marked with the hand of antiquity, solemn as reli- 
gious awe, adorned with all the magnificence of 
barbarous profusion, dim windows, fretted pillars, 
long colonnades, and dark ceilings. Think then, 
what were my sensations at being introduced to 
such a scene. I stood in the mklst of the temple, 
and threw my eyes round on the walls filled with 
the statues, the inscriptions, and the monuments of 
the dead. 

Alas, I said to myself, how does pride attend 
the puny child of dust even to the grave 1 Even 
humble as I am, I possess more ccHisequence in the 
present scene than the greatest hero of them all ; 
they have toiled for an hour to gain a transient im- 
mortality, and are at length retired to the grave, 
where they have no attendant but the worm, none 
to flatter but the epitaph. 



44 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

' As I was indulging such reflections, a gentleman 
dressed in black, perceiving me to be a stranger, 
came up, entered into conversation, and politely 
offered to be my instructor and guide through the 
temple. If any monument, said he, should parti- 
cularly excite your curiosity, I shall endeavour to 
satisfy your demands. I accepted with thanks the 
gentleman's offer, adding, that *'I was come to 
observe the policy, the wisdom, and the justice of 
the English, in conferring rewards upon deceased 
merit. If adulation like this, continued I, be pro- 
perly conducted, as it can no ways injure those 
who are flattered, so it may be a glorious incentive 
to those who are now capable of enjoying it It is 
the duty of every good government to turn this 
monumental pride to its own advantage, to be- 
come strong in the aggregate from the weakness of 
the individual. If none but the truly great have a 
place in this awful repository, a temple like this 
will give the finest lessons of morality, and be a 
strong incentive to true ambition. I am told, that 
none have a place here but characters of the most 
distinguished merit." The man in black seemed 
impatient at my observations, so I discontinued 
my remarks, and we walked on together to take a 
view of every particular monument in order as 
it lay. 

As the eye is naturally caught by the finest ob- 
jects, I could not avoid being particularly curious 
about one monument which appeared more beau- 
tiful than the rest ; that, said I to my guide, I 
take to be the tomb of some very great man. By 
the peculiar excellence of the workmanship, and 
the magnificence of the design, this must be a 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 45 

trophy raised to the memory of some king who has 
ssred his country from ruin, or law-giver, who has 
reduced his fellow-citizens from anarchy into just 

subjection. It is not requisite, replied my 

companion smiling, to have such qualifications in 
order to have a very fine monument here. More 
humble abilities will suffice. Whai^ I suppose then, 
the gaining two or three battles y or the taking half a 
score townsy is thought a sufficient qualification t 
Gaining battles, or taking towns, replied the man 
in black, may be of service ; but a gentleman may 
have a very fine monument here without ever seeing 
a battle or a si^e. This then is the monument of 
some poet y I presume^ of one whose wit has gained 
Jkim immortality ? No, sir, replied my guide, the 
gentleman who lies here never made verses ; and 
as for wit, he despised it in others, because he had 
none himself. Fray tell me then in a word, said I 
peevishly, what is the great man who lies here par- 
ticularly remarkable for f Remarkable, sir ! said 
my companion ; why, sir, the gentleman that lies 

here is remarkable, very remarkable for a tomb 

in Westminster-abbey. Buty headof my Ancestors! 
how has he got here f I fancy he could never brU>e 
the guardians of the temple to give him a place : 
Should he not be ashamed to be seen among company ^ 
where even moderate merit would look like infamy t 
I suppose, replied the man in black, the gentleman 
was rich, and his fiiends, as is usual in such a case, 
told him he was great He readily believed them ; 
the guardians of the temple, as they got by the 
self-delusion, were ready to believe him too ; so he 
paid his money for a fine monument; and the 
workman, as you see, has made him one the most 



46 TH£ CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

beaiitifiiL Think not, however, that this gentle- 
man is singular in his desire of being buried amcMig 
the great, there are several others in the temple, 
who, hated and shunned by the great while alive, 
have oome here, liilly resolved to keep them com- 
pany now they are dead. 

As we walked along to a particular part of the 
temple, there, says the gentleman, pointing with 
his finger, that is the poets' comer ; there you see 
the monuments of ^akespear, and Milton, and 
Prior, and Drayton. Drajrton, I replied, I never 
heard of him before, but I have been told of one 
Pope, is he there ? It is time enough, replied my 
guide, these hundred years, he is not long dead, 
people have not done bating him yet. Strange, 
cried I, can any be found to hate a man, whose 
Hfe was wholly spent in entertaining and instruct- 
ing his fdlow creatures ! Yes, says my gmde, they 
hate him for that veiy reason. There are a set of 
men called answerers of books, who take upon 
them to watch the republic of letters, and distri- 
bute reputation by the sheet ; they somewhat re* 
semble the eunuchs in a seri^lio, who are in- 
d^ble of giving pleasure themselves, and hinder 
those that would* These answerers have no other 
emplojrment but to cry out Dunce, and Scribbler, 
to praise the dead, and revile the living, to grant 
a man of confessed abilities some small share of 
merit, to applaud twenty blockheads in order to gain 
the reputation of candour, and to revile the moral 
character of the man whose writings they cannot 
y, injure. Such wretches are kept in pay by some 
mercenary bookseller, or more frequently, the 
bookseller himself takes this dirty work o£f their 



THE CITIZEN OF THE VfTORLD. 47 

hands, as all that is required is to be very abnsiTe 
and very dull ; every Poet of any genius is sure to 
find such enemies, he feels, thou^ he seems to 
despise their malice, they make him miserable here, 
and in the pursuit of empty fame, at last he gains» 
solid anxiety. 

Has this been the case with eiferypoet I see here f 
cried I— Yes, with every motiier's son of them, 
replied he, except he happened to be bom a man* 
darine. If he luis much money, he may buy repa» 
tation from your book answerers, as well as a 
monument frx>m the guardians of the temple. 

But are there noisome men of distinguished tasto^ 
as in China, who are wilUng to patronite men ef 
merit emdseften the rancour ef malevolent dulness 9 

I own there are many, replied the man in black, 
but, alas ! Sir, the book ^uiswerers crowd about 
them, and call themselves the writers of books ; 
and the patron is too indolent to distinguish ; thus 
poets are kept at a distance, while their enemies 
eat up all their rewards at the mandarine's table. 

Leaving this part of the temple, we made up to 
an iron gate, through which my companion told 
me we were to pass in order to see the monuments 
of the kings. Accordingly I marched up without 
further ceremony, and was going to enter, when 
a person who held the gate in his hand, told me 
I must pay first I was surprised at such a demand ; 
and asked the man whether the people of England 
kept a show? Whether the paltry sum he de- 
manded was not a national reproach ? Whether it 
was not more to the honour of the country to let 
their magnificence or their antiquities be openly 
seen, than thus meanly to tax a curiosity which 



48 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

tended to their own honour ? As for your questions, 
replied the gate-keeper, to be sure they may be very 
right, because I don't understand them, but as for 
that there three-pence, I farm it from one, who 
rents it from another, who hires it from a third, 
who leases it from the guardians of the temple, 
and we all (must live. I expected upon paying 
here to see something extraordinary, since what I 
had seen for nothing filled me with so much sur- 
prize ; but in this I was disappointed ; there was 
little more within than black coffins, rusty armour, 
tattered standards, and some few slovenly figures 
in wax. I was sorry I had paid, but I comforted 
myself by considering it would be my last pay- 
ment. A person attended us, who, without once 
blushing, told an hundred lies; he talked of a 
lady who died by pricking her finger, of a king 
with a golden head, and twenty such pieces of ab- 
surdity ; Look ye there, gentlemen, says he, point- 
ing to an old oak chair, there's a curiosity for ye ; 
in that chair the kings of England were crowned, 
you see also a stone underneath, and that stone is 
Jacob's pillow. I could see no curiosity either in 
the oak chair or the stone ; could I, indeed, be- 
hold one of the old kings of England seated in this, 
or Jacob's head laid upon the other, there might be 
something curious in the sight ; but in the present 
case, there was no more reason for my surprize than 
if I should pick a stone from their streets, and call 
it a curiosity, merely because one of the kings 
happened to tread upon it as he passed in a 
procession. 

From hence our conductor led us through 
several dark walks and winding ways, uttering lies. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 49 

talking to himself, and flourishing a wand which 
he held in his hand. He reminded me of the black 
magicians of Kobi. After we had been almost 
fatigued with g variety of objects, he, at last, 
desired me to consider attentively a certain suit of 
armour, which seemed to shew nothing remarkable. 
This armour, said he, belonged to general Monk. 
Very surprising^ that a general should toear armour. 
And pray, added he, observe this cap, this is 
general Monk's cap. Very strange indeed, very 
strange, thai a general shottld have a cap also! 
Pray friend, what might this cap have cost origi' 
nallyl That, Sir, sa3rs he, I don't know, but 
this cap is all the wages I have for my trouble. 
A very small recompence, truly, said I. Not so 
very small, replied he, for every gentleman puts 
some money into it, and I spend the money. 
What, more money I still more money I Every 
gentleman gives something, sir. I'll give thee 
nothing, returned I ; the guardians of the temple 
should pay you your wages, friend, and not permit 
you to squeeze thus from every spectator. When 
we pay our money at the door to see a show, we 
never give more as we are going out. Sure the 
guardians of the temple can never think they get 
enough. Shew me the gate % if I stay longer, I 
may probably meet with more of those ecclesiastical 
beggars. 

Thus leaving the temple precipitately, I re- 
turned to my lodgings, in order to ruminate over 
what was great, and to despise what was mean in 
the occurrences of the day. 



I. B 




50 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

LETTER XIV. 
Ffom the same, 

WAS some days ago agreeably sur- 
prized by a message from a lady of 
distinction, who sent me word, that she 
most passionately desired the pleasure 
of' my acquaintance; and, with the utmost im- 
patience, expected an interview. I will not deny, 
my dear Fum Hoam, but that my vanity was 
raised at such an invitation, I flattered myself that 
she had seen me in some public place, and had 
conceived an affection for my person, which thus 
induced her to deviate from the usual decorums of 
the sex. My imagination painted her in all the 
bloom of youth and beauty. I £uicied her at- 
tended by the Loves and Graces, and I set out 
with the most pleasing expectations of seeing the 
conquest I had made. 

When I was introduced into her apartment, my 
expectations were quickly at an end ; L perceived 
a little shrivelled figure indolently reclined on a 
sofa, who nodded by way of approbation at my 
approach. This, as I was afterwards informed, 
was the lady herself, a woman equally distin- 
guished for rank, politeness, taste, and understand- 
ing. As I was dressed after the fashion of Europe, 
she had taken me for an Englishman, and conse- 
quently saluted me in her ordinary manner ; but 
when the footman informed her grace that I was 
the gentleman from China, she instantly lifted her- 
self from the couch, while her eyes sparkled with 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 51 

unusual vivacity. " Bless me t can this be the '^ 
gentleman that was bom so far from home ? What 
an unusual share of somethingness in his whole ap- 
pearance. Lord, how I am charmed with the out- 
landish cut of his face ; how bewitching the exotic 
breadth of his forehead. I would give the world 
to see him in his own country dress. Pray turn 
about, Sir, and let me see you behind. There I 
there's a travelled air for you. You that attend 
there, bring up a plate of beef cut into small 
pieces ; I have a violent passion to see him eat. 
Pray, Sir, have you got your chop sticks about 
you ? It will be so pretty to see the meat carried 
to the mouth with a jerk. Pray speak a little 
Chinese: I have learned some of the language my- 
self. Lord, have you nothing pretty from China 
about you; something that one does not know 
what to do with ? I have got twenty things from 
China that are of no use in the world. Look at 
those jars, they are of the right pea-green : these 
are the furniture." Dear madam^ said I, these^ 
though they tnay appear fine in your eyes, are but 
paltry to a Chinese; but^ as they are useful utensils, 
it is proper they should have a place in every apart- 
ment. Useful 1 Sir, replied the lady ; sure you 
mistake, they are of no use in the world. What I 
are they not filled with an infusion of tea <u in 
China ? replied I. Quite empty and useless upon 
my honour. Sir. Then they are the most cumbrous 
and clumsy furniture in the worldy as nothing is 
truly elegant but what unites use with beauty, I 
protest, says the lady, I shall begin to suspect thee 
of being an actual barbarian. I suppose you hold 
my two beautiful pagods in contempt. What! 



5a THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

cried I, has Fohi spread his gross superstitions here 
also? Fagods of all ktttds are my aversion, A 
Chinese, a traveller, and want taste ! it surprises 
me. Pray, sir, examine the beauties of that 
Chinese temple which you see at the end of the 
garden. Is there any thing in China more beauti- 
ful? Where I stand I see nothings madam^ at the 
end cf the garden that may not as well be called an 
Egyptian pyramid as a Chinese temple; for that 
little building in view is as like the one as Mother, 
What 1 Sir, is not that a Chinese temple ? you 
must surely be mistaken. Mr. Freeze, who de- 
signed it, calls it one, and nobody disputes his pre- 
tensions to taste. I now found it vain to contradict 
the lady in any thing she thought fit to advance ; 
so was resolved rather to act the disciple than the 
instructor. She took me through several rooms 
all furnished, as she told me, in the Chinese 
manner ; sprawling dragons, squatting pagods, and 
clumsy mandarines, were stuck upon every shelf : 
In turning round one must have used caution not 
to demolish a part of the precarious furniture. 

In a house like this, thought I, one must live 
continually upon the watch ; the inhabitant must 
resemble a knight in an enchanted castle, who ex- 
pects to meet an adventure at every turning. But^ 
madam^ said l,dono accidents ever happen to all this 
finery 1 Man, Sir, replied the lady, is bom to 
misfortunes, and it is but fit I should have a share. 
Three weeks ago, a careless servant snapped off 
the head of a favourite mandarine : I had scarce 
done grieving for that, when a monkey broke a 
beautiful jar ; this I took the more to heart, as the 
injury was done me by a friend : however, I sur- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 53 

vived the calamity; when yesterday crash went 
half a dozen dragons upon the marble hearth 
stone ; and yet I live ; I survive it all : you can't 
conceive what comfort I find under afflictions firom 
philosophy. There is Seneca, and Bolingbroke, 
and some others, who guide me through life, and 
teach me to support its calamities. — I could not 
but smile at a woman who makes her own misfor- 
tunes, and then deplores the miseries of her situa- 
tion. Wherefore, tired of acting with dissimula- 
tion, and willing to indulge my meditations in 
solitude, I took leave just as the servant was bring- 
ing in a plate of beef, pursuant to the directions of 
his mistress. Adieu. 




LETTER XV. 
From the same, 

I HE better sort here pretend to the ut- 
most compassion for animals of every 
kind ; to hear them speak, a stranger 
would be apt to imagine they could 
hardly hurt the gnat that stung them ; they seem 
so tender, and so full of pity, that one would take 
them for the harmless friends of the whole creation ; 
the protectors of the meanest insect or reptile that 
was privileged with existence. And yet would 
you believe it, I have seen the very men who have 
thus boasted of their tenderness at the same time 
devouring the flesh of six different animals tossed 
up in a fricassee. Strange contrariety of conduct ; 
they pity and they ect the objects of their com- 



54 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

passion. The lion roars with terror over its 
captive; the tiger sends forth its hideous shriek 
to intimidate its prey; no creature shews any 
fondness for its short-lived prisoner, except a man 
and a cat 

Man was bom to live with innocence and sim- 
plicity, but he has deviated from nature ; he was 
bom to share the bounties of heaven, but he has 
monopolized them; he was bom to govern the 
brote creation, but he is become their tyrant. If 
an epicure now shall happen to surfeit on his last 
night's feast, twenty animals the next day are to 
undergo the most exquisite tortures in order to 
provoke his appetite to another guilty meal. Hail, 
O ye simple, honest bramins of the east, ye in- 
offensive friends of all that were bom to happiness 
as well as you: you never sought a short-lived 
pleasure from the miseries of other creatures. You 
never studied the tormenting arts of ingenious re- 
finement ; you never surfeited upon a guilty meal. 
How much more purified and refined are all your 
sensations than ours: you distinguish every ele- 
ment with the utmost precision ; a stream untasted 
before is new luxury, a change of air is a new 
banquet, too refined for western imaginations to 
conceive. 

Though the Europeans do not hold the trans- 
migration of souls, yet one of their doctors has, 
with great force of argument, and great plausibi- 
lity of reasoning, endeavoured to prove that the 
bodies of animals are the habitations of daemons 
and wicked spirits, which are obliged to reside in 
these prisons till the resurrection pronounces their 
isjverlasting punishment ; but are prcvious'y con- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 55 

demned to sufifer all the pains and hardships in- 
flicted upon them by man, or by each other here. 
If this be the case, it may frequently happen, that 
while we whip p^ to death, or boil live lobsters, 
we are putting some old acquaintance, some near 
relation, to excruciating tortures, and are servings' 
him up to the very same table where he was once 
the most welcome companion. 

" Kabul, says the Zendavesta, was bom on the 
rushy banks of the river Mawra ; his possessions 
were great, and his luxuries kept pace with the 
affluence of his fortune ; he hated the harmless 
bramins, and demised their holy religion ; every 
day his table was decked out with the flesh of an 
hundred different animals, and his cooks had an 
hundred different wajrs of dressing it, to solicit 
even satiety. 

"Notwithstanding all his eating, he did not 
arrive at old age, he died of a surfeit, caused by 
intemperance : upon this, his soul was carried off, 
in order to take its trial before a select assembly 
of the souls of those animals which his gluttony 
had caused to be slain, and who were now ap- 
pointed his judges. 

'* He trembled before a tribunal, to every member 
of which, he had formerly acted as an unmerdful 
tyrant : he sought for pity, but found none dis- 
posed to grant it. Does he not remember, cries 
the angry boar, to what agonies I was put, not to 
satisfy his hunger, but W^ vnnity? I was first 
hunted to death, and my flesh scarce thought 
worthy of coming once to his table. Were my 
advice followed, he should do penance in the 
shape of an hog, which in life he most resembled. 



S6 THR CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

*' I am rather, cries a sheep upon the bench, for 
having him suffer under the appearance of a lamb, 
we may then send him through four or five trans- 
migrations in the space of a month. Were my 
voice of any weight in the assembly, cries a calf, 
he should rather assume such a form as mine : I 
was bled every day, in order to make my flesh 
white, and at last killed without mercy. Would 
it not be wiser, cries a hen, to cram him in the 
shape of a fowl, and then smother him in his own 
blood as I was served ? The majority of the as- 
sembly were pleased with this punishment, and 
were going to condemn him without further delay, 
when the ox rose up to give his opinion : I am 
informed, says this councillor, that the prisoner at 
the bar has left a wife with child behind him. 
By my knowledge in divination I foresee that this 
child will be a son, decrepit, feeble, sickly, a 
plague to himself and all about him. What say 
you then, my companions, if we condemn the 
father to animate the body of his own son ; and 
by this means make him feel in himself those 
miseries his intemperance must otherwise have 
entailed upon his posterity. The whole court ap- 
plauded the Ingenuity of his torture, they thanked 
him for his advice. KLabul was driven once more 
to revisit the earth ; and his soul in the body of 
his own son, passed a period of thirty years, loaded 
with misery, anxiety, and disease." 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 57 

LETTER XVI. 
From the same, 

KNOW not whether I am more obliged 
to the Chinese missionaries for the in- 
struction I have received from them, 
or prejudiced by the falshoods they 
have made me believe. By them I was told that 
the Pope was universally allowed to be a man, 
and placed at the head of the church ; in England, 
however, they plainly prove him to be an whore in 
man's clothes, and often bum him in efi^ as an 
imposter. A thousand books have been written 
on either side of the question ; priests are eternally 
disputing against each other; and those mouths 
that want argument are filled with abuse. Which 
party must I believe, or shall I give credit to 
neither ? When I survey the absurdities and false- 
hoods with which the books of the Europeans are 
filled, I thank heaven for having been bom in 
China, and that I have sagacity enough to detect 
imposture. 

The Europeans reproach us with false history 
and fabulous choronology ; bow should they blush 
to see their own books, many of which are written 
by the doctors of their religion, filled with the 
most monstrous fables, and attested with the utmost 
solemnity. The bounds of a letter do not permit 
me to mention all the absurdities of this kind, 
which in my reading I have met with. I shall 
confine myself to the accounts which some of their 
lettered men give of the persons of some of the 



58 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

inhabitants on our globe. And not satisfied with 
the most solemn asseverations, they sometimes 
pretend to have been eye-witnesses of what they 
describe. 

A christian doctor in one of his principal per- 
formances ^ says, that it was not impossible for a 
whole nation to have but one eye in the middle of 
the forehead. He is not satisfied with leaving it 
in doubt ; but in another work ^ assures us, that 
the £su:t was certain, and that he himself was an 
eye-witness of it Whetty says he, / took a journey 
into Ethiopia in company with several other ser- 
vants of Christy in order to preach the gospel there ; 
I beheld in the southern provinces of that coutttty 
a nation which had only one eye in the midst of 
th^r foreheads. 

You will, no doubt, be surprized, reverend Fum, 
with this author's effrontery; but alas he is not 
alone in this story ; he has only borrowed it from 
several others who wrote before him. Solinus 
creates another nation of Cyclops. The Arimas- 
pians who inhabit those countries that border on 
the Caspian sea. This author goes on to tell us 
of a people of India, who have but one leg and 
one eye, and yet are extremely active, run with 
great swiftness, and live by hunting. These people 
we scarce know how to pity or admire ; but the 
men whom Pliny calls Cynamolci, who have got 
the heads of dogs, really deserve our compassion. 
Instead of languages they express their sentiments 
by barking. Solinus confirms what Pliny men- 
tions ; and Simon Mayole, a French bishop, talks 

1 Augustin, de Civit. Dei, lib. xvi. p. 42a. 
S Id. ad fratres in Eremo, Serm. xxxvii. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 59 

of them as of particular and familiar acquaintances. 
After passing the desarts of Egypt, says he, we 
meet with the Kunokephaloiy who inhabit those 
regions that border on Ethiopia ; they live by hunt- 
ing; they cannot speak, but whistle ; their chins 
resemble a serpenfs head; their hands are artned 
with long sharp claws ; their breast resembles that 
of a greyhound ; and they excel in swiftness and 
agility. Would you think it, my friend, that these 
odd kind of people are, notwithstanding their 
figure, excessively delicate; not even an alder- 
man's wife, or Chinese mandarine, can excel them 
in this particular. These People, continues our 
faithful bishop, never refuse wine ; lave roast and 
boiled meat ; they are particularly curious in 
having their meat well dressed, and spurn at it if 
in the least tcUnted. When the Ptolemies reigned 
in Egypt (says he a little farther on) those men 
with dog/ heads taught Grammar and Music, 
For men who had no voices to teach music, and 
who could not speak to teach grammar, is, I con- 
fess a little extraordinary. Did ever the disciples 
of Fohi broach any thing more ridiculous ? 

Hitherto we have seen men with heads strangely 
deformed, and with dogs' heads ; but what would 
you say if you heard of men without any heads at 
all ? Pomponius Mela, Solinus, and Aulus Gellius, 
describe them to our hand: "The Blemiae have 
a nose, eyes, and mouth on their breasts ; or, as 
others will have it, placed on their shoulders." 

One would think that these authors had an an- 
tipathy to the human form, and were resolved to 
make a new figure of their own : but let us do 
them justice ; though they sometimes deprive us of 



6o THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

a leg, an arm, an head, or some such trifling part of 
the body, they often as liberally bestow upon us 
something that we wanted before. Simon Mayole 
seems our particular friend in this respect : if 
he has denied heads to one part of mankind, he 
has given tails to another. He describes many of 
the English of his time, which is not more than an 
hundred years ago, as having tails. His own 
words are as follow : In England there are some 
families which have tails ^ as a punishment for de- 
riding an Augustin Friar sent by St, Gregory, and 
who preached in Dorsetshire. They sewed the tails 
of different animals to his clothes ; but soon they 
found that those tails entailed on them and their 
posterity for ever. It is certain that the author had 
some ground for this description ; many of the 
English wear tails to their wigs to this very day, as 
a mark, I suppose, of the antiquity of their fami- 
lies, and perhaps as a S3nnbol of those tails with 
which they were formerly distinguished by Nature. 
You see, my friend, there is nothing so ridiculous 
that has not at some time been said by some 
philosopher. The writers of books in Europe 
seem to think themselves authorised to say what 
they please ; and an ingenious philosopher among 
them ^ has openly asserted, that he would under- 
take to persuade the whole republic of readers to 
believe that the sun was neither the cause of light 
nor heat ; if he could only get six philosophers on 
his side. Farewell. 

1 Fontenelle. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 61 

LETTER XVII. 
From the same, 

[ERE an Asiatic politician to read the 
treaties of peace and friendship that 
have been annually making for more 
than an hundred years among the in- 
habitants of Europe, he would probably be sur- 
prized how it should ever happen that christian 
princes could quarrel among each other. Their 
compacts for peace are drawn up with the utmost 
precision, and ratified with the greatest solem- 
nity ; to these each party promises a sincere and 
inviolable obedience, and all wears the appear- 
ance of open friendship and unreserved recon- 
ciliation. 

Yet, notwithstanding those treaties, the people 
of Europe are almost continually at war. There 
is nothing more easy than to break a treaty ratified 
in all the usual forms, and yet neither party be 
the aggressor. One side, for instance, breaks a 
trifling article by mistake ; the opposite party upon 
this makes a small but premeditated reprisal ; this 
brings on a return of greater firom the other ; both 
sides complain of injuries and infractions ; war is 
declared ; they beat, are beaten ; some two or three 
hundred thousand men are killed, they grow tired, 
leave off just where they began ; and so sit coolly 
down to make new treaties. 

The English and French seem to place them- 
selves foremost among the champion states of 
Europe. Though parted by a narrow sea, yet are 



6a THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

they entirely of opposite characters ; and from 
their Vicinity are taught to fear and admire each 
other. They are at present eng^ed in a very de- 
structive war, have already spilled^nuch blood, are 
excessively irritated ; and all upon account of one 
side's desiring to wear greater quantities of furs 
than the other. 

The pretext of the war is about some lands a 
thousand leagues off; a country cold, desolate, 
and hideous ; a country belonging to a people who 
were in possession for time immemorial. The 
savages of Canada claim a property in the country 
in dispute; they have all the pretensions which 
l<Hig possession can confer. Here they had reigned 
for ages without rivals in dominion ; and knew no 
enemies but the prowling bear or insidious tyger ; 
their native forests produced all the necessaries of 
life, and they found ample luxury in the enjoy- 
ment. In this manner they might have continued 
to live to eternity, had not the English been in- 
formed that those countries produced furs in great 
abundance. From that moment the country be- 
came an object of desire ; it was found that furs 
were things very much wanted in England ; the 
ladies edged some of their clothes with furs, and 
muffs were worn both by gentlemen and ladies. 
In short, furs were found indispensably necessary 
for the happiness of the state : and the king was 
consequently petitioned to grant not only the 
country of Canada, but all the savages belonging 
to it to the subjects of England, in order to have 
the people supplied with proper quantities of this 
necessary commodity. 

So very reasonable a request was immediately 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 6j 

complied with, and large colonies were sent abroad 
to procure fiirs, and take possession. The French 
who were equally in want of furs (for they were as 
fond of mufl& and tippets as the English) made the 
very same request to their monarch, and met with 
the same gracious reception from their king, who 
generously granted what was not his to give. 
Wherever the French landed, they called the 
country their own ; and the English took posses- 
sion wherever they came upon the same equitable 
pretensions. The harmless savages made no oppo* 
sition; and could the intruders have agreed to- 
gether, they might peaceably have shared this 
desolate country between them. But they quarrelled 
about the boundaries of their settlements, about 
grounds and rivers to which neither side could 
shew any other right than that of power, and 
which neither could occupy but by usurpation. 
Such is the contest, that no honest man can 
heartily wish success to either party. 

The war has continued for some time with 
various success. At first the French seemed victo* 
rious ; but the English have of late dispossessed them 
of the whole country in dispute. Think not, how* 
ever, that success on one side is the harbinger of 
peace : on the contrary, both parties must be 
heartily tired to effect even a temporary reconcilia- 
tion. It should seem the business of the victorious 
party to o0er terms of peace ; but there are many 
in England, who, encouraged by success, are for 
still protracting the war. 

The best English politicians, however, are sen- 
sible, that to keep their present conquests, would 
be rather a burthen than an advantage to them. 



64 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

rather a diminutioii of their strength than an en- 
crease of power. It is in the politic as in the 
human oonstitutioa ; if the limbs grow too large for 
the body, their size, instead of improving, will 
diminish the vigour of the whole. The colonies 
should always bear an exact proportion to the 
mother* country; when they grow populous, they 
grow powerful, and by becoming powerful, they 
become independent also; thus subordination is 
destroyed, and a country swallowed up in the 
extent of its own dominions. The Turkish empire 
Would be more fbrmidaUe, were it less extensive. 
Were it not for those countries, which it can 
neither conmiand, nor give entirely away, which it 
is obliged to protect, but from which it has no 
power to exact obedience. 

Yet, obvious as these truths are, there are many 
Englishmen who are for transphmting new colonies 
into this late acquisition, for peopling the deserts 
of America with the refuse of their countrymen, 
and (as they express it) with the waste of an 
exuberant nation. But who are those unhappy 
creatures who are to be thus drained away ? Not 
the sickly, for they are unwelcome guests abroad 
as well as at home ; nor the idle, for they would 
starve as well behind the Applachian mountains as 
in the streets of London. This refuse is composed 
of the laborious and enterprising, di such men as 
can be serviceable to their country at home, of 
men who ought to be regarded as the sinews of the 
people, and cherished with every degree of political 
indulgence. And what are the commodities which 
this colony, when established, are to produce in 
return ? Why raw silk, hemp, and tobacco. Eng- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 65 

land, therefore, must make an exchange of her best 
and brevet subjects for raw silk, hemp, and 
tobacco; her hardy veterans and honest trades- 
men, mast be trucked for a box of snuff or a silk 
petticoat. Strange absurdity I Sure the politics 
<A the Daures are not more strange, who sell their 
religion, their wives, and their liberty for a glass 
bead, or a paltry penknife. Farewell. 




LETTER XVIII. 
From the same, 

'HE English love their wives with much 
passion, the Hollanders with much 
prudence. The English when they give 
their hands, frequently give their hearts ; 
the Dutch give the hand, but keep the heart wisely 
in their own possession. The English love with 
violence, and expect violent love in return ; the 
Dutch are satisfied with the slightest acknowledg- 
ments, for they give little away. The English ex- 
pend many of the matrimonial comforts in the first 
year ; the Dutch frugally husband out their plea- 
sures, and are always constant because they are 
always indifferent. 

There seems very little difference between a 
Dutch bridegroom and a Dutch husband. Both 
are equally possessed of the same cool unexpecting 
serenity ; they can see neither Elysium nor Para- 
dise behind the curtain ; and Yiffrow is not more 
a goddess on the wedding night, than after twenty 
years' matrimonial acquaintance. On the other 
I. F 



66 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

hand, many of the English marry, in order to have 
one happy month in their lives; they seem in- 
capable of looking beyond that period ; they unite 
in hopes of finding rapture, and disappointed in 
that, disdain ever to accept of happiness. From 
hence we see open hatred ensue ; or what is worse, 
concealed disgust under the appearance of fulsome 
endearment. Much formality, great civility, and 
studied compliments are exhibited in public ; cross 
looks, sulky silence, or open recrimination, fill up 
their hours of private entertainment. 

Hence I am taught, whenever I see a new 
married couple more than ordinarily fond before 
faces, to consider them as attempting to impose 
upon the company or themselves, either hating 
each other heartily, or consuming that stock of love 
in the beginning of their course, which should serve 
them through their whole journey. Neither side 
should expect those instances of kindness which 
are inconsistent with true freedom or happiness to 
bestow. Love, when founded in the heart, will 
shew itself in a thousand unpremeditated sallies of 
fondness ; but every cool deliberate exhibition of 
the passion, only argues little understanding, or 
great insincerity. 

Choang was the fondest husband, and Hansi the 
most endearing wife in all the kingdom of Korea : 
they were a pattern of conjugal bliss ; the inhabi- 
tants of the country around saw, and envied their 
felicity ; wherever Choang came, Hansi was sure 
to follow ; and in all the pleasures of Hansi, Choang 
was admitted a partner. They walked hand in 
hand wherever they appeared, shewing every mark 
of mutual satisfaction, embracing, kissing, their 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 67 

mouths were for ever joined, and to speak in the 
language of anatomy, it was with them one per- 
petual anastomosis. 

Their love was so great, that it was thought no- 
thing could interrupt their mutual peace ; when an 
accidicnt happened, which, in some measure, 
diminished the husband's assurance of his wife's 
fidelity ; for love so refined as his, was subject to 
a thousand little disquietudes. 

Happening to go one day alone among the tombs 
that lay at some distance from his hou^, he there 
perceived a lady dressed in the deepest mourning, 
(being clothed all over in white) fiuining the wet 
clay that was raised over one of the graves with a 
large £ui, which she held in her hand. Choang, 
who had early been taught wisdom in the school 
of Lao, was unable to assign a cause for her present 
employment; and coming up, civilly demanded 
the reason. Alas, replied the lady, her eyes bathed 
in tears ; how is it possible to siuidve the loss of 
my husbandi who lies buried in this grave; he was 
the best of men, the tenderest of husbands ; with 
his dying breath he bid me never marry again till 
the earth over his grave should be dry ; and here 
you see me steadily resolving to obey his will, and 
endeavouring to dry it with my £eui. I have em- 
ployed two whole days in fuLuling his commands, 
and am determined not to marry till they are punc- 
tually obeyed, even though his grave should take 
up four days in drying. 

Choang, who was struck with the widow's 
beauty, could not, however, avoid smiling at her 
haste to be married ; but, concealing the cause of 
his mirth, civilly invited her home; adding, that 



68 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

he had a wife who might be capable of giving her 
some consolation. As soon as he and his guest 
were returned, he imparted to Hansi in private 
what he had seen, and could not avoid expressing 
his uneasiness, that such might be his own case if 
his dearest wife should one day happen to survive 
him. 

It is impossiUe to describe Hansi's resentment at 
so unkind a suspicion. As her passion for him was 
not only great, but extremely delicate, she em- 
ployed tears, anger, frowns, and exclamations, to 
chide his suspicions; the widow herself was in- 
veighed against ; and Hansi declared she was re- 
solved never to sleep under the same roof with a 
wretch, who, like her, could be guilty of such 
barefaced inconstancy. The night was cold and 
stormy ; however, the stranger was obliged to seek 
another lodging, for Choang was not disposed to 
resist, and Hansi would have her way. 

The widow had scarce been gone an hour, when 
an old disciple of Choang's, whom he had not seen 
for many years, came to pay him a visit. He was 
received with the utmost ceremony, placed in the 
most honourable seat at supper, and the wine be- 
gan to circulate with great freedom. Choang and 
Hansi exhibited open marks of mutual tenderness, 
and unfeigned reconciliation : nothing could equal 
their apparent happiness ; so fond an husband, so 
obedient a wife, few could behold without re- 
gretting their own infelicity. When, lo ! their 
happiness was at once disturbed by a most fatal 
accident. Choang fell lifeless in an apoplectic fit 
upon the floor. Every method was used, but in 
vain, for his recovery. Hansi was at first incon- 



THE CITIZElf OF THE WORLD. 69 

solable for his death : after some hours, however, 
she found spirits to read his last will. The ensuipg 
day she b^;an to moralize and talk wisdom ; the 
next day she was able to comfort the young dis- 
ciple ; and, on the third, to shorten a long story, 
they both agreed to be married. 

There was now no longer mourning in the 
apartments ; the body of Choang was now thrust 
into an old coffin, and placed in one of the meanest 
rooms, there to lie unattended until the time pre- 
scribed by law for his interment. In the mean 
time Hansi, and the young disciple, were arrayed 
ii^ the most magnificent habits ; the bride wore in 
her nose a jewel of immense price, and her lover 
was dressed in all the finery of his former master, 
tc^ether with a pair of artificial whiskers that 
reached down to his toes. The hour of their nup- 
tials was arrived; the whole £unily sympathized 
with their approaching happiness ; the apartinents 
were brightened up with lights that diffused the 
most exquisite perfume, and a lustre more br^ht 
than noon day. The lady expected her youthful 
lover in an inner apartment with impatience ; when 
his servant approaching with terror in his coun- 
tenance, informed her, that his master was fallen 
into a fit, which would certainly be mortal, unless 
the heart of a man lately dead, could be obtained, 
and applied to his breast. She scarce waited to 
hear the end of his story, when, tucking up her 
clothes, she ran with a mattock in her hand to the 
coffin, where Choang lay, resolving to apply the 
heart of her dead husband as a cure for the living. 
She therefore struck the lid with the utmost vio- 
lence. In a few blows the coffin flew open, when 



70 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

the body, which, to all appearance had been dead, 
began to move. Terrified at the sight, Hansi 
dropped the mattock, and Choang walked out, 
astonished at his own situation, his wife's unusual 
magnificence, and her more amazing surprize. He 
went among the apartments, unable to conceive 
the cause of so much splendour. He was not long 
in suspense before his domestics informed him of 
every transaction since he first became insensible. 
He could scarce believe what they told him, and 
went in pursuit of Hansi herself, in order to re- 
ceive more certain information, or to reproach her 
infidelity. But she prevented his reproaches : he 
found her weltering in blood ; for she had stabbed 
herself to the heart, being unable to survive her 
shame and disappointment. 

Choang, being a philosopher, was too wise to 
make any loud lamentations ; he thought it best 
to bear his loss with serenity ; so, mending up the 
old coffin where he had lain himself, he placed his 
faithless spouse in his room ; and, unwilling that 
so many nuptial preparations should l)e expended 
in vain, he the same night married the widow 
with the large fan. 

As they both were apprised of the foibles of 
each other before hand, they knew how to excuse 
them after marriage. They lived together for 
many years in great tranquillity, and not expect- 
ing rapture, made a shift to find contentment. 
Farewell. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 71 

LETTER XIX. 1 

To the same, 

|H£ gentleman dressed in black, who 
was my companion through Westmin- 
ster Abbey, came yesterday to pay me a 
visit ; and after drinking tea, we both 
resolved to take a walk together, in order to enjoy 
the freshness of the country, which now begins to 
resume its verdure. Before we got out of the 
suburbs, however, we were stopped in one of the 
streets by a crowd of people, gathered in a circle 
round a man and his wife, who seemed too loud 
and too angry to be understood. The people 
were highly pleased with the dispute, which upon 
enquiry we found to be between Dr. Cacafogo an 
apothecary, and his wife. The doctor, it seems, 
coming unexpectedly into his wife's apartment, 
found a gentleman there in circumstances not in 
the least equivocaL 

The doctor, who was a person of nice honour, 
resolving to revenge the flagrant insult, imme- 
diately flew to the chinmey-piece, and taking down 
a rusty blunderbuss, drew the trigger upon the 
defiler of his bed ; the delinquent would certainly 
have been shot through the head, but that the 
piece had not been charged for many years. The 
gallant made a shift to escape through the window, 
but the lady still remained ; and as she well knew 
her husband's temper, undertook to manage the 
quarrel without a second. lie was furious, and 
she loud ; their noise had gathered all the mob 



7t THE CrnZEN OF THE WORLD. 

who charitably assembled on the oocasioiiy not to 
pievent, bat to enjoy the quarreL 

Alas, said I to my companion, what will become 
of this unhappy creature thus caught in adultery 1 
Believe me, I pity her from my heart ; her hus- 
band, I suppose will shew her no mercy. Will 
they bum her as in India, or behead her as in 
Persia ; will they load her with stripes as in Tur- 
key, or keep ha in perpetual imprisonment, as 
with us in China 1 Piythee, what is the wife's 
punishment in England for such offences? Wh«i 
a lady is thus caught tripping, replied my com- 
panion, they never punish her, but the husband. 
You surely jest, interrupted I $ I am a foreigner, 
and you would abuse my ignorance \ I am really 
serious, returned he ; E^. Cacafogo has caught his 
wife in the act ; but as he had no witnesses, his 
small testimony goes for nothing ; the consequence 
therefore of his discovery will be, that she may be 
packed off to live among her relations, and the 
doctor must be obliged to allow her a separate 
maintenance. Amazing, cried 1 1 is it not enough 
that she is permitted to live separate from the 
object she detests, but must he give her money to 
keep her in spirits too? That he must, says my 
guide ; and be called a cuckold by all his neigh- 
bours into the bargain. The men will laugh at 
him, the ladies will pity him; and all that his 
warmest friends can say in his favour, will be, 
that ih& poor good soul has mvor had any harm in 
him, I want patience, interrupted I ; what 1 are 
there no private chastisements for the wife; no 
schools of penitence to show her her folly; no 
rods for such delinquents ? Psha, man, replied he 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 73 

smiling ; if eveiy delinquent among us were to be 
treated in your manner, one half of the kingdom 
would flog the other. 

I must confess, my dear Fum, that if I were an 
English husband, kA all things I would take care 
not to be jealous, nor busily pry into those secrets 
my wife was pleased to keep from me. Should I 
detect her infidelity, what is the consequence? If 
I calmly pocket the abuse, I am laughed at by her 
and her gallant ; if I talk my grie& aloud like a 
tragedy hero, I am laughed at by the whole world. 
The course then I would take would be, whenever 
I went out, to tell my wife where I was going, lest 
I should unexpectedly meet her abroad in company 
with some dear deceiver. Whenever I returned, 
I would use a peculiar rap at the door, and give 
four loud hems as I walked deliberately up the 
stair-case. I would never inquisitively peep imder 
her bed, or look behind the curtains. And even 
though I knew the captain was there, I would 
calmly take a dish of my wife's cool tea, and talk 
of the army with reverence. 

Of all nations, the Russians seem to me to be- 
have most wisely in such circumstances. The wife 
promises her husband never to let him see her 
transgressions of this nature ; and he as punctually 
promises, whenever she is so detected, without the 
least anger, to beat her without mercy: so they 
both know what each has to expect ; the lady 
transgresses, is beaten, taken s^ain into favour, 
and all goes on as before. 

When a Russian young lady, therefore, is to be 
married, her father, with a cudgel in his hand, 
asks the bridegroom, whether he chooses this virgin 



74 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

for his bride? to which the other replies in the 
affirmative. Upon this, the Either turning the 
lady three times round, and giving her three strokes 
with his cudgel on the back ; my dear^ cries he, 
thisi ar$ the last Hews you ar$ ever to receive from 
your tender father^ I resign my emthority^ and my 
cue^ to your kusbemd; he knows better than me 
the use of either. The bridegroom knows decorums 
too well to accept of the cudgel abruptly; he 
assures the £Either that the lady vdll never want it, 
and that he would not for the world make any use 
of it. But the £Either, who knows what the lady 
may want better than he, insists upon his accep- 
tance. Upon this, there follows a scene of Russian 
politeness, while one refuses, and the other offers 
the cudgel. The whole, however, ends with the 
bridegroom's taking it, upon which the lady drops 
a curtsy in token of obedience, and the ceremony 
proceeds as usual. 

There is something excessively fair and open in 
this method of courtship. By this, both sides are 
prepared for all the matrimonial adventures that 
are to follow. Marriage has been compared to a 
game of skill for life ; it is generous thus in both 
parties to declare they are sharpers in the beginning. 
In England, I am told both sides use every art to 
conceal their defects from each other before mar- 
riage, and the rest of their lives may be regarded 
as doing penance for their former dissimulation. 
Farewell. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 75 

LETTER XX. 
From the same. 

\HE republic of letters is a very common 
expression among the Europeans ; and 
yet when applied to the learned of 
Europe, is the most absurd that can be 
imagined, since nothing is more unlike a republic 
than the society which goes by that name. From 
this expression one would be apt to imagine, that 
the learned were united into a single body, joining 
their interests, and concurriDg in the same design. 
From this one might be apt to compare them to 
our literary societies in China, where each acknow- 
ledges a just subordination ; and all contribute to 
build the temple of science, without attempting 
from ignorance or envy to obstruct each other. 

But very di£ferent is the state of learning here ; 
every member of this £uicied republic is desirous 
of governing, and none willing to obey; each 
looks upon his fellow as a rival, not an assistant in 
the same pursuit. They calumniate, they injure, 
they despise, they ridicule each other : if one man 
writes a book that pleases, others shall write books 
to shew that he might have given still greater 
pleasure, or should not have pleased. If one 
happens to hit upon something new, there are 
numbers ready to assure the public that all this 
was no novelty to them or the learned ; that Car- 
danus or Brunus, or some other author too dull to 
be generally read, had anticipated the discovery. 
Thus, instead of uniting like the members of a 



76 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

commonwealth, they are divided into almost as 
many factions as there are men ; and their jarring 
constitution, instead of being styled a republic of 
letters, should be entitled, an anarchy of literature. 

It is true, there are some of superior abilities 
who reverence and esteem each other ; but their 
mutual admiration is not sufficient to shield off the 
contempt of the crowd. The wise are but few, 
and they praise with a feeble voice; the vulgar 
are many, and roar in reproaches. The truly 
great seldom unite in societies, have few meetings, 
no cabals; the dunces hunt in full cry till they 
have run down a reputation, and then snarl and 
fight with each other about dividing the spoil. 
Here you may see the compilers, and the book- 
answerers of every month, when they have cut up 
some respectable name, most frequently reproach- 
ing each other with stupidity and dullness: re- 
sembling the wolves of the Russian forest, who 
prey upon venison, or horse flesh when they can 
get it ; but in cases of necessity, lying in wait to 
devour each other. While they have new books 
to cut up, they make a hearty meal ; but if this 
resource should unhappily fail, then it is that 
critics eat up critics, and compilers rob from 
compilations. 

Confucius observes that it is the duty of the 
learned to unite society more closely, and to per- 
suade men to become citizens of the world ; but 
the authors I refer to, are not only for disuniting 
society, but kingdoms also; if the English are at- 
war with France, the dunces of France think it 
their duty to be at war with those of England. 
Thus Freron, one of their first rate scribblers, thinks 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 77 

proper to characterise all the English writers in 
the gross. "Their whole merit, says he, con- 
sists in exaggeration, and often in extravagance ; 
correct their pieces as you please, there still re- 
mains a leaven which corrupts the whole. They 
sometimes discover genius, but not the smallest 
share of taste : England is not a soil for the plants 
of genius to thrive in." This is open enough, 
with not the least adulation in the picture ; but 
hear what a Frenchman of acknowledged abilities 
says upon the same subject. " I am at a loss to 
determine in what we excel the English, or where 
they excel us ; when I compare the merits of both 
in any one species of literary composition, so many 
reputable and pleasing writers present themselves 
from either country, that my judgment rests in 
suspense: I am pleased with the disquisition^ 
without finding the object of my enquiry." But 
lest you should think the French alone are faulty 
in this respect, hear how an English journalist de- 
livers his sentiments of them. " We are amazed, 
says he, to find so many works translated firom 
the French, while we have such numbers n^lected 
of our own. In our opinion, notwithstanding their 
fame throughout the rest of Europe, the French 
are the most contemptible reasoners (we had almost 
said writers) that can be imagined. However, 
nevertheless, excepting, &c." Another English 
writer, Shaftesbury, if I remember, on the contrary, 
says, that the French authors are pleasing and 
judicious, more clear, more methodical, and enter- 
taining than those of his own country. 

From these opposite pictures, you perceive that 
the good authors of either country praise, and the 



C v.^ 



78 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

bad revile each other ; and yet, perhaps, you wUl 
be surprized that indifferent writers should thus be 
the most apt to censure, as they have the most to 
apprehend from recrimination ; you may, perhaps, 
imagine that such as are possessed of fame them- 
selves should be . most ready to declare their 
opinions, since what they say, might pass for deci- 
sion. But the truth happens to be, that the great 
are solicitous only of raising their own reputations, 
while the opposite class, alas ! are solicitous of 
bringing every reputation down to a level with 
their own. 

But let us acquit them of malice and envy ; a 
critic is often guided by the same motives that 
direct his author. The author endeavours to per- 
V> suade us, that he has written a good book : the 

r\K^C\*Syv\ critic is equally solicitous to sliew that he could 
write a better, had he thought proper. A critic is 
a being possessed of all the vanity, but not the 
genius, of a scholar, incapable, from his native 
weakness, of lifting himself from the ground, he 
applies to contiguous merit for support, makes the 
sportive sallies of another's imagination his serious 
employment, pretends to take our feelings under 
his care, teaches where to condemn, where to lay 
the emphasis of praise, and may with as much 
justice be called a man of taste, as the Chinese 
who measures his wisdom by the length of his 
nails. 

If then a book, spirited or humorous, happens to 
appear in the republic of letters, several critics are 
in waiting to bid the public not to laugh at a single 
line of it, for themselves had read it ; and they 
know what is most proper to excite laughter. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. » 

Other critics contradict the fulminations of this 
tribunal, call them all spiders, and assure the 
public, that they ought to laugh without restraint. 
Another set are in the mean time quietly employed 
in writing notes to the book, intended to shew the 
particular passages to be laughed at ; when these 
are out, others still there are who write notes upon 
notes. Thus a single new book employs not only 
the pap^-makers, the printers, the press-men, the 
bookbinders, the hawkers, but twenty critics, and 
as many compilers. In short, the body of the 
learned may be compared to a Persian army, where 
there are many pioneers, several sutlers, number- 
less servants, women and children in abundance, 
and but few soldiers. Adieu. 




LETTER XXI. 
To the same, 

{HE English are as fond of seeing plays 
acted as the Chinese; but there is a 
vast difference in the manner of con- 
ducting them. We play our pieces in 
the open air, the English theirs under cover ; we 
act by day -light, they by the blaze of torches. One 
of our pla3rs continues eight or ten days succes- 
sively; an English piece seldom takes up above 
four hours in the representation. 

My companion in black, with whom I am now 
beginning to contract an intimacy, introduced me 
a few nights ago to the play-house, where we 
placed ourselves conveniently at the foot of the 



8o THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

Stage. As the curtain was not drawn before my 
arrival, I had an opportunity of observing the be- 
haviour of the spectators, and indulging those re- 
flections which novelty generally inspires. 

The rich in generid were placed in the lowest 
seats, and the poor rose above them in degrees 
proportioned to their poverty. The order of pre- 
cedence seemed here inverted ; those who were 
undermost all the day, now enjoyed a temporary 
eminence, and became masters of the ceremonies. 
It was they who called for the music, indulging 
every noisy freedom, and testifying all the inso- 
lence of beggary in exaltation. 

They who held the middle region seemed not 
so riotous as those above them, nor yet so tame 
as those below ; to judge by their looks, many 
of them seemed strangers there as well as myself. 
They were chiefly employed during this period 
of expectation in eating oranges, reading the story 
of the play, or making assignations. 

Those who sat in the lowest rows, which are 
called the pit, seemed to consider themselves as 
judges of the merit of the poet and the perform- 
ers ; they were assembled partly to be amused, and 
partly to shew their taste ; appearing to labour 
under that restraint which an affectation of supe- 
rior discernment generally produces. My com- 
panion, however, informed me, that not one in an 
hundred of them knew even the first principles of 
criticism ; that they assumed the right of being 
censors because there was none to contradict their 
pretensions ; and that every man who now called 
himself a connoisseur, became such to all intents 
and purposes. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 8x 

Those who sat in the boxes appeared in the 
most unhappy situation of alL The rest of the 
audience came merely for their own amusement ; 
these rather to furnish out a part of the entertain- 
ment themselves. I could not avoid considering 
them as acting parts in dumb show, not a curtsy 
or nod, that was not the result of art ; not a look 
nor a smile that was not designed for murder. 
Gentlemen and ladies ogled each other through 
spectacles; for my companion observed, that 
blindness was of late become feshionable: all affec- 
ted indifference and ease, while their hearts at the 
same time burned for conquest. Upon the whole, 
the lights, the music, the ladies in their gayest 
dresses, the men with cheerfulness and expecta- 
tion in their looks, all conspired to make a most 
agreeable picture, and to fill an heart that sym- 
pathizes at human happiness with an expressible 
serenity. 

The expected time for the play to begin at last 
arrived, the curtain was drawn, and the actors 
came on. A woman, who personated a queen, 
came in curtsying to the audience, who clapped 
-their hands upon her appearance. Clapping of 
hands is, it seems, the manner of applauding in 
England : the manner is absurd ; but every coun- 
try, you know, has its peculiar absurdities. I was 
equally surprised, however, at the submission of 
the actress, who should have considered herself as 
a queen, as at the little discernment of the audience 
who gave her such marks of applause before she 
attempted to deserve them. Preliminaries be- 
tween her and the audience being thus adjusted, 
the dialc^ue was supported between her and a 

I. G 



8a THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

most hopeful youth, who acted the part of her 
confidant They both appeared in extreme dis- 
tress, for it seems the queen had lost a child some 
fifteen years before, and still keeps its dear resem- 
blance next h^r heart, while her kind companion 
bore a part in her sorrows. 

Her lamentations grew loud. Comfort is offered, 
but she detests the very sound. She bids them 
preach comfort to the winds. Upon this her hus- 
band comes in, who seeing the queen so much 
afflicted, can himself hardly refrain from tears or 
avoid partaking in the soft distress. After thus 
grieving through three scenes, the curtain dropped 
for the first act 

Truly, said I to my companion, these kings and 
queens iure very much disturbed at no very great 
misfortune ; certain I am were people of humbler 
stations to act in this manner, they would be 
. thought divested of common sense. I had scarce 
finished this observation, when the curtain rose, 
and the king came on in a violent passion. His 
wife had, it seems, refused his proffered tendemessj 
had spumed his royal embrace ; and he seemed 
resolved not to survive her fierce disdain. After 
he had thus fretted, and the queen had firetted 
through the second act, the curtain was let down 
once more. 

Now, says my companion, you perceive the king 
to be a man of spirit, he feeb at every pore ; one 
of your phlegmatic sons of clay would have given 
the queen her own way, and let her come to herself 
by degrees ; but the king is for immediate tender^ 
ness, or instant death : death and tenderness aie 
leading passions of every modem buskined hero ; 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 83 

this moment they embrace, and the next stab, 
mbdng daggers and kisses in every period. 

I was going to second his remarks, when my 
attention was engrossed by a new object ; a man 
caote'in balandi^ a strnwupon his nose, and 
the audience were dappii^ their hands in all th6 
raptnies cf applause. To what purpose, cried I, 
does- dni unmeaning figure m^e his appearance ; 
ia he a pert of the plot ? Unmeaning do you call 
him, replied my friend in black ; this is one of 
the most important diaracters of the whole play ; 
nothii^ pleases the people more- than the seeing 
a straw balanced ; there is a gteat deal of mean- 
ing^ in the straw; ^ there is something suited to 
every apprehension' in the sight ; and a fellow pos- 
sessed bf talents Uke these is sure of making his 
ioittoe. " ■ • ■ . ., , 

The' third act now began with an actor, who 
came to inform us that he was the villain of the 
plaj^^and intended to diow strange things before all 
was oveKi He was joined by another, who seemed 
as mneh disposed fturmischief as he; their intrigues 
contimied through tiiis whole division. If that be 
a villain, 'said I, he tliuilt be a very stupid one, to 
tell his secrets without being asked ; such solilo- 
qaies of late are never admitted in China. 

The nod;e of dapping i nte rr up ted me once more ; 
a child <A six year? old was learning to dance on the 
stag^ whidi jgavi6 thd^ ladies and mandarines infi- 
nite satisfiiction. -I anr sorry,- said I, to see the 
pretty creature so early learning so very bad a 
trade. Dancing being, I presume, as contemptible 
here as in China. Quite the reverse, interrupted 
my botopamon ; dancing is a very reputaUe and 



84 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

genteel employment here ; men have a greater 
chance for encouragement from the merit of their 
heels than their heads. One who jumps up and 
flourishes his toes three times before he comes to 
the ground, may have three hundred a year ; he 
who flourishes them four times, gets four hundred ; 
but he who arrives at five is inestimable, and may 
demand what salary he thinks proper. The female 
dancers t(X> are valued for this sort of jumping and 
crossing ; and 'tis a cant word among them, that 
she deserves most who shews highest But the 
fourth act is begun, let us be attentive. 

In the fourth act the queen finds her long lost 
child, now grovm up into a youth of smart parts, 
and great qualifications; wherefore she wisely con- 
'siders that the crown will fit his head better than 
that of her husband, whom she knows to be a 
driveler. The king discovers her design, and here 
comes on the deep distress ; he loves the queen, 
and he loves the kingdom ; he resolves therefore, 
in order to possess both, that her son must die. 
The queen exclaims at his barbarity ; is frantic 
with rage, and at length overcome with sorrow, 
falls into a fit ; upon which the curtain drops, and 
the act is concluded. 

Observe the art of the poet, cries my companion ; 
when the queen can say no more, she falls into a 
fit. While thus her eyes are shut, while she is sup- 
ported in the arms of Abigail, what horrors do we 
not fancy, we feel it in every nerve ; take my word 
for it, that fits are the true aposiopesis of modem 
tragedy. 

The fifth act began, and a busy piece it was. 
Scenes shifting, trumpets sounding, mobs halloo- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 85 

ing, carpets spreading, guards bustling from one 
door to another ; gods, daemons, da^ers, racks 
and ratsbane. But whether the king was killed, or 
the queen was drowned, or the son was poisoned, I 
have absolutely forgotten. 

When the play was over, I could not avoid ob- 
serving, that the persons of the drama appeared ii| 
as much distress in the first act as the last : how is 
it possible, said I, to sympathize with them through 
^y^ long acts ; pity is but a short-lived passion ; I 
hate to hear an actor mouthing trifles, neither 
startxngs, strainings, nor attitudes afifect me 119}$$$.. 
there be cause Pttfterniave' 'Beeh once or twice 
-deteftgd'"by those unmeaning alarms, my heart 
sleeps in peace, probably unaffected by the prin- 
cipal distress. There should be one great passion 
aimed at by the actor as well as the poet, all the 
rest should be subordinate, and only contribute to 
make that the greater ; if the actor therefore ex- 
claims upon every occasion in the tones of despair, 
he attempts to move us too soon ; he anticipates 
the blow, he ceases to affect though he gains our 
applause. 

I scarce perceived that the audience were almost 
all departed ; wherefore mixing with the crowd, 
my companion and I got into the street ; where 
essaying an hundred obstacles from coach wheels 
and palanquin poles, like birds in their flight 
through the branches of a forest, after various 
turnings, we both at length got home in safety. 

Adieu. 




86 THE CITIZEN OF THE IVOELD. 

LETTER XXII. 
J'Hm the same. 

HE letter which came by the way of 
Smyrna, and which you sent me an- 
opene4f was from my son. As I have 
permitted you to take copies of all those 
I send to China, you might have made no cere- 
mony in opening those directed to me. Either in 
joy or sorrow, my friend should participate in my 
feelings. // would give plectsure to see a good mem 
pleaded at my success ; it would give almost equal 
pleasure to see him sympathise at my disappoint- 
ment. 

Every account I receive from the east seems to 
come loaded with some new affliction. My wife 
and daughter were taken from me, and yet I sus- 
tained the loss with intrepidity ; my son is made a 
slave among the barbarians, which was the only 
blow that could have reached my heart : yes, I 
will indulge the transports of Nature for a little, 
in order to shew I can overcome them in the end. 
True magnanimity consists not in never fcdling, 
but in RISING every time we fall. 

When our mighty emperor had published his 
displeasure at my departure, and seized upon all 
that was mine, my son was privately secreted from 
his resentment. Under the protection and guar- 
dianship of Fum Hoam, the best and the wisest of 
all the inhabitants of China ; he was for some time 
instructed in the learning of the missionaries, and 
the wisdom of the east. But hearing of my adven- 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 87 

tures, and incited bf filial piety, he was resolved 
to follow my fortunes, and share my distress. 

He passed the confines of China in disguise ; 
hired himself as a camel-driver to a caravan that 
was crossing the desarts of Thibet, and was within 
one day's journey of the river Laur, which divides 
that country from India, when a body of wandering 
Tartars falling unexpectedly upon the caravan, 
plundered it, and made those who escaped their 
first fury slaves. By those he was led into the 
extensive and desolate regions that border on the 
shores of the Aral lake. 

Here he lived by hunting ; and was obliged to 
supply every day a certain proportion of the spoil 
to re^e his savage masters ; his learning, his vir- 
tues, and even his beauty were qualifications that 
no way served to recommend him ; they knew no 
merit but that of providing large quantities of milk 
and raw flesh ; and were sensible of no happiness 
but that of rioting on the undressed meal. 

Some merchants from Mesched, however, com- 
ing to trade with the Tartars for slaves, he was 
sold among the number, and led into the kingdom 
of Persia, where he is now detained. He is there 
obliged to watch the looks of a voluptuous and 
cruel master, a man fond of pleasure yet incapable 
of refinement, whom many years service in war has 
taught pride, but not bravery. 

That treasure which I still keep within my 
bosom, my child, my all that was left to me, is 
now a slave. * Good heavens, why was this ? why 
have I been introduced into this mortal apartment, 

1 This whole apostrophe seems most literally translated 
from Ambulaaohamed, the Arabian poet. 



88 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

to be n spectator of my own misfortunes, and the 
misfortunes of my fellow creatures ! wherever I 
turn, what a labyrinth of doubt, error, and dis- 
appointment appears: why was I brought into 
being; for what purposes made; from whence 
have I come ; whither strayed ; or to what regions 
am I hastening? Reason cannot resolve. It lends 
a ray to shew the horrors of my prison, but not a 
light to guide me to escape them. Ye boasted 
revelations of the earth, how little do you aid the 
enquiry. 

How am I surprised at the inconsistency of the 
magi ; their two principles of good and evil affright 
me. The Indian who bathes his visage in urine, 
and calls it piety, strikes me with astonishment. 
The christian who believes in three gods is highly 
absurd. The Jews who pretend that deity is 
pleased with the efiiision of blood, are not less 
displeasing. I am equally surprised that rational 
beings can come from the extremities of the earth, 
in order to kiss a stone, or scatter pebbles. How 
contrary to reason are those ; and yet all pretend 
to teach me to be happy. 

Surely all men are blind and ignorant of truth. 
Mankind wanders, unknowing his way from morn- 
ing till the evening. "Where shall we turn after 
happiness ; or is it wisest to desist from the pur- 
suit ? Like reptiles in a comer of some stupendous 
palace, we peep from our holes ; look about us, 
wonder at all we see, but are ignorant of the great 
architect's design : O for a revelation of himself, 
for a plan of his universal s)rstem : O for the 
reasons of our creation ; or why we were created 
to be thus unhappy. If we are to experience no 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 89 

other felicity but what this life affords, then are we 
miserable indeed. If we are bom only to look 
about lis, repine and die ; then has heaven been 
guilty of injustice. If this life terminates my exis- 
tence, I despise the blessings of providence, and 
the wisdom of the giver. If this life be my all, let 
the fbllowii^ epitaph be written on the tomb of 
Altangi. By my jfaihet's crimes I received this^ 
By my own crimes I bequeath it to posterity ! 









LETTER XXIII. 
To the same, 

T while I sometimes lament the case 
of humanity, and the depravity of 
human nature, there now and then 
appear gleams of greatness that serve 
to relieve the eye oppressed with the hideous 
prospect, and resemble those cultivated spots that 
are sometimes found in the midst of an Asiatic 
wilderness. I see many superior excellencies 
among the English, which it is not in the power of 
all their follies to hide : I see virtues, which in 
other countries are known only to a few, practised 
here by every rank of people. 

I know not whether it proceeds from their supe- 
rior opulence that the English are more charitable 
than the rest of mankind ; whether by being 
possessed of all the conveniencies of life them- 
selves, they have more leisure to perceive the 
uneasy situation of the distressed ; whatever be the 
motive, they are not only the most charitable of 



90 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

any other nation, but most judicious in distin- 
guishing the properest objects of compassion. 

In other countries the giver is generally in- 
fluenced by the immediate impulse of pity ; his 
generosity is exerted as much to relieve his own 
uneasy sensations, as to comfort the object in dis- 
tress: in England benefactions are of a more 
. general nature ; some men of fortune and universal 
benevolence propose the proper objects ; the wants 
and the merits of the petitioners are canvassed by 
the people ; neither passion nor pity find a place in 
the cool discussion ; and charity is then only exerted 
when it has received the approbation of reason. 

A late instance of this finely directed benevolence 
forces itself strongly on my imagination, that it in 
a manner reconciles me to pleasure, and onqs mare 
makes me the universal friend of man. 

The English and French have not only political 
reasons to induce them to mutual hatred, but-often 
the more prevailing motive of private interest to 
widen the breach ; a war between other countries 
is carried on collectively, army fights against army, 
and a man's own private resentment is lost in that 
of the community ; but in England and France the 
individuals of each country plunder each other at 
sea without redress, and consequently feel that 
animosity against each other which passengers do 
at a robber. They have for some time carried on 
an expensive war ; and several captives have been 
taken on both sides. Those made prisoners by the 
French have been used with cruelty, and guarded 
with unnecessary caution. Those taken by the 
English, being much more numerous, were con- 
fined in the ordinary manner ; and, not being 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, qx 

released by their countrymen, b^[an to feel all 
those inconveniences which arise from want of 
covering and long confinement. 

Their, countrymen were informed of their de- 
plorable situation; but they, more intent on an- 
noying their enemies than relieving their friends, 
reftised the least assistance. The English now saw 
thousands of their fellow creatures starving in every 
inison, forsaken by those whose duty it was to pro- 
tect them, labouring with disease, and without 
clothes to keep off the severity of the season. Na- 
tional benevolence prevailed over national ani- 
mosity: Their prisoners were indeed enemies, 
but they were enemies in distress ; they ceased to 
be hateful, when they no longer continued to be 
formidable : foi^etting therefore their national 
hatred, the men who were brave enough to con- 
qu^, were generous enough to forgive : and they, 
whom all the world seemed to have disclaimed, at 
last found pity and redress from those they at- 
tempted to subdue. A subscription was opened, 
ample charities cpUected, proper necessaries pro- 
cured, and the poor gay sons of a merry nation 
were once mtMre taught to resume their former 
gaiety. 

When I cast my eye over the list of those who 
contributed on this occasion, I find the names 
almost entirely English, scarce one foreigner ap- 
pears among Uie number. It was for Englishmen 
alone to be capable of such exalted virtue. I own, 
I caonot k)ok over this catalogue of good men and 
phfloaoi^iers without thinking better of myself, be- 
cause it makes me entertain a more favourable 
opinion of mankind : I am particularly struck with 



9« THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

one who writes these words upon the paper that 
enclosed his benefaction. The miti tf an Engiisk- 
moHf a cUium of the worlds ie Frtnehmem^ prisoners 
ofwor^ asidnahid. I only wish that he may find 
as much i^easare ,firom his yirtues, as I have done 
in reflecting upon them, that alone will amply re« 
ward him. Such a one, my friend, is an honour to 
human nature | he makes no private distinctions of 
party ; all that are stamped with the divine image of 
their Creator are friends to him ; he is a noHoe ef 
thewoM; and the emperor (^Qiina may be proud 
that he has such a countryman. 

To re}oice at the destruction of our enemies, is 
a foible grafted upon human nature, and we must 
be permitted to indulge it : the true way of atoning 
for such an ill-founded jdeasure, is thus to turn our 
triumph into an act of benevolence, and to testify 
our own joy by endeavouring to banish anxiety 
from others. 

Hamti, the best and wisest emperor that ever 
filled the throne, after having gained three signal 
victories over the Tartars, who had invaded his 
dominions, returned to Nankin in order to enjoy 
the glory of his conquest. After he had rested for 
some days, the people, who are naturally fond of 
processions, impatiently expected the triumphant 
entry, which emperors upon such occasions were 
accustomed to make. Their murmurs came to the 
emperor's ear. He loved his people, and was 
willing to do all in his power to satisfy their just 
desires. He therefore assured them, that he in- 
tended, upon the next feast of the Lanthoms, to 
exhibit one of the most glorious triumphs that had 
ever been seen in China. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 93 

The people were in nptmcs at his ooDdeaooi- 
sioo $ ufed, on the appointed dagr* assemUed at the 
gates of the paboe with the most eager czpecta- 
tioos. Here they waited for soaae time without 
seeing anj of those prepaiations which nrnallf pre- 
cede a pageant, llie knthom, with ten thoosmd 
■tapers, was not yet farooght forth ; the fire-works, 
whidi nsoaUy c o rered the dty walls, were not jet 
lighted ; the people onoe more began to nmnnoE 
at this ddaj ; when in the midst of their impa- 
lienoe, the palace gates flew open, and the emperor 
himsdf appeared, not in splendour or magnificence, 
bot in an oidinaiy habit, followed by the blind, the 
niaimed, and the stiangeis of the dty, all in new 
dothes, and eadi canying in his hand money 
enough to snpply his necessities for the year. The 
people were at fiist amaied, but soon perceived the 
wisdom of their king, who taught them, that to 
make one man happy was more truly great than 
having ten thousand captives groaning at the wheels 
of his duuriot. Adieu. 



LETTER XXIV. 
To the same, 

HATEVER may be the merits of the 
English in other sciences, they seem 
peculiarly excellent in the art of 
healing. There is scarcdy a disorder 
inddent to humanity, against which they are 
not possessed with a most infallible antidote. The 
professors of other arts confess the inevitable intri- 






94 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

cacy of things ; talk with doubt, and decide with 
hesitation; but doubting is entirely unknown in 
medicine; the advertising professors here delight in 
cases of difficulty ; be the disorder never so despe- 
rate or radiod, yon will find numbers in every 
street, who» by levelling a pill at the part afifected, 
promise a certain cure without loss of time, know- 
ledge of & bedfellow, <ar hindrance of business. 

When I consider the assiduity of this profession, 
their benevolence omases me. They not only in 
general g^ their medicines for half value; but use 
the most persuasive remonstrances to induce the 
sick to come and be cured. Sure there must be 
something strangely obstinate in an English patient, 
who refuses so much health upon such easy terms ; 
does he take a pride in being bloated with a dropsy ? 
Does he find pleasure in the altenuaions of an inter- 
mittent fever? Or feel as much satisfaction in 
nursing, up. his gout, as he found pleasure in 
acquiring it ? He must, otherwise he would never 
reject such repeated assurances of instant relief* 
What can be more convincing than the manner in 
which the sick are invited to be well ? The doctor 
first begs the most earnest attention of the public 
to what he is going to propose ; he solemnly 
affirms the pill was never found to want success ; 
he produces a list of those who have been rescued 
from the grave by taking it. Yet, notwithstanding 
all this, there are many here who now and then 
think proper to be sick; only sick did T- say? 
There are some who even think proper to die I 
Yes, by the head of Confucius they die ; though 
they might have purchased the health-restoring 
specific for half a crown at every comer. 



THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD, 9$ 

I am amaxed, my dear Fiim Hoam, that these 
doctors who know what an obstinate set of people 
they have to deal with, have never thought of at- 
tempting to revive the dead. When the living are 
foand to reject their prescriptions, they ought in 
conscience to apply to the dead, from whom they 
can exptet no such mbrtifying repulses ; they would 
find in the dead the most complying patients ima- 
ginable ; and what gratitude might they not expect 
from the patient's son, now no longer an heir, and 
his wife, now no longer a widow. 

Think not, my friend, that there is anything 
ddmefical in such an attempt ; they already per- 
form cures equally strange : What can be more 
truly astonishing than to see old age restored to 
youth, and vigour to the most feeble constitutions ; 
yet this is performed here every day ; a simple 
electuary effects these wonders, even without the 
bungling ceremonies of haying the patient boiled 
up in a kettle, or ground down in a mill. 

Few physicians here go through the ordinaiy 
courses of education, but receive all their know- 
ledg^e of medicine by immediate insj^iration frpm 
heaven. Some are thus inspired even in the 
womb ; and what is very remarkable, understand 
their profession as well at three years old as at 
threescore. Others \ixvt spent a great part of 
their lives unconscious of any latent excellence, 
till a bankruptcy, or a residence in gaol, have 
called their miraculous powers into exertion. And 
others still there are indebted ta their superlative 
ignorance alone for success. The more ignorant 
the practitioner, the less capable is he thought of 
deceiving. The people here judge, as they do in 



96 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

the east ; where it is thought absolutely requisite 
that a man should be an idiot before he pretend 
to be either a conjuror or a doctor. 

When a physician by inspiration is sent for, he 
never perplexes the patient by previous examina- 
tion ; he asks very few questions, and those only 
f(Mr form sake. He knows every disorder by in- 
tuition. He administers the pill or drop for every 
distemper ; nor is more inquisitive than the fiurrier 
while he drenches an horse. If the patient lives, 
then has he one more to add to the surviving list ; 
if he dies, then it may be justly said of the patient's 
disorder, that as it was not curedf the disordir was 
incurable* 




LETTER XXV. 

From the same, 

WAS some days ago in company with 
a politician, who very pathetically de- 
claimed upon the miserable situation 
of his country : he assured me, that 
the whole political machine was moving in a wrong 
track, and that scarce even abilities like his own 
could ever set it right again. '* What have we, 
said he, to do with the wars on the continent ; we 
are a commercial nation ; we have only to culti- 
vate commerce like our neighbours the Dutch ; it 
is our business to encrease trade by settling new 
colonies : riches are the strength of a nation ; and 
for the rest, our ships, our ships alone will protect 
us." I found in vain to oppose my feeble argu- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 97 

ments to those of a man who thought himself wise 
enough to direct even the ministry ; I fancied, 
however, that I saw with more certainty, because 
I reasoned without prejudice : I therefore begged 
leave instead of argument, to relate a short history. 
He gave me a smile at once of condescension and 
contempt, and I proceeded as follows to describe, 
The rise and declension of the kingdom of 
Lao. 

Northward of China, and in one of the doublings 
of the great wall, the fruitfid province of Lao 
enjoyed its liberty and a peculiar government of 
its own. As the inhabitants were on all sides 
surrounded by the wall, they feared no sudden in- 
vasion from the Tartars ; and being each possessed 
of property, they were zealous in its defence. 

The natural consequences of security and af- 
fluence in any country is a love of pleasure ; when 
the wants of Nature are supplied, we see after the 
conveniencies ; when possessed of these, we desire 
the luxuries of life ; and when every luxury is pro- 
vided, it is then ambition takes up the man, and 
leaves him still something to wish for : the in- 
habitants of the country from primitive simplicity 
soon began to aim at elegance, and from el^^ce 
proceeded to refinement. It was now found abso- 
hitely requisite, for the good of the state, that the 
people should be divided : formerly the same hand 
that was employed in tilling the ground, or in dress- 
ing up the manufactures, was also in time of need 
a soldier ; but the custom was fore now changed ; 
for it was perceived, that a man bred up from 
childhood to the arts either of peace or war, be- 
came more eminent by this means in his respective 

I. • H 



98 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

profession. The inhabitants were therefore now 
distinguished into artizans and soldiers ; and while 
those improved the luxuries of life, these watched 
for the security ci the people. 

A country possessed of freedom has always two 
sorts of enemies to fear : foreign foes who attack 
its existence from without, and internal miscreants 
who betray its liberties within. The inhabitants 
of Lao were to guard against both. A country of 
artiians were most likely to preserve internal liberty ; 
and a nation of soldiers were fittest to repel a foreign 
invasion. Hence naturally arose a division of 
opinion between the artizans and soldiers of the 
kingdom. The artizans ever complaining, that 
freedom was threatened by an armed internal force, 
were for disbanding the soldiers, and insisted that 
their walls, their walls alone were sufficient to 
repel the most formidable invasion : the warriors, 
on the contrary, represented the power of the 
neighbouring kings, the combinations formed 
against their state, and the weakness of the wall 
which every earthquake might overturn. While 
this altercation continued, the kingdom might be 
justly said to enjoy its greatest share of vigour : 
every order in the state, by being watchful over 
each other, contributed to diffuse happiness equally 
and balanced the state. Thearts of peace flourished, 
nor were those of war neglected ; the neighbour- 
ing powers, who had nothing to apprehend from 
the ambition of men whom they only saw solici- 
tous not for riches but freedom, were contented to 
traffic with them : they sent their goods to be 
manufactured in Lao, and paid a large price for 
them upon their return. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 99 

By these means this people at length became 
moderately rich, and their opulence naturally in. 
vited the invader ; a Tartar prince led an immense 
army against them, and they as bravely stood up 
in their own defence ; they were still inspired with 
a love c^ their country; they fought the barba- 
rous enemy with fortitude, and gained a complete 
victory. 

. From this moment, which they regarded as the 
completion of their glory, historians date their 
down-falL They had risen in strength by a love 
of their country, and fell by indulging ambition. 
The country possessed by the invading Tartars, 
seemed to them a prize that would not only render 
them more formidable for the future, but which 
would increase their opulence for the present ; it 
was unanimously resolved, therefore, both by sol- 
diers and artizans, that those desolate regions 
should be peopled by colonies from Lao. When a 
trading nation begins to act the conqueror, it is 
then perfectly undone : it subsists in some measure 
by the support of its neighbours ; while they con- 
tinue to r^ard it without envy or apprehension, 
trade may flourish ; but when once it presumes to 
assert as its right what is only enjoyed as a fiaivour, 
each country reclaims that part of commerce which 
it has power to take back, and turns it into some 
other channel more honourable, though perhaps 
less convenient. 

Every neighbour now began to regard with 
jealous eyes this ambitious common-wealth, and 
forbade their subjects any future intercourse with 
them. The inhabitants of Lao, however, still pur- 
sued the same ambitious maxims ; it was firom 



loo THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

their colonies alone they expected riches ; and 
riches, said they, are strength, and strength is 
security. Numberless were the migrations of the 
desperate and enterprising of this country to people 
the desolate dominions lately possessed by the 
Tartar; between these colonies and the mother 
country, a very advantageous traffic was at first 
carried on, the republic sent their colonies large 
quantities of the manufactures of the country, 
and they in return provided the republic with 
an equivalent in ivory and ginseng. By this 
means the inhabitants became immensely rich, 
and this produced an equal degree of volup- 
tuousness ; for men who have much money will 
always find some fantastical modes of enjoyment. 
How shall I mark the steps by which they de- 
clined I Every colony in process of time spreads 
over the whole country where it first was planted. 
As it grows more populous, it becomes more 
polite; and those manufactures for which it was 
in the beginning obliged to others, it learns to 
dress up itself: such was the case with the colonies 
of Lao ; they in less than a century became a 
powerful and a polite people, and the more polite 
they grew, the less advantageous was the commerce 
which still subsisted between them and others. 
By this means the mother country being abridged 
in its commerce grew poorer but not less luxurious. 
Their former wealth had introduced luxury ; and 
wherever luxury once fixes, no art can either lessen 
or remove it. Their commerce with their neigh- 
bours was totally destroyed ; and that with their 
colonies was every day naturally and necessarily 
declining ; they still, however, preserved the in- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, xoi 

solence of wealth, without a power to support it, 
and persevered in being luxurious while contemp- 
tible from poverty. In short, the state resembled 
one of those bodies bloated with disease, whose 
bulk is only a symptom of its wretchedness. 

Their former optilence only rendered them more 
impotent, as those individuals who are reduced 
from riches to poverty, are of all men the most 
unfortunate and helpless. They had imagined, 
because their colonies tended to make them rich 
upon the first acquisition, they would still continue 
to do so ; they now found however, that on them- 
selves alone they should have depended for sup- 
port; that colonies ever afforded but temporary 
affluence, and when cultivated and polite are no 
longer useful. From such a concurrence of cir- 
cumstances they soon became contemptible. The 
emperor Honti invaded them with a powerful 
army. Historians do not say whether their colo- 
nies were too remote to lend assistance, or else 
were desirous of shaking off their dependance : 
But certain it is, they scarce made any resistance ; 
their walls were now found but a weak defence ; 
and they at length were obliged to acknowledge 
subjection to the empire of China. 

Happy, very happy might they have been, had 
they known when to bound their riches and their 
glory. Had they known that extending empire is 
often diminishing power, that countries are ever 
strongest which are internally powerful ; that colo- 
nies by draining away the brave and enterprizing, 
leave the country in the hands of the timid and the 
avaricious ; that walls give little protection, unless 
manned with resolution ; that too much commerce 



zot THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

may injure a nation as well as too little ; and that 
there is a wide difference between a conquering 
and a flourishing empire. Adieu. 




LETTER XXVI. 
To the same, 

^HOUGH fond of many acquaintances, I 
desire an intimacy only with a few. 
The man in black whom I have often 
mentioned, is one whose friendship I 
could wish to acquire, because he possesses my 
esteem. His manners, it is true, are tinctured 
with some strange inconsistencies ; and he may be 
justly termed an humourist in a nation of humour- 
ists. Though he is generous even to profusion, he 
affects to be thought a prodigy of parsimony and 
prudence ; though his conversation be replete with 
the most sordid and selfish maxims, his heart is 
dilated with the most unbounded love. I have 
known him profess himself a man-hater, while his 
cheek was glowing with compassion ; and while 
his looks were softened into pity, I have heard him 
use the language of the most unbounded ill-nature. 
Some affect humanity and tenderness, others boast 
of having such dispositions from Nature ; but he is 
the only man I ever knew who seemed ashamed of 
h's natural benevolence. He takes as much pains 
to hide his feelings as any hypocrite would to con- 
ceal his indifference; but on every unguarded 
moment the mask drops off, and reveals him to the 
most superficial observer. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 103 

In one of our late excursions into the country, 
happening to discourse upon the provision that was 
made for the poor in England, he seemed amazed 
how any of his countrymen could be so foolishly 
weak as' to relieve occasional objects of charity, 
when the laws had made such ample provision for 
their support. In every parish house, says he, the 
poor are supplied with food, clothes, fire, and a 
bed to lie on; they want no more, I desire no 
more myself; yet still they seem discontented. 
I'm surprised at the inactivity of our magistrates,- 
in not taking up such vagrants who are only a 
weight upon the industrious ; I'm surprized that 
the people are found to relieve them, when they 
must be at the same time sensible that it, in some 
measure, encourages idleness, extravagance, and 
imposture. Were I to advise any man for whom I 
had the least regard, I would caution him by all 
means not to be imposed upon by their false pre- 
tences : let me assure you, Sir, they are impostors, 
every one of them-; and rather merit a prison than 
relief. 

He was proceeding in this strain earnestly, to 
dissuade me from an imprudence of which I am 
seldom guilty ; when an old man who still had 
about him the remnants of tattered finery, implored 
our compassion. He assured us that he was no 
common beggar, but forced into the shameful pro- 
fession, to support a djring wife and five hungry 
children. Being prepossessed against such false- 
hoods, his story had not the least influence upon 
me ; but it was quite otherwise with the man in 
black ; I could see it visibly operate upon his 
countenance, and effectually interrupt his harangue. 



X04 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

I could easily perceive that his heart burned to 
relieve the five starving children, but he seemed 
ashamed to discover his weakness to me. While 
he thus hesitated between compassion and pride, I 
pretended to look another way, and he seized this 
opportunity of giving the poor petitioner a piece of 
silver, bidding him at the same time, in order that 
I should not hear, go work for his bread, and not 
tease passengers with such impertinent falsehoods 
for the future. 

As he had fancied himself quite unperceived, he 
continued, as we proceeded, to rail against beggars 
with as much animosity as before ; he threw in 
some episodes on his own amazing prudence and 
economy, with his profound skill in discovering 
impostors ; he explained the manner in which he 
would deal with beggars were he a magistrate, 
hinted at enlarging some of the prisons for their 
reception, and told two stories of ladies that were 
robbed by beggarmen. He was beginning a third 
to the same purpose, when a sailor with a wooden 
1^ once more crossed our walks, desiring our pity, 
and blessing our limbs. I was for going on with- 
out taking any notice, but my friend looking wish- 
fully upon the poor petitioner, bid me stop, and he 
would shew me with how much ease he could at 
any time detect an impostor. 

He now therefore assumed a look of importance, 
and in an angry tone began to examine the sailor, 
demanding in what engagement he was thus dis- 
abled and rendered unfit for service. The sailor 
replied in a tone as angrily as he, that he had been 
an officer on board a private ship of war, and that 
he had lost his leg abroad in defence of those who 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 105 

did nothing at home. At this reply, all my fiiend's 
importance vanished in a moment ; he had not a 
single question more to ask ; he now only studied 
what method he should take to relieve him unob- 
served. He had however no easy part to act, as 
he was obliged to preserve the appearance of ill- 
nature before me, and yet relieve himself by re- 
lieving the sailor. Casting therefore a furious look 
upon some bundles of chips which the fellow carried 
in a string at his back, my friend demanded how he 
sold his matches ; but not waiting for a reply, de- 
sired, in a surly tone, to have a shilling's worth. 
The sailor seemed at first surprised at his demand, 
but soon recollected himself^ and presenting his 
whole bundle. Here, master, sajrs he, take all my 
cargo, and a blessing into the bargain. 

It is impossible to describe with what an air of 
triumph my friend marched off with his new pur- 
chase, he assured me that he was firmly of opinion 
that those fellows must have stolen their goods, 
who could thus afford to sell them for half value ; 
he informed me of several different uses to which 
those chips might be applied ; he expatiated largely 
upon the savings that would result from lighting 
candles with a match instead of thrusting them into 
the fire. He averred, that he would as soon have 
parted with a tooth as his money to those vaga- 
bonds, unless for some valuable consideration. I 
cannot tell how long this panegjrric upon frugality 
and matches might have continued, had not his 
attention been called off by another object more 
distressful than either of the former. A woman in 
rags, with one child in her arms, and another on 
her back, was attempting to sing ballads, but with 



io6 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

such a moomful voice that it was difficult to deter- 
mine whether she was singing or crying. A wretch, 
who, in the deepest distress still aimed at good 
humour, was an object my friend was by no means 
capable of withstanding ; his vivacity, and his dis- 
course were instantly interrupted % upon this occa- 
sion his very dissimulation had forsaken him. 
Even, in my presence, he immediately applied his 
hands to his pockets, in order to relieve her \ but 
guess his concision, when he found he had already 
given away all the money he carried about him to 
former ol:9ects. The misery painted in the woman's 
visage, was not half so strongly expressed as the 
agony in his. He continued to search for some 
time, but to no purpose, till, at length, recollecting 
himself, with a fiEu:e of ineffable good-nature, as he 
had no money, he put into her hands his shilling's 
worth of matches. 



LETTER XXVII. 
To the same, 

S there appeared something reluctantly 
good in the character of my companion, 
I must own it surprized me what could 
be his motives for thus concealing 
virtues which others take such pains to display. I 
was unable to repress my desire of knowing the his- 
tory of a man who thus seemed to act under con- 
tinual restraint, and whose benevolence was rather 
the effect of appetite than reason. 

It was not however till after repeated solicita- 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 



X07 



tions he thought proper to gratify my curiosity. 
" If you are fond, says he, of hearing hair breadth 
^ scapes y my history must certainly please ; for I have 
beoi for twenty years upon the very verge of 
starving, without ever being starved. 

'* My fiither, the younger son (^ a good family, 
was possessed of a small living in the church. His 
education was above his fortune, and his generosity 
greater than his education. Poor as he was, he 
had his flatterers still poorer than himself; for 
every dinner he gave them, they returned him an 
equivalent in praise ; and this was all he wanted ; 
the same ambition that actuates a monarch at the 
head of an army, influenced my father at the head 
of his table ; he told the story of the ivy-tree, and 
that was laughed at ; he repeated the jest of the 
two scholars and one pair of breeches, and the 
company laughed at that ; but the story of Tafiy 
in the sedan chair was sure to set the table 
in a roar ; thus hb pleasure encreased in propor- 
tion to the pleasure he gave ; he loved . all the 
world, and he fancied all the world loved him. 

"As his fortune was but small, he lived up to 
the very extent of it ; he had no intentions of 
leaving his children money, for that was dross ; he 
was resolved they should have learning ; for leam« 
ing, he used to observe, was better than silver or 
gold. For this purpose he imdertook to instruct us 
himself; and took as much pains to form our 
morals, as to improve our understanding. . We 
were told that universal benevolence was what first 
cemented society ; we were taught to consider all 
the wants of mankind as our own ; to regard the 
hMman face divine with affection and esteem ; he 



/ 



xoS THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

wound us up to be mere machines of pity, and ren- 
dered us incapable of withstanding the slightest 
impulse made either by real or fictitious distress ; in 
a word, we were perfectly instructed in the art of 
giving away thousands before we were taught 
the more necessary qualification of getting a 
farthing. 

" I cannot avoid imagining, that thus refined by 
his lessons out of all my suspicion, and divested of 
even all the little cunning which Nature had given 
me, I resembled, upon my first entrance into the 
busy and insidious world, one of those gladiators 
who were exposed with armour in the amphitheatre 
at Rome. My father, however, who had only seen 
the world on one side, seemed to triumph in my 
superior discernment ; though my whole stock of 
wisdom consisted in being able to talk like himself 
upon subjects that once were useful, because they 
were then topics of the busy world ; but that now 
were utterly useless, because connected with the 
busy world no longer. 

** The first opportunity he had of finding his ex- 
pectations disappointed, was at the very middling 
figure I made in the university ; he had flattered 
himself that he should soon see me rising into the 
foremost rank in literary reputation, but was morti- 
fied to find me utterly unnoticed and unknown. 
His disappointment might have been partly as- 
cribed to his having over-rated my talents, and 
partly to my dislike of mathematical reasonings at 
a time, when my imagination and memory yet un- 
satisfied, were more eager after new objects, than 
desirous of reasoning upon those I knew. This 
did not, however, please my tutors, who observed 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, X09 

indeed, that I was a little dull ; but at the same 
time allowed, that I seemed to be "vety good-natured, 
and had no harm in me. 

** After I had resided at college seven years, my 
father died, and left me — ^his blessing. Thus 
shoved from shore without ill-nature to protect, or 
cunning to guide, or proper stores to subsist me in 
so dangerous a voyage, I was obliged to embark in 
the wide world at twenty-two. But, in order to 
settle in life, my friends advised (for they alwa}^ 
advise when they begin to despise us) they advised 
me, I say, to go into orders. 

"To be obliged to wear a. long wig, when I 
liked a short one, or a black coat, when I gene- 
rally dressed in brown, I thought was such a re- 
straint upon my liberty, that I absolutely rejected 
the proposal. A priest in England, is not the 
same mortified creature with a bonze in China ; 
with us, not he that fasts best, but eats best, is 
reckoned the best liver; yet I rejected a life of 
luxury, indolence, and ease, from no other con- 
sideration but that boyish one of dress. So that 
my friends were now perfectly satisfied I was un- 
done ; and yet they thought it a pity for one who 
had not the least harm in him, and was so very 
good-natured. 

"Poverty naturally begets dependence, and I 
was admitted as flatterer to a great man. At first 
I was surprised, that the situation of a flatterer at 
a great man*s table could be thought disagreeable ; 
there was no great trouble in listening attentively 
when his lordship spoke, and laughing when he 
looked round for applause. This even good- 
manners might have obliged me to perform. I 



iio THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

found, however, too soon, that his lordship was a 
greater dunce than myself; and from that very 
moment flattery was at an end. I now rather 
aimed at setting him right, than at receiving his 
ahsurdities with submission : to flatter those we do 
not know is an easy task ; but to flatter our inti- 
mate acquaintances, all whose foibles are strongly 
in our eye, is drudgery insupportable. Every time 
I now opened my lips in praise, my falsehood 
went to my conscience; his lordship soon per- 
ceived me to be very unfit for service ; I was 
therefore discharged : my patron at the same time 
being graciously pleased to observe, that he be- 
lieved I was tolerably good-natured, and had not 
the least harm in me. 

"Disappointed in ambition I had recourse to 
love. A young lady, who lived with her aunt, 
and was possessed of a pretty fortune in her own 
disposal, had given me, as I fiancied, some reason 
to expect success. The sjrmptoms by which I was 
guided were striking ; she had always laughed 
with me at her awkward acquaintance, and at her 
aunt among the number ; she always observed, 
that a man of sense would make a better husband 
than a fool, and I as constantly applied the obser- 
vation in my own favour. She continually talked 
in my company of friendship and the beauties of 
the mind, and spoke of Mr. Shrimp, my rival's 
high-heel'd shoes with detestation. These were 
circumstances which I thought strongly in my 
favour ; so after resolving, and re-resolviug, I had 
courage enough to tell her my mind. Miss heard 
my proposal with serenity, seeming at the same 
time to study the flgures of her fan. Out at last it 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, \%x 

came. There was but one small objection to com- 
plete our happiness, which was no more, than 

that she was married three months before to 

Mr. Shrimp, with bigh-heel'd shoes! By way 
of consolation however she observed, that tho' I 
was disappointed in her, my addresses to her 
aunt would probably kindle her into sensibility ; 
2(s the old lady always allowed me to be very good- 
natured, and not to have the least diare of harm in 
Hie. 

" Yet still I had friends, numerous friends, and 
to them I was resolved to apply. O friendship 1 
thou fond soother of the human breast, to thee we 
fly in every calamity ; to thee the wretched seek 
for succour ; on thee the care-tired son of misery, 
fondly relies ; from thy kind assistance the un- 
fortunate always hopes relief, and may be ever 
sure of— disappointment 1 My first applica- 
tion was to a city scrivener, who had frequently 
offered to lend me money when he knew I did not 
want it. I informed him, that now was the time 
to put his friendship to the test ; that I wanted to 
borrow a couple of hundreds for a certain occasion, 
and was resolved to take it up from him. And 
pray. Sir, cried my friend, do you want all this 
money ? Indeed I never wanted it more, returned 
I. I am sorry for that, cries the scrivener, vdth 
all my heart; for they who want money when 
they come to borrow, will always want money 
when they should come to pay. 

*' From him I flew with indignation to one of 
the best friends I had in the world, and made the 
same request. Indeed, Mr. Dry-bone, cries my 
friend, I always thought it would come to this. 



xxa THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

You know, sir, I would not advise you but for 
your own good; but your conduct has hitherto 
been ridiculous in the highest degree, and some 
of your acquaintance always thought you a very 
silly fellow ; let me see, you want two hundred 
pounds; do you only want two hundred, sir, 
exactly? To confess a truth, returned I, I shall 
want three hundred; but then I have another 
friend from whom I can borrow the rest. Why 
then, replied my friend, if you would take my 
advice; and you know I should not presume to 
advise you but for your own good, I would recom- 
mend it to you to borrow the whole sum from 
that other friend ; and then one note will serve for 
all, you know. 

*• Poverty now began to come fast upon me, yet 
instead of growing more provident or cautious as I 
grew poor, I became every day more indolent and 
simple. A friend was arrested for fifty pounds, I 
was unable to extricate him except by becoming 
his bail. When at liberty he fled from his creditors, 
and left me to take his place. In prison I expected 
greater satisfactions than I had enjoyed at large. 
I hoped to converse with men in this new world 
simple and believing like myself, but I found them 
as cunning and as cautious as those in the world I 
had left behind. They spunged up my money 
whilst it lasted, borrowed my coals and never paid 
them, and cheated me when I played at cribbage. 
All this was done because they believed me to be 
very good-natured, and knew that I had no harm 
in me. 

** Upon my first entrance into this mansion, 
which is to some the abode of despair, I felt no 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, X13 

sensations different from those I experienced 
abroad. I was now on one side the door, and 
those who were unconfined were on the other; 
this was all the difference between us. At first 
indeed I felt some uneasiness, in considering how 
I should be able to provide this week for the 
wants of the week ensuing ; but after some time, 1 

if I fdlmd myself sure of eating one day, I never / 
troubled my head how I was to be supplied 
another. I seized every precarious meal with the 
utmost good humour, indulged no rants of spleen 
at my situation, never called down heaven and all 
the stars to behold me dining upon an halfpenny- 
worth of radishes : my very companions were 
taught to believe that I liked salad better than 
mutton. I contented myself with thinking, that 
all my life I should either eat white bread or 
brown ; considered that all that happened was ; / 
best, laughed when I was not in pain, took the \ 
world as it went, and read Tacitus often, for want 
of more books and company. 

" How long I might have continued in this 
torpid state of simplicity I cannot tell, had I not 
been rouzed by seeing an old acquaintance, whom 
I knew to be a prudent blockhead preferred to a 
place in the government. I now found that I had 
pursued a wrong track, and that the true way of 
being able to relieve others, was first to aim at 
independence myself. My immediate care, there- 
fore, was to leave my present habitation, and 
make an entire reformation in my conduct and 
behaviour. For a free, open, undesigning deport- 
ment, I put on that of closeness, prudence and 
economy. One of the most heroic actions I ever 

I. I 



1X4 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

performed, and for which I shall praise m3rself as 
long as I live, was the refusing half a crown to an 
old aoquahitance, at the time when he wanted it, 
and I had it to spare ; for this alone I deserve to 
be decreed an ovation. 

'' I now therefore pursued a coarse of uninter- 
rupted frugality, seldom wanted a dinner, and 
was consequently invited to twenty. I soon ^^an 
to get the character of a saving hunks that had 
nfoney $ and insensibly grew into esteem. Neigh- 
bours have asked my advice in the disposal of their 
daughters, and I have always taken care not to 
give any. I have contracted a friendship with an 
alderman, only by observing, that if we take a 
farthing from* a thousand pound, it will be a 
thousand pound no longer. I have been invited 
to a pawnbroker's table, by pretending to hate 
gravy ; and am now actually upon treaty of mar- 
riage with a rich widow, for only having observed 
that the bread was rising. If ever I am asked a 
question, whether I know it or not, instead of 
answering, I only smile and look wise. If a 
charity is proposed, I go about with the hat, but 
put nothing in myself. If a wretch solicits my 
pity, I observe that the world is filled with im- 
postors, and take a certain method of not being 
deceived by never relieving. In short, I now find 
the truest way of finding esteem even from the in- 
digent, is to give away nothings and thus have much 
in our power to give, " 



THE CfTTZEN OF THE WORLD, 1x5 

LETTER XXVIII. 
To the same. 



*' ry 



\'j 



■'■Hi -•''.-■ 



[ATELY in company with my friend in 
Idaek, whose oonversadon is now both 
my amusement and instnictioav ^ could 
not avoid dbU!tm% tlte great nfunbeft<]f 
old "teKhelorr and maiden' ladies with which this 
cityseent tb be over-run. •Sate marriage, said I> 
is not sufficiently enooaiaged,er we should never 
behold such crawtkof batteved beaux and decayed 
coqaets ntdXL attenipl^ig'to.dkive a trade they have 
bc^ ft9 ^ong. -unfit ifvy and Swarming tqxm the 
gaiety of the age. I behold an old badielor in the 
most contemptible Ught, asan animal that Ihres 
upon tiie common- 8toek= without contribtttaig his 
share: he is a beast of prey; and -the lawsshoald 
make> ase ef /as 'iiiany ^ stratagems^^ iand as^.<mach 
force-to drivethe reluctant savHge>into&e toils, as 
the Indians when> they bant the riiinoceipos. < The 
mob should be peitoitted to • hallo aftei> him; boys 
might pkytridcs' on -him with impunity, every 
well-bred ooaipany should iaa^ at. him, and i^ 
when turned ofBixtjs he effsiedto-aiake love, his 
mlstien might spit in his fiice, or, what wooidi)^ 
perhaps a greater purashmeat, shoald iurly grant 
the favour. '• 

As for old maids, continued I, they should not 
be treated with so much severity, because tsappose 
none would be so if they eOuld. No lady^in her 
senses would choose to make a subbrdinate figure at 
christenings and lyings-in, when She might be the 



zz6 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

principal herself; nor curry favour with a sister-in- 
law, when she might command an husband, nor 
toil in preparing custards, when she might lie abed 
imd give directions how they ought to be made, 
nor stifle all her sensations in demure formality, 
when she might with matrimbnial freedom shake 
her acquaintance by the hand, and wink at a 
double entendre. No lady could be so very silly 
as to live single, if she could help it I consider 
an unmarried lady declining into the vale of years, 
as one of those charming countries bordering on 
China that lies waste for want of proper inhabi- 
tants. We are not to accuse the country, but the 
ignorance of its neighbours, who are insensible of 
its beauties, though at liberty to enter and culti- 
vate the soiL 

" Indeed, Sir, replied my companion, you are 
very little acquainted with the English ladies to 
think they are old maids against their will. I dare 
venture to affirm that you can hardly select one of 
them all, but has had frequent offers of marriage, 
which, either pride or avarice has not made her 
reject. Instead of thinking it a disgrace, they 
take every occasion to boast of their former 
cruelty ; a soldier does not exult more when he 
counts over the wounds he has received, than a 
female veteran when she relates the wounds she 
has formerly given : exhaustless when she begins a 
narrative of the former death-dealing power of her 
eyes. She tells of the knight in gold lace, who 
died with a single frown, and never rose again till 

he was married to his maid : Of the squire, 

who being cruelly denied, in a rage, flew to the 
window, and lifting up the sash, threw himself in 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, X17 

an agony into his arm chair : Of the parson, who 

crossed in love, resolutely swallowed opium, which 

banished the stings of despised love by ^making 

him sleep. In short, she talks over her former 
losses with pleasure, and, like some tradesmen, 
finds consolation in the many bankruptcies she has 
suffered. 

" For this reason, whenever I see a superannua- 
ted beauty still unmarried, I tacitly accuse her 
either of pride, avarice, coquetry, or affectation. 
There's Miss Jenny Tinderbox, I once remember 
her to have had some beauty, and a moderate for- 
tune. Her elder sister happened to marry a man 
of quality, and this seemed as a statute of virginity 
s^ainst poor Jane. • Because there was one lucky 
bit in the family, she was resolved not to disgrace 
it by introducing a tradesman ; by thus rejecting 
ber equals, and neglected or despised by her supe- 
riors, she now acts in the capacity of tutoress to 
her sister's children, and undergoes the drudgery of 
three servants, without receiving the wages of one. 

" Miss Squeeze, was a pawnbroker's daughter ; 
her father had early taught her that money was a 
very good thing, and left her a moderate fortune 
at his death. She was so perfectly sensible of the 
value of what she had got, that she was resolved 
never to part with a &rthing without an equality 
on the part of her suitor ; she thus refused several 
offers made her by people who wanted to better 
themselves, as the saying is ; and grew old and ill- 
natured, without ever considering that she should 
have made an abatement in her pretensions, from 
her face being pale, and marked with the smalls 
pox. 



zz8 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

"Lady Betty Tempest on the contrary had 
beauty, with fortune and family. But, fond of 
conquest, she passed from triumph to triumph ; 
she had read plays and romances, and there had 
learned that a plain man of common sense was no 
better than a fool ; such she refused, and sighed 
only for the gay, giddy, inconstant and thought- 
less; after she had thus rejected hundreds who 
liked her, and sighed for hundreds who despised 
her, she found herself insensibly deserted : at pre- 
sent she is company only for her aunts and cousins, 
and sometimes makes one in a country-dance, with 
only one of the chairs for a partner, casts off round 
a joint-stool, and sets to a comer cupboard. In a 
word, she is treated with civil contempt from every 
quarts, and placed, like a piece of old-fashioned 
lumber, merely to fill up a comer. 

*' But Sophronia, the sagacious Sophronia ; how 
shall I mention her? She was taught to love 
Greek, and hate the men from her very infancy : 
she has rejected fine gentlemen because they were 
not pedants, and pedants because they were not 6ne 
gentlemen ; her exquisite sensibility has taught 
her to discover every fault in every lover, and her 
inflexible justice has prevented her pardoning 
them ; thus she rejected several offers, till the 
wrinkles of age had overtaken her ; and now, 
without one good feature in her face, she talks in- 
cessantly of the beauties of the mind." Farewell. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 1x9 

LETTER XXIX. 
From the same, 

ERE we to estimate the leaniing of the 
English by the niunber of books that 
are every day published among them, 
perhaps no country, not even China 
itself, could equU them in this particular. I have 
reckoned not less than twenty-three new books 
published in (xie day; which upon computation, 
makes eight thousand three hundred and ninety- 
five in one year. Most of these are not confined 
to one single science, but embrace the whole circle. 
History, politics, poetry, mathematics, metaphy- 
sics, and the philosophy of Nature are all com- 
prized in a manual not larger than that in which 
our children are taught the letters. If then we 
suppose the learned of England to read but an 
eighth part of the works which daily come from 
the press (and sure none can pretend to learning 
upon less easy terms) at this rate every scholar will 
read a thousand books in one year. From such a 
calculation you may conjecture w;hat an amazing 
fiind of literature a man must be possessed of, who 
thus reads three new books every day, not one of 
which but contains all the good things that ever 
were said or written. 

And yet I know not how it happens, but the 
English are not in reality so learned as would 
seem from this calculation. We meet but few who 
know all arts and sciences to perfection ; whether 
it is that the generality are incapable of such ex- 



xao THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

tensive knowledge, or that the authors of those 
books are not adequate instructors. In China, the 
emperor himself takes cognisance of all the doctors 
in the kingdom who profess authorship. In Eng- 
land, every man may be an author that can write ; 
for they have by law a liberty not only of saying 
what they please, but of being also as dull as they 
please. / 

Yesterday I testified my surprize to the man in 
black, where writers could be found in sufficient 
number to throw off the books I daily saw crowd- 
ing from the press. I at first imagined that their 
learned seminaries might take this method of in- 
structing the world. But to obviate this objection, 
my companion assured me, that the doctors of 
colleges never wrote, and that some of them had 
actually forgot their reading ; but if you desire, 
continued he, to see a collection of authors, I fancy 
I can introduce you this evening to a club, which 
assembles every Saturday at seven, at the sign of 
the Broom near Islington, to talk over the business 
of the last, and the entertainment of the week 
ensuing. I accepted his invitation, we walked to- 
gether, and entered the house some time before 
the usual hour for the company assembling. 

My friend took this opportunity of letting me 
into the characters of the principal members of the 
club, not even the host excepted, who, it seems, 
was once an author himself, but preferred by a 
bookseller to this situation as a reward for his 
former services. 

The first person, said he, of our society, is doctor 
Nonentity, a metaphysician. Most people think 
him a profound scholar ; but as he seldom speaks, 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, zaz 

I cannot be positive in that particular ; he gene- 
rally spreads himself before the fire, sucks his 
pipe, talks little, drinks much, and is reckoned 
very good company. I'm told he writes indexes 
to perfection, he makes essays on the origin of evil, 
philosophical enquiries upon any subject, and 
draws up an answer to any book upon twenty-four 
hours warning. You may distinguish him from the 
rest of the company by his long grey wig, and the 
blue handkerchief round his neck. 

The next to him in merit and esteem is Tim 
Syllabub, a droll creature ; he sometimes shines 
as a star of the first magnitude among the choice 
spirits of the age ; he is reckoned equally excellent 
at a rebus, a riddle, a bawdy song, and an hymn for 
the tabernacle. You will know him by his shabby 
finery, his powdered wig, dirty shirt, and broken 
silk stockings. 

After him succeeds Mr. Tibs, a very useful hand ; 
he write receipts for the bite of a mad dog, and 
throws off an eastern tale to perfection ; he under- 
stands the business of an author as well as any man ; 
for no bookseller alive can cheat him ; you may dis- 
tinguish him by the peculiar clumsiness of hb figure 
and the coarseness of his coat : however, though it 
be coarse, (as he frequently tells the company) he 
has paid for it. 

Lawyer Squint is the politician of the society ; 
he makes speeches for parliament, writes addresses 
to his fellow subjects, and letters to noble com- 
manders, he gives the history of every new play, 
and finds seasonable thoughts upon every occasion. 
— My companion was proceeding in his description, 
when the host came running in with terror on his 



m THR CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

countenance to tell us, that the door was beset 
with bailifis. If that be the case then, says my 
\ companion, we had as good be going ; for I am 
f positive we shall not see one of the company this 
night. Wherefore disappointed we were both 
obliged to return home, he to enjoy the oddities 
which compose his character alone, and I to write 
as usual to my friend the occurrences of the day. 
Adieu. 




LETTER XXX. 
From the same, 

|Y my last advices from Moscow, I find 
the caravan has not yet departed from 
China: I still continue to write, ex- 
pecting that you may receive a large 
number of my letters at once. In them you will 
find rather a minute detail of English peculiarities, 
than a general picture of their manners or disposi- 
tion. Happy it were for mankind if all travellers 
would thus, instead of characterising a people in 
general terms, lead us into a detail of those 
minute circumstances which first influenced their 
opinion : the genius of a country should be investi- 
gated with a kind of experimental enquiry : by this 
means we should have more precise and just no- 
tions of foreign nations, and detect travellers 
themselves when they happened to form wrong 
conclusions. 

My friend and I repeated our visit to the club of 
authors ; where, upon our entrance, we found the 



THM CITIZEN OF THE IVORLD, 1*3 

members all assembled and engaged in a loud 
debate^ 

The poetf in shabby finery, holding a manuscript 
in his hand, was earnestly endeavouring to per- 
suade the company to hear him read the first book 
of an heroic poem, which he had composed the day 
before. But. Against this, all the members very 
warmly objected. They knew no reason why any 
member of the club should be indulged with a par< 
ticular hearing, when many of them had publi^ed 
whole volumes which had never been looked in. 
They insisted that the law should be observed, 
where reading in .company was expressly noticed. 
It was in vain that the plaintiff pleaded the peculiar 
tnerit of his piece ; he spoke to an assembly insen- 
sible to all his remonstrances ; the book of laws 
was opened, and read by the secretary, where it 
was expressly enacted, "That whatsoever poet, 
speechmaker, critic, or historian, should presume 
to engage the company by reading his own works, 
he was to lay down six-pence previous to opening 
the manuscript, and should be charged one shilUng 
an hour while he continued reading j the said 
shilling to be equally distributed among the com- 
pany as a recompence for their trouble." 

Our poet seemed at first to shrink at the penalty, 
hesitating for sometime whether he should deposit 
the fine, or shut up the poeiA ; but looking round, 
and perceiving two strangers in the room, his love 
of fame out- weighed his prudence, and laying down 
the sum by law established, he insisted on his 
prerogative. 

^A profound silence ensuing, he began by ex- 
plaining his design. ** Gentlemen, says he, the 



it4 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

present piece is not one of your common epic 
poems, which come from the press like paper kites 
in summer ; there are none of your Tumuses or 
Dido's in it ; it is an heroical description of Nature. 
I only beg youll endeavour to make your souls 
unison with mine, and hear with the same en- 
thusiasm with which I have written. The poem 
begins with the description of an author's bed- 
chamber : the picture was sketched in my own 
apartment ; for you must know, gentlemen, that I 
am myself the hero. Then putting himself into 
the attitude of an orator, with all the emphasis of 
voice and action, he proceeded. 

"Where the Red Lion flaring o'er the way, 

Invites each passing stranger that can pay ; 

Where Calvert's butt, and Pars<m's black champaign, 

Regale the drabs and bloods of Drury lane ; 

There in a lonely room, firom bailiffii snug. 

The muse found Scroggen stretch'd beneath a rug. 

A window patch'd with paper lent a ray, 

That dimly shew'd the state in which he lay ; 

The sanded floor that grits beneath the tread ; 

The humid wall with paltry pictures spread : 

The royal game of goose was there in view, 

And the twelve rules the royal martyr drew ; 

The seasons fram'd with listing foimd a place, 

And brave prince William shew'd his lamp-black face : 

The mom was cold, he views with keen desire 

The rusty grate unconscious of a fire ; 

^th beer and milk arrears the frieze was scor'd. 

And five crack'd tea cups dress'd the chimney board, 

A night cap deck'd his brows instead of bay, 

A cap by night a stocking all the day I " 

With this last line he seemed so much elated, 
that he was unable to proceed : ** There gentlemen, 
cries he, there is a description for you ; Rabelais*s 
bed-chamber is but a fool to it : 



THR CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, x»s 
A ca^ by night a stocking all thi day I 

There is sound and sense, and. truth, and nature 
in the trifling compass of ten little syllables." 

He was too much employed in self-admiration to 
observe the company : who by nods, winks, shrugs 
and stifled laughter, testified every mark of con- 
tempt. He turned severally to each for their opi" 
nion, and found all however ready to applaud. 
One swore it was inimitable ; another said it was 
damn'd fine ; and a third cried out in a rapture Ca- 
rissimo. At last addressing himself to the president^ 
and pray, Mr. Squint, says he, let us have your 
opinion. Mine, answered the president, (taking 
the manuscript out of the author's hands) may this 
glass sufibcate me, but I think it equal to any 
thing I have seen ; and I fancy, (continued he 
doubling up the poem, and forcing it into the 
author's pocket) that you will get great honour 
when it comes out ; so I shall b^ leave to put it 
in. We will not intrude upon your good-nature, 
in desiring to hear more of it at present ; ex ungtte 
Htrcidem^ we are satisfied, perfectly satisfied. 
The author made two or three attempts to poll 
it out a second time, and the president made 
as many to prevent him. Thus though with re- 
luctance he was at last obliged to sit down,* 
contented with the commendations for which he 
had paid. 

When this tempest of poetry and praise was 
blown over, one of the company changed the sub- 
ject, by wondering how any man can be so dull as 
to write poetry at present, since prose itself would 
hardly pay. Would you think it, gentlemen, con- 
tinued he, I have actually written last week sixteen 



u6 T//M CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

prayers, twelve bawdy jests, and three sermons, all 
at the rate of six-pence a-piece ; and what is still 
more extraordinary, the bookseller has lost by the 
bargain. Such sermons would once have gained me 
« pvfebend's stall ; but now alas we have ndther 
piety, taste, nor hamonr among us. Positfrelyif 
this seasoB does not turn out better than it hsA 
begun, unless the ministry commit some blimders 
to -furnish us with a new topic of abuse, I' shall re^ 
waaut my old bcainess of working ait the press; 'in^ 
steadf of finding it employment; 

The'wiiole dub.seem to join in condemning the 
season^ aft: one of the worst that iiad^come for some 
time'; a gentleman particularly 'observed that the 
nobility were never kaownlx^ subscribe worse than 
at present. ** 1 know not* liow it happens, said he^ 
though I follow xhttk «p aa dose as posdbtev 7«t I 
caa hardly get a single subseviption in a "Week. 
The houses of the^ great are as inaccessible as 
a frontier garrison at mid->night I never see a 
nobleman!s*door haif opened that some surly porter 
or footman does not stand full in the breach. I 
was yesterday to wait with a subscription proposal 
upon my- lord Squashy the Creolian. I had posted 
myself at his door, the whole morning, and just as 
he was getting inta his coach, thrust my proposal 
snug into: his hand folded up in the form of a 
letter from myself. He just glanced at the super- 
scription, and, not knowing the hand, consigned it 
to his valet de chambre; this respectable personage 
treated it as his master, and put it into the hands 
of the porter. The porter grasped my proposal 
frowning ; and, measuring my figure from top to 
toe, put it back into my own hands unopened. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, i«7 

'* To the devil I pitch all the nobility, cries a 
little man, in a peculi^ur accent^ I am sore they have 
of lat« u^ed me most -scomly* :Yob- muslt know, 
gentlemen, some time ago, 4ipon diei anival .of a 
certain, noble duke froih his .tnunds, liset myself 
down^ and camped up «;fihe flaanting, poetical 
panegyric, whidi I had writteik in snaha stxain 
that I fitncied it wocdd have-^even wheedled mUk 
from a moase. ' In this I xepresested ithe whole 
kingdom welcoming his grace toJiis nativesoil, not 
forgetting the loss France and Italy would sustain 
in their arts by his. departure. I expected to /toudi 
for a bank bill at least ; so folding up my verses in 
gilt paper, I gave my last half crown* to a genteel 
servant to be the bearer. . My letter was safely con- 
veyed to his gnu:e, and the servant aftisrfour hours 
absenoe, during which time I ied.the life of a fiend, 
retuitied with a letter four times as big as mine. 
Guess my extasy at the prospect of so fine a letum^ 
I eagerly took the pacquet into my hands, -that 
trembled to receive it I kept it some .time* un- 
opened before me, brooding over the expected 
treasure it contained y. when opening it, as 1 hope 
to be saved, gentlemen j his grace had sent me in 
pa3rment for my poem no 'bank bills, but six oofnes 
of verse, eadi longer than mine^ addressed to him 
upon the same occasion." 

" A nobleman, cries a member, whp had hither- 
to been silent, is created as much for the oof^usion 
of us authors as the catch-pole. I'M tell you a 
story, gentlemen, which is as true as that this pipe 
is made of clay. When I was delivered of nqr first 
book, I owed my taylor for a suit of clothes, but 
that is nothing new, you know, and may be any 



198 THR CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

man's case as well as mine. Well, owing him for 
a suit of clothes, and hearing that my book took 
very well, he sent for his money, and insisted upon 
being paid immediately: though I was at that 
time rich in feune, for my book run like wild^fire, 
yet I was very short in money, and being unable to 
latiflfy his demand, prudently resolved to keep my 
chamber, preferring a prison of my own chusing at 
home, to one of my tailor's choosing abroad. In 
vain the bailifib used all their arts to decoy me 
from my citadel, in vain they sent to let me know 
that a gentleman wanted to speak with me at the 
next tavern, in vain they came with an urgent 
message from my aunt in the country ; in vain I 
was told that a particular friend was at the point of 
death, and desired to take his last farewell ; I was 
deaf, insensible, rock, adamant, the bailiffs could 
make no impression on my hard heart, for I 
effectually kept my liberty by never stirring out of 
the room. 

** This was very well for a fortnight ; when one 
morning I received a most splendid message from 
the earl of Doomsday, importing that he had read 
my book, and was in raptures with every line of it ; 
he impatiently longed to see the author, and had 
some designs which might turn out greatly to my 
advantage. I paused upon the contents of this 
message, and found there could be no deceit, for 
the card was gilt at the edges, and the bearer, I 
was told, had quite the looks of a gentleman. 
Witness ye powers, how my heart triumphed at my 
own importance ; I saw a long perspective of feli- 
city before me, I applauded the taste of the times, 
which never saw genius forsaken ; I had prepared 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 199 

a set introductory speech for the occasion, five 
glaring compliments for his lordship, and two more 
modest for myself. The next morning, therefore, 
in order to be punctual to my ai^xnntment, I took 
coach, and ordered the fellow to drive to the street 
and house mentioned in his lordship's address. I 
had the precaution to pull up the windows as 
I went along to keep off the busy part of mankind^ 
and, big with expectation, femcied the coach never 
went &st enough. At length, however, the wished 
for moment of its stopping arrived, this for some 
time I impatiently expected, and letting down the 
door in a transport, in order to take a previous view 
of his IcMrdship's magnificent palace and situation, I 
found poison to my sight ! I found m3rself, not in 
an degant street, but a paltry lane, not at a noble- 
man's door, but the door of a spuo^fing-house ; I 
found the coachman had all this while been just 
driving me to jail, and I saw the bailiff with a 
devil's face, coming out to secure me." 

To a philosopher, no circumstance, however \ 
trifling, is too minute; he finds instruction and \ 
entertainment in occiurences, which are passed 
over by the rest of mankind as low, trite, and in- 
different ; it is from the number of these particulars, 
which, to many, appear insignificant, that he is at 
last enaUed to form general conclusions; this, 
therefore, must be my excuse for sending so &r as 
China accounts of manners and follies, which, 
though minute in their own nature, serve more 
truly to characterise this people than histories of 
their public treaties, courts, ministers, negotiations, 
and ambassadors. Adieu. 



I. 



I30 THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 



LETTER XXXI. 
From the same. 



-'*^.V1L.'U«V» 






HE English have not yet brought the art 
of gardening to the same perfection 
with the Chinese, but have lately begun 
to imitate them ; Nature is now fol- 
lowed with gpreater assiduity than formerly; th6 
trees are suffsied to shoot out into the utmost 
luxuriance ; the streams no longer forced from their 
native beds» are permitted to wind along the 
vallies: spontaneous flowers take place of the 
finished partene^ and the enamelled meadow of 
the shaven green. 

Yet still the English are fu behind us in this 
charming art ; their designers have not yet attained 
a power of uniting instruction with beauty. An 
European will scarcely conceive my meaning, when 
I say that there is scarce a garden in China which 
does not contain some fine moral, couched under 
the general design, where one is not taught wisdom 
as, he walks, and feels the force of some noble 
truth, or delicate precept resulting from the dis- 
position of the groves, streams or grottos. Permit 
me to illustrate what I mean by a description of 
my gardens at Quainsi My heart still hovers 
round those scenes of former happiness with plea- 
sure ; and I find a satbfaction in enjoying them at 
this distance, though but in imagination. 

You descended from the house between two 
groves of trees, planted in such a manner, that 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 131 

they were impenetrable to the eye ; while on each 
hand the way was adorned with all that was beauti- 
ful in porcelain, statuary, and painting. This 
passage from the house opened into an area sur- 
rounded with rocks, flowers, trees and shrubs, but 
all so disposed as if each was the spontaneous pro- 
duction of Nature. As you proceeded forward on 
this lawn, to your right and left-hand were two 
gates, opposite each other, of very different archi- 
tecture and design ; and before you lay a temple 
built rather with minute elegance than ostentation. 
The right-hand gate was planned with the utmost 
amplidty, or rather rudeness ; ivy clasped round 
the pillars, the baleful Cyprus hung over it ; time 
seemed to have destroyed all the smoothness and 
r^^ularity of the stone : two champions with lifted 
dubs appeared in the act of guarding its access ; 
dragons and serpents were seen in the most hideous 
attitudes, to deter the spectator from approaching; 
and the perspective view that lay behind, seemed 
dark and gloomy to the last d^pree ; the stranger 
was tempted to enter only from the motto : Pbrvia 

VIRTUTI. 

The opposite gate was formed in a very different 
manner ; the architecture was light, elegant, and 
inviting ; flowers hung in wreaths round the pillars ; 
all was finished in the most exaot and masterly 
manner ; the very stone of which it was built, still 
preserved its polish; nymphs, wrought by the 
hand of a master, in the most alluring attitudes, 
beckoned the stranger to approach ; while all that 
lay behind, as fiir as the eye could reach, seemed 
gay, luxuriant, and capable of affording endless 
I^easure. The motto itself contributed to invite 



xja THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

him ; for over the gate was written these words, 
Facilis Descensus. 

By this time I fanqr you begin to perceive that 
the gloomy gate was designed to represent the 
road to virtue ; the opposite, the more agreeable 
passage to vice. It is but natural to suppose, that 
the spectator was always tempted to enter by the 
gate which offered him so many allurements ; I 
always in these cases left him to his choice ; but 
generally found that he took to the left, which 
promised most entertainment. 

Immediately upon his entering the gate of vice, 
the trees and flowers were disposed in such a 
manner as to make the most pleasing impression ; 
but as he walked further on, he insensibly found 
the garden assume the air of a wilderness, the 
landskips began to darken, the paths grew more 
intricate, he appeared to go downwards, frightful 
locks seemed to hang over his head, gloomy 
caverns, unexpected precipices, awful ruins, heaps 
of unburied bones, and terrifying sounds, caused 
by unseen waters, began to take place of what at 
first appeared so lovely ; it was in vain to attempt 
returning, the labyrinth was too much perplexed 
for any but myself to find the way back. In short, 
when sufficiently impressed with the horrors of 
what he saw, and the imprudence of his choice, I 
brought him by an hidden door, a shorter way 
back into the area from whence at first he had 
strayed. 

The gloomy gate now presented itself before the 
stranger ; and though there seemed little in its ap- 
pearance 'to tempt his curiosity, yet encouraged by 
the motto, he generally proceeded. The darkness 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 133 

of the entrance, the frightful figures that seemed to 
obstruct his way, the trees of a mournful green, 
conspired at first to disgust him : as he went for- 
ward, however, all began to open and wear a more 
pleasing appearance, beautiful cascades, beds of 
flowers, trees loaded with firuit or blossoms, and 
unexpected brooks, improved the scene : he now 
found that he was ascending, and, as he proceeded, 
all Nature grew more beautifid, the prospect 
widened as he went higher, even the air itself, 
seemed to become more pure. Thus pleased, and 
happy from unexpected beauties, I at last led him 
to an arbour, from whence he could view the 
garden, and the whole country around, and where 
he might own, that the road to Virtue terminated 
in Happiness. 

Though from this description you may imagine, 
that a vast tract of ground was necessary to exhibit 
such a pleasing variety in, yet be assured I have 
seen several gardens in England take up ten times 
the space which mine did, without half the beauty. 
A very small extent of ground is enough for an 
elegant taste ; the greater room is required if mag- 
nificence is in view. There is no spot, tho* ever 
so little, which a skilful designer might not thus 
improve, so as to convey a delicate allegory, and 
impress the mind with truths the most useful and 
necessary. Adieu. 




134 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

LETTER XXXI I. 
From the same, 

IN a late excursion with my friend into 
the country, a gentleman with a blue 
ribbon tied round his shoulder, and in 
a chariot drawn by six horses passed 
swiftly by us, attended with a numerous train of 
captains, lacquies, and coaches filled with women. 
When we were recovered from the dust raised by 
this cavalcade, and could continue our discourse 
without danger of suffocation, I observed to my 
companion, that all this state and equipage which 
he seemed to despise, would in China be regarded 
with the utmost reverence, because such distinc- 
tions were always the reward of merit ; the great- 
ness of a Mandarine's retinue being a most certain 
mark of the superiority of his abilities or virtue. 

The gentleman who has now passed us, replied 
my companion, has no claims from his own merit 
to distinction ; he is possessed neither of abilities 
nor virtue ; it is enough for him that one of his an- 
cestors was possessed of these qualities two hundred 
years before him. There was a time, indeed, when 
his family deserved their title, but they are long 
since degenerated, and his ancestors for more than 
a century have been more and more solicitous to 
keep up the breed of their dogs and horses, than that 
of their children. This very nobleman, simple as 
he seems, is descended from a race of statesmen and 
heroes ; but unluckily his great grandfather marry- 
ing a cook maid, and she having a trifling passion 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 13s 

for his lordship's groom, they some how crossed 
the strain, and produced an heir, who took alter 
his mother in his great love to good eatings and his 
father in a violent affection for horseflesh. These 
passions have for some generations passed on from 
fether to son, and are now become the character* 
istics of the femily, his present lordship being 
equally remarkable for his kitchen and his table. / 

Bat such a nobleman, cried I, deserves our pity 
thus i^aced in so high a sphere of life, which only 
the more exposes to contempt. A king may con- 
fer titles, but it is personal merit alone that insures 
respect I suppose, added I, that such men who 
are despised by their equals, neglected by their in- 
feriors, are condemned to live among involuntary 
dependants in irksome solitude ? 

You are still under a mistake, replied my com- 
panion, for though this nobleman is a stranger to 
generosity ; though he takes twenty opportunities 
in a day of letting his guests know how much he 
despises them ; though he is possessed neither of 
taste, wit, nor wisdom : though incapable of im- 
proving others by his OHiversaticm, and never 
known to enrich any l^ his bounty, yet for all this, 
his company is eagerly sought alter : he is a lord, 
and that is as much as most people desire in a com- 
panion. Quality and title have such allurements, 
that hundreds are ready to give up all their own 
importance, to cringe, to flatter, to look little, and 
to pall every pleasure in constraint, merely to be 
among the great, though without the least hopes 
of improving their understanding, or sharing their 
generosity ; they might be happy among their 
equals, but those are despised for company, where 



136 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

they are despised in turn. You saw what a crowd 
(^ humble cousins, card-ruined beaus, and captains 
on half pay, were willing to make up this great 
man's retinue down to his country seat. Not one 
of all these that could not lead a more comfortable 
life at home in their little lodging of three shillings 
a week, with their luke-warm dinner, served up 
between two pewter plates from a cook*s shop. 
Yet poor devils, they are willing to undergo the 
impertinence and pride of their entertainer, merely 
to be thought to live among the great : they are 
willing to pass the summer in bondage, though 
oonsdous they are taken dovm only to approve his 
lordship*s taste upon every occasion, to tag all his 
stupid observations with a vtry true^ to praise 
his stable, and descant upon his claret and cookery. 
The pitiful humiliations of the gentlemen you 
are now describing, said I, puts me in mind of 
a custom among the Tartars of Koreki, not en* 
tirely dissimilar to this we are now considering.^ 
The Russians, who trade with them carry thither 
a kind of mushrooms, which they exchange for 
furs of squirrels, ermines, sables, and foxes. These 
mushrooms the rich Tartars lay up in large quan- 
tities for the winter ; and when a nobleman makes 
a mushroom feast, all the neighbours around are 
invited. The mushrooms are prepared by boiling, 
by which the water acquires an intoxicating 
quality, and is a sort of drink which the Tartars 
prize beyond all other. When the nobility and 

1 Van Stralenbei^ff, a writer of credit, gives the same 
account of this people. Vid. an Historico-Geograpliica.1 
Deacription of the north eastern parts of Europe and Asia, 

P» 397* ' 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 137 

lacte are assembled, and the ceremonies usual 
between people of distinction over, the mushroom 
broth goes freely round ; they laugh, talk double 
entendre, grow fuddled, «nd become excellent 
company. The poorer sort, who love mushroom 
broth to distraction as well as the rich, but cannot 
afford it at the first hand, post themselves on these 
occasions round the huts of the rich, and watch 
the opportunity of the ladies and gentlemen as 
they come down to pass their liquor, and holding 
a wooden bowl, catch the delicious fluid, very 
little altered by filtration, being still strongly 
tinctured with Uie intoxicating quality. Of thh 
they drink with the utmost satisfaction and thus 
they get as drunk and as jovial as their betters. 

Happy nobility, cries my companion, who can 
fear no diminution of respect, unless by being 
seized with a strangury; and who when most 
drunk are most useful ; though we have not this 
custom among us, I foresee, that if it were intro- 
duced, we might have many a toad-eater in England 
ready to drink from the wooden bowl on these 
occasions, and to praise the flavour of his lordship's 
liquor : As we have different classes of gentry, 
who knows but we may see a lord holding the 
bowl to a minister, a knight holding it to his 
lordship, and a simple 'squire drinking it double 
distilled from the loins of knighthood. For my 
part, I shall never for the future hear a great man's 
flatterers haranguing in his praise that I shall not 
fancy I behold the wooden bowl ; for I can see no 
reason why a man, who can live easily and happily 
at home, should bear the drudgery of decorum and 
the impertinence of his entertainer, unless intoxi- 



S3l THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

cated with a passion for all that was quality ; 
unless he thought that whatever came from Um 
great was delicious, and had the tincture of the 
mushroom in it Adieu. 




LETTER XXXIII. 
From the same* 

AM disgusted, O Fum Hoam, even to 
sickness disgusted. Is it possible to 
bear the presumption of those islanders^ 
when they pretend to instruct me in the 
ceremonies of China ! They lay it down as a 
maxim, that every person who comes from thence 
must express himself in metaphor ; swear by Alia, 
rail against wine, and behave, and talk and write 
like a Turk or Persian. They make no distinction 
between our elegant manners, and the voluptuous 
barbarities of our eastern neighbours. Wherever 
I come, I raise either diffidence or astonishment ; 
some fancy me no Chinese, because I am formed 
more like a man than a monster ; and others wonder 
to find one bom five thousand miles from England, 
endued with common sense. Strange, say they, 
that a man who has received his education at such 
a distance from London, should . have common 
sense : to be born out of England, and yet have 
common sense ! impossible 1 He must be some 
Englbhman in disguise ; his very visage has 
nothing of the true exotic barbarity. 

I yesterday received an invitation from a lady 
of distinction, who it seems had collected all her 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 139 

knowledge of eastern manners from fictions every 
day propagated here, imder the titles of eastern 
tales, and oriental histories : she received me very 
politely, but seemed to wonder that I neglected 
bringii^ opium and* a tobacco box ; when chairs 
were drawn fcnr the rest of the company, I was 
assigrned my place on a cushion on the floor. It 
was in vain that I protested the Chinese used 
chairs as in Europe ; she understood ded^rums too 
well to entertain me with the ordinary civilities. 

I had scarce been seated according to her direc- 
tions, when the footman was ordered to pin a 
napkin under my chin ; this I protested against, as 
being no way Chinese ; however, the whole com- 
pany, who it seems were a club of connoisseurs^ 
gave it unanimously against me, and the napkin 
was pinned accordingly. 

It was impossible to be angry with people, who 
seemed to err only from an excess of politeness, 
and I sat c<mtented, expecting their importunities 
were now at an end ; but as soon as ever dinner 
was served, the lady demanded whether I was for 
a plate of Biotas clewSy or a slice of Birds' nests f 
As these were dishes with which I vms utterly un- 
acquainted, I was desirous of eating only what I 
knew, and therefore begged to be helped from a 
piece of beef that lay on the side table : my request 
at once disconcerted the whole company. A Chinese 
eat beef ! that could never be ! there was no local 
propriety in Chinese beef, whatever there might 
be in Chinese pheasant. Sir, said my entertainer, 
I think I have some reasons to fancy myself a 
judge of these matters: in short, the Chinese 
never eat beef ; so that I must be permited to re- 



MO THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

commend the Pilaw, there was never better dressed 
at Pekin ; the saffron and rice are well boiled, and 
the spices in perfection. 

I had no sooner begun to eat what was laid be- 
fore me, than I found the whole company as 
much astonished as before ; it seems I made no 
use of my chop-sticks. A grave gentleman, whom 
I take to be an author, harangued very learnedly (as 
the company seemed to think) upon the use which 
was made of them in China : he entered into a long 
argument with himself about their first introduc- 
tion, without once appealing to me, who might be 
supposed best capable of silencing the enquiry. As 
the gentleman therefore took my silence for a 
mark of his own superior sagacity, he was resolved 
to pursue the triumph : he talked of our cities, 
mountains and animals, as £B.miliarly as if he had 
been bom in Quamsi, but as ierroneously as if a 
native of the moon ; he attempted to prove that I 
had nothing of the true Chinese cut" in my visage ; 
shewed that my cheek bones should have been 
higher, and my forehead broader; in short, he 
almost reasoned me out of my country, and effec- 
tually persuaded the rest of the company to be of 
his opinion. 

I was going to expose his mistakes, when it was 
insisted that I had nothing of the true eastern 
manner in my delivery. This gentleman's conver- 
sation (says one of the ladies, who was a great 
reader) is like our own, mere chit chat and common 
sense ; there is nothing like sense in the true 
eastern style, where nothing more is required but 
sublimity. Oh for an history of Aboulfaouris, the 
grand voyager, of genii, magicians, rocks, bags of 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, x^t 

bullets, giants, and enchanters, where all is great, 
obscure, magnificent, and unintelligible 1 I have 
written many a sheet of eastern tale myself, inter* 
rupts the author, and I defy the severest critic to 
say but that I have stuck close to the true manner. 
I have compared a lady's chin to the snow upon 
the mountains of Bomek ; a soldier's sword, to the 
clouds that obscure the face of heaven. If riches 
are mentioned, I compare them to the flocks that 
graze the verdant Tefflis ; if poverty, to the mists 
that veil the brow of mount Baku. I have used 
thu and thou upon all occasions, I have described 
£Edlen stars, and splitting mountains, not forgetting 
the little Houries who make a pretty figure in every 
description. But you shall hear how I generally 
begin. ** Eben-ben-bolo, who was the son of Ban, 
iHras bom on the foggy summits of Benderabassi. 
His beard was whi^r than the feathers which veil 
the breast of the Penguin ; his eyeswerelike the eyes 
of doves, when washed by the dews of the morning ; 
\i\& hair, which hung like the willow weeping over 
the glassy stream, was so beautiful that it seemed 
to reflect its own brightness ; and his feet were as 
the feet of a wild deer which fleeth to the tops of 
the mountains." There, there, is the true eastern 
taste for you ; every advance made towards sense, 
is only a deviation from sound. Eastern tales 
should always b^ sonorous, lofty, musical and 
unmeaning. 

I could not avoid' smiling to hear a native of 
England attempt to instruct me in the true eastern 
idiom, and after he looked round some time for 
applause, I presumed to ask him whether he had 
ever travelled into the east ; to which he replied in 



Z4a THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

the negative ; I demanded whether he understood 
Chinese or Arabic, to which also he answered as 
before. Then how, Sir, said I, can you pretend 
to determine upon the eastern style, who are entirely 
unacquainted with the eastern writings? Take, 
Sir, the word of one who is professedly a Chinese, 
and who is actually acquainted with the Arabian 
'^ writers, that what is palmed upon you daily for an 
imitation of eastern writing, no wa3rs resembles 
their manner, either in sentiment or diction* In 
the east, similes are seldom used, and metaphors 
almost wholly unknown ; but in China particularly, 
the very reverse of what you allude to, takes place ; 
a cool phlegmatic method of writing prevails there. 
The writers of that country, ever more assiduous to 
instruct than to please, address rather the judg- 
ment than the fancy. Unlike many authors of 
Europe, who have no consideration of the reader's 
time, they generally leave more to be understood 
than they express. 

Besides, Sir, you must not expect from an in- 
habitant of China the same ignorance, the same 
unlettered simplicity, that you find in a Turk^ 
Persian^ or native of Peru. The Chinese are 
versed in the sciences as well as you, and are 
masters of several arts unknown to the people of 
Europe. Many of them are instructed not only in 
their own national learning, but are perfectly well 
acquainted with the languages and learning of the 
west. If my word in such a case, is not to be 
taken, consult your own travellers on this head, 
who affirm, that the scholars of Pekin and Siam 
sustain theological theses in Latin. The college of 
Masprend^ which is but a league from Siam (says 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 143 

one of your travellers ^) came in a body to salute 
our aptdassador, Nothing' gave nie more sincere 
^asure than to behold a number of priests vener* 
able both from age and modesty^ followed by a num- 
ber of youths of all nations^ Chinese, Japanese, 
Tonquinese, of Cochin China, Pegu and Siam, aU 
willing to pay their respects in the most polite 
n^nner imaginable, A Cochin Chinese made an 
excellent Latin oration upon this occasion : he was 
succeeded, and even out-done, by a student of Ton- 
quin, who was as well skilled in the western learn' 
ing as any scholar of Paris, Now, Sir, if youths 
who never stirred from home, are so perfectly 
skilled in your laws and learning, surely more must 
be expected from one like me, who have travelled 
so many thousand miles, who have conversed 
familiarly for several years with the English factors 
eittabtished at Canton, and the missionaries se|it us 
from every part of Europe. The unaffected of 
every country nearly resemble each other, and a 
page -of our Confucius and of your Tillotson have 
scarce any material difference. Paltry siffectation, 
strained allusions, and di^isting finery^ are easily 
attained by those who choose to wear them ; and 
they are but too frequently the badges of ignorance, 
or of stupidity whenever it would endeavour to 
please. 

I was proceeding in my discourse, when, looking 
roundf I perceived the company no way attentive 
to what I attempted, with so much earnestness, to 
enforce. One lady was whispering her that sat 

1 Journal ou suite du Voyage de Siam en forme de 
Letitres familieres fait en 1685, & x686, par N. L. D. C, 
p. X74, edit. Aiiistelod» x686. 



144 THB CITIZEN OP THE WORLD. 

next, another was studying the merits of a £ui, a 
third began to yawn, and the author himself fell 
fast asleep : I thought it, therefore, high time to 
make a retreat, nor did the company seem to shew 
any regret at my preparations for departure ; even 
the lady who had invited me, with the most morti- 
fying insensibility, saw me seize my hat and rise 
from my cushion ; nor was I invited to repeat my 
visit, because it was found that I aimed at appear- 
ing rather a reasonable creature, than an outlandish 
idiot. Adieu. 




LETTER XXXIV. 
To the same, 

I HE polite arts are in this countiy subject 
to as many revolutions as its laws or 
politics ; not only the object of fancy 
and dress, but even of delicacy, and 
taste are directed by the capricious influence of 
fashion. I am told there has been a time when 
poetry was universally encouraged by the great, 
when men of the first rank not only patronised the 
poet, but produced the finest models for his imita- 
tion; it was then the English sent forth those 
glowing rhapsodies, which we have so often 
read over together with rapture ; poems big with 
all the sublimity of Mentius, and supported by 
reasoning as strong as that of Zimpo. 

The nobility are fond of wisdom, but they are 
also fond of having it without study ; to read poetry 
required thought, and the English nobility were 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 145 

not fond of thinking ; they soon therefore placed 
their affections upon music, because in this they 
might indulge an happy vacancy, and yet still have 
pretensions to delicacy and taste as befcure. They 
soon brought their numerous dependents into an 
approbation of their pleasures; who in turn led 
their thousand imitators to feel or feign a similitude 
of passion. Colonies of singers were now imported 
from abroad at a vast expence, and it was expected 
the English would soon be able to set examples to 
Europe ; all these expectations however were soon 
<iis5ipated ; in spite of the zeal which fired the 
great, the ignorant vulgar refused to be taught to 
sing ; refused to undergo the ceremonies which 
were to initiate them in the singing fraternity; 
thus the colony from abroad dwindled by d^;rees ; 
for they were of themselves unfortunately incapable 
of progagating the breed. 

Music having thus lost its splendour. Painting is 
now become the sole object of fashionable care ; 
the title of connoisseur in that art is at present the 
safest passp(Mt in every fashionable society ; a well 
timed shrug, an admiring attitude, and one or two 
exotic tones of exclamation are sufficient qualifica^ 
tions for men of low circumstances to curry favour ; 
even some of the young nobility are themselves 
early instructed in handling the pencil, while their 
happy parents, big with expectation, foresee the 
walls of every apartment covered with the manu- 
factures of their posterity. 

But many of the English are not content with 
giving all their time to this art at home ; some 
young men of distinction are found to travel thro' 
Europe with no other intent than that of under - 

I. L 



146 THE CITi2SN OF THE WORLD, 

Standing and collecting pictures ; studying seals, 
and describing statues; on they travel from this 
cabinet of curiosities to that gallery of pictures, 
waste the prime of life in wonder, skilful in pictures, 
ignorant in men ; yet impossible to be reclaimed, 
because their follies take shelter under the names 
of delicacy and taste. 

It is true, Painting should have due encourage- 
ment ; as the painter can undoubtedly fit up our 
apartments in as much more elegant manner than 
the upholsterer ; but I should think a man of 
fashion makes but an indifferent exchange, who 
lays out all that time in furnishing his house which 
he should have employed in the furniture of his 
head ; a person who shews no other symptoms of 
taste than his cabinet or gallery, might as well 
boast to me of the furniture of his kitchen. 

I know no other motive but vanity that induces 
the great to testify such an inordinate passion for 
pictures ; after the piece is bought, and gazed at 
eight or ten days successively, the purchaser's plea- 
sure must surely be over ; all the satisfaction he can 
then have, is to shew it to others ; he may be con- 
sidered as the guardian of a treasure of which he 
makes no manner of use ; his gallery is furnished 
not for himself, but the connoisseur, who is gene- 
rally some humble flatterer, ready to feign a rapture 
he does not feel ; and as necessary to the happiness 
of a picture-buyer, as gazers are to the magnificence 
of an Asiatic procession. 

I have enclosed a letter from a youth of distinc- 
tion, on his travels, to his father i% England ; in 
which he appears addicted to no vice, seems 
obedient to his governor, of a good natural dispo- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, X47 

sition, and fond of improvement ; but at the same 
time early taught to regard cabinets and galleries 
as the only proper schools of improvement, and to 
consider a skill in pictures as the properest know- 
ledge for a man of quality. 

My Lord, 
We have been but two days at Antwerp, where- 
fore I have sat down as soon as possible to give you 
some account of what we have seen since our 
arrival, desirous of letting no opportunity pass 
without writing to so good a fathef . Immediately 
upon alighting from our Rotterdam machine, my 
governor who is immoderately fond of paintings, 
and at the same time an excellent judge, would let 
no time pass till we paid our respects to the church 
of the virgiti-mother, which contains treasure beyond 
estimation. We took an infinity of pains in know- 
ing its exact dimensions, and differed half a foot in 
our calculation ; so I leave that to some succeeding 
information. I really believe my governor and I 
could have lived and died there. There is scarce 
a pillar in the whole church that is not adorned by 
a Rubens, a Vander Meuylen, a Vandyke, or a 
Wouverman. What attitudes, carnations, and 
draperies ! I am almost induced to pity the English 
who have none of those exquisite pieces among 
them. As we are willing to let slip no opportunity 
of doing business, we immediately after went to 
wait on Mr. Hogendorp, whom you have so fre- 
quently commended for his judicious collection. 
His cameos are indeed beyond price ; his intaglios 
not so good. He shewed us one of an officiating 
fiamen, which he thought to be an antique ; but 



ms the citizen of the world. 

my governor, who is not to be decetred in these 
IMiticolan, soon found it to be an arrant finqut 
cento, I could not, however, sufficiently admire 
the genius of Mr. Hogendorp, who has been able 
to collect from all parts of the worid a thousand 
things which no body knows the use o£ Except 
your lordship and my governor, I do not know any 
body I admire so much. He is indeed asnrprizing 
genius. The next morning early, as we were re- 
solved to take the whole day before us, we sent oar 
compliments to Mr. Van Sprockken, desiring to 
see his gallery, which request he very politely com' 
plied with. His gallery measures fifty feet by 
twenty, and is well filled ; but what su^)rized me 
most of all, was to see an holy fiimily just like your 
lordship's, which this ingenious gentleman assures 
me is the true originaL «I own, this gave me inex- 
pressible uneasiness, and I fear it will to your 
lordship, as I had flattered myself that the only 
original was in your lordship's possession ; I would 
advise you, however, to take yours down till its 
merit can be ascertained, my governor assuring 
me, that he intends to write a long dissertation to 
prove its originality. One might study in this city 
for ages, and still find something new : we went 
from this to view the cardinal's statues, which are 
really very fine ; there were three spintria executed 
in a very masterly manner, all arm in arm : the 
torse which I heard you talk so much of, is at last 
discovered to be a Hercules spinning, and not 
a Cleopatra bathing, as your lordship had con- 
jectured : there has been a treatise written to 
prove it. 

My lord Firmly is certainly a Goth, a Vandal, 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 149 

no taste in the world for painting. I wonder how 
any call him a man of taste ; passing through the 
streets of Antwerp a few days ago, and observing 
the nakedness of the inhabitants, he was so bar- 
barous as to observe, that he thought the best 
method the Flemings could take, was to sell their 
pictures, and buy clothes. Ah, Cogline ! We shall 
go to-morrow to Mr. Carwarden's cabinet, and the 
next day we shall see the curiosities collected by 
Van Ran, and the day after we shall pay a visit to 

Mount Calvary, and after that but I find my 

paper finished ; so with the most sincere wishes to 
your lordship's happiness, and with hopes after 
having seen Italy, that centre of pleasure, to return 
home worthy the care and expence which has been 
generously laid out in my improvement, 

I remain, my Lx>rd, 
Yours, &c. 



LETTER XXXV, 

From f/ingpo, a sleeve in Persia^ to Altangi^ a 
travelling philosopher of China^ by the way of 
Moscow, 

rORTUNE has made me the slave of 
another, but nature and inclination 
render me entirely subservient to you ; 
a tyrant commands my body, but you 
are master of my heart And yet let not thy in- 
flexible nature condemn me when I confess that I 
find my soul shrink with my circumstances. I 
feel my mind not less than my body, bend beneath 




ISO THE CiTIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

the rigours of serntnde, the master whom I serve 
grows every day more formidable. In spite of 
reasoQ which should teidi me to despise him, his 
hideous image fills even my dreams with horror. 

A few days ago a christian slave, vAto wrought 
in the gardens, happening to enta an arbour where 
the tyrant was entertaining the ladiesof his Haram 
with Gofiiee, the unhappy captive vras instantly 
stabbed to the heart for his intrusion. I have been 
preferred to his place, which tho* kss laborious 
than my fonner station, is yet more ungrateful, as 
it brings me nearer him whose presence excites 
sensations at once of disgust and apprehension. 

Intd what a state of misery are the modem 
Persians fallen ? A nation famous for setting the 
world an example of freedom, is now become a land 
of tyrants, and a den of slaves. The houseless 
Tartar of Kamkatska, who enjoys his herbs and 
his fish in unmolested freedom, may be envied, if 
compared to the thousands who pine here in hope- 
less servitude, and curse the day that p;ave them 
being. Is this just dealing, heaven ! to render 
millions wretched to swell up the happiness of a 
few ; cannot the powerful of this earth be happy 
without our sighs and tears ; must every luxury of 
the great be woven from the calamities of the 
poor I It must, it must surely be, that this jarring 
discordant life is but the prelude to some future 
harmony ; the soul attuned to virtue here, shall go 
from hence to fill up the universal choir where 
Tien presides in person, where there shall be no 
tyrants to frown, no shackles to bind, nor no whips 
to threaten, where I shall once more meet my 
father with rapture, and give a loose to filial piety. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, xsx 

where I shall hang on his neck, and hear the wis* 
dom of his lips, and thank him for all the happi- 
ness to which he has introduced me. 

The wretch whom fortune has made my master, 
has lately purchased several slaves of both sexes ; 
among the rest I hear a christian captive talked of 
with admiration. The eunuch who bought her, 
and who is accustomed to survey beauty with in- 
difference, speaks of her with emotion 1 Her pride, 
however, astonishes her attendant slaves not less 
than her beauty ; it is reported that she refuses the 
warmest solicitations of her haughty lord ; he has 
even offered to make her one of his four wives upon 
changing her religion, and conforming to his. It 
is probable she cannot reiiise such extraordinary 
ofiers, and her delay is perhaps intended to en- 
hance her favours. 

I have just now seen her, she inadvertently ap- 
proached the place without a veil, where I sat 
writing. She seemed to regard the heavens alone 
with fixed attention ; there her most ardent gaze 
was directed. Genius of the sun I what unex- 
pected softness ! what animated grace ! her beauty 
seemed the transparent covering of virtue. Celestial 
beings could not wear a look of more perfection 
while sorrow humanized her form, and mixed my 
s^miration with pity. I rose from the bank on 
which I sat, and she retired ; happy that none ob- 
served us, for such an interview might have been 
fatal. 

I have regarded, till now, the opulence and the 
power of my tyrant, without envy ; I saw him 
with a mind incapable of enjo3ring the gifts of for- 
tune, and consequently regarded him as one loaded. 



ISS THR CtrrZEN OF TffS WORLD, 

rtther than enriched with its favours. But at pre- 
sent, when I think that so much beauty is reserved 
only for him, that so many charms shall be lavished 
OD a wretch incapable of feeling the greatness of 
the blessing, I own I feel a reluctance to which I 
have hitherto been a stranger. 

But let not my father impute those uneasy sen- 
sations to so trifling a cause as love. No, never 
let it be thought that your son, and the pupil of 
the wise Fum Hoam could stoop to so degrading 
a passion. I am only displeased at seeing so much 
excellence so unjustly disposed of. 

The uneasiness which I feel is not for m3rself, 
but for the beautiful christian. When I reflect on 
the barbarity of him for whom she is designed, I 
pity, indeed I pity her. When I think that she 
must only share one heart, who deserves to com- 
mand a thousand, excuse me, if I feel an emotion, 
which universal benevolence extorts from me. As 
I am convinced, that you take a pleasure in those 
sallies of humanity, and are particularly pleased 
with compassion, I could not avoid discovering the 
sensibility with which I felt this beautiful stranger's 
distress. I have for a while forgot in hers, the 
miseries of my own hopeless situation. The tyrant 
grows every day more severe, and love which 
softens all other minds into tenderness, seems only 
to have encreased his severity. Adieu. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 153 

LETTER XXXVI. 

To the same, 

IHE whole Haxam is filled with a tumul- 
tuous joy ; Zelis, the beautiful captive, 
has consented to embrace the religion 
of Mahomet, and become one of the 
wives of the festidious Persian, It is impossible 
to describe the transport that sits on every face on 
this occasion. Music and feasting fill every apart- 
ment, the most miserable slave seems to forget his 
diains, and sympathizes with the happiness of 
Mostadad. The herb we tread beneath our feet 
is not made tnore for our use, than every slave 
around him for their imperious master; mere 
machines of obedience they wait with silent 
assiduity, feel his pains, and rejoice in his exulta- 
tion. Heavens ! how much is requisite to make 
one man happy ! 

Twelve of the most beautiful slaves, and I 
among the number, have got orders to prepare for 
carrying him in triumph to the bridal apartment. 
The blaze of perfumed torches are to imitate the 
day ; the dancers and singers are hired at a vast 
expence. The nuptials are to be celebrated on the 
approaching feast of Barboura, when an hundred 
taels in gold are to be distributed among the barren 
wives, in order to pray for fertility from the ap- 
proaching union. 

What will not riches procure ! an hundred do- 
mestics, who curse the tyrant in their souls, are 
commanded to wear a face of joy, and they are 



154 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

jojfiiL An himdred flatterors are oi d ered to attend, 
and tbey 611 his ears with praise. Beanty, all 
commanding beanty, sues for admittance, and 
scarcely receives an answer ; even love itself seems 
to wait upon fortune, or though the passion be 
only feigned, yet it wears every appearance of 
sincerity ; and what greater pkasore can even true 
sincerity confer, or what would the rich have more? 

Nothing can exceed the intended magnificence 
of the bridegroom, but the costly dresses of the 
bride, six eonachs in the most samptaoas habits 
are to conduct him to the nuptial couch, and wait 
his orders. Six ladies, in all the magnificence of 
Persia, are directed to undress the bride. Their 
business is to assist to encourage her, to divest her 
of every encumbering part of her dress, all but the 
last covering, which, by an artfiil complication of 
ribbons, is purposely made difficult to unloose, 
and with which she is to part reluctantly even to 
the joyful possessor of her beauty. 

Mostadad, O my father, is no philosopher ; and 
yet he seems perfectly contented with ignorance. 
Possessed of numberless slaves, camels, and women, 
he desires no greater possession. He never opened 
the page of Mentius, and yet all the slaves tell me 
that he is happy. 

Forgive the weakness of my nature, if I some- 
times feel my heart rebellious to the dictates of 
wisdom, and eager for happiness like his. Yet 
why wish for his wealth with his ignorance ; to be 
like him, incapable of sentimental pleasures, in- 
capable of feeling the happiness of making others 
happy, incapable of teaching the beautiful Zelis 
philofionhv. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 155 

What, shall I in a transport of passion give up 
the golden mean, the universal harmony, the un- 
changing essence for the possession of an hundred 
camels; as many slaves, thirty-five beautiful horses, 
and seventy-three fine women : first blast me to 
the centre 1 Degrade me beneath the most de- 
graded 1 Pare my nails, ye powers of heaven 1 ere 
I would stoop to such an exchange. What, part 
with philosophy, which teaches me to suppress my 
passions instead of gratifying them, whidi teaches 
me even to divest my soul of passion, which teaches 
serenity in the midst of tortures ; philosophy, by 
which even now I am so very serene, and so very 
'much at ease, to be persuaded to part with it for 
any other enjo3rment ! Never, never, even though 
per suasion spoke in the agfiguts of Zelis ! 

A female slave informs me that the bride is to 
be arrayed in a tissue of silver, and her hwadorned 
with the largest pearls of Ormus ; but why tease 
you with particulars, in which we both are so little 
concerned ; the pain I feel in separation throws a 
gloom over my mind, which in this scene of uni- 
versal joy I fear may be attributed to some other 
cause ; how wretched are those who are like me, 
denied even the last resource of misery, their tears< 
Adieu. 




ts« THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

LETTER XXXVII. 
From the same* 

BEGIN to have doubts whether wisdom 
be alone safficient to make us happy. 
Whether every step we make in refine- 
ment is not an inlet into new dis- 
quietudes. A mind too vigorous and active, serves 
only to consume the body to which it is joined, as 
the richest jewels are soonest found to wear their 
settings. 

When we rise in knowledge as the prospect 
widens, the objects of our regard become more ob- 
scure, and the unlettered peasant, whos^ views are 
only directed to the narrow sphere around him, be- 
holds Nature with a finer relish, and tastes her 
blessings with a keener appetite than the philoso- 
pher, whose mind attempts to grasp an universal 
system. 

As I was some days ago pursuing this subject 
among a circle of my fellow slaves, an ancient 
Guebre of the number, equally remarkable for 
his piety and wisdom, seemed touched with my 
conversation, and desired to illustrate what I had 
been saying with an allegory taken from the Zenda- 
vesta of Zoroaster ; by this shall we be taught, 
says he, that they who travel in pursuit of wisdom, 
walk only in a circle ; and after all their labour, at 
last return to their pristine ignorance ; and in this 
also we shall see that enthusiastic confidence, or 
unsatisf^ng doubts terminate all our enquiries. 

times, before myriads of nations covered 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 157 

the earth, the whole human race lived together in 
one valley. The simple inhabitants, surrounded 
on every side by lofty mountains, knew no other 
world but the little spot to which they were con- 
fined. They fancied the heavens bent down to 
meet the mountain tops, and formed an impene- 
trable wall to surround them. None had ever yet 
ventured ta climb the steepy cliff, in order to ex*- 
plOTe those regions that lay beyond it ; they knew 
the nature of the skies only from a tradition, which 
mentioned their being made of adamant; tradi- 
tions make up the reasonings of the simple, and 
serve to silence every enquiry. 

In this sequestered vale, blessed with all the 
spontaneous productions of Nature, the honeyed 
blossom, the refreshing breeze, the gliding brook, 
a^d golden fruitage, the simple inhabitants seemed 
happy in themselves, in each other ; they desi(|^ 
no greater pleasures, for they knew of none greater ; 
ambition, pride and envy, were vices uj;iknown 
among them ; and from this peculiar simplicity of 
its possessors, the country was called the valUy of 
ignoranu. 

At length, however, an unhappy youth more 
aspiring than the rest undertook to climb the 
mountain's side, and examine the summits which 
were UlMiv deemed inaccessible. The inhabi- 
tants ftoor below, gazed with wonder at his in- 
trepidity, some applauded his courage, others cen- 
sured Us folly, still however he proceeded towards 
the place where the earth and heavens seemed to 
unite, and at length arrived at the wished for 
height with extreme labour and assiduity. ^, 

His first surprize was to find the skies,, not as h|^ 






i5« THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD. 

expected within his reach, but still as far off as be- 
fore; his amazement increased when he saw a 
wide extended region lying on the opposite side of 
the mountain, but it rose to astonxslunent when he 
beheld a country at a distance more beautiful and 
alluring than even that he had just left behind. 

As he continued to gaze with wonder, a genius, 
with a look of infinite modesty, approaching, 
offered to be his guide and instructor. The distant 
country which you so much admire, says the angelic 
being, is called the Land of Certainiy, in that 
charming retreat, sentiment contributes to refine 
every sensual banquet ; the inhabitants are blessed 
with every solid enjoyment, and still more blessed 
in a perfect consciousness of their own felicity ; 
ignorance in that country is wholly unknown, all 
there is satisfaction without alloy, for every pleasure 
first undergoes the examination of reason. As fof 
me I am called the genius of DenionstrtUion^ and 
am stationed here in order to conduct every ad- 
venturer to that land of happiness through those 
intervening regions you see over-hung with fogs 
and darkness, and horrid with forests, cataracts, 
caverns, and various other shapes of danger. But 
follow me, and in time I may lead you to that 
distant desirable land of tranquillity. 

The intrepid traveller immediately put himself 
under the direction of the genius, and both journey- 
ing on together with a slow but agreeable pace, 
deceived the tediousness of the way by conversa- 
tion. The beginning of the journey seemed to 
promise true satisfaction, but as they proceeded 
forward, the skies became more gloomy and the 
way more intricate, they often inadvertently ap- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 159 

proached the brow of some frightful precipice, or 
the brink of a torrent, and were obliged to measure 
bade their former way; the gloom increasing as 
they proceeded, their pace became more slow; 
they paused at every step, frequently stumbled, 
and their distrust and timidity encreased. The 
genius of Demonstration now, therefore, advised 
his pupil to grope upon hands and feet, as a method 
though more slow, yet less liable to error. 

In this manner they attempted to pursue their 
journey for some time, when they were overtaken 
by another genius, who, with a precipitate pace 
seemed travelling the same way. He was instantly 
known by the other to be the genius of Probability^ 
He wore two wide extended wings at his back, 
which incessantly waved, without increasing the 
rapidity of his motion ; his countenance betrayed a 
confidence that the ignorant might mistake for sin- 
cerity, and he had but one eye, which was fixed in 
the middle of his forehead. 

Servant of Hormizda, cried he, approaching the 
mortal pilgrim, if thou art travelling to the Land 
of Certainty^ how is it possible to arrive there 
under the guidance of a genius, who proceeds for- 
ward so slowly, and is so little acquainted with the 
way ; follow me, we shall soon perform the journey 
to where every pleasure awaits our arrival. 

The peremptory tone in which this genius spoke, 
and the speed with which he moved forward, in- 
duced the traveller to change his conductor, and 
leaving his modest companion behind, he pro- 
ceeded forward with his more confident director, 
seeming not a little pleased at the increased velo- 
city of his motion. 



s6o THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

But soon he found reasons to repent. When- 
ever a torrent crossed their way, his guide taught 
him to despise the obstacle by plunging him in ; 
whenever a precipice presented, he was directed to 
fling himself forward. Thus each moment mira- 
culously escaping ; his repeated escapes only served 
to encrease his temerity. He led him therefore 
forward, amidst infinite difficulties, till they arrived 
at the borders of an ocean which appeared un- 
navigable from the black mists that lay upon its 
surface. Its unquiet waves were of the darkest 
hue, and gave a lively representation of the various 
agitations of the human mind. 

The genius of Probability now confessed his 
temerity, owned his being an improper guide to the 
Land of Certainty^ a country where no mortal had 
ever been permitted to arrive ; but at the same 
time offered to supply the traveller with another 
conductor, who should carry him to thi Land of 
Confidencey a region where the inhabitants lived 
with the utmost tranquillity, and tasted almost as 
much satisfaction as if in the Land of Certainty. 
Not waiting for a reply, he stamped three times on 
the ground, and called forth the Damon of Error^ 
a gloomy fiend of the servants of Arimanes. The 
yawning earth gave up the reluctant savage, who 
seemed unable to bear the light of the day. His 
stature was enormous, his colour black and hideous, 
his aspect betrayed a thousand varying passions, 
and he spread forth pinions that were fitted for the 
most rapid flight. The traveller at first was shocked 
at the spectre ; but finding him obedient to superior 
power, he assumed his former tranquillity. 

I have called you to duty, cries the genius to 



I 

THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, x6i 

the daemon, to bear on your back a son of mortality 
over the Ocean of Doubts into the Land of Confix 
denee: I expect you'll perform your commission 
with punctuality. And as for you, continued the 
genius, addressing the traveller, when once I have 
bound this fillet round your eyes, let no voice of 
persuasion, nor threats the most terrifying, per< 
suade you to unbind it in order to look round ; keep 
the fillet fast, look not at the ocean below, and 
you may certainly expect to arrive at a region of 
pleasure. 

Thus sa3ring, and the traveller's eyes being 
covered, the daemon muttering curses, raised him 
on his back, and instantly up-borne by his strong 
pinions, directed his flight among the clouds. 
Neither the loudest thunder, nor the most angry 
tempest, could persuade the traveller to unbind hi$ 
eyes. The daemon directed his flight downwards, 
and skimmed the surface of the ocean ; a thousand 
voices, some with loud invectives, others in the 
sarcastic tones of contempt, vainly endeavoured to 
persuade him to look round ; but be still continued 
to keep his eyes covered, and would in all proba^ 
bility have arrived at the happy land, had not 
flattery efiected what other means could not per- 
form. For now he heard himself welcomed on 
every side to the promised land, and an universal 
shout of joy was sent forth at his safe arrival ; the 
wearied traveller, desirous of seeing Ihe long wished 
for country, at length pulled the fillet firom his eyes, 
and ventured to look round him. But he had un- 
loosed the band too soon ; he was not yet above 
half way over. The daemon, who was still hover- 
ing in the air, and had produced those sounds only 

I. M 



z6t THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

in order to deceive, was now freed from his com- 
mission ; wherefore throwing the astonished travel- 
ler from his hack, the unhappy youth fell headlong 
into the subjacent Ocei^i of Doubts, from whence 
he never after was seen to rise. 




LETTER XXXVIII. 

From Lien Chi Altangi^ to Fum Hoaniy first pre- 
sident of the Ceremonial Academy fU Pekin^ in 
China, 

'HEN Parmenio, the Grecian, had done 
something which excited an universal 
shout from the surrounding multitude, 
he was instantly struck with the doubt, 
that what had their approbation must certainly be 
wrong ; and turning to a philosopher who stood 
near him, Pray^ sir, says he, pardon me ; I fear I 
have been guilty of some absurdity. 

You know that I am not less than him a despiser 
of the multitude ; you know that I equally detest 
flattery to the great ; yet so many circumstances 
have concurred to give a lustre to the latter part of 
the present English monarch's reign, that I cannot 
withhold my contribution of praise ; I cannot avoid 
the acknowledging the crowd for once just, in their 
unanimous approbation. 

Yet think not that battles gained, dominion ex- 
tended, or enemies brought to submission, are the 
virtues which at present claim my admiration. 
Were the reigning monarch only famous for his 
victories, I should regard his character with indiffe- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD: 163 

rence; the boast of heroism in this enlightened 
age is justly r^arded as a qualification of a very 
subordinate rank, and mankind now begin to look 
with becoming horror on these foes to man ; the 
virtue in this aged monarch which I have at present 
in view, is one of a much more exalted nature, is 
one of the most difficult of attainment, is the least 
praised of all kingly virtues, and yet deserves the 
greatest praise ; the virtue I mean is Justice ; a 
strict administration of justice, without severity and 
without £Eivour. 

Of all virtues this is the most difficult to be 
practised by a king who has a power to pardon. 
All. men, even tyrants themselves, lean to mercy 
when unbiassed by passions or interest, the heart 
naturally persuades to forgiveness, and pursuing 
the dictates of this pleasing deceiver, we are led to 
prefer our private satisfaction to public utility^ 
what a thorough love for the public, what a stroi^ 
command over the passions, what a 6ndy conducted 
judgment must he possess who opposes the dictates 
df reason to those of his heart, and prefers the 
future interest of his people to his own inmiediate 
satisfieu:tion. 

If still to a man's own natural bias for tender- 
ness, we add the numerous solicitations made by a 
criminal's friends for mercy ; if we survey a king 
not only opposing his own feelings, but reluctantly 
refusing those he regards, and this to satisfy the 
public, whose cries he. may never hear, whose gra- 
titude he may never receive, this surely is true 
greatness 1 Let us fancy ourselves for a moment in 
this^ just old man's place, surrounded by numbers, 
all soliciting the same favour, a favour that Nature 



i«» THK CmZEN OP TMM WORLD. 

dItpoKs VB to pant, ivheie the indneeneBts to pity 
are laid befcie M in the itioivest 1%^ toppliuitt 
al oar feet, aooK icaii^to loait a idMaUnooe 
op p o d ii g a oompliaBee ; let «, I My,iappoM oar- 
adfCi in tadi a dtaation, and I fency wo dioold 
find OBwdica more lyt to act the di a faclfr of good' 
natnred men than of apr|^ magiitiatei. 

What oontiibates to ndK justice abofo aO odier 
Uqglj Tirtnei ii, that it ii aeldom attended with a 
doe diare of aDDlame. and thoMt iriio ma tiiie it 
nnist be influenced faj greater motives than empty 
feme s the people are genendly wdl*pleased widi a 
remission of ponisfament, and all that wears tiie 
iqipearsnoeofhnmanity; it is the wise alone iriio 
are amiable of disoemmg that impartial Jnstiee is 
tlie truest mercy : theyknowittobcTCfydBflicalt, 
at once to compassionate, and yet cnndrmn an 
object that pleads for tenderness. 

I have been led into this common-place train of 
thought by a late striking instance in this country 
of the impartiality of justice, and of the king's in- 
flexible resolution of inflicting punishment where it 
was justly due. A man of the first quality in a fit 
either of passion, melancholy, or madness, mur- 
dered his servant ; it was expected that his station 
in life would have lessened the ^;nominy of his 
punishment ; however, he was arraigned, con- 
demned, and underwent the same degrading death 
with the meanest malefactor. It was well con- 
sidered that virtue alone is true nobility ; and that 
be whose actions sink him even beneath the vulgar, 
hm no right to those distinctiona which should be 
lewards only of merit ; it was perhaps con- 
od that crimes were more heinous among the 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 165 

higher classes of people, as necessity exposes them 
to fewer temptations. 

Over all the east, even China not excepted, a 
person oi the same quality guilty of such a crime, 
iiu^t, by giving up a share of his fortune to the 
judge, buy off his sentence; there are several 
countries, even in Europe, where the servant is 
entirely the property of his master ; if a slave kills 
his lord, he dies by the most excruciating tortures ; 
but if the circumstances are reversed, a small fine 
buys off the punishment of the offender. Happy 
the country where all are equal, and where those 
who sit as judges have too much integrity to receive 
a bribe, and too much honour to pity from a simi- 
litude of the prisoner's title or circumstances with 
their own. Such is England ; yet think not that 
it was always equally famed for this strict impar- 
tiality. There was a time even here when title 
softened the rigours of the law, when dignified 
wretches were suffered to live, and continue for 
years an equal disgrace to justice and nobility. 

To this day in a neighbouring country, the great 
are often most scandalously pardoned for the most 
scandalous offences. A person is still alive among 
them who has more than once deserved the most 
ignominious severity of justice. His being of the 
blood royal, however, was thought a sufficient 
atonement for his being a disgrace to humanity. 
This remarkable personage took pleasure in shoot- 
ing at the passengers below, from the top of his 
palace; and in this most princely amusement he 
usually spent some time every day. He was at 
length arraigned by the friends of a person whom 
in this manner he had killed, was found guilty of 




m tmB CITiZMN OF THE WORLD. 

and oondemned to dk. Hii lu et dful 
pftidooed him in constdention of hkimnk 
^ftSkf. The imrepentiiig crimiiial toon after 
hii usual entertainment, and in the Mme 
killed another man. He was a aeoond 
condemned ; and strange to think, ii second 
received his majesty's pardon I WoaM yoa 
It ? A third time the very same man was 
ipiltj of the very same ollenoe; a third tfane 
.Ihaii fia r the laws of his country foond him guilty 
^ wish for the honour of humanity I could 
the rest!— -A third time he was par- 
! Will you not think such a story too extra- 
4idinary for belief, will you not think me describ- 
•Inf the savage ii^bitants of Congo; alas, the 
«toiy is but too true, and the country where it was 
•Inuaaacted, regards itself as the polites t in E urope! 
•Adieu: 



LETTER XXXIX. 

From Lien Chi Altangi /o * * *, Merchant in 

Amsterdam, 






jEREMONIES are different in every 

country, but true politeness is every 

where the same. Ceremonies, which 

take up so much of our attention, are 

'only artificial helps which ignorance assumes, in 

order to imitate politeness, which is the result of 

good sense and good-nature. A person possessed 

-» qualities, though he had never seen a court, 

^{reeable; and if without them, would 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 167 

dontinne a clown, though he had been all his life a 
gentleman usher. 

. How would a Chinese, bred up in the formalities 
of an eastern court, be regarded, should he carry 
all his good manners beyond the Great Wall? 
How would an Englishman, skilled in all the 
decorums of western good breeding, appear at an 
eastern entertainment : would he not be reckoned 
more fantastically savage than even his unbred 
footman ! 

Ceremony resembles that base coin which circu- 
lates through a country by the royal mandate ; it 
serves every purpose of real money at home, but is 
entirely useless if carried abroad ; a person \irho 
should attempt to circulate his native trash in an- 
other country, would be thought either ridiculous 
or culpable. He is truly well bred who knows 
when to value and when to despise those national 
peculiarities which are regarded by some with so 
much observance, a traveller of taste at once per- 
ceives that the wise are polite all the world over ; 
but that fools are polite only at home. 

I have now before me two very fashionable 
letters upon the same subject, both written by 
ladies of distinction ; one of whom leads the feshion 
in England, and the other sets the ceremonies of 
China ; they are both regarded in their respective 
countries by all the beau monde, as standards of 
taste, and models of true politeness, and both give 
us a true idea of what they imagine elegant in their 
admirers ; which of them understands true polite- 
ness or whether either, you shall be at liberty to 
determine : the English lady writes thus to her 
female confidante. 



^ THE CITIZEN OF THE IVORLD. 

\5 1 Stc, my dear Charlotte, I believe the colonel 
vCI CUTV ic at last ; he is a most irresistible fellow, 
^c B flat- So ^"^^^ dressed, so neat, so sprightly, 
jp.j p^ts about one so agreeably, that I vow, he 
^1 ai innch spirits as the marquis of Monkeyman*s 
l^im greyhound. I first saw him at Ranelagh ; 
^ fl r«ig« there ; he is nothing without Ranelagh, 
^ Kanelag^ nothing without him. The next 
^T be sent a card, and compliments, desiring to 
^^ oD mamma and me to the music subscription. 
lie looked all the time with such irresistible im- 
D^ijnirr that positively he had something in his 
^oe gave me as much pleasure as a pair-royal of 
^lorak in my own hand. He waited on mamma 
^ me the next morning to know how we got 
^ooe : you must know the insidious devil makes 
Igte to us both. Rap went the footman at the 
^oor ; bounce went my heart ; I thought he would 
ligve rattled the house down. Chariot drove up to 
the window, with his footmen in the prettiest 
liveries : he has infinite taste, that is flat. Mamma 
had spent all the morning at her head ; but for my 
port, I was in an undress to receive him ; quite 
jtsy, mind that ; no way disturbed at his ap- 
proach : mamma pretended to be as degagee as I, 
^d yet I saw her blush in spite of her. Positively 
lie is a most killing devil 1 We did nothing but 
laugh all the time he staid with us ; I never heard 
90 many very good things before : at first he 
mistook mamma for my sister ; at which she 
laughed : then he mistook my natural complexion 
lor paint ; at which I laughed : and then he shewed 
US a picture in the lid of his snuff-box, at which 
ghed. He plays picquet so very ill, and 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 169 

is SO very fond of cards, and loses with such a 
gxace, that positively he has won me ; I have got 
a cool hundred, but have lost my heart. I need 
not tell you that he is only a colonel of the train- 
bands. 

I am, dear Charlotte, 

Yours for ever, 

Belinda. 

The Chinese lady addresses her confidante, a 
poor relation of the family, upon the same occa- 
sion ; in which she seems to understand decorums 
even better than the western beauty. You who 
have resided so long in China will readily acknow- 
ledge the picture to be taken from Nature ; and, 
by being acquainted with the Chinese customs, 
will better apprehend the lady*s meaning. 

From Yaoua to Yaya. 

Papa insists upon one, two, three, four hundred 
taels firom the colonel my lover, before he parts 
with a lock of my hair. Ho, how I wish the dear 
creature may be able to produce the money, and 
pay papa my fortune. The colonel is reckoned 
the politest man in all Shensi. The first visit he 
paid at our houses mercy, what stooping, and 
cringing, and stopping, and fidgeting, and going 
back, and creeping forward, there was between 
him and papa, one would have thought he had got 
the seventeen books of ceremonies all by heart* 
When he was come into the hall he flourished his 
hands three times in a very graceful manner. 
Papa, who would not be outdone, flourished his 



both tlras c o ntint w d floBiiiiilif ibr «anii iniriiln 
fa ^ poUtiii masatm imigfaihie> iiMil^Qiiei 
fatevMialplMe betina die ■ctw4 nijetf iiar 
the whole ceremony throi^ a dit Of Ml4li^ 
ookiid WM lentibie^ fcv pgfM faformed hn^ I 
would fanre ghvft the wofld to hsve diewn him 
WKfUMM dwet, bot h«d no of^portunity. H wm 
the fint time I had ever the luipplneas of eedng 
mi^tamhm pafia, and I wd# ln3Nk^ I 

IkoashI wydiree eoulii^^ald hate mmlfyWHf^ 
M fiom my 1^ Ho» hat W iMoA mM 
chatmfaigiy, he It redcoocd tiie hiH inpii aftt 
fathewhplep»ofinceifeg'heiawtyfct» aiiia pii|^ 

dwffti hat evea thoee aataial idvaatmei aMifah> 
pnmeA by hit dieit, whidi it MitalMr jMiit 
detoripticB. NHt hetd wai dote dummi a& h«t 

the crown, and the hair of that wat braided fato a 
most beautiful tail» that reached down to his heels, 
was terminated by a bunch of yellow roses. Upon 
his first entering the room, I could easily perceive 
he had been highly perfumed with assafoetida. 
But then his looks, his looks, my dear Ya3ra, were 
irresistible. He kept his eyes stedfostly fixed on 
the wall during the whole ceremony, and I sin- 
cerely believe no accident could have discomposed 
his gmvity, or drawn his eyes away. After a 
polite silence of two hours, he gallantly b^;ged to 
have the singing woman introduced, purely for 
my amusement. After one of them had for some 
time entertained us with her voice, the colonel and 
she retired for some minutes together. I thought 
they would never have come back ; I must own he 
is a most agreeable creature. Upon his return, 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, xyt 

they again renewed the concert, and he continued 
to gaze upon the wall as usual, when, in less than 
half an hotir more 1 Ho, but he retired out of the 
room with another. He is indeed a most agree- 
able creature. 

When he came to take his leave, the whole 
ceremony b^an afresh ; papa would see him to the 
door, but the colonel swore he would rather see the 
earth turned upside down than permit him to stir a 
single step, and papa was at last obliged toc6mply. 
As soon as he was got to the door, papa; went out 
to see him on horse-back ; here they continued half 
an hour bowing and cringing, before one would 
mount or the other go in, but the colonel was at 
last victorious. He had scarce gone an hundred 
paces from the house when papa running out hal- 
loo*d after him, A good journey. Upon which the 
colonel returned, and would see papa into his house 
before ever h^ would depart. He was no sooner 
got home than he sent me a very fine present of duck 
eg^ painted of twenty different colours. His gene- 
rosity I own has won mew I have ever since been 
trying over the eight letters of good fortune, and 
have great hopes. All I have to apprehend is that 
after he has married me, and that I am carried to his 
house close shut up in my chair, when he comes ta 
have the first sight of my face, he may shut me up 
a second time and send me back to papa. How- 
ever I shall appear as 6ne as possible ; mamma and 
I have been to buy the clothes for my wedding. I 
am to have a new/ong" whang in my hair, the beak 
of which will reach down to my nose ; the milliner 
from whom we bought that and our ribbons 
cheated us as if she had no conscience, and so to 



S7t THE CITiXKN OP THE WOELD. 

qoiet ndse I dieated hor. All dib is fidr 700 
know. I leoMiiif nqr dear Yajm, 

Your efor fidtlifiily 

Yaoua. 



LETTER XL. 






r Vy 



IwTe alwajpt teilifi c d tii6 Ujghflit 

tlioiq;iit them not inferior to tbe Gieekty 
Romans, or efcn the Odnese in the 
ait But it Is now thoogiit even by the En(^ 
tiiemsehres that die laoe of their poets is eactinct« 
eveiy diqr prodnoes some pathetic ^^''Wwtiiw 
upon the decadence of taste and genius. F^gssns, 
say tliey, has slipped the bridle fiom his month, 
and our modem bards attempt to direct his flight 
by catching him by the taiL 

Vet, my friend, it is only among the ignorant 
that such discourses prevail, men of true discern- 
ment can see several poets still among the English, 
some of whom equal if not surpass their pre- 
decessors. The ignorant term that alone poetry 
which is couched in a certain number of syllables 
in every line, where a vapid thought is drawn out 
into a number of verses of equal length, and per- 
haps pointed with rhymes at the end« But glowing 
sentiment, striking imagery, concise expression, 
natural description, and modulated periods are full 
sufficient entirely to fill up my idea of this art, and 
make way to every passion. 

If my idea of poetry therefore be just, the Eng- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, X73 / 

lish are not at present so destitute of poetical merit 
as they seem to imagine. I can see several poets 
in disguise among them ; men furnished with that ! 
strength of soul, sublimity of sentiment, and gran- 
deur of expression, which constitutes the charactec 
Many of the writers of their modem odes, sonnets, 
tragedies, or rebusses, it is true, deserve not the 
name, though they have done nothing but dink 
rhymes and meastire syllables for years together ; 
their Johnsons and Smolletts are truly poets ; 
though for aught I know they never made a single 
verse in their whole lives. 

In every incipient language the poet and the 
prose writer are very distinct in their qualifications : 
the poet ever proceeds first, treading unbeaten 
paths, enriching his native funds, and employed in 
new adventures. The other follows with moie 
cautious steps, and though slow in his motions, 
treasures up every useful or pleasing discovery. 
But when once all the extent and the force of the 
language is known, the poet then seems to rest 
from his labour, and is at length overtaken by his 
assiduous pursuer. Both characters are then 
blended into one, the historian and orator catch 
all the poet's fire, and leave him no real mark of 
distinction except the iteration of numbers regn- 
larly returning. Thus in the decline of ancient 
European learning, Seneca, though he wrote in 
prose, is as much a poet as Lucan, and Longinus, 
though but a critic, more sublime than Apollonins* 

From this then it appears that poetry is not dis- 
continued, but altered among the English at pre- 
sent ; the outward form seems different from what 
it was, but poetry still continues internally the 



t94 TMM CiTilEN Of THE WORLD. 

mom; the oofy qnotioo nmaias whether the 
metric feet owd by the good wiitea of the bit age, 
or the pranie munben emplofed by the good 
Wfken^TthiiibepidEenbiei And hare the pcac- 
tiee of the bit iqEe appeento me mperior) thej 
mbmitted to the nitnhil of immbefs.eiid limihur 
•ooDdii and thii ie<ndnt» imteed of diminiihhig^ 
angnented the fixee of their aenthnent and atjle. 
Fan^ reitiained maj be compared to a fbontahi 
wfakh phqpa h^^hest by dimfaifahh^ the apertme* 
Of the Jtroth of thb maxim in every langnaiQe, efipiy 
fine writer is perfectly icnaibie from hii-own expe* 
rienoe» and yet to eqiiain the icaaon would be 
perhape as diflBoolt as to make % fr%id genins 
profit by the diiooveiy* 

There is still another reason in frioor of the 
practice of the last age» to be dnnni from the 
variety, of modulation. The mnsioal period in 
prose is confined to a very few dianges ; the num- 
bers in veise are capable of infinite variation. I 
speak not now firom the practice of modem verse 
writers, few of whom have any idea of musical 
variety, but run on in the same monotonous flow 
through the whole poem ; but rather from the 
example of their former poets, who were tolerable 
masters of this variety, and also from a capacity in 
the language of still admitting various unantici- 
pated music. 

Several rules have been drawn up for varying 
the poetic measure, and critics have elaborately 
talked of accents and syllables, but good sense and 
a fine ear, which rules can never teach, are what 
akme can in such a case determine. The rap- 
flowings of joy, or the interruptions of in- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. x/s 

dignation, require accents placed entirely different, 
and a structure consonant to the emotions they 
would express. Changing passions, and numbers 
changing with those passions, make the whole 
secret of western as well as eastern poetry. In a \ 
wordy the great faults of the modem professed 
English poets are, that they seem to want num- 
bers which should vary with the passion, and are 
more employed in describing to the imagination 
than striking at the heart. 




LETTER XLI. 
From the same, 

|OME time since I sent thee, oh holy 
disciple of Confucius, an account of the 
grand abbey or mausoleum of the kings 
and heroes of this nation. I have since 
been introduced to a temple not so ancient, but iac 
superior in beauty and magnificence. In this, 
which is the most considerable of the empire, there 
are no pompous inscriptions, no flattery paid the 
dead, but all is el^ant and awfully simple. There 
are however a few rags hung round the walls, 
which have at a vast expence been taken from the 
enemy in the present war. The silk of which they 
are composed when new, might be valued at half a 
string of copper money^ in China ; yet this wise 
people fitted out a fleet and an army in order to 
seize them ; though now grown old, and scarce 
capable of being patched up into a handkerchief. 
By this conquest the English are said to^havr 



176 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

gained, and the French to have lost, much honour. 
Is the honour of European nations placed only in 
tattered silk ? 

In this tethple I was permitted to remain during 
the whole service ; and were you not already ac- 
quainted with the religion of the English, yam 
might, from my description, be inclined to believe 
them as grossly idolatrous as the disciples of Laa 
The idol which they seem to address, strides like a 
colossus over the door of the inner temple, which 
here, as with the Jews, is esteemed the most sacred 
part of the building. Its oracles are delivered in 
an hundred various tones, which seem to inspire 
the worshippers with enthusiasm and awe : an old 
woman who appeared to be the priestess, was 
employed in various attitudes, as she felt the in- 
spiration. When it began to speak, all the people 
remained fixed in silent attention nodding assent, 
looking approbation, appearing highly edified by 
those sounds, which to a stranger might seem in- 
articulate and unmeaning. 

When the idol had done speaking, and the 
priestess had locked up its lungs with a key, ob- 
serving almost all the company leaving the temple,. 
I concluded the service was over, and taking my 
hat, was going to walk away with the crowd, when 
I was stopt by the man in black, who assured me 
that the ceremony had scarcely yet begun ! What, 
cried I, do I not see almost the whole body of the 
worshippers leaving the church ? Would you per- 
suade me that such numbers who profess religion 
and morality would in this shameless manner quit 
the temple before the service was concluded ? you 
surely mistake ; not even the Kalmouks would be 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 177 

guilty of such an indecency, though all the object 
of their worship was but a joint stool. My friend 
seemed to blush for his countrymen, assuring me 
that those whom I saw running away, were only a 
parcel of musical blockheads, whose passion was 
merely for sounds, and whose heads were as 
empty as a fiddle case ; those who remain behind, 
says he, are the true Religious ; they make use of 
miusic to warm their hearts, and to lift them to a 
proper pitch of rapture ; examine their behaviour, 
and you will confess there are some among us who 
practise true devotion. 

I now looked round me as he directed, but saw 
nothing of that fervent devotion which he had 
promised ; one of the worshippers appeared to be 
ogling the company through a gla$s ; another was 
fervent not in addresses to heaven, but to his mis- 
tress ; a third whispered, a fourth took snuff, and 
the priest himself, in a drowsy "tone, read over the 
duties of the day. 

Bless my eyes, cried I, as I happened to look to> 
wards the door, what do I see ; one of the wor> 
shippers fallen fast asleep, and actually sunk down 
on his cushion : is he now enjoying the benefit of 
a trance, or does he receive the influence of some 
mysterious vision ! Alas^ alas, replied my com- 
panion, no such thing; he has only had the mis- 
fortune of eating too Itearty a dinner, and finds 
it impossible to keep his eyes open. Turning to 
another part of the temple, I perceived a young 
lady just in the same circumstances and attitude ; 
strange, cried I, can she too have over-eaten her- 
self? O fie, replied my friend, you now grow 
censorious. She grow drowsy from eating too 

I. N 



THE CmZEN OF THM WORLD. 

\! ikai wmUd b$ fnfiuuaimt Sks mfy 
tBt^mtm/fvmAmfutifsat up mil might tU a htig 
fmjy* TviVL me where I will then, nyt I» I am 
iwueive no ling^ lyiaptom of devotion among the 
wonhippeny eicept from that old woman in the 
coner, who nts groanhig bdiind the long stidaoC 
» monniing fim } the indeed teems gpreatljr edified 
with what the hears. Aye^ replied mj friend, / 
kmw wi shmldfind sotm U aUch you; I kmm 
ker; tkmi is tJk$ Diaf kufy w»o Htm im iki 

In short, the remissness of hdiaYioar in almost 
all the worshippers, and some eren of the guardians, 
struck me with snrprise ; I had been taught to be- 
lieve that none were ever promoted to offioes in the 
temple, but men remarlcaUe for their superior 
sanctity, learning, and rectitude ; that there was 
no such thing heard of as penons being introduced 
into the church merely to oblige a senator, or 
provide for the younger branch of a noble family : 
I expected, as their minds were continually set upon 
heavenly things, to see their eyes directed there 
also, and hoped from their behaviour to perceive 
their inclinations corresponding with their duty. 
But I am since informed, that some are appointed 
to preside over temples they never visit; and, 
while they receive all the money, are contented 
with letting others do all the good. Adieu. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 179 



LETTER XLII. 

From Fum Hoam^ to Lien Chi Aliangi, the discon* 
tented wanderer^ by the way of Moscow. 



X'iS: 




|UST I ever continue to condenm thy 
perseverance, and blame that curiosity, 
which destroys thy happiness ! What 
yet untasted banquet, what luxury yet 
unknown, has rewarded thy painful adventures! 
Name a pleasure which thy native country could 
not amply procure ; frame a wish that might liot 
have been satisfied in China! Why then sudi 
toil, and such danger, in pursuit of raptures within 
your reach at home. 

The Europeans, you will say, excel us in 
sciences and in arts ; those sciences which bound 
the aspiring wish, and those arts which tend to 
gratify even unrestrained desire. They may per- 
haps outdo us in the arts <^ building ships, casting 
cannons, or measuring mountains, but are they 
superior in the greatest of all arts, the art of 
governing kingdoms and ourselves ? 

When I compare the history of China with that 
of Europe, how do I exult in being a native of that 
kingdom which derives its original firom the stm. 
Upon opening the Chinese history, I there behbld 
an ancient extended empire, established by laws 
which Nature and reason seem to have dictated. 
The duty of children to their parents, a duty which 
Nature implants in every breast, forms the strength 
of that government which has subsisted for time 
immemorial. Filial obedience is the first and 



\ 



/ 



z8o THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

greatest requisite of a state ; by this we become good 
subjects to our emperors, capable of behaving with 
just subordination to our superiors, and grateful 
dependents on heaven ; by this we become fonder 
of marriage, in order to be capable of exacting 
obedience from others in our turn : by this we 
become good magistrates ; for early submission 19 
the truest lesson to those who would learn to rale* 
By this the whole state may be said to resemble 
one family, of which the emperor is the protector, 
fether, and friend. « 

In this happy region, sequestered from the rest 
of mankind, I see a succession of princes who in 
general considered themselves as the fathers of 
their people ; a race of philosophers who bravely 
combated idolatry, prejudice, and t3rranny> at the 
eitpence of their private happiness and immediate 
reputation. Whenever an usurper or a tyrant in^ 
truded into the administration, how have all the 
good and great been united against him ? Can 
European history produce an instance like that of 
the twelve mandarines, who all resolved to apprize 
the vicious emperor Tisiang of the irregularity of 
his conduct. He who first undertook the dan- 
gerous task was cut in two by the emperor's order ; 
the second was ordered to be tormented, and then 
put to a cruel death ; the third undertook the task 
with intrepidity, and was instantly stabbed by the 
tyrant's hand : in this manner they all suffered, 
except one. But not to be turned from his pur- 
pose, the brave survivor entering the palace with 
the instruments of torture in his hand, Herey cried 
he, addressing himself to the throne, here, O 
Tisiang, are the marks your faithful stibjects receive 



THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD. i8x 

for their loyalty ; I am wearied with serving a 
tyrant y and now cotne for my reward. The em- 
peror, struck with his intrepidity, instantly forgave 
the boldness of his conduct, and reformed his own« 
What European annals can boast of a tyrant thus 
reclaimed to lenity ! 

When five brethren had set upon the great em- 
peror Ginsong alone ; with his sabre he slew four 
of them ; he was struggling with the fifth, when 
his guards coming up were going to cut the con- 
spirator into a thousand pieces. No, no, cried the 
emperor, with a calm and placid countenance, of 
all his brothers he is the only one remaining, at 
least let one of the family be suffered to live, that Hs 
aged parents may have sotne body left to feed and 
comfort them. 

When Haitong, the last emperor of the house of 
Ming, saw himself besi^ed in his own dty by the 
usurper, he was resolved to issue from his palace 
with six hundred of his guards, and give the enemy 
battle ; but they forsook him. Being thus without 
hopes and chusing death rather than to £aU alive 
into the hands of a rebel, he retired to his garden, 
conducting his little daughter, an only child in his 
hand, there, in a private arbour, unsheathing his 
sword, he stabbed the young innocent to the heart, 
and then dispatching himself, left the following 
words written with his blood on the border of his 
vest Forsaken by my subjects, abandoned by my 
friends, use my body as you will, but spare, O spare, 
my people. 

An empire which has thus continued invariably 
the same for such a long succession of ages, which 
though at last conquered by the Tartars, still pre- 



i«i THM CtTlZEN OF THM WORLD. 

wartM its andent laws and learning ; and may 
more ptopcr ly be laid to annex the dominkms of 
Tartaiy to iti empire, than to admit a foreign con- 
queror ; an empire at huge as Emope* governed 
by one kw, acknowledging rafajectioa to one 
prince, and experiencing bat one revc^tion of any 
coQtinitance in the ipaoe of four ihooaand years ; 
this is something so peculiarly great, that I am 
naturally led to despise all other nations on the 
compariioQ. HereweseenoreligioiisperMcatioiis» 
no enmity between mankind, for difference in 
opinion. The disciples of Lao Kimn, the idola- 
trous sectaries of Fohi, and the philosophical 
children of Confodm^ only strive to shew by their 
actions the truth of their doctrines. 

Now turn from thb happy peacefol scene to 
Europe the theatre of intrigue, avarice and am- 
bition. How many revolutions does it not expe- 
rience in the compass even of one age ; and to 
what do these revolutions tend but the destruction 
of thousands. Every great event is replete with 
some new calamity. The seasons of serenity are 
passed over in silence, their histories seem to 
speak only of the storm. 

There we see the Romans extending their power 
over barbarous nations, and in turn becoming a 
prey to those whom they had conquered. We see 
those barbarians, when become christians, engaged 
in continual wars with the followers of Mahomet ; 
or more dreadful still, destro3ang each other. We 
see councils in the earlier ages authorising every 
iniquity ; crusades spreading desolation in the 
country left, as well as that to be conquered. 
Excommunications freeing subjects from natural 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 183 

all^iance, and persuading to sedition ; blood 
flowing in the fields and on scaffolds; tortures 
used as arguments to convince the recusant : to 
heighten the horror of the piece, behold it shaded 
with wars, rebellions, treasons, plots, politics, and 
poison. 

And what advantage has any country of Europe 
obtained from such calamities ? Scarce any. 
Their dissensions for more than a thpusand years 
have served to make each other unhappy, but have 
enriched none. All the great nations still neariy 
preserve their ancient limits ; none have been able 
to subdue the other, and so terminate the dispute. 
France^ in spite of the conquests of Edward the 
third, and Henry the fifth, notwithstanding the 
efforts of Charles the fifth and Philip the second, 
still remains within its ancient limits. Spain, 
Germany, Great Britain, Poland, the states of the 
north, are nearly still the same. What effect then 
has the blood of so many thousands, the destruc- 
tion of so many cities, produced ? Nothing neither 
great or considerable. The christian princes have 
lost indeed much from the enemies of Christen- 
dom, but they have gained nothing from each 
other. Their princes, because they preferred 
ajnlMtioft-to justice, deserve the character of ene- 
mies to mankind ; and their priests, by neglecting 
morality for opinion, have mistaken the interests 
of society. 

On whatever side we r^^rd the history of 
Europe, we shall perceive it to be a tissue of 
crimes, follies, and misfortunes, of politics without 
design, and wars without consequence; in this 
long list of human infirmity, a great character, or a 



1^4 TUB CiTIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

shining virtue may sometimes happen to arise, as 
we often meet a cottage or a cultivated spot, in the 
most hideous wilderness. But for an Alfred, an 
Alphonso, a Frederic, or one Alexander III. we 
meet a thousand princes who have disgraced 
humanity. 



LETTER XLIII. 

jp^m Lien Chi Altangi, to Futn Hoam^ first pre- 
sident of the Ceremonial Academy at Ptkin^ 
in China, 






'E have just received accounts here, that 
Voltaire the poet and philosopher of 
Europe is dead I He is now beyond 
the reach of the thousand enemies, who 
while living, degraded his writings, and branded 
his character. Scarce a page of his latter produc- 
tions that does not betray the agonies of an heart 
bleeding under the scourge of unmerited reproach. 
Happy therefore at last in escaping from calumny, 
happy in leaving a world that was unworthy of him 
and his writings. 

Let others, my friend, bestrew the hearses of 
the great with panegyric ; but such a loss as the 
world has now suffered affects me with stronger 
emotions. When a philosopher dies, I consider 
myself as losing a patron, an instructor, and a 
friend. I consider the world as losing one who 
might serve to console her amidst the desolations 
of war and ambition. Nature every day produces 
in abundance men capable of filling all the requi- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 185 

site duties of authority ; but she is nig^rd in the 
birth of an exalted mind, scarcely producing in a 
century a single genius to bless and enlighten a 
degenerate age. Prodigal in the production of 
kings, governors, mandarines, chams, and ooor* 
tiers, she seems to have forgotten for more than 
three thousand years, the manner in which die 
once formed the brain of a Confucius ; and vrell it 
is she has forgotten, when a bod world gave him 
so very bad a reception. 

Whence, my friend, this malevolence whidi has 
ever pursued the great even to the tomb ; whence 
this more than fiend-like disposition of emluttering 
the lives of those who would make us more wise 
and more happy ? 

When I cast my eye over the fates of seveial 
philosophers, who have at different periods e&^ 
lightened mankind, I must confess it inspires me 
with the most degrading reflections on humanity. 
When I read of the stripes of Mentius, the tortures 
of Tchin, the bowl of Socrates, and the bath of 
Seneca; when I hear of the persecutions of Dante^ 
the imprisonment of Galileo, the indignities &ii£; 
fered by Montaigne, the banishment of Carte- 
sius, the in£euny of Bacon ; and that even Locke 
himself escaped not without reproach; when I 
think on such subjects, I hesitate whether most to 
blame, the ignorance or the villainy of my fellow 
creatures. 

Should you look for the character of Voltaire 
among the journalists and illiterate writers of the 
age, you will there find him characterized as a 
monster, with a head turned to wisdom, and an 
heart inclining to vice ; the powers of his mind 



iW TUB CiTIZKK OF THM WORLD: 

and the bMcnew oC hit principles fbrming a detes- 
table contrast But seek for his diaracter among 
writers like himself, and jool find him veiy difie- 
lently described. Yonperodvehimintbeiraocoants 
posse ■ Bed of good-natare, hamanitf , creatness of 
soul, fortitude, and almost every irirtne: in this 
descrip t ion those who might be snppoeed best ao- 
qoainted with his character are nnanimons. The 
lojal Pmssian,* D'Aigens,* Diderot,* D'Alcmbertif 
and Fontenelle conspire in drawing the pietnre, in 
describing the friend of man and the patron of 
eveiy rising genios* 

Mk inflexible pers ev erance in what he thoo^t 
was right, and a generous detestation of flattery, 
fonned the ground-work of this great man's cha^ 
lacter. From these principles many strong virtues 
and fowfonlts arose; as he was warm in his friend- 
ship, and severe in resentment, all that mention 
him seem possessed of the same qualities, and speak 
of him with rapture or detestation. A person of 
his eminence can have few indifferent as to his 
character ; every reader must be an enemy or an 
admirer. 

This poet began the course of glory so early as 
the age of eighteen, and even then was author of a 
tragedy which deserves applause ; possessed of a 
small patrimony he preserved his independence in 
an age of venality, and supported the dignity of 
learning, by teaching his cotemporary writers to 
live like him, above the favours of the great. He 
was banished his native country for a satire upon 
the royal concubine. He had accepted the place 

^ Philosophe sans souci. * Let. Chin. 

' Encycloped. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 187 ~~-^ v, ^^ , 

of historian to the French king, but refused to 
keep it when he found it was presented only in 
order that he should be the first flatterer of the 
state. 

The great Prussian received him as an ornament 
to this kingdom, and had sense enough to value his 
friendship, and profit by his instructions. In this 
court he continued till an intrigue, with which the 
world seems hitherto unacquainted, obliged him to 
quit that country. His own happiness, the happi- 
ness of the monarch, of his sister^ of a part of the 
court, rendered his departure necessary. 

Tired at length of courts, and all the follies of 
the great, he retired to Switzerland, a country of 
liberty, where he enjoyed tranquillity and the 
muse. Here, though without any taste for magni- 
ficence himself, he usually entertained at his table 
the learned and polite of Europe, who were attrac- 
ted by a desire of seeing a person from whom they 
had received so much satis&ction. The entertain- 
ment was conducted with the utmost el^^nce» 
and the conversation was that of philosophars. 
Every country that at once united liberty and 
science were his peculiar favourites. The being an 
Englishman ^was to him a character that claimed 
admiration and respect. 

Between Voltaire and the disciples o f Co n fuc ius, S. 
there are many differences ; however, being of a 
different opinion does not in the least diminish my 
esteem ; I am not displeased with my brother, be- 
cause he happens to ask our father for favours in 
a different manner from me. Let his errors rest in 
peace, his excellencies deserve admiration ; let me 
with the wise admire his wisdom ; let the envious 




ill T»B CtTiXKN OF TOM WVJtLA 

tad the it;iioffftiit lidicale hit fclblet s the folly of 
totben It ever mott ridiailoiit to thoie who tie 
theiHWitfet most' lodoth* AcUeii% 



LETTER XLIV, 
/hMi Zim Cki AhoMgi t§ ffiitgfQ^ a sbme im 

» 

|T k impottible to fonn a philoeophk 
^Titem of happineit which It adapted to 
eveiy oonditSon in life» tinee evcfy per* 
ton who tntvdt hi thit great pursuit 
takes a aepaimte road* ThediffiKingooloiinwhldi 
svit diffiBrent eomplexiciiSy are not more various 
than the difierent pleasares appiopriated to difie- 
nnt minds. The various sects who hanre pretended 
to give lessons to instruct me in happiness, have 
described their own particular sensations without 
considering ours, have only loaded their disdples 
with constraint, without .adding to their real 
felicity. 

If I find pleasure in dancing, how ridiculous 
would it be in me to prescribe such an amusement 
for the entertainment of a cripple ; should he, on 
the other hand, place his chief delight in painting, 
yet would he be absurd in recommending the same 
relish to one who had lost the power of distinguish- 
ing colours. General directions are therefore com- 
monly useless ; and to be particular would exhaust 
volumes, since each individual may require a par- 
ticular system of precepts to direct his choice, 
f^very mind seems capable of entertaining a 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLDi xSg 

certain quantity of happiness, which no institutions 
can increase, no circumstances alter, and entirely 
independent on fortune. Let any man compare 
his present fortune with the past, and he Will pro- 
bably find himself, upon the whole, neither better 
nor worse than formerly. 

Gratified ambition, or irreparable calamity may 
produce transient sensations of pleasure or distress. 
Those storms may discompose in proportion as 
they are strong, or the mind is pliant to their im> 
pression. But the soul, though at first lifted up by 
the event, is every day operated upon with dimi* 
nished influence ; and at length subsides into the 
level of its usual tranquillity. Should some un- 
expected turn of fortune take thee from fetters, and 
place thee on a throne, exultation would be natural 
upon the change ; but the temper, like the fiEu:e, 
would soon resume its native serenity. 

Every wish therefore which leads us to expect 
happiness somewhere else but where we are, every 
institution which teaches us that we should be 
better, by being possessed of something new, which 
promises to lift us a step higher than we are^ only 
lays a foundation for uneasiness, because it con- 
tracts debts which we cannot repay ; it calls that 
a good, which when we have found it, will in fact» 
add nothing to our happiness. 

To enjoy the present, without regret for the 
past, or solicitude for the future, has been the 
advice rather of poets than philosophers. And yet 
the precept seems more rational than is generally 
imagined. It is the only general precept respect- 
ing the pursuit of happiness, that can be applied 
with propriety to every condition of life. The 



S90 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

man of pleasure, the man of business, and the 
philosopher are equally interested in its disquisi- 
tion. If we do not find happiness in the present 
moment, in what shall we find it ; Either in reflect- 
ing on the past, or prognosticating the future. But 
let us see how these are capable of producing 
satisfaction. 

A remembrance of what is past, and an antici- 
pation of what is to come, seem to be the two 
faculties by which man differs most from other 
animals. Though brutes enjoy them in a limited 
degree, yet their whole life seems taken up in the 
present, regardless of the past and the future. Man, 
on the contrary, endeavours to derive his happi- 
ness, and experiences most of his miseries fh>m 
these two sources. 

Is this superiority of reflection a prerogative of 
which we should boast, and for which we shall 
thank Nature ; or is- it a misfortune of which we 
should complain and be humble. Either from the 
abuse, or from the nature of things, it certainly 
makes our condition more miserable. 

Had we a privilege of calling up, by the power 

of memory, only such passages as were pleasing, 

unmixed with such as were disagreeable, we might 

then excite at pleasure an ideal happiness, perhaps 

more poignant than actual sensation. But this is 

not the case ; the past is never represented without 

some disagreeable circumstance, which tarnishes all 

its beauty ; the remembrance of an evil carries in 

it nothing agreeable, and to remember a good is 

-~ accompanied with regret. Thus we lose 

San we gain by remembrance. 

we shall find our expectation of the future 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, xgz 

to be a gift more distressful even than the former. 
To fear an approaching evil is certainly a most dis- 
agreeable sensation ; and in expecting an approach- 
ing good, we experience the inquietude of wanting 
actual possession. 

Thus, whichever way we look, the prospect is 
disagreeable. Behind, we have left pleasures we 
shall never more enjoy, and therefore regret ; and 
before, we see pleasures which we languish to 
possess, and are consequently uneasy till we possess ' 
them. Was there any method of seizing the present, 
unembittered by such reflections, then would our 
state be tolerably easy. 

This, indeed, is the endeavour of all mankind, 
who untutored by philosophy, pursue as much as 
they can a life of amusement and dissipation. 
Every rank in life, and every size of understanding, 
seems to follow this alone ; or not pursuing it, de- 
viates from happiness. The man of pleasure pur- 
sues dissipation by profession ; the man of business 
pursues it not less, as every voluntary labour he 
undergoes is only dissipation in disguise. The 
philosopher himself, even while he reasons upon 
the subject, does it unknowingly with a view of 
dissipating the thoughts of what he was, or what 
he must be. , 

The subject therefore comes to this. Which is 
the most perfect sort of dissipation: pleasure, 
business, or philosophy ; which best serves to ex- 
clude those uneasy sensations which memory or 
cmticipation produce. 

The enthusiasm of pleasure charms only by in- 
tervals. The highest rapture lasts only for a mo- 
ment, and all the senses seem so combined^ as to 



i9t THB CITIZRN OF THE WORLD, 

be »oon tired into languor by the gratification of 
any one of them. It is only among the poets we 
hear of men changing to one delight, when satiated 
with another. In Nature, it is very different : the 
glutton, when sated with the full meal, is unquali« 
fied to feel the real pleasure of drinking ; the 
drunkard in turn finds few of those transports which 
lovers boast in enjoyment ; and the lover, when 
cloyed, finds a diminution of every other appetite. 
Thus, after a full indulgence of any one sense, the 
man of pleasure finds a lax^or in all, is placed in 
a chasm between past and expected enjoyment^ 
perceives an interval which must be filled up. The 
present can give no satis&ction, because he has 
already robbed it of every charm : a mind thus left 
without immediate gratification. Instead of a life 
of dissipation, snone has more frequent conversa- 
tions with disagreeable j^^than he : his enthusiasms 
are but few and transient ; his appetites, like angry 
creditors, continually making fruitless demands for 
what he is unable to pay ; and the greater his 
former pleasure, the more impatient his expecta- 
tions ; a life of pleasure is therefore the most un- 
pleasing life in the world. 

Habit has rendered the man of business more 
cool in his desires, he finds less regret for past 
pleasures, and less solicitude for those to come. 
The life he now leads, though tainted in some 
measure with hope, is yet not afflicted so strongly 
with regret, and is less divided between short- 
lived rapture and lasting anguish. The pleasures 
he has enjoyed are not so vivid, and those he 
has to expect, cannot consequently create so much 
anxiety. 



THE CITIZMN OP THE WORLD, 193 

The philosopher, who extends his regard to all ^. 
mankind, must have still a smaller concern for 
what has already affected, or may hereafter affect 
himself; the concerns of others make his whole 
study, and that study is his pleasure ; and this 
pleasure is continuing in its nature, because it can 
be changed at will, leaving but few of these 
anxious intervals which are employed in taMm- 
brance or anticipation* The philosopher Ynf tliia 
means leads a life of almost continued diadpatSofi ; 
and reflection, which makes the uneasiness and 
misery of others, serves as a compani<m and in*' 
structor to him. 

In a word, positive happiness Is constitutional,! 
and incapable of increase ; misery is artifldal, 
generally proceeds from our foUy. Philosophy 
add to our happiness in no other manner, bst by 
diminishing our misery : it should not pvetend to 
increase our present stock, but make us ec(m6* 
mists of what we are possessed of. The great 
source of calamity lies in regret ariuiticipation % b& 
therefore, is most wise who thinks of Uie preseailY 
alone, regardless of the past or the iuttire. This v^ ^ 
impossible to the man of pleasure ; it is diflScult to 
the man of business; and is in some measim 
attainable by the philosopher. Hi^>py were we all 
bom philosophers, all bom with a talent of thtti^ 
dissipating our own cares, by spreading them tipoa 
all mankind 1 Adien. 



onstitutional,lt 
irtiflcial, and\\ 
ulosophy can U 



i^- 



I. 




X94 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 



LETTER XLV. 

From Lien Chi Altangi^ to Fum Hoam^ first 
President of th€ Ceremonial Academy at Pekin^ 
in China, 

HOUGH the frequent invitations I re- 
ceive from men of distinction here 
might excite the vanity of some, I am 
quite mortified however when I con- 
sider the motives that inspire their civility. I am 
sent for not to be treated as a friend, but to satisfy 
curiosity ; not to be entertained so much as won- 
dered at ; the same earnestness which excites them 
to see a Chinese, would have made them equally 
proud of a visit from the rhinoceros. 

From the highest to the lowest, this people seem 
fond of sights and monsters. I am told of a person 
here who gets a very comfortable livelihood by 
making wonders, and then selling or shewing them 
to the people for money, no matter how insignifi- 
cant they were in the beginning ; by locking them 
up close, and shewing for money, they soon became 
prodigies ! His first essay in this way was to exhibit 
himself as a wax-work figure behind a glass door at 
a puppet show. Thus keeping the spectators at a 
proper distance, and having his head adorned with 
a copper crown, he looked extremely natural, and 
very like the life itself He continued this exhibi- 
tion with success, till an involuntary fit of sneezing 
brought him to life before all the spectators, and 
consequently rendered him for that time as entirely 
useless, as the peaceable inhabitant of a catacomb. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 195 

Determined to act the statue no more, he next 
levied contributions under the figure of an Indian 
king ; and by painting his face, and counterfeiting 
the savage howl, he frighted several ladies and 
children with amazing success : in this manner 
therefore he might have lived very comfortably, had 
he hot been arrested for a debt that was contracted 
when he was the figure in wax-work : thus his face 
underwent an involuntary ablution, and he found 
himself reduced to his primitive complexion and 
indigence. 

After some time, being freed from gaol, he was 
now grown wiser, and instead of making himself a 
wonder, was resolved only to make wonders. He 
learned the art of pasting up mummies ; was never 
at a loss for an artificial lusus natwa ; nay, it has 
been reported, that he has sold seven petrified 
lobsters of his own manufacture to a noted collector 
of rarities ; but this the learned Cracovius Putridus 
has undertaken to refute in a very elaborate disser- 
tation. 

His last wonder was nothing more than an halter, 
yet by this halter he gained more than by all his 
former exhibitions. The people, it seems, had got 
it in their heads, that a certain noble criminal was 
to be hanged with a silken rope. Now there was 
nothing they so much desired to see as this very 
rope ; and he was resolved to gratify their curiosity : 
he therefore got one made, not only of silk, but to 
render it more striking, several threads of gold 
were intermixed. The people paid their money 
only to see silk, but were highly satisfied when 
they found it was mixed with gold into the bargain. 
It is scarce necessary to mention, that the projector: 



196 THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD, 

lold his silkeo rope for almost what it had cost him, 
assooD as the criminal was known to be baDged in 
hempen msterials. 

By their fondness of sig^its, one wonld be apt to 
imagine, that imttrad of desiring to see thii^ as 
they should be, they are rather solicitous of seeing 
than as they ought not to be. A cat with four 
legs is disregarded, though never so useful ; but if 
it has but two, and is consequently incapable of 
catching mice, it is reckoned inestimable, and 
every man of taste is ready to raise the auction. A 
man, though in his person faultless as an aerial 
genius, might starve ; but if stuck over with hideous 
warts like a porcupine, his fortune is made for ever, 
and he may propagate the breed with impunity and 
applause. 

A good woman in my neighbourhood, who was 
bred an habit-maker, though she handled her 
needle tolerably well, could scarcely get employ- 
ment. But being obliged by an accident to have 
l>oth her hands cut off from the elbows, what would 
in another country have been her ruin, made her 
fortune here, she now was thought more fit for her 
trade than l)efore ; business flowed in a-pace, and 
all i>copIc paid for seeing the mantua-maker who 
wrought without hands. 

A gentleman shewing me his collection of pic- 
tures, stopped at one with peculiar admiration ; 
there, cries he, is an inestimable piece. I gazed at 
the picture for some time, but could see none of 
ihivso ijriices with which he seemed enraptured ; it 
appeared to me the most paltry piece of the whole 
collection : I therefore demanded where those 
beauties lay, of which I was yet insensible. Sir, 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 197 

cries he, the merit does not consist in the piece, 
but in the manner in which it was done. The 
painter drew the whole with his foot, and held the 
pencil between his toes : I bought it at a very 
great price; for peculiar merit should ever be 
rewarded. 

But these people are not more fond of wonders 
than liberal in rewarding those who shew them. 
From the wonderful dog of knowledge at present 
under the patronage of the nobility, down to the 
man with the box, who professes to shew the most 
imitation of Nature that was ever seen ; they all 
live in luxury. A singing woman shall collect sub- 
scriptions in her own coach and six ; a fellow shall 
make a fortune by tossing a straw from his toe to 
his nose ; one in particular has found that eating 
fire was the most ready way to live ; and another 
who jingles several bells fixed to his cap, is the 
only man that I know of who has received emolu- 
ment from the labours of his head. 

A young author, a man of good-nature and 
learning, was compldning to me some nights ago 
of this misplaced generosity of the times. Here, 
says he, have I spent part of my youth in attempt- 
ing to instruct and amuse my fellow creatures, and 
all my reward has been solitude, poverty, and 
reproach ; while a fellow, possessed of even the 
smallest share of fiddling merit, or who has perhaps 
learned to whistle double, is rewarded, applauded, 
and caressed ! Prythee, young man, says I to him, 
are you ignorant, that in so large a city as this, it 
is better to be an amusing than an useful member 
of society ? Can you leap up, and touch your feet 
four times before you come to the ground? A^o, 



198 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

Sir, Can you pimp for a man of quality? No^ 
Sir, Can you stand upon two horses at full speed? 
No, Sir, Can you swallow a pen-knife ? / can 
da none of these tricks. Why then, cried I, there 
is no other prudent means of subsistence left but to 
apprize the town that you speedily intend to eat 
up your own nose, by subscription. 

I have frequently regretted that none of our 
eastern posture masters or show men have ever 
ventured to 'England. I should be pleased to see 
that money circulate in Asia, which is now sent to 
Italy and France, in order to bring their vaga- 
bonds hither. Several of our tricks would un- 
doubtedly give the English high satisfaction. Men 
of fashion would be greatly pleased with the pos- 
tures as well as the condescension of our dancing 
girls : and ladies would equally admire the con- 
ductors of our fire-works. What an agreeable 
surprize would it be to see a huge fellow with 
whiskers flash a charged blunderbuss full in a 
lady's face, without singeing her hair, or melting 
her pomatum. Perhaps when the first surprize was 
over, she might then grow familiar with danger ; 
and the ladies might vie with each other in standing 
fire with intrepidity. 

Cut of all the wonders of the east, the most use- 
ful, and I should fancy, the most pleasing, would 
be the looking-glass of Lao, which reflects the 
mind as well as the body. It is said that the 
emperor Chusi used to make his concubines dress 
their heads and their hearts in one of these glasses 
every morning ; while the lady was at her toilet, 
he would frequently look over her shoulder ; and 
it is recorded, that among the three hundred 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 199 

which composed his seraglio, not one was found 
whose mind was not even more beautiful than her 
person. 

I make no doubt but a glass in this country 
would have the very same effect The English 
ladies, concubines and all, would undoubtedly cut 
very pretty figures in so faithful a monitor. There, 
should we happen to peep over a lady's shoulder 
while dressing, we might be able to see neither 
gaming nor ill-nature ; neither pride, debauchery, 
nor a love of gadding. We should find her, if 
any sensible defect appeared in the mind, more 
careful in rectifying it, than plastering up the 
irreparable decays of the person ; nay, I am even 
apt to fancy, that ladies would find more real plea- 
sure in this utensil in private, than in any other 
bauble imported from China, though never so 
expensive, or amusing. 



LETTER XLVI. 
To the same, 

PON finishing my last letter I retired 
to rest, reflecting upon the wonders of 
the glass of Lao, wishing to be pos- 
sessed of one here, and resolved in 
such a case to oblige every lady with a sight of it 
for nothing. What fortune denied me waking, 
fancy supplied in a dream ; the glass, I know not 
how, was put into my possession, and I could per- 
ceive several ladies approaching, some voluntarily. 




no THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

Others driven forward against their wills b3r a set of 
discontented genii, whom by intuition I knew were 
their husbands. 

The apartment in which I was to show away 
was filled with several gaming tables, as if just for- 
saken ; the candles were burnt to the socket, and 
the hour was five o'clock in the morning. Placed 
at one end of the room, which was of prodigious 
length, I could more easily distinguish every 
female figure as ^e marched up from the door ; 
but guess my surprise, when I could scarce per- 
eeive one blooming or agreeable face among the 
number. This, hovrever, I attributed to the early 
hour, and kindly considered that the face of a lady 
just risen from bed ought always to find a com- 
passionate advocate. 

The first person who came up in order to view 
her intellectual face was a commoner's ¥rife, who, 
as I afterwards found, being bred up during her 
virginity in a pawn-broker's shop, now attempted 
to make up the defects of breeding and sentiment 
by the magnificence of her dress, and the expen- 
siveness of her amusements. ** Mr. Showman, cried 
she, approaching, I am told you has something to 
shew in that there sort of magic lanthorn, by which 
folks can see themselves on the inside ; I protest, 
as my lord Beetle says, I am sure it will be vastly 
pretty, for I have never seen any thing like it 
before. But how ; are we to strip off our cloaths 
and be turned inside out? if so, as lord Beetle 
says, I absolutely declare off; for I would not 
strip for the world before a man's face, and so 
I tells his lordship almost every night of my life.'* 
I informed the lady that I would dispense with the 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 20z 

ceremony of stripping, and immediately presented 
my glass to her view. 

As when a first-rate beauty, after having with 
difficulty escaped the small pox, revisits her 
favourite mirror, that mirror which had repeated 
the flattery of every lover, and even added force to 
the complement ; expecting to see what had so 
often given her pleasure, she no longer beholds the 
cherried lip, the polished forehead, and speaking 
blush, but an hateful phyz, quilted into a thousand 
seams by the hand of deformity ; grief, resent- 
ment, and rage fills her bosom by turns ; she 
blames the &tes and the stars, but most of all the 
unhappy glass feels her resentment. So it was 
with the lady in question ; she had never seen her 
own mind before, and was now shocked at its 
deformity. One single look was sufficient to 
satisfy her curiosity ; I held up the glass to her 
face, and she shut her eyes ; no entreaties could 
prevail upon her to gaze once more ! she was even 
going to snatch it from my hands, and break it in 
a thousand pieces. I found it was time therefore 
to dismiss her as incorrigible, and shew away to 
the next that offered. 

This was an unmarried lady, who continued in a 
state of virginity till thirty-six, and then admitted a 
lover when she despaired of an husband. No * 
woman was louder at a revel than she, perfectly 
free-hearted, and almost in every respect a man; 
she understood ridicule to perfection, and was once 
known even to sally out in order to beat the watch. 
'* Here, you my dear with the outlandish face, 
(said she addressing me) let me take a single peep. 
Not that I care three dams what figure I may cut 



9oa THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

in the glass of such an old-fashioned creature ; if I 
am allowed the beauties of the face by people of 
fashion, I know the world will be complaisant 
enough to toss me the beauties of the. mind into 
the bargain.*' I held my glass before her as she 
desired, and must confess, was shodced with the 
reflection. The lady, however, gazed for some time 
with the utmost complacency \ and at last turning 
to me with the most satisfied smile said, she never 
could thihk she had been half so handsome. 

Upon her dismission a lady of distinction was 
rductantly hauled along to the glass by her hus- 
band ; in bringing her forward, as he came first to 
the glass himself, his mind appeared tinctured with 
immoderate jealousy, and I was going to reproach 
him for using her with such severity ; but when 
the lady came to present herself, I immediately re- 
tracted ; for alas it was seen that he had but too 
much reason for his suspicions. 

The next was a lady who usually teased all her 
acquaintance in desiring to be told of her faults, 
and then never mended any. Upon approaching 
the glass, I could readily perceive vanity, affecta- 
tion, and some other ill-looking blots on her mind ; 
wherefore by my advice she immediately set about 
mending. But I could easily find she was not 
earnest in the work ; for as she repaired them on 
one side, they generally broke out on another. 
Thus, after three or four attempts, she began to 
make the ordinary use of the glass in settling her 
hair. 

The company now made room for a woman of 
learning, who approached with a slow pace and a 
solemn countenance, which for her own sake, I 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 903 

could wish had been cleaner. "Sir, cried the 
lady, flourishing her hand, which held a pinch of 
snuff, I shall be enraptured by having presented 
to my view a mind with which I have so long 
studied to be acquainted : but, in order to give the 
sex a proper example, I must insist, that all the 
company may be permitted to look over my 
shoulder.*' I bowed assent, and presenting the 
glass, shewed the lady a mind by no means so fair 
as she had expected to see. Ill-nature, ill placed 
pride, and spleen, were too legible to be mistaken^ 
Nothing could be more amusing than the mirth of 
her female companions who had looked over. 
They had hated her from the beginning, and now 
the apartment echoed with an universal laugh. 
Nothing but a fortitude like her's could have with? 
stood their raillery : she stood it however ; and 
when the burst was exhausted, with great tran- 
quillity she assured the company, that the whole 
was a deceptio visus, and that she was too well 
acquainted ¥rith her own mind to believe any &lse 
representations from another. Thus saying, she 
retired with a sullen satisfaction, resolved not to 
mend her faults, but to write a criticism on the 
mental reflector. 

I must own, by this time I began myself to sus- 
pect the fidelity of my mirror ; for as the ladies 
appeared at least to have the merit of rising early, 
since they were up at five, I was amazed to find 
nothing of this good quality pictured upon their 
minds in the reflection ; I was resolved therefore 
to communicate my suspicions to a lady, whose 
intellectual countenance appeared more fair than 
any of the rest, not having above seventy-nine 



•04 TffM CtTtZMN OF THE WORLD. 

wfo^ in ftll, beftidet ilipt and foibtet. ** I own« 
youg woman* laid I, that there aie aome yiztnea 
npon that mfaid of yoor's ; but there ia still one 
iriiich I do not aee lepraaented ; I mean that of 
rising betimes in the morning ; I fimey the g^asa 
fidsein that paitiealar.'' The jrmmg lady smiled 
•t mj simpUcitjr; and, with a blnrii, c o nfigiaed , 
that she and the whole company had been vp all 
QMn^ gamingi 

Bf this time aU the ladies, eaeeptooe, had seen 
themaalYcs socoeasivelf, and disliked tlie show, or 
ieolded the show-man % I was resolTed, howevei^ 
that she who seemed to neglect herself, and was 
Mgiected by the vest, should take a view; and 
gabig.vp to n eocner of Hie room, idiere she still 
con thiuc d sittiaf , I presented my glam full in her 
hc9- Heie it was that leznlted in mysnooessf 
no blot, BO stain, appeared on cny~parr*af the 
faithfiil minor. As when the large, unwritten 
page presents its snowy spotless bosom to the 
writer's hand ; so appeared the glass to my view. 
Here, O ye daughters of English ancestors, cried 
I, turn hither, and behold an object worthy imita- 
tion : look upon the mirror now, and acknowledge 
its justice, and this woman's pre-eminence ! The 
ladies obeying the summons, came up in a group, 
and looking on, acknowledged there was some 
truth in the picture, as the person now represented 
had been deaf, dumb, and a fool from her cradle. 

Thus much of my dream I distinctly remember ; 
the rest was filled with chimseras, enchanted castles, 
^d flying dragons as usual. As you, my dear 
Fum Hoam, are particularly versed in the interpre- 
tation of those midnight warnings, what pleasure 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, aos 

should I find in your explanation : but that our 
distance prevents ; I make no doubt, however, but 
that from my description you will very much vene- 
rate the good qualities of the English ladies in 
general, since dreams, you know, go always by 
contraries. Adieu« 




LETTER XL VI I. 

Prom LUn Chi Altangi to ffingpo, a slave in 

Persia,^ 

[OUR last letters betray a mind seemingly 
fond of wisdom, yet tempested up by a 
thousand passions* You would fondly 
persuade me that my former lessons 
still influence your conduct, and yet your mind 
seems not less enslaved| than your body. Know- 
ledge, wisdom, erudition, arts and el^ance^ what 
are they, but the mere trappings of the mind« if 
they do not serve to encrease the happiness of thft 
possessor ? A mind rightly instituted in the school 
of philosophy, acquires at once the stability of the 
oak, and the flexibility of the osier. The truest 
manner of lessening our agonies, is to shrink firom 
their pressure ; is to confess that we feel tbem« 

The fortitude of European sages is but a drettm | 
for where lies the merit in being insensible to the 
strokes of fortune, or in dissemblic^ our sensibility ; 
if we are insensible, that arises only from an haf^y 
constitution ; that is a blessing previously granted 

I This Iett«r appears to be little more than a rhapsody of 
sentiments from Confucius. Vid. the Latm translation. 



M TBM CtTiZBN OF THB WOBLD, 

lif'keatciiy and which no art can proeure, no 
nUitntions Inpfonc* 

'' *lf tre diwemWe our feelings we only artificially 
jMdaifonr to pemiade othen that we enjoj priri- 
MfM wfaldi we actiudlj do not poMeii. TIniB 
«Me we endeavoiir to appear happy* we led at 
Qpoe an the pangi of internal misery, and all the 
idf-fepfoadifaig conidoiiineH of eiuieavoiiiing to 
d6ceiTe» 

I know bat of two lects of phlloiophen in the 
wodd that have endeavouxed to inrtilfiatft that for- 
titade is but an hnaginaiy virtue i I mean the fol- 
lowers of Conlhciiis, and those who prdiess the 
doetrines of Christ AU other sects teach pride 
toder mlsfertancs; they alone teadi hnmility. 
Mikity sayi onr Chinese philosopher^ not more 
•01^ fellows day, than groans and tears grow out 
oi pam I wnen uusmcranes ineruoief oppiessi wnen 
tyrants threaten, it is oar interest, it is our duty, to 
fl^ even to dissipation for support, to seek redress 
from friendship, or seek redress from that best of 
friends who loved us into being. 

Philosophers, my son, have long declaimed 
against the passions, as being the source of all our 
miseries ; they are the source of all our misfortunes 
I own ; but they are the source of our pleasures 
too I and every endeavour of our lives, and all the 
institutions of philosophy, should tend to this, not 
to dissemble an absence of passion, but to repel 
Uiose which lead to vice, by those which direct to 
Virtue. 

The soul may be compared to a field of battle, 
where two armies are ready every moment to en- 
counter ; not a single vice bat has a more powerful 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 207 

opponent ; and not one virtue but may be overborne 
by a combination of vices. Reason guides the 
hands of either host, nor can it subdue one passion 
but by the assistance of another. Thus, as a bark 
on every side beset with storms, enjoys a state of 
rest, so does the mind, when influenced by a just 
eq uipoise of the passions, enjoy tranquillity. 

I iiave used such means as my little fortune 
would admit to procure your freedom. I have 
lately written to the governor of Argun to pay your 
ransom, though at the expence of all the wealth I 
brought with me from China. If we become poor 
we shall at least have the pleasure of bearing 
poverty together ; for what is fatigue or famine, 
when weighed against friendship and freedom. 

Adieu. 



LETTER XLVIII. 

From Lien Chi Altangi to* * * * *^ merchant 
in Amsterdam, 

APPENING some days ago to call at a 
painter's to amuse myself in examining 
some pictures (I had no design to buy) 
it surprised me to see a young prince in 
the working room, dressed in a painter's apron, 
and assiduously learning the trade. We instantly 
remembered to have seen each other ; and, after 
the usual compliments, I stood by while he con- 
tinued to paint on. As everything done by the 
rich is praised, as princes here, as well as in China, 
are never without followers, three or four persons. 




ao8 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

who had the appearance of gentlemen, were placed 
behind to comfort and applaud him at every 
stroke. 

Need I tell, that it struck me with very disagree- 
able sensations to see a youth who by his station in 
Uftt had it i»i his power to be useful to thousands^ 
thus letting his mind run to waste upon canvas, at 
th4 same time fancying himself improving in taste, 
and filling his rank with proper decorum. 

As seeing an error, and attempting to redress it, 
are only one and the same with me, I took occa- 
sion, upon his lordship's desiring my opinion of a 
Chinese scroll, intended for the frame of a picture ; 
to assure him, that a mandarine of China thought 
a minute acquaintance with such mechanical trifles 
below his dignity. 

This reply raised the indignation of some, and 
the contempt of others : I could hear the names of 
Vandal, Goth, taste, polite arts, delicacy, and fire, 
repeated in tones of ridicule or resentment. But 
considering that it was in vain to argue against 
people who had so much to say, without contra- 
dicting them, I begged leave to repeat a fairy tale. 
This request redoubled their laughter ; but not 
easily abashed at the raillery of boys, I persisted, 
observing that it would set the absurdity of placing 
our affections upon trifles in the strongest point of 
view, and adding that it was hoped the moral 
would compensate for its stupidity. For heaven's 
sake, cried the great man, washing his brush in 
water, let us have no morality at present ; if we 
must have a story, let it be without any moral. I 
pretended not to hear ; and while he handled the 
brush, proceeded as follows : 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 209 

In the kingdom of Bonbobbin, which, by the 
Chinese annal, appears to have flourished twenty 
thousand years ago, there reigned a prince en- 
dowed with every accomplishment which generally 
distinguishes the sons of kings. His beauty was 
brighter than the sun. The sun to which he was 
nearly related, would sometimes stop his course in 
order to look down and admire him. 

His mind was not less perfect than his body ; he 
knew all things without having ever read ; philo- 
sophers, poets, and historians, submitted their 
works to his decision ; and so penetrating was he, 
that he could tell the merit of a book by looking on 
the cover. He made epic poems, tragedies, and 
pastorals, with surprising facility; song, epigram, 
or rebus, was all one to him, though it is observed 
he could never finish an acrostic. In short, the 
fairy, who presided at his birth, had endowed him 
with almost every perfection, or what was just the 
same, his subjects were ready to acknowledge he 
possessed them all ; and, for his own part, he knew 
nothing to the contrary. A prince so accomplished, 
received a name suitable to his merit ; and he was \ 
called ^g^benm bonbobbin- ^n bobbine t, which 
signifies EnJightener of the Sun. "^ 

As he was very powerful, and yet unmarried, all 
the neighbouring kings earnestly sought his alliance. 
Each sent his daughter, dressed out in the most 
magnificent manner, and with the most sumptuous 
retinue imaginable, in order to allure the prince : 
so that at one time there were seen at his court not 
less than seven hundred foreign princesses of ex- 
quisite sentiment and beauty, each alone sufficient 
to make seven hundred ordinary men happy. 

ii^; I. p 



axo THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

Distracted in such a variety, the generous Bon- 
benin, hod he not been obliged by the laws of 
the empire to make choice of one, would very wil* 
Ungly have married them all, for none understood 
gallantry better. He spent numberless hours of 
solicitude in endeavouring to determine whom he 
should chuse; one lady was possessed of every 
perfection, but he disliked her eyebrows ; another 
was brighter than the morning star, but he disap- 
proved her fong whang ; a third did not lay white 
enough on her cheek ; and a fotirth did not suffi- 
ciently blacken her nails. At last, after number- 
less disappointments on one side and the other, he 
jnade choice of the incomparable Nanhoa, queen 
of the scarlet dragons. 

The preparations for the royal nuptials, or the 
envy of the disappointed ladies, needs no descrip- 
tion ; both the one and the other were as great 
as they could be ; the Ijeautiful princess was con- 
ducted amidst admiring multitudes to the royal 
couch, where after being divested of every encum- 
bering ornament, she was placed, in expectance of 
the youthful bridegroom, who did not keep her 
long in expectation. He came more chearful than 
the morning, and printing on her lips a burning 
kiss, the attendants took this as a proper signal to 
withdraw. 

Perhaps I ought to have mentioned in the be- 
ginning that, among several other qualifications, 
the prince was fond of collecting and breeding 
mice, which being an harmless pastime, none of 
his councillors thought proper to dissuade him 
from : he therefore kept a variety of these pretty 
little animals in the most beautiful cages enriched 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, an 

with diamonds, rubies, emeralds, pearls, and other 
precious stones : thus he innocently spent four hours 
each day, in contemplating their innocent little 
pastimes. 

But to proceed. The Prince and Princess were 
now in bed ; one with all the love and expecta^ 
tion, the other with all the modesty and fear, 
which is natural to suppose, both willing, yet 
afraid to begin ; when the Prince happening to | 
look towards the outside of the bed, perceived one \ 
of the most beautiful animals in the world, a white '\ 
mouse with green eyes, playing about the floor, ' 
and performing an hundred pretty tricks. He 
was already master of blue mice, red mice, and 
even white mice with yellow eyes ; but a white 
mouse with green eyes, was what he long endea- 
voured to possess: wherefore leaping from bed 
with the utmost impatience and agility, the youth- 
ful Prince attempted to seize the little charmer^ 
but it was fled in a moment ; for alas ! the mouse 
was sent by a discontented Princess, and was itself 
a fairy. 

It is impossible to describe the agony of the 
Prince upon this occasion, he sought round and 
round every part of the room, even the bed where 
the Princess lay was not exempt from the enquiry : 
he turned the princess on one side and t'other, 
stripped her quite naked, but no moose was to be 
found ; the princess herself was kind enough to 
assist, but still to no purpose. 

Alas, cried the young Prince in an agony, how 
unhappy am I to be thus disappointed ; never sure 
was so beautiful an animal seen, I would give half 
my kingdom and my princess, to him that would 



aza THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

find it. The princess, though not much pleased 
with the latter part of his offer, endeavoured to 
comfort him as well as she could ; she let him 
know that he had an hundred mice already, which 
ought to be at least sufficient to satisfy any philo- 
sopher like him. Though none of them had green 
eyes, yet he should learn to thank heaven that they 
had eyes. She told him, (for she was a profound 
moralist) that incurable evils must be borne, and 
that useless lamentations were vain, and that man 
was born to misfortunes ; she even entreated him 
to return to bed, and she would endeavour to lull 
him on her bosom to repose ; but still the prince 
continued inconsolable ; and regarding her with a 
stem air, for which his family was remarkable, he 
vowed never to sleep in the royal palace, or indulge 
himself in the innocent pleasures of matrimony, 
till he had found the white mouse with the green 
eyes. 

Prythee, Col. Leech, cried his Lordship, inter- 
rupting me, how do you like that nose ; don't you 
think there is something of the manner of Rem- 
brandt in it ; A prince in all this agony for a white 
mouse, O ridiculous ! Don't you think, Major 
Vampyre, that eye -brow stippled very prettily ; 
but pray what are the green eyes to the purpose, 
except to amuse children? I would give a thou- 
sand guineas to lay on the colouring of this cheek 
more smoothly. But I ask pardon, pray, Sir, 
proceed. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD ai3 

LETTER XLIX. 
From the same, 

INGS, continued I, at that time were 
different from what they are now; 
they then never engaged their word 
for any thing which they did not 
rigorously intend to perform. This was the case of 
Bonbenin, who continued all night to lament his 
misfortunes to the princess, who echoed groan for 
groan. When morning came, he published an 
edict, offering half his kingdom and his princess, to 
the person who should catch and bring him the 
white mouse with green eyes. 

The edict was scarce published, when all the 
traps in the kingdom were baited with cheese; 
numberless mice were taken and destroyed; but 
still the much wished for mouse was not among 
the number. The privy council was assembled 
more than once to give their advice ; but all their 
deliberations came to nothing ; even though there 
were two complete vermin-killers and three pro- 
fessed rat-catchers of the number. Frequent ad- 
dresses, as is usual on extraordinary occasions, 
were sent from all parts of the empire ; but though 
these promised well, though in them he received 
an assurance, that his faithful subjects would assist 
in his search with their lives and fortunes, yet, with 
all their loyalty, they failed when the time came 
that the mouse was to be caught. 

The prince therefore wa& resolved to go himself 
in search, determined never to lie two nights in 



az4 THE CJTIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

one place till he had found what he sought for. 
Thus quitting his palace without attendants, he 
set out upon his journey, and travelled through 
many a desert, and crossed many a river, high 
over hills, and down along vales, still restless, still 
enquiring wherever he came ; but no white moose 
was to be found. 

As one day, fatigued with his journey, he was 
shading himself from the heat of the mid-day sun, 
under the arching branches of a banana tree, medi- 
tating on the object of his pursuit, he perdelved an 
old woman, hideously deformed, approaching him ; 
by her stoop, and the wrinkles of her visage, she 
seemed at least five hundred years old ; and the 
spotted toad was not more freckled than was her 
skin. ''Ah! prince Bonbenin-bonbobbin-bon-: 
bobbinet, cried the creature, what has led you so 
many thousand miles from your own kingdom ; 
what is it you look for, and what induces you to 
travel into the kingdom of Emmets ? " The prince, 
who was excessively complaisant, told her the 
whole story three times over ; for she was hard of 
hearing. ** Well, says the old fairy, for such she 
was, I promise to put you in possession of the 
white mouse with green eyes, and that immediately 
too upon one condition." ** One condition, cried 
the prince in a rapture, name a thousand ; I shall 
undergo them all with pleasure." "Nay, inter- 
rupted the old fairy, I ask but one, and that not very 
mortifying neither ; it is only that you instantly 
consent to marry me." 

It is impossible to express the prince's confusion 
at this demand ; he loved the mouse, but he de- 
tested the bride ; he hesitated ; he desired time to 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 2x5 

think upon the proposal ; he would have been glad 
to consult his friends on such an occasion. " Nay, 
nay, cried the odious fairy, if you demur, I re- 
tract my promise ; I do not desire to force my 
favours on any man. Here, you my* attendants, 
cried she, stamping with her foot, let my machine 
be driven up ; Barbocela, Queen of Emmets, is | 
not used to contemptuous treatment." She had no 
sooner spoken than her fiery chariot appeared in 
the air, drawn by two snails ; and she was just 
going to step in, when the prince reflected, that 
now or never was the time to be possessed of the 
white mouse ; and quite forgetting his lawful prin- 
cess -Nanhoa, falling on his knees, he implored 
forgiveness for having rashly rejected so much 
beauty. This well-timed compliment instantly ap- 
peased the angry fairy. She affected an hideous 
leer of approbation, and, taking the young prince 
by the hand, conducted him to a neighbouring 
church, where they were married together in a 
moment As soon as the ceremony was performed, 
the prince, who was to the last degree desirous of 
seeing his favourite mouse, reminded the bride of 
her promise. "To confess a truth, my prince, 
cried she, I myself am that very white mouse you 
saw on your wedding night in the royal apartment. 
I now therefore give you the choice, whether you 
would have me a mouse by day and a woman by 
night, or a mouse by night and a woman by day." 
Though the prince was an excellent casuist, he 
was quite at a loss how to determine, but at last 
thought it most prudent to have recourse to a blue 
cat that had followed him from his own dominions, 
and frequently amused him with its conversation, 



9x6 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

anil assisted him with its advice ; in fact this cat 
was no other than the faithful princess Nanfaoa 
-herself, who had shared with him all his hardships 
in this disguise. 

By her instructions he was determined in his 
choice, and returning to the old fairy, prudently 
observed that as she must have been sensible he 
had married her only for the sake of what she had, 
and not for her personal qualifications, he thought 
it would for several reasons be most convenient, if 
she continued a woman by day and appeared a 
mouse by night. 

The old fairy was a good deal mortified at her 
husband's want of gallantry, though she was re- 
luctantly obliged to comply ; the day was there- 
fore spent in the most polite amusements, the 
gentlemen talked smut, the ladies laughed, and 
were angry. At last the happy night drew near, 
the blue cat still stuck by the side of its master, and 
even followed him to the bridal apartment. Bar- 
baccla entered the chamber, wearing a train fifteen 
yards long, supported by porcupines, and all over 
beset with jewels, which served to render her more 
detestable. She was just stepping into bed to the 
l*rince, forgetting her promise, when he insisted 
upon seeing her in the shape of a mouse. She had 
promised, and no fairy can break her word ; where- 
fore assuming the figure of the most Ixjautiful 
mouse in the world, she skipjied and played about 
with an infinity of amusement. The prince in an 
agony of rapture, was desirous of seeing his pretty 
playfellow move a slow dance about the floor to 
his own singing ; he began to sing, and the mouse 
immediately to perform with the most ptrfcct 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 817 

knowledge of time, and the finest grace and greatest 
gravity imaginable ; it only began, for Nanhoa, who 
had long waited for the opportunity in the shape of 
a cat, flew upon it instantly without remorse, and 
eating it up in the hundredth part of a moment, 
broke the charm, and then resumed her natural 
figure. 

Th^ Prince now found that he had all along been 
under the power of enchantment, that his passion 
for the white mouse was entirely fictitious, and not 
the genuine complexion of his soul ; he now saw 
that his earnestness after mice was an illiberal 
amusement, and much more becoming a ratcatcher 
than a prince. All his meannesses now stared him 
in the face, he begged the discreet princess's pardon 
an hundred times. The princess very readily for- 
gave him ; and both returning to their palace in 
Bonbobbin lived very happily together, and reigned 
many years with all that wisdom, which, by the 
story, they appear to have been possessed of. Per- 
fectly convinced by their former adventures that 
ihey who place their affections on trifies at first for 
amusement^ will fittd those trifles at last become their 
Most serious concern. Adieu. 



•i8 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 




LETTER L. 

From LUn Chi AUangiy to Fum Hoaviy first Presi- 
dent of the Ceremonial Academy at Pekin^ in 
China, 

|SK an Englishman what nation in the 
world enjoys most freedom, and he im- 
mediately answers, his own. Ask him 
in what that freedom principally con- 
sists, and he is instantly silent. This happy pre- 
eminence does not arise from the people's enjo3ring 
a larger share in legislation than elsewhere ; for in 
this particular, several states in Europe excel 
them ; nor does it arise from a greater exemption 
from taxes, for few countries pay more ; it does 
not proceed from their being restrained by fewer 
laws, for no people are burthened with so many ; 
nor does it particularly consist in the security of 
their property, for property is pretty well secured 
in every polite state of Europe. 

How then are the English more free (for more 
free they certainly are) than the people of any other 
country, or under any other form of government 
whatever. Their freedom consists in their enjoy- 
ing all the advantages of democracy with this supe- 
rior prerogative borrowed from monarchy, that the 
severity of their laws may be relaxed without en- 
dangering the constitution. 

In a monarchical state, in which the constitution 
is strongest, the laws may be relaxed without danger ; 
for though the people should be unanimous in the 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, m9 

breach of any one in particular, jret still there is an 
effective power superior to the people, capable of 
enforcing obedience, whenever it may be proper to 
inculcate the law either towards the support or 
wel&ure of the community. 

But in all those governments, where laws derive 
their sanction from the people alone, transgressions 
cannot be overlooked without bringing the consti- 
tution into danger. They who transgress the law 
in such a case, are those who prescribe it, by which 
means it loses not only its influence but its sanc- 
tion. In every republic the laws must be strong, 
because the constitution is feeble, they must re* 
semble an Asiatic husband who is justly jealouSy 
because he knows himself impotent. Thus in 
Holland, Switzerland, and Genoa, new laws are 
not frequently enacted, but the old ones are ob- 
served with unremitting severity. In such repub- 
lics therefore the people are slaves to laws of their 
own making, little less than in unmixed monarchies 
where they are slaves to the will of one subject to 
frailties like themselves. 

In England, from a variety of happy accidents* 
their constitution is just strong enough, or if you 
will, monarchical enough, to permit a relaxation of 
the severity of laws, and yet those laws still to re- 
main sufficiently strong to govern the people. Hiis 
is the most perfect state of civil liberty, of which 
we can form any idea ; here we see a greater 
number of laws than in any other country, while 
the people at the same time obey only such as are 
Onmediaiely conducive to the interests of society ; 
several are unnoticed, many unknown ; some kept 
to be revived and enforced upon proper occasions, 




th 



j» THE 

others left to grow obsolete, 

necessity ot abtogalioo. 

Scarce an Englishman who does r 
every ilay of his life, offend with impunitjr against 
some express law, and for which in a certain con- 
juncture of circumstances he would not receive 
puniEhment. G^tmJng houses, preaching at pro- 
hibited places, assembled crowds, noclumal amuse- 
ments, public shows, and an hundred other in- 
stances arc forbid and frequented. These prohibi- 
tions are useful ; though it be prudent in their 
magistrates, nod happy for their people, that theji 
are not enforced, and none but the venal or 
mercenary attempt to enforce them. 

Tbe law in this cose, like an indulgent parent, 
still keeps the rod, though the child is seldom cor- 
rected. Were those pardoned offences to rise into 
enormity, were they likely to obstruct the happiness 
ofsoctety, or endanger the state, il is then (hat justice 
would resume her terrors, and punish those fonlts 
which she had so often overlooked with indulgence. 
It is to this ductility of the laws that an English- 
aua owes the freedom he enjoys superior to others 
inamorepopatatgovemment; every step therefore 
the constitution lakes towards a Democratic form, 
every diminution of Ihe l^al authority is, in fact, 
a diminution of the subjects' freedom ; but every 
attempt to render the government more popular, 
not only impairs natural liberty, bat even will at 
last, dinolve the political constitution. 

Every popular government seems calculated to 
last only for a lime, it grows rigid with i^e, new 
laws are mnltiplying, and the old continue in force, 
snlijects ate oppressed, hardened mth a multi- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. aax 

plicity of legal injunctions, there are none from 
whom to expect redress, and nothing but a strong 
convulsion in the state can vindicate them into 
former liberty : thus the people of Rome, a few 
great ones excepted, found more real freedom under 
their emperors though tyrants, than they had ex- 
perienced in the old age of the commonwealth, in 
which their laws were become numerous and pain- 
ful, in which new laws were every day enacting 
and the old ones executed with rigour. They even 
refused to be reinstated in their former prerogatives, 
upon an offer niade them to this purpose ; for they 
actually found emperors the only means of softening 
the rigours of their constitution. 

The constitution of England, is at present pos- 
sessed of the strength of its native oak, and the 
flexibility of the bending tamarisk ; but should the 
people at any time, vrith a mistaken seal, pant 
after an imaginary freedom, and fancy that abridg- 
ing monarchy was increasing their privileges, they 
would be very much mistaken, since every jewel 
plucked from the crown of majesty would only be 
made use of as a bribe to corruption ; it o^ight en- 
rich the few who shared it among them, but would 
in fact impoverish the public 

As the Roman senators by slow and imperceptible 
degrees became masters of the people, yet still 
flattered them with a shew of freedom, while them- 
selves only were*free ; so is it possible for a body 
of men, while they stand up for privileges, to grow 
into an exuberance of power themselves, and the 
public become actually dependent, while some of 
its individuals only governed. 

If then, my friend, there should in. this country. 



M9 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

ever be on the throne a king who through good- 
nature or age, should give up the smallest part of 
his prerogative to the people, if there should come 
a minister of merit and popularity — But I have 
room for no more. Adieu« 




LETTER LI. 
To the same, 

S I was yesterday seated at break£Eist 
over a pensive dish of tea, my medita- 
tions were interrupted by my old friend 
and companion, who introduced a 
stranger, dressed pretty much like himself. The 
gentleman made several apologies for his visit, 
begged of me to impute his intrusion to the sin- 
cerity of his respect, and the warmth of his curiosity. 
As I am very suspicious of my company, when I 
find them very civil without any apparent reason, 
I answered the stranger's caresses at first with 
reserve ; which my friend perceiving, instantly let 
me into my visitor's trade and character, asking 
Mr. Fudge, whether he had lately published any 
thing new ? I now conjectured that my guest was 
no other than a bookseller, and his answer con- 
firmed my suspicions. 

** Excuse me. Sir, says he, it is not the season ; 
books have their time as well as cucumbers. I 
would no more bring out a new work in summer, 
than I would sell pork in the dog-days. Nothing 
in my way goes off in summer, except very light 
goods indeed. A review, a magazine, or a sessions 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, ss^ 

paper, may amuse a summer reader ; but all our 
stock of value we reserve for a spring and wintet 
trade." / mtist confess. Sir, Wfs I, a curiosity to 
know what you call a vcUuabie stock, which can only 
bear a winter perusal. ' ' Sir, replied the bookseller^ 
it is not my way to cry up my own goods ; but 
without exaggeration I will yentore to shew with 
any of the trade ; ray books at least have the pecu- 
liar advantage of being always new ; and it is my 
way to clear ofiP my old to the trunk-makers every 
season. I have ten new title pages now about nie^ 
which only want books to be added to make them 
the Hnest things in Nature. Others may pretend 
to direct the vulgar ; but that is not my Way ; I 
always let the vulgar direct me ; wherever popular 
clamour arises, I always echo the million. Foe 
instance, should the people in general say that such 
a man is a rogue, I instantly give orders to set him 
down in print a villain ; thus eveiy man buys the 
book, not to learn new sentiments, but to have the 
pleasure of seeing his own reflected." But Sir, 
interrupted I, you speak as if you yourself wrote the 
books you publish ; may I be so bold as to ask a sight 
of some of those intended publications which are 
shortly to surprise the toorld7 ** As to that. Sir, 
replied the talkative bookseller, I only draw out 
the plans myself ; and though I am very cautious 
of communicating them to any, yet, as in the end 
I have a favour to ask, you shall see a few of them. 
Here, Sir, here they are, diamonds of the first 
water, I assure you. Imprimis, a translation of 
several medical precepts for the use of such phy- 
sicians as do not understand Latin. Item, the 
young clergyman's art of placing patches regularly, 



r 



^ 



tM THE CIT/Z£N OF THE IVOfCLD. 
wilh a (lisseilation on the diflerent mnnnei af 
smiling without distorting tlie face. Item, the 
whole ait of love made petfectt^ cosy by a biober 
of 'Change Alley. Hem, the ptopei manner of 
cuttii^ blacklcod pencils, and mnkiog crayons ; by 
Ihe Right lion, the Earl of * " *. Item, the 
muster master general, or the review of reviews — " 
JVr, cried I, interrupting him, my curiosity witk 
ngard la title fagti ii satisjitd, J sketUd be gtadta 
ut tome longer maHuicripi, an history, or an ^e 
feem^ — " Bless me, cries the nia.n of industry, now 
you speak of on epic poem, you shall see an excel- 
lent l^e. Here it is ; dip into il where you will, 
it will be found replete wilh true modem humour. 
Strokes, Sir i il is filled wilh strokes of wit and 
satire in every line. " Do yen call thtst dosha of 
Iht pen itrakts, replied I, for I must cvn/ai I can 
set aa alh^l "And pray Sir, returned he, what 
do you cpll iheni ? I)'i you st-e any thing good 
now a-days thai is not filled with strokes — and 

duhei? Sir, a well placed dash makes half the 

wit of OUT writers of modern humour. I bought 
tut season a piece that had no other meiil upon 
eaith than nine bandied and ninety-five breaks, 
seventy-two ha ha's, three good things, and a 
garter. And yet it played off, and bounced, and 
cracked, and made more sport than a fine work." 
I fancy then. Sir, you -aiere a considerable gainert 
" It must be owned the piece did pay ; but upon 
the whole I cuinot much boast of last winter's 
luccess; I gained by two murders, but then I lost 
fay an ill timed charity sermon. I was i consider- 
able sufferer by my Direct Road to an Estate, tmt 
the Infernal Goide brought me up ^pin. Ab, 



THE CITIZEN OF THE 'WORLD, aas 

Sir, that was a piece touched off by the hands of a 
master, filled with good things from one end to the 
other. The author had nothing but the jest in 
view ; no dull moral lurking beneath, nor ill- 
natured satire to sour the reader's good humour ; 
he wisely considered that moral and humour at the 
same time were quite overdoing the business." To 
what purpose was the book then publ slud? cried I. 
** Sir, the book was published in order to be sold ; 
and no book sold better, except the criticisms upon 
it, which came out soon after. Of all kinds of 
writings that goes off best at present ; and I gene- 
rally fasten a criticism upon every selling book that 
is published. 

I once had an author who never lefl the least 
opening for the critics ; close was the word, always 
very right, and very dull, ever on the safe side of 
an argument ; yet, with all his qualifications, in- 
capable of coming into favour. I soon perceived 
that his bent was for criticism ; and as he was 
good for nothing else, supplied him with pens and 
paper, and planted him at the beginning of every 
month as a censor on the works of others. In 
short, I found him a treasure, no merit could 
escape him : but what is most remarkable of all, 
he ever wrote best and bitterest when drunk." 
But are there not some works^ interrupted I, that 
from the very manner of their composition niust be 
exempt from criticism; particularly such as profess 
to disregard its laws, ** There is no work whatso- 
ever but he can criticise, replied the bookseller ; 
even though you wrote in Chinese he would have 
a pluck at you. Suppose you should take it into 
your head to publish a book, let it be a volume of 

I. Q 



r 



THE CITIZEN OP THE WORI.D. 



h» 



lelWrs for instnnce ; wrils how you will, 
he shall shew the world you could have written 
better. Should you, with the most local exact- 
, stick to the manneis anil cuslonu of the 
itry from whence you come ; should you con- 
fine yourself to the narrow limits of eastern know. 
ledge, and be peifcctlyGiiople, and perfectly nalurol, 
be has Ihcn the strongest reason to etdaim. He 
may with i meer send you back to China for 
readers. He may observe, that after the first or 
second letter the iferation of the same simplicity is 
iOBupportably tedious ; but the worst of all is, the 
public in such a cose will anticipate his censures, 
and leave you with all youi uninstructive simplicity 
to be mauled at discretion," 

Yts, cried I, bal, in erdtr le avtid kis indigna- 
AVn, aiui what I jheuU ftar mart, thai of tkt 
pitblit, I vietcid in stick a ease write viilh all tkt 
knoviled^ 1 7ifOS mailer of. As 1 am riDt possessed 
of much leaniisig, at least I would net suppress 
what little I had; nor would I appear more stupid 
than Nature made mt. "Here then, cries the 
bookseller, we should have you entirely in our 
power ; imnatural, uQeasterii ; quite out of cha- 
racter ; erroneously sensible would be the whole 
ay ; Sir, we should then hual you down like a 
lat." Head cf my father I said I, sure there are 
iul Ike twt wayi ; lit door must either be shut, or 
it must be open. I must either be natural or tm- 
natural. " Be what you will, we shall criticise 
you, returned Ihe bookseller, and prove you a 
dunce in spite of yout teeth. But, ^ii, it is time 
that I should come to business. J huve just now 
in the press an history of China ; hut if you will 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, wj 

but put your name to it as the author, I shall repay 
the obligation with gratitude." What, Sir, re- 
plied I, put my ftame to a work which I have net 
written I Never while I retain a proper respect 
for the public and myself. The bluntness of my 
reply quite abated the ardour of the bookseller's 
conversation ; and, after about half an hour^s dis- 
agreeable reserve, he with some ceremony took his 
leave and withdrew. Adieu, 




LETTER LI I. 
To the same. 

|N all other countries, my dear Fum 
Hoam, the rich are distinguished by 
their dress. In Persia, China, and 
most parts of Europe, those who are 
possessed of much gold or silver, put some oV it 
upon their clothes; but in England, those who 
carry much upon their clothes, are remarked for 
having but little in their pockets. A tawdry out- 
side is regarded as a badge of poverty, and those 
who can sit at home, and gloat over their thou- 
sands in silent satisfaction, are generally found to 
do it in plain clothes. 

This diversity of thinking from the rest of the 
world which prevails here, I was first at a loss to 
account for ; but am since informed that it was in- 
troduced by an intercourse between them and their 
neighbours the French ; who, whenever they came 
in order to pay those islanders a visit, were gene- 
rally very well dressed, and very poor, daubed 






OF THE tVORLD. 
with lace, but all the gilding on the outside. By 
this means laced clothes have been brought so 
much into contempt, that al present eviiii their 
toandaitnes ate ashamed of finerr. 

I must own myself a convert to English sim- 
plicity ; I am no more for ostentation of weallh 
than of ieaming j the person who in company 
ahonld pretend to be wiser Ihan others, I ata apt 
to regard as illiterate and ill bred ; the person 
whose clothes are extremely line, I am loo apt ta 
consider as not lieing possessed of any superiority 
of fortune, but resembling those Indians who are 
found to wear all the gold they have in the world 

I wos lately introduced into a company of the 
best dressed men I have seen since my arrival. 
Upon entering the room, I was struck with awe nl 
the grandeur of the dilferenl dresaes. That per- 
sonage, thouyhl 1, in blue and g"ld, mu^t be some 
emperor's son ; that, in green and silver, a. prince 
of the blood ; he, in embroidered scarlet, a prime 
ininister, all first rate noblemen, I suppose, and 
nell-loolcing noblemen too. I sate for some time 
with that uneasiness which consdous inferiority 
produces in Che ingenious mind, all attention to 
their discourse. However, I found their conversa- 
tion more vulgar than I could have expected from 
personages of such distinction : if these, thought I 
to myself, be princes, they are the most stupid 
princes I have ever conversed with : yet still I 
continued to venerate their dress ; for dress has a 
kind of mechanical inBuence on the mind. 

My friend in black indeed did not behave with 
the same deference, but contradicted the finest of 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 929 

them all in the most J)eremptory tones of contempt. 
But I had scarce time to wonder at the imprudence 
of his conduct, when I found occasion to be equally 
surprised at the absurdity of theirs ; for upon the 
entry of a middle-aged man, dressed in a cap, dirty 
shirt and boots, the whole circle seemed diminished 
of their former importance, and contended who 
should be first to pay their obeisance to the stranger. 
They somewhat resembled a circle of Kalmucs offer- 
ing incense to a bear. 

Eager to know the cause of so much seeming 
contradiction, I whispered my friend out of the 
room, and found that the august company consisted 
of no other than a dancing master, two fiddlers, 
and a third rate actor, all assembled in order to 
make a set at country dances ; as the middle-aged 
gentleman whom I saw enter was a squire firom the 
country, and desirous of learning the new manner 
of footing, and smoothing up the rudiments of his 
rural minuet. 

I was no longer surprised at the authority which 
my friend assumed among them, nay, was even 
displeased (pardon my eastern education) that he 
had not kicked every creature of them down stairs. 
** What, said I, shall a set of such paltry fellows 
dress themselves up like sons of kings, and claim 
even the transitory respect of half an hour 1 There 
should be some law to restrain so manifest a breach 
of privilege ; they should go from house to house, 
as in China, with the instruments of their profession 
strung round their necks ; by this means we might 
be able to distinguish and treat them in a style of 
becoming contempt.** H< '•^'^nd, replied 

my companion, were ! to take 



r 



>»> THE CITIZES OF THE WORLD, 
place, u dancing tuaslns and fidiller^ now mimic 
gentlemen io appearance, we shoald Ihen fiml pur 
fine genllemen confomiing ID Iheirs. A beau 
■nighl be introduced lo a. Judy of fashion with a 
Bddle case hanging al his neck by a red ribbon ; 
and, instead of a cane, might cany a liddle stick. 
Thougli 10 be as dull as a first rale dancing master 
■night be used with proverbial justice ; jel, dull as 
he », many a fine gentleman sets him up ns the 
proper standard of politeness, copies not only the 
pert vivacity of his air, but the Hat insipidity of his 
coDveriatioo. In short, if you make a law against 
dancing masters imitating the fine gentleman, you 
should with OB much reason enact, That no fine 
geotlemaii shall imitate the dancing master. 

After I bad left my Mend, I made towards 
home, reflecting as I went upon the difficulty of 
distinguishing men by their appearance. Invited, 
however, by the freshness of the evening, I did not 
letum directly, but went to ruminate on what had 
passed in a public garden belonging to the city. 
Here, as I sat upon one of the benches, and felt the 
pleasing sympathy which Nature in bloom inspires, 
a disconsolated figure, who sate on the other end of 
the seal, seemed no wayto enjoy the serenity of the 

His dress was miserable beyond description ; a 
thread-bare coat Of the rudest materials ; a shirt, 
though clean, yet extremely coarse ; hair that 
seemed to have been long unconscious of the 
comb ; and all the rest of his equipage impressed 
with the marks of genuine poverty. 



vs 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 231 

of humanity, to offer comfort and assistance. You 
know my heart ; and that all who are miserable 
may claim a place there. The pensive stranger at 
first declined any conversation ; but at last per- 
ceiving a peculiarity in my accent and manner 
of thinking, he began to unfold himself by degrees. 

I now found that he was not so very miserable 
as he at first appeared ; upon my offering him 
a small piece of money, he refused my favour, yet 
without appearing displeased at my intended gene- 
rosity. It is true he sometimes interrupted the 
conversation with a sigh, and talked pathetically 
of neglected merit ; still I could perceive a serenity 
in his countenance, that upon a closer inspection, 
bespoke inward content. 

Upon a pause in the conversation I was going to 
take my leave, when he begged I would favour him 
with my company home to supper. I was surprised 
at such a demand from a person of his appearance, 
but willing to indulge curiosity, I accepted his in- 
vitation ; and though I felt some repugnance at 
being seen with one who appeared so very wretched, 
went along with seeming alacrity. 

Still as he approached nearer home, his good 
humour proportionably seemed to increase. At 
last he stopped, not at the gate of an hovel, but of 
a magnificent palace I When I cast my eyes upon 
all the sumptuous elegance wMch every where pre- 
sented upon entering, and then when I looked at 
my seeming miserable conductor, I could scarce 
think that all this finery belonged to him ; yet in 
fact it did. Numerous servants ran through the 
apartments with silent assiduity ; several ladies of 
beauty and magnificently dressed came to welcome 



•UK CITIZB.V OF THE 
return i a most elegant supper was provided ; 
Yam, I found the peivin, whom a little befoK 1 
sincerely pitietl, to be in reitlitya most rcGned 
lire ; One viho louried caitttmpt abroad, m 
to /tit with ieetier gust the Measure ef pre- 
mie U ksme. Allien. 



LETTER LIII. ^H 

From the same. ^" 

^^^^'^ even beyond the efibtta of the Chinete 
tlieiDEelveB. How were we enraptured with those 
bold figures which sent every sentiment with force 
to ihe heart. How hnre we spent whole days to- 
gether in learning those arts by which European 
writers got within the passions, and led the reader 
as if by enchantment. 

But though we have learned most of the rheto- 
rical figures of the last age, yet there seems to be 
one or two of great use here, which have not yet 
travelled to China. The figures I mean are called 
Ba-aidy and Ftrlness ; none are mote fashionable ; 
none so sure of admirers ( they are of such a nature, 
that the merest blockhead, by a proper use of them, 
shall have the reputation of a wit ; they lie levello 
the meanest capacities, and address those passions 
which all have, or would be ashamed to disown. 

It has been observed, and 1 believe with some 
truth, that it is vay diiBcult for a dunce to obtain 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 233 

the reputation of a wit ; yet by the assistance of the 
figure Bawdy ^ this may be easily effected, and a 
l>awdy blockhead often passes for a fellow of smart 
parts and pretensions. Every object in Nature 
helps the jokes forward, without scarce any effort 
of the imagination. If a lady stands, something 
very good may be said upon that, if she happens to 
fall, with the help of a little fashionable Pruriency, 
there are forty sly things ready on the occasion. 
But a prurient jest has always been found to give 
most pleasure to a few very old gentlemen, who 
being in some measure dead to other sensations, 
feel the force of the allusion with double violence 
on the organs of risibility. 

An author who writes in this manner is generally 
sure therefore of having the very old and the im> 
potent among his admirers ; for these he may pro- 
perly be said to write, and from these he ought to 
expect his reward, his works being often a very 
pniper succedaneum to cantharides, or an assa- 
foetida pill. His pen should be considered in the 
same light as the squirt of an apothecary, both being 
directed at the same generous end. 

But though this manner of writing be perfectly 
adapted to the taste of gentlemen and ladies of 
fashion here, yet still it deserves greater praise in 
being equally suited to the most vulgar apprehen- 
sions. The very ladies and gentlemen of Benin or 
Caffraria, are in this respect tolerably polite, and 
might relish a prurient joke of this kind with 
critical propriety ; probably, too, with higher gust, 
as they wear neither breeches nor petticoats to 
intercept the application. 

It is certain I never could have expected the 



tH THE CITIZEN OF TUB H-OK1.D. 
Ikdlel here, Wiuied as they are by eduoU 
wpoble nl orce of bravely throwing off their pi 
diw«, nnd not only sppUudinE books in which Ihii 
ligTire makes Ihe only merit, but even odopting it 
in thtir own converealion. Yet so it is, the pretty 
innocents now carry those books openly ii 
h«ntli, which formetly were hid under the cushion ; 
Ihry now lisp their dovUe meanings with so mad 
£t*ce, ind talk over the raptures they bestow with 
•Dch lilllc teserre, Ihiu I am somelimis reminded 
of a ciulom among the entertainera in China, who 
, tbink it a piece of necessary breeding to whet the 
L< appetites of their guests, by letting Ihem smell 
.tfnncr in the kitchen before it is served op to 
Ublc. 

The veneration we have for mnny things, entirely 
proceeds from their bring carefully concealed. 
Were the idolatrous Tartar permitted to lifl the 
veil which krei": hi? ifiol frutn view, it might be R 
certain method to cuie his tiitnre superstition ; 
with what a noble spirit of freedom therefore 
must that writer be possessed, who bravely paints 
things as they are, who lifts the veil of modesty, 
who displaj-s the most hidden recesses of the 
tetnple, and shews the eiring people that the 
object of their vows is either, perhaps * mouse. 

However, though this figure be at present so 
much in fashion ; though the profiessois of it are so 
much caressed by the great, those perfect judges of 
literary excellence ; yet it is confessed to be onlya 
revival of what was once fashionable here before. 
There was a time, when by this very manner of 
writing, the gentle Tom Ihiifey, u I read io Eog- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 335 

lish authors, acquired his great reputation, and be- 
came the favourite of a king. 

The works of this original genius, though they 
never travelled abroad to China, and scarce have 
reached posterity at home, were once found upon 
every fashionable toilet, and made the subject of 
polite, I mean very polite conversation. ^* Has your 
Grace seen Mr, Durfeys last new things the Oylet 
Hole. A most facetious piece? Sure, my Lord, all 
the world must have seen it; Durfey is certainly the 
most comical creature alive. It is impossible to read 
his things and live. Was there ever any thing so 
natural and pretty ^ as when the Squire and Bridget 
meet in the cellar. And then the cUfficulties they 
both find in broaching the beer barrel are so arch and 
so ingenious ! We have certainly nothing of this kind 
in the language^^ 

In this manner they spoke then, and in this 
manner they speak now ; for though the successor 
of Durfey does not excel him in wit, the world must 
confess he out does him in obscenity. 

There are several very dull fellows, who, by a few 
mechanical helps, sometimes learn to become ex- 
tremely brilliant and pleasing ; with a little dex- 
terity in the management of the eye brows, fingers, 
and nose. By imitating a cat, a sow and pigs ; by 
a loud laugh, and a slap on the shoulder, the most 
ignorant are furnished out for conversation. But 
the writer finds it impossible to throw his winks, 
his shrugs, or his attitudes upon paper ; he may 
borrow some assistance indeed, by printing his 
face at the title page ; but without wit to pass for 
a man of ingenuity, no other mechanical help but 
downright obscenity will suffice. By speaking to 



THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD. 
me peculiai aensnlions, we are aJivflys sure of 
•■iling laiighlcr, for the jesl Joes not lie in the 
!er, but in the tuhject. 

<u( Bawdy is often helped on by anolher figure, 
ed Pertness ; and few indeed are found \a a- 
in one that are not possessed of the other. 
a in common conversation the best way to 
-ice the audience Inugh is by first laughing your- 
; BO in writing, theproperest manner is toihew 
Lltempl at humour, which will pass upon most fbi 
mour in lenlily. To effect this, readers most be 
iieatcd with the most perfect familiarity : m one 
page the author is to make them a low bow, and in 
the next to pull them by the nose : he must talk in 
riddles, and then send them to bed in order to 
dream for the solution. He must speak of himself 
and his chapters, and his manner, and what he 
would be at, and his own importance, and his 
mother's impottance with the most unpitying pro- 
lixity : now and then testifying his contempt fof 
all but himself, smiling without a jest,"aiid with- 
out wit possessing vivadty. Adieu. 



LETTER LIV. 

from Ihi sanu. 

gggiaHOUGH naturally pensive, yet 1 nm 
Jt^anfim fond of gay company, and take every 
^^K^ opportunity of thus dismissing the mind 

often found in the centre of a crowd ; and wher- 
ever pleasure is to be sold, am always a purchaser. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, %yj 

In those places, without being remarked by any, I 
join in whatever goes forward, work my passions 
into a similitude of frivolous earnestness, shout a$ 
they shout, and condemn as they happen to dis- 
approve. A mind thus sunk for a while below its 
natural standard, is qualified for stronger flights, 
as those first retire who would spring forward with 
greater vigour. 

Attracted by the serenity of the evening, my 
friend and I lately went to gaze upoi\ the company 
in one of the public walks near the city. Here we 
sauntered together for some time, either praising the 
beauty of such as were handsome, or the dresses 
of such as had nothing else to recommend them. 
We had gone thus deliberately forward for some 
time-, when stopping on a sudden, my friend caught 
me by the elbow, and led me out of the public 
walk ; I could perceive by the quickness of his 
pace, and by his frequently looking behind, that 
he was attempting to avoid somebody who fol- 
lowed ; we now turned. tathe..zight, then to th^ 
left ; as we went forward he still went faster; but 
in vain ; the person whom he attempted to escape, 
hunted us through every doubling, and gained 
upon us each moment ; so that at last we fairly 
stood still, resolving to face what we could not 
avoid. 

Our pursuer soon came up, and joined us with 
all the familiarity of an old acquaintance. My dear 
Drybone^ cries he, shaking my friend's hand, where 
have you bun hiding this half a century t Positively 
I had fancied you were gone down to cultivate mat- 
rimony and your estate in the country. During the 
reply, I had an opportunity of surveying the ap- 



m THE CITIZES OF THE WORLD. ^^™ 
peitrance of oui new companion ; his hat wn 
^incheil up with peculiar imartness ; his looks wen 
pile, Ihin, and sharp ; raand his Deck he wore a 
broad bluctc ribbon, and in his bosom a buckle 
studded with glass ; his coat wa^ Irimmed with 
tarnished twist ; he woie b; his side a sword with 
a black hill, and hii stockings of silk, though newl; 
washed, were grown yellow by long service. I was 
so much engaged with the peculiarity of his dress, 
ihai I attendetl only to the latter part of my friend'i 
l*]ily, in which he coniplimenlcd Mr. Tibbs on the 
IMIc of his clothes, and the bloom in his counte~ 
tasxtx,Pika,ftlia, Will, cried the figure, nonmrief 
Uial if you Inn me, yon intnir I haU fiaitery, an my 
tttll J do ; and yil to ke lure an intimacy wi/i Iht 
gnat will impivue em'i affiearattet, and a ceurtt oj 
vetiison will falUn ; and yH faith I desfdse Iki 
grait as tnueh as you do; but thtre are a great 
many damn' d honal fellows among Ikmt ; and we 
must not guarrel with one half, haause the other 
wants ivetding. If thty were all such as lay lord 
Mtidltr, one of the most good-natured creatures that 
ever squstted a lemon, I should myself be among 
the number of their admirers. I was yesterday to 
dim at the Dutchess of iHceadilly's, my lord tnu. 
there. Ned, says he to me, Ntd, says he, I'll held 
gold to silver I can tell where you were pocuhitig 
last night. Poaching, my lord, says I ; faith you 
hoDe missed already ; for I staid at heme, and let 
tht girls peach for me. Thai's my ivay ; I taie a, 
fine woman as some animals do their /rey • stand 
still, and swoop, they fall into my mouth. 

Ah, Tibbs, thou art an happy fellow, cried my 
compLuiion with looks of infinite pity, I hope your 



n 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 939 

fortune is as much improved as your understanding 
in such company ? Improved^ replied the other ; 

Yon shall know y but let it go no further ^ a 

great secret -five hundred a year to begin with. 

My lord's word of honour for it^^ — His lord- 
ship took me doivn in his own Chariot yesterday, 
and we had a tete-a-tete dinner in the country ; 
where we talked of nothing else, I fancy you forget, 
sir, cried I, you told us but this moment of your 
dining yesterday in town ! Did I say so, replied he 

cooly, to be sure if I said so, it was so Dined in 

town : egad now I do remember, I did dine in town ; 
but I dined in the countiy too ; for you must know, 
my boys, I eat two dinners. By the bye, I am 
grown as nice as the Devil in my eating, Pll tell 
you a pleasant affair about that : We were a select 
party of us to dine at Lady GrogranCs, an affected 
piece, but let it go no further ; a secret: well, there 
happened to be no Assafxtida in the sauce to a 
turkey, upon which, says I, Vll hold a thousand 

guitteas, and say done first, that But dear 

Drybone, you are an honest creature, lend me half' 
a-crownfor a minute or two, or so, just till — But 
hearkee, ask me for it the next time we meet, or it 
may be twenty to one but I forget to pay you. 

When he left us, our conversation naturally 
turned upon so extraordinary a character. His 
very dress cries my friend, is not less extraordinary 
than his conduct. If you meet him this day you 
find him in rags, if the next in embroidery. With 
those persons of distinction, of whom he talks so 
familiarly, he has scarce a coffee-house acquain- 
tance. However, both for interests of society, and 
perhaps for his own, heaven has made him poor, 






1 



»40 THE CITIZEN OP THE O'ORLD. 
and while a1! the world perceive his wants, ] 
fancies them conceiileii ftom every eye. An jigrf 
able companion liecause he underalaniU Haltei 
smd all musl be pleased with the first part of 1 
conveisalion, though all are sure of its endL 
with a demand on theii putEe. White liis you 
countenances ihe levity of his conduct, he m 
thus earn a precarious subsistence, but when a 
comes on, the gravity of which is incompatible wi 
bufToonery, then will he find himself forsaken 
alL Condemned in the decline of life to ha 
upon some rich family whom he once despise 
there to unde^o all the ingenuity of studied ce 
tempt, to be employed only as a spy upon t 
servants, or a bugbear to fnght the children in 
obedience. Adieu. 



LETTER LV. 

7e Iht same. 

R^nUQ AM apt lo fancy T have contracted 
S^lfiiliK new acquaintance whom it will be 

iSsi^^ beau yesterday overtook me again 
one of the public walks, and slapping me on t 
shouldei, saluted me with an aii of the most p 
feet &miliarity. His dress was the same as usu 
except that he had more powder in his hair, w( 
a dirtier shiit, a pair of temple spectacles, and I 
hat under his arm. 

As I knew him to be an harmless amusing lit 
Ihine, I could not return his smiles with any < 
gree of severity i so we walked forward on ter 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 341 

of the utmost intimacy, and in a few minutes dis- 
cussed all the usual topics preliminary to particular 
conversation. 

The oddities that marked his character, however, 
soon began to appear ; he bowed to several well 
dressed persons, who, by their manner of returning 
the compliment, appeared perfect strangers. At 
intervals he drew out a pocket book, seeming to 
take memorandums before all the company, with 
much importance and assiduity. In this manner 
he led me through the length of the whole walk, 
fretting at ,his absurdities, and fancying myself 
hmghed at not less than him by every spectator. 

When we were got to the end of our procession. 
Blast me, cries he, with an air of vivacity, / 
nfversaw the park so thin in my life before^ there's 
no company at alUo-day, Not a single face to be seen. 
No company, interrupted I peevishly ; no company 
where there is such a crowd ; why man, there's too 
much. What are the thousands that have been laugh- 
ing at us but company ! Lard, my dear, returned 
he, with the utmost goo^ htunour, you seem im- 
mensely chagrined ; but blast me, when the world 
laughs at me, I laugh at all the world, and so we 
are even. My lord Trip, Bill Squash the Creo' 
Han, and I, sometimes nuike a party at being ridi- 
culous ; and so we say and do a thousand things for 
the joke sake. But I see you are grave, and if you 
are for a fine grave sentimental companion, you 
shall dine with me and my wife to day, I must in- 
sist onU; ril introduce you to Mrs, Tibbs, a Lady 
of as elegant qualifications as any in Nature; she 
was bred, but that^s betvoeen ourselves, under the 
inspection of the Countess of All-nigkt. A charm- 

1. R 



348 THE CITIZEN OF THE 1VORLD, 

in^ body of voice, but no more of that , she will grot 
us a song. You shall see my little girl too, Caro- 
lina IVilhelma Amelia Tibbs, a sweet pretty creaturt; 
I design her for my Lord Drumstick's eldest son^ 
but thats in friendship, let it go no further ; shii 
but six years old, and yet she wcUks a minuet, am 
plays on the guitar immensely already. I intern 
she shall be as perfect as possible in every cucompUsh' 
ment. In the first place Pll make her a scholar ^ 
ril teach her Gredt myself, and learn that lan- 
guage purposely to instruct her; but let that be a 
secret. 

Thus saying, without waiting for a reply, he 
took me by the arm and hauled me along. W( 
passed through many dark alleys and windin| 
ways ; for, from some motives to me unknown, h( 
seemed to have a particular aversion to ever) 
frequented street ; at last, however, we got to the 
door of a dismal looking house in the outlets of th( 
town, where he informed me he chose to reside foi 
the benefit of the air. 

We entered the lower door, which ever seeraec 
to lie most hospitably open ; and I began to ascenc 
an old and creaking stair-case, when, as he mountec 
to shew me the way, he demanded, whether I de 
lighted in prospects, to which answering in th( 
affirmative, T/icttt says he, / shall shczo you one o, 
the most charming in the world out of my imndows 
we shall see the ships sailings and the whole country 
for twenty miles round, tip topy quite high. J/j 
Lord Swamp would give ten thousand guineas fo^ 
such a one ; but as I sometimes pleasantly tell him 
I always love to keep my prospects at home, that nt- 
friends may see me the oftener. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 243 

By this time we were arrived as high as the stairs 
would permit us to ascend, till we came to what he 
was facetiously pleased to call the first floor down 
the chimney ; and knocking at the door, a voice 
from within demanded, who's there? My con- 
ductor answered, that it was him. But this not 
satisfying the querest, the voice again repeated the 
demand : to which he answered louder than before ; 
and now the door was opened by an old woman 
with cautious reluctance. 

When we were got in, he welcomed me to his 
house with great ceremony, and turning to the old 
woman, asked where was her lady? " Good troth, 
replied she, in a peculiar dialect, she's washing 
your two shirts at the next door, because they have 
taken an oath against lending out the tub any 
longer." My two shirts, cries he in a tone that 
Altered with confusion, what does the idiot mean I 
"I ken what I mean well enough, replied the 
other, she's washing your twa shirts at the next 

door, because " Fire and fury, no more of thy 

stupid explanations, cried he, — Go and inform her 
lue have got company. Were that Scotch hag to be 
forever in the family, she would never learn polite- 
ness, nor forget that absurd poisonous accent of hers, 
or testify the smallest specimen of breeding or high 
life ; and yet it is very surprising too, as I had her 
from a parliament man, a friend of mine, from the 
highlands, one cf the politest men in the world ; but 
thafs a secret. 

We waited some time for Mrs. Tibbs* arrival, 
during which interval I had a full opportunity of 
surveying the chamber and all its furniture ; which 
consisted of four chairs with old wrought bottoms, 



M4 THE tITTZEN Of THE WORLD. 
ihat he asinred me were his wife's cmbtoideiy i : 
Kiuui- uble that had beeo onu japaoned, a cradle, 
in one comer, a lumbering cabiaet in the other ; a 
tuokcn shephmless, and b tnnndiuine without a 
liu<l, were stuck over the chimney ; and round the 
wall several paltrjr, unframed pictures, which be 
observed, were all his own drawing : Whai dt 
yoH Ihink, Sir, of Ika* head in a torner, dtmt in Iht 
manntr of Griiani t Iktn't the trut keeping in it : 
il'i ray etonfate, and though Ihert happens te bim 
likeness, a anaUess nffkrcd me an htatdred for ill 
fiUtV : I refuieJ fur, fur, hang il, that imuld U 
mtrAanieal, you knsv). 

The wife Bt lut made bcr appearance, nt oticc a 
xlaltem and a coquet ; much emaciated, but siill 
carrying the remaiux of beauty. She made tweniy 
apologies for being seen in auch odious dishabille, 
btil hoped Co be excused, as she had staid out iill 
night at the gardens with the countess, who vsi 
excessively food of the ^mu. "And, indeed, ray 
dear, added ihe, turning lo her husband, his loiil- 
ship drank your health in a bumper. " J^erjcuk, 
cries he, a dear gied-naitircd creature, / knot 
loves me ; bHl I kopt, my dear, you ktaie givm 
orders for dinner ; you n£id make no great prefara 
Hens niitier, there are btit three of ui, semelkiag 
eUgoHl, and liale viill do ; alitrbot, an ortolan, e< 

a . Or what da you Ikinh my dear, inlei 

(apta ■CtxviMe.Bf anictprettybitofoxtheek, piping 
hot, and dressed with a tittle of my aan sauce — 7h< 
very thing, replies he, it v/ill tat best ■a/ilk loeii 
smart bottled beer ; tut be sure lo let's have II 
Itaice his grace viasso/andof. 1 hate your immetvi 
loads of miai, that is country all ot/tr; tsetreme dis- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 245 

gusiing to those who are in the least (uquaintedwith 
high life. 

By this time my curiosity b^;an to abate, and 
my appetite to increase ; the company of fools may 
at first make us smile, but at last never fails of ren- 
dering us melancholy, I therefore pretended to re- 
collect a prior engagement, and after having shewn 
my respect to the house, according to the fashion 
of the English, by giving the old servant a piece of 
money at the door, I took my leave ; Mr. Tibbs 
assuring me that dinner, if I staid, would be ready 
at least in less than two hours. 




ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES 

TO VOL. I. 

Page XXV, /. 3. *^ Escobar,"** — A famous Spanish 
casuist and Jesuit, b. 1589, d. 1669. He was 
bitterly attacked in the ** Lettres Provinciales,'' 
and against him La Fontaine wrote the ballade 
having for burden — " Escobar sail un chemin de 
velours ^^^ which Mr. Andrew Lang has happily 
Englished — *'£}scobar makes a primrose path to 
heaven." 

Page XXV, /. 5. " Caramuel" — ^Also a Spanish 
controversialist, b. 1606, d. 1682. 

Page XXV, /. 9. " The same scale.** — See the 
''poetical scale" which Goldsmith published in 
the *' Literary Magazine " for January, 1758, 
where certain English poets are compared under 
the heads of "genius," "judgment," "learning," 
and " versification." 

Page xxix, /. 4. Final quotation, — ^This is from 
the " Greek Anthology," i. 80. In the Dublin 
issue of 1769 is added the following translation :«• 

" Fortnne and Hope adieu t I see my Port, 

Too long your dupe ; be others now your Sport,"— 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORI.D. 
v!u adopted by Percy in bis edition of iSoi. 
I popular Lalin version of the original, 
jtl Bins of SuittUane concludes Book ix. of 
:cl»ble adventures :— 



Pagi 3,1. 12. " apoor phihsaphiiwaHdirer."^ 
" The Philosophic Wotidetet " was ihe liUc su^es- 
tcd by Johnson for Traveller." {Forslet't 

"Life," 1871.1. 36^., 

PagnJ. 31. "o. I'A"' of painting."— 

The London signs, th.- - •) indications of housei 
before they were nurabe in 1764, would require 
ft treatise of description, ^inningham dates theil 
final dovmiall in 1766 ; . il is scarcely possible 
that Ihcy all disappei at once. "They are 
generally adom'd with ring and Gilding," says 
Misson } " and there arc several thai, with the 
Branches of Iron that support them, cost above s 
hundred Guineas." This is confirmed by tie 
■• Genllemon's MagHiine" for 177°, which says 
Ihat there were many such on Ludgate Hill. Gay 
refers to their "crealclng noise" in "Trivia," I 
158, as a sign of rain ; and Addison ("Spectator," 
a8) to their curious fauna : " Our streets are filled 
with blue boars, black swans, and red lions ; not lo 
mention flying pifi", nnd hi^s in armour." The 
blue boar has not yet been evolved ; but the black 
swan has ceased to be a rara avis. 

Page 6, I. 3. "Film Hoa«i."—l'n 1725 was 
published "Chinese Tales; or, the Wonderful 
Adventures of the Mandarine Fum Hoatn," trans- 
lated from the French, 2 voU. 34ino. 



ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES, 249 

Page 6, /. 12. ** / only drag a greater length of 
j chain,*'* — ^This thought is repeated in line 10 of 
j " The TraveUer " :— 

"And drags at each remove a lengthening chain." 

Goldsmith perhaps recollected Gibber's "When 
I am with Florimel it [my heart] is still your 

J prisoner, it only draws a longer chain after it'* 

I (** Gomical Lovers," 1707, act v.) 

Page 10, /. 30. "/ have seen a lady,'" — Gf; 
•* The Double Transformation," 1 1, 43-6 : — 

" "Hs true she dress'd with modem grace. 
Half naked at a ball or race ; 
But when at home, at board or bed, 
Five greasy night caps Mrrapp'd her head." 

Page 12, /. 27. " The soldier^'' etc.— Mr. J. W. 
M. Gibbs (Bell's edition) points out that this inci- 
dent is to be found in John Byrom's "Tom the 
Porter," where the interlocutors are the same. 
B3n'om died in 1763. 

Page 16, /. 33. " I therefore send a specimsnj** 
— There is a certain similarity between what fol- 
lows and the clever " Relations V^ritables de 
Differents Endroits d'Europe " of Anthony liamil* 
ton. (See Saintsbury's "Essays on French No- 
velists," 1891, p. 57.) 

Page 17, /. 12. '* father /«Mif«."--This name 
is obviously coined from the monosyllable after- 
wards made inmiortal by Mr. Burchell. See also 
p. 222, 1. 19. 

Page 19, /. 27. ^^Damien^* i,e, Robert Francis 
Damiens, a poor half-witted wretch who was exe- 
cuted in March, 1757, after the most horrible torture, 
for attempting to assassinate LouisXV. An account 



. ayi THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLO. 
of hi* trial wu publiihed st Paris io four vuluma, 
I2mt>. Thii was suromuiied in the " Monlhlj 
Review" fo( July, 1757, pp. S7-7S, during Ihf 
lime of Goldsmiih'* bondage to GritHLhs, ond 
pcrliaps by Goldsmiih. humetf. 

/V" '9, I- 30. " WanHd an tisArr."—Cl 
"Tho Vicar of WalielicW," 1766, ii. 4: "Cnnrou 
dreu the boys' hui? No. Then jou won't 
tot a school. H»ve you had the smiJI-pox ? '. 
Then jrou won't do for I acbool. " Cf. also "Th( 
IJee." '759> No. *. where GoWsmith is eloqneol 
npon Uahenioni. He hnd himself held this un- 
enviable pOBt in Dr. Milner's school at PeckhBnii 
which has only recently (1891) disappcwed. 
was, indeed, known as "Goldsmith's bouse." 
sketch of it was published In the " Daily Gniiduc ' 
for February nth, 1S91. 

J^gt 19, /. 3a. "lit imall-fiox." — In lien of 
this adverliaement, the followinE appeared in llit 
" Public Ledger " version o[ the Itlter :— " ENK- i 
LAND. There was a. great concourse of nobilili 
this season at Newmarket. The French are pic- i 
paring to invade us from Havre. These, however, 1 
■le only the efforts of a sinking nation ; for adminl | 
Hawke has come up with them, and drubbed then j 
heartily. There will he a great route this evening | 
at the house of her grace the dutches} of Birmicj- ', 
haro (Februnry 7, 1760)." 

Fagt so, I. 3. "the Padarttn mare."— 
"Black and All Black," the " Padnreen n 
was a famous racer. "There has been moremooej 
■pent in the encouragement of the Padarecn miR 
there [I'.r. in Ireland] one season, than given it 
reward! to learned m.eD since the times of Uiha:" 



I 



ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES, 951 

(Goldsmith to Daniel Hodson in December, I757» 
\ Prior^s " Life," i. 248.) 

I Page 29, /. 12. ** The laws are cemented with 

\ blood:'— a. Letter Ixxx., and "Vicar of Wake- 
field," 1766, ii. 122 : *' Our possessions are paled 
/ up with new edicts every day, and hung round with 
j gibbets to scare every invader." The severity of 
the penal laws was a favourite subject with Gold- 
smith. See also "Rambler," April 20th, 1751, 
and "London," 1738, 11. 238-43, for Johnson's 
opinions on the same theme. 

Page 41, /. 10. " he should lU in stated — Cf. 
"The Good Natur'd Man," act i. : " We shall see 
something that will give us a good deal of pleasure, 
I promise you; old Ruggins, the curry-comb maker, 
lying in state ; I'm told he makes a very handsome 
corpse." Hogarth satirized funeral ceremonial in 
Plate VI. of "A Harlot's Progress." 

Page ^^ /. 7. "Mtf employment of his whole 
life to deserve 1/."— Cf. "The Vicar of Wakefield," 
1 766, i. II: "I wrote a similar epitaph for my wife, 
though still living, in which I extpUed her pru- 
dence, oeconomy, and obedience till death. . . . 
It admonished my wife of her duty to me, and my 
fidelity to her ; it inspired her with a passion for 
£une, and constantly put her in mind of her end." 
Page 46, /. 1 2. " one Pope, is he there / " — Pope, 
in pursuance of the directions in his will, was 
buried in Tvrickenham Church, near the monument 
to his parents. Seventeen years after his death in 
May, 1744 (and consequently after the date of Lien 
Chi's letter), Warburton erected a monument to 
him, and, in " direct violation of the wishes and 
feelings of Pope as expressed in his will," added 



■)• THE CITIZEX OF THE It'OKLD. 
Ihe fallaving qualnin, penned hy the poet in 



Who Mva Outn-'d Folks like you ; 
Let Honux bliuh ud Vic^i mo. " 

Fagt ^6, /. n. " Ikty semcwhat reunbli Ik 
iWB«*f."— This is borrowed from ihe last lindd 
a hmlaiH Isunchcil by M. Alexis Pitoa agaiiut A> 
•1)W Pes Fontaines : — 

"Cat I'eunuque u milieu da i^niil : 

Pagt SI, /. 3. " sanKlhingiuss.'' — Eorle, " En(- 
lisb Prose," 1890, p. 211, Tnentions this ongUciniij 
of "jc ne sail quoi " as a coinage of Goldsmili. 

Pngf S*. '■ 4- " ""^ Chinrse temple.'"— h 
1?S7, not long before this letter wns wriller, Sii 
William Chambers had published his " Desipii 
of Chinese Buildings," a taste which he iifto- 
wa.rds carried out Id those "lowers of Kew"le 
which Goldsmilh refers in the " Thrcnodia Augai- 
talis." In 1773 be published a " Dissertoti* 
on Oriental Gardening," which, among olhB 
adverse publications, called forth the famouj 
"Heroic Epistle" addressed to btm by Maio 
and (it isEuspecled) Horace Walpole. His Chinta 
architecture was greatly ridiculed ; and hisfaoiiw 
Kew pagoda is considered to be but a poor coi^^ol 
Ihe nine-storeyed edifices of the Flowery Lind. 

Fb^Sl-'- (>■ " '^' /to^."— Cf. Prior's "Alms,' 



ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES, 053 

" Choose then, good Pope, at home to stay, 

Nor westward curious take thy way : 

Thy way unhappy shouldst thou take , 

From Tyber*! bank to Leman lake ; . . . 

Thy sex is lost ; thy town is gone, 

No longer Rome, but Babylon." 

Page 62, /. 3. " a very destructive war** — ^The 
war of 1756-63 with France, which was raging 
when this letter was Written, arose out of the in- 
determinate state in which the French and British 
interests in North America had been left in 1748 
by the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle. 

Page 67, /. 2. ** one perpetual anastomosis.** — 
This is probably a memory of Goldsmith's medical 
studies imder ^exander Monro at Edinburgh, and 
signifies, ** in the language of anatomy," a junction, 
or — as Johnson has it — ^an ** inosculation " of blood- 
vessels. 

Page 70, /. 29. " to find contentment, ** — " This 
story," says Charles* Knight's annotator, " was 
translated into French by P^re Dentrecolles, a 
French Jesuit missionary in China in the seven- 
teenth century. Voltaire has made some use of it 
in ' Zadig.'" An abstract of the original tale is 
given in Davis's '* Chinese," 1845, ii 194-208. It 
was rendered fully in 1872 by Dr. Samuel Birch. 

Page 75, /. 26. ** Cardanus orBrunus" Car- 
danus, an Italian physician of the sixteenth cen- 
tury ; — Brunus = Giordano Bruno. * 

Page 76, /. 29. " citiuns of the zvorld.**—This 
is the first mention of the subsequent title of these 
letters. See also p. 92, IL 3 and 10. 

Page 85, /. 4. " / Aave absolutely forgotten,**— 
The play intended was probably Home's ' ' Douglas, " 



•54 THE CmZEH OF THE WORLD. 

which, as stated in the " Introdaction," Goldsmith 
had noticed in the " Monthly Review " for May, 

1757. 
Page 85, /. 27. " istayU^an kmndred obstacles* 

— This seems to be used in the sense of "ex- 
periencing." Perhaps it is a recollection of the 
French "essuyer." 

Pagt 102, /. 3. ** a JUn^rishing empire J*^(X 
•• The Deserted VUlage," 11. 265-8. 

Page 107, L 3. "uir AM/«»y."— See «« Intro- 
duction," pp. zvii-xiz. It is quite like Goldsmith 
to make his " man in black" say that he "gene- 
rally dressed in brown ** (p. 109, L 14). 

Page 124, L 13. ^*ke proceeded.** — The first 
form of these verses is in a letter written to the 
Rev. Henry Goldsmith in 1759 (Percy, " Memoir," 
1 801, pp. 53-9) ; in their last form they appear in 
** The Deserted Village," 11. 227-36. 

Page 141, /. 25. " the mountains** — This is on 
excellent parody of the cheap Orientalism in vogue 
among those who, as Pope wrote to Arbuthnot, 
"turned a Persian tale for half-a-crown. " See 
the account at p. 121, I. 19, of that ** very useful 
hand," Mr. Tibs (a different person, by the way, 
from the inimitable little Beau). 

Page 164, /. 23. *M man of the first quality, ^^ 
— Lawrence Shirley, Earl Ferrers, who was hung 
at Tyburn 5th May, 1760, for the murder of his 
land-steward. 

Page 166, /. 12. ** a third time he was 
pardoned,** — The person referred to, who is named 
in the ** Contents," was the Comte de Charolais. 
** Louis XV. is reported to have told him when he 
came to solicit letter of grace for another wanton 



ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES. 255 

murder of a fellow-creature, that the pardon of 
whoever should kill the Count himself would be 
more readily granted." (Knight's Annotator.) 

Page 168, /. 6, ^^ Ranelagh*'* was opened in 
May, 1742, and by this time was far more 
fashionable than Vauxhall Gardens. Walpole was 
converted to it ; Lord Chesterfield liked it so much 
that he had his letters directed there ; but Smollett 
seems to have remained cold to the attractions 
of its famous Rotunda. " What are the amuse- 
ments of Ranelagh? " asks Mr. Bramble. " One 
half of the company are following one another's 
tails, in an eternal circle, like so many blind asses 
in an olive-mill, where they can neither discourse; 
distinguish, nor be distingubhed ; while the other 
half are drinking hot water, under the denomina- 
tion of tea, till nine or ten o'clock at night, to 
keep them awake for the rest of the evening." 
(" Humphry CUnker.") 

Page 168, /. 13. ** a pair-royal of naturals ** 
A point in the now forgotten game of basset. 

Page 172, /. 8. **/A^ race of their poets is ex- 
tinct" — Gray, Beattie, and Churchill were the 
poets of 1760. Smollett and Johnson had pub- 
lished no verse for some years. 

Page 174, /. 9. *^ Fancy restraisied,^* etc.^ 
Goldsmith had already used this simile in the 
••Present State of Polite Learning," 1759, p. 
151 : "Fancy, like a fountain, plays highest by 
diminishing the aperture." Montaigne, book i., 
chap. XXV., has the same idea ''writ large": 
" And touching bookes : Historie is my chiefe 
studie, Poesie my only delight, to which I am 
particularly affected : for as Cleanthes said, that 



■jt THE CITIZEV OF THE WORLD. 
U th« voice being forciblie peat in the ni 
fullGl of a tiumpel, al last issueth faith mon 
Itront; and shriller, lo mr* scfmes, that a lei 
Onnniiiglj and closely couched in measure -kecpins 
Posie.darti it Klfc forth moiefuriously, and wound) 
me «ven to the quicke." (Florio's translation, 
Uoiky's reprint of iSS6.) 

yV 183, /. 18. "' /Vflurf" waa not difidoi 
tmiil i77>- 

Pitgt 184, /. 8. Vallaire did noi die until Wy, 
177N. Goldsmith had written his "MeinoiR"in 
the " Lady's Mngaiine " for 1761. 

/•agi 186, I. IS- "■ fagtdy tithUh drnnm 
affhuii."—" lEJipe^" 

fagi 187. /. II. "cf kit lister." — Vollaiie'i 
oorcespondciU, WUhelniina, Mai^ravioe of Bni- 
leuth. 

Pt^ 191, /. 16. " immidiatt gratificiUim^' 
— Bolween Ihcse words in the liisl edition of 17(1 
come the following, omilled in the edition of 1774 
by a printer's error ! *' employmenl, naturally le 
cart to the past or the future 1 (he reJtector find 
that he was happy, nn'd kno<«-E that he cannot be s 
now; he sees that he may yet be happy, nnd 
wishes the hour was come ; thus every period ol 
hia eonlinuance is miserable, except that very 
■hort one of innuediate gratification. " 

Fiigt 195, /. 16. "a litken rapt." — See noti 
pagi: 164, 1. 23. Whether the rope wai silke 
doubtful (cf, p. 196, 1. j) ; but Watpole says the 
executioners fuuehl foF it, and the one who lost il 
cried. [Letter to Sir Horace Mann, 7th May, 
T760, — a long account of Lord Ferrerc and his 
execution). 




ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES. 257 

Page 197, /. 4. ^* between his ioes^ — Gold- 
smith's painter may have been imaginary. But 
see the account in Paget's '* Paradoxes and 
Puzzles," 1874, pp. 447-9, of M. Charles Felu, 
the well-known Antwerp artist, who notwithstand- 
ing the lack of arms, was a really capable copyist 
of the old masters. 

Page 224, /. 7. '* the review of reviews,^"* — 
From this it would appear that a notable enter- 
prise of our own day had its prototype in 1760. 

Page 226, /. 28. " The door must either ^^^ etc. 
— Lien Chi is quoting a French proverb which De 
Musset took for the title of a charming little 
comedy. Goldsmith's " Chinese Philosopher " 
must have been deeply imbued with Gallic litera- 
ture, for at p. 237, L 7, he paraphrases ** Reculer 
pour mieux sauter," 

Page 232, /. 7. "How often J* — The first para- 
graphs of this letter, as shown by the addition of 
the name in the *' Contents," were aimed at 
Sterne's "Tristram Shandy," two volumes of 
which had been published at this date. 

Page 234, /. 34. " Tom £>uffey,"—Thc " face- 
tious" author of "Wit and Mirth; or, Pills to 
Purge Melancholy." 

Page 237, /. 28. " Our pursuer." — According 
to Mr. Forster the original of this excellent 
character was supposed to be one Thornton, for- 
merly an officer in the army. ("Life," 1871, i. 262.) 



I. 




CHISWICK PKISS:— C. WHITTINCMAM AND Ca, TOOKS 
COURT, CHAKCflOtT LANS. 



The borrower must return this item on or before 
the iasi date stamped below. If another user 
places a recall for this item, the borrower will 
be nolified of the need for an earlier return. 

Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt 
the borrower from overdue fines. 



Harvard College Widener Library 
Cambridee. MA 02 138 617-495-2413 



_, WIDFNER 

LETTER LVI. 

From Fum Noam t» Altangi, the discontefUed 

wanderer, 

iHE distant sounds of music that catch 
new sweetness as they vibrate through 
the long drawn valley, are not more 
pleasing to the ear than the tidings of a 
far distant friend. 

I have just received two hundred of thy letters 
by the Russian caravan, descriptive of the manners 
of Europe. You have left it to geographers to de- 
termine the size of their mountains, and extent of 
their lakes, seeming only employed in discovering 
the genius, the government, and disposition of the 
people. 

II. B 




2 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

In those letters I perceive a journal of the opera- 
tions of your mind upon whatever occurs, rather 
than a detail of your travels from one building to 
another ; of your taking a draught of this ruin, or 
that obelisk ; of paying so many Tomans for this 
commodity, or laying up a proper store for the 
passage of some new wilderness. 

From your accounts of Russia I leam, that this 
nation is again relaxing into pristine barbarity, that 
its great emperor wanted a life of an hundred years 
more to bring about his vast design. A savage 
people may be resembled to their own forests ; a 
few years are sufficient to clear away the obstruc- 
tions to agriculture ; but it requires many ere the 
ground acquires a proper degree of fertility ; the 
Russians, attached to their ancient prejudices, 
again renew their hatred to strangers, and indulge 
every former brutal excess. So true it is, that the 
revolutions of wisdom are slow and difficult, the 
revolutions of folly or ambition precipitate and easy. 
We are not to be astonished^ says Confucius,^ that 
the wise walk more slowly in their road to virtue^ 
than fools in their passage to vice ; since passion 
drags us along, while wisdom only points out the 
way. 

The German empire, that remnant of the majesty 
of ancient Rome, appears from your account on the 
eve of dissolution. The members of its vast body 
want every tie of government to unite them, and 
seem feebly held together only by their respect for 

1 Though this fine maxim be not found in the Latin 
edition of the morals of Confucius, yet we find it ascribed 
to him by Le Comte, Etat present de la Chine. Vol. I. 
p. 343. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 3 

ancient institutions. The veiy name of country 
and countrymen, v^hich in other nations makes 
one of the strongest bonds of government, has been 
here for some time laid aside, each of its inhabitants 
seeming more proud of being called from the petty 
state which gives him birth, than by the more well 
known title of German. 

This government may be regarded in the light of 
a severe master, and a feeble opponent The states 
which are now subject to the laws of the empire, 
are only watching a pn^r occasion to fling off the 
yoke, and those which are become too powerful to 
be compelled to obedience, now begin to think of 
dictating in their turn. The struggles in this state 
are therefore not in order to preserve but to destroy 
the ancient constitution ; if one side succeeds, the 
government must become despotic, if the other, 
several states will subsist without nominal subordi- 
nation, but in either case the Germanic constitution 
will be no more. 

Sweden, on the contrary, though now seemingly 
a strenuous assertor of its liberties, ^s probably 
only hastening on to despotism. Their senators, 
while they pretend to vindicate the freedom of the 
people, are only establishing their own indepen- 
dence. The deluded people will however at last 
perceive the miseries of an aristocratical govern- 
ment ; they will perceive that the administration of 
a society of men is ever more painful than that of 
one only. They will fly from this most oppressive 
of all forms, where one single member is capable 
of controlling the whole, to take refuge under the 
throne which will ever be attentive to their com- 
plaints. No people long endure an aristocratical 



4 THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD, 

goverament, when they could apply elsewhere for 
redress. The lower orders of people may be en- 
slaved for a time by a number of tyrants, but upon 
the first opportunity they will ever take a refuge in 
despotism or democracy. 

As the Swedes are making concealed approaches 
to despotism, the French, on the other hand, are 
imperceptibly vindicating themselves into freedom. 
When I consider that those parliaments (the mem- 
bers of which are all created by the court, the 
presidents of which can act only by immediate 
direction) presume even to mention privileges and 
freedom, who, till of late, received directions from 
the throne with implicit humility; when this is 
considered, I cannot help fancying that the genius 
of freedom has entered that kingdom in disguise. 
Jf they have but three weak monarchs more, suc- 
cessively on the throne, the mask will be laid aside, 
and the country will certainly once more be free. 

When I compare the figure which the Dutch 
make in Europe with that they assume in Asia, I 
am struck with surprize. In Asia, I find them the 
great Lords of all the Indian seas ; in Europe the 
timid inhabitants of a paltry state. No longer the 
sons of freedom, but of avarice ; no longer assertors 
of their rights by courage, but by n^otiations ; 
fawning on those who insult them, and crouching 
imder the rod of every neighbouring power. With- 
out a friend to save them in distress, and without 
virtue to save themselves ; their government is 
poor, and their private wealth will serve to invite 
some neighbouring invader. 

I long with impatience for your letters from 
England, Denmark, Holland, and Italy ; yet why 



THR CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 5 

wish for relations which only describe new calami- 
ties, which shew that ambition and avarice are 
equally terrible in every region. Adieu. 




LETTER LVII. 

From Lien Chi Altangi^ to Fum Hoam^ first Pred- 
dent of the Ceremonial Academy at Pekin^ in 
China. 

HAVE frequently admired the manner 
of criticising in China, where the learned 
are assembled in a body to judge of 
every new publication ; to examine the 
merits of the work without knowing the circum- 
stances of the author, atid then to usher it into the 
world with proper marks of respect or reprobation. 
In England there are no such tribunals erected ; 
but if a man thinks proper to be a judge of genius, 
few will be at the pains to contradict his preten- 
sions. If any choose to be critics, it is but saying 
they are critics ; and from that time forward they 
become invested with full power and authority over 
every caitifF who aims at their instruction or enter- 
tainment. 

As almost every member of society has by this 
means a vote in literary transactions ; it is no way 
surprizing to find the rich leading the way here as 
in other common concerns of life, to see them either 
bribing the numerous herd of voters by their interest, 
or brow-beating them by their authority. 

A great man says, at his table, that such a book 
is fto bcut thing. Immediately the praise is carried 



6 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

off by five flatterers to be dispersed at twelve diffe- 
rent coffee-houses, from whence it circulates, still 
improving as it proceeds, through forty-five houses, 
where cheaper liquors are sold ; from thence it is 
carried away by the honest tradesman to his own 
fire-side, where the applause is eagerly caught up 
by his wife and children who have been long taught 
to regard his judgment as the standard of perfection. 
Thus when we have traced a wide extended literary 
reputation up to its original source, we shall find 
it derived from some great man, who has, perhaps, 
received all his education and English from a tutor 
of Berne, or a dancing-master of Picardy. 

The English are a people of good sense ; and I 
am the more surprized to find them swayed in their 
opinions, by men who often from their very educa- 
tion, are incompetent judges. Men who being 
always bred in affluence, see the world only on one 
side, are surely improper judges of human nature ; 
they may indeed describe a ceremony, a pageant or 
a ball ; but how can they pretend to dive into the 
secrets of the human heart, who have been nursed 
up only in forms, and daily behold nothing but the 
same insipid adulation smiling upon every face. 
Few of them have been bred in that best of schools, 
the school of adversity ; and by what I can learn, 
fewer still have been bred in any school at all. 

From such a description one would think, that a 
droning duke, or a dowager duchess, was not pos- 
sessed of more just pretensions to taste than persons 
of less quality ; and yet whatever the one or the 
other may write or praise, shall pass for perfection, 
without farther examination. A nobleman has but 
to take a pen, ink, and paper, write away through 



THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD, 7 

three laige volumes, and then s^ his name to the 
title page, though the whole might have heen before 
more disgusting than his own rent-roll, yet signing 
his name and title gives value to the deed ; title 
being alone equivalent to taste, imagination, and 
genius. 

As soon as a piece therefore is published the first 
questions are. Who is the author? Does he keep 
a coach ! Where lies his estate I What sort of a 
table does he keep? If he happens to be poor and 
unqualified for such a scrutiny, he and his works 
sink into irremediable obscurity ; and too late he 
finds, that having fed upon Turtle is a more ready 
way to &une than having digested Tnlly. 

The poor devil, against whom fiishion has set its 
face, vainly all^^es, that he has been bred in every 
port of Europe where knowledge was to be sold ; 
that he has grown pale in the study of Nature and 
himself ; his works may please upon the perusal, 
but his pretensions to fame are entirely disregarded ; 
he is treated like a fiddler, whose music, though 
liked, is not much praised, because he lives by it ; 
while a gentleman performer, though the most 
wretched scraper alive, throws the audience into 
raptures. The fiddler indeed may in such a case 
console himself by thinking, that while the other 
goes off with all the praise, he runs away with all 
the money : but here the parallel drops ; for while 
the nobleman triumphs in unmerited applause, the 
author by profession, steals ofi* with — Nothing, 

The poor, therefore, here, who draw their pens 
auxiliary to the laws of their country, must think 
themselves very happy if they find, not fame but 
forgiveness ; and yet they are hardly treated ; for 



8 THB CITIZEN OF THE IVORLD. 

as every country grows more polite, the prass be- 
comes more useful ; and writers become more neces- 
sary, as readers are supposed to increase. In a 
poUshed society, that man, though in rags, who 
has the power of enforcing virtue from the press, is 
of more real use than forty stupid brachmans or 
bonzes, or guebres, though they preached never so 
often, never so loud, or never so long. That man, 
though in rags, who is capable of deceiving even 
indolence into Mrisdom, and who professes amuse- 
ment while he aims at reformation, is more useful 
in refined society than twenty cardinals with all 
their scarlet, and tricked out in all the fopperies of 
scholastic finery. 




LETTER LVIII. 
To the same. 

[S the man in black takes every oppor- 
tunity of introducing me to such com- 
pany as may serve to indulge my specula- 
tive temper, or gratify my curiosity, I 
was by his influence lately invited to a visitation 
dinner. To understand this term, you must know, 
that it waa formerly the custom here for the princi- 
pal priests to go about the country once a year, 
and examine upon the spot whether those of subordi- 
nate orders did their duty, or were qualified for the 
task ; whether their temples were kept in proper 
rq)aiK„oK the laity pleased with their administration. 
Though a visitation of this nature was very useful. 



THS CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, f 

yet it was found to be extremely troublesome, and 
for many reasons utterly inconvenient ; for as the 
principal priests were obliged to attend at court, in 
order to solicit preferment, it was impossible they 
could at the same time attend in the country, 
which was quite out of the road to promotion : if 
we add to this the gout, which has been time 'mt< 
memorial a derical disorder here, together with 
the bad wine, and ill dressed provisions that must 
infiUlibly be served up by the way, it was not strange 
that the custom has been long discontinued. At 
present, therefore, every head of the church, instead 
of going about to visit his priests, is satisfied if his 
priests come in a body once a year to visit him ; by 
this means the duty of half a year is despatched in 
a day. When assemUed, he asks each in his turn 
how they have behaved, and are liked ; upon which, 
those who have neglected their duty, or are dis- 
agreeable to their congr^ation, no doubt accuse 
themselves, and tell him all their £euilts ; for which, 
he reprimands them most severely. 

The thoughts of beii^ introduced into a company 
of philosophers and learned men, (for such I con- 
ceived them) gave me no small pleasure ; I ex« 
pected our entertainment would resemble those 
sentimental banquets so finely described by Xeno^ 
phon and Plato ; I was hoping some Socrates 
would be Ixrought in from the door, in order to 
harangue upon divine love ; but as for eating and 
drinking I had prepared myself to be disappointed 
in that particular. I was apprized, that fasting 
and temperance were tenets strongly recommended 
to the professors of Christianity ; and I had seen 
the frugality and mortification of the priests of 



xo THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

the east ; so that I expected an entertainment 
where we should have much reasonmg, and little 
meat. 

Upon being introduced, I confess I found no 
great signs of mortification in the faces or persons 
of the company. However, I imputed their florid 
looks to temperance, and their corpulency to a 
sedentary way of living. I saw several preparations 
indeed for dinner, but none for philosophy. The 
company seemed to gaze upon the table with silent 
expectation ; but this I easily excused. Men of 
wbdom, thought I, are ever slow of speech ; they 
deliver nothing unadvbedly. Silence^ says Con- 
fucius, is a friend that will never betray. They 
are now probably inventing maxims, or hard say- 
ings, for their mutual instruction, when some one 
shall think proper to begin. 

My curiosity was now wrought up to the highest 
pitch ; I impatiently looked round to see if any 
were going to interrupt the mighty pause ; when, 
at last, one of the company declared, that there 
was a sow in his neighbourhood that farrowed fifteen 
pigs at a litter. This I thought a very preposterous 
beginning : but just as another was going to second 
the remark, dinner was served, which interrupted 
the conversation for that time. 

The appearance of dinner, which consisted of a 
variety of dishes, seemed to diffuse new cheerful- 
ness upon every face ; so that I now expected the 
philosophical conversation to begin, as they im- 
proved in gopd humour. The principal priest, 
however, opened his mouth, with only observing, 
that the venison had not been kept enough, though 
he had given strict orders for having it killed ten 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. x\ 

days before. Ifear^ continued he, it will be found 
to want the true heathy flavour ; you will find 
nothing of the original wildness in it» A priest, 
who sate next him, having smelt it and wiped his 
nose : " Ah, my good lord, cries he, yon axe too 
modest, it is perfectly fine ; every body knows that 
no body understands keepii^ venison with your 
lordship." "Ay, and partridges too, interrupted 
another ; I never find them right any where else." 
His lordship was going to reply, when a third took 
off the attention of the company, by recommending 
the pig as inimitable. *' I fancy, my lord, con- 
tinues he, it has been smothered in its own blood. " 
*' If it has been smothered in its blood, cried a 
£eicetioas member, helping himself, well now 
smother it in egg sauce." This poignant piece of 
humour produced a long loud laugh, which the 
facetious brother observing, and now that he was 
in luck, willing to second his blow, assured the 
company he would tell them a good story about 
that : '* As good a story, cries he, bursting into a 
violent fit of laughter himself, as ever you heard in 
your lives ; there was a farmer of my parish, who 
used to sup upon wild ducks and flummery ; so this 
farmer — Doctor Marrowfat , cries his lordship, inter- 
rupting him, give me leave to drink your health -*- 
so being fond of wild ducks and flummery — Doctor , 
adds a gentleman who sate next him, let me advise 
to a Ttnng of this turkey ; — so this farmer being 
fond — Hob nobf Doctor^ which do you chuse, white 
or re i? — So being fond of wild ducks and flummery ; 
— take care of your batuly Sir, it may dip in the 
gravy. The Doctor, now looking round, found 
not a single eye disposed to listen ; wherefore calling 



la THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

for a gloss of wine, he gulped down the disappoint- 
ment and the tale in a bumper. 

The conversation now begaA to be little more 
than a rhapsody of exclamations; as each had 
pretty well satisfied his own appetite, he now found 
suiEcient time to press others. ExcelUnt^ the very 
thing ; let me recommend the pig^ do but taste the 
bctcon ; never eat a better thing in my Hfe ; exquisite, 
deiicious. This edifying discourse continued through 
three courses, which lasted as many hours, till 
every one of the company were unable to swallow 
or utter any thing more. 

It is very natural for men who are abridged in 
one excess, to break into some other. The clergy 
here, particularly those who are advanced in years, 
think if they are abstemious with regard to women 
and wine, they may indulge their other appetites 
vdthout censure. Thus some are found to rise in 
the morning only to a consultation with their cook 
about dinner, and when that has been swallowed, 
make no other use of their faculties (if they have 
any) but to ruminate on the succeeding meat 

A debauch in wine is even more pardonable than 
this, since one glass insensibly leads on to another, 
and instead of sateing whets the appetite. The 
progressive steps to it are cheerful and seducing ; 
the grave are animated, the melancholy relieved, 
and there is even classic authority to countenance 
the excess. But in eating after Nature is once 
satisfied every additional morsel brings stupidity 
and distempers with it, and as one of their own 
poets expresses it, 

Th« soul subsides, and wickedly inclines, 
To seem but mortal, even in sound divines. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 13 

Let me suppose, after such a meal as this I have 
been describing, while all the company are sitting 
in lethargic silence round the table, grunting under 
a load of soup, pig, pork, and bacon ; let me sup- 
pose, I say, some hungry beggar, with looks of 
want, peeping through one of the windows, and 
thus addressing the assembly. Prithee, pluck ihoss 
napkins from your chins ; after Nature is kH^ied 
all that you eat extraordinary is mypropertjti and 
I claim it as mine. It weu given you in order to 
relieve me^ ctnd not to'oppress yourselves. How can 
they comfort or instruct others who can scarce feel 
their oum exist ena, except from the unsavoury re- 
turns of an ill digested maid. But though neither 
you nor the cushions you sit upon will hear me, yet 
the world regards the excesses of its teachers with a 
prying eye, and notes their conduct with double 
sooerity, I know no other answer any one of the 
com p any could make to such an expostulation, but 
this : *' Friend, you talk of our lodng a character, 
and being disliked by the world ; weU» and sup- 
posing all this to be true, what then ! who cares 
for the world ? We'll preach for the world, and 
the world shall pay us for preaching, whether we 
like each other or not" 




14 THE CITIZES OF THE WORLD. 



LETTER LIX. 
From Ilingpo to Lun Chi Altangi^ by tk€ wc^ of 

)OU wfll probably be pleased to we my 
letter dated from Terki, a city which 
lies beyond the bound of the Pecdan 
empire: here, blessed with security, 
with all that is dear, I doable my laptmes, by 
communicating them to you ; the mind sym- 
pathiadng with the freedom of the body, my whole 
soul is dilated in gratitude, love, and praise. 

Vet were my own happiness all that inspired my 
present joy, my raptures might justly merit the im- 
putation of self-interest ; but when I think that the 
beautiful ZelLs is also free, forgive my triumph 
when I boast of having rescued from captirity dw 
most deserving object upon earth. 

You remember the reluctance she testified at 
being obliged to marry the t}Tant she hated. Her 
compliance at last was only feigned, in order to 
gain time to try some future means of ^ifape. 
During the interval between her promise and the 
intended performance of it, she came undiscovered 
one evening to the place where I generally retired 
after the fatigues of the day ; her appearance was 
like that of an aerial genius, when it descends to 
minister comfort to undeserved distress ; the mild 
lustre of her eye served to banish my timidity ; her 
accents were sweeter than the echo of some dist- 
symphony. ** Unhappy stranger, said she, r 
Persian language, you here perceive one 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

wretched than thyself; all diis solcniiiitj of 
paiatioD, this degance of dress, and die modber of 
loy attendants, serve bat to cncrease my ihnirs ; 
if you have cooiage to lescne an unhappy w o auj i 
from approachii^ nun, and our detested tysmt, 
}'oa may depend upon my fbtnre giatitwir." I 
bowed to the groond, and die left me, fiUcd with 
rapture and astonishment. Nig^ braog^ nae no 
rest, nor could the ensning momii^ calm die 
anxieties of my mind. I projected a thmwaiid 
methods for her defiveiy ; but each, iHien strictly 
examined, appeared impracticable ; in this moer* 
tainty the evenii^ again arrived, and I plaoed my> 
self on my former statkn in hopes of a repeated 
visit. After some short expectation, the fac^^ 
perfection 2^;ain appeared ; I bowed, as before, to 
the ground ; when raising me up die observed, 
that the time was not to be spent in useless cere- 
mony ; she observed that the day £;^]owing was 
appointed for the celebration of her nuptials, and 
that something was to be done that very night for 
our mutual deliverance. I offered with the utmost 
humility to pursue whatever scheme she should 
direct ; upon which she proposed that instant to 
scale the garden wall, adding, that she had pre- 
vailed upon a female slave, who was now waiting 
at the appointed place, to assist her with a bdder. 
Pursuant to this information I led her trembling 
to the place appointed ; but instead of the slave we 
expected to see, Mostadad himself was there await- 
ing our arrival ; the wretch in whom we confided, 
it seems, had betrayed our design to her master, 
and he now saw the most convincing proofs of her 
information. He was just going to draw his sabre. 



x6 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

when a principle of avarice repressed his iury, and 
he resolved, after a severe chastisement, to dispose 
of me to another master, in the mean time ordering 
me to be confined in the strictest manner, and the 
next day to receive an hundred blows on the soles 
of my feet. 

When the morning came I was led out in order 
to receive the punishment, which, from the severity 
with which it is generally inflicted upon slaves, is 
worse even than death. 

A trumpet was to be a signal for the solemniza- 
tion of the nuptials of Zelis, and for the infliction 
of my punishment Each ceremony to me equally 
dreadful were just going to begin, when we were 
informed that a large party of Circassian Tartars 
had invaded the town, and were laying all in ruin. 
Every person now thought only of saving himself; 
I instantly unloosed the cords with which I was 
bound, and seizing a scymetar from one of the 
slaves who had not courage to resist rat^ flew to the 
women's apartment where Zelis was confined, 
dressed out for the intended nuptials. I bade 
her follow me without delay ; and going forwaid^ 
cut my way through eunuchs, who made but a 
fiunt resistance. The whole city wits now a scene 
of conflagration and terror; every person was 
willing to save himself, unmindful of others. In 
this confusion seizing upon two of the fleetest 
coursers in the stables of Mostadad, we fled north- 
ward towards the kingdom of Circassia. As there 
were several others flying in the same manner^ we 
passed without notice, and in three days arrived at 
Terki, a city that lies in a valley within the bosom 
of the frowning mountains of Caucasus. 



THE CITIZEN OF TH^ WORLD, 17 

Here, free from every apprehension of danger, 
we enjoy all those satisfactions which are consistent 
with virtue ; though I find my heart at intervals 
give way to unusual passions, yet such is my 
admiration for my fair companion, that I lose even 
tenderness in distant respect. Though her person 
demands particular regard even among the beauties 
of Circassia, yet is her mind far more lovely. How 
vexy different is a woman who thus has cultivated 
her understanding, and been refined into delicacy 
of sentiment, from the daughters of the east, whose 
education is only formed to improve the person, 
and make them more tempting objects of prostitu- 
tion ! Adieu. 




LETTER LX. 

From Hingpo to Lien Chi AUangi^ by the way 

cf Moscow, 

HEN sufficiently refreshed after the 
fatigues of our precipitate flight, my 
curiosity, which had been restrained 
by the appearance of immediate danger, 
now began to revive : I longed to know by what 
distressful accidents my isSx fugitive became a 
captive, and could not avoid testifying a surprize 
how so much beauty could be involved in the 
calamities from whence she had been so lately 
rescued. 

Talk not of personal charms, cried she with 
emotion, since to them I owe every misfortune : 
look round on the numberless beauties of the 
II. c 



\\ 



x8 T//E CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

country where we are ; and see how Nature has 
poured its charms upon every face, and yet by this 
profusion heaven would seem to shew how little it 
regards such a blessing, since the gift is lavished 
upon a nation of prostitutes. 

I perceive you desire to know my story, and 
your curiosity is not so great as my impatience to 
gratify it : I find a pleasure m telling past mis- 
fortunes to any, but when my deliverer is pleased 
with the relation, my pleasure is prompted by 
duty. 

I ^ was bom in a country far to the west, where 
the men are braver, and the women more fair than 
those of Circassia ; where the valour of the hero is 
guided by wisdom, and where delicacy of senti- 
ment points the shafts of female beauty. I was 
the only daughter of an officer in the army, the 
child of his age, and as he used fondly to express 
it, the only chain that bound him to the world, or 
made his life pleasing. His station procured him 
an acquaintance with men of greater rank of for- 
tune than himself, and his regard for me induced 
him to bring me into every family where he was 
acquainted : Thus I was early taught all the ele- 
gancies and fashionable foibles of such as the world 
calls polite, and though without fortune myself, 
was taught to despise those who lived as if they 
were poor. 

My intercourse with the great, and my affecta- 
tion of grandeur procured me many lovers : but 

1 This story bears a striking similitude to the real history 
of Miss S d who accompanied Lady W e, in her re- 
treat near Florence, and which the editor had from her own 
mouth. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 19 

want of fortune deterred *them all from any other 
views than those of passing the present moment 
agreeaUy, or of meditating my future ruin. In 
every company I found myself addressed in a 
wumer strain of passion, than other ladies who 
were superior in point of rank and beauty ; and 
this I imputed to an excess of respect, which in 
reality proceeded from very different motives. 

Among the number of such as paid me their 
addresses, was a gentleman, a Mend of my fJEUher, 
rather in the decline of life, with nothing remark- 
able either in his person or address to recommend 
him. His age which was about forty, his fortune 
which was moderate, and barely sufficient to sup- 
port him, served to throw me off my guard, so 
that I considered him as the only sincere admirer 
I had. 

Designing lovers in the decline of life are ever 
most dangerous. Skilled in all the weaknesses of 
the sex, they seize each favourable opportunity, 
and by having less passion than youthful admirers, 
have less real respect, and therefore less timidity. 
This insidious wretch used a thousand arts to suc- 
ceed in his base designs, all which I saw, but 
imputed to different views, because I thought it 
absurd to believe the real motives. 

As he continued to frequent my father's, the 
friendship between them became every day greater ; 
and at last from the intimacy with which he was 
received, I was taught to look upon him as a guar- 
dian and a friend. Though I never loved, yet I 
esteemed him ; and this was enough to make me 
wish for an union, for which he seemed desirous, 
but to which he feigned seyeral delays ; while in 



90 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

the mean time, from a &lse report of our being 
married, every other admirer forsook me. 

I was at last however awakened from the delu- 
sion, by an account of his being just married to 
another young lady with a considerable fortune. 
This was no great mortification to me, as I had 
always regarded him merely from prudential mo- 
tives ; but it had a very different effect upon my 
father, who, rash and passionate by Nature, and 
besides stimulated by a mbtaken notion of military 
honour, upbraided his friend in such terms, that a 
challenge was soon given and accepted. 

It was about midnight when I was awakened by 
a message from my father, who desired to see me 
that moment I rose with some surprize, and fol- 
lowing the messenger, attended only by another 
servant, came to a field not far from the house, 
where I found him, the assertor of my honour, my 
only friend and supporter, the tutor and com- 
panion of my youth, lying on one side covered over 
with blood, and just expiring. No tears streamed 
down my cheeks, nor sigh escaped from my breast, 
at an object of such terror. I sat down, and sup- 
porting his aged head in my lap, gazed upon the 
ghastly visage with an agony more poignant even 
than despairing madness. The servants were gone 
for more assistance. In this gloomy stillness of 
the night no sounds were heard but his agonizing 
respirations ; no object was presented but his 
wounds, which still continued to stream. With 
silent anguish I hung over his dear face, and with 
my hands strove to stop the blood as it flowed 
from his wounds; he seemed at first insensible, 
but at last turning his dying eyes upon me, *' My 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, ai 

dear^ dear child, cried he, dear, though you have 
forgotten your own honour and stained mine, I 
will yet forgive you ; by abandoning virtue you 
have undone me^ and yourself yet take my forgive" 
ness with the same compassion I wish heaven may 
pity nie.*'' He expired. All my succeeding happi- 
ness fled with him. Reflecting that I was the 
cause of his death whom only I loved upon earth, 
accused of betraying the honour of his £unily with 
his latest breath : conscious of my own innocence, 
yet without even a possibility of vindicating it ; 
without fortune or friends to relieve or pity me, 
abandoned to in£aimy and the wide censuring 
world, I called out upon the dead body that lay 
stretched before me, and in the agony of my heart 
asked why he could have left me thus ? Why, my 
dear, my only papa, why could you ruin me thus 
and yourself for ever ! O pity, and return, since 
there is none but you to comfort me. 

I soon found that I had real cause for sorrow ; 
that I was to expect no compassion from my own 
sex, nor assistance from the other ; and that repu- 
tation was much more useful in our commerce with 
mankind than really to deserve it. Wherever I 
came, I perceived myself received either with con- 
tempt or detestation ; or whenever I was civilly 
treated, it was from the most base and ungenerous 
motives. 

Thus driven from the society of the virtuous, I 
was at last, in order to dispel the anxieties of in- 
supportable solitude, oblig^ to take up with the 
company of those whose characters were blasted 
like my own ; but who perhaps deserved their in- 
famy. Among this number was a lady of the first 



as THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

distinction, whose character the public thought 
proper to brand even with greater infamy than 
mine. A similitude of distress soon united us ; I 
knew that general reproach had made her miser- 
able ; and I had learned to regard misery as an 
excuse for guilt. Though this lady had not virtue 
enough to avoid reproach, yet she had too mu(^ 
delicate sensibility not to feel it She therefore 
proposed our leaving the country where we were 
bom, and going to live in Italy, where our charac- 
ters and misfortunes would be unknown. A^th 
this I eagerly complied, and we soon found our- 
selves in one of the most charming retreats in the 
most beautiful province of that enchanting country. 
Had my companion chosen this as a retreat for 
injured virtue, an harbour where we might look 
with tranquility on the distant angry world, I 
should have been happy ; but very different was 
her design ; she had pitched upon this situation 
only to enjoy those pleasures in private, which she 
had not sufficient effrontery to satisfy in a more 
open manner, A nearer acquaintance soon shewed 
me the vicious part of her character ; her mind as 
well as her body seemed formed only for pleasure ; 
she was sentimental only as it served to protract 
the immediate enjoyment. Formed for society 
alone, she spoke infinitely better than she wrote, 
and wrote infinitely better than she Hved. A 
person devoted to pleasure often leads the most 
miserable life imaginable ; such was her case ; she 
considered the natural moments of languor as in- 
supportable, passed all her hours between rapture 
and anxiety ; ever in an extreme of agony or of 
bliss. She felt a pain as sincere for want of appe- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 33 

tile, as the starving wretch who wants a meal. 
In those intervals she usually kept her bed, and 
rose only when in expectation of some new en- 
jojmdent. The luxuriant air of the country, the 
romantic situation of her palace, and the genius of 
a people whose only happiness lies in sensual re- 
finement, all contributed to banish the remem- 
brance of her native country. 

But though such a life gave her pleasure, it had 
a very different effect upon me ; I grew every day 
more pensive, and my melancholy was regarded as 
an insult upon her good humour : I now perceived 
myself entirely unfit for all society ; discarded from 
the good, and detesting the infamous ; I seemed 
in a state of war with every rank of people ; that 
virtue which should have been my protection in 
the world, was here my crime : in short, detesting 
life, I was determined to become a recluse, to 
leave a world where I found no pleasure that could 
allure me to stay. Thus determined, I embarked 
in order to go by sea to Rome, where I intended 
to take the veil ; but even in so short a passage my 
hard fortune still attended me ; our ship was taken 
by a Barbary corsair ; the whole crew, and I among 
the number, being made slaves. It carries too 
much the air of romance to inform you of my dis- 
tresses or obstinacy in this miserable state ; it is 
enough to observe that I have been bought by 
several masters, each of whom perceiving my re- 
luctance, rather than use violence, sold me to 
another, till it was my happiness to be at last 
rescued by you." 

Thus ended her relation, which I have abridged, 
but as soon as we are arrived at Moscow, for which 




34 THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD. 

we intend to set out shortly, you shall be informed 
of all more particularly. In the mean time, the 
greatest addition to my happiness will be to hear 
of yours. Adieu. 



LETTER LXI. 
From the same, 

^E news of your freedom lifts the load 
of former anxiety from my mind ; I can 
now think of my son without regret, 
applauded his resignation under cala- 
mities, and his conduct in extricating himself 
from it. 

You are now free, just let loose from the bondage 
of an hard master: this is the crisis of your fate ; 
and as you now manage fortune, succeeding life 
will be marked with happiness or misery ; a few 
years* perseverance in prudence, which at your age 
is but another name for virtue, will ensure comfort, 
pleasure, tranquility, esteem ; too eager an enjoy- 
ment of every good that now offers, will reverse 
the medal, and present you with poverty, anxiety, 
remorse, contempt. 

As it has been observed that none are better 
qualified to give others advice, than those who 
have taken the least of it themselves ; so in this 
respect I find myself perfectly authorized to offer 
mine, even though I should waive my paternal 
authority upon this occasion. 

The most usual way among young men who 
have no resolution of their own, is first to ask one 
friend's advice and follow it for some time ; then 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, «s 

to ask advice of another, and tum to that ; so of a 
third, still unsteady, always changing. However, 
be assured that every change of this nature is for 
the worse ; people may tell you of your being unfit 
for some peculiar occupations in life; but heed 
them not ; whatever employment you follow with 
perseverance and assiduity, will be found fit for 
you ; it will be your support in youth, and <!omfort 
in age. In learning the useful part of every pro- 
fession, very moderate abilities will suffice ; even 
if the mind be a little balanced with stupidity, it 
may in this case be useful. Great abilities have 
always been less serviceable to the possessors than 
moderate ones. Life has been compared to a race, 
but the allusion still improves, by observing that 
the moat swift are ever the least manageable. 

To know one profession only, is enough for <me 
man to know ; and this (whatever the professors 
may tell 3^u to the contrary) is soon learned. Be 
contented therefore with one good employment; 
for if you understand two at a time, people will 
give you business in neither. 

A conjurer and a tailor once happened to con- 
verse together. Alas, cries the tailor, what an 
unhappy poor creature am I ; if people should ever 
take it in their heads to live without clothes I am 
undone ; I have no other trade to have recourse 
to. Indeed, friend, I pity you sincerely, replies 
the conjurer; but thank heaven, things are not 
quite so bad with me ; for if one trick should fiul, 
I have a hundred tricks more for them yet. How- 
ever, if at any time you are reduced to beggary, 
apply to me, and I will relieve you. A famine 
overspread the land ; the tailor made a shift to 



•6 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

live, because his customers could not be without 
cloaths ; but the poor conjurer, with all his bun* 
dred tricks, could find none that had money to 
throw away : it was in vain that he promised to 
eat fire, or to vomit pins ; no single creature would 
relieve him, till he was at last obliged to beg from 
the very tailor whose calling he had formerly 
despised. 

There are no obstructions more fatal to fortune 
than pride and resentment If you must resent 
injuries at all, at least suppress your indignation 
until you become rich, and then shew away ; the 
resentment of a poor man is like the efforts of a 
harmless insect to sting ; it may get him crushed, 
but cannot defend him. Who values that anger 
which is consumed only in empty menaces ? 

Once upon a time a goose fed its young by a 
pond side ; and a goose in such circumstances is 
always extremely proud, and excessive punctilious. 
If any other animal without the least design to 
offend, happened to pass that way, the goose was 
immediately at him. The pond, she said, was hers, 
and she would maintain a right in it, and support 
her honour, while she had a bill to hiss, or a wing 
to flutter. In this manner she drove away ducks, 
pigs, and chickens ; nay, even the insidious cat 
was seen to scamper. A lounging mastiff, how* 
ever, happened to pass by, and thought it no harm 
if he should lap a little of the water, as he was 
thirsty. The guardian goose fiew at him like a 
fury, pecked at him with her beak, and flapped 
him with her feathers. The dog grew angry, had 
twenty times a good mind to give her a sly snap ; 
but suppressing his indignation, because his master 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 97 

was nigh, A pox take thee^ cries he, for a fool, sure 
those who have neither strength nor weapons to 
fight, at least should be civil; that fluttering and 
hissing of thine may one day get thine head snapt 
off", but it can neither injure thine enemies, or ever 
protect thee. So saying, he went forward to the 
pond, quenched his thirst, in spite of the goose, 
and followed his master. 

Another ohstmction to the fortune of youth is, 
that while they are willing to take offence from 
none, they are also equally desirous of giving none 
offence. From hence they endeavour to please all, 
comply with every request, attempt to suit them- 
selves to every company; have no will of their own, 
but like wax catch every contiguous impresssion. 
By thus attempting to give universal satisfaction, 
they at last find themselves miserably disappointed ; 
to bring the generality of admirers on our side, it 
is sufficient to attempt pleasing a very few. 

A painter of eminence was once resolved to 
finish a piece which should please the whole 
world. When, therefore, he had drawn a picture, 
in which his utmost skill was exhausted, it was 
exposed in the public market-place, with direc- 
tions at the bottom for every spectator to mark 
with a brush, which lay by, every limb, and fea- 
ture, which seemed erroneous. The spectators 
came, and in general applauded ; but each, willing 
to show his talent at criticism, marked whatever 
he thought proper. At evening, when the painter 
came, he was mortified to find the whole picture 
one universal blot ; not a single stroke that was 
not stigmatized with marks of disapprobation : 
not satisfied with this trial, the next day he was 



s8 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

resolved to try them in a different nuuiner, and 
exposing his picture as before, desired that every 
spectator would mark those beauties he approved 
or admired. The people complied, and the artist 
returning, found his picture replete with the marks 
of beauty ; every stroke that had been yesterday 
condemned now received the character of appro- 
bation. Wtll^ cries the painter, I now find that the 
best way to please one half of the worlds is not to 
mind what the other half says ; since what are 
faults in the eyes of these^ shall he by those regarded 
as beauties. Adieu. 



I'^'v?!. 



LETTER LXII. 
From the same, 

CHARACTER such as you have repre- 
sented that of your £Eur companion, 
which continues virtuous, though loaded 
with infamy, is truly great. Many 
regard virtue because it is attended with api^use ; 
your favourite only for the internal pleasure it 
confers. I have often wished that ladies like her 
were proposed as models for female imitation, and 
not such as have acquired fiEune by qualities repug- 
nant to the natural softness of the sex. 

Women famed for their valour, their skill in 
politics, or their learning, leave the duties of their 
own sex, in order to invade the privileges of ours. 
I can no more pardon a fair one for endeavouring 
to wield the club of Hercules, than I could him 
for attempting to twirl her distaff. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 99 

The modest virgin, the prudent wife, or the 
careful matron are much more serviceable in life 
than petticoated philosophers, blustering heroines, 
or virago queens. She who makes her husband 
and her children happy, who reclaims the one from 
vice, and trains up the other to virtue, is a much 
greater character than ladies described in romance, 
whose whole occupation is to murder mankind 
with shafts from their quiver or their eyes. 

Women, it has been observed, are not naturally 
formed for great cares themselves, but to soften 
ours. Their tenderness is the proper reward for 
the dangers we undergo for their preservation % 
and the ease and cheerfulness of their conversa- 
tion, our desirable retreat from the fatigues of 
intense application. They are confined within the 
narrow limits of domestic assiduity; and when 
they stray beyond them, they move beyond their 
sphere, and consequently without grace. 

Fame therefore has been very unjustly dis- 
pensed among the female sex. Those who least 
deserved to be remembered, meet our admiration 
and applause; while many, who have been an 
honour to humanity, are passed over in silence. 
Perhaps no age has produced a stronger instance 
of misplaced fame than the present : the Semi- 
ramis and the Thalestris of antiquity are talked 
of, while a modem character, infinitely greater 
than either, is unnoticed and unknown. 

Catherina Alexowna,^ bom near Derpat, a little 
dty in Livonia, was heir to no other inheritance 
than the virtues and frugality of her parents. Her 

1 This account seems taken from the manuscript memoirs 
of H. Spilman, Esq. 



90 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

father being dead, she lived with her aged mother, 
in their cottage covered with straw ; and both, 
though very poor, were very contented. Here, 
retired from the gaze of the world, by the labour of 
her hands, she supported her parent, who was now 
mcapable of supporting herself. While Catherina 
spun, the old woman would sit by, and read some 
book of devotion ; thus when the fatigues of the 
day were over, both would sit down contentedly 
by their fireside, and enjoy the frugal meal with 
vacant festivity. 

Though her face and person were models of per- 
fection, yet her whole attention seemed bestowed 
upon her mind ; her mother taught her to read, 
and an old Lutheran minister instructed her in 
the maxims and duties of religion. Nature had 
furnished her not only with a ready but a solid 
turn of thought, not only with a strong but a 
right understanding. Such truly female accom- 
plishments procured her several solicitations of 
marriage from the peasants of the country; but 
their offers were refused : for she loved her mother 
too tenderly to think of a separation. 
. Catherina was fifteen when her mother died ; 
she now therefore left her cottage, and went to 
live with the Lutheran minister, by whom she had 
been instructed from her childhood. In his house 
she resided, in quality of governess to his children ; 
at once reconciling in her character unerring pru- 
dence with surprising vivacity. 

The old man, who regarded her as one of his 
own children, had her instructed in dancing and 
music by the masters who attended the rest of his 
family ; thus she continued to improve till he died, 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 31 

by which accident she was once more reduced to 
pristine poverty. The country of Livonia was at 
this time wasted by war, and lay in a most miser- 
able state of desolation. Those calamities are ever 
most heavy upon the poor ; wherefore Catherina, 
though possessed of so many accomplishments, 
experienced all the miseries of hopeless indigence. 
Provisions becoming every day more scarce, and 
her private stock being entirely exhausted, she 
resolved at last to travel to Marienburgh, a city of 
greater plenty. 

With her scanty wardrobe, packed up in a wal- 
let, she set out on her journey on foot : she was to 
walk through a region miserable by nature, but 
rendered stUl more hideous by the Swedes and 
Russians, who, as each happened to become mas- 
ters, plundered it at discretion : but hunger had 
taught her to despise the dangers and fatigues of 
the way. 

One evening, upon her joitmey, as she had en- 
tered a cottage by the way side, to take up her 
lodging for the night, she was insulted by two 
Swedish soldiers, who insisted upon qualifying her, 
as they termed it, to follow the camp. They might 
probably have carried their insults into violence, 
had not a subaltern officer, accidentally passing by, 
come in to her assistance : upon his appearing, the 
soldiers immediately desisted ; but her thankful- 
ness was hardly greater than her surprise, when 
she instantly recollected in her deliverer, the son 
of the Lutheran minister, her former instructor, 
benefactor, and friend. 

This was an happy interview for Catherina : the 
little stock of money she had brought from home 



3a THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

was by this time quite exhausted ; her clothes were 
gone, piece by piece, in order to satisfy those who 
had entertained her in their houses ; her generous 
countryman, therefore, parted with what he could 
spare, to buy her clothes, furnished her with an 
horse, and gave her letters of recommendation to 
Mr. Gluck, a &ithfhl friend of his feither's, and 
Superintendant of Marienburgh. 

Our beautiful stranger had only to appear to be 
well received ; she was immediately admitted into 
the Superintendant's family, as governess to his 
two daughters; and though yet but seventeen, 
shewed'herself capable of instructing her sex, not 
only in virtue, but politeness. Such was her good 
sense and beauty, that her master himself in a 
short time offered her his hand, which to his great 
surprize she thought proper to refuse. Actuated 
by a principle of gratitude, she was resolved to 
marry her deliverer only, even though he had lost 
an arm, and was otherwise disfigured by wounds 
in the service. 

In order therefore to prevent further solicitations 
from others, as soon as the officer came to town 
upon duty, she offered him her person, which he 
accepted with transport, and their nuptials were 
solemnized as usuaL But all the lines of her 
fortune were to be striking : the very day on which 
they were married the Russians laid siege to 
Marienburgh; the unhappy soldier had now no 
time to enjoy the well earned pleasures of matri- 
mony ; he was called off before consummation to 
an attack, from which he was never after seen to 
return. 

In the mean time the siege went on with fury. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 33 

Aggravated oo one side b^ olsdBaqrf 00 the 
other b^ revenge. This war bct w em the tvo 
northern powers at that time, was tralj bar- 
baious; the innocent pensnt and the harmless 
!riigin often shared the fiite of the soldier in 
Maxienbnigh was taken \r§ ■■■■It ; and 
the iiiiy of the assailants, that not only the garrison, 
bat almost all the inhabitants, men, women, and 
children, were put to the sword ; at length when 
the carnage was pretty well ovo^ Cathcnna was 
found hid in an oven. 

She had been hitherto poor, but still was free ; 
die was now to con fo im to her hard fiOe, and 
learn what it was to be a slave : in this situation, 
however, she behaved with piety and hmnility; 
and though misfortunes had abated her vivacity, 
yet she was cheeifuL The fane of her merit and 
xes^;nation reached even Prince Menzikofi^ the 
Russian General; he desired to see her, was 
struck with her beauty, boi^ht her finom the 
seedier, her master, and placed her under the 
direction of his own sister. Here she was treated 
with all the respect which her merit deserved, 
while her beauty every day improved with her 
good fortune. 

She had not been long in this situation, when 
Peter the Great pajring the prince a visit, Cathe- 
rina happened to come in with some dry fruits, 
which she served round with peculiar modesty. 
The mighty monarch saw, and was struck with 
her beauty. He returned the next day, called for 
the beautiful slave, asked her several questions, 
and found her understanding even more perfect 
than her person. 

II. D 



34 THE CITIZBN OF THE WORLD. 

He had been forced when young to many from 
motives of interest, he was now resolved to marry 
pursuant to his own inclinations. He immediately 
enquired the history of the fiur Livonian, who was 
not yet eighteen. He traced her through the vale 
of obscurity, through all the vicissitudes of her 
fortune, and found her truly great in them all. 
The meanness of her birth was no obstmctioo to 
his design ;- their nuptials were solenmized in 
private: the Prince assuring his courtiers, that 
virtue alone was the properest ladder to a thioae. 

We now see Catherinai^ from the low mud* 
walled cottage, Eknpress of the greatest kingdom 
upon earth. The poor solitary wanderer is now 
•nrrounded by thousands, who find happiness in 
her smilex. She, who formerly wanted a meal, 
is now capable of difl^ing plenty upon whole 
nations* 'To her fortune site owed a port of this 
pre-eminence, but to her virtues more. 

She ever after retained' those great qualities 
which first placed her on a throne ; and while the 
extraordinary Prince, her husband, laboured for 
the reformation of his male subjects, she studied in 
her turn the improvement of her own sex. She 
altered their dresses, introduced mixed assemblies, 
instituted an order of female knighthood ; and, at 
length, when she had greatly filled all the stations 
of Empress, friend, wife, and mother, bravely 
died without regret ; regretted by all. Adieu. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 35 



LETTER LXIIL 

» Lien Chi Aliangi^ to Fum Hoam^ first 
resident of the Ceremonial Academy^ at Pekin, 
: China, 

|N eveiy letter I expect accounts of some 
new rerolatioDs in China, some stnmgc 
occaxrence in the state, or disaster 
among my private acquaintance. I 
I every packet wiUi tremulous expectation, 
am agreeably disappointed whea I find my 
tds and my country continuing in felicity. I 
defy but they are at rest ; th^ snffer few 
iges but what pass, in my own restless imagi- 
jn ; it is only the rapidity of my own motion 
I an imaginary swiftness to ol^ects which are 
ime measure immovable, 
et believe me, my friend, that even China 
f is imperceptibly degenerating from her 
ent greatness ; her laws are now more venal, 
her merchants are more deceitful than for* 
y; the very arts and sciences have run to 
y. Observe the carvings on our ancient 
ges; figures that add grace even to natuce. 
re is not an artist now in all the en^>ire that 
imitate their beauty. Our manufactures in 
elain too are inferior to what we once wese 
ms for ; and even Europe now begins to excel 
There was a time when China was the re- 
acle of strangers, when all were welcome who 
*r came to improve the state,, or admire its 
tness ; now the empixc is shut up from every 



96 THE CITIZEN OF THE IVOELD, 

foreign improvement; and the very inhabitants 
discourage each other from prosecuting their own 
internal advantages. 

Whence this degeneracy in a state so little suh* 
ject to external revolutions ; how happens it that 
China, which is now more powerful than ever, 
which is less subject to foreign invasions, and even 
assisted in some discoveries, by her connexiom with 
Europe ; whence comes it, I say, that the empire 
is thus declining so fast into barbarity ? 

This decay is surely from nature, and not the 
result of voluntary degeneracy. In a period of 
two or three thousand years she seems at proper 
intervals to produce great minds, with an effort 
resemlding that which introduces the vicissitudes 
of seasons^ They rise up at once, continue for an 
age, enlighten the world, fall like ripened com, 
and mankind again gradually relapse into pristine 
barbarity. We little ones look around, are amazed 
at the decline, seek after the causes of this invisible 
decay, attribute to want of encouragement what 
really proceeds from want of power, are asto- 
nished to find every art and every science in the 
decline, not considering that autumn is over, and 
fatigued nature begins to repose for some suc- 
ceeding effort. 

Some periods have been remarkable for the pro- 
duction of men of extraordinary stature ; others 
for producing some particular animals in great 
abundance ; some for eveessive plenty ; and others 
again for seemingly causeless famine. Nature 
which shews herself so very different in her visible 
productions, must surely differ also from herself in 
the production of minds ; and while she astonishes 



THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLp. 37 

one age with the strength and stature of a Milo or 
a Mazimm, may bless another with the wisdom of 
a Plato, or the goodness of an Antonine. 

Let us not then attribate to accident the idling 
off of every nation ; but to the natmal revcdution 
of things. Often in the darkest ages there has 
appeared some one man of sm|nizing abilities, 
who^ with ail his nnderstanding, fidled to bring 
his barbarous age into refinement: all mankind 
seemed to sleep, till Nature gave the general call, 
and then the whole world seemed at once roused 
at the voice ; science triumphed in every country, 
and die brightness of a single genius seemed lost 
in a galaxy of oont^uous glory. 

Thus the enlightened periods in every age have 
been umversaL At the time n^ien China first 
began to Emerge firom barbarity, the western worid 
was equally rising into refinement ; when we had 
our YmUf they had their Sesostris, In succeeding 
ages, Confudus and Pythagoras seem bom nearly 
together, and a train of philosophers then sprung 
tip as well in Greece as in China. The period of 
renewed barbarity begun to have an universal 
spread much about the same time, and continued 
for several centuries, till in the year of the christian 
sera 1400, the emperor Yonglo arose, to revive the 
learning of the east ; while about the same time 
the Medicean family laboured in Italy to raise 
infimt genius firom the cradle : thus we see polite- 
ness spreading over every part of the world in one 
age, and barbarity succeeding in another ; at one 
period a blaze of light diffusing itself over the 
whole world, and at another all mankind wrapped 
up in the profoundest ignorance. 



38 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

Such has been the situation of things in times 
past ; and such probably it will ever be. China, 
I have observed, has evidently begun to degenerate 
from its former politeness ; and were the learning 
of the Europeans at present candidly considared, 
the decline would perhaps appear to have already 
taken place. We should find among the ntthres 
of the west the study of morality displaced ffx 
mathematical disquisition, or metaphysical subtle- 
ties ; we should find learning to bc^gin to separate 
from the useful duties and concerns of life, while 
none ventured to aspire after that character, but 
they who know much more than is truly amudng 
or useful. We should find every great attempt 
suppressed by prudence, and the rapturous sub- 
limity in writing cooled by a cautious fear of 
offence. We should find few of those daring 
spirits, who bravely venture to be wrong, and who 
are willing to hazard much for the sake of great 
acquisitions. Providence has indulged the world 
with a period of almost four hundred years* re- 
finement ; does it not now by degrees sink us 
into our former ignorsmce, leaving us only the love 
of wisdom, while it deprives us of its advantages? 
Adieu. 




THS CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 39 

LETTER LXIV. 
From the same, 

[E imnces of Europe have fbtmd out « 
mimner of rewarding their subjects who 
have behaved wsell, by presenting them 
with about two yards of blue ribbon, 
irfudk is worn about the shoulder. They who are 
honoured with this mark of distinction are called 
knights, and the King himself is alwajrs the head 
of the order. This is a very frugal method of 
recompensing the most important services ; and it 
is very fortunate for kings that their subjects are 
satisfied with such trifling rewards. Should a 
nobleman happen to lose his leg in battle, the 
King presents him with two yards of ribbon, and 
he is paid for the loss of his Umb. Should an 
ambassador spend all hts paternal fortune in sup- 
porting the honour of his country abroad, the King 
presents him with two yards of ribbon, which ts to 
be considered as an equivalent to his estate. In 
short, while an European king has a yard of blue 
or green ribbon left, he need be under no appre- 
hensions of wanting statesmen, generals, and 
soldiers. 

I cannot sufficiently admire those kingdoms in 
which men with large patrimonial estates are 
willing thus to undergo real hardships for empty 
favours. A person, already possessed of a com- 
petent fortune, who undertakes to enter the career 
of ambition, feels many real inconveniences from 
his station, while it procures him no neal happiness 



40 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD* 

that he was not possessed of before. He conld 
eat, drink, and sleep, before he became a courtier, 
as well, perhaps better than when invested with 
his authority. He could command flatterers in a 
private station, as well as in his public capacity, 
and indulge at home every fiivourite inrllnatihni 
ttooensured and unseen by the people. 

What real good then does an addition to s for* 
tune already sufficient procure ? Not any. €oM 
the great man by having his fortune incmsed, 
increase also his appetites, then precedence ddgfat 
be attended with real amusement. 

Was he by having his one thousand made twOf 
thus enabled to enjoy two wives, or eat t«o 
dinners ; then indeed he might be excused ft>r 
undergoing some pain, in order to extend the 
sphere of his enjoyments. But on the oontnury, he 
finfls his desire for pleasure often lessen, as he 
takes pains to be able to improve it; and his 
capacity of enjoyment diminishes as his fortune 
happens to increase. 

Instead therefore of regarding the great with 
envy, I generally consider them with some share 
of compassion.. I look upon them as a set of good- 
natured misguided people, who are indebted to us 
and not to themselves for all the happiness they 
enjoy. For our pleasure, and not their own, they 
sweat under a cumbrous heap of finery ; for our 
pleasure the lacquied train, the slow parading^ 
pageant, with all the gravity of grandeur, moves 
in review ; • single coat, or a single footman, 
answers all the purposes of the most indolent 
refinement as well ; and those who have twenty, 
may be said ta kM|^ one for their own pleasure^ 



THE CITIZSN OF THE WORLDi 4» 

and the other nineteen merely for ours. So tme 
is the obsenration of Confucius, thai we take greater 
pains U persuade others thai we are happy ^ than in 
endeavouring to think so ourselves. 

But though this desire of being seen, of being 
loade the subject of discourse, and of suppoitiii|{ 
the dignities of an exalted station, be tronbtetaniq 
enough to the ambitions ; yet it is well for sockty 
that thete are men thus willing to exchange ease 
and safety, fox danger and a ribbon. We lose 
nothing hf their vanity, and it would be unkind to 
endeavour to deprive a child of iU rattle. If a 
Duke or a Duchess are willing to carry a long train 
for our entertainment, so much the worse for them- 
selves ; if they choose to exhibit in public with a 
hundred lacquies and Mamehiks in their equipage 
for our entertainment, still so much the worse for 
themselves ; it is the spectators alone who give 
and re ce i ve the. pleasure ; they only the sweating 
figures that swell the pageant. 

A Bffandarine who took much pride in appearing 
with a number of jeweb cm every part of his robe, 
was OQoe accosted by an old sly Bonze, who fol- 
lowing him through several streets, and bowing 
often to the ground, thanked him for his jewels. 
What does the man mean ? cried the Mandarine. 
Friend, I never gave thee any of my jewels. No, 
replied the other ; but you have let me look at 
them, and that is all the use you can make of them 
yourself; so there is no difference between us, 
except that yon have the trouble of watching them, 
and that is an employment I don't much desire. 
Adieu. 



43 THE CiTtZEN OF THE WORLD, 

LETTER LXV. 
From the same. 






[HOUGH not very fond ol seeii^ a 
pageant myself, yet I am generally 
pleased with being in the crowd which 
sees it; it is amusing to observe the 
effect which such a spectacle has upon the variety 
of &ces, the pleasure it excites in some, the envy 
in others, and the wishes it raises in all. With 
this design I lately went to see the entry of a 
foreign Ambassador, resolved to make one in the 
mob, to shout as they shouted, to fix with earnest- 
ness upon the same frivolous objects, and partici- 
pate for a while the pleasures and the wishes of 
the vulgar. 

Struggling here for some time, in order to be 
first to see the cavalcade as it passed, some one of 
the crowd unluckily happened to tread upon my 
shoe, and tore it in such a numner, that I was 
utterly unqualified to march forward with the main 
body, and obliged to fall back in the rear. Thus 
rendered incapable of being a spectator of the 
shew myself, I was at least willing to observe the 
spectators, and limped behind like one of the in- 
valids which follow the march of an army. 

In this plight, as I was considering the eager^ 
ness that appeared on every face, how some 
bustled to get foremost, and others contented 
themselves with taking a transient peep when they 
could ; how some praised the four black servants, 
that were stuck behind one of the equipages, and 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 43 

some the ribbons that decorated the horses' necks 
in another; my attention was called off to an 
object more extraordinary than any I had yet seen : 
A poor cobbler sat in his stall by the way side, and 
continued to work while the crowd passed by, 
without testifyii^ the smallest share of curiosity. 
I own his want c^ attention excited mine ; and as 
I stood in need of his assistance, I thought it best 
to employ a philosophic cobbler on this occasion : 
perceiving my business, therefore, he desired me 
to enter and sit down, took my shoe in his lap, 
and began to mend it with his usual indifference 
and tadtumity. 

" How, my friend, said I to him, can you con- 
tinue to work while all those fine things are passing 
by your door?" "Very fine they are master, 
returned the cobUer, frar those that like them, to be 
sure ; but what are all those fine thii^ to me ? 
Yon don't know what it is to be a cobbler, and so 
much the better for yourself. Your bread is baked, 
you may go and see sights the whole day, and eat 
a warm supper when you come home at night ; 
but for me, if I should run hunting after all these 
fine folk, what should I get by my journey but an 
appetite, and, God help me, I have too much of 
that at home already, without stirring out for it. 
Your people who may eat four meals a day and a 
supper at night, are but a bad example to such a 
one as I. No, master, as God has called me into 
this world in order to mend old shoes, I have no 
business with fine folk, and they no business with 
me." I here interrupted him with a smile. " See 
this last, master, continues he, and this hammer ; 
this last and hammer are the two best friends I 



44 THK CiTIZMN OF THE WORLD. 

have in this world ; nobodj else will be my friend, 
because I want a friend. The great folks you saw 
pass by just now have five hundred friends, because 
they have no occasion for them ; now, while I 
stick to my good friends here, I am very ooDten« 
ted ; but when I ever so little run after sights and 
fine things, I begin to hate my work, I grow sad, 
and have no heart to mend shoes any longer." 

This discourse only served to raise my curiosity 
to know more of a man whom Nature had thus 
formed into a philosopher. I therefore insensibly 
led him into an history of his adventures: **I have 
lived, said he, a wandering life, now five and fifty 
years, here toniay and gone to-morrow; for it was 
my misfortune, when I was 3foung, to be fond of 
changing." You have been a traveller tkem, J pre* 
lume, interrupted L "I can't boast much of travel- 
ling, continued he, for I have never left the parish 
in which I was bom but three times in my life, 
that I can remember ; but then there is not a street 
in the v^hole neighbourhood that I have not lived 
in, at some time or another. When I began to 
settle and to take to my business in one street, 
some unforeseen misfortune, or a desire of trying 
my luck elsewhere, has removed me, perhaps a 
whole mile away from my former customers, while 
some more lucky cobbler would come into my place, 
and make a handsome fortune among friends of 
my making : there was one who actually died in a 
stall that I had left, worth seven pounds seven 
shillings, all in hard gold, which he had qoilted 
into the waistband of his breeches." 
: I could not but smile at these migrations of a 
man by the fire-side, and continued to ask if he 



THE "CiTIZSN OF THE IVORLD, 45 

had ever been married. " Ay, that I have, mas- 
ter, replied he, for sixteen long years ; and a 
weary life I had of it, heaven knows. My wife 
topic it into her head, that the only way- to thrive 
in this world, was to save money, so though our 
comings-in was but about three shillings a week, 
all thai ever she could lay her hands upoA the Used 
to hide away from me, though we were obl%ed 
to starve the whole week after for it 

'* The first three years we used to quarrel about 
this every day, and I always got the better ; but 
she had a hard spirit, and still continued to hide 
as usual ; so that I was at last tired of quarrelling 
and getting the better, and she scraped and scraped 
at pleasure, till I was almost starved to death. 
Her conduct drove me at last in despair to the ale« 
house ; here I used to sit with people who hated 
home like myself, drank while I had money left, 
and nm in score when any body would trust me ; 
till at last the landlady, coming one day with a 
long bill when I was from home, and putting it 
into my wife's hands, the let^th of it effectually 
broke her heart I searched the whole stall lafter 
she was dead for money, but she had hidden it so 
eflfectually, that with all my pains I could never 
find a fiuthing." 

By this time my shoe was mended, and satis- 
fying the poor artist for his trouble, and rewarding 
him besides for his information, I took my leave, 
and returned home to lengthen out the amusement 
his conversation afibrded, by communicating it to 
my firiend. Adieu. 




THE CmZBN OF THE WORLD. 



LETTER LXVI. 

Prom Uen Chi Aliangi to Hingpo, by tJu way 

of Moscow, 

lENEROSITY properly applied wUI 
supply every other external advantage 
in life, but the love of thofe we con- 
verse with ; it will procure esteem and 
a conduct resembling real affection, but actual love 
is the spontaneous production of the mind, no 
generosity can purchase, no rewards increase, nor 
no liberality continue it, the very person who is 
obliged, has it not in his power to force his lin- 
gering affections upon the object he should love, 
and voluntarily mix passion with gratitude. 

Imparled fortune, and well -placed liberality, 
may procure the benefactor good will, may load 
the person obliged, with the sense of the duty he 
lies under to retaliate; this is gratitude: and 
simple gratitude, untinctured with love, is all the 
return an ingenuous mind can bestow for former 
benefits. 

But gratitude and love are almost opposite affec- 
tions ; love is often an involuntary passion, placed 
upon our companions without our consent, and 
frequently conferred without our previous esteem. 

We love some men, we know not why ; our 
tenderness is naturally excited in all their concerns ; 
we excuse their fjaults with the same indulgenoei 
and approve their virtues with the same applause 
with which we consider our own. While we enter, 
tain the passion it pleases us ; we cherish it with 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 47 

delight, and give it up with reluctance, and love 
for love is all the reward we expect or desire. 

Gratitude, on the contrary, is never conferred, 
but where there have been previous endeavours to 
excite it ; we consider it as a debt, and our spirits 
wear a load till we have discharged the obligation. 
Every acknowledgment of gratitude is a circum- 
stance of humiliation ; and some are found to sub- 
mit to fiequent mortifications of this kind ; pro- 
claiming what obligations they owe, merely 
because they think it in some measure cancels the 
debt. 

Thns love is the most easy and agreeable, and 
gratitude the most - humiliating affection of the 
mind ; we never reflect on the man we hviy with- 
out« exulting in our choice, while he who has 
bound OS to him by benefits^^xaty rises to our 
idea as a person to whom we have in some mea- 
sure, forfeited our freedom. Love and gratitude 
are seldom thesefore found in the same breast 
without impairing each other ; we may tender the 
one or the other singly to those we converse with,> 
but cannot command both together. By attempt- 
ing to increase, we diminish them ; the mind be- 
comes bankrupt under too large obligations; all 
additional benefits lessen every hope of future 
return, and bar up every avenue that leads to 
tenderness. 

In all our connexions with society therefore, it 
is not only generous, but prudent, to appear in- 
sensible of the value of those favours we bestow, 
and endeavour to make the obligation seem as 
slight as possible. Love must be taken by strata- 
gem, and not by (^)en .force : We should seem 



48 THR CiTiZBN OF THE WORLD, 

ignorant that we oblige, and leave the mind at 
full liberty to give or refuse its affections ; for coot 
straint may indeed leave the receiver still grateful, 
but it will certainly produce disgust. 

If to procure gratitude be our only aim, there ii 
no great art in making the acquisition ; a benefit 
conferred demands a just acknowledgment, and 
we have a right to insist upon our due. 

But it were much more prudent to forego on 
right on such an occasion, and exchai^ it, if we 
can, for love. We receive but little advantage 
from repeated protestations of gratitude, but they 
cost him very much from whom we exact them in 
return; exacting a grateful acknowledgment, ii 
demanding a debt by which the creditor is not 
advantaged, and the debtor pays with reluctance. 

As Mincius the Philosopher was travelling io 
the pursuit of wisdom, night overtook him at the 
foot of a gloomy mountain, remote from the habi< 
tations of men. Here as he was straying, while 
rain and thunder conspired to Aiake s^tude still 
more hideous, he perceived a hermit's cell, and 
approaching, asked for shelter: Enter, cries the 
hermit, in a severe tone, men deserve not to be 
obliged, but it would be imitating their ingrati* 
tude, to treat them as they deserve. Come in : 
examples of vice may sometimes strengthen us in 
the ways of virtue. 

After a frugal meal, which consisted of roots 
and tea, Mencius could not repress his curiosity to 
)cnow why the hermit had retired from numkind, 
the actions- of whom taught the truest lessons of 
wisdonu Mention not the name of man, cries the 
hermit, with indignation ; here let me live retired 



THE CJTtZSJf €Pr TSI ITZS-IJI. ^ 




from a base ■w^uniirii "wmSiz isze 
beasts of the farcam I siufll aii£ an £atcaes»u 
lion is a geii c iut taamm^ mad ^e -ioc * 

aod smile vlifle he f« w ■IH> 3L Jjk im 

usid ai kj mmmHrndt 

shrewdly. Yes, 

I hare cxhaasied bj whoie 

and that cap, and thoK ■HOLaBE mL "iutcZ 

in letani. iyid\ 

eufy Umd at 

midoabcedljr, vqAed Ae 

merit ol^bemg^: 

thai ihej ruamtd Mt 

A tboosmd 

loaded me with 

tioDS received. 

If them, s^ 

ycur feritme^ im 

unjusi t» accmse 

themselves Miged, yms 

certainly earmed emckfatamr, iy jkjwmm x iy 

ledging the ^^aiiam, Tht hcmu: wot ^nsatic vott 

the replj, and tttefiing he ^soc wrs. vaciruio^ t 

have heard of thegreatt McBcaaK^ amt ««. Tgrtnmw 

are the man; lam bcmt fcwiiiuw i^ae^ ikLp inc 

still a child in wiidom, talce me sack M' :as: vsaiMi 

of man, and rdratr me a» flor <c^ she himc apas^ 

rant and the yvmngcst </ jRmr ^Kxciia - 

Indeed, mj son, i£ is bcncr Ur aaeaner jioeaitt a. 
oar passage thnMgjh life that gcmdU <6s3«a«t«ift ; 
and as love isammewiDiB^ioiaxaflU'.asrilEBan^ 
tribute than extorted 6b6ggoom^ As we: 
when greatlj obliged, yjiirmh oust 

II. 




so THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

never after be recovered : the mind that is base 
enough to disallow the just return, instead of 
feeling any uneasiness upon recollection, triumphs 
in its new acquired freedom, and in some measure 
is pleased with conscious baseness. 

Very different is the situation of disagreeing 
friends, their separation produces mutual uneasi- 
ness : Like that divided being in fabulous creation, 
their sympathetic souls once more desire their 
former union, the joys of both are imperfect, their 
gayest moments tinctured with uneasiness; each 
seeks for the smallest concessions to clear the way 
to a wished for explanation ; the most trifling 
acknowledgment, the slightest accident serves to 
effect a mutual reconciliation. 

But instead of pursuing the thought, permit me 
to soften the severity of advice, by an European 
story, which will fully illustrate my meaning. 

A fiddler and his wife, who had rubbed through 
life, as most couples usually do, sometimes good 
friends, at others not quite so well ; one day hap- 
pened to have a dispute, which was conducted 
with becoming spirit on both sides. The wife was 
sure she was right, and the husband was resolved 
to have his own way. What was to be done in 
such a case ? the quarrel grew worse by explana- 
tions, and at last the fury of both rose to such a 
pitch, that they made a vow never to sleep to- 
gether in the same bed for the future. This was 
the most rash vow that could be imagined, for they 
still were friends at bottom, and besides they had 
but one bed in the house ; however, resolved they 
were to go through with it, and at night the fiddle- 
case was laid in bed between thenii in order to 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 51 

make a jteparation. In this manner they continued 
for thre€f weeks ; every night the fiddle-case being 
placed as a barrier to divide them. 

By this time, however, each heartily repented of 
their vow, their resentment was at an end, and 
their love began to return ; they wished the fiddle- 
case away, but both had too much spirit to begin. 
One night, however, as they were both lying awake 
with the detested fiddle-case between them, the 
husband happened to sneeze, to which the wife, 
as is usual in such cases, bid God bless him ; Ay^ 
but, returns the husband, woman, do you say that 
from your heart J Indeed, I do, my poor Nicholas, 
cries his wife, I say it with all my heart. If so then, 
sajrs the husband, we had as good remove the fiddle' 
case. 



LETTER LXVII. 
From the same, 

[OOKS, my son, while they teach us to 
respect the interests of others, often 
make us unmindful of our own ; while 
they instruct the youthful reader to 
grasp at social happiness, he grows miserable in 
detail, and attentive to universal harmony, often 
forgets that he himself has a part to sustain in the 
concert. I dislike therefore the philosopher who 
describes the inconveniences of life in such pleasing 
colours that the pupil grows enamoured of distress, 
longs to try the charms of poverty, meets it with- 
out dread, nor fears its inconveniences, till he 
severely feels them. 




$9 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

A youth, who has thus spent his life among 
books, new to the world, and unacquainted with 
man, but by philosophic information, may be con- 
sidered as a being, whose mind is filled vrith the 
vulgar errors of the wise ; utterly unqualified for a 
journey through life, yet confident of his own skill 
in the direction, he sets out with confidence, 
blunders on with vanity, and finds himself at last 
undone. 

He first has learned from books, and then lays 
it down as a maxim, that all mankind are virtuous 
or vicious in excess ; and he has been long taught 
to detest vice and love virtue : warm therefore in 
attachments, and stedfast in enmity, he treats 
every creature as a friend or foe ; expects firom 
those he loves unerring integrity, and consigns his 
enemies to the reproach of wanting every virtue. 
On this principle he proceeds ; and here begin his 
disappointments : upon a closer inspection of 
human nature, he perceives, that he should have 
moderated his friendship, and softened his severity; 
for he often finds the excellencies of one part of 
mankind clouded with vice, and the faults of the 
other brightened with virtue ; he finds no cha- 
racter so sanctified that has not its failings, none 
so infamous, but has somewhat to attract our 
esteem ; he beholds impiety in lawn, and fidelity 
in fetters. 

He now therefore, but too late, perceives that 
his regards should have been more cool, and his 
hatred less violent ; that the truly wise seldom 
court romantic friendships with the good, and 
avoid, if possible, the resentment even of the 
wicked : every moment gives him fresh instances 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 53 

that the bonds of friendship are broken if drawn 
too closely, and that those whom he has treated 
with disrespect more than retaliate the injury : at 
length therefore he is obliged to confess, that 'he 
has declared war upon the vicious half of man- 
kind, without being able to form an alliance 
among the virtuous to espouse his quarrel. 

Our book -taught philosopher, however, is now 
too fiu advanced to recede ; and though poverty 
be the just consequence of the many enemies his 
conduct has created, yet he is resolved to meet it 
without shrinking : philosophers have described 
poverty in most charming colours ; and even his 
vanity is touched, in thinking, that he should 
shew the world, in himself one more example of 
patience, fortitude, and resignation. Comcj then, 
O Poverty ! for what is there in thee dreadful to 
the Wise ; temperance, health, and frugality, walk 
in thy train ; cheerfulness and liberty are ever thy 
companions. Shall any be ashamed of thee of whom 
Cincinatus was not ashamed t the running brook, 
the herbs of tJie field can amply satisfy nature ; 
tfion wants but little, nor that little long; come, 
then, O Poverty, while kings stand by and gaze 
with admiration, at the true philosopher'* s resig- 
ticUion. 

The goddess appears ; for Poverty ever comes 
at the call : but, alas ! he finds her by no means 
the charming figure books and his warm imagina- 
tion bad painted. As when an eastern bride whom 
her friends and relations had long described as a 
model of perfection, pays her 6rst visit, the long- 
ing bridegroom lifts the veil to see a face he had 
never seen before ; but instead of a countenance, 



54 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

Naxing with beauty like the sun, he beholds de- 
Kvmity shooting icicles to his heart ; such appears 
Toverty to her new entertainer ; all the fabric of 
enthusiasm is at once demolished, and a thou- 
sand miseries rise upon its ruins, while Contempt, 
with pointing finger, is foremost in the hideous 
procession. 

The poor man now finds that he can get no 
kings to look at him while he is eating ; he finds 
that in proportion as he grows poor, the world 
turns its back upon him, and gives him leave to 
act the philosopher in all the majesty of solitude ; 
it might be agreeable enough to play the philo- 
sopher, while we are conscious that mankind arc 
spectators ; but what signifies wearing the mask 
of sturdy contentment, and mounting the stage of 
restraint, when not one creature will assist at the 
exhibition ! Thus is he forsaken of men, while 
his fortitude wants the satisfaction even of self- 
applause ; for either he docs not feel his present 
calamities, and that is natural insensibility^ or he 
disguises his feelings, and that is dissimulation. 

Spleen now lx:gins to take up the man ; not dis- 
tinguishing in his resentments, he regards all man- 
kind with detestation, and commencing man-hater, 
seeks solitude to be at liberty to rail. 

It has been said, that he who retires to solitude, 
is either a beast or an angel. The censure is too 
severe, and the praise unmerited ; the discontented 
being, who retires from society, is generally some 
good-natured man, who has begun life without ex- 
perience, and knew not how to gain it in his inter- 
— -«w with mankind. Adieu. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 55 



LETTER LXVIII. 

From Lien Chi Altangi^ to Fum Hoam^ first Pre- 
sidtnt of the CerttminiaJ Academy ^ at Pekin in 
Cfuna, 

FORMERLY acquainted thee, most 
grave Fum^ with the excellence of the 
English in the art of healing. The 
Chinese boast their skill in pulses, the 
Siamese their botanical knowledge, but the English 
advertisiiig physicians alone, of being the great re- 
storers of health, the dispensers of youth, and the 
insurers of longevity. I can never enough admire 
the sagacity of this country for the encouragement 
given to the professors of this art ; with what in- 
dulgence does she foster up those of her own 
growth, and kindly cherish those that come from 
abroad. Like a skilful gardener she invites them 
from every foreign climate to herself. Here every 
great exotic strikes root as soon as imported, and 
feels the genial beam of favour ; while the mighty 
metropolis, like one vast munificent dunghill, re- 
ceives them indiscriminately to her breast, and 
supplies each with more than native nourishment. 
In other countries the physician pretends to cure 
disorders in the lump ; the same doctor who com- 
bats the gout in the toe, shall pretend to prescribe 
for a pain in the head, and he who at one time 
cures a consumption, shall at another give drugs 
for a dropsy. How absurd and ridiculous ! this is 
being a mere jack of all trades. Is the animal 
machine less complicated than a brass pin ? Not 



56 TUB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

less than ten different hands are acquired to make 
a pin ; and shall the body be set right by one 
single operator ? 

The English are sensible of the force of this 
reasoning ; they have therefore one doctor for the 
eyes, another for the toes ; they have their sciatica 
doctors, and inoculating doctors; they have one 
doctor who is modestly content with securing them 
from bugbites, and five hundred who prescribe for 
the bite of mad dogs. 

The learned are not here retired with vicious 
modesty from public view ; for every dead wall is 
covered with their names, their abilities, their 
amazing cures, and places of abode. Few patients 
can escape falling into their hands, unless blasted 
by lightning, or struck dead with some sudden 
disorder : it may sometimes happen, that a stranger 
who does not understand English^ or a countryman 
who cannot read, dies without ever hearing of the 
vivifying drops, or restorative electuary ; but for my 
part, before I was a week in town, I had learned to 
bid the whole catalogue of disorders defiance, and 
was perfectly acquainted with the names and the 
medicines of every great man, or great woman of 
them all. 

But OS nothing pleases . curiosity more than 
anecdotes of the great, however minute or trifling, 
I must present you, inadequate as my abilities are 
to the subject, with some account of those person- 
ages who lead in this honourable profession. 

The first upon the list of glory, is doctor Richard 
Rock^ F.U.N. This great man is short of stature, 
is fat, and wad^iles as he walks. He always wears 
a white three-tail'd wig, nicely combed, and frizzed 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 57 

upon each cheek. Sometimes he carries a cane, 
but a hat never; it is indeed very remarkable, 
that this extraordinary personage should never 
wear an hat, but so it is, he never wears an hat. 
He is usually drawn at the top of his own bilb, 
sitting in his arm chair, holding a little bottle 
between his finger and thumb, and surrounded 
with rotten teeth, nippers, pills, pakets, and 
gally-pots. No man can promise fairer nor better 
than he ; for, as he observes, Bt your disorder 
mver so far gone, be under no uneasiness^ tnake 
yoursdfqmte easy^ / can cure you. 

The next in fome, though by some reckoned 
of equal pretensions, is doctor Timothy Franks, 
F.O.G.H., Uving in a place caUed the Old Bailey, 
As Rock is remarkably squab, his great rival 
Franks is as remarkably tall. He was bom in the 
year of the christian sera 1692, and is, while I now 
write, exactly sixty-eight years, three months, and 
four days old. Age, however, has no ways im- 
paired his usual health and vivacity, I am told, he 
generally walks with his breast open. This gen- 
tleman, who is of a mixed reputation, is particu- 
larly remarkable for a becoming assurance, which 
carries him gently through life ; for, except doctor 
kock^ none are more blessed with the advantages 
of face than doctor Franks, 

And yet the great have their foibles as well as 
the little. I am almost ashamed to mention it. 
Let the foibles of the great rest in peace. Yet I 
most impart the whole to my friend. These two 
great men are actually now at variance ; yes, my 
dear Fum Hoam, by the head of our grandfather, 
they are now at variance like mere men, mere 



58 THE CITIZES OF THE WORLD, 

common mortals. The champion Rock advises 
the world to beware of bogtrotting quacks, while 
Franks retorts the wit and the sarcasm (for they 
have both a world of wit) by fixing on his rival the 
odious appellation of Dumplin Dick, He calls 
the serious doctor Rocky Dumplin Dick! Head of 
Confucius t what profanation ! Dumplin Dick! 
What a pity, ye powers, that the learned, who 
were bom mutually to assist in enlightening the 
world, should thus differ among themselves, and 
make even the profession ridiculous ! Sure the 
world is wide enough, at least, for two great per- 
sonages to figure in ; men of science should leave 
controversy to the little world below them ; and 
then we might see Rock and Franks walking 
together hand in hand, smiling onward to immor- 
tality. 

Next to these is doctor Walker, preparator of 
his own medicines. This gentleman is remarkable 
for an aversion to quacks; frequently cautionii^ 
the public to be careful into what hands they 
commit their safety : by which he would insinuate, 
that if they did not employ him alone, they must 
be undone. His public spirit is equal to his suc- 
cess. Not for himself, but his country, is the gaily- 
pot prepared and the drops sealed up with proper 
directions for any part of the town or country. All 
this is for his country's good : so that he is now 
grown old in the practice of physic and virtue; 
and to use his own elegance of expression. There 
is not such another medicine as his in the world 
c^gain. 

This, my friend, is a formidable triumvirate; 
and yet, formidable as they are, I am resolved to 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 59 

defend the honour of Chinese physic against them 
alL I have made a vow to summon doctor Rock 
to a solemn disputation in all the mysteries of the 
profession, before the face of every PkUomath^ 
student in astrology, and member of the learned 
societies. I adhere to, and venerate the doctrines 
of old fVang'skU'ko. In the very teeth of oppo- 
sition I will maintain, Thai the heart is the son of 
the HveTy which hcts the kidneys for its mother^ and 
the stomach for its wife,'^ I have therefore drawn 
up a disputation challenge, which is to be sent 
^eedily, to this effect : 

I, Lien Chi Altangiy D.N.R.P., native oiHonan 
in China^ to Richard Rocky F.U.N., native of 
Garbe^e-dlleym iVafping, defiance. Though, Sir, 
I am perfectly sensible of your importance, thoi^ 
no stranger to your studies in the paths of nature, 
3ret there may be many things in the art of ph)^ 
with which you are yet unacquainted. I know full 
well a doctor thou art, great Rock^ and so am I. 
Wherefore I challenge, and do hereby invite you 
to a trial of learning upon hard problems, and 
l^notty physical points. In this debate we will 
calmly investigate the whole theory and practice 
of medicine, botany and chemistry ; and I invite 
all the philomaths, with many of the lecturers in 
medicine, to be present at the dispute : which, I 
hope, will be carried on with due decorum, with 
proper gravity, and as befits men of erudition and 
science, among each other. But before we meet 
&ce to face, I would thus publicly, and in the face 
of the whole world, desire you to answer me one 

^ See Du Halde, vol. iL fol. p. 185. 



6o THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

question ; I ask it with the same earnestness with 
which you have often solicited the public ; answer 
me, I say, at otice, without having recourse to 
your physical dictionary, which of those three dis- 
orders, incident to the human body, is the most 
fatal, the syncope^ parenthesis^ or apoplexy ^ I beg 
your reply may be as public as this my demand.^ I 
am, as hereafter may be, your admirer or your 
rival. Adieu. 



LETTER LXIX. 
To the same. 

INDULGENT nature seems to have 
exempted this island from many of 
those epidemic evils which are so fatal 
in other parts of the world. A want 
of rain but for a few days beyond the expected 
season in China, spreads famine, desolation, and 
terror, over the whole country; the winds that 
blow from the brown bosom of the western desert 
are impregnated with death in every gale ; but in 
this fortunate land of Britain, the inhabitant courts 
health in every breeze, and the husbandman ever 
sows in joyful expectation. 

But though the nation be exempt from real evils, 
think not, my friend, that it is more happy on this 
account than others. They are afflicted, it is true, 
with neither famine nor pestilence, but then there 
is a disorder peculiar to the country, which every 

1 The day after this was published, the editor received 
^hswer, in which the doctor seems to be of opinion, that 
X)plexy is most fatal. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. «i 

eason makes strange ravages among them; it 
preads with pestilential rapidity, and infects 
ilmost every rank of people ; what b still more 
tiai^e the natives have no name for this peculiar 
nalady, though well known to fore^ physicians 
ly the appellation of Epidemic terror, 

A season is never known to pass in which the 
people are not visited by this cn»el calamity in one 
shape <Hr another, seemingly different, though ever 
the same ; one yeax it issues from a baker's shop 
in the shape of a six-penny logif, the next it takes 
the appearance of a comet with a fiery tail, a third 
it threatens like a flat-bottomed boat, and a fourth 
it carries consternation at the bite of a mad dog. 
The people, when once infected, lose their relish 
for happiness, saunter about with looks of despon- 
dence, ask after the calamities of the day, and 
receive no comfort but in heightening eadi other's 
distress. It is insignificant how remote or near, 
bow weak or powerful the object of terror may be, 
when once they resolve to fr%ht and be frighted, 
the merest trifles sow consternation and dismay, 
each proportions his fears, not to the object, but 
to the dread he discovers in the countenance of 
others ; for when once the fermentation is begun, 
It goes on of itself, though the original cause be 
discontinued which first set it in motion. 

A dread of mad dogs is the epidentic terror which 
now prevails, and the whole nation is at pn-esent 
actually groaning under the malignity of its in- 
fluence. The people sally from their houses with 
that circumspection which is prudent in such as 
expect a mad dog at every turning. The physician 
publishes his prescription, the beadle prepares his 



68 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

halter, and a few of unusual bravery arm them- 
selves with lxx)ts and buff gloves, in order to face 
the enemy if he should offer to attack them. In 
short, the whole people stand bravely upon their 
defence, and seem by their present spirit to show 
a resolution of not being tamely bit by mad dogs 
any longer. 

Their manner of knowing whether a dog be mad 
or no, somewhat resembles the ancient European 
custom of tr3ring witches. The old woman sus- 
pected was tied hand and foot and thrown into 
the water. If she swam, then she was instantly 
carried off to be burnt for a witch, if she sunk, 
then indeed she was acquitted of the charge, but 
drowned in the experiment. In the same manner 
a crowd gather round a dog suspected of madness, 
and they begin by teasing the devoted animal on 
every side ; if he attempts to stand upon the de- 
fensive and bite, then is he unanimously found 
guilty, for a matl dog always snaps at evny thing; 
if, on the contrary, he strives to escape by running 
away, then he can expect no compassion, far mad 
dogs always run straightforward before them. 

It is pleasant enough for a neutral being like 
me, who have no share in those ideal calamities, 
to mark the stages of this national disease. The 
terror at first feebly enters with a disregarded story 
of a little dog, that had gone through a neigh- 
bouring village, that was thought to be mad by 
several that had seen him. The next account 
comes, that a mastiff ran through a certain town, 
and had bit five geese, which immediately run 
mad, foamed at the bill, and died in gpreat agonies 
soon after. Then comes an affecting history of a 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 63 

little boy bit in the leg, and gone down to be dipt 
in the salt water ; when the people have suffi- 
ciently shuddered at that, they are next congealed 
with a frightful account of a man who was said 
lately to have died from a bite he had received 
some years before. This relation only prepares 
the way for another, still more hideous, as how 
the master of a family, with seven small children, 
were all bit by a mad lap dog, and how the poor 
£EUher first perceived the infection by calling for a 
draught of water, where he saw the lap dog 
swimming in the cup. 

When epidemic terror is thus once excited, every 
morning comes loaded with some new disaster ; as 
in stories of ghosts each loves to hear the account, 
though it only serves to make him uneasy, so here 
each listens with eagerness, an^ adds to the tidings 
with new circumstances of peculiar horror. A lady 
for instance, in the country, of very weak nerves 
has been frighted by the barking of a dog ; and 
this, alas ! too frequently happens. The story soon 
b improved and spreads, that a mad dog had 
frighted a lady of distinction. These circumstances 
begin to grow terrible before they have reached 
the neighbouring village, and there the report is, 
that a lady of quality was bit by a mad mastiff. 
This account every moment gathers new strength 
and grows more dismal as it approaches the capi- 
tal, and by the time it has arrived in town the 
lady is described, with wild eyes, foaming mouth, 
running mad upon all four, barking like a dog, 
biting her servants, and at last smothered between 
two beds by the advice of her doctors : while the 
mad mastiff is in the mean time ranging the whole 



64 THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD. 

country over, slavering at the mouth, and seeking 
whom he may devour. 

My landlady, a good-natured woman, but a little 
credulous, waked me some mornings ago before 
the usual hour with horror and astonishment in her 
looks ; she desired me if I had any regard for my 
safety, to keep within ; for a few days ago so dis- 
mal an accident had happened, as to put all the 
world upon their guard. A mad dog down in the 
country, she assured me, had bit a fiumer, who 
soon becoming mad ran into his own yard, and bit 
a fine brindled cow ; the cow quickly became as 
mad as the man, began to foam at the mouth, aud 
raising herself up, walked about on her hind legs, 
sometimes barking like a dog, and sometimes at- 
tempting to talk like the fJEurmer. Upon examin- 
ing the grounds of this story, I found my landlady 
had it from one neighlxmr, who had it from 
another ne^hbour, who heard it from very good 
authority. 

Were most stories of this nature thoroughly 
examined, it would be found that numbers of such 
as have been said to suffer were no way injured, 
and that of those who have been actually bitten, 
not one in a hundred was bit by a mad dog. Such 
accounts in general therefore only serve to make 
the people miserable by fidse terrors, and some- 
times fright the patient into actual frenzy, by 
creating those very S3rmptoins they pretended to 
deplore. 

But even allowing three or four to die in a 
season of this terrible death (and four is probably 
too large a concession), yet still it is not considered, 
how many are preserved in their health and in 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 65 

their property by this devoted animal's services. 
The midnight robber is kept at a distance ; the in- 
sidious thief is often detected, the healthful chase 
repairs many a worn constitution, and the poor 
man finds in his dog a willing assistant, eager 
to lessen his toi^, and content with the smallest 
retribution. 

A dog, says one of the English poets, " is an 
hooest creature, and I am a finend to dogs.** Of 
•11 the beasts that graze the lawn or hunt the forest, 
a dog is the only animal, that leaving his fellows, 
attempts to cultivate the firiendship of man ; to 
man he looks in all his necessities with a speaking 
eye for assistance ; exerts for him all the little ser- 
vice in his power with cheerfulness and {Measure ; 
fiw him bears famine and fatigue with patience and 
fesignation ; no injuries can abate his fidelity, no 
distress induce him to forsake his benefactor ; stu- 
dious to please, and fearing to offend, he is still an 
humble stedfost dependant, and in him alone fawn- 
ing is not flattery. How unkind then to torture 
this faithful creature who has left the forest, to 
dum the protection of man ; how ungrateful a 
letum to the trusty animal for all its services. 
Adieu. 



IL 




66 THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD, 



LETTER LXX. 

From Lien Chi Altangi to Hingpo^ by the way of 

Moscow, 

|H£ Europeans are themselves blind, 
who describe fortune without sight. No 
first rate beauty ever had finer eyes, or 
saw more clearly ; they who have no 
other trade but seeking their fortune, need never 
hope to find her ; coquette like she flies firom her 
close pursuers, and at last fixes on the plodding 
mechanic, who stays at home, and minds his 
business. 

I am amazed how men can call her blind, when 
by the company she keeps she seems so very dis- 
cerning. Wherever you see a gaming-table, be 
very sure fortune is not there ; wherever you see 
an house with the doors open, be very sure for- 
tune is not there ; when you see a man whose 
pocket-holes are laced with gold, be satisfied for- 
tune is not there ; wherever you see a beautifal 
woman good-natured and obl^ing, be convinced 
fortune is never there. In short, she is ever seen 
accompanying industry, and as often trundling a 
wheelbarrow, as lolling in 9. coach and six. 

If you would make fortune your friend, or to 
personize her no longer, if you desire, my son, to 
be rich and have money, be more eager to save 
than to acquire : when people say. Money is to be 
got here^ and money is to be got there, take no 
notice ; mind your own business t stay where yoa 
are ; and secure all you can get, without stirring. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 67 

iVhen you hear that your neighbour has picked up 
I purse of gold in the street, never run out into 
hit same street, looking about you in order to pick 
ip such another : or when you are informed, that 
le has made a fortune in one branch of business, 
aever change your own, in order to be his rival. 
Do not desire to be rich all at once ; but patiently 
idd fiuthing to farthing. Perhaps you despise the 
petty sum ; and yet they who want a farthmg, and 
have no firiend that will lend them it, think far- 
things very good things. Whmg the foolish miller, 
nrhen he wanted a £Eurthing in his distress, found 
that no fnend would lend, because they knew he 
Hranted. Did you ever read the story of Whang in 
[mr books of Chinese learning ; he, who despising 
small sums, and grasping at all, lost even what he 
had? 

IVkangf the miller, was naturally avaricious ; 
Dobody loved money better than he, or more re- 
spected those that had it. When people would 
talk of a rich man in company. Whang would say, 
I know him very well ; he and I have been long 
acquainted ; he and I are intimate ; he stood for 
a child of mine : but if ever a poor man was men- 
tioned, he had not the least knowledge of the 
man ; he might be very well for aught he knew ; 
but he was not fond of many acquaintances, and 
loved to choose his company. 

Whang, however, with all his eagerness for 
riches, was in reality poor, he had nothing but the 
profits of his mill to support him, but though these 
irere small they were certain ; while his mill stood 
md went, he was sure of eating, and his frugality 
iras soch, that he every day laid some money by. 



68 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

which he would at intervals count and contemplate 
with much satisfaction. Yet still his acquisidoos 
were not equal to his desires, he only found him- 
self above Mrant, whereas he desired to be possessed 
of affluence. 

One day as he was indulging these wishes, he 
was informed, that a neighbour of his had found a 
pan of money under ground, having dreamed of it 
three nights running before. These tidii^ weie 
daggers to the heart of poor Whang, Here am I, 
says he, toiling and moiling from morning till 
night for a few paltry farthings, while neighbour 
Hunks only goes quietly to bed, and dreams him- 
self into thousands before morning. O that I could 
dream like him, with what pleasure would I dig 
round the pan ; how slily would I carry it home ; 
not even my wife should see me ; and then, O the 
pleasure of thrusting one's hand into a heap of gold 
up to the elbow ! 

Such reflections only served to make the miller 
unhappy ; he discontinued his former assiduity, he 
was quite disgusted with small gains, and his cus- 
tomers began to forsake him. Every day he re- 
peated the wish, and every night laid himself down 
in order to dream. Fortune that was for a long 
time unkind, at last however seemed to smile upon 
his distresses, and indulged him with the willed 
for vision. He dreamed, that under a certain part 
of the foundation of his mill, there was concealed 
a monstrous pan of gold and diamonds, buried 
deep in the ground, and covered with a large flat 
stone. He rose up, thanked the stars, that were 
at last pleased to take pity on hb sufferings, and 
concealed his good luck from every person, as is 



70 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 



LETTER LXXI. 

From Lien Chi Altcu^^ to Fum Hoam, first 1 
sident cf the Ceremamai Acadetny at PiHt^ 
China, 









[HE people of London are as fon 
walking as our friends of Ftki% 
riding ; one of the principal entert 
ments of the citizens here in summ 
to repair about nightfall to a garden not far J 
town, where they walk about, shew their 
clothes and best faces, and listen to a concert 
vided for the occasion. 

I accepted an invitation a few evenings ago! 
my old friend, the man in black, to be one 
party that was to sup there, and at the appoi 
hour waited upon him at his lodgings The 
found the company assembled and expecting 
arrival. Our party consisted of my friend in sv 
lative finery, his stockings rolled, a black V( 
waistcoat which was formerly new, and his 
wig combed down in imitation of hair. A pf 
broker's widow, of whom, by the bye, my fi 
was a professed admirer, dressed out in g 
damask, with three gold rings on every fir 
Mr. Tibhs^ the second-rate beau I have forn 
described, together with his lady, in flimsy 
dirty gauze instead of linen, and an hat as bi 
an umbrella. 

Our first difficulty was in settling how we sh 
set out. Mrs. Tibbs had a natural aversion tc 
water, and the widow being a little in flesl 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, ji 

Warmly protested against walking; a coach was 
therefore agreed upon ; which being too small to 
carry five, Mr. Tibbs consented to sit in his safe's 
lap. 

In this manner therefore we set forward, being 
entertained by the way with the bodings of Mr. 
TtMSf who assured us, he did not expect to see a 
single creature for the evening above the degree of 
a cheesemonger; that this was the last night of 
the gardens, and that consequently we should be 
pestered with the nobility and gentry from Thames^ 
Ureet and Crooked-lane^ with several other pro- 
phetic ejaculations probably inspired by the un- 
easiness of his situation. 

The illuminations began before we arrived, and 
I must confess, that upon entering the gardens, I 
found every sense overpaid with moce than ex- 
pected pleasure ; the lights every where glimmer- 
ing through the scarcely moving trees ; the full- 
bodied concert bursting on the stillness of the 
night, the natural concert of the birds in the more 
retired part of the Grove, vying with that which 
was formed by art ; the company gaily dressed, 
looking satisfaction, and the table spread with 
various delicacies, all conspired to fill my imagina- 
tion with the visionary happiness of the Arabian 
lawgiver, and lifted me into an extasy of admira- 
tion. Head of Confucius, cried I to my friend, 
this is fine ! this unites rural beauty with courtly 
magnificence ; if we except the virgins of immor- 
tality that hang on every tree, and may be plucked 
at every desire, I don't see how this falls short of 
Mahomefs Paradise! As for virgins, cries my 
friend, it is true, they are a fruit that don't much 



79 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

abound in our gardens here ; but if ladies as plenty 
as apples in autumn, and as complying as any 
houri of them all can content you, I £uicy, we 
have no need to go to heaven for Paradise. 

I was going to second his remarks, when we 
were called to a consultation by Mr. Tibbs and the 
rest of the company, to know in what manner we 
were to lay out the evening to the greatest advan- 
tage. Mrs. Tibbs was for keeping the genteel 
walk of the garden, where she observed there ¥7as 
always the very best company ; the widow, on the 
contrary, who came but once a season, was for 
securing a good standing-pllu:e to see the water- 
works, which she assured us would b^n in less 
than an hour at farthest ; a dispute therefore began, 
and as it was managed between two of very oppo- 
site characters, it threatened to grow more bitter 
at every reply. Mrs. Tibbs wondered how people 
could pretend to know the polite world who had 
received all their rudiments of breeding behind a 
counter ; to which the other replied, that tho' 
some people sat behind counters, yet they could 
sit at the head of their own tables too, and carve 
three good dishes of hot meat whenever they 
thought proper, which was more than some people 
could say for themselves, that hardly knew a rabbit 
and onions from a green goose and gooseberries. 

It is hard to say where this might have ended, 
had not the husband, who probably knew the 
impetuosity of his wife's disposition, proposed to 
end the dispute by adjourning to a box, and try if 
there was any thing to be had for supper that was 
supportable. To this we all consented, but here 
a new distress arose, Mr. and Mrs. Tibbs would 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. j% 

sit in none bat a genteel box, a box where tfaej 
might see and be seen, one, as thejr ejip i cs«J it, 
io the very focns of public Tiew ; but such a box 
WIS not easy to be obtained, idr though wc vcre 
poiectly convinced of our own gentility, and the 
gentnity of oar appeaiance, yet wc ioand it a difli- 
cnk matter to perniade the keepeis of the bom to 
be of onr opinion ; they diose to lescnpe genteel 
boMs for what they judged more genteel oompaoy. 

At last however we were fixed, though aonc- 
whit obscurely, and supplied with the usual enter- 
totmeat of the place. The widow found die supper 
eicdlent, but Mrs. Tibbs thoii^ eicry dnag de- 
testable : come, come, my dear, cries the huslund, 
fay way of consolation, to be sure we can't find 
ndi dressing here as we have at lord Cmmp't or 
bdy Crimp's ; but for Vanxhall dreaing it is pretty 
good ; it is not their victuals indeed I find findt 
with, but their wine ; their wine, cries he, drinking 
off a glass, indeed, is most abominable. 

By this last contradiction the widow was fidrly 
OQuqaered in point of politeness. She p ei c e i fe d 
now that she had no pretensions in the world to 
tiste, her very senses were vulgar, since she had 
poised detestable custard, and smacked at wretched 
wine ; she was therefore content to yiel^ the vic- 
toiy, and for the rest of the night to listen and 
intprove. It is true, she would now and then for- 
get herself, and confess she was pleased, but they 
>Qon brought her back again to miserable refine- 
iBeDt. She once praised the painting of the box 
i& which we were sitting, but was soon convinced 
that toch paltry pieces ought rather to excite horror 
than satisfaction ; she ventured again to commend 



74 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

one of the singers, but Mrs. Tibbs soon let her 
know, in the style of a connoisseur, that the linger 
in question had neither ear, voice, nor judgment. 

Mr. Tibbs Tioy9 willing to prove that his wife's 
pretensions to music were just, entreated her to 
fiivour the company with a song ; but to this she 
gave a positive denial, for you know very well, my 
dear, says she, that I am not in voice to day, aiKi 
when one's voice is not equal to one's judgment, 
what signifies singing ; besides as there is no ac- 
companiment, it would be but spoiling music. 
All these excuses however were overruled by the 
rest of the company, who, though one would think 
they already had music enough, joined in the 
entreaty. But particularly the widow, now willing 
to convince the company of her breeding, pressed 
80 warmly that she seemed determined to take no 
refusal. At last then the lady complied, and after 
humming for some minutes, began with such a 
voice and such affectation, as I could perceive gave 
but little satis£Eu:tion to any except her husband. 
He sat with rapture in his eye, and beat time with 
his hand on the table. 

You must observe, my friend, that it is the 
custom of this country, when a lady or gentleman 
happens to sing, for the company to sit as mute 
and motionless as statues. Every feature, every 
limb must seem to correspond in fixed attention, 
and while the song continues, they are to renuui 
in a state of universal petri^tion. In this mor< 
tifying situation we had continued for some time, 
listening to the song, and looking with tranquiUity, 
when the master of the box came to inform us, 
that the water-works were going to begin. Al 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 7$ 

this information I could instantly perceive the 
widow bounce from her seat ; but correcting her- 
self, she sat down again, repressed by motives of 
good breeding. Mrs. Tibbs^ who had seen the 
water-works an hundred times, resolved not to be 
intarmpted, continued her song without any share 
of mercy, nor had the smallest pity on our impa- 
tience. The widow's &ce, I own, gave me high 
entertainment ; in it I could plainly read the 
stmggle she felt between good breeding and cu- 
riosity ; she talked of the water-works the whole 
evenii^ before, and seemed to have come merely 
in order to see them; but then she could not 
bdmce out in the very middle of a song, for that 
would be forfeiting all pretensions to high life, or 
hig^-tived company ever after : Mrs. TUbi there- 
fore kept on singing, and we continued to listen^ 
till at last, when the song was just concluded, the 
waiter came to inform us that the water-works 
were over t 

The water-works over, cried the widow t the 
water-works over already, that's impossible, they 
can't be over so soon ! It is not my business, 
replied the fellow, to contradict your ladyship, I'll 
ran again and see ; he went, and soon returned 
with a confirmation of the dismal tidings. No 
ceremony could now bind my friend's disappointed 
mistress, she testified her displeasure in the openest 
manner ; in short, she now began to find fault in 
torn, and at last, insisted upon going home, just 
at the time that Mr. and Mrs. Tibbs assured the 
company, that the polite hours were going to begin, 
and that the ladies would instantaneously be enter- 
tained with the horns. Adieu. 



y6 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

LETTER LXXII. 
Frtnn the same. 



m 






OT &r from this city lives a poor tinkeri 
who has educated seven sons, all at this 
very time in arms and fighting for tbdi 
country, add what reward do yoa think 
has the tinker from the state for such important 
services ? None in the world ; his sons, when the 
vrar is over, may probably be whipt from parish 
to parish as vagabonds, and the old man, when 
past labour, may die a prisoner in some house of 
correction. 

Such a worthy subject in China would be held 
in universal reverence ; his services would be re- 
warded, if not with dignities, at least with an 
exemption from labour ; he would take the left 
hand at feasts, and mandarines themselves would 
be proud to shew their submission. The EngUsk 
laws punish vice, the Chinese laws do moie, thef 
reward virtue 1 

Considering the little encouragements given to 
matrimony here, I am not surprized at the dis- 
couragements given to propagation. Would you 
believe it, my dear Fum Hoam^ there are laws 
made, which even forbid the peoples marrying 
each other. By the head of Confucius I jest not ; 
there are such laws in being here ; and yet their 
law-givers have neither been instructed among the 
Hottentots^ nor imbibed their principles of equity 
frx)m the natives of Anamaboo. 

There are laws which ordain, that no man shall 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, n 

many a woman against her own consent This 
though contrary to what we are taught in AsiOf 
and thoi]^h in some measure a clog upon matri- 
mony, I have no great objection to. There are 
laws which ordain, that no woman shall marry 
against her fiEither and mother's consent, unless 
arrived at an age of maturity ; by which is under- 
stood those years, when women with us are gene- 
rally past child-bearing. This must be a clog upon 
matrimony, as it is more difficult for the lover to 
please three than one, and much more difficult 
to please old people than young ones. The laws 
ordain, that the consenting couple shall take a 
long time to consider before they marry, this is a 
very great dog, because people love to have all rash 
actions done in a hurry. It is ordained, that all 
marriages shall be proclaimed before celebration ; 
this is a severe clog, as many are ashamed to 
have their marriage made public, from motives of 
vidofos modesty, and many afraid from views of 
temporal interest It is ojdained, that there is 
nothing sacred in the ceremony, but that it may 
be dissolved to all intents and purposes by the 
authority of any dvil magistrate, ^d yet oppo- 
site to this it is ordained, that the priest shall be 
paid a large sum of money for granting his sacred 
permission. 

Thus you see, my friend, that matrimony here 
is hedged round with so many obstructions, that 
those who are willing to break through or sur- 
mount them must be contented, if at last they find 
it a bed of thorns. The laws are not to blame, for 
they have deterred the people from engaging as 
much as they could. It is indeed become a very 



78 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

serious affair in England^ and none but serious 
people are generally found willing to engage. 
The young, the gay, and the beautiful, who have 
motives of passion only to induce them, are seldom 
found to embark, as those inducements are taken 
avray, and none but the old, the ugly, and the 
mercenary are seen to unite, who, if they have 
any posterity at all, will probably be an ill-£ivoQxed 
race like themselves. 

What gave rise to those laws might have been 
some such accidents as these. It sometimes hap* 
pened, that a miser who had spent all his youth, 
in scraping up money to give his daughter sadi 
a fortune as might get her a mandarine husband, 
found his expectations disappointed at last, hy her 
running away with his footman: this must have 
been a sad shock to the poor disconsolate parent, 
to see his poor daughter in a one horse chaise, 
when he had designed her for a coach and six : 
what a stroke from Providence ! to see his dear 
money go to enrich a beggar ; all Nature cried out 
at the profonation I 

It sometimes happened also, that a lady who 
had inherited all the titles, and all the nervous 
complaints of nobility, thought fit to impair her 
dignity and mend her constitution, by marrying 
a farmer; this must have been a sad shock to 
her inconsolable relations, to see so fine a flower 
snatched from a flourishing family, and planted in 
a dunghill ; this was an absolute inversion of the 
first principles of things. 

In order, therefore, to prevent the Great from 
being thus contaminated by vulgar alliances, the 
obstacles to matrimony have been so fiOQtris^y 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 79 

It the rich only can marry amongst the rich, 
d the poor, who would leave celibacy, must be 
QtcQt to encrease their poverty with a wife. Thus 
n their laws fairly inverted the inducements to 
itrimooy; Nature tells us, that beauty is the 
)par allurement of those who are rich, and 
aey of those who are poor ; but things here 
!» contrived, that the rich are invited to marry 
that fortune which they do not want, and the 
r have no inducement, but that beauty which 
y do not feel. 

Ui equal diffusion of riches through any country 
r constitutes its hapfuness. Great wealth in the 
wemkcxt of one stagnates, >and extreme poverty 
li another keei>s him in unambitious indigence; 

the moderately rich are generally active ; not 
fiur removed from poverty to fear its calamities ; 

too near extreme wealth to slacken the nerve 
labour, they still remain between both in a 
e of continual fluctuation. How impolitic 
refore are those laws which promote the accu- 
lation of wealth among the rich, more impolitic 
[ in attempting to increase the depression on 
erty. 

taicon the English philosopher, compares money 
nanure, if gathered in heaps, sajrs he, it does no 
d ; on the contrary, it becomes offensive. But 
Qg spread, though never so thinly, over the 
face of the earth, it enriches the whole country, 
na the wealth a nation possesses must expa- 
e, or it is of no benefit to the public ; it becomes 
tier a grievance, where matrimonial laws thus 
ifine it to a few. 
But this restraint upon matrimonial community, 



8o THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

even considered in a physical light, is injorioas.' 
As those who rear up animals take all possible 
pains to cross the strain in order to improve the 
breed ; so in those countries, where marriage is 
most free, the inhabitants are found every age to 
improve in stature and in beauty; on the contraiy, 
where it is confined to a caste^ a tribe^ or an ktfi^ 
as among the Gaurs, the Jews, or the TartaiSi 
each division soon assumes a &mily likeness, and 
every tribe degenerates into peculiar deformity. 
From hence it may be easily inferred, that if the 
mandarines here are resolved only to many among 
each other, they will soon produce a posterity with 
mandarine faces; and we shall see the heir of 
some honourable family, scarce equal to the abor- 
tion of a country former. 

These are a few of the obstacles to marriage 
here, and it is certain, they have in some measure 
answered the end, for celibacy is both frequent 
and fJEishionable. Old bachelors appear abroad 
without a mask, and old maids, my dear Fum 
Hoaniy have been absolutely known to ogle. To 
confess in friendship, if I were an Englishman, I 
fancy I should be an old bachelor myself; I should 
never find courage to run through all the adven- 
tures prescribed by the law. I could submit M 
court my mistress herself upon reascmable tefOHi' 
but to court her &ther, her mother, and a long 
tribe of cousins, aunts, and relations, and then 
stand the butt of a whole country church; I 
would as soon turn tail and make love to her 
grandmother. 

I can conceive no other reason for thus loading 
matrimony with so many prohibitions, unless it be 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 8x 

that the country was thought already too populous, 
and this was found to be the most effectual means 
of thinning it. If this was the motive, I cannot 
but congratulate the wise projectors on the success 
of their scheme. Hail, O ye dim-sighted poli- 
ticians, ye weeders of men ! 'Tis yours to clip the 
wing of industry, and convert H3rmen to a broker. 
*Tis yours to behold small objects with a micro- 
scopic eye, but to be blind to those which require 
in extent of vision. Tis yours, O ye discemers 
of mankind, to lay the line between society, and 
weaken that force by dividing, which should bind 
with united vigour. Tis yours, to introduce na- 
tional real distress, in order to avoid the imaginary 
distresses of a few. Your actions can be justified 
by an hundred reasons like truth, they can be op- 
posed by but a few reasons, and those reasons are 
true. FarewelL 



LETTER LXXIII. 

From Lien Chi Altangi to Hingpo^ by the way of 

Moscow, 

[G£ that lessens the enjoyment of life 
increases our desire of living. Those 
dangers, which, in the vigour of youth 
we had learned to despise, assume new 
ienrots as we grow old. Our caution increasing as 
Qv years increase, fear becomes at last the pre- 
vnling passion of the mind; and the small re- 
mainder of life is taken up in useless efforts to keep 
off onr end, or provide for a continued existence. 

11. G 




88 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

Strange contradiction in our nature, and tc 
which even the wise ore liable ! If I should judg< 
of that part of life which lies before me by tha 
which I have already seen, the prospect is hideous 
Experience tells me, that my past enjoyments hav 
brought no real felicity ; and sensation assures mc 
that those I have felt are stronger than those whic 
are yet to come. Yet experience and sensation i 
vain persuade ; hope, more powerful than eithe 
dresses out the distant prospect in fancied beauti 
some happiness in long perspective still beckoi 
me to pursue, and, like a losing gamester, evei 
new disappointment increases my ardour to coi 
tinue the game. 

Whence, my friend, this increased love of lii 
which grows upon us with our years; wbeni 
comes it, that we thus make greater efforts to pi 
serve our existence, at a period when it becom 
scarce worth the keeping? Is it that Natui 
attentive to the preservation of mankind, increas 
our wishes to live, while she lessens our enjo 
ments ; and, as she robs the senses of every pie 
sure, equips imagination in the spoil ? Life wou 
l)e insupportable to an old man, who, loaded wi 
infirmities, feared death no more than when in t 
vigour of manhood ; the numberless calamities 
decaying nature, and the consciousness of si 
viving every pleasure, would at once induce hi 
with his own hand to terminate the scene 
misery; but happily the contempt of death f( 
sakes him at a time when it could only be prej 
dicial ; and life acquires an imaginary value, 
proportion as its real value is no more. 

Our attachment to every object around us i 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 83 

creases, in general, from the length of our ac- 
quaintance with it. I would not choose, says a 
French philosopher, to see an old post pulled up, 
with which I had been long acquainted. A mind 
long habituated to a certain set of objects, in- 
sensibly becomes fond of seeing them ; visits them 
from habit, and parts from them with reluctance : 
from hence proceed the avarice of the old in every 
kind of possession. They love the world and all 
that it produces ; they love life and all its advan- 
tages ; not because it gives them pleasure, but 
because they have known it long. 

Chinvang, the Chaste, ascending the throne of 
China, commanded that all who were unjustly 
detained in prison, during the preceding reigns, 
should be set free. Among the number who came 
to thank their deliverer on this occasion, there 
appeared a majestic old man, who, falling at the 
emperor's feet, addressed him as follows : '* Great 
father of China, behold a wretch, now eighty-five 
years old, who was shut up in a dungeon at the 
age of twenty-two. I was imprisoned, though a 
stranger to crime, or without being even confronted 
by my accusers. I have now lived in solitude and 
darkness for more than fifty years, and am grown 
familiar with distress. As yet dazzled with the 
splendour of that sun to which you have restored 
me, I have been wandering the streets to find some 
friend that would assist, or relieve, or remember 
me ; but my friends, my family, and relations, are 
all dead, and I am forgotten. Permit me then, O 
Chinvang, to wear out the wretched remains of 
life in my former prison ; the walls of my dungeon 
are, to me, more pleasing than the most splendid 



84 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

palace ; I have not long to live, and shall be un- 
happy except I spend the rest of my days where 
my youth was passed ; in that prison from whence 
you were pleased to release me.'* 

The old man*s passion for confinement b amilar 
to that we all have for life. We are habituated to 
the prison, we look round with discontent, are dis- 
pleased with the abode, and yet the length of ooi 
captivity only increases our fondness for the celL 
The trees we have planted, the houses we have 
built, or the posterity we have begotten, all serve 
to bind us closer to earth, and embitter our parting. 
Life sues the young like a new acquaintance ; the 
companion, as yet unexhausted, is at once instruc* 
tive and amusing, 'tis company pleases, yet for all 
this it is but little regarded. To us, who are de- 
clined in years, life appears like an old friend ; its 
jests have been anticipated in former conversation ; 
it has no new story to make us smile, no new 
improvement with which to surprize, yet still we 
love it ; destitute of every agreement, still we love 
it ; husband the wasting treasure with increased 
frugality, and feel all the poignancy of anguish in 
the fatal separation. 

Sir Philip Mordaunt was young, beautiful, sin- 
cere, brave, an Englishman. He had a complete 
fortune of his own, and the love of the king his 
master, which was equivalent to riches. Life 
opened all her treasure before him, and promised 
a long succession of future happiness. He came, 
tasted of the entertainment, but was disgusted even 
in the beginning. He professed an aversion to 
living, was tired of walking round the same circle ; 
had tried every enjoyment, and found them all 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 85 

grow weaker at every repetition. " If life be in 
jrouth so displeasing, cried he to himself, what 
will it appear when age comes on ; if it be at pre- 
sent indifferent, sure it will then be execrable." 
This thought embittered every reflection ; till, at 
last, with all the serenity of perverted reason, he 
ended the debate with a pistol I Had this self-de- 
hided man been apprized, that existence grows 
more desirable to us the longer we exist, he would 
iMMTCtfien^faced old age without shrinking, he 
would have boldly dared to live, and served that 
society, by his future assiduity, which he basely 
injured by his desertion. Adieu. 



LETTER LXXIV. 

From Lien Chi Altangi^ to Futn Hoam^ first Pre- 
sident of the Ceremonial Academy ^ at Pekin^ in 
China, 

|N reading the news-papers here, I have 
reckoned up not less than twenty-five 
great men, seventeen very great men, 
and nine very extraordinary men in less 
than the compass of half a year. These, say the 
gazettes, are the men that posterity are to gaze at 
with admiration ; these the names that fame will 
be employed in holding up for the astonishment of 
succeeding ages. Let me see — forty-six great men 
in half a year, amounts just to ninety-two in a year. 
— >-I wonder how posterity will be able to remember 
them all, or whether the people, in future times. 




86 THE CITlZEtr OF THE WORLD, 

9 

will have any other business to mind, but that of 
getting the catalogue by heart. 

Does the mayor of a corporation make a speech? 
he is instantly set down for a great man. Does a 
pedant digest his common place book into a folio? 
he quickly becomes great. Does a poet string up 
trite sentiments in rhyme? he also becomes the 
great man of the hour. How diminutive soever 
the object of admiration, each is followed by a 
crowd of still more diminutive admirers. The 
shout begins in his train, onward he marches 
towards immortality, looks back at the pursuing 
crowd with self-satisfaction ; catching all the oddi- 
ties, the whimsies, the absurdities, and the little- 
nesses of conscious greatness, by the way. 

I was yesterday invited by a gentleman to dinner, 
who promised that our entertainment should con- 
consist of an haunch of venison, a turtle, and a 
great man. I came, according to appointment. 
The venison was fine, the turtle good, but the 
great man insupportable. The moment I ventured 
to speak, I was at once contradicted with a snap. 
I attempted, by a second and a third assault, to r^ 
trieve my lost reputation, but was still beat back 
with confusion. I was resolved to attack him once 
more from entrenchment, and turned the conver- 
sation upon the government of China : but even 
here he asserted, snapped, and contradicted as 
before. Heavens, thought I, this man pretends 
to know China even better than myself ! I looked 
round to see who was on my side, but every eye 
was fixed in admiration on the great man ; I there- 
fore, at last thought proper to sit silent, and act the 
pretty gentleman during the ensuing conversatioii. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 87 

When a man has once secured a circle of ad- 
mirers, he may be as ridiculous here as he thinks 
proper ; and it all passes for elevation of sentiment, 
or learned absence. If he transgresses the common 
fonns of breeding, mistakes even a tea-pot for a 
tobacco-box, it is said, that his thoughts are fixed 
on more important objects : to speak and act like 
the rest of mankind is to be no greater than they. 
There is something of oddity in the very idea ^ of 
greatness ; for we are seldom astonished at a thing 
very much resembling ourselves. 

When the Tartars make a Lama, their first care 
is to place him in a dark comer of the temple ; 
here he is to sit half concealed from view, to regu- 
late the motion of his hands, lips, and eyes ; but, 
above all, he is enjoined gravity and silence. This, 
however, is but the prelude to his apotheosis : a 
set of emissaries are dispatched among the people 
to cry up his piety, gravity, and love of raw flesh ; 
the people take them at their word, approach the 
Lama, now become an idol, with the most humble 
prostration ; he receives their addresses without 
motion, commences a god, and is ever after fed by 
his priests with the spoon of immortality. The 
same receipt in this country serves to make a great 
man. The idol only keeps close, sends out his 
little emissaries to be hearty in his praise; and 
straight, whether statesman or author, he is set 
down in the list of fame, continuing to be praised 
while it is fashionable to praise, or while he pru- 
dently keeps his minuteness concealed from the 
public. 

I have visited many countries, and have been in 
cities without number, yet never did I enter a town 



9i THB CITIZEN OP THB WORLD, 

which could not produce ten or twelve of those 
little great men ; all fencjring themselves known 
to the rest of the world, lemd complimenting each 
other upon their extensive reputation. It is amus- 
ing enough when two of those domestic prodigies 
of learning mount the stage of ceremony, and give 
and take praise from each other. I have been pie* 
sent when a German doctor, for having pironouneed 
a panegyric upon a certain monk, was thought the 
most ingenious man in the world ; till the monk 
soon after divided this reputation by returning the 
compliment $ by which means they both marched 
off with universal applause. 

The same degree of undeserved adulation that 
attendsv our great man while living, often also 
follows him to the tomb. It frequently happens 
that one of his little admirers sits down big with 
the important subject, and is delivered of the bis* 
tory of his life and writings. This may properly 
be called the revolutions of a life between the fire- 
side and the easy-chair. In this we learn, the 
year in which he was bom, at what an early age 
he gave symptoms of uncommon genius and appli* 
cation, together with some of his smart sajongs, 
collected by his aunt and mother, while yet but a 
boy. The next book introduces him to the univer- 
sity, where we are informed of his amazing pro- 
gress in learning, his excellent skill in darning 
stockings, and his new invention for papering 
lxx)ks to save the covers. He next makes his ap- 
pearance in the republic of letters, and publishes 
his folJ<x Now the colossus is reared, his works 
are eagerly bought up by all the purchasers of 
scarce, books. The learned societies invite him to 



THS CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, tg 

become a member; he disputes against some 
foreigner with a long Latin name, conquers in the 
cootroversy, is complimented by several authors of 
gnKTity and importance, is excessively fond of egg- 
WQce with his pig, becomes president of a literary 
dab, and dies in the meridian of his glory. Ha{^ 
they, who thus have some little £uthful attendant, 
who never forsakes them, but prepares to wrangle 
tad to praise against every opposer ; at once ready 
to increase their pride while living, and their cha- 
racter when dead« For yon and I, my friend, who 
have no humble admirer thus to attend us, we, who 
neither are, nor ever will be great men, and who do 
not much care whether we are great men or no, at 
least let us strive to be honest men, and to have 
common sense. 




LETTER LXXV. 
To the same, 

[HERE are numbers in this city who live 
by ¥rriting new books ; and yet there 
are thousands of volumes in every large 
library unread and forgotten. This, 
upon my arrival, was one of those contradictions 
which I was unable to account for. Is it possible, 
said I, that there should be any demand for new 
books, before those already published are read? 
Can there be so many employed in producing a 
commodity, with which the market is already over- 
stodced $ and with goods also better than any of 
modem manufacture ! 



90 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

What at first view appeared an inconsistence, is 
a proof at once of this people's Mosdom and refine- 
ment. Even allowing the works of their ancestors 
better written than theirs, yet those of the modems 
acquire a real value, by being marked with the 
impression of the times. Antiquity has been in 
the possession of others, the present is our own ; 
let us first therefore learn to know what belongs to 
ourselves, and then, if we have leisure, cast our 
reflections back to the reign of Shonou^ who 
governed twenty thousand years before the creation 
of the moon. 

The volumes of antiquity, like medals, may very 
well serve to amuse the curious, but the works of 
the modems, like the current coin of a kingdom, 
are much better for immediate use; the former are 
often prized above their intrinsic value, and kept 
with care, the latter seldom pass for more than 
they are worth, and are often subject to the merci- 
less hands of sweating critics, and clipping com- 
pilers ; the works of antiquity were ever praised, 
those of the modems read ; the treasures of our 
ancestors have our esteem, and we boast the pas-' 
sion ; those of contemporary genius engage our 
heart, although we blush to own it The visits we 
pay the former resemble those we pay the great i 
the ceremony is troublesome, and yet such as we 
would not choose to forego; our acquaintance with 
modem books, is like sitting with a friend ; our 
pride is not flattered in the interview, but it gives 
more intemal satisfaction. 

In proportion as society refines, new books must 
ever become more necessary. Savage rusticity is re- 
claimed by oral admonition alone ; but the elegant 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 91 

excesses of refinement are best corrected by the 
still voice of studious enquiry. In a polite age, al- 
most every person becomes a reader, and receives 
more instruction from the press than the pulpit. 
The preaching Bonze may instruct the illiterate 
peasant; but nothing less than the insinuating 
address of a fine writer, can win its way to an 
heart already relaxed in all the effeminacy of re- 
finement. Books are necessary to correct the vices 
of the polite, but those vices are ever changing, 
and the antidote should be changed accordingly ; 
should still be new. 

Instead, therefore, of thinking the number of 
new publications here too great, I could wish it 
still greater, as they are the most useful instru- 
ments of reformation. Every country must be 
instructed either by writers or preachers ; but as 
the number of readers increases, the number of 
hearers is proportionably diminished, the writer 
becomes more useful, and the preaching Bonze less 
necessary. 

Instead, therefore, of complaining that writers 
are overpaid, when their works procure them a 
bare subsistence, I should imagine it the duty of a 
state not only to encourage their numbers, but 
their industry. A Bonze is rewarded with immense 
riches for instructing only a few, even of the most 
^orant, of the people ; and sure the poor scholar 
should not beg his bread, who is capable of in- 
structing a million. 

Of all rewards, I grant, the most pleasing to a 
man of real merit, is fame ; but a polite age, of all 
times, is that in which scarce any share of merit 
can acquire it What numbers of fine writers in 



ga THE CITlZEif OF THE iVORLD. 

the Utter empire of Rome, when refinement was 
carried to the highest pitch, have missed that &me 
and immortality which they had fondly arrogated 
to themselves? How many Greek authors, who 
wrote at that period when Constantinople was the 
refined mistress of the empire^ now rest either not 
printed, or not read, in the libraries of Europe I 
Those who came first, while either state as yet was 
barbarous, carried all the reputation away. Authors, 
as the age refined, became more numerous, and 
their numbers destroyed their fieime. It is but 
natural, therefore, for the writer, when conscious 
that his works will not procure him fame hereafter, 
to endeavour to make them turn out to his tem- 
poral interest here. 

Whatever be the motives which induce men to 
write, whether avarice or fame, the country be* 
comes most wise and happy, in which they most 
serve for instructors. The countries where sacer- 
dotal instruction alone is permitted, remain in 
ignorance, superstition, and hopeless slavery. In 
England, where there are as many new books 
published as in all the rest of Europe together, a 
spirit of freedom and reason reigns among the 
people ; they have been often known to act like 
fools, they are generally found to think like men« 

The only danger that attends a multiplicity of 
publications, is that some of them may be calcu- 
lated to injure, rather than benefit society. But 
where writers are numerous, they also serve as a 
check upon each other; and perhaps a literary 
inquisition is the most terrible punishment that can 
be conceived, to a literary transgressor. 

But, to do the English justice, there are but few 



THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD. 93 

offenders of this kind, their publications in general 
aim at mending either the heart, or improving the 
common weaL The dullest writer talks of virtue, 
and liberty, and benevolence, with esteem ; tells 
his true st(»y, filled with good and wholesome 
advice ; warns against slavery, bribery, or the bite 
of a mad dog, and dresses up his little useful 
Biagacine of knowledge and entertainment, at least 
with a good intention. The dunces of Franee, on 
the other hand, who have less encouragement, are 
more vidoos. Tender hearts, languishing eyes, 
LeoncMra in love at thirteen, extatic transports, 
st<^en blisses, are the frivolous subjects of their 
finvdons menuw* In England, if a bawdy block- 
head thus breaks in on the community, he sets his 
whc^e fraternity in a roar ; nor can he escape, even 
thougih he should fly to nobility for shelter. 

Thus even dunces, my friend, may make them- 
selves nsefuL But there are others whom Nature 
has blest with talents above the rest of mankind ; 
men capable of thinking vdth precision, and im- 
pressing their thought with rapidity. Beings who 
difinse those r^ards upon mankind, which others 
contract and settle upon themselves. These de- 
serve every honour from that community of which 
they are more peculiarly the children ; to such I 
would give my heart, since to them I am indebted 
foe its humanity. Adieu* 



p« TS£ CinZEX OF THE IFORLD, 

LETTER LXX\a. 

Frvm Simsfm i» Liem Cki AUamgi, by the way of 




STILL remain at Terh\ where I have 
i Tc d\ Tid that mooey, which was le* 
mined boe in ofder to rdease xne from 
capdritj. M j £ur companion still im- 
pnyrcs in mj esteem ; the more I know her mind, 
her beanty becomes more po^nant ; she appears 
cbarnui^, eren amoi^ the daughters of Ctrrassia, 
Vet were I to examine her beauty with the art 
of a statnarr, I should find nmnbers here that far 
surpass her; Natnre has not granted her all the 
boasted Cirrassiam legnlarity of feature, and yet 
she greatly exceeds the fisiirest of the country, in 
the art of seizing the affections. Whence, have 1 
often said to mj'self, this resistless magic that 
attends even moderate charms ? Though I regard 
the beauties of the country with admiration, every 
interview i^'eakens the impression, but the form of 
2^1is grows upon my imagination, I never behold 
her without an increase of tenderness and respect 
\Vhence this injustice of the mind in preferring 
imperfect beauty to that which Nature seems to 
have finished with care? whence the infatuation, 
that he whom a comet could not amaze, should be 
astonished at a meteor ! When reason was thus 
fatigued to find an answer, my imagination pursued 
the subject, and this was the result. 

I fancied myself placed between two landscapes, 
this called the region of Beatity, and that the 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 95 

valley of the Graces ; the one adorned with all that 
luxuriant nature could bestow ; the fruits of various 
climates adorned the trees, the grove resounded 
with music, the gale breathed perfume, every charm 
that could arise from symmetry and exact distribu- 
tion were here conspicuous, the whole offering a 
prospect of pleasure without end. The valley of 
ths Graces on the other hand, seemed by no means 
so inviting ; the streams and the groves appeared 
jnst as they asually do in frequented countries ; no 
magnificent parterres, no concert in the grove, the 
rivulet was edged with weeds, and the rook joined 
its voice to that of the nightingale. All was sim- 
plicity and nature. 

The most striking objects ever first allure the 
traveller; I entered the region of Beauty with 
increased curiosity, and promised myself endless 
aattrfaction in bdng introduced to the presiding 
goddess. I perceived several strangers, who en- 
tered with the same design, and what surprised 
me not a little, was to see several others hastening 
to leave this abode of seeming felicity. 

After some &tigue, I had at last the honour of 
being introduced to the goddess, who represented 
Beauty in person. She was seated on a throne, 
at the foot of which stood several strangers lately 
introduced like me; all ga2dng on her form in 
extasy. Ah^ what eyes! what lips ! how clear her 
complexion! how perfect her shape! at these ex- 
clamations Beauty with downcast eyes, would en- 
deavour to counterfeit modesty, but soon again 
looking round as if to confirm every spectator in 
bis favourable sentiments, sometimes she would 
attempt to allure us by smiles; and at intervals 



96 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

would bridle back, in oider to inspire ns with 
respect as well as tenderness. 

This ceremony lasted for some time, and had 
so much employed our e]re8, that we had forgot 
all this while that the goddess was silenL We 
soon, however, began to perceive the defect: 
JVhai, said we, among each other, are we U kmft 
nothing but languiihing airs^ soft looks, and isicH- 
nations of the head, wtU the goddess only deign t$ 
satisfy our eyes f Upon this one of the cowigoaxf 
stepped up to present her with some fruits be had 
gathered by the way. She received the present 
most sweetly smiling, and with one of the whitest 
hands in the world, but still not a word eacKpci 
her lips. 

I now found that my companions grew weaiy 
of their homage ; they went oflP one by one, and 
resolving not to be left behind, I offered to go in 
my turn ; when just at the door of the temple I 
was called back by a female, whose name was 
Pride, and who seemed displeased at the behaviour 
of the company. Where are you hastening t said 
she to me with an angry sir ^ the goddess of Beauty 
is here* I have been to visit her, Madam, replied 
I, and find her more beautiful even than report 
had made her. Af$d why then will you Uatie korf 
added the female. I have seen her long cnotighy 
returned I ; I have got all her features by heart 
Her eyes are still the same. Her nose is a very 
fine one, but it is still just such a nose now, as it 
was half an hour ago: could she throw a Uttle 
more mind into her face, perhaps I should be for 
wishing to have more of her company. What 
signifies, replied my female, whether she has a 



\ 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 97 

ndndornat ; has she any occasiffH for a mind, so 
formed as she is by nature ? If she had a common 
face, indeed, there might be some reason for thinking 
to improve it ; but when features are edready per' 
feet, every alteration would hut impair them, A 
fine face is edreculy at the point of perfection, and a 
fine lady should endeavour to keep it so; the im^ 
pressum it would receive from thought, would but 
disturb its whole economy. 

To this speech I gave no reply, but made the 
best of my way to the valley of the Graces. Here 
I found all those who before had been my com- 
panions in the region of beauty, now npon> the 
same errand. 

As we entered the valley, the pzx)spect insensibly 
seemed to improve; we found every thing so 
natural, so domestic, and pleasing, that our minds, 
which before were ccmgealed in. admiration, now 
relaxed into gaiety and good-humour. We had 
designed to pay our respects to the presiding god- 
dess, but she was no where to be found. One of 
our companions asserted, that her temple lay to 
the right; another, to the left; a third, insisted 
that it was straight before us ; and a fourth, that 
we had left it behind. In short, we found every 
thing familiar and charming, but could not deter- 
mine where to seek for the Grace in person. 

In this agreeable incertitude we passed several 
hours, and though very desirous of finding the 
goddess, by no means impatient of the dday. 
Every part of the valley presented some minute 
beauty, which without offering itself at once, stole 
upon the soul, and captivated us with the charms 
of our retreat. Still, however, we continued to 

II. H 



98 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

search, and might still have continued, had we 
not been interrupted by a voice which, though we 
could not see from whence it came, addressed us 
in this manner : 

" If you would find the goddess of Grace, sedc 
her not under one form, for she assumes a thoa- 
sand. Ever changing under the eye of inspectioo, 
her variety, rather than her figure, is pleasing. In 
contemplating her beauty, the eye glides over every 
perfection vrith g^ddy delight, and, capable of fixing 
no where, is charmed with the whole. ^ She is 
now Contemplation with solemn look, again Com* 
passion with humid ejre ; she now sparkles with 
joy, soon every feature speaks distress : her looks 
at times invite cur approach, at others repress oar 
presumption ; the goddess cannot be properly called 
beautiful under any one of these forms, but by com- 
bining them all, she becomes irresistibly pkasing." 
Adieu. 



LETTER LXXVII. 

From Lien Chi Altangiy to Fum Hoam^ first ?n- 
sident of the Ceremonial Academy y ai FiHh in 
China, 

I HE shops of London are as well for* 
nished as those of Pekin. Those of 
London have a picture hung at their 
door, informing the passengers what 
they have to sell, as those at Pekin have a board 
to assure the buyer, that they have no intentions 
to cheat him. 

1 '* ViUtus nlmitim lubricus aspici*" — Hon. 




THE CmZMN OF THR WORLD, 99 

I was this morning to buy silk for a night-cap ; 
immediately upon entering the mercer's shop, the 
master and his two men, vrith wigs plastered with 
powder, appeared to ask my commands. They 
were certainly the civilest people alive ; if I but 
looked, they flew to the place where I cast my 
eye; every motion of mine sent them nmning 
round the whole shop for my satisfaction. I 
informed them that I wanted what was good, and 
they shewed me not less than forty pieces, and 
each was better than the former; the prettiest 
pattern in nature, and the fittest in the world for 
night-caps. My very good friend, said I to the 
mercer, you must not pretend to instruct me in 
silks, I know these in particular to be no better 
than your mere flimsy Bungees, That may be^ 
cried the mercer, who I afterwards found had 
never contradicted a man in his life, / cati^t pre- 
tend to say but they may ; but I can assure you^ 
my Lady Trail has had a sacque from this piece 
this very morning. But friend, said I, though my 
lady has chosen a sacque firom it, I see no necessity 
that I should wear it for a night-cap. That may 
bey returned he again, yet what becomes a pretty 
lady^ will at any time look well on a handsome 
gentleman. This short compliment was thrown in 
so very seasonably upon my ugly Uuie, that even 
thoi^h I disliked the silk, I desired him to cut me 
oflf the pattern of a night-cap. 

While this business was consigned to his jour- 
neyraaokf the master himself took down some pieces 
of silk still finer than any I had yet seen, and 
spfeading them before me, There, cries he, there*s 
ieauty, my Lord Snakeskin has bespoke the fellow 



loo THB CITIZEN OP THE WORLD. 

to this for the birtk'night this very mormng ; it 
VHfuid look charmingiy in waistcoais. But I don't 
.want a waistcoat, replied I : Noi watU a waist- 
coat, returned the mercer, tkem I would advise you 
to buy one; when waistcoats are wanted^ you may 
depend upon it they will come dear* Always bt^ 
before you want, and you are sure to be well used, 
as they say in Cheapside, There was so much 
justice in his advice, that I could not refuse taking 
it ; besides, the silk, which was really a good one, 
increased the temptation, so I gave orders for that 
too. 

As I was waiting to have my bargains measured 
and cut, which I know not how, they executed 
but slowly ; during the interval, the mercer enter- 
tained me with the modem manner of some of the 
nobility receiving company in their morning gowns ; 
Perhaps, Sir, adds he, you have a mind to see what 
kind of silk is universally worn. Without waiting 
for my reply, he spreads a piece before me, which 
might be reckoned beautiful even in China. If 
the nobility, continues he, were to know I sold this 
to any under a Right Honourable, I should cer- 
tainly lose their custom ; you see, my Lord, it is at 
once rich, tasty, and quite the things I am no 
Lord, interrupted I. — / beg pardon, cried he, but 
be pleased to remember, when you intend buying a 
morning, gown, that you had an ojfer from me (f 
somethingworth money. Conscience, Sir, conscience 
is my way of dealing; you may buy a momittggewn 
now, or you may stay till they become dectrer and 
less fashionable, but it is not my business to advise. 
In short, most reverend Fum, he persuaded me to 
buy a morning gown also, and would probably 



- .V 



TUB CITIZEN OF THE WORLDS. wt 

have persuaded me to have bought half the good» 
in his shop, if I had stayed long enough or was 
fomished with sufficient money. 

Upon retnming home, I could not help re- 
fleeting with some astonishment, how this very 
man with such a confined education and capacity, 
vas yet capable of turning me as he thou^t 
proper, and moulding me to his inclinations ! I 
knew he was only answering his own purposes, 
etcn while he attempted to appear solidtous about 
mine; yet by a voluntary infetnation, a sort of 
passion compounded of vanity and good nature, I 
walked into the snare with my eyes qpen, and put 
mysdf to future pain in <Mrder to give him imme- 
diate pleasure. The wisdom of the ignorant, 
somewhat lesemUes the instinct of animals ; it is 
diffiised in but a very narrow sphere, but within: 
that circle it acts with v^our, uniformity, and 
Adieu. 



LETTER LXXVIII. 
From the same, 

[ROM my former accounts you may be 
apt to fancy the English the most ridi- 
culous people under the sun. They 
are indeed ridiculous : yet every other 
natioQ in Europe is equally so ; each laughs at 
each, and the Asiatic at all. 

I may, upon another occasion, point out what is 
most strikingly absurd in other countries ; I shall 
at present confine myself only to France. The first 




vM THE CITIZEN OF THE IP'ORLD. 

national peculiarity a traveller meets upon entering 
that kingdom, is an odd sort of a staring vivacity 
in every eye, not excepting even the children ; the 
|)eople, it seems, have got it into their heads that 
they have more wit than others, and so stare m 
order to look smart. 

I know not how it happens, but there appears t 
sickly delicacy in the faces of their finest womeo* 
This may have introduced the use of paint, and 
paint produces wrinkles : so that a fine lady shall 
look like an hag at twenty-three. But as in some 
measure they never appear young, so it may he 
equally asserted, that they actually think them* 
selves never old ; a gentle Miss shall prepare for 
new conquests at sixty, shall hobble a rigadooD 
when she can scarce walk without a crutch, she 
shall affect the girl, play her fan and her eyes, and 
talk of sentiments, bleeding hearts, and expiring 
for love, when actually dying with age. Like ft 
departing philosopher, she attempts to make her 
last moments the most brilliant of her life. 

Their civility to strangers is what they are 
chiefly proud of; and to confess sincerely, their 
beggars are the very politest beggars I ever knew ; 
in other places, a traveller is addressed with ft 
piteous whine, or a sturdy solemnity, but a Fkench 
beggar shall ask your charity with a very genteel 
bow, and thank you for it with a smile and shrug. 

Another instance of this people's breeding I most 
not forget. An Englishman would not speak his 
native language in a company of foreigners, where 
he was sure that none understood him ; a travel- 
ling Hottentot himself would be silent if acquainted 
only with the language of his country; but a 



THE CmZSN OF THE WORLD. 103 

tVend mu m shall talk to you whether yon under- 
stand his language or not; never tronUing his 
head whether you have learned French, still he 
keeps up the conversation, fixes his eyes full in 
yoor fiice, and asks a thousand questions, which 
he answers himself iox want of a more satisfactory 
reply. 

Bat their civility to foreigners is not half so 
great as their admiration of themselves. Every 
thing that belongs to them and their nation is 

f great ; magnificent beyond expression ; qqite ro- 
mantic ! every garden is a paradise, every hovel a 
palace^ and every woman an angel. They shut 
their eyes dose, throw their mouths wide open, 
and cry out in a rapture : Sacrel What beauty ! 
O CUl, what tatte^ mort de ma vie^ what grandeur, 
was ever any people like ourselves ; we are the 
nation of men, and all the rest no better than two- 
legged barbarians. 

I fimcy the French would make the best cooks 
in the world, if they had but meat ; as it is, they 
can drfss you out five different dishes from a 
nettl^top, seven firom a dock leaf, and twice as 
many firom a frog*s haunches ; these eat prettily 
enough when one is a little used to them, are easy 
of digestion, and sddom over-load the stomach 
with crudities. They seldom dine under seven hot 
dishes; it is true, indeed, with all this magnifi- 
cence, they seldom spread a cloth before the 
guests ; but in that I cannot be angry with them ; 
since those who have got no linen upon their 
backs, may very well be excused for wanting it 
upon their tables. 

Even religion itself loses its solemnity among 



I04 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

them. Upon their roads, at about every five 
miles distance, you see an image of the Vifgin 
Mary dressed up in grim head-cloths, painted 
cheeks, and an old red petticoat ; before her a 
lamp is often seen burning, at which, with the 
saint's permission, I have frequently lighted my 
pipe. Instead of the Virgin, you are sometiiiMi 
presented with a crucifix, at other times witht 
wooden Saviour, fitted out in complete gamitoR^ 
with sponge, spear, nails, pincers, hammer, beet- 
wax, and vinegar-bottle. Some of these images, I 
have been told, came down from heaven ; if so, a 
heaven they have but bungling workmen. 

In passing through their towns, you frequently 
see the men sitting at the doors knitting stockings, 
while the care of cultivating the groand isA 
pruning the vines £fitlls to the women. This if 
perhaps the reason why the &ir sex are gmnted 
some peculiar privileges in this country ; partica- 
larly, when they can get horses, of riding without 
a side-saddle. 

But I begin to think you may find this descnp- 
tion pert and dull enough ; perhaps it is so, yet in 
general it is the manner in which the French 
usually describe foreigners ; and it is but just to 
force 9k part fA that ridicule back upon them, which 
they attempt to lavish on others. Adieu. 



THE CITIZEN Of THE WORLD, 105 




LETTER LXXIX. 
From the same, 

;HE two theatres, which serve to amuse 
the citizens here, are again opened for 
the winter. The mimetic troops, diffe- 
rent frcnn those of the state, begin their 
campaign when all the others quit the field ; and 
at a time when the Europeans cease to destroy 
each other in reality, they are entertained with 
mock battles upon the stage. 

The dancing master once more shakes his quiver- 
ing feet*; the <;^urpenter prepares his paradise of 
paste-board ; the hero resolves to cover his fore* 
head with bnas, and the heroine begins to scour 
up her c(^>per tail, preparative to future opera- 
tioos ; in short, all are in motion, from the thea- 
rical letter-carrier in yellow clothes, to Alexander 
the Great that stands on a stooL 

Both houses have already commenced hostilities. 
War, open war ! and no quarter received or given I 
Two singing women, like heralds, have begun the 
contest ; the whole town is divided on this solemn 
occasion ; one has the finest pipe, the other the 
finest manner; one curtesies to the ground, the 
other salutes the audience with a smile ; one comes 
on with modesty which asks, the other Mrith bold- 
ness which extorts applause ; one wears powder, 
the other has none ; one has the longest waist, but 
the other I4>pears most easy ; all, all is important 
and serious ; the town as yet perseveres in its neu- 



k4 the citizen op THE WORLD, 

timlity, a cause of such moment demands the nxxt 
mature deliberation, they continue to exhibit, and 
it is very possible this contest may oontinne to 
please to the end of the season. 

But the Generals of either army, have, as I am 
told, several reinforcements to lend occasional 
assistance. If they produce a pair of diamond 
buckles at one house, we have a pair of eye-brows 
that can match them at the other. If we outdo 
them in our attitude, they can overcome us by a 
shrug; if we can bring more children on the stage, 
they can brii^ more guards in red clothes, who 
strut and shoulder their swords to the astonialh 
ment of every spectator. 

They tell me here, that people frequent the 
theatre in order to be instructed as well as amused. 
I smile to hear the assertion. If I ever go to one 
of their playhouses, what with trumpets, hallowiog 
behind the stage, and bawling upon it, I am quite 
disry before the performance is over. If I enter 
the house with any sentiments in my head, I tm 
sure to have none going away, the whole mind 
being filled with a dead march, a funeral proces- 
sion, a cat-call, a jig, or a tempest 

There is perhaps nothing more easy than to write 
properly for the English theatre ; I am amazed that 
none are apprenticed to the trade. The author, 
when well acquainted with the value of thunder 
and lightning, when versed in all the mystery of 
scene-shifting and trap-doors; when skilled in 
the proper periods to introduce a wire-walker, or a 
water-fall ; when instructed in every actor's pecu- 
liar talent, and capable of adapting his speeches 
to the supposed excellence ; when thus instructed, 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, loy 

knows all that can give a modem audience plea- 
sure. One player shines in an exclamation, another 
in a groan, a third in a horror, a fourth in a start, 
a fifth in a smile, a sixth £unts, and a seventh 
fidgets round the stage with peculiar vivacity; 
that piece therefore will succeed best where eadi 
has a proper opportunity of shining ; the actor's 
business is not so much to adapt himself to the 
poet, as the poet's to adapt himself to the actor. 

The great secret, therefore, of tragedy-vniting 
at present, is a perfect acquaintance with thea- 
trical mVs and aA'j, a certain number of these 
intei^>ersed with ffMbl tortures, racks, and dam" 
naium, shall distort every actor almost into con- 
vulsions, and draw tears from every spectator; 
a proper use of these will infidlibly fill the whole 
house with applause. But above all, a whining 
scene must strike most forcibly. I would advise 
firom my present knowledge of the audience, the 
two favourite players of the town to introduce a 
scene of this sort in every play. Towards the 
middle of the last act, I would have them enter 
with wild looks and out-spread arms ; there is no 
necessity for speaking, they are only to groan at 
each ether, they must vary the tones of exdama- 
tioo and. despair throi:^ the whole theatrical 
gamut, wring their ^[ures into every shape of 
distress, and when their calamities have drawn a 
proper quantity of tears firom the s]rmpathetic 
spectators, they may go off in dumb solemnity at 
different doors, clasping their hands, or slapping 
their pocket-holes; this, which may be called a 
tragic pantomime, vrill answer every purpose of 
moving the passions, as well as words could have 



to8 THE CITIZEN OP THE IVORLD, 

(lone, and it must save those expenses which go 
to reward an author. 

All modem plays that woold keep the audience 
alive, must be conceived in this manner, and 
indeed, many a modem play is made up on no 
other plan. This is the merit that lifts up the 
heart, like opium, into a rapture of insensibility, 
and can dbmiss the mind from all the fiuigue of 
thinking : thb is the eloquence that shines in many 
a long forgotten scene, which has been redconed 
excessive fine upon acting ; this the lightning that 
flashes no less in the Hyperbolical tyrant, wh» 
brtakfasts on the wind^ than in little Norval, 9i 
harmUts as the babt unborn. Adieu. 




LETTER LXXX. 
From the same, 

HAVE always regarded the spirit of 
mercy, which appears in the Chinese 
laws, vrith admiration. An order for 
the execution of a criminal is carried 
from court by slow joumies of six miles a day, but 
a pardon is sent down with the most rapid di^)atch. 
If five sons of the same £fitther be guilty of the same 
offence, one of them is forgiven, in order to oon- 
tinue the family and comfort his aged parents in 
their decline. 

Similar to this, there is a spirit of mercy bteathes 
through the laws of England, which some enone* 
ouely endeavour to suppress ; the laws however 
seem unwilling to punish the offender, or to fiir- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 109 

lish the officers of jastice with every means of 
icting with severity. Those who arrest debtors 
ire denied the use of arms, the nightly watch is 
permitted to repress the disorders of the drunken 
itizens only with dubs; jastice in such a case 
leeins to hide her terrors, and permits some offen- 
ieiB to escape rather than load any with a punish- 
OBcnt disproportioned to the crime. 

Thnft it tt the glory of an Englishman, that he is 
not only governed by laws, but that these are also 
tempered by mercy ; a country restrained by severe 
laws, and those too executed with severity (as in 
Japan) is under the most terrible species of tyranny; 
a rojral tyrant is generally dreadfiil to the great, but 
numerous penal laws grind every rank of people, 
and chiefly those kast able to resist oppression, 
the poor. 

It is very possible thus for a people to become 
slaves to laws oi their own enacting, as the Athe« 
mans were to those <^ Draco. "It might first 
happen (says the historian) that men with peculiar 
talents for villainy attempted to evade the ordi- 
nances already established ; their practices there- 
fore soon brought on a new law levelled against 
them ; but the same degree of cunning whic^ had 
tans^t the knave to evade the former statutes, 
taught him to evade the latter also; he flew to 
new shifts, while justice pursued with new ordi- 
nances ; still however he kept his proper distance, 
and whenever one crime was judged penal by the 
state, he left committing it in order to practise 
some unforbidden species of villainy. Thus the 
criminal against whom the threatenings were de- 
nounced always escaped free; while the simple 



iio THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

rogue alone felt the rigour of justice. In the mean 
time penal laws become numerous, almost every 
person in the state unknowingly at different tunes 
offended, and was every moment subject to a mali- 
cious prosecution.*' In fact, penal laws, instead of 
preventing crimes, are generally enacted after the 
commission ; instead of repressing the growth of 
ingenious villainy, only multiply deceit, by putting 
it upon new shifts and expedients of pcactisisg 
with impunity. 

Such laws, therefore, resemble the guards which 
are sometimes imposed upon tributary Princes, 
apparently indeed to secure them irom daagef, 
but in reality, to confirm their captivity. 

Penal laws, it must be allowed, secure property 
in a state, but they also diminish personal secoiity 
in the same proportion : There is no positive law 
how equitable soever, that may not be sometimes 
capable of injustice. When a law enacted to make 
theft punishable with death, happens to be equi- 
tably executed, it can at best only guard our pos- 
sessions ; but when by favour or ignorance justice 
pronounces a wrong verdict, it then attacks oar 
lives, since in such a case the whole community 
suffers with the innocent victim ; if therefore In 
<Mrder to secure the effects of one man, I should 
make a law which may take away the life of 
another, in such a case to attain a smaller good, I 
am guilty of a greater evil, to secure society in the 
possession of a bauble, I render a real and valuable 
possession precarious. And indeed the experience 
of every age may serve to vindicate the assertion : 
No law could be more just than that called ksm 
MajesiatiSt when Rome was governed by Emperon. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, iif 

t was but reasonable, that every conspiracy against 
he administration should be detected and punished; 
'et what terrible slaughters succeeded in conse- 
(uence of its enacting ; proscription, stranglings, 
XMSonings, in almost every family of distinction, 
ret an done in a legal way, every criminal had his 
zial^ and lost his life by a majority of witnesses. 

And such will ever be the case, where ponish- 
nents are numerous, and where a weak, vicious, 
tmt above all, where a mercenary magistrate is con- 
semed in their execution ; such a man deares to 
lee penal laws increased, since he too frequently 
has it in his power to turn them into instruments 
of extortion ; in such hands the more laws, the 
adder means, not <^ satisfying justice, but of satiat- 
ing avarice. 

A mercenary magistrate who is rewarded in pro- 
portion, not to his int^[rity, but to the number he 
convicts, must be a person of the most unblemished 
character, or he will lean on the side of cruelty ; 
and when once the work of injustice is begun, it Is 
impossible to tell )iow fieur it will proceed ; it is said 
of the Hyena, that naturally it is no way ravenous, 
bat when once it has tasted human flesh, it becomes 
the most voracious animal of the forest, and con- 
tinues to persecute mankind ever after : A corrupt 
magistrate may be considered as a human Hyena, 
he begins perhaps by a private snap, he goes on to 
a morsel among friends, he proceeds to a meal in 
public, from a meal he advances to a surfeit, and 
at last sucks blood like a vampire. 

Not in such hands should the administration of 
justice be entrusted, but to those who know how 
to reward as well as to punish ; it was a fine say- 



iia THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

ing of Nangfu the emperor, who being told that 
his enemies had raised an insurrection in one of 
the distant provinces ; Come then, my friends, 
said he, follow me, and I promise you that we 
shall quickly destroy them ; he marched forwaxd, 
and the rebels submitted upon his approach. All 
now thought that he would take the most lifpil 
revenge, but were surprised to see the aqptifM 
treated with mildness and humanity. How 1 criei 
his first minister, is this the manner in which yo8 
fulfil your promise ? your royal word was givea 
that your enemies should be destroyed, and behold 
you have pardoned all, and even caressed some 1 
I promised, replied the emperor, with a generovs 
air, to destroy my enemies, I have fulfilled my 
word, for see they are enemies no longer ; I have 
made friends of them. 

This, could it always succeed, were the tnie 
method of destroying the enemies of a state ; vreU 
it were if rewards and mercy alone could regulate 
the commonwealth; but since punishments an 
sometimes necessary, let them at least be render^ 
terrible, by being executed but seldom, and kt 
justice lift her sword rather to terrify than revenge. 
Adieu. 




THS CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 113 

LETTER LXXXL 
From the same. 

HAYE as yet given you bat a short and 
imperfect description of the Ladies of 
EngUmd. Woman, my friend, is a 
subject not easily understood, even in 
China ; irfiat therefore can be expected from my 
knowledge of the sex in a country where they are 
univennUy allowed to be riddles, and I but a 
stranger? 

To confess a truth, I was afraid to begin the de« 
scription, lest the sex should undergo some new 
revolntioQ before it was finished ; and my picture 
should thus become old before it could well be said 
to have ever been new. To-day they are lifted 
upon stilts, to-morrow they lower their heels and 
raise their heads ; their clothes at one time are 
bloated out with whalebone ; at present they have 
laid their hoops aside and are become as slim as 
mermaids. All, all is in a state of continual fluc- 
tuation, from the Mandarine's wife, who rattles 
through the streets in her chariot, to the humble 
sempstress, who clatters over the pavement in iron- 
shod pattens. 

What chiefly distinguishes the sex at present is 
the train. As a Lady's quality or fashion was once 
determined here by the circumference of her hoop, 
both are now measured by the length of her tail.- 
Women of moderate fortunes are contented with 
tails moderately long ; but ladies of true taste and 
distinction set no bounds to their ambition in this 
II. I 



114 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

particular. I am told the lady Mayoress, on days 
uf ceremony, carries one longer than a bell-wether 
of Bantam, whose tail you know is trundled along 
in a wheel*barrow. 

Sun of China, what contradictions do we find in 
this strange world ! not only.the people of different 
countries think in opposition to each other, bat the ' 
inhabitants of a single island are often found in- 
consistent with themselves ; would you beUeve it ? 
this very people, my Fum, who are so fond of 
seeing their women with long t^ls, at the nne 
time dock their horses to the very rump ! 1 ! 

But you may easily guess that I am no way 
displeased with a £ashion which tends to increase a 
demand for the commodities of the East, and is so 
very beneficial to the country in which I was bom. 
Nothing can be better calculated to increase the 
price of silk than the present manner of dressing. 
A lady's train is not bought but at some expense, 
and after it has swept the public walks for a very 
few evenings, is fit to be worn no longer : more silk 
must be bought in order to repair the breach, and 
sotfie ladies of peculiar economy, are thus found to 
patch up their tails eight or ten times in a season. 
This unnecessary consumption may introduce 
poverty here, but then we shall be the richer for it 
in China. 

The man in black, who is a professed enemy to 
this manner of ornamenting the tail, assures mey 
there are numberless inconveniences Attending it* 
and that a lady dressed up -to the fashion is a* 
much a cripple as any in Nankin. But his chirf 
indignation is levelled at those who dress in thi^ 
manner, without a proper fortune to support it- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 115 

He assures xne, that he has known some, who 
would have a tail, though they wanted a petticoat, 
and others, who, without any other pretensions, 
fanicied they became ladies merely from the addi- 
tion of three superfluous yards of ragged silk ; 
I know a thrifty good woman, continues he, who 
thinking herself obliged to carry a train like her 
betters, never walks from home without the uneasy 
apprehensions of wearii^ it out too soon ; every 
excursion she makes gives her new anxiety, and her 
train is every bit as importunate, and wounds her 
peace as much as the bladder we sometimes see tied 
to the tail of a cat. 

Nay, he ventures to affirm, that a train may often 
bring a lady into the most critical circumstances ; 
for should a rude fellow, says he, offer to come up 
to ravish a kiss, and the lady attempt to avoid 
it, in retiring she must necessarily tread upon 
her train, and thus fisdl fairly upon her back, by 
which means every one knows, — her clothes may 
be spoiled. 

The ladies here make no scruple to laugh at the 
smallness of a Chinese slipper, but I fancy our 
wives at China would have a more real cause 
of laughter, could they but see the immoderate 
leng^ of an European train. Head of Confucius I 
to view a human being crippling herself with a 
' great unwieldy tail for our diversion ; backward 
she cannot go, forward she must move but slowly, 
and if ever she attempts to turn round, it must be 
in a circle not smaller than that described by, the 
iriieeling crocodile, when it would face an assailant. 
And yet to think that all this confers importance 
and majesty I to think that a lady acquires addi- 



ii6 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

tional respect from fifteen yards of trailing taffety ! 
I can*t contain ; ha, ha, ha ; this is certainly t 
remnant of European barbarity, the female Tartir 
dressed in sheep-skins, is in fieur more convenient 
drapery. Their own writers have sometimes in* 
veighed against the absurdity of this feshion, bnt 
perhaps it has never been ridiculed so well as npGQ 
the Italian theatre, where Pasquarielo being en* 
gaged to attend on the countess of Femambroco, 
having one of his hands employed in carrying her 
muff, and the other her lap dog, he bears her train 
majestically along by sticking it in the waistband of 
his breeches. Adieu. 




LETTER LXXXII. 
From the same, 

DISPUTE has for some time divided 
the philosophers of Europe ; it is de- 
bated, whether arts and sciences are 
more serviceable or prejudicial to man- 
kind. They, who maintain the cause of literature, 
endeavour to prove their usefulness from the im- 
possibility of a large number of men subsisting in a 
small tract of country without them ; from the 
pleasure which attends the acquisition ; and from 
the influence of knowledge in promoting practical 
morality. 

They who maintain the opposite opinion, display 

the happiness and innocence of those uncultivated 

Hions who live without learning ; urge the nooM* 

I vices which are to be found only in polished 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 117 

societjt enlarge upon the oppression, the cruelty 
and the Uood which must necessarily be shed, in 
order to cement civil society, and insist upon the 
happy equality of conditions in a barbarous state, 
preferable to the unnatural subordination of a more 
refined constitution. 

This dispute, which has already given so much 
emj^oyment to speculative indolence, has been 
managed with much* ardour, and (not to suppress 
our sentiments) with but little sagacity. They who 
insist that the sciences are useful in refined society 
are certainly right, and they who maintain that 
barbarous nations are more happy without them, 
are right also ; but when one side for this reason 
attempts to prove them as universally useful to the 
solitary barbarian, as to the native of a crowded 
common-wealth ; or when the other endeavours to 
banish them as prejudicial to all society, even from 
populous states as well as from the inhabitants of 
the wilderness, they are both wrong ; since that 
knowledge which makes the happiness of a refined 
£ur(^)ean, would be a torment to the precarious 
tenant of an Asiatic wild. 

Let me, to prove this, transport the imagination 
for a moment to the midst of a forest in Siberia. 
There we behold the inhabitant, poor indeed, but 
equally fond of happiness with the most refined 
philosopher of China. The earth lies uncultivated 
and uninhabited for miles around him ; his little 
family and he the sole and undisputed possessors. 
In such circumstances Nature and Reason will in- 
duce him to prefer a hunter's life to that of culti- 
vating the earth. He will certainly adhere to that 
manner of living which is carried on at the smallest 



xi8 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

expense of labour, and that food which is most 
agreeable to the appetite ; he will prefer indolent 
though precarious luxury to a laborious thoogfa 
permanent competence, and a knowledge of his 
own happiness will determine him to perserere in 
native barbarity. 

In like manner his happiness will incline him to 
bind himself by no law : Laws are made in older to 
secure present property, but he is possessed of no 
property which he is afraid to lose, and desires no 
more than will be sufficient to sustain him; to 
enter into compacts with others, would be under- 
going a voluntary obligation without the expectance 
of any reward. He and his countrymen are tenants, 
not rivals, in the same inexhaustible forest ; the in- 
creased possessions of one by no means diminishes 
the expectations arising from equal assiduity in 
another ; there are no need of laws therefore to re- 
press ambition, where there con be no mischief at- 
tending its most boimdless gratifications. 

Our solitary Siberian will, in like manner, find 
the sciences not only entirely useless in directing 
his practice, but disgusting even in speculation. In 
every contemplation our curiosity must be first ex- 
cited by the appearances of things, before our 
reason undergoes the fatigue of investigating the 
causes. Some of those appearances are produced 
by experiment, others by minute enquiry; some 
arise from a knowledge of foreign climates, and 
others from an intimate study of our own. But 
there are few objects in comparison which present 
themselves to the inhabitant of a barbarous country; 
the game he hunts, or the transient cottage he builds, 
« up the chi«f objects of his concern ; his corio- 



THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD. 119 

dty therefore most be proportkmafalj less ; and if 
Jiat is diminished, the reasoning fiK»lty will be 
iiminished in propordoo. 

Besides, sensual enjoyment adds wings to caiio- 
Bty. We consider few objects with ardent atten- 
tiooy but those which have some connectioo with 
our wishes, our pleasures, or our necessities. A 
denre di enjoyment first interests our paawms in 
the pursuit, points out the object of investigatioii, 
sad reason then comments where sense has led the 
way. An increase in the nombercf oar enjoyments 
thcnefo r e necessarily produces an increase of scien- 
ti6c research ; but in countries where afanost every 
enjoyment is wanting, Reason there seems destitute 
of its great inspirer, and speculation is the business 
of fools, when it becomes its own reward. 

Tlie barbarous Siberian is too wise, thcrc&xe, to 
esduuist his time in quest of knowledge, which 
neither curiosity prompts, nor pleasure impels him 
to pursue. When told of the exact admeasurement 
of a degree upon the equator at Quito, he feels no 
pleasure in the account ; when informed that such 
a discovery tends to promote navigation aad com- 
merce, he finds himself no way interested in either. 
A discovery which some have pursued at the 
haaard of their lives, affects him with neither as- 
tonishment nor pleasure; He is satisfied with 
thoroughly understanding the few objects wMch 
contribute to his own felicity, he kocm-s the pro- 
perest places where to lay the snare for the sable, 
and discerns the value of fiirs with more than 
European sagacity. More extended knowledge 
would only serve to render him unhappy, it mi^t 
lend a ray to shew him the misery of his situation. 



ISO THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

but could not guide him in his efforts to avoid it 
Ignorance is the happiness of the poor. 

The misery of a being endowed with sentiments 
above its capacity of fruition, is most admirably 
described in one of the fables of Locman, the 
Indian moralist. *' An elephant that had been 
peculiarly serviceable in fighting the battles of 
Wistnow, was ordered by the god to wish for 
whatever he thought proper, and the desire shoold 
be attended with immediate gratification. The 
elephant thanked his benefactor on bended knees, 
and desired to be endowed with the reason and the 
faculties of a man. Wistnow was sorry to hear the 
foolish request, and endeavoured to dissuade him 
from his misplaced ambition ; but finding it to no 
purpose, gave him at last such a portion of wisdom 
as could correct even the 2^ndavesta of Zoroaster. 
The reasoning elephant went away rejoicing in his 
new acquisition, and though his body still retained 
its andent form, he found his appetites and pas- 
sions entirely altered. He first considered that 
it would not only be more comfortable, but also 
more becoming to wear clothes ; but unhappily he 
had no method of making them himself, nor had 
he the use of speech to demand them from others, 
and this was the first time he felt real anxiety. He 
soon perceived how much more elegantly men were 
fed than he, thereibie he began to loath his usual 
food and longed for those delicacies which adorn 
the tables of Princes ; but here again he found it 
impossible to be satisfied ; for though he could 
easily obtain flesh,, yet he found it impossible to 
s it in any degree of perfection. In short, 
pkasure that contributed to the felicity of 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. lax 

mankind, served cmly.to render him more mise- 
rable, as he found himself utterly deprived of the 
power of enjoyment. In this manner he led a re- 
pining, discontented life, detesting himself and 
displeased with his ill-judged ambition, till at last 
his benefactor Wistnow, taking compassion on his 
forlorn situation, restored him to the ignorance and 
the happiness which he was originally formed to 
enjoy." 

No, my friend, to attempt to introduce the 
sciences into a nation of wandering barbarians, is 
only to render them more miserable than even 
nature designed they should be. A life of sim- 
plidty is best fitted to a state ofsolitude. 

The great law-giver of Russia attempted to im- 
prove the desolate inhabitants of Siberia, by send- 
ing among them some of the politest men of 
Europe. The consequence has shewn, that the 
country was as yet unfit to receive them ; they 
languished for a time with a sort of exotic malady, 
every day degenerated from themselves, and, at 
last, instead of rendering the country more 
polite, they conformed to the soil, and put on 
barbarity. 

No, my friend, in order to make the sciences 
useful in any country, it must first become populous; 
the inhabitant must go through the different stages 
of hunter, shepherd, and husbandman : then when 
property becomes valuable, and consequently gives 
cause for injustice ; then when laws are appointed 
to repress injury, and secure possession, when men, 
by the sanction of those laws, become possessed of 
siq[)erflaity, when luxury is thus introduced and de- 
mands its continual supply, then it is that the 



,22 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

sciences become necessary and useful ; the state 
then cannot subsist without them ; they must then 
be introduced, at once to teach men to draw the 
greatest possible quantity of pleasure from circom- 
scribed possession ; and to restrain them within 
the lx}unds of moderate enjoyment. 

The sciences arc not the cause of luxury, but its 
consequence, and this destroyer thus brings with it 
an antidote which resists the virulence of its own 
poison. By asserting that luxury introduces the 
sciences, we assert a truth ; but if with those, who 
reject the utility of learning, we assert that the 
sciences also introduce luxury, we shall be at once 
false, absurd, and ridiculous. Adieu. 



LETTER LXXXIII. 

From Lien Chi Altangi to HingpOf by the way of 

Mosccnv, 

[OU are now arrived at an age, my son, 
when pleasure dissuades from applica- 
tion, but rob not by present gratification 
all the succeeding period of life of its 
happiness. Sacrifice a little pleasure at first to the 
expectance of greater. The study of a very few 
years will make the rest of life completely easy. 

But instead of continuing the subject myself, 
take the following instructions borrowed from a 
modern philosopher of China.* "He who has 

1 A transladon of this passage may also be seen in Du 
vol. ii. Fol. p. 47, and 58. This extract will at 
Tt to shew that fondness for humomr which appears 
ifdogs of the Chinese. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 123 

begun his fortune by study will certainly confirm it 
by perseverance. The love of books damps the 
passion for pleasure, and when this passion is once 
extinguished, life is then cheaply supported ; thus 
a man being possessed of more than he wants, can 
never be subject to great disappointments, and 
avoids all those meannesses which indigence some- 
times unavoidably produces. 

'* There is unspeakable pleasure attending the 
life of a voluntary student. The first time I read 
an excellent book, it is to me just as if I had gained 
a new friend. When I read over a book I have 
perused before, it resembles the meeting Mrith an 
old one. We ought to lay hold of every incident 
in life for improvement, the trifling as well as the 
important. It is not one diamond alone which gives 
lustre to another, a common coarse stone is also 
employed for that purpose. Thus I ought to draw 
advantage from the insults and contempt I meet 
with from a worthless fellow. His brutality ought 
to induce me to self-examination, and correct every 
blemish that may have given rise to his calumny. 

' ' Yet ¥rith all the pleasures and profits which are 
generally produced by learning, parents often find 
it difficult to induce their children to study. They 
often seem dragged to what wears the appearance 
of application. Thus being dilatory in the be- 
ginning, all future hopes of eminence are entirely 
cut off. If they find themselves obliged to write 
two lines more polite than ordinary, their pencil 
then seems as heavy as a millstone, and they 
spend ten years in turning two or three periods 
wHh propriety. 

"These persons are most at a loss when a 



i>4 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

banquet is almost over ; the plate and the dice go 
round, that the number of little verses which each 
is obliged to repeat may be determined by chance. 
The booby, when it comes to his turn, appears 
quite stupid and insensible. The company diyert 
themselves with his confusion ; and sneers, vrinks, 
and whispers are circulated at his expense. As for 
him, he opens a pair of large heavy eyes, stares at 
all about him, and even offers to join in the laugh, 
without ever considering himself as the burthen of 
all their good humour. 

** But it is of no importance to read much, except 
you be regular in your reading. If it be inter* 
rupted for any considerable time, it can never he 
attended with proper improvement There are 
some who study for one day with intense applica- 
tion, and repose themselves for ten days after. 
* But wisdom is a coquette, and must Ise courted with 
unabating assiduity. 

''It was a saying of the ancients, that -a man 
never opens a book, without reaping some advan- 
tage by it. I say with them, that every book can 
serve to make us more expert, except romances, 
and these are no better than instruments of de- 
bauchery. They are dangerous fictions, where love 
is the ruling passion. 

*' The most indecent strokes there pass for turns 
of wit ; intrigue and criminal liberties for gallantry 
and politeness. Assignations, and even villainy, 
are put in such strong lights, as may inspire, even 
grown men, with the strongest passion ; how much 
more therefore ought the youth of either sex to 
dread them, whose reason is so weak, and whose 
hearts are so susceptible of passion ? 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. x*$ 

** To dip in by a beck-door, or leap a wall, are 
accomplishments that when handsomely set off en* 
chant a young heart. It is true the plot is com* 
monly wound up by a marriage, concluded with 
the consent of parents, and adjusted by eyery 
ceremony prescribed by law. But as in the body 
of the work there are many passages that ofiend 
good morals, overthrow laudable customs, violate 
the laws, and destroy the duties most essential to 
society, virtue is thereby exposed to the most dan- 
gerous attacks. 

''.But, say some, the authors of these romances 
have nothing in view, but to represent vice 
punished, and virtue rewarded. Granted. But 
will the greater number of readers take notice 
of these punishments and rewards ? Are not their 
minds carried to something else ? Can it be ima- 
gined that the art with which the author inspires 
the love of virtue, can overcome that crowd of 
thoughts which sway them to licentiousness ? To , 
be able to inculcate virtue by so leaky a vehicle, 
the author must be a philosopher of the first rankk 
But in our age we can find but few first-rate 
philosophers. 

** Avoid such performances where vice assumes 
the face of virtue ; seek wisdom and knowledge 
without ever thinking you have found them. A 
man is wise while he continues in the pursuit of "^ 
wisdom ; but when he once fancies that he has 
found the object of his enquiry, he then becomes a 
fool. Learn to pursue virtue from the man that is 
blind, who never makes a step without first ex- 
amining the ground Mrith his staff. 

*' The world is like a vast sea, mankind like a 



ia6 THE CiTlZEN OF THE WORLD, 

vessel sailing on its tempestuous bosom. Our 
prudence is its sails, the sciences serve us for oan, 
good or bod fortune are the favourable or contrary 
winds, and judgment is the rudder ; without this 
last the vessel is tossed by every billow, and 
will find shipwreck in every breeze. In a word, 
obscurity and indigence are the parents of vigilance 
and economy ; vigilance and economy, of riches 
and honour ; riches and honour, of pride and 
luxury ; pride and luxury, of impurity and idle* 
ness ; and impurity and idleness again produce in* 
digence and obscurity. Such are the revolutions of 
life." Adieu. 




LETTER LXXXIV. 

From Lien Chi Altangi, to Fum Jloam^ jifi^ 
I^resident of the ''Ceremonial Acadefity otFekin, 
in China, 

FANCY the character of a poet, is in 
every country the same, fond of enjoy- 
ing the present, careless of the future, 
his conversation that of a man of sense, 
his actions those of a fool ! of fortitude able to 
stand unmoved at the bursting of an earthquake, 
yet of sensibility to be affected by the brealdng of 
a tea-cup ; such is his character, which considered 
in every light, is the very opposite of that which 
leads to riches. 

The poets of the west are as remarkable for 
their indigence as their genius, and yet among the 
numerous hospitals designed to relieve the poor, I 



THE CITIZBN OF THE H^ORLD. 127 

have heard of bat one erected for the f>enefit of 
decayed authors. This was founded by Pope Urban 
VIII., and called the retreat of the incurables, 
intimating, that it was equally impossible to re- 
claim the patients, who sued for reception, from 
poverty, or from poetry. To be sincere, were I 
to send you an account of the lives of the western 
poets, either ancient or modem, I fancy you would 
think me employed in collecting materials for an 
histoiy of human wretchedness. 

Homer is the first poet and beggar of note »nong 
the ancients ; he was blind, and sung his ballads 
about the streets ; but it is observed, that his mouth 
was more frequently filled with verses than with 
bread. Plautus the comic poet was better off; he 
had two trades, he was a poet for his diversion, and 
helped to turn a mill in order to gain a livelihood. 
Terence was a slave, and Boethius died in a jail. 

Among the Italians, Paulo Burghese, almost as 
good a poet as Tasso, knew fourteen different 
trades, and yet died because he could get employ- 
ment in none. Tasso himself, who had the most 
amiable character of all poets, has often been 
obliged to borrow a crown from some friend, in 
order to pay for a month's subsistence ; he has left 
us a pretty sonnet, addressed to his cat, in which 
he begs the light of her eyes to write by, being 
too poor to affcMrd himself a candle. But Benti- 
Toglio, poor Bentivoglio ! chiefly demands our 
j»ty. His comedies will last with the Italian 
language ; he dissipated a noble fortune in acts of 
charity and benevolence; but falling into miseiy 
in his old age, was refused to be admitted into an 
hoipital which he himself had erected. 



ta8 THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD, 

In Spain it b said, the great Cervantes died of 
hunger; and it is certain that the famous Camoens 
ended his days in an hospital. 

If we turn to France, we shall there find even 
stronger instances of the ingratitude of the public. 
Vaugelas, one of the politest writers, and one of 
the honestest men of his time, was sumamed the 
Owl, from his being obliged to keep within sU 
day, and venture out only by night, through fear 
of hb creditors. His last will is very remarkable; 
after having bequeathed all his worldly substance to 
the discharging his debts, he goes on thus : But as 
there still may remain some creditors unpaid, even 
after all that I have shall be disposed of, in such a 
case, it is my last will, that my body should be 
sold to the surgeons to the best advantage, and 
that the purchase should go to the discharging 
those debts which I owe to society ; so that if I 
could not, while living, at least when dead, I may 
be useful. 

Cassandcr was one of the greatest geniuses of 
his time, yet all his merit could not procure him 
a bare .subsistence. Being by degrees driven into 
an hatred of all mankind from the little pity he 
found amongst them, he even ventured at last un* 
gratefully to impute hb calamities to providence. 
In his last agonies, when the priest entreated him 
to rely on the justice of heaven, and ask mercy 
from him that made him ; if God, replies he, has 
shown nie no Justice here^ what reason have I /# 
expect any from him hereafter? But being answered, 
that a suspension of justice was no argument that 
should induce us to doubt of its reality; let me 
entreat you, continued hb confessor^ by all that is 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 139 

dear, to be reconciled to God, your father, your 
maker, and friend. No^ replied the exasperated 
wretch, you know the manner in which he left ttte 
to live ; (and pointing to the straw on which he 
WIS stretched) and you see the manner in which he 
UoBves me to die I 

But the sufferings of the poet in other countries 
are nothing when compared to his distresses here, 
the names of Spencer and Otway, Butler and 
Diyden, are every day mentioned as a national 
reproach, some of them lived in a state of pre- 
carious indigence, and others literally died of 
hunger. 

At present the few poets of England no longer 
depend on the Great for subsistence, they have now 
no other patrons but the public, and the public, 
collectively considered, is a good and generous 
master. It is indeed, too frequently mistaken as 
to the merits of every candidate for favour ; but to 
make amends, it is never mistaken long. A per- 
formance indeed may be forced for a time into 
reputation, but destitute of real merit it soon 
sinks ; time, the touchstone of what is truly valu- 
able, will soon discover the fraud, and an author 
should never arrogate to himself any share of suc- 
cess till his works have been read at least ten years 
with satisfaction. 

A man of letters at present, whose works are 
valuable, is perfectly sensible of their value. Every 
polite member of the community by buying what 
he writes, contributes to reward him. The ridi- 
cule therefore of living in a garret, might have 
been wit in the last age, but continues such no 
longer, because no longer true. A writer of real 

II. K 



ty> THE CtTTZEN OF THE WORLD, 

merit now may easily be ridi if his heart be set 
only on fortune : and for those who have no merit, 
it is but fit that sudi should remain in merited 
obscurity. He may .now refuse an invitation to 
dinner, without fearing to incur his patioaVi dis- 
pleasure, or to starve by remaining at home. He 
may now venture to appear in company with jvst 
such clothes as other men generally wear, and talk 
even to princes, Mrith all the conscious superiority 
of wisdom. Though he cannot boast of fortone 
here, yet he can bravely assert the dignity of 
independence. Adieu. 




LETTER LXXXV. 
Prom th€ same, 

HAVE interested myself so long in all 
the concerns of this people, that I am 
almost become an Englishman ; I now 
begin to read with pleasure of their 
taking towns or gaining battles, and secretly wish 
disappointment to all the enemies of Britain. Yet 
still my regard to mankind fills me with coAcem 
for their contentions. I could wish to see the dis- 
turbances of Europe once more amicably adjusted: 
I am an enemy to nothing in this good world but 
war ; I hate fighting between rival states : I hate 
it between roan and man ; I hate fighting even 
between women ! 

I already informed you, that while Europe was 
at variance, we were also threatened from the 
stage with an irreconcileable opposition, and that 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 131 

our singiiig women were resolved to sing at each 
other to the end of the season. O my friend, 
those lears were just. They are not only de- 
termined to sing at each other to the end of the 
season, but what is worse, to sing the same song, 
and what is still more insupportable, to make us 
pay for hearing. 

If they be for war, for my part I should advise 
them to have a public congress, and there £urly 
squall at each other. What signifies sounding the 
trumpet of defiance at a distance, and calling in the 
town to fight their battles. I would have them come 
boldly into one of the most open and frequented 
streets, face to fajotf and there try their skill in 
quavering. 

However this may be, resolved I am that they 
shall not touch one single piece of silver more of 
mine. Though I have ears for music, thanks 
to heaven, they are not altogether asses ears. 
What ! Polly and the Pick-pocket to-night, Polly 
and the Pick-pocket to-morrow night, and Polly 
and the Pick-pocket again ; I want patience. I 
will hear no more. My soul is out of tune, all 
jairing discord, and confusion. Rest, rest, ye 
dear three clinking shillings in my pocket's bottom ; 
the music you make is more harmonious to my 
spirit, than cat-gut, rosin, or all the nightingales 
that ever chimiped in petticoats. 

But what raises my indignation to the greatest 
degree, is that this piping does not only pester me 
on the stage, but is my punishment in private con- 
venation. What is it to me, whether ihejitu pipe 
of one, or the great manner of the other be prefer- 
able? what care I, if one has a better top, or the 



139 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

other a nobler bottom ? how am I concerned, if 
one sings from the stomach, or the other sings with 
a snap ? yet paltry as these matters are, they make 
a subject of debate wherever I go, and this musical 
dispute, especially among the fair sex, almost 
always ends in a very unmusical altercation. 

Sure the spirit of contention is mixed into the 
very constitution of the people ; divisions among 
the inhabitants of other countries arise only from 
their higher concerns, but subjects the most cod* 
temptible are made an affair of party here, the 
spirit is carried even into their amu^ments. The 
very ladies, whose duty should seem to allay the 
impetuosity of the opposite sex, become themselves 
party champions, engage in the thickest of the 
fight, scold at each other, and shew their courage, 
even at the expence of their lovers and their 
beauty. 

There are even a numerous set of poets who 
help to keep up the contention, and write for the 
stage. Mistake me not, I do not mean pieces to 
be acted upon it, but panegyrical verses on the 
performers, for that is the most universal method 
of writing for the stage at present. It is the busi- 
ness of the stage poet therefore to watch the 
appearance of every new player at his own house, 
and so come out next day with a flaunting copy of 
news-paper verses. In these Nature and the actor 
may be set to run races, the player always coming 
off victorious ; or Nature may mistake him for her- 
self ; or old Shakespear may put on his winding- 
sheet and pay him a visit ; or the tuneful nine may 
strike up their harps in his praise ; or should 
it happen to be an actress, Venus, the beauteous 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 133 

qaeen of love, and the naked graces, are ever 
in waiting : the lady must be herself a goddess 
bred and bom ; she must — ^but you shall have 
a specimen of one of these poems, which may con- 
vey a more precise idea. 

On seeing Mrs. ***, pbsporm in the charactbx 

OF **♦*, 

To ]rou, bright fair, the nine address their lays. 
And tune my feeble voice to sing thy praise. 
The heart-felt power of every charm divine. 
Who can withstand their all-commanding shine ? 
See how she moves along with every Rrace, 
While soul-brought tears steal down each shining face. 
She speaks, 'tis rapture all and nameless bliss. 
Ye gods, what transport e'er compar'd to this. 
As when in Paphian grov<& the queen of Love, 
With fond complaint address'd the listening Jove, 
"Twas joy, and endless blisses all around, 
And rocks forgot their hardness at the sound. 
Then first, at last even Jove was taken in. 
And felt her charms, without disguise, within. 

And yet, think not, my friend, that I have any 
particular animosity against the champions who 
are at the head of the present commotion ; on the 
contrary, I could find pleasure in their music, 
if served up at proper intervals ; if I heard it only 
on proper occasions, and not about it wherever I go. 
In fact, I could patronize them both ; and as an 
instance of my condescension in this particular, 
they may come and give me a song at my lodging, 
on any evening when I'm at leisure, provided they 
keep a becoming distance, and stand, while they 
ocmtinae to entertain me, with decent humility at 
4hedoor. 

You perceive I have not read the seventeen 



,^ THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

books of Chinese ceremonies to no purpose. I 
know the proper share of respect due to evciy rank 
in society. Stage-players, fire-eaters, singing 
M-omen, dancing-dogs, wild beasts, and wiie* 
walkers, as their efforts are exerted for our amuse- 
ment, ought not efttirely to be despised. The 
laws of every country should allow them to play 
their tricks at least with impunity. They should 
not l)e branded with the ignominious appellation 
of vagabonds ; at least they deserve a rank in 
society equal to the mystery of barbers, or under- 
takers, and could my influence extend so far, they 
should be allowed to earn even forty or fifty pounds 
a year, if eminent in their profession. 

I am sensible however that you will censure me 
of profusion in this respect, bred up as you are in 
the narrow prejudices of eastern frugality. Yoa 
will undoubtedly assert, that such a stipend is too 
great for so useless an employment. Yet how will 
your surprise increase, when told, that though the 
law holds them as vagabonds, many of them earn 
more than a thousand a year. You are amazed 
There is cause for amazement. A vagabond with 
a thousand a year is indeed a curiosity in Nature ; 
a wonder far surpassing the flying fish, petrified 
crab, or travelling lobster. However, from my 
great love to the profession, I would willingly 
have them divested of part of their contempt, 
and part of their finery; the law should kindly 
take them under the wing of protection, fix 
them into a corporation, like that of the bar* 
l>crs, and abridge their ignominy and their pen- 
sions. As to their abilities in other respects, I 
leave that entirely to the public, who are 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 135 

certainly in this case the properest judges — whether 
they despise them or no. 

Yes, my Fum^ I would abridge their pensions. 
A theatrical warrior who conducts the battles of 
the stage, should be cooped up with the same 
caution as a Bantam cock that is kept for fighting. 
When one of those animals is taken from its native 
dunghill, we retrench it both in the quantity of its 
food, and the number of its seraglio : players 
should in the same manner be fed, not fattened ; 
they should be permitted to get their bread, but not 
eat the people's bread into the bargain ; and in- 
stead of being permitted to keep four mistresses, in 
conscience they should be contented only with twOh 

Were stage-players thus brought into boundsi 
perhaps we should find their admirers less sanguinei 
and consequently less ridiculous in patronizing 
them. We should no longer be struck with the 
absurdity of seeing the same people, whose valour 
makes such a figure abroad, apostrophizing in the 
praise of a bouncing blockhead, and wrangling in 
the defence of a copper-tidrd actress at home. 

I shall conclude my letter with the sensible ad- 
monition of Mi the philosopher. '*You love 
harmony, sajrs he, and are charmed with music. 
I do not blame you for hearing a fine voice, when 
yoa are in yoiur closet with a lovely parterre under 
your eye, or in the night time, while perhaps the 
moon diffuses her silver rays. But is a man to 
carry this passion so feur as to let a company of 
comedians, musicians, and singers, grow rich upon 
his ezhansted fortune ? If so, he resembles one of 
those dead bodies, whose brains the embalmers 
httve picked out through its ears." Adieu. 




136 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

LETTER LXXXVI. 
From the same, 

F all the places of amusement where 
gentlemen and ladies are entertained, I 
have not been yet to visit Newjnaiket 
This, I am told, is a large field, wheie, 
upon certain occasions, three or four horses aie 
brought together, then set a running, and that 
horse which runs swiftest wins the wager. 

This is reckoned a very polite and fashionable 
amusement here, much more followed by the 
nobility, than partridge fighting at Java, or paper 
kites at Madagascar ; several of the great here, I 
am told, understand as much of farriery as theit 
grooms ; and a horse, with any share of merit, can 
never want a patron among the nobility. 

We have a description of this entertainment 
almost every day in some of the gazettes, as Ux in* 
stance : '* On such a day the Give and Take 
Plate was run for between his Grace's Crab, his 
Lordship's Periwinkle, and 'Squire Smackem's 
Slamerkin. All rode their own horses. Theie 
was the greatest concourse of nobility that lias 
been known here for several seasons. The odds 
were in favour of Crab in the beginning, but 
Slamerkin, after the first heat seemed to have the 
match hollow ; however, it was soon seen, that 
Periwinkle improved in wind, which at last, 
turned out accordingly ; Crab was run to a stand 
still, Slamerkin was knocked up, and Periwinkle 
was brought in with universal applause." Thof 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 137 

you see Periwinkle received universal applause, 
and no doubt his Lordship came in for some share 
of that praise which was so liberally bestowed 
upon Periwinkle. Sun of China ! how glorious 
must the Senator appear in his cap and leather 
breeches, his whip crossed in his mouth, and thus 
coming to the goal amongst the shouts of grooms, 
jockeys, pimps, stable-bred Dukes, and degraded 
Generals I 

From the description of this princely amusement, 
now transcribed, and from the great veneration I 
have for the characters of its principal promoters, 
I make no doubt but I shall look upon an horse- 
race with becoming reverence, predisposed as I 
am by a similar amusement, of which I have lately 
been a spectator ; for just now I happened to have 
an opportunity of being present at a Cart-race. 

Whether this contention between three carts of 
different parishes was promoted by a subscriptioa 
among the nobility, or whether the grand-jury in 
council assembled, had gloriously combined to en- 
courage plaustral merit, I cannot take upon me to 
determine ; but certain it is, the whole was con- 
ducted with the utmost regularity and decorum, 
and the company, which made a brilliant appear- 
ance, were universally of opinion, that the sport 
was high, the running fine, and the riders influenced 
fay no bribe. 

It was run on the road from London to a village 
called Brentford, between a turnip cart, a dust cart, 
and a dung cart ; each of the owners condescend- 
ing to mount and be his own driver. The odds at 
starting were dust against dung^ five to four ; but 
after half a nule going, the knowing ones found 



138 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

themselves all on the wrong side, and xi^m&tum^ 
against the field, brass to silver. 

Soon however the contest became moredonbtfiil; 
Turnip indeed kept the way, but it was perceived 
that Dung had better bottom. The road re-echoed 
with the shouts of the spectators ; Dung agsinst 
Turnip ; Turnip against Dung, was now the 
universal cry ; neck and neck ; one rode li^er, 
but the other had more judgment I could not 
but particularly observe the ardour with which the 
lair sex espoused the cause of the di£fereiit liden 
on this occasion ; one was charmed ¥nith the un* 
washed beauties of Dung ; another was capthsled 
with the patibulary aspect of Turnip : white in the 
mean time unfortunate gloomy Dust, who came 
whipping behind, was cheered by the eocoarage- 
ments of some, and pity of all. 

The contention now continued for some tlitae, 
without a possibility of determining to whom vic- 
tory designed the prize. The winning-post ap- 
peared in view, and he who drove the turnip cait, 
assured himself of success ; and successful he m^ht 
have been, had his horse been as ambitious as he ; 
but upon approaching a turn from the road, whidi 
led homewards, the horse fairly stood still, and re- 
fused to move a foot farther. The dung cart bad 
scarce time to enjoy this temporary triumph, when 
it was pitched headlong into a ditch by the way 
side, and the rider left to wallow in congoiial mud. 
I>ust in the mean time soon came up, and nol 
being far from the post, came in amidst the shosts 
and acclamations of all the spectators, and greatly 
caressed by all the quality of Brentford. Fortune 
was kind only to one, who ought to have been 



TH'E CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 139 

favourable to all ; each had peculiar merit, each 
laboured hard to earn the prize, and each richly 
deserved the cart he drove. 

I do not know whether this description may not 
have anticipated that which I intended giving of 
Newmarket I am told there is little else to be 
seen even there. There may be some minute 
<lifferences in the dress of the spectators, but ncme 
at all in their understandings ; the quality of Brent- 
ford are as remarkable for politeness and delicacy^ 
as the breeders of Newmarket. The quality of 
Brentford drive their own carts, and the honour- 
able fraternity of Newmarket ride their own^horses. 
In short, the matches in <me place are as rational 
as those in the other ; and it is more than probablje, 
that turnips, dfist, and dung, are all that can be 
found to fumi^ out descripticm in either. 

Forgive me, my friend, but a person like me, 
bred up in a j^losophic seclusion, is apt to regard 
perhaps with too much asperity, those occurrences 
which sink man below his station in Nature, and 
diminish the intrinsic value of humanity. 



LETTER LXXXVII. 
From Fum Hoam to Lien Chi Altangi, 






OU tell me the people of Europe are 
wise; but where lies their wisdom? 
You say they are valiant too; yet I 
liave some reasons to doubt of their 
vakvr. They are engaged in war among each 
other, yet apply to the Russians, their neighbours 



♦^ -■ 



*s> 



140 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

and ours, for assistance. Cultivating such an 
alliance argues at once imprudence and timidity. 
All subsidies paid for sucK an aid is strengthening 
the Russians, already too powerful, and weaken* 
ing the employers, already exhausted by intestine 
commotions. 

I cannot avoid beholding the Russian empire is 
the natural enemy of the more western parts of 
Europe ; as an enemy already possessed of great 
strength, and from the nature of the govermnent, 
every day threatening to become more powerfbL 
This exten^ve empire, which, both in Europe and 
Asia, occupies almost a third of the old world, was, 
about two centuries ago, divided into separate 
kingdoms and dukedoms, and from such a divisioB 
consequently feeble. Since the times, however, of 
John Basilides, it has increased in strei^h and ex* 
tent ; and those untrodden forests, those innn- 
merable savage animals ^which formerly coveted 
the face of the country, are now removed, and 
colonies of mankind planted in their room. A 
kingdom thus enjo3ring peace internally, possessed 
of an unbounded extent of dominion, and learning 
the military art at the expence of others abroad, 
must every day grow more powerful ; and it is, 
probable, we shall hear Russia, in future times, as 
formerly, called the Officina Gentium. 

It was long the wish of Peter, their great 
monarch, to have a fort in some of the western 
parts of Europe ; many of his schemes and treaties 
were directed to this end, but happily for Europe 
he failed in them all. A fort in the power of this 
people would be like the possession of a flood* 
gate ; and whenever ambition, interest, or ne- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 141 

cessity prompted, they might then be able to 
deluge the whole world with a barbarous inunda- 
tion. 

Believe me, my friend, I cannot sufficiently con- 
temn the politics of Europe, who thus make this 
powerful people arbitrators in their quarrel. The 
Russians are now at that period between refine- 
ment and barbarity, which seems most adapted to 
military achievement ; and if once they happen to 
get footing in the western parts of Europe, it is not 
the feeble efforts of the sons of effeminacy and 
dissention, that can serve to remove them. The 
fertile valley and soft climate, will ever be suffi- 
cient inducements to draw whole myriads from 
their native deserts, the trackless wild, or snowy 
mountain. 

History, experience, reason, nature, expand the 
book of wisdom before the eyes of mankind, but 
they will not read. We have seen with terror 
a winged phalanx of famished locusts each singly 
contemptible, but from multitude become hideous, 
cover, like clouds, the face of day, and threaten the 
whole world with ruin. We have seen them 
settling on the fertile plains of India and Egypt, 
destroying in an instant the labours and the hopes 
of nations ; sparing neither the firuit of the earth 
nor the verdure of the fields, and changing into a 
frightful desert) landscapes of once luxuriant 
beauty. We have seen myriads of ants issuing 
together from the southern desert, like a torrent 
whose source was inexhaustible, succeeding each 
other without end, and renewing their destroyed 
forces with unwearied perseverance, bringing deso-. 
laticm wherever they came, banishing men an4 



149 THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD. 

Animals, and, when destitute of all subsistence, in 
heA|)8 infecting the wilderness which they bd 
made ! Like these have been the migxations of 
men. When as yet savage, and almost resembUng 
their brute partners in the forest, subject like them 
only to the instincts of Nature, and directed by 
hunger alone in the choice of an abode, how hate 
we seen whole armies starting wild at once firom 
their forests and their dens ; Goths, Huns, Vandals, 
Saracens, Turks, Tartars, myriads of men, animals 
in human form, without country, without name^ 
without laws, out-powering by numbers all oppost' 
tion, ravaging cities, overturning empires, andi 
after having destroyed whole nations, and spre»^ 
extensive desolation, how have we seen them si0^ 
oppressed by some new enemy, more barbarous axs>^ 
even more unknown than they I Adieu. 




LETTER LXXXVIIL 

From Lien Chi AUangi\ to Fum Hodm^ fif^ 
Presidetit of the Ceremonial Academy at Fekit^ ^ 
in China, 

S the instruction of the fair sex in tb 
country is entirely committed to th 
care of foreigners, as their language 
masters, music-masters, hoir-frizieis 
and governesses, are all from abroad, I had 
intentions of opening a fenmle academy myself, anc^ 
made no doubt, as I was quite a foreigner, of nEieet-^ 
ing a favourable reception. 
In this I intended to instruct the ladies in all the 



■ ■ • 

B.- '' 

■«>rn 



;ia 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, X43 

conjugal mj^teries ; wives should be taught the art 
of managing husbands, and maids the skill of pro- 
perly choosing them; I would teach a wife how isi 
she might venture to be sick without giving disgust, 
she should be acquainted with the great benefits of 
the choljc in the stomach, and all the thorough- 
bred msolence of fashion ; maids should learn the 
secret of nicely distinguishing every competitor ; 
they should be able to know the difference between 
a pedant and a scholar, a citizen and a prig, a 
squire and his horse, a bean and his monkey ; but 
chiefly they should be taught the art of managing 
their smiles, from the contemptuous simper to the 
long laborious laugh. 

But I have discontinued the project ; for what 
would signify teaching ladies the manner of govern- 
ing or choosing husbands, when marriage is at pre« 
sent so much oat of fashion, that a lady is very 
well off, who can get any husband at all. Celi- 
bacy now prevails in every rank of life, the streets 
are crowded with old bachelors, and the houses 
with ladies who have refused good offers, and are 
never likely to receive any for the future. 

The only advice, therefore, I could give the fair 
sex as things stand at present, is to get husbands 
as fiist as they can. There is certainly nothing in 
the whole creation, not even Babylon in ruins, 
more troly deplorable than a lady in the virgin 
bloom of sixty-three, or a battered unmarried beau, 
who squibs about from place to place, shewing his 
pig-tail wig and his ears. The one appears to my 
imagination in the form of a double night-cap, or 
ft roU of pomatum, the other in the shape of an 
clectiiMy. or a box of pills. 



Z44 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

I would once more therefore advise the ladies to 
get husbands. I would desire them not to discard 
an old lover without very sufficient reasons, w 
treat the new with ill -nature till they know him 
false ; let not prudes allege the falseness of the 
sex, coquettes the pleasures of long courtship, (V 
parents, the necessary preliminaries of penny fcf 
penny. I have reasons that would silence event 
casuist in this particular. In the first place, there* 
fore, I divide the subject into fifteen heads, and 
then sic ar^tmetttor — but not to give you and my- 
self the spleen, be contented at present with an 
Indian tale. 

In a winding of the river Amidar, just before it 
falls into the Caspian sea, there lies an island un- 
frequented by the inhabitants of the Continent 
In this seclusion, blest with all that wild unculti- 
vated Nature could bestow, lived a princess vA 
her two daughters. She had been wrecked upon 
the coast while her children as yet were in&nts, 
who of consequence, though grown up, were en- 
tirely unacquainted with man. Yet, unexperienced 
as the young ladies were in the opix)site sex, both 
early discovered symptoms, the one of prudery, the 
other of being a coquette. The eldest was e^*' 
leaniing maxims of wisdom and discretion from 
her mamma, while the youngest employed all ber 
hours in gazing at her own face in a ncighbouiil>S 
fountain. 

Their usual amusement in this solitude was fish- 
ing : Their mother had taught them all the secret! 
of the art ; she shewed them which were the most 
likely places to throw out the line, what baits 
were most proper for the various seasons, and the 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 145 

best manner to draw up the finny prey, when they 
had' hooked it In this manner they spent their 
time, easy and innocent, till one day, the Princess 
being indisposed, desired them to go and catch her 
a sturgeon or a shark for supper, which she fancied 
might sit easy on her stomach. The daughters 
obeyed, and clapping on a gold fish, the usual 
bait, on those occasions, went and sat upon one of 
the rocks, letting the gilded hook glide down with 
the stream. 

On the opposite shore, farther down, at the 
mouth of the river, lived a diver for pearls ; a 
youth, who, by long habit in his trade, was almost 
g^wn amphibious ; so that he could remain whole 
hours at the bottom of the water, without ever 
fetching breath. He happened to be at that very 
instant diving, when the ladies were fishing with 
the gilded hook. Seeing therefore the bait, which 
to him had the appearance of real gold, he was re- 
solved to seize the prize, but both hands bein^ 
already filled with pearl oysters, he found himself 
obliged to snap at it with his mouth : The conse- 
quence b easily imagined ; the hook, before un- 
perodvedy was instantly fastened in his jaw, nor 
could he, with all his efforts or his floundering, get 
free. 

" Sister, cries the youngest Princess, I have cer- 
tainly cau|^t a monstrous fish ; I never perceived 
any thing struggle so at the end of my line before ; 
come, and help me to draw it in." They both 
now therefore assisted in fishing up the Diver 
OQ sImk ; but nothing could equal their surprise 
npon teeing him. *' Bless my eyes, cries the prude, 
what bave we got here ; this b a very odd fish to 

IL L 



-{ 



146 THE CITIZEN OF THE HVRLD, 

be sure ; I never saw any thing in my life look so 
queer ; what eyes, what terrible claws, what i 
monstrous snout ; I have read of this monster 
somewhere before, it certainly must be a TMleHg 
that cats women ; let us throw it back into the set 
where we found it." 

The Diver in the mean time stood upon tbe 
l)eflch, at the end of the line, with the hook in bis 
mouth, using every art that he thought conld best 
excite pity, and particularly l(X)king cxtFemely 
tender, which is usual in such circumstances. The 
coquette therefore, in some measure influenced fajthe 
innocence of his looks, ventured to contradict her 
comjxinion. " Upon my word, sister, says she, I 
sec nothing in the animal so very terrible as yoa are 
pleased to apprehend ; I think it may serve veil 
enough for a change. Always sharks, and star- 
geons, and lobsters, and crawfish, make me qaitc 
sick. I fancy a slice of this nicely grilladed, and 
dresseil up with shrimp-sauce, would be very pretty 
eating. I fancy mamma would like a bit with 
{licklcs above all things in the world ; and if it 
should not sit easy on her stomach, it will be tine 
enough to discontinue it when found disagreeable, 
you know." ** Horrid, cries the prude, would the 
girl be poisoned ; I tell you it is a Tanlang; I 
have read of it in twenty places. It is every where 
dcscrilKxl as the most pernicious animal that ever 
infested the ocean. I am certain it is the most 
insidious, ravenous creature in the world * and i^ 
certain destruction if taken internally." The 
youngest sister was now therefore obliged to sub* 
niit : l)oth assisted in drawing the hook with some 
violence from the Diver's jaw ; and he finding 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 147 

himself at liberty, bent his breast against the broad 
wave and disappeared in an instant. 

Just at this juncture the mother came down to the 
beach, to know the cause of her daughters' delay ; 
they told her every circumstance, describing the 
monster they had caught. The old lady was one 
of the most discreet women in the world ; she was 
called the bl^k- ^efi Py^g^ y;, from two black 
eyes she had received in her youth, being a little ^ 
addicted to boung in her liquor. **Alas, my 
children, cries she» what have you done ; the fish 
yoa caught was a man-fish ; one of the most tame 
domestic animals in the world. We could have 
let him run and play about the garden, and he would 
have been twenty times more entertaining than our 
squirrel or monkey." '* If that be all, says the 
young coquette, we will fish for him again. If that 
be ail, 1*11 hold three tooth-picks to one pound of 
smifify I catch him whenever I please. " Accord- 
ingly they threw in their line once more, but with 
all their gilding, and paddling, and assiduity, they 
could never after catch the Diver. In this state of 
solitude and disappointment they continued for 
many jrears, still filing, but without success ; till, 
«t last, the genius of the place, in pity to their dis- 
tresses, changed the prude into a shrimp, and the 
coquette into an oyster. Adieu. 




X48 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

LETTER LXXXIX. 
From the same, 

AM amused, my dear Fum, with tlie 
labours of some of the learned hoe. 
One shall write you %. whole folio on 
the dissection of a cateJf^Uar. Anothei 
shall swell his works with a description of the 
plumage on the wing of a butterfly ; a third shall 
see a little world on a peach leaf, and publish 
a book to describe what his readers might see more 
clearly in two minutes, only by being furnished 
with eyes and a microscope. 

I have frequently compared the understanding! 
of such men, to their own glasses. Their field of 
vision is too contracted to take in the whole of tny 
but minute objects ; they view all Nature bit I7 
bit ; now the proboscis, now the antennae, now the 
pinnse of — a flea. Now the polypus comes to 
breakfast upon a worm ; now it is kept up to tee 
how long it will live without eating ; now it is 
turned inside outward ; and now it sickens and 
dies. Thus they proceed, laborious in trifles, con- 
stant in experiment, without one single abstraction, 
by which alone knowledge may be properly said 
to increase ; till, at last, their ideas, ever em- 
ployed upon minute things, contract to the size of 
the diminutive object, and a single mite shall fill 
their whole mind's capacity. 

Yet believe me, my friend, ridiculous as these 
men are to the world, they are set up as objects 
of esteem for each other. They have particular 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, Z49 

places appointed for their meetings ; in which one 
shows his cockle-shell, and is praised by all the 
society ; another produces his powder, makes some 
experiments that result in nothing, and comes off 
with admiration and applause ; a third comes out 
with the important discovery of some new process 
in the skeleton of a mole, and is set down as tht 
accurate and sensible; while one still more for- 
tunate than the rest, by pickling, potting, and pre- 
senring monsters, rises into unbounded reputation^ 

The labours of such men, instead of being cal- 
culated to amuse the public, are laid out only in 
to diverting each other. The world becomes very 
little the better or the wiser, for knowing what is 
the peculiar food of an insect, that is itself the 
food of another, which in its turn is eaten by a 
third ; but there are men who have studied them- 
selves into an habit of investigating and admiring 
such minutiae To these such subjects are pleasing, 
as there are some who contentedly spend whole 
days in endeavouring to solve enigmas, or dis- 
entangle the puzzling sticks of children. 

But of all the learned, those who pretend to 
investigate remote antiquity, have least to plead 
in their own defence, when they carry this passion 
to a fiuilty excess. They are generally found to 
supply by conjecture the want of record, and then 
by perseverance are wrought up into a confidence 
of Uie truth of opinions, which even to themselves 
at first appeared founded only in imagination. 

The Europeans have heard much of the kingdom 
of China : its politeness, arts, commerce, laws, and 
morals, are, however, but very imperfectly known 
amoog tbem. They have, even now, in their 



15© TtiB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

Indian warehouse numberless utensils, pUntei 
minerals, and machines, of the use of which 6iey 
are entirety ignorant ; nor can any among them 
even make a probable guess, for what they ndig^t 
have been designed. Yet though this people be 
so ignorant of the present real state of China, the 
philosophers I am describing have entered into 
long, learned, laborious disputes, about whatQuDi 
was two thousand years aga China and EaiopeiB 
happiness are but little connected even at tins 
day; but European hapjnness and China two 
thousand years ago have certainly no connectkn 
at all. However, the learned have written on 
and pursued the subject through lall the labyrinths 
of antiquity ; though the early dews and the tainted 
gale be passed away, though no footsteps remin 
to direct the doubtful chace, yet still they nm 
forward, open upon the uncertain scent, and thoQ|^ 
in fact they follow nothing, are earnest in the pur- 
suit. In thb chace however they all take diffnent 
ways. One, for example, confidently assures ns, 
that China was peopled by a colony from Egypt 
Sesostris, he observes, led his army as fi^ as the 
Ganges ; therefore, if he went so fieur, he might 
stin have gone as far as China, which is but aboat 
a thousand miles from thence ; therefore he did go 
to China ; therefore China was not peopled before 
be went there ; therefore it was peopled by him. 
Besides, the Egyptians have pyramids ; the Qiinese 
have in like manner their porcelain tower; the 
Egyptians used to light up candles upon every re- 
joicing, the Chinese have lanthoms upon the same 
occasions ; the Egyptians had their great river, 
so have the Chinese ; but what serves to put the 



THE CITIZEN OP' THE WORLD. 151 

matter past a doubt is, that the ancient Kmgs of 
China and those of Egypt were called by the same 
names. The emperor Ki is certainly the same 
with king Atoes ; for, if we only change A^ into A^ 
and f into toes^ we shall have the name Atoes ; 
and with equal ease Menes may be proved to be 
the same with the emperor Yu; therefore the 
Chinese are a colony from Egjrpt. 

But another of the learned is entirely different 
from the last ; and he will have the Chinese to be 
a colony planted by Noah just fifter the delug e. 
First, from the vast similitude there is between 
the name of Fohi, the founder of the Chinese 
monarchy, and that of Noah, the presenrer of the 
human race: Noah, Fohi, very like each btiier 
truly; they have eacli but four letters, alid only 
two of the four happen to differ. But to strengthen 
the ailment, Fohi, as the Chinese chronicle as* 
sertSy bad no Either. Noah, it is true, had a 
lather, as the European Bible tells us ; but then, 
as this father was probably drowned in the flood, 
it is just the same as if he had no father at all ; 
therefore Noah and Fohi are the same. Just after 
the flood, the earth was covered with mud ; if it 
was covered with mud, it must have been in* 
crustated mud ; if it was incrustated, it was clothed 
with verdure ; this was a fine, unembarrassed road 
for Noah to fly from his wicked children ; he there-; 
fore did fly from them, and took a journey of two 
thousand miles for his own amusement ; therefore 
Noah and Fohi are the same. 

Another sect of literati, for they all pass among 
the vulgar for very great scholars, assert, that the 
Chinese came neither from the colony of Sesostris, 



xst THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

nor from Noah, but are descended from Vixgi^ 
Meshec and Tubal, and therefore ndther Setoitm, 
nor Noah, nor Fohi are the same. 

It is thus, my friend, that indolence assumes the 
drs of wisdom, and while it tosses the cap sad 
ball with in&ntine folly, desires the world to look 
on, and calls the stupid pastinir> phflosophyand 
learning. Adieu. 



LETTER XC. 
From the same* 

HEN the men of this conntry are once 
turned of thirty, they regularly redie 
every year at proper intervals to lie in 
of the spleen. The vulgar, unfrimished 
with the luxurious comforts of the soft cushion, down 
bed, and easy chair, are obliged when the fit is on 
them, to nurse it up by drinking, idleness, and ill- 
humour. In such dispositions, unhappy is the 
foreigner who happens to cross them ; his loog 
chin, tarnished coat, or pinched hat, are sure to 
receive no quarter. If they meet no foreigner 
however to fight with, they are in such cases gene 
rally content with beating each other. 

The rich, as they have more sensibility, are 
operated upon with greater violence by this dis* 
order. Difierent from the poor, instead of becom- 
ing more insolent, they grow totally unfit for oppo- 
sition. A general here, who would have faced a 
culverin when well, if the fit be on him, shall 
hardly find courage to snufi'a candle. An admiral. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 153 

who could have opposed a broadside without 
shrinking, shall sit whole days in his chamber, 
mobbed up in double night-caps, shuddering at 
the iDtmsive breeze, and distinguishable from his 
wife only by his black beard and heavy eye-brows. 

In the country this disorder mostly attacks the 
fair sex, in town it is most unfavourable to the 
men. A lady, who has pined whole years amidst 
cooing doves, and complaining nightingales in 
rural retirement, shall resume all her vivacity in 
one night at a city gaming-table ; her husband, 
who roared, hunted, and got drunk at home, shall 
grow splenetic in town in proportion to his wife's 
good humour. Upon their arrival in London, they 
exchange their disorders. In consequence of her 
parties and excursions, he puts on the furred cap 
and scarlet stomacher, and perfectly resembles an 
Indian husband, who when his wife is safely de- 
livered, permits her to transact business abroad 
while he undergoes all the formality of keeping 
his bed, and receiving all the condolence in her 
place. 

But those who reside constantly in town, owe 
this disorder mostly to the influence of the weather. 
It is impossible to describe what a variety of trans- 
mutations an east wind shall produce ; it has been 
known to change a Lady of fashion into a parlour 
couch ; an Alderman into a plate of custards, and 
a dispenser of justice into a rat trap. Even Philo; 
sophers themselves are not exempt from its in- 
fluence ; it has often converted a Poet into a coral 
and bells, and a patriot Senator into a dumb 
waiter. 

Some days ago I went to visit the man in black, 



XS4 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

and entered his house with that cheerfulness, vliich 
the certainty of a favourable reception always in- 
spires. Upon opening the door of his apartment, 
I found him with the most rueful face imaginable 
in a morning gown and flannel night-cap, earnestly 
employed in learning to blow the German flute. 
Struck with the absurdity of a man in the decline 
of life, thus blowing away all his constitution and 
spirits, even without the consolation of being 
musical ; I ventured to ask what could induce 
him to attempt learning so difficult an instrument 
so late in life. To this he made no reply, but 
groaning, and still holding the flute to his lip, con* 
tinued to gaze at me for some moments very angrily, 
and then proceeded topractise his gammut as before. 
After having produced a variety of the most hideous 
tones in nature ; at last turning to me, he demanded, 
whether I did not think he made a surprizing pio« 
gress in two days ? You see, continues he, I have 
got the Ambusheer already, and as for fingeringi 
my master tells me, I shall have that in a few 
lessons more. I was so much astonished with this 
instance of inverted ambition, that I knew not 
what to reply, but soon discerned the cause of all 
his absurdities ; my friend was under a metamor- 
phosis by the power of spleen, and flute-blowiog 
was unluckily become his adventitious passion. 

In order therefore to banish his anxiety imper- 
ceptibly, by seeming to indulge it, I began to 
descant on those gloomy topics by which Philoso- 
phers often get rid of their own spleen, by com- 
municating it ; the wretchedness of a man in this 
life, the happiness of some wrought out of the 
miseries of others, the necessity that wretches 



THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD. 1515 

should expire under punishment, that rogues might 
enjoy affluence in tranquillity ; I led him on from 
the inhumanity of the rich to the ingratitude of the 
b^gar ; from the insincerity of refinement to the 
fierceness of rusticity ; and at last had the good 
fortune to restore him to his usual serenity of 
temper, by permitting him to expatiate upon all 
the modes of human misery. 

"Some n^ts ago, says my friend, sitting 
alone by my fire, I happened to look into an ac- 
count of the detection of a set of men called the 
thief^takeis. I read over the many hideous cruel- 
ties of those haters of mankind, of their pretended 
friendship to wretches they meant to betray, of 
their sending men out to rob, and then hanging 
them. I could not avoid sometimes interrupting 
the narrative, by crying out, Yet these are men I 
As I went on, I was informed that they had lived 
by this practice several years, and had been en- 
riched by the price of blood, and yet, cried I, / 
have been sent into this world, and am desired to 
call these men my krothers I 1 read that the very 
man who led the condemned wretch to the gallows, 
Was he who wisely swore his liie away ; and yet, 
continued I, that perjuror had just such a nose, 
tMch lips, such hands, and such eyes as Newton. I 
mt last came to the account of the wretch, that was 
Marched after robbing one of the thief-takers of 
half a crowiL Those of the confederacy knew that 
he had got but that single half crown in the world ; 
after a long search therefore, which they knew 
would be fruitless, and taking from him the half 
crown, which they knew was all he had, one of the 
gang compassionately cried out, AUis, poor crea- 



xs4 THE CITIZEN OF THK WORLD, 

ture.Uthim ktep ail the rest he has got^ it wiU i» \ 
him service in Newgate^ where we are semimgkim* 
This was an instance of such complicated goiltand 
hypocrisy, that I threw down the book in an agony 
of rage, and began to think with malice cj all the 
human kind. I sat silent for some miniitct» flii 
soon perceiving the ticking of my watch beginri n 
to grow noisy and troublesome, I quickly pbooi 
it out of hearing, and strove to reswne my tenniti'. 
But the watch-man soon gave me m second akn. 
I had scarcely recovered from this, when mypeioe 
was assaulted by the wind at my window ; and 
when that ceased to blow, I listened for death* 
watches in the ¥rainscot. I now found my whole 
system discomposed, I strove to find a resource ia 
philosophy and reason ; bat what oonkl I oppoie) 
or where direct my blow, when I could see no 
enemy to combat I saw no misery appffoaching» 
not knew any I had to fear, yet stUl I was miseiahle. 
Morning came, I sought for tranquillity in dissipa- 
tion, sauntered from one place of public resort to 
another, but found myself disagreeable to my ac- 
quaintance, and ridiculous to others. I tried at 
different times dancing, fencing, and riding, I 
solved geometrical problems, shaped tobacco- 
stoppers, wrote verses and cut paper. At last I 
placed my affections on music, and find, tiiat 
earnest employment, if it cannot cure, at least will 
palliate every anxiety.*' Adieu. 




THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 157 

LETTER XCI. 
From the same. 

[T is no unpleasing contemplation to con- 
sider the influence which soil and climate 
have upon the disposition of the inhabi- 
tants, the animals and vegetables of 
different countries. That among the brute crea- 
tion is much more visible than in man, and that in 
v^;etable8 more than either. In some places those 
plants which are entirely poisonous at home lose 
their ddeterioos quality by being carried abroad ; 
there are serpents in Macedonia so harmless as to 
be used as play-things for children, and we are 
told, that in some parts of Fez there are lions so 
very timorous as to be scared away, though coming 
in herds, by the cries of women. 

I know of no country where the influence of 
climate and soil is more visible than in England ; 
the same hidden cause which gives courage to their 
dogs and cocks, gives also fierceness to their men. 
But diiefly this ferocity appears among the vulgar. 
The polite of every country pretty nearly resemble 
cadi other. But as in simpling, it is among the 
ODColtivated productions of Nature, we are to 
emnine the cfauacteristic differences of climate 
and soil, so in an estimate of the genius of the 
people, we must look among the sons of un- 
polished rusticity, llie vulgar English therefore 
migr be easily distinguished from all the rest of 
the worid, by superior pride, impatience, and a 
pecnllur haidinen of souL 



158 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

Perhaps no qualities in the world are more sos- 
ceptible of a fine polish than these ; artificial com* 
plaisance and easy deference being superinduced 
over these, generally forms a great character; 
something at once elegant and majestic, aflaUe 
yet sincere. Such in general are the bettei KKts 
but they who are left in primitive rudeness an the 
least disposed for society with others,, or oonfiort 
internally, of any people under the sun. 

The poor indeed of every country, 9X% bat littk 
prone to treat each other with tenderness ; theii 
own miseries are too apt to engross all their pity; 
and perhaps too they give but little commiseiatioa, 
as they find but little from others. But, in Englandi 
the poor treat each other upon every occasion with 
more than savage animosity, and as if they woe in 
a state of open war by nature. I^ China, if two 
porters should meet in a narrow street, they would 
lay down their burthens, make a thousand exaises 
to each other for the accidental interruption, and 
beg pardon on their knees ; if two men of the same 
occupation should meet here, they would first begin 
to scold, and at last to beat each other. One 
would think they had miseries enough resulting 
from penury and labour not to increase them bjr 
ill nature among themselves, and subjection to new 
penalties, but such considerations never weigh with 
them. 

But to recompence this strange absurdity, they 
are in the main generous, brave and. enterprising. 
They feel the slightest injuries with a degree of 
ungovemed impatience, but resist the greatest 
calamities with surprizing fortitude. Those miseries 
under which any other people in the world would 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 159 

sink« they have often showed they were capable of 
enduring ; if accidentally cast upon some desolate 
coast, their perseverance is beyond what any other 
natioii Is capable of sustaining ; if imprisoned for 
criines^ their efforts to escape are greater than 
among others. The peculiar strength of their « 
pqsons* when compared to those elsewhere, 
aigoes their hardiness ; even the strongest prisons 
I have ever seen in other countries, would be very 
insufficient to confine the untameable spirit of an 
EnglishnMin. In short, what man dares do in 
curpumstances of danger, an Ei^lishman will. 
His virtues seem to sleep in the calm, and are 
called out only to combat the kindred storm. 

But the greatest eulogy of this people^ is the 
generosity of their miscreants ; the texidemess in 
general of their robbers and highwa3rmen. Per* 
haps no people can produce instances of the same 
kind, where the desperate mix pity with injustice ; 
still shewing that they understand a distinction in 
crimes, and even, in acts of violence, have still 
some tincture of remaining virtue. In every other 
country robbery and murder go almost always 
together ; here it seldom happens, except upon ill- 
judged resistance or pursuit. The banditti of 
other countries are unmerciful to a supreme de- 
gree ; the highwajrman and robber here are gene- 
rous at least to the public, and pretend even to 
virtues in their intercourse among each other. 
Taking therefore my opinion of the English from 
the virtues and vices practised among the vulgar, 
they at once present to a stranger all their fiaults* 
and keep their virtues up only for the enquiring 
eye of a philosopher. 



z6e THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

Foreigners are generally shocked at their inso- 
lence upon first coming among them ; they find 
themselves ridiculed and insulted in every street ; 
they meet with none of those trilling civilities, lo 
frequent elsewhere, which are instances of nratoal 
good will without previous acquaintance ; they 
travel through the country either too ignoniDt or 
too obstinate to cultivate a closer acquaintance, 
meet every moment something to excite their dis- 
gust, and return home to characterize this as the 
region of spleen, insolence, and ill-nature. In 
short, England would be the last place in the 
world I would travel to by way of amusement ; 
but the first for instruction. I would choose to 
have others for my acquaintance, but Englishmen 
for my friends. 



LETTER XCIL 
To the same* 



-*<»kAim 







HE mind is ever ingenious in making its 
own distress. The waodering be^;ar, 
who has none to protect, to feed, or to 
shelter him, fancies complete happiness 
in labour and a full meal ; take him from rags and 
want, feed, clothe, and employ him, his wishes 
now rise one step above his station ; he could be 
happy were he possessed of raiment, food, and 
ease. Suppose his wishes gratified even in these, 
his prospects widen as he ascends ; he finds him- 
self in affluence and tranquillity indeed, bat indo- 
lence soon breeds anxiety, and he desires not only 



THE CITIZRN OF THE WORLD. i6t 

to be freed from pain, but to be possessed of plea- 
sure : pleasure is granted him, and this but opens 
his soul to ambition, and ambition will be sure to 
taint his future happiness, either with jealousy, 
disappointment, or fatigue. 

But of all the arts of distress found out by man 
for his own torment, perhaps, that of philosophic 
misery is most truly ridiculous, a passion no where 
carried to so extravagant an excess, as in the 
country where I now reside. It is not enough to 
engage all the compassion of a philosopher here, 
that his own globe is harassed with wars, pestilence, 
or barbarity, he shall grieve for the inhabitants of 
the moon, if the situation of her imaginary moun- 
tains happens to alter; and dread the extinction 
of the sun, if the spots on his surface happen to 
increase : one should imagine, that philosophy was 
introduced to make men happy, but here it serves 
to make hundreds miserable. 

My landlady some da3rs ago brought me the 
diary of a philosopher of this desponding sort, who 
had lodged in the apartment before me. It con- 
tains the history of a life, which seems to be one 
continued tissue of sorrow, apprehension, and 
distress. A sii^le week will serve as a specimen 
of the whole. 

Monday. In what a transient deca3ring situation 
are we placed, and what various reasons does phi- 
losophy furnish to make mankind unhappy ! A 
single grain of mustard shall continue to produce 
its fimiHtude through numberless successions ; yet 
what has been granted to this little seed has been 
denied to our planetary sjrstem ; the mustard-seed 
is atin metered, but the system is growing old, 

n. M 



x69 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

and must quickly fail to decay. How terrible will 
it be, when the motions of all the planets have at 
last become so irregular as to need repairingi 
when the moon shall fall into frightful paroxysms 
of alteration, when the earth, deviating from its 
ancient track, and with every other ]^anet for* 
getting its circular revolutions, shall become so 
eccentric, that unconfined by the laws of 8}rstem, 
it shall 0y off inta boundless space, to knock 
against some distant world, (ur £edl in upon the 
sun, either extinguishing his light, or burned up 
by his flames in a moment. Perhaps while I write, 
this dreadful change is begun. Shield me from 
universal ruin ! Yet idiot man laughs, sings, and 
rejoices in the very face of the sun, and seems no 
way touched Mrith his situation. ■ 

Tuesday, Went to bed in great distress^ awaked 
and was comforted, by considering that this change 
was to happen at some indefinite time, and there- 
fore, like death, the thoughts of it might easily be 
borne. But there is a revolution, a fixed deter* 
mined revolution, which must certaixily come to 
pass ; yet which, by good fortune, I shall never 
feel, except in my posterity. The obliquity of the 
equator with the ecliptic, is now twenty minutes 
less than when it was observed two thousand years 
ago by Piteas, If this be the case, in six thousand 
the obliquity will be still less by an whole degree. 
This being supposed, it is evident, that our earth, 
OS Louville has clearly proved, has a -motion, by 
which the climates must necessarily change place, 
and, in the space of about one million of years, 
England shall actually travel to the Antarctic pole. 
I shudder at the change 1 How shall our unhappy 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 263 

grand-children endure the hideous climate I A 
million of jrears will soon be accomplished ; they 
are bat a moment when compared to eternity; 
then shall our charming country, as I may say, in 
a moment of time, resemble the hideous wilderness 
of NomZembla. 

Wednesday, To-night, by my calculation, the 
long predicted comet is to make its first appearance. 
Heavens, what terrors are impending over our little 
dim speck of earth ! Dreadfiil visitation ! Are we 
to be scorched in its fires, or only smothered in the 
vapour of its tail ? That is the question ! Thought- 
less mortals, go build houses, plant orchards, 
purchase estates, for to-morrow you die. But 
what if the comet should not come ? That would 
be equally &taL Comets are servants which 
periodically return to supply the sun with fuel. 
If our sun therefore should be disappointed of the 
expected supply, and all his fuel be in the mean- 
time burnt out, he must expire like an exhausted 
taper. What a miserable situation must our earth 
be in without his enlivening ray? Have we not 
seen several neighbouring suns entirely disappear ? 
Has not a fixed star, near the tail of the Ram, 
lately been quite extinguished ? 

Thursday, The comet has not yet appeared ; 
I am sorry for it : first, sorry because my calcula- 
tion is false ; secondly, sorry lest the sun shoukl 
want fuel ; thirdly, sorry lest the wits should laugh 
at our erroneous predictions ; and fourthly, sorry 
because if it appears to-night, it must necessarily 
come within the sphere of the earth*s attraction ; 
and heaven help the unhappy country on which it 
happens to fall. 



i64 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

Friday, Our whole society have been out all 
eager in search of the comet. We have seen not 
less than sixteen comets in different parts of the 
heavens. However we are unanimously resolved 
to fix upon one only to be the comet expected. 
That near Virgo wants nothing but a tail to fit it 
out completely for terrestrial admiration. 

Saturday. The moon is I find at her old piaoks. 
Her appulses, librations, and other irregularities, 
indeed amaze me. My daughter too is this moroiDg 
gone off with a grenadier. No way surprising. 1 
was never able to give her a relish for wisdom. 
She ever promised to be a mere expletive in the 
creation. But the moon, the moon gives me real 
uneasiness ; I fondly fended I had fixed her. I 
had thought her constant, and constant only to 
me ; but every night discovers her infidelity, and 
proves me a desolate and abandoned lover. 
Adieu. 



LETTER XCIII. 
To the same, 

|T is surprising what an influence dUes 
shall have upon the mind, even though 
these titles be of our own making. 
Like children we dress up the puppets 
in finery, and then stand in astonishment at the 
plastic wonder. I have been told of a rat-catcher 
here, who strolled for a long time about the villages 
near town, without finding any employment ; at 
last, however, he thought proper to take the title 
of his Majesty's Rat-catcher in ordinary, and this 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 165 

succeeded beyond his expectations ; when it was 
known that he caught rats at court, all were ready 
to give him countenance and emplo3mient. 

But of all the people, they who make books 
seem most perfectly sensible of the advantage of 
titular dignity. All seem convinced, that a book 
written by vulgar hands, can neither instruct nor 
improve; none but Kings, Chams, and Man- 
darines, can write with any probability of success. 
If the titles inform me right, not only Kings and 
Courtiers, but Emperors themselves in this country, 
periodically supjdy the press. 

A man here who should write, and honestly 
confess that he wrote for bread, might as well send 
his manuscript to fire the baker's oven ; not one 
creature will read him ; all must be court-bred 
poets, or pretend at least to be court-bred, who 
can expect to please. Should the caitiff ^drly 
avow a design of emptying our pockets and filling 
his own, eveiy reader would instantly forsake him; 
even those who wrote for bread themselves, would 
combine to wwry him, perfectly sensible, that his 
attempts only served to take the bread out of their 
mouths. 

And yet this silly prepossession the more amazes 
me, when I consider, that almost all the excellent 
productions in wit that have appeared here, were 
purely the offspring of necessity ; their Drydens, 
Butlers, Otways, and Farquhars, were all writers 
for bread. Believe me, my firiend, hunger has a 
most amazing faculty of sharpening the genius; 
and he who with a full belly, can think like a hero, 
after a course of fasting, shall rise to the sublimity 
of a demi-god* 



i66 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

But what will most amaze, is, that this very set 
. of men, who are now so much depreciated by fooU, 
are however the very best writers they have smoog 
them at present. For my ovm part, were I to buy 
an hat, I would not have it from a stocking-maker, 
but an hatter ; were I to buy shoes, I should not 
go to the tailor's for that purpose. It is jot M 
with regard to wit : did I, ior my life, deike lote 
well served, I would apply only to those «to 
made it their trade, and lived by it. You Mdt 
at the oddity of my opinion ; but be assured, ny 
friend, that wit is in some measure mechaniad: 
and that a man long halHtuated to catch at even 
its resemblance, will at last be happy enough to 
possess the substance : by a long habit of writing 
he acquires a justness of thinking, and a mastery 
of manner, which holiday-writers, even with ten 
times his genius, may vainly attempt to equal 

How then are they deceived, who expect firom 
title, dignity, and exterior circumstance, an excel- 
lence, which is in some measure acquired by habit, 
and sharpened by necessity ; you have seen, like 
me, many literary reputations promoted by the 
influence of fashion, which have scarce survived 
the possessor ; you have seen the poor hardly earn 
the little reputation they acquired, and their merit 
only acknowledged when they were incapable of 
enjoying the pleasures of popularity ; such, how- 
ever, is the reputation worth possessing, that 
which is hardly earned is hardly lost. Adieu. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 167 



LETTER XCIV. 

From Hingpo in Moscow^ to Lien Chi Aliangi in 

London. 

!HERE will my disappointments end? 
Must I still be doomed to accuse the 
severity of my fortune, and shew my 
constancy in distress rather than mode- 
ration in prosperity ? I had at least hopes of con- 
vcyixkg my charming companion safe from the 
reach of every enemy, and of again restoring her 
to her native soil. But those hopes are now no 
more. 

Upon leavii^ Terki, we took the nearest road 
to the dominions of Russia. We passed the Ural 
mountains covered in eternal snow, and traversed 
the forests of Ufa, where the prowling bear and 
shrieking hyena keep an undisputed possession. 
We next embarked upon the rapid river Bulija ; and 
made the best of our way to the banks of the Wolga, 
where it waters the fruitful valleys of Casan. 

There were two vessels in company properly 
equipped and armed, in order to oppose the Wolga 
]»rates, who, we were informed, infested this 
m&^ Of all mankind, these pirates are the most 
terrible. They are composed of the criminals and 
outlawed peasants of Russia, who fly to the forests 
that lie along the banks of the Wolga for protec- 
tion. Here they join in parties, lead a savage life, 
and have no other subsistence but plunder. Being 
deprived of houses, friends, or a fixed habitation, 
they become more terrible even than the tiger, and 



x68 THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

as insensible to all the feelings of humanity. They 
neither give quarter to those they conquer, nor 
receive it when overpowered themselves. The 
severity of the laws against them serves to increase 
their barbarity, and seems to make them a neutral 
species of beings, between the wildness of the lion 
and the subtilty of the man. When taken alive 
their punishment is hideous. A floating gibbet is 
erected, which is let run down with the stream ; 
here upon an iron hook stuck under their ribs, and 
upon which the whole weight of their body depends, 
they are left to expire in the most terrible agonies ; 
some being thus found to linger several days 
successively. 

We were but three days' vojrage from the con- 
fluence of this river into the Wolga, when we 
perceived at a distance behind us an armed barque 
coming up with the assistance of sails and oaxs, in 
order to attack us. The dreadiiil signal of death 
was hung upon the mast, and our captain with his 
glass could easily discern them to be pirates. It 
is impossible to express our constematicm on this 
occasion ; the whole crew instantly came together 
to consult the properest means of safety. It was 
therefore soon determined to send off" our women 
and valuable commodities in one of our vessels, 
and that the men should stay in the other and 
boldly oppose the enemy. This resolution was 
soon put into execution, and I now reluctantly 
parted from the beautiful Zelis for the first time 
.since our retreat from Persia. The vessel in which 
she was, disappeared to my longing eyes, in pro- 
.portion as that of the pirates approached us. They 
•ooo came up ; but» upon examining our strength, 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 169 

and perhaps sensible of the manner in which we 
had sent off our most valuable effects, they seemed 
more eager to pursue the vessel we had sent away, 
than attack us. In this manner they continued to 
harass us for three dajrs ; still endeavouring to pass 
us without fighting. But, on the fourth day, finding 
it entirely impossible, and despairing to seize the 
expected booty, they desisted from their endea- 
vonn, and left us to pursue our voyage without 
interrnption. 

Onr joy on this occasion was great ; but soon a 
disappointment more4efrible, because unexpected, 
succeeded. The barque, in which our women 
and treasure were sent off, was wrecked upon the 
banks of the Wolga, for want of a proper number 
of hands to manage her, and the whole crew carried 
by the peasants up the country. Of this however 
we were not sensible till our arrival at Moscow ; 
where expecting to meet our separated barque, we 
were informed of its misfortune, and our loss. 
Need I paint the situation of my mind on this 
occasion? Need I describe all I feel, when I 
despair of beholding the beautiful Zelis more ! 
Fancy had dressed the future prospect of my life 
in the gayest colouring ; but one unexpected stroke 
c^ fortune has robbed it of every charm. Her 
dear idea mixes with every scene of pleasure, and 
without her presence to enliven it, the whole be- 
comes tedious, insipid, insupportable. I will con- 
fess, now that she is lost, I will confess, I loved 
her ; nor b it in the power of time, or of reason, 
to erase her image from my heart. Adieu. 




<70 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 



LETTER XCV. 

From Lien Chi AUangi to Hingpo^ at Moscm} 

[OUR misfortunes are mine. But as 
every p^od of life is marked with its 
own, you must learn to endure them. 
Disappointed love makes the misery of 
youth ; disappointed ambition, that of manhood ; 
and successless avarice, that of age. These three 
attack us through life ; and it is our duty to stand 
upon our guard. To love, we ought to oppoie 
dissipation, and endeavour to change the object of 
the afifections ; to ambition, the happiness of indo- 
lence and obscurity $ and to avarice, the fear of 
soon dying. These are the shields with which we 
should arm ourselves ; and thus make every scene 
of life, if not pleasing, at least supportable. 

Men complain of not finding a place of repose. 
They are in the wrong ; they have it for seeking. 
What they should indeed complain of is, that the 
heart is an enemy to that very repose they seek. 
To themselves alone should they impute their dis- 
content. They seek within the short span of life 
to satisfy a thousand desires ; each of which alone 
is unsatiable. One month passes and another 
comes on ; the year ends and then begins ; bat 
man is still unchanging in folly, still blindly con- 
tinuing in prejudice. To the wise man* every 
climate and every soil is pleasing ; to him, a par* 

1 This letter is a rhapsody from the Maxims of the philo- 
sopher Mtf. Vide Lett, curieuaes & ediiiantes. Vide etiam 
Du Halde, voL ii. p. 98. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD^ 271 

terre of flowers is the famous valley of gold ; to 
bim, a Iktle brook, the fountain of young peach" 
trees; ^ to sudi a man, the melody of birds is more 
ravishing than the harmony of a full concert ; and 
the tincture of the cloud preferable to the touch of 
the finest pendL 

The life of man is a journey : a journey that 
must be travelled, however bad the roads or the 
accommodation. If, in the beginning, it is found 
dai^^erous, narrow, and difficult, it must either 
grow better in the end, or we shall by custom 
learn to bear its inequality. 

But though I see you incapable of penetrating 
into grand principles, attend at least to a simile 
adapted to every apprehension. I am mounted 
upon a wretched ass. I see another man before 
me upon a sprightly horse, at which I find some 
uneasiness. I look behind me, and see numbers 
on foot stooping under heavy burdens; let me 
learn to pity their estate, and thank heaven for 
my own. 

Shingfu, when under misfortunes, would in the 
beginning weep like a child ; but he soon re- 
covered his former tranquillity. After indulging 
grief for a few days, he would become, as usual, 
the most merry old man in all the province of 
ShansL About the time that his wife died, his 
possessions were all consumed by fire, and his 
only son sold into captivity ; Shingfu grieved for 
one day, and the next went to dance at a Man- 
darine's door for his dinner. The company were 
surprised to see the old man so merry when suffer- 
ing such great losses, and the Mandarine himself 
1 This pasnge the editor does not understand. 



I 



17a THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

coming out, asked him how he, who had grieved 
so much, and given way to the calamity the day 
before, could now be so cheerful ? " You ask me 
one question, cries the old man, let me answer by 
asking another : Which is the most durable, a 
hard thing, or a soft thing ; that which resists, or 
that which makes no resistance ? " An kardtkh^ 
to be sure^ replied the Mandarine. " There you 
are wrong, returned Shingfu. I am now focuscore 
years old ; and if you look in my mouth, you wiU 
find that I have lost all my teeth, but not a fait of 
my tongue/* Adieu. 




LETTER XCVI. 

From Lien Chi Altangi^ to Fum Hoam^ first Pre- 
sident of the Ceremonial Academy ^ at Pekin^ in 
China, 

{HE manner of grieving for our departed 
friends in China is very different from 
that of Europe. The mourning colour 
of Europe is black; that of China 
white. When a parent or relation dies here, Ux 
they seldom mourn for friends, it is only clapping 
on a suit of sables, grin^cing it for a few days, 
and all, soon forgotten, goes on as before ; not a 
single creature missing the deceased, except per- 
haps a favourite house*keeper or a favourite cat 

On the contrary, with us in China it is a very 
serious affair. The piety with which I have seen 
you behave on one of these occasions should never 
be forgotten. I remember it was upon the death 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 273 

of thy grandmother's maiden sister. The coffin 
was exposed in the principal hall in public view. 
Before it were placed the figures of eunuchs, 
horses, tortoises, and other animals, in attitudes of 
grief and respect The more distant relations 
of the old lady, and I among the number, came to 
pay our compliments of condolence, and to salute 
the deceased alter the manner of our country. We 
had scarce presented our wax candles and perfumes, 
and given the bowl of departure, when, crawling on 
his belly from under a curtain, out came the reve- 
rend Fum Hoam himself, in all the dismal solem- 
nity of distress. Your looks were set for sorrow ; 
yoipr clothing consisted in an hempen bag tied 
round the neck with a string. For two long 
months did this mourning continue. By night 
you lay stretched on a single mat, and sat on 
the stool of discontent by day. Pious man, who 
could thus set an example of sorrow and decorum 
to our country. Pious country, where, if we 
do not grieve at the departure of our friends 
for their sakes, at least we are taught to regret 
them for our own. 

All is very different here ; amazement all. What 
sort of a people am I got amongst 1 Fum, thou son 
of Fo, what sort of people am I got amongst ! No 
crawling round the coffii^; no dressing up in hem- 
pen bags ; no lying on mats, or sitting on stools. 
Gentlemen here shall put on first mourning with as 
sprightly an air as if {xreparing for a birth-night ; 
and widows shall actually dress for another hus- 
band in their weeds for the former. The best jest 
of all is, that our merry mourners clap bits of 
muslin on their sleeves, and these are called 



174 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

weepers. Weeping muslin ; alas, alas, very sor* 
rowfiil truly ! These weepers then it seems are to 
bear the whole burden of the distress. 

But I have had the strongest instance of this 
contrast ; this tragi-comical behaviour in dstita 
upon a recent occasioiL Their Kinf!^, whose d^ 
parture, though sudden, was not unexpected, died 
after a reign of many years. His age, and nocer- 
tain state of health, served in some measure to 
diminish the sorrow of his subjects ; and their ex- 
pectations from his successor seemed to balance 
their minds between uneasiness and satisfodko. 
But how ought they to have behaved on such an 
occasion ? Surely, they ought rather to have en* 
deavoured to testify their gratitude to their de* 
ceased friend, than to proclaim their hopes of the 
future. Sure even the Successor must suppose 
their love to wear the fiace of adulation, which so 
quickly changed the object. However, the very 
same day on which the old King died, they made 
rejoicing for the new. 

For my part, I have no conception of this new 
manner of mourning and rejoicing in a breath; 
of being merry and sad ; of mixing a funeral pro- 
cession with a jig and a bonfire. At least, it would 
have been just, that they who flattered the King 
while living for virtues which he had not, should 
lament him dead for those he really had. 

In this universal cause for national distress, as I 
had no interest myself, so it is but natural to sup- 
pose, I felt no real affliction. In all the losses of 
our friends, says an European philosopher, we first 
consider how much our own welfare is affected by 
their departure, and moderate our real grief just in 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 175 

the same proportion. Now, as I had neither re* 
ceived nor expected to receive favours from kii^s 
or their flatterers ; as I had no acquaintance in 
particular with their late monarch ; as I knew that 
(he place of a king is soon supplied ; and as 
the Chinese proverb has it, that though the world 
may sometimes want cobblers to mend their shoes, 
thue is DO danger of its wanting Emperors to rule 
their kingdoms : from such considerations, I could 
bear the loss of a king with the most philosophic 
resignation. However, I thought it my duty at 
kast to appear sorrowful; to put cm a melan« 
choly aspect, or to set my face by that of the 
peof^e. 

The first company I came amongst after the 
oews became general, was a set of jcdly companions 
who were drinking prosperity to the ensuing reign. 
I entered the room with looks of despair, and even 
expected applause for the superlative misery of my 
countenance. Instead of that I was universally 
condemned by the company for a grimacing son of 
a. whore, and desired to take away my penitential 
f^iz to some other quarter, I now corrected my 
former mistake, and with the most sprightly air ima- 
ginable entered a company, where they were talking 
over the ceremonies of the approaching funeral. 
Here I sat for spme time with an air of pert vivacity ; 
when one of the chief mourners immediately observ- 
ii^ my good humour, desired me, if I pleased, to 
go and grin somewhere else; they wanted Df 
disaffected scoundrels there. Leaving this com- 
pany therefore, I was resolved to assume a look 
perfectly neutral ; and have ever since been study- 
ing the fashionable air : something between jest 



176 THR CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

and earnest ; a complete virginity of &oe, an- 
contaminated with the smallest symptom d 
meaning. 

But though grief be a very s%ht affidr here, the 
mourning, my friend, is a very important concern. 
When an Emperor dies in China, the whole ex- 
pence of the solemnities is defrayed from the royal 
coffers. When the great die here, Mandarines are 
ready enough to order mourning ; but I do not lee 
that they are so ready to pay for it If they send 
me down from court the grey undress frock, or the 
black coat without pocket holes, I am willing 
enough to comply with their commands, and wear 
both ; but, by the head of Confridus 1 to be 
obliged to wear black, and buy it into the bargain, 
is more than my tranquillity of temper can bear. 
What, order me to wear mourning before thej 
know whether I can buy it or no 1 Fum, thou son 
of Fo, what sort of people am I got amongst ; 
where being out of black is a certain S3rmptom of 
poverty; where those who have miserable &oei 
cannot have mourning, and those who have mourn- 
ing will not wear a miserable face 1 



LETTER XCVII. 
From the sami, 

|T is usual for the booksellers here, wheo 
a book has given universal pleasure 
upon one subject, to bring on several 
more upon the same plan ; which are 
sure to have purchasers and readers from that de- 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 177 

sire which all men have to view a pleasing object 
on every side. The first performance serves rather 
to awaken than satisfy attention ; and when that 
is once moved, the slightest effort serves to con- 
tinue its progression ; t)ie merit of the first diffuses 
a light sufficient to illuminate the succeeding 
efforts ; and no other subject can be relished, till 
that is exhausted. A stupid work coming thus 
immediately in the train of an applauded perfor- 
mance, weans the mind from the object of its 
pleasure ; and resembles the sponge thrust into the 
mouth of a dischaxged culverin, in order to adapt 
it for a new explosion. 

This manner, however, of drawing off a subject, 
or a peculiar mode of writing to the dregs, effec- 
tually precludes a revival of that subject or manner 
for some time for the future ; the sated reader turns 
from it with a kind of literary nausea; and though 
the titles of books are the part of them most read, 
yet he has scarce perseverance enough to wade 
through the title page. 

Of this number I own myself one ; I am now 
grown callous to several subjects, and different 
kinds of composition : « whether such originally 
pleased I will not take upon ipe to determine; but 
at present I spurn a new book merely upon seeing 
its name in an advertisement ; nor have the smallest 
curiosity to look beyond the first leaf, even though 
in the second the author promises his own face 
neatly engraved on copper. 

I am become a perfect Epicure in reading; plain 
beef or solid mutton will never do. I am for a 
Chinese dish of bear's claws and bird's nests. I am 
for sauce strong with assafoetida, or fuming with 

II. N 



178 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

garlic For this reason there are an hundred veiy 
wise, learned, virtuoas, well-intended prodnctiooi 
that have no charms for me. Thus, for the sod of 
me, I could never find courage nor grace vo/m^ 
to wade above two pages deep into Tk^u^^upm 
God and Nature^ or Thoughts upon Providatct^ or 
Thoughts upon J*hgg Grace, or indeed into Thoi^ 
upon any thing at alL I can no longer meditate 
with Meditations for everyday in the ytu; £nji 
upon divers subjects cannot allure me, though 
never so interesting ; and as for Funeral Sermons, 
or even Thanksgiving Sermons, I can neitherweep 
with the one, nor rejoice with the other. 

But it is chiefly in gentle poetry, where I seldoin 
look fiirther than the title. The truth Is, I take vp 
lKX>ks to be told something new; but here, as it is 
now managed, the reader is told nothing. He 
opens the book, and there finds very good words, 
truly, and much exactness of rhyme, but no infor- 
mation. A parcel of gaudy images pass on faefixe 
his imagination like the figures in a dream ; hot 
<:uriosity, induction, reason, and the whcde train of 
afiections are fast asleep. The jucunda H idomt 
vita ; those sallies which mend the heart while 
they amuse the fancy, are quite forgotten : so that 
-a reader who would take up some modem ap* 
plauded performances of this kind, must, in oidei 
to be pleased, first leave his good sense behind 
him, take for his recompence and guide bloated 
and compound epithet, and dwell on paintingSi 
just indeed, because laboured with minute exact- 
ness. 

If we examine, however, our internal sensations, 
^lil^shail find ourselves bnt little pleased with such 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, I79 

laboured vanities ; we shall find that our applause 
rather proceeds from a kind of contagion caught 
up from others, and which we contribute to diffuse, 
than from what we privately feel. There are some 
subjects of which almost all the world perceive the 
futility; yet all combine in imposing upon each 
other, as worthy of praise. But chiefly this im- 
position obtains in literature, where men publicly 
contemn what they relish with rapture in private, 
and approve abroad what has given disgust at 
home. The truth is, we deliver those criticisms in 
public which are supposed to be best calculated 
not to do justice to the author, but to impress others 
with an opinion of our superior discernment. 

But let works of this kind, which have already 
come off with such applause, enjoy it all. It is 
neither my wish to diminish, as I was never con- 
siderable enough to add to their fame. But for the 
future I fear there are many poems, of which I 
shall find spirits to read but the title. In the first 
l^ace, all odes upon winter, or summer, or autumn ; 
in short all odes, epodes, and monodies whatso- 
ever, shall hereafter be deemed too polite, classical, 
obficure, and refined, to be read, and entirely 
above human comprehension^ Pastorals are pretty 
enough — for those that like them — but to me 
lliyrsis is one of the most insipid fellows I ever 
conversed with ; and as for Coiydon, I do not 
choose his company. Elegies and epistles are very 
fine to those to whom they are addressed ; and as 
for epic poems, I am generally able to dbcover the 
whole plan in reading the two first pages. 

Tragedies, however, as they are now made, are 
good instructive moral sermcns enough ; and it 



x8o THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

would be a fault not to be pleased Yiii^igoodihhipi 
There I learnt several great truths ; as, that k ■ 
impossible to see into the ways of fiitnritj; tliA 
punishment alwajrs attends the villain, that lofeb 
the fond soother of the human breast, that «t 
should not resist heaven's will, for in resitdq^ 
heaven's will, heaven's will is resisted; with 
several other sentiments equally new, delicate nd 
striking. Every new tragedy therefore I shall go 
to see ; for reflections of this nature make a tokr 
able harmony, when mixed up with a proper qoan* 
tity of drum, trumpet, thunder, lightning, or the 
scene shifter's whistle. Adieu. 




LETTER XCVIII. 
From the same, 

HAD some intentions lately of going 
to visit Bedlam, the place H'here those 
who go mad are confined. I went to 
wait upon the man in black to be my 
conductor, but I found him preparing to go to 
Westminster-hall, where the English hold tbeir 
courts of justice. It gave me some surprise to fin^ 
my friend engaged in a law-suit, but more so wbeo 
he informed me that it had been depending f* 
several years. How is it possible^ cried I, fvr ' 
man who knows the tvorld to go to law; lam w/^ 
acquainted with the courts of justice in China, thif 
resemble rat-traps every one of them, nothing mif* 
easy to get in, but to get out again is atUndidwU^ 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, i8i 

ne difficulty^ and mart cunning than rats are 
mrally found to possess / 

Faith, replied my friend, I shoald not have gone 
law, but that I was assured of success before I 
gan ; things were presented to me in so alluring 
ight, that I thoi^ht by barely declaring myself 
amdidate for the prize, I had nothing more to 
but to enjoy the fruits of the victory. Thus 
ve I been upon the eve of an imaginary triumph 
cry term these ten years, have travelled forward 
th victory ever in my view, but ever out of 
ich ; however, at present I fimcy we have 
mpered our antagonist in such a manner, that 
thout some unforeseen demur, we shall this very 
y lay him fairly on his back. 
If things be so situated^ said I, IdonU care if I 
Umdyou to the courts^ and partake in the pleasure 
your success. But prithee, continued I, as we 
t forward, what recuons have you to think an 
fair at last concluded, which has given you so 
any former disappointments f My lawyer tells 
e, returned he, ihsX I have Salkeld and Ventris 
rong in my favour, and that there are no less 
an fifteen cases in point. I understand, said I, 
ose are two of your judges who have already de- 
wed their opinions. Pardon me, replied my 
lend, Salkeld and Ventris are lawyers who some 
mdred years ago gave their opinion on cases 
milar to mine ; these opinions which make for 
e my lawyer is to cite, and those opinions which 
ok another way, are cited by the lawyer employed 
f my antagonist ; as I observed, I have Salkeld 
id Ventris for me, he has Coke and Hales for 
im, and he that has most opinions, is most likely 



xN THE CITIZBH OF THE WORLD, 

to carry his cause. But wh^re is thi necessity^ 
cried I, of prolonging a suit by citing the opimm 
and reports of others^ since the same good sense 
which determined lawyers in former ages tMf/ 
serve to guide your judges at this day. They at 
that time gave their opinions only from the light oj 
reason, your judges have the same light at preseni 
to direct them, let me even add a greater^ as in 
former ages, there were many prejudices froM which 
the present is happily free,, If arguing from atUkm- 
ties he exploded from every other branch of leamitig, 
why should it be particularly adhered to in thist 
I plainly foresee how such a method of investigatitn 
must embarrass every suit, and even perplex the 
student, ceremonies will be multiplied, formalities 
must increase, and more time will thus be spent in 
learning the arts of litigation thcM in the diseovetf 
of right, 

I see, cries my friend, that you are for a speedy 
administration of justice, but all the world will 
grant that the more time that is taken up in cod* 
sidering any subject the better it will be under* 
stood. Besides, it is the boast of an Englishman} 
that his property is secure, and all the world will 
grant that a deliberate administration of justice is 
the best way to secure his property. Why have wc 
so many lawyers, but to secure our property ; why 
so many formalities, but to secure our property 1 
Not less than one hundred thousand families live 
in opulence, elegance and ease, merely by securing 
our property. 

To embarrass justice, returned I, by a multiplicity 
of law^, or to hazard it by a confidence in oiur 
judges, are, I grant, the opposite rocks on which 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 183 

legisUUire wisdom has ever split ; in one case, the 
client resembles that Emperor, who is said to have 
been saffocated with the bedclothes, which were 
only designed to keep him warm ; in the other, to 
that town which let the enemy tsike possession of 
its walls, in order to shew the world how little 
they depended upon aught but courage for safety : 
— But bless me, what numbers do 1 see here — all 
in black — how is it possible that half this multitude 
find employment? Nothing so easily conceived, 
returned my companion, they live' by watching 
each other. For instance, the catchpole watches 
the man in debt, the attorney watches the catch - 
pole, the counsellor watches the attorney, the 
solicitor the counsellor, and all find sufficient em- 
ployment. I conceive jrou, interrupted I, they 
watch each other, but it is the client that pays them 
all for watching ; it puts me in mind of a Chinese 
Fable, which is entitled, Five animals ai a meal, 

A grasshopper filled with dew, was merrily 
singing under a shade ; a whongam that eats grass- 
hoppers had marked it for its prey, and was just 
stretching forth to devour it ; a serpent that had 
for a long time fed only on whangams, was coiled 
up to fasten on the whangam ; a yellow bird was 
just upon the wing to dart upon the serpent ; a 
hawk had just stooped from above to seize the 
yellow bird ; all were intent on their prey, and 
unmindful of their danger : So the whangam eat 
the grasshopper, the serpent eat the whangam, the 
yellow bird the serpent, and the hawk the yellow 
bird ; when sousing from on high, a vulture gobbled 
up the hawk, grasshopper, whangaa^^frikd' all in a 
moment. 



i84 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

I had scarce finished my fable, when the Uwyer 
came to inform my friend, that his cause was pst 
off till another term, that moaey was wanted to 
retain, and that all the world was of opinion, that the 
very next hearing would bring him off victorioas. 
If so, then cries my friend, I believe it will be my 
wisest way to continue the cause for another term, 
and in the mean time, my friend here and I will 
go and see Bedlam. Adieu. 



:^^^: '^: 



LETTER XCIX. 
From the same. 

LATELY received a visit from the 
little beau, who I found had assumed a 
new flow of spirits with a new suit of 
clothes. Our discourse happened to 
turn upon the different treatment of the fair sex here 
and in Asia, with the influence of beauty in refiniitg 
our manners and improving our conversation. 

I soon perceived he was strongly prejudiced in 
favour of the Asiatic method of treating the sex, and 
that it was impossible to persuade him, but that a 
man was happier who had four wives at his com- 
mand, than he who had only one. " It is true, 
cries he, your men of fashion in the East are slaves, 
and under some terrors of having their throats 
squeezed by a bow-string ; but what then, they 
can find ample consolation in a seraglio; they 
make indeed an indifferent figure in conversation 
abroad, but then they have a seraglio to console 
them at home, I am told they have no balls> 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 185 

drams, nor (4>eras, bat then they have got a 
seraglio; they may be deprived of wine and 
French cookery, but they have a seraglio ; a 
seraglio, a seraglio, my dear creature, wipes 
off every inconvenience in the world. 

^* Besides, I am told, your Asiatic beauties are 
ihe most convenient women alive, for they have no 
souls ; positively there is nothing in Nature I 
should like so much as ladies without souls ; soul, 
bere, is the utter ruin of half the sex. A girl 
of eighteen shall have soul enough to spend an 
hundred pounds in the turning of a trump. Her 
mother shall have soul enough to ride a sweep- 
stake match at a horse-race ; her maiden aunt shall 
have soul enough to purchase the furniture of a 
whole toy-shop, and others shall have soul enough 
to behave as if they had no souls at all.** 

With respect to the soul, interrupted I, the 
Asiatics are much kinder to the fair sex than you 
imagine; instead of one soul, Fohi the idol of 
China, gives every woman three, the Bramines 
give them fifteen ; and even Mahomet himself, no 
where excludes the sex from Paradise. Abulfeda 
reports, that an old woman one day importuning 
him to know what she ought to do in order to gain 
Paradise ; My good lady, answered the Prophet, 
dd women never get there. What, never get to 
Paradise, returned the matron, in a fiiry. Never, 
says he, for they always grow young by the ivay. 

No, Sir, continued I, the men of Asia behave 
with more deference to the sex than you seem 
to imagiiie. As you of Europe say grace, upon 
sitting down to dinner, so it is the custom in China 
to say grace, when a man goes to bed to his wife. 



tt6 THE CmZEN OF THE WORLD. 

And may Idu, returned ray companion, kttuwy 
pretty ceremony ; for seriously ^ Sir, I see no ream 
why a man should not be as grateful in one situa- 
tion as in the other. Upon honour, I always fiU 
myself much more disposed to groHtude, en At 
couch of a fine woman, than upon sitting domi to a 
sirloin of beef 

Another ceremony, said I, resuming the conver- 
sation, in favour of the sex amongst us, is the 
bride's being allowed after marriage, her three ieffi 
of froecbm. During this interval, a thousand a* 
travagances are practised by either sex. The lady 
is placed upon the nuptial bed, and numberiess 
monkey tricks are played round to divert ber. 
One gentleman smells her perfumed handkerchief, 
another attempts to untie her garters, a third polls 
off her shoe to play hunt the slipper, another 
pretends to be an idiot, and endeavours to raise a 
laugh by grimacing ; in the mean time, the gjtss 
goes briskly about, till ladies, gentlemen, wife, 
husband, and all are mixed together in one imin* 
dation of arrack punch. 

"Strike me dumb, deaf, and Uind, cried my 
companion, but very pretty ; there's some seoie 
in your Chinese ladies' condescensions ; but among 
us, you shall scarce find one of the whole sex that 
shall hold her good humour for three days together. 
No later than yesterday I happened to say some 
civil things to a citizen's wife of my acquaintance, 
not because I loved, but because I had charity; 
and what do you think was the tender creature's 
reply ! Only that she detested my pigtail wig, 
high-heeled shoes, and sallow complexion. That 
is all. Nothing more ! Yes, by the havens, 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 1B7 

lough fthe was more ugly than an unpainted 
ctress, I found her more insolent than a thorough 
red woman of quality." 

He was proceeding in this wild manner, when 
ift invective was interrupted by the man in black, 
fho entered the apartment, introducing his niece, 
. young lady of exquisite beauty. Her very 
ppeaiwDce was sufficient to silence the severest 
•Urist of the sex ; easy without pride, and free 
fithOQt impodeooe, she seemed capable of supply- 
Ofr eveiy sense with pleasure ; her looks, her con- 
renatioD were natural and unconstrained ; she had 
lesther been taught to languish nor ogle, to laugh 
vithoot a Jest, or sigh without sorrow. I found 
hat she had just returned from abroad, and had 
Men oonveisant in the manners of the world. 
Zvaioaitf prompted me to ask several questions, 
ant she declined them all. I own I never found 
myself so strongly prejudiced in favour of apparent 
merit before ; and could willingly have prolonged 
yaa conversation, but the company after some time 
vnthdrew. Just, however, before the little beau 
took his leave, he called me aside, and requested I 
would change him a twenty pound bill, which as I 
was incapable of doing, he was contented Mrith 
borrowing half a trown. Adieu. 



I 



188 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 




LETTER C. 
From Lien Chi AUangi to Hingpo^ by the way 

of MOKOW, 

^W virtues have been more praised by 
moralists, than generosity ; every pnc* 
tical treatise of Ethics tends to incretse 
our sensibility of the distresses of othen, 
and to relax the grasp of frugality. Philosophen 
that are poor, praise it because they are gainers by 
its effects ; and the opulent Seneca himself has 
written a treatise on benefits, though he wis 
known to give nothing away. 

But among the many who have enforced the duty 
of giving, I*m surprised there are none to inculcate 
the ignominy of receiving, to shew that by every 
fetvour we accept, we in some measure forfeit oor 
native fireedom, and that a state of continual de* 
pendance on the generosity of others, is a life 
of gradual debasement. 

Were men taught to despise the receiving obliga- 
tions with the same force of reasoning and dedama* 
tion that they are instructed to confer then^we 
might then see every person in todety filling up 
the requisite duties of his station with cheerful in- 
dustry, neither relaxed by hope, nor sullen from 
disappointment. 

Every favour a man receives, in some measure 
sinks him below his dignity, and in proportion to 
the value of the benefit, or the frequency of its ac- 
ceptance, he gives up so much of his natural inde- 
pendence. He therefore, who thrives upon the 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 189 

inmerited bounty of another, if he has any sensi- 
>ility, suffers the worst of servitude ; the shackled 
ilave may murmur without reproach, but the 
lumble dependent is taxed with ingratitude upon 
nrery symptom of discontent ; the one may rave 
xnmd the walls of his cell, but the other lingers 
A all the silence of mental confinement. To in> 
crease his distress, every new obligation but adds 
:o the former load which kept the vigorous mind 
from rising; till at last, elastic no longer, it shapes 
itself to constraint, and puts on habitual servility. 

It is thus with the feeling mind ; but there are 
some who, bom without any share of sensibility, 
receive favour after favour, and still cringe for 
more, who accept the offer of generosity with as 
little reluctance as the wages of merit, and even 
make thanks for past benefits an indirect petition 
for new ; such I grant can suffer no debasement 
from dependence, since they were originally as vile 
as was possible to be ; dependence degrades only 
the ingenuous, but leaves the sordid mind in pris- 
tine meanness. In this manner therefore long 
continued generosity is misplaced, or it is in- 
jurious ; it either finds a man worthless, or it makes 
him so ; and true it is, that the person who is con- 
tented to be often obliged, ought not to have been 
obliged at all. 

Yet while I describe the meanness of a life of 
continued dependence, I would not be thought to 
include those natural or political subordinations 
which subsist in every society, for in such, though 
dependence is exacted from the inferior, yet the 
obligation on either side is mutual. The son must 
rely upon his parent for support, but the parent lies 



\ 



I90 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

under the same obligations to give, that the othei 
has to expect ; the subordinate officer most receive 
the commands of his superior, but for this obedi- 
ence, the former has a right to demand an iitfer- 
course of fieivour; such is not the dependence I 
would depreciate, but that where every expected 
favour must be the result of mere benevolence in 
the giver, where the benefit can be kept without 
remorse, or transferred without injustice. The 
character of a legacy-hunter, for instance, is detesr 
table in some countries, and despicable in all; this 
universal contempt of a man who infringes upon 
none of the laws of society, some moralists have 
arraigned as a popular and unjust prejudice; never 
considering the necessary degradations a wretch 
must undergo, who previously expects to grow rich 
by benefits, without having either natural or social 
claims to enforce his petitions. 

But this intercourse of benefaction and acknow- 
Icilgement is often injurious even to the giver as 
well as the receiver ; a man can gain but Httk 
knowledge of himself, or of the world, amidst a 
circle of those whom hope or gratitude has gathered 
round him ; their unceasing humiliations must 
necessarily increase his comparative magnitude, 
for all men measure their own abilities by those of 
their company ; thus being taught to over-rate his 
merit, he in reality lessens it ; increasing in con- 
fidence, but not in power, his professions end in 
empty boast, his undertakings in shameful dis* 
appointment. 

It is perhaps one of the severest misfortunes of 
the great, that they are, in general, obliged to live 
among men whose real value is lessened bydcpen* 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 191 

dence, and whose minds are enslaved by obliga- 
tion. The humble companion may have at first 
accepted patronage with generous views, but soon 
he 'feels the mortifying influence of conscious in- 
feriority, by degrees sinks into a flatterer, and 
from flattery at last degenerates into stupid venera- 
tion. To remedy this the great often dismiss their 
old dependents, and take new. Such changes are 
falsely imputed to levity, falsehood, or caprice, in 
the patron, since they may be more justly ascribed 
to the client's gradual deterioration. 

No, my son, a life of independence is generally 
a life of virtue. It is that which fits the soul for 
every generous flight of humanity, freedom, and 
friendship. To give should be our pleasure, but 
to receive our shame; serenity, health, and 
affluence attend the desire of rising by labour ; 
misery, repentance, and disrespect that of succeed-p> 
ing by extorted benevolence ; the man who can 
thank himself alone for the happiness he enjoys, is 
truly blest ; and lovely, far more lovely the sturdy 
gloom of laborious indigence, than the fawning 
simper of thriving adulation. Adieu. 




19* THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 



LETTER CI. 

From Lien Chi Altcm^^ to Fum ffoam^ first Pn- 
sidetit of the Ceremonial Academy , at PeMn i» 
China, 

N every society some men are bcm to 
teach, and others to receive instruction; 
some to work, and others to enjoy id 
idleness the fruits of their industiy; 
some to govern, and others to obey. Eveiy 
people, how free soever, must be contented to 
give up part of their liberty and judgment to thoK 
who govern, in exchange for their hopes of 
security; and the motives which first in6uenoed 
their choice in the election of their governon 
should ever be weighed against the succeeding 
apparent inconsistencies of their conduct. AU can* 
not be rulers, and men are generally best governed 
by a few. In makuig way through the intiicaciei 
of business, the smallest obstacles are apt to retard 
the execution of what is to be planned by a multi- 
plicity of counsels ; the judgment of one akme 
being always fittest for winding through the laby- 
rinths of intrigue, and the obstructions of dis- 
appointment. A serpent, which, as the (able 
observes, is furnished with one head and many 
tails, is nuich more capable of subsistence and ex- 
pedition, than another, which is furnished with but 
one tail and many heads. 

Obvious as these truths are, the people of this 
country seem insensible of their force. Not satis* 
ficd with the advantages of internal peace and 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 193 

Opulence, they still murmur at their governors, and 
interfere in the execution of their designs; as if 
they wanted to be something more than happy. 
But as the Europeans instruct by argument, and 
the Asiatics mostly by narration, were I to address 
them, I should convey my sentiments in the follow- 
ing stoiy. 

^3JftluV^^d long been Prime Minister of Tipar- 
tala, a fertile country that stretches along the 
western confines of China. During his adminis- 
tration, whatever advantages could be derived 
from arts, learning, and commerce, were seen to 
bless the people ; nor were the necessary precau- 
tions of providing for the security of the state for- 
gotten. It often happens, however, that when 
men are possessed of all they want, they then 
begin to find torment from imaginary afflictions, 
and lessen their present enjoyments, by foreboding 
that those enjoyments are to have an end. The 
people now therefore endeavoured to find out 
grievances ; and after some search, actually began 
to think themselves aggrieved. A petition against 
the enormities of Takupi was carried to the throne 
in due form ; and the Queen who governed the 
country, willing to satisfy her subjects, appointed 
a day, in which his accusers should be heard, and 
the Minister should stand upon his defence. 

The day being arrived, and the Minister brought 
before the tribunal, a carrier, who supplied the 
city with fish, appeared among the number of his 
accusers. He exclaimed, that it was the custom, 
Ume immemorial, for carriers to bring their fish 
upon an horse in a hamper ; which being placed on 
one side, and balanced by a stone on the other, 

II. o 



I 



194 THE CITIZEN! OF THE WORLD, 

was thus conveyed with ease and safety ; but that 
the prisoner, moved either by a spirit of innovt* 
tion, or perhaps brilxid by the hamper-makns, 
had obliged all carriers to use the stone no longer, 
but balance one hami^er with another ; an order 
entirely repugnant to the customs of all antiquity, 
and those of the kingdom of Tipartala in particultr. 

The carrier iinished ; and the whole court shook 
their heads at the innovating Minister : when a 
second witness appeared. He was inspector rf 
the city buildings, and accused the disgraced 
favourite of having given orders for the demolilion 
of an ancient ruin, which obstructed the passage 
through one of the principal streets. He observed, 
that such buildings were noble monuments of bar* 
Iiarous antiquity ; contributed finely to shew hov 
little their ancestors understood of architecture: 
r^nd for that reason such monuntents should be 
held sacreil, and suffered gradually to decay. 

The last witness now appeared. This was a 
widow, who had laudably attempted to bum her- 
self upon her husband's funeral pile. But the In- 
novating Minister had prevented the execution of 
her design, and was insensible to her tears, protesta- 
tions, and entreaties. 

The Queen could have pardoned the two former 
offences, but this last was considered as so gross 
an injury to the sex, and so directly contrary to all 
the customs of antiquity, that it called for imn^ 
diate justice. ** What, cried the Queen, not sufe 
a woman to bum herself when she thinks proper? 
The sex are to be very prettily tutored, no donbt, 
if they must be restrained from entertaining thei' 
female friends now and then with a fried wifc» w 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 195 

roasted acquaintance. I sentence the criminal to 
be banished my presence for ever, for his injurious 
treatment of the sex.'* 

Takupi had been hitherto silent, and spoke only 
to shew the sincerity of his resignation. ** Great 
Queen, cried he, I acknowledge my crime ; and 
since I am to be banished, I beg it may be to some 
ruined town, or desolate village in the country I 
have governed. I shall find some pleasure in im- 
proving the soil, and bringing back a spirit of 
industry among the inhabitants." His request ap- 
pearing reasonable, it was immediately complied 
with, and a courtier had orders to fix upon a place 
of banishment, answering the Minister's descrip- 
tion. After some months search, however, the 
enquiry proved fruitless ; neither a desolate village, 
nor a ruined town, was found in the whole kingdom. 
AlaSi said Takupi then to the Queen, how can that 
cotmtrybt iU governed which has neither a desolate 
village J nor a ruined town in itl The Queen per- 
ceived the justice of his expostulation, and the 
Minister was received into more than former 
favour. 



LETTER CIL 
From the same, 

[E ladies here are by no means such 
ardent gamesters as the women of Asia. 
In this respect I must do the English 
justice ; for I love to praise where ap- 
plause is justly merited. Nothing more common 
in China, than to see two women of fashion con- 




736 THE CITIZEN OF THE IVORLD, 

tinne gaxninj*, till one has won all the other's 
clothes, and stripped her quite naked ; the winner 
thus marching off ia a double suit of finery, and the 
loser shrinking behind in the primitive simplicity of 
Nature. 

No doubt, you remember when Shang^ oar 
maiden aunt, played with a sharper. First her 
money went ; then her trinkets were produced ; 
her clothes followed piece by piece soon after; 
when she had thus played herself quite naked, 
being a woman of spirit, and willing to pursue )ut 
owHy she staked her teeth ; fortune was against 
her even here, and her teeth followed her clothes ; 
at last she played for her left eye, and, oh, hard 
fate, this too she lost : however, she had the coo- 
solation of biting the sharper, for he never perceived 
that it was made of glass till it became his own. 

How happy, my friend, are the English ladieSi 
who never rise to such an inordinance of passion! 
Though the sex here are naturally fond of games 
of chance, and are taught to manage games of skiU 
from their infancy, yet they never pursue ill fortune 
with such amazing intrepidity. Indeed I may en* 

tirely acquit them of ever playing 1 mean of 

playing for their eyes or their teeth. 

It is true, they often stake their fortune, their 

beauty, health, and reputations at a gaming table. 

It even sometimes happens, that they play their 

husbands into a jail ; yet still they preserve a d^ 

luiknown to our wives and daughters of 

\ have been present at a rout in this 

where a woman of fashion, after losing 

\ has sat writhing in all the agonies of 

and yet, after all, never once attempted 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 197 

to strip a single petticoat, or cover the board, as 
her last stake, with her head-clothes. 

However, though I praise their moderation at 
play, I must not conceal their assiduity. In China, 
our women, except upon some great days^ are never 
permitted to finger a dice-box ; but here every day 
seems to be a festival ; and night itself, which gives 
others rest, only serves to increase the female 
gamester's industry. I have been told of an old 
lady in the country, who being given over by the 
physicians, played with the curate of her parish to 
pass the time away: having won all his money, 
she next proposed playing for her funeral charges ; 
the proposal was accepted ; but unfortunately the 
lady expired just as she had taken in her game. 

There are some passions, which though diffe- 
rently pursued, are attended with equal conse- 
quences in every country : here they game with 
more perseverance, there with greater fury ; here 
they strip their £i.milies, there they strip them- 
selves naked. A lady in China, who indulges a 
passion for gaming, often becomes a drunkard; 
and by flourishing a dice-box in one hand, she 
generally comes to brandish a dram cup in the 
other. Far be it from me to say there are any who 
drink drams in England ; but it is natural to sup- 
pose, that when a lady has lost everything else but 
her honour, she will be apt to toss that into the 
bargain ; and grown insensible to nicer feelings, 
behave like the Spaniard, who, when all his money 
was gone, endeavoured to borrow more, by offering 
to pawn his whisker. Adieu. 




,:i THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 



LETTER cm. 

From Lien Chi Altangi to ***, Merchant in 

Amsterdam. 

HAVE just received a letter from my 
son, in which he informs me of the 
fniitlessness of his endeavours to re- 
cover the lady with whom he fled from 
Persia. He strives to cQver under the appearance 
of fortitude a heart torn with anxiety and dis- 
appointment. I have offered little consolation; 
since that but too frequently feeds the sorrow which 
it pretends to deplore, and strengthens the impres- 
sion, which nothing but the external rubs- of time 
and accident can thoroughly efface. 

He informs me of his intentions of quitting 
Moscow the first opportunity, and travelling by 
land to Amsterdam. I must, therefore, upon his 
arrival, entreat the continuance of your friendship; 
and beg of you to provide him with proper direc- 
tions for finding me in London. You can scarcely 
l>e sensible of the joy I expect upon seeing him 
once more : the ties between the father and the son 
among us of China are much more closely drawn 
than with you of Europe. 

The remittances sent me from Argun to Moscow 

came in safety. I cannot sufficiently admire that 

spirit of honesty, which prevails through the whole 

--"->»ry of Siberia: perhaps the savages of that 

^ region are the only untutored people of 

«, that cultivate the moral virtues, e\'ea 

knowing that their actions merit praise. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 199 

I have been told snrprisiiig things of their good- 
ness, benevolence, and generosity; and the on- 
intermpted commerce between China and Rnssia 
serves as a collateral confirmation. 

Let usy says the Chinese law-giver, mdmire ike 
rude virtues of the ignorant^ hut rather imitate the 
delicate morals of the polite. In the country where 
I reside, though honesty and benevi^ence be not 
so congenial, yet Art supplies the place of Nature. 
Though here every vice is carried to excess ; yet 
every virtue is practised also with unexampled 
superiority. A dty like this is the soil for great 
virtues and great vices ; the villain can sooo im- 
prove here in the deepest mysteries of deceiving ; 
and the practical philc»opher can every day meet 
new incitements to mend his honest intentions. 
There are no pleasures, saisnal or sentimental, 
which this city does not produce ; yet I know not 
how, I could not be content to reside here for life. 
There is something so seducing in that spot in 
which we first had existence, that nothing but it 
can please ; whatever vicissitudes we experience in 
life, however we toil, or wheresoever we wander, 
our fatigued wishes still recur to home for tran- 
qnillity, we long to die in that spot which gave us 
birth, and in that pleasing expectation opiate every 
calamity. 

You now therefore perceive that I have some 
intentions of leaving this country ; and yet my de- 
tuned departure fills me with reluctance and 
regret. Though the friendships of travellers are 
generally more transient than vernal snows, still I 
feel an uneasiness at breaking the connections I 
have formed since my arrival ; particularly I shall 



joo THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

have no small pain in leaving my usual comptnioo, 
guide, and instructor. 

I shall wait for the arrival of my son before I set 
out. He shall be my companion in every intended 
journey for the future ; in his company I can sap- 
port the fatigues of the way with redoubled ardour, 
pleased at once with conveying instruction, and 
exacting obedience. Adieu. 




LETTER CIV. 

From Lien Chi Altangi^ to Fum ffoam, first Pre- 
sident of the Ceremoftial Academy ai Peking in 
China, 

[UR scholars of China have a most pro* 
found veneration for forms. A first rate 
beauty never studied the decorums of 
dress with more assiduity; they may 
properly enough be said to be clothed with wisdom 
from head to foot ; they have their philosophical 
caps and philosophical whiskers, their philosophi- 
cal slippers, and philosophical fans ; there is even 
a philosophical standard for measuring the nails ; 
and yet, with all this seeming wisdom, they are 
often found to be mere empty pretenders. 

A philosophical beau is not so frequent in 

Europe ; yet I am told that such characters are 

found here. I mean such as punctually support 

^1 4eoonims of learning, without being really 

and, or naturally possessed of a fine on- 

{; who labour hard to obtain the titular 

ending literary merit ; who flatter others, 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, mb 

I order to be flattered in tarn ; and ooly ttndj to 
e thought students. 

A character of this kind gcnerallj re c cit e s am- 
•ny in his study, in all the p ensi t e Vxwa^atj d 
Lippersy night-gown, and easjr chair. The taUe m 
oveied with a large book, which is always \utpL 
tpen* and never read ; his solitary boua 
ledicated to dodng, mendiiig pens, feciiDg 
Nilse, peeping through the micnKoope, aitd 
imes reading amusing books, which he 
n company. His hbnry is pteserred with 
nost religious neatness ; and is genenSy a 
jory of scarce books, which bear an hi^ pnoe, 
jecause too dull or useless to 
:he ordinary methods of pubhcatioaL 

Such men are generally candidaics Hor 
tanoe into hterary dubs, acadcanes itad 
tioDS, where they regularly meet to give axkd 
ft little instruction and a great ileal of poise, 
conversation they never betray ignnrsTirr, 
they never seem to receive inHonBatkaL Ofter 
t new observation, they have hard it htiw»s 
pmdi them in an argument, and they wc^ wtJk a 




Yet how trifling soever these fittie arts naj te^ 
pear, they answer one valnaUe paqnae, of ipuua^ 
the pnctiseiB the esteem they wiu fur. Tut 
bounds of a man's knowledge are eaisly crjnoeainac, 
if he has but prudence; but all can reafiiJ j tet aiiO 
admire m gilt library, m. ati (d long loik, a MLt>«r 
tfandish, or a weO-coBbed whtkkcr, who an it^ 
capable of distinguishing a dnnoe. 

When Father Matthew, the first Europe*!) Khk 
liooery entered China, the couit was itdfjftmdf 



aos THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

that he possessed great skill in astronomy ; he was 
therefore sent for, and examined. The estabUshed 
astronomers of state undertook this task; and 
made their report to the Emperor, that his skill 
was but very superficial, and no way comparable 
to their own. The Missioner, however, appealed 
from their judgment to experience, and chaUenged 
them to calculate an eclipse of the moon, that was 
to happen a few nights following. '' What, said 
some, shall a Barbarian, without nails, pretend to 
vie with men in astronomy, who have made it the 
study of their lives, with men who know half the 
knowable characters of words, who wear sdentifical 
caps and slippers, and who have gone thxoagfa 
every literary degree with applause?** They ac- 
cepted the challenge, confident of success. The 
eclipse began ; the Chinese produced a most 
splendid apparatus, and were fifteen minutes 
wrong ; the Missioner, with a single instrument, 
was exact to a second. This was convincing ; but 
the court astronomers were not to be convinced ; 
instead of acknowledging their error, they assured 
the Emperor, that their calculations were certainly 
exact, but that the stranger without nails had 
actually bewitched the moon. Well thn^ cries 
the good Emperor, smiling at their ignoiiBce,/w 
shall still continue to be servants of the fMOon ; te^ 
I constitute this tnan her Controller. 

China is thus replete with men, whose only pK- 

tensions to knowledge arise from external drcom* 

stances ; and in Europe every country abounds 

with them in proportion to its ignorance. Spain 

■^ Flanders, who are behind the rest of Europe 

kaming, at least three centuries, have twenty 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 203 

itefary titles and marks of distinction unknown in 
i'rance or England: they have their Clarissimi 
nd Preclarissimiy their Accuratissimt vjid Afinu' 
issi$m ; a round cap entitles one student to ai^e, 
md a square cap permits another to teach ; while 
i cap with a tassel almost sanctifies the head 
it happens to cover. But where true knowledge is 
cultivated, these formalities begin to disappear ; 
die ermined cowl, the solemn beard, and sweeping 
tram are laid aside ; philosophers dress, and talk, 
and think like other men ; and lamb-skin dressers, 
and cap-makers, and tail-carriers, now deplore 
a literary age. 

For my ^wn part, my friend, I have seen enough 
of presuming ignorance, never to venerate wisdom 
bat where it actually appears. I have received 
literary titles and dbtinctions mjrself ; and, by the 
quantity of my own wisdom, know how very little 
wisdom they can confer. Adieu. 



LETTER CV. 
From the same, 

[HE time for the young King's corona- 
tion approaches ; the great and the 
little world look forward with im- 
patience. A knight from the country, 
who has brought up his family to see and be seen 
on this occasion, has taken all the lower part of 
the house where I lodge. His wife is laying in a 
large quantity of silks, which the mercer tells her 
are to be £ashionable next season ; and Miss, her 




S04 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

daughter, has actually had her ears bored previoot 
to the ceremony. In all this bustle of prepentkn 
I am considered as mere lumber, and have beeo 
shoved up two stories higher to make room for 
others my landlady seems perfectly convinced are 
my betters ; but whom, before me, she is contented 
with only calling very good company. 

The little beau, who has now forced himidf 
into my intimacy, was yesterday giving me a mort 
minute detail of the intended procession. All nm 
are eloquent upon their £eivourite topic ; and diii 
seemed peculiarly adapted to the size and torn of 
his understanding. His whole mind was blasoDed 
over with a variety of glittering images ; corooetf, 
escutcheons, lace, fringe, tassels, stones, bo^ei, 
and spun glass. *' Here, cried he. Garter is to 
walk ; and there Rouge Dragon marches with the 
escutcheons on his back. Here Clarendeux 
moves forward ; and there Blue Mantle disdains 
to be left behind. Here the Aldermen march two 
and two ; and there the undaunted Champion of 
England, no way terrified at the very numerous 
appearance of gentlemen and ladies, rides .forward 
in complete armour, and, with an intrepid air, 
throws down his glove. Ah, continues he, should 
any be so hardy as to take up that fatal glove, and 
so accept the challenge, we should see fine sport } 
the Champion would shew him no mercy; be 
would soon teach him all his passes with a witness. 
However, I am afraid we shall have none vnlling 
to try it with him, upon the approaching occasion, 
for two reasons ; first, because his antagonist would 
stand a chance of being killed in the single combat) 
and secondly, because if he escapes the Champion'i 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. aos 

umiy he would certainly be hanged for treason. No, 
1O9 I ianqr none will be so hardy as to dispute it 
irith m Champion like him inured to arms ; and we 
thall probably see him prancing unmolested away, 
tkoldii^ his bridle thus in one hand, and brandish- 
ing his dram cup in the other." 

Some men have a manner of describing, which 
only wraps the subject in more than former ob- 
scurity ; thus I was unable, with all my com- 
panion's volubility, to form a distinct idea of the 
intended procession. I was certain, that the in- 
auguration of a king should be conducted with 
solemnity and religious awe ; and I could not be 
persuaded that there was much solemnity in this 
description. If this be true, cried I to myself, the 
people of Europe surely have a strange manner of 
mixing solemn and fantastic images together ; pic- 
tuxes at once replete with burlesque and the sub* 
lime. At a time when the King enters into the 
most solemn compact with his people, nothing 
surely should be admitted to diminish from the 
real majesty of the ceremony. A ludicrous image 
brought in at such a time throws an air of ridicule 
upon the whole. It some way resembles a picture 
I have seen, designed by Albert Durer, where, 
amidst all the solemnity of that awful scene, a 
deity judging, and a trembling world awaiting 
the decree, he has introduced a merry mortal 
trundling his scolding wife to hell in a wheel- 
barrow. 

My companion, who mistook my silence during 
thn interval of reflection, for the rapture of astonish- 
mcnty proceeded to describe those frivolous parts 
of the show, that mgstly struck his imagination ; 



ao6 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

and to assure me, that if I stayed in this coontiy 
some months longer I should see fine things. " For 
my own part, continued he, I know already of 
fifteen suits of clothes, that would stand on one end 
with gold lace, all designed to be first shown there ; 
and as for diamonds, rubies, emeralds and pearls, 
we shall see them as thick as brass nails in a sedan 
chair. And then we are all to walk so majesti- 
cally thus ; this foot always behind the foot brfoie. 
The ladies are to fling nosegays ; the court poets to 
scatter verses ; the spectators are to be all in fidl 
dress ; Mrs. Tibbs, in a new sacque, ruffles, and 
frenched hair; look where you will, one thing 
finer than another ; Mrs. Tibbs curtsies to the 
Duchess ; her Grace returns the compliment with 
a bow. Largess, cries the Herald. Make room, 
cries the Gentleman Usher. Knock him down, 
cries the guard. Ah, continued he, Bmared at his 
own description, whatan astonishing scene of 
grandeur can art produce from the smallest circum- 
stance, when it thus actually turns to wonder one 
man putting on another man's hat" 

I now found his mind was entirely set upon the 
fopperies of the pageant, and quite r^ardless 
of the real meaning of such costly preparations. 
Pageants^ says Bacon, are pretty things; hut 
we should rather study to make them elegant than 
expettsive. Processions, cavalcades, and all that 
fund of gay frippery, furnished out by tailcis, 
barbers, and tire-women, mechanically influence 
the mind into veneration : an Emperor, in bis 
night-cap, would not meet with half the respect of 
an Emperor with a glittering crown. Politics re- 
semble religion ; attempting to divest either of 



THE CITIZES OF THE WORLD, 907 

ceremony, is the most certain method of bringing 
either into contempt. The weak must have their 
inducements to admiration as well as the wise ; and 
it is the business of a sensible government, to im- 
press all ranks with a sense of subordination, 
whether this be effected by a diamond buckle 
or a virtuous edict, a sumptuary Uw or a glass 
necklace. 

This interval of reflection only gave my com- 
panion spirits to begin his description afresh ; and 
as a greater inducement to raise my curiosity, he 
informed me of the vast sums that were given by 
the spectators for places. *' That the ceremony 
must be fine, cries he, is very evident from the fine 
price that is paid for seeing it. Several ladies have 
assured me, they could willingly part with one eye, 
rather than be prevented from looking on with the 
other. Come, come, continues he, I have a friend, 
who, for my sake, will supply us with places at the 
most reasonable rates ; I'll take care you shall not 
be imposed upon ; and he will inform you of the 
use, finery, rapture, splendour, and enchantment 
of the whole ceremony better than I." 

Follies often repeated, lose their absurdity and 
assume the appearance of reason : his arguments 
were so often and so strongly enforced, that I had 
actually some thoughts of becoming a spectator. 
We accordingly went together to bespeak a place ; 
but guess my surprise, when the man demanded a 
poise of gold for a single seat : I could hardly be- 
lieve him serious upon making the demand. 
" Prithee, firiend, cried I, after I have.paid twenty 
pocinds for sitting here an hour or two, can I bring 
a part of the Coronation back ? '' No^ Sir, " How 



Ml THE CtTlZES OF THE WORLD, 

long cm I live upon it after I have come away?" 
Soi loHg^ Sir, *' Can a Coronation clothe, feed, or 
£aitten me ? " Sir, replied the mBn,yoti seem te it 
ttmJer a mistakt ; ail theit you can bring awc^t 
t> M« pitasnre of having it to say, thai you saw tk 
CaromatioM, ** Blast me, cries Tibbs, if that be all, 
there's no need of paying for that, since I am 
resolved to have that pleasure, whether I am there 
or no!" 

I am conscious, my friend, that this is but a veiy 
confused description of the intended ceremony. 
You may object, that I neither settle rank, preoe* 
dency, Tkctt place; that I seem ignorant whether 
Gules walks before or behind Garter; that I 
have neither mentioned the dimensions of a 
Lord's cai>, nor measured the length of a Lady's 
tail. I know your delight is in minute descrip- 
tion ; and this I am unhappily disqualified firom 
furnishing ; yet, upon the whole, I £ancy it will be 
no way comparable to the magnificence of our late 
Emperor \Mumgti*s procession, when he was mar- 
ried to the moon, at which Fum Hoam himself pre- 
sided in person. Adieu. 



LETTER CVL 
To the same, 

^T was formerly the custom here, wheD 

X men of distinction died, for their sor* 

I viving acquaintance to throw each & 

• slight present into the gprave. Several 

jt'lUtk value were made use of for that par* 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, aoQ 

po6e ; perfumes, reliques, spices, bitter herbs, 
camomile, wormwood, and verses. This custom, 
however, is almost discontinued ; and nothing but 
verses alone are now lavished on such occasions ; 
an oblation which they suppose may be interred 
with the dead without any injury to the living. 

Upon the death of the great therefore, the poets 
and undertakers are sure of emplo3m[ient. While 
one provides the long cloak, black staff, and 
mourning coach, the other produces the pastoral or 
degy, the monody or apotheosb. The nobility 
need be under no apprehensions, but die as fast as 
they think proper, the poet and undertaker are 
leady to supply them ; these can find metaphorical 
tears and family escutcheons at half an hour's 
warning ; and when the one has soberly laid the 
body in the grave, the other is ready to fix it figura- 
tively among the stars. 

There are several ways of being poetically sor- 
rowful on such occasions. The bard is now some 
pensive youth of science, who sits deploring among 
the tombs ; again he is Thyrsis, complaining in a 
circle of harmless sheep. Now Britannia sits upon 
her own shore, and gives a loose to maternal ten- 
derness ; at another time, Parnassus, even the 
mountain Parnassus, gives way to sorrow, and 
is bathed in tears of distress. 

But the most useful manner is this : Damon 
meets Menalcas, who has got a most gloomy 
countenance. The shepherd asks his friend, 
whence that look of distress ? to which the other 
xej^es, that Pollio is no more. If that be the case 
then, cries Damon, let us retire to 3ronder bower at 
some distance off, where the cypres* and the jessa- 

II. p 



BIO THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

mine add fragrance to the breeze ; and let us weep 
alternately for PoUio, the friend of shepherds, and 
the patron of every muse. Ah, returns his fellow 
shepherd, what think you rather of that grotto 
by the fountain side ; the murmuring stream will 
he^ to assist our complaints, and a nightingale on 
a neighbouring tree will join her voice to the con- 
cert. When the place is thus settled, they begin : 
the brook stands still to hear their lamentations; 
the cows forget to graze ; and the very tigers start 
from the forest with sympathetic concern. By the 
tombs of our ancestors, my dear Fum, I am quite 
unaffected in all this distress : the whole is liquid 
laudanum to my spirits ; and a tiger of common 
sensibility has twenty times more tenderness 
than I. 

But though I could never weep with the com- 
plaining shepherd, yet I am sometimes induced to 
pity the poet, whose trade is thus to make Demi- 
gods and Heroes for a dinner. There is not in 
Nature a more dismal figure than a man who sits 
down to premeditated flattery ; every stanza be 
writes, tacitly reproaches the meanness of bis 
occupation, till at last his stupidity becomes more 
stupid, and his dullness more diminutive. 

I am amazed, therefore, that none have yet 
found out the secret of flattering the worthless, and 
yet of preserving a safe conscience. I have often 
wished for some method by which a man might do 
himself and his deceased patron justice, without 
being under the hateful reproach of self-conviction. 
After long lucubration, I have hit upon such an 
expedient ; and send you the specimen of a poeD 
upon the decease of a great man, in which the 



THR CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. an 

flattery is perfectly fine, and yet the poet perfectly 
innocent. 

On thb Death op thb Right Honourable ***» 

Ye muses, pour the pitjring tear 

For PoIIio snatch'd away : 
O had he liv'd another year 1 

He had not dial to day, 

0| were he bom to bless mankind. 

In virtuous times of yore, 
Heroes themselves had fallen behind 1 

Whender he went be/ore. 

How sad the groves and plains appear. 

And sympathetic sheep ; 
£ven pitying hills would drop a tear i 

If hilU could learn to wee^. 

His bounty in exalted stndn 

Each bard might well display : 
Since none implor'd relief in vain J 

That went relieved ttway. 

And hark ! I hear the tuneful throng 

His obsequies forbid, 
He still shall live, shall live as long, 

As ever dead man did. 



LETTER CVIL 
To the same, 

[T is the most usual method in every 
report, first to examine its probability, 
and then act as the conjuncture may 
require. The English, however, exert 
a different spirit in such circumstances ; they first 
act, and, when too late, begin to examine. From 




SIS THE CiTIZEH OF THR WORLD. 

a knowledge of this disposition, there are aeveial 
here who make it their business to frame new re- 
ports at every convenient interval, all tending to 
denounce ruin both on their contemporaries and 
their posterity. This denunciation is eagerly caught 
up by the public ; away they fling to propagate the 
distress ; sell out at one place, buy in at another, 
grumble at their governors, |shout in mobs, and 
when they have thus, for some time, behaved like 
fools, sit down coolly to argue and talk wisdom, to 
puzzle each other with syllogism, and prepare for 
the next report that prevails, which is always 
attended with the same success. 

Thus are they ever rising above one report only 
to sink into another. They resemble a dog in a 
well, pawing to get free. When he has raised his 
upper parts above water, and every spectator 
imagines him disengaged, his lower parts drag him 
down again and sink hun to the nose ; he makes 
new efforts to emerge, and every effort increasing 
his weakness, only tends to sink him the deeper. 

There are some here, who, I am told, make a 
tolerable subsistence by the credulity of their 
countrymen : as they find the public fond of blood, 
wounds and death, they contrive political ruins 
suited to every month in the year ; this month the 
people are to be eaten up by the French in flat- 
bottomed boats ; the next by the soldiers, designed 
to beat the French back ; now the people are 
going to jump down the gulf of luxury ; and nov 
nothing but a herring subscription can fish them up 
again. Time passes on ; the report proves &lse ; 
new circumstances produce new changes, but the 
people never change, they are persevering in folly. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. ••tj 

In other countries, those boding politicians would 
be left to fret over their own schemes alone, and 
grow splenetic without hopes of infecting others : 
But England seems to be the very region where 
spleen delights to dwell ; a man not only can give 
an onbotinded scope to the disorder in himself, but 
may, if he pleases, propagate it over the whole 
kingdom, with a certainty of success. He has only 
to cry out, that the government, the government is 
all wrong, that their schemes are leading to ruin, 
that Britons are no more, every good member of 
the commonwealth thinks it his duty, in such a 
case, to deplore the universal decadence with sym- 
pathetic sorrow, and, by fancying the constitution 
in a decay, absolutely to impair its vigour. 

This people would laugh at my simplicity, should 
I advise them to be less sanguine in harbouring 
gloomy predictions, and examine coolly before they 
attempted to complain. I have just heard a story, 
which, though transacted in a private femily, serves 
very well to describe the behaviour of the whole 
nation, in cases of threatened calamity. As there 
are public, so there are private incendiaries here. 
One of the last, either for the amusement of his 
friends, or to divert a fit of the spleen, lately sent 
a threatening letter to a worthy family in my neigh- 
bourhood, to this effect. 

** SIR, knowing you to be very rich, and finding 
myself to be very poor, I think proper to inform 
you, that I have learned the secret of poisoning 
man, woman, and child, without danger of detec- 
tion. Don't be uneasy. Sir, you may take your 
choice of being poisoned in a fortnight, or poisoned 
in a month, or poisoned in six weeks ; you shall 



BI4 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

have fiill time to settle your afi&dis. Though I'm 
poor, I love to do things like a gentleman. But, 
Sir, you must die ; I have determined it within 
my own breast that you must die. Blood, Sir, 
blood is my trade; so I could wish you would this 
day six weeks take leave of 3^our friends, wife, and 
family, for I cannot possibly allow you longer 
time. To convince you more certainly of the 
power of my art, by which you may know I speak 
truth ; take this letter, when you have read it, tear 
off the seal, fold it up, and give it to your £Bivourite 
Dutch mastiff that sits by the fire, he will swallow 
it. Sir, like a butter'd toast ; in three hours foor 
minutes after he has taken it, he will attempt 
to bite off hb own tongue, and half an hour after 
burst asunder in twenty pieces. Blood, blood, 
blood ; so no more at present from. Sir, your most 
obedient, most devoted humble servant to com- 
mand till death." 

You may easily imagine the consternation into 
which this letter threw the whole good-natured 
family. The poor man, to whom it was addressed, 
was the more surprised, as not knowing how he 
could merit such inveterate malice. All the friends 
of the family were convened ; it w&s universally 
agreed, that it was a most terrible affair, and that 
the government should be solicited to offer a 
reward and a pardon : a fellow of this kind would 
go on poisoning family after family ; and it was 
impossible to say where the destruction would end. 
In pursuance of these determinations, the govern- 
ment was applied to ; strict search was made after 
the incendiary, but all in vain. At last, therefore, 
they recollected that the experiment was not yet 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 2x5 

tried upon the dog; the Dutch mastifif was brought 
up, and placed in the midst of the friends and 
relations, the seal was torn off, the packet folded 
up with care, and soon they found, to the great 

surprise of all ^that the d<^ would not eat the 

letter. Adieu. 




LETTER CVIII. 
To the same, 

HAVE frequently been amazed at the 
ignorance of almost all the European 
travellers, who have penetrated any 
considerable way eastward into Asia. 
They have been influenced either by motives of 
commerce or piety, and their accounts are such as 
might reasonably be expected from men of very 
narrow or very prejudiced education, the dictates 
of superstition, or the result of ignorance. Is it not 
surprising that, in such a variety of adventurers, 
not one single philosopher should be found ? for as 
to the travels of Gemelli, the learned are long 
agreed that the whole is but an imposture. 

There is scarce any country, how rude or un- 
cultivated soever, where the inhabitants are not 
possessed of some peculiar secrets, either in Nature 
or Art, which might be transplanted with success ; 
in Siberian Tartary, for instance, the natives ex- 
tract a strong spirit from milk, which is a secret 
probably unknown to the chemists of Europe. In 
the most savage parts of India, they are possessed 
of the secret of dyeing vegetable sut»tances scarlet ; 



«t6 THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

and of refining lead into a metal which, for hard- 
ness and colour, is little inferior to silver; not one 
of which secrets but would in Europe make a 
man's fortune. The power of the Asiatics in pro- 
ducing winds, or bringing down rain, the Euro- 
peans are apt to treat as fabulous, because they 
have no instances of the like nature among them- 
selves ; but they would have treated the secrets of 
gunpowder and the mariner's compass, in the 
same manner, had they been told the Chinese used 
such arts before the invention was common with 
themselves at home. 

Of all the English philosophers I most reverence 
Bacon^ that great and hardy genius ; he it is who 
allows of secrets yet unknown ; who, undaunted 
by the seeming difficulties that oppose, prompts 
human curiosity to examine every part of Nature, 
and even exhorts man to try whether he cannot 
subject the tempest, the thunder, and even earth- 
quakes to human control : O did a man of his 
daring spirit, of his genius, penetration, and learn- 
ing travel to those countries, which have been 
visited only by the superstitious and mercenary, 
what might not mankind expect : how would he 
enlighten the regions to which he travelled ! And 
what a variety of knowledge and useful improve- 
ment would he not bring back in exchange ! 

There is probably no country so barbarous, that 
would not disclose all it knew, if it received firom 
the traveller equivalent information ; and I am apt 
to think, that a person, who was ready to give 
more knowledge than he received, would be wel- 
come wherever he came. All his care in travelling 
should only be to suit his intellectual banquet to 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. siy 

the people with whom he conversed ; he should 
not attempt to teach the unlettered Tartar astro- 
nomy, nor yet instruct the polite Chinese in the 
ruder arts of subsistence ; he should endeavour to 
improve the Barbarian in the secrets of living com-' 
fortably; and the inhabitant of a more refined 
country in the speculative pleasures of science. 
How much more nobly would a philosopher thus 
employed spend his time, than by sitting at home 
earnestly intent upon adding one star more to his 
catalogue, or one monster more to his collection ; 
or still, if possible, more triflingly sedulous in the 
incatenation of fleas, or the sculpture of a cherry- 
stone. 

I never consider this subject, without being sur- 
prised how none of those societies, so laudably 
established in England for the promotion of arts 
and learning, have never thought of sending one of 
their members into the most eastern parts of Asia, 
to make what discoveries he was able. To be con- 
vinced of the utility of such an undertaking, let 
them but read the relations of their own travellers. 
It will be there found, that they are as often 
deceived themselves, as they attempt to deceive 
others. The merchants tell us perhaps the price 
of different commodities, the methods of baling 
them up, and the properest manner for an Euro- 
pean to preserve his health in the country. The 
missioner, on the other hand, informs us, with 
what pleasure the country to which he was sent, 
embraced Christianity, and the numbers he con- 
verted ; what methods he took to keep Lent in a 
region where there was no fish, or the shifts he 
made to celebrate the rites of his religion, in places 



9i8 THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLI>, 

where there was neither bread nor wine ; such ac* 
counts, with the usual appendage of marriages and 
funerals, inscriptions, rivers, and mountains, mske 
up the whole of an European traveller's dlaiy; 
but as to all the secrets of which the inhahHawH 
are possessed, those are universally attributed to 
magic ; and when the traveller can give no otfaa 
account of the wonders he sees performed, he iwi] 
contentedly ascribes them to the power of dx 
devil. 

It was an usual observation of Boyh^ the EngHd 
chemist, that if every artist would but discova 
what new observations occurred to him in the euf' 
cise of his trade, philosophy would thence gu 
innumerable improvements. It may be observed, 
with still greater justice, that if the useful know 
ledge of every country, howsoever barbarous, wk 
gleaned by a judicious observer, the advantage 
would be inestimable. Are there not even ii 
Europe, manyuseful inventions known or practised 
but in one place ? The instrument, as an example 
for cutting down com in Germany, is much mon 
handy and expeditious, in my opinion, than the 
sickle used in England. The cheap and expeditiom 
manner of making vinegar without previous fermen* 
tation, is known only in a part of France. If such 
discoveries therefore, remain still to be known at 
home ; what fiinds of knowledge might not be col* 
lected, in countries yet unexplored, or only passed 
through by ignorant travellers in hasty caravans. 

The caution with which foreigners are received 
in Asia, may be alleged as an objection to such a 
design. But how readily have several European 
merchants found admission into regions the most 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, np 

suspecting, under the character of SanjapinSj or 
northern pilgrims ; to such, not even China itself 
denies access. 

To send out a traveller, pr oper l y qualified for 
these purposes, might be an object of national con- 
cern; it would in some measure repair the braachcs 
made by ambition ; and mig^ show that there 
were still some who boasted a greater name than 
that of patriots, who professed themselves lofcrs 
of men. The only difficulty would remain in 
dioosing a proper person for so arduous an enter- 
prise. He should be a man of a philosophical 
turn, one apt to deduce consequences of general 
utility 6om particular occurrences, neither swollen 
with pride, nor hardened by prejudice, neither 
wedded to one particular system, nor instructed 
only in one particular science ; neither wholly a 
botanist, nor quite an antiquarian ; his mind should 
be tinctured with miscellaneous knonriedge, and 
his manners humanized by an intercourse with 
men. He should be, in some measure, an enthusiast 
to ;the design ; fond of tiavellii^, from a rapid 
imagination, and an innate love of change ; fur- 
Dished with a body capable of sustaining every 
fiitigue, and a heart not easily terrified at danger. 
Adieu. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

LETTER CIX 
From the same. 

INE of the principal tasks I had proposed 
to mjrself on my arrival here, was to 
become acquainted with the names and 
characters of those now living, who is 
scholars or wits, had acquired the greatest share 
of reputation. In order to succeed in this design, 
I fancied the surest method would be to begin my 
enquiry among the ignorant, judging that his &me 
would be greatest, which was loud enough to be 
heard by the vulgar. Thus predisposed, I begu 
the search, but only went in quest of disappoint* 
ment and perplexity. I found every district had a 
peculiar famous man of its own. Here the stoiy* 
telling shoemaker had engrossed the admiration on 
one side of the street, while the bellman, who ex< 
celleth at a catch, was in quiet possession of tlie 
other. At one end of a lane, the sextcm was r^ 
garded as the greatest man alive, but I had not 
travelled half its length, till I found an enthusiaat 
teacher had divided his reputation. My landlady 
perceiving my design, was kind enough to offer 
me her advice in this affair. It was true, she ob* 
served, that she was no judge, but she knew what 
pleased herself, and if I would rest upon her jodg* 
ment, I should set down Tom Collins as the most 
ingenious man in the world, for Tom was able to 
take off all mankind, and imitate besides a sow 
and pigs to perfection. 
I now perceived, that taking my standard of 



THS CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, mx 

reputation among the vulgar, would swell my 
catalogue of great names above the size of a Court 
Calendar, I therefore discontinued this method of 
pursuit, and resolved to prosecute my enquiry into 
that usual residence of fsune, a bookseller's shop. 
In consequence of this, I entreated the bookseller 
to let me know who were they who now made the 
greatest figure either in morals, wit, or learning. 
Without giving me a direct answer, he pulled a 
pamphlet from the shelf. The Young Attorneys 
Guide.; there, Sir, cries he, there's a touch for 
you, fifteen hundred of these moved off in a day : 
I take the author of this pamphlet either for title, 
preface, plan, body, or index to be the com^detest 
hand in England. I found it was vain to prosecute 
my enquiry, where my informer appeared so incom. 
petent a judge of merit, so paying for the Young 
Attorneys Guide^ which good manners ob%ed me 
to buy, I walked off. 

My pursuit after famous men now brought me 
into a print shop. Here, thought I, the painter 
only reflects the public voice. As every man who 
deserved it had formerly his statue placed up in the 
Roman forum, so here probably the pictures of 
none but such as merit a place in our affections are 
held up for public sale. But guess my surprise 
when I came to examine this depositary of noted 
faces ; all distinctions were levelled here, as in the 
grave, and I could not but regard it as the catacomb 
of real merit. The brickdust man took up as much 
room as the truncheoned hero, and the judge was 
elbowed by the thief-taker; quacks, pimps, and 
buffoons increased the group, and noted stallions 
only made room for more noted whores. I had 



THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

read the works of some of the modems previous to 
my coming to England, with delight and approba- 
tion, but I found their faces had no place here, the 
walls were covered with the names of authois I 
had never known, or had endeavoured to forget; 
with the little self-advertising things of a day, who 
had forced themselves into fashion, but not into 
fame ; I could read at the bottom of some pictuies, 
the names of **, and ***, and ♦♦♦♦, ^u equally 
candidates for the vulgar shout, and foremost to 
propagate their unblushing faces upon brass. My 
uneasiness therefore at not finding my few fiivourite 
names among the number, was now changed into 
congratulation ; I could not avoid reflecting on 
the fine observation of Tacitus on a similar occa- 
sion. In this cavalcade of flattery, cries the his* 
torian, neither the pictures of Brutus, Cassius, nor 
Cato, were to be seen, eo clariores quia imagiius 
eorum non cUferebantur^ their absence being the 
strongest proof of their merit. 

It is in vain, cried I, to seek for true greatness 
among these monuments of the unburied dead; 
let me go among the tombs of those who are con* 
fessedly famous, and see if any have been lately 
deposited there, who deserve the attention of pos- 
terity, and whose names may be transmitted to my 
distant friend, as an honour to the present age. 
Determined in my pursuit, I paid a second visit to 
Westminster-abbey. There I found several new 
monuments erected to the memory of several great 
n; the names of the great men I absolutely 
t, but I well remember that RoubiUac was 
Rtuary who carved them. I could iK)t help 
ig at two modem epitaphs in particular; one 



THE CtTtZESr i^ TBE WDJtLT. 



of whidi poiMd tbe iliiiiiw rl iar 

atUiqua sHrpe; the oAer ccmnended ^le dead, 




the ||[veatest wtantL €£. vat^ ctaffasusd in iis being 
descended fin^ wbl iflnvnwan* haiBe; Ihe rhirf &- 
tmcdoa of the other, dad: he had jgupjied sg) xb 
old house that was Cuffiig. Ate&, aihss, cried I, 
such mommients as these oosSa hcmanr, sot iqion 
the great men, bat apoD fid3e KonldDac. 

Hitheito dnappoBDted ia mj enq^oirjr after the 

great of the present age, I vas resolved to zdxk id 

company, and tiyidiat I oonld leacn among cmics 

in coflfee-hooses ; and here it vats that I heard nay 

&voiirite names talked cf even vilh inrertxrd firmr. 

A gentleman of rraltrd mcrii, as a vziifir, -wb 

branded in general tenns as a bad mas ; another 

of exquisite delicacjr, as a poet, was reproached ibr 

wanting good nature ; a third was aonBgd of imt- 

thinking ; and a foorth of haring once been a 

player. Strange, cried I, how anjast are mankind 

in Uie distribution of £une ; the ignorant, among 

irhom I sought at firit, were willii^ to grant, bat 

incapable of disHngnishing the Tiitnes of those 

which deserved it ; among those I now converse 

with, they know the proper objects of admiration, 

bot mix envy with applause. 

Disappointed so c^en, I was now resolved to 
examine those characters in person, of whom the 
world talked so freely ; by conversing with men 
of real merit, I b^^ to find out those characters 
which really deserved, though they strove to avoid, 
applause. I found the vulgar admiration entirely 
misplaced, and malevolence without its sting. 
The truly great, possessed of numerous small 



»«4 



THB CmZEN OF THE WORLD. 



fiiults, and shining virtues, preserve a sablime in 
morals as in writing. They who have attained m 
excellence in either, commit numberless transgici- 
sions observaUe to thb meanest understanding. 
The ^orant critic and dull remarker can readily 
spy blemishes in eloquence or morals, whose send- 
ments are not sufficiently elevated to observe t 
beauty ; but such are judges neither of books oor 
of life ; they can diminish no solid reputation by 
their censure, nor bestow a lasting character by 
their applause : In short, I found by my seaich, 
that such only can confer real fame upon otbeis, 
who have merit themselves to deserve it Adieu. 




LETTER ex. 
To the same, 

HERE are numberless employments in 
the courts of the Eastern monarcbs 
utterly unpractised and unknown in 
Europe. They have no such ofSceis, 
for instance, as the Emperor's ear-tickler, or tooUi- 
picker ; they have never introduced at the oonrts 
the Mandarine appointed to bear the royal tobacco- 
box, or the grave director of the imperial exerdta- 
tions in the seraglio. Yet I am surprised that the 
English have imitated us in none of these particn- 
lars, as they are generally pleased with every thing 
that comes from Qiina, and excessively fond of 
creating new and useless employments. They 
have filled their houses with our furniture, their 
public gardens with our fire-works, and their very 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, aas 

ponds with our fish ; our courtiers, my friend, are 
the fish, and the furniture they should have im- 
ported ; our courtiers would fill up the necessary 
ceremonies of a court better than those of Europe, 
would be contented with receiving large salaries 
for doing little, whereas some of this country are 
at present discontented though they receive large 
salaries for doing nothing. 

I lately, therefore, had thoughts of publishing a 
proposal here, for the admission of some new 
Eastern offices and titles into their court register. 
As I consider myself in the light of a Cosmopolite, 
I find as much satisfEiction in scheming for the 
countries in which I happen to reside, as for that 
in which I was bom. 

The finest apartments in the palace of Pegu are 
frequently infested with rats. These the religion 
of the country strictly forbids the people to kill. 
In such circumstances therefore they are obliged to 
have recourse to some great man of the court, who 
is willing to free the royal apartments even at the 
hazard of his salvation. After a weak monarch's 
reign, the quantity of court vermin in every comer 
of the palace is surprising, but a prudent king and 
a vigilant officer soon drives them from their sanc- 
tuaries behind the mats and the tapestry, and 
efiectually frees the court. Such an officer in 
England would in my opinion be serviceable at 
this juncture ; for if, as I am told, the palace be 
old, much vermin must undoubtedly have taken 
refuge behind the wainscot and hangings. A 
minister should therefore be invested with the title 
and dignities of Court-vermin killer; he should 
have full power either to banish, take, poison, or 

II. Q 



sfl6 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

destroy them, with enchantments, traps, fenets, or 
ratsbane. He might be permitted to brandish his 
besom without remorse, and brush down every 
part of the furniture, without sparing a sii^le cob- 
web however sacred by long prescription. I com- 
municated this proposal some days ago in a com- 
pany of the first distinction, and enjoying the 
most honourable offices of the state. Among the 
number were the inspector of Great Britain, Mr. 
Henriques the Director of the Ministry, Ben. 
Victor the Treasurer, John Lockman the Secl^ 
tary, and the Conductor qH the Imperial Maga- 
dne. They all acquiesced in the utility of my 
proposal, but were apprehensive it might meet 
with some obstructions from court upholsterers and 
chamber-maids, who would object to it from the 
demolition of the furniture, and the dangerous use 
of ferrets and ratsbane. 

My next proposal is rather more general than the 
former, and might probably meet with less opposi- 
tion. Though no people in the world flatter eacb 
other more than the English, I know none who 
understand the art less, and flatter with such little 
refinement. Their panegyric, like a Tartar feast, 
is indeed served up with profusion, but their 
cookery is insupportable. A client here shall 
dress up a fricassee for his patron, that shall offend 
an ordinary nose before it enters the room. A 
town shall send up their address to a great minister, 
which shall prove at once a satire on the minister 
and themselves. If the favourite of the day sits, or 
stands, or sleeps, there are poets to pat it bto 
verse, and priests to preach it in the pulpit In 
order therefore to free both those who pnuse, and 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. aay 

those who are praised, from a duty probably 
disagreeable to both, I would constitute professed 
flatterers here as in several courts of India. These 
are appointed in the courts of their princes, to in- 
struct the people where to exclaim mth admira- 
tkxi, and i^ere to lay an emphasis of praise. But 
an officer of this kind is always in waiting when the 
£inperar converses in a £amiliar manner among his 
Rajahs and other nobility. At every sentence, 
vAntsk the monarch pauses, and smiles at what 
he has been saying, the Karamatman, as this 
officer is called, is to take it for granted, that 
his majesty has said a good thing. Upon which 
he cries out Karamat ! Karamat ! a miracle, a 
miracle, and throws up his hands and his eyes 
in extacy. This is echoed by the courtiers around, 
while the Emperor sits all this time in sullen satis- 
faction, enjoying the triumph of his joke, or study- 
ing a new repartee. 

I would have such an officer placed at every 
great man's table in England. By frequent prac- 
tice he might soon become a perfect master of the 
art, and in time would turn out pleasing to his 
patron, no way troublesome to himself, and might 
prevent the nauseous attempts of many more igno- 
rant pretenders. The clergy here, I am convinced, 
would relish this proposal It would provide 
places for several of them. And indeed by some 
of their late productions many appear to have 
qualified themselves as candidates for this office 
already. 

But my last proposal I take to be of the utmost 
importance. Our neighbour the Empress of Russia 
has, you may remember, instituted an order of 



ta8 THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

female knighthood. The Empress of Germany has 
also instituted another ; the Chinese have had such 
an order time immemorial. I am amazed the 
English have never come into such an institution. 
When I consider what kind of men are made 
knights here, it appears strange, that they have 
never conferred this honour upon women. They 
make cheese-mongers and pastry-cooks, Kn%^ ; 
then why not their wives? They have called 
up tallow-chandlers to maintain the hardy profes- 
sion of chivalry and arms ; then why not their 
wives ? Haberdashers are sworn, as I suppose all 
knights must be sworn, never to fly in time tf 
mellay or battUf to maintain and uphold the nohlc 
estate of Chivalry^ with horse hamishe and ether 
Knightlye habiliments. Haberdashers, I say, are 
sworn to all this, then why not their wives ? Cer- 
tain I am their wives understand fighting and feats 
of mellay and battle better than they, and as for 
Knightlye horse and hamishe, it is probable, both 
know nothing more than the harness of a one horse 
chaise. No, no, my friend, instead of conferring 
any order upon the husbands, I would knight 
their wives. However, the state should not lie 
troubled with a new institution upon this occasion. 
Some ancient exploded order might be revived, 
which would furnish both a motto and a name, the 
ladies might be permitted to choose for themselves. 
There are for instance the obsolete orders of the 
Dragon in Germany, of the Rue in Scotland, and 
the Porcupine in France, all well-sounding names, 
and very applicable to my intended female institu- 
tion. Adieu. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 229 

LETTER CXL 
To the same^ 

lELIGIOUS sects in England are far 
more numerous than in China. ' Every 
man who has interest enough to hire a 
conventicle here, may set up for himself 
and sell off a new religion. The sellers of the 
newest pattern at present give extreme good bar- 
gains ; and let their disciples have a great deal of 
canfitUnce for very little money. 

Their shops are much frequented, and their cus- 
tomers every day increasing, for people are natu- 
imlly fond of going to Paradise at as small expence 
as possiUe. 

Yet you must not conceive this modem sect, 
as differing in opinion from those of the established 
religion : Difference of opinion indeed formerly 
divided their sectaries, and sometimes drew their 
armies to the field. White gowns and black 
mantles, flapped hats and cross pocket holes, were 
once the obvious causes of quarrel ; men then had 
some reason for fighting, they knew what they 
idoght about ; but at present, they are arrived at 
such refinement in religion-making, that they have 
actually formed a new sect without a new opinion ; 
they quarrel for opinions they both equally defend ; 
they hate each other, and that is all the difference 
between them. 

But though their principles are the same, their 
practice is somewhat different. Those of the 
established religion laugh when they are pleased. 



a^o THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

and their groans are seldom extorted but by pain 
or danger. The new sect, on the contrary, weep 
for their amusement, and use little music, except a 
chorus of sighs and groans, or tunes that are made 
to imitate groaning. Laughter is their aversion ; 
lovers court each other from the Lamentatioiis ; the 
bridegroom approaches the nuptial couch in sor- 
rowful solemnity, and the bride looks moie &mal 
than an undertaker's shop. Dancing rcrand the 
room is with them running in a direct line to the 
devil ; and as for gaming, though bat in jest, they 
would sooner play with a rattle-saake*s tail, than 
finger a dice-box. 

By this time you perceive that I am describing a 
sect of Enthusiasts, and you have already compared 
them with the Faquirs, Bramins, and Talapoinsof 
the East. Among these, you know, are genera* 
tions that have been never known to smile, and 
voluntary affliction makes up all the merit they can 
boast of. Enthusiasms in every country produce 
the same effects ; stick the Faquir with pins, or 
confine the Bramine to a vermin hospital, spread 
the Talapoin on the ground, or load the Sectary's 
brow with contrition; those worshippers who dis- 
card the light of reason, are ever gloomy ; their 
fears increase in proportion to their ignorance, as 
men are continually under apprehensions who walk 
in darkness. 

Yet there is still a stronger reason for the 
enthusiast's being an enemy to laughter, namely, 
his being himself so proper an object of ridicule. 
It is remarkable that the propagators of false doc- 
trines have ever been averse to mirth, and always 
begin by recommending gravity, when they in- 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. %zt 

tended to disseminate imposture. Fohi, the idol 
of China, is represented as having never laughed ; 
Zoroaster the leader of the Bramins, is said to 
have laughed but twice, upon his coming into the 
world, and upon his leaving it; and Mahomet 
himself, though a lov^ of {Measure, was a professed 
opposer of gaiety. Upon a certain occasion telling 
his followers, that they would all appear naked at 
the resurrection, his £sivourite wife represented such 
an assembly as immodest and unbeocMning. Foolish 
woman, cried the grave prophet, though the whole 
assembly be naked, on that day they shall have 
forgotten to laugh. Men like him opposed ridi- 
cule, because they knew it to be a most formidable 
antagonist, and preached up gravity, to conceal 
their own want of importance. 

Ridicule has ever been the most powerful enemy 
of enthusiasm, and properly the only antagonist 
that can be opposed to it with success. Persecu- 
tion only s^ves to propagate new religions ; they 
acquire fresh vigour beneath the executioner and 
the axe, and like some vivacious insects, multiply 
by dissection. It is also impossible to combat en- 
thusiasm with reason, for though it makes a show 
of resistance, it soon eludes the pressure, refers 
you to distinctions not to be understood, and feel- 
ings which it cannot explain. A man who would 
endeavour to fix an enthusiast by argument, might 
as well attempt to spread quicksilver with his 
fingers. The only way to conquer a visionary is to 
despise him ; the stake, the faggot, and the dis- 
puting Doct(Mr, in some measure, ennoble the 
opinions they are brought to oppose ; they are 
harmless against innovating pride ; contempt alone 



939 THE CtTtZBS OF THE WORLD, 

is truly dreadfuL Hnnteis generally know the 
most vulnerable part of the b^ists they pursue, by 
the care which every animal takes to defend the 
side which is weakest ; on what side the enthusiast 
is most vulnerable, may be known by the caie 
which he takes in the beginning to work his di^ 
dples into gravity, and guard them against dK 
power of ridicule. 

When Philip the second was King of Spain, 
there was a contest in Salamanca between two 
orders of friars for superiority. The legend of one 
side contained more extraordinary miracles, but the 
legend of the other was reckoned most authentic. 
They reviled each other, as is usual in disputes of 
divinity, the people were divided into factions, 
and a civil war appeared unavoidable. In order to 
prevent such an imminent calamity, the combatants 
were prevailed upon to submit their legends to the 
fiery trial, and that which came forth untouched by 
the fire, was to have the victory, and to be honoured 
with a double share of reverence. Whenever the 
people flock to see a miracle, it is an hundred to 
one but that they see a miracle ; incredible there- 
fore were the numbers that were gathered round 
upon this occasion ; the friars on each side ap- 
proached, and confidently threw their respective 
legends into the flames, when lo, to the utter dis- 
appointment of all the assembly, instead of a 
miracle, both legends were consumed. Nothing 
but this, turning both parties into contempt, could 
have prevented the efhision of blood. The people 
now laughed at their former folly, and wondered 
why they fell out. Adieu. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, a33 

LETTER CXI I. 
To the same, 

[E English are at present employed in 
celebrating a feast which becomes 
general every seventh year ; the Parlia- 
ment of the nation being then dissolved 
and another appointed to be chosen. This solem- 
nity falls infinitely short of our feast of the lan- 
terns in magnificence and splendour ; it is also 
surpassed by others of the East in unanimity and 
pure devotion, but no festival in the world can 
compare with it for eating. Their eating indeed 
amazes me : Had I five hundred heads, and were 
each head furnished with brains, yet would they all 
be insufficient to compute the number of cows, 
pigs, geese, and turkeys, which upon this occasion 
die for the good of their country ! 

To say the truth, eating seems to make a grand 
ingredient in all English parties of zeal, business, 
or amusement. When a Church is to be built, or 
an Hospital to be endowed, the Directors assemble, 
and instead of consulting upon it, they eat upon it, 
by which means the business goes forward with suc- 
cess. When the Poor are to be relieved, the officers 
appointed to dole out public charity, assemble and 
eat upon it : Nor has it ever been known, that 
they filled the bellies of the poor till they had pre- 
viously satisfied their own. But in the election of 
magistrates the people seem to exceed all bounds ; 
the merits of a candidate are often measured by the 
number of his treats ; his constituents assemble. 



•34 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

eat upon him, and lend their applause, not to his 
integrity or sense, but to the quantities of his beef 
and brandy. 

And yet I could forgive this people their plenti- 
ful meals on this occasion, as it is extremely natural 
for every man to eat a great deal when he gets it 
for nothing ; but what amazes me is, that all thii 
good living no way contributes to improve thdi 
good humour. On the contrary, they seem to kxe 
their temper as they lose their appetites; evoy 
morsel they swallow, and every glass they pour 
down serves to increase their animosity. Many 
an honest man, before as harmless as a tame 
rabbit, when loaded with a single election dinner, 
has become more dangerous than a cfaaiged 
culverin. Upon one of these occasions, I have 
actually seen a bloody-minded man milliner sally 
forth at the head of a mob, determined to fece 
a desperate pastry cook, who was general of the 
opposite party. 

But you must not suppose they are without a pre- 
text for thus beating each other. On the contrary, 
no man here is so uncivilized as to beat his neigh- 
bour without producing very sufficient reasons. 
One candidate, for instance, treats with gin, a 
spirit of their own manufacture ; another, always 
drinks brandy imported from abroad. Brandy is 
a wholesome liquor ; gin a liquor wholly their 
own. This then furnishes an obvious cause of 
quarrel. Whether it be most reasonable to get 
drunk with gin, or get drunk with brandy? The 
mob meet upon the debate; fight themselves 
sober ; and then draw off to get drunk again, 
and charge for another encounter. So that the 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 935 

English may now properly be said to be engaged 
in war; since while they are subduing their 
enemies abroad, they are breaking each other's 
heads at home. 

I lately made an excursion to a neighbouring 
fiOage^ in order to be a spectator of the ceremonies 
pnetjsed upon this occasion. I left town in com- 
pany with three fiddlers, nine dozen of hams, and 
a ooipofation poet, which were designed as 
teiDforoements to the gin-drinking party. We 
entered the town with a very good face; the 
fiddlers, no way intimidated by the enemy, kept 
handling their arms up the principal street. By 
this prudent manoeuvre they took peaceable pos- 
session of their head-quarters, amidst the shouts of 
mnltitudes, who seemed perfectly rejoiced at hear- 
ing their music, but above all at seeing their 
bacon. 

I most own I could not avoid being pleased to 
see all ranks of people on this occasion, levelled 
into an equality, and the poor, in some measure, 
enjoying the primitive privileges of Nature. If 
there was any distinction shewn, the lowest of the 
people seemed to receive it from the rich. I could 
perceive a cobbler with a levee at his door, and an 
haberdasher giving audience from behind his coun- 
ter. But my reflections were soon interrupted by 
a mob, who demanded whether I was for the dis- 
tillery or the brewery? as these were terms with 
which I was totally unacquainted, I chose at first 
to be silent; however, I know not what might 
have been the consequence of my reserve, had not 
the attention of the mob been called off to a skir- 
mish between a brandy-drinker's cow, and a gin- 



1)6 THE CiTiZEN OF THE WORLD. 

drinker's mastiff, which tamed out greatly to the 
satisfaction of the mob in favour of the mastiff. 

This spectacle, which afforded high entertain- 
ment, was at last ended by the appearance of one 
of the candidates, who came to harangue the 
mob ; he made a very pathetic speech upon dK 
late excessive importation of foreign dramsy'-aii 
the downfall of thbc distillery ; I could see tcxMaf 
the audience shed tears. He was accompanied it 
his procession by Mrs. Deputy and Mrs. Mayores. 
Mrs. Deputy was not in the least in liquor ; tsd 
for Mrs. Mayoress, one of the spectators assuxed 
me in my ear that, — she was a very fine woman 
before sIm had the small pox. 

Mixing with the crowd, I was now ccmducted to 
the hall where the magistrates are chosen : tmt 
what tongue can describe this scene of confasioD ; 
the wiiole crowd seemed equally inspired with 
anger, jealousy, politics, patriotism, and punch : I 
reoEiarked one figure that was carried up by two 
men upon this occasion. I at first began to pity 
his infirmities as natural, but soon found the feUow 
so drunk that he could not stand ; another made 
his appearance to give his vote, but though he 
could stand, he actually lost the use of his tongae, 
and remained sflent ; a third, who, though exces- 
sively drunk, could both stand and speak, bemg 
asked the candidate's name for whom he voted, 
could be prevailed upon to make no other answer, 
but tobacco and brandy. In short, an election- 
hall seems to be a theatre where every passion is 
without disguise ; a school where fools may 

ttdily become worse, and where philosopheis 

igf gather wisdom. Adieu. 



THE CITIZEN OP TBE WORLD. 

LETTER CXllL 
Frvmthe 




[HE disputes moos tbe 
now curied on m a xmdn hkbb 
paidkns mamcr tlaai ioaDcdj. Tboe 
wna dme when iaSk>n lauugbi 10 
oppose fidio, and a dMnnp i nB vat ciien liaed Sor 
life under the l i nnfft of a on^ aodiflL ill 
piesenty the oootioveEEjr k decided in a mmnug y 
way; an epignun or an acrostic fimibesiiiedebiK:, 
tnd the combatant, like the incan>re Tartar, 
advances, and letiies vith a ans^ Uov. 

An important liteiaiy debate al present cnposMs 
the attention of the tovn. It is cnxied cm -vioh 
sharpness, and a proper daae of dns epogxam- 
iffyfiral fiuy. An aothor, it seens, has talccn an 
aversion to the feces of severd plajers, and has 
written verses to prove his disliiEc; the piayers 
fell upon the aothor, and assore the town he mast 
be dull, and their feces must be good bcgansr he 
wants a dinner ; a critic comes to the poet*s asas- 
tance, asserting, that the verKS were perfectly 
original, and so smart that he could never hare 
written them without the asHstanfr of friends; the 
friends upon this arraign the critic, and plainly 
prove the verses to be all the anthor's own. So at 
it they are, all four together by the ears, the friends 
at the critic, the critic at the players, the j^yers 
at the author, and the author at the j^yers again. 
It is impossible to determine how tins many-sided 
contest will end, or idiich party to adhere ta 



•^ TBM CiTtZEN OF THE WORin, 

The Unm, withcMit siding with any, view the com* 
bat in suspense, Uke the Bubled hero of antiquity, 
who beheld the ctfth-bom brothers give and 
receive matind wounds, and fail by indiscriminate 



This is, in some m c aso r c , a state of the present 
dispate; but the combatants here differ in one 
Rspect firam the champiops of the fitble. ETCf| 
■rw woand caily gives v^onr for another blow ; 
thoogb they appear to strike, they are in fiKt 
■ratoaUy swelling themselves into coDsidemtioii, 
and thus advertising each other away into fune. 
ToHky says odc, myname shall be in the Gazettei 
the next day my rival's; people will natundlj 
enquire abont as ; thus we shall at least make a 
■oiae in the street, thoi^ we have nothing to sell 
I have read of a dtspnte of a similar nature, vrfaidi 
was managed here about twenty years aga Uil* 
debiand Jacob, as I think he was called, and 
Charles Johnson were poets, both at that time 
possessed of great reputation, for Johnson bad 
written eleven pbys acted with great success, and 
Jacob, though he had written but five, had five 
times thanked the town for their unmerited ap- 
plause. They soon became mutually enamoured 
of each other's talents ; they wrote, they felt, they 
challenged the town for each other. Johnson 
assured the public that no poet alive had the easy 
simplicity of Jacob, and Jacob exhibited Johnson 
as a master-piece in the pathetic. Their mutual 
praise was not vrithout effect, the town saw their 
plays, were in raptures, read, and without cen- 
suring them, forgot them. So formidable an union, 
however, vras soon opposed by Tibbald. Tibbald 



THE CITIZEN OF THE IVORLD. 139 

asserted, that the tragedies of one had faults, and 
the comedies of the other sabstituted wit for viva- 
city; the combined champions flew at him like 
tigers, arraigned the censurer's judgment, and im- 
peached his sincerity. It was a long time a dispute 
among the learned, which was in fact the greatest 
man, Jacob, Johnson, or Tibbald ; they had all 
written for the stage with great success, their names 
were seen in almost every paper, and their works 
in every coffee-house. However, in the hottest of 
the dispute, a fourth combatant made his appear- 
ance, and swept away the three combatants, 
tragedy, comedy, and all into undistinguished 
ruin. 

From this time they seemed consigned into the 
hands of criticism, scarce a day passed in which 
they were not arraigned as detested writers. The 
critics, these enemies of Dryden and Pope, were 
their enemies. So Jacob and Johnson, instead of 
mending by criticism, called it envy, and because 
Dryden and Pope were censured, they compared 
themselves to Dryden and Pope. 

But to return ; the weapon chiefly used in the 
present controversy is epigram, and certainly never 
was a keener made use of. They have discovered 
surprising sharpness on both sides. The first that 
came out upon this occasion, was a kind of new 
composition in this way, and might more properly 
be called an epigrammatic -thesis, than an epigram. 
It consists first, of an argument in prose ; next fol- 
lows a motto from Roscommon ; then comes the 
epigram ; and lastly, notes serving to explain the 
epigram. But you shall have it with all its 
decorations. 



) 



840 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

An epigram. 

Addressed to the Gentlemen reflected on in the 
RosciAD, a Poem, by the Author. 

JVorrud with debts a$tdptut aU h^ts ^haU^ 
His pen he j^rostituteSf favoidagaoL — RoscOM. 

" Let not the hungry Bavius* angry stroke 
Awake resentment, or your rage provoke : 
But pitying his distress, let virtue 1 shine. 
And giving each jrour bounty,' let hint dine; 
For thus retain'd, as learned council can, 
Each case, however bad, hell new japan : 
And by a quick transition, plainly show 
Twas no defect of yours, hat pocket low^ 
That caus'd \ica putrid henntl to o'erflow." 

The last lines are certainly executed in a very 
masterly manner. It is of that species of argumen- 
tation, called the perplexing. It ei&ctually flings 
the antagonist into a mist ; there's no answering 
it : the laugh is raised against him, while he is 
endeavouring to find out the jest. At once he 
shows, that the author has a kennel, and that this 
kennel is putrid, and that this putrid kennel over- 
flows. But why does it overflow ? It overflows, 
because the author happens to have low pockets ! 

There was also another new attempt in this way; 
a prosaic epigram which came out upon this occa- 
sion. This is so full of matter, that a critic might 
split it into fifteen epigrams, each properly fitted 
with its sting. You shall see it. 

To G. C. ANQ R. L. 

*' 'Twas you, or I, or he, or~alI together, 

Twas one, both, three of them, they know not whether. 

This I believe, between us great or small. 

You, I, he, wrote it not — 'twas Chiuxhill's alL" 

1 Charity. 

^ Settled at one shilling, the price of the poem. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, S4X 

There, there's a perplex ! I could have wished, 
to make it quite perfect, the author as in the case 
before, had added notes. Almost every word 
admits a scholium, and a long one too. I, YOU, 
HE ! Suppose a stranger should ask, and who 
are you ? Here are three obscure persons spoken 
of, that may in a short time be utterly forgotten. 
Their names should have consequently been men- 
tioned in notes at the bottom. But when the 
reader comes to the words great and smttU^ the 
maze is inextricable. Here the stranger may dive 
for a mystery, without ever reaching the bottom. 
Let him know then, that ^truUl is a word purely 
introduced to make good rhyme, and great was a 
very proper word to keep smcUl company. 

Yet, l^ being thus a spectator of others' dangers, 
I must OMm I begin to tremble in this literary 
contest for my own. I b^n to fear that my chal- 
lenge to Doctor Rock was unadvised, and has pro- 
cured me more antagonists than I had at first ex- 
pected. I have received private letters from several 
of the literati here, that fill my soul with apprehen- 
sion. I may safely aver, that / never gave any 
creature in this good city offence, except only my 
rival Doctor Rock, yet by the letters I every day 
receive, and by some I have seen printed, I am 
arraigned at one time as being a dull fellow, at 
another as being pert ; I am here petulant, there 
I am heavy ; by the head of my ancestors, they 
treat me with more inhumanity than a flying fish. 
If I dive and run my nose to the bottom, there a 
devouring shark is ready to swallow me up ; if I 
skim the surface, a pack of dolphins are at my tail 
to snap me ; but when I take wing and attempt to 

II. R 



iir:fi^iL I ^EBDne a jkct td nay 

dK hoBOBt of tbe 



I-ETTEiL CXn". 

diBDOCIIIt* 




lev ri i Bni i 'fs move pnper to invite to oonrtsh^). 
Here kive ma^A span Mmao^ parintrd lawns and 
vxziung graves, jud icvd upon gales, waftmgat 
oQoe botk fcagiaurr and hannonj. Yet it seeas 
he fasu loBiken tbe idand ; and when a couple 
are nov to be manied, mntnal love or an miioDQf 
minds is tbe last and most tnflii^ ooosideratioiL 
If tbeir goods and chattels can be brought to unite, 
their sjrmpatbetic sools are ever ready to guanintee 
the treaty. The gentleman's mortgaged lawn be- 
comes enamoured of tbe lady's marriageable grove ; 
the match is struck up, and both parties are piously 
in love — according to act of parliament. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, ^43 

Thus they, who have fortune, are possessed at 
least of something that is lovely ; but I actually 
pity those that have none. I am told there was a 
time, when ladies with no other merit but youth, 
virtue, and beauty, had a chance for husbands, at 
least, among the ministers of the church, or the 
officers of the army. The blush and innocence of 
sixteen was said to have a powerful influence over 
these two professions. But of late, all the little 
traffic of blushing, ogling, dimpling, and smiling, 
has been forbidden by an act in that case wisely 
made and provided. A lady's whole cargo of 
smiles, sighs, and whispers, is declared utterly 
^contraband, till she arrives in the warm latitudes 
of twenty-two, where commodities of this nature 
ace too often found to decay. She is then per- 
mitted to dimple and smile, when the dimples and 
smiles b^in to forsake her ; and when perhaps 
^own ugly, is charitably entrusted with an un- 
limited use of her charms. Her lovers, however, 
by this time have forsaken her ; the captain has 
changed for another mistress; the priest himself 
leaves her in solitude, to bewail her virginity, and 
she dies even without the benefit of clergy. 

Thus you find the Europeans discouraging love 
with as much earnestness, as the rudest savage of 
Sofala. The Genius is surely now no more. In 
every region I find enemies in arms to oppress 
him. Avarice in Europe, jealousy in Persia, cere- 
mcmy in China, poverty among the Tartars, and 
-Inst in Circassia, are all prepared to oppose his 
power. The Genius is certainly banished from 
earth, though once adored under such a variety of 
fomis. He is no where to be found ; and all that 



CF TBE WORLD. 



T^ GcBEEB of Lav«y»^tbe eastern Apologiie, 
ji^c^ irBOcii B tbe kappy pluDs of Abn, 

tyglih, and cTCxj sound 
pr>f3Brd rffTaqwF-Jry. Hb teapfe at fist «*s 

the nomber of his 



vGCazi 



tbevefoRiv kis ahan at kngth qute deseited,be 
was moit e d to icmove to some move pvopitkns 
icgioQ, and he a^nidig d the hur ses of ereiy 
coancrj, vheie he ooold hope fer a pvofier recep- 
tioo, to asKTt dieir nglit to his p g cs enc c among 
them. In retnm to this ptnrfamation, emhassies 
«cie sent firam the Ladies of evcij pait of the 
world u> invite him, and to diqilay the saperiority 
of their daims. 

And first the beaoties of China appeared. No 
coontij oonld compare with them for modesty, 
either of look, dress, or bdiavioiir ; thdr eyes weie 
never lifted from the ground ; their robes of the 
most beantifiil silk, hid thdr hands, bosom and 
neck, while their £eu:es only were left uncovered. 
They indulged no airs that mig^t express loose 
desire, and they seemed to study only the graces 
of inanimate beauty. Their black teeth and 
plucked eye-brows were, however, alledged by the 
Genius against them, but he set them entirely 
aside, when he came to examine their little feet 

The beauties of Circassia next made their ap- 
pearance. They advanced hand in hand, singing 
the most immodest airs, and leading up a dance in 
the most luxurious altitudes. Their dress was bat 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. a45 

half a covering ; the neck, the left breast, and all 
the lunbs were exposed to view, which after some 
time seemed rather to satiate than inflame desire. 
The lily and the rose contended in forming their 
complexions ; and a soft sleepiness of eye, added 
irresistible poignancy to their charms ; but their 
beaaties were obtruded, not offered to their ad- 
mirers; they seemed to give rather than receive 
courtship; and the Genius of Love dismissed them 
as unworthy his regard, since they exchanged the 
duties of love, and made themselves not the pur- 
sued, but the pursuing sex. 

The kingdom of Kashmire next produced its 
charming deputies. This happy r^on seemed 
peculiarly sequestered by Nature for his abode. 
Shady mountains fenced it on one side from the 
scorching sun ; the sea-bom breezes on the other, 
gave peculiar luxuriance to the air. Their com- 
plexions were of a bright yellow, that appeared 
almost transparent, while the crimson tulip seemed 
to blossom on their cheeks. Their features and 
limbs were delicate beyond the statuary's power to 
express; and their teeth whiter than their own 
ivory. He was almost persuaded to reside among 
them, when unfortunately one of the ladies talked 
of appointing his seraglio. 

In this procession the naked inhabitants of 
Southern America would not be left behind : their 
charms were found to surpass whatever the warmest 
imagination could conceive ; and served to shew, 
that beauty could be perfect, even with the seem- 
ing disadvantage of a brown complexion. But 
their savage education rendered them utterly un- 
qualified to make the proper use of their power, 



346 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

and they were rejected as being incapable of 
uniting mental with sensual satisfaction. In this 
manner the deputies of other kingdoms had thdr 
suits rejected : the black beauties of Benin, and 
the tawny daughters of Borneo, the women of 
Wida with well scarred faces, and the 'hideous 
virgins of Caffraria ; the squab ladies of Lapland, 
three feet high, and the giant fair ones of Pata- 
gonia. 

The beauties of Europe at last appeared: grace 
was in their steps, and sensibility sat smiling in 
every eye. It was the universal opinion, while 
they were approaching, that they would prevail ; 
and the Genius seemed to lend them his most 
favourable attention. They opened their preten* 
sions with the utmost modesty ; but unfortunately 
as their orator proceeded, she happened to let fidl 
the words house in town, settlement omd pm-momj* 
These seemingly harmless terms had instantly a 
surprising effect : the Genius with ungovernable 
rage burst from amidst the circle; and waving 
his youthful pinions, left this earth, and flew 
back to those etherial mansions from whence be 
descended. 

The whole assembly was struck with amazement: 
they now justly apprehended, that female powei 
would be no more, since love had forsaken them. 
They continued some time thus in a state of torpid 
despair, when it was proposed by one of the num- 
ber, that since the real Genius had left them, in 
order to continue their power, they should set op 
I idol in his stead ; and that the ladies of eveiy 
antry should furnish him with what each liked 
It This {proposal was instantly relished and 



THR CiTiZEX or 7£Z 



agreed ta An 
capricioiis gifts 
resembting the 
China fomisfaed tbe 
Kashmife aqipiied 
Europe dapped a 
Yugkis of CoBgo 
that time, afl the 
reality paid to the 
religioDs, the 
the heart is least 







AdicK. 



LETTER CX\^ 




CKIKD have ever been prone to 
patiate in the praise oc bixmaa 
The dignity of man b a subject that 
has alwa^ been the £rvoaziie theme 
of humanity; they luiTe declaimed viih that osten- 
tadon, which osoally accompanies sndi as are soie 
of hayii^ a partial andience ; they have obuiaed 
victories, because there were none to oppose. Yet 
from all I have ever read or seen, men appear 
more apt to err by having too h^, than by having 
too despicaUe an ofMnion of thor nature ; and by 
attempting to exalt their ordinal place in the crea- 
tion, depress their real value in society. 

The most ^norant naticMis have always been 
found to think most highly of themselves. The 
Deity has ever been thought peculiarly concerned 
.in their glory and preservation ; to have fought 



•48 THR CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

their battles, and inspired their teachers: theii 
wizards are said to be familiar with heaven ; and 
every hero has a guard of angels as well as men to 
attend him. When the Portuguese first came 
among the wretched inhabitants of the coast of 
Africa, these savage nations readily allowed the 
strangers more skill in navigation and war ; yet 
still considered them, at best, but as useful sei* 
▼ants broi^;fat to their coasts by their guardian 
serpent, to supply them with luxuries they could 
have lived without Though they could grant the 
Portuguese more riches, they could never allow 
them to have such a king as their Tottimondelem, 
who wore a brauxlet of shells round his neck, and 
whose legs were covered with ivory. 

In this manner, examine a savage in the history 
of his country and predecessors ; you ever find his 
warriors able to conquer armies, and his sages ac* 
<iuainted with more than possible knowledge: 
human nature is to him an unknown country ; he 
thinks it capable of great things, because he is 
ignorant of its boundaries ; whatever can be con- 
ceived to be done he allows to be possible, and 
whatever is possible he conjectures must have been 
done. He never measures the actions and powers 
of others by what himself is able to perform, nor 
makes a proper estimate of the greatness of his 
fellows by bringing it to the standard of his own 
incapacity. He is satisfied to be one of a country 
where mighty things have been ; and'imagines the 
fancied power of others reflects a lustre on himself. 
Thus, by degrees, he loses the idea. of his own in* 
sic:nificance in a confused notion of the extraordi- 
weis of humanity, and is willing to grant 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 249 

extraordinary gifts to every pretender, because 
unacquainted with their claims. 

This is the reason, why demi-gods and heroes 
have ever been erected in times or countries of 
^norance and barbarity ; they addressed a people 
who had high opinions of human nature, because 
they were ignorant how £ur it could extend ; they 
addressed a people who were willing to allow that 
men should be gods, because they were yet imper- 
fectly acquainted'with God, and with man. These 
impostors knew, that all men are naturally fond of 
seeing something very great made from the little 
materials of humanity ; that ignorant nations are 
not more proud of building a tower to reach heaven, 
ot a pyramid to last for ages, than of raising up a 
demi-god of their own country and creation. The 
same pride that erects a colossus or a pyramid, in- 
stalls a god or a hero : but though the adoring 
savage can raise his colossus to the clouds, he can 
exalt the hero not one inch above the standard of 
humanity ; incapable therefore of exalting the idol, 
he debases himself and falls prostrate before him. 

When man has thus acquired an erroneous idea 
of the dignity of his species, he and the gods be- 
come perfectly intimate; men are but angels, 
angels are but men, nay but servants that stand in 
waiting to execute human commands. The Per- 
sians, for instance, thus address their prophet 
Haly : ^ " I salute thee, glorious Creator, of whom 
the sun is but the shadow. Masterpiece of the 
Liord of human creatures, great star of justice and 
religion. The sea is not rich and liberal but by 
the gifts of thy munificent hands. The angel 
1 Chardin's Thivels, p. 409, 



•so THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

treasurer of heaven, reaps his harvest in the feitile 
gardens of the purity of thy nature. The primnm 
mobile would never dart the ball of the sun through 
the trunk of heaven, were it not to serve the morn- 
ing out of the extreme love she has for thee. The 
angel Gabriel, messenger of truth, every day kisses 
the groundsil of thy gate. Were there a place 
more exalted than the most high throne of God, I 
would affirm it to be thy place, O master of the 
faithful ; Gabriel with all his art and knowledge, 
is but a mere scholar to thee." Thus, my friend, 
men think proper to treat angels ; but if indeed 
there be such an order of beings, with what a 
degree of satirical contempt must they listen to 
the songs of little mortals thus flattering each other. 
Thus to see creatures, wiser indeed than the 
monkey, and more active than the oyster, claiming 
to themselves the mastery of heaven ; minims, the 
tenants of an atom, thus arrogating a partnership 
in the creation of universal Nature ! Sure heaven 
is kind, that launches no thunder at those guilty 
heads ; but it is kind, and regards their follies with 
pity, nor will destroy creatures that it loved into 
being. 

But whatever success this practice of making 
demi-gods might have been^attended with in bar- 
barous nations, I do not know that any man 
became a god in a country, where the inhabitants 
were refined. Such countries generally have too 
close an inspection into human weakness, to think 
it invested with celestial power. They sometimes 
indeed admit the gods of strangers, or of their 
aiicestors, which had their existence in times of 
obscurity; their weakness of being forgotten, 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, «5» 

while nothing but their power and their miracles 
were remembered. The Chinese, for instance, 
never had a god of their own country, the 
idols which the vulgar worship at this day were 
brought from the barbarous nations around them. 
The Roman Emperors, who pretended to divinity, 
were generally taught by a poniard that they were 
mental ; and Alexander, though he passed among 
barbarous countries for a real God, could never 
persuade his polite countrymen into a similitude of 
thinking. The Lacedemonians shrewdly complied 
with his commands, by the following sarcastic 
edict : 

El AX«{a»djpe^ BviXiirai «iww 0«Pf, 9«0f «sw. 

Adieu. 



LETTER CXVL 
To the same, 

[HERE is something irresistibly pleasing 
in the conversation of a fine woman ; 
even though her tongue be silent, the 
eloquence of her eyes teaches wis- 
dom. The mind sympathizes with the regularity 
of the object in view, and struck with external 
grace, vibrates into respondent harmony. In this 
agreeable disposition, I lately found myself in 
company with my friend and his niece. Our con- 
versation turned upon love, which she seemed 
equally capable of defending and inspiring. W6 
were each of different opinions upon this subject ; 
the lady insisted that it was a natural and univer- 
sal passion, and produced the happiness of those 




S5« THB CITIZEN OP THE WORLD. 

who cultivated it with proper precaution. My 
firiend denied it to be the work of Nature, but 
allowed it to have a real existence, and affirmed 
that it was of infinite service in refining society ; 
while I, to keep up the dispute, affirmed it to be 
merely a name, first used by the cunning part 
of the £Eur sex, and admitted by the silly part of 
ours, therefore no way more natural than taking 
snuff or chewing opium. 

** How is it possiUe, cried I, that such a passion 
can be natural, when our opinions even of beauty, 
which inspires it, are entirely the result of fashion 
and caprice ? The ancients, who pretended to be 
connoisseurs in the art, have praised narrow fore- 
heads, red hair, and eyebrows that joined each 
other over the nose. Such were the charms that 
once captivated Catullus, Ovid, and Anacreon. 
Ladies would at present be out of humour, if their 
lovers praised them for such graces ; and should 
an antique beauty now revive, her face would cer* 
tainly be put under the discipline of the tweezer, 
forehead-cloth and lead comb, before it could be 
seen in public company. 

** But the difference between the ancients and 
modems is not so great, as between the different 
countries of the present world. A lover of Gon- 
gora, for instance, sighs for thick lips ; a Chinese 
lover is poetical in praise of thin. In Circassia, a 
straight nose is thought most consistent with 
beauty ; cross but a mountain which separates it 
from the Tartars, and there flat noses, tawny 
skins, and eyes three inches asunder, are all the 
Authion. In Persia and some other countries, a 
when he marries, chooses to have his bride a 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, ss3 

maid ; in the Phillipine Islands, if a bridegroom 
happens to pefceiTe on the first night that he is 
put off with a virgin, the marriage is declared void 
to all intents and purposes, and the bride sent back 
with disgrace. In some parts of the fUist, a 
woman of beauty, properly fed up for sale, often 
amounts to one hundred crowns ; in the kingdom 
of Loango, ladies di the very best fashion are sold 
for a pig, queens however sell better, and some- 
times amount to a cow. In short, turn even to 
England, do not I there see the beautiful part of 
the sex neglected ; and none now marrying or 
making love but old men and old women that have 
saved money ? Do not I see beauty from fifteen to 
twenty-one rendered null and void to all intents 
and purposes, and those six precious years of 
womanhood put under a statute of virginity? 
What I shall I call that rancid passion love, which 
passes between an old bachelor of fifty-six, and a 
widow lady of forty-nine ? Never ! never ! What 
advantage is society to reap firom an intercourse, 
where the big belly is oftenest on the man's side ? 
Would any persuade me that such a passion wss 
natural, unless the human jace were more fit for 
love as they approached the decline, and, like 
silk-worms, become breeders just before they 
expired ? " 

Whether love be natural or no, replied my 
friend, gravely, it contributes to the happiness of 
every society into which it is introduced. All our 
pleasures are short, and can only charm at inter- 
vals : love is a method of protracting our greatest 
pleasure ; and surely that gamester who plays the 
greatest stake to the best advantage, will, at the 



•M THB CtTIZBN OF THB WORLD, 

cad of life, lise vktorions. This was the opinioB 
of Vamni, who aflirmed that every hour was lost 
wi i ck wMs not spemt in hoe. His accusers were 
uable to comprehend his meaning, and the poor 
advocate far lore was bamed in flames, alas, no 
wmy metapboncaL Bat whatever advantages the 
individnal may reap firom this passion, sodety will 
oeftainly be icfined and improved by its introduc- 
tkm : All laws, calculated to discourage it, tend 
to embmle the species, and weaken the state. 
Tboi^ it cannot plant morals in the human 
breast, it cul ti v ates them vrhen there : pity, gene- 
lonty, and hooour, receive a brighter polish from 
its assistance; and a sii^;le amour is sufficient 
entirely to brush off the down. 

Bat it is an exotic of the most delicate constitu- 
tioD ; it req nire s the greatest art to introduce it 
into a state, and the smallest discouragement is 
soffident to repress it agaiiL Let us only consider 
with what ease it was formerly extinguished in 
Rome, and with what difficulty it was lately re* 
vTTsd in Eorope : it seemed to sleep for ages, and 
at last fan^ht its way among us through tilts, 
toonamcnts, dragons, and all the dreams of 
chivalry. The rest of the world, China only ex- 
cepted, are and have ever been utter strangers to 
its delfts and advantages. In other countries, 
as men find themselves stronger than women, they 
lay a claim to a rigorous superiority; this is 
natural, and love, wfaidi gives up this natural ad- 
vantage, most certainly be the effect of art Ab 
art calculated to lei^then out our happier moments, 
^^ add new graces to society. 

\ entirely acquiesce in your sentiments, says the 



THE CITIZEN OP THE WORLD, ^n 

lady, with r^ard to the advantages of this passion, 
but cannot avoid giving it a nobler origin than you 
have been pleased to assign. I must think, that 
those countries, where it is rejected, are obliged to 
have recourse to art to stifle so natural a produc- 
tion, and those nations, where it is cultivated, only 
make nearer advances to nature. The same efforts 
that are used in some places to suppress pity and 
other natural passions, may have been employed to 
extioguish love. No nation, however unpolished, 
is remarkable for innocence, that is not famous for 
passion ; it has flourished in the coldest, as well as 
the warmest r^ons. Even in the sultry wilds of 
southern America, the lover is not satisfied with 
possessing his mistress's person without having her 
mind. 

In all my Enna's beauties blestf 

Amidtt profusion, still I pine; 
For the* she gives me up her breast ^ 

Its panting tenant is not mine.^ 

But the effects of love are too violent to be the 
result of an artificial passion. Nor is it in the 
power of fashion to force the constitution into 
those changes, which we every day observe. 
Several have died of it. Few lovers are unac- 
quainted with the fate of the two Italian lovers, Da 
Corsin and Julia Bellamano, who, after a long 
separation, expired with pleasure in each other's 
arms. Such instances are too strong confirmations 
of the reality of the passion, and serve to shew that 
supposing it, is but opposing the natural dictates of 
the heart. Adieu. 

1 Translation of a South American Ode. 




• i 

•56 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 



LETTER CXVII. 
To the same, 

[HE dock just struck two, the ex|uibg 
taper rises and sinks in the socket, the 
watchman forgets the hour in slumber, 
the laborious and the happy, are at rest, 
and nothing wakes but meditation, guilt, revelry, 
and despair. The drunkard once more fills the 
destroying bowl, the robber walks his midnight 
round, and the suicide lifts his guilty arm against 
his own sacred person. 

Let me no longer waste the night over the page 
of antiquity, or the sallies of cotemporary genius, 
but pursue the solitary walk, where vanity, ever 
changing, but a few hours past, v^alked before 
me, where she kept up the pageant, and now, 
like a froward child, seems hushed with her own 
importunities. 

What a gloom hangs all around; the dying 
lamp feebly emits a yellow gleam, no sound is 
heard but of the chiming clock, or the distant 
watch-dog. All the bustle of human pride is for- 
gotten, an hour like this may well display the 
emptiness of human vanity. 

There will come a time, when this temporary 
solitude may be made continual, and the city itself, 
like its inhabitants, fade away, and leave a desert 
in its room. 

What cities, as great as this, have once 
triumphed in existence, had their victories as 
great, joy as just, and as unbounded, and with 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 957 

short sighted presumption, promised themselves 
immortality. Posterity can hardly trace the situa- 
tion of some. The sorrowful traveller wanders 
over the awfiil ruins of others ; and as he beholds, 
he learns wisdom, and feels the transience of every 
sublunary possession. 

Here, he cries, stood their citadel, now grown 
over with weeds ; there their senate-house, but 
now the haunt of every noxious reptile ; temples 
and theatres stood here, now only an undistin- 
guished heap of ruin. They are fallen, for luxury 
and avarice first made them feeble. The rewards 
of state were conferred on amusing, and not on 
useful, members of society. Their riches and 
opulence invited the invaders, who, though at first 
repulsed, returned again, conquered by perseve- 
rance, and at last swept the defendants into undis- 
tinguished destruction. 

How few appear in those streets, which but some 
few hours ago were crowded ; and those who ap- 
pear, now no longer wear their daily mask, nor 
attempt to hide their lewdness or their misery. 

But who are those who make the streets their 
couch, and find a short repose from wretchedness 
at the doors of the opulent ? These are strangers, 
■wanderers, and orj^ians, whose circumstances are 
too humble to expect redress, and whose distresMS 
are too great even for pity. Their wretchedncw 
excites rather horror than pity. Some are without 
the covering even of rags, and others emaciated 
with disease ; the worid has disclaimed them ; 
society turns its back upon their distress, and has 
given them up to nakedness and hunger. These 
poor shivering femalfs have ooce seen happier 

II. s 



V 



258 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

days, and been flattered into lieauty. They have 
been prostituted to the gay luxurious villain, and 
are now turned out to meet the severity of winter. 
Perhaps, now lying at the doors of their betrayeis, 
they sue to wretches whose hearts are insensible, 
or debauchees who may curse, but will not relieye 
them. 

Why, why was I bom a man, and yet see 
the suffering of wretches I cannot relieve ! Poor 
houseless creatures ! the world will give you le* 
proaches, but vdll not give you relie£ The 
slightest misfortunes of the great, the most imagi- 
nary uneasinesses of the rich, are aggravated with aU 
the power of eloquence, and held up to engage our 
attention and sympathetic sorrow. The poor weep 
unheeded, persecuted by every subordinate species 
of tyranny ; and every law, which gives others 
security, becomes an enemy to them. 
' Why was this heart of mine formed with so much 
sensibility ! or why was not my fortune adapted to 
its impulse ! Tenderness, without a capacity of 
relieving, only makes the man who feels it more 
wretched than the object which sues for assistance. 
Adieu. 






THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 259 




LETTER CXVIII. 

Fum Hoam to Lien Chi Altangi^ the discontented 
Wanderer^ by the way of Moscow » 

HAVE been just sent upon an embassy 
to Japan ; my commission is to be dis> 
patched in four days, and you can 
hardly conceive the pleasure I shall find 
apon revisiting my native country. I shall leave 
nrith joy this proud, barbarous, inhospitable region, 
trhere every object conspires to diminish my satis- 
Action, and increase my patriotism. 

But though I find the inhabitants savage, yet the 
Dutch merchants who are permitted to trade 
hither, seem still more detestable. They have 
raised my dislike to Europe in general ; by them 
I learn how low avarice can d^^rade human 
nature; how many indignities an European will 
suffer for gain. 

I was present at an audience given by the Em- 
peror to the Dutch envoy, who had sent several 
presents to all the courtiers some days previous to 
^is admission ; but he was obliged to attend those 
designed for the Emperor himself. From the ac- 
:ounts I had heard of this ceremony, my curiosity 
prompted me to be a spectator of the whole. 

First went the presents^ set out on beautiful 
enamelled tables, adorned with flowers, borne on 
tnen*s shoulders, and followed by Japanese music 
and dancers. From so great respect paid to the 
gifts themselves, I had fancied the donors must 



s6o THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

have received almost divine honours. Bat about 
a quarter of an hour after the presents had been 
carried in triumph, the envoy and his train woe 
brought forward. They were covered from head 
to foot with long black veils, which prevented 
their seeing, each led by a conductor, chosen from 
the meanest of the people. In this dishonourable 
manner having traversed the city of Jedo, tiiey tt 
length arrived at the palace gate, and after waiting 
half an hour, were admitted into the guard lOom. 
Here their eyes were uncovered, and in about an 
hour the gentleman usher introduced them into the 
hall of audience. The Emperor was at length 
shewn sitting in a kind of alcove at the upper end 
of the room, and the Dutch envoy was conducted 
towards the throne. 

As soon as he had approached within a certain 
distance, the gentleman usher cried out with a load 
voice, Holandd CapUan; upon these words the 
envoy fell flat upon the ground, and crept upon his 
hands and feet towards the throne. Still approach* 
ing, he reared himself upon his knees, and then 
bowed his forehead to the ground. These cere- 
monies being over, he was directed to withdraw, 
still grovelling on his belly, and going backward 
like a lobster. 

Men must be excessively fond of riches, when 
they are earned with such circumstances of abject 
submission. Do the Europeans worship heaven 
itself with marks of more profound respect ? Do 
they confer those honours on the Supreme of 
beings, which they pay to a barbarous king, who 
gives them a permission to purchase trinkets and 
porcelain ! What a glorious exchange, to fofieit 



THS CmZSN OF THE WORLD. a^i 

thdr national honoor, and even tlicir title to 
humanity, for a screen or a snoff-box ! 

If these ceremonies essa3red in the first andienoe 
appeared mortifying, those which are practised in 
the second are infinitely more so. In the second 
aadience, the Emperor and the ladies of court 
were placed behind lattices in such a manner as to 
see without being seen. Here all the Europeans 
were directed to pass in review, and grovel and act 
the serpent as before: with this spectacle, the 
whole court seemed highly delighted. The strangers 
were asked a thousand ridiculous questions; as 
their names, and their ages : They were ordered 
to write, to stand upright, to sit, to stop, to com- 
{diment each other, to be drunk, to speak the 
Japanese language, to talk Dutch, to sing, to eat ; 
in short, they were ordered to do all that could 
satisfy the curiosity of women. 

Imagine, my dear Altangi, a set of grave men 
thus transformed into bufibons, and acting a part 
every whit as honourable as that of those instructed 
animals which are shewn in the streets of Pekin to 
the mob on a holiday. Yet the ceremony did not 
end here, for every great lord of the court was to 
be visited in the same manner ; and their ladies, 
who took the whim firom their husbands, were all 
equally fond of seeing the strangers perform, even 
the children seeming highly diverted with the 
dancing Dutchmen. 

Alas, oied I, to myself, upon returning from 
such a spectacle, is this the nation which assumes 
such dignity at the court of Pekin ? Is this that 
people that appear so proud at homd, and in every 
country where they have the least authority? How 



26a THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

does a love of gain transform the gravest of man- 
kind into the most contemptible and ridiculous? I 
had rather continue poor all my life, than become 
rich at such a rate. Perish those riches which are 
acquired at the expence of my honour or my 
humanity ! Let me quit, said I, a country where 
there are none but such as treat all others like 
slaves, and more detestable still, in suffering sucb 
treatment. I have seen enough of this nation, to 
desire to see more of others. Let me leave a 
people suspicious to excess, whose morals are cor- 
rupted, and equally debased by superstition and 
vice; where the sciences are left uncultivated, 
where the Great are slaves to the Prince, and 
tyrants to the people, where the women are chaste 
only when debarred of the power of trtosgression; 
where the true disciples of Confucius are not less 
persecuted than those of Christianity : in a word, 
a country where men are forbidden to think, and 
consequently labour under the most miserable 
slavery, that of mental servitude. Adieu. 



LETTER CXIX. 

From Lien Chi Altangi to Fum Hoam^ first Pre- 
sident of the Ceremonial Acadefny, at Fekin^ in 
China, 

I HE misfortunes of the great, my friend, 
are held up to engage our attention, are 
enlarged upon in tones of declamation, 
and the world is called upon to gaze at 

the noble sufferers ; they have at once the comfort 

of admiration and pity. 




THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 9<?3 

Yet where is the magnanimity of bearing mis- 
fortunes when the whole world is looking on? 
Men in such circumstances can act bravely even 
from motives of vanity. He only who, in the vale of 
obscurity, can brave adversity, who without friends 
to encourage, acquaintances to pity, or even without 
hope to alleviate his distresses, can behave with 
tranquillity and indifference, is truly great : whether 
peasant or courtier, he deserves admiration, and 
should be held up for our imitation and respect. 

The miseries of the poor are however entirely 
disiegarded ; though some undergo more real 
hardships in one day, than the great in their whole 
lives. It is indeed inconceivable what difficulties 
the meanest English sailor or soldier endures with- 
out murmuring or regret. Every day is to him a 
day of misery, and yet he bears his hard fate 
without repining. 

With what indignation do I hear the heroes of 
tragedy complain of misfortunes and hardships, 
whose greatest calamity is founded in arrogance 
and pride. Their severest distresses are pleasures, 
compared to what many of the adventuring poor 
every day sustain, without murmuring. These 
may eat, drink, and sleep, have slaves to attend 
them, and are sure of subsistence for life, while 
many of their fellow-creatures are obliged to wan- 
der, without a friend to comfort or to assist them, 
find enmity in every law, and are too poor to 
obtain even justice. 

I have been led into these reflections, from acci- 
dentally meeting some days ago a poor fellow 
begging at one of the outlets of this town, with a 
wooden leg. I was curious to learn what had 



«€4 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

reduced him to his iireseiit ntaation ; and afta 
giving him what I thought proper, desiied to 
know the history of his life and misfortunes, and 
the manner in which he was redaced to his ptetent 
distress. The disabled soldier, for sach he was, 
with an intrepidity truly British, leaning on has 
crutch, put himself into an attitude to comply with 
my request, and gave me his history as follows : 

'* As for misfortunes. Sir, I cannot pretend to 
have gone through more than others. Except the 
loss of my limb, and my being obliged to beg, I 
don*t know any reason, thank heaven, that I have 
to complain : there are some who have lost both 
legs, and an eye ; but, thank heaven, it is not 
quite so bad with me. 

'* My father was a labourer in the country, and 
died when I was five years old ; so I was put upon 
the parish. As he had been a wandering sort of a 
man, the parishioners were not able to tell to what 
parish I belonged, or where I was bom ; so tbe]^ 
sent me to another parish, and that parish sent me 
to a third, till at last it was thought I belonged to 
no parish at all. At length, however, they fixed 
me. I had some disposition to be a scholar, and 
had actually learned my letters ; but the master of 
the work-house put me to business, as soon as I 
was able to handle a mallet. 

** Here I lived an easy kind of a life for fire 
years. I only wrought ten hours in the day, and 
had my meat and drink provided for my labour. 
It is true, I was not suffered to stir far from the 
house, for fear I should run away : but what of 
that, I had the liberty of the whole house, and the 
yard before the door, and that was enough for me. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 265 

" I was next bound out to a fisurmer, where I was 
up both early and late, but I eat and drank well, 
and liked my business well enough, till he died. 
Being then obliged to provide for m3rself, I was 
reserved to go and seek my fortune. Thus I lived, 
and went from town to town, working when I could 
get emplojrment, and starving when I could get 
none, and might have lived so still : But happening 
one day to go through a field belonging to a magis- 
trate, I spy'd a hare crossing the path just before 
me. I believe the devil put it in my head to fling 
my stick at it : well, what will you have on*t ? I 
kiird the hare, and was bringing it away in triumph, 
when the justice himself met me : he called me a 
villain, and collaring me, desired I would give an 
account of myself. I began immediately to give a 
full account of all that I knew of my breed, seed, 
and generation : but though I gave a very long 
account, the justice said, I could give no account 
of mjrself ; so I was indicted, and found guilty of 
being poor, and sent to Newgate, in order to be 
transported to the plantations. 

*' People may say this and that of being in jail ; 
but for my part, I found Newgate as agreeable a 
place as ever I was in, in all my life. I had my 
belly full to eat and drink, and did no work ; but 
alas, this kind of life was too good to last for ever ! 
I was taken out of prison, after five months, put on 
board of a ship, and sent off with two hundred more. 
Our "passage was but indififerent, for we were all 
confined in the hold, and died very fast for want of 
sweet air and provisions ; but for my part, I did 
'not want meat, because I had a fever all the way ; 
providence was kind when provisions grew shOTt, 



t66 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

it took away my desire of eating. When we came 
ashore, we were sold to the planters. I was boiuid 
for seven years, and as I ¥ras no scholar, for I had 
forgot my letters, I was obliged to work among 
the negroes ; and served out my time, as in duty 
bound to da 

*' When my time was expired, I worked my 
passage home, and glad I was to see Old England 
again, because I loved my country. O liberty, 
liberty, liberty! that is the property of eveiy 
Englishman, and I will die in its defence : I was 
afraid, however, that I should be indicted for a 
vagabond once more, so did not much care to go 
into the country, but kept about town, and did 
little jobs when I could get them. I was veiy 
happy in this numner for some time; till one 
evening, coming home from work, two men 
knocked me down, and then desired me to stand 
still. They belonged to a press gang; I was 
carried before the justice, and as I could give no 
account of mjrself (that was the thing that always 
hobbled me) I had my choice left, whether to go 
on board a man of war, or list for a soldier ; I 
chose to be a soldier, and in this post of a gentle* 
man, I served two campaigns, was at the battles in 
Flanders, and received but one wound through the 
breast, which is troublesome to- this day. 

** When the peace came on, I was discharged : 
and as I could hot work, because my wound was 
sometimes painful, I listed for a landman in the 
East-India company's service. I here fought the 
French in six pitched battles ; and verily believe, 
that if I could read or write, our captain would 
have given me promotion, and made me a cor* 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 9&j 

poral. But that was not my good fortune, I soon 
fell sick, and when I became good for nothing, 
got leave to return home again with forty pounds 
in my pocket, which I saved in the service. This 
was at the beginning of the present war, so I hoped 
to be set on shore, and to have the pleasure of 
spending my money ; but the government wanted 
men, and I was pressed again, before ever I could 
set foot on shore. 

'* The boatswain found me, as he said, an obsti- 
nate fellow : he swore that I understood my busi- 
ness perfectly well, but that I pretended sickness 
merely to be idle : God knows, I knew nothing of 
sea-bosiness : He beat me without considering 
what he was about But still my forty pounds was 
some comfort to me under every beating; the 
money was my comfort, and the money I might 
have had to this day ; but that our ship was taken 
by the French, and so I lost it all I 

** Our crew was carried into a French prison, and 
many of them died, because they were not used to 
live in a jail ; but for my part it was nothing to me, 
for I was seasoned. One night, however, as I was 
sleeping on the bed of boards, with a warm blanket 
about me (for I always loved to lie well), I was 
awaked by the boatswain, who had a dark lantern 
in his hand. 'Jack, says he to me, will you knock 
out the French sentry's brains ? * * I don't care, says 
I, striving to keep myself awake, if I lend a hand.' 
Then follow me, says he, and I hope we shall do 
business. ' So up I got, and tied my blanket, which 
was all the clothes I had, about my middle, and 
went with him to fight the Frenchmen : we had no 
arms; but one Englishman is able to beat five 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

French at any time ; so we went down to the door, 
where both the sentries were posted, and rashiog 
upon them, seized their arms in a moment, and 
knocked them down. From thence, nine of us ran 
together to the quay, and seizing the first boat we 
met, got out of the harbour, and put to sea : we 
had not been here three days, before we were taken 
up by an English privateer, who was glad of so 
many good hands ; and we consented to run out 
chance. However, we had not so much luck as 
we expected. In three days we fell in with a 
French man of war of forty guns, while we hid 
but twenty-three; so to it we went. The figfat 
lasted for three hours, and I verily believe w^ 
should have taken the Frenchman, but unfortn* 
nately, we lost almost all our men, just as we were 
going to get the victory. I was once more in the 
po¥rer of the French, and I believe it would have 
gone hard with me, had I been brought back to 
my old jail in Brest : but by good fortune, we were 
retaken and carried to England once more. 

" I had almost forgot to tell you, that in this last 
engagement, I was wounded in two places ; I lost 
four fingers of the left hand, and my leg was shot 
off. Had I the good fortune to have lost my leg 
and use of my hand on board a king's ship, and 
not a privateer, Ij should have been entituled to 
clothing and maintenance during the rest of my 
life, but that was not my chance ; one man is bom 
with a silver spoon in his mouth, and another with 
a wooden ladle. However, blessed be God, I 
enjoy good health, and have no enemy in this 
world that I know of, but the French, and the 
Justice of Peace.** 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 369 

Thus saying, he limped off, leaving my friend 
and me in admiration of his intrepidity and content ; 
nor could we avoid acknowledging, that an habitual 
acquaintance with misery, is the truest school of 
fortitude and philosophy. Adieu. 






LETTER CXX. 
From the same, 

|HE titles of European Princes are rather 
more numerous than ours of Asia, but 
by no means so sublime. The king of 
Visapour or P^;u, not satisfied with 
claiming the globe and all its appurtenances to him 
and his heirs, asserts a property even in the firma- 
ment, and extends his orders to the milky way. 
The monarchs of Europe, with more modesty, con- 
^e their titles to earth, but make up by number, 
what is wanting in their sublimity. Such is their 
passion for a long list of these splendid trifles, that 
I have known a German Prince with more titles 
than subjects, and a Spanish nobleman with more 
names than shirts. 

Contrary to this, '' The English monarchs, says 
a writer of the last century, disdain to accept of 
such titles, which tend only to increase their pride, 
without improving their glory; they are above 
depending on the feeble helps of heraldry for 
respect, perfectly satisfied with the consciousness 
of acknowledged power." At present, however, 
these maxims are laid aside ; the English monarchs 
have of late assumed new titles, and have im- 



no THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

pressed their coins with the names and arms of 
obscure dukedoms, petty states, and subordinate 
employments. Their design in this, I make no 
doubt, was laudably to add new lustre to the 
British throAe, but in reality, paltry claims only 
serve to diminish that respect they are designed to 
secure. 

There is, in the honours assumed by Kings, as 
in the decorations of architecture, a majestic sim- 
plicity, which best conduces to inspire our reverence 
and respect ; numerous and trifling ornaments in 
either, are strong indications of meanness in the 
designer, or of concealed deformity : should, for 
instance, the Emperor of China, among other titles, 
assume that of Deputy Mandarine of Maccau, or 
the Monarch of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, 
desire to be acknowledged as Duke of Brentford, 
Lunenburg, or Dncoln, the observer revolts at this 
mixture of important and paltry claims, and forgets 
the Emperor in his familiarity with the Duke or 
the Deputy. 

I remember a similar instance of this inverted 
ambition, in the illustrious King of Manacabo, upon , 
his first treaty with the Portuguese. Amoi^ the 
presents that were made him by the ambassador 
of that nation, was a sword with a brass hilt, which 
he seemed to set a peculiar value upon. This he 
thought too great an acquisition to his glory, to be 
forgotten among the number of his titles. He 
therefore gave orders that his subjects should style 
him for the future. Talipot^ the immortal Potentate 
of Manacabo, Messenger of Morning, Enlightener 
of the Sun, Possessor of the wIwU Earth, and 
mighty Monarch of the Brass-handled Sword, 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, aji 

This method of mixing majestic and paltry titles, 
of quartering the arms of a great empire and an 
obscure province, upon the same medal here, had 
its rise in the virtuous partiality of their late 
monarchs. Willing to testify an affection to their 
native country, they gave its name and ensigns a 
place upon their coins, and thus in some measure 
ennobled its obscurity. It was indeed but just, that 
a people which had given England up their King, 
should receive some honorary equivalent in return ; 
but at present these motives are no more : England 
has now a Monarch wholly British, and it has 
some reason to hope for British titles upon British 
coins. 

However, were the money of England designed 
to circulate in Germany, there would be no flagrant 
impropriety in impressing it with German names 
and arms; but though this might have been so 
upon former occasions, I am told there is no danger 
of it for the future ; as England therefore designs 
to keep back its gold, I candidly think Lunenburg, 
Oldenburgh, and the rest of them, may very well 
keep back their titles. 

It is a mistaken prejudice in princes, to think 
that a number of loud sounding names can give 
new claims to respect. The truly great have ever 
disdained them : When Timur the Lame had con- 
quered Asia, an orator by profession came to com- 
pliment him upon the occasion. He began his 
harangue, by styling him the most omnipotent, 
and the most glorious object of the creation ; the 
Emperor seemed displeased with his paltry adula- 
tion, yet still he went on, complimenting him, as 
the most mighty, the most valiant, and the most 



979 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

perfect of beings : Hold there, my friend, cries the 
lame EmpercMr, hold there, till I have got anotha 
leg. In fiEict, the feeble or the despotic alone find 
pleasure in multiplying these pageants of vanity, 
but strength and freedom have nobler aims, SDd 
often find the finest adulation in majestic simplicity. 
The young Monarch of this country, has already 
testified a proper contempt for several unmeaning 
appendages on royalty ; cooks and scullions biYe 
been obliged to quit their fires ; gentlemen's gentle- 
men, and the whole tribe of necessary peopU^ who 
did nothing, have been dismissed from further ser- 
vices. A youth, who can thus bring back simplicity 
and frugality to a court, will soon probably have a 
true respect for his own glory, and while he has 
dismissed all useless emplojrments, may disdain to 
accept of empty or degrading titles. Adieu. 






WfM 



LETTER CXXI. 
From the same, 

'HENEVER I attempt to characterixe 
the English in general ; some unfore- 
seen difficulties constantly occur to dis- 
concert my design ; I hesitate between 
censure and praise : when I consider them as a 
reasoning philosophical people, they have my ap- 
plause ; but when I reverse the medal, and obserre 
their inconstancy and irresolution, I can scarcely 
persuade myself that I am observing the same 
people. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 973 

Yet upon examination, this very inconstancy, so 
remarkable here, flows from no other source than 
their love of reasoning. The man who examines a 
complicated subject on every side^ and calls in 
reason to his assistance, will frequently change ; 
will find himself distracted by opposing probabili- 
ties and contending proofs: every alteration of 
place will diversify the prospect, will give some 
latent argument new force, and contribute to 
maintain an anarchy in the mind. 

On the contrary, they who never examine with 
their own reason, act with more simplicity. Igno- 
rance is positive, instinct perseveres, and the human 
being moves in safety within the narrow circle of 
bmtal uniformity. What is true with regard to 
individuals, is not less so when applied to states. 
A reasoning government like thi^ is in continual 
fluctuation, while those kingdoms where men are 
taught not to controvert but obey, continue always 
the same. In Asia, for instance, where the 
monarch's authority is supported by force, and ac- 
knowledged through fear, a change of government 
is entirely unknown. All the inhabitants seem to 
wear the same mental complexion, and remain 
contented with hereditary oppression. The sove- 
reign's pleasure is the ultimate rule of duty, every 
branch of the administration is a perfect epitome 
of the whole ; and if one tyrant is deposed, another 
starts up in his room to govern as his predecessor. 
The English, on the contrary, instead of being led 
by power, endeavour to guide themselves by reason ; 
instead of appealing to the pleasure of the prince, 
appeal to the original rights of mankind. What 
one rank of men assert is denied by others, as the 

II, T 



174 THE CITIZMN OP TH& WORLD. 

reasons on opposite sides happen to come home 
with greater or less conviction. The people of 
Asia are directed by precedent, which never alters ; 
the English by reason, which is ever changing its 
appearance. 

The disadvantages of an Asiatic government 
acting in this manner by precedent are evident*, 
original errors are thus continued, without hopes 
of redress, and all marks of genius are levelled 
down to one standard, since no superiority of 
thinking can be allowed its exertion in mending 
obvious defects. But to recompense those defects, 
their governments undergo no new alterations, 
they have no new evils to fear, nor no fermentt- 
tions in the constitution that continue : the ttnfj^ 
for power is soon over, and all becomes tnnqid 
as before ; the]\ are habituated to subordination, 
and men are taught to form no other desires, than 
those which they are allowed to satisfy. 

The disadvantages of a government acting from 
the immediate influence of reason, like that of 
England, are not less than those of the former. 
It is extremely difficult to induce a number of firee 
beings to co-operate for their mutual benefit ; every 
possible advantage will necessarily be sought, and 
every attempt to procure it must be attended with 
a new fermentation ; various reasons will lead difife* 
rent ways, and equity and advantage will often he 
out-balanced by a combination of clamour and 
prejudice. But though such a people may be thus 
in the wrong, they have been influenced by an 
happy delusion, their errors are seldom seen till 
they are felt ; each man is himself the tyrant he 
has obeyed, and such a master he can easily foigive. 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 275 

The disadvantages he feels, may in reality be equal 
to what is felt in the most despotic government ; 
but man will bear every calamity with patience, 
when he knows himself to be the author of his own 
misfortunes. Adieu. 




LETTER CXXIL 
From the same, 

[Y long residence here begins to fatigue 
me, as every object ceases to be new, it 
no longer continues to be pleasing; 
some minds are so fond of variety, that 
pleasure itself if permanent, would be insupport- 
able, and we are thus obliged to solicit new happi- 
ness even by courting distress : I only, therefore, 
wait the arrival of my son to vaiy this trifling scene, 
and borrow new pleasure from danger and fatigue. 
A life, I own, thus spent in wandering from place 
to place is at best but empty dissipation. But to 
pursue trifles is the lot of humanity ; and whether 
we bustle in a pantomime or strut at a coronation ; 
whether we shout at a bonfire or harangue in a 
senate-house; whatever object we follow, it will 
at last surely conduct us to futility and disappoint- 
ment The wise bustle and laugh as they walk in \ 
the pageant, but fools bustle and are important'; 
and this probably is all the diflerence between 
them. 

This may be an apology for the levity of my 
former correspondence ; I talked of trifles, and I 



•96 THE CJTJZSN OF THE WORLD. 

knew that they were trifles ; to make the things of 
this life ridiculous, it was only sufficient to call 
them by their names. 

In other respects, I have omitted several striking 
circumstances in the description of this country, as 
supposing them either already known to you, or as 
not being thoroughly known to myself: But there 
is one omission for which I expect no forgiveness, 
namely, my being totally silent upon their build* 
ings, roads, rivers, and mountains. This is a 
branch of science, on which all other travellers are 
so very prolix, that my deficiency will appear the 
more glaring. With what pleasure, for instance, 
do some read of a traveller in E^g3rpt, measuring a 
hWtn. column with his cane, and finding it exactly 
five feet nine inches long ; of his creeping throogh 
the mouth of a catacomb, and coining out by > 
different hole firom that he entered; of his stealing 
the finger of an antique statue, in spite of the 
janizary that watched him ; or his adding a new 
conjecture to the hundred and fourteen conjectures, 
already puUished upon the names of Osiris and 
Isis. 

Methinks I hear some of my firiends in China, 
demanding a similar account of London and the 
adjacent villages; and if I remain here much 
longer, it is probable I may gratify their curiosity. 
I intend, when run dry on other topics, to take a 
serious survey of the City-wall i to describe that 
beautifiil building the Mansion-house; I will 
enumerate the magnificent squares, in which the 
'^obUity chiefly reside, and the Royal Palace ap- 

mted for the reception of the English Monarch ; 

r will I forget the beauties of Shoe-lane, io 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 279 

which I myself have resided since my arrival. 
You shall find me no way inferior to many of my 
brother travellers in the arts of description. At 
present, however, as a specimen of this way of 
writing, I send you a few hasty remarks, collected 
in a late journey I made to Kentish-town, and this 
in the manner of modem voyagers, 

" Having heard much of Kentish-town, I con- 
ceived a strong desire to see that celebrated place. 
I could have wished, indeed, to satisfy my curiosity 
without going thither; but that was impracticable, 
and therefore I resolved to go. Travellers have 
two methods of going to Kentish-town ; they take 
coach which costs nine-pence, or they go a foot, 
which costs nothing; in my opinion, a coach is by 
£u the most eligible convenience, but I was re- 
solved to go on foot, having considered with my- 
self, that going in that manner would be the 
cheapest way. 

" As you set out from Dog-house Bar, you enter 
upon a fine levelled road, railed in on both sides, 
commanding on the right a fine prospect of groves, 
and fields enamelled with flowers, which would 
wonderfully charm the sense of smelling, were it 
not for a dunghill on the left, which mixes its 
effluvia with their odours. This dunghill is of 
much greater antiquity than the road ; and I must 
not omit a piece of injustice I was going to commit 
upon this occasion. My indignation was levelled 
against the makers of the dunghill, for having 
brought it so near the road ; whereas, it should 
have fallen upon the makers of the road, for having 
brought that so near the dunghill. 

" After proceeding in this manner for some time, 



nt THR crrrzEN of the world. 

a building lesembling somewhat a triumphal aicfa 
salutes the traveller's view. This structure, how- 
ever, is peculiar to this country, and vulgarly caUed 
a turnpike gate : I could perceive a long inscrip- 
tion in large characters on the front, probably upon 
the occasion of some triumph, but being in haste, 
I left it to be made out by some subsequent adven- 
turer, who may happen to travel this way; so con- 
tinuing my course to the west, I soon arrived at 
an unwalled town called Islington. 

'* Islingtcm is a pretty neat town, mostly built of 
brick, with a church and bells : It has a small lake 
or rather pond in the midst ; though at present veiy 
much neglected. I am told it is dry in summer ; 
if this be the case, it can be no very proper recep- 
tacle for fish, of which the inhabitants themselves 
seem sensible, by bringing all that is eaten there 
from London. 

" After having surveyed the curiosities of this fair 
and beautiful town, I proceeded forward, leaving 
a hit stone building called the White G)ndmt 
House on my right; here the inhabitants of 
London often assemble to celebrate a feast of hot 
rolls and butter ; seeing such numbers, each vrith 
their little tables before them, employed on this 
occasion, must no doubt be a very amusing sight to 
the looker on, but still more so to those .who 
perform in the solemnity. 

<* From hence I parted with reluctance to PoH" 

crass as it is written, or Pancridge as it is pro- 

-""^•nced; but which should be both pronounced 

itten Pangrace: This emendation I will 

meo arbitrio : Iloy in the Greek language 

41^ which added to the English woid/mrif} 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 979 

maketh all grace, or Pangrace, and indeed this is 
a very proper appellation to a place of so much 
sanctity, as Pangrace is universally esteemed. 
However this be, if you except the parish church 
and its fine bells, there is little in Pangrace worth 
the attention of the curious observer. 

" From Pangrace to Kentish-town is an easy 
journey of one mile and a quarter : The road lies 
through a fine champaign country, well watered 
with beautiful drains, and enamelled with flowers 
of all kinds, which might contribute to charm 
every sense, were it not that the odoriferous gales 
are often more impregnated with dust than 
jjerfume. 

" As you enter Kentish-town, the eye is at once 
presented with the shops of artificers, such as 
vendors of candles, small coal, and hair brooms ; 
there are also several august buildings of red brick, 
with numberless sign-posts, or rather pillars, in a 
peculiar order of afthitecture ; I send you a drawing 
of several, vide A. B. C. This pretty town pro- 
bably borrows its name from its vicinity to the 
county of Kent ; and indeed it is not unnatural 
that it should, as there are only London and the 
adjacent villages that lie between them. Be this 
as it will, perceiving night approach, I made a 
hasty repast on roasted mutton, and a certain dried 
fruit called potatoes, resolving to protract my re- 
marks upon my return : And this I would very 
willingly have done ; but was prevented by a cir- 
cumstance which in truth I had for some time 
foreseen, for night coming on, it was impossible to 
take a proper survey of the coimtry, as I was to re- 
turn home in the dark.*' Adieu« 



t8o THB CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 






LETTER CXXIII. 
TotJusame, 

[FTER a Tuiety of disappointments, my 
wishes are at length fully satisfied. My 
son, so loi^ expected, is arrived, at 
once, by his presence, banishing my 
anxiety, and opening a new scene of unexpected 
pleasure. His improrements in mind and person 
have far surpassed even the sanguine expectations 
of a father. I led him a boy, but he is returned r. 
man ; pleasing in his person, hardened by travel, 
and polished by adversity. His disappointment in 
love, however, had infused an air of melancholy 
into his conversation, which seemed at intervals to 
interrupt our mutual satisBsiction. I expected that 
this could find a cure only from time ; but for- 
tune, as if willing to load us with her &vours, 
has, in a moment, repaid every uneasiness with 
rapture. 

Two days after his arrival, the man in black 

with his beautiful niece, came to congratulate us 

upon this occasion ; but guess our surprise, when 

my firiend's lovely kinswoman was found to be the 

very captive my son had rescued firom Persia, and 

who had been wrecked on the Wolga, and was 

carried by the Russian peasants to the port of 

•^y Were I to hold the pen of a novelist, 

be prolix in descritoi^ their feelings at so 

ed an interview ; but you may conceive 

\ without my assistance; words were 



THE CZnZEK OF THE WDRZJ). 



to c^sfSE *^'^" TxsanspaOi^ thfn iunK* 
WGvds descf^K; ii ? 

When iwuyuuu|;jrnjBiKW fc i in r rdy nmnnnT gd 
of eacii adia:, Tjftfhing cac give lae sact plnwirr 

iBBzned: ir kdigi I know 

I BID laUM i \ at tilK> iMiMJi tf i i 




f ooBed me for a mazciH] 
ai ■ool tD MTUipalliise witii 
ieiicxij. I jngrantly, tbexenxe, 
in hhwrir, wbetiicr we m^iinnoc 
•ddes ty maiziage : lui^ sonl 
ftff *^ of f""^*'' inaTfTHilB Willi niinr, 
he instaatlj ga^e his uMtt^'m, and the next digr 
ain w MiIr d £ar l3ut so^enmiiatian %£ their 



All the aoqnaintanoes vinch I had made since 
my arrival, were present at ^ns gay scdemnity. 
The little heaa vas cna H»tiUi!« r d master of the caere- 
monies, and his wife Mis. T^>bs ooDdncted the 
entertainment with prtjper decormn. The man in 
blade and the pawnbraker''s widow, were very 
spr^^itly and tender upon this occasion. The 
widow was diesKd up mder the diiectioD of Mis. 
Tibba ; and as for her lover, bis &oe was set off by 
the aasistanoe of a pig-tail w^ which was lent by 
the little bean, to fit him for making love with 
proper formality. The whole company easily per- 
ceived, that it would be a doable wedding before 
all was over, and indeed my friend and the widow 
seemed to make no secret of their passion ; he even 
caUed me aside, in order to know my candid 
opioioD, whether I did not think him a little too 
old to be married. As for my own part, continued 



OF THE WORLD, 

10 pfiiT the fool, but an my 
and pfodnoe me as 
toodien. 

to mn on with 

Etoy 

pretty, 

xt: the Ban in black sat 

bff?rd ber plate, dumed her 

and her elbov, be 

« on which she 

aadqnated pasaoow 

this 





caDcd for, and 

a fine tnrkey was 

The Emopeaos, yoo 

; Bj friend therefore 

to a pait of the 

m opportunity 

arcing; an art, iqxn 

henelf; began tocot 

sg. Mmdmm^ cries my 

t» mdviu^ I vmdi 

€u til l^wiU 

r, replies the widow, give 

ap a fowl, I always 

l«r, wrfffiw, replies the 

mintimuMner^ 

mstk tkt wmg: ^, intcrmpts the 

m, begin with 
^ X won pease ; tsmi give mc leave to take 
I hope I am not to be tai^it at this 
e d the dnu JfiMbaa, intenvpcs be, we art 
^im^iiiBMmatmaeL (Md, Sir ! intennpts 



THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 983 

the other, who is old, Sir ? when I die of age, 
I know of some that will quake for fear ; if the leg 
does not come off, take the turkey to yourself. 
Madam^ replied the man in black, / donU cart 
a farthing whether the leg or the wing comes off; if 
you care for the leg firsts why you shall have 
the argutneuty even though it be cu I say. As 
for the matter of that, cries the widow, I don't care 
a fig whether you are for the leg off or on ; and 
friend, for the future, keep your distance. O^ re- 
plied the other, that is easily done^ it is only moving 
to the other end of the tablcy and sO, madam^ your 
most obedient humble servant. 

Thus was this courtship of an age destroyed 
in one moment ; for this dialogue effectually broke 
off the match between this respectable couple, that 
had been but just concluded. The smallest acci- 
dents disappoint the most important treaties. 
However, though it in some measure interrupted 
the general satisfaction, it no ways lessened the 
happiness of the youthful couple; and by the 
young lady's looks, I could perceive dhe was not 
entirely displeased with the interruption. 

In a few hours the whole transaction seemed 
entirely forgotten, and we have all since enjoyed 
those satisfactions which result from a consciousness 
of making each other happy. My son and his fiiir 
partner are fixed here for life ; the man in black has 
given them up a small estate in the country, which 
added to what I was able to bestow, will be 
capable of supplying all the real, but not the ficti- 
tious demands of happiness. As for myself, the 
world being but one city to me, I don't much care 
in which of the streets I happen to reside ; I shall 



TUX, WORLD. 




m f ti mining 
and Dsve pre* 



fA^toutld 




ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES 

TO VOL. II. 

Page 4, /. 19. " once mare be free." — " All 
the symptoms, which I have ever met with in his* 
tory, previous to great chaises and revohitions in 
govermnent, now exbt, and daily increase, in 
France. I am glad of it ; the rest of Europe will 
be the quieter, and have time to recover." (Ches- 
terfield's "Letters," ii 332.) This particular 
epistle is dated 25th December, 1753, although it 
was not published until 1774. 

Page 6, /. 33. **A noblemanj^ — ^Dodsley's 
" Economy of Human Life," 1750, long owed its 
vogue to the supposition that its author was Lord 
Chesterfield ; and it was no doubt with a business 
eye to this prejudice in favour of authors of quality 
that Goldsmith's subsequent "History of Eng- 
land," 1764, fireely attributed at the time to Lyttel- 
ton, Orrery, and others, was put forward as being 
"a Series of Letters from a Nobleman to his 
Son." 

Page 12, /. 33. •« The soul subsides:'— T)ka is 
a couplet firom Pope's ** Second Satire of the 
Second Book of Horace," IL 79-80. 




iH TBE CITIZEN OF THE 1V0RLD, 

Bggg 99, il 2S. **a modem charadery—^* H. 
Spil»in, £1^9" bas, appaientlyy no place in the 
MvKom Catalogiie, so that his mannscript 
(if they ever existed) never attained the 
(Hgmtj of piinL As Knight's *' Annotator " says, 
Catharine's life is somewhat romanced. 

Pagt 37, /. I. " tf MHo or a iMiurMwrn."— Milo, 
or MHon, of Crotona, was a Grecian athlete; 
Maiiminus , a Roman Emperor^ of whose feats of 
strength eztnotdinarj tales are tc^d. 

^^e^ 17f ^ 19- ^^ottr VaUf they had their 
SetoOriL" The Emperor Yaoo, to whom the 
JHtefralatinn of the calmdar is attributed, lived, 
a cao u i diag to Knight's ''Annotator," about 2000 
m.c SesoKiis or Ramses (mra 1500 B.C.) was a 



-P^r 44, il 33. "/few m^gratwtu.''^<}o\d' 
ras fcod of this idea. He repeats it in 
form, p. 8S, L 20 ; and he had used it in a 
letter to his brother-in-law Hodson. In the 
"Critical Rjnriew" lor June, 1759, he laughs at 
tbose pnrfessofs whose " whole lives passed away 
berveen the focside and the easy diair," and in the 
•* Vicar of Wakefidd," 1766, L 2, he says "all 
oar adventmes were hj the fireside, and all our 
migaaiaos from the bhie bed to the brown." 

Agt 53, 1 23. "mum wants but little P—kSi 
naackcKivledged qaotation from Youi^s *'Com- 
J^^aaan^ I743i "N^t," ir. 9. Goldsmith also 
cx M te ne d it into lines 31-2 of *' Edwin and 
Ai^riiiia-*' 

BMge 56, Z. 29. " s:mu account of thou per- 
^gn,^ — ^Rock (familiar to students of Hogaith), 
akSfe and WaObe^ were all wdl-known contero- 



ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES. «97 

poraiy quacks. " In the journals of the time (says 
Prior) Franks advertised in bills against Rock : 
' Be not Rocked into eternity by that vain and 
impudent pretender Dumpling Dick^ who still 
lives at the gate of the inn where he was once 
porter.' To which Rock rejoined : ' If you would 
avoid destruction, avoid the Old Bailey ; for there 
lives an old soldier discharged by the UcU of drum ^ 
who has killed his thousands, but not in battle ; 
his piUs are much more fEital than were his 
bulUts:*' 

Page 6i, /. 13. ^^like a flai-boUomed booty ^ 
Cf. vol. i. p. 19, L 14 ; and p. 212, L 27, of the 
present volume. During the war of 1756-63, 
invasion from France by this means was constantly 
expected, and confidently announced by report. 
In an *' Eclogue on the Death of his late Most Gra- 
cious Majesty Geoi^e II.'' (one of those popular 
elegies referred to at p. 209), Cloddipole, con- 
jecturing the cause of Corydon's grief, sajrs — 

" Perhaps some hungry Frenchmen have got o'er. 
In iStakc flat-bottom' d boait^ to England's shore." 

Cf. also the final stanza of the once-popular ballad 
of "Captain (of Militia) Sir Dilberry Diddle " :— 

" He dreamt, Fame reports, that he cat all the throats 
Of the French as they landed in flat-bottomed boats. 
In bis sleep if such dreadful destruction he makes, 
What havock, ye gods ! we shall have when he wakes I ** 

Page 61 , /. 28. * * the epidemic terror which now 
prevails" — During the summer months of 1760 
hydrophobia was unusually prevalent ; and in 
August orders were issued by the Lord Mayor for 
killing all stray dogs. The journals of the day 



«■ TWM cmZEJi OP THE WORLD, 

to dttssoliject, and opportune 
pvompdy in the field with 
Madness*" hj Dr. Robert 





dadk flopres arc tboogfat sodi a 
the biles of mad dogs, that 
tlisn forty people that he 
Tcmple-Bsr and St 
prove no bad paescivativei 
wan ^peather.** («< Lloyd's 
EvQsmag FosL* A^^. 27-29, 176a) 

" — ^T\Bk cpBaHne<< with other tieatmeot, 
& ^m pa hi laaolf ia the pte-Pttteinian days. 

the several t»fi»wig pbtoes 
ays the joamal quoted in 
daieof Almost I, "there 
dipped on this accoont 
dogs] this snmmer, than 
Sor aay fire y>eais pfeceding.** 
63.Z5L ** mudkrwi Uiwum iw9 Ms,"" 
aad bleeding to death are said to 
oned ID in hopeless cases. Instances 
c^ ea:^ joe n e |K ated in ** Lloyd's Evenii^ Post " 

I^&y,lt. ** sme ^ a€ EmgUsk ptds."*-- 
Or«^T« says Mr. J. W. M. Gibbs, is here prDbably 
ittmied. aad he lefcB to ''Venice Preserved," 
ad iL sc 2« 

/^TCX^S. ** * gmrdtm mti fiur Jram tmmJ^ 
— VtjnhaH Gaidens existent in Addison^s day as 
ihe X<v Spra^ Gardens (in opposition to the Old 
^prc^Oaidens at Charing Cross), had been revived 




ILLUSTRATIVE SOT£S. 



in 1732 with new glories, by Jomfhwi Tyes ; and, 
at this date, vas the diief ^jm^ i^i w— m i ^ attnc- 
tion of the middle-ciaaB London sighsseer. It«a> 
as popidar, but not as ^ahionable, as Ranriagh : 
and most people, like the pawnlxokcr's widow, 
made a point of risitiDg it at least once dmizig the 



P(aigit 70, /. a6L *'a mmturml avenmm U tJu 
waUr," — ^The cnstomaiy approach to the gardens 
6x>m the Middlesex side of the Thames was by 
wherry to Vanzhan Stain. In tins way, dm 
1770^ the bolder spirits of Mr. ^latthew Bramble's 
party in " Homphrey Clinker " made what a 
French poet called U irajet duJUuoe fatal. 

Page 71, Lq. ^Ukelast night of ike gunkms," 
— ^The Vanxhall season lasted from May to August. 
The present Chinese letter af^ieared in the " Public 
Ledger " for 2nd September, 176a 

Page 71, /. 12. ** Crooked-lame,** like the Kent 
Street of Ma/^am^ Blaize, must have been specially 
familiar to Goldsmith, for he mentions it again in 
Act i. of " The Good Natnr'd Man." It is a turning 
out of Cannon Street. 

Page 72, /. 13. " Ike water-works" — ^This was 
not, as might be supposed, the playing of fountains, 
but a ** moving picture,'* which only lasted a few 
minutes. In the *' Gentleman's Magazine" for 
August, 1765, it is thus described: *'A curious 
piece of machinery has of late years been exhibited, 
about nine o'clock, on the inside of one of the 
hedges, situated in a hollow on the left hand .... 
representing a beautiful landscape in perspective, 
with a miller's house, a water-mill, and a cascade. 
The exact appearance of water is seen flowing 

II. u 



390 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, 

downi a declivity ; and, turning the wheel of the 
mill, it rises up in a foam at the bottom, and then 
glides away." As time went on, this attractioD 
of Vauxhall was greatly elaborated. 

P<^^ 73» /• 3i« " She once praised the pamt- 
ing" — If it were by Hogarth, who was credited 
with some of these embellishments, she showed 
her judgment. But probably the majority of the 
pictures were by Frank Hayman. There was one, 
*' enlightened to the front with globes," at the 
back of each of the old supper-boxes in the 
Grove. 

^g^ 75» ^•34- *' «^'M the horns*'— i.e. the 
French horns, a special feature in the Vauxhall 
programme. Cf Letter Iv. vol. i., where Mrs. 
Tibbs excuses her dishabille upon the ground that 
" she had staid out all night at the gardens \ue. 
Vauxhall] with the countess, who was excessively 
fond of the horns." 

Page 76, /. 19. " the little encouragements given 
to matrimony,** — This paper, which in the "Con- 
tents " is entitled "The Marriage Act censured," is 
obviously prompted by Lord Hardwicke's measure 
of 26 Geo. IL c. 33 (1753). Lien Chi seems to 
agree with the opinion expressed by Horace Wal- 
pole, that the Act was so drawn by the judges " as 
to clog all matrimony in general " ; and, owing to 
the obstacles which it placed in the vray of clandes- 
tine unions, it continued, for a long time, to be 
very unpopular. But it nevertheless did away 
with many loose and scandalous practices, — eg. 
the notorious and nefarious Fleet marriages. 

Page 82, /. 2. *'// I should jud^,"—Ur. 
J. \V. M. Gibbs points out that Goldsmith puts 



ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES. 291 

these words almost textually into the lips of Honey- 
wood in Act i. of "The Good Natur'd Man." 

Page 100, /. I. **M^ birih-night" — ue. the 
evening of the King's birthday, when all the world 
appeared in new costumes. Cf. the ** Rape of the 
Lock," i. 23 — 

"A Youth more glitt'ring than a Birth-night Beau." 

Page 102, /. 15. ** hobble a rigadoan,* — A 
dance for two persons. "This so enlivened me, 
that I led him by the Hand into the next Room, 
where we danced a Rigadoon together." (" Guar- 
dian," No. 154.) 

Page 105, /. 19. •* Two singing women,''^ — Mrs. 
Vincent (Drury Lane) and Miss Brent (Covent 
Garden), who, at this date, divided the suffrages 
of the town as " Polly Peachum " in the ** Beggar's 
Opera." (See also Letter Ixxxv. p. 130.) 

Page 114, /. 12. ^* dock their horses,*^ — Voltaire 
referred to this practice when he said sarcastically 
that the English cut off" with the same scissors the 
heads of their kings and the tails of their horses ; 
and Richardson's " man of True Honour," Sir 
Charles Grandison, shows his superiority to a 
barbarous fashion by declining to comply with it. 
** His horses," said Miss Harriet Byron, " are not 
docked ; their tails are only tied up when they are 
on the road. " 

Page 120, /. 5. ** Locman,^* — "An Abyssinian 
philosopher of great repute : Mahomet has called 
a chapter in the Koran after him, in which God is 
represented as sajdng, * I have bestowed wisdom 
upon Lokman.' " (Knight's Annotator.) 

Page 124, /. 24. " instrufnents of debauchery, ^^ 
— This and what follows was true of the bulk of 



iga THE CITIZEN OF THE IVORLD. 

the literature which at this time constituted tbe 
staple material of the circulating libraries. Its 
theme, in Charles Lamb's words, was generally 
"the undivided pursuit of lawless gallantly." 
GeofgeCohnan's "PolljHoneycombe,aDramati£k 
Novel of one Act,** produced atDrury Lane Theatre 
in December, 1760, was designed, according to its 
preface, *' to expose the folly and ill consequences 
of a passion in young girls, for Romances and 
Novels," the contemporary characteristics of 
whidi the final couplets df the Prologue thus 
sketches : — 

"Awl then so temiimtental is die Stile, 
So diasie, yet so bcwttdung all the while ! 
Plot, and Elopement, Pmsioq, Rape, and Riq)ture, 
Tbe total sum of ev'ry dear — dear — Chapter. 

Tis not akiie the Small-talk and the Smart, 
Tis Ne^timoA beguiles the Female Heart. 

mdts--she sighs— Love steals npra 



And then— Alas, poor Girl !— good night, poor H<xiour!" 

The last words of the piece sum up the matter : 
*' A man," says the heroine's father, " might as 
well turn his daughter loose into Covent Garden, 
as trust the cultivation of her mind to a Circulat- 
ing Library." This suggests the later utterance of 
>ir Anthony Absc^ute : '* Madam, a circulating 
library in a town is as an evergreen tree of diabo- 
lical knowledge." (" Rivals," act i. sc. iL) 

P^git 126, L 18. '' of fortiiude:* etc-This 
closely resembles a passage in the *' Present State 
of Polite Learning," 1759, p. 142: "Though 
{.ossessed of fortitude to stand unmoved the ex- 
pected bursts of an earthquake, yet of feelings so 

jqwsitel^ poigiianty as to agonize under the 



ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES, 193 

slightest disappointment." In both instances 
Goldsmith has been thought to speak of himself. 

Page 128, /. I. " the great Cervantes died of 
hunger.'^'* — This is not borne out by the later bio- 
graphies, especially that most recent and most 
admirable one by Mr. Henry Edward Watts. 
(" Great Writers " Series, 1891.) 

Page 128, /. 21. " Cassander,** — Fran9ois Cas- 
sandre, d. 1695. 

Page 129, /. 15. **no longer depend on the 
Great" — In 1760 the *' noble patron " was being 
supplanted by the public ; and the day of subscrip- 
tion editions like those of Prior and Gay was on 
the wane. Goldsmith himself was never indebted 
to assistance of this kind. His *' Polite Learn- 
ing" and "Vicar" were issued without dedica- 
tions ; the " Traveller " was inscribed to his 
brother, one of the "inferior clergy " ; and "The 
Deserted Village" and "She Stoops to Con- 
quer " were tributes to Reynolds and Johnson, his 
personal friends. 

Page 133, /. 6. " On seeing Mrs, * * *."— 
This is generally included in Goldsmith's poems. 
But it should be remembered that he gives it as a 
specimen of the inane panegyrical verses of his 
time. 

Page 154, /. 6. " to blow the German flute,** — 
Goldsmith evidently, like Mr. Richard Swiveller, 
r^[arded music as a specific for low spirits. In the 
"Vicar of Wakefield," Squire Thomhill, when 
utterly discredited, devotes himself to " learning 
to blow the French horn." 

Page 154, /. 19. "/ have got the Ambusheer 
already," — Probably the Man in Black means 



rs? crrzzMjr or the world. 

X itsss x^Tpoed to tlie mouthing of 

•-" — Catdng paper 

coomplishment 

in it, and Hoiace 

of her " mosaics " 

BHriing:ton was also an 

'^toTM. rt^m of tmany yean,^^ 
Goose tbe Second died on 
«if Oc36er 25, 1760, " in the 77th 
ic IS 1^^ ani ^e 54tk of his reign ; be- 
JM.u i :m jetf» aoc repcaed bj his subjects for 
^ finuiirif aad zonl viitaes.* So speaks (in the 
^liSmsiaK GaaK£3e'' icv October j6, 1760) the 
~3nl 'sSbbsblT- voioe vUch circles roimd the 




T^ L II. •^tJu grey mmirtss frack:'-' 
Tise: Tocsss^ soszt mosrzizsg formally presaibed 
\^seL CiaiitVi aia was a ''daric grey 
: :2e frsssy ^' \xaciL doch, without buttons 
m lae sbrnes aaid pockets, plain mnsHn or long 
jrvx crxvacs aac wrepcis, shamoy shoes and 
^-jrtrssw mne iai-vxads, and black swords and 
ruckjes..'^ Tbe cocas of the armj were to wear 
- re»i Siosc wrih buack * ; the o£Bcers of the fleet 
'^ Sme aac wiA :-iiafk " 

Btsgtv^Lx. '''wimylduJ* (SeealsoM^ 
I 23. -Sudi Kserciatioos as these of )Ir. Tibbs 
xze bxrcCSr bcc essential in oar day to the accurate 
pc^secrxse^i of hssnoroQS diaracter. Bat — to judge 
bv ibe =>rTVi2scs aad essajrists — excessive swearing 
c::^^ bar? been corcmon in all classes of eighteenth* 
cecrnEj liie, both with men and women. Canning, 



ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES, 295 

in 1786, made ironical proposals for a swearer's 
** Vade Mecum," the advertisement of which was 
to be as follows : ** Ladies and Gentlemen in- 
structed in the most fashionable and elegant 
oaths ; the most peculiarly adapted to their 
several ages, manners and professions, &c. He 
(the advertiser) has now ready for the press a book 
entitled * The Complete Oath Register : or. Every 
^fan his Own Swearer, containing oaths and 
imprecations for all times, seasons, purposes and 
occasions. Mso Sentimental oaths {qxXsAiqz, Like- 
viist Execrations for the year 1786." ("Micro- 
scosm.") 

Page 197, /. 27. ** everything else but her 
honour." — Goldsmith may have had in mind 
Hogarth's "Lady's Last Stake "; or "Piquet "; or 
"Virtue in Danger," which he painted for Lord 
Charlemont in 1759, and which was exhibited at 
Spring Gardens in May, 1761. But reference to 
this "last stake" at cards are not uncommon in 
eighteenth-century literature. (See " The World*' 
for nth December, 1755.) 

Page 199, /. 25. " W? long to die in that spot,^^ 

— Cf. " The Deserted Village," 11. 95-6 :— 

" I still had hopes, my long vexations pass'd. 
Here to return— and die at home at last." 

Page 201, /. 5. " night-gownJ*^ — This was the 

morning- or dressing-gown referred to in Letter 

Ixxvii. p. 100, 1. 17. Davies says of Garrick 

(" Life," ii. chap. 52), " He was wrapped in a rich 

night-gown, like that which he always wore in 

Lusignan." Cf. also Prior's " Malone," i860, p. 

410, " He was sitting in his counting-house in his 

night-gown,^* 



096 THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

P^ 201, /. 33. *' Father Maithtw^*^^^'U.9X^^ 
Ricci, an Italian Jesuit, went to China in 1583, 
bat did not obtain an introduction to the emperor 
until 160 1. His mathematical attainments secured 
him a footing at court 

Page 203, /. 13. **Kieraty age.** — In the first 
and third editions, the paragrai^, by a manifest 
printer's error, ends abruptly at • * literary. ** " Age ** 
was added in the Dublin editions of 1769 and 1775, 
and it has been adopted by the later editors. In 
the '* Public Ledger'* version, however, the last 
words are ** literary decay." 

Page 203, /. 20. * * the young Kin^s cor<matkm, ** 
— George III. was not crowned until September, 
1 761, so that this paper, which appeared in 
February, 1 761, is anticipatory. 

Page 206 /. 26. ** Pageants, says Boom, are 
pretty things,** —'WYoit Bacon says is : "These 
Things are but Toyes. . . . But yet, since Princes 
will have such Things, it is better, they should be 
Graced with Elegancy, then Daubed with Cost" 
(Essay xxxvii., ** Of Masques and Triumphs.**) 

Page 212, /. 31. "a herring subscription,**^ 
This refers to the British White Herring Fishery 
Company of 1750, from which a mine of wealth 
was anticipated by speculators. Cf. " The Bee, *' Na 
vi., November 10, 1759, p. 188 : ** A few years ago 
the herring fishery employed all Grub-street; it 
was the topic in every coffee-house, and the burthen 
of every ballad. We were to drag . up oceans of 
gold from the bottom of the sea ; we were to supply 
all Europe with herrings upon our own terms.** 

Page 215, L 19. — **an imposture,** — Humboldt, 
says Knight's Annotator, was not of this opinion. 



ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES, agj 

Gemelli was a Neapolitan, whose " Travels round 
the World " were published in 1699- 1700. It was 
the Jesuit missionaries who cast a doubt on their 
authenticity. 

Page 226, /. 8. ** Among the number" — ^Jacob 
Henriquez was a projector who advertised in 
the "Public Ledger"; Victor was Treasurer of 
Drury Lane Theatre ; and Lockman, Secretary 
and Laureate of the Herring Fishery (see n. to p. 
212, 1. 31). In Hogarth's "Beer Street," 1751, 
the fishwomen are represented singing one of 
Lockman's Herring ballads, which had created a 
furore at Vauxhall Gardens. 

Page 229, /. 5. ^^the sellers of the newest pat- 
tern,'''' — Goldsmith, like Anstey, Walpole, Smollett, 
Hogarth, and others, seems to have joined in the 
popular attacks on the followers of Wesley and 
Whitefield, the last of which, Foote's "Minor," 
with its character of " Mother Cole," had recently 
been produced at the Ha3niiarket. As Knight*s 
annotator observes, he "does not appear to 
have justly appreciated the moral regeneration 
which Methodism was producing amongst the 
poorer classes in England, and which at length 
stimulated the clei^, and roused them from their 
slumbering state to renewed zeal and usefulness." 

Page2yjf /. 14. "a» author" — Clearly Charles 
Churchill, of the "Rosciad." It is doubtful 
whether the epigrams that follow on p. 240, the 
first of which had already appeared in the " Public 
Ledger," are by Goldsmith, though they are 
generally included in his works. The " G. C." 
and "R. L."are George Colman and Churchill's 
friend Robert Lloyd. 



«fB THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD. 

Pagt 254, / 2. " VanmL "— Vanini, an Italian 
priest, was burnt at Touloose as an atheist in 1619. 
Voltaire contests the justice of his feUe, in a paper 
which Goldsmith translated in *<The Bee" for 
Not. 10, 1759. 

Bagi 256, L I. ^^Tke clock Just struck two,*" 

— Thb letter, whidi b reprinted, with some omis- 

sioii, from "The Bee** for 27 October, 1759 

(Na ir.), b there entitled, as in the ''Contents'* 

to thb volnme, "A City Night-Piece,** — a name 

probably suggested by the "Night-Piece on 

Death " of Punell, whose life Goldsmith after- 
wards wrote. 

I^ 256, /. la ^*Letmuuo hu^er waste,** etc 

— Ct Pumell, iL 1-4:— 

** By the Uae Uper's traD&bling light. 
No more I waste the wakeful night, 
Inteat with endless tiew to pore 
The schoolmen and the sages o'er." 

/^ 256, /. 19. " Tk€ distatU wjtck-do^.^-^Ci. 
"The Vicar of Wakefield, 1766, u. 57: "No 
$v>ciKb were heard bat of the shrilling cock, and 
the deep-mouthed watch-dog, at hollow dbtance "; 
and " The Deserted ViUage," L 121 :— 

** The watchdog's Toke that bay*d the vhisp'ring wind." 

/^ 257. A 7. **ff<rt, ke cricsy stood tJUir 
citoifL"^ — This recaUs a writer from whom Gold- 
smith coold certainly not hare borrowed, Omar 
Khar\-im> ^mAsiydf, xviiL : — 

** T!kef say the Lion and the Liaud keep 

The Coerts where Jamshyd gloraed and drank deep : 

And BahiAa^ that great Huntei^the Wild Ass, 
Staays o*cr hb Ucm^ but cannot break hb Sleep." 



ILLl'STRATFt'E SOTES, 299 

Page 257, /. 33. " JTusdpxnrskxvtrim^fgmalisr 
— Cf. " The Deserted MDage,' IL 325-6 :— 



" Arc these tfay serioos tlsx^^Ks ?— Ah, tarn thiae ej«s 
l^liere the poor hoasdess tkicerimg/r wtmlt 



Page 258, /, 4. ^'Perka/Sy mno /jrmg:'—CL 
•'The Deserted Milage," IL 331-2 :— 

" Nov lost to an ; her bieads, her Txitoe fled. 
Near her betrayer s door she lajs her head,** etc 

Page 262, /. 22. ** 7^ wtisfortutus of the 
great" — This essay is reprinted, with variatioDs, 
from the "British Magazine" for June, 176a 

Page 275, /. 6. ^^My long r««/^JK^r."— This 
paper, like Hogarth's "Five Days' Peregrination,** 
and Fielding's " Letter from a French Gentleman 
to his Friend at Paris," is an obvious skit upon the 
trivialities of travellers. 

Page 278, /. 21. " WhiU Conduit Honse."^ 
This past -away Pentonville paradise was formerly 
highly popular. **Time was," says the Rev. 
Charles Jenner, — 

"When graver citizens, in suits of brown. 

Lined every dusty avenue to town. 

Or led the children and the loving spouse, 

To spend two shillings at iVhite CoHdnit House.** 

Goldsmith was well acquainted with the neigh- 
bourhood, and with this particular resort, once the 
scene of an embarrassing adventure, in which he 
figures forlornly as an entertainer without funds. 
(See Forster's "Life," 1871, i. 264.) 




CHISWICK press:— C WHXTTtMGVAM AXl? CO. 
COUKT, CHANCXXY LASTS. 



TOO! 



2C 



I . 



1 

1 n 


5 


■ 




