REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  REVOLUTION 
IN  FRANCE.  BY  EDMUND  BURKE. 
WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY  GEORGE 
SAMPSON. 


LONDON:    WALTER  SCOTT,  LTD., 

PATERNOSTER  SQUARE. 


1  s 

I- 1  .         >    *    *     <  r  i~*  f* 


JAN11  19S6 


^ 


1    A  *>  <.'  Q  ^  £ 

If  o  o  o  £  «) 


INTRODUCTION. 


ANY  attempt  to  consider  the  tumultuous  life  of  Burke  with 
in  the  limits  of  a  short  article  is  foredoomed  to  failure.  His 
career  shows  a  double  phase,  each  remarkable.  In  the 
political  history  of  England  he  holds  a  prominent  place 
through  participation  in  many  a  great  struggle;  in  the 
history  of  English  letters  he  is  renowned  as  the  greatest  of 
those  who  have  used  our  tongue  in  prose  to  ends  of 
power  and  passion.  This  introduction  will  contain  no 
consideration  whatever  of  Burke  the  politician;  and  of 
Burke  the  writer,  it  will  present  the  merest  outline  of  a 
sketch.  If,  by  giving  a  short  account  of  his  principal 
works,  and  a  taste  of  their  quality  in  the  shape  of  a 
small  quotation,  it  will  persuade  any  one  either  to  read 
as  a  whole  the  magnificent  and  momentous  fruits  of  an 
intellect  truly  great,  or  even  to  make  the  attempt,  it  will 
have  accomplished  all  it  aims  to  do. 

He  was  born  in  Dublin,  probably  in  the  January  of 
1729  (N.S.),  and  came  to  London  to  study  for  the  legal  pro 
fession  in  1750.  His  literary  life  began  in  1756  with  the 
pamphlet  entitled  A  Vindication  of  Natural  Society,  etc., 
written  in  imitation  of  the  style  of  Bolingbroke,  and  in 
ridicule  of  that  noble  writer's  facile  philosophy.  The  joke 
was  so  subtle  that  it  eluded  the  wits  of  the  public,  who  took 
the  piece  seriously  as  a  newly-discovered  essay  of  Boling- 
broke's,  and  Burke  had  to  explain  his  jest  in  a  second 


vi  INTRODUCTION. 

edition.  "When  it  is  remembered  that  Bolingbroke's  prose 
was  highly  esteemed  at  this  time,  there  is  matter  for  astonish 
ment  in  the  spectacle  of  a  young  and  unpractised  writer 
deceiving  with  a  forgery  the  critical  admirers  of  the  master- 
hand.  However,  in  Burke  we  may  trace  many  of  the 
qualities  of  St.  John's  lucid  and  often  admirable  prose;  and 
from  this,  it  seems  to  me,  we  should  assume  that  the  two 
writers  had  some  affinity  in  style,  and  not  (as  some  have 
done)  that  Burke's  effort  at  imitation  strained  his  style  for 
ever  out  of  its  natural  line  of  growth.  The  wonder  is  that 
Burke  displayed  so  much  distinction  in  style  while  yet,  so 
far  as  the  public  is  concerned,  an  unpractised  writer.  Here 
is  a  short  passage  from  this  work  : — 

'  I  now  come  to  show  that  political  society  is  justly  chargeable  with 
much  the  greatest  part  of  this  destruction  of  the  species.  To  give  the 
fairest  play  to  every  side  of  the  question,  I  will  own  that  there  is  a 
haughtiness  and  fierceness  in  human  nature  which  will  cause  innumer 
able  broils,  place  men  in  what  situation  you  please  ;  but  owning  this,  I 
still  insist  in  charging  it  to  political  regulations  that  these  broils  are  so 
frequent,  so  cruel,  and  attended  with  consequences  so  deplorable.  In 
a  state  of  nature,  it  had  been  impossible  to  find  a  number  of  men, 
sufficient  for  such  slaughters,  agreed  in  the  same  bloody  purpose;  or 
allowing  that  they  might  have  come  to  such  an  agreement  (an  impos 
sible  supposition),  yet  the  means  that  simple  nature  has  supplied  them 
with  are  by  no  means  adequate  to  such  an  end  ;  many  scratches,  many 
bruises  undoubtedly  would  be  received  upon  all  hands  ;  but  only  a  few, 
a  very  few  deaths.  Society  and  politics,  which  have  given  us  these 
destructive  views,  have  given  us  also  the  means  of  satisfying  them. 
From  the  earliest  dawnings  of  policy  to  this  day,  the  invention  of  men 
has  been  sharpening  and  improving  the  mystery  of  murder,  from  the 
first  rude  essays  of  clubs  and  stones,  to  the  present  perfection  of 
gunnery,  cannonecring,  bombarding,  mining,  and  all  those  species  of 
artificial,  learned,  and  refined  cruelty,  in  which  we  are  now  so  expert, 
and  which  make  a  principal  part  of  what  politicians  have  taught  us  to 
believe  is  our  principal  glory." 


INTRODUCTION.  vii 

Another,  and  more  striking  passage  on  the  slavery  of  man 
kind  to  noxious  trades  is  quoted  in  Mr.  Morley's  admirable 
"  English  Men  of  Letters "  monograph.  The  whole 
pamphlet  was  meant  as  a  protest,  by  a  reductio  ad  absurdum, 
against  the  increasing  habit  so  repugnant  to  the  mind  of 
Burke,  of  rashly  applying  destructive  theoretical  principles 
to  political  and  social  institutions  whose  practical  wisdom 
had  been  demonstrated  by  ages  of  excellent  results. 
Throughout  his  life  this  attitude  of  mind  remained  one  of 
Burke's  most  notable  characteristics  as  a  politician;  and 
those  who  study  the  present  work  will  find  that  revision  of 
political  disabilities  from  the  point  of  view  of  some  vague 
"  rights  of  man  "  is  what  provoked  his  most  crushing  con 
tempt  and  vehement  protests. 

His  first  serious  work,  the  Philosophical  Inquiry  into 
the  Origin  of  our  Ideas  of  the  Sublime  and  Beautiful,  etc,, 
was  also  published  in  1756.  Rumour  assigns  the  compo 
sition  of  this  piece  to  Burke's  twentieth  year.  This  can 
readily  be  believed,  for  the  work  is  immature  and  insuffi 
cient.  It  is  known  to  have  influenced  Lessing;  it  is  believed 
to  have  influenced  Kantj  otherwise  it  has  little  claim  on 
present-day  readers,  not  especially  interested  in  the  literature 
of  aesthetics. 

At  Burke's  suggestion,  Dodsley  began  the  issue  of  the 
Annual  Register,  and  paid  the  future  politician  for  a  sum 
mary  and  criticism  of  contemporary  events.  This  is  of 
more  importance  in  the  consideration  of  Burke's  life  than 
may  appear ;  for  the  knowledge  he  must  have  acquired, 
together  with  the  mental  habit  thus  formed  of  isolating 
important  facts  during  a  rapid  survey  of  events,  formed  an 
equipment  of  the  utmost  value  for  his  political  career. 

The  first  of  his  political  works  (omitting  the  leaflet  on 


viii  INTRODUCTION. 

the  Rockingham  administration),  entitled  Observations  on  a 
Late  Publication  intituled  "  The  Present  State  of  the  Nation" 
appeared  in  1769.  It  was  written  in  reply  to  Grenville's 
defence  of  Bute,  and  is  remarkable  for  its  severity  of  style 
and  its  admirable  management  of  financial  and  commercial 
details.  Its  importance,  however,  is  overshadowed  by  the 
Thoughts  on  the  Cause  of  the  Present  Discontents  (1770). 
Immediately,  this  work  is  a  masterly  exposition  of  the 
system  of  political  intrigue  which  had  its  centre  in  the 
King ;  it  contains,  besides,  matter  for  other  ages  in  its  wise 
generalisations  and  its  incontrovertible  axioms  of  political 
wisdom ;  it  is  written,  too,  in  prose  that  is  lucid  and 
forcible  without  much  adornment.  One  unforeseen  result 
of  the  work  was  the  growth  of  a  belief  that  Burke  was 
Junius.  This,  however,  Burke  denied ;  and,  indeed,  the 
Thoughts  and  the  Letters  have  nothing  but  their  aim  in 
common.  Here  is  a  passage  from  the  conclusion —the 
famous  defence  of  party  : — 

"  It  is  an  advantage  to  all  narrow  wisdom  and  narrow  morals,  that 
their  maxims  have  a  plausible  air ;  and,  on  a  cursory  view,  appear 
equal  to  first  principles.  They  are  light  and  portable.  They  are  as 
current  as  copper  coin  ;  and  about  as  valuable.  They  serve  equally 
the  first  capacities  and  the  lowest ;  and  they  are,  at  least,  as  useful  to 
the  worst  men  as  to  the  best.  Of  this  stamp  is  the  cant  of  Not  men  but 
measures  ;  a  sort  of  charm  by  which  many  people  get  loose  from  every 
honourable  engagement.  When  I  see  a  man  acting  this  desultory  and 
disconnected  part,  with  as  much  detriment  to  his  own  fortune  as 
prejudice  to  the  cause  of  any  party,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  he  is 
right ;  but  I  am  ready  to  believe  he  is  in  earnest.  I  respect  virtue  in 
all  its  situations ;  even  when  it  is  found  in  the  unsuitable  company  of 
weakness.  I  lament  to  see  qualities,  rare  and  valuable,  squandered 
away  without  any  public  utility.  But  when  a  gentleman  with  great 
visible  emoluments  abandons  the  party  in  which  he  has  long  acted,  and 
tells  you,  it  is  because  he  proceeds  on  his  own  judgment ;  that  he  acts 


INTRODUCTION.  ix 

on  the  merits  of  the  several  measures  as  they  arise;  and  that  he  is 
obliged  to  follow  his  own  conscience,  and  not  that  of  others ;  he  gives 
reasons  which  it  is  impossible  to  mistake.  What  shall  we  think  of  him 
who  never  differed  from  a  certain  set  of  men  until  the  moment  they  lost 
their  power,  and  who  never  agreed  with  them  in  a  single  instance 
afterwards?  Would  not  such  a  coincidence  of  interest  and  opinion  be 
rather  fortunate?  Would  it  not  be  an  extraordinary  cast  upon  the 
dice,  that  a  man's  connections  should  degenerate  into  faction  precisely 
at  the  critical  moment  when  they  lose  their  power,  or  he  accepts  a 
place?  When  people  desert  their  connections,  the  desertion  is  a 
manifest  fact,  upon  which  a  direct  simple  issue  lies,  triable  by  plain 
men.  Whether  a  measure  of  government  be  right  or  wrong,  is  no 
matter  of  fact,  but  a  mere  affair  of  opinion,  on  which  men  may,  as  they 
do,  dispute  and  wrangle  without  end.  But  whether  the  individual 
thinks  \h&  measure  right  or  wrong,  is  a  point  at  still  a  greater  distance 
from  the  reach  of  all  human  decision.  It  is  therefore  very  convenient 
to  politicians  not  to  put  the  judgment  of  their  conduct  on  overt  acts, 
cognisable  in  any  ordinary  court,  but  upon  such  matter  as  can  be 
triable  only  in  that  secret  tribunal,  where  they  are  sure  of  being  heard 
with  favour,  or  where  at  the  worst  the  sentence  will  be  only  private 
whipping." 

In  1773  Burke  visited  France,  and  there  felt  the  first 
weak  strength  of  those  currents  of  thought  and  action 
which  were  presently  to  sweep  out  of  existence  the  proudest 
monarchy  in  Europe.  There,  too,  in  the  radiant  morning 
of  her  life  he  saw  the  ill-fated  Marie  Antoinette;  and 
seventeen  years  later,  when  his  mind  and  heart  had  been 
moved  by  the  story  of  that  tragic  procession  to  Paris,  the 
memory  of  her  bright  image  flitted  across  the  gloomy 
picture  and  moved  him  to  that  passionate  outburst,  the 
most  famous  passage  in  all  his  works. 

The  years  1774-78  form  a  period  of  Burke's  life  which 
is  honourable  alike  to  his  memory  as  a  politician  and  his 
fame  as  a  writer.  The  King  and  Lord  North,  urged  by  the 
approval  of  the  public,  were  hastening  on  the  war  with  the 


x  INTRODUCTION. 

American  colonists.  It  is  easy  for  Englishmen  to  admit 
now  that  the  colonists  had  the  principle  of  right  on  their 
side.  At  the  time  it  was  not  easy  to  see  nor  to  admit.  Of 
all  the  men  who  tried  in  vain  to  arouse  the  better  feelings 
of  the  nation,  none  was  more  eager  and  fervent  than  Burke. 
He  was  never  tired  of  proclaiming  his  belief  in  a  rational 
liberty.  This  is  the  theme  alike  of  the  Present  Discontents, 
and  of  the  speeches,  on  the  American  war.  It  was  the  spirit 
of  injustice  that  he  fought.  He  knew  that  if  the  efforts 
at  oppression  in  America  were  successful  the  way  was  open 
for  a  similar  policy  in  England.  And  so  it  is  that  the 
literary  results  of  this  great  business  —  the  Speech  on 
American  Taxation  (1774),  the  Speech  on  Conciliation  with 
the  Colonies  (1775),  and  the  Letter  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Bristol 
(1777) — are  full  of  a  high  seriousness  and  true  patriotic 
fervour,  such  as  will  probably  ensure  for  them  a  truer  life  as 
literature,  and  a  greater  continuity  of  vital  influence  as 
political  thought,  than  will  be  accorded  to  any  other  por 
tions  of  his  work.  In  the  two  other  great  causes  with 
which  his  name  is  associated — the  prosecution  of  Warren 
Hastings,  and  the  agitation  against  the  French  Revolu 
tion — it  is  impossible  not  to  feel  that  he  is  often  in  the 
wrong ;  that  his  vehemence  is  misplaced ;  that  his  appeal 
is  too  often  merely  and  solely  to  sentiment,  which  may  be 
as  easily  called  forth  in  a  wrong  cause  as  in  a  right  one. 
These  pieces  are  marked  by  Burke's  marvellous  compre 
hension  of  detail;  by  profound  political  wisdom;  by  a 
fervour  such  as  reason  in  the  calmest  moments  accepts  as 
just  and  fitting;  by  a  prophetic  instinct  of  the  consequences 
of  the  national  policy,  that  facts  have  demonstrated  to  have 
been  unfailingly  correct;  they  have  in  addition  literary 
excellence  that  gives  them  rank  with  his  most  esteemed 


INTRODUCTION.  xi 

works,  although  they  contain  little  in  his  famous  vein  of 
splendour.  I  shall  quote  nothing  from  them,  for  they  should 
be  in  the  hands  of  all  who  care  for  what  is  noble  in  English 
thought  and  letters.  They  will  be  found  in  volumes  i.  and 
ii.  of  the  excellent  "Bohn"  edition  of  his  works.  Three 
famous  speeches  fall  between  Burke's  campaign  on  behalf  of 
America  and  his  campaign  on  behalf  of  India.  One  is  his 
speech  on  his  plan  of  purging  the  house  of  its  venal  mem 
bers  by  a  system  of  Economical  Reform ;  the  second,  the 
speech  on  Fox's  India  Bill;  the  third,  the  speech  on  the 
Nabob  of  Arcot's  Debts.  The  former  lacks  attractiveness 
of  subject,  but  is  one  of  Burke's  finest  parliamentary  efforts. 
It  makes  plain  how  much  potential  bribery  in  the  shape  of 
appointments  to  useless  and  lucrative  offices  was  available 
as  an  inducement  for  members  to  vote  as  they  were 
required.  Here  is  a  specimen  in  a  lighter  vein  than  usual— 
a  vein,  by  the  way,  that  Burke  could  never  work  to  much 
advantage: — 


"There  is,  Sir,  another  office  which  was  not  long  since  closely  con 
nected  with  this  of  the  American  secretary  ;  but  has  been  lately  separated 
from  it  for  the  very  same  purpose  of  all  the  separations  and  all  the  con 
junctions  that  have  been  lately  made — a  job.  I  speak,  Sir,  of  the  board 
of  trade  and  plantations.  This  board  is  a  sort  of  temperate  bed  of 
influence;  a  sort  of  gently  ripening  hothouse,  where  eight  members  of 
parliament  receive  salaries  of  a  thousand  a  year  for  a  certain  time,  in 
order  to  mature,  at  a  proper  season,  a  claim  for  two  thousand,  granted 
for  doing  less,  and  on  the  credit  of  having  toiled  so  long  in  that  inferior, 
laborious  department. 

"  I  have  known  that  board,  off  and  on,  for  a  great  number  of  years. 
Both  of  its  pretended  objects  have  been  much  of  the  objects  of  my  study 
if  I  have  a  right  to  call  any  pursuits  of  mine  by  so  respectable  a  name. 
I  can  assure  the  House,  and  I  hope  they  will  not  think  that  I  risk  my 
liltle  credit  lightly,  that,  without  meaning  to  convey  the  least  reflectio 


xii  INTRODUCTION. 

upon  any  one  of  its  members  past  or  present,  it  is  a  board  which,  if 

not  mischievous,  is  of  no  use  at  all This  board,  Sir,  has  had 

both  its  original  formation,  and  its  regeneration,  in  a  job.  In  a  job  it 
was  conceived,  and  in  a  job  its  mother  brought  it  forth.  It  made  one 
among  those  showy  and  specious  impositions  which  one  of  the 
experiment-making  administrations  of  Charles  the  Second  held  out  to 
delude  the  people,  and  to  be  substituted  in  the  place  of  the  real  service 
which  they  might  expect  from  a  parliament  annually  sitting.  It  was 
intended,  also,  to  corrupt  that  body  whenever  it  should  be  permitted  to 
sit.  It  was  projected  in  the  year  1668,  and  it  continued  in  a  tottering 
and  rickety  childhood  for  about  three  or  four  years  ;  for  it  died  in  the 
year  1673,  a  babe  of  as  little  hopes  as  ever  swelled  the  bills  of  mortality 
in  the  article  of  convulsed  or  over-laid  children,  who  have  hardly  stepped 
over  the  threshold  of  life." 

The  speech  on  the  India  Bill  is  of  a  different  nature.  It 
contains  much  that  is  in  Burke's  finest  manner,  and  con 
cludes  with  a  panegyric  on  Fox — "  a  studied  panegyric,  the 
fruit  of  much  meditation."  I  quote  part  of  it. 

"  He  has  faults ;  but  they  are  the  faults  that,  though  they  may  in  a 
small  degree  tarnish  the  lustre,  and  sometimes  impede  the  march,  of  his 
abilities,  have  nothing  in  them  to  extinguish  the  fire  of  great  virtues. 
In  those  faults  there  is  no  mixture  of  deceit,  of  hypocrisy,  of  pride,  of 
ferocity,  of  complexional  despotism,  or  want  of  feeling  for  the  distresses 
of  mankind.  His  are  faults  which  might  exist  in  a  descendant  of  Henry 
the  Fourth  of  France,  as  they  did  exist  in  that  father  of  his  country. 
Henry  the  Fourth  wished  that  he  might  live  to  see  a  fowl  in  the  pot  of 
every  peasant  in  his  kingdom.  That  sentiment  of  homely  benevolence 
was  worth  all  the  splendid  sayings  that  are  recorded  of  kings.  But 
this  gentleman,  a  subject,  may  this  day  say  this  at  least,  with  truth, 
that  he  secures  the  rice  in  his  pot  to  every  man  in  India.  A  poet  of 
antiquity  thought  it  one  of  the  first  distinctions  to  a  prince  whom  he 
meant  to  celebrate,  that  through  a  long  succession  of  generations  he 
had  been  the  progenitor  of  an  able  and  virtuous  citizen,  who  by  force  of 
the  arts  of  peace  had  corrected  governments  of  oppression,  and  sup 
pressed  wars  of  rapine. 


INTRODUCTION.  xiii 

Indole  proh  quanta  juvenis,  quanturnque  daturas 
Ausonioe  populis  ventura  in  stccnla  civeni. 
llle  super  Gangein,  super  exaaditus  et  Iiulos, 
Iinplebit  terras  voce;  et  furialia  bella 
Fulmine  compescet  linguie. 

This  was  what  was  said  of  the  predecessor  of  the  only  person  to  whose 
eloquence  it  does  not  wrong  that  of  the  mover  of  this  bill  to  be  com 
pared.  But  the  Ganges  and  the  Indus  are  the  patrimony  of  the  fame  of 
my  honourable  friend,  and  not  of  Cicero.  1  confess,  I  anticipate  with 
joy  the  reward  of  those  whose  whole  consequence,  power,  and  authority 
exist  only  for  the  benefit  of  mankind ;  and  I  carry  my  mind  to  all  the 
people,  and  all  the  names  and  descriptions,  that,  relieved  by  this  bill,  will 
bless  the  labours  of  this  parliament,  and  the  confidence  which  the  best 
House  of  Commons  has  given  to  him  who  the  best  deserves  it.  The  little 
cavils  of  party  will  not  be  heard,  where  freedom  and  happiness  will  be 
felt.  There  is  not  a  tongue,  a  nation,  or  religion  in  India  which  will 
not  bless  the  presiding  care  and  manly  beneficence  of  this  house,  and  of 
him  who  proposes  to  you  this  great  work.  Your  names  will  never  be 
separated  before  the  throne  of  the  Divine  Goodness,  in  whatever 
language,  or  with  whatever  rites,  pardon  is  asked  for  sin,  and  reward 
for  those  who  imitate  the  Godhead  in  his  universal  bounty  to  his 
creatures.  These  honours  you  deserve,  and  they  will  surely  be  paid, 
when  all  the  jargon  of  influence,  and  party,  and  patronage  are  swept 
into  oblivion." 

However,  the  Bill  was  thrown  out  in  the  Lords — no 
worse  fate  than  it  deserved;  and  with  this  defeat  came  the 
downfall  of  the  Whig  ministry.  The  succeeding  years, 
1783-90,  were  the  most  troubled  of  Burke's  political  life. 
The  hopeless  condition  of  the  Whig  party  goaded  him  into 
mere  factious  opposition,  and  his  speeches  were  received 
either  with  contempt  or  organised  interruption.  Yet  during 
this  period  was  delivered  one  of  his  greatest  speeches,  that 
on  the  Nabob  of  Arcot's  debts.  It  is  difficult  to  say 
whether  this  speech  is  more  admirable  for  its  mastery  of 
details  and  technicalities,  or  for  its  magnificent  eloquence. 

b 


xiv  INTRODUCTION. 

The   passage    quoted    below    is    well   known,    but    it   can 
scarcely  be  quoted  too  often. 

"  When  at  length  Hyder  All  found  that  he  had  to  do  with  men  who 
either  would  sign  no  convention,  or  whom  no  treaty  and  no  signature 
could  bind,  and  who  were  the  determined  enemies  of  human  inter 
course  itself,  he  decreed  to  make  the  country  possessed  by  these 
incorrigible  and  predestinated  criminals  a  memorable  example  to  man 
kind.  He  resolved,  in  the  gloomy  recesses  of  a  mind  capacious  of 
such  things,  to  leave  the  whole  Carnatic  an  everlasting  monument  of 
vengeance,  and  to  put  perpetual  desolation  as  a  barrier  between  him 
and  those  against  whom  the  faith  which  holds  the  moral  elements  of 
the  world  together  was  no  protection.  lie  became  at  length  so 
confident  of  his  force,  so  collected  in  his  might,  that  he  made  no 
secret  whatsoever  of  his  dreadful  resolution.  Having  terminated  his 
disputes  with  every  enemy  and  every  rival,  who  buried  their  mutual 
animosities  in  their  common  detestation  against  the  creditors  of  the 
Nabob  of  Arcot,  he  drew  from  every  quarter  whatever  a  savage  ferocity 
could  add  to  his  new  rudiments  in  the  arts  of  destruction  ;  and  com 
pounding  all  the  materials  of  fury,  havoc,  and  desolation  into  one 
black  cloud,  he  hung  for  a  while  on  the  declivities  of  the  mountains. 
Whilst  the  authors  of  all  these  evils  were  idly  and  stupidly  gazing  on 
this  menacing  meteor,  which  blackened  all  their  horizon,  it  suddenly 
burst,  and  poured  down  the  whole  of  its  contents  upon  the  plains  of 
the  Carnatic.  Then  ensued  a  scene  of  woe,  the  like  of  which  no  eye 
had  seen,  no  heart  conceived,  and  which  no  tongue  can  adequately 
tell.  All  the  horrors  of  war  before  known  or  heard  of,  were  mercy  to 
that  new  havoc.  A  storm  of  universal  fire  blasted  every  field,  con 
sumed  every  house,  destroyed  every  temple.  The  miserable  inhabitants 
flying  from  their  flaming  villages,  in  part  were  slaughtered  ;  others, 
without  regard  to  sex,  to  age,  to  the  respect  of  rank,  or  sacredness  of 
function,  fathers  torn  from  children,  husbands  from  wives,  enveloped  in 
a  whirlwind  of  cavalry,  and  amidst  the  goading  spears  of  drivers,  and 
the  trampling  of  pursuing  horses,  were  swept  into  captivity  in  an 
unknown  and  hostile  land.  Those  who  were  able  to  evade  this 
tempest  fled  to  the  walled  cities.  But  escaping  from  fire,  sword,  and 

exile,     they     fell     into    the    jaws    of    famine For     eighteen 

months,  without  intermission,  this  destruction  raged  from  the  gates  of 


INTRODUCTION.  xv 

Madras  to  the  gates  of  Tanjore  ;  and  so  completely  did  these  masters 
in  their  art,  Hyder  Ali,  and  his  more  ferocious  son,  absolve  themselves 
of  their  impious  vow,  that  when  the  British  armies  traversed,  as  they 
did,  the  Carnatic  for  hundreds  of  miles  in  all  directions,  through  the 
whole  line  of  their  march  they  did  not  see  one  man,  not  one  woman, 
not  one  child,  not  one  four-footed  beast  of  any  description  whatever. 
One  dead,  uniform  silence  reigned  over  the  whole  region.  With  the 
inconsiderable  exceptions  of  the  narrow  vicinage  of  some  few  forts,  I 
wish  to  be  understood  as  speaking  literally :— I  mean  to  produce  to  you 
more  ^than  three  witnesses,  above  all  exception,  who  will  support  this 
assertion  in  its  full  extent.  That  hurricane  of  war  passed  through  every 
part  of  the  central  provinces  of  the  Carnatic.  Six  or  seven  districts  to 
the  north  and  to  the  south  (and  these  not  wholly  untouched)  escaped 
the  general  ravage." 

Now  comes  the  second  of  the  three  great  affairs  with 
which  the  name  of  Burke  is  for  ever  implicated.  We  have 
seen  him  as  the  spokesman  of  the  American  colonists  in 
their  struggle  against  political  oppression  •  now  we  see  him 
armed  on  behalf  of  the  Hindoos  against  the  tyranny  and 
rapacity  of  Hastings  and  his  subordinates.  In  1772  Burke's 
knowledge  of  Indian  affairs  was  such  as  to  bring  him  the 
offer  of  a  lucrative  post  in  that  country ;  while  it  is  again 
brilliantly  revealed  in  the  speech  from  which  the  last  quota 
tion  was  made.  Knowing  Indian  affairs,  then,  as  few  men 
in  or  out  of  the  country  knew  them,  Burke  resolved  to 
express  his  deep-seated  disapproval  of  the  Company's 
methods  by  impeaching  its  principal  servant  Macaulay 
speaks  of  Burke's  conduct  in  this  affair  and  in  his  crusade 
against  the  French  Revolution  as  being  that  of  a  "great 
and  good  man,  led  into  extravagance  by  a  sensibility  which 
domineered  over  all  his  faculties."  There  is  no  need  to 
follow  Mr.  Morley  in  his  discrimination  of  the  nature  and 
range  of  Burke's  "  sensibility  ";  Macaulay's  phrase  expresses 


xvi  INTRODUCTION. 

with  characteristic  clearness  and  emphasis  both  the  mental 
attitude  of  Burke  and  his  constant  lack  of  "reasonableness." 
That  Hastings  and  his  subordinates,  during  an  administra 
tion  that  made  as  a  whole  for  settlement  and  order,  were 
guilty  of  enormous  crimes  is  unfortunately  beyond  argu 
ment;  just  as  true  is  it  that  these  crimes  were  exhibited 
by  Burke  in  the  fiercest  of  lights — magnified  by  his  mere 
vehemence.  Happily,  however,  the  vexed  political  issues 
of  the  controversy  do  not  concern  us  here.  Burke  partly 
prepared  his  speeches  for  publication ;  but  death  found  the 
task  unfinished,  and  not  till  twenty-eight  years  after  his 
death  were  these  wonderful  pieces  of  oratory  given  to  the 
world.  In  them,  the  peculiar  strength  of  Burke  is  exhibited 
at  its  best  and  worst ;  and  a  careful  study  of  the  whole 
series  is  one  of  the  most  fascinating  of  tasks.  On  the  fifth 
day  he  described  in  words  of  blood  and  flame  the  atrocities 
of  Debi  Sing.  The  passage  is  unfortunately  too  long  to 
quote,  but  the  reader  may  be  referred  to  vol.  vii.,  p.  186,  etc., 
of  the  Bohn  Library  edition.  The  effect  on  the  auditors 
was  remarkable ;  the  most  callous  were  deeply  moved,  while 
the  susceptible  sobbed  and  fainted.  That  the  occasion  might 
lack  nothing  of  effect,  Burke  himself  sank  down  exhausted. 
He  tried  to  continue,  but  failed;  and  on  the  motion  of  the 
Prince  of  Wales  the  sitting  was  suspended. 

At  this  time  Burke  had  a  few  friends  who  could  see 
through  the  savage  irritability  that  unjust  neglect  added  to 
the  trials  of  increasing  age;  and  these  loved  and  admired 
him  beyond  measure.  Johnson,  Reynolds,  Garrick,  and 
Burke — what  a  quartet  this  is  !  Others  there  were  whose 
names  are  of  less  importance,  or  whose  intimacy  was  not  so 
complete.  His  enemies,  however,  were  many  and  power 
ful.  His  reputation  and  circumstances  were  such,  that  his 


INTRODUCTION.  xvii 

party  dared  not  put  him  into  a  Cabinet  office  during  their 
brief  period  in  power;  while  the  other  side  pursued  him 
with  hatred  and  obloquy  of  peculiar  malevolence.  His 
indiscreet  violence  led  to  the  rumour  of  madness,  and  gave, 
indeed,  probability  thereto.  Presently  all  this  was  changed. 
The  name  of  Burke  became  popular  in  England,  and  was 
mentioned  with  admiration  in  the  most  distant  courts  of 
Europe.  What  devotion  to  constitutional  liberty  in  England 
had  failed  to  do,  was  effected  by  his  opposition  to  un 
bridled  licence  in  a  neighbouring  country. 

In  1789  began  the  French  Revolution;— outwardly  at 
least,  and  so  far  as  one  can  point  to  a  definite  beginning. 
The  fine  spirits  of  England  were  enthusiastic  in  their 
encouragement  of  the  struggling  nation.  The  cause  of 
freedom  seemed  to  prosper  amazingly.  Yet  in  the  tumult 
of  rejoicing,  doubt  whispered  an  uneasy  interrogation.  The 
insurgents  ceased  to  be  soldiers  of  liberty;  they  soon 
exhibited  the  disorder  and  licence  of  an  armed  mob.  Many 
who  had  been  indifferent  declared  against  them;  and  even 
among  the  friends  of  the  Revolution  there  were  some  who 
felt  disquieted  at  the  course  of  events.  Burke  was  not 
indifferent.  He  saw  every  principle  that  had  inspired  and 
guided  his  public  life  now  being  openly  violated;  and  he 
lifted  his  mighty  voice  in  a  storm  of  denunciation  that  grew 
fiercer  as  events  progressed,  and  that  Death  found  still 
raging  in  fury.  Most  of  Burke's  political  friends,  however, 
were  still  pronouncedly  in  sympathy  with  the  Revolutionists; 
and  the  first-fruits  of  his  intervention  in  the  struggle  came 
in  the  shape  of  loss  of  friends, — the  rupture  of  ties  that  the 
course  of  years  and  the  associations  of  public  life  had  bound 
very  closely  about  his  heart. 

In  February,   1790,  during  a   debate   on  the  army  esti- 


xviii  INTRODUCTION. 

mates,  Fox  found  cause  to  express  his  agreement  with  the 
conduct  of  the  French  army  in  rising  against  their  officers. 
This  drew  from  Burke  his  first  public  denunciation  of  the 
Revolution.  Fox  replied  with  great  earnestness  and 
generosity,  saying  of  his  old  friend  and  colleague,  in  unfor 
gettable  words,  "  If  all  the  political  information  I  have 
learned  from  books,  all  which  I  have  gained  from  science, 
and  all  which  my  knowledge  of  the  world  and  its  affairs  has 
taught  me,  were  put  into  one  scale,  and  the  improvement 
which  I  have  derived  from  my  right  honourable  friend's 
instruction  and  conversation  were  placed  in  the  other,  I 
should  be  at  a  loss  to  decide  to  which  to  give  the  preference. 
I  have  learned  more  from  my  right  honourable  friend  than 
from  all  the  men  with  whom  I  ever  conversed." 

Burke  replied  very  mildly,  and  the  affair  was  likely  to 
drop,  had  not  Sheridan  chosen  to  denounce  Burke  as  a 
renegade  from  the  cause  of  liberty.  Though  bound  in 
politics,  the  two  were  rarely  in  personal  sympathy;  and  in  a 
few  cutting  words  Burke  renounced  any  further  intercourse 
with  his  assailant.  All  attempts  at  reconciliation  failed. 
The  next  step  in  this  famous  business — a  discreditable 
step — came  soon  after.  On  March  2nd,  Fox  moved  for  the 
repeal  of  the  Corporation  and  Test  Acts,  a  cause  that  had 
had  Burke's  sympathy.  Now,  however,  he  feared  the  relief 
of  the  Dissenters  in  religion  might  seem  to  encourage  the 
feeling  of  dissent  in  politics.  "There  was,"  he  said,  "a 
wild  spirit  of  innovation  abroad,  which  required  not  in 
dulgence  but  restraint."  The  house  was  on  his  side;  and 
while  in  the  previous  session  the  motion  had  been  lost  by 
twenty  votes,  it  was  now  decisively  crushed  by  a  majority 
of  one  hundred  and  eighty-nine. 

Meanwhile,  Burke  was  preparing  to  carry  his  denunciation 


INTRODUCTION.  xix 

of  the  Revolution  to  a  larger  audience.  With  unexampled 
care  he  was  elaborating  the  treatise  which  the  reader  now 
has  before  him.  It  was  indeed  "elaborated";  for  Prior 
alleges,  on  the  authority  of  Dodsley's  accounts,  that  more 
than  a  dozen  revises  were  prepared  and  destroyed.  It 
finally  appeared  early  in  November,  1790,  and  was  bought 
up  eagerly  by  friends  and  enemies.  In  six  days  its  sale 
reached  7000  copies;  in  a  year  more  than  30,000  had 
been  disposed  of  in  England  and  France.  For  several 
years  the  sale  continued  steadily;  for  there  were  many  who 
lost  sight  of  its  political  bearings  in  admiration  of  its  stately 
beauty  of  style.  It  was  like  a  trumpet  call;  at  its  sound, 
the  nation  took  sides.  Round  Burke  there  gathered  those 
who  had  in  former  years  heaped  scorn  and  obloquy  upon 
him;  while  against  him  he  saw  his  political  friends  of  many 
years,  led  by  Fox  himself.  The  final  rupture  between  these 
two  great  friends  and  great  men  took  place  on  May  6th, 
1791,  during  the  debate  on  the  Quebec  Bill.  Burke  was 
censured  for  introducing  French  affairs.  Fox  seconded  the 
motion  and  spoke  strongly  in  favour  of  it.  Burke  com 
plained  bitterly  of  the  line  that  Fox  took:  that  he  had 
dragged  into  the  debate  confidential  and  private  communi 
cations  of  many  years  gone  by;  and  said  that  the  affair  had 
been  so  put  that  he  must  renounce  his  principles  or  his 
friends.  "  Mr.  Fox  here  observed  there  is  no  loss  of  friend 
ship."  "  I  regret  to  say  there  is,"  was  the  reply;  "I  know 
the  value  of  my  line  of  conduct;  I  have  indeed  made  a 
great  sacrifice;  I  have  done  my  duty  though  I  have  lost  my 
friend.  There  is  something  in  the  detested  French  con 
stitution  that  envenoms  everything  it  touches.  .  .  ."  "Mr. 
Fox,  unusually  excited  by  this  public  renunciation  of  long 
intimacy,  rose  under  excited  feelings,  so  that  it  was  some 


xx  INTRODUCTION. 

moments,"  says  the  Morning  Chronicles  report,  "before  he 
could  proceed.  Tears  rolled  down  his  cheeks,  and  he  strove 
in  vain  to  give  utterance  to  feelings  that  dignified  his  nature. 
When  he  had  recovered,  ...  an  eloquent  appeal  broke 
forth  to  his  old  and  revered  friend — to  the  remembrance  of 
their  past  attachment — their  unalienable  friendship — their 
reciprocal  affection,  as  dear  and  almost  as  binding  as  the 
ties  of  nature  between  father  and  son.  Seldom  had  there 
been  heard  in  the  House  of  Commons  an  appeal  so  pathetic 
and  so  personal."  (Prior's  Life,  Bonn  Ed.,  p.  329.)  The 
rupture  with  Fox  was  followed  by  separation  from  his  party. 
In  Parliament  his  position  was  most  painful.  Yet  in  spite 
of  the  strain  he  never  ceased  to  write.  The  Reflections 
was  followed  in  the  next  year  (i  791)  by  a  Letter  to  a  Member 
of  the  National  Assembly,  Hints  for  a  Memorial,  etc., 
Appeal  from  the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs,  and  the  Thoughts 
on  French  Affairs.  It  seemed  that,  cut  off  from  his  friends, 
he  found  relief  in  denouncing  the  cause  of  the  rupture. 

The  execution  of  the  king,  early  in  1793,  brought  the 
nation  as  a  whole  to  Burke's  side.  War  was  demanded  on 
all  sides,  and  at  this  time,  Burke,  though  not  a  minister,  was 
nearly  the  most  powerful  man  in  the  country.  His  labours 
with  the  pen,  however,  never  ceased ;  and  several  valuable 
pieces  were  produced  about  this  time.  Rather  earlier  comes 
the  first  letter  to  Langrishe  (1792),  which  is  valuable  for  its 
own  sake,  and  also  for  showing  how  calm  Burke  could  be  on 
other  matters  in  the  midst  of  his  anti-Gallican  tempest.  The 
Report  on  the  Lords'  Journals  (1794)  is  large  and  important. 
But  his  work  was  nearly  over.  The  death  of  his  son 
Richard,  whom  he  idolised,  came  on  him  with  crushing 
suddenness  in  1795.  The  proposals  for  a  peerage  therefore 
fell  through,  and  instead  he  was  granted  certain  pensions. 


INTRODUCTION.  xxi 

The  grant  was  attacked  in  the  Lords  by  the  Duke  of  Bed 
ford  and  the  Earl  of  Lauderdale.  The  spectacle  of  a 
member  of  the  bounty-fed  house  of  Russell  protesting 
against  grants  from  the  Crown,  gave  Burke  a  chance ;  and 
he  replied  with  the  famous  Letter  to  a  Noble  Lord 
(r795)-  In  a  short  space  it  contains  almost  everything  that 
is  characteristic  of  Burke's  prose.  Indeed,  scarcely  any 
piece  of  equal  length  compasses  such  extremes  of  eloquence, 
pathos,  and  irony.  Its  complete  felicity  is  amazing.  It  is 
so  proportionate  that  a  quotation  would  only  misrepresent 
it.  The  letter  to  William  Elliott  (1795)  is  less  known  than 
it  deserves  to  be.  Like  the  Letter  to  a  Noble  Lord,  it 
contains  a  reference  to  the  death  of  his  son.  Here  is  a 
short  passage  : — 

"If  I  saw  this  auspicious  beginning,  baffled  and  frustrated  as  I  am, 
yet,  on  the  verge  of  a  timely  grave,  abandoned  abroad  and  desolate  at 
home,  stripped  of  my  boast,  my  hope,  my  consolation,  my  helper,  my 
counsellor,  and  my  guide  (you  know  in  part  what  I  have  lost,'  and 
would  to  God  I  could  clear  myself  of  all  neglect  and  fault  in  that  'loss), 
yet  thus,  even  thus,  I  would  rake  up  the  fire  under  all  the  ashes  that 
oppress  it.  I  am  no  longer  patient  of  the  public  eye  ;  nor  am  I  of  force 
to  win  my  way,  and  to  justle  and  elbow  in  a  crowd.  But  even  in 
solitude  something  may  be  done  for  society.  The  meditations  of  the 
iloset  have  affected  senates  with  a  subtle  fren/.y,  and  inflamed  armies 
with  the  brands  of  the  furies.  The  cure  might  come  from  the  same 
source  with  the  distemper.  I  would  add  my  part  to  those  who  would 
animate  the  people  (whose  hearts  arc  yet  right)  to  new  exertions  in  the 
old  cause. 

His  last  publications  were  the  first  two  of  the  letters  known 
briefly  and  conveniently  as  the  Letters  on  a  Regicide 
Peace.  Two  more  were  written,  but  were  published\fter 
his  death.  The  last  is  unfinished,  though  commenced  first 
A  short  piece  comes  before  it,  -  The  Thoughts  and 


xxii  INTRODUCTION. 

Details  on  Scarcity  (1795).  Of  this  piece  Mr.  Morley 
says  that  "  it  contains  ideas  on  free  trade  which  were  too  far 
in  advance  of  the  opinion  of  his  time"  (page  204).  The 
following  is  the  best  known  passage  in  it ;  it  is  curious,  but 
approval  of  the  argument  will  not  be  universally  conceded. 

"As  to  what  is  said,  in  a  physical  and  moral  view  against 
the  home  consumption  of  spirits,  experience  has  long  since 
taught  me  very  little  to  respect  the  declamation  on  that 
subject.  Whether  the  thunder  of  the  laws  or  the  thunder  of 
eloquence  is  hurled  on  gin,  always  am  I  thunder  proof. 
The  alembic,  in  my  mind,  has  furnished  the  world  a  far 
greater  benefit  and  blessing,  than  if  the  opus  maximum  had 
been  really  found  by  chemistry,  and,  like  Midas,  we  could 
turn  everything  to  gold."  More  follows  of  the  same 
character;  and  one  almost  thinks  of  the  "Fable  of  the 
Bees." 

The  Letters  on  a  Regicide  Peace  were  written  to  re 
vive  the  waning  interest  of  the  nation  in  the  war — a  Holy 
War  to  Burke— and  in  consequence,  they  lack  much  of  that 
clarity  of  political  wisdom  which  shone  in  his  earlier  writings. 
There  is,  too,  a  corresponding  heightening  of  the  literary 
colour.  It  is  difficult,  perhaps,  to  read  Burke  with  complete 
detachment  from  political  sympathies ;  but  to  belittle  the 
prose  of  the  Regicide  Peace  because  the  political  thought 
is  reactionary,  is  unfair  and  uncritical.  The  letters  are  not 
perfect;  but  they  contain  pieces  in  the  "grand  manner" 
hardly  to  be  matched  in  the  rest  of  his  work.  They  form 
the  culminating  point  of  his  labours  against  the  Revolution, 
and  they  are  the  logical  development  of  his  methods.  To 
compare  these  inflammatory  pieces  with  the  cool  narrative 
of  the  Preface  to  Brissofs  Address  is  to  see  with  what 
mastery  Burke  could  wield  dissimilar  weapons  in  the  literary 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxi  11 


armoury.  As  I  said  above,  they  are  not  perfect  as  literary 
pieces ;  but  the  student  who  sits  down  to  separate  the  pearls 
from  the  pebbles,  will  enter  upon  a  task  that  cannot  but 
delight  him,  if  he  cares  for  directness  and  force,  joined  with 
all  the  splendours  of  a  great  imagination. 

In  July,  1797,  he  died,  and  was  simply  buried  in  the 
church  at  Beaconsfield,  in  accordance  with  his  own  instruc 
tions. 

When  the  present  work  was  composed,  the  Revolution, 
as  we  conceive  it,  was  scarcely  begun.  There  was  still  a 
king;  and  of  the  famous — or  infamous— names  that  are 
prompted  to  our  memories  by  the  mention  of  the  French 
Revolution,  most  were  quite  unknown  or  were  barely  heard 
of.  The  whole  work  is  a  piece  of  special  pleading — some 
of  it  being  specious  argument.  It  states  the  case  for  the 
Royal  Family  and  the  many  vested  interests.  Of  the 
sufferings  and  oppression  borne  by  the  nation  at  large  the 
reader  will  find  no  word.  It  provoked  many  replies, 
notably  the  Vindicia  Gallicce  of  Mackintosh,  and  the  Rights 
of  Man,  by  Thomas  Paine  \  but  the  reader  need  not  concern 
himself  with  these.  Let  him  turn  to  Arthur  Young's 
Travels  in  France  and  he  will  find,  not  only  the  best 
answer  to  Burke,  but  also  an  invaluable,  nay,  indispens 
able  preface  to  any  study  of  this  great  struggle.  Read 
with  an  eye  to  the  years  immediately  following  its 
publication,  the  book  astonishes  by  a  foresight  almost 
prophetical.  Scarcely  a  woe  that  fell  on  the  unhappy 
land  of  France  has  not  its  origin  indicated  in  these  pages. 
Indeed,  few  historical  events  have  been  more  accurately 
foreshadowed  than  the  rise  and  power  of  Napoleon  was 
by  Burke  in  his  indictment  of  the  military  organisation. 
Yet  all  through  the  piece  one  thinks  with  some  regret  of 


xxiv  INTRODUCTION. 

that  Burke  who,  in  earlier  years,  applied  his  political  faith 
(not  then,  indeed,  fully  developed  as  to  some  of  its  issues) 
to  causes  less  doubtful  than  the  crushing  of  a  nation's  first 
struggles  towards  freedom  from  real  social  evils.  There  is 
sentiment  in  the  Reflections,  sentiment  for  the  loss  of  much 
that  was  picturesque ;  sensibility  too ;  but  there  is,  after  all, 
little  humanity  in  it.  Man  is  more  than  a  cipher  in 
political  arithmetic.  Governments  were  devised  for  the 
ultimate  benefit  of  mankind,  not  men  that  there  might 
be  governments  and  picturesque  institutions.  There  are 
"  rights  of  men  "  ;  and  if  in  any  form  of  government  these 
rights  are  denied,  that  form  is  not  to  be  supported,  be  it 
endeared  by  associations  the  most  venerable,  and  relations 
the  most  entitled  to  dutiful  affection. 

Few,  however,  who  read  this  volume  will  concern  them 
selves  with  its  historic  truth  or  its  political  justness.  The 
Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution  is  the  most  famous 
book  of  Edmund  Burke,  writer  of  English;  and  nine  out  of 
ten  who  read  the  W7ork  do  so  wiih  no  other  aim  than  to 
become  acquainted  with  the  style  of  one  who,  a  generation 
ago,  wras  considered  to  have  reached  the  highest  point  of 
excellence  in  the  art  of  making  fine  prose.  The  work  is 
designed  to  fall  into  two  parts,  and  of  these  the  second  is 
the  better  both  in  matter  and  manner.  The  sophistries  of 
the  first  part  are  clothed  in  disproportionate  vehemence,  as 
if  Burke  himself  were  partly  conscious  of  the  weakness  of 
his  arguments  in  a  bad  case ;  the  second  part  exhibits 
his  variety  and  vigour,  his  simplicity  and  his  massive 
grandeur  almost  at  their  best.  In  the  first  part  his  appeal 
is  to  sentiment,  in  the  second  to  intellect ;  and  the  reader 
will  find  the  style  bearing  properly  its  part  in  these  different 
motions.  With  a  certain  class  of  people  there  is  a  growing 


INTRODUCTION.  xxv 

notion  that  style  is  a  sort  of  pontifical  vestment  assumed 
by  a  writer  when  he  is  about  to  translate  his  thoughts  into 
words — that  a  person  deliberately  adopts  a  certain  style  of 
writing  as  one  may  select  a  mode  of  dressing  the  hair  or 
tying  a  neckcloth.  For  this  malady  of  mind — the  causes 
of  which  are  easy  to  trace — a  few  pages  of  Burke  assimi 
lated  at  frequent  intervals  is  at  once  a  corrective  and  a 
tonic.  Burke  did  not  practise  a  certain  style  of  utterance 
and  then  look  around  for  something  to  say.  With  him,  as 
with  all  writers  whose  fame  endures  beyond  their  own  little 
hour,  the  great  question  is,  How  can  I  utter  what  I  have  to 
say  in  the  best  possible  manner, — best  for  the  immediate 
end  in  view,  and  best  for  its  own  sake  ?  Cardinal  Newman 
has  on  this  point  certain  wise  words — words  that  are 
weighted  with  the  authority  of  a  master  of  all  the  graces  of 
expression  :  "I  wish  you  to  observe  that  the  mere  dealer 
in  words  cares  little  or  nothing  for  the  subject  which  he  is 
embellishing,  but  can  paint  and  gild  anything  whatever  to 
order ;  whereas  the  artist,  whom  I  am  acknowledging,  has 
his  great  or  rich  vision  before  him,  and  his  only  aim  is  to 
bring  out  what  he  thinks  or  what  he  feels,  in  a  way  adequate 
to  the  thing  spoken  of,  and  appropriate  to  the  speaker." 

Some  one  has  said,  in  effect,  that  Burke's  writings  were 
written  speeches,  and  that  his  speeches  were  spoken 
pamphlets.  When  one  considers  that  Burke  in  most  of 
his  later  writings  is  making  a  direct  appeal  about  some 
special  question,  the  presence  of  the  oratorical  note  is  not 
surprising.  Thus  Burke's  compositions  pay  largely  for 
being  read  aloud.  Charles  Lamb,  in  whom  the  literary 
instinct  was  peculiarly  strong,  wrote  in  a  letter  to  Words 
worth  :  "  The  poets  are  as  well  to  listen  to ;  anything  high 
may,  nay,  must  be  read  out ;  you  read  it  to  yourself  with  an 


xxvi  INTRODUCTION. 

imaginary  auditor."  (Ainger,  ii.  243.)  This  reading  aloud 
gives  a  very  distinct  gain  in  the  case  of  Burke.  The  phrases 
seem  in  themselves  to  flow  smoothly  from  the  tongue ;  and 
in  their  place  in  the  larger  periods,  they  fit  with  an  exact 
ness  that  gratifies  the  ear  while  it  convinces  the  mind. 
The  balance  of  each  sentence — the  systole  and  diastole — is 
perfect,  and  reading  aloud  establishes  this.  There  is  no 
reaching  the  end  of  a  clause  with  stunning  suddenness,  or 
collapsing  at  a  belated  full  point  with  a  gasp. 

In  conclusion,  let  me  call  the  reader's  attention  to  the 
enormous  variety  that  Burke  exhibits.  For  every  passage 
of  vehemence  and  passion  we  may  quote,  another  may  be 
cited  for  sanity  and  lucidity;  with  each  example  of  ornate 
splendour  we  may  range  a  specimen  of  simplicity  and 
directness.  A  sentence  quoted  from  Burke  is  nearly 
always  misleading  both  in  form  and  in  matter.  A  short 
passage  may  bear  different  meanings  as  it  is  considered 
in  its  logical  connection  or  viewed  alone.  Again,  many 
pieces  can  be  found  in  which  the  use  of  images  seems  to 
exceed  the  bounds  of  good  taste ;  but  in  most  cases  these 
concrete  passages  form  a  sort  of  climax,  and  the  gradual 
approach  thereto  tones  down  any  elaboration  of  ornament. 
His  greater  pieces  must  be  read;  though  it  is  better  to  read 
him  completely.  A  leisurely  but  observant  journey  through 
the  eight  volumes  of  the  Bohn  reprint  or  the  sixteen 
volumes  of  the  old  edition  will  invigorate  the  taste  and 
mind  as  will  few  other  excursions  in  literature.  It  will  be, 
in  addition,  an  act  of  decent  homage  to  the  memory  of  a 
man  who  was,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  words,  "a  great 
genius." 

GEORGE  SAMPSON. 


REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  REVOLUTION 
IN  FRANCE. 


REFLECTIONS 

ON 

THE    REVOLUTION    IN    FRANCE, 

AND 

ON    THE    PROCEEDINGS    IN    CERTAIN    SOCIETIES    IN    LONDON 
RELATIVE    TO    THAT    EVENT  : 

IN    A    LETTER 

INTENDED  TO  HAVE  BEEN  SENT  TO  A  GENTLEMAN  IN  PARIS. 
1790. 

IT  may  not  be  unnecessary  to  inform  the  reader  that  the 
following  Reflections  had  their  origin  in  a  correspondence 
between  the  Author  and  a  very  young  gentleman  at  Paris, 
who  did  him  the  honour  of  desiring  his  opinion  upon  the 
important  transactions  which  then,  and  ever  since,  have  so 
much  occupied  the  attention  of  all  men.  An  answer  was 
written  some  time  in  the  month  of  October,  1789;  but  it 
was  kept  back  upon  prudential  considerations.  That  letter 
is  alluded  to  in  the  beginning  of  the  following  sheets.  It 
has  been  since  forwarded  to  the  person  to  whom  it  was 
addressed.  The  reasons  for  the  delay  in  sending  it  were 
assigned  in  a  short  letter  to  the  same  gentleman.  This 
produced  on  his  part  a  new  and  pressing  application  for 
the  Author's  sentiments. 


REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

The  Author  began  a  second  and  more  full  discussion  on 
the  subject.  This  he  had  some  thoughts  of  publishing  early 
in  the  last  spring;  but,  the  matter  gaining  upon  him,  he 
found  that  what  he  had  undertaken  not  only  far  exceeded 
the  measure  of  a  letter,  but  that  its  importance  required 
rather  a  more  detailed  consideration  than  at  that  time  he 
had  any  leisure  to  bestow  upon  it.  However,  having  thrown 
down  his  first  thoughts  in  the  form  of  a  letter,  and,  indeed, 
when  he  sat  down  to  write,  having  intended  it  for  a  private 
letter,  he  found  it  difficult  to  change  the  form  of  address, 
when  his  sentiments  had  grown  into  a  greater  extent,  and 
had  received  another  direction.  A  different  plan,  he  is 
sensible,  might  be  more  favourable  to  a  commodious  divi 
sion  and  distribution  of  his  matter. 


DEAR  SIR, 

You  are  pleased  to  call  again,  and  with  some  earnest 
ness,  for  my  thoughts  on  the  late  proceedings  in  France. 
I  will  not  give  you  reason  to  imagine  that  I  think  my 
sentiments  of  such  value  as  to  wish  myself  to  be  solicited 
about  them.  They  are  of  too  little  consequence  to  be  very 
anxiously  either  communicated  or  withheld.  It  was  from 
attention  to  you,  and  to  you  only,  that  I  hesitated  at  the 
time  when  you  first  desired  to  receive  them.  In  the  first 
letter  I' had  the  honour  to  write  to  you,  and  which  at  length 
I  send,  I  wrote  neither  for  nor  from  any  description  of  men; 
nor  shall  I  in  this.  My  errors,  if  any,  are  my  own.  My 
reputation  alone  is  to  answer  for  them. 

You  see,  Sir,  by  the  long  letter  I  have  transmitted  to  you, 
that  though  I  do  most  heartily  wish  that  France  may  be 
animated  by  a  spirit  of  rational  liberty,  and  that  I  think  you 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  3 

bound,  in  all  honest  policy,  to  provide  a  permanent  body 
in  which  that  spirit  may  reside,  and  an  effectual  organ  by 
which  it  may  act,  it  is  my  misfortune  to  entertain  great 
doubts  concerning  several  material  points  in  your  late 
transactions.  . 

You  imagined,  when  you  wrote  last,  that  I  might  possibly 
be  reckoned  among  the  approvers  of  certain  proceedings  in 
France,  from  the  solemn  public  seal  of  sanction  they  have 
received  from  two  clubs  of  gentlemen  in  London,  called  the 
Constitutional  Society,  and  the  Revolution  Society. 

I  certainly  have  the  honour  to  belong  to  more  clubs  than 
one,  in  which  the  constitution  of  this  kingdom,  and  the 
principles  of  the  glorious  Revolution,  are  held  in  high  re 
verence  :  and  I  reckon  myself  among  the  most  forward  in 
my  zeal  for  maintaining  that  constitution  and  those  prin 
ciples  in  their  utmost  purity  and  vigour.  It  is  because  I 
do  so  that  I  think  it  necessary  fo  me  that  there  should 
be  no  mistake.  Those  who  cultivate  the  memory  of  our 
Revolution,  and  those  who  are  attached  to  the  constitution 
of  this  kingdom,  will  take  good  care  how  they  are  involved 
with  persons  who,  under  the  pretext  of  zeal  towards  the 
Revolution  and  constitution,  too  frequently  wander  from 
their  true  principles;  and  are  ready  on  every  occasion  to 
depart  from  the  firm  but  cautious  and  deliberate  spirit 
which  produced  the  one,  and  which  presides  in  the  other. 
Before  I  proceed  to  answer  the  more  material  particulars 
in  your  letter,  I  shall  beg  leave  to  give  you  such  informa 
tion  as  I  have  been  able  to  obtain  of  the  two  clubs  which 
have  thought  proper,  as  bodies,  to  interfere  in  the  concerns 
of  France;  first  assuring  you  that  I  am  not,  and  that  I 
have  never  been,  a  member  of  either  of  those  societies. 
The  first,  calling  itself  the  Constitutional  Society,  or 


4  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

Society  for  Constitutional  Information,  or  by  some  such 
title,  is,  I  believe,  of  seven  or  eight  years  standing.  The 
institution  of  this  society  appears  to  be  of  a  charitable,  and 
so  far  of  a  laudable  nature :  it  was  intended  for  the  circula 
tion,  at  the  expense  of  the  members,  of  many  books,  which 
few  others  would  be  at  the  expense  of  buying;  and  which 
might  lie  on  the  hands  of  the  booksellers,  to  the  great  loss 
of  a  useful  body  of  men.  Whether  the  books,  .so  chari 
tably  circulated,  were  ever  as  charitably  read,  is  more  than 
I  know.  Possibly  several  of  them  have  been  exported  to 
France;  and,  like  goods  not  in  request  here,  may  with  you 
have  found  a  market.  I  have  heard  much  talk  of  the 
lights  to  be  drawn  from  books  that  are  sent  from  hence. 
What  improvements  they  have  had  in  their  passage  (as  it 
is  said  some  liquors  are  meliorated  by  crossing  the  sea)  I 
cannot  tell  :  but  I  never  heard  a  man  of  common  judg 
ment,  or  the  least  degree  of  information,  speak  a  word  in 
praise  of  the  greater  part  of  the  publications  circulated  by 
that  society;  nor  have  their  proceedings  been  accounted, 
except  by  some  of  themselves,  as  of  any  serious  consequence. 
Your  National  Assembly  seems  to  entertain  much  the 
same  opinion  that  I  do  of  this  poor  charitable  club.  As  a 
nation,  you  reserved  the  whole  stock  of  your  eloquent 
acknowledgments  for  the  Revolution  Society;  when  their 
fellows  in  the  Constitutional  were,  in  equity,  entitled  to 
some  share.  Since  you  have  selected  the  Revolution 
Society  as  the  great  object  of  your  national  thanks  and 
praises,  you  will  think  me  excusable  in  making  its  late 
conduct  the  subject  of  my  observations.  The  National 
Assembly  of  France  has  given  importance  to  these  gentle 
men  by  adopting  them;  and  they  return  the  favour,  by 
acting  as  a  committee  in  England  for  extending  •  the 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  5 

principles  of  the  National  Assembly.  Henceforward  we 
must  consider  them  as  a  kind  of  privileged  persons;  as 
no  inconsiderable  members  in  the  diplomatic  body.  This 
is  one  among  the  revolutions  which  have  given  splendour 
to  obscurity,  and  distinction  to  undiscerned  merit.  Until 
very  lately  I  do  not  recollect  to  have  heard  of  this  club. 
I  am  quite  sure  that  it  never  occupied  a  moment  of  my 
thoughts  ;  nor,  I  believe,  those  of  any  person  out  of  their 
own  set.  I  find,  upon  inquiry,  that  on  the  anniversary  of 
the  Revolution  in  1688,  a  club  of  dissenters,  but  of  what 
denomination  I  know  not,  have  long  had  the  custom  of 
hearing  a  sermon  in  one  of  their  churches ;  and  that  after 
wards  they  spent  the  clay  cheerfully,  as  other  clubs  do,  at 
the  tavern.  But  I  never  heard  that  any  public  measure,  or 
political  system,  much  less  that  the  merits  of  the  constitu 
tion  of  any  foreign  nation,  had  been  the  subject  of  a  formal 
proceeding  at  their  festivals;  until,  to  my  inexpressible 
surprise,  I  found  them  in  a  sort  of  public  capacity,  by  a 
congratulatory  address,  giving  an  authoritative  sanction  to 
the  proceedings  of  the  National  Assembly  in  France. 

In  the  ancient  principles  and  conduct  of  the  club,  so  far 
at  least  as  they  were  declared,  I  see  nothing  to  which  I 
could  take  exception.  I  think  it  very  probable  that,  for 
some  purpose,  new  members  may  have  entered  among 
them;  and  that  some  truly  Christian  politicians,  who 
love  to  dispense  benefits,  but  are  careful  to  conceal  the 
hand  which  distributes  the  dole,  may  have  made  them  the 
instruments  of  their  pious  designs.  Whatever  I  may  have 
reason  to  suspect  concerning  private  management,  I  shall 
speak  of  nothing  as  of  a  certainty  but  what  is  public. 

For  one,   I   should    be  sorry  to  be  thought,  directly  or 
ndirectly,    concerned    in    their    proceedings.      I     certainly 


6  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

take  my  full  share,  along  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  in 
my  individual  and  private  capacity,  in  speculating  on  what 
has  been  done,  or  is  doing,  on  the  public  stage,  in  any 
place  ancient  or  modern ;  in  the  republic  of  Rome,  or 
the  republic  of  Paris ;  but  having  no  general  apostolical 
mission,  being  a  citizen  of  a  particular  state,  and  being 
bound  up,  in  a  considerable  degree,  by  its  public  will,  I 
should  think  it  at  least  improper  and  irregular  for  me  to 
open  a  formal  public  correspondence  with  the  actual  govern 
ment  of  a  foreign  nation,  without  the  express  authority  of 
the  government  under  which  I  live. 

I  should  be  still  more  unwilling  to  enter  into  that  corre 
spondence  under  anything  like  an  equivocal  description, 
which  to  many,  unacquainted  with  our  usages,  might  make 
the  address,  in  which  I  joined,  appear  as  the  act  of  persons 
in  some  sort  of  corporate  capacity,  acknowledged  by  the 
laws  of  this  kingdom,  and  authorised  to  speak  the  sense 
of  some  part  of  it.  On  account  of  the  ambiguity  and 
uncertainty  of  unauthorised  general  descriptions,  and  of  the 
deceit  which  may  be  practised  under  them,  and  not  from 
mere  formality,  the  House  of  Commons  would  reject  the 
most  sneaking  petition  for  the  most  trifling  object,  under 
that  mode  of  signature  to  which  you  have  thrown  open  the 
folding  doors  of  your  presence-chamber,  and  have  ushered 
into  your  National  Assembly  with  as  much  ceremony  and 
parade,  and  with  as  great  a  bustle  of  applause,  as  if  you  had 
been  visited  by  the  whole  representative  majesty  of  the 
whole  English  nation.  If  what  this  society  has  thought 
proper  to  send  forth  had  been  a  piece  of  argument,  it  would 
have  signified  little  whose  argument  it  was.  It  would  be 
neither  the  more  nor  the  less  convincing  on  account  of  the 
party  it  came  from.  But  this  is  only  a  vote  and  resolution. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  7 

It  stands  solely  on  authority;  and  in  this  case  it  is  the  mere 
authority    of    individuals,    few    of    whom    appear.     Their 
signatures  ought,  in  my  opinion,  to  have  been  annexed  to 
their  instrument.     The  world  would  then  have  the  means  of 
knowing  how  many  they  are;  who  they  are;  and  of  what 
value  their  opinions  may  be,  from  their  personal  abilities, 
from  their  knowledge,  their  experience,  or  their  lead  and 
authority  in  this  state.     To  me,  who  am  but  a  plain  man, 
the  proceeding  looks  a  little  too  refined,  and  too  ingenious- 
it  has  too  much  the  air  of  a  political  stratagem,  adopted  for 
the  sake  of  giving,  under  a  high-sounding  name,  an  import 
ance  to  the  public  declarations  of  this  club,  which,  when  the 
matter  came  to  be  closely  inspected,  they  did  not  altogether 
so  well  deserve.     It   is   a   policy  that   has  very  much   the 
complexion  of  a  fraud. 

I  flatter  myself  that  I  love  a  manly,  moral,  regulated 
liberty  as  well  as  any  gentleman  of  that  society,  be  he  who 
he  will ;  and  perhaps  I  have  given  as  good  proofs  of  my 
attachment  to  that  cause,  in  the  whole  course  of  my  public 
conduct.  I  think  I  envy  liberty  as  little  as  they  do,  to  any 
other  nation.  But  I  cannot  stand  forward  and  give  praise 
or  blame  to  anything  which  relates  to  human  actions  and 
human  concerns,  on  a  simple  view  of  the  object,  as  it  stands 
stripped  of  every  relation,  in  all  the  nakedness  and  solitude 
of  metaphysical  abstraction.  Circumstances  (which  with 
some  gentlemen  pass  for  nothing)  give  in  reality  to  every 
political  principle  its  distinguishing  colour  and  discriminating 
effect.  The  circumstances  are  what  render  every  civil 
and  political  scheme  beneficial  or  noxious  to  mankind. 
Abstractedly  speaking,  government,  as  well  as  liberty,  is 
good;  yet  could  I,  in  common  sense,  ten  years  ago,  have 
felicitated  France  on  her  enjoyment  of  a  government  (for 


REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

she  then  had  a  government)  without  inquiry  what  the  nature 
of  that  government  was,  or  how  it  was  administered?  Can 
I  now  congratulate  the  same  nation  upon  its  freedom  ?  Is 
it  because  liberty  in  the  abstract  may  be  classed  amongst 
the  blessings  of  mankind,  that  I  am  seriously  to  felicitate  a 
madman,  who  has  escaped  from  the  protecting  restraint  and 
wholesome  darkness  of  his  cell,  on  his  restoration  to  the 
enjoyment  of  light  and  liberty?  Am  I  to  congratulate  a 
highwayman  and  murderer,  who  has  broke  prison,  upon  the 
recovery  of  his  natural  rights?  This  would  be  to  act  over 
again  the  scene  of  the  criminals  condemned  to  the  galleys, 
and  their  heroic  deliverer,  the  metaphysic  Knight  of  the 
Sorrowful  Countenance. 

When  I  see  the  spirit  of  liberty  in  action,  I  see  a  strong 
principle  at  work  ;  and  this,  for  a  while,  is  all  I  can  possibly 
know  of  it.  The  wild  gas,  the  fixed  air,  is  plainly  broke 
loose:  but  we  ought  to  suspend  our  judgment  until  the 
first  effervescence  is  a  little  subsided,  till  the  liquor  is  cleared, 
and  until  we  see  something  deeper  than  the  agitation  of  a 
troubled  and  frothy  surface.  I  must  be  tolerably  sure, 
before  I  venture  publicly  to  congratulate  men  upon  a 
blessing,  that  they  have  really  received  one.  Flattery 
corrupts  both  the  receiver  and  the  giver;  and  adulation  is 
not  of  more  service  to  the  people  than  to  kings.  I  should 
therefore  suspend  my  congratulations  on  the  new  liberty  of 
France,  until  I  was  informed  how  it  had -been  combined 
with  government ;  with  public  force  ;  with  the  discipline  and 
obedience  of  armies;  with  the  collection  of  an  effective  and 
well-distributed  revenue;  with  morality  and  religion;  with 
the  solidity  of  property;  with  peace  and  order;  with  civil 
and  social  manners.  All  these  (in  their  way)  are  good 
things  too;  and,  without  them,  liberty  is  not  a  benefit  whilst 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  9 

it  lasts,  and  is  not  likely  to  continue  long.  The  effect  of 
liberty  to  individuals  is,  that  they  may  do  what  they  please  : 
we  ought  to  see  what  it  will  please  them  to  do,  before  we 
risk  congratulations,  which  may  be  soon  turned  into 
complaints.  Prudence  would  dictate  this  in  the  case  of 
separate,  insulated,  private  men  ;  but  liberty,  when  men  act 
in  bodies,  is  power.  Considerate  people,  before  they  declare 
themselves,  will  observe  the  use  which  is  made  of  power ; 
and  particularly  of  so  trying  a  thing  as  new  power  in  new 
persons,  of  whose  principles,  tempers,  and  dispositions  they 
have  little  or  no  experience,  and  in  situations  where  those 
who  appear  the  most  stirring  in  the  scene  may  possibly  not 
be  the  real  movers. 

All  these  considerations,  however,  were  below  the  trans 
cendental  dignity  of  the  Revolution  Society.  Whilst  I 
continued  in  the  country,  from  whence  I  had  the  honour 
of  writing  to  you,  I  had  but  an  imperfect  idea  of  their 
transactions.  On  my  coming  to  town,  I  sent  for  an  account 
of  their  proceedings,  which  had  been  published  by  their 
authority,  containing  a  sermon  of  Dr.  Price,  with  the  Duke 
de  Rochefaucault's  and  the  Archbishop  of  Aix's  letter,  and 
several  other  documents  annexed.  The  whole  of  that  publi 
cation,  with  the  manifest  design  of  connecting  the  affairs 
of  France  with  those  of  England,  by  drawing  us  into  an 
imitation  of  the  conduct  of  the  National  Assembly,  gave 
me  a  considerable  degree  of  uneasiness.  The  effect  of  that 
conduct  upon  the  power,  credit,  prosperity,  and  tranquillity 
of  France  became  every  day  more  evident.  The  form  of 
constitution  to  be  settled,  for  its  future  polity,  became  more 
clear.  We  are  now  in  a  condition  to  discern,  with  tolerable 
exactness,  the  true  nature  of  the  object  held  up  to  our 
imitation.  If  the  prudence  of  reserve  and  decorum  dictates 


jo  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

silence  in  some  circumstances,  in  others  prudence  of  a 
higher  order  may  justify  us  in  speaking  our  thoughts.  The 
beginnings  of  confusion  with  us  in  England  are  at  present 
feeble  enough ;  but,  with  you,  we  have  seen  an  infancy,  still 
more  feeble,  growing  by  moments  into  a  strength  to  heap 
mountains  upon  mountains,  and  to  wage  war  with  Heaven 
itself.  Whenever  our  neighbour's  house  is  on  fire,  it  cannot 
be  amiss  for  the  engines  to  play  a  little  on  our  own.  Better 
to  be  despised  for  too  anxious  apprehensions,  than  ruined 
by  too  confident  a  security. 

Solicitous  chiefly  for  the  peace  of  my  own  country,  but 
by  no  means  unconcerned  for  yours,  I  wish  to  communicate 
more  largely  what  was  at  first  intended  only  for  your  private 
satisfaction.  I  shall  still  keep  your  affairs  in  my  eye,  and 
continue  to  address  myself  to  you.  Indulging  myself  in  the 
freedom  of  epistolary  intercourse,  I  beg  leave  to  throw  out 
my  thoughts,  and  express  my  feelings,  just  as  they  arise  in 
my  mind,  with  very  little  attention  to  formal  method.  I 
set  out  with  the  proceedings  of  the  Revolution  Society ;  but 
I  shall  not  confine  myself  to  them.  Is  it  possible  I  should? 
It  appears  to  me  as  if  I  were  in  a  great  crisis,  not  of  the 
affairs  of  France  alone,  but  of  all  Europe,  perhaps  of  more 
than  Europe.  All  circumstances  taken  together,  the  French 
Revolution  is  the  most  astonishing  that  has  hitherto 
happened  in  the  world.  The  most  wonderful  things  are 
brought  about  in  many  instances  by  means  the  most  absurd 
and  ridiculous;  in  the  most  ridiculous  modes;  and,  ap 
parently,  by  the  most  contemptible  instruments.  Every 
thing  seems  out  of  nature  in  this  strange  chaos  of  levity  and 
ferocity,  and  of  all  sorts  of  crimes  jumbled  together  with  all 
sorts  of  follies.  In  viewing  this  monstrous  tragi-comic 
scene,  the  most  opposite  passions  necessarily  succeed,  and 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  n 

sometimes  mix  with  each  other  in  the  mind;  alternate 
contempt  and  indignation;  alternate  laughter  and  tears; 
alternate  scorn  and  horror. 

It  cannot  however  be  denied  that  to  some  this  strange 
scene  appeared  in  quite  another  point  of  view.  Into  them 
it  inspired  no  other  sentiments  than  those  of  exultation  and 
rapture.  They  saw  nothing  in  what  has  been  done  in 
France,  but  a  firm  and  temperate  exertion  of  freedom ;  so 
consistent,  on  the  whole,  with  morals  and  with  piety  as  to 
make  it  deserving  not  only  of  the  secular  applause  of  dash 
ing  Machiavelian  politicians,  but  to  render  it  a  fit  theme  for 
all  the  devout  effusions  of  sacred  eloquence. 

On  the  forenoon  of  the  4th  of  November  last,  Doctor 
Richard  Price,  a  non-conforming  minister  of  eminence, 
preached  at  the  dissenting  meeting-house  of  the  Old  Jewry, 
to  his  club  or  society,  a  very  extraordinary  miscellaneous 
sermon,  in  which  there  are  some  good  moral  and  religious 
sentiments,  and  not  ill  expressed,  mixed  up  in  a  sort  of 
porridge  of  various  political  opinions  and  reflections ;  but 
the  Revolution  in  France  is  the  grand  ingredient  in  the 
cauldron.  I  consider  the  address  transmitted  by  the 
Revolution  Society  to  the  National  Assembly,  through  Earl 
Stanhope,  as  originating  in  the  principles  of  the  sermon,  and 
as  a  corollary  from  them.  It  was  moved  by  the  preacher  of 
that  discourse.  It  was  passed  by  those  who  came  reeking 
from  the  effect  of  the  sermon,  without  any  censure  or 
qualification,  expressed  or  implied.  If,  however,  any  of  the 
gentlemen  concerned  shall  wish  to  separate  the  sermon  from 
the  resolution,  they  know  how  to  acknowledge  the  one,  and 
to  disavow  the  other.  They  may  do  it :  I  cannot. 

Tor   my  part,    I   looked    on   that   sermon   as   the  public 
declaration  of  a  man  much  connected  with  literary  caballers, 


12  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

and  intriguing  philosophers;  with  political  theologians,  and 
theological  politicians,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  I  know 
they  set  him  up  as  a  sort  of  oracle ;  because,  with  the  best 
intentions  in  the  world,  he  naturally  philippises^  and  chants 
his  prophetic  song  in  exact  unison  with  their  designs. 

That  sermon  is  in  a  strain  which  I  believe  has  not  been 
heard  in  this  kingdom,  in  any  of  the  pulpits  which  are 
tolerated  or  encouraged  in  it,  since  the  year  1648;  when  a 
predecessor  of  Dr.  Price,  the  Rev.  Hugh  Peters,  made  the 
vault  of  the  king's  own  chapel  at  St.  James's  ring  with  the 
honour  and  privilege  of  the  saints,  who,  with  the  "high 
praises  of  God  in  their  mouths,  and  a  /zev-edged  sword  in 
their  hands,  were  to  execute  judgment  on  the  heathen,  and 
punishments  upon  the  people ;  to  bind  their  kings  with 
chains,  and  their  nobles  with  fetters  of  iron."1  Few 
harangues  from  the  pulpit,  except  in  the  days  of  your  league 
in  France,  or  in  the  days  of  our  solemn  league  and  covenant 
in  England,  have  ever  breathed  less  of  the  spirit  of 
moderation  than  this  lecture  in  the  Old  Jewry.  Supposing, 
however,  that  something  like  moderation  were  visible  in  this 
political  sermon  ;  yet  politics  and  the  pulpit  are  terms  that 
have  little  agreement.  No  sound  ought  to  be  heard  in  the 
church  but  the  healing  voice  of  Christian  charity.  The 
cause  of  civil  liberty  and  civil  government  gains  as  little  as 
that  of  religion  by  this  confusion  of  duties.  Those  who 
quit  their  proper  character,  to  assume  what  does  not  belong 
to  them,  are,  for  the  greater  part,  ignorant  both  of  the 
character  they  leave,  and  of  the  character  they  assume. 
Wholly  unacquainted  with  the  world  in  which  they  are  so 
fond  of  meddling,  and  inexperienced  in  all  its  affairs,  on 
which  they  pronounce  with  so  much  confidence,  they  have 
1  Psalm  cxlix. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  13 

nothing  of  politics  but  the  passions  they  excite.  Surely  the 
church  is  a  place  where  one  day's  truce  ought  to  be  allowed 
to  the  dissensions  and  animosities  of  mankind. 

This  pulpit  style,  revived  after  so  long  a  discontinuance, 
had  to  me  the  air  of  novelty,  and  of  a  novelty  not  wholly 
without  danger.  I  do  not  charge  this  danger  equally  to 
every  part  of  the  discourse.  The  hint  given  to  a  noble  and 
reverend  lay-divine,  who  is  supposed  high  in  office  in  one 
of  our  universities,1  and  other  lay-divines  "of  rank  and 
literature,"  may  be  proper  and  seasonable,  though  somewhat 
new.  If  the  noble  Seekers  should  find  nothing  to  satisfy 
their  pious  fancies  in  the  old  staple  of  the  national  church, 
or  in  all  the  rich  variety  to  be  found  in  the  well-assorted 
warehouses  of  the  dissenting  congregations,  Dr.  Price 
advises  them  to  improve  upon  non-conformity;  and  to  set 
up,  each  of  them,  a  separate  meeting-house  upon  his  own 
particular  principles.2  It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  this 
reverend  divine  should  be  so  earnest  for  setting  up  new 
churches,  and  so  perfectly  indifferent  concerning  the 
doctrine  which  may  be  taught  in  them.  His  zeal  is  of  a 
curious  character.  It  is  not  for  the  propagation  of  his  own 
opinions,  but  of  any  opinions.  It  is  not  for  the  diffusion  of 
truth,  but  for  the  spreading  of  contradiction.  Let  the  noble 
teachers  but  dissent,  it  is  no  matter  from  whom  or  from 
what.  This  great  point  once  secured,  it  is  taken  for  granted 

1  Discourse  on  the  Love  of  our  Country,  Nov.  41!),  1789,  by  Dr. 
I  Richard  Price,  3rd  edition,  pp.  17  and  18. 

-  "Those  who  dislike  that  mode  of  worship  which  is  prescribed  by 
public  authority,  ought,  if  they  can  find  no  worship  out  of  the  church 
tvhich  they  approve,  to  set  up  a  separate  worship  for  themselves ;  and  by 
lining  this,  and  giving  an  example  of  a  rational  and  manly  worship,  men 
l)f  weight  from  their  rank  and  literature  may  do  the  greatest  service  to 
lociety  and  the  world."— Page  18  Dr.  Price's  Sermon. 


i4  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

their  religion  will  be  rational  and  manly.  I  doubt  whether 
religion  would  reap  all  the  benefits  which  the  calculating 
divine  computes  from  this  "great  company  of  great 
preachers."  It  would  certainly  be  a  valuable  addition  of 
nondescripts  to  the  ample  collection  of  known  classes, 
genera  and  species,  which  at  present  beautify  the  hortus 
siccus  of  dissent.  A  sermon  from  a  noble  duke,  or  a  noble 
marquis,  or  a  noble  earl,  or  baron  bold,  would  certainly 
increase  and  diversify  the  amusements  of  this  town,  which 
begins  to  grow  satiated  with  the  uniform  round  of  its  vapid 
dissipations.  I  should  only  stipulate  that  these  new  Mess- 
Johns  in  robes  and  coronets  should  keep  some  sort  of 
bounds  in  the  democratic  and  levelling  principles  which  are 
expected  from  their  titled  pulpits.  The  new  evangelists 
will,  I  dare  say,  disappoint  the  hopes  that  are  conceived  of 
them.  They  will  not  become,  literally  as  well  as  figuratively, 
polemic  divines,  nor  be  disposed  so  to  drill  their  congrega 
tions,  that  they  may,  as  in  former  blessed  times,  preach 
their  doctrines  to  regiments  of  dragoons  and  corps  of 
infantry  and  artillery.  Such  arrangements,  however  favour 
able  to  the  cause  of  compulsory  freedom,  civil  and  religious, 
may  not  be  equally  conducive  to  the  national  tranquillity. 
These  few  restrictions  I  hope  are  no  great  stretches  of 
intolerance,  no  very  violent  exertions  of  despotism. 

But  I  may  say  of  our  preacher,  "  utinam  nugis  iota  ilia 
dedisset  tempora  scevitia" — All  things  in  this  his  fulminating 
bull  are  not  of  so  innoxious  a  tendency.  His  doctrines  affect 
our  constitution  in  its  vital  parts.  He  tells  the  Revolution 
Society  in  this  political  sermon  that  his  Majesty  "  is  almost 
the  only  lawful  king  in  the  world,  because  the  only  one  who 
owes  his  crown  to  the  choice  of  his  people."  As  to  the  kings  of 
the  world,  all  of  whom  (except  one)  this  archpontiff  of  the 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  15 

rights  of  men,  with  all  the  plenitude,  and  with  more  than  the 
boldness,  of  the  papal  deposing  power  in  its  meridian 
fervour  of  the  twelfth  century,  puts  into  one  sweeping 
clause  of  ban  and  anathema,  and  proclaims  usurpers  by 
circles  of  longitude  and  latitude  over  the  whole  globe,  it 
behoves  them  to  consider  how  they  admit  into  their  terri 
tories  these  apostolic  missionaries,  who  are  to  tell  their 
subjects  they  are  not  lawful  kings.  That  is  their  concern. 
It  is  ours,  as  a  domestic  interest  of  some  moment,  seriously 
to  consider  the  solidity  of  the  only  principle  upon  which 
these  gentlemen  acknowledge  a  king  of  Great  Britain  to  be 
entitled  to  their  allegiance. 

This  doctrine,  as  applied  to  the  prince  now  on  the  British 
throne,  either  is  nonsense,  and  therefore  neither  true  nor 
false,  or  it  affirms  a  most  unfounded,  dangerous,  illegal, 
and  unconstitutional  position.  According  to  this  spiritual 
doctor  of  politics,  if  his  Majesty  does  not  owre  his  crown  to 
the  choice  of  his  people,  he  is  no  lawful  king.  Now  nothing 
can  be  more  untrue  than  that  the  crown  of  this  kingdom  is 
so  held  by  his  Majesty.  Therefore,  if  you  follow  their  rule, 
the  king  of  Great  Britain,  who  most  certainly  does  not  owe 
lis  high  office  to  any  form  of  popular  election,  is  in  no 
respect  better  than  the  rest  of  the  gang  of  usurpers  who 
reign,  or  rather  rob,  all  over  the  face  of  this  our  miserable 
world,  without  any  sort  of  right  or  title  to  the  allegiance 
of  their  people.  The  policy  of  this  general  doctrine,  so 
qualified,  is  evident  enough.  The  propagators  of  this 
political  gospel  are  in  hopes  that  their  abstract  principle 
(their  principle  that  a  popular  choice  is  necessary  to  the 
legal  existence  of  the  sovereign  magistracy)  would  be  over 
looked,  whilst  the  king  of  Great  Britain  was  not  affected  by 
t.  In  the  meantime  the  ears  of  their  congregations  would 


T6  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

be  gradually  habituated  to  it,  as  if  it  were  a  first  principle 
admitted  without  dispute.  For  the  present  it  would  only 
operate  as  a  theory,  pickled  in  the  preserving  juices  of  pulpit 
eloquence  and  laid  by  for  future  use.  Condo  et  compono 
qiice.  mox  depromere  passim.  By  this  policy,  whilst  our 
government  is  soothed  with  a  reservation  in  its  favour,  to 
which  it  has  no  claim,  the  security,  which  it  has  in  common 
with  all  governments,  so  far  as  opinion  is  security,  is  taken 
away. 

Thus  these  politicians  proceed,  whilst  little  notice  is 
taken  of  their  doctrines ;  but  when  they  come  to  be 
examined  upon  the  plain  meaning  of  their  words  and  the 
direct  tendency  of  their  doctrines,  then  equivocations  and 
slippery  constructions  come  into  play.  When  they  say  the 
king  owes  his  crown  to  the  choice  of  his  people,  and  is 
therefore  the  only  lawful  sovereign  in  the  world,  they  will 
perhaps  tell  us  they  mean  to  say  no  more  than  that  some  of 
the  king's  predecessors  have  been  called  to  the  throne  by 
some  sort  of  choice ;  and  therefore  he  owes  his  crown  to 
the  choice  of  his  people.  Thus,  by  a  miserable  subterfuge, 
they  hope  to  render  their  proposition  safe  by  rendering  it 
nugatory.  They  are  welcome  to  the  asylum  they  seek  for 
their  offence,  since  they  take  refuge  in  their  folly.  For 
if  you  admit  this  interpretation,  how  does  their  idea  of  j 
election  differ  from  our  idea  of  inheritance?  And  how 
does  the  settlement  of  the  crown  in  the  Brunswick 
line  derived  from  James  the  First  come  to  legalise  our  j 
monarchy,  rather  than  that  of  any  of  the  neighbouring  ; 
countries?  At  some  time  or  other,  to  be  sure,  all  the 
beginners  of  dynasties  were  chosen  by  those  who  called 
them  to  govern.  There  is  ground  enough  for  the  opinion 
that  all  the  kingdoms  of  Europe  were,  at  a  remote  period, 

I 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  17 

elective,  with  more  or  fewer  limitations  in  the  objects  of 
choice.     But    whatever    kings    might    have    been    here,   or 
elsewhere,  a  thousand  years  ago,  or  in  whatever  manner  the 
ruling   dynasties  of   England   or   France  may  have  begun, 
the  king  of  Great  Britain  is  at  this  day  king  by  a  fixed  rule  of 
succession,  according  to  the  laws  of  his  country;  and  whilst 
the    legal    conditions   of  the   compact   of    sovereignty    are 
performed  by  him  (as  they  are  performed),    he   holds   his 
crown  in  contempt  of  the  choice  of  the  Revolution  Society, 
who  have  not  a  single  vote  for  a  king  amongst  them,  either 
individually    or    collectively;    though    I    make    no    doubt 
they  would   soon   erect    themselves    into    an    electoral  col 
lege,    if    things    were    ripe    to    give    effect    to    their   claim. 
His  Majesty's  heirs  and  successors,  each  in  his  time  and 
order,  will  come  to  the  crown  with  the  same  contempt  of 
their  choice  with  which  his  Majesty  has  succeeded  to  that 
he  wears. 

Whatever  may  be  the  success  of  evasion  in  explaining 
away  the  gross  error  rf fact,  which  supposes  that  his  Majesty 
(though  he  holds  it  in  concurrence  with  the  wishes)  owes  his 
crown  to  the  choice  of  his  people,  yet  nothing  can  evade 
their  full  explicit  declaration  concerning  the  principle  of 
a  right  in  the  people  to  choose;  which  right  is  directly 
maintained  and  tenaciously  adhered  to.  All  the  oblique 
insinuations  concerning  election  bottom  in  this  proposition, 
and  are  referable  to  it.  Lest  the  foundation  of  the  king's 
exclusive  legal  title  should  pass  for  a  mere  rant  of  adulatory 
freedom,  the  political  divine  proceeds  dogmatically  to  assert l 
that,  by  the  principles  of  the  Revolution,  the  people  of 
England  have  acquired  three  fundamental  rights,  all  which, 

1  -Discourse  on  the  Lore  of  our  Country,  by  Dr.  Price,  p.  34. 

2 


,8  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

with  him,  compose  one  system,  and  He  together  in  one  short 
sentence;  namely,  that  we  have  acquired  a  right, 
i.   "To  choose  our  own  governors." 
2    "  To  cashier  them  for  misconduct." 
,!   "To  frame  a  government  for  ourselves." 
Tins  new,  and  hitherto  unheard-of   bill  of   rights,  though 
made  in  the  name  of  the  whole  people,  belongs  to  those 
gentlemen  and  their  faction  only.     The  body  of  the  people 
of  England  have  no  share  in  it.     They  utterly  disclaim  ,t 
They  will  resist  the  practical  assertion  of  it  with  their  lives 
and   fortunes.     They  are   bound  to  do  so  by  the  laws  of 
their  country,  made  at  the  time   of  that  very  Revolution 
which    is   appealed   to   in    favour    of    the    fictmous   nghts 
claimed  by  the  Society  which  abuses  its  name. 
"  These  gentlemen  of  the  Old  Jewry,  in  all  their  reasonings 
on  the  Revolution  of  .688,  have  a  Revolution  which  hap 
pened   in   England  about  forty  years   before,  and  the  late 
French  Revolution,  so  much  before  their  eyes  and  m  the.r 
hearts,  that  they  are  constantly  confounding  all  the  Are, 
toother      It  is  necessary  that  we  should  separate  what  they 
confound.     We  must  recall  their  erring  fancies  to  the  acts 
of  the   Revolution  which  we   revere,  for   the  discovery  of 
its  true  principles.     If  the  principles  of  the  Revolution  of 
,688  are  anywhere  to  be  found,  it  is  in  the  statute  calk 
the  Declaration  of  Right.     In  that  most  wise,  sober,  and 
considerate    declaration,   drawn   up    by   great   lawyers  and 
great    statesmen,    and    not    by   warm   and    inexperienced 
enthusiasts,    not    one    word    is    said,    nor    one    suggestion 
made,  of  a  general  right  "to  choose  our  own  governors; 
to  cashier  them  for  misconduct ;  and  to  form  a  government 

for  ourselves"  ««MI- 

This  Declaration  of  Right  (the  act  of  the  ist  of  William 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  19 

and  Mary,  sess.  2,  ch.  2)  is  the  corner  stone  of  our  con 
stitution,  as  reinforced,  explained,  improved,  and  in  its 
fundamental  principles  for  ever  settled.  It  is  called  "An 
Act  for  declaring  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  subject,  and 
for  settli)ig  the  succession  of  the  crown."  You  will  observe 
that  these  rights  and  this  succession  are  declared  in  one 
body,  and  bound  indissolubly  together. 

A  few  years  after  this  period,  a  second  opportunity  offered 
for  asserting  a  right  of  election  to  the  crown.  On  the 
prospect  of  a  total  failure  of  issue  from  King  William,  and 
from  the  Princess,  afterwards  Queen  Anne,  the  consideration 
of  the  settlement  of  the  crown,  and  of  a  further  security  for 
the  liberties  of  the  people,  again  came  before  the  legislature. 
Did  they  this  second  time  make  any  provision  for  legalising 
the  crown  on  the  spurious  revolution  principles  of  the  Old 
Jewry  ?  No.  They  followed  the  principles  which  prevailed 
in  the  Declaration  of  Right ;  indicating  with  more  precision 
the  persons  who  were  to  inherit  in  the  Protestant  line. 
This  act  also  incorporated,  by  the  same  policy,  our  liberties, 
and  a  hereditary  succession  in  the  same  act.  Instead  of  a 
right  to  choose  our  own  governors,  they  declared  that  the 
succession  in  that  line  (the  Protestant  line  drawn  from  James 
the  First)  was  absolutely  necessary  "  for  the  peace,  quiet, 
and  security  of  the  realm,"  and  that  it  was  equally  urgent 
on  them  "  to  maintain  a  certainty  in  the  succession  thereof, 
to  which  the  subjects  may  safely  have  recourse  for  their 
protection."  Both  these  acts,  in  which  are  heard  the  un 
erring,  unambiguous  oracles  of  revolution  policy,  instead  of 
countenancing  the  delusive,  gipsy  predictions  of  a  "right  to 
choose  our  governors,"  prove  to  a  demonstration  how  totally 
adverse  the  wisdom  of  the  nation  was  from  turning  a  case 
of  necessity  into  a  rule  of  law. 


20  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

Unquestionably  there  was  at  the  Revolution,  in  the  person 
of  King  William,  a  small  and  a  temporary  deviation  from  the 
strict  order  of  a  regular  hereditary  succession  ;  but  it  is 
against  all  genuine  principles  of  jurisprudence  to  draw  a 
principle  from  a  law  made  in  a  special  case,  and  regarding 
an  individual  person.  Privi/egiutn  non  transit  in  exemphun. 
If  ever  there  was  a  time  favourable  for  establishing  the 
principle,  that  a  king  of  popular  choice  was  the  only  legal 
king,  without  all  doubt  it  was  at  the  Revolution.  Its  not 
being  done  at  that  time  is  a  proof  that  the  nation  was  of 
opinion  it  ought  not  to  be  done  at  any  time.  There  is  no 
person  so  completely  ignorant  of  our  history  as  not  to  know 
that  the  majority  in  parliament  of  both  parties  were  so  little 
disposed  to  anything  resembling  that  principle,  that  at  first 
they  were  determined  to  place  the  vacant  crown,  not  on  the 
head  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  but  on  that  of  his  wife  Mary, 
daughter  of  King  James,  the  eldest  born  of  the  issue  of  that 
king,  which  they  acknowledged  as  undoubtedly  his.  It 
would  be  to  repeat  a  very  trite  story,  to  recall  to  your 
memory  all  those  circumstances  which  demonstrated  that 
their  accepting  King  William  was  not  properly  a  choice ;  but 
to  all  those  who  did  not  wish,  in  effect,  to  recall  King  James, 
or  to  deluge  their  country  in  blood,  and  again  to  bring  their 
religion,  laws,  and  liberties  into  the  peril  they  had  just 
escaped,  it  was  an  act  of  necessiiy,  in  the  strictest  moral  sense 
in  which  necessity  can  be  taken. 

In  the  very  act,  in  which  for  a  time,  and  in  a  single  case, 
parliament  departed  from  the  strict  order  of  inheritance,  in 
favour  of  a  prince,  who,  though  not  next,  was  however  very 
near,  in  the  line  of  succession,  it  is  curious  to  observe  how 
Lord  Somers,  who  drew  the  bill  called  the  Declaration  of 
Right,  has  comported  himself  on  that  delicate  occasion.  It 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  21 

is  curious  to  observe  with  what  address  this  temporary 
solution  of  continuity  is  kept  from  the  eye  :  whilst  all  that 
could  be  found  in  this  act  of  necessity  to  countenance  the 
idea  of  a  hereditary  succession  is  brought  forward,  and 
fostered,  and  made  the  most  of,  by  this  great  man,  and  by 
the  legislature  who  followed  him.  Quitting  the  dry,  im 
perative  style  of  an  act  of  parliament,  he  makes  the  Lords 
and  Commons  fall  to  a  pious,  legislative  ejaculation,  and 
declare  that  they  consider  it  "as  a  marvellous  providence, 

,  and  merciful  goodness  of  God  to  this  nation,  to  preserve 
their  said  Majesties'  royal  persons,  most  happily  to  reign 
over  us  on  the  throne  of  their  ancestors,  for  which,  from  the 
bottom  of  their  hearts,  they  return  their  humblest  thanks 
and  praises." — The  legislature  plainly  had  in  view  the  act  of 
recognition  of  the  first  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  chap.  3rd,  and 
of  that  of  James  the  First,  chap,  ist,  both  acts  strongly  de 
claratory  of  the  inheritable  nature  of  the  crown,  and  in  many 
parts  they  follow,  with  a  nearly  literal  precision,  the  words 
and  even  the  form  of  thanksgiving  which  is  found  in  these 
old  declaratory  statutes. 

The  two  Houses,  in  the  act  of  King  William,  did  not 

'  thank  God  that  they  had  found  a  fair  opportunity  to  assert 
a  right  to  choose  their  own  governors,  much  less  to  make  an 
election  the  only  lawful  title  to  the  crown.  Their  having 
3een  in  a  condition  to  avoid  the  very  appearance  of  it,  as 
nuch  as  possible,  was  by  them  considered  as  a  providential 

,'  :scape.  They  threw  a  politic,  well-wrought  veil  over  every 
ircumstance  tending  to  weaken  the  rights,  which  in  the 

'•   neliorated  order  of  succession  they  meant  to  perpetuate ; 

'.  T  which  might  furnish  a  precedent  for  any  future  departure 
"om  what  they  had  then  settled  for  ever.  Accordingly, 
iat  they  might  not  relax  the  nerves  of  their  monarchy, 


22  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

and  that  they  might  preserve  a  close  conformity  to  the  prac 
tice  of  their  ancestors,  as  it  appeared  in  the  declaratory 
statutes  of  Queen  Mary1  and  Queen  Elizabeth,  in  the  next 
clause  they  vest,  by  recognition,  in  their  Majesties,  all  the 
legal  prerogatives  of  the  crown,  declaring  "that  in  them 
they  are  most  fully  ^  rightfully,  and  entirely  invested,  incor 
porated,  united,  and  annexed."  In  the  clause  which  follows, 
for  preventing  questions,  by  reason  of  any  pretended  titles 
to  the  crown,  they  declare  (observing  also  in  this  the  tradi 
tionary  language,  along  with  the  traditionary  policy  of  the 
nation,  and  repeating  as  from  a  rubric  the  language  of  the 
preceding  acts  of  Elizabeth  and  James)  that  on  the  pre 
serving  "a  certainty  in  the  SUCCESSION  thereof,  the  unity, 
peace,  and  tranquillity  of  this  nation  doth,  under  God,  wholly 
depend." 

They  knew  that  a  doubtful  title  of  succession  would  but 
too  much  resemble  an  election  ;  and  that  an  election  would 
be  utterly  destructive  of  the  "  unity,  peace,  and  tranquillity 
of  this  nation,"  which  they  thought  to  be  considerations  of 
some  moment.  To  provide  for  these  objects,  and  therefore 
to  exclude  for  ever  the  Old  Jewry  doctrine  of  "a  right  to 
choose  our  own  governors,"  they  follow  with  a  clause 
containing  a  most  solemn  pledge,  taken  from  the  preceding 
act  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  as  solemn  a  pledge  as  ever  was  or 
can  be  given  in  favour  of  a  hereditary  succession,  and  as 
solemn  a  renunciation  as  could  be  made  of  the  principles  by 
this  Society  imputed  to  them.  "The  Lords  spiritual  and 
temporal,  and  Commons,  do,  in  the  name  of  all  the  people 
aforesaid,  most  humbly  and  faithfully  submit  themselves, 
their  heirs  and  posterities  for  ever;  and  do  faithfully  promise 
that  they  will  stand  to,  maintain,  and  defend  their  said 
1  ist  Mary,  scss.  3,  ch.  I. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  23 

Majesties,  and  also  the  limitation  of  the  crown,  herein 
specified  and  contained,  to  the  utmost  of  their  powers,"  etc. 
So  far  is  it  from  being  true  that  we  acquired  a  right  by 
the  Revolution  to  elect  our  kings;  that  if  we  had  possessed  it 
before,  the  English  nation  did  at  that  time  most  solemnly 
renounce  and  abdicate  it,  for  themselves,  and  for  all  their 
posterity  for  ever.  These  gentlemen  may  value  themselves 
as  much  as  they  please  on  their  Whig  principles;  but  I 
never  desire  to  be  thought  a  better  Whig  than  Lord  Somcrs ; 
or  to  understand  the  principles  of  the  Revolution  better 
than  those  by  whom  it  was  brought  about;  or  to  read  in  the 
Declaration  of  Right  any  mysteries  unknown  to  those  whose 
penetrating  style  has  engraved  in  our  ordinances,  and  in  our 
hearts,  the  words  and  spirit  of  that  immortal  law. 

It  is  true  that,  aided  with  the  powers  derived  from  force 
and  opportunity,  the  nation  was  at  that  time,  in  some  sense, 
free  to  take  what  course  it  pleased  for  filling  the  throne; 
but  only  free  to  do  so  upon  the  same  grounds  on  which  they 
might  have  wholly  abolished  their  monarchy,  and  every 
other  part  of  their  constitution.  However,  they  did  not 
think  such  bold  changes  within  their  commission.  It  is 
indeed  difficult,  perhaps  impossible,  to  give  limits  to  the 
mere  abstract  competence  of  the  supreme  power,  such  as  was 
exercised  by  parliament  at  that  time ;  but  the  limits  of 
a  moral  competence,  subjecting,  even  in  powers  more 
indisputably  sovereign,  occasional  will  to  permanent  reason, 
and  to  the  steady  maxims  of  faith,  justice,  and  fixed 
fundamental  policy,  are  perfectly  intelligible,  and  perfectly 
binding  upon  those  who  exercise  any  authority,  under  any 
name,  or  under  any  title,  in  the  state.  The  House  of  Lords, 
for  instance,  is  not  morally  competent  to  dissolve  the  House 
of  Commons  ;  no,  nor  even  to  dissolve  itself,  nor  to  abdicate, 


24  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

if  It  would,  its  portion  in  the  legislature  of  the  kingdom. 
Though  a  king  may  abdicate  for  his  own  person,  he  cannot 
abdicate  for  the  monarchy.     By  as  strong,  or  by  a  stronger 
reason,  the  House  of  Commons  cannot  renounce  its  share 
of  authority.     The  engagement  and  pact  of  society,  which 
generally  goes  by  the  name  of  the  constitution,  forbids  such 
invasion  and  such  surrender.     The  constituent  parts  of  a 
state  are  obliged  to  hold  their  public  faith  with  each  other, 
and  with  all   those  who  derive  any  serious  interest  under 
their  engagements,   as  much  as  the  whole   state  is  bound 
to  keep    its    faith   with   separate   communities.     Otherwise 
competence  and  power  would  soon  be  confounded,  and  no 
law   be   left  but   the   will   of  a   prevailing   force.     On   this 
principle  the  succession  of  the  crown  has  always  been  what 
it  now  is,  a  hereditary  succession  by  law:  in  the  old  line  it 
was  a  succession  by  the  common   law;   in  the  new  by  the 
statute  law,  operating  on  the  principles  of  the  common  law, 
not  changing  the  substance,  but  regulating  the  mode,  and 
describing  the  persons.      Both  these  descriptions  of  law  are 
of  the  same  force,  and  are  derived  from  an  equal  authority, 
emanating    from    the    common    agreement    and    original 
compact  of  the  state,  comtmtni  sponsiom  reipitbliccc,  and  as 
such  are  equally  binding  on  king  and  people  too,  as  long  as 
the  terms  are  observed,  and  they  continue  the  same  body 
politic. 

It  is  far  from  impossible  to  reconcile,  if  we  do  not  suffer 
ourselves  to  be  entangled  in  the  mazes  of  metaphysic  sophis 
try,  the  use  both  of  a  fixed  rule  and  an  occasional  deviation; 
the  sacredness  of  a  hereditary  principle  of  succession  in  our 
government,  with  a  power  of  change  in  its  application  in 
cases  of  extreme  emergency.  Even  in  that  extremity  (if  we 
take  the  measure  of  our  rights  by  our  exercise  of  them  at 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  25 

the  Revolution),  the  change  is  to  be  confined  to  the  peccant 
part  only;  to  the  part  which  produced  the  necessary  devia 
tion;  and  even  then  it  is  to  be  effected  without  a  decomposi 
tion  of  the  whole  civil  and  political  mass,  for  the  purpose  of 
originating  a  new  civil  order  out  of  the  first  elements  of 
society. 

A  state  without  the  means  of  some  change  is  without  the 
means  of  its  conversation.     Without  such  means  it  might 
even  risk  the  loss  of  that  part  of  the  constitution  which  it 
wished  the  most  religiously  to  preserve.     The  two  principles 
of  conversation  and  correction  operated  strongly  at  the  two 
critical  periods  of  the  Restoration  and    Revolution,  when 
England  found  itself  without  a  king.      At  both  those  periods 
the  nation  had  lost  the  bond  of  union  in  their  ancient  edifice; 
I  they  did  not,   however,  dissolve  the  whole  fabric.     On  the 
:  contrary,  in  both  cases  they  regenerated  the  deficient  part 
of  the  old  constitution  through  the  parts  which  were  not 
|  impaired.     They  kept  these  old  parts  exactly  as  they  were, 
that  the  part    recovered  might  be  suited  to  them.     They 
cacted  by  the  ancient  organised  states  in  the  shape  of  their 
old  organisation,  and  not  by  the  organic  molecuke  of  a  dis- 
?banded  people.      At  no  time,  perhaps,   did  the  sovereign 
^legislature  manifest  a  more  tender  regard  to  that  fundamental 
•principle  of  British  constitutional  policy  than  at  the  time  of 
!:he  Revolution,  when  it    deviated  from  the  direct  line  of 
hereditary  succession.     The  crown  was    carried  somewhat 
out  of  the  line  in  which  it  had  before  moved  ;  but  the  new 
ine  was  derived  from  the  same  stock.     It  was  still  a  line  of 
Hereditary  descent ;  still  a  hereditary  descent  in  the  same 
jlood,  though  a  hereditary  descent  qualified  with  Protest- 
ntism.     When  the  legislature  altered  the  direction,  but  kept 
he  principle,  they  showed  that  they  held  it  inviolable. 


26  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

On  this  principle,  the  law  of  inheritance  had  admitted 
some  amendment  in  the  old  time,  and  long  before  the  era 
of  the  Revolution.  Some  time  after  the  conquest  great 
questions  arose  upon  the  legal  principles  of  hereditary 
descent.  It  became  a  matter  of  doubt,  whether  the  heir/^ 
capita  or  the  heir  per  stripes  wras  to  succeed ;  but  whether 
the  heir  per  capita  gave  way  when  the  heirdom  per  stripes 
took  place,  or  the  Catholic  heir  when  the  Protestant  was 
preferred,  the  inheritable  principle  survived  with  a  sort  of 
immortality  through  all  transmigrations — multosque  per  annos 
stat  foHuna  domus^  et  avi  numerantur  avorum.  This  is  the 
spirit  of  our  constitution,  not  only  in  its  settled  course,  but 
in  all  its  revolutions.  Whoever  came  in,  or  however  he 
came  in,  whether  he  obtained  the  crown  by  law  or  by 
force,  the  hereditary  succession  was  either  continued  or 
adopted. 

The  gentlemen  of  the  Society  for  Revolutions  see  nothing 
in  that  of  1688  but  the  deviation  from  the  constitution;  and 
they  take  the  deviation  from  the  principle  for  the  principle. 
They  have  little  regard  to  the  obvious  consequences  of  their 
doctrine,  though  they  must  see  that  it  leaves  positive  autho 
rity  in  very  few  of  the  positive  institutions  of  this  country. 
When  such  an  unwarrantable  maxim  is  once  established, 
that  no  throne  is  lawful  but  the  elective,  no  one  act  of  the 
princes  who  preceded  this  era  of  fictitious  election  can  be 
valid.  Do  these  theorists  mean  to  imitate  some  of  their 
predecessors,  who  dragged  the  bodies  of  our  ancient  sove-  ' 
reigns  out  of  the  quiet  of  their  tombs  ?  Do  they  mean  to 
attaint  and  disable  backwards  all  the  kings  that  have  reigned 
before  the  Revolution,  and  consequently  to  stain  the  throne  i 
of  England  with  the  blot  of  a  continual  usurpation?  Do 
they  mean  to  invalidate,  annul,  or  to  call  into  question, 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  27 

together  with  the  titles  of  the  whole  line  of  our  kings,  that 
great  body  of  our  statute  law  which  passed  under  those 
whom  they  treat  as  usurpers?  to  annul  laws  of  inestimable 
value  to  our  liberties — of  as  great  value  at  least  as  any  which 
have  passed  at  or  since  the  period  of  the  Revolution?  If 
kings,  who  did  not  owe  their  crown  to  the  choice  of  their 
people,  had  no  title  to  make  laws,  what  will  become  of  the 
statute  de  taliagio  non  concedendo  ? — of  the  petition  of  right  1 
— of  the  act  of  habeas  corpus  ?  Do  these  new  doctors  of  the 
rights  of  men  presume  to  assert  that  King  James  the  Second, 
who  came  to  the  crown  as  next  of  blood,  according  to  the 
rules  of  a  then  unqualified  succession,  was  not  to  all  intents 
and  purposes  a  lawful  king  of  England,  before  he  had  done 
any  of  those  acts  which  were  justly  construed  into  an  abdi 
cation  of  his  crown  ?  If  he  was  not,  much  trouble  in  parlia 
ment  might  have  been  saved  at  the  period  these  gentlemen 
commemorate.  But  King  James  was  a  bad  king  with  a  good 
title,  and  not  a  usurper.  The  princes  who  succeeded 
according  to  the  act  of  parliament  which  settled  the  crown 
on  the  Electress  Sophia  and  on  her  descendants,  being 
Protestants,  came  in  as  much  by  a  title  of  inheritance  as 
King  James  did.  He  came  in  according  to  the  law,  as  it 
stood  at  his  accession  to  the  crown ;  and  the  princes  of  the 
House  of  Brunswick  came  to  the  inheritance  of  the  crown, 
not  by  election,  but  by  the  law,  as  it  stood  at  their  several 
accessions  of  Protestant  descent  and  inheritance,  as  I  hope 
I  have  shown  sufficiently. 

The  law  by  which  this  royal  family  is  specifically  des 
tined  to  the  succession,  is  the  act  of  the  i2th  and  i3th  of 
King  William.  The  terms  of  this  act  bind  "us  and  our 
htirS)  and  our  posterity,  to  them,  their  fairs,  and  their  pos 
terity"  being  Protestants,  to  the  end  of  time,  in  the  same 


28  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

words  as  the  Declaration  of  Right  had  bound  us  to 
the  heirs  of  King  William  and  Queen  Mary.  It  there 
fore  secures  both  a  hereditary  crown  and  a  hereditary 
allegiance.  On  what  ground,  except  the  constitutional 
policy  of  forming  an  establishment  to  secure  that  kind 
of  succession  which  is  to  preclude  a  choice  of  the  people 
for  ever,  could  the  legislature  have  fastidiously  rejected  the 
fair  and  abundant  choice  which  our  country  presented  to 
them,  and  searched  in  strange  lands  for  a  foreign  princess, 
from  whose  womb  the  line  of  our  future  rulers  were  to 
derive  their  title  to  govern  millions  of  men  through  a  series 
of  ages  ? 

The  Princess  Sophia  was  named  in  the  act  of  settlement 
of  the  1 2th  and  isth  of  King  William,  for  a  stock  and  root 
of  inheritance  to  our  kings,  and  not  for  her  merits  as  a 
temporary  administratrix  of  a  power  which  she  might  not, 
and  in  fact  did  not,  herself  ever  exercise.  She  was  adopted 
for  one  reason,  and  for  one  only,  because,  says  the  act, 
"the  most  excellent  Princess  Sophia,  Electress  and  Duchess 
Dowager  of  Hanover,  is  daughter  of  the  most  excellent 
Princess  Elizabeth,  late  Queen  of  Bohemia,  daughter  of 
our  late  sovereign  lord  King  James  the  First,  of  happy 
memory,  and  is  hereby  declared  to  be  the  next  in  succession 
in  the  Protestant  line,"  etc.  etc.;  "and  the  crown  shall 
continue  to  the  heirs  of  her  body,  being  Protestants." 
This  limitation  was  made  by  parliament,  that  through  the 
Princess  Sophia  an  inheritable  line  not  only  was  to  be 
continued  in  future,  but  (what  they  thought  very  material) 
that  through  her  it  was  to  be  connected  with  the  old  stock 
of  inheritance  in  King  James  the  First;  in  order  that  the 
monarchy  might  preserve  an  unbroken  unity  through  all 
ages,  and  might  be  preserved  (with  safety  to  our  religion) 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  29 

in  the  old  approved  mode  by  descent,  in  which,  if  our 
liberties  had  been  once  endangered,  they  had  often,  through 
all  storms  and  struggles  of  prerogative  and  privilege,  been 
preserved.  They  did  well.  No  experience  has  taught  us 
that  in  any  other  course  or  method  than  that  of  a  heredi 
tary  crown  our  liberties  can  be  regularly  perpetuated  and 
preserved  sacred  as  our  hereditary  right.  An  irregular, 
convulsive  movement  may  be  necessary  to  throw  off  an 
irregular,  convulsive  disease.  But  the  course  of  succession 
is  the  healthy  habit  of  the  British  constitution.  Was  it  that 
the  legislature  wanted,  at  the  act  for  the  limitation  of 
the  crown  in  the  Hanoverian  line,  drawn  through  the 
female  descendants  of  James  the  First,  a  due  sense  of 
the  inconveniences  of  having  two  or  three,  or  possibly 
more,  foreigners  in  succession  to  the  British  throne?  No  !— 
they  had  a  due  sense  of  the  evils  which  might  happen  from 
such  foreign  rule,  and  more  than  a  due  sense  of  them.  But 
a  more  decisive  proof  cannot  be  given  of  the  full  conviction 
of  the  British  nation,  that  the  principles  of  the  Revolution 
did  not  authorise  them  to  elect  kings  at  their  pleasure,  and 
without  any  attention  to  the  ancient  fundamental  principles 
of  our  government,  than  their  continuing  to  adopt  a  plan  of 
hereditary  Protestant  succession  in  the  old  line,  with  all 
the  dangers  and  all  the  inconveniences  of  its  being  a  foreign 
line  full  before  their  eyes,  and  operating  with  the  utmost 
force  upon  their  minds. 

A  few  years  ago  I  should  be  ashamed  to  overload  a  matter, 
so  capable  of  supporting  itself,  by  the  then  unnecessary 
support  of  any  argument;  but  this  seditious,  unconstitu 
tional  doctrine  is  now  publicly  taught,  avowed,  and  printed. 
The  dislike  I  feel  to  revolutions,  the  signals  for  which  have 
so  often  been  given  from  pulpits  ;  the  spirit  of  change  that 


3o  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

is  gone  abroad ;  the  total  contempt  which  prevails  with  you, 
and  may  come  to  prevail  with  us,  of  all  ancient  institutions, 
when  set  in  opposition  to  a  present  sense  of  convenience,  or 
to  the  bent  of  a  present  inclination  :  all  these  considerations 
make  it  not  unadvisable,  in  my  opinion,  to  call  back  our 
attention  to  the  true  principles  of  our  own  domestic  laws ; 
that  you,  my  French  friend,  should  begin  to  know,  and  that 
we  should  continue  to  cherish  them.  We  ought  not,  on 
either  side  of  the  water,  to  suffer  ourselves  to  be  imposed 
upon  by  the  counterfeit  wares  which  some  persons,  by  a 
double  fraud,  export  to  you  in  illicit  bottoms,  as  raw 
commodities  of  British  growth,  though  wholly  alien  to  our 
soil,  in  order  afterwards  to  smuggle  them  back  again  into 
this  country,  manufactured  after  the  newest  Paris  fashion  of 
an  improved  liberty. 

The  people  of  England  will  not  ape  the  fashions  they  have 
never  tried,  nor  go  back  to  those  which  they  have  found 
mischievous  on  trial.  They  look  upon  the  legal  hereditary 
succession  of  their  crown  as  among  their  rights,  not  as 
among  their  wrongs ;  as  a  benefit,  not  as  a  grievance ;  as  a 
security  for  their  liberty,  not  as  a  badge  of  servitude.  They 
look  on  the  frame  of  their  commonwealth,  such  as  it 
stands,  to  be  of  inestimable  value;  and  they  conceive  the 
undisturbed  succession  of  the  crown  to  be  a  pledge  of  the 
stability  and  perpetuity  of  all  the  other  members  of  our 
constitution. 

I  shall  beg  leave,  before  I  go  any  further,  to  take  notice 
of  some  paltry  artifices  which  the  abettors  of  election,  as 
the  only  lawful  title  to  the  crown,  are  ready  to  employ, 
in  order  to  render  the  support  of  the  just  principles  of  our 
constitution  a  task  somewhat  invidious.  These  sophisters 
substitute  a  fictitious  cause,  and  feigned  personages,  in 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  31 

whose  favour  they  suppose  you  engaged,  whenever  you 
defend  the  inheritable  nature  of  the  crown.  It  is  common 
with  them  to  dispute  as  if  they  were  in  a  conflict  with  some 
of  those  exploded  fanatics  of  slavery,  who  formerly  main 
tained,  what  I  believe  no  creature  now  maintains,  "  that  the 
crown  is  held  by  divine  hereditary  and  indefeasible  right." 
—These  old  fanactics  of  single  arbitrary  power  dogmatised 
as  if  hereditary  royalty  was  the  only  lawful  government  in 
;he  world,  just  as  our  new  fanatics  of  popular  arbitrary 
3ower  maintain  that  a  popular  election  is  the  sole  lawful 
source  of  authority.  The  old  prerogative  enthusiasts,  it  is 
true,  did  speculate  foolishly,  and  perhaps  impiously  too,  as 
f  monarchy  had  more  of  a  divine  sanction  than  any  other 
mode  of  government ;  and  as  if  a  right  to  govern  by  inherit 
ance  were  in  strictness  indefeasible  in  every  person,  who 
should  be  found  in  the  succession  to  a  throne,  and  under 
every  circumstance,  which  no  civil  or  political  right  can  be. 
But  an  absurd  opinion  concerning  the  king's  hereditary  right 
to  the  crown  does  not  prejudice  one  that  is  rational,  and 
jottomed  upon  solid  principles  of  law  and  policy.  If  all 
the  absurd  theories  of  lawyers  and  divines  were  to  vitiate 
the  objects  in  which  they  are  conversant,  we  should  have  no 
law  and  no  religion  left  in  the  world.  But  an  absurd  theory 
on  one  side  of  a  question  forms  no  justification  for  alleging 

false  fact,  or  promulgating  mischievous  maxims,  on  the 
other. 

The  second  claim  of  the  Revolution  Society  is  "a  right  of 
cashiering  their  governors  for  misconduct"  Perhaps  the 
apprehensions  our  ancestors  entertained  of  forming  such  a 
precedent  as  that  "of  cashiering  for  misconduct,"  was  the 
:ause  that  the  declaration  of  the  act,  which  implied  the 
ibdication  of  King  James,  was,  if  it  had  any  fault,  rather  too 


32  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

guarded,  and  too  circumstantial.1  But  all  this  guard,  and 
all  this  accumulation  of  circumstances,  serves  to  show  the 
spirit  of  caution  which  predominated  in  the  national  councils 
in  a  situation  in  which  men  irritated  by  oppression,  and 
elevated  by  a  triumph  over  it,  are  apt  to  abandon  themselves 
to  violent  and  extreme  courses  :  it  shows  the  anxiety  of  the 
great  men  who  influenced  the  conduct  of  affairs  at  that  great 
event  to  make  the  Revolution  a  parent  of  settlement,  and 
not  a  nursery  of  future  revolutions. 

No  government  could  stand  a  moment,  if  it  could  be 
blown  down  with  anything  so  loose  and  indefinite  as  an 
opinion  of  "misconduct"  They  who  led  at  the  Revolution 
grounded  the  virtual  abdication  of  King  James  upon  no 
such  light  and  uncertain  principle.  They  charged  him  with 
nothing  else  than  a  design,  confirmed  by  a  multitude  of 
illegal  overt  acts,  to  subvert  the  Protestant  church  and  state. 
and  their  fundamental,  unquestionable  laws  and  liberties :  I 
they  charged  him  with  having  broken  the  original  contract ;' 
between  king  and  people.  This  was  more  than  misconduct. 
A  grave  and  overruling  necessity  obliged  them  to  take  the 
step  they  took,  and  took  with  infinite  reluctance,  as  under 
that  most  rigorous  of  all  laws.  Their  trust  for  the  future 
preservation  of  the  constitution  was  not  in  future  revolutions. 
The  grand  policy  of  all  their  regulations  was  to  render  it 
almost  impracticable  for  any  future  sovereign  to  compel  the 
states  of  the  kingdom  to  have  again  recourse  to  those  violent  \ 

1  "That  King  James  the  Second,  having  endeavoured  to  subvert 
the  constitution  of  the  kingdom  by  breaking  the  original  contract  •• 
between  king  and  people,  and,  by  the  advice  of  Jesuits,  and  other  j 
wicked  persons,  having  violated  the  fundamental  laws,  and  having\ 
withdrawn  himself  out  of  t  Jit  kingdom,  hath  abdicate  {  the  government,  ! 
and  the  throne  is  thereby  vacant  " 

} 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  33 

remedies.  They  left  the  crown  what,  in  the  eye  and  estima 
tion  of  law,  it  had  ever  been,  perfectly  irresponsible.  In  order 
to  lighten  the  crown  still  further,  they  aggravated  responsibility 
on  ministers  of  state.  By  the  statute  of  the  ist  of  King 
William,  sess.  2nd,  called  "  the  act for  declaring  the  rights  and 
liberties  of  tlie  subject,  and  for  settling  the  succession  to  the  crow  a" 
they  enacted  that  the  ministers  should  serve  the  crown  on 
the  terms  of  that  declaration.  They  secured  soon  after  the 
frequent  meetings  of  parliament,  by  which  the  whole  govern 
ment  would  be  under  the  constant  inspection  and  active 
control  of  the  popular  representative  and  of  the  magnates  of 
the  kingdom.  In  the  next  great  constitutional  act,  that  of 
the  1 2th  and  i3th  of  King  William,  for  the  further  limitation 
of  the  crown,  and  better  securing  the  rights  and  liberties  of 
the  subject,  they  provided  "  that  no  pardon  under  the  great 
seal  of  England  should  be  pleadable  to  an  impeachment  by 
the  Commons  in  parliament.''  The  rule  laid  down  for 
government  in  the  Declaration  of  Right,  the  constant  inspec 
tion  of  parliament,  the  practical  claim  of  impeachment,  they 
thought  infinitely  a  better  security  not  only  for  their  consti 
tutional  liberty,  but  against  the  vices  of  administration,  than 
the  reservation  of  a  right  so  difficult  in  the  practice,  so  un 
certain  in  the  issue,  and  often  so  mischievous  in  the  conse 
quences,  as  that  of  "cashiering  their  governors." 

Dr.  Price,  in  his  sermon,1  condemns  very  properly  the 
practice  of  gross,  adulatory  addresses  to  kings.  Instead  of 
this  fulsome  style,  he  proposes  that  his  Majesty  should  be 
told,  on  occasions  of  congratulation,  that  "he  is  to  consider 
himself  as  more  properly  the  servant  than  the  sovereign  of 
his  people."  Eor  a  compliment,  this  new  form  of  address 

'js  not  seem  to  be  very  soothing.     Those  who  are  servants 
1  Pp.  22-24. 

3 


34  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

in  name,  as  well  as  in  effect,  do  not  like  to  be  told  of  their 
situation,  their  duty,  and  their  obligations.  The  slave,  in 
the  old  play,  tells  his  master,  "Hcec  commemoratio  est  quasi  ex- 
probatio.n  It  is  not  pleasant  as  compliment;  it  is  not  whole 
some  as  instruction.  After  all,  if  the  king  were  to  bring 
himself  to  echo  this  new  kind  of  address,  to  adopt  it  in 
terms,  and  even  to  take  the  appellation  of  Servant  of  the 
People  as  his  royal  style,  how  either  he  or  we  should  be 
much  mended  by  it,  I  cannot  imagine.  I  have  seen  very 
assuming  letters,  signed,  Your  most  obedient,  humble 
servant.  The  proudest  domination  that  ever  was  endured 
on  earth  took  a  title  of  still  greater  humility  than  that  which 
is  now  proposed  for  sovereigns  by  the  Apostle  of  Liberty. 
Kings  and  nations  were  trampled  upon  by  the  foot  of  one 
calling  himself  "the  Servant  of  Servants;"  and  mandates 
for  deposing  sovereigns  were  sealed  with  the  signet  of  "  the 
Fisherman." 

I  should  have  considered  all  this  as  no  more  than  a  sort 
of  flippant,  vain  discourse,  in  which,  as  in  an  unsavoury 
fume,  several  persons  suffer  the  spirit  of  liberty  to  evaporate, 
if  it  were  not  plainly  in  support  of  the  idea,  and  a  part  of 
the  scheme,  of  "cashiering  kings  for  misconduct."  In  that 
light  it  is  worth  some  observation. 

Kings,  in  one  sense,  are  undoubtedly  the  servants  of  the 
people,  because  their  power  has  no  other  rational  end  than 
that  of  the  general  advantage ;  but  it  is  not  true  that  they 
are,  in  the  ordinary  sense  (by  our  constitution  at  least), 
anything  like  servants ;  the  essence  of  whose  situation  is  to 
obey  the  commands  of  some  other,  and  to  be  removable  at 
pleasure.  But  the  king  of  Great  Britain  obeys  no  other 
person  ;  all  other  persons  are  individually,  and  collectively 
too,  under  him,  and  owe  to  him  a  legal  obedience.  The  law, 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  35 

which  knows  neither  to  flatter  nor  to  insult,  calls  this  high 
magistrate,  not  our  servant,  as  this  humble  divine  calls 
him,  but  "our  sovereign  Lord  the  King;"  and  we,  on  our 
parts,  have  learned  to  speak  only  the  primitive  language  of 
the  law,  and  not  the  confused  jargon  of  their  Babylonian 
pulpits. 

^  As  he  is  not  to  obey  us,  but  as  we  are  to  obey  the  law  in 
him,  our  constitution  has  made  no  sort  of  provision  towards 
rendering  him,  as  a  servant,  in  any  degree  responsible.  Our 
constitution  knows  nothing  of  a  magistrate  like  the  Justida 
of  Arragon  ;  nor  of  any  court  legally  appointed,  nor  of  any 
process  legally  settled,  for  submitting  the  king  to  the  respon 
sibility  belonging  to  all  servants.  In  this  he  is  not  dis 
tinguished  from  the  Commons  and  the  Lords,  who,  in  their 
several  public  capacities,  can  never  be  called  to  an  account 
for  their  conduct ;  although  the  Revolution  Society  chooses 
to  assert,  in  direct  opposition  to  one  of  the  wisest  and  most 
beautiful  parts  of  our  constitution,  that  "a  king  is  no  more 
than  the  first  servant  of  the  public,  created  by  it,  and 
responsible  to  it" 

111  would  our  ancestors  at  the  Revolution  have  deserved 
their  fame  for  wisdom,  if  they  had  found  no  security  for 
their  freedom,  but  in  rendering  their  government  feeble  in 
its  operations  and  precarious  in  its  tenure ;  if  they  had  been 
able  to  contrive  no  better  remedy  against  arbitrary  power 
than  civil  confusion.  Let  these  gentlemen  state  who  that 
representative  public  is  to  whom  they  will  affirm  the  king,  as 
a  servant,  to  be  responsible.  It  will  be  then  time  enough 
for  me  to  produce  to  them  the  positive  statute  law  which 
affirms  that  he  is  not. 

The  ceremony  of  cashiering  kings,  of  which  these  gentle 
men  talk  so  much  at  their  ease,  can  rarely,  if  ever,  be  per- 


L 

36  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

formed  without  force.     It  then  becomes  a  case  of  war,  and 
not  of  constitution.     Laws  are  commanded  to  hold  their 
tongues  amongst    arms  ;  and    tribunals  fall  to  the  ground 
with  the  peace  they  are  no  longer  able  to  uphold.     The  Re 
volution  of  1688  was  obtained  by  a  just  war,  in  the  only  case 
in  which  any  war,  and  much  more  a  civil  war,  can  be  just. 
4 '  Justa  bella  quibus  necessaria"    The  question  of  dethroning, 
or,  if  these  gentlemen  like  the  phrase  better.  "  cashiering 
kings,"  will  always  be,  as  it  has  always  been,  an  extraordinary 
question  of  state,  and  wholly  out  of  the  law;  a  question  (like 
all  other  questions  of  state)  of  dispositions,  and  of  means, 
and  of  probable  consequences,  rather  than  of  positive  rights. 
As  it  was  not  made  for  common  abuses,  so  it  is  not  to  be 
agitated  by  common  minds.     The  speculative  line  of  de 
marcation,  where  obedience  ought  to  end,  and  resistance 
must  begin,  is  faint,  obscure,  and  not  easily  definable.     It 
is  not  a  single  act,  or  a  single  event,  which  determines  it. 
Governments  must  be  abused  and  deranged  indeed,  before 
it  can  be  thought  of;  and  the  prospect  of  the  future  must 
be  as  bad  as  the  experience  of  the  past.     When  things  are 
in  that  lamentable  condition,  the  nature  of  the  disease  is  to 
indicate  the  remedy  to  those  whom  nature  has  qualified  to 
administer   in    extremities  this    critical,   ambiguous,    bitter 
potion  to  a  distempered  state.     Times,  and  occasions,  and 
provocations  will  teach  their  own  lessons.     The  wise  will 
determine  from  the  gravity  of  the  case;  the  irritable,  from 
sensibility  to  oppression  ;  the  high  minded,  from  disdain  and 
indignation  at  abusive  power  in  unworthy  hands;  the  brave 
and  bold,  from  the  love  of  honourable  danger  in  a  generous 
cause  :  but,  with  or  without  right,  a  revolution  will  be  the 
very  last  resource  of  the  thinking  and  the  good. 

The  third  head  of  right,  asserted  by  the  pulpit  of  the  Old 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  37 

Jewry,  namely,  the  "right  to  form  a  government  for  our 
selves,"  has,  at  least,  as  little  countenance  from  anything 
done  at  the  Revolution,  either  in  precedent  or  principle,  as 
the  two  first  of  their  claims.  The  Revolution  was  made  to 
preserve  our  ancient.,  indisputable  laws  and  liberties,  and  that 
ancient  constitution  of  government  which  is  our  only  secu 
rity  for  law  and  liberty.  If  you  are  desirous  of  knowing  the 
spirit  of  our  constitution,  and  the  policy  which  predominated 
in  that  great  period  which  has  secured  it  to  this  hour,  pray 
look  for  both  in  our  histories,  in  our  records,  in  our  acts  of 
parliament,  and  journals  of  parliament,  and  not  in  the  ser 
mons  of  the  Old  Jewry,  and  the  after-dinner  toasts  of  the 
Revolution  Society.  In  the  former  you  will  find  other 
ideas  and  another  language.  Such  a  claim  is  as  ill-suited 
to  our  temper  and  wishes  as  it  is  unsupported  by  any  ap 
pearance  of  authority.  The  very  idea  of  the  fabrication  of 
a  new  government  is  enough  to  fill  us  with  disgust  and  horror. 
We  wished  at  the  period  of  the  Revolution,  and  do  now 
wish,  to  derive  all  we  possess  as  an  inheritance  from  our  fore 
fathers.  Upon  that  body  and  stock  of  inheritance  we  have 
taken  care  not  to  inoculate  any  scion  alien  to  the  nature  of 
the  original  plant.  All  the  reformations  we  have  hitherto 
made  have  proceeded  upon  the  principle  of  reverence  to 
antiquity ;  and  I  hope,  nay  I  am  persuaded,  that  all  those 
which  possibly  may  be  made  hereafter,  will  be  carefully 
formed  upon  analogical  precedent,  authority,  and  example. 

Our  oldest  reformation  is  that  of  Magna  Charta.  You 
will  see  that  Sir  Edward  Coke,  that  great  oracle  of  our  law, 
and  indeed  all  the  great  men  who  follow  him,  to  Blackstone,1 
are  industrious  to  prove  the  pedigree  of  our  liberties.  They 
endeavour  to  prove  that  the  ancient  charter,  the  Magna 
1  See  Blackstone's  Mag)ia  C/ia/'la,  printed  at  Oxfuixl,  1759. 


33  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

Charta  of  King  John,  was  connected  with  another  positive 
charter  from  Henry  I.,  and  that  both  the  one  and  the  other 
were  nothing  more  than  a  re-affirmance  of  the  still  more 
ancient  standing  law  of  the  kingdom.  In  the  matter  of  fact, 
for  the  greater  part,  these  authors  appear  to  be  in  the  right ; 
perhaps  not  always;  but  if  the  lawyers  mistake  in  some 
particulars,  it  proves  my  position  still  the  more  strongly; 
because  it  demonstrates  the  powerful  prepossession  towards 
antiquity  with  which  the  minds  of  all  our  lawyers  and 
legislators,  and  of  all  the  people  whom  they  wish  to  influence, 
have  been  always  filled;  and  the  stationary  policy  of  this 
kingdom  in  considering  their  most  sacred  rights  and 
franchises  as  an  inheritance. 

In  the  famous  law  of  the  3rd  of  Charles  I.,  called  the 
Petition  of  Right,  the  parliament  says  to  the  king,  "Your 
subjects  have  inherited  this  freedom,"  claiming  their 
franchises  not  on  abstract  principles  "  as  the  rights  of  men," 
but  as  the  rights  of  Englishmen,  and  as  a  patrimony  derived 
from  their  forefathers.  Selden,  and  the  other  profoundly 
learned  men,  who  drew  this  Petition  of  Right,  were  as  well 
acquainted,  at  least,  with  all  the  general  theories  concerning 
the  "  rights  of  men,"  as  any  of  the  discourses  in  our  pulpits, 
or  on  your  tribune  ;  full  as  well  as  Dr.  Price,  or  as  the  Abbe 
Sieyes.  But,  for  reasons  worthy  of  that  practical  wisdom 
which  superseded  their  theoretic  science,  they  preferred  this 
positive,  recorded,  hereditary  title  to  all  which  can  be  dear 
to  the  man  and  the  citizen,  to  that  vague  speculative  right, 
which  exposed  their  sure  inheritance  to  be  scrambled  for 
and  torn  to  pieces  by  every  wild,  litigious  spirit. 

The  same  policy  pervades  all  the  laws  which  have  since 
been  made  for  the  preservation  of  our  liberties.  In  the  ist 
of  William  and  Mary,  in  the  famous  statute  called  the  \ 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  39 

Declaration  of  Right,  the  two  Houses  utter  not  a  syllable  of 
"a  right  to  frame  a  government  for  themselves."  You  will 
see  that  their  whole  care  was  to  secure  the  religion,  laws, 
and  liberties  that  had  been  long  possessed,  and  had  been 
lately  endangered.  "Taking1  into  their  most  serious 
consideration  the  best  means  for  making  such  an  establish 
ment,  that  their  religion,  laws,  and  liberties  might  not  be  in 
danger  of  being  again  subverted,"  they  auspicate  all  their 
proceedings,  by  stating  as  some  of  those  best  means,  "in  the 
first  place  "  to  do  "  as  their  ancestors  in  like  cases  have  usually 
done  for  vindicating  their  ancient  rights  and  liberties,  to 
declare;  "- — and  then  they  pray  the  king  and  queen,  "  that  it 
may  be  declared  and  enacted,  that  all  and  singular  the  rights 
and  liberties  asserted  and  declared  are  the  true  ancient  and 
indubitable  rights  and  liberties  of  the  people  of  this 
kingdom." 

You  will  observe  that  from  Magna  Charta  to  the 
Declaration  of  Right,  it  has  been  the  uniform  policy  of  our 
constitution  to  claim  and  assert  our  liberties  as  an  entailed 
inheritance  derived  to  us  from  our  forefathers,  and  to  be 
transmitted  to  our  posterity  ;  as  an  estate  specially  belonging 
to  the  people  of  this  kingdom,  without  any  reference  what 
ever  to  any  other  more  general  or  prior  right.  By  this 
means  our  constitution  preserves  a  unity  in  so  great  a 
diversity  of  its  parts.  We  have  an  inheritable  crown  ;  an 
inheritable  peerage ;  and  a  House  of  Commons  and  a  people 
inheriting  privileges,  franchises,  and  liberties,  from  a  long 
line  of  ancestors 

This  policy  appears  to  me  to  be  the  result  of  profound 
reflection;    or  rather  the  happy  effect  of  following  nature, 
which  is  wisdom  without  reflection,  and  above  it.     A  spirit 
1  i  W.  and  M. 


40  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

of  innovation  is  generally  the  result  of  a  selfish  temper,  and 
confined  views.  People  will  not  look  forward  to  posterity, 
who  never  look  backward  to  their  ancestors.  Besides,  the 
people  of  England  well  know  that  the  idea  of  inheritance 
furnishes  a  sure  principle  of  conservation,  and  a  sure  prin 
ciple  of  transmission;  without  at  all  excluding  a  principle  of 
improvement.  It  leaves  acquisition  free  ;  but  it  secures  what 
it  acquires.  Whatever  advantages  are  obtained  by  a  state 
proceeding  on  these  maxims,  are  locked  fast  as  in  a  sort  of 
family  settlement ;  grasped  as  in  a  kind  of  mortmain  for  ever. 
By  a  constitutional  policy,  working  after  the  pattern  of  nature, 
we  receive,  we  hold,  we  transmit  our  government  and  our 
privileges,  in  the  same  manner  in  which  we  enjoy  and  trans 
mit  our  property  and  our  lives.  The  institutions  of  policy, 
the  goods  of  fortune,  the  gifts  of  providence,  are  handed 
down  to  us,  and  from  us,  in  the  same  course  and  order. 
Our  political  system  is  placed  in  a  just  correspondence  and 
symmetry  with  the  order  of  the  world,  and  with  the  mode  of 
existence  decreed  to  a  permanent  body  composed  of  transitory 
parts ;  wherein,  by  the  disposition  of  a  stupendous  wisdom, 
moulding  together  the  great  mysterious  incorporation  of  the 
human  race,  the  whole,  at  one  time,  is  never  old,  or  middle- 
aged,  or  young,  but,  in  a  condition  of  unchangeable  constancy, 
moves  on  through  the  varied  tenor  of  perpetual  decay,  fall, 
renovation,  and  progression.  Thus,  by  preserving  the  method 
of  nature  in  the  conduct  of  the  state,  in  what  we  improve, 
we  are  never  wholly  new ;  in  what  we  retain,  we  are  never 
wholly  obsolete.  By  adhering  in  this  manner  and  on  those 
principles  to  our  forefathers,  we  are  guided  not  by  the  super 
stition  of  antiquarians,  but  by  thespirit  of  philosophic  analogy. 
In  this  choice  of  inheritance  we  have  given  to  our  frame  of 
polity  the  image  of  a  relation  in  blood  ;  binding  up  the  con-  | 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  41 

stitution  of  our  country  with  our  dearest  domestic  ties  ; 
adopting  our  fundamental  laws  into  the  bosom  of  our  family 
affections;  keeping  inseparable,  and  cherishing  with  the 
warmth  of  ail  their  combined  and  mutually  reflected  charities, 
our  state,  our  hearths,  our  sepulchres,  and  our  altars. 

Through  the  same  plan  of  a  conformity  to  nature  in  our 
artificial  institutions,  and  by  calling  in  the  aid  of  her  unerring 
and  powerful  instincts,  to  fortify  the  fallible  and  feeble  con 
trivances  of  our  reason,  we  have  derived  several  other,  and 
those  no  small  benefits,  from  considering  our  liberties  in  the 
light  of  an  inheritance.     Always  acting  as  if  in  the  presence 
of  canonised  forefathers,  the  spirit  of  freedom,  leading  in  it 
self  to  misrule  and  excess,  is  tempered  with  an  awful  gravity. 
This  idea  of  a  liberal  descent  inspires  us  with  a  sense  of 
habitual  native   dignity,   which   prevents  that  upstart  inso 
lence  almost  inevitably  adhering  to  and    disgracing   those 
who  are  the  first  acquirers  of  any  distinction.     By  this  means 
Our  liberty  becomes  a  noble  freedom.      It  carries  an  imposing 
and  majestic   aspect.      It   has   a    pedigree   and   illustrating 
ancestors.     It  has  its  bearings  and  its  ensigns  armorial.      It 
has  its  gallery  of  portraits;  its  monumental  inscriptions;  its 
records,  evidences,  and  titles.     We  procure  reverence  to  our 
civil  institutions  on  the  principle  upon  which  nature  teaches 
us  to  revere  individual  men ;  on  account  of  their  age,  and 
on  account  of  those  from  whom  they  are  descended.     All 
your  sophisters  cannot  produce  anything  better  adapted  to 
preserve  a  rational  and  manly  freedom  than  the  course  that 
we  have  pursued,  who  haye  chosen  our  nature  rather  than 
our  speculations,  our  breasts  rather  than  our  inventions,  for 
the  great  conservatories  and  magazines  of  our  rights  and 
privileges. 

You  might,  if  you  pleased,  have  profited  of  our  example, 


42  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

and  have  given  to  your  recovered  freedom  a  correspondent 
dignity.  Your  privileges,  though  discontinued,  were  not  lost 
to  memory.  Your  constitution,  it  is  true,  whilst  you  were 
out  of  possession,  suffered  waste  and  dilapidation ;  but  you 
possessed  in  some  parts  the  walls,  and,  in  all,  the  foundations, 
of  a  noble  and  venerable  castle.  You  might  have  repaired 
those  walls ;  you  might  have  built  on  those  old  foundations. 
Your  constitution  was  suspended  before  it  was  perfected; 
but  you  had  the  elements  of  a  constitution  very  nearly  as 
good  as  could  be  wished.  In  your  old  states  you  possessed 
that  variety  of  parts  corresponding  with  the  various  descrip 
tions  of  which  your  community  was  happily  composed  ;  you 
had  all  that  combination  and  all  that  opposition  of  interests, 
you  had  that  action  and  counteraction,  which,  in  the  natural 
and  in  the  political  world,  from  the  reciprocal  struggle  of 
discordant  powers,  draws  out  the  harmony  of  the  universe. 
These  opposed  and  conflicting  interests,  which  you  considered 
as  so  great  a  blemish  in  your  old  and  in  our  present  con 
stitution,  interpose  a  salutary  check  to  all  precipitate  resolu 
tions.  They  render  deliberation  a  matter  not  of  choice,  but 
of  necessity  ;  they  make  all  change  a  subject  of  compromise, 
which  naturally  begets  moderation  ;  they  produce  tempera 
ments  preventing  the  sore  evil  of  1  a-sh,  crude,  unqualified 
reformations  ;  and  rendering  all  the  headlong  exertions  of 
arbitrary  power,  in  the  few  or  in  the  many,  for  ever  im 
practicable.  Through  that  diversity  of  members  and  inter 
ests,  general  liberty  had  as  many  securities  as  there  were 
separate  views  in  the  several  orders  ;  whilst  by  pressing  down 
the  whole  by  the  weight  of  a  real  monarchy,  the  separate 
parts  would  have  been  prevented  from  warping,  and  starting 
from  their  allotted  places. 

You  had  all  these  advantages  in  your  ancient  states ;  but  \ 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  43 

you  chose  to  act  as  if  you  had  never  been  moulded  into 
civil  society,  and  had  everything  to  begin  anew.  You  began 
ill,  because  you  began  by  despising  everything  that  belonged 
to  you.  You  set  up  your  trade  without  a  capital.  If  the 
last  generations  of  your  country  appeared  without  much 
lustre  in  your  eyes,  you  might  have  passed  them  by,  and 
derived  your  claims  from  a  more  early  race  of  ancestors. 
Under  a  pious  predilection  for  those  ancestors,  your  imagina 
tions  would  have  realised  in  them  a  standard  of  virtue  and 
wisdom,  beyond  the  vulgar  practice  of  the  hour :  and  you 
would  have  risen  with  the  example  to  whose  imitation 
you  aspired.  Respecting  your  forefathers,  you  would  have 
been  taught  to  respect  yourselves.  You  would  not  have  chosen 
to  consider  the  French  as  a  people  of  yesterday,  as  a  nation 
of  low-born  servile  wretches  until  the  emancipating  year 
of  1789.  In  order  to  furnish,  at  the  expense  of  your  honour, 
an  excuse  to  your  apologists  here  for  several  enormities  of 
yours,  you  would  not  have  been  content  to  be  represented 
as  a  gang  of  Maroon  slaves,  suddenly  broke  loose  from  the 
house  of  bondage,  and  therefore  to  be  pardoned  for  your 
abuse  of  the  liberty  to  which  you  were  not  accustomed,  and 
ill  fitted.  Would  it  not,  my  worthy  friend,  have  been  wiser 
to  have  you  thought,  what  I,  for  one,  always  thought  you,  a 
generous  and  gallant  nation,  long  misled  to  your  disadvantage 
by  your  high  and  romantic  sentiments  of  fidelity,  honour,  and 
loyalty ;  that  events  had  been  unfavourable  to  you,  but  that 
you  were  not  enslaved  through  any  illiberal  or  servile 
disposition  ;  that  in  your  most  devoted  submission,  you  were 
actuated  by  a  principle  of  public  spirit,  and  that  it  was  your 
cojntry  you  worshipped,  in  the  person  of  your  king?  Had 
you  made  it  to  be  understood,  that  in  the  delusion  of  this 
amiable  error  you  had  gone  further  than  your  wise  ancestors  ; 


44  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

that  you  were  resolved  to  resume  your  ancient  privileges, 
whilst  you  preserved  the  spirit  of  your  ancient  and  your 
recent  loyalty  and  honour ;  or  if,  diffident  of  yourselves,  and 
not  clearly  discerning  the  almost  obliterated  constitution  of 
your  ancestors,  you  had  looked  to  your  neighbours  in  this 
land,  who  had  kept  alive  the  ancient  principles  and  models 
of  the  old  common  law  of  Europe  meliorated  and  adapted 
to  its  present  state — by  following  wise  examples  you  would 
have  given  new  examples  of  wisdom  to  the  world.  You 
would  have  rendered  the  cause  of  liberty  venerable  in  the 
eyes  of  every  worthy  mind  in  every  nation.  You  would 
have  shamed  despotism  from  the  earth,  by  showing  that 
freedom  was  not  only  reconcilable,  but,  as  when  well 
disciplined  it  is,  auxiliary  to  law.  You  would  have  had  an 
unoppressive  but  a  productive  revenue.  You  would  have  had 
a  flourishing  commerce  to  feed  it.  You  would  have  had  a 
free  constitution ;  a  potent  monarchy ;  a  disciplined  army ; 
a  reformed  and  venerated  clergy ;  a  mitigated  but  spirited 
nobility,  to  lead  your  virtue,  not  to  overlay  it ;  you  would 
have  had  a  liberal  order  of  commons,  to  emulate  and  to 
recruit  that  nobility;  you  would  have  had  a  protected, 
satisfied,  laborious,  and  obedient  people,  taught  to  seek  and 
to  recognise  the  happiness  that  is  to  be  found  by  virtue  in 
all  conditions ;  in  which  consists  the  true  moral  equality  of 
mankind,  and  not  in  that  monstrous  fiction,  which,  by 
inspiring  false  ideas  and  vain  expectations  into  men  destined 
to  travel  4n  the  obscure  walk  of  laborious  life,  serves  only 
to  aggravate  and  embitter  that  real  inequality  which  it 
never  can  remove ;  and  which  the  order  of  civil  life  estab 
lishes  as  much  for  the  benefit  of  those  whom  it  must  leave 
in  a  humble  state,  as  those  whom  it  is  able  to  exalt  to  a 
condition  more  splendid,  but  not  more  happy.  You  had  a 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  45 

smooth  and  easy  career  of  felicity  and  glory  laid  open  to  you, 
beyond  anything  recorded  in  the  history  of  the  world ;  but 
you  have  shown  that  difficulty  is  good  for  man. 

Compute  your  gains :  see  what  is  got  by  those  extravagant 
and  presumptuous  speculations  which  have  taught  your 
leaders  to  despise  all  their  predecessors,  and  all  their 
contemporaries,  and  even  to  despise  themselves,  until 
the  moment  in  which  they  became  truly  despicable.  By 
following  those  false  lights,  France  has  bought  undisguised 
calamities  at  a  higher  price  than  any  nation  has  purchased 
the  most  unequivocal  blessings  !  France  has  bought  poverty 
by  crime  !  France  has  not  sacrificed  her  virtue  to  her  interest, 
but  she  has  abandoned  her  interest,  that  she  might  prostitute 
her  virtue.  All  other  nations  have  begun  the  fabric  of  a  new 
government,  or  the  reformation  of  an  old,  by  establishing 
originally,  or  by  enforcing  with  greater  exactness,  some  rites 
or  other  of  religion.  All  other  people  have  laid  the  founda 
tions  of  civil  freedom  in  severer  manners,  and  a  system  of  a 
more  austere  and  masculine  morality.  France,  when  she  let 
:  loose  the  reins  of  regal  authority,  doubled  the  licence  of  a 
•ferocious  dissoluteness  in  manners,  and  of  an  insolent 
jirreligion  in  opinions  and  practices;  and  has  extended 
| through  all  ranks  of  life,  as  if  she  were  communicating  some 
j privilege,  or  laying  open  some  secluded  benefit,  all  the 
'unhappy  corruptions  that  usually  were  the  disease  of  wealth 
and  power.  This  is  one  of  the  new  principles  of  equality  in 
I  France. 

France,  by  the  perfidy  of  her  leaders,  has  utterly  disgraced 
the  tone  of  lenient  council  in  the  cabinets  of  princes,  and 
disarmed  it  of  its  most  potent  topics.  She  has  sanctified 
the  dark,  suspicious  maxims  of  tyrannous  distrust;  and 
taught  kings  to  tremble  at  (what  will  hereafter  be  called) 


46  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

the  delusive  plausibilities  of  moral  politicians.  Sovereigns 
will  consider  those  who  advise  them  to  place  an  unlimited 
confidence  in  their  people,  as  subverters  of  their  thrones  ;  as 
traitors  who  aim  at  their  destruction,  by  leading  their  easy 
good-nature,  under  specious  pretences,  to  admit  combinations 
of  bold  and  faithless  men  into  a  participation  of  their  power. 
This  alone  (if  there  were  nothing  else)  is  an  irreparable 
calamity  to  you  and  to  mankind.  Remember  that  your 
parliament  of  Paris  told  your  king  that,  in  calling  the  states 
together,  he  had  nothing  to  fear  but  the  prodigal  excess  of 
their  zeal  in  providing  for  the  support  of  the  throne.  It  is 
right  that  these  men  should  hide  their  heads.  It  is  ri^ht 

D 

that  they  should  bear  their  part  in  the  ruin  which  their 
counsel  has  brought  on  their  sovereign  and  their  country. 
Such  sanguine  declarations  tend  to  lull  authority  asleep;  to 
encourage  it  rashly  to  engage  in  perilous  adventures  of 
untried  policy;  to  neglect  those  provisions,  preparations,  and 
precautions  which  distinguish  benevolence  from  imbecility; 
and  without  which  no  man  can  answer  for  the  salutary  effect 
of  any  abstract  plan  of  government  or  of  freedom.  For 
want  of  these,  they  have  seen  the  medicine  of  the  state 
corrupted  into  its  poison.  They  have  seen  the  French  rebel 
against  a  mild  and  lawful  monarch,  with  more  fury,  outrage, 
and  insult  than  ever  any  people  has  been  known  to  rise 
against  the  most  illegal  usurper,  or  the  most  sanguinary 
tyrant  Their  resistance  was  made  to  concession ;  their  revolt . 
was  from  protection ;  their  blow  was  aimed  at  a  hand  hold-  j ; 
ing  out  graces,  favours,  and  immunities. 

This  was  unnatural.     The  rest  is  in  order.     They  have  I: 
found  their  punishment  in  their  success.     Laws  overturned ;  I 
tribunals    subverted;    industry  without    vigour;    commerce-' 
expiring;  the  revenue  unpaid,  yet  the  people  impoverished ;<) 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  47 

a  church  pillaged,  and  a  state  not  relieved;  civil  and  military 
anarchy  made  the  constitution  of  the  kingdom;  everything 
human  and  divine  sacrificed  to  the  idol  of  public  credit,  and 
national  bankruptcy  the  consequence ;  and,  to  crown  all,  the 
paper  securities  of  new,  precarious,  tottering  power,  the  dis 
credited  paper  securities  of  impoverished  fraud  and  beggared 
rapine,  held  out  as  a  currency  for  the  support  of  an 
empire,  in  lieu  of  the  two  great  recognised  species  that 
represent  the  lasting,  conventional  credit  of  mankind,  which 
disappeared  and  hid  themselves  in  the  earth  from  whence 
they  came,  when  the  principle  of  property,  whose  crea 
tures  and  representatives  they  are,  was  systematically 
subverted. 

Were  all  these  dreadful  things  necessary  ?     Were  they  the 
inevitable  results  of  the  desperate  struggle  of  determined 
patriots,  compelled  to  wade  through  blood  and  tumult,  to  the 
quiet  shore  of  a  tranquil  and  prosperous  liberty?     No!  no 
thing  like  it.     The  fresh  ruins  of  France,  which  shock  our 
feelings  wherever  we  can  turn  our  eyes,  are  not  the  devasta 
tion  of  civil  war ;  they  are  the  sad  but  instructive  monuments 
of  rash  and  ignorant  counsel  in  time  of  profound  peace. 
They  are  the  display  of  inconsiderate  and  presumptuous,  be 
cause  unresisted    and  irresistible,  authority.     The  persons 
who  have  thus  squandered  away  the  precious  treasure  of  their 
crimes,  the  persons  who  have  made  this  prodigal  and  wild 
waste  of  public  evils  (the  last  stake  reserved  for  the  ultimate 
ransom  of  the  state),  have  met  in  their  progress  with  little, 
or  rather  with  no  opposition  at  all.     Their  whole  march  was 
more  like  a  triumphal  procession  than  the  progress  of  a  war. 
Their  pioneers  have  gone  before  them,  and  demolished  and 
laid  everything  level  at  their  feet.     Not  one  drop  of  their 
blood  have  they  shed  in  the  cause  of  the  country  they  have 


48  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

ruined.  They  have  made  no  sacrifices  to  their  projects  of 
greater  consequence  than  their  shoe-buckles,  whilst  they 
were  imprisoning  their  king,  murdering  their  fellow-citizens, 
and  bathing  in  tears,  and  plunging  in  poverty  and  distress, 
thousands  of  worthy  men  and  worthy  families.  Their  cruelty 
has  not  even  been  the  base  result  of  fear.  It  has  been  the 
effect  of  their  sense  of  perfect  safety,  in  authorising  treasons, 
robberies,  rapes,  assassinations,  slaughters,  and  burnings, 
throughout  their  harassed  land.  But  the  cause  of  all  was 
plain  from  the  beginning. 

This  unforced  choice,  this  fond  election  of  evil,  would 
appear  perfectly  unaccountable,  if  we  did  not  consider  the 
composition  of  the  National  Assembly:  I  do  not  mean  its 
formal  constitution,  which,  as  it  now  stands,  is  exceptionable 
enough,  but  the  materials  of  which,  in  a  great  measure,  it 
is  composed,  which  is  of  ten  thousand  times  greater  conse 
quence  than  all  the  formalities  in  the  world.  If  we  were 
to  know  nothing  of  this  assembly  but  by  its  title  and  func 
tion,  no  colours  could  paint  to  the  imagination  anything 
more  venerable.  In  that  light  the  mind  of  an  inquirer, 
subdued  by  such  an  awful  image  as  that  of  the  virtue  and 
wisdom  of  a  whole  people  collected  into  a  focus,  would  pause 
and  hesitate  in  condemning  things  even  of  the  very  worst 
aspect.  Instead  of  blamable,  they  would  appear  only  mys 
terious.  But  no  name,  no  power,  no  function,  no  artificial 
institution  whatsoever,  can  make  the  men  of  whom  any 
system  of  authority  is  composed  any  other  than  God,  and 
nature,  and  education,  and  their  habits  of  life  have  made  them. 
Capacities  beyond  these  the  people  have  not  to  give.  Virtue 
and  wisdom  may  be  the  objects  of  their  choice ;  but  their 
choice  confers  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  on  those  upon 
whom  they  lay  their  ordaining  hands.  They  have  not  the 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  49 

engagement  of  nature,  they  have  not  the  promise  of  revela 
tion,  for  any  such  powers. 

After  I  had  read  over  the  list  of  the  persons  and  descrip 
tions  elected  into  the  Tiers  Etat,  nothing  which  they  after 
wards  did  could  appear  astonishing.  Among  them,  indeed, 
I  saw  some  of  known  rank  ;  some  of  shining  talents  ;  but  of 
any  practical  experience  in  the  state,  not  one  man  was  to  be 
found.  The  best  were  only  men  of  theory.  But  whatever 
the  distinguished  few  may  have  been,  it  is  the  substance  and 
mass  of  the  body  which  constitutes  its  character,  and  must 
finally  determine  its  direction.  In  all  bodies,  those  who  will 
lead,  must  also,  in  a  considerable  degree,  follow.  They  must 
conform  their  propositions  to  the  taste,  talent,  and  disposi 
tion  of  those  whom  they  wish  to  conduct :  therefore,  if  an 
assembly  is  viciously  or  feebly  composed  in  a  very  great  part 
of  it,  nothing  but  such  a  supreme  degree  of  virtue  as  very 
rarely  appears  in  the  world,  and  for  that  reason  cannot  enter 
into  calculation,  will  prevent  the  men  of  talents  disseminated 
through  it  from  becoming  only  the  expert  instruments  of 
absurd  projects !  If,  what  is  the  more  likely  event,  instead 
of  that  unusual  degree  of  virtue,  they  should  be  actuated  by 
sinister  ambition,  and  a  lust  of  meretricious  glory,  then  the 
feeble  part  of  the  assembly,  to  whom  at  first  they  conform, 
becomes  in  its  turn  the  dupe  and  instrument  of  their  de 
signs.  -In  this  political  traffic,  the  leaders  will  be  obliged  to 
bow  to  the  ignorance  of  their  followers,  and  the  followers  to 
become  subservient  to  the  worst  designs  of  their  leaders. 

To  secure  any  degree  of  sobriety  in  the  propositions  made 
by  the  leaders  in  any  public  assembly,  they  ought  to  respect, 
in  some  degree  perhaps  to  fear,  those  whom  they  conduct. 
To  be  led  any  otherwise  than  blindly,  the  followers  must  be 
qualified,  if  not  for  actors,  at  least  for  judges ;  they  must 

4 


50  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

also  be  judges  of  natural  weight  and  authority.  Nothing 
can  secure  a  steady  and  moderate  conduct  in  such  assemblies, 
but  that  the  body  of  them  should  be  respectably  composed, 
in  point  of  condition  in  life,  of  permanent  property,  of 
education,  and  of  such  habits  as  enlarge  and  liberalise  the 
understanding. 

In  the  calling  of  the  states-general  of  France,  the  first 
thing  which  struck  me  was  a  great  departure  from  the  ancient 
course.  I  found  the  representation  for  the  Third  Estate 
composed  of  six  hundred  persons.  They  were  equal  in 
number  to  the  representatives  of  both  the  other  orders.  If 
the  orders  were  to  act  separately,  the  number  would  not, 
beyond  the  consideration  of  the  expense,  be  of  much  moment. 
But  when  it  became  apparent  that  the  three  orders  were  to 
be  melted  down  into  one,  the  policy  and  necessary  effect  of 
this  numerous  representation  became  obvious.  A  very  small 
desertion  from  either  of  the  other  two  orders  must  throw  the 
power  of  both  into  the  hands  of  the  third.  In  fact,  the 
whole  power  of  the  state  was  soon  resolved  into  that  body. 
Its  due  composition  became  therefore  of  infinitely  the  greater 
importance. 

Judge,  Sir,  of  my  surprise,  when  I  found  that  a  very  great 
proportion  of  the  Assembly  (a  majority,  I  believe,  of  the 
members  who  attended)  was  composed  of  practitioners  in 
the  law.  It  was  composed,  not  of  distinguished  magistrates, 
who  had  given  pledges  to  their  country  of  their  science, 
prudence,  and  integrity;  not  of  leading  advocates,  the 
glory  of  the  bar  ;  not  of  renowned  professors  in  universities; 
— but  for  the  far  greater  part,  as  it  must  in  sucli  a  number, 
of  the  inferior,  unlearned,  mechanical,  merely  instrumental 
members  of  the  profession.  There  were  distinguished 
exceptions;  but  the  general  composition  was  of  obscure 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  51 

provincial  advocates,  of  stewards  of  petty  local  jurisdictions, 
country  attorneys,  notaries,  and  the  whole  train  of  the 
ministers  of  municipal  litigation,  the  fomenters  and  con 
ductors  of  the  petty  war  of  village  vexation.  From  the 
moment  I  read  the  list,  I  saw  distinctly,  and  very  nearly  as 
it  has  happened,  all  that  was  to  follow. 

The  degree  of  estimation  in  which  any  profession  is  held 
becomes  the  standard  of  the  estimation  in  which  the 
professors  hold  themselves.  Whatever  the  personal  merits 
of  many  individual  lawyers  might  have  been,  and  in  many  it 
was  undoubtedly  very  considerable,  in  that  military  kingdom 
no  part  of  the  profession  had  been  much  regarded,  except 
the  highest  of  all,  who  often  united  to  their  professional 
offices  great  family  splendour,  and  were  invested  with  great 
power  and  authority.  These  certainly  were  highly  respected, 
and  even  with  no  small  degree  of  awe.  The  next  rank  was 
not  much  esteemed ;  the  mechanical  part  was  in  a  very  low 
degree  of  repute. 

Whenever  the  supreme  authority  is  vested  in  a  body  so 
composed,  it  must  evidently  produce  the  consequences  of 
supreme  authority  placed  in  the  hands  of  men  not  taught 
habitually  to    respect    themselves;    who    had    no    previous 
fortune  in  character  at  stake ;  who  could  not  be  expected  to 
bear  with  moderation,  or  to  conduct  with  discretion,  a  power 
which   they  themselves,    more    than    any   others,    must    be 
surprised  to  find  in  their  hands.      Who  could  flatter  himself 
that  these  men,  suddenly,  and,  as  it  were,  by  enchantment, 
snatched  from  the  humblest  rank  of  subordination,  would 
not  be  intoxicated  with  their  unprepared  greatness  ?     Who 
could  conceive  that  men  who  are  habitually  meddling,  daring, 
subtle,  active,  of  litigious  dispositions  and  unquiet  minds| 
would  easily  fall  back  into  their  old  condition  of  obscure 


52  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

contention,  and  laborious,  low,  and  unprofitable  chicane? 
Who  could  doubt  but  that,  at  any  expense  to  the  state,  of 
which  they  understood  nothing,  they  must  pursue  their 
private  interests  which  they  understood  but  too  well?  It 
was  not  an  event  depending  on  chance,  or  contingency.  It 
was  inevitable ;  it  was  necessary ;  it  was  planted  in  the 
nature  of  things.  They  must  join  (if  their  capacity  did  not 
permit  them  to  lead)  in  any  project  which  could  procure 
to  them  a  litigious  constitution;  which  could  lay  open  to 
them  those  innumerable  lucrative  jobs  which  follow  in  the 
train  of  all  great  convulsions  and  revolutions  in  the  state, 
and  particularly  in  all  great  and  violent  permutations  of 
property.  Was  it  to  be  expected  that  they  would  attend 
to  the  stability  of  property,  whose  existence  had  always 
depended  upon  whatever  rendered  property  questionable, 
ambiguous,  and  insecure  ?  Their  objects  would  be  enlarged 
with  their  elevation,  but  their  disposition  and  habits,  and 
mode  of  accomplishing  their  designs,  must  remain  the  same. 
Well !  but  these  men  were  to  be  tempered  and  restrained 
by  other  descriptions,  of  more  sober  and  more  enlarged 
understandings.  Were  they  then  to  be  awed  by  the  super- 
eminent  authority  and  awful  dignity  of  a  handful  of 
country  clowns,  who  have  seats  in  that  Assembly,  some  of 
whom  are  said  not  to  be  able  to  read  and  write  ?  and  by  not 
a  greater  number  of  traders,  who,  though  somewhat  more 
instructed,  and  more  conspicuous  in  the  order  of  society, 
had  never  known  anything  beyond  their  counting-house? 
No !  both  these  descriptions  were  more  formed  to  be  over 
borne  and  swayed  by  the  intrigues  and  artifices  of  lawyers, 
than  to  become  their  counterpoise.  With  such  a  danger 
ous  disproportion,  the  whole  must  needs  be  governed  by 
them.  To  the  faculty  of  law  was  joined  a  pretty  consider- 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  53 

able  proportion  of  the  faculty  of  medicine.  This  faculty 
had  not,  any  more  than  that  of  the  law,  possessed  in  France 
its  just  estimation.  Its  professors,  therefore,  must  have  the 
qualities  of  men  not  habituated  to  sentiments  of  dignity. 
But  supposing  they  had  ranked  as  they  ought  to  do,  and  as 
with  us  they  do  actually,  the  sides  of  sick  beds  are  not  the 
academies  for  forming  statesmen  and  legislators.  Then 
came  the  dealers  in  stocks  and  funds,  who  must  be  eager,  at 
any  expense,  to  change  their  ideal  paper  wealth  for  the  more 
solid  substance  of  land.  To  these  were  joined  men  of  other 
descriptions,  from  whom  as  little  knowledge  of,  or  attention 
to,  the  interests  of  a  great  state  was  to  be  expected,  and  as 
little  regard  to  the  stability  of  any  institution ;  men  formed 
to  be  instruments,  not  controls.  Such  in  general  was  the 
composition  of  the  Tiers  Elat  in  the  National  Assembly; 
in  which  was  scarcely  to  be  perceived  the  slightest 
traces  of  what  we  call  the  natural  landed  interest  of  the 
country. 

We  know  that  the  British  House  of  Commons,  without 
shutting  its  doors  to  any  merit  in  any  class,  is,  by  the  sure 
operation  of  adequate  causes,  filled  with  everything  illustri 
ous  in  rank,  in  descent,  in  hereditary  and  in  acquired  opu 
lence,  in  cultivated  talents,  in  military,  civil,  naval,  and 
politic  distinction,  that  the  country  can  afford.  But  sup 
posing,  what  hardly  can  be  supposed  as  a  case,  that  the  House 
of  Commons  should  be  composed  in  the  same  manner  with 
the  Tiers  Etat  in  France,  would  this  dominion  of  chicane  be 
borne  with  patience,  or  even  conceived  without  horror?  God 
forbid  I  should  insinuate  anything  derogatory  to  that  pro 
fession,  which  is  another  priesthood,  administrating  the  rights 
of  sacred  justice.  But  whilst  I  revere  men  in  the  functions 
which  belong  to  them,  and  would  do  as  much  as  one  man  can 


54  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

do  to  prevent  their  exclusion  from  any,  I  cannot,  to  flatter 
them,  give  the  lie  to  nature.  They  are  good  and  useful  in 
the  composition  ;  they  must  be  mischievous  if  they  prepon 
derate  so  as  virtually  to  become  the  whole.  Their  very 
excellence  in  their  peculiar  functions  may  be  far  from  a  quali 
fication  for  others.  It  cannot  escape  observation,  that  when 
men  are  too  much  confined  to  professional  and  faculty  habits, 
and  as  it  were  inveterate  in  the  recurrent  employment  of 
that  narrow  circle,  they  are  rather  disabled  than  qualified  for 
whatever  depends  on  the  knowledge  of  mankind,  on  experi 
ence  in  mixed  affairs,  on  a  comprehensive,  connected  view  of 
the  various,  complicated,  external  and  internal  interests, 
which  go  to  the  formation  ot  that  multifarious  thing  called 
a  state. 

After  all,  if  the  House  of  Commons  were  to  have  a  wholly 
professional  and  faculty  composition,  what  is  the  power  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  circumscribed  and  shut  in  by  the 
immovable  barriers  of  laws,  usages,  positive  rules  of  doctrine 
and  practice,  counterpoised  by  the  House  of  Lords,  and  every 
moment  of  its  existence  at  the  discretion  of  the  crown  to 
continue,  prorogue,  or  dissolve  us  ?  The  power  of  the  House 
of  Commons,  direct  or  indirect,  is  indeed  great ;  and  long 
may  it  be  able  to  preserve  its  greatness,  and  the  spirit 
belonging  to  true  greatness,  at  the  full ;  and  it  will  do  so, 
as  long  as  it  can  keep  the  breakers  of  law  in  India  from 
becoming  the  makers  of  law  for  England.  The  power,  how 
ever,  of  the  House  of  Commons,  when  least  diminished,  is 
as  a  drop  of  water  in  the  ocean,  compared  to  that  residing 
in  a  settled  majority  of  your  National  Assembly.  That 
Assembly,  since  the  destruction  of  the  orders,  has  no  funda 
mental  law,  no  strict  convention,  no  respected  usage  to  re 
strain  it.  Instead  of  finding  themselves  obliged  to  conform 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  55 

to  a  fixed  constitution,  they  have  a  power  to  make  a  constitu 
tion  which  shall  conform  to  their  designs.  Nothing  in 
heaven  or  upon  earth  can  serve  as  a  control  on  them.  What 
ought  to  be  the  heads,  the  hearts,  the  dispositions,  that  are 
qualified,  or  that  dare,  not  only  to  make  laws  under  a  fixed 
constitution,  but  at  one  heat  to  strike  out  a  totally  new  con 
stitution  for  a  great  kingdom,  and  in  every  part  of  it,  from 
the  monarch  on  the  throne  to  the  vestry  of  a  parish?  But— 
"fools  rusk  in  where  angels  fear  to  tread?  In  such  a  state 
of  unbounded  power  for  undefined  and  undefinablc  purposes, 
the  evil  of  a  moral  and  almost  physical  inaptitude  of  the  man 
to  the  function  must  be  the  greatest  we  can  conceive  to 
happen  in  the  management  of  human  affairs. 

Having  considered  the  composition  of  the  Third  Estate  as 
it  stood  in  its  original  frame,  I  took  a  view  of  the  representa 
tives  of  the  clergy.     There  too  it  appeared  that  full  as  little 
regard  was  had  to  the  general  security  of  property,  or  to  the 
aptitude  of  the  deputies  for  their  public  purposes,  in  the 
principles  of  their  election.     That  election  was  so  contrived, 
,  ,.as  to  send  a  very  large  proportion  of  mere  country  curates 
to  the  great  and  arduous  work  of  new-modelling  a  state; 
.  limen  who  never  had  seen  the  state  so  much  as  in  a  picture; 
\ ;  men  who  knew  nothing  of  the  world  beyond  the  bounds  of 
an   obscure   village;    who,   immersed   in   hopeless    poverty, 
could  regard  all  property,  whether  secular  or  ecclesiastical, 
'.'..  \  with  no  other  eye  than  that  of  envy  ;  among  whom  must  be 
J  many  who,  for  the  smallest  hope  of  the  meanest  dividend  in 
'  plunder,  would  readily  join  in  any  attempts  upon  a  body  of 
"    wealth,  in  which  they  could  hardly  look  to  have  any  share, 
I   except  in  a   general   scramble.      Instead   of  balancing  the 
1 '  power  of  the  active  chicaners  in  the  other  assembly,  these 
1  ^.curates  must  necessarily  become  the  active  coadjutors,  or  at 


56  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

best  the  passive  instruments,  of  those  by  whom  they  had 
been  habitually  guided  in  their  petty  village  concerns.  They 
too  could  hardly  be  the  most  conscientious  of  their  kind, 
who,  presuming  upon  their  incompetent  understanding, 
could  intrigue  for  a  trust  which  led  them  from  their  natural 
relation  to  their  flocks,  and  their  natural  spheres  of  action, 
to  undertake  the  regeneration  of  kingdoms.  This  prepon 
derating  weight,  being  added  to  the  force  of  the  body  of 
chicane  in  the  Tiers  Etat,  completed  that  momentum  of 
ignorance,  rashness,  presumption,  and  lust  of  plunder,  which 
nothing  has  been  able  to  resist. 

To  observing  men  it  must  have  appeared  from  the  begin 
ning  that  the  majority  of  the  Third  Estate,  in  conjunction 
with  such  a  deputation  from  the  clergy  as  I  have  described, 
whilst  it  pursued  the  destruction  of  the  nobility,  would 
inevitably  become  subservient  to  the  worst  designs  of  indi 
viduals  in  that  class.  In  the  spoil  and  humiliation  of  their 
own  order  these  individuals  would  possess  a  sure  fund  for 
the  pay  of  their  new  followers.  To  squander  away  the 
objects  which  made  the  happiness  of  their  fellows,  would  be 
to  them  no  sacrifice  at  all.  Turbulent,  discontented  men 
of  quality,  in  proportion  as  they  are  puffed  up  with  personal 
pride  and  arrogance,  generally  despise  their  own  order. 
One  of  the  first  symptoms  they  discover  of  a  selfish  and 
mischievous  ambition,  is  a  profligate  disregard  of  a  dignity 
which  they  partake  with  others.  To  be  attached  to  the  sub 
division,  to  love  the  little  platoon  we  belong  to  in  society, 
is  the  first  principle  (the  germ  as  it  were)  of  public  affections. 
It  is  the  first  link  in  the  series  by  which  we  proceed  towards 
a  love  to  our  country,  and  to  mankind.  The  interest  of 
that  portion  of  social  arrangement  is  a  trust  in  the  hands  of 
all  those  who  compose  it ;  and  as  none  but  bad  men  would 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  57 

justify  it  in  abuse,  none  but  traitors  would  barter  it  away  for 
their  own  personal  advantage. 

There  were  in  the  time  of  our  civil  troubles  in  England 
(I  do  not  know  whether  you  have  any  such  in  your  Assembly 
in  France)  several  persons,  like  the  then  Earl  of  Holland, 
who  by  themselves  or  their  families  had  brought  an  odium 
on  the  throne,  by  the  prodigal  dispensation  of  its  bounties 
towards  them,  who  afterwards  joined  in  the  rebellions  arising 
from  the  discontents  of  which  they  were  themselves  the 
cause ;  men  who  helped  to  subvert  that  throne  to  which 
they  owed,  some  of  them,  their  existence,  others  all  that 
power  which  they  employed  to  ruin  their  benefactor.  If  any 
bounds  are  set  to  the  rapacious  demands  of  that  sort  of 
people,  or  that  others  are  permitted  to  partake  in  the  objects 
they  would  engross,  revenge  and  envy  soon  fill  up  the  crav 
ing  void  that  is  left  in  their  avarice.  Confounded  by  the 
complication  of  distempered  passions,  their  reason  is  dis 
turbed  ;  their  views  become  vast  and  perplexed ;  to  others 
inexplicable ;  to  themselves  uncertain.  They  find,  on  all 
sides,  bounds  to  their  unprincipled  ambition  in  any  fixed 
order  of  things.  But  in  the  fog  and  haze  of  confusion  all  is 
enlarged,  and  appears  without  any  limit. 

When  men  of  rank  sacrifice  all  ideas  of  dignity  to  an 
ambition  without  a  distinct  object,  and  work  with  low 
instruments  and  for  low  ends,  the  whole  composition  be 
comes  low  and  base.  Does  not  something  like  this  now 
appear  in  France  ?  Does  it  not  produce  something  ignoble 
and  inglorious?  a  kind  of  meanness  in  all  the  prevalent 
policy  ?  a  tendency  in  all  that  is  done  to  lower  along  \vith 
individuals  all  the  dignity  and  importance  of  the  state? 
Other  revolutions  have  been  conducted  by  persons  who, 
whilst  they  attempted  or  affected  changes  in  the  common- 


58  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

wealth,  sanctified  their  ambition  by  advancing  the  dignity 
of  the  people  whose  peace  they  troubled.  They  had  long 
views.  They  aimed  at  the  rule,  not  at  the  destruction,  of 
their  country.  They  were  men  of  great  civil  and  great 
military  talents,  and  if  the  terror,  the  ornament  of  their 
age.  They  were  not  like  Jew  brokers,  contending  with  each 
other  who  could  best  remedy  with  fraudulent  circulation 
and  depreciated  paper  the  wretchedness  and  ruin  brought 
on  their  country  by  their  degenerate  councils.  The  com 
pliment  made  to  one  of  the  great  bad  men  of  the  old  stamp 
(Cromwell)  by  his  kinsman,  a  favourite  poet  of  that  time, 
shows  what  it  was  he  proposed,  and  what  indeed  to  a  great 
degree  he  accomplished,  in  the  success  of  his  ambition  : 

"  Still  as  you  rise,  the  state  exalted  too, 
Finds  no  distemper  whilst  'tis  changed  \>y  you  ; 
Changed  like  the  world's  great  scene,  when  without  noise 
The  rising  sun  night's  vulgar  lights  destroys." 

These  disturbers  were  not  so  much  like  men  usurping 
power,  as  asserting  their  natural  place  in  society.  Their 
rising  was  to  illuminate  and  beautify  the  world.  Their 
conquest  over  their  competitors  was  by  outshining  them. 
The  hand  that,  like  a  destroying  angel,  smote  the  country, 
communicated  to  it  the  force  and  energy  under  which  it 
suffered.  I  do  not  say  (God  forbid),  I  do  not  say  that  the 
virtues  of  such  men  were  to  be  taken  as  a  balance  to  their 
crimes :  but  they  were  some  corrective  to  their  effects. 
Such  was,  as  I  said,  our  Cromwell.  Such  were  your  whole 
race  of  Guises,  Condes,  and  Colignis.  Such  the  Richelieus, 
who  in  more  quiet  times  acted  in  the  spirit  of  a  civil  war, 
Such,  as  better  men,  and  in  a  less  dubious  cause,  were  your 
Henry  the  Fourth  and  your  Sully,  though  nursed  in  civil 
confusions,  and  not  wholly  without  some  of  their  taint.  It 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  59 

is  a  thing  to  be  wondered  at,  to  see  how  very  soon  France, 
when  she  had  a  moment  to  respire,  recovered  and  emerged 
from  the  longest  and  most  dreadful  civil  war  that  ever  was 
known  in  any  nation,  Why?  Because  among  all  their 
massacres,  they  had  not  slain  the  mind  in  their  country.  A 
conscious  dignity,  a  noble  pride,  a  generous  sense  of  glory 
and  emulation,  was  not  extinguished.  On  the  contrary,  it 
was  kindled  and  inflamed.  The  organs  also  of  the  state,  how 
ever  shattered,  existed  All  the  prizes  of  honour  and  virtue, 
all  the  rewards,  all  the  distinctions  remained.  But  your 
present  confusion,  like  a  palsy,  has  attacked  the  fountain  of 
life  itself.  Every  person  in  your  country,  in  a  situation  to 
be  actuated  by  a  principle  of  honour,  is  disgraced  and 
degraded,  and  can  entertain  no  sensation  of  life,  except  in  a 
mortified  and  humiliated  indignation.  But  this  generation 
will  quickly  pass  away.  The  next  generation  of  the  nobility 
will  resemble  the  artificers  and  clowns,  and  money-jobbers, 
usurers,  and  Jews,  who  will  be  always  their  fellows,  some 
times  their  masters.  Believe  me,  Sir,  those  who  attempt  to 
level,  never  equalise.  In  all  societies,  consisting  of  various 
descriptions  of  citizens,  some  description  must  be  uppermost. 
The  levellers  therefore  only  change  and  pervert  the  natural 
order  of  things ;  they  load  the  edifice  of  society,  by  setting 
up  in  the  air  what  the  solidity  of  the  structure  requires  to  be 
on  the  ground.  The  association  of  tailors  and  carpenters, 
of  which  the  republic  (of  Paris,  for  instance)  is  composed, 
cannot  be  equal  to  the  situation,  into  which,  by  the  worst  of 
usurpations,  a  usurpation  on  the  prerogatives  of  nature, 
you  attempt  to  force  them. 

The  Chancellor  of  France  at  the  opening  of  the  states, 
said,  in  a  tone  of  oratorical  flourish,  that  all  occupations 
were  honourable.  If  he  meant  only,  that  no  honest  employ- 


60  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

ment  was  disgraceful,  he  would  not  have  gone  beyond  the 
truth.  But  in  asserting  that  anything  is  honourable,  we 
imply  some  distinction  in  its  favour.  The  occupation  of  a 
hair-dresser,  or  of  a  working  tallow-chandler,  cannot  be  a 
matter  of  honour  to  any  person — to  say  nothing  of  a  number 
of  other  more  servile  employments.  Such  descriptions  of 
men  ought  not  to  suffer  oppression  from  the  state;  but 
the  state  suffers  oppression,  if  such  as  they,  either  indivi 
dually  or  collectively,  are  permitted  to  rule.  In  this  you 
think  you  are  combating  prejudice,  but  you  are  at  war  with 
nature.1 

I  do  not,  my  dear  Sir,  conceive  you  to  be  of  that 
sophistical,  captious  spirit,  or  of  that  uncandid  dulness, 
as  to  require,  for  every  general  observation  or  sentiment, 
an  explicit  detail  of  the  correctives  and  exceptions,  which 
reason  will  presume  to  be  included  in  all  the  general 
propositions  which  come  from  reasonable  men.  You  do 
not  imagine  that  I  wish  to  confine  power,  authority,  and 
distinction  to  blood,  and  names,  and  titles.  No,  Sir. 

1  Ecclesiasticus,  chap,  xxxviii.,  verses  24,  25.  "The  wisdom  of  a 
learned  man  comeih  by  opportunity  of  leisure :  and  he  that  hath  little 
business  shall  become  wise."—"  How  can  he  get  wisdom  that  holdeth 
the  plough,  and  that  glorieth  in  the  goad  ;  that  driveth  oxen ;  and  is 
occupied  in  their  labours  ;  and  whose  talk  is  of  bullocks?  " 

Ver.  27.  "  So  every  carpenter  and  work-master  that  laboureth  night 
and  day,"  etc. 

Ver.  33.  "They  shall  not  be  sought  for  in  public  counsel,  nor  sit 
high  in  the  congregation  :  they  shall  not  sit  on  the  judge's  seat,  nor 
understand  the  sentence  of  judgment ;  they  cannot  declare  justice  and 
judgment,  and  they  shall  not  be  found  where  parables  are  spoken." 

Ver.  34.    "But  they  will  maintain  the  state  of  the  world." 

I  do  not  determine  whether  this  book  be  canonical,  as  the  Gallican 
church  (till  lately)  has  considered  it,  or  apocryphal,  as  here  it  is  taken. 
I  am  sure  it  contains  a  great  deal  of  sense  and  truth. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  61 

There  is  no  qualification  for  government  but  virtue  and 
wisdom,  actual  or  presumptive.  Wherever  they  are  actually 
found,  they  have,  in  whatever  state,  condition,  profession, 
or  trade,  the  passport  of  Heaven  to  human  place  and 
honour.  Woe  to  the  country  which  would  madly  and 
impiously  reject  the  service  of  the  talents  and  virtues,  civil, 
military,  or  religious,  that  are  given  to  grace  and  to  serve  it; 
and  would  condemn  to  obscurity  everything  formed  to 
diffuse  lustre  and  glory  around  a  state !  Woe  to  that 
country  too,  that,  passing  into  the  opposite  extreme, 
considers  a  low  education,  a  mean  contracted  view  of 
things,  a  sordid,  mercenary  occupation,  as  a  preferable  title 
to  command !  Everything  ought  to  be  open ;  but  not 
indifferently  to  every  man.  No  rotation ;  no  appointment 
by  lot ,  no  mode  of  election  operating  in  the  spirit  of 
sortition,  or  rotation,  can  be  generally  good  in  a  govern 
ment  conversant  in  extensive  objects.  Because  they  have 
no  tendency,  direct  or  indirect,  to  select  the  man  with  a 
view  to  the  duty,  or  to  accommodate  the  one  to  the  other. 
I  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  that  the  road  to  eminence  and 
power,  from  obscure  condition,  ought  not  to  be  made  too 
easy,  nor  a  thing  too  much  of  course.  If  rare  merit  be  the 
rarest  of  all  rare  things,  it  ought  to  pass  through  some  sort 
of  probation.  The  temple  of  honour  ought  to  be  seated  on 
an  eminence.  If  it  be  opened  through  virtue,  let  it  be 
remembered  too  that  virtue  is  never  tried  but  by  some 
difficulty  and  some  struggle. 

Nothing  is  a  due  and  adequate  representation  of  a  state, 
that  does  not  represent  its  ability  as  well  as  its  property. 
Bui  as  ability  is  a  vigorous  and  active  principle,  and  as 
property  is  sluggish,  inert,  and  timid,  it  never  can  be  safe 
from  the  invasions  of  ability,  unless  it  be,  out  of  all  proper- 


62  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

tion,  predominant  in  the  representation.  It  must  b<_ 
represented  too  in  great  masses  of  accumulation,  or  it  is  no? 
rightly  protected.  The  characteristic  essence  of  property, 
formed  out  of  the  combined  principles  of  its  acquisition 
and  conservation,  is  to  be  unequal.  The  great  masses 
therefore  which  excite  envy,  and  tempt  rapacity,  must  be 
put  out  of  the  possibility  of  danger.  Then  they  form  a 
natural  rampart  about  the  lesser  properties  in  all  their 
gradations.  The  same  quantity  of  property,  which  is  by 
the  natural  course  of  things  divided  among  many,  has  not 
the  same  operation.  Its  defensive  power  is  weakened  as 
it  is  diffused.  In  this  diffusion  each  man's  portion  is  less 
than  what,  in  the  eagerness  of  his  desires,  he  may  flatter 
himself  to  obtain  by  dissipating  the  accumulations  of 
others.  The  plunder  of  the  few  would  indeed  give  but  a 
share  inconceivably  small  in  the  distribution  to  the  many. 
lUit  the  many  are  not  capable  of  making  this  calculation  ; 
and  those  who  lead  them  to  rapine  never  intend  this 
distribution. 

The  power  of  perpetuating  our  property  in  our  families  is 
one  of  the  most  valuable  and  interesting  circumstances 
belonging  to  it,  and  that  which  tends  the  most  to  the 
perpetuation  of  society  itself.  It  makes  our  weakness 
subservient  to  our  virtue ;  it  grafts  benevolence  even  upon 
avarice.  The  possessors  of  family  wealth,  and  of.  the 
distinction  which  attends  hereditary  possession  (as  most  • 
concerned  in  it),  are  the  natural  securities  for  this  trans 
mission.  With  us  the  House  of  Peers  is  formed  upon  this 
principle.  It  is  wholly  composed  of  hereditary  oroperty 
and  hereditary  distinction ;  and  made  therefore  the  Vmrcl 
of  the  legislature  ;  and,  in  the  last  event,  the  sole  judge  of 
all  property  in  all  its  subdivisions.  The  House  of  Commons  ' 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  63 

too,  though  not  necessarily,  yet  in  fact,  is  always  so  com 
posed,  in  the  far  greater  part.  Let  those  large  proprietors 
be  what  they  will,  and  they  have  their  chance  of  being 
amongst  the  best,  they  are,  at  the  very  worst,  the  ballast  in 
the  vessel  of  the  commonwealth.  For  though  hereditary 
wealth,  and  the  rank  which  goes  with  it,  are  too  much 
idolised  by  creeping  sycophants,  and  the  blind,  abject 
admirers  of  power,  they  are  too  rashly  slighted  in  shallow 
speculations  of  the  petulant,  assuming,  short-sighted  cox 
combs  of  philosophy.  Some  decent,  regulated  pre 
eminence,  some  preference  (not  exclusive  appropriation) 
given  to  birth,  is  neither  unnatural,  nor  unjust,  nor 
impolitic. 

It  is  said  that  twenty-four  millions  ought  to  prevail  over 
two  hundred  thousand.  True  ;  if  the  constitution  of  a 
kingdom  be  a  problem  of  arithmetic.  This  sort  of 
discourse  does  well  enough  with  the  lamp-post  for  its 
second ;  to  men  who  may  reason  calmly,  it  is  ridiculous. 
The  will  of  the  many,  and  their  interest,  must  very  often 
differ ;  and  great  will  be  the  difference  when  they  make 
an  evil  choice.  A  government  of  five  hundred  country 
attorneys  and  obscure  curates  is  not  good  for  twenty-four 
millions  of  men,  though  it  were  chosen  by  eight-and-forty 
millions ;  nor  is  it  the  better  for  being  guided  by  a  dozen 
of  persons  of  quality,  who  have  betrayed  their  trust  in 
order  to  obtain  that  power.  At  present,  you  seem  in 
everything  to  have  strayed  out  of  the  high  road  of  nature. 
The  property  of  France  does  not  govern  it.  Of  course 
property  is  destroyed,  and  rational  liberty  has  no  existence. 
All  you  have  got  for  the  present  is  a  paper  circulation,  and 
a  stock-jobbing  constitution ;  and,  as  to  the  future,  do  you 
seriously  think  that  the  territory  of  France,  upon  the 


64  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

republican  system  of  eighty-three  independent  municipali 
ties  (to  say  nothing  of  the  parts  that  compose  them),  can 
ever  be  governed  as  one  body,  or  can  ever  be  set  in  motion 
by  the  impulse  of  one  mind  ?  When  the  National  Assembly 
has  completed  its  work,  it  will  have  accomplished  its  ruin. 
These  commonwealths  will  not  long  bear  a  state  of  sub 
jection  to  the  republic  of  Paris.  They  will  not  bear  that 
this  one  body  should  monopolise  the  captivity  of  the  king, 
and  the  dominion  over  the  assembly  calling  itself  National. 
Each  will  keep  its  own  portion  of  the  spoil  of  the  church  to 
itself;  and  it  will  not  suffer  either  that  spoil,  or  the  more 
just  fruits  of  their  industry,  or  the  natural  produce  of  their 
soil,  to  be  sent  to  swell  the  insolence,  or  pamper  the  luxury, 
of  the  mechanics  of  Paris.  In  this  they  will  see  none  of 
the  equality,  under  the  pretence  of  which  they  have  been 
tempted  to  throw  off  their  allegiance  to  their  sovereign,  as 
well  as  the  ancient  constitution  of  their  country.  There 
can  be  no  capital  city  in  such  a  constitution  as  they  have 
lately  made.  They  have  forgot  that  when  they  framed 
democratic  governments,  they  had  virtually  dismembered 
their  country.  The  person,  whom  they  persevere  in  calling 
king,  has  not  power  left  to  him  by  the  hundredth  part 
sufficient  to  hold  together  this  collection  of  republics.  The 
republic  of  Paris  will  endeavour  indeed  to  complete  the 
debauchery  of  the  army,  and  illegally  to  perpetuate  the 
assembly,  without  resort  to  its  constituents,  as  the  means 
of  continuing  its  despotism.  It  will  make  efforts,  by 
becoming  the  heart  of  a  boundless  paper  circulation,  to 
draw  everything  to  itself;  but  in  vain.  All  this  policy  in 
the  end  will  appear  as  feeble  as  it  is  now  violent. 

If  this  be  your  actual  situation,  compared  to  the  situation 
to  which  you  were  called,  as  it  were  by  the  voice  of  God 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  65 

and  man,  I  cannot  find  it  in  my  heart  to  congratulate  you 
on  the  choice  you  have  made,  or  the  success  which  has 
attended  your  endeavours.  I  can  as  little  recommend  to 
any  other  nation  a  conduct  grounded  on  such  principles, 
and  productive  of  such  effects.  That  I  must  leave  to 
those  who  can  see  farther  into  your  affairs  than  I  am  able 
to  do,  and  who  best  know  how  far  your  actions  are 
favourable  to  their  designs.  The  gentlemen  of  the 
Revolution  Society,  who  were  so  early  in  their  congratu 
lations,  appear  to  be  strongly  of  opinion  that  there  is 
some  scheme  of  politics  relative  to  this  country,  in  which 
your  proceedings  may,  in  some  way,  be  useful.  For  your 
Dr.  Price,  who  seems  to  have  speculated  himself  into  no 
small  degree  of  fervour  upon  this  subject,  addresses  his 
auditory  in  the  following  very  remarkable  words :  "  I 
cannot  conclude  without  recalling  particularly  to  your 
recollection  a  consideration  which  I  have  more  than  once 
alluded  to,  and  which  probably  your  thoughts  have  been  all 
along  anticipating ;  a  consideration  with  which  my  mind  is 
impressed  more  than  I  can  express.  I  mean  the  considera 
tion  of  the  favourableness  of  the  present  times  to  all  exertions 
in  the  cause  of  liberty" 

It  is  plain  that  the  mind  of  this  political  preacher  was  at 
the  time  big  with  some  extraordinary  design ;  and  it  is  very 
probable  that  the  thoughts  of  his  audience,  who  understood 
him  better  than  I  do,  did  all  along  run  before  him  in  his 
reflection,  and  in  the  whole  train  of  consequences  to  which 
it  led. 

Before  I  read  that  sermon,  I  really  thought  I  had 
lived  in  a  free  country;  and  it  was  an  error  I  cherished, 
because  it  gave  me  a  greater  liking  to  the  country  I  lived  in. 
I  was  indeed  aware  that  a  jealous,  ever-waking  vigilance,  to 

5 


66  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

guard  the  treasure  of  our  liberty,  not  only  from  invasion, 
but  from  decay  and  corruption,  was  our  best  wisdom,  and 
our  first  duty.  However,  I  considered  that  treasure  rather 
as  a  possession  to  be  secured,  than  as  a  prize  to  be  con 
tended  for.  I  did  not  discern  how  the  present  time  came 
to  be  so  very  favourable  to  all  exertions  in  the  cause  of 
freedom.  The  present  time  differs  from  any  other  only  by 
the  circumstance  of  what  is  doing  in  France.  If  the  example 
of  that  nation  is  to  have  an  influence  on  this,  I  can  easily 
conceive  why  some  of  their  proceedings  which  have  an  un 
pleasant  aspect,  and  are  not  quite  reconcilable  to  humanity, 
generosity,  good  faith,  and  justice,  are  palliated  with  so 
much  milky  good-nature  towards  the  actors,  and  borne  with 
so  much  heroic  fortitude  towards  the  sufferers.  It  is 
certainly  not  prudent  to  discredit  the  authority  of  an  example 
wre  mean  to  follow.  But  allowing  this,  we  are  led  to  a  very 
natural  question : — What  is  that  cause  of  liberty,  and  what 
are  those  exertions  in  its  favour,  to  which  the  example  of 
France  is  so  singularly  auspicious  ?  Is  our  monarchy  to  be 
annihilated,  with  all  the  laws,  all  the  tribunals,  and  all  the 
ancient  corporations  of  the  kingdom  ?  Is  every  land-mark 
of  the  country  to  be  done  away  in  favour  of  a  geometrical 
and  arithmetical  constitution  ?  Is  the  House  of  Lords  to 
be  voted  useless?  Is  episcopacy  to  be  abolished?  Are 
the  church  lands  to  be  sold  to  Jews  and  jobbers;  or  given 
to  bribe  new-invented  municipal  republics  into  a  participa 
tion  in  sacrilege?  Are  all  the  taxes  to  be  voted  grievances, 
and  the  revenue  reduced  to  a  patriotic  contribution,  or 
patriotic  presents?  Are  silver  shoe-buckles  to  be  substi 
tuted  in  the  place  of  the  land  tax  and  the  malt  tax,  for  the 
support  of  the  naval  strength  of  this  kingdom?  Are  all 
orders,  ranks,  and  distinctions  to  be  confounded,  that  out 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  67 

of  universal  anarchy,  joined  to  national  bankruptcy,  three 
or  four  thousand  democracies  should  be  formed  into  eighty- 
three,   and   that   they  may  all,   by  some  sort  of  unknown 
attractive   power,   be   organised  into   one?     For  this  great 
end  is  the  army  to  be  seduced  from  its  discipline  and  its 
-  fidelity,  first  by  every  kind  of  debauchery,  and  then  by  the 
terrible   precedent  of  a   donative  in   the   increase  of  pay? 
Are  the  curates  to  be  seduced  from  their  bishops,  by  hold 
ing  out  to  them  the  delusive  hope   of  a   dole  out  of  the 
spoils  of  their  own  order?     Are  the  citizens  of  London  to 
be  drawn   from    their   allegiance   by  feeding  them  at   the 
expense  of  their  fellow-subjects?     Is  a  compulsory  paper 
currency  to  be  substituted  in  the  place  of  the  legal  coin  of 
this  kingdom  ?     Is  what  remains  of  the  plundered  stock  of 
public    revenue    to    be    employed   in    the  wild   project    of 
maintaining  two  armies  to  watch  over   and  to   fight   with 
each   other?     If  these   are    the   ends  and    means   of   the 
Revolution   Society,  I  admit   they  are  well   assorted;    and 
France  may   furnish    them    for    both   with   precedents    in 
point. 

I  see  that  your  example  is  held  out  to  shame  us.  I 
know  that  we  are  supposed  a  dull,  sluggish  race,  rendered 
passive  by  finding  our  situation  tolerable,  and  prevented  by 
a  mediocrity  of  freedom  from  ever  attaining  to  its  full  per 
fection.  Your  leaders  in  France  began  by  affecting  to 
admire,  almost  to  adore,  the  British  constitution;  but  as 
they  advanced,  they  came  to  look  upon  it  with  a  sovereign 
contempt.  The  friends  of  your  National  Assembly  amongst 
us  have  full  as  mean  an  opinion  of  what  was  formerly 
thought  the  glory  of  their  country.  The  Revolution  Society 
has  discovered  that  the  English  nation  is  not  free.  They 
are  convinced  that  the  inequality  in  our  representation  is  a 


68  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

"defect  in  our  constitution  so  gross  and  palpable,  as  to  make 
it  excellent  chiefly  inform  and  theory."*-  That  a  represen 
tation  in  the  legislature  of  a  kingdom  is  not  only  the  basis 
of  all  constitutional  liberty  in  it,  but  of  "all  legitimate 
government;  that  without  it  a  government  is  nothing  but  a 
usurpation;" — that  "when  the  representation  is  partial, 
the  kingdom  possesses  liberty  only  partially ;  and  if  ex 
tremely  partial,  it  gives  only  a  semblance;  and  if  not  only 
extremely  partial,  but  corruptly  chosen,  it  becomes  a 
nuisance.'1'1  Dr.  Price  considers  this  inadequacy  of  repre 
sentation  as  our  fundamental  grievance;  and  though,  as  to 
the  corruption  of  this  semblance  of  representation,  he  hopes 
it  is  not  yet  arrived  to  its  full  perfection  of  depravity,  he 
fears  that  "  nothing  will  be  done  towards  gaining  for  us 
this  essential  blessing,  until  some  great  abuse  of  power  again 
provokes  our  resentment,  or  some  great  calamity  again 
alarms  our  fears,  or  perhaps  till  the  acquisition  of  a 
pure  and  equal  representation  by  other  countries,  whilst 
we  are  mocked  with  the  shadow,  kindles  our  shame." 
To  this  he  subjoins  a  note  in  these  words:  "  A  representa 
tion  chosen  chiefly  by  the  Treasury,  and  a  few  thousands 
of  the  dregs  of  the  people,  who  are  generally  paid  for 
their  votes." 

You  will  smile  here  at  the  consistency  of  those  demo- 
cratists,  who,  when  they  are  not  on  their  guard,  treat  the 
humbler  part  of  the  community  with  the  greatest  contempt, 
whilst,  at  the  same  time,  they  pretend  to  make  them  the 
depositories  of  all  power.  It  would  require  a  long  discourse 
to  point  out  to  you  the  many  fallacies  that  lurk  in  the 
generality  and  equivocal  nature  of  the  terms  "inadequate 
representation."  I  shall  only  say  here,  in  justice  to  that 
1  Discourse  on  the  Love  of  our  Country,  3rd  edition,  p.  39. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  69 

old-fashioned  constitution,  under  which  we  have  long 
prospered,  that  our  representation  has  been  found  perfectly 
adequate  to  all  the  purposes  for  which  a  representation  of 
the  people  can  be  desired  or  devised.  I  defy  the  enemies 
of  our  constitution  to  show  the  contrary.  To  detail  the 
particulars  in  which  it  is  found  so  well  to  promote  its  ends, 
would  demand  a  treatise  on  our  practical  constitution.  I 
state  here  the  doctrine  of  the  Revolutionists,  only  that  you 
and  others  may  see  what  an  opinion  these  gentlemen 
entertain  of  the  constitution  of  their  country,  and  why  they 
seem  to  think  that  some  great  abuse  of  power,  or  some 
great  calamity,  as  giving  a  chance  for  the  blessing  of  a 
constitution  according  to  their  ideas,  would  be  much 
palliated  to  their  feelings;  you  see  why  they  are  so  much 
enamoured  of  your  fair  and  equal  representation,  which 
being  once  obtained,  the  same  effects  might  follow.  You 
see  they  consider  our  House  of  Commons  as  only  "  a 
semblance,"  "a  form,"  "a  theory,"  "a  shadow,"  "a 
mockery,"  perhaps  "  a  nuisance." 

These  gentlemen  value  themselves  on  being  systematic; 
and  not  without  reason.  They  must  therefore  look  on  this 
gross  and  palpable  defect  of  representation,  this  funda 
mental  grievance  (so  they  call  it),  as  a  thing  not  only 
vicious  in  itself,  but  as  rendering  our  whole  government 
absolutely  illegitimate,  and  not  at  all  better  than  a  down 
right  usurpation.  Another  revolution,  to  get  rid  of  this 
illegitimate  and  usurped  government,  would  of  course  be 
perfectly  justifiable,  if  not  absolutely  necessary.  Indeed 
their  principle,  if  you  observe  it  with  any  attention,  goes 
much  further  than  to  an  alteration  in  the  election  of  the 
House  of  Commons;  for,  if  popular  representation,  or 
choice,  is  necessary  to  the  legitimacy  of  all  government,  the 


70  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

House  of  Lords  is,  at  one  stroke,  bastardised  and  corrupted 
in  blood.  That  House  is  no  representative  of  the  people 
at  all,  even  in  ''semblance  or  in  form."  The  case  of  the 
crown  is  altogether  as  bad.  In  vain  the  crown  may  en 
deavour  to  screen  itself  against  these  gentlemen  by  the 
authority  of  the  establishment  made  on  the  Revolution. 
The  Revolution  which  is  resorted  to  for  a  title,  on  their 
system,  wants  a  title  itself.  The  Revolution  is  built, 
according  to  their  theory,  upon  a  basis  not  more  solid  than 
our  present  formalities,  as  it  was  made  by  a  House  of 
Lords,  not  representing  any  one  but  themselves;  and  by 
a  House  of  Commons  exactly  such  as  the  present,  that  is, 
as  they  term  it,  by  a  mere  "shadow  and  mockery"  of 
representation. 

Something  they  must  destroy,  or  they  seem  to  themselves 
to  exist  for  no  purpose.  One  set  is  for  destroying  the  civil 
power  through  the  ecclesiastical;  another,  for  demolishing 
the  ecclesiastic  through  the  civil.  They  are  aware  that 
the  worst  consequences  might  happen  to  the  public  in 
accomplishing  this  double  ruin  of  church  and  state;  but 
they  are  so  heated  with  their  theories,  that  they  give  more 
than  hints  that  this  ruin,  with  all  the  mischiefs  that  must 
lead  to  it  and  attend  it,  and  which  to  themselves  appear 
quite  certain,  would  not  be  unacceptable  to  them,  or  very 
remote  from  their  wishes.  A  man  amongst  them  of  great 
authority,  and  certainly  of  great  talents,  speaking  of  a 
supposed  alliance  between  church  and  state,  says,  "  Perhaps 
we  must  wait  for  the  fall  of  the  civil  powers  before  this  most 
unnatural  alliance  be  broken.  Calamitous  no  doubt  will  f 
that  time  be.  But  what  convulsion  in  the  political  world 
ought  to  be  a  subject  of  lamentation,  if  it  be  attended  with 
so  desirable  an  effect  ? "  You  see  with  what  a  steady  eye 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  71 

these  gentlemen  are  prepared  to  view  the  greatest  calamities 
which  can  befall  their  country. 

It  is  no  wonder  therefore,  that  with  these  ideas  of  every 
thing  in  their  constitution  and  government  at  home,  either 
in  church  or  state,  as  illegitimate  and  usurped,  or  at  best  as 
a    vain    mockery,    they    look    abroad    with    an    eager    and 
passionate  enthusiasm.     Whilst  they  are  possessed  by  these 
notions,  it  is  vain  to  talk  to  them  of  the  practice  of  their 
ancestors,  the  fundamental  laws  of  their  country,  the  fixed 
form  of  a  constitution,  whose  merits  are  confirmed  by  the 
solid  test    of  long    experience,    and    an    increasing   public 
strength  and  national  prosperity.      They  despise  experience 
as  the  wisdom  of  unlettered  men;  and  as  for  the  rest,  they 
have  wrought  under-ground  a  mine  that  will  blow  up,  at  one 
grand  explosion,  all  examples  of  antiquity,  all  precedents, 
charters,  and  acts  of  parliament.     They  have  "the  rights  of 
men."     Against  these  there  can  be  no  prescription;  against 
these  no  agreement  is  binding:  these  admit  no  temperament, 
and    no    compromise:    anything    withheld    from    their   full 
demand  is  so  much  of  fraud  and  injustice.     Against  these 
their  rights  of  men  let  no  government  look  for  security  in  the 
length  of  its  continuance,  or  in  the  justice  and  lenity  of  its 
administration.     The  objections  of  these  speculatists,  if  its 
forms   do   not  quadrate   with   their   theories,   are    as    valid 
against  such  an  old  and  beneficent  government,  as  against 
the  most  violent  tyranny,  or  the  greenest  usurpation.     They 
are  always  at  issue  with  governments,  not  on  a  question  of 
abuse,   but  a   question   of  competency,  and   a  question  of 
title.     I  have  nothing  to  say  to  the  clumsy  subtilty  of  their 
political  metaphysics.     Let  them  be  their  amusement  in  the 
schools.—"  Ilia  scjactat  in  aula—sEohts,  ct  clauso  ventorum 
carccre  regnct" — But  let  them  not  break  prison  to  burst  like 


72  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

a  Levanter,  to  sweep  the  earth  with  their  hurricane,  and  to 
break  up  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  to  overwhelm 
us. 

Far  am  I  from  denying  in  theory,  full  as  far  is  my  heart 
from  withholding  in  practice  (if  I  were  of  power  to  give  or 
to  withhold),  the  real  rights  of  men.  In  denying  their  false 
claims  of  right,  I  do  not  mean  to  injure  those  which  are 
real,  and  are  such  as  their  pretended  rights  would  totally 
destroy.  If  civil  society  be  made  for  the  advantage  of  man, 
all  the  advantages  for  which  it  is  made  become  his  right. 
It  is  an  institution  of  beneficence;  and  law  itself  is  only 
beneficence  acting  by  a  rule.  Men  have  a  right  to  live  by 
that  rule ;  they  have  a  right  to  do  justice,  as  between  their 
fellows,  whether  their  fellows  are  in  public  function  or  in 
ordinary  occupation.  They  have  a  right  to  the  fruits  of 
their  industry ;  and  to  the  means  of  making  their  industry 
fruitful.  They  have  a  right  to  the  acquisitions  of  their 
parents ;  to  the  nourishment  and  improvement  of  their 
offspring;  to  instruction  in  life,  and  to  consolation  in  death. 
Whatever  each  man  can.  separately  do,  without  trespassing 
upon  others,  he  has  a  right  to  do  for  himself;  and  he  has  a 
right  to  a  fair  portion  of  all  which  society,  with  all  its  com 
binations  of  skill  and  force,  can  do  in  his  favour.  In  this 
partnership  all  men  have  equal  rights ;  but  not  to  equal 
things.  He  that  has  but  five  shillings  in  the  partnership, 
has  as  good  a  right  to  it  as  he  that  has  five  hundred  pounds 
has  to  his  larger  proportion.  But  he  has  not  a  right  to  an 
equal  dividend  in  the  product  of  the  joint  stock;  and  as  to 
the  share  of  power,  authority,  and  direction  which  each 
individual  ought  to  have  in  the  management  of  the  state, 
that  I  must  deny  to  be  amongst  the  direct  original  rights  of 
man  in  civil  society;  for  I  have  in  my  contemplation  the 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  73 

civil  social  man,  and  no  other.     It  is  a  thing  to  be  settled 
by  convention. 

If  civil  society  be  the  offspring  of  convention,  that  con 
vention  must  be  its  law.  That  convention  must  limit  and 
modify  all  the  descriptions  of  constitution  which  are  formed 
under  it.  Every  sort  of  legislative,  judicial,  or  executory 
power  are  its  creatures.  They  can  have  no  being  in  any 

j  other  state  of  things;  and  how  can  any  man  claim  under  the 
conventions  of  civil  society,  rights  which  do  not  so  much  as 
suppose  its  existence?  rights  which  are  absolutely  repug- 

;  nant  to  it  ?  One  of  the  first  motives  to  civil  society,  and 
which  becomes  one  of  its  fundamental  rules,  is,  that  no  man 

\  should  be  judge  in  his  own  cause.  By  this  each  person  has  at 
once  divested  himself  of  the  first  fundamental  right  of  un- 
covenanted  man,  that  is,  to  judge  for  himself,  and  to  assert 
his  own  cause.  He  abdicates  all  right  to  be  his  own 
governor.  He  inclusively,  in  a  great  measure,  abandons  the 
right  of  self-defence,  the  first  law  of  nature.  Men  cannot 
enjoy  the  rights  of  an  uncivil  and  of  a  civil  state  together. 
That  he  may  obtain  justice,  he  gives  up  his  right  of  deter 
mining  what  it  is  in  points  the  most  essential  to  him.  That 
he  may  secure  some  liberty,  he  makes  a  surrender  in  trust 
of  the  whole  of  it. 

Government  is  not  made  in  virtue  of  natural  rights,  which 
may  and  do  exist  in  total  independence  of  it ;  and  exist  in 
much  greater  clearness,  and  in  a  much  greater  degree  of 
abstract  perfection  :  but  their  abstract  perfection  is  their 
practical  defect.  By  having  a  right  to  everything  they  want 
everything.  Government  is  a  contrivance  of  human  wisdom 
to  provide  for  human  wants.  Men  have  a  right  that  these 
wants  should  be  provided  for  by  this  wisdom.  Among  these 
wants  is  to  be  reckoned  the  want,  out  of  civil  society,  of  a 


74  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

sufficient  restraint  upon  their  passions.  Society  requires 
not  only  that  the  passions  of  individuals  should  be  subjected, 
but  that  even  in  the  mass  and  body,  as  well  as  in  the 
individuals,  the  inclinations  of  men  should  frequently  be 
thwarted,  their  will  controlled,  and  their  passions  brought 
into  subjection.  This  can  only  be  done  by  a  power  out 
of  themselves ;  and  not,  in  the  exercise  of  its  function,  sub 
ject  to  that  will  and  to  those  passions  which  it  is  its  office 
to  bridle  and  subdue.  In  this  sense  the  restraints  on  men, 
as  well  as  their  liberties,  are  to  be  reckoned  among  their 
rights.  But  as  the  liberties  and  the  restrictions  vary  with 
times  and  circumstances,  and  admit  of  infinite  modifications, 
they  cannot  be  settled  upon  any  abstract  rule;  and  nothing 
is  so  foolish  as  to  discuss  them  upon  that  principle. 

The  moment  you  abate  anything  from  the  full  rights  of 
men,  each  to  govern  himself,  and  suffer  any  artificial,  positive 
limitation  upon  those  rights,  from  that  moment  the  whole 
organisation  of  government  becomes  a  consideration  of 
convenience.  This  it  is  which  makes  the  constitution  of  a 
state,  and  the  due  distribution  of  its  powers,  a  matter  of  the 
most  delicate  and  complicated  skill.  It  requires  a  deep 
knowledge  of  human  nature  and  human  necessities,  and  of 
the  things  which  facilitate  or  obstruct  the  various  ends, 
which  are  to  be  pursued  by  the  mechanism  of  civil  institu 
tions.  The  state  is  to  have  recruits  to  its  strength,  and 
remedies  to  its  distempers.  What  is  the  use  of  discussing  a 
man's  abstract  right  to  food  or  medicine?  The  question  is 
upon  the  method  of  procuring  and  administering  them.  In 
that  deliberation  I  shall  always  advise  to  call  in  the  aid  of 
the  farmer  and  the  physician,  rather  than  the  professor  of 
metaphysics. 

The  science  of  constructing  a  commonwealth,  or  renovat- 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  75 

ing  it,  or  reforming   it,   is,  like    every   other    experimental 
science,  not  to  be  taught  a  priori.     Nor  is  it  a  short  ex 
perience   that   can   instruct    us    in    that    practical    science ; 
because  the   real   effects   of   moral   causes  are  not   always 
immediate  ;  but  that  which  in  the  first  instance  is  prejudicial 
may  be  excellent  in  its  remoter  operation  ;  and  its  excellence 
may  arise  even  from  the  ill  effects  it  produces  in  the  begin 
ning.       The    reverse    also    happens :    and    very    plausible 
schemes,  with   very  pleasing    commencements,   have   often 
shameful  and  lamentable  conclusions.     In  states  there  are 
;  often  some  obscure  and  almost  latent  causes,  things  which 
appear  at  first  view  of  little  moment,  on  which  a  very  great 
i  part    of  its    prosperity   or   adversity   may   most    essentially 
:  depend.      The   science   of  government   being  therefore  so 
|  practical  in  itself,  and  intended  for  such  practical  purposes, 
a   matter  which    requires    experience,  and    even    more  ex 
perience  than  any  person  can  gain  in  his  whole  life,  however 
sagacious  and  observing  he  may  be,  it  is  with  infinite  caution 
that  any  man  ought  to  venture  upon  pulling  down  an  edifice, 
which  has   answered   in   any  tolerable  degree  for  ages  the 
common  purposes  of  society,   or  on  building  it  up  again, 
[Without   having   models   and    patterns   of  approved  utility 
\ before  his  eyes. 

.  i:  These  metaphysic  rights  entering  into  common  life,  like 
j  |j rays  of  light  which  pierce  into  a  dense  medium,  are,  by  the 
I  |iaws  of  nature,  refracted  from  their  straight  line.  Indeed 
Jin  the  gross  and  complicated  mass  of  human  passions  and 
n  Concerns,  the  primitive  rights  of  men  undergo  such  a  variety 
,f  | :>f  refractions  and  reflections,  that  it  becomes  absurd  to  talk 
jipf  them  as  if  they  continued  in  the  simplicity  of  their 

I" original  direction.      The   nature   of  man  is   intricate;    the 
objects  of  society  are  of  the  greatest  possible  complexity ; 


76  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

and  therefore  no  simple  disposition  or  direction  of  power 
can  be  suitable  either  to  man's  nature,  or  to  the  quality  of 
his  affairs.  When  I  hear  the  simplicity  of  contrivance 
aimed  at  and  boasted  of  in  any  new  political  constitutions, 
I  am  at  no  loss  to  decide  that  the  artificers  are  grossly 
ignorant  of  their  trade,  or  totally  negligent  of  their  duty. 
The  simple  governments  are  fundamentally  defective,  to  say 
no  worse  of  them.  If  you  were  to  contemplate  society  in 
but  one  point  of  view,  all  these  simple  modes  of  polity  are 
infinitely  captivating.  In  effect  each  would  answer  its  single 
end  much  more  perfectly  than  the  more  complex  is  able  to 
attain  all  its  complex  purposes.  But  it  is  better  that  the 
whole  should  be  imperfectly  and  anomalously  answered, 
than  that,  while  some  parts  are  provided  for  with  great 
exactness,  others  might  be  totally  neglected,  or  perhaps 
materially  injured,  by  the  over-care  of  a  favourite  member. 

The  pretended  rights  of  these  theorists  are  all  extremes : 
and  in  proportion  as  they  are  metaphysically  true,  they  are 
morally  and  politically  false.  The  rights  of  men  are  in  a 
sort  of  middle,  incapable  of  definition,  but  not  impossible  to 
be  discerned.  The  rights  of  men  in  governments  are  their i 
advantages;  and  these  are  often  ,in  balances  between 
differences  of  good;  in  compromises  sometimes  between  good 
and  evil,  and  sometimes  between  evil  and  evil.  Political 
reason  is  a  computing  principle;  adding,  subtracting, 
multiplying,  and  dividing,  morally  and  not  metaphysically,  or 
mathematically,  true  moral  denominations. 

By  these  theorists  the  right  of  the  people  is  almost  always 
sophistically  confounded  with  their  power.  The  body  of 
the  community,  whenever  it  can  come  to  act,  can  meet  with 
no  effectual  resistance ;  but  till  power  and  right  are  the  same, 
the  whole  body  of  them  has  no  right  inconsistent  with  virtue, 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  77 

and  the  first  of  all  virtues,  prudence.  Men  have  no  right  to 
what  is  not  reasonable,  and  to  what  is  not  for  their  benefit ; 
for  though  a  pleasant  writer  said,  Liceat  perire  poetis^  when 
one  of  them,  in  cold  blood,  is  said  to  have  leaped  into  the 
flames  of  a  volcanic  revolution,  Ardentem  frigidus  sEtnam 
insiluit)  I  consider  such  a  frolic  rather  as  an  unjustifiable 
poetic  licence,  than  as  one  of  the  franchises  of  Parnassus  ; 
and  whether  he  were  poet,  or  divine,  or  politician  that  chose 
to  exercise  this  kind  of  right,  I  think  that  more  wise,  because 
more  charitable,  thoughts  would  urge  me  rather  to  save  the 
man,  than  to  preserve  his  brazen  slippers  as  the  monuments 
of  his  folly. 

The  kind  of  anniversary  sermons  to  which  a  great  part  of 
what  I  write  refers,  if  men  are  not  shamed  out  of  their 
present  course,  in  commemorating  the  fact,  will  cheat  many 
out  of  the  principles,  and  deprive  them  of  the  benefits,  of 
the  Revolution  they  commemorate.  I  confess  to  you,  Sir,  I 
never  liked  this  continual  talk  of  resistance,  and  revolution, 
or  the  practice  of  making  the  extreme  medicine  of  the 
constitution  its  daily  bread.  It  renders  the  habit  of  society 
dangerously  valetudinary :  it  is  taking  periodical  doses  of 
mercury  sublimate,  and  swallowing  down  repeated  provo 
catives  of  cantharides  to  our  love  of  liberty. 

This  distemper  of  remedy,  grown  habitual,  relaxes  and 
wears  out,  by  a  vulgar  and  prostituted  use,  the  spring  of  that 
spirit  which  is  to  be  exerted  on  great  occasions.  It  was  in 
the  most  patient  period  of  Roman  servitude  that  themes  of 
tyrannicide  made  the  ordinary  exercise  of  boys  at  school — 
cum  perimit  sccvos  das  sis  numerosa  tyrannos.  In  the  ordi 
nary  state  of  things,  it  produces  in  a  country  like  ours  the 
worst  effects,  even  on  the  cause  of  that  liberty  which  it 
abuses  with  the  dissoluteness  of  an  extravagant  speculation. 


78  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

Almost  all  the  high-bred  republicans  of  my  time  have,  after 
a  short  space,  become  the  most  decided,  thorough-paced 
courtiers ;  they  soon  left  the  business  of  a  tedious,  moderate, 
but  practical  resistance,  to  those  of  us  whom,  in  the  pride 
and  intoxication  of  their  theories,  they  have  slighted  as  not 
much  better  than  Tories.     Hypocrisy,  of  course,  delights  in 
the  most  sublime  speculations  ;  for,  never  intending  to  go 
beyond  speculation,  it  costs  nothing  to  have  it  magnificent. 
But  even  in  cases  where  rather  levity  than  fraud  was  to  be 
suspected  in  these  ranting  speculations,  the  issue  has  been 
much  the  same.     These  professors,  finding  their  extreme 
principles   not   applicable   to   cases   which   call   only  for  a 
qualified,  or,  as  I  may  say,  civil  and  legal  resistance,  in  such 
cases  employ  no  resistance  at  all.     It  is  with  them  a  war  or 
a  revolution,  or  it  is  nothing.     Finding   their  schemes   of 
politics  not  adapted  to  the  state  of  the  world  in  which  they 
live,  they  often  come  to  think  lightly  of  all  public  principle ; 
and  are  ready,  on  their  part,  to  abandon  for  a  very  trivial 
interest  what  they  find  of  very  trivial  value.     Some  indeed 
are  of  more  steady  and  persevering  natures ;  but  these  are 
eager  politicians  out  of  parliament,  who  have  little  to  tempt 
them  to  abandon  their  favourite  projects.     They  have  some 
change  in  the  church  or  state,  or  both,  constantly  in  their  view. 
When  that  is  the  case,  they  are  always  bad  citizens,  and  per 
fectly  unsure  connections.    For,  considering  their  speculative 
designs  as  of  infinite  value,  and  the  actual  arrangement  of 
the  state  as  of  no  estimation,  they  are  at  best  indifferent 
about  it.     They  see  no  merit  in  the  good,  and  no  fault  in 
the  vicious,  management  of  public  affairs  ;  they  rather  rejoice 
in  the  latter,  as  more  propitious  to  revolution.     They  see  no 
merit  or  demerit  in  any  man,  or  any  action,  or  any  political 
principle,  any  further  than  as  they  may  forward  or  retard 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  79 

their  design  of  change  :  they  therefore  take  up,  one  day,  the 
j  most  violent  and  stretched  prerogative,  and  another  time  the 
wildest  democratic  ideas  of  freedom,  and  pass  from  the  one 
to  the  other  without  any  sort  of  regard  to  cause,  to  person, 
or  to  party. 

In  France  you  are  now  in  the  crisis  of  a  revolution,  and 
j  in  the  transit  from  one  form  of  government  to  another — you 
j  cannot  see  that  character  of  men  exactly  in  the  same  situation 
in  which  we  see  it  in  this  country.  With  us  it  is  militant; 
with  you  it  is  triumphant ;  and  you  know  how  it  can  act 
when  its  power  is  commensurate  to  its  will.  I  would  not 
[be  supposed  to  confine  those  observations  to  any  description 
of  men,  or  to  comprehend  all  men  of  any  description 
within  them — No  !  far  from  it.  I  am  as  incapable  of  that 
injustice,  as  I  am  of  keeping  terms  with  those  who  profess 
principles  of  extremes;  and  who,  under  the  name  of 
religion,  teach  little  else  than  wild  and  dangerous  politics. 
The  worst  of  these  politics  of  revolution  is  this:  they  temper 
and  harden  the  breast,  in  order  to  prepare  it  for  the 
desperate  strokes  which  are  sometimes  used  in  extreme 
occasions.  But  as  these  occasions  may  never  arrive,  the 
mind  receives  a  gratuitous  taint ;  and  the  moral  sentiments 
suffer  not  a  little,  when  no  political  purpose  is  served  by  the 
depravation.  This  sort  of  people  are  so  taken  up  with  their 
;heories  about  the  rights  of  man,  that  they  have  totally 
brgotten  his  nature.  Without  opening  one  new  avenue  to 
:he  understanding,  they  have  succeeded  in  stopping  up  those 
hat  lead  to  the  heart.  They  have  perverted  in  themselves, 
md  in  those  that  attend  to  them,  all  the  well-placed 
sympathies  of  the  human  breast. 

This  famous  sermon  of  the  Old  Jewry  breathes  nothing  but 
his  spirit  through  all  the  political  part.     Plots,  massacres, 


So  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

assassinations,  seem  to  some  people  a  trivial  price  for 
obtaining  a  revolution.  A  cheap,  bloodless  reformation,  a 
guiltless  liberty,  appear  flat  and  vapid  to  their  taste.  There 
must  be  a  great  change  of  scene ;  there  must  be  a  magnifi 
cent  stage  effect;  there  must  be  a  grand  spectacle  to  rouse 
the  imagination,  grown  torpid  with  the  lazy  enjoyment  of 
sixty  years'  security,  and  the  still  unanimating  repose  of  public 
prosperity.  The  preacher  found  them  all  in  the  French 
Revolution.  This  inspires  a  juvenile  warmth  through  his 
whole  frame.  His  enthusiasm  kindles  as  he  advances;  and 
when  he  arrives  at  his  peroration  it  is  in  a  full  blaze.  Then 
viewing,  from  the  Pisgah  of  his  pulpit,  the  free,  moral,  happy, 
flourishing,  and  glorious  state  of  France,  as  in  a  bird's-eye 
landscape  of  a  promised  land,  he  breaks  out  into  the  follow 
ing  rapture  : 

"What  an  eventful  period  is  this !  I  am  thankful  that 
have  lived  to  it ;  I  could  almost  say,  Lord,  now  lettest  thou 
thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salva- 
f{OHf — I  have  lived  to  see  a  diffusion  of  knowledge,  which 
has  undermined  superstition  and  error. — I  have  lived  to  see 
the  rights  of  men  better  understood  than  ever;  and  nations 
panting  for  liberty  which  seemed  to  have  lost  the  idea  of 

it. I  have  lived  to  see  thirty  millions  of  people,  indignant 

and  resolute,  spurning  at  slavery,  and  demanding  liberty 
with  an  irresistible  voice.  Their  king  led  in  triumph,  and 
an  arbitrary  monarch  surrendering  himself  to  his  subjects"^ 

1  Another  of  these  reverend  gentlemen,  who  was  witness  to  some  ol 
the  spectacles  which  Paris  has  lately  exhibited,  expresses  himself  thus: — 
"A  king  dragged  in  submissive  triumph  by  his  conquering  subjects,  i< 
one  of  those  appearances  of  grandeur  which  seldom  rise  in  the  prospeci 
of  human  affairs,  and  which,  during  the  remainder  of  my  life,  I  shal 
think  of  with  wonder  and  gratification."  These  gentlemen  agre< 
marvellously  in  their  feelings. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  Si 

Before  I  proceed  further,  I  have  to  remark  that  Dr.  Price 
seems  rather  to  overvalue  the  great  acquisitions  of  light  which 
he  has  obtained  and  diffused  in  this  age.  The  last  century 
appears  to  me  to  have  been  quite  as  much  enlightened. 
It  had,  though  in  a  different  place,  a  triumph  as  memorable 
as  that  of  Dr.  Price;  and  some  of  the  great  preachers  of 
that  period  partook  of  it  as  eagerly  as  he  has  done  in  the 
triumph  of  France.  On  the  trial  of  the  Rev.  Hugh  Peters 
for  high  treason,  it  was  deposed  that  when  King  Charles 
was  brought  to  London  for  his  trial,  the  Apostle  of  Liberty 
in  that  day  conducted  the  triumph.  "I  saw/''  says  the  wit 
ness,  "his  Majesty  in  the  coach  with  six  horses,  and  Peters 
riding  before  the  king,  triumphing  ])r.  Price,  when  he 
talks  as  if  he  had  made  a  discovery,  only  follows  a  prece 
dent  ;  for,  after  the  commencement  of  the  king's  trial,  this 
precursor,  the  same  Dr.  Peters,  concluding  a  long  prayer  at 
the  Royal  Chapel  at  Whitehall  (he  had  very  triumphantly 
chosen  his  place),  said,  "I  have  prayed  and  preached  these 
twenty  years ;  and  now  I  may  say  with  old  Simeon,  Lord, 
now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  for  mine  eyes 
have  seen  thy  salvation."1  Peters  had  not  the  fruits  of  his 
prayer;  for  he  neither  departed  so  soon  as  he  wished,  nor 
in  peace.  He  became  (what  I  heartily  hope  none  of  his 
followers  may  be  in  this  country)  himself  a  sacrifice  to  the 
triumph  which  he  led  as  pontiff.  They  dealt  at  the  Restora 
tion,  perhaps,  too  hardly  with  this  poor  good  man.  But  we 
owe  it  to  his  memory  and  his  sufferings,  that  he  had  as  much 
illumination,  and  as  much  zeal,  and  had  as  effectually  under 
mined  all  the  superstition  and  error  which  might  impede  the 
great  business  he  was  engaged  in,  as  any  who  follow  and 
repeat  after  him,  in  this  age,  which  would  assume  to  itself  an 
1  State  7^rials,  vol.  ii.;  pp.  360,  363. 

6 


82  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

exclusive  title  to  the  knowledge  of  the  rights  of  men,  and  all 
the  glorious  consequences  of  that  knowledge. 

After  this  sally  of  the  preacher  of  the  Old  Jewry,  which 
differs  only  in  place  and  time,  but  agrees  perfectly  with  the 
spirit  and  letter  of  the  rapture  of  1648,  the  Revolution 
Society,  the  fabricators  of  governments,  the  heroic  band  of 
cashierers  of  monarchs^  electors  of  sovereigns,  and  leaders  of 
kings  in  triumph,  strutting  with  a  proud  consciousness  of 
the  diffusion  of  knowledge,  of  which  every  member  had 
obtained  so  large  a  share  in  the  donative,  were  in  haste  to 
make  a  generous  diffusion  of  the  knowledge  they  had  thus 
gratuitously  received.  To  make  this  bountiful  communica 
tion,  they  adjourned  from  the  church  in  the  Old  Jewry  to 
the  London  Tavern ;  where  the  same  Dr.  Price,  in  whom  the 
fumes  of  his  oracular  tripod  were  not  entirely  evaporated, 
moved  and  carried  the  resolution,  or  address  of  congratula 
tion,  transmitted  by  Lord  Stanhope  to  the  National  Assembly 
of  France. 

I  find  a  preacher  of  the  gospel  profaning  the  beautiful  and 
prophetic  ejaculation,  commonly  called  " nunc  dimittis" 
made  on  the  first  presentation  of  our  Saviour  in  the  temple, 
and  applying  it,  with  an  inhuman  and  unnatural  rapture,  to 
the  most  horrid,  atrocious,  and  afflicting  spectacle  that 
perhaps  ever  was  exhibited  to  the  pity  and  indignation  of. 
mankind.  This  "leading  in  triumph"  a  thing  in  its  best 
form  unmanly  and  irreligious,  which  fills  our  preacher  with 
such  unhallowed  transports,  must  shock,  I  believe,  the 
moral  taste  of  every  well-born  mind.  Several  English  were 
the  stupefied  and  indignant  spectators  of  that  triumph.  It 
was  (unless  we  have  been  strangely  deceived)  a  spectacle 
more  resembling  a  procession  of  American  savages,  entering 
into  Onondaga.  after  some  of  their  murders  called  victories, 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  83 

and  leading  into  hovels  hung  round  with  scalps,  their 
captives,  overpowered  with  the  scoffs  and  buffets  of  women 
as  ferocious  as  themselves,  much  more  than  it  resembled  the 
triumphal  pomp  of  a  civilised,  martial  nation  ;  —  if  a  civilised 
nation,  or  any  men  who  had  a  sense  of  generosity,  were 
capable  of  a  personal  triumph  over  the  fallen  and  afflicted. 

This,  my  dear  Sir,  was  not  the  triumph  of  France.  I 
must  believe  that,  as  a  nation,  it  overwhelmed  you  with 
shame  and  horror.  I  must  believe  that  the  National 
Assembly  find  themselves  in  a  state  of  the  greatest  humilia 
tion  in  not  being  able  to  punish  the  authors  of  this  triumph, 
or  the  actors  in  it ;  and  that  they  are  in  a  situation  in  which 
any  inquiry  they  may  make  upon  the  subject  must  be  desti 
tute  even  of  the  appearance  of  liberty  or  impartiality.  The 
apology  of  that  Assembly  is  found  in  their  situation ;  but 
when  we  approve  what  they  must  bear,  it  is  in  us  the 
degenerate  choice  of  a  vitiated  mind. 

With  a  compelled  appearance  of  deliberation,  they  vote 
under  the  dominion  of  a  stern  necessity.  They  sit  in  the 
heart,  as  it  were,  of  a  foreign  republic  :  they  have  their 
residence  in  a  city  whose  constitution  has  emanated  neither 
from  the  charter  of  their  king,  nor  from  their  legislative 
power.  There  they  are  surrounded  by  an  army  not  raised  either 
by  the  authority  of  their  crown,  or  by  their  command;  and 
which,  if  they  should  order  to  dissolve  itself,  would  instantly 
dissolve  them.  There  they  sit,  after  a  gang  of  assassins  had 
driven  away  some  hundreds  of  the  members ;  whilst  those 
who  held  the  same  moderate  principles,  with  more  patience 
or  better  hope,  continued  every  day  exposed  to  outrageous 
insults  and  murderous  threats.  There  a  majority,  sometimes 
real,  sometimes  pretended,  captive  itself,  compels  a  captive 
king  to  issue  as  royal  edicts,  at  third  hand,  the  polluted 


84  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

nonsense  of  their  most  licentious  and  giddy  coffee-houses. 
It  is  notorious  that  all  their  measures  are  decided  before 
they  are  debated.     It  is  beyond  doubt  that  under  the  terror 
of  the  bayonet,  and  the  lamp-post,  and  the  torch  to  their 
houses,  they  are  obliged  to  adopt  all  the  crude  and  desperate 
measures    suggested    by   clubs    composed    of  a   monstrous 
medley  of   all   conditions,  tongues,   and   nations.      Among 
these  are  found  persons,  in  comparison  of  whom  Catiline 
•  would    be    thought    scrupulous,   and    Cethegus    a    man    of 
sobriety  and   moderation.      Nor  is  it.  in  these  clubs  alone 
that  the  public  measures  are  deformed  into  monsters.     They 
undergo  a  previous  distortion  in  academies,  intended  as  so 
many  seminaries  for  these  clubs,  which  are  set  up  in  all  the 
places   of  public   resort.      In   these   meetings   of  all   sorts, 
every  counsel,  in  proportion   as   it   is   daring,  and  violent, 
and   perfidious,  is  taken  for  the   mark  of  superior  genius. 
Humanity  and   compassion   are   ridiculed   as   the   fruits  of 
superstition  and  ignorance.      Tenderness  to  individuals  is 
considered  as    treason   to   the  public.      Liberty  is   always 
to  be  estimated  perfect  as  property  is  rendered  insecure. 
Amidst  assassination,  massacre,  and  confiscation,  perpetrated 
or  meditated,  they  are  forming  plans  for  the  good  order  of 
future  society.     Embracing  in  their  arms  the  carcases  of  base 
criminals,  and  promoting  their  relations  on  the  title  of  their 
offences,  they  drive  hundreds  of  virtuous  persons  to  the  same 
end,  by  forcing  them  to  subsist  by  beggary  or  by  crime. 

The  Assembly,  their  organ,  acts  before  them  the  farce  of 
deliberation  with  as  little  decency  as  liberty.  They  act  like 
the  comedians  of  a  fair  before  a  riotous  audience;  they 
act  amidst  the  tumultuous  cries  of  a  mixed  mob  of  ferocious 
men,  and  of  women  lost  to  shame,  who,  according  to  their 
insolent  fancies,  direct,  control,  applaud,  explode  them  ;  and 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  85 

sometimes  mix  and  take  their  seats  amongst  them  ;  domi 
neering  over  them  with  a  strange  mixture  ot  servile  petu 
lance  and  proud,  presumptuous  authority.  As  they  have 
inverted  order  in  all  things,  the  gallery  is  in  the  place  of  the 
house.  This  Assembly,  which  overthrows  kings  and  king 
doms,  has  not  even  the  physiognomy  and  aspect  of  a  grave 
legislative  body— nee  color  imperil,  nee  from  ulla  senatiis. 
They  have  a  power  given  to  them,  like  that  of  the  evil  prin 
ciple,  to  subvert  and  destroy;  but  none  to  construct,  except 
such  machines  as  may  be  fitted  for  further  subversion  and 
further  destruction, 

Who  is  it  that  admires,  and  from  the  heart  is  attached  to, 
national  representative  assemblies,  but  must  turn  with  horror 
and  disgust  from  such  a  profane  burlesque,  and  abominable 
perversion  of  that  sacred  institute  ?     Lovers  of  monarchy, 
lovers  of  republics,  must  alike  abhor  it,     The  members  of 
your  Assembly  must  themselves  groan  under  the  tyranny  of 
which  they  have  all  the  shame,  none  of  the  direction,  and 
little  of  the  profit,     I  am  sure  many  of  the  members  com 
posing  even  the  majority  of  that  body  must  feel  as  I  do,  not 
withstanding  the  applauses  of  the  Revolution  Society.    Miser 
able  King  !  miserable  Assembly  !    How  must  that  assembly 
be  silently  scandalised  with   those  of  their  members   who 
could  call  a  day  which  seemed  to  blot  the  sun  out  of  heaven, 
"//«  beau  jour/"1     How  must  they  be  inwardly  indignant 
at  hearing  others,  who  thought  fit  to  declare  to  them  "that 
the  vessel  of  the  state  would  fly  forward  in  her  course  towards 
regeneration  with  more  speed  than  ever,"  from  the  stiff  gale  of 
treason  and  murder  which  preceded  our  preacher's  triumph  ! 
What  must  they  have  felt,  whilst,  with  outward  patience,  and 
inward  indignation,  they  heard  of  the  slaughter  of  innocent 
1  6th  of  October,  1789. 


86  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

gentlemen  in  their  houses,  that  "the  Wood  spilled  was  not 
the  most  pure  ! "  What  must  they  have  felt,  when  they  were 
besieged  by  complaints  of  disorders  which  shook  their  coun 
try  to  its  foundations,  at  being  compelled  coolly  to  tell  the 
complainants  that  they  were  under  the  protection  of  the 
law,  and  that  they  would  address  the  king  (the  captive  king) 
to  cause  the  laws  to  be  enforced  for  their  protection  ;  when 
the  enslaved  ministers  of  that  captive  king  had  formally 
notified  to  them  that  there  were  neither  law,  nor  authority, 
nor  power  left  to  protect !  What  must  they  have  felt  at 
being  obliged,  as  a  felicitation  on  the  present  new  year,  to 
request  their  captive  king  to  forget  the  stormy  period  of  the 
last,  on  account  of  the  great  good  which  he  was  likely  to 
produce  to  his  people ;  to  the  complete  attainment  of  which 
good  they  adjourned  the  practical  demonstrations  of  their 
loyalty,  assuring  him  of  their  obedience,  when  he  should  no 
longer  possess  any  authority  to  command  ! 

This  address  was  made  with  much  good  nature  and 
affection,  to  be  sure.  But  among  the  revolutions  in  France 
must  be  reckoned  a  considerable  revolution  in  their  ideas  of 
politeness.  In  England  we  are  said  to  learn  manners  at 
second-hand  from  your  side  of  the  water,  and  that  we  dress 
our  behaviour  in  the  frippery  of  France.  If  so,  we  are  still 
in  the  old  cut ;  and  have  not  so  far  conformed  to  the  new 
Parisian  mode  of  good  breeding,  as  to  think  it  quite  in  the 
most  refined  strain  of  delicate  compliment  (whether  in  con 
dolence  or  congratulation)  to  say,  to  the  most  humiliated 
creature  that  crawls  upon  the  earth,  that  great  public 
benefits  are  derived  from  the  murder  of  his  servants,  the 
attempted  assassination  of  himself  and  of  his  wife,  and  the 
mortification,  disgrace,  and  degradation  that  he  has  per 
sonally  suffered.  It  is  a  topic  of  consolation  which  our 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  87 

ordinary  of  Newgate  would  be  too  humane  to  use  to  a  criminal 
at  the  foot  of  the  gallows.  I  should  have  thought  that  the 
hangman  of  Paris,  now  that  he  is  liberalised  by  the  vote  of 
the  National  Assembly,  and  is  allowed  his  rank  and  arms  in 
the  heralds'  college  of  the  rights  of  men,  would  be  too  gene 
rous,  too  gallant  a  man,  too  full  of  the  sense  of  his  new  dignity, 
to  employ  that  cutting  consolation  to  any  of  the  persons 
whom  the  leze  nation  might  bring  under  the  administration 
of  his  executive  power. 

A  man  is  fallen  indeed  when  he  is  thus  flattered.  The 
anodyne  draught  of  oblivion,  thus  drugged,  is  well  calculated 
to  preserve  a  galling  wakefulness,  and  to  feed  the  living 
ulcer  of  a  corroding  memory.  Thus  to  administer  the  opiate 
potion  of  amnesty,  powdered  with  all  the  ingredients  of  scorn 
and  contempt,  is  to  hold  to  his  lips,  instead  of  "the  balm  of 
hurt  minds,"  the  cup  of  human  misery  full  to  the  brim,  and 
to  force  him  to  drink  it  to  the  dregs. 

Yielding  to  reasons,  at  least  as  forcible  as  those  which 

were  so  delicately  urged  in  the  compliment  on  the  new  year, 

the  King  of  France  will  probably  endeavour  to  forget  these 

events   and   that  compliment.      But  history,  who   keeps  a 

durable  record  of  all  our  acts,  and  exercises  her  awful  censure 

j!  over  the  proceedings  of  all  sorts  of  sovereigns,  will  not  forget 

|  either  those  events,  or  the  era  of  this  liberal  refinement  in 

I.  the  intercourse  of  mankind.      History  will  record   that  on 

!  the  morning  of  the   6th  of  October,    1789,  the   King  and 

|  Queen  of  France,  after  a  day  of  confusion,  alarm,  dismay, 

1  and  slaughter,  lay  down,  under  the  pledged  security  of  public 

I  faith,   to   indulge   nature   in    a    few   hours    of  respite,    and 

j  troubled,  melancholy  repose.     From  this  sleep  the  Queen 

was  first  startled  by  the  voice  of  the  sentinel  at  her  door, 

who  cried  out  to  her  to  save  herself  by  flight — that  this  was 


88  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

the  last  proof  of  fidelity  he  could  give — that  they  were  upon 
him,  and  he  was  dead.  Instantly  he  was  cut  down,  A 
band  of  cruel  ruffians  and  assassins,  reeking  with  his  blood, 
rushed  into  the  chamber  of  the  Queen,  and  pierced  with  a 
hundred  strokes  of  bayonets  and  poniards  the  bed,  from 
whence  this  persecuted  woman  had  but  just  time  to  fly 
almost  naked,  and,  through  ways  unknown  to  the  murderers, 
had  escaped  to  seek  refuge  at  the  feet  of  a  king  and  husband, 
not  secure 'of  his  own  life  for  a  moment. 

This  king,  to  say  no  more  of  him,  and  this  queen,  and 
their  infant  children  (who  once  would  have  been-  the  pride 
and  hope  of  a  great  and  generous  people),  were  then  forced 
to  abandon  the  sanctuary  of  the  most  splendid  palace  in  the 
world,  which  they  left  swimming  in  blood,  polluted  by 
massacre,  and  strewed  with  scattered  limbs  and  mutilated 
carcases.  Thence  they  were  conducted  into  the  capital  of 
their  kingdom.  Two  had  been  selected  from  the  unprovoked, 
unresisted,  promiscuous  slaughter  which  was  made  of  the 
gentlemen  of  birth  and  family  who  composed  the  king's  body 
guard.  These  two  gentlemen,  with  all  the  parade  of  an 
execution  of  justice,  were  cruelly  and  publicly  dragged  to 
the  block,  and  beheaded  in  the  great  court  of  the  palace. 
Their  heads  were  stuck  upon  spears,  and  led  the  procession; 
whilst  the  royal  captives  who  followed  in  the  train  were 
slowly  moved  along,  amidst  the  horrid  yells,  and  shrilling 
screams,  and  frantic  dances,  and  infamous  contumelies,  and 
all  the  unutterable  abominations  of  the  furies  of  hell,  in  the 
abused  shape  of  the  vilest  of  women.  After  they  had  been 
made  to  taste,  drop  by  drop,  more  than  the  bitterness  of, 
death,  in  the  slow  torture  of  a  journey  of  twelve  miles,  pro-| 
tracted  to  six  hours,  they  were,  under  a  guard,  composed  of 
those  very  soldiers  who  had  thus  conducted  them  through 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  89 

this  famous  triumph,  lodged  in  one  of  the  old  palaces  of 
Paris,  now  converted  into  a  bastile  for  kings. 

Is  this  a  triumph  to  be  consecrated  at  altars?  to  be  com 
memorated  with  grateful  thanksgiving  ?  to  be  offered  to  the 
divine  humanity  with  fervent  prayer  and  enthusiastic  ejacu 
lation? —  These  Theban  and  Thracian  orgies,  acted  in 
France,  and  applauded  only  in  the  Old  Jewry,  I  assure  you, 
kindle  prophetic  enthusiasm  in  the  minds  but  of  very  few 
people  in  this  kingdom  :  although  a  saint  and  apostle,  who 
may  have  revelations  of  his  own,  and  who  has  so  completely 
vanquished  all  the  mean  superstitions  of  the  heart,  may 
incline  to  think  it  pious  and  decorous  to  compare  it  with  the 
entrance  into  the  world  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  proclaimed 
in  a  holy  temple  by  a  venerable  sage,  and  not  long  before 
not  worse  announced  by  the  voice  of  angels  to  the  quiet 
innocence  of  shepherds. 

At  first  I  was  at  a  loss  to  account  for  this  fit  of  unguarded 
transport.  I  knew,  indeed,  that  the  sufferings  of  monarchs 
make  a  delicious  repast  to  some  sort  of  palates.  There 
were  reflections  which  might  serve  to  keep  this  appetite 
within  some  bounds  of  temperance.  But  when  I  took  one 
circumstance  into  my  consideration,  I  was  obliged  to  confess 
that  much  allowance  ought  to  be  made  for  the  society,  and 
that  the  temptation  was  too  strong  for  common  discretion  ; 
I  mean,  the  circumstance  of  the  lo  Pa?an  of  the  triumph, 
the  animating  cry  which  called  "for  a// the  BISHOPS  to  be 
hanged  on  the  lamp-posts,"  l  might  well  have  brought  forth 
a  burst  of  enthusiasm  on  the  foreseen  consequences  of  this 
happy  day.  I  allow  to  so  much  enthusiasm  some  little 
deviation  from  prudence.  I  allow  this  prophet  to  break 
forth  into  hymns  of  joy  and  thanksgiving  on  an  event  which 
1  Tons  les  Evcques  a  la  lanterne. 


00 


REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 


appears  like  the  precursor  of  the  Millennium,  and  the  pro 
jected  fifth  monarchy,  in  the  destruction  of  all  church 
establishments.  There  was,  however  (as  in  all  human 
affairs  there  is),  in  the  midst  of  this  joy,  something  to 
exercise  the  patience  of  these  worthy  gentlemen,  and  to  try 
the  long-suffering  of  their  faith.  The  actual  murder  of  the 
king  and  queen,  and  their  child,  was  wanting  to  the  other 
auspicious  circumstances  of  this  "beautiful day?  The  actual 
murder  of  the  bishops,  though  called  for  by,  so  many  holy 
ejaculations,  was  also  wanting.  A  group  of  regicide  and 
sacrilegious  slaughter  was  indeed  boldly  sketched,  but  it  was 
only  sketched.  It  unhappily  was  left  unfinished,  in  this 
great  history-piece  of  the  massacre  of  innocents.  What 
hardy  pencil  of  a  great  master,  from  the  school  of  the  rights 
of  men,  will  finish  it,  is  to  be  seen  hereafter.  The  age  has 
not  yet  the  complete  benefit  of  that  diffusion  of  knowledge 
that  has  undermined  superstition  and  error ;  and  the  King 
of  France  wants  another  object  or  two  to  consign  to  oblivion, 
in  consideration  of  all  the  good  which  is  to  arise  from  his 
own  sufferings,  and  the  patriotic  crimes  of  an  enlightened 
age.1 

1  It  is  proper  here  to  refer  to  a  letter  written  upon  this  subject  by  an 
eye-witness.  That  eye-witness  was  one  of  the  most  honest,  intelligent, 
and  eloquent  members  of  the  National  Assembly,  one  of  the  most 
active  and  zealous  reformers  of  the  state.  He  was  obliged  to  secede 
from  the  assembly  ;  and  he  afterwards  became  a  voluntary  exile,  on 
account  of  the  horrors  of  this  pious  triumph,  and  the  dispositions  of 
men  who,  profiting  of  crimes,  if  not  causing  them,  have  taken  the  lead 
in  public  affairs. 

Extract  of  M.  de  Lally  ToIIendal's  Second  Letter  to  a  Friend. 

"  Parlons  du  parti  que  j'ai  pris;  il  est  bien  justifie  dans  ma  conscience. 
— Ni  cette  ville  coupable,  ni  cette  assembled  plus  coupable  encore,  ne 
meritoient  que  je  me  justifie  ;  mais  j'ai  a  cceur  que  vous,  et  les  personnes 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE. 


91 


Although  this  work  of  our  new  light  and  knowledge  did 

not  go  to  the  length  that  in  all  probability  it  was  intended 

it  should  be  carried,  yet  I  must  think  that  such  treatment  of 

any  human  creatures  must  be  shocking  to  any  but  those  who 

are  made  for  accomplishing  revolutions.      But  I  cannot  stop 

here.     Influenced  by  the  inborn  feelings  of  my  nature,  and 

not  being  illuminated   by  a  single  ray  of  this  new-sprung 

j   modern  light,  I  confess  to  you,  Sir,  that  the  exalted  rank  of 

the  persons  suffering,  and  particularly  the  sex,  the  beauty, 

.   and  the  amiable  qualities  of  the  descendant  of  so  many  kings 

;   and  emperors,  with  the  tender  age  of  royal  infants,  insensible 

only  through  infancy  and  innocence  of  the  cruel  outrages 

|  qui  pensent  comma  vous,  nc  me  condamnent  pas. — Ma  sante,  je  vous 
li  jure,  me  rendoit  mes  fonctions  impossibles;  mais  meme  en  les  mettant 
j  de  cote  il  a  etc  au-dessus  de  mes  forces  de  supporter  plus  longtems 
I  1'horreur  qua  me  causoit  ce  sang,— ces  tetcs — cette  IZV&Q pre.sque  egorgee, 
I,  — ce  roi, — amene  esclave, — entrant  a  Paris,  au  milieu  de  ses  assassins,  et 
I  precede  des  tetes  de  ses  malheureux  gardes — ces  perfides  janissaires,  ces 
I  assassins,  ces  fcmmes  cannibales,  ce  cri  de  TOUS  LKS  EVBQUES  A  LA 
||  LANTERNE,  dans  le  moment  cm  le  roi  entre  sa  capitale  avec  deux  evequcs 
I  de  son  conseil  dans  sa  voiture — tin  coup  de  fusil,  qua  j'ai  vu  tirer  dans 
\TUidescarossesdelareine.  M.  Bailly  appellant  cela  tin  beau  jour, — • 
1 1'assemblee  ayant  declare  froidement  le  matin,  qu'il  n'etoit  pas  de  sa 
I  dignite  d'aller  toute  entiere  environner  le  roi — M.  Mirabcau  disant 
limpunement  dans  cette  assemble  quc  le  vaisseau  de  1'etat,  loins  d'etre 

I'  arrete  dans  sa  course,  s'elanceroit  avec  plus  de  rapidite  quc  jamais  vers 
sa  regeneration— M.   Barnave,  riant  avec  lui,  quand  des  flots  dc  sang 
coulaient  autour  de  nous — le  vertueux  Mourner*  echappant  par  miracle 
•.a  vingt  assassins,  qui  avoicnt  votilu  faiie  de  sa  tete  tin  trophee  de  plus: 
iVoilacequi  me  fit  jurer  de  ne  plus  mettre  le  pied  dans  celte  cavcrne 
\(FAntropophages  [the  National   Assembly]  ou  je  n'avois  plus  de  force 
yd'elever  la  voix,  ou  depuis  six  semaines  je  1'avois  eleve'e  en  vain. 

"  Moi,  Mounier,  et  tons  les  honnetes  gens,  ont  pense  qua  le  dernier 


*  N.B.— Mr.  Mounier  was  then  speaker  of  the  National  Assembly.     lie  has 
i  since  been  obliged  to  live  in  exile,  though  one  of  the  firmest  assertors  of  liberty. 


92  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

to  which  their  parents  were  exposed,  instead  of  being  a 
subject  of  exultation,  adds  not  a  little  to  my  sensibility  on 
that  most  melancholy  occasion. 

I  hear  that  the  august  person  who  was  the  principal 
object  of  our  preacher's  triumph,  though  he  supported  him 
self,  felt  much  on  that  shameful  occasion.  As  a  man,  it 
became  him  to  feel  for  his  wife  and  his  children,  and  the 
faithful  guards  of  his  person,  that  were  massacred  in  cold 
blood'about  him;  as  a  prince,  it  became  him  to  feel  for  the 
strange  and  frightful  transformation  of  his  civilised  subjects, 
and  to  be  more  grieved  for  them  than  solicitous  for  himself. 
It  derogates  little  from  his  fortitude,  while  it  adds  infinitely 
to  the  honour  of  his  humanity.  I  am  very  sorry  to  say  it, 
very  sorry  indeed,  that  such  personages  are  in  a  situation 

effort  a  faire  pour  le  bien  etoit  d'en  sortir.  Aucune  idee  de  crainte  ne 
s'est  approchee  de  moi.  Je  rougirois  de  m'en  defend  re.  J'avois  encore 
re£u  sur  la  route  de  la  part  de  ce  peuple,  moins  coupable  que  ceux  qui 
1'ont  enivre  de  fureur,  des  acclamations,  et  des  applaudissements,  dont 
d'autres  auroient  etc  flattcs,  et  qui  m'ont  fait  fremir.  C'est  a  1'indig- 
nalion,  c'est  a  1'horreur,  c'est  aux  convulsions  physiques,  que  le  seul 
aspect  du  sang  me  fait  eprouver  que  j'ai  cede.  On  brave  une  seul  mort ; 
on  la  brave  plusieurs  fois,  quand  elle  peut  etre  utile.  Mais  aucune 
puissance  sous  le  Ciel,  mais  aucune  opinion  publique  ou  privee  n'ont  le 
droit  de  me  condamner  a  souffrir  inutilement  mille  supplices  par 
minute,  et  a  perir  de  desespoir,  de  rage,  au  milieu  des  triomphes^  du 
crime  que  je  n'ai  pu  arreter.  Us  me  proscriront,  ils  confisqueront  mes 
biens.  Je  labourerai  la  terre,  et  je  ne  les  verrai  plus. — Voila  ma  justi 
fication.  Vous  pourrez  la  lire,  la  montrer,  la  laisser  copier ;  tant  pis 
pour  ceux  qui  ne  la  comprendront  pas  ;  ce  ne  sera  alors  moi  qui  auroit 
eu  tort  de  la  leur  dormer." 

This  military  man  had  not  so  good  nerves  as  the  peaceable  gentle 
man  of  the  Old  Jewry. — See  Mons.  Mounier's  narrative  of  these 
transactions;  a  man  also  of  honour,  and  virtue,  and  talents,  and  there 
fore  a  fugitive. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  93 

in  which  it  is  not  becoming  in  us  to  praise  the  virtues  of 
the  great. 

I  hear,  and  I  rejoice  to  hear,  that  the  great  lady,  the  other 
object  of  the  triumph,  has  borne  that  day  (one  is  interested 
that  beings  made  for  suffering  should  suffer  well),  and  that 
she  bears  all  the  succeeding  days,  that  she  bears  the  im 
prisonment  of  her  husband,  and  her  own  captivity,  and  the 
exile  of  her  friends,  and  the  insulting  adulation  of  addresses, 
and  the  whole  weight  of  her  accumulated  wrongs,  with  a 
serene  patience,  in  a  manner  suited  to  her  rank  and  race, 
and  becoming  the  offspring  of  a  sovereign  distinguished  for 
her   piety  and  her   courage ;    that,  like   her,  she   has    lofty 
sentiments  5    that   she   feels  with  the  dignity   of  a   Roman 
j  matron  ;  that  in  the  last  extremity  she  will  save  herself  from 
|  the  last  disgrace  j  and  that,  if  she  must  fall,  she  will  fall  by 
|  no  ignoble  hand. 

It  is  now  sixteen  or  seventeen  years  since  I  saw  the  Queen 

1  of  France,  then  the  dauphiness,  at  Versailles ;  and  surely 

I  never  lighted  on  this  orb,  which  she  hardly  seemed  to  touch, 

|  a  more  delightful  vision.     I  saw  her  just  above  the  horizon, 

|  decorating  and  cheering  the  elevated  sphere  she  just  began 

I  to  move  in, — glittering  like  the  morning-star,  full  of  life,  and 

(splendour,  and  joy.     Oh!   what  a  revolution!  and  what  a 

I  heart   must  I   have  to   contemplate  without   emotion   that 

I  elevation  and  that  fall !     Little  did  I  dream  when  she  added 

;' titles  of  veneration  to  those  of  enthusiastic,  distant,  respect- 

:  ful  love,  that  she  should  ever  be  obliged  to  carry  the  sharp 

|;antidote  against   disgrace  concealed  in  that  bosom  ;    little 

fldid  I  dream  that  I  should  have  lived  to  see  such  disasters 

(fallen  upon  her  in  a  nation  of  gallant  men,  in  a  nation  of 

,  jinen  of  honour,  and  of  cavaliers.     I  thought  ten  thousand 

Swords  must  have  leaped  from  their  scabbards  to  avenge  even 


94  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

a  look  that  threatened  her  with  insult.  But  the  age  of 
chivalry  is  gone.  That  of  sophisters,  economist^,  and 
calculators  has  succeeded  ,•  and  the  glory  of  Europe  is 
extinguished  for  ever.  Never,  never  more  shall  we  behold 
that  generous  loyalty  to  rank  and  sex,  that  proud  submission, 
that  dignified  obedience,  that  subordination  of  the  heart, 
which  kept  alive,  even  in  servitude  itself,  the  spirit  of  an 
exalted  freedom.  The  unbought  grace  of  life,  the  cheap 
defence  of  nations,  the  nurse  of  manly  sentiment  and 
heroic  enterprise,  is  gone !  It  is  gone,  that  sensibility  of 
principle,  that  chastity  of  honour,  which  felt  a  stain  like  a 
wound,  which  inspired  courage  whilst  it  mitigated  ferocity, 
which  ennobled  whatever  it  touched,  and  under  which  vice 
itself  lost  half  its  evil,  by  losing  all  its  grossness. 

This  mixed  system  of  opinion  and  sentiment  had  its  origin 
in  the  ancient  chivalry ;  and  the  principle,  though  varied  in 
its  appearance  by  the  varying  state  of  human  affairs,  sub 
sisted  and  influenced  through  a  long  succession  of  generations, 
even  to  the  time  we  live  in.  If  it  should  ever  be  totally 
extinguished,  the  loss  I  fear  will  be  great.  It  is  this  which 
has  given  its  character  to  modern  Europe.  It  is  this  which 
has  distinguished  it  under  all  its  forms  of  government,  and 
distinguished  it  to  its  advantage,  from  the  states  of  Asia,  and  f 
possibly  from  those  states  which  flourished  in  the  most 
brilliant  periods  of  the  antique  world.  It  was  this  which, 
without  confounding  ranks,  had  produced  a  noble  equality, 
and  handed  it  down  through  all  the  gradations  of  social  life. 
It  was  this  opinion  which  mitigated  kings  into  companions, 
and  raised  private  men  to  be  fellows  with  kings.  Without 
force  or  opposition,  it  subdued  the  fierceness  of  pride  and 
power;  it  obliged  sovereigns  to  submit  to  the  soft  collar 
of  social  esteem,  compelled  stern  authority  to  submit  to 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  95 

elegance,  and  gave  a  dominating  vanquisher  of  laws  to  be 
subdued  by  manners. 

But  now  all  is  to  be  changed.  All  the  pleasing  illusions, 
which  made  power  gentle  and  obedience  liberal,  which  har 
monised  the  different  shades  of  life,  and  which,  by  a  bland 
assimilation,  incorporated  into  politics  the  sentiments  which 
beautify  and  soften  private  society,  are  to  be  dissolved  by 
this  new  conquering  empire  of  light  and  reason.  All  the 
decent  drapery  of  life  is  to  be  rudely  torn  off.  All  the 
superadded  ideas,  furnished  from  the  wardrobe  of  a  moral 
imagination,  which  the  heart  owns,  and  the  understanding 
ratifies,  as  necessary  to  cover  the  defects  of  our  naked, 
shivering  nature,  and  to  raise  it  to  dignity  in  our  own 
estimation,  are  to  be  exploded  as  a  ridiculous,  absurd,  and 
antiquated  fashion. 

On  this  scheme  of  things,  a  king  is  but  a  man,  a  queen  is 
but  a  woman;  a  woman  is  but  an  animal,  and  an  animal 
not  of  the  highest  order.  All  homage  paid  to  the  sex  in 
general  as  such,  and  without  distinct  views,  is  to  be  regarded 
as  romance  and  folly.  Regicide,  and  parricide,  and  sacrilege 
are  but  fictions  of  superstition,  corrupting  jurisprudence  by 
destroying  its  simplicity.  The  murder  of  a  king,  or  a  queen, 
or  a  bishop,  or  a  father,  are  only  common  homicide;  and  if 
the  people  are  by  any  chance,  or  in  any  way,  gainers  by  it, 
a  sort  of  homicide  much  the  most  pardonable,  and  into 
which  we  ought  not  to  make  too  severe  a  scrutiny. 

On  the  scheme  of  this  barbarous  philosophy,  which  is 
the  offspring  of  cold  hearts  and  muddy  understandings,  and 
which  is  as  void  of  solid  wisdom  as  it  is  destitute  of  all 
taste  and  elegance,  laws  are  to  be  supported  only  by  their 
own  terrors,  and  by  the  concern  which  each  individual  may 
find  in  them  from  his  own  private  speculations,  or  can 


96  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

spare  to  them  from  his  own  private  interests.  In  the  groves 
of  their  academy,  at  the  end  of  every  vista,  you  see  nothing 
but  the  gallows.  Nothing  is  left  which  engages  the  affec 
tions  on  the  part  of  the  commonwealth.  On  the  principles 
of  this  mechanic  philosophy,  our  institutions  can  never  be 
embodied,  if  I  may  use  the  expression,  in  persons  ;  so  as  to 
create  in  us  love,  veneration,  admiration,  or  attachment. 
But  that  sort  of  reason  which  banishes  the  affections  is 
incapable  of  filling  their  place.  These  public  affections, 
combined  with  manners,  are  required  sometimes  as  supple 
ments,  sometimes  as  correctives,  always  as  aids  to  law. 
The  precept  given  by  a  wise  man,  as  well  as  a  great  critic, 
for  the  construction  of  poems,  is  equally  true  as  to  states  :— 
Non  satis  est  pukhra  esse  poemata,  dulcia  sunto.  There 
ought  to  be  a  system  of  manners  in  every  nation,  which  a 
well-formed  mind  would  be  disposed  to  relish.  To  make 
us  love  our  country,  our  country  ought  to  be  lovely. 

But  power,  of  some  kind  or  other,  will  survive  the  shock 
in  which  manners  and  opinions  perish  ;  and  it  will  find 
other  and  worse  means  for  its  support.  The  usurpation 
which,  in  order  to  subvert  ancient  institutions,  has  destroyed 
ancient  principles,  will  hold  power  by  arts  similar  to  those 
by  which  it  has  acquired  it.  When  the  old  feudal  and 
chivalrous  spirit  of  fealty,  which,  by  freeing  kings  from  fear, 
freed  both  kings  and  subjects  from  the  precautions  of 
tyranny,  shall  be  extinct  in  the  minds  of  men,  plots  and 
assassinations  will  be  anticipated  by  preventive  murder  and 
preventive  confiscation,  and  that  long  roll  of  grim  and 
bloody  maxims,  which  form  the  political  code  of  all  power, 
not  standing  on  its  own  honour,  and  the  honour  of  those 
who  are  to  obey  it.  Kings  will  be  tyrants  from  policy, 
when  subjects  are  rebels  from  principle. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  .97 

When  ancient  opinions  and  rules  of  life  are  taken  away, 
the  loss  cannot  possibly  be  estimated.  From  that  moment 
we  have  no  compass  to  govern  us ;  nor  can  we  know 
distinctly  to  what  port  we  steer.  Europe,  undoubtedly, 
taken  in  a  mass,  was  in  a  flourishing  condition  the 
day  on  which  your  Revolution  was  completed.  How 
much  of  that  prosperous  state  was  owing  to  the  spirit 
of  our  old  manners  and  opinions  is  not  easy  to  say ; 
but  as  such  causes  cannot  be  indifferent  in  their  opera 
tion,  we  must  presume  that,  on  the  whole,  their  operation 
was  beneficial. 

We  are  but  too  apt  to  consider  things  in  the  state  in 
which  we  find  them,  without  sufficiently  adverting  to  the 
causes  by  which  they  have  been  produced,  and  possibly 
may  be  upheld.  Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  our 
manners,  our  civilisation,  and  all  the  good  things  which  are 
connected  with  manners  and  with  civilisation,  have,  in  this 
European  world  of  ours,  depended  for  ages  upon  two 
principles ;  and  were  indeed  the  result  of  both  combined  -} 
I  mean  the  spirit  of  a  gentleman,  and  the  spirit  of  religion. 
The  nobility  and  the  clergy,  the  one  by  profession,  the 
other  by  patronage,  kept  learning  in  existence,  even 
in  the  midst  of  arms  and  confusions,  and  whilst  govern 
ments  were  rather  in  their  causes,  than  formed.  Learn 
ing  paid  back  what  it  received  to  nobility  and  to 
priesthood ;  and  paid  it  with  usury,  by  enlarging  their 
ideas,  and  by  furnishing  their  minds.  Happy  if  they 
had  all  continued  to  know  their  indissoluble  union, 
and  their  proper  place !  Happy  if  learning,  not  de 
bauched  by  ambition,  had  been  satisfied  to  continue  the 
instructor,  and  not  aspired  to  be  the  master !  Along 
with  its  natural  protectors  and  guardians,  learning  will 

7 


9§  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

be  cast  into  the  mire,  and  trodden  down  under  the  hoofs 
of  a  swinish  multitude.1 

If,  as  I  suspect,  modern  letters  owe  more  than  they  are 
always  willing  to  own  to  ancient  manners,  so  do  other 
interests  which  we  value  full  as  much  as  they  are  worth. 
Even  commerce,  and  trade,  and  manufacture,  the  gods  of 
our  economical  politicians,  are  themselves  perhaps  but 
creatures ;  are  themselves  but  effects,  which,  as  first  causes, 
we  choose  to  worship.  They  certainly  grew  under  the 
same  shade  in  which  learning  flourished.  They  too  may 
decay  with  their  natural  protecting  principles.  With  you, 
for  the  present  at  least,  they  all  threaten  to  disappear 
together.  Where  trade  and  manufactures  are  wanting  to  a 
people,  and  the  spirit  of  nobility  and  religion  remains, 
sentiment  supplies,  and  not  always  ill  supplies,  their  place; 
but  if  commerce  and  the  arts  should  be  lost  in  an  experi 
ment  to  try  how  well  a  state  may  stand  without  these  old 
fundamental  principles,  what  sort  of  a  thing  must  be  a 
nation  of  gross,  stupid,  ferocious,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
poor  and  sordid  barbarians,  destitute  of  religion,  honour, 
or  manly  pride,  possessing  nothing  at  present,  and  hoping 
for  nothing  hereafter  ? 

I  wish  you  may  not  be  going  fast,  and  by  the  shortest 
cut,  to  that  horrible  and  disgustful  situation.  Already  there 
appears  a  poverty  of  conception,  a  coarseness  and  vulgarity, 
in  all  the  proceedings  of  the  Assembly  and  of  all  their 
instructors.  Their  liberty  is  not  liberal.  Their  science  is 
presumptuous  ignorance.  Their  humanity  is  savage  and 
brutal. 

1  See  the  fate  of  Bailly  and  Condorcet,  supposed  to  be  here  particu 
larly  alluded  to.  Compare  the  circumstances  of  the  trial  and  execution 
of  the  former  with  this  prediction. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  99 

It  is  not  clear,  whether  in  England  we  learned  those 
grand  and  decorous  principles  and  manners,  of  which  con 
siderable  traces  yet  remain,  from  you,  or  whether  you  took 
them  from  us.  But  to  you,  I  think,  we  trace  them  best. 
You  seem  to  me  to  be — gentis  incunabula  nosfrce.  France 
has  always  more  or  less  influenced  manners  in  England; 
and  when  your  fountain  is  choked  up  and  polluted,  the 
stream  will  not  run  long,  or  not  run  clear,  with  us,  or 
perhaps  with  any  nation.  This  gives  all  Europe,  in  my 
opinion,  but  too  close  and  connected  a  concern  in  what  is 
done  in  France.  Excuse  me,  therefore,  if  I  have  dwelt  too 
long  on  the  atrocious  spectacle  of  the  6th  of  October,  1789, 
or  have  given  too  much  scope  to  the  reflections  which  have 
arisen  in  my  mind  on  occasion  of  the  most  important  of  all 
revolutions,  which  may  be  dated  from  that  day,  I  mean  a 
revolution  in  sentiments,  manners,  and  moral  opinions. 
As  things  now  stand,  with  everything  respectable  destroyed 
without  us,  and  an  attempt  to  destroy  within  us  every 
principle  of  respect,  one  is  almost  forced  to  apologise  for 
harbouring  the  common  feelings  of  men. 

Why  do  I  feel  so  differently  from  the  Reverend  Dr.  Price, 
and  those  of  his  lay  flock  who  will  choose  to  adopt  the 

sentiments    of    his    discourse? — For   this    plain    reason • 

because  it  is  natural  I  should ;  because  we  are  so  made,  as 
to  be  affected  at  such  spectacles  with  melancholy  sentiments 
upon  the  unstable  condition  of  mortal  prosperity,  and  the 
tremendous  uncertainty  of  human  greatness;  because  in 
those  natural  feelings  we  learn  great  lessons;  because  in 
events  like  these  our  passions  instruct  our  reason  ;  because 
when  kings  are  hurled  from  their  thrones  by  the  Supreme 
Director  of  this  great  drama,  and  become  the  objects  of 
insult  to  the  base,  and  of  pity  to  the  good,  we  behold  such 


TOO  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

disasters  in  the  moral,  as  we  should  behold  a  miracle  in  the 
physical,  order  of  things.  We  are  alarmed  into  reflection; 
our  minds  (as  it  has  long  since  been  observed)  are  purified 
by  terror  and  pity ;  our  weak,  unthinking  pride  is  humbled 
under  the  dispensations  of  a  mysterious  wisdom.  Some 
tears  might  be  drawn  from  me,  if  such  a  spectacle  were 
exhibited  on  the  stage.  I  should  be  truly  ashamed  of 
finding  in  myself  that  superficial,  theatric  sense  of  painted 
distress,  whilst  I  could  exult  over  it  in  real  life.  With  such 
a  perverted  mind,  I  could  never  venture  to  show  my  face 
at  a  tragedy.  People  would  think  the  tears  that  Garrick 
formerly,  or  that  Siddons  not  long  since,  have  extorted 
from  me,  were  the  tears  of  hypocrisy;  I  should  know  them 
to  be  the  tears  of  folly. 

Indeed  the  theatre  is  a  better  school  of  moral  sentiments 
than  churches,  where  the  feelings  of  humanity  are  thus  out 
raged.  Poets  who  have  to  deal  with  an  audience  not  yet 
graduated  in  the  school  of  the  rights  of  men,  and  who  must 
apply  themselves  to  the  moral  constitution  of  the  heart, 
would  not  dare  to  produce  such  a  triumph  as  a  matter  of 
exultation.  There,  where  men  follow  their  natural  impulses, 
they  would  not  bear  the  odious  maxims  of  a  Machiavelian 
policy,  whether  applied  to  the  attainment  of  monarchical  or 
democratic  tyranny.  They  would  reject  them  on  the  modern, 
as  they  once  did  on  the  ancient  stage,  where  they  could  not 
bear  even  the  hypothetical  proposition  of  such  wickedness 
in  the  mouth  of  a  personated  tyrant,  though  suitable  to  the 
character  he  sustained.  No  theatric  audience  in  Athens 
would  bear  what  has  been  borne,  in  the  midst  of  the  real 
tragedy  of  this  triumphal  day  ;  a  principal  actor  weighing,  as 
it  were,  in  scales  hung  in  a  shop  of  horrors, — so  much  actual 
crime  against  so  much  contingent  advantage, — and  after  put- 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE,  101 

ting  in  and  out  weights,  declaring  that  the  balance  was  on 
the  side  of  the  advantages.  They  would  not  bear  to  see  the 
crimes  of  new  democracy  posted  as  in  a  ledger  against  the 
crimes  of  old  despotism,  and  the  book-keepers  of  politics 
finding  democracy  still  in  debt,  but  by  no  means  unable 
or  unwilling  to  pay  the  balance.  In  the  theatre,  the  first 
intuitive  glance,  without  any  elaborate  process  of  reasoning, 
would  show  that  this  method  of  political  computation  would 
justify  every  extent  of  crime.  They  would  see  that  on  these 
principles,  even  where  the  very  worst  acts  were  not  perpe 
trated,  it  was  owing  rather  to  the  fortune  of  the  conspirators, 
than  to  their  parsimony  in  the  expenditure  of  treachery  and 
blood.  They  would  soon  see  that  criminal  means  once 
tolerated  are  soon  preferred.  They  present  a  shorter  cut  to 
the  object  than  through  the  highway  of  the  moral  virtues. 
Justifying  perfidy  and  murder  for  public  benefit,  public 
benefit  would  soon  become  the  pretext,  and  perfidy  and 
murder  the  end ;  until  rapacity,  malice,  revenge,  and  fear 
more  dreadful  than  revenge,  could  satiate  their  insatiable 
appetites.  Such  must  be  the  consequences  of  losing,  in  the 
splendour  of  these  triumphs  of  the  rights  of  men,  all  natural 
sense  of  wrong  and  right. 

But  the  Reverend  Pastor  exults  in  this  "leadingin  triumph," 
because  truly  Louis  the  Sixteenth  was  "an  arbitrary  mon 
arch  ; "  that  is,  in  other  words,  neither  more  nor  less  than 
because  he  was  Louis  the  Sixteenth,  and  because  he  had  the 
misfortune  to  be  born  king  of  France,  with  the  prerogatives 
of  which,  a  long  line  of  ancestors,  and  a  long  acquiescence 
of  the  people,  without  any  act  of  his,  had  put  him  in 
possession.  A  misfortune  it  has  indeed  turned  out  to  him, 
that  he  was  born  king  of  France.  But  misfortune  is  not 
crime,  nor  is  indiscretion  always  the  greatest  guilt.  I  shall 


102  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

never  think  that  a  prince,  the  acts  of  whose  whole  reign  was 
a  series  of  concessions  to  his  subjects,  who  was  willing  to 
relax   his   authority,  to   remit   his   prerogatives,  to  call   his 
people   to   a   share   of  freedom,    not    known,    perhaps    not 
desired,  by  their  ancestors  ;  such  a  prince,  though  he  should 
be  subject  to  the  common  frailties  attached  to  men  and  to 
princes,  though  he  should  have  once  thought  it  necessary 
to  provide   force  against  the  desperate   designs  manifestly 
carrying   on   against   his   person   and   the   remnants   of  his 
authority;  though  all  this  should  be  taken  into  consideration, 
I  shall  be  led  with  great  difficulty  to  think  he  deserves  the 
cruel  and  insulting  triumph  of  Paris  and  of  Dr.  Price.     I 
tremble  for  the  cause  of  liberty,  from  such  an  example  to  kings. 
I  tremble  for  the  cause  of  humanity,  in  the  unpunished  out 
rages  of  the  most  wicked  of  mankind.     But  there  are  some 
people  of  that  low  and  degenerate  fashion  of  mind,  that  they 
look  up  with  a  sort  of  complacent  awe  and  admiration  to 
kings,  who  know  to  keep  firm  in  their  seat,  to  hold  a  strict 
hand  over  their  subjects,  to  assert  their  prerogative,  and,  by 
the  awakened  vigilance   of  a   severe  despotism,   to  guard 
against  the  very  first  approaches  of  freedom.     Against  such 
as   these   they  never   elevate   their   voice.     Deserters  from 
principle,  listed  with  fortune,  they  never  see  any  good  in 
suffering   virtue,     nor    any    crime    in    prosperous    usurpa 
tion. 

If  it  could  have  been  made  clear  to  me  that  the  king  and 
queen  of  France  (those  I  mean  who  were  such  before  the 
triumph)  were  inexorable  and  cruel  tyrants,  that  they  had 
formed  a  deliberate  scheme  for  massacring  the  National 
Assembly  (I  think  I  have  seen  something  like  the  latter  in 
sinuated  in  certain  publications),  I  should  think  their  captivity 
just.  If  this  be  true,  much  more  ought  to  have  been  done, 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  103 

but  done,  in  my  opinion,  in  another  manner.  The  punish 
ment  of  real  tyrants  is  a  noble  and  awful  act  of  justice;  and 
it  has  with  truth  been  said  to  be  consolatory  to  the  human 
mind.  But  if  I  were  to  punish  a  wicked  king,  I  should 
regard  the  dignity  in  avenging  the  crime.  Justice  is  grave 
and  decorous,  and  in  its  punishments  rather  seems  to 
submit  to  a  necessity  than  to  make  a  choice.  Had  Nero, 
or  Agrippina,  or  Louis  the  Eleventh,  or  Charles  the  Ninth, 
been  the  subject;  if  Charles  the  Twelfth  of  Sweden,  after 
the  murder  of  Patkul,  or  his  predecessor  Christina,  after  the 
murder  of  Monaldeschi,  had  fallen  into  your  hands,  Sir, 
or  into  mine,  I  am  sure  our  conduct  would  have  been 
different. 

If  the  French  king,  or  king  of  the  French  (or  by  what 
ever  name  he  is  known  in  the  new  vocabulary  of  your 
constitution),  has  in  his  own  person,  and  that  of  his  queen, 
really  deserved  these  unavowed,  but  unavenged,  murderous 
attempts,  and  those  subsequent  indignities  more  cruel  than 
murder,  such  a  person  would  ill  deserve  even  that  sub 
ordinate  executory  trust  which  1  understand  is  to  be  placed 
in  him;  nor  is  he  fit  to  be  called  chief  in  a  nation  which  he 
has  outraged  and  oppressed.  A  worse  choice  for  such  an 
office,  in  a  new  commonwealth,  than  that  of  a  deposed 
tyrant,  could  not  possibly  be  made.  But  to  degrade  and 
insult  a  man  as  the  worst  of  criminals,  and  afterwards  to 
trust  him  in  your  highest  concerns,  as  a  faithful,  honest, 
and  zealous  servant,  is  not  consistent  with  reasoning,  nor 
prudent  in  policy,  nor  safe  in  practice.  Those  who  could 
make  such  an  appointment  mu,st  be  guilty  of  a  more 
flagrant  breach  of  trust  than  any  they  have  yet  committed 
against  the  people.  As  this  is  the  only  crime  in  which 
your  leading  politicians  could  have  acted  inconsistently, 


io4  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

I  conclude  that  there  is  no  sort  of  ground  for  these 
horrid  insinuations.  I  think  no  better  of  all  the  other 
calumnies. 

In  England,  we  give  no  credit  to  them.  We  are  generous 
enemies:  we  are  faithful  allies.  We  spurn  from  us  with 
disgust  and  indignation  the  slanders  of  those  who  bring  us 
their  anecdotes  with  the  attestation  of  the  flower-de-luce  on 
their  shoulder.  We  have  Lord  George  Gordon  fast  in 
Newgate;  and  neither  his  being  a  public  proselyte  to 
Judaism,  nor  his  having,  in  his  zeal  against  Catholic  priests 
and  all  sorts  of  ecclesiastics,  raised  a  mob  (excuse  the  term, 
it  is  still  in  use  here)  which  pulled  down  all  our  prisons, 
have  preserved  to  him  a  liberty,  of  which  he  did  not 
render  himself  worthy  by  a  virtuous  use  of  it.  We  have 
rebuilt  Newgate,  and  tenanted  the  mansion.  We  have 
prisons  almost  as  strong  as  the  Bastile,  for  those  who  dare 
to  libel  the  queens  of  France.  In  this  spiritual  retreat,  let 
the  noble  libeller  remain.  Let  him  there  meditate  on  his 
Thalmud,  until  he  learns  a  conduct  more  becoming  his 
birth  and  parts,  and  not  so  disgraceful  to  the  ancient 
religion  to  which  he  has  become  a  proselyte;  or  until  some 
persons  from  your  side  of  the  water,  to  please  your  new 
Hebrew  brethren,  shall  ransom  him.  He  may  then  be 
enabled  to  purchase,  with  the  old  hoards  of  the  synagogue, 
and  a  very  small  poundage  on  the  long  compound  interest 
of  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  (Dr.  Price  has  shown  us  what 
miracles  compound  interest  will  perform  in  1790  years), 
the  lands  which  are  lately  discovered  to  have  been  usurped 
by  the  Gallican  church.  ^Send  us  your  Popish  archbishop 
of  Paris,  and  we  will  send  you  our  Protestant  Rabbin.  We 
shall  treat  the  person  you  send  us  in  exchange  like  a  gentle 
man  and  an  honest  man,  as  he  is  ;  but  pray  let  him  bring 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  105 

with  him  the  fund  of  his  hospitality,  bounty,  and  charity; 
and,  depend  upon  it,  we  shall  never  confiscate  a  shilling  of 
that  honourable  and  pious  fund,  nor  think  of  enriching  the 
treasury  with  the  spoils  of  the  poor-box. 

To  tell  you  the  truth,  my  dear  Sir,  I  think  the  honour  of 
our  nation  to  be  somewhat  concerned  in  the  disclaimer  of 
the  proceedings  of  this  society  of  the  Old  Jewry  and  the 
London  Tavern.  I  have  no  man's  proxy.  I  speak  only 
for  myself,  when  I  disclaim,  as  I  do  with  all  possible 
earnestness,  all  communion  with  the  actors  in  that  triumph, 
or  with  the  admirers  of  it.  When  I  assert  anything  else,  as 
concerning  the  people  of  England,  I  speak  from  observa 
tion,  not  from  authority;  but  I  speak  from  the  experience 
I  have  had  in  a  pretty  extensive  and  mixed  communication 
with  the  inhabitants  of  this  kingdom,  of  all  descriptions  and 
ranks,  and  after  a  course  of  attentive  observation,  begun 
early  in  life,  and  continued  for  nearly  forty  years.  I  have 
often  been  astonished,  considering  that  we  are  divided  from 
you  but  by  a  slender  dyke  of  about  twenty-four  miles,  and 
that  the  mutual  intercourse  between  the  two  countries  has 
lately  been  very  great,  to  find  how  little  you  seem  to  know 
of  us.  I  suspect  that  this  is  owing  to  your  forming  a  judg 
ment  of  this  nation  from  certain  publications,  which  do, 
very  erroneously,  if  they  do  at  all,  represent  the  opinions 
and  dispositions  generally  prevalent  in  England.  The  vanity, 
restlessness,  petulance,  and  spirit  of  intrigue,  of  several 
petty  cabals,  who  attempt  to  hide  their  total  want  of  con 
sequence  in  bustle  and  noise,  and  puffing,  and  mutual 
quotation  of  each  other,  makes  you  imagine  that  our 
contemptuous  neglect  of  their  abilities  is  a  mark  of  general 
acquiescence  in  their  opinions.  No  such  thing,  I  assure 
you.  Because  half-a-dozen  grasshoppers  under  a  fern  make 


106  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

the  field  ring  with  their  importunate  chink,  whilst  thousands 
of  great  cattle,  reposed  beneath  the  shadow  of  the  British 
oak,  chew  the  cud  and  are  silent,  pray  do  not  imagine  that 
those  who  make  the  noise  are  the  only  inhabitants  of  the 
field;  that,  of  course,  they  are  many  in  number;  or  that, 
after  all,  they  are  other  than  the  little,  shrivelled,  meagre, 
hopping,  though  loud  and  troublesome,  insects  of  the 
hour. 

I  almost  venture  to  affirm  that  not  one  in  a  hundred 
amongst  us  participates  in  the  "  triumph  "  of  the  Revolution 
Society.  If  the  king  and  queen  of  France,  and  their 
children,  were  to  fall  into  our  hands  by  the  chance  of  war, 
in  the  most  acrimonious  of  all  hostilities  (1  deprecate  such 
an  event,  I  deprecate  such  hostility),  they  would  be  treated 
with  another  sort  of  triumphal  entry  into  London.  We 
formerly  have  had  a  king  of  France  in  that  situation;  you 
have  read  how  he  was  treated  by  the  victor  in  the  field;  and 
in  what  manner  he  \vas  afterwards  received  in  England. 
Four  hundred  years  have  gone  over  us;  but  I  believe  we 
are  not  materially  changed  since  that  period.  Thanks  to 
our  sullen  resistance  to  innovation,  thanks  to  the  cold 
sluggishness  of  our  national  character,  we  still  bear  the 
stamp  of  our  forefathers.  We  have  not  (as  I  conceive)  lost 
the  generosity  and  dignity  of  thinking  of  the  fourteenth 
century;  nor  as  yet  have  we  subtilised  ourselves  into 
savages.  We  are  not  the  converts  of  Rousseau;  we  are 
not  the  disciples  of  Voltaire;  Helvetius  has  made  no 
progress  amongst  us.  Atheists  are  not  our  preachers;  mad 
men  are  not  our  lawgivers.  We  know  that  we  have  made 
no  discoveries,  and  we  think  that  no  discoveries  are  to  be 
made,  in  morality;  nor  many  in  the  great  principles  of 
government,  nor  in  the  ideas  of  liberty,  which  were  under- 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  107 

stood  long  before  we  were  born,  altogether  as  well  as  they 
will  be  after  tl..'  grave  has  heaped  its  mould  upon  our 
presumption,  and  the  silent  tomb  shall  have  imposed  its 
law  on  our  pert  loquacity.  In  England  we  have  not  yet 
been  completely  embowelled  of  our  natural  entrails;  we 
still  feel  within  us,  and  we  cherish  and  cultivate,  those 
inbred  sentiments  which  are  the  faithful  guardians,  the 
active  monitors  of  our  duty,  the  true  supporters  of  all 
liberal  and  manly  morals.  We  have  not  been  drawn  and 
trussed,  in  order  that  we  may  be  filled,  like  stuffed  birds  in 
a  museum,  with  chaff  and  rags  and  paltry  blurred  shreds 
of  paper  about  the  rights  of  man.  We  preserve  the  whole 
of  our  feelings  still  native  and  entire,  unsophisticated  by 
pedantry  and  infidelity.  We  have  real  hearts  of  flesh  and 
blood  beating  in  our  bosoms.  We  fear  God;  we  look  up 
with  awe  to  kings;  with  affection  to  parliaments;  with  duty 
to  magistrates;  with  reverence  to  priests;  and  with  respect 
to  nobility.1  Why?  Because  when  such  ideas  are  brought 
before  our  minds,  it  is  natural  to  be  so  affected;  because 
all  other  feelings  are  false  and  spurious,  and  tend  to  cor 
rupt  our  minds,  to  vitiate  our  primary  morals,  to  render 
us  unfit  for  rational  liberty;  and  by  teaching  us  a  servile, 
licentious,  and  abandoned  insolence,  to  be  our  low 

1  The  English  are.  I  conceive,  misrepresented  in  a  letter  published 
in  one  of  the  papers,  by  a  gentleman  thought  to  be  a  dissenting 
minister. — When  writing  to  Dr.  Price  of  the  spirit  which  prevails  at 
Paris,  he  says,  "  The  spirit  of  the  people  in  this  place  has  abolished  all 
the  proud  distinctions  which  the  kin*  and  nobles  had  usurped  in  their 
minds;  whether  they  talk  of  the  king,  the  noble,  or  the  priest,  their 
whole  language  is  that  of  the  most  enlightened  and  liberal  amongst  the 
English."  If  this  gentleman  means  to  confine  the  terms  enlightened 
and  liberal  to  one  set  of  men  in  England,  it  may  be  true.  It  is  not 
generally  so. 


io8  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

sport  for  a  few  holidays,  to  make  us  perfectly  fit  for, 
and  justly  deserving  of,  slavery,  through  the  whole  course 
of  our  lives. 

You  see,  Sir,  that  in  this  enlightened  age  I  am  bold  enough 
to  confess  that  we  are  generally  men  of  untaught  feelings  ; 
that  instead  of  casting  away  all  our  old  prejudices,  we  cherish 
them  to  a  very  considerable  degree,  and,  to  take  more  shame 
to  ourselves,  we  cherish  them  because  they  are  prejudices ; 
and  the  longer  they  have  lasted,  and  the  more  generally  they 
have  prevailed,  the  more  we  cherish  them  We  are  afraid 
to  put  men  to  live  and  trade  each  on  his  own  private  stock 
of  reason  ;  because  we  suspect  that  this  stock  in  each  man  is 
small,  and  that  the  individuals  would  do  better  to  avail  them 
selves  of  the  general  bank  and  capital  of  nations  and  of  ages. 
Many  of  our  men  of  speculation,  instead  of  exploding  general 
prejudices,  employ  their  sagacity  to  discover  the  latent  wisdom 
which  prevails  in  them.  If  they  find  what  they  seek,  and 
they  seldom  fail,  they  think  it  more  wise  to  continue  the 
prejudice,  with  the  reason  involved,  than  to  cast  away  the 
coat  of  prejudice,  and  to  leave  nothing  but  the  naked  reason  ; 
because  prejudice,  with  its  reason,  has  a  motive  to  give  action 
to  that  reason,  and  an  affection  which  will  give  it  permanence. 
Prejudice  is  of  ready  application  in  the  emergency ;  it  pre 
viously  engages  the  mind  in  a  steady  course  of  wisdom  and 
virtue,  and  does  not  leave  the  man  hesitating  in  the  moment 
of  decision,  sceptical,  puzzled,  and  unresolved.  Prejudice 
renders  a  man's  virtue  his  habit ;  and  not  a  series  of  uncon 
nected  acts.  Through  just  prejudice,  his  duty  becomes  a 
part  of  his  nature. 

Your  literary  men,  and  your  politicians,  and  so  do  the 
whole  clan  of  the  enlightened  among  us,  essentially  differ  in 
these  points.  They  have  no  respect  for  the  wisdom  of 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  109 

others  ,•  but  they  pay  it  off  by  a  very  full  measure  of  con 
fidence  in  their  own.  With  them  it  is  a  sufficient  motive  to 
destroy  an  old  scheme  of  things,  because  it  is  an  old  one.  As 
to  the  new,  they  are  in  no  sort  of  fear  with  regard  to  the 
duration  of  a  building  run  up  in  haste ;  because  duration  is 
no  object  to  those  who  think  little  or  nothing  has  been  done 
before  their  time,  and  who  place  all  their  hopes  in  discovery. 
They  conceive,  very  systematically,  that  all  things  which 
give  perpetuity  are  mischievous,  and  therefore  they  are  at 
inexpiable  war  with  all  establishments.  They  think  that 
government  may  vary  like  modes  of  dress,  and  with  as  little 
ill  effect :  that  there  needs  no  principle  of  attachment,  except 
a  sense  of  present  conveniency,  to  any  constitution  of  the 
state.  They  always  speak  as  if  they  were  of  opinion  that 
there  is  a  singular  species  of  compact  between  them  and  their 
magistrates,  which  binds  the  magistrate,  but  which  has  no 
thing  reciprocal  in  it,  but  that  the  majesty  of  the  people  has 
a  right  to  dissolve  it  without  any  reason,  but  its  will.  Their 
attachment  to  their  country  itself  is  only  so  far  as  it  agrees 
with  some  of  their  fleeting  projects  •  it  begins  and  ends  with 
that  scheme  of  polity  which  falls  in  with  their  momentary 
opinion. 

These  doctrines,  or  rather  sentiments,  seem  prevalent  with 
your  new  statesmen.  But  they  are  wholly  different  from 
those  on  which  we  have  always  acted  in  this  country. 

I  hear  it  is  sometimes  given  out  in  France  that  what  is 
doing  among  you  is  after  the  example  of  England.  I  beg 
leave  to  affirm  that  scarcely  anything  done  with  you  has 
originated  from  the  practice  or  the  prevalent  opinions  of  this 
people,  either  in  the  act  or  in  the  spirit  of  the  proceeding. 
Let  me  add,  that  we  are  as  unwilling  to  learn  these  lessons 
from  France,  as  we  are  sure  that  we  never  taught  them  to 


no  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

that  nation.  The  cabals  here,  who  take  a  sort  of  share  in 
your  transactions,  as  yet  consist  of  but  a  handful  of  people. 
If  unfortunately  by  their  intrigues,  their  sermons,  their  pub 
lications,  and  by  a  confidence  derived  from  an  expected  union 
with  the  counsels  and  forces  of  the  French  nation,  they  should 
draw  considerable  numbers  into  their  faction,  and  in  conse 
quence  should  seriously  attempt  anything  here  in  imitation 
of  what  has  been  done  with  you,  the  event,  I  dare  venture  to 
prophesy,  will  be,  that,  with  some  trouble  to  their  country, 
they  will  soon  accomplish  their  own  destruction.  This  people 
refused  to  change  their  law  in  remote  ages  from  respect  to  the 
infallibility  of  popes;  and  they  will  not  now  alter  it  from  a 
pious  implicit  faith  in  the  dogmatism  of  philosophers;  though 
the  former  was  armed  with  the  anathema  and  crusade,  and 
though  the  latter  should  act  with  the  libel  and  the  lamp-iron. 

Formerly  your  affairs  were  your  own  concern  only.  We 
felt  for  them  as  men  ;  but  we  kept  aloof  from  them,  because 
we  were  not  citizens  of  France.  But  when  we  see  the  model 
held  up  to  ourselves,  we  must  feel  as  Englishmen,  and  feel 
ing,  we  must  provide  as  Englishmen.  Your  affairs,  in  spite 
of  us,  are  made  a  part  of  our  interest ;  so  far  at  least  as  to 
keep  at  a  distance  your  panacea,  or  your  plague.  If  it  be  a 
panacea,  we  do  not  want  it.  We  know  the  consequences  of 
unnecessary  physic.  If  it  be  a  plague,  it  is  such  a  plague 
that  the  precautions  of  the  most  severe  quarantine  ought  to 
be  established  against  it. 

I  hear  on  all  hands  that  a  cabal,  calling  itself  philosophic, 
receives  the  glory  of  many  of  the  late  proceedings  ;  and  that 
their  opinions  and  systems  are  the  true  actuating  spirit  of 
the  whole  of  them.  I  have  heard  of  no  party  in  England, 
literary  or  political,  at  any  time,  known  by  such  a  description. 
It  is  not  with  you  composed  of  those  men,  is  it?  whom 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  in 

the  vulgar,  in  their  blunt,  homely  style,  commonly  call 
atheists  and  infidels  ?  If  it  be,  I  admit  that  we  too  have  had 
writers  of  that  description,  who  made  some  noise  in  their 
day.  At  present  they  repose  in  lasting  oblivion.  Who,  born 
within  the  last  forty  years,  has  read  one  word  of  Collins,  and 
Toland,  and  Tindal,  and  Chubb,  and  Morgan,  and  that 
whole  race  who  called  themselves  Freethinkers?  Who  now 
reads  Bolingbroke?  Who  ever  read  him  through?  Ask 
the  booksellers  of  London  what  is  become  of  all  these  lights 
of  the  world.  In  as  few  years  their  few  successors  will  go  to 
the  family  vault  of  "all  the  Capulets."  But  whatever  they 
were,  or  are,  with  us,  they  were  and  are  wholly  unconnected 
individuals.  With  us  they  kept  the  common  nature  of 
their  kind,  and  were  not  gregarious.  They  never  acted  in 
corps,  or  were  known  as  a  faction  in  the  state,  nor  presumed 
to  influence  in  that  name  or  character,  or  for  the  purposes 
of  such  a  faction,  on  any  of  our  public  concerns.  Whether 
they  ought  so  to  exist,  and  so  be  permitted  to  act,  is  another 
question.  As  such  cabals  have  not  existed  in  England,  so 
neither  has  the  spirit  of  them  had  any  influence  in  establish 
ing  the  original  frame  of  our  constitution,  or  in  any  one  of 
the  several  reparations  and  improvements  it  has  undergone. 
The  whole  has  been  done  under  the  auspices,  and  is 
confirmed  by  the  sanctions,  of  religion  and  piety.  The 
whole  has  emanated  from  the  simplicity  of  our  national 
character,  and  from  a  sort  of  native  plainness  and  directness 
of  understanding,  which  for  a  long  time  characterised  those 
men  who  have  successively  obtained  authority  amongst  us. 
This  disposition  still  remains ;  at  least  in  the  great  body  of 
the  people. 

We   know,   and  what  is   better,   we  feel   inwardly,  that 
religion  is  the  basis  of  civil  society,  and  the  source  of  all 


ii2  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

good  and  of  all  comfort.1  In  England  we  are  so  convinced 
of  this,  that  there  is  no  rust  of  superstition,  with  which 
the  accumulated  absurdity  of  the  human  mind  might  have 
crusted  it  over  in  the  course  of  ages,  that  ninety-nine  in  a 
hundred  of  the  people  of  England  would  not  prefer  to  im 
piety.  We  shall  never  be  such  fools  as  to  call  in  an  enemy 
to  the  substance  of  any  system  to  remove  its  corruptions,  to 
supply  its  defects,  or  to  perfect  its  construction.  If  our 
religious  tenets  should  ever  want  a  further  elucidation,  we 
shall  not  call  on  atheism  to  explain  them.  We  shall  not 
light  up  our  temple  from  that  unhallowed  fire.  It  will  be 
illuminated  with  other  lights.  It  will  be  perfumed  with 
other  incense  than  the  infectious  stuff  which  is  imported  by 
the  smugglers  of  adulterated  metaphysics.  If  our  ecclesias 
tical  establishment  should  want  a  revision,  it  is  not  avarice 
or  rapacity,  public  or  private,  that  we  shall  employ  for  the 
audit,  or  receipt,  or  application  of  its  consecrated  revenue. 
Violently  condemning  neither  the  Greek  nor  the  Armenian, 
nor,  since  heats  are  subsided,  the  Roman  system  of  religion, 
we  prefer  the  Protestant ;  not  because  we  think  it  has  less 
of  the  Christian  religion  in  it,  but  because,  in  our  judgment, 
it  has  more.  We  are  Protestants,  not  from  indifference,  but 
from  zeal. 

We  know,  and  it  is  our  pride  to  know,  that  man  is  by  his 
constitution  a  religious  animal;  that  atheism  is  against,  not 
only  our  reason,  but  our  instincts ;  and  that  it  cannot  prevail 

1  Sit  igitur  hoc  ab  initio  persnasum  civibus,  dominos  esse  omnium 
rerum  ac  moderatores,  decs  ;  eaque,  quse  gerantur,  eorum  geri  vi,  ditione, 
ac  numine  ;  eosdemque  optime  de  genere  hominum  mereri ;  et  qualis 
quisque  sit,  quid  agat,  quid  in  se  admittat,  qua  mente,  qua  pietate  colat 
religiones  intueri ;  piorum  et  impiorum  babere  rationem.  His  enim 
rebus  imbut?e  montes  hand  sane  abhorrebunt  ab  utili  et  h  versa  sententia. 
• — Cic.  De  Legibns,  1.  2. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  113 

long.  But  if,  in  the  moment  of  riot,  and  in  a  drunken 
delirium  from  the  hot  spirit  drawn  out  of  the  alembic  of  hell, 
which  in  France  is  now  so  furiously  boiling,  we  should 
uncover  our  nakedness,  by  throwing  off  that  Christian  religion 
which  has  hitherto  been  our  boast  and  comfort,  and  one 
great  source  of  civilisation  amongst  us,  and  among  many 
other  nations,  we  are  apprehensive  (being  well  aware  that 
the  mind  will  not  endure  a  void)  that  some  uncouth,  per 
nicious,  and  degrading  superstition  might  take  the  place  of  it. 
For  that  reason,  before  we  take  from  our  establishment 
the  natural,  human  means  of  estimation,  and  give  it  up  to 
contempt,  as  you  have  done,  and  in  doing  it  have  incurred 
the  penalties  you  well  deserve  to  suffer,  we  desire  that  some 
other  may  be  presented  to  us  in  the  place  of  it.  We  shall 
then  form  our  judgment. 

On  these  ideas,  instead  of  quarrelling  with  establishments, 
as  some  do,  who  have  made  a  philosophy  and  a  religion  of 
their  hostility  to  such  institutions,  we  cleave  closely  to  them. 
We  are  resolved  to  keep  an  established  church,  an  established 
monarchy,  an  established  aristocracy,  and  an  established 
democracy,  each  in  the  degree  it  exists,  and  in  no  greater.  I 
shall  show  you  presently  how  much  of  each  of  these  we 
possess. 

It  has  been  the  misfortune  (not,  as  these  gentlemen  think 
it,  the  glory)  of  this  age  that  everything  is  to  be  discussed, 
as  if  the  constitution  of  our  country  were  to  be  always  a 
subject  rather  of  altercation  than  enjoyment.  For  this 
reason,  as  well  as  for  the  satisfaction  of  those  among  you  (if 
any  such  you  have  among  you)  who  may  wish  to  profit  of 
examples,  I  venture  to  trouble  you  with  a  few  thoughts  upon 
each  of  these  establishments.  I  do  not  think  they  were 
unwise  in  ancient  Rome,  who,  when  they  wished  to  new- 


ii4  REFLECTIONS  ON  TPIE 

model  their  laws,  set  commissioners  to  examine  the   best 
constituted  republics  within  their  reach. 

First,  I  beg  leave  to  speak  of  our  church  establishment, 
which  is  the  first  of  our  prejudices,  not  a  prejudice  destitute 
of  reason,  but  involving  in  it  profound  and  extensive  wisdom. 
I  speak  of  it  first.  It  is  first,  and  last,  and  midst  in  our 
minds.  For,  taking  ground  on  that  religious  system,  of 
which  we  are  now  in  possession,  we  continue  to  act  on  the 
early  received  and  uniformly  continued  sense  of  mankind. 
That  sense  not  only,  like  a  wise  architect,  hath  built  up  the 
august  fabric  of  states,  but  like  a  provident  proprietor,  to 
preserve  the  structure  from  profanation  and  ruin,  as  a  sacred 
temple  purged  from  all  the  impurities  of  fraud,  and  violence, 
and  injustice,  and  tyranny,  hath  solemnly  and  for  ever 
consecrated  the  commonwealth,  and  all  that  officiate  in  it. 
This  consecration  is  made,  that  all  who  administer  in  the 
government  of  men,  in  which  they  stand  in  the  person  of 
God  himself,  should  have  high  and  worthy  notions  of  their 
function  and  destination  ;  that  their  hope  should  be  full  of 
immortality;  that  they  should  not  look  to  the  paltry  pelf  of 
the  moment,  nor  to  the  temporary  and  transient  praise  of 
the  vulgar,  but  to  a  solid,  permanent  existence,  in  the 
permanent  part  of  their  nature,  and  to  a  permanent  fame 
and  glory,  in  the  example  they  leave  as  a  rich  inheritance  to 
the  world. 

Such  sublime  principles  ought  to  be  infused  into  persons 
of  exalted  situations  ;  and  religious  establishments  provided, 
that  may  continually  revive  and  enforce  them.  Every  sort 
of  moral,  every  sort  of  civil,  every  sort  of  politic  institution, 
aiding  the  rational  and  natural  ties  that  connect  the  human 
understanding  and  affections  to  the  divine,  are  not  more 
than  necessary,  in  order  to  build  up  that  wonderful  structure, 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  115 

Man ;  whose  prerogative  it  is,  to  be  in  a  great  degree  a 
creature  of  his  own  making;  and  who,  when  made  as  he 
ought  to  be  made,  is  destined  to  hold  no  trivial  place  in  the 
creation.  But  whenever  man  is  put  over  men,  as  the  better 
nature  ought  ever  to  preside,  in  that  case  more  particularly, 
he  should  as  nearly  as  possible  be  approximated  to  his 
perfection. 

The  consecration  of  the  state,  by  a  state  religious  establish 
ment,  is  necessary  also  to  operate  with  a  wholesome  awe 
upon  free  citizens  ;  because,  in  order  to  secure  their  freedom, 
they  must  enjoy  some  determinate  portion  of  power.  To 
them  therefore  a  religion  connected  with  the  state,  and  with 
their  duty  towards  it,  becomes  even  more  necessary  than  in 
such  societies,  where  the  people,  by  the  terms  of  their  sub 
jection,  are  confined  to  private  sentiments,  and  the  manage 
ment  of  their  own  family  concerns.  All  persons  possessing 
any  portion  of  power  ought  to  be  strongly  and  awfully 
impressed  with  an  idea  that  they  act  in  trust :  and  that  they 
are  to  account  for  their  conduct  in  that  trust  to  the  one 
great  Master,  Author,  and  Founder  of  society. 

This  principle  ought  even  to  be  more  strongly  impressed 
upon  the  minds  of  those  who  compose  the  collective  sove 
reignty,  than  upon  those  of  single  princes.  Without  in 
struments,  these  princes  can  do  nothing.  Whoever  uses 
instruments,  in  finding  helps,  finds  also  impediments. 
Their  power  is  therefore  by  no  means  complete  ;  nor  are  they 
safe  in  extreme  abuse.  Such  persons,  however  elevated  by 
flattery,  arrogance,  and  self  opinion,  must  be  sensible  that, 
whether  covered  or  not  by  positive  law,  in  some  way  or  other 
they  are  accountable  even  here  for  the  abuse  of  their  trust. 
If  they  are  not  cut  off  by  a  rebellion  of  their  people,  they 
may  be  strangled  by  the  very  janissaries  kept  for  their 


Il6  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

security  against  all  other  rebellion,     Thus  we  have  seen  the 
king  of  France  sold  by  his  soldiers  for  an  increase  of  pay. 
But  where  popular  authority  is  absolute  and  unrestrained, 
the  people  have  an  infinitely  greater,  because  a  far  better 
founded,  confidence  in  their  own  power.     They  are  them 
selves,  in  a  great  measure,  their  own  instruments.     They  are 
nearer   to    their    objects.     Besides,    they    are    less    under 
responsibility  to  one  of  the  greatest  controlling  powers  on 
earth,  the   sense   of  fame    and  estimation.     The   share    of 
infamy,  that  is  likely  to  fall  to  the  lot  of  each  individual  in 
public  acts,  is  small  indeed;  the  operation  of  opinion  being 
in  the  inverse  ratio  to  the  number  of  those  who  abuse  power. 
Their  own  approbation  of  their  own  acts  has  to  them  the 
appearance  of  a  public  judgment  in  their  favour.     A  perfect 
democracy  is  therefore  the  most  shameless  thing  in  the  world. 
As  it  is  the  most  shameless,  it  is  also  the  most  fearless.     No 
man  apprehends  in  his  person  that  he  can  be  made  subject 
to  punishment.     Certainly  the  people  at  large  never  ought  : 
for  as  all  punishments  are  for  example  towards  the  conserva 
tion  of  the  people  at  large,  the  people  at  large  can  never 
become  the  subject  of  punishment  by  any  human  hand.1   It 
is  therefore  of  infinite  importance  that  they  should  not  be 
suffered  to  imagine  that  their  will,  any  more  than  that  of  kings, 
is  the  standard  of  right  and  wrong.     They  ought  to  be  per 
suaded  that  they  are  full  as  little  entitled,  and  far  less  qualified, 
with  safety  to  themselves,  to  use  any  arbitrary  power  what 
soever  ;  that  therefore  they  are  not,  under  a  false  show  of 
liberty,   but   in    truth,   to    exercise   an  unnatural,   inverted 
domination,  tyrannically  to  exact,  from  those  who  officiate  in 
the  state,  not  an  entire  devotion  to  their  interest,  which^  is 
their  right,  but  an  abject  submission  to  their  occasional  will; 
1  Quicquid  multis  peccatur  inultem. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  117 

extinguishing  thereby,  in  all  those  who  serve  them,  all  moral 
principle,  all  sense  of  dignity,  all  use  of  judgment,  and  all 
consistency  of  character ;  whilst  by  the  very  same  process 
they  give  themselves  up  a  proper,  a  suitable,  but  a  most 
contemptible  prey  to  the  servile  ambition  of  popular  syco 
phants,  or  courtly  flatterers. 

When  the  people  have  emptied  themselves  of  all  the  lust 
of  selfish  will,  which  without  religion  it  is  utterly  impossible 
they  ever  should,  when  they  are  conscious  that  they  exercise, 
and  exercise  perhaps  in  a  higher  link  of  the  order  of  delegation, 
the  power,  which  to  be  legitimate  must  be  according  to  that 
eternal,  immutable  law,  in  which  will  and  reason  are  the 
same,  they  will  be  more  careful  how  they  place  power  in 
base  and  incapable  hands.  In  their  nomination  to  office, 
they  will  not  appoint  to  the  exercise  of  authority,  as  to  a 
pitiful  job,  but  as  to  a  holy  function;  not  according  to  their 
sordid,  selfish  interest,  nor  to  their  wanton  caprice,  nor  to 
their  arbitrary  will;  but  they  will  confer  that  power  (which 
any  man  may  well  tremble  to  give  or  to  receive)  on  those 
only  in  whom  they  may  discern  that  predominant  proportion 
of  active  virtue  and  wisdom,  taken  together  and  fitted  to  the 
charge,  such,  as  in  the  great  and  inevitable  mixed  mass  of 
human  imperfections  and  infirmities,  is  to  be  found. 

When  they  are  habitually  convinced  that  no  evil  can  be 
acceptable,  either  in  the  act  or  the  permission,  to  him  whose 
essence  is  good,  they  will  be  better  able  to  extirpate  out  of 
the  minds  of  all  magistrates,  civil,  ecclesiastical,  or  military, 
anything  that  bears  the  least  resemblance  to  a  proud  and 
lawless  domination. 

But  one  of  the  first  and  most  leading  principles  on  which 
the  commonwealth  and  the  laws  are  consecrated,  is  lest  the 
temporary  possessors  and  life-renters  in  it,  unmindful  of 


Il8  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

what  they  have  received  from  their  ancestors,  or  of  what  is 
due  to  their  posterity,  should  act  as  if  they  were  the  entire 
masters ;  that  they  should  not  think  it  among  their  rights  to 
cut  off  the  entail,  or  commit  waste  on  the  inheritance,  by 
destroying  at  their  pleasure  the  whole  original  fabric  of  then- 
society  ;  hazarding  to  leave  to  those  who  come  after  them  a 
ruin  instead  of  a  habitation— and  teaching  these  successors 
as  little  to  respect  their  contrivances,  as  they  had  themselves 
respected  the  institutions  of  their  forefathers.     By  this  un 
principled  facility  of  changing  the  state  as  often,  and  as  much, 
and  in  as  many  ways,  as  there  are  floating  fancies  or  fashions, 
the  whole  chain  and  continuity  of  the  commonwealth  would 
be  broken.     No  one  generation  could  link  with  the  other. 
Men  would  become  little  better  than  the  flies  of  a  summer. 
And  first  of  all,  the  science  of  jurisprudence,  the  pride  of 
the   human  intellect,  which,   with   all  its    defects,    redund 
ancies,    and  errors,   is  the   collected  reason   of  ages,  com 
bining   the   principles  of   original  justice  with  the  infinite 
variety    of   human    concerns,   as   a   heap   of   old    explode- 
errors,     would     be     no    longer     studied.       Personal     self 
sufficiency  and  arrogance  (the  certain  attendants  upon  all 
those  who  have  never  experienced  a  wisdom  greater  than 
their  own)  would  usurp  the  tribunal.     Of  course  no  certain 
laws,    establishing    invariable    grounds    of   hope    and    fear, 
would  keep  the  actions  of  men  in  a  certain  course,  or  direct 
them   to  a  certain  end.      Nothing  stable  in  the  modes  of 
holding  property,  or  exercising  function,  could  form  a  solid 
ground  on  which  any  parent  could  speculate  in  the  educa 
tion  of  his  offspring,  or  in  a  choice  for  their  future  establish 
ment  in  the  world.     No  principles  would  be  early  worked 
into  the  habits.     As  soon  as  the  most  able  instructor  had 
completed  his  laborious   course   of  institution,   instead   of 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  119 

sending  forth  his  pupil,  accomplished  in  a  virtuous  discip 
line    fitted  to   procure  him   attention   and   respect,  in   his 
place  in  society,  he  would  find  everything  altered;  and  that 
he  had  turned  out  a  poor  creature  to  the  contempt  and 
derision   of   the   world,    ignorant    of   the    true    grounds    of 
estimation.     Who  would  ensure  a  tender  and  delicate  sense 
of  honour  to  beat  almost  with  the  first  pulses  of  the  heart 
when    no    man    could   know  what    would    be    the    test    of 
honour  in  a  nation,  continually  varying  the  standard  of  its 
coin?      No    part    of    life    would    retain    its    acquisitions. 
Barbarism  with  regard  to  science  and  literature,  unskilful- 
ness  with  regard  to  arts  and  manufactures,  would  infallibly 
succeed   to  "the   want   of  a    steady   education    and    settled 
principle ;   and  thus  the  commonwealth  itself  would,  in  a 
few  generations,  crumble   away,  be   disconnected  into  the 
dust  and  powder  of  individuality,  and  at  length  dispen 
to  all  the  winds  of  heaven 

To  avoid  therefore  the  evils  of  inconstancy  and  versatility, 
ten  thousand  times  worse  than  those  of  obstinacy  and  the 
blindest  prejudice,  we  have  consecrated  the  state,  that  no 
man  should  approach  to  look  into  its  defects  or  corruptions 
but  with    due    caution;    that   he    should    never   dream    of 
beginning  its  reformation  by  its  subversion  ;  that  he  should 
approach  to  the  faults  of  the  state  as  to  the  wounds  of  a 
father,  with  pious  awe  and  trembling  solicitude.     By  this 
t   wise  prejudice  we  are  taught  to  look  with  horror  on  those 
children  of  their  country  who  are  prompt  rashly  to  hack 
that  aged  parent  in  pieces,  and  put  him  into  the  kettle  of 
magicians,   in   hopes   that   by   their   poisonous   weeds,  an- 
wild  incantations,  they  may  regenerate  the  paternal  constit 
*     tion,  and  renovate  their  father's  life. 

Society  is  indeed  a  contract.     Subordinate  contracts  for 


120  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

objects   of   mere   occasional   interest   may  be  dissolved  at 
pleasure— but   the    state    ought    not    to    be    considered   as 
nothing  better  than  a  partnership  agreement  in  a  trade  of 
pepper  and  coffee,  calico  or  tobacco,  or  some  other  such 
low  concern,  to  be  taken  up  for  a  little  temporary  interest, 
and  to  be  dissolved  by  the  fancy  of  the  parties.      It  is  to  be 
looked  on  with  other  reverence ;  because  it  is  not  a  partner 
ship  in  things  subservient  only  to  the  gross  animal  existence 
of  a  temporary  and  perishable  nature.     It  is  a  partnership 
in  all  science;   a  partnership  in  all  art;   a  partnership  in 
every  virtue,  and  in  all  perfection.     As  the  ends  of  such  a 
partnership   cannot    be    obtained    in    many  generations,   it 
becomes   a  partnership  not   only   between    those   who  are 
living,    but   between   those  who  are   living,   those  who   are 
dead,  and   those   who   are  to  be  born.     Each   contract  of 
each  particular  state  is  but  a  clause  in  the  great  primeval 
contract  of  eternal  society,  linking  the  lower  with  the  higher 
natures,  connecting  the  visible  and  invisible  world,  according 
to  a  fixed  compact  sanctioned  by  the  inviolable  oath  which 
holds   all   physical   and   all   moral   natures,    each    in   their 
appointed  place.     This   law  is  not  subject  to  the  will  of 
those   who,    by  an   obligation    above   them,   and    infinitely 
superior,  are  bound  to  submit  their  will  to  that  law.     The~ 
municipal  corporations  of  that  universal  kingdom  are  not 
morally  at  liberty  at  their  pleasure,  and  on  their  speculations 
of  a  contingent  improvement,  wholly  to  separate  and  tear 
asunder  the  bands  of  their  subordinate  community,  and  to 
dissolve  it  into  an  unsocial,  uncivil,  unconnected  chaos  of 
elementary  principles.      It  is  the  first  and  supreme  necessity  - 
only,  a  necessity  that  is  not  chosen,  but  chooses,  a  necessity 
paramount  to  deliberation,  that  admits  no  discussion,  and      1 
demands  no  evidence,  which  alone  can  justify  a  resort  to 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  121 

anarchy.  This  necessity  is  no  exception  to  the  rule; 
because  this  necessity  itself  is  a  part  too  of  that  moral  and 
physical  disposition  of  things,  to  which  man  must  be 
obedient  by  consent  or  force  :  but  if  that  which  is  only 
submission  to  necessity  should  be  made  the  object  of 
choice,  the  law  is  broken,  nature  is  disobeyed,  and  the 
rebellious  are  outlawed,  cast  forth,  and  exiled,  from  this 
world  of  reason,  and  order,  and  peace,  and  virtue,  and 
fruitful  penitence,  into  the  antagonist  world  of  madness, 
discord,  vice,  confusion,  and  unavailing  sorrow. 

These,  my  dear  Sir,  are,  were,  and,  I  think,  long  will  be, 
the  sentiments  of  not  the  least  learned  and  reflecting  part 
of  this  kingdom.  They  who  are  included  in  this  descrip 
tion  form  their  opinions  on  such  grounds  as  such  persons 
ought  to  form  them.  The  less  inquiring  receive  them  from 
an  authority,  which  those  whom  Providence  dooms  to  live 
on  trust  need  not  be  ashamed  to  rely  on.  These  two  sorts 
of  men  move  in  the  same  direction,  though  in  a  different 
place.  They  both  move  with  the  order  of  the  universe. 
They  all  know  or  feel  this  great  ancient  truth  :  "  Quod  illi 
principi  et  pnepotenti  Deo  qui  omnem  hunc  mundum  regit, 
nihil  eorum  quce  quidem  fiant  in  terris  acceptius  quam 
concilia  et  ccetus  hominum  jure  sociati  quje  civitates 
appellantur."  They  take  this  tenet  of  the  head  and  heart, 
not  from  the  great  name  which  it  immediately  bears,  nor 
from  the  greater  from  whence  it  is  derived ;  but  from  that 
which  alone  can  give  true  weight  and  sanction  to  any 
learned  opinion,  the  common  nature  and  common  relation 
of  men.  Persuaded  that  all  things  ought  to  be  done  with 
reference,  and  referring  all  to  the  point  of  reference  to 
which  all  should  be  directed,  they  think  themselves  bound, 
not  only  as  individuals  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  heart,  or  as 


122  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

congregated  in  that  personal  capacity,  to  renew  the  memory 
of  their  high  origin  and  cast ;  but  also  in  their  corporate 
character  to  perform  their  national  homage  to  the  institutor, 
and  author,  and  protector  of  civil  society ;  without  which 
civil  society  man  could  not  by  any  possibility  arrive  at  the 
perfection  of  which  his  nature  is  capable,  nor  even  make  a 
remote  and  faint  approach  to  it.  They  conceive  that  He 
who  gave  our  nature  to  be  perfected  by  our  virtue,  willed 
also  the  necessary  means  of  its  perfection.— He  willed 
therefore  the  state— He  willed  its  connection  with  the 
source  and  original  archetype  of  all  perfection.  They  who 
are  convinced  of  this  his  will,  which  is  the  law  of  laws,  and 
the  sovereign  of  sovereigns,  cannot  think  it  reprehensible 
that  this  our  corporate  fealty  and  homage,  that  this  our 
recognition  of  a  signiory  paramount,  I  had  almost  said  this 
oblation  of  the  state  itself,  as  a  worthy  offering  on  the  high 
altar  of  universal  praise,  should  be  performed  as  all  public, 
solemn  acts  are  performed,  in  buildings,  in  music,  in 
decoration,  in  speech,  in  the  dignity  of  persons,  according 
to  the  customs  of  mankind,  taught  by  their  nature;  this  is, 
with  modest  splendour  and  unassuming  state,  with  mild 
majesty  and  sober  pomp.  For  those  purposes  they  think 
some  part  of  the  wealth  of  the  country  is  as  usefully 
employed  as  it  can  be  in  fomenting  the  luxury  of  indi 
viduals.  It  is  the  public  ornament.  It  is  the  public 
consolation.  It  nourishes  the  public  hope.  The  poorest 
man  finds  his  own  importance  and  dignity  in  it,  whilst 
the  wealth  and  pride  of  individuals  at  every  moment  makes 
the  man  of  humble  rank  and  fortune  sensible  of  his 
inferiority,  and  degrades  and  vilifies  his  condition.  It  is 
for  the  man  in  humble  life,  and  to  raise  his  nature,  and  to 
put  him  in  mind  of  a  state  in  which  the  privileges  of 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  123 

opulence  will  cease,  when  he  will  be  equal  by  nature, 
and  may  be  more  than  equal  by  virtue,  that  this  por 
tion  of  the  general  wealth  of  his  country  is  employed  and 
sanctified. 

I  assure  you  I  do  not  aim  at  singularity.  I  give  you 
opinions  which  have  been  accepted  amongst  us,  from  very 
early  times  to  this  moment,  with  a  continued  and  general 
approbation,  and  which  indeed  are  so  worked  into  my 
mind,  that  I  am  unable  to  distinguish  what  I  have  learned 
from  others  from  the  results  of  my  own  meditation. 

It  is  on  some  such  principles  that  the  majority  of  the 
people  of  England,  far  from  thinking  a  religious  national 
establishment  unlawful,  hardly  think  it  lawful  to  be  without 
one.  In  France  you  are  wholly  mistaken  if  you  do  not 
believe  us  above  all  other  things  attached  to  it,  and  beyond 
all  other  nations;  and  when  this  people  has  acted  unwisely 
and  unjustifiably  in  its  favour  (as  in  some  instances  they 
have  done  most  certainly),  in  their  very  errors  you  will  at 
least  discover  their  zeal. 

This  principle  runs  through  the  whole  system  of  their 
polity.  They  do  not  consider  their  church  establishment 
as  convenient,  but  as  essential  to  their  state;  not  as  a  thing 
heterogeneous  and  separable;  something  added  for  accom 
modation;  what  they  may  either  keep  or  lay  aside,  according 
to  their  temporary  ideas  of  convenience.  They  consider  it 
as  the  foundation  of  their  whole  constitution,  with  which, 
and  with  every  part  of  which,  it  holds  an  indissoluble 
union.  Church  and  state  are  ideas  inseparable  in  their 
minds,  and  scarcely  is  the  one  ever  mentioned  without 
mentioning  the  other. 

Our  education  is  so  formed  as  to  confirm  and  fix  this 
impression.  Our  education  is  in  a  manner  wholly  in  the 


124  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

hands  of  ecclesiastics,  and  in  all  stages  from  infancy  to 
manhood.  Even  when  our  youth,  leaving  schools  and 
universities,  enter  that  most  important  period  of  life  which 
begins  to  link  experience  and  study  together,  and  when 
with  that  view  they  visit  other  countries,  instead  of  old 
domestics  whom  we  have  seen  as  governors  to  principal 
men  from  other  parts,  three-fourths  of  those  who  go  abroad 
with  our  young  nobility  and  gentlemen  are  ecclesiastics; 
not  as  austere  masters,  nor  as  mere  followers;  but  as  friends 
and  companions  of  a  graver  character,  and  not  seldom 
persons  as  well  born  as  themselves.  With  them,  as  relations, 
they  most  constantly  keep  up  a  close  connection  through 
life.  By  this  connection  we  conceive  that  we  attach  our 
gentlemen  to  the  church;  and  we  liberalise  the  church  by 
an  intercourse  with  the  leading  characters  of  the  country. 

So  tenacious  are  we  of  the  old  ecclesiastical  modes  and 
fashions  of  institution,  that  very  little  alteration  has  been 
made  in  them  since  the  fourteenth  or  fifteenth  century: 
adhering  in  this  particular,  as  in  all  things  else,  to  our  old 
settled  maxim,  never  entirely  nor  at  once  to  depart  from 
antiquity.  We  found  these  old  institutions,  on  the  whole, 
favourable  to  morality  and  discipline;  and  we  thought  they 
were  susceptible  of  amendment,  without  altering  the  ground. 
We  thought  that  they  were  capable  of  receiving  and  meli 
orating,  and  above  all  of  preserving,  the  accessions  of 
science  and  literature,  as  the  order  of  Providence  should 
successively  produce  them.  And  after  all,  with  this  Gothic 
and  monkish  education  (for  such  it  is  in  the  ground-work), 
we  may  put  in  our  claim  to  as  ample  and  as  early  a  share 
in  all  the  improvements  in  science,  in  arts,  and  in  literature, 
which  have  illuminated  and  adorned  the  modern  world,  as 
any  other  nation  in  Europe:  we  think  one  main  cause  of 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  125 

i    this  improvement  was  our  not  despising  the  patrimony  of 
knowledge  which  was  left  us  by  our  forefathers. 

It  is  from  our  attachment  to  a  church  establishment  that 
the  English  nation  did  not  think  it  wise  to  intrust  that  great, 
fundamental  interest  of  the  whole  to  what  they  trust  no 
part  of  their  civil  or  military  public  service,  that  is,  to  the 
unsteady  and  precarious  contribution  of  individuals.  They 
go  further.  They  certainly  never  have  suffered,  and  never 
will  suffer,  the  fixed  estate  of  the  church  to  be  converted 
into  a  pension,  to  depend  on  the  treasury,  and  to  be  delayed, 
withheld,  or  perhaps  to  be  extinguished,  by  fiscal  difficulties: 
which  difficulties  may  sometimes  be  pretended  for  political 
purposes,  and  are  in  fact  often  brought  on  by  the  extrava 
gance,  negligence,  and  rapacity  of  politicians.  The  people 
of  England  think  that  they  have  constitutional  motives,  as 
well  as  religious,  against  any  project  of  turning  their  in 
dependent  clergy  into  ecclesiastical  pensioners  of  state. 
They  tremble  for  their  liberty,  from  the  influence  of  a 
clergy  dependent  on  the  crown;  they  tremble  for  the  public 
tranquillity  from  the  disorders  of  a  factious  clergy,  if  it  were 
made  to  depend  upon  any  other  than  the  crown.  They 
therefore  made  their  church,  like  their  king  and  their 
nobility,  independent. 

From  the  united  considerations  of  religion  and  constitu 
tional  policy,  from  their  opinion  of  a  duty  to  make  sure 
provision  for  the  consolation  of  the  feeble  and  the  instruc 
tion  of  the  ignorant,  they  have  incorporated  and  identified 
the  estate  of  the  church  with  the  mass  of  private  property, 
of  which  the  state  is  not  the  proprietor,  either  for  use  or 
dominion,  but  the  guardian  only  and  the  regulator.  They 
have  ordained  that  the  provision  of  this  establishment 
might  be  as  stable  as  the  earth  on  which  it  stands,  and 


i26  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

should    not   fluctuate    with    the    Euripus    of    funds    and 
actions. 

The   men   of  England,   the    men.   I  mean,  of  light  and 
leading  in  England,  whose  wisdom   (if  they  have   any)  is 
open  and  direct,  would  be  ashamed,  as  of  a  silly,  deceitful 
trick,   to    profess    any    religion   in    name    which,    by    their 
proceedings,  they  appear  to  contemn.     If  by  their  conduct 
(the  only  language  that  rarely  lies)  they  seemed  to  regard 
the    great  ruling   principle    of   the   moral    and   the  natural 
world  as  a  mere  invention  to  keep  the  vulgar  in  obedience, 
they  apprehend  that  by  such  a  conduct  they  would  defeat 
the  politic  purpose  they  have  in  view.     They  would  find  it 
difficult  to  make  others  believe  in  a  system  to  which  they 
manifestly  gave  no  credit  themselves.     The  Christian  states 
men  of  this  land  would  indeed  first  provide  for  the  multitude; 
because  it  is  the  multitude;  and  is  therefore,  as  such,  the 
first    object    in    the    ecclesiastical    institution,    and    in    all 
institutions.     They  have  been  taught  that  the  circumstance 
of  the  gospel's  being  preached  to  the  poor,  was  one  of  the 
great  tests  of  its  true  mission.     They  think,  therefore,  that 
those  do  not  believe   it  who  do  not  take  care  it   should 
be  preached  to  the  poor.     But  as  they  know  that  charity  is 
not  confined  to  any  one  description,  but   ought  to  apply 
itself  to  all  men  who  have  wants,  they  are  not  deprived  of 
a  due  and  anxious  sensation  of  pity  to  the  distresses  of  the 
miserable  great.     They  are  not  repelled  through  a  fastidious 
delicacy,  at  the  stench  of  their  arrogance  and  presumption, 
from   a  medicinal  attention  to   their  mental  blotches  and 
running  sores.     They  are  sensible  that  religious  instruction 
is  of  more  consequence  to  them  than  to  any  others;  from 
the  greatness  of  the  temptation  to  which  they  are  exposed; 
from  the  important  consequences  that  attend  their  faults; 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  127 

from  the  contagion  of  their  ill  example;  from  the  necessity 
of  bowing  down  the  stubborn  neck  of  their  pride  and 
ambition  to  the  yoke  of  moderation  and  virtue;  from  a 
consideration  of  the  fat  stupidity  and  gross  ignorance  con 
cerning  what  imports  men  most  to  know,  which  prevails  at 
courts,  and  at  the  head  of  armies,  and  in  senates,  as  much 
as  at  the  loom  and  in  the  field. 

The  English  people  are  satisfied  that  to  the  great  the 
consolations  of  religion  are  as  necessary  as  its  instructions. 
They  too  are  among  the  unhappy.  They  feel  personal 
pain  and  domestic  sorrow.  In  these  they  have  no  privilege, 
but  are  subject  to  pay  their  full  contingent  to  the  contribu 
tions  levied  on  mortality.  They  want  this  sovereign  balm 
under  their  gnawing  cares  and  anxieties,  which,  being  less 
conversant  about  the  limited  wants  of  animal  life,  range 
without  limit,  and  are  diversified  by  infinite  combinations, 
in  the  wild  and  unbounded  regions  of  imagination.  Some 
charitable  dole  is  wanting  to  these,  our  often  very  unhappy 
brethren,  to  fill  the  gloomy  void  that  reigns  in  minds  which 
have  nothing  on  earth  to  hope  or  fear;  something  to  relieve 
in  the  killing  languor  and  over-laboured  lassitude  of  those 
who  have  nothing  to  do;  something  to  excite  an  appetite 
to  existence  in  the  palled  satiety  which  attends  on  all 
pleasures  which  may  be  bought,  where  nature  is  not  left  to 
her  own  process,  where  even  desire  is  anticipated,  and 
therefore  fruition  defeated  by  meditated  schemes  and 
contrivances  of  delight;  and  no  interval,  no  obstacle,  is 
interposed  between  the  wish  and  the  accomplishment. 

The  people  of  England  know  how  little  influence  the 
teachers  of  religion  are  likely  to  have  with  the  wealthy  and 
powerful  of  long  standing,  and  how  much  less  with  the 
newly  fortunate,  if  they  appear  in  a  manner  no  way  assorted 


i28  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

to  those  with  whom  they  must  associate,  and  over  whom 
they  must  even  exercise,  in  some  cases,  something  like  an 
authority.  What  must  they  think  of  that  body  of  teachers, 
if  they  see  it  in  no  part  above  the  establishment  of  their 
domestic  servants?  If  the  poverty  were  voluntary,  there 
might  be  some  difference.  Strong  instances  of  self-denial 
operate  powerfully  on  our  minds;  and  a  man  who  has  no 
wants  has  obtained  great  freedom  and  firmness,  and  even 
dignity.  But  as  the  mass  of  any  description  of  men  are 
but  men,  and  their  poverty  cannot  be  voluntary,  that 
disrespect,  which  attends  upon  all  lay  poverty,  will  not 
depart  from  the  ecclesiastical.  Our  provident  constitution 
has  therefore  taken  care  that  those  who  are  to  instruct 
presumptuous  ignorance,  those  who  are  to  be  censors  over 
insolent  vice,  should  neither  incur  their  contempt  nor  live 
upon  their  alms;  nor  will  it  tempt  the  rich  to  a  neglect  of 
the  true  medicine  of  their  minds.  For  these  reasons,  whilst 
we  provide  first  for  the  poor,  and  with  a  parental  solicitude, 
we  have  not  relegated  religion  (like  something  we  were 
ashamed  to  show)  to  obscure  municipalities  or  rustic 
villages.  No  !  we  will  have  her  to  exalt  her  mitred  front 
in  courts  and  parliaments.  We  will  have  her  mixed  through 
out  the  whole  mass  of  life,  and  blended  with  all  the  classes 
of  society.  The  people  of  England  will  show  to  the  haughty 
potentates  of  the  world,  and  to  their  talking  sophisters, 
that  a  free,  a  generous,  an  informed  nation  honours  the 
high  magistrates  of  its  church;  that  it  will  not  suffer  the 
insolence  of  wealth  and  titles,  or  any  other  species  of  proud 
pretension,  to  look  down  with  scorn  upon  what  they  look 
up  to  with  reverence;  nor  presume  to  trample  on  that 
acquired  personal  nobility,  which  they  intend  always  to  be, 
and  which  often  is,  the  fruit,  not  the  reward  (for  what  can 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  129 

be  the  reward?),  of  learning,  piety,  and  virtue.  They  can 
see,  without  pain  or  grudging,  an  archbishop  precede  a 
duke.  They  can  see  a  bishop  of  Durham,  or  a  bishop  of 
Winchester,  in  possession  of  ten  thousand  pounds  a  year; 
and  cannot  conceive  why  it  is  in  worse  hands  than  estates 
to  the  like  amount  in  the  hands  of  this  earl  or  that  squire; 
although  it  may  be  true  that  so  many  clogs  and  horses  are 
not  kept  by  the  former,  and  fed  with  the  victuals  which 
ought  to  nourish  the  children  of  the  people.  It  is  true  the 
whole  church  revenue  is  not  always  employed,  and  to  every 
shilling,  in  charity;  nor  perhaps  ought  it;  but  something  is 
generally  so  employed.  It  is  better  to  cherish  virtue  and 
lumanity,  by  leaving  much  to  free  will,  even  with  some  loss 
to  the  object,  than  to  attempt  to  make  men  mere  machines 
and  instruments  of  a  political  benevolence.  The  world  on 
the  whole  will  gain  by  a  liberty,  without  which  virtue  can 
not  exist. 

When  once  the  commonwealth  has  established  the  estates 
of  the  church  as  property,  it  can,  consistently,  hear  nothing 
of  the  more  or  the  less.  Too  much  and  too  little  are  treason 
against  property.  AVhat  evil  can  arise  from  the  quantity 
in  any  hand,  whilst  the  supreme  authority  has  the  full, 
sovereign  superintendence  over  this,  as  over  all  property,  to 
prevent  every  species  of  abuse ;  and,  whenever  it  notably 
deviates,  to  give  to  it  a  direction  agreeable  to  the  purposes 
of  its  institution. 

In  England  most  of  us  conceive  that  it  is  envy  and 
malignity  towards  those  who  are  often  the  beginners  of  their 
own  fortune,  and  not  a  love  of  the  self-denial  and  mortifica 
tion  of  the  ancient  church,  that  makes  some  look  askance 
at  the  distinctions,  and  honours,  and  revenues  which,  taken 
from  no  person,  are  set  apart  for  virtue.  The  ears  of  the 

9 


130  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

people  of  England  are  distinguishing.  They  hear  these  men 
speak  broad.  Their  tongue  betrays  them.  Their  language 
is  in  the  patois  of  fraud  ;  in  the  cant  and  gibberish  of 
hypocrisy.  The  people  of  England  must  think  so,  when 
these  praters  affect  to  carry  back  the  clergy  to  that  primitive, 
evangelic  poverty  which,  in  the  spirit,  ought  always  to  exist 
in  them  (and  in  us  too,  however  we  may  like  it),  but  in  the 
thing  must  be  varied,  when  the  relation  of  that  body  to  the 
state  is  altered ;  when  manners,  when  modes  of  life,  when 
indeed  the  whole  order  of  human  affairs,  has  undergone  a 
total  revolution.  We  shall  believe  those  reformers  then  to 
be  honest  enthusiasts,  not,  as  now  we  think  them,  cheats  and 
deceivers,  when  we  see  them  throwing  their  own  goods  into 
common,  and  submitting  their  own  persons  to  the  austere 
discipline  of  the  early  church. 

With  these  ideas  rooted  in  their  minds,  the  Commons  of 
Great  Britain,  in  the  national  emergencies,  will  never  seek 
their  resource  from  the  confiscation  of  the  estates  of  the 
church  and  poor.  Sacrilege  and  proscription  are  not  among 
the  ways  and  means  of  our  committee  of  supply.  The  Jews 
in  Change  Alley  have  not  yet  dared  to  hint  their  hopes  of  a 
mortgage  on  the  revenues  belonging  to  the  see  of  Canter 
bury.  I  am  not  afraid  that  I  shall  be  disavowed,  when  I 
assure  you  that  there  is  not  one  public  man  in  this  kingdom 
whom  you  would  wish  to  quote,  no  not  one,  of  any  party  or 
description,  who  does  not  reprobate  the  dishonest,  perfidious, 
and  cruel  confiscation  which  the  National  Assembly  has 
been  compelled  to  make  of  that  property,  which  it  was  their 
first  duty  to  protect. 

It  is  with  the  exultation  of  a  little  national  pride  I  tell 
you,  that  those  amongst  us  who  have  wished  to  pledge  the 
societies  of  Paris  in  the  cup  of  their  abominations  have  been 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE  I3I 

disappointed.  The  robbery  of  your  church  has  proved  a 
security  to  the  possessions  of  ours.  It  has  roused  the 
people.  They  see  with  horror  and  alarm  that  enormous  and 
shameless  act  of  proscription.  It  has  opened,  and  will 
more  and  more  open,  their  eyes  upon  the  selfish  enlarge 
ment  of  mind,  and  the  narrow  liberality  of  sentiment  of 
insidious  men,  which,  commencing  in  close  hypocrisy  and 
fraud,  have  ended  in  open  violence  and  rapine.  At  home 
we  behold  similar  beginnings.  We  are  on  our  guard  against 
similar  conclusions. 

I  hope  we  shall  never  be  so  totally  lost  to  all  sense  of  the 
duties  imposed  upon  us  by  the  law  of  social  union,  as   upon 
any  pretext  of  public  service,  to  confiscate  the  -oods  of  a 
single  unoffending  citizen.     Who  but  a  tyrant  (a  name  ex 
pressure  of  everything  which  can  vitiate  and  degrade  human 
nature)    could    think   of  seizing  on   the  property   of  men 
unaccused,    unheard,    untried,    by   whole    descriptions,    by 
hundreds  and  thousands  together?     Who,  that  had  not  lost 
every  trace  of  humanity,  could  think  of  casting  down  men  of 
exalted  rank  and  sacred  function,  some  of  them  of  an  a*e  to 
call  at  once  for  reverence  and  compassion,  of  casting  Them 
down   from    the    highest    situation   in   the    commonwealth 
wherein  they  were  maintained  by  their  own  landed  property' 
to  a  state  of  indigence,  depression,  and  contempt? 
^  The  confiscates  truly  have  made  some  allowance  to  their 
victims  from  the  scraps  and  fragments  of  their  own  tables 
from  which  they  have   been   so  harshly  driven,  and  which 
have  been  so  bountifully  spread  for  a  feast  to  the  harpies  of 
usury     But  to  drive  men  from  independence  to  live  on  alms 
is  itself  great  cruelty.     That  which  might  be  a  tolerable  con^ 
ition  to  men  in  one  state  of  life,  and   not  habituated  to 
)ther  things,  may,  when  all  these  circumstances  are  altered 


i32  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

be  a  dreadful  revolution  ;  and  one  to  which  a  virtuous  mind 
would  feel  pain  in  condemning  any  guilt,  except  that  which 
would  demand  the  life  of  the  offender.  But  to  many  minds 
this  punishment  of  degradation  and  infamy  is  worse  than 
death.  Undoubtedly  it  is  an  infinite  aggravation  of  this 
cruel  suffering,  that  the  persons  who  were  taught  a  double 
prejudice  in  favour  of  religion,  by  education,  and  by  the 
place  they  held  in  the  administration  of  its  functions,  are  to 
receive  the  remnants  of  their  property  as  alms  from  the  pro 
fane  and  impious  hands  of  those  who  had  plundered  them 
of  all  the  rest ;  to  receive  (if  they  are  at  all  to  receive)  not 
from  the  charitable  contributions  of  the  faithful,  but  from 
the  insolent  tenderness  of  known  and  avowed  atheism,  the 
maintenance  of  religion,  measured  out  to  them  on  the 
standard  of  the  contempt  in  which  it  is  held ;  and  for  the 
purpose  of  rendering  those  who  receive  the  allowance  vile, 
and  of  no  estimation,  in  the  eyes  of  mankind. 

But  this  act  of  seizure  of  property,  it  seems,  is  a  judgment 
in  law,  and  not  a  confiscation.  They  have,  it  seems,  found 
out  in  the  academies  of  the  Palais  Royal,  and  the  Jacobins t 
that  certain  men  had  no  right  to  the  possessions  which 
they  held  under  law,  usage,  the  decisions  of  courts,  and  the 
accumulated  prescription  of  a  thousand  years  They  say 
that  ecclesiastics  are  fictitious  persons,  creatures  of  the  state, 
whom  at  pleasure  they  may  destroy,  and  of  course  limit  and 
modify  in  every  particular ;  that  the  goods  they  possess  are 
not  properly  theirs,  but  belong  to  the  state  which  created 
the  fiction  ;  and  we  are  therefore  not  to  trouble  ourselves 
with  what  they  may  surfer  in  their  natural  feelings  and 
natural  persons,  on  account  of  what  is  done  towards  them  in 
this  their  constructive  character.  Of  what  import  is  it  under 
what  names  you  injure  men,  and  deprive  them  of  the  just 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE  133 

emoluments  of  a  profession  in  which  they  were  not  only 
permitted  but  encouraged  by  the  state  to  engage ;  and  upon 
the  supposed  certainty  of  which  emoluments  they  had  formed 
the  plan  of  their  lives,  contracted  debts,  and  led  multitudes 
to  an  entire  dependence  upon  them? 

You  do  not  imagine,  Sir,  that  I  am  going  to  compliment 
this  miserable  distinction  of  persons  with  any  long  discussion. 
The  arguments  of  tyranny  are  as  contemptible  as  its  force  is 
dreadful.  Had  not  your  confiscators,  by  their  early  crimes, 
obtained  a  power  which  secures  indemnity  to  all  the  crimes 
of  which  they  have  since  been  guilty,  or  that  they  can  com 
mit,  it  is  not  the  syllogism  of  the  logician,  but  the  lash  of  the 
executioner,  that  would  have  refuted  a  sophistry  which 
becomes  an  accomplice  of  theft  and  murder.  The  sophistic 
tyrants  of  Paris  are  loud  in  their  declamations  against  the 
departed  regal  tyrants  who  in  former  ages  have  vexed  the 
world.  They  are  thus  bold,  because  they  are  safe  from  the 
dungeons  and  iron  cages  of  their  old  masters.  Shall  we  be 
more  tender  of  the  tyrants  of  our  own  time,  when  we  see 
them  acting  worse  tragedies  under  our  eyes?  shall  we 
not  use  the  same  liberty  that  they  do,  when  we  can  use 
it  with  the  same  safety?  when  to  speak  honest  truth  only 
requires  a  contempt  of  the  opinions  of  those  whose  actions 
we  abhor  ? 

This  outrage  on  all  the  rights  of  property  was  at  first 
covered  with  what,  on  the  system  of  their  conduct,  was  the 
most  astonishing  of  all  pretexts— a  regard  to  national  faith. 
The  enemies  to  property  at  first  pretended  a  most  tender, 
delicate,  and  scrupulous  anxiety  for  keeping  the  king's  en 
gagements  with  the  public  creditor.  These  professors  of 
the  rights  of  men  are  so  busy  in  teaching  others,  that  they 
have  not  leisure  to  learn  anything  themselves;  otherwise 


134  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

they  would  have  known  that  it  is  to  the  property  of  the 
citizen,  and  not  to  the  demands  of  the  creditor  of  the  state, 
that  the  first  and  original  faith  of  civil  society  is  pledged. 
The  claim  of  the  citizen  is  prior  in  time,  paramount  in  title, 
superior  in  equity.  The  fortunes  of  individuals,  whether 
possessed  by  acquisition,  or  by  descent,  or  in  virtue  of  a 
participation  in  the  goods  of  some  community,  were  no  part 
of  the  creditor's  security,  expressed  or  implied.  They  never 
so  much  as  entered  into  his  head  when  he  made  his  bargain. 
He  well  knew  that  the  public,  whether  represented  by  a 
monarch  or  by  a  senate,  can  pledge  nothing  but  the  public 
estate ;  and  it  can  have  no  public  estate,  except  in  what  it 
derives  from  a  just  and  proportioned  imposition  upon  the 
citizens  at  large.  This  was  engaged,  and  nothing  else  could 
be  engaged,  to  the  public  creditor.  No  man  can  mortgage 
his  injustice  as  a  pawn  for  his  fidelity. 

It  is  impossible  to  avoid  some  observation  on  the  contra 
dictions  caused  by  the  extreme  rigour  and  the  extreme  laxity 
of  this  new  public  faith,  which  influenced  in  this  transaction, 
and  which  influenced  not  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
obligation,  but  to  the  description  of  the  persons  to  whom  it 
was  engaged.  No  acts  of  the  old  government  of  the  kings 
of  France  are  held  valid  in  the  National  Assembly,  except 
his  pecuniary  engagements ;  acts  of  all  others  of  the  most 
ambiguous  legality.  The  rest  of  the  acts  of  that  royal 
government  are  considered  in  so  odious  a  light,  that  to  have 
a  claim  under  its  authority  is  looked  on  as  a  sort  of  crime. 
A  pension,  given  as  a  reward  for  service  to  the  state,  is  surely 
as  good  a  ground  of  property  as  any  security  for  money 
advanced  to  the  state.  It  is  better;  for  money  is  paid,  and 
well  paid,  to  obtain  that  service.  We  have  however  seen 
multitudes  of  people  under  this  description  in  France,  who 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  135 

never  had  been  deprived  of  their  allowances  by  the  most 
arbitrary  ministers,  in  the  most  arbitrary  times,  by  this 
assembly  of  the  rights  of  men,  robbed  without  mercy.  They 
were  told,  in  answer  to  their  claim  to  the  bread  earned  with 
their  blood,  that  their  services  had  not  been  rendered  to  the 
country  that  now  exists. 

This  laxity  of  public  faith  is  not  confined  to  those  un 
fortunate  persons.  The  Assembly,  with  perfect  consistency 
it  must  be  owned,  is  engaged  in  a  respectable  deliberation 
how  far  it  is  bound  by  the  treaties  made  with  other  nations 
under  the  former  government,  and  their  committee  is  to 
report  which  of  them  they  ought  to  ratify,  and  which  not. 
By  this  means  they  have  put  the  external  fidelity  of  this 
virgin  state  on  a  par  with  its  internal. 

It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  upon  what  rational  principle  the 
royal  government  should  not,  of  the  two,  rather  have  pos 
sessed  the  power  of  rewarding  service,  and  making  treaties, 
in  virtue  of  its  prerogative,  than  that  of  pledging  to  creditors 
the  revenue  of  the  state,  actual  and  possible.  The  treasure 
of  the  nation,  of  all  things,  has  been  the  least  allowed  to  the 
prerogative  of  the  king  of  France,  or  to  the  prerogative  of 
any  king  in  Europe.  To  mortgage  the  public  revenue  im 
plies  the  sovereign  dominion,  in  the  fullest  sense,  over  the 
public  purse.  It  goes  far  beyond  the  trust  even  of  a  tem 
porary  and  occasional  taxation.  The  acts,  however,  of  that 
dangerous  power  (the  distinctive  mark  of  a  boundless  des 
potism)  have  been  alone  held  sacred.  Whence  arose  this 
preference  given  by  a  democratic  assembly  to  a  body  of 
property  deriving  its  title  from  the  most  critical  and  ob 
noxious  of  all  the  exertions  of  monarchical  authority?  Reason 
can  furnish  nothing  to  reconcile  inconsistency;  nor  can 
partial  favour  be  accounted  for  upon  equitable  principles. 


136  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

But  the  contradiction  and  partiality  which  admit  no  justifi 
cation  are  not  the  less  without  an  adequate  cause;  and  that 
cause  I  do  not  think  it  difficult  to  discover. 

By  the  vast  debt  of  France  a  great  moneyed  interest  has 
insensibly  grown  up,  and  with  it  a  great  power.  By  the 
ancient  usages  which  prevailed  in  that  kingdom,  the  general 
circulation  of  property,  and  in  particular  the  mutual  converti 
bility  of  land  into  money,  and  of  money  into  land,  had  always 
been  a  matter  of  difficulty.  Family  settlements,  rather  more 
general  and  more  strict  than  they  are  in  England,  the  jus 
retractus,  the  great  mass  of  landed  property  held  by  the 
crown,  and,  by  a  maxim  of  the  French  law,  held  unalienably, 
the  vast  estates  of  the  ecclesiastic  corporations,— all  these  had 
kept  the  landed  and  moneyed  interests  more  separated  in 
France,  less  miscible,  and  the  owners  of  the  two  distinct 
species  of  property  not  so  well  disposed  to  each  other  as 
they  are  in  this  country. 

The  moneyed  property  was  long  looked  on  with  rather  an 
evil  eye  by  the  people.  They  saw  it  connected  with  their 
distresses,  and  aggravating  them.  It  was  no  less  envied  by 
the  old  landed  interests,  partly  for  the  same  reasons  that 
rendered  it  obnoxious  to  the  people,  but  much  more  so  as  it 
eclipsed,  by  the  splendour  of  an  ostentatious  luxury,  the 
unendowed  pedigrees  and  naked  titles  of  several  among  the 
nobility.  Even  when  the  nobility,  which  represented  the 
more  permanent  landed  interest,  united  themselves  by 
marriage  (which  sometimes  was  the  case)  with  the  other 
description,  the  wealth  which  saved  the  family  from  ruin 
was  supposed  to  contaminate  and  degrade  it.  Thus  the 
enmities  and  heart-burnings  of  these  parties  were  increased 
even  by  the  usual  means  by  which  discord  is  made  to  cease 
and  quarrels  are  turned  into  friendship.  In  the  meantime 


REVOLUTION   IN  FRANCE.  137 

the  pride  of  the  wealthy  men,  not  noble  or  newly  noble, 
increased  with  its  cause.  They  felt  with  resentment  an 
inferiority,  the  grounds  of  which  they  did  not  acknowledge. 
There  was  no  measure  to  which  they  were  not  willing  to 
lend  themselves,  in  order  to  be  revenged  of  the  outrages  of 
this  rival  pride,  and  to  exalt  their  wealth  to  what  they 
considered  as  its  natural  rank  and  estimation.  They  struck 
at  the  nobility  through  the  crown  and  the  church.  They 
attacked  them  particularly  on  the  side  on  which  they  thought 
them  the  most  vulnerable,  that  is,  the  possessions  of  the 
church,  which,  through  the  patronage  of  the  crown,  gene 
rally  devolved  upon  the  nobility.  The  bishoprics  and  the 
great  commendatory  abbeys  were,  with  few  exceptions,  held 
by  that  order. 

In  this  state  of  real,  though  not  always  perceived,  warfare 
between  the  noble  ancient  landed  interest  and  the  new 
moneyed  interest,  the  greatest  because  the  most  applicable 
strength  was  in  the  hands  of  the  latter.  The  moneyed  interest 
is  in  its  nature  more  ready  for  any  adventure,  and  its 
possessors  more  disposed  to  new  enterprises  of  any  kind. 
Being  of  a  recent  acquisition,  it  falls  in  more  naturally  with 
any  novelties.  It  is  therefore  the  kind  of  wealth  which  will 
be  resorted  to  by  all  who  wish  for  change. 

Along  with  the  moneyed  interest,  a  new  description  of  men 
had  grown  up,  with  whom  that  interest  soon  formed  a  close 
and  marked  union  ;  I  mean  the  political  men  of  letters. 
Men  of  letters,  fond  of  distinguishing  themselves,  are  rarely 
averse  to  innovation.  Since  the  decline  of  the  life  and 
greatness  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth,  they  were  not  so  much 
cultivated  either  by  him,  or  by  the  regent,  or  the  successors 
to  the  crown;  nor  were  they  engaged  to  the  court  by  favours 
and  emoluments  so  systematically  as  during  the  splendid 


138  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

period  of  that  ostentatious  and  not  impolitic  reign,  What 
they  lost  in  the  old  court  protection,  they  endeavoured 
to  make  up  by  joining  in  a  sort  of  incorporation  of  their 
own ;  to  which  the  two  academies  of  France,  and  after 
wards  the  vast  undertaking  of  the  Encyclopaedia,  carried 
on  by  a  society  of  these  gentlemen,  did  not  a  little 
contribute. 

The  literary  cabal  had  some  years  ago  formed  something 
like  a  regular  plan  for  the  destruction  of  the  Christian 
religion.  This  object  they  pursued  with  a  degree  of  zeal 
which  hitherto  had  been  discovered  only  in  the  propagators 
of  some  system  of  piety.  They  were  possessed  with  a  spirit 
of  proselytism  in  the  most  fanatical  degree;  and  from  thence, 
by  an  easy  progress,  with  the  spirit  of  persecution  according 
to  their  means.1  What  was  not  to  be  done  towards  their  great 
end  by  any  direct  or  immediate  act,  might  be  wrought  by  a 
longer  process  through  the  medium  of  opinion.  To  com 
mand  that  opinion,  the  first  step  is  to  establish  a  dominion  j 
over  those  who  direct  it.  They  contrived  to  possess  them-j 
selves,  with  great  method  and  perseverance,  of  all  the 
avenues  to  literary  fame.  Many  of  them  indeed  stood  high 
in  the  ranks  of  literature  and  science.  The  world  had  don< 
them  justice ;  and  in  favour  of  general  talents  forgave  the 
evil  tendency  of  their  peculiar  principles.  This  was  true 
liberality;  which  they  returned  by  endeavouring  to  confine 
the  reputation  of  sense,  learning,  and  taste  to  themselves  or 
their  followers.  I  will  venture  to  say  that  this  narrow, 
exclusive  spirit  has  not  been  less  prejudicial  to  literature  anc 


1  This  (down  to  the  end  of  the  first  sentence  in  the  next  paragraph) 
and  some  other  parts  here  and  there,  were  inserted  on  his  reading  th< 
manuscript,  by  my  lost  Son. 


REVOLUTION   IN  FRANCE.  139 

to  taste  than  to  morals  and  true  philosophy.  These  atheist 
ical  fathers  have  a  bigotry  of  their  own ;  and  they  have 
learnt  to  talk  against  monks  with  the  spirit  of  a  monk.  But  in 
some  things  they  are  men  of  the  world.  The  resources  of 
intrigue  are  called  in  to  supply  the  defects  of  argument  and 
wit.  To  this  system  of  literary  monopoly  was  joined  an 
unremitting  industry  to  blacken  and  discredit  in  every  way, 
and  by  every  means,  all  those  who  did  not  hold  to  their 
faction.  To  those  who  have  observed  the  spirit  of  their 
conduct,  it  has  long  been  clear  that  nothing  was  wanted  but 
the  power  of  carrying  the  intolerance  of  the  tongue  and  of 
the  pen  into  a  persecution  which  would  strike  at  property, 
liberty,  and  life. 

The  desultory  and  faint  persecution  carried  on  against 
them,  more  from  compliance  with  form  and  decency  than 
with  serious  resentment,  neither  weakened  their  strength, 
nor  relaxed  their  efforts.  The  issue  of  the  whole  was,  that, 
what  with  opposition,  and  what  with  success,  a  violent  and 
malignant  zeal,  of  a  kind  hitherto  unknown  in  the  world, 
had  taken  an  entire  possession  of  their  minds,  and  rendered 
their  whole  conversation,  which  otherwise  would  have  been 
pleasing  and  instructive,  perfectly  disgusting.  A  spirit  of 
cabal,  intrigue,  and  proselytism  pervaded  all  their  thoughts, 
words,  and  actions.  And,  as  controversial  zeal  soon  turns 
its  thoughts  on  force,  they  began  to  insinuate  themselves 
into  a  correspondence  with  foreign  princes ;  in  hopes, 
through  their  authority,  which  at  first  they  flattered,  they 
might  bring  about  the  changes  they  had  in  view.  To  them 
it  was  indifferent  whether  these  changes  were  to  be  accom 
plished  by  the  thunderbolt  of  despotism,  or  by  the  earth 
quake  of  popular  commotion.  The  correspondence  between 
this  cabal  and  the  late  king  of  Prussia  will  throw  no  small 


140  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

light  upon  the  spirit  of  all  their  proceedings.1  For  the  same 
purpose  for  which  they  intrigued  with  princes,  they  culti 
vated,  in  a  distinguished  manner,  the  moneyed  interest  of 
France ;  and  partly  through  the  means  furnished  by  those 
whose  peculiar  offices  gave  them  the  most  extensive  and 
certain  means  of  communication,  they  carefully  occupied  all 
the  avenues  to  opinion. 

Writers,  especially  when  they  act  in  a  body,  and  with  one 
direction,  have   great    influence   on  the  public   mind ;   the 
alliance,  therefore,  of  these  writers  with  the  moneyed  interest2 
had  no  small  effect  in  removing  the  popular  odium  and  env 
which  attended  that  species  of  wealth.     These  writers,  lik 
the  propagators  of  all  novelties,  pretended  to  a  great  zeal  fo 
the  poor  and  the  lower  orders,  whilst  in  their  satires  the 
rendered  hateful,  by  every  exaggeration,  the  faults  of  courts 
of  nobility,   and   of  priesthood.      They  became   a   sort   o 
demagogues.     They  served  as  a  link  to  unite,  in  favour  o 
one    object,    obnoxious    wealth    to   restless   and    desperat 
poverty. 

As  these  two  kinds  of  men  appear  principal  leaders  in  al 
the  late  transactions,  their  junction  and  politics  wall  serve  t< 
account,  not  upon  any  principles  of  law  or  of  policy,  but  as  a 
cause,  for  the  general  fury  with  which  all  the  landed  property 
of  ecclesiastical  corporations  has  been  attacked;  and  the 
great  care  which,  contrary  to  their  pretended  principles,  ha: 
been  taken,  of  a  moneyed  interest  originating  from  the 
authority  of  the  crown.  All  the  envy  against  wealth  and 
power  was  artificially  directed  against  other  descriptions  o 

1  I  do  not  choose  to  shock  the  feeling  of  the  moral  reader  with  an] 
quotation  of  their  vulgar,  base,  and  profane  language. 

-  Their  connection  with  Turgot  and  almost  all  the  people  of  th< 
finance. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANC  ft  141 

riches.  On  what  other  principle  than  that  which  I  have 
stated  can  we  account  for  an  appearance  so  extraordinary 
and  unnatural  as  that  of  the  ecclesiastical  possessions,  which 
had  stood  so  many  successions  of  ages  and  shocks  of  civil 
violences,  and  were  girded  at  once  by  justice,  and  by  pre 
judice,  being  applied  to  the  payment  of  debts,  comparatively 
recent,  invidious,  and  contracted  by  a  decried  and  subverted 
government  ? 

Was  the  public  estate  a  sufficient  stake  for  the  public 
debts?  Assume  that  it  was  not,  and  that  a  loss  must  be  in 
curred  somewhere — -When  the  only  estate  lawfully  possessed, 
and  which  the  contracting  parties  had  in  contemplation  at 
the  time  in  which  their  bargain  was  made,  happens  to  fail, 
who,  according  to  the  principles  of  natural  and  legal  equity, 
ought  to  be  the  sufferer?  Certainly  it  ought  to  be  either 
the  party  who  trusted,  or  the  party  who  persuaded  him  to 
trust ;  or  both ;  and  not  third  parties  who  had  no  concern 
with  the  transaction.  Upon  any  insolvency  they  ought  to 
suffer  who  are  weak  enough  to  lend  upon  bad  security,  or 
they  who  fraudulently  held  out  a  security  that  was  not 
valid.  Laws  are  acquainted  with  no  other  rules  of  decision. 
But  by  the  new  institute  of  the  rights  of  men,  the  only 
persons  who  in  equity  ought  to  suffer  are  the  only  persons 
who  are  to  be  saved  harmless:  those  are  to  answer  the 
| debt  who  neither  were  lenders  nor  borrowers,  mortgagers 
nor  mortgagees. 

Whit  had  the  clergy  to  do  with  these  transactions?    \Vhat 
| had  they  to  do  with  any  public  engagement  further  than  the 
[extent  of  their  own  debt?     To  that,  to  be  sure,  their  estates 
Lvere  bound  to  the  last  acre.      Nothing  can  lead  more  to  the 
:rue  spirit  of  the  Assembly,  which  fits  for  public  confiscation, 
vith  its  new  equity,  and  its  new  morality,  than  an  attention 


142  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

to  their  proceeding  with  regard  to  this  debt  of  the  clergy. 
The  body  of  confiscators,  true  to  that  moneyed  interest  for 
which  they  were  false  to  every  other,  have  found  the  clergy 
competent  to  incur  a  legal  debt.  Of  course  they  declared 
them  legally  entitled  to  the  property  which  their  power  of 
incurring  the  debt  and  mortgaging  the  estate  implied; 
recognising  the  rights  of  those  persecuted  citizens,  in  the 
very  act  in  which  they  were  thus  grossly  violated. 

If,  as  I  said,  any  persons  are  to  make  good  deficiencies 
to  the  public  creditor,  besides  the  public  at  large,  they  must 
be  those  who  managed  the  agreement  Why  therefore  are 
not  the  estates  of  all  the  comptrollers-general  confiscated  ? 
Why  not  those  of  the  long  succession  of  ministers,  financiers 
and  bankers  who  have  been  enriched  whilst  the  nation  was 
impoverished  by  their  dealings  and  their  counsels  ?  Why  IL 
not  the  estate  of  M.  Laborde  declared  forfeited  rather  than 
of  the  archbishop  of  Paris,  who  has  had  nothing  to  do  in  the 
creation  or  in  the  jobbing  of  the  public  funds  ?  Or,  if  you 
must  confiscate  old  landed  estates  in  favour  of  the  money 
jobbers,  why  is  the  penalty  confined  to  one  description  ?  I 
do  not  know  whether  the  expenses  of  the  Duke  de  Choiseu 
have  left  anything  of  the  infinite  sums  which  he  had  derivet 
from  the  bounty  of  his  master,  during  the  transactions  of  a 
reign  which  contributed  largely  by  every  species  of  prodigality 
in  war  and  peace,  to  the  present  debt  of  France.  If  any 
such  remains,  why  is  not  this  confiscated?  I  remember  to 
have  been  in  Paris  during  the  time  of  the  old  government. 
I  was  there  just  after  the  Duke  d'Aiguillon  had  been  snatched 
(as  it  was  generally  thought)  from  the  block  by  the  hand  of 
a  protecting  despotism.  He  was  a  minister,  and  had  some 

1  All  have  been  confiscated  in  their  turn. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  143 

concern  in  the  affairs  of  that  prodigal  period.  Why  do  I 
not  see  his  estate  delivered  up  to  the  municipalities  in  which 
it  is  situated  ?  The  noble  family  of  Noailles  have  long  been 
servants  (meritorious  servants,  I  admit)  to  the  crown  of 
France,  and  have  had  of  course  some  share  in  its  bounties. 
Why  do  I  hear  nothing  of  the  application  of  their  estates  to 
the  public  debt  ?  Why  is  the  estate  of  the  Duke  de  Roche- 
foucault  more  sacred  than  that  of  the  Cardinal  de  Roche- 
foucault?  The  former  is,  I  doubt  not,  a  worthy  person; 
and  (if  it  were  not  a  sort  of  profaneness  to  talk  of  the  use,' 
as  affecting  the  title  to  property)  he  makes  a  good  use  of  his 
revenues;  but  it  is  no  disrespect  to  him  to  say,  what 
authentic  information  well  warrants  me  in  saying,  that  the 
use  made  of  a  property  equally  valid,  by  his  brother  *  the 
cardinal  archbishop  of  Rouen,  was  far  more  laudable  and  far 
more  public-spirited.  Can  one  hear  of  the  proscription  of 
such  persons,  and  the  confiscation  of  their  effects,  without 
indignation  and  horror?  He  is  not  a  man  who  does  not 
feel  such  emotions  on  such  occasions.  He  does  not 
deserve  the  name  of  a  free-man  who  will  not  express  them. 

Few  barbarous  conquerors  have  ever  made  so  terrible  a 
revolution  in  property.  None  of  the  heads  of  the  Roman 
factions,  when  they  established  "crude/em  Warn  hastam"  in 
all  their  actions  of  rapine,  have  ever  set  up  to  sale  the  goods 
of  the  conquered  citizen  to  such  an  enormous  amount.  It 
must  be  allowed  in  favour  of  those  tyrants  of  antiquity,  that 
what  was  done  by  them  could  hardly  be  said  to  be  done  in 
cold  blood.  Their  passions  were  inflamed,  their  tempers 
soured,  their  understandings  confused,  with  the  spirit  of 
revenge,  with  the  innumerable  reciprocated  and  recent 

1  Not  his  brother,  nor  any  near  relation ;  but  this  mistake  does  not 
liect  the  argument. 


T44  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

inflictions  and  retaliations  of  blood  and  rapine.  They  were 
driven  beyond  all  bounds  of  moderation  by  the  apprehension 
of  the  return  of  power  with  the  return  of  property,  to  the 
families  of  those  they  had  injured  beyond  all  hope  of  for 
giveness. 

These   Roman   confiscators,   who  were    yet   only   in   the 
elements  of  tyranny,  and  were  not  instructed  in  the  rights  of 
men  to  exercise  all  sorts  of  cruelties  on  each  other  without 
provocation,  thought  it  necessary  to  spread  a  sort  of  colour 
over  their  injustice.     They  considered  the  vanquished  party 
as  composed  of  traitors  who  had  borne  arms,  or  otherwise 
had  acted  with  hostility,  against  the  commonwealth.     They 
regarded  them  as  persons  who  had  forfeited  their  property 
by  their  crimes.     With  you,  in  your  improved  state  of  the 
human  mind,  there  was  no  such  formality.     You  sei/ed  upon 
five  millions  sterling  of  annual  rent,   and  turned   forty  or 
fifty  thousand  human  creatures  out  of  their  houses,  because 
"such  was  your  pleasure."     The  tyrant  Harry  the  Eighth  of 
England,  as  he  was  not  better  enlightened  than  the  Roman 
Mariuses    and    Syllas,   and    had   not   studied   in   your  new 
schools,  did  not  know  what  an  effectual  instrument  of  des 
potism  was  to  be  found  in  that  grand  magazine  of  offensive 
weapons,  the  rights  of  men.     When  he  resolved  to  rob  the 
abbeys,  as  the  club  of  the  Jacobins  have  robbed  all  the 
ecclesiastics,  he  began  by  setting  on  foot  a  commission  to 
examine  into  the  crimes  and  abuses  which  prevailed  in  those 
communities.      As   it   might  be   expected,  his  commission 
reported  truths,   exaggerations,  and  falsehoods.     But  truly 
or  falsely,  it  reported  abuses  and  offences.     However,  as 
abuses  might  be  corrected,  as  every  crime  of  persons  does 
not   infer  a  forfeiture  with  regard  to  communities,  and  as 
property,   in   that  dark  age,   was  not  discovered  to  be  a 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  145 

creature  of  prejudice,  all  those  abuses  (and  there  were  enough 
of  them)  were  hardly  thought  sufficient  ground  for  such  a 
confiscation  as  it  was  for  his  purpose  to  make.  He  therefore 
procured  the  formal  surrender  of  these  estates.  All  these 
operose  proceedings  were  adopted  by  one  of  the  most 
decided  tyrants  in  the  rolls  of  history,  as  necessary  pre 
liminaries,  before  he  could  venture,  by  bribing  the  members 
of  his  two  servile  houses  with  a  share  of  the  spoil,  and 
holding  out  to  them  an  eternal  immunity  from  taxation,  to 
demand  a  confirmation  of  his  iniquitous  proceedings  by  an 
act  of  parliament.  Had  fate  reserved  him  to  our  times,  four 
technical  terms  would  have  done  his  business,  and  saved 
him  all  this  trouble;  he  needed  nothing  more  than  one  short 
form  of  incantation — "  Philosophy \  Light,  Liberality,  the 
Rights  of  Me n^ 

I  can  say  nothing  in  praise  of  those  acts  of  tyranny,  which 
no  voice  has  hitherto  evei  commended  under  any  of  their 
false  colours ;  yet  in  these  false  colours  a  homage  was  paid 
by  despotism  to  justice.  The  power  which  was  above  all 
fear  and  all  remorse  was  not  set  above  all  shame.  Whilst 
shame  keeps  its  watch,  virtue  is  not  wholly  extinguished  in 
the  heart;  nor  will  moderation  be  utterly  exiled  from  the 
minds  of  tyrants. 

I  believe  every  honest  man  sympathises  in  his  reflections 
with  our  political  poet  on  that  occasion,  and  will  pray  to 
avert  the  omen  whenever  these  acts  of  rapacious  despotism 
present  themselves  to  his  view  or  his  imagination  : 

— "  May  no  such  storm 
Fall  on  our  times,  \\here  ruin  must  reform. 
Tell  me  (my  Muse)  what  monstrous  dire  offence, 
What  crimes  could  any  Christian  kiny;  incense 
To  such  a  rage?     Was't  luxury  or  lust? 

10 


i46  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

Was  he  so  temperate,  so  chaste,  so  just  ? 

Were  these  their  crimes?  they  were  his  own  much  more, 

But  wealth  is  crime  enough  to  him  that's  poor.'' l 

This  same  wealth,  which  is  at  all  times  treason  and  kse 
nation  to  indigent  and  rapacious  despotism,  under  all  modes 
of  polity,  was  your  temptation  to  violate  property,  law,  and 
religion,  united  in  one  object.  But  was  the  state  of  France 
so  wretched  and  undone,  that  no  other  resource  but  rapine 
remained  to  preserve  its  existence?  On  this  point  I  wish  to 
receive  some  information.  When  the  states  met,  was  the 

1  The  rest  of  the  passage  is  this— 

"  Who  having  spent  the  treasures  of  his  crown, 
Condemns  their  luxury  to  feed  his  own. 
And  yet  this  act,  to  varnish  o'er  the  shame 
Of  sacrilege,  must  bear  Devotion's  name. 
No  crime  so  bold,  but  would  be  understood 
A  real,  or  at  least  a  seeming  good  ; 
Who  fears  not  to  do  ill,  yet  fears  the  name, 
And,  free  from  conscience,  is  a  slave  to  fame. 
Thus  he  the  church  at  once  protects,  and  spoils; 
But  princes'  swords  are  sharper  than  their  styles, 
And  thus  to  th'  ages  past  he  makes  amends, 
Their  charity  destroys,  their  faith  defends. 
Then  did  Religion  in  a  lazy  cell, 
In  empty  aery  contemplation  dwell ; 
And,  like  the  block,  unmoved  lay  ;   but  ours, 
As  much  too  active,  like  the  stork  devours. 
Is  there  no  temperate  region  can  be  known, 
Betwixt  their  frigid  and  our  torrid  zone  ? 
Could  we  not  wake  from  that  lethargic  dream. 
But  to  be  restless  in  a  worse  extreme  ? 
And  for  that  lethargy  was  there  no  cure, 
But  to  be  cast  into  a  calenture  ; 
Can  knowledge  have  no  bound,  but  must  advance 
So  far,  to  make  us  wish  for  ignorance  ? 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  147 

condition  of  the  finances  of  France  such,  that,  after  econo 
mising  on  principles  of  justice  and  mercy  through  all 
departments,  no  fair  repartition  of  burthens  upon  all  the 
orders  could  possibly  restore  them?  If  such  an  equal 
imposition  would  have  been  sufficient,  you  well  know  it 
might  easily  have  been  made.  M.  Necker,  in  the  budget 
which  he  laid  before  the  orders  assembled  at  Versailles,  made 
a  detailed  exposition  of  the  state  of  the  French  nation.1 

If  we  give  credit  to  him,  it  was  not  necessary  to  have 
recourse  to  any  new  impositions  whatsoever,  to  put  the 
receipts  of  France  on  a  balance  with  its  expenses.  He 
stated  the  permanent  charges  of  all  descriptions,  including 
the  interest  of  D  new  loan  of  four  hundred  millions,  at 
531,444,000  livres;  the  fixed  revenue  at  475,294,000, 
making  the  deficiency  56,150,000,  or  short  of  .£2,200,000 
sterling.  But  to  balance  it,  he  brought  forward  savings'and 
improvements  of  revenue  (considered  as  entirely  certain)  to 
rather  more  than  the  amount  of  that  deficiency;  and  he 
concludes  with  these  emphatical  words  (p.  39),  "  Quel  pays, 
Messieurs,  que  celui,  ou,  sans  iiupots  et  avec  de  simples 

And  rather  in  the  dark  to  grope  our  way, 
Than,  led  by  a  false  guide,  to  err  by  day? 
Who  sees  these  dismal  heaps,  but  would  demand 
What  barbarous  invader  sacked  the  land  ? 
But  when  he  hears,  no  Goth,  no  Turk  did  bring 
This  desolation,  but  a  Christian  king; 
When  nothing,  but  the  name  of  zeal,  appears 
'Twixt  our  best  actions  and  the  worst  of  theirs, 
What  does  he  think  our  sacrilege  would  spare, 
When  such  th'  effects  of  our  devotion  are  ?" 

Cooper's  Hill,  by  Sir  JOHN  DENHAM. 

1  Rapport  de  Mons.  le  Directeur-General  des  Finances,  fait  par  ordre 
iu  Roi  a  Versailles.     Mai  5,  1789. 


148  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

objets  tnapperpts,  on  peut  faire  disparoitre  un  deficit  qui  a 
fait  tant  de  bruit  en  Europe."  As  to  the  reimbursement, 
the  sinking  of  debt,  and  the  other  great  objects  of  public 
credit  and  political  arrangement  indicated  in  Mons.  Necker's 
speech,  no  doubt  could  be  entertained  but  that  a  very 
moderate  and  proportioned  assessment  on  the  citizens  with 
out  distinction  would  have  provided  for  all  of  them  to  the 
fullest  extent  of  their  demand. 

If  this  representation  of  Mons.  Necker  was  false,  then  the 
Assembly  are  in  the  highest  degree  culpable  for  having 
forced  the  king  to  accept  as  his  minister,  and  since  the 
king's  deposition,  for  having  employed,  as  their  minister,  a 
man  who  had  been  capable  of  abusing  so  notoriously  the 
confidence  of  his  master  and  their  own ;  in  a  matter  too  of 
the  highest  moment,  and  directly  appertaining  to  his  parti 
cular  office.  But  if  the  representation  was  exact  (as  having 
always,  along  with  you,  conceived  a  high  degree  of  respect 
for  M.  Necker,  I  make  no  doubt  it  was),  then  what  can  be 
said  in  favour  of  those  who,  instead  of  moderate,  reason 
able,  and  general  contribution,  have  in  cold  blood,  and 
impelled  by  no  necessity,  had  recourse  to  a  partial  and  cruel 
confiscation? 

Was  that  contribution  refused  on  a  pretext  of  privilege, 
either  on  the  part  of  the  clergy,  or  on  that  of  the  nobility  ? 
No,  certainly.  As  to  the  clergy,  they  even  ran  before 
the  wishes  of  the  third  order.  Previous  to  the  meeting 
of  the  states,  they  had  in  all  their  instructions  expressly 
directed  their  deputies  to  renounce  every  immunity,  which 
put  them  upon  a  footing  distinct  from  the  condition  of  their 
fellow-subjects.  In  this  renunciation  the  clergy  were  even 
more  explicit  than  the  nobility. 

But  let  us  suppose  that  the  deficiency  had  remained  at  the 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  149 

fifty-six  millions  (or  ^"2,200,000  sterling),  as  at  first  stated 
by  M  Necker.  Let  us  allow  that  all  the  resources  he 
opposed  to  that  deficiency  were  impudent  and  groundless 
fictions;  and  that  the  Assembly  (or  their  lords  of  articles1 
at  the  Jacobins)  were  from  thence  justified  in  laying  the 
whole  burthen  of  that  deficiency  on  the  clergy,— yet  allowing 
all  this,  a  necessity  of  ^£2,200,000  sterling  will  not  support 
a  confiscation  to  the  amount  of  five  millions.  The  imposi 
tion  of  ^2,200,000  on  the  clergy,  as  partial,  would  have 
been  oppressive  and  unjust,  but  it  would  not  have  been 
altogether  ruinous  to  those  on  whom  it  was  imposed;  and 
therefore  it  would  not  have  answered  the  real  purpose  of  the 
managers. 

Perhaps  persons  unacquainted  with  the  state  of  France, 
on  hearing  the  clergy  and  the  noblesse  were  privileged  in 
point  of  taxation,  may  be  led  to  imagine  that,  previous  to 
the  Revolution,  these  bodies  had  contributed  nothing  to 
the  state.  This  is  a  great  mistake.  They  certainly  did  not 
contribute  equally  with  each  other,  nor  either  of  them 
equally  with  the  commons.  They  both,  however,  contributed 
largely.  Neither  nobility  nor  clergy  enjoyed  any  exemption 
from  the  excise  on  consumable  commodities,  from  duties  of 
custom,  or  from  any  of  the  other  numerous  indirect  im 
positions  which  in  France,  as  well  as  here,  make  so  very  large 
a  proportion  of  all  payments  to  the  public.  The  noblesse  paid 
the  capitation.  They  paid  also  a  land-tax,  called  the 
twentieth  penny,  to  the  height  sometimes  of  three,  sometimes 
of  four,  shillings  in  the  pound  ;  both  of  them  direct  imposi 
tions  of  no  light  nature,  and  no  trivial  produce.  The  clergy 

1  In  the  constitution  of  Scotland,  during  the  Stuart  reigns,  a  com 
mittee  sat  for  preparing  bills;  and  none  could  pass  but  those  previously 
approved  by  them.  This  committee  was  called  lords  of  articles. 


150  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

of  the  provinces  annexed  by  conquest  to  France  (which  in 
extent  make  about  an  eighth  part  of  the  whole,  but  in  wealth 
a  much  larger  proportion)  paid  likewise  to  the  capitation 
and  the  twentieth  penny,  at  the  rate  paid  by  the  nobility. 
The  clergy  in  the  old  provinces  did  not  pay  the  capitation  ; 
but  they  had  redeemed  themselves  at  the  expense  of  about 
twenty-four  millions,  or  a  little  more  than  a  million  sterling. 
They  were  exempted  from  the  twentieths;  but  then  they 
made  free  gifts  :  they  contracted  debts  for  the  state ;  and 
they  were  subject  to  some  other  charges,  the  whole  com 
puted  at  about  a  thirteenth  part  of  their  clear  income. 
They  ought  to  have  paid  annually  about  forty  thousand 
pounds  more,  to  put  them  on  a  par  with  the  contribution  of 
the  nobility. 

When  the  terrors  of  this  tremendous  proscription  hung 
over  the  clergy,  they  made  an  offer  of  a  contribution,  through 
the  archbishop  of  Aix,  which,  for  its  extravagance,  ought  not 
to  have  been  accepted.  But  it  was  evidently  and  obviously 
more  advantageous  to  the  public  creditor,  than  anything 
which  could  rationally  be  promised  by  the  confiscation. 
Why  was  it  not  accepted  ?  The  reason  is  plain — There  was 
no  desire  that  the  church  should  be  brought  to  serve  the 
state.  The  service  of  the  state  was  made  a  pretext  to 
destroy  the  church.  In  their  way  to  the  destruction  of  the 
church  they  would  not  scruple  to  destroy  their  country; 
and  they  have  destroyed  it.  One  great  end  in  the  project 
would  have  been  defeated,  if  the  plan  of  extortion  had  been 
adopted  in  lieu  of  the  scheme  of  confiscation.  The  new 
landed  interest  connected  with  the  new  republic,  and  con 
nected  with  it  for  its  very  being,  could  not  have  been  created. 
This  was  among  the  reasons  why  that  extravagant  ransom 
was  not  accepted. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  151 

The  madness  of  the  project  of  confiscation,  on  the  plan 
that  was  first  pretended,  soon  became  apparent.  To  bring 
this  unwieldy  mass  of  landed  property,  enlarged  by  the  con 
fiscation  of  all  the  vast  landed  domain  of  the  crown,  at  once 
into  market,  was  obviously  to  defeat  the  profits  proposed  by 
the  confiscation  by  depreciating  the  value  of  those  lands, 
and  indeed  of  all  the  landed  estates  throughout  France. 
Such  a  sudden  diversion  of  all  its  circulating  money  from 
trade  to  land  must  be  an  additional  mischief.  What  step 
was  taken?  Did  the  Assembly,  on  becoming  sensible  of  the 
inevitable  ill  effects  of  their  projected  sale,  revert  to  the 
offers  of  the  clergy?  No  distress  could  oblige  them  to 
travel  in  a  course  which  was  disgraced  by  any  appearance 
of  justice.  Giving  over  all  hopes  from  a  general  immediate 
sale,  another  project  seems  to  have  succeeded.  They  pro 
posed  to  take  stock  in  exchange  for  the  church  lands.  In 
that  project  great  difficulties  arose  in  equalising  the  objects 
to  be  exchanged.  Other  obstacles  also  presented  themselves, 
which  threw  them  back  again  upon  some  project  of  sale. 
The  municipalities  had  taken  an  alarm.  They  would  not 
hear  of  transferring  the  whole  plunder  of  the  kingdom  to 
the  stock-holders  in  Paris.  Many  of  those  municipalities 
had  been  (upon  system)  reduced  to  the  most  deplorable 
indigence.  Money  was  nowhere  to  be  seen.  They  were 
therefore  led  to  the  point  that  was  so  ardently  desired. 
They  panted  for  a  currency  of  any  kind  which  might  revive 
their  perishing  industry.  The  municipalities  were  then  to 
be  admitted  to  a  share  in  the  spoil,  which  evidently  rendered 
the  first  scheme  (if  ever  it  had  been  seriously  entertained) 
iltogether  impracticable.  Public  exigencies  pressed  upon 
Ull  sides.  The  minister  of  finance  reiterated  his  call  for 
supply  with  a  most  urgent,  anxious,  and  boding  voice.  Thus 


152  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

pressed  on  all  sides,  instead  of  the  first  plan  of  converting 
their  bankers  into  bishops  and  abbots,  instead  of  paying  the 
old  debt,  they  contracted  a  new  debt,  at  three  per  cent., 
creating  a  new  paper  currency,  founded  on  an  eventual  sale 
of  the  church  lands  They  issued  this  paper  currency  to 
satisfy  in  the  first  instance  chiefly  the  demands  made  upon 
them  by  the  bank  of  discount,  the  great  machine,  or  paper- 
mill,  of  their  fictitious  wealth 

The  spoil  of  the  church  was  now  become  the  only  resource 
of  all  their  operations  in  finance,  the  vital  principle  of  all 
their  politics,  the  sole  security  for  the  existence  of  their 
power.  It  was  necessary  by  all,  even  the  most  violent  means, 
to  put  every  individual  on  the  same  bottom,  and  to  bind  the 
nation  in  one  guilty  interest  to  uphold  this  act,  and  the 
authority  of  those  by  whom  it  was  done.  In  order  to  force 
the  most  reluctant  into  a  participation  of  their  pillage,  they 
rendered  their  paper  circulation  compulsory  in  all  payments. 
Those  who  consider  the  general  tendency  of  their  scheme 
to  this  one  object  as  a  centre,  and  a  centre  from  which  after 
wards  all  their  measures  radiate,  will  not  think  that  I  dwell 
too  long  upon  this  part  of  the  proceedings  of  the  National 
Assembly. 

To  cut  off  all  appearance  cf  connection  between  the  crown 
and  public  justice,  and  to  bring  the  whole  under  implicit 
obedience  to  the  dictators  in  Paris,  the  old  independent 
judicature  of  the  parliaments,  with  all  its  merits,  and  all  its 
faults,  was  wholly  abolished.  Whilst  the  parliaments  existed 
it  was  evident  that  the  people  might  some  time  or  other 
come  to  resort  to  them,  and  rally  under  the  standard  of  their 
ancient  laws.  It  became,  however,  a  matter  of  consideration 
that  the  magistrates  and  officers,  in  the  courts  now  abolished, 
had  purchased  their  places  at  a  very  high  rate,  for  which,  as 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  153 

well  as  for  the  duty  they  performed,  they  received  but  a 
very  low  return  of  interest.  Simple  confiscation  is  a  boon 
only  for  the  clergy ; — to  the  lawyers  some  appearances  of 
equity  are  to  be  observed ;  and  they  are  to  receive  com 
pensation  to  an  immense  amount.  Their  compensation 
becomes  part  of  the  national  debt,  for  the  liquidation  of 
which  there  is  the  one  exhaustlcss  fund.  The  lawyers  are  to 
obtain  their  compensation  in  the  new  church  paper,  which 
is  to  march  with  the  new  principles  of  judicature  and 
legislature.  The  dismissed  magistrates  are  to  take  their 
share  of  martyrdom  with  the  ecclesiastics,  or  to  receive  their 
own  property  from  such  a  fund,  and  in  such  a  manner,  as 
all  those  who  have  been  seasoned  with  the  ancient  principles 
of  jurisprudence,  and  had  been  the  sworn  guardians  of 
property,  must  look  upon  with  horror.  Even  the  clergy  are 
to  receive  their  miserable  allowance  out  of  the  depreciated 
paper,  which  is  stamped  with  the  indelible  character  of 
sacrilege,  and  with  the  symbols  of  their  own  ruin,  or  they 
must  starve.  So  violent  an  outrage  upon  credit,  property, 
and  liberty  as  this  compulsory  paper  currency,  has  seldom 
been  exhibited  by  the  alliance  of  bankruptcy  and  tyranny, 
at  any  time,  or  in  any  nation. 

In  the  course  of  all  these  operations,  at  length  comes  out 
the  grand  arcanum;—  that  in  reality,  and  in  a  fair  sense,  the 
lands  of  the  church  (so  far  as  anything  certain  can  be 
gathered  from  their  proceedings)  are  not  to  be  sold  at  all. 
By  the  late  resolutions  of  the  National  Assembly,  they  are 
indeed  to  be  delivered  to  the  highest  bidder.  But  it  is  to 
be  observed,  that  a  certain  portion  only  of  the  purchase  money 
is  to  be  laid  down.  A  period  of  twelve  years  is  to  be  given 
for  the  payment  of  the  rest.  The  philosophic  purchasers 
are  therefore,  on  payment  of  a  sort  of  fine,  to  be  put  instantly 


154  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

into  possession  of  the  estate.  It  becomes  in  some 
respects  a  sort  of  gift  to  them  ;  to  be  held  on  the  feudal 
tenure  of  zeal  to  the  new  establishment.  This  project  is 
evidently  to  let  in  a  body  of  purchasers  without  money. 
The  consequence  will  be,  that  these  purchasers,  or  rather 
grantees,  will  pay,  not  only  from  the  rents  as  they  accrue, 
which  might  as  well  be  received  by  the  state,  but  from  the 
spoil  of  the  materials  of  buildings,  from  waste  in  woods,  and 
from  whatever  money,  by  hands  habituated  to  the  gripings 
of  usury,  they  can  wring  from  the  miserable  peasant.  He 
is  to  be  delivered  over  to  the  mercenary  and  arbitrary  dis 
cretion  of  men,  who  will  be  stimulated  to  every  species  of 
extortion  by  the  growing  demands  on  the  growing  profits  of 
an  estate  held  under  the  precarious  settlement  of  a  new 
political  system. 

When  all  the  frauds,  impostures,  violences,  rapines, 
burnings,  murders,  confiscations,  compulsory  paper  cur 
rencies,  and  every  description  of  tyranny  and  cruelty 
employed  to  bring  about  and  to  uphold  this  Revolution, 
have  their  natural  effect — that  is,  to  shock  the  moral  senti 
ments  of  all  virtuous  and  sober  minds,  the  abettors  of  this 
philosophic  system  immediately  strain  their  throats  in  a 
declamation  against  the  old  monarchical  government  of 
France.  When  they  have  rendered  that  deposed  power 
sufficiently  black,  they  then  proceed  in  argument,  as  if  all 
those  who  disapprove  of  their  new  abuses  must  of  course 
be  partisans  of  the  old;  that  those  who  reprobate  their 
crude  and  violent  schemes  of  liberty  ought  to  be  treated  as 
advocates  for  servitude.  I  admit  that  their  necessities  do 
compel  them  to  this  base  and  contemptible  fraud.  Nothing 
can  reconcile  men  to  their  proceedings  and  projects,  but 
the  supposition  that  there  is  no  third  option  between  them 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  155 

and  some  tyranny  as  odious  as  can  be  furnished  by  the 
records  of  history,  or  by  the  invention  of  poets.  This 
prattling  of  theirs  hardly  deserves  the  name  of  sophistry. 
It  is  nothing  but  plain  impudence.  Have  these  gentlemen 
never  heard,  in  the  whole  circle  of  the  worlds  of  theory  and 
practice,  of  anything  between  the  despotism  of  the  monarch 
and  the  despotism  of  the  multitude  ?  Have  they  never  heard 
of  a  monarchy  directed  by  laws,  controlled  and  balanced  by 
the  great  hereditary  wealth  and  hereditary  dignity  of  a  nation ; 
and  both  again  controlled  by  a  judicious  check  from  the 
reason  and  feeling  of  the  people  at  large,  acting  by  a 
suitable  and  permanent  organ  ?  Is  it  then  impossible  that 
a  man  may  be  found  who,  without  criminal  ill  intention,  or 
pitiable  absurdity,  shall  prefer  such  a  mixed  and  tempered 
government  to  either  of  the  extremes ;  and  who  may  repute 
that  nation  to  be  destitute  of  all  wisdom  and  of  all  virtue, 
which,  having  in  its  choice  to  obtain  such  a  government 
with  ease,  or  ratJier  to  confirm  it  when  actually  possessed, 
thought  proper  to  commit  a  thousand  crimes,  and  to  subject 
their  country  to  a  thousand  evils,  in  order  to  avoid  it? 
Is  it  then  a  truth  so  universally  acknowledged,  that  a  pure 
democracy  is  the  only  tolerable  form  into  which  human 
society  can  be  thrown,  that  a  man  is  not  permitted  to 
hesitate  about  its  merits,  without  the  suspicion  of  being  a 
friend  to  tyranny — that  is,  of  being  a  foe  to  mankind  ? 

I  do  not  know  under  what  description  to  class  the  present 
ruling  authority  in  France.  It  affects  to  be  a  pure  demo 
cracy,  though  I  think  it  in  a  direct  train  of  becoming  shortly 
a  mischievous  and  ignoble  oligarchy.  But  for  the  present 
I  admit  it  to  be  a  contrivance  of  the  nature  and  effect  of 
what  it  pretends  to.  I  reprobate  no  form  of  government 
merely  upon  abstract  principles.  There  may  be  situations 


i56  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

in  which  the  purely  democratic  form  will  become  necessary. 
There  may  be  some  (very  few,  and  very  particularly  circum 
stanced)  where  it  would  be  clearly  desirable.  This  I  do 
not  take  to  be  the  case  of  France,  or  of  any  other  great 
country.  Until  now,  we  have  seen  no  examples  of  con 
siderable  democracies.  The  ancients  were  better  acquainted 
with  them.  Not  being  wholly  unread  in  the  authors,  who 
had  seen  the  most  of  those  constitutions,  and  who  best 
understood  them,  I  cannot  help  concurring  with  their 
opinion,  that  an  absolute  democracy,  no  more  than  absolute 
monarchy,  is  to  be  reckoned  among  the  legitimate  forms  of 
government.  They  think  it  rather  the  corruption  and 
degeneracy,  than  the  sound  constitution  of  a  republic.  If 
I  recollect  rightly,  Aristotle  observes,  that  a  democracy  has 
many  striking  points  of  resemblance  with  a  tyranny.1  Of 
this  I  am  certain,  that  in  a  democracy  the  majority  of  the 
citizens  is  capable  of  exercising  the  most  cruel  oppressions 
upon  the  minority,  whenever  strong  divisions  prevail  in  that 
kind  of  polity,  as  they  often  must;  and  that  oppression  of 

1  When  I  wrote  this  I  quoted  from  memory,  after  many  years  had 
elapsed  from  my  reading  the  passage.  A  learned  friend  has  found  it, 
and  it  is  as  follows  :  — 

To  rjOos  TO  avTo,  /ecu  &[j.(pu  oe<riroTLKa  rdov  fieXribvuv,  Kalra  \f'7]<pi<Tfj.aTa, 
&<nrep  e/eet  ra  tTTLray/aaTa  '  /cat  6  drj/^ayuybs  /ecu  6  /coAa£,  ol  aurol  Kal 
dvdXoyoi '  /cat  ^tdXicrra  e/cdrepot  trap  e/carepots  la"xi'0i>(nv,  ol  fJiev  KoXaKes 
Trapa  Tvpavvois,  ol  de  drj/uayuyol  Trapa  rots  S^ots  rots  rotot/rots. — 

"The  ethical  character  is  the  same;  both  exercise  despotism  over 
the  better  class  of  citizens  ;  and  decrees  are  in  the  one,  what  ordinances 
and  arrets  are  in  the  other  :  the  demagogue  too,  and  the  court  favourite, 
are  not  unfrequently  the  same  identical  men,  and  always  bear  a  close 
analogy  ;  and  these  have  the  principal  power,  each  in  their  respective 
forms  of  government,  favourites  with  the  absolute  monarch,  and 
demagogues  with  a  people  such  as  I  have  described." — Arist.  Politic. , 
lib.  iv. ,  cap.  4. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  T57 

the  minority  will  extend  to  far  greater  numbers,  and  will  be 
carried  on  with  much  greater  fury  than  can  almost  ever  be 
apprehended  from  the  dominion  of  a  single  sceptre.  In 
such  a  popular  persecution,  individual  sufferers  are 'in  a 
much  more  deplorable  condition  than  in  any  other  Under 
a  cruel  prince  they  have  the  balmy  compassion  of  mankind 
to  assuage  the  smart  of  their  wounds;  they  have  the 
plaudits  of  the  people  to  animate  their  generous  constancy 
under  their  sufferings:  but  those  who  are  subjected  to 
wrong  under  multitudes  are  deprived  of  all  external  con 
solation.  They  seem  deserted  by  mankind,  overpowered 
by  a  conspiracy  of  their  whole  species. 

But  admitting  democracy  not   to    have    that    inevitable 
tendency  to  party  tyranny  which  I  suppose  it  to  have   and 
admitting  it  to  possess  as  much  good  in  it  when  unmixed 
as   I   am   sure   it   possesses  when  compounded  with  other 
forms;  does  monarchy,  on  its  part,   contain  nothin-  at  all 
to  recommend  it?     I  do  not  often  quote  Bolingbroke   nor 
have  his  works  m  general  left  any  permanent  impression  on 
He  is  a  presumptuous  and  a  superficial  writer 
But  he  has  one  observation  which,  in  my  opinion    is  not 
without   depth  and  solidity.       He  says  that  he  prefers    a 
monarchy  to  other  governments;   because  you  can   better 
ingraft  any   description   of  republic   on   a   monarchy  than 
anything  of  monarchy  upon  the  republican  forms      I  think 
him  perfectly  in  the  right.     The  fact  is  so  historically  and 
it  agrees  well  with  the  speculation. 

I  know  how  easy  a  topic  it  is  to  dwell  on  the  faults  of 

departed   greatness.       By   a   revolution    in    the    state     the 

fawning  sycophant  of  yesterday  is  converted  into  the  austere 

ic  of  the  present  hour.     But  steady,  independent  minds 

when  they  have  an  object  of  so  serious  a  concern  to  man- 


158  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

kind  as  government  under  their  contemplation,  will  disdain 
to  assume  the  part  of  satirists  and  declaimers.  They  will 
judge  of  human  institutions  as  they  do  of  human  characters. 
They  will  sort  out  the  good  from  the  evil,  which  is  mixed 
in  mortal  institutions,  as  it  is  in  mortal  men. 

Your  government  in  France,  though  usually,  and  I  think 
justly,  reputed  the  best  of  the  unqualified  or  ill-qualified 
monarchies,  was  still  full  of  abuses.  These  abuses  accumu 
lated  in  a  length  of  time,  as  they  must  accumulate  in  every 
monarchy  not  under  the  constant  inspection  of  a  popular 
representative.  I  am  no  stranger  to  the  faults  and  defects 
of  the  subverted  government  of  France ;  and  I  think  I  am 
not  inclined  by  nature  or  policy  to  make  a  panegyric  upon 
anything  which  is  a  just  and  natural  object  of  censure. 
But  the  question  is  not  now  of  the  vices  of  that  monarchy, 
but  of  its  existence.  Is  it  then  true  that  the  French 
government  was  such  as  to  be  incapable  or  undeserving  of 
reform  ;  so  that  it  was  of  absolute  necessity  that  the  whole 
fabric  should  be  at  once  pulled  down,  and  the  area  cleared 
for  the  erection  of  a  theoretic,  experimental  edifice  in  its 
place?  All  France  was  of  a  different  opinion  in  the 
beginning  of  the  year  1789.  The  instructions  to  the  repre 
sentatives  to  the  states-general,  from  every  district  in  that 
kingdom,  were  filled  with  projects  for  the  reformation  of 
that  government,  without  the  remotest  suggestion  of  a 
design  to  destroy  it.  Had  such  a  design  been  then  even 
insinuated,  I  believe  there  would  have  been  but  one  voice, 
and  that  voice  for  rejecting  it  with  scorn  and  horror.  Men 
have  been  sometimes  led  by  degrees,  sometimes  hurried, 
into  things  of  which,  if  they  could  have  seen  the  whole 
together,  they  never  would  have  permitted  the  most  remote 
approach.  When  those  instructions  were  given,  there  was 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  159 

no  question  but  that  abuses  existed,  and  that  they  demanded 
a  reform ;  nor  is  there  now.  In  the  interval  between  the 
instructions  and  the  Revolution,  things  changed  their  shape; 
and,  in  consequence  of  that  change,  the  true  question  at 
present  is,  Whether  those  who  would  have  reformed,  or 
those  who  have  destroyed,  are  in  the  right? 

To  hear  some  men  speak  of  the  late  monarchy  of  France, 
you  would  imagine  that  they  were  talking  of  Persia  bleeding 
under  the  ferocious  sword  of  Tahmas  Kouli  Khan ;  or  at 
least  describing  the  barbarous  anarchic  despotism  of  Turkey, 
where  the  finest  countries  in  the  most  genial  climates  in 
the  world  are  wasted  by  peace  more  than  any  countries 
have  been  worried  by  war;  where  arts  are  unknown,  where 
manufacturers  languish,  where  science  is  extinguished,  where 
agriculture  decays,  where  the  human  race  itself  melts  away 
and  perishes  under  the  eye  of  the  observer.  Was  this  the 
case  of  France  ?  I  have  no  way  of  determining  the  question 
but  by  a  reference  to  facts.  Facts  do  not  support  this 
resemblance.  Along  with  much  evil,  there  is  some  good 
in  monarchy  itself;  and  some  corrective  to  its  evil  from 
religion,  from  laws,  from  manners,  from  opinions,  the  French 
monarchy  must  have  received;  which  rendered  it  (though  by 
no  means  a  free,  and  therefore  by  no  means  a  good,  constitu- 
'  ition)  a  despotism  rather  in  appearance  than  in  reality. 

Among  the  standards  upon  which  the  effects  of  government 
1  Dn  any  country  are  to  be  estimated,  I  must  consider  the  state 
1  }f  its  population  as  not  the  least  certain.  No  country  in 
"  vhich  population  flourishes,  and  is  in  progressive  improve- 
'n  nent,  can  be  under  a  very  mischievous  government.  About 
1  ixty  years  ago,  the  Intendants  of  the  generalities  of  France 
e  inade,  with  other  matters,  a  report  of  the  population  of  their 

everal  districts.     I   have  not  the   books,  which  are   very 

,vas  ' 


i6o  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

voluminous,  by  me,  nor  do  I  know  where  to  procure  them 
(I  am  obliged  to  speak  by  memory,  and  therefore  the  less 
positively),  but  I  think  the  population  of  France  was  by 
them,  even  at  that  period,  estimated  at  twenty-two  millions 
of  souls.  At  the  end  of  the  last  century  it  had  been  generally 
calculated  at  eighteen.  On  either  of  these  estimations, 
France  was  not  ill  peopled.  M.  Neck  or,  who  is  an  authority 
for  his  own  time  at  least  equal  to  the  Intendants  for  theirs, 
reckons,  and  upon  apparently  sure  principles,  the  people  of 
France,  in  the  year  i  780,  at  twenty-four  millions  six  hundred 
and  seventy  thousand.  But  was  this  the  probable  ultimate 
term  under  the  old  establishment?  Dr.  Price  is  of  opinion 
that  the  growth  of  population  in  France  was  by  no  means  at 
its  acme  in  that  year.  I  certainly  defer  to  Dr.  Price's  autho 
rity  a  good  deal  more  in  these  speculations  than  I  do  in  his 
general  politics.  This  gentleman,  taking  ground  on  M 
Necker's  data,  is  very  confident  that  since  the  period  of  tha 
minister's  calculation,  the  French  population  has  increasec 
rapidly;  so  rapidly,  that  in  the  year  1789  he  will  not  consen 
to  rate  the  people  of  that  kingdom  at  a  lower  number  than 
thirty  millions.  After  abating  much  (and  much  I  think 
ought  to  be  abated)  from  the  sanguine  calculation  of  Dr 
Price,  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  population  of  France  did 
increase  considerably  during  this  later  period  ;  but  supposing 
that  it  increased  to  nothing  more  than  will  be  sufficient  to 
complete  the  twenty-four  millions  six  hundred  and  sevent 
thousand  to  twenty-five  millions,  still  a  population  of  twenty 
five  millions,  and  that  in  an  increasing  progress,  on  a  spaa 
of  about  twenty-seven  thousand  square  leagues,  is  immense 
It  is,  for  instance,  a  good  deal  more  than  the  proportionable 
population  of  this  island,  or  even  than  that  of  England,  th< 
best  peopled  part  of  the  united  kingdom. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  161 

It  is  not  universally  true  that  France  is  a  fertile  country. 
Considerable  tracts  of  it  are  barren,  and  labour  under  other 
natural  disadvantages.  In  the  portions  of  that  territory  where 
things  are  more  favourable,  as  far  as  I  am  able  to  discover, 
the  numbers  of  the  people  correspond  to  the  indulgence 
of  nature.1  The  Generality  of  Lisle  (this  I  admit  is  the 
strongest  example)  upon  an  extent  of  four  hundred  and  four 
leagues  and  a  half,  about  ten  years  ago,  contained  seven 
hundred  and  thirty-four  thousand  six  hundred  souls.,  which 
is  one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  seventy-two  inhabitants 
to  each  square  league.  The  middle  term  for  the  rest  of 
France  is  about  nine  hundred  inhabitants  to  the  same 
admeasurement. 

I  do  not  attribute  this  population  to  the  deposed  govern 
ment  ;  because  I  do  not  like  to  compliment  the  contrivances 
of  men  with  what  is  due  in  a  great  degree  to  the  bounty  of 
Providence.  But  that  decried  government  could  not  have 
obstructed,  most  probably  it  favoured,  the  operation  of  those 
causes  (whatever  they  were),  whether  of  nature  in  the  soil, 
or  habits  of  industry  among  the  people,  which  has  produced 
so  large  a  number  of  the  species  throughout  that  whole 
kingdom,  and  exhibited  in  some  particular  places  such 
prodigies  of  population.  I  never  will  suppose  that  fabric  of 

state  to  be  the  worst  of  all  political  institutions,  which,  by 
experience,  is  found  to  contain  a  principle  favourable  (how 
ever  latent  it  may  be)  to  the  increase  of  mankind. 

The  wealth  of  a  country  is  another,  and  no  contemptible 
standard,  by  which  we  may  judge  whether,  on  the  whole,  a 
government  be  protecting  or  destructive.  France  far  exceeds 
England  in  the  multitude  of  her  people ;  but  I  apprehend 

1  De  P Administration  des  Finances  de  la  France,  par  Mons.  Necker, 
vol.  i.,  p  288. 

II 


162  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

that  her  comparative  wealth  is  much  inferior  to  ours ;  that 
it  is  not  so  equal  in  the  distribution,  nor  so  ready  in  the 
circulation.  I  believe  the  difference  in  the  form  of  the  two 
governments  to  be  amongst  the  causes  of  this  advantage  on 
the  side  of  England.  I  speak  of  England,  not  of  the  whole 
British  dominions  ;  which,  if  compared  with  those  of  France, 
will,  in  some  degree,  weaken  the  comparative  rate  of  wealth 
upon  our  side.  But  that  wealth,  which  will  not  endure  a  com 
parison  -with  the  riches  of  England,  may  constitute  a  very 
respectable  degree  of  opulence.  M.  Necker's  book,  published 
in  1785,!  contains  an  accurate  and  interesting  collection  of 
facts  relative  to  public  economy  and  to  political  arithmetic; 
and  his  speculations  on  the  subject  are  in  general  wise  and 
liberal.  In  that  work  he  gives  an  idea  of  the  state  of  France, 
very  remote  from  the  portrait  of  a  country  whose  government 
was  a  perfect  grievance,  an  absolute  evil,  admitting  no  cure 
but  through  the  violent  and  uncertain  remedy  of  a  tota 
revolution.  He  affirms  that,  from  the  year  1726  to  the  year 
1784,  there  was  coined  at  the  mint  of  France,  in  the  species 
of  gold  and  silver,  to  the  amount  of  about  one  hundrec 
millions  of  pounds  sterling.2 

It  is  impossible  that  M.  Necker  should  be  mistaken  in  the 
amount  of  the  bullion  which  has  been  coined  in  the  mint. 
It  is  a  matter  of  official  record.  The  reasonings  of  this  able 
financier,  concerning  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  which 
remained  for  circulation,  when  he  wrote  in  1785,  that  is, 
about  four  years  before  the  deposition  and  imprisonment 
of  the  French  king,  are  not  of  equal  certainty;  but  they  are 
laid  on  grounds  so  apparently  solid,  that  it  is  not  easy  to 
refuse  a  considerable  degree  or  assent  to  his  calculation. 

1  De  r Administration  des  Finances  de  la  France,  par  Mons.  Necker. 

2  Vol.  iii. ,  chap.  8  and  chap.  9. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  163 

He  calculates  the  numeraire^  or  what  we  call  specie,  then 
actually  existing  in  France,  at  about  eighty-eight  millions 
of  the  same  English  money.  A  great  accumulation  of 
wealth  for  one  country,  large  as  that  country  is  !  M.  Necker 
was  so  far  from  considering  this  influx  of  wealth  as  likely 
to  cease,  when  he  wrote  in  1785,  that  he  presumes  upon  a 
future  annual  increase  of  two  per  cent,  upon  the  money 
brought  into  France  during  the  periods  from  which  he 
computed. 

Some  adequate  cause  must  have  originally  introduced  all 

the  money  coined  at  its  mint  into  that  kingdom  ;  and  some 

cause  as  operative  must  have  kept  at  home,  or  returned  into 

its   bosom,   such  a  vast  flood  of  treasure  as   M.   Necker 

calculates  to  remain  for  domestic  circulation.     Suppose  any 

reasonable  deductions  from  M.  Necker's  computation,  the 

remainder  must  still  amount  to  an  immense  sum.     Causes 

thus  powerful  to  acquire,  and  to  retain,  cannot  be  found  m 

discouraged  industry,   insecure   property,   and  a  positively 

destructive  government.     Indeed,  when  I  consider  the  face 

of  the  kingdom  of  France ;  the  multitude  and  opulence  of 

.her  cities;   the  useful  magnificence  of  her  spacious  high 

roads  and  bridges ;  the  opportunity  of  her  artificial  canals 

and  navigations  opening  the  conveniences  of  maritime  com- 

ejmunication  through   a  solid  continent   of  so   immense  an 

h  J extent;  when  I  turn  my  eyes  to  the  stupendous  works  of 

sjher  ports  and  harbours,  and  to  her  whole  naval  apparatus, 

nt j whether  for  war  or  trade;  when  I  bring  before  my  view  the 

jejoumber  of  her  fortifications,  constructed  with  so  bold  and 

to  (masterly  a  skill,  and  made  and  maintained  at  so  prodigious  a 

]ii.j:harge,  presenting  an  armed  front  and  impenetrable  barrier 

.fl !  o  her  enemies   upon  every   side ;    when    I   recollect    how 

'ery  small  a  part  of  that  extensive  region  is  without  cultiva- 


164  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

tion,  and  to  what  complete  perfection  the  culture  of  many 
of  the  best  productions  of  the  earth  have  been  brought  in 
France;  when  I  reflect  on  the  excellence  of  her  manu 
factures  and  fabrics,  second  to  none  but  ours,  and  in  some 
particulars  not  second;  when  I  contemplate  the  grand 
foundations  of  charity,  public  and  private;  when  I  survey 
the  state  of  all  the  arts  that  beautify  and  polish  life ;  when  I 
reckon  the  men  she  has  bred  for  extending  her  fame  in  war, 
her  able  statesmen,  the  multitude  of  her  profound  lawyers 
and  theologians,  her  philosophers,  her  critics,  her  historians 
and  antiquaries,  her  poets  and  her  orators,  sacred  and 
profane;  I  behold  in  all  this  something  which  awes  and 
commands  the  imagination,  which  checks  the  mind  on  the 
brink  of  precipitate  and  indiscriminate  censure,  and  which 
demands  that  we  should  very  seriously  examine  what  anc 
how  great  are  the  latent  vices  that  could  authorise  us  at 
once  to  level  so  spacious  a  fabric  with  the  ground.  I  do 
not  recognise  in  this  view  of  things  the  despotism  of  Turkey 
Nor  do  I  discern  the  character  of  a  government  that  has 
been,  on  the  whole,  so  oppressive,  or  so  corrupt,  or  so  negli 
gent,  as  to  be  utterly  unfit/^r  all  reformation.  I  must  think 
such  a  government  well  deserved  to  have  its  excellencies 
heightened,  its  faults  corrected,  and  its  capacities  improvec 
into  a  British  constitution. 

Whoever  has  examined  into  the  proceedings  of  that 
deposed  government  for  several  years  back,  cannot  fail  to 
have  observed,  amidst  the  inconstancy  and  fluctuation 
natural  to  courts,  an  earnest  endeavour  towards  the  pros 
perity  and  improvement  of  the  country ;  he  must  admit 
that  it  had  long  been  employed,  in  some  instances  wholly 
to  remove,  in  many  considerably  to  correct,  the  abusive 
practices  and  usages  that  had  prevailed  in  the  state;  and 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  165 

that  even  the  unlimited  power  of  the  sovereign  over  the 
persons  of  his  subjects,  inconsistent,  as  undoubtedly  it  was, 
with  law  and  liberty,  had  yet  been  every  day  growing  more 
mitigated  in  the  exercise.      So  far  from  refusing  itself  to 
reformation,  that  government  was  open,  with  a  censurable 
degree  of  facility,  to  all  sorts  of  projects  and  projectors  on 
the  subject.     Rather  too  much  countenance  was  given  to 
the  spirit  of  innovation,  which  soon  was  turned  against  those 
who  fostered  it,  and  ended  in  their  ruin.     It  is  but  cold, 
and  no  very  flattering,  justice  to  that  fallen  monarchy,  to 
say  that,  for  many  years,  it  trespassed  more  by  levity  and 
want  of  judgment  in  several  of  its  schemes,  than  from  any 
defect  in  diligence  or  in   public  spirit.      To  compare  the 
government  of  France  for  the  last  fifteen  or  sixteen  years 
with  wise  and  well-constituted  establishments  during  that,  or 
during  any  period,  is  not   to   act  with  fairness.     But  if  in 
point  of  prodigality  in  the  expenditure  of  money,  or  in  point 
of  rigour  in  the  exercise  of  power,  it  be  compared  with  any 
of  the  former  reigns,  I  believe  candid  judges  will  give  little 
credit  to  the  good  intentions  of  those  who  dwell  perpetually 
on  the  donations  to  favourites,  or  on  the  expenses  of  the 
court,  or  on  the  horrors  of  the  Bastile,  in  the  reign  of  Louis 
the  Sixteenth.1 

Whether  the  system,  if  it  deserves  such  a  name,  now 
built  on  the  ruins  of  that  ancient  monarchy,  will  be  able  to 
give  a  better  account  of  the  population  and  wealth  of  the 
country,  which  it  has  taken  under  its  care,  is  a  matter  very 
doubtful.  Instead  of  improving  by  the  change,  I  apprehend 

1  The  world  is  obliged  to  M.  de  Calonne  for  the  pains  he  has  taken 
to  refute  the  scandalous  exaggerations  relative   to  some  of  the  royal 
expenses,  and  to  detect  the  fallacious  account  given  of  pensions,  for  the 
|  wicked  purpose  of  provoking  the  populace  to  all  sorts  of  crimes. 


166  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

that  a  long  series  of  years  must  be  told,  before  it  can  recover 
in  any  degree  the  effects  of  this  philosophic  revolution,  and 
before  the  nation  can  be  replaced  on  its  former  footing.  If 
Dr.  Price  should  think  fit,  a  few  years  hence,  to  favour  us 
with  an  estimate  of  the  population  of  France,  he  will  hardly 
be  able  to  make  up  his  tale  of  thirty  millions  of  souls,  as 
computed  in  1789,  or  the  Assembly's  computation  of  twenty- 
six  millions  of  that  year;  or  even  M.  Necker's  twenty-five 
millions  in  1780.  I  hear  that  there  are  considerable 
emigrations  from  France ;  and  that  many,  quitting  that 
voluptuous  climate,  and  that  seductive  Cii  cean  liberty,  have 
taken  refuge  in  the  frozen  regions,  and  under  the  British 
despotism,  of  Canada. 

In  the  present  disappearance  of  coin,  no  person  could 
think  it  the  same  country,  in  which  the  present  minister 
of  the  finances  has  been  able  to  discover  fourscore  millions 
sterling  in  specie.  From  its  general  aspect  one  would  con 
clude  that  it  had  been  for  some  time  past  under  the  special 
direction  of  the  learned  academicians  of  Laputa  and  Balni- 
barbi.1  Already  the  population  of  Paris  has  so  declined, 
that  M.  Necker  stated  to  the  National  Assembly  the  pro 
vision  to  be  made  for  its  subsistence  at  a  fifth  less  than  what 
had  formerly  been  found  requisite.2  It  is  said  (and  I  have 
never  heard  it  contradicted)  that  a  hundred  thousand  people 
are  out  of  employment  in  that  city,  though  it  is  become  the- 
seat  of  the  imprisoned  court  and  National  Assembly.  No 
thing,  I  am  credibly  informed,  can  exceed  the  shocking  and 
disgusting  spectacle  of  mendicancy  displayed  in  that  capital. 

1  See  Gulliver's  Travels  for  the  idea  of  countries  governed  by  philo 
sophers. 

2  M.  de  Calonne  states  the  falling  off  of  the  population  of  Paris  as  far 
more  considerable ;  and  it  may  be  so,  since  the  period  of  M.   Necker's 
calculation. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  167 

Indeed  the  votes  of  the  National  Assembly  leave  no  doubt 
of  the  fact.  They  have  lately  appointed  a  standing  com 
mittee  of  mendicancy.  They  are  contriving  at  once  a  vigorous 
police  on  this  subject,  and,  for  the  first  time,  the  imposition 
of  a  tax  to  maintain  the  poor,  for  whose  present  relief  great 
sums  appear  on  the  face  of  the  public  accounts  of  the  year.1 
In  the  meantime  the  leaders  of  the  legislative  clubs  and 
coffee-houses  are  intoxicated  with  admiration  at  their  own 
wisdom  and  ability.  They  speak  with  the  most  sovereign 

1  Travaux  de  charite  pour  subvenir 

au  manque  de  travail  a  Paris  et         Livres.  £         s.   d. 

dans  les  provinces  3,866,920-  161,121  13  4 

Destruction  de  vagabondage  et  de  la 

mendicite  -  1,671,417  -  69,642  7  6 

Primes  pour  1'irnportation  de  grains  5,671,907  --  236,329  9  2 
Depenses  relatives  aux  subsistances, 

deduction  fait  des   recouvrements 

qui  ont  eu  lieu      -  -39,871,790  —  1,661,32411     8 


Total         Liv.  51,082,034— ,£2,128,418     i     8 

When  I  sent  this  book  to  the  press,  I  entertained  some  doubt  con 
cerning  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  last  article  in  the  above  accounts, 
which  is  only  under  a  general  head,  without  any  detail.  Since  then  I 
have  seen  M.  de  Calonnc's  work.  I  must  think  it  a  great  loss  to  me 
that  I  had  not  that  advantage  earlier.  M.  de  Calonne  thinks  this  article 
to  be  on  account  of  general  subsistence  ;  but  as  he  is  not  able  to 
comprehend  how  so  great  a  loss  as  upwards  of  £1,661,000  sterling  could 
be  sustained  on  the  difference  between  the  price  and  the  sale  of  grain, 
he  seems  to  attribute  this  enormous  head  of  charge  to  secret  expenses 
of  the  Revolution.  I  cannot  say  anything  positively  on  that  subject. 
The  reader  is  capable  of  judging,  by  the  aggregate  of  these  immense 
charges,  on  the  state  and  condition  of  France  ;  and  the  system  of  public 
economy  adopted  in  that  nation.  These  articles  of  account  produced 
no  inquiry  or  discussion  in  the  National  Assembly. 


1 68  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

contempt  of  the  rest  of  the  world.  They  tell  the  people  to 
comfort  them  in  the  rags  with  which  they  have  clothed  them, 
that  they  are  a  nation  of  philosophers ;  and,  sometimes,  by 
all  the  arts  of  quackish  parade,  by  show,  tumult,  and  bustle, 
sometimes  by  the  alarms  of  plots  and  invasions,  they  attempt 
to  drown  the  cries  of  indigence,  and  to  divert  the  eyes  of 
the  observer  from  the  ruin  and  wretchedness  of  the  state. 
A  brave  people  will  certainly  prefer  liberty  accompanied 
with  a  virtuous  poverty  to  a  depraved  and  wealthy  servitude. 
But  before  the  price  of  comfort  and  opulence  is  paid,  one 
ought  to  be  pretty  sure  it  is  real  liberty  which  is  purchased, 
and  that  she  is  to  be  purchased  at  no  other  price.  I  shall 
always,  however,  consider  that  liberty  as  very  equivocal  in 
her  appearance,  which  has  not  wisdom  and  justice  for  her 
companions;  and  does  not  lead  prosperity  and  plenty  in 
her  train. 

The  advocates  for  this  Revolution,  not  satisfied  with 
exaggerating  the  vices  of  their  ancient  government,  strike  at 
the  fame  of  their  country  itself,  by  painting  almost  all  that 
could  have  attracted  the  attention  of  strangers,  I  mean  their 
nobility  and  their  clergy,  as  objects  of  horror.  If  this  were 
only  a  libel,  there  had  not  been  much  in  it.  But  it  has 
practical  consequences.  Had  your  nobility  and  gentry,  who 
formed  the  great  body  of  your  landed  men,  and  the  whole 
of  your  military  officers,  resembled  those  of  Germany  at  the 
period  when  the  Hanse-towns  were  necessitated  to  confeder 
ate  against  the  nobles  in  defence  of  their  property — had  they 
been  like  the  Orsini  and  Vitelli  in  Italy,  who  used  to  sally 
from  their  fortified  dens  to  rob  the  trader  and  traveller — had 
they  been  such  as  the  Mamelukes  in  Egypt,  or  the  Nayres 
on  the  coast  of  Malabar,  I  do  admit  that  too  critical  an 
inquiry  might  not  be  advisable  into  the  means  of  freeing 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  169 

the  world  from  such  a  nuisance.  The  statues  of  Equity 
and  Mercy  might  be  veiled  for  a  moment.  The  tenderest 
minds,  confounded  with  the  dreadful  exigence  in  which 
morality  submits  to  the  suspension  of  its  own  rules  in  favour 
of  its  own  principles,  might  turn  aside  whilst  fraud  and 
violence  were  accomplishing  the  destruction  of  a  pretended 
nobility  which  disgraced,  whilst  it  persecuted,  human  nature. 
The  persons  most  abhorrent  from  blood,  and  treason,  and 
arbitrary  confiscation,  might  remain  silent  spectators  of  this 
civil  war  between  the  vices. 

But  did  the  privileged  nobility  who  met  under  the  king's 
precept  at  Versailles,  in  1789,  or  their  constituents,  deserve 
to  be  looked  on  as  the  Nay  res  or  Mamelukes  of  this  age,  or 
as  the  Orsim'sind  Vitelli  of  ancient  times?  If  I  had  then 
asked  the  question  I  should  have  passed  for  a  madman. 
What  have  they  since  done  that  they  were  to  be  driven  into 
exile,  that  their  persons  should  be  hunted  about,  mangled, 
and  tortured,  their  families  dispersed,  their  houses  laid  in 
ashes,  and  that  their  order  should  be  abolished,  and  the 
memory  of  it,  if  possible,  extinguished,  by  ordaining  them  to 
change  the  very  names  by  which  they  were  usually  known  ? 
Read  their  instructions  to  their  representatives.  They 
breathe  the  spirit  of  liberty  as  warmly,  and  they  recommend 
reformation  as  strongly,  as  any  other  order.  Their  privileges 
relative  to  contribution  were  voluntarily  surrendered ;  as  the 
king,  from  the  beginning,  surrendered  all  pretence  to  a  right 
of  taxation.  Upon  a  free  constitution  there  was  but  one 
opinion  in  France.  The  absolute  monarchy  was  at  an  end. 
It  breathed  its  last,  without  a  groan,  without  struggle, 
without  convulsion.  All  the  struggle,  all  the  dissension, 
arose  afterwards  upon  the  preference  of  a  despotic  democracy 
to  a  government  of  reciprocal  control.  The  triumph  of  the 


170  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

victorious    party    was    over    the    principles    of   a    British 
constitution. 

I  have  observed  the  affectation,  which  for  many  years  past 
has  prevailed  in  Paris  even  to  a  degree  perfectly  childish,  of 
idolising  the  memory  of  your  Henry  the  Fourth.  If  any 
thing  could  put  one  out  of  humour  with  that  ornament  to 
the  kingly  character,  it  would  he  this  overdone  style  of 
insidious  panegyric.  The  persons  who  have  worked  this 
engine  the  most  busily  are  those  who  have  ended  their 
panegyrics  in  dethroning  his  successor  and  descendant;  a 
man  as  good-natured,  at  the  least,  as  Henry  the  Fourth; 
altogether  as  fond  of  his  people ;  and  who  has  done  infinitely 
more  to  correct  the  ancient  vices  of  the  state  than  that  great 
monarch  did,  or  we  are  sure  he  ever  meant  to  do.  Well  it 
is  for  his  panegyrists  that  they  have  not  him  to  deal  with. 
For  Henry  of  Navarre  was  a  resolute,  active,  and  politic 
prince.  He  possessed  indeed  great  humanity  and  mildness  ; 
but  a  humanity  and  mildness  that  never  stood  in  the  way 
of  his  interests.  He  never  sought  to  be  loved  without 
putting  himself  first  in  a  condition  to  be  feared.  He  used 
soft  language  with  determined  conduct.  He  asserted  and 
maintained  his  authority  in  the  gross,  and  distributed  his  acts 
of  concession  only  in  the  detail.  He  spent  the  income  of 
his  prerogative  nobly;  but  he  took  care  not  to  break  in 
upon  the  capital ;  never  abandoning  for  a  moment  any  of 
the  claims  which  he  made  under  the  fundamental  laws,  nor 
sparing  to  shed  the  blood  of  those  who  opposed  him, 
often  in  the  field,  sometimes  upon  the  scaffold.  Because 
he  knew  how  to  make  his  virtues  respected  by  the 
ungrateful,  he  has  merited  the  praises  of  those  whom,  if 
they  had  lived  in  his  time,  he  would  have  shut  up  in 
the  Bastile,  and  brought  to  punishment  along  with  the 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  171 

regicides  whom    he  hanged  after  he  had   famished   Paris 
into  a  surrender. 

If  these  panegyrists  are  in  earnest  in  their  admiration  of 
Henry  the  Fourth,  they  must  remember  that  they  cannot 
think  more  highly  of  him  than  he  did  of  the  noblesse  of 
France;  whose  virtue,  honour,  courage,  patriotism,  and 
loyalty  were  his  constant  theme. 

But  the  nobility  of  France  are  degenerated  since  the  days 
of  Henry  the  Fourth.  That  is  possible.  But  it  is  more  than 
I  can  believe  to  be  true  in  any  great  degree.  I  do  not 
pretend  to  know  France  as  correctly  as  some  others ;  but  I 
have  endeavoured  through  my  whole  life  to  make  myself 
acquainted  with  human  nature;  otherwise  I  should  be  unfit 
to  take  even  my  humble  part  in  the  service  of  mankind.  In 
that  study  I  could  not  pass  by  a  vast  portion  of  our  nature, 
as  it  appeared  modified  in  a  country  but  twenty-four  miles 
from  the  shore  of  this  island.  On  my  best  observation, 
compared  with  my  best  inquiries,  I  found  your  nobility  for 
the  greater  part  composed  of  men  of  high  spirit,  and  of  a 
delicate  sense  of  honour,  both  with  regard  to  themselves 
individually,  and  with  regard  to  their  whole  corps,  over  whom 
they  kept,  beyond  what  is  common  in  other  countries,  a 
censorial  eye.  They  were  tolerably  well  bred ;  very  officious, 
humane,  and  hospitable ;  in  their  conversation  frank  and 
open ;  with  a  good  military  tone ;  and  reasonably  tinctured 
with  literature,  particularly  of  the  authors  in  their  own 
language.  Many  had  pretensions  far  above  this  description. 
I  speak  of  those  who  were  generally  met  with. 

As  to  their  behaviour  to  the  inferior  classes,  they  appeared 
to  me  to  comport  themselves  towards  them  with  good  nature, 
and  with  something  more  nearly  approaching  to  familiarity 
;han  is  generally  practised  with  us  in  the  intercourse 


172  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

between  the  higher  and  lower  ranks  of  life.  To  strike  any 
person,  even  in  the  most  abject  condition,  was  a  thing  in 
a  manner  unknown,  and  would  be  highly  disgraceful.  In 
stances  of  other  ill-treatment  of  the  humble  part  of  the 
community  were  rare:  and  as  to  attacks  made  upon  the 
property  or  the  personal  liberty  of  the  commons,  I  never 
heard  of  any  whatsoever  from  them ;  nor,  whilst  the  laws 
were  in  vigour  under  the  ancient  government,  would  such 
tyranny  in  subjects  have  been  permitted.  As  men  of  landed 
estates,  I  had  no  fault  to  find  with  their  conduct,  though 
much  to  reprehend,  and  much  to  wish  changed,  in  many  of 
the  old  tenures.  Where  the  letting  of  their  land  was  by  rent, 
I  could  not  discover  that  their  agreements  with  their  farmers 
were  oppressive ;  nor  when  they  were  in  partnership  with 
the  farmer,  as  often  was  the  case,  have  I  heard  that  they  had 
taken  the  lion's  share.  The  proportions  seemed  not 
inequitable.  There  might  be  exceptions ;  but  certainly  they 
were  exceptions  only.  I  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  in 
these  respects  the  landed  noblesse  of  France  were  worse  than 
the  landed  gentry  of  this  country ;  certainly  in  no  respect 
more  vexatious  than  the  landholders,  not  noble,  of  their  own 
nation.  In  cities  the  nobility  had  no  manner  of  power;  in 
the  country  very  little.  You  know,  Sir,  that  much  of  the 
civil  government,  and  the  police  in  the  most  essential  parts, 
was  not  in  the  hands  of  that  nobility  which  presents  itself 
first  to  our  consideration.  The  revenue,  the  system  and 
collection  of  which  were  the  most  grievous  parts  of  the 
French  government,  was  not  administered  by  the  men  of  the 
sword  ;  nor  were  they  answerable  for  the  vices  of  its  principle 
or  the  vexations,  where  any  such  existed,  in  its  management. 
Denying,  as  I  am  well  warranted  to  do,  that  the  nobility 
had  any  considerable  share  in  the  oppression  of  the  people 


REVOLUTION  IN   FRANCE.  173 

in  cases  in  which  real  oppression  existed,  I  am  ready  to  admit 
that  they  were  not  without  considerable  faults  and  errors.  A 
foolish  imitation  of  the  worst  part  of  the  manners  of  England, 
which  impaired  their  natural  character,  without  substituting 
in  its  place  what  perhaps  they  meant  to  copy,  has  certainly 
rendered  them  worse  than  formerly  they  were.  Habitual 
dissoluteness  of  manners  continued  beyond  the  pardonable 
period  of  life,  was  more  common  amongst  them  than  it  is 
with  us ;  and  it  reigned  with  the  less  hope  of  remedy,  though 
possibly  with  something  of  less  mischief,  by  being  covered 
with  more  exterior  decorum.  They  countenanced  too  much 
that  licentious  philosophy  which  has  helped  to  bring  on  their 
ruin.  There  was  another  error  amongst  them  more  fatal. 
Those  of  the  commons  who  approached  to  or  exceeded 
many  of  the  nobility  in  point  of  wealth,  were  not  fully  ad 
mitted  to  the  rank  and  estimation  which  wealth,  in  reason 
and  good  policy,  ought  to  bestow  in  every  country ;  though 
I  think  not  equally  with  that  of  other  nobility.  The  two  kinds 
of  aristocracy  were  too  punctiliously  kept  asunder;  less  so, 
however,  than  in  Germany  and  some  other  nations. 

This  separation,  as  I  have  already  taken  the  liberty  of 
suggesting  to  you,  1  conceive  to  be  one  principal  cause  of 
the  destruction  of  the  old  nobility.  The  military,  particularly, 
was  too  exclusively  reserved  for  men  of  family.  But,  after 
all,  this  was  an  error  of  opinion,  which  a  conflicting  opinion 
would  have  rectified.  A  permanent  assembly,  in  which  the 
commons  had  their  share  of  power,  would  soon  abolish 
whatever  was  too  invidious  and  insulting  in  these  distinctions; 
and  even  the  faults  in  the  morals  of  the  nobility  would  have 
been  probably  corrected,  by  the  greater  varieties  of  occupa 
tion  and  pursuit  to  which  a  constitution  by  orders  would 
have  given  rise. 


i74  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

All  this  violent  cry  against  the  nobility  I  take  to  be  a  mere 
work  of  art.  To  be  honoured  and  even  privileged  by  the 
laws,  opinions,  and  inveterate  usages  of  our  country,  growing 
out  of  the  prejudice  of  ages,  has  nothing  to  provoke  horror 
and  indignation  in  any  man.  Even  to  be  too  tenacious 
of  those  privileges  is  not  absolutely  a  crime.  The  strong 
struggle  in  every  individual  to  preserve  possession  of  what 
he  has  found  to  belong  to  him,  and  to  distinguish  him,  is  one 
of  the  securities  against  injustice  and  despotism  implanted  in 
our  nature.  It  operates  as  an  instinct  to  secure  property, 
and  to  preserve  communities  in  a  settled  state.  What  is 
there  to  shock  in  this  ?  Nobility  is  a  graceful  ornament  to 
the  civil  order.  It  is  the  Corinthian  capital  of  polished 
society.  Omnes  boni  nobilitati  semper  favetnus,  was  the  say 
ing  of  a  wise  and  good  man.  It  is  indeed  one  sign  of  a 
liberal  and  benevolent  mind  to  incline  to  it  with  some  sort  of 
partial  propensity.  He  feels  no  ennobling  principle  in  his 
own  heart,  who  wishes  to  level  all  the  artificial  institutions 
which  have  been  adopted  for  giving  a  body  to  opinion,  and 
permanence  to  fugitive  esteem.  It  is  a  sour,  malignant, 
envious  disposition,  without  taste  for  the  reality,  or  for  any 
image  or  representation  of  virtue,  that  sees  with  joy  the 
unmerited  fall  of  what  had  long  flourished  in  splendour  and 
in  honour.  I  do  not  like  to  see  anything  destroyed;  any 
void  produced  in  society ;  any  ruin  on  the  face  of  the  land. 
It  was  therefore  with  no  disappointment  or  dissatisfaction 
that  my  inquiries  and  observations  did  not  present  to  me 
any  incorrigible  vices  in  the  noblesse  of  France,  or  any 
abuse  which  could  not  be  removed  by  a  reform  very  short 
of  abolition.  Your  noblesse  did  not  deserve  punishment  : 
but  to  degrade  is  to  punish. 

It  was  with  the  same  satisfaction  I  found  that  the  result 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  175 

of  my  inquiry  concerning  your  clergy  was  not  dissimilar.  It 
is  no  soothing  news  to  my  ears,  that  great  bodies  of  men  are 
incurably  corrupt.  It  is  not  with  much  credulity  I  listen  to 
any,  when  they  speak  evil  of  those  whom  they  are  going  to 
plunder.  I  rather  suspect  that  vices  are  feigned  or  exaggerated, 
when  profit  is  looked  for  in  their  punishment.  An  enemy 
is  a  bad  witness ;  a  robber  is  a  worse.  Vices  and  abuses 
there  were  undoubtedly  in  that  order,  and  must  be.  It  was 
an  old  establishment,  and  not  frequently  revised.  But  I  saw 
no  crimes  in  the  individuals  that  merited  confiscation  of 
their  substance,  nor  those  cruel  insults  and  degradations,  and 
that  unnatural  persecution,  which  have  been  substituted  in 
the  place  of  meliorating  regulation. 

If  there  had  been  any  just  cause  for  this  new  religious 
persecution,  the  atheistic  libellers,  who  act  as  trumpeters  to 
animate  the  populace  to  plunder,  do  not  love  any  body  so 
much  as  not  to  dwell  with  complacence  on  the  vices  of  the 
|  existing  clergy.  This  they  have  not  done.  They  find 
!  themselves  obliged  to  rake  into  the  histories  of  former  ages 
I  (which  they  have  ransacked  with  a  malignant  and  profligate 
industry)  for  every  instance  of  oppression  and  persecution 
which  has  been  made  by  that  body  or  in  its  favour,  in  order 
to  justify,  upon  very  iniquitous,  because  very  illogical, 
principles  of  retaliation,  their  own  persecutions,  and  their 
own  cruelties.  After  destroying  all  other  genealogies  and 
family  distinctions,  they  invent  a  sort  of  pedigree  of  crimes. 
It  is  not  very  just  to  chastise  men  for  the  offences  of  their 
natural  ancestors:  but  to  take  the  fiction  of  ancestry  in  a 
corporate  succession,  as  a  ground  for  punishing  men  who 
have  no  relation  to  guilty  acts,  except  in  names  and  general 
descriptions,  is  a  sort  of  refinement  in  injustice  belonging 
to  the  philosophy  of  this  enlightened  age.  The  Assembly 


176  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

punishes  men,  many,  if  not  most,  of  whom  abhor  the  violent 
conduct  of  ecclesiastics  in  former  times  as  much  as  their 
present  persecutors  can  do,  and  who  would  be  as  loud  and 
as  strong  in  the  expression  of  that  sense,  if  they  were  not 
well  aware  of  the  purposes  for  which  all  this  declamation  is 
employed. 

Corporate  bodies  are  immortal  for  the  good  of  the  mem 
bers,  but  not  for  their  punishment.  Nations  themselves 
are  such  corporations.  As  well  might  we  in  England  think 
of  waging  inexpiable  war  upon  all  Frenchmen  for  the  evils 
which  they  have  brought  upon  us  in  the  several  periods  of 
our  mutual  hostilities.  You  might,  on  your  part,  think 
yourselves  justified  in  falling  upon  all  Englishmen  on 
account  of  the  unparalleled  calamities  brought  on  the 
people  of  France  by  the  unjust  invasions  of  our  Henrys 
and  our  Edwards.  Indeed  we  should  be  mutually  justified 
in  this  exterminatory  war  upon  each  other,  full  as  much  as 
you  are  in  the  unprovoked  persecution  of  your  present 
countrymen,  on  account  of  the  conduct  of  men  of  the  same 
name  in  other  times. 

We  do  not  draw  the  moral  lessons  we  might  from  history. 
On  the  contrary,  without  care  it  may  be  used  to  vitiate 
our  minds  and  to  destroy  our  happiness.  In  history  a  great 
volume  is  unrolled  for  our  instruction,  drawing  the  materials 
of  future  wisdom  from  the  past  errors  and  infirmities  of 
mankind.  It  may,  in  the  perversion,  serve  for  a  magazine, 
furnishing  offensive  and  defensive  weapons  for  parties  in 
church  and  state,  and  supplying  the  means  of  keeping  alive, 
or  reviving,  dissensions  and  animosities,  and  adding  fuel  to 
civil  fury.  History  consists,  for  the  greater  part,  of  the 
miseries  brought  upon  the  world  by  pride,  ambition, 
avarice,  revenge,  lust,  sedition,  hypocrisy,  ungoverned  zeal, 


REVOLUTION  IN   FRANCE.  177 

and  all  the  train  of  disorderly  appetites  which  shake  the 
public  with  the  same 

"  troublous  storms  that  toss 
The  private  state,  and  render  life  unsweet." 

These  vices  are  the  causes  of  those  storms.  Religion, 
morals,  laws,  prerogatives,  privileges,  liberties,  rights  of 
men,  are  the  pretexts.  The  pretexts  are  always  found  in 
some  specious  appearance  of  a  real  good.  You  would  not 

j  secure  men  from  tyranny  and  sedition,  by  rooting  out  of 
the  mind  the  principles  to  which  these  fraudulent  pretexts 
apply?  If  you  did,  you  would  root  out  everything  that  is 
valuable  in  the  human  breast.  As  these  are  the  pretexts, 
so  the  ordinary  actors  and  instruments  in  great  public  evils 
are  kings,  priests,  magistrates,  senates,  parliaments,  national 

I  assemblies,  judges,  and  captains.  You  would  not  cure  the 
evil  by  resolving  that  there  should  be  no  more  monarchs, 
nor  ministers  of  state,  nor  of  the  gospel;  no  interpreters  of 
aw;  no  general  officers;  no  public  councils.  You  might 
change  the  names.  The  things  in  some  shape  must  remain. 
A  certain  quantum  of  power  must  always  exist  in  the  com 
munity,  in  some  hands,  and  under  some  appellation.  Wise 
men  will  apply  their  remedies  to  vices,  not  to  names;  to 
the  causes  of  evil  which  are  permanent,  not  to  the  occasional 
organs  by  which  they  act,  and  the  transitory  modes  in  which 
they  appear.  Otherwise  you  will  be  wise  historically,  a  fqpl 
n  practice.  Seldom  have  two  ages  the.  same  fashion  in 
their  pretexts  and  the  same  modes  of  mischief.  Wickedness 
s  a  little  more  inventive.  Whilst  you  are  discussing  fashion, 
the  fashion  is  gone  by.  The  very  same  vice  assumes  a  new 
body.  The  spirit  transmigrates;  and,  far  from  losing  its 
Drinciple  of  life  by  the  change  of  its  appearance,  it  is 

12 


i78  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

renovated  in  its  new  organs  with  afresh  vigour  of  a  juvenile 
activity.  It  walks  abroad,  it  continues  its  ravages,  whilst 
you  are  gibbeting  the  carcase,  or  demolishing  the  tomb. 
You  are  terrifying  yourselves  with  ghosts  and  apparitions, 
whilst  your  house  is  the  haunt  of  robbers.  It  is  thus  with 
all  those  who,  attending  only  to  the  shell  and  husk  of 
history,  think  they  are  waging  war  with  intolerance,  pride, 
and  cruelty,  whilst,  under  colour  of  abhorring  the  ill 
principles  of  antiquated  parties,  they  are  authorising  and 
feeding  the  same  odious  vices  in  different  factions,  and 
perhaps  in  worse. 

Your  citizens  of  Paris  formerly  had  lent  themselves  as 
the  ready  instruments  to  slaughter  the  followers  of  Calvin, 
at  the  infamous  massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew.  What  should 
we  say  to  those  who  could  think  of  retaliating  on  the 
Parisians  of  this  day  the  abominations  and  horrors  of  that 
time?  They  are  indeed  brought  to  abhor  that  massacre. 
Ferocious  as  they  are,  it  is  not  difficult  to  make  them 
dislike  it;  because  the  politicians  and  fashionable  teachers 
have  no  interest  in  giving  their  passions  exactly  the  same 
direction.  Still,  however,  they  find  it  their  interest  to  keep 
the  same  savage  dispositions  alive.  It  was  but  the  other 
day  that  they  caused  this  very  massacre  to  be  acted  on  the 
stage  for  the  diversion  of  the  descendants  of  those  who 
committed  it.  In  this  tragic  farce  they  produced  the 
cardinal  of  Lorraine  in  his  robes  of  function,  ordering 
general  slaughter.  Was  this  spectacle  intended  to  make 
the  Parisians  abhor  persecution,  and  loathe  the  effusion  of 
blood? — No;  it  was  to  teach  them  to  persecute  their  own 
pastors;  it  was  to  excite  them,  by  raising  a  disgust  and 
horror  of  their  clergy,  to  an  alacrity  in  hunting  down  to 
destruction  an  order  which,  if  it  ought  to  exist  at  all,  ought 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  179 

to  exist  not  only  in  safety,  but  in  reverence.  It  was  to 
stimulate  their  cannibal  appetites  (which  one  would  think 
had  been  gorged  sufficiently)  by  variety  and  seasoning;  and 
to  quicken  them  to  an  alertness  in  new  murders  and 
massacres,  if  it  should  suit  the  purpose  of  the  Guises  of  the 
day.  An  assembly,  in  which  sat  a  multitude  of  priests  and 
prelates,  was  obliged  to  suffer  this  indignity  at  its  door. 
The  author  was  not  sent  to  the  galleys,  nor  the  players  to 
the  house  of  correction.  Not  long  after  this  exhibition, 
those  players  came  forward  to  the  Assembly  to  claim  the 
rites  of  that  very  religion  which  they  had  dared  to  expose, 
and  to  show  their  prostituted  faces  in  the  senate,  whilst  the 
archbishop  of  Paris,  whose  function  was  known  to  his 
people  only  by  his  prayers  and  benedictions,  and  his  wealth 
only  by  his  alms,  is  forced  to  abandon  his  house,  and  to 
fly  from  his  flock  (as  from  ravenous  wolves),  because, 
truly,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  the  cardinal  of  Lorraine  was 
a  rebel  and  a  murderer.1 

Such  is  the  effect  of  the  perversion  of  history  by  those 
who,  for  the  same  nefarious  purposes,  have  perverted  every 
other  part  of  learning.  But  those  who  will  stand  upon  that 
elevation  of  reason,  which  places  centuries  under  our  eye, 
and  brings  things  to  the  true  point  of  comparison,  which 
obscures  little  names,  and  effaces  the  colours  of  little 
parties,  and  to  which  nothing  can  ascend  but  the  spirit  and 
moral  quality  of  human  actions,  will  say  to  the  teachers 
of  the  Palais  Royal,— The  cardinal  of  Lorraine  was  the 
murderer  of  the  sixteenth  century,  you  have  the  glory  of 
being  the  murderers  in  the  eighteenth;  and  this  is  the  only 
difference  between  you.  But  history  in  the  nineteenth 
1  This  is  on  a  supposition  of  the  truth  of  this  story,  but  he  was  not 
in  France  at  the  time.  One  name  serves  as  well  as  another. 


iSo  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

century,  better  understood,  and  better  employed,  will,  I 
trust,  teach  a  civilised  posterity  to  abhor  the  misdeeds  of 
both  these  barbarous  ages.  It  will  teach  future  priests  and 
magistrates  not  to  retaliate  upon  the  speculative  and  in 
active  atheists  of  future  times,  the  enormities  committed 
by  the  present  practical  zealots  and  furious  fanatics  of  that 
wretched  error,  which,  in  its  quiescent  state,  is  more  than 
punished,  whenever  it  is  embraced.  It  will  teach  posterity 
not  to  make  war  upon  either  religion  or  philosophy,  for  the 
abuse  which  the  hypocrites  of  both  have  made  of  the  two 
most  valuable  blessings  conferred  upon  us  by  the  bounty  of 
the  universal  Patron,  who  in  all  things  eminently  favours 
and  protects  the  race  of  man. 

If  your  clergy,  or  any  clergy,  should  show  themselves 
vicious  beyond  the  fair  bounds  allowed  to  human  infirmity, 
and  to  those  professional  faults  which  can  hardly  be 
separated  from  professional  virtues,  though  their  vices 
never  can  countenance  the  exercise  of  oppression,  I  do 
admit  that  they  would  naturally  have  the  effect  of  abating 
very  much  of  our  indignation  against  the  tyrants  who  exceed 
measure  and  justice  in  their  punishment.  I  can  allow  in 
clergymen,  through  all  their  divisions,  some  tenaciousness 
of  their  own  opinion,  some  overflowings  of  zeal  for  its 
propagation,  some  predilection  to  their  own  state  and  office, 
some  attachment  to  the  interest  of  their  own  corps,  some 
preference  to  those  who  listen  with  docility  to  their  doctrines, 
beyond  those  who  scorn  and  deride  them.  I  allow  all  this, 
because  I  am  a  man  who  have  to  deal  with  men,  and  who 
would  not,  through  a  violence  of  toleration,  run  into  the 
greatest  of  all  intolerance.  I  must  bear  with  infirmities 
until  they  fester  into  crimes. 

Undoubtedly,  the  natural  progress  of  the  passions,  from 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  181 

frailty  to  vice,  ought  to  be  prevented  by  a  watchful  eye  and 
a  firm  hand.  But  is  it  true  that  the  body  of  your  clergy 
had  past  those  limits  of  a  just  allowance?  From  the 
general  style  of  your  late  publications  of  all  sorts,  one  would 
be  led  to  believe  that  your  clergy  in  France  were  a  sort  of 
monsters  ;  a  horrible  composition  of  superstition,  ignorance, 
sloth,  fraud,  avarice,  and  tyranny.  But  is  this  true  ?  Is  it 
true,  that  the  lapse  ot  time,  the  cessation  of  conflicting 
interests,  the  woeful  experience  of  the  evils  resulting  from 
party  rage,  have  had  no  sort  of  influence  gradually  to  meliorate 
their  minds?  Is  it  true,  that  they  were  daily  renewing 
invasions  on  the  civil  power,  troubling  the  domestic  quiet  of 
their  country,  and  rendering  the  operations  of  its  govern 
ment  feeble  and  precarious  ?  Is  it  true,  that  the  clergy  of 
our  times  have  pressed  down  the  laity  with  an  iron  hand, 
and  were,  in  all  places,  lighting  up  the  fires  of  a  savage 
persecution  ?  Did  they  by  every  fraud  endeavour  to 
increase  their  estates  ?  Did  they  use  to  exceed  the  due 
demands  on  estates  that  were  their  own  ?  Or,  rigidly 
screwing  up  right  into  wrong,  did  they  convert  a  legal  claim 
into  a  vexatious  extortion  ?  When  not  possessed  of  power, 
were  they  filled  with  the  vices  of  those  who  envy  it  ?  Were 
they  inflamed  with  a  violent,  litigious  spirit  of  controversy  ? 
Goaded  on  with  the  ambition  of  intellectual  sovereignty, 
were  they  ready  to  fly  in  the  face  of  all  magistracy,  to  fire 
s,  j  churches,  to  massacre  the  priests  of  other  descriptions,  to 
10  jpull  down  altars,  and  to  make  their  way  over  the  ruins  of 
ubverted  governments  to  an  empire  of  doctrine,  sometimes 
lattering,  sometimes  forcing,  the  consciences  of  men  from 
he  jurisdiction  of  public  institutions  into  a  submission  to 
heir  personal  authority,  beginning  with  a  claim  of  liberty, 
md  ending  with  an  abuse  of  powrer? 


182  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

These,  or  some  of  these,  were  the  vices  objected,  and  not 
wholly  without  foundation,  to  several  of  the  churchmen  of 
former  times,  who  belonged  to  the  two  great  parties  which 
then  divided  and  distracted  Europe. 

If  there  was  in  France,  as  in  other  countries  there  visibly 
is,  a  great  abatement,  rather  than  any  increase  of  these  vices, 
instead  of  loading  the  present  clergy  with  the  crimes  of  other 
men,  and  the  odious  character  of  other  times,  in  common 
equity  they  ought  to  be  praised,  encouraged,  and  supported, 
in  their  departure  from  a  spirit  which  disgraced  their  pre 
decessors,  and  for  having  assumed  a  temper  of  mind  am 
manners  more  suitable  to  their  sacred  function. 

When  my  occasions  took  me  into  France,  towards  th 
close  of  the  late  reign,  the  clergy,  under  all  their  forms 
engaged  a  considerable  part  of  my  curiosity.  So  far  frorr 
finding  (except  from  one  set  of  men,  not  then  very  numerous 
though  very  active)  the  complaints  and  discontents  agains 
that  body  which  some  publications  had  given  me  reason  t( 
expect,  I  perceived  little  or  no  public  or  private  uneasines 
on  their  account.  On  further  examination,  I  found  th 
clergy,  in  general,  persons  of  moderate  minds  and  decorou 
manners  ;  I  include  the  seculars,  and  the  regulars  of  botl 
sexes.  I  had  not  the  good  fortune  to  know  a  great  many  o 
the  parochial  clergy ;  but  in  general  I  received  a  perfect!; 
good  account  of  their  morals,  and  of  their  attention  to  thei 
duties.  With  some  of  the  higher  clergy  I  had  a  persona 
acquaintance ;  and  of  the  rest  in  that  class,  a  very  good 
means  of  information.  They  were,  almost  all  of  theiP 
persons  of  noble  birth.  They  resembled  others  of  their  owr 
rank  \  and  where  there  was  any  difference,  it  was  in  thei] 
favour.  They  were  more  fully  educated  than  the*  military 
noblesse;  so  as  by  no  means  to  disgrace  their  profession  bj 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  183 

ignorance,   or  by  want  of  fitness  for  the  exercise  of  their 
authority.       They    seemed    to    me,    beyond    the    clerical 
character,  liberal  and  open ;  with  the  hearts  of  gentlemen, 
and  men  of  honour;   neither  insolent  nor  servile  in  their 
manners    and    conduct.      They   seemed    to    me    rather   a 
superior  class ;  a  set  of  men  amongst  whom  you  would  not 
be  surprised  to  find  a  Fenelon.     I  saw  among  the  clergy  in 
Paris  (many  of  the  description  are  not  to  be  met  with  any 
where)   men   of  great  learning  and   candour;    and   I   had 
reason  to  believe  that  this  description  was  not  confined  to 
Paris.    What  I  found  in  other  places,  I  know  was  accidental; 
and  therefore  to  be  presumed  a  fair  sample.     I  spent  a  few 
days  in  a  provincial   town,  where,  in   the  absence   of  the 
bishop,   I   passed   my  evenings   with  three   clergymen,  his 
vicars-general,  persons  who  would  have  done  honour  to  any 
church.     They  were  all  well  informed;  two  of  them  of  deep, 
general,    and    extensive    erudition,    ancient    and    modern, 
oriental  and  western ;  particularly  in  their  own  profession.' 
They  had    a    more    extensive   knowledge    of  our   English 
divines  than  I  expected ;  and  they  entered  into  the  genius 
of  those  writers  with   a  critical   accuracy.     One    of  these 
gentlemen  is  since  dead,  the  Abbe  Morangis.     I  pay  this 
tribute,  without  reluctance,  to  the  memory  of  that   noble, 
reverend,  learned,  and  excellent  person ;  and  I  should  do 
the  same,   with   equal  cheerfulness,   to  the   merits   of  the 
others,  who  I  believe  are  still  living,  if  I  did  not  fear  to  hurt 
those  whom  I  am  unable  to  serve. 

Some  of  these  ecclesiastics  of  rank  are,  by  all  titles,  per 
sons  deserving  of  general  respect.  They  are  deserving  of 
gratitude  from  me,  and  from  many  English.  If  this  letter 
should  ever  come  into  their  hands,  I  hope  they  will  believe 
there  are  those  of  our  nation  who  feel  for  their  unmerited 


184  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

fall,  and  for  the  cruel  confiscation  of  their  fortunes,  with  no 
common  sensibility.  What  I  say  of  them  is  a  testimony,  as 
far  as  one  feeble  voice  can  go,  which  I  owe  to  truth.  When 
ever  the  question  of  this  unnatural  persecution  is  concerned, 
I  will  pay  it.  No  one  shall  prevent  me  from  being  just  and 
grateful.  The  time  is  fitted  for  the  duty ;  and  it  is 
particularly  becoming  to  show  our  justice  and  gratitude, 
when  those  who  have  deserved  well  of  us  and  of  mankind 
are  labouring  under  popular  obloquy,  and  the  persecutions 
of  oppressive  power. 

You  had  before  your  Revolution  about  a  hundred  and 
twenty  bishops.  A  few  of  them  were  men  of  eminent 
sanctity,  and  charity  without  limit.  When  we  talk  of  the 
heroic,  of  course  we  talk  of  rare  virtue.  I  believe  the  in 
stances  of  eminent  depravity  may  be  as  rare  amongst  them 
as  those  of  transcendent  goodness.  Examples  of  avarice 
and  of  licentiousness  may  be  picked  out,  I  do  not  question 
it,  by  those  who  delight  in  the  investigation  which  leads  to 
such  discoveries.  A  man  as  old  as  I  am  will  not  be 
astonished  that  several,  in  every  description,  do  not  lead 
that  perfect  life  of  self-denial,  with  regard  to  wealth  or  to 
pleasure,  which  is  wished  for  by  all,  by  some  expected,  but 
by  none  exacted  with  more  rigour  than  by  those  who  are 
the  most  attentive  to  their  own  interests,  or  the  most 
indulgent  to  their  own  passions.  When  I  was  in  France,  I 
am  certain  that  the  number  of  vicious  prelates  was  not  great. 
Certain  individuals  among  them,  not  distinguishable  for  the 
regularity  of  their  lives,  made  some  amends  for  their  want 
of  the  severe  virtues,  in  their  possession  of  the  liberal ;  and 
were  endowed  with  qualities  which  made  them  useful  in  the 
church  and  state.  I  am  told  that,  with  few  exceptions, 
Louis  the  Sixteenth  had  been  more  attentive  to  character, 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  185 

in  his  promotions  to  that  rank,  than  his  immediate  pre 
decessor;  and  I  believe  (as  some  spirit  of  reform  has 
prevailed  through  the  whole  reign)  that  it  may  be  true. 
But  the  present  ruling  power  has  shown  a  disposition  only 
to  plunder  the  church.  It  has  punished  all  prelates;  which 
is  to  favour  the  vicious,  at  least  in  point  of  reputation.  It 
has  made  a  degrading  pensionary  establishment,  to  which 
no  man  of  liberal  ideas  or  liberal  condition  will  destine  his 
children.  It  must  settle  into  the  lowest  classes  of  the 
people.  As  with  you  the  inferior  clergy  are  not  numerous 
enough  for  their  duties ;  as  these  duties  are,  beyond 
measure,  minute  and  toilsome,  as  you  have  left  no  middle 
classes  of  clergy  at  their  ease,  in  future  nothing  of 
science  or  erudition  can  exist  in  the  Gallican  church.  To 
complete  the  project,  without  the  least  attention  to  the 
rights  of  patrons,  the  Assembly  has  provided  in  future  an 
elective  clergy ;  an  arrangement  which  will  drive  out  of  the 
clerical  profession  all  men  of  sobriety;  all  who  can  pretend 
to  independence  in  their  function  or  their  conduct;  and 
which  will  throw  the  whole  direction  of  the  public  mind 
into  the  hands  of  a  set  of  licentious,  bold,  crafty,  factious, 
flattering  wretches,  of  such  condition  and  such  habits  of  life 
as  will  make  their  contemptible  pensions  (in  comparison  of 
which  the  stipend  of  an  exciseman  is  lucrative  and  honour 
able)  an  object  of  low  and  illiberal  intrigue.  Those  officers, 
whom  they  still  call  bishops,  are  to  be  elected  to  a  provision 
comparatively  mean,  through  the  same  arts  (that  is, 
electioneering  arts),  by  men  of  all  religious  tenets  that  are 
known  or  can  be  invented.  The  new  lawgivers  have  not 
ascertained  anything  whatsoever  concerning  their  qualifica 
tions,  relative  either  to  doctrine  or  to  morals;  no  more  than 
they  have  done  with  regard  to  the  subordinate  clergy;  nor 


186  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

does  it  appear  but  that  both  the  higher  and  the  lower  may, 
at  their  discretion,  practise  or  preach  any  mode  of  religion 
or  irreligion  that  they  please.  I  do  not  yet  see  what  the 
jurisdiction  of  bishops  over  their  subordinates  is  to  be,  or 
whether  they  are  to  have  any  jurisdiction  at  all. 

In  short,  Sir,  it  seems  to  me  that  this  new  ecclesiastical 
establishment  is  intended  only  to  be  temporary,  and  prepara 
tory  to  the  utter  abolition,  under  any  of  its  forms,  of  the  Chris 
tian  religion,  whenever  the  minds  of  men  are  prepared  for 
this  last  stroke  against  it,  by  the  accomplishment  of  the  plan 
for  bringing  its  ministers  into  universal  contempt.  They 
who  will  not  believe  that  the  philosophical  fanatics  who  guide 
in  these  matters  have  long  entertained  such  a  design,  are 
utterly  ignorant  of  their  character  and  proceedings.  These 
enthusiasts  do  not  scruple  to  avow  their  opinion  that  a  state 
can  subsist  without  any  religion  better  than  with  one;  and 
that  they  are  able  to  supply  the  place  of  any  good  which 
may  be  in  it,  by  a  project  of  their  own — namely,  by  a  sort 
of  education  they  have  imagined,  founded  in  a  knowledge 
of  the  physical  wants  of  men ;  progressively  carried  to  an 
enlightened  self-interest,  which,  when  well  understood,  they 
tell  us,  will  identify  with  an  interest  more  enlarged  and 
public.  The  scheme  of  this  education  has  been  long  known. 
Of  late  they  distinguish  it  (as  they  have  got  an  entirely  new 
nomenclature  of  technical  terms)  by  the  name  of  a  Civic 
Education, 

I  hope  their  partisans  in  England  (to  whom  I  rather 
attribute  very  inconsiderate  conduct,  than  the  ultimate 
object  in  this  detestable  design)  will  succeed  neither  in  the 
pillage  of  the  ecclesiastics,  nor  in  the  introduction  of  a 
principle  of  popular  election  to  our  bishoprics  and  parochial 
cures.  This,  in  the  present  condition  of  the  world,  would 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  187 

be  the  last  corruption  of  the  church;  the  utter  ruin  of  the 
clerical  character ;  the  most  dangerous  shock  that  the  state 
ever  received  through  a  misunderstood  arrangement  of 
religion.  I  know  well  enough  that  the  bishoprics  and  cures, 
under  kingly  and  seignoral  patronage,  as  now  they  are  in 
England,  and  as  they  have  been  lately  in  France,  are 
sometimes  acquired  by  unworthy  methods;  but  the  other 
mode  of  ecclesiastical  canvass  subjects  them  infinitely  more 
surely  and  more  generally  to  all  the  evil  arts  of  low  ambition, 
which,  operating  on  and  through  greater  numbers,  will 
produce  mischief  in  proportion. 

Those  of  you  who  have  robbed  the  clergy,  think  that 
they  shall  easily  reconcile  their  conduct  to  all  Protestant 
nations  ;  because  the  clergy,  whom  they  have  thus  plundered, 
degraded,  and  given  over  to  mockery  and  scorn,  are  of  the 
Roman  Catholic,  that  is,  of  their  own  pretended  persuasion. 
I  have  no  doubt  that  some  miserable  bigots  will  be  found 
here,  as  well  as  elsewhere,  who  hate  sects  and  parties  differ 
ent  from  their  own,  more  than  they  love  the  substance  of 
religion ;  and  who  are  more  angry  with  those  who  differ  from 
them  in  their  particular  plans  and  systems,  than  displeased 
with  those  who  attack  the  foundation  of  our  common  hope. 
These  men  will  write  and  speak  on  the  subject  in  the 
manner  that  is  to  be  expected  from  their  temper  and 
character.  Burnet  says,  that  when  he  was  in  France,  in  the 
year  1683,  "the  method  which  carried  over  the  men  of  the 
finest  parts  to  Popery  was  this— they  brought  themselves 
to  doubt  of  the  whole  Christian  religion.  When  that 
was  once  done,  it  seemed  a  more  indifferent  thing  of 
what  side  or  form  they  continued  outwardly/'  If  this  was 
then  the  ecclesiastical  policy  of  France,  it  is  what  they 
have  since  but  too  much  reason  to  repent  of.  They  pre- 


1 88  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

ferred  atheism  to  a  form  of  religion  not  agreeable  to  their 
ideas.  They  succeeded  in  destroying  that  form ;  and 
atheism  has  succeeded  in  destroying  them.  I  can  readily 
give  credit  to  Burnet's  story;  because  I  have  observed 
too  much  of  a  similar  spirit  (for  a  little  of  it  is  "much 
too  much")  amongst  ourselves.  The  humour,  however,  is 
not  general. 

The  teachers  who  reformed  our  religion  in  England  bore 
no  sort  of  resemblance  to  your  present  reforming  doctors  in 
Paris.  Perhaps  they  were  (like  those  whom  they  opposed) 
rather  more  than  could  be  wished  under  the  influence  of  a 
party  spirit ;  but  they  were  more  sincere  believers ;  men  of 
the  most  fervent  and  exalted  piety;  ready  to  die  (as  some  of 
them  did  die)  like  true  heroes  in  defence  of  their  particular 
ideas  of  Christianity;  as  they  would  with  equal  fortitude, 
and  more  cheerfully,  for  that  stock  of  general  truth,  for  the 
branches  of  which  they  contended  with  their  blood.  These 
men  would  have  disavowed  with  horror  those  wretches  who 
claimed  a  fellowship  with  them  upon  no  other  titles  than 
those  of  their  having  pillaged  the  persons  with  whom  they 
maintained  controversies,  and  their  having  despised  the 
common  religion,  for  the  purity  of  which  they  exerted  them 
selves  with  a  zeal  which  unequivocally  bespoke  their  highest 
reverence  for  the  substance  of  that  system  which  they  wished 
to  reform.  Many  of  their  descendants  have  retained  the 
same  zeal,  but  (as  less  engaged  in  conflict)  with  more 
moderation.  They  do  not  forget  that  justice  and  mercy  are 
substantial  parts  of  religion.  Impious  men  do  not  recom 
mend  themselves  to  their  communion  by  iniquity  and  cruelty 
towards  any  description  of  their  fellow-creatures. 

We  hear  these  new  teachers  continually  boasting  of  their 
spirit  of  toleration.     That  those  persons  should  tolerate  all 


REVOLUTION   IN  FRANCE.  189 

opinions,  who  think  none  to  be  of  estimation,  is  a  matter  of 
small  merit.    Equal  neglect  is  not  impartial  kindness.    The 
species  of  benevolence,  which  arises  from  contempt,  is  no 
true  charity.     There  are   in   England  abundance  of  men 
who  tolerate  in  the  true  spirit  of  toleration.     They  think  the 
dogmas  of  religion,  though  in  different  degrees,  are  all  of 
moment;  and  that  amongst  them  there  is,  as  amongst  all 
things  of  value,  a  just  ground  of  preference.     They  favour, 
therefore,  and   they  tolerate.     They  tolerate,   not  because 
they  despise   opinions,    but   because   they  respect   justice. 
They  would  reverently  and  affectionately  protect  all  religions, 
because  they  love  and  venerate  the  great  principle  upon 
which  they  all  agree,  and  the  great  object  to  which  they  are 
all  directed.    They  begin  more  and  more  plainly  to  discern 
that  we  have  all  a  common  cause,   as  against  a  common 
enemy.     They  will  not  be  so  misled  by  the  spirit  of  faction 
as  not  to  distinguish  what  is  done  in  favour  of  their  sub 
division,  from  those  acts  of  hostility  which,  through  some 
particular  description,   are    aimed  at   the   whole    corps,    in 
which  they  themselves,  under  another  denomination,  are 
included.     It  is  impossible  for  me  to  say  what  may  be  the 
character  of  every  description  of  men  amongst  us.     But  I 
speak  for  the  greater  part;  and  for  them,  I  must  tell  you, 
that  sacrilege  is  no  part  of  their  doctrine  of  good  works ; 
that,  so  far  from  calling  you  into  their  fellowship  on  such 
title,  if  your  professors  are  admitted  to  their  communion, 
they  must  carefully  conceal  their  doctrine  of  the  lawfulness 
of  the  proscription  of  innocent  men ;  and  that  they  must 
make  restitution  of  all  stolen  goods  whatsoever.     Till  then 
they  are  none  of  ours. 

You  may  suppose  that  we  do  not  approve  your  confisca 
tion  of  the  revenues  of  bishops,  and  deans,  and  chapters, 


T9o  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

and  parochial  clergy  possessing  independent  estates  arising 
from  land,  because  we  have  the  same  sort  of  establishment 
in  England.  That  objection,  you  will  say,  cannot  hold  as 
to  the  confiscation  of  the  goods  of  monks  and  nuns,  and  the 
abolition  of  their  order.  It  is  true  that  this  particular  part 
of  your  general  confiscation  does  not  affect  England,  as  a 
precedent  in  point ;  but  the  reason  implies,  and  it  goes  a 
great  way.  The  long  parliament  confiscated  the  lands  of 
deans  and  chapters  in  England  on  the  same  ideas  upon 
which  your  assembly  set  to  sale  the  lands  of  the  monastic 
orders.  But  it  is  in  the  principle  of  injustice  that  the 
danger  lies,  and  not  in  the  description  of  persons  on  whom 
it  is  first  exercised.  I  see,  in  a  country  very  near  us,  a 
course  of  policy  pursued  which  sets  justice,  the  common 
concern  of  mankind,  at  defiance.  With  the  National 
Assembly  of  France,  possession  is  nothing,  law  and  usage 
are  nothing.  I  see  the  National  Assembly  openly  repro 
bate  the  doctrine  of  prescription,  which  one  of  the  greatest 
of  their  own  lawyers1  tells  us,  with  great  truth,  is  a  part  of 
the  law  of  nature.  He  tells  us,  that  the  positive  ascertain 
ment  of  its  limits,  and  its  security  from  invasion,  were 
among  the  causes  for  which  civil  society  itself  has  been 
instituted.  If  prescription  be  once  shaken,  no  species  of 
property  is  secure,  when  it  once  becomes  an  object  large 
enough  to  tempt  the  cupidity  of  indigent  power.  I  see  a 
practice  perfectly  correspondent  to  their  contempt  of  this 
great  fundamental  part  of  natural  law.  I  see  the  confiscators 
begin  with  bishops,  and  chapters,  and  monasteries;  but  I 
do  not  see  them  end  there.  I  see  the  princes  of  the  blood, 
who,  by  the  oldest  usages  of  that  kingdom,  held  large  landed 
estates  (hardly  with  the  compliment  of  a  debate),  deprived 
1  Domat. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  I9I 

of  their  possessions,  and,  in  lieu  of  their  stable,  independent 
property,  reduced  to  the  hope  of  some  precarious,  charitable 
pension,  at  the  pleasure  of  an  assembly  which   of  course 
will  pay  little  regard  to  the  rights  of  pensioners  at  pleasure, 
when  it  despises  those  of  legal  proprietors.     Flushed  with 
the  insolence  of  their  first  inglorious  victories,  and  pressed 
by  the  distresses  caused  by  their  lust  of  unhallowed  lucre, 
disappointed    but    not    discouraged,    they    have   at    length 
ventured  completely  to  subvert  all  property  of  all  descrip 
tions  throughout  the  extent  of  a  great  kingdom.    They  have 
compelled  all  men,  in  all  transactions  of  commerce,  in  the 
disposal  of  lands,  in  civil  dealing,  and  through  the  whole 
communion  of  life,  to  accept  as  perfect  payment  and  good 
and  lawful  tender,  the  symbols  of  their  speculations  on  a 
projected  sale  of  their  plunder.     What  vestiges  of  liberty  or 
property  have  they  left?     The  tenant-right  of  a  cabbage- 
garden,  a  year's  interest  in  a  hovel,  the  good-will  of  an  ale 
house  or  a  baker's  shop,  the  very  shadow  of  a  constructive 
property,  are  more  ceremoniously  treated  in  our  parliament, 
than  with  you  the  oldest  and  most  valuable  landed  posses 
sions,  in  the  hands  of  the  most  respectable  personages,  or 
than  the  whole  body  of  the  moneyed  and  commercial  interest 
of  your  country.     We  entertain  a  high  opinion  of  the  legis 
lative  authority;    but  we   have  never  dreamt    that   parlia 
ments    had    any    right   whatever    to    violate    property,    to 
overrule  prescription,  or  to  force  a  currency  of  their  own 
fiction  in  the  place  of  that  which  is  real,  and  recognised  by 
the  law  of  nations.     But  you,  who  began  with  refusing  to 
submit  to  the   most    moderate   restraints,    have  ended   by 
establishing  an  unheard-of  despotism.     I  find  the  ground 
upon  which  your  confiscators  go  is  this  :  that  indeed  their 
proceedings  could  not  be  supported  in  a  court  of  justice  • 


iQ2  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

but  that  the  rules  of  prescription  cannot  bind  a  legislative 
assembly.1  So  that  this  legislative  assembly  of  a  free  nation 
sits,  not  for  the  security,  but  for  the  destruction,  of  property, 
and  not  of  property  only,  but  of  every  rule  and  maxim 
which  can  give  it  stability,  and  of  those  instruments  which 
can  alone  give  it  circulation. 

When  the  Anabaptists  of  Miinster,  in  the  sixteenth 
century,  had  filled  Germany  with  confusion,  by  their  system 
of  levelling,  and  their  wild  opinions  concerning  property,  to 
what  country  in  Europe  did  not  the  progress  of  their  fury 
furnish  just  cause  of  alarm  ?  Of  all  things,  wisdom  is  the 
most  terrified  with  epidemical  fanaticism,  because  of  all 
enemies  it  is  that  against  which  she  is  the  least  able  to 
furnish  any  kind  of  resource.  We  cannot  be  ignorant  of 
the  spirit  of  atheistical  fanaticism,  that  is  inspired  by  a 
multitude  of  writings,  dispersed  with  incredible  assiduity 
and  expense,  and  by  sermons  delivered  in  all  the  streets  and 
places  of  public  resort  in  Paris.  These  writings  and  sermons 
have  filled  the  populace  with  a  black  and  savage  atrocity  of 
mind,  which  supersedes  in  them  the  common  feelings  of 
nature,  as  well  as  all  sentiments  of  morality  and  religion ; 
insomuch  that  these  wretches  are  induced  to  bear  with  a 
sullen  patience  the  intolerable  distresses  brought  upon  them 
by  the  violent  convulsions  and  permutations  that  have  been 
made  in  property.2  The  spirit  of  proselytism  attends  this 

1  Speech    of    Mr.     Camus,    published    by    order   of    the    National 
Assembly. 

2  Whether  the  following  description  is  strictly  true,  I  know  not ;  but 
it  is  what  the  publishers  would  have  pass  for  true  in  order  to  animate 
others.     In  a  letter  front  Toul,  given   in  one  of  their  papers,  is  the 
following  passage  concerning  the  people  of  that   district:   "Dans  la 
Revolution  actuelle,  ils  ont  resiste  a  toutes  les  seductions  du  bigotisme, 
aux  persecutions,  et  aux  tracasseries  des  ennemis  de  la  Revolution. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  193 

spirit  of  fanaticism.  They  have  societies  to  cabal  and 
correspond  at  home  and  abroad  for  the  propagation  of  their 
tenets.  The  republic  of  Berne,  one  of  the  happiest,  the 
most  prosperous,  and  the  best  governed  countries  upon 
earth,  is  one  of  the  great  objects  at  the  destruction  of 
which  they  aim.  I  am  told  they  have  in  some  measure 
succeeded  in  sowing  there  the  seeds  of  discontent.  They 
are  busy  throughout  Germany.  Spain  and  Italy  have  not 
been  untried.  England  is  not  left  out  of  the  comprehensive 
scheme  of  their  malignant  charity :  and  in  England  we  fir^d" 
those  who  stretch  out  their  arms  to  them,--v¥he--recrjrrfm1md 
their  example  from  more  than  one  pulpit,  and  who  choose 
in  more  than  one  periodical  meeting  publicly  to  correspond 
with  them,  to  applaud  them,  and  to  hold  them  up  as  objects 
for  imitation ;  who  receive  from  them  tokens  of  confra 
ternity,  and  standards  consecrated  amidst  their  rights  and 
mysteries ; l  who  suggest  to  them  leagues  of  perpetual  amity, 

Oubliant  leurs  phis  grdnds  interels  pour  rendre  hommage  aux  vues 
d'ordre  general  qui  ont  determine  I'Assemblee  Nationale,  ils  voient, 
sans  se  plaindre,  supprimer  cette  foule  d'etablissemens  ecclesiastiques  par 
lesquels  ils  subsistoient ;  et  meme,  en  perdant  leur  siege  episcopal,  la 
seul  de  toutes  ses  ressources  qui  pouvoit,  ou  plutot  qui  devoif,  en  toute 
tquite,  leur  etre  conservee  ;  condamnes  &  la  phis  effrayante  misere,  sans 
avoir  tie  ni pu  etre  en.'endus,  ils  ne  murmiirent  point,  ils  restent  fideles 
aux  principes  du  plus  pur  patriotisine  ;  ils  sont  encore  prets  a  verser 
leur  sang  pour  le  maintien  de  la  Constitution,  qui  va  reduire  leur  ville 
a  la  plus  deplorable  millite."  These  people  are  not  supposed  to  have 
endured  those  sufferings  and  injustices  in  a  struggle  for  liberty,  for  the 
same  account  states  truly  that  they  had  been  always  free  ;  their  patience 
in  beggary  and  ruin,  and  their  suffering,  without  remonstrance,  the 
most  flagrant  and  confessed  injustice,  if  strictly  true,  can  be  nothing 
but  the  effect  of  this  dire  fanaticism.  A  great  multitude  all  over  France 
is  in  the  same  condition  and  the  same  temper. 

1  See  the  proceedings  of  the  confederation  at  Nantz. 


194  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

at  the  very  time  when  the  power  to  which  our  constitution 
has  exclusively  delegated  the  federative  capacity  of  this 
kingdom,  may  find  it  expedient  to  make  war  upon  them. 

It  is  not  the  confiscation  of  our  church  property  from 
this  example  in  France  that  I  dread,  though  I  think  this 
would  be  no  trifling  evil.  The  great  source  of  my  solicitude 
is,  lest  it  should  ever  be  considered  in  England  as  the  policy 
of  a  state  to  seek  a  resource  in  confiscations  of  any  kind;  or 
that  any  one  description  of  citizens  should  be  brought  to 
regard  any  of  the  others  as  their  proper  prey.1  Nations  are 
wading  deeper  and  deeper  into  an  ocean  of  boundless  debt. 
Public  debts,  which  at  first  were  a  security  to  governments, 
by  interesting  many  in  the  public  tranquillity,  are  likely  in 
their  excess  to  become  the  means  of  their  subversion.  If 
governments  provide  for  these  debts  by  heavy  impositions, 
they  perish  by  becoming  odious  to  the  people.  If  they  do 

1  "Si  plures  sunt  ii  quibus  improbe  datum  est,  quam  illi  quibis 
injuste  ademptum  est,  idcirco  plus  etiam  valent  ?  Non  enim  numero 
hsec  juclicantur  sed  pondere.  Quam  atitcm  habet  cequitatem,  ut  agrum 
multis  annis,  aut  etiam  sceculis  ante  possessum,  qui  nullum  habuit 
habeat  ;  qui  aulem  habuit  amittat  ?  Ac,  propter  hoc  injuring  genus, 
Lacedoemonii  Lysandrum  Ephorum  expulerunt  :  Agin  regem  (quod 
nunquam  antea  apud  eos  acciderat)  necaverunt :  exque  eo  tempore  tante 
discordiaj  secutre  sunt,  ut  et  tyranni  existerint,  et  optimates  extermina- 
rentur,  et  preclarissime  constituta  respublica  dilaberetur.  Nee  vero 
solum  ipsa  cecidit,  sed  etiam  reliquam  Grseciam  evertit  contagionibus 
malorum,  quoe  a  Lacedsemoniis  profectce  manarunt  latins." — After  speak 
ing  of  the  conduct  of  the  model  of  true  patriots,  Aratus  of  Sicyon,  which 
was  in  a  very  different  spirit,  he  says,  ' '  Sic  par  est  agere  cum  civibus ;  non 
ut  bis  jam  vidimus,  hastam  in  foro  ponere  et  bona  civium  voci  subjicere 
proeconis.  At  ille  Griecus  (id  quod  fuit  sapient  is  et  prsestantis  viri 
omnibus  consulendum  esse  putavit  :  eaque  est  summa  ratio  et  sapientia 
boni  civis,  commoda  civium  non  divellere,  sed  omnes  eadem  sequitate 
continere." — Cic.  G/l,  1.  2. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  195 

not  provide  for  them  they  will  be  undone  by  the  efforts  of 
the  most  dangerous  of  all  parties ;  I  mean  an  extensive, 
discontented  moneyed  interest,  injured  and  not  destroyed. 
The  men  who  compose  this  interest  look  for  their  security, 
in  the  first  instance,  to  the  fidelity  of  government;  in  the 
second,  to  its  power.  If  they  find  the  old  governments 
effete,  worn  out,  and  with  their  springs  relaxed,  so  as  not  to 
be  of  sufficient  vigour  for  their  purposes,  they  may  seek  new 
ones  that  shall  be  possessed  of  more  energy;  and  this 
energy  will  be  derived,  not  from  an  acquisition  of  resources, 
but  from  a  contempt  of  justice.  Revolutions  are  favourable 
to  confiscation  ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  know  under  what 
obnoxious  names  the  next  confiscations  will  be  authorised. 
I  am  sure  that  the  principles  predominant  in  France  extend 
to  very  many  persons,  and  descriptions  of  persons,  in  all 
countries  who  think  their  innoxious  indolence  their  security. 
This  kind  of  innocence  in  proprietors  may  be  argued  into 
inutility;  and  inutility  into  an  unfitness  for  their  estates. 
Many  parts  of  Europe  are  in  open  disorder.  In  many 
others  there  is  a  hollow  murmuring  under  ground ;  a  con 
fused  movement  is  felt,  that  threatens  a  general  earthquake 
in  the  political  world.  Already  confederacies  and  correspon 
dencies  of  the  most  extraordinary  nature  are  forming,  in 
several  countries.1  In  such  a  state  of  things  we  ought  to 
hold  ourselves  upon  our  guard.  In  all  mutations  (if  muta 
tions  must  be)  the  circumstance  which  will  serve  most  to 
blunt  the  edge  of  their  mischief,  and  to  promote  what  good 
may  be  in  them,  is,  that  they  should  find  us  with  our  minds 
tenacious  of  justice,  and  tender  of  property. 

But  it  will  be  argued   that   this   confiscation   in   France 

1  See  two  books  entitled,  Einige  Originahchriften  des  Illuminatcn- 
ordens— System  und  Folgen  des  Illuminatenordens.     Miinchen,  1787. 


196  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

ought  not  to  alarm  other  nations.  They  say  it  is  not  made 
from  wanton  rapacity ;  that  it  is  a  great  measure  of  national 
policy,  adopted  to  remove  an  extensive,  inveterate,  supersti 
tious  mischief.  It  is  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  I  am 
able  to  separate  policy  from  justice.  Justice  itself  is  the 
great  standing  policy  of  civil  society ;  and  any  eminent 
departure  from  it,  under  any  circumstances,  lies  under  the 
suspicion  of  being  no  policy  at  all. 

When  men  are  encouraged  to  go  into  a  certain  mode  of 
life  by  the  existing  laws,  and  protected  in  that  mode  as  in  a 
lawful  occupation — when  they  have  accommodated  all  their 
ideas  and  all  their  habits  to  it — when  the  law  had  long 
made  their  adherence  to  its  rules  a  ground  of  reputation, 
and  their  departure  from  them  a  ground  of  disgrace  and 
even  of  penalty — I  am  sure  it  is  unjust  in  legislature,  by  an 
arbitrary  act,  to  offer  a  sudden  violence  to  their  minds  and 
their  feelings;  forcibly  to  degrade  them  from  their  state  and 
condition,  and  to  stigmatise  with  shame  and  infamy  that 
character,  and  those  customs,  which  before  had  been  made 
the  measure  of  their  happiness  and  honour.  If  to  this  be 
added  an  expulsion  from  their  habitations,  and  a  confiscation 
of  all  their  goods,  I  am  not  sagacious  enough  to  discover 
how  this  despotic  sport,  made  of  the  feelings,  consciences, 
prejudices,  and  properties  of  men,  can  be  discriminated  from 
the  rankest  tyranny. 

If  the  injustice  of  the  course  pursued  in  France  be  clear, 
the  policy  of  the  measure,  that  is,  the  public  benefit  to  be 
expected  from  it,  ought  to  be  at  least  as  evident,  and  at 
least  as  important.  To  a  man  who  acts  under  the  influence 
of  no  passion,  who  has  nothing  in  view  in  his  projects  but 
the  public  good,  a  great  difference  will  immediately  strike 
him  between  what  policy  would  dictate  on  the  original 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  197 

introduction  of  such  institutions,  and  on  a  question  of  their 
total  abolition,  where  they  have  cast  their  roots  wide  and 
deep,  and  where,  by  long  habit,  things  more  valuable  than 
themselves  are  so  adapted  to  them,  and  in  a  manner  inter 
woven  with  them,  that  the  one  cannot  be  destroyed  without 
notably  impairing  the  other.  He  might  be  embarrassed  if 
the  case  were  really  such  as  sophisters  represent  it  in  their 
paltry  style  of  debating.  But  in  this,  as  in  most  questions 
of  state,  there  is  a  middle.  There  is  something  else  than 
the  mere  alternative  of  absolute  destruction,  or  unreformed 
existence.  Spartam  nactus  es ;  hanc  exorna.  This  is,  in 
my  opinion,  a  rule  of  profound  sense,  and  ought  never  to 
depart  from  the  mind  of  an  honest  reformer.  I  cannot 
conceive  how  any  man  can  have  brought  himself  to  that 
pitch  of  presumption,  to  consider  his  country  as  nothing 
but  carle  blanche,  upon  which  he  may  scribble  whatever  he 
pleases.  A  man  full  of  warm,  speculative  benevolence  may 
wish  his  society  otherwise  constituted  than  he  finds  it;  but 
a  good  patriot,  and  a  true  politician,  always  considers  how 
he  shall  make  the  most  of  the  existing  materials  of  his 
country.  A  disposition  to  preserve,  and  an  ability  to  im 
prove,  taken  together,  would  be  my  standard  of  a  statesman. 
Everything  else  is  vulgar  in  the  conception,  perilous  in  the 
execution. 

There  are  moments  in  the  fortune  of  states,  when  parti 
cular  men  are  called  to  make  improvements,  by  great  mental 
exertion.  In  those  moments,  even  when  they  seem  to 
enjoy  the  confidence  of  their  prince  and  country,  and  to  be 
invested  with  full  authority,  they  have  not  always  apt  instru 
ments.  A  politician,  to  do  great  things,  looks  for  a  power, 
what  our  workmen  call  a  purchase ;  and  if  he  finds  that 
power,  in  politics  as  in  mechanics,  he  cannot  be  at  a  loss  to 


198  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

apply  it.  In  the  monastic  institutions,  in  my  opinion,  was 
found  a  great  power  for  the  mechanism  of  politic  benevo 
lence.  There  were  revenues  with  a  public  direction  ;  there 
were  men  wholly  set  apart  and  dedicated  to  public  purposes, 
without  any  other  than  public  ties  and  public  principles ; 
men  without  the  possibility  of  converting  the  estate  of  the 
community  into  a  private  fortune;  men  denied  to  self- 
interests,  whose  avarice  is  for  some  community;  men  to 
whom  personal  poverty  is  honour,  and  implicit  obedience 
stands  in  the  place  of  freedom.  In  vain  shall  a  man  look 
to  the  possibility  of  making  such  things  when  he  wants  them. 
The  winds  blow  as  they  list.  These  institutions  are  the 
products  of  enthusiasm;  they  are  the  instruments  of  wisdom. 
Wisdom  cannot  create  materials;  they  are  the  gifts  of  nature 
or  of  chance ;  her  pride  is  in  the  use.  The  perennial  ex 
istence  of  bodies  corporate  and  their  fortunes  are  things 
particularly  suited  to  a  man  who  has  long  views;  who 
meditates  designs  that  require  time  in  fashioning,  and  which 
propose  duration  when  they  are  accomplished.  He  is  not 
deserving  to  rank  high,  or  even  to  be  mentioned  in  the 
order  of  great  statesmen,  who,  having  obtained  the  command 
and  direction  of  such  a  power  as  existed  in  the  wealth,  the 
discipline,  and  the  habits  of  such  corporations,  as  those 
which  you  have  rashly  destroyed,  cannot  find  any  way  of 
converting  it  to  the  great  and  lasting  benefit  of  his  country. 
On  the  view  of  this  subject,  a  thousand  uses  suggest  them 
selves  to  a  contriving  mind.  To  destroy  any  power,  growing 
wild  from  the  rank  productive  force  of  the  human  mind,  is 
almost  tantamount,  in  the  moral  world,  to  the  destruction 
of  the  apparently  active  properties  of  bodies  in  the  material. 
It  would  be  like  the  attempt  to  destroy  (if  it  were  in  our 
competence  to  destroy)  the  expansive  force  of  fixed  air  in 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  199 

nitre,  or  the  power  of  steam,  or  of  electricity,  or  of  magnet 
ism.  These  energies  always  existed  in  nature,  and  they 
were  always  discernible.  They  seemed,  some  of  them 
unserviceable,  some  noxious,  some  no  better  than  a  sport 
to  children ;  until  contemplative  ability,  combining  with 
practic  skill,  tamed  their  wild  nature,  subdued  them  to  use, 
and  rendered  them  at  once  the  most  powerful  and  the  most 
tractable  agents,  in  subservience  to  the  great  views  and 
designs  of  men.  Did  fifty  thousand  persons,  whose  mental 
and  whose  bodily  labour  you  might  direct,  and  so  many 
hundred  thousand  a  year  of  a  revenue,  which  was  neither 
lazy  nor  superstitious,  appear  too  big  for  your  abilities  to 
wield?  Had  you  no  way  of  using  the  men  but  by  convert 
ing  monks  into  pensioners?  Had  you  no  way  of  turning 
the  revenue  to  account,  but  through  the  improvident 
resource  of  a  spendthrift  sale?  If  you  were  thus  destitute 
of  mental  funds,  the  proceeding  is  in  its  natural  course. 

|  Your  politicians  do  not  understand  their  trade ;  and  there 
fore  they  sell  their  tools. 

But  the  institutions  savour  of  superstition  in  their  very 

I  principle;  and  they  nourish  it  by  a  permanent  and  standing 
influence.  This  I  do  not  mean  to  dispute;  but  this  ought 

':  not  to  hinder  you  from  deriving  from  superstition  itself  any 
resources  which  may  thence  be  furnished  for  the  public 

j  advantage.     You   derive    benefits   from    many   dispositions 

I  and  many  passions  of  the  human  mind,  which  are  of  as 
doubtful  a  colour,  in  the  moral  eye,  as  superstition  itself.  It 

'•  was  your  business  to  correct  and  mitigate  everything  which 
was  noxious  in  this  passion,  as  in  all  the  passions.  But 
is  superstition  the  greatest  of  all  possible  vices  ?  In  its 
possible  excess  I  think  it  becomes  a  very  great  evil.  It  is, 
however,  a  moral  subject;  and  of  course  admits  of  all 


200  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

degrees  and  all  modifications.  Superstition  is  the  religion 
of  feeble  minds;  and  they  must  be  tolerated  in  an  inter 
mixture  of  it,  in  some  trifling  or  some  enthusiastic  shape  or 
other,  else  you  will  deprive  weak  minds  of  a  resource  found 
necessary  to  the  strongest.  The  body  of  all  true  religion 
consists,  to  be  sure,  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  the  Sovereign 
of  the  world;  in  a  confidence  in  his  declarations;  and  in 
imitation  of  his  perfections.  The  rest  is  our  own.  It  may 
be  prejudicial  to  the  great  end;  it  may  be  auxiliary.  Wise 
men,  who  as  such  are  not  admirers  (not  admirers  at  least  of 
the  Munera  Terra),  are  not  violently  attached  to  these 
things,  nor  do  they  violently  hate  them.  Wisdom  is  not 
the  most  severe  corrector  of  folly.  They  are  the  rival 
follies,  which  mutually  wage  so  unrelenting  a  war;  and 
which  make  so  cruel  a  use  of  their  advantages,  as  they  can 
happen  to  engage  the  immoderate  vulgar,  on  the  one  side 
or  the  other,  in  their  quarrels.  Prudence  would  be  neuter; 
but  if,  in  the  contention  between  fond  attachment  and 
fierce  antipathy  concerning  things  in  their  nature  not  made 
to  produce  such  heats,  a  prudent  man  were  obliged  to  make 
a  choice  of  what  errors  and  excesses  of  enthusiasm  he  would 
condemn  or  bear,  perhaps  he  would  think  the  superstition 
which  builds,  to  be  more  tolerable  than  that  which 
demolishes — that  which  adorns  a  country,  than  that  which 
deforms  it — that  which  endows,  than  that  which  plunders — • 
that  which  disposes  to  mistaken  beneficence,  than  that 
which  stimulates  to  real  injustice — that  which  leads  a  man 
to  refuse  to  himself  lawful  pleasures,  than  that  which  snatches 
from  others  the  scanty  subsistence  of  their  self-denial.  Such, 
I  think,  is  very  nearly  the  state  of  the  question  between  the 
ancient  founders  of  monkish  superstition,  and  the  supersti 
tion  of  the  pretended  philosophers  of  the  hour. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  201 

For  the  present  I  postpone  all  consideration  of  the 
supposed  public  profit  of  the  sale,  which,  however,  I  con 
ceive  to  be  perfectly  delusive.  I  shall  here  only  consider 
it  as  a  transfer  of  property.  On  the  policy  of  that  transfer  I 
shall  trouble  you  with  a  few  thoughts. 

In  every  prosperous  community  something  more  is 
produced  than  goes  to  the  immediate  support  of  the 
producer.  This  surplus  forms  the  income  of  the  landed 
capitalist.  It  will  be  spent  by  a  proprietor  who  does  not 
labour.  But  this  idleness  is  itself  the  spring  of  labour;  this 
repose  the  spur  to  industry.  The  only  concern  of  the  state 
is,  that  the  capital  taken  in  rent  from  the  land  should  be 
returned  again  to  the  industry  from  whence  it  came;  and 
that  its  expenditure  should  be  with  the  least  possible 
detriment  to  the  morals  of  those  who  expend  it,  and  to 
those  of  the  people  to  whom  it  is  returned. 

In  all  the  views  of  receipt,  expenditure,  and  personal 
employment,  a  sober  legislator  would  carefully  compare  the 
possessor  whom  he  was  recommended  to  expel,  with  the 
stranger  who  was  proposed  to  fill  his  place.  Before  the 
inconveniences  are  incurred  which  must  attend  all  violent 
revolutions  in  property  through  extensive  confiscation,  we 
ought  to  have  some  rational  assurance  that  the  purchasers 
of  the  confiscated  property  will  be  in  a  considerable  degree 
more  laborious,  more  virtuous,  more  sober,  less  disposed 
to  extort  an  unreasonable  proportion  of  the  gains  of  the 
labourer,  or  to  consume  on  themselves  a  larger  share  than 
is  fit  for  the  measure  of  an  individual;  or  that  they  should 
be  qualified  to  dispense  the  surplus  in  a  more  steady  and 
equal  mode,  so  as  to  answer  the  purposes  of  a  politic 
expenditure,  than  the  old  possessors,  call  those  possessors 
bishops,  or  canons,  or  commendatory  abbots,  or  monks,  or 


202  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

what  you  please.    "The  monks  are  lazy."    Be  it  so.    Suppose 
them  no  otherwise  employed  than  by  singing  in  the  choir. 
They  are  as  usefully  employed  as  those  who   neither  sing 
nor  say.     As  usefully  even  as  those  who  sing  upon  the 
stage.     They  are  as  usefully  employed  as  if  they  worked  from 
dawn  to  dark  in  the    innumerable    servile,  degrading,  un 
seemly,     unmanly,     and     often     most     unwholesome    and 
pestiferous  occupations,  to  which  by  the    social    economy 
so  many  wretches  are  inevitably  doomed.     If  it  were  not 
generally  pernicious  to  disturb  the  natural  course  of  things, 
and  to  impede,  in  any  degree,  the  great  wheel  of  circulation 
which  is  turned  by  the  strangely-directed  labour  of  these 
unhappy    people,    I    should    be    infinitely    more    inclined 
forcibly  to  rescue  them  from  their  miserable  industry,  than 
violently  to  disturb  the  tranquil  repose  of  monastic  quietude. 
Humanity,  and  perhaps  policy,  might  better  justify  me  in 
the  one  than  in  the  other.     It  is  a  subject  on  which  I  have 
often  reflected,  and  never  reflected  without  feeling  from  it. 
I  am  sure  that  no  consideration,  except   the   necessity  of 
submitting  to  the  yoke   of  luxury,   and   the  despotism   of 
fancy,  who  in  their  own  imperious  way  will  distribute  the 
surplus   product  of  the   soil,   can  justify  the  toleration  of 
such   trades    and   employments    in    a   well-regulated    state. 
But  for  this  purpose  of  distribution,  it  seems  to  me  that  the 
idle  expenses  of  monks  are  quite  as  well  directed  as  the  idle 
expenses  of  us  lay-loiterers. 

When  the  advantages  of  the  possession  and  of  the  pro 
ject  are  on  a  par,  there  is  no  motive  for  a  change.  But  m 
the  present  case,  perhaps,  they  are  not  upon  a  par,  and  the 
difference  is  in  favour  of  the  possession.  It  does  not 
appear  to  me  that  the  expenses  of  those  whom  you  are 
going  to  expel,  do  in  fact  take  a  course  so  directly  and  so 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  203 

generally  leading  to  vitiate  and  degrade  and  render  miser 
able  those  through  whom  they  pass,  as  the  expenses  of 
those  favourites  whom  you  are  intruding  into  their  houses. 
Why  should  the  expenditure  of  a  great  landed  property, 
which  is  a  dispersion  of  the  surplus  product  of  the  soil, 
appear  intolerable  to  you  or  to  me,  when  it  takes  its  course 
through  the  accumulation  of  vast  libraries,  which  are  the 
history  of  the  force  and  weakness  of  the  human  mind; 
through  great  collections  of  ancient  records,  medals,  and 
coins,  which  attest  and  explain  laws  and  customs;  through 
paintings  and  statues,  that,  by  imitating  nature,  seem  to 
extend  the  limits  of  creation;  through  grand  monuments  of 
the  dead,  which  continue  the  regards  and  connections  of 
life  beyond  the  grave ;  through  collections  of  the  specimens 
of  nature,  which  become  a  representative  assembly  of  all 
the  classes  and  families  of  the  world,  that  by  disposition 
facilitate,  and,  by  exciting  curiosity,  open  the  avenues  to 
science?  If  by  great  permanent  establishments,  all  these 
objects  of  expense  are  better  secured  from  the  inconstant 
sport  of  personal  caprice  and  personal  extravagance,  are 
they  worse  than  if  the  same  tastes  prevailed  in  scattered 
individuals?  Does  not  the  sweat  of  the  mason  and 
carpenter,  who  toil  in  order  to  partake  the  sweat  of  the 
peasant,  flow  as  pleasantly  and  as  salubriously,  in  the  con 
struction  and  repair  of  the  majestic  edifices  of  religion,  as 
in  the  painted  booths  and  sordid  sties  of  vice  and  luxury; 
as  honourably  and  as  profitably  in  repairing  those  sacred 
works,  which  grow  hoary  with  innumerable  years,  as  on  the 
momentary  receptacles  of  transient  voluptuousness;  in 
opera-houses,  and  brothels,  and  gaming-houses,  and  club 
houses,  and  obelisks  in  the  Champ  de  Mars?  Is  the 
surplus  product  of  the  olive  and  the  vine  worse  employed 


204  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

in  the  frugal  sustenance  of  persons,  whom  the  fictions  of  a 
pious  imagination  raise  to  dignity  by  construing  in  the 
service  of  God,  than  in  pampering  the  innumerable  multi 
tude  of  those  who  are  degraded  by  being  made  useless 
domestics,  subservient  to  the  pride  of  man?  Are  the 
decorations  of  temples  an  expenditure  less  worthy  a  wise 
man  than  ribbons,  and  laces,  and  national  cockades,  and 
petit  maisons,  and  petit  soupers,  and  all  the  innumerable 
fopperies  and  follies  in  which  opulence  sports  away  the 
burthen  of  its  superfluity  ? 

We  tolerate  even  these ;  not  from  love  of  them,  but  for 
fear  of  worse.  We  tolerate  them,  because  property  and 
liberty,  to  a  degree,  require  that  toleration.  But  why 
proscribe  the  other,  and  surely,  in  every  point  of  view, 
the  more  laudable  use  of  estates  ?  Why,  through  the 
violation  of  all  property,  through  an  outrage  upon  every 
principle  of  liberty,  forcibly  carry  them  from  the  better  to 
the  worse  ? 

This   comparison  between  the  new  individuals  and  the 
old  corps  is  made  upon  a  supposition  that  no  reform  could 
be  made  in  the  latter.     But,  in  a  question  of  reformation,  I 
always  consider  corporate  bodies,  whether  sole  or  consisting 
of  many,  to  be  much  more  susceptible  of  a  public  direction 
by  the  power  of  the  state,  in  the  use  of  their  property,  and 
in    the   regulation    of   modes   and   habits  of  life   in    their 
members,    than   private   citizens   ever  can   be,   or  perhaps  ( 
ought  to  be  :  and  this  seems  to  me  a  very  material  con 
sideration  for  those  who  undertake  anything  which  merits  ' 
the  name  of  a  politic  enterprise. — So  far  as  to  the  estates  of : 
monasteries. 

With  regard  to  the  estates  possessed  by  bishops  and 
canons,  and  commendatory  abbots,  I  cannot  find  out  for 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  205 

what  reason  some  landed  estates  may  not  be  held  other 
wise  than   by  inheritance.       Can  any  philosophic   spoiler 
undertake  to  demonstrate  the  positive  or  the  comparative 
evil  of  having  a  certain,  and  that  too  a  large,  portion  of 
landed   property,    passing   in    succession    through   persons 
whose  title  to  it  is,  always  in  theory,  and  often  in  fact,  an 
eminent  degree  of  piety,  morals,  and  learning;  a  property 
which,  by  its  destination,  in  their  turn,  and  on  the  score  of 
merit,  gives  to  the  noblest  families  renovation  and  support, 
to  the  lowest  the  means  of  dignity  and  elevation;  a  property, 
the  tenure  of  which  is  the  performance  of  some  duty  (what 
ever  value  you  may  choose  to  set  upon  that  duty),  and  the 
I  character  of  whose  proprietors  demands,  at  least,  an  exterior 
;  decorum,  and  gravity  of  manners;    who  are  to  exercise  a 
generous  but  temperate  hospitality ;  part  of  whose  income 
,  they  are  to  consider  as  a  trust  for  charity;  and  who,  even 
j  when  they  fail  in   their  trust,  when  they  slide  from  their 
j  character,  and   degenerate    into  a    mere   common    secular 
nobleman  or  gentleman,  are  in  no  respect  worse  than  those 
[  who  may  succeed  them  in  their  forfeited  possessions?     Is 
it  better  that  estates  should  be  held  by  those  who  have  no 
duty,    than    by   those   who    have    one? — by   those    whose 
character  and  destination  point  to   virtues,  than  by  those 
who  have  no  rule  and  direction  in  the  expenditure  of  their 
I  estates  but  their  own  will  and  appetite  ?     Nor  are  these 
|  estates  held  altogether  in  the  character  or  with  the  evils 
supposed  inherent  in  mortmain.     They  pass  from  hand  to 
1  hand   with  a  more  rapid  circulation  than  any  other.     No 
excess   is  good ;    and  therefore   too  great  a  proportion  of 
landed  property  may  be  held  officially  for  life :  but  it  does 
not  seem  to  me  of  material  injury  to  any  commonwealth, 
that  there  should  exist  some  estates  that  have  a  chance  of 


206  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

being  acquired  by  other  means  than  the  previous  acquisi 
tion  of  money. 

This  letter  is  grown  to  a  great  length,  though  it  is  indeed 
short  with  regard  to  the  infinite  extent  of  the  subject. 
Various  avocations  have  from  time  to  time  called  my  mind 
from  the  subject.  I  was  not  sorry  to  give  myself  leisure 
to  observe  whether,  in  the  proceedings  of  the  National 
Assembly,  I  might  not  find  reasons  to  change  or  to  qualify 
some  of  my  first  sentiments.  Everything  has  confirmed  me 
more  strongly  in  my  first  opinions.  It  was  my  original 
purpose  to  take  a  view  of  the  principles  of  the  National 
Assembly  with  regard  to  the  great  and  fundamental  estab 
lishments  ;  and  to  compare  the  whole  of  what  you  have 
substituted  in  the  place  of  what  you  have  destroyed,  with 
the  several  members  of  our  British  constitution.  But  this 
plan  is  of  a  greater  extent  than  at  first  I  computed,  and  I 
find  that  you  have  little  desire  to  take  the  advantage  of  any 
examples.  At  present  I  must  content  myself  with  some 
remarks  upon  your  establishments;  reserving  for  another 
time  what  I  proposed  to  say  concerning  the  spirit  of  our 
British  monarchy,  aristocracy,  and  democracy,  as  practi 
cally  they  exist. 

I  have  taken  a  view  of  what  has  been  done  by  the 
governing  power  in  France.  I  have  certainly  spoke  of  it 
with  freedom.  Those  whose  principle  it  is  to  despise  the 
ancient,  permanent  sense  of  mankind,  and  to  set  up  a 
scheme  of  society  on  new  principles,  must  naturally  expect 
that  such  of  us  who  think  better  of  the  judgment  of  the 
human  race  than  of  theirs,  should  consider  both  them  and 
their  devices  as  men  and  schemes  upon  their  trial.  They 
must  take  it  for  granted  that  we  attend  much  to  their 
reason,  but  not  at  all  to  their  authority.  They  have  not 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  207 

one  of  the  great  influencing  prejudices  of  mankind  in  their 
favour.  They  avow  their  hostility  to  opinion.  Of  course 
they  must  expect  no  support  from  that  influence,  which, 
with  every  other  authority,  they  have  deposed  from  the  seat 
of  its  jurisdiction. 

I  can  never  consider  this  Assembly  as  anything  else  than 
a  voluntary  association  of  men,  who  have  availed  them 
selves  of  circumstances  to  seize  upon  the  power  of  the 
state.  They  have  not  the  sanction  and  authority  of  the 
character  under  which  they  first  met.  They  have  assumed 
another  of  a  very  different  nature;  and  have  completely 
altered  and  inverted  all  the  relations  in  which  they  origin 
ally  stood.  They  do  not  hold  the  authority  they  exercise 
under  any  constitutional  law  of  the  state.  They  have 
departed  from  the  instructions  of  the  people  by  whom  they 
were  sent;  which  instructions,  as  the  Assembly  did  not 
act  in  virtue  of  any  ancient  usage  or  settled  law,  were  the 
sole  source  of  their  authority.  The  most  considerable  of 
their  acts  have  not  been  done  by  great  majorities ;  and  in 
this  sort  of  near  divisions,  which  carry  only  the  constructive 
authority  of  the  whole,  strangers  will  consider  reasons  as 
well  as  resolutions. 

If  they  had  set  up  this  new,  experimental  government  as 
a  necessary  substitute  for  an  expelled  tyranny,  mankind 
would  anticipate  the  time  of  prescription,  which,  through 
^  long  usage,  mellows  into  legality  governments  that  were 
violent  in  their  commencement.  All  those  who  have 
affections  which  lead  them  to  the  conservation  of  civil 
order  would  recognise,  even  in  its  cradle,  the  child  as 
legitimate,  which  has  been  produced  from  those  principles 
of  cogent  expediency  to  which  all  just  governments  owe 
their  birth,  and  on  which  they  justify  their  continuance. 


2o8  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

But  they  will  be  late  and  reluctant  in,  giving  any  sort  of 
countenance  to  the  operations  of  a  power  which  has 
derived  its  birth  from  no  law  and  no  necessity,  but  which 
on  the  contrary  has  had  its  origin  in  those  vices  and 
sinister  practices  by  which  the  social  union  is  often  dis 
turbed  and  sometimes  destroyed.  This  Assembly  has 
hardly  a  year's  prescription.  We  have  their  own  word  for 
it  that  they  have  made  a  revolution.  To  make  a  revolu 
tion  is  a  measure  which,  prima  fronte,  requires  an  apology. 
To  make  a  revolution  is  to  subvert  the  ancient  state  of  our 
country ;  and  no  common  reasons  are  called  for  to  justify 
so  violent  a  proceeding.  The  sense  of  mankind  authorises 
us  to  examine  into  the  mode  of  acquiring  new  power,  and 
to  criticise  on  the  use  that  is  made  of  it,  with  less  awe  and 
reverence  than  that  which  is  usually  conceded  to  a  settled 
and  recognised  authority. 

In  obtaining  and  securing  their  power,  the  Assembly  pro 
ceeds  upon  principles  the  most  opposite  from  those  which 
appear  to  direct  them  in  the  use  of  it.  An  observation  on 
this  difference  will  let  us  into  the  true  spirit  of  their 
conduct.  Everything  which  they  have  done,  or  continue  to 
do,  in  order  to  obtain  and  keep  their  power,  is  by  the  most 
common  arts.  They  proceed  exactly  as  their  ancestors  of 
ambition  have  done  before  them. — Trace  them  through  all 
their  artifices,  frauds,  and  violences,  you  can  find  nothing 
at  all  that  is  new.  They  follow  precedents  and  examples 
with  the  punctilious  exactness  of  a  pleader.  They  never 
depart  an  iota  from  the  authentic  formulas  of  tyranny  and 
usurpation.  But  in  all  the  regulations  relative  to  the  public 
good,  the  spi'rit  has  been  the  very  reverse  of  this.  There 
they  commit  the  whole  to  the  mercy  of  untried  specula 
tions  ;  they  abandon  the  dearest  interests  of  the  public  to 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  209 

those  loose  theories,  to  which  none  of  them  would  choose 
to  trust  the  slightest  of  his  private  concerns.  They  make 
this  difference,  because  in  their  desire  of  obtaining  and 
securing  power  they  are  thoroughly  in  earnest ;  there  they 
travel  in  the  beaten  road.  The  public  interests,  because 
about  them  they  have  no  real  solicitude,  they  abandon  wholly 
to  chance :  I  say  to  chance,  because  their  schemes  have 
nothing  in  experience  to  prove  their  tendency  beneficial. 

We  must  always  see  with  a  pity  not  unmixed  with  respect 
the  errors  of  those  who  are  timid  and  doubtful  of  them 
selves  with  regard  to  points  wherein  the  happiness  of 
mankind  is  concerned.  But  in  these  gentlemen  there  is 
nothing  of  the  tender,  parental  solicitude  which  fears  to 
cut  up  the  infant  for  the  sake  of  an  experiment.  In  the 
vastness  of  their  promises,  and  the  confidence  of  their 
predictions,  they  far  outdo  all  the  boasting  of  empirics. 
The  arrogance  of  their  pretensions,  in  a  manner  provokes 
and  challenges  us  to  an  inquiry  into  their  foundation. 

I  am  convinced  that  there  are  men  of  considerable  parts 
among  the  popular  leaders  in  the  National  Assembly.  Some 
of  them  display  eloquence  in  their  speeches  and  their 
writings.  This  cannot  be  without  powerful  and  cultivated 
talents.  But  eloquence  may  exist  without  a  proportionable 
degree  of  wisdom.  When  I  speak  of  ability,  I  am  obliged 
to  distinguish.  What  they  have  done  towards  the  support 
of  their  system  bespeaks  no  ordinary  men.  In  the  system 
itself,  taken  as  the  scheme  of  a  republic  constructed  for 
procuring  the  prosperity  and  security  of  the  citizen,  and  for 
promoting  the  strength  and  grandeur  of  the  state,  I  confess 
myself  unable  to  find  out  anything  which  displays,  in  a  single 
instance,  the  work  of  a  comprehensive  and  disposing  mind, 
or  even  the  provisions  of  a  vulgar  prudence.  Their  purpose 


2To  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

everywhere  seems  to  have  been  to  evade  and  slip  aside 
from  difficulty.  This  it  has  been  the  glory  of  the  great 
masters  in  all  the  arts  to  confront,  and  to  overcome;  and 
when  they  had  overcome  the  first  difficulty,  to  turn  it  into 
an  instrument  for  new  conquests  over  new  difficulties;  thus 
to  enable  them  to  extend  the  empire  of  their  science ;  and 
even  to  push  forward,  beyond  the  reach  of  their  original 
thoughts,  the  land-marks  of  the  human  understanding  itself. 
Difficulty  is  a  severe  instructor,  set  over  us  by  the  supreme 
ordinance  of  a  parental  Guardian  and  Legislator,  who  knows 
us  better  than  we  know  ourselves,  as  he  loves  us  better  too. 
Pater  ipse  colendi  hand  facilem  esse  viam  voluit  He  that 
wrestles  with  us  strengthens  our  nerves,  and  sharpens  our 
skill.  Our  antagonist  is  our  helper.  This  amicable  conflict 
with  difficulty  obliges  us  to  an  intimate  acquaintance  with 
our  object,  and  compels  us  to  consider  it  in  all  its  relations. 
It  will  not  suffer  us  to  be  superficial.  It  is  the  want  of 
nerves  of  understanding  for  such  a  task,  it  is  the  degenerate 
fondness  for  tricking  short-cuts,  and  little  fallacious  facilities, 
that  has  in  so  many  parts  of  the  world  created  governments 
with  arbitrary  powers.  They  have  created  the  late  arbitrary 
monarchy  of  France.  They  have  created  the  arbitrary 
republic  of  Paris.  With  them  defects  in  wisdom  are  to 
be  supplied  by  the  plenitude  of  force.  They  get  nothing 
by  it.  Commencing  their  labours  on  a  principle  of  sloth, 
they  have  the  common  fortune  of  slothful  men.  The 
difficulties  which  they  rather  had  eluded  than  escaped,  meet 
them  again  in  their  course;  they  multiply  and  thicken  on 
them  ;  they  are  involved,  through  a  labyrinth  of  confused 
detail,  in  an  industry  without  limit,  and  without  direction; 
and,  in  conclusion,  the  whole  of  their  work  becomes  feeble, 
vicious,  and  insecure. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  211 

It  is  this  inability  to  wrestle  with  difficulty  which  has 
obliged  the  arbitrary  Assembly  of  France  to  commence  their 
schemes  of  reform  with  abolition  and  total  destruction.1  But 
is  it  in  destroying  arid  pulling  down  that  skill  is  displayed? 
Your  mob  can  do  this  as  well  at  least  as  your  assemblies. 
The  shallowest  understanding,  the  rudest  hand,  is  more  than 
equal  to  that  task.  Rage  and  frenzy  will  pull  down  more 
in  half  an  hour,  than  prudence,  deliberation,  and  foresight 
can  build  up  in  a  hundred  years.  The  errors  and  defects  of 
old  establishments  are  visible  and  palpable.  It  calls  for 
little  ability  to  point  them  out ;  and  where  absolute  power 
is  given,  it  requires  but  a  word  wholly  to  abolish  the  vice 
and  the  establishment  together.  The  same  lazy  but 
restless  disposition  which  loves  sloth  and  hates  quiet, 
directs  the  politicians  when  they  come  to  work  for  supply 
ing  the  place  of  what  they  have  destroyed.  To  make  every 
thing  the  reverse  of  what  they  have  seen  is  quite  as  easy  as 
to  destroy.  No  difficulties  occur  in  what  has  never  been 
tried.  Criticism  is  almost  baffled  in  discovering  the  defects 
of  what  has  not  existed  ;  and  eager  enthusiasm  and  cheating 

1  A  leading  member  of  the  Assembly,  M.  Rabaud  de  St.  Etienne,  has 
expressed  the  principle  of  all  their  proceedings  as  clearly  as  possible— 
Nothing  can  be  more  simple  : — "  Toils  Jes  etablissemens  en  France 
couronnent  le  malheur  du  peitple:  pour  le  rendre  heureux  il  faut  le 
renouveler;  changer  ses  idees  ;  changer  ses  loix  ;  changer  ses  mteurs;  . 
changer  les  homines ;  changer  les  chases ;  changer  les  mots  ....  tout 
detruire  ;  oui,  tout  detruire  ;  puisque  tout  est  a  recreer"  This  gentle 
man  was  chosen  president  in  an  assembly  not  sitting  at  the  Quinze-vingt, 
or  the  Felits  Mai  sons  ;  and  composed  of  persons  giving  themselves  out 
to  be  rational  beings  ;  but  neither  his  ideas,  language,  nor  conduct  differ 
in  the  smallest  degree  from  the  discourses,  opinions,  and  actions  of  those 
within  and  without  the  Assembly,  who  direct  the  operations  of  the 
machine  now  at  work  in  France. 


2i2  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

hope  have  all  the  wide  field  of  imagination,  in  which  they 
may  expatiate  with  little  or  no  opposition. 

At  once  to  preserve  and  to  reform  is  quite  another  thing. 
When  the  useful  parts  of  an  old  establishment  are  kept,  and 
what  is  superadded  is  to  be  fitted  to  what  is  retained,  a 
vigorous  mind,  steady,  persevering  attention,  various  powers 
of  comparison  and  combination,  and  the  resources  of  an 
understanding  fruitful  in  expedients,  are  to  be  exercised ; 
they  are  to  be  exercised  in  a  continued  conflict  with  the 
combined  force  of  opposite  vices,  with  the  obstinacy  that 
rejects  all  improvement,  and  the  levity  that  is  fatigued  and 
disgusted  with  everything  of  which  it  is  in  possession.  But 
you  may  object — "A  process  of  this  kind  is  slow.  It  is  not 
fit  for  an  assembly  which  glories  in  performing  in  a  few 
months  the  work  of  ages.  Such  a  mode  of  reforming, 
possibly,  might  take  up  many  years."  Without  question  it 
might ;  and  it  ought.  It  is  one  of  the  excellencies  of  a 
method  in  which  time  is  amongst  the  assistants,  that  its 
operation  is  slow,  and  in  some  cases  almost  imperceptible. 
If  circumspection  and  caution  are  a  part  of  wisdom,  when  we 
work  only  upon  inanimate  matter,  surely  they  become  a  part 
of  duty  too,  when  the  subject  of  our  demolition  and  con 
struction  is  not  brick  and  timber,  but  sentient  beings,  by  the 
sudden  alteration  of  whose  state,  condition,  and  habits, 
multitudes  may  be  rendered  miserable.  But  it  seems  as  if 
it  were  the  prevalent  opinion  in  Paris,  that  an  unfeeling  heart, 
and  an  undoubting  confidence,  are  the  sole  qualifications  for 
a  perfect  legislator.  Far  different  are  my  ideas  of  that  high 
office.  The  true  lawgiver  ought  to  have  a  heart  full  of 
sensibility.  He  ought  to  love  and  respect  his  kind,  and  to 
fear  himself.  It  may  be  allowed  to  his  temperament  to  catch 
his  ultimate  object  with  an  intuitive  glance;  but  his  move- 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  213 

ments  towards  it  ought  to  be  deliberate  Political 
arrangement,  as  it  is  a  work  for  social  ends,  is  to  be  only 
wrought  by  social  means.  There  mind  must  conspire  with 
mind.  Time  is  required  to  produce  that  union  of  minds 
which  alone  can  produce  all  the  good  we  aim  at.  Our 
patience  will  achieve  more  than  our  force.  If  I  might 
venture  to  appeal  to  what  is  so  much  out  of  fashion  in  Paris, 
I  mean  to  experience,  I  should  tell  you  that  in  my  course  I 
have  known,  and,  according  to  my  measure,  have  co-operated 
with  great  men ;  and  I  have  never  yet  seen  any  plan  which 
has  not  been  mended  by  the  observations  of  those  who  were 
much  inferior  in  understanding  to  the  person  who  took  the 
lead  in  the  business.  By  a  slow  but  well-sustained  progress, 
the  effect  of  each  step  is  watched  ;  the  good  or  ill  success  of 
the  first  gives  light  to  us  in  the  second ;  and  so,  from  light  to 
light,  we  are  conducted  with  safety  through  the  whole  series. 
We  see  that  the  parts  or  the  system  do  not  clash.  The  evils 
latent  in  the  most  promising  contrivances  are  provided  for  as 
they  arise.  One  advantage  is  as  little  as  possible  sacrificed 
to  another.  We  compensate,  we  reconcile,  we  balance.  We 
are  enabled  to  unite  into  a  consistent  whole  the  various 
anomalies  and  contending  principles  that  are  found  in  the 
minds  and  affairs  of  men.  From  hence  arises,  not  an  excel 
lence  in  simplicity,  but  one  far  superior,  an  excellence  in 
composition.  Where  the  great  interests  of  mankind  are 
concerned  through  a  long  succession  of  generations,  that 
succession  ought  to  be  admitted  into  some  share  in  the 
councils  which  are  so  deeply  to  affect  them.  If  justice 
requires  this,  the  work  itself  requires  the  aid  of  more  minds 
than  one  age  can  furnish.  It  is  from  this  view  of  things 
that  the  best  legislators  have  been  often  satisfied  with  the 
establishment  of  some  sure,  solid,  and  ruling  principle  in 


2i4  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

government;  a  power  like  that  which  some  of  the  philo 
sophers  have  called  a  plastic  nature ;  and  having  fixed  the 
principle,  they  have  left  it  afterwards  to  its  own  operation. 

To  proceed  in  this  manner,  that  is,  to  proceed  with  a 
presiding  principle,  and  a  prolific  energy,  is  with  me  the 
criterion  of  profound  wisdom.  What  your  politicians  think 
the  marks  of  a  bold,  hardy  genius,  are  only  proofs  of  a 
deplorable  want  of  ability.  By  their  violent  haste  and  their 
defiance  of  the  process  of  nature,  they  are  delivered  over 
blindly  to  every  projector  and  adventurer,  to  every  alchemist 
and  empiric.  They  despair  of  turning  to  account  anything 
that  is  common.  Diet  is  nothing  in  their  system  of  remedy. 
The  worst  of  it  is,  that  this  their  despair  of  curing  common 
distempers  by  regular  methods,  arises  not  only  from  defect 
of  comprehension,  but,  I  fear,  from  some  malignity  of 
disposition.  Your  legislators  seem  to  have  taken  their 
opinions  of  all  professions,  ranks,  and  offices,  from  the 
declamations  and  buffooneries  of  satirists  ;  who  would  them 
selves  be  astonished  if  they  were  held  to  the  letter  of  their 
own  descriptions.  By  listening  only  to  these,  your  leaders 
regard  all  things  only  on  the  side  of  their  vices  and  faults, 
and  view  those  vices  and  faults  under  every  colour  of 
exaggeration.  It  is  undoubtedly  true,  though  it  may  seem 
paradoxical ;  but  in  general,  those  who  are  habitually  em 
ployed  in  finding  and  displaying  faults  are  unqualified  for 
the  work  of  reformation  :  because  their  minds  are  not  only 
unfurnished  with  patterns  of  the  fair  and  good,  but  by  habit 
they  come  to  take  no  delight  in  the  contemplation  of  those 
things.  By  hating  vices  too  much,  they  come  to  love  men 
too  little.  It  is  therefore  not  wonderful  that  they  should  be 
indisposed  and  unable  to  serve  them.  From  hence  arises 
the  complexional  disposition  of  some  of  your  guides  to  pull 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  215 

everything  in  pieces.  At  this  malicious  game  they  display 
the  whole  of  their  quadrimanous  activity.  As  to  the  rest, 
the  paradoxes  of  eloquent  writers,  brought  forth  purely  as  a 
sport  of  fancy,  to  try  their  talents,  to  rouse  attention  and 
excite  surprise,  are  taken  up  by  these  gentlemen,  not  in  the 
spirit  of  the  original  authors,  as  means  of  cultivating  their 
taste  and  improving  their  style.  These  paradoxes  become 
with  them  serious  grounds  of  action,  upon  which  they  proceed 
in  regulating  the  most  important  concerns  of  the  state. 
Cicero  ludicrously  describes  Cato  as  endeavouring  to  act,  in 
the  commonwealth,  upon  the  school  paradoxes  which 
exercised  the  wits  of  the  junior  students  in  the  Stoic 
philosophy.  If  this  was  true  of  Cato,  these  gentlemen  copy 
after  him  in  the  manner  of  some  persons  who  lived  about 
his  time— -pede  nudo  Catonem.  Mr.  Hume  told  me  that  he  had 
from  Rousseau  himself  the  secret  of  his  principles  of  com 
position.  That  acute  though  eccentric  observer  had 
perceived  that  to  strike  and  interest  the  public,  the 
marvellous  must  be  produced ;  that  the  marvellous  of  the 
heathen  mythology  had  long  since  lost  its  effects;  that  giants, 
magicians,  fairies,  and  heroes  of  romance  which  succeeded, 
had  exhausted  the  portion  of  credulity  which  belonged  to 
their  age;  but  now  nothing  was  left  to  the  writer  but  that 
species  of  the  marvellous  which  might  still  be  produced,  and 
with  as  great  an  effect  as  ever,  though  in  another  way;  that 
is,  the  marvellous  in  life,  in  manners,  in  characters,  and  in 
extraordinary  situations,  giving  rise  to  new  and  unlooked-for 
strokes  in  politics  and  morals.  I  believe  that  were  Rousseau 
alive,  and  in  one  of  his  lucid  intervals,  he  would  be  shocked 
at  the  practical  frenzy  of  his  scholars,  who  in  their  paradoxes 
are  servile  imitators,  and  even  in  their  incredulity  discover 
an  implicit  faith. 


216  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

Men  who  undertake  considerable  things,  even  in  a  regular 
way,  ought  to  give  us  ground  to  presume  ability.  But  the 
physician  of  the  state,  who,  not  satisfied  with  the  cure  of 
distempers,  undertakes  to  regenerate  constitutions,  ought  to 
show  uncommon  powers.  Some  very  unusual  appearances 
of  wisdom  ought  to  display  themselves  on  the  face  of  the 
designs  of  those  who  appeal  to  no  practice,  and  who  copy 
after  no  model.  Has  any  such  been  manifested?  I  shall 
take  a  view  (it  shall  for  the  subject  be  a  very  short  one)  of 
what  the  Assembly  has  done,  with  regard,  first,  to  the 
constitution  of  the  legislature ;  in  the  next  place,  to  that  of 
the  executive  power;  then  to  that  of  the  judicature;  after- 
.  wards  to  the  model  of  the  army ;  and  conclude  with  the 
system  of  finance;  to  see  whether  we  can  discover  in  any 
part  of  their  schemes  the  portentous  ability  which  may 
justify  these  bold  undertakers  in  the  superiority  which  they 
assume  over  mankind. 

It  is  in  the  model  of  the  sovereign  and  presiding  part  of 
this  new  republic,  that  we  should  expect  their  grand  display. 
Here  they  were  to  prove  their  title  to  their  proud  demands. 
For  the  plan  itself  at  large,  and  for  the  reasons  on  which  it 
is  grounded,  I  refer  to  the  journals  of  the  Assembly  of  the 
29th  of  September,  1789,  and  to  the  subsequent  proceedings 
which  have  made  any  alterations  in  the  plan.  So  far  as  in 
a  matter  somewhat  confused  I  can  see  light,  the  system 
remains  substantially  as  it  has  been  originally  framed.  My 
few  remarks  will  be  such  as  regard  its  spirit,  its  tendency, 
and  its  fitness  for  framing  a  popular  commonwealth,  which 
they  profess  theirs  to  be,  suited  to  the  ends  for  which  any 
commonwealth,  and  particularly  such  a  commonwealth,  is 
made.  At  the  same  time,  I  mean  to  consider  its  consistency 
with  itself  and  its  own  principles.  \ 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  217 

Old  establishments  are  tried  by  their  effects.  If  the 
people  are  happy,  united,  wealthy,  and  powerful,  we  presume 
the  rest.  We  conclude  that  to  be  good  from  whence  good 
is  derived.  In  old  establishments  various  correctives  have 
been  found  for  their  aberrations  from  theory.  Indeed  they 
are  the  results  of  various  necessities  and  expediences.  They 
are  not  often  constructed  after  any  theory ;  theories  are 
rather  drawn  from  them.  In  them  we  often  see  the  end  best 
obtained,  where  the  means  seem  not  perfectly  reconcilable 
to  what  we  may  fancy  was  the  original  scheme.  The 
means  taught  by  experience  may  be  better  suited  to  political 
ends  than  those  contrived  in  the  original  project.  They 
again  react  upon  the  primitive  constitution,  and  sometimes 
improve  the  design  itself,  from  which  they  seem  to  have 
departed.  I  think  all  this  might  be  curiously  exemplified  in 
the  British  Constitution.  At  worst,  the  errors  and  deviations 
of  every  kind  in  reckoning  are  found  and  computed,  and 
the  ship  proceeds  in  her  course.  This  is  the  case  of  old 
establishments;  but  in  a  new  and  merely  theoretic  system, 
it  is  expected  that  every  contrivance  shall  appear,  on  the  face 
of  it,  to  answer  its  ends  ;  especially  where  the  projectors  are 
no  way  embarrassed  with  an  endeavour  to  accommodate  the 
new  building  to  an  old  one,  either  in  the  walls  or  on  the 
foundations. 

The  French  builders,  clearing  away  as  mere  rubbish  what 
ever  they  found,  and,  like  their  ornamental  gardeners, 
forming  everything  into  an  exact  level,  propose  to  rest  the 
whole  local  and  general  legislature  on  three  bases  of  three 
different  kinds — one  geometrical,  one  arithmetical,  and  the 
third,  financial ;  the  first  of  which  they  call  the  basis  of 
territory ;  the  second,  the  basis  of  population ;  and  the  third, 
the  basis  of  contribution.  For  the  accomplishment  of  the 


218  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

first  of  these  purposes,  they  divide  the  area  of  their  country 
into  eighty-three  pieces,  regularly  square,  of  eighteen  leagues 
by  eighteen.  These  large  divisions  are  called  Departments. 
These  they  portion,  proceeding  by  square  measurement,  into 
1,720  districts,  called  Communes.  These  again  they  sub 
divide,  still  proceeding  by  square  measurement,  into  smaller 
districts  called  Cantons,  making  in  all  6,400. 

At  first  view  this  geometrical  basis  of  theirs  presents  not 
much  to  admire  or  to  blame.  It  calls  for  no  great  legislative 
talents.  Nothing  more  than  an  accurate  land  surveyor,  with 
his  chain,  sight,  and  theodolite,  is  requisite  for  such  a  plan 
as  this.  In  the  old  divisions  of  the  country,  various  accidents 
at  various  times,  and  the  ebb  and  flow  of  various  properties 
and  jurisdictions,  settled  their  bounds.  These  bounds  were 
not  made  upon  any  fixed  system  undoubtedly.  They  were 
subject  to  some  inconveniences;  but  they  were  incon 
veniences  for  which  use  had  found  remedies,  and  habit  had 
supplied  accommodation  and  patience.  In  this  new  pavement 
of  square  within  square,  and  this  organisation,  and  semi- 
organisation,  made  on  the  system  of  Empedocles  and 
Buffon,  and  not  upon  any  politic  principle,  it  is  impossible 
that  innumerable  local  inconveniences,  to  which  men  are 
not  habituated,  must  not  arise.  But  these  I  pass  over, 
because  it  requires  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  country, 
which  I  do  not  possess,  to  specify  them. 

When  these  state  surveyors  came  to  take  a  view  of  their 
work  of  measurement,  they  soon  found  that  in  politics  ^the 
most  fallacious  of  all  things  was  geometrical  demonstration. 
They  had  then  recourse  to  another  basis  (or  rather  buttress) 
to  support  the  building,  which  tottered  on  that  false  founda 
tion.  It  was  evident  that  the  goodness  of  the  soil,  the 
number  of  the  people,  their  wealth,  and  the  largeness  of 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  219 

their  contribution,  made  such  infinite  variations  between 
square  and  square,  as  to  render  mensuration  a  ridiculous 
standard  of  power  in  the  commonwealth,  and  equality  in 
geometry  the  most  unequal  of  all  measures  in  the  distribution 
of  men.  However,  they  could  not  give  it  up.  But  dividing 
their  political  and  civil  representation  into  three  parts,  they 
allotted  one  of  those  parts  to  the  square  measurement,  with 
out  a  single  fact  or  calculation  to  ascertain  whether  this 
territorial  proportion  of  representation  was  fairly  assigned, 
and  ought  upon  any  principle  really  to  be  a  third.  Having, 
however,  given  to  geometry  this  portion  (of  a  third  for  her 
dower)  out  of  compliment,  I  suppose,  to  that  sublime  science, 
they  left  the  other  two  to  be  scuffled  for  between  the  other 
parts,  population  and  contribution. 

When  they  came  to  provide  for  population,  they  were  not 
able  to  proceed  quite  so  smoothly  as  they  had  done  in  the 
field  of  their  geometry.  Here  their  arithmetic  came  to  bear 
upon  their  juridical  metaphysics.  Had  they  stuck  to  their 
metaphysic  principles,  the  arithmetical  process  would  be 
simple  indeed.  Men,  with  them,  are  strictly  equal,  and  are 
entitled  to  equal  rights  in  their  own  government.  Each 
head,  on  this  system,  would  have  its  vote,  and  every  man 
would  vote  directly  for  the  person  who  was  to  represent  him 
in  the  legislature.  "But  soft — by  regular  degrees,  not  yet." 
This  metaphysic  principle,  to  which  law,  custom,  usage, 
policy,  reason,  were  to  yield,  is  to  yield  itself  to  their  pleasure. 
There  must  be  many  degrees,  and  some  stages,  before  the 
representative  can  come  in  contact  with  his  constituent. 
Indeed,  as  we  shall  soon  see,  these  two  persons  are  to  have 
no  sort  of  communion  with  each  other.  First,  the  voters  in 
the  Canton^  who  compose  what  they  call  primary  assemblies, 
are  to  have  a  qualification.  What !  a  qualification  on  the 


22O 


REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 


indefeasible  rights  of  men?  Yes;  but  it  shall  be  a  very 
small  qualification.  Our  injustice  shall  be  very  little 
oppressive ;  only  the  local  valuation  of  three  days'  labour 
paid  to  the  public.  Why,  this  is  not  much,  I  readily  admit, 
for  anything  but  the  utter  subversion  of  your  equalising 
principle.  As  a  qualification  it  might  as  well  be  let  alone ; 
for  it  answers  no  one  purpose  for  which  qualifications  are 
established  ;  and,  on  your  ideas,  it  excludes  from  a  vote  the 
man  of  all  others  whose  natural  equality  stands  the  most  in 
need  of  protection  and  defence :  I  mean  the  man  who  has 
nothing  else  but  his  natural  equality  to  guard  him.  You 
order  him  to  buy  the  right,  which  you  before  told  him  nature 
had  given  to  him  gratuitously  at  his  birth,  and  of  which  no 
authority  on  earth  could  lawfully  deprive  him.  With  regard 
to  the  person  who  cannot  come  up  to  your  market,  a  tyran 
nous  aristocracy,  as  against  him,  is  established  at  the  very 
outset,  by  you  who  pretend  to  be  its  sworn  foe. 

The  gradation  proceeds.  These  primary  assemblies  of 
the  Canton  elect  deputies  to  the  Commune;  one  for  every 
two  hundred  qualified  inhabitants.  Here  is  the  first  medium 
put  between  the  primary  elector  and  the  representative 
legislator ;  and  here  a  new  turnpike  is  fixed  for  taxing  the 
rights  of  men  with  a  second  qualification  :  for  none  can  be 
elected  into  the  Commune  who  does  not  pay  the  amount  of 
ten  days'  labour.  Nor  have  we  yet  done.  There  is  still 
to  be  another  gradation.1  These  Communes,  chosen  by  the 

1  The  Assembly,  in  executing  the  plan  of  their  committee,  made 
some  alterations.  They  have  struck  out  one  stage  in  these  gradations  ; 
this  removes  a  part  of  the  objection  ;  but  the  main  objection,  namely, 
that  in  their  scheme  the  first  constituent  voter  has  no  connection  with 
the  representative  legislator,  remains  in  all  its  force.  There  are  other 
alterations,  some  possibly  for  the  better,  some  certainly  for  the  worse ; 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  221 

Canton,  choose  to  the  Department;  and  the  deputies  of  the 
Department  choose  their  deputies  to  the  National  Assembly. 
Here  is  a  third  barrier  of  a  senseless  qualification.  Every 
deputy  to  the  National  Assembly  must  pay,  in  direct  con 
tribution,  to  the  value  of  a  mark  of  silver.  Of  all  these 
qualifying  barriers  we  must  think  alike ;  that  they  are 
impotent  to  secure  independence  ;  strong  only  to  destroy 
the  rights  of  men. 

In  all  this  process,  which  in  its  fundamental  elements 
affects  to  consider  only  population  upon  a  principle  of 
natural  right,  there  is  a  manifest  attention  to  property;  which, 
however  just  and  reasonable  on  other  schemes,  is  on  theirs 
perfectly  unsupportable. 

When  they  come  to  their  third  basis,  that  of  Contribution, 
we  find  that  they  have  more  completely  lost  sight  of  their 
rights  of  men.  This  last  basis  rests  entirely  on  property. 
A  principle  totally  different  from  the  equality  of  men,  and 
utterly  irreconcilable  to  it,  is  thereby  admitted ;  but  no 
sooner  is  this  principle  admitted,  than  (as  usual)  it  is  sub 
verted  ;  and  it  is  not  subverted  (as  we  shall  presently  see) 
to  approximate  the  inequality  of  riches  to  the  level  of  nature. 
The  additional  share  in  the  third  portion  of  representation 
(a  portion  reserved  exclusively  for  the  higher  contribution) 
is  made  to  regard  the  district  only,  and  not  the  individuals 
in  it  who  pay.  It  is  easy  to  perceive,  by  the  course  of  their 
reasonings,  how  much  they  were  embarrassed  by  their 
contradictory  ideas  of  the  rights  of  men  and  the  privileges 
of  riches.  The  committee  of  constitution  do  as  good  as 
admit  that  they  are  wholly  irreconcilable.  "The  relation 

but  to  the  author  the  merit  or  demerit  of  these  smaller  alterations  ap 
pears  to  be  of  no  moment,  where  the  scheme  itself  is  fundamentally 
vicious  and  absurd. 


222  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

with  regard  to  the  contributions  is  without  doubt  null  (say 
they)  when  the  question  is  on  the  balance  of  the  political 
rights  as  between  individual  and  individual ;  without  which 
personal  equality  woiild  be  destroyed,  and  an  aristocracy  of 
the  rich  would  be  established.  But  this  inconvenience 
entirely  disappears  when  the  proportional  relation  of  the 
contribution  is  only  considered  in  the  great  masses,  and  is 
solely  between  province  and  province ;  it  serves  in  that  case 
only  to  form  a  just  reciprocal  proportion  between  the  cities, 
without  affecting  the  personal  rights  of  the  citizens." 

Here  the  principle  of  contribution,  as  taken  between  man 
and  man,  is  reprobated  as  null,  and  destructive  to  equality  : 
and  as  pernicious  too;  because  it  leads  to  the  establishment 
of  an  aristocracy  of  the  rich.  However,  it  must  not  be 
abandoned.  And  the  way  of  getting  rid  of  the  difficulty 
is  to  establish  the  inequality  as  between  department  and 
department,  leaving  all  the  individuals  in  each  department 
upon  an  exact  par.  Observe,  that  this  parity  between 
individuals  had  been  before  destroyed,  when  the  qualifica 
tions  within  the  departments  were  settled;  nor  does  it  seem 
a  matter  of  great  importance  whether  the  equality  of  men  be 
injured  by  masses  or  individually.  An  individual  is  not  of 
the  same  importance  in  a  mass  represented  by  a  few,  as  in  a 
mass  represented  by  many.  It  would  be  too  much  to  tell  a 
man  jealous  of  his  equality,  that  the  elector  has  the  same 
franchise  who  votes  for  three  members  as  he  who  votes  for  ten. 

Now  take  it  in  the  other  point  of  view,  and  let  us  suppose 
their  principle  of  representation  according  to  contribution, 
that  is,  according  to  riches,  to  be  well  imagined,  and  to  be 
a  necessary  basis  for  their  republic.  In  this  their  third  basis 
they  assume  that  riches  ought  to  be  respected,  and  that 
justice  and  policy  require  that  they  should  entitle  men,  in 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  223 

some  mode  or  other,  to  a  larger  share  in  the  administration 
of  public  affairs ;  it  is  now  to  be  seen  how  the  Assembly 
provides  for  the  pre-eminence,  or  even  for  the  security,  of 
the  rich,  by  conferring,  in  virtue  of  their  opulence,  that 
larger  measure  of  power  to  their  district  which  is  denied  to 
them  personally.  I  readily  admit  (indeed  I  should  lay  it 
down  as  a  fundamental  principle)  that  in  a  republican 
government,  which  has  a  democratic  basis,  the  rich  do 
require  an  additional  security  above  what  is  necessary  to 
them  in  monarchies.  They  are  subject  to  envy,  and  through 
envy  to  oppression.  On  the  present  scheme  it  is  impossible 
to  divine  what  advantage  they  derive  from  the  aristocratic 
preference  upon  which  the  unequal  representation  of  the 
masses  is  founded.  The  rich  cannot  feel  it,  either  as  a  sup 
port  to  dignity,  or  as  security  to  fortune  :  for  the  aristocratic 
mass  is  generated  from  purely  democratic  principles  ;  and 
the  prevalence  given  to  it  in  the  general  representation  has 
no  sort  of  reference  to,  or  connection  with,  the  persons,  upon 
account  of  whose  property  this  superiority  of  the  mass  is 
established.  If  the  contrivers  of  this  scheme  meant  any 
sort  of  favour  to  the  rich,  in  consequence  of  their  contribu 
tion,  they  ought  to  have  conferred  the  privilege  either  on 
the  individual  rich,  or  on  some  class  formed  of  rich  persons 
(as  historians  represent  Servius  Tullius  to  have  done  in  the 
early  constitution  of  Rome) ;  because  the  contest  between 
the  rich  and  the  poor  is  not  a  struggle  between  corporation 
and  corporation,  but  a  contest  between  men  and  men  ;  a 
competition  not  between  districts,  but  between  descriptions. 
It  would  answer  its  purpose  better  if  the  scheme  were  in 
verted  ;  that  the  votes  of  the  masses  were  rendered  equal ; 
and  that  the  votes  within  each  mass  were  proportioned  to 
property. 


224  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

Let  us  suppose  one  man  in  a  district  (it  is  an  easy  sup 
position)  to  contribute  as  much  as  a  hundred  of  his 
neighbours.  Against  these  he  has  but  one  vote.  If  there 
were  but  one  representative  for  the  mass,  his  poor  neigh 
bours  would  outvote  him  by  a  hundred  to  one  for  that 
single  representative.  Bad  enough.  But  amends  are  to  be 
made  him.  How?  The  district,  in  virtue  of  his  wealth,  is 
to  choose,  say  ten  members  instead  of  one  :  that  is  to  say, 
by  paying  a  very  large  contribution  he  has  the  happiness  of 
being  outvoted,  a  hundred  to  one,  by  the  poor,  for  ten 
representatives,  instead  of  being  outvoted  exactly  in  the  same 
proportion  for  a  single  member.  In  truth,  instead  of  bene 
fiting  by  this  superior  quantity  of  representation,  the  rich 
man  is  subjected  to  an  additional  hardship.  The  increase 
of  representation  within  his  province  sets  up  nine  persons 
more,  and  as  many  more  than  nine  as  there  may  be  demo 
cratic  candidates,  to  cabal  and  intrigue,  and  to  flatter  the 
people  at  his  expense  and  to  his  oppression.  An  interest  is 
by  this  means  held  out  to  multitudes  of  the  inferior  sort,  in 
obtaining  a  salary  of  eighteen  livres  a  day  (to  them  a  vast 
object),  besides  the  pleasure  of  a  residence  in  Paris,  and 
their  share  in  the  government  of  the  kingdom.  The  more 
the  objects  of  ambition  are  multiplied  and  become  demo 
cratic,  just  in  that  proportion  the  rich  are  endangered. 

Thus  it  must  fare  between  the  poor  and  the  rich  in  the 
province  deemed  aristocratic,  which  in  its  internal  relation 
is  the  very  reverse  of  that  character.  In  its  external  rela 
tion,  that  is,  its  relation  to  the  other  provinces,  I  cannot  see 
how  the  unequal  representation,  which  is  given  to  masses  on 
account  of  wealth,  becomes  the  means  of  preserving  the 
equipoise  and  the  tranquillity  of  the  commonwealth.  For  if 
it  be  one  of  the  objects  to  secure  the  weak  from  being 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  225 

crushed  by  the  strong  (as  in  all  society  undoubtedly  it  is), 
how  are  the  smaller  and  poorer  of  these  masses  to  be  saved 
from  the  tyranny  of  the  more  wealthy  ?  Is  it  by  adding  to 
the  wealthy  further  and  more  systematical  means  of  oppress 
ing  them  ?  When  we  come  to  a  balance  of  representation 
between  corporate  bodies,  provincial  interests,  emulations, 
and  jealousies  are  full  as  likely  to  arise  among  them  as 
among  individuals  ;  and  their  divisions  are  likely  to  produce 
a  much  hotter  spirit  of  dissension,  and  something  leading 
much  more  nearly  to  a  war. 

I  see  that  these  aristocratic  masses  are  made  upon  what  is 
called  the  principle  of  direct  contribution.  Nothing  can  be 
a  more  unequal  standard  than  this.  The  indirect  contribu 
tion,  that  which  arises  from  duties  on  consumption,  is  in 
truth  a  better  standard,  and  follows  and  discovers  wealth 
i  more  naturally  than  this  of  direct  contribution.  It  is  difficult 

!  indeed  to  fix  a  standard  of  local  preference  on  account  of 
the  one,  or  of  the  other,  or  of  both,  because  some  provinces 
may  pay  the  more  of  either  or  of  both,  on  account  of  causes 
not  intrinsic,  but  originating  from  those  very  districts  over 
whom  they  have  obtained  a  preference  in  consequence  of 
their  ostensible  contribution.     If  the  masses  were  independ- 
)-  !  ent,  sovereign  bodies,  who  were  to  provide  for  a  federative 
i  treasury  by  distinct  contingents,  and  that  the  revenue  had 
1  not  (as  it  has)  many  impositions  running  through  the  whole, 
;n  i  which  affect  men  individually,  and  not  corporately,  and  which, 
-1'    by  their  nature,  confound  all   territorial   limits,  something 
ee    might  be  said  for  the  basis  of  contribution  as  founded  on 
on    masses.    But  of  all  things,  this  representation,  to  be  measured 
:!ie    by  contribution,  is  the  most  difficult  to  settle  upon  principles 
r"  |  of  equity  in  a  country  which  considers  its  districts  as  mem- 
ty    bers  of  a  whole.    For  a  great  city,  such  as  Bourdeaux,  or  Paris, 


226  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

appears  to  pay  a  vast  body  of  duties,  almost  out  of  all 
assignable  proportion  to  other  places,  and  its  mass  is 
considered  accordingly.  But  are  these  cities  the  true 
contributors  in  that  proportion  ?  No.  The  consumers  of  the 
commodities  imported  into  Bourdeaux,  who  are  scattered 
through  all  France,  pay  the  import  duties  of  Bourdeaux,  The 
produce  of  the  vintage  in  Guienne  and  Languedoc  give  to 
that  city  the  means  of  its  contribution  growing  out  of  an 
export  commerce.  The  landholders  who  spend  their  estates 
in  Paris,  and  are  thereby  the  creators  of  that  city,  contribute 
for  Paris  from  the  provinces  out  of  which  their  revenues 
arise.  Very  nearly  the  same  arguments  will  apply  to  the 
representative  share  given  on  account  of  direct  contribution  : 
because  the  direct  contribution  must  be  assessed  on 
wealth  real  or  presumed ;  and  that  local  wealth  will 
itself  arise  from  causes  not  local,  and  which  therefore  in 
equity  ought  not  to  produce  a  local  preference. 

It  is  very  remarkable  that  in  this  fundamental  regulation, 
which  settles  the  representation  of  the  mass  upon  the  direct 
contribution,  they  have  not  yet  settled  how  that  direct 
contribution  shall  be  laid,  and  how  apportioned.  Perhaps 
there  is  some  latent  policy  towards  the  continuance  of  the 
present  Assembly  in  this  strange  procedure.  However,  until 
they  do  this,  they  can  have  no  certain  constitution.  It 
must  depend  at  last  upon  the  system  of  taxation,  and  must 
vary  with  every  variation  in  that  system.  As  they  have 
contrived  matters,  their  taxation  does  not  so  much  depend 
on  their  constitution,  as  their  constitution  on  their  taxation. 
This  must  introduce  great  confusion  among  the  masses ;  as 
the  variable  qualification  for  votes  within  the  district  must, 
if  ever  real  contested  elections  take  place,  cause  infinite 
internal  controversies. 


REVOLUTION  IN   FRANCE.  227 

To  compare  together  the  three  bases,  not  on  their 
political  reason,  but  on  the  ideas  on  which  the  Assembly 
works,  and  to  try  its  consistency  with  itself,  we  cannot  avoid 
observing  that  the  principle  which  the  committee  call  the 
basis  of  population  does  not  begin  to  operate  from  the  same 
point  with  the  two  other  principles  called  the  bases  of 
territory  and  of  contribution,  which  are  both  of  an  aristocratic 
nature.  The  consequence  is,  that,  where  all  three  begin  to 
operate  together,  there  is  the  most  absurd  inequality  produced 
by  the  operation  of  the  former  on  the  two  latter  principles. 
Every  canton  contains  four  square  leagues  and  is  estimated 
to  contain,  on  the  average,  4000  inhabitants,  or  680  voters  in 
\.\\Q  primary  assemblies,  which  vary  in  numbers  with  the  popu 
lation  of  the  canton,  and  send  one  deputy  to  the  commune 
for  every  200  voters.  Nine  cantons  make  a  commune. 

Now  let  us  take  a  canton  containing  a  sea-port  town  of 
trade,  or  a  great  manufacturing  town.  Let  us  suppose  the 
population  of  this  canton  to  be  12,700  inhabitants,  or  2,193 
voters,  forming  three  primary  assemblies,  and  sending  1cn 
deputies  to  the  commune. 

Oppose  to  this  one  canton  two  others  of  the  remaining 
eight  in  the  same  commune.  These  we  may  suppose  to 
have  their  fair  population  of  4000  inhabitants  and  680 
voters  each,  or  8000  inhabitants  and  1,360  voters,  both 
together.  These  will  form  only  two  primary  assemblies, 
and  send  only  six  deputies  to  the  commune. 

When  the  assembly  of  the  commune  comes  to  vote  on  the 
basis  of  territory,  which  principle  is  first  admitted  to  operate 
in  that  assembly,  the  single  canton,  which  has  half  the  terri 
tory  of  the  other  two,  will  have  ten  voices  to  six  in  the  elec 
tion  of  three  deputies  to  the  assembly  of  the  department, 
chosen  on  the  express  ground  of  a  representation  of  territory. 


228  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

This  inequality,  striking  as  it  is,  will  be  yet  highly  aggra 
vated,  if  we  suppose,  as  we  fairly  may,  the  several  other 
cantons  of  the  commune  to  fall  proportionately  short  of  the 
average  population,  as  much  as  the  principal  canton  exceeds 
it.  Now  as  to  the  basis  of  contribution,  which  also  is  a 
principle  admitted  first  to  operate  in  the  assembly  of  the 
commune.  Let  us  again  take  one  canton,  such  as  is  stated 
above.  If  the  whole  of  the  direct  contributions  paid  by 
a  great  trading  or  manufacturing  town  be  divided  equally 
among  the  inhabitants,  each  individual  will  be  found  to  pay 
much  more  than  an  individual  living  in  the  country  accord 
ing  to  the  same  average.  The  whole  paid  by  the  inhabitants 
of  the  former  will  be  more  than  the  whole  paid  by  the  in 
habitants  of  the  latter — we  may  fairly  assume  one-third 
more.  Then  the  12,700  inhabitants,  or  2,193  voters  of  the 
canton,  will  pay  as  much  as  19,050  inhabitants,  or  3,289 
voters  of  the  other  cantons,  which  are  nearly  the  estimated 
proportion  of  inhabitants  and  voters  of  five  other  cantons. 
Now  the  2,193  voters  will,  as  I  before  said,  send  only  ten 
deputies  to  the  assembly;  the  3,289  voters  will  send  sixteen. 
Thus,  for  an  equal  share  in  the  contribution  of  the  whole 
commune,  there  will  be  a  difference  of  sixteen  voices  to 
ten  in  voting  for  deputies  to  be  chosen  on  the  principle 
of  representing  the  general  contribution  of  the  whole 
commune, 

By  the  same  mode  of  computation  we  shall  find  15,875 
inhabitants,  or  2,741  voters  of  the  other  cantons,  who  pay 
one-sixth  LESS  to  the  contribution  of  the  whole  commune, 
will  have  three  voices  MORE  than  the  12,700  inhabitants,  or 
2,193  voters  of  the  one  canton. 

Such  is  the  fantastical  and  unjust  inequality  between  mass 
and  mass,  in  this  curious  repartition  of  the  rights  of  repre- 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  229 

sentation  arising  out  of  territory  and  contribution.  The 
qualifications  which  these  confer  are  in  truth  negative  quali 
fications  that  give  a  right  in  an  inverse  proportion  to  the 
possession  of  them. 

In  this  whole  contrivance  of  the  three  bases,  consider  H 
in  any  light  you  please,  I  do  not  see  a  variety  of  objects 
reconciled  in  one  consistent  whole,  but  several  contradictory 
principles  reluctantly  and  irreconcilably  brought  and  held 
together  by  your  philosophers,  like  wild  beasts  shut  up 
in  a  cage,  to  claw  and  bite  each  other  to  their  mutual 
destruction. 

I  am  afraid  I  have  gone  too  far  into  their  way  of  con 
sidering  the  formation  of  a  constitution.  They  have  much, 
but  bad,  metaphysics;  much,  but  bad,  geometry;  much, 
but  false,  proportionate  arithmetic;  but  if  it  were  all  as 
exact  as  mataphysics,  geometry,  and  arithmetic  ought  to  be, 
and  if  their  schemes  were  perfectly  consistent  in  all  their 
parts,  it  would  make  only  a  more  fair  and  sightly  vision. 
It  is' remarkable  that  in  a  great  arrangement  of  mankind, 
not  one  reference  whatsoevei  is  to  be  found  to  anything 
moral  or  anything  politic;  nothing  that  relates  to  the 
concerns,  the  actions,  the  passions,  the  interests  of  men. 
Hominem  non  sapiunt. 

You  see  I  only  consider  this  constitution    as   electoral, 
and  leading  by  steps  to  the  National  Assembly.     I  do  not 
enter  into  the  internal  government  of  the  departments,  and 
their  genealogy  through  the  communes  and  cantons.     These 
local  governments  are,  in  the  original  plan,  to  be  as  nearly 
as  possible  composed  in  the  same  manner  and  on  the  same 
principles  with  the  elective  assemblies.     They  are  each  of 
them  bodies  perfectly  compact  and  rounded  in  themselves. 
You  cannot  but  perceive  in  this  scheme  that  it  has  a 


230  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

direct  and  immediate  tendency  to  sever  France  into  a 
variety  of  republics,  and  to  rendei  them  totally  independent 
of  each  other  without  any  direct  constitutional  means  of 
coherence,  connection,  or  subordination,  except  what  may 
be  derived  from  their  acquiescence  in  the  determinations  of 
the  general  congress  of  the  ambassadors  from  each  indepen 
dent  republic.  Such  in  reality  is  the  National  Assembly, 
and  such  governments  I  admit  do  exist  in  the  world,  though 
in  forms  infinitely  more  suitable  to  the  local  and  habitual 
circumstances  of  their  people.  But  such  associations,  rather 
than  bodies  politic,  have  generally  been  the  effect  of  neces 
sity,  not  choice;  and  I  believe  the  present  French  power  is 
the  very  first  body  of  citizens  who,  having  obtained  full 
authority  to  do  with  their  country  what  they  pleased,  have 
chosen  to  dissever  it  in  this  barbarous  manner. 

It  is  impossible  not  to  observe  that,  in  the  spirit  of  this 
geometrical  distribution  and  arithmetical  arrangement,  these 
pretended  citizens  treat  France  exactly  like  a  country  of 
conquest.  Acting  as  conquerors,  they  have  imitated  the 
policy  of  the  harshest  of  that  harsh  race.  The  policy  of 
such  barbarous  victors,  who  contemn  a  subdued  people,  and 
insult  their  feelings,  has  ever  been,  as  much  as  in  them  lay, 
to  destroy  all  vestiges  of  the  ancient  country,  in  religion,  in 
polity,  in  laws,  and  in  manners;  to  confound  all  territorial 
limits;  to  produce  a  general  poverty;  to  put  up  their 
properties  to  auction;  to  crush  their  princes,  nobles,  and 
pontiffs;  to  lay  low  everything  which  had  lifted  its  head 
above  the  level,  or  which  could  serve  to  combine  or  rally, 
in  their  distresses,  the  disbanded  people,  under  the  standard 
of  old  opinion.  They  have  made  France  free  in  the  manner 
in  which  those  sincere  friends  to  the  rights  of  mankind,  the 
"Romans,  freed  Greece,  Macedon,  and  other  nations.  They 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  231 

destroyed  the  bonds  of  their  union,  under  colour  of  pro 
viding  for  the  independence  of  each  of  their  cities. 

When  the  members  who  compose  these  new  bodies  of 
cantons,  communes,  and  departments,  arrangements  pur 
posely  produced  through  the  medium  of  confusion,  begin  to 
act,  they  will  find  themselves  in  a  great  measure  strangers 
to  one  another.  The  electors  and  elected  throughout, 
especially  in  the  rural  cantons,  will  be  frequently  without 
any  civil  habitudes  or  connections,  or  any  of  that  natural 
discipline  which  is  the  soul  of  a  true  republic.  Magistrates 
and  collectors  of  revenue  are  now  no  longer  acquainted  with 
their  districts,  bishops  with  their  dioceses,  or  curates  with 
their  parishes.  These  new  colonies  of  the  rights  of  men 
bear  a  strong  resemblance  to  that  sort  of  military  colonies 
which  Tacitus  has  observed  upon  in  the  declining  policy  of 
Rome.  In  better  and  wiser  days  (whatever  course  they 
took  with  foreign  nations)  they  were  careful  to  make  the 
elements  of  methodical  subordination  and  settlement  to  be 
coeval;  and  even  to  lay  the  foundations  of  civil  discipline 
in  the  military.1  But,  when  all  the  good  arts  had  fallen 
into  ruin,  they  proceeded,  as  your  Assembly  does,  upon  the 
equality  of  men,  and  with  as  little  judgment,  and  as  little 
care  for  those  things  which  make  a  republic  tolerable  or 
durable.  But  in  this,  as  well  as  almost  every  instance, 
your  new  commonwealth  is  born,  and  bred,  and  fed,  in 

1  Non,  ut  olim,  universes  legiones  deducebantur  cum  tribunis,  et  cen- 
tunonibus,  et  sui  cujusque  ordinis  mililibus,  ut  consensu  et  caritate 
rempublicam  afficerent ;  sed  ignoti  inter  se,  diversis  manipulis,  sine 
rectore,  sine  affectibus  mutuis,  quasi  ex  alio  gcnere  mortalium,  rcpcnte 
in  unum  collecti,  numerus  magis  quam  colonia. — Tac.  AnnaL,  1.  14, 
sect.  27.  All  this  will  be  still  more  applicable  to  the  unconnected, 
rotatory,  biennial  national  assemblies,  in  this  absurd  and  senseless 
constitution. 


232  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

those  corruptions  which  mark  degenerated  and  worn-out 
republics.  Your  child  comes  into  the  world  with  the 
symptoms  of  death;  the  fades  Hippocratica  forms  the 
character  of  its  physiognomy,  and  the  prognostic  of  its 
fate. 

The  legislators  who  framed  the  ancient  republics  knew 
that  their  business  was  too  arduous  to  be  accomplished  with 
no  better  apparatus  than  the  metaphysics  of  an  under 
graduate,  and  the  mathematics  and  arithmetic  of  an  excise 
man.  They  had  to  do  with  men,  and  they  were  obliged  to 
study  human  nature.  They  had  to  do  with  citizens,  and 
they  were  obliged  to  study  the  effects  of  those  habits  which 
are  communicated  by  the  circumstances  of  civil  life.  They 
were  sensible  that  the  operation  of  this  second  nature  on 
the  first  produced  a  new  combination;  and  thence  arose 
many  diversities  amongst  men,  according  to  their  birth, 
their  education,  their  professions,  the  periods  of  their  lives, 
their  residence  in  towns  or  in  the  country,  their  several  ways 
of  acquiring  and  of  fixing  property,  and  according  to  the 
quality  of  the  property  itself,  all  which  rendered  them  as  it 
were  so  many  different  species  of  animals.  From  hence 
they  thought  themselves  obliged  to  dispose  their  citizens 
into  such  classes,  and  to  place  them  in  such  situations  in 
the  state,  as  their  peculiar  habits  might  qualify  them  to  fill, 
and  to  allot  to  them  such  appropriated  privileges  as  might 
secure  to  them  what  their  specific  occasions  required,  and 
which  might  furnish  to  each  description  such  force  as  might 
protect  it  in  the  conflict  caused  by  the  diversity  of  interests 
that  must  exist,  and  must  contend,  in  all  complex  society: 
for  the  legislator  would  have  been  ashamed  that  the  coarse 
husbandman  should  well  know  how  to  assort  and  to  use  his 
sheep,  horses,  and  oxen,  and  should  have  enough  of  com- 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  233 

mon  sense  not  to  abstract  and  equalise  them  all  into 
animals,  without  providing  for  each  kind  an  appropriate 
food,  care,  and  employment;  whilst  he,  the  economist, 
disposer,  and  shepherd  of  his  own  kindred,  subliming 
himself  into  an  airy  metaphysician,  was  resolved  to  know 
nothing  of  his  flocks  but  as  men  in  general.  It  is  for  this 
reason  that  Montesquieu  observed  very  justly  that  in  their 
classification  of  the  citizens,  the  great  legislators  of  antiquity 
made  the  greatest  display  of  their  powers,  and  even  soared 
above  themselves.  It  is  here  that  your  modern  legislators 
have  gone  deep  into  the  negative  series,  and  sunk  even  below 
their  own  nothing.  As  the  first  sort  of  legislators  attended 
to  the  different  kinds  of  citizens,  and  combined  them  into 
one  commonwealth,  the  others,  the  metaphysical  and 
alchemistical  legislators,  have  taken  the  direct  contrary 
course.  They  have  attempted  to  confound  all  sorts  of 
citizens,  as  well  as  they  could,  into  one  homogeneous  mass; 
and  then  they  divided  this  their  amalgama  into  a  number 
of  incoherent  republics.  They  reduce  men  to  loose 
counters,  merely  for  the  sake  of  simple  telling,  and  not  to 
figures  whose  power  is  to  arise  from  their  place  in  the  table. 
The  elements  of  their  own  metaphysics  might  have  taught 
them  better  lessons.  The  troll  of  their  categorical  table 
might  have  informed  them  that  there  was  something  else  in 
the  intellectual  world  besides  substance  and  quantity.  They 
might  learn  from  the  catechism  of  metaphysics  that  there 
were  eight  heads  more,1  in  every  complex  deliberation, 
which  they  have  never  thought  of;  though  these,  of  all  the 
ten,  are  the  subjects  on  which  the  skill  of  man  can  operate 
anything  at  all. 

So   far  from   this   able   disposition   of  some  of   the   old 
1  Qualitas,  Relatio,  Actio,  Passio,  Ubi,  Quando,  Situs,  Habitus. 


234  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

republican  legislators,  which  follows  with  a  solicitous 
accuracy  the  moral  conditions  and  propensities  of  men, 
they  have  levelled  and  crushed  together  all  the  orders 
which  they  found,  even  under  the  coarse  unartificial 
arrangement  of  the  monarchy,  in  which  mode  of  govern 
ment  the  classing  of  the  citizens  is  not  of  so  much  im 
portance  as  in  a  republic.  Tt  is  true,  however,  that  every 
such  classification,  if  properly  ordered,  is  good  in  all  forms 
of  government;  and  composes  a  strong  barrier  against 
the  excesses  of  despotism,  as  well  as  it  is  the  necessary 
means  of  giving  effect  and  permanence  to  a  republic.  For 
want  of  something  of  this  kind,  if  the  present  project  of  a 
republic  should  fail,  all  securities  to  a  moderated  freedom 
fail  along  with  it ;  all  the  indirect  restraints  which  mitigate 
despotism  are  removed;  insomuch  that  if  monarchy  should 
ever  again  obtain  an  entire  ascendency  in  France,  under 
this  or  under  any  other  dynasty,  it  will  probably  be,  if  not 
voluntarily  tempered,  at  setting  out,  by  the  wise  and  virtuous 
counsels  of  the  prince,  the  most  completely  arbitrary  power 
that  has  ever  appeared  on  earth.  This  is  to  play  a  most 
desperate  game. 

The  confusion  which  attends  on  all  such  proceedings, 
they  even  declare  to  be  one  of  their  objects,  and  they  hope 
to  secure  their  constitution  by  a  terror  of  a  return  of  those 
evils  which  attended  their  making  it.  "  By  this,"  say  they, 
"its  destruction  will  become  difficult  to  authority,  which 
cannot  break  it  up  without  the  entire  disorganisation  of  the 
whole  state. J;  They  presume  that  if  this  authority  should 
ever  come  to  the  same  degree  of  power  that  they  have 
acquired,  it  would  make  a  more  moderate  and  chastised 
use  of  it,  and  would  piously  tremble  entirely  to  disorganise 
the  state  in  the  savage  manner  that  they  have  done.  They 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  235 

expect,  from  the  virtues  of  returning  despotism,  the  security 
which  is  to  be  enjoyed  by  the  offspring  of  their  popular 
vices. 

I  wish,  Sir,  that  you  and  my  readers  would  give  an 
attentive  perusal  to  the  work  of  M.  de  Calonne  on  this 
subject.  It  is  indeed  not  only  an  eloquent,  but  an  able 
and  instructive,  performance.  I  confine  myself  to  what  he 
says  relative  to  the  constitution  of  the  new  state,  and  to  the 
condition  of  the  revenue.  As  to  the  disputes  of  this 
minister  with  his  rivals,  I  do  not  wish  to  pronounce  upon 
them.  As  little  do  I  mean  to  hazard  any  opinion  con 
cerning  his  ways  and  means,  financial  or  political,  for  taking 
his  country  out  of  its  present  disgraceful  and  deplorable 
situation  of  servitude,  anarchy,  bankruptcy,  and  beggary. 
I  cannot  speculate  quite  so  sanguinely  as  he  does  :  but  he 
is  a  Frenchman,  and  has  a  closer  duty  relative  to  those 
J  objects,  and  better  means  of  judging  of  them,  than  I  can 
I  have.  I  wish  that  the  formal  avowal  which  he  refers  to, 
made  by  one  of  the  principal  leaders  in  the  Assembly,  con 
cerning  the  tendency  of  their  scheme  to  bring  France  not 
only  from  a  monarchy  to  a  republic,  but  from  a  republic  to 
a  mere  confederacy,  may  be  very  particularly  attended  to. 
It  adds  new  force  to  my  observations  :  and  indeed  M.  de 
Calonne's  work  supplies  my  deficiencies  by  many  new  and 
striking  arguments  on  most  of  the  subjects  of  this  letter.1 

It  is  this  resolution,  to  break  their  country  into  separate 
republics,  which  has  driven  them  into  the  greatest  number 
of  their  difficulties  and  contradictions.  If  it  were  not  for 
this,  all  the  questions  of  exact  equality,  and  these  balances, 
never  to  be  settled,  of  individual  rights,  population,  and 
contribution,  would  be  wholly  useless.  The  representation, 
1  See  VEtat  de  la  Frame,  p.  363. 


236  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

though  derived  from  parts,  would  be  a.  duty  which  equally 
regarded  the  whole.     Each  deputy  to  the  Assembly  would 
be  the  representative  of  France,  and  of  all  its  descriptions, 
of  the  many  and  of  the  few,  of  the  rich  and  of  the  poor,  of 
the  great  districts  and   of  the   small.     All   these   districts 
would  themselves  be  subordinate  to  some  standing  authority, 
existing  independently  of  them,  an  authority  in  which  their 
representation,  and  everything  that  belongs  to  it,  originated, 
and  to  which  it  was  pointed,     This  standing,  unalterable, 
fundamental  government  would  make,  and  it  is  the   only 
thing  which  could  make,  that  territory  truly  and  properly  ; 
whole.     With  us,  when   we   elect  popular  representatives 
we  send  them  to  a  council,  in  which  each  man  individually 
is  a  subject,  and  submitted  to  a  government  complete  in  al 
its  ordinary  functions.     With  you  the  elective  Assembly  is 
the  sovereign,  and  the  sole  sovereign ;  all  the  members  are 
therefore  integral  parts  of  this  sole  sovereignty.     But  with 
us   it    is    totally    different.       With    us    the   representative, 
separated  from  the  other  parts,  can  have  no  action  and  no 
existence.     The  government  is  the  point  of  reference  of  the 
several  members  and  districts  of  our  representation.     This 
is  the  centre  of  our  unity.     This  government  of  reference  is 
a  trustee  for  the  whole,  and  not  for  the  parts.     So  is  the 
other  branch  of  our  public  council.  I  mean  the  House  of 
Lords.     With  us  the  king  and  the  lords  are  several  and 
joint    securities    for    the    equality    of    each    district,    eaclj 
province,  each  city.     When  did  you  hear  in  Great  Britain 
of  any  province  suffering  from  the  inequality  of  its  repre 
sentation  ;  what  district  from  having  no  representation  at 
all  ?     Not  only  our  monarchy  and  our  peerage  secure  the 
equality  on  which  our  unity  depends,  but  it  is  the  spirit  of 
the   House  of  Commons  itself.      The  very  inequality  of 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  237 

•'I  representation,  which  is  so  foolishly  complained  of,  is 
perhaps  the  very  thing  which  prevents  us  from  thinking  or 
acting  as  members  for  districts.  Cornwall  elects  as  many 
members  as  all  Scotland.  But  is  Cornwall  better  taken 
care  of  than  Scotland  ?  Few  trouble  their  heads  about  any 
of  your  bases,  out  of  some  giddy  clubs.  Most  of  those  who 
wish  for  any  change,  upon  any  plausible  grounds,  desire  it 
on  different  ideas. 

Your  new  constitution  is  the  very  reverse  of  ours  in  its 
principle ;  arid  I  am  astonished  how  any  persons  could 
dream  of  holding  out  anything  done  in  it,  as  an  example 
for  Great  Britain.  With  you  there  is  little,  or  rather  no, 
connection  between  the  last  representative  and  the  first 
constituent.  The  member  who  goes  to  the  National 
Assembly  is  not  chosen  by  the  people,  nor  accountable 
to  them.  There  are  three  elections  before  he  is  chosen  : 
two  sets  of  magistracy  intervene  between  him  and  the 
primary  assembly,  so  as  to  render  him,  as  I  have  said,  an 
ambassador  of  a  state,  and  not  the  representative  of  the 
people  within  a  state.  By  this  the  whole  spirit  of  the 
election  is  changed;  nor  can  any  corrective  which  your 
constitution-mongers  have  devised,  render  him  anything 
else  than  what  he  is.  The  very  attempt  to  do  it  would 
inevitably  introduce  a  confusion,  if  possible,  more  horrid 
than  the  present.  There  is  no  way  to  make  a  connection 
between  the  original  constituent  and  the  representative,  but 
by  the  circuitous  means  which  may  lead  the  candidate  to 
apply  in  the  first  instance  to  the  primary  electors,  in  order 
that  by  their  authoritative  instructions  (and  something  more 
perhaps)  these  primary  electors  may  force  the  two  succeeding 
bodies  of  electors  to  make  a  choice  agreeable  to  their 
wishes.  But  this  would  plainly  subvert  the  whole  scheme 


233  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

It   would   be  to  plunge  them  back  into  that  tumult  and 
confusion  of  popular  election   which,  by  their  interposed 
gradation  of  elections,  they  mean  to  avoid,  and  at  length  to  I 
risk  the  whole  fortune  of  the  state  with  those  who  have  the ' 
least  knowledge  of  it,  and  the  least  interest  in  it.     This  is  , 
a  perpetual  dilemma,  into  which  they  are  thrown  by  the  ' 
vicious,    weak,    and    contradictory    principles    they    have ' 
chosen.     Unless  the  people  break  up  and  level  this  grada-  J 
tion,  it  is  plain  that  they  do  not  at  all  substantially  elect  to 
the  Assembly ;  indeed  they  elect  as  little  in  appearance  as 
reality. 

What  is  it  we  all  seek  for  in  an  election  ?  To  answer  its 
real  purposes,  you  must  first  possess  the  means  of  knowing 
the  fitness  of  your  man  ;  and  then  you  must  retain  some 
hold  upon  him  by  personal  obligation  or  dependence.  For 
what  end  are  these  primary  electors  complimented,  or 
rather  mocked,  with  a  choice  ?  They  can  never  know  any-  ' 
thing  of  the  qualities  of  him  that  is  to  serve  them,  nor  has  ' 
he  any  obligation  whatsoever  to  them.  Of  all  the  powers 
unfit  to  be  delegated  by  those  who  have  any  real  means  of 
judging,  that  most  peculiarly  unfit  is  what  relates  to  a 
personal  choice.  In  case  of  abuse,  that  body  of  primary 
electors  never  can  call  the  representative  to  an  account  for 
his  conduct.  He  is  too  far  removed  from  them  in  the  chain 
of  representation.  If  he  acts  improperly  at  the  end  of  his 
two  years'  lease,  it  does  not  concern  him  for  two  yearsfl 
more.  By  the  new  French  constitution  the  best  and  the 
wisest  representatives  go  equally  with  the  worst  into  this 
Limbus  Patriun.  Their  bottoms  are  supposed  foul,  and 
they  must  go  into  dock  to  be  refitted.  Every  man  who  has 
served  in  an  assembly  is  ineligible  for  two  years  arter.  Just 
as  these  magistrates  begin  to  learn  their  trade,  like  chimney- 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE,  239 

sweepers,  they  are  disqualified  for  exercising  it.  Super 
ficial,  new,  petulant  acquisition,  and  interrupted,  dronish, 
broken,  ill  recollection,  is  to  be  the  destined  character  of 
all  your  future  governors.  Your  constitution  has  too  much 
of  jealousy  to  have  much  of  sense  in  it.  You  consider 
the  breach  of  trust  in  the  representative  so  principally, 
that  you  do  not  at  all  regard  the  question  of  his  fitness  to 
execute  it. 

This  purgatory  interval  is  not  unfavourable  to  a  faithless 
representative,  who  may  be  as  good  a  canvasser  as  he  was  a 
bad  governor.  In  this  time  he  may  cabal  himself  into  a 
superiority  over  the  wisest  and  most  virtuous.  As,  in  the 
end,  all  the  members  of  this  elective  constitution  are  equally 
fugitive,  and  exist  only  for  the  election,  they  may  be  no 
longer  the  same  persons  who  had  chosen  him,  to  whom 
he  is  to  be  responsible  when  he  solicits  for  a  renewal 
of  his  trust.  To  call  all  the  secondary  electors  of  the 
Commune  to  account  is  ridiculous,  impracticable,  and 
unjust;  they  may  themselves  have  been  deceived  in  their 
choice,  as  the  third  set  of  electors,  those  of  the  Depart 
ment,  may  be  in  theirs.  In  your  elections  responsibility 
cannot  exist. 

Finding  no  sort  of  principle  of  coherence  with  each  other 
in  the  nature  and  constitution  of  the  several  new  republics 
of  France,  I  considered  what  cement  the  legislators  had 
provided  for  them  from  any  extraneous  materials.  Their 
confederations,  their  spectacles,  their  civic  feasts,  and  their 
enthusiasm,  I  take  no  notice  of:  they  are  nothing  but  mere 
tricks;  but  tracing  their  policy  through  their  actions,  I  think 
I  can  distinguish  the  arrangements  by  which  they  prorose 
to  hold  these  republics  together.  The  first,  is  the  confisca 
tion,  with  the  compulsory  paper  currency  annexed  to  it;  the 


24o  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

second,  is  the  supreme  power  of  the  city  of  Paris;  the  third, 
is  the  general  army  of  the  state.  Of  this  last  I  shall  reserve 
what  I  have  to  say  until  I  come  to  consider  the  army  as  a 
head  by  itself. 

As  to  the  operation  of  the  first  (the  confiscation  and  paper 
currency)  merely  as  a  cement,  I  cannot  deny  that  these,  the 
one  depending  on  the  other,  may  for  some  time  compose 
some  sort  of  cement,  if  their  madness  and  folly  in  the 
management,  and  in  the  tempering  of  the  parts  together, 
does  not  produce  a  repulsion  in  the  very  outset.  But 
allowing  to  the  scheme  some  coherence  and  some  duration, 
it  appears  to  me  that  if,  after  a  while,  the  confiscation 
should  not  be  found  sufficient  to  support  the  paper  coinage 
(as  I  am  morally  certain  it  will  not),  then,  instead  of  cement 
ing,  it  will  add  infinitely  to  the  dissociation,  distraction,  and 
confusion  of  these  confederate  republics,  both  with  relation 
to  each  other,  and  to  the  several  parts  within  themselves. 
But  if  the  confiscation  should  so  far  succeed  as  to  sink  the 
paper  currency,  the  cement  is  gone  with  the  circulation.  In 
the  meantime  its  binding  force  will  be  very  uncertain,  and 
it  will  straiten  or  relax  with  every  variation  in  the  credit  of 
the  paper. 

One  thing  only  is  certain  in  this  scheme,  which  is  an  effect 
seemingly  collateral,  but  direct,  I  have  no  doubt,  in  the  minds 
of  those  who  conduct  this  business,  that  is,  its  effect  in  pro 
ducing  an  Oligarchy  in  every  one  of  the  republics.  A 
paper  circulation,  not  founded  on  any  real  money  deposited 
or  engaged  for,  amounting  already  to  four-and-forty  millions 
of  English  money,  and  this  currency  by  force  substituted  in 
the  place  of  the  coin  of  the  kingdom,  becoming  thereby  the 
substance  of  its  revenue,  as  well  as  the  medium  of  all  its 
commercial  and  civil  intercourse,  must  put  the  whole  of 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE. 


241 


what  power,  authority,  and  influence  is  left,  in  any  form 
whatsoever  it  may  assume,  into  the  hands  of  the  managers 
and  conductors  of  this  circulation. 

In  England  we  feel  the  influence  of  the  bank,  though  it  is 
only  the  centre  of  a   voluntary   dealing.     He  knows  little 
indeed  of  the  influence  of  money  upon  mankind,  who  does 
not  see  the  force  of  the  management  of  a  moneyed  concern, 
which  is  so  much  more  extensive,  and  in  its  nature  so  much 
more  depending  on  the  managers,  than  any  of  ours.     But 
this   is  not   merely  a   money  concern.       There  is  another 
member   in    the    system    inseparably   connected   with    this 
money  management.     It  consists  in  the  means  of  drawing 
out  at  discretion  portions  of  the  confiscated  lands  for  sale  • 
and  carrying  on  a   process   of  continual   transmutation   of 
paper  into  land,  and  land  into  paper.     When  we  follow  this 
process  in  its  effects,  we   may  conceive  something   of  the 
intensity  of  the  force  with  which  this  system  must  operate. 
By  this  means  the  spirit  of  money-jobbing  and  speculation 
goes  into  the  mass  of  land  itself,  and  incorporates  with  it. 
By  this  kind  of  operation,  that  species  of  property  becomes 
(as    it   were)    volatilised;    it   assumes    an    unnatural    and 
monstrous  activity,  and  thereby  throws  into  the  hands  of  the 
several  managers,  principal  and   subordinate,  Parisian  and 
provincial,  all  the  representative  of  money,  and  perhaps  a 
full  tenth  part  of  all  che  land  in  France,  which   has   now 
acquired  the  worst  and  most  pernicious  part  of  the  evil  of  a 
paper  circulation,   the  greatest  possible   uncertainty  in   its 
value.     They  have  reversed  the  Latonian  kindness  to  the 
landed  property  of  Deles.      They  have  sent   theirs  to  be 
blown   about,  like  the  light  fragments  of  a  wreck,  oras  et 
littora  circum. 

The  new  dealers,  being  all   habitually  adventurers,  and 

16 


242  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

without  any  fixed  habits  or  local  predilections,  will  purchase 
to  job  out  again,  as  the  market  of  paper,  or  of  money,  or  of 
land,  shall  present  an  advantage.  For  though  a  holy  bishop 
thinks  that  agriculture  will  derive  great  advantages  from  the 
"enlightened"  usurers  who  are  to  purchase  the  church  con 
fiscations,  I,  who  am  not  a  good,  but  an  old  farmer,  with 
great  humility  beg  leave  to  tell  his  late  lordship  that  usury 
is  not  a  tutor  of  agriculture;  and  if  the  word  "enlightened" 
be  understood  according  to  the  new  dictionary,  as  it  always 
is  in  your  new  schools,  I  cannot  conceive  how  a  man's  not 
believing  in  God  can  teach  him  to  cultivate  the  earth  with 
the  least  of  any  additional  skill  or  encouragement.  "  Diis 
immortalibus  sero,"  said  an  old  Roman  when  he  held  one 
handle  of  the  plough,  whilst  Death  held  the  other.  Though 
you  were  to  join  in  the  commission  all  the  directors  of  the 
two  academies  to  the  directors  of  the  Caisse  d'Escompte, 
one  old,  experienced  peasant  is  worth  them  all.  I  have 
got  more  information  upon  a  curious  and  interesting  branch 
of  husbandry,  in  one  short  conversation  with  an  old 
Carthusian  monk,  than  I  have  derived  from  all  the  Bank 
directors  that  I  have  ever  conversed  with.  However,  there 
is  no  cause  for  apprehension  from  the  meddling  of  money- 
dealers  with  rural  economy.  These  gentlemen  are  too  wise 
in  their  generation.  At  first,  perhaps,  their  tender  and 
susceptible  imaginations  may  be  captivated  with  the  innocent 
and  unprofitable  delights  of  a  pastoral  life ;  but  in  a  little 
time  they  will  find  that  agriculture  is  a  trade  much  more 
laborious,  and  much  less  lucrative,  than  that  which  they  had 
left.  After  making  its  panegyric,  they  will  turn  their  backs 
on  it  like  their  great  precursor  and  prototype.  They  may, 
like  him,  begin  by  singing  " Beatus  Hie" — but  what  will  be 
the  end? 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  243 

HiEC  ubi  lociitus  fanerator  Alfhhis, 

/am  jam  fittunts  ntslicns 
Oinnem  redegit  Idibus  pecun:am} 

Qu&rit  Kalendis  ponere. 

They  will  cultivate  the  Caisse  d'Fglise,  under  the  sacred 
auspices  of  this  prelate,  with  much  more  profit  than  its  vine 
yards  and  its  corn-fields.  They  will  employ  their  talents 
according  to  their  habits  and  their  interests.  They  will  not 
follow  the  plough  whilst  they  can  direct  treasuries  and 
govern  provinces. 

Your  legislators,  in  everything  new,  are  the  very  first  who 
have  founded  a  commonwealth  upon  gaming,  and  infused 
this  spirit  into  it  as  its  vital  breath.  The  great  object  in  these 
politics  is  to  metamorphose  France  from  a  great  kingdom 
into  one  great  play-table;  to  turn  its  inhabitants  into  a 
nation  of  gamesters ;  to  make  speculation  as  extensive  as 
life;  to  mix  it  with  all  its  concerns  ;  and  to  divert  the  whole 
of  the  hopes  and  fears  of  the  people  from  their  usual 
channels  into  the  impulses,  passions,  and  superstitions  of 
those  who  live  on  chances.  They  loudly  proclaim  their 
opinion,  that  this  their  present  system  of  a  republic  cannot 
possibly  exist  without  this  kind  of  gaming  fund ;  and  that 
the  very  thread  of  its  life  is  spun  out  of  the  staple  of  these 
speculations.  The  old  gaming  in  funds  was  mischievous 
enough  undoubtedly;  but  it  was  so  only  to  individuals.  Even 
when  it  had  its  greatest  extent,  in  the  Mississippi  and  South 
Sea,  it  affected  but  few,  comparatively ;  where  it  extends 
further,  as  in  lotteries,  the  spirit  has  but  a  single  object. 
But  where  the  law,  which  in  most  circumstances  forbids, 
and  in  none  countenances,  gaming,  is  itself  debauched,  so  as 
to  reverse  its  nature  and  policy,  and  expressly  to  force  the 
subject  to  this  destructive  table,  by  bringing  the  spirit  and 


244  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

symbols  of  gaming  into  the  minutest  matters,  and  engaging 
everybody  in  it,  and  in  everything,  a  more  dreadful  epidemic 
distemper  of  that  kind  is  spread  than  yet  has  appeared  in  the 
world.  With  you  a  man  can  neither  earn  nor  buy  his  dinner 
without  a  speculation.  What  he  receives  in  the  morning 
will  not  have  the  same  value  at  night.  What  he  is  com 
pelled  to  take  as  pay  for  an  old  debt  will  not  be  received  as 
the  same  when  he  comes  to  pay  a  debt  contracted  by  him 
self;  nor  will  it  be  the  same  when  by  prompt  payment  he 
would  avoid  contracting  any  debt  at  all.  Industry  must 
wither  away.  Economy  must  be  driven  from  your  country. 
Careful  provision  will  have  no  existence.  Who  will  labour 
without  knowing  the  amount  of  his  pay?  Who  will  study 
to  increase  what  none  can  estimate?  Who  will  accumulate, 
when  he  does  not  know  the  value  of  what  he  saves  ?  If  you 
abstract  it  from  its  uses  in  gaming,  to  accumulate  your  paper 
wealth,  would  be  not  the  providence  of  a  man,  but  the  dis 
tempered  instinct  of  a  jackdaw. 

The  truly  melancholy  part  of  the  policy  of  systematically 
making  a  nation  of  gamesters  is  this,  that  though  all  are 
forced  to  play,  few  can  understand  the  game;  and  fewer  still 
are  in  a  condition  to  avail  themselves  of  the  knowledge. 
The  many  must  be  the  dupes  of  the  few  who  conduct  the 
machine  of  these  speculations.  What  effect  it  must  have  on 
the  country  people  is  visible.  The  townsman  can  calculate 
from  day  to  day;  not  so  the  inhabitant  of  the  country. 
When  the  peasant  first  brings  his  corn  to  market,  the 
magistrate  in  the  towns  obliges  him  to  take  the  assignat  at 
par;  when  he  goes  to  the  shop  with  his  money,  he  finds  it 
seven  per  cent,  the  worse  for  crossing  the  way.  This 
market  he  will  not  readily  resort  to  again.  The  towns 
people  will  be  inflamed ;  they  will  force  the  country  people 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  245 

to  bring  their  corn.  Resistance  will  begin,  and  the  murders 
of  Paris  and  St.  Denis  may  be  renewed  through  all  France. 
What  signifies  the  empty  compliment  paid  to  the  country, 
by  giving  it,  perhaps,  more  than  its  share  in  the  theory  of 
your  representation?  Where  have  you  placed  the  real 
power  over  moneyed  and  Banded  circulation  ?  Where  have 
you  placed  the  means  of  raising  and  falling  the  value  of 
every  man's  freehold?  Those,  whose  operations  can  take 
from,  or  add  ten  per  cent,  to,  the  possessions  of  every  man 
in  France,  must  be  the  masters  of  every  man  in  France. 
The  whole  of  the  power  obtained  by  this  revolution  will 
settle  in  the  towns  among  the  burghers,  and  the  moneyed 
directors  who  lead  them.  The  landed  gentleman,  the 
yeoman,  and  the  peasant,  have,  none  of  them,  habits,  or 
inclinations,  or  experience,  which  can  lead  them  to  any 
share  in  this  the  sole  source  of  power  and  influence  now 
left  in  France.  The  very  nature  of  a  country  life,  the  very 
nature  of  landed  property,  in  all  the  occupations  and  all  the 
pleasures  they  afford,  render  combination  and  arrangement 
(the  sole  way  of  procuring  and  exerting  influence)  in  a 
manner  impossible  amongst  country  people.  Combine 
them  by  all  the  art  you  can,  and  all  the  industry,  they  are 
always  dissolving  into  individuality.  Anything  in  the  nature 
of  incorporation  is  almost  impracticable  amongst  them. 
Hope,  fear,  alarm,  jealousy,  the  ephemerous  tale  that  does 
its  business  and  dies  in  a  day,  all  these  things,  which  are  the 
reins  and  spurs  by  which  leaders  check  or  urge  the  minds 
of  followers,  are  not  easily  employed,  or  hardly  at  all, 
amongst  scattered  people.  They  assemble,  they  arm,  they 
act,  with  the  utmost  difficulty,  and  at  the  greatest  charge. 
Their  efforts,  if  ever  they  can  be  commenced,  cannot  be 
sustained.  They  cannot  proceed  systematically.  If  the 


246  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

country  gentlemen  attempt  an  influence  through  the  mere 
income  of  their  property,  what  is  it  to  that  of  those  who 
have  ten  times  their  income  to  sell,  and  who  can  ruin  their 
property  by  bringing  their  plunder  to  meet  it  at  market?  If 
the  landed  man  wishes  to  mortgage,  he  falls  the  value  of  his 
land,  and  raises  the  value  of  assignats.  He  augments  the 
power  of  his  enemy  by  the  very  means  he  must  take  to  con 
tend  with  him.  The  country  gentleman  therefore,  the 
officer  by  sea  and  land,  the  man  of  liberal  views  and  habits, 
attached  to  no  profession,  will  be  as  completely  excluded 
from  the  government  of  his  country  as  if  he  were  legislatively 
proscribed.  It  is  obvious  that  in  the  towns,  all  the  things 
which  conspire  against  the  country  gentleman  combine  in 
favour  of  the  money  manager  and  director.  In  towns 
combination  is  natural.  The  habits  of  burghers,  their 
occupations,  their  diversion,  their  business,  their  idleness, 
continually  bring  them  into  mutual  contact.  Their  virtues 
and  their  vices  are  sociable;  they  are  always  in  garrison; 
and  they  come  embodied  and  half  disciplined  into  the 
hands  of  those  who  mean  to  form  them  for  civil  or  military 
action. 

All  these  considerations  leave  no  doubt  on  my  mind  that, 
if  this  monster  of  a  constitution  can  continue,  France  will 
be  wholly  governed  by  the  agitators  in  corporations,  by 
societies  in  the  towns  formed  of  directors  of  assignats,  and 
trustees  for  the  sale  of  church  lands,  attorneys,  agents, 
money-jobbers,  speculators,  and  adventurers,  composing  an 
ignoble  oligarchy,  founded  on  the  destruction  of  the  crown, 
the  church,  the  nobility,  and  the  people.  Here  end  all  the 
deceitful  dreams  and  visions  of  the  equality  and  rights  of 
men.  In  "the  Serbonian  bog"  of  this  case  oligarchy  they 
are  all  absorbed,  sunk,  and  lost  for  ever. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  247 

Though  human  eyes  cannot  trace  them,  one  would  be 
tempted  to  think  Some  great  offences  in  France  must  cry  to 
heaven,  which  has  thought  fit  to  punish  it  with  a  sub 
jection  to  a  vile  and  inglorious  domination,  in  which  no 
comfort  or  compensation  is  to  be  found  in  any  even  of  those 
false  splendours,  which,  playing  about  other  tyrannies, 
prevent  mankind  from  feeling  themselves  dishonoured  even 
whilst  they  are  oppressed.  I  must  confess  I  am  touched 
with  a  sorrow,  mixed  with  some  indignation,  at  the  conduct 
of  a  few  men,  once  of  great  rank,  and  still  of  great  character, 
who,  deluded  with  specious  names,  have  engaged  in  a 
business  too  deep  for  the  line  of  their  understanding  to 
fathom;  who  have  lent  their  fair  reputation,  and  the 
authority  of  their  high-sounding  names,  to  the  designs  of 
men  with  whom  they  could  not  be  acquainted ;  and  have 
thereby  made  their  very  virtues  operate  to  the  ruin  of  their 
country. 

So  far  as  to  the  first  cementing  principle. 
The  second  material  of  cement  for  their  new  republic  is 
the  superiority  of  the  city  of  Paris  :    and  this,  I  admit,  is 
strongly  connected  with  the  other  cementing  principle   of 
paper  circulation  and  confiscation.     It  is  in  this  part  of  the 
project  we  must  look  for  the  cause  of  the  destruction  of  all 
the  old  bounds  of  provinces  and  jurisdictions,  ecclesiastical 
and  secular,  and  the  dissolution  of  all  ancient  combinations 
of  things,  as  well  as  the  formation  of  so  many  small  uncon 
nected  republics.     The  power  of  the  city  of  Paris  is  evidently 
one  great  spring  of  all  their  politics.      It  is  through  the 
power  of  Paris,  now  become  the  centre  and  focus  of  jobbing, 
that  the  leaders  of  this  faction  direct,  or  rather  command,' 
the  whole  legislative  and  the  whole  executive  government 
Everything  therefore  must  be  done  which  can  confirm  the 


248  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

authority  of  that  city  ovei  the  other  republics.  Paris  is 
compact ;  she  has  an  enormous  strength,  wholly  dispro- 
portioned  to  the  force  of  any  of  the  square  republics ;  and 
this  strength  is  collected  and  condensed  within  a  narrow 
compass.  Paris  has  a  natural  and  easy  connection  of  its 
parts,  which  will  not  be  affected  by  any  scheme  of  a 
geometrical  constitution,  nor  does  it  much  signify  whether 
its  proportion  of  representation  be  more  or  less,  since  it  has 
the  whole  draft  of  fishes  in  its  drag-net.  The  other  divisions 
of  the  kingdom  being  hackled  and  torn  to  pieces,  and 
separated  from  all  their  habitual  means,  and  even  principles 
of  union,  cannot,  for  some  time  at  least,  confederate  against 
her.  Nothing  was  to  be  left  in  all  the  subordinate  members, 
but  weakness,  disconnection,  and  confusion.  To  confirm 
this  part  of  the  plan,  the  Assembly  has  lately  come  to  a 
resolution  that  no  two  of  their  republics  shall  have  the  same 
commander-in-chief. 

To  a  person  who  takes  a  view  of  the  whole,  the  strength 
of  Paris,  thus  formed,  will  appear  a  system  of  general  weak 
ness.  It  is  boasted  that  the  geometrical  policy  has  been 
adopted,  that  all  local  ideas  should  be  sunk,  and  that  the 
people  should  no  longer  be  Gascons,  Picards,  Bretons, 
Normans;  but  Frenchmen,  with  one  country,  one  heart, 
and  one  Assembly.  But  instead  of  being  all  Frenchmen, 
the  greater  likelihood  is  that  the  inhabitants  of  that  region 
wTill  shortly  have  no  country.  No  man  ever  was  attached 
by  a  sense  of  pride,  partiality,  or  real  affection,  to  a  descrip 
tion  of  square  measurement.  He  never  will  glory  in 
belonging  to  the  Chequer  No.  71,  or  to  any  other  badge- 
ticket.  We  begin  our  public  affections  in  our  families.  No 
cold  relation  is  a  zealous  citizen.  We  pass  on  to  our 
neighbourhoods,  and  our  habitual  provincial  connections. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  249 

These  are  inns  and  resting-places.  Such  divisions  of  our 
country  as  have  been  formed  by  habit,  and  not  by  a  sudden 
jerk  of  authority,  were  so  many  little  images  of  the  great 
country  in  which  the  heart  found  something  which  it  could 
fill.  The  love  to  the  whole  is  not  extinguished  by  this 
subordinate  partiality.  Perhaps  it  is  a  sort  of  elemental 
training  to  those  higher  and  more  large  regards,  by  which 
alone  men  come  to  be  affected,  as  with  their  own  concern, 
in  the  prosperity  of  a  kingdom  so  extensive  as  that  of 
France.  In  that  general  territory  itself,  as  in  the  old  name 
of  provinces,  the  citizens  are  interested  from  old  prejudices 
and  unreasoned  habits,  and  not  on  account  of  the  geometric 
properties  of  its  figure.  The  power  and  pre-eminence  of 
Paris  does  certainly  press  down  and  hold  these  republics 
together  as  long  as  it  lasts.  But,  for  the  reasons  I  have 
already  given  you,  I  think  it  cannot  last  very  long. 

Passing  from  the  civil  creating  and  the  civil  cementing 
principles  of  this  constitution,  to  the  National  Assembly, 
which  is  to  appear  and  act  as  sovereign,  we  see  a  body  in  its 
constitution  with  every  possible  power,  and  no  possible 
external  control.  We  see  a  body  without  fundamental  laws, 
without  established  maxims,  without  respected  rules  of 
proceeding,  which  nothing  can  keep  firm  to  any  system 
whatsoever.  Their  idea  of  their  powers  is  always  taken  at 
the  utmost  stretch  of  legislative  competency,  and  their 
examples  for  common  cases  from  the  exceptions  of  the  most 
urgent  necessity.  The  future  is  to  be  in  most  respects  like 
the  present  Assembly;  but,  by  the  mode  of  the  new  elections 
and  the  tendency  of  the  new  circulations,  it  will  be  purged 
of  the  small  degree  of  internal  control  existing  in  a  minority 
chosen  originally  from  various  interests,  and  preserving 
something  of  their  spirit.  If  possible,  the  next  Assembly 


250  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

must  be  worse  than  the  present.  The  present,  by  destroying 
and  altering  everything,  will  leave  to  their  successors 
apparently  nothing  popular  to  do.  They  will  be  roused  by 
emulation  and  example  to  enterprises  the  boldest  and  the 
most  absurd.  To  suppose  such  an  assembly  sitting  in 
perfect  quietude  is  ridiculous. 

Your  all-sufficient  legislators,  in  their  hurry  to  do  every 
thing  at  once,  have  forgot  one  thing  that  seems  essential, 
and  which  I  believe  never  has  been  before,  in  the  theory  or 
the  practice,  omitted  by  any  projector  of  a  republic.  They 
have  forgot  to  constitute  a  senate,  or  something  of  that 
nature  and  character.  Never,  before  this  time,  was  heard 
of  a  body  politic  composed  of  one  legislative  and  active 
assembly,  and  its  executive  officers,  without  such  a  council; 
without  something  to  which  foreign  states  might  connect 
themselves;  something  to  which,  in  the  ordinary  detail  of 
government,  the  people  could  look  up;  something  which 
might  give  a  bias,  and  steadiness,  and  preserve  something 
like  consistency  in  the  proceedings  of  state.  Such  a  body 
kings  generally  have  as  a  council.  A  monarchy  may  exist 
without  it;  but  it  seems  to  be  in  the  very  essence  of  a 
republican  government.  It  holds  a  sort  of  middle  place 
between  the  supreme  power  exercised  by  the  people,  or 
immediately  delegated  from  them,  and  the  mere  executive. 
Of  this  there  are  no  traces  in  your  constitution  ;  and,  in 
providing  nothing  of  this  kind,  your  Solons  and  Numas 
have,  as  much  as  in  anything  else,  discovered  a  sovereign 
incapacity. 

Let  us  now  turn  our  eyes  to  what  they  have  done  to 
wards  the  formation  of  an  executive  power.  For  this  they 
have  chosen  a  degraded  king.  This  their  first  executive 
officer  is  to  be  a  machine,  without  any  sort  of  deliberative 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  251 

discretion  in  any  one  act  of  his  function.  At  best  he  is  but 
a  channel  to  convey  to  the  National  Assembly  such  matter 
as  it  may  import  that  body  to  know.  If  he  had  been  made 
the  exclusive  channel,  the  power  would  not  have  been  with 
out  its  importance;  though  infinitely  perilous  to  those  who 
would  choose  to  exercise  it.  But  public  intelligence  and 
statement  of  facts  may  pass  to  the  Assembly  with  equal 
authenticity,  through  any  other  conveyance.  As  to  the 
means,  therefore,  of  giving  a  direction  to  measures  by  the 
statement  of  an  authorised  reporter,  this  office  of  intelligence 
is  as  nothing. 

To  consider  the  French  scheme  of  an  executive  officer,  in 
its  two  natural  divisions  of  civil  and  political. — In  the  first 
it  must  be  observed  that,  according  to  the  new  constitution, 
the  higher  parts  of  judicature,  in  either  of  its  lines,  are  not 
in  the  king.  The  king  of  France  is  not  the  fountain  of 
justice.  The  judges,  neither  the  original  nor  the  appellate, 
are  of  his  nomination.  He  neither  proposes  the  candidates, 
nor  has  a  negative  on  the  choice.  He  is  not  even  the  public 
prosecutor.  He  serves  only  as  a  notary  to  authenticate  the 
choice  made  of  the  judges  in  the  several  districts.  By  his 
officers  he  is  to  execute  their  sentence.  When  we  look  into 
the  true  nature  of  his  authority,  he  appears  to  be  nothing 
more  than  a  chief  of  bumbailiffs,  Serjeants  at  mace,catchpoles, 
jailers,  and  hangmen.  It  is  impossible  to  place  anything 
called  royalty  in  a  more  degrading  point  of  view.  A  thou 
sand  times  better  had  it  been  for  the  dignity  of  this  unhappy 
prince,  that  he  had  nothing  at  all  to  do  with  the  administra 
tion  of  justice,  deprived  as  he  is  of  all  that  is  venerable,  and 
all  that  is  consolatory,  in  that  function,  without  power  of 
originating  any  process ;  without  a  power  of  suspension, 
mitigation,  or  pardon.  Everything  in  justice  that  is  vile  and 


252  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

odious  is  thrown  upon  him.  It  was  not  for  nothing  that 
the  Assembly  has  been  at  such  pains  to  remove  the  stigma 
from  certain  offices,  when  they  are  resolved  to  place  the 
person  who  had  lately  been  their  king  in  a  situation  but 
one  degree  above  the  executioner,  and  in  an  office  nearly  of 
the  same  quality.  It  is  not  in  nature,  that,  situated  as  the 
king  of  the  French  now  is,  he  can  respect  himself,  or  can  be 
respected  by  others. 

View  this  new  executive  officer  on  the  side  of  his  political 
capacity,  as  he  acts  under  the  orders  of  the  National 
Assembly.  To  execute  laws  is  a  royal  office  ;  to  execute 
orders  is  not  to  be  a  king.  However,  a  political  executive 
magistracy,  though  merely  such,  is  a  great  trust.  It  is  a  trust 
indeed  that  has  much  depending  upon  its  faithful  and  diligent 
performance,  both  in  the  person  presiding  in  it  and  in  all  its 
subordinates.  Means  of  performing  this  duty  ought  to  be 
given  by  regulation  ;  and  dispositions  towards  it  ought  to  be 
infused  by  the  circumstances  attendant  on  the  trust.  It 
ought  to  be  environed  with  dignity,  authority,  and  considera 
tion,  and  it  ought  to  lead  to  glory.  The  office  of  execution 
is  an  office  of  exertion.  It  is  not  from  impotence  we  are  to 
expect  the  tasks  of  power.  What  sort  of  person  is  a  king  to 
command  executory  service,  who  has  no  means  whatsoever 
to  reward  it?  Not  in  a  permanent  office;  not  in  a  grant 
of  land ;  no,  not  in  a  pension  of  fifty  pounds  a  year ;  not 
in  the  vainest  and  most  trivial  title.  In  France  the  king 
is  no  more  the  fountain  of  honour  than  he  is  the  fountain 
of  justice.  All  rewards,  all  distinctions,  are  in  other  hands. 
Those  who  serve  the  king  can  be  actuated  by  no  natural 
motive  but  fear ;  by  a  fear  of  everything  except  their  master. 
His  functions  of  internal  coercion  are  as  odious  as  those 
which  he  exercises  in  the  department  of  justice.  If  relief 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  253 

is  to  be  given  to  any  municipality,  the  Assembly  gives  it. 
If  troops  are  to  be  sent  to  reduce  them  to  obedience  to  the 
Assembly,  the  king  is  to  execute  the  order;  and  upon 
every  occasion  he  is  to  be  spattered  over  with  the  blood  of 
his  people.  He  has  no  negative;  yet  his  name  and  authority 
is  used  to  enforce  every  harsh  decree.  Nay,  he  must  concur- 
in  the  butchery  of  those  who  shall  attempt  to  free  him  from 
his  imprisonment,  or  show  the  slightest  attachment  to  his 
person  or  to  his  ancient  authority. 

Executive  magistracy  ought  to  be  constituted  in  such  a 
manner,  that  those  who  compose  it  should  be  disposed  to 
love  and  to  venerate  those  whom  they  are  bound  to  obey. 
A  purposed  neglect,  or,  what  is  worse,  a  literal  but  perverse 
and  malignant  obedience,  must  be  the  ruin  of  the  wisest 
counsels.  In  vain  will  the  law  attempt  to  anticipate  or  to 
follow  such  studied  neglects  and  fraudulent  attentions.  To 
make  them  act  zealously  is  not  in  the  competence  of  law, 
Kings,  even  such  as  are  truly  kings,  may  and  ought  to 
bear  the  freedom  of  subjects  that  are  obnoxious  to  them. 
They  may  too,  without  derogating  from  themselves,  bear  even 
the  authority  of  such  persons,  if  it  promotes  their  service. 
Louis  the  Thirteenth  mortally  hated  the  Cardinal  de  Riche 
lieu  ;  but  his  support  of  that  minister  against  his  rivals  was  the 
source  of  all  the  glory  of  his  reign,  and  the  solid  foundation 
of  his  throne  itself.  Louis  the  Fourteenth,  when  come  to 
the  throne,  did  not  love  the  Cardinal  Mazarin ;  but  for  his 
interests  he  preserved  him  in  power.  When  old,  he  detested 
Louvois  ;  but  for  years,  whilst  he  faithfully  served  his  great 
ness,  he  endured  his  person.  When  George  the  Second  took 
Mr.  Pitt,  who  certainly  was  not  agreeable  to  him,  into  his 
councils,  he  did  nothing  which  could  humble  a  wise  sovereign. 
But  these  ministers,  who  were  chosen  by  affairs,  not  by 


254  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

affections,  acted  in  the  name  of,  and  in  trust  for,  kings;  and 
not  as  their  avowed,  constitutional,  and  ostensible  masters. 
I  think  it  impossible  that  any  king,  when  he  has  recovered 
his  first  terrors,  can  cordially  infuse  vivacity  and  vigour  into 
measures  which  he  knows  to  be  dictated  by  those  who,  he 
must  be  persuaded,  are  in  the  highest  degree  ill  affected  to 
his  person.     Will  any  ministers,  who  serve  such  a  king  (or 
whatever  he  may  be  called)  with  but  a  decent  appearance  of 
respect,  cordially  obey  the  orders  of  those  whom  but  the 
other  day  in  his  name  they  had  committed  to  the  Bastile  ? 
will  they  obey  the  orders  of  those  whom,  whilst  they  were 
exercising  despotic  justice  upon  them,  they  conceived  they 
were  treating  with  lenity;  and  from  whom,  in  a  prison,  they 
thought  they  had  provided  an  asylum?     If  you  expect  such 
obedience,  amongst  your  other  innovations  and  regenerations, 
you  ought  to  make  a  revolution  in  nature,  and  provide  a  new 
constitution  for  the  human  mind.     Otherwise,  your  supreme 
government  cannot   harmonise  with   its   executory  system. 
There  are  cases  in  which  we  cannot  take  up  with  names  and 
abstractions.     You  may  call  half  a  dozen  leading  individuals, 
whom  we   have  reason   to  fear  and  hate,  the   nation.     It 
makes  no  other  difference,  than  to  make  us  fear  and  hate 
them  the   more.     If  it   had   been  thought  justifiable  and 
expedient  to  make  such  a  revolution  by  such  means,  and 
through  such  persons,  as  you  have  made  yours,  it  would  have 
been  more  wise  to  have  completed  the  business  of  the  fifth 
and  sixth  of  October.     The  new  executive  officer  would  then 
owe  his  situation  to  those  who  are  his  creators  as  well  as  his 
masters;  and  he  might  be  bound  in  interest,  in  the  society 
of  crime,  and  (if  in  crimes  there  could  be  virtues)  in  gratitude, 
to  serve  those  who  had  promoted  him  to  a  place  of  great 
lucre  and  great  sensual  indulgence;   and  of  something  more: 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  255 

for  more  he  must  have  received  from  those  who  certainly 
would  not  have  limited  an  aggrandised  creature,  as  they 
have  done  a  submitting  antagonist 

A  king  circumstanced  as  the  present,  if  he  is  totally  stupe 
fied  by  his  misfortunes,  so  as  to  think  it  not  the  necessity, 
but  the  premium   and  privilege,  of  life   to   eat  and   sleep', 
without  any  regard  to  glory,  can  never  be  fit  for  the  office. 
If  he  feels  as  men  commonly  feel,  he  must  be  sensible  that 
an  office  so  circumstanced  is  one  in  which  he  can  obtain  no 
fame  or  reputation.     He  has  no  generous  interest  that  can 
excite  him  to  action.     At  best,  his  conduct  will  be  passive 
and  defensive.     To  inferior  people  such  an  office  might  be 
matter  of  honour.     But  to  be  raised  to  it,  and  to  descend  to 
it,  are  different  things,   and   suggest   different    sentiments. 
Does   he  really  name   the   ministers?      They  will   have   a 
sympathy  with   him.      Are  they  forced  upon   him?      The 
whole  business  between  them  and  the  nominal  king  will  be 
mutual  counteraction.     In  all  other  countries,  the  office  of 
ministers  of  state  is  of  the  highest  dignity.     In  France  it  is 
full  of  peril,  and  incapable  of  glory.     Rivals,  however,  they 
will    have   in    their   nothingness,    whilst   shallow   ambition 
exists  in  the  world,  or  the  desire  of  a  miserable  salary  is  an 
incentive  to  short-sighted  avarice.     Those  competitors  of  the 
ministers  are  enabled  by  your  constitution  to  attack  them  in 
their  vital  parts,  whilst  they  have  not  the  means  of  repelling 
their  charges  in  any  other  than  the  degrading  character  of 
culprits.      The  ministers  of  state  in   France  are  the   only 
persons  in  that  country  who  are  incapable  of  a  share  in  the 
national  councils.    What  ministers  !    What  councils  !    What 
a  nation  !— But  they  are  responsible.     It  is  a  poor  service 
that  is  to  be  had  from  responsibility.     The  elevation  of  mind 
to  be  derived  from  fear  will  never  make  a  nation  glorio 


>us. 


256  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

Responsibilityprevents  crimes.  It  makes  all  attempts  against 
the  laws  dangerous.  But  for  a  principle  of  active  and  zealous 
service,  none  but  idiots  could  think  of  it.  Is  the  conduct  of 
a  war  to  be  trusted  to  a  man  who  may  abhor  its  principle ; 
who,  in  every  step  he  may  take  to  render  it  successful, 
confirms  the  power  of  those  by  whom  he  is  oppressed? 
Will  foreign  states  seriously  treat  with  him  who  has  no 
prerogative  of  peace  or  war ;  no,  not  so  much  as  in  a 
single  vote  by  himself  or  his  ministers,  or  by  any  one 
whom  he  can  possibly  influence?  A  state  of  contempt 
is  not  a  state  for  a  prince :  better  get  rid  of  him  at  once. 

I  know  it  will  be  said  that  these  humours  in  the  court  and 
executive  government  will  continue  only  through  this  genera 
tion  ;  and  that  the  king  has  been  brought  to  declare  the 
dauphin  shall  be  educated  in  a  conformity  to  his  situation. 
If  he  is  made  to  conform  to  his  situation,  he  will  have  no 
education  at  all.  His  training  must  be  worse  even  than 
that  of  an  arbitrary  monarch.  If  he  reads — whether  he 
reads  or  not,  some  good  or  evil  genius  will  tell  him  his 
ancestors  were  kings.  Thenceforward  his  object  must  be  to 
assert  himself,  and  to  avenge  his  parents.  This  you  will  say 
is  not  his  duty.  That  may  be ;  but  it  is  nature ;  and  whilst 
you  pique  nature  against  you,  you  do  unwisely  to  trust  to 
duty.  In  this  futile  scheme  of  polity,  the  state  nurses  in  its 
bosom,  for  the  present,  a  source  of  weakness,  perplexity, 
counteraction,  inefficiency,  and  decay;  and  it  prepares  the 
means  of  its  final  ruin.  In  short,  I  see  nothing  in  the  exe 
cutive  force  (I  cannot  call  it  authority)  that  has  even  an 
appearance  of  vigour,  or  that  has  the  smallest  degree  of  just 
correspondence  or  symmetry,  or  amicable  relation  with  the 
supreme  power,  either  as  it  now  exists,  or  as  it  is  planned 
for  the  future  government 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  257 

You  have  settled,  by  an  economy  as  perverted  as  the 
policy,  two1  establishments  of  government;  one  real,  one 
fictitious.  Both  maintained  at  a  vast  expense;  but  the 
fictitious  at,  I  think,  the  greatest.  Such  a  machine  as  the 
latter  is  not  worth  the  grease  of  its  wheels.  The  expense  is 
exorbitant;  and  neither  the  show  nor  the  use  deserve  the 
tenth  part  of  the  charge.  Oh  !  but  I  don't  do  justice  to  the 
talents  of  the  legislators  :  I  don't  allow,  as  I  ought  to  do,  for 
necessity.  Their  scheme  of  executive  force  was  not  their 
choice.  This  pageant  must  be  kept.  The  people  would  not 
consent  to  part  with  it.  Right;  I  understand  you.  You  do, 
in  spite  of  your  grand  theories,  to  which  you  would  have 
heaven  and  earth  to  bend,  you  do  know  how  to  conform 
yourselves  to  the  nature  and  circumstances  of  things  But 
when  you  were  obliged  to  conform  thus  far  to  circumstances, 
you  ought  to  have  carried  your  submission  farther,  and  to 
have  made,  what  you  were  obliged  to  take,  a  proper  instru 
ment,  and  useful  to  its  end.  That  was  in  your  power.  For 
instance,  among  many  others,  it  was  in  your  power  to  leave 
to  your  king  the  right  of  peace  and  war.  What !  to  leave  to 
the  executive  magistrate  the  most  dangerous  of  all  preroga 
tives?  I  know  none  more  dangerous;  nor  any  one  more 
necessary  to  be  so  trusted.  I  do  not  say  that  this  preroga 
tive  ought  to  be  trusted  to  your  king,  unless  he  enjoyed 
other  auxiliary  trusts  along  with  it,  which  he  does  not  now 
hold.  But  if  he  did  possess  them,  hazardous  as  they  are 
undoubtedly,  advantages  would  arise  from  such  a  constitu 
tion,  more  than  compensating  the  risk.  There  is  no  other 
way  of  keeping  the  several  potentates  of  Europe  from 
intriguing  distinctly  and  personally  with  the  members  of 

3  In  reality  three,  to  reckon  the  provincial  republican  establishments. 

'7 


258  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

your  Assembly,  from  intermeddling  in  all  your  concerns, 
and  fomenting,  in  the  heart  of  your  country,  the  most 
pernicious  of  all  factions ;  factions  in  the  interest  and  under 
the  direction  of  foreign  powers.  From  that  worst  of  evils, 
thank  God,  we  are  still  free.  Your  skill,  if  you  had  any, 
would  be  well  employed  to  find  out  indirect  correctives  and 
controls  upon  this  perilous  trust.  If  you  did  not  like  those 
which  in  England  we  have  chosen,  your  leaders  might  have 
exerted  their  abilities  in  contriving  better.  If  it  were 
necessary  to  exemplify  the  consequences  of  such  an  execu 
tive  government  as  yours,  in  the  management  of  great  affairs, 
I  should  refer  you  to  the  late  reports  of  M.  de  Montmorin 
to  the  National  Assembly,  and  all  the  other  proceedings 
relative  to  the  differences  between  Great  Britain  and  Spain. 
It  would  be  treating  your  understanding  with  disrespect  to 
point  them  out  to  you. 

I  hear  that  the  persons  who  are  called  ministers  have 
signified  an  intention  of  resigning  their  places.  I  am  rather 
astonished  that  they  have  not  resigned  long  since.  For  the 
universe  I  would  not  have  stood  in  the  situation  in  which 
they  have  been  for  this  last  twelvemonth.  They  wished 
well,  I  take  it  for  granted,  to  the  Revolution.  Let  this  fact 
be  as  it  may,  they  could  not,  placed  as  they  were  upon  an 
eminence,  though  an  eminence  of  humiliation,  but  be  the 
first  to  see  collectively,  and  to  feel  each  in  his  own  depart 
ment,  the  evils  which  have  been  produced  by  that  revolution. 
In  every  step  which  they  took,  or  forbore  to  take,  they  must 
have  felt  the  degraded  situation  of  their  country,  and  their 
utter  incapacity  of  serving  it.  They  are  in  a  species  of  sub 
ordinate  servitude,  in  which  no  men  before  them  were  ever 
seen.  Without  confidence  from  their  sovereign,  on  whom  they 
were  forced,  or  from  the  Assembly  who  forced  them  upon 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  259 

him,  all  the  noble  functions  of  their  office  are  executed  by 
committees  of  the  Assembly,  without  any  regard  whatsoever 
to  their  personal  or  their  official  authority.  They  are  to 
execute,  without  power ;  they  are  to  be  responsible,  without 
discretion  ;  they  are  to  deliberate,  without  choice.  In  their 
puzzled  situation,  under  two  sovereigns,  over  neither  of 
whom  they  have  any  influence,  they  must  act  in  such  a 
manner  as  (in  effect,  whatever  they  may  intend)  sometimes 
to  betray  the  one,  sometimes  the  other,  and  always  to  betray 
themselves.  Such  has  been  their  situation  ;  such  must  be 
the  situation  of  those  who  succeed  them.  I  have  much 
respect,  and  many  good  wishes,  for  M.  Necker.  I  am 
obliged  to  him  for  attentions.  I  thought  when  his  enemies 
had  driven  him  from  Versailles,  that  his  exile  was  a  subject 
of  most  serious  congratulation — sed  multa  urbes  et  publica 
vota  vicerunt.  He  is  now  sitting  on  the  ruins  of  the  finances, 
and  of  the  monarchy  of  France. 

A  great  deal  more  might  be  observed  on  the  strange 
constitution  of  the  executory  part  of  the  new  government ; 
but  fatigue  must  give  bounds  to  the  discussion  of  subjects 
which  in  themselves  have  hardly  any  limits. 

As  little  genius  and  talent  am  I  able  to  perceive  in  the 
plan  of  judicature  formed  by  the  National  Assembly. 
According  to  their  invariable  course,  the  framers  of  your 
constitution  have  begun  with  the  utter  abolition  of  the 
parliaments.  These  venerable  bodies,  like  the  rest  of  the 
old  government,  stood  in  need  of  reform,  even  though  there 
should  be  no  change  made  in  the  monarchy.  They  required 
several  more  alterations  to  adapt  them  to  the  system  of  a 
free  constitution.  But  they  had  particulars  in  their  constitu 
tion,  and  those  not  a  few  which  deserved  approbation  from 
the  wise.  They  possessed  one  fundamental  excellence: 


260  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

they  were  independent.     The  most  doubtful  circumstance 
attendant  on  their  office,  that  of  its  being  vendible,  contri 
buted  however  to  this  independency  of  character.    They  held 
for  life.    Indeed  they  may  be  said  to  have  held  by  inheritance. 
Appointed  by  the  monarch,  they  were  considered  as  nearly 
out  of  his  power.     The  most  determined  exertions  of  that 
authority  against  them  only  showed  their  radical  independ 
ence     They  composed  permanent  bodies  politic,  constituted 
to    resist    arbitrary    innovation ;    and    from    that    corporate 
constitution,  and  from  most  of  their  forms,  they  were  well 
calculated  to  afford  both  certainty  and  stability  to  the  laws. 
They  had  been  a  safe  asylum  to  secure  these  laws,  in  all 
the  revolutions  of  humour  and  opinion.     They  had  saved 
that   sacred  deposit   of  the  country  during  the  reigns  of 
arbitrary   princes   and    the   struggles   of   arbitrary   factions. 
They  kept  alive  the  memory  and  record  of  the  constitution. 
They  were  the  great  security  to   private  property;   which 
might  be  said  (when  personal  liberty  had  no  existence)  to  be, 
in  fact,  as  well  guarded  in  France  as  in  any  other  country. 
Whatever  is  supreme  in  a  state  ought  to  have,  as  much  as 
possible,  its  judicial  authority  so  constituted  as  not  only  not 
to  depend  upon  it,  but  in  some  sort  to  balance  it.     It  ought 
to  give  a  security  to  its  justice  against  its  power.     It  ought 
to  make  its  judicature,  as  it  were,  something  exterior  to  the 
state. 

These  parliaments  had  furnished,  not  the  best  certainly, 
but  some  considerable  corrective  to  the  excesses  and  vices 
of  the  monarchy.  Such  an  independent  judicature  was  ten 
times  more  necessary  when  a  democracy  became  the 
absolute  power  of  the  country.  In  that  constitution,  elective, 
temporary,  local  judges,  such  as  you  have  contrived, 
exercising  their  dependent  functions  in  a  narrow  society, 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  26r 

must  be  the  worst  of  all  tribunals.  In  them  it  will  be  vain 
to  look  for  any  appearance  of  justice  towards  strangers, 
towards  the  obnoxious  rich,  towards  the  minority  of  routed 
parties,  towards  all  those  who  in  the  election  have  supported 
unsuccessful  candidates.  It  will  be  impossible  to  keep  the 
new  U-ibunals  clear  of  the  worst  spirit  of  faction.  All 
contrivances  by  ballot  we  know  experimentally  to  be  vain 
and  childish  to  prevent  a  discovery  of  inclinations.  Where 
they  may  the  best  answer  the  purposes  of  concealment,  they 
answer  to  produce  suspicion,  and  this  is  a  still  more  mis 
chievous  cause  of  partiality. 

_  If  the  parliaments  had  been  preserved,  instead  of  being 
dissolved  at  so  ruinous  a  change  to  the  nation,  they  might 
have    served    in    this    new    commonwealth,    perhaps    not 
precisely  the  same  (I  do  not  mean  an  exact  parallel),  but 
nearly  the    same,   purposes    as    the    court    and    senate    of 
Areopagus  did  in  Athens ;  that  is,  as  one  of  the  balances 
and  correctives  to  the  evils  of  a  light  and  unjust  democracy. 
Every  one  knows  that  this  tribunal  was  the  great  stay  of 
that  state;  every  one  knows  with  what  care  it  was  upheld, 
and  with  what  a  religious  awe  it  was   consecrated.     The 
parliaments  were   not  wholly  free   from   faction,    I   admit; 
but  this  evil  was  exterior  and  accidental,  and  not  so  much 
the  vice  of  their  constitution  itself,  as  it  must  be  in  your 
new  contrivance  of  sexennial  elective  judicatories.     Several 
English   commend   the   abolition   of  the   old   tribunals,  as 
supposing  that  they  determined  everything  by  bribery  'and 
corruption.       But  they   have   stood   the  test  of  monarchic 
and  republican  scrutiny.     The  court  was  well  disposed  to 
prove  corruption  on  those  bodies  when  they  were  dissolved 
in   1771.— Those   who    have  again   dissolved    them  would 
have  done  the  same  if  they  could—but  both  inquisitions 


262  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

having  failed,   I  conclude  that  gross  pecuniary  corruption 
must  have  been  rather  rare  amongst  them. 

It  would  have  been  prudent,  along  with  the  parliaments, 
to  preserve  their  ancient  power  of  registering,  and  of 
remonstrating  at  least,  upon  all  the  decrees  of  the  National 
Assembly,  as  they  did  upon  those  which  passed  in  the  time 
of  the  monarchy.  It  would  be  a  means  of  squaring  the 
occasional  decrees  of  a  democracy  to  some  principles  of 
general  jurisprudence.  The  vice  of  the  ancient  demo 
cracies,  and  one  cause  of  their  ruin,  was,  that  they  ruled,  as 
you  do,  by  occasional  decrees,  psephismata.  This  practice 
soon  broke  in  upon  the  tenour  and  consistency  of  the  laws; 
it  abated  the  respect  of  the  people  towards  them;  and 
totally  destroyed  them  in  the  end. 

Your  vesting  the  power  of  remonstance,  which,  in  the 
time  of  the  monarchy,  existed  in  the  parliament  of  Paris,  in 
your  principal  executive  officer,  whom,  in  spite  of  common 
sense,  you  persevere  in  calling  king,  is  the  height  of 
absurdity.  You  ought  never  to  suffer  remonstrance  from 
him.  who  is  to  execute.  This  is  to  understand  neither 
council  nor  execution;  neither  authority  nor  obedience. 
The  person  whom  you  call  king  ought  not  to  have  this 
power,  or  he  ought  to  have  more. 

Your  present  arrangement  is  strictly  judicial.  Instead  of 
imitating  your  monarchy,  and  seating  your  judges  on  a 
bench  of  independence,  your  object  is  to  reduce  them  to 
the  most  blind  obedience.  As  you  have  changed  all  things, 
you  have  invented  new  principles  of  order.  You  first 
appoint  judges,  who,  I  suppose,  are  to  determine  according 
to  law,  and  then  you  let  them  know  that,  at  some  time  or 
other,  you  intend  to  give  them  some  law  by  which  they  are 
to  determine.  Any  studies  which  they  have  made  (if  any 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  263 

they  have  made)  are  to  be  useless  to  them.  But  to  supply 
these  studies,  they  are  to  be  sworn  to  obey  all  the  rules, 
orders,  and  instructions  which  from  time  to  time  they  are 
to  receive  from  the  National  Assembly.  These  if  they 
submit  to,  they  leave  no  ground  of  law  to  the  subject. 
They  become  complete  and  most  dangerous  instruments  in 
the  hands  of  the  governing  power,  which,  in  the  midst  of  a 
cause,  or  on  the  prospect  of  it,  may  wholly  change  the  rule 
of  decision.  If  these  orders  of  the  National  Assembly 
come  to  be  contrary  to  the  will  of  the  people,  who  locally 
choose  those  judges,  such  confusion  must  happen  as  is 
terrible  to  think  of.  For  the  judges  owe  their  places  to  the 
local  authority;  and  the  commands  they  are  sworn  to  obey 
come  from  those  who  have  no  share  in  their  appointment. 
In  the  meantime  they  have  the  example  of  the  court  of 
Chatekt  to  encourage  and  guide  them  in  the  exercise  of 
their  functions.  That  court  is  to  try  criminals  sent  to  it  by 
the  National  Assembly,  or  brought  before  it  by  other  courses 
of  delation.  They  sit  under  a  guard  to  save  their  own  lives. 
They  know  not  by  what  law  they  judge,  nor  under  what 
authority  they  act,  nor  by  what  tenure  they  hold.  It 
is  thought  that  they  are  sometimes  obliged  to  condemn 
at  peril  of  their  lives.  This  is  not  perhaps  certain, 
nor  can  it  be  ascertained ;  but  when  they  acquit,  we 
know  they  have  seen  the  persons  whom  they  discharge, 
with  perfect  impunity  to  the  actors,  hanged  at  the  door  of 
their  court. 

The  Assembly  indeed  promises  that  they  will  form  a 
body  of.  law,  which  shall  be  short,  simple,  clear,  and  so 
forth.  That  is,  by  their  short  laws,  they  will  leave  much  to 
the  discretion  of  the  judge  ;  whilst  they  have  exploded  the 
authority  of  all  the  learning  which  could  make  judicial 


264  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

discretion  (a  thing  perilous  at  best)  deserving  the  appella 
tion  of  a  sound  discretion. 

It  is  curious  to  observe  that  the  administrative  bodies 
are  carefully  exempted  from  the  jurisdiction  of  these  new 
tribunals.  That  is,  those  persons  are  exempted  from  the 
power  of  the  laws,  who  ought  to  be  the  most  entirely  sub 
mitted  to  them.  Those  who  execute  public  pecuniary 
trusts,  ought  of  all  men  to  be  the  most  strictly  held  to  their 
duty.  One  would  have  thought  that  it  must  have  been 
among  your  earliest  cares,  if  you  did  not  mean  that  those 
administrative  bodies  should  be  real,  sovereign,  indepen 
dent  states,  to  form  an  awful  tribunal,  like  your  late  parlia 
ments,  or  like  our  king's  bench,  where  all  corporate  officers 
might  obtain  protection  in  the  legal  exercise  of  their 
functions,  and  would  find  coercion  if  they  trespassed 
against  their  legal  duty.  But  the  cause  of  the  exemption 
is  plain.  These  administrative  bodies  are  the  great  instru 
ments  of  the  present  leaders  in  their  progress  through 
democracy  to  oligarchy.  They  must  therefore  be  put 
above  the  law.  It  will  be  said  that  the  legal  tribunals 
which  you  have  made  are  unfit  to  coerce  them.  They  are 
undoubtedly.  They  are  unfit  for  any  rational  purpose.  It 
will  be  said  too,  that  the  administrative  bodies  will  be 
accountable  to  the  general  assembly.  This,  I  fear,  is 
talking  without  much  consideration  of  the  nature  of  that 
assembly,  or  of  these  corporations.  However,  to  be  subject 
to  the  pleasure  of  that  assembly  is  not  to  be  subject  to  law 
either  for  protection  or  for  constraint. 

This  establishment  of  judges  as  yet  wants  something  to 
its  completion.  It  is  to  be  crowned  by  a  new  tribunal. 
This  is  to  be  a  grand  state  judicature ;  and  it  is  to  judge  of 
crimes  committed  against  the  nation — that  is,  against  the 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE,  265 

power  of  the  Assembly.  It  seems  as  if  they  had  something 
in  their  view  of  the  nature  of  the  high  court  of  justice 
erected  in  England  during  the  time  of  the  great  usurpation. 
As  they  have  not  yet  finished  this  part  of  the  scheme,  it  is 
impossible  to  form  a  right  judgment  upon  it.  However,  if 
great  care  is  not  taken  to  form  it  in  a  spirit  very  different 
from  that  which  has  guided  them  in  their  proceedings 
relative  to  state  offences,  this  tribunal,  subservient  to  their 
inquisition,  the  committee  of  research,  will  extinguish  the  last 
sparks  of  liberty  in  France,  and  settle  the  most  dreadful 
and  arbitrary  tyranny  ever  known  in  any  nation.  If  they 
wish  to  give  to  this  tribunal  any  appearance  of  liberty  and 
justice,  they  must  not  evoke  from  or  send  to  it  the  causes 
relative  to  their  own  members,  at  their  pleasure.  They 
must  also  remove  the  seat  of  that  tribunal  out  of  the 
republic  of  Paris.1 

Has  more  wisdom  been  displayed  in  the  constitution  of 
your  army  than  what  is  discoverable  in  your  plan  of  judica 
ture?  The  able  arrangement  of  this  part  is  the  more 
difficult,  and  requires  the  greater  skill  and  attention,  not 
only  as  a  great  concern  in  itself,  but  as  it  is  the  third 
cementing  principle  in  the  new  body  of  republics,  which  you 
call  the  French  nation.  Truly  it  is  not  easy  to  divine  what 
that  army  may  become  at  last.  You  have  voted  a  very 
large  one,  and  on  good  appointments,  at  least  fully  equal  to 
your  apparent  means  of  payment,  But  what  is  the  principle 
of  its  discipline?  or  whom  is  it  to  obey?  You  have  got 
the  wolf  by  the  ears,  and  I  wish  you  joy  of  the  happy 
position  in  which  you  have  chosen  to  place  yourselves,  and 

1  For  further  elucidations  upon  the  subject  of  all  these  judicatures, 
and  of  the  committee  of  research,  see  M.  de  Calonne's  work. 


266  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

in  which  you  are  well  circumstanced  for  a  free  deliberation, 
relatively  to  that  army,  or  to  anything  else. 

The  minister  and  secretary  of  state  for  the  war  depart 
ment  is  M.  de  la  Tour  du  Pin.  This  gentleman,  like  his 
colleagues  in  administration,  is  a  most  zealous  assertor  of 
the  Revolution,  and  a  sanguine  admirer  of  the  new  constitu 
tion,  which  originated  in  that  event.  His  statement  of 
facts,  relative  to  the  military  of  France,  is  important,  not 
only  from  his  official  and  personal  authority,  but  because  it 
displays  very  clearly  the  actual  condition  of  the  army  in 
France,  and  because  it  throws  light  on  the  principles  upon 
which  the  Assembly  proceeds,  in  the  administration  of  this 
critical  object.  It  may  enable  us  to  form  some  judgment, 
how  far  it  may  be  expedient  in  this  country  to  imitate  the 
martial  policy  of  France. 

M.  de  la  Tour  du  Pin,  on  the  fourth  of  last  June,  comes 
to  give  an  account  of  the  state  of  his  department,  as  it 
exists  under  the  auspices  of  the  National  Assembly.  No 
man  knows  it  so  well;  no  man  can  express  it  better. 
Addressing  himself  to  the  National  Assembly,  he  says: 
"  His  Majesty  has  this  day  sent  me  to  apprize  you  of  the 
multiplied  disorders  of  which  every  day  he  receives  the  most 
distressing  intelligence.  The  army  (le  corps  militaire) 
threatens  to  fall  into  the  most  turbulent  anarchy.  Entire 
regiments  have  dared  to  violate  at  once  the  respect  due  to 
the  laws,  to  the  king,  to  the  order  established  by  your 
decrees,  and  to  the  oaths  which  they  have  taken  with  the 
most  awful  solemnity.  Compelled  by  my  duty  to  give  you 
information  of  these  excesses,  my  heart  bleeds  when  I 
consider  who  they  are  that  have  committed  them.  Those 
against  whom  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  withhold  the  most 
grievous  complaints,  are  a  part  of  that  very  soldiery  which 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  267 

to  this  day  have  been  so  full  of  honour  and  loyalty,  and 
with  whom,  for  fifty  years,  I  have  lived  the  comrade  and 
the  friend. 

"  What  incomprehensible  spirit  of  delirium  and  delusion 
has  all  at  once  led  them  astray  ?  Whilst  you  are  indefatigable 
in  establishing  uniformity  in  the  empire,  and  moulding  the 
whole  into  one  coherent  and  consistent  body;  whilst  the 
French  are  taught  by  you  at  once  the  respect  which  the  laws 
owe  to  the  rights  of  man,  and  that  which  the  citizens  owe  to 
the  laws,  the  administration  of  the  army  presents  nothing 
but  disturbance  and  confusion.  I  see  in  more  than  one 
corps  the  bonds  of  discipline  relaxed  or  broken ;  the  most 
unheard-of  pretensions  avowed  directly  and  without  any 
disguise ;  the  ordinances  without  force ;  the  chiefs  without 
authority ;  the  military  chest  and  the  colours  carried  off;  the 
authority  of  the  king  himself  \risum  teneatis\  proudly  defied; 
the  officers  despised,  degraded,  threatened,  driven  away,  and 
some  of  them  prisoners  in  the  midst  of  their  corps,  dragging 
on  a  precarious  life  in  the  bosom  of  disgust  and  humilia 
tion.  To  fill  up  the  measure  of  all  these  horrors,  the  com 
mandants  of  places  have  had  their  throats  cut,  under  the 
eyes,  and  almost  in  the  arms,  of  their  own  soldiers. 

"  These  evils  are  great ;  but  they  are  not  the  worst  conse 
quences  which  may  be  produced  by  such  military  insurrec 
tions.  Sooner  or  later  they  may  menace  the  nation  itself. 
The  nature  of  things  requires  that  the  army  should  never  act 
but  as  an  instrument.  The  moment  that,  erecting  itself  into 
a  deliberative  body,  it  shall  act  according  to  its  own  resolu 
tions,  the  government,  be  it  what  it  may,  will  immediately 
degenerate  into  a  military  democracy;  a  species  of  political 
monster,  which  has  always  ended  by  devouring  those  who 
have  produced  it. 


268  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

c>  After  all  this,  who  must  not  be  alarmed  at  the  irregular 
consultations,  and  turbulent  committees,  formed  in  some 
regiments  by  the  common  soldiers  and  non-commissioned 
officers,  without  the  knowledge,  or  even  in  contempt  of  the 
authority,  of  their  superiors;  although  the  presence  and 
concurrence  of  those  superiors  could  give  no  authority  to 
such  monstrous  democratic  assemblies  [cornices]." 

It  is  not  necessary  to  add  much  to  this  finished  picture  : 
finished  as  far  as  its  canvas  admits;  but  as  I  apprehend,  not 
taking  in  the  whole  of  the  nature  and  complexity  of  the  dis 
orders  of  this  military  democracy,  which,  the  minister  at  war 
truly  and  wisely  observes,  wherever  it  exists,  must  be  the 
true  constitution  of  the  state,  by  whatever  formal  appellation 
it  may  pass.  For,  though  he  informs  the  Assembly  that 
the  more  considerable  part  of  the  army  have  not  cast  off 
their  obedience,  but  are  still  attached  to  their  duty,  yet  those 
travellers  who  have  seen  the  corps  whose  conduct  is  the 
best,  rather  observe  in  them  the  absence  of  mutiny  than  the 
existence  of  discipline. 

I  cannot  help  pausing  here  for  a  moment  to  reflect  upon 
the  expressions  of  surprise  which  this  minister  has  let  fall, 
relative  to  the  excesses  he  relates.  To  him  the  departure 
of  the  troops  from  their  ancient  principles  of  loyalty  and 
honour  seems  quite  inconceivable.  Surely  those  to  whom  he 
addresses  himself  know  the  causes  of  it  but  too  well.  They 
know  the  doctrines  which  they  have  preached,  the  decrees 
which  they  have  passed,  the  practices  which  they  have 
countenanced.  The  soldiers  remember  the  6th  of  October. 
They  recollect  the  French  guards.  They  have  not  forgotten 
the  taking  of  the  king's  castles  in  Paris  and  Marseilles. 
That  the  governors  in  both  places  were  murdered  with  im 
punity  is  a  fact  that  has  not  passed  out  of  their  minds. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  269 

They  do  not  abandon  the  principles  laid  down  so  ostenta 
tiously  and  laboriously  of  the  equality  of  men.  They  cannot 
shut  their  eyes  to  the  degradation  of  the  whole  noblesse  of 
France,  and  the  suppression  of  the  very  idea  of  a  gentleman. 
The  total  abolition  of  titles  and  distinctions  is  not  lost 
upon  them.  But  M  de  la  Tour  du  Pin  is  astonished  at 
their  disloyalty,  when  the  doctors  of  the  Assembly  have 
taught  them  at  the  same  time  the  respect  due  to  laws. 
It  is  easy  to  judge  which  of  the  two  sorts  of  lessons  men 
with  arms  in  their  hands  are  likely  to  learn.  As  to  the 
authority  of  the  king,  we  may  collect  from  the  minister 
himself  (if  any  argument  on  that  head  were  not  quite 
superfluous)  that  it  is  not  of  more  consideration  with  these 
troops  than  it  is  with  everybody  else.  "The  king,"  says 
he,  "has  over  and  over  again  repeated  his  orders  to  put  a 
stop  to  these  excesses  :  but,  in  so  terrible  a  crisis,  your  [the 
Assembly's]  concurrence  is  become  indispensably  necessary 
to  prevent  the  evils  which  menace  the  state.  You  unite 
to  the  force  of  the  legislative  power,  that  of  opinion  still 
more  important."  To  be  sure,  the  army  can  have  no 
opinion  of  the  power  or  authority  of  the  king.  Perhaps  the 
soldier  has  by  this  time  learned  that  the  Assembly  itself 
does  not  enjoy  a  much  greater  degree  of  liberty  than  that 
royal  figure. 

It  is  now  to  be  seen  what  has  been  proposed  in  this 
exigency,  one  of  the  greatest  that  can  happen  in  a  state. 
The  minister  requests  the  Assembly  to  array  itself  in  all  its 
terrors,  and  to  call  forth  all  its  majesty.  He  desires  that 
the  grave  and  severe  principles  announced  by  them  may 
give  vigour  to  the  king's  proclamation.  After  this  we  should 
have  looked  for  courts  civil  and  martial ;  breaking  of  some 
corps,  decimating  of  others,  and  all  the  terrible  means  which 


270  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

necessity  has  employed  in  such  cases  to  arrest  the  progress 
of  the  most  terrible  of  all  evils ;  particularly,  one  might 
expect  that  a  serious  inquiry  would  be  made  into  the 
murder  of  commandants  in  the  view  of  their  soldiers.  Not 
one  word  of  all  this,  or  of  anything  like  it.  After  they 
had  been  told  that  the  soldiery  trampled  upon  the  decrees 
of  the  Assembly  promulgated  by  the  king,  the  Assembly 
pass  new  decrees ;  and  they  authorise  the  king  to  make  new 
proclamations.  After  the  secretary  at  war  had  stated  that 
the  regiments  had  paid  no  regard  to  oaths  pretes  avec  la  plus 
imposante  solemnit'e — they  propose — what?  More  oaths. 
They  renew  decrees  and  proclamations  as  they  experience 
their  insufficiency,  and  they  multiply  oaths  in  proportion  as 
they  weaken,  in  the  minds  of  men,  the  sanctions  of  religion. 
I  hope  that  handy  abridgments  of  the  excellent  sermons 
of  Voltaire,  d'Alembert,  Diderot,  and  Helvetius,  on  the 
Immortality  of  the  Soul,  on  a  particular  superintending 
Providence,  and  on  a  Future  State  of  Rewards  and  Punish 
ments,  are  sent  down  to  the  soldiers  along  with  their  civic 
oaths.  Of  this  I  have  no  doubt ;  as  I  understand  that  a 
certain  description  of  reading  makes  no  inconsiderable  part  of 
their  military  exercises,  and  that  they  are  full  as  well  supplied 
with  the  ammunition  of  pamphlets  as  of  cartridges. 

To  prevent  the  mischiefs  arising  from  conspiracies, 
irregular  consultations,  seditious  committees,  and  monstrous 
democratic  assemblies  ["  comitia,  cornices  "]  of  the  soldiers, 
and  all  the  disorders  arising  from  idleness,  luxury,  dissipa 
tion,  and  insubordination,  I  believe  the  most  astonishing 
means  have  been  used  that  ever  occurred  to  men,  even  in 
all  the  inventions  of  this  prolific  age.  It  is  no  less  than 
this: — The  king  has  promulgated  in  circular-letters  to  all  the 
regiments  his  direct  authority  and  encouragement,  that  the 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  271 

several  corps  should  join  themselves  with  the  clubs  and 
confederations  in  the  several  municipalities,  and  mix  with 
them  in  their  feasts  and  civic  entertainments !  This  jolly 
discipline,  it  seems,  is  to  soften  the  ferocity  of  their  minds  ; 
to  reconcile  them  to  their  bottle  companions  of  other 
descriptions ;  and  to  merge  particular  conspiracies  in  more 
general  associations.1  That  this  remedy  would  be  pleasing 
to  the  soldiers,  as  they  are  described  by  M.  de  la  Tour  du 
Pin,  I  can  readily  believe ;  and  that,  however  mutinous 
otherwise,  they  will  dutifully  submit  themselves  to  these 
royal  proclamations.  But  I  should  question  whether  all  this 
civic  swearing,  clubbing,  and  feasting  would  dispose  them, 
more  than  at  present  they  are  disposed,  to  an  obedience  to 
their  officers ;  or  teach  them  better  to  submit  to  the  austere 
rules  of  military  discipline.  It  will  make  them  admirable 
citizens  after  the  French  mode,  but  not  quite  so  good 
soldiers  after  any  mode.  A  doubt  might  well  arise  whether 
the  conversations  at  these  good  tables  would  fit  them  a  great 
deal  the  better  for  the  character  of  mere  instruments,  which 
this  veteran  officer  and  statesman  justly  observes  the  nature 
of  things  always  requires  an  army  to  be. 

Concerning  the  likelihood  of  this  improvement  in  dis 
cipline,  by  the  free  conversation  of  the  soldiers  with  muni 
cipal  festive  societies,  which  is  thus  officially  encouraged 

1  Comme  sa  majeste  y  a  reconnu,  non  une  systeme  dissociations 
particulieres,  mais  une  reunion  de  volontes  de  tous  les  Francois  poui 
la  liberte  et  la  prosperite  communes,  ainsi  pour  la  maintien  de 
1'ordre  publique ;  il  a  pense  qu'il  convenoit  que  chaque  regiment 
prit  part  a  ces  fetes  civiques  pour  multiplier  les  rapports  et  referrer 
les  liens  d'union  entre  les  citoyens  et  les  troupes. — Lest  I  should  not 
be  credited,  I  insert  the  words,  authorising  the  troops  to  feast  with  the 
popular  confederacies. 


272  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

by  royal  authority  and  sanction,  we  may  judge  by  the  state 
of  the  municipalities  themselves,  furnished  to  us  by  the  war 
minister  in  this  very  speech  He  conceives  good  hopes  of 
the  success  of  his  endeavours  towards  restoring  order  for  the 
present  from  the  good  disposition  of  certain  regiments ;  but 
he  finds  something  cloudy  with  regard  to  the  future.  As  to 
preventing  the  return  of  confusion,  "for  this,  the  administra 
tion  (says  he)  cannot  be  answerable  to  you,  as  long  as  they 
see  the  municipalities  arrogate  to  themselves  an  authority 
over  the  troops,  which  your  institutions  have  reserved  wholly 
to  the  monarch.  You  have  fixed  the  limits  of  the  military 
authority  and  the  municipal  authority.  You  have  bounded 
the  action,  which  you  have  permitted  to  the  latter  over  the 
former,  to  the  right  of  requisition ;  but  never  did  the  letter 
or  the  spirit  of  your  decrees  authorise  the  commons 
in  these  municipalities  to  break  the  officers,  to  try 
them,  to  give  orders  to  the  soldiers,  to  drive  them  from  the 
posts  committed  to  their  guard,  to  stop  them  in  their  marches 
ordered  by  the  king,  or,  in  a  word,  to  enslave  the  troops  to 
the  caprice  of  each  of  the  cities,  or  even  market  towns,  through 
which  they  are  to  pass." 

Such  is  the  character  and  disposition  of  the  municipal 
society  which  is  to  reclaim  the  soldiery,  to  bring  them  back 
to  the  true  principles  of  military  subordination,  and  to  render 
them  machines  in  the  hands  of  the  supreme  power  of  the 
country !  Such  are  the  distempers  of  the  French  troops  ! 
Such  is  their  cure !  As  the  army  is,  so  is  the  navy.  The 
municipalities  supersede  the  orders  of  the  Assembly,  and  the 
seamen  in  their  turn  supersede  the  orders  of  the  municipal 
ities.  From  my  heart  I  pity  the  condition  of  a  respectable 
servant  of  the  public,  like  this  war  minister,  obliged  in  his 
old  age  to  pledge  the  Assembly  in  their  civic  cups,  and  to 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  273 

enter  with  a  hoary  head  into  all  the  fantastic  vagaries  of 
these  juvenile  politicians.  Such  schemes  are  not  like 
propositions  coming  from  a  man  of  fifty  years'  wear  and  tear 
amongst  mankind.  They  seem  rather  such  as  ought  to  be 
expected  from  those  grand  compounders  in  politics,  who 
shorten  the  road  to  their  degrees  in  the  state ;  and  have  a 
certain  inward  fanatical  assurance  and  illumination  upon  all 
subjects ;  upon  the  credit  of  which  one  of  their  doctors  has 
thought  fit,  with  great  applause,  and  greater  success,  to 
caution  the  Assembly  not  to  attend  to  old  men,  or  to  any 
persons  who  valued  themselves  upon  their  experience.  I 
suppose  all  the  ministers  of  state  must  qualify,  and  take  this 
test ;  wholly  abjuring  the  errors  and  heresies  of  experience 
and  observation.  Every  man  has  his  own  relish.  But  I 
think  if  I  could  not  attain  to  the  wisdom,  I  would  at  least 
preserve  something  of  the  stiff  and  peremptory  dignity  of 
age.  These  gentlemen  deal  in  regeneration  :  but  at  any  price 
I  should  hardly  yield  my  rigid  fibres  to  be  regenerated  by 
them  ;  nor  begin,  in  my  grand  climacteric,  to  squall  in  their 
new  accents,  or  to  stammer,  in  my  second  cradle,  the 
elemental  sounds  of  their  barbarous  metaphysics.1  Si  isti 
mihi  largiantiir  ut  repueriscam,  et  in  eorum  amis  vagiam, 
valde  recusem  ! 

The  imbecility  of  any  part  of  the  puerile  and  pedantic 
system  which  they  call  a  constitution,  cannot  be  laid  open 
without  discovering  the  utter  insufficiency  and  mischief  of 
every  other  part  with  which  it  comes  in  contact,  or  that 
bears  any  the  remotest  relation  to  it.  You  cannot  propose  a 
remedy  for  the  incompetence  of  the  crown,  without  display 
ing  the  debility  of  the  Assembly.  You  cannot  deliberate 
on  the  confusion  of  the  army  of  the  state,  without  disclosing 

1  This  war  minister  has  since  quitted  the  school,  and  resigned  his  office. 

18 


274  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

the  worse  disorders  of  the  armed  municipalities.  The 
military  lays  open  the  civil,  and  the  civil  betrays  the  military, 
anarchy.  I  wish  everybody  carefully  to  peruse  the  eloquent 
speech  (such  it  is)  of  Mons.  de  la  Tour  du  Pin.  He  attributes 
the  salvation  of  the  municipalities  to  the  good  behaviour  of 
some  of  the  troops.  These  troops  are  to  preserve  the  well- 
disposed  part  of  those  municipalities,  which  is  confessed  to 
be  the  weakest,  from  the  pillage  of  the  worst  disposed,  which 
is  the  strongest.  But  the  municipalities  affect  a  sovereignty, 
and  will  command  those  troops  which  are  necessary  for  their 
protection.  Indeed  they  must  command  them  or  court 
them.  The  municipalities,  by  the  necessity  of  their  situation, 
and  by  the  republican  powers  they  have  obtained,  must, 
with  relation  to  the  military,  be  the  masters,  or  the  servants, 
or  the  confederates,  or  each  successively;  or  they  must  make 
a  jumble  of  all  together,  according  to  circumstances.  What 
government  is  there  to  coerce  the  army  but  the  municipality, 
or  the  municipality  but  the  army?  To  preserve  concord 
where  authority  is  extinguished,  at  the  hazard  of  all  con 
sequences,  the  Assembly  attempts  to  cure  the  distempers 
by  the  distempers  themselves;  and  they  hope  to  preserve 
themselves  from  a  purely  military  democracy,  by  giving  it  a 
debauched  interest  in  the  municipal. 

If  the  soldiers  once  come  to  mix  for  any  time  in  the 
municipal  clubs,  cabals,  and  confederacies,  an  elective 
attraction  will  draw  them  to  the  lowest  and  most  desperate 
part.  With  them  will  be  their  habits,  affections,  and 
sympathies.  The  military  conspiracies,  which  are  to  be 
remedied  by  civic  confederacies ;  the  rebellious  municipali 
ties,  which  are  to  be  rendered  obedient  by  furnishing  them 
with  the  means  of  seducing  the  very  armies  of  the  state  that 
are  to  keep  them  in  order ;  all  these  chimeras  of  a  monstrous 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  275 

and  portentous  policy  must  aggravate  the  confusion  from 
which  they  have  arisen.     There  must  be  blood.     The  want 
of  common  judgment  manifested  in  the  construction  of  all 
their  descriptions  of  forces,  and  in  all  their  kinds  of  civil 
and  judicial  authorities,  will  make  it  flow.     Disorders  may 
be  quieted  in  one  time  and  in  one  part.     They  will  break  out 
in  others ;  because  the  evil  is  radical  and  intrinsic.    All  these 
schemes  of  mixing  mutinous  soldiers  with  seditious  citizens 
must  weaken  still  more  and  more  the  military  connection  of 
soldiers   with    their  officers,  as   well   as  add    military  and 
mutinous  audacity  to  turbulent  artificers  and  peasants.     To 
secure  a  real  army,  the  officer  should  be  first  and  last  in  the 
eye  of  the  soldier;  first  and  last  in  his  attention,  observance, 
and  esteem.     Officers  it  seems  there  are  to  be,  whose  chief 
qualification  must  be  temper  and  patience.     They  are  to 
manage  their  troops   by  electioneering  arts.      They  must 
bear  themselves  as  candidates,  not  as  commanders.     But  as 
by  such  means  power  may  be  occasionally  in  their  hands, 
the  authority  by  which  they  are  to  be  nominated  becomes 
of  high  importance. 

What  you  may  do  finally  does  not  appear;  nor  is  it  of 
much  moment,  whilst  the  strange  and  contradictory  relation 
between  your  army  and  all  the  parts  of  your  republic,  as 
well  as  the  puzzled  relation  of  those  parts  to  each  other  and 
to  the  whole,  remain  as  they  are.  You  seem  to  have  given 
the  provisional  nomination  of  the  officers,  in  the  first 
instance,  to  the  king,  with  a  reserve  of  approbation  by  the 
National  Assembly.  Men  who  have  an  interest  to  pursue 
are  extremely  sagacious  in  discovering  the  true  seat  of 
power.  They  must  soon  perceive  that  those  who  can 
negative  indefinitely,  in  reality  appoint.  The  officers  must 
therefore  look  to  their  intrigues  in  that  Assembly,  as  the 


276  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

sole,  certain  road  to  promotion.  Still,  however,  by  your 
new  constitution  they  must  begin  their  solicitation  at  court 
This  double  negotiation  for  military  rank  seems  to  me  a 
contrivance  as  well  adapted,  as  if  it  were  studied  for  no 
other  end,  to  promote  faction  in  the  Assembly  itself, 
relative  to  this  vast  military  patronage ;  and  then  to  poison 
the  corps  of  officers  with  factions  of  a  nature  still  more 
dangerous  to  the  safety  of  government,  upon  any  bottom  on 
which  it  can  be  placed,  and  destructive  in  the  end  to  the 
efficiency  of  the  army  itself.  Those  officers  who  lose  the 
promotions  intended  for  them  by  the  crown  must  become 
of  a  faction  opposite  to  that  of  the  Assembly  which  has 
rejected  their  claims,  and  must  nourish  discontents  in  the 
heart  of  the  army  against  the  ruling  powers.  Those  officers, 
on  the  other  hand,  who,  by  carrying  their  point  through  an 
interest  in  the  Assembly,  feel  themselves  to  be  at  best  only 
second  in  the  good-will  of  the  crown,  though  first  in  that  of 
the  Assembly,  must  slight  an  authority  which  would  not 
advance  and  could  not  retard  their  promotion.  If  to  avoid 
these  evils  you  will  have  no  other  rule  for  command  or 
promotion  than  seniority,  you  will  have  an  army  of  formality; 
at  the  same  time  it  will  become  more  independent,  and 
more  of  a  military  republic.  Not  they,  but  the  king  is  the 
machine.  A  king  is  not  to  be  deposed  by  halves.  If  he  is 
not  everything  in  the  command  of  an  army,  he  is  nothing. 
What  is  the  effect  of  a  power  placed  nominally  at  the  head 
of  the  army,  who  to  that  army  is  no  object  of  gratitude,  or 
of  fear?  Such  a  cipher  is  not  fit  for  the  administration  of 
an  object,  of  all  things  the  most  delicate,  the  supreme 
command  of  military  men.  They  must  be  constrained 
(and  their  inclinations  lead  them  to  what  their  necessities 
require)  by  a  real,  vigorous,  effective,  decided,  personal 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  277 

authority.  The  authority  of  the  Assembly  itself  suffers  by 
passing  through  such  a  debilitating  channel  as  they  have 
chosen.  The  army  will  not  long  look  to  an  assembly 
acting  ^through  the  organ  of  false  show  and  palpable 
imposition.  They  will  not  seriously  yield  obedience  to  a 
prisoner.  They  will  either  despise  a  pageant,  or  they  will 
pity  a  captive  king.  This  relation  of  your  army  to  the 
crown  will,  if  I  am  not  greatly  mistaken,  become  a  serious 
dilemma  in  your  politics. 

It  is  besides  to  be  considered  whether  an  assembly  like 
yours,  even  supposing  that  it  was  in  possession  of  another 
sort  of  organ  through  which  its  orders  were  to  pass,  is  fit 
for  promoting  the  obedience  and  discipline  of  an  army.     It 
is  known  that  armies  have  hitherto  yielded  a  very  precarious 
and  uncertain  obedience  to  any  senate,  or  popular  authority; 
and  they  will  least  of  all  yield  it  to  an  assembly  which  is 
only  to  have  a  continuance  of  two  years.     The  officers  must 
totally  lose  the  characteristic  disposition  of  military  men,  if 
they  see  with  perfect  submission  and  due  admiration,  the 
dominion  of  pleaders;  especially  when  they  find  that  they 
have  a  new  court  to  pay  to  an  endless  succession  of  those 
pleaders;  whose  military  policy,  and  the  genius  of  whose 
command  (if  they  should  have  any),  must  be  as  uncertain 
as  their  duration  is    transient.      In  the  weakness  of  one 
kind  of  authority,  and  in  the  fluctuation  of  all,  the  officers 
of  an  army  will  remain  for  some  time  mutinous  and  full  of 
faction,  until  some  popular  general,  who  understands  the 
art  of  conciliating  the  soldiery,  and  who  possesses  the  true 
spirit  of  command,  shall  draw  the  eyes  of  all  men   upon 
himself.     Armies  will  obey  him  on  his  personal  account 
There  is  no  other  way  of  securing  military  obedience  in 
this  state  of  things.     But  the  moment  in  which  that  event 


278  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

shall  happen,  the  person  who  really  commands  the  army  is 
your  master ;  the  master  (that  is  little)  of  your  king,  the 
master  of  your  Assembly,  the  master  of  your  whole  republic. 
How  came  the  Assembly  by  their  present  power  over 
the  army?  Chiefly,  to  be  sure,  by  debauching  the  soldiers 
from  their  officers.  They  have  begun  by  a  most  terrible 
operation.  They  have  touched  the  central  point,  about 
which  the  particles  that  compose  armies  are  at  repose. 
They  have  destroyed  the  principle  of  obedience  in  the 
great,  essential,  critical  link  between  the  officer  and  the 
soldier,  just  where  the  chain  of  military  subordination  com 
mences  and  on  which  the  whole  of  that  system  depends. 
The  soldier  is  told  he  is  a  citizen,  and  has  the  rights  of 
man  and  citizen.  The  right  of  a  man,  he  is  told,  is  to  be 
his  own  governor,  and  to  be  ruled  only  by  those  to  whom 
he  delegates  that  self-government.  It  is  very  natural  he 
should  think  that  he  ought  most  of  all  to  have  his  choice 
where  he  is  to  yield  the  greatest  degree  of  obedience.  He 
will  therefore,  in  all  probability,  systematically  do  what  he 
does  at  present  occasionally;  that  is,  he  will  exercise  at 
least  a  negative  in  the  choice  of  his  officers.  At  present 
the  officers  are  known  at  best  to  be  only  permissive,  and  on 
their  good  behaviour.  In  fact,  there  have  been  many 
instances  in  which  they  have  been  cashiered  by  their  corps. 
Here  is  a  second  negative  on  the  choice  of  the  king;  a 
negative  as  effectual  at  least  as  the  other  of  the  Assembly. 
The  soldiers  know  already  that  it  has  been  a  question,  not 
ill  received  in  the  National  Assembly,  whether  they  ought 
not  to  have  the  direct  choice  of  their  officers,  or  some  pro 
portion  of  them  ?  When  such  matters  are  in  deliberation 
it  is  no  extravagant  supposition  that  they  will  incline  to  the 
opinion  most  favourable  to  their  pretensions.  They  will 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  279 

not  bear  to  be  deemed  the  army  of  an  imprisoned  king, 
whilst  another  army  in  the  same  country,  with  whom  too 
they  are  to  feast  and  confederate,  is  to  be  considered  as  the 
free  army  of  a  free  constitution.     They  will  cast  their  eyes 
on   the   other   and   more    permanent  army;    I    mean    the 
municipal.      That   corps,   they    well    know,    does    actually 
elect  its  own  officers.     They  may  not  be  able  to  discern 
the  grounds  of  distinction  on  which  they  are  not  to  elect  a 
Marquis  de  la  Fayette  (or  what  is  his  new  name  ?)  of  their 
own.     If  this  election  of  a  commander-in-chief  be  a  part  of 
the  rights  of  men,  why  not  of  theirs?     They  see  elective 
justices  of  peace,  elective  judges,  elective  curates,  elective 
bishops,  elective  municipalities,  and  elective   commanders 
of  the  Parisian  army.— Why  should  they  alone  be  excluded  ? 
Are  the  brave  troops  of  France  the  only  men  in  that  nation 
who  are  not  the  fit  judges  of  military  merit,  and  of  the 
qualifications  necessary   for   a   commander-in-chief?      Are 
they  paid  by  the  state,  and  do  they  therefore  lose  the  rights 
of  men  ?     They  are  a  part  of  that  nation  themselves,  and 
contribute  to  that  pay.     And  is   not  the  king,  is  not  the 
National  Assembly,  and  are  not  all  who  elect  the  National 
Assembly,  likewise  paid  ?     Instead  of  seeing  all  these  forfeit 
their  rights  by  their  receiving  a  salary,  they  perceive  that  in 
all  these  cases  a  salary  is  given  for  the  exercise  of  those 
rights.     All  your  resolutions,  all  your  proceedings,  all  your 
debates,   all    the    works    of  your   doctors    in    religion    and 
politics,  have  industriously  been  put  into  their  hands;  and 
you  expect  that  they  will  apply  to  their  own  case  just  as 
much  of  your  doctrines  and  examples  as  suits  your  pleasure. 
Everything  depends  upon  the  army  in  such  a  government 
as   yours;    for   you    have    industriously  destroyed   all   the 
opinions,  and  prejudices,  and,  as  far  as  in  you  lay,  all  the 


280  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

instincts  which  support  government.  Therefore  the  moment 
any  difference  arises  between  your  National  Assembly  and 
any  part  of  the  nation,  you  must  have  recourse  to  force. 
Nothing  else  is  left  to  you ;  or  rather  you  have  left  nothing 
else  to  yourselves.  You  see,  by  the  report  of  your  war 
minister,  that  the  distribution  of  the  army  is  in  a  great 
measure  made  with  a  view  of  internal  coercion.1  You  must 
rule  by  an  army;  and  you  have  infused  into  that  army  by 
which  you  rule,  as  well  as  into  the  whole  body  of  the  nation, 
principles  which  after  a  time  must  disable  you  in  the  use 
you  resolve  to  make  of  it.  The  king  is  to  call  out  troops  to 
act  against  his  people,  when  the  world  has  been  told,  and 
the  assertion  is  still  ringing  in  our  ears,  that  troops  ought 
not  to  fire  on  citizens.  The  colonies  assert  to  themselves 
an  independent  constitution  and  a  free  trade.  They  must 
be  constrained  by  troops.  In  what  chapter  of  your  code  of 
the  rights  of  men  are  they  able  to  read  that  it  is  a  part  of 
the  rights  of  men  to  have  their  commerce  monopolised  and 
restrained  for  the  benefit  of  others  ?  As  the  colonists  rise 
on  you,  the  negroes  rise  on  them.  Troops  again — Massacre, 
torture,  hanging !  These  are  your  rights  of  men !  These 
are  the  fruits  of  metaphysic  declarations  wantonly  made,  and 
shamefully  retracted !  It  was  but  the  other  day  that  the 
farmers  of  land  in  one  of  your  provinces  refused  to  pay 
some  sorts  of  rent  to  the  lord  of  the  soil.  In  consequence 
of  this,  you  decree  that  the  country  people  shall  pay  all 
rents  and  dues,  except  those  which  as  grievances  you  have 
abolished ;  and  if  they  refuse,  then  you  order  the  king  to 
march  troops  against  them.  You  lay  down  metaphysic  pro 
positions  which  infer  universal  consequences,  and  then  you 

1  Courier  Frar^ois,  3oth  July,  1790.     Assembled  Nationale,  Numero 
210. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  281 

attempt  to  limit  logic  by  despotism.  The  leaders  of  the 
present  system  tell  them  of  their  rights,  as  men,  to  take 
fortresses,  to  murder  guards,  to  seize  on  kings  without  the 
least  appearance  of  authority  even  from  the  Assembly,  whilst, 
as  the  sovereign  legislative  body,  that  Assembly  was  sitting 
in  the  name  of  the  nation— and  yet  these  leaders  presume  to 
order  out  the  troops  which  have  acted  in  these  very  disorders, 
to  coerce  those  who  shall  judge  on  the  principles,  and  follow 
the  examples,  which  have  been  guaranteed  by  their  own 
approbation. 

The  leaders  teach  the  people  to  abhor  and  reject  all 
feodality  as  the  barbarism  of  tyranny,  and  they  tell  them 
afterwards  how  much  of  that  barbarous  tyranny  they  are  to 
bear  with  patience.  As  they  are  prodigal  of  light  with  regard 
to  grievances,  so  the  people  find  them  sparing  in  the  extreme 
with  regard  to  redress.  They  know  that  not  only  certain 
quit-rents  and  personal  duties,  which  you  have  permitted 
them  to  redeem  (but  have  furnished  no  money  for  the 
redemption),  are  as  nothing  to  those  burthens  for  which  you 
have  made  no  provision  at  all.  They  know  that  almost  the 
whole  system  of  landed  property  in  its  origin  is  feudal ;  that 
it  is  the  distribution  of  the  possessions  of  the  original  pro 
prietors,  made  by  a  barbarous  conqueror  to  his  barbarous 
instruments ;  and  that  the  most  grievous  effects  of  the  con 
quest  are  the  land  rents  of  every  kind,  as  without  question 
they  are. 

The  peasants,  in  all  probability,  are  the  descendants  of 
these  ancient  proprietors,  Romans  or  Gauls.  But  if  they 
fail,  in  any  degree,  in  the  titles  which  they  make  on  the 
principles  of  antiquaries  and  lawyers,  they  retreat  into  the 
citadel  of  the  rights  of  men.  There  they  find  that  men  are 
equal;  and  the  earth,  the  kind  and  equal  mother  of  all, 


282  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

ought  not  to  be  monopolised  to  foster  the  pride  and  luxury 
of  any  men,  who  by  nature  are  no  better  than  themselves, 
and  who,  if  they  do  not  labour  for  their  bread,  are  worse. 
They  find  that  by  the  laws  of  nature  the  occupant  and 
subduer  of  the  soil  is  the  true  proprietor;  that  there  is  no 
prescription  against  nature ;  and  that  the  agreements  (where 
any  there  are)  which  have  been  made  with  the  landlords, 
during  the  time  of  slavery,  are  only  the  effect  of  duresse  and 
force ;  and  that  when  the  people  re-entered  into  the  rights 
of  men,  those  agreements  were  made  as  void  as  everything 
else  which  had  been  settled  under  the  prevalence  of  the  old 
feudal  and  aristocratic  tyranny.  They  will  tell  you  that  they 
see  no  difference  between  an  idler  with  a  hat  and  a  national 
cockade,  and  an  idler  in  a  cowl  or  in  a  rochet.  If  you 
ground  the  title  to  rents  on  succession  and  prescription, 
they  tell  you  from  the  speech  of  M.  Camus,  published  by 
the  National  Assembly  for  their  information,  that  things  ill 
begun  cannot  avail  themselves  of  prescription ;  that  the 
title  of  these  lords  was  vicious  in  its  origin ;  and  that  force 
is  at  least  as  bad  as  fraud.  As  to  the  title  by  succession, 
they  will  tell  you  that  the  succession  of  those  who  have 
cultivated  the  soil  is  the  true  pedigree  of  property,  and  not 
rotten  parchments  and  silly  substitutions ;  that  the  lords 
have  enjoyed  their  usurpation  too  long ,  and  that  if  they 
allow  to  these  lay  monks  any  charitable  pension,  they 
ought  to  be  thankful  to  the  bounty  of  the  true  proprietor, 
who  is  so  generous  towards  a  false  claimant  to  his  goods. 

When  the  peasants  give  you  back  that  coin  of  sophistic 
reason,  on  which  you  have  set  your  image  and  superscrip 
tion,  you  cry  it  down  as  base  money,  and  tell  them  you  will 
pay  for  the  future  with  French  guards,  and  dragoons,  and 
hussars.  You  hold  up,  to  chastise  them,  the  second-hand 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  283 

authority  of  a  king,  who  is  only  the  instrument  of  destroying, 
without  any  power  of  protecting  either  the  people  or  his  own 
person.  Through  him  it  seems  you  will  make  yourselves 
obeyed.  They  answer,  You  have  taught  us  that  there  are 
no  gentlemen;  and  which  of  your  principles  teach  us  to  bow 
to  kings  whom  we  have  not  elected  ?  We  know,  without 
your  teaching,  that  lands  were  given  for  the  support  of 
feudal  dignities,  feudal  titles,  and  feudal  offices.  When  you 
took  down  the  cause  as  a  grievance,  why  should  the  more 
grievous  effect  remain?  As  there  are  now  no  hereditary 
honours,  and  no  distinguished  families,  why  are  we  taxed  to 
maintain  what  you  tell  us  ought  not  to  exist  ?  You  have 
sent  down  our  old  aristocratic  landlords  in  no  other 
character,  and  with  no  other  title,  but  that  of  exactors  under 
your  authority.  Have  you  endeavoured  to  make  these  your 
rent-gatherers  respectable  to  us  ?  No.  You  have  sent  them 
to  us  with  their  arms  reversed,  their  shields  broken,  their 
impresses  defaced;  and  so  displumed,  degraded,  and  meta 
morphosed,  such  unfeathered  two-legged  things,  that  we  no 
longer  know  them.  They  are  strangers  to  us.  They  do 
not  even  go  by  the  names  of  our  ancient  lords.  Physically 
they  may  be  the  same  men ;  though  we  are  not  quite  sure 
of  that,  on  your  new  philosophic  doctrines  of  personal 
identity.  In  all  other  respects  they  are  totally  changed. 
We  do  not  see  why  we  have  not  as  good  a  right  to  refuse 
them  their  rents  as  you  have  to  abrogate  all  their  honours, 
titles,  and  distinctions.  This  we  have  never  commissioned 
you  to  do ;  and  it  is  one  instance,  among  many  indeed,  of 
your  assumption  of  undelegated  power.  We  see  the  burghers 
of  Paris,  through  their  clubs,  their  mobs,  and  their  national 
guards,  directing  you  at  their  pleasure,  and  giving  that  as 
law  to  you  which,  under  your  authority,  is  transmitted  as 


284  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

law  to  us.  Through  you,  these  burghers  dispose  of  the 
lives  and  fortunes  of  us  all.  Why  should  not  you  attend  as 
much  to  the  desires  of  the  laborious  husbandman  with 
regard  to  our  rent,  by  which  we  are  affected  in  the  most 
serious  manner,  as  you  do  to  the  demands  of  these  insolent 
burghers,  relative  to  distinctions  and  titles  of  honour,  by 
which  neither  they  nor  we  are  affected  at  all  ?  But  we  find 
you  pay  more  regard  to  their  fancies  than  to  our  necessities. 
Is  it  among  the  rights  of  man  to  pay  tribute  to  his  equals  ? 
Before  this  measure  of  yours,  we  might  have  thought  we 
were  not  perfectly  equal.  We  might  have  entertained  some 
old,  habitual,  unmeaning  prepossession  in  favour  of  those 
landlords ;  but  we  cannot  conceive  with  what  other  view 
than  that  of  destroying  all  respect  to  them,  you  could  have 
made  the  law  that  degrades  them.  You  have  forbidden  us 
to  treat  them  with  any  of  the  old  formalities  of  respect,  and 
now  you  send  troops  to  sabre  and  to  bayonet  us  into  a  sub 
mission  to  fear  and  force,  which  you  did  not  suffer  us  to  yield 
to  the  mild  authority  of  opinion. 

The  ground  of  some  of  these  arguments  is  horrid  and 
ridiculous  to  all  national  ears ;  but  to  the  politicians  of 
metaphysics  who  have  opened  schools  for  sophistry,  and 
made  establishments  for  anarchy,  it  is  solid  and  conclusive. 
It  is  obvious  that  on  a  mere  consideration  of  the  right,  the 
leaders  in  the  Assembly  would  not  in  the  least  have  scrupled 
to  abrogate  the  rents  along  with  the  titles  and  family 
ensigns.  It  would  be  only  to  follow  up  the  principle  of 
their  reasonings,  and  to  complete  the  analogy  of  their  con 
duct.  But  they  had  newly  possessed  themselves  of  a  great 
body  of  landed  property  by  confiscation.  They  had  this 
commodity  at  market;  and  the  market  would  have  been 
wholly  destroyed  if  they  were  to  permit  the  husbandmen  to 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  285 

riot  in  the  speculations  with  which  they  so  freely  intoxicated 
themselves.  The  only  security  which  property  enjoys  in  any 
one  of  its  descriptions,  is  from  the  interests  of  their  rapacity 
with  regard  to  some  other.  They  have  left  nothing  but  their 
own  arbitrary  pleasure  to  determine  what  property  is  to  be 
protected  and  what  subverted. 

Neither  have  they  left  any  principle  by  which  any  of  their 
municipalities  can  be  bound  to  obedience ;  or  even  conscien 
tiously  obliged  not  to  separate  from  the  whole  to  become 
independent,  or  to  connect  itself  with  some  other  state. 
The  people  of  Lyons,  it  seems,  have  refused  lately  to  pay 
taxes.  Why  should  they  not?  What  lawful  authority  is 
there  left  to  exact  them  ?  The  king  imposed  some  of  them. 
The  old  states,  methodised  by  orders,  settled  the  more 
ancient.  They  may  say  to  the  Assembly,  Who  are  you,  that 
are  not  our  kings,  nor  the  states  we  have  elected,  nor  sit  on 
the  principles  on  which  we  have  elected  you?  And  who 
are  we,  that  when  we  see  the  gabelles,  which  you  have 
ordered  to  be  paid,  wholly  shaken  off,  when  we  see  the  act 
of  disobedience  afterwards  ratified  by  yourselves,  who  are  we, 
that  we  are  not  to  judge  what  taxes  we  ought  or  ought  not  to 
pay,  and  who  are  not  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  same  powers, 
the  validity  of  which  you  have  approved  in  others?  To 
this  the  answer  is,  We  will  send  troops.  The  last  reason  of 
kings  is  always  the  first  with  your  Assembly.  This  military 
aid  may  serve  for  a  time,  whilst  the  impression  of  the  increase 
of  pay  remains,  and  the  vanity  of  being  umpires  in  all 
disputes  is  flattered.  But  this  weapon  will  snap  short, 
unfaithful  to  the  hand  that  employs  it.  The  Assembly  keep 
a  school,  where,  systematically,  and  with  unremitting 
perseverance,  they  teach  principles,  and  form  regulations, 
destructive  to  all  spirit  of  subordination,  civil  and  military 


286  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

—and  then  they  expect  that  they  shall  hold  in  obedience  an 
anarchic  people  by  an  anarchic  army. 

The  municipal  army  which,  according  to  their  new  policy, 
is  to  balance  this  national  army,  if  considered  in  itself  only, 
is  of  a  constitution  much  more  simple,  and  in  every  respect 
less  exceptionable.  It  is  a  mere  democratic  body,  uncon 
nected  with  the  crown  or  the  kingdom;  armed,  and  trained, 
and  officered  at  the  pleasure  of  the  districts  to  which  the 
corps  severally  belong;  and  the  personal  service  of  the 
individuals,  who  compose,  or  the  fine  in  lieu  of  personal 
service,  are  directed  by  the  same  authority.1  Nothing  is 
more  uniform.  If,  however,  considered  in  any  relation  to 
the  crown,  to  the  National  Assembly,  to  the  public  tribunals, 
or  to  the  other  army,  or  considered  in  a  view  to  any  co 
herence  or  connection  between  its  parts,  it  seems  a  monster, 
and  can  hardly  fail  to  terminate  its  perplexed  movements  in 
some  great  national  calamity.  It  is  a  worse  preservative  of 
a  general  constitution  than  the  systasis  of  Crete,  or  the 
confederation  of  Poland,  or  any  other  ill-devised  corrective 
which  has  yet  been  imagined,  in  the  necessities  produced  by 
an  ill-constructed  system  of  government. 

Having  concluded  my  few  remarks  on  the  constitution 
of  the  supreme  power,  the  executive,  the  judicature,  the 
military,  and  on  the  reciprocal  relation  of  all  these  establish 
ments,  I  shall  say  something  of  the  ability  showed  by  your 
legislators  with  regard  to  the  revenue. 

In  their  proceedings  relative  to  this  object,  if  possible, 
1  I  see  by  M.  Necker's  account,  that  the  national  guards  of  Paris  have 
received,  over  and  above  the  money  levied  within  their  own  city,  about 
^145,000  sterling  out  of  the  public  treasure.  Whether  this  be  an  actual 
payment  for  the  nine  months  of  their  existence,  or  an  estimate  of  their 
yearly  charge,  I  do  not  clearly  perceive.  It  is  of  no  great  importance, 
as  certainly  they  may  take  whatever  they  please. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  287 

still  fewer  traces  appear  of  political  judgment  or  financial 
resource.     When  the  states  met,  it  seemed  to  be  the  great 
object  to  improve  the  system   of  revenue,  to  enlarge  its 
collection,  to  cleanse  it  of  oppression  and  vexation,  and  to 
establish  it  on    the   most  solid  footing.     Great  were    the 
expectations  entertained  on  that  head  throughout  Europe. 
It  was  by  this  grand  arrangement  that  France  was  to  stand 
or  fall;  and  this  became,  in  my  opinion,  very  properly,  the 
test  by  which  the  skill  and  patriotism  of  those  who  ruled  in 
that  Assembly  would  be  tried.     The  revenue  of  the  State  is 
the    State.       In    effect  all    depends    upon   it,    whether   for 
support  or  for  reformation.     The  dignity  of  every  occupa 
tion  wholly  depends  upon  the  quantity  and   the  kind  of 
virtue  that  may  be  exerted  in  it.     As  all  great  qualities  of 
the    mind  which  operate  in   public,  and  are    not    merely 
suffering  and  passive,  require  force  for  their  display,  I  had 
almost  said  for  their  unequivocal  existence,  the  revenue, 
which  is  the  spring  of  all  power,  becomes  in  its  administra 
tion  the  sphere  of  every  active  virtue.     Public  virtue,  beino; 
of  a  nature  magnificent  and  splendid,  instituted  for  great 
things,    and    conversant    about    great    concerns,    requires 
abundant  scope  and  room,  and  cannot   spread  and  grow 
under  confinement,  and  in  circumstances  straitened,  narrow, 
and  sordid.     Through  the  revenue  alone  the  body  politic 
can  act  in  its  true  genius  and  character,  and  therefore  it  will 
display  just  as  much  of  its  collective  virtue,  and  as  much  of 
that  virtue  which  may  characterise  those  who  move  it,  and 
are,   as    it   were,   its    life  and   guiding   principle,   as  'it   is 
possessed  of  a  just  revenue.      For  from   hence  not   only 
magnanimity,  and  liberality,  and  beneficence,  and  fortitude, 
and  providence,  and  the  tutelary  protection  of  all  good  arts' 
derive   their  food,   and    the    growth   of  their   organs,   but 


288  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

continence,  and  self-denial,  and  labour,  and  vigilance,  and 
frugality,  and  whatever  else  there  is  in  which  the  mind 
shows  itself  above  the  appetite,  are  nowhere  more  in  their 
proper  element  than  in  the  provision  and  distribution  of  the 
public  wealth.  It  is  therefore  not  without  reason  that  the 
science  of  speculative  and  practical  finance,  which  must 
take  to  its  aid  so  many  auxiliary  branches  of  knowledge, 
stands  high  in  the  estimation  not  only  of  the  ordinary  sort, 
but  of  the  wisest  and  best  men ;  and  as  this  science  has 
grown  with  the  progress  of  its  object,  the  prosperity  and 
improvement  of  nations  has  generally  increased  with  the 
increase  of  their  revenues ;  and  they  will  both  continue  to 
grow  and  flourish,  as  long  as  the  balance  between  what  is 
left  to  strengthen  the  efforts  of  individuals,  and  what  is 
collected  for  the  common  efforts  of  the  State,  bear  to  each 
other  a  due  reciprocal  proportion,  and  are  kept  in  a  close 
correspondence  and  communication.  And  perhaps  it  may 
be  owing  to  the  greatness  of  revenues,  and  to  the  urgency 
of  State  necessities,  that  old  abuses  in  the  constitution  of 
finances  are  discovered,  and  their  true  nature  and  rational 
theory  comes  to  be  more  perfectly  understood ;  insomuch 
that  a  smaller  revenue  might  have  been  more  distressing  in 
one  period  than  a  far  greater  is  found  to  be  in  another; 
the  proportionate  wealth  even  remaining  the  same.  In  this, 
state  of  things,  the  French  Assembly  found  something  in 
their  revenues  to  preserve,  to  secure,  and  wisely  to  ad 
minister,  as  well  as  to  abrogate  and  alter.  Though  their 
proud  assumption  might  justify  the  severest  tests,  yet  in 
trying  their  abilities  on  their  financial  proceedings,  I  would 
only  consider  what  is  the  plain,  obvious  duty  of  a  common 
finance  minister,  and  try  them  upon  that,  and  not  upon 
models  of  ideal  perfection. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  289 

The  objects  of  a  financier  are,  then,  to  secure  an  ample 
revenue;    to    impose    it  with   judgment  and   equality;    to 
employ  it  economically;  and,  when  necessity  obliges  him 
to  make  use  of  credit,  to  secure  its  foundations  in  that 
instance,  and  for  ever,  by  the  clearness  and  candour  of  his 
proceedings,    the    exactness    of   his    calculations,    and    the 
solidity  of  his  funds.     On  these  heads  we  may  take  a  short 
and  distinct  view  of  the  merits  and  abilities  of  those  in  the 
National   Assembly,  who   have   taken    to    themselves    the 
management   of  this  arduous  concern.     Far  from  any  in 
crease  of  revenue  in  their  hands,  I  find,  by  a  report  of  M 
Vernier,  from  the  committee  of  finances,  of  the  second  of 
August  last,  that  the  amount  of  the  national  revenue    as 
compared   with   its   produce    before   the    Revolution     was 
diminished  by  the  sum  of  two  hundred  millions,  or  eHit 
millions  sterling  of  the  annual  income,  considerably  more 
than  one-third  of  the  whole. 

If  this  be  the  result  of  great  ability,  never  surely  was 
ability  displayed  in  a  more  distinguished  manner,  or  with  so 
powerful  an  effect.  No  common  folly,  no  vulgar  incapacity 
no  ordinary  official  negligence,  even  no  official  crime  no 
corruption,  no  peculation,  hardly  any  direct  hostility  which 
we  have  seen  in  the  modern  world,  could  in  so  short  a  time 
have  made  so  complete  an  overthrow  of  the  finances,  and 
with  them,  of  the  strength  of  a  great  kingdom.-^  o,,i 
vestram  rempublicam  lantam  amisistis  tarn  cito  1 

The  sophisters  and  declaimers,  as  soon  as  the  Assembly 
met,  began  with  decrying  the  ancient  constitution  of  the 
revenue  m  many  of  its  most  essential  branches,  such  as  the 
public  monopoly  of  salt.  They  charged  it,  as  truly  as 
unwisely,  with  being  ill-contrived,  oppressive,  and  partial 
Th,s  representation  they  were  not  satisfied  to  make  use  of  in 


2QQ  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

speeches  preliminary  to  some  plan  of  reform;  they  declared 
it  in  a  solemn  resolution  or  public  sentence,  as  it  were 
judicially,  passed  upon  it;  and  this  they  dispersed  through 
out  the  nation.  At  the  time  they  passed  the  decree,  with 
the  same  gravity  they  ordered  the  same  absurd,  oppressive, 
and  partial  tax  to  be  paid,  until  they  could  find  a  revenue 
to  replace  it.  The  consequence  was  inevitable.  The 
provinces  which  had  been  always  exempted  from  this  salt 
monopoly,  some  of  whom  were  charged  with  other  contri 
butions,  perhaps  equivalent,  were  totally  disinclined  to  bear 
any  part  of  the  burthen,  which  by  an  equal  distribution  was 
to  redeem  the  others.  As  to  the  Assembly,  occupied  as  it 
was  with  the  declaration  and  violation  of  the  rights  of  men, 
and  with  their  arrangements  for  general  confusion,  it  had 
neither  leisure  nor  capacity  to  contrive,  nor  authority  to 
enforce,  any  plan  of  any  kind  relative  to  the  replacing  the 
tax  or  equalising  it,  or  compensating  the  provinces,  or  for 
conducting  their  minds  to  any  scheme  of  accommodation 
with  the  other  districts  which  were  to  be  relieved. 

The  people  of  the  salt  provinces,  impatient  under  taxes, 
damned  by  the  authority  which  had  directed  their  payment, 
very  soon  found  their  patience  exhausted.  They  thought 
themselves  as  skilful  in  demolishing  as  the  Assembly  could 
be.  They  relieved  themselves  by  throwing  off  the  whole 
burthen.  Animated  by  this  example,  each  district,  or  part 
of  a  district,  judging  of  its  own  grievance  by  its  own  feeling, 
and  of  its  remedy  by  its  own  opinion,  did  as  it  pleased  with 
other  taxes. 

We  are  next  to  see  how  they  have  conducted  themselves 
in  contriving  equal  impositions,  proportioned  to  the  means 
of  the  citizens,  and  the  least  likely  to  lean  heavy  on  the 
active  capital  employed  in  the  generation  of  that  private 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  2gi 

wealth   from  whence  the  public  fortune  must  be  derived. 
By  suffering  the  several  districts,  and  several  of  the  indivi 
duals  in  each  district,  to  judge  of  what  part  of  the  old 
revenue  they  might  withhold,  instead  of  better  principles 
of  equality,  a  new  inequality  was  introduced  of  the  most 
oppressive  kind     Payments  were  regulated  by  dispositions 
The  parts  of  the  kingdom  which  were  the  most  submissive' 
the  most  orderly,  or  the  most  affectionate  to  the  common 
wealth,  bore  the  whole  burthen  of  the  state.     Nothing  turns 
out  to  be  so  oppressive  and  unjust  as  a  feeble  government. 
To  fill  up  all  the  deficiencies  in  the  old  impositions,  and 
the   new   deficiencies   of  every   kind   which    were    to    be 
expected,  what  remained  to  a  state  without  authority  ?     The 
National  Assembly  called  for  a  voluntary  benevolence;  for  a 
fourth  part  of  the  income  of  all  the  citizens,  to  be  estimated 
on  the  honour  of  those  who  were  to  pay.     They  obtained 
something  more  than  could  be  rationally  calculated    but 
what  was  far  indeed  from  answerable  to  their  real  neces 
sities,  and  much  less  to  their  fond  expectations.     Rational 
people  could  have  hoped  for  little  from  this  their  tax  in  the 
disguise   of  a   benevolence;    a  tax  weak,  ineffective,   and 
unequal;    a  tax  by  which   luxury,  avarice,  and  selfishness 
were  screened,  and  the  load  thrown  upon  productive  capital 
upon  integrity,  generosity,  and  public  spirit— a  tax  of  regu 
lation  upon  virtue.     At  length  the  mask  is  thrown  off,  and 
they  are  now  trying  means  (with  little  success)  of  exacting 
their  benevolence  by  force. 

This  benevolence,  the  rickety  offspring  of  weakness,  was 
to  be  supported  by  another  resource,  the  twin  brother  of 
the  same  prolific  imbecility.  The  patriotic  donations  were 
to  make  good  the  failure  of  the  patriotic  contribution. 
John  Doe  was  to  become  security  for  Richard  Roe.  By 


292  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

this  scheme  they  took  things  of  much  price  from  the  giver, 
comparatively  of  small  value  to  the  receiver;  they  ruined 
several  trades;  they  pillaged  the  crown  of  its  ornaments, 
the  churches  of  their  plate,  and  the  people  of  their  personal 
decorations.  The  invention  of  these  juvenile  pretenders 
to  liberty  was  in  reality  nothing  more  than  a  servile  imita 
tion  of  one  of  the  poorest  resources  of  doting  despotism. 
They  took  an  old  huge  full-bottomed  periwig  out  of  the 
wardrobe  of  the  antiquated  frippery  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth, 
to  cover  the  premature  baldness  of  the  National  Assembly. 
They  produced  this  old-fashioned  formal  folly,  though  it 
had  been  so  abundantly  exposed  in  the  Memoirs  of  the 
Duke  de  St.  Simon,  if  to  reasonable  men  it  had  wanted  any 
arguments  to  display  its  mischief  and  insufficiency.  A 
device  of  the  same  kind  was  tried  in  my  memory  by  Louis 
the  Fifteenth,  but  it  answered  at  no  time.  However,  the 
necessities  of  ruinous  wars  were  some  excuse  for  desperate 
projects.  The  deliberations  of  calamity  are  rarely  wise. 
But  here  was  a  season  for  disposition  and  providence.  It 
was  in  a  time  of  profound  peace,  then  enjoyed  for  five 
years,  and  promising  a  much  longer  continuance,  that  they 
had  recourse  to  this  desperate  trifling.  They  were  sure  to 
lose  more  reputation  by  sporting,  in  their  serious  situation, 
with  these  toys  and  playthings  of  finance,  which  have  filled 
half  their  journals,  than  could  possibly  be  compensated  by 
the  poor  temporary  supply  which  they  afforded.  It  seemed 
as  if  those  who  adopted  such  projects  were  wholly  ignorant 
of  their  circumstances,  or  wholly  unequal  to  their  necessities. 
Whatever  virtue  may  be  in  these  devices,  it  is  obvious  that 
neither  the  patriotic  gifts,  nor  the  patriotic  contribution,  can 
ever  be  resorted  to  again.  The  resources  of  public  folly 
are  soon  exhausted.  The  whole  indeed  of  their  scheme  of 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  293 

revenue  is  to  make,  by  any  artifice,  an  appearance  of  a  full 
reservoir  for  the  hour,  whilst  at  the  same  time  they  cut  off 
the  springs  and  living  fountains  of  perennial  supply.  The 
account  not  long  since  furnished  by  M.  Necker  was  meant, 
without  question,  to  be  favourable.  He  gives  a  flattering 
view  of  the  means  of  getting  through  the  year;  but  he 
expresses,  as  it  is  natural  he  should,  some  apprehension  for 
that  which  was  to  succeed.  On  this  last  prognostic,  instead 
of  entering  into  the  grounds  of  this  apprehension,  in  order, 
by  a  proper  foresight,  to  prevent  the  prognosticated  evil, 
M.  Necker  receives  a  sort  of  friendly  reprimand  from  the 
president  of  the  Assembly. 

As  to  their  other  schemes  of  taxation,  it  is  impossible  to 
say  anything  of  them  with  certainty;  because  they  have 
not  yet  had  their  operation  :  but  nobody  is  so  sanguine  as 
to  imagine  they  will  fill  up  any  perceptible  part  of  the  wide 
gaping  breach  which  their  incapacity  has  made  in  their 
revenues.  At  present  the  state  of  their  treasury  sinks  every 
day  more  and  more  in  cash,  and  swells  more  and  more  in 
fictitious  representation.  When  so  little  within  or  without 
is  now  found  but  paper,  the  representative  not  of  opulence 
but  of  want,  the  creature  not  of  credit  but  of  power,  they 
imagine  that  our  flourishing  state  in  England  is  owing  to 
that  bank-paper,  and  not  the  bank-paper  to  the  flourishing 
condition  of  our  commerce,  to  the  solidity  of  our  credit, 
and  to  the  total  exclusion  of  all  idea  of  power  from  any  part 
of  the  transaction.  They  forget  that,  in  England,  not  one 
shilling  of  paper-money  of  any  description  is  received  but 
of  choice ;  that  the  whole  has  had  its  origin  in  cash  actually 
deposited;  and  that  it  is  convertible  at  pleasure,  in  an 
instant,  and  without  the  smallest  loss,  into  cash  again.  Our 
paper  is  of  value  in  commerce,  because  in  law  it  is  of  none. 


294  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

It  is  powerful  on  'Change,  because  in  Westminster  Hall  it 
is  impotent.  In  payment  of  a  debt  of  twenty  shillings,  a 
creditor  may  refuse  all  the  paper  of  the  bank  of  England. 
Nor  is  there  amongst  us  a  single  public  security,  of  any 
quality  or  nature  whatsoever,  that  is  enforced  by  authority. 
In  fact  it  might  be  easily  shown  that  our  paper  wealth, 
instead  of  lessening  the  real  coin,  has  a  tendency  to  increase 
it ;  instead  of  being  a  substitute  for  money,  it  only  facilitates 
its  entry,  its  exit,  and  its  circulation ;  that  it  is  the  symbol 
of  prosperity,  and  not  the  badge  of  distress.  Never  was  a 
scarcity  of  cash,  and  an  exuberance  of  paper,  a  subject  of 
complaint  in  this  nation. 

Well!  but  a  lessening  of  prodigal  expenses,  and  the 
economy  which  has  been  introduced  by  the  virtuous  and 
sapient  Assembly,  make  amends  for  the  losses  sustained  in 
the  receipt  of  revenue.  In  this  at  least  they  have  fulfilled 
the  duty  of  a  financier. — Have  those  who  say  so  looked 
at  the  expenses  of  the  National  Assembly  itself?  of  the 
municipalities  ?  of  the  city  of  Paris  ?  of  the  increased  pay 
of  the  two  armies?  of  the  new  police?  of  the  new  judica 
tures?  Have  they  even  carefully  compared  the  present 
pension  list  with  the  former?  These  politicians  have  been 
cruel,  not  economical.  Comparing  the  expenses  of  the 
former  prodigal  government  and  its  relation  to  the  then 
revenues  with  the  expenses  of  this  new  system  as  opposed 
to  the  state  of  its  new  treasury,  I  believe  the  present  will  be 
found  beyond  all  comparison  more  chargeable.1 

1  The  reader  will  observe  that  I  have  but  lightly  touched  (my  plan 
demanded  nothing  more)  on  the  condition  of  the  French  finances,  as 
connected  with  the  demands  upon  them.  If  I  had  intended  to  do 
otherwise,  the  materials  in  my  hands  for  such  a  task  are  not  altogether 
perfect.  On  this  subject  I  refer  the  reader  to  M.  de  Calonne's  work ; 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  295 

It  remains  only  to  consider  the  proofs  of  financial  ability, 
furnished  by  the  present  French  managers  when  they  are  to 
raise  supplies  on  credit.  Here  I  am  a  little  at  a  stand ;  for 
credit,  properly  speaking,  they  have  none.  The  credit  of 
the  aneient  government  was  not  indeed  the  best ;  but  they 
could  always,  on  some  terms,  command  money,  not  only  at 
home,  but  from  most  of  the  countries  of  Europe  where  a 
surplus  capital  was  accumulated;  and  the  credit  of  that 
government  was  improving  daily.  The  establishment  of  a 
system  of  liberty  would  of  course  be  supposed  to  give  it 
new  strength  :  and  so  it  would  actually  have  done,  if  a 
system  of  liberty  had  been  established.  What  offers  has 
their  government  of  pretended  liberty  had  from  Holland, 
from  Hamburg,  from  Switzerland,  from  Genoa,  from 
England,  for  a  dealing  in  their  paper?  Why  should  these 
nations  of  commerce  and  economy  enter  into  any  pecuniary 
dealings  with  a  people  who  attempt  to  reverse  the  very 
nature  of  things ;  amongst  whom  they  see  the  debtor 
prescribing  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet,  the  medium  of  his 
solvency  to  the  creditor;  discharging  one  of  his  engage 
ments  with  another;  turning  his  very  penury  into  his 
resource;  and  paying  his  interest  with  his  rags? 

and  the  tremendous  display  that  he  has  made  of  the  havoc  and  devasta 
tion  in  the  public  estate,  and  in  all  the  affairs  of  France,  caused  by  the 
presumptuous  good  intentions  of  ignorance  and  incapacity.  Such 
effects  those  causes  will  always  produce.  Looking  over  that  account 
with  a  pretty  strict  eye,  and  with  perhaps  too  much  rigour,  deducting 
everything  which  may  be  placed  to  the  account  of  a  financier  out  of 
place,  who  might  be  supposed  by  his  enemies  desirous  of  making  the 
most  of  his  cause,  I  believe  it  will  be  found  that  a  more  salutary 
lesson  of  caution  against  the  daring  spirit  of  innovators  than  what  has 
been  supplied  at  the  expense  of  France,  never  was  at  any  time 
furnished  to  mankind. 


296  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

Their  fanatical  confidence  in  the  omnipotence  of  church 
plunder  has  induced  these  philosophers  to  overlook  all  care 
of  the  public  estate,  just  as  the  dream  of  the  philosopher's 
stone  induces  dupes,  under  the  more  plausible  delusion  of 
the  hermetic  art,  to  neglect  all  rational  means  of  improving 
their  fortunes.       With   these    philosophic    financiers,    this 
universal  medicine  made  of  church  mummy  is  to  cure  all 
the  evils  of  the   state.     These  gentlemen  perhaps  do  not 
believe  a  great  deal  in  the  miracles  of  piety ;  but  it  cannot 
be  questioned  that  they  have  an  undoubting  faith  in  the 
prodigies  of  sacrilege.     Is  there  a  debt  which  presses  them  ? 
—Issue   ass/'gnats.      Are  compensations  to  be  made,  or  a 
maintenance  decreed  to  those  whom  they  have  robbed  of 
their  freehold  in  their  office,  or  expelled  from  their  pro 
fession  ? — Assignats.     Is  a  fleet  to  be  fitted  out  ? — Assignats. 
If  sixteen  millions  sterling  of  these  assignats,  forced  on  the 
people,  leave  the  wants  of  the  state  as  urgent  as  ever — 
issue,  says  one,   thirty  millions  sterling  of  assignats — says 
another,  issue  fourscore  millions  more  of  assignats.      The 
only  difference  among  their   financial  factions  is    on    the 
greater  or  the  lesser  quantity  of  assignats  to  be  imposed  on 
the  public  sufferance.     They  are  all  professors  of  assignats. 
Even  those  whose  natural  good   sense  and  knowledge  of 
commerce,  not  obliterated  by  philosophy,  furnish  decisive 
arguments  against  this  delusion,  conclude  their  arguments 
by  proposing  the  emission  of  assignats.     I  suppose  they 
must  talk  of  assignats,   as   no    other   language  would   be 
understood.      All  experience  of  their  inefficacy  does  not 
in    the    least    discourage    them.      Are    the    old    assignats 
depreciated  at  market  ? — What  is  the  remedy  ?     Issue  new 
assignats. — Mais  si  maladia,  opiniatria,  non  vult  se  gar  ire, 
quid  illifacere?  assignare — postea  assignare ;  ensuita  assign- 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  297 

are.  The  word  is  a  trifle  altered.  The  Latin  of  your 
present  doctors  may  be  better  than  that  of  your  old  comedy; 
their  wisdom  and  the  variety  of  their  resources  are  the 
same.  They  have  not  more  notes  in  their  song  than  the 
cuckoo ;  though,  far  from  the  softness  of  that  harbinger  of 
summer  and  plenty,  their  voice  is  as  harsh  and  as  ominous 
as  that  of  the  raven. 

Who  but  the  most  desperate  adventurers  in  philosophy 
and  finance  could  at  all  have  thought  of  destroying  the 
settled  revenue  of  the  State,  the  sole  security  for  the  public 
credit,  in  the  hope  of  rebuilding  it  with  the  materials  of 
confiscated  property?  If,  however,  an  excessive  zeal  for 
the  State  should  have  led  a  pious  and  venerable  prelate  (by 
anticipation  a  father  of  the  church1)  to  pillage  his  own 
order,  and,  for  the  good  of  the  church  and  people,  to  take 
upon  himself  the  place  of  grand  financier  of  confiscation, 
and  comptroller  general  of  sacrilege,  he  and  his  coadjutors 
were,  in  my  opinion,  bound  to  show,  by  their  subsequent 
conduct,  that  they  knew  something  of  the  office  they 
assumed.  When  they  had  resolved  to  appropriate  to  the 
Fisc  a  certain  portion  of  the  landed  property  of  their 
conquered  country,  it  was  their  business  to  render  their 
bank  a  real  fund  of  credit,  as  far  as  such  a  bank  was  capable 
of  becoming  so. 

To  establish  a  current  circulating  credit  upon  any  Land- 
bank,  under  any  circumstances  whatsoever,  has  hitherto 
proved  difficult  at  the  very  least.  The  attempt  has  com 
monly  ended  in  bankruptcy.  But  when  the  Assembly  were 
led,  through  a  contempt  of  moral,  to  a  defiance  of  economical, 
principles,  it  might  at  least  have  been  expected  that  nothing 
would  be  omitted  on  their  part  to  lessen  this  difficulty,  to 
1  La  Bruyere  of  Bossuet. 


298  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

prevent  any  aggravation  of  this  bankruptcy.  It  might  be 
expected  that,  to  render  your  Land-bank  tolerable,  every 
means  would  be  adopted  that  could  display  openness  and 
candour  in  the  statement  of  the  security ;  everything  which 
could  aid  the  recovery  of  the  demand.  To  take  things  in 
their  most  favourable  point  of  view,  your  condition  was  that 
of  a  man  of  a  large  landed  estate,  which  he  wished  to 
dispose  of  for  the  discharge  of  a  debt,  and  the  supply  of 
certain  services.  Not  being  able  instantly  to  sell,  you 
wished  to  mortgage.  What  would  a  man  of  fair  intentions, 
and  a  commonly  clear  understanding,  do  in  such  circum 
stances  ?  Ought  he  not  first  to  ascertain  the  gross  value  of 
the  estate ;  the  charges  of  its  management  and  disposition ; 
the  encumbrances  perpetual  and  temporary  of  all  kinds 
that  affect  it ;  then,  striking  a  net  surplus,  to  calculate  the 
just  value  of  the  security?  When  that  surplus  (the  only 
security  to  the  creditor)  had  been  clearly  ascertained,  and 
properly  vested  in  the  hands  of  trustees;  then  he  would 
indicate  the  parcels  to  be  sold,  and  the  time  and  conditions 
of  sale ;  after  this,  he  would  admit  the  public  creditor,  if  he 
chose  it,  to  subscribe  his  stock  into  this  new  fund;  or 
he  might  receive  proposals  for  an  assignat  from  those 
who  would  advance  money  to  purchase  this  species  of 
security. 

This  would  be  to  proceed  like  men  of  business,  methodi 
cally  and  rationally ;  and  on  the  only  principles  of  public 
and  private  credit  that  have  an  existence.  The  dealer 
would  then  know  exactly  what  he  purchased ;  and  the  only 
doubt  which  could  hang  upon  his  mind  would  be  the  dread 
of  the  resumption  of  the  spoil,  which  one  day  might  be 
made  (perhaps  with  an  addition  of  punishment)  from  the 
sacrilegious  gripe  of  those  execrable  wretches  who  could 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  299 

become  purchasers  at  the  auction  of  their  innocent  fellow- 
citizens. 

An  open  and  exact  statement  of  the  clear  value  of  the 
property,  and  of  the  time,  the  circumstances,  and  the  place 
of  sale,  were  all  necessary,  to  efface  as  much  as  possible  the 
stigma  that  has  hitherto  been  branded  on  every  kind  of 
Land-bank.  It  became  necessary  on  another  principle,  that 
is,  on  account  of  a  pledge  of  faith  previously  given  on  that 
subject,  that  their  future  fidelity  in  a  slippery  concern  might 
be  established  by  their  adherence  to  their  first  engagement. 
When  they  had  finally  determined  on  a  state  resource  from 
church  booty,  they  came,  on  the  i4th  of  April,  1790,  to  a 
solemn  resolution  on  the  subject ;  and  pledged  themselves 
to  their  country,  "that  in  the  statement  of  the  public 
charges  for  each  year  there  should  be  brought  to  account 
a  sum  sufficient  for  defraying  the  expenses  of  the  R.C.A. 
religion,  the  support  of  the  ministers  at  the  altars,  the  relief 
of  the  poor,  the  pensions  to  the  ecclesiastics,  secular  as  well 
as  regular,  of  the  one  and  of  the  other  sex,  in  order  that  the 
estates  and  goods  which  are  at  the  disposal  of  the  nation  may 
be  disengaged  of  all  charges,  and  employed  by  the  representatives, 
or  the  legislative  body,  to  the  great  and  most  pressing  exigencies 
of  the  state"  They  further  engaged,  on  the  same  day,  that 
the  sum  necessary  for  the  year  1791  should  be  forthwith 
determined. 

In  this  resolution  they  admit  it  their  duty  to  show 
distinctly  the  expense  of  the  above  objects,  which,  by  other 
resolutions,  they  had  before  engaged  should  be  first  in  the 
order  of  provision.  They  admit  that  they  ought  to  show 
the  estate  clear  and  disengaged  of  all  charges,  and  that 
they  should  show  it  immediately.  Have  they  done  this 
immediately,  or  at  any  time  ?  Have  they  ever  furnished  a 


300  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

rent-roll  of  the  immovable  estates,  or  given  in  an  inventory 
of  the  movable  effects,  which  they  confiscate  to  their 
assignats?  In  what  manner  they  can  fulfil  their  engage 
ments  of  holding  out  to  public  service  "an  estate  disengaged 
of  all  charges,"  without  authenticating  the  value  of  the  estate, 
or  the  quantum  of  the  charges,  I  leave  it  to  their  English 
admirers  to  explain.  Instantly  upon  this  assurance,  and 
previously  to  any  one  step  towards  making  it  good,  they 
issue,  on  the  credit  of  so  handsome  a  declaration,  sixteen 
millions  sterling  of  their  paper.  This  was  manly.  Who, 
after  this  masterly  stroke,  can  doubt  of  their  abilities  in 
finance?  —  But  then,  before  any  other  emission  of  these 
financial  indulgences,  they  took  care  at  least  to  make  good 
their  original  promise  ! — If  such  estimate,  either  of  the  value 
of  the  estate  or  the  amount  of  the  encumbrances,  has  been 
made,  it  has  escaped  me.  I  never  heard  of  it. 

At  length  they  have  spoken  out,  and  they  have  made  a 
full  discovery  of  their  abominable  fraud,  in  holding  out  the 
church  lands  as  a  security  for  any  debts  or  any  service  what 
soever.  They  rob  only  to  enable  them  to  cheat ;  but  in  a 
very  short  time  they  defeat  the  ends  both  of  the  robbery 
and  the  fraud,  by  making  out  accounts  for  other  purposes, 
which  blow  up  their  whole  apparatus  of  force  and  of  decep 
tion.  I  am  obliged  to  M.  de  Calonne  for  his  reference  to  the 
document  which  proves  this  extraordinary  fact ;  it  had  by 
some  means  escaped  me.  Indeed  it  was  not  necessary  to 
make  out  my  assertion  as  to  the  breach  of  faith  on  the 
declaration  of  the  i4th  of  April,  1790.  By  a  report  of  their 
committee  it  now  appears  that  the  charge  of  keeping  up  the 
reduced  ecclesiastical  establishments,  and  other  expenses 
attendant  on  religion,  and  maintaining  the  religious  of  both 
sexes,  retained  or  pensioned,  and  the  other  concomitant 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  301 

expenses  of  the  same  nature,  which  they  have  brought  upon 
themselves  by  this  convulsion  in  property,  exceeds  the 
income  of  the  estates  acquired  by  it  in  the  enormous  sum 
of  two  millions  sterling  annually;  besides  a  debt  of  seven 
millions  and  upwards.  These  are  the  calculating  powers  of 
imposture !  This  is  the  finance  of  philosophy !  This  is 
the  result  of  all  the  delusions  held  out  to  engage  a  miserable 
people  in  rebellion,  murder,  and  sacrilege,  and  to  make 
them  prompt  and  zealous  instruments  in  the  ruin  of  their 
country !  Never  did  a  state,  in  any  case,  enrich  itself  by 
the  confiscations  of  the  citizens.  This  new  experiment 
has  succeeded  like  all  the  rest.  Every  honest  mind, 
every  true  lover  of  liberty  and  humanity,  must  rejoice  to 
find  that  injustice  is  not  always  good  policy,  nor  rapine 
the  high  road  to  riches.  I  subjoin  with  pleasure,  in  a  note, 
the  able  and  spirited  observations  of  M.  de  Calonne  on  this 
subject.1 

In  order  to  persuade  the  world  of  the  bottomless  resource 

1  "Ce  n'est  point  a  1'assemblee  entiere  que  je  m'adresse  ici ;  je  ne 
parle  qu'a  ceux  qui  1'egarent,  en  lui  cachant  sous  des  gazes  seduisantes 
le  but  ou  ils  1'entrainent.  C'est  a  eux  que  je  dis  :  votre  objet,  vous  n'en 
disconviendrez  pas,  c'est  d'oter  tout  espoir  au  clerge,  et  de  consommer 
sa  ruine  ;  c'est-la,  en  ne  vous  soupconnant  d'aucune  combinaison  de 
cupidite,  d'aucun  regard  sur  le  jeu  des  effets  publics,  c'est-la  ce  qu'on 
doit  croire  que  vous  avez  en  vue  dans  la  terrible  operation  que  vous 
proposez  ;  c'est  ce  qui  doit  en  etre  le  fruit.  Mais  le  peuple  que  vous 
y  interessez,  quel  avantage  peut-il  y  trouver?  En  vous  servant  sans 
cesse  de  lui,  que  faites  vous  pour  lui?  Rien,  absolument  rien  ;  et,  au 
contraire,  vous  faites  ce  qui  ne  conduit  qu'a  1'accabler  de  nouvelles 
charges.  Vous  avez  rejete,  a  son  prejudice,  une  offre  de  400  millions, 
dont  1'acceptation  pouvoit  devenir  un  moyen  de  soulagement  en  sa 
faveur;  et  a  cette  ressource,  aussi  profitable  que  legitime,  vous  avez 
substitue  une  injustice  ruineuse,  qui,  de  votre  propre  aveu,  charge  le 
tre'sor  public,  et  par  consequent  le  peuple,  d'un  surcroit  de  depense 


302  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

of  ecclesiastical  confiscation,  the  Assembly  have  proceeded 
to  other  confiscations  of  estates  in  offices,  which  could  not 
be  done  with  any  common  colour  without  being  com 
pensated  out  of  this  grand  confiscation  of  landed  property. 
They  have  thrown  upon  this  fund,  which  was  to  show  a 
surplus,  disengaged  of  all  charges,  a  new  charge — namely, 
the  compensation  to  the  whole  body  of  the  disbanded  judi 
cature  ;  and  of  all  suppressed  offices  and  estates  ;  a  charge 
which  I  cannot  ascertain,  but  which  unquestionably  amounts 
to  many  French  millions.  Another  of  the  new  charges  is  an 
annuity  of  four  hundred  and  eighty  thousand  pounds 
sterling,  to  be  paid  (if  they  choose  to  keep  faith)  by  daily 
payments,  for  the  interest  of  the  first  assignats.  Have 
they  ever  given  themselves  the  trouble  to  state  fairly  the 
expense  of  the  management  of  the  church  lands  in  the 
hands  of  the  municipalities  to  whose  care,  skill,  and  dili 
gence,  and  that  of  their  legion  of  unknown  under-agents, 
they  have  chosen  to  commit  the  charge  of  the  forfeited 
estates,  and  the  consequence  of  which  had  been  so  ably 
pointed  out  by  the  bishop  of  Nancy? 

But  it  is  unnecessary  to  dwell  on  these  obvious  heads  of 
encumbrance.  Have  they  made  out  any  clear  state  of  the 
grand  encumbrance  of  all,  I  mean  the  whole  of  the  general 
and  municipal  establishments  of  all  sorts,  and  compared  it 
with  the  regular  income  by  revenue  ?  Every  deficiency  in 

annuelle  de  50  millions  au  moins,  et  d'un  remboursement  de  150 
millions. 

"  Malheureux  peuple  !  voila  ce  que  vous  vaut  en  dernier  resultat  1'ex- 
propriation  de  1'Eglise,  et  la  durete  des  decrets  taxateurs  du  traitement 
des  ministres  d'une  religion  bienfaisante  ;  et  desormais  ils  seront  a  votre 
charge:  leurs  charites  soulageoient  les  pauvres ;  et  vous  allez  etre 
imposes  pour  subvenir  a  leur  entretien  ! " — De  FEtat  de  la  France,  p. 
8 1.  See  also  p.  92,  and  the  following  pages. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  303 

these  becomes  a  charge  on  the  confiscated  estate,  before 
the  creditor  can  plant  his  cabbages  on  an  acre  of  church 
property.     There  is  no  other  prop  than  this  confiscation  to 
keep  the  whole  state  from  tumbling  to  the  ground.     In  this 
situation  they  have  purposely  covered  all,  that  they  ought 
industriously  to  have  cleared,  with  a  thick  fog;  and  then, 
blindfold  themselves,  like  bulls  that  shut  their  eyes  when 
they  push,  they  drive,  by  the  point  of  the  bayonets,  their 
slaves,  blindfolded  indeed  no  worse  than  their  lords,  to  take 
their  fictions  for  currencies,  and  to  swallow  down  paper  pills 
by  thirty-four  millions  sterling  at  a  dose.    Then  they  proudly 
lay  in  their  claim  to  a  future  credit,  on  failure  of  all  their 
past  engagements,  and  at  a  time  when  (if  in  such  a  matter 
anything  can  be  clear)  it  is  clear  that  the  surplus  estates  will 
never  answer  even  the  first  of  their  mortgages,  I  mean  that 
of  the  four  hundred  millions  (or  sixteen  millions  sterling)  of 
assignats.     In  all  this  procedure  I  can  discern  neither  the 
solid  sense  of  plain   dealing,  nor  the   subtle   dexterity  of 
ingenious  fraud.      The  objections  within  the  Assembly  to 
pulling  up  the  flood-gates  for  this  inundation  of  fraud  are 
unanswered;  but  they  are  thoroughly  refuted  by  a  hundred 
thousand  financiers  in  the  street.     These  are  the  numbers 
by  which  the  metaphysic  arithmeticians  compute.     These 
are  the  grand  calculations  on  which  a  philosophical  public 
credit  is  founded  in  France.     They  cannot  raise  supplies ; 
but  they  can  raise  mobs.     Let  them  rejoice  in  the  applauses 
of  the  club  at  Dundee,  for  their  wisdom  and  patriotism  in 
having  thus  applied  the  plunder  of  the  citizens  to  the  service 
of  the  state.     I  hear  of  no  address  upon  this  subject  from 
the  directors  of  the  bank  of  England;  though  their  approba 
tion  would  be  of  a  little  more  weight  in  the  scale  of  credit 
than  that  of  the  club  at  Dundee.     But,  to  do  justice  to  the 


3o4  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

club,  I  believe  the  gentlemen  who  compose  it  to  be  wiser 
than  they  appear;  that  they  will  be  less  liberal  of  their 
money  than  of  their  addresses ;  and  that  they  would  not 
give  a  dog's-ear  of  their  most  rumpled  and  ragged  Scotch 
paper  for  twenty  of  your  fairest  assignats. 

Early  in  this  year  the  Assembly  issued  paper  to  the 
amount  of  sixteen  millions  sterling:  what  must  have  been 
the  state  into  which  the  Assembly  has  brought  your  affairs, 
that  the  relief  afforded  by  so  vast  a  supply  has  been  hardly 
perceptible?  This  paper  also  felt  an  almost  immediate 
depreciation  of  five  per  cent.,  which  in  a  little  time  came  to 
about  seven.  The  effect  of  these  assignats  on  the  receipt 
of  the  revenue  is  remarkable.  M.  Necker  found  that  the 
collectors  of  the  revenue,  who  received  in  coin,  paid  the 
treasury  in  assignats.  The  collectors  made  seven  per  cent, 
by  thus  receiving  in  money,  and  accounting  in  depreciated 
paper.  It  was  not  very  difficult  to  foresee  that  this  must  be 
inevitable.  It  was,  however,  not  the  less  embarrassing. 
M.  Necker  was  obliged  (I  believe,  for  a  considerable  part, 
in  the  market  of  London)  to  buy  gold  and  silver  for  the 
mint,  which  amounted  to  about  twelve  thousand  pounds 
above  the  value  of  the  commodity  gained.  That  minister 
was  of  opinion  that,  whatever  their  secret  nutritive  virtue 
might  be,  the  state  could  not  live  upon  assignats  alone; 
that  some  real  silver  was  necessary,  particularly  for  the 
satisfaction  of  those  who,  having  iron  in  their  hands,  were 
not  likely  to  distinguish  themselves  for  patience,  when  they 
should  perceive  that  whilst  an  increase  of  pay  was  held  out 
to  them  in  real  money,  it  was  again  to  be  fraudulently  drawn 
back  by  depreciated  paper.  The  minister,  in  this  very 
natural  distress,  applied  to  the  Assembly  that  they  should 
order  the  collectors  to  pay  in  specie  what  in  specie  they 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  305 

had  received.  It  could  not  escape  him  that  if  the  treasury 
paid  three  per  cent,  for  the  use  of  a  currency  which  should 
be  returned  seven  per  cent,  worse  than  the  minister  issued 
it,  such  a  dealing  could  not  very  greatly  tend  to  enrich  the 
public.  The  Assembly  took  no  notice  of  his  recommenda 
tion.  They  were  in  this  dilemma— If  they  continued  to 
receive  the  assignats,  cash  must  become  an  alien  to  their 
treasury:  if  the  treasury  should  refuse  those  paper  amulets, 
or  should  discountenance  them  in  any  degree,  they  must 
destroy  the  credit  of  their  sole  resource.  They  seem  then 
to  have  made  their  option;  and  to  have  given  some  sort  of 
credit  to  their  paper  by  taking  it  themselves;  at  the  same 
time  in  their  speeches  they  made  a  sort  of  swaggering 
declaration,  something,  I  rather  think,  above  legislative 
competence;  that  is,  that  there  is  no  difference  in  value 
between  metallic  money  and  their  assignats.  This  was  a 
good,  stout,  proof  article  of  faith,  pronounced  under  an 
anathema,  by  the  venerable  fathers  of  this  philosophic  synod. 
Credat  who  will—certainly  ix&JudcRus  Apella, 

A  noble  indignation  rises  in  the  minds  of  your  popular 
leaders,  on  hearing  the  magic  lantern  in  their  show  of 
finance  compared  to  the  fraudulent  exhibitions  of  Mr.  Law. 
They  cannot  bear  to  hear  the  sands  of  his  Mississippi 
compared  with  the  rock  of  the  church,  on  which  they  build 
their  system.  Pray  let  them  suppress  this  glorious  spirit, 
until  they  show  to  the  world  what  piece  of  solid  ground 
there  is  for  their  assignats,  which  they  have  not  pre-occupied 
by  other  charges.  They  do  injustice  to  that  great,  mother 
fraud,  to  compare  it  with  their  degenerate  imitation.  It  is 
not  true  that  Law  built  solely  on  a  speculation  concerning 
the  Mississippi.  He  added  the  East  India  trade;  he  added 
the  African  trade;  he  added  the  farms  of  all  the  farmed 


20 


06  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 


revenue  of  France.  All  these  together  unquestionably 
could  not  support  the  structure  which  the  public  enthusiasm, 
not  he,  chose  to  build  upon  these  bases.  But  these  were, 
however,  in  comparison,  generous  delusions.  They  sup 
posed,  and  they  aimed  at,  an  increase  of  the  commerce  of 
France.  They  opened  to  it  the  whole  range  of  the  two 
hemispheres.  They  did  not  think  of  feeding  France  from 
its  own  substance.  A  grand  imagination  found  in  this 
flight  of  commerce  something  to  captivate.  It  was  where 
withal  to  dazzle  the  eye  of  an  eagle.  It  was  not  made  to 
entice  the  smell  of  a  mole,  nuzzling  and  burying  himself  in 
his  mother  earth,  as  yours  is.  Men  were  not  then  quite 
shrunk  from  their  natural  dimensions  by  a  degrading  and 
sordid  philosophy,  and  fitted  for  low  and  vulgar  deceptions. 
Above  all,  remember  that  in  imposing  on  the  imagination, 
the  then  managers  of  the  system  made  a  compliment  to  the 
freedom  of  men.  In  their  fraud  there  was  no  mixture  of 
force.  This  was  reserved  to  our  time,  to  quench  the  little 
glimmerings  of  reason  which  might  break  in  upon  the  solid 
darkness  of  this  enlightened  age. 

On  recollection,  I  have  said  nothing  of  a  scheme  of 
finance  which  may  be  urged  in  favour  of  the  abilities  of 
these  gentlemen,  and  which  has  been  introduced  with  great 
pomp,  though  not  yet  finally  adopted,  in  the  National 
Assembly.  It  comes  with  something  solid  in  aid  of  the 
credit  of  the  paper  circulation;  and  much  has  been  said  of 
its  utility  and  its  elegance.  I  mean  the  project  for  coining 
into  money  the  bells  of  the  suppressed  churches.  This  is 
their  alchemy.  There  are  some  follies  which  baffle  argu 
ment,  which  go  beyond  ridicule,  and  which  excite  no 
feeling  in  us  but  disgust;  and  therefore  I  say  no  more 
upon  it. 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  307 

It  is  as  little  worth  remarking  any  further  upon  all  their 
drawing  and  re-drawing,  on  their  circulation  for  putting  off 
the   evil   day,   on   the   play   between    the   treasury  and^the 
Caisse  d'Escompie,    and    on    all   these    old,   exploded   con 
trivances    of  mercantile  fraud,   now  exalted   into  policy  of 
state.     The  revenue  will  not  be  trifled  with.     The  prattling 
about  the  rights  of  men  will  not  be  accepted  in  payment 
for  a  biscuit  or  a   pound   of  gunpowder.     Here  then  the 
metaphysicians  descend   from   their  airy  speculations,    and 
faithfully  follow  examples.     What  examples  ?    The  examples 
of  bankrupts.     But  defeated,  baffled,  disgraced,  when  their 
breath,  their  strength,  their  inventions,  their  fancies  desert 
them,  their  confidence  still  maintains  its   ground.     In  the 
manifest  failure  of  their  abilities,  they  take  credit  for  their 
benevolence.     When  the  revenue  disappears  in  their  hands, 
they  have  the  presumption,  in  some  of  their  late  proceed 
ings,  to  value  themselves  on  the  relief  given  to  the  people. 
They  did    not    relieve    the    people.       If   they    entertained 
such  intentions,  why  did  they  order  the  obnoxious  taxes  to 
be  paid  ?     The  people  relieved  themselves  in  spite  of  the 
Assembly. 

But  waiving  all  discussion  on  the  parties  who  may  claim 
the  merit  of  this  fallacious  relief,  has  there  been,  in  effect, 
any  relief  to  the  people  in  any  form  ?  Mr.  Bailly,  one  of 
the  grand  agents  of  paper  circulation,  lets  you  into  the 
nature  of  this  relief.  His  speech  to  the  National  Assembly 
contained  a  high  and  laboured  panegyric  on  the  inhabitants 
of  Paris,  for  the  constancy  and  unbroken  resolution  with 
which  they  have  borne  their  distress  and  misery.  A  fine 
picture  of  public  felicity  !  What !  great  courage  and  un 
conquerable  firmness  of  mind  to  endure  benefits  and  sustain 
redress?  One  would  think  from  the  speech  of  this  learned 


3o8  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

Lord  Mayor  that  the  Parisians,  for  this  twelvemonth  past,  had 
been  suffering  the  straits  of  some  dreadful  blockade ;  that 
Henry  the  Fourth  had  been  stopping  up  the  avenues  to 
their  supply,  and  Sully  thundering  with  his  ordnance  at 
the  gates  of  Paris;  when  in  reality  they  are  besieged  by 
no  other  enemies  than  their  own  madness  and  folly,  their 
own  credulity  and  perverseness.  But  Mr.  Bailly  will  sooner 
thaw  the  eternal  ice  of  his  Atlantic  regions  than  restore  the 
central  heat  to  Paris,  whilst  it  remains  "smitten  with  the 
cold,  dry,  petrific  mace  "  of  a  false  and  unfeeling  philosophy. 
Some  time  after  this  speech,  that  is,  on  the  thirteenth  of 
last  August,  the  same  magistrate,  giving  an  account  of  his 
government  at  the  bar  of  the  same  Assembly,  expresses 
himself  as  follows:  "In  the  month  of  July,  1789"  (the 
period  of  everlasting  commemoration),  "the  finances  of  the 
city  of  Paris  \vere  yet  in  good  order;  the  expenditure  was 
counterbalanced  by  the  receipt,  and  she  had  at  that  time  a 
million"  (forty  thousand  pounds  sterling)  "in  bank.  The 
expenses  which  she  has  been  constrained  to  incur,  subsequent 
to  the  Revolution,  amount  to  2,500,000  livres.  From  these 
expenses,  and  the  great  falling  off  in  the  product  of  the  free 
gifts,  not  only  a  momentary,  but  a  total,  want  of  money  has 
taken  place."  This  is  the  Paris  upon  whose  nourishment, 
in  the  course  of  the  last  year,  such  immense  sums,  drawn 
from  the  vitals  of  all  France,  have  been  expended.  As 
long  as  Paris  stands  in  the  place  of  ancient  Rome,  so  long 
she  will  be  maintained  by  the  subject  provinces.  It  is  an 
evil  inevitably  attendant  on  the  dominion  of  sovereign 
democratic  republics.  As  it  happened  in  Rome,  it  may 
survive  that  republican  domination  which  gave  rise  to  it. 
In  that  case  despotism  itself  must  submit  to  the  vices  of 
popularity.  Rome,  under  her  emperors,  united  the  evils  of 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  309 

both  systems;    and   this   unnatural    combination    was    one 
great  cause  of  her  ruin. 

^  To  tell  the  people  that  they  are  relieved  by  the  dilapida 
tion  of  their  public  estate,  is  a  cruel  and  insolent  imposi 
tion.      Statesmen,   before   they  valued  themselves   on    the 
relief  given  to  the  people  by  the  destruction  of  their  revenue, 
ought  first  to  have  carefully  attended  to  the  solution  of  this 
problem  :  Whether  it  be  more  advantageous  to  the  people 
to  pay  considerably,  and  to  gain  in  proportion ;  or  to  gain 
little  or  nothing,  and  to  be  disburdened  of  all  contribu 
tion?     My  mind  is  made  up  to  decide  in  favour  of  the  first 
proposition.      Experience  is  with  me,  and,   I  believe,  the 
best  opinions  also.     To  keep  a  balance  between  the  power 
of  acquisition  on  the  part  of  the  subject  and  the  demands 
he  is  to  answer  on  the  part  of  the  State,  is  the  fundamental 
part  of  the  skill  of  a  true  politician.     The  means  of  acquisi 
tion  are  prior  in  time  and  in  arrangement.     Good  order  is 
the    foundation    of   all  good    things.      To   be   enabled    to 
acquire,  the  people,  without  being  servile,  must  be  tractable 
and  obedient.      The  magistrate  must  have  his  reverence, 
the  laws  their  authority.     The  body  of  the  people  must  not 
find  the  principles  of  natural  subordination  by  art  rooted 
out  of  their  minds.     They  must  respect  that  property  of 
which  they  cannot  partake.     They  must  labour  to  obtain 
what  by  labour  can  be  obtained ;  and  when  they  find,  as 
they   commonly    do,   the    success    disproportioned    to    the 
endeavour,  they  must   be   taught  their  consolation  in   the 
final  proportions   of  eternal  justice.      Of  this  consolation 
whoever  deprives  them,  deadens  their  industry,  and  strikes 
at  the  root  of  all  acquisition  as  of  all  conservation.     He 
that  does  this  is  the  cruel  oppressor,  the  merciless  enemy 
of  the  poor  and  wretched;  at  the  same  time  that  by  his 


3io  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

wicked  speculations  he  exposes  the  fruits  of  successful 
industry,  and  the  accumulations  of  fortune,  to  the  plunder 
of  the  negligent,  the  disappointed,  and  the  unprosperous. 

Too  many  of  the  financiers  by  profession  are  apt  to  see 
nothing  in  revenue  but  banks,  and  circulations,  and  annuities 
on  lives,  and  tontines,  and  perpetual  rents,  and  all  the  small 
wares  of  the  shop.  In  a  settled  order  of  the  State,  these 
things  are  not  to  be  slighted,  nor  is  the  skill  in  them  to  be 
held  of  trivial  estimation.  They  are  good,  but  then  only 
good,  when  they  assume  the  effects  of  that  settled  order, 
and  are  built  upon  it.  But  when  men  think  that  these 
beggarly  contrivances  may  supply  a  resource  for  the  evils 
which  result  from  breaking  up  the  foundations  of  public 
order,  and  from  causing  or  suffering  the  principles  of 
property  to  be  subverted,  they  will,  in  the  ruin  of  their 
country,  leave  a  melancholy  and  lasting  monument  of  the 
effect  of  preposterous  politics,  and  presumptuous,  short 
sighted,  narrow-minded  wisdom. 

The  effects  of  the  incapacity  shown  by  the  popular 
leaders  in  all  the  great  members  of  the  commonwealth  are 
to  be  covered  with  the  "all-atoning  name"  of  liberty.  In 
some  people  I  see  great  liberty  indeed ;  in  many,  if  not  in 
the  most,  an  oppressive,  degrading  servitude.  But  what  is 
liberty  without  wisdom,  and  without  virtue?  It  is  the 
greatest  of  all  possible  evils ;  for  it  is  folly,  vice,  and 
madness,  without  tuition  or  restraint.  Those  who  know 
what  virtuous  liberty  is,  cannot  bear  to  see  it  disgraced  by 
incapable  heads,  on  account  of  their  having  high-sounding 
words  in  their  mouths.  Grand,  swelling  sentiments  of 
liberty  I  am  sure  I  do  not  despise.  They  warm  the  heart ; 
they  enlarge  and  liberalise  our  minds;  they  animate  our 
courage  in  a  time  of  conflict.  Old  as  I  am,  I  read  the  fine 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  3II 

raptures  of  Lucan  and  Corneille  with  pleasure.     Neither  do 
I  wholly  condemn  the  little  arts  and  devices  of  popularity. 
They  facilitate  the  carrying  of  many  points  of  moment  ' 
they  keep  the  people  together;  they  refresh  the  mind  in  its 
exertions ;  and  they  diffuse  occasional  gaiety  over  the  severe 
brow  of  moral  freedom.     Every  politician  ought  to  sacrifice 
to  the  graces ;  and  to  join  compliance  with  reason.     But  in 
such  an  undertaking  as  that  in  France,  all  these  subsidiary 
sentiments  and  artifices  are  of  little  avail.      To  make  a 
government  requires  no  great  prudence.     Settle  the  seat  of 
power;  teach  obedience:  and  the  work  is  done.     To  give 
freedom  is  still  more  easy.     It  is  not  necessary  to  guide ;  it 
only  requires  to  let  go  the  rein.     But  to  form  a  free  govern- 
ment;  that  is,  to  temper  together  these  opposite  elements 
of  liberty  and  restraint  in   one    consistent  work,   requires 
much  thought,  deep  reflection,  a  sagacious,  powerful,  and 
combining  mind.     This  I  do  not  find  in  those  who  take 
the  lead  in  the  National  Assembly.     Perhaps  they  are  not 
so  miserably  deficient  as  they  appear.     I  rather  believe  it. 
It  would  put  them   below  the  common   level  of  human 
understanding.       But    when    the  leaders    choose  to   make 
themselves  bidders  at  an  auction  of  popularity,  their  talents, 
in  the  construction  of  the  State,   will    be   of  no  service' 
They  will  become   flatterers   instead    of    legislators;    the 
instruments,  not  the  guides,  of  the  people.     If  any  of 'them 
should    happen    to   propose  a   scheme   of  liberty,   soberly 
limited,  and  defined  with  proper  qualifications,  he  will  be 
immediately  outbid  by  his  competitors,  who  will  produce 
something   more  splendidly  popular.      Suspicions   will   be 
raised  of  his  fidelity  to  his  cause.      Moderation  will   be 
stigmatised  as  the  virtue  of  cowards,  and  compromise  as 
the  prudence  of  traitors;  until,  in  hopes  of  preserving  the 


3i2  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE 

credit  which  may  enable  him  to  temper,  and  moderate,  on 
some  occasions,  the  popular  leader  is  obliged  to  become 
active  in  propagating  doctrines,  and  establishing  powers, 
that  will  afterwards  defeat  any  sober  purpose  at  which  he 
ultimately  might  have  aimed. 

But  am  I  so  unreasonable  as  to  see  nothing  at  all  that 
deserves  commendation  in  the  indefatigable  labours  of  this 
Assembly?  I  do  not  deny  that,  among  an  infinite  number 
of  acts  of  violence  and  folly,  some  good  may  have  been 
done.  They  who  destroy  everything  certainly  will  remove 
some  grievance.  They  who  make  everything  new,  have  a 
chance  that  they  may  establish  something  beneficial.  To 
give  them  credit  for  what  they  have  done  in  virtue  of  the 
authority  they  have  usurped,  or  which  can  excuse  them  in 
the  crimes  by  which  that  authority  has  been  acquired,  it 
must  appear  that  the  same  things  could  not  have  been 
accomplished  without  producing  such  a  revolution.  Most 
assuredly  they  might;  because  almost  every  one  of  the 
regulations  made  by  them,  which  is  not  very  equivocal,  was 
either  in  the  cession  of  the  king,  voluntarily  made  at  the 
meeting  of  the  states,  or  in  the  concurrent  instructions  to 
the  orders.  Some  usages  have  been  abolished  on  just 
grounds;  but  they  were  such  that  if  they  had  stood  as  they 
were  to  all  eternity,  they  would  little  detract  from  the 
happiness  and  prosperity  of  any  state.  The  improvements 
of  the  National  Assembly  are  superficial,  their  errors  funda 
mental. 

Whatever  they  are,  I  wish  my  countrymen  rather  to 
recommend  to  our  neighbours  the  example  of  the  British 
constitution,  than  to  take  models  from  them  for  the  im 
provement  of  our  own.  In  the  former  they  have  got  an 
invaluable  treasure.  They  are  not,  I  think,  without  some 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE.  3r3 

causes  of  apprehension  and  complaint;   but  these  they  do 
not  owe  to  their  constitution,  but  to  their  own  conduct.     I 
think  our   happy  situation  owing  to  our  constitution;  but 
owing  to  the  whole  of  it,  and  not  to  any  part  singly;  owing 
m  a  great  measure  to  what  we  have  left  standing  in  our 
several  reviews  and  reformations,  as  well  as  to  what  we  have 
altered  or  superadded.     Our  people  will  find  employment 
enough  for  a  truly  patriotic,  free,  and  independent  spirit,  in 
guarding  what  they  possess  from   violation.     I  would  not 
exclude  alteration   neither;    but   even  when  I   changed,  it 
should  be  to  preserve.     I  should  be  led  to  my  remedy  by 
a  great   grievance.     In   what    I  did,    I   should   follow   the 
example  of  our  ancestors.     I  would  make  the  reparation  as 
nearly  as  possible  in  the  style  of  the  building.     A  politic 
caution,  a  guarded  circumspection,  a  moral  rather  than  a 
complexional  timidity,  were  among  the  ruling  principles  of 
our  forefathers  in  their  most  decided  conduct.     Not  being 
illuminated  with  the  light  of  which  the  gentlemen  of  France 
tell  us  they  have  got  so  abundant  a  share,  they  acted  under 
a  strong  impression  of  the  ignorance  and  fallibility  of  man 
kind.     He  that  had  made  them  thus  fallible,  rewarded  them 
for  having  in  their  conduct  attended  to  their  nature.     Let 
us  imitate  their  caution,  if  we  wish  to  deserve  their  fortune, 
or  to  retain  their  bequests.     Let  us  add,  if  we  please,  but 
let  us  preserve  what  they  have  left;   and  standing  on  the 
firm  ground  of  the  British  constitution,  let  us  be  satisfied 
to  admire,  rather  than  attempt  to  follow  in  their  desperate 
flights,  the  aeronauts  of  France. 

I  have  told  you  candidly  my  sentiments.  I  think  they 
are  not  likely  to  alter  yours.  I  do  not  know  that  they 
ought.  You  are  young;  you  cannot  guide,  but  must  follow 
the  fortune  of  your  country.  But  hereafter  they  may  be 


REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE. 

\ 

of  some  use  to  you,  in  some  future  form  which  your  com 
monwealth  may  take.  In  the  present  it  can  hardly  remain; 
but  before  its  final  settlement  it  may  be  obliged  to  pass,  as 
one  of  our  poets  says,  "  through  great  varieties  of  untried 
being,"  and  in  all  its  transmigrations  to  be  purified  by  fire 
and  blood. 

I  have  little  to  recommend  my  opinions  but  long  observa 
tion  and  much  impartiality.     They  come  from  one  who  has 
been  no  tool  of  power,  no  flatterer  of  greatness;  and  who 
in  his  last  acts  does  not  wish  to  belie  the  tenour  of  his  life. 
They  come  from   one,  almost  the   whole  of  whose  public 
exertion  has  been  a  struggle  for  the  liberty  of  others;  from 
one  in  whose   breast   no   anger  durable   or  vehement  has 
ever  been  kindled,  but  by  what  he  considered  as  tyranny; 
and  who  snatches  from  his  share  in  the  endeavours  which 
are  used  by  good  men  to  discredit  opulent  oppression,  the 
hours   he   has   employed  on  your  affairs;    and   who   in   so 
doing  persuades  himself  he  has  not  departed  from  his  usual 
office:  they  come  from  one  who  desires  honours,  distinctions, 
and  emoluments,  but  little;  and  who  expects  them  not  at 
all;  who  has  no  contempt  for  fame,  and  no  fear  of  obloquy; 
who  shuns  contention,  though  he  will  hazard  an  opinion: 
from   one  who   wishes    to   preserve   consistency,   but   who 
would  preserve  consistency  by  varying  his  means  to  secure 
the  unity  of  his  end ;  and,  when  the  equipoise  of  the  vessel 
in  which  he  sails  may  be  endangered  by  overloading  it  upon 
one  side,  is  desirous   of  carrying  the   small   weight  of  his 
reasons  to  that  which  may  preserve  its  equipoise. 


THE  WALTER  SCOTT  I'll  ESS,    .NEWCASTLE-ON-TYXE. 


DRAMATIC    ESSAYS 

(3  VOLS.). 

Edited  by  WILLIAM  ARCHER  and  ROBERT  W.  LOWE. 

Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  Price  35.  6d.  each, 

VOL.   1. 

DRAMATIC  ESSAYS  BY  LEIGH  HUNT. 

Selected  and  Edited,  with  Notes  and  Introduction,  by  WILLIAM 
ARCHER  and  ROBERT  W.  LOWE.  With  an  Engraved  Portrait  of 
Leigh  Hunt  as  Frontispiece. 

This  Volume  contains  the  Criticisms  collected  by  LEIGH  HUNT 
himself  in  1807  (long  out  of  print),  and  the  admirable  articles  which 
he  contributed  more  than  twenty  years  later  to  "  The  Tatler  "  and 
never  republished. 

"All  students  of  drama  and  lovers  of  'the  play'  will  welcome  the 
admirably  produced  volume  of  Dramatic  Essays  by  Leiah  Hunt 
selected  and  edited  by  Air.  Archer  and  Mr.  Lowe,  with  notes,  and 
an  extremely  interesting  introduction  written  by  Mr.  Archer."— The 


VOL.   II. 

SELECTIONS    FROM    THE    CRITICISMS 

OF  WILLIAM  HAZLITT.  Annotated,  with  an  Introduction 
by  WILLIAM  ARCHER,  and  an  Engraved  Portrait  of  Hazlitt  as 
Frontispiece. 

"A  book  which  every  one  interested  in  the  history  of  the  London 
stajje  will  prize  highly,  and  will  not  only  read  with  pleasure,  but  will 
desire  to  have  always  by  them  for  purposes  of  reference."— Scotsman. 


VOL.   III. 

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  DRAMATIC 

CRITICISMS  (hitherto  uncollected)  OF  JOHN  FORSTER 
and  GEORGE  HENRY  LEWES.  With  Notes  and  an  Intro 
duction  by  WILLIAM  ARCHER  and  ROBERT  W.  LOWE,  and  a 
Portrait  of  George  Henry  Lewes  as  Frontispiece. 

"  The  volume,  which  is  carefully  edited,  contains  a  quantity  of  vivid 
portraiture,  and  will  be  welcomed  by  students  as  bringing  us  in  touch 
with  the  stage  of  the  early  fifties."— Literary  World. 


London:  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  Paternoster  Square. 


WORKS  BY  GEORGE  MOORE. 

Cloth,  Croivti  8vo,  Price  6s. 

Esther   Waters:    A    Novel 

BY  GEORGE  MOORE 

Strong,  vivid,  sober,  yet  undaunted  in  its  realism,  full  to  the  brim  o( 
observation  of  life  and  character,  Esther  Waters  is  not  only  immeasurably 
superior  to  anything  the  author  has  ever  written  before,  but  it  is  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  works  that  has  appeared  in  print  this  year,  and  one  which 
does  credit  not  only  to  the  author,  but  the  country  in  which  it  has  been 
written.'—  The  World. 

'As  we  live  the  book  through  again  in  memory,  we  feel  more  and  more 
confident  that  Mr.  Moore  has  once  for  all  vindicated  his  position  among  the 
half-do/en  living  novelists  of  whom  the  historian  of  English  literature  will 
have  to  take  account.' — Daily  Chronicle. 


Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  568  pages,  Price  6s. 

Celibates. 

'  A  rcma;  kable  book,  that  adds  to  the  reputation  of  its  author.'— 
Speaker. 

'  Excessively  clever.'— The  Times. 

'  These  studies  are  amazingly  clever.'—  The  Daily  Ncrvs. 

'  A  sympathetic  and  masterly  analysis  of  toraperament.'— The 
Literary  World. 


Other  Novels  by  George  Moore 

Crown  Si'ff,  Clolh,  2s-  6rf.  each. 
A  DRAMA  IN   MUSLIN.     Seventh  Edition. 
A  MODERN   LOVER.     New  Edition. 
A  MUMMER'S  WIFE.    Twentieth  Edition. 
VAIN    FORTUNE.      New   Revised   Edition.      With    Five 
Illustrations  by  MAURICE  GREIFFENHAGEN. 

New  Edition,  Crown  8vo,  Cfath,  6s. 
MODERN  PAINTING.  By  GEORGE  MOORE. 
IMPRESSIONS  AND  OPINIONS.  By  GEORGE  MOORE. 

1  His  book  is  one  of  the  best  books  about  pictures  that  have  come  into 
our  hands  for  some  years.' — St.  James's  Gazette. 

'A  more  original,  a  better  informed,  a  more  suggestive,  and,  let  us  add, 
a  more  amusing  work  on  the  art  of  to-day,  we  have  never  read  than  this 
volume.'—  Glasgow  Herald. 


LONDON:  WALTER  SCOTT,  LTD.,  Paternoster  Square. 


THE  SCOTT  LIBRARY. 

Cloth,   Uncut  Edges,   Gilt  Top.        Price  is.   6d.    per  Volume. 


VOLUMES    ALREADY    IS3UED- 

1  MALORY'S   ROMANCE   OF   KING    ARTHUR    AND    THE 

Quest  of  the  Holy  Grail.     Edited  by  Ernest  Rhys. 

2  THOREAU'S  WALDEN.     WITH  INTRODUCTORY  NOTE 

by  Will  H.  Dircks. 

3  TIIOREAU'S    "WEEK/'      WITH  PREFATORY  NOTE  BY 

Will  H.  Dircks. 

4  TIIOREAU'S     ESSAYS.       EDITED,     WITH     AN    INTRO- 

auction,  by  Will  II.  Dircks. 

5  CONFESSIONS  OF   AN    ENGLISH    OPIUM-EATER,  ETC. 

]5y  Thomas  De  Quincey.     With  Introductory  Note  by  William  Sharp. 

6  LANDORiS  IMAGINARY  CONVERSATIONS.    SELECTED, 

with  Introduction,  by  Havelock  Ellis. 

7  PLUTARCH'S     LIVES    (LANGITORNE).      WITH    INTRO- 

ductory  Note  by  B.  J.  Snell,  M.  A. 

8  BROWNE'S    RELIGIO     MEDICI,     ETC.      WITH    1NTRO- 

duction  by  J.  Addington  Symonds. 

9  SHELLEY'S   ESSAYS   AND    LETTERS.     EDITED,    WITH 

Introductory  Note,  by  Ernest  Rhys. 

10  SWIFT'S  PROSE  WRITINGS.   CHOSEN  AND  ARRANGED, 
with  Introduction,  by  Walter  Lewin. 

ri  MY  STUDY  WINDOWS.     BY  JAMES  RUSSELL  LOWELL 
With  Introduction  by  R.  Ciarnett,  LL.D. 

12  LOWELL'S  ESSAYS   ON  THE  ENGLISH  POETS.     WITH 

a  new  Introduction  by  Mr.  Lowell. 

13  THE  BIGLOW  PAPERS.     BY  JAMES  RUSSELL  LOWELL. 

With  a  Prefatory  Note  by  Ernest  Rhys. 

14  GREAT     ENGLISH     PAINTERS.     SELECTED    FROM 

Cunningham's  Liven.     Edited  by  William  Sharp. 

London  :  WAI.TKII  SCOTT,  LIAIITKI>,  Paternoster  Sqmre. 


THE  SCOTT  LIBRARY— continued. 

15  BYRON'S     LETTERS     AND     JOURNALS.        SELECTED, 

with  Introduction,  by  Mathilde  Blind. 

1 6  LEIGH  HUNT'S  ESSAYS.     WITH  INTRODUCTION  AND 

Notes  by  Arthur  Symons. 

17  LONGFELLOW'S     "HYPERION,"    "KAVANAGII,"    AND 

"The  Trouveres."    With  Introduction  by  W.  Tirebuck. 

1 8  GREAT    MUSICAL    COMPOSERS.       BY    G.    E.    FERRIS. 

Edited,  with  Introduction,  by  Mrs.  William  Sharp. 

19  THE  MEDITATIONS  OF  MARCUS  AURELIUS.      EDITED 

by  Alice  Zimmern. 

20  THE  TEACHING  OF  EPICTETUS.     TRANSLATED  FROM 

the  Greek,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  T.  W.  Rolleston. 

21  SELECTIONS  FROM   SENECA.     WITH  INTRODUCTION 

by  Walter  Clode. 

22  SPECIMEN  DAYS  IN  AMERICA.     BY  WALT  WHITMAN. 

Revised  by  the  Author,  with  fresh  Preface. 

23  DEMOCRATIC     VISTAS,    AND     OTHER     PAPERS.       BY 

Walt  Whitman.     (Published  by  arrangement  with  the  Author.) 

24  WHITE'S   NATURAL  HISTORY  OF   SELBORNE.     WITH 

a  Preface  by  Richard  Jefferies. 

25  DEFOE'S     CAPTAIN     SINGLETON.        EDITED,      WITH 

Introduction,  by  H.  Halliday  Sparling. 

26  MAZZINI'S      ESSAYS:      LITERARY,     POLITICAL,     AND 

Religious.     With  Introduction  by  William  Clarke. 

27  PROSE  WRITINGS  OF  HEINE.     WITH  INTRODUCTION 

by  Havelock  Ellis. 

28  REYNOLDS'S     DISCOURSES.       WITH     INTRODUCTION 

by  Helen  Zimmern. 

29  PAPERS     OF     STEELE    AND    ADDISON.      EDITED    BY 

Walter  Lewin. 

30  BURNS'S     LETTERS.       SELECTED     AND     ARRANGED, 

with  Introduction,  by  J.  Logie  Robertson,  M.A. 

31  VOLSUNGA    SAGA.      WILLIAM   MORRIS.      WITH     INTRO- 

duction  by  II.  II.  Sparling. 


.ondon  :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  Paternoster  Square. 


THE  SCOTT  LIBRARY— continued. 

32  SARTOR  RESARTUS.      BY  THOMAS   CARLYLE.     WITH 

Introduction  by  Ernest  Rhys. 

33  SELECT    WRITINGS     OF     EMERSON.       WITH     INTRO- 

duction  by  Percival  Chubb. 

34  AUTOBIOGRAPHY     OF     LORD     HERBERT.       EDITED, 

with  an  Inti'oduction,  by  Will  II.  Dircks. 

35  ENGLISH     PROSE,     FROM     MAUNDEVILLE     TO 

Thackeray.     Chosen  and  Edited  by  Arthur  Galton. 

36  THE  PILLARS  OF  SOCIETY,  AND  OTHER  PLAYS.     BY 

Ilenrik  Ibsen.     Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Havelock  Ellis. 

37  IRISH     FAIRY    AND     FOLK    TALES.       EDITED     AND 

Selected  by  W.  B.  Yeats. 

38  ESSAYS     OF     DR.    JOHNSON,    WITH     BIOGRAPHICAL 

Introduction  and  Notes  by  Stuart  J.  Reid. 

39  ESSAYS     OF    WILLIAM     HAZLITT.      SELECTED     AND 

Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  Frank  Carr. 

40  LANDOR'S  PENTAMERON,  AND  OTHER  IMAGINARY 

Conversations.     Edited,  with  a  Preface,  by  H.  Ellis. 

41  POE'S   TALES   AND   ESSAYS.     EDITED,   WITH   INTRO- 

duction,  by  Ernest  Rhys. 

42  VICAR    OF  WAKEFIELD.      BY    OLIVER    GOLDSMITH. 

Edited,  with  Preface,  by  Ernest  Rhys. 

43  POLITICAL     ORATIONS,      FROM      WENTWORTH      TO 

Macaulay.     Edited,  with  Introduction,  by  William  Clarke. 

44  THE    AUTOCRAT    OF    THE    BREAKFAST-TABLE.      BY 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes. 

45  THE  POET  AT  THE  BREAKFAST-TABLE.     BY  OLIVER 

Wendell  Holmes. 

46  THE   PROFESSOR   AT    THE    BREAKFAST-TABLE.       BY 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes. 

47  LORD     CHESTERFIELD'S     LETTERS     TO      HIS     SON. 

Selected,  with  Introduction,  by  Charles  Sayle. 

48  STORIES  FROM  CARLETON.    SELECTED,  WITH  INTRO- 

duction,  by  W.  Yeats. 


London:  WALTEII  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  Paternoster  Square. 


THE  SCOTT  LIBRARY— continued. 

49  JANE  EYRE.   BY  CHARLOTTE  BRONTE.   EDITED  BY 

Clement  K.  Shorter. 

50  ELIZABETHAN     ENGLAND.       EDITED     BY     LOTIIROP 

Withington,  with  a  Preface  by  Dr.  Furnivall. 

51  THE  PROSE  WRITINGS  OF  THOMAS  DAVIS.     EDITED 

by  T.  W.  Rolleston. 

52  SPENCE'S     ANECDOTES.       A     SELECTION.      EDITED, 

with  an  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  John  Underbill. 

53  MORE'S  UTOPIA,  AND  LIFE  OF  EDWARD  V.     EDITED, 

with  an  Introduction,  by  Maurice  Adams. 

54  SADI'S    GULISTAN,    OR    FLOWER    GARDEN.      TRANS- 

lated,  with  an  Essay,  by  James  Iloss. 

55  ENGLISH    FAIRY    AND    FOLK    TALES.       EDITED     BY 

E.  Sidney  Hartland. 

56  NORTHERN    STUDIES.     BY    EDMUND    GOSSE.     WITH 

a  Note  by  Krnest  Rhys. 

57  EARLY  REVIEWS   OF   GREAT  WRITERS.     EDITED    BY 

E.  Stevenson. 

58  ARISTOTLE'S      ETHICS.        WITH      GEORGE      HENRY 

Lewes's  Essay  on  Aristotle  prefixed. 

59  LANDOR'S  PERICLES   AND  ASPASIA.      EDITED,  WITH 

an  Introduction,  by  Ilavelock  Ellis. 

60  ANNALS   OF  TACITUS.     THOMAS   GORDON'S    TRANS- 

lation.     Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Arthur  Gal  ton. 

Ci  ESSAYS    OF    ELI  A.      BY     CHARLES    LAMB.      EDITED, 
with  an  Introduction,  by  Ernest  Rhys. 

62  BALZAC'S     SHORTER     STORIES.        TRANSLATED     BY 

William  Wilson  and  the  Count  Stenbock. 

63  COMEDIES     OF     DE     MUSSET.       EDITED,    WITH     AN 

Introductory  Note,  by  S.  L.  Gwynn. 

64  CORAL    REEFS.      BY    CHARLES     DARWIN.      EDITED, 

with  an  Introduction,  by  Dr.  J.  W.  Williams. 

65  SHERIDAN'S     PLAYS.       EDITED,     WITH     AN     INTRO- 

duction,  by  Rudolf  Dircks. 


London  :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  Paternoster  Square. 


THE  SCOTT  LIBRARY— continued. 

66  OUR  VILLAGE.     BY  MISS   MITFORD.      EDITED,  WITH 

an  Introduction,  by  Ernest  Rhys. 

67  MASTER  HUMPHREY'S  CLOCK,  AND  OTHER  STORIES. 

By  Charles  Dickens.     With  Introduction  by  Frank  T.  Marzials. 

68  TALES     FROM     WONDERLAND.        BY     RUDOLPH 

Uaumbach.    Translated  by  Helen  B.  Dole. 

69  ESSAYS  AND  PAPERS  BY  DOUGLAS  JERROLD.    EDITED 

by  Walter  Jerrokl. 

70  VINDICATION     OF    THE    RIGHTS     OF    WOMAN.       BY 

Mary  Wollstonecraft.     In'  reduction  by  Mrs.  E.  Rubins  Pennell. 

71  "THE  ATHENIAN  ORACLE."     A  SELECTION.     EDITED 

by  John  Underbill,  with  Prefatory  1,'ote  by  Walter  Besant. 

72  ESSAYS      OF      SAINTE-BEUVE.       TRANSLATED     AND 

Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Elizabeth  Lee. 

73  SELECTIONS     FROM     PLATO.       FROM     THE     TRANS- 

lation  of  Sydenham  and  Taylor.     Edited  by  T.  W.  Rolleston. 

74  HEINE'S  ITALIAN  TRAVEL  SKETCHES,  ETC.     TRANS- 

lated  by  Elizabeth  A.  Sharp.     NVith  an  Introduction  from  the  French  of 
Theophile  Gantier. 

75  SCHILLER'S     MAID     OF     ORLEANS.        TRANSLATED, 

with  an  Introduction,  by  Major-General  Patrick  Maxwell. 

76  SELECTIONS  FROM  SYDNEY  SMITH.     EDITED,  WITH 

an  Introduction,  by  Ernest  Rhys. 

77  THE  NEW  SPIRIT.     BY  HAVELOCK  ELLIS. 

78  THE  BOOK   OF   MARVELLOUS  ADVENTURES.     FROM 

the  "Morte  d' Arthur."     Edited  by  Ernest  Rhys.     [This,  together  with 
No.  1,  forms  the  complete  "Morte  d' Arthur."] 

79  ESSAYS  AND  APHORISMS.      BY  SIR  ARTHUR  HELPS. 

With  an  Introduction  by  E.  A.  Helps. 

80  ESSAYS      OF      MONTAIGNE.       SELECTED,      WITH     A 

Prefatory  Note,  by  Percival  Chubb. 

Si  THE     LUCK    OF     BARRY     LYNDON.       BY     W.     M. 
Thackeray.     Edited  by  F.  T.  Marzials. 

82  SCHILLER'S    WILLIAM    TELL.      TRANSLATED,    WITH 
an  Introduction,  by  Major-General  Patrick  Maxwell. 


London:  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  Paternoster  Square. 


THE    SCOTT    LIBRARY— continued. 

83  CARLYLE'S     ESSAYS     ON     GERMAN      LITERATURE. 

With  an  Introduction  by  Ernest  Rhys. 

84  PLAYS  AND  DRAMATIC  ESSAYS  OF  CHARLES  LAMB. 

Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Rudolf  Dircks. 

85  THE    PROSE    OF    WORDSWORTH.       SELECTED    AND 

Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Professor  William  Knight. 

86  ESSAYS,    DIALOGUES,   AND    THOUGHTS    OF    COUNT 

Giacomo  Leopardi.     Translated,  with  an  Introduction  and  Notes,  by 
Major-General  Patrick  Maxwell. 

87  THE    INSPECTOR-GENERAL.      A    RUSSIAN    COMEDY. 

By  Nikolai  V.  Gogol.     Translated  from  the  original,  with  an  Introduction 
and  Notes,  by  Arthur  A.  Sykes. 

88  ESSAYS  AND  APOTHEGMS  OF  FRANCIS,  LORD  BACON. 

Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  John  Buchan. 

89  PROSE  OF  MILTON.     SELECTED  AND  EDITED,  WITH 

an  Introduction,  by  Richard  Garnett,  LL.D. 

90  THE  REPUBLIC  OF  PLATO.    TRANSLATED  BY 

Thomas  Taylor,  with  an  Introduction  by  Theodore  Wratislaw. 

91  PASSAGES    FROM     FROISSART.       WITH    AN    INTRO- 

duction  by  Frank  T.  Marzials. 

92  THE  PROSE  AND  TABLE  TALK  OF  COLERIDGE 

Edited  by  Will  II.  Dircks. 

93  HEINE    IN    ART    AND    LETTERS.      TRANSLATED    BY 

Elizabeth  A.  Sharp. 

94  SELECTED    ESSAYS    OF    DE    QUINCEY.       WITH     AN 

Introduction  by  Sir  George  Douglas,  Bart. 

95  VASARI'S  LIVES  OF  ITALIAN  PAINTERS.     SELECTED 

and  Prefaced  by  Havelock  Ellis. 

96  LAOCOON,     AND      OTHER      PROSE     WRITINGS      OF 

LESSING.     A  new  Translation  "by  W.  B.  Ronnfeldt. 

97  PELLEAS   AND   MELISANDA,  AND   THE   SIGHTLESS. 

Two  Plays  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck.     Translated  from  the  French  by 
Laurence  Alma  Tadema. 

98  THE  COMPLETE  ANGLER  OF  WALTON  AND  COTTON. 

Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Charles  Hill  Dick. 


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  Paternoster  Square. 


THE    SCOTT    LIBRARY— continued. 

99  LESSING'S  NATHAN  THE  WISE.  TRANSLATED  BY 
Major-General  Patrick  Maxwell. 

100  THE   POETRY  OF  THE  CELTIC  RACES,  AND  OTHER 

Essays  of  Ernest  Renan.     Translated  by  W.  G.  Hutchison. 

101  CRITICISMS,  REFLECTIONS,  AND  MAXIMS  OF  GOETHE. 

Translated,  with  an  Introduction,  by  W.  B.  Ronnfeldt. 

102  ESSAYS     OF    SCHOPENHAUER.         TRANSLATED     BY 

Mrs.  Rudolf  Dircks.     With  an  Introduction, 

103  RENAN'S  LIFE  OF  JESUS.       TRANSLATED,  WITH  AN 

Introduction,  by  William  G.  Hutchison. 

104  THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  SAINT  AUGUSTINE.     EDITED, 

with  an  Introduction,  by  Arthur  Symons. 

105  THE    PRINCIPLES    OF    SUCCESS     IN     LITERATURE. 

By  George  Henry  Lewes.     Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  T.  Sharper 
Knowlson. 

106  THE  LIVES  OF  DR.  JOHN  DONNE,  SIR  HENRY  WOTTON, 

Mr.  Richard  Hooker,  Mr.  George  Herbert,  and  Dr.  Robert  Sanderson. 
By  Izaac  Walton.     Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Charles  Hill  Dick. 

107  WHAT   IS   ART?     BY   LEO    TOLSTOY.     TRANSLATED 

from  the  Original    Russian    MS.,   with  an   Introduction,   by  Aylmer 
Maude. 

108  RENAN'S     ANTICHRIST.       TRANSLATED,     WITH    AN 

Introduction,  by  W.  G.  Hutchison. 

109  ORATIONS    OF    CICERO.      SELECTED    AND    EDITED, 

with  an  Introduction,  by  Fred.  W.  Norris. 

no  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  REVOLUTION  IN  FRANCE. 
By  Edmund  Burke.  With  an  Introduction  by  George  Sampson. 

in  THE  LETTERS  OF  THE  YOUNGER  PLINY.  SERIES  I. 
Translated,  with  an  Introductory  Essay,  by  John  B.  Firth,  B.A. ,  Late 
Scholar  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford. 

112  THE  LETTERS  OF  THE  YOUNGER  PLINY.     SERIES  II. 

Translated  by  John  B.  Firth,  B.A. 

113  SELECTED  THOUGHTS  OF  BLAISE  PASCAL.     TRANS- 

lated  and  Edited,  with  an  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  Gertrude  Burford 
Rawlings. 

114  SCOTS  ESSAYISTS  :  FROM  STIRLING  TO  STEVENSON. 

Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Oliphant  Smeaton. 


London  :   WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED.  Paternoster  Square. 


Library   of   Humour. 

Cloth  Elegant,  Large  Crown  Svo,  Price  %s.  6d.  per  Vol. 

'  The  boolcs  are  delightful  in  every  ivay,  and  are  notable  for  the  hi<jh 
standard  of  taxtc  and  the  excellent  judgment  that  characterise  their 
editing,  as  well  as  fur  the  brilliancy  of  the  literature  that  they  contain. 
—BOSTON  (U.S.A.)  GAZETTE. 

VOLUMES  ALREADY  ISSUED. 

THE  HUMOUR  OF  FRANCE.  Translated,  with  an 
Introduction  and  Notes,  by  ELIZABETH  LEE.  With 
numerous  Illustrations  by  PAUL  FRENZKNY. 

THE  HUMOUR  OF  GERMANY.  Translated,  with 
an  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  HANS  MULLER-CASENOY. 
With  numerous  Illustrations  by  C.  E.  BROCK. 

THE  HUMOUR  OF  ITALY.  Translated,  with  an 
Introduction  and  Notes,  by  A.  WERNER.  With  50  Illus 
trations  and  a  Frontispiece  by  ARTURO  FALDI. 

THE  HUMOUR  OF  AMERICA.  Selected,  with  a 
copious  Biographical  Index  of  American  Humorists,  by 
JA.MF.S  BARR. 

THE  HUMOUR  OF  HOLLAND.  Translated,  with 
an  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  A.  WERNER.  With 
numerous  Illustrations  by  DUDLEY  HARDY. 

THE  HUMOUR  OF  IRELAND.  Selected  by  I).  J. 
O'DoxoGHUE.  With  numerous  Illustrations  by  OLIVER 
PAQUE. 

THE  HUMOUR  OF  SPAIN.  Translated,  with  an 
Introduction  and  Notes,  by  SUSETTE  M.  TAYLOR.  With 
numerous  Illustrations  by  II.  R.  MILLAR. 

THE  HUMOUR  OF  RUSSIA.  Translated,  with 
Notes,  by  E.  L.  BOOLE,  and  an  Introduction  by  STEPNIAK. 
With  50  Illustrations  by  PAUL  FRENZENY. 


LONDON:    WALTER  SCOTT,  LID.,  Paternoster  Square 


IBSEN'S    PROSE    DRAMAS. 

EDITED   BY   WILLIAM   ARCHER. 

Complete  in  Five  Vols.     Crcwn  8vo,  Cloth,  Price  3/6  each. 
Set  of  Five  Vols.,  in  Case,  17/6;  in  Half  Morocco,  in  Case,  32/6. 

"  We  scan  at  last  to  be  shown  men  and  women  as  they  are  ;  and  at  firs!  it 
is  more  than  we  can  endure.  .  .  .  All  Ibsen's  chai  acters  speak  and  act  as  if 
(hey  were  hypnotised,  and  under  their  creator's  imperious  demand  to  reveal 
themselves.  There  never  was  such  a  mirror  held  up  to  nature  before:  it  is 
too  terrible.  .  .  .  Yet  we  must  return  to  Ibsen,  with  his  icmoi  seless  surgery, 
his  remorseless  electric-light,  until  we,  too,  have  grown  strong  and  leatnelio 
face  the  naked— if  necessary,  the  fayed  and  bleeding— reality."— SPEAKER 
(London). 

VOL.  I.  "A  DOLL'S  HOUSE,"  "THE  LEAGUE  OF 
YOUTH,"  and  "THE  PILLARS  OF  SOCIETY."  With 
Portrait  cf  the  Author,  and  Biographical  Introduction  by 
WILLIAM  ARCHER. 

VOL.  II.  "GHOSTS,"  "AN  ENEMY  OF  THE  PEOPLE," 
and  "THE  WILD  DUCK."  With  an  Introductory  Note. 

VOL.  III.  "LADY  INGER  OF  OSTRAT,"  "THE  VIKINGS 
AT  HELGELAND,"  "THE  PRETENDERS."  With  an 
Introductory  Note  and  Portrait  of  Ibsen. 

VOL.    IV.       "EMPEROR     AND     GALILEAN."      With    an 

Introductory  Note  by  WILLIAM  ARCHER. 

V.  "ROSMERSHOLM,"  "THE  LADY  FROM  THE 
SEA,"  "HEDDA  GA13LER."  Translated  by  WILLIAM 
ARCHER.  With  an  Introductory  Note. 

The  sequence  of  the  p'ays  in  each  volume  is  chronological  ;  the  complete 
set  of  volumes  comprising  the  dramas  thus  presents  them  in  chronological 
order. 

"  The  art  of  prose  translation  does  not  perhaps  enjoy  a  very  high  literary 
status  in  England,  but  we  have  no  hesitation  in  numbering  the  present 
version  of  Ibsen,  so  far  as  it  has  gone  (Vols.  I.  and  II.),  among  the  very 
best  achievements,  in  that  kind,  of  our  generation." — Academy. 

"We  have  seldom,  if  ever,  met  with  a  translation  so  absolutely 
idiomatic." —  Glasgow  Herald. 

London :  WALTER  SCOTT,   LIMITED,  Paternoster  Square. 


COMPACT  AND  PRACTICAL. 

In  Limp  Cloth  ;  for  the  Pocket.     Price  One  Shilling 

THE    EUROPEAN 

CONVERSATION  BOOKS, 


FRENCH  ITALIAN 

SPANISH  GERMAN 

NORWEGIAN 

CONTENTS. 

Hints  to  Travellers — Everyday  Expressions — Arriving  at 
and  Leaving  a  Railway  Station — Custom  House  Enquiries — In 
a  Train  —A  t  a  Buffet  and  Restaurant — A  t  an  Hotel— Paying  an 
Hotel  Bill — Enquiries  i?i  a  Town — On  Board  Ship — Embarking 
and  Disembarking — Excursion  by  Carriage — Enquiries  as  to 
Diligences — Enquiries  as  to  Boats — Engaging  Apartments — 
Washing  List  and  Days  of  Week — Restaurant  Vocabulary — 
Telegrams  and  Letters,  etc.,  etc. 


The  contents  of  these  little  handbooks  are  so  arranged  as  to 
permit  direct  and  immediate  reference.  All  dialogues  or  enquiries  not 
considered  absolutely  essential  have  been  purposely  excluded,  nothing 
being  introduced  which  might  confuse  the  traveller  rather  than  assist 
him.  A  few  hints  are  given  in  the  introduction  which  will  be  found 
valuable  to  those  unaccustomed  to  foreign  travel. 

London:  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  Paternoster  Square. 


Crown  Svo,  about  350  pp.  each,  Cloth  Cover,  2/6  per  Vol.; 
Half-Polished  Morocco,  Gilt  Top,  5s. 

Count  Tolstoy's  Works. 

The  following  Volumes  are  already  issued — 


A   RUSSIAN   PROPRIETOR. 

THE  COSSACKS. 

IVAN     ILYITCH,     AND      OTHER 

STORIES. 
MY   RELIGION. 
LIFE. 

MY   CONFESSION. 
CHILDHOOD,     BOYHOOD, 

YOUTH. 

THE   PHYSIOLOGY   OF   WAR. 
ANNA   KAREN  IN  A.      3/6. 


WHAT   TO   DO? 

WAR    AND    PEACE.      (4  vols.) 

THE   LONG   EXILE,    ETC. 

SEVASTOPOL. 

THE   KREUTZER   SONATA,  AND 

FAMILY   HAPPINESS. 
THE     KINGDOM     OF     GOD     IS 

WITHIN   YOU. 
WORK    WHILE    YE    HAVE    THE 

LIGHT. 
THE   GOSPEL   IN   BRIEF. 


Uniform  with  the  above — 
IMPRESSIONS  OF  RUSSIA.     By  Dr.  GEORG  BRANDES. 

Post  410,  Cloth,  Price  is. 

PATRIOTISM   AND   CHRISTIANITY. 

To  which  is  appended  a  Reply  to  Criticisms  of  the  Work. 

By  COUNT  TOLSTOY. 

i/-   Booklets  by  Count  Tolstoy. 

Bound  in  White  Grained  Boards,  with  Gilt  Lettering. 


WHERE    LOVE   IS,   THERE    GOD 

IS  ALSO. 

THE   TWO   PILGRIMS. 
WHAT   MEN    LIVE   BY. 


THE   GODSON. 

IF    YOU    NEGLECT    THE    FIRE, 

YOU  DON'T  PUT  IT  OUT. 

WHAT  SHALL  IT  PROFIT  A  MAN? 


2/-   Booklets  by  Count  Tolstoy. 

NEW    EDITIONS,    REVISED. 

Small  I2ino,  Cloth,  with  Embossed  Design  on  Cover,  each  containing 

Two  Stories  by  Count  Tolstoy,  and  Two  Drawings  by 

II.  R.  Millar.     In  Box,  Price  2s.  each. 


Volume  I.  contains — 

WHERE    LOVE    IS,   THERE   GOD 

IS   ALSO. 
THE  GODSON. 

Volume  II.  contains— 

WHAT   MEN   LIVE   BY. 
WHAT     SHALL     IT     PROFIT     A 
MAN? 


Volume  III.  contains — 
THE  TWO   PILGRIMS. 
IF    YOU    NEGLECT    THE    FIRE, 

YOU  DON'T  PUT  IT  OUT. 
Volume  IV.  contains — 

MASTER    AND    MAN. 

Volume  V.  contains— 
TOLSTOY'S   PARABLES. 


London:  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  Paternoster  Square. 


NEW   ENGLAND   LIBRARY. 

QRAVURE   EDITION. 

PRINTED  ON  ANTIQUE  PAPER.     2s.  6d.  PER  VOL. 
Each  Volume  with  a  Frontispiece  in  Photogravure. 

By   NATHANIEL   HAWTHORNE. 

THE  SCARLET  LETTER. 

THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  SEVEN  GABLES. 

THE  BLITHEDALE  ROMANCE. 

TANGLEWOOD  TALES. 

TWICE-TOLD  TALES. 

A  WONDER-BOOK  FOR  GIRLS  AND  BOYS. 

OUR  OLD  HOME. 

MOSSES  FROM  AN  OLD  MANSE. 

THE  SNOW  IMAGE. 

TRUE  STORIES  FROM  HISTORY  AND  BIOGRAPHY. 

THE  NEW  ADAM  AND  EVE. 

LEGENDS  OF  THE  PROVINCE  HOUSE. 

By   OLIVER   WENDELL   HOLMES. 

THE  AUTOCRAT  OF  THE  BREAKFAST-TABLE. 
THE  PROFESSOR  AT  THE  BREAKFAST-TABLE. 
THE  POET  AT  THE  BREAKFAST-TABLE. 
ELSIE  VENNER. 

By    HENRY   THOREAU. 

ESSAYS  AND  OTHER  WRITINGS. 
WALDEN;   OR,  LIFE  IN  THE  WOODS. 

A  WEEK  ON  THE  CONCORD.  

London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED.  Paternoster  Square. 


Crown  Svo,    Cloth,   $s.  6d.  each;  some  vo!s.,   6s. 

The  Contemporary  Science  Series. 

EDITED  BY  HAVELOCK  ELLIS. 

Illustrated  Volumes  containing  fotzveen  300  and  ^QQ  pp. 

EVOLUTION  OF  SEX.     By  Prof.  GEDDES  and  THOMSON. 
ELECTRICITY  IN  MODERN  LIFE.     By  G.  W   DE  TUNZELMANN 
THE  ORIGIN  OF  THE  ARYANS.     By  Dr.  T  \YIOR 
PHYSIOGNOMY  AND  EXPRESSION.     By  P.  MANTEGAZZA. 
EVOLUTION  AND  DISEASE.     By  J.  B.  SUTTON. 
THE  VILLAGE  COMMUNITY.     By  G.  L.  GOMMF 
THE  CRIMINAL.     By  HAVELOCK  ELI  is 
SANITY  AND  INSANITY.     By  Dr.  C.  MERCIER. 
HYPNOTISM.     By  Dr.  ALBERT  MOLL  (Berlin) 
MANUAL  TRAINING      By  Dr.  WOODWARD  (St.  Louis) 
SCIENCE  OF  FAIRY  TALES.     By  E.  S.  HARTLAND. 
PRIMITIVE  FOLK.     By  ELIE  RECLUS. 
EVOLUTION  OF  MARRIAGE.     By  LKTOURNEAU 
BACTERIA  AND  THEIR  PRODUCTS.     By  Dr.  WOODHEAD 
EDUCATION  AND  HEREDITY.     By  T.   M.  GUYAU 
THE  MAN  OF  GENIUS.     By  Prof.   LOMBROSO 
PROPERTY:  ITS  ORIGIN.     By  CH.  LETOURNEAU. 
VOLCANOES  PAST  AND  PRESENT.     By  Prof  HUIL. 
PUBLIC  HEALTH  PROBLEMS.     By  Dr.  I.  F.  SVKES. 
MODERN  METEOROLOGY.     By  FRANK  WALDO,  Ph.D. 
THE  GERM-PLASM.     By  Professor  WFLSMANN      6s 
THE  INDUSTRIES  OF  ANIMALS.     By  F.  HOUSSAY. 
MAN  AND  WOMAN.     By  HAVELOCK  ELLIS.     6s. 
MODERN  CAPITALISM.     By  JOHN  A.  HOHSON,  M.A. 
THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.     By  F.  PODMORE    MA 
COMPARATIVE  PSYCHOLOGY.    By  Prof!  C.  L.  MORGAN,  F  R  S     6s 
THE  ORIGINS  OF  INVENTION.     By  O   T.  MASON 
THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  BRAIN.     By  II.  II.  DONAI  DSON 
EVOLUTION  IN  ART.     By  Prof.  A.  C.  HADDON    F.R  S 
HALLUCINATIONS  AND  ILLUSIONS.     By  E.  PARISH.     6s 
PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  EMOTIONS.     Bv  Prof.  RIBOT.     6s 
THE  NEW  PSYCHOLOGY.     By  Dr.  F,  W.  SCRIPTURE.     6s. 
SLEEP:    ITS  PHYSIOLOGY,  PATHOLOGY,  HYGIENE,  AND  PSYCHOLOGY. 

By  MARIE  DE  MANACKIXE. 
THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  DIGESTION.      By  A.   LOCKIIART 

GILI.ESPIE,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.  ED.,  F.R.S.  ED.     6s. 
DEGENERACY:     ITS    CAUSES,    SIGNS,    AND    RESULTS.       By    Prof. 

EUGENE  S.  TALBOT,  M.D.,  Chicago.     6s 
THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    EUROPEAN    FAUNA       By    R     F 

SCHARFF,  B.Sc.,  PH.D.,  F.Z.S.     6s. 

THE  RACES  OF  MAN:  A  SKETCH  OF  ETHNOGRAPHY  AND  ANTHRO 
POLOGY.     By  L  DENIKER.     6s. 
THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  RELIGION.     By  Prof.  S'ARBUCK.     6s. 


London:  WALTER  SCOTT,   LIMITED,   Paternoster  S<- 


SPECIAL  EDITION  OF  THE 

CANTERBURY    POETS. 

Square  §vo,  Cloth,  Gilt  Top  Elegant,  Price  T.S. 
Each  Volume  with  a  Frontispiece  in  Photogravure. 

CHRISTIAN  YEAR.    With  Portrait  of  John  Keble. 

LONGFELLOW.     With  Portrait  of  Longfellow. 

SHELLEY.     With  Portrait  of  Shelley. 

WORDSWORTH.     With  Portrait  of  Wordsworth. 

WHITTIER,     With  Portrait  of  Whittier. 

BURNS.     Songs  \With  Portrait  of  Burns,  and  View  of  "The 

BURNS.     Poems  J  Auld  Brig  o' Doon." 

KEATS.     With  Portrait  of  Keats. 

EMERSON.     With  Portrait  of  Emerson. 

SONNETS  OF  THIS  CENTURY.     Portrait  of  D.  G.  Rossetti. 

WHITMAN.     With  Portrait  of  Whitman. 

LOVE  LETTERS  OF  A  VIOLINIST.    Portrait  of  Eric  Mackay. 

SCOTT.     Lady  of  the  Lake,  ^  With  Portrait  of  Sir  Walter  Scott, 

etc.  V        and     View    of     "  The  Silver 

SCOTT.     Marmion,  etc.        J         Strand,  Loch  Katrine." 
CHILDREN  OF  THE  POETS.     With  an  Engraving  of  "The 

Orphans,"  by  Gainsborough. 

SONNETS  OF  EUROPE.     With  Portrait  of  J.  A.  Symonds. 
SYDNEY  DOBELL.     With  Portrait  of  Sydney  Dobell. 
II  KRRICK.     With  Portrait  of  Herrick. 

BALLADS  AND  RONDEAUS.     Portrait  of  W.  E.  Henley. 
IRISH  MINSTRELSY.    With  Portrait  of  Thomas  Davis. 
PARADISIC  LOST.    With  Portrait  of  Milton. 
FAIRY  MUSIC.     Engraving  from  Drawing  by  C.  E.  Brock. 
GOLDEN  TREASURY.     With  Engraving  of  Virgin  Mother. 
AMERICAN  SONNETS.     With  Portrait  of  J.  R.  Lowell. 
IMITATION  OF  CHRIST.     With  Engraving,  "Eccellomo." 
PAINTER  POETS.     With  Portrait  of  Walter  Crane. 
WOMEN  POETS.    With  Portrait  of  Mrs.  Browning. 
POEMS  OF  HON.  RODEN  NOEL.    Portrait  of  Hon.  R.  Noel. 
AMERICAN  HUMOROUS  VERSE.     Portrait  of  Mark  Twain. 
SONGS  OF  FREEDOM.     With  Portrait  of  William  Morris. 
SCOTTISH  MINOR  POETS.     With  Portrait  of  R.  Tannahill. 
CONTEMPORARY    SCOTTISH    VERSE.     With  Portrait  of 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson. 

PAR4DISE  REGAINED.     With  Portrait  of  Milton. 
CAVALIER  POETS.     With  Portrait  of  Suckling. 
HUMOROUS  POEMS.     With  Portrait  of  Hood. 
II  HUBERT.     With  Portrait  of  Herbert. 
POE.     With  Portrait  of  Poe. 

OWEN  MEREDITH.     With  Portrait  of  late  Lord  Lytton. 
LOVE  LYRICS.     With  Portrait  of  Raleigh. 
GERMAN  BALLADS.     With  Portrait  of  Schiller. 
CAMPBELL.     With  Portrait  of  Campbell. 
CANADIAN  POEMS.     With  View  of  Mount  Stephen. 
EARLY  ENGLISH  POETRY.     With  Portrait  of  Earl  of  Surrey. 
ALLAN  RAMSAY.     With  Portrait  of  Ramsay. 
SPENSER.     With  Portrait  of  Spenser. 


COWPFRW>h  p  ,      Tlio  Death  of  Chatterton 

A)\\  PER.     A\  ith  Portrait  of  Cowner 
CHAUCKR.     With  Portrait  of  Chaucer 

with  Portrait  of  Coleride. 


POPE.  With  Portrait  of  Pope. 
BYRON.  Miscellaneous)  w  .., 
BYRON.  Don  Juan  }  ^  lth  Portraits  of  Byron. 

^^^^^ 


. 

SOUTHKY.     With  Portrait. 
HUGO.     With  Portrait 
GOETHE.     With  Portrait 
BERANGER.     With  Portrait 
HEINE.     With  Portrait 
S/mrM™^-    yii  View  of  Corbiere  Rocks,  Jersey. 

I  AD?  "o?T  PVovih   w-'frl^  °f  Philip  Boilrke  Wanton. 

J.yiton. 


HORACE.     With  I>ortrait 
CRAB  BE.     With  Portrait.' 


ARNOLD:    win,  Portrait 
THIC  V 


WAR  SONGS.     With  Portrait  of  Lord  Robots. 


Great  Writers. 

A    NEW   SERIES   OF   CRITICAL    BIOGRAPHIES. 

Edited  by  E.  ROBERTSON  and  F.  T.  MARZIALS. 

Cloth,  Uncut  Edges,  Gilt  Top.      Price  1/6. 
Longfellow         .        By  Professor  Eric  S.  Robertson 
.      By  Hull  Caine 
By  Frank  T.  Marziala 
By  J.  Knight 
.  By  Colonel  F.  Grant 
By  G.  T.  Bettany 
By  A.  Birrell 
By  n.  Garnctt,  LL.D. 
By  R,  B.  Haldane,  ALP. 
By  W.  M.  Rossetti 
By  William  Sharp 
By  David  ILinnay 
By  Austin  Dobson 
.    By  Professor  Yonge 
By  Professor  Blackie 
By  Frank  T.  Marzials 
By  R.  Garnett,  LL.  D. 
.    By  James  Sime 
By  Kdmund  Gosse 
.     By  Canon  Variables 
By  T.  E.  Kebbel 
By  William  Sharp 
.      By  W.  L.  Courtney 
By  Henry  W.  Nevinson 


Coleridge 

Dickens      . 

Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti 

Samuel  Johnson 

Darwin 

Charlotte  Bronte      . 

Carlyle 

Adam  Smith      . 

Keats 

Shelley 

Smollett     . 

Goldsmith 

Scott 

Burns 

Victor  Hugo      . 

Emerson    . 

Goethe 

Congreve    . 

Bunyan 

Crabbe 

Heine 

Mill    .... 

Schiller 


Marryat     .....       By  David  Hannay 

Leasing      .....     By  T.  W.  Rolleston 

Milton        ....         By  R  Garnett,  LL.D. 

Balzac        .        .        .        -By  Frederick  Wedmore 
George  Eliot      ....     By  Oscar  Browning 

Jane  Austen      ....      By  Goldwin  Smith 

Browning  .....        By  William  Sharp 

Byron         ....          By  Hon.  Roden  Noel 

Hawthorne        ...      By  Moncure  D.  Conway 
Schopenhauer  ...         By  Professor  Wallace 
Sheridan    .....        By  Lloyd  Sanders 

Thackeray.        .    By  H.  Merivale  and  F.  T.  Marzials 
Cervantes  .....  By  H.  E.  Watts 

Voltaire      ....         By  Francis  Espinasse 

Leigh  Hunt        ...        By  Cosmo  Monkhouse 
Whittier     .....          By  W.  J.  Lin  ton 

Renan         ....         By  Francis  Espinasse 

Thoreau      ......       By  H.  S.  Salt 

A  Complete  Bibliography  to  each  Volume. 
Library  Edition  of  "Great  Writers,"  Demy  8vo,  2/6. 

London:  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED. 


0 


SE-:  r   APK  24 


DC     Burke,  Edmund 

150      Reflections  on  the 

B8     Revolution  in  France 


19—
