Iittp://www.arcliive.org/details/liistoryofengland001gold 


THE 


HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 


THE  EARLIEST  TIMES 

TO 

THE  DEATH  OF  GEORGE  II. 

BFDR.  GOLDSMITH, 


A  CONTINUATION 

FROM  THE  COMMENCEMENT  OF  THE  REIGN  OF  GEORGE  Hi.  TO  THE  PEACE 
OF  AMIENS,  IN  1802. 

BF  THE  REV.  MAJ^LEY  WOOD,  A.  M. 

QF  EXETER  COLLEGE,  OXON. 


IN  TWO  VOLUJMES. 

FIR^T  AMERICAN,  FROM  THE  NINTH  LONDON  EDITION,  CORRECTED. 

VOL.  I. 


BOSTON  : 

PUBLISHED  BY  CHESTER  STEBBINS. 


1814. 


(y 


PREFACE. 

F  ROM  the  favourable  reception  given  to  my  Abridge 
ment  of  Roman  History,  published  some  time  since^ 
several  friends,  and  others,  whose  business  leads  them 
to  consult  the  wants  of  the  public,  have  been  induced 
to  suppose  that  an  English  history  written  on  the  same 
plan  would  be  acceptable.  It  was  their  opinion,  that 
we  still  wanted  a  work  of  this  kind,  where  the  narra- 
tive, though  very  concise,  is  not  totally  without  interest^ 
and  the  facts,  though  crowded,  are  yet  distinctly  seen. 

The  business  of  abridging  the  works  of  others  has 
hitherto  fallen  to  the  lot  of  very  dull  men  5  andr  the  art 
of  blotting,  which  an  eminent  critic  calls  the  most  diffi- 
cult of  all  others,  has  been  usually  practised  by  those 
who  found  themselves  unable  to  write.  Hence  our 
abridgments  are  generally  more  tedious  than  the  works 
from  which  they  pretend  to  relieve  us ;  and  they 
have  effectually  embarrassed  that  road  which  they  la* 
boured  to  shorten. 

As  the  present  compiler  starts  with  such  humble 
competitors,  it  will  scarcely  be  thought  vanity  in  hini 
if  he  boasts  himself  their  superior.  Of  the  many  abridg- 
ments of  our  own  history  hitherto  published,  none  seems 
possessed  of  any  share  of  merit  or  reputation :  some 
have  been  written  in  dialogue,  or  merely  in  the  stiffness 
of  an  index,  and  some  to  answer  the  purposes  of  a  par- 
ty. A  very  small  share  of  taste,  therefore,  was  suffi- 
cient to  keep  the  compiler  from  the  defects  of  the  one  ; 
and  a  very  small  share  of  philosophy  from  the  misrep- 
resentations of  the  other. 


4j  preface. 

It  is  not  easy,  however,  to  satisfy  the  different  expec- 
tations of  mankind  in  a  work  of  this  kind,  calculated 
for  every  apprehension,  and  on  which  all  are  conse- 
quently capable  of  forming  some  judgment.  Some 
may  say  that  it  is  too  long  to  pass  under  the  denomina- 
tion of  an  abridgment ;  and  others,  that  it  is  too  dry  to 
be  admitted  as  an  history  :  it  may  be  objected,  that  re- 
flection is  almost  entirely  banished  to  make  room  for 
facts,  and  yet  that  many  facts  are  wholly  omitted, 
which  might  be  necessary  to  be  known. 

It  must  be  confessed  tJiat  all  those  objections  are 
partly  true ;  for  it  is  impossible,  in  the  same  work,  at 
once  to  attain  contrary  advantages.  The  compiler, 
who  is  stinted  in  room,  must  often  sacrifice  interest  to 
brevity  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  while  he  endeavours 
to  amuse,  must  frequently  transgress  the  limits  to  which 
his  plan  should  confine  him.  Thus  all  such  as  desire 
only  amusement  may  be  disgusted  with  his  brevity,  and 
such  as  seek  for  information  may  object  to  his  displac- 
ing facts  for  empty  description. 

To  attain  the  greatest  number  of  advantages  with  the 
fewest  inconveniences,  is  all  that  can  be  attained  in  an 
abridgment,  the  very  name  of  which  implies  imperfec- 
tion. It  will  be  sufficient,  therefore,  to  satisfy  the 
writer's  wishes,  if  the  present  work  be  found  a  plain 
unaffected  narrative  of  facts,  with  just  ornament  enough 
to  keep  attention  awake,  and  with  reflection  barely  suf- 
ficient to  set  the  reader  upon  thinking. — Very  moder- 
ate abilities  were  equal  to  sucli  an  undertaking ;  and 
it  is  hoped  the  performance  will  satisfy  such  as  take  up 
books  to  be  informed  or  amused,  without  much  consid- 
ering who  the  writer  is,  or  envying  any  success  he  may 
have  had  in  a  former  compilation. 


PREFACE.  3 

As  the  present  publication  is  designed  for  the  benefit 
of  those  who  intend  to  lay  a  foundation  for  future 
study,  or  desire  to  refresh  their  memories  upon  the  old, 
or  who  think  a  moderate  share  of  history  suflBcient  for 
the  purposes  of  life,  recourse  has  been  had  only  to  those 
authors  which  are  best  known,  and  those  facts  only 
have  been  selected  w^hich  are  allowed  on  all  hands  to 
be  true.  Were  an  epitome  of  history  the  field  for  dis- 
playing  erudition,  the  author  could  show  that  he  has 
read  many  books  which  others  have  neglected  ;  and 
that  he  also  could  advance  many  anecdotes  which^are 
at  present  very  little  known.  But  it  must  be  remem- 
bered, that  all  these  minute  recoveries  could  be  inserted 
only  to  the  exclusion  of  more  material  facts,  which  it 
would  be  unpardonable  to  omit.  He  foregoes,  tliere- 
fore,  the  petty  ambition  of  being  thought  a  reader  of 
forgotten  books, — his  aim  being  not  to  add  to  our  pre- 
sent stock  of  history,  but  to  contract  it. 

The  books  which  have  been  used  in  this  abridg- 
ment are  chiefly  Rapin,  Carte,  Smollett  and  Hume. 
They  have  each  their  peculiar  admirers,  in  proportion 
as  the  reader  is  studious  of  historical  antiquities,  fond 
of  minute  anecdote,  a  warm  partisan,  or  a  deliberate 
reasoner.  Of  these  I  have  particularly  taken  Hume 
for  my  guide,  as  far  as  he  goes  ;  and  it  is  but  justice  to 
say,  that  wherever  I  was  obliged  to  abridge  his  work^ 
I  did  it  with  reluctance,  as  I  scarce  cut  out  a  line  that 
did  not  contain  a  beauty. 

But  though  I  must  warmly  subscribe  to  the  learnings 
elegance,  and  depth  of  Mr.  Hume's  History,  yet  I 
cannot  entirely  acquiesce  in  his  principles.  With  re- 
gard  to  religion,  he  seems  desirous  of  playing  a  double 
part,-— ef  appearing  to  some  readers  as  if  he  reverenced^ 


6  PREFACE. 

and  to  others  as  if  he  ridiculed  it.  He  seems  sensible 
of  the  political  necessity  of  religion  in  every  state ;  but 
at  the  same  time  he  would  every  where  insinuate  that 
it  owes  its  authority  to  no  higher  an  origin.  Thus  he 
weakens  its  influence^  while  he  contends  for  its  utility  5 
and  vainly  hopes,  that  while  free-thinkers  shall  ap- 
plaud his  scepticism,  real  believers  will  reverence  him 
for  his  zeal. 

In  his  opinions  respecting  government,  perhaps  also 
he  may  be  sometimes  reprehensible ;  but  in  a  country 
like  ours,  where  mutual  contention  contributes  to  the 
security  of  the  constitution,  it  will  be  impossible  for  an 
historian,  who  attempts  to  have  any  opinion,  to  satisfy 
all  parties.  It  is  not  yet  decided  in  politics,  whether 
the  diminution  of  kingly  power  in  England  tends  to 
increase  the  happiness  or  the  freedom  of  the  people. 
For  my  own  part,  from  seeing  the  bad  effects  of  the  ty- 
ranny of  the  great  in  those  republican  states  that  pre- 
tend to  be  free,  I  cannot  help  wishing  that  our  mon- 
archs  may  still  be  allowed  to  enjoy  the  power  of  con- 
trolling the  encroachments  of  the  great  at  home.  A 
king  may  easily  be  restrained  from  doing  wrong,  as 
he  is  but  one  man ;  but  if  a  number  of  the  great  are 
permitted  to  divide  all  authority,  who  can  punish  them 
if  they  abuse  it  ?  Upon  this  principle,  therefore,  and 
not  from  any  empty  notion  of  divine  or  hereditary  right, 
some  may  think  I  have  leaned  towards  monarchy., 
But  as,  in  the  things  I  have  hitherto  written,  I  hav# 
neither  allured  the  vanity  of  the  great  by  flattery,  nor 
satisfied  the  malignity  of  the  vulgar  by  scandal,  as  I 
Jiave  endeavoured  to  get  an  honest  reputation  by  liberal 
pursuits,  it  is  hoped  the  reader  will  admit  my  impar- 
tiality. 


HISTOBY  OF  ENGLAND. 


CHAP.  I. 

OF  THE  BRITONS  BEFORE  THE  ARRIVAL  OF  THE  ROMANS. 

XT  is  fortunate  for  mankind,  that  those  periods  of  history  which 
are  the  least  serviceable,  are  the  least  known.  It  has  been  the 
study  of  many  learned  men  to  rescue  from  obscurity,  and  throw 
light  upon,  those  early  ages  when  the  Britons  were  wholly  bar- 
barous, and  their  country  uncultivated.  But  these  researches 
have  generally  terminated  in  conjecture ;  so  that  from  whence 
Britain  was  at  first  peopled,  or  took  its  name,  is  still  uncertain. 
The  variety  of  opinions  upon  this  head  serve  to  prove  the  futility 
of  all. 

It  will,  therefore,  be  sufficient  to  observe,  that,  this  beautiful 
island,  by  some  thought  the  largest  in  the  world,  was  called  Bri- 
tannia by  the  Romans  long  before  the  time  of  Csesar.  It  is  sup- 
posed that  this  name  was  originally  given  it  by  the  merchants  who 
resorted  hither  from  the  continent.  These  called  the  inhabitants 
by  one  common  name  of  Briths,  from  the  custom  among  the  na- 
tives of  painting  their  naked  bodies  and  small  shields  with  an 
azure  blue,  which  in  language  of  the  country  was  called  brith,  and 
which  served  to  distinguish  them  from  those  strangers  who  came 
among  them  for  the  purposes  of  trade  or  alliance. 

The  Britons  were  but  very  little  known  to  the  rest  of  the 
world  before  the  time  of  the  Romans.  The  coasts  opposite  Gaul, 
indeed,  were  frequented  by  merchants  who  traded  thither  for 
such  commodities  as  the  natives  were  able  to  produce.  These,  it 
is  thought,  after  a  time,  possessed  themselves  of  all  the  maritime 
places  where  they  had  at  first  been  permitted  to  reside.    There, 


g  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

finding  the  country  fertile,  and  commodiously  situated  for  trade; 
they  settled  upon  the  sea-side,  and  introduced  the  practice  of  ag- 
riculture. But  it  was  very  different  with  the  inland  inhabitants 
of  the  country,  who  considered  themselves  as  the  lawful  posses- 
sors of  the  soil.  These  avoided  all  correspondence  with  the  new- 
comers, whom  they  considered  as  intruders  upon  their  property. 

The  inland  inhabitants  are  represented  as  extremely  numer- 
ous, living  in  cottages  thatched  with  straw,  and  feeding  large  herds 
of  cattle.  Their  houses  were  scattered  all  over  the  country,  with- 
out observance  of  order  or  distance,  being  placed  at  smaller  or 
greater  intervals,  as  they  were  invited  by  the  fertility  of  the  soil, 
or  the  convenience  of  wood  and  water.  They  lived  mostly  upon 
milk,  or  flesh  procured  by  the  chase.  What  clothes  they  wore  to 
cover  any  part  of  their  bodies  were  usually  the  skins  of  beasts  j; 
but  much  of  their  bodies,  as  the  arms,  legs,  and  thighs,  was  left 
naked,  and  those  parts  were  usually  painted  blue.  Their  hair, 
which  was  long,  flowed  down  upon  their  backs  and  shoulders, 
while  their  beards  were  kept  close  shaven,  except  upon  the  upper 
lip,  where  it  was  suffered  to  grow.  The  dress  of  savage  nations 
is  every  where  pretty  much  the  same,  being  calculated  rather  to 
inspire  terror  than  to  excite  love  or  respect. 

The  commodities  exported  from  Britain  were  chiefly  hides  and 
tin.  This  metal  was  then  thought  peculiar  to  the  island,  and  was 
in  much  request  abroad,  both  in  nearer  and  remoter  regions. 
Some  silver  mines  were  also  known,  but  not  in  common  use,  as  the 
inhabitants  had  but  little  knowledge  how  to  dig,  refine,  or  improve 
them.  Pearls  also  were  frequently  found  on  their  shores,  but  nei- 
ther clear  nor  coloured  like  the  oriental,  and  therefore  in  no 
great  esteem  among  strangers.  They  had  but  little  iron ;  and 
what  they  had,  was  used  either  for  arms,  or  for  rings,  which  was 
a  sort  of  money  current  among  them.  They  had  brass  money 
also ;  but  this  was  all  brought  from  abroad. 

Their  language,  customs,  religion,  and  government,  were  gen-^ 
eralty  the  same  with  those  of  the  Gauls,  their  neighbours  of  thfe 
continent.  As  to  their  government,  it  consisted  of  several  small 
principalities,  each  under  its  respective  leader ;  and  this  seems  to 
be  the  earliest  mode  of  dominion  with  which  mankind  is  acquaint- 
ed, and  deduced  from  the  natural  privileges  of  paternal  authority. 
Whether  these  small  principalities  descended  by  successioji,  or 


OF  THE  BRITONS.  ® 

were  elected  in  consequence  of  the  advantages  of  age,  wisdom^ 
Or  valour  in  the  families  of  the  princes,  is  not  recorded.  Upon 
great  or  uncommon  dangers,  a  commander  in  chief  was  chosen 
by  common  consent,  in  a  general  assembly ;  and  to  him  was  com- 
mitted the  conduct  of  the  general  interest,  the  power  of  making 
peace,  or  leading  to  war.  In  the  choice  of  a  person  of  such  pow- 
er, it  is  easy  to  suppose  that  unanimity  could  not  always  be 
found ;  whence  it  often  happened,  that  the  separate  tribes  were 
defeated  one  after  the  other,  before  they  could  unite  under  a  sin- 
gle leader  for  their  mutual  safety. 

Their  forces  consisted  chiefly  of  foot,  and  yet  they  could  bring 
a  considerable  number  of  horse  into  the  field  upon  great  occasions. 
They  likewise  used  chariots  in  battle,  which,  with  short  scythes 
fastened  to  the  ends  of  the  axle-trees,  inflicted  desperate  wounds, 
spreading  terror  and  devastation  wheresoever  they  drove.  Nor, 
while  the  chariots  were  thus  destroying,  were  the  warriors  who 
conducted  them  unemployed.  These  darted  their  javelins  against 
the  enemy,  ran  along  the  beam,  leaped  on  the  ground,  resumed 
their  seat,  stopped  or  turned  their  horses  at  full  speed,  and  some- 
times cunningly  retreated  to  draw  the  enemy  into  confusion. 
Notliing  can  be  more  terrible  than  the  idea  of  a  charioteer  thus 
driving  furiously  in  the  midst  of  dangers  :  but  these  machines 
seem  to  have  been  more  dreadful  than  dangerous ;  for  they 
were  quickly  laid  aside  v/hen  tliis  brave  people  was  instructed  in 
the  more  regular  arts  of  war. 

The  religion  of  the  Britons  was  one  of  the  most  considerable 
parts  of  their  government ;  and  the  Druids,  who  were  the  guar- 
dians of  it,  possessed  great  authority  among  them^  These  en- 
deavoured to  impress  the  minds  of  the  people  with  an  opinion  of 
their  skill  in  the  arts  of  divination ;  they  oiFered  sacrifices  in 
public  and  private,  and  pretended  to  explain  the  immediate  will 
of  Heaven.  No  species  of  superstition  was  ever  more  horrible 
than  theirs ;  besides  the  severe  penalties  which  they  were  permit- 
ted to  inflict  in  this  world,  they  inculcated  the  eternal  transmi- 
gration of  souls,  and  thus  extended  their  authority  as  far  as  the 
fears  of  their  votaries.  They  sacrificed  human  victims,  which 
they  burned  in  large  wicker  idols,  made  so  capacious  as  to  con- 
tain a  multitude  of  persons  at  once,  who  were  thus  consumed  to- 
gether.   The  female  Druids  plunged  their  knives  ip.to  the  breasts 

VOL.  y,  3 


10  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

of  the  prisoners  taken  in  war,  and  prophesied  from  tli6  manner 
in  which  the  blood  happened  to  stream  from  the  wound.  Their 
altars  consisted  of  four  broad  stones,  three  set  edge-wise,  and  the 
fourth  at  top,  manj  of  which  remain  to  this  day.  To  these  rites, 
tending  to  hnpress  ignorance  with  awe,  tliey  added  the  austerity 
of  their  manners,  and  the  simplicity  of  their  lives.  They  lived 
in  woods,  caves,  and  hollow  trees ;  their  food  was  acorns  and 
berries,  and  their  drink  water ;  by  these  arts  they  were  not  only 
respected,  but  almost  adored  by  the  people.  They  were  admired 
not  only  for  knowing  more  than  other  men,  but  for  despising 
Avhat  all  others  valued  and  pursued.  Hence  they  were  patiently 
permitted  to  punish  and  correct  crimes  from  which  they  them- 
selves were  supposed  to  be  wholly  free ;  and  their  authority  was 
so  great,  that  not  only  the  property  but  also  the  lives  of  the  peo- 
ple w^ere  entirely  at  their  disposal.  No  laws  were  instituted  by 
the  princes,  or  common  assemblies,  without  their  advice  and  ap- 
probation J  no  person  was  punished  by  bonds  or  death,  without 
their  passing  sentence ;  no  plunder  taken  in  war  was  used  by  the 
captor  until  the  Druids  determined  what  part  they  should  seclude 
for  themselves. 

It  may  be  easily  supposed  that  the  manners  of  the  people  took 
a  tincture  from  the  discipline  of  their  teachers.  Their  lives  were 
simple,  but  they  were  marked  with  cruelty  and  fierceness ;  their 
courage  was  great,  but  neither  dignified  by  mercy  nor  persever- 
ance. In  short,  to  have  a  just  idea  of  what  the  Britons  then  were, 
Ave  have  only  to  turn  to  the  savage  nations  which  still  subsist  in 
primseval  rudeness.  Temperate  rather  from  necessity  than  choice ; 
patient  of  fatigue,  yet  inconstant  in  attachment ;  bold,  improvi- 
dent, and  rapacious : — such  is  the  picture  of  savage  life  at  present, 
and  such  it  appears  to  have  been  from  the  beginning.  Little  en- 
tertainment, therefore,  can  be  expected  from  the  accounts  of  a 
nation  thus  circumstanced  ;  nor  can  its  transactions  come  prop- 
erly under  tlie  notice  of  the  liistorian,  since  they  are  too  minute- 
ly divided  to  be  exhibited  at  one  view ;  the  actors  are  too  barba- 
rous to  interest  the  reader  j  and  no  skill  can  be  shown  in  developing 
the  motives  and  counsels  of  a  people  chiefly  actuated  by  sudden 
and  tumultuary  gusts  of  passion. 


BRITONS  AND  ROMANS.  H 


CHAP.  II. 

FROM  THE  DESCENT  OF  JULIUS  CMSAR  TO  THE  RELINQUISHING  OF  THF. 
ISLAND  BY  THE  ROMANS. 

JL  HE  Britons,  in  the  rude  and  barbarous  state  in  which  we  have 
just  described  them,  seemed  to  stand  in  need  of  more  polished 
instructors  ;  and  indeed  whatever  evils  may  attend  the  conquest 
of  heroes,  their  success  has  generally  produced  one  good  effect, 
in  disseminating  the  arts  of  refinement  and  humanity.  It  ever 
happens,  when  a  barbarous  nation  is  conquered  by  another  more 
advanced  in  the  arts  of  peace,  that  it  gains  in  elegance  a  recom- 
pense for  what  it  loses  in  liberty.  The  Britons  had  long  remain* 
ed  in  this  rude  but  independent  state,  when  Csesar,  having  over- 
run Gaul  with  his  victories,  and  willing  still  further  to  extend  his 
fame,  determined  upon  the  conquest  of  a  country  that  seemed  to 
promise  an  easy  triumph.  He  was  allured  neither  by  the  riches 
nor  the  renown  of  the  inhabitants  ;  but  being  ambitious  rather  of 
splendid  than  of  useful  conquests,  he  was  willing  to  carry  the 
Roman  arms  into  a  country,  the  remote  situation  of  which  would 
add  seeming  difficulty  to  the  enterprise,  and  consequently  pro- 
duce an  increase  of  reputation.  His  pretence  was,  to  punish 
these  islanders  for  having  sent  succours  to  the  Gauls  while  he 
waged  war  against  that  nation,  as  well  as  for  granting  an  asy- 
lum to  such  of  the  enemy  as  had  sought  protection,  from  his  re- 
sentment. The  natives,  informed  of  his  intention,  were  sensible 
of  the  unequal  contest,  and  endeavoured  to  appease  him  by  sub- 
inission.  He  received  their  embassadors  with  great  complacency, 
and  having  exhorted  them  to  continue  steadfast  in  the  same  sen- 
timents, in  the  mean  time  made  preparations  for  the  execution  of 
his  design.  When  the  troops  destined  for  the  expedition  were 
embarked,  he  set  sail  for  Britain  about  midnight,  and  the  next 
morning  arrived  on  the  coast  near  Dover,  where  he  saw  the  rocks 
and  cliffs  covered  with  armed  men  to  oppose  his  landing. 

Finding  it  impracticable  to  gain  tlie  shore  where  he  Ant.  Ch. 
first  intended,  from  the  agitation  of  the  sea,  and  the  im-      ^^* 
pending  mountains,  he  resolved  to  choose  a  landing-place  of 
greater  security.    The  plage  he  chose  wa*  about^eight  miles  far- 


i2  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND 

ther  on,  some  suppose  at  Deal,  where  an  inclining  shore  and  a 
level  country  invited  his  attempts.  The  poor,  naked,  ill -armed 
Britons,  we  may  well  suppose,  were  but  an  unequal  match  for 
the  disciplined  Romans,  who  had  before  conquered  Gaul,  and  af- 
terwards became  the  conquerors  of  the  world.  However,  they 
made  a  brave  opposition  against  the  veteran  army ;  the  conflicts 
between  them  were  fierce,  the  losses  mutual,  and  the  success, 
various.  The  Britons  had  chosen  Cassibelaunus  for  their  com- 
mander in  chief;  but  the  petty  princes  under  his  command,  either 
desiring  his  station,  or  suspecting  his  fidelity,  threw  off  their  al- 
legiance. Some  of  them  fled  with  their  forces  into  the  internal 
parts  of  the  kingdom ;  others  submitted  to  Csesar  ;  till  at  length 
Cassibelaunus  himself,  weakened  by  so  many  desertions,  resolved 
upon  making  what  terms  he  was  able,  while  he  yet  had  power  to 
keep  the  field.  The  conditions  offered  by  Csesar,  and  accepted 
by  him,  were,  that  he  should  send  to  the  continent  double  the 
number  of  hostages  at  first  demanded,  and  that  he  should  aC' 
knowledge  subjection  to  the  Romans. 

The  Romans  were  pleased  with  the  name  of  this  new  and  re- 
mote conquest,  and  the  senate  decreed  a  supplication  of  twenty 
days  in  consequence  of  their  general's  success.  Having,  there- 
fore, in  this  manner  rather  discovered  than  subdued  the  southern 
parts  of  the  island,  Csesar  returned  into  Gaul  with  his  forces,  and 
left  the  Britons  to  enjoy  their  customs,  religion,  and  laws.  But 
the  inhabitants,  thus  relieved  from  the  terror  of  his  arms,  neglect- 
ed the  performance  of  their  stipulations ;  and  only  two  of  their 
states  sent  over  hostages  according  to  the  treaty.  Csesar,  it  is 
likely,  was  not  much  displeased  at  the  omission,  as  it  furnished 
him  with  a  pretext  of  visiting  the  island  once  more,  and  complet- 
ing a  conquest  which  he  had  only  begun. 

Accordingly,  the  ensuing  spring  he  set  sail  for  Britain  with 
eight  hundred  ships ;  and  arriving  at  the  place  of  his  former  de- 
scent, he  landed  without  opposition.  The  islanders  being  appris- 
ed of  his  invasion,  had  assembled  an  army,  and  marched  down 
to  the  sea-side  to  oppose  him ;  but  seeing  the  number  of  his  for- 
ces, and  the  whole  sea,  as  it  were,  covered  with  his  shipping, 
they  were  struck  with  consternation,  and  retired  to  their  places 
of  security.  The  Romans,  however,  pursued  them  to  their  re- 
treats, until  at  last  common  danger  induced  these  poor  barbari* 


BRITONS  AND  ROMANS.  IS 

»ns  to  forget  their  former  dissensions,  and  to  unite  their  whole 
strength  for  the  mutual  defence  of  their  liberty  and  possessions. 
Cassibelaunus  was  chosen  to  conduct  the  common  cause ;  and 
for  some  time  he  harassed  the  Romans  in  their  march,  and  reviv- 
ed the  desponding  hopes  of  his  countrymen.  But  no  opposition 
that  undisciplined  strength  could  make  was  able  to  repress  the 
vigour  and  intrepidity  of  Ctesar.  He  discomfited  the  Britons  in 
every  action  :  he  advanced  into  the  country,  passed  the  Thames 
in  the  face  of  the  enemy,  took  and  burned  the  capital  city  of 
Cassibelaunus,  established  his  ally  Mandubratius  as  sovereign  of 
the  Trinobantes ;  and  having  obliged  the  inhabitants  to  make 
new  submissions,  he  again  returned  with  his  army  into  Gaul,  hav- 
ing made  himself  rather  the  nominal  than  the  real  possessor  of 
the  island. 

Whatever  the  stipulated  tribute  might  have  been,  it  is  more 
than  probable,  as  there  was  no  authority  left  to  exact  it,  that  it 
was  but  indifferently  paid.  Upon  the  accession  of  Augustus,  that 
emperor  had  formed  a  design  of  visiting  Britain,  but  was  diverted 
from  it  by  an  unexpected  revolt  of  the  Pannonians.  Some  years 
after  he  resumed  his  design  ;  but  being  met  in  his  way  by  the 
British  embassadors,  who  promised  the  accustomed  tribute,  and 
made  the  usual  submissions,  he  desisted  from  his  intention.  The 
year  following,  finding  them  remiss  in  their  supplies,  and  untrue 
to  their  former  professions,  he  once  more  prepared  for  the  inva- 
sion of  the  country ;  but  a  well-timed  embassy  again  averted  his 
indignation,  and  the  submissions  he  received  seemed  to  satisfy 
his  resentment :  upon  his  death-bed  he  appeared  sensible  of  the 
overgrown  extent  of  the  Roman  empire,  and  he  recommended  it 
to  his  successors  never  to  enlarge  their  territories. 

Tiberius  followed  the  maxims  of  Augustus  ;  and,  wisely  judg- 
ing the  empire  already  too  extensive,  made  no  attempt  upon  Bri- 
tain. Some  Roman  soldiers  having  been  wrecked  on  the  British 
coast,  the  inhabitants  not  only  assisted  them  with  the  greatest 
humanity,  but  sent  them  in  safety  back  to  their  general.  In  con- 
sequence of  these  friendly  dispositions,  a  constant  intercourse  of 
good  offices  subsisted  between  the  two  nations;  the  principal 
British  nobility  resorted  to  Rome,  and  many  received  their  edu- 
eation  there. 


14  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

From  that  time  the  Britons  began  to  improve  in  all  the  art« 
which  contribute  to  the  advancement  of  human  nature.  The  first 
art  which  a  savage  people  is  generally  taught  by  their  politer 
neighbours  is  that  of  war.  The  Britons,  thenceforward,  though 
not  wholly  addicted  to  the  Roman  method  of  fighting,  neverthe- 
less adopted  several  of  their  improvements,  as  well  in  their  arms 
as  in  their  arrangement  in  the  field.  Their  ferocity  to  strangers, 
for  which  they  had  been  always  remarkable,  was  mitigated  ;  and 
they  began  to  permit  an  intercourse  of  commerce  even  in  the  in- 
ternal parts  of  the  country.  They  still,  however,  continued  to 
live  as  herdsmen  and  hunters,' — a  manifest  proof  that  the  country 
was  as  yet  but  thinly  inhabited.  A  nation  of  hunters  can  never 
be  populous,  as  their  subsistence  is  necessarily  diffused  over  a 
large  tract  of  country,  while  the  husbandman  converts  every  part 
of  nature  to  human  use,  and  flourishes  most  by  the  vicinity  of 
those  whom  he  is  to  support. 

The  wild  extravagances  of  Caligula,  by  which  he  threatened 
Britain  with  an  invasion,  served  rather  to  expose  him  to  ridicule, 
than  the  island  to  danger.    The  Britons  therefore,  for  almost  a 
century,  enjoyed  their  liberty  unmolested,  till  at  length  the  Ro- 
mans, in  the  reign  of  Claudius,  began  to  think  seriously  of  reduc- 
ing them  under  their  dominion.     The  expedition  for  this  purpose 
was  conducted  in  the  beginning  by  Plautius  and  other  command- 
ers, with  that  success  which  usually  attended  the  Roman  arms. 
-„        Claudius  liimself,  finding  affairs  sufficiently  prepared 
for  his  reception,  made  a  journey  thither,  and  received 
the  submission  of  such  states  as,  living  by  commerce,  were  will- 
ing to  purchase  tranquillity  at  the  expense   of  freedom.    It  is 
true  that  many  of  the  inland  provinces  preferred  their  native 
simplicity  to  imported  elegance,  and,  rather  than  bow  their  necks 
to  the  Roman  yoke,  offered  their  bosoms  to  the  sword.    But  the 
southern  coast,  with  all  the  adjacent  inland  country,  was  seized 
by  the   conquerors,  who   secured  the  possession  by  fortifying 
camps,  building  fortresses,  and  planting  colonies.     The   other 
parts  of  the  country  either  thought  themselves  in  no  danger,  or 
continued  patient  spectators  of  the  approaching  devastation. 

Caractacus  was  the  fii'st  who  seemed  willing,  by  a  vigorous  ef- 
fort, to  rescue  his  country,  and  repel  its  insulting  and  rapacious 
conquerors.    The  venality  aiid  corruption  of  tlifi  Roman  prsetors 


BRITONS  AND  ROMANS.  15 

and  officers?  who  were  appointed  to  levy  tlie  contributions  in  Bri- 
tain, served  to  excite  the  indignation  of  the  natives,  and  give 
spirit  to  his  attempts.  This  rude  soldier,  though  with  inferior 
forces,  continued,  for  about  the  space  of  nine  years,  to  oppose 
and  harass  the  Romans ;  so  that  at  length  Ostorius  Scapula  was 
sent  over  to  command  their  armies.  He  was  more  successful 
than  his  predecessors.  He  advanced  the  Roman  conquests  over 
Britain,  pierced  the  country  of  the  Silures,  a  warlike  na- 
tion  along  the  banks  of  the  Severn,  and  at  length  came  up  •-  'J 
with  Caractacus,  who  had  taken  possession  of  a  very  advanta- 
geous post  upon  an  inaccessible  mountain,  washed  by  a  deep  and 
rapid  stream.  The  unfortunate  British  general,  when  he  saw 
the  enemy  approaching,  drew  up  his  army,  composed  of  different 
tribes,  and,  going  from  rank  to  rank,  exhorted  them  to  strike  the 
last  blow  for  liberty,  safety,  and  life.  To  these  exhortations  his 
soldiers  replied  with  shouts  of  determined  valour.  But  what 
could  undisciplined  bravery  avail  against  the  attack  of  an  army 
skilled  in  all  the  arts  of  war,  and  inspired  by  a  long  train  of  con- 
quests ?  The  Britons  were,  after  an  obstinate  resistance,  totally 
routed  ;  and  a  few  days  after  Caractacus  himself  was  delivered 
up  to  the  conquerors  by  Cartismandua,  queen  of  the  Brigantes, 
with  whom  he  had  taken  refuge.  The  capture  of  this  general 
was  received  with  such  joy  at  Rome,  that  Claudius  commanded 
that  he  should  be  brought  from  Britain,  in  order  to  be  exhibited 
as  a  spectacle  to  the  Roman  people.  Accordingly,  on  the  day 
appointed  for  that  purpose,  the  emperor,  ascending  his  throne, 
ordered  the  captives,  and  Caractacus  among  the  number,  to  be 
brought  into  his  presence.  The  vassals  of  the  British  king,  with 
the  spoils  taken  in  war,  were  first  brought  forward ;  these  were 
followed  by  liis  family,  who,  with  abject  lamentations,  were  seen 
to  implore  for  mercy.  Last  of  all  came  Caractacus,  with  an  un- 
daunted air  and  a  dignified  aspect.  He  appeared  no  way  deject- 
ed at  the  amazing  concourse  of  spectators  that  were  gathered 
upon  this  occasion,  but,  casting  his  eyes  on  the  splendours  that 
surrounded  him,  "Alas  !"  cried  he,  "  how  is  it  possible  that  a 
people  possessed  of  such  magnificence  at  home,  could  envy  me 
an  humble  cottage  in  Britain  ?"  When  brought  into  the  empe- 
ror's presence,  he  is  said  to  have  addressed  him  in  the  following 
manner :  "  Had  my  moderation  been  equal  to  my  birth  and  for- 


16  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

tune,  I  had  arrived  in  this  city  not  as  a  captive  but  as  a  friends 
But  my  present  misfortunes  redound  as  much  to  your  honour  as 
to  my  disgiace  ;  and  the  obstinacy  of  my  opposition  serves  to  in- 
crease the  splendours  of  your  victory.  Had  I  surrendered  my- 
self in  the  beginning  of  the  contest,  neither  my  disgrace  nor 
your  glory  would  have  attracted  the  attention  of  the  world,  and 
my  fate  would  have  been  buried  in  general  oblivion.  I  am  now 
at  your  mercy ;  but  if  my  life  be  spared,  I  shall  remain  an  eter- 
nal monument  of  your  clemency  and  moderation."  The  emperor 
was  affected  with  the  British  hero's  misfortunes,  and  won  by  his 
address.  He  ordered  him  to  be  unchained  upon  the  spot,  with 
the  rest  of  the  captives  ;  and  the  first  use  they  made  of  their  lib- 
erty was  to  go  and  prostrate  themselves  before  the  empress 
Agrippina,  who,  as  some  suppose,  had  been  an  intercessor  for 
their  freedom. 

Notwithstanding  these  misfortunes,  the  Britons  were  not  sub- 
dued, and  this  island  was  regarded  by  the  ambitious  Romans  as 
a  field  in  which  military  honour  might  still  be  acquired.  The 
Britons  made  one  expiring  effort  more  to  recover  their  liberty  in 
the  time  of  Nero,  taking  advantage  of  the  absence  of  Paulinus 
the  Roman  general,  who  was  employed  in  subduing  the 
•-  '^  Isle  of  Anglesey.  That  small  island,  which  was  separated 
from  Britain  by  a  narrow  channel,  still  continued  the  chief  seat 
of  the  Druidical  superstitions,  and  constantly  afforded  a  retreat 
to  their  defeated  forces.  It  was  thought  necessary  therefore  to 
subdue  that  place,  in  order  to  extirpate  a  religion  that  disdained 
submission  to  foreign  laws  or  leaders ;  and  Paulinus,  the  greatest 
general  of  his  age,  undertook  the  task.  The  Britons  endeavour- 
ed to  obsti'uct  his  landing  on  that  last  retreat  of  their  supersti- 
tions and  liberties,  both  by  the  force  of  their  arms  and  the  ter- 
rors of  their  religion.  The  priests  and  islanders  were  drawn  up 
in  order  of  battle,  upon  the  shore,  to  oppose  his  landing.  The 
women,  dressed  like  furies,  with  dishevelled  hair,  and  torches  in 
their  hands,  poured  forth  the  most  terrible  execrations.  Such  a 
sight  at  first  confounded  the  Romans,  and  fixed  them  motionless 
on  the  spot ;  so  that  they  received  the  first  assault  without  oppo- 
sition. But  Paulinus,  exhorting  his  troops  to  despise  the  mena- 
ces of  an  absurd  superstition,  impelled  them  to  the  attack,  drove 
the  Britons  pff  th^  field,  burned  the  Druids  in  the  same  fires  they 


BRITONS  AND  ROMANS.  if 

had  prepared  for  their  captive  enemies,  and  destroyed  all  their 
consecrated  groves  and  altars. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Britons,  taking  advantage  of  his  absence  j 
resolved  by  a  general  insurrection  to  free  themselves  from  that 
state  of  abject  servitude  to  which  they  were  reduced  by  the  Ro- 
mans. They  had  many  motives  to  aggiavate  their  resentment ; 
the  greatness  of  their  taxes,  w^hich  were  levied  with  unremitting 
severity  ;  the  cruel  insolence  of  their  conquerors,  who  reproach'^ 
ed  that  very  poverty  which  they  had  caused ;  but  particularly 
the  cruel  treatment  of  Boadicea,  queen  of  the  Iceni,  drove  them 
at  Irst  into  open  rebellion.  Prasatagus,  king  of  the;  Iceni,  at  his 
death,  had  bequeathed  one  half  of  his  dominions  to  the  Romans, 
and  the  other  to  his  daughter^ ;  thus  hoping^  by  the  sacrifice  of  a 
part,  to  secure  the  rest  in  his  family :  but  it  had  a  different  ef- 
fect ;  for  the  Roman  procurator  immediately  took  possession  of 
the  whole  ;  and  when  Boadicea,  the  widow  of  the  deceased,  at- 
tempted to  remonstrate,  he  ordered  her  to  be  scourged  like  a 
slave,  and  violated  the  chastity  of  her  daughters.  These  outrage 
es  were  sufficient  to  produce  a  revolt  through  the  whole  island. 
The  Iceni,  being  the  most  deeply  interested  in  the  quarrel,  were 
the  first  to  take  arms ;  all  the  other  states  soon  followed  the 
example  :  and  Boadicea,  a  woman  of  great  beauty  and  masculine 
spirit,  was  appointed  to  head  the  common  forces,  which  amount- 
ed to  two  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  fighting  men.  These,  ex- 
asperated by  their  wrongs,  attacked  several  of  the  Roman  settle- 
ments and  colonies  with  success.  Paulinus  hastened  to  relieve 
London,  which  was  already  a  flourishing  colony ;  but  found  on 
his  arrival  that  it  would  be  requisite  for  the  general  safety  to  a- 
bandon  that  place  to  the  merciless  fury  of  the  enemy.  London 
was  therefore  soon  reduced  to  ashes  5  such  of  the  inhabitants  as 
remained  in  it  w^ere  massacred ;  and  the  Romans,  with  all  other 
strangers,  to  the  number  of  seventy  thousand,  were  cruelly  put 
to  the  sword.  Flushed  with  these  successes,  the  Britons  no  long-* 
er  sought  to  avoid  the  enemy,  but  boldly  came  to  the  place  where 
Paulinus  awaited  their  arrival,  posted  in  a  very  advantageous 
manner  with  a  body  of  ten  thousand  men.  The  battle  was  obsti- 
nate and  bloody.  Boadicea  herself  appeared  in  a  chariot  with  her 
two  daughters,  and  harangued  her  army  with  masculine  firmness  5 
but  the  irregular  and  undisciplined  bravery  of  her  troops  was  un- 

VOL.  r.  3 


18  HISTOKY  OF  ENGLAND. 

able  to  resist  the  cool  intrepidity  of  the  Romans.  They  were 
routed  with  great  slaughter;  eighty  thousand  perished  in  the 
field,  and  an  infinite  number  were  made  prisoners ;  while  Boadi- 
cea  herself,  fearing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enraged  victor, 
put  an  end  to  her  life  by  poison.  Nero  soon  after  recalled  Pau- 
linus  from  a  government,  where,  by  suffering  and  inflicting  so 
many  severities,  he  was  judged  improper  to  compose  the  angry 
and  alarmed  minds  of  the  natives.  After  an  interval,  Cerealis 
received  the  command  from  Vespasian,  and  by  his  bravery  prop- 
agated the  terror  of  the  Roman  arms.  Julius  Frontinus  succeed- 
ed Cerealis  both  in  authority  and  reputation.  The  general  who 
finally  established  the  dominion  of  the  Romans  in  this  island  was 
Julius  Agricola,  who  governed  it  during  the  reigns  of  Vespasian, 
Titus,  and  Domitian,  and  distinguished  himself  as  well  by  lus 
courage  as  humanity. 

Agi'icola,  who  is  considered  as  one  of  the  gi'eatest  characters  in 
history,  formed  a  regular  plan  for  subduing  and  civilizing  the  isl- 
and, and  thus  rendering  the  acquisition  useful  to  the  conquerors. 
As  the  northern  pai't  of  the  country  was  least  tractable,  he  car- 
ried lus  victorious  arms  thither,  and  defeated  the  undisciplined 
enemy  in  every  encounter.  He  pierced  into  the  formerly  inac- 
cessible forests  and  mountains  of  Caledonia ;  he  drove  onward  all 
those  fierce  and  untractable  spirits  who  preferred  famine  to  slave- 
ry, and  who,  rather  than  submit,  chose  to  remain  in  perpetual  hos- 
tility. Nor  was  it  without  opposition  that  he  thus  made  his  way 
into  a  country  rude  and  impervious  by  nature.  He  was  opposed 
by  Galgacus  at  the  head  of  a  numerous  army,  whom  he  defeated 
in  a  decisive  action,  in  which  considerable  numbers  were  slain. 
Being  thus  successful,  he  did  not  think  proper  to  pursue  the  en- 
emy into  their  retreats  ;  but,  embarking  a  body  of  troops  on 
board  his  fleet,  he  ordered  the  commander  to  surround  tlie  whole 
c(*»st  of  Britain,  which  had  not  been  discovered  to  be  an  island 
till  the  preceding  year.  This  armament,  pursuant  to  his  orders, 
steered  to  the  northward,  and  there  subdued  the  Orkneys ;  then 
making  the  tour  of  the  whole  island,  it  arrived  in  the  port  of 
Sandwich,  without  having  met  with  the  least  disaster. 

During  these  military  enterprises,  Agricola  was  ever  attentive 
to  the  arts  of  peace.  He  attempted  to  humanize  the  fierceness 
of  those  who  acknoAvIedged  his  power,  by  introducing  the  Roman 


BRITONS  AND  ROMANS,  19 

laws,  habits,  manners,  and  learning.  He  taught  them  to  desire 
and  raise  all  the  conveniences  of  life,  instructed  them  in  the  arts 
of  agriculture,  and,  in  order  to  protect  them  in  their  peaceable 
possessions,  he  drew  a  rampart,  and  fixed  a  train  of  garrisons  be- 
tween them  and  their  northern  neighbours  ;  thus  cutting  oflf  the 
ruder  and  more  barren  parts  of  the  island,  and  securing  the  Ro- 
man province  from  the  invasion  of  a  fierce  and  necessitous  ene- 
my. In  this  manner  the  Britons,  being  almost  totally  subdued, 
now  began  to  throw  oflf  all  hopes  of  recovering  their  former  lib- 
erty ;  and,  having  often  experienced  the  superiority  of  the  Rod- 
mans, consented  to  submit,  and  were  content  with  safety.  From 
that  time  the  Romans,  seemed  more  desirous  of  securing 
what  they  possessed  than  of  making  new  conquests ;  and  L  '-" 
were  employed  rather  in  repressing  than  punishing  their  restless 
northern  invaders. 

For  several  years  after  the  time  of  Agricola,  a  profound  peace 
seems  to  have  prevailed  in  Britain ;  and  little  mention  is  made 
of  the  affairs  of  the  island  by  any  historian.  The  only  incidents 
which  occur,  are  some  seditions  among  the  Roman  legions  quar- 
tered there,  and  some  usurpations  of  the  imperial  dignity  by  the 
Roman  governors.  The  natives  remained  totally  subdued  and 
dispirited :  the  arts  of  luxury  had  been  introduced  among  them, 
and  seemed  to  aflford  a  wretched  compensation  for  their  former 
independence.  All  the  men  who  had  a  passion  for  liberty  were 
long  since  destroyed ;  the  flower  of  their  youth  were  draughted 
out  of  the  island  to  serve  in  foreign  wars ;  and  those  who  remain- 
ed were  bred  up  in  servitude  and  submission.  Such,  therefore, 
were  very  unlikely  to  give  any  disturbance  to  their  governors  ; 
and,  in  fact,  instead  of  considering  their  yoke  as  a  burthen,  they 
were  taught  to  regard  it  as  their  ornament  and  protection.  In- 
deed, nothing  was  likely  to  shake  the  power  of  Rome  in  the  isl- 
and, but  the  dissensions  and  distresses  of  the  Romans  themselves  ; 
and  that  dreadful  period  at  last  arrived. 

Rome,  that  had  for  many  ages  given  laws  to  nations,  and  dif- 
fused slavery  and  oppression  over  the  known  world,  at  length 
began  to  sink  under  her  own  magnificence.  Mankind,  as  if  by  a 
general  consent,  rose  up  to  vindicate  their  natural  freedom ;  al- 
most every  nation  asserting  that  independence  which  they  had 
been  long  so  unjustly  deprived  of.    It  was  in  these  turbulent 


$0  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

times  that  the  emperors  found  themselves  obliged  to  recruit  their 
legions  from  the  troops  that  were  placed  to  defend  the  frontier 
provinces.  "When  the  heart  of  the  empire  was  contended  for,  it 
was  not  much  considered  in  what  manner  the  extremities  were 
to  be  defended.  In  this  manner  the  more  distant  parts  of  the 
empire  M'ere  frequently  left  without  a  guard ;  and  the  weakness 
of  the  government  there  frequently  excited  fresh  insurrections 
among  the  natives.  These,  with  a  thousand  other  calamities, 
daily  grew  greater ;  and,  as  the  enemies  of  the  Roman  people  in- 
creased, their  own  dissensions  among  each  other  seemed  to  in- 
crease in  the  same  proportion. 

During  these  struggles  the  British  youth  were  frequently  drawn 
away  into  Gaul,  to  give  ineftectual  succour  to  the  various  contend- 
ers for  the  empire,  who,  failing  in  every  attempt,  only  left  the 
name  of  tyrants  behind  them.  In  the  mean  time,  as  the  Roman 
forces  decreased  in  Britain,  the  Picts  and  Scots  continued  still 
more  boldly  to  infest  the  northern  parts ;  and  crossing  the  friths, 
which  the  Romans  could  not  guard,  in  little  wicker-boats  covered 
with  leather,  filled  the  country,  wherever  they  came,  with  slaugh- 
ter and  consternation.  When  repulsed  by  superior  numbers,  as 
was  at  first  always  the  case,  they  retired  with  the  spoil,  and  watch- 
ed for  the  next  opportunity  of  invasion,  when  the  Romans  were 
di'awn  into  the  remoter  parts  of  the  island. 

These  enterprises  were  often  repeated,  and  as  often  repressed, 
but  still  with  diminishing  vigour  on  the  side  of  the  defendants. 
The  southern  natives  being  accustomed  to  have  recourse  to  Rome, 
as  well  for  protection  as  for  laws,  made  supplications  to  the  em- 
perors, and  had  one  legion  sent  over  for  their  defence.  This  re- 
lief was,  in  the  beginning,  attended  with  the  desired  effect ;  the 
barbarous  invaders  were  repulsed  and  driven  back  to  their  native 
deserts  and  mountains.  They  returned,  however,  when  the  Ro- 
man forces  were  withdrawn ;  and  although  they  were  again  re- 
pulsed by  the  assistance  of  a  legion  once  more  sent  from  Rome, 
yet  they  too  well  perceived  thp  weakness  of  the  enemy,  and  their 
own  superior  force. 

At  length,  in  the  reign  of  Valentinian  the  Younger,  the  empire 
of  Rome  began  to  tremble  for  its  capital  ;  and,  being  fatigued 
with  distant  expeditions,  informed  the  wretched  Britons,  whom 
their  own  arts  had  enfeebled,  that  they  were  now  no  longer  to 


BRITONS  AND  ROMANS.  21 

expect  foreign  protection.  They  accordingly  drew  away  from 
the  island  all  the  Romans,  and  many  of  the  Britons  who  were  fit 
for  military  services.  Thus,  taking  their  last  leave  of  the  island, 
they  left  the  natives  to  the  choice  of  their  own  government  and 
kings.  They  gave  them  the  best  instructions  the  calamitous 
times  would  permit,  for  exercising  their  arms,  and  repairing  their 
ramparts.  They  helped  the  natives  to  erect  anew  a  wall  of  stone 
built  by  the  emperor  Severus  across  the  island,  which  they  had 
not  at  that  time  artisans  skilful  enough  among  themselves  to  re- 
pair. Having  thus  prepared  for  their  departure  in  a  friendly 
manner,  the  Romans  left  the  island,  never  more  to  return,  after 
having  been  masters  of  it  during  the  course  of  near  four  centuries. 
It  may  be  doubted  whether  the  arts  which  the  Romans  planted 
£&nong  the  islanders  were  not  rather  prejudicial  than  serviceable 
to  them,  as  they  only  contributed  to  invite  the  invader,  without 
furnishing  the  means  of  defence.  If  we  consider  the  many  pub- 
lic ways,  and  villas  of  pleasure  that  were  then  among  them,  the 
many  schools  instituted  for  the  instruction  of  youth,  the  number- 
less coins,  statues,  tessellated  pavements,  and  other  curiosities 
that  were  common  at  that  time,  we  have  no  doubt  but  that  the 
Britons  made  a  very  considerable  progress  in  the  arts  of  peace, 
although  they  declined  in  those  of  war.  But,  perhaps,  an  at- 
tempt at  once  to  introduce  these  advantages  will  ever  be  ineffect- 
ual. The  arts  of  peace  and  refinement  must  rise  by  slow  de- 
grees in  every  country  ;  and  can  never  be  propagated  with  the 
same  rapidity  by  which  new  governments  may  be  introduced.  It 
will  take,  perhaps,  a  course  of  some  centuries  before  a  barbarous 
people  can  entirely  adopt  the  manners  of  their  conquerors  ;  so 
that  all  the  pains  bestowed  by  the  Romans  in  educating  the  Bri- 
tons, only  served  to  render  them  a  more  desirable  object  of  inva- 
sion, and  dressed  them  up  as  victims  for  succeeding  slaughter. 


22  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

CHAP.  III. 
THE  SBITOKS  AND  SAXOHTS. 

1  HE  Britons  being  now  left  to  themselves,  considered  their  new 
liberties  as  their  greatest  calamity.  They  had  been  long  taught 
to  lean  upon  others  for  support ;  and  that  now  taken  away,  they 
found  themselves  too  feeble  to  make  any  opposition.  Far  from 
practising  the  lessons  they  had  received  from  the  Romans,  they 
aggravated  their  misfortunes  with  unavailing  complaints,  which 
only  served  to  render  them  still  more  contemptible.  Unaccustom- 
ed both  to  the  perils  of  war  and  to  the  cares  of  civil  government, 
they  found  themselves  incapable  of  forming  or  executing  any 
measures  for  resisting  the  incursions  of  their  barbarous  invaders. 
Though  the  Roman  soldiers  were  drawn  away,  their  families  and 
descendants  were  still  spread  over  the  face  of  the  country,  and 
left  without  a  single  person  of  conduct  or  courage  to  defend  them. 
To  complete  the  measure  of  their  wretchedness,  the  few  men  of 
any  note  who  remained  among  them  were  infected  with  the  am- 
bition of  being  foremost  in  command ;  and,  disregarding  the  com- 
mon enemy,  were  engaged  in  dissensions  among  each  other. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Picts  and  Scots,  uniting  together,  began 
to  look  upon  Britain  as  their  own,  and  attacked  the  northern 
wall  with  redoubled  forces.  This  rampart,  though  formerly  built 
of  stone,  had  been  some  time  before  repaii-ed  with  sods  ;  andp 
consequently,  Avas  but  ill  fitted  to  repress  the  attacks  of  a  perse- 
vering enemy.  The  assailants,  therefore,  were  not  at  the  trouble 
of  procuring  military  engines  or  battering  rams  to  overthrow  it, 
but  with  iron  hooks  pulled  down  the  inactive  defenders  from  the 
top,  and  then  undermined  the  fortification  at  their  leisure.  Hav- 
ing thus  opened  to  themselves  a  passage,  they  ravaged  the  whole 
country  with  impunity,  while  the  Bi'itons  sought  precai'ious  shel- 
ter in  their  woods  and  mountains. 

In  this  exigence  the  unhappy  Britons  had  a  third  time  recourse 
to  Rome,  hoping  to  extort  by  importunity  that  assistance  which 
was  denied  upon  prudential  motives.  Aetius,  the  renowned  gen- 
eral of  Valentinian,  had,  about  that  time,  gained  considerable  ad-* 


BRITONS  AND  SAXONS.  23 

vantages  over  the  Goths,  and  seemed  to  give  fresh  hopes  of  re- 
storing the  Ronaan  empire.  It  was  to  him  they  applied  for  suc- 
cor, in  a  strain  of  the  most  abject  solicitation.  "  The  Barbari- 
ans," said  they,  "  on  the  one  hand,  drive  us  into  the  sea ;  the 
sea,  on  the  other,  drives  us  hack  upon  the  Barbarians.  We  have 
only  the  hard  choice  left  us,  of  perishing  by  the  sword,  or  being 
drowned  in  the  deep."  Such,  however,  were  the  calamities  of 
the  Romans  themselves,  surrounded  as  they  were  by  myriads. of 
savage  nations,  that  they  could  yield  no  assistance  to  such  re- 
mote and  unserviceable  allies. 

The  Britons,  thus  neglected,   were  reduced  to  de-  r44,s  1 

spair ;  while,  having  left  their  fields  uncultivated, 
they  began  to  find  the  miseries  of  famine  added  to  the  horrors  of 
war.  It  happened,  however,  that  the  Barbarians  themselves  be- 
gan to  feel  the  same  inconveniences  in  a  country  which  they  had 
ravaged  j  and  being  harassed  by  the  irruptions  of  the  Britons,  as 
well  as  the  want  of  necessaries,  they  were  obliged  to  retreat  from 
the  southern  parts  of  the  kingdom  laden  with  spoil. 

The  enemy  having  thus  left  the  country  open,  the  Britons  joy- 
fully issued  ifrom  their  mountains  and  forests,  and  pursued  once 
more  their  usual  arts  of  husbandry,  which  were  attended  with 
such  abundance  the  succeeding  season,  that  they  soon  forgot  all 
their  past  miseries.  But  it  had  been  happy  for  them  if  plenty 
had  not  removed  one  evil  to  plant  another.  They  began,  from  a 
state  of  famine,  to  indulge  themselves  in  such  riot  and  luxury, 
that  their  bodies  were  totally  enervate,d,  and  their  minds  de- 
bauched. 

Thus,  entirely  occupied  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  present  inter- 
val of  peace,  they  made  no  provision  for  resisting  the  enemy, 
who  were  only  taking  breath  to  r^new  their  former  invasions. 
Christianity,  indeed,  had  been  introduced  among  them  some  time 
before,  though  at  v^^hat  period  is  not  certainly  known  :  however, 
to  the  other  calamities  of  the  state  were  added  also  their  disputes 
in  theology.  The  disciples  of  Pelagius,  wha  was  a  native  of  Bri- 
tain, had  increased  in  a  great  degree ;  and  the  clergy,  who  con- 
sidered his  opinions  as  heretical,  were  more  solicitously  employed 
in  resisting  them  than  in  opposing  the  common  enemy.  Besides 
all  these  calamities,  a  terrible  pestilence  visited  the  southern  parts 


24  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

of  the  island,  which  thinned  its  inhabitants,  and  totally  deprived 
them  of  all  power  of  resistance. 

It  was  in  this  deplorable  and  enfeebled  stat;e  that  the  Britons 
were  informed  of  fresh  preparations  for  an  invasion  from  their 
merciless  northern  neighbours.  To  oppose  their  progress,  they 
pitched  upon  Vortigern  as  their  general  and  sovereign, — a  prince 
who  is  said  to  have  raised  himself  to  the  supreme  command  by 
the  murder  of  his  predecessor.  This  step  was  only  productive 
of  fresh  calamities.  Vortigern,  instead  of  exerting  what  strength 
yet  remained  in  the  kingdom,  only  set  himself  to  look  about  for 
foreign  assistance  ;  and  the  Saxons  appeared  to  him  at  once  the 
most  martial,  and  the  most  likely  to  espouse  his  interests. 

The  Saxons  v/ere  one  branch  of  those  Gothic  nations,  whichj 
swarming  from  the  northern  hive,  came  down  to  give  laws,  man- 
ners, and  liberty  to  the  rest  of  Europe.  A  part  of  this  people, 
under  the  name  of  Suvi,  had,  some  time  before  Csesar's  invasion 
of  Gaul,  subdued  and  possessed  an  extensive  empire  in  Germany. 
These,  for  their  strength  and  valour,  were  formidable  to  all  the 
German  nations.  They  were  afterwards  divided  into  several 
nations,  and  each  became  famous  for  subduing  that  country 
which  was  the  object  of  its  invasion.  France,  Germany,  and 
England  were  among  the  number  of  their  conquests. 

There  is  a  period  between  savage  rudeness  and  excessive  re- 
finement, which  seems  peculiarly  adapted  for  the  purpose  of  war, 
and  which  fits  mankind  for  great  achievements.  In  this  state  of 
half  refinement,  when  compared  to  the  Britons,  were  the  Saxons 
at  the  time  their  assistance  was  thought  necessary.  They  dressed 
with  some  degree  of  elegance,  which  the  generality  of  the  Bri- 
tons, even  though  so  long  under  the  institutions  of  the  Romans, 
had  not  yet  learned  to  practise.  Their  women  used  linen  gar- 
ments trimmed  and  striped  with  purple.  Their  hair  was  bound 
in  wreaths,  or  fell  in  curls  upon  their  shoulders ;  their  arms  were 
bare,  and  their  bosoms  uncovered  ;•— fashions  which,  in  some 
measure,  seem  peculiar  to  the  ladies  of  England  to  this  day. 
Their  government  was  generally  an  elective  monarchy,  and  some- 
times a  republic.  Their  commanders  were  chosen  for  their  mer* 
it,  and  dismissed  from  duty  when  their  authority  was  no  longer 
needful.  The  salaries  they  were  supplied  with  seldom  exceeded 
a  bare  subsistence ;  and  the  honours  they  regeived  were  the  only 


BRITONS  A.ND  SAXONS.  25 

reward  of  their  superior  dangers  and  fatigues.  The  custom  of 
trying  by  twelve  men  is  of  Saxon  original :  slavery  was  unknown 
among  them,  and  they  were  taught  to  prefer  death  to  a  shameful 
existence.  We  are  told  by  Marcellinus,  that  a  body  of  them 
being  taken  prisoners,  were  kept  for  exhibition  on  the  ampliithe- 
atre  at  Rome,  as  gladiators,  for  the  entertainment  of  the  people 
The  morning,  however,  on  which  they  were  expected  to  perform? 
they  were  every  one  found  dead  in  his  cell,  each  choosing  rather 
a  voluntary  death  than  to  be  the  ignominious  instruments  of  bru- 
tal {Measure  to  their  conquerorSo  The  chastity  of  this  people  is 
equally  remarkable  ;  and  to  be  without  children  was  to  be  with- 
out praise.  But  their  chief  excellence,  and  what  they  most  glo- 
ried in,  was  their  skill  in  war.  They  had,  in  some  measure^ 
learned  discipline  from  the  Romans,  whom  they  had  often  de- 
feated ;  and  had,  for  a  century  and  a  half  before,  made  frequent 
(descents  upon  the  coasts  of  Britain  for  the  sake  of  plunder. 
They  w«re,  therefore,  a  very  formidable  enemy  to  the  Romans 
when  settled  there ;  and  an  officer  was  appointed  to  oppose  their  in- 
roads, under  the  title  of  the  "  Count  of  the  Saxon  shore."  Thus,  ev- 
er restless  and  bold,  they  considered  war  as  their  trade,  and  were, 
in  consequence,  taught  to  consider  victory  as  a  doubtful  advan- 
tage, but  courage  as  a  certain  good,  A  nation,how ever,  entirely  ad^ 
dieted  to  war  has  seldom  wanted  the  imputation  of  cruelty,  as  those 
terrors  which  are  opposed  without  fear  are  9ften  inflicted  Avithout 
regret.  The  Saxons  are  represented  as  a  very  cruel  nation ;  but 
we  must  remember  that  their  enemies  have  drawn  the  picture. 

It  was  upon  this  people  tliat  Vortigern  turned  his  eyes  for  suc- 
cour against  the  Picts  and  Scots,  whose  cruelties,  perhaps,  were 
still  more  flagrant.  It  certainly  was  not  \yithout  thp  most  press- 
ing invitations  that  the  Saxons  deigi^ed  to  espouse  their  cause ; 
and  we  are  yet  in  possession  of  the  form  of  their  request,  as  left 
us  by  Wittichindijs,  a  cotemporary  his|:orian  of  some  credit* 
.«'^  The  poor  and  distressed  Tritons,  ^Impst  worn  out  by  hostile  in- 
vasions, and  harassed  by  continual  incursions,  are  humble  suppli- 
jants  to  you,  most  valiant  Saxons,  for  succour.  We  are  possessed 
of  a  wide -extended  and  a  fertile  country ;  tliis  we  yield  wholly  to 
be  at  your  devotion  and  command.  Beneath  the  wings  of  your 
valour  we  seek  for  safety,  and  shall  willingly  undergo  what9ver 
services  you  may  hereafter  be  pleased  tq  impose," 

VOL.    I.  4 


26  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

It  was  no  disagreeable  circumstance  to  these  conquerors,  to  ba 
thus  invited  into  a  country  upon  which  they  had,  for  ages  before, 
been  forming  designs.  In  consequence,  therefore,  of  Vortigern's 
solemn  invitation,  they  arrived  with  fifteen  hundred  n>en,  under 
tlie  command  of  Hengist  and  Horsa,  who  were  brothers,  and  land- 
ed on  the  isle  of  Thanet.  There  they  did  not  long  remain  inac- 
tive; but,  being  joined  by  the  British  forces,  they  boldly  marched 
against  the  Picts  and  Scots,  who  had  advanced  as  far  as  Lincoln- 
sliire,  and  soon  gained  a  complete  victory  over  them. 

Hengist  and  Horsa  possessed  great  credit  among  their  coun  • 
trymen  at  home,  and  had  been  much  celebrated  for  their  valour 
and  the  splendour  of  their  descent.     They  were  believed  to  be 
sprung  from  Woden,  Avho  was  worshipped  as  a  god  among  this 
people,  and  were  said  to  be  no  more  than  the  fourth  in  descent 
from  him.     This  report,  how  fabulous  soever,  did  not  a  little  con-r 
tribute  to  increase  their  authority  among  their  associates ;  and 
being  sensible  of  the  fertility  of  the  country  to  which  they  came» 
and  the  barrenness  of  that  which  they  had  left  behind,  they  invitr 
ed  over  great  numbers  of  their  countrymen  to  become  sharers  in 
their  new  expedition.     It  was  no  difficult  matter  to  persuade  the 
Saxons  to  embrace  an  enterprise,  which  promised  at  once  an  op- 
jportunity  of  displaying  their  valour  and  of  rewarding  their  rapa- 
city.    Accordingly  they  sent  over  a  fresh  supply  of  five 
L       'J  thousand  men,  who  passed  over  in  seventeen  vessels. 
It  was  now,  but  too  late,  that  the  Britons  began  to  entertain 
apprehensions  of  their  new  allies,  whose  numbers  they  found  aug- 
menting as  their  services  became  less  necessary.     They  had  long 
found  their  chief  protection  in  passive  submission  ;  and  they  rer 
solved,  upon  this  occasion,  to  bear  every  encioachment  with 
patient  resignation.     But  the  Saxons,  being  determined  to  come 
to  a  rupture  Avith  them,  easily  found  a  pretext,  in  complaining 
that  their  subsidies  were  ill  paid,  and  their  provisions  withdrawn. 
They,  therefore,  demanded  that  these  grievances  should  be  im- 
mediately redressed,  otherwise  they  would  do  themselves  justice  ; 
and  in  the  mean  time  they  engaged  in  a  treaty  with  the  Picts, 
whom  they  had  been  called  in  to  repress.     The  Britons,  impell^ 
cd  by  the  urgency  of  their  calamities,  at  length  took  up  arms  ; 
and  having  deposed  Vortigern,  by  whose  counsel  and  vices  they 
were  thus  reduced  to  an  extremity,  they  put  themselves  under 


ijKITONS  AND  SAXONS.  gf 

ihe  command  of  Vortimer,  his  son.  Many  were  the  battles 
fought  between  these  enraged  nations,  their  hatred  to  each  other 
being  still  more  inflamed  by  the  difference  of  their  religion,  the 
Britons  being  all  Christians,  and  the  Saxons  still  remaining  in  a 
state  of  idolatry.  There  is  little  to  entertain  the  reader  in  the 
narration  of  battles,  where  rather  obstinate  valour  than  prudent 
conduct  procured  the  victory ;  and,  indeed,  the  accounts  given 
us  of  them  are  very  opposite,  when  described  by  British  and  Sax- 
on annalists.  However,  the  progress  the  latter  still  made  in  the 
island  sufficiently  proves  the  advantage  to  have  been  on  their 
side ;  although,  in  a  battle  fought  at  Eglesford,  Horsa,  the  Saxon 
general  was  slain. 

But  a  single  victory,  or  even  a  repetition  of  success,  could 
avail  but  little  against  an  enemy  continually  reinforced  from 
abroad  f  for  Hengist,  now  becoming  sole  commander,  and  procur- 
ing constant  supplies  from  his  native  country,  carried  devasta- 
tion into  the  most  remote  corners  of  Britain.  Chiefly  anxious  to 
spread  the  terror  of  his  arms,  he  spared  neither  sex,  age,  nor 
condition,  but  laid  the  country  desolate  before  liim.  The  priests 
and  bishops  found  no  protection  from  their  sacred  calling,  but 
were  slaughtered  upon  their  altars.  The  people  were  massacred 
in  heaps  ;  and  some,  choosing  life  upon  the  most  abject  terms, 
were  contented  to  become  slaves  to  the  victors.  It  was  about 
this  time  that  numbers  deserted  their  native  country,  and  fled 
over  to  Armorica,  since  called  Brittany,  where  they  settled  in 
great  numbers,  among  a  people  of  the  same  manners  and  lan- 
guage with  themselves. 

The  British  historians,  in  order  to  account  for  the  easy  con- 
quest of  their  country  by  the  Saxons,  assign  their  treachery,  not 
less  than  their  valour,  as  a  principal  cause.  They  allege  that 
Vortigern  was  artfully  inveigled  into  a  passion  for  Rowena,  the 
daughter  of  Hengist ;  and,  in  order  to  marry  her,  was  induced  to 
settle  the  fertile  province  of  Kent  upon  her  father,  from  whence 
the  Saxons  could  never  after  be  removed.  It  is  alleged  also, 
that,  upon  the  death  of  Vortimer,  which  happened  shortly  after 
the  victory  obtained  at  Eglesford,  Vortigern  his  father  was  rein- 
stated upon  the  throne.  It  is  added  that  this  weak  monarch 
accepting  of  a  festival  from  Hengist,  three  hundred  of  his  nobil- 
ity were  treacherously  slaughtered,  and  himself  detained  as  a 
captive. 


08  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

Be  these  facts  as  they  mayy  it  is  certain  that  the  affairs  of  the 
Britons  gradually  declined  |  and  they  found  but  a  temporary  re-' 
lief  in  the  valour  of  one  or  two  of  their  succeeding  kings.  Alter 
the  death  of  Vortimer,  Ambrosius,  a  Briton  though  of  Roman 
descent,  was  invested  with  the  command,  and  in  some  measure 
proved  successful  in  uniting  his  countrymen  against  the  Saxons. 
He  penetrated  with  liis  army  into  the  heart  of  their  possessions  y 
and  though  he  fought  them  with  doubtful  advantage,  yet  he  re- 
stored the  British  interest  and  dominion.  Still,  however,  Hen- 
gist  kept  his  ground  in  the  country ;  and  inviting  over  a  new 
tribe  of  Saxons,  under  the  command  of  his  brother  Octa,  he 
settled  them  in  Northumberland.  As  for  himself,  he  kept  pos- 
session of  the  kingdom  of  Kent,  comprehending  also  Middlesex 
and  Essex,  fixing  his  royal  seat  at  Canterbury,  and  leaving  his 
new-acquired  dominions  to  Ms  posterity. 

r- -go  -]      After  the   death  of    Hengist,    several  other   German 
tribes,  allured  by  the  success  of  their  countrymen,  came 
over  in  great  numbers.     A  body  of  their  countrymen,  under  the 
r-A-rf  -1  command  of  JEAla.  and  his  three  sons,  had  some  time  be- 
fore laid  the  foundation  of  the  kingdom  of  the  South  Sax- 
ons, though  not  without  great  opposition  and  bloodshed.     Tliis 
new  kingdom  included  Surry,  Sussex,  and  the  New  Forest ;  and 
extended  to  the  frontiers  of  Kent. 

Anotiier  tribe  of  Saxons,  under  the  command  of  Cerdic  and 
his  son  Kenric,  landed  in  the  West,  and  from  thence  took  the 
name  of  West  Saxons.  These  met  a  very  vigorous  opposition 
from  the  natives :  but  being  reinforced  from  Germany,  and  as- 
sisted by  their  countrymen  on  the  island,  they  routed  the  Bri- 
tons ;  and  although  retarded  in  their  progress  by  the  celebrated 
king  Arthur,  they  had  strength  enough  to  keep  possession  of  the 
conquests  they  had  already  made.  Cerdic,  therefore,  with  his 
son  Kenric,  established  the  third  Saxon  kingdom  in  the  island, 
namely,  that  of  the  West  Saxons,  including  the  counties  of  Hants, 
Dorset,  Wilts,  Berks,  and  the  Isle  of  Wight. 

It  was  in  opposing  this  Saxon  invader  that  the  celebrated 
prince  Arthur  acquired  his  fame.  Howsoever  unsuccessful  all 
liis  valour  might  have  been  in  the  end,  yet  his  name  makes  so 
great  a  figure  in  the  fabulous  annals  of  the  times,  that  some 
notice  must  be  taken  of  him.    This  prince  is  of  such  obscure 


BRITONS  AND  SAXONS.  £9 

Original,  that  some  authors  suppose  him  to  be  the  son  of  king 
Ambrosius,  and  others  only  his  nephew ;  others  again  aifirm  that 
he  was  a  Cornish  prince,  and  son  of  Gurlois,  king  of  that  prov- 
ince. However  this  be,  it  is  certain  he  was  a  commander  of 
great  valour ;  and  could  courage  alone  repair  the  miserable  state 
of  the  Britons,  his  might  have  been  effectual.  According  to 
Nennius,  and  the  most  authentic  historians,  he  is  said  to  have 
worsted  the  Saxons  in  twelve  successive  battles.  In  one  of  these, 
namely,  that  fought  at  Caerbaden,  in  Berks,  it  is  asserted  that 
he  killed  no  less  than  four  hundred  and  forty  of  the  enemy  with 
his  own  hand.  But  the  Saxons  were  too  numerous  and  powerful 
to  be  extirpated  by  the  desultory  efforts  of  single  valour  ;  so  that 
a  peace,  and  not  conquest,  were  the  immediate  fruits  of  his  vic- 
tories. The  enemy,  therefore,  still  gained  ground  5  and  this 
prince,  in  the  decline  of  life,  had  the  mortification,  from  some 
domestic  troubles  of  his  own,  to  be  a  patient  spectator  of  their 
encroachments.  His  first  wife  had  been  carried  off  by  Melnas, 
king  of  Somersetshire,  who  detained  her  a  whole  year  at  Glaston- 
bury, until  Arthur,  discovering  the  place  of  her  retreat,  advanced 
with  an  army  against  the  ravisher,  and  obliged  him  to  give  her 
back,  by  the  mediation  of  Gildas  Albanius.  In  his  second  wife, 
perhaps,  he  might  have  been  more  fortunate,  as  we  have  no 
mention  made  of  her ;  but  it  was  otherwise  with  his  third  con- 
sort, who  was  debauched  by  his  own  nephew  Mordred.  This 
produced  a  rebellion,  in  which  the  king  and  his  traitorous  kins  - 
man  meeting  in  battle,  they  slew  each  other. 

In  the  mean  time,  while  the  Saxons  were  thus-  gaining  ground 
in  the  West,  their  countrymen  were  not  less  active  in  othej? 
parts  of  the  island.  Adventurers  still  continuing  to  pour  r--^,^  -, 
over  from  Germany,  one  body  of  them,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Uffa,  seized  upon  the  counties  of  Cambridge,  Suffolk, 
and  Norfolk,  and  gave  their  commander  the  title  of  king  of  the 
East  Angles,  which  was  the  fourth  Saxon  kingdom  founded  in 
Britain. 

Another  body  of  these  adventurers  fonned  a  kingdom  under 
the  title  of  East  Saxony,   or  Essex,  comprehending   p^.^-  -j 
Essex,  Middlesex,  and  part   of    Hertfordshire.     This    ^      '-^ 
kingdom,  which  was  dismembered  from  that  of  Kent,  formed 
the  fifth,  Segion  principality  founded  in  Britain. 


30  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

The  kingdom  of  Mercia  was  the  sixth  which  was  established 
by  these  fierce  invaders,  comprehending  all  the  middle  counties, 
from  the  banks  of  the  Severn  to  the  frontiers  of  the  two  last- 
named  kingdoms. 
/  The  seventh  and  last  kingdom  which  they  obtained  was  tliat 
of  Northumberland,  one  of  the  most  powerful  and  extensive  of 
them  all.  This  was  formed  from  the  union  of  two  smaller  Saxon 
kingdoms,  the  one  called  Bernicia,  containing  the  present  county 
of  Northumberland  and  tlie  bishopric  of  Durham ;  the  subjects  of 
the  other,  called  the  Deiri,  extending  themselves  over  Lanca* 
shire  and  Yorkshire.  These  kingdoms  were  united  in  the  person 
of  Ethelfrid,  king  of  Northumberland,  by  the  expulsion  of  Ed- 
win, his  brother-in-law,  from  the  kingdom  of  the  Deiri,  and  the 
seizure  of  his  dominions. 

~  In  this  manner,  the  natives  being  overpowered,  or  entirely 
expelled,  seven  kingdoms  were  established  in  Britain,  which 
have  been  since  well  known  by  the  name  of  the  Saxon  Heptar- 
chy.— The  unfortunate  Britons  having  been  exhausted  by  con- 
tinual wars,  and  even  worn  out  by  their  own  victories,  were 
reluctantly  compelled  to  forsake  the  more  fertile  parts  of  the 
country,  and  to  take  refuge  in  the  mountainous  parts  of  Wales 
and  Cornwall.  All  the  vestiges  of  Roman  luxury  were  now 
almost  totally  destroyed  by  the  conquerors,  who  rather  aimed 
at  enjoying  the  comforts  of  life  than  its  magnificence.  The  few 
natives  who  were  not  either  massacred  or  expelled  their  habita- 
tions, were  reduced  to  the  most  abject  slavery,  and  employed  in 
cultivating  those  grounds  for  their  new  masters,  which  they  once 
claimed  as  their  own. 

From  this  time  British  and  Roman  customs  entirely  ceased  in 
the  island  ;  the  language,  which  had  been  either  Latin  or  Celtic, 
was  discontinued,  and  the  Saxon  or  English  only  was  spoken. 
The  land,  before  divided  into  colonies  or  governments,  was  can- 
toned into  shires,  with  Saxon  appellations  to  distinguish  them. 
The  habits  of  the  people  in  peace,  and  arms  in  war,  their  titles  of 
honour,  their  laM^s,  and  methods  of  trial  by  jury,  were  continued 
as  originally  practised  by  the  Germans,  only  with  such  alterations 
as  increasing  civilization  produced.  Conquerors,  although  they  dis- 
seminate their  own  laws  and  manners,  often  borrow  from  the  people 
they  subdue.   In  the  present  instance  they  imitatedthe  Britons  in 


SAXON  HEPTARCHY.  31 

their  government,  by  despotic  and  hereditary  monarchies,  while 
their  exemplary  chastity,  and  their  abhorence  of  slavery,  were 
quite  forgotten. 

The  Saxons  being  thus  established  in  all  the  desirable  parts  of 
the  island,  and  having  no  longer  the  Britons  to  contend  with,  be- 
gan to  quarrel  among  themselves.  A  country  divided  into  a  num- 
ber of  petty  independent  principalities  must  ever  be  subject  to 
contention,  as  jealousy  and  ambition  have  more  frequent  incen- 
tives to  operate.  The  wars  and  revolutions  of  these  little  rival 
states  were  extremely  numerous,  and  the  accounts  of  them  have 
swelled  the  historian's  page.  But  these  accounts  are  so  confus- 
edly written,  the  materials  so  dry,  uninteresting,  and  filled  with 
such  improbable  adventures,  that  a  repetition  of  them  can  gratify 
neither  the  reader's  judgment  nor  curiosity.  Instead,  therefore, 
of  entering  into  a  detail  of  tumultuous  battles,  petty  treacheries, 
and  obscure  successions,  it  will  be  more  conformable  to  the  pres- 
ent plan  to  give  some  account  of  the  introduction  of  Christianity 
among  the  Saxons,  which  happened  during  this  dreary  period. 

The  Christian  religion  never  suffered  more  persecution  than 
it  underwent  in  Britain  from  the  barbarity  of  tlie  Saxon  pagans, 
who  burned  all  the  churches,  stained  the  altars  with  the  blood  of 
the  clergy  and  massacred  all  those  whom  they  found  profess- 
ing Christianity.  This  deplorable  state  of  religion  in  Britain  was 
first  taken  into  consideration  by  St.  Gregory,  who  was  tlien 
pope ;  and  he  undertook  to  send  missionai-ies  thither.  It  is  said, 
that  before  his  elevation  to  the  papal  chair,  he  chanced  one  day 
to  pass  through  the  slave-market  at  Rome,  and  perceiving  some 
children  of  great  beauty  who  were  set  up  for  sale,  he  inquired 
about  their  country ;  and  finding  they  were  English  pagans,  he 
is  said  to  have  cried  out,  in  the  Latin  language,  J\*on  Jingli  sed 
Jbigdi  forent,  si  essent  Christiani — "  They  would  not  be  English^ 
but  Angels,  had  they  been  Christians."  From  that  time  he  was 
struck  with  an  ardent  desire  to  convert  that  unenlightened  na- 
tion, and  actually  embarked  in  a  ship  for  Britain ;  when  liis 
pious  intentions  were  frustrated  by  his  being  detained  at  Rome 
by  the  populace,  who  loved  him.  He  did  not  however  lay  aside 
his  holy  resolution  ;  for,  having  succeeded  to  the  papal  chair,  he 
ordered  a  monk,  named  Augustine,  and  others  of  the  same  fra- 
ternity, to  undertake  the  mission  into  Britain.    It  vfas  not  with- 


32  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

out  some  reluctance  that  these  reverend  men  undertook  so  dan- 
gerous a  task ;  but  some  favourable  circumstances  in  Britain 
seemed  providentially  to  prepare  the  way  for  their  arrival.  Ethel- 
bert,  king  of  Kent,  in  his  father's  lifetime,  had  married  Bertha, 
the  only  daughter  of  Caribert,  king  of  Paris,  one  of  the  descend- 
ants of  Clovis,  king  of  Gaul.  But  before  he  was  admitted  to  this 
alliance,  he  was  obliged  to  stipulate  tliat  this  princess  should  en- 
joy the  free  exercise  of  her  religion,  which  was  that  of  Christianity. 
She  was  therefore  attended  to  Canterbury,  the  place  of  her  resi- 
dence, by  Luidhard,  a  Gaulish  prelate,  who  officiated  in  a  church 
dedicated  to  St.  Martin,  which  had  been  built  by  the  Romans, 
near  the  walls  of  Canterbury.  The  exemplary  conduct  and  pow- 
erful preaching  of  this  primitive  bishop,  added  to  the  queen's 
learning  and  zeal,  made  very  strong  impressions  upon  the  king, 
as  well  as  the  rest  of  his  subjects,  in  favour  of  Christianity.  The 
general  reception  of  this  holy  religion  all  over  the  continent  might 
also  contribute  to  dispose  the  minds  of  these  idolaters  for  its  ad- 
mission, and  make  the  attempt  less  dangerous  than  Augustine 
and  his  associates  at  first  supposed. 

Tliis  pious  monk,  upon  his  first  landing  in  the  Isle  of  Thanet, 
sent  one  of  his  interpreters  to  the  Kentish  king,  declaring  he  was 
come  from  Rome  with  ofters  of  eternal  salvation.  In  the  mean, 
time  he  and  his  followers  lay  in  the  open  air,  that  they  might  not, 
according  to  the  belief  of  the  times,  by  entering  a  Saxon  house, 
subject  themselves  to  the  power  of  heathen  necromancy.  The 
king  immediately  ordered  them  to  be  furnished  with  all  necessa- 
ries, and  even  visited  them,  though  without  declaiming  himself  as 
yet  in  their  favour.  Augustine,  however,  encouraged  by  this  fa- 
vourable reception,  and  now  seeing  a  prospect  of  success,  pro- 
ceeded with  redoubled  zeal  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  even  en- 
deavoured to  call  in  the  aid  of  miracles  to  enforce  his  exhorta- 
tions. So  much  assiduity,  together  with  the  earnestness  of  his 
address,  the  austerity  of  his  life,  and  the  example  of  his  followers, 
at  last  powerfully  operated.  The  king  openly  espoused  th^ 
Christian  religion,  while  his  example  wrought  so  successfully  on 
his  subjects,  that  numbers  of  them  came  voluntarily  to  be  bap- 
tized, their  missioner  loudly  declaring  against  any  coercive  means 
towards  their  conversion.  The  heathen  temples,  being  purified, 
weie  changed  to  places  of  Christian  worship ;  and  such  churches 


SAXON  HEPTARCHY.  5^, 

as  had  been  suffered  to  decay  were  repaired.    The  more  to  fa- 
cilitate the  reception  of  Christianity,  the  pope  enjoined  his  mis- 
sioner  to  remove  the  pagan  idols,  but  not  to  throw  down  the 
altars,  observing,  that  the  people  would  be  allured  to  frequent 
those  places  which  they  had  formerly  been  accustomed  to  revere. 
He  also  permitted  him  to  indulge  the  people  in  those  feasts  and 
cheerful  entertainments  which  they  had  been  formerly  accustom- 
ed to  celebrate  near  the  places  of  their  idolatrous  worship.    The 
people  thus  exchanged  their  antient  opinions   with  readiness^, 
since  they  found  themselves  indulged  in  those  innocent  relaxa- 
tions, which  are  only  immoral  when  carried  to  an  excess.     Au- 
gustine was  consecrated    archbishop  of  Canterbury,   endowed 
with  authority  over  all  the  British  churches  ;  and  his  associates, 
having  spread  themselves  over  all  the  country,  completed  that 
conversion  which  was  so  happily  begun. 

The  kingdom  of  the  heptarchy  which  next  embraced  the  Christ- 
ian faith  was  that  of  Northumberland,  at  that  time  the  most 
powerful  of  the  rest :  Edwin,  a  wise,  brave,  and  active  prince, 
then  king  of  the  country,  was  mari'ied  to  Ethelburga,  the  daugh- 
ter of  Ethelbert,  who  had  been  so  lately  converted.  This 
princess,  emulating  tlie  glory  of  her  mother,  who  had  been  the 
instrument  of  converting  her  husband  and  liis  subjects  to  Chris- 
tianity, carried  Paulinus,  a  learned  bishop,  with  her  into  North- 
umberland, ha^^lng  previously  stipulated  for  the  free  exercise  of 
li^er  religion.  Edwin,  whom  his  queen  unceasingly  solicited  to 
embrace  Christianity,  for  a  long  time  hesitated  on  the  proposal^ 
willing  to  examine  its  doctrines  before  he  declared  in  their  far 
vour.  Accordingly  he  held  several  conferences  with  Paulinus, 
disputed  with  his  counsellors,  meditated  alone,  and,  after  a  seri- 
ous discussion,  declared  himself  a  Christian.  The  high-priest 
also  of  the  pagan  superstition  soon  after  declaring  himself  a  con- 
vert to  the  arguments  of  Paulinus,  the  whole  body  of  the  people 
unanimously  followed  their  example. 

The  authority  of  Edwin,  who  was  thus  converted,  soon  after 
prevailed  upon  Earpwold,  the  king  of  the  East  Angles,  to  em- 
brace Christianity.  This  monarch,  however,  after  the  death  of 
Edwin,  relapsed  into  his  former  idolatry,  at  the  persuasion  of  Ms 
wife.    But  upon  his  decease,  Sigebert,  his  half-brother,  who  had 

VOL.  I.  5 


S4  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

Ibeen  educated  in  France,  restored  Christianity,  and  introduced 
learning  among  the  Angles. 

Mercia,.  the  most  powerful  kingdom  of  all  the  Saxon  heptarchy, 
owed  its  conversion,  like  the  former,  to  a  woman.  The  wife  of 
Peada,  wlio  was  the  daugliter  of  Oswy,  king  of  Northumberland, 
having  been  bred  in  the  Christian  faith,  employed  her  influence 
with  success  in  converting  her  husband  and  his  subjects.  But 
it  seems  the  new  religion  was  attended  with  small  influence  on 
the  manners  of  that  fierce  people,  as  we  find  Otto,  one  of  their 
new-converted  kings,  in  a  few  reigns  after,  treacherously  de- 
stroying Ethelbert,  king  of  the  East  Angles,  at  an  entertainment 
to  which  he  had  been  invited.  However,  to  make  atonement  for 
this  transgi-ession,  we  find  liim  paying  great  court  to  the  clergy, 
giving  the  tenth  of  his  goods  to  the  church,  and  making  a  pilgrim- 
age to  Rome,  where  his  riches  procured  him  the  papal  absolution. 
It  was  upon  this  occasion,  the  better  to  ingi^atiate  himself  with 
the  pope,  that  he  engaged  to  pay  him  a  yearly  donation  for  the 
support  of  an  English  college  at  Rome ;  and,  in  order  to  raise  the 
sum,  he  imposed  a  tax  of  a  penny  on  each  house  possessed  of 
thirty  pence  a  year.  This  imposition  being  afterwards  generally 
levied  throughout  the  kingdom,  went  by  the  name  of  Peter-pence, 
and  in  succeeding  times  gave  rise  to  many  ecclesiastical  abuses. 

In  the  kingdom  of  Essex,  Sebert,  who  was  nephew  to  Ethel- 
bert, king  of  Kent,  of  whose  conversion  we  have  already  made 
mention,  was  also  prevailed  upon  by  his  uncle  to  embrace  the 
Clu-istian  religion.  His  sons,  however,  relapsed  into  idolatry, 
and  banished  Melitus,  the  Christian  bishop,  from  their  territories, 
because  he  refused  to  let  them  eat  the  white  bread  which  was 
distributed  at  the  communion.  But  Christianity  was  restored 
two  or  three  reigns  after,  by  Sigebert  the  Good ;  and  such  was 
the  influence  of  its  doctrines  upon  OfFa,  the  third  in  succession 
from  him,  that  he  went  upon  a  pilgrimage  to  Rome,  and  shut 
himself  up  during  the  rest  of  his  life  in  a  cloister. 

We  know  but  little  of  the  propagation  of  Christianity  in  the 
kingdom  of  Sussex  ;  but  this  being  the  smallest  of  all  the  Saxon 
heptarchy,  it  is  probable  that  it  was  governed  in  its  opinions  by 
some  of  its  more  powerful  neighbours.  It  is  said,  tiiat,  during 
the  reign  of  Cissa,  one  of  its  kings,  which  continued  seventy -six 


SAXON  HEPTARCHY.  Sg 

years,  ihe  kingdom  fell  into  a  total  dependence  upon  that  of 
Wessex,  and  to  tliis  it  is  probable  that  it  owed  its  conversion. 

The  kingdom  of  Wessex,  which  in  the  end  swallowed  up  all 
the  rest,  deserves  our  more  particular  attention.  This  princi- 
pality, which,  as  has  been  already  related,  was  founded  by  Cer- 
dic,  was,  of  all  the  Saxon  establishments  in  Britain,  the  most  ac- 
tive and  warlike.  The  great  opposition  the  invaders  of  this  prov- 
ince originally  met  from  the  natives,  whom  they  expelled,  not 
without  much  bloodshed,  served  to  carry  their  martial  spirit  to 
the  highest  pitch.  Cerdic  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Kenric,  and 
he  by  Ceanhin,  a  prince  more  ambitious  and  enterprising  than 
either  of  the  former.  He  had,  by  waging  continual  war  against 
the  Britons,  added  a  great  part  of  the  counties  of  Devon  and 
Somerset  to  his  dominions  ;  and,  not  satisfied  with  conquest  over 
his  natural  enemies,  he  attacked  the  Saxons  themselves,  till,  be- 
coming terrible  to  all,  he  provoked  a  general  confederacy  against 
him.  This  combination  took  place  ;  so  that  he  was  at  last  expell- 
ed the  throne,  and  died  in  exile  and  misery^  His  two  sons  suc- 
ceeded ;  and,  after  a  succession  of  two  more,  Kynegils  inherited 
the  crown.  This  prince  embraced  Christianity  through  the  per- 
suasion of  Oswald,  the  king  of  Northumberland,  his  son-in-law. 
After  some  succeeding  obscure  reigns,  Ceodwalla  mounted  the 
throne,  an  enterprising,  warlike,  and  successful  prince.  He  sub-^ 
dued  entirely  the  kingdom  of  Sussex,  and  annexed  it  to  his  own 
dominions.  He  made  also  some  attempts  upon  Kent,  but  was 
repulsed  with  vigour.  Ina,  his  successor,  was  the  most  renown-* 
ed  and  illustrious  of  all  the  kings  who  reigned  in  England  during 
the  heptarchy.  This  monarch  inherited  the  military  virtues  of 
Ceodwalla,  but  improved  by  policy,  justice,  and  prudence.  He 
made  war  upon  the  Britons,  who  yet  remained  in  Somersetshire ; 
and  having  totally  subdued  that  province,  he  treated  the  vanquish- 
ed with  a  humanity  hitherto  unknown  to  the  Saxon  conquerors. 
In  less  than  a  year  after  he  mounted  the  throne  of  Wessex,  he 
was  declared  monarch  of  the  Anglo-Saxons :  a  remarkable  proof 
of  the  great  character  he  had  acquired.  He  compiled  a  body  of 
laws,  which  served  as  the  ground-work  of  those  which  were  af- 
terwards published  by  Alfted.  He  also  assembled  a  general  coun- 
cil of  the  clergy,  in  which  it  was  determined  that  all  churches? 
monasteries,  and  places  of  religious  worship  which  had  gone  to 


^  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

ruin  Or  decay,  should  be  rebuilt  and  repaired.  At  length,  after 
a  distinguished  reign  of  thirty -seven  years,  in  the  decline  of  life, 
he  made  a  pilgrimage  to  Rome ;  and,  on  his  return  home,  shut 
himself  up  in  a  cloister,  where  he  died.  To  him  succeeded  Os- 
wald, Cudred,  Sigebert,  Cenulph,  and  Brithric  ;  all  these  claim- 
ing the  crown,  not  entirely  by  hereditary  right,  nor  yet  totally 
rejecting  their  family  pretensions. 

It  was  in  the  reign  of  the  last-named  monarch,  that  Egbert,  a 
grand  nephew  of  the  late  king  Ina,  began  to  giow  very  popular 
among  the  West  Saxons,  both  on  account  of  his  family  and  pri- 
vate merit.  Being  sensible,  however,  of  the  danger  of  popularity, 
under  such  a  jealous  monarch  as  Brithric,  he  withdrew  secretly 
into  France,  to  the  court  of  Charlemagne,  at  that  time  the  most 
polished  prince  of  Europe.  This  was  a  school  in  which  young 
Egbert  failed  not  to  make  a  rapid  proficiency ;  and  he  soon  ac- 
quired such  accomplishments,  both  in  arts  and  arms,  as  raised 
him  greatly  superior  to  any  of  his  countrymen  at  home. 

Nor  was  it  long  before  this  prince  had  an  opportunity  of  dis- 
playing his  natural  and  acquired  talents  to  advantage  ;  for,  Brith- 
ric being  poisoned  by  lus  wife  Eadburga,  the  nobility  recalled 
him  from  France,  in  order  to  ascend  the  throne  of  his  ancestors. 

p-Qp  -,  About  that  time  also,  a  fortunate  concurrence  of 
events  seemed  to  prepare  the  way  for  his  becoming  sole 
monarch  of  the  whole  country.  In  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  hep- 
tarchy, an  exact  rule  of  succession  was  but  little  regarded ;  while, 
at  the  same  time,  family  pretensions  were  not  laid  totally  aside. 
jEvery  person  of  the  collateral  line  had  as  good  a  right  to  assert 
his  claim  as  those  who  urged  direct  descent ;  so  that  the  reigning 
monarch  was  under  continual  apprehensions  from  the  princes  of. 
the  blood,  whom  he  was  taught  to  consider  as  rivals,  and  whose 
death  alone  could  ensure  him  tranquillity.  From  this  fatal  cause, 
together  with  the  passion  princes  then  had  of  retiring  to  monas- 
teries, and  the  opinion  of  merit  attending  the  preservation  of 
chastity,  even  in  a  married  state  ;  from  these  causes,  I  say,  the 
royal  families  had  been  entirely  extinguished  in  all  the  kingdoms, 
except  that  of  Wessex.  Thus  Egbert  was  the  only  surviving  de- 
scendant of  those  conquerors  who  boasted  their  descent  from 
Woden;  and  consequently,  beside  liis  personal  merit,  he  had 
hereditary  pretensions  to  the  throne  of  the  united  kingdoms.. 


SAXON  HEPTARCHY;  sr 

It  is  indeed  probable  that  he  had  already  planned  the  union  of 
the  heptarchy  ;  but,  in  order  to  avert  the  suspicions  of  the  neigh- 
bouring states,  he  attacked  the  Britons  in  Cornwall,  and  continu- 
ed to  act  as  mediator  among  the  Saxon  princes,  whose  differences 
were  become  almost  irreconcilable.  His  moderation  in  these 
good  offices,  the  prudence  he  manifested  in  his  own  government, 
and  his  known  capacity  in  the  affairs  of  war  and  peace,  procured 
him  such  a  degi-ee  of  reputation  that  he  was  soon  considered  as 
chief  of  the  Saxon  heptarchy. 

But  his  ambition  was  not  to  be  satisfied  with  a  mere  nominal 
superiority;  he  still  aimed  at  breaking  down  all  distinctions,  and 
uniting  these  petty  states  into  one  great  and  flourishing  kingdom. 
The  king  of  Mercia  was  the  first  who  furnished  him  with  a  pre- 
text for  recovering  the  part  of  his  dominions  which  had  formerly 
been  dismembered  by  that  state.  Beornulf,  the  monarch  of  that 
country,  who  had  already  almost  obtained  the  sovereignty  over  the 
heptarchy,  taking  advantage  of  Egbert's  absence,  who  was  em- 
ployed in  quelling  the  Britons,  invaded  his  dominions  with  a  nu- 
merous army  composed  of  the  flower  of  his  country.  Egbert  was 
not  remiss  in  marching  to  oppose  him,  with  a  body  of  troops  less 
numerous  than  those  of  Beornulf,  but  more  brave  and  resolute. 
Both  armies  met  at  Wilton,  and  a  battle  ensuing,  the  Mercians 
were  defeated  with  terrible  slaughter. 

In  the  mean  time,  while  the  victor  pursued  his  conquest  into 
the  enemies'  country,  he  dispatched  his  eldest  son,  Ethelwolf, 
with  an  army,  into  the  kingdom  of  Kent,  who  soon  made  himself 
master  of  the  whole  nation,  and  expelled  Baldred,  their  monarch, 
to  whom  his  subjects  had  paid  a  very  unwilling  obedience.  The 
East  Saxons  also,  and  part  of  Surry,  dissatisfied  with  their  sub- 
jection to  the  Mercians,  readily  submitted  to  Egbert;  nor  were 
the  East  Angles  backward  in  sending  embassadors  to  crave  his 
protection  and  assistance  against  that  nation,  whose  yoke  they 
had  for  some  time  endured,  and  were  resolved  no  longer  to  bear. 
The  Mercian  king,  attempting  to  repress  their  defection,  was  de- 
feated and  slain :  and  two  years  after,  Ludecan,  his  successor, 
met  with  the  same  fate.  Withalf,  one  of  their  eoldermen,  soon 
after  put  himself  at  their  head  ;  but  being  diiven  from  province 
to  province  by  the  victorious  arms  of  Egbert,  he  was,  at  last, 
obliged  to  take  shelter  in  the  abbev  of  Croyland.  while  Egbert 


SB  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

made  Iiimself  master  of  the  whole  kingdom  of  Mercia.  However, 
in  order  to  accustom  that  people  to  his  dominion,  he  permitted 
Withalf  to  govern  tlie  kingdom  as  a  vassal,  and  tributary  under 
him ;  thus,  at  once  satisfying  lus  ambition,  and  flattering  the  peo- 
ple with  an  appearance  of  their  former  government. 

The  king  of  Northumberland  was  the  last  that  submitted  to  his 
authority.  This  state  had  been  long  harassed  by  civil  wars  and 
usurpations  :  all  order  had  been  destroyed  among  the  people,  and 
the  kingdom  was  weakened  to  such  a  degree,  that  it  was  in  no 
condition  to  withstand  such  an  invader  as  Egbert.  The  inhabit- 
ants, therefore,  unable  to  resist  his  power,  and  desirous  of  possess- 
ing some  established  form  of  government,  very  cheei-fully  sent 
deputies,  Avho  submitted  to  his  authority,  and  expressed  their  al- 
legiance to  him  as  their  sovereign.  By  this  submission,  all  the 
kingdoms  of  the  heptarchy  were  united  under  his  command ;  but, 
to  give  splendor  to  his  authority,  a  general  council  of  the  clergy 
and  laity  was  summoned  at  Winchester,  where  he  was  solemnly 
crowned  king  of  England,  by  which  name  the  united  kingdom 
was  thenceforward  called. 

Thus,  about  four  hundred  years  after  the  first  arrival  of  the 
Saxons  in  Britain,  all  their  petty  settlements  were  united  into 
one  great  state,  and  nothing  offered  but  prospects  of 
peace,  security,  and  increasing  refinement.  At  this  ^  'J 
period,  namely  about  the  eighth  century,  the  arts  and  scienceSy 
which  had  been  before  only  known  to  the  Greeks  and  Romans, 
were  disseminated  over  Europe,  where  they  were  sufficient  to 
raise  the  people  above  mere  barbarians  ;  but  yet  lost  all  their  na- 
tive splendor  in  the  transplantation.  The  English,  at  this  time, 
might  be  considered  as  polite,  if  compared  to  the  naked  Britons 
at  the  invasion  of  Csesar.  The  houses,  furniture,  clothes,  eating, 
and  all  the  real  luxuries  of  sense,  were  almost  as  great  then  as 
they  have  been  since.  But  the  people  were  incapable  of  senti- 
mental pleasure.  All  the  learning  of  the  times  was  confined 
among  the  clergy ;  and  little  improvement  could  be  expected 
from  their  reasonings,  since  it  was  one  of  their  tenets  to  discard 
the  light  of  reason.  An  eclipse  was  even  by  their  historians 
talked  of  as  an  omen  of  threatened  calamities ;  and  magic  was 
not  only  believed,  but  some  actually  believed  themselves  magi- 
cians.   Even  the  clergy  were  not  averse  to  t)iese  opinions,  aS 


SAXON  MONARCHY.  S9 

such,  in  some  measure,  served  to  increase  their  authority.  In- 
deed the  reverence  of  the  clergy  was  carried  so  high,  that  if  a  per- 
son appeared  in  a  sacerdotal  habit  on  the  highway,  the  people 
flocked  round  him,  and,  with  all  the  marks  of  profound  respect, 
received  every  word  he  uttered  as  an  oracle.  From  this  blind 
attachment,  the  social  and  even  the  militaiy  virtues  began  to  de- 
cline among  them.  The  reverence  towards  saints  and  relics 
served  to  supplant  the  adoration  of  the  Supreme  Being.  Monas- 
tic observances  were  esteemed  more  meritorious  than  active  vir- 
tues ;  and  bounty  to  the  church  atoned  for  all  the  violences  done 
to  society.  The  nobility,  whose  duty  it  was  to  preserve  the 
military  spirit  from  declining,  began  to  prefer  the  sloth  and  secu-- 
rity  of  a  cloister  to  the  tumult  and  glory  of  war ;  and  those 
rewards  which  should  have  gone  to  encourage  the  soldier,  were 
lavished  in  maintaining  the  credulous  indolence  of  monastic  su-> 
perstition. 


CHA.P.  IV. 

FROM  THE  ACCESSION  OF  EGBERT  TO  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. 

It  might  have  been  reasonably  expected,  that  a  wise  and  fortu-« 
nate  prince,  at  the  head  of  so  great  a  kingdom,  and  so  united  and 
numerous  a  people  as  the  English  then  were,  should  not  only 
have  enjoyed  the  fruits  of  peace  and  quiet,  but  left  felicity  to  suc- 
ceeding generations.  The  inhabitants  of  the  several  provinces, 
tired  out  with  mutual  dissensions,  seemed  to  have  lost  all  desire 
of  revolting :  the  race  of  their  antient  kings  was  extinct,  and 
none  now  remained  but  a  prince  who  deserved  their  allegiance, 
both  by  the  merit  of  his  services  and  the  splendor  of  his  birth. 
Yet,  such  is  the  instability  of  human  aiFairs,  and  the  weakness  of 
man's  best  conjecture,  that  Egbert  was  hardly  settled  on  this 
united  throne,  when  both  he  and  his  subjects  began  to  be  alarm- 
ed at  the  approach  of  new  and  unknown  enemies,  and  the  island 
Exposed  to  fresh  invasions. 

About  this  time  a  mighty  swarm  of  those  nations  who  ^ 

had  possessed  the.  countpies  bordering  on  the  Baltic,  be-  *-      *-* 


40  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

gan,  under  the  names  of  Danes  and  Normans,  to  infest  the  west* 
ern  coasts  of  Europe ;  and  to  fill  all  places,  wherever  they  came, 
\vith  slaughter  and  devastation.  These  were,  in  fact,  no  other 
than  the  ancestors  of  the  very  people  whom  they  came  to  despoil, 
and  might  be  considered  as  the  original  stock  from  whence  the  nu- 
merous colonies  that  infested  Britain  lud  migrated  some  centuries 
before.  Tlie  Normans  fell  upon  the  northern  coasts  of  France  ; 
ihe  Danes  chiefly  levelled  their  fury  against  England,  their  first 

pyoT  -I   appearance  being  when  Brithric  was  king  of  Wessex. 

L  *J  It  was  then  that  a  small  body  of  them  landed  on  the 
coasts  of  that  kingdom,  with  a  view  of  learning  the  state  of  the 
country ;  and,  having  committed  some  small  depredations,  fled 
to  their  ships  for  safety.  About  seven  years  after  the  first  at- 
tempt they  made  a  descent  upon  the  kingdom  of  Northumberland, 
where  they  pillaged  a  monastery  ;  but  their  fleet  being  shattered 
by  a  storm,  they  were  defeated  by  the  inhabitants,  and  put  to  the 
sword.  It  was  not  till  about  five  years  after  the  accession  of  Eg- 
bert that  their  invasions  became  truly  formidable.  From  that 
time  they  continued  with  unceasing  ferocity,  until  the  whole 
kingdom  was  reduced  to  a  state  of  the  most  distressful  bondage. 

As  the  Saxons  had  utterly  neglected  their  naval  power  since 
their  first  settlement  in  Britain,  the  Danes,  who  succeeded  them 
in  the  empire  of  the  sea,  found  no  difficulty  in  landing  upon  the 
isle  of  Sheppey,  in  Kent,  which  they  ravaged,  returning  to  their 
ships  loaden  with  the  spoil.  Their  next  attempt,  the  year  ensu- 
ing, was  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tyne,  where  they  landed  a  body  of 
fifteen  thousand  men,  that  made  good  their  ground  against  the 
efforts  of  Egbert ;  who,  after  a  battle,  was  obliged  to  draw  off  his 
forces  by  night.  Within  two  years  after,  they  landed  in  Corn- 
wall ;  and  being  joined  by  the  Britons  thei-e,  they  advanced  to- 
wards the  borders  of  Devonshire,  where  they  were  totally  routed 
by  Egbert,  in  a  pitched  battle,  at  Hengsdown-hill  near  Kelling- 
ton.  By  this  victory  he  secured  the  kingdom  from  invasion  for 
some  time ;  but  his  death  seemed  to  put  a  period  to  the  success 
of  his  countrymen,  and  to  invite  the  enemy  tQ  renew  their  devas- 
tations with  impunity. 

He  Avas  succeeded  by  Ethelwolf,  his  son,  who  had  neither  the 
vigour  nor  the  abilities  of  his  father.  This  prince  had  been  edu- 
cated in  a  cloister,  and  had  actually  taken  orders  dining  the 


SAXON  MONARCHY.  4}, 

life  of  his  elder  brother  ;  but  upon  his  death  he  received  a  dis- 
pensation to  quit  the  monkish  habit,  and  to  maiTy.  He  was 
scarcely  settled  on  his  throne  when  a  fleet  of  Danish  ravagers^ 
consisting  of  thirty-three  sail,  landed  at  Southampton  ;  but  were 
repulsed,  though  not  without  great  slaughter  on  both  sides.  How- 
ever, no  defeat  could  repress  the  obstinacy,  nor  could  any  dif- 
ficulties daunt  the  courage  of  these  fierce  invaders,  who  still  per- 
severed in  their  descents,  and,  year  after  yearj  made  inroads 
into  the  country,  marking  their  way  with  pillage,  slaughter, 
and  desolation.  Though  often  repulsed,  they  always  obtain- 
ed their  end, — of  spoiling  the  country  and  carrying  the  plunder 
away.  It  was  their  method  to  avoid  coming,  if  possible,  to  a  gen- 
eral engagement ;  but  scattering  themselves  over  the  face  of  the 
country,  they  carried  away,  indiscriminately,  as  well  the  inhabi- 
tants themselves  as  all  their  moveable  possessions.  If  the  mili- 
tary force  of  the  country  was  drawn  out  against  them,  the  inva- 
ders either  stood  their  ground,  if  strong  enough  to  oppose;  or  re- 
treated to  their  ships,  if  incapable  of  resistance.  Thus,  by  mak- 
ing continual  and  repeated  descents,  every  part  of  England  was 
kept  in  constant  alarm,  every  county  fearful  of  giving  assistance^ 
to  the  next,  as  its  own  safety  was  in  danger.  From  this  general 
calamity  the  priests  and  monks  were  no  way  exempted ;  they 
were  rather  the  chief  objects  on  whom  these  Danish  idolaters, 
wreaked  their  resentment. 

In  this  state  of  fluctuating  success  affairs  continued  for  some 
feme,  the  English  often  repelling,  and  as  often  being  repulsed  by, 
their  fierce  invaders ;  till  at  length  the  Danes  resolved  upon 
making  a  settlement  in  the  country,  and,  landing  on  the  isle  of 
Thanet,  stationed  themselves  there.  In  this  place  they 
kept  their  ground,  notwithstanding  a  bloody  victory  >-  J 
gained  over  them  by  Ethelwolf.  From  thence  they  soon  after 
removed  to  the  isle  of  Sheppey,  which  they  considered  as  more 
convenient  for  their  tumultuary  depredations^ 

In  the  mean  time  Ethelwolf,  the  wretched  monarch  of  the 
country,  instead  of  exerting  his  strength  to  repel  these  invaders, 
was  more  solicitous  to  obey  the  dictates  of  monkish  superstition. 
In  order  to  manifest  his  devotion  to  the  pope,  he  sent  his  son  Al- 
fred to  Rome  to  receive  confirmation  from  his  holiness  ;  and,  not 
satisfied  with  this  testimony  of  his  zealj  uudertpolv  «i  pilgrimage 

VOL.    I.  6 


42^  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

tliither  in  person.  He  passed  a  twelvemonth  in  that  city,  amf 
gained  no  small  applause  for  liis  devotion,  which  he  testified  by 
his  great  liberality  to  the  church.  In  his  return  home  he  married 
Judith,  daughter  to  the  emperor  Charles  the  Bald ;  but,  on  his 
landing  in  his  own  dominions,  he  was  surprised  to  find  his  title 
to  the  crown  disputed. 

His  second  son,  Ethelbald,  upon  the  death  ©f  his  elder  brother, 
perceiving  the  miserable  state  to  which  the  kingdom  was  reduc- 
ed by  the  king's  ill-timed  superstitions,  formed  a  conspiracy  to 
expel  him  from  the  throne.  The  people  seemed  equally  divided 
between  the  claims  of  the  father  and  son ;  so  that  a  bloody  civil 
war  seemed  likely  to  complete  the  picture  of  the  calamities  of  the 
times.  A  division  of  the  kingdom  at  length  terminated  the  dis- 
pute ;  the  king  was  content  with  the  eastern  part  of  the  monar- 
chy, while  his  son  was  appointed  to  govern  the  western,  which 
was  the  most  powerful,  and  the  most  exposed  to  danger. 

Having  come  to  this  agreement,  a  council  was  summoned  of 
the  states  of  the  kingdom ;  and,  besides  the  ratification  of  this 
grant,  a  tithe  of  all  the  produce  of  the  land  was  settled  upon  the 
clergy. 

Ethelwolf  lived  only  two  years  after  this  agreement  j  leaving, 
by  will,  the  kingdom  shared  between  his  two  eldest  sons,  Ethel- 
bald  and  Ethelbert ;  the  west  being  consigned  to  the  former,  the 
east  to  the  latter.  The  reign  of  Ethelbald  was  of  no  long  coiiv 
tinuance ;  however,  in  so  short  a  space,  he  crowded  a  number  of 
vices  suflicient  ta  render  his  name  odious  to  posterity.  He  mar- 
ried Judith,  his  own  mother-in-law ;  and  was,  not  without  great 
difficulty,  prevailed  upon  to  divorce  her.  The  reign  of  his  brother 
was  of  longer  duration  j  and,  as  we  are  told,  was  in  every  re- 
spect more  meritorious.  Nevertheless,  the  kingdom  was  still  in- 
fested by  the  Danes,  who  committed  great  outrages. 

This  prince  was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Ethelred,  a  brave 
king,  but  whose  valour  was  insufficient  to  repress  the  Danish 
incursions.  In  these  exploits  he  was  always  assisted  by  his 
younger  brother  Alfred,  afterwards  surnamed  the  Great,  who  sa- 
crificed all  private  resentment  to  the  public  good,  having  been 
deprived  by  the  king  of  a  large  patrimony.  It  was  during  this 
prince's  reign  that  the  Danes,  penetrating  into  Mereia,  took  up 
tijeir  winter-quarters,  at  Nottingham  j  from  whence  they  were 


4 


SAXON  MONARCHY.  43 

»ot  dislodged  without  difficulty.  Their  next  station  was  at 
Reading,  from  whence  they  infested  the  country  with  their  ex- 
cursions- The  king,  attended  by  his  brother  Alfred,  marched  at 
the  head  of  the  West  Saxons  against  them ;  there,  after  many 
reciprocations  of  success,  the  king  died  of  a  wound  which  he 
received  in  battle,  and  left  to  his  brother  Alfred  the  inheritance 
of  a  kingdom  that  was  now  reduced  to  the  brink  of  ruin. 

Nothing  could  be  more  deplorable  than  the  state  of  the  coun- 
try when  Alfred  came  to  the  throne.  The  Danes  had  already 
subdued  Northumberland  and  East  Anglia,  and  had  penetrated 
into  the  very  heart  of  Wessex.  The  Mercians  were  united 
against  him ;  the  dependence  upon  the  other  provinces  of  the 
empire  was  but  precarious ;  the  lands  lay  uncultivated,  through 
fears  of  continual  incursions ;  and  all  the  churches  and  monaste- 
ries were  burned  to  the  ground.  In  this  terrible  situation  of 
affairs  nothing  appeared  but  objects  of  terror,  and  every  hope 
was  lost  in  despaii-.  The  wisdom  and  virtues  of  one  man  were 
found  sufficient  to  bring  back  happiness,  security,  and  order  j  and 
all  the  calamities  of  the  times  found  redress  from  Alfred. 

This  prince  seemed  born  not  only  to  defend  his  bleeding  coun- 
try, but  even  to  adorn  humanity.  He  had  given  very  early  in*' 
stances  of  those  great  virtues  which  afterwards  signalized  his 
reign ;  and  was  anointed  by  pope  Leo  as  future  king,  when  he 
was  sent  by  his  father  for  his  education  to  Rome.  On  his  return 
from  thence,  he  became  every  day  more  the  object  of  his  father's 
fond  affections  ;  and  that,  perhaps,  was  the  reason  why  his  edu- 
cation was  at  first  neglected.  He  had  attained  the  age  of  twelve 
before  he  was  made  acquainted  with  the  lowest  elements  of  liter,- 
ature ;  but  hearing  some  Saxon  poems  read  wliich  recounted  the 
praise  of  heroes,  his  whole  mind  was  roused,  not  only  to  obtain 
a  similitude  of  glory,  but  also  to  be  able  to  transmit  that  glory  to 
posterity.  Encouraged  by  the  queen  his  mother,  and  assisted  by 
a  penetrating  genius,  he  soon  learned  to  read  these  compositions, 
and  proceeded  from  thence  to  a  knowledge  of  Latin  authors,  who 
directed  his  taste,  and  rectified  his  ambition. 

He  was  scarce  come  to  the  crown  when  he  was  obliged  to  op- 
pose the  Danes,  who  had  seized  Wilton,  and  were  exercising 
their  usual  ravages  on  the  countries  around.  He  marched 
against  them  with  the  few  troops  he  could  assemble  on  a  sudden, 


44  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

and  a  desperate  battle  was  fought,  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  En- 
glish. But  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  misfortune  to  abate  the 
king's  diligence,  though  it  repressed  his  power  to  do  good.  He 
was  in  a  little  time  enabled  to  hazard  another  engagement :  so 
that  the  enemj,  dreading  his  courage  and  activity,  proposed 
terms  of  peace,  which  he  did  not  think  proper  to  refuse.  They 
had  by  this  treaty  agreed  to  relinquish  the  kingdom  ;  but,  instead 
of  complying  with  their  engagements,  they  only  removed  from 
one  place  to  another,  burning  and  dcsti-oying  wherever  they 
came. 

Alfred,  thus  opposed  to  an  enemy  whom  no  stationary  force 
could  resist,  nor  no  treaty  could  bind,  found  himself  unable  to 
repel  the  efforts  of  those  ravagers,  who  from  all  quarters  invaded 
him.  New  swarms  of  the  enemy  arrived  every  year  upon  the 
coast,  and  fresh  invasions  were  still  projected.  It  was  in  vain 
that  Alfred  pursued  them,  straitened  their  quarters,  and  com- 
pelled them  to  treaties  :  they  broke  every  league ;  and,  continu- 
ing their  attacks  with  unabated  perseverance,  at  length  totally 
dispirited  his  army,  and  induced  his  superstitious  soldiers  to  be- 
lieve themselves  abandoned  by  Heaven,  since  it  thus  permitted 
the  outrages  of  the  fierce  idolaters  with  impunity.  Some  of 
them  therefore  left  their  country,  and  retired  into  Wales,  or  fled 
to  the  continent.  Others  submitted  to  the  conquerors,  and  pur- 
chased their  lives  by  their  freedom.  In  this  universal  defection, 
Alfred  vainly  attempted  to  remind  them  of  the  duty  they  owed 
their  country  and  their  king ;  but,  finding  his  remonstrances  in- 
effectual, he  was  obliged  to  give  way  to  the  wretched  necessity 
of  the  times.  Accordingly,  relinquishing  the  ensigns  of  his  dig- 
nity, and  dismissing  his  servants,  he  dressed  himself  in  the  habit 
of  a  peasant,  and  lived  for  some  time  in  the  house  of  a  herdsman, 
who  had  been  intrusted  with  the  care  of  his  cattle.  In  this  man- 
ner, though  abandoned  by  the  world,  and  fearing  an  enemy  in 
every  quarter,  still  he  resolved  to  continue  in  his  country,  to 
catch  tiie  slightest  occasions  for  bringing  it  relief.  In  his  solitary 
retreat,  which  was  in  the  county  of  Somerset,  at  the  confluence 
ot  the  rivers  Parret  and  Thone,  he  amused  himself  with  music, 
and  supported  his  humble  lot  with  the  hopes  of  better  fortune^ 
It  is  said,  that,  one  day,  being  commanded  by  the  herdsman's 
^yife,  who  was  ignorant  of  his  quality,  to  take  care  of  some  cakes 


SAXON  MONARCHY.  45 

Xvhich  were  baking  by  the  fire,  he  happened  to  let  them  burn,  for 
which  she  severely  upbraided  him  for  neglect. 

Previous  to  his  retirement,  Alfred  had  concerted  measures  for 
assembling  a  few  trusty  friends,  whenever  an  opportunity  should 
offer  of  annoying  the  enemy,  who  were  now  in  possession  of  all 
the  country.  This  chosen  band,  still  faithful  to  their  monarch, 
took  shelter  in  the  forests  and  marshes  of  Somerset,  and  from 
thence  made  occasional  irruptions  upon  straggling  parties  of  the 
enemy.  Their  success,  in  this  rapacious  and  dreary  method  of 
living,  encouraged  many  more  to  join  their  society,  till  at  length, 
sufficiently  augmented,  they  repaired  to  their  monarch,  who  had 
by  that  time  been  reduced  by  famine  to  the  last  extremity. 

Mean  while,  Ubba,  the  chief  of  the  Danish  commanders,  car- 
ried terror  over  the  whole  land,  and  now  ravaged  the  country  of 
Wales  without  opposition.  The  only  place  where  he  found  re- 
sistance was,  in  his  return,  from  the  castle  of  Kenwith,  into  which 
the  earl  of  Devonshire  had  retired  with  a  small  body  of  troops. 
This  gallant  soldier  finding  himself  unable  to  sustain  a  siege,  and 
knowing  the  danger  of  surrendering  to  a  perfidious  enemy, 
was  resolved,  by  one  desperate  effort,  to  sally  out  and  force  his 
way  through  the  besiegers,  sword  in  hand.  The  proposal  was 
embraced  by  all  his  followers,  while  the  Danes,  secure  in  their 
numbers,  and  in  their  contempt  of  the  enemy,  were  not  only 
routed  with  great  slaughter,  but  Ubba,  their  general,  was  slain. 

This  victory  once  more  restored  courage  to  the  dispirited  Sax- 
ons ;  and  Alfred,  taking  advantage  of  their  favourable  disposition, 
prepared  to  animate  them  to  a  vigorous  exertion  of  their  superi- 
ority. He  soon  therefore  apprised  them  of  the  place  of  his  retreat, 
and- instructed  them  to  be  ready  with  all  their  strength  at  a  min- 
ute's warnins;.  But  none  was  found  who  would  undertake  to 
give  intelligence  of  the  forces  and  posture  of  the  enemy.  Not 
knowing,  therefore,  a  person  in  whom  to  confide,  he  undertook 
this  dangerous  task  himself.  In  the  simple  dress  of  a  shepherd, 
with  a  harp  in  his  hands,  he  entered  the  Danish  camp,  tried  all 
his  arts  to  please,  and  was  so  much  admired  that  he  was  brought 
into  the  presence  of  Guthrum,  the  Danish  prince,  with  whom  he 
remained  some  days.  There  he  remarked  the  supine  security  of 
the  Danes,  their  contempt  of  the  English,  their  negligence  in  for* 
aging  and  plundering,  and  their  dissolute  wasting  of  such  ill-^got'' 


46  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

ten  booty.  Having  made  his  observations,  he  returned  to  his  re* 
treat,  and,  detaching  proper  emissaries  among  his  subjects,  ap- 
pointed them  to  meet  him  in  arms  in  the  forests  of  Selwood,— a 
summons  vi^hich  they  gladly  obeyed. 

It  Vi'as  against  the  most  unguarded  quarter  of  the  enemy  that 
Alfred  made  his  most  violent  attack,  wliile  the  Danes,  surprised 
to  behold  an  army  of  English,  whom  tliey  considered  as  totally 
subdued,  made  but  a  faint  resistance,  notwithstanding  the  supe- 
riority of  their  number.  They  were  routed  with  great  slaugh- 
ter :  and  though  such  as  escaped  fled  for  refuge  into  a  fortified 
camp  in  the  neighbourhood,  yet,  being  unprovided  for  a  siege,  in 
less  than  a  fortnight  they  were  compelled  to  surren- 
•-  *-•  der  at  discretion.  By  the  conqueror's  permission,  those 
who  did  not  choose  to  embrace  Christianity  embarked  for  Flan- 
ders, under  the  command  of  one  of  their  generals  called  Hast- 
ings. Guthrum,  their  prince,  became  a  convert,  with  thirty  of 
his  nobles,  and  the  king  himself  answered  for  him  at  the  font. 

Of  the  Danes  who  had  enlisted  with  Hastings,  a  part  returned, 
contrary  to  agreement,  once  more  to  ravage  that  country  where 
they  had  been  so  mercifully  spared,  and,  landing  on  the  coasts 
of  Kent,  advanced  towards  Rochester,  in  hopes  of  surprising 
that  city.  They  were  soon,  however,  deterred  from  proceeding, 
by  hearing  that  Alfred  was  upon  his  march  to  oppose  tliem. 
That  such  depredations  might  be  prevented  for  the  future,  this 
monarch  equipped  a  strong  fleet,  ^vith.  which  he  attacked  and  de- 
stroyed sixteen  of  their  vessels  in  the  port  of  Harwich.  There 
was  now  but  the  port  of  London  open  to  the  invaders ;  and  a» 
that  city  was  but  weakly  garrisoned,  he  soon  reduced  it  to  capit- 
ulation. Having  augmented  its  fortifications,  and  embellished  it 
with  a  number  of  new  edifices,  he  delivered  it  in  charge  to  his 
son-in-law,  Ethelred,  and  thus  secured  the  whole  country  from 
foreign  danger. 

Alfred  had  now  attained  the  meridian  &f  glory ;  he  possessed 
a  greater  extent  of  territory  than  had  ever  been  enjoyed  by  any 
of  his  predecessors ;  the  kings  of  Wales  did  him  homage  for 
their  possessions,  the  Northumbrians  received  a  king  of  his  ap- 
pointing, and  no  enemy  appeared  to  give  him  the  least  apprehen- 
sions, or  excite  an  alarm.  In  this  state  of  prosperity  and  pro- 
found tranquillity,  which  lasted  for  twelve  yeaxs,  Alfred  was  dil-^ 


SAXON  MONARCHY.  47 

igently  employed  in  cultivating  the  arts  of  peace,  and  in  repair- 
ing the  damages  which  the  kingdom  had  sustained  by  war.  Af- 
ter rebuilding  the  ruined  cities  which  had  been  destroyed  by  the 
Danes,  he  established  a  regular  militia  for  the  defence  of  the 
kingdom.  He  took  care  that  all  his  subjects  should  be  armed  and 
registered ;  he  assigned  them  a  regular  rotation  of  duty  ;  a  part 
was  employed  to  cultivate  the  land,  while  others  were  appointed 
to  repel  any  sudden  invasion  from  the  enemy.  He  took  care  to 
provide  a  naval  force  that  was  more  than  a  match  for  the  invad- 
ers, and  trained  his  subjects  as  well  in  the  practice  of  sailing  as 
of  naval  engagements.  A  fleet  of  a  hundred  and  twenty  ships  of 
war  was  thus  stationed  along  the  coasts  5  and  being  well  sup- 
plied with  all  things  necessary,  both  for  subsistence  and  war,  it 
impressed  the  incursive  enemy  with  awe.  Not  but  that  there 
succeeded  some  very  formidable  descents,  which  the  king  found 
it  difficult  to  repress.  Hastings,  the  Danish  chieftain,  in  particu- 
lar, appeared  off  the  coast  of  Kent  with  a  fleet  of  three  hundred 
and  fifty  sail ;  and  although  his  forces  were  vigorously  opposed 
and  repulsed  by  the  vigilance  of  Alfred,  yet  he  found  means  to 
secure  himself  in  the  possession  of  Bamflete,  near  the  isle  of 
Canvey,  in  the  county  of  Essex.  But  he  was  not  long  settled 
there  when  his  garrison  was  overpowered  by  a  body  of  the  citi- 
zens of  London,  with  great  slaughter,  and  his  wife  and  two  sons 
made  captives.  These  experienced  the  king's  clemency  :  he  re- 
stored them  to  Hastings,  on  condition  that  he  should  depart  the 
kingdom.  Nor  were  the  East  Anglian  Danes,  as  well  as  insur- 
gents of  Northumberland,  much  more  successful.  These  broke 
into  rebellion ;  and,  yielding  to  their  favourite  habits  of  depreda- 
tion, embarked  on  board  two  hundred  and  forty  vessels,  and  ap- 
peared before  Exeter.  There,  however,  they  met  a  very  bloody 
reception  from  Alfred ;  and  were  so  discouraged,  that  they  put 
to  sea  again  without  attempting  any  other  enterprise.  A  third 
body  of  piratical  Danes  were  even  more  unsuccessful  than  either  of 
the  former.  Great  numbers  of  them,  after  the  departure  of  Hast- 
ings, seized  and  fortified  Shobury,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Thames  : 
and,  having  left  a  garrison  there,  marched  along  the  banks  of  the 
river  till  they  came  to  Bodington,  in  the  county  of  Gloucester, 
where  being  reinforced  by  a  body  of  Welshmen,  they  threw  up 
entrenchpaents,  and  prepared  for  defence.    There  they  were  sur- 


48  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

rounded  bj  the  king's  forces,  and  reduced  to  the  utmost  extrem- 
ity. After  having  eaten  their  horses,  and  many  of  them  perishing 
with  hunger,  they  made  a  desperate  sally,  in  which  numbers  were 
cut  to  pieces.  Those  who  escaped,  being  pursued  by  the  vigi- 
lance of  Alfred,  were  finally  dispersed,  or  totally  destroyed.  Nor 
did  he  treat  the  Northumbrian  freebooters  with  less  severity. 
Falling  upon  them  while  they  were  exercising  their  ravages  in 
the  West,  he  took  twenty  of  their  ships  ;  and  having  tried  all  the 
prisoners  at  Winchester,  he  hanged  them  as  pirates,  and  as  the 
common  enemies  of  mankind. 

Having  by  this  vigilance  and  well-timed  severity  given  peace 
and  total  security  to  his  subjects,  his  next  care  was  to  polish  the 
country  by  arts,  as  he  had  protected  it  by  arms.  He  is  said  to 
have  drawn  up  a  body  of  laws ;  but  those  which  remain  to  this 
day  under  his  name  seem  to  be  only  the  laws  already  practised 
in  the  country  by  his  Saxon  ancestors,  and  to  which,  probably,  he 
gave  his  sanction.  The  trial  by  juries,  mulcts  and  fines  for  of- 
fences, by  some  ascribed  to  him,  are  of  a  much  more  antient  date* 
The  care  of  Alfred  for  the  encouragement  of  learning  did  not  a 
little  tend  to  improve  tlie  morals  and  restrain  the  barbarous  habits 
of  the  people.  When  he  came  to  the  throne,  he  found  the  En- 
glish sunk  into  the  grossest  ignorance  and  barbarism,  proceeding 
from  the  continued  disorders  of  the  government  and  from  the  ra- 
vages of  the  Danes.  He  himself  complains,  that,  on  his  acces- 
sion, he  knew  not  one  person  south  of  the  Thames  who  could  so 
much  as  interpret  the  Latin  service.  To  remedy  this  deficiency, 
he  invited  over  the  most  celebrated  scholai'S  from  all  parts  of  Eu- 
rope ;  he  founded,  or  at  least  re-established,  the  university  of  Ox- 
ford, and  endowed  it  with  many  privileges.  He  gave,  in  his  own 
example,  the  strongest  incentives  to  study.  He  usually  divided 
his  time  into  three  equal  portions  ;  one  was  given  to  sleep,  and 
the  refection  of  his  body,  diet,  and  exercise  5  another  to  the  dis- 
patch of  business ;  and  the  third  to  study  and  devotion.  He 
made  a  considerable  progress  in  the  diiferent  studies  of  grammar^ 
rhetoric,  philosophy,  architecture,  and  geometry.  He  was  an 
excellent  historian,  he  understood  music,  and  was  acknowledged 
to  be  the  best  Saxon  poet  of  the  age.  He  left  many  works  behind 
him,  many  of  which  remain  to  this  day.  He  translated  the  Pas- 
toral of  Gregory  L,  Boetius  de  Consolation^^  and  Bede's  Ecclesi- 


SAXOJl  MONARCH^.  4§ 

astical  History,  into  the  Saxon  language.  Sensible  that  his  illit- 
erate subjects  were  not  much  susceptible  of  speculative  instruc- 
tion, he  endeavoured  to  convey  his  morality  by  parables  and  sto- 
ries, and  is  said  to  have  translated  from  the  Greek  the  Fables  of 
^sop.  Nor  did  he  ev6n  neglect  the  more  mechanical  arts  of  life. 
Before  his  time  the  generality  of  the  people  chiefly  made  use  of 
timber  in  building.  Alfred  raised  his  palaces  of  brick,  and  the 
nobility  by  degrees  began  to  imitate  his  example.  He  introduced 
and  encouraged  manufactures  of  all  kinds  ;  and  no  inventor  or 
improver  of  any  ingenious  art  was  suffered  to  go  unrewarded. 
Even  the  elegancies  of  life  were  brought  to  him  from  the  Mediter- 
ranean ;  and  his  subjects,  by  seeing  these  productions  of  the 
peaceful  arts,  were  taught  to  respect  the  virtues  of  justice  and  in- 
dustry, by  which  alone  they  could  be  procured.  It  was  after  a 
glorious  reign  of  twenty ^nine  years,  thus  spent  in  the  advance- 
ment of  his  subjects'  happiness,  that  he  died,  in  the  vig-  rqn-i  n 
our  of  his  age,  and  the  full  enjoyment  of  his  fiicultiesj 
an  example  to  princes,  and  an  ornament  to  human  nature.  To 
give  a  character  of  this  prince  would  only  be  to  sum  up  those 
qualities  v/hich  constitute  perfection^  Even  virtues  seemingly 
opposite  were  happily  blended  in  his  disposition;  persevering^ 
yet  flexible ;  moderate,  yet  enterprising ;  just,  yet  merciful  z 
stern  in  command,  jet  gentle  in  conversation.  Nature  also,  as  if 
desirous  that  such  admirable  qualities  of  mind  should  be  set  off  to 
the  greatest  advantage,  had  bestowed  on  him  all  bodily  accofa- 
plishments,  vigour,  dignity,  and  an  engaging,  open  countenance. 
In  short,  historians  have  taken  such  delight  in  describing  the  hero, 
that  they  have  totally  omitted  the  mention  of  his  smaller  errors, 
which  doubtless  he  must  have  had  in  consequence  of  his  humanity>i 

Alfred  had,  by  his  wife  Ethel  switha,  the  daughter  of  a  Mercian 
earl,  three  sons  and  three  daughters.  His  eldest  son,  Edmund, 
died  without  issue,  during  his  father's  life-time.  His  third  sonj 
Ethelward,  inherited  his  father's  passion  for  letters,  and  lived  a 
private  life.  His  second  son,  Edward,  succeeded  him  on  the 
throne. 

Edward  was  scarce  settled  on  the  throne  when  his  preten- 
sions were  disputed  by  Ethelward,  his  cousin-germanj  who  raised 
a  large  party  among  the  Northumbrians  to  espouse  his  cause.  At 
first  his  aims  seemed  to  be  favoured  by  fortune;  but  he  was  soott- 

VOI.  T,  ? 


^A  HlSTOliY  OF  ENGLAND. 

after  killed  in  battle,  and  his  death  thus  freed  Edward  from  a  very 
dangerous  competitor.     Nevertheless  the  death  of  their  leader  was 
not  sufficient  to  intimidate  his  turbulent  adherents.     During  the 
whole  of  this  prince's  reign  there  were  but  few  intervals  free  from 
ihe  attempts  and  insurrections  of  the  Northumbrian  rebels.     Ma- 
ny were  the  battles  he  fought,  and  the  victories  he  won ;  so  that, 
though  he  might  be  deemed  unequal  to  his  father  in  the  arts  of 
peace,  he  did  not  fall  short  of  him  in  the  military  virtues.    He 
built  several  castles,  and  fortified  different  cities.     He  reduced 
Tui-kethill,  a  Danish  invader,  and  obliged  him  to  retire  with  his 
['ollowers.     He  subdued  the  East  Angles,  and  acquired  dominion 
over  the  Northumbrians  themselves.     He  was  assisted  in  these 
conquests  by  his  sister,  Ethelfleda,  the  widow  of  Ethelbert,  earl 
of  Mercia,  who,  after  her  husband's  death,  retained  the  govern- 
ment  of  that  province.     Thus,  after  Edward  had  reduced  the 
whole  kingdom  to  his   obedience,  and  begun  his  endeavours  to 
promote  the  happiness  of  his  people,  he  was  prevented  by  death 
from  the  completion  of  his  designs. 
rqas  -I       To  him  succeeded  Athelstan,  his  natural  son,  the 
*-'  illegitimacy  of  his  birth  not  being  then  deemed  a  suffi- 
cient obstacle  to  Ms  inheriting  the  crown.     To  this  prince,  as  to 
the  former,  there  was  some  opposition  made  in  the  beginning, 
Alfred,  a  nobleman  of  his  kindred,  is  said  to  have  entered  into  a 
conspiracy  against  him,  in  favour  of  the  legitimate  sons  of  the 
deceased  king,  who  were  yet  too  young  to  be  capable  of  govern- 
ing themselves.     Whatever  his  attempts  might  have  been,  he 
denied  the  charge,  and  offered  to  clear  himself  of  it  by  oath  be- 
fore the  pope.     The  proposal  was  accepted ;  and  it  is  asserted, 
that  he  had  scarce  sworn  himself  innocent,  when  he  fell  into  con- 
vulsions, and  died  three  days  after.     This  monarch  received  also 
some  disturbance  from  the  Northumbrian  Danes,  whom  he  com- 
pelled to  surrender ;  and  resenting  the  conduct  of  Constantine, 
king  of  Scotland,  who  had  given  them  assistance,  he  ravaged  that 
country  with  impunity,  till  at  length  he  was  appeased  by  the 
humble  submissions  of  that  monarch.    These  submissions,  how- 
ever, being  extorted,  were  insincere.     Soon  after  Athelstan  had 
evacuated  that  kingdom,  Constantine  entered  into  a  confederacy 
with  a  body  of  Danish  pirates  and  some  Welsh  princes  who  Avere 
jealous  of  Athelstan's  growing  greatness.    A  bloody  battle  was 


SAXON  MONARCHY.  ^'1 

fought  at  Brunsburg,  in  Northumberland,  in  which  the  English 
monarch  was  again  victorious.  After  this  success,  Athelstan 
enjoyed  his  crown  in  tranquillity;  and  he  is  regarded  as  one  of 
the  ablest  and  most  active  of  the  Saxon  kings.  During  his  reign 
the  Bible  was  translated  into  the  Saxon  language ;  and  some  allir 
ances  also  were  formed  by  him  with  the  princes  on  the 
continent.  He  died  at  Gloucester,  after  a  reign  of  six-  L  -J 
teen  years ;  and  was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Edmund. 

Edmund,  like  the  rest  of  his  predecessors,  met  with  disturb'^ 
ance  from  the  Northumbrians  on  his  accession  to  the  throne ;  but 
his  activity  soon  defeated  their  attempts.  The  great  end,  there- 
fore, which  he  aimed  at,  during  his  reign,  was  to  curb  the  licen- 
tiousness of  this  people,  who  offered  to  embrace  Christianity  as 
an  atonement  for  their  offences.  Among  other  schemes  for  the 
benefit  of  the  people,  he  was  the  first  monarch  who,  by  law,  insti- 
tuted capital  punishments  in  England.  Remarking  that  fines  and 
pecuniary  mulcts  were  too  gentle  methods  of  treating  robbers, 
who  were,  in  general,  men  who  had  nothing  to  lose,  he  enacted, 
that,  in  gangs  of  robbers,  when  taken,  the  oldest  of  them  should 
be  condemned  to  the  gallows.  This  was  reckoned  a  very  severe 
law  at  the  time  it  was  enacted  ;  for,  among  our  early  ancestors, 
all  the  penal  laws  were  mild  and  merciful.  The  resentment  this 
monarch  bore  to  men  of  that  desperate  way  of  living  was  the 
cause  of  his  death.  His  virtues,  abilities,  wealth,  and  temper- 
ance, promised  him  a  long  and  happy  reign ;  when,  on  a  certain 
day,  as  he  was  solemnizing  a  festival  in  Gloucestershire,  he  re- 
marked that  Leolf,  a  notorious  robber  whom  he  had  sentenced  to 
jbanishment,  had  yet  the  boldness  to  enter  the  hall  where  he  was 
dining,  and  to  sit  at  the  table  among  the  royal  attendants.  En- 
raged at  this  insolence,  he  commanded  him  to  leave  the  room ; 
but  on  his  refusing  to  obey,  the  king,  whose  temper  was  naturally 
choleric,  flew  against  him,  and  caught  him  by  the  hair.  The 
ruffian,  giving  way  to  rage  also  on  his  side,  drew  a  dagger,  and, 
lifting  his  arm,  with  a  furious  blow  stabbed  the  monarch  to  the 
heart,  who  fell  down  on  the  bosom  of  his  murderer.  The  death 
of  the  assassin,  who  was  instantly  cut  in  pieces,  was  but  a  small 
compensation  for  the  loss  of  a  king,  loved  by  his  subjects,  and 
deserving  their  esteem. 

The  late  Idng's  sons  were  too  young  to  succeed  him  in  the  di- 


/yjl  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

vecllon  of  so  difficult  a  government  as  that  of  England :  his 
brother  Edred  was  therefore  appointed  to  succeed ;  and,  like 
his  predecessors,  this  monarch  found  himself  at  the  head  of  a  rei 
bellious  and  refractory  people.  The  Northumbrian  Danes,  as 
usual,  made  several  attempts  to  shake  off  the  English  yoke ;  so 
that  the  king  was  at  last  obliged  to  place  garrisons  in  their  most 
considerable  towns,  and  to  appoint  an  English  governor  over 
them,  who  might  suppress  their  insurrections  on  the  first  ap-. 
pearance.  About  this  time  the  monks,  from  being  contented  to 
govern  in  ecclesiastical  matters,  began  to  assume  the  direction  in 
civil  affairs ;  and,  by  artfully  managing  the  superstitions  and  the 
fears  of  the  people,  erected  an  authority  that  was  not  shaken  oflf 
by  several  succeeding  centuries.  Edred  had  blindly  delivered 
over  his  conscience  to  the  guidance  of  Dunstan,  abbot  of  Glaston- 
bury, who  was  afterwards  canonized  j  and  this  man,  under  the 
appearance  of  sanctity,  concealed  the  most  boundless  anibition. 
The  monks  had  hitherto  been  a  kind  of  secular  priests,  who, 
though  they  lived  in  communities,  were  neither  separated  from 
the  rest  of  the  world,  nor  useless  to  it.  They  were  often  mar- 
ried ;  they  were  assiduously  employed  in  the  education  of 
youth,  and  subject  to  the  commands  of  temporal  superiors. 
The  celibacy  and  the  independency  of  the  clergy,  as  being  a 
measure  that  Avould  contribute  to  the  establishrnent  of  the  pa- 
pal power  in  Europe,  was  Avarmly  recommended  by  the  see  of 
Home  to  all  ecclesiastics  in  general,  but  to  the  monks  in  partic-^ 
ular.  The  present  favourable  opportunity  offered  of  carrying  thi^ 
measure  in  England,  arising  from  the  superstitious  character  of 
Edred,  and  the  furious  zeal  of  Dunstan?  Both  lent  it  all  the  as- 
sistance in  their  power ;  and  the  order  of  Benedictine  monks 
was  established  under  the  direction  of  Dunstan.  Edred  implicitly 
submitted  to  his  directions  both  in  church  and  state ;  and  the 
Itingdom  was  in  a  fair  way  of  being  turned  into  a  papal  province? 
by  this  zealous  ecclesiastic,  when  he  was  checked  in  the  midst  of 
his  career  by  the  death  of  the  king,  who  died  of  a  quinsy,  in  the 
tenth  year  of  Jiis  reign. 

Edwy,  his  nephe\\',  who  ascended  the  throne,  his  own 

L       "J    sons  being  yet  unfit  to  govern,  was  a  prince  of  great 

personal  accomplishments  and  a  martial  disposition.    But  he  was 

j.iQW  come  to  the  government  of  a  kingdom  in  which  he  had  ai^ 


SAXON  MONARCH V,  5a 

eneniy  to  contend  with,  against  whom  all  military  virtues  could 
be  of  little  service.  Dunstan,  who  had  governed  during  the  for- 
mer reign,  was  resolved  to  remit  nothing  of,hi«  authority  in  this ; 
and  Edwy,  immediately  upon  his  accession,  found  himself  involv- 
ed in  a  quarrel  with  the  monks,  whose  rage  neither  his  accom- 
plishments nor  his  virtues  could  nutigate.  He  seems  to  have 
been  elected  by  the  secular  priests  in  opposition  to  the  monks ; 
so  that  their  whole  body,  and  Dunstan  at  their  head,  pursued  him 
with  implacable  animosity  while  living,  and  even  endeavoured  to 
brand  his  character  to  posterity. 

This  Dunstan,  who  makes  a  greater  figoire  in  these  times  than 
even  kings  themselves,  was  boi-n  of  noble  parents  in  the  West; 
but  being  defamed  as  a  man  of  licentious  manners  in  his  youth, 
he  betook  himself  to  the  austerities  of  a  monastic  life,  either  to 
atone  for  his  faults,  or  vindicate  his  reputation.  He  secluded 
himself  entirely  from  the  world,  in  a  cell  so  small  that  he  could 
neither  stand  erect  nor  lie  along  in  it.  It  was  in  this  retreat  of 
constant  mortification  that  his  zeal  grew  furious,  and  his  fancy 
teemed  with  visions  of  the  most  extravagant  nature.  His  suppos- 
ed illuminations  were  frequent;  his  temptations  strong,  but  he 
always  resisted  with  bravery.  The  devil,  it  was  said,  one  day 
paid  him  a  visit  in  the  shape  of  a  fine  young  woman ;  but  Dun- 
stan, knowing  the  deceit,  and  provoked  at  his  importunity,  seized 
him  by  the  nose  with  a  pair  of  red-hot  pincers,  as  he  put  his  head 
into  the  cell ;  and  he  held  him  there  till  the  malignant  spirit  made 
the  whole  neighbourhood  resound  with  his  bellowings.  Nothing 
was  so  absurd  but  what  the  monks  were  ready  to  propagate  in 
favour  of  their  sect.  Crucifixes,  altars,  and  even  horses  were 
heard  to  harangue  in  their  defence  against  the  secular  clergy. 
These  miracles,  backed  by  their  stronger  assertions,  prevailed 
with  the  people,  Dunstan  was  considered  as  the  peculiar  fa- 
vourite of  the  Almighty,  and  appeared  at  court  with  an  authority 
greater  than  that  of  kings  ;  since  theirs  was  confened  by  men, 
but  his  allowed  by  Heaven  itself.  Being  possessed  of  so  much 
power,  it  may  be  easily  supposed  that  Edwy  could  make  but  a 
feeble  resistance ;  and  that  his  first  fault  was  likely  to  be  attend- 
ed with  the  most  dangerous  consequences.  The  monk  found  or 
made  one  on  the  very  day  of  his  coronation.  There  was  a  lady 
pf  the  royal  blood,  named  Elgiva,  whose  beauty  had  made  a  strong 


54  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

impression  on  this  young  monarch's  heart.  He  had  even  ven- 
tured to  marry  her,  contrary  to  the  advice  of  his  counsellors,  as 
she  was  in  the  degrees  of  aflSnity  prohibited  by  the  canon  law. 
On  the  day  of  his  coronation,  while  his  nobility  were  giving  a 
loose  to  the  more  noisy  pleasures  of  wine  and  festivity  in  the 
great  hall,  Edwy  retired  to  his  wife's  apartment,  where,  in  com- 
pany with  her  mother,  he  enjoyed  the  more  pleasing  satisfaction 
of  her  conversation.  Dunstan  no  sooner  perceived  his  absence, 
than,  conjecturing  the  reason,  he  rushed  fiercely  into  the  apait- 
ment,  and,  upbraiding  him  with  all  the  bitterness  of  ecclesiastical 
rancour,  dragged  him  forth  in  the  most  outrageous  manner.  Dun- 
stan, it  seems,  was  not  Avithout  his  enemies ;  for  the  king  was 
advised  to  punish  this  insult,  by  ordering  him  to  account  for  the 
money  with  which  he  had  been  intrusted  during  the  last  reign. 
This  account  the  haughty  monk  refused  to  give  in ;  wherefore  he 
was  deprived  of  all  the  ecclesiastical  and  civil  emoluments  of 
which  he  had  been  in  possession,  and  banished  the  kingdom.  His 
exile  only  served  to  increase  the  reputation  of  his  sanctity  among 
the  people ;  and  Odo,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  was  so  far  trans- 
ported with  the  spirit  of  the  party,  that  he  pronounced  a  divorce 
between  Edwy  and  Elgiva.  Ecclesiastical  censures  were  then 
attended  with  the  most  formidably  effects.  The  king  could  no 
longer  resist  the  indignation  of  the  church,  but  consented  to  sur- 
render his  beautiful  wife  to  its  fury.  Accordingly,  Odo  sent  into 
the  palace  a  party  of  soldiers,  who  seized  the  queen,  and,  by  his 
orders,  branded  her  on  the  face  with  a  hot  iron.  Not  contented 
with  this  cruel  vengeance,  they  carried  her  by  force  into  Ireland, 
and  there  commanded  her  to  remain  in  perpetual  exile.  This 
injunction,  however,  ivas  too  distressing  for  that  faithful  woman 
to  comply  with ;  for,  being  cured  of  her  wound,  and  having  ob- 
literated the  marks  which  had  been  made  to  deface  her  beauty, 
she  once  more  ventured  to  return  to  the  king,  whom  she  still  re- 
garded as  her  husband.  But  misfortune  still  continued  to  pur- 
sue her.  She  was  taken  prisoner  by  a  party  whom  the  archbish- 
op had  appointed  to  observe  her  conduct,  and  was  put  to  death 
in  the  most  cruel  manner;  the  sinews  of  her  legs  cut,  and  her 
body  mangled,  she  was  thus  left  to  expire  in  the  most  cruel  ag- 
ony. In  the  mean  time  a  secret  revolt  against  Edwy  became  al- 
most general ;  and  that  it  might  not  be  doubted  at  whose  instiga- 


SAXON  MONARCKX  55 

4,ion  this  revolt  was  undertaken,  Dunstan  returned  to  England, 
and  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the  party.  The  malcontents  at 
last  proceeded  to  open  rebellion ;  and  having  placed  Edgar,  the 
king's  younger  brother,  a  boy  of  about  thirteen  years  of  age,  at 
their  head,  they  soon  put  him  in  possession  of  all  the  northern 
parts  of  the  kingdom.  Edwy's  power,  and  the  number  of  his  ad- 
herents, every  day  declining,  he  was  at  last  obliged  to  consent 
to  a  partition  of  the  kingdom ;  but  his  death,  which  happened 
soon  after,  freed  his  enemies  from  all  further  inquietude,  and 
gave  Edgar  peaceable  possession  of  the  government. 

Edgar  being  placed  on  the  throne  by  the  influence 
of  the  monks,  affected  to  be  entirely  guided  by  their    L       'J 
directions  in  all  his  succeeding  transactions.     There  has  ever 
been  some  popular  cry,  some  darling  prejudice  amongst  the  En- 
glish; and  he  who  has  taken  the  advantage  of  it,  has  always 
found  it  of  excellent  assistance  to  his  government.     The  sancti- 
ty of  the  monks  was  the  cry  at  that  time ;  and  Edgar,  chiming 
in  with  the  people,  at  once  promoted  their  happiness  and  his 
own  glory.    Few  English  monarchs  have  reigned  with  more  for- 
tune or  more  splendour  than  he.     He  not  only  quieted  all  do- 
mestic insurrections,  but  repressed  all  foreign  invasions ;  and 
his  power  was  so  well  established,  and  so  widely  extended,  that 
he  is  said  to  have  been  rowed  in  his  barge  by  eight  tributary 
kings  upon  the  river  Dee.     The  monks  whom  he  promoted  are 
loud  in  his  praise ;  and  yet  the  example  of  his  continence  was  no 
way  corresponding  with  that  chastity  and  forbearance  on  which 
they  chiefly  founded  their  superior  pretensions  to  sanctity.     It  is 
indeed  somewhat  extraordinary,  that  one  should  have  been  extoll- 
ed for  his  virtues  by  the  monks,  whose  irregularities  were  so 
peculiarly  opposite  to  the  tenets  they  they  enforced.     His  first 
transgression  of  this  kind  was  the  breaking  into  a  convent,  car- 
rying off  Editha,  a  nun,  by  force,  and  even  committing  violence 
on  her  person.    For  this  act  of  sacrilege  and  barbarity,  no  other 
penance  was  enjoined  than  that  he  should  abstain  from  wearing 
his  crown  for  seven  years.    As  for  tlie  lady  herself,  he  was  per- 
mitted to  continue  his  intercourse  with  her  without  scandal. 
There  was  another  mistress  of  Edgar's,  named  Elfleda  the  Fair^ 
with  whom  he  formed  a  connection  by  a  kind  of  accident  j — ^for 
being  at  the  house  of  one  of  his  nobles,  and  fixing  his  affections 


56  HIS  TORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

on  tl\e  nobleman's  daughter,  he  privately  requested  that  the  young' 
lady  should  pass  that  very  night  with  him.  The  lady's  mother^ 
knowing  his  power,  and  the  impetuosity  of  his  temper,  prevailed 
upon  her  daughter  seemingly  to  comply  with  his  request;  but,  in 
the  mean  time,  substituted  a  beautiful  domestic  in  the  young  la- 
dy's place.  In  the  moi-ning,  when  the  king  perceived  the  deceit, 
instead  of  being  displeased  at  the  stratagem,  he  expressed  pleas- 
ure in  the  adventure ;  and  transferring  his  love  to  Elfleda,  as 
the  damsel  was  called,  slie  became  his  favourite  mistress,  and 
maintained  an  ascendency  over  him  till  his  marriage  with  Elfrida* 
The  story  of  this  lady  is  too  remarkable  to  be  passed  over  in  si- 
lence. 

Edgar  had  long  heard  of  the  beauty  of  a  young  lady,  whose 
name  was  Elfrida,  daughter  to  the  earl  of  Devonshire  ;  but,  un- 
willing to  credit  common  fame  in  this  particular,  he  sent  Ethel- 
wald,  his  favourite  friend,  to  see,  and  inform  him,  if  Elfrida  was 
indeed  that  incomparable  woman  report  had  described  her.  Eth- 
elwald,  arriving  at  the  earl's,  had  no  sooner  cast  his  eyes  upon 
that  nobleman's  daughter  than  he  became  desperately  enamoured 
of  her  himself.  Such  was  the  violence  of  his  passion,  that,  for- 
getting his  master's  intentions,  he  solicited  only  his  own  inter- 
ests, and  demanded  for  himself  the  beautiful  Elfrida  from  her  fa- 
ther in  marriage.  The  favourite  of  a  king  was  not  likely  to  find 
a  refusal ;  the  earl  gave  his  consent,  and  their  nuptials  were  per- 
formed in  private.  Upon  his  return  to  court,  Avhich  was  shortly 
after,  he  assured  the  king,  that  her  i-iches  alone  and  her  high  qual- 
ity had  been  the  cause  of  her  admiration  ;  and  he  appeared  amaz- 
ed how  the  world  could  talk  so  much,  and  so  unjustly,  of  her 
charms.  The  king  was  satisfied,  and  no  longer  felt  any  curiosi- 
ty, while  Ethelwald  secretly  triumphed  in  his  address.  When 
he  had,  by  this  deceit,  weaned  the  king  from  his  purpose,  betook 
an  opportunity,  after  some  time,  of  turning  the  conversation  on 
Elfrida,  representing,  that  though  the  fortune  of  the  earl  of  Dev- 
onshire's daughter  would  be  a  trifle  to  a  king,  yet  it  would  be  an 
immense  acquisition  to  a  needy  subject-  He,  therefore,  humbly 
entreated  permission  to  pay  his  addresses  to  her,  as  she  was  the 
richest  heiress  in  the  kingdom.  A  request  so  seemingly  reason- 
able was  readily  complied  with  :  Ethelwald  returned  to  his  wife, 
and  their  nuptials  were  solemnized  in  public.    His  greatest  care^ 


SAXON  MONARCHY,-  ^ 

however,  was  employed  in  keeping  her  from  court ;  and  he  took 
every  precaution  to  prevent  her  appearing  before  a  king  so  sus- 
ceptible of  love,  whilst  he  was  so  capable  of  inspiring  that  pas- 
sion.   But  it  was  impossible  to  keep  his  treachery  long  conceal- 
ed.    Favourites  are  never  without  private  enemies,  who  watch 
every  opportunity  of  rising  upon  their  ruin.    Edgar  was  soon  in- 
formed of  the  whole  transaction ;  but.  dissembling  his  resentment, 
he  took  occasion  to  visit  that  part  of  the  country  where  this  mir- 
acle of  beauty  was  detained,  accompanied  by  Ethelwald,  who  re- 
luctantly attended  him  thither.     Upon  coming  near  the  lady's 
habitation,  he  told  him  that  he  had  a  curiosity  to  see  his  wife,  of 
whom  he  had  formerly  heard  so  much,  and  desired  to  be  intro- 
duced as  his  acquaintance.      Ethelwald,  thunder-struck  at  the 
proposal,  did  all  in  his  power,  but  in  vain,  to  dissuade  him.    All 
he  could  obtain^  was  permission  to  go  before,  on  pretence  of  pre- 
paring for  the  king's  reception*     On  his  arrival  he  fell  a,t  his 
wife's  feet,  confessing  what  he  had  done  to  be  possessed  of  her 
charms,  and  conjuring  her  to  conceal,  as  much  as  possible,  her 
beauty  from  the  king,  who  was  but  too  susceptible  of  its  power* 
Elfrida,  little  obliged  to  him  for  a  passion  that  had  deprived  her 
of  a  crown,  promised  compliance ;  but,  prompted  either  by  vani- 
ty or  revenge,  adorned  her  person  with  the  most  exquisite  artj 
and  called  up  all  her  beauty  on  the  occasion.    The  event  answer- 
ed her  expectations :  the  king  no  sooner  saw  than  he  loved  her, 
and  was  instantly  resolved  to  obtain  her^    The  better  to  effect 
his  intentions,  he  concealed  his  passion  from  the  husband,  and 
took  leave  with  a  seeming  indifference  ;  but  his  revenge  was  not 
the  less  certain  and  fatal.     Ethelwald  was  some  time  after  sent 
into  Northumberland,  upon  pretence  of  urgent  affairs,  and  was 
found  murdered  in  a  wood  by  the  way.     Some  say  he  was  stab- 
bed by  the  king's  own  hand  ;  some,  that  he  only  commanded  the 
assassination  :  however  this  be,  Elfrida  was  invited  soon  after  to 
court,  by  the  king's  own  order,  and  their  nuptials  were  perform- 
ed with  the  usual  solemnity. 

Such  was  the  criminal  passion  of  a  monarch,  whom  the  monks 
have  thought  proper  to  represent  as  the  most  perfect  of  mankind. 
His  reign  was  successful,  because  it  was  founded  upon  a  compli- 
ance with  the  prejudices  of  the  people ;  but  it  produced  very  sen- 
sible evils,  and  these  fell  upon  his  successor.    He  died  after  a 

TOL.  I.  8 


58  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

reign  of  sixteen  years,  in  the  thirty -third  year  of  his  age,  being^ 
succeeded  by  his  son  Edward,  whom  he  had  by  his  first  marriage 
with  the  daughter  of  the  earl  of  Ordmer. 

Edward,  surnamed  the  Martyr,  was  made  king  by 

L  *J  the  interest  of  the  monks,  and  lived  but  four  years  after 
liis  accession.  In  his  reign  there  is  notliing  remarkable,  if  we 
except  his  tragical  and  memorable  end.  Though  this  young 
monarch  had  been  from  the  beginning  opposed  by  Elfrida,  his 
step-mother,  who  seems  to  have  united  the  greatest  deformity  of 
mind  with  the  highest  graces  of  person,  yet  he  ever  showed  her 
marks  of  the  strongest  regard,  and  even  expressed,  on  all  occa- 
sions, the  most  tender  aifection  for  her  son,  his  brother.  How- 
ever, hunting  one  day  near  Corfe-castle,  where  Elfrida  resided, 
he  thought  it  his  duty  to  pay  her  a  visit,  although  he  was  not  at- 
tended by  any  of  his  retinue.  There  desiring  some  liquor  to  be 
brought  him,  as  he  was  tliirsty,  while  he  Avas  yet  holding  the  cup 
to  his  head,  one  of  Elfrida's  domestics,  instructed  for  that  pur- 
pose, stabbed  him  in  the  back.  The  king,  finding  himself  wound- 
ed, put  spurs  to  his  horse ;  but,  fainting  with  the  loss  of  blood,  he 
fell  from  the  saddle,  and  his  foot  sticking  in  the  stirrup,  he  was 
dragged  along  by  his  horse  till  he  was  killed.  Being  tracked  by 
the  blood,  his  body  was  found,  and  privately  interred  at  Ware- 
ham  by  his  servants. 

Ethelred  the  Second,  the  son  of  Edgar  and  Elfrida, 

L  'J  succeeded ;  a  weak  and  irresolute  monarch,  incapable 
of  governing  the  kingdom,  or  providing  for  its  safety.  After  a 
train  of  dissensions,  follies,  and  vices,  which  seem  to  have  marked 
some  of  the  former  reigns,  it  is  not  sui'prising  that  the  country 
was  weakened  ;  and  the  people,  taught  to  rely  entirely  on  prse- 
ternatural  assistance,  were  rendered  incapable  of  defending  them- 
selves. During  this  period,  therefore,  their  old  and  terrible  ene- 
mies, the  Danes,  who  seem  not  to  be  loaded  with  the  same  accu- 
mulation of  vice  and  folly,  were  daily  gaining  ground.  The 
weakness  and  the  inexperience  of  Ethelred  appeared  to  give  a 
favourable  opportunity  for  renewing  their  depredations ;  and  ac- 
cordingly they  landed  on  several  parts  of  the  coasts,  spreading 
their  usual  terror  and  devastation.  The  English,  ill-provided  to 
oppose  such  an  enemy,  made  but  a  feeble  resistance ;  endeavour- 
ing, by  treachery  and  submission,  to  avert  the  storm  they  had  not 
spirit  to  oppose. 


SAXON  MONARCHY.  59 

The  northern  invaders,  now  well  acquainted  with  the  defence- 
less condition  of  England,  made  a  powerful  descent,  under  the 
command  of  Sweyn  king  of  Denmark,  and  Olave  king  of  Norway, 
who,  sailing  up  the  Humber,  committed  on  all  sides  their  de- 
structive ravages.     The  English  opposed  them  with  a  formidable 
armj,  but  were  repulsed  with  great  slaughter.    The  Danes,  en- 
couraged by  this  success,  marclied  boldly  into  the  heart  of  the 
kingdom,  filling  all  places  with  the  marks  of  horrid  cruelty.    Eth- 
elred  had,  upon  a  former  invasion  of  these  pirates,  bought  them 
off  with  money ;  and  he  now  resolved  to  put  the  same  expedient 
in  practice  once  more.    He  sent  embassadors,  therefore,  to  the 
two  kings,  and  offered  them  subsistence  and  tribute,  provided 
they  would  restrain  their  ravages,  and  depart  the  kingdom.     It 
has  often  been  remarked,  that  buying  off  an  invasion  only  serves 
to  strengthen  the  enemy,  and  to  invite  a  repetition  of  hostilities. 
Such  it  happened  upon  this  occasion :  Sweyn  and  Olave  agreed 
to  the  terms,  and  peaceably  took  up  their  quarters  at  Southamp- 
ton, where  the  sum  of  sixteen  thousand  pounds  was  paid  them. 
Olave  returned  to  his  native  country,  and  never  infested  England 
more ;  but  Sweyn  was  less  scrupulous,  and  the  composition  with 
him  gave  but  a  short  interval  to  the  miseries  of  the  English. 

The  English  now  found  their  situation  truly  deplora- 
ble. The  weakness  of  the  king,  the  divisions  of  the  no-  L^^°*J 
bility,  the  treachery  of  some,  and  the  cowardice  of  others,  frus- 
trated all  their  endeavours  for  mutual  defence.  The  Danes,  ever 
informed  of  their  situation,  and  ready  to  take  advantage  of  it, 
appeared,  a  short  time  after  the  late  infamous  composition,  upon 
the  English  shore,  and,  rising  in  their  demands  in  proportion  to 
the  people's  incapacity  to  oppose,  now  demanded  twenty-five 
thousand  pounds  more.  This  sum  they  also  received ;  and  this 
only  served  to  improve  their  desire  for  fresh  exactions.  But 
they  soon  had  a  material  cause  of  resentment  given  them,  by 
which  the  infraction  of  the  stipulated  treaty  became  necessary. 
The  Danes,  as  hath  been  already  observed,  had  made  several  set-o 
tlements,  for  many  years  before,  in  different  parts  of  the  king- 
dom. There,  without  mixing  with  the  natives,  they  still  main- 
tained a  peaceable  correspondence  and  connexion  among  them. 
Their  military  superiority  was  generally  acknowledged  by  all  5 
and  the  kings  of  England  had  been  accustomed  to  keep  in  pay 


GO  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

bodies  of  Danish  troops,  whom  they  quartered  in  different  parts 
of  the  country.  These  mercenaries  had  attained  to  such  a  height 
of  luxury,  according  to  the  old  English  writers,  that  they  combed 
their  hair  once  a  day,  bathed  themselves  once  a  week ;  and,  by 
these  arts,  then  esteemed  effeminate,  had  rendered  themselves  so 
agreeable  to  the  fair  sex,  that  they  debauched  the  wives  and 
daughters  of  the  English,  and  had  dishonoured  many  families. 
To  those  insults  was  added  the  treachery  of  their  conduct  upon 
every  threatened  invasion,  as  they  still  showed  their  attachment 
to  their  own  countrymen,  against  those  among  whom  they  were 
permitted  to  reside.  These  were  motives  sufficient,  in  that  bar- 
barous age,  for  a  general  massacre ;  and  Ethelred,  by  a  policy  in- 
cident to  weak  princes,  embraced  the  cruel  resolution  of  putting 
them  all  to  the  sword.  This  plot  was  carried  on  with  such  se- 
crecy, that  it  was  executed  in  one  day,  and  all  the  Danes  in 
England  were  destroyed  without  mercy.  But  this  massacre,  so 
perfidious  in  the  contriving,  and  so  cruel  in  the  execution,  instead 
of  ending  the  long  miseries  of  the  people,  only  prepared  the  way 
for  greater  calamities. 

While  the  English  were  congratulating  each  other  upon  their 
late  deliverance  from  an  inveterate  enemy,  Sweyn,  king  of  Den^ 
mark,  who  had  been  informed  of  their  treacherous  cruelties,  ap-^ 
peared  off  the  western  coasts  with  a  large  fleet,  meditating  slaugh- 
ter, and  furious  with  revenge.     The  English  vainly  attempted  to 
summon  their  forces  together ;  treachery  and  cowardice  still  op- 
erated to  dispirit  their  troops,  or  to  dissipate  them.     To  these 
miseries  was  added  a  dreadful  famine,  partly  from  the  bad  sea- 
sons,  and  partly  from  the  decay  of  agriculture.    For  a  while  they 
supposed  that  the  Danish  devastations  would  be  retarded  by  the 
payment  of  thirty  thousand  pounds,  which  the  invaders  agreed  to 
accept ;  but  this,  as  in  all  the  former  cases,  afforded  but  a  tem- 
porally relief.    For  a  while  they  placed  some  hopes  in  a  powerful 
navy,  which  they  found  means  to  equip  5  but  this  was  soon  di- 
vided and  dispersed,  without  doing  them  any  service.    Nothing, 
therefore,  now  remained  but  their  suffering  the  just  indignation  of 
the  conqueror,  and  undergoing  all  the  evils  that  war,  inflamed  by 
revenge,  could  inflict.  During  this  period,  a  general  consternation, 
together  with  a  mutual  diffidence  and  dissension,  prevailed.     Ces- 
«iations  from  these  calamities  were  purchased,  one  after  another^^ 


SAXON  MONARCHY.  61 

by  immense  sums ;  but  as  they  afforded  only  a  short  alleviation 
of  the  common  distress,  no  other  resource  remained  at  last  than 
that  of  submitting  to  the  Danish  monarch,  of  swearing  allegiance 
to  him,  and  giving  hostages  as  pledges  of  sincerity.  Ethelred 
was  obliged  to  fly  into  Normandy,  and  the  whole  country  thus 
came  under  the  power  of  Sweyn,  his  victorious  rival. 

The  death  of  Sweyn,  which  happened  about  six  weeks  after, 
seemed  to  offer  a  favourable  opportunity  of  once  more  restoring 
Ethelred  to  the  throne,  and  his  subjects  to  their  liberties.  Ac^ 
cordingly  he  seized  it  with  avidity :  but  his  misconducts  were  in- 
curable ;  and  his  indolence,  credulity,  and  cowardice,  obstructed 
all  success.  At  length,  after  having  seen  the  greatest  part  of  the 
kingdom  seized  by  the  insulting  enemy,  after  refusing  to  head 
his  troops  to  oppose  them,  he  retired  to  London,  where  he  ended 
an  inglorious  reign  of  thirty -five  years  by  a  natural  death,  leaving 
behind  him  two  sons,  the  eldest  of  whom,  Edmund,  succeeded  to 
his  crown  and  his  misfortunes. 

Edmund,  his  son  and  successor,  received  the  surname  p^  ^.^  f.  -, 
of  Ironside,  from  liis  hardy  opposition  to  the  enemy  5  *-  *^ 
but  this  opposition  seemed  as  ineffectual  to  restore  the  happiness 
of  his  country  as  it  was  to  continue  him  in  the  possession  of  the 
throne.  He  was  opposed  by  one  of  the  most  powerful  and  vigi- 
lant monarchs  then  in  Europe ;  for  Canute,  afterwards  surnamed 
the  Great,  succeeded  Sweyn  as  king  of  Denmark,  and  also  as 
general  of  the  Danish  forces  in  England.  The  contest  between 
these  two  monarchs  was  therefore  managed  with  great  obstinacy 
and  perseverance ;  the  first  battle  that  was  fought  appeared  un- 
decisive ;  a  second  followed,  in  which  the  Danes  were  victori- 
ous :  but  Edmund  still  having  interest  enough  to  bring  a  third 
army  into  the  field,  the  Danish  and  English  nobility,  equally  ha- 
rassed by  these  convulsions,  obliged  their  kings  to  come  to  a  com- 
promise, and  to  divide  the  kingdom  between  them  by  treaty. 
Canute  reserved  to  liimself  the  northern  parts  of  the  kingdom ; 
the  southern  parts  were  left  to  Edmund :  but  this  prince  being 
murdered  about  a  month  after  the  treaty  by  his  two  chamberlains, 
at  Oxford,  Canute  was  left  in  peaceable  possession  of  the  whole 
Idngdom. 

Canute,  though  he  had  gratified  his  ambition  in  obtaining 
possession  of  the  English  crow%  yet  was  obliged  at  first  to  make 


62  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

some  mortifying  concessions ;  and,  in  order  to  gain  the  affections 
of  the  nobility,  he  endeavoured  to  gratify  their  avarice.  But  as 
his  power  grew  stronger,  and  his  title  more  secure,  he  then  re- 
sumed those  grants  which  he  had  made,  and  even  put  many  of 
the  English  nobles  to  death,  sensible  that  those  who  had  betrayed 
their  native  sovereign  would  never  be  true  to  liim.  Nor  was  he 
less  severe  in  his  exactions  upon  the  subordinate  ranks  of  the 
people,  levying  at  one  time  seventy -two  thousand  pounds  upon 
the  country,  and  eleven  thousand  more  upon  the  city  of  London 
only. 

Having  thus  strengthened  his  new  power  by  effectually  weak* 
ening  all  who  had  wealth  or  authority  to  withstand  him,  he  next 
began  to  show  the  merciful  side  of  his  character.  Nor  does  it 
seem  without  just  grounds  that  he  is  represented  by  some  histori- 
ans as  one  of  the  first  characters  in  those  barbarous  ages.  The 
invectives  which  are  thrown  out  against  him  by  the  English  writ- 
ers seem  merely  the  effect  of  national  resentment,  or  prejudice, 
unsupported  by  truth.  His  first  step  to  reconcile  tlie  English  to 
his  yoke,  was,  by  sending  back  to  Denmark  as  many  of  his  fol- 
lowers as  he  could  safely  spare.  He  made.no  distinction  between 
the  English  and  Danes  in  the  administration  of  justice,  but  restor- 
ed the  Saxon  customs  in  a  general  assembly  of  the  kingdom.  The 
two  nations  thus  uniting  with  each  other,  were  glad  to  breathe  for 
a  while  from  the  tumult  and  slaughter  in  which  they  had  mutual- 
ly involved  each  other ;  and,  to  confirm  their  amity,  the  king 
himself  married  Emma,  the  sister  of  Richard,  duke  of  Normandy, 
who  had  ever  warmly  espoused  tlie  interests  of  the  English. 

Canute,  having  thus  settled  his  power  in  England  beyond  the 
danger  of  a  revolution,  made  a  voyage  into  Denmark,  as  his  na- 
tive dominions  were  attacked  by  the  king  of  Sweden.  In  this 
expedition  Godwin,  an  English  earl,  was  particularly  distinguish- 
ed for  his  valour,  and  acquired  that  fame  which  afterwards  laid 
a  foundation  for  the  immense  power  he  acquired  during  the  suc- 
ceeding reigns.  In  another  voyage  he  made  to  Denmark,  he  at- 
tacked Norway  ;  and,  expelling  Olaus  from  his  kingdom,  annex- 
ed it  to  his  own  empire.  Thus,  being  at  once  king  of  England, 
Denmark,  and  Norway,  he  was  considered  as  the  most  warlike 
and  potent  prince  in  Europe ;  while  the  security  of  his  power  in» 
clined  his  temper,  which  was  naturally  cruelj  to  mercy. 


SAXON  MONARCHY.  'fi3 

As  his  reign  was  begun  in  blood,  he  was,  towards  the  end  of 
it,  willing  to  atone  for  his  former  fierceness  by  acts  of  penance 
and  devotion.  He  built  churches,  endowed  monasteries,  and 
appointed  revenues  for  the  celebration  of  mass.  He  even  under- 
took a  pilgrimage  to  Rome,  where  he  remained  a  considerable 
time ;  and,  besides  obtaining  from  the  pope  some  privileges  for 
the  English  school  erected  there,  he  engaged  all  the  princes 
through  whose  dominions  he  passed,  to  desist  from  those  heavy 
impositions  which  they  were  accustomed  to  exact  from  the  En- 
glish pilgrims.  The  piety  of  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  and  the 
resolute  valour  of  the  former,  were  topics  that  filled  the  mouths 
of  his  courtiers  with  flattery  and  praise.  They  even  affected  to 
think  his  power  uncontrollable,  and  that  all  things  would  be 
obedient  to  his  command.  Canute,  sensible  of  their  adulation,  is 
said  to  have  taken  the  following  method  to  reprove  them.  He 
ordered  his  chair  to  be  set  on  the  sea-shore  while  the  tide  was 
coming  in,  and  commanded  the  sea  to  retire.  "  Thou  art  under 
my  dominion  (cried  he) ;  the  land  upon  which  I  sit  is  mine ;  I 
charge  thee,  therefore,  to  approach  no  further,  nor  dare  to  wet 
the  feet  of  thy  sovereign."  He  feigned  to  sit  some  time  in  ex- 
pectation of  submission,  till  the  waves  began  to  surround  him ; 
then,  turning  to  his  courtiers,  he  observed,  that  the  titles  of  Lord 
and  Master  belonged  only  to  him  whom  both  earth  and  seas  were 
ready  to  obey.  Thus,  feared  and  respected,  he  lived  many  years 
honoured  with  the  surname  of  Great  for  his  power,  but  deserv- 
ing it  still  more  for  his  virtues.  He  died  at  Shaftesbury,  in  the 
nineteenth  year  of  Iiis  reign,  leaving  behind  three  sons,  Sweyn. 
Harold,  and  Hardicnute.  Sweyn  was  crowned  king  of  Norway : 
Hardicnute  was  put  in  possession  of  Denmark ;  and  Harold  suc- 
ceeded his  father  on  the  English  throne. 

Harold,  surnamed  Harefoot,  from  his  swiftness  riQo*j-i 
in  running,  upon  his  first  coming  to  the  crown  met  with 
no  small  opposition  from  his  younger  brother,  Hardicnute.  But, 
by  the  intervention  of  the  nobles,  a  compromise  was  made  be- 
tween them ;  by  which  it  was  agreed  that  Harold  should  have 
London,  and  all  the  provinces  north  of  the  Thames,  M^ile  the 
possession  of  the  southern  parts  should  be  ceded  to  Hardicnute ; 
and,  until  that  prince  should  appear  in  person,  Emma,  his  moth- 
er, should  govern  in  his  stead.    But  this  agreement  was  of  short 


64  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

duration ;  for,  queen  Emma  having  brought  over  from  Normandy 
Edward  and  Alfred,  descendants  of  the  antient  Saxon  kings,  Al- 
fred was  invited,  with  the  warmest  professions  of  friendship,  by 
Harold  to  London,  and  treacherously  set  upon,  by  his  orders,  on 
the  way.  Six  hundred  of  his  train  were  murdered  in  the  most 
cruel  manner ;  he  himself  was  taken  prisoner ;  and  his  eyes  be- 
ing put  out,  he  was  conducted  to  the  monastery  of  Ely,  where  he 
died  soon  after.  Edward  and  Emma,  apprised  of  his  fate,  fled  to 
the  continent ;  and  Harold,  without  resistance,  took  possession 
of  the  whole  kingdom.  He  lived  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  trea- 
chery but  four  years ;  and  dying,  very  little  regretted  by  his  sub- 
jects, he  left  the  succession  open  to  his  brother. 

Hardicnute's  title  was  readily  acknowledged  both 
L  "^  'J  by  the  Danes  and  the  English ;  and  upon  his  arrival 
from  the  continent  he  was  received  with  the  most  extravagant 
demonstrations  of  joy.  The  ceremony  of  his  coronation  was 
scarce  performed  when  he  gave  the  first  specimen  of  tJie  badness 
of  Ms  disposition,  in  his  impotent  insults  upon  the  body  of  his 
brother,  which  he  ordered  to  be  dug  up,  beheaded,  and  thrown 
into  the  Thames.  When  it  was  found  some  time  after  by  a  fish- 
erman, and  buried,  he  ordered  it  to  be  again  dug  up,  and  to  be 
thrown  into  the  Thames  a  second  time.  His  malice,  however, 
was  in  the  end  ineflfectual ;  for  it  was  again  found,  and  buried 
with  the  greatest  secrecy.  Hardicnute's  next  act  of  rigorous  sove- 
reignty was  the  imposition  of  a  giievous  tax  for  the  payment  of 
his  navy;  which  was  the  more  intolerable,  as  the  nation  was 
threatened  with  a  famine.  In  these  acts  of  severity,  Godwin, 
duke  of  Wessex,  who  had  been  a  vile  instrument  of  treachery 
and  oppression  during  the  former  reign,  was  assistant  now. 
However,  his  base  compliances  did  not  entirely  screen  liim  from 
the  resentment  of  Emma,  who  had  the  strongest  reasons  to  be- 
lieve that  he  was  instrumental  in  the  death  of  prince  Alfred,  her 
son.  At  her  instigation,  therefore,  Alfric,  archbishop  of  Yorkj 
accused  him  of  being  an  accomplice,  and  demanded  justice  accord- 
ingly. Godwin  found  means  to  evade  the  danger,  by  appealing 
to  the  king's  avarice,  and  not  to  the  justice  of  his  cause.  He  pre- 
sented him  with  a  magnificent  galley,  curiously  carved  and  gild- 
ed, rowed  by  four-score  men,  who  wore  each  of  them  a  gold  brace- 
let on  his  arm,  weighing  sixteen  ounces,    The  king?  softened  by 


SAXON  MONARCHY.  63 

tills  present,  permitted  him  to  pui*ge  himself  by  oath ;  and  God" 
win  very  readily  sworei  that  he  had  no  hand  in  the  death  of  Al- 
fred. This  king's  violence  and  unjust  government  were  but  of 
short  duration.  He  died  two  years  after  his  accession,  in  conse- 
quence of  excess  at  the  marriage  of  a  Danish  lord,  which  was  cel- 
ebrated at  Lambeth.  His  deaths  far  from  being  regretted  by  the 
English,  became  the  subject  of  their  derision,  his  anniversary  be* 
ing  distinguished  by  the  name  of  Hock  Holiday. 

Edward,  surnamed  the  Confessou,  from  his  piety, 
had  many  rivals,  whose  claims  to  the  crown  were  rather  ^  '-^ 
more  just  than  his  own.  The  direct  descendants  of  the  last  Saxon 
monarch  were  still  in  being,  though  at  the  remote  distance  of  the 
kingdom  of  Hungary*  Sweyn,  the  eldest  son  of  Hardicnute,  was 
still  alive,  but  at  that  time  engaged  in  wars  in  Norway.  It  re- 
quired therefore  the  utmost  diligence  in  Edward  to  secure  his 
claims,  before  either  of  these  could  come  over  to  dispute  his  title; 
His  own  authority,  though  great  in  the  kingdom,  was  not  suffi- 
cient to  expedite  his  affairs  with  the  desired  dispatch  5  he  was 
therefore  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  Godwin,  whose  power  was 
then  very  extensive,  to  second  his  pretensions.  This  nobleman^ 
though  long  an  enemy  to  his  family,  finding,  upon  the  present  oc- 
casion, that  their  interests  were  united,  laid  aside  all  former  ani- 
mosity, and  concurred  in  fixing  him  upon  the  throne. 

The  English,  who  had  long  groaned  under  a  foreign  yoke,  now 
set  no  bounds  to  their  joy,  at  finding  the  line  of  their  antient 
monarchs  restored ;  and  at  first  the  warmth  of  their  raptures  was 
attended  with  some  violence  against  the  Danes :  but  the  new- 
king,  by  the  mildness  of  his  character,  soon  composed  these  dif- 
ferenceSj  and  the  distinction  between  the  two  nations  gradually 
disappeared.  Thus,  after  a  struggle  of  above  two  hundred  years, 
all  things  seemed  to  remain  in  the  same  state  in  which  those  con- 
flicts began.  These  invasions  from  the  Danes  produced  no  new 
change  of  laws,  customs,  language,  or  religion ;  nor  did  any  other 
traces  of  their  establishments  seem  to  remain^  except  the  castles 
they  built,  and  the  families  that  still  bear  their  names.  No  fur- 
ther mention  therefore  is  made  of  two  distinct  nations ;  for  the 
Normans  coming  in  soon  after  served  to  unite  them  into  a  closer 
union. 
VOL.  I.  9 


(3G  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

The  first  acts  of  this  monarch's  reign  bore  the  appearance  c^f 
severity,  for  he  resumed  all  grants  that  had  been  made  by  the 
ciown  in  former  reigns ;  and  he  ordered  his  mother  Emma,  who 
was  ever  intriguing  against  him,  to  be  shut  up  in  a  monastery. 
As  he  had  been  bred  in  the  Norman  court,  he  showed,  in  every 
instance,  a  predilection  for  the  customs,  laws,  and  even  the  na- 
tives of  that  country ;  and  among  the  rest  of  his  faults,  though  he 
had  married  Editha,  the  daughter  of  Godwin,  yet,  either  from 
mistaken  piety  or  fixed  aversion,  during  his  whole  reign  he  ab- 
stained from  her  bed. 

However  these  actions  might  be  regarded  by  many  of  the  king's 
subjects  (for  they  were  all  of  a  doubtful  kind),  certain  it  is  that 
Godwin,  who  was  long  grown  much  too  powerful  for  a  subject, 
made  them  the  pretext  of  his  opposition.     He  began  by  complain- 
ing of  the  influence  of  the  Normans  in  the  government;  and  his 
animosities  soon  broke  out  into  action-     Eustace,  count  of  Bou- 
logne, who  had  mai-ried  Edward's  sister,  arrived  in  England  upon 
a  visit  to  the  king,  and  was  received  with  great  honour  and  affec- 
tion.    Upon  his  return  to  Dover,  having  sent  a  sei'vant  before 
him  to  bespeak  lodgings  in  that  city,  a  fray  happened  between 
this  domestic  and  the  townsmen,  in  which  he  lost  his  life.     The 
count  and  his  attendants  attempting  to  take  revenge,  the  inhab- 
itants took  arms ;  and  both  sides  engaging  with  great  fury,  the 
count  was  obliged  to  find  safety  by  flight,  after  having  lost  about 
twenty  of  his  men,  and  slain  as  many  of  the  people.     The  count, 
exasperated  at  tliis  insult,  returned  to  the  court  at  Gloucester, 
and  demanded  justice  of  the  king,  who  very  warmly  espoused  his 
quarrel.     He  instantly  gave  orders  to  Godwin,  in  whose  govern- 
ment Dover  lay,  to  go  immediately  to  the  place,  and  to  punish 
the  inhabitants  for  their  crime.     Tiiis  was  a  conjuncture  highly 
favourable  to  the  schemes  of  this  aspiring  chief;  and,  thinking 
that  now  was  tlie  time  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the  people,  he 
absolutely  refused  to  obey  the  king's  command.     Sensible,  howev- 
er, that  obedience  would  soon  be  extorted,  unless  he  could  defend 
Iiis  insolence,  he  prepared  for  his  defence,  or  rather  for  an  attack 
upon  Edward.     Accordingly,  under  a  pretence  of  repressing 
some  disorders  on  the  Welsh  frontier,  he  secretly  assembled  a 
great  array,  and  attempted  to  surprise  the  king,  who  continued, 
without  the  smallest  suspicion,  at  Gloucester.    Neverthelessj  be- 


SAXON  MONARCHY;  67 

ing  soon  informed  of  Godwin's  treachery,  his  first  step  was  pri- 
vately to  summon  all  the  assistance  he  could,  and,  in  the  miean- 
while,  to  protract  the  time  by  a  pretended  negotiation.  As  soon 
as  he  found  himself  in  a  capacity  to  take  the  field,  he  then  changed 
his  tone ;  and  Godwin,  finding  himself  unable  to  oppose  his  supe- 
rior force,  or  to  keep  his  army  together,  permitted  it  to  disperse, 
and  took  shelter  with  Baldwin,  earl  of  Flanders.  His  estates, 
which  were  numerous,  together  with  those  of  his  sons,  were  con- 
fiscated ;  and  the  greatness  of  the  family  seemed,  for  a  time,  to 
be  totally  overthrown. 

But  this  nobleman's  power  was  too  strong  to  be  shaken  by  so 
slight  a  blast;  for,  being  assisted  wdth  a  fleet  by  the  earl  of  Flan- 
ders, he  landfed  on  the  isle  of  Wight,  where  he  was  joined  by  his 
son  Harold,  with  a  squadron  which  that  nobleman  had  collected 
in  Ireland.  From  thence  being  reinforced  by  great  numbers  of 
his  former  dependants  and  followers,  he  sailed  up  the  Thames, 
and,  appearing  before  London,  threw  all  things  into  confusion. 
In  this  exigence  the  king  alone  seemed  resolute ;  but  his  nobility, 
many  of  whom  were  secretly  inclined  to  Godwin,  brought  on  a 
negotiation,  in  which  it  was  stipulated,  that  the  king  should  dis- 
miss all  his  foreign  servants,  the  primate  being  among  the  num- 
ber ;  and  that  Godwin  should  give  hostages  for  his  own  future 
good  behaviour.  Godwin's  death,  which  followed  soon  after,  pre- 
vented him  from  reaping  the  fruits  of  an  agreement,  by  which  the 
king's  authority  was  almost  reduced  to  nothing. 

This  nobleman  was  succeeded  in  his  governments  and  offices 
by  his  son  Harold,  who,  in  his  ambition,  w^as  equal  to  his  father, 
but  in  his  virtues  and  abilities  far  his  superior.  By  a  modest  and 
gentle  demeanor  he  acquired  the  good  will  of  Edward,  or  at  least 
softened  those  impressions  of  hatred  which  he  had  long  borne  the 
whole  family.  He  artfully  insinuated  himself  into  the  affections 
of  the  people  by  his  liberality  and  apparent  candour,  while  every 
day  he  increased  his  power  by  seeming  modestly  to  decline  it. 
By  these  arts  he  not  only  supplanted  Algar,  duke  of  Mercia, 
whom  the  king  raised  up  to  rival  his  power,  but  he  got  his  brother 
Tosti  made  duke  of  Northumberland,  upon  the  death  of  Siw^rd, 
who  had  long  governed  that  province  with  great  glory.  ',*■ 

Harold's  insinuating  manners,  his  power,  and  virtues,  extended 
m^  increased  his  popularity  to  such  a  degree,  that  he  began  to  be 


68  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

talked  of  as  the  most  proper  person  to  succeed  to  the  cro^vn. 
But  nothing  could  be  more  ungrateful  to  Edward  than  such  a  de- 
sire, as  he  abhorred  a  successor  from  the  family  of  Godwin. 
Aroused,  therefore,  by  these  rumours,  he  sent  for  his  nephew 
Edward  from  Hungary,  who  was,  in  fact,  the  direct  descendant 
from  the  antient  Saxon  kings.  Prince  Edward  soon  arrived,  but 
was  scarcely  safe  landed  Avhen  he  died,  leaving  his  pretensions  to 
Edgar  Atheling,  his  son,  who  was  too  young,  weak,  and  inactive 
to  avail  himself  of  Ms  title.  The  king  was  now  therefore  thrown 
into  ncAv  difl&culties.  He  saw  the  youth  and  inexperience  of  Ed-! 
gar,  and  dreaded  the  immoderate  ambition  of  Harold.  He  could 
not,  without  reluctance,  think  of  increasing  the  grandeur  of  a 
family  which  had  risen  on  the  ruins  of  royal  authority,  and  had 
been  stained  in  the  blood  of  his  own  brother.  In  this  uncertainty 
he  is  said  to  have  cast  bis  eyes  on  William,  duke  of  Normandy, 
as  a  person  fit  to  succeed  him ;  but  of  the  truth  of  this  circumi 
stance  we  must,  at  this  distance  of  time,  be  contented  to  remain 
in  uncertainty, 

In  the  mean  time  Harold  did  not  remit  in  obedience  to  the 
king,  or  his  assiduities  to  the  people ;  still  increasing  in  his  pow- , 
er,  and  preparing  his  way  for  his  advancement,  on  the  first  va- 
cancy, to  the  throne.  In  these  aims  fortune  herself  seemed  to 
assist  him ;  and  two  incidents,  which  happened  about 
L  *-•  this  time,  contributed  to  fix  that  popularity  which  he 
had  been  so  long  eagerly  in  pursuit  of.  The  Welsh  renewing 
their  hostilities  under  prince  Griffin,  were  repelled  by  liim,  and 
rendered  tributary  to  the  crown  of  England.  The  other  incident 
was  no  less  honourable  :  his  brother  Tosti,  w^ho  had  been  ap- 
pointed to  the  government  of  Northumberland,  having  grievously 
oppressed  the  people,  was  expelled  in  an  insurrection,  and  Harold 
was  ordered  by  the  king  to  reinstate  him  in  his  power,  and  punish 
the  insurgents.  While  yet  at  the  head  of  an  army,  preparing  to 
take  signal  vengeance  for  the  injury  done  to  his  brother,  he  was 
met  by  a  deputation  of  the  people  who  had  been  so  cruelly  gov- 
erned. They  assured  him  that  they  liad  no  intention  to  rebel, 
but  had  taken  up  arms  merely  to  protect  themselves  from  the  cru- 
elty of  s  rapacious  governor.  They  enumerated  the  grievances 
^ey 'had  sustained  from  his  tyranny,  brought  the  strongest  proofs 
$f  his  guilt,  and  appealed  to  Harold's  equity  for  redress.    This 


SAXON  MOlsr  \BCHY.  69 

tiobleman,  convinced  of  Tosti's  brutality,  sacrificecj  his  affection 
to  his  duty ;  and  not  only  procured  their  pardon  from  the  king, 
but  confirmed  the  governor  whom  the  Northumbrians  had  chosen 
in  his  command.  From  that  time  Harold  became  the  idol  of  the 
people ;  and  indeed  his  virtues  deserved  their  love,  had  they  not 
been  excited  by  ambition. 

Harold,  thus  secure  of  the  affections  of  the  English,  no  longer 
strove  to  conceal  his  aims,  but  openly  aspired  at  the  succession. 
He  every  where  insinuated,  that  as  the  heir-apparent  to  the  crown 
was  utterly  unequal  to  the  task  of  government,  both  from  age  and 
natural  imbecility,  there  was  none  so  proper  as  a  man  of  mature 
experience  and  tried  integrity  j  he  alleged,  that  a  man  born  in 
England  was  only  fit  to  govern  Englishmen  ;  and  that  none  but 
an  able  general  could  defend  them  against  so  many  foreign  ene- 
mies as  they  were  every  day  threatened  with.  The  people  readily 
saw  to  what  these  speeches  tended ;  and,  instead  of  discoun- 
tenancing his  pretensions,  assisted  them  with  their  wishes  and 
applause.  Edward,  broken  with  age  and  infirmities,  his  mind  en- 
tirely engrossed  by  the  visions  of  superstition,  and  warmly  attach- 
ed to  none,  saw  the  danger  to  which  the  government  was  expos- 
ed, but  took  feeble  and  irresolute  steps  to  secure  the  succession. 
While  he  continued  thus  uncertain,  he  was  surprised  by  sickness, 
which  brought  him  to  his  end,  on  the  fifth  of  January,  in  the  sixty- 
fifth  year  of  his  age,  and  twenty -fifth  of  his  reign,  r-^  -,gg  -, 

This  prince,  who  was  reverenced  by  the  monks,  un^ 
der  the  titles  of  Saint  and  Confessor,  had  but  weak  pretensions 
to  either,  being  indolent,  irresolute,  and  credulous.  The  tran- 
quillity of  his  reign  was  owing  rather  to  the  weakness  of  his  for- 
eign enemies  than  to  his  own  domestic  strength.  But,  though 
he  seemed  to  have  few  active  virtues,  yet  he  certainly  had  no 
vices  of  an  atrocious  kind;  and  the  want  of  the  passions,  rather 
than  their  restraint,  was  then,  as  it  has  been  long  since,  the  best 
title  to  canonization.  He  was  the  first  who,  from  his  supposed 
sanctity,  touched  for  the  king's^evil. 

Harold,  whose  intrigues  and  virtues  seemed  to  give  a  right  to 
his  pretensions,  ascended  the  throne  without  any  opposition. 
The  citizens  of  London,  who  were  ever  fond  of  an  elective  mon- 
archy, seconded  his  claims  ;  the  clergy  adopted  his  cause ;  and 
the  body  of  the  people,  whose  friend  he  had  been,  sincerely  loved 


70  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

him.  Nor  were  the  first  acts  of  his  reign  unworthy  of  the  gener- 
al prejudice  in  his  favour.  He  took  the  most  effectual  measures 
for  an  impartial  administration  of  justice  ;  ordered  the  laws  to  be 
revised  and  reformed;  and  those  disturbers  of  the  public  peace 
to  be  punished,  who  had  thriven  under  the  lenity  of  the  last  reign. 

But  neither  his  valour,  his  justice,  nor  his  popularity,  were  able 
to  secure  him  from  the  misfortunes  attendant  upon  an  ill-gi-ound- 
ed  title.  The  first  symptoms  of  his  danger  came  from  his  own 
brother  Tosti,  who  had  taken  refuge  in  Flanders,  and  went  among 
the  princes  of  the  continent,  endeavouring  to  engage  them  in  a 
league  against  Harold,  whom  he  represented  as  a  tyrant  and 
usurper.  Not  content  with  this,  being  furnished  with  some  ships 
by  the  earl  of  Flanders,  he  made  a  descent  upon  the  isle  of 
Wight,  which  he  laid  under  contribution,  and  pillaged  along  the 
coast,  until  he  was  encountered  and  routed  by  Morcar,  who  had 
been  appointed  to  the  government  from  which  he  was  expelled. 

But  he  was  not  yet  without  succour  ;  for  Harfagar,  king  of 
Norway,  who  had  been  brought  over  by  his  remonstrances,  arriv- 
ed with  a  fleet  of  two  hundred  sail  at  the  mouth  of  the  river 
Humber,  where  he  was  joined  by  the  shattered  remains  of  Tosti 's 
forces.  It  was  in  vain  that  the  earls  of  Mercia  and  Northumber- 
land attempted  to  stop  their  progress,  with  a  body  of  new-raised 
undisciplined  troops :  they  were  quickly  routed,  and  York  fell  a 
prey  to  the  enemy.  Meanwhile  Harold,  being  informed  of  this 
misfortune,  hastened  with  an  army  to  the  protection  of  his  people, 
and  expressed  the  utmost  ardour  to  show  himself  worthy  of  their 
favour.  He  had  given  so  many  proofs  of  an  equitable  and  pru- 
dent administration,  that  the  people  flocked  from  all  quarters  to 
join  his  standard ;  and  as  soon  as  he  reached  the  enemy  at  Stan- 
ford, he  found  himself  in  a  condition  of  giving  them  battle.  The 
action  was  very  bloody ;  but  the  victory  was  decisive  on  the  side 
of  Harold,  and  ended  in  the  total  rout  of  the  Norwegians,  Harfa- 
gar their  king  and  Tosti  being  slain.  Those,  who  escaped,  owed 
their  safety  to  the  personal  prowess  of  a  brave  Norwegian,  who 
is  said  to  have  defended  a  bridge  over  the  Derwent  for  three 
hours,  against  the  whole  English  army  5  daring  which  time,  he 
slew  forty  of  their  best  men  with  his  battle-ax :  but  he  was  at 
length  slain  by  an  arrow.  Harold,  pursuing  his  victory,  made 
himself  master  of  a  Norwegian  fleet  that  lay  in  the  river  Ousej 


SAXON  MONARCHY.  ft 

and  had  the  generosity  to  give  prince  Olave,  the  son  of  Harfagar, 
his  liberty,  and  allowed  him  to  depart  with  twenty  vessels.  There 
had  never  before  been  in  England  an  engagement  between  two 
such  numerous  armies,  each  being  composed  of  no  less  than 
threescore  thousand  men.  The  news  of  this  victory  diffused  in- 
expressible joy  over  the  whole  kingdom;  they  gloried  in  a  mon- 
arch, who  now  showed  himself  able  to  defend  them  from  insult, 
and  avenge  them  of  their  invaders :  but  they  had  not  long  time 
for  triumph,  when  news  was  brought  of  a  fresh  invasion,  more 
formidable  than  had  ever  been  formed  against  England  before. 
This  was  under  the  conduct  of  William,  duke  of  Normandy,  who 
lauded  at  Hastings  with  an  army  of  disciplined  veter-  ^  ^ 
ans,  and  laid  claim  to  the  English  crown.  1066. 

William,  who  was  afterwards  called  the  Conqueror,  v;as  the 
natural  son  of  Robert,  duke  of  Normandy.  His  mother's  name 
was  Arlette,  a  beautiful  maid  of  Falaise,  whom  Robert  fell  in  love 
with  as  she  stood  gazing  at  the  door  whilst  he  passed  through  the 
town.  William,  who  was  the  offspring  of  this  amour,  owed  a 
part  of  his  greatness  to  his  birth,  but  still  more  to  his  own  per- 
sonal merit.  His  body  was  vigorous,  his  mind  capacious  and 
noble,  and  his  courage  not  to  be  repressed  by  apparent  dano-er. 
His  father  Robert  growing  old,  and,  as  was  common  with  princes 
then,  superstitious  also,  resolved  upon  a  pilgi'image  to  Jerusalem, 
contrary  to  the  advice  and  opinion  of  all  his  nobility.  As  his 
heart  was  fixed  upon  the  expedition,  instead  of  attending  to  their 
remonstrances,  he  showed  them  his  son  William,  whom,  though 
illegitimate,  he  tenderly  loved,  and  recommended  to  their  care, 
exacting  an  oath  from  them  of  homage  and  fealty.  He  then  put 
him,  as  he  was  yet  but  ten  years  of  age,  under  the  tutelage  of  the 
French  king ;  and  soon  after  going  into  Asia,  from  whence  he 
never  returned,  left  young  William  rather  the  inheritor  of  his 
wishes  than  his  crown.  In  fact  William,  from  the  beginning, 
found  himself  exposed  to  many  dangers,  and  much  opposition, 
from  his  youth  and  inexperience,  from  the  reproach  of  his  birth, 
from  a  suspected  guardian,  a  disputed  title,  and  a  distracted 
state.  The  regency,  appointed  by  Robert,  were  under  great  diffi- 
culties in  supporting  the  government  against  this  complication  of 
dangers :  and  the  young  prince,  when  he  came  of  age,  found  him- 
self reduced  to  a  very  low  condition.    But  the  great  qualities 


jra  HISTORY  OF  ENGLANd. 

which  he  soon  displayed  in  the  field  and  the  cabinet  gave  encour' 
agement  to  his  friends,  and  struck  a  terror  into  his  enemies.  He 
on  all  sides  opposed  his  rebellious  subjects,  and  repressed  foreign 
invadei's,  while  his  valour  and  conduct  prevailed  in  every  action. 
The  tranquillity  which  he  had  thus  established  in  his  dominions 
induced  him  to  extend  his  views  ;  and  some  overtures,  made 
him  by  Edward  the  Confessor  in  the  latter  part  of  his  reign,  who 
was  wavering  in  the  choice  of  a  successor,  inflamed  his  ambition 
with  a  desire  of  succeeding  to  the  English  throne.  Whether  Ed- 
ward really  appointed  liim  to  succeed,  as  William  all  along  pre- 
tended, is,  at  this  distance  of  time,  uncertain ;  but  it  is  beyond 
a  doubt,  that  Harold,  happening  to  pay  a  visit  to  the  Norman 
coast,  was  induced  by  this  prince  to  acknowledge  his  claims,  and 
to  give  a  promise  of  seconding  them.  Tliis  promise,  however, 
Harold  did  not  think  proper  to  perform,  when  it  stood  in  the  way 
of  his  own  ambition ;  and  afterwards,  when  William  objected  to 
the  breach,  he  excused  himself,  by  alleging  that  it  was  extorted 
from  him  at  a  time  when  he  had  no  power  to  refuse.  On  what- 
ever side  justice  might  lie,  the  pretext  on  William's  part  was,  that 
he  was  appointed  heir  to  the  crown  of  England  by  Edward  the 
Confessor,  upon  a  visit  he  had  paid  that  monarch  during  his  life- 
time. In  consequence  of  these  pretensions,  he  was  not  remiss, 
after  the  death  of  Edward,  to  lay  in  his  claims ;  but  Harold  would 
admit  none  of  them,  resolved  to  defend  by  Ms  valour  what  his  in- 
trigues had  won.  William,  finding  that  arms  alone  were  to  be 
the  final  deciders  of  this  dispute,  prepared  to  assert  his  right  with 
vigour.  His  subjects,  as  they  had  long  been  distinguished  for 
valour  among  the  European  nations,  had  at  this  time  attained  to 
the  highest  pitch  of  military  glory.  His  court  was  the  centre  of 
politeness ;  and  all  who  wished  for  fame  in  arms,  or  were  natur- 
ally fond  of  adventure,  flocked  to  put  themselves  under  his  con* 
duct.  The  fame  of  his  intended  invasion  of  England  was  diffus- 
ed over  the  whole  continent ;  multitudes  came  to  offer  him  their 
services  in  this  expedition  ;  so  that  he  was  embarrassed  rather  in 
the  choice  of  whom  he  should  take  than  in  the  levying  his  forces. 
The  pope  himself  was  not  behind  the  rest  in  favouring  his  preten- 
sions ;  but,  either  influenced  by  the  apparent  justice  of  his  claims, 
or  by  the  hopes  of  extending  the  authority  of  the  church,  he  im- 
mediately pronounced  Harold  an  usurper.    He  denounced  ex^ 


SAXON  MONARCHV.  '  f^ 

Communication  against  him  and  all  his  adherents ;  and  sent  the 
duke  a  consecrated  banner,  to  inspire  him  with  confidence.  With 
such  favourable  incentives,  William  soon  found  himself  at  the 
head  of  a  chosen  army  of  sixty  thousand  men,  all  equipped  in 
the  most  warlike  and  splendid  manner.  The  discipline  of  tlie 
men,  the  vigour  of  the  horses,  the  lustre  of  the  arms  and  accou- 
trements, were  objects  that  had  been  scarcely  seen  in  Europe  for 
some  ages  before.  It  was  in  the  beginning  of  summer  that  he 
embarked  this  powerful  body  on  board  a  fleet  of  three  hundred 
sail ;  and,  after  some  small  opposition  from  the  weather,  landed 
^t  Pevensey,  on  the  coast  of  Sussex,  with  resolute  tranquillity. 
William  himself,  as  he  came  on  shore,  happened  to  stumble  and 
fall ;  but,  instead  of  being  discomposed  at  the  accident,  he  had 
the  presence  of  mind  to  cry  out,  that  he  thus  took  possession  of 
the  country.  Different  from  all  the  ravagers  to  which  England 
had  been  formerly  accustomed,  this  brave  pi-ince  made  no  show 
of  invading  a  foreign  country,  but  rather  encamping  in  his  own. 
Here  he  continued  in  a  quiet  and  peaceable  manner  for  about  a 
fortnight,  either  willing  to  refresh  his  troops,  or  desirous  of  knoAV- 
ing  the  reception  his  pretensions  to  the  crown  would  meet  with 
among  the  people.  After  having  refreshed  his  men  at  this  place, 
and  sent  back  his  fleet  to  Normandy  to  leave  no  retreat  for  cow- 
ardice, he  advanced  along  the  sea-side  to  Hastings,  where  he  pub- 
lished a  manifesto,  declaring  the  motives  that  induced  him  to  un- 
dertake  this  enterprise. 

He  was  soon  roused  from  his  inactivity  by  the  approach  of 
Harold,  who  seemed  resolved  to  defend  his  right  to  the  crown, 
and  retain  that  sovereignty  which  he  had  received  from  the  peo- 
ple, who  only  had  a  right  to  bestow  it.  He  was  now  returning, 
flushed  with  conquest,  from  the  defeat  of  the  Norwegians,  with 
all  the  forces  he  had  employed  in  that  expedition,  and  all  he 
could  invite  or  collect  in  the  country  through  which  he  passed. 
His  army  was  composed  of  active  and  valiant  troops,  in  high 
spirits,  strongly  attached  to  their  king,  and  eager  to  engage.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  army  of  William  consisted  of  the  flower  of 
all  the  continent,  and  had  been  long  inured  to  danger.  The 
men  of  Bretagne,  Boulogne,  Flanders,  Poictou,  Maine,  Orleans, 
France,  and  Normandy,  were  all  voluntarily  united  under  his 
command.     England  never  before,  nor  never  since,  saw  two  such 

VOL.   I,  10 


74  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

armies  drawn  up  to  dispute  its  crown.  The  day  before  the  bat- 
tle, William  sent  an  offer  to  Harold  to  decide  the  quarrel  between 
them  by  single  combat,  and  thus  to  spare  the  blood  of  thousands; 
but  Harold  refused,  and  said  he  would  leave  it  to  the  God  of  ar- 
mies to  determine.  Both  armies,  therefore,  that  night  pitched  in 
sight  of  each  other,  expecting  the  dawning  of  the  next  day  with 
impatience.  The  English  passed  the  night  in  songs  and  feasting ; 
the  Normans,  in  devotion  and  prayer. 

The  next  morning,  at  seven,  as  soon  as  day  appeared,  both  ar- 
mies were  drawn  up  in  array  against  each  other.  Harold  ap- 
peared in  the  centre  of  his  forces,  lea^ding  on  his  army  on  foot, 
that  his  men  might  be  more  encouraged  by  seeing  their  king  ex- 
posed to  an  equality  of  danger.  William  fought  on  horseback, 
leading  on  his  army,  that  moved  at  once,  singing  the  song  of  Ro- 
land, one  of  the  famous  chiefs  of  their  country.  The  Normans 
began  the  fight  with  their  cross-bows,  which,  at  first,  galled  and 
surprised  the  English ;  and,  as  their  ranks  were  close,  their  ar- 
rows did  great  execution.  But  soon  they  came  to  closer  fight, 
and  the  English,  with  their  bills,  hewed  down  their  adversaries 
Avith  great  slaughter.  Confusion  was  spreading  among  the  ranks, 
v/hen  William,  who  found  himself  en  the  brink  of  destruction, 
hastened,  with  a  select  band,  to  the  relief  of  his  forces.  His 
presence  restored  the  suspense  of  battle ;  he  was  seen  in  every 
place  endeavouring  to  pierce  the  ranks  of  the  enemy,  and  had 
three  horses  slain  under  him.  At  length,  perceiving  that  the 
English  line  continued  impenetrable,  he  pretended  to  give  ground  ; 
which,  as  he  expected,  drew  the  enemy  from  their  ranks,  and  he 
was  instantly  ready  to  take  advantage  of  their  disorder.  Upon 
a  signal  given,  the  Normans  readily  returned  to  the  charge  witli 
greater  fury  than  before,  broke  the  English  troops,  and  pursued 
them  to  a  rising  ground.  It  was  in  this  extremity  that  Harold 
Avas  seen  flying  from  rank  to  rank,  rallying  and  inspiring  his 
troops  with  vigour ;  and  though  he  had  toiled  all  day,  till  near 
night-fall,  in  the  front  of  his  Kentish  men,  yet  he  still  seemed 
unabated  in  force  or  courage,  keeping  his  men  to  the  post  of  hon- 
our. Once  more,  therefore,  the  victory  seemed  to  turn  against 
the  Normans,  and  they  fell  in  gi-eat  numbers ;  so  that  tlie  fierce- 
ness and  obstinacy  of  this  memorable  battle  was  often  renewed 
by>  the  courage  of  the  leaders,  whenever  that  of  the  soldiers  be- 


SAXON  MONARCHY.  7^ 

■gan  to  slacken.  Fortune,  at  length,  determined  a  victory  that 
valour  was  unable  to  decide.  Harold,  making  a  furious  onset  at 
the  head  of  his  troops,  against  the  Norman  heavy -anned  infantry, 
was  shot  into  the  brain  by  an  arrow ;  and  his  two  valiant  broth- 
ers, fighting  by  his  side,  shared  th«  same  fate.  He  fell  with  his 
sword  in  his  hand,  amidst  heaps  of  slain,  and,  after  the  battle, 
the  royal  corpse  could  hardly  be  distinguished  among  the  dead. 
From  the  moment  of  his  deatli,  all  courage  seemied  to  forsake  the 
English ;  they  gave  ground  on  every  side,  and  were  pursued  with 
great  slaughter  by  the  victorious  Normans.  Thus,  after  a  battle 
which  was  fought  from  morning  till  sun-set,  the  invaders  proved 
successful,  and  the  English  crown  became  the  reward  q^.^  ^^ 
©f  victory.  There  fell  near  fifteen  thousand  of  the  Nor-  1066. 
mans,  while  the  loss  on  the  side  of  the  vanquished  was  yet  more 
considerable,  beside  that  of  the  king  and  his  two  brothers.  The 
Eext  day,  the  dead  body  of  Harold  was  brought  to  William,  and 
generously  restored,  without  ransom,  to  his  mother. 

This  was  the  end  of  the  Saxon  monarchy  in  England,  which 
had  continued  for  more  than  six  hundred  years.  Before  the  time 
of  Alfred,  the  kings  of  this  race  seemed  totally  immersed  in  ig- 
norance ;  and  after  him  taken  up  with  combating  the  superstition 
cf  the  monks,  or  blindly  obeying  its  dictates.  As  for  the  crown, 
during  this,  period,  it  was  neither  wholly  elective  nor  yet  totally 
hereditary,  but  disposed  of  either  by  the  will  of  the  former  pos- 
sessor, or  obtained  by  the  eminent  intrigues  or  services  of  some 
person  nearly  allied  to  the  royal  family.  As  for  the  laws  and, 
customs  of  this  race,  they  brought  in  many  long  in  practice  among 
their  German  ancestors  ;  but  they  adopted  also  many  more  which 
they  found  among  the  Britons,  or  which  th&  Romans  left  behind 
them  after  their  abdication.  They  assumed,  in  imitation  of  those 
nations,  the  name  of  kings  5  nay,  some  of  them  took  the  Greek 
appellation  of  Basileus,  a  title  unknown  to  the  countries  from 
whence  they  came.  Their  noblemen  also  assumed  names  of 
Roman  authority,  being  termed  di^kes  or  duces ;  while  the  lower 
classes  of  people  were  bought  and  sQld  with  the  farms  they  culti- 
vated ;  a  horrrid  custom,  first  introduced  by  the  Greeks  and  Ro? 
mans,  and  afterwards  adopted  by  the  countries  they  conquered. 
Their  canon  laws  also,  which  often  controlled  the  civil  authority, 
l^ad  primarily  their  origin  in  Rome  5  and  the  priests  ^nd  monks, 


76  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

who  drew  them  up,  had  generally  their  education  there.  We 
must  not,  therefore,  ascribe  the  laws  and  customs  which  then 
prevailed  over  England,  entirely  to  Saxon  original,  as  many  of 
them  were  derived  from  the  Britons  and  Romans.  But,  now  the 
Saxon  monarchy  was  no  more,  all  customs  and  laws,  of  whatever 
original,  were  cast  down  into  one  common  mass,  and  cemented 
by  those  of  Norman  institution.  The  whole  face  of  obligation 
was  altered,  and  the  new  masters  instituted  new  modes  of  obe- 
dience. The  laws  were  improved ;  but  the  taste  of  the  people 
for  polite  learning,  arts,  and  philosophy,  for  more  than  four  hun- 
dred years  after,  was  still  to  continue  the  same.  It  appears  sur-» 
prising  enough,  in  such  a  variety  of  events,  such  innovation  in 
military  discipline,  and  such  changes  in  government,  that  true 
politeness,  and  what  is  called  a  taste  in  the  arts,  never  came  to 
be  cultivated.  Perhaps  the  reason  may  be,  that,  while  the  au- 
{hority  of  the  church  continued  so  great,  the  people  were  afraid 
of  any  knowledge  but  that  derived  to  them  tlirough  their  clergy ; 
and,  being  secluded  from  tlie  ordinary  conversation  of  mankind, 
they  were  but  indifferent  judges  of  human  nature.  A  monk  of 
the  tenth  century,  and  a  monk  of  the  eighteenth  century,  are 
equally  refined,  and  equally  fit  to  advance  those  studies  that 
give  us  an  acquaintance  with  ourselves,  or  that  tend  to  display 
the  mazes  of  the  human  heart. 


CHAP.  V, 

WILLIAM  THE  CONQUEROH. 

^  OTHING  could  exceed  the  consternation  of  the  English  upon 
the  loss  of  the  battle  of  Hastings  :  their  king  slain,  the  flower  of 
their  nobility  cut  off,  and  their  whole  army  dispersed  or  destroyed, 
struck  them  with  despair.  Very  little  seemed  now  remaining 
but  a  tame  submission  to  the  victor ;  and  William,  sensible  of 
their  terror,  was  careful  not  to  lose  the  fruits  of  victory  by  delay. 
Accordingly,  after  the  pursuit  of  the  flying  enemy,  and  a  short 
refreshment  of  his  own  army,  he  set  forward  on  the  completion 
of  his  design  5  and,  sitting  down  before  Dover,  took  it  after  a 


"WILLTAIM  I.  fj 

slight  resistance,  and  fortified  it  with  fresh  redoubts.  After  a 
short  delay  at  this  place,  he  advanced  by  quick  marches  towards 
London,  where  his  approach  served  to  spread  new  confusion. 
The  inhabitants  for  some  time  hesitated  between  their  terrors 
and  their  loyalty ;  but,  casting  their  eyes  on  every  side,  they 
saw  no  person  of  valour  or  authority  sufficient  to  support  them 
in  their  independence.  Edgar  Atheling,  the  right  heir  to  the 
croAvn,  was  a  weak  and  feeble  prince,  without  courage  or  ambi- 
tion ;  all  their  other  leaders  were  either  destroyed,  or  too  remote 
to  lend  them  assistance.  The  clergy,  who  had  a  large  share  in 
the  deliberations,  declared  openly  for  a  prince  whose  pretensions 
were  acknowledged,  and  whose  arms  were  blessed  by  the  holy 
see.  Nothing  remained,  but  to  submit  to  the  necessity  of  the 
times,  and  to  acknowledge  those  claims  which  it  was  not  in  their 
power  to  oppose.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  William  passed  the 
Thames,  at  Wallingford,  Stigand,  the  primate,  made  submissions 
to  him  in  the  name  of  the  clergy ;  and  before  he  came  within 
sight  of  the  city,  all  the  chief  nobility,  and  Edgar  Atheling  himself, 
who  just  before  had  been  created  king,  came  into  his  camp,  and 
declared  an  intention  of  yielding  to  his  authority.  William  was 
glad  of  being  thus  peaceably  put  in  possession  of  a  throne,  which 
several  of  his  predecessors  had  not  gained  without  repeated  vic- 
tories. He  readily  accepted  the  crown  upon  the  terms  that  were 
offered  him ;  which  were,  that  he  should  govern  according  to  the 
established  customs  of  the  country.  W^illiam,  though  he  had  it 
in  his  power  to  dictate  his  own  conditions  rather  than  receive 
any,  chose  to  have  his  election  considered  rather  as  a  gift  from 
his  subjects  than  a  measure  extorted  by  him.  He  knew  himself 
to  be  a  conqueror,  but  was  willing  to  be  thought  a  legal  king. 

In  order  to  give  his  invasion  all  the  sanction  possible,  he  was- 
crowned  at  Westminster  by  the  arch-bishop  of  York,  and  took 
the  oath  usual  in  the  times  of  the  Saxon  and  Danish  kings ;  which 
was,  to  protect  and  defend  the  church,  to  observe  the  laws  of  the 
realm,  and  to  govern  the  people  with  impartiality.  Having  thus 
given  all  possible  satisfaction  to  the  English,  his  next  care  was 
to  reward  the  many  brave  adventurers  who  had  followed  his  for- 
tunes. He  first  divided  the  lands  of  the  English  barons  who  op- 
posed him,  among  the  Norman  barons  who  had  assisted  his  enter- 
prise ;  and  such  as  he  could  neither  supply  with  money  nor  lands* 


TS  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

he  appointed  to  the  vacant  offices  of  the  state.  But,  as  there- 
were  still  numbers  unprovided  for,  he  quartered  them  on  the  rich 
abbeys  of  the  kingdom,  until  better  means  offered  for  their  ad- 
vancement. This,  which  gave  no  small  umbrage  to  the  clergy, 
was  but  little  resented  by  the  people,  who  were  willing  to  see 
their  own  burthens  lightened,  by  having  apart  of  them  laid  upon 
shoulders  that  were  at  that  time  much  better  able  to  bear  them. 

But  what  gave  them  great  umbrage  M^as,  to  see  him  place  all 
real  power  in  the  hands  of  his  own  countrymen,  and  still  to  give 
them  possession  of  the  sword,  to  which  he  owed  all  his  authority. 
He  disarmed  the  city  of  London,  and  other  places  which  appear- 
ed most  warlike  and  populous,  and  quartered  Norman  soldiers  in 
all  those  places  where  he  most  dreaded  an  insurrection.  Having 
thus  secured  the  government,  and,  by  a  mixture  of  vigour  and 
lenity,  brought  the  English  to  an  entire  submission,  he  resolved 
to  return  to  the  continent,  there  to  enjoy  the  triumph  and  con- 
gratulation of  his  antient  subjects.  Having  no  reason  to  appre- 
hend any  disturbance  in  his  absence  among  the  English,  whose 
aflfection  he  had  taken  such  pains  to  conciliate,  he  left  the  regen- 
cy with  his  brother  Odo  bishop  of  Bayeux,  and  William  Fitzos- 
borne.  To  secure  himself  yet  further,  he  resolved  to  carry  along 
with  him  all  the  English  noblemen  from  whose  power  or  inclina- 
tion he  could  apprehend  a  i-evolt :  and,  pretending  to  take  great 
pleasure  in  their  conversation,  he  set  sail  with  his  honourable 
captives  for  Normandy,  where  he  was  received  by  his  natural 
subjects  with  a  mixture  of  admiration  and  joy.  He  resided  for 
some  time  at  the  abbey  of  Feschamp,  where  he  was  visited  by  an 
embassador  from  the  king  of  France,  sent  to  congratulate  him  on 
his  success.  William,  naturally  fond  of  splendour,  received  this 
embassy  with  great  state  and  magniJBcence ;  while  his  English 
courtiers,  willing  to  ingratiate  themselves  with  their  new  sove-r 
reign,  endeavoured  to  outshine  each  other,  and  made  a  display 
of  riches  which  struck  foreigners  with  astonishment.  It  was 
probably  this  foolish  ostentation  that  excited  the  pride  of  the 
Normans  to  treat  men  with  contempt  who  were  apparently  sq 
much  above  them. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  absence  of  the  Conqueror  in  England 
produced  the  most  fatal  effects.  His  officers,  being  no  longer 
controlled  by  his  justice,  thought  this  a  fit  opportunity  for  ex- 


WILLIAM  t  t^ 

tbrtion;  while  the  English,  no  longer  awed  by  his  presence, 
thought  it  the  happiest  occasion  for  vindicating  their  freedom. 
The  two  governors  he  had  left  behind  took  all  opportunities  of 
oppressing  the  people ;  either  desiring  to  provoke  them  to  rebell- 
ion, in  order  to  profit  by  confiscations,  or,  in  case  they  submitted 
tamely  to  their  impositions,  to  grow  rich  without  slaughter.  The 
inhabitants  of  Kent,  who  were  more  immediately  exposed  to 
these  outrages,  having  repeated  their  complaints  and  remon- 
strances to  no  purpose,  at  length  had  recourse  to  Eustace,  count 
of  Boulogne,  who  assisted  them  in  an  attack  upon  the  garrison 
ef  Dover,  But  the  Normans  were  upon  their  guard,  and,  having 
repulsed  the  assailants  with  some  slaughter,  took  the  nephew  of 
count  Eustace  prisoner.  This  miscarriage  did  not  deter  Edric 
the  Forester  from  repelling  the  depredations  of  the  Normans, 
and,  in  his  turn,  from  wasting  their  possessions.  But  though 
these  open  hostilities  were  not  very  considerable,  the  disaffection 
among  the  English  was  general,  and  the  people  began  too  late  to 
perceive  that  strength  will  ever  give  laws  to  justice.  A  secret 
conspiracy  was  therefore  formed  for  destroying  all  the  Normans, 
as  the  Danes  had  been  formerly  cut  off ;  and  this  was  prosecuted 
with  so  much  animosity,  that  the  vassals  of  the  earl  Coxo  put 
him  to  death,  because  he  refused  to  head  them  against  the  invaders. 

William,  being  informed  of  these  commotions,  hastened  over 
to  England,  and  arrived  time  enough  to  prevent  the  execution  of 
this  bloody  enterprise.  The  conspirators  had  already  taken  the 
resolution,  and  fixed  the  day  for  the  intended  massacre,  whicli 
was  to  be  on  Ash- Wednesday,  during  the  time  of  divine  service, 
when  all  the  Normans  would  be  unarmed,  as  penitents,  according 
to  the  discipline  of  the  times.  But  his  presence  quickly  discon- 
certed all  their  schemes.  Such  of  them  as  had  been  more  open 
in  their  mutiny  betrayed  their  guilt  by  flight ;  and  this  served  to 
confirm  the  proofs  of  an  accusation  against  those  who  remained. 

From  that  time  forward  the  king  began  to  lose  all  confidence 
in  his  English  subjects,  and  to  regard  them  as  inveterate  and 
irreconcilable  enemies.  He  had  already  raised  such  a  number 
of  fortresses  in  the  kingdom,  that  he  no  longer  dreaded  the  tu- 
multuous or  transient  efforts  of  a  discontented  multitude ;  he  de- 
termined to  treat  them  as  a  conquered  nation,  to  indulge  his  own 
avarice,  and  that  of  his  followers,  by  numerous  confiscations? 


go  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

and  to  secure  his  power  bj  humbling  all  who  were  able  to  make 
any  resistance.  The  fii-st  signal  of  his  arbitrary  power  was  mani- 
fested in  renewing  the  odious  tax  of  Danegelt,  which  had  been 
abolished  by  Edward  the  Confessor.  This  measure  produced  re- 
monstrances, complaints,  and  even  insm-rections,  in  different 
parts  of  the  kingdom ;  but  William,  conscious  of  his  power,  march- 
ed against  such  as  were  most  formidable,  and  soon  compelled 
them  to  implore  for  mercy.  In  this  manner  the  inhabitants  of 
Exeter  and  Cornwall  excited  his  resentment,  and  experienced 
jiis  lenity. 

But  these  insurrections  were  slight,  compared  to  that 
L  'J  in  the  North,  which  seemed  to  threaten  the  most  impor- 
tant consequences.  This  was  excited  by  the  intrigues  of  Edwin 
and  Morcar,  the  two  most  powerful  noblemen  of  the  English  race* 
who,  joined  by  Blethim  prince  of  North  Wales,  Malcolm  king  of 
Scotland,  and  Sweyn  king  of  Denmark,  resolved  to  make  one 
great  effort  for  the  recovery  of  their  antient  liberties.  But  the 
vigour  and  celerity  of  William  destroyed  their  projects  before 
they  were  ripe  for  execution ;  for,  advancing  towards  them  at  the 
head  of  a  powerful  army,  by  forced  marches,  the  two  earls  were 
so  intimidated,  that,  instead  of  opposing,  they  had  recourse  to  the 
Conqueror's  clemency,  by  submission.  He  did  not  think  proper 
to  reject  their  advances,  but  pardoned  them  without  hesitation. 
A  peace  wbich  he  made  with  Malcolm  king  of  Scotland,  shortly 
after,  seemed  to  deprive  them  of  all  hopes  of  future  assistance 
from  without  the  kingdom. 

But,  whatever  the  successes  of  William  might  have  been,  the 
inhabitants,  whether  English  or  Normans,  were  at  that  tiine  in  a 
most  dreadful  situation.  All  the  miseries  that  insolence  on  one 
hand,  and  hatred  on  the  other;  that  tyranny  and  treason,  sus- 
picion and  assassination,  could  bring  upon  a  people,  were  there 
united.  The  Normans  were  seen  to  commit  continual  insults 
upon  the  English,  and  these  vainly  sought  redress  from  their  par- 
tial masters.  Legal  punishment  being  denied,  they  sought  for 
private  vengeance  5  and  a  day  seldom  passed  but  the  bodies  of 
assassinated  Normans  were  found  in  the  woods  and  highways, 
■without  any  possibility  of  bringing  the  perpetrators  to  justice. 
Thus,  at  length,  the  conquerors  themselves  began  again  to  wish 
for  the  tranquillity  and  security  of  their  native  country ;  and  sev- 


WILLIAM  L  81 

eral  of  thetn,  though  intrusted  with  great  commands,  desired  to 
be  dismissed  the  service.  In  order  to  prevent  these  desertionsj 
which  William  highly  resented,  he  was  obliged  to  allure  others 
to  stay,  by  the  largeness  of  his  bounties.  These  brought  on  fresh 
exactions,  and  hew  insurrections  were  the  natural  consequences. 

The  inhabitants  of  Northumberland,  impatient  of  their  yokcj 
attacked  the  Norman  garrison  in  Durham,  and,  taking  advantage 
of  the  governor's  negligence,  put  him,  with  seven  hundred  of  his 
men,  to  the  sword.  The  Norman  governor  of  York  shared  the 
same  fate ;  and  the  insurgents,  being  reinforced  by  the  Danes, 
and  some  leaders  from  Scotland,  attacked  the  castle,  which  was 
defended  by  a  garrison  of  three  thousand  men.  Mallet,  its  gov- 
ernor, that  he  might  the  better  provide  for  its  defence,  set  fire  to 
some  houses  which  lay  contiguous ;  but  the  fire  spreading,  the 
whole  city  was  quickly  in  flames.  This  proved  the  cause  of  his 
destruction ;  for  the  enraged  inhabitants,  joining  in  the  assault^ 
entered  the  citadel  sword  in  hand,  and  cut  off  the  whole  garrison, 
without  mercy.  This  transient  gleam  of  success  seemed  to  spread 
a  general  spirit  of  insurrection.  The  counties  of  Somerset,  Dor- 
set, Coinwall,  and  Devon,  united  in  the  common  cause,  and  de- 
termined to  make  one  great  effort  for  the  recovery  of  their  for- 
mer freedom. 

William,  undaunted  amidst  this  scene  of  confusion,  assembled 
his  forces,  and  led  them  towards  the  North,  conscious  that  his 
presence  alone  would  be  sufficient  to  repress  these  rude  efforts  of 
unadvised  indignation.  Accordingly,  wherever  he  appeared,  the 
insurgents  either  submitted  or  retired.  The  Danes  were  content 
to  return,  without  committing  any  further  hostilities,  into  Den : 
mark.  Waltheoff,  who  long  defended  York  castle,  submitted  to 
the  victor's  clemency,  and  was  taken  into  favour.  Edric,  another 
nobleman,  who  commanded  the  Northumbrians,  made  his  sub- 
mission to  the  Conqueror,  and  obtained  pardon ;  while  the  rest 
dispersed  themselves,  and  left  the  Normans  undisputed  masters 
of  the  whole  kingdom.  Edgar  Atheling,  who  had  been  drawn 
among  the  rest  into  this  insurrection,  sought  a  retreat  in  Scotland 
from  the  pursuit  of  his  enemies.  There  he  continued,  till,  by 
proper  solicitation,  he  was  again  taken  into  favour  by  the  king. 
From  that  time  he  remai»ed  in  England  iji  a  private  station,  con- 
voL.  I.  n 


8g  History  of  England. 

tent  with  opulence  and  security ;  perhaps  as  happy,  though  not 
so  splendid,  as  if  he  had  succeeded  in  the  career  of  his  ambition. 
William  being  now  acknowledged  master  of  a  people  that  more 
than  once  showed  reluctance  to  his  government,  he  resolved  to 
throw  off  all  appearance  of  lenity,  and  to  incapacitate  them  from 
future  insurrections.  His  first  step  was,  to  order  the  county  of 
Northumberland  to  be  laid  waste,  the  houses  to  be  burnt,  the  in- 
struments of  husbandry  to  be  destroyed,  and  the  inhabitants  to 
seek  new  habitations.  By  this  order  it  is  said  that  above  one 
hundred  thousand  persons  perished,  either  by  the  sword  or  fam- 
ine 5  and  the  country  is  supposed,  even  at  this  day,  to  bear  the 
marks  of  its  antient  depopulation.  He  next  proceeded  to  con- 
fiscate all  the  estates  of  the  English  gentry,  and  to  grant  them 
liberally  to  his  Norman  followers.  Thus  all  the  antient  and  hon- 
ourable families  were  reduced  to  beggary,  and  the  English  found 
themselves  entirely  excluded  from  every  road  that  led  either  to 
honour  or  preferment.  They  had  the  cruel  mortification  to  find^ 
that  all  his  power  only  tended  to  their  depression ;  and  that  the 
scheme  of  their  subjection  was  attended  with  every  circumstance 
of  insult  and  indignity. 

He  was  not  yet,  however,  sufficiently  arbitrary  to  change  all 
the  laws  then  in  being  for  those  of  his  own  country.  He  only 
made  several  innovations,  and  ordered  the  law-pleas  in  the  sev- 
eral courts  to  be  made  in  the  Norman  language.  Yet,  with  all 
his  endeavours  to  make  the  French  the  popular  language,  the 
English  still  gained  ground ;  and,  what  deserves  remark,  it  had 
adopted  much  more  of  the  French  idiom  for  two  or  three  reigns 
before  than  during  the  whole  line  of  the  Norman  kings  suc- 
ceeding. 

The  feudal  law  had  been  before  introduced  into  England  by 
tlie  Saxons ;  but  tljjis  monarch  reformed  it  according  to  the  model 
of  that  practised  in  his  native  dominions.  He  divided  all  the 
lands  of  England,  except  the  royal  demesne,  into  baronies,  and 
conferred  those,  upon  certain  military  conditions,  on  the  most 
considerable  of  his  followers.  These  had  a  power  of  sharing  their 
grants  to  inferior  tenants,  who  were  denominated  knights  or  vas- 
sals, and  who  paid  their  lord  the  same  duty  that  he  paid  the  sove- 
reign. To  the  first  class  of  these  baronies  the  English  were  not 
admitted  j  and  the  few  who  were  permitted  still  to  retain  their 


WILLIAM  I.  8g 

landed  property,  were  content  to  be  received  in  the  second.  The 
barons  exercised  all  kinds  of  jurisdiction  within  their  own  manors, 
and  held  courts  in  which  they  administered  justice  to  their  own 
vassals.  Tliis  law  extended  not  only  to  the  laity,  but  also  to  the 
bishops  and  clergy.  They  had  usurped  a  power,  during  the  Saxon, 
succession,  of  being  governed  within  themselves :  but  William 
restrained  them  to  the  exercise  of  their  ecclesiastical  power  only, 
and  submitted  them  to  a  similitude  of  duties  with  the  rest  of  their 
fellow-subjects.  This  they  at  first  regarded  as  a  grievous  impo- 
sition :  but  the  king's  authority  was  established  by  a  power  that 
neither  the  clergy  nor  the  pope  could  intimidate.  But,  to  keep 
the  clergy  as  much  as  possible  in  his  interests,  he  appointed  none 
but  his  own  countrymen  to  the  most  considerable  church-digni" 
ties,  and  even  displaced  Stigand,  arch-bishop  of  Canterbury,  upon 
some  frivolous  pretences.  His  real  motive  was,  that  such  a  dig- 
nity was  too  exalted  for  a  native  to  possess. 

While  he  was  thus  employed  in  humbling  the  clergy,  he  was 
no  less  solicitous  to  repress  many  of  those  superstitious  practices 
to  which  they  had  given  countenance.  He  endeavoured  to  abol" 
ish  trials  by  ordeal  and  camp-fight :  the  ordeal  trial,  which  had 
been  originally  of  pagan  institution,  and  was  still  held  in  venera- 
tion by  the  Saxon  Christians,  was  either  by  fire  or  water.  It 
was  used  in  criminal  cases,  where  the  suspicions  were  strong,  but 
the  proofs  not  evident.  In  that  of  fire,  the  person  accused  was. 
brought  into  an  open  plain,  and  several  plough-shares,  heated 
red-hot,  were  placed  at  equal  intervals  before  him :  over  these  he 
was  to  walk  blindfold  5  and  if  he  escaped  unhurt,  he  was  ac- 
quitted of  the  charge.  In  the  trial  by  water,  the  person  accused 
was  thrown,  bound  hand  and  foot,  into  the  water  :  if  he  sunk,  he 
was  declared  innocent ;  if  he  swam,  he  was  executed,  as  being 
thus  miraculously  convicted.  The  trial  by  camp-fight  was  per- 
formed by  single  combat,  in  lists  appointed  for  that  purpose,  be- 
tween the  accuser  and  the  accused.  He  who,  in  such  a  case;, 
came  off  victorious,  was  deemed  innocent ;  and  he  who  was  con- 
quered, if  he  survived  his  antagonist's  resentment  in  the  field, 
was  sure  to  suffer  as  a  malefactor  some  time  after.  Both  these 
trials  William  abolished,  as  unchristian  and  unjust;  and  he  re- 
duced all  causes  to  the  judgment  of  twelve  men,  of  a  rank  nearly 
equal  to  tliat  of  the  prisoner.    This  method  of  trial  by  jury  was 


84  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

common  to  the  Saxons,  as  well  as  the  Normans,  long  before ;  but 
it  was  now  confirmed  by  him  with  all  the  sanction  of  undisputed 
authority. 

While  William  was  thus  employed,  in  rewarding  his  associ- 
ates, punishing  the  refractory,  and  giving  laws  for  the  benefit  of 
all,  he  was  threatened  with  an  insurrection  in  his  dominions  on 
ri071 1  ^^^  continent,  which  he  thought  his  presence  necessary 
to  suppress.  Unwilling,  however,  to  draw  off  his  Nor- 
man forces  from  England,  he  carried  over  a  considerable  army, 
composed  almost  entirely  of  English ;  and  by  those  brave  troops 
he  soon  reduced  the  revolters  to  submission.  Thus  we  see  a 
whimsical  vicissitude  of  fortune :  the  inhabitants  of  Normandy 
brought  over  for  the  conquest  of  the  English,  and  the  English 
sent  back  to  conquer  the  Normans.  However,  William  had  not 
time  to  enjoy  his  success  unmolested ;  for  accounts  were  quickly 
brought  him  from  England,  that  a  new  conspiracy  was  formed, 
more  dreadful,  in  being  supported  by  the  joint  efforts  of  the 
Normans  as  well  as  the  English.  The  adventurers  who  had  fol- 
lowed the  fortunes  of  William  into  England,  had  been  bred  in 
authority  and  independence  at  home,  and  were  ill  able  to  endure 
the  absolute  authority  which  this  monarch  had  for  some  time 
assumed.  The  discontents  were  therefore  become  very  general 
among  these  haughty  nobles,  and  some  wanted  only  the  oppor- 
tunity of  his  absence  to  break  out  into  open  rebellion.  Among 
the  number  was  Roger,  earl  of  Hereford,  son  and  heir  to  Fitzos- 
borne,  who  had  been  the  king's  principal  favourite.  This  noble- 
man had,  either  by  way  of  compliment  to  the  king,  or  in  com- 
pliance Avith  some  obligation  of  the  feudal  law,  solicited  William's 
consent  to  permit  the  marriage  of  his  sister  with  Ralph  de  Guader, 
earl  of  Norfolk ;  but  he  was  flatly  refused.  Nevertheless,  he  pro- 
ceeded to  solemnize  the  nuptials  with  great  magnificence,  assem- 
bling all  his  friends,  and  those  of  Guader,  upon  the  occasion.  As 
the  parents  of  the  new -married  couple  were  well  acquainted  with 
the  character  of  William,  whose  resentment  they  had  every 
reason  to  dread,  they  took  the  opportunity,  while  the  company 
was  heated  with  wine,  to  introduce  that  as  a  subject  of  conversa- 
tion. They  inveighed  against  the  severity  of  his  government  5 
they  observed,  that  by  means  of  his  excessive  impositions  he  had 
taken  with  one  hand  what  he  had  given  with  tlie  other ;  they 


WILLIAM  I;  83 

affected  to  commiserate  the  English,  whom  he  had  reduced  to 
beggary ;  and  aggravated  the  defects  in  his  disposition,  which 
they  represented  as  haughty  and  unfoi'giving.  The  guests  wera 
ready  enough  at  any  time  to  concur  in  their  complaints ;  but  now, 
warmed  by  the  jollity  of  the  entertainment,  they  put  no  bounds 
to  their  zeal.  They  unanimously  entered  into  a  conspiracy  to 
shake  off  his  yoke ;  and  earl  Waltheoff  himself,  whom  we  have 
already  seen  pardoned  upon  a  former  insurrection,  was  among 
the  foremost  on  this  occasion.  But  it  was  not  without  the  great' 
est  anxiety  that  he  reflected,  in  his  cooler  intervals,  upon  an  en- 
gagement made  in  the  ardour  of  intoxication,  big  with  the  most 
fatal  consequences  both  to  himself  and  his  country.  In  this  state  of 
per-turbation,  he  had  recourse  to  his  wife,  the  niece  of  the  king, 
and  unbosomed  himself  to  her,  as  he  had  the  most  firm  reliance 
on  her  fidelity.  But  he  was  deceived ;  for  she  was  in  love  with 
another,  and  only  wanted  an  opportunity  of  getting  rid  of  her  hus- 
band at  any  rate.  She,  therefore,  instantly  found  means  to  com- 
municate the  whole  affair  to  the  king,  taking  care  to  represent 
her  husband's  conduct  in  the  most  disadvantageous  point  of  light. 
In  the  mean  time,  Waltheoff  himself  gave  way  to  his  internal  re? 
morse,  and  confessed  the  whole  conspiracy  to  Lanfranc,  who  ex- 
horted him,  by  all  means,  to  reveal  it  to  the  king ;  which  he  was 
at  la^t  persuaded  to  do  :  but  it  was  not  till  the  whole  affair  had 
been  divulged  by  his  faithless  consort.  William  coolly  thanked 
him  for  his  fidelity  ;  but  the  former  account  of  his  perfidy  sunk 
deep  into  the  king's  mind,  and  he  secretly  resolved  to  punish  it. 
During  this  interval,  the  conspirators  being  informed  that 
Waltheoff  was  gone  over  to  Normandy,  justly  concluded  that 
their  designs  were  betrayed,  and  flew  to  arms  before  their  schemes 
were  ripe  for  execution.  The  earl  of  Hereford  was  checked  by 
Walter  de  Lacy,  a  great  baron  in  the  king's  interest.  The  earl 
of  Norfolk  was  defeated  by  Odo,  the  king's  brother ;  and  the 
prisoners  who  were  taken  had  each  the  right  foot  cut  off",  in  order 
to  deter  others  from  a  similitude  of  treason.  The  earl  himself 
retired  to  Denmark ;  so  that  William,  upon  his  arrival  in  En- 
gland, found  that  nothing  remained  for  him  to  do  but  to  punish 
the  criminals  5  which  was  performed  with  unusual  severity. 
-Many  of  the  rebels  were  hanged,  some  had  their  eyes  put  out, 
and  others  their  Jiands  cut  off.    The  unfortunate  Waltheoff,  who 


Se  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND, 

had  imprudently  entered  into  the  conspiracy,  but  attempted  to 
atone  for  his  fault  by  an  early  confession,  found  no  mercy.  He 
was  rich,  and  he  was  an  Englishman ;  two  faults  that  served  to 
aggravate  his  guilt :  he  was  accordingly  tried,  condemned,  and 
executed.  His  infamous  wife  did  not  long  enjoy  the  fruits  of  her 
perfidy  ;  but,  falling  some  time  after  under  the  king's  displeas- 
«re,  was  abandoned  by  the  world,  and  passed  the  rest  of  her  life 
in  contempt,  remorse,  and  misery.  Some  assert  that  tliis  noble- 
man fell  a  sacrifice  to  the  cruelty  of  Odo,  not  of  William ;  but, 
however  that  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  Waltheoff,  and  Fitz-Au- 
bert,  a  noble  Norman,  who  was  also  beheaded  on  this  occasion, 
were  the  only  persons  of  note  that  were  executed  during  the 
reign  of  William  the  Conqueror.  Having  thus  re-established  the 
peace  of  his  government,  and  extinguished  the  last  embers  of  re- 
bellion with  blood,  William  returned  once  more  to  the  continent, 
in  order  to  pursue  Guader,  who,  escaping  from  England,  had 
taken  refuge  with  the  count  of  Bretagne.  Finding  him,  however, 
too  powerfully  protected  by  that  prince,  instead  of  prosecuting 
his  vengeance,  he  wisely  came  to  a  treaty  with  the  count,  in 
v.'hich  Guader  ^vas  included. 
ri07fi  1  William,  having  thus  secured  the  peace  of  his  domin- 
ions, now  expected  rest  from  his  labours ;  and,  finding 
none  either  walling  or  powerful  enough  to  oppose  him,  he  hoped 
that  the  end  of  his  reign  would  be  marked  with  prospei'ity  and 
peace.  But  such  is  the  blindness  of  human  hope,  that  he  found 
enemies  where  he  least  expected  them,  and  such  too  as  served  to 
embitter  all  the  latter  part  of  his  life.  His  last  troubles  were  ex- 
cited by  his  own  children,  from  the  opposing  of  whom  he  could 
expect  to  reap  neither  glory  nor  gain.  He  had  four  sons,  Robert, 
Richard,  William,  and  Henry,  besides  several  daughters.  Robert, 
his  eldest  son,  surnamed  Curthose,  from  the  shortness  of  his  legs, 
was  a  prince  who  inherited  all  the  bravery  of  his  family  and  na- 
tion, but  was  rather  bold  than  prudent,  rather  enterprising  thau 
politic.  Earnest  after  fame,  and  even  impatient  that  his  father 
should  stand  in  the  way,  he  aspired  at  that  independence  to 
which  his  temper,  as  well  as  some  circumstances  in  his  situation, 
conspired  to  invite  him.  He  had  formerly  been  promised  by  his 
father  the  government  of  Maine,  a  province  of  France,  which  had 
submitted  to  William,  and  was  also  declared  successor  to  tho- 


WILLIAM  I.  %f 

dukedom  of  Normandy.  However,  when  he  came  to  demand  the 
execution  of  these  engagements,  he  received  an  absolute  denial ; 
the  king  shrewdly  observing,  that  it  was  not  his  custom  to  throw 
off  his  clothes  till  he  went  to  bed.  Robert  openly  declared  his 
resentment,  and  was  often  heard  to  express  his  jealousy  of  his 
two  surviving  brothers,  William  and  Henry  ;  for  Richard  was 
killed,  in  hunting,  by  a  stag.  These,  by  greater  assiduity,  had 
wrought  upon  the  credulity  and  aifections  of  the  king,  and  con- 
sequently were  the  most  obnoxious  to  Robert.  A  mind,  there- 
fore, so  well  prepared  for  resentment,  soon  found  or  made  a  cause 
for  an  open  rupture.  The  princes  were  one  day  in  sport  together, 
and,  in  the  idle  petulance  of  play,  took  it  in  their  heads  to  throw 
water  upon  their  elder  brother  as  he  passed  through  the  court,  on 
leaving  their  apartment.  Robert,  all  alive  to  suspicion,  quickly 
turned  this  idle  frolic  into  a  studied  indignity ;  and  having  these 
jealousies  still  further  inflamed  by  one  of  his  favourites,  he  drew 
his  sword,  and  ran  up  stairs  with  an  intent  to  take  revenge.  The 
whole  castle  was  quickly  filled  with  tumult,  and  it  was  not  with- 
out some  difficulty  that  the  king  himself  was  able  to  appease  it. 
But  he  could  not  allay  the  animosity,  which,  from  that  moment, 
ever  after  prevailed  in  his  family.  Robert,  attended  by  several 
of  his  confederates,  withdrew  to  Rouen  that  very  night,  hoping  ta 
surprise  the  castle  ;  but  Ms  design  was  defeated  by  the  governor. 

The  flame  being  thus  kindled,  the  popular  character  of  the 
prince,  and  a  sympathy  of  manners,  engaged  all  the  young  nobil- 
ity of  Normandy  and  Maine,  as  well  as  of  Anjou  and  Bretagne, 
to  espouse  his  quarrel ;  even  his  mother,  it  is  said,  supported  him 
by  secret  remittances,  and  aided  him  in  this  obstinate  resistance 
by  private  encouragement.  This  unnatural  contest  continued 
for  several  years  to  inflame  the  Norman  state  ;  and  William  v^as 
at  last  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  England  for  supporting  his  au- 
thority against  his  son.  Accordingly,  drawing  an  army  of  En- 
glishmen together,  he  led  them  over  into  Normandy  s,  where  he 
soon  compelled  Robert  and  his  adherents  to  quit  the  field,  and 
he -was  quickly  reinstated  in  all  his  dominions.  As  for  Rohert, 
being  no  longer  able  to  resist  his  father,  he  was  obliged  to  take 
shelter  in  the  castle  of  Gerberoy,  which  the  king  of  France  had 
provided  for  him,  where  he  was  shortly  after  besieged  by  his 
father.     As  the  garrison  was  strong,  and  conscious  of  guilt,  it 


88  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

made  a  most  gallant  defence ;  and  many  were  the  skirmished 
and  duels  that  were  fought  under  its  walls.     In  one  of  these, 
accident  brought  the  king  and  his  son  together ;  but,  being  both 
concealed  by  their  helmets,  they  attacked  each  other  with  mutual 
fury.     A  fierce  and  dreadful  combat  ensued  between  them,  till 
at  last  the  young  prince  wounded  liis  father  in  the  arm,  and 
threw  him  from  his  horse.     The  next  blow  would,  in  all  proba- 
bility, have  put  an  end  to  the  king's  life,  had  he  not  cried  out  for 
assistance.     Robert  then   immediately   recollected  his   father's 
voice ;  and  at  once  stung  with  a  consciousness  of  his  crime,  he 
leaped  from  his  horse,  and  raised  the  fallen  monarch  from  the 
ground.     He  then  prostrated  himself  in  his  presence,  and  craved 
pardon  for  his  offences,  promising  for  the  future  a  strict  adher- 
ence to  his  duty.     The  resentment  harboured  by  the  king  was 
not  so  easily  appeased ;  perhaps  his  indignation  at  being  over- 
come added  to  his  anger :  instead,  thei^efore,  of  pardoning  his 
son,  he  gave  him  his  malediction,  and  departed  for  his  own  camp 
on  Robert's  horse,  which  the  prince  had  assisted  him  to  mount. 
However,  the  conduct  of  the  son  served,  after  some  recollection, 
to  appease    the  father.     As  soon  as  William  was  returned  to 
Rouen,  he  became  reconciled  to  Robert,  and   carried  him  with 
him  into  England,  where  he  was  successfully  employed  in  retali* 
ating  an  invasion  of  Malcolm  king  of  Scotland. 
riORI  1      William,  being  thus  freed  from  foreign  and  domestic 
enemies,  began  to  have  sufficient  leisure  for  a  more  at* 
tentive  application  to  the  duties  of  peace.     For  this  purpose,  the 
Doomsday  Book  Vv'as  compiled  by  his  order,  which  contains  a 
general  survey  of  all  the  lands  in  the  kingdom  5  their  extent  in 
each  district ;  their  proprietors,  tenures,  value,  the  quantity  of 
meadow,  pasture,  wood,  and  arable  land,  which  they  contained  ; 
and  in  some  counties,  the  number  of  tenants,  cottages,  and  people 
of  all  denominations,  who  lived  upon  them.     This  detail  enabled- 
him  to  regulate  the  taxations  in  such  a  manner,  that  all  the  inhab- 
itants were  compelled  to  bear  their  duties  in  proportion  to  their 
abilities. 

He  was  no  less  careful  of  the  methods  of  saving  money  than 
of  accumulation.  He  reserved  a  very  ample  re-  enue  for  the 
crown ;  and,  in  the  general  distiibution  of  land  among  his  follow- 
ers, he  kept  possession  of  no  less  tlian  fourteen  hundred  manors 


WILLIAM  I.  g9r 

in  different  parts  of  the  country.  Such  was  his  income,  that  it  is 
justly  said  to  have  exceeded  that  of  any  English  prince  either  be- 
fore or  since  his  time.  No  king  of  England  was  ever  so  opulent ; 
jione  so  able  to  support  the  splendour  and  magnificence  of  a 
court ;  none  had  so  many  places  of  trust  and  profit  to  bestow ; 
and  none,  consequently,  had  his  commands  attended  with  such 
implicit  obedience. 

There  was  one  pleasure  to  which  William,  as  well  as  all  th© 
Normans  and  antient  Saxons,  was  addicted,  which  was  hunting. 
To  indulge  this  in  its  utmost  extent,  he  depopulated  the  country 
of  Hants  for  thirty  miles,  turning  out  the  inhabitants,  destroying 
all  the  village)^,  and  making  the  wretched  outcasts  no  compensa- 
tion for  such  an  injury.  In  the  time  of  the  Saxon  kings,  all  no-^ 
blemen  without  distinction  had  a  right  to  hunt  in  the  royal  forests ; 
but  William  appropriated  all  these,  and  published  very  severe 
laws  to  prohibit  his  subjects  from  encroaching  on  this  part  of  his 
prerogative.  The  killing  of  a  deer,  a  boar,  or  even  a  hare,  was 
punished  with  the  loss  of  the  delinquent's  eyes,  at  a  time  when 
the  killing  of  a  man  might  be  atoned  for  by  paying  a  moderate 
fine  or  composition. 

As  the  king's  wealth  and  power  were  So  great,  it  may  be  easily 
supposed  that  the  riches  of  his  ministers  were  in  proportion. 
Those  of  his  uterine  brother  Odo,  bishop  of  Bayeux,  were  so  great, 
that  he  resolved  to  purchase  the  papacy.  For  this  purpose,  tak- 
ing the  opportunity  of  William's  absence,  he  equipped  a  vesse! 
at  the  Isle  of  Wight,  on  board  of  which  he  sent  immense  treas- 
ures, and  prepared  for  his  embarkation ;  but  he  was  unfortunately 
detained  by  contrary  winds.  In  the  mean  time  William,  having 
had  intimation  of  his  design,  resolved  to  prevent  the  exportation 
of  so  much  wealth  from  his  dominions.  Accordingly,  returning 
from  Normandy,  where  he  was  then  employed,  he  came  into  En- 
gland at  the  very  instant  his  brother  was  stepping  on  board,  and 
immediately  ordered  him  to  be  made  a  prisoner.  His  attendants, 
however,  respecting  the  immunities  of  the  church,  scrupled  to  ex- 
ecute his  commands  ;  so  that  the  king  himself  was  obliged  with 
his  own  hands  to  seize  him.  Odo,  disconcerted  at  so  unexpected 
an  intervention,  appealed  to  the  pope ;  who,  he  alleged,  was  the 
only  person  upon  earth  to  try  a  bishop.  To  this  the  king  replied, 
that  he  did  not  seize  him  as  bishop  of  Bayeux,  but  as  the  earl  of 

VOL.  I.  12 


j9'0l  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

Kent ;  and  in  that  capacity  he  expected,  and  would  have,  an  ac- 
count of  his  administration.  He  was  therefore  sent  prisoner  inta 
Normandy;  and,  notwithstanding  all  the  remonstrances  and 
threats  of  Gregory,  he  was  detained  in  custody  during  the  remain- 
der of  William's  reign. 

William  had  scarcely  put  an  end  to  this  transaction  when  he 
felt  a  very  severe  blow  in  the  death  of  Matilda,  his  queen ;  and^, 
as  misfortunes  generally  come  together,  he  received  information 
of  a  general  insurrection  in  Maine,  the  nobility  of  which  had  been 
always  averse  from  the  Norman  government.  Upon  his  arrival 
on  the  continent,  he  found  that  the  insurgents  had  been  secretly 
assisted  and  excited  by  the  king  of  France,  whose  p61icy  consisted 
in  thus  lessening  the  Norman;  power,  by  creating  dissensions 
among  the  nobles  of  its  different  provinces.  William's  displeas- 
ure was  not  a  little  increased  by  tlie  account  he  received  of  some 
railleries  which  that  monai'ch  had  thrown  out  against  him.  It 
seems  that  William,  who  was  become  corpulent,  had  been  de- 
tained in  bed  some  time  by  sickness ;  and  Philip  was  heard  to 
say,  that  he  only  lay  in  of  a  big  belly.  This  so  provoked  the 
English  monarch,  that  he  sent  him  word  he  should  soon  be  up, 
and  would  at  his  churching  present  such  a  number  of  tapers  as 
would  set  the  kingdom  of  France  in  a  flame. 
■  In  order  to  perform  this  promise  he  levied  a  strong  army,  and, 
entering  the  isle  of  France,  destroyed  and  burned  all  the  villages 
and  houses  without  opposition.  He  took  the  town  of  Mante,. 
which  he  reduced  to  ashes.  But  the  progress  of  these  hostilities 
was  stopped  by  an  accident,  which  shortly  after  put  an  end  to 
William's  life.  His  horse,  chancing  to  place  his  fore-feet  on 
some  hot  ashes,  plunged  so  violently  that  the  rider  was  thrown 
forward,  and  bruised  upon  the  pummel  of  the  saddle  to  such  a  de- 
gree, that  he  suffered  a  relapse,  and  was  obliged  to  return  to 
Rouen.  Finding  his  illness  increase,  and  being  sensible  of  the 
approach  of  death,  he  began  to  turn,  his  eyes  to  a  future  state, 
from  which  the  pursuit  of  ambition  had  long  averted  them.  He 
was  now  struck  with  remorse  for  all  the  cruelties  and  depreda- 
tions he  had  made :  he  endeavoured  to  atone  for  his  former  of- 
fences by  large  presents  to  churches  and  monasteries,  and  by  giv- 
ing liberty  to  many  prisoners  whom  he  unjustly  detained.  He 
was  even  prevailed  on,  though  not  without  reluctance,  to  consent. 


WILLIAM  I,  fl 

with  his  dying  breath,  to  the  deliverance  of  his  brother   Odo, 
against  whom  he  was  extremely  incensed.     He  then  bequeathed 
Normandy  and  Le  Maine  to  his  eldest  son  Robert,  whom  he  nev- 
er loved  ;  to  Heniy  he  left  five  thousand  pounds  and  his  mother's 
jointure,  without  the  smallest  territory;  and  though  he  would 
not  pretend  to  establish  the  succession  of  the  crown  of  England, 
to  \vhich  he  now  began  to  perceive  that  he  had  no  title,  he  ex- 
pressed his  wish  that  it  might  devolve  to  his  favourite  son  Wil- 
liam, whom  he  immediately  dispatched  with  letters  to  the  arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury,  desiring  his  assistance.     Having  thus  regu- 
lated his  temporal  affairs,  he  was  conveyed  in   a  litter  to  a  little 
village  near  Rouen,  where  he  might  settle  the  concerns  of  his  soul 
without  noise  or  interruption.     It  was  there  that  he  died,  in  the 
sixty -first  year  of  his  age,  after  having  reigned  fifty -two  in  Nor- 
mandy, and  twenty-one  in  England.     His  body  was  interred  in 
the  church  at  Caen,  which  he  himself  had  founded  :  but  his  inter- 
ment was  attended  with  a  remarkable   circumstance.     As  the 
body  was  carrying  to  the  grave,  the  prelates  and  priests  attend- 
ing with  the  most  awful  silence,  a  man,  who  stood  upon  an  emi- 
nence, was  heard  to  cry  out  with  a  loud  voice,  and  to  forbid  the 
interment  of  the  body  in  a  spot  that  had  been  unjustly  seized  by 
the  Conqueror.     ''  That  very  place,"  cried  the  man,  "  is    the 
area  of  my  father's  house  ;  and  I  now  summon  the  departed  soul 
before  the  divine  tribunal  to  do  me  justice,  and  to  atone  for  so 
great  an  oppression."     The  bishops  and  attendants  Avere  struck 
with  the  man's  intrepid  conduct ;  they  inquired  into  the  truth  of 
his  charge,  and  finding  it  just,  agreed  to  satisfy  him  £or  the  dam- 
ages he  had  sustained. 

William  was  a  prince  of  great  courage  and  capacity :  ambitiouSj 
politic,  cruel,  vindictive,  and  rapacious.  He  was  fond  of  glory, 
and  parsimonious  merely  for  the  purposes  of  ostentation.  Though 
sudden  and  impetuous  in  his  enterprises,  he  was  cool,  deliberate, 
and  indefatigable  in  times  of  danger.  He  is  said,  by  the  Nor- 
man writers,  to  be  above  eight  feet  high,  his  body  strong  built 
and  well  proportioned,  and  his  strength  such  that  none  of  his 
courtiers  could  draw  his  bow.  He  talked  little ;  he  was  seldom 
affable  to  any,  except  to  Lanfranc,  arch-bishop  of  Canterbury  j 
with  him  he  was  ever  meek  and  gentle, — with  all  others  stern 
and  austere.    Though  he  rendered  himself  formidable  to  all;  and 


92  HISTORY  OF  ENGLA^^^, 

odious  to  many,  jet  he  had  policy  sufficient  to  transmit  his  power 
to  posterity,  and  the  throne  is  still  occupied  by  his  descendants. 


CHAP.  VI. 

WILLIAM  RTJFUS. 

Vt  iLLiAM,  surnamed  Rufus  from  the  colour  of  his  hair,  had  no 
sooner  received  the  late  king's  letter  to  Lanfranc  in  his  favour, 
than  he  hastened  to  take  measures  for  securing  himself  on  the 
throne.  Arriving,  therefore,  before  the  news  of  William's  death 
had  yet  reached  England,  his  first  care  was  to  take  possession  of 
the  treasure  left  by  the  king  at  Winchester,  which  amounted  to 
the  sum  of  sixty  thousand  pounds.  He  then  addressed  the  pri- 
mate, who  had  always  considered  him  with  an  eye  of  peculiar 
affection,  and  who  noAV,  finding  the  justness  of  his  claim,  instant- 
ly proceeded  to  the  ceremony  of  his  coronation.  At  the  same 
time  Robert,  who  had  been  appointed  successor  to  Normandy, 
took  peaceable  possession  of  that  government  5  where  his  person 
was  loved,  and  his  accession  long  desired. 

In  the  beginning  of  William  Rufus's  reign  the  English  began 
to  think  they  had  hitherto  mistaken  this  prince's  character,  who 
had  always  appeared  to  them  rude  and  brutal.  He  at  first  seemed 
to  pay  the  utmost  regard  to  the  counsels  of  Lanfranc  the  primate, 
which  were  mild  and  gentle,  and  constantly  calculated  for  the 
benefit  of  the  nation.  Nevertheless,  the  Norman  barons,  who 
knew  him  better,  perceived  that  he  kept  his  disposition  under  an 
unnatural  restraint,  and  that  he  only  waited  an  opportunity  for 
throwing  off  the  mask  when  his  power  should  be  established. 
They  were,  from  the  beginning,  displeased  at  the  division  of  the 
empire  by  the  late  king ;  they  eagerly  desired  an  union  as  before, 
and  looked  upon  Robert  as  the  proper  owner  of  the  whole.  The 
natural  disposition  also  of  this  prince  was  as  pleasing  to  them  as 
that  of  William  his  brother  was  odious.  Robert  was  open,  gener- 
ous, and  humane  ;  he  carried  his  facility  to  an  excess,  as  he  could 
scarcely  find  strength  of  mind  to  give  any  of  his  adherents  the 
mortification  of  a  refusal.    But  this  was  a  quality  no  way  disa- 


WILLIAM  11.  93 

greeable  to  those  who  expected  to  build  their  ambition  on  the  easy 
pliancy  of  his  temper.  A  powei'ful  conspiracy  was  therefore  car- 
ried on  against  William ;  and  Odo,  the  late  king's  brother,  un- 
dertook to  conduct  it  to  maturity. 

William,  sensible  of  the  danger  that  threatened  him  on  all 
sides,  endeavoured  to  gain  the  affections  of  the  native  English, 
whom  he  prevailed  upon,  by  promises  of  future  good  treatment 
and  preference  of  the  distribution  of  his  favours,  to  espouse  his 
interests.  He  was  soon  in  the  field  ;  and,  at  the  head  of  a  nu- 
merous army,  showed  himself  in  readiness  to  oppose  all  who 
should  dispute  his  pretensions.  In  the  mean  time  Odo  had  writ- 
ten to  Robert  an  account  of  the  conspiracy  in  his  favour,  urging 
him  to  use  dispatch,  and  exciting  him  by  the  greatness  of  the  dan- 
ger, and  the  splendour  of  the  reward.  Robert  gave  the  most 
positive  assurances  of  speedy  assistance  ;  but  his  indolence  was 
not  to  be  excited  by  distant  expectations.  Instead  of  employing 
his  money  in  levies  to  support  his  friends  in  England,  he  squan- 
dered it  away  in  idle  expenses  and  unmerited  benefits,  so  that  he 
procrastinated  his  depaiture  till  tiie  opportunity  was  lost ;  while 
William  exerted  himself  with  incredible  activity  to  dissipate  the 
confederacy  before  he  could  amve.  Nor  was  this  difficult  to 
effect :  the  conspirators  had,  in  consequence  of  Robert's  assur- 
ances, taken  possession  of  some  fortresses  ;  but  the  appearance 
of  the  king  soon  reduced  them  to  implore  for  mercy.  He  granted 
them  their  lives,  but  confiscated  all  their  estates,  and  banished 
them  the  kingdom. 

William,  thus  freed  from  all  danger  of  insurrection,  and  fixed 
in  the  peaceable  possession  of  the  kingdom,  showed  the  first  in- 
stance of  his  perverse  disposition,  in  his  ingratitude  to  the  En- 
glish who  had  secured  him  on  the  throne. 

The  death  of  Lanfranc,  which  followed  shortly  after,  took  off 
all  restraint  from  his  inclinations  ;  and  his  mind  now  appeared  in 
its  natural  deformity,  tyrannical  and  unjust.  He  ordered  a  new 
survey  to  be  taken  of  all  the  lands  and  property  of  the  kingdom  ; 
and  wherever  he  found  them  undervalued  in  the  Doomsday -book, 
he  raised  the  proportion  of  taxes  accordingly.  Even  the  privi- 
leges of  the  church,  which  were  held  very  sacred  in  those  times 
-of  ignorance,  were  but  a  feeble  rampart  against  his  usurpations  ; 
he  seized  the  vacant  bishoprics,  and  openly  put  to  sale  such  ab- 


94  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

beys  as  he  thought  proper.  But,  not  contented  with  exerting  hi» 
tyranny  over  his  own  dominions,  he  was  resolved  to  extend  his 
authority  over  those  of  his  brother.  In  consequence  of  this  reso- 
lution he  appeared  in  Normandy  at  the  head  of  a  numerous  army ; 
but  the  nobility,  on  both  sides,  strongly  connected  by  interest  and 
alliances,  brought  on  an  accommodation.  Ainong  other  articles 
of  this  treaty,  it  was  agreed,  that,  in  case  either  of  the  brothers 
should  die  without  issue,  the  survivor  should  inherit  all  his  do-« 
minions.  It  was  in  vain  that  Henry,  the  other  brother,  remon- 
strated against  this  act  of  injustice ;  it  was  in  vain  that  he  took 
arms,  and  even  defended  a  little  fortress  on  the  coast  of  Nor- 
mandy, for  some  time,  against  their  united  assaults.  He  was  at 
last  obliged  to  surrender  ;  and  being  despoiled  of  even  the  small 
patrimony  that  was  left  him,  he  wandei-ed  about  for  some  years 
with  a  few  attendants,  and  was  often  reduced  to  gi-eat  poverty. 

It  was  in  besieging  this  fortress  that  a  circumstance  or  two 
have  been  related,  which  serve  to  mark  the  character  of  the  two 
brothers.  As  William  was  taking  the  air  one  day  on  horseback, 
at  some  distance  from  the  camp,  he  perceived  two  horsemen  rid- 
ing out  from  the  castle,  who  soon  came  up  and  attacked  him.  In 
the  very  first  encounter,  the  king's  horse  being  killed,  overturned^ 
and  lay  upon  him  in  such  a  manner  that  he  could  not  disengage 
himself.  His  antagonist,  while  he  remained  in  this  situation, 
lifted  up  his  arm  to  dispatcli  him  ;  when  William  exclaimed,  in 
a  menacing  tone,  "  Hold,  villain  !  I  am  the  king  of  England." 
The  two  soldiers  were  immediately  seized'  Avith  veneration  and 
awe ;  and,  helping  him  up,  accommodated  him  with  one  of  their 
horses.  William  was  not  ungrateful  for  this  service  ;  he  mounted 
the  horse,  and,  ordering  the  soldier  to  follow,  took  him  into  his 
service.  Soon  after  Robert  had  an  occasion  to  show  still  greater 
marks  of  generosity ;  for,  hearing  that  the  garrison  was  in  great 
distress  for  v/ant  of  water,  he  not  only  ordered  that  Henry  should 
be  permitted  to  supply  himself,  but  also  sent  him  some  pipes  of 
wine  for  his  own  table.  Rufus  did  not  at  all  approve  of  this  ill- 
timed  generosity;  but  Robert  answered  his  remonstrances  by 
saying,  "  Shall  we  suffer  our  brother  to  die  with  thirst  ?  Where 
shall  we  find  another  when  he  is  gone  ?" 

The  intestine  and  petty  discoi'ds  that  ensued  upon  this  accom- 
modation between  Robert  and  Rufus,  seem  scarce  worthy  the  at- 


WILLIAM  IL  ^5 

'  fention  of  history.  They  indeed  produced  more  real  calamities 
to  the  people  than  splendid  invasions  and  bloody  battles  ;  as  the 
depredations  of  petty  tyrants  are  ever  more  severely  felt  by  the 
poor  than  the  magnanimous  projects  of  ambition.  A  rupture  en- 
sued between  Rufus  and  Malcolm,  king  of  Scotland,  in  which  the 
latter  was  ultimately  surprised,  and  slain,  by  a  party  from  Aln- 
wick castle. 

A  new  breach  was  made  some  time  after  between  the 
brothers,  in  which  Rufus  found  means  to  encroach  still  ^  "^'^ 
further  upon  Robert's  possessions.  An  incursion  from  the  Welslv 
filled  the  country  of  England  with  alarm ;  but  they  were 
quickly  repelled,  and  obliged  to  find  refuge  in  their  na-  L  ■-• 
live  mountains.  A  conspiracy  of  the  Norman  barons  in  England 
threatened  sei'ious  consequences;  but  their  schemes  were  pre- 
vented and  frustrated.  Robert  Mowbray,  earl  of  Northumber- 
land, who  was  at  the  head  of  this  plot,  was  thrown  into  prison, 
where  he  died,  after  thirty  years  confinement.  The  count  of  Eu, 
another  conspirator,  denying  the  charge,  fought  with  his  accuser 
in  presence  of  the  court  at  Windsor,  and,  being  worsted  in  the 
combat,  was  condemned  to  be  castrated,  and  to  have  his  eyes  put 
out.  Every  conspiracy,  thus  detected,  served  to  enrich  the  king, 
who  took  care  to  apply  to  his  own  use  those  treasures  that  had 
been  amassed  for  the  purpose  of  dethroning  him. 

But  the  memory  of  these  transient  broils  and  unsuccessful 
treasons  was  now  totally  eclipsed  by  one  of  the  most  noted  en- 
terprises that  ever  adorned  the  annals  of  nations,  or  excited  the 
attention  of  mankind :  I  mean  the  crusades,  Avhich  were  now  first 
projected.  Peter  the  Hermit,  a  native  of  Amiens  in  Picardy,  was 
a  man  of  great  zeal,  courage,  and  piety.  He  had  made  a  pil- 
grimage to  the  holy  sepulchre  at  Jerusalem,  and  beheld,  with  in- 
dignation, the  cruel  manner  in  which  the  Christians  were  treated 
by  the  Infidels,  who  were  in  possession  of  that  place.  Unable  to 
suppress  his  resentment,  upon  hisi-eturn  he  entertained  the  bold' 
design  of  freeing  ijlie  whole  country  from  the  Mahometan  yoke, 
and  of  restoring  to  the  Christians  the  land  where  their  religion 
was  first  propagated.  He  proposed  his  views  to  Martin  II.,  a(. 
that  time  pope,  who  permitted  rather  than  assisted  this  bold  en- 
thusiast in  his  aims.  Peter,  therefore,  warmed  with  a  zeal  that, 
knew  no  bounds,  began  to  preach  the  crusade,  and  ir,  exrito  ih^ 


96  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

princes  of  Christendom  to  the  recovery  of  the  Holy  Land.  Bare" 
headed  and  bare-footed,  he  travelled  from  court  to  court,  preach- 
ing as  he  went,  and  inflaming  the  zeal  of  every  rank  of  people. 
The  fame  of  this  design  being  thus  diffused,  prelates,  nobles,  and 
princes,  concurred  in  seconding  it;  and,  at  a  council  held  at 
Clermont,  where  the  pope  himself  exhorted  to  the  undertaking, 
the  whole  assembly  cried  out  with  one  voice,  as  if  by  inspiration, 
It  is  the  will  of  God  I  It  is  the  will  of  God  !  From  that  time 
nothing  was  seen  but  an  universal  migration  of  the  western  na- 
tions into  the  East ;  men  of  all  ranks  flew  to  arms  with  the  ut- 
most alacrity,  and  bore  the  sign  of  the  cross  upon  their  right 
shoulder,  as  a  mark  of  their  devotion  to  the  cause.  In  the  midst 
of  this  universal  ardour  that  was  diffused  over  Europe,  men  were 
not  entirely  forgetful  of  their  temporal  interest ;  for  some,  hop- 
ing a  more  magnificent  settlement  in  the  soft  regions  of  Asia, 
sold  their  European  property  for  whatever  they  could  obtain,  con- 
tented Avith  receiving  any  thing  for  what  they  were  predetermined 
to  relinquish.  Among  the  princes  who  felt  and  acknowledged 
this  general  spirit  of  enterprise,  was  Robert,  duke  of  Normandy. 
The  crusade  was  entirely  adapted  to  his  inclinations  and  his  cir- 
cumstances ;  he  was  brave,  zealous,  covetous  of  glory,  harassed 
by  insurrections,  and,  what  was  more  than  all,  naturally  fond  of 
change.  In  order  to  supply  money  to  defray  the  necessary 
charges  of  so  expensive  an  undertaking,  he  offered  to  mortgage 
his  dukedom  of  Noi-mandy  to  his  brother  Rufus  for  a  stipulated 
sum  of  money.  This  sum,  which  was  no  greater  than  ten  thou- 
sand marks,  was  readily  promised  by  Rufus,  whose  ambition 
was  upon  the  watch  to  seize  every  advantage.  He  was  no 
ways  solicitous  about  raising  the  money,  as  he  knew  the  riches 
of  his  clergy.  From  them,  therefore,  he  forced  the  whole, — 
heedless  of  their  murmurs,  and  aggravating  his  injustice  by  the 
pious  pretences  he  made  use  of  to  cover  his  extortions:  thus 
equipping  his  brother  for  his  romantic  expedition  to  the  Holy 
Land,  he  more  wisely,  and  more  safely,  took  peaceable  possession 
of  his  dukedom  at  home. 

In  this  manner  was  Normandy  once  more  united  to  England ; 
and  from  this  union,  afterwards,  arose  those  numerous  wars  with 
France,  which  for  whole  centuries  continued  to  depopulate  both 
nations,  without  conducing  in  the  end  to  increase  the  power  of 


William  il  9f 

either.  However,  Rufus  was  not  a  little  pleased  with  this  acquis 
sition ;  he  made  a  voyage  to  his  new  dominion,  and  took 
possession  of  it  for  five  years,  according  to  agreement  L  'J 
with  his  brother.  He  also  demanded  of  the  king  of  France  a 
part  of  the  territory  of  Vexin,  Avhich  he  pretended  was  an  appur- 
tenance to  his  duchy,  and  even  attempted  to  enforce  his  claims 
by  arms.  But  though  the  cession  of  Maine  and  Normandy  great- 
ly increased  the  king's  territories,  they  added  but  little  to  his  real 
power,  as  his  new  subjects  were  composed  of  men  of  independent 
spirits,  more  ready  to  dispute  than  obey  his  commands.  Many 
were  the  revolts  and  insurrections  which  he  was  obliged  to  quell 
in  person ;  and  no  sooner  was  one  conspiracy  suppressed  than 
another  rose  to  give  him  fresh  disquietude. 

In  the  midst  of  these  foreign  troubles,  he  found  himself  involved 
in  a  disagreeable  quarrel  with  Anselm,  arch-bishop  of  Canterbury, 
a  prelate  of  a  haughty  disposition,  and  extremely  tenacious  of 
the  rights  of  the  clergy.  There  was  at  that  time  a  schism  in  the 
church,  between  Urban  and  Clement,  who  both  pretended  to  the 
papacy ;  and  Anselm,  who  had  already  acknowledged  Urban, 
was  determined,  without  the  king's  consent,  to  introduce  his  au- 
thority into  England.  William,  who,  imitating  his  father's  exam- 
ple, had  prohibited  his  subjects  from  recognizing  any  pope  whom, 
he  had  not  previously  approved,  was  enraged  at  Anselm's  preten- 
sions. A  synod  was  summoned  at  Rocldngham,  for  deposing 
the  prelate ;  but  instead  of  obeying  the  king,  the  members  of  it 
declared,  that  none  but  the  pope  could  inflict  a  censure  on  their 
primate.  To  this  was  soon  after  added  a  fresh  offence.  Anselm, 
being  required  to  furnish  his  quota  of  soldiers  for  an  intended 
expedition  against  the  Welsh,  reluctantly  complied ;  but  he  sent 
them  so  ill  equipped,  that  Rufus  threatened  him  with  a  prosecu- 
tion. As  the  resentments  on  both  sides  were  increased,  their 
mutual  demands  were  raised  in  proportion,  till  at  length  their 
anger  proceeded  to  recrimination ;  and  Anselm,  finding  it  danger- 
ous to  remain  in  the  kingdom,  desired  permission  to  retire  to 
Rome.  This  request  the  king  very  readily  complied  with ;  but, 
in  order  to  mortify  the  prelate  yet  more,  he  sent  an  officer  to 
search  his  baggage  after  he  was  on  board,  and  to  seize  all  his 
money,  on  pretence  of  a  law  which  forbade  the  exportation  of 
silver.    Not  content  Avith  this,  he  ordered  all  his  temporalities  to 

VOL.   I.  13 


,98  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

be  confiscated,  and  actually  kept  possession  of  them  the  remain** 
ing  part  of  his  life. 

This  open  infringement  of  what  were  then  considered  as  rights 
of  the  church,  served  to  exasperate  the  pope,  as  well  as  all  the 
ecclesiastics  of  his  own  dominions,  against  him.  Urban  even 
menaced  him  with  the  sentence  of  excommunication ;  but  he  was 
too  earnestly  engaged  in  the  crusade  to  attend  to  any  other  busi- 
ness. Rufus,  therefore,  little  regarded  those  censures,  which  he 
found  were  iiiefFectual :  he  had  but  very  little  religion  at  best  5 
and  the  amazing  infatuation  of  the  times  inspired  him  with  no 
very  high  ideas  of  the  wisdom  of  its  professors.  It  is  reported 
of  him,  that  he  once  accepted  fifty  marks  of  a  Jew,  whose  son 
had  been  converted  to  Christianity,  and  who  engaged  him  by  that 
present  to  assist  in  bringing  back  the  youth  to  Judaism.  Wil- 
liam employed  both  menaces  and  persuasion  to  that  purpose ;  but, 
finding  liis  efforts  ineffectual,  he  sent  for  the  father,  and  inform- 
ing him  that  the  new  convert  was  obstinate  in  his  faith,  he  return- 
ed him  half  the  money,  and  kept  the  rest  for  his  pains.  At  anoth- 
er time,  he  is  said  to  have  sent  for  some  learned  Clu-istian  theo- 
logians and  some  JeAvish  ral)bies,  and  bade  them  fairly  dispute 
the  points  of  tlieir  religion  before  him.  He  was  perfectly  indif- 
ferent, he  said,  which  sliould  prevail ;  he  had  his  ears  open  to 
both,  and  he  would  embrace  that  doctrine,  which,  upon  compari- 
son, should  be  found  supported  on  the  most  solid  arguments. 

In  this  manner  Rufus  proceeded,  careless  of  approbation  or 
censure,  and  only  intent  upon  extending  his  dominions,  either  by 
purchase  or  conquest.  The  earl  of  Poictou  and  Guienne,  inflamed 
with  a  desire  of  going  upon  the  crusade,  had  gathered  an  immense 
multitude  for  that  expedition,  but  wanted  money  to  forward  his 
preparations.  He  had  recourse  therefore  to  Rufus,  and  offered 
to  mortgage  all  his  dominions,  without  much  considering  what 
would  become  of  his  unhappy  subjects  that  he  thus  disposed  of. 
The  king  accepted  this  offer  with  his  usual  avidity,  and  had  pre- 
pared a  fleet  and  an  army,  in  order  to  take  possession  of  the  rich 
provinces  thus  consigned  to  his  trust.  But  an  accident  put  an. 
end  to  all  his  ambitious  projects,  and  served  to  rid  the  world  of 
a  mercenary  tyrant.  His  favourite  amusement  was  hunting,  al- 
most the  only  relaxation  of  princes  in  those  rude  times,  when 
the  other  arts  of  peace  were  but  little  cultivated.    The  New  For^ 


WILLIAM  H;  -9^' 

est  was  generally  the  scene  of  his  sport ;  and  there  he  usually- 
spent  those  hours  which  were  not  employed  in  business  of  a  more 
serious  nature.  One  day,  as  he  was  mounting  his  horse  in  order 
to  take  his  customary  amusement,  he  is  said  to  have  been  stopped 
ly  a  monk,  who  warned  him,  from  some  dreams  he  had  the  night 
before,  to  abstain  from  that  ^day's  diversion.  Rufus,  smiling  at 
his  superstition,  ordered  him  to  be  paid  for  his  zeal,  but  desired 
him  to  have  more  favourable  dreams  for  the  future.  Thus  setting 
forward,  he  began  the  chase,  attended  by  Walter  Tyrrel,  a  French 
knight,  famous  for  archery,  who  always  accompanied  him  in  these 
excursions.  Towards  sunset,  they  found  themselves  separated 
from  the  rest  of  their  retinue ;  and  the  king  dismounted,  either 
through  fatigue,  or  in  expectation  of  a  fresh  horse.  Just  at  that 
instant  a  stag  bounded  out  before  him  ',  and  Rufus,  drawing  his 
bow,  wounded  the  animal,  yet  not  so  mortally  but  that  it  fled, 
while  he  followed  in  hopes  of  seeing  it  fall.  As  the  setting  sun 
beamed  in  his  face,  he  held  up  his  hands  before  his  eyes,  and 
stood  in  that  posture,  when  Tyrrel,  who  had  been  engaged  in  the 
same  pursuit,  let  fly  an  arrow,  which  glancing  from  a  tree  struck 
the  king  to  the  heart.  He  dropped  dead  instantaneously ;  while 
the  innocent  author  of  his  deaih,  terrified  at  tlie  accident,  put 
spurs  to  his  horse,  hastened  to  the  sea-shore,  embarked  for  France, 
and  joined  the<;rusade  that  was  then  setting  out  for  Jerusalem. 
William's  body,  being  found  by  some  countrymen  passing  through 
the  forest,  was  laid  across  a  horse,  and  carried  to  Winchester, 
where  it  was  next  day  interred  in  the  cathedral,  without  ceremo- 
ny, or  any  marks  of  respect.  Few  lamented  his  fete,  and  none 
of  the  courtiers  attended  his  funeral. 

It  requires  no  great  art  to  draw  the  character  of  a  prince  whose 
vices  were  coinpensated  by  scarce  one  virtue.  Rufus  was  a  per- 
fidious, encroaching,  and  a  dangerous  neighbour  ;  an  unkind  and 
ungenerous  relation,  a  rapacious  and  yet  a  prodigal  prince.  How- 
ever, there  remain  to  this  day  some  monuments  of  his  public  spir- 
it ;  the  Tower,  Westminster-hall,  and  London-bridge,  were  all 
built  by  him,  and  are  evidences  that  the  treasures  of  government 
were  not  all  expended  in  vain.  William  Rufus  was  slain  in  the 
thirteenth  year  of  his  reign,  and  about  the  fortieth  of  his  age.  As 
he  never  was  married,  he  left  no  legitimate  issue  behind  liim :  the 
succession,  therefore,  of  course  devolved  upon  Robert,  his  elder 
brother  5  but  he  was  thee  too  distant  to  assert  his  preteiisions. 


100  PISTORY^  OF  ENQLAND. 

CHAP,  \IL 
HEKfRY  I.  SURNAMED  BEAU-CLERC. 

J.  HERE  were  now  two  competitors  for  the  crown,-— -Robert,  whq 
had  engaged  in  the  holy  war,  and  Henrj,  the  youngest  brother, 
who  continued  at  home.  Had  Robert  been  in  Normandy  when 
William  died,  there  is  no  doubt,  from  the  popularity  of  his  char«! 
acter,  and  from  the  treaty  formerly  concluded  between  the  two 
brothers,  but  that  he  would  have  been  elected  without  opposition. 
This  valiant  and  generous  prince,  having  led  his  followers  into 
Palestine,  and  there  distinguished  himself  by  his  courage,  his  affa- 
ble disposition,  and  unbounded  generosity,  after  the  taking  of  Je- 
rusalem, began  to  think  of  returning  home,  and  of  enjoying  in 
tranquillity  that  glory  which  he  had  acquired  in  the  field  against 
the  infidels.  But,  instead  of  taking  the  most  direct  road  to  En- 
gland, he  passed  through  Italy,  where  he  became  acquainted  with 
Sibylla,  daughter  of  count  ConA^ersano,  a  lady  of  celebrated  beau- 
ty ;  and,  marrjing  her,  he  lavished  away,  in  her  company,  those 
hours  which  should  have  been  employed  in  the  recovery  of  his 
kingdom. 

In  the  mean  time  Henry,  who  had  been  hunting  in  the  New 
Forest  when  his  brother  was  slain,  took  the  earliest  advantage  of 
the  occasion,  and,  hastening  to  Winchester,  resolved  to  secure 
the  royal  treasure,  which  he  knew  to  be  the  best  assistant  in  se- 
conding his  aims.  William  de  Breteuil,  who  had  the  care  of  the 
treasury,  informed  of  the  king's  death,  opposed  himself  boldly  to 
Henry's  pretensions.  He  ventured  to  assure  Henry,  that  the 
money  in  his  custody,  as  well  as  the  crown,  belonged  to  his  elder 
brother,  and  that  he  was  resolved  to  continue  firm  in  his  just  al- 
legiance. The  dispute  was  on  the  point  of  producing  bloodshed, 
•when  several  of  Henry's  partisans  arriving,  compelled  Breteuil  to 
surrender  the  treasure,  with  a  part  of  which  they,  in  all  proba- 
bility, hoped  to  be  rewarded  for  their  service.  Being  possessed 
of  this,  without  losing  time,  he  next  hastened  to  London,  where 
he  procured  himself  to  be  proclaimed  king,  and  instantly  proceed- 
ed to  the  exercise  of  the  royal  dignity.  The  barons,  as  well  as 
the  people,  acquiesced  in  a  claim  which  they  were  unprepared  to 
resist,  and  yielding  obedience  from  the  fears  of  immediate  danger. 


HENRY  I.  3^01 

Whenever  there  is  a  disputed  throne,  the  people  generally  be- 
come umpires,  and  thus  regain  a  part  of  those  natural  rights  of 
which  they  might  have  been  deprived.  Henry  easily  foresaw 
that,  to  secure  his  usurped  title,  his  subjects  were  to  be  indulged, 
and  that  his  power  could  only  find  security  in  their  affections. 
His  first  care,  therefore,  was  to  make  several  concessions  in  their 
favour.  He  granted  them  a  charter,  establishing  the  churches  in 
possession  of  all  their  immunities ;  abolishing  those  excessive 
fines  which  used  to  be  exacted  from  heirs  5  granting  his  barons 
and  military  tenants  the  power  of  bequeathing  their  money  by 
will ;  remitting  all  debts  due  to  the  crown  ;  offering  a  pardon  for 
all  former  offences,  and  promising  to  confirm  and  observe  all  the 
laws  of  Edward  the  Confessor.  These  concessions  pleased  the 
clergy  and  the  people,  while  the  king,  who  meant  only  to  observe 
them  while  his  power  was  in  dispute,  boasted  of  the  lenity  of  his 
government. 

Still  further  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the  people,  Henry  ex- 
pelled from  court  all  the  ministers  of  his  brother's  debauchery  and 
arbitrary  power ;  he  stripped  Ralph  Flambard,  who  had  been  his 
brother's  principal  favourite,  and  consequently  obnoxious  to  the 
people,  of  his  dignity,  and  had  him  confined  to  the  Tower.  But 
what  gave  liim  the  greatest  share  of  popularity  was  his  recalling 
Anselm,  arch-bishop  of  Canterbury,  who  had  been  banished  dur- 
ing the  last  reign,  to  his  former  dignity  and  his  favour.  One 
thing  only  remained  to  confirm  his  claims  without  danger  of  a 
rival.  The  English  still  remembered  their  Saxon  monarchs  with 
gratitude,  and  beheld  them  excluded  the  throne  with  regret.  There 
still  remained  some  of  the  descendants  of  that  favourite  line,  and, 
among  others,  Matilda,  the  niece  of  Edgar  Atheling ;  which  lady, 
having  declined  all  pretensions  to  royalty,  was  bred  up  in  a  con- 
vent, and  had  actually  taken  the  veil.  Upon  her  Henry  first 
fixed  his  eyes  as  a  proper  consort,  by  whose  means  the  long  breach 
between  the  Saxon  and  Norman  interests  would  be  finally  united. 
It  only  remained  to  get  over  the  scruple  of  her  being  a  nun :  but 
this  a  council,  devoted  to  his  interests,  readily  admitted ;  and 
Matilda  being  pronounced  free  to  marry,  the  nuptials  were  cele- 
brated with  great  pomp  and  solemnity. 

It  was  at  this  unfavourable  juncture  that  Robert  returned  from 
abroad,  and,  after  taking  possession  of  his  native  dominions,  laid 


iO£  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

his  claim  to  the  crown  of  England.  But  he  was  now,  as  in  all  his 
former  attempts,  too  late  for  success.  However,  as  he  was  a  man 
of  undaunted  resolution,  he  seemed  resolved  to  dispute  his  preten- 
sions to  the  last ;  and  the  great  fame  he  had  acquii-ed  in  the  East 
did  not  a  little  serve  to  forward  his  endeavours.  He  was  also 
excited  to  these  resolutions  by  Flambard,  who  had  escaped  from 
the  Tower ;  together  with  several  others,  as  well  of  the  Norman 
as  the  English  nobility.  Even  the  seamen  were  affected  with  the 
general  popularity  of  his  name,  and  revolted  to  him  with  the 
greatest  part  of  a  fleet  that  had  been  equipped  to  oppose  his  pas- 
sage. Henry,  who  outwardly  pretended  to  slight  all  these  prep- 
arations, yet  had  penetration  enough  to  perceive  that  his  subjects 
fluctuated  in  their  inclinations  between  Mm  and  his  brother.  In 
this  emergency  he  had  recourse  to  the  bigotry  of  the  people  to 
oppose  their  sentiments  of  justice.  He  paid  diligent  court  to 
Anselm,  whose  sanctity  and  wisdom  he  pretended  to  revere  ;  and 
this  prelate,  in  return,  employed  all  his  credit  in  securing  him  on 
the  throne.  He  scrupled  not  to  assure  the  nobles  of  the  king's 
sincerity  in  his  professions  of  justice;  and  even  rode  through  the 
ranks  of  the  army,  recommending  to  the  soldiery  the  defence  of 
their  king,  and  promising  to  see  their  valour  rewarded.  Thus 
the  people  were  retained  in  their  allegiance  to  the  usurper, 
and  the  army  marched  cheerfully  forward  to  meet  Robert  and 
liis  forces,  which  were  landed  in  safety  at  Portsmouth.  When 
the  two  armies  came  in  sight,  they  both  seemed  equally  unwilling 
to  hazard  a  battle ;  and  their  leaders,  who  saw  that  much  more 
would  be  lost  than  gained  by  such  a  conflict,  made  proposals  for 
an  accommodation.  This,  after  the  removal  of  a  few  obstacles, 
was  agreed  to ;  and  it  was  stipulated  that  Robert,  upon  the  re- 
ceipt of  a  certain  sum,  should  resign  his  pretensions  to  England  5 
and  that  if  either  of  the  princes  died  without  issue,  the  other 
should  succeed  to  his  dominions.  This  treaty  being  ratified,  the 
armies  on  each  side  were  disbanded  ;  and  Robert,  having  lived 
two  months  in  the  utmost  harmony  with  his  brother,  returned  in 
peace  to  his  own  dominions. 

But  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  formal  treaties  to  bind  up  the 
resentment  of  a  monarch  who  knew  himself  injured,  and  found  it 
in  his  power  to  take  revenge.  Henry  soon  showed  his  resolution 
to  punish  all  the  heads  of  the  party  which  had  lately  opposed  him  5 


HENRY  L  lOS 

and  this  he  did,  under  different  pretexts,  and  by  repeated  prose* 
cutions.  The  earl  of  Slirewsburj,  Arnulf  de  Montgomery,  and 
Roger,  earl  of  Lancaster,  were  banished  the  kingdom,  p^^„£,  -. 
with  the  confiscations  of  their  estates.  Robert  de  Pon-  L  '^'■^ 
tefract,  Robert  de  Mallet,  William  de  Warene,  and  the  earl  of 
Cornwall,  were  treated  with  equal  severity ;  so  that  Robert,  find- 
ing his  friends  thus  oppressed,  came  over  to  England  to  intercede 
in  their  behalf.  Henry  received  him  very  coolly,  and  assembled 
a  council  to  deliberate  in  what  manner  he  should  be  treated;  so 
that  Robert,  finding  his  own  liberty  to  be  in  danger,  was  glad  to 
ask  permission  to  return ;  which,  however,  was  not  granted  him 
till  he  consented  to  give  up  his  pension. 

But  the  consequences  of  Robert's  indiscretion  were  not  con- 
fined to  his  own  safety  alone  :  as  he  was  totally  averse  to  busi- 
ness, and  only  studious  of  the  more  splendid  amusements  or  em'- 
ployments  of  life,  his  affairs  every  day  began  to  wear  a  worse  ap- 
pearance. His  servants  pillaged  him  without  compunction  ;  and 
lie  is  described  as  lying  whole  days  a-bed  for  want  of  clothes,  of 
which  they  had  robbed  him.  His  subjects  were  treated  still  more 
deplorably ;  for,  being  under  the  command  of  petty  and  rapacious 
tyrants,  who  plundered  them  without  mercy,  the  whole  country 
was  become  a  scene  of  violence  and  depredation.  It  was  in  this 
miserable  exigence  that  the  Normans  at  length  had  recourse  td 
Henry,  from  whose  wise  administration  of  his  own  dominions 
they  expected  a  similitude  of  prosperity,  should  he  take  the  reins 
of  theirs.  Henry  very  readily  promised  to  redress  their  griev- 
ances, as  he  knew  it  would  be  the  direct  method  to  second  his 
own  ambition.  The  year  ensuing,  therefore,  he  landed 
in  Normandy  with  a  strong  army,  took  some  of  the  prin-  L  *-i 
cipal  towns,  and  showed,  by  the  rapidity  of  his  progress,  that  li@ 
meditated  the  entire  conquest  of  the  country. 

Robert,  who  had  already  mortgaged  or  given  away  the  great- 
est part  of  his  demesne,  spent  his  time  in  the  most  indolent 
amusements,  and  looked  upon  the  progress  of  Henry  with  an  eye 
S  of  perfect  indifference.  But  being  at  last  roused  from  his  leth- 
argy, and  finding  his  affairs  in  a  desperate  situation,  he  took  the 
strange  resolution  of  appealing,  in  person,  to  Henry's  natural  af- 
fections, which  this  brave,  imprudent  man  estimated  by  the  emo- 
tions of  his  own  heart.    Henry  received  him  not  only  with  cool-^ 


i04  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

ness  but  contempt ;  and  soon  taught  him,  that  no  virtues  will 
gain  that  man  esteem  who  has  forfeited  his  pretensions  to  pru- 
dence. Robert,  thus  treated  with  indignity,  quitted  his  brother 
in  a  transport  of  rage,  expressing  an  ardent  purpose  of  revenge  ; 
to  which  Henry  paid  no  sort  of  regard. 

Robert  was  resolved,  however,  to  show  himself  formidable, 
even  in  the  most  distressed  state  of  his  circumstances.  Possessed 
with  higli  ideas  of  chivalry,  which  his  expedition  to  the  Holy  Land 
served  to  heighten,  he  was  willing  to  retrieve  his  affairs  by  val- 
our, which  he  had  lost  by  indolence.  Being  supported  by  the  earl 
of  Mortaigne  and  Robert  de  Belesme,  Henry's  inveterate  ene- 
mies, he  raised  an  army,  and  approached  his  brother's  camp,  with 
a  view  of  finishing,  by  a  decisive  battle,  the  quarrel  between 
them.  While  the  two  armies  were  yet  in  sight  of  each  other, 
some  of  the  clergy  employed  their  mediation  to  bring  on  a  treaty  ; 
but  as  Henry  insisted  upon  Robert's  renouncing  the  government 
of  his  dominions  entirely,  and  one  half  of  the  revenue,  all  ac- 
commodation was  rejected  with  disdain,  and  both  sides  prepared 
for  battle.  Robert  was  now  entered  on  that  scene  of  action  in 
which  he  chiefly  gloried,  and  in  which  he  was  always  known  to 
excel.  He  animated  his  little  army  by  his  example,  and  led  them 
to  the  encounter  with  that  spirit  which  had  formerly  made  the 
infidels  tremble.  There  was  no  withstanding  his  first  shock ;  that 
quarter  of  the  English  army  where  he  made  the  impression  gave 
way,  and  he  was  nearly  on  the  point  of  gaining  a  complete  vic- 
tory. But  it  was  different  on  that  quarter  where  Belesme  com- 
manded ;  he  was  put  to  flight  by  one  of  the  king's  generals,  who 
also  advancing  himself  with  a  fresh  body  of  horse  to  sustain  his 
centre,  his  whole  army  rallied ;  while  Robert's  forces,  exhausted 
and  broken,  gave  ground  on  every  side,  in  spite  of  all  his  effoi'ts 
and  acts  of  personal  valour.  But  though  he  now  saw  his  army 
defeated,  and  numbers  falling  round  him,  yet  he  refused  to  find 
safety  by  flight,  or  turn  his  back  upon  an  enemy  that  he  still 
disdained.  He  was  taken  prisoner,  with  near  ten  thousand  of 
his  men,  and  all  the  considerable  barons  who  had  adhered  to  his 
misfortunes.  This  victory  was  followed  by  the  final  reduction 
of  Normandy,  while  Henry  returned  in  triumph  to  England, 
leading  with  him  his  captive  brother,  who,  after  a  life  of  bravery, 
generosity,  and  truth,  now  found  himself  not  only  deprived  of  his 


HENRY  I.  105 

patrimony  and  his  friends,  but  also  of  his  freedom.  Henry,  \in» 
mindful  of  his  brother's  former  magnanimity  with  regard  to  him, 
detained  him  a  prisoner  during  the  remainder  of  his  life,  which 
was  no  less  than  twenty -eight  years  ;  and  he  died  in  the  castle 
of  Cardiff,  in  Glamorganshire.  It  is  even  said  by  some  that  he 
was  deprived  of  his  sight  by  a  red-hot  copper  bason  applied  to  his 
eyes ;  while  his  brother  attempted  to  stifle  the  reproaches  of  his 
conscience  by  founding  the  abbey  of  Reading,  which  was  then 
considered  as  a  sufiicient  atonement  for  every  degree  of  barbarity* 

The  first  step  Henry  took,  after  his  return  to  England,  was  to 
i-eform  some  abuses  which  had  crept  in  among  his  courtiers  ;  for, 
as  they  were  allowed  by  the  feudal  law  to  live  upon  the  king's 
tenants  whenever  he  travelled,  they,  under  colour  of  this,  com- 
mitted all  manner  of  ravages  with  impunity.  To  remedy  this 
disorder,  he  published  an  edict,  punishing  with  the  loss  of  sight 
all  such  as  should,  under  pretext  of  royal  authority,  commit  any 
-depredation  in  the  places  through  which  they  passed.  Some  dis- 
putes also  concerning  ecclesiastical  affairs,  which  were  supported 
by  Anselm,  the  arch-bishop  of  Canterbury,  were  compromised 
and  adjusted.  Henry  was  contented  to  resign  his  right  of  grant- 
ing ecclesiastical  investitures,  but  was  allowed  to  receive  homage 
from  his  bishops  for  all  their  temporal  properties  and  privileges. 
The  marriage  of  priests  also  was  prohibited,  and  laymen  were  not 
allowed  to  marry  within  the  seventh  degree  of  affinity.  The 
laity  were  also  prohibited  from  wearing  long  hair,*— a  mode  of 
dress  to  which  the  clergy  showed  the  utmost  aversion. 

These  regulations  served  to  give  employment  to  Henry  in  his 
peaceful  intervals  ;  but  the  apprehensions  which  he  had  from  the 
dissatisfaction  of  his  Norman  subjects,  and  his  fears  for  the  suc- 
cession, gave  him  too  much  business  to  permit  any  long^  inter- 
vals of  relaxation.  His  principal  concern  was  to  prevent  his 
nephew,  William,  the  son  of  Robert,  from  succeeding  to  the 
crown,  in  prejudice  of  William,  his  own  son,  for  whom  he  was 
solicitous  to  secure  it.  His  nephew  was  but  six  years  of  age 
when  he  committed  him  to  the  care  of  Helie  de  St.  Saen ;  and 
this  nobleman  discharged  his  trust  in  his  education  with  a  degree 
of  fidelity  uncommon  at  the  barbarous  period  we  are  describing. 
Finding  that  Henry  was  desirous  of  recovering  possession  of  his 
gupil's  person,  he  withdrew,  and  carried  him  to  the  court  of  Fulk, 

VOL.    I.  14 


J{)6  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

Count  of  Aujou,  who  gave  him  protection.  This  noble  youth^ 
wandering  from  court  to  court,  evaded  all  the  arts  of  his  power- 
ful uncle,  who  was  not  remiss  in  trjdng  every  method  of  seizing 
him,  either  by  treaty  or  intimidation.  In  this  struggle  Lewis, 
the  king  of  France,  took  the  young  adventurer's  part,  and  en- 
deavoured to  interest  the  pope  in  his  quarrel.  Failing  in  this,  he 
endeavoured  to  gain,  by  force  of  arm&y  what  his  negotiations  could 
not  obtain.  A  war  ensued  between  him  and  Henry,  in  which 
many  sliglit  battles  were  fought,  but  attended  with  no  decisive 
consequences.  In  one  of  these,  which  was  fought  at  Noyon,  a 
city  that  Lewis  had  an  intention  to  surprise,  the  valour  both  of 
the  nephew  and  the  uncle  were  not  a  little  conspicuous.  This 
young  man,  who  inherited  all  his  father's  bravery,  charged  the 
van  of  tlie  English  army  with  such  impetuosity,  that  it  fell  back 
upon  the  main  body,  commanded  by  the  king  in  person,  whose 
utmost  efforts  were  unequal  to  the  attack.  Still,  however,  exert- 
ing all  his  endeavours  to  stem  the  torrent  of  th^  enemy  that  was 
pouring  down  upon  him,  a  Norman  knight,  whose  name  was 
William  Crispin,  discharged  at  his  head  two  such  furious  strokes 
of  a  sabre,  that  his  helmet  was  cut  through,  and  his  head  severely 
wounded.  At  the  sight  of  his  own  blood,  which  rushed  down  his 
visage,  he  was  animated  to  a  double  exertion  of  his  strengih,  and 
retorted  the  blow  with  such  force,  that  liis  antagonist  was  brought 
to  the  ground,  and  taken  prisoner.  This  decided  the  victory  in 
favour  of  the  English,  who  pursued  the  French  with  great  slaugh- 
ter ;  and  it  also  served  to  bring  on  an  accommodation  soon  after, 
in  which  the  interests  of  his  nephew  were  entirely  neglected,. 
From  this  period  till  the  time  of  that  brave  youth's  death,  which 
happened  about  eight  years  after,  he  appears  to  have 
L  'J  been  employed  in  ineffectual  struggles  to  gain  those  do- 
minions to  which  he  had  the  most  just  hereditary  claims,  but 
wanted  power  to  back  his  pretensions. 

Fortune  now  seemed  to  smile  upon  Henry,  and  promise  a  long- 
succession  of  felicity.  He  was  in  peaceable  possession  of  two 
powerful  states,  and  had  a  son  who  was  acknowledged  undisputed 
heir,  arrived  at  his  eighteenth  year,  whom  he  loved  most  tenderly. 
His  daughter  Matilda  was  also  married  to  the  emperor  Henry  V. 
of  Germany,  and  she  had  been  sent  to  that  court,  while  yet  but 
eight  years  old,  for  her  education.    All  his  prospects,  however. 


HENRY  Ir  lOf 

^ere  at  once  clouded  by  unforeseen  misfortunes  and  accidents, 
which  tinctured  his  remaining  years  with  misery.     The  king, 
from  the  facility  with  which  he  usurped  the  crown,  dreading  that 
his  family  might  be  subverted  with  the  same  ease,  took  care  to 
have  his  son  recognized  as  his  successor  by  the  states  of  England, 
and  carried  him  over  to  Normandy  to  receive  the  homage  of  the 
barons  of  that  duchy.     After  performing  this  requisite  ceremony, 
Henry,  returning  triumphantly  to  England,  brought  Vv'ith  him  a 
numerous  retinue  of  the  chief  nobility,  who  seemed  to  share  in 
his  successes.     In  one  of  the  vessels  of  the  fleet,  his  son,  and 
several  young  noblemen,  the  companions  of  his  pleasures,  went 
together  to  i-ender  the  passage  more  agreeable.     The  king  set 
sail  from  Barfleur,  and  was  soon  carried  by  a  fair  wind  out  of 
sight  of  land.     The  prince  was  detained  by  some  accident ;  and 
his  sailors,  as  well  as  their  captain  Fitz  Stephen,  having  spent  the 
interval  in  drinking,  became  so  disordered,  that  they  ran  the  ship 
upon  a  rock,  and  immediately  it  was  dashed  to  pieces.     Thp 
prince  was  put  into  the  boat,  and  might  have  escaped,  had  he  not 
been  called  back  by  the  cries  of  Maude,  his  natural  sister.     He 
was  at  first  conveyed  out  of  danger  himself,  but  could  not  leave 
A  person  so  dear  to  perish  without  an  effort  to  save  her.     He, 
therefore,  prevailed  upon  the  sailors  to  row  back  and  take  her  in. 
The  approach  of  the  boat  giving  several  others,  who  had  been  left 
upon  the  wreck,  the  hopes  of  saving  their  lives,  numbers  leaped 
in,  and  the  whole  went  to  the  bottom.     Above  a  hundred  and 
foi'ty  young  noblemen,  of  the  principal  families  of  England  and 
Normandy,  were  lost  on  this  occasion.     A  butcher  of  Rouen  was 
the  only  person  onboard  who  escaped  ;  he  clung  to  the  mast,  and 
was  taken  up  the  next  morning  by  some  fishermen.     Fitz  Stei" 
phen,  the  captain,  while  the  butcher  was  thus  buffeting  the  waves 
for  his  life,  swam  up  to  him,  and  inquired  if  the  prince  was  yet 
living ;  when  being  told  that  he  had  perished,  *'  Then  I  will  not 
X)utlive  him,"  said  the  captain,  and  immediately  sunk  to  the  bot- 
tom.    The  shrieks  of  these  unfortunate  people  were  heard  from 
the  shore,  and  the  noise  even  reached  the  king's  ship ;  but  the 
cause  was  then  unknown.     Henry  entertained  hopes  for  three 
days  that  his  son  was  put  into  some  distant  port  of  England  ;  but 
when  certain  intelligence  of  the  calamity  was  brought  him,  he 
fainted  away,  and  was  never  seQii  to  smile  from  that  moment  t? 
the  day  of  his  deatk 


108  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND- 

The  rest  of  this  prince's  life  seems  a  mere  blank :  his  restless 
desires  having  now  nothing  left  worth  toiling  for,  he  appeared 
more  fond  of  repose  than  ambition.  His  daughter  Matilda,  how- 
ever, becoming  a  widow  b}''  the  death  of  the  emperor,  he  married 
her  a  second  time  to  GeoiFrey  Plantagenet,  eldest  son  of  the  count 
of  Anjou,  and  endeavoured  to  insure  her  accession  by  obliging  his 
barons  to  recognizie  her  as  the  heir  of  all  his  dominions.  Some 
time  after,  that  princess  was  delivered  of  a  son,  who  received 
the  name  of  Henry ;  and  the  king,  further  to  insure  her  success- 
ion, caused  all  the  nobility  of  England  and  Normandy  to  renew 
their  former  oaths  of  allegiance.  The  barons  of  these  times  were 
ready  enough  to  swear  whatever  the  monarch  commanded ;  but, 
it  seems,  they  observed  it  no  longer  than  wlule  they  were  com- 
pelled to  obey.  Henry  did  not  long  survive  these  endeavours  to 
secure  the  succession  in  his  family.  He  was  seized  with  a  sud- 
den illness  at  St.  Denis,  a  little  town  in  Normandy,  from  eating 
too  plentifully  of  lampreys,  a  dish  he  was  particularly  fond  of. 
jjg^  J     He  died  in  the  sixty -seventh  year  of  his  age,  and  the 

1135.  thirty-fifth  of  his  reign,  leaving,  by  will,  his  daughter 
Matilda  heiress  of  all  his  dominions. 

If  we  consider  Henry's  character  impartially,  we  shall  find 
HM)re  to  admire  than  to  love  in  it.  It  cannot  be  doubted  but  that 
he  was  a  wise  and  a  valiant  prince ;  and  yet  our  hearts  revolt 
against  his  success,  and  follow  the  unfortunate  Robert  even  to 
his  captivity.  Henry's  person  was  manly,  his  countenance  en- 
gaging, his  eye  clear,  serene,  and  penetrating.  By  his  great 
progress  in  literature  he  acquired  the  name  of  Beau-clerc,  or  the 
Scholar ;  and  such  was  the  force  of  his  eloquence,  that,  after  a 
conference  with  him,  the  pope  is  said  to  have  given  him  the  prefer- 
ence to  all  the  other  princes  of  Europe.  He  was  much  addicted  to 
women,  and  left  behind  him  a  numerous  spurious  offspring.  Hunt- 
ing also  was  one  of  his  favourite  amusements  :  and  he  is  accused 
of  augmenting  the  forests  which  had  been  appropriated  during  the 
former  reigns  for  that  diversion.  His  justice  also  seemed  to  ap- 
proach to  cruelty  :  stealing  was  first  made  capital  in  his  reign ; 
and  false  coining  was  punished  with  death  and  mutilation.  He 
first  granted  the  city  of  London  a  charter  and  privileges ;  and 
from  this  first  concession  we  may  date  the  origin  of  English  lib- 
erty, such  as  Ave  find  it  at  this  day. 


STEPHEN.  109 


CHAP.  VIII. 


STEPHEN. 


As  every  expedient  was  used  during  the  life  of  the  late  king  to 
fix  the  succession  in  his  family,  he,  among  others,  thought  that 
the  aggrandizing  his  nearest  relations  would  not  be  an  impolitic 
step.  He  only  dreaded  the  designs  of  Robert  and  his  adherents, 
no  way  mistrusting  any  attempts  from  another  quarter.  With 
these  views,  he  was  very  liberal  in  heaping  favours  upon  the  chil- 
dren of  his  sister  Adela,  who  had  been  married  to  the  count  of 
Blois.  He  thought  they  would  be  the  strongest  safeguard  to  pro- 
tect him  from  the  aspiring  attempts  of  his  brother,  or  his  posteri- 
ty ;  and  he  was  resolved  to  load  them  with  favours,  as  being  too 
far  removed  from  the  crown  to  entertain  any  hopes  of  succeeding 
in  their  designs  to  obtain  it :  in  pursuance  of  this  plan,  he  had, 
some  years  before  his  death,  invited  Stephen  and  Henry,  the  two 
youngest  of  his  sister's  sons,  into  England,  and  received  them 
with  great  honour  and  esteem.  Thinking  that  he  could  never 
do  too  much  to  secure  their  affections,  he  maried  Stephen  to  the 
daughter  and  heiress  of  Eustace,  count  of  Boulogne,  who  brought 
him  an  immense  fortune.  He  conferred  on  him  the  great  estates 
forfeited  by  Robert  Mallet  in  England,  and  by  the  earl  of  Mor- 
taigne,  in  Normandy.  Nor  was  Stephen's  brother,  Henry,  with- 
out his  share  in  the  king's  liberalities.  He  was  created  abbot  of 
Glastonbury,  and  bishop  of  Winchester ;  so  that  the  two  brothers 
were  thus  become  by  far  the  most  powerful  subjects  in  the  king- 
dom. 

Such  great  riches,  so  much  power,  and  the  consciousness  of 
abilities,  were  the  first  incentives  to  Stephen's  ambition.  Placed 
at  no  great  distance  from  the  throne  by  birth,  and  perceiving  the 
success  of  his  uncle's  usurpation,  he  resolved  to  run  the  same  ca- 
reer, and  strike  for  the  crown.  For  this  purpose,  even  during  the 
king's  lifetime,  he  used  all  his  arts  to  procure  popularity,  and  to 
cultivate  the  affections  of  the  English  nobility.  By  his  bravery, 
activity,  and  vigour,  he  acquired  the  esteem  of  the  barons ;  by 
his  generosity  and  familiar  address  he  obtained  the  love  of  the 
people.    No  sooner,  therefore,  was  the  king  known  to  be  dead, 


.J  10  HISTORY  OF  ENGLANB. 

than  Stephen,  conscious  of  his  own  power  and  influence,  resolved 
to  secure  to  himself  the  possession  of  what  he  so  long  desired. 
He  immediately  hastened  from  Normandy,  where  he  then  was, 
and,  setting  sail  for  England,  landed  at  Dover.  But  there  the 
citizens,  apprised  of  his  intent,  shut  their  gates  against  him. 
From  thence  he  went  on  to  Canterbury,  where  he  was  treated 
with  the  like  disrespect;  but,  passing  on,  he  arrived  at  London, 
where  he  was  immediately  saluted  king  by  all  the  lower  ranks  of 
the  people.  Being  thus  secure  of  the  populace,  his  next  step 
was  to  gain  over  the  clergy  ;  and  for  that  purpose,  his  brother 
the  bishop  of  Winchester  exerted  all  his  influence  among  them 
with  great  success.  The  arch-bishop  of  Canterbury,  as  he  had 
taken  the  oaths  of  allegiance  to  Matilda,  seemed  for  a  while  to 
stand  out;  but  Hugh  Bigod,  steward  of  the  household,  averring, 
upon  oath,  tliat  the  late  king  had  expressed  his  intentions  to  make 
Stephen  his  heir,  the  arch-bishop  anointed  him  M^ithout  further 
scruple.  Thus  was  Stephen  made  king,  by  one  of  those  speedy 
revolutions  which  ever  mark  the  barbarity  of  a  state  in  which 
they  are  customary.  The  people  acquiesced  in  his  claims  from 
his  popularity  ;  the  clergy  allowed  them,  being  influenced  by  the 
intrigues  of  his  brother ;  and  the  nobility  acknowledged  a  king, 
from  the  weakness  of  whose  title  they  might  derive  power  to 
themselves. 

The  first  acts  of  an  usurper  are  always  popular.  Stephen,  in 
«rder  to  secure  his  tottering  throne,  passed  a  charter,  granting 
several  privileges  to  the  different  orders  of  the  state.  To  the 
nobility,  a  permission  to  hunt  in  the  royal  forests ;  to  the  clergy, 
a  speedy  filling  of  all  vacant  benefices ;  and  to  the  people,  a  res- 
toration of  the  laws  of  Edward  the  Confessor.  To  fix  himself 
still  more  securely,  he  took  possession  of  the  royal  treasures  at 
Winchester,  and  had  his  title  ratified  by  the  pope  with  a  part  of 
the 'money. 

A  crown  thus  gained  by  usurpation  was  to  be  kept  only  by 
repeated  concessions.  The  nobility  and  the  clergy,  in  proportion 
as  they  were  indulged  in  one  demand  only  prepared  to  find  out 
others.  The,  barons,  in  return  for  their  submission,  required  the 
right  of  fortifying  their  castles,  and  putting  themselves  in  a  pos- 
ture of  defence ;  nor  could  the  king  refuse  his  consent  to  such 
exorbitant  demands,  as  their  opposition  might  be  fatal.    The 


STEPHEN",  111; 

clergy  imitated  the  same  pernicious  example ;  and,  in  a  short 
time,  all  England  was  filled  with  these  independent  fortresses, 
wliich  the  noblemen  garrisoned  with  their  own  vassals,  or  with 
mercenary  bravoes  hired  from  the  continent :  nothing  could  ex- 
ceed the  misery  which  the  kingdom  niust  have  been  reduced  to  at 
that  terrible  period  of  aristocracy.  Unbounded  rapine  was  exer- 
cised upon  the  people  for  the  maintenance  of  those  troops ;  the 
private  animosities  of  the  nobility  were  productive  of  wars  in 
every  quarter ;  the  erection  of  one  castle  proved  the  immediate 
cause  of  building  many  more ;  and  the  whole  country  presented  a 
scene  of  petty  tyranny  and  hostile  preparation.  It  was  in  vain 
that  a  victory  gained  by  the  Ling  ov«r  the  Scots  at  ri  -i  oo  -] 
Northallerton  promised  to  allay  the  murmurs  of  the 
people :  their  miseries  were  risen  to  too  great  a  height  for  such 
brilliant  successes  to  remove.  The  prince,  having  usurped  the 
crown  without  a  title,  Avas  obliged  to  tolerate  in  others  that  in- 
justice by  which  he  had  himself  risen  to  the  throne. 

Not  only  real,  but  imaginary  grievances  were  added  to  raise 
the  discontents  of  the  people,  and  fill  the  country  with  complaints 
against  government.  The  clergy,  whose  poAver  had  been  firm- 
ly established  on  the  ruins  of  the  regal  authority,  began,  in  imi- 
tation of  the  lay -barons,  to  build  castles,  and  entertain  garri- 
sons, sensible  that  their  sacred  pretensions  would  be  more  im- 
plicitly obeyed  when  their  temporal  power  was  sufficient  to  en- 
force them.  Stephen,  who  now  too  late  perceived  the  mischiefs 
attending  these  multiplied  citadels,  resolved  to  begin  with  de- 
stroying those  of  the  clergy,  whose  profession  seemed  to  be  averse 
from  the  duties  of  war.  Taking,  therefore,  the  pretence  of  a 
fray,  which  had  risen  between  the  retinue  of  the  bishop  of  Salis- 
bury and  that  of  the  earl  of  Bretagne,  he  seized  that  prelate,  and 
obliged  both  him  and  the  bishop  of  Lincoln  to  deliver  up  their 
castles  which  they  had  lately  erected.  This  the  whole  body  of 
the  clergy  considered  as  a  breach  of  that  charter  which  he  had 
granted  upon  his  accession;  they  loudly  murmured  against  this 
infraction ;  and  even  the  bishop  of  Winchester,  his  brother,  re- 
solved to  vindicate  the  privileges  of  the  church,  which  he  pre- 
tended were  openly  violated.  A  synod  was  assembled,  in  which 
the  disgraced  prelates  openly  inveighed  against  the  king.    But 


112  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

he,  instead  of  answering  the  charge  in  person,  sent  one  of  hia 
barons  to  plead  his  cause,  and  intimidate  his  accusers. 

It  was  in  this  critical  situation  of  Stephen's  affairs  that  accounts 
were  brought  him  of  Matilda's  landing  in  England,  with  a  resolu* 
tion  to  dispossess  him,  and  regain  the  crown.  Matilda,  upon  the 
death  of  the  late  king,  being  then  in  Normandy,  found  herself 
totally  unable  to  oppose  the  rapid  progress  of  her  rival.  She 
was  not  less  unfortunate  in  her  continental  connections  than  in 
those  at  home.  The  Norman  barons,  unwilling  to  have  the  unioa 
with  England  dissolved,  almost  unanimously  declared  for  Stephen, 
and  put  him  in  possession  of  their  government :  while  Geoffrey 
himself,  Matilda's  husband,  was  content  to  resign  his  pretensions, 
and  to  receive  a  pension  from  the  English  king.  He  had  not, 
however,  long  acquiesced  in  this  compromise  when  he  was  incited 
to  a  renewal  of  his  wife's  claims  by  Robert  earl  of  Gloucester, 
natural  son  of  the  late  king,  a  nobleman  who  had,  from  the  be- 
ginning, opposed  the  accession  of  Stephen,  and  only  waited  a  fit 
opportunity  to  begin  an  insurrection.  Tliis  haughty  baron,  hav- 
ing at  length  settled  with  his  friends  the  project  of  an  opposition, 
retired  to  the  continent,  to  the  court  of  Matilda,  and  from  thence 
sent  the  king  a  defiance,  solemnly  renouncing  his  allegiance.  It 
was  not  long  before  he  was  in  a  capacity  effectually  to  second 
his  declarations ;  for,  sensible  of  the  power  of  his  party  in  En- 
gland, he  landed,  together  with  Matilda,  whose  claims  he  pro- 
fessed to  support,  upon  the  coast  of  Sussex. 

.  The  whole  of  Matilda's  retinue,  upon  this  occasion,  amounted 
to  no  more  than  a  hundred  and  forty  knights,  who  immediately 
took  possession  of  Arundel  castle ;  but  the  nature  of  her  claims 
soon  increased  the  number  of  her  partisans,  and  her  forces  every 
day  seemed  to  gain  ground  upon  those  of  her  antagonist.  Mean- 
time Stephen,  being  assured  of  her  an-ival,  flew  to  be- 
L  *-J  siege  Arundel,  where  she  had  taken  refuge,  and  where 
she  was  protected  by  the  queen  dowager,  who  secretly  favoured 
her  pretensions.  This  fortress  was  too  feeble  to  promise  a  long 
defence ;  and  it  would  have  been  soon  taken,  had  it  not  been  rep- 
resented to  the  king,  that  as  it  was  a  castle  belonging  to  the 
queen  dowager,  it  would  be  an  infringement  on  the  respect  which 
was  her  due,  to  attempt  taking  it  by  force.  There  was  a  spirit  of 
generosity  mixed  with  the  rudeness  of  the  times,  that  unaccount- 


STEPHEJfi  113 

ably  prevailed  in  many  transactions,;  Stephen  permitted  Matil- 
da to  come  forth  in  safety,  and  had  her  conveyed  with  security 
to  Bristol,  another  fortress  equally  strong  with  that  from  whence 
he  permitted  her  to  retire.  It  would  be  tedious  to  relate  the  vari- 
ous skirmishes  on  either  side^  in  pursuance  of  their  respective 
pretensions  ;  it  will  suffice  to  say,  that  Matilda's  forces  increased 
every  day,  while  her  antagonist  seemed  every  hour  to  become 
more  unpopular.  The  troops  Stephen  led  were,  in  general,  for- 
eign mercenarieSj  commanded  by  tumultuous  barons^ — ^more  ac- 
customed to  pillage  than  to  conquer.  But,  in  this  fluctuation  of 
success,  the  kingdom  was  exposed  to  ruin,  whichever  side  pre-* 
tended  to  victory*  The  castles  of  the  nobility  were  become  re- 
ceptacles for  licensed  robbers,  who  gave  their  rapine  the  name  of 
attachment  to  party.  The  land  was  left  untilled,  the  instruments 
of  husbandry  were  destroyed  or  abandoned,  and  a  terrible  famine, 
the  result  of  general  disorder,  oppressed  at  once  the  spoiled  and 
the  spoilers. 

After  the  misery  of  numberless  undecisive  conflicts,  added  to 
the  rest  of  the  country's  calamities,  a  complete  victory,  gained  by 
the  forces  of  Matilda,  promised  to  terminate  their  disputes.  Ste- 
phen had  marched  his  forces  to  relieve  the  city  of  Lincoln ;  the 
earl  of  Gloucester  led  a  body  of  troops  to  second  the  ef-  _. 

forts  of  the  besiegers*  These  two  armies  engaged  within  ^  'J 
sight  of  the  city,  and  a  dreadful  conflict  ensued.  After  a  violent 
shock,  the  two  wings  of  Stephen's  army,  which  were  composed  of 
horse,  were  put  to  flight ;  and  the  infantry,  soon  following  the 
example,  deserted  their  king.  All  the  race  of  the  Noi-man  con- 
queror were  brave,  Stephen  was  for  some  time  left  without  at- 
tendants, and  fought  on  foot  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies,  assault- 
ed by  multitudes,  and  resisting  all  their  efforts  with  astonishing 
intrepidity.  Being  hemmed  in  on  every  side,  he  made  way  for 
some  time  with  his  battle-axe ;  but  that  breaking,  he  drew  his 
sword,  and  dealt  his  blows  round  the  circle  in  which  he  was  in- 
closed. At  length,  after  performing  more  than  could  be  naturally 
expected  from  a  single  arm,  his  sword  flying  in  pieces,  he  was 
obliged  to  surrender  himself  prisoner.  He  was  conducted  to 
Gloucester ;  and  though  at  first  treated  with  respect,  he  was  soon 
after,  on  some  suspicions,  thrown  into  prison,  and  laid  in  irons. 

VOL.    I.  15 


114  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND.       , 

Stephen  and  his  party  now  seemed  totally  disabled.  Matilda 
was  possessed  not  only  of  superior  power,  but  also  the  juster  title. 
She  was  considered  as  incontestable  sovereign,  and  the  barons 
came  in  daily  from  all  quarters  to  do  her  homage.  The  bishop 
of  Winchester  himself,  who  had  espoused  her  cause  against  his 
brother,  admitted  her  claims ;  he  led  her  in  procession  into  his 
cathedral,  and  blessed  her  with  the  greatest  solemnity  ;  the  arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury  also  swore  allegiance  5  and  shortly  after  an 
ecclesiastical  council,  at  which  none  of  the  laity  assisted,  except 
deputies  from  the  city  of  London,  confirmed  her  pretensions ;  and 
she  was  crowned  at  Winchester  with  all  imaginable  solemnity. 

A  crown  thus  every  ^vay  secured,  seemed  liable  to  be  shaken 
by  no  accidents ;  yet  such  is  the  vanity  of  human  security,  and 
such  was  the  great  increase  of  power  among  the  barons,  who  were 
in  effect  masters  of  those  they  nominally  elected  as  governors, 
that  Matilda  remained  but  a  short  time  in  possession  of  the  throne. 
This  princess,  beside  the  disadvantages  of  her  sex,  which  weak- 
ened her  influence  over  a  martial  people,  was  resolved  upon  re- 
pressing the  growing  power  of  the  nobles,  who  had  left  only  the 
shadow  of  authority  to  their  sovereign.  But  having  neither  tem- 
per nor  policy  sufficient  to  carry  her  views  into  execution,  she 
disgusted  those  by  her  pride  to  Avhom  she  was  obliged  for  her 
power.  The  first  petition  she  refused  was  the  releasement  of 
Stephen  ;  she  rejected  the  remonstrance  of  the  Londoners,  who 
entreated  her  to  mitigate  the  severe  laws  of  the  Norman  princes, 
and  revive  those  of  Edward  the  Confessor.  She  affected  to  treat 
the  nobility  with  a  degree  of  disdain  to  which  they  had  long  been 
unaccustomed ;  while  the  fickle  nation  once  more  began  to  pity 
their  deposed  king,  and  to  repent  the  steps  they  had  taken  in  her 
favour.  The  bishop  of  Winchester,  who  probably  was  never  her 
sincere  partisan,  was  not  remiss  in  fomenting  these  discontents  5 
and,  when  he  found  the  people  ripe  for  a  tumult,  detached  a  party 
of  his  friends  and  vassals  to  block  up  the  city  of  London,  where 
tlie  queen  then  resided.  At  the  same  time  measures  were  taken 
to  instigate  the  Londoners  to  a  revolt,  and  to  seize  ^ler  person. 
Matilda,  having  timely  notice  of  this  conspiracy,  fled  to  Winches- 
ter, whither  the  bishop,  still  her  secret  enemy,  followed  her, 
watching  an  opportunity  to  ruin  her  cause.  His  party  Avas  soon 
sufficiently  strong  to  bid  the  queen  open  defiance,  and  to  besiege 


STEPHEN,  115 

her  in  the  very  place  where  she  first  received  his  benediction. 
There  she  continued  for  some  time ;  but  the  town  being  pressed 
by  famine,  she  Avas  obliged  to  escape,  while  her  brother,  the  earl 
of  Gloucester,  endeavouring  to  follow,  was  taken  prisoner,  and 
exchanged  for  Stephen,  who  still  continued  a  captive.  Thus  a 
sudden  revolution  once  more  took  place ;  Matilda  was  deposed, 
and  obliged  to  seek  for  safety  in  Oxford.  Stephen  was  again  re- 
cognized as  king,  and  taken  from  his  dungeon  to  be  placed  on 
the  throne. 

The  civil  war  now  broke  out  afresh,  with  all  its  train  of  de- 
vastations. Many  were  the  battles  fought,  and  various  the  strat- 
agems of  those  who  conducted  the  affairs  of  either  party.  Ma- 
tilda escaped  from  Oxford,  at  a  time  when  the  fields  were  covered 
with  snow,  by  being  dressed  all  in  white,  with  four  knights,  her 
attendants,  habited  in  the  same  manner,  Stephen  was  upon 
another  occasion  surprised  by  the  earl  of  Gloucester  at  Wilton, 
and  obliged  to  find  safety  by  flight.  Another  time  the  empress 
was  obliged  to  quit  the  kingdom ;  and  the  death  of  the  eai'l  of 
Gloucester  soon  after,  who  was  the  soul  of  her  party,  gave  a 
dreadful  blow  to  her  interests. 

Yet  still  the  affairs  of  Stephen  continued  to  fluctuate.  Though 
this  monarch  had  the  good  fortune  to  see  his  rival  fly  to  the  con* 
tinent,  and  leave  him  entire  possession  of  the  kingdom ;  though 
his  brother  was  possessed  of  the  highest  authority  among  the  cler- 
gy ;  yet  he  was  still  insecure.  Finding  that  the  castles  built  by 
the  noblemen  of  his  own  party  encouraged  a  spirit  of  independ- 
ence, and  were  little  less  dangerous  than  those  which  remained 
in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  he  endeavoured  to  gain  these ;  and 
this  attempt  united  many  of  his  own  adherents  against  him.  This 
discontent  was  increased  by  the  opposition  of  the  clergy,  who, 
from  having  been  on  his  side,  began  to  declare  loudly  in  favour 
of  his  opponents.  The  pope  laid  his  whole  party  under  an  inter- 
dict, for  his  having  refused  to  send  deputies,  to  be  named  by  him- 
self, to  the  general  council  at  Rheims.  By  this  sentence,  which 
was  now  first  practised  in  England,  divine  service  was  prohibited, 
and  all  the  offices  of  religion  ceased,  except  baptism  anVi  extreme 
unction.  This  state  of  Stephen's  affairs  looked  so  unpromising, 
that  a  rcA^olution  was  once  more  expected ;  when  his  submission 
to  the  see  of  Rome  for  a  while  suspended  the  threatened  blow. 


116  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

Stephen  had  hitherto  been  opposed  only  by  men  who  seconded 
the  pretensions  of  another ;  and  who  consequently  wanted  that 
popularity  which  those  have  who  fight  their  own  cause.  But  he 
xvas  now  to  enter  the  lists  with  a  new  opposer,  who  was  every 
day  coming  to  maturity,  and  growing  more  formidable.  This 
was  Henry,  the  son  of  Matilda,  who  had  reached  his  sixteenth 
P  _    year,  and  gave  the  greatest  hopes   of  being  one  day  a 

L  '-■  valiant  leader  and  a  consummate  politician.  It  was 
,usual  in  those  days  for  young  noblemen  to  receive  the  honour  of 
knighthood  before  they  were  permitted  to  carry  arms  ;  and  Henry 
proposed  to  receive  his  admission  from  his  great  uncle,  David, 
king  of  Scotland.  With  this  view,  and  in  hopes  of  once  more 
inspiring  his  mother's  party,  he  landed  in  England  with  a  great 
retinue  of  knights  and  soldiers,  accompanied  by  many  noblemen 
as  well  English  as  foreigners.  The  ceremony  was  performed  by 
the  Scot's  king  at  Carlisle,  amidst  a  multitude  of  people  assembled 
on  this  occasion,  who  all,  pleased  with  the  vigour,  the  address, 
and  still  more  perhaps  with  the  youth  of  the  prince,  secretly  be- 
gan to  wish  for  a  revolution  in  his  favour.  Soon  after  his  return 
to  Normandy,  he  v,  as,  by  his  mother's  consent,  invested  with 
that  duchy,  which  had  some  time  before  revolted  to  her.  He  was 
also,  upon  the  death  of  his  father  Geoffrey  Plantagenet,  secured 
in  the  possession  of  his  dominions ;  and,  to  add  still  more  to  his 
increasing  power,  he  married  Eleanor,  the  daughter,  and  heiress 
of  the  duke  of  Guienne  ^d  Poitou ;  and  took  possession  of  these 
extensive  territories. 

With  this  great  accession  of  power,  young  Henry  was  now  re- 
solved to  reclaim  his  hereditary  kingdom,  and  to  dispute  once 
more  Stephen's  usurped  pretensions.  For  this  purpose,  being 
previously  assured  of  the  dispositions  of  the  majority  of  the  peo- 
ple in  his  favour,  he  made  an  invasion  on  England, 
L  'J  where  he  was  immediately  joined  by  almost  all  the  bar- 
ons of  the  kingdom.  Though  it  was  the  middle  of  winter,  he  ad- 
vanced to  besiege  Malmsbury ;  and  took  the  town,  after  having 
worsted  a  body  of  the  enemy  that  attempted  to  oppose  his  march. 
Soon  after,  Reading,  and  ?iboye  thirty  other  fortresses,  submitted 
without  resistance. 

In  the  mean  time  Stephen,  alarmed  at  the  power  and  popularity 
pf  his  young  rival,  tried  every  method  to  anticipate  the  purpose 


STEPHEN.  117 

of  his  invasion,  by  depriving  him  of  a  succession  he  so  earnestly 
sought  after.  He  had  convoked  a  council  in  London,  where  he 
proposed  his  own  son  Eustace,  who  was  but  a  weak  prince,  as  his 
associate  in  government  as  well  as  his  successor.  He  had  even 
expressed  a  desire  of  immediately  proceeding  to  the  coronation ; 
but  was  mortified  to  find  that  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  re- 
fused to  perform  the  ceremony.  It  was  then  no  time  to  prosecute 
his  resentment,  when  his  rival  was  landed,  and  making  hasty 
strides  to  the  throne ;  wherefore,  finding  that  Henry  was  advanc- 
ing with  a  rapid  progress,  he  marched  with  all  possible  diligence 
to  oppose  him,  while  he  was  besieging  Wallingford ;  and  coming 
in  sight,  he  rested  his  army  to  prepare  for  battle.  In  this  situa- 
tion the  two  armies  remained  for  some  time,  within  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  of  each  other,  a  decisive  action  being  every  day  expected. 
While  they  continued  thus  in  anxious  expectation,  a  treaty  was 
set  on  foot,  by  the  interposition  of  William  earl  of  Arundel,  for 
terminating  the  dispute  without  blood.  The  death  of  Stephen's 
son,  which  happened  during  the  course  of  the  treaty,  facilitated 
its  conclusion.  It  was  therefore  agreed  by  all  parties,  that  Ste- 
phen should  reign  during  life  ;  and  that  justice  should  be  admin- 
istered in  his  name ;  that  Henry  should,  on  Stephen's  death,  suc- 
ceed to  the  kingdom ;  and  William,  Stephen's  son,  should  in- 
herit Boulogne  and  his  patrimonial  estate.  After  all  the  barons 
had  sworn  to  this  treaty,  which  filled  the  whole  kingdom  with 
joy,  Henry  evacuated  England,  and  Stephen  returned  to  the 
peaceable  enjoyment  of  his  throne.  His  reign,  however,  q^.^  25 
was  soon  terminated  by  his  death,  v/hich  happened  about  1154. 
a  year  after  the  treaty,  at  Canterbury,  where  he  was  interred. 

The  fortune  of  many  princes  gives  them,  with  posterity,  the 
reputation  of  wisdom  and  virtue.  Stephen  wanted  success  in  all 
his  schemes  but  that  of  ascending  the  throne  ;  and  consequently 
his  virtues  and  abilities  now  remain  doubtful.  If  we  estimate 
them  by  the  happiness  of  his  subjects,  they  will  appear  in  a  very 
despicable  light;  for  England  was  never  more  miserable  than 
during  his  reign  5  but  if  we  consider  them  as  they  appear  in  his 
private  conduct,  few  monarchs  can  boast  more.  Active,  gener- 
ous, and  brave,  his  sole  aim  was  to  destroy  a  vile  aristocracy  that 
oppressed  the  people ;  but  the  abilities  of  no  man,  however  poli- 
tic or  intrepid,  were  then  sufficient  to  resist  an  evil  that  was  too 


113  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

firmly  supported  by  power.  The  faults,  therefore,  of  this  mon- 
arch's reign  are  entirely  to  be  imputed  to  the  ungovernable  spirit 
of  tlie  people ;  but  liis  virtues  were  his  own. 


CHAr.  IX. 

HENRY  II. 

W  E  have  hitherto  seen  the  barons  and  clergy  becoming  power- 
ful, in  proportion  to  the  weakness  of  the  monarch's  title  to  the 
crown,  and  enriching  themselves  with  the  spoils  of  enfeebled 
majesty.  Henry  Plantagenet  had  now  every  right,  from  heredi- 
tary succession,  from  universal  assent,  from  power,  and  personal 
merit,  to  make  sure  of  the  throne,  and  to  keep  its  prerogatives 
unimpaired.  He  was  employed  in  besieging  a  castle  of  one  of 
his  mutinous  barons  upon  the  continent,  when  news  was  brought 
him  of  Stephen's  death :  but,  sensible  of  the  security  of  his  claims 
in  England,  he  would  not  relinquish  his  enterprise  till  he  had 
reduced  the  place.  He  then  set  out  on  his  journey,  and  was  re- 
ceived in  England  with  the  acclamations  of  all  the  people,  who, 
harassed  with  supporting  opposite  pretensions,  were  now  rejoiced 
to  see  all  parties  united. 

The  first  act  of  Henry's  government  gave  the  people  a  happy 
omen  of  his  future  wise  administration.  Conscious  of  his 
strength,  he  began  to  correct  those  abuses,  and  to  resume  those 
privileges  which  had  been  extorted  from  the  weakness  or  the 
credulity  of  his  predecessors.  He  immediately  dismissed  all 
those  mercenary  soldiers  who  committed  infinite  disorders  in  the 
nation.  He  ordered  all  t!ie  castles  which  were  erected  since  the 
death  of  Henry  the  First,  and  were  become  receptacles  of  rapine, 
to  be  demolished,  except  a  few  which  he  retained  in  his  own 
hands  for  the  protection  of  the  kingdom.  The  adulterated  coin 
was  cried  down,  and  new  money  struck  of  the  right  value  and 
standard.  He  resumed  many  of  those  benefactions  which  had 
been  made  to  churches  and  monasteries  in  the  former  reigns. 
He  gave  charters  to  several  towns,  by  which  the  citizens  claimed 
their  freedom,  and  privileges,  independent  of  any  superior  but 


HENRY  IL  119 

himself.  These  charters  were  the  ground-work  of  English  liberty. 
The  struggles  which  had  before  this  time  been,  whether  the  king, 
or  the  barons,  or  the  clergy,  should  be  despotic  over  the  people, 
now  began  to  assume  a  new  aspect ;  and  a  fourth  order,  namely, 
that  of  the  more  opulent  of  the  people,  began  to  claim  a  share  in 
administration.  Thus  was  the  feudal  government  at  first  impair- 
ed; and  liberty  began  to  be  more  equally  diffused  throughout 
the  nation. 

From  this  happy  commencement  England  once  more  began  to 
respire ;  agriculture  returned  with  security ;  and  every  individ- 
ual seemed  to  enjoy  the  happy  effects  of  the  young  king's  wise 
administration.  Not  but  that  some  slight  commotions  proceeded 
from  many  of  the  depressed  barons,  who  were  quickly  brought  to 
a  sense  of  their  duty ;  as  also  from  the  Welsh,  who  made  several 
incursions ;  but  these  were  at  last  obliged  to  make  submission, 
and  to  return  to  their  natural  fastnesses.  But  to  such  a  state  of 
tranquillity  was  the  whole  kingdom  brought  in  a  very  short  time, 
that  Henry  thought  his  presence  no  longer  necessary  to  preserve 
order  at  home,  and  therefore  made  ^^n  expedition  to  the  conti- 
nent, where  his  affairs  were  in  some  disorder. 

As  the  transactions  of  the  continent  do  not  properly  fall  within 
the  limits  of  this  scanty  page,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  say,  that 
Henry's  valour  and  prudence  seconding  his  ambition,  he  soon 
extended  his  power  in  that  part  of  his  dominions,  and  found  him- 
self, either  by  marriage  or  hereditary  claims,  master  of  a  third 
part  of  the  French  monarchy.  He  became  possessed,  in  right  of 
his  father,  of  Anjou,  Touraine,  and  Maine  ;  in  that  of  his  mother, 
of  Normandy ;  in  that  of  his  wife,  of  Guienne,  Poitou,  Saintongej 
Auvergne,  Perigord,  Angoumois,  and  the  Limousin ;  to  which  he 
shortly  after  added  Bretagne,  by  marrying  his  son,  who  was  yet 
a  child,  to  tlie  heiress  of  that  dukedom,  who  was  yet  a  child  also  ; 
and  thus  securing  that  province,  under  pretence  of  being  his  son's 
guardian.  It  was  in  vain  that  Lewis,  the  king  of  France,  opposed 
his  growing  power ;  and  several  ineffectual  engagements  served 
only  to  prove  that  little  was  to  be  acquired  by  force.  A  cessa- 
tion of  arms,  therefore,  was  at  first  concluded  between  them, 
and,  soon  after,  a  peace,  which  was  brought  about  by  the  pope's 
mediation. 


120  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

ril6l  1  Henry,  being  thus  become  the  most  powerful  prince 
of  his  age,  the  undisputed  monarch  of  England,  possess^ 
ed  of  more  than  a  third  of  France,  and  having  humbled  the  barons 
that  attempted  to  circumscribe  his  power,  naturally  expected  to 
reign  with  very  little  opposition  for  the  future.  But  it  happened 
otherwise.  He  found  the  severest  mortifications  from  a  quarter 
where  he  least  expected  resistance.  Though  he  had  diminished 
the  power  of  the  barons,  he  was  sensible  that  the  temporal  influ- 
ence of  the  clergy  was  still  gaining  ground ;  and  was  grown  to 
such  a  pitch  as  would  shortly  annihilate  the  authority  of  the  sove- 
reign himself. 

They  now  seemed  resolved  not  only  to  be  exempted  from  the 
ordinary  taxes  of  the  state,  but  to  be  secured  from  its  punish- 
ments also.  They  had  extorted  an  immunity  from  all  but  eccle- 
siastical penalties,  during  the  last  distracted  reign;  and  they 
continued  to  iiiaintain  that  grant  in  the  present.  It  may  easily 
be  supposed,  that  a  law  which  thus  screened  their  guilt,  contrib- 
uted to  increase  it .;  and  we  accordingly  find  upon  record  not  less 
than  a  hundred  murders  committed  by  men  in  holy  orders,  in 
the  short  period  since  the  king's  accession,  not  one  of  which  was 
punished,  not  so  much  as  with  degradation ;  while  the  bishops 
themselves  seemed  to  glory  in  this  horrid  indulgence. 

The  mild  character  and  advanced  age  of  Theobald,  archbishop 
of  Canterbury,  together  with  his  merits,  in  refusing  to  put  the 
crown  on  the  head  of  Eustace,  the  son  of  Stephen,  prevented 
Henry,  during  his  lifetime,  from  any  attempts  to  repress  the 
vices  of  his  clergy ;  but,  after  his  death,  he  resolved  to  exert  him- 
self with  more  activity.  For  this  purpose,  and  that  he  might  be 
secure  against  any  opposition,  he  advanced  to  that  dignity  Thomas 
a  Becket,  on  whose  compliance  he  supposed  he  could  entirely 
depend. 

The  famous  Thomas  a  Becket,  the  first  man  of  English  extrac- 
tion who  had,  since  the  Norman  conquest,  risen  to  any  share  of 
power,  was  the  son  of  a  citizen  of  London.  Having  received  his 
early  education  in  the  schools  of  that  metropolis,  he  resided  some 
time  at  Paris ;  and  on  his  return  became  clerk  in  the  sheriff's 
office.  In  that  station  he  was  recommended  to  the  archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  and  behaved  with  so  much  prudence,  that  he  obtain- 
ed from  that  prelate  some  beneficial  dignities  in  the  church » 


HENRY  IT.  121 

i'homas,  however,  was  not  contented  with  moderate  preferment, 
and  resolved  to  fit  himself  for  a  higher  station  in  life,  by  travel- 
ling to  Italy,  where  he  studied  the  civil  law  at  Bologna.  On  his 
return,  he  appeared  to  have  made  so  great  a  proficiency  in  knowl- 
edge, that  he  was  promoted  by  his  patron  to  the  archdeaconry  of 
Canterburyj  an  office  of  considerable  trust  and  profit.  On  the 
accession  of  Henry  to  the  throne,  he  was  recommended  to  that 
monarch  as  worthy  of  greater  preferment;  and  the  king  finding, 
on  further  acquaintance,  that  his  spirit  and  abilities  entitled  hini 
to  the  highest  trusts,  he  soon  promoted  him  to  the  dignity  of 
chancellor,  one  of  the  first  civil  office^  in  the  kingdom.  Prefer- 
ments were  now  heaped  upon  him  without  number.  He  was^ 
made  provost  of  Beverleyj  dean  of  Hastings,  and  constable  of  the 
Tower.  He  was  put  in  possession  of  the  honours  of  Eye  and 
Berkham ;  and,  to  complete  his  grandeur^  he  was  intrusted  with 
the  education  of  prince  Henryj  son  and  heir  to  the  king*  His 
revenues  were  immense  5  his  expenses  were  inbrediblei  He  kept 
open  table  for  persons  of  all  ranks;  The  most  costly  luxuries 
were  provided  for  his  entertainmentsi  The  pomp  of  his  retinue^ 
the  sumptuousness  of  his  furniture,  and  the  munificence  of  his 
presents,  corresponded  with,  the  greatness  of  his  preferments^ 
His  apartments  exhibited  an  odd  mixture  of  the  rudeness  of  the 
times  and  the  splendour  of  his  station ;  they  glittered  with  gold 
and  silver-plate,  and  yet  were  covered  with  hay  or  clean  straw 
in  winter,  and  with  green  boughs  or  rushes  irt  summer,  for  the 
ease  of  his  guests  to  recline  on.  A  considerable  number  of  knights 
were  retained  in  his  service,  and  the  greatest  barons  were  fond 
of  being  received  at  hil  table  ;  the  king  himself  frequently  con- 
descended to  partake  of  his  entertainments.  He  employed  two- 
and-fifty  clerks  in  keeping  accounts  of  the  vacant  prelacies  and 
his  own  ecclesiastical  preferments.  When  he  crossed  the  sea, 
he  was  always  attended  ^vith  five  ships ;  and  in  an  embassy  to 
Paris,  he  appeared  with  a  thousand  persons  in  his  retinue,  dis- 
playing such  wealth  as  amazed  the  spectators.  As  he  was  but 
in  deacon's  orders,  he  declined  few  of  the  amusements  then  in 
fashion.  He  diverted  liimself  in  hawking,  hunting,  chess-playing, 
and  tilting ;  at  which  he  was  so  expert,  that  even  the  most  ap- 
proved knights  dreaded  liis  encounter.  His  familiarity  with  the 
king  is  ascertained  by  a  story  told  of  their  happening  tQ  meet  a 
VOL*  t,  ^6 


tiQ  HISTORY  OF  ENGLx\ND. 

beggar-man,  as  they  were  riding  together  through  London* 
"  Would  it  not  be  right,"  says  the  king,  casting  his  eyes  on  a, 
poor  wretch  that  was  shivering  with  cold,  "  to  clothe  that  man 
*'  in  this  severe  season  ?"  "  Certainly,"  replied  his  chancellor  ; 
"  and  you  do  right  in  considering  his  calamity."  "  If  so,  then," 
cried  the  king,  "  he  shall  have  a  coat  instantly ;"  and  witiiout 
more  delay  he  began  to  pull  oft'  the  chancellor's  coat  with  vio- 
lence. The  chancellor  defended  himself  for  some  time  ;  but  af- 
ter a  struggle,  in  which  they  had  both  like  to  have  fallen  to  the 
ground,  he  gave  up  his  coat,  and  the  king  gave  it  to  the  beggar^ 
who,  ignorant  of  the  quality  of  his  benefactors,  was  not  a  little 
surprised  with  his  good  fortune..  Thus  great  and  intimate  was 
Becket,  while  yet  but  chancellor ;  but  when,  contrary  to  the  ad- 
vice of  Matilda,  he  was  promoted  still  higher  to  tiie  archbishop- 
ric of  Canterbury,  his  whole  conduct  took  a  new  turn.  No  sooner 
was  he  fixed  in  this  high  station,  which  rendered  him  for  life  the 
second  person  in  the  kingdom,  than  he  endeavoured  to  retrieve 
the  character  of  sanctity  which  his  former  levities  might  have  ap- 
peared to  oppose.  Without  consulting  his  master's  pleasure,  he 
sent  him  the  seals  of  his  office  as  lord -chancellor,  pretending 
that  he  was  henceforth  to  be  employed  in  matters  of  a  more  sa- 
cred nature.  Though  he  still  retained  the  pomp  and  splendour 
of  his  retinue,  he  was  in  his  own  person  the  most  mortified  man 
that  could  be  seen.  He  wore  sackcloth  next  his  skin.  He  chang- 
ed it  so  seldom,  that  it  was  filled  with  dirt  and  vermin.  His 
usual  diet  was  bread ;  his  drink,  water,  which  he  rendered  fur- 
ther unpalatable  by  the  mixture  of  unsavoury  herbs.  His  back 
was  mangled  with  frequent  discipline.  He  every  day  washed 
on  his  knees  the  feet  of  thirteen  beggars.  Every  one  that  made 
profession  of  sanctity  was  admitted  to  his  conversation ;  and  his 
aspect  wore  the  appearance  of  mortification  and  secret  sorrow. 
To  these  mortifications  he  sacrificed  all  the  comforts  of  life  ;  and 
it  would  be  unjust  to  suppose  but  that  he  thought  them  really 
meritorious. 

Henry  now  saw,  when  it  was  too  late,  the  ambitious  superiority 
which  Becket  aimed  at.  His  resignation  of  the  chancellor's  office 
served  to  raise  his  suspicions,  how  much  he  was  mistaken  in  the 
pliancy  of  Becket's  disposition ;  but  he  was  soon  after  convinced, 
when  this  churchman,  now  made  archbishop,  began  to  revive. 


HENRY  II.  123 

some  antient  claims  to  several  church-lands  that  had  lain  dor- 
mant ever  since  the  Conquest.  Henry,  indeed,  prevailed  upon 
him  to  desist  from  one  or  two  of  these  claims  ;  but  he  found,  for 
the  future,  that  he  was  to  expect,  in  the  seemingly  easy  Becket, 
a  most  obstinate  and  turbulent  opposer  to  all  his  schemes  of 
humbling  the  clergy. 

Notwithstanding  this  unexpected  opposition,  Henry  was  re- 
solved to  try  every  expedient  to  rectify  the  errors  that  had  crept 
in  among  the  clergy,  who,  under  a  pretence  of  independence  upon 
secular  power,  w^ere  grown  most  abominably  licentious.     During 
the  preceding  reign,  a  great  number  of  idle  and  illiterate  persons, 
in  order  to  enjoy  the  indulgence  of  their  vices,  had  entered  into 
holy  orders ;  for  the  bishops  seldom  rejected  any  that  presented. 
These  having  no  benefices,  and  belonging  to  no  diocese,  and  conse- 
♦juently  subject  to  no  jurisdiction,  committed  the  most  flagrant 
enormities  with  impunity.     Among  other  inventions  of  the  clergy 
to  obtain  money,  that  of  selling  pardons  was  introduced,  and  had 
become  a  revenue  to  the  priests.     These  and  such  like  grievances 
bore  hard  upon  the  people,  who  were  at  the  same  time   taught 
that  their   only  remedy  was  implicit  submission.     A  prince  of 
Henry's  excellent  penetration  easily  pierced  through  the  mist  of 
ignorance  in  which  the  age  was  involved ;  and  he  resolved,  by  a 
bold  struggle,  to   free  the  laity  from  these  clerical  usurpations. 
An  opportunity  soon  offered,  that  gave  him  a  popular  pretext  for 
beginning  his  intended  reformation.     A  man  in  holy  orders  had 
debauched  the  daughter  of  a  gentleman  in  Worcestershire,  and 
then  murdered  the  father,  to  prevent  the  effects  of  his  resentment. 
The  atrociousness  of  the  crime  produced  a  spirit  of  indignation 
among  the  people ;  and  the  king  insisted  tliat  the  assassin  should 
be  tried  by  the  civil  magistrate.     This  Becket  opposed,  alleging 
the  privileges  of  the  church ;  and  ordered  the  criminal  to  be  con- 
fined in  the  bishop's  prison,  lest  he  should  be  seized  by  the  offi- 
cers of  the  king.     It  was  to  no  purpose  that  the  king  desired  he 
might  be  tried  first  by  an  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction,  and  then  de- 
livered up  to  the  secular  tribunal.     Becket  asserted  that  it  was 
unjust  to  try  a  man  twice  for  the  same  offence ;  and  appealed  for 
the  equity  of  his  opinions  to  the  court  of  Rome.     This,  however, 
was  the  time  for  Henry  to  make  his  boldest  attack  upon,  the  im- 
munities of  the  church,  when,  to  defend  itself,  it  must  also  es- 


124  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

pouse  the  cause  of  the  most  atrocious  of  criminals.  He,  therefore, 
summoned  an  assembly  of  all  the  prelates  in  England,  and  de- 
sired that  the  murderer  should  be  delivered  over  to  the  hands  of 
justice,  and  a  law  made  to  punish  such  delinquents  for  the  future. 
Becket  retired  with  the  prelates  to  deliberate  ;  but,  as  he  directed 
the  assembly,  they  entrenched  themselves  behind  the  papal  de- 
crees, and  refused  to  give  up  their  prisoner.  Henry,  willing  to 
bring  them  to  an  open  absurdity,  demanded,  whether  they  were 
willing  or  not  to  submit  to  the  antient  laws  and  customs  of  the 
kingdom  ?  To  this  they  replied  with  equal  art,  that  they  were 
willing,  except  where  their  own  order  was  concerned.  The  king, 
provoked  past  bearing  by  this  evasive  answer,  instantly  quitted 
the  assembly,  and  sent  Becket  orders  to  surrender  the  honours 
and  castles  which  he  continued  to  hold  in  consequence  of  having 
been  chancellor.  These  being  surrendered,  the  prelate  quitted 
London  without  taking  the  least  notice  of  the  assembly. 

Labouring  for  some  time  under  the  uncertainty  of  the  king's 
displeasure,  Bepket  was  soon  after  induced  to  give  way,  and  to 
promise  his  majesty,  without  reserve,  a  steady  observance  of  the 
antient  laws  and  customs  of  the  kingdom.  This  was  the  disposi- 
tion which  the  king  wished  to  retain  him  in  ;  and  he  therefore 
summoned  a  general  council  of  the  nobility  and  prelates  at  Clar- 
endon, to  whom  he  submitted  this  great  and  important  affair,  and 
desired  their  concurrence.  These  councils  seem,  at  that  time, 
convened  rather  to  give  authenticity  to  the  king's  decrees,  than 
to  enact  laws  that  were  to  bind  their  posterity.  A  number  of 
regulations  were  there  drawn  up,  which  were  afterwards  well 
known  under  the  title  of  the  Constitutions  of  Clarendon,  and  were 
then  voted  without  opposition.  By  these  regulations  it  was 
enacted,  that  clergymen  accused  of  any  crime  should  be  tried  in 
the  civil  coui'ts ;  that  laymen  should  not  be  tried  in  the  spiritual 
courts,  except  by  legal  and  reputable  witnesses ;  that  the  king 
should  ultimately  judge  in  ecclesiastical  and  spiritual  appeals; 
that  the  archbishops  and  bishops  should  be  regarded  as  barons, 
and  obliged  to  furnish  the  public  supplies  as  usual  with  persons  of 
their  rank ;  that  the  goods  forfeited  to  the  king  should  not  be 
protected  in  cliurches  or  church-yards  by  the  clergy ;  and  that 
the  sons  of  villains  should  not  take  orders  without  the  consent  of 
their  lord.    These,  with  some  others  of  less  consequence,  or  iiTi- 


HENRY  II.  125 

plied  in  the  above,  to  the  number  of  sixteen,  wei:e  readily  sub- 
scribed by  all  the  bishops  present ;  and  Becket  himself,  who  at 
first  showed  some  reluctance,  added  his  name  to  the  number.  It 
only  remained  that  the  pope  should  ratify  them ;  but  there  Henry 
was  mistaken.  Alexander,  who  was  then  pope,  con- 
demned them  in  the  strongest  terms,  abrogated,  an-  Ll-'^"'*"J 
nulled,  and  rejected  them  :  out  of  sixteen  he  admitted  only  six, 
which  he  thought  not  important  enough  to  deserve  censure. 

How  Henry  could  suppose  the  pope  would  give  consent  to  these 
articles,  which  must  infallibly  have  destroyed  his  whole  authority 
in  the  kingdom,  is  not  easy  to  conceive  ;  but  we  may  well  sup- 
pose, that  a  man  of  Becket's  character  must  be  extremely  mor- 
tified at  finding  that  he  had  signed  what  the  pope  had  refused  to 
confirm.  Accordingly,  on  this  occasion,  he  expressed  the  deep- 
est sorrow  for  his  former  concessions.  He  redoubled  his  austeri- 
ties, in  order  to  punish  himself  for  his  criminal  compliance ;  and 
refused  to  officiate  at  the  altar  till  he  had  obtained  absolution  from 
his  holiness.  All  these  mortifications  appeared  to  Henry  as  lit- 
tle more  than  specious  insults  upon  himself;  his  former  affection 
was  converted  into  hatred,  and  the  breach  between  him  and  the 
archbishop  every  day  grew  wider.  At  last,  willing  to  supersede 
the  prelate's  authority  at  any  rate,  he  desired  that  the  pope  would 
send  a  legate  into  his  dominions  ;  who,  from  the  nature  of  his  com- 
mission, might  have  a  superior  control.  This  the  pope  readily 
granted ;  and  a  legate  was  appointed,  but  with  a  clause  annexed 
to  his  commission,  that  he  was  to  execute  nothing  in  prejudice  of 
the  archbishop.  An  authority  thus  clogged  in  that  very  part 
where  it  was  desired  to  be  unlimited,  Avas  no  way  agreeable  to 
the  king ;  and  he  sent  back  the  commission  with  great  indigna- 
tion. He  now,  therefore,  went  another  way  to  wreak  his  resent- 
ment upon  Becket.  He  had  him  sued  for  some  lands,  which 
were  part  of  a  manor  belonging  to  his  primacy ;  and  the  primate 
being  detained  by  sickness  from  coming  into  court,  his  non-attend- 
ance was  construed  into  disrespect.  A  great  council  was  sum- 
moned at  Northampton,  where  Becket  defended  his  cause  in  per- 
son ;  but  he  was  condemned  as  guilty  of  a  contempt  of  the  king's 
court,  and  as  wanting  in  that  fealty  which  he  had  sworn  to  his 
sovereign.  All  his  goods  and  chattels  were  confiscated  ;  and  the 
bishop  of  Winchester  was  obliged  to  pronounce  the  sentence 


126  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

against  him.  Besides  this  conviction,  the  king  exhibited  another 
charge  against  him  for  three  hundred  pounds,  which  he  had  levied 
on  tlie  honours  of  Eye  and  Berkham,  while  he  remained  in  pos- 
session. Becket,  rather  than  aggravate  the  king's  resentment, 
agreed  to  give  sureties  for  the  payment.  The  next  day  another 
suit  was  commenced  against  him  for  a  thousand  marks,  which  the 
king  had  lent  him  on  some  former  occasion.  Immediately  on  the 
back  of  these,  a  tliird  claim  was  made,  still  greater  than  the  for- 
mer :  this  w  as,  to  give  an  account  of  the  money  he  had  received 
and  expended  during  the  time  of  his  chancellorship.  The  esti- 
mate was  laid  at  no  less  than  forty  thousand  marks ;  and  Becket 
was  wholly  unprovided  either  of  the  means  of  balancing  his  ac- 
counts, or  of  securities  for  answering  so  great  a  demand.  In  tliis 
exigence  his  friends  were  divided  what  council  to  give.  Some 
prelates  advised  him  to  resign  his  see,  in  hopes  of  an  acquittal ; 
some  counselled  him  to  throw  himself  entirely  upon  the  king's 
mercy  5  and  some,  to  offer  ten  thousand  marks  as  a  general  satis- 
faction for  all  demands.  Becket  followed  none  of  these  opinions ; 
but,  with  an  intrepidity  peculiar  to  himself,  arraying  himself  in 
his  episcopal  vestments,  and  with  the  cross  in  his  hand,  he  went 
forward  to  the  king's  palace,  and,  entering  the  royal  apartments, 
sat  down,  holding  up  his  cross  as  his  banner  of  protection.  The 
king,  who  sat  in  an  inner  room,  ordered  by  proclamation  the  pre- 
lates and  the  nobility  to  attend  him ;  to  whom  he  complained 
loudly  of  Becket's  insolence  and  inflammatory  proceedings.  The 
whole  council  joined  in  condemning  this  instance  of  his  unac- 
countable pride ;  and  determined  to  expostulate  with  him  upon 
his  inconsistency,  in  formxerly  subscribing  the  Constitutions  of 
Clarendon,  and  now  in  being  the  first  to  infringe  them.  But  all 
their  messages,  threats,  and  arguments  were  to  no  purpose ; 
Becket  had  taken  his  resolution,  and  it  was  now  too  late  to  at- 
tempt to  shake  it.  He  put  himself,  in  the  most  solemn  manner, 
under  the  protection  of  the  supreme  pontiff;  and  appealed  to  him 
against  any  penalty  which  his  iniquitous  judges  might  think  pi'op. 
er  to  inflict.  Then  departing  the  palace,  he  asked  the  king's  im- 
mediate permission  to  leave  Northampton ;  and  upon  receiving  a 
refusal,  he  secretly  withdrew  in  disguise,  and  at  last  found  means 
to  cross  over  to  the  continent. 
Here  it  may  be  natural  to  inquire  how  a  person  of  such  meau 


HENRY  IIv  IQJ 

extraction  should  be  able  to  form  any  kind  of  opposition  to  so 
powerful  a  monarch  as  Henry  ?  But  the  state  was  then,  as  it  was 
for  some  ages  after,  composed  of  three  distinct  powers,  all  pursu- 
ing separate  interests,  and  very  little  dependant  upon  each  other. 
These  were,  that  of  the  king,  that  of  the  barons,  and  that  of  the 
clergy ;  for  as  yet  the  people  had  scarce  any  influence,  separately 
considered.  Of  these  three  powers  the  most  recent  was  that  of 
the  clergy,  which,  wanting  the  sanction  of  prescriptive  right,  en- 
deavoured to  make  up  those  defects  by  their  superior  arts  of  pop- 
ularity. They  therefore  attached  the  people,  v/ho  had  hitherto 
been  considered  as  unworthy  of  notice  in  the  constitution,  to 
their  party ;  and  thus  gained  an  acquisition  of  strength  that  was 
often  too  powerful  for  the  other  two  members  of  the  state.  The 
king,  being  but  a  single  person,  could  have  no  wide  connections 
among  the  lower  orders  of  mankind ;  the  nobles,  being  bred  up  in 
a  haughty  independence,  were  taught  to  regard  the  inferior  ranks 
as  slaves :  the  clergy  alone,  by  their  duty,  being  obliged  to  con- 
verse with  the  lowest  as  well  as  the  highest  orders,  were  most 
beloved  by  the  populace,  who,  since  they  were  at  any  rate  to  be 
slaves,  were  the  more  willing  to  obey  men  who  conversed  with 
them,  and  who  seemed  to  study  their  welfare,  than  such  as  kept 
them  at  a  humiliating  distance,  and  only  regarded  them  as  the 
instruments  of  their  private  ambition.  For  these  reasons,  there- 
fore, during  the  times  we  speak  of,  the  side  of  the  clergy  was  al- 
ways espoused  by  the  people  ;  and  Becket,  upon  the  present  oc- 
casion, secretly  relied  on  their  encouragement  and  support. 

The  intrepidity  of  Becket,  joined  to  his  apparent  sanctity, 
gained  him  a  very  favourable  reception  upon  the  continent,  both 
from  the  people  and  their  governors.  The  king  of  France,  who 
hated  Henry,  very  much  aifected  to  pity  his  condition ;  and  the 
pope,  whose  cause  he  had  so  strenuously  defended,  honoured  him 
with  the  greatest  marks  of  distinction,  while  he  treated  Henry's 
embassadors  with  coolness  and  contempt.  Becket,  sensible  of 
his  power,  was  willing  to  show  all  possible  humility ;  and  even; 
resigned  his  see  of  Canterbury  into  the  pope's  hands,  in  order  to 
receive  it  back  from  him  with  greater  solemnity,  and  with  an  in- 
vestiture of  more  apparent  sanctity.  Such  favours  bestowed  upon 
an  exile,  and  a  perjured  traitor,  for  such  had  been  his  sentence  of 
condemnation  in  England,  excited  the  indignation  of  Henry  be- 


1£8  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

yond  measure.  He  saw  his  embassadors  slighted,  all  his  endeav- 
ours to  procure  a  conference  with  the  pope  frustrated,  and  his 
subjects  daily  excited  to  discontents,  in  consequence  of  the 
king's  severity  to  a  sanctified  character.  In  this  state  of  resent- 
ment, Henry  i-esolved  to  throAv  off  all  dependance  upon  the  pon- 
tiff at  once,  and  to  free  himself  and  his  people  from  a  burthen 
that  had  long  oppressed  them  without  pity.  He  accordingly  is- 
sued orders  to  his  justiciaries,  inhibiting,  under  severe  penalties, 
all  appeals  to  the  pope  or  the  archbishop  ;  and  forbidding  any  of 
them  to  receive  mandates  from  them,  or  to  apply  to  their  authority. 
He  declared  it  treasonable  to  bring  over  from  either  of  them  any 
interdict  upon  the  kingdom.  This  he  made  punishable  in  secular 
clergymen  by  the  loss  of  their  eyes  and  by  castration,  in  regulars 
by  the  amputation  of  their  feet,  and  in  laymen  by  death. 

The  pope  and  the  archbishop  were  not  remiss  on  their  side  to 
retort  these  fulminations,  and  to  shake  the  very  foundation  of  the 
king's  authority.  Becket  compared,  himself  to  Christ,  who  had 
been  condemned  by  a  lay  tribunal,  and  who  was  crucified  a-new 
in  the  present  oppressions  under  which  the  church  laboured.  But 
he  did  not  rest  in  complaints  only ',  he  issued  out  a  censure,  ex- 
communicating the  king's  chief  ministers  by  name,  all  that  were 
concerned  in  sequestering  the  revenues  of  his  see,  and  all  who 
obeyed  or  favoured  the  Constitutions  of  Clarendon.  He  even 
threatened  to  excommunicate  the  king  himself  if  he  did  not  im- 
mediately repent ;  and  to  give  his  censures  the  greater  energy^ 
he  got  them  to  be  ratified  by  the  pope. 

Whatever  Henry's  contempt  of  these  fulminations  might  be  in 
the  beginning,  he,  after  some  deliberation,  began  to  find  them 
more  formidable  than  he  had  supposed,  and  secretly  wished  for 
an  accommodation.  Yet  there  seemed  no  other  way  for  termi- 
nating these  disputes,  but  by  the  king's  appealing  to  the  pope,  as 
umpire  between  him  and  the  archbishop  ;  and  this  promised  no 
very  favourable  decision.  However,  perceiving  that  his  authority 
was  beginning  to  decline  among  his  subjects,  and  that  his  rivals 
on  the  continent  had  actually  availed  themselves  of  his  perplexi- 
ties, he  resolved  at  any  rate  to  apply  to  the  pope  for  his  mediation. 
The  pope,  on  the  other  hand,  was  every  day  threatened 
•-  '-^  himself  by  the  machinations  .of  an  antipope.  He  was 
apprehensive  that  the  king  of  England  might  join  against  him ;  he> 


HENRY  n.  12,9 

kiiew  his  great  abilities,  and  was  sensible  that  as  yet  no  insurrec- 
tion had  been  made  in  consequence  of  the  threats  and  exhorta** 
tions  of  Becket.  Thus  the  disposition  of  both  parties  produced 
frequent  attempts  towards  an  accommodation ;  but  the  mutual 
jealousies  that  each  bore  of  the  other,  and  their  anxiety  not  to 
lose  the  least  advantage  in  the  negotiation,  often  protracted  this 
desirable  treaty.  At  one  time  the  terms  being  agreed  on,  were 
postponed  by  the  king's  refusing  to  sign  but  with  a  salvo  to  his 
royal  dignity.  At  another  time  they  were  accommodated,  but 
broke  off  by  Becket's  refusing  to  submit  but  with  a  salvo  to  the 
honour  of  God.  A  third  and  a  fourth  negotiation  followed  with-' 
out  effect.  In  this  last  all  the  terms  were  completely  adjusted, 
when  Becket  took  it  into  his  head  to  demand  a  kiss  of  peace. 
This  the  king  refused  to  grant ;  and  both  parties  once  more  pre- 
pared for  mutual  annoyance. 

These  disturbances  continued  for  some  time  longer ;  Eecket 
never  losing  an  opportunity  of  impeaching  the  king's  ministers, 
and  obstructing  all  his  measures.  At  length,  by  the  mediation  of 
the  pope's  legate,  all  difficulties  were  adjusted ;  and  while  the 
king  allowed  Becket  to  return,  that  prelate  consented  to  wave 
the  kiss  of  peace.  The  ceremonial  of  the  interview  being  regu- 
lated, when  the  archbishop  approached,  the  king  advanced  to 
meet  him  in  the  most  gracious  manner ;  and  conversed  with  him 
for  some  time  with  great  ease,  familiarity,  and  kindness.  All 
material  points  being  adjusted,  Becket  attended  Henry  on  horse- 
back ;  and  as  they  rode  together,  the  prelate  begged  some  satis- 
faction from  tlie  invasions  of  his  right  by  the  archbishop  of  York, 
who  had  some  time  before  crowned  the  young  prince.  To  this 
Henry  replied,  that  what  was  past  could  not  be  undone  ;  but  that 
he  would  take  care  that  none  but  he  should  crown  the  young 
queen,  which  ceremony  was  soon  to  be  performed.  Becket, 
transported  at  this  instance  of  the  king's  condescension,  alighted 
instantly,  and  threw  himself  at  the  feet  of  his  sovereign,  who, 
leaping  from  his  horse  at  the  same  time,  lifted  him  from  the 
ground,  and  helped  him  to  remount.  The  terms  of  their  present 
agreement  were  very  advantageous  to  the  prelate  5  and  this  might 
have  inspired  him,  in  the  ardour  of  his  gratitude,  to  such  a  humil- 
iation. It  was  agreed  that  he  should  not  give  up  any  of  the 
lights  of  the  church,  or  resign  any  ef  those  pretensions  which  had 

voL./r.  17     , 


130  HISTORY  OF  ENGLANDl 

/ 

been  the  original  ground  of  the  quarrel ;  that  Becket  and  his  ad- 
herents should  be  restored  to  their  livings ;  and  that  all  the  pos- 
sessors of  such  benefices  belonging  to  the  see  of  Canterbury  as^ 
had  been  installed  since  the  primate's  absence  should  be  expelled, 
and  Becket  have  liberty  to  supply  the  vacancies.  In  return  for 
these  concessions,  the  king  only  reaped  tlie  advantage  of  seeing 
liis  ministers  absolved  from  the  sentence  of  excommunication,  and 
of  preventing  an  interdict  which  vs^as  preparing  to  be  laid  upon 
all  his  dominions. 

Becket  having  thus,  in  some  measure,  triumphed  over  the  king, 
was  resolved  to  remit  nothing  of  the  power  which  he  had  acquir- 
ed. He  soon  began  to  show,  that  not  even  a  temporary  tranquil- 
lity was  to  be  the  result  of  his  reconciliation.  Nothing  could 
exceed  the  insolence  with  which  he  conducted  himself  upon  his 
first  landing  in  England.  Instead  of  retiring  quietly  to  his  dio- 
cese with  that  modesty  which  became  a  man  just  pardoned  by  his 
king,  he  made  a  progress  through  Kent  in  all  the  splendour  and 
magnificence  of  a  sovereign  pontiff.  As  he  approached  South- 
wark,  the  clergy,  the  laity,  men  of  all  ranks  and  ages,  came  forth 
to  meet  him,  and  celebrated  his  triumphal  entry  with  hymns  of 
joy.  Thus,  confident  of  the  voice  and  the  hearts  of  the  people, 
he  began  to  lanch  forth  his  tliunders  against  those  who  had  been 
his  former  opposers.  The  archbishop  of  York,  who  had  crowned 
Henry's  eldest  son  in  his  absence,  was  the  first  against  whom  he 
denounced  sentence  of  suspension.  The  bishops  of  London  and 
Salisbury  he  actually  excommunicated.  Robert  de  Broc  and 
Nigel  de  Sackville  were  exposed  to  the  same  censures ;  and 
many  of  the  most  considerable  prelates  and  ministers,  who  had 
assisted  at  the  late  coronation  of  the  young  prince,  were  partak- 
ers of  the  common  calamity.  One  man  he  excommunicated  for 
having  spoken  against  him ;  and  another  for  having  cut  off  tha 
tail  of  one  of  his  horses. 

Henry  was  then  in  Normandy,  while  the  primate  was  thus  tri- 
umphantly parading  through  the  kingdom ;  and  it  was  not  without 
the  utmost  indignation  that  he  received  information  of  his  turbu- 
lent insolence.  When  the  suspended  and  excommunicated  pre- 
lates arrived  with  their  complaints,  his  anger  knew  no  bounds. 
He  broke  forth  into  the  most  acrimonious  expressions  against  that 
arrogant  churchman,  whom  he  had  raised  from  the  lowest  station 


HENRY  IL  ^  131 

to  be  tlie  plague  of  his  life,  and  the  continual  disturber  of  his 
government.  The  archbishop  of  York  remarked  to  him,  that  so 
long  as  Becket  lived,  he  could  never  expect  to  enjoy  peace  or 
tranquillity ;  and  the  king  himself  burst  out  into  an  exclamation, 
that  he  had  no  friends  about  him,  or  he  would  not  so  long  have 
been  exposed  to  the  insults  of  that  ungrateful  hypocrite.  These 
words  excited  the  attention  of  the  whole  court,  and  armed  four  of 
his  most  resolute  attendants  to  gratify  their  monarch's  secret 
inclinations.  The  names  of  these  knights  and  gentlemen  of  his 
household  were,  Reginald  Fitz-Urse,  William  de  Tracy,  Hugh 
de  Morville,  and  Richard  Brito,  who  immediately  communicated 
their  thoughts  to  each  other.  They  instantly  bound  themselves 
by  an  oath  to  revenge  their  king's  quarrel ;  and,  secretly  retiring 
from  court,  took  shipping  at  different  ports,  and  met  the  next 
day  at  the  castle  of  Saltwode,  within  six  miles  of  Cantei-bury, 
Some  menacing  expressions  which  they  had  dropt,  and  their  sud- 
den departure  gave  the  king  reason  to  suspect  their  design.  He 
therefore  sent  messengers  to  overtake  and  forbid  tliem,  in  his 
name,  to  commit  any  violence  ;  but  these  orders  arrived  too  late 
to  prevent  their  fatal  purpose.  The  conspirators,  being  joined  by 
some  assistants  at  the  place  of  their  meeting,  proceeded  to  Can- 
terbury with  all  the  haste  their  bloody  intentions  required.  Ad- 
vancing directly  to  Becket's  house,  and  entering  his  apartment, 
they  reproached  him  very  fiercely  for  the  rashness  and  the  inso- 
lence of  his  conduct;  as  if  they  had  been  willing  to  enjoy  his 
terrors  before  they  destroyed  him.  Becket,  however,  was  not  in 
the  least  terrified ;  but  vindicated  his  actions  with  that  zeal  and 
resolution,  which  nothing  probably  but  the  consciousness  of  his 
innocence  could  inspire.  The  conspirators  felt  the  force  of  his 
replies ;  and  were  particularly  enraged  at  a  charge  of  ingratitude, 
which  he  objected  to  three  of  them,  who  had  been  formerly  re- 
tained in  his  service.  During  this  altercation,  the  time  approached 
for  Becket  to  assist  at  vespers,  whither  he  went  unguarded,  the 
conspirators  following,  and  preparing  for  their  attempt.  As  soon 
as  he  had  reached  the  altar,  where  it  is  just  to  think  he  aspired 
at  the  glory  of  martyrdom,  they  all  fell  upon  him ;  and  having 
cloven  his  head  with  repeated  blows,  he  dropped  down  dead 
before  the  altar  of  St.  Benedict,  which  was  besmeared  with  liis 
blood  and  brains. 


132  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

The  circumstances  of  the  murder,  the  place  where  it  was  per- 
petrated, and  the  fortitude  with  Avhich  the  prelate  resigned  him- 
self to  his  fate,  made  a  most  surprising  impression  on  the  people. 
No  sooner  was  his  death  known  than  they  rushed  into  the  church 
to  see  thq  body ;  and  dipping  their  hands  in  his  blood,  crossed 
themselves  with  it  as  with  that  of  a  saint.  The  clergy,  whose 
interest  it  was  to  have  Becket  considered  as  a  saint,  and  perhaps 
who  were  real  in  their  belief,  considering  the  times  we  treat  of, 
did  all  that  lay  in  their  pov/er  to  magnify  his  sanctity,  to  extol 
ihe  merits  of  his  martyrdom,  and  to  hold  him  out  as  the  fittest 
object  of  tlie  veneration  of  the  people.  Their  endeavours  soon 
prevailed.  Innuinerable  were  the  mii-acles  said  to  be  wrought  at 
his  tomb  5  for  when  the  people  are  brought  to  see  a  miarcle,  they 
generally  find  or  make  one.  It  was  not  sufficient  that  his  shtine 
had  the  power  of  restoring  dead  men  to  life ;  it  restored  also 
cows,  dogs,  and  horses.  It  was  reported,  and  believed,  that  he 
rose  from  his  coffin  before  he  was  buried,  to  light  the  tapers  de- 
signed for  his  funeral :  nor  was  he  remiss,  wlien  the  funeral  cer- 
emony was  over,  in  stretching  forth  his  hands  to  give  his  benef 
diction  to  the  people.  Thus  Becket  became  a  saint ;  and  the 
king  was  strongly  suspected  of  procuring  his  assassination. 

Nothing  could  exceed  the  king's  consternation  upon  receiving 
the  first  news  of  this  prelate's  catastroplie.  He  was  instantly 
sensible  that  the  murder  would  be  ultimately  imputed  to  him. 
He  was  apprised  that  his  death  would  effect  what  his  opposition 
could  not  do  ;  and  would  procure  those  advantages  to  the  church 
which  it  had  been  the  study  of  his  whole  reign  to  refuse.  These 
considerations  gave  hira  the  most  unfeigned  concern.  He  shut 
himself  up  in  darkness,  refusing  even  the  attendance  of  his  do- 
mestics. He  even  rejected,  during  three  days,  all  nourishinent. 
The  courtiers  dreading  the  effigcts  of  his  regret,  were  at  last  obli- 
ged to  break  into  his  solitude ;  in  order  to  persuade  him  to  be 
reconciled  to  a  measure  that  he  could  not  redress.  The  pope 
soon  after,  being  made  sensible  of  the  king's  innocence,  granted 
him  his  pardon;  but  upon  condition  that  he  would  make  every 
future  submission,  and  perform  every  injunction  that  th^  holy  see 
should  require.  All  things  being  thus  adjusted,  the  assassins  who 
had  murdered  Becket  retired  in  safety  to  the  enjoyment  of  their 
foririer  dignities  and  honours ;  and  the  king,  in  order  to  divert 


HENRY  n.  13S 

the  minds  of  the  people  to  a  diiFerent  object,  undertook  an  expe- 
dition against  Ireland. 

Ireland  was  at  that  time  in  pretty  much  the  same  situation  that 
England  had  been  after  the  first  invasion  of  the  Saxons.  They 
had  been  early  converted  to  Christianity ;  and,  for  three  or  four 
centuries  after,  possessed  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  learning 
of  the  times  ;  being  undisturbed  by  foreign  invasions,  and  perhaps 
too  poor  to  invite  the  rapacity  of  conquerors,  they  enjoyed  a 
peaceful  life,  which  they  gave  up  to  piety,  and  such  learning  as 
was  then  thought  necessary  to  promote  it.  Of  their  learning, 
their  arts,  their  piety,  and  even  their  polished  manners,  toa  many 
monuments  remain  to  this  day  for  us  to  make  the  least  doubt 
concerning  them ;  but  it  is  equally  true,  that  in  time  they  fell 
from  these  advantages  ;  and  their  degenerate  posterity,  at  the 
period  we  are  now  speaking  of,  were  wrapt  in  the  darkest  bar- 
barity. This  may  be  imputed  to  the  frequent  invasions  which 
they  suffered  from  the  Danes,  who  over -ran  the  whole  country, 
and  every  where  spread  their  ravages,  and  confirmed  their  au- 
thority. The  natives,  kept  in  the  strictest  bondage,  grew  every 
day  more  ignorant  and  brutal ;  and  when  at  last  they  rose  upon 
their  conquerors,  and  totally  expelled  them  the  island,  they  want- 
ed instructors  to  restore  them  to  their  former  attainments. 
From  thence  they  continued  in  the  most  deplorable  state  of  bar- 
barism. The  towns  that  had  been  formerly  built  were  suffered 
to  fall  into  ruin ;  the  inhabitants  exercised  pasture  in  the  open 
country,  and  sought  protection  from  danger  by  retiring  into  their 
forests  and  bogs.  Almost  all  sense  of  religion  was  extinsruished  ; 
the  petty  princes  exercised  continual  outrages  upon  eacii  other's 
territories ;  and  nothing  but  strength  alone  was  able  to  procure 
redress. 

At  the  time  wh^en  Henry  first  planned  the  invasion  of  the  isl- 
and, it  was  divided  into  five  principalities,  namely,  Leinster, 
Meath,  Munster,  Ulster,  and  Connaught ;  each  governed  by  its 
respective  monarch.  As  it  had  been  usual  for  one  or  other  of 
those  to  take  the  lead  in  their  wai'S,  he  was  denominated  sole 
monarch  of  the  kingdom,  and  possessed  of  a  power  resembling 
that  of  the  early  Saxon  monarchs  in  England.  Roderic  O'Con- 
nor, king  of  Connaught,  was  then  advanced  to  this  dignity,  and 
Dermot  IM'Morrogli  was  king  of  Leinster.      This  last-named 


134  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

prince,  a  weak,  licentious  tyrant,  had  carried  oif  and  ravished 
the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Meath,  who,  being  strengthened  by 
the  alliance  of  tlie  king  of  Connaught,  invaded  the  ravislier's  do- 
minions, and  expelled  him  from  his  kingdom.  This  prince,  thus 
justly  punished,  had  i-ecourse  to  Henry,  who  was  at  that  time  in- 
Guienne,  and  offered  to  hold  his  kingdom  of  the  English  crown, 
in  case  he  recovered  it  by  the  king's  assistance.  Henry  readily 
accepted  the  offer ;  but,  being  at  that  time  embarrassed  by  more 
near  interests,  he  only  gave  Dermot  letters  patent,  by  which  he 
empowered  all  his  subjects  to  aid  the  Irish  prince  in  the  recovery 
of  his  dominions.  Dermot,  relying'  on  this  authority,  returned 
to  Bristol,  where,  after  some  difficulty,  he  formed  a  treaty  with 
Richard,  surnamed  Strongbow,  earl  of  Pembroke,  who  agreed  to 
reinstate  him  in  his  dominions,  upon  condition  of  his  being  mar- 
ried to  his  daughter  Eva,  and  declared  heir  of  all  his  territory. 
He  at  the  same  time  contracted  for  succours  with  Robert  Fitz- 
stephen,  and  Maurice  Fitzgerald,  whom  he  promised  to  gratify 
with  the  city  of  Wexford,  and  the  two  adjoining  districts,  which 
were  then  in  possession  of  the  Easterlings.  Being  thus  assured 
of  assistance,  he  returned  privately  to  Ireland,  and  concealed 
himself  during  the  winter  in  the  monastery  of  Ferns,  which  he  had 
founded.  Robert  Fitzstephen  was  first  able,  the  ensuing  spring,  to 
f-i-,ya~\  fiilfil  liis  engagements,  by  landing  with  a  hundred  and 
thirty  knights,  sixty  esquires,  and  three  hundred  arch- 
ers. They  were  soon  after  joined  by  Maurice  Pendergast,  who, 
about  the  same  time,  brought  over  ten  knights  and  sixty  archers  ; 
and  with  this  small  body  of  forces  they  resolved  on  besieging 
Wexford,  which  was  to  be  theirs  by  treaty.  This  town  was 
quickly  reduced ;  and  the  adventurers,  being  reinforced  by  another 
body  of  men,  to  the  amount  of  an  hundred  and  fifty,  under  the 
command  of  Maurice  Fitzgerald,  composed  an  army  that  struck 
the  barbarous  natives  with  awe.  Roderic,  the  chief  monarch  of 
the  island,  ventured  to  oppose  them,  but  he  was  defeated;  and 
soon  after  the  prince  of  Ossory  was  obliged  to  submit,  and  give 
hostages  for  his  future  conduct. 

Dermot  being  thus  reinstated  in  his  hereditary  dominions,  soon 
began  to  conceive  hopes  of  extending  the  limits  of  his  power, 
and  making  himself  master  of  Ireland.  With  these  views  he 
endeavoured  to  expedite  Strongbow,  who,  being  personally  pro- 


HENRY  ir.  155 

hibited  by  the  king,  was  not  yet  come  over.  Dermot  tried  to 
inflame  his  ambition  by  the  glory  of  the  conquest,  and  his  avarice 
by  the  advantages  it  would  procure :  he  expatiated  on  the  cow- 
ardice of  the  natives,  and  the  certainty  of  his  success.  Strong- 
bow  first  sent  over  Raymond,  one  of  his  retinue,  with  ten  knights 
and  seventy  archers,;  and  receiving  permission  shortly  after  for 
himself,  he  landed  with  two  hundred  horse  and  a  hundred  arch- 
ers. All  these  English  forces,  now  joining  together,  became 
irresistible ;  and  though  the  whole  number  did  not  amount  to  a 
thousand,  yet,  such  was  the  barbarous  state  of  the  natives,  that 
they  were  every  where  put  to  the  rout.  The  city  of  Waterford 
quickly  surrendered ;  Dublin  was  taken  by  assault ;  and  Strong- 
bow,  soon  after  marrying  Eva,  according  to  treaty,  became  master 
of  the  kingdom  of  Leinster  upon  Dermot's  decease. 

The  island  being  thus  in  a  manner  wholly  subdued,  for  nothing 
was  capable  of  opposing  the  further  progi-ess  of  the  English  arms, 
Henry  became  jealous  of  their  success,  and  was  willing  to  share 
in  person  those  honours  which  the  adventurers  had  already  se- 
cured.    He  therefore  shortly  after  landed  in  Ireland,  at  the  head 
of  five  hundred  knights,  and  some  soldiers  ;  not  so  much  to  con- 
quer a  disputed  territory,  as  to  take  possession  of  a  subject  king- 
dom.    In  his  progress  through  the  country,  he  received  the  hom- 
age of  the  petty  chieftains  as  he  went  along,  and  left  most  of 
them  in  possession  of  their  antient  territories.     In  a  place  so  un- 
cultivated, and  so  ill  peopled,  there  was  still  land  enough  to  sat- 
isfy the  adventurers  who   had  followed   him.     Strongbow  was 
made  seneschal  of  Ireland ;  Hugh  de  Lacey  was  made  governor 
of  Dublin,  and  John  de  Courcy  received  a  patent  for  conquering 
the  province  of  Ulster,  which  had  as  yet  remained  unsubdued. 
The  Irish  bishops  very  gladly  admitted  the  English,   as  they  ex- 
pected from  their  superior  civilization  a  greater  degree  of  rever- 
ence and  respect.     Pope  Adrian,  who  had,  in  the  beginning,  en- 
couraged Henry  to  subdue  the  Irish  by  his  bull,  granting  him  the 
kingdom,  now  confirmed  him  in  his  conquest;  and  the  kings  of 
England  were   acknowledged    as   lords  over    Ireland  forever. 
Thus,  after  a  trifling  effort,  in  which  very  little  money  was  ex- 
pended, and  little  blood  shed,  that   beautiful  island  became  aa 
appendage  to  the  English  crown,  and  as  such  it  has  ever  sinca 
continued  with  unshaken  fidelity. 


156  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

The  joy  wliich  tliis  conquest  diiFused  was  very  great;  and 
Henry  seemed  now  to  have  attained  the  summit  of  his  utmost 
"wishes.  He  was  now  undisputed  monarch  of  the  greatest  domain 
in  Europe  ;  father  of  a  numerous  progeny,  that  gave  both  lustre 
and  authority  to  his  crown  ;  victorious  over  all  his  enemies,  and 
cheerfully  obeyed  by  all  his  subjects.  Hepry,  his  eldest  son, 
had  been  anointed  king,  and  was  acknowledged  as  undoubted 
successor  ;  Richard,  his  second  son,  was  invested  with  the  duchy 
of  Guienne  and  Poitou  ;  Geoffrey,  his  third  son,  inherited,  in 
right  of  his  wife,  the  duchy  of  Bretagne ;  and  John,  his  youngest, 
was  designed  as  king  in  Ireland.  Such  was  the  flattering  pros- 
pect of  grandeur  before  him  ;  but  such  is  the  instability  of  human 
happiness,  that  this  very  exaltation  of  his  family  proved  the 
means  of  embittering  his  future  life,  and  disturbing  his  govern- 
ment. 

Among  the  few  vices  ascribed  to  this  monarch,  unlimited  gal- 
lantry was  one.  Queen  Eleanor,  whom  he  married  from  motives 
of  ambition,  and  who  had  been  divorced  from  her  former  royal 
consort  for  her  incontinence,  was  long  become  disagreeable  to 
Henry ;  and  he  sought  in  others  those  satisfactions  he  could* not 
find  with  her.  Among  the  number  of  his  mistresses  we  have  the 
name  of  Fair  Rosamond,  whose  personal  charms,  and  whose  death, 
make  so  conspicuous  a  figure  in  the  romances  and  the  ballads  of 
this  period.  It  is  true  that  the  severity  of  criticism  has  rejected 
most  of  these  accounts  as  fabulous  ;  but  even  well-known  fables, 
when  much  celebrated,  make  a  part  of  the  history,  at  least  of  the 
manners,  of  the  age.  Rosamond  Clifford  is  said  to  have  been  the 
most  beautiful  woman  that  ever  was  seen  in  England,  if  what  ro- 
mances and  poets  assert  be  true.  Henry  loved  her  with  a  long 
and  faithful  attachment ;  and  in  order  to  secure  her  from  the  re- 
sentment of  his  queen,  who,  from  having  been  formerly  inconti- 
nent herself,  now  became  jealous  of  his  incontinence,  he  concealed 
her  in  a  labyrinth  in  Woodstock  Park,  where  he  passed  in  her 
company  his  hours  of  vacancy  and  pleasure.  How  long  this  se- 
cret intercourse  continued  is  not  told  us  ;  but  it  was  not  so  closely 
concealed  but  that  it  came  to  the  queen's  knowledge,  who,  as  the 
accounts  add,  being  guided  by  a  clue  of  silk  to  her  fair  rival's  re- 
treat, obliged  her,  by  holding  a  drawn  dagger  to  her  breast,  to 
swallow  poison.    Whatever  may  be  the  veracity  of  tiiis  story, 


tiENRY  in  IS7 

certain  it  is,  that  this  haughty  woman,  though  formerly  offensive 
by  her  own  gallantries,  was  now  no  less  so  by  her  jealousy;  and 
she  it  was  who  first  sowed  the  seeds  of  dissension  between  the 
king  and  his  children. 

Young  Henry  was  taught  to  believe  himself  injured,  when,  upon 
being  crowned  a^^flMtner  in  the  kingdom,  he  was  not  admitted 
into  a  share  of  th^Bninistration.  This  prince  had,  from  the  be- 
ginning, shown  a  degree  of  pride  that  seems  to  have  been  hered- 
itai-y  to  all  the  Norman  succession :  when  the  ceremony  of  his 
coronation  was  performing,  the  king,  willing  to  give  it  all  the 
splendour  possible,  waited  upon  him  at  table  ;  and  while  he  oftered 
him  the  cup,  observed  that  no  prince  ever  before  had  been  so  mag- 
nificently attended.  "  There  is  nothing  very  extraordinary," 
replied  the  young  prince,  "  in  seeing  the  son  of  a  count  serving 
the  son  of  a  king."  From  this  instance,  nothing  seemed  great 
enough  to  satisfy  his  ambition  ;  and  he  took  the  first  opportunity 
to  assert  his  aspiring  pretensions.  The  discontent  of  young  Hen- 
vy  was  soon  followed  by  that  of  Geoffrey  and  Richard,  whom  the 
queen  persuaded  to  assert  their  title  to  the  territories  assigned 
them ;  and,  upon  the  king's  refusing  their  undutiful  demands,  they 
all  fled  secretly  to  the  court  of  France,  where  Lewis,  who  was 
instrumental  in  increasing  their  disobedience,  gave  them  counte- 
nance and  protection*  Queen  Eleanor  herself  was  meditating  an 
escape  to  the  same  court,  and  had  put  on  man's  apparel  for  that 
purpose,  when  she  was  seized  by  the  king's  order,  and  prit  into 
confinement.  Thus  Heniy  saw  all  his  long  perspective  of  future 
happiness  totally  clouded ;  his  sons,  scarce  yet  arrived  at  man- 
hood, eager  to  share  the  spoils  of  their  father's  possessions  ;  his 
queen  warmly  encouraging  those  undutiful  princes  in  their  re- 
bellion ;  and  many  potentates  of  Europe  not  ashamed  to  lend  them 
assistance  to  support  their  pretensions.  Nor  were  his  prospects 
much  more  pleasing  when  he  looked  among  his  subjects  :  his  li- 
centious barons,  disgusted  with  a  vigilant  administration,  desired 
to  be  governed  by  princes  whom  they  could  flatter  or  intimidate  : 
the  clergy  had  not  yet  forgot  Becket's  death  ;  and  the  people 
considered  him  as  a  saint  and  a  martyr.  In  this  universal  disaf- 
fection, Henry  supported  that  intrepidity  which  he  had  shown 
through  life,  and  prepared  for  a  contest  from  which  he  could  ex- 
pect to  reap  neither  profit  nor  glory.     Twenty  thousand  merce- 

VOL.    I.  18 


r33  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

naiy  soldiers,  joined  to  some  troops  wkk'h  he  brought  over  from 
Ireland,  and  a  few  barons  of  approved  fidelity,  formed  the  sole 
force  with  which  he  proposed  to  resist  his  opponents. 

It  was  not  long  before  the  young  princes  had  sufficient  influence 
upon  the  continent  to  raise  a  powerful  confederacy  in  their  favour. 
Beside  the  king  of  France,  Philip  count  o^Elajiders,  Matthew 
count  of  Boulogne,  Theobald  count  of  BloisHpR  Henry  count  of 
Eu,  all  declared  themselves  in  their  interests;  William,  king  of 
Scotland,  also  made  one  of  this  association ;  and  a  plan  was  con- 
certed for  a  general  invasion  of  Henry's  extensive  dominions. 
This  was  shortly  after  put  into  execution.  The  king's  continen- 
tal dominions  were  invaded  on  one  side  by  the  counts  of  Flanders 
and  Boulogne  ;  on  the  other  by  the  king  of  France  with  a  large 
army,  which  the  young  English  princes  animated  by  their  pres- 
P  ence  and  popularity.     But  Henry  found  mean&  to  op- 

'-  *-'  pose  them  on  every  quarter ;  the  count  of  Boulogne 
being  mortally  wounded  in  the  assault  of  the  town  of  Driencourt, 
his  death  stopped  the  progress  of  tlie  Flemish  arms  on  that  side. 
The  French  army  being  obliged  to  retire  from  the  siege  of  Ver- 
neuil,  Henry  attacked  their  rear,  put  them  to  the  rout,  and  took 
several  prisoners.  The  barons  of  Bretagne  also,  who  had  risen 
in  favour  of  the  young  princes,  shared  no  better  fate  ;  their  army 
was  defeated  in  the  field,  and,  taking  shelter  in  the  town  of  Dol, 
were  there  made  prisoners  of  war.  These  successes  repressed 
the  pride  and  the  expectations  of  the  confederated  forces ;  and  a 
conference  was  demanded  by  the  French  king,  to  which  Henry 
readily  agreed.  In  this  interview,  he  had  the  mortification  to  see 
llis  three  sons  ranged  on  the  side  of  his  mortal  and  inveterate 
enemy ;  but  he  was  still  more  disappointed  to  find  that  their  de- 
mands rose  with  their  incapacity  to  obtain  them  by  compulsion. 

"While  Henry  was  thus  quelling  the  insolence  of  his  foreign  en- 
emies, his  English  subjects  were  in  no  small  danger  of  revolting 
from  their  obedience  at  home.  The  nobility  were  in  general 
united  to  oppose  him ;  and  an  irruption  at  this  time  by  the  king 
of  Scotland,  assisted  their  schemes  of  insurrection.  The  earl  of 
Leicester,  at  the  head  of  a  body  of  Flemings,  invaded  SuiFolk,  but 
was  repulsed  with  great  slaughter.  The  earl  of  Ferrars,  Roger 
de  Mowbray,  and  many  others  of  equal  dignity,  rose  in  arms ; 
while  the  more  to  augment  the  confusion,  the  king  of  Scotland 


HENRY  If.  139 

broke  into  the  northern  provinces  with  an  army  of  eighty  thousand 
men,  which  laid  the  whole  country  into  one  extensive  scene  of 
desolation.  Henry,  from  baffling  his  enemies  in  France,  flew 
over  to  oppose  those  in  England ;  but  his  long  dissension  with 
Becket  still  was  remeiiibered  against  him,  and  it  was  his  interest 
to  persuade  the;«|M[|W'  as  well  as  the  people,  that  he  was  no  way 
accessary  to  his^^Ber.  Ail  the  world  now  began  to  think  the 
dead  prelate  a  saint ;  and,  if  we  consider  the  ignorance  of  the 
times,  perhaps  Henry  himself  thought  so  too.  He  had  some  time 
before  taken  proper  precautions  to  exculpate  himself  to  the  pope, 
and  given  him  the  most  solemn  promises  to  perform  whatever  pe- 
nances the  church  should  inflict.  He  had  engaged  on  the  Christ- 
mas following  to  take  the  cross ;  and,  if  the  pope  insisted  on  it, 
to  serve  three  years  against  the  infidels,  either  in  Spain  or  Pales- 
tine ;  and  promised  not  to  stop  appeals  to  the  holy  see.  These 
concessions  seemed  to  satisfy  the  court  of  Rome  for  that  time  5 
but  they  were  nevertheless,  every  day,  putting  Henry  in  mind  of 
his  promise,  and  demanding  those  humiliations,  for  his  offences  to 
the  saint,  that  could  alone  reconcile  him  to  the  church.  He  now 
therefore  found  it  the  most  proper  conjuncture  to  obey  :  and, 
knowing  the  influence  of  superstition  over  the  minds  of  the  peo- 
ple, and  perhaps  apprehensive  that  a  part  of  his  troubles  arose 
from  the  displeasure  of  Heaven,  he  resolved  to  do  penance  at  the 
shrine *of  St.  Thomas  of  Canterbury,  for  that  was  the  name  given 
to  Becket  upon  his  canonization.  As  soon  as  he  came  within 
-sight  of  the  church  of  Canterbury,  alighting  from  his  horse,  he 
walked  barefoot  towards  the  town,  prostrated  himself  before  the 
shrine  of  the  saint,  remained  in  fasting  and  prayer  a  whole  day, 
watched  all  night  the  holy  relics,  made  a  grant  of  fifty  pounds  a 
year  to  the  convent  for  a  constant  supply  of  tapers  to  illuminate 
the  shrine ;  and,  not  satisfied  with  these  submissions,  he  assem- 
bled a  chapter  of  monks,  disrobed  before  them,  put  a  scourge  of 
discipline  into  each  of  their  hands,  and  presented  his  bare  shoul- 
ders to  their  infliction.  Next  day  he  received  absolution  ;  and 
departing  for  London,  received  the  agi-eeable  news  of  a  victory 
over  the  Scots,  obtained  on  the  very  day  of  his  absolution. 

Having  thus  made  his  peace  with  the  church,  and  brought  over 
the  minds  of  the  people,  he  fought  upon  surer  grounds :  every 
victory  he  obtained  was  imputed  to  the  favour  of  th.e  reconciled 


HO  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

saint,  and  every  success  thus  tended  to  ascertain  the  growing 
confidence  of  his  party.  The  victory  which  was  gained  over  the 
Scots  was  signal  and  decisive.  William,  their  king,  after  having 
committed  the  most  horrible  depredations  upon  the  northern  fron- 
tiers, had  thought  proper  to  retreat,  upon  the  advance  of  an  En- 
glish army,  commanded  by  Ralph  de  Glanvi]jM|j«  famous  English 
lawyer.  As  he  liad  fixed  his  station  at  Ali«P^  he  thought  him- 
self perfectly  secure,  from  the  remoteness  o^he  enemy,  against 
any  attack.  In  this,  however,  he  was  deceived ;  for  Glanville, 
informed  of  his  situation,  made  a  hasty  and  fatiguing  march  to  the 
place  of  his  encampment,  and  approached  it  very  nearly  during 
the  obscurity  of  a  mist.  The  Scotch,  who  continued  in  perfect 
security,  were  surprised  in  the  morning  to  find  themselves  attack- 
ed by  the  enemy,  which  they  thought  at  such  a  distance;  and 
their  king  venturing  with  a  small  body  of  a  hundred  horse  to  op- 
pose the  assailants,  was  quickly  surrounded,  and  taken  prisoner. 
His  troops  hearing  of  his  disaster,  fled  on  all  sides  with  the  utmost 
precipitation,  and  made  the  best  of  their  way  to  their  own  country. 

From  that  time  Henry's  aiFairs  began  to  wear  a  better  aspect ; 
the  barons,  who  had  revolted,  or  were  preparing  for  a  revolt,  made 
instant  submission  ;  they  delivered  up  their  castles  to  the  victor, 
and  England  in  a  few  weeks  was  restored  to  perfect  tranquillity. 
Young  Henry,  who  was  ready  to  embark  with  a  large  army,  t» 
Second  the  efforts  of  the  English  insurgents,  finding  all  disturb- 
ances quieted  at  home,  abandoned  all  thoughts  of  the  expedition. 
Lewis  attempted  in  vain  to  besiege  Rouen,  which  Henry  hastened 
over  to  succour.  A  cessation  of  arms,  and  a  conference  was 
once  more  agreed  upon  by  the  two  monarchs.  Henry  grant<;d 
his  sons  much  less  advantageous  terms  than  they  formerly  refused 
to  accept ;  the  most  material  were  some  pensions  for  their  sup- 
port, some  castles  for  their  residence,  and  an  indemnity  to  all 
their  adherents.  Thus  England  once  more  emerged  from  the 
numerous  calamities  that  threatened  to  overwhelm  it,  and  the 
king  was  left  at  free  liberty  to  make  various  provisions  for  the 
glory,  the  liappiness,  and  the  security  of  his  people. 

His  first  care  was  to  make  his  prisoner,  the  king  of  Scots,  un- 
dergo a  proper  punishment  for  his  unmerited  and  ungenerous  at- 
tack. That  prince  was  obliged  to  sign  a  treaty,  by  which  he  was 
compelled  to  do  homage  to  Henry  for  his  dominions  in  Scotland. 


HENRY  II.  141 

It  was  agreed,  that  his  barons  and  bishops  also  should  do  the  same ; 
and  that  the  fortresses  of  Edinburgh,  Stirling,  Berwick,  Roxbo- 
rough,  and  Jedborough,  should  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the 
conqueror  till  the  articles  were  performed.  This  treaty  was 
punctually  and  rigorously  executed :  the  king,  barons,  and  pre- 
lates of  Scotland,  did  homage  to  Henry  in  the  cathedral  of  York : 
so  that  he  might  rroBpbe  considered  as  monarch  of  the  whole  isl- 
and, the  mountainous  parts  of  Wales  only  excepted. 

His  domestic  regulations  were  as  wise  as  his  political  conduct 
was  splendid.  He  enacted  severe  penalties  against  robbery?^ 
murder,  false  coining,  and  burning  of  houses  ;  ordaining  that 
these  crimes  should  be  punished  by  the  amputation  of  the  right 
hand  and  right  foot.  The  ordeal  trial  by  the  water,  though  it 
still  subsisted,  was  yet  so  far  weakened,  as  that  if  a  person  who 
came  oflf  in  this  scrutiny  were  legally  convicted  by  creditable 
testimony,  he  should  nevertheless  suffer  banishment.  He  par- 
titioned out  the  kingdom  into  four  divisions ;  and  appointed  itin- 
erant justices  to  go  their  respective  circuits  to  tiy  causes,  to 
restrain  the  cx'uelties  of  their  barons,  and  to  protect  the  lower 
ranks  of  the  people  in  security.  He  renewed  the  trial  by  juries, 
which,  by  the  barbarous  method  of  camp-fight,  was  almost  grown 
obsolete.  He  demolished  all  the  new  erected  castles  that  had 
been  built  in  the  times  of  anarchy  and  general  confusion ;  and, 
to  secure  the  kingdom  more  effectually  against  any  threatened 
invasion,  he  established  a  well-armed  militia,  which  with  proper 
accoutrements,  specified  in  the  act,  were  to  defend  the  realm 
upon  any  emergency. 

But  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  wisdom  to  conciliate  the  turbu- 
lent and  ambitious  spirits  of  his  sons,  who,  not  contented  with 
rebelling  against  their  father,  now  warmly  prosecuted  their  enmi- 
ties against  each  other.  Richard,  whom  Henry  had  made  master 
of  Guienne,  and  who  had  already  displayed  great  marks  r^  ^  n/^  -i 
of  valour  in  humbling  his  mutinous  barons,  refused  to 
obey  his  father's  orders  in  doing  homage  to  his  elder  brother  for 
that  duchy.  Young  Henry  and  Geoffrey,  uniting  their  arms, 
cari'ied  war  into  their  brother's  dominions  ;  and  while  the  king 
'^was  endeavouring  to  compose  their  differences,  he  found  himself 
secretly  conspired  against  by  all.  What  the  result  of  this  con- 
spiracy might  be,  is  uncertain  ;  for  it  was  defeated  by  the  death 


143  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

of  young  Henrj,  who  died  in  the  twenty -sixth  year  of  his  age, 
of  a  fever,  at  Martel,  not  without  the  deepest  remorse  for  his 
tindutiful  conduct  towards  his  father. 

H^ ..  „(,  -,  As  this  prince  left  no  posterity,  Richard  was  become 
heir  in  his  room ;  and  he  sopn  discovered  the  same  ar- 
dent ambition  that  had  misled  his  elder  brotiier.  He  refused  to 
obey  his  father's  commands  in  giving  up  GJRnne,  which  he  had 
been  put  in  possession  of;  and  even  made  preparations  to  attack 
his  brother  Geoffrey,  who  was  possessed  of  Bretagne.  No  sooner 
was  this  breach  made  up,  at  the  intercession  of  the  queen,  than 
Geoffrey  broke  out  into  violence,  and  demanded  Anjou  to  be 
annexed  to  his  dominions  of  Bretao-ne.  This  bein";  refused  him, 
he  followed  the  old  undutiful  method  of  procuring  redress,  fled 
to  the  court  of  France,  and  prepared  to  levy  an  army  against  his 
father.  Henry  was  freed  from  the  danger  that  threatened  him 
on  that  quarter,  by  the  affliction  of  his  son's  death,  who  was 
killed  in  a  tournament  at  Paiis.  The.  loss  of  this  prince  gave 
few,  except  the  king  himself,  any  uneasiness,  as  he  was  univer- 
sally hated,  and  went  among  the  people  under  the  opprobrious 
name  of  The  Child  of  Perdition. 

But  the  death  of  the  prince  did  not  wholly  remove  the  cause  of 
his  revolt  5  for  Philip,  the  king  of  France,  disputed  his  title  to  the 
wardship  of  Arthur,  the  son  of  Geoffrey,  who  was  now  become 
duke  of  Bretagne,  upon  the  death  of  his  father.  Some  other 
causes  of  dissension  inflamed  the  dispute  between  the  two  mon- 
archs.  Philip  had  once  more  debauched  Richard  front  his  duty ; 
and  insisted  upon  his  marriage  being  completed  with  Adelais, 
the  sister  of  France :  and  threatened  to  enforce  his  pretensions 
by  a  formidable  invasion.  In  consequence  of  this  claini,  another 
conference  was  held  between  Gisors  and  Trie,  the  usual  place  of 
meeting,  under  a  vast  elm,  that  is  said  to  have  shaded  more  than 
an  acre.  It  was  in  the  midst  of  this  conference  upon  their  mutual 
rights,  that  a  new  object  of  interest  was  offered  to  their  delibera- 
tion, and  that  quickly  bore  down  all  secular  considerations  before 
it.  The  archbishop  of  Tyre  appeared  before  the  assembly  in  the 
most  miserable  habit,  and  with  looks  calculated  to  inspire  com- 
passion. He  had  come  from  the  Holy  Land,  and  had  seen  the 
oppressions  of  the  Christians,  who  were  appointed  to  defend  the 
Holy  Sepulchre,  and  was  a  witness  of  the  triumph  of  the  infidels. 


HENRY  ir.  143 

He  painted  the  distresses  of  those  champions  of  the  cross  in  the 
most  pathetic  manner ;  he  deplored  their  bravery  and  their  mis- 
fortunes. The  Christians,  about  a  century  before,  had  attacked 
and  taken  Jerusalem  |  but  the  Saracens  recovered  courage  after 
the  first  torrent  of  success  was  past,  and  being  every  day  rein-r 
forced  by  fresh  supplies,  at  last  conquered  by  perseverance  » 
land  of  M'arriors,  w^,  in  common,  preferring  celibacy  to  marri-r 
age,  had  not  multiplied  in  the  osdinary  methods  of  population. 
The  holy  city  itself  was  soon  retaken  by  the  victorious  arms  of 
Saladin  ;  and  all  Palestine,  except  a  few  maritime  towns,  was 
entirely  subdued.  Nothing  now  remained  of  those  boasted  con- 
quests that  had  raised  the  glory,  and  inflamed  the  zeal  of  the 
western  world ;  and  nothing  was  to  be  seen,  of  what  near  a  cen- 
tury before  had  employed  the  efforts  of  all  the  noblest  spirits  of 
Europe  to  acquire.  The  western  Christians  were  astonished  at 
receiving  this  dismal  intelligence ;  the  whole  audience  burst  into 
tears ;  the  two  kings  laid  aside  their  animosity,  and  agreed  to 
convert  their  whole  attention  to  the  rescuing  Jerusalem  from  the 
hands  of  the  infidels.  They  instantly  therefore  took  the  cross  5 
many  of  their  most  considerable  vassals  imitated  their  example  ; 
and  as  the  emperor  Frederick  I.  entered  into  the  same  confed^ 
eracy,  it  was  universally  expected  that  nothing  could  resist  their 
united  endeavours.  But  it  was  the  fate  of  Henry  to  be  crossed 
in  his  most  darling  pursuits  by  his  undutiful  and  ungrateful  chil- 
dren. 

Richard,  who  had  long  wished  to  have  all  the  glory  of  such  aft 
expedition  to  himself,  and  who  could  not  bear  to  have  even  his- 
father  a  partner  in  his  victories,  entered  into  a  confederacy  with 
the  king  of  France,  who  promised  to  confirm  him  in  those  wishes 
at  which  he  so  ardently  aspired.  He  therefore  began  by  making 
an  inroad  into  the  territories  of  the  count  of  Thoulouse,  a  vassal 
of  the  king  of  France :  and  this  monarch,  in  order  to  retaliate, 
carried  war  into  the  provinces  of  Berri  and  Auvergne.  Henry, 
who  was  apprised  of  their  secret  confederacy,  nevertheless  at- 
tempted to  make  depredations  in  turn  upon  the  dominions  of  the 
French  king.  Conferences  were  proposed,  attended,  and  dis- 
missed. At  length,  Henry  found  himself  obliged  to  give  up  all 
hopes  of  taking  the  cross,  and  compelled  to  enter  upon  a  war 
■with  France  and  his  eldest  son,  who-  were  unnaturally  leaguett 


144  HISTORY  01'  ENGLAND. 

against  him.  He  noAv  saw  the  confederacy  daily  gaining  ground. 
Ferte-Bernai'd  fell  first  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy ;  Mans  was 
next  taken  by  assault  j  Amboise,  Chaumont,  and  Chateau  de  Loire, 
opened  their  gates  upon  the  enemy's  appearance ;  Tours  was 
invested ;  and  the  king,  who  had  retired  to  Saumur,  and  had 
daily  instances  of  the  cowardice  and  infidelity  of  his  governors, 
expected  the  most  dismal  issue  of  all  his  enterprises.  While  he 
was  in  this  state  of  despondency,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  the 
count  of  Flanders,  and  archbishop  of  Rheims,  interposed  their 
good  offices ;  and  at  last  a  treaty  was  concluded,  in  which  he 
submitted  to  many  mortifying  concessions.  It  was  agreed  that 
Richard  should  marry  the  princess  Adelais,  and  be  crowned  king 
of  England  during  the  life -time  of  his  father.  It  was  stipulated, 
that  Henry  should  pay  twenty  thousand  marks  to  the  king  of 
France,  as  a  compensation  for  the  charges  of  the  war^  that  his 
own  barons  should  engage  to  make  him  observe  this  treaty ;  and 
in  case  of  violating  it,  to  join  Philip  and  Richard  against  him; 
and  that  all  his  vassals  who  espoused  the  cause  of  Richard  should 
receive  an  indemnity  for  the  offence.  These  were  terms  suffi- 
ciently humiliating  to  a  prince  accustomed  to  give,  not  receive, 
commands  :  but  v/hat  was  his  resentment,  when,  upon  demanding 
a  list  of  the  barons  that  were  to  be  thus  pardoned,  he  found  his 
son  John,  his  favourite  child,  among  the  number.  He  had  long 
borne  an  infirm  state  of  body  Avith  calm  resignation ;  he  had  seen 
his  children  rebel  without  much  emotion  ;  he  saw  his  own  son  his 
conqueror,  himself  bereft  of  his  poAver,  reduced  to  the  condition 
of  a  fugitive,  and  almost  suppliant  in  his  old  age ;  and  all  this  he 
endured  with  tranquillity  of  temper ; — but  when  he  saw  that  child, 
whose  interests  always  lay  next  his  heart,  among  the  number  of 
those  who  were  in  rebellion  against  him,  he  could  no  longer  con- 
tain his  indignation.  He  broke  out  into  expressions  of  the  ut- 
most despair  j  cursed  the  day  in  which  he  had  received  his  inis- 
erable  being ;  and  bestowed  on  his  ungrateful  children  a  male- 
diction which  he  never  after  could  be  prevailed  upon  to  retract. 
The  more  his  heart  was  disposed  to  friendship  and  affection,  the 
more  he  resented  this  barbarous  return ;  and  now,  not  having 
one  corner  in  his  heart  where  he  could  look  for  comfort,  or  fly 
for  refuge  from  his  conflicting  passions,  he  lost  all  his  former  vi- 
vacity.   A  lingering  fever,  caused  by  a  broken  heart,  soon  after 


HENRY  II.  145 

terminated  his  life  and  his  miseries.  He  died  at  the  castle  of 
Chinon,  near  Saumur. 

His  corpse  was  conveyed  by  his  natural  son  GeoiFrey,  who  of 
all  his  children  behaved  with  duty,  to  the  nunnery  of  Fontevrault ; 
and  next  day,  while  it  lay  in  the  abbey  church,  Richard  chancing 
to  enter,  was  struck  with  horror  at  the  sight.  At  his  approach 
the  blood  was  seen  to  gush  out  at  the  mouth  and  nostrils  of  the 
corpse ;  and  this,  which,  without  doubt,  was  accidental,  was  in^* 
terpreted  by  the  superstition  of  the  times  as  the  most  dreadful 
rebuke  :  Richard  could  not  endure  the  sight;  he  exclaimed,  "that 
he  was  his  father's  murderer;"  and  expressed  a  strong,  though 
late,  sense  of  that  undutiful  conduct  which  brought  his  parent  to' 
an  untimely  grave. 

Thus  died  Henry,  in  the  fifty-eighth  year  of  his  age,  p. .  „„  ^ 
and  the  thirty -fifth  of  liis  reign  ;  in  the  course  of  which  >-  '-^ 
he  displayed  all  the  abilities  of  a  politician,  all  the  sagacity  of  a 
legislator,  and  all  the  magnanimity  of  a  hero.  He  was  of  a  mid-^ 
die  stature,  strong  and  well  proportioned  ;  his  countenance  was 
lively  and  engaging ;  his  conversation  affable  and  entertaining  j 
his  elocution  easy,  persuasive,  and  ever  at  command..  When  he 
could  enjoy  leisure,  he  recreated  himself  either  in  learned  con- 
versation or  reading,  and  he  cultivated  his  natural  talents  by 
study  above  any  prince  of  his  time.  During  his  reign  all  foreign 
improvements  in  literature  and  politeness,  in  laws  and  arts,  seem 
to  have  been,  in  a  good  measure,  transplanted  into  England.  The 
little  learning  of  the  Saxon  priests,  which  was  confined  to  church 
history  and  legendary  tales,  was  now  exchanged  for  the  subtleties 
of  school  philosophy.  The  homely  manners  of  the  great  were 
softened  by  the  pomps  of  chivalry.  The  people,  hoAvever,  were 
as  yet  far  from  being  civilized  ;  and  even  in  their  cities,  where 
the  social  arts  were  best  cultivated,  there  were  amazing  instances 
of  barbarity.  It  was  common,  for  instance,  in  London,  for  great- 
numbers,  to  the  amount  of  a  hundred,  or  more,  of  the  sons  and  re- 
lations of  eminent  citizens,  to  form  themselves  into  a  confederacy 
to  plunder  and  rob  their  more  wealthy  neighbours.  By  these 
crimes  it  was  become  so  dangerous  to  walk  the  streets  at  night, 
that  the  citizens,  after  dark,  were  obliged  to  continue  within 
doors.  A  b'and  of  these  ruffians  had  one  day  attacked  the  house 
of  a  rich  citizen,  with  an  intention  to  plunder  it.     They  had  al- 

VOL,  I.  19 


145  lllSTOKY  OF  ENGLAND, 

ready  broke  through  a  stone-Avall  with  hammers  and  wedges,  amJ 
were  actually  entering  the  house  sword  in  hand,  when  the  citizen, 
in  complete  armour,  supported  by  his  servant,  appeared  in  the 
passage  to  oppose  them.  He  cut  off  the  right  hand  of  the  first 
robber  that  entered ;  and  made  such  a  noble  resistance,  that  his 
neighbours  had  time  to  assemble  and  come  to  his  relief.  The 
man  who  lost  his  hand  was  caught ;  and  was  tempted,  by  the 
promise  of  a  pardan,  to  reveal  his  confederates,  among  whom  was 
one  John  Senex,  esteemed  among  the  richest  and  the  best  born 
citizens  of  London.  He  was  convicted  by  the  ordeal  trial ;  and 
though  he  oiFered  five  hundred  marks  for  his  life,  the  king  refused 
the  money,  and  ordered  liim  to  be  hanged. 

Henry  left  only  two  legitimate  sons,  Richai-d,  who  succeeded 
him,  and  John,  who  inherited  no  territory,  and  therefore  received 
the  surname  of  Lackland.  He  left  three  legitimate  daughters, 
Maud,  who  was  married  to  the  duke  of  Saxony,  Eleanor,  married 
to  Alphonso  king  of  Castile,  and  Joan,  to  William,  king  of  Sicily. 
He  left  two  natural  sons  by  Rosamond ;  Richard  Longsword, 
who  was  afterwards  married  to  the  daughter  and  heiress  of  the 
earl  of  Salisbury  j  and  Geoftrey,  who  was  afterwards  archbishop 
of  York. 


CHAP.  X. 
RICHARD  I.  SURNAMED  CffiUR  DE  LIDS. 

xiicHARD,  who  succeeded  to  the  throne  without  opposition, 
seemed  resolved  to  discourage  future  disobedience,  by  dismissing 
from  his  service  all  those  who  had  assisted  him  in  his  former  un- 
dutiful  conduct.  Those  who  had  seconded  his  rebellion,  instead 
of  meeting  with  that  trust  and  honour  which  they  expected,  were 
treated  with  scorn  and  neglect.  He  retained  in  his  service  all 
the  loyal  adherents  of  the  late  king 5  and  more  than  once  observ^ 
ed,  that  those  who  were  faithful  to  one  sovereign  would  probably 
continue  so  to  another.  He  instantly,  upon  his  accession,  re- 
leased his  mother  from  confinement ;  and  was  profuse  in  heaping 
favours  upon  his  brother  John,  who  afterwards  made  but  a  very 
indifferent  return  for  his  indulgence. 


RICHARD  I.  147 

But  the  king  was  no  way  suspicious  in  his  temper .;  nor  did  he 
give  much  attention  to  his  own  security,  being  more  earnestly  so- 
licitous of  fame.  A  romantic  desire  for  strange  adventures,  and 
an  immoderate  zeal  for  the  external  rites  of  Christianity,  were 
the  ruling  passions  of  the  times.  By  these  alone  glory  was  to  be 
acquired ;  and  by  these  Richard  only  hoped  for  glory.  The 
Jews,  who  had  been  for  some  time  increasing  in  the  kingdom, 
were  the  first  who  fell  a  sacrifice  to  the  enthusiastic  zeal  of  the 
people  ;  and  great  numbers  of  them  were  slaughtered  by  the  citi- 
zens of  London,  upon  the  very  day  of  the  king's  coronation. 
Five  hundred  of  that  infatuated  people  had  retired  into  York 
Castle  for  safety ;  but  finding  themselves  unable  to  defend  the 
place,  they  resolved  to  perish  by  killing  one  another,  rather  than 
meet  the  fury  of  their  persecutors.  Having  taken  this  gloomy 
resolution,  they  first  murdered  their  wives  and  children ;  next 
threw  the  dead  bodies  over  the  wall  against  their  enemies,  who 
attempted  to  scale  it ;  and  then  setting  fire  to  the  houses,  per- 
ished in  the  flames. 

This  hoiTid  massacre,  which  was  in  itself  so  impolitic  and  un- 
just, instead  of  tarnishing  the  lustre  of  this  monarch's  reign,  was 
then  considered  as  a  most  splendid  commencement  of  his  govei'n- 
ment ;  and  the  people  were  fronr  thence  led  to  form  the  most  fa- 
vourable sentiments  of  his  future  glory.  Nor  was  it  long  before 
he  showed  himself  perfectly  fitted  to  gratify  their  most  romantic 
desires.  Perhaps  impelled  more  by  a  love  of  military  glory  than 
actuated  by  superstition,  he  resolved  upon  an  expedition  to  the 
Holy  Land,  and  took  every  method  to  raise  money  for  so  expen- 
sive an  undertaking.  His  father  had  left  him  a  treasure  of  above 
a  hundred  thousand  marks ;  and  this  sum  he  endeavoured  to  au*- 
ment  by  all  expedients,  however  pernicious  to  the  public,  or  dan- 
gerous to  royal  authority.  He  set  up  to  sale  the  revenues  and 
manors  of  the  crown,  and  several  offices  of  the  greatest  trust  and 
ower.  Liberties,  charters,  castles,  and  employments,  were  given 
0  the  best  bidders.  When  some  of  his  friends  suggested  the 
danger  attending  this  venality,  he  told  them  he  would  sell  the 
city  of  London  itself,  if  he  could  procure  a  purchaser.  In  these 
times  we  find  but  one  man  who  was  honest  enough  to  retire  from 
employment  when  places  were  become  thus  ignominious.  This 
was  the  great  laAvyer  Glanville,  who  resigned  his  post  of  justicia- 


J 48  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

rj,  and  took  the  cross.  Richard  was  not  much  displeased  at  his 
resignation,  as  he  was  able  shortly  after  to  sell  his  employment 
to  Hugh,  bishop  of  Durham,  who  gave  a  thousand  mai-ks  for  the 
office.  Thus  the  king,  elated  with  the  hopes  of  fame,  was  blind 
to  every  other  consideration.  Numerous  exactions  were  practised 
upon  people  of  all  ranks  and  stations  ;  menaces,  promises,  expos- 
tulations, were  used  to  frighten  the  timid,  or  allure  the  avari- 
cious. A  zealous  preacher  of  those  times  was  so  far  emboldened 
as  to  remonstrate  against  the  king's  conduct ;  and  advised  him  to 
part  with  his  three  daughters,  which  were  Pride,  Avarice,  and 
Sensuality.  To  this  Richard  readily  replied,  "  You  counsel  I'ight, 
"  my  friend ;  and  I  have  already  proxdded  husbands  for  them  all. 
'«  I  will  dispose  of  my  Pride  to  the  Templars  ;  my  Avarice  to  the  , 
•^^  Monks ;  and  as  for  my  Sensuality,  the  Clergy  shall  share  that 
^'  among  them."  At  length,  the  king  having  got  together  a  suf- 
ficient supply  for  his  undertaking,  and  having  even  sold  his  su- 
periority over  the  kingdom  of  Scotland,  which  had  been  acquired 
in  the  last  reign,  for  a  moderate  sum,  he  set  out  for  the  Holy 
Land,  whither  he  was  impelled  by  repeated  messages  from  the 
king  of  France,  who  was  ready  to  embark  in  the  same  enterprise. 

The  first  place  of  rendezvous  for  the  two  armies  of  England 
and  France  was  the  plain  of  Vezelay,  on  the  borders  of  Burgun- 
dy, where,  when  Richard  and  Philip  arrived,  they  found  their  ar- 
mies amounting  to  a  hundred  thousand  fighting  men.  These 
were  all  ardent  in  the  cause ;  the  flower  of  all  the  military  in 
both  dominions,  and  provided  with  all  the  implements  and  accou- 
trements of  war.  Here  the  French  prince  and  the  English  enter- 
ed into  the  most  solemn  engagements  of  mutual  support ;  and 
having  determined  to  conduct  their  armies  to  the  Holy  Land  by 
sea,  they  parted,  one  for  Genoa,  the  other  for  Marseilles,  with  a 
view  of  meeting  the  fleets  that  were  to  attend  them  at  their  rer 
spective  stations.  It  was  not  long  after  that  both  fleets  put  to 
sea;  and  nearly  about  the  same  time  were  obliged,  by  stress  q|| 
weather,  to  take  shelter  in  Messina,  the  capital  of  Sicily,  whereB| 
they  were  detained  during  the  whole  winter.  Richard  took  up 
his  quarters  in  the  suburbs,  and  possessed  himself  of  a  small  fort, 
which  commanded  the  harbour.  Philip  quartered  his  troops  iu 
the  town,  and  lived  upon  good  terms  with  the  Sicilian  king. 

It  is  now  unknown  what  gave  rise  to  a  quarrel,  which  happened 


RICHARD  T.  149 

soon  after,  between  the  Sicilians  and  the  English;  it  is  doubtful 
whether  the  intrigues  of  the  French  king,  or  the  violent  proceed- 
ings of  Richard.  Certain  it  is,  that  the  Messinese  soon  took  oc- 
casion to  treat  the  English  with  great  insolence  ;  shut  their  gates, 
manned  their  walls,  and  set  Richard  at  defiance.  Richard,  who 
had  hitherto  acted  as  a  fi'iend,  endeavoured  to  use  the  mediation 
of  Philip  to  compromise  this  quarrel ;  but  while  the  two  monarchs 
were  yet  in  deliberation,  a  body  of  Sicilians  issued  from  the  town, 
and  attacked  the  Englisli  witli  great  impetuosity.  This  insult 
was  sufficient  to  excite  the  fury  of  Richard,  who,  naturally  bold, 
and  conscious  of  his  own  superior  force,  assaulted  the  city  with 
such  fury,  tliat  it  was  soon  taken,  and  the  standard  of  England 
displayed  on  the  ramparts.  Philip,  who  considered  the  place  as 
his  quarters,  exclaimed  against  the  insult,  and  ordered  some  of  his 
troops  to  pull  down  that  mark  of  his  disgrace.  To  this,  however, 
Richard  returned  for  answer,  that  he  was  willing  to  take  down 
the  standard,  since  it  displeased  his  associate,  but  that  no  power 
on  earth  should  compel  him  to  do  so.  This  was  sufficient  to  pro- 
duce a  mutual  jealousy  between  these  two  princes,  which  never 
after  subsided ;  but  which  was  still  more  inflamed  by  the  opposi- 
tion of  their  tempers. 

Many  were  the  mistrusts  and  the  mutual  reconciliations  be- 
tween these  two  monarchs,  which  were  very  probably  inflamed 
by  the  Sicilian  king's  endeavours.  At  length,  however,  having 
settled  all  controversies,  they  set  sail  for  the  Holy  Land,  where 
the  French  arrived  long  before  the  English.  The  little  knowl- 
edge that  was  then  had  of  the  art  of  sailing,  made  that  passage  by 
sea  very  long  and  dangerous,  which  is  now  considered  as  so  tri- 
fling. Richard's  fleet  was  once  more  encountered  by  a  tempest, 
and  two  of  the  ships  driven  upon  the  coast  of  the  island  of  Cy- 
prus. Isaac,  who  was  then  prince  of  that  country,  either  impelled 
by  avarice,  or  veiling  to  discourage  the  rest  of  Richard's  fleet 
from  landing,  pillaged  the  ships  that  were  stranded,  and  threw 
trnie  seamen  and  soldiers  into  prison.  But  Richard,  who  soon  af- 
ter arrived,  took  ample  vengeance  for  that  injury.  He  disem- 
barked his  troops,  defeated  the  tyrant,  entered  the  capital  by 
storm,  obliged  Isaac  to  surrender  at  discretion,  and  took  the  isl- 
and into  his  own  possession.  It  was  there  that  Richard  married 
Berengaria,  daughter  to  the  king  of  Navarre,  who  had  attended 


150  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

him  in  his  expedition ;  and  whom  he  had  preferred  to  Adelais, 
the  king  of  France's  sister,  whose  charms  were  not  so  powerful, 
or  whose  fidelity  was  more  suspected. 

Upon  the  anival  of  the  English  army  in  Palestine,  fortune  was 
seen  to  declare  more  openly  in  favour  of  the  common  cause. 
The  French  and  English  princes  seemed  to  forget  their  secret 
jealousies,  and  act  in  concert.  In  besieging  the  city  of  Acre, 
while  the  one  made  the  attack  the  other  guarded  the  trenches  ; 
and  this  duty  they  performed  each  day  alternately.  By  this  con- 
duct, that  garrison,  after  a  long  and  obstinate  resistance,  was 
obliged  to  capitulate ;  and  upon  condition  of  having  their  lives 
spared,  they  promised  to  restore  all  the  prisoners  that  had  been 
made  by  the  Saracens,  and  to  deliver  up  the  wood  of  the  true 
cross.  Such  were  the  amazing  advantages  that  attended  an  en- 
terprise that  had  laid  Asia  in  blood,  and  had,  in  a  great  measure, 
depopulated  Europe  of  its  bravest  forces. 

Immediately  after  the  conquest  of  this  place,  Philip, 
-  ■-'  either  disgusted  at  the  ascendant  assumed  by  Richard, 
or  perhaps  displeased  at  his  superior  popularity,  declared  his  res- 
olution of  returning  to  France.  He  pleaded  the  bad  state  of  his 
health  in  excuse  for  his  desertion  ^  and,  to  give  a  colour  to  his 
friendly  professions,  he  left  Richai'd  ten  thousand  of  his  troops, 
under  the  command  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy.  Richai'd,  being 
now  left  sole  conductor  of  the  war,  went  on  from  victory  to  vic- 
tory. The  Christian  adventurers,  under  his  command,  deter- 
mined to  besiege  the  renowned  city  of  Ascalon,  in  order  to  pre- 
pare the  way  for  attacking  Jerusalem  with  greater  advantage. 
Saladin,  the  most  renowned  of  all  the  Saracen  monarchs,  was  re- 
solved to  dispute  their  march,  and  placed  himself  upon  the  road 
with  an  army  of  three  hundred  thousand  men.  This  was  a  day 
equal  to  Richard's  wishes  ;  this  an  enemy  worthy  his  highest  am- 
bition. The  English  were  victorious.  Richard,  when  the  wings 
of  his  army  were  defeated,  led  on  the  main  body  in  person,  a; 
restored  the  battle.  The  Saracens  fled  in  the  utmost  confusio 
and  no  less  than  forty  thousand  of  their  number  perished  on  th 
field  of  battle.  Ascalon  soon  surrendered  after  this  victory ; 
other  cities  of  less  note  followed  the  example ;  and  Richard  was 
at  last  able  to  advance  within  sight  of  Jerusalem,  the  object  of 
Ills  long  and  ardent  expectations.    But,  just  at  tlus  glorious  June- 


's^' 

;hr 


RICHARD  I.  151 

ture,  his  ambition  was  to  suflFer  a  total  overthrow :  upon  review- 
ing his  forces,  and  considering  his  abilities  to  prosecute  the  siege, 
he  found  that  his  army  was  so  wasted  with  famine,  fatigue,  and 
even  with  victory,  that  they  were  neither  able  nor  willing  to  sec- 
ond the  views  of  their  commander.  It  appeared,  therefore,  ab- 
solutely necessary  to  come  to  an  accommodation  with  Saladin  ; 
and  a  truce  for  three  years  was  accordingly  concluded,  in  which 
it  was  agreed,  that  the  sea-port  towns  of  Palestine  should  remain 
in  the  hands  of  the  Christians;  and  that  all  of  that  religion  should 
be  permitted  to  make  their  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem  in  perfect  se- 
curity. 

Richard,   having  thus  concluded  his    expedition,   with  more 
glory  than  advantage,  began  to  think  of  returning  home,  and  of 
enjoying  in  tranquillity  those  honours  which  he  had  reaped  witii 
so  much  danger.     But  he  was  at  a  loss  how  to  proceed.     If  he' 
should  take  shipping,  and  return  by  the  way  he  came,  he  must 
necessarily  put  himself  into  the  power  of  the  king  of  France, 
from  whose  resentment  he  had  every  thing  to  fear.     No  way  was 
left  but  by  going  more  to  the  North  5  wherefore,  taking  shipping 
for  Italy,  he  was  once   more   wrecked,  near  Aquileia.     From: 
thence  directing  his  travels  towards  Ragusa,  and  putting  on  the 
disguise  of  a  pilgrim,  he  resolved  to  make  his  way,  in  that  pri- 
vate manner,  through  Germany.     But,  unfortunately,  his  inten- 
tions and  person  were  not  so  concealed,  but  that  his  quality  was 
suspected ;  and  the  governor  of  Istria  pursued  him,  in  order  to 
make  him  a  prisoner.     Being  thus  forced  from  the  direct  roady 
and  now  become  a  fugitive,  he  was  obliged  to  pass  by  Vienna^ 
where  his  expenses  and  liberalities  betraying  his  dignity,  though 
disguised  in  the  habit  of  a  pilgrim,  he  was  arrested  by  Leopold, 
duke  of  Austria,  who  commanded  him  to  be  imprisoned  and  load- 
ed with  shackles,  to  the  disgrace  of  honour  and  humanity.     This 
prince  had  served  under  Richard  at  the  siege  of  Acre  ;  and  being' 
disgusted  at  some  affront  offered  him  by  his   commander  on  that 
occasion,  he  took  this  base  method  of  retaliating  the  injury.     His 
avarice,  also,  might  have  had  a  share  in  this  procedure,  as  he  ex- 
pected a  large  share  of  that  ransom  which  he  knew  would  be  given 
by  the  English  to  extricate  their  king  from  bondage.     Henry  the 
Sixth,  vt^ho  was  then  emperor  of  Germany,  was  equally  an  enemy 
to  Richard,  on  accoxuit  of  the  alliance  contracted  between  him 


153  HISTORY  Ol-"  ENGLAND. 

and  Tancred  king  of  Sicily,  by  his  marriage  with  Berengaria, 
When,  therefore,  shortly  after,  he  received  the  news  of  Richard's 
being  in  custody,  he  required  the  prisoner  to  be  delivered  up  to 
him,  and  ordered  a  large  sum  of  money  to  the  duke  as  a  reward 
for  this  service.  Thus  the  king  of  England,  who  had  long  filled 
the  world  with  his  fame,  was  basely  thrown  into  a  dungeon,  and 
loaded  with  irons,  by  those  who  expected  to  reap  a  sordid  advan- 
tage from  his  misfortunes.  It  was  a  longtime  before  his  subjects 
in  England  knew  what  was  become  of  their  warlike  monarch.  So 
little  intercourse  was  there  between  different  nations  at  tliattime, 
that  this  discovery  is  said  by  some  to  have  been  made  by  a  poor 
French  minstrel,  who  playing  upon  his  harp,  near  the  fortress  in 
which  Richai'd  was  confined,  a,  tune  whiclihe  knew  that  unhappy 
monarch  was  fond  of,  he  was  answered  by  the  king  from  within, 
who  with  his  harp  played  the  same  tune  ;  and  this  discovered  the 
place  of  his  confinement. 

In  the  mean  time,  while  Richard  was  thus  fruitlessly  victorious, 
and  afterwards  misei-ably  confined,  his  affairs  in  England  were 
in  a  very  unprosperous  situation.  The  kingdom,  as  has  been  be- 
fore observed,  was  put  under  the  government  of  two  prelates,  one 
of  whom  had  bought  his  place,  and  the  other  had  risen  to  it  by  the 
meanest  arts  of  adulation.  The  bishop  of  Durham  was  ignorant 
and  avaricious ;  Lojlgchamp  his  colleague  was  naturally  proud, 
and  still  more  elated  by  the  consciousness  of  possessing  his  mas- 
ter's favour.  Tempers  so  opposite  soon  begat  enmity ;  and 
Longchamp  went  even  so  far  as  to  arrest  the  person  of  his  col- 
league, who  was  obliged  to  resign  his  power  to  obtain  his  liberty. 
It  was  to  no  purpose  that  the  king,  by  his  letters,  commanded 
Longchamp  to  replace  his  co-adjutor ;  this  haughty  prelate  refused 
to  obey,  alleging  that  he  knew  the  king's  secret  intentions  better 
than  to  comply.  He  proceeded,  therefore,  still  to  govern  the 
kingdom  alone ;  and  as  he  knew  his  situation  was  precarious,  he 
increased  the  number  of  his  guard,  without  which  he  never  ven- 
tured from  his  palace.  In  the  universal  disgust  which  so  much 
power  and  magnificence  naturally  produced  against  him,  there 
was  none  in  the  kingdom  hardy  enough  to  control  his  will,  ex- 
cept John,  the  king's  brother,  who,  having  been  personally  dis- 
obliged by  this  prelate,  was  willing  to  catch  the  present  favourable 
occasion  of  universal  discontent,  to  oppose  himself  to  his  power. 


RICHARD  I.  159 

He  accordingly  ventured  to  summon,  at  Reading,  a  general  coun- 
cil of  the  nobility  and  prelates  ;  and  cited  Longchamp  to  appear 
before  them.  Longchamp,  sensible  of  his  own  insolence  and  their 
enmity,  was  unwilling  to  trust  himself  in  their  power,  but  shut 
himself  up  in  the  Tower  of  London.  From  thence  he  fled,  in  the 
disguise  of  a  female  habit,  beyond  sea ;  upon  which  the  archbishop 
of  Rouen  was  made  justiciary  in  his  room.  These  dissensions 
were  soon  known  by  the  king  of  France,  who  was  by  this  time  re- 
turned from  the  Holy  Land.  He  made  all  possible  use  of  Long- 
ehamp's  resentment,  to  divide  the  English  still  more  effectually  5 
and  even  had  almost  prevailed  upon  John  to  throw  off  his  alle- 
giance, by  an  offer  of  putting  him  in  possession  of  all  Richard's 
continental  dominions. 

It  was  in  this  precarious  situation  of  affairs  that  the  English 
were  first  informed  of  the  captivity  of  their  beloved  monarch,  and 
the  base  treatment  he  had  received^  without  even  the  colour  of 
justice  to  gloss  over  the  injury.  The  queen-dowager  was  particu- 
larly enraged  at  the  treatment  of  her  favourite  son.  She  wrote 
reiterated  letters  to  pope  Celestine,  to  excite  his  compassion  or 
his  indignation,  but  all  to  very  little  purpose.  The  people  testi- 
fied their  regard  for  him  with  all  the  marks  of  violence  and  de» 
spair.  -  The  clergy  Considered  him  as  a  sufferer  in  the  cause  of 
the  church ;  and  all  mouths  were  filled  with  the  nobleness  of  his 
actions,  and  the  greatness  of  his  fall;  But  while  these  testified 
the  sincerity  of  their  sorrow,  there  were  some  that  secretly  re- 
joiced in  his  disaster,  and  did  all  they  could  to  prolong  the  term 
of  his  captivity.  Of  this  number  was  the  king  of  France,  his  an- 
tient  enemy,  and  his  own  brother  John,  who,  forgetting  every  tie 
of  kindred,  duty,  or  gratitude,  on  the  first  invitation  from  Philip, 
suddenly  went  abroad,  and  held  a  conference  with  him,  in  which, 
the  perpetual  captivity  of  Richard  was  agreed  upon.  He  stipu- 
lated to  deliver  into  Philip's  hand  a  great  part  of  Normandy  ;  andj 
in  return,  he  i-eceived  the  French  Icing's  assurances  of  being  se- 
cured on  the  English  throne ;  and  some  say  that  he  did  homage 
for  the  crown  of  England.  In  consequence  of  this  treaty,  Philip 
invaded  Normandy,  the  fortresses  of  which  were  delivered  up  to 
him  after  a  colour  of  opposition ;  and  all  but  Rouen  were  subject- 
ed to  this  authority.  John,  on  his  side,  was  equally  assiduous  to 
secure  England  ;  and,  upon  his  arrival  in  London,  claimed  the 

VOL.  r.  20 


154  ms  roIlY  OF  ENGLANir. 

throne,  as  being  heir  to  his  brother,  of  wI\ose  death  he  pretended^ 
to  have  received  certain  intelligence.  But  in  this  the  traitor's 
expectations  were  disappointed.  His  claim  was  rejected  bj  all 
the  barons,  wlio  took  such  measures  to  provide  for  the  security  of 
the  kingdom,  tliat  John  was  obliged  to  return  to  the  continent,  and 
opei|ly  to  acknowledge  his  alliance  with  the  king  of  France. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  unhappy  Richard  suffered  all  the  morti- 
fications that  malicious  tyranny  could  inflict.  The  emperor,  in 
order  to  render  him  more  impatient  for  the  recovery  of  his  liberty, 
and  make  him  submit  to  the  payment  of  a  larger  ransom,  treated 
him  with  the  greatest  severity,  and  reduced  him  to  a  condition 
worse  than  that  of  the  meanest  malefactor.  Richard,  however, 
was  too  noble-spirited  to  be  meanly  depressed  by  those  indignities. 
As  he  did  not  knoAV  what  extremities  he  might  be  reduced  to,  or 
what  condescensions  he  might  be  obliged  to  make,  he  wrote  to  the 
justiciary  of  England  to  obey  no  orders  that  should  come  from 
him,  if  they  seemed  in  the  least  contrary  to  his  honour  or  the 
good  of  the  nation.  His  precautions  were  well  founded  ;  for  the 
emperor,  willing  to  intimidate  him,  had  him  even  accused  at  the 
diet  of  Worms  of  many  crimes  and  misdemeanors,  partly  to  jus- 
tify his  own  cruelty,  and  partly  to  swell  the  ransom.  There  he 
was  charged  with  making  an  alliance  with  Tancred,  the  usurper 
of  Sicily ;  of  turning  the  arms  of  the  crusade  against  a  Christian 
prince ;  of  affronting  the  duke  of  Austria  before  Acre  ;  of  ob- 
structing the  progress  of  the  Christian  arms,  by  his  contest  with 
the  king  of  France ;  of  concluding  a  truce  with  Saladin,  and 
leaving  Jerusalem  in  the  hands  of  the  infidels.  These  frivolous 
charges  were  heard  by  Richard  with  becoming  indignation.  He 
.  even  waived  his  dignity  to  answer  them ;  and  so  fully  vindicated 
himself  before  the  princes  who  composed  the  diet,  that  they  ex- 
claimed loudly  against  the  conduct  of  the  emperor,  while  the  pope 
even  threatened  him  with  excommunication.  This  barbarous 
monarch  now  saw  that  he  could  no  longer  detain  his  prisoner. 
He  therefore  was  willing  to  listen  to  terms  of  accommodation. 
A  ransom  was  agreed  upon,  which  amounted  to  a  hundred  and 
fifty  thousand  marks,  or  about  three  hundred  thousand  pounds  of 
our  money.  Of  this,  Richard  was  to  pay  one  hundred  thousand 
before  he  received  his  liberty,  and  sixty-seven  hostages  were  to 
be  delivered  for  the  remainder.     The  agreement  being  thus  made. 


RICMAIID  I^  155 

Kichard  sent  Hubert,  one  of  his  faithful  followers  in  the  Holy 
Land,  to  England,  with  the  terms  upon  which  he  was  to  receive 
his  liberty,  and  with  a  commission  to  raise  money  for  that  purpose. 
In  the  feudal  times,  every  military  tenant  was,  by  law,  obliged 
to  give  aid  for  the  ransom  of  his  lord  from  captivity.  The  tax 
arising  from  this  obligation  ^\'as  accordingly  raised  throughout  the 
kingdom,  and  assessed  by  itinerant  justices.  But  the  ardour  of 
the  people  outwent  the  cool  offerings  of  their  duty ;  great  sums 
were  raised  by  voluntary  contribution  to  purchase  the  fi-eedom  of 
their  king.  The  churches  and  monasteries  melted  down  their 
plate ;  the  bishops,  abbots,  and  nobles,  paid  a  fourth  of  their  an- 
nual income  j  the  inferior  clergy  contributed  a  tenth  of  their 
tithes,  and  the  requisite  sum  was  thus  at  length  amassed  ;  with 
which  queen  Eleanor,  and  the  justiciary,  immediately  set  out  for 
Germany. 

While  the  English  were  thus  piously  employed  in  preparing  for 
the  ransom  of  their  king,  Philip  was  as  assiduously  occupied  in 
endeavouring  to  prolong  Richard's  captivity.  As  he  had  the  pas- 
sions of  the  emperor  to  work  upon,  whom  he  knew  to  be  avari- 
cious to  the  last  degree,  he  made  him  fresh  proposals  still  more 
lucrative  than  those  which  had  been  agreed  upon  for  Richard's 
ransom.  He  offered  to  marry  the  emperor's  daughter,  and  to 
gratify  him  with  a  sum  equal  to  the  ransom,  if  he  would  only  de- 
tain his  prisoner  for  one  year  more  in  captivity.  The  emperor 
perceived  that  he  had  concluded  a  treaty  with  Richard  too  hastily, 
and  repented  of  his  rashness.  He  was  very  willing  to  sacrifice 
every  consideration  of  honour  or  justice  ;  but  then  he  feared  the 
resentment  of  his  princes,  who,  in  these  feudal  times,  had  poAver 
to  punish  his  injustice.  Thus  he  continued  fluctuating  between 
his  avarice  and  his  fears,  between  different  motives  equally  sor- 
did, until  the  day  fixed  for  the  king's  deliverance  arrived.  His 
releasem«nt  from  captivity  was  performed  with  great  ceremony 
at  Mentz,  in  presence  of  the  German  nobility :  the  money  was 
paid  by  queen  Eleanor,  the  hostages  were  delivered  as  a  security 
for  the  remainder,  and  Richard  once  more  restored  to  freedom. 
In  the  mean  time,  the  emperor  beheld  his  releasement  with  an  ag- 
itation of  all  the  malignant  passions.  He  could  not  bear  to  see 
one  he  had  made  his  enemy  in  a  state  of  felicity  ;  he  could  not 
bear  to  lose  the  superior  advantages  that  w^ere  offered  for  his  de- 


156  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

tention.  All  his  terrors,  from  his  own  subjects,  gave  way  to  the 
superior  dictates  of  avarice;  he  once  more  resolved  to  send  him 
jjack  to  his  former  prison,  and  gave  orders  to  have  him  pursued 
and  arrested.  But  luckily  the  messengers  were  too  late.  Rich- 
ard, well  acquainted  with  his  perfidy,  and  secretly  apprised  of  the 
offers  of  the  French  king,  had  ordered  some  shipping  to  attend 
liim  at  the  mouth  of  the  Scheld ;  so  that,  upon  his  arrival  at  the 
place  of  embarking,  he  went  instantly  on  board,  although  the  wind 
was  against  him,  and  was  out  of  sight  of  land  when  his  pursuers 
reached  Antwerp. 

Nothing  could  exceed  the  joy  of  the  English  upon  seeing  their 
monarch  return,  after  all  his  achievements  and  sufferings.  He 
made  his  entry  into  London  in  triumph ;  and  such  was  the  pro- 
fusion of  wealth  shown  by  the  citizens,  that  the  German  lords 
who  attended  him  were  heard  to  say,  that  if  the  emperor  had 
known  of  their  affluence,  he  would  not  so  easily  have  parted  with 
their  king.  He,  soon  after,  ordered  himself  to  be  crowned  a-new 
at  Winchester.  He  convoked  a  general  council  at  Nottingham, 
at  which  he  confiscated  all  his  traitorous  brother's  possessions  5 
and  then  having  made  proper  preparations  for  avenging  himself 
on  the  king  of  France,  he  set  sail  with  a  strong  body  of  forces 
for  Normandy. 

,       Richard  was  but  one  day  landed,  when  his  faithless 

L  ^J  brother  John  came  to  make  submission,  and  to  throw 
himself  at  his  monarch's  feet.  It  was  not  without  some  degree 
of  resentment  that  Richard  received  a  prince,  who  had  all  along 
been  leagued  with  his  mortal  enemy  against  him.  However,  at 
the  intercession  of  queen  Eleanor,  he  was  received  into  favour. 
I''  I  forgive  him,"  said  the  king  ;  "  and  I  wish  I  could  as  easily 
forget  his  offences  as  he  will  forget  my  pardon.'^  This  conde- 
scension was  not  lost  upon  a  man  whose  heart,  though  naturally 
bad,  was  not  yet  dead  to  every  sentiment  of  humanity.  From 
that  time  he  served  him  faithfully ;  and  did  him  signal  services 
in  his  battles  with  the  king  of  France,  which  followed  soon  after. 
These  wars,  which  produced  no  remarkable  event,  nor 

L  'J  were  succeeded  by  any  permanent  consequences,  only 
served  to  keep  the  animosity  of  the  two  nations  alive,  without 
fixing  their  claims  or  pretensions.  The  most  remarkable  circum- 
stance, in  the  tedious  journals  pf  those  transactions,  is  the  taking 
i 


'       RICHARD  I.  157" 

the  bishop  off  Beauvais  captive  at  the  head  of  his  vassals,  and  his 
being  put  in  prison  bj  Richard.  When  the  pope  demanded  his 
liberty,  and  claimed  him  as  a  child  of  the  church,  the  king  sent 
his  holiness  the  bloody  coat  of  mail  which  that  prelate  had  worn 
in  battle  5  asking  whether  that  was  the  coat  of  his  son  ?  The  cru- 
elty of  both  parties  was  in  this  manner  inflamed  by  insult  and  re- 
venge. Both  kings  frequently  put  out  the  eyes  of  their  prison- 
ers ;  and  treaties  were  concluded  and  broke  with  very  little  re- 
pugnance. At  length,  the  pope's  legate  induced  them  to  com- 
mence a  treaty,  v/hich  promised  to  be  attended  with  a  firmer  re- 
conciliation ;  but  the  death  of  Richard  put  an  end  to  the  contest. 
Aymar,  viscount  of  Limoges,  a  vassal  of  the  crown,  r^iqq  -1 
iiad  taken  possession  of  a  treasui-e  which  was  found  by 
one  of  his  peasants  in  digging  a  field ;  and  to  secure  the  remain- 
der, he  sent  a  part  of  it  to  the  king.  Richard,  as  superior  lord, 
sensible  that  he  had  a  right  to  the  whole,  insisted  on  its  b6ing  sent 
him ;  and,  upon  refusal,  attacked  the  castle  of  Chalus,  where  he 
understood  this  treasure  had  been  deposited.  On  the  fourth  day 
of  the  siege,  as  he  was  riding  round  the  place  to  observe  where 
the  assault  might  be  given  with  the  fairest  success,  he  was  aimed 
at  by  one  Bertram  de  Gourdon,  an  archer,  from  the  castle,  and 
pierced  in  the  shoulder  with  an  arrow.  The  wound  was  not  in 
itself  dangerous ;  but  an  unskilful  surgeon  endeavouring  to  disen- 
gage the  arrow  from  the  flesh,  so  rankled  the  wound  that  it  morti- 
fied and  brought  on  fatal  symptoms.  Richard,  when  he  found  his 
end  approaching,  made  a  will,  in  which  he  bequeathed  the  king- 
dom, with  all  his  treasure,  to  his  brother  John,  except  a  fourth 
part,  which  he  distributed  among  his  servants.  He  ordered  also 
that  the  archer  who  had  shot  him  should  be  brought  into  his  pres- 
ence, and  demanded  "  what  injury  he  had  done  him  that  he 
should  take  away  his  life  .^"  The  prisoner  answered  with  deliber- 
ate intrepidity  :  ^'  You  killed  with  your  own  hands  my  father, 
and  my  two  brothers  ;  and  you  intended  to  have  hanged  me.  I 
am  now  in  your  power,  and  my  torments  may  give  you  revenge ; 
but  I  will  endure  them  with  pleasure,  since  it  is  my  consolation 
that  I  have  rid  the  world  of  a  tyrant."  Richard,  struck  with  this 
answer,  ordered  the  soldier  to  be  presented  with  one  hundred 
shillings,  and  set  at  liberty;  but  Marcade,  the  general  who  com- 
manded under  him,  like  a  true  ruffian,  ordered  him  to  be  flayed 


158  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

alive,  and  then  hanged.  Richard  died  in  the  tenth  year  of  his 
reign,  and  the  forty -second  of  his  age,  leaving  only  one  natural 
son,  called  Philip,  behind  him. 

Richard  had  all  the  qualities  that  could  gain  the  admiration  and 
love  of  a  barbarous  age,  and  few  of  those  that  could  ensure  the  ap- 
probation of  his  more  refined  posterity.  He  M^as  open,  magnani- 
mous, generous,  and  brave,  to  a  degree  of  romantic  excess.  But 
then  he  was  cruel,  proud,  and  resentful.  He  valued  neither  the 
blood  nor  the  treasure  of  his  subjects  ;  and  he  enfeebled  his  states 
by  useless  expeditions,  and  wars  calculated  rather  to  promote  his 
own  revenge  than  their  interests.  During  this  reign,  the  inferior 
orders  of  the  people  seemed  to  increase  in  power,  and  to  show  a 
degree  of  independent  obstinacy.  Formerly,  they  were  led  on 
to  acts  of  treason  by  their  barons  ;  they  were  now  found  to  aim 
at  vindicating  their  rights  under  a  leader  of  their  own  rank  and 
denomination.  The  populace  of  London  placed  at  their  head  one 
William  Fitzosborn,  commonly  called  Longbeard,  who  had  been 
bred  to  the  law ;  but  who,  fonder  of  popularity  than  business,  re- 
nounced his  profession,  and  espoused  the  cause  of  the  poor  with 
uncommon  enthusiasm.  He  styled  himself  the  saviour  of  the 
poor ;  and,  upon  a  certain  occasion,  even  went  over  to  Norman- 
dy, where  he  represented  to  the  king  that  the  poorer  citizens 
were  oppressed  by  an  unequal  assessment  of  taxes,  and  obtained 
a  mitigation.  His  fame  for  this  became  so  great  Among  tlie  lower 
orders  of  his  fellow  citizens,  that  above  fifty  thousand  of  them 
entered  into  an  engagement  to  defend  and  to  obey  him.  Mur- 
<lers  were  in  consequence  daily  committed  in  the  streets ;  but 
whether  by  Longbeard's  order,  is  uncertain.  The  justiciary  (for 
the  king  was  then  absent)  summoned  him  before  the  council  to 
answer  for  his  conduct:  but  he  came  with  such  a  formidable 
train,  that  none  were  found  hardy  enough  to  accuse  him.  How- 
ever, he  was  pursued  some  time  after  by  a  detachment  of  officers 
of  justice ;  but  killing  one  of  them,  he  escaped  with  his  concubine 
to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  Le  Bow,  where  he  defended  himself 
with  determined  resolution.  There  he  was  supplied  with  arms 
and  provisions,  and  expected  to  be  joined  by  the  populace  ;  but 
being  deceived  in  his  expectations,  he  was  at  last  forced  from  his 
retreat  by  the  smoke  of  wet  straw  kindled  for  the  purpose  at  the 
door.    He  was  then  taken,  tried,  and  convicted  ;  and  being  drawn 


JOHN.  159 

at  a  horse's  tail  through  the  streets  of  London,  he  was  hung  in 
chains,  with  nine  more  of  his  accomplices.  The  lower  class  of 
people,  when  he  was  dead,  began  to  revere  a  man  that  they  had 
not  spirit  to  relieve.  They  stole  his  gibbet,  and  paid  it  a  venera- 
tion like  that  offered  to  the  wood  of  the  cross.  The  turf  on 
which  it  stood  was  carried  away,  and  kept  as  a  preservative  from 
sickness  and  misfortune ;  and  had  not  the  clergy  withstood  the 
torrent  of  popular  superstition,  his  memory  might  have  probably 
received  honours  similar  to  those  paid  at  the  shrine  of  St,  Thom- 
as of  Canterbury. 


CHAP,  XI. 


V T  ERE  the  claims  of  princes  settled  on  the  same  principles  that 
govern  the  lower  orders  of  mankind,  John  had  nothing  to  fear 
from  a  disputed  succession.  The  king  of  France,  who  was  the 
only  monarch  that  could  assist  the  pretensions  of  a  rival,  had 
long  declared  for  John's  title  5  and,  during  the  life  of  his  brother^ 
had  given  him  the  most  convincing  proofs  of  sincerity  in  his  as- 
sistance. But  it  was  otherwise  now  that  Richard  was  no  more. 
Philip  began  to  show  that  his  former  alliances  and  friendships 
were  calculated  not  to  serve  John,  but  to  distress  England ;  not 
to  distribute  justice,  but  to  increase  his  own  power.  There  Ava& 
an  old  claimant  of  the  crown,  whom  indeed  Richard,  upon  his 
taking  the  cross,  declared  heir  to  the  throne ;  but  who  was  after- 
wards  set  aside,  at  the  instance  of  the  dowager-queen.  This  was 
Arthur,  the  son  of  his  late  brother  Geoffrey,  a  youth  who,  though 
then  but  twelve  years  of  age,  promised  to  be  deserving  of  the 
kingdom.  Philip,  who  only  desired  an  occasion  to  embarrass 
John,  soon  resolved  to  second  this  young  claimant's  pretensions ; 
and  several  of  the  continental  barons  immediately  declared  in 
favour  of  Arthur's  succession. 

John,  who  was  readily  put  in  possession  of  the  English  throne, 
lost  no  time  to  second  his  interest  on  the  continent ;  and  his  first 
care  was  to  recover  the  revolted  provinces  from  young  Arthur, 


IQQ  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

"his  nephew.  The  war,  therefore,  hetween  the  English  and  Fr6nch 
king  was  renewed  with  all  its  former  animosity,  and  all  its  usual 
detail  of  petty  victories  and  undecisive  engagements.  At  length 
a  treaty  put  an  end  to  those  conquests  that  only  served  to  thin 
mankind ;  and  it  was  hastened  by  a  circumstance  peculiarly  fa- 
vourable. Joiin's  nephew,  Arthur,  together  with  Constantia,  his 
mother,  distrusting  the  designs  of  the  king  of  France,  who  only 
intended  to  betray  them,  came  to  throw  themselves  on  his  mercy^ 
and  restored  the  provinces  which  still  continued  in  their  interest. 
Thus  this  monarch,  after  a  short  contest,  saw  himself  undisputed 
monarch  of  all  the  dominions  Avhich  were  annexed  to  the  English 
throne.  But  he  was  ill  able  to  preserve  that  power  by  his  pru- 
dence, which  was  thus  easily  obtained  by  the  mutual  jealousies 
of  his  enemies.  His  first  transgression  was  his  marriage 
L  "J  with  Isabella,  daughter  of  the  count  of  Angouleme,  while 
the  queen  was  yet  alive ;  and,  what  still  increased  the  offence, 
while  Isabella  probably  belonged  to  another  husband,  the  count 
de  la  Marche,  Vv'ho  ai'dently  loved  her.  This  produced  an  insur- 
rection against  him ;  to  repress  which  he  was  obliged  to  have  re- 
course to  his  English  subjects  for  assistance,  by  whose  means  the 
confederacy  was  soon  broken ;  and  John  found,  by  his  present 
success,  that  he  might  in  future  commit  violences  with  impunity. 

As  the  method  of  deciding  all  disputes  by  duel  was  still  in 
full  force,  John  resolved  to  avail  himself  of  this  advantage  against 
all  his  refractoi-y  barons.  He  kept  a  set  of  hired  bravoes,  under 
the  title  of  his  champions ;  and  these  he  deputed  to  fight  his 
cause  whenever  any  of  the  nobility  opposed  his  encroachments. 
Such  contemptible  opponents  very  justly  gave  the  haughty  barons 
disgust ;  and  an  universal  discontent  prevailed  among  them,;, 
which  at  last  produced  another  dangerous  confederacy.  John 
attempted  to  break  it  by  oaths,  protestations,  and  perfidies  ;  but 
every  attempt  of  this  kind  only  served  to  connect  his  enemies, 
and  render  his  person  contemptible. 

Something  still  remained  to  render  Jolm  hateful  to  his  subjects ; 
and  this  ill-disposed  prince  took  the  first  opportunity  of  becoming 
so.  Young  Arthur,  who,  with  his  mother,  had  so  imprudently 
resigned  themselves  to  his  protection,  soon  perceived  their  error, 
and  found  that  nothing  honourable  was  to  be  expected  from  a 
prince  of  liis  abandoned  character.    Observing  somewhat  very 


JOHN,  161 

suspicious  in  his  manner  of  conducting  himself  to  them,  they  fled 
from  Mans,  where  he  detained  them,  and  retired  in  the  night  to 
Angers,  from  whence  they  went  once  more  to  take  refuge  with 
their  old  protector.  As  it  was  Philip's  interest  to  treat  them 
with  all  possible  indulgence,  they  were  received  with  great  marks 
of  distinction ;  and  young  Arthur's  interests  were  soon  after  very 
vigorously  supported.  One  town  after  another  submitted  to  his 
authority ;  and  all  his  attempts  seemed  attended  with  success. 
But  his  unfortunate  ardour  soon  put  an  end  to  his  hopes  and  his 
claims.  Being  of  an  enterprising  disposition,  and  fond  of  mili- 
tarj'-  glory,  he  had  laid  siege  to  a  fortress  in  which  the  dowager- 
queen  was  protected,  and  defended  by  a  weak  garrison.  John, 
therefore,  falling  upon  his  little  army  before  they  were  aware  of 
his  approach,  the  young  prince  was  taken  prisoner,  together  with 
the  most  considerable  of  the  revolted  barons*  The  greater  part 
of  the  prisoners  were  sent  over  to  England  ;  but  the  unfortunate 
prince  himself  was  shut  up  in  the  castle  of  Falaise.  John,  thus 
finding  a  I'ival  at  his  mercy,  from  whom  he  had  every  thing  to 
dread,  began  to  meditate  upon  measures  which  would  most  ef- 
fectually remove  his  future  apprehensions.  No  other  expedient 
suggested  itself  but  what  is  foremost  in  the  imagination  of  ty- 
rants, namely,  the  young  prince's  death.  How  this  brave  youth. 
was  4ispatched,  is  not  well  known :  certain  it  is,  that  from  the 
moment  of  his  confinement  he  was  never  heard  of  more.  The 
most  probable  account  of  this  horrid  transaction  is  as  follows. 
The  king  having  first  proposed  to  one  of  his  servants,  William  de 
la  Braye,  to  dispatch  Arthur,  the  brave  domestic  replied,  that  he 
■was  a  gentleman,  and  not  an  executioner*  This  ofiicer  having 
positively  refused  to  comply,  John  had  recourse  to  another  instru- 
ment, who  went,  with  proper  directions,  to  the  castle  where  Ar- 
thur was  confined,  to  destroy  him.  But  still  this  prince's  fate 
seemed  suspended :  for  Hubert  de  Bourg,  chamberlain  to  the 
king,  and  constable  of  the  place,  willing  to  save  him,  undertook 
the  cruel  office  himself,  and  sent  back  the  assassin  to  his  em- 
ployer. However,  he  was  soon  obliged  to  confess  the  imposture  ; 
for  Arthur's  subjects  vowing  the  severest  revenge,  Hubert,  to  ap- 
pease them,  revealed  the  secret  of  his  pretended  death,  and  as- 
sured them  that  their  prince  was  still  alive,  and  in  his  custody. 
John,  now  finding  that  all  his  emissaries  had  still  more  compiinQ- 

VOL.  I.  21 


I6j2  IIISTOliV  OF  ENGLAND. 

tioii  tliau  himself,  resolved,  with  his  own  hands,  to  execute  ths 
blood  J  deed;  and  for  that  purpose  had  Arthur  removed  to  the 
castle  of  Rouen,  situated  upon  the  river  Seine.  It  was  at  mid- 
niglit  when  John  came  in  a  boat  to  the  place,  and  ordered  tlie 
young  prince  to  be  brought  before  him.  Long  confinement,  soli- 
tude, and  the  continuance  of  bad  fortune,  had  now  broken  this 
generous  youth's  spirit ;  and  perceiving  that  his  death  was  medi- 
tated, he  threw  liimself  in  the  most  imploi'ing  manner  upon  his 
knees  before  his  uncle,  and  begged  for  mercy.  John  was  too 
much  hardened  in  the  school  of  tyranny,  to  feel  any  pity  for  his 
wretched  suppliant.  His  youth,  his  affinity,' his  merits,  were  all 
disregarded,  or  were  even  obnoxious  in  a  rival.  The  barbarous 
tyrant,  making  no  reply,  stabbed  him  with  his  own  hands ;  and, 
fastening  a  stone  to  the  dead-  body,  threw  it  into  the  Seine.  This 
inhuman  action  tlius  rid  John  of  a  hated  rival ;  but,  happily  for 
the  instruction  of  future  princes,  it  opened  the  way  to  his  future 
ruin.  Having  in  this  manner  shown  himself  the  enemy  of  man- 
kind in  the  prosperity  of  his  reign,  the  whole  world  seemed  to 
turn  their  back  upon  him  in  his  distress. 

John  was  now  detested  by  all  mankind  j  and  the  rest  of  his 
reign  he  only  supported  himself  in  power,  by  making  it  the  inter- 
est of  some  to  protect  him,  and  letting  others  feel  the  effects  of 
his  resentment,  if  they  offered  to  defend  themselves.  The  loss 
of  all  his  French  provinces  immediately  followed  liis  last  trans- 
gression. Not  but  that  ]^e  attempted  a  defence ;  and  even  laid 
siege  to  Alencon,  one  of  the  towns  that  had  revolted  from  him. 
But  Philip,  his  active  rival,  persuaded  a  body  of  knights,  who 
were  assembled  at  a  tournament,  to  take  his  part ;  and  these 
readily  joining  against  the  parricide,  quickly  obliged  him  to  raise 
the  siege.  John,  therefore,  repulsed  and  stript  of  his  dominions, 
was  obliged  to  bear  the  insult  with  patience;  though^  indeed, 
such  was  the  ridiculous  absurdity  of  his  pride,  that  he  assured 
those  about  him  of  his  being  able  to  take  back  in  a  day,  what  cost 
the  French  years  in  acquiring. 

_  Normandy  soon  followed  the  fate  of  the  French  prov- 
•-  '-'  inces.  Chateau-Gaillard,  one  of  its  strongest  fortress- 
es, being  taken  after  an  obstinate  siege,  the  whole  duchy  lay  open 
to  the  invader ;  and  while  John  basely  sought  safety  by  flying 
into  England,  Philip?  secure  of  his  prey,  pushed  his  conquests 


JOHN.  163 

Vith  vigour.  The  whole  duchy  submitted  to  his  authority  ;  and 
thus,  after  being  for  near  three  centuries  dismembered  from  the 
French  monarchy,  was  again  reunited. 

John,  being  thus  stript  of  all  his  continental  dominions,  was 
resolved  to  v/reak  his  vengeance  on  that  part  of  the  monarchy 
which  still  acknowledged  subjection.  Upon  his  arrival,  therefore, 
in  England,  he  began  to  lay  the  blame  of  this  ill  success  upon 
his  barons,  who,  he  pretended,  had  deserted  his  standard  in  Nor- 
mandy. To  punish  them  for  this  imputed  offence,  he  levied  large 
sums  upon  their  estates  and  effects,  under  colour  of  preparations 
for  a  Norman  expedition  ;  which,  however,  he  deferred  till  the 
Kext  year.  When  the  season  came  for  making  it,  he  summoned 
all  his  barons  to  attend  him ;  and  then  capriciously  deferred  the 
execution  of  his  projects  to  another  opportunity.  The  year  fol-^ 
lowing  he  put  to  sea,  as  if  with  a  firm  resolution  to  ^o  wonders ; 
but  returned  soon  after,  without  making  the  smallest  attempt. 
Another  year  elapsed,  when  he  promised  that  he  would  then  re- 
deem his  country's  reputation  by  a  most  signal  blow.  He  set  sail, 
landed  at  Rochelle,  marched  to  Angers,  laid  the  city  in  ashes  5 
and  hearing  that  the  enemy  were  preparing  to  oppose  him,  he 
reimbarked  his  troops,  and  returned  -once  more  to  his  indignant 
country,  loaden  with  shame  and  confusion. 

Hitherto  John  was  rather  hateful  to  his  subjects  than  contempt- 
ible ;  they  rather  dreaded  than  despised  him.  But  he  soon  showed 
that  he  might  be  offended,  if  not  without  resentment,  at  least 
with  impunity.  It  was  the  fate  of  this  vitious  prince  to  make  those 
the  enemies  of  himself  v/hom  he  wanted  abilities  to  make  the  en- 
emies of  each  other.  The  clergy  had  for  some  time  acted  as  a 
community  independent  of  the  crown,  and  had  their  elections  of 
each  other  generally  confirmed  by  the  pope,  to  whom  alone  they 
owned  subjection.  However,  the  election  of  archbishops  had  for 
some  time  been  a  continual  subject  of  dispute  between  the  suffra- 
gan bishops  and  the  Augustine  monks  5  and  both  had  precedents 
to  confirm  their  pretensions.  Things  being  in  this  situation,  Hu- 
bert, the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  died :  arid  the  Augustine 
monks,  in  a  very  private  manner,  made  choice  of  Reginald,  their 
sub -prior.  The  bishops  exclaimed  at  this  election,  as  a  manifest 
invasion  of  their  privileges  ;  and  a  furious  theological  contest  was 
likely  to  ensue.    A  politic  prince  would  have  seized  such  a  con- 


J64  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

juncture  with  joy ;  and  would  have  managed  the  quarrel  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  enfeeble  the  exorbitant  power  of  the  clergy  by  in- 
flaming their  mutual  animosity.  But  John  was  not  a  politic 
prince.  He  immediately  sided  with  the  suffragan  bishops  ;  and 
John  de  Gray,  bishop  of  Norwich,  was  unanimously  chosen.  To 
decide  the  mutual  claims  of  both  parties,  it  was  expedient  to  ap- 
peal to  the  see  of  Rome  :  an  agent  M\as  sent  by  the  bishops  to 
maintain  their  cause,  while  the  monks  dispatched  twelve  of  their 
order  to  support  their  pretensions.  Innocent  III.  who  then  filled 
the  chair,  possessed  an  unbounded  share  of  power,  and  his  talents 
were  equal  to  the  veneration  in  which  he  was  held.  He  seized 
with  avidity  that  conjuncture  which  John  failed  to  use  :  and  va- 
cating the  claims  of  both  parties,  as  uncanonical  and  illegal,  he 
enjoined  the  monks  to  choose  cardinal  Stephen  Langton,  an  En- 
glishman, then  at  the  court  of  Rome,  as  a  fit  person  to  fill  the 
vacant  dignity. 

This  was  an  encroachment  of  power  that  the  see  of  Rome  had 
long  been  aiming  at,  and  was  now  resolved  to  maintain.  The 
being  able  to  nominate  to  the  greatest  dignity  in  the  kingdom, 
next  to  that  of  the  king,  was  an  acquisition  that  would  effectually 
give  the  court  of  Rome  an  autliority  which  it  had  hitherto  vainly 
pretended  to  assume.  So  great  an  insult  was  to  be  introduced 
to  this  weak  prince  with  persuasions  adapted  to  his  capacity ; 
and  the  pope  accordingly  sent  him  a  most  affectionate  letter,  with 
a  present  of  four  gold  rings  set  with  precious  stones.  He  begged 
John  to  consider  seriously  the  form  of  the  rings,  their  number, 
their  matter,  and  their  colour.  Their  form  being  round,  shadow- 
ed out  eternity,  for  which  it  was  his  duty  to  prepare.  Their 
number,  four,  denoted  the  four  cardinal  virtues,  which  it  was  his 
duty  to  practise.  Their  matter  being  gold,  the  most  precious  of 
metals,  denoted  wisdom,  the  most  precious  of  accomplishments, 
which  it  was  his  duty  to  acquire :  and  as  to  their  colour,  the 
green  colour  of  the  emerald  x-epresented  faith ;  the  yellow  of  the 
sapphire,  hope ;  the  redness  of  the  ruby,  charity ;  and  the  splen- 
dour of  the  topaz,  good  works.  John  received  the  rings,  thought 
all  the  pope's  illustrations  very  beautiful,  but  was  resolved  not  to 
admit  Stephen  Langton  as  archbishop  of  Canterbury. 

As  all  John's  measures  were  conducted  with  violence,  he  sent 
two  knights  of  his  train,  who  were  fit  instruments  for  such  a  prince. 


JOHN.  165 

to  expel  the  monks  from  their, convent,  and  to  take  possession  of 
their  revenues.  The  pope  was  not  displeased  at  this  instance  of 
his  impetuosity ;  he  was  sensible  that  John  would  sink  in  the 
contest,  and  therefore  persevered  the  more  vigorously  in  his  pre- 
tensions. He  began  his  attempts  to  carry  his  measures  by  sooth- 
ing, imploring,  and  urging ;  he  proceeded  to  threats,  and  at  last 
sent  three  English  prelates  to  the  king  to  inform  him,  that  if  he 
persevered  in  his  disobedience  he  would  put  the  kingdom  under 
the  sentence  of  an  interdict.  All  the  other  prelates  threw  them- 
selves on  their  knees  before  the  king ;  entreated  him  in  the  most 
earnest  manner  not' to  bring  upon  them  the  resentment  of  the  holy 
tribunal ;  exhorted  him  to  receive  the  new  elected  primate,  and 
to  restore  the  monks  to  their  convent,  from  whence  they  had  been 
expelled.  But  these  entreaties  served  only  to  inflame  his  resent- 
ment. He  broke  out  into  the  most  violent  invectives ;  and  swore 
by  God's  teeth,  his  usual  oath,  that  if  the  kingdom  was  put  under 
an  interdict,  he  would  banish  the  whole  body  of  the  clergy,  and 
confiscate  all  their  possessions.  This  idle  threat  only  served  to 
hasten  the  resentment  of  the  pontiff.  Perceiving  the  king's  weak- 
ness, and  how  little  he  was  loved  by  his  subjects,  he  issued  at 
last  the  sentence  of  the  interdict,  which  was  so  much  dreaded  by 
the  whole  nation.  This  instrument  of  terror  in  the  hands  of  the 
see  of  Rome  was  calculated  to  strike  the  senses  in  the  highest 
degree,  and  to  operate  upon  the  superstitious  minds  of  the  peo- 
ple. By  it  a  stop  was  immediately  put  to  divine  service,  and  to 
the  administration  of  all  the  sacraments  but  baptism.  The  church 
doors  were  shut,  the  statues  of  the  saints  were  laid  on  the  ground. 
The  dead  were  refused  Christian  burial,  and  were  thrown  in  the 
ditches  and  on  the  highways,  without  the  usual  rites,  or  any  fu- 
neral solemnity.  Marriage  was  celebrated  in  the  church-yards, 
and  the  people  prohibited  the  use  of  meat,  as  in  times  of  public 
penance.  They  were  debarred  from  all  pleasure ;  they  were 
prohibited  from  shaving  their  beards,  from  saluting  each  other, 
and  giving  any  attention  to  their  apparel.  Every  circumstance 
seemed  calculated  to  inspire  religious  terror,  and  testified  the  ap- 
prehensions of  divine  vengeance  and  indignation.  Against  such 
calamity,  increased  by  the  deplorable  lamentations  of  the  clergy, 
it  was  in  vain  that  John  exerted  all  his  authority,  threatened  and 
punished,  and  opposed  the  terrors  of  his  temporal  power  to  their 


166  lilSTOllY  OF  ENGLAND. 

ecclesiastical  censures.  It  was  in  vain  that  he  banished  some, 
and  confined  others  ;  it  was  in  vain  that  he  treated  the  adherents 
of  Langton  with  rigour,  and  ordered  all  the  concubines  of  the 
clergy  to  be  imprisoned.  The  church  conquered  by  perseverance; 
and  John  saAV  himself  every  day  growing  more  obnoxious  and 
more  contemptible.  The  barons,  many  of  whose  families  he  had 
dishonoured  by  his  licentious  amours,  were  almost  to  a  man  his 
declared  enemies.  The  clergy  represented  him  in  the  most  odi- 
ous light  to  the  people :  and  nothing  remained  to  him  but  the  fee- 
ble relics  of  that  power  which  had  been  so  strongly  fixed  by  his 
grandfather,  that  all  his  vices  were  hitherto  unable  totally  to 
overthrow. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  pope,  seeing  all  the  consequences  he  ex- 
pected attending  the  interdict,  and  that  the  king  was  thus  render- 
ed perfectly  disagreeable  to  his  subjects,  resolved  to  second  his 
bloAv  J  and,  while  the  people  were  yet  impressed  with  terror,  de- 
termined to  take  advantage  of  their  consternation.  The  church 
of  Rome  had  artificially  contrived  a  gradation  of  sentences ;  by 
which,  while  &he  inflicted  one  punishment,  she  taught  the  sufferers 
to  expect  more  formidable  consequences  from  those  which  were 
to.  ensue.  On  the  back  of  the  interdict,  therefore,  came  the  sen- 
tence of  excommunication,  by  which  John  was  at  once  rendered 
n  90Q  1  impious  and  unfit  for  human  society.  No  sooner  was 
this  terrible  sentence  denounced  against  him,  than  his 
subjects  began  to  think  of  opposing  his  authority.  The  clergy 
were  the  first  to  set  an  example  of  disobedience.  Geoffrey,  arch- 
deacon of  Norwich,  who  was  intrusted  with  a  considerable  office 
ki  the  court  of  exchequer,  resigned  his  employment ;  which  so 
exasperated  the  king  that  he  had  him  confined,  and,  ordering  his 
head  to  be  covered  with  a  great  leaden  cope,  thus  kept  him  in  tor- 
ment till  he  died.  Most  of  the  other  bishops,  dreading  his  fate, 
left  the  kingdom.  Many  of  tlie  nobility  also,  terrified  at  the 
king's  tyranny,  went  into  voluntary  exile  :  and  those  who  remain- 
ed employed  their  time  in  cementing  a  confederacy  against  him. 
The  next  gradation  of  papal  indignation  was  to  absolve  John's 
subjects  from  their  oaths  of  fidelity  and  allegiance,  and  to  declare 
every  one  excommunicated  who  had  any  commerce  with  him  in 
public  or  private,  at  his  table,  in  his  council,  or  even  in  private 
conversation.    John,  however,  still   continued   refractory  j  and 


JOHN.  ler 

only  one  step  more  remained  for  the  pope  to  take,  and  this  was  to 
give  away  the  kingdom  to  another. 

No  situation  could  be  more  deplorable  than  that  of  John,  upon 
this  occasion.  Furious  at  his  indignities,  jealous  of  his  subjecte, 
and  apprehending  an  enemy  in  every  face, — ^it  is  said  that,  fearing 
a  conspiracy  against  his  life,  he  shut  himself  up  a  whole  night  in 
the  castle  of  Nottingham,-  and  suffered  none  to  approach  his  per- 
son. Being  informed  that  the  king  of  Wales  had  taken  part 
against  him,  he  ordered  all  the  Welch  hostages  to  be  instantly 
put  to  death.  Being  apprehensive  of  the  fidelity  of  bis  barons,  he 
required  their  sons  and  daughters  as  hostages  for  their  obedience. 
When  his  officers  repaired  on  this  odious  duty  to  the  castle  of 
William  Brause,  a^nobleman  of  great  note,  that  baron's  wife  reso- 
lutely told  them,  that  she  would  never  trust  her  children  in  the 
hands  of  a  man  who  had  so  barbarously  murdered  his  own  nephew. 
John  was  so  provoked  at  this  merited  reproach,  that  he  sent  a 
body  of  forces  to  seize  the  person  of  Brause,  who  fled  into  Ireland 
with  his  wife  and  family.  But  John's  indignation  pursued  them 
there  ;  and,  discovering  the  unhappy  family  in  their  retreat,  he 
seized  the  wife  and  son,  whom  he  starved  to  death  in  prison,  while 
the  unfortunate  father  narrowly  escaped  by  flying  into  France* 

Meanwhile  the  pope,  who  had  resolved  on  giving  the  kingdom 
to  another,  was  employed  in  fixing  upon  a  person  who  was  will- 
ing to  accept  the  donation,  and  had  power  to  vindicate  his  claim. 
Philip,  the  king  of  France,  seemed  the  fittest  for  such  an  under- 
taking ;  he  was  politic  and  powerful  j  he  had  already  despoiled 
John  of  his  continental  dominions,  and  was  the  most  likely  person 
to  deprive  him  of  the  remainder.  To  him,  therefore,  the  pope 
made  a  tender  of  the  kingdom  of  England;  and  Philip  veiy  ar- 
dently embraced  the  offer.  To  strengthen  the  hands  of  Philip 
still  more,  the  pope  published  a  crusade  against  the  deposed  mon- 
arch all  over  Europe,  exhorting  the  nobility,  the  knights,  and  men 
of  every  condition,  to  take  up  arms  against  that  persecutor  of  the 
church,  and  to  enlist  under  the  French  banner.  Philip  was  not 
less  active  on  his  part ;  he  levied  a  great  army  5  and,  summoning 
all  the  vassals  of  the  crown  to  attend  him  at  Rouen,  he  collected 
a  fleet  of  seventeen  hundred  vessels  in  the  seaports  of  r-to-ic^-, 
Normandy  and  Picardy,  already  devouring  in  imagina-  '  ~ 
tion  the  kingdom  he  was  appointed  to  possess. 


168  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

John,  who,  unsettled  and  apprehensive,  scarcely  knew  where 
to  turn,  was  still  able  to  make  an  expiring  eiFort  to  receive  the 
enemy.  All  Imted  as  he  was,  the  natural  enmity  between  the 
French  and  the  English,  the  name  of  king,  which  he  still  retained, 
and  some  remaining  power,  put  him  at  the  head  of  sixty  thousand 
men :  a  sufficient  number  indeed,  but  not  to  be  relied  on,  and 
•with  these  he  advanced  to  Dover.  Europe  now  regarded  the  im- 
portant preparations  on  both  sides  with  impatience ;  and  the  deci- 
sive blow  was  soon  expected,  in  which  the  church  was  to  triumph 
or  to  be  overthrown.  But  neither  Philip  nor  John  had  ability 
equal  to  the  pontiff  by  whom  they  were  actuated  ;  he  appeared 
on  this  occasion  too  refined  a  politician  for  either.  He  only  in- 
tended to  make  use  of  Philip's  power  to  intimidate  his  refractory 
son,  not  to  destroy  him.  He  expected  more  advantages  from  his 
agreement  with  a  prince  so  abject  both  in  character  and  fortune, 
than  from  his  alliance  with  a  great  and  victorious  monarch,  who» 
having  nothing  else  left  to  conquer,  might  convert  his  power 
against  his  benefactor.  He  therefore  secretly  commissioned  Pan- 
dolf,  his  legate,  to  admit  of  John's  submission,  in  case  it  should 
be  offered  ;  and  he  dictated  the  terms  which  would  be  proper  for 
him  to  impose.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  legate  passed  through 
France,  where  he  beheld  Philip's  great  armament  ready  to  set 
sail,  and  highly  commended  that  monarch's  zeal  and  expedition. 
From  thence  he  went  in  person,  or,  as  some  say,  sent  over  an 
envoy  to  Dover,  under  pretence  of  negotiating  with  the  barons, 
and  had  a  conference  with  Jolni  upon  his  arrival.  He  there  repre- 
sented to  this  forlorn  prince  the  numbers  of  the  enemy,  the  hatred 
of  his  own  subjects,  and  the  secret  confederacy  there  was  in  En- 
gland against  him.  He  intimated,  that  there  was  but  one  way  to 
secure  himself  from  impending  danger ;  which  was,  to  put  him- 
self under  the  pope's  protection,  who  was  a  merciful  father,  and 
still  willing  to  receive  a  repentant  sinner  to  his  bosom.  John 
was  too  much  intimidated  by  the  manifest  danger  of  his  situation 
not  to  embi'ace  every  means  offered  for  his  safety.  He  assented 
to  the  truth  of  the  legate's  remonstrances,  and  took  an  oath  to 
perform  whatever  stipulations  the  pope  should  impose.  Having 
thus  sworn  to  the  performance  of  an  unknown  command,  the 
artful  Italian  so  well  managed  the  barons,  and  so  effectually  in- 
timidated the  king,  that  he  persuaded  him  to  take  the  most  extra- 


JOHN.  169 

ordinary  oath  in  all  the  records  of  history,  before  all  the  people, 
kneeling  upon  his  knees,  and  with  his  hands  held  up  between 
those  of  the  legate. 

"I,  John,  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of  England,  and  lord  of 
Ireland,  in  order  to  expiate  my  sins,  from  my  own  free  will,  and 
the  advice  of  my  barons,  give  to  the  church  of  Rome,  to  pope  In- 
nocent, and  his  successors,  the  kingdom  of  England,  and  all  other 
prerogatives  of  my  crown.  I  will  hereafter  hold  them  as  the 
pope's  vassal.  I  will  be  faithful  to  God,  to  the  church  of  Rome) 
to  the  pope  my  master,  and  his  successors  legitimately  elected. 
I  promise  to  pay  him  a  tribute  of  a  thousand  marks  yearly ;  to 
wit,  seven  hundred  for  the  kingdom  of  England,  and  three  hun- 
dred for  the  kingdom  of  Ireland."  Having  thus  done  homage  to 
the  legate,  and  agreed  to  reinstate  Langton  in  the  primacy,  he 
received  the  crown,  which  he  had  been  supposed  to  have  forfeited, 
while  the  legate  trampled  under  his  feet  the  tribute  which  John 
had  consented  to  pay. 

Thus,  after  all  his  armaments  and  expectationsj  Philip  saw 
himself  disappointed  of  his  prey,  and  perceived  that  the  pope  had 
over-reached  him  in  this  transaction.  Nevertheless,  as  he  had 
undertaken  the  expedition  at  the  pope's  request,  he  was  resolved 
to  prosecute  the  war  in  opposition  to  him  and  all  his  censures. 
He  laid  before  his  vassals  the  ill-treatment  he  had  received  from 
the  court  of  Rome  ;  and  they  all  vowed  to  second  his  enterprise, 
except  the  earl  of  Flanders,  who  declared  against  the  impiety  of 
the  undertaking.  In  the  mean  time,  while  the  French  king  was 
resolving  to  bring  this  refractory  nobleman  to  his  duty,  the  En- 
glish admiral  attacked  the  French  fleet  in  their  harbours,  where 
he  took  three  hundred  ships,  and  destroyed  a  hundred  more. 
Philip  finding  it  impossible  to  prevent  the  rest  from  falling  into 
the  hands  of  the  enemy,  set  fire  to  them  himself,  and  was  thus 
obliged  to  give  up  all  designs  upon  England. 

John  was  now  once  more,  by  the  most  abject  submis-  rinid  l 
sions,  reinstated  in  power ;  but  his  late  humiliations 
did  not  in  the  least  serve  to  relax  his  cruelty  or  insolence.  One 
Peter  of  Pomfret,  a  hermit,  had  foretold,  that  the  king  this  very 
year  should  lose  his  crown  ;  and  for  that  rash  prophecy  he  had 
been  thrown  into  Corfe  castle  :  John  now  determined  to  punish 
him  as  an  impostor,  and  had  him  arraigned  for  that  purpose. 
VOL.  r.  22 


170  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

The  poor  hermit,  who  was  probably  some  wi-etched  enthusiast, 
asserted  the  truth  of  his  prediction,  alleging  that  the  king  had 
given  up  his  crown  to  the  pope,  from  whom  he  again  received  it. 
Tliis  argument  would  have  prevailed  with  any  person  less  cruel 
than  John.  The  defence  was  supposed  to  augment  the  crime. 
Peter  was  dragged  at  horses'  tails  to  the  town  of  Warham,  and 
there  hanged  on  a  gibbet  with  his  son. 

In  this  manner,  by  repeated  acts  of  cruelty,  by  expeditions 
Mdthout  effect,  and  humiliations  without  reserve,  John  was  long 
become  the  detestation  of  all  mankind.  Equally  odious  and  con- 
temptible, both  in  public  and  private  life,  he  affronted  the  barons 
by  his  insolence,  and  dishonoured  their  families  by  his  debauche- 
ries ;  he  enraged  them  by  his  tyranny,  and  impoverished  them  by 
his  exactions.  But  now,  having  given  up  the  independence  of  Iiis 
kingdom  to  a  foreign  power,  his  subjects  thought  they  had  a  right 
to  claim  a  part  of  that  power  which  he  had  been  granting  so  libe- 
rally to  strangers. 

The  barons  had  been  long  forming  a  confederacy  against  him  ; 
but  their  union  was  broken,  or  their  aims  disappointed,  by  vari- 
ous and  unforeseen  accidents.  Nothing  at  present  seemed  so 
much  to  forward  their  combinations  as  the  concurrence  of  Lang- 
ton  the  primate,  who,  though  forced  upon  the  kingdom  by  the  see 
of  Rome,  amply  compensated  to  his  countrymen  by  his  attach- 
ment to  their  real  interests. 

This  prelate,  either  a  sincere  friend  of  the  people,  or  a  secret 
enemy  to  the  king,  or  supposing  that,  in  their  mutual  conflict,  the 
clergy  would  become  superior ;  or,  perhaps,  instigated  by  all 
these  motives,  had  formed  a  plan  for  reforming  the  government, 
which  still  continued  in  a  very  fluctuating  situation.  At  a  synod 
of  his  prelates  and  clergy,  convened  in  St.  Paul's,  on  pretence 
of  examining  into  the  losses  sustained  by  the  exiled  bishops,  he 
conferred  privately  with  a  number  of  barons,  and  expatiated  upon 
the  vices  and  the  injustice  of  their  sovereign.  He  showed  them 
a  copy  of  Henry  the  First's  charter,  which  was  luckily  found  in 
a  monastery ;  for  so  little  had  those  charters,  extorted  from  kings 
at  their  coronation,  been  hitherto  observed,  that  they  soon  came 
into  disuse,  and  were  shortly  after  buried  in  total  oblivion.  There 
was  but  one  copy  of  this  important  charter  now  left  in  the  king- 
dom ;  and  that,  as  was  observed,  was  found  in  the  rubbish  of  an 


JOHN.  in 

obscure  monastery.  However,  it  contained  so  many  articles 
tending  to  restore  and  fix  the  boundaries  of  justice,  that  Langton 
exhorted  the  confederating  barons  to  insist  on  the  renewal  and 
observance  of  it.  The  barons  swore  they  would  lose  their  lives 
sooner  than  forego  those  claims  that  were  founded  on  nature,  on 
reason,  and  precedent.  The  confederacy  every  day  began  to 
spread  wider,  and  to  take  in  almost  all  the  barons  of  England. 

Anew  and  a  more  numerous  meeting  was  summoned  by  Lang- 
ton,  at  St.  Edmundsbury,  under  colour  of  devotion.  He  again 
produced  to  the  assembly  the  charter  of  Henry,  and  renewed  his 
exhortations  to  continue  stedfast  and  zealous  in  their  former  laud- 
able conspiracy.  The  barons,  inflamed  by  his  eloquence,  and 
still  more  by  their  injuries,  as  also  encouraged  by  their  numbers, 
solemnly  swore  before  the  high  altar  to  adhere  to  each  other,  to 
insist  on  their  demands,  and  to  persevere  in  their  attempts  until 
they  obtained  redress.  They  agreed,  that  after  Christmas  they 
would  prefer  their  common  petition  in  a  body ;  and  in  the  mean 
time  separated,  with  resolutions  of  putting  themselves  in  a  pos- 
tui'e  of  defence,  to  enlist  men,  and  fortify  their  castles.  Pursu- 
ant to  their  promise  and  obligations,  they  repaired,  in  the  begin- 
ning of  January,  to  London,  accoutred  in  military  garb  and  equi- 
page, and  presented  their  demands  to  the  king  j  alleging  that  he 
had  promised  to  grant  them,  at  the  time  he  was  absolved  from  his 
excommunication,  when  he  consented  to  a  confirmation  of  the 
laws  of  Edward  the  Confessor.  On  the  other  hand,  John,  far 
from  complying  with  their  request,  resented  their  presumption, 
and  even  insisted  upon  a  promise  under  their  hands  and  seals, 
that  they  would  never  demand,  or  attempt  to  extort,  such  privi- 
leges for  the  future.  This,  however,  they  boldly  refused,  and 
considered  as  an  unprecedented  act  of  power ;  so  that,  perceiving 
their  unanimity,  in  order  for  a  while  to  break  their  combination, 
he  desired  further  time  to  consider  of  an  answer  to  their  demands. 
He  promised,  that  at  the  festival  of  Easter,  he  would  give  a  posi- 
tive reply  to  their  petition  ;  and  offered  them  the  archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  the  bishop  of  Ely,  and  the  earl  mareschal,  as  sure- 
ties for  fulfilling  his  engagements.  The  barons  accepted  the 
terms,  and  peaceably  returned  to  their  habitations.  They  saw 
their  own  strength,  and  were  certain  at  any  time  to  enforce  their 
demands. 


17^2  IirSTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

Freedom  could  never  have  found  a  more  favourable  conjuncture 
for  its  exertions  than  under  the  government  of  a  weak  and  vitious 
monarch,  such  as  John  was,  whose  resistance  only  served  to  give 
splendour  to  every  opposition.  Although  he  had  granted  the 
barons  assurances  of  his  good  intentions,  yet  nothing  was  further 
from  his  heart  than  complying  with  their  demands.  In  order  to 
break  their  league,  he  had  recourse  to  the  power  of  the  clergy,  of 
whose  influence  he  had  experience  from  his  own  recent  misfor- 
tunes. He  courted  their  favo...,  l-^  granting  them  a  chartei> 
establishing  all  those  rights  of  which  they  were  already  in  pos- 
session, and  which  he  now  pretended  liberally  to  bestow,  when 
he  had  not  the  ability  to  refuse.  He  took  the  cross,  to  ingratiate 
himself  still  further;  and,  that  he  might  enjoy  those  privileges 
annexed  to  the  profession,  he  appealed  to  the  pope  against  the 
usurpation  of  his  barons,  and  craved  his  holy  protection.  Nor 
were  the  barons  remiss  in  their  appeals  to  the  pontiff.  They  al- 
leged that  their  just  privileges  were  abridged,  and  entreated  the 
interposition  of  his  authority  with 'the  king.  The  pope  did  not 
hesitate  in  taking  his  part.  A  kn'.g  who  had  already  given  up  all 
to  his  protection,  who  had  regularly  paid  the  stipulated  tributes, 
and  who  took  every  occasion  to  advance  the  interests  of  the 
church,  was  much  more  meritorious  in  his  eyes  than  a  confedera- 
cy of  barons,  whom,  at  best,  he  could  manage  with  difficulty,  and 
whose  first  endeavours  would  |)eihaps  be  to  shake  off  his  author- 
ity. He  therefore  wrote  letters  to  England,  reproaching  Lang- 
ton,  and  the  bishops,  for  favouring  these  dissensions,  and  com- 
manding them  to  promote  peace  between  the  parties.  He  ex- 
horted the  barons  to  conciliate  the  king,  not  with  menaces,  but 
humble  entreaties ;  and  promised,  upon  their  obedience,  to  in- 
terpose his  own  authority  in  favour  of  such  of  their  petitions  as 
he  should  find  to  be  just.  At  the  same  time  he  annulled  their 
associations,  and  forbad  them  to  engage  in  any  confederacy  for 
the  future. 

Neither  the  bishops  nor  barons  paid  the  least  regard  to  the 
pope's  remonstrance ;  and  as  for  John's  pretences  of  taking  the 
cross,  they  turned  them  into  ridicule.  They  had  for  some  time 
been  spectators  of  the  interested  views  of  the  see  of  Rome.  They 
found  that  the  pope  consulted  only  his  own  interests,  instead  of 
promoting  those  of  the  church  or  the  state.    They  continued,  in- 


JOHN.  173 

deed,  to  reverence  his  authority  as  much  as  ever,  when  exerted 
on  points  of  duty  ;  but  they  now  began  to  separate  between  his 
religious  and  his  political  aims,  adhering  to  the  one,  and  reject^ 
ing  the  other.  The  bishops  and  bai-ons,  therefore,  on  this  occa- 
sion, employed  all  their  arts  and  emissaries  to  kindle  a  spirit  of 
revolt  in  the  nation  ;  and  there  was  now  scarce  a  nobleman  in  the 
kingdom  who  did  not  either  personally  engage  in  the  design,  or 
secretly  favour  the  undertaking.  After  waiting  till  Easter,  when 
the  king  promised  to  return  them  an  answer,  upon  the  approach 
of  that  festival  they  met,  by  agreement,  at  Stamford.  There  they 
assembled  a  force  of  above  two  thousand  knights,  and  a  body  of  foot 
to  a  prodigious  number.  From  thence,  elated  with  their  ^215 
power,  they  marched  to  Brackley,  about  fifteen  miles  Apr  2r.' 
from  Oxford,  the  place  where  the  court  then  resided.  John,  hear- 
ing of  their  approach,  sent  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  tlie  earl 
of  Pembroke,  and  others  of  his  council,  to  know  the  particulars 
of  their  request,  and  what  those  liberties  were  which  they  so  ear- 
nestly importuned  him  to  grant.  The  barons  delivered  a  sched- 
ule, containing  the  chief  articles  of  their  demands,  and  of  which 
the  charters  of  Henry  and  Edward  formed  the  ground-work.  No 
sooner  were  they  shown  to  the  king  than  he  burst  into  a  furious 
passion,  and  asked  why  the  barons  did  not  also  demand  his  king- 
dom ;  swearing  that  he  would  never  comply  with  such  exorbitant 
demands.  But  the  confederacy  was  now  too  strong  to  fear  much 
from  the  consequences  of  his  resentment.  They  chose  Robert 
Fitzwalter  for  their  general,  whom  they  dignified  with  the  titles 
of  "  Mareschal  of  the  army  of  God,  and  of  the  Holy  Church," 
and  proceeded  without  further  ceremony  to  make  war  upon  the 
king.  They  besieged  Northampton,  they  took  Bedford,  they 
were  joyfully  i-eceived  into  London.  They  wrote  circular  letters 
to  all  the  nobility  and  gentlemen  who  had  not  yet  declared  in 
their  favour,  and  menaced  their  estates  with  devastation  in  case 
of  refusal  or  delay. 

In  the  mean  time  the  timid  king  was  left  at  a  place  called  Odi- 
ham,  in  Hants,  with  a  mean  retinue  of  only  seven  knights,  where 
he  vainly  endeavoured  to  avert  the  storm,  by  the  mediation  of 
his  bishops  and  ministers.  He  appealed  to  Langton  against  these 
fierce  remonstrants,  little  suspecting  that  the  primate  himself 
was  leagued  against  him.    He  desired  him  to  fulminate  the  thun- 


174  '  inSTOIlY  OF  ENGLAND. 

ders  of  the  church  upon  those  who  had  taken  anns  against  their 
prince  ;  and  aggravated  the  impiety  of  their  opposition,  as  he 
was  engaged  in  tlie  pious  and  noble  duties  of  the  crusade.  Lang- 
ton  permitted  the  tyrant  to  waste  his  passion  in  empty  complaints, 
and  declared  he  would  not  pass  any  censure  where  he  found  no 
delinquent.  He  promised  indeed  that  much  might  be  done,  in 
case  some  foreign  auxiliaries,  whom  John  had  lately  brought  over, 
were  dismissed ;  and  the  v/eak  prince,  supposing  his  advice  sin- 
cere, disbanded  a  great  number  of  Germans  and  Flemings,  whom 
he  had  retained  in  his  service.  When  the  king  had  thus  left 
himself  without  protection,  he  then  thought  it  was  the  duty  of 
Langton  to  perform  his  promise,  and  to  give  him  the  aid  of  the 
church,  since  he  had  discarded  all  temporal  assistants.  But  what 
was  his  surprise,  when  the  archbishop  refused  to  excommunicate 
a  single  baron,  and  peremptorily  opposed  his  commands  !  John, 
stung  with  resentment  and  regret,  knew  not  where  to  turn  for 
advice  or  comfort :  as  he  had  hitherto  sported  with  the  happiness 
of  mankind,  he  found  none  that  did  not  secretly  rejoice  in  his 
sufferings.  He  now  began  to  think  that  any  terms  wei-e  to  be 
complied  with ;  and  that  it  was  better  to  reign  a  limited  prince 
than  sacrifice  his  crown,  and  perhaps  his  life,  to  ambition.  But 
first  he  offered  to  refer  all  differences  to  the  pope  alone,  or  to 
eight  barons,  four  to  be  chosen  by  himself,  and  four  by  the  con- 
federates. This  the  barons  scornfully  rejected.  He  then  as- 
sured them  that  he  would  submit  at  discretion,  and  that  it  was 
his  supreme  pleasure  to  grant  all  their  demands :  a  conference 
was  accordingly  appointed,  and  all  things  adjusted  for  this  most 
important  treaty. 

The  ground  whjere  the  king's  commissioners  met  the  barons 
was  between  Staines  and  Windsor,  at  a  place  called  Runimede, 
still  held  in  reverence  by  posterity,  as  the  spot  where  the  stand- 
ard of  freedom  was  first  erected  in  England.  There  the  barons 
appeared,  with  a  vast  number  of  knights  and  warriors,  on  the  fif- 
teenth day  of  June,  while  those  on  the  king's  part  came  a  day  or 
two  after.  Both  sides  encamped  apart,  like  open  enemies.  The 
debates  between  power  and  precedent  are  generally  but  of  short 
continuance.  The  barons,  determined  on  carrying  their  aims, 
would  admit  of  few  abatements  ;  and  the  king's  agents  being  for 
the  most  part  in  their  interestsj  few  debates  ensued.    After  some 


JOHN".  irs 

days,  the  king,  with  a  facility  that  was  somewhat  suspicious, 
signed  and  sealed  the  charter  required  of  him ;  a  charter  which 
continues  in  force  to  this  day,  and  is  the  famous  bulwark  of  En- 
glish liberty,  which  now  goes  by  the  name  of  Magna  Charta. 
This  famous  deed  either  granted  or  secured  very  important  privi- 
leges to  those  orders  of  the  kingdom  that  were  already  possessed 
of  freedom,  namely,  to  the  clergy,  the  barons,  and  the  gentle- 
men ;  as  for  the  inferior  and  the  greatest  part  of  the  people,  they 
were  as  yet  held  as  slaves,  and  it  was  long  before  they  could  come 
to  a  participation  of  legal  protection. 

The  clergy,  by  this  charter,  had  their  former  grants  confirmed. 
All  check  upon  appeals  to  Rome  was  removed,  by  allowance  to 
every  man  to  depart  the  kingdom  at  pleasure  ;  and  the  fines  upon, 
the  clergy,  for  any  offence,  were  ordained  to  be  proportionable 
to  their  temporal,  not  their  ecclesiastical  possessions.  With  re- 
spect to  the  bai'ons,  they  were  secured  in  the  custody  of  the  va- 
cant abbeys  and  convents  which  were  under  their  patronage.  The 
reliefs  or  duties  to  be  paid  for  earldoms,  baronies,  and  knights' 
fees,  were  fixed,  which  before  were  arbitrary.  This  charter  de- 
creed, that  barons  should  recover  the  lands  of  their  vassals,  for- 
feited for  felony,  after  being  a  year  and  a  day  in  possession  of 
the  crown;  that  they  should  enjoy  the  wardships  of  their  military 
tenants,  who  held  other  lands  of  the  crown  by  a  different  tenure ; 
that  a  person  knighted  by  the  king,  though  a  minor,  should  enjoy 
the  privileges  of  a  full-grown  man,  provided  he  was  a  ward  of  the 
crown.  It  enacted,  that  heirs  should  be  married  without  dis- 
paragement; and  before  the  marriage  was  contracted,  the  nearest 
relations  were  to  be  informed  of  it.  No  scutage,  or  tax,  was  to 
be  imposed  upon  the  people  by  the  great  council  of  the  nation, 
except  in  three  particular  cases  ;  the  king's  captivity,  the  knight- 
ing his  eldest  son,  and  the  marrying  his  eldest  daughter.  When 
the  great  council  was  to  be  assembled,  the  prelates,  earls,  and 
great  barons,  were  to  be  called  to  it  by  a  particular  writ,  the 
lesser  barons  by  a  summons  of  the  sheriff".  It  went  on  to  ordain^ 
that  the  king  shall  not  seize  any  baron's  land  for  a  debt  to  the 
crown,  if  the  baron  possesses  personal  property  sufficient  to  dis- 
charge the  debt.  No  vassal  shall  be  allowed  to  sell  so  much  of 
his  land,  as  to  incapacitate  him  from  performing  the  necessary 
service  to  his  lord.     With  respect  to  the  people,  the  following 


176  HISTORY  OF  EXGLAND, 

"vvere  the  principal  clauses  calculated  for  their  benefit.  It  was 
Ordained,  that  all  the  privileges  and  immunities,  granted  by  the 
king  to  his  barons,  should  be  also  gi-anted  by  the  barons  to  their 
vassals.  One  weight  and  one  measure  shall  be  observed  through- 
out the  whole  kingdom ;  merchants  shall  be  allowed  to  transact 
all  business,  without  being  exposed  to  any  arbitrary  tolls  and  im- 
positions ;  they,  and  all  freemen,  shall  be  allowed  to  go  out  of 
the  kingdom,  and  return  to  it  at  pleasure  ;  London,  and  all  cities 
and  boroughs,  shall  preserve  their  antient  liberties,  immunities, 
and  free  customs ;  aids  or  taxes  shall  not  be  required  of  them, 
except  by  the  consent  of  the  great  council ;  no  towns  or  individ- 
uals shall  be  obliged  to  make  or  support  bridges,  but  by  antient 
customs ;  the  goods  of  every  freeman  shall  be  disposed  of  accord- 
ing to  his  will ;  if  he  die  intestate,  his  heirs  shall  succeed  to  them ; 
no  ofiRcer  of  the  crown  shall  take  any  horses,  carts,  or  wood, 
without  the  consent  of  the  owner ;  the  king's  courts  of  justice 
shall  be  stationary,  and  shall  no  longer  follow  his  person ;  they 
shall  be  open  to  every  one,  and  justice  shall  no  longer  be  bought, 
refused,  or  delayed  by  them ;  the  sheriffs  shall  be  incapacitated 
to  hold  pleas  of  the  crown,  and  shall  not  put  any  person  upon 
his  trial  from  rumour  or  suspicion  alone,  but  upon  the  evidence  of 
lawful  witnesses :  no  freeman  shall  be  taken  or  imprisoned,  or 
dispossessed  of  his  free  tenement  and  liberties,  or  outlawed,  or 
banished,  or  anywise  hurt  or  injured,  unless  by  the  legal  judg- 
ment of  his  peers,  or  by  the  law  of  the  land  ;  and  all  who  suffered 
otherwise  in  this,  arid  the  two  former  reigns,  shall  be  restored  to 
their  rights  and  possessions  ;  every  freeman  shall  be  fined  in  pro- 
portion to  his  fault,  and  no  fine  shall  be  levied  on  him  to  his  utter 
ruin.  Such  were  the  stipulations  in  favour  of  that  part  of  the 
people,  who,  being  either  merchants,  or  the  descendants  of  the 
nobles,  or  of  the  clergy,  were  thus  independent  of  an  immediate 
lord.  But  that  part  of  the  people  who  tilled  the  ground,  who 
constituted,  in  all  probability,  the  majority  of  the  nation,  had  but 
one  single  clause  in  their  favour,  which  stipulated,  that  no  villain, 
or  rustic  should  by  any  fine  be  bereaved  of  his  carts,  ploughs,  and 
instruments  of  husbandry.  As  for  the  rest,  they  were  considered 
as  a  part  of  the  property  belonging  to  an  estate,  and  passed  away 
with  the  horses,  cows,  and  other  moveables,  at  the  will  of  the 
owner. 


JOHN.  17T 

This  great  charter  being  agreed  to  by  all,  ratified,  and  mutually 
signed  by  both  parties,  the  barons,  in  order  to  secure  the  observ- 
ance of  it,  and  knowing  the  perfidious  disposition  of  the  king,  pre- 
i^ailed  upon  him  to  appoint  twenty -five  of  their  order  as  conser- 
vators of  the  public  liberty.  These  were  to  admonish  the  king,  if 
lie  should  act  contrary  to  his  written  obligations  ;  and  in  case  of 
resistance,  they  might  levy  war  against  him,  and  attack  his  castles. 
John,  with  his  usual  perfidy,  seemed  to  submit  passively  to  all 
these  regulations,  however  injurious  to  majesty;  and  even  sent 
writs  to  the  sheriffs,  ordering  them  to  constrain  every  one  to  swear 
obedience  to  the  twenty -five  barons.  He  pretended  that  his  gov- 
ernment was  henceforth  to  undergo  a  total  reformation,  more  in- 
dulgent to  the  liberty  and  independence  of  the  people.  His  sub- 
jects there foi-e  flattered  themselves  with  brighter  prospects  ;  and 
it  was  thought  the  king's  misfoi-tunes  had  humanized  his  dispo- 
sition. 

But  John's  seeming  tranquillity  was  but  dissim.ulation.  The 
more  care  his  barons  had  taken  to  bind  him  to  their  will,  the  more 
impatient  he  grew  under  their  restrictions.  He  burned  with  de- 
sire to  shake  off  the  conditions  they  had  imposed  upon  him.  The 
submissions  he  had  paid  to  the  pope,  and  the  insults  he  had  sus- 
tained from  the  king  of  France,  slightly  affected  him,  as  they 
were  his  equals  ;  but  the  sense  of  his  subjection  to  his  own  vas- 
sals sunk  deep  in  his  mind  5  and  he  was  determined,  at  all 
events,  to  recover  his  former  power  of  doing  mischief.  He  grew 
sullen,  silent,  and  reserved.  He  shunned  the  society  of  his  former 
companions,  and  even  retired  into  the  lele  of  Wight,  as  if  to  hide 
his  disgrace  in  solitude.  But  he  was  still,  however,  employed  in 
machinations  to  obtain  revenge.  He  had  sent  to  the  continent  to 
enlist  a  large  body  of  mercenary  troops  |  he  had  made  complaints 
to  the  pope  of  the  insurrections  of  his  subjects  against  him;  and 
the  pontiff  very  warmly  espoused  his  cause.  A  bull  was  sent 
over,  annulling  the  whole  charter ;  and  at  the  same  time  the 
foreign  forces  arrived,  whom  John  intended  to  employ  in  giving 
his  intentions  efficacy. 

He  now  no  longer  took  shelter  under  the  arts  of  dissimulation, 
but  acted  the  bold  tyrant ;  a  character  that  became  him  much 
better.  The  barons,  after  obtaining  the  charter,  seemed  to  have 
been  lulled  into  a  fatal  security ;  and  took  no  measures  for  assem- 

i^oL,  I.  23 


IT'S  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

bling  their  forces  in  case  of  the  introduction  of  a  foreign  army. 
The  king,  therefore,  was  for  some  time  undisputed  Piaster  of  the 
field,  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  Germans,  Brabantines,  and  Flem- 
ings, all  eager  for  battle,  and  inspired  with  the  hopes  of  dividing 
the  kingdom  among  them.  The  castle  of  Rochester  was  first 
invested,  and,  after  an  obstinate  resistance,  was  obliged  to  sur- 
render at  discretion.  John,  irritated  at  the  length  of  the  siege, 
was  going  to  hang  the  governor  and  all  the  garrison,  contrary  to 
the  law^  of  war ;  but,  at  the  intercession  of  one  of  his  generals, 
he  only  put  the  inferior  prisoners  to  death.  After  tlie  reduction 
of  this  important  fortress,  the  royal  interests  began  to  prevail  5 
and  two  armies  were  formed,  M'ith  one  of  which  tlie  king  marched 
northward,  subduing  all  fortresses  and  towns  that  lay  in  his  way. 
The  other  army,  commanded  by  t!ie  earl  of  Salisbury,  was  equally 
vigorous  and  successful  |  several  submitted  at  his  approach,  and 
London  itself  was  in  the  utmost  danger.  The  foreign  mercena- 
ries committed  the  most  horrible  cruelties  in  their  march,  and 
ravaged  the  counti-y  in  a  most  dreadful  manner.  Urged  on  at 
once  by  their  natural  rapacity,  and  the  cruelty  of  the  king,  noth- 
ing was  seen  but  the  flames  of  villages  and  castles ;  consternation 
and  misery  were  pictured  in  the  looks  of  the  people  ;  and  tortures 
were  every  where  exercised  by  the  soldiers  to  make  the  inhabit- 
ants reveal  their  riches.  Wherever  the  king  marched,  the  prov- 
inces were  laid  waste  on  each  side  his  passage ;  as  he  considered 
every  estate  which  was  not  his* immediate  property  as  entirely 
hostile,  and  a  proper  object  of  military  execution, 
r-^  g^  ^  -|  The  barons,  reduced  to  this  deplorable  situation,  their 
estates  destroyed,  their  liberties  annihilated,  and  their 
persons  exposed  to  the  revenge  of  a  malicious  tyrant,  lost  all 
power  of  self-defence.  They  were  able  to  raise  no  army  in  En- 
gland that  could  stand  before  their  ravager,  and  yet  they  had  no 
hopes  from  submission.  In  this  desperate  exigence  they  applied 
to  the  old  enemy  of  their  country,  Philip,  king  of  France,  and 
offered  to  acknowledge  Lewis,  the  eldest  son  of  that  m.onarch,  as 
their  sovereign,  on  condition  of  his  affording  them  protection 
against  their  domestic  destroyer.  No  proffer  could  have  been 
more  agreeable  to  this  ambitious  monarch,  who  long  wanted  to 
annex  England  to  the  rest  of  his  dominions.  He  therefore  in- 
stantly embraced  the  proposal  of  the  barons,  of  whom,  however, 


JOHN.  ir9 

he  demanded  five -and -twenty  hostages  for  the  performance  of 
their  promise.  These  being  sent  over,  he  began  to  make  the 
most  diligent  preparations  for  this  expedition,  regardless  of  the 
menaces  of  the  pope,  who  threatened  Philip  with  excommunica- 
tion, and  actually  excommunicated  Lewis,  the  son,  some  time 
after.  The  first  detachment  consisted  of  a  body  of  seven  thou- 
sand men,  which  he  reinforced  soon  after  by  a  powerful  army, 
Commanded  by  Lewis  himself,  who  landed  at  Sandwich  without 
opposition. 

John,  who  but  just  now  saw  himself  in  the  career  of  victory, 
upon  the  landing  of  the  French  army  was  stopped  all  of  a  sudden, 
and  found  himself  disappointed  in  his  revenge  and  ambition. 
The  first  effect  of  their  appearance  was,  that  most  of  the  foreign 
troops  deserted,  refusing  to  serve  against  the  heir  of  their  mon- 
archy. Many  considerable  noblemen  also  deserted  his  party ; 
and  his  castles  daily  fell  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies.  Thus 
England  saw  nothing  but  a  prospect  of  being  every  way  undone. 
If  John  succeeded,  a  tyrannical  and  implacable  monarch  was  to 
be  their  tormentor ;  if  Lewis  should  prevail,  the  country  was  ever 
&fter  to  submit  to  a  more  powerful  monarchy,  and  was  to  become 
a  province  to  France.  What  neither  human  prudence  could 
foresee,  nor  policy  suggest,  was  brought  about  by  a  happy  and 
unexpected  concurrence  of  events.  Neither  John  nor  Lewis 
succeeded  in  their  designs  upon  the  people's  happiness  and 
freedom. 

Lewis,  having  vainly  endeavoured  to  pacify  the  pope's  legate, 
resolved  to  set  the  pope  at  defiance,  and  marched  his  army 
against  the  castle  of  Rochester,  which  he  quickly  reduced.  Thence 
he  advanced  to  London,  where  the  barons  and  burghers  did  him 
homage,  and  took  the  oath  of  fealty,  after  he  had  sworn  to  con- 
firm the  liberties  and  privileges  of  the  people.  Though  never 
crowned  king  of  England,  yet  he  exercised  sovereign  authority, 
granting  charters,  and  appointing  oflicers  of  state.  But  how  flat- 
tering soever  the  prospect  before  him  appeared,  yet  there  was  a 
secret  jealousy  that  was  destroying  his  ambition,  and  undermin- 
ing all  his  pretensions.  Through  a  great  degree  of  imprudence? 
he,  on  every  occasion,  showed  a  visible  preference  to  his  natural 
French  subjects,  to  the  detriment  of  those  he  came  to  govern. 
The  suspicions  of  the  English  against  him  were  still  further  in- 


180  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

creased  by  the  death-bed  confession  of  the  count  de  Melun,  one 
of  his  courtiers,  who  declared  to  those  about  him,  that  it  was  the 
intention  of  Lewis  to  exterminate  the  English  barons  as  traitors, 
and  to  bestow  their  dignities  and  estates  on  his  own  French  sub- 
jects, upon  whose  fidelity  he  could  safely  rely.  Whatever  truth 
there  might  be  in  this  confession,  it  greatly  operated  upon  the 
minds  of  the  people  :  so  that  the  earl  of  Salisbury,  and  other  no- 
blemen, who  had  forsaken  John's  party,  once  more  deserted  to 
him,  and  gave  no  small  lustre  to  his  cause. 

In  the  mean  time  John  was  assembling  a  considerable  army, 
with  a  view  to  make  one  great  effort  for  the  crown  ;  and,  at  the 
head  of  a  large  body  of  troops,  he  resolved  to  penetrate  into  the 
heart  of  the  kingdom.  With  these  resolutions  he  departed  from 
Lynn,  which,  for  its  fidelity,  he  had  distinguished  with  many 
marks  of  favour,  and  directed  his  route  towards  Lincolnshire. 
His  road  lay  along  the  shore,  which  was  overflowed  at  high  water  : 
but  not  being  apprised  of  this,  or  being  ignorant  of  the  tides  of 
the  place,  he  lost  all  his  carriages,  ti-easures,  and  baggage,  by 
their  influx.  He  himself  escaped  with  the  greatest  difliculty,  and 
arrived  at  the  abbey  of  Swinsted,  where  his  grief  for  the  loss  he 
liad  sustained,  and  the  distracted  state  of  his  affairs,  threw  him 
into  a  fever,  which  soon  appeared  to  be  fatal.  Next  day,  being 
unable  to  ride  on  horseback,  he  was  carried  in  a  litter  to  the  castle 
of  Seaford,,  and  from  thence  removed  to  Newark,  where,  after 
having  made  his  Avill,  he  died,  in  the  fifty -first  year  of  his  age, 
and  the  eighteenth  of  his  reign. 

This  monster's  character  is  too  strongly  marked  in  every  trans- 
action of  his  life,  to  leave  the  smallest  necessity  for  disentangling 
it  from  the  ordinary  occurrences  of  his  reign.  It  was  destructive 
to  the  people,  and  ruinous  to  himself.  He  left  two  legitimate 
sons  behind  him ;  Henry,  who  succeeded  him  on  the  throne,  and 
was  now  nine  years  of  age  ;  Richard  who  was  about  seven.  He 
left  also  three  daughters ;  Jane,  married  to  Alexander,  king  of 
Scots  ;  Eleanor,  married  to  the  earl  of  Pembroke ;  and  Isabella, 
married  to  the  emperor  Frederic  II.  His  illegitimate  children 
were  numerous,  but  unnoted. 


HENRY  HI.  181 


GHAP.  XII. 


HENRY  lit 


1  HE  English,  being  now  happily  rid  of  a  tyrant  who  threatened 
the  kingdom  with  destruction^  had  still  his  rival  to  fear,  who  only 
aimed  at  gaining  the  crown,  to  make  it  subservient  to  that  of 
France.  The  partiality  of  Lewis  on  every  occasion  was  the 
more  disgusting,  as  it  was  the  less  concealed.  The  diffidence 
which  he  constantly  discovered  of  the  fidelity  of  the  barons  in- 
creased that  jealousy  which  was  so  natural  for  them  to  entertain 
on  the  present  occasion.  An  accident  happened,  which  rendered 
him  still  more  disagreeable  to  his  new  subjects.  The  govern- 
ment of  the  castle  of  Hertford  becoming  vacant,  it  was  claimed 
as  of  right  by-  Robert  Fitzwalter,  a  nobleman  who  had  been  ex- 
tremely active  in  his  service:  but  his  claim  was  rejected.  It 
Avas  now,  therefore,  apparent  that  the  English  would  be  excluded 
from  every  trust  under  the  French  government,  and  that  foreign- 
ers were  to  engross  all  the  favour  of  their  new  sovereign.  Nor 
was  the  excommunication  denounced  against  Lewis,  by  the  pope, 
entirely  without  its  effect.  In  fact  tlie  people  were  easily  per- 
suaded to  consider  a  cause  as  impious  and  profane,  for  which 
they  had  already  entertained  an  unsurmountble  aversion. 

In  tliis  disposition  of  the  people,  the  claims  of  any  native,  with 
even  the  smallest  pretensions  to  favour,  would  have  had  a  most 
probable  chance  of  succeeding.  A  claim  was  accordingly  made 
in  favour  of  young  Henry,  the  son  of  the  late  king,  who  was  now 
but  nine  years  of  age.  The  earl  of  Pembroke,  a  nobleman  of 
great  worth  and  valour,  who  had  faithfully  adhered  to  John  in  all 
the  fluctuations  of  his  fortune,  was  at  the  time  of  that  prince's 
death  marshal  of  England,  and  consequently  at  the  head  of  the 
army.  This  nobleman  determined  to  support  the  declining^  in- 
terests of  the  young  prince,  and  had  him  solemnly  crowned  by 
the  bishops  of  Winchester  and  Bath,  at  Gloucester.  In  order 
also  to  enlarge  and  confirm  his  own  authority  upon  the  present 
occasion,  a  general  council  of  the  barons  was  summoned  at  Bris- 
tol, where  the  earl  was  chosen  guardian  to  the  king,  and  pro- 
tector of  the  kingdom.     His  first  act  was  highly  pleasing  to  the 


18£  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

people,  and  reconciled  them  to  the  interests  of  the  young  prince ; 
he  made  young  Henry  grant  a  new  charter  of  liberties,  which 
contained  but  very  few  exceptions  from  that  already  extorted 
from  his  predecessor.  To  this  was  added  also  a  charter,  ascer- 
taining the  jurisdiction  and  the  boundaries  of  the  royal  forests, 
which  from  thence  was  called  the  Charta  Foresta.  By  this  it 
was  enacted,  that  all  the  forests  which  had  been  inclosed  since 
the  reign  of  Henry  the  Second  should  be  again  restored  to  the 
people,  and  new  perambulations  made  for  that  purpose.  Offences 
on  the  forests  were  no  longer  declared  to  be  capital,  but  punish- 
able by  gentler  laws  ;  and  all  the  proprietors  of  land  were  grant- 
ed a  power  of  cutting  and  using  their  own  wood  at  pleasure.  To 
these  measures,  which  gave  universal  satisfaction,  Pembroke  took 
care  to  add  his  more  active  endeavours  against  the  enemy.  He 
wrote  letters,  in  the  king's  name,  to  all  the  malcontent  barons, 
assuring  them  of  his  resolution  to  govern  them-  by  their  own 
charters  ;  and  represented  the  danger  which  they  incurred  by 
their  adherence  to  a  French  monarch,  who  only  wanted  to  oppress 
them.  These  assurances  were  attended  with  the  desii-ed  eifect. 
The  party  in  the  interests  of  Lewis  began  to  lose  ground  every 
day,  by  the  desertion  of  some  of  its  most  powerful  leaders.  The 
earls  of  Salisbury,  Arundel,  and  Warenne,  together  with  William 
Marshall,  eldest  son  of  the  protector,  came  over  to  the  young 
king ;  and  all  the  rest  of  the  barons  appeared  desirous  of  an  op- 
portunity of  following  their  example. 

The  protector  was  so  much  strengthened  by  these  accessions, 
that  he  took  the  field  ;  but  the  French  army  appearing,  he  was 
obliged  to  retire.  The  count  de  Perche,  who  commanlled  for 
Lewis,  was  so  elated  with  his  superiority,  that  he  marched  to 
Lincoln ;  and,  being  admitted  into  the  town,  began  to  attack  the 
castle,  which  he  soon  reduced  to  extremity.  The  protector,  now 
finding  that  a  decisive  below  was  to  be  struck,  summoned  all  his 
forces  from  every  quarter,  in  order  to  relieve  a  place  of  so  much 
importance  ;  and  he,  in  turn,  appeared  so  much  superior  to  the 
French,  that  they  shut  themselves  within  the  city,  and  resolved 
to  take  shelter  behind  the  walls.  But  the  garrison  of  the  castle, 
having  received  a  strong  reinforcement,  mf^,de  a  vigorous  sally 
upon  the  besiegers,  while  the  English  army  assaulted  them  from 
without ;  and,  scaling  the  walls,  entered  the  city  sword  in  hand. 


HEXRY  III.  185 

Lincoln  was  delivered  OA'er  to  be  pillaged  ;  the  French  army  was 
totally  routed,  the  commander  in  chief  was  killed,  and  several  of 
the  rest  made  prisoners  of  war.     This  misfortune  of  the  French 
was  but  the  forerunner  of  another.    Their  fleet,  which  was  bring- 
ing over  reinforcements  both  of  men  and  money,  was  attacked  bj 
the  English,  under  the  command  of  Philip  d'Albiney,  and  was  re- 
pulsed with  considerable  loss.     D'Albiney  is  said  to  have  prac- 
tised a  stratagem  against  them,  to  which  he  owed  his  victory. 
Having  got  the  wind  of  the  French,  he  ordered  his  men  to  throw 
quicklime  in  the  faces  of  the  enemy;  which,  blinding  them,  they 
were  disabled   from  further   defence.      These  repeated   losses 
served,  at  length,  to  give  peace  to  the  kingdom.     Lewis,  finding 
his   cause  every  day  declining,  and  that  it  was  at  last  grown 
wholly  desperate,  began  to  be  anxious  for  the  safety  of  his  per- 
son ;  and  was  glad  to  submit  to  any  conditions  favourable  to  his 
retreat.     He  concluded  a  peace  with  the  protector,  in  vv'hich  he 
agreed  to  leave  the  kingdom  ;  and  in  which  he  exacted,  in  return, 
an  indemnity  for  all  his  adherents.     Thus  ended  a  civil  war 
which  had  for  some  time  drenched  the  kingdom  in  blood  ;  and 
in  which  not  only  its  constitution,  but  all  its .  happiness,  seemed 
irretrievable.     The  death  of  John,  and  the  abdication  of  Lewis, 
were  circumstances  that  could  hardly  be  expected  even  by  the 
most   sanguine    well-Avishers  of  their  country.     The    one   was 
brought  about  by  accident,  and  the  other  by  the  prudence  and  in- 
trepidity of  the  earl  of  Pembroke,  the  protector,  who  himself  did 
not  long  survive  his  success. 
ri2l6  1      "^^^  yo^^"§  ^'^i^o  was  of  a  character  the  very  opposite 
of  his  father  :  as  he  grew  up  to  man's    estate,  he  was 
found  to  be  gentle,  merciful,  and  humane  ;  he  appeared  easy  and 
good-natured  to  his  dependants,  but  no  way  formidable  to  his 
enemies.     Without  activity  or  vigour,  he  was  unfit  to  conduct  iq. 
war ;  without  distrust  or  suspicion,  he  was  imposed  upon  in  time 
of  peace.     A  king  of  such  beneficent  and  meek  qualifications  was 
very  little  fitted  to  hold  the  reins  of  a  kingdom  such  as  England 
was  at  that  time,  where  every  order   was  aspiring  to  indepen- 
dence, and  endeavouring  to  plume  themselves  with  the  spoils  of 
the  prerogative.     The  protector  was  succeeded  in  his  office  by 
Peter,  bishop  of  Winchester,  and  Hubert  de  Burgh,  high  justicia- 
ry; but  no  authority  in  the  governors  could  control  a  people 


184  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

who  had  been  long  used  to  civil  discoi-d,  and  who  caught  every 
slight  occasion  to  magnify  small  offences  into  public  grievances. 
The  nobles  were  now,  in  effect,  the  tyrants  of  the  people  ;  for, 
having  almost  totally  destroyed  the  power  of  the  crown,  and  being 
encouraged  by  the  weakness  of  a  minority,  they  considered  the 
laws  as  instruments  made  only  for  their  defence,  and  with  which 
they  alone  were  to  govern.  They  therefore  retained  by  force  the 
royal  castles  w^hich  they  had  usurped  during  the  former  convul- 
sions ;  they  oppressed  their  vassals  ;  they  infested  their  weaker 
neighbours ;  and  they  invited  all  disorderly  people  to  take  pro- 
tection under  their  authority.  It  is  not  then  to  be  wondered, 
that  there  w^ere  many  complaint's  against  those  who  were  placed 
over  them.  Hubert  de  Burgh,  who  seemed  to  take  the  lead  in 
government,  at  this  time  experienced  many  conspiracies  formed 
not  only  against  his  authority  but  his  person ;  and  so  little  did 
the  confederates  regard  secrecy,  that  they  openly  avowed  their 
intentions  of  removing  him  from  his  office.  The  barons  being  re- 
quii-ed  by  him  to  give  up  their  castles,  they  not  only  refused,  but 
several  of  them  entered  into  a  confederacy  to  surprise  London ; 
and,  with  the  earls  of  Chester  and  Albemarle  at  their  head,  they 
advanced  as  far  as  Waltham  with  that  intention.  At  that  time, 
however,  their  aims  were  frustrated  by  the  diligence  of  the  gov- 
ernment :  but  they  did  not  desist  from  their  enterprise ;  for, 
meeting  some  time  after  at  Leicester,  they  endeavoured  to  seize 
tlie  king,  but  found  themselves  disappointed  in  this,  as  in  their 
former  attempt.  In  this  threatening  commotion,  the  power  of  the 
church  was  obliged  to  interpose  ;  and  the  archbishops  and  pre- 
lates threatened  the  barons  with  the  sentence  of  excommunica- 
tion, if  they  should  persist  either  in  their  attempts  upon  the  king 
or  in  detaining  his  castles.  This  menace  at  last  prevailed.  Most 
of  the  foi'tresses  were  surrendered;  and  the  number  at  that  time 
is  said  to  have  amounted  to  above  a  thousand.  But  though  Hen- 
ry gained  this  advantage  by  the  prudence  and  perseverance  o 
his  minister,  yet  his  power  was  still  established  upon  a  very  weak 
foundation.  A  contest  with  his  brother  Richard,  who  had  amass- 
ed such  sums  of  money  as  to  be  reckoned  the  richest  prince  in 
Europe,  soon  showed  the  weakness  both  of  his  power  and  his  dis- 
position.  Richard  had  unjustly  expelled  an  inferior  baron  from 
his  manor  ;  and  the  king  insisted  upon  his  restoring  him.    Th^ 


HENRY  III.  186 

6ther  persisting  in  his  refusal,  a  pow^erful  confederacy  was  form" 
ed,  and  an  army  assembled,  which  the  king  had  neither  power  nor 
courage  to  resist.     Richard's  injustice  was  declared  legal ;  and 
his  resentment  was  obliged  to  be   mollified  by  grants  of  much 
greater   importance  than  the  manor  which  had   been  the  first 
ground  of  the  quarrel.     Thus  was  the  king  obliged  to  submit  to 
all  the  demands  of  his  haughty  vassal ;  and  he  had  scarce  any 
person  who  seemed  solicitous  for  his  interests,  but  Hubert  de 
Burgh,  whom,  nevertheless,  he  discarded  in  a  sudden  caprice,  and 
thus  exposed  his  faithful  servant  to  the  violent  persecution  of  his 
enemies.     Among  the  many  frivolous  crimes  objected  to  him,  he 
was  accused  of  gaining  the  king's  affections  by  enchantment,  and 
sending  the  prince  of  Wales  a  jewel  which  he  had  stolen  from  the 
treasury,  that  rendered  the  wearer  invulnerable,     Hubert,  when 
he  found  his  ruin  resolved  on,  was  compelled  to  take  sanctuary 
in  a  church ;  but  the  king  was  prevailed  upon  to  give  orders  for 
his  being  dragged  from*  thence.     Thus  irresolute  and  timid,  the 
orders  of  one  moment  contradicted  those  of  the  preceding. 

He  quickly  recalled  the  orders  he  had  given,  and  again  renewed 
them.  The  clergy  interposed,  and  obliged  the  king  to  permit 
him  to  return  to  his  sanctuary  ;  but  he  was  once  more  constrained 
to  surrender  himself  a  prisoner,  and  was  confined  to  the  castle 
of  Devizes.  From  thence  Hubert  made  his  escape ;  and  though 
he  afterwards  obtained  the  king's  pardon,  he  never  testified  any 
desire  to  encounter  future  dangers  in  his  service. 

But,  as  weak  princes  are  never  to  be  without  governing  favour^- 
ites,  the  place  of  Hubert  was  soon  supplied  by  Peter  de  Roches^ 
bishop  of  Winchester,  a  Poitevin  by  birth,  one  equally  remarka=> 
ble  for  his  arbitrary  conduct  and  for  his  courage  and  abilities. 
Henry,  in  pursuance  of  this  prelate's  advice,  invited  over  a  great 
number  of  Poitevins  and  other  foreigners,  who,  having  rngn-.  -i 
■  neither  principles  nor  fortunes  at  home,  were  willing  to 
adopt  whatever  schemes  their  employer  should  propose.  Every 
office  and  command  were  bestowed  on  these  unprincipled  stran- 
gers, whose  avarice  and  rapacity  were  exceeded  only  by  their 
pride  and  insolence.  So  unjust  a  partiality  to  strangers  very 
naturally  excited  the  jealousy  of  the  barons;  and  they  even  ven- 
tured to  assure  the  king,  that,  if  he  did  not  dismiss  all  foreigners 
from  court,  they  would  drive  both  him  and  them  out  of  the  king- 
voL.  I.  24 


186  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

dom.  But  the  bishop  of  Winchester  had  taken  his  measures  so 
well,  that  he  brought  over  many  of  the  most  powerful  of  the  con- 
federates, and  the  estates  of  the  more  obnoxious  barons  were 
confiscated,  for  the  benefit  of  his  needy  countrymen.  In  these 
violent  measures  the  king  was  a  calm  consenting  spectator ;  he 
was  contented  with  present  advantages;  and  while  these  confis- 
cations procured  immediate  wealth,  he  little  regarded  the  conse- 
quence. But,  as  Henry  was  chiefly  swayed  by  tumultuary  re- 
monstrances, another  confederacy,  at  the  head  of  which  the 
archbishop  of  Canterbury  was,  induced  him  to  dismiss  his  minis- 
ter, and  to  send  him  and  his  needy  countrymen  out  of  the  king- 
doni.  Encouragement  to  foreigners  was  the  chief  complaint 
against  the  king ;  and  it  was  now  expected  that  the  people  were, 
to  be  no  longer  aggi-ieved  by  seeing  such  advanced  above  them. 
riQoa-t  But  their  hopes  were  quickly  disappointed;  for,  the 
king  having  married  Eleanor,  daughter  of  the  count  of 
Provence,  he  transferred  his  affections  to  the  strangers  of  that 
country,  whom  he  caressed  with  the  fondest  affection,  and  en- 
riched with  the  most  imprudent  generosity^  Places,  dignities, 
and  vast  treasures,  were  lavished  upon  them ;  many  young  noble- 
men, who  were  wards  to  the  crown,  were  manied  to  wives  of 
that  country ;  and  when  the  sources  of  the  king's  liberality  were 
dried  up,  he  resumed  all  the  grants  he  had  formerly  made,  in  or- 
der to  continue  his  favours.  The  resentment  of  every  rank  of 
people  was  excited  by  this  mischievous  attachment ;  but  their  an- 
ger was  scarce  kept  within  bounds,  when  they  saw  a  new  swarn> 
of  these  intruders  come  over  from  Gascony,  with  Isabella,  the 
king-'s  mother,  who  had  been  some  time  before  married  to  the 
count  de  la  Marche.  To  these  just  causes  of  complaint  were 
added  the  king's  unsuccessful  expeditions  to  the  continent,  his 
total  want  of  economy,  and  his  oppressive  exactions,  which  were 
but  the  result  of  the  former.  The  kingdom,  therefore,  waited 
with  gloomy  resolution,  resolving  to  take  vengeance  when  the 
general  discontent  was  arrived  at  maturity. 

To  these  temporal  discontents,  those  arising  from  the  rapacity 
of  the  see  of  Rome  were  added  shortly  after.  The  clergy  of  En- 
gland, while  they  were  contending  for  the  power  of  the  pope,  were 
not  aware  that  they  were  effectually  opposing  their  own  interests ; 
for  the  pontiff",  having  by  various  arts  obtained  the  investiture  of 


HENRY  III.  137 

all  livings  and  prelacies  in  the  kingdom,  failed  not  to  fill  up  every 
vacancy  with  his  own  creatures.  His  power  being  established, 
he  now  began  to  turn  it  to  liis  profit,  and  to  enrich  the  church  by 
€very  art  of  extortion  and  avarice.  At  this  time,  all  the  chief 
benefices  of  the  kingdom  were  conferred  on  Italians. 
Oreat  numbers  of  that  nation  were  sent  over  at  one  time  L  '^'-l 
to  be  provided  for  ;  the  king's  chaplain  alone  is  said  to  have  held 
at  once  seven  hundred  ecclesiastical  livings.  These  abuses  be- 
came too  glaring  even  for  the  blind  superstition  of  the  people  to 
submit  to ;  they  rose  in  tumults  against  the  Italian  clergy,  pilla- 
ged their  barns,  wasted  th^ir  fields,  and  insulted  their  persons. 
But  these  were  transient  obstacles  to  the  papal  encroachments. 
The  pontiff  exacted  the  revenues  of  all  vacant  benefices ;  the 
twentieth  of  all  ecclesiastical  livings  without  exception  ;  the  third 
of  such  as  exceeded  a  hundred  marks  a  year,  and  the  half  of  such 
as  were  held  by  non-residents  :  he  claimed  the  goods  of  all  in- 
testate clergymen ;  he  pretended  a  right  of  inheriting  all  money 
^ot  by  usury  ;  and  he  levied  voluntary  contributions  on  the  peo- 
ple. The  indignities  Avhich  the  people  suffered  from  these  in- 
truding ecclesiastics  were  still  more  oppressive  than  their  exac- 
tions. On  a  certain  occasion,  while  the  English  were  complain- 
ing of  the  avarice  of  their  king,  and  his  profusion  to  foreign  fa- 
vourites, the  pope's  legate  made  his  triumphal  entry  into  England^ 
and  some  business  induced  him  to  visit  Oxford  before  his  return. 
He  was  received  there  with  all  possible  splendour  and  ceremony, 
and  the  most  sumptuous  preparations  were  made  for  his  table. 
One  day,  as  the  legate's  dinner  was  preparing,  several  scholars 
of  the  university  entered  his  kitchen,  some  incited  by  motives  of 
curiosity,  others  of  hunger :  while  they  were  thus  employed  in 
admiring  the  luxury  and  opulence  in  which  this  dignitary  was 
served,  and  of  which  they  were  only  to  be  spectators,  a  poor 
Irish  scholar  ventured  to  beg  relief  from  the  cook,  who  was  an 
Italian,  as  were  all  the  legate's  domestics.  This  brutal  fellow, 
instead  of  giving  the  poor  Irishman  an  alms,  threw  a  ladle-full  of 
boiling  water  in  his  face,  and  seemed  to  exult  in  his  brutality. 
The  indignity  so  provoked  a  Welsh  student  who  was  near,  that, 
with  a  bow  which  he  happened  to  have  in  his  hand,  he  shot  the 
cook  dead  with  an  arrow.  The  legate  hearing  the  tumult  retired 
in  a  fright  to  the  toAver  of  the  church,  where  he  remained  tiU 


188  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

night-fall.  As  soon  as  he  found  that  he  might  retii-e  in  safety,  he 
hastened  to  the  king,  who  was  then  at  London,  and  complained 
to  him  of  the  outrage.  The  king,  with  his  usual  submission  to 
the  church,  appeared  in  a  violent  passion,  and  offered  to  give  im- 
mediate satisfaction  by  putting  the  offenders  to  death.  The  le- 
gate at  first  seemed  to  insist  upon  vengeance,  but  at  length  was 
appeased  by  a  proper  submission  from  the  university.  All  the 
scholars  of  that  school  which  had  offended  him  were  ordered  to  be 
stript  of  their  gowns,  and  to  go  in  procession  bare-footed,  with 
halters  about  their  necks,  to  the  legate's  house,  and  there  were 
directed  humbly  to  crave  his  absolution  and  pardon. 

But  the  impositions  of  the  church  appeared  in  their  most  con- 
spicuous point  of  view  in  a  transaction  between  the  pope  and  the 
king.  The  court  of  Rome  some  time  before,  had  reduced  tlie 
kingdom  of  Sicily  to  the  same  state  of  vassalage  to  which  En- 
gland had  submitted ;  but  Mainfroy,  an  usurper,  under  pretence 
of  governing  the  kingdom  for  the  lawful  heir,  had  seized  upon  the 
crown,  and  was  resolved  to  reject  the  pope's  authority.  As  the 
pontiff  found  that  his  own  force  alone  was  not  sufficient  to  vin- 
dicate his  claims,  he  had  recourse  to  Richard,  the  king's  brother, 
whose  wealth  he  was  not  ignorant  of;  and  to  him,  and  his  heirs, 
he  offered  the  kingdom  of  Sicily,  with  only  one  condition,  that 
he  should  regain  it  from  the  hands  of  the  usurper.  Richard  was 
too  well  acquainted  with  the  difficulty  of  the  enterprise  to  com- 
ply with  such  a  proposal ;  but  when  it  was  made  to  the  king 
himself,  the  weak  monarch,  dazzled  with  the  splendour  of  the 
conquest,  embraced  the  proposal  with  ardour.  Accordingly,  with- 
out reflecting  on  the  consequences,  or  even  consulting  the  parlia- 
ment, he  gave  the  pope  unlimited  credit  to  expend  whatever  sums 
he  should  think  proper  for  completing  the  conquest  of  that  king- 
dom. This  was  what  the  pope  expected  and  desired ;  he  sooa 
brought  Henry  in  debtor  for  more  than  a  hundred  thousand  marks, 
a  debt  which  he  had  never  been  advised  with  in  the  contracting. 
Henry  was  mortified  at  the  greatness  of  the  sum,  and  still  more 
at  the  little  prospect  of  its  being  laid  out  with  success  ;  but  he 
dreaded  the  pope's  displeasure,  and  therefore  he  resolved  to  have 
recourse  to  parliament  for  a  supply. 

In  this  universal  state  of  indignation,  it  may  readily  be  imagined 
that  the  barons  were  more  liberal  of  their  complaints  than  their 


HENRY  III.  189 

supplies.  They  determined  not  to  lavish  their  money  on  favour- 
ites without  merit,  and  expeditions  without  a  prospect  of  success. 
The  clergy  themselves  began  to  turn  against  their  spiritual  father : 
and  the  bishop  of  London  boldly  asserted,  that  if  the  king  and 
the  pope  should  take  the  mitre  from  his  head,  he  would  clap  on  a 
helmet.  But  though  the  bishops  and  clergy  were  obliged  to  ac- 
quiesce in  furnishing  a  part  of  this  absurd  expense,  the  barons 
still  continued  refractory  ;  and,  instead  of  supplies,  for  some  time 
answered  with  expostulations.  They  urged  the  king's  partiality 
to  foreigners ;  they  aggravated  the  injuries  of  his  servants,  and 
the  unjust  seizures  made  by  his  officers  from  men  of  mercantile 
professions.  The  parliament  therefore  was  dissolved  (for  so  now 
the  general  assembly  of  the  nation  began  to  be  called),  and  another 
soon  after  was  convened  with  as  little  success.  The  urgency  of 
the  king's  affairs  required  that  money  should  be  procured  at  any 
rate  ;  and  yet  the  legate  never  failed,  upon  those  occasions,  to 
obstruct  the  king's  demands,  by  making  several  for  himself.  It 
was  now,  therefore,  that  Henry  went  amongst  such  of  his  subjects 
as  were  firmly  attached  tq  him,  and  begged  for  assistance  at  their 
own  houses.  At  one  time,  he  would  get  money  by  pretending  to 
take  the  cross ;  at  another,  he  would  prevail  by  asserting  that  he 
was  resolved  to  re-conquer  his  French  dominions.  At  length  his 
barons,  perceiving  the  exigencies  to  which  he  was  reduced,  seem- 
ed, in  mere  pity,  willing  to  grant  him  aid  ;  and,  upon  his  prom- 
ising to  grant  them  plenary  redress,  a  very  liberal  supply  was 
obtained,  for  which  he  renewed  their  charter  with  more  than  usual 
solemnity.  All  the  prelates  and  abbots  were  assembled, 
with  burning  tapers  in  their  hands ;  the  Magna  Charta  L  -"  'J 
was  read  in  their  presence ;  and  they  denounced  sentence  of  ex- 
communication against  all  who  should  infringe  upon  its  decisions ; 
they  then  put  out  their  tapers  on  the  ground,  and  exclaimed, 
"  May  every  soul  that  proves  false  to  this  agreement  so  stink  and 
corrupt  in  hell !"  The  king  had  his  part  in  the  ceremony,  and 
subjoined,  "So  help  me  God,  I  will  inviolably  keep  all  these 
things,  as  I  am  a  man,  as  I  am  a  Christian,  as  I  am  a  knight,  and 
as  I  am  a  king  crowned  and  anointed !"  Thus  solemn  were  their 
mutual  engagements  ;  but  the  wretched  Henry  had  no  sooner  re- 
ceived the  supplies  for  which  his  parliament  had  been  convoked, 
than  he  forgot  every  article  of  what  he  had  so  solemnly  agreed  to 
observe. 


190  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

Though  the  king,  in  the  last  convention,  had  solemnly  engaged 
to  follow  the  advice  of  English  counsellors,  yet  he  w^as  directed 
in  all  his  measures  by  foreigners  ;  and  William  de  Valence,  on 
whom  he  conferred  various  honours,  gi-asped  at  every  post  of 
profit  that  was  in  the  royal  power  to  bestow.  This  imprudent 
preference,  joined  to  a  thousand  other  illegal  evasions  of  justice, 
at  last  impelled  Simon  Montfort,  earl  of  Leicester,  to  attempt  an 
innovation  in  the  government,  and  to  wrest  the  sceptre  from  the 
feeble  hand  that  held  it.  This  nobleman  was  the  son  of  the  fa- 
mous general  who  commanded  against  the  Albigenses,  a  sect  of 
enthusiasts  that  had  been  destroyed  some  time  before  in  the  king- 
dom of  Savoy.  He  was  married  to  the  king's  sister  ;  and,  by  his 
power  and  address,  was  possessed  of  a  strong  interest  in  the  na- 
tion, having  gained  equally  the  affections  of  the  great  and  the 
little.  The  king  was  the  only  person  whose  favour  he  disdained 
to  cultivate.  He  so  much  disregarded  Heniy's  friendship  or  en- 
mity, that  when  the  monarch,  upon  a  certain  occasion,  called  him 
traitor,  Leicester  gave  him  the  lye,  and  told  him,  that  if  he  were 
not  his  sovereign  he  would  soon  make  him  repent  of  his  insult. 
Being  possessed  of  power  too  great  for  a  subject,  he  had  long, 
though  secretly,  aspired  at  the  throne^  and  filled  all  places  with 
complaints  of  the  king's  injustice,  partiality,  and  inability  to  gov- 
ern. Having  at  last  found  his  designs  ripe  for  execution,  he  called 
a  meeting  of  the  most  considerable  barons  ;  and  concealing  his 
private  ambition  under  the  mask  of  public  concern,  he  represented 
to  them  the  necessity  of  reforming  the  state.  He  exaggerated 
the  oppressions  of  the  lower  orders  of  the  people,  the  violations 
of  the  barons'  privileges,  the  continued  plunder  of  the  clergy,  and 
the  perfidy  of  the  king.  His  popularity  and  his  power  added 
weight  to  his  eloquence ;  and  the  barons  entered  into  a  resolu- 
tion of  redressing  public  grievances,  by  taking  the  administration 
of  the  government  into  their  own  hands, 

The  first  place  where  this  formidable  confederacy  discovered 
itself  was  in  the  parliament-house,  where  the  barons  appeared  in 
complete  armour.  The  king,  upon  his  entry,  asked  them  what 
•\vas  their  intention ;  to  which  they  submissively  replied,  To  make 
him  their  sovereign,  by  confirming  his  power,  and  to  have  their 
grievances  redressed.  Henry,  who  was  ready  enough  to  promise 
whatever  was  demanded,  instantly  assured  them  of  his  intentions 


HENRY  111,  191 

to  give  all  possible  satisfaction ;   and  for  that  purpose  summoned 
another  parliament  at  Oxford,  to  digest  a  new  plan  of  government, 
and  to  elect  proper  persons  who  were  to  be  intrusted  Avith  the 
chief  authority.    This  parliament,  afterwards  called  the  mad  par- 
liament, went  expeditiously  to  work  upon  the  business  of  reforma- 
tion.    Twenty-four  barons  were  appointed,  with  supreme  au- 
thority, to  reform  the  abuses  of  the  state,  and  Leicester  was 
placed  at  their  head.     The  first  step  was  calculated  for  the  good 
of  the  people,  as  it  contained  the  rude  out-line  of  the  house  of 
commons,  which  makes  a  part  of  the  constitution  at  this  day. 
They  ordered  that  four  knights  should  be  chosen  by  each    j^^^^  ^j^ 
county,  who  should  examine  into  the  grievances  of  their       i-^ss. 
respective  constituents,  and  attend  at  the  ensuing  parliament  to 
give  information  of  their  complaints.     They  ordained  that  three 
sessions  of  parliament  should  be  regularly  held  every  year  ;  that 
a  new  high  sheriff  should  be  annually  elected ;  that  no  wards  nor 
castles  should  be  intrusted  to  foreigners ;  no  new  forests  made  ; 
nor  the  revenues  of  any  counties  let  to  farm.     These  constitu- 
tions were  so  just,  that  some  of  them  have  been  continued  to  the 
present  time  ;  but  it  was  not  the  security  of  the  people,  but  the 
establishment  of  their  own  power,  that  this  odious  confederacy 
endeavoured  to  effect.     Instead  of  resigning  their  power  wheri 
they  had  fulfilled  the  purposes  of  their  appointment,  they  still 
maintained  themselves  in  an  usurped  authority  ;  at  one  time  pre- 
tending that  they  had  not  as  yet  digested  all  necessary  regula- 
tions for  the  benefit  of  the  state  ;  at  another,  that  their  continu- 
ance in  power  was  the  only  remedy  the  people  had  against  the 
faithless  character  of  the  king :  in  short,  they  resolved  to  main- 
tain their  stations  till  they  should  think  proper  to  resign  their  au- 
thority.    The  whole  state  accordingly  underwent  a  complete  al- 
teration ;  all  its  former  officers  were  displaced,  and  creatures  of 
the  twenty -four  barons  were  put  in  their  room  ;  they  had  even 
the  effrontery  to  impose  an  oath  upon  every  individual  of  the  na- 
tion, declaring  an  implicit  obedience  to  all  the  regulations  exe- 
cuted, and  to  be  yet  executed,  by  the  barons  who  were  thus  ap- 
pointed as  rulers.     They  not  only  abridged  the  authority  of  the 
king,  but  the  efficacy  of  parliament,  giving  up  to  twelve  persons 
all  parliamentary  power  between  each  session.     Thus  these  inso- 
lent nobles,  after  having  trampled  upon  the  crown,  now  threv/ 


192  IIISTOIIY  OF  ENGLAND, 

pi'ostrate  all  the  rights  of  the  people  ;  and  a  vile  oligarchy  was  o« 
■  the  point  of  being  established  forever. 

The  first  opposition  that  was  made  to  these  usurpations  was 
from  that  very  power  which  so  lately  began  to  take  place  in  the 
constitution.  The  knights  of  the  shire,  who  for  some  time  had 
begun  to  be  regularly  assembled  in  a  separate  house,  now  first 
perceived  those  grievances,  which  they  submitted  to  the  superior 
assembly  of  the  barons  for  redress.  These  bold  and  patriotic  men 
strongly  remonstrated  against  the  slowness  of  the  proceedings  of 
their  twenty-four  rulers ;  and,  for  the  first  time,  began  to  show 
that  spirit  of  just  resistance  which  has  ever  since  actuated  their 
counsels  in  a  greater  or  a  less  degree.  They  represented,  that 
though  the  king  had  performed  all  the  conditions  required  of  him, 
the  barons  had  hitherto  done  nothing  on  their  part  that  showed  an 
equal  regai'd  for  the  people  ;  that  their  own  interests  and  power 
seemed  the  only  aim  of  all  their  decrees ;  and  they  even  called 
upon  the  king's  eldest  son,  prince  Edward,  to  interpose  his  au- 
thority, and  save  the  sinking  nation. 

Prince  Edward  was  at  this  time  about  twenty -two  years  of 
age,  when  the  hopes  which  were  conceived  of  his  abilities  and  his 
integrity  rendered  him  an  important  personage  in  the  transac- 
tions of  the  times,  and  in  some  measure  atoned  for  his  father's  im- 
becility. Upon  this  occasion  his  conduct  was  fitted  to  impress 
the  people  with  the  highest  idea  of  his  piety  and  justice.  He  al- 
leged, when  appealed  to,  that  he  had  sworn  to  the  late  Constitu- 
tions of  Oxford,  which,  though  contrary  to  his  own  private  senti- 
ments, he  yet  resolved  by  no  means  to  infringe.  At  the  same 
time,  however,  he  sent  a  message  to  the  barons,  requiring  them 
to  bring  their  undertaking  to  an  end,  or  otherwise  to  expect  the 
most  vigorous  opposition  to  their  usurpations.  To  this  the  barons 
were  obliged  to  reply,  by  publishing  a  new  code  of  laws,  which, 
though  it  contained  scarce  any  thing  material,  yet  they  supposed 
would,  for  a  while,  dazzle  the  eyes  of  the  people,  until  they 
could  take  measures  to  confirm  their  authority  upon  a  securer 
foundation.  In  this  manner,  under  various  pretences  and  studi- 
ed delays,  they  continued  themselves  in  power  for  three  years  ; 
while  the  whole  nation  perceived  their  aims,  and  loudly  con- 
demned their  treachery.  The  pope  himself  beheld  their  usurpa- 
tions with  indignation,  and  absolved  the  king  and  all  his  subjects 


Henry  hi.  195 

from  the  oath  which  they  had  taken  to  observe  the  Provisions  of 
Oxford. 

The  people  now  only  wanted  a  leader  to  subvert  this  new  ty- 
ranny imposed  upon  them  ;  but  they  knew  not  where,  nor  whom, 
they  could  apply  to  for  succour^  The  king  himself,  weak,  timid j 
irresolute,  and  superstitious,  was  in  a  manner  leagued  with  those 
who  opposed  and  depressed  his  own  interests  5  the  clergy,  who 
formerly  gave  the  people  redress,  were  become  an  independent 
body,  and  little  concerned  in  the  commotions  of  the  state,  which 
they  regarded  as  tame  spectators.  In  this  distressful  situation, 
they  had  recourse  to  young  prince  Edward,  who,  at  a  very  early 
age,  had  given  the  strongest  proofs  of  courage,  of  wisdom,  and  of 
constancy.  At  first,  indeed,  when  applied  to,  appearing  sensible 
of  what  his  father  had  suffered  by  levity  and  breach  of  promise,  he 
refused  some  time  to  take  advantage  of  the  pope's  absolution,  and 
the  people's  earnest  application ;  but  being  at  last  persuaded  to 
concur,  a  parliament  was  called,  in  which  the  king  resumed  his 
former  authority ;  and  the  barons,  after  making  one  fruitless  ef- 
fort to  take  him  by  surprise  at  Winchester,  were  obliged  to  acqui- 
esce iti  what  they  could  not  openly  oppose^ 

In  the  mean  time  the  earl  of  Leicester,  no  way  discouraged  by 
the  bad  success  of  his  past  enterprises,  resolved  upon  entirely 
overturning  that  power  which  he  hud  already  humbled.  For  this 
purpose  he  formed  a  most  powerful  confederacy  with  the  prince 
of  Wales,  who  invaded  England  with  a  body  of  thirty  thousand 
men.  To  these  barbarous  ravagers  Leicester  quickly  joined  hiS 
own  forces ;  and  the  v/hole  kingdom  was  soon  exposed  to  all  the 
devastations  of  a  licentious  army.  The  citizens  of  London  also 
were  not  averse  to  his  cause.  Under  the  command  of  their  mayor,, 
Thomas  Fitz-Richard,  a  furious  and  licentious  man,  they  fell 
upon  the  Jews,  and  many  of  the  more  wealthy  inhabitants,  pillag- 
ing and  destroying  wherever  they  came.  The  fury  of  the  faction 
•was  not  confined  to  London  only,  but  broke  out  in  most  of  the 
populous  cities  of  the  kingdom ;  while  the  king,  with  his  usual 
pusillanimity,  deplored  the  turbulence  of  the  times,  and  in  vain 
applied  to  the  pope  for  his  holy  protection. 

In  this  distressful  state  of  the  nation,  nothing  now  remained 
but  an  accommodation  with  the  insurgent  barons;  and,  after  some 
time,  a  treaty  of  peace   was  concluded,  but  upon  the  most  disad- 

VOL.  1.  S5 


J94  HISTORY  Oi"  ENGLAND. 

P  c:^  -J  vantageoiis  terms  to  the  king  and  his  party.  The  Pro- 
^  ''  visions  of  Oxford  were  again  restored,  and  tlie  barons 
re-established  in  the  sovereignty  of  the  kingdom.  They  took  pos- 
session of  all  the  royal  castles  and  fortresses ;  they  even  named 
the  officers  of  the  king's  household,  and  summoned  a  parliament 
to  meet  at  Westminster,  in  order  the  more  fully  to  settle  the  plan 
of  their  gavernment.  By  this  assembly  it  was  enacted  that  the 
authority  of  the  twenty -four  barons  should  continue ;  and  that 
not  only  during  the  reign  af  the  king,  but  also  during  that  of 
prince  Edward.. 

But  these  were  conditions  which,  though  the  pusillanimous 
feing  could  very  easily  submit  to,  yet  the  young  prince  would  by 
no  means  acquiesce  in.  He  appealed  to  the  king  of  France,  to 
whom  he  consented  to  refer  the  subject  of  his  infringed  preten- 
sions ;  and  when  that  just  monarch  declared  in  his  favour,  he  re- 
solved to.  have  recourse  to  arms,  the  last  refuge  of  oppressed  roy- 
alty. Accordingly,  summoning  the  king's  military  vassals  from  all 
quarters,  and  being  reinforced  by  many  of  the  more  equitable  bar- 
ons, he  resolved  to  take  the  field.  His  first  attempts  were  suc- 
cessful ;  Northampton,  Leicester,  and  Nottingham,  submitted  to 
his  power  5  and  he  proceeded  into  the  county  of  Derby,  in  order 
to  ravage  with  fire  and  sword  the  estates  of  such  as  had  espoused 
the  opposite  cause.  On  the  other  side,  the  earl  of  Leicester  was 
besieging  Rochester,  when  he  was  informed  of  the  king's  suc- 
cesses ;  upon  which  he  raised  the  siege^and  retreated  to  London, 
where  he  was  joined  by  a  body  of  the  citizens  amounting  to  fif- 
teen thousand  men.  Both  armies  being  thus  pretty  near  equal, 
they  resolved  to  come  to  an  engagement,  and  Leicester  halted 
within  about  two  miles  from  Lewes  in  Sussex ;  offering,  at  the 
same  time,  terms  of  accommodation  which  he  well  knew  the  king 
would  reject.^  Upon  the  refusal  of  these  with  contempt,  both 
sides  prepared  for  a  battle  with  the  utmost  rancour  and  animosity. 
The  earl  advanced  with  his  troops  near  Lewes,  where  the  king 
had  drawn  up  his  forces  to  give  him  a  proper  reception.  The 
rojal  army  was  formed  in  three  divisions :  prince  Edward  com- 
manded on  the  right ;  Richard,  the  king's  brother,  who  had  been 
some  time  before  made  king  of  the  Romans,  was  posted  on  the 
left  wing ;  and  Henry  himself  remained  in  the  centre.  The  earl's 
army  was  divided  into  four  bodies :  the  first  was  conducted  by 


HENRY  III.  195 

Henry  de  Montfort,  son  of  the  general ;  the  second  was  com- 
«ianded  by  the  earl  of  Gloucester ;  the  third  was  under  the  com- 
mand of  the  earl  himself  j  and  the  fourth,  consisting  of  Londoners, 
was  under  the  direction  of  Nicholas  Seagrave.  To  encourage 
these  insui'gents  still  further,  the  bishop  of  Chichester  gave  a 
general  absolution  to  their  party,  accompanied  with  assurances, 
that  if  any  of  them  fell  in  the  action,  they  would  infallibly  be  re- 
ceived into  heaven,  as  a  reward  for  their  suffering  in  so  meritori- 
ous a  cause.  The  battle  was  begun  by  prince  Edward,  who  rushed 
upon  the  Londoners,  placed  foremost  in  th€  post  of  honour,  with 
so  much  fury,  that  they  were  unable  to  sustain  the  charge,  but, 
giving  way,  fled  with  great  precipitation.  The  prince,  transport- 
ed with  a  desire  of  revenging  the  insults  they  had  offered  to  his 
mother,  pursued  them  four  miles  off  the  field  of  battle,  causing  a 
terrible  slaughter.  While  he  was  making  this  imprudent  use  of 
his  victory,  the  earl  of  Leicester,  who  was  a  skilful  commander, 
pushed  with  all  his  forces  against  the  enemies'  left  wing,  soon 
put  them  to  the  rout,  and  took  both  the  king  and  his  brother  pris- 
oners. It  was  a  dreadful  prospect,  therefore,  to  the  young  prince, 
w^ho  was  now  returning  victorious  from  the  pursuit,  to  behold  the 
Held  covered  with  the  bodies  of  his  friends,  and  still  more  when 
he  heard  that  his  father  and  his  uncle  were  defeated  and  taken. 
In  tliis  deplorable  state,  he  at  first  endeavoured  to  inspire  his  re- 
maining troops  with  ardour ;  but  being  artfully  amused  by  Leices- 
ter with  a  pretended  negotiation,  he  quickly  found  his  little  body 
of  troops  surrounded,  and  himself  obliged  to  submit  to  such  terms 
as  the  conqueror  thought  fit  to  impose.  These  were  short,  and 
very  conformable  to  his  wretched  situation.  He,  together  with 
another  general,  named  Henry  d'Almain,  were  to  surrender 
themselves  prisoners,  as  pledges  in  the  place  of  the  king  and  his 
brother,  who  were  to  be  released ;  the  Provisions  of  Oxford  were 
to  continue  in  full  force,  but  to  be  revised  by  six  Frenchmen  ap- 
pointed by  the  king  of  France,  three  prelates,  and  three  noble- 
men, who,  with  three  more  of  their  own  choosing,  were  to  be  in- 
vested with  full  powers  to  settle  all  disturbances  that  then  sub- 
sisted.    Such  was  the  convention  called  the  Mise  of  Lewes. 

These  great  advantages  were  no  sooner  obtained,  than 
Leicester  resolved  to  possess  himself  of  that  power  for    L        '-J 
which  he  had  so  long  been  struggling.    Instead  of  referring  the 


196  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

subject  in  dispute  to  the  king  of  France,  as  was  agreed  on,  he 
kept  Richard  still  a  prisoner ;  and  though  he  had  already  con- 
fined prince  Edward  in  the  castle  of  Dover,  yet  he  etfectually 
took  cai'e  still  to  continue  the  king  also  in  bondage.  To  add  to 
his  injustice,  he  made  use  of  his  name  for  purposes  the  most  pre- 
judicial to  the  royal  interests ;  and  while  he  every  where  disarmed 
the  king's  adherents,  he  was  cautiously  seen  to  keep  his  partisans 
in  a  posture  of  defence.  The  king,  a  poor  contemptible  specta- 
tor of  his  own  degradation,  was  carried  about  from  place  to  place, 
and  obliged  to  give  his  governors  directions  to  deliver  their  cas- 
tles into  the  hands  of  his  enemy.  To  this  usurpation  of  the 
king's  authority,  Leicester  added  the  most  barefaced  and  rapa- 
cious avarice.  He  seized  the  estates  of  no  less  than  eighteen 
barons,  as  his  share  of  the  spoil  gained  in  the  battle  of  Lewes. 
He  engrossed  to  himself  the  ransom  of  all  the  prisoners  ;  he  mo- 
nopolized the  sale  of  wool  to  foreign  markets ;  and,  to  fix  him- 
self completely  in  authority,  he  ordained  that  all  power  should  be 
exercised  by  a  council  of  nine  persons,  who  were  to  be  chosen 
by  three  persons,  or  the  majority  of  them;  and  these  were  the 
earl  himself,  the  earl  of  Gloucester,  and  the  bishop  of  Chichester. 

In  this  stretch  of  power  Leicester  was  not  so  entirely  secure, 
but  that  he  still  feared  the  combinations  of  the  foreign  states 
against  him,  as  well  as  the  internal  machinations  of  the  royal 
party.  The  king  of  France,  at  the  intercession  of  the  queen  of 
England,  who  had  taken  refuge  at  his  court,  actually  prepared  to 
reinstate  Henry  in  his  dominions ;  the  pope  was  not  sparing  in 
his  ecclesiastical  censures ;  and  there  were  many  other  princes 
that  pitied  the  royal  sufferings,  and  secretly  wished  the  usurper's 
fall.  The  miserable  situation  of  the  kingdom,  in  the  end  pro- 
duced the  happiness  of  posterity.  Leicester,  to  secure  his  ill^ 
acquired  power,  was  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  an  aid  till  now 
entirely  unknown  in  England,  namely,  that  of  the  body  of  the 
people.  He  called  a  parliament,  where,  besides  the  barons  of  his 
own  party,  and  several  ecclesiastics  who  were  not  immediate  ten- 
ants of  the  crown,  he  ordered  returns  to  be  made  of  two  knights 
from  every  shire ;  and  also  deputies  from  the  boroughs,  which 
had  been  hitherto  considered  as  too  inconsiderable  to  have  a  voice 
Jan.  20    '^  legislation.     This  is  the  first  confirmed  outline  of  an 

J266,     English  house  of  commons.     The  people  had  been  gain- 


HENRY  III.  197- 

ing  some  consideration  since  the  gradual  diminution  of  the  force 
of  the  feudal  system.  The  establishment  of  corporation  charters, 
bj  which  many  of  the  rustic  slaves  were  in  a  capacity  of  rescuing 
themselves  from  the  power  of  their  masters,  increased  not  only 
the  power  of  the  people,  but  their  ardour  to  be  free.  As  arts  in- 
creased, the  number  of  these  little  independent  republics,  if  they 
may  be  so  called,  increased  in  proportion;  and  we  find  them,  at 
the  present  period,  of  consequence  enough  to  be  adopted  into  a 
share  of  the  legislature.  Such  was  the  beginning  of  an  institu- 
tion, that  has  since  been  the  guardian  of  British  liberty,  and  the 
admiration  of  mankind.  In  this  manner  it  owed  its  original  to 
the  aspiring  aims  of  a  haughty  baron,  who  flattered  the  people 
with  the  name  of  freedom,  with  a  design  the  more  completely  to 
tyrannize. 

A  parliament,  assembled  in  this  manner  to  second  the  views  of 
the  earl,  was  found  not  so  very  complying  as  he  expected.  Many 
of  the  barons,  who  had  hitherto  steadfastly  adhered  to  his  party, 
appeared  disgusted  at  his  immoderate  ambition ;  and  many  of  the 
people,  who  found  that  a  change  of  masters  was  not  a  change 
from  misery  to  happiness,  began  to  wish  for  the  establishment  of 
the  royal  family.  In  this  exigence,  Leicester,  finding  himself 
unable  to  oppose  the  concurring  wishes  of  the  nation,  was  re- 
solved to  make  a  merit  of  what  he  could  not  prevent;  and  he  ac- 
cordingly released  prince  Edward  from  confinement,  and  had  him 
introduced  at  Westminster -hall,  where  his  freedom  was  confirmed 
by  the  unanimous  voice  of  the  barons.  But  though  Leicester  had 
all  the  popularity  of  restoring  the  prince,  yet  he  was  politic  enough 
to  keep  him  still  guarded  by  his  emissaries,  who  watched  all  his 
motions,  and  frustrated  all  his  aims. 

On  the  other  hand,  prince  Edward,  who  had  too  much  penetra- 
tion not  to  perceive  that  he  v/as  made  the  tool  of  Leicester's  am- 
bition, ardently  watched  an  opportunity  to  regain  that  freedom  of 
which  he  then  enjoyed  but  the  appearance.  An  opportunity  soon 
offered  for  procuring  him  a  restoration  of  his  former  liberty  with 
his  power.  The  earl  of  Gloucester,  one  of  the  heads  of  Leices- 
ter's party,  being  discontented  at  that  nobleman's  great  power, 
retired  from  court  in  disgust,  and  went,  for  safety,  to  his  estate 
on  the  borders  of  Wales.  Leicester  was  not  slow  in  pursuing 
Mm  thither ;  and,  to  give  greater  authority  to  his  arms,  carried 


198  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

the  king  and  the  prince  of  Wales  along  with  him.     This  was  the 
happy  opportunity  that  young  Edward  long  wanted,  in  order  to 
eftect  his  escape.     Being  furnished  by  the  earl  of  Gloucester  with 
a  horse  of  extraordinary  swiftness,  under  a  pretence  of  taking 
the  air  with  some  of  Leicester's  retinue,  who  were  in  reality  ap- 
pointed to  guard  him,  he  proposed  that  they  should  run  their 
horses  one  against  the  other.     When  he  perceived  that  he  had 
thus  sufiiciently  tired  their  horses,  immediately  mounting  Glou- 
cester's horse,  that  was  still  fresh,  he  bid  his  attendants  very  po- 
litely farewell.     They  followed  him  indeed  for  some  time  ;  but 
the  appearance  of  a  body  of  troops  belonging  to  Gloucester  soon 
put  an  end  to  the  pursuit.     This  happy  event  seemed  the  signal 
for  the  whole  body  of  the  royalists  to  rise.     The  well-known  valour 
of  the  young  prince,  the  long  train  of  grievances  which  the  peo- 
ple endured,  and  the  countenance  of  the  earl  of  Gloucester,  a  man 
of  great  power,  all  combined  to  increase  their  numbers,  and  in- 
spire their  activity.     An  army  was  soon  assembled,  which  Leices- 
ter had  no  power  to  withstand ;  and  he  saw  his  hard-earned 
power  every  day  ravished  from  him,  without  being  able  to  strike 
a  single  blow  in  its  defence.     His  son,  attempting  to  bring  him 
a  reinforcement  of  troops  from  London,  was,  by  a  vigorous  march 
of  young  Edward,  surprised,  and  his  army  cut  to  pieces. 

It  was  not  long  after,  that  the  earl  himself,  ignorant  of  his  son's 
fate,  passed  the  Severn,  in  expectation  of  the  London  army ;  but 
instead  of  the  troops  he  expected,  he  soon  perceived  that  the 
indefatigable  prince  was  coming  up  to  give  him  battle.  Nor 
was  it  without  a  stratagem  that  his  little  army  was  assaulted. 
While  the  prince  led  a  part  of  his  troops  by  a  circuit  to  attack 
him  behind,  he  ordered  another  body  of  them  to  advance  with 
the  banners  of  the  London  army  that  was  just  defeated,  which, 
for  a  long  time,  the  earl  mistook  for  an  actual  reinforcement,  and 
made  dispositions  accordingly.  At  last,  however,  this  proud  but 
unfortunate  general  perceived  his  mistake,  and  saw  that  the  en- 
emy was  advancing  against  him  on  all  sides,  v/ith  the  most  regu- 
lar dispositions  and  determined  bravery.  He  now,  therefore, 
found  that  all  was  lost ;  and  was  so  struck  with  dismay,  that  he 
could  not  help  exclaiming,  "  The  Lord  have  mercy  upon  our 
souls,  for  our  bodies  are  doomed  to  destruction  !"  He  did  not^ 
however,  abandon  all  hopes  of  safety ;  but  drew  up  his  men  in  a 


HENRY  Iir.  199 

compact  circle,  and  exhorted  them  to  fight  like  men  who  had  all 
to  gain,  or  all  to  suffer.  At  the  same  time,  he  obliged  the  old 
king  to  put  on  armour,  and  to  fight  against  his  own  cause,  in  the 
front  of  the  army.  The  battle  soon  began ;  but  the  earl's  army, 
having  been  exhausted  by  famine  on  the  mountains  of  Wales, 
were  but  ill  able  to  sustain  the  impetuosity  of  young  Edward's 
attack,  who  bore  down  upon  them  with  incredible  fury.  During 
this  terrible  day,  Leicester  behaved  with  astonishing  intrepidity, 
and  kept  up  the  spirit  of  the  action  from  two  o'clock  in  the  after- 
noon till  nine  at  night.  At  last,  his  horse  being  killed  under  him, 
he  was  compelled  to  fight  on  foot ;  and  though  he  demanded 
quarter,  the  adverse  party  refused  it,  with  a  barbarity  common, 
enough  in  the  times  we  are  describing.  The  old  king,  who  was 
placed  in  the  front  of  the  battle,  was  soon  wounded  in  the  shoul- 
der ;  and  not  being  known  by  his  friends,  he  wa&  on  the  point  of 
being  killed  by  a  soldier ;  but  crying  out,  "  I  am  Henry  of  Win- 
chester, the  king  !"  he  was  saved  by  a  knight  of  the  royal  army. 
Prince  Edward,  hearing  the  voice  of  his  father,  instantly  ran  to 
the  spot  where  he  lay,  and  had  him  conducted  to  a  place  of  safety^ 
The  body  of  Leicester,  being  found  among  the  dead,  was  barba- 
rously mangled  by  one  Roger  Mortimer,  and  then,  with  an  accu- 
mulation of  inhumanity,  sent  to  the  wretched  widow,  as  a  testi- 
mony of  the  royal  party's  success. 

This  victory  proved  decisive  ;  and  those  who'  were  formerly 
persecuted  now  became  oppressors  in  their  turn.  The  king,  who 
was  grown  vindictive  from  his  sufferings,  resolved  to  take  a  sig- 
nal vengeance  on  the  citizens  of  London,  who  had  ever  forward- 
ed the  interests  of  his  opponents.  In  this  exigence,  submission 
was  their  only  resource ;  and  Henry  was  hardly  prevailed  upon 
from  totally  destroying  the  city.  He  was  at  last  contented  to 
deprive  it  of  its  military  ensigns  and  fortifications,  and  to  levy 
upon  the  inhabitants  a  very  heavy  contribution.  Fitz-  1266. 
Richard,  the  seditious  mayor,  was  imprisoned,  and  pur-  -^'^S-  ^• 
chased  his  pardon  with  the  loss  of  his  substance.  The  rebels  ev- 
ery-where  submitted,  or  were  pursued  with  rigour.  Their  cas- 
tles were  taken  and  demolished  ;  and  scarce  any  were  fountt 
that  disputed  the  king's  authority.  Among  the  few  who  still 
continued  refractory,  was  one  Adam  Gordon,  formerly  governor 
of  Dunster  castle,  and  very  much  celebrated  for  his  prodigious 


200  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

strength  and  great  bravery.  This  outrageous  baroii  uiaintained 
himself  for  some  time  in  the  forests  of  Hampshire,  and  ravaged 
the  counties  of  Berks  and  Surry.  Prince  Edward  was,  at  length, 
obliged  to  lead  a  body  of  troops  into  that  part  of  the  country  to 
force  him  from  thence ;  and  attacked  his  camp  with  great  bravery. 
Being  transported  with  the  natural  impetuosity  of  youth,  and  the 
ardour  of  the  action,  he  leapt  over  the  trench,  by  which  it  was 
defended,  attended  by  a  few  followers ;  and  thus  found  himself 
unexpectedly  cut  off  from  the  rest  of  his  army.  Gordon  soon 
distinguished  him  from  the  rest  of  his  attendants ;  and  a  single 
combat  began  between  these  two  valiant  men,  which,  for  a  long 
time,  continued  doubtful.  But  the  prince's  fortune  at  last  pre- 
vailed :  Adam's  foot  happening  to  slip,  he  received  a  wound, 
which  disabled  him  from  continuing  the  action,  and  he  remained 
at  the  mercy  of  the  conqueror.  Edward  was  as  merciful  as  he 
vi^as  brave  :  he  not  only  granted  him  his  life,  but  introduced  him 
that  very  night  to  his  consort  at  Guildford ;  procured  him  his  par- 
don and  estate,  and  received  him  into  favour.  Gordon  was  not 
ungrateful  for  such  mercy  ;  he  ever  after  followed  the  prince, 
and  was  often  found  combating  by  his  side  in  the  most  dangerous 
shock  of  battle.  In  this  manner  the  generosity  of  the  prince  tem- 
pered the  insolence  of  victory  :  the  strength  was  gradually  re- 
stored to  the  different  members  of  the  constitution,  that  had  been 
so  long  weakened  by  the  continuance  of  civil  discord. 

Edward,  having  thus  restored  peace  to  the  kingdom,  found  his 
affairs  now  so  firmly  established,  that  it  was  not  in  the  power  of 
any  slight  disgust  taken  by  the  licentious  barons  to  shake  them. 
The  earl  of  Gloucester,  indeed,  who  had  been  so  instrumental  in 
restoring  the  king  to  the  crown,  thought  that  no  recompense 
could  equal  his  merits.  He  therefore  engaged  once  more  in  open 
rebellion  ;  but  was  soon  brought  to  submission  by  the  prince,  who 
obliged  him  to  enter  into  a  bond  of  twenty  thousand  marks,  nev- 
er to  take  part  in  similar  schemes  for  the  future.  The  kingdom 
being  thus  tolerably  composed,  that  spirit  of  adventure  and  ar- 
dour for  military  glory,  which  shone  forth  in  all  the  prince's  ac- 
tions, now  impelled  him  to  undertake  the  expedition  against  the 
infidels  in  the  Holy  Land.  The  crusade  was  at  that  time  the 
great  object  of  ambition ;  all  other  wars  were  considered  as  tri- 
fling, and  all  other  successes  as  mean,  in  comparison  of  those  gain- 


HENRY  Hi.  ^01 

% 

ed  over  the  enemies  of  Christ  and  his  religion.  To  ^hat  renowned 
field  of  blood  flocked  all  the  brave,  the  pious,  the  ambitious,  and 
the  powerful. 

In  pursuance  of  this  resolution,  which  though  succeeding  fash- 
ions of  thinking  have  condemned,  yet  certainly  then  was  prose^ 
cuted  upon  the  noblest  motives,  Edward  sailed  from  England 
with  a  large  army,  and  arrived  at  the  camp  of  Lewis,  the  king  of 
France,  which  lay  before  Tunis,  and  where  he  had  the  misfortune 
to  hear  of  that  good  monarch's  death  before  his  arrival.  The 
prince,  however,  no  way  discouraged  by  this  event,  continued  his 
voyage,  and  arrived  at  the  Holy  Land  in  safety. 

He  was  scarce  departed  Upon  this  pious  expedition,  when  the 
health  of  the  old  king  began  to  decline;  and  he  found  not  only 
his  own  constitution,  but  also  that  of  the  state,  in  such  a  danger- 
ous situation,  that  he  wrote  letters  to  his  son,  pressing  hiin  to  re- 
turn with  all  dispatch.  The  former  calamities  began  to  threaten 
the  kingdom  again ;  and  the  barons,  taking  advantage  of  the 
king's  weakness,  oppressed  the  people  with  impunity.  Bands  of 
robbers  infested  vai-ious  parts  of  the  nation  ;  and  the  populace  of 
London  once  more  resumed  their  accustomed  licentiousness.  To 
add  to  the  king's  uneasiness,  his  brother  Richard  died,  who  had 
long  assisted  him  with  his  advice  in  all  emergencies.  He  there- 
fore ardently  wished  for  the  return  of  his  gallant  son,  who  had 
placed  the  sceptre  in  hands  that  were  too  feeble  to  hold  it.  At 
last,  overcome  by  the  cares  of  government  and  the  infirmities  of 
agCj  he  ordered  himself  to  be  removed,  by  easy  journeys,  from  St. 
Edmund's  to  Westminster;  where  sending  for  the  earl  of  Glouces- 
ter, he  obliged  him  to  swear  that  he  would  preserve  the  peace  of 
the  kingdom,  and  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  maintain  the  inter- 
ests of  his  son.  That  same  night  he  expired ;  and  the  next  morn- 
ing the  great  seal  was  delivered  to  the  archbishop  of  York,  and 
the  lords  of  the  privy  council. 

Thus  died  Henry,  in  the  sixty -fourth  year  of  his  age,  and  the 
fifty -sixth  of  his  reign,  the  longest  to  be  met  with  in  the  English 
annals.  He  was  a  prince  more  adapted  for  private  than  for  pub- 
lic life ;  his  ease,  simplicity,  and  good  nature,  would  have  se- 
cured him  that  happiness  in  a  lower  station,  of  which  they  de- 
prived him  upon  a  throne.  However,  from  his  calamities  the  peo- 
ple afterwards  derived  the  most  permanent  blessings ;  that  liber- 

voL.  I,  26 


£gg2  HISTORY  OF  ENG1.AXD, 

ty  which  they  extorted  from  his  weakness,  tiiey  continued  to  pre*- 
serve  under  bolder  princes  who  succeeded  him.  The  flame  (tf 
freedom  had  now  diffused  itself  from  the  incorporated  towns 
through  the  whole  mass  of  the  people,  and  ever  afterwards  blaz- 
ed forth  at  convenient  seasons ;  so  that,  in  proportion  as  the  up- 
per orders  lost,  the  people  were  sure  to  be  gainers.  In  this  con- 
test, though  they  often  laid  down  their  lives  and  suffered  all  the 
calamities  of  civil  war,  yet  those  calamities  were  considered  as 
nothing,  when  weighed  against  the  advantages  of  freedom  and 
security. 


CHAP.  XIIL 
EDWARD  I- 

VV  HiLE  tlie  unfortunate  Henry  was  thus  vainly  struggling 
against  the  ungovernable  spirit  of  his  subjects,  his  son  and  suc- 
cessor, Edward,  was  employed  in  the  holy  wars,  where  he  revived 
the  glory  of  the  English  name,  and  made  the  enemies  of  Chris- 
tianity tremble.  He  had  arrived  at  the  city  of  Aeon,  in  Pales- 
tine, just  as  the  Saracens  were  sitting  down  to  besiege  it.  He 
soon  relieved  the  place,  followed  the  enemy,  and  obtained  many 
victories,  wliich,  though  splendid,  were  not  decisive.  Su<;h,  how- 
ever, Avere  the  enemies'  terrors  at  the  progress  of  his  arms,  that 
they  resolved  to  destroy  by  treachery  that  valiant  commander 
whom  they  could  not  oppose  in  the  field.'  A  tribe  of  Mahome- 
tan enthusiasts  had  long  taken  possession  of  an  inaccessible 
mountain  in  Syria,  under  the  command  of  a  petty  prince,  who 
went,  in  the  Christian  armies,  under  the  name  of  the  Old  Man  of 
the  Mountain,  and  whose  subjects  were  called  Assassins;  from 
whence  we  have  since  borrowed  the  name  to  signify  a  private 
stabber.  These  men,  wholly  devoted  to  their  commander,  and 
inflamed  with  a  detestable  superstition,  undertook  to  destroy  any 
Christian  prince  or  leader  who  became  obnoxious  to  their  party. 
It  was  in  vain  to  threaten  them  with  punishment ;  they  knew  the 
dangers  that  awaited  them,  but,  resolute  to  destroy,  tliey  ruslied 
upon  certain  death.    Some  time  before,  the  capital  of  this  triba 


EDWARD  I.  mS 

■lud  been  taken  by  the  Tartars,  and  the  inhabitants  put  to  the 
sword ;  yet  there  still  remained  numbers  of  them  that  were  edu- 
cated in  that  gloomy  school  of  superstition ;  and  one  of  those 
undertook  to  murder  the  prince  of  England.  In  order  to  gain 
admittance  to  Edward's  presence,  he  pretended  to  have  letters  to 
deliver  from  the  governor  of  Joppa,  proposing  a  negotiation ;  and 
thus  he  was  permitted  to  see  the  prince,  who  conversed  with 
him  freely  in  the  French  language,  which  the  assassin  understood. 
In  this  manner  he  continued  to  amuse  liim  for  some  time,  being 
permitted  to  have  free  egress  and  regress  from  the  royal  apart- 
ments. It  was  on  the  Friday  in  Whitsun-w^eek  that  lie  found  Edr 
ward  sitting  in  his  apartment  alone,  in  a  loose  garment,  the 
weather  being  extremely  hot.  This  was  the  opportunity  the  in- 
fidel had  so  long  earnestly  desired ;  and  looking  round  to  see  if 
there  were  any  present  to  prevent  him,  and  finding  him  alone,  he 
drew  a  dagger  from  his  breast,  and  attempted  to  plunge  it  into 
the  prince's  bosom.  Edward  had  just  time  to  perceive  the  mur- 
derer's intention,  and,  with  great  presence  of  mind,  received  the 
blow  upon  his  arm.  Perceiving  the  assassin  about  to  repeat  his 
blow,  he  struck  him  at  once  to  the  ground  with  his  foot ;  and, 
wresting  the  weapon  from  his  hand,  buried  it  instancy  in  his  bo- 
som. The  domestics,  hearing  a  noise,  quickly  came  into  the 
room,  and  soon  wreaked  their  resentment  on  the  perfidious 
wretch's  body,  who  had  thus  abused  the  la^ws  of  hospitality.  The 
wound  the  prince  had  received  was  the  more  dangerous,  as  having 
been  inflicted  with  a  poisoned  dagger ;  and  it  soon  began  to  ex- 
hibit some  symptoms  that  appeared  fatal.  He  therefore  expected 
his  fate  with  great  intrepidity,  and  made  his. will,  contented  to  die 
in  a  cause  which  he  was  assm-ed  would  procure  him  endless  fe- 
licity. But  his  usual  good  fortune  prevailed  ;  an  English  surgeon 
of  extraordinary  sjdll,  by  making  deep  incisions,  and  cutting 
away  the  mortified  parts,  completed  the  cure,  and  restored  him  to 
health  in  little  more  than  a  fortnight.  A  recovery  so  unexpected 
v/as  considered  by  the  superstitious  army  as  miraculous ;  nor 
were  there  wanting  some,  who  alleged  that  he  owed  his  safety  to 
the  piety  of  Eleonora  his  wife,  who  sucked  the  poison  from  the 
v/ound,  to  save  his  life,  at  the  hazard  of  her  own.  However  this 
be,  it  is  probable  that  the  personal  danger  he  incurred,  by  contin- 
uing tl\e  war  in  Palestine,  might  induce  him  m,ore  readily  to  list^i* 


204  HISTORY  OF  ENGLA.ND. 

xo  terms  of  accommodation,  which  were  proposed  soon  after  by 
the  soklan  of  Babylon.  He  received  that  monarch's  embassadors 
in  a  very  honourable  manner,  and  concluded  a  truce  with  him  for 
ten  years,  ten  weeks,  and  ten  days.  Having  thus  settled  the  af- 
fairs of  Palestine,  in  the  best  manner  they  would  admit  of,  he  set 
sail  for  Sicily,  where  he  arrived  in  safety,  and  there  first  heard 
the  news  of  the  king  his  father's  death,  as  well  as  that  of  his  own 
son  John,  a  boy  of  six  years  of  age.  He  bore  the  last  with  resigr 
nation,  but  appeared  extremely  afflicted  at  the  death  of  his  father; 
at  which  when  the  king  of  Sicily  expressed  his  surprise,  he  ob- 
served that  the  death  of  a  son  was  a  loss  which  he  might  hope  to 
repair,  but  that  of  a  father  was  a  loss  irreparable. 

Though  the  death  of  the  king  happened  while  tlie  successor 
was  so  far  from  home,  yet  measures  had  been  so  well  taken,  that 
the  crown  was  transferred  with  the  greatest  tranquillity.  The 
high  character  acquired  by  the  prince,  during  the  late  commotions, 
had  procured  him  the  esteem  and  affection  of  all  i-anks  of  men ; 
and,  instead  of  attempting  to  oppose,  their  whole  wish  was  to  see 
him  once  more  returning  in  triumph.  But  the  prince,  sensible 
of  the  quiet  state  of  the  kingdom,  did  not  seem  in  much  haste  to 
take  possession  of  the  throne;  and  he  spent  near  a  year  in 
France  before  he  made  his  appearance  in  England.  The  honoursf 
he  received  from  the  great  upon  the  continent,  and  the  acclama- 
tions with  which  he  was  every  where  attended  by  the  people, 
were  too  alluring  to  a  young  mind  to  be  suddenly  relinquished  ; 
he  was  even  tempted  to  exhibit  proofs  of  his  bravery  in  a  tourna= 
ment,  to  which  he  was  invited  by  the  count  de  Chalons,  who  defied 
him  to  a  trial  of  his  skill.  Impressed  with  high  ideas  of  the  chiv- 
alry of  the  times,  he  accepted  the  challenge  ;  and  proposed,  with 
his  knights,  to  hold  the  field  against  all  that  would  enter  the 
lists.  His  usual  good  fortune  attended  him ;  and  his  success  had 
like  to  have  converted  a  trial  of  skill  into  a  matter  of  bloody  con- 
tention. The  count  de  Chalons,  enraged  at  being  foiled,  made  a 
serious  attack  upon  the  English,  in  which  some  blood  was  idly 
spilt ;  but  Edward  and  his  knights  still  maintained  the  superior^ 
ity.  From  Chalons  Edward  proceeded  to  Paris,  where  he  was 
magnificently  entertained  by  Philip,  king  of  France,  to  whom  he 
did  homage  for  the  territories  the  kings  of  England  had  possessed 
in  that  kingdom.    From  Paris  he  set  out  for  Gascony,  to  cixrh 


EDWARD  I.  205 

the  insolence  of  Gaston  count  Bearne,  who  had  rebelled  in  his 
absence.  From  thence  he  passed  through  Monti'euil,  where  he 
accommodated  some  differences  between  the  English  and  Flem- 
ings. At  length,  after  various  battles,  dangers,  and  fatigues,  he 
arrived  in  his  native  dominions,  amidst  tlie  loud  acclamations  of 
his  people,  and  was  solemnly  crowned  at  Westminster  by  the 
archbishop  of  Canterbury.  The  joy  of  all  ranks  upon  this  occa- 
sion was  inexpressible  ;  the  feasting  continued  a  whole  fortnight 
at  the  king's  expense ;  five  hundred  horses  were  turned  loose,  as 
the  property  of  those  who  could  catch  them.  The  king  of  Scot- 
land, with  several  other  princes,  graced  the  solemnity,  and  did 
homage  for  those  territories  they  held  under  the  English  crown. 
Nothing  therefore  remained  to  complete  the  felicity  of  the  people 
but  the  continuance  of  such  prosperity ;  and  this  they  had  every 
reason  to  expect  from  the  king's  justice,  his  economy,  and  his 
prudence. 

As  Edward  was  now  come  to  an  undisturbed  throne,  the  oppo- 
site interest  was  proportionably  feeble.  The  barons  were  ex- 
hausted by  long  mutual  dissensions  ;  the  clergy  were  divided  in 
their  interests,  and  agreed  only  in  one  point,  to  hate  the  pope, 
who  had  for  some  time  drained  them  with  impunity  :  the  people, 
by  some  insurrections  against  the  convents,  appear  to  have  hated 
the  clergy  with  equal  animosity.  These  disagreeing  orders  con- 
curred in  one  point  only,  that  of  esteeming  and  reverencing  the 
king.  In  such  a  conjuncture,  therefore,  few  measures  could  be 
taken  by  the  crown  that  would  be  deemed  oppressive ;  and  we 
accordingly  find  the  present  monarch  often,  from  his  own  author- 
ity alone,  raising  those  taxes  that  would  have  been  peremptorily 
refused  to  his  predecessor.  However,  Edward  was  naturally 
prudent ;  and  though  capable  of  becoming  absolute,  he  satisfied 
himself  with  moderate  power,  and  laboured  only  to  be  terrible  to 
his  enemies. 

His  first  care  was  to  correct  those  disorders  which  had  crept 
in  under  the  last  part  of  his  father's  feeble  administration.  He 
proposed,  by  an  exact  distribution  of  justice,  to  give  equal  pro- 
tection and  redress  to  all  the  orders  of  the  state.  He  took  every 
opportunity  to  inspect  the  conduct  of  all  his  magistrates  and 
judges,  and  to  displace  such  as  were  negligent  or  corrupt.  In 
short,  a  system  of  strict  justice,  marked  with  an  air  qf  severity, 


^6  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

was  pursued  throughout  his  reign  ;  formidable  to  the  people  in- 
deed, but  yet  adapted  to  the  ungovernable  licentiousness  of  the 
times.  The  Jews  were  the  only  part  of  his  subjects  who  wei-e 
refused  that  equal  justice  which  the  king  made  a  boast  of  dis- 
tributing. As  Edward  had  been  bred  up  in  prejudices  against 
■them,  and  as  these  were  still  more  confirmed  by  his  expedition  to 
the  Holy  Land,  he  seemed  to  have  no  compassion  upon  their  suf- 
ferings. Many  were  the  arbitrary  taxes  levied  upon  them ;  two 
hundred  and  eighty  of  them  were  hanged  at  once,  upon  a  charge 
of  adulterating  the  coin  of  the  kingdom ;  the  goods  of  the  rest 
were  confiscated,  and  all  of  that  religion  utterly  banished  the 
kingdom.  This  severity  was  very  grateful  to  the  people,  who 
hated  the  Jews,  not  only  for  their  tenets,  but  for  their  method  of 
living,  which  was  by  usury  and  extortion. 

But  Edward  had  too  noble  a  spirit  to  be  content  with  the  ap= 
plause  this  petty  oppression  acquired  :  he  resolved  to  march 
against  Lewellyn,  prince  of  North  Wales,  who  had  refused  to  do 
homage  for  his  dominions,  and  seemed  bent  upon  renouncing  all 
dependence  upon  the  crown  of  England.  The  Welsh  had  for 
many  ages  enjoyed  their  own  laws,  language,  customs,  and  opin- 
ions. They  were  the  remains  of  the  antient  Britons  who  had  es- 
caped the  Roman  and  Saxon  invasions,  and  still  preserved  their 
freedom  and  their  country  uncontaminated  by  the  admission  of 
foreign  conquerors.  But  as  they  were,  from  their  number,  inca- 
pable of  withstanding  their  more  powerful  neighbours  on  the 
plain,  their  chief  defence  lay  in  their  inaccessible  mountains, 
those  natural  bulwarks  of  the  country.  Whenever  England  was 
<]istressed  by  factions  at  home,  or  its  forces  called  off  to  wars 
abroad,  the  Welsh  made  it  a  constant  practice  to  pour  in  their  ir- 
regular troops,  and  lay  the  open  country  waste  wherever  they 
came.  Nothing  could  be  more  pernicious  to  a  country  than  seve- 
ral neighbouring  independent  principalities,  under  different  com- 
manders, and  pursuing  different  interests ;  the  mutual  jealousies 
of  such  were  sure  to  harass  the  people ;  and  wherever  victory  was 
purchased,  it  was  always  at  the  expense  of  the  general  welfare. 
Sensible  of  this,  Edward  had  long  wished  to  reduce  that  incursive 
people,  and  had  ordered  Lewellyn  to  do  homage  for  his  territo- 
ries ;  which  summons  the  Welsh  prince  refused  to  obey,  unless 
the  king's  oxyn  son  should  be  delivered  as  a  hostage  for  his  safe 


EDWARD  I.  20r 

return.  The  king  was  not  displeased  at  this  refusal,  as  it  served 
to  give  him  a  pretext  for  his  intended  invasion.  He  therefore 
levied  an  army  against  Lewellyn,  and  marched  into  his  country 
with  certain  assurance  of  success.  Upon  the  approach  of  Ed- 
ward, the  Welsh  prince  took  refuge  among  the  inaccessible  moun- 
tains of  Snowdon,  and  there  resolved  to  maintain  his  ground, 
without  trusting  to  the  chance  of  battle.  These  were  the  steep 
retreats  that  had  for  many  ages  before  defended  his  ancestors 
against  all  the  attempts  of  the  Norman  and  Saxon  conquerors. 
But  Edwardy  equally  vigorous  and  cautious,  having  explored  ev- 
ery part  of  his  way,  pierced  into  the  very  centre  of  Lewellyn's 
territories,  and  approached  the  Welsh  army  in  its  last  retreat, 
Lewellyn  at  first  little  regarded  the  progress  of  an  enemy  that  he 
supposed  would  make  a  transient  invasion,  and  then  depart ;  but 
his  contempt  was  turned  into  consternation,  when  he  saw  Edward 
place  his  forces  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  and  surround  his  ar- 
my, in  order  to  force  it  by  famine.  Destitute  of  magazines,  and 
cooped  up  in  a  narrow  corner  of  the  country,  without  provisions 
for  his  troops,  or  pasturage  for  his  cattle,  nothing  remained  but 
death  or  submission ;  so  that  the  unfortunate  Welsh  prince,  with- 
out being  able  to  strike  a  blow  for  his  independence,  was  at  last 
obliged  to  submit  at  discretion,  and  to  receive  such  terms  as  the 
victor  was  pleased  to  impose.  Lewellyn  consented  to  pay  fifty 
thousand  pounds,  as  a  satisfaction  for  damages  ;  to  do  homage  to 
the  crown  of  England ;  to  permit  all  other  barons,  except  four 
near  Snowdon,  to  swear  fealty  in  the  same  manner ;  to  relin- 
quish the  country  between  Cheshire  and  the  river  Conway  5  to  do 
justice  to  his  own  family ;  and  to  deliver  hostages  for  the  secu- 
rity of  his  submission. 

But  this  treaty  was  only  of  short  duration  :  the  op- 
pression of  the  conqueror,  and  the  indignant  pride  of  L  '^  '-! 
the  conquered  nation,  could  not  long  remain  without  producing 
new  dissensions.  The  lords  of  the  Marches  committed  all  kinds 
of  injustice  on  their  Welsh  neighbours ;  and  although  Edward 
remitted  the  fifty  thousand  pounds  penalty,  yet  he  laid  other 
restrictions  some  time  after  upon  Lewellyn,  which  that  prince 
considered  as  more  injurious.  He  particularly  exacted  a  promise 
from  him  at  Worcester,  that  he  would  retain  no  person  in  his 
principality  that  should  be  disagreeable  to  the  English  monarch. 


208  HISTORY  01-  ENGLAND. 

These  were  insults  too  great  to  be  endured,  and  ortce  more  the 
"VVelsli  flew  to  arms.  A  body  of  their  forces  took  the  field,  under 
the  command  of  David,  the  brother  of  their  prince,  ravaged  tiie 
plain  country,  took  the  castle  of  Harwardin,  made  sir  Roger  Clif- 
ford,  justice  of  the  Marches,  who  was  very  dangerously  wounded, 
their  prisoner,  and  soon  after  laid  siege  to  the  castle  of  Rhudlan. 
When  the  account  of  these  hostilities  was  brought  to  Edward,  he 
assembled  a  numerous  army,  and  set  out  with  a  resolution  to  ex- 
terminate Lewellyn  and  his  whole  family,  and  to  reduce  that 
people  to  such  an  abject  state,  that  they  should  never  after  be 
able  to  revolt,  or  distress  their  peaceable  neighbours.  At  first, 
however,  the  king's  endeavours  were  not  attended  with  their 
visual  success  :  having  caused  a  bridge  of  boats  to  be  laid  over  the 
river  Menay,  a  body  of  forces,  commanded  by  lord  Latimer  and 
De  Thonis,  passed  over  before  it  was  completely  finished,  to 
signalise  their  courage  against  the  enemy.  The  Welsh  patiently 
remained  in  their  fastnesses  till  they  saw  the  tide  flowing  in  be- 
yond the  end  of  the  bridge,  and  thus  cutting  ofi'the  retreat  of  the 
assailants.  It  was  then  that  they  poured  down  from  their  moun- 
tains with  hideous  outcries,  and,  with  the  most  ungovernable  fury, 
put  the  whole  body  that  had  got  over  to  the  swoi-d.  This  defeat 
revived  the  sinking  spirits  of  the  Welsh,  and  it  was  now  univer- 
sally believed  by  that  superstitious  people  that  heaven  had  de- 
clared in  their  favour.  A  story  ran,  that  it  was  foretold,  in  the 
prophecies  of  Merlin,  that  Lewellyn  was  to  be  the  restorer  of 
Brutus's  empire  in  Britain  :  a  wizard  had  prognosticated  that  he 
should  ride  through  the  streets  of  London  with  a  crown  upon  his 
head.  These  were  inducements  sufiiciently  strong  to  persuade 
this  prince  to  hazard  a  decisive  battle  against  the  English.  With 
this  view  he  marched  into  Radnorshire ;  and  passing  the  river 
Wey,his  troops  were  surprised  and  defeated  by  Edward  Mortimer, 
while  he  himself  was  absent  from  his  army  upon  a  conference 
with  some  of  the  barons  of  that  country.  Upon  his  return,  seeing 
the  dreadful  situation  of  his  affairs,  he  ran  desperately  into  the 
midst  of  the  enemy,  and  quickly  found  that  death  he  so  ardently 
sought  for.  One  of  the  English  captains,  recognizing  his  coun- 
tenance, severed  his  head  from  his  body,  and  it  was  sent  to  Lon- 
don, where  it  was  received  with  extreme  demonstrations  of  joy. 
The  brutal  spirit  of  the  times  will  sufficiently  appear  from  the 


EbWARiD  t  209 

barbarity  of  the  citizens  on  this  occasion :  the  head  being  encir- 
cled in  a  silver  coronet,  to  fulfil  the  prediction  of  a  wizard,  it 
was  placed  by  them  upon  a  pillory,  that  the  populace  might  glut 
their  eyes  with  such  an  agreeable  spectacle.  David,  the  brother 
of  this  unfortunate  prince,  soon  after  shared  the  same  fate ;  while 
his  followers,  quite  dispirited  by  the  loss  of  their  beloved  leader, 
obeyed  but  slowly,  and  fought  with  reluctance.  Thus,  being  at 
last  totally  abandoned,  he  was  obliged  to  hide  himself  in  one  of 
the  obscure  caverns  of  the  country ;  but  his  retreat  being  soon 
after  discovered,  he  was  taken,  tried,  and  condemned  as  a  traitor. 
His  sentence  was  executed  with  the  most  rigorous  severity  ;  he 
was  hanged,  drawn,  and  quartered,  only  for  having  bravely  de^ 
fended  the  expiring  liberties  of  his  native  country,  and  his  own 
hereditary  possessions.  With  him  expired  the  government  and 
the  distinction  of  the  nation.  It  was  soon  after  united  to  the 
kingdom  of  England,  made  a  principality,  and  given  to  the  eldest 
son  of  the  crown.  Foreign  conquest  might  add  to  the  glory,  but 
this  added  to  the  felicity  of  the  kingdom^  The  Welsh  were  now 
blended  with  the  conquerors ;  and,  in  the  revolution  of  a  few 
ages,  all  national  animosity  was  entirely  forgotten. 

At  the  time  of  the  conquest,  however,  the  Welsh  submitted 
with  extreme  reluctance  ;  and  few  nations  ever  bowed  to  a  for^ 
eign  yoke  with  greater  indignation.  The  bards  of  the  country, 
whose  employment  consisted  in  rehearsing  the  glorious  deeds  of 
their  ancestors,  were  particularly  obnoxious  to  the  king,  whoj 
considering  that  while  they  continued  to  keep  the  antient  flame 
alive  he  must  expect  no  peace  in  his  new  acquisitions,  ordered 
them  to  be  massacred,  from  motives  of  barbarous  policy  at  that 
time  not  uncommon.  This  severity  he  is  said  to  have  softened 
by  another  measure,  equally  politic,  and  far  less  culpable.  In 
order  to  flatter  their  vanity,  and  amuse  their  superstition,  he  left 
his  queen  to  be  delivered  in  the  castle  of  Caernarvon,  and  after- 
wards presented  the  child,  whose  name  was  Edward,  to  the 
Welsh  lords,  as  a  native  of  their  country,  and  as  their  appointed 
prince.  The  lords  received  him  with  acclamations  of  joy,  con- 
sidering him  as  a  master  who  would  govern  them  as  a  distinct 
people  from  the  English,  there  being  at  that  time  another  heir- 
apparent  to  the  English  crown.  But  the  death  of  the  eldest  son, 
Alphonso,  soon  after  made  young  Edward,  who  had  been  thus 

VOL,  I.  37 


£10  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

created  prince  of  Wales,  heir  also  to  the  English  monarchy ;  and 
ever  since  the  government  of  both  nations  has  continued  to  flow 
in  one  undivided  cliannel. 

This  great  and  important  conquest  being  achieved,  paved  the 
way  for  one  of  still  more  importance,  though  not  attended  with 
such  permanent  consequences.  Alexander  III.  king  of  Scotland, 
had  been  killed  by  a  fall  from  his  horse,  leaving  only  Margaret, 
his  grand-daughter,  heir  to  the  crown,  who  died  some  time  after. 
The  death  of  this  princess  produced  a  most  ardent  dispute  about 
the  succession  to  the  Scottish  throne,  being  claimed  by  no  less 
than  tv/elve  competitors*  That  nation  being  thus  divided  into  as 
many  factions  as  there  were  pretenders,  the  guardians  of  the 
realm  would  not  undertake  to  decide  a  dispute  of  so  much  conse- 
quence. The  nobility  of  the  country  were  no  less  divided  in 
their  opinions ;  and,  after  long  debates,  they  at  last  unanimously 
agreed  to  refer  the  contest  to  the  determination  of  the  king  of 
England.  The  claims  of  all  the  other  candidates  were  reduced 
to  three,  who  were  the  descendants  of  the  earl  of  Huntingdon  by 
three  daughters ;  John  Hastings,  Avho  claimed  in  right  of  his 
mother,  as  one  of  the  co-heiresses  of  the  crown ;  John  Baliol,  who^ 
alleged  his  right,  as  being  descended  from  the  eldest  daughter, 
who  was  his  grand-mother ;  and  Robert  Bruce,  who  was  the  ac- 
tual son  of  the  second  daughter.  In  this  contest,  which  was  re- 
ferred to  Edward,  he  pretended  the  utmost  degree  of  deliberation  ; 
and  although  he  had  long  formed  his  resolution,  yet  he  ordered 
all  inquiries  to  be  made  on  the  subject,  that  he  might  be  master 
of  the  arguments  that  could  be  advanced  on  any  side  of  the  ques- 
tion. In  this  research,  he  soon  discovered  that  some  passages  in 
old  chronicles  might  be  produced  to  favour  his  own  secret  incli- 
nations ;  and,  without  further  delay,  instead  of  admitting  the 
claims  of  the  competitors,  he  boldly  urged  his  own  ;  and,  to  sec- 
ond his  pretensions,  advanced  with  a  formidable  army  to  the 
frontiers  of  the  kingdom. 

The  Scottish  barons  were  thunderstruck  at  these  unexpected 
pretensions ;  and  though  they  felt  the  most  extreme  indignation 
at  his  procedure,  yet  they  resolved  to  obey  his  summons  to  meet 
at  the  castle  of  Norham,  a  place  situated  on  the  southern  banks 
of  the  Tweed,  where  he  convened  the  parliament  of  that  country. 
He  there  produced  the  proofs  of  his  superiority,  which  he  alleged 


EDWARD  I.  211 

were  unquestionable,  and  desired  their  concurrence  with  his 
claims ;  at  the  same  time  advising  them  to  use  deliberation,  and 
to  examine  all  his  allegations  with  impartial  justice.  To  a  pro- 
posal that  appeared  in  itself  so  unreasonable,  no  immediate  an- 
swer could  be  given  ;  for,  where  all  is  defective,  it  is  not  easy  to 
submit  to  the  combating  a  part :  the  barons,  therefore,  continued 
silent ;  and  Edward,  interpreting  this  for  a  consent,  addressed 
himself  to  the  several  competitors  to  the  crown ;  and  previous  to 
his  appointing  one  of  them  as  his  vassal,  he  required  their  ac- 
knowledgment of  his  superiority.  He  naturally  concluded  that 
none  of  them  would  venture  to  disoblige  the  man  who  was  unan- 
imously appointed  to  be  the  arbitrator  of  his  pretensions.  Nor 
was  he  deceived ;  he  found  them  all  equally  obsequious  on  this 
occasion.  Robert  Bruce  was  the  first  who  made  the  acknowledg- 
ment, and  the  rest  quickly  followed  his  example.  Edward,  being 
thus  become  the  superior  of  the  kingdom,  undertook  next  to  con- 
sider which  of  the  candidates  was  the  fittest  to  be  appointed  un- 
der him ;  or  it  may  be,  as  they  appeared  all  indifferent  to  him, 
which  had  the  justest  claim.  In  order  to  give  this  deliberation 
the  appearance  of  impartiality,  a  hundred  commissioners  were  ap- 
pointed 5  forty  of  them  being  chosen  by  the  candidates  who  were 
in  the  interests  of  John  Baliol ;  foi-ty,  by  those  in  the  interests  of 
Robert  Bruce ;  and  twenty,  who  v/ere  chosen  by  Edward  himself. 
Having  thus  fitted  matters  to  his  satisfaction,  he  left  the  commis- 
sioners to  sit  at  Berwick ;  and  went  southward,  to  free  their  de- 
liberations from  all  shadow  of  restraint.  The  subject  of  the  dis- 
pute ultimately  rested  in  this  question :  Whether  Ealiol,  who 
was  descended  from  the  elder  sister,  but  further  removed  by 
one  degree,  was  to  be  preferred  before  Bruce,  who  was  actually 
the  younger  sister's  son  ?  The  rights  of  inheritance,  as  at  pres- 
ent generally  practised  over  Europe,  were  even  at  that  time 
pretty  well  ascertained ;  and  not  only  the  commissioners,  but 
many  of  the  best  lawyers  of  the  age,  universally  concurred  in  af- 
firming Baliol's  superior  claim.  Edward,  therefore,  pronounced 
sentence  in  his  favour ;  and  that  candidate,  upon  renewing  his 
oath  of  fealty  to  England,  was  put  in  possession  of  the  Scottish 
kingdom,  and  all  its  fortresses,  which  had  been  previously  put  i© 
the  hands  of  the  king  of  England. 

Baliol  being  thug  placed  upon  the  Scottish  throne,  less  as  a 


212  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

king-  than  as  a  vassal,  Edward's  first  step  was  sufficient  to  convince 
that  people  of  his  intentions  to  stretch  the  prerogative  to  tlie  ut- 
most.    Instead  of  gradually  accustoming  the  Scots  to  bear  the 
English  joke,  and  of  sliding  in  his  new  power  upon  them  by  slow 
and  imperceptible  degrees,  he  began  at  once  to  give  them  notice 
of  his  intentions.     A  merchant  of  Gascony  had  presented  a  peti- 
tion to  him,  importing  that  Alexander,  the  late  king  of  Scotland, 
was  indebted  to  him  a  large  sum,  which  was  still  unpaid,  not- 
withstanding all  his  solicitations  to  Baliol,  the  present  king,  for 
payment;  Edward  eagerly  embraced  this  opportunity  of  exer- 
cising his  new  right,  and  summoned  the  king  of  Scotland  to  ap- 
pear at  Westminster,  to  answer  in  person  the  merchant's  com- 
plaint.    Upon  subjects  equally  trivial   he  sent  six  different  sum- 
monses, at  different  times,  in  one  year ;  so  that  the  poor  Scottish 
king  soon  perceived  that  he  was  possessed  of  the  name  only,  but 
not  the  authority,  of  a  sovereign.    Willing,  therefore,  to  shake  off 
the  yoke  of  so  troublesome  a  master,  Baliol  revolted,  and  pro- 
cured the  pope's  absolution  from  his  former  oaths  of  homage.    To 
strengthen  his  hands  still  more,  he  entered  into  a  secret  treaty 
-with  Philip,  king  of  France,  which  was  the  commencement  of  a 
union  between  these  two  nations,  that,  for  so  many  succeeding 
ages,  was  fatal  to  the  interests  of  England.     To  confirm  this  al- 
liance, the  king  of  Scotland  stipulated  a  marriage  between  his 
eldest  son  and  the  daughter  of  Philip  de  Valois. 

Edward,  to  whom  these  transactions  were  no  secret,  endeav- 
oured to  ward  the  threatened  blow,  by  being  the  first  aggressor ; 
and  accordingly  summoned  John  to  perform  the  duty  of  a  vassal, 
and  to  send  him  a  supply  of  forces  against  an  invasion  from 
France,  with  which  state  he  had  for  some  time  been  at  variance. 
He  also  summoned  him  to  surrender  some  of  his  principal  forts, 
and  to  appear  at  a  parliament  which  was  held  at  Newcastle. 
None  of  these  commands,  as  he  well  foresaw,  being  complied 
with,  he  resolved  to  enforce  obedience  by  marching  a  body  of 
thirty  thousand  foot,  and  four  thousand  horse,  into  the  heart  of 
the  kingdom  of  Scotland.  As  the  Scottish  nation  had  little  reli- 
ance on  the  vigour  or  the  courage  of  their  king,  they  had  assigned 
him  a  council  of  twelve  noblemen  to  assist,  or,  moi-e  properly 
speaking,  to  superintend  his  proceedings.  They  raised  an  army 
pf  forty  thousand  men  for  the  present  emergency,  and  marched 


EDWATiD  I.  213 

tliem  to  the  frontiers,  which  Edward  was  now  preparing  to  attack. 
But  some  of  the  most  considerable  of  the  Scottish  nobility,  among 
whom  were  Robert  Bruce  and  his  son,  endeavoured  to  ingratiate 
themselves  with  Edward  by  an  early  submission,  which  served 
not  a  little  to  intimidate  those  who  still  adhered  to  their  king.    The 
progress,  therefore,  of  the  English  arms  was  extremely  rapid ; 
Berwick  was  taken  by  assault,  sir  William  Douglas,  the  gover- 
nor, made  prisoner,  and  a  garrison  of  seven  thousand  men  put  to 
the  sword.     Elated  by  these  advantages,  Edward  dispatched  the 
earl  Warenne,  with  ten  thousand  men,  to  lay  siege  to  Dun- 
bar ;  and  the  Scots,  sensible  of  the  importance  of  that  place,  ad- 
vanced with  their  whole  army,  under  the  command  of  the  earls 
of  Mar,  Buchan,  and  Lenox,  to  relieve  it.     Although  the  superi- 
ority of  the  numbers  w^as  greatly  on  their  side,  yet  courage  and 
discipline  were  entirely  on  that  of  the  English.     The  conflict  was 
of  short  continuance  :  the  Scots  were  soon  throvi^n  into  confusion, 
and  twenty  thousand  of  their  men  were  slain  upon  the  field  of 
battle.     The  castle  of  Dunbar,  with  all  its  garrison,  surrendered 
the  day  following ;  and  Edward,  who  was  now  come  up  with  the 
main  body  of  his  army,  led  them  onward  into  the  country  to  cer- 
tain conquest.     The  castles  of  the  greatest  strength  and  impor- 
tance opened  their  gates  to  him  almost  without  resistance ;  and 
the  whole  southern  part  of  the  country  acknowledged  the  con- 
queror.    The  northern  parts  were  not  so  easily  reducible,  being 
defended  by  the  inaccesible  mountains,  and  intricate  forests,  that 
deform  the  face  of  that  country.     To  make  himself  master  of  this 
part  of  the  kingdom,  Edward  reinforced  his  army  with  numbers 
of  men  levied  in  Ireland  and  Wales,  who,  being  used  to  this  kind 
of  desultory  war,  were  best  qualified  to  seek  or  pursue  the  latent 
enemy.     But  Baliol  made  these  preparations   unnecessary;  he 
found  that  a  ready  submission  was  more  safe  and  easy  than  a 
fierce  resistance  drawn  out  among  mountainous  deserts,  and  those 
solitudes  made  still  more  dreadful  by  famine.     He  hastened, 
therefore,  to  make  his  peace  Vvdth  the  victor,  and  expressed  the 
deepest  repentance  for  his  former  disloyalty.     To  satisfy  him 
still  further,  he  made  a  solemn  resignation  of  the  crown  into  his 
hands ;  and  the  whole  kingdom  soon  after  followed  his  example. 
Edward,  thus  master  of  the  kingdom,  took  every  precaution  to 
secure  his  title,  and  to  abolish  those  distinctions  which  might  be 
apt  to  keep  the  nation  in  its  former  independence. 


214  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

He  carefully  destroyed  all  records  and  monuments  of  antiqui- 
ty that  inspired  the  people  with  a  spirit  of  national  pride.  He 
carried  away  a  stone,  which  the  traditions  of  the  vulgar  pretend- 
ed to  have  been  Jacob's  pillow,  on  which  all  their  kings  were 
seated  when  they  were  anointed.  This,  the  antient  tradition 
had  assured  them,  was  the  mark  of  their  government,  and  wherev- 
er it  was  placed  their  command  was  always  to  follow.  The 
great  seal  of  Baliol  was  broken ;  and  that  unhappy  monarch  him- 
self was  carried  as  a  prisoner  to  London,  and  committed  to  cus- 
tody in  the  Tower.  Two  years  afterwards  he  was  restored  to 
his  liberty,  and  banished  to  France,  where  he  died  in  a  private 
station,  without  making  any  further  attempts  to  reinstate  himself 
upon  the  throne  ;  happier  perhaps  in  privacy  than  if  gratified  in 
the  pursuits  of  ambition. 

The  cessation  which  was  given  to  Edward  by  those  successes, 
in  his  insular  dominions,  induced  him  to  turn  his  ambition  to  the 
continent,  where  he  expected  to  recover  a  part  of  those  territo- 
ries that  had  been  usurped  from  his  crown  during  the  imbecility 
of  his  predecessors.      There  had  been  a  rupture  with  France 
some  time  before,  upon  a  very  trifling  occasion.     A  Norman  and 
English  ship  met  oiFthe  coast,  near  Bayonne,  and  having  both  oc- 
casion to  draw  water  from  the  same  spring,  there  happened  a 
quarrel  for  the  preference.     This  scuffle,  in  which  a  Norman  was 
slain,  produced  a  complaint  to  the  king  of  France,  who  desired 
the  complainant  to  take  his  own  revenge,  and  not  bring  such  mat- 
ters before  him.     This  the  Normans  did  shortly  after  ;  for,  seiz- 
ing the  crew  of  a  ship  in  the  Channel,  they  hanged  a  part  of 
them,  together  with  some  dogs,  in  the  presence  of  all  tlieir  com- 
panions.    This  produced  a  retaliation  from  the  English  cinque- 
ports  ;  and  the  animosity  of  the  merchants  on  both  sides  being 
wrought  up  to  fury,  the  sea  became  a  scene  of  piracy  and  murder. 
No  quarter  was  given  on  either  side  ;   the  mariners  were  destroy- 
ed by  thousands ;  and  at  last  the  affair  became  too  serious  for  the 
sovereigns  of  either  side  to  continue  any  longer  unconcerned 
spectators.     Some  ineffectual  overtures  were  made  for  an  accom- 
modation ;  but  Edward,  seeing  that  it  was  likely  to  come  to  an 
open  rupture,  gave  orders  for  having  his  territory  of  Guienne,  up- 
on the  continent,  put  into  a  posture  of  defence.     Nor  was  he  re- 
miss in  making  treaties  with  several  neighbouring  princes,  whose 


EDWARD  I.  215 

assistance  he  purchased,  though  greatly  to  the  diminution  of  his 
scanty  revenues.  He  even  sent  an  army,  collected  in  England 
from  the  jails,  which  had  been  filled  with  robbers  in  the  former 
reign,  and  who  were  now  made  serviceable  to  the  state.  These, 
though  at  first  successful  under  the  command  of  John  de  Bre- 
tagne,  earl  of  Richmond,  were,  however,  soon  repulsed  by  the 
French  army,  under  the  command  of  Charles,  brother 
to  the  king  of  France.  Yet  it  was  not  easy  to  discour-  ^  *-J 
age  Edward  from  any  favourite  pursuit.  In  about  three  years  af- 
ter, he  again  renewed  his  attempts  upon  Guienne,  and  sent 
thither  an  army  of  seven  thousand,  men,  under  the  command  of 
his  brother,  the  earl  of  Lancaster.  That  prince  gained,  at  first, 
some  advantages  over  the  French  at  Bordeaux  :  but  he  was  soon 
after  seized  with  a  distemper,  of  which  he  died  at  Bayonne. 

The  king,  finding  his  attempts  upon  that  quarter  unsuccessful, 
resolved  to  attack  France  upon  another,  where  he  hoped  that 
kingdom  would  be  more  vulnerable.  He  formed  an  alliance  with 
John,  earl  of  Holland,  by  giving  him  his  daughter  Elizabeth  in 
marriage  ;  and  also  with  Guy,  earl  of  Flanders,  whose  assistance 
he  procured  for  the  stipulated  sum  of  seventy-five  thousand 
pounds.  From  these  assistances  he  entertained  hopes  of  being 
once  more  able  to  recover  his  hereditary  dominions;  and  he  ac- 
cordingly set  himself  earnestly  about  providing  money  for  such 
an  arduous  undertaking.  This  was  not  obtained  without  the 
greatest  struggles  with  his  clergy  and  the  people ;  so  that  when 
he  came  to  take  the  field  in  Flanders,  at  the  head  of  an  army  of 
fifty  thousand  men,  the  proper  season  of  action  was  lost ;  where- 
fore the  king  of  France  and  he  were  glad  to  come  to  an  accommo- 
dation, by  which  they  agreed  to  submit  their  differences  to  the 
arbitration  of  the  pope.  By  this  mediation  it  was  agreed  between, 
them,  that  their  union  should  be  cemented  with  a  double  mar- 
riage,— that  of  Edward  with  Margaret,  Philip's  sister ;  and  that 
of  the  prince  of  Wales  with  Isabella,  the  French  monarch's 
daughter.  Philip  was  prevailed  on  to  restore  Guienne  to  the  En- 
glish. He  agreed  also  to  abandon  the  king  of  Scotland,  upon 
condition  that  Edward  should  in  like  manner  neglect  the  earl  of 
Flanders.  Thus,  after  a  very  expensive  war,  the  two  monarchs 
were  obliged  to  sit  down  just  where  they  began  5  and  instead  of 
making  preparations  against  each  other,  they  resolved  to  turn  the 
weight  of  their  power  upon  their  weaker  neighbourSo 


£16  V  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

But  though  this  expedition  was  tlius  fruitlessly  terminated,  yet 
the  expenses  which  were  requisite  for  fitting  it  out  were  not  only 
burthensome  to  the  king,  but  even,  in  the  event,  threatened  to 
shake  him  on  his  throne.  In  order  at  first  to  set  the  great  ma- 
chine in  movement,  he  raised  considerable  supplies  by  means  of 
his  parliament ;  and  that  august  body  was  then  first  modelled  by 
him  into  the  form  in  which  it  continues  to  this  day.  As  the 
great  part  of  the  property  of  the  kingdom  was  now,  by  the  intro* 
duel  ion  of  commerce,  and  the  impi'ovement  of  agriculture,  trans- 
ferred from  the  barons  to  the  lower  classes  of  the  people,  so  their 
consent  was  thought  necessary  for  the  raising  any  considerable 
supplies.  For  this  reason  he  issued  writs  to  the  sheriffs,  enjoin- 
ing them  to  send  to  parliament,  along  with  two  knights  of  the 
shire  (as  in  the  former  reign),  two  deputies  from  each  borough 
within  their  county,  and  these  provided  with  sufficient  powers 
from  their  constituents  to  grant  such  demands  as  they  should 
think  reasonable  for  the  safety  of  the  state.  The  charges  of 
these  deputies  were  to  be  borne  by  the  borough  which  sent  them  ; 
and  so  far  were  they  from  considering  their  deputation  as  an  hon- 
our, nothing  could  be  more  displeasing  to  any  borough  than  to  be 
thus  obliged  to  send  a  deputy,  or  to  any  individual  than  to  be 
thus  chosen.  However,  the  authority  of  these  commoners  in- 
creased by  time.  Their  union  gave  them  weight ;  and  it  became 
customary  among  them,  in  return  for  the  supplies  which  they  had 
granted,  to  prefer  petitions  to  the  crown  for  the  redress  of  those 
grievances  under  which  they  supposed  tlie  nation  to  labour.  The 
more  the  king's  necessities  increased,  the  more  he  found  it  expe- 
dient to  give  them  an  early  redress,  till  from  requesting  the  com- 
mons proceeded  to  requiring  ;  and,  having  all  the  property  of  the 
nation,  they  by  degrees  began  to  be  possessed  of  the  power. 
Such  was  the  constitution  of  that  parliament  to  which  Edward 
applied  for  assistance  against  France.  He  obtained  from  the  ba- 
rons and  knights  a  grant  of  the  twelfth  of  their  moveables ;  from 
the  boroughs  an  eighth  ;  and  from  the  clergy  he  resolved  to  ex- 
act a  fifth  ;  but  he  there  found  an  unexpected  resistance.  This 
body  of  men,  who  had  already  felt  the  weight  of  his  necessities, 
resolved  to  avail  themselves  of  any  pretext  rather  than  thus  sub- 
mit to  such  a  heavy  and  disproportioned  imposition.  The  pope 
had  sometime  before  issued  a  bull,  prohibiting  the  clergy  froni 


EDWARD  I.  Sir 

paying  taxes  to  any  temporal  prince,  without  permission  from  the 
see  of  Rome  ;  and  those  of  England  now  pleaded  conscience,  in 
refusing  to  comply  with  the  king's  demand.  They  alleged,  that 
they  owed  obedience  to  two  sovereigns,  a  spiritual  and  a  tempo- 
ral ;  but  that  their  eternal  happiness  bound  them  to  obey  one, 
while  only  their  worldly  safety  led  them  to  acknowledge  the 
commands  of  the  others  Edward  was  somewhat  mortified  at 
their  refusal,  but  employed  their  own  arguments  with  great  force 
against  them.  He  refused  them  his  temporal  protection,  ordered 
his  judges  to  receive  no  cause  brought  before  them  by  the  clergy, 
but  to  hear  and  decide  all  causes  in  which  they  were  defendants  ; 
to  do  every  man  justice  against  them  ;  and  to  deny  them  justice 
even  under  the  greatest  injury. 

In  this  outlawed  situation  they  suffered  numberless  hardships 
from  every  rufiian,  while  the  king's  officers  remained  unconcerned 
spectators  of  the  ravages  committed  upon  them,  without  incurring 
the  hatred  of  oppressive  or  vindictive  cruelty.     Whenever  the 
clergy  ventured  from  home,  they  were  dismounted  from  theic 
horses,  and  robbed  of  their  clothes ;  the  primate  himself  was  at- 
tacked on  the  highway,  and  stripped  of  all  his  equipage  and  fur- 
niture.    These    severities  at  length  prevailed ;  and   the  clergy 
agreed  to  lay  the  sums  they  were  taxed  in  some  church  appointed 
them,  which  were  to  be  taken  away  by  the  king's  officers.     Thus 
at  once  they  obeyed  the  king,  without  incurring  the  censures  of 
the  pope.     But  though  these  sums  were  very  great,  yet  they  were 
by  no  means  adequate  to  the  wants  of  the  state.     New  taxes 
were  therefore  arbitrarily  imposed.     Edward  laid  a  duty  of  forty 
shillings  a  sack  upon  wool ;  he  required  the  sheriffs  of  each  county 
to  supply  him  with  two  thousand  quarters  of  wheat,  and  as  many 
of  oats,  without  considering  the  means  by  which  they  were  to  be 
obtained.     These  he  levied  by  the  way  of  loans,  promising  to 
pay  an  equivalent  whenever  the  exigencies  of  the  state  were  less 
pressing.     Such  various  modes  of  oppression  were  not  suffered 
without  murmuring.     The  clergy  were  already  disgusted   to  a 
man  ;  the  people  complained  at  those  extortions  they  could  not 
resist;  while  many  of  the  more  powerful  barons,  jealous  of  their 
own  privileges,  as  well  as  of  national  liberty,  gave  countenance 
to  the  general  discontent. 

The  first  symptoms  of  this  spirit  of  resistance  appeared  upon 

VOL.  I.  28 


218  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

the  king's  ordering  Humphry  Bohun,  the  constable,  and  Roger 
Bigod,  the  mareschal  of  England,  to  take  the  command  of  an 
army  that  he  proposed  to  send  over  into  Gascony,  while  he  him- 
self intended  to  make  a  diversion  on  the  side  of  Flanders.  But 
these  two  powerful  noblemen  refused  to  obey  his  orders,  alleg- 
ing, that  they  were  obliged  by  their  offices  to  attend  him  only  in 
the  wars,  and  not  to  conduct  his  armies.  A  violent  altercation 
ensued.  The  king,  addressing  himself  to  the  constable,  cried 
out,  "  Sir  earl,  by  God,  you  shall  either  go  or  be  hanged."  To 
which  the  haughty  baron  replied,  "  Sir  king,  by  God,  I  will  neither 
go  nor  be  hanged."  This  opposition  quite  defeated  his  scheme 
for  the  conquest  of  Guienne.  He  found  he  had  driven  preroga- 
tive a  little  too  far ;  and  with  that  presence  of  mind  which  al- 
wsijs  brought  him  back,  when  he  had  the  least  gone  beyond  tlie 
line  of  discretion,  he  desired  to  be  reconciled  to  his  barons,  to 
the  church,  and  to  his  people.  He  therefore  pleaded  the  urgent 
necessities  of  the  crown,  and  promised,  upon  his  return  from 
Flanders,  whither  he  was  then  going,  to  redress  all  grievances, 
to  restore  the  execution  of  the  laws,  and  to  make  his  subjects 
compensation  for  the  losses  which  they  had  sustained.  These 
professions  served  pretty  well  to  allay  the  kindling  discontents  of 
the  nation  during  his  absence  abroad,  except  that  the  ensuing 
parliament  only  the  two  noblemen,  attended  by  a  great  body  of 
cavalry  and  infantry,  took  possession  of  the  city  gates,  and  obliged 
the  king's  council  to  sign  the  Magna  Charta,  and  to  add  a  clause, 
to  secure  the  nation  forever  against  all  impositions  and  taxes 
without  the  consent  of  parliament.  This  the  council  readily  agreed 
to  sign ;  and  the  king  himself,  when  it  was  sent  over  to  him  in 
Flanders,  after  some  hesitation,  thought  proper  to  do  the  same. 
These  concessions  he  again  confirmed  upon  his  return  5  and 
though  it  w^as  probable  he  was  averse  to  granting  them,  yet  he 
was  at  last  brought  to  give  a  plenary  consent  to  all  the  articles 
that  were  demanded  of  him.  Thus,  after  the  contest  of  an  age^ 
the  Magna  Charta  Avas  finally  established ;  nor  was  it  the  least 
circumstance  in  its  favour,  that  its  confirmation  was  procured 
from  one  of  the  greatest  and  boldest  princes  that  ever  swayed  the 
English  sceptre. 

But  though  the  confirmation  of  this  charter  was  obtained  with- 
out much  violence,  yet  it  is  probable,  that  the  disturbance  given 


EDWARD  I.  ^19 

by  Scotland  about  the  same  time  might  have  hastened  r^  oq-k  -i 
its  final  execution.  That  fierce  nation,  which  had  been 
conquered  some  time  before  with  so  much  ease,  still  discovered  a 
spirit  of  independence,  that  no  severity  could  restrain,  nor  de^ 
feats  subdue.  The  earl  Warenne  had  been  left  justiciary  in  that 
kingdom ;  and  his  prudence  and  moderation  were  equal  to  his 
valour.  He  therefore  protected  the  people  with  his  justice,  as  he 
had  subdued  them  by  his  arms  :  but  being  obliged,  by  the  bad  state 
of  his  health,  to  leave  that  kingdom,  he  left  the  administration  in 
the  hands  of  two  very  improper  ministers ;  the  one,  whose  name 
was  Ormesby,  was  rigorous  and  cruel ;  the  other,  called  Cressing- 
ham,  was  avaricious  and  mean.  Under  such  an  administration  little 
stability  could  be  expected ;  and  their  injustice  soon  drove  this 
distressed  people  into  open  rebellion.  A  few  of  those  who  had  fled 
into  the  most  inaccessible  mountains  from  the  arms  of  Edward, 
took  this  opportunity  to  pour  down  and  strike  for  freedom.  They 
were  headed  by  William  Wallace,  so  celebrated  in  Scottish  story, 
the  younger  son  of  a  gentleman  who  lived  in  the  western  part  of 
the  kingdom.  He  was  a  man  of  gigantic  stature,  incredible 
strength,  and  amazing  intrepidity  ;  eagerly  desirous  of  independ- 
ence, and  possessed  with  the  most  disinterested  spirit  of  patriot- 
ism. To  this  man  had  resorted  all  those  who  were  obnoxious  to 
the  English  government ;  the  proud,  the  bold,  the  criminal,  and 
the  ambitious.  These,  bred  among  dangers  and  hardships  them- 
selves, could  not  forbear  admiring  in  their  leader  a  degree  of 
patience,  under  fatigue  and  famine,  which  they  supposed  beyond 
the  power  of  human  nature  to  endure ;  he  soon,  therefore,  be- 
came the  principal  object  of  their  aifection  and  their  esteem.  His 
first  exploits  were  confined  to  petty  ravages  and  occasional  at- 
tacks upon  the  English.  As  his  forces  increased,  his  efforts  be- 
came more  formidable ;  every  day  brought  accounts  of  his  great 
actions  ;  his  party  was  joined  first  by  the  desperate,  and  then  by 
the  enterprising ;  at  last,  all  who  loved  their  country  came  to 
take  shelter  under  his  protection.  Thus  reinforced,  he  formed  a 
plan  of  surprising  Ormesby,  the  unworthy  English  minister,  who 
resided  at  Scone ;  but  though  this  tyrant  escaped  the  meditated 
irruption,  yet  his  efiects  served  to  recompense  the  insurgents. 
From  this  time,  the  Scots  began  to  grow  too  powerful  for  the  En= 
flish  that  were  appointed  to  govern  them  j  many  of  their  princi- 


220  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

pal  barons  joined  the  insurgents ;  sir  William  Douglas  was  among 
the  foremost  openly  to  avow  his  attachment ;  while  Robert  Bruce 
more  secretly  favoured  and  promoted  the  cause.  To  oppose  this 
unexpected  insurrection,  earl  Warenne  collected  an  army  of  forty 
thousand  men  in  the  North  of  England,  and  prepared  to  attack 
the  Scots,  who  had  by  this  time  crossed  the  borders,  and  had  be- 
gun to  ravage  the  country.  He  suddenly  entered  Annandale, 
and  came  up  with  the  enemy  at  Irvine,  where  he  surprised  their 
forces,  who,  being  inferior  in  number,  capitulated,  and  promised 
to  give  hostages  for  their  future  fidelity.  Most  of  the  nobility 
renewed  their  oaths,  and  joined  the  English  army  with  reluctance, 
waiting  a  more  favourable  occasion  for  vindicating  their  freedom. 
Wallace  alone  disdained  submission ;  but,  with  his  faithful  fol- 
lowers, marched  northwards,  with  a  full  intention  to  protract  the 
hour  of  slavery  as  long  as  he  could.  In  the  mean  time,  Warenne 
advanced  in  the  pursuit,  and  overtook  him,  where  he  was  advan- 
tageously posted,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Stirling,  on  the  other 
side  of  the  river  Forth.  The  earl,  perceiving  the  favourable 
ground  he  had  chosen,  was  for  declining  the  engagement  :  but  be- 
ing pressed  by  Cressingham,  a  proud  man,  whose  private  revenge 
operated  over  his  judgment,  the  old  earl  was  at  last  obliged  to 
comply,  and  he  passed  over  a  part  of  his  army  to  begin  the  attack. 
Wallace,  allowing  such  numbers  of  the  English  to  get  over  as  he 
thought  himself  superior  to,  boldly  advanced  upon  them  before 
they  were  completely  formed,  and  put  them  entirely  to  the  rout. 
Part  were  pursued  into  the  river  that  lay  in  the  rear,  and  the 
rest  were  cut  to  pieces-  Among  the  slain  was  Cressingham  him- 
self, whose  memory  was  so  extremely  odious  to  the  Scots,  that 
they  flayed  his  dead  body,  and  made  saddles  of  his  skin.  Wa- 
renne retired  with  the  remains  of  his  army  to  Berwick,  while  his 
pursuers  took  such  castles  as  were  but  ill  provided  for  a  siege. 
Wallace  returned  into  Scotland,  after  having  thus,  for  a  time, 
saved  his  country,  laden  w^ith  an  immense  plunder,  with  which 
he  for  a  while  dispelled  the  prospect  of  famine,  that  seemed  to 
threaten  the  nation. 

P  Edward,  who  had  been  over  in  Flanders  while  these 

L  'J  misfortunes  happened  in  England,  hastened  back  with 
impatience  to  restore  his  authority,  and  secure  his  former  con- 
f^uests.     As  the  discontents  of  the  people  were  not  yet  entirely 


EDWARD  I.  221 

appeased,  he  took  every  popular  measure  that  he  thought  would 
sive  them  satisfaction.  He  restored  to  the  citizens  of  London 
the  power  of  electing  their  own  magistrates,  of  which  they  had 
been  deprived  in  the  latter  part  of  his  father's  reign.  He  ordered 
strict  inquiries  to  be  made  concerning  the  quantity  of  corn  which 
he  had  arbitrarily  seized  for  the  use  of  his  ai-mies,  as  if  he  intend- 
ed to  pay  the  value  to  the  owners.  Thus  having  appeased,  if  not 
satisfied,  all  complaints,  he  levied  the  whole  force  of  his  domin- 
ions ;  and,  at  the  head  of  a  hundred  thousand  men,  he  directed 
his  march  to  the  North,  fully  resolved  to  take  vengeance  upon 
the  Scots  for  their  late  defection. 

It  may  easily  be  supposed  that  the  Scots,  even  if  united,  were 
but  ill  able  to  resist  such  an  army,  commanded  by  such  a  king ; 
but  their  own  mutual  dissensions  served  to  render  them  still  more 
unequal  to  the  contest,  and  to  prepare  Edward's  way  to  an  easy 
triumph.  The  Scots  were  headed  by  three  commanders,  who 
each  claimed  an  equal  share  of  authority ;  these  were  the  steward 
of  Scotland,  Cummin  of  Badenoch,  and  William  Wallace,  who 
offered  to  give  up  his  command,  but  whose  party  refused  to  fol- 
low any  other  leader.  The  Scotch  army  was  posted  at  Falkirk, 
and  there  proposed  to  abide  the  assault  of  the  English,  They 
were  drawn  up  in  three  separate  divisions,  each  forming  a  com- 
plete body  of  pikemen,  and  the  intervals  filled  up  with  archers. 
Their  horses  were  placed  in  the  rear,  and  their  front  was  secured 
with  palisadoes. 

Edward,  though  he  saw  that  the  advantage  of  situation  was 
against  him,  little  regarded  such  a  superiority,  confident  of  his 
skill  and  his  numbers ;  wherefore,  dividing  his  forces  also  into 
three  bodies,  he  led  them  to  the  attack.  Just  as  he  advanced  at 
the  head  of  his  troops,  the  Scots  set  up  such  a  shout,  that  the 
horse  upon  which  the  king  rode  took  fright,  threw,  and  afterwards 
kicked  him  on  the  ribs  as  he  lay  on  the  ground ;  but  the  intrepid 
monarch,  though  sorely  bruised  with  his  fall,  quickly  mounted 
again  with  his  usual  alacrity,  and  ordered  the  Welsh  troops  to 
begin  the  attack.  These  made  but  a  feeble  resistance  against  the 
Scots,  who  fought  with  determined  valour;  but  Edward,  seeing 
them  begin  to  decline,  advanced  in  person  at  the  head  of  another 
battalion ;  and,  having  pulled  up  the  palisadoes,  charged  the  ene- 
my with  such  impetuosity  that  they  were  no  longer  able  to  resist. 


222  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

In  this  distress,  Wallace  did  all  that  lay  in  the  power  of  man  to 
sustain  and  avert  the  shock ;  but  the  division  commanded  by 
Cummin  quitting  the  field,  both  the  divisions  of  the  lord  steward, 
as  well  as  that  of  Wallace,  lay  exposed  to  the  English  archers, 
■who  at  that  time  began  to  excel  those  of  all  other  nations.  Wal- 
lace for  a  while  maintained  an  unequal  contest  with  his  pikemen  ; 
but  finding  himself  in  danger  of  being  surrounded,  he  was  at  last 
obliged  to  give  way,  and  slowly  to  draw  off  the  poor  remnant  of 
his  troops  behind  the  river  Carron.  Such  was  the  famous  battle 
of  Falkirk,  in  which  Edward  gained  a  complete  victory,  leaving 
twelve  thousand  of  the  Scots,  or,  some  will  have  it,  fifty  thousand, 
dead  upon  the  field  of  battle,  while  the  English  had  not  a  hundred 
slain. 

A  blow  so  dreadful  had  not  as  yet  entirely  crushed  the  spirits 
of  the  Scotch  nation ;  and  after  a  short  interval  they  began  to 

ri2Q8  1  '^^'^^^the  from  their  calamities.  Wallace,  who  had  gain- 
ed all  their  regards  by  his  valour,  showed  that  he  still 
merited  them  more  by  his  declining  the  rewards  of  ambition. 
Perceiving  how  much  he  was  envied  by  the  nobility,  and  know- 
ing how  prejudicial  that  envy  would  prove  to  the  interests  of  his 
country,  he  resigned  the  regency  of  the  kingdom,  and  humbled 
himself  to  a  private  station.  He  proposed  Cummin  as  the  prop- 
erest  person  to  supply  his  room  ;  and  that  nobleman  endeavoured 
to  show  himself  worthy  of  this  pre-eminence.  He  soon  began  to 
annoy  the  enemy  ;  and  not  content  with  a  defensive  war,  he 
made  incursions  into  the  southern  counties  of  the  kingdom,  which 

rtnrvg  -|  Edv/ard  had  imagined  wholly  subdued.  They  attacked 
'^  an  army  of  the  English  lying  at  Roslin,  near  Edin- 
burgh, and  gained  a  complete  victory.  The  renown  of  the  Scot- 
tish arnis  soon  began  to  spread  dismay  among  the  English  garri- 
sons left  in  that  kingdom ;  and  they  evacuated  all  the  fortresses 
of  which  they  had  for  some  time  been  put  in  possession.  Thus 
once  more  the  task  of  conquest  was  to  be  performed  over  again  ; 
and  in  proportion  to  their  losses  the  Scots  seemed  to  gather  fresh 
obstinacy. 

But  it  was  not  easy  for  any  circumstances  of  bad  fortune  to  re- 
press the  enterprising  spirit  of  the  king.  He  assembled  a  great  fleet 

^■,i,r)e^  "I  a^d  army  J  and,  entering  the  frontiers  of  Scotland,  ap- 
peared  with  a  force  which  the  enemy  could  not  think 


EDWARD  I.  223 

of  resisting  in  the  open  field.  The  fleet  furnished  the  land  army 
with  all  necessary  provisions ;  while  these  marched  securely 
along,  and  traversed  the  kingdom  from  one  end  to  the  other,  ra- 
vaging the  open  country,  taking  all  the  castles,  and  receiving  the 
submissions  of  all  the  nobles.  This  complete  conquest  employed 
Edward  for  the  space  of  two  years ;  but  he  seemed,  by  the  sever- 
ity of  his  conduct,  to  make  the  natives  pay  dear  for  the  trouble 
to  which  they  had  put  him.  He  abrogated  all  the  Scottish  laws 
and  customs ;  he  endeavoured  to  substitute  those  of  England  in 
their  place ;  he  eiptirely  rased  or  destroyed  all  their  monuments 
of  antiquity,  and  endeavoured  to  blot  out  even  the  memory  of 
their  former  independence  and  freedom.  There  seemed  to  re- 
main only  one  obstacle  to  the  final  destruction  of  the  Scottish 
monarchy  ;  and  that  was  William  Wallace,  who  still  continued 
refractory,  and,  wandering  with  a  few  forces  from  mountain  to 
mountain,  still  preserved  his  native  independence  and  usual  good 
fortune.  But  even  their  feeble  hopes  from  him  were  soon  disap- 
pointed ;  he  was  betrayed  into  the  king's  hands  by  sir  John  Mon- 
teith,  his  friend,  whom  he  had  made  acquainted  with  the  place  of 
his  concealment,  being  surprised  by  him  as  he  lay  asleep  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Glasgow.  The  king,  willing  to  strike  the  Scots 
with  an  example  of  severity,  ordered  him  to  be  conducted  in 
chains  to  London,  whither  he  w^as  carried  amidst  infinite  crowds 
of  spectators,  who  flocked  to  see  a  man  that  had  often  filled  the 
whole  country  with  consternation.  On  the  day  after  his  arrival 
he  was  brought  to  his  trial,  as  a  traitor,  at  Westminster-hall, 
where  he  was  placed  upon  a  high  chair,  and  crowned  with  laurel 
in  derision.  Being  accused  of  various  imputed  crimes,  he  plead- 
ed Not  guilty,  and  refused  to  own  the  jurisdiction  of  the  court^ 
affirming  that  it  was  equally  unjust  and  absurd  to  charge  him 
with  treason  against  a  prince  whose  title  he  had  never  acknowl- 
edged ;  and  as  he  was  born  under  the  laws  of  another  country, 
it  was  cruel  to  try  him  by  those  to  which  he  was  a  stranger.  The 
judges  disregarded  his  defence ;  for,  considering  Edward  as  the 
immediate  sovereign  of  Scotland,  they  found  him  guilty  of  high- 
treason,  and  condemned  him  to  be  hanged,  drawn,  and  quarter- 
ed ;  the  usual  punishment  for  such  offences.  This  sentence  was 
executed  with  the  most  rigourous  punctuality  ;  and  his  head  and 
quarters  were  exposed  in  the  chief  cities  of  England.     Such  was 


224  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

the  wretched  end  of  a  brave  man,  who  had,  through  a  course  of 
many  years,  with  signal  perseverance  and  conduct,  defended  hig 
native  country  against  an  unjust  invader. 

Robert  Bruce  was  among  those  on  whom  the  cruel  fate  of 
Wallace  had  made  the  deepest  impression.  This  nobleman, 
whom  we  have  already  seen  as  competitor  for  the  crown,  and 
whose  claims,  though  set  aside  by  Edward,  were  still  secretly 
pursued,  was  now  actually  in  the  English  army.  He  never  was 
sincerely  attached  to  the  English  monarch,  whom  he  was  in  some 
measure  compelled  to  follow ;  and  an  interview  with  Wallace, 
some  time  before  that  champion  was  taken,  confirmed  him  in  his 
resolution  to  set  his  country  free.  But  as  he  was  now  grown  old 
and  infirm,  he  was  obliged  to  give  up  the  flattering  ambition  of 
being  the  deliverer  of  his  people,  and  to  leave  it  in  charge  to  his 
son,  whose  name  was  Robert  Bruce  also,  and  who  received  the 
project  with  ardour.  This  young  nobleman  was  brave,  active, 
and  prudent;  and  a  favourable  conjuncture  of  circumstances 
seemed  to  conspire  with  his  aims.  John  Baliol,  whom  Edward 
had  dethroned  and  banished  into  France,  had  lately  died  in  that 
country  ;  his  eldest  son  continued  a  captive  in  the  same  place ; 
there  was  none  to  dispute  his  pretensions,  except  Cummin,  who 
was  regent  of  the  kingdom ;  and  he  also  was  soon  after  brought 
over  to  second  his  interests.  He  therefore  resolved  upon  freeing 
his  country  from  the  English  yoke ;  and  although  he  attended 
the  court  of  Edward,  yet  he  began  to  make  secret  preparations 
for  his  intended  revolt.  Edward,  who  had  been  informed  not 
only  of  his  intentions,  but  of  his  actual  engagements,  contented 
himself  v.'ith  setting  spies  round  him  to  watch  his  conduct,  and 
ordered  all  his  motions  to  be  strictly  guarded.  Bruce  was  still 
busily  employed  in  his  endeavours,  unconscious  of  being  suspect- 
ed, or  even  of  having  guards  set  upon  his  conduct ;  but  he  was 
taught  to  understand  his  danger,  from  a  present  sent  him,  by  a 
young  nobleman  of  his  acquaintance,  of  a  pair  of  gilt  spurs  and 
a  purse  of  gold.  This  he  considered  as  a  warning  to  make  his 
escape  ;  which  he  did  by  ordering  his  horses  to  be  shod  with 
their  shoes  turned  backwards, to  prevent  his  being  tracked  in  the 
snow,  which  had  then  fallen. 

His  dispatch  was  considered  then  as  very  great ;  hav- 
nouu.j  -^g  travelled  from  London  to  Lochmaben,  which  is  near 


EDWARD  I.  ££5 

four  hundred  miles,  in  seven  days.  Cummin,  who  had  in  the  be- 
ginning concurred  in  his  schemes,  was  privately  known  to  have 
communicated  the  whole  to  Edward ;  and  Bruce  was  resolved,  in 
the  first  place,  to  take  vengeance  upon  him  for  his  perfidy. 
Hearing  that  he  was  then  at  Dumfries,  he  went  thither,  and,  meet- 
ing him  in  the  cloisters  of  a  monastery  belonging  to  the  Gray 
Friars,  reproached  him  in  severe  terms  with  his  treachery ;  and, 
drawing  his  sword,  instantly  plunged  it  in  his  breast.  Sir  Thom- 
as Kirkpatrick,  one  of  Bruce's  friends,  asking  him  soon  after  if 
the  traitor  was  slain,  and  Bruce  answering  that  he  believed  so, 
"What!"  replied  the  other,  "  only  belief?  I  will  secure  him;" 
and  going  back  to  where  Cummin  was  receiving  absolution  at  the 
altar,  he  stabbed  him  to  the  heart.  It  is  a  disagreeable  reflection, 
that  actions  begun  in  this  manner  should,  nevertheless,  terminate 
in  success. 

Bruee  had  by  this  action  not  only  rendered  himself  the  object 
of  Edward's  resentment,  but  involved  all  his  party  in  the  sam6 
guilt.  They  had  now  no  resource  left  but  to  confirm  by  desperate 
valour  what  they  had  begun  in  cruelty ;  and  they  soon  expelled 
such  of  the  English  forces  as  had  fixed  themselves  in  the  kingdom. 
Bruce  was  solemnly  crowned  king  by  the  bishop  of  St.  Andrew's, 
in  the  abbey  of  Scone  ;  and  numbers  flocked  to  his  standard,  re- 
solved to  confirm  his  pretensions.  Thus,  after  twice  conquering 
the  kingdom,  and  as  often  pardoning  the  delinquents ;  after  hav- 
ing spread  his  victories  in  every  quarter  of  the  country,  and  re- 
ceived the  most  humble  submissions,  the  old  king  saw  that  his 
whole  work  was  to  begin  afresh,  and  that  nothing  but  the  final 
destruction  of  the  inhabitants  could  give  him  assurance  of  tran- 
quillity. But  no  difficulties  could  repress  the  arduous  spirit  of 
this  monarch,  who,  though  now  vei"ging  towards  his  decline,  yet 
resolved  to  strike  the  parting  blow,  and  to  make  the  Scots  once 
more  tremble  at  his  appearance.  He  vowed  revenge  against  the 
whole  nation ;  and  averred,  that  nothing  but  reducing  them  to 
the  completest  bondage  could  satisfy  his  resentment.  He  sum« 
moned  his  prelates,  nobility,  and  all  who  held  by  knight's  ser- 
vice, to  meet  him  at  Carlisle,  which  was  appointed  as  the  general 
rendezvous ;  and  in  the  mean  time  he  detached  a  body  of  forces 
before  him  into  Scotland,  under  the  command  of  Aymer  de  Val* 
ence,  who  began  the  threatened  infliction  by  a  complete  victory 

VOL.  I,  29 


226  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

over  Bruce,  near  Methuen,  in  Perthshire.  That  warlike  corns 
mander  fought  with  great  obstinacy  ;  he  was  thrice  dismounted 
from  his  horse  in  the  action,  and  as  often  recovered  :  but  at  last 
he  was  obliged  to  fly,  and  take  shelter,  with  a  few  followers,  in 
the  Western  Isles.  The  earl  of  Athol,  sir  Simon  Fraser,  and 
sir  Christopher  Seton,  who  had  been  taken  prisoners,  were  exe- 
cuted as  traitors  on  the  spot.  Immediately  after  this  dreadful 
blow,  the  resentful  king  himself  appeared  in  person,  entering 
Scotland  with  his  army  divided  into  two  parts,  and  expecting  to 
find,  in  the  opposition  of  the  people,  a  pretext  for  punishing  them. 
But  this  brave  prince,  who  was  never  cruel  but  from  motives  of 
policy,  could  not  punish  the  poor  submitting  natives,  who  made 
no  resistance.  His  anger  was  disappointed  in  their  humiliation  : 
and  he  was  ashamed  to  extirpate  those  who  only  opposed  patience 
to  his  indignation.  It  was  chiefly  upon  the  nobles  of  the  country 
that  the  weight  of  his  resentment  fell.  The  sister  of  Bruce,  and 
the  countess  ofBuchan,  were  shut  up  in  wooden  cages,  and  hung 
over  the  battlements  of  a  fortress ;  and  his  two  brothers  fell  by 
the  hands  of  the  executioner.  The  obstinacy  of  this  commander 
served  to  inflame  the  king's  resentment.  He  still  continued  to 
excite  fresh  commotions  in  the  Highlands ;  and,  though  often 
overcome,  presisted  in  seemingly  fruitless  opposition.  Edward, 
therefore,  at  last  resolved  to  give  no  quarter ;  and  at  the  head  of 
a  great  army  entered  Scotland,  from  whence  he  had  lately  re- 
treated, resolving  to  exterminate  the  whole  body  of  those  insur- 
gents who  seemed  so  implacably  averse  to  his  government.  Noth- 
ing lay  before  the  refractory  Scots,  but  prospects  of  the  most 
speedy  and  terrible  vengeance ;  while  neither  their  valour  nor 
their  mountains  were  found  to  aftbrd  them  any  permanent  pro? 
tection.  But  Edward's  death  put  an  end  to  their  apprehensions, 
and  effectually  rescued  their  country  from  total  subjection.  He 
sickened  and  died  at  Carlisle  of  a  dysentery ;  enjoining  his  son, 
with  his  last  breath,  to  prosecute  the  enterprise,  and  never  to  de- 
jy,^,  sist  till  he  had  finally  subdued  the  kingdom.  He  ex- 
1307,  pired  in  the  sixty-ninth  year  of  his  age  and  the  thirty-^ 
fifth  of  his  reign,  after  having  added  more  to  the  solid  interests  of 
the  kingdom  than  any  of  those  who  went  before  or  have  since 
succeeded  him.  He  was  a  promoter  of  the  happiness  of  the  peo-^ 
pkj  and  seldom  attempted  exerting  any  arbitrary  stretch  of  pow* 


EDWARD  I.  22f 

er,  but  with  a  prospect  of  increasing  the  welfare  of  his  subjects. 
He  was  of  a  very  majestic  appearance,  tall  in  stature,  of  regular 
features,  with  keen  piercing  black  eyes,  and  an  aspect  that  com- 
manded reverence  and  esteem.  His  constitution  was  robust,  his 
strength  and  dexterity  unequalled^  and  his  shape  agreeable,  ex- 
cept from  the  extreme  length  and  smallness  of  his  legs,  from 
wheace  he  had  the  appellation  of  Longshanks.  He  seemed  tO 
have  united  all  those  advantages  which  in  that  age  might  be  con- 
sidered as  true  glory.  He  gained  renown  by  his  piety  in  the 
Holy  Land  ;  he  fixed  the  limits  of  justice  at  home  ;  he  confirmed 
the  rights  of  the  people ;  he  was  the  most  expert  at  martial  exer- 
cises of  any  man  in  the  kingdom ;  and  was  allowed  to  be  a  con- 
queror, by  his  success  over  the  kingdom  of  Scotland.  Succeeding 
times  have,  with  great  justice,  questioned  the  merit  of  some  of 
these  claims ;  but  none  can  deny  him  comparative  excellence,  if 
they  look  upon  those  princes  who  either  went  before  or  have  suc- 
ceeded. Edward,  by  his  first  wife  Eleanor  of  Castile,  had  four 
sons,  and  eleven  daughters ;  of  the  last,  most  died  young ;  of  the 
former,  Edward  the  Second  alone,  his  heir  and  successor,  surviv-> 
ed  him. 

If  we  turn  to  the  state  of  the  people  during  his  administratiortj 
we  shall  find  that  England  acquired  not  only  great  power,  but 
great  happiness,  under  his  protection.  The  barons,  who  mighty 
during  this  period,  be  considered  as  a  junto  of  petty  tyrants," 
ready  to  cry  out  for  liberty,  which  they  alone  were  to  share,  were 
kept  under ;  and  their  combinations  were  but  feeble  and  ill  sup- 
ported. The  monarch  was  in  some  measure  absolute,  though  he 
was  prudent  enough  not  to  exert  his  power.  He  was  severe,  in- 
deed ;  and  some  people  tax  this  severity  as  a  stain  upon  his  mem- 
ory ;  but  let  it  be  remembered  that  he  was  the  first  who  began  to 
distribute  indiscriminate  justice.  Before  his  time,  the  people 
who  rose  in  insurrections  were  punished  in  the  most  cruel  man- 
ner by  the  sword  or  gibbet ;  while  at  the  same  time  the  nobility, 
who  were  really  guilty,  were  treated  with  a  degree  of  lenity 
which  encouraged  them  to  fresh  insurrections.  But  what  gave 
Edward's  reign  a  true  value  with  posterity,  was  the  degree  of  pow- 
er which  the  people  began  to  assume  during  this  period.  The 
king  considered  the  clergy  and  barons  in  some  measure  as  rivals  ; 
and,  to  weaken  their  force,  he  never  attempted  to  control  the 


228  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

slow  but  certain  advances  made  by  the  people,  which  in  time  en- 
tirely destroyed  the  power  of  the  one,  and  divided  the  authority 
of  the  other. 


CHAP.  XIII. 

EDWARD  II.  SXniNAMED  OF  CAERNARVON. 

1  HE  pleasui'e  which  the  people  generally  feel  at  the  accession 
of  a  new  prince,  effaces  their  sorrow  for  the  deceased  ;  the  faults 
of  the  one  are  known  and  hated,  while  the  other,  from  novelty, 
receives  imputed  merit.  Much,  therefore,  was  expected  from  the 
young  prince  ;  and  all,  orders  hastened  to  take  the  oath  of  allegi- 
ance to  him.  He  was  now  in  the  twenty -third  year  of  his  age, 
of  an  agreeable  figure,  of  a  mild  harmless  disposition,  and  appar- 
ently addicted  to  few  vices.  But  he  soon  gave  symptoms  of  his 
unfitness  to  succeed  so  great  a  monarch  as  his  father ;  he  was 
rather  fond  of  the  enjoyment  of  his  power  than  of  securing  it ; 
and,  lulled  by  the  flattery  of  his  courtiers, he  thought  he  had  done 
enough  for  glory  when  he  had  accepted  the  crown.  Instead, 
therefore,  of  prosecuting  the  war  against  Scotland,  according  to 
the  injunctions  he  had  received  from  his  dying  father,  he  took  no 
steps  to  check  the  progress  of  Bruce  j  his  march  into  that  coun- 
try being  rather  a  procession  of  pageantry  than  a  warlike  expedi- 
tion. Bruce,  no  longer  dreading  a  great  conqueror  in  the  field? 
boldly  issued  from  his  retreats,  and  even  obtained  a  considerable 
advantage  over  Aymer  de  Valence,  who  commanded  the  English 
forces.  Young  Edward  looked  tamely  on,  and,  instead  of  re- 
pressing the  enemy,  endeavoured  to  come  to  an  accommodation. 
The  English  barons,  who  had  been  kept  under  during  the  preced- 
ing reign,  now  saw  that  the  sceptre  was  fallen  into  such  feeble 
hands,  that  they  might  re-assert  their  former  independency  with 
impunity. 

To  confirm  the  inauspicious  conjectures  that  were  al- 
*-  "^  '-'  ready  formed  of  this  reign,  Edward  recalled  one  of  his 
favourites,  who  was  banished  during  his  father's  reign,  being  ac- 
cused of  corrupting  the  prince's  morals.  The  name  of  this  much- 


EDWARD  IL  229 

loved  youth  was  Pierf?  Gavestone,  the  son  of  a  Gascon  knight, 
who  had  been  employed  in  the  service  of  the  late  king.  This 
young  man  soon  insinuated  himself  into  the  affections  of  the 
prince,  and,  in  fact,  was  adorned  with  every  accomplishment  of 
person  and  mind  that  was  capable  of  creating  affection  :  but  he 
was  utterly  destitute  of  those  qualities  of  heart  and  undei'stand- 
ing  that  serve  to  procure  esteem.  He  was  beautiful,  witty,  brave, 
and  active ;  but  then  he  was  vicious,  effeminate,  debauched,  and 
trifling.  These  were  qualities  entirely  adapted  to  the  taste  of 
the  young  monarch,  and  such  as  he  could  not  think  of  living 
without.  He  therefore  took  Gavestone  into  his  particular  inti- 
macy, and  seemed  to  think  no  rewards  equal  to  his  deserts'. 
Even  before  his  arrival  at  court  from  exile,  he  endowed  him  with 
the  whole  earldom  of  Cornwall,  which  had  lately  fallen  to  the 
crown.  He  married  him  soon  after  to  his  own  niece,  and  granted 
him  a  sum  of  two-and-thirty  thousand  pounds,  which  the  late 
king  had  reserved  for  the  maintenance  of  one  hundred  and  forty 
knights,  who  had  undertaken  to  carry  his  heart  to  Jerusalem. 

These  accumulated  favours  did  not  fail  to  excite  the  jealousies 
and  indignation  of  the  barons ;  and  Gavestone  was  no  way  so- 
licitous to  soften  their  resentment.  Intoxicated  with  his  power, 
he  became  haughty  and  overbearing.  He  treated  the  English  no- 
bility, from  whom  it  is  probable  he  received  marks  of  contempt, 
with  scorn  and  derision.  Whenever  there  was  to  be  a  display  • 
of  pomp  or  magnificence,  Gavestone  was  sure  to  eclipse  all  others ; 
and  he  not  only  mortified  his  rivals  by  his  superior  splendour, 
but  by  his  superior  insolence.  • 

The  barons  were  soon  after  still  more  provoked  to  see  this  pre- 
sumptuous favourite  appointed  guardian  of  the  realm,  during  a 
journey  the  king  was  obliged  to  make  to  Paris  to  espouse  the 
princess  Isabella,  to  whom  he  had  been  long  since  betrothed. 
They  were  not  remiss,  therefore,  upon  the  arrival  of  this  prin- 
cess, who  was  imperious  and  intriguing,  to  make  her  of  their 
party,  and  to  direct  her  animosity  against  Gavestone ;  which,  to 
do  him  justice,  he  took  little  care  to  avoid.  A  conspiracy  was 
soon  formed  against  him,  at  the  head  of  which,  queen  Isabella, 
and  the  earl  of  Lancaster,  a  nobleman  of  great  power,  were  as- 
sociated. They  bound  themselves  by  oath  to  expel  Gavestone, 
and  began  to  throw  off  all  reverence  foe  the  royal  authority,  which 


230  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

they  saw  wholly  in  the  possession  of  this  overgrown  favourite. 
At  length,  the  king  found  himself  obliged  to  submit  to  their  united 
clamour;  and  he  sent  Gavestone  out  of  the  kingdom,  by  appoint- 
ing him  lord-lieutenant  of  Ireland.  But  this  compliance  was  of 
short  duration  :  the  weak  monarch,  long  habituated  to  his  favour- 
ite, could  not  live  without  him ;  and  having  obtained  a  dispensa- 
tion from  the  pope  for  his  breach  of  faith,  he  once  more  recalled 
Gavestone,  and  even  went  down  to  Chester  to  receive  him  on  his 
first  landing  from  Ireland.  A  parliament  was  soon  after  assem- 
bled, where  the  king  had  influence  sufficient  to  have  his  late  con- 
duct approved  ;  and  this  served  only  to  increase  his  ridiculous 
affection,  and  to  render  Gavestone  still  more  odious.  This  in- 
fatuated creature  himself,  forgetting  his  past  misfortunes,  and 
unmindful  of  future  danger,  resumed  his  former  ostentation  and 
insolence,  and  made  himself  every  day  some  new  enemy. 

It  was  easy  to  perceive  that  a  combination  of  the  nobles,  while 
the  queen  secretly  assisted  their  designs,  would  be  too  powerful 
against  the  efforts  of  a  weak  king  and  a  vain  favourite.  They 
■were  resolved  upon  the  fall  of  Gavestone,  even  though  that  of 
Edward  himself  should  be  involved  in  the  same  ruin.  They  soon 
therefore  assembled  in  a  tumultuary  parliament,  contrary  to  the 
king's  express  command,  attended  with  a  numerous  retinue  of 
armed  followers,  and  began  their  first  usurpation  by  giving  laws 
M     h  16   ^^  ^^^  king.     They  compelled  him  to  sign  a  commission, 

1308.  by  which  the  whole  authority  of  government  was  to  be 
delegated  to  twelve  persons,  to  be  chosen  by  themselves.  These 
were  to  have  the  government  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  regulation 
of  the  king's  household.  They  were  to  enact  ordinances  for  the 
good  of  the  state,  and  the  honour  of  the  king;  their  commission 
was  to  continue  for  six  months  ;  and  then  they  were  to  lay  down 
their  authority.  Many  of  their  ordinances  were  accordingly  put 
in  force  ;  and  some  of  them  appeared  for  the  advantage  of  the 
nation ;  such  as  the  requiring  that  the  sheriffs  should  be  men  of 
property  ;  the  prohibiting  the  adulteration  of  the  coin ;  the  ex- 
cluding foreigners  from  farming  the  revenues  ;  and  the  revoking 
all  the  late  exorbitant  grants  of  the  crown.  All  these  the  king, 
who  saw  himself  entirely  stript  of  his  power,  could  very  patiently 
submit  to ;  but  when  he  learned  that  Gavestone  was  to  be  banished 
forever  from  his  dominions,  he  no  longer  was  master  of  his  tern- 


EDWARD  II.  231 

per ;  but  removing  to  York,  where  he  was  at  a  small  distance 
from  the  immediate  terror  of  the  confederated  power,  he  instantly 
invited  Gavestone  back  from  Flanders,  whither  the  barons  had 
banished  him  ;  and  declaring  his  punishment  and  sentence  to  be 
illegal,  he  openlj  reinstated  him  in  all  his  former  splendours. 
This  was  sufficient  to  spread  an  alarm  over  the  whole 
kingdom ;  all  the  great  barons  flew  to  arms  ;  the  earl  of  L  'J 
Lancaster  put  himself  at  the  head  of  this  irresistible  confederacy ; 
Guy,  earl  of  Warwick,  entered  into  it  with  fury ;  the  earl  of 
Hereford,  the  earl  of  Pembroke,  and  the  earl  Warenne,  all  em- 
braced the  same  cause ;— whilst  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury 
brought  over  the  majority  of  the  ecclesiastics,  and  consequently 
of  the  people.  The  unhappy  Edward,  instead  of  attempting  to 
make  resistance,  sought  only  for  safety :  ever  happy  in  the  com- 
pany of  his  favourite,  he  embarked  at  Tinmouth,  and  sailed  with 
him  to  the  castle  of  Scarborough,  where  he  left  Gavestone  as  in  a 
place  of  safety ;  and  then  went  back  to  York  himself,  either  to 
raise  an  army  to  oppose  his  enemies,  or,  by  his  presence,  to  allay 
their  animosity.  In  the  mean  time  Gavestone  was  besieged  in 
Scarborough  by  the  earl  of  Pembroke  ;  and  had  the  garrison  been 
sufficiently  supplied  with  provisions,  that  place  would  have  been 
impregnable.  But  Gavestone,  sensible  of  the  bad  condition  of  the 
garrison,  took  the  earliest  opportunity  to  offer  terms  of  capitula- 
tion. He  stipulated,  that  he  should  remain  in  Pembroke's  hands 
as  a  prisoner  for  two  months ;  and  that  endeavours  should  be 
used,  in  the  mean  time,  for  a  general  accommodation.  But  Pem- 
broke had  no  intention  that  he  should  escape  so  easily ;  he  or- 
dered him  to  be  conducted  to  the  castle  of  Deddingtoh,  near  Ban- 
bury, where,  on  pretence  of  other  business,  he  left  him  with  a 
feeble  guard ;  which  the  earl  of  Warwick  having  notice  of,  he  at- 
tacked the  castle  in  which  the  unfortunate  Gavestone  was  con- 
fined, and  quickjy  made  himself  master  of  his  person.  The  earls 
of  Lancaster,  Hereford,  and  Arundel,  were  soon  apprised  of 
Warwick's  success,  and  informed  that  their  common  enemy  was 
now  in  custody  at  Warwick  castle.  Thither,  therefore,  they 
hastened  with  the  utmost  expedition,  to  hold  a  consultation  upon 
the  fate  of  their  prisoner.  This  was  of  no  long  continuance ; 
they  unanimously  resolved  to  put  him  to  death,  as  an  enemy  to 
the  kingdom,  and  gave  him  no  time  to  prepare  for  his  execution;. 


232.  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

Thej  instantly  had  him  conveyed  to  a  place  called  Blacklow- 
hill,  where  a  Welsh  executioner,  provided  for  that  purpose,  sev- 
ered the  iiead  from  the  body.  There  appeared  a  deeper  spirit  of 
cruelty  now  entering  into  the  nation  than  had  been  known  in 
times  of  barbarism  and  ignorance.  It  is  probable,  that  the  mu- 
tual slaughters  committed  by  the  Christians  and  Saracens  upon 
each  other,  in  the  crusades,  made  the  people  familiar  with  blood, 
and  taught  Christians  to  butcher  each  other  with  the  same  alac- 
rity with  which  they  were  seen  to  destroy  infidels,  to  whom  they 
seldom  gave  any  quarter. 

The  king  at  first  seemed  to  feel  all  the  resentment  which  so 
sensible  an  injury  could  produce  ;  but,  equally  weak  in  his  at- 
tachment and  his  revenge,  he  was  soon  appeased,  and  granted  the 
perpetrators  a  free  pardon,  upon  their  making  a  show  of  submis- 
sion and  repentance.  An  apparent  tranquillity  was  once  more 
established  among  the  contending  parties ;  and  that  resentment 
which  they  had  exercised  upon  each  other,  was  now  converted 
against  the  Scots,  who  were  considered  as  the  common  enemy. 
A  war  had  been  declared  some  time  before  with  this  nation,  in 
order  to  recover  that  authority  over  them  which  had  been  estab- 
lished in  the  former  reign,  and  a  truce  was  soon  after  concluded ; 
but,  tlie  terms  of  it  being  ill  observed  on  both  sides,  the  animosi- 
ties were  kindled  afresh,  and  the  whole  military  force  of  England 
was  called  out  by  the  king,  together  with  very  large  reinforce- 
ments, as  well  from  the  continent  as  other  parts  of  the  English 
dominions.  Edward's  army  amounted  to  a  hundred  thousand 
men  5  while  Bruce,  king  of  Scotland,  could  bring  but  a  body  of 
thirty  thousand  to  oppose  him.  Both  armies  met  at  a  place  called 
Bannockburn,  in  the  kingdom  of  Scotland,  within  two  miles  of 
Stirling ;  the  one  confident  in  numbers,  the  other  relying  wholly 
on  its  advantageous  position.  Bruce  had  a  hill  on  his  right  flank, 
and  a  bog  on  his  left ;  with  a  rivulet  in  front,  on  the  banks  of 
which  he  had  caused  several  deep  pits  to  be  dug,  with  sharp  stakes 
driven  into  them,  and  the  whole  carefully  concealed  from  the  view 
of  the  enemy.  The  onset  was  made  by  the  English  j  and  a  very 
furious  engagement  ensued  between  the  cavalry  on  both  sides. 
The  fortune  and  intrepidity  of  Bruce  gave  the  first  turn  to  the 
day.  He  engaged  in  single  combat  with  Henry  de  Bohun,  a 
gentleman  of  the  family  of  Hereford  j  and  at  one  stroke  clove  his 


EDWARD  II.  233 

$kull  with  his  battle-axe  to  the  chin.  So  favotii'able  a  beginning 
•was  only  interrupted  by  the  night ;  for,  the  battle  renewing  at 
the  dawn  of  the  ensuing  day,  the  English  cavalry  once  more  at- 
tempted to  attack  the  Scottish  army,  but  unexpectedly  found 
themselves  entangled  among  those  pits  which  Bruce  had  previ- 
ously made  to  receive  them.  The  earl  of  Gloucester,  the  king's 
nephew,  was  overthrown  and  slain :  this  served  to  intimidate  the 
whole  English  army;  and  they  were  soon  still  more  alai-med  by 
the  appearance  of  a  fresh  army,  as  they  supposed  it  to  be,  that 
was  preparing,  from  a  neighbouring  height,  to  fall  upon  them  in 
the  rear.  This  was  only  composed  of  wagoners  and  attendants 
upon  the  Scottish  camp,  who  had  been  supplied  by  the  king  v/itli 
standards,  and  ordered  to  make  as  formidable  an  appearance  as 
they  could.  The  stratagem  took  effect :  the  English,  intimidated 
by  their  losses,  and  distracted  by  their  fears,  began  to  fly  on  all 
sides  ;  and,  throwing  away  theii*  arms,  were  pursued  with  great 
slaughter  as  far  as  Berwick. 

Edward  himself  narrowly  escaped  by  flight  to  Dunbar,  where 
he  was  received  by  the  earl  of  Marche,  and  thence  conveyed  in 
safety  by  sea  to  Berwick.  This  battle  was  decisive  in  favour  of 
the  Scots.  It  secured  the  independence  of  the  crown  of  that 
kingdom ;  and  such  was  the  influence  of  so  great  a  defeat  upon 
the  minds  of  the  English,  that  for  some  years  after  no  superiority 
of  numbers  could  induce  them  to  take  the  field  against  their  for- 
midable adversaries. 

Want  of  success  is  ever  attended  with  want  of  author-    r^  r-i  j  -i 
ity.     The  king,  having  suffered  not  only  a  defeat  from 
the  Scots,  but  also  having  been  weakened  by  several  insurrections 
among  the  Welsh  and  Irish,  found  his  greatest  afflictions  still  re- 
maining in  the  turbulence  and  insolence  of  his  subjects  at  home. 
The  nobility,  ever  factious,  now  took  the  advantage  of  his  feeble 
situation  to  depress  his  power,  and  re-establish  their  own.     The 
earl  of  Lancaster,  and  those  of  his  party,  no  sooner  saw  the  un- 
fortunate monarch  return  with  disgrace,^  than  they  renewed  their 
demands,  and  were  reinstated  in  their  former  power  of  governing 
the  kingdom.     It  was  declared,  that  all  offices  should  be  filled 
from  time  to  time  by  the  votes  of  parliament;  which,  as  they 
were  influenced  by  the  great  barons,  these  eflectually  took  all 
government  into  their  own  hands.    Thus,  from  every  fresh  calam- 
voL.  I.  -        30 


234  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

ity  the  state  suffered ;  the  barons  acquired  new  power  ;  and  theiv 
aims  were  not  so  much  to  repress  the  enemies  of  their  country, 
as  to  foment  new  animosities,  and  strengthen  every  foreign  con- 
federacy. 

A  confirmed  opposition  generally  produces  an  opposite  comhi- 
nation.  The  king,  finding  himself  thus  steadily  counteracted  by 
all  his  subjects,  had  no  resource  but  in  another  favourite,  on  whom 
he  reposed  all  confidence^  and  from  whose  connections  he  hoped 
for  assistance.  The  name  of  this  new  favourite  was  Hugh  Des- 
penser,  a  young  man  of  a  noble  English  family,  of  some  merit, 
and  very  engaging  accomplishments.  His  father  was  a  person 
of  a  much  more  estimable  character  than  the  son ;  he  was  ven- 
erable from  his  years,  and  respected  through  life  for  his  wisdom, 
his  valour,  and  his  integrity.  But  tliese  excellent  qualities  were 
all  diminished  and  vilified,  from  the  moment  he  and  his  son  be- 
gan to  share  the  king's  favour.  The  turbulent  barons,  and  Lan- 
caster at  their  head,  regarded  them  as  rivals,  and  taught  the  peo- 
ple to  despise  those  accomplishments  that  only  served  to  eclipse 
their  own.  The  king,  equally  weak  and  unjust  in  his  attachments, 
instead  of  profiting  by  the  wisdom  of  his  favourites,  endeavoured 
to  strengthen  himself  by  their  power.  For  this  purpose  he  mar- 
ried the  young  Spenser  to  his  niece  ;  he  settled  upon  him  some 
very  large  possessions  in  the  marches  of  Wales ;  and  even  dis- 
possessed some  lords  unjustly  of  their  estates,  in  order  to  accu- 
mulate them  upon  his  favourite.  This  was  a  pretext  the  king's 
enemies  had  been  long  seeking  for  :  the  earls  of  Lancaster  and 
Hereford  flew  to  arms  ;  and  the  lords  Audley  and  Ammori,  who 
had  been  dispossessed,  joined  them  with  all  their  forces.  Their 
first  measure  was  to  require  the  king  to  dismiss  or  confine  his  fa- 
vourite, the  young  Spenser ;  menacing  him,  in  case  of  a  refusal, 
with  a  determination  to  obtain  by  force  what  should  be  denied  to 
their  importunities»  This  request  was  scarce  made,  when  they 
began  to  show  their  resolution  to  have  redress,  by  pillaging  and 
destroying  the  lands  of  young  Spenser,  and  burning  his  houses- 
The  estates  of  the  father  soon  after  shared  the  same  fate ;  and 
the  insurgents,  having  thus  satiated  themselves  with  the  plunder 
of  this  most  opulent  family,  marched  to  London,  to  inflict  with 
their  own  hands  that  punishment  which  had  been  denied  to  their 
remonstrances.     Finding  a  free  entrance  into  the  city,  they  a» 


EDWARD  11.  235 

mtimidated  the  parliament  that  was  then  sitting,  that  a  sentence 
was  procured  of  perpetual  exile  against  the  two  Spensers,  and  a 
forfeiture  of  their  fortune  and  estates.  But  an  act  of  this  kind, 
extorted  by  violence,  was  not  likely  to  bind,  the  king  any  longer 
than  necessity  conipelkd  him.  Some  time  after,  having  assem- 
bled a  small  army  to  punish  one  of  the  barons,  who  had  offered 
an  indignity  to  the  queen,  he  thought  it  a  convenient  opportunity 
to  take  revenge  on  all  his  enemies  at  once,  and  to  recall  the  two 
Spensers,  whose  company  he  so  ardently  desired.  In  this  man- 
ner the  civil  war  was  kindled  afresh,  and  the  country  once  more 
involved  in  all  the  horrors  of  slaughter  and  devastation. 

The  king  had  now  got  the  start  of  his  adversaries,  and  hastened 
by  forced  marches  towards  the  borders  of  Wales,  where  the  ene- 
my's chief  power  lay.  Lancaster,  however,  was  not  slow  in  making 
head  against  him  ;  having  summoned  together  all  his  vassals  and 
retainers,  and  being  joined  by  the  earl  of  Hereford.  Still  fur- 
ther to  strengthen  his  party,  he  formed  an  alliance  with  the  king 
of  Scotland,  with  whom  he  had  long  been  privately  connected. 
But  his  diligence  on  this  occasion  proved  ineffectual :  the  king, 
at  the  head  of  thirty  thousand  men,  pressed  him  so  closely,  that 
he  had  not  time  to  collect  his  forces  together ;  and,  flying  from, 
one  place  to  another,  he  was  at  last  stopt  in  his  way  toward? 
Scotland  by  sir  Andrew  Harcla,  who  repulsed  his  forces  in  a 
skirmish,  in  which  the  eai'I  of  Hereford  was  slain,  and  Lancaster 
himself  taken  prisonerj  As  he  had  formerly  shown  little  mercy 
to  Gaveston,  there  was  very  little  extended  to  him  upon  this  oc^ 
casion.  He  was  condemned  by  the  court  martial ;  and  led, 
mounted  on  a  lean  horse,  to  an  eminence  near  Pom  fret,  in  cir- 
cumstances of  the  greatest  indignity,  where  he  was  beheaded  by 
a  Londoner.  The  people,  with  whom  he  had  once  been  a  favour- 
ite, seemed  to  have  quite  forsaken  him  in  his  disgrace  ;  they  re- 
viled him,  as  he  was  led  to  execution,  with  every  kind  of  reproach  5 
and  even  his  own  vassals  seemed  eager  to  remove  suspicion,  by 
their  being  foremost  to  insult  his  distress.  About  eighteen  more 
of  the  princial  insurgents  were  afterwards  condemned  and  exe- 
cuted in  a  more  legal  manner,  while  others  found  safety  by  es^ 
caping  to  the  continent. 

A  rebellion  thus  crushed,  served  only  to  increase  the  pride  and 
Trapacity  of  young  Spenser;  most  ©f  the  forfeitures  were  seized 


gS6  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

for  his  use ;  and  in  his  promptitude  to  punish  the  delinquents, 
he  was  found  guilty  of  many  acts  of  rapine  and  injustice.  He 
himself  laid  the  train  for  his  own  future  misfortunes,  and  an  oc- 
^  casion  soon  offered  for  puttinji;  it  into  effect  against  him. 
I.  '-'  -J  The  king  of  France,  taking  the  advantage  of  Edward's 
weakness,  resolved  to  confiscate  all  his  foreign  dominions.  After 
Si  fruitless  embassy  from  Edward,  to  dissuade  that  monarch  from 
his  purpose,  the  queen  of  England  herself  desired  permission  to 
go  over  to  the  court  of  France,  to  endeavour  to  avert  the  storm. 
The  French  king,  though  he  gave  her  the  kindest  reception,  was 
resolved  to  listen  to  no  accommodation,  unless  Edward  in  person 
should  appear,  and  do  him  homage  for  the  dominions'  he  held  un- 
der him.  This  M'as  reckoned  a  very  dangerous  step ;  and  what 
the  king  of  England  could  not  think  of  complying  with,  nor  what 
his  favourite  Spenser  v^^as  willing  to  permit.  In  this  exigence, 
the  queen  started  a  new  expedient,  v/hich  seemed  calculated  to 
get  rid  of  all  difficulties.  It  was,  that  Edward  should  resign  the 
dominion  of  Guienne  to  his  son,  now  thirteen  years  of  age  ;  and 
that  the  young  prince  should  go  to  Paris,  to  pay  that  homage 
which  had  been  required  of  the  father.  With  this  proposal  all 
parties  agreed  $  young  Edward  was  sent  to  Paris  ;  and  the  queen, 
a  haughty  and  ambitious  woman,  having  thus  got  her  son  in 
her  power,  was  resolved  to  detain  him  till  her  own  aims  were 
complied  with.  Among  the  number  of  these  was  the  expulsion 
of  the  Spensers,  against  whom  she  had  conceived  a  violent  ha- 
tred, from  their  gieat  influence  over  the  king. 

In  consequence  of  this  resolution  she  protracted  the  negotiation 
for  some  time  ;  and  being  at  last  required  by  the  king  to  return, 
she  replied,  that  she  would  never  again  appear  in  England  till 
Spenser  was  removed  from  the  royal  presence,  and  banished  the 
kingdom.  By  this  reply,  she  gained  two  very  considerable  ad- 
vantages ;  she  became  popular  in  England,  where  Spenser  was 
universally  disliked ;  and  she  had  the  pleasure  of  enjoying  the 
company  of  a  young  nobleman,  whose  name  was  Mortimer,  upon 
whom  she  had  lately  placed  her  affections.  This  youth  had,  in 
some  former  insurrection,  been  condemned  for  high  treason,  but 
had  the  sentence  commuted  into  perpetual  imprisonment  in  the 
Tower.  From  thence,  however,  he  had  the  good  fortune  to  es- 
cape into  France,  and  soon  became  distinguished  among  his  par- 


EDWARD  11.  237 

ty  for  his  violent  animosity  to  Spenser.  The  graces  of  his  per- 
son  and  address,  but  particularly  his  dislike  to  the  favourite,  ren- 
dered him  very  acceptable  to  the  queen  ;  so  that,  from  being  a 
partisan,  he  became  a  lover,  and  was  indulged  with  all  the  familiar- 
ities that  her  criminal  passion  could  confer.  The  queen's  court 
now,  therefore,  became  a  sanctuary  for  all  the  malcontents  who 
Avere  banished  their  own  country,  or  who  chose  to  come  over.  A 
correspondence  was  secretly  carried  on  with  the  discontented  at 
home ;  and  nothing  now  was  aimed  at  but  to  destroy  the  favour- 
ites, and  dethrone  the  king. 

To  second  the  queen's  efforts,  many  of  the  principal  rj^325  T 
nobles  prepared  their  vassals,  and  loudly  declared 
against  the  favourite.  The  king's  brother,  the  earl  of  Kent,  was 
led  into  engage  among  the  rest  j  the  earl  of  Norfolk  was  prevailed 
upon  to  enter  secretly  into  the  conspiracy  ;  the  brother  and  heir 
to  the  earl  of  Lancaster  was  from  principle  attached  to  the 
cause  :  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  expressed  his  approbation  of 
the  queen's  measures  ;  and  the  minds  of  the  people  were  enflam- 
ed  by  all  those  arts  winch  the  designing  practise  upon  the  weak 
and  ignorant.  In  this  universal  disposition  to  rebel,  the  queen 
prepared  for  her  expedition ;  and,  accompanied  by  three  thou- 
sand men  at  arms,  set  out  from  Dort  harbour  and  landed  safely, 
without  opposition,  on  the  coast  of  Suffolk.  She  no  sooner  ap- 
peared than  there  seemed  a  general  revolt  in  her  favour ;  three 
prelates,  the  bishops  of  Ely,  Lincoln,  and  Hereford,  brought  her 
all  their  vassals  ;  and  Robert  de  Watteville,  who  had  been  sent 
to  oppose  her  progress,  deserted  to  her  with  all  his  forces. 

In  this  exigence  the  unfortunate  Edward  vainly  attempted  to 
collect  his  friends,  and  bring  the  malcontents  to  their  duty  ;  he 
was  obliged  to  leave  the  capital  to  the  resentment  of  the  prevail- 
ing party;  and  the  populace,  immediately  upon  his  desertion, 
flew  out  into  those  excesses,  which  are  the  consequence  of  brutal- 
ity unrestrained  by  fear.  They  seized  Walter  Stapleton,  bishop 
of  Exeter,  as  he  was  passing  through  the  city,  beheaded  him  with- 
out any  form  of  trial,  and  threw  his  body  into  the  Thames.  They 
also  seized  upon  the  Tower,  and  agreed  to  show  no  mercy  to  any 
who  should  oppose  their  attempts.  In  the  mean  time,  the  king 
found  the  spirit  of  disloyalty  was  not  confined  to  the  capital 
alone,  but  diffused  over  the  whole  kingdom.    He  had   placed 


238  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

some  dependence  upon  the  garrison  which  was  stationed  in  the 
castle  of  Bristol,  under  the  command  of  the  elder  Spenser;  but 
they  mutinied  against  their  governor,  and  that  unfortunate  favour- 
ite was  delivered  up,  and  condemned  by  the  tumultuous  barons 
to  the  most  ignominious  death.  He  was  hanged  on  a  gibbet  in  his 
armour,  his  body  was  cut  to  pieces  and  thrown  to  the  dogs,  and 
his  head  was  sent  to  Winchester,  where  it  was  set  on  a  pole,  and 
exposed  to  the  insults  of  the  populace.  Thus  died  the  elder 
Spenser,  in  his  ninetieth  year,  whose  character  even  the  malevo- 
lence of  party  could  not  tarnish.  He  had  passed  a  youth  of  tran- 
quillity and  reputation ;  but  his  fond  compliance  with  his  son's 
ambition  at  length  involved  his  age  in  ruin,  though  not  disgrace. 

Young  Spenser,  the  unhappy  son,  did  not  long  survive  the  fa- 
ther; he  was  taken  with  some  others  who  had  followed  the  fortunes 
of  the  wretched  Icing,  in  an  obscure  convent  in  Wales,  and  the 
merciless  victors  resolved  to  glut  their  revenge  in  adding  insult 
to  cruelty.  The  queen  had  not  patience  to  wait  the  formality  of 
a  trial  ;  but  ordered  him  immediately  to  be  led  forth  before  the 
insulting  populace,  and  seemed  to  take  a  savage  pleasure  in  feast- 
ing her  eyes  with  his  distresses.  The  gibbet  erected  for  his  exe- 
cution was  fifty  feet  high ;  his  head  was  sent  to  London,  where 
the  citizens  received  it  in  brutal  triumph,  and  fixed  it  on  the 
bi'idge.  Several  other  lords  also  shared  his  fate ;  all  deserving 
pity  indeed,  had  they  not  themselves  formerly  justified  the  pres-^ 
ent  inhumanity,  by  setting  a  cruel  example. 

In  the  mean  time  the  king,  who  hoped  to  find  refuge  in  Wales, 
was  quickly  discovered,  and  closely  pursued  by  his  triumphant 
enemies.  Finding  no  hopes  of  succour  in  that  part  of  the  coun- 
try, he  took  shipping  for  Ireland ;  but  even  there  his  wretched 
fortune  seemed  willing  to  persecute  him ;  he  was  driven  back  by 
contrary'-  winds,  and  delivered  up  to  his  adversaries,  who  express- 
ed their  satisfaction  in  the  grossness  of  their  treatment.  He  was 
conducted  to  the  capital,  amidst  the  insults  and  reproaches  of  the 
people,  and  confined  in  the  Tower.  A  charge  was  soon  after 
exhibited  against  him  ;  in  which  no  other  crimes  but  his  incapa- 
city to  govern,  his  indolence,  his  love  of  pleasure,  and  his  being 
swayed  by  evil  counsellors,  were  objected  against  him.  His  de- 
position was  quickly  voted  by  parliament ;  he  was  assigned  a 
pension  for  his  support ;  his  son  Edward,  a  youth  of  fourteen. 


EDWARD  11.  239 

was  fixed  upon  to  succeed  him,  and  the  queen  was  appointed  re- 
gent during  the  minority. 

The  deposed  monarch  but  a  short  time  survived  his  misfor- 
tunes ;  he  was  sent  from  prison  to  prison,  a  wretched  ^^  „„-.  -, 
outcast,  and  the  sport  of  his  inhuman  keepers.  He  had 
been  at  first  consigned  to  the  custody  of  the  earl  of  Lancaster  ; 
but  this  nobleman  showing  some  marks  of  respect  and  pity,  he 
was  taken  out  of  his  hands,  and  delivered  over  to  lord  Berkeley, 
Montravers,and  Gournay,who  were  intrusted  with  the  charge  of 
guarding  him  month  about.  Whatever  his  treatment  from  lord 
Berkeley  might  have  been,  the  other  two  seemed  resolved  that  he 
should  enjoy  none  of  the  comforts  of  life  while  in  their  custody. 
They  practised  every  kind  of  indignity  upon  him,  as  if  their  de- 
sign had  been  to  accelerate  his  death  by  the  bitterness  of  his  suf- 
ferings. Among  other  acts  of  brutal  oppression,  it  is  said  that 
they  shaved  him  for  sport  in  the  open  fields,  using  water  from  a 
neighbouring  ditch.  The  genius  of  the  people  must  have  been 
greatly  debased,  or  they  would  never  have  permitted  such  inde- 
cencies to  be  practised  on  a  monarch,  whose  greatest  fault  was 
the  violence  of  his  friendships.  He  is  said  to  have  borne  his  form- 
er indignities  with  patience,  but  all  fortitude  forsook  him  upon 
this  occasion  ;  he  looked  upon  his  merciless  insulters  with  an  air 
of  fallen  majesty,  and,  bursting  into  tears,  exclaimed,  that  the 
time  might  come  when  he  should  be  more  decently  attended. 
This,  however,  was  but  a  vain  expectation.  As  his  persecutors 
saw  that  his  death  might  not  arrive,  even  under  every  cruelty, 
till  a  revolution  had  been  made  in  his  favour,  they  resolved  to  rid 
themselves  of  their  fears  by  destroying  him  at  once.  According- 
ly, his  two  keepers,  Gournay  and  Montravers,  came  to  Berkeley 
castle,  where  Edward  was  then  confined  \  and  having  concerted 
a  method  of  putting  him  to  death  without  any  external  signs  of 
violence,  they  threw  him  on  a  bed,  holding  him  down  by  a  table, 
which  they  placed  over  him.  They  then  ran  a  horn  pipe  up  his 
body,  through  which  they  conveyed  a  red-hot  iron ;  and  thus 
burnt  his  bowels,  without  disfiguring  his  body.  By  this  cruel  ar- 
tifice, they  expected  to  have  their  crime  concealed  ;  but  his  hor- 
rid shrieks,  which  were  heard  at  a  distance  from  the  castle,  soon 
gave  a  suspicion  of  the  murder  ;  and  the  whole  was  soon  after  di- 
vulgedy  by  the  confession  of  one  of  the  accomplices.     Misfortunes 


^0  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

like  his  must  ever  create  pity ;  and  a  punishment  so  dispropor* 
tionate  to  the  sufferer's  guilt  must  wipe  away  even  many  of  those 
faults  of  which  Edward  was  justly  culpable.  He  left  behind  him 
four  children,  two  song,  and  two  daughters  :  Edward  was  his  el- 
dest son  and  successor ;  John  died  young ;  Jane  was  afterwards 
married  to  David  Bruce,  king  of  Scotland  ;  and  Eleanor  was  mar- 
ried to  Reginald,  count  of  Gueldres. 


CHAP.  XIV. 

EDWARD  III. 

The  parliament  by  which  young  Edward  was  raised  to  the 
throne,  during  the  life  of  his  father,  appointed  twelve  persons  as 
his  privy -council,  to  direct  the  operations  of  government.  Mor- 
timer, the  queen's  paramour,  who  inight  naturally  be  set  down  as 
one  of  the  members,  artfully  excluded  himself,  under  a  pretended 
show  of  moderation  ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  secretly  influenced 
all  the  measures  that  came  under  their  deliberation.  He  caused 
the  greatest  part  of  the  royal  revenues  to  be  settled  on  the  queen- 
dowager,  and  seldom  took  the  trouble  to  consult  the  ministers  of 
government  in  any  public  undertaking.  The  king  himself  was 
so  besieged  by  the  favourite's  creatures,  that  no  access  could  be 
procured  to  him,  and  the  whole  sovereign  authority  was  shared 
between  Mortimer  and  the  queen,  who  took  no  care  to  conceal 
her  criminal  attachment. 

A  government  so  constituted  could  not  be  of  long  continuance  ? 
and  the  slightest  shock  was  sufficient  to  overturn  that  power 
which  was  founded  neither  in  strength  nor  virtue.  An  irruption 
of  the  Scots  gave  the  first  blow  to  Mortimer's  credit;  and  young 
Edward's  own  abilities  contributed  to  its  ruin.  The  Scots,  who 
had  no  connection  with  either  party,  were  resolved  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  the  feeble  state  of  the  nation  ;  and,  without  regarding 
the  truce  that  subsisted  between  the  two  kingdoms,  attempted  to 
surprise  the  castle  of  Norham.  This  commencement  of  hostili- 
ties they  soon  after  seconded  by  a  formidable  invasion  on  the 
northern  counties,  with  an  army  of  twenty  thousand  men.      Ed- 


EDWARD  III.  241 

■WtLvd,  even  at  this  early  age,  discovered  that  martial  disposition 
for  which  he  was  afterwards  so  famous.  He  resolved  to  intercept 
them  in  their  retreat ;  and  began  his  march  in  the  mid-     ^  -. 

die  of  July,  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  threescore  thou-  L  ^  •  J 
sand  men  ;  but  after  undergoing  incredible  fatigues,  in  pursuing 
them  through  woods  and  morasses,  he  was  unable  to  perceive  any 
signs  of  an  enemy,  except  from  the  ravages  they  had  made,  and 
the  smoking  ruins  of  villages  which  they  had  set  on  fire.  In  this 
disappointment,  he  had  no  other  resource  but  to  oiFer  a  reward  to 
any  who  should  discover  the  place  where  the  Scots  were  posted. 
This  the  enemy  understanding,  sent  him  word  that  they  were 
ready  to  meet  him  and  give  him  battle.  However,  they 
had  taken  so  advantageous  a  situation,  on  the  opposite  banks 
of  the  river  Ware,  that  the  king  found  it  impracticable  to  at- 
tack them ;  and  no  threats  could  bring  them  to  a  battle  upon 
equal  terms. 

It  was  in  this  situation  that  the  first  breach  was  discovered  be" 
tween  the  king  and  Mortimer,  the  queen's  favourite.  This  young 
monarch,  all  ardour  to  engage,  resolved  that  night,  at  all  haz- 
ards, not  to  allow  the  ravagers  to  escape  with  impunity ;  but 
Mortimer  opposed  his  influence  to  the  valour  of  the  king,  and 
prevented  an  engagement,  which  might  be  attended  with  the 
most  destructive  consequences  to  his  authority,  whether  he  won 
or  lost  the  day.  Shortly  after,  the  Scots,  under  the  command  of 
Douglas,  made  an  irruption  into  the  English  camp  by  night,  and 
arrived  at  the  very  tent  in  which  the  king  was  sleeping.  But 
the  young  monarch,  happening  to  wake  in  the  critical  moment, 
made  a  valiant  defence  against  the  enemy ;  his  chamberlain  and 
chaplain  died  fighting  by  his  side ;  and  he  thus  had  time  given 
him  to  escape  in  the  dark.  The  Scots,  being  frustrated  in  their 
design  upon  the  king,  were  contented  to  decamp  for  their  own 
country,  leaving  their  tents  standing,  without  any  person  behind 
them,  except  six  English  prisoners,  whose  legs  had  been  broken 
to  prevent  their  carrying  intelligence  to  their  countrymen.  The 
escape  of  the  Scots  was  as  disagreeable  a  circumstance  to  the 
English  army,  as  the  valour  of  the  young  king  was  applauded  and 
admired.  The  failure  on  one  part  was  entirely  ascribed  to  the 
queen's  favourite ;  and  the  success  on  the  other  to  the  king's  own 
intrepidity.  The  people  began  to  wish  for  a  removal  of  that  au- 
VOL.  I.  SI 


9ia  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

thority  which  stood  between  them  and  the  monarcli ;  and  spared 
no  pains  to  aggravate  the  faults  of  their  governors,  or  to  extol 
the  rising  merit  of  their  young  sovereign. 

Mortimer  now  found  himself  in  a  very  precarious  situation, 
and  was  resolved,  on  any  terms,  to  procure  a  peace  with  Scot- 
land, in  order  to  fix  his  power  more  firmly  at  home.  A  treaty 
was  accordingly  concluded  between  the  two  nations,  in  which  the 
English  renounced  all  title  to  sovereignty  over  the  sister  king- 
dom ;  and  the  Scots,  in  return,  agreed  to  pay  thirty  thousand 
marks  as  a  compensation.  The  next  step  that  Mortimer  thought 
necessary  for  his  security,  was,  to  seize  the  earl  of  Kent,  brother 
to  the  late  king,  a  harmless  and  well-meaning  person,  who,  under 
a  persuasion  that  his  brother  was  still  alive,  and  concealed  in  some 
secret  prison,  entered  into  a  design  of  restoring  him  to  liberty, 
and  reinstating  him  in  his  former  power.  Him  therefore  Morti- 
mer resolved  to  destroy ;  and,  summoning  him  before  parliament, 
had  him  accused,  condemned,  and  executed,  even  before  the 
young  king  had  time  to  interpose  in  his  favour.  In  proportion  as 
Mortimer  thus  got  rid  of  his  enemies,  he  was  careful  to  enrich 
himself  with  their  spoils.  The  estate  of  the  unfortunate  earl  was 
seized  upon  for  the  use  of  the  favourite's  youngest  son  :  the  im- 
mense foi'tunes  of  theSpensers  were  in  like  manner  converted  to 
his  use.  Thus  his  power  became  invidious,  and  his  corrupt  morals 
made  it  still  more  formidable. 

It  was  in  this  posture  of  affairs  that  Edward  resolved  to  sliake 
off  an  authority  which  was  odious  to  the  nation,  and  particularly 
restrictive  upon  him.  But  such  was  the  power  of  the  favourite, 
that  it  required  as  much  precaution  to  overturn  the  usurper  as  to 
establish  the  throne.  The  queen  and  Mortimer  had  for  some 
time  chosen  the  castle  of  Nottingham  for  the  place  of  their  resi- 
dence ;  it  was  strictly  guarded,  the  gates  locked  every  evening, 
and  the  keys  carried  to  the  queen.  It  was  therefore  agreed  be- 
tween the  king  and  some  of  his  barons,  who  secretly  entered  into 
his  designs,  to  seize  upon  them  in  this  fortress ;  and  for  that  pur- 
pose, sir  William  Eland,  the  governor,  was  induced  to  admit  them 
by  a  secret  sul)terraneous  passage,  which  had  been  formerly  con- 
trived for  an  outlet,  but  was  now  hidden  with  rubbish,  and  known 
only  to  one  or  two.  It  was  by  this,  that  the  noblemen  iii  the 
king's  interests  entered  the  castle  in  the  night ;  and  Mortimer, 


EDWARD  IH.  243 

without  having  it  in  his  power  to  make  any  resistance,  was  seiz- 
ed in  an  apartment  adjoining  that  of  the  queen.  It  was  in  vain 
that  she  endeavoured  to  protect  him  ;  in  vain  she  entreated  them 
to  spare  her  "  gentle  Mortimer  ;"  the  barons,  deaf  to  her  en- 
treaties, denied  her  that  pity  which  she  had  so  often  refused  to 
others.  Her  paramour  was  condemned  by  the  parliament,  which 
was  then  sitting,  without  being  permitted  to  make  his  defence,  or 
even  examining  a  witness  against  him.  He  was  hanged  on  a 
gibbet  at  a  place  called  Elmes,  about  a  mile  from  London,  where 
his  body  was  left  hanging  for  two  days  after.  A  similar  sentence 
was  passed  against  some  of  his  adherents,  particularly  Gournay 
and  Montravers,  the  murderers  of  the  late  king;  but  these  had 
time  to  elude  punishment,  by  escaping  to  the  continent.  The 
queen,  who  was  cei'tainly  the  most  culpable,  was  shielded  by  the 
dignity  of  her  situation ;  she  was  only  deprived  of  all  share  of 
power,  and  confined  for  life,  to  the  castle  of  Risings,  with  a  pen- 
sion of  three  thousand  pounds  a  year.  From  this  confinement 
she  was  never  after  set  free ;  and  though  the  king  annually  paid 
her  a  visit  of  decent  ceremony,  yet  she  found  herself  abandoned 
to  universal  contempt  and  detestation  ;  and  continued,  for  above 
twenty -five  years  after,  a  miserable  monument  of  blasted  ambi- 
tion. 

Edward,  being  thus  freed  from  the  control  ot  usurped  authori- 
ty, resolved  to  become  popular,  by  an  expedient  which  seldom 
failed  to  gain  the  affections  of  the  English.  He  knew  that  a  con- 
quering monarch  was  the  fittest  to  please  a  warlike  people.  The 
weakness  of  the  Scottish  government,  which  was  at  that  time  un- 
der a  minority,  gave  him  a  favourable  opportunity  of  renewing 
hostilities;  and  the  turbulent  spirit  of  the  nobles  of  that  country 
contributed  still  more  to  promote  his  aims.  A  new  pretender  also 
started  up  to  that  throne,  namely  Edward  Baliol,  Avhose  father 
John  had  been  crowned  king  of  Scotland  :  and  Edward  resolved 
to  assist  him  in  his  pretensions.  He  therefore  gave  him  permis- 
sion to  levy  what  forces  he  was  able  in  England ;  and,  with  not 
above  three  thousand  adventurers  thus  fortuitously  united,  Baliol 
gained  a  considerable  victory  over  his  countrymen,  in  which 
twelve  thousand  of  their  men  were  slain.  This  victory,  which 
was  followed  by  some  others,  so  intimidated  the  Scots,  that  their 
armies  dispersed,  and  the  kingdom  seemed  as  if  subdued  by  a 


244  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

-handful  of  men.  Baliol,  by  one  of  those  unexpected  turns  of  for- 
tune, common  enougli  in  barbarous  times,  was  crowned  king  at 
Scone :  and  every  nobleman,  who  was  most  exposed  to  danger, 
submitted  to  his  authority.  But  he  did  not  long  enjoy  his  supe- 
riority ;  by  another  turn  equally  sudden,  he  was  attacked  and 
defeated  by  sir  Archibald  Douglas,  and  obliged  to  take  refuge  in 
England  once  more,  in  a  miserable  condition. 

An  attempt,  thus  unsuccesfully  made  by  Baliol,  only  served  to 
inflame  the  ardour  of  Edward,  who  very  joyfully  accepted  of  that 
offer  of  homage  and  superiority,  which  it  was  BalioPs  present  in- 
terest to  make.  He  therefore  prepared,  with  all  his  force,  to  re- 
instate the  deposed  king  of  Scotland  in  a  government  which, 
■would  ever  after  be  subordinate  to  his  own.  He  accordingly 
prevailed  upon  his  parliament  to  give  him  a  supply,  which  they 
reluctantly  did ;  and,  wdth  a  well -disciplined  army,  he  laid  siege 
to  Berwick,  which  capitulated  after  a  vigorous  defence.  It  was 
in  attempting  to  relieve  this  city  that  a  general  engagement  en- 
sued between  the  Scots  and  the  English.  It  was  fought  at  Hali- 
down-hill,  a  little  north  of  Berwick.  The  fortune  of  Edward 
prevailed,  Douglas,  the  Scottish  general,  was  slain,  and  soon 
after  the  whole  army  put  to  the  rout.  This  victory  was  in  a 
great  measure  obtained  by  the  expertness  of  the  English  archers, 
who  now  began  to  be  famous  over  Europe  for  their  peculiar  skill. 
All  the  Scottish  nobles  of  great  distinction  were  either  slain  or 
taken  prisoners ;  near  thirty  thousand  of  their  men  fell  in  the 
la\  r  9  action,  while  the  loss  of  the  English  only  amounted  to 
1333.  about  fifteen  men ;  an  inequality  almost  incredible. 
This  important  victory  decided  the  fate  of  Scotland  ;  Baliol,  with 
very  little  trouble,  made  himself  master  of  the  country;  and  Ed- 
ward returned  in  triumph  to  England,  having  previously  secured 
many  of  the  principal  towns  in  Scotland,  which  were  declared  to 
be  annexed  to  the  English  monarchy.  These  victories,  however, 
were  rather  splendid  than  serviceable;  the  Scots  seemed  about 
this  time  to  have  conceived  an  insurmountable  aversion  to  the 
English  government ;  and  no  sooner  were  Edward's  forces  with- 
drawn, than  they  revolted  against  Baliol,  and  well  nigh  expelled 
him  the  kingdom.  Edward's  appearance  a  second  time  served  to 
bring  them  to  subjection;  but  they  quickly  renewed  their  animosi- 
ties upon  his  retiring.    It  was  in  vain,  therefore,  that  he  employ- 


EDWARD  III,  £45 

ed  all  the  arts  of  persuasion,  and  all  the  terrors  of  war,  to  induce 
them  to  submission  ;  they  per  seA^ered  in  their  reluctance  to  obey: 
and  they  were  daily  kept  in  hopes,  by  promises  of  succour  from 
France. 

This  kingdom,  which  had  for  a  long  time  discontinued  its  ani- 
mosities against  England,  began  to  be  an  object  of  Edward's 
jealousy  and   ambition.     A  new  scene  began  to  be  opened  in 
France,  which  operated  for  more  than  a  century  in  subjecting 
that  country  to  all  the  miseries  of  war,  till  Europe  at  last  began 
to  doubt,  whether  it  was  annexed  to  England  by  right  of  arms, 
or  of  succession.     France,  at  that  period,  was  neither  the  exten- 
sive nor  the  powerful  kingdom   we  see  it  at  this  day.     Many 
great  provinces  have  been  added  to  it  since  that  period,  particu- 
larly Dauphiny,  Provence,  and  Franche  Comte  ;  and  the  govern- 
ment was  still  more  enfeebled  by  those  neighbouring  princes  who 
were  pretended  subjects  to  the  king,  but,  in  reality,  formidable 
rivals  of  his  power.     At  the  time  we  are  speaking  of,  that  king- 
dom was  particularly  unfortunate ;  and  the  king  shared  in  the 
general  calamity.     The  three  sons  of  Philip  the  Fair,  in  full  par- 
liament, accused  their  wives  of  adultery  ;  and  in  consequence  of 
this  accusation  they  were  condemned,  and  imprisoned  for  life. 
Lewis  Hutin,  the  successor  to  the  crown  of  France,  caused  his 
wife  to  be  strangled,  and  her  lovers  to  be  flayed  alive.     After  his 
death,  as  he  left  only  a  daughter,  his  next  brother,  Philip  the  Tall, 
assumed  the  crown,  in  prejudice  of  the  daughter ;  and  vindicated 
his  title  by  the  Salic  law,  which  laid  it  down,  that  no  female  should 
succeed  to  the  crown.     This  law,  however,  was  not  universally 
acknowledged,  nor  sufficiently  confirmed  by  precedents  to  pro- 
cure an  easy  submission.     They  had  hitherto  inquired  but  slightly 
in  France,  whether  a  female  could  succeed  to  the  kingdom ;  and 
as  laws  are  only  made  to  regulate  what  may  happen  by  what  has 
happened  already,  there  were  no  facts  upon  which  to  ground  the 
opinions  on  either  side  of  the  question.     There  were,  in  reality, 
precedents  to  countenance  both  claims,  and  thus  to  keep  mankind 
in  suspense.     The  parliament  in  France  had  often  adjudged  the 
succession  to  women,  as  Artois  was  formerly  given  to  a  female, 
in  prejudice  of  the  male  heir.    The  succession  of  Champagne  had 
been,  on  some  occasion,  given  to  the  daughters ;  while,  on  others, 
they  were  judged  unqualified  to  succeed.    We  thus  see  that  right 


246  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

changed  w-ith  power;  and  justice,  in  such  a  case,  was  unknown, 
or  disregarded.  In  the  present  instance,  the  younger  brother  of 
the  late  king,  Charles  the  Fair,  jealous  of  his  elder  brother's  for- 
tune, opposed  his  pretensions,  and  asserted  that  the  late  king's 
daughter  was  rightful  heir  to  his  crown.  The  cause,  thus  warmly 
contested  between  the  two  brothers,  was  at  last  carried  before 
the  parliament  of  France ;  and  they  decided,  upon  the  Salic  law, 
in  favour  of  Philip  the  elder.  This  monarch  enjoyed  the  crown 
but  a  short  time  ;  and,  dying,  left  only  daughters  to  succeed  him. 
Charles,  therefore,  without  a  male  opponent,  seized  the  crown, 
and  enjoyed  it  for  some  time ;  but  he  also  dying,  left  his  wife 
pregnant.  As  there  was  now  no  apparent  heir,  the  regency  was 
contested  by  two  persons,  who  laid  their  claims  upon  this  occa- 
sion. Edward  the  Third  urged  his  pretensions,  as  being  by  his 
,  mother  Isabella,  who  was  daughter  to  Philip  the  Fair,  and  sister 
to  the  three  last  kings  of  France,  rightful  heir  to  the  crown.  Philip 
Valois,  on  the  other  hand,  put  himself  in  actual  possession  of  the 
government,  as  being  next  heir  by  the  male  succession.  He  was, 
for  this  reason,  constituted  regent  of  France;  and  the  queen- 
dowager  being  unfortunately,  some  time  after,  brought  to  bed  of 
a  daughter,  he  was  unanimously  elected  king.  He  was  crowned 
amidst  the  universal  congratulations  of  his  subjects ;  received  the 
appellation  of  Philip  the  Fortunate ;  and  to  this  he  added  those 
qualities >which  might  merit  good  fortune,  namely,  justice  and 
virtue.  Among  other  instances  of  his  felicity,  he  might  reckon 
that  of  the  homage  paid  him  by  Edward,  his  rival,  which  he  came 
to  offer  at  Amiens.  However,  as  strength  generally  inspires  am- 
bition, this  homage  was  soon  followed  by  a  war ;  and  Edward 
disputed  that  crown,  of  which  he  had  just  before  declared  himself 
a  vassal. 

A  brewer  of  Ghent  was  one  of  those  who  gave  the  greatest  as- 
sistance to  Edward  in  this  war,  and  determined  him  to  assume 
the  title  of  king  of  France.  This  citizen's  name  was  James  Ar- 
teveld,  a  man  grown  too  pow^erful  for  a  subject ;  and  one  of  those 
whom,  according  to  Machiavel,  kings  ought  to  flatter  or  destroy. 
This  citizen  had,  for  some  time,  governed  his  countrymen  with  a 
more  absolute  sway  than  had  ever  been  assumed  by  any  of  their 
lawful  sovereigns.  He  placed  and  displaced  magistrates  at  his 
pleasure.    He  was  accompanied  by  a  guard,  who,  on  the  least 


EDWARD  IIL  247 

signal  from  him,  instantly  assassinated  any  man  who  had  the 
misfortune  to  fall  under  his  displeasure.  With  the  assistance  of 
this  man,  therefore,  Edward  resolved  to  undertake  the  conquest 
of  France.  He  first,  however,  in  a  formal  manner  consulted  his 
parliament  on  the  propriety  of  the  undertaking,  obtained  their 
approbation,  received  a  proper  supply  of  wool,  which  he  intended 
to  barter  with  the  Flemings  ;  and  being  attended  with  a  body  of 
English  forces,  and  several  of  the  nobility,  he  sailed  over  to  Flan- 
ders, big  with  his  intended  conquests. 

Edward's  first  step  was  to  assert  his  claim  to  the  French  crown ; 
to  assume  the  title  of  king  of  the  country,  and  brand  Philip,  his 
rival,  with  the  title  of  usurper.  Philip,  on  the  other 
hand,  made  vigorous  preparations  to  oppose  him ;  he  L  "^^^  'J 
even  challenged  the  invader  to  try  their  fortune  in  single  combat, 
upon  equal  terms,  in  some  appointed  plain.  Edward  accepted 
the  challenge ;  for  in  every  action  this  prince  affected  the  hero : 
but  some  obstacles  intervening,  the  war  was  prosecuted  in  the 
usual  manner,  both  sides  taking  every  advantage  when  it  happen- 
ed to  offer. 

The  first  great  advantage  gained  by  the  English  was  in  a  naval 
engagement  on  the  coast  of  Flanders,  in  which  the  French  lost 
two  hundred  and  thirty  ships,  and  had  thirty  thousand  of  their 
seamen,  and  two  of  their  admirals,  slain.     None  of  Philip's  cour- 
tiers, it  is  said,  dared  to  inform  him  of  the  event,  till  his  jester 
gave  him  a  hint,  by  which  he  discovered  the  loss  he  had  sustain- 
ed.    This  victory,  together  with  some  successful  operations  that 
soon  after  followed,  brought  on  a  truce,  which  neither  side  seemed 
willing  to  break,  till  the  ambition  of  Edward  was  once  more  ex- 
cited by  the  invitation  of  the   count  de  Montfort,  who  had  pos- 
sessed himself  of  the  province  of  Bretagne,  and  applied  to  Edward 
to  second  his  claims.     An  offer  of  this  kind  entirely  coincided  with 
Edward's  most  sanguine  desires.    He  immediately  saw  the  advan- 
tages arising  from  such  a  proposal.     He  was  happy  in  the  promised 
assistance  of  Montfort,  an  active  and  valiant  pinnee,  closely  united 
to  him  by  interest,  and  thus  opening  to  him  an  entrance  into  the 
heart  of  France.     On  the  other  hand,  he  could  have  no  hopes 
from  the  side  of  Flanders,  as  he  was  obstructed  by  those  nume- 
rous fortifications  which  had  been  raised  on  that  frontier.    These 
flattering  prospects,  however,  Avere  for  a  while  damped  by  the 


£48  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

impi-isonment  of  Montfort ;  whose  aims  being  discovered,  he  found 
himself  besieged  in  the  city  of  Nantes,  and  taken.  But  Jane  of 
Flanders,  his  wife,  soon  made  up  for  the  loss  of  her  husband. 
This  lady,  who  was  one  of  the  most  extraordinary  women  of  the 
age,  courageously  undertook  to  support  tlie  falling  fortunes  of 
her  family.  She  assembled  the  inhabitants  of  Rennes,  where  she 
then  resided ;  and,  carrying  her  infant  son  in  her  arms,  deplored 
her  misfortunes,  and  attempted  to  inspire  the  citizens  with  an  af- 
fection for  her  cause.  The  inhabitants  of  Nantes  instantly  es- 
poused her  interests,  and  all  the  other  fortresses  of  Bretagne  em- 
braced the  same  resolution.  The  king  of  England  was  apprised 
of  her  efforts  in  his  favour,  and  entreated  to  send  her  succours 
with  all  possible  expedition  to  the  town  of  Hennebonne,  in  which 
place  she  resolved  to  sustain  the  attacks  of  the  enemy.  .She  was 
not  deceived  in  her  opinion  of  the  enemy's  vigilance  and  activity. 
Charles  de  Blois,  Philip's  general,  anxious  to  make  himself  mas- 
ter of  so  important  a  fortress  as  Hennebonne,  and  still  more  to 
take  the  countess  prisoner,  sat  down  before  the  place  with  a 
large  army,  and  conducted  the  siege  with  indefatigable  industry. 
The  defence  v/as  no  less  vigorous  ;  several  sallies  were  made  by 
the  garrison,  in  which  the  countess  herself  was  still  the  most  ac- 
tive, and  led  on  to  the  assault.  Observing  one  day  that  their 
whole  army  had  quitted  the  camp  to  join  in  a  general  storm,  she 
sallied  out  by  a  postern  at  the  head  of  three  hundred  horse,  set 
fire  to  the  enemy's  tents  and  baggage,  put  their  sutlers  and  ser- 
vants to  the  sword,  and  occasioned  such  an  alarm,  that  the  French 
desisted  from  the  assault  in  order  to  cut  off  her  communication 
with  the  town.  Thus  intercepted,  she  retired  to  Auray,  where  she 
continued  for  five  or  six  days ;  then  returning  at  the  head  of  five 
hundred  horse,  she  fought  her  way  through  one  quarter  of  the 
French  camp,  and  i-eturned  to  her  faithful  citizens  in  triumph. 
But  mere  unsupported  valour  could  not  repel  all  the  encroach- 
ments of  an  active  and  superior  enemy.  The  besiegers  had  at 
length  made  several  breaches  in  the  walls  ;  and  it  was  apprehend- 
ed that  a  general  assault,  which  was  hourly  expected,  would  be 
fatal.  A  capitulation  was  therefore  proposed,  and  a  conference 
was  already  begun,  when  the  countess,  who  had  mounted  on  a 
high  tower,  and  was  looking  towards  the  sea  with  great  impatience, 
descried  some  ships  at  a  distance.     She  immediately  exclaimed 


EDWARD  lit.  £49 

that  succoui'S  were  arrived,  and  forbade  any  further  capitulation. 
She  was  not  disappointed  in  her  wishes :  the  fleet  she  discerned 
carried  a  body  of  English  gentlemen,  with  six  thousand  archers, 
whom  Edward  had  prepared  for  the  relief  of  Hennebonne,  but 
who  had  been  long  detained  by  contrary  winds.  They  entered 
the  harbour,  under  the  conduct  of  sir  Walter  Manny,  one  of  the 
most  valiant  commanders  of  his  time.  This  relief  served  to  keep 
up  the  declining  spirits  of  the  Bretons,  until  the  time  appointed 
by  the  late  truce  with  Edward  was  expired,  on  which  he  was  at 
liberty  to  renew  the  war  in  greater  form. 

He  accordingly  soon  after  landed  at  Morbian,  near  Vannes, 
with  an  army  of  twelve  thousand  men  ;  and  being  mas-  r-^  ^  .^  , 
ter  of  the  field,  where  no  enemy  dared  to  appear  against  *"       ^ 
him,  he  endeavoured  to  give  lustre  to  his  arms  by  besieging  some 
of  the  most  capital  of  tlie  enemy's  fortifications.     The  vigour  of 
his  operations  led  on  to  another  truce ;   and  this  was  soon  after 
followed  by  a  fresh  infraction.     The  truth  is,  neither  side  observ- 
ed a  truce  longer  than  it  coincided  with  their  interests ;  and  both 
had  always  sufficient  art  to  throw  the  blame  of  perfidy  from  them- 
selves.    The  earl  of  Derby  was  sent  by  Edward  to  defend  the 
province  of  Guienne,  with  instructions  also  to  take  every  possi- 
ble advantage  that  ciixumstances  might  offer.     At  first  his  suc- 
cesses were  rapid  and  brilliant  :  but  as  soon  as  the  French  king 
had  time  to  prepare,  he  met  with  a  very  unexpected  resistance ; 
so  that  the  English  general  was  compelled  to  stand  upon  the  de- 
fensive.    One  fortress  after  another   was    surrendered  to   the 
French ;  and  nothing  appeared  but  a  total  extinction  of  the  pow- 
er of  England  upon  the  continent.     In  this  situation,  Edward  re- 
solved to  bring  relief  in  person  to  his  distressed  subjects  and  al- 
lies ;  and  accordingly  embarked  at  Southampton  on  board  a  fleet 
of  near  a  thousand  sail,  of  all  dimensions.     He  carried   r-^  „.r,  -, 
with  him,  besides  all  the  chief  nobility  of  England,  his 
eldest  son,  the  prince  of  Wales  (afterwards  surnamed  the  Black 
Prince),  a  youth  of  about  fifteen  years  old,  and  already  remarka- 
ble both  for  understanding  and  valour  above  his  age.     His  army 
consisted  of   four  thousand  men  at  arms,  ten  thousand  archers, 
ten  thousand  Welsh  infantry,  and  six  thousand  Irish,  all  which 
he  landed  safely  at  La  Hogue,  a  port  in  Normandy,  which  coun- 
try he  determined  to  make  the  seat  of  war. 
VOL.  I.  53 


250  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

The  intelligence  oi'  Edward's  landing,  and  the  devastation 
caused  bj  his  troops,  who  dispersed  themselves  over  the  whole 
face  of  the  country,  soon  spread  universal  consternation  through 
the  French  court.  The  rich  city  of  Caen  was  taken  and  plunder- 
ed by  the  English  without  mercy ;  the  villages  and  towns,  even 
np  to  Paris,  shared  the  same  fate  j  and  the  French  had  no  other 
resource  but  by  breaking  down  their  bridges  to  attempt  putting  a 
stop  to  the  invader's  career.  In  the  mean  time,  Philip  was  not 
idle  in  making  preparations  to  repress  the  enemy.  He  had  sta- 
tioned one  of  his  generals,  Godemar  de  Faye,  with  an  army  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  river  Somme,  over  which  Edward  was  to 
pass  :  while  he  himself,  at  the  head  of  a  hundred  thousand  fight- 
ing men,  advanced  to  give  the  English  battle.  Edward  thus,  in 
the  midst  of  his  victories,  unexpectedly  exposed  to  the  danger  of 
being  inclosed  and  of  starving  in  an  enemy's  country,  published 
a  reward  to  any  that  should  bring  him  intelligence  of  a  passage 
over  the  river  Somme.  This  was  discovered  by  a  peasant  of  the 
country  ;  and  Edward  had  just  time  to  get  his  whole  army  over 
the  river,  when  Philip  appeared  in  his  rear. 

As  both  armies  had  for  some  time  been  in  sight  of  each  other, 
nothing  was  so  eagerly  expected  by  both  parties  as  a  battle ;  and 
although  the  forces  were  extremely  disproportioned,  the  English 
amounting  only  to  thirty  thousand,  the  French  to  a  hundred  and 
twenty  thousand,  yet  Edward  resolved  to  indulge  the  impetuosi- 
ty of  his  troops,  and  put  all  to  the  hazard  of  a  battle.  He  ac- 
cordingly chose  his  ground,  with  advantage,  near  the  village  of 
Crecy ;  and  there  determined  to  wait  with  tranquillity  the  shock 
of  the  enemy.  He  drew  up  his  men  on  a  gentle  ascent,  and  di- 
vided them  into  three  lines.  The  first  was  commanded  by  the 
young  prince  of  Wales  5  the  second  was  conducted  by  the  earls 
of  Northampton  and  Arundel ;  and  the  third,  which  was  kept  as 
a  body  of  reserve,  was  headed  by  the  king  in  person.  As  his 
small  army  was  in  danger  of  being  surrounded,  he  thi-ew  up 
trenches  on  his  flank,  and  placed  all  his  baggage  in  a  wood  be- 
hind liim,  Avhich  he  also  secured  by  an  entrenchment.  Having 
thus  made  the  proper  dispositions,  he  and  the  prince  of  Wales  re- 
ceived the  sacrament  with  great  devotion ;  and  all  his  behaviour 
denoted  the  calm  intrepidity  of  a  man  resolved  on  conquest  or 
death.     He  rode  from  rank  to  rank  with  a  serene  countenance; 


EDWARD  HI.  £51 

bade  his  soldiers  remember  the  honour  of  their  country  ;  and  by 
his  eloquence  animated  the  whole  army  to  a  degree  of  enthusias- 
tic expectation.  It  is  said  also  by  some,  that  he  first  made  use  of 
ai'tilleiy  upon  this  occasion ;  and  placed  in  his  front  some 
pieces,  which  contributed  not  a  little  to .  throw  the  enemy  into 
disorder. 

On  the  other  side,  Philip,  impelled  by  resentment,  and  confi- 
dent in  his  numbers,  was  more  solicitous  of  bringing  the  enemy 
to  an  engageinent  than  prudent  in  ialcing  measures  for  the  suc- 
cess of  it.  He  was  advised  by  some  of  his  generals  to  defer  the 
combat  till  the  ensuing  day,  when  his  army  would  have  recover- 
ed from  their  fatigue,  and  might  be  disposed  into  better  or- 
der than  their  present  hurry  permitted  them  to  observe.  But  it 
was  now  too  late  ;  the  impatience  of  his  troops  was  too  great  to 
be  restrained  ;  they  pressed  one  upon  the  other,  and  no  orders 
could  curb  their  blind  impetuosity.  They  were  led  on,  hov/ever, 
in  three  bodies  to  oppose  those  of  the  English.  The  first  line, 
consisting  of  fifteen  thousand  Genoese  cross-bow-men,  were  com- 
manded by  Anthony  Doria;  the  second  body  was  led  by  the 
count  Alencon,  brother  to  the  king ;  and  the  king  himself  was  at 
the  head  of  the  third. 

About  three  in  the  afternoon  the  famous  battle  of  Crecy  began, 
by  the  French  king's  ordering  the  Genoese  archers  to  charge  ;  but 
they- were  so  fatigued  with  their  march,  that  they  cried  out  for  a 
little  rest  before  they  should  engage.  The  count  Alencon,  being 
informed  of  their  petition,  rode  up  and  reviled  them  as  cowards, 
commanding  tiiem  ^to  begin  the  onset  without  delay.  Their  reluc- 
tance to  begin  was  still  more  increased  by  a  heavy  shower  which 
fell  that  instant  and  relaxed  their  bow-strings,  so  that  the  dis- 
charge they  made  produced  but  very  little  eifect.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  English  archers,  who  kept  their  bows  in  cases,  and 
were  favoured  by  a  sudden  gleam  of  sunshine  that  rather  dazzled 
the  enemy,  let  fly  their  arrows  so  thick,  and  with  such  good  aim, 
that  nothing  was  to  be  seen  among  the  Genoese  but  hurry,  terror, 
and  dismay.  The  young  prince  of  Wales  had  presence  of 
mind  to  take  advantage  of  their  confusion,  and  to  lead  on  his  line 
to  the  charge.  The  French  cavalry,  however,  commanded  by  count 
Alencon,  wheeling  round,  sustained  the  combat,  and  began  to 
h^m  the  English  round.    The  earls  of  Arundel  and  Nortiiampton 


252  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAlND. 

now  came  in  to  assist  the  prince,  who  appeared  foremost  in  the 
very  shock,  and,  wherever  he  appeared,  turning  the  fortune  of 
ihe  dsij.  The  thickest  of  the  battle  was  now  gathered  round 
turn,  and  the  valour  of  a  boy  filled  even  veterans  with  astonish- 
ment. But  their  surprise  at  his  courage  could  not  give  way  to 
their  fears  for  his  safety.  Being  apprehensive  that  some  mis- 
chance might  happen  to  him  in  the  end,  an  officer  was  dispatched 
to  the  king,  desiring  that  succours  might  be  sent  to  the  prince's 
relief.  Edward,  who  had  all  this  time,  with  great  tranquillity, 
viewed  the  engagement  from  a  windmill,  demanded,  with  seem- 
ing deliberation,  if  his  son  were  dead ;  but  being  answered  that 
he  still  lived,  and  was  giving  astonishing  instances  of  his  valour  ; 
*'  Then  tell  my  generals,"  cried  the  king,  "  that  he  shall  have  no 
assistance  from  me ;  the  honour  of  this  day  shall  be  his  ;  let  him 
show  himself  w^orthy  the  profession  of  arms,  and  let  him  be  in- 
debted to  his  own  merit  alone  for  victory."  This  speech,  being 
reported  to  the  prince  and  his  attendants,  inspired  them  with 
new  courage  ;  they  made  a  fresh  attack  upon  the  French  cavalry, 
and  count  Alencon,  their  bravest  commander,  was  slain.  This 
^yas  the  beginning  of  their  total  overthrow :  the  French,  being 
now  without  a  competent  leader,  were  thrown  into  confusion : 
the  Welsh  infantry  rushed  into  the  midst  of  the  conflict,  and  dis- 
patched those  with  their  long  knives  who  had  survived  the  fury 
of  the  former  onset.  It  was  in  vain  that  the  king  of  France 
seemed  almost  singly  to  maintain  the  combat ;  he  endeavoured  to 
animate  his  few  followers,  both  by  his  voice  and  example :  but 
the  victory  was  too  decisive  to  be  resisted  :  while  he  was  yet  en- 
deavouring to  face  the  enemy,  John  de  Hainault  seized  the  reins 
of  his  horse,  and,  turning  him  round,  carried  him  off  the  field  of 
battle.  In  this  engagement,  thirty  thousand  of  the  French  were 
killed  upon  the  field ;  and,  among  this  number,  were  John  king  of 
Bohemia,  James  king  of  Majorca,  Ralph  duke  of  Lorrain,  nine 
counts,  four-andrtwenty  bannerets,  twelve  hundred  knights,  fif- 
teen hundred  gentlemen,  and  four  thousand  men  at  arms-  There 
is  something  remarkable  in  the  fate  of  the  Bohemian  monarch  ; 
who,  though  blind,  was  yet  willing  to  share  in  the  engagement. 
This  unfortunate  prince,  inquiring  the  fate  of  the  day,  was  told 
that  all  was  lost,  and  his  son  Charles  obliged  to  retire  desperately 
wounded  -,  and  that  the  prince  of  Wales  bore  down  every  thing 


/ 

EDWARD  III.  25S 

before  him.  Having  received  tliis  information,  blind  as  he  was, 
he  commanded  his  knights  to  lead  him  into  the  hottest  part  of 
the  battle  against  the  young  virarrior  :  accordingly,  four  of  them 
rushed  with  him  into  the  thickest  part  of  the  enemy,  where  they 
Avere  all  quickly  slain. 

The  whole  French  army  took  to  flight,  and  were  put  to  the 
sword  by  the  pursuers  without  mercy,  till  night  stopped  the  car- 
nage. The  king,  on  his  return  to  the  camp,  flew  into  the  arms 
of  the  prince  of  Wales,  and  exclaimed,  "  My  valiant  son !  con- 
tinue as  you  have  begun ;  you  have  acquitted  yourself  nobly,  and 
are  worthy  of  the  kingdom  that  will  be  your  inheritance."  The 
next  morning  was  foggy ;  and  a  party  of  the  militia  of  Rouen, 
coming  to  join  the  French  army,  were  routed  by  the  English  at 
the  first  onset;  many  more  also  were  decoyed  by  soine  French 
standards,  which  the  victors  placed  upon  the  mountains,  and  to 
which  the  fugitives  resorted,  where  they  were  cut  in  pieces  with- 
out mercy.  Never  was  a  victory  more  seasonable,  or  less  bloody, 
to  the  English  than  this.  Notwithstanding  the  great  slaughter  of 
the  enemy,  the  conquerors  lost  but  one  esquire,  three  knights, 
and  a  few  of  inferior  rank.  The  crest  of  the  king  of  Bohemia 
was  three  ostrich  feathers,  with  this  motto,  Ich  clien,  which  signi- 
fies, in  the  German  language,  I  serve.  This  was  thought  to  be  a 
proper  prize  to  perpetuate  the  victory ;  and  it  was  accordingly 
added  to  the  arms  of  the  prince  of  Wales,  and  it  has  been  adopt- 
ed by  all  his  successors. 

But  this  victory  was  attended  with  still  more  substantial  ad- 
vantages ;  for  Edward,  as  moderate  in  conquest  as  prudent  in  his 
measures  to  obtain  it,  resolved  to  secure  an  easy  entrance  into 
France  for  the  future.  With  this  view  he  laid  siege  to  Calais, 
that  was  then  defended  by  John  de  Vienne,  an  experienced  com- 
mander, and  supplied  with  every  thing  necessary  for  defence. 
The  king,  however,  knowing  the  difficulty  of  taking  so  strong  a 
town  by  force,  resolved  to  reduce  it  by  famine.  He  chose  a  se- 
cure station  for  his  camp  ;  drew  entrenchments  round  the  city, 
and  made  proper  provisions  for  his  soldiers  to  endure  a  winter 
campaign.  These  operations,  though  slow,  were  at  length  suc- 
cessful. It  was  in  vain  that  the  governor  made  a  noble  defence, 
that  he  excluded  all  the  useless  mouths  from  the  city,  which  Ed- 
"Vvard  generously  permitted  to  pass  unmolested  through  his  camp. 


254  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

It  was  at  length  taken,  after  a  twelvemonth's  siege,  the  defend- 
ants having  been  reduced  to  the  last  extremitj  bj  famine  and  fa- 
tigue. The  obstinate  resistance  made  bj  the  townsmen  was  not 
a  little  displeasing  to  Edward ;  and  he  had  often  declared,  that, 
when  put  in  possession  of  the  place,  he  would  take  signal  revenge 
for  the  numbers  of  men  he  had  lost  during  the  siege.  It  was  with 
great  difficulty,  therefore,  that  he  Avas  persuaded  to  accept  of 
their  submission,  and  to  spare  their  lives,  upon  condition  that  six 
of  die  most  considerable  citizens  should  be  sent  him,  to  be  dis- 
posed of  as  he  should  think  proper  :  but  on  these  he  was  resolv- 
ed to  wreak  his  resentment,  and  he  gave  orders  that  they  should 
be  led  into  his  camp,  bare-headed  and  bare-footed,  with  ropes 
iabout  their  necks,  in  the  manner  of  criminals  just  prepared  for 
instant  execution.  When  the  news  of  this  fierce  resolution  was 
brought  into  the  city,  it  spread  new  consternation  among  the  in- 
habitants. Who  should  be  the  men  that  were  thus  to  be  offered 
up  as  victims  to  procure  the  safety  of  all  the  rest,  and  by  their 
deaths  appease  the  victor's  resentment,  was  a  fresh  subject  of 
dreadful  inquiry.  In  this  terrible  suspense,  one  of  the  principal 
inhabitants,  whose  name  was  Eustace  de  St.  Piei-re,  walked  for- 
ward, and  offered  himself  as  willing  to  undergo  any  tortures  that 
could  procure  his  fellow-citizens  safety.  Five  more  soon  follow- 
ed his  noble  example ;  and  these,  marching  out  like  criminals, 
laid  the  keys  of  their  city  at  Edward's  feet :  but  no  submissions 
seemed  sufficient  to  appease  his  resentment ;  and  they  would  in 
all  probability  have  suffered  death,  had  not  the  generosity  of  their 
conduct  affected  the  queen,  who  interceded  in  their  behalf,  and 
witli  some  difficulty  obtained  their  pardon. 

Edvyard,  having  thus  opened  himself  a  passage  into  France,  by 
r.oAr  1  which  he  might  at  any  time  pour  in  his  forces,  and  with- 
draw them  with  security,  resolved  on  every  method 
that  could  add  strength  or  stability  to  his  new  acquisition.  He 
ordered  all  the  French  inhabitants  to  leave  the  town,  and  peopled 
it  with  his  own  subjects  from  England.  He  also  made  it  the 
staple,  or  principal  market  for  wool,  leather,  tin,  and  lead,  which 
were  the  principal  English  commodities  for  which  there  was  any 
considerable  demand  upon  the  continent.  All  the  English  were 
obliged  to  bring  their  goods  thither ;  and  foreign  merchants  came 
to  the  same  place  to  purchase  them.    By  these  means  the  city 


EDWARD  in.  Q55 

became  populous,  rich,  and  flourishing ;  and  although  it  had  like 
to  have  been  taken  some  time  after  by  treachery,  it  continued  for 
above  two  centuries  after  in  the  possession  of  the  English,  and 
braved  all  the  military  power  of  France. 

The  treachery,  which  had  like  to  have  restored  it  to  the  French, 
arose  from  the  perfidy  of  Aymer  de  Pavie,  an  Italian,  who  had 
been  appointed  governor  of  the  place.  He  agreed  to  deliver  it 
up  to  the  enemy ;  when  his  perfidy  was  discovered  by  Edward, 
who  obliged  him  to  carry  on  the  treaty,  and  to  persuade  the  ene- 
my that  he  was  still  in  their  interests.  Accordingly  a  day  was 
appointed  for  the  admission  of  the  French  troops  into  the  city  5 
while  the  king,  with  a  strong  body  of  forces,  took  care  to  prepare 
for  their  reception.  All  those  who  entered  the  city  w^ere  immedi- 
ately cut  to  pieces  ;  and  the  garrison,  with  Edward,  and  sir  Wal- 
ter Manny  at  their  head,  rushing  out  in  the  pursuit  of  the  rest,  a 
fierce  and  bloody  engagement  ensued,  in  which  the  king  over- 
threw and  took  Eustace  de  Ribaumont,  a  man  of  remarkable 
strength  and  valour,  with  his  own  hand. 

In  this  manner,  the  war  between  the  English  and  French  was 
carried  on  with  mutual  animosity  ;  a  war  which  at  once  thinned 
the  inhabitants  of  the  invaded  country,  while  it  drained  that  of 
the  invaders.  But  a  destruction  still  more  terrible  than  that  of 
war  contributed,  at  this  time,  to  desolate  the  wretched  provinces 
of  Europe.  A  pestilence,  more  dreadful  than  any  mentioned  in 
the  annals  of  history,  which  had  already  almost  dispeopled  Asia 
and  Africa,  came  to  settle  upon  the  western  world  with  increased 
malignity.  It  is  said  to  have  taken  its  origin  in  the  great  kingdom 
of  Cathay,  where  it  rose  from  the  earth  with  the  most  horrid  and 
sulphureous  stench,  destroying  all  the  inhabitants,  and  even 
marking  plants  and  minerals  with  its  malignity.  The  fourth  part 
of  the  people  were  cut  off;  and  it  particularly  i-aged  with  such 
violence  in  London,  that  in  one  year's  space  there  were  buried  in 
the  Charter  House  church-yard  above  fifty  thousand  p.  ^  .^  -, 
persons.  It  was  in  the  midst  of  this  terrible  infliction 
from  nature  that  the  ambition  of  Edward  and  Philip  was  exerted 
for  new  conquests,  and  was  adding  to  the  calamities  of  mankind. 
Yet  still  these  ravages  were  silently  repairing  by  commerce  and 
industry  :  these  arts,  which  Avere  then  despised  by  princes,  were 
laying   the  seeds  of  future  opulence  and  increased  population. 


£56  HIS  rOHY  OF  ENGLAND. 

The  arts  of  peace  had  for  some  time  been  revived  in  Italy,  and 
were  gradually  travelling  westward ;  the  refinements  and  the 
pleasures  of  sense  every  day  began  to  improve,  although  intellec- 
tual refinements  were  as  yet  totally  unknown.  Sensual  enjoy- 
ments must  ever  be  carried  to  some  height,  before  mankind  can 
find  leisure  or  taste  for  entertainments  of  a  more  exquisite  nature. 

Nor  was  England  free  from  internal  wars  during  this  dreary 
period.  While  Edward  was  reaping  victories  upon  the  conti- 
nent, the  Scots,  ever  willing  to  embrace  a  favourable  opportunity 
of  rapine  and  revenge,  invaded  the  frontiers  with  a  numerous  ar- 
my, headed  by  David  Bruce  their  king.  This  unexpected  inva- 
sion, at  such  a  juncture,  alarmed  the  English,  but  was  not  capa- 
ble of  intimidating  them.  Lionel,  Edward's  son,  who  was  left 
guardian  of  England  during  his  father's  absence,  was  yet  too 
young  to  take  upon  him  the  command  of  an  army ;  but  the  victo- 
ries on  the  continent  seemed  to  inspire  even  women  with  valour : 
Philippa,  Edward's  queen,  took  upon  her  the  conduct  of  the  field, 
n  'idC  "1  ^^^  prepared  to  repulse  the  enemy  in  person.  Accord- 
ingly, having  made  lord  Percy  general  under  her,  she 
met  the  Scots  at  a  place  called  NevilPs  Cross,  near  Durham,  and 
offered  them  battle.  The  Scottish  king  was  no  less  impatient  to 
engage ;  he  imagined  that  he  might  obtain  an  easy  victory  against 
undisciplined  troops,  and  headed  by  a  woman.  But  he  was  mis- 
erably deceived ;  his  army  was  quickly  routed  and  driven  from 
the  field ;  fifteen  thousand  of  his  men  were  cut  to  pieces ;  and 
himself,  with  many  of  his  nobles  and  knights,  were  taken  prison- 
ers, and  carried  in  triumph  to  London. 

This  victory  diffused  an  universal  degree  of  joy  through  the  na- 
tion ;  a  captive  king  was  an  object  that  flattered  their  pride,  and 
they  soon  had  new  reasons  for  exultation.  Philip,  who  was  sur- 
named  the  Fortunate,  upon  coming  to  the  crown  of  France,  end- 
ed his  life  under  the  accumulation  of  every  misfortune  that  could 
render  a  king  unhappy.  John,,  his  son,  succeeded  liim  on  the 
throne,  which  was  but  ill  supported  by  Philip,  and  yet  still  worse 
by  him.  Tliis  weak  yet  virtuous  prince,  upon  coming  to  the 
crown,  found  himself  at  the  head  of  an  exhausted  nation,  and  a 
divided  and  factious  nobility.  France  at  that  time  pretty  much 
resembled  England  under  the  reign  of  a  prince  of  the  same  name 
some  ages  before.     They  had  parliaments  of  barons  despotic  over 


EDWARD  Ilf,  25/ 

theif  own  hereditary  possessions ;  and  they  obliged  John  their 
king  to  sign  a  charter  very  mUch  resembling  the  Magna  Charta 
which  had  formerly  been  signed  by  his  namesake  of  England, 
The  warlike  resources^  therefore,  of  France  and  England  were  at 
this  time  very  unequal.  John  was  at  the  head  of  a  nobility  that 
acknowledged  no  subordination  among  each  other  ;  they  led 
their  dependent  slaves  to  battle,  and  obeyed  their  superiors  only 
as  it  suited  their  inclination.  Their  king  might  more  justly  be 
said  to  command  a  number  of  small  armies  under  distinct  lead- 
ers, than  one  vast  machine  operating  with  uniformity  and  united 
efforts.  The  French  barons  paid  their  own  soldiers,  punished 
their  transgressions,  and  rewarded  their  fidelity.  But  the  forces 
of  England  were  under  a  very  different  establishment ;  the  main 
body  of  the  English  army  was  composed  of  soldiers  indiscrimi- 
nately levied  throughout  the  nation,  paid  by  the  king,  and  re- 
garding him  alone  as  the  source  of  preferment  or  disgrace.  In-- 
stead  of  personal  attendance,  the  nobility  contributed  supplies  in 
money  ;  and  there  was  only  such  a  number  of  nobles  in  the  ar* 
my  as  might  keep  the  spirit  of  honour  alive,  witlvout  injuring  mil- 
itary subordination. 

It  was  in  this  state  of  things  that  a  short  truce,  which  had  been 
concluded  between  Edward  and  Philip,  was  dissolved  by  the-death 
of  the  latter  j  and  Edward,  well  pleased  with  the  factions  that 
then  prevailed  in  France,  was  resolved  to  seize  the  opportunity 
of  increasing  its  distresses.  Accordingly  the  black  Prince  was 
sent  into  France  with  his  army,  on  board  a  fleet  of  a  hundred 
sail ;  and,  landing  in  Gascony,  carried  his  devastations  into  the 
heart  of  the  country.  On  the  other  hand,  Edward  himself  made 
an  irruption  on  the  side  of  Calais,  at  the  head  of  a  numerous  ar- 
my, and  ravaged  all  the  open  country.  In  the  mean  time  John, 
who  was  as  yet  unprepared  to  oppose  the  progress  of  the  enemy, 
continued  a  quiet  spectator  of  their  insults ;  nor  was  it  till  the 
succeeding  summer's  campaign  that  he  resolved  to  attack  the 
Black  Prince,  whose  army  was  by  this  time  reduced  to  rjgg^  -i 
a  body  of  about  twelve  thousand  men.  With  such  a 
trifling  complement  of  forces  had  this  young  warrior  ventured  to 
penetrate  into  the  heart  of  France,  with  a  design  of  joining  his 
forces  to  those  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster.  But  he  soon  found  that 
his  scheme  was  impracticable :  the  country  before  him  was  too 

VOL.  r.-  33 


258  illSTOllY  OF  ENGLAND. 

well  guarded  to  prevent  his  advancing  further ;  and  all  the  bridges 
behind  were  broken  down  :  which  effectually  barred  a  retreat. 
In  this  embarrassing  situation,  his  perplexity  was  increased  by  be- 
ing informed  that  the  king  of  France  was  actually  marching  at 
the  head  of  sixty  thousand  men  to  intercept  him.  He  at  first 
thought  of  retreating  ;  but,  soon  finding  it  impossible,  he  deter- 
mined calmly  to  wait  the  approach  of  the  enemy  ;  and,  notwith- 
standing the  disparity  of  forces,  to  commit  all  to  the  hazard  of  a 
battle. 

It  was  at  a  place  called  Maupertuis,  near  Poictiers,  that  both  ar- 
mies came  in  sight  of  each  other.  The  French  king  might  very 
easily  have  starved  the  English  into  any  terms  he  thought  proper 
to  impose  ;  but  such  was  the  impatient  valour  of  the  French  no- 
bility, and  such  their  certainty  of  success,  that  it  might  have 
been  equally  fatal  to  attempt  repressing  their  ardour  to  engage. 
In  the  mean  time,  while  both  armies  were  drawn  out,  and  expect- 
ing the  signal  to  begin,  they  were  stopped  by  the  appearance  of 
the  cardinal  of  Perigord,  who  attempted  to  be  a  mediator  between 
them.  However,  John,  who  made  himself  sure  of  victory,  would 
listen  to  no  other  terms  than  the  restitution  of  Calais  ;  with  which 
the  Black  Prince  refusing  to  comply,  the  onset  was  deferred  till 
the  next  morning,  for  which  both  sides  waited  in  anxious  suspense. 

It  was  during  this  interval  that  the  young  prince  showed  him- 
self worthy  of  conquest ;  he  strengthened  his  post  by  new  in- 
trenchments ;  he  placed  three  hundred  men  in  ambush,  with  as 
many  archers,  who  were  commanded  to  attack  the  enemy  in  flank 
during  the  heat  of  the  engagement.  Having  taken  these  precau- 
tions, and  the  morning  beginning  to  appear,  he  ranged  his  army 
in  three  divisions ;  the  van,  commanded  by  the  earl  of  Warwick  j 
the  rear,  by  the  earls  of  Salisbury  and  Suffolk ;  and  the  main 
body  by  himself.  In  like  manner  the  king  of  France  arranged 
his  forces  in  three  divisions ;  the  first  commanded  by  the  duke  of 
Orleans ;  the  second  by  the  dauphin,  attended  by  his  younger 
brothers ;  while  himself  led  up  the  main  body,  seconded  by  his 
youngest  and  favourite  son,  then  about  fourteen  years  of  age.  As 
the  English  were  to  be  attacked  only  by  marching  up  a  long  nar- 
row lane,  the  French  suffered  greatly  from  their  archers,  who 
were  posted  on  each  side  behind  the  hedges.  Nor  were  they  in 
a  better  situation  upon  emerging  from  this  danger,  being  met  by 


EDWARD  IIL  259 

ihe  Black  Prince  himself,  at  the  head  of  a  chosen  body  of  troops, 
who  made  a  furious  onset  upon  their  forces,  already  in  great  dis- 
order. A  dreadful  overthrow  ensued  :  tliose  who  were  as  yet  in 
the  lane  recoiled  upon  their  own  forces  ;  while  the  English  troops 
who  had  been  placed  in  ambush  took  that  opportunity  to  increase 
the  confusion,  and  confirm  the  -victpi-y.  The  dauphin,  and  the 
duke  of  Orleans,  were  among  the  first  that  fled.  The  king  of 
France  himself  made  the  utmost  efforts  to  retrieve  by  his  valour 
what  his  rashness  had  forfeited ;  but  his  single  courage  was  una- 
ble to  stop  that  consternation  which  had  now  become  general, 
through  his  army ;  and  his  cavalry  soon  flying,  he  found  himself 
totally  exposed  to  the  enemy's  fury.  He  saw  his  nobles  falling 
round  him,  valiantly  fighting  in  his  defence,  and  his  youngest  son 
wounded  by  his  side.  At  length,  spent  with  fatigue,  and  despair- 
ing of  success,  he  thought  of  yielding  himself  a  prisoner ;  and 
frequently  cried  out,  that  he  was  ready  to  deliver  himself  to  his 
cousin,  the  prince  of  Wales.  The  honour  of  taking  him,  however, 
was  reserved  for  a  much  more  ignoble  hand ;  he  was  seized  by 
Dennis  de  Morbec,  a  knight  of  Arras,  who  had  been  obliged  to 
fly  his  country  for  murder. 

This  success  was,  in  a  great  measure,  owing  to  the  valour  and 
conduct  of  the  Black  Prince ;  but  his  moderation  in  victory  was 
a  nobler  triumph  than  had  ever  graced  any  former  conqueror. 
He  came  forth  to  meet  the  captive  monarch  with  an  air  of  pitying 
modesty ;  he  remonstrated  with  him  in  the  most  humble  manner, 
when  he  began  to  complain  of  his  misfortunes,  that  he  still  had 
the  comfort  left  of  reflecting,  that,  though  unsuccessful,  he  had 
done  all  that  deserved  to  ensure  conquest ;  he  promised,  that  a 
submissive  deference  to  his  dignity  should  never  be  wanting  to 
soften  his  captivity ;  and  at  table  he  actually  refused  to  sit  down, 
but  stood  among  the  number  of  his  prisoner's  attendants,  declar- 
ing that  it  did  not  become  him,  as  a  subject,  to  sit  down  in  the 
presence  of  a  king. 

In  April  following,  the  prince  conducted  his  royal 
prisoner  tlii'ough  London,  attended  by  an  infinite  con-  L^^^' -J 
course  of  people  of  all  ranks  and  stations.  His  modesty  upon 
this  occasion  was  not  less  than  before:  the  king  of  France  was 
clad  in  royal  apparel,  and  mounted  on  a  white  steed,  distinguished 
by  its  size  and  beauty ;  while  the  prince  himself  rode  by  his  side 
wpou  a  mean  little  horse,  and  in  very  plain  attire. 


260  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

Two  kings  prisoners  in  the  same  court,  and  at  the  same  time, 
were  considered  as  glorious  achievements  ;  but  all  that  England 
gained  by  them  M'as  only  glory.  Whatever  was  won  in  France, 
with  all  the  dangers  of  war,  and  the  expense  of  prepai-ation,  was 
successively,  and  in  a  manner  silently,  lost,  without  the  mortifi- 
cation of  a  defeat.  It  may  be  easily  supposed,  that  the  ti-eaties 
which  were  made  with  the  captive  kings  were  highly  advanta- 
geous to  the  conquerors ;  but  these  treaties  were  no  longer  ob- 
served than  while  the  English  had  it  in  their  power  to  enforce 
obedience.  It  is  true  that  John  held  to  his  engagements  as  far 
as  he  was  able ;  but  by  being  a  prisoner  he  lost  his  authority,  and 
his  misfortunes  had  rendered  him  contemptible  at  home.  The 
dauphin,  and  the  states  of  France,  rejected  the  treaties  he  had 
been  induced  to  sign ;  and  prepared,  in  good  earnest,  to  repel  the 
meditated  invasions  of  the  conqueror.  All  the  consid- 
•-  "^  'J  arable  towns  were  put  in  a  posture  of  defence  ;  and  ev- 
ery thing  valuable  in  the  kingdom  was  secured  in  fortified  places. 
It  was  in  vain,  therefore,  that  Edward  tried  to  allure  the  dauphin 
to  hazard  a  battle,  by  sending  him  a  defiance  ;  it  was  impossible 
to  make  that  cautious  prince  change  the  plan  of  his  operations  ;. 
it  was  in  vain  that  Edward  alleged  the  obligation  of  the  treaties 
which  had  been  signed  at  London,  and  plundered  the  country 
round  to  provoke  an  engagement.  He  at  length  thought  fit  to 
listen  to  equitable  terms  of  peace,  which  was  concluded  upon  con- 
dition that  king  John  should  be  restored  to  liberty,  on  paying  a 
ransom  of  about  a  million  and  a  half  of  our  money.  It  was  stipu- 
lated, that  Edward  should  forever  renounce  all  claim  to  the  king- 
dom of  France  ;  and  should  only  remain  possessed  of  the  territo- 
ries of  Poictou,  Saintonge,  I'Agenois,  Perigord,  the  Limousin, 
Quercy,  Rouergue,  I'Angoumois,  and  other  districts  in  that  quar- 
ter, together  with  Calais,  Guisnes,  Montreuil,  and  the  county  of 
Ponthieu,  on  the  other  side  of  France  :  some  other  stipulations 
were  made  iii  favour  of  the  allies  of  England ;  and  forty  hostages 
were  sent  to  England,  as  a  security  for  the  execution  of  these 
conditions. 

Upon  John's  return  to  his  dominions,  he  found  himself  very  ill 
able  to  comply  with  those  terms  of  peace  that  had  been  just  con- 
cluded. He  was  without  finances,  at  the  head  of  an  exhausted 
State ;  his  soldiers  without  discipline,  and  his  peasants  without 


EDWARD  III.  261 

subordination.  These  had  risen  in  great  numbers  ;  and  one  of 
tlie  chiefs  of  their  banditti  assumed  the  title  of  the  Eriend  of  God 
and  the  Terror  of  Man.  A  citizen  of  Sens,  named  John  Gouge, 
also  got  himself,  by  means  of  his  robberies,  to  be  acknowledged 
king ;  and  he  soon  caused  as  many  calamities  by  his  devastations 
as  the  real  king  had  brought  on  by  his  misfortunes.  Such  was 
the  state  of  that  wretched  kingdom  upon  the  return  of  its  captive 
monarch ;  and  yet,  such  was  his  absurdity,  that  he  immediately 
prepared  for  a  crusade  into  the  Holy  Land,  before  he  was  well 
replaced  on  the  throne.  Had  his  exhausted  subjects  been  able 
to  equip  him  for  this  chimerical  project,  it  is  probable  he  would 
have  gone  through  with  it;  but  their  miseries  were  such,  that 
they  were  even  too  poor  to  pay  his  ransom.  This  was  a  breach 
of  treaty  that  John  would  not  submit  to ;  and  he  was  heard  to 
express  himself  in  a  very  noble  manner  upon  the  occasion  : 
"  Though,"  says  he,  "  good  faith  should  be  banished  from  the  rest 
of  the  earth,  yet  she  ought  still  to  retain  her  habitation  in  the 
breast  of  kings."  In  consequence  of  this  declaration,  he  actually 
returned  to  England  once  more,  and  yielded  himself  a  prisoner, 
since  he  could  not  be  honourably  free.  It  is  said  by  some,  that 
his  passion  for  the  countess  of  Salisbury  was  the  real  cause  of 
this  journey ;  but  we  want  at  this  time  the  foundation  for  sucK 
an  injurious  report.  He  was  lodged  in  the  Savoy,  the  palace 
where  he  had  resided  during  his  captivity :  and  soon  after  he 
closed  a  long  and  unfortunate  reign,  by  his  death,  which 
happened  in  about  the  fifty-sixth  year  of  his  age.  L1od4.J 

Charles,  surnamed  the  Wise,  succeeded  his  father  on  the 
throne  of  France  ;  and  this  monarch,  merely  by  the  force  of  a 
finely  conducted  policy,  and  even  though  suffering  some  defeats, 
restored  his  country  once  more  to  tranquillity  and  power.  He 
quelled  and  dissipated  a  set  of  banditti  who  had  associated  them- 
selves under  the  name  of  Companions,  and  who  had  long  been  a 
terror  to  the  peaceable  inhabitants.  He  had  them  inroUed  into  a 
body,  and  led  them  into  the  kingdom  of  Castile  against  Peter, 
surnamed  the  Cruel,  whom  his  subjects  had  dethroned,  and  who, 
by  means  of  an  alliance  with  the  English,  endeavoured  to  get  him- 
self reinstated  upon  the  throne.  In  consequence  of  these  alliances, 
the  English  and  French  again  came  to  an  engagement;  their 
armies  on  the  one  side  commanded  by  the  Black  Prince ;  on  the 


262  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

other,  by  Henry  of  Transtamare,  and  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  one 

of  the  most  consummate  generals  and  accomplished  characters  of 

the  age  in  which  he  lived.     However,  tlie  usual  good  fortune  of 

April  s,    ^'^®  English  prince  prevailed ;    tlie  French  lost  above 

1367.  twenty  thousand  men,  while  only  four  knights  and  forty 
private  men  on  the  side  of  the  English  were  slain. 

Nevertheless,  these  victories  were  attended  with  very  good  ef- 
fects. The  English,  by  their  frequent  supplies,  had  been  quite 
exhausted,  and  w^ere  unable  to  continue  an  army  in  the  field. 
Charles,  on  the  other  hand,  cautiously  forbore  coming  to  any  de- 
cisive engagement,  but  was  contented  to  let  his  enemies  waste 
their  strength  in  attempts  to  plunder  a  fortified  country.  When 
they  were  retired,  he  then  was  sure  to  sally  forth,  and  possess 
himself  of  such  places  as  they  were  not  strong  enough  to  defend. 
He  first  fell  upon  Ponthieu  5  the  citizens  of  Abbeville  opened  their 
gates  to  him ;  those  of  St.  Valois,  Rue,  and  Crotoy,  imitated  the 
example ;  and  the  whole  country  was,  in  a  little  time,  reduced 
to  total  submission.  The  southern  provinces  were,  in  the  same 
manner,  invaded  by  his  generals  with  equal  success ;  while  the 
Black  Pi'ince,  destitute  of  supplies  from  England,  and  wasted  by 
a  cruel  and  consumptive  disorder,  was  obliged  to  retui-n  to  his 
native  country,  leaving  the  affairs  of  the  south  of  France  in  a  most 
desperate  condition. 

In  this  exigence,  the  resentment  of  the  king  of  England  was 
excited  to  the  utmost  pitch  ;  and  he  seemed  resolved  to  take  sig- 
nal vengeance  on  his  enemies  on  the  continent.  But  the  fortu- 
nate  occasion  seemed  now  elapsed  ;  and  all  his  designs  were 
marked  with  ill  success.  The  earl  of  Pembroke,  and  his  whole 
army,  were  intercepted  at  sea,  and  taken  prisoners  by  Henry, 
king  of  Castile.  This  nobleman  in  person  attempted  to  embark 
with  an  arm3r  for  Bourdeaux;  but  was  detained  by  contrary 
winds,  and  obliged  to  lay  aside  the  expedition.  Sir  Robert 
Knolles,  one  of  his  generals  on  the  continent,  at  the  head  of  thir- 
ty thousand  men,  was  defeated  by  Bertrand  du  Guesclin ;  while 
the  duke  of  Lancaster,  at  the  head  of  twenty -five  thousand  men, 
had  the  mortification  of  seeing  his  troops  diminished  one  half  by 
flying  parties,  without  ever  coming  to  a  battle.  Such  was  the  pic- 
ture that  presented  itself  to  this  victorious  monarch  in  the  decline 
of  life ;  and  this  might  w^ell  serve  as  a  lesson  to  the  princes  of 


EDWARD  III.  263 

the  age,  that  more  permanent  advantages  are  obtained  by  wisdom 
than  by  valour  .Added  to  his  other  uneasinesses,  he  had  the  mor- 
tification to  see  his  authority  despised  at  home.  It  was  in  vain 
that  he  sought  refuge,  in  his  age,  from  the  complaints  of  his  sub- 
jects, in  the  arms  of  a  favourite  mistress  whose  name  was  Alice 
Pierce  ;  this  only  served  to  exasperate  his  people  the  more 
against  him,  and  to  turn  their  indignation  into  contempt.  But 
what,  of  all  other  things,  served  to  gloom  the  latter  part  of  this 
splendid  reign,  was  the  approaching  death  of  the  Black  Prince, 
whose  constitution  showed  but  too  manifestly  the  symptoms  of  a 
speedy  dissolution.  This  valiant  and  accomplished  prince  died 
in  the  forty-sixth  year  of  his  age,  leaving  behind  him  a  character 
without  a  single  blemish,  and  a  degree  of  sorrow  among  the  peo- 
ple that  time  could  scarcely  alleviate.  His  affability,  clemency, 
and  liberal  disposition,  have  been  celebrated  by  different  histori- 
ans. Though  born  in  an  age  in  which  military  virtues  alone  were 
held  in  esteem,  he  cultivated  the  arts  of  peace,  and  seemed  ever 
more  happy  in  deserving  praise  than  in  obtaining  it. 

The  king  was  most  sensibly  affected  with  the  loss  of  his  son, 
and  tried  every  art  to  remove  his  uneasiness.  He  had  banished 
his  concubine  some  time  before  from  his  presence  ;  but  took  her 
again,  in  hopes  of  finding  some  consolation  in  her  company.  He 
removed  himself  entirely  from  the  duties  and  burthens  of  the 
state,  and  left  his  kingdom  to  be  plundered  by  a  set  of  rapacious 
ministers.  He  did  not  survive  the  consequences  of  his  bad  con- 
duct ;  but  died  about  a  year  after  the  prince,  at  Shene,  in  Surry, 
deserted  by  all  his  courtiers,  even  by  those  who  had  grown  rich 
by  his  bounty.  He  expired  in  the  sixty -fifth  year  of  his  age,  and 
the  fifty-first  of  his  reign  ;  a  prince  more  admired  than  r-icj'r  -i 
loved  by  his  subjects,  and  more  an  object  of  their  ap- 
plause than  their  sorrow. 

The  reign  of  Edward  was  rather  brilliant  than  truly  serviceable 
tp  his  subjects.  If  England,  dui'ing  these  shining  triumphs  on  the 
continent,  gained  any  real  advantage,  it  was  only  that  of  having 
a  spirit  of  elegance  and  honour  diffused  among  the  higher  ranks 
of  the  people.  In  all  conquests,  something  is  gained  in  civil  life 
from  the  people  subdued ;  and  as  France  was  at  that  time  evi- 
dently more  civilized  than  England,  those  imitative  islanders,  as 
they  were  then  called,  adopted  the  arts  of  the  people  they  over- 


\ 


264  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

came.  The  meanest  soldier  in  the  English  army  now  began  to 
follow  his  leader  from  love,  and  not  compulsion ;  he  was  brave 
from  sentiment  alone,  and  had  the  honour  of  his  country  beating 
in  his  breast,  even  though  in  the  humblest  station.  This  was  the 
time  when  chivalry  was  at  its  highest  pitch ;  and  many  of  the 
successes  of  England  were  owing  to  that  romantic  spirit  which 
the  king  endeavoured  to  diffuse,  and  of  which  he  was  the  most 
shining  example.  It  was  this  spirit  that  in  some  measure  served 
to  soften  the  ferocity  of  the  age  ;  being  a  mixture  of  love,  generos- 
ity, and  war.  Instead  of  being  taught  the  sciences,  the  sons  of 
the  nobility  were  brought  into  the  field  as  soon  as  they  were  able, 
and  instructed  in  no  other  arts  but  those  of  arms  ;  such  as  the 
method  of  sitting  on  horseback,  of  wielding  the  lance,  running  at 
the  ring,  flourishing  at  a  tournament,  and  addressing  a  mistress. 
To  attain  these,  was  considered  as  the  sum  of  all  human  ac- 
quirements ;  and  though  war  made  their  only  study,  yet  the  rules 
of  tactics,  encampments,  stratagems,  and  fortifications,  were  al- 
most totally  disregarded. 

r-.  „.q  -,  It  was  in  this  reign  that  the  order  of  the  Garter  was 
instituted ;  the  number  received  into  which  was  to  con- 
sist of  twenty -four  persons,  beside  the  king.  A  vulgar  story  pre- 
vails, but  unsupported  by  any  antient  authoi-ity,  that  the  countess 
of  Salisbury,  at  a  ball,  happening  to  diop  her  garter,  the  king  took 
it  up  and  presented  it  to  her  with  these  words,  "  Honi  soit  qui 
mal  y  pense  :"  Evil  to  him  that  evil  thinks.  This  accident  is 
said  to  give  rise  to  the  order  and  the  motto ;  it  being  the  spirit  of 
the  times  to  mix  love  and  war  together,  and  for  knights  to  plume 
themselves  upon  the  slightest  tokens  that  their  mistresses  were 
pleased  to  bestow. 

Edward  left  many  children  by  his  queen  Philippa  of  Hainault; 
his  eldest  son,  the  Black  Prince,  died  before  him,  but  left  a  son, 
named  Richard,  who  succeeded  to  the  throne  ;  Edward's  second 
son  was  Lionel,  duke  of  Clarence  ;  the  third  son  was  called  John 
of  Gaunt,  from  the  place  of  his  birth,  and  was  afterwards  created 
duke  of  Lancaster  5  the  fourth  son  was  Edmund,  earl  of  Cam- 
bridge, and  afterwards  duke  of  York ;  the  fifth  son  was  Thomas, 
duke  of  Gloucester,  the  most  ambitious  and  enterprising  of  all 
his  family.  There  were  several  daughters  also  ;  but,  as  there  is 
nothing  material  in  their  history,  we  shall  pass  over  their  names 
without  further  notice. 


TSICHARD  11.  265 

CHAP.  XV. 

RICHARD  IL 

IvicHARD  II.  came  to  the  throne  of  his  grandfather  when  as  yet 
but  eleven  years  of  age,  and  found  the  people  discontented  and 
poor,  the  nobles  proud  and  rebellious.  A  spirit  of  profusion  had 
entered  into  the  kingdom  with  the  spirit  of  gallantry ;  v/hich, 
while  it  produced  indolence  and  rapacity  among  the  higher  or- 
ders, produced  want  and  disobedience  among  the  poor. 

As  the  king  was  a  minor,  the  government  was  vested  in  the 
hands  of  his  three  uncles,  the  dukes  of  Lancaster,  York,  and 
Gloucester  J  the  difference  of  whose  dispositions,  it  was  supposed, 
would  serve  to  check  the  defects  of  each  other.  Lancastery 
though  experienced  during  the  late  reign  in  government,  was 
neither  popular  nor  enterprising;  York  was  indolent  and  weak; 
Gloucester  turbulent,  popular,  and  ambitious.  Under  the  secret 
influence  of  these,  wthout  any  regency  being  appointed,  the  whole 
system  of  government  was  kept  together  for  some  years ;  the 
authority  established  during  the  former  reign  still  continuing  to 
operate  in  this. 

Bift  though  government  was  carried  on,  yet  it  was  not  without 
many  commotions,  arising  either  from  the  impatience  of  the  peo- 
ple or  the  ambition  of  the  great :  as  the  late  king  had  left  the 
kingdom  involved  in  many  dangerous  and  expensive  wars,  and 
as  these  demanded  large  and  constant  supplies,  the  murmurs  of 
the  people  increased  in  proportion.  Nor  were  they  lessoned  by 
the  manner  of  carrying  on  these  expeditions ;  which,  in  general, 
were  languid,  and  upon  the  whole  unsuccessful.  The  duke  of 
Lancaster  laid  claim  to  the  crown  of  Castile,  and  made  a  fruit- 
less expedition ;  the  war  with  France  produced  no  enterprise  of 
lustre,  and  that  with  Scotland  was  rather  unsuccessful.  The  ex* 
penses,  however,  of  the  armaments  to  face  the  enemy  on  every 
side,  and  a  want  of  ceconomy  in  the  administration,  entirely  ex- 
hausted the  treasury ;  and  a  new  tax  of  three  groats,  on  every 
person  above  fifteen,  was  granted  by  pai'liament  as  a  supply. 
The  indignation  of  the  people  had  been  for  some  time  increasing  j 

VOL.  r.  34 


266  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

but  a  tax  so  unequitable,  in  whicb  tbe  ricb  paid  no  more  tban  the 
poor,  kindled  the  resentment  of  the  latter  into  a  flame. 

Notwithstanding  the  numbers  who  by  war,  by  a  residence  in 
towns,  and  by  other  means  had  become  free,  yet  there  were  still 
multitudes  in  the  country  who  had  lands  in  villanage,  that  were 
only  slaves  to  the  lords  from  whom  they  held.  These  had  seen 
the  advantages  of  liberty,  from  its  effects  upon  those  of  equal 
tank  who  had  gone  to  live  in  towns ;  and  they  panted  for  a  par- 
ticipation of  those  advantages.  Several  of  these  had  become  opu- 
lent enough  to  purchase  their  freedom ;  but,  by  an  unjust  act 
of  parliament  in  this  reign,  these  purchases  were  declared  of  no 
validity.  This  act  the  peasants  considered  as  an  infraction  of 
the  laws  of  humanity ;  and  such  indeed  it  must  be  allowed  to 
have  been.  But  it  had  long  been  the  prescriptive  manner  of  rea- 
soning, to  have  no  regard  for  the  rights  of  a  certain  class  of  men 
who  were  supposed  too  low  for  justice.  The  seeds  of  discontent 
were  still  more  cultivated  by  the  preaching  of  several  men,  who 
went  about  the  country  inculcating  the  natural  equality  of  man- 
kind, and  consequently  the  right  that  all  had  to  an  equal  partici- 
pation of  the  goods  of  nature.  Hitherto  we  have  seen  popular 
insurrections  only  in  towns ;  but  we  now  find  the  spirit  of  free- 
dom gaining  ground  in  the  country.  Our  citizens  soon  began  to 
perceive  their  own  strength  ;  but  it  was  a  considerable  time  be- 
fore the  peasantry,  who  had  been  annexed  to  the  soil,  claimed  a 
share  in  those  advantages.  We,  in  this  first  instance,  find  a 
knowledge  of  the  rights  of  humanity  diffusing  itself  even  to  the 
very  lowest  of  the  people,  and  exerting  itself  in  rude  and  terrible 
efforts  for  freedom. 

The  minds  of  the  peasants  being  thus  prepared  for  insurrection, 
the  manner  of  collecting  this  unjust  poll-tax  soon  furnished  them 
with  a  pretext  for  beginning  the  revolt.  It  began  in  Essex,  where 
a  report  was  industriously  spread,  that  the  peasants  were  to  be 
destroyed,  their  houses  burned,  and  their  farms  plundered.  A 
blacksmith,  well  known  by  the  name  of  Wat  Tyler,  was  the  first 
that  excited  them  to  arms.  The  tax-gatherers,  coming  to  this 
man's  house  while  he  was  at  work,  demanded  payment  for  his 
daughter ;  which  he  refused,  alleging  that  she  was  under  the 
age  mentioned  in  the  act.  One  of  the  brutal  collectors  insisted 
pn  her  being  a  full  grown  woman,  and  immediately  attempted 


RICHARD  IL  267 

giving  a  very  indecent  proof  of  his  assertion.  This  provoked  the 
father  to  such  a  degree,  that  he  instantly  struck  him  dead  with  a 
blow  of  his  hammer.  The  standei'S-by  applauded  his  spirit,  and, one 
and  all,  resolved  to  defend  his  conduct.  He  was  considered  as 
a  champion  in  the  cause,  and  appointed  the  leader  and  spokes- 
man of  the  people.  It  is  easy  to  imagine  the  disorders  commit- 
ted by  this  tumultuous  rabble :  the  whole  neighbourhood  rose  in 
arms ;  they  burnt  and  plundered  wherever  they  came,  and  re^ 
venged  upon  their  former  masters  all  those  insults  which  they 
had  long  sustained  with  impunity.  As  the  discontent  was  gener- 
al, the  insurgents  increased  in  proportion  as  they  approached  the 
capital.  The  flame  soon  propagated  itself  into  Kent,  Hertford-* 
shirej  Surry,  Sussex,  Suffolk,  Norfolk,  Cambridge,  and  Lincoln^ 
They  were  found  to  amount  to  above  a  hundred  thousand  men. 
by  the  time  they  were  arrived  at  Blackheath ;  from  whence  they 
sent  a  message  to  the  king,  who  had  taken  shelter  in  the  Tower, 
desiring  a  conference  with  him.  With  this  message  Richard  was 
desirous  of  complying,  but  was  intimidated  by  their  fierce  de- 
meanour. In  the  mean  time  they  had  entered  the  city,  burning 
and  plundering  the  houses  of  such  as  Avere  obnoxious  from  their 
power,  or  remarkable  for  their  riches.  They  broke  into  the  Savoy 
palace,  belonging  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  put  several  of  his 
attendants  to  death.  Their  animosity  was  particularly  levelled 
against  the  lawyers,  to  whom  they  sliowed  no  mercy.  Such  was  the 
vehemence  of  their  fury,  that  the  king  began  to  tremble  for  his 
own  safety ;  and,  knowing  that  the  Tower  was  not  capable  of 
standing  against  an  assault,  he  went  out  among  them,  and  desir- 
ed to  know  their  demands.  To  this  they  made  a  very  humble  re- 
monstrance, requiring  a  general  pardon,  the  abolition  of  slavery^ 
freedom  of  commerce  in  market-towns,  and  a  fixed  rent  instead 
of  those  services  required  by  the  tenure  of  villanage.  As  these 
requests  were  reasonable,  the  king  soon  comjilied ;  and  charters 
were  accordingly  made  out,  ratifying  the  grant.  In  the  mean 
time  another  body  of  these  insurgents  had  broke  into  the  Tower, 
and  murdered  the  chancellor,  the  primate,  and  the  treasurer,  with 
some  other  officers  of  distinction.  They  then  divided  themselves 
into  bodies,  and  took  up  their  quarters  in  different  parts  of 
the  city.  At  the  head  of  one  of  these  was  Wat  Tyler,  who  led 
his  men  into  Smithfield,  where  he  was  met  by  the  king,  who  in- 


268  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

vited  him  to  a  conference,  under  a  pretence  of  hearing  and  re- 
dressing his  grievances.  Tyler,  ordering  his  companions  to  re- 
tire till  he  should  give  them  a  signal,  boldly  ventured  to  meet  the 
king  in  the  midst  of  his  retinue  ;  and  accordingly  began  the  con- 
ference. The  denunds  of  this  demagogue  are  censured  by  all 
the  historians  of  the  time  as  insolent  and  extravagant ;  and  yet 
nothing  can  be  more  just  than  those  they  have  delivered  for  him. 
He  required  that  all  slaves  should  be  set  free  ;  that  all  common- 
ages should  be  open  to  the  poor  as  well  as  to  the  rich ;  and  that 
a  general  pardon  should  be  passed  for  the  late  outrages.  Whilst 
he  made  these  demands,  he  now  and  then  lifted  up  his  sword  in 
a  menacing  manner  5  which  insolence  so  raised  the  indignation 
of  William  Walworth,  then  mayor  of  London,  attending  on  the- 
king,  that,  without  considering  the  danger  to  which  he  exposed 
his  majesty,  he  stunned  Tyler  with  a  blow  of  his  mace ;  while 
one  of  the  king's  knights,  riding  up,  dispatched  him  with  his 
sword.  The  mutineers,  seeing  their  leader  fall,  prepared  them- 
selves to  take  revenge ;  and  their  bows  were  now  bent  for  execu- 
tion ;  when  Richard,  though  not  yet  quite  sixteen  years  of  age, 
rode  up  to  the  rebels,  and,  with  admirable  presence  of  mind,  cried 
out, "  What,  my  people,  will  you  then  kill  your  king  ?  Be  not  con- 
cerned for  the  loss  of  your  leader  :  I  myself  will  now  be  your  geii- 
eral ;  follow  me  into  the  field,  and  you  shall  have  whatever  yon 
desire."  The  awed  multitude  immediately  desisted  j  they  fol- 
lowed the  king,  as  if  mechanically,  into  the  fields,  and  there  he 
granted  them  the  same  charter  that  he  had  before  given  to  their 
companions. 

These  grants,  for  a  short  time,  gained  the  king  great  popular- 
ity ;  and  it  is  probable  it  was  his  own  desire  to  have  them  con- 
tinued :  but  the  nobles  had  long  tasted  the  sweets  of  power,  and 
were  unwilling  to  admit  any  other  to  a  participation.  The  par- 
liament soon  revoked  these  charters  of  enfranchisement  and  par- 
don ;  the  low  people  were  reduced  to  the  same  slavish  condition 
as  before,  and  several  of  the  ringleaders  were  punished  with  cap- 
ital severity.  The  insurrections  of  the  barons  against  their  kings 
are  branded  in  our  history  with  no  great  air  of  invective  ;  but  the 
tumults  of  the  people  against  the  barons  are  marked  with  all  the 
virulence  of  reproach. 

The  cruelty  which  was  exercised  against  the  popular  leaders 


RICHARD  II.  269 

upon  this  occasion  created  no  small  enmity  against  the  king. 
He  had  first  granted  them  a  charter,  which  implied  the  justice  of 
their  demands ;  and  he  was  seen,  soon  after,  weak  enough  to  re- 
voke what  he  had  before  allowed  the  justice  of.  It  is  probable  also, 
that  his  uncles  were  not  backward  in  increasing  this  general  dis- 
like against  him  j  as  by  that  means  they  were  more  like  to  continue 
in  their  present  authority.  His  own  capricious  conduct,  indeed, 
might  very  well  countenance  them  in  the  restrictions  they 
placed  upon  him ;  as  he  very  soon  testified  an  eager  desire  to 
govern,  without  any  of  the  requisites  to  fit  him  for  such  a  difl&cult 
undertaking  :  he  soon  discovered  an  attachment  to  favourites, 
without  any  merit  on  their  side  to  entitle  them  to  such  flattering 
distinctions.  Robert  Vere,  earl  of  Oxford,  a  young  man,  whose 
person  was  faultless,  but  whose  morals  were  debauched,  had  ac- 
quired an  entire  ascendant  over  him.  This  nobleman  was  first 
created  marquis  of  Dublin,  and  then  duke  of  Ireland,  with  the 
entire  sovereignty,  during  life,  of  that  island.  He  gave  him  liis 
own  cousin  in  marriage ;  and  soon  after  permitted  him  to  repu- 
diate her  for  another  lady,  of  whom  he  was  enamoured.  He  soon 
became  the  channel  through  which  all  royal  favour  passed  to  the 
people ;  and  he  possessed  all  the  power,  while  the  king  had  only 
the  shadow  of  royalty. 

A  partiality  in  princes  ever  produces  animosity  among  their 
subjects.  Those  noblemen  who  were  either  treated  with  disre- 
spect by  the  favourite,  or  who  thought  that  they  had  themselves 
better  pretensions  to  favour,  instantly  took  the  alarm,  and  com- 
bined against  him.  At  the  head  of  this  association  were,  Mow- 
bray, earl  of  Nottingham  ;  Fitz-Alan,  earl  of  Arundel ;  Percy, 
earl  of  Northumberland ;  Montacute,  earl  of  Salisbury ;  and 
Beauchamp,  earl  of  Warwick.  These,  uniting,  resolved  on  the 
destruction  of  the  favourite ;  and  they  began  by  marking  out 
Michael  de  la  Pole,  who  was  then  chancellor,  and  Oxford's  chief 
friend  and  supporter,  as  the  first  object  of  their  vengeance.  He 
was  accordingly  impeached  in  parliament ;  and,  although  nothing 
material  was  alleged  against  him,  such  was  the  interest  of  the 
conspiring  barons,  that  he  was  condemned,  and  deprived  of  his 

office. 

From  punishing  his  ministers,  they  soon  after  ventured  to  at- 
tack the  king  in  person.     Under  a  pretence  that  he  was  as  yet 


270  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

unable  to  govern,  although  he  was  at  that  time  tweiitj-one,  they 
ri386.1    appointed  a  commission  of  fourteen  persons,  upon  whom 
the  sovereign  power  was  to  be  transferred  for  a  year. 
This  was,  in  fact,  totally  depriving  the  king  of  all   power,  and 
oppressing  the  kingdom  with  a  confirmed  aristocracy.    This  mea- 
sure was  driven  forward  by  the  duke  of  Gloucester ;  and  none 
but  those  of  his  own  faction  were  admitted  as  members  of  the 
committee.     It  was  not  without  a  struggle  that  the  king  saw  him- 
self thus  totally  divested  of  authority ;  he  endeavoured  first  to 
gain  over  the  parliament  to  his  intei-ests,  by  influencing  the  sher- 
iffs of  each  county,  who  were  then  the  only  returning  officers. 
This  measure  failing,  he  applied  to  the  judges  ;  and  they,  either 
from  motives  of  interest,  or  from  conviction,  declared,  that  the 
commission  which  had  deprived  him  of  his  authority  was  unlaw- 
ful ;  and  that  those  who  procured  or  advised  it  were  punishable 
with  death.     This  sentence  was  quickly  opposed  by  declarations 
from  the  lords  :  the  duke  of  Gloucester  saw  his  danger  if  the  king 
should  prevail  j  and,  secretly  assembling  his  party,  he  appeared 
in  arms  at  Haringay  Park,  near  Highgate,  at  the  Iiead  of  a  body 
of  men,  more  than  sufficient  to  intimidate  the  king  and  all  his  ad- 
herents.    These  insurgents,  sensible  of  their  own  power,  were 
now  resolved  to  make  use  of  the  occasion  j  and  began  by  demand- 
ing of  the  king  the  names  of  those  who  had  advised  him  to  his 
late  rash  measures.     A  few  days  after  they  appeared  armed  in 
his  presence,  and  accused,  by  name,  the  archbishop  of  York,  the 
duke  of  Ireland,  the  earl  of  Suffolk,  and  sir  Robert  Tresilian,  one 
of  the  judges,  who  had  declared  in  his  favour,  together  with  sir 
Nicholas  Bember,  as  public  and  dangerous  enemies  to  the  state. 
It  was  now  too  late  for  the  opposite  party  to  attempt  any  other 
vindication  of  their  conduct  than  by  arms.     The  duke  of  Ireland 
fled  into  Cheshire,  where  he  attempted  to  raise  a  body  of  forces  j 
but  was  quickly  obliged  to  fly  into  Flanders,  on  the  arrival  of  the 
duke  of  Gloucester  with  a  superior  army.     Soon  after  the  king 
was  obliged  to  summon  a  parliament ;  an  accusation  was  drawn 
up  against  five  of  his  counsellors ;  of  these  only  sir  Nicholas 
Bember  was  present;  and  he  was  quickly  found  guilty,  con- 
demned, and  executed,  together  with  sir  Robert  Tresilian,  who 
had  been  discovered  and  taken  during  the  interval.    But  the  blood 
of  one  or  two  was  not  sufficient  to  satiate  the  resentment  of  the 


RICHARD  II.  271 

duke  of  Gloucester ;  lord  Beauchamp  of  Holt  was  shortly  after 
condemned  and  executed  ;  and  sir  Simon  Burley,  who  had  been 
appointed  the  king's  governor,  shared  the  same  fate,  although 
the  queen  continued  for  three  hours  on  her  knees  before  the  duke, 
imploring  his  pardon. 

It  might  be  supposed  that,  after  such  a  total  subversion  of  the 
royal  power,  there  would  be  no  more  struggles,  during  this  reign, 
between  the  prince  and  his  nominal  subjects  ;  but,  whether  from 
the  fluctuation  of  opinions  among  the  people,  or  from  the  influence 
of  a  military  force  \vhich  had  been  lately  levied  against  France, 
we  find  Richard  once  more  resolved  to  shake  off  that  power  which 
had  long  controlled  him,  and  actually  bringing  the  parliament  to 
second  his  resolutions. 

In  an  extraordinary  council  of  the  nobility,  assem-  p^(,cq-, 
bled  after  Easter,  he,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  present, 
desired  to  know  his  age ;  and  being  told  that  he  was  turned  of 
two-and-twenty,  he  alleged,  that  it  was  time  then  for  him  to  gov- 
ern without  help,  and  that  there  was  no  reason  that  he  should  be 
deprived  of  those  rights  which  the  meanest  of  his  subjects  enjoy- 
ed. The  lords  answering,  i*n  some  confusion,  that  he  had  cer- 
tainly an  indisputable  right  to  take  upon  himself  the  government 
of  the  kingdom  :  "  Yes,"  replied  he,  "  I  have  long  been  under  the 
government  of  tutors ;  and  I  will  now  first  show  my  right  to  pow- 
er by  their  removal."  He  then  ordered  Thomas  Arundel,  whom 
the  commissioners  had  lately  appointed  chancellor,  to  give  up  the 
seal,  which  he  next  day  delivered  to  William  of  Wickham,  bishop 
of  Winchester.  He  next  removed  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  the 
earl  of  Warwick,  and  other  lords  of  the  opposition,  from  the  coun- 
cil. The  bishop  of  Hereford  lost  his  ofldice  of  treasurer  ;  the  earl 
of  Arundel  was  deprived  of  the  post  of  high-admiral  j  all  the 
great  officers  of  the  household,  as  well  as  the  judges,  were  chang- 
ed ;  and  all  the  offices  felt  the  influence  of  this  extraordinary  re- 
volution. 

The  king,  being  thus  left  at  liberty  to  conduct  the  business  of 
government  at  discretion,  began  by  showing  many  marks  of  mod- 
eration towards  those  who  before  had  endeavoured  to  depress  his 
power  :  he  seemed  to  be  entirely  reconciled  to  his  uncles  ;  and 
he  remitted  some  subsidies  which  had  been  granted  him,  that  ac- 
quired liim  for  a  time  the  affections  of  the  people.    But  he  want- 


272  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

ed  those  arts  that  arc  usually  found  to  procure  a  lasting  respect ; 
lie  was  fond  of  luxurious  pleasures  and  idle  ostentation ;  he  ad- 
mitted the  meanest  ranks  to  his  familiarity ;  and  his  conversa- 
tion was  not  adapted  to  impress  them  with  a  reverence  for  his 
morals  or  abilities.  His  military  talents,  on  which  mankind  then 
placed  the  greatest  value,  were  seldom  exerted,  and  never  with 
any  great  success.  The  French  war  was  scarce  heard  of  ;  and 
some  successful  inroads  of  the  Scots,  particularly  that  whicb 
brought  on  a  disputed  victory  at  Otterbourne,  were  only  opposed 
by  those  barons  whose  possessions  lay  along  the  frontier.  He 
gained  indeed  some  reputation  for  arms  in  Ireland ;  but  his  suc- 
cesses there  were  too  insignificant  to  give  him  a  decisive  charac- 
ter. From  thence,  the  small  regard  which  the  public  bore  his 
person  disposed  them  to  murmur  against  his  administration,  and 
to  receive  with  avidity  every  complaint  which  discontent  or  am- 
bition suggested  to  his  prejudice. 

Whether  the  duke  of  Gloucester  was  secretly  displeased  with 
this  mean  disposition  in  his  I'oyal  nephew,  or  wanted  to  make 
himself  king  by  fomenting  jealousies  against  him,  must  remain 
forever  unknown ;  but  certain  it  is,  that  he  used  every  art  to  in- 
crease the  aversion  of  the  nation  against  him,  and  to  establish  his 
own  popularity.  He  represented  the  peace  which  had 
L  '^  'J  been  just  then  concluded  witli  France  as  the  result  of 
the  king's  pusillanimity :  and  plausibly  appeared  to  lament  that 
Richai'd  should  have  degenerated  so  far  from  the  heroic  virtues 
of  his  father.  He  frequently  spoke  with  contempt  of  the  king's 
person  and  govei^nment,  and  deliberated  concerning  the  lawful- 
ness of  throwing  off  all  allegiance  to  him.  These  were  insults 
that  deserved  to  be  chastised  in  any  subject  5  but  which  called 
aloud  for  punishment  in  him,  whose  popularity  was  dangerous, 
and  who  more  than  once  had  testified  a  disposition  to  rebel.  As 
all  his  conduct  was  secretly  observed  by  the  king's  emissaries, 
Richard  at  length  formed  a  resolution  of  ridding  himself  entirely 
both  of  him  and  his  faction,  sensible  that  he  then  had  the  parlia- 
ment entirely  at  his  disposal.  He  accordingly  ordered  Glouces- 
ter to  be  immediately  arrested  and  sent  over  to  Calais,  at  which 
place  there  was  no  danger  of  a  rescue  from  his  numerous  adherents. 
The  earls  of  Arundel  and  Warwick  were  seized  at  the  same 
time ;  and  a  parliament  was  summoned  at  Westminster,  which 


RICHARD  II.  SrS 

Ihe  king  knew  to  be  obedient  to  his  vail.  This  parliament,  as 
he  was  apprised,  passed  whatever  acts  he  thought  proper  to  dic- 
tate :  they  annulled  forever  the  commission  of  fourteen,  which 
had  usu-ped  upon  his  authority;  they  repealed  all  those  acts 
which  had  condemned  las  former  ministers ;  and  revoked  the 
general  pardon  which  the  king  had  granted,  upon  his  assuming 
the  reins  of  government  into  his  own  hands.  In  consequence  of 
this  several  of  the  party  of  Gloucester  were  impeached,  condemn- 
ed, and  executed.  Fitz-Alan,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  was 
banished  the  kingdom,  and  his  temporalities  sequestered.  The 
earl  of  Arundel  vainly  attempted  to  plead  the  king's  general  par- 
don to  stop  his  execution;  the  earl  of  Warwick,  showing  signs  of 
contrition,  had  his  life  spared,  but  was  banished  to  the  Isle  of 
Man.  The  greatest  criminal  yet  remained ;  and  a  warrant  was 
accordingly  issued  to  the  earl  mareschal,  governor  of  Calais,  to 
bring  over  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  to  take  his  trial  as  the  rest  had 
done.  It  is  probable  this  nobleman  would  have  shared  the  same 
fate  with  the  rest  of  his  party  ;  but  he  was  privately  dispatched 
in  prison,  being  smothered,  as  it  afterwards  appeared,  between 
two  pillows,  by  his  keepers. 

The  death  of  a  nobleman  so  popular  as  the  duke  did  not  fail  to 
increase  those  animosities  which  had  already  taken  deep  root  in, 
the  kingdom.  The  aggrandisement  of  some  new  favourites  con- 
tributed still  more  to  make  the  king;  odious  ;  but  though  he  seem- 
cd  resolved,  by  all  his  actions,  to  set  his  subjects  against  him,  it' 
was  accident  that  gave  the  occasion  for  his  overthrow.  After  the 
■destruction  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  and  the  heads  of  that  party, 
a  misunderstanding  broke  out  among  those  noblemen  who  had 
joined  in  the  prosecution.  The  earl  of  Hereford  appeared  in  par- 
liament, and  accused  the  duke  of  Norfolk  of  having  spoken  sedi- 
tious words  against  his  majesty  in  a  private  conversation.  Nor- 
folk denied  the  charge ;  gave  Hereford  the  lie ;  and  offered  to 
prove  his  innocence  by  single  combat.  As  proofs  were  wanting 
for  legal  trial,  the  lords  readily  acquiesced  in  that  mode  of  de- 
termination ;  the  time  and  place  were  appointed;  and  the  whole 
nation  waited  with  anxious  suspense  for  the  event.  At  length  the 
day  arrived  on  which  this  duel  was  to  be  fought ;  and  as  combats 
of  this  kind  were  then  very  prevalent,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  de- 
scribe the  ceremonies  on  that  occasion.     Hereford,  the  challenger, 

tot.  I.  S5 


£74  HISTORY  OS*  ENGLAND. 

first  appeared  on  a  white  charger,  gaily  caparisoned,  armed  at  all 
points,  and  holding  his  drawn  sword.     When  he  approached  the 
lists,  the  mareschal  demanded  his  name  and  business ;  to  which  he 
replied,  "  I  am  Henry  of  Lancaster,  earl  of  Hereford,  come  hither 
according  to  my  duty,  against  Thomas  Mowbray,  duke  of  Nor- 
folk, a  false  traitor  to  God  and  the  king,  the  realm  and  me."   Then 
taking  the  oath  that  his  quarrel  was  just  and  true,  he  desired  to 
enter  the  lists  j  which   being   granted,  he  sheathed  his  sword, 
pulled  down  his  beaver,  crossed  himself  on  the  forehead,  seized 
his  lance,  passed  the  barrier,  alighted,  and  ssA  down  i-n  a  chair  of 
green  velvet  placed  at  one  end  of  the  lists.    He  had  scarce  taken 
his  seat  when  the  king  came  into  the  field  with  great  pomp,  at- 
tended by  the  lords,  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  who  came  from  France 
on  purpose  to  see  this  famous  trial,  and  ten  thousand  men  at 
arms,  to  prevent  tumults  and  disturbances.     His  majesty  being 
seated  in  his  chair  of  state,  the  king  at  arms  proclaimed  that  none 
but  such  as  were  appointed  to  marshal  the  field  should  presume 
to  touch  the  lists  upon  pain  of  death.     Then  another  herald  pro- 
claimed aloud,  "  Behold  here  Henry  of  Lancaster,  earl  of  Here- 
ford, who  has  entered  the  lists  to  perform  his  devoir  against 
Thomas  Mowbray,  duke  of  Norfolk,  on  pain  of  being  counted 
false  and  recreant."     Just  then  the.  duke  of  Norfolk  appeared  iii 
armSj  mounted  upon  a  barbed  horse,  with  a  coat  of  arms  of  crim- 
son velvet,  embroidered  with  lions  of  silver  and  mulberry  trees : 
and,  having  taken  his  oath  before  the  constable  and  mareschal,  en- 
tered the  field,  exclaiming  aloud,  "  God  defend  the  right !"    Then 
alighting  from  hfs  horse,  he  placed  himself  in  a  chair  of  crimson 
velvet  opposite  to  his  antagonist,  at  the  other  end  of  the  lists. 
After  which  the  mareschal,  having  measured  their  lances,  deliv- 
ered one  to  the  challenger,  and  sent  a  knight  with  the  other  to 
the  duke  of  Noi'folk  5  and  proclamation  was  made  that  they  should 
prepare  for  the   combat.    Accordingly,  mounting  their  horses. 
•&nd  closing  their  beavers,  they  fixed  their  lances  in  rest,  and  the 
trumpets  sounded  the  charge.    The  earl  of  Hereford  began  his 
career  v/ith  great  violence  ;  but  before  he  could  join  his  antago- 
nist, the  king  threw  down  his  warder,  and  the  heralds  interposed. 
By  the  advice  and  authority  of  his  parliamentary  commissioners, 
he  stopped  tlie  combat,  and  ordered  both  the  combatants  to  leave 
iht  kingdom.    The  duke  of  Norfolk  li-e  banished  for  life,  but  tho 


V  RICHARD  II.  275 

«ail  of  Hereford  only  for  ten  years.  Thus,  the  one  was  con- 
demned to  exile  without  being  charged  with  any  offence,  and  the 
other  without  being  convicted  of  any  crime.  The  duke  of  Nor- 
folk was  overwhelmed  -with  grief  and  despondence  at  the  judg- 
ment awarded  against  him ;  he  retired  to  Venice,  where,  in  a 
little  time  after,  he  died  of  a  broken  heart.  Hereford's  behav- 
iour on  this  occasion  was  resigned  and  submissive  ;  whicli  so 
pleased  the  king,  that  he  consented  to  shorten  the  date  of  his 
banishment  four  years ;  and  he  also  granted  him  letters  patent, 
insuring  him  the  enjoyment  of  any  inheritance  which  should  fall 
to  him  during  his  absence.  But  nothing  could  be  more  fluctuat- 
ing than  Richard's  promises  or  friendship.  The  earl  of  Hereford 
retiring  into  Flanders,  and  from  thence  to  Paris,  found  there  a 
very  favourable  reception  from  the  French  king.  He  even  opened 
a  treaty  of  marriage  with  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Berry,  un- 
cle to  the  king  of  France;  but  was  prevented  from  completing 
the  alliance  by  the  interest  of  Richard,  who,  dreading  the  increas- 
ing power  of  the  banished  earl,  sent  over  the  earl  of  Salisbury  to 
Paris,  Y;ith  instructions  to  break  off  the  match.  Such  an  unex- 
pected injury  could  not  fail  to  aggravate  the  resentment  of  Here- 
ford ;  but  he  had  still  more  cogent  reasons  for  anger,  upon  the 
death  of  his  father,  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  which  happened  shortly 
after.  Richard,  as  v/e  before  observed,  had  given  him  letters  pa- 
tent, empowering  him  to  possess  any  successions  that  should  fall 
to  him  while  abroad ;  but,  being  now  afraid  of  strengthening  the 
hands  of  a  man  whom  he  had  injured,  he  revoked  those  letters, 
and  retained  the  possession  of  the  Lancaster  estate  to  himself. 

Such  complicated  injuries  served  to  inflame  the  resentment  of 
Hereford  against  the  king;  and  although  he  had  hitherto  con- 
cealed them,  he  now  set  no  bounds  to  his  indignation,  but  even 
conceived  a  desire  of  dethroning  a  person  who  had  shown  himself 
so  unworthy  of  power.  Indeed  no  man  could  be  better  qualified 
for  an  enterprise  of  this  nature  tlmn  the  earl  of  Hereford  :  he  was 
cool,  cautious,  discerning,  and  resolute.  He  had  served  with 
distinction  against  the  infidels  of  Lithuania;  and  lis  had  just 
Joined  to  his  other  merits  those  ©f  piety  and  valour.  He  was  the 
idol  of  the  soldiery,  and  the  favourite  of  the  people  ;  he  was  im- 
mensely rich,  and,  by  blood  or  alliance,  connected  with  all  the 
great  families  of  the  nation,    Ojj  the  other  hand,  the  king,  finding 


are  history  of  England. 

himself  above  all  restraint,  gave  himself  up  to  a  soft  effemiiiat© 
life,  regardless  of  his  ovv^n  safety  and  of  the  good  of  the  public. 
His  ministers,  following  the  example  of  their  sovereign,  gave  little 
attention  to  business,  but  saw,  without  anj  concern,  the  honour 
of  the  nation  sinking  into  contempt.  In  this  situation  all  people 
naturally  turned  their  eyes  upon  the  banished  earl  as  the  only 
person  from  whom  they  could  expect  relief  or  redress.  He  was 
stimulated  by  private  injuries ;  and  had  alliances  and  fortune 
sufficient  to  give  weight  to  his  measures.  The  malcontents  only 
waited  for  the  absence  of  the  king  to  put  their  schemes  in  execu- 
tion ;  and  for  these  an  opportunity  was  quickly  offered. 

The  earl  of  Marche,  presumptive  heir  to  the  crown,  having 
been  appointed  the  king's  lieutenant  in  Ireland,  was  slain  in  a 
skirmish  with  the  natives  of  that  country ;  which  so  incensed 
Richard,  tliat,  unmindful  of  his  precarious  situation  at  home,  he 
resolved  with  a  numerous  army  to  revenge  his  death  in  person. 
The  duke  of  Lancaster  (for  that  was  the  title  which  Hereford  as- 
sumed upon  the  death  of  his  father)  being  informed  of  Richard's 
departure  for  Ireland,  instantly  embarked  at  Nantz,  with  a  ret- 
inue of  sixty  persons,  in  three  small  vessels,  and  landed  at  Ra- 
venspur  in  Yorkshire.  The  earl  of  Northumberland,  who  had 
long  been  a  malcontent,  together  with  Henry  Percy  his  son,  who, 
from  his  ardent  valour,  was  surnamed  Hotspur,  immediately 
joined  him  with  their  forces.  After  this  junction  the  concourse 
of  people  coming  to  list  under  his  banner  was  so  great,  that,  in  a 
few  daj's,  his  army  amounted  to  three-score  thousand  men. 

The  duke  of  York  had  been  left  guardian  of  the  realm  during 
Richard's  absence  ,  but  his  efforts  were  ineffectual,  as  the  most 
powerful  persons  who  espoused  the  king's  interests  were  then  ac- 
tually with  him  in  Ireland.  The  duke,  however,  assembled  a 
body  of  forty  thousand  men  at  St.  Alban's ;  but  found  them 
either  quite  dispirited,  or  more  attached  to  the  cause  of  the  rebels 
than  of  the  crown.  It  had  been  Hereford's  policy,  from  the  be-? 
ginning,  to  hide  the  real  motives  of  his  expedition,  and  to  give 
out  that  he  oul}^  aimed  at  the  recovery  of  his  patrimony  and 
dukedom.  Upon  the  present  occasion,  therefore,  he  entreated 
the  duke  of  York  not  to  oppose  a  loyal  and  humble  suppliant  in 
the  recovery  of  his  just  rights  ;  but  to  concur  in  a  measure  that 
was  more  likely  t-o  promote  the  king's  honour  than,  injure  his  in- 


RICHARD  II.  £7? 

terests.  York  was  deceived  by  these  specious  professions ;  he 
declared  that  he  would  not  only  approve,  but  assist  him  in  his 
pretensions ;  and  both  ai'mies  meeting,  embraced  with  acclama- 
tions of  joy. 

Whilst  these  things  w^ere  transacting  in  England,  Richard  con- 
tinued in  Ireland  in  perfect  security.  Contrary  winds,  which  at 
that  time  continued  to  blow  for  three  weeks  together,  prevented  his 
receiving  any  news  of  the  rebellion  which  was  begun  in  his  na- 
tive dominions.  Upon  the  first  information,  therefore,  he  imme- 
diately imprisoned  the  earl  of  Hereford's  brothers,  whom  he  had 
taken  over  with  him,  and  then  resolved  to  go  immediately  over 
to  fight  the  enemy  in  person.  Yet,  ever  wavering  in  his  resolu-  ' 
tions,  he  was  persuaded  to  stay  some  time  longer,  till  he  could 
prepare  ships  to  transport  all  his  forces  together.  This  delay 
completed  his  ruin  j  so  that,  when  he  landed  at  Milford -haven 
with  a  body  of  twenty  thousand  men,  he  had  the  mortification  to 
find  that  the  duke  of  York  had  already  espoused  the  interest  of 
his  rival,  and  that  his  force  was  every  way  inferior  to  that  of  the 
enemy.  He  now  saw  himself  in  a  dreadful  situation,  in  the  midst 
of  an  enraged  people,  without  any  friend  on  whom  to  rely,  and  for- 
saken by  those,  who,  in  the  sunshine  of  his  power,  had  only  con- 
tributed to  fan  his  follies.  His  little  army  gradually  began  to  de- 
sert him,  till  at  last  he  found  he  had  not  above  six  thousand  men 
who  followed  his  standard.  Thus,  not  knowing  whom  to  trust  to,, 
or  where  to  turn,  he  saw  no  other  hopes  of  safety,  but  to  throw 
himself  upon  the  generosity  of  his  enemy,  and  to  gain  from  pity 
what  he  could  not  obtain  by  arms.  He  therefore  sent  Hereford 
word  that  he  was  ready  to  submit  to  whatever  terms  he  thought 
proper  to  prescribe ;  and  that  he  earnestly  desired  a  conference. 
For  this  purpose,  the  earl  appointed  him  to  meet  at  a  cas- 
tle within  about  ten  miles  of  Chester,  where  he  came  L  ^  'J 
the  next  day  with  his  whole  army.  Richard,  who  the  day  before 
had  been  brought  thither  by  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  descry- 
ing his  rival's  approach  from  the  walls,  went  down  to  receive 
him ;  while  Hereford,  after  some  ceremony,  entered  the  castle  in 
complete  armour,  only  his  head  was  bare,  in  compliment  to  the 
fallen  king.  Richard  received  him  with  that  open  air  for  which 
he  had  been  remarkable,  and  kindly  bade  him  welcome.  "  My 
lord  the  king?"  returned  Hereford,  w^ith  a  cool  respectful  bow, 


278  HISTOjRY  OP  ENGLAND. 

"  I  am  come  sooner  than  you  appointed,  because  your  people  say, 
that  for  one-and-twenty  years  you  have  governed  with  rigour  and 
indiscretion.  They  are  very  ill  satisfied  with  your  conduct ;  but, 
if  it  please  God,  I  will  help  you  to  govern  them  better  for  the 
time  to  come."  To  this  declaration  the  king  made  no  other  an- 
swer, but,  "  Fair  cousin,  since  it  pleases  you,  it  pleases  us  like- 
wise." 

But  Hereford's  haughty  a,nswer  was  not  the  only  mortification 
the  unfortunate  Richard  was  to  endure.  After  a  short  conversa- 
tion with  some  of  the  king's  attendants,  Hereford  ordered  the 
king's  horses  to  be  brought  out  of  the  stable  ;  and  two  wretched  an- 
imals being  produced,  Richard  was  placed  upon  one,  and  iiis  fa- 
vourite, the  earl  of  Salisbury,  upon  the  other.  In  this  mean 
equipage  they  rode  to  Chester,  and  were  conveyed  to  the  castle, 
with  a  great  noise  of  trumpets,  and  through  a  vast  concourse  of 
people,  who  were  no  way  moved  at  the  sight.  In  this  manner  he 
was  led  triumphantly  along,  from  town  to  town,  amidst  multi- 
tudes who  scoffed  at  him,  and  extolled  his  rival.  "  Long  live  the 
good  duke  of  Lancaster,  our  deliverer !"  was  the  general  cry ; 
but  as  for  the  king,  to  use  the  pathetic  words  of  the  poet,  "  none 
cried  God  bless  him."  Thus,  after  repeated  indignities,  he  was 
cmifined  a  close  prisoner  in  the  Tower ;  there,  if  possible,  to  un- 
dergo a  still  greater  variety  of  studied  insolence,  and  flagrant 
contempt.  The  wretched  monarch,  humbled  in  this  manner,  be- 
gan to  lose  the  pride  of  a  king  with  the  splendours  of  royalty, 
and  his  spirits  sunk  to  his  circumstances.  There  was  no  great 
difficulty,  therefore,  in  inducing  him  to  sign  a  deed,  by  which  he 
renounced  his  crown,  as  being  unqualified  for  governing  the  king- 
dom. Upon  this  r-esignation  Hereford  founded  his  principal 
claim  :  but  willing  to  fortify  his  pretensions  with  every  appear- 
ance of  justice,  he  called  a  parliament,  which  was  readily  brought 
to  approve  and  confirm  his  claims.  A  frivolous  charge  of  thirty- 
three  articles  was  drawn  up,  and  found  valid  against  the  king ; 
upon  which  he  was  solemnly  deposed,  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster 
elected  in  his  stead,  by  the  title  of  Henry  IV.  Thus  began  the 
contest  between  the  houses  of  York  and  Lancaster,  which,  for 
several  years  after,  deluged  the  kingdom  with  blood  ;  and  yet, 
in  the  end,  contributed  to  settle  and  confirm  the  constitution. 

When  Richard  was  deposed,  the  earl  of  Northumberland  made 


KICHARD  It  gf9 

a  motion  in  the  house  of  peers,  demanding  the  advice  of  parlia- 
ment with  regard  to  the  future  treatment  of  the  deposed  king. 
To  this  they  replied,  that  he  should  be  imprisoned  in  some  secure 
place,  where  his  friends  and  partisans  should  not  be  able  to  find 
him.  This  was  accordingly  put  in  practice ;  but  while  he  still 
continued  alive,  the  usurper  could  not  remain  in  safety.  Indeed 
some  conspiracies  and  commotions,  which  followed  soon  after, 
induced  Henry  to  wish  for  Richard's  death  ;  in  consequence  of 
which,  one  of  those  assassins  that  are  found  in  every  court,  ready 
to  commit  the  most  horrid  crimes  for  reward,  w€nt  down  to  the 
place  of  this  unfortunate  monarch's  confinement,  in  the  castle  of 
Pomfret,  and,  with  eight  of  his  followers,  rushed  into  his  apart- 
ment. The  king,  concluding  their  design  was  to  take  away  his 
life,  resolved  not  to  fall  unrevenged,  but  to  sell  it  as  deai-ly  as  he 
could ;  wherefore  wresting  a  pole-axe  from  one  of  the  murderers, 
he  soon  laid  four  of  their  number  dead  at  his  feet.  But  he  was 
at  length  overpowered,  and  struck  dead  by  the  blow  of  a  pole- 
axe  ;  although  some  assert  that  he  was  starved  in  prison.  Thus 
died  the  unfortunate  Richard,  in  the  thirty -fourth  year  of  his  age^ 
and  the  twenty-third  of  his  reign.  Though  his  conduct  was 
blameable,  yet  the  punishment  he  suffered  was  greater  than  hia 
offences ;  and,  in  the  end,  his  sufferings  made  more  converts  to» 
his  family  and  cause  than  ever  his  most  meritorious  actions  could 
have  procured  them.  He  left  no  posterity,  either  legitimate  or 
otherwise. 

It  was  during  this  reign  that  John  Wickliff,  a  secular  priest, 
educated  at  Oxford,  began  to  propagate  his  doctrines ;  and  he  has 
the  honour  of  being  the  first  person  who  had  sagacity  to  see 
through  the  errors  of  the  church  of  Rome,  and  courage  enough  to 
attempt  a  reformation.  He  denied  the  doctrine  of  the  real  pres- 
ence, the  supremacy  of  the  church  of  Rome,  and  the  merit  of  mo- 
nastic vows.  He  maintained  that  the  scriptures  were  the  sole 
rule  of  faith;  that  the  church  was  dependent  on  the  state;  that 
the  clergy  ought  to  possess  no  estates  ;  and  the  numerous  cere- 
monies of  the  church  were  hurtful  to  true  piety.  In  short,  most 
of  his  doctrines  were  such  as  the  v.'isdom  of  posterity  thought  fi^ 
to  establish  :  and  Wickliff  failed  in  being  a  reformer,  only  because 
the  minds  of  men  were  not  yet  sufficiently  ripened  for  the  truths 
he  endeavoured  to  inculcate.     The  clergy  of  that  age  did  not  fail 


280  HISTOllY  OF  ENGLAND. 

to  oppose  Wickliff  with  fury  ;  but  as  his  doctrines  were  pleasing 
to  the  higher  ordei'S  of  the  laitj,  he  found  protection  from  their 
indignation.  John  of  Gaunt  was  his  particular  friend  and  favour- 
er ;  and  when  summoned  to  appear  before  the  bishop  of  London, 
that  nobleman  attended  him  into  the  court,  and  defended  him 
both  from  the  resentment  of  the  clergy  and  the  rage  of  the  popu- 
lace. However,  in  process  of  time,  he  had  the  satisfaction  to  see 
the  people,  who  were  at  first  strongly  prejudiced  against  him,  en- 
tirely declaring  in  his  favour  ;  and  although  he  was  often  cited 
to  appear  before  the  prelates,  yet,  from  the  estimation  he  Avas  held 
in,  both  among  the  higher  and  lower  ranks  of  the  laity,  he  was 
always  dismissed  without  injury.  In  this  manner  he  contiuued, 
during  a  long  life,  to  lessen  the  credit  of  thfe  clergy,  both  by  his 
preaching  and  writings ;  and  at  last  died  of  a  palsy,  in  the  year 
1385,  at  his  rectory  of  Lutterworth,  in  the  county  of  Leicester ; 
while  the  clergy  took  care  to  represent  his  death  as  a  judgment 
from  heaven  for  his  multiplied  heresies  and  impieties. 


CHAP.  XVI. 


ri-'^qq"'  ]N  xjmerous  formalities  ai'e  seldom  used  but  to  cover 
distrust  or  injustice.  Henry  the  Fourth,  knowing  the 
weakness  of  his  title,  was,  at  least,  determined  to  give  his  coro- 
nation all  possible  solemnity,  and  to  make  religion  a  cloak  to 
cover  his  usurpation.  Accordingly,  particular  care  vi'as  taken  to 
procure  a  certain  oil,  said  to  have  been  presented  by  the  Virgin 
Mary  to  Thomas  a,  Becket  during  his  exile.  The  phial  that  con- 
tained this  precious  balm  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  hermit, 
who  gave  it  to  the  first  duke  of  Lancaster,  assuring  him  that  all 
kings  anointed  with  that  oil  would  become  true  champions  of  the 
church.  On  the  present  occasion,  being  seized  by  Henry  among 
the  other  jewels  of  Richard,  he  was  anointed  with  it  in  all  the 
forms ;  at  the  same  time  declaring,  that  he  had  ascended  tlie 
throne  by  the  light  of  conquest,  the  resignation  of  Richard  in  his 
favour,  and  as  the  most  direct  descendant  of  Henry  the  Third, 


Henry  iv.  281 

king  of  Etigland.  These  were  the  formalities  employed  to  hide 
his  Ambition,  or  perhaps  quiet  his  own  fears ;  for  the  heir  of  the 
house  of  Mortimer,  who  had  in  the  late  reign  been  declared  in 
parliament  the  true  heir  to  the  crown,  was  still  alive,  though  but 
a  boy  of  seven  years  of  age.  Him  Henry  detained,  together 
with  his  younger  brother,  in  an  honourable  custody,  at  Windsor 
castle. 

But  notwithstanding  these  precautions  for  his  security,  Henry 
soon  found  that  the  throne  of  an  usurper  is  ever  a  bed  of  thorns. 
Such  violent  animosities  broke  out  among  the  barons,  in  the  first 
session  of  his  parliament,  that  forty  challenges  were  given  and 
received,  and  forty  guantlets  thrown  down  as  pledges  of  the  sin- 
cerity of  their  resentment.  Although  these  commotions  were 
seemingly  suppressed  by  his  moderation  for  that  time,  they  soon 
broke  out  into  rebellion ;  and  a  conspiracy  was  formed  for  seiz-- 
ing  Henry  at  Windsor,  and  replacing  Richard  on  the  throne,  who 
was  supposed  to  be  yet  alive.  This  plot  was  set  on  foot  by  the 
earls  of  Rutland,  Kent,  Huntingdon,  and  lord  Spenser,  whom 
Henry  had  degraded  from  superior  titles  conferred  upon  them  by 
the  late  king.  The  particulars  of  their  scheme  were  committed 
to  writing,  and  each  of  the  confederates  had  a  copy  signed  by  all 
the  rest.  Among  the  number  of  these,  the  dtike  of  Aumerle  was 
one,  furnished  with  a  paper,  which  he  unfortunately  dropped  out 
of  his  bosom  as  he  was  sitting  one  day  at  dinner  with  his  father, 
the  duke  of  York.  The  father,  perceiving  something  fall,  pri- 
vately took  it  up,  and  to  his  great  astonishment  discovered  the 
contents,  which  he  resolved,  with  all  diligence,  to  disclose  to  the 
king,  and  accordingly  rode  off  with  the  utmost  expedition  to 
Windsor,  where  the  court  resided  at  that  juncture.  In  the  mean 
time  the  son,  finding  the  sad  mischance  that  had  happened,  and 
guessing  the  c^use  of  his  father's  expedition,  was  resolved,  if  pos- 
sible, to  prevent  his  information ;  and,  hastening  by  a  shorter 
way,  discovered  the  whole  to  the  king,  and  obtained  the  royal 
pardon  before  his  father  could  arrive  ;  who,  coming  soon  after, 
produced  the  paper  with  the  names  of  the  conspirators. 

In  the  mean  time,  while  Henry  employed  the  most 
vigorous  efforts  to  dispel  the  rising  storm,  the  conspira-     ^         '-^ 
tors,  finding  their  first  intentions  frustrated,  dressed  up  one  of 
the  late  king's  chaplains  in  royal  robes,  giving  out  that  he  was 

vot.  I.  36 


282  HISTORY  OF  ENGLANH. 

the  deposed  monarch,  whom  they  had  taken  from  his  prison  and 
were  willing  to  replace  on  the  throne.    Pity  is  a  passion  for 
which  the  English  have  ever  been  remarkable  ;    majesty  in  dis- 
tress was  an  object  sufficient  at  once  to  excite  their  loyalty  and 
compassion  ;  and  they  accordingly  flocked  in  great  numbers  round 
the  standard  of  the  conspirators.     Their  army  soon  became  con- 
siderable, and  encamped  near  Cirencester,  while  the  leaders  took 
lip  their  head -quarters  within  the  town ;  yet  so  careless  or  inex- 
perienced were  they,  that  they  neglected  to  place  proper  guards 
at  the  gates  and  avenues  of  the  place.      This  was  quickly  per- 
ceived by  the  mayor  of  the  town,  who  was  in  the  interests  of  the 
king :  this  magistrate,  assembling  four  hundred  men  in  the  nights 
secured  the  gates  so  as  to  exclude  the  army  encamped  without, 
and  then  he  attacked  the  chiefs  within.     The  earls  of  Kent  and 
Salisbury  were  taken,  after  an  obstinate  resistance,  and  beheaded 
on  the  spot  by  the  mayor's  order.     The  earl  of  Huntingdon  and 
lord  Spenser  escaped  over  the  tops  of  tlae  houses  into  the  camp, 
in  hopes  of  storming  the  town  at  the  head  of  their  forces  :    but 
they  quickly  had  the  mortification  to  find  the  tents  and  bag- 
gage abandoned  by  the  soldiers,  who,  upon  hearing  the  noise  and 
tumult  within,  had  concluded  that  a  party  of  the  king's  army  had 
entered  privately  to  strengthen  the  townsmen ;  and,  under  the 
conviction  of  this,  they  fled  with  the  utmost  precipitation. 

The  two  lords,  perceiving  that  all  hope  was  over,  endeavoured 
to  conceal  themselves  separately ;  but  they  were  soon  after  taken, 
and  lost  their  heads  upon  a  scaffold,  by  the  king's  order.  Their 
deaths  were  soon  after  followed  by  those  of  sir  Thomas  Blount 
and  sir  Benedict  Sely ;  and  when  the  quarters  of  these  unhappy 
men  were  brought  to  London,  no  less  than  eighteen  bishops,  and 
thirty -two  mitred  abbots,  joined  the  populace,  and  met  them  witli 
the  most  indecent  mai'ks  of  joy  and  exultation.  In  this  shocking 
procession  was  seen  the  earl  of  Rutland  carrying  the  head  of  lord 
Spenser,  his  brother-in-law,  in  ti'iumph,  after  having  betrayed 
him.  This  miscreant  had  been  long  inured  to  blood  and  treach- 
ery :  he  was  instrumental  in  the  murder  of  his  uncle,  the  duke  of 
Gloucester,  to  please  Richard  ;  he  soon  after  deserted  the  fallen 
fortunes  of  that  monarch,  and  joined  with  Henry ;  not  long  after, 
he  entered  into  a  conspiracy  against  this  monarch,  after  having 
$worn  allegiance  to  him ;  and  now,  at  last,  betrayed  those  very 


IIENRY  IV.  g8S 

associates  whom  he  had  seduced  into  this  enterprise,  carrying  in 
triumph  the  marks  of  his  execrable  villany. 

But  the  suppression  of  a  single  rebellion  was  not  sufficient  to 
give  quiet  to  a  kingdom  threatened  with  foreign  invasion,  and 
torn  by  intestine  discontent.  The  king  of  France  had  actually 
raised  a  vast  armament  to  invade  England  :  but  a  truce  was  soon 
after  concluded  for  .eight-and-twenty  years ;  and  it  was  agreed, 
that  queen  Isabel,  who  had  been  married  to  Richard,  but  whose 
marriage  had  not  been  consummated,  should  return'  to  France, 
her  native  country.  The  Scots,  shortly  after,  began  to  renew 
their  antient  disturbances  ;  and  while  the  English  army  marched 
northward  to  oppose  their  incursions,  the  Welsh,  on  the  other 
side,  under  the  conduct  of  Owen  Glendour,  attacked  the  king- 
dom upon  the  defenceless  quarter.  Many  were  the  petty  victo- 
ries gained,  and  the  ravages  committed,  on  either  part,  in  this 
contest.  The  name  of  Owen  Glendour  is  respected  among  his 
countrymen  to  this  very  day  ;  but  as  all  his  conquests  procured 
no  lasting  advantage,  and  as  all  his  victories  only  terminated  in 
fame,  they  are  scarce  worth  a  place  in  the  page  of  history.  It 
will  be  sufiicient  to  observe,  that,  whatever  honour  the  English 
lo&t  on  the  side  of  Wales,  they  gained  an  equivalent  on  thje/  of 
Scotland  5  the  Welsh  maintained  their  ground,  although  their 
chieftain  Glendour  was  taken  prisoner,  while  the  Scots  still 
fled  before  the  English,  and  would  neither  submit,  nor  yet  give 
them  battle. 

It  was  in  a  skirmish  between  the  Scots  and  the  riAnai 
English,  that  Archibald,  earl  of  Douglas,  and  many  of 
the  Scottish  nobility,  were  taken  prisoners  by  the  earl  of  North- 
umberland, and  carried  to  Alnwick  castle.  This  success  was 
considered  at  first  as  a  signal  advantage  ;  but  it  was  soon  at- 
tended with  consequences  that  were  fatal  to  the  victors.  When 
Henry  received  intelligence  of  this  victory,  he  sent  the  earl  or- 
ders not  to  ransom  his  prisoners,  as  he  intended  to  detain  them, 
In  order  to  increase  his  demands  in  making  peace  with  Scotland. 
This  message  was  highly  resented  by  the  earl  of  Northumber- 
land, who,  by  the  laws  of  war  that  prevailed  in  that  age,  had  a 
right  to  the  ransom  of  all  such  as  he  had  taken  in  battle.  The 
command  was  still  more  irksome,  as  he  considered  the  king  as 
jtiis  debtor,  both  for  security  and  his  crown.    Indeed,  the  obliga- 


g84  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

tions  which  Henry  owed  him  were  of  a  nature  the  most  likely  to 
produce  ingratitude  on  the  one  side,  and  discontent  on  the  other, 
Tlie  prince  naturally  became  jealous  of  that  power  which  had  ad- 
vanced him  to  the  throne  ;  and  the  subject  thouglit  himself  enti- 
tled to  every  favour  the  crown  had  to  bestow.  Not  but  that 
Henry  had  already  conferred  the  highest  honours  upon  him ;  he 
had  made  him  constable  of  the  kingdom,  and  given  him  several 
other  employments  ;  but  nothing  could  satisfy  this  nobleman's 
ambition,  while  the  king  had  any  thing  left  to  give.  According- 
ly, stung  with  this  supposed  injury,  he  resolved  to  overturn  a 
throne  which  he  had  the  chief  hand  in  establishing.  A  scheme 
was  laid,  in  which  the  Scots  and  Welsh  were  to  unite  their  forces, 
and  to  assist  Northumberland  in  elevating  Mortimer,  as  the  true 
r-,A(\o  -|  heir  to  the  crown  of  England.  When  all  things  were 
prepared  for  the  intended  insurrection,  the  earl  had  the 
mortification  to  find  himself  unable  to  lead  on  the  troops,  being 
seized  with  a  sudden  illness  at  Berwick.  But  the  want  of  his 
presence  was  well  supplied  by  his  son  Harry  Percy,  surnamed 
Hotspur,  who  took  the  command  of  the  troops,  and  marched  them 
towards  Shrewsbury,  in  order  to  join  his  forces  with  those  of 
Gr  ndour,  who,  sometime  before,  had  been  exchanged  from  pris- 
on, and  had  now  advanced  with  his  forces  as  far  as  Shropshire. 
Upon  the  junction  of  these  two  armies,  they  published  a  manifes- 
to, which  aggravated  their  real  grievances,  and  invented  more. 
In  the  mean  time,  Henry,  who  had  received  no  intelligence  of 
their  designs,  was  at  first  greatly  surprised  at  the  news  of  this 
rebellion.  But  fortune  seemed  to  befriend  him  on  this  occasion  ; 
he  had  a  small  army  in  readiness,  which  he  had  intended  against 
the  Scots  ;  and  knowing  the  importance  of  dispatch  against  such 
active  enemies,  he  instantly  hurried  down  to  Shrewsbury,  that  he 
might  give  the  rebels  battle. 

Upon  the  approach  of  the  two  armies,  both  sides  seemed  willing 
to  give  a  colour  to  their  cause,  by  showing  a  desire  of  reconcilia- 
tion ;  but  when  they  came  to  open  their  mutual  demands,  the 
treaty  was  turned  into  abuse  and  recrimination.  On  one  side 
were  objected  rebellion  and  ingratitude :  on  the  other,  tyranny 
and  usurpation.  The  two  armies  Avere  nearly  equal,  each  con- 
sisting of  about  twelve  thousand  men ;  the  animosity,  on  both 
sides,  vfa,s  inflamed  to  the  highest  pitch  j  and  no  prudence  or 


\ 

HENRY  IV.  S85 

military  skill  could  determine  on  which  side  the  victory  might 
incline.  Accordingly,  a  very  bloody  engagement  ensued,  ii^ 
which  the  generals  on  both  sides  exerted  themselves  with  great 
bravery.  Henry  was  seen  every  where  in  the  thickest  of  the 
£ght ;  while  his  valiant  son,  who  was  afterwards  the  renowned 
conqueror  of  France,  fought  by  his  side,  and,  though  wounded  in 
the  face  by  an  arrow,  still  kept  the  field,  and  performed  astonish- 
ing acts  of  valour.  On  the  other  side,  the  daring  Hotspur  sup- 
ported that  renown  which  he  had  acquired  in  many  bloody  en- 
gagements, and  every  where  sought  out  the  king  as  a  noble  ob- 
ject of  his  indignation.  At  last,  however,  his  death,  from  an  un- 
known h9,nd,  decided  the  victory  ;  and  the  fortune  of  Henry  once 
more  prevailed.  On  that  bloody  day,  it  is  said  that  no  less  than 
two  thousand  three  hundred  gentlemen  were  slain,  and  about  sis 
thousand  private  men,  of  whom  two  thirds  were  of  Hotspur's  army. 

While  this  furious  transaction  was  going  forward,  Northum- 
berland, who  was  lately  recovered  from  his  indisposition,  was  ad- 
vancing with  a  body  of  troops  to  reinforce  the  army  of  the  mal- 
contents, and  take  upon  him  the  command.  But  hearing  by  the 
way  of  his  son?s  misfortune,  he  dismissed  his  troops,  not  daring 
to  take  the  field  with  so  small  a  force,  before  an  army  superior 
in  number,  and  flushed  with  recent  victory.  The  earl  for  a  while 
attempted  to  find  safety  in  flight ;  but  at  last  being  pressed  by 
his  pursuers,  and  finding  himself  totally  without  resource,  he 
chose  rather  to  throw  himself  upon  the  king's  mercy  than  lead  a 
precarious  and  indigent  life  in  exile.  Upon  his  appearing  before 
Henry,  at  York,  he  pretended  that  his  sole  intention  in  arming- 
was  to  mediate  between  the  two  parties  ;  and  this,  though  a  very 
weak  apology,  seemed  to  satisfy  the  king.  Northumberland  there- 
fore received  a  pardon ;  Henry  probably  thinking  that  he  was 
sufliciently  punished  by  the  loss  of  his  army?  and  the  death  of  his 
favourite  son. 

But  the  extinction  of  one  rebellion  only  seemed  to  give  rise  to 
another.  The  archbishop  of  York,  who  had  been  promoted  dur- 
ing the  late  reign,  entered  into  a  confederacy  with  the 
earl  of  Nottingham,  and  the  earl  of  Northumberland  who  ^  ^'-^ 
had  been  so  lately  pardoned,  to  dethrone  the  king,  and  set  young 
Mortimer  in  his  place.  Had  the  forces  of  these  insurgents  co- 
pperated  with  those  that  were  so  lately  overthrown,  it  is  possible 


286  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

they  might  have  overpowered  any  body  of  men  which  the  king 
could  bring  into  the  field ;  but  they  began  their  operations  just 
when  their  confederates  were  defeated.  This  powerful  combina- 
tion, however,  took  the  field,  and  published  a  manifesto,  in  which 
they  reproached  Henry  with  usurpation,  tyranny,  and  mui-der ; 
they  required  that  the  right  line  should  be  restored,  and  all  griev- 
ances redressed.  The  earl  of  Westmoreland,  who  had  been  sent 
against  them  with  a  very  inferior  force,  demanded  a  conference, 
to  which  they  readily  consented.  The  chiefs,  on  each  side,  met 
at  Skipton,  in  Yorkshire,  and,  in  the  presence  of  both  armies, 
entered  upon  the  subject  of  their  grievances  and  complaints. 
The  archbishop  loudly  deplored  the  nation's  injuries  and  his  own  5 
the  earl  of  Westmoreland  not  only  allowed  the  Justice  of  his  re- 
monstrances, but  begged  of  him  to  propose  the  remedies.  The 
archbishop  entered  upon  many  stipulations,  and  the  earl  granted 
them  all.  He  now  therefore  entreated,  that,  since  they  had  noth- 
ing more  to  ask  or  to  fear,  they  would  dismiss  their  forces,  and 
trust  to  his  honour  for  the  rest.  His  specious  promises,  and  plau- 
sible manners,  led  them  to  their  ruin.  The  insurgents  immedi- 
ately disbanded  their  troops,  while  he  gave  private  orders  that 
his  own  army  should  not  disperse  till  further  notice ;  and  thus 
Laving  disqualified  them  for  defence,  instantly  seizing  upon  the 
archbishop  and  the  earl  of  Nottingham,  he  carried  them  to  the 
king.  The  form  of  a  trial  was  a  very  unnecessary  ceremony,  to 
men  whose  fate  was  pre-determined  5  the  archbishop  of  York  was 
the  first  prelate  who  was  capitally  punished  in  England  ;  the  earl 
of  Nottingham  slmred  the  same  fate,  and  the  earl  of  Northum- 
berland found  safety  by  flying  into  Scotland  ;  but  he  was  slain 
about  three  years  after,  in  an  incursion,  by  sir  Thomas  Rokeby 
sheriff  of  Yorkshire. 

Such  advantages  seemed  to  promise  the  country,  long  torn 
with  factions,  and  threatened  with  invasions,  some  degree  of  re- 
pose ;  but  a  new  calamity  now  began  to  appear,  which,  though 
small  in  the  beginning,  was  attended,  in  the  course  of  ages,  with 
most  dreadful  effects.  Since  Wickliff  had  published  his  opin- 
ions, in  the  last  reign,  his  doctrines  met  with  so  many  partisans, 
that  tb3  clergy  began  to  tremble  for  their  influence  over  the 
minds  of  the  people.  They  therefore  used  all  their  interest  to 
bring  the  king  over  to  their  party ;  who  had  more  than  once,  m 


HENRY  IV.  287 

former  times,  declared  himself  in  favour  of  the  new  doctrines. 
But  at  present,  as  he  was  conscious  of  the  weakness  of  his  title 
to  the  crown,  he  was  resolved  to  make  use  of  every  support  to 
confirm  his  pretensions  ;  and,  among  others,  that  offered  him  by 
the  clergy  was  by  no  means  to  be  thouglit  slightly  of.  He  seem- 
ed to  listen  with  great  earnestness  to  their  complaints  ;  and  took 
an  occasion  to  direct  his  parliament  to  attend  to  the  conservation 
of  the  church,  which  he  asserted  was  then  in  danger.  How  re- 
luctant soever  the  house  of  commons  might  be  to  prosecute  a  sect 
whose  crime  at  any  rate  was  but  error,  the  credit  of  the  court  and 
the  cabals  of  the  clergy  at  last  obtained  an  act  for  burning  obsti- 
nate heretics.  This  statute  was  no  sooner  passed  than  the  clergy 
resolved  to  show  that  it  was  not  hung  up  as  an  empty  terror,  but 
that  it  would  be  urged  with  all  the  force  of  v^hich  it  was  capable. 
William  Sawtre,  a  follower  of  WicklifF,  and  rector  of  St.  Osithe's, 
London,  had  been  condemned  by  the  convocation  of  Canterbury, 
and  was  soon  after  burned  alive,  by  virtue  of  the  king's  writ  de-  , 
livered  to  the  lord-mayor  of  London.  This  was  the  first  man 
that  suffered  death  in  England  for  the  sake  of  religion ;  but  the 
fires  once  kindled  were  not  likely  to  be  soon  extinguished,  as  the 
clergy  had  the  power  of  continuing  the  flame.  They  easily  per- 
ceived, that  a  power  of  burning  their  enemies  would  revive  that 
share  of  temporal  power  which  they  had  possessed  some  centu- 
ries before ;  and  in  this  they  were  not  mistaken.  They  thus  re- 
newed their  pristine  authority,  but  upon  very  different  grounds  ^ 
for,  as  in  the  Saxon  times  they  fixed  their  power  upon  the  affec- 
tions, they  now  founded  it  upon  tlie  terrors  of  the  people. 

By  these  means  Henry  seemed  to  surmount  all  his  troubles  j 
and  the  calm,  which  was  thus  produced,  was  employed  by  him  in 
endeavours  to  acquire  popularity,  which  he  had  lost  by  the  se- 
verities exercised  during  the  preceding  part  of  his  reign.  For 
that  reason,  he  often  permitted  the  house  of  commons  to  assume 
powers  which  bad  not  been  usually  exercised  by  their  predeces- 
sors. In  the  sixth  year  of  his  reign,  when  they  voted  him  the 
supplies,  they  appointed  treasurers  of  their  own,  to  see  the  money 
disbursed  for  the  purposes  intended ;  and  required  them  to  de- 
liver in  their  accounts  to  the  house.  They  proposed  thirty  very 
important  articles  for  the  government  of  the  king's  houseliold  5 
and,  on  the  whole,  preserved  their  privileges  and  freedom  more 


288  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

entire,  timing  his  reign,  than  in  that  of  any  of  his  predecessors. 
But  while  the  king  thus  laboured,  not  without  success,  to  retrieve 
the  reputation  he  had  lost,  his  son  Henry,  prince  of  Wales,  seem- 
ed equally  bent  on  incurring  the  public  aversion.  He  became 
notorious  for  all  kinds  of  debauchery ;  and  ever  chose  to  be  sur- 
rounded by  a  set  of  wretches,  who  took  pride  in  committing  the 
most  illegal  acts,  with  the  prince  at  their  head.  The  king  was 
not  a  little  mortified  at  this  degeneracy  in  his  eldest  son,  who 
seemed  entirely  forgetful  of  his  station,  although  he  had  already 
exhibited  repeated  proofs  of  his  valour,  conduct,  and  generosity. 
Such  were  the  excesses  into  which  he  ran,  tliat  one  of  his  disso- 
lute companions  having  been  brought  to  trial  before  sir  William 
Gascoigne,  chief-justice  of  the  king's  bench,  for  some  misdemean- 
our, the  prince  was  so  exasperated  at  the  issue  of  the  trial,  that 
he  struck  the  judge  in  open  court.  The  venerable  magistrate, 
who  knew  the  reverence  that  was  due  to  his  station,  behaved 
with  a  dignity  that  became  his  office,  and  immediately  ordered 
the  prince  to  be  committed  to  prison.  When  this  transaction  was 
reported  to  the  king,  who  was  an  excellent  judge  of  mankind,  he 
could  not  help  exclaiming  in  a  transport,  "  Happy  is  the  king 
that  has  a  magistrate  endowed  with  courage  to  execute  the  laws 
upon  such  an  offender ;  still  more  happy,  in  having  a  son  willing 
to  submit  to  such  a  chastisement."  This,  in  fact,  is  one  of  the 
first  great  instances  we  read  in  the  English  history,  of  a  magis- 
trate doing  justice  in  opposition  to  power;  since,  upon  many 
former  occasions,  we  find  the  judges  only  ministers  of  royal 
caprice. 

Henry,  whose  health  had  for  some  time  been  declining,  did  not 
long  outlive  this  transaction.  He  was  subject  to  fits,  which  be- 
reaved him,  for  the  time,  of  his  senses;  and  which,  at  last,  brought 
on  the  near  approach  of  death,  at  Westminster.  As 
L  "^'J  his  constitution  decayed,  his  fears  of  losing  the  crown 
redoubled  even  to  a  childish  anxiety.  He  could  not  be  persuaded 
to  sleep,  unless  the  royal  diadem  were  laid  upon  his  pillow.  He 
resolved  to  take  the  cross,  and  fight  the  cause  of  the  pilgi'ims  to 
Jerusalem  ;  and  even  imparted  his  designs  to  a  great  council,  de- 
manding their  opinions  relative  to  his  intended  journey  :  but  his 
disorder  increasing  to  a  violent  degree,  he  was  obliged  to  lay 
aside  his  scheme,  and  to  prepare  for  a  journey  of  much  greater 


HENRY  IV.  289 

importance.  In  this  situation,  as  he  was  one  day  in  a  violent 
paroxysm,  the  prince  of  Wales  took  up  the  crown  and  carried  it 
away ;  but  the  king  soon  after  recovering  his  senses,  and  missing 
the  crown,  demanded  what  was  become  of  it  ?  Being  informed 
that  the  prince  of  Wales  had  carried  it  off:  «  What !"  said  th6 
king,  "  would  he  rob  me  of  my  right  before  my  death  ?"  But  the 
prince,  just  then  entering  the  room,  assured  his  father  that  he  had 
no  such  motives  in  what  he  had  done,  went  and  replaced  the 
crown  where  he  had  found  it,  and,  having  received  his  father's 
blessing,  dutifully  retired.  The  king  was  taken  with  his  last  fit 
while  he  was  at  his  devotions  before  the  shrine  of  St.  Edward  the 
Confessor,  in  Westminster  Abbey  ;  and  thence  he  was  carried  to 
tlie  Jerusalem  Chamber.  When  he  had  recovered  from  his  swoon, 
perceiving  himself  in  a  strange  place,  he  desired  to  know  where 
he  was,  and  if  the  apartment  had  any  particular  name  :  being  in- 
formed that  it  was  called  the  Jerusalem  Chamber,  he  said,  that  he 
then  perceived  a  prophecy  was  fulfilled,  which  declared  that  he 
should  die  in  Jerusalem.  Thus  saying,  and  recommending  his 
soul  to  his  Maker,  he  soon  after  expired,  in  the  forty-seventh 
year  of  his  age,  and  the  fourteenth  of  his  reign. 

If  we  consider  this  monarch  on  one  side  of  his  character,  he 
will  appear  an  object  worthy  of  the  highest  applause  5  if  on  the 
other,  of  our  warmest  indignation.  As  a  man,  he  was  valiant, 
prudent,  cool,  and  sagacious.  These  virtues  adorned  him  in  his 
private  character ;  nor  did  his  vices  appear  till  ambition  brought 
him  within  sight  of  a  throne :  it  was  then  that  he  was  discovered 
to  be  unjust,  cruel,  gloomy,  and  tyrannical ;  and  though  his  reign 
contributed  much  to  the  happiness  of  his  subjects,  yet  it  was  en- 
tirely destructive  of  his  own.  He  was  twice  married :  by  his 
first  wife,  Mary  de  Bohun,  he  had  four  sons,— -Henry,  his  succes- 
sor ;  Thomas,  duke  of  Clarence ;  John,  duke  of  Bedford ;  Hum- 
phry, duke  of  Gloucester :  and  two  daughters.  By  his  second 
wife  he  had  no  issue. 


VOL.  I,  57 


2,90  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 


CHAP.  XVIT. 


HENRY  V. 


ri413  1  -I  HE  death  of  Henry  IV.  gave  the  people  very  little 
concern,  as  he  had  always  governed  them  rather  by 
their  fears  than  their  affections.  But  the  rejoicings  made  for  the 
succession  of  his  son,  notwithstanding  his  extravagances,  were 
manifest  and  sincere.  In  the  very  height  and  madness  of  the 
revel,  he  would  often  give  instances  of  the  noblest  disposition  ; 
and,  though  he  did  not  practise  the  virtues  of  temperance,  he  al- 
ways showed  that  he  esteemed  them.  But  it  was  his  courage 
which,  in  tha.t  martial  age,  chiefly  won  the  peopie^s  affection  and 
applause.  Courage  and  superstition  then  made  up  the  whole  sys- 
tem of  human  duty ;  nor  had  the  age  any  other  idea  of  heroism^ 
but  what  was  the  result  of  this  combination. 

The  first  steps  taken  by  the  young  king  confirmed  all  those 
prepossessions  entertained  in  his  favour.  He  called  together  his 
former  companions,  acquainted  them  with  his  intended  reformat 
tion,  exhorted  them  to  follow  his  example^  and  thus  dismissed 
them  from  bis  presence,  allowing  thsm  a  competency  to  subsist 
upon,  till  he  saw  them  worthy  of  higher  promotion.  The  faithful 
ministers  of  his  father,  at  first,  indeed,  began  to  tremble  for  their 
former  justice  in  the  administration  of  their  duty ;  but  he  soon 
eased  them  of  their  fears,  by  taking  them  into  his  friendship  and 
confidence.  Sir  William  Gascoigne,  who  thought  himself  the 
most  obnoxious,  met  with  praises  instead  of  reproaches,  and  was 
exhorted  to  persevere  in  the  same  rigorous  and  impartial  execution 
of  justice. 

But  Heniy  did  not  stop  here ;  he  showed  himself  willing  to 
correct  not  only  Ms  own  private  errors  but  those  of  the  former 
reign.  He  expressed  the  deepest  sorrov/  for  the  fate  of  tlie  un- 
happy Richard,  and  ordered  his  funeral  obsequies  to  be  performed 
with  royal  solemnity.  He  seemed  ambitious  to  bury  all  party 
distinctions  in  oblivion ;  the  good  men  only  of  each  party  were 
dear  to  him :  and  the  bad  vainly  alleged  their  loyalty  as  an  ex- 
tenuation of  their  vices.  The  exhortations  as  well  as  the  exam- 
ple of  the  prince  gave  encouragement  to  virtue  j  all  parties  ware 


HENRY  Vc  591 

equally  attached  to  so  just  a  prince,  and  the  defects  of  his  title 
were  forgotten  amidst  the  lustre  of  his  admirable  qualities. 

In  this  manner,  the  people  seemed  happy  in  their  new  king ; 
hut  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  man  to  raise  himself  entirely  above 
the  prejudices  of  the  age  in  which  he  lives,  er  to  correct  those 
abuses  which  often  employ  the  sagacity  of  whole  centuries  to  dis- 
cover. The  vices  of  the  clergy  had  drawn  upon  them  the  con- 
tempt and  detestation  of  the  people ;  but  they  were  resolved  to 
continue  their  antient  power,  not  by  reforming  themselves,  but 
by  persecuting  those  who  opposed  them.  The  heresy  of  Wick- 
liff,  or  LoUardism  as  it  was  called,  began  to  spread  every  day 
more  and  more,  while  it  received  a  new  lustre  from  the  protec- 
tion and  preaching  of  sir  John  Oldcastle,  baron  of  Cobham,  who 
had  been  one  of  the  king's  domestics,  and  stood  high  in  his  favour. 
His  character,  both  for  civil  and  military  excellence,  pointed  him 
out  to  Arundel,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  as  the  proper  victim 
of  ecclesiastical  vengeance  ;  and  he  applied  to  the  king  for  per- 
mission to  indict  lord  Cobham,  as  a  miscreant  guilty  of  the  most 
atrocious  heresy.  But  the  generous  nature  of  the  prince  was 
averse  to  such  sanguinary  methods  of  conversion ;  and  he  resolved 
first  to  try  what  effects  the  arts  of  reason  and  persuasion  would 
produce  upon  this  bold  leader  of  his  sect.  He  accordingly  desired 
a  private  conference  with  lord  Cobham  ;  but  he  found  that  nobler- 
man  obstinate  in  his  opinions,  and  determined  rather  to  part  with 
life  than  what  he  believed  upon  conviction.  The  king  finding 
him  immoveable,  gave  him  up  to  the  fury  of  his  enemies.  Perse* 
cution  ever  propagates  those  errors  which  it  aims  at  abolishing. 
The  pi'imate  indicted  lord  Cobham ;  and,  with  the  assistance  of 
his  suffragans,  condemned  him,  as  an  heretic,  to  be  burned  alive. 
Cobham,  however,  escaping  from  the  Tower,  before  the  day  ap- 
pointed for  his  execution,  privately  went  among  his  party  ;  and, 
stimulating  their  zeal,  led  them  up  to  London  to  take  a  signal 
revenge  of  his  enemies.  But  the  king,  apprised  of  his  ^414  i 
intentions,  ordered  that  the  city  gates  should  be  shut ; 
and,  coming  by  night  with  his  guard  into  St.  Giles's  Fields,  seiz- 
ed such  of  the  conspirators  as  appeared,  and  afterwards  laid  hold 
of  several  parties  that  were  hastening  to  the  appointed  place. 
Some  of  these  were  executed,  but  the  greater  number  pardoned, 
Cobham  himself  found  means  of  escaping  for  that  time  :  but  }i« 


292  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

was  taken  about  four  years  after  ;  and  never  did  the  cruelty  of 
man  invent,  or  crimes  draw  down,  such  torments  as  he  was  made 
to  endure.  He  was  hung  up  with  a  chain  by  the  middle ;  and 
thus  at  a  slow  fire  burned,  or  rather  roasted,  alive. 

Such  spectacles  as  these  must  naturally  excite  the  disgust  of  the 
people,  not  only  against  the  clergy  but  the  government  itself. 
Henry,  to  turn  their  minds  from  such  hideous  scenes,  resolved  to 
take  the  advantage  of  the  troubles  in  which  France  was  at  that 
time  engaged,  and  pursue  the  advice  of  his  dying  father,  who  gave 
it  as  iiis  last  instructions,  that  he  should  employ  his  subjects  in 
foreign  expeditions,  and  thus  give  all  the  restless  spirits  occupa- 
tion for  their  inquietude.  Charles  the  Sixth,  who  was  then  king 
of  France,  was  subject  to  frequent  fits  of  lunacy,  which  totally 
disqualified  him  for  reigning.  During  the  paroxysms  of  his  dis- 
ease, the  ambition  of  his  vassals  and  courtiei'S  had  room  for  exer- 
tion ;  and  they  grew  powerful  from  their  sovereign's  weakness. 
The  administration  of  affairs  was  disputed  between  his  brother 
Lewis,  duke  of  Orleans,  and  his  cousin-german,  John  duke  of 
Burgundy.  Isabella,  his  queen,  also  had  her  party ;  and  the  king 
vainly  attempted  to  secure  one  also  in  his  favour.  Each  of  these, 
^s  they  happened  to  prevail,  branded  their  captives  with  the 
name  of  traitors  ;  and  the  gibbets  were  at  once  hung  with  the  bo- 
dies of  the  accused  and  the  accusers.  This,  therefore,  was 
thought  by  Henry  a  favourable  opportunity  to  recover  from 
France  those  grants  that  had  been  formerly  given  up  by  treaty. 
But  previously,  to  give  his  intended  expedition  the  appearance 
of  justice,  he  sent  over  embassadors  to  Paris,  offering  a  perpetual 
peace  and  alliance,  on  condition  of  being  put  in  possession  of  all 
those  provinces  which  had  been  ravished  from  the  English  during 
the  former  reigns,  and  of  espousing  Catharine,  the  French  king's 
daughter,  with  a  suitable  dowry.  Though  the  French  court  was 
at  that  time  extremely  averse  to  war,  yet  the  exorbitance  of  these 
demj^nds  could  not  be  complied  with  ;  and  Henry  very  probably 
made  them  in  hopes  of  a  denial.  He  assembled  a  great  fleet  and 
army  at  Southampton  ;  and  having  allured  all  the  military  men 
of  the  kingdom  to  attend  him,  from  the  hopes  of  conquest,  he  put 
r-iA-ic-\  to  sea,  and  landed  at  Harfleur,  at  the  head  of  an  army 
of  six  thousand  men  at  arms,  and  twenty -four  thousand 
foot,  mostly  archers. 


HENRY  V.  295 

The  first  operations  were  upon  Harfleur,  which,  being  pressed 
hard,  promised  at  a  certain  day  to  surrender,  unless  relieved  before 
that  time.     The  day  arriving,  and  the  garrison,  unmindful  of  their 
engagement,  still  resolving  to  defend  the  place,  Henry  ordered 
an  assault  to  be  made,  took  the  town  by  storm,  and  expelled  the 
garrison  and  the  inhabitants.     Thence  the  victor  advanced  into 
the  country,  which  had  been  already  rendered  desolate  by  fac- 
tions, and  which  he  now  totally  laid  waste.     Although  the  enemy 
made  but  a  feeble  resistance,  yet  the  climate  seemed  to  fight 
against  the  English, — a  contagious  dysentery  carrying  off  or  dis- 
abling one  half  of  Henry's  army.     In  such  a  situation  he  had  re- 
course to  an  expedient,  common  enough  in  that  barbarous  age,  to 
inspire  his  troops  with  confidence  in  their  general.     He  challeng-i 
ed  the  dauphin,  who  commanded  in  the  French  army,  to  single 
combat,  offering  to  stake  his  pretensions  on  t^e  event.     This 
challenge,  as  might  naturally  be  expected,  was  rejected  ;  and  the 
French,  though  disagreeing  internally,  at  last  seemed  to  unite,  at 
the  appearance  of  the  common  danger.     Fourteen  thousand  men 
at  arms,  and  forty  thousand  foot,  were  by  this  time  assembled, 
under  trhe  command  of  the  constable  L'Albret,  and  were  so  sta- 
tioned as  to  threaten  an  interception  of  Henry's  weakened  forces 
on  their  return.     The  English  monarch,  when  it  was  too  late,  be- 
gan to  repent  of  his  rash  inroad  into  a  country  where  disease  and 
a  powerful  army  every  where  threatened  destruction  ;  he  there- 
fore began  to  think  of  retiring  into  Calais.     In  this  retreat,  which 
was  at  once  both  painful  and  dangerous,  Henry  took  every  pre^ 
caution  to  inspire  his  troops  with  patience  and  perseverance ;  and 
showed  them  in  his  own  person  the  brightest  example  of  fortitude 
and  resignation.      He  was  continually  harassed  on  his  march  by 
flying  parties  of  the  enemy ;  and  whenever  he  attempted  to  pass 
the  river  Somme,  over  which  his  march  lay,  he  saw  troops  on  the 
other  side  ready  to  oppose  his  passage.     However,  he  was  §o  for- 
tunate as  to  seize  by  surprise  a  passage  near  St.  Quintin,  which 
had  not  been  sufficiently  guarded ;  and  there  he  safely  carried 
over  his  army. 

But  the  enemy  still  hoped  to  intercept  his  retreat ;  and,  after 
he  had  passed  the  small  river  Ternois  at  Blangi,  he  was  surprised 
to  observe  from  the  heights  the  whole  French  army  (considerably 
reinforced)  drawn  up  on  the  plains  of  Azincourt,  and  so  posted, 


<^  mSTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  proceed  on  his  march  without 
coming  to  an  engagement.  No  situation  could  be  more  unfavour- 
able than  that  in  which  he  then  found  himself.  His  army  was 
wasted  with  disease,  the  soldiers'  spirits  worn  down  with  fatigue, 
destitute  of  provisions,  and  discouraged  by  their  retreat.  Their 
whole  body  scarcely  exceeded  twelve  thousand  men;  and  these 
were  to  sustain  the  shock  of  an  enemy  six  times  their  number, 
headed  by  expert  generals,  and  plentifully  supplied  with  provis- 
ions. This  disparity,  as  it  depressed  the  English,  raised  the  cour- 
age of  the  French  in  proportion ;  and  so  confident  were  they  of 
success,  that  they  began  to  treat  for  the  ransom  of  their  prison- 
ers. Henry,  on  the  other  hand,  though  sensible  of  his  extreme 
clanger,  did  not  omit  any  circumstance  that  could  assist  his  situa- 
tion. As  the  enemy  were  so  much  superior,  he  drew  up  his  army 
on  a  nan'ow  ground  between  two  woods,  which  guarded  each 
fiaiik ;  and  he  patiently  expected,  in  that  position,  the  attack  of 
the  enemy.  The  constable  of  France  was  at  the  head  of  one  ar- 
my ;  and  Henry  himself,  with  Edward  duke  of  York,  commanded 
the  other.  For  a  time  botli  armies,  as  if  afraid  to  begin,  kept 
silently  gazing  at  each  other,  neither  being  willing  to  break  their 
ranks  by  making  the  onset ;  which  Henry  perceiving,  with  a 
cheerful  countenance  cried  out,  "  My  friends,  since  they  will  not 
begin,  it  is  ours  to  set  them  the  example :  come  on,  and  the  Bless- 
ed Trinity  be  our  protection  !"  Upon  this,  the  whole  army  set 
forward  with  a  shout,  while  the  French  still  continued  to  wait 
their  approacli  with  intrepidity.  The  English  archers,  who  had 
long  been  famous  for  their  great  skill,  first  let  fly  a  shower  of  ar- 
rows three  feet  long,  which  did  great  execution.  The  French  cav- 
alry advancing  to  repel  these,  two  hundred  bow-men,  who  lay  till 
tlien  concealed,  rising  on  a  sudden,  let  fly  among  them,  and  pro^ 
duced  such  a  confusion,  that  the  archers  threw  by  their  arrows, 
and,  rushing  in,  fell  upon  them  sword  in  hand.  The  French  at 
first  repulsed  the  assailants,  who  were  enfeebled  by  disease ;  but 
ihej  soon  made  up  the  defect  by  their  valour ;  and,  resolving  to 
conquer  or  die,  burst  in  upon  the  enemy  with  such  impetuosity, 
tliat  the  French  were  soon  obliged  to  give  way. 

In  the  mean  time  a  body  of  English  horse,  which  had  been  con- 
cealed in  a  neighbouring  wood,  rushing  out,  flanked  the  French 
infantry,  and  a  general  disorder  began  to  ensue.    The  first  line 


HETVRY  y.  S95 

of  the  enemy  being  routed,  the  second  line  marched  up  to  inter- 
rupt the  progress  of  the  victory.  Henry,  therefore,  alighted  from 
his  horse,  presented  himself  to  the  enemy  with  an  undaunted 
countenance  ;  and  at  the  head  of  his  men  fought  on  foot,  encour- 
aging some,  and  assisting  others.  Eighteen  French  cavaliers, 
who  were  resolved  to  kill  him,  or  die  in  the  attempt,  rushing  from 
the  ranks  together,  advanced,  and  one  of  them  stunned  the  king 
with  a  blow  of  his  battle-axe.  They  then  fell  upon  him  in  a  body  ; 
and  he  was  upon  the  point  of  sinking  under  their  blows,  when 
David  Gam,  a  valiant  Welshman,  aided  by  two  of  his  country- 
men, came  up  to  the  king's  assistance,  and  soon  turned  the  atten- 
tion of  the  assailants  from  Henry  ta  themselves,  till  at  lengtli^ 
being  overpowered,  they  fell  dead  at  his  feet.  The  king  had  by 
this  time  recovered  his  senses  ;  and  fresh  troops  advancing  to  his 
relief,  the  eighteen  French  cavaliers  were  slain  :  upon  which  he 
knighted  the  Welshmen  who  had  so  valiantly  fallen  in  his  de- 
fence. The  heat  of  the  engagement  still  increasing,  Henry's 
courage  seemed  also  to  increase,  and  the  most  dangerous  situa- 
tion was  where  he  fought  in  person  :  his  brother,  who  was  stun- 
ned by  a  blow,  fell  at  his  feet ;  and  while  the  king  was  piously 
endeavouring  to  succour  him,  he  received  another  blow  himself, 
which  threw  him  upon  his  knees.  But  he  soon  recovered ;  and 
leading  on  his  troops  with  fresh  ardour,  they  ran  headlong  upon 
the  enemy  ;  and  put  them  into  such  disorder,  that  their  leaders 
could  never  after  bring  them  to  the  charge.  The  duke  of  Alen- 
^on,  who  commanded  the  second  line,  seeing  it  fly,  resolved,  by 
(me  desperate  stroke,  to  retrieve  the  fortune  of  the  day,  or  fall  in 
the  attempt.  Wherefore  running  up  to  Henry,  and  at  the  same 
time  crying  aloud  that  he  was  the  duke  of  Alencon,  he  discharged 
such  a  blow  on  his  head,  that  it  carried  olF  part  of  the  king's  hel- 
met ;  while,  in  the  m.ean  time,  Henry,  not  having  been  able  to 
ward  off  the  blow,  returned  it  by  striking  the  duke  to  the  ground, 
and  he  was  soon  killed-  by  the  surrounding  crowd,  all  the  king's 
efforts  to  save  him  proving  ineffectual.  In  this  manner  the 
French  were  overthrown  in  every  part  of  the  field ;  from  their 
number,  being  crov/ded  into  a  very  narrovir  space,  they  were  in- 
eaple  of  either  flying  or  making  any  resistance ;  so  that  they  cov- 
ered the  ground  with  heaps  of  slain.  After  all  appearance  of  op- 
position was  ovei-ythe  English  had  leisure  to  make  prisoners,  j  aii^ 


296  HISTORY  OF  EJN  GLAND. 

having  advanced  with  uninterrupted  success  to  the  open  plain, 
they  there  saw  the  remains  of  the  French  rear-guard,  which  still 
maintained  a  show  of  opposition.  At  the  same  time  was  heard 
an  alarm  from  behind,  which  proceeded  from  a  number  of  peasants 
who  had  fallen  upon  the  English  baggage,  and  were  putting  those 
who  guarded  it  to  the  sword.  Henry,  now  seeing  the  enemy  on 
all  sides  of  him,  began  to  entertain  apprehensions  from  his  pris- 
oners, the  number  of  whom  exceeded  even  that  of  his  army.  He 
thought  it  necessary,  therefore,  to  issue  general  orders  for  putting 
them  to  death ;  but  on  the  discovery  of  the  certainty  of  his  vic- 
tory, he  stopped  the  slaughter,  and  was  still  able  to  save  a  great 
number.  This  severity  tarnished  the  glory  which  his  victory 
would  otherwise  have  acquired  :  but  all  the  heroism  of  that  age 
is  tinctured  with  barbarity. 

This  battle  was  very  fatal  to  France,  from  the  number  of 
princes  and  nobility  slain  or  taken  prisoners.  Among  the  num- 
ber of  the  slain  were  the  constable  of  France,  the  two  brothers  of 
the  duke  of  Burgundy,  the  duke  of  Barre,  and  the  count  de  Marie. 
An  archbishop  of  Sens  also  perished  fighting  in  this  battle.  The 
killed  are  computed  on  the  whole  to  have  amounted  to  ten  thou- 
sand men  ;  and  as  the  loss  fell  chiefly  upon  the  cavalry,  it  is  pre- 
tended that  of  these  eight  thousand  were  gentlemen.  The  num- 
ber of  prisoners  of  whom  the  most  distinguished  were  the  dukes 
of  Orleans  and  Bourbon,  approached  fourteen  thousand.  All  the 
English  who  were  slain  did  not  exceed  eighty  ;  a  number  amaz- 
ingly inconsiderable,  if  we  compare  the  loss  with  the  victory. 

Oct  26  ^^'^^^  victory,  how  great  soever  it  might  have  been, 
1415.  was  attended  with  no  immediate  good  effects.  Henry 
did  not  interrupt  his  retreat  a  moment  after  the  battle  of  Azin- 
court,  but  carried  his  prisoners  to  Calais,  and  thence  to  England, 
where  the  parliament,  dazzled  with  the  splendour  of  his  late  vic- 
tory, granted  him  new  supplies,  though  unequal  to  the  expenses 
ri4l7l  °^  ^  campaign.  With  these  supplies,  and  new  levies^ 
he  landed  an  army  of  twenty -five  thousand  men  in  Nor- 
mandy, and  prepared  to  strike  a  decisive  blow  for  the  crown  of 
France,  to  which  the  English  monarchs  had  long  made  preten- 
sions. That  wretched  country  was  now  in  a  most  deplorable 
situation.  The  whole  kingdom  appeared  as  one  vast  theatre  of 
crimes,  murders,  injustice,  and  devastation.    The  duke  of  Orlean? 


'  tlENRY  V.  29f 

\vas  assassinated  by  the  duke  of  Burgundy ;  and  the  duke  of  Bur» 
gundy,  in  his  turn,  fell  by  the  treachery  of  the  dauphin.  At  the 
same  time,  the  duke's  son,  desirous  of  revenging  his  father's 
death,  entered  into  a  secret  treaty  with  the  English ;  and  a  league 
was  immediately  concluded  at  Arras,  between  Henry  ri4iq-i 
and  the  young  duke  of  Burgundy,  in  which  the  king 
promised  to  revenge  the  murder  of  the  late  duke  :  and  the  son 
seemed  to  insist  upon  no  further  stipulations.  Henry,  therefore, 
proceeded  in  his  conquests,  without  much  opposition  from  any 
quarter.  Several  towns  and  provinces  submitted  on  his  ap- 
proach ;  the  city  of  Rouen  was  besieged  and  taken  ;  Pontoise  and 
Gisors  he  soon  became  master  of.  He  even  threatened  Paris  by 
the  terror  of  his  power,  and  obliged  the  court  to  move  to  Troye. 
It  was  at  this  city  that  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  who  had  taken  up- 
on him  the  protection  of  the  French  king,  met  Henry,  in  order  to 
ratify  that  treaty,  which  was  formerly  begun,  and  by  which  the 
fcrown  of  France  was  to  be  transferred  to  a  stranger.  The  imbe- 
cility into  which  Charles  had  fallen,  made  him  passive  in  this  re- 
markable treaty ;  and  Henry  dictated  the  terms*  throughout  the 
whole  negotiation.  The  principal  articles  of  tliis  treaty  were, 
that  Henry  should  espouse  the  princess  Catharine;  that  king 
Charles  should  enjoy  the  title  and  dignity  of  king  for  life, — but 
that  Henry  should  be  declared  heir  to  the  crown,  and  should  be 
intrusted  with^the  present  administration  of  the  government; 
that  France  and  England  should  fotever  be  united  under  one 
king,  but  should  still  retain  their  respective  laws  and  privileges  ; 
that  Henry  should  unite  his  arms  with  those  of  king  Charles  and 
the  duke  of  Burgundy,  to  depress  and  subdue  the  dauphin  and  his 
partisans.  Such  was  the  tenor  of  a  treaty,  too  repugnant  to  the 
real  interests  of  both  kingdoms  to  be  of  long  duration ;  but  the 
contending  parties  were  too  much  blinded  by  their  resentments 
and  jealousies  to  see  that  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  princes  to  bar- 
ter kingdoms,  contrary  to  the  real  interests  of  the  community. 

It  was  not  long  after  this  treaty  that  Henry  married  p^  .^^  -, 
the  princess  Catharine ;  after  which  he  carried  his  fa- 
ther-in-law to  Paris,  and  took  formal  possession  of  that  capital. 
There  he  obtained,  from  the  estates  of  the  kingdom,  a  ratification 
of  the  late  compact ;  and  then  turned  his  arms,  with  success, 
against  the  adherents  of  the  dauphin,  who,  in  the  mean  time,  wan- 

TOL.  I.  38 


298  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

dered  about  a  stranger  in  his  own  patrimony,  and  to  his  enemies'^ 
successes  only  opposed  fruitless  expostulations. 
Pj  .£,j  -.  Henry's  supplies  were  not  provided  in  such  plenty  as 
to  enable  him  to  carry  on  the  war  without  returning  in 
person  to  prevail  upon  his  parliament  for  fresh  succours  ;  and 
upon  his  arrival  in  England,  though  he  found  his  subjects  highly 
pleased  with  the  splendour  of  his  conquests,  yet  they  seemed 
somewhat  doubtful  as  to  the  advantage  of  them.  A  treaty  wlucli 
in  its  consequences  was  likely  to  transfer  the  seat  of  the  empire 
from  England  was  not  much  relished  by  the  parliament.  They, 
therefore,  upon  various  pretences,  refused  him  a  supply  equal  to 
his  exigencies  or  his  demands ;  but  he  was  resolved  on  pursuing 
his  schemes  :  and  joining  to  the  supplies  granted  at  home  the 
contributions  levied  on  the  conquered  provinces,  he  was  able  to 
assemble  an  army  of  twenty -eight  thousand  men,  and  with  these 
he  landed  safely  at  Calais. 

In  the  mean  time  the  dauphin,  a  prince  of  great  prudence  and 
activity,  omitted  no  opportunity  of  repairing  Ms  ruined  situa- 
tion, while  Henry  was  absent  from  France.  He  prevailed  upon 
the  regent  of  Scotland  to  send  him  a  body  of  seven  thousand  men 
from  that  kingdom  ;  and  with  these,  and  some  forces  of  his  own, 
he  attacked  the  duke  of  Clarence,  brother  of  Henry,  and  gained 
a  complete  victory. 

This  was  the  first  action  wlilch  turned  tlie  tide  of  success 
against  the  English.  But  it  was  of  short  duration  ;  for  Henry 
soon  after  appearing  with  a  considerable  army,  the  dauphin  fled 
at  his  approach  ;  while  many  of  the  places  which  had  submitted 
to  this  prince,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Paris,  surrendered  to  the 
conqueror.  While  Henry  was  thus  victorious,  he  fixed  his  resi- 
dence at  Paris  ;  and  while  Charles  had  but  a  small  court,  he  was 
ri409  "I  attended  with  a  very  magnificent  one.  On  Whitsun- 
day the  two  kings  and  tlieir  two  queens,  with  crowns 
on  their  heads,  dined  together  in  public  ;  Charles  receiving  ap- 
parent homage,  but  Henry  commanding  with  absolute  authority. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  dauphin  v/as  chased  beyond  the  Loire, 
and  almost  totally  dispossessed  of  a,ll  the  northern  provinces.  He 
was  even  pursued  into  the  south,  by  the  united  arms  of  the  En- 
glish and  Burgundians,  and  threatened  with  total  destruction.  In 
this  exigence,  he  foui^d  it  necessary  to  spin  out  the  ^var,  and  tO' 


HENRY  V.  299 

evade  all  hazardous  actions  with  a  rival  who  had  been  long  ac- 
customed to  victory.  His  prudence  was  every  where  remarkable  ; 
and,  after  a  train  of  long  persecutions  from  Fortune,  he  found 
her  at  length  willing  to  declare  in  his  favour,  by  ridding  him  of 
an  antagonist  that  was  likely  to  become  a  master. 

Henry,  at  a  time  when  his  glory  had  nearly  reached  its  sum- 
mit, and  both  crowns  were  just  devolved  upon  him,  was  seized 
with  a  fistula ;  a  disorder  which,  from  the  unskilfulness  of  the 
physicians  of  the  times,  soon  became  mortal.  Perceiving  his  dis- 
temper incurable,  and  that  his  end  was  approaching,  he  sent  for 
his  brother  the  duke  of  Bedford,  the  earl  of  Warwick,  and  a  few 
other  noblemen  whom  he  had  honoured  with  his  confidence ;  and 
to  them  he  delivered,  in  great  tranquillity,  his  last  will  with  re- 
gard to  the  government  of  his  kingdom  and  family.  He  recom- 
mended his  son  to  their  protection ;  and  though  he  regretted  the 
being  unable  to  accomplish  the  great  object  of  his  ambition,  in  to- 
tally subduing  France,  yet  he  expressed  great  indifference  at  the 
approach  of  death ;  he  devoutly  waited  its  arrival,  and  expired 
with  the  same  intrepidity  with  which  he  had  lived,  in  the  thirty- 
fifth  year  of  his  age,  and  the  tenth  year  of  his  reign. 

This  prince  possessed  many  virtues,  but  his  military  successes 
gave  him  credit  for  more  than  he  really  possessed.  It  is  certain, 
however,  that  he  had  the  talent  of  attaching  his  friends  by  afia- 
bility,  and  of  gaining  his  enemies  by  address  and  clemency.  Yet 
his  reign  was  rather  splendid  than  profitable  ;  the  treasures  of  the 
nation  were  lavished  on  conquests,  which,  even  if  they  could 
have  been  maintained,  would  have  proved  injurious  to  the  nation. 
Nevertheless  he  died  fortunate,  by  falling  in  the  midst  of  his  tri- 
umphs, and  leaving  his  subjects  in  the  very  height  of  his  reputa- 
tion. Charles,  who  died  two  months  after  him,  finished  a  wretched 
reign,  long  passed  in  phrensy  and  contempt,  despised  by  his 
friends,  insulted  by  his  allies,  and  leaving  the  most  miserable  sub- 
jects upon  earth. 

Henry  left  by  his  queen,  Catharine  of  France,  only  one  son, 
who  succeeded  him  on  the  throne  ;  and  whose  misfortunes,  during- 
the  course  of  a  long  reign,  surpassed  all  the  glories  and  successes 
of  his  father. 

The  English  triumphs  at  this  time  in  France  produced  scarce 
any  good  eftects  at  home :  as  they  grew  warlike  they  became  sav^ 


500  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

age,  and,  panting  after  foreign  possessions,  forgot  the  arts  of  cul- 
tivating those  that  lay  nearer  home.  Our  language,  instead  of 
improving,  was  more  neglected  than  before  ;  Langland  and  Chau- 
cer had  begun  to  polish  it,  and  enrich  it  with  new  and  elegant 
constructions;  but  it  now  was  seen  to  relapse  into  its  former 
rudeness,  and  no  poet  or  historian  of  note  was  born  in  this  tem- 
pestuous period. 


HENRY  vr. 

Henry  VI.  was  not  quite  a  year  old  when  he  came  to  the  throne  ; 
and  liis  relatives  began,  soon  after,  to  dispute  the  administration 
during  his  minority.  The  duke  of  Bedford,  one  of  the  most  ac- 
complished princes  of  the  age,  and  equally  experienced  both  in 
the  cabinet  and  the  field,  was  appointed,  by  parliament,  protec- 
tor of  England,  defender  of  the  church,  and  first  counsellor  to 
the  king.  His  brother,  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  was  fixed  upon  to 
govern  in  his  absence,  while  he  conducted  the  war  in  France ; 
and,  in  order  to  limit  the  power  of  both  brothers,  a  council  was 
named,  without  whose  advice  and  approbation  no  measure  of 
importance  could  be  carried  into  execution. 

Things  being  adjusted  in  this  manner,  as  the  conduct  of  military 
operations  was  at  that  time  considered  in  a  much  superior  light 
to  civil  employments  at  home,  the  duke  of  Bedford  fixed  his  sta- 
tion in  France,  to  prosecute  the  successes  of  the  English  in  that 
part  of  their  dominions,  and  to  repress  the  attempts  of  Charles 
VII.,  who  succeeded  his  father  on  a  nominal  throne.  Nothing 
could  be  more  deplorable  than  the  situation  of  that  monarch  on 
assuming  his  titlei  to  the  crown.  The  English *\vere  masters  of 
almost  all  France ;  and  Henry  VI.,  though  yet  an  infant,  was 
solemnly  invested  with  regal  power  by  legates  from  Paris.  The 
duke  of  Bedford  was  at  the  head  of  a  numerous  army,  in  the. 
heart  of  the  kingdom,  ready  to  oppose  every  insurrection ;  while 
the  duke  of  Burgundy,  who  had  entered  into  a  firm  confederacy 
with  him,  remained  steady,  and  seconded  his  claims.    NotwitK*' 


HENRY  VI.  SOI 

standing  these  unfavourable  appearances,  Charles  (who,  though 
not  yet  twenty,  united  the  prudence  6f  age  with  the  affability  of 
youth)  found  means  to  break  the  leagues  formed  against  him,  and 
to  bring  back  his  subjects  to  their. natural  interests  and  their  duty. 

However,  his  first  attempts  were  totally  destitute  of 
success  5  wherever  he  endeavoured  to  face  the  enemy,  L  -J 
he  was  overthrown ;  and  he  could  scarcely  i-ely  on  the  friends 
next  his  person.  His  authority  was  insulted  even  by  his  own 
servants :  various  advantages  were  obtained  over  him ;  and  a 
battle  fought  near  Verneuil,  in  which  he  was  totally  defeated  by 
the  duke  of  Bedford,  seemed  to  render  his  affairs  wholly  despe- 
rate. However,  from  the  impossibility  of  the  English  keeping 
the  field  without  new  supplies,  Bedford  was  obliged  to  retire  into 
England,  and  in  the  mean  time  his  vigilant  enemy  began  to  re- 
cover from  his  late  consternation.  Dunois,  one  of  his  generals, 
at  the  head  of  one  thousand  six  hundred  men,  compelled  the  earl 
of  Warwick  to  raise  the  siege  of  Montargis  5  and  this  advantage, 
slight  as  it  was,  began  to  make  the  French  suppose  that  the  En- 
glish were  not  invincible. 

But  they  soon  had  still  greater  reason  to  triumph  in  their 
change  of  fortune,  and  a  new  revolution  was  produced  by  means 
apparently  the  most  unlikely  to  be  attended  with  success.  The 
assistance  of  a  female,  of  the  humblest  birth  and  meanest  educa- 
tion, served  to  turn  the  tide  of  victory  in  their  favour,  and  im- 
press their  enemies  with  those  terrors  Avhich  had  hitherto  render- 
ed them  unequal  in  the  field.  By  this  feeble  aid,  the  vanquished 
became  the  victors  ;  and  the  English,  every  where  worsted,  w^ere 
at  length  totally  expelled  the  kingdom. 

In  the  village  of  Domremi,  near  Vaucouleurs,  on  the  borders 
of  Lorraine,  there  lived  a  country  girl,  about  twenty-seven  years 
of  age,  called  Joan  of  Arc.  This  girl  had  been  a  servant  at  a 
small  inn ;  and  in  that  humble  station  had  submitted  to  those 
hardy  employments  which  fit  the  body  for  the  fatigues  of  war. 
She  was  of  an  irreproachable  life,  and  had  hitherto  testified  none 
of  those  enterprising  qualities  which  displayed  themselves  soon 
after.  She  contentedly  fulfilled  the  duties  of  her  situation,  and 
was  remarkable  only  for  her  modesty,  and  love  of  religion.  But 
the  miseries  of  her  country  seemed  to  have  been  one  of  the  great- 
est objects  of  her  compassion  and  regard.    Her  king  expelled  his 


302  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

native  throne,  her  country  laid  in  blood,  and  strangers  executing 
unnumbered  rapines  before  her  eyes,  were  suflRcient  to  excite  her 
resentment,  and  to  warm  her  heart  with  a  desire  of  redress.  Her 
mind,  inflamed  by  these  objects,  and  brooding  with  melancholy 
steadfastness  upon  them,  began  to  feel  several  impulses  which  she 
was  willing  to  mistake  for  the  inspirations  of  heaven.  Convinced 
of  the  reality  of  her  own  admonitions,  she  had  recourse  to  Bau- 
dricourt,  governor  of  Vaucouleurs,  and  informed  him  of  her  des- 
tination by  heaven  to  free  her  native  country  from  its  fierce  in- 
vaders. Baudricourt  treated  her  at  first  with  some  neglect :  but 
her  importunities  at  length  prevailed  :  and  willing  to  make  a  trial 
of  her  pretensions,  he  gave  her  some  attendants,  who  conducted 
her  to  the  French  court,  which  at  that  time  resided  at  Chinon. 

The  French  court  were  probably  sensible  of  the  weakness  of 
her  pretensions  ;  but  they  were  willing  to  make  use  of  every  ar- 
tifice to  support  their  declining  fortunes.  It  was  therefore  given 
out,  that  Joan  was  actually  inspired ;  that  she  was  able  to  dis- 
cover the  king  among  the  number  of  his  courtiers,  although  he  had 
laid  aside  all  the  distinctions  of  his  authority ;  that  she  had  told 
hint  such  secrets  as  were  only  knoAvn  to  himself  j  and  that  she 
had  demanded,  and  minutely  described,  a  sword  in  the  church  of 
St.  Catharine  de  Fierbois,  which  she  had  never  seen.  In  this 
manner  the  minds  of  the  vulgar  being  prepared  for  her  appear- 
ance, she  was  armed  cap-a-pie,  mounted  on  a  charger,  and  shown 
in  that  martial  dress  to  the  people.  She  was  then  brought  before 
the  doctors  of  the  university  j  and  they,  tinctured  with  the  credu- 
lity of  the  times,  or  willing  to  second  the  imposture,  declared  that 
slie  had  actually  received  her  commission  from  above. 

When  the  preparations  for  her  mission  were  completely  bla- 
zoned, their  next  aim  was  to  send  her  against  the  ene- 
L  '^  "J  my.  The  English  were  at  that  time  besieging  the  city  of 
Orleans,  the  last  resource  of  Charles,  and  every  thing  promised 
them  a  speedy  surrender.  Joan  undertook  to  raise  the  siege  j 
and,  to  render  herself  still  more  remarkable,  girded  herself  with 
ihe  miraculous  sword,  of  which  she  had  before  such  extraordinary 
notices.  Thus  equipped,  she  ordered  all  the  soldiers  to  confess 
themselves  before  they  set  out;  she  displayed  in  her  hand  a  con- 
secrated banner,  and  assured  the  troops  of  certain  success.  Such 
confidence  on  her  side  soon  raised  the  spirits  of  the  French  array  j 


HENRY  VI.  SOS 

and  even  the  English,  -who  pretended  to  despise  her  efforts,  felt 
themselves  secretly  influenced  with  the  terrors  of  her  mission. 
A  supply  of  provisjion  was  to  be  conveyed  into  the  town ;  Joan, 
at  the  head  of  some  French  troops,  covered  the  embarkation,  and 
entered  Orleans  at  the  head  of  the  convoy  which  she  had  safely 
protected.  While  she  was  leading  her  troops  along,  a  dead  si- 
lence and  astonishment  reigned  among  the  English ;  and  they  re- 
garded with  religious  awe  that  temerity  which  they  thought  noth- 
ing but  supernatural  assistance  could  inspire.  But  they  were 
soon  roused  from  their  state  of  amazement  by  a  sally  from  the 
town ;  Joan  led  on  the  besieged,  bearing  the  sacred  standard  in 
her  hand,  encouraging  them  with  her  words  and  actions,  bringing 
them  up  to  the  trenches,  and  overpowering  the  besiegers  in  their 
©wn  redoubts.  In  the  attack  of  one  of  the  forts,  she  was  wounded 
in  the  neck  with  an  arrow ;  but  instantly  pulling  out  the  weapon, 
"with  her  own  hands,  and  getting  the  wound  quickly  dressed,  she 
hastened  back  to  head  the  troops,  and  to  plant  her  victorious  ban- 
ner on  the  ramparts  of  the  enemy.  These  successes  continuing 
the  English  found  that  it  was  impossible  to  resist  troops  animated 
by  such  superior  energy ;  and  Suffolk,  who  conducted  the  attack, 
thinking  that  it  might  prove  extremely  dangerous  to  remain  any 
longer  in  the  presence  of  such  a  courageous  and  victorious  enemy^ 
raised  the  siege,  and  retreated  with  ail  imaginable  precaution. 

From  being  attacked,  the  French  now  in  turn  became  the  ag- 
gressors. Charles  formed  a  body  of  six  thousand  men,  and  sent 
them  to  besiege  Jergeau,  which  the  earl  of  Suffolk  occupied  with 
a  part  of  his  army.  The  city  was  taken  ;  Suffolk  yielded  himself 
a  prisoner,  and  Joan  marched  into  the  place  in  triumph,  at  the 
head  of^  the  army.  A  battle  was  soon  after  fought  near  Patay^ 
where  the  English  were  worsted  as  before  5  and  the  generals 
Scales  and  Talbot  were  taken  prisoners. 

The  raising  of  the  siege  of  Orleans  was  one  part  of  the  Maid's 
promise  to  the  king  of  France ;  the  crowning  him  at  Rheims  was 
the  other.  She  now  declared  that  it  was  time  to  complete  that 
ceremony ;  and  Charles,  in  pursuance  of  her  advice,  set  out  for 
Rheims,  at  the  head  of  twelve  thousand  men.  The  towns  through 
which  he  passed  opened  their  gates  to  receive  him ;  and  Rheims 
sent  him  a  deputation,  with  its  keys,  upon  his  approach.  The 
ceremony  of  his  coronation  was  there  performed  with  the  utmost 


304  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

solemnity ;  and  the  Maid  of  Orleans  (for  so  she  was  now  called)) 
seeing  the  completion  of  her  mission,  desired  leave  to  retire,  alleg- 
ing that  she  had  now  accomplished  the  end  of  her  calling.  But 
her  services  had  been  so  great,  that  the  king  could  not  think  of 
parting ;  he  pressed  her  so  earnestly  to  stay,  that  she  at  length 
complied  with  his  request. 

A  tide  of  success  followed  the  performance  of  this  solemnity  ; 
Laon,  Soissons,  Chateau -Thierri,  Provins,  and  many  other  towns 
and  fortresses  in  that  neighbourhood,  submitted  to  him  on  the 
first  summons.  On  the  other  hand  the  English,  discomfited  and 
dispirited,  fled  in  every  quarter,  unknowing  whether  to  ascribe 
their  misfortunes  to  the  power  of  sorcery  or  to  a  celestial  influ- 
ence, but  equally  terrified  at  either.  They  now  found  them- 
selves deprived  of  the  conquests  they  had  gained,  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  French  had  formerly  submitted  to  their  power. 
Their  own  divisions,  both  abroad  and  at  home,  unfitted  them  en- 
tirely for  carrying  on  the  war ;  and  the  duke  of  Bedford,  not- 
withstanding all  his  prudence,  saw  himself  divested  of  his  strong 
holds  in  the  country,  without  being  able  to  stop  the  enemy's  prog- 
ress. In  order,  therefore,  to  revive  the  declining  state  of  his  af- 
fairs, he  resolved  to  have  Henry  crowned  king  at  Paris,  knowing 
that  the  natives  would  be  allured  to  obedience  by  the  splendour 
r-tAci-i -]  of  the  ceremony.  Henry  was  accordingly  crowned,  all 
the  vassals  that  still  continued  under  the  English  power 
swearing  fealty  and  homage.  But  it  was  now  too  late  for  the 
ceremonies  of  a  coronation  to  give  a  turn  to  the  affairs  of  the  En- 
glish ;  the  generality  of  the  kingdom  had  declared  against  them, 
and  the  remainder  only  waited  a  convenient  opportunity  to  follo\y 
the  example.  ^ 

An  accident  had  previously  occurred,  which,  though  it  promised 
to  promote  the  English  cause  in  France,  in  the  end  served  to  ren- 
der it  odious,  and  conduced  to  the  total  evacuation  of  that  coun- 
try. The  duke  of  Burgundy,  at  the  head  of  a  powerful  army, 
had  laid  siege  to  Compeigne ;  and  the  Maid  of  Orleans  had 
thrown  herself  into  the  place,  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  the  gov- 
ernor, who  did  not  desire  the  company  of  one  whose  authority- 
would  be  greater  than  his  own.  The  garrison,  however,  rejoiced 
at  her  appearance,  and  believed  themselves  invincible  under  her 
protection.    But  their  joy  was  of  short  duration ;  for  Joan  having, 


HENRY  VI.  305 

the  day  after  her  arrival,  headed  a  sally,  and  twice  driven  the 
enemy  from  their  entrenchments,  she  was  at  last  obliged  to  re- 
tire, placing  herself  in  the  rear,  to  protect  the  retreat  of  her  for- 
ces. But  in  the  end,  attempting  to  follow  her  troops  into  the 
city,  she  found  the  gates  shut,  and  the  bridge  drawn  up,  by  order 
of  the  governor,  who  is  said  to  have  long  wished  for  an  opportu- 
nity of  delivering  her  up  to  the  enemy* 

Nothing  could  exceed  the  joy  of  the  besiegers,  in  having  taken 
a  person  who  had  been  so  long  a  terror  to  their  arms.  The  ser* 
vice  of  Te  Deum  was  publicly  celebrated  on  this  occasion  ;  and 
it  was  hoped  that  the  capture  of  this  extraordinary  person  would 
restore  the  English  to  their  former  victories  and  successes.  The 
duke  of  Bedford  was  no  sooner  informed  of  her  being  taken,  than 
he  purchased  her  of  the  count  Vendome,  who  had  made  her  his 
prisoner,  and  ordered  her  to  be  committed  to  close  confinement. 
The  credulity  of  both  nations  was  at  that  time  so  great,  that 
nothing  was  too  absurd  to  gain  belief  that  coincided  with  their 
passions.  As  Joan  but  a  little  before,  from  her  successes,  was  re- 
garded as  a  saint,  she  was  now,  upon  her  captivity,  considered  as 
a  sorceress,  forsaken  by  the  dsemon  who  had  granted  her  a  falla- 
cious and  temporary  assistance.  Accordingly  it  was  resolved  in 
council  to  send  her  to  Rouen,  to  be  tried  for  witchcraft ;  and  the 
bishop  of  Beauvais,  a  man  wholly  devoted  to  the  English  inter- 
est, presented  a  petition  against  her  for  that  purpose.  The  uni- 
versity of  Paris  was  so  mean  as  to  join  in  the  same  request.  Sev- 
eral prelates,  among  whom  the  cardinal  of  Winchester  was  the 
only  Englishman,  were  appointed  as  her  judges.  They  held 
their  court  in  Rouenj  where  Henry  then  resided ;  and  the  Maid, 
clothed  in  her  former  military  apparel,  but  loaded  with  irons,  was 
produced  before  this  tribunal.  Her  behaviour  there  no  way  dis- 
graced her  former  gallantry  ;  she  betrayed  neither  weakness  nor 
womanish  submission ;  but  appealed  to  God  and  the  pope  for  the 
truth  of  her  former  revelations.  In  the  issue,  she  was  found 
guilty  of  heresy  and  witchcraft,  and  sentenced  to  be  burned  alive, 
the  common  punishment  for  such  offences. 

But,  previous  to  the  infliction  of  this  dreadful  sentence  upon 
her,  they  were  resolved  to  make  her  abjure  her  former  errors ; 
and  at  length  so  far  prevailed  upon  her  by  terror  and  rigorous 
VOL.  I.  39 


306  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

treatment,  that  her  spirits  were  entirely  broken  by  the  hardships 
she  was  obliged  to  suffer.  Her  former  visionary  dreams  begaii 
to  vanish,  and  a  gloomy  distrust  to  take  place  of  her  late  inspira- 
tions. She  publicly  declared  herself  willing  to  recant,  and  prom- 
ised never  more  to  give  way  to  the  vain  delusions  which  had 
hitherto  misled  her  and  imposed  on  the  people.  This  was  what 
her  oppressors  desired ;  and,  willing  to  show  some  appearance  of 
mercy,  they  changed  her  sentence  into  perpetual  imprisonment, 
and  to  be  fed  during  life  on  bread  and  water.  But  the  rage  of 
her  enemies  was  not  yet  satiated.  Perfectly  satisfied  of  her  guilt, 
they  were  willing  to  know  if  her  reformation  was  equally  certain. 
Suspecting  that  the  female  dress,  which  she  had  consented  to 
wear,  Avas  disagreeable  to  her,  they  purposely  placed  in  her 
apartment  a  suit  of  men's  apparel,  and  watched  for  the  eifect  of 
their  temptation  upon  her.  Their  cruel  artifice  prevailed.  Joan, 
struck  with  the  sight  of  a  dress  in  which  she  had  gained  so  much 
glory,  immediately  threw  off  her  penitent's  robes,  and  put  on  the 
forbidden  garment.  Her  enemies  found  her  equipped  in  this 
manner ;  and  her  imprudence  was  considered  as  a  relapse  into 
Jier  former  transgressions.  No  recantation  would  suflSce,  and  no 
pardon  would  be  granted  to  her.  She  was  condemned  to  be  burn- 
ed alive  in  the  market-place  of  Rouen;  and  this  infamous  sen- 
tence was  accordingly  executed  upon  her. 

Surperstition  adds  virulence  to  the  natural  cruelty  of  mankind ; 
and  this  cruel  sentence  served  only  to  inflame  the  hatred  between 
the  contending  powers,  without  being  advantageous  to  the  cause 
of  the  invaders.  One  of  the  fii'st  misfortunes  which  the  English 
felt  after  this  punishment,  was  the  defection  of  the  duke  of  Bur- 
gundy, who  had  for  some  time  seen  the  error  of  his  conduct,  and 
wished  to  break  an  unnatural  connection,  that  only  served  to  in- 
P  -^  volve  his  country  in  ruin.  A  treaty  was  therefore  be- 
gun,  and  concluded,  between  him  and  Charles,  in  which 
the  latter  made  all  the  atonements  possible  for  his  offence ;  and 
the  former  agreed  to  assist  him  in  driving  the  English  out  of 
France.  This  was  a  mortal  blow  to  their  cause ;  and  such  were 
its  effects  upon  the  populace  in  London  when  they  were  informed 
of  it,  that  they  killed  several  of  the  duke's  subjects,  who  happened 
to  be  among  them  at  that  time.  It  might  perhaps  also  have  has- 
tened the  duke  of  Bedford's  death,  who  died  at  Rouen  soon  after 


HENRY  VI.  S07 

the  treaty  was  concluded  ;  and  Richard,  duke  of  York,  was  ap- 
pointed his  successor  in  the  regency  of  France. 

From  this  period  the  English  affairs  became  totally  irretrievable. 
The  city  of  Paris  returned  once  more  to  the  sense  of  its  duty. 
Lord  Willoughby,  who  commanded  it  for  the  English,  was  coii- 
tented  to  stipulate  for  the  safe  retreat  of  his  troops  to  Normandy. 
Thus  ground  was  continually,  though  slowly,  gained  by  the 
French ;  and  notwithstanding  their  fields  were  laid  waste,  and 
their  towns  depopulated,  yet  they  found  protection  from  the  weak- 
ness and  divisions  of  the  English.  At  length  both  parties  began 
to  grow  weary  of  a  war,  which,  though  carried  on  but  feebly,  was 
a  burthen  greater  than  either  could  support.  But  the  terms  of 
peace  insisted  upon  by  both  were  so  wide  of  each  other,  that  no 
hopes  of  an  accommodation  could  quickly  be  expected.  1-1444  "i 
A  truce,  therefore,  for  twenty-two  months  was  conclud- 
ed, which  left  every  thing  on  the  present  footing  between  the 
parties. 

No  sooner  was  this  agreed  upon  than  Charles  employed  himself 
with  great  industry  and  judgment  in  repairing  those  numbei'less 
ills  to  which  his  kingdom,  from  the  continuance  of  wars  both  for- 
eign and  domestic,  had  so  long  been  exposed.  He  established 
discipline  among  his  troops,  and  justice  among  his  governors. 
He  revived  agriculture,  and  repressed  faction.  Thus  being  pre- 
pared once  more  for  taking  the  field,  he  took  the  first  favourable 
occasion  of  breaking  the  truce  ;  and  Normandy  was  at  the  same 
time  invaded  by  four  powerful  armies,  one  commanded  r-t^Ao  1 
by  Charles  himself,  a  second  by  the  duke  of  Bretagne, 
a  third  by  the  duke  of  Alencon,  and  a  fourth  by  the  count  Du= 
nois.  Every  place  opened  its  gates  almost  as  soon  as  the  French 
appeared.  Rouen  was  the  only  town  that  promised  to  hold  out 
a  siege ;  but  the  inhabitants  clamoured  so  loud  for  a  surrender, 
that  the  duke  of  Somerset,  who  commanded  the  garrison,  was 
obliged  to  capitulate.  The  battle,  or  rather  the  skir-  r^Agn  ~i 
mish,  of  Fourmigni  was  the  last  stand  which  the  English 
made  in  defence  of  their  French  dominions.  However,  they 
were  put  to  the  rout,  and  above  a  thousand  were  slain.  All  Nor- 
mandy and  Guienne,  that  had  so  long  acknowledged  subjection 
to  England,  were  quickly  lost ;  and  the  English  at  length  saw 
themselves  entirely  dispossessed  of  countries  which  for  three  cen- 


308  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

P^  ._„  -|  turies  they  had  considered  as  annexed  to  their  native 
dominions.  Calais  alone  remained  of  all  their  con? 
quests;  and  this  was  but  a  small  compensation  for  the  blood  and 
treasure  which  had  been  lavished  in  France,  and  only  served  to 
gratify  ambition  Avith  a  transient  applause. 

It  may  easily  be  supposed  that  the  ill  success  in  France,  which 
began  almost  with  young  Henry's  reign,  produced  dissensions 
and  factious  among  the  rulers  at  home.  The  duke  of  Gloucester, 
who  had  been  appointed  regent  of  England  during  his  brother's 
absence,  was  not  so  secure  in  his  place  but  that  he  had  many 
who  envied  his  situation.  Among  the  number  of  these  was  Hen- 
ry Beaufort,  bishop  of  Winchester,  great  uncle  to  the  king,  and 
son  of  John  of  Gaunt.  This  prelate,  to  whom  the  care  of  the 
king's  person  and  education  had  been  intrusted,  was  a  man  of 
great  capacity  and  experience,  but  of  an  intriguing  and  dangerous 
disposition.  As  he  aspired  to  the  government  of  affairs,  he  had 
continual  disputes  with  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  and  gained  fre- 
quent advantages  over  the  open  temper  of  that  prince.  It  was  in 
vain  that  the  duke  of  Bedford  employed  all  his  own  authority, 
and  that  of  parliament,  to  reconcile  them ;  their  mutual  animos- 
ities served  for  several  years  to  embarrass  government,  and  to 
give  its  enemies  every  advantage.  The  sentiments  of  these  two 
leaders  of  their  party  were  particularly  divided  with  regard  to 
France.  The  cardinal  encouraged  every  proposal  of  accommo- 
dation with  that  country  ;  the  duke  of  Gloucester  was  for  main- 
taining the  honour  of  the  English  arms,  and  winning  back  all  that 
had  been  lost  by  defeats  or  delay.  In  this  contest  the  powers 
seemed  nearly  divided  ;  and  it  became  incumbent  on  one  side  to 
call  in  new  auxiliaries,  before  either  party  could  turn  the  political 
scale.  For  this  purpose  the  cardinal  resolved  to  strengthen  him- 
self, by  procuring  a  suitable  match  for  Henry ;  and  then,  by 
bringing  the  new  queen  over  to  his  interests,  to  turn  the  balance 
sn  his  favour.  Accordingly,  the  earl  of  Suffolk,  a  nobleman  whom 
he  knew  to  be  steadfast  in  his  attachments,  was  sent  over  to 
France,  apparently  to  settle  the  terms  of  the  truce,  which  had 
been  then  begun  ;  but,  in  reality,  to  procure  a  suitable  match  for 
the  king.  The  duke  of  Gloucester  had  before  proposed  a  daugh- 
ter of  the  count  d'Armagnac,  but  had  not  influence  sufficient  to 
prevail.     The  cardinal  and  his  friends  had  cast  their  eye  on  Mai> 


HENRY  VI.  309 

garet  of  Anjou,  daughter  of  Regnier,  titular  king  of  Sicily,  Na- 
ples, and  Jerusalem,  but  without  either  real  power  or  possessions. 
This  princess  was  considered  as  the  most  accomplished  of  the  age, 
both  in  mind  and  person  j  and  it  was  thought  would,  by  her  own 
abilities,  be  able  to  supply  the  defects  of  her  consort,  who  was 
weak,  timid,  and  superstitious.  The  treaty  was  hastened  by  Suf- 
folk ;  and  the  marriage  was  solemnised  in  England,  when  Henry 
was  in  his  twenty -fourth  year. 

The  cardinal  being  strengthened  by  this  new  alliance  (for  the 
queen  came  immediately  into  his  measures),  the  duke  of  Glouces- 
ter soon  found  himself  possessed  of  only  the  shadow  of  power 
without  the  substance  ;  all  his  measures  were  over-ruled  by  his 
powerful  antagonist ;  and  he  daily  found  himself  insulted  in  the 
most  cruel  manner.  One  of  the  principal  steps  his  enemies  took 
to  render  him  odious,  was  to  accuse  his  wife,  the  duchess,  of 
witchcraft.  She  was  charged  with  conversing  with  one  Roger 
Bolingbroke,  a  priest  and  reputed  necromancer,  and  also  one 
Mary  Gurdemain,  who  was  said  to  be  a  witch.  It  is  asserted 
that  these  three  in  conjunction  had  made  a  figure  of  the  king  in 
wax,  which  was  placed  before  a  gentle  fire ;  and  as  the  wax  dis- 
solved, the  king's  strength  was  expected  to  waste ;  and  upon  its 
total  dissolution  his  life  was  to  be  at  an  end.  This  accusation 
was  readily  attended  to  in  that  credulous  age ;  and  the  more  it 
departed  from  reason,  the  fitter  it  was  for  becoming  an  object  of 
belief.  The  prisoners  were  pronounced  guilty ;  neither  the  rank 
of  the  duchess,  nor  the  innocence  of  the  accused,  could  protect 
them ;  she  was  condemned  to  do  penance,  and  to  suffer  perpetual 
imprisonment  J  Bolingbroke,  the  priest,  was  hanged;  and  the 
woman  was  burned  in  Smithfield. 

But  this  was  only  the  beginning  of  the  duke's  distresses.  The 
cardinal  of  Winchester  resolved  to  drive  his  resentment  to  ex- 
tremity, and  accordingly  procured  a  parliament  to  be  summoned, 
not  at  London,  which  was  too  well  affected  to  the  duke,  but  at 
St.  Edmundsbury,  where  his  adherents  were  sufficiently  nume- 
rous to  overawe  every  opponent.  As  soon  as  he  appeared,  he 
was  accused  of  treason,  and  thrown  into  prison  ;  and  on  the  day 
on  which  he  was  to  make  his  defence,  he  was  found  dead  in  his 
jsed,  though  without  any  signs  of  violence  upon  his  body. 

The  death  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester  was  universally  ascribed 


SIO  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

to  the  cardinal  of  Winchester,  who  himself  died  six  weeks  after, 
testifying  the  utmost  remorse  for  the  bloody  scene  he  had  acted. 
What  share  the  queen  had  in  the  guilt  of  this  transaction  is  un- 
certain ;  her  usual  activity  and  spirit  made  the  public  conclude, 
with  some  reason,  that  the  duke's  enemies  durst  not  have  ventur- 
ed on  such  a  deed  without  her  privity.  Henry  did  not  fail  to 
share  in  the  general  disgust  that  was  thus  produced  ;  and,  as  he 
wanted  abilities,  he  never  had  the  art  to  remove  any  suspicion. 
From  this  time  discontent  began  to  prevail  among  the  people,  and 
faction  among  the  great.  A  weak  prince  seated  on  the  throne 
of  England,  however  gentle  and  innocent,  seldom  fails  of  having 
his  authority  despised,  and  his  power  insulted.  The  incapacity 
of  Henry  began  every  day  to  appear  in  a  fuller  light ;  and  the 
foreign  war  being  now  extinguished,  the  people  began  to  prepare 
for  the  horrors  of  intestine  strife.  In  this  period  of  calamity  a 
new  interest  was  revived,  which  had  lain  dormant  in  the  times  of 
prosperity  and  triumph. 

It  was  now  that  the  English  were  to  pay  the  severe  though  late 
penalty  for  having  unjustly  deposed  Richard  the  Second  ;  another 
Richard,  who  was  duke  of  York,  beginning  to  think  of  preferring 
his  claims  to  the  crown.  This  nobleman  was  descended,  by  the 
mother's  side,  from  Lionel,  one  of  the  sons  of  Edward  the  Third  | 
whereas  the  reigning  king  was  descended  from  John  of  Gaunt,  a 
son  of  the  same  monarch,  but  younger  than  Lionel.  Richard, 
therefore,  stood  plainly  in  succession  before  Henry  ;  and  he  be- 
gan to  think  the  Aveakness  and  unpopularity  of  the  present  reign 
a  favourable  moment  for  ambition.  The  ensign  of  Richard  was  a 
white  rose,  that  of  Henry  a  red  ;  and  this  gave  name  to  the  two 
factions  whose  animosity  was  now  about  to  drench  the  kingdom 
with  blood. 

The  cardinal  of  Winchester  being  dead,  the  duke  of  Suffolk, 
who  had  a  hand  in  Gloucester's  assassination,  took  the  lead  in 
public  affairs ;  and,  being  secretly  aided  by  the  interest  of  the 
queen,  managed  all  with  uncontrollable  authority.  As  this  noble- 
man had  made  his  way  to  power  by  murder,  so  he  was  resolved 
to  maintain  himself  in  it  by  the  usual  resources  of  bad  men,  by 
tyranny  over  his  inferiors,  and  flattery  to  the  queen.  His  con- 
duct soon  excited  the  jealousy  or  the  hatred  of  the  whole  king- 
'  dom.    The  great  nobility  could  ill  brook  the  exaltation  of  a  subject 


HENRY  VI.  311 

above  them  who  was  of  a  birth  inferior  to  their  own.  The  people 
complained  of  his  arbitrary  measures,  and  the  immense  acquisi- 
tions which  he  had  made  in  office  ;  and  the  blame  of  every  odi- 
ous and  unsuccessful  measure  was  instantly  given  to  him.  Suf- 
folk was  not  ignorant  of  the  hatred  of  the  people ;  but  supposed 
that  his  crimes  vv'ere  such  as  could  not  be  proved  against  him, 
or  that,  if  proved,  he  could  readily  evade  punishment :  he  en- 
deavoured, therefore,  to  overawe  his  enemies  by  boldly  present- 
ing himself  to  the  charge  ;  and  he  called  upon  them  to  show  an 
instance  of  his  guilt.  This  was  what  the  house  of  commons  had 
long  wished  for;  and  they  immediately  opened  their  charge 
against  him,  ,of  corruption,  tyranny,  and  treason.  He  was  ac- 
cused of  being  the  cause  of  the  loss  of  France  ;  of  persuading  the 
French  king,  with  an  armed  force,  to  invade  England  ;  and  of  be- 
traying in  office  the  secrets  of  his  department.  This  accusation 
might  have  been  false ;  but  the  real  motive,  which  was  Suffolk's 
power  and  the  cruel  use  he  made  of  it,  was  left  unmentioned,  al- 
though it  was  true.  It  was  no  easy  matter  for  any  one  man's 
strength,  how  great  soever,  to  withstand  the  united  resentment 
of  a  nation  ;  so  that  the  court  was  obliged  to  give  up  its  favourite  | 
and  the  king,  to  shield  him  as  much  as  possible  from  popular  re- 
sentment, banished  him  from  the  kingdom  for  five  years.  This 
was  considered  by  some  as  an  escape  from  justice  :  the  captain 
of  a  vessel  was  therefore  employed  by  his  enemies  to  intercept 
him  in  his  passage  to  France  j  he  was  seized  near  Dover,  his 
head  was  struck  off  on  the  side  of  a  long-boat,  and  his  body  thrown 
into  the  sea.  There  is  little  in  the  transactions  of  these  times 
to  interest  us  on  the  side  of  either  party  ;  we  see  scarce  any  thing 
but  crimes  on  both  sides,  without  one  shining  character  or  one 
virtue  to  animate  the  narrative. 

By  the  death  of  the  duke  of  Suffolk,  Richard  of  York 
saw  himself  rid  of  a  potent  enemy,  and  was  pleased  to  L  '^ 
see  the  discontents  of  the  nation  daily  increase.  Among  the 
number  of  complaints  to  vdiich  the  unpopularity  of  the  government 
gave  rise,  there  were  some  which  even  excited  insurrection ;  par- 
ticularly that  headed  by  John  Cade,  which  was  of  the  most  dan- 
gerous nature.  This  man  was  a  native  of  Ireland,  who  had  been 
obliged  to  fiy  over  into  France  for  his  crimes  ;  but  seeing  the  peo- 
ple upon  his  return  prepared  for  violent  measures,  he  assumed 


312  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

the  name  of  Mortimer,  and,  at  the  head  of  twenty  thousand 
Kentish-men,  advanced  towards  the  capital,  and  encamped  at 
Blackheath.  The  king,  being  informed  of  this  commotion,  sent  a 
message  to  demand  the  cause  of  their  assembling  in  arms ;  and 
Cade,  in  the  name  of  the  community,  answered,  that  their  only 
aim  was  to  punish  evil  ministers,  and  procure  a  redress  of  griev- 
ances for  the  people.  The  king's  council  deeming  these  demands 
seditious,  a  body  of  fifteen  thousand  men  were  levied  to  oppose 
the  insurgents ;  while  Henry  himself  marched  at  their  head  to- 
wards Blackheath.  At  his  approach  Cade  retired,  as  if  he  had 
been  afraid  of  an  engagement,  and  lay  in  ambush  in  a  wood,  not 
doubting  that  he  should  be  pursued  by  the  king's  whole  army ; 
but  the  king  was  content  with  sending  a  detachment  after  the  fu- 
gitives, and  returning  himself  to  London.  This  was  what  Cade 
desired  to  see  5  and,  sallying  out  from  his  ambuscade,  he  cut  the 
detachment  in  pieces. 

The  citizens  of  London  soon  after  opened  their  gates  to  the 
victor ;  and  Cade  for  some  time  maintained  great  order  and  dis- 
cipline among  his  followers.  He  always  led  them  out  into  the 
field  during  the  night-time ;  and  published  severe  edicts  against 
plunder,  and  violence  of  every  kind. 

Next  day,  being  informed  that  the  treasurer,  lord  Say,  was  in 
the  city,  he  caused  him  to  be  apprehended  and  beheaded,  without 
any  form  of  trial ;  and  in  the  evening  returned  to  Southwark. 
Thus  for  some  days  he  continued  the  practice  of  entering  the 
city  in  the  morning,  and  quitting  it  at  night;  but  at  length,  be- 
ing unable  to  keep  his  followers  within  bounds,  the  citizens  re- 
solved to  shut  their  gates  against  him.  Cade  endeavouring  to 
force  his  way,  an  engagement  ensued  between  him  and  the  citi- 
zens, which  was  not  discontinued  until  night  put  an  end  to  the 
engagement.  The  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  the  chancellor, 
who  had  taken  refuge  in  the  Tower,  being  informed  of  the  situa- 
tion of  affairs,  found  means  to  draw  up  the  same  night  an  act  of 
amnesty,  which  was  privately  dispersed  among  the  rebels.  This 
had  the  desired  effect.  Cade  saw  himself  in  the  morning  aban- 
doned by  most  of  his  followers,  and,  retreating  to  Rochester,  was 
obliged  to  fly  alone  into  the  wolds  of  Kent,  where,  a  price  being 
set  upon  his  head  by  proclamation,  he  was  discovered  and  slain  by 
one  Alexander  Eden,  who,  in  recompense  for  this  service,  was 
made  governor  of  Dgver-castle. 


HENRY  VI,  SIS 

In  the  mean  time,  the  duke  of  York  secretly  fomented  p^ .  ^  -, 
these  disturbances ;  and,  pretending  to  espouse  the  cause  L  '-' 
of  the  people,  wrote  to  the  king,  advising  a  reformation  in  the 
ministry ;  and  the  house  of  commons  was  brought  over  to  second 
his  request.  An  address  was  presented  against  the  duke  of  Som^ 
erset,  the  duchess  of  Suffolk,  the  bishop  of  Chester,  sir  John  Sut- 
ton, and  lord  Dudley,  praying  the  king  to  remove  them  forever 
from  his  person  and  councils,  and  to  prohibit  them  from  ap- 
proaching within  twelve  miles  of  the  court.  Though  the  king 
was  willing  enough  to  oppose  so  violent  and  arbitrary  an  attack 
upon  his  favourites,  yet  he  endeavoured  to  soften  the  general  ani- 
mosity against  them,  by  promising  to  banish  a  part  of  the  obnox- 
ious ministry  from  court  for  the  space  of  a  year. 

But  partial  concessions  in  government  are  generally 
bad  palliatives.  The  duke  of  York,  who  found  the  peo-  L  '"'-^ 
pie  strongly  attached  to  him,  resolved  to  avail  himself  of  his 
power ;  and,  raising  a  body  of  ten  thousand  men,  marched  to- 
wards London,  demanding  a  reformation  of  the  government,  and 
the  removal  of  the  duke  of  Somerset  from  all  his  power  and  au- 
thority. He  had  hopes  from  the  beginning  that  the  citizens 
would  have  thrown  open  the  gates  to  him ;  but  was  much  morti- 
fied when  he  found  that  he  was  refused  admission.  Upon  his  re- 
treat into  Kent,  a  parley  ensued  between  the  king  and  him,  in 
which  the  duke  still  insisted  on  the  dismission  of  Somerset ;  with 
which  Henry  seemed  at  length  willing  to  comply.  The  duke  of 
York  was,  therefore,  persuaded  to  pay  his  respects  to  the  king 
in  his  tent ;  but,  on  repeating  his  charge  against  the  duke  of 
Somerset,  he  was  surprised  to  see  that  minister  step  from  behind 
the  curtain,  and  offer  to  justify  his  innocence.  York  now  per- 
ceived his  danger,  and  repressed  the  impetuosity  of  his  accusa- 
tion. As  soon  as  he  left  the  presence,  the  king  commanded  him 
to  be  apprehended ;  but  such  was  this  nobleman's  authority,  or 
such  the  timidity  of  the  king's  council,  that  they  suffered  him  to 
retire  to  his  seat  at  Wigmore,  upon  promising  strict  obedience  for 
the  future. 

A  reconciliation  thus  extorted  could  be  of  no  long  duration, 

York  still  secretly  aspired  to  the  crown  ;  and  though  he  wished 

nothing  so  ardently,  yet  he  was  for  some  time  prevented  by  his 

own  scruples  from  seizing  it.     What  his  intrigues  failed  to  bring 

VOL.   I.  40 


314  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

about,  accident  produced  to  his  desire.  The  king  falling  into  a 
distemper,  which  so  far  increased  his  natural  imbecility 
•-  '-■  that  it  even  rendered  him  incapable  of  maintaining  the 
appearance  of  royalty,  York  was  appointed  lieutenant  and  pro- 
tector of  the  kingdom,  with  powers  to  hold  and  open  parliament 
at  pleasure.  This  was  a  fatal  blow  to  the  house  of  Lancaster  : 
all  the  adherents  of  that  party  were  dismissed  from  court,  and 
the  duke  of  Somerset  was  sent  to  the  Tower. 

York,  being  thus  invested  with  a  plenitude  of  power,  continu- 
ed in  the  enjoyment  of  it  for  some  time :  hut  at  length  the  un- 
happy king  recovered  from  his  lethargic  complaint;, and,  as  if 
awaking  from  a  dream,  perceived,  with  surprise,  that  he  was 
stripped  of  all  his  authority.  Margaret,  his  queen,  also  did  all 
in  her  power  to  rouse  him  to  a  sense  of  his  unworthj  situation, 
and  prevailed  upon  him  to  remove  the  duke  of  York  from  his 
r-iAfiK-i  power;  in  consequence  of  which  that  nobleman  had  in- 
stant recourse  to  arms.  The  impotent  monarch,  thus 
obliged  to  take  the  field,  was  dragged  after  his  army  to  St.  Al- 
ban's,  where  both  sides  came  to  an  engagement,  in  which  the 
Yorkists  gained  a  complete  victoiy,  and  the  duke  of  Somerset 
was  slain.  The  king  himself  being  wounded,  and  taking  shelter 
in  a  cottage  near  the  field  of  battle,  v^as  taken  prisoner,  and  treat- 
ed by  the  victor  with  great  respect  and  tenderness.  Thence  he 
was,  shortly  after,  led  in  triumph  to  London  ;  and  the  duke  of 
Yoi'k,  permitting  him  still  to  enjoy  the  name  of  king,  reserved  to 
himself  the  title  of  protector,  in  which  consisted  all  the  real  power 
of  the  crown. 

Henry  was  now  but  a  prisoner  treated  with  the  splendid  forms 
of  royalty ;  yet,  indolent  and  sickly,  he  seemed  pleased  with  his 
situation,  and  did  not  regret  that  power  which  was  not  to  be  ex- 
ercised without  fatigue.  But  it  was  otherwise  with  Margaret,  his 
queen.  She,  naturally  bold,  active,  and  endued  with  masculine 
courage,  could  not  be  content  with  the  appearance  of  chat  author- 
ity which  her  enemies  alone  permitted  her  to  exercise ;  she  con- 
tinued to  excite  the  wretched  monarch  to  a  vindication  of  his  re- 
gal dignity,  and  to  spur  him  on  to  independence.  He  was,  there- 
fore, once  more  induced  to  assert  his  prerogative ;  and  the  duke 
of  York  was  obliged  to  retire,  to  be  in  readiness  to  oppose  any 
designs  against  his  liberty  and  life.    At  first  a  negotiation  for 


HENRY  VI.  315 

peace  was  entered  upon  by  both  parties ;  but  their  mutual  dis- 
trusts soon  brought  them  into  the  field,  and  the  fate  of  the  kingdom 
was  given  up  to  be  determined  by  the  sword.  Their  gept  23, 
armies  met  at  Bloreheath,  on  the  borders  of  Stafford-  i*59- 
shire,  and  the  Yorkists  gained  some  advantages.  But  when  a 
more  general  action  was  about  to  ensue,  the  night  before  the  in- 
tended engagement,  sir  Andrew  Trollop,  who  commanded  a  body 
of  veterans  for  the  duke  of  York,  deserted  with  all  his  men  to  the 
king ;  and  this  so  intimidated  the  whole  army  of  the  Yorkists, 
that  they  separated  the  next  day  without  striking  a  single  blow. 
The  duke  of  York  fled  to  Ireland ;  the  earl  of  Warwick,  one  of 
his  boldest  and  ablest  supporters,  escaped  to  Calais,  with  the 
government  of  which  he  had  been  entrusted  during  the  late  pro- 
tectorship 5  and  all  the  party,  thus  suppressed,  concealed  their 
intentions  for  a  more  favourable  opportunity.  Nor  was  this  op- 
portunity long  wanting :  Warwick,  having  met  with  some  sucr 
cesses  at  sea,  landed  in  Kent ;  and  being  there  joined  by  f^aro  t 
some  other  barons,  he  marched  up  to  London  amidst 
the  acclamations  of  the  people.  The  city  immediately  opened 
its  gates  to  him  ;  and  his  troops  increasing  on  every  day's  march, 
he  soon  found  himself  in  a  condition  to  face  the  royal  army, 
which  hastened  from  Coventry  to  attack  him.  Never  was  there 
a  more  formidable  division  of  interests,  or  greater  inveteracy  be^ 
tween  the  chiefs  of  either  party,  than  the  present,  Warwick 
was  one  of  the  most  celebrated  generals  of  his  age,  formed  for 
times  of  trouble,  extremely  artful,  and  incontestably  brave,  equally 
skilful  in  council  and  the  field,  and  inspired  with  a  degree  of 
hatred  against  the  queen  that  nothing  could  suppress.  On  the 
other  side,  the  queen  seemed  the  only  acting  general :  she  ranged 
the  army  in  battalia,  and  gave  the  necessary  orders,  while  the 
poor  king  was  brought  forward,  an  involuntary  spectator  of  those 
martial  preparations.  Both  armies  met  on  a  plain  near  North- 
ampton. The  queen's  forces  were  considerably  inferior  in  num- 
ber to  those  of  the  earl ;  but  she  was  not  discouraged.  While 
she  went  about  from  rank  to  rank,  the  king  remained  in  his 
tent,  awaiting  the  issue  of  the  combat,  with  female  doubts  and 
apprehensions.  The  battle  continued  for  five  hours,  with  the  ut- 
most obstinacy  j  but  at  length  the  good  fortune  and  the  numbers 
of  Warwick  were  seen  to  prevail,    The,  queen's  amy  w^s  pver-? 


316  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

thrown ;  and  she  had  the  misfortune  to  see  the  king  once  more 
made  a  prisoner,  and  brought  back  to  his  capital  in  triumph. 

The  cause  of  the  Yorkists  being  thus  confirmed  by  the  strong- 
est arguments,  those  of  power,  a  parliament  was  called  to  give  it 
their  moi-e  formal  sanction.  The  duke  of  York,  whose  prospects 
began  to  widen  as  he  rose,  from  being  contented  with  the  pro- 
tectorship, now  began  to  claim  the  crown.  It  was  now,  for  the 
first  time,  that  the  house  of  loi'ds  seemed  to  enjoy  an  unbiassed 
deliberative  authority ;  the  cause  of  Henry,  and  that  of  the  duke 
of  York,  were  solemnly  debated,  each  side  producing  their  rea- 
sons without  fear  or  control.  This  was  the  first  time  that  a  spirit 
of  true  rational  liberty  ever  appeared  to  exert  itself  in  England, 
and  in  which  recent  conquest  did  not  supersede  all  deliberation. 
The  duke,  though  a  conqueror,  could  not  entirely  gain  his  cause  : 
it  was  determined  that  Henry  should  possess  the  throne  during 
his  life ;  and  that  the  duke  should  be  appointed  his  successor,  to 
the  utter  exclusion  of  the  prince  of  Wales,  who,  yet  but  a  child, 
was  insensible  of  the  injury  that  was  done  him. 

The  queen,  to  all  appearance,  now  seemed  utterly  destitute  of 
every  resource ;  her  armies  were  routed,  her  husband  taken  pris- 
oner, and  the  parliament  disclaimed  her  cause.  Yet  though  she 
had  lost  all,  she  still  retained  her  native  intrepidity  and  persever- 
ance :  she  was  a  woman  of  a  great  mind  and  some  faults,  but 
ambition  seemed  to  be  the  leading  passion  in  all  her  conduct. 
Though  a  fugitive,  distant  from  the  capital,  opposed  by  a  victori- 
ous array  and  a  consummate  general,  she  still  tried  every  resource 
to  repair  her  disastrous  circumstances.  She  flew  to  Wales ;  there 
endeavoured  to  animate  her  old  friends,  and  to  acquire  new. 
The  nobility  of  the  North,  who  regarded  themselves  as  the  most 
warlike  of  the  kingdom,  were  moved  with  indignation  to  find  tlie 
Southern  barons  dispose  of  the  crown,  and  settle  the  government. 
They  began  to  consider  the  royal  cause  as  unjustly  oppressed ; 
and  the  queen  soon  found  herself  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  twen- 
ty thousand  men,  ready  to  second  her  pretensions.  She  and  her 
Dec.  .30  old  enemy,  the  duke  of  York,  once  more  met  upon  Wake- 

1460.  ggiti  Green,  near  the  castle  of  Sandal;  and  victory,  on 
this  occasion,  declared  itself  in  favour  of  the  queen.  The  duke 
of  York  was  killed  in  the  action ;  and  as  his  body  was  found 
among  the  slain,  his  head  was  cut  off  by  Margaret's  orders,  and 


HENRY  VI.  S17 

fixed  on  the  gates  of  York,  with  a  paper  crown  in  derision  of  his 
pretended  title.  His  son,  the  earl  of  Rutland,  a  youth  of  seven- 
teen, was  taken  prisoner  and  killed  in  cold  blood  by  lord  Clifford, 
in  revenge  for  his  father's  death,  who  had  fallen  in  the  battle  of 
St.  Alban's. 

Margaret,  being  victorious,  marched  towards  London,  in  order 
to  give  the  king  liberty  ;  but  the  earl  of  Warwick,  who  now  put 
himself  at  the  head  of  the  Yorkists,  commanded  an  army  in  which 
he  led  about  the  captive  king,  to  give  a  sanction  to  his  attempts. 
Upon  the  approach  of  the  Lancastrians,  he  conducted  his  forces, 
strengthened  by  a  body  of  Londoners,  who  were  very  af-  r-iACi  ■^ 
fectionate  to  his  cause,  and  gave  battle  to  the  queen  at 
St.  Alban's.  While  the  armies  were  warmly  engaged,  lord  Love- 
lace, who  commanded  a  considerable  body  of  Yorkists,  treacher- 
ously withdrew  from  the  combat  5  and  this  decided  the  victory 
in  favour  of  the  queen.  Above  two  thousand  of  the  Yorkists 
perished  in  the  battle,  and  the  person  of  the  king  again  fell  into 
the  hands  of  his  own  party, — to  be  treated  with  apparent  respect, 
but  real  contempt.  Lord  Bonneville,  to  whose  care  he  had  been 
intrusted,  continued  with  him  after  the  defeat,  upon  an  assurance 
of  pardon  ;  but  Margaret,  regardless  of  her  husband's  promise, 
ordered  his  head  to  be  struck  off. 

It  only  now  remained  that  the  city  of  London  should  declare 
in  the  queen's  favour  :  but  Warwick  had  previously  secured  it  in 
his  interests ;  and  the  citizens,  who  dreaded  her  tumultuous  army, 
refused  to  open  their  gates  to  her  summons.  In  the  mean  time 
young  Edward,  the  eldest  son  of  the  late  duke  of  York,  began  to 
repair  the  losses  his  party  had  lately  sustained,  and  to  give  spirit 
to  the  Yorkists.  This  prince  in  the  bloom  of  youth,  remarkable 
for  the  beauty  of  his  person,  his  bravery,  and  popular  deportment, 
advanced  towards  London  with  the  remainder  of  Warwick's  ar- 
my, and,  obliging  Margaret  to  retire,  entered  the  city  amidst  the 
acclamations  of  the  people.  Perceiving  his  own  popularity,  he 
supposed  that  now  was  the  time  to  assert  his  claim  to  the  crown  ; 
and  his  friend  Warwick,  assembling  the  citizens  in  St.  John's 
Fields,  pronounced  an  harangue,  setting  forth  the  title  of  Ed- 
ward, and  inveighing  against  the  tyranny  and  usurpation  of  the 
house  of  Lancaster.  He  then  demanded  whether  they  chose 
Henry  for  their  king  ;  to  wliich  the  people  crying,  "  A  York !  a 


318  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

York !"  he  quickly  called  an  Assembly  of  lords  and  bishops  at 
Baynard's  Castle,  and  these  ratified  their  choice.  The  young 
duke  was  proclaimed  king,  by  the  title  of  Edward  IV.,  and  then 
conducted,  with  great  ceremony,  to  the  palace  where  Henry  used 
to  lodge  when  within  the  ^valls  of  the  city. 

But  the  miseries  of  a  civil  war  were  not  yet  completed ;  and 
Margaret  resolved  to  strike  another  blow.  Upon  her  retiring  to 
the  North,  ^reat  numbers  flocked  to  her  standard,  and  she  was 
able,  in  a  few  days,  to  assemble  an  army  of  sixty  thousand  men 
in  Yorkshire.  On  the  other  side,  the  eai'l  of  Warwick  conduct- 
ed young  Edward  at  the  head  of  forty  thousand  men  to  oppose 

March  29  ^^®^'  ^^^^^  ^^^^^  ^*  length  met  near  Towton,  in  the 
1461.  county  of  York,  to  decide  the  fate  of  empire ;  and  nev- 
er was  England  depopulated  by  so  terrible  an  engagement.  It 
was  a  dreadful  sight  to  behold  a  hundred  thousand  men  of  the 
same  country  engaged  against  each  other ;  and  all  to  satisfy  the 
empty  ambition  of  the  weakest  or  the  worst  of  mankind.  While 
the  army  of  Edward  was  advancing  to  the  charge,  there  happen- 
ed a  great  fall  of  snow,  which  driving  full  in  the  faces  of  the 
enemy  blinded  them  ;  and  this  advantage,  seconded  by  an  impet- 
uous onset,  decided  the  victory  in  their  favour.  Edward  issued 
orders  to  give  no  quarter  ;  and  a  bloody  slaughter  ensued,  in 
which  thirty -five  thousand  of  the  Lancastrians  were  slain.  Ed- 
ward entered  York  victorious  ;  and  taking  down  the  heads  of  his 
father,  and  the  earl  of  Salisbury,  that  were  placed  over  the  city 
gates,  put  up  that  of  the  earl  of  Devonshire  in  their  stead. 

In  the  mean  time,  Margaret,  hearing  the  fate  of  her  army,  and 
being  sensible  that  no  place  in  England  could  now  alFord  her  pro- 
tection, fled  with  Henry  and  her  son  to  Scotland.  But  no  ca- 
lamity was  able  to  repress  her  perseverance :  though  so  often 
n  4fio  1  overcome,  yet  she  was  resolved  once  more  to  enter  En- 
gland with  five  thousand  men  granted  her  by  the  French 
king ;  and  the  unfortunate  Henry  was  led  onward,  by  his  pres- 
ence to  enforce  her  claims.  But  even  here  her  former  ill  fortune 
attended  her  ;  and  her  little  fleet  was  dispersed  by  a  tempest, 
while  she  herself  escaped  with  some  difficulty  by  entering  the 
ri4fi4  1  ^^outh  of  the  Tweed.  A  defeat,  which  her  few  forces 
suffered  at  Hexham,  seemed  to  render  her  cause  despe- 
rate ;  and  the  cruelty  which  was  practised  upon  all  her  adherents 
rendered  it  still  more  dangerous. 


HENRY  VI.  319 

The  loss  of  this  battle  appeared  to  deprive  her  of  every  re- 
source ;  she  and  her  husband  were  obliged  to  seek  for  safety  in  a 
separate  flight,  without  attendants,  and  without  even  the  necessa- 
ries of  life.  The  weak  unfortunate  king,  always  imprudent  and 
always  unsuccessful,  thought  he  could  remain  concealed  in  En- 
gland ;  but  his  error  was  soon  attended  with  the  obvious  conse- 
quences 5  for  he  was  taken  prisoner,  carried  to  London  with  ig- 
nominy, and  confined  in  the  Tower.  Margaret  was  rather  more 
fortunate.  She  flying  with  her  son  into  a  forest,  where  she  en- 
deavoured to  conceal  herself,  was  set  upon  during  the  darkness  of 
the  night  by  robbers,  who,  either  ignorant  or  regardless  of  her 
quality,  despoiled  her  of  her  rings  and  jewels,  and  treated  her 
with  the  utmost  indignity.  But  she  found  more  respectful  treat- 
ment from  one  of  those  lawless  men,  who,  knowing  her  station, 
resolved  to  procure  her  safety  at  the  hazard  of  his  own ;  and  at 
last  conducte^d  her  to  the  sea-coast,  whence  she  made  her  escape 
to  her  father  in  Flanders,  who,  though  very  poor,  strove  as  well 
as  he  could  to  supply  her  with  the  necessaries  of  life.  To  the 
same  court  the  dukes  of  Somerset  and  Exeter  retired  ;  and  they, 
literally  speaking,  felt  all  the  miseries  of  want.  Philip  de  Co- 
mines,  the  French  historian,  says,  he  saw  the  duke  of  Exeter  fol- 
lowing the  duke  of  Burgundy's  equipage  bare-footed,  and  serving 
for  his  livelihood  as  a  footman.  This  was  a  strange  situation  for 
a  lord,  who  had  conducted  armies,  and  was  allied  to  kings  and 
princes ;  but  those  enjoyments  which  served  to  distinguish  the 
great  from  the  little  were  not  so  apparent  then  as  at  present. 

Edward  being  now,  by  means  of  the  earl  of  Warwick,  fixed 
upon  the  throne,  reigned  in  peace  and  security,  while  his  title 
was  recognised  by  parliament,  and  universally  submitted  to  by 
the  people.  He  began,  therefore,  to  give  a  loose  to  his  favourite 
passions ;  and  a  spirit  of  gallantry,  mixed  with  cruelty,  was  seen 
to  prevail  in  his  court.  In  the  very  same  palace  which  one  day 
exhibited  a  spectacle  of  horror  was  to  bt;  seen  the  day  following 
a  masque  or  a  pageant ;  and  the  king  would  at  once  gallant  a 
mistress  and  inspect  an  execution.  In  order  to  turn  him  from 
these  pursuits,  which  were  calculated  to  render  him  unpopular, 
the  earl  of  Warwick  advised  him  to  marry ;  and,  with  his  con- 
sent, went  over  to  France  to  procure  Bona  of  Savoy  as  queen ; 
and  the  match  was  accordingly  concluded.    But  whilst  the  ead 


520  tflSTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

was  hastening  tlie  negotiation  in  France,  the  king  himself  ren- 
dered it  abortive  at  home,  by  marrying  Elizabeth  Widville,  lady 
Gray,  with  whom  he  had  fallen  in  love,  and  whom  he  had  vainly 
endeavoured  to  debauch.  Having  thus  given  Warwick  real  cause 
of  offence,  he  resolved  to  widen  the  breach,  by  driving  him  trom 
the  council.  Every  incident  tended  to  increase  the  jealousy  be- 
tween the  king  and  this  powerful  subject;  the  favour  shown  the 
queen's  party,  and  the  contempt  which  was  thrown  upon  the  earl, 
manifested  an  open  rupture.  Warwick,  whose  prudence  was 
equal  to  his  bravery,  soon  made  use  of  both  to  assist  his  revenge; 
he  seduced  the  duke  of  Clarence,  brother  to  the  king,  and,  to  con- 
firm that  nobleman  in  his  interests,  gave  him  his  daughter  in  mar- 
riage. Thus  an  extensive  and  dangerous  combination  was  formed 
against  Edward  and  his  ministry  ;  and  an  accident  that  followed 
soon  after  contributed  to  fan  the  flame.  The  inhabitants  about 
n  4fiQ  1    ^^'  Leonard's  hospital,  in  Yorkshire,  complained  that  the 

duties  levied  for  that  institution,  which  were  originally 
allotted  for  pious  uses,  were  now  secreted  by  the  managers  ;  and 
they  refused  to  contribute  their  part.  They  soon  after  rose  in  a 
body  to  oppose  the  ecclesiastical  severities  that  were  levelled 
against  them  by  the  earl  of  Pembroke.  It  is  thought  that  the 
earl  of  Warwick  had  some  hand  in  fomenting  these  disorders ; 
and  although  this  rebellion  was  quieted  by  a  pardon  from  Edward, 
yet  some  others,  that  broke  out  shortly  after,  appeared  favoura- 
ble to  Warwick's  designs.  Vengeance  seemed  to  be  the  only 
motive  this  nobleman  had  in  view ;  and  that  he  pursued  with  un- 
abating  assiduity.  Plots,  treasons,  stratagems,  and  negotiations, 
followed  each  other  in  rapid  succession :  but  at  last  fortune  seem- 
ed to  favour  Warwick's  aims,  and  the  king,  as  we  are  told,  fell 
into  his  power,  by  accepting  an  invitation  which  the  earl  gave 
him  in  order  to  betray  him.  Be  this  as  it  may,  Edward  had  soon 
the  good  fortune  to  see  himself  at  the  head  of  a  numerous  army, 
and  in  a  condition  to  take  satisfaction  for  the  treachery  of  his 
powerful  opponent.  Resolving,  therefore,  to  take  advantage  of 
ri47n"l    the  enemies'  weakness,  after  having  defeated  a  party 

commanded  by  lord  Wells,  and  cut  off  his  head,  he 
inarched  to  give  them  battle.  In  this  exigence,  Warwick,  and 
the  duke  of  Clarence,  had  no  other  resource  but  to  quit  the  king- 
dom ;  and  embarking  for  Calais,  they  seized  upon  some  Flemish 


HENRY  VI.  321 

vessels,  which  they  found  lying  along  that  coast,  with  which  they 
entered  one  of  the  ports  of  France.  Here  tliey  entered  into  an 
union  with  Margaret,  which  was  dictated  by  necessity  5  both 
sides  being  willing  to  forget  their  mutual  animosity,  in  order  to 
second  their  revenge.  Lewis  XI.,  king  of  France,  prepared  a 
fleet  to  escort  them  ;  and  seizing  the  opportunity,  they  landed 
at  Dartmouth  with  a  small  body  of  troops,  while  Edward  was  in 
the  North  suppressing  an  insurrection  which  had  lately  appeared 
there.  Nothing  can  be  more  extraordinary  than  the  success  of 
Warwick  upon  this  occasion.  The  spirit  of  discontent  with 
which  many  were  infected,  and  the  general  instability  of  the  En- 
glish nation,  conspired  with  his  ambition ;  and  in  less  than  six 
days  such  multitudes  flocked  to  his  standard,  that  he  saw  himself 
at  the  head  of  an  army  of  threescore  thousand  men. 

It  was  now  become  Edward's  turn  to  fly  the  kingdom.  He 
had  just  time  to  escape  an  attempt  made  upon  his  person  in  the 
night,  by  the  marquis  of  Montague  j  and  to  embark  on  board  a 
small  fleet,  which  lay  off  Lynn  in  Norfolk.  Nor  were  his  dan- 
gers lessened  at  sea,  where  he  was  chased  by  some  ships  belong- 
ing to  the  Hanse-towns,  who  were  then  at  war  with  both  France 
and  England.  But  at  length  he  landed  safely  in  Holland,  where 
he  received  a  cool  reception  from  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  with 
whom  he  had  some  time  be'fore  entered  into  an  alliance. 

In  the  mean  time  Warwick,  with  his  resistless  army,  advanced 
to  London ;  and  once  more  the  poor  passive  king  Henry  was  re- 
leased from  prison,  to  be  placed  upon  a  dangerous  throne.  A  par- 
liament was  called,  which  confirmed  Henry's  title  with  great 
solemnity;  and  Warwick  was  himself  received  among  the  people 
under  the  title  of  the  King-maker.  All  the  attainders  of  the 
Lancastrians  were  reserved;  and  every  one  was  restored,  who 
had  lost  either  honours  or  fortune  by  his  former  adherence  to 
Henry's  cause.  All  the  considerable  Yorkists  either  fled  to  the 
continent,  or  took  shelter  in  sanctuaries,  where  the  ecclesiastical 
privileges  afforded  them  protection. 

But  Edward's  party,  though  repressed,  was  not  destroyed. 
Though  an  exile  in  Holland,  he  iiad  many  partisans  at  home ;  and, 
after  an  absence  of  five  months,  being  seconded  by  a 
small  body  of  forces  granted  him  by  the  duke  of  Bur-    •-        '-' 
gundy,  he  made  a  descent  at  Ravenspur  in  Yorkshire.    Though 

VOL.  I.  41 


322  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

at  first  he  was  coolly  received  by  the  English,  yet  his  army  in- 
creased upon  its  march,  while  his  moderation  and  feigned  humility 
still  added  to  the  number  of  his  partisans.  London,  at  that  time 
ever  ready  to  admit  the  most  powerful,  opened  her  gates  to  him ; 
and  the  wretched  Henry  was  once  more  plucked  from  his  throne, 
to  be  sent  back  to  his  former  mansion. 

Thus  Warwick  began  to  experience  the  instability  of  fortune, 
and  find  his  party  declining ;  but  what  gave  the  most  dreadful 
blow  to  his  hopes  was  the  defection  of  his  son-in-law,  the  duke  of 
Clarence,  who  went  over  to  Edward,  and  threw  all  his  weight 
into  the  opposite  scale.  Nothing  now  remained  to  Warwick,  but 
to  cut  short  a  state  of  anxious  suspense  by  hazarding  a  battle  ; 
and  though  he  knew  his  forces  to  be  inferior  to  those  of  Edward, 
yet  he  placed  his  greatest  dependance  upon  his  own  generalship. 
With  this  resolution  he  marched  from  St.  Alban's,  where  he  was 
stationed,  and  advancing  towards  Barnet,  within  ten  miles  of 
London,  there  resolved  to  wait  for  Edward,  who  was  not  slow  in 
marching  down  to  oppose  him.  Warwick  and  Edward  were  at 
that  time  considered  as  the  two  most  renowned  generals  of  the 
ao-e ;  and  now  was  to  be  struck  the  decisive  blow  that  was  either 
to  fix  Edward  on  the  throne,  or  to  overthrow  his  pretensions  for- 
ever. The  unfortunate  Henry  also  was  dragged  along  to  be  a 
spectator  of  the -engagement;  happy  in  his  natural  imbecility, 
which  seemed  as  a  balm  to  sooth  all  his  afflictions. 

The  battle  began  early  in  the  morning,  and  lasted  till 

1471  '  noon.  Both  armies  fought  with  great  obstinacy  and 
bravery,  not  honour  but  life  depending  on  the  issue  of  the  contest. 
The  example  of  Warwick  inspired  his  troops  with  more  than  com- 
mon resolution,  and  the  victory  for  a  while  seemed  to  declare  in 
his  favour.  But  an  accident  at  last  threw  the  balance  against 
him :  from  the  mistiness  of  the  morning,  a  part  of  his  army  hap- 
pening to  mistake  a  body  of  their  own  forces  for  the  enemy,  fell 
furiously  upon  them,  and  this  error  turned  the  fortune  of  the  day. 
Warwick  did  all  that  experience,  valour,  or  conduct,  could  sug- 
gest, to  retrieve  the  mistake :  but  it  was  now  too  late ;  no  art 
could  remove  the  ill  effects  of  the  error ;  wherefore,  finding  all 
hopes  gone,  he  was  resolved  to  sell  the  conquerors  a  dear-bought 
victory.  He  had,  contrary  to  his  usual  practice,  engaged  that 
day  on  foot;  and  leading  a  chosen  body  into  the  thickest  of  the 


«     HENRY  VI.  323 

slaughter,  he  there  fell  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies,, covered  with 
wounds.  His  brother  underwent  the  same  fate ;  and  six  thou- 
sand of  his  adherents  were  slain,  Edward  having  ordered  that  no 
quarter  should  be  given. 

Margaret,  who  had  been  ever  fruitful  in  resources,  was  at  that 
time  returning  with  her  son  from  France,  where  she  had  been 
negotiating  for  fresh  supplies.  She  had  scarce  time  to  refresh 
herself  from  the  fatigues  of  her  voyage,  when  she  received  the 
fatal  news  of  the  death  of  the  brave  Warwick,  and  the  total  de- 
struction of  her  party.  Though  she  had  hitherto  boldly  with- 
stood all  the  attacks  of  fortune,  the  present  information  was  too 
Adolent  a  blow  for  nature  to  support.  Her  grief,  for  the  first  time, 
found  way  in  a  torrent  of  tears ;  and  yielding  to  her  unhappy 
fate,  she  took  sanctuary  in  the  abbey  of  Beaulieu  in  Hampshire. 

She  had  not  been  long  in  this  melancholy  abode  before  she 
found  some  few  friends  still  willing  to  assist  her  fallen  fortunes. 
Tudor,  earl  of  Pembroke,  Courtenay,  earl  of  Devonshire,  the 
lords  Wenlock  and  St.  John,  with  other  men  of  rank,  exhorted 
her  still  to  hope  for  success,  and  offered  to  assist  her  to  the  last. 
A  dawn  of  hope  was  sufficient  to  revive  the  courage  of  this  mag- 
nanimous woman  ;  and  the  recollection  of  her  former  misfortunes 
gave  way  to  the  flattering  prospect  of  another  trial.  The  duke 
of  Somerset  headed  her  army  ;  a  man  who  had  shared  her  dan- 
gers, and  had  ever  been  steady  in  her  cause.  He  was  valiant, 
generous,  and  polite  ;  but  rash  and  headstrong.  When  Edward 
first  attacked  him  in  his  entrenchments,  he  repulsed  him  with 
such  vigour,  that  the  enemy  retired  with  precipitation;  upon 
which  the  duke,  supposing  them  routed,  pursued,  and  ordered 
lord  Wenlock  to  support  his  charge.  But  unfortunately  this  lord 
disobeyed  his  orders;  and  Somerset's  forces  were  soon  overpow- 
ered by  numbers.  In  this  dreadful  exigence,  the  duke,  finding 
that  all  was  over,  became  ungovernable  in  his  rage ;  and  behold- 
ing Wenlock  inactive,  in  the  very  place  where  he  had  first  drawn 
up  his  men,  he  gave  way  to  his  fury,  ran  upon  the  coward  with 
his  heavy  battle-axe  in  both  hands,  and  with  one  blow  dashed  out 
his  brains. 

The  queen  and  the  prince  were  taken  prisoners  after  the  bat- 
tle, and  brought  into  the  presence  of  Edward.  The  young  prince 
appeared  before  the  conqueror  with  undaunted  majesty ;  and  be^ 


524  HISTORY  OF  ENGLltND. 

ing  asked,  in  an  insulting  manner,  liow  he  dared  to  invade  En- 
gland without  leave,  the  young  prince,  more  mindful  of  liis  high 
birth  than  of  his  ruined  fortune,  replied,  "  I  entered  the  domin- 
ions of  my  father,  to  revenge  his  injuries  and  redress  my  own." 
The  barbarous  Edward,  enraged  at  his  intrepidity,  struck  him  on 
the  mouth  with  his  gauntlet ;  and  this  served  as  a  signal  for  fur- 
ther brutality ;  the  dukes  of  Gloucester  and  Clarence,  and  other 
courtiers,  rushing  on  the  unarmed  youth  at  once,  like  wild  beasts, 
stabbed  him  to  the  heart  with  their  daggers.  To  complete  the 
tragedy,  Henry  himself,  who  had  long  been  the  passive  spectator 
of  all  these  horrors,  was  now  thought  unfit  to  live.  The  duke  of 
Gloucester,  afterwards  Richard  the  Third,  entering  his  chamber 
alone,  murdered  him  in  cold  blood.  Of  all  those  who  were  taken, 
few  were  suffered  to  survive  but  Margaret  herself.  Edward  per- 
haps expected  that  she  would  be  ransomed  by  the  king  of  France  ; 
and  in  this  point  he  was  not  deceived,  as  that  monarch  paid  fifty 
thousand  crowns  for  her  freedom.  This  extraordinary  woman, 
after  having  sustained  the  cause  of  her  husband  in  twelve  battles  ; 
after  having  survived  her  friends,  fortunes,  and  children,  died  a 
few  years  after  in  privacy  in  France,  very  miserable  indeed  ;  but 
with  few  claims  to  our  pity,  except  her  courage  and  her  distresses. 


CHAP.  XIX. 
EDWARD  IV. 

Of  ail  people  the  English  are  the  most  truly  compassionate ;  and 
a  throne  raised  upon  cruelty  never  wanted  enemies  among  them. 
Nothing  could  have  been  more  ill-judged  than  any  attempts  to 
govern  such  a  people  by  the  hands  of  the  executioner ;  and  the 
leaders  of  either  faction  seemed  insensible  of  this  truth.  Edward, 
being  now  freed  from  great  enemies,  turned  to  the  punishment  of 
those  of  less  note ;  so  that  the  gibbets  were  hung  with  his  adver- 
saries, and  their  estates  confiscated  to  his  use.  The  bastard  Fal- 
conbridge,  among  others,  having  advanced  to  London  at  the  head 
of  a  small  body  of  forces,  was  repulsed ;  and,  being  taken  prisoner, 
was  immediately  executed. 


EDWARD  IV.  SZ5 

While  Edward  was  thus  rendering  himself  terrible  on  the  one 
hand,  he  was  immersed  in  abandoned  pleasures  on  the  other.  Na- 
ture, it  seems,  was  not  unfavourable  to  him  in  that  respect;  as 
he  was  universally  allowed  to  be  the  most  beautiful  man  of  his 
time.  His  courtiers  also  seemed  willing  to  encourage  those  de- 
baucheries in  which  they  had  a  share ;  and  the  clergy,  as  they 
themselves  practised  every  kind  of  lewdness  with  impunity,  were 
ever  ready  to  lend  absolution  to  all  his  failings.  The  truth  is, 
enormous  vices  had  been  of  late  so  common,  that  adultery  was 
held  but  as  a  very  slight  offence.  Among  the  number  of  his  mis- 
tresses was  the  wife  of  one  Shore,  a  merchant  in  the  city,  a  wo- 
man of  exquisite  beauty  and  good  sense,  but  who  had  not  virtue 
enough  to  resist  the  temptations  of  a  handsome  man  and  a  monarch. 
England  now  enjoying  a  temporary  calm,  Edward  thought  that 
the  best  way  to  ingratiate  himself  with  his  subjects  would  be  to 
assert  his  right  to  his  dominions  in  France,  which  the  insurrec- 
tions of  his  father  had  contributed  to  alienate  during  the  former 
reign.  An  attempt  of  this  kind  would  serve  to  give  vent  to  the 
malignant  disposition  of  his  enemies,  and  would  be  sure  to  please 
the  vulgar,  who  are  ever  more  fond  of  splendid  than  of  useful 
acquisitions.  To  prosecute  this  scheme,  the  king  sent  oiF  to  his 
ally,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  a  reinforcement  of  three  thousand 
men,  and  soon  after  passed*  over  himself  at  the  head  of 
a  numerous  army.  Lewis  was,  not  without  reason,  L1'*''^'J 
alarmed  at  this  formidable  invasion,  which,  as  he  was  unable  to 
resist,  he  strove  to  obviate  by  treaty.  This  succeeded  more  ef- 
fectually than  arms  :  the  two  kings  had  an  interview  at  Pecquig- 
ni ;  and,  upon  the  promise  of  a  stipulated  sum,  Edward  agreed  to 
lead  his  forces  back  to  England.  This  monarch  wanted  to  return 
home  to  his  mistresses,  to  spend  upon  them  the  money  he  ex- 
pected to  receive  from  France ;  and  the  French  monarch  hoped 
soon  to  put  himself  in  a  posture  to  refuse  giving  the  sums  which 
he  had  only  made  a  promise  to  pay. 

Upon  the  conclusion  of  this  expedition,  which  thus  ended  with- 
out effect,  Edward  appeared  no  less  actuated  by  private  passions, 
unworthy  of  a  sovereign  and  a  statesman,  than  jealous  of  all  who 
seen.ed  to  despise  his  conduct.  Among  the  detail  of  private 
wrongs,  which  are  too  minute  for  history,  an  act  of  tyranny,  of 
which  he  was  guilty  in  his  own  faijfiily,  deserves  the  detestation 


326  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

of  posterity.  The  duke  of  Clarence,  by  all  his  services  in  de- 
serting Warwick,  had  never  been  able  to  recover  the  king's 
friendship,  which  he  had  forfeited  by  his  former  confederacy  with 
that  nobleman.  A  pretext  was,  therefore,  sought  to  ruin  him ; 
and  the  openness  of  his  hasty  temper  soon  gave  the  wished-for 
occasion.  The  king  hunting  one  day  in  the  park  of  Thomas 
Burdet,  a  creature  of  the  duke's,  killed  a  white  buck,  which  was 
a  great  favourite  of  the  owner.  Burdet,  vexed  at  the  loss,  broke 
into  a  passion,  and  wished  the  horns  of  the  deer  in  the  belly  of 
the  person  who  had  advised  the  king  to  that  insult.  For  this  tri- 
fling exclamation  Burdet  was  tried  for  his  life,  and  publicly  exe- 
cuted at  Tyburn.  The  duke  of  Clarence,  upon  the  death  of  his 
friend,  vented  his  grief  in  renewed  reproaches  against  his  brother, 
and  exclaimed  against  the  iniquity  of  the  sentence.  The  king, 
highly  offended  with  this  liberty,  or  using  that  as  a  pretext  against 
_  him,  had  him  arraigned  before  the  house  of  peers,  and 

•-  *-'  appeared  in  person  as  his  accuser.  In  those  times  of 
confusion,  every  crime  alleged  by  the  prevailing  party  was  fatal : 
the  duke  was  found  guilty ;  and  being  allowed  to  choose  the  man- 
ner in  which  he  would  die,  he  was  privately  drowned  in  a  butt 
of  malmsey,  in  the  Tower  :  a  whimsical  choice,  implying  that  he 
had  an  extraordinary  passion  for  that  liquor. 

The  rest  of  this  monarch's  life  was  spent  in  riot  and  debauch- 
ery ;  in  gratifications  that  are  pleasing  only  to  the  narrow  mind, 
in  useless  treaties  with  France,  in  which  he  was  ever  deceived, 
and  in  empty  threats  against  the  monarch  who  had  deceived  him. 
His  parliament,  become  merely  the  ministers  of  his  will,  consent- 
ed, at  his  request,  to  a  v/ar  with  France,  at  a  time  when  his  alli- 
ances upon  the  continent  were  so  broken  that  it  was  impossible 
for  it  to  succeed.  The  people  seemed  equally  pleased  with  the 
prospect  of  an  expedition,  which  without  serving  could  only  tend 
to  impoverish  the  nation ;  and  great  hopes  were  revived  of  once 
more  conquering  France.  While  all  were  thus  occupied  with 
hope  or  private  distrust,  and  while  Edward  was  employed  in 
.  ;i  g  making  preparations  for  that  enterprise,  he  was  seized 
.1483. '  with  a  distemper,  of  which  he  expired,  in  the  forty -first 
year  of  his  age,  and  (counting  from  his  first  usurpation)  inp  the 
twenty -third  of  his  reign.  The  character  of  this  prince  is  easily 
summed  up.    His  best  qualities  were  courage  and  beauty ;  his 


EDWARD  V.  S9.7 

bad,  a  combination  of  all  the  vices.  Besides  five  daughters,  he 
left  two  sons  ;  Edward,  prince  of  Wales,  his  successor,  then  in 
his  thirteenth  year ;  and  Richard,  duke  of  York,  in  his  ninth  year. 


CHAP.  XX. 


EDWARD  V. 


PON  the  death  of  Edward  the  kingdom  was  divided  into  two 


u 

new  factions.  The  queen's  family,  who  during  the  last  reign  had 
grown  into  power,  had  become  obnoxious  to  the  old  nobility,  w^ho 
could  not  bear  to  act  in  subordination  to  persons  whom  they  con- 
sidered as  inferiors.  The  king,  during  his  lifetime,  had  been 
able  to  overawe  these  animosities ;  and  on  his  death-bed  he  en- 
deavoured to  guard  against  their  future  increase.  He  expressed 
a  desire  that  his  brother,  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  should  be  in- 
trusted with  the  regency,  and  recommended  peace  and  unanim- 
ity during  the  minority  of  his  son.  But  the  king  was  no  sooner 
dead  than  the  parties  broke  out  with  all  their  former  resentment ; 
and  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  a  crafty,  wicked,  and  ambitious 
prince,  resolved  to  profit  by  their  mutual  contentions. 

His  first  aim  was  to  foment  the  discontents  of  the  old  nobility, 
by  insinuating  that  the  queen  wanted  to  hide  the  meanness  of 
her  original  in  a  multitude  of  new  promotions ;  at  the  same  time 
he  redoubled  his  professions  of  zeal  and  attachment  to  that  prin- 
cess, and  thus  entirely  gained  her  confidence.  Having  succeed- 
ed thus  far,  he  gained  over  the  duke  of  Buckingham,  and  some 
ether  lords,  to  his  interest ;  and  prevailed  upon  them  to  second 
him  in  his  attempts  to  procure  the  guardianship  of  the  young 
king,  and  the  custody  of  his  person. 

Being  sure  of  the  assistance  of  these  noblemen,  he  resolved  to 
take  the  king  out  of  the  custody  of  the  earl  of  Rivers,  his  uncle 
by  the  mother's  side ;  and  having  ordered  that  nobleman  to  be 
arrested,  he  laet  young  Edward  in  person,  and  offered  to  conduct 
him  to  Loudon,  with  the  most  profound  demonstrations  of  re- 
spect. Having  thus  secured  the  person  of  the  king,  his  next  step 
was  to  get  the  charge  of  the  king's  brother,  who,  with  the  queen, 


528  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

his  mother,  had  taken  sanctuary  in  Westminster  Abbey.  The 
queen,  who  had  foreseen  from  the  beginning  the  dangers  that 
threatened  her  family,  M'as  with  great  difficulty  persuaded  to  de- 
liver up  her  child :  but,  at  the  intercession  of  the  primate,  and 
the  archbishop  of  York,  she  was  at  last  induced  to  comply  ;  and 
clasping  the  child  in  her  arms,  with  a  last  embrace,  took  leave  of 
him  with  a  shower  of  tears.  The  young  king,  finding  that  he 
was  to  have  the  pleasure  of  his  brother's  company,  was  greatly 
rejoiced  at  the  queen's  compliance,  not  considei'ing  the  fatal  in- 
tent of  these  preparations  ;  for,  in  a  few  days  after,  the  duke  of 
Gloucester,  who  had  been  made  protector  of  the  realm,  upon  a 
pretence  of  guarding  their  persons  from  danger,  conveyed  them 
both  to  the  Tower. 

Having  tlius  secured  the  persons  of  those  he  intended  to  de- 
stroy, his  next  step  was  to  spread  a  report  of  their  illegitimacy ; 
and,  by  pretended  obstacles,  to  put  off  the  day  appointed  for  the 
young  king's  coronation.  Lord  Stanley,  a  man  of  deep  penetra- 
tion, was  the  first  to  disclose  his  fears  of  the  protector's  ill  de- 
signs ;  and  communicated  his  suspicions  to  lord  Hastings,  who 
long  had  been  firmly  attached  to  the  king's  family.  Hastings 
would  at  first  give  the  surmise  no  credit ;  and  probably  his 
wishes  that  such  a  project  might  not  be  true,  influenced  his  judg- 
ment, and  confirmed  his  security.  But  he  was  soon  undeceived ; 
for  Catesby,  a  vile  instrument  of  tl^e  protector,  was  sent  to  sound 
him,  and  to  try  whether  he  could  not  be  brought  over  to  assist 
the  projected  usurpation.  Hastings  treated  the  proposal  with 
horror ;  he  professed  himself  immoveable  in  his  adherence  to  the 
king ;  and  his  death  was,  therefore,  resolved  on  by  the  protector. 

In  the  mean  time  orders  had  been  dispatched  to  execute  lord 
Rivers,  sir  Richard  Grey,  and  sir  Thomas  Vaughan,  who  had  been 
confined  in  Pontefract  castle,  and  whose  only  crime  was  their 
attachment  to  the  young  king.  On  tlie  very  day  on  which  they 
were  beheaded,  the  protector  summoned  a  council  in  the  Tower, 
whither  lord  Hastings,  amongst  others,  repaired,  no  way  suspect- 
ing that  his  own  life  was  in  danger.  The  duke  of  Gloucester 
was  capable  of  committing  the  most  bloody  and  treacherous  mur- 
ders with  the  utmost  coolness  and  indifference.  He  came  thither 
at  nine  o'clock  in  tlie  morning,  with  the  most  cheerful  counte- 
nance, saluting  the  members  with  the  utmost  affability,  and  de- 


EDWARD  V.  329 

monstrations  of  unusual  good  humour.    He  complimented  the 
bishop  of  Ely  on  his  early  strawberries,  and  begged  to  have  a  dish 
of  them.     He  then  left  the  council,  as  if  called  away  by  other 
business ;  but  desired  that  his  absence  might  not  interrupt  the 
debates.     In  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  he  returned  quite  altered 
in  look,  knitting  his  brows,  biting  his  lips,  and  showing,  by  a  fre- 
quent change  of  countenance,  the  signs  of  some  inward  perturba- 
tion.    A  silence  ensued  for  some  time;  and  the  lords  looked 
upon  each  other,  not  without  reason,  expecting  some  horrid  catas- 
trophe.    At  length,  he  broke  the  dreadful  silence  :  "  My  Lords," 
cried  he, "  what  punishment  do  they  deserve,  who  have  conspired 
against  my  life?"    This   question  redouhlpd  the  astonishment  of 
the  assembly ;  and  the  silence  continuing,  lord  Hastings  at  length 
made  answer,  that  whoever  did  so  deserved  to  be  punished  as  a 
traitor.     "  These  traitors,"  cried  the  protector,  "  are  the  sorce- 
ress my  brother's  wife,  and  Jane  Shore,  his  mistress,  with  others 
their  associates.     See  to  what  a  condition  they  have  reduced  me 
by  their  incantations  and  witchcrafts."     Upon  which  he  laid  bare 
his  arm,  all  shrivelled  and  decayed.    The  amazement  of  the  coun^ 
cil  seemed  to  increase  at  this  terrible  accusation  ;  and  lord  Hast- 
ings again  said,  "  If  they  have  committed  such  a  crime,  they  de- 
serve  punishment." — "  If  ?"  cried  the  protector,  with  a  loud 
voice :  "  dost  thou  answer  me  with  Ifs  ?  I  tell  thee  that  they 
have  conspired  my  death ;  and  that  thou,  traitor,  art  an  accom- 
plice in  their  crime  !"  He  then  struck  the  table  twice  with  his 
hand  ;  and  the  room  was  instantly  filled  with  ai-med  men.     "  I 
arrest  thee,"  continued  he,  turning  to  Hastings,  "  for  high  trea- 
son ;"  and  at  the  same  time  gave  liim  in  charge  to  the  soldiers. 
In  the  mean  time  the  council-room  was  filled  with  tumult  and 
confusion ;  and  though  no  rescue  was  offered,  yet  the  soldiers 
caused  a  bustle,  as  if  they  apprehended  danger.     One  of  them 
narrowly  missed  cleaving  lord  Stanley's  head  with  a  battle-axe ; 
but  he  fortunately  escaped,  by  shrinking  under  tlie  table.     In  all 
probability  the  fellow  had  orders  for  that  attempt ;  and  should 
Stanley  be  killed,  his  death  might  be  ascribed  to  the  tumult  caused 
by  an  intended  rescue.    However,  though  he  escaped  the  blow, 
he  was  arrested  by  order  of  the  protector,  who  was  well  apprised 
of  his  attachment  to  the  young  king.     As  for  lord  Hastings,  he 
was  obliged  to  make  a  short  confession  to  the  next  priest  that  was 
VOL.  I.  42 


330  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND; 

at  hand  j  the  protector  crying  out,  by  St.  Paul,  that  he  would  not 
dine  till  he  had  seen  his  head  taken  off.  He  was  accordingly 
hurried  out  to  the  little  gi-een  before  the  Tower  chapel,  and  there 
beheaded  on  a  log  of  wood  that  accidentally  lay  in  the  way. 
Two  hours  after,  a  proclamation,  very  well  drawn  up,  was  read 
to  the  citizens  of  London,  enumerating  his  offences,  and  palliat- 
ing the  suddenness  of  his  punishment.  It  was  remarked,  how- 
ever, by  a  merchant  among  the  auditors,  that  the  proclamation 
was  certainly  drawn  up  by  a  spirit  of  prophecy. 

The  protector,  having  thus  dismissed  from  the  world  those 
whom  he  most  feared,  was  willing  to  please  the  populace  by  pun- 
ishing Jane  Shore,  the  late  king's  mistress.  This  unfortunate 
woman  was  an  enemy  too  humble  to  excite  his  jealousy ;  yet,  as 
he  had  accused  her  of  witchcraft,  of  wliich  all  the  world  saw  she 
was  innocent,  he  thought  proper  to  make  her  an  example,  for 
those  faults  of  which  she  was  really  guilty.  Jane  Shore  had  been 
formerly  deluded  from  her  husband,  who  was  a  goldsmith  in  Lom- 
bard-street, and  continued  to  live  with  Edward,  the  most  guiltless 
mistress  of  his  abandoned  court.  She  was  ever  known  to  inter- 
cede for  the  distressed,  and  was  usually  applied  to  as  a  mediator 
for  mercy.  She  was  charitable,  generous,  and  of  a  most  pleasing 
conversation;  her  wit  being  said  to  be  as  irresistible  as  her  beauty. 
As  she  was  blameless  in  other  respects,  the  protector  ordered  her 
to  be  sued  for  incontinency,  as  having  left  her  husband  to  live  in 
adultery  with  another.  It  is  very  probable  that  the  people  were 
not  displeased  at  seeing  one  again  reduced  to  former  meanness^ 
who  had  for  a  while  been  raised  above  them,  and  enjoyed  the 
smiles  of  a  court.  The  charge  against  her  was  too  notorious  to 
be  denied ;  she  pleaded  guilty,  and  was  accordingly  condemned 
to  walk  barefoot  through  the  city,  and  to  do  penance  in  St.  Paul's 
church  in  a  white  sheet,  with  a  wax  taper  in  her  hand,  before 
thousands  of  spectators.  She  lived  above  forty  years  after  this 
sentence,  reduced  to  extreme  wretchedness ;  and  sir  Thomas 
More,  in  the  succeeding  reign,  assures  us,  that  he  saw  her  gath- 
ering herbs  in  a  field  near  the  city  for  her  niglitly  repast ;  an  ex- 
traordinary example  for  the  ingratitude  of  courts,  and  tlie  re- 
verses of  fortune. 

The  protector  now  began  to  throw  off  the  mask,  and  to  deny 
his.  pretended  regard  for  the  sons  of  the  late  king,  thinking  it  high 


EDWARD  V.  351 

time  to  aspire  at  the  throne  more  openly.    He  had  previously 
gained  over  the  duke  of  Buckingham,  a  man  of  talents  and  power, 
by  bribes  and  promises  of  future  favour.     This  nobleman,  there- 
fore, used  all  his  arts  to  infuse  into  the  people  an  opinion  of  the 
bastardy  of  the  late  king,  and  also  that  of  his  children.     Doctor 
Shaw,  a  popular  preacher,  was  hired  to  harangue  the  people  from 
St.  Paul's  Cross  to  the  same  purpose;  where,  after  having  dis- 
played the  incontinence  of  the  queen,  and  insisting  on  the  ille- 
gality of  the  young  king's  title,  he  expatiated  on  the  virtues  of 
the  protector.     «  It  is  the  protector,"  cried  he,  "  who  carries  in 
his  face  the  image  of  virtue,  and  the  marks  of  a  true  descent. 
He  alone  can  restore  the  lost  honour  and  glory  of  the  nation.' 
It  was  hoped  upon  this  occasion,  that  some  of  the  populace  would 
have  cried  out,  «  Long  live  king  Richard  I"  but  the  audienc  re- 
maining silent,  the  duke  of  Buckingham  undertook  to  persuade 
them  in  his  turn.     His  speech  was  copious  upon  the  calamities 
of  the  last  reign,  and  tlie  bastardy  of  the  present  race  ;  he  saw 
only  one  method  of  shielding  oiF  the  miseries  that  threatened  the 
state,  which  was,  to  elect  the  protector ;  but  he  seemed  appre- 
hensive that  he  would  never  be  prevailed  on  to  accept  of  a  crown, 
accompanied  with  such  difficulty  and  danger.     He  next  asked 
his  auditors,  whether  they  would  have  the  protector  for  their 
king ;  but  was  mortified  to  find  that  a  total  silence  ensued.    The 
mayor,  who  was  in  the  secret,  willing  to  relieve  him  in  this  em- 
barrassing situation,  observed,  that  the  citizens  were  not  accus-= 
tomed  to  be  harangued  by  a  person  of  such  quality,  and  would 
only  give  an  answer  to  their  recorder.     This  officer  repeated  the 
duke's  speech ;  but  the  people  continuing  still  silent,  "  This  is 
strange  obstinacy !"  cried  the  duke ;  "  we  only  require  of  you, 
in  plain  terms,  to  declare,  whether  or  not  you  will  have  the  duke 
of  Gloucester  for  your  king ;  as  the  lords  and  commons  have  suf- 
ficient power  without  your  concurrence  .►*"  After  all  these  efforts, 
some  of  the  meanest  apprentices,  incited  by  the  protector's  and 
Buckingham's  servants,  raising  a  feeble  cry  of,  "  God  save  king 
Richard !"  the  mob  at  the  door,  a  despicable  class  of  people,  ever 
pleased  with  novelty,  repeated  the  cry,  and,  throwing  up  their 
caps,  repeated,  A  Richard!  a  Richard ! 

In  this  manner  the  duke  took  the  advantage  of  this  faint  ap- 
probation ;  and  the  next  day,  at  the  head  of  the  mayor  and  al' 


332  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  % 

dermen,  went  to  wait  upon  the  protector,  at  Baynard's  Castle, 
with  offers  of  the  crown.  When  Richard  was  told  that  a  great 
multitude  waited  at  the  door,  with  his  usual  hypocrisy  he  appear- 
ed to  the  crowd  in  a  gallery  between  two  bishops,  and  at  first 
seemed  quite  surprised  at  such  a  concourse  of  people.  But  when 
he  was  informed  that  their  business  was  to  offer  him  the  crown, 
he  declared  against  accepting  it ;  alleging  his  love  for  the  late 
king,  his  brother,  his  affection  for  the  children  under  his  care, 
and  his  own  insufficiency.  Buckingham,  seeming  displeased  with 
this  answer,  muttered  some  words  to  himself,  but  at  length 
plainly  told  him,  "  that  it  was  needless  to  refuse,  for  the  people 
were  bent  on  making  him  king ;  that  they  had  now  proceeded  too 
far  to  recede ;  and  therefore,  in  case  of  his  refusal,  were  deter- 
mined to  offer  the  crown  where  it  would  meet  a  more  ready  ac- 
ceptance." This  was  a  resolution  which  the  protector's  tender- 
ness for  his  people  would  not  suffer  him  to  see  effected.  "  I  per- 
ceive," said  he  in  a.  modpst  tone,  "  that  the  nation  is  i-esolved  to 
load  me  with  preferments,  uriequal  to  my  abilities  or  my  choice  ; 
yet,  since  it  is  my  duty  to  obey  the  dictates  of  a  free  people,  I 
will,  though  reluctantly,  accept  their  petition.  I  therefore,  from 
this  moment,  enter  upon  the  government  of  England  and  France, 
with  a  resolution  to  defend  the  one  and  subdue  the  othei'."  The 
crowd  being  thus  dismissed,  each  man  returned  home,  pondering 
upon  the  proceedings  of  the  day,  and  making  such  remarks  as 
passion,  interest,  or  party  might  suggest, 


CHAP.  XXI. 
RICHARD  lU, 

June  27  One  Crime  ever  draws  on  another ;  justice  will  revolt 
1483.  against  fraud,  and  usurpation  requires  security.  As 
soon,  therefore,  as  Richard  was  seated  upon  the  throne,  he  sent 
the  governor  of  the  Tower  orders  to  put  tlie  two  young  princes 
to  death :  but  this  brave  man,  whose  name  was  Brackenbury,  re- 
fused to  be  made  the  instrument  of  a  tyrant's  will ;  and  submis- 
gively  answered,  that  he  knew  not  how  to  embrue  his  hands  ia 


RICHARD  IIL  333 

innocent  blood.  A  fit  instrument,  however,  was  not  long  want- 
ing ;  sir  James  Tyrrel  readily  undertook  the  office,  and  Brack- 
enbury  was  ordered  to  resign  to  him  the  keys  for  one  night. 
Tyrrel  choosing  three  associates.  Slater,  Dighton,  and  Forest, 
came  in  the  night-time  to  the  door  of  the  chamber  where  the 
princes  were  lodged;  and  sending  in  the  assassins,  he  bade  them 
execute  their  commission,  while  he  remained  without.  They 
found  the  young  princes  in  bed,  fallen  into  a  sound  sleep.  After 
suffocating  them  with  the  bolsters  and  pillows,  they  showed  their 
naked  bodies  to  Tyrrel ;  who  ordered  them  to  be  buried  at  the 
stair-foot,  deep  in  the  ground,  under  a  heap  of  stones.  These 
facts  appeared  in  the  succeeding  reign,  being  confessed  by  the 
perpetrators ;  who,  however,  escaped  punishment  for  the  crime. 
The  bodies  of  the  princes  were  afterwards  sought  by  Henry  VII., 
but  could  not  be  found :  however,  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.,  the 
bones  of  two  young  persons,  answering  their  ages,  were  discov- 
ered in  the  very  spot  where  it  was  said  they  were  buried :  they 
were  interred  in  a  marble  monument,  by  order  of  the  king,  in 
Westminster  Abbey. 

Richard  had  now  waded  through  every  obstacle  to  tlie  throne ; 
and  began,  after  the  manner  of  all  usurpers,  to  strengthen  his  ill- 
gotten  power,  by  sovereign  connections.  Sensible  also  of  the  influ- 
ence of  pageantry  and  show  upon  the  minds  of  the  people,  he 
caused  himself  to  be  crowned  first  at  London,  and  afterwards  at 
York.  The  clergy  he  endeavoured  to  secure  by  great  indulgen- 
ces ;  and  his  friends,  by  bestowing  rewards  on  them  in  propor- 
tion as  they  were  instrumental  in  placing  him  on  the  tlirone. 

But  while  he  thus  endeavoured  to  establish  his  power,  he  found 
it  threatened  on  a  quarter  where  he  least  expected  an  attack. 
The  duke  of  Buckingham,  who  had  been  too  instrumental  in  plac- 
ing him  on  the  throne,  though  he  had  received  the  greatest  re- 
wards for  his  services,  yet  continued  to  wish  for  more.  He  had 
already  several  posts  and  governments  conferred  upon  him ;  but 
that  nobleman,  whose  avarice  was  insatiable,  making  a  demand  of 
the  confiscated  lands  belonging  to  the  earldom  of  Hereford,  to 
which  his  family  had  an  antient  claim,  Richard  either  reluctant- 
ly complied  with  his  request,  or  but  partially  indulged  it,  so  that 
a  coolness  soon  ensued  ;  and  no  sooner  had  Buckingham  suppos- 
ed himself  injured,  than  he  resolved  to  dethrone  a  monarch  whose 


534  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

title  was  founded  in  injustice.  At  first,  however,  this  aspiring 
sii'^ject  remained  in  doubt,  whether  he  should  put  up  for  the 
crown  himself,  or  set  up  another ;  but  the  latter  resolution  pre- 
vailing, he  determined  to  declare  for  Henry,  earl  of  Richmond, 
who  was  at  that  time  an  exile  in  Bretagne,  and  was  considered 
«s  the  only  surviving  branch  of  the  house  of  Lancaster. 

Henry,  earl  of  Richmond,  was  detained  in  a  kind  of  honoura- 
ble custody  by  the  duke  of  Bretagne.  He  was  one  of  those  who 
had  the  good  fortune  to  escape  the  numerous  massacres  of  the 
preceding  reigns ;  but  as  he  was  a  descendant  of  John  of  Gaunt, 
by  the  female  line,  he  was  for  that  reason  obnoxious  to  those  in 
power.  He  had  long  lived  in  exile  ;  and  was,  at  one  time,  de- 
livered up  to  the  embassadors  of  Edward,  who  were  preparing  to 
carry  him  over  to  England,  when  the  prince,  who  delivered  him, 
repented  of  what  he  had  done,  and  took  him  from  the  embassa- 
doi-s  just  as  they  were  leading  him  on  sliip-board.  This  was  the 
youth  on  whom  the  duke  of  Buckingham  cast  his  eye,  to  succeed 
to  the  crown,  and  a  negotiation  was  begun  between  them  for  that 
purpose.  Henry's  hereditary  right  to  the  throne  was  doubtful  ; 
but  the  crimes  of  the  usurper  served  to  strengthen  his  claims. 
However,  to  improve  his  title,  a  mairiage  was  projected  between 
him  and  the  princess  Elizabeth,  eldest  daughter  of  the  late  king, 
and  the  queen  dowager  was  prevailed  on  to  accede  to  the  measure. 

Richard,  in  the  mean  time,  either  informed  by  his  creatures,  or 
kept  distrustful  by  conscious  guilt,  began  to  suspect  Buckingham's 
fidelity ;  and  the  secret  informations  which  he  daily  received,  left 
him  no  room  to  doubt  of  the  truth  of  his  suspicions.  Impressed 
with  this  jealousy,  he  formed  a  resolution  of  sending  for  him  to 
court ;  and  the  duke's  refusing  to  obey  the  summons  confii-med 
him  in  his  fears.  But  he  soon  had  the  plainest  proofs  of  Bucking- 
ham's enmity ;  intelligence  arriving  that  this  nobleman  was  at  the 
head  of  a  large  body  of  men  in  arms,  and  marching  towards  the 
western  shore,  Richard,  whose  courage  no  danger  could  allay,  im- 
mediately put  himself  in  a  posture  of  defence,  by  levying  some 
ti-oops  in  the  North,  and  prepared  to  meet  the  insurgents  witli 
his  usual  expedition.  But  fortune  seemed  his  friend  on  the  pres- 
ent occasion,  and  rendered  all  his  preparations  unnecessary.  As 
Buckingham  was  advancing  by  hasty  marches  towards  Glouces- 
•ter,  where  he  intended  to  eross  the  Severn,  he  found  that  river 


RICHARD  TIL  333 

swollen  to  such  a  degi'ee,  that  the  country  on  both  sides  was  del- 
uged, and  even  the  tops  of  some  hills  were  covered  with  water. 
This  inundation  continued  for  ten  days ;  during  which  Bucking- 
ham's army,  composed  of  Welshmen,  could  neither  pass  the  river, 
nor  find  subsistence  on  their  own  side ;  they  were  therefore  obli- 
ged to  disperse,  and  return  home,  notwithstanding  all  the  duke's 
eiforts  to  prolong  their  stay.  In  this  helpless  situation,  the  duke, 
after  a  short  deliberation,  took  refuge  at  the  house  of  one  Banis- 
ter, who  had  been  his  servant,  and  who  had  received  repeated 
obligations  from  his  family.  But  the  wicked  seldom  find,  as  they 
seldom  exert,  friendship.  Banister,  unable  to  resist  the  tempta- 
tion of  a  large  reward  that  was  set  upon  the  duke's  head,  betrayed 
him  to  the  sheriff  of  Shropshire,  who,  surrounding  the  house  with 
armed  men,  seized  the  duke,  in  the  habit  of  a  peasant,  and  con- 
ducted him  to  Salisbury,  where  he  was  instantly  tried,  condemn- 
ed, and  executed,  according  to  the  summary  method  practised  in 
those  ages. 

In  the  mean  time  the  earl  of  Richmond  appeared  on  the  coast 
of  England ;  but,  finding  his  hopes  frustrated  by  the  failure  of 
Buckingham,  he  hastily  set  sail  again,  and  returned  to  Bretagne. 
Thus  every  concurrence  seemed  to  promise  Richard  a  long  pos- 
session of  the  crown  :  however,  the  authority  of  parliament  was 
still  wanting  to  give  sanction  to  the  injustice  of  his  proceedings  ; 
but  in  those  times  of  ignorance  and  guilt  that  was  easily  procured. 
An  act  was  passed,  confirming  the  illegitimacy  of  Ed- 
ward's children;  an  act  of  attainder  was  also  confirmed  L  'J 
against  Henry,  earl  of  Richmond ;  and  all  the  usurper's  wishes 
seemed  to  be  the  aim  of  their  deliberations.  One  thing  was  want- 
ing to  complete  Richard's  security,  which  was  the  death  of  his 
rival:  to  effect  this, he  sent  embassadors  to  the  duke  of  Bretagne, 
seemingly  upon  business  of  a  public  nature ;  but,  in  reality,  to 
treat  with  Landois,  that  prince's  minister,  to  deliver  up  the  earl. 
The  minister  was  base  enough  to  enter  into  the  negotiation ;  but 
Richmond,  having  had  timely  notice,  fled  into  France,  and  just 
reached  the  confines  of  that  kingdom,  when  he  found  that  he  was 
pursued  by  those  who  intended  to  give  him  up  to  his  rival. 

Richard,  thus  finding  his  attempts  to  seize  his  ene- 
my's person  unsuccessful,  became  every  day  more  cruel,    L        '-^ 
as  his  power  grew  more  precarious.    Among  those  who  chiefly 


33G  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

excited  his  jealousy,  was  the  lord  Stanley,  who  was  married  to 
the  mother  of  Henry ;  and  to  keep  him  steadfast  in  obedience,  he 
took  his  son  as  a  hostage  for  the  father's  behaviour.  He  now  also 
resolved  to  get  rid  of  his  present  queen,  Anne,  to  make  room  for 
a  match  with  his  niece,  the  princess  Elizabeth,  by  whose  alliance 
he  hoped  to  cover  the  injustice  of  his  claims.  The  lady  whom  he 
wished  to  remove  was  the  widow  of  the  young  prince  of  Wales, 
wliom  he  had  murdered  with  his  own  hands  at  Tewkesbury ;  and 
it  is  no  slight  indication  of  the  barbarity  of  the  times,  that  the 
widow  should  accept  for  her  second  lord  the  murderer  of  her  for- 
mer husband.  But  she  was  now  rewarded  for  that  instance  of  inhu- 
manity, as  Richard  treated  her  with  so  much  pride  and  indifference, 
that  she  died  of  grief,  according  to  his  ardent  expectation.  How- 
ever, his  wishes  were  not  crowned  with  success  in  his  applications 
to  Elizabeth :  the  mother,  indeed,  was  not  averse  to  the  match  j 
but  the  princess  herself  treated  his  vile  addresses  with  contempt 
and  detestation. 

Amidst  the  perplexity  caused  by  this  unexpected  refusal,  ha 
received  information  that  the  earl  of  Richmond  was  once  more 
making  preparations  to  land  in  England,  and  assert  his  claims  to 
the  crown.  Richard,  who  knew  not  in  what  quarter  he  might  ex- 
pect the  invader,  had  taken  post  at  Nottingham,  in  the  centre  of 
the  kingdom ;  and  had  given  commissions  to  several  of  his  crea- 
tures, to  oppose  the  enemy  wherever  he  should  land.  The  ac- 
counts received  of  Richmond's  preparations  were  not  ungrounded; 
he  set  out  from  Hai  fleur  in  Normandy,  with  a  retinue  of  about  two 
thousand  persons  5  and,  after  a  voyage  of  six  days,  arrived  at  Mil- 
ford-haven,  in  Wales,  where  he  landed  without  opposition.  Sir 
Rice  ap  Thomas,  and  sir  Walter  Herbert,  who  were  intrusted  to 
oppose  him  in  Wales,  were  both  in  his  interests ;  the  one  imme- 
diately deserted  to  him,  and  the  other  made  but  a  feeble  opposi- 
tion. Upon  news  of  this  descent,  Richard,  who  was  possessed  of 
courage  and  military  conduct,  his  only  virtues,  instantly  resolved 
to  meet  his  antagonist,  and  decide  their  mutual  pretensions  by  a 
battle.  Richmond,  on  the  other  hand,  being  reinforced  by  sir 
Thomas  Bourchier,  sir  Walter  Hungerford,  and  others,  to  the 
number  of  about  six  thousand,  boldly  advanced  with  the  same 
intention ;  and  in  a  few  days  both  armies  drew  near  Bosworth 
field  in  Leicestersliire,  to  determine  a  contest  that  had  now  for 


RICHARD  IIL  337 

thirty  years  filled  the  kingdom  with  civil  commotions,  and  delu- 
ged its  plains  with  blood. 

The  army  of  Richard  was  above  double  that  of  Henry ;  but  the 
chief  confidence  of  the  latter  lay  in  the  friendship  and  secret  as- 
surances of  lord  Stanley,  who,  with  a  body  of  seven  thousand  men, 
hovered  near  the  field  of  battle,  and  declined  engaging  on  either 
side. 

Richard,  perceiving  his  enemy  advance,  drew  up  his  army, 
consisting  of  about  thirteen  thousand  men,  in  order  of  battle ;  he 
gave  the  command  of  the  van-guard  to  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  while 
he  led  the  main  body  himself,  with  the  crown  on  his  head,  de- 
signing by  this  either  to  inspire  the  enemy  with  awe,  or  to  ren- 
der himself  conspicuous  to  his  own  army.  The  van  of  Rich- 
mond's army,  consisting  of  archers,  was  commanded  by  John 
earl  of  Oxford ;  sir  Gilbert  Talbot  led  the  right  wing,  sir  John 
Savage  the  left;  while  the  earl  himself,  accompanied  by  his 
uncle^  the  earl  of  Pembroke,  placed  himself  in  the  main  body. 
Lord  Stanley,  in  the  mean  time,  posted  himself  on  one  flank, 
between  the  two  armies,  while  his  brother  took  his  station  on  the 
other.  Richard,  seeing  him  thus  in  a  situation  equally  conve- 
nient for  joining  either  army,  immediately  sent  him  orders  to 
unite  himself  to  the  main  body ;  which  the  other  refusing,  he  gave 
instant  orders  for  beheading  lord  Stanley's  son,  whom  he  still 
kept  as  a  hostage.  He  was  persuaded,  however,  to  postpone  the 
execution  till  after  the  fight ;  and  attending  to  the  more  import- 
ant transactions  of  the  day,  he  directed  the  trumpets  to  sound  to 
battle.  The  two  armies  approaching  each  other,  the  battle  began 
with  a  shower  of  arrows,  and  soon  the  adverse  fronts  were  seen 
closing.  This  was  what  lord  Stanley  had  for  some  time  expect- 
ed, who  immediately  profiting  by  the  occasion,  joined  the  line  of 
Richmond,  and  thus  turned  the  fortune  of  the  day.  This  meas- 
ure, so  unexpected  to  the  men,  though  not  to  their  leaders,  had 
a  proportioned  effect  on  both  armies ;  it  inspired  unusual  courage 
into  Henry's  soldiers,  and  threw  Richard's  into  confusion.  The 
intrepid  tyrant,  perceiving  the  danger  of  his  situation,  spurred 
his  horse  into  the  thickest  of  the  fight,  while  Richmond  quitted 
his  station  behind,  to  encourage  his  troops  by  his  presence  in  the 
front.     Richard,  perceiving  him,  was  desirous  of  ending  all  by 

one  blow ;  and  with  irresistible  fury  flew  through  thousands  to 
VOL.  I,  43 


338  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

attack  him.  He  slew  sir  William  Brandon,  the  eavPs  standard- 
bearer,  who  attempted  to  stop  his  career.  Sir  John  Cheyne,  hav- 
ing taken  Brandon's  place,  was  thrown  bj  him  to  the  ground. 
Richmond,  in  the  mean  time,  stood  firm  to  oppose  liim  ;  but  they 
'  were  separated  by  the  interposing  crowd.  Richard,  thus  disap- 
pointed, went,  by  his  presence,  to  inspire  his  troops  at  another 
quarter ;  but  at  length  perceiving  his  army  every  where  yielding 
or  flying,  and  now  finding  that  all  was  gone,  he  rushed  with  a 
loud  shout  into  the  midst  of  the  enemy,  and  there  met  a  better 
death  than  his  crimes  and  cruelties  deserved.  After  the  battle 
his  body  was  found  stripped  among  a  heap  of  slain,  covered  with 
wounds,  and  the  eyes  frightfully  staring  :  it  was  thrown  across  a 
horse,  the  head  hanging  doAvn  on  one  side  and  the  legs  on  the 
other,  and  thus  carried  to  Leicester.  It  lay  there  two  days  ex- 
posed to  public  view,  and  then  was  buried  without  further  cere- 
mony. 

Richard's  crown,  being  found  by  one  of  Henry's  soldiei-s  on 
the  field  of  battle,  was  immediately  placed  upon  the  head  of  the 
conqueror  ;  while  the  whole  army,  as  if  inspired  with  one  voice, 
cried  out,  "  Long  live  king  Henry  !" 

Thus  ended  the  bloody  reign  of  Richard ;  and  by  his  deaths 
the  race  of  the  Plantagenet  kings,  who  had  been  in  possession  of 
the  crown  during  the  space  of  three  hundred  and  thirty  years, 
became  extinct.  Thus  ended  also  the  contests  between  the 
houses  of  York  and  Lancaster,  by  which  most  of  the  an tient  fam- 
ilies of  the  kingdom  were  extinguished,  and  more  than  a  hundred 
thousand  men  lost  their  lives,  either  by  the  sword  or  the  execu- 
tioner. 

These  dissensions  had  for  some  time  reduced  the  kingdom  to 
a  state  of  savage  barbarity.  Laws,  arts,  and  commerce,  which 
had  before  emitted  some  feeble  gleams,  were  entirely  neglected 
for  the  practice  of  arms ;  and.to  be  a  conqueror  was  suflicient,  in 
the  eyes  of  brutal  people,  to  stand  for  every  other  virtue.  The 
English  had  as  yet  but  little  idea  of  legal  subordination  ;  nor 
could  they  give  any  applause  to  those  who  attempted  to  cultivate 
the  arts  o  f  peace,  the  whole  of  their  study  and  education  being- 
turned  for  war.  The  ferocity  of  the  people  to  each  other  was 
incredible.  However,  the  women,  whatever  part  they  took  in 
disturbances  of  the  government,  wei-e  exempted  from  capital  pun- 


HENRY  VII.  .339 

ishments ;  nor  were  they  ever  put  to  death,  except  when  con- 
victed of  witchcraft  or  poisoning.  As  for  the  clergy,  they  were 
entirely  distinct  from  the  laity,  both  in  customs,  laws,  and  learn- 
ing. They  were  governed  by  the  code  of  civil  law,  drawn  up  ia 
the  times  of  Justinian ;  while  the  laity  were  held  by  the  common 
law,  which  had  been  traditional  from  times  immemorial  in  the 
country.  The  clergy,  whatever  may  be  told  to  the  contrary,  un- 
derstood and  wrote  Latin  fluently  ;  while  the  laity,  on  the  other 
hand,  understood  nothing  of  Latin,  but  applied  themselves  wholly 
to  the  French  language,  when  they  aspired  at  the  character  of  a 
polite  education-  The  clergy,  as  a  body  distinct  from  the  state, 
little  interested  themselves  in  civil  polity  ;  and  perhaps  they 
were  not  displeased  to  see  the  laity,  whom  they  considered  less 
as  fellow-subjects  than  rivals  for  power,  weakening  themselves  by 
continual  contests,  and  tljus  rendering  themselves  more  easily 
manageable.  In  short,  as  there  was  no  knowledge  of  govern- 
ment among  the  individuals,  but  what  totally  resulted  from  pow- 
er, the  state  was  like  a  feverish  constitution,  ever  subject  to  fer- 
ment and  disorder.  France,  indeed,  had  served  for  some  time 
as  a  drain  for  the  peccant  humours ;  but  when  that  was  no  longer 
open,  the  disorders  of  the  constitution  seemed  daily  to  increase, 
and  vented  themselves  at  last  in  all  the  horrors  of  a  lon^-cor^tin? 
£d  civil  war. 


CHAP.  XXII. 

HENRY  Vir. 

A-FTER  having  presented  the  reader  with  a  frightful  ^j,„  23^ 
train  of  treasons,  stratagems,  murders,  and  usurpations,  i*S5. 
we  are  beginning  to  emerge  into  a  time  of  greater  importance 
and  glory.  We  are  now  to  view  the  conduct  of  a  monarch  who, 
if  not  the  best,  was  at  least  the  most  useful  of  any  that  ever  sat 
upon  the  English  throne.  We  are  now  to  behold  a  nation  of  tur 
mult  reduced  to  civil  subordination  ;  an  insolent  and  factious 
aristocracy  humbled,  wise  laws  enacted,  commerce  restored,  and 
tlie  peaceful  arts  made  amiable  tq  a  people,  for  whom  war  alone 


340  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

heretofore  had  charms.  Hitherto  we  have  only  beheld  the  actions 
of  a  barbarous  nation,  obeying  with  reluctance,  and  governed  by 
caprice ;  but  henceforward  we  may  discover  more  refined  poli- 
tics, and  better  concerted  schemes  ;  human  wisdom,  as  if  roused 
from  her  lethargy  of  thirteen  hundred  years,  exerting  all  her  ef- 
forts to  subdue  the  natural  ferocity  of  the  people,  and  to  intro- 
duce permanent  felicity. 

Henry's  first  care,  upon  coming  to  the  throne,  was  to  marry 
the  princess  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Edward  the  Fourth  ;  and  thus 
he  blended  the  interests  of  the  houses  of  York  and  Lancaster,  so 
that  ever  after  they  were  incapable  of  distinction.  Nevertheless, 
being  apprehensive  that  the  people  might  suppose  he  claimed  the 
crown  in  right  of  this  union,  he  deferred  the  queen's  coronation 
till  two  years  after ;  by  which  he  hoped  to  make  the  priority  of 
his  own  claim  incontestable.  His  reign  also  happily  commenced 
with  an  obedience  to  the  forms  of  law,  of  which  England  had 
hitherto  seen  few  examples.  An  act  had  been  passed  in  the  pre- 
ceding reign  for  the  attainder  of  his  friends  and  followers,  which 
continued  still  in  force  ;  and  the  names  of  many  members  of  that 
house,  by  which  it  was  to  be  repealed,  were  expressly  mentioned 
in  the  attainder.  To  suffer  these  to  join  in  repealing  that  stat- 
ute, would  be  admitting  them  as  judges  in  their  own  cause ;  but 
to  this  Henry  prudently  objected,  obliging  them  to  leave  tlie 
house  till  an  act  was  passed  for  reversing  their  attainder. 

Before  this  reign,  it  had  been  usual,  in  the  case  of  any  person 
who  was  attainted,  for  the  king,  after  his  execution,  to  give  away 
his  estates  to  any  of  the  court  favourites  that  happened  to  be 
most  in  confidence.  Henry  wisely  perceived  that  this  severity 
had  two  bad  effects :  the  cruelty  of  the  measure  In  the  first 
place  excited  indignation ;  and  it  also  made  the  favourite  too 
powerful  for  subjection.  In  order  to  remedy  these  inconvenien- 
ces, he  made  a  law  to  deprive  those  wlio  were  found  in  arms  of 
their  estates  and  efl:ects,  and  sequestered  them  for  the  benefit  of 
the  crown. 

A  great  part  of  the  miseries  of  his  predecessors  proceeded  from 
their  poverty,  Avhich  was  mostly  occasioned  by  riot  and  dissipa- 
tion. Henry  saw  that  money  alone  could  turn  the  scale  of  power 
in  his  favour  ;  and  therefore  hoarded  up  all  the  confiscations  of 
his  enemies  with  the  utmost  frugality.    Hence  he  has  been  ac- 


HENRY  VII.  S41 

cused  by  historians  of  avarice ;  but  that  avarice  which  tends  to 
strengthen  government,  and  repress  sedition,  is  not  only  excusa- 
ble but  praise-worthy.  Liberality  in  a  king  is  too  often  a  mis- 
placed virtue.  What  is  thus  given  is  generally  extorted  from 
the  industrious  and  needy,  to  be  lavished  as  rewards  on  the  rich, 
the  insidious,  and  the  fawning,  upon  the  sycophants  of  a  court,  or 
the  improvers  of  luxurious  i-efinement.  Henry  showed  himself 
very  different  from  his  predecessors  in  these  respects,  as  he  gave 
very  few  rewards  to  the  courtiers  about  his  person,  and  none  ex- 
cept the  needy  shared  his  benefactions.  He  released  all  prison- 
ers- for  debt  in  his  dominions,  whose  debts  did  not  amount  to  forty 
shillings,  and  paid  their  creditors  from  the  royal  coffers.  Thus 
his  economy  rendered  him  not  only  useful  to  the  poor,  but  ena- 
bled him  to  be  just  to  his  own  creditors,  both  abroad  and  at  home. 
Those  sums  which  he  borrowed  from  the  city  of  London,  or  any 
of  his  subjects,  he  repaid  at  the  appointed  day  with  the  utmost 
punctuality ;  and  in  proportion  as  he  was  esteemed  in  his  own 
dominions,  he  became  I'espectable  abroad. 

With  regard  to  the  king's  servants,  he  was  himself  the  only 
acting  minister ;  and  as  for  the  rest,  he  did  not  choose  his  under 
agents  from  among  the  nobility,  as  had  been  most  usual ;  but 
pitched  upon  John  Moi-ton  and  Richard  Fox,  two  clergymen,  per- 
sons of  industry,  vigilance,  and  capacity,  to  whom  he  chiefly  con- 
fided his  affairs  and  secret  counsels.  They  had  shared  with  him 
in  all  his  former  dangers  and  distresses ;  and  he  now  took  care 
that  they  should  participate  in  his  good  fortune ;  the  one  beino- 
goon  after  created  bishop  of  Ely,  the  other  bishop  of  Exeter.  He 
perhaps  supposed,  that  as  clergymen  were  naturally  more  de- 
pendent on  him  than  the  nobility,  so  they  would  be  more  submis- 
sive to  his  commands,  and  more  active  in  their  services. 

Immediately  after  his  marriage  with  Elizabeth,  he  r^  40^-1 
issued  a  general  pardon  to  all  such  as  chose  to  accept 
it ;  but  those  lords  who  had  been  the  favourites  of  the  last  rei2:n, 
and  long  accustomed  to  turbulence,  refused  his  proffered  tender- 
ness, and  fiew  to  arms.  Lord  Lovel,  together  with  Humphrey 
and  Thomas  Stafford,  placed  themselves  at  the  head  of  this  in- 
surrection ;  but  Henry  sent  the  duke  of  Bedford  to  oppose  them, 
with  orders  to  try  what  might  be  done  by  offering  a  pardon,  be- 
fore he  made  any  attempts  to  reduce  them.    The  duke  punctually 


342  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

obeyed  his  instructions ;  and  a  general  promise  of  pardon  wa» 
made  to  the  rebels,  which  had  a  greater  effect  on  the  leaders  than 
on  their  followers.  Lovel,  who  had  undertaken  an  enterprise 
that  exceeded  his  courage  and  capacity,  was  so  terrified  with  the 
fears  of  desertion  among  his  troops,  that  he  suddenly  withdrew 
himself;  and,  after  lurking  some  time  in  Lancashire,  made  his 
escape  into  Flanders,  where  he  was  protected  by  the  duchess  of 
Burgundy.  The  StaiFords  took  sanctuary  in  the  church  of  Coin- 
ham,  a  village  near  Abingdon  :  but  it  appearing  that  this  church 
had  not  the  privilege  of  giving  protection,  they  were  taken  thence; 
the  elder  Stafford  was  executed  at  Tyburn ;  the  younger,  plead- 
ing that  he  was  misled  by  his  brother,  obtained  his  pardon.  The 
rebel  army,  now  without  a  leader,  submitted  to  the  mercy  of  the 
king,  and  were  permitted  to  disperse  without  punishment. 

But  the  people  were  become  so  turbulent  and  factious  by  a  long 
course  of  civil  war,  that  no  governor  could  rule,  nor  any  king 
please  tliem ;  so  that  one  rebellion  seemed  extinguished  only  to 
give  rise  to  another.     The  king,  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign, 
had  given  orders  that  the  son  of  the  duke  of  Clarence,  whom  we 
have  already  mentioned  as  being  drowned  in  a  wine-butt,  should 
be  taken  from  the  prison  where  he  had  been  confined  by  Richard, 
and  brought  to  the  Tower.     This  unfortunate  youth,  who  was 
styled  the  earl  of  Warwick,  was,  by  long  confinement,  so  unac" 
quainted  with  the  world,  that,  as  we  are  told,  he  could  not  tell 
the  difference  between  a  duck  and  a  hen.     However,  the  unhappy 
youth,  harmless  as  he  was,  was  made  an  instrument  to  deceive 
the  people.     There  lived  in  Oxford  one  Richard  Simon,  a  priest, 
who,  possessing  some  subtletj^,  and  more  rashness,  trained  up  one 
Lambert  Simnel,  a  baker's  son,  to  counterfeit  the  person  of  the 
earl  of  Warwick  ;  and  he  was  previously  instructed  by  his  tutor 
to  talk  upon  many  facts  and  occurrences,  as  having  happened  to 
him  in  the  court  of  Edward.     But  as  the  impostor  was  not  calcu- 
lated to  bear  a  close  inspection,  it  was  thought  proper  to  show 
him  first  at  a  distance ;  and  Ireland  was  judged  the  fittest  theatre 
for  him  to  support  his  assumed  character.     The  plot  unfolded  to 
tlieir  wishes;  Simnel  was  received  with  the  utmost  joy,  and  pro- 
claimed king  of  Ireland;  he  was  conducted  by  the  magistrates 
and  the  populace  of  Dublin  with  great  pomp  to  the  Castle,  where 
he  was  treated  conformably  to  his  supposed  birth  and  distinction, 


Henry  vil  343 

Henry  could  not  help  feeling  more  uneasiness  at  this  bare-faced 
impostui-e  than  it  seemed  to  deserve  :  but  the  penetrating  mon- 
arch saw  that  his  mother-in-law  was  at  the  bottom  of  it ;  and  he 
dreaded  the  fierce  inquietude  of  her  temper.  He  was  resolved 
therefore  to  take  the  advice  of  his  council  upon  this  occasion ; 
and  they,  after  due  deliberation,  determined  upon  confining  the 
old  queen  to  a  monastery  5  but,  to  wipe  off  the  imputation  of  trea- 
son from  one  so  nearly  allied  to  the  crown,  it  was  given  out  that 
she  was  thus  punished  for  having  formerly  delivered  up  the  prinr 
cess,  her  daughter,  to  Richard.  The  people,  as  usual,  murmured 
at  the  severity  of  her  treatment  :  but  the  king,  unmindful  of  their 
idle  clamours,  persisted  in  his  resolution ;  and  she  remained  in 
confinement  till  her  death,  which  did  not  happen  till  several  years 
after.  The  next  measure  was  to  show  Warwick  to  the  people.  In 
consequence  of  this  he  was  taken  from  the  Tower,  and  led  through 
•the  principal  streets  of  London  ;  after  which  he  was  conducted 
in  solemn  procession  to  St.  Paul's,  where  great  numbers  were  as- , 
sembled  to  see  him.  Still,  however,  they  proceeded  in  Dublin  to 
honour  their  pretended  monarch  ;  and  he  was  crowned  with  great 
solemnity,  in  presence  of  the  earl  of  Kildare,  the  chancellor,  and 
the  other  officers  of  state.  Such  impositions  upon  the  people 
were  very  frequent  at  that  time,  in  several  parts  of  Europe. 
Lorrain,  Naples,  and  Portugal,  had  their  impostors,  who  continu- 
ed to  deceive  for  a  long  time  without  detection.  In  fact,  the  in- 
habitants of  every  country  were  so  much  confined  within  their 
own  limits,  and  knew  so  little  of  what  was  passing  in  the  rest  of 
the  world,  that  any  distant  story  might  be  propagated,  how  im- 
probable soever.  In  this  manner  king  Simnel,  being  now  joined 
by  lord  Lovel  and  other  malcontents  of  rank,  resolved  to 
pass  over  into  England  ;  and  accordingly  landed  in  L^'^^'' -J 
Lancashire,  whence  he  marched  to  York,  expecting  that  the 
country  would  rise  and  join  him  as  he  marched  along.  But  in 
this  he  was  deceived :  the  people,  unwilling  to  join  a  body  of 
German  and  Irish  troops,  by  whom  he  was  supported,  and  kept 
in  awe  by  the  king's  reputation,  remained  in  tranquillity,  or  gave 
all  their  assistance  to  the  royal  cause.  The  earl  of  Lincoln, 
therefore,  a  disaffected  lord,  to  whom  the  command  of  the  rebel 
army  was  given,  finding  no  hopes  but  in  speedy  victory,  was  de^ 
termined  to  bring  the  contest  to  a  short  issue.     The  opposite  ar- 


344  HISTORY  OP  ENGLANJO. 

mies  met  at  Stoke,  in  the  county  of  Nottingham,  and  fought  a 
battle,  which  was  more  bloody,  and  more  obstinately  disputed, 
than  could  have  been  expected  from  the  inequality  of  their  forces. 
But  victory  at  length  declared  in  favour  of  the  king,  and  it  proved 
decisive.  The  earl  perished  in  the  field  of  battle ;  lord  Lovel 
was  never  more  heard  of,  and  it  was  supposed  he  shared  the 
same  fate.  Simnel  and  his  tutor  Simon  were  taken  prisoners ; 
and  four  thousand  of  the  common  men  fell  in  battle.  Simon, 
being  a  priest,  could  not  be  tried  by  the  civil  power,  and  was  only 
committed  to  close  confinement.  Simnel  was  too  contemptible 
to  excite  the  king's  fears  or  resentment ;  he  was  pardoned,  and 
made  a  scullion  in  the  king's  kitchen,  whence  he  was  afterwards 
advanced  to  the  rank  of  falconer,  in  which  mean  employment  he 
died. 

Things  being  thus  quietly  settled  at  home,  Henry  began  to 
turn  his  thoughts  toward  his  continental  connections,  and  to  es- 
tablish some  degree  of  understanding  between  himself  and  the 
neighbouring  states.  He  was  too  wise  a  prince  not  to  perceive 
the  fatality  of  conquests  upon  the  continent,  which  could  at  best 
produce  no  other  reputation  than  the  empty  one  of  military  glory. 
Yet,  while  he  internally  despised  such  pernicious  triumphs,  he 
Avas  obliged,  in  order  to  gain  popularity,  to  countenance  them. 
He,  therefore,  frequently  boasted  that  he  was  determined  to 
ravish  his  kingdom  of  France  from  the  usurpers,  who  had  long- 
possessed  it ;  and  that  he  would  lay  the  whole  country  in  blood. 
But  these  were  the  distant  threats  of  a  crafty  politician ;  there 
was  nothing  more  distant  from  his  heart.  As  far  as  negotiations 
went,  he  did  all  in  his  power  to  keep  the  interests  of  that  king- 
dom so  nearly  balanced,  as  to  prevent  any  fi-om  growing  too 
powerful ;  but  as  for  succours  of  men  and  money,  he  too  well 
knew  the  value  of  both  to  lavish  them,  as  his  predecessors  had 
done,  upon  such  fruitless  projects. 

About  this  time  the  nobles  of  Bretagne,  being  disgusted  with 
their  minister,  Peter  Landois,  rose  in  conspiracy  against  him, 
ri488  1  ^^^  P^^  ^^"^  ^^  death.  Willing  to  defend  one  crime 
by  another,  they  called  in  the  aid  of  the  French  mon- 
arch to  protect  them  from  the  resentment  of  their  own  sovereign- 
Charles  VHI.  quickly  obeyed  the  call ;  but  instead  of  only  bring- 
ing the  nobles  assistance^  he  over-ran  and  took  possession  of  the 


HENRY  VII.  345 

greatest  part  of  the  country.  The  aid  of  Henry  was  implored 
by  the  distressed  Bretons  5  but  this  monarch  appeared  more  will- 
ing to  assist  them  by  negotiations  than  by  arms.  Though  he  was 
determined  to  maintain  a  pacific  conductj  as  far  as  the  situation 
of  his  affairs  would  permit,  he  knew  too  well  the  warlike  dispo- 
sition of  his  subjects,  and  their  desires  to  engage  in  any  scheme 
that  promised  the  humiliation  of  France.  He  resolved,  there- 
fore, to  take  advantage  of  this  propensity ;  and  to  draw  some 
supplies  of  money  from  the  people,  on  pretence  of  giving  assist- 
ance to  the  duke  of  Bretagne.  He  accordingly  summoned  a 
parliament  to  meet  at  Westminster,  and  easily  per-  p^ .  on  -1 
suaded  them  to  grant  a  considerable  supply.  But 
money  was,  at  that  time,  more  easily  granted  than  levied  in  En- 
gland. A  new  insurrection  began  in  Yorkshire,  the  people  re- 
sisting the  commissioners  who  were  appointed  to  levy  the  tax. 
The  earl  of  Northumberland  attempted  to  enforce  the  king's 
command  ;  but  the  populace,  being  by  this  taught  to  believe  that 
he  was  the  adviser  of  their  oppressions,  flew  to  arms,  attacked  his 
house,  and  put  him  to  death.  The  mutineers  did  not  stop  thei'e  ; 
but  by  the  advice  of  one  John  a  Chambre,  a  seditious  fellow  of 
mean  birth,  they  chose  sir  John  Egremont  for  their  leader,  and 
prepared  themselves  for  a  vigorous  resistances  The  king,  upon 
hearing  this  rash  proceeding,  immediately  levied  a  force,  which 
he  put  under  the  earl  of  Surry;  and  this  nobleman,  encountering 
the  rebels,  dissipated  the  tumult,  and  took  their  leader  prisoner. 
John  a  Chambre  was  shortly  after  executed ;  but  sir  John  Egre- 
mont fled  to  the  court  of  the  duchess  of  Burgundy,  the  usual  retreat 
of  all  who  were  obnoxious  to  government  in  England. 

As  Henry  had  gone  thus  far  in  preparations  for  a  war  with 
France,  he  supposed  that  it  would  be  too  flagrant  an  imposition 
upon  the  credulity  of  the  nation,  not  to  put  a  part  of  his  threats  in 
execution.  The  French  Avere,  by  this  time,  in  possession  of  all 
Bretagne;  and  a  marriage  hadbeenlately  concluded  be- 
tween the  French  monarch  and  the  duchess  of  the  last  ^  ^^-J 
jiamed  territory.  This  accession  of  power,  in  a  rival  state,  was  form  - 
idable  not  only  to  Henry  but  to  Europe.  He  therefore  prepared  to 
make  a  descent  upon  France ;  and  accordingly  landed 
at  Calais  with  an  army  of  twenty -five  thousand  foot,  and  L  ^  -^J 
sixteen  hundred  horse,  which  he  put  under  the  command  of  the 

VOL.  I.  44 


346  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

duke  of  Bedford  and  the  earl  of  Oxford.  But,  notwithstanding 
this  appearance  of  an  hostile  disposition,  there  had  been  seci-et 
advances  made  towards  a  peace  three  months  before,  and  com- 
missioners had  been  appointed  to  treat  of  the  terms.  The  de- 
mands of  Henry  were  wholly  pecuniary  ;  and  the  king  of  France, 
who  deemed  the  peaceable  possession  of  Bretagne  an  equivalent 
for  any  sum,  readily  agreed  to  the  proposals  made  him.  He  en- 
gaged to  pay  Henry  near  two  hundred  thousand  pounds  sterling, 
as  a  reimbursement  for  the  expenses  of  this  expedition ;  and  he 
stipulated  to  pay  a  yearly  pension  to  him,  and  his  heirs,  of  twenty- 
five  thousand  crowns. 

Henry,  having  thus  made  an  advantageous  peace,  had  reason  to 
flatter  himself  with  the  prospect  of  long  tranquillity  :  but  he  was 
mistaken ;  he  had  still  enemies  who  found  means  to  embroil  him 
in  fresh  difficulties  and  dangers.  One  would  have  imagined,  from 
the  ill  success  of  Simnel's  imposture,  that  few  would  be  willing  to 
embark  in  another  of  a  similar  kind  :  however,  the  old  duchess  of 
Burgundy,  rather  irritated  than  discouraged  by  the  failure  of  her 
past  enterprises,  was  determined  to  disturb  that  government 
which  she  could  not  subvert.  She  first  procured  a  report  to  be 
spread,  that  the  young  duke  of  York,  said  to  have  been  murdered 
in  the  Tower,  was  still  living ;  and  finding  the  rumour  greedily 
received,  she  soon  produced  a  young  man,  who  assumed  his  name 
and  character.  The  person  pitched  upon  to  sustain  this  part 
was  one  Osbeck  or  Warbeck,  the  son  of  a  converted  Jew,  who 
had  been  in  England  during  the  reign  of  Edward  IV.  where  he 
had  this  son  named  Peter,  but  corrupted  after  the  Flemish  man- 
ner into  Peterkin  or  Perkin.  It  was  by  some  believed  that  Ed- 
wai-d,  among  his  other  amorous  adventures,  had  a  secret  corres- 
pondence with  Warbeck's  wife,  which  might  account  for  a  strik- 
ing resemblance  between  young  Perkin  and  that  monarch.  Per- 
kin, following  the  fortunes  of  his  father,  had  travelled  for  many 
years  from  place  to  place ',  so  that  his  birth  and  circumstances 
became  thereby  unknown,  and  difficult  to  be  traced  by  the  most 
diligent  inquiry.  The  variety  of  his  adventures  might  have  con- 
tributed to  assist  the  natural  sagacity  and  versatility  of  his  dispo- 
sition ;  as  he  seemed  to  be  a  youth  capable  of  sustaining  any 
part,  or  any  assumed  character.  The  duchess  of  Burgundy  found 
this  youth  entirely  suited  to  her  purposes ;  and  her  lessons,  in- 


HENRY  VII.  347 

structing  him  to  personate  the  duke  of  York,  were  easily  learned 
and  strongly  retained  by  a  youth  of  such  quick  apprehension. 
In  short,  his  graceful  air,  his  courtly  address,  his  easy  manners, 
and  elegant  conversation,  were  capable  of  imposing  upon  all  but 
such  as  were  conscious  of  the  imposture.    '/ 

The  kingdom  of  Ireland,  which  still  retained  its  attachments  to 
the  house  of  York,  was  pitched  upon  as  the  proper  place  for  Per- 
kin's  first  appearance,  as  it  before  had  favoured  the  pretensions  of 
Simnel.     He  landed  at  Cork ;  and,  immediately  assuming  the 
name  of  Richard  Plantagenet,  drew  to  himself  numerous  parti- 
sans among  that  credulous  people.     He  wrote  letters  to  the  earls 
of  Desmond  and  Kildare,  inviting  them  to  join  his  party  ;  he  dis- 
persed every  where  the  strange  intelligence  of  his  escape  from 
his  uncle  Richard's  cruelty ;  and  men,  fond  of  everything  new 
and  wonderful,  began  to  make  him  the  general  subject  of  their 
discourse,  and  even  the  object  of  their  favour.     From  Ireland  his 
fame  soon  spread  over  into  France ;  and  Charles  sent  Perkin  an 
invitation  to  his  court,  where  he  received  him  with  all  the  marks 
of  consideration  that  were  due  to  his  supposed  dignity.     The 
youth,  no  way  dazzled  by  his  elevation,  supported  the  prepos- 
session which  was  spread  abroad  in  his  favour  ;  so  that  England 
itself  soon  began  to  give  credit  to  his  pretensions  ;  while   sir 
George  Nevil,  sir  John  Taylor,  and  above  a  hundred  gentlemen 
more  went  to  Paris  to  pay  him  homage,  and  offer  their  services. 
Upon  the  peace  being  shortly  after  concluded  between  France 
and  England,  the  impostor  was  obliged  to  make  his  residence  at 
the  court  of  his  old  patroness,  the  duchess  of  Burgundy,  and  the 
interview  between  these  conscious  deceivers  was  truly  ridiculous. 
The  duchess  affected  the  utmost  ignorance  of  his  pretensions, 
and  even  put  on  the  appearance  of  distrust,  having,  as  she  said? 
been  already  deceived  by  Simnel.     She  seemed  to  examine  all 
his  assertions  with  the  most  scrupulous  diffidence ;  put  many  par- 
ticular questions  to  him,  affected  astonishment  at  his  answers, 
and  at  last,  after  long  and  severe  scrutiny,  burst  out  into  joy  and 
admiration  at  his  delivery,  acknowledging  him  as  her  nephew,  as 
the  true  image  of  Edward,  and  legitimate  successor  to  the  En- 
glish throne.     She  immediately  assigned  him  an  equipage  suita- 
ble to  his  pretensions ;  appointed  him  a  guard  of  thirty  halberdiers  ? 


348  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

and  on  all  occasions  honoured  him  with  the  appellation  of  the 

White  Rose  of  England. 

r-j  .g^  "1  ^^^^  English,  prone  to  revolt,  gave  credit  to  all  these 
absurdities  ;  wliile  the  young  man's  prudence,  conversa- 
tion, and  deportment,  served  to  confirm  what  their  disaffectioa 
and  credulity  had  begun.  All  such  as  were  disgusted  with  the 
king  prepared  to  join  him  ;  and  some  of  those  who  had  been  in 
favour  with  Henry,  and  had  contributed  to  place  him  on  the 
throne,  thinking  their  services  could  never  be  sufficiently  repaid, 
now  privately  abetted  the  imposture,  and  became  heads  of  the 
conspiracy.  These  were  joined  by  numbers  of  the  inferior  class, 
some  greedy  of  novelty,  some  blindly  attached  to  their  leaders, 
and  SQme  induced  by  their  desperate  fortunes  to  wish  for  a 
change.. 

Among  those  who  secretly  abetted  the  cause  of  Perkin  were 
lord  Fitzwalter,  sir  Simon  Montfort,  sir  Thomas  Thwaites,  and 
sir  Robert  Clifford.  But  the  person  of  the  greatest  weight,  and 
the  most  dangerous  opposition,  was  sir  William  Stanley,  the  lord 
chamberlain,  and  brother  to  the  famous  lord  Stanley,  who  had 
so  effectually  supported  the  interests  of  Henry.  This  personage, 
either  moved  by  a  blind  credulity,  or  more  probably  by  a  restless 
ambition,  entered  into  a  regular  conspiracy  against  the  king ;  and 
a  correspondence  was  settled  between  the  malcontents  in  En- 
gland and  those  in  Flanders. 

While  the  plot  was  thus  carrying  on  in  all  quarters,  Henry 
was  not  inattentive  to  the  designs  of  his  enemies.  He  spared 
neither  labour  nor  expense  to  detect  the  falsehood  of  the  preten- 
der to  his  crown  ;  and  was  equally  assiduous  in  finding  out  who 
were  his  secret  abettors.  For  this  purpose  he  dispersed  his  spies 
through  all  Flanders,  and  brought  over,  by  large  bribes,  some  of 
those  whom  he  knew  to  be  in  the  enemies'  interests.  Among 
these,  sir  Robert  Clifford  was  the  most  remarkable,  both  for  his 
consequence,  and  the  confidence  with  which  he  was  trusted. 
From  this  person  Henry  learned  the  whole  of  Perkin's  birth  and 
adventures,  together  with  the  names  of  all  those  who  had  se- 
cretly combined  to  assist  him.  The  king  was  pleased  with  the 
discovery ;  but  the  more  trust  he  gave  to  his  spies,  the  higher  re- 
sentment did  he  feign  against  them. 


HENRY  VII.  549 

At  first  he  was  struck  with  indignation  at  the  ingratitude  of 
many  of  those  about  him  ;  but,  concealing  his  resentment  for  a 
proper  opportunity,  he,  almost  at  the  same  instant,  ar-    ri  494  -1 
rested   Fitzwalter,  Montfort,  and  Thwaites,  together 
>vith    William  d'Aubigni,  Robert  RadclifFe,  Thomas  Cressener, 
and  Thomas  Astwood.  All  these  were  arraigned,  convicted,  and 
condemned  for  high  treason.     Montfort,  RadclifFe,  and  d'Aubig- 
ni, were  immediately  executed ;  the  rest  received  pardon.     But 
the  principal  delinquent  yet  remained  to  be  punished,  whose  sta- 
tion, as  lord  chamberlain,  and  whose  connections  with  many  of 
the  principal  men  in  the  kingdom,  seemed  to  exempt  him  from 
censure.  To  elFectthis,  Clifford  was  directed  to  come  over  private- 
ly to  England,  and  to  accuse  Stanley  in  person  ;  which  he  did, 
to  the  seeming  astonishment  of  all  present.     Henry  affected  to 
receive  the  intelligence  as  false  and  incredible  ;  but,  Clifford  per- 
sisting in  his  accusation,  Stanley  was  committed  to  custody,  and 
soon  after  examined  before  the  council.     Finding  his  guilt  but 
too  clearly  proved,  he  did  not  attempt  to  conceal  it,  supposing 
that  an  open  confession  might  serve  as  an  atonement,  or  trusting 
to  his  former  services  for  pardon  and  security.     In  this  he  was 
mistaken  ;  after  a  delay  of  six  weeks,  during  which  time    r-,  49^  -i 
the  king  affected  to  deliberate  upon  his  conduct,  he  was 
brought  to  trial,  when  he  was  condemned,  and  shortly  after  be- 
headed.    Through  the  whole  of  this  reign,  the  king  seemed  to 
make  a  distinction  in  the  crimes  of  those  who  conspired  against 
him  :  whenever  the  conspirator  took  up  arms  against  him  from  a 
conscientious  adherence  to  principle,  and  a  love  of  the  house  of 
York,  he  generally  found  pardon  ;  but  when  a  love  of  change,  or 
an  impatience  of  subordination,  inspired  the  attempt,  the  offender 
was  sure  to  be  treated  with  the  utmost  rigour  of  the  law. 

While  the  adherents  of  Perkin  were  thus  disappointed  in  En- 
gland, he  himself  attempted  landing  in  Kent;  the  gentlemen  of 
which  country  gathered  in  a  body  to  oppose  him.  Their  aim 
was  to  allure  him  on  shore  by  proffers  of  assistance,  and  then 
seize  his  person :  but  the  wary  youth,  observing  that  they  had 
more  order  and  regularity  in  their  movements  than  could  be  sup- 
posed in  new -levied  forces,  refused  to  commit  himself  into  their 
hands ;  wherefore  they  attacked  his  attendants  who  had  come 
gshore,  of  whom  they  took  a  hundred  and  fifty  prisoners.    These 


550  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

were  tried  and  condemned,  and  all  executed  by  order  of  the  king, 
who  was  resolved  to  use  no  lenity  to  men  of  such  desperate 
fortunes. 

The  young  adventurer,  finding  his  hopes  frustrated  in  the  at- 
tempt, went  next  to  try  his  fortune  in  Scotland.  In  that  country 
his  luck  seemed  greater  than  in  England.  James  the  Fourth  re- 
ceived him  with  great  cordiality ;  he  was  seduced  to  believe  the 
story  of  his  birth  and  adventures ;  and  he  carried  his  confidence 
so  far,  as  to  give  him  in  marriage  lady  Catharine  Gordon,  daugh- 
ter to  the  earl  of  Huntley,  and  a  near  kinswoman  of  his  own ;  a 
young  lady  eminent  for  virtue  as  well  as  beauty.  Not  content 
with  these  instances  of  favour,  he  resolved  to  attempt  setting  him 
on  the  throne  of  England.  It  was  naturally  expected  that,  upon 
Perkin's  first  appearance  in  that  kingdom,  all  the  friends  of  the 
house  of  York  would  rise  in  his  favour.  Upon  this  ground  the 
n  4Qfi  1  ^"^S  ^^  Scotland  entered  England  with  a  numerous; 
army,  and  proclaimed  the  young  adventurer  v/herever 
he  went.  But  Perkin's  pretensions,  attended  by  repeated  disap- 
pointments, were  now  become  stale,  even  in  the  eyes  of  the  pop- 
ulace ;  so  that,  contrary  to  expectation,  none  were  found  to  se- 
cond them.  Being  disappointed  in  this,  he  returned  to  Edin- 
burgh, where  he  continued  to  reside,  till,  upon  the  conclusion  of 
a  treaty  of  peace  between  the  two  kingdoms,  he  was  obliged  to 
leave  Scotland,  and  to  seek  a  new  protector. 

In  the  mean  time  Henry  found  little  uneasiness  at  Perkin's  ir- 
ruption, as  he  was  sensible  it  would  serve  him  as  a  pretext  to  de- 
mand further  supplies  from  parliament,  with  which  he  knew  they 
would  readily  comply.  The  vote  was  in  fact  easily  enough  obtain- 
ed 5  but  he  found  it  not  so  easy  to  levy  the  money.  The  inhabit- 
ants of  Cornwall  were  the  first  to  refuse  contributing  supplies  for 
ri4Q7  "1  *^^®  safety  of  the  northern  parts  of  the  kingdom,  which 
were  so  very  remote  from  them.  Their  discontents  were 
further  inflamed  by  one  Michael  Joseph,  a  farrier  of  Bodmin,  who 
had  long  been  the  spokesman  of  the  multitude.  To  him  was  joined 
one  Thomas  Flammock,  a  lawj^er;  and,  under  the  conduct  of  these 
two,  the  insurgents  passed  through  the  county  of  Devon,  and  reach- 
ed that  of  Somerset,  where  they  were  joined  by  Lord  Audley,  a  no- 
bleman of  an  antient  family,  popular  in  his  deportment,  but  vain, 
ambitious,  and  restless  in  his  temper.    Thus  headed,  and  breathing 


HENRY  VII.  351 

destruction  to  the  king's  commissioners,  they  marched  with  great 
speed  towards  London,  without,  however,  committing  any  devasta- 
tions by  the  way.  At  length,  without  receiving  countenance  or  re- 
inforcement on  their  march,  they  pitched  their  camp  near  Eltham, 
not  far  from  London.  Henry,  whose  courage  and  intrepidity 
were  never  to  be  moved,  had  some  time  before  levied  an  army  to 
oppose  the  Scots  ;  and  tliis  he  ordered  southward  to  suppress 
the  Cornish  insurrection.  On  other  occasions  it  was  usual  with 
him  to  hasten  to  a  decision ;  and  it  was  a  saying  with  him,  that 
he  only  desired  to  see  his  enemies ;  but  as  the  present  insurgents 
behaved  in  an  inoffensive  manner,  he  protracted  his  attack  for 
some  time,  till  at  length  it  was  begun  by  lord  d'Aubigni,  who, 
after  some  resistance,  broke  and  put  them  to  flight.  Lord  Aud- 
ley,  Flammock,  and  Joseph,  were  taken  and  executed ;  but  the 
rest,  to  the  number  of  fourteen  thousand,  were  suffered  to  depart 
without  punishment. 

In  the  mean  time  the  restless  Perkin  being  dismissed  from 
Scotland,  and  meeting  with  a  very  cold  reception  from  the  Flem- 
ings, who  now  desired  to  be  at  peace  with  the  English,  resolved 
to  continue  his  scheme  of  opposition  ;  and  once  more  took  refuge 
among  the  wilds  and  fastnesses  of  Ireland.  Impatient,  however, 
of  an  inactive  life,  he  held  a  consultation  with  his  followers, 
Heme,  Skelton,  and  Astley,  three  broken  tradesmen ;  and  by 
their  advice  he  resolved  to  try  the  affections  of  the  Cornish  men, 
whose  discontents  the  king's  late  lenity  had  only  contributed  to 
inflame.  These  were  a  tumultuous  multitude,  too  ignorant  for 
gratitude  ;  and  upon  their  return  ascribed  the  royal  clemency  to 
fear,  inducing  their  countrymen  to  believe  that  the  whole  king- 
dom was  ready  to  rise  to  vindicate  their  quarrel.  It  was  in  con- 
sequence of  these  suggestions  that  they  determined  to  send  for 
Perkin  to  put  himself  at  their  head ;  and  he  no  sooner  made  his 
appearance  among  them  at  Bodmin,  than  the  populace,  to  the 
number  of  three  thousand  men,  flocked  to  his  standard.  Elate 
with  this  appearance  of  success,  he  assumed,  for  the  first  time, 
the  title  of  Richard  the  Fourth,  king  of  England  ;  and,  not  to  suf- 
fer the  spirits  of  his  adherents  to  languish,  he  led  them  to  the 
gates  of  Exeter.  Finding  the  inhabitants  obstinate  in  refusing  to 
admit  him,  and  being  unprovided  with  artillery  to  force  an  en- 
trance, he  resolved  to  continue  before  it  until  possessed  of  a  suf- 


Q52  HISTOHY  of  ENGLAND. 

ficient  force  to  make  a  further  progress  into  the  kingdom.  In  the 
mean  time  Henry,  being  informed  of  his  landing  and  his  designs, 
expressed  great  joy  upon  the  occasion,  declaring  that  he  should 
now  have  the  pleasure  of  an  interview  with  a  person  whom  he 
had  long  wished  to  see.  All  the  courtiers,  sensible  of  Perkin's 
desperate  situation,  and  the  general  suspicion  there  was  of  their 
own  fidelity,  prepared  themselves  to  assist  the  king  with  great 
alacrity.  The  lords  d'Aubigni  and  Broke,  the  earl  of  Devon- 
shire, and  the  duke  of  Buckingham,  appeared  at  the  head  of  their 
I'espective  forces,  and  seemed  eager  for  an  opportunity  of  dis- 
playing their  courage  and  loyalty.  Perkin  being  informed  of 
these  great  preparations  broke  up  the  siege  of  Exeter,  and  re- 
tired to  Taunton.  His  followers  by  this  time  amounted  to  seven 
thousand  men,  and  appeared  ready  to  defend  his  cause  :  but  his 
heart  failed  him  ;  and,  instead  of  bringing  them  into  the  field,  ho 
privately  deserted  them,  and  took  sanctuary  in  the  monastery  of 
Beaulieu  in  the  New  Forest.  His  wretched  adherents,  left  to 
the  king's  mercy,  found  him  still  willing  to  pardon  ;  and,  except 
fe  few  of  the  ringleaders,  none  were  treated  with  capital  severity. 
The  lady  Catharine  Gordon,  wife  to  Perkin,  fell  into  the  conquer- 
or's hands,  and  was  treated  by  him  with  all  the  lenity  due  to  her 
sex  and  quality.  She  was  placed  in  a  reputable  station  near  the 
person  of  the  queen,  and  assigned  a  pension,  which  she  enjoyed 
till  her  death.  But  the  manner  in  which  Perkin  himself  was  to  be 
treated  appeared  more  doubtful.  At  first  it  was  suggested  by 
some,  that  he  should  be  taken  forcibly  from  the  sanctuary  to 
Avhich  he  had  fled,  and  made  a  public  example  ;  but  Henry  thought 
that  milder  methods  would  answer  as  well.  He  therefore  em- 
ployed some  persons  to  treat  with  Perkin,  and  to  persuade  him, 
under  promise  of  a  pardon,  to  deliver  himself  up  to  justice,  and  to 
confess  and  explain  all  the  cixxumstances  of  his  imposture.  His 
affairs  being  altogether  desperate,  he  embraced  the  king's  offers, 
without  hesitation,  and  quitted  the  sanctuary.  Henry  being  de- 
sirous of  seeing  him,  he  was  brought  to  court,  and  conducted 
through  the  streets  of  London  in  a  kind  of  mock  triumph,  amidst 
the  derision  and  insults  of  the  populace,  which  he  bore  with  the 
most  dignified  resignation.  He  was  then  compelled  to  sign  a 
confession  of  his  former  life  and  conduct,  which  was  printed  and 
dispersed  tliroughout  the  nation  ;  but  it  was  so  defective  and  con- 


HENRY  VU,  S5S 

tradictory,  that  instead  of  explaining  the  pretended  imposture,  it 
left  it  still  more  doubtful  than  before ;  and  this  youth's  real  pre- 
tentions are  to  this  very  day  an  object  of  dispute  among    riiog  i 
the  learned.    However,  though  his  life  was  granted  him, 
he  was  still  detained  in  custody,  and  keepers  were  appointed  to 
watch  over  his  conduct.     But  his  impatience  of  any  confinement 
could  not  be  controlled  ;  he  broke  loose  from  his  keepers,  and, 
flying  to  the  sanctuary  of  Shene,  put  himself  in  the  hands  of  the 
prior  of  that  monastery.    He  was  again  prevailed  on  to  trust  him- 
self to  the  king's  mercy ;  but,  in  order  to  reduce  him  to  the  low- 
est state  of  contempt,  he  was  set  in  the  stocks  at  Westminster 
and  Cheapside,  and  obliged  to  read  aloud,  in  both  places,  the  con- 
fession which  had  been  formerly  published  in  his  name.    From 
this  place  of  scorn  he  was  conveyed  to  the  Tower,  where  it  was 
thought  the  strength  of  his  prison  would  be  sufficient  to  restrain, 
his  restless,  active  disposition;  but  nothing  could  repress  his  hab- 
its of  inquietude.    He  had  insinuated  himself  into  the  intimacy 
of  four  servants  of  the  lieutenant  of  the  Tower ;  and  by  their 
means  opened  a  correspondence  with  the  unfortunate  earl    r-i  aqq  i 
of  Warwick,  who  had  been  confined  there  for  many  years 
before,  and  kept  in  a  state  of  utter  ignorance.  In  all  probability  Par- 
kin was  permitted  to  enter  into  this  correspondence  with  him  by  the 
connivance  of  the  king,  who  hoped  that  his  enterprising  genius, 
and  insinuating  address,  would  engage  the  simple  Warwick  in 
some  project  that  would  furnish  a  pretext  for  taking  away  their 
lives  ;  which  accordingly  happened.     Perkin  tampered  with  the 
servants,  who,  it  is  said,  agreed  to  murder  their  master,  and  thus 
secure  the  gates  of  the  Tower,  by  which  the  prisoners  might  make 
their  escape  to  some  secure  part  of  the  kingdom. 

That  the  danger  might  appear  more  imminent  and  pressing,  so 
as  to  justify  the  steps  which  Henry  intended  to  take,  another  dis- 
turbance was  raised  at  the  same  time  in  Kent,  where  a  young 
man,  called  Ralph  Wilford,  the  son  of  a  cordwainer,  personated 
the  earl  of  Warwick,  under  the  conduct  and  direction  of  one 
Patrick,  an  Augustine  monk,  who  in  his  sermons  exhorted  the 
people  to  take  arms  in  his  favour.  This  friar,  who  had  been  used 
as  a  tool  for  the  king's  emissaries,  was  arrested,  together  with  his 
pupil ;  and  Wilford  was  hanged  without  ceremony,  but  the  tutor 

obtained  his  pardon.    This  was  the  prelude  to  the  fate  of  Perkin 
VOL,  I.  45 


S54  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

and  the  earl  of  Warwick  ;  the  former  of  whom  was  tried  at  West- 
minster, and,  being  convicted  on  the  evidence  of  the  servants  of 
the  Tower,  was  hanged  at  Tyburn  with  John  Walter,  mayor  of 
Cork,  who  had  constantly  adhered  to  his  cause  in  all  the  vicissir 
tudes  of  his  fortune.  Blewet  and  Astwood,  two  of  the  servants, 
underwent  the  same  fate ;  but  six  other  persons,  condemned  as 
accomplices  in  the  same  conspiracy,  were  pardoned.  In  a  few 
days  after  Perkin's  execution,  the  wretched  eai'l  of  Warwick  was 
tried  by  his  peers  ;  and  being  convicted  of  high-treason,  in  cour 
sequence  of  pleading  guilty  to  the  arraignment,  was  beheaded  on 
Tower  Hill,  and  in  him  ended  the  last  male  branch  of  the  house 
of  Plantagenet.  The  deplorable  end  of  this  innocent  nobleman, 
and  the  fate  of  Perkin,  who,  notwithstanding  all  that  appeared 
against  him,  was,  by  the  unprejudiced  part  of  the  nation,  deemed 
the  real  5qn  of  king  Edwards  filled  th^s  whole  kingdom  with  such 
aversion  to  the  government  of  king  Henry,  that,  to  throw  the  odi- 
um from  himself,  he  was  obliged  to  lay  it  to  the  a,ecount  of  his  ally, 
Ferdinand  of  Arragon,  who,  he  said,  scrupled  his  alliance  while 
any  prince  of  the  house  of  York  remained  alive. 

There  had  been  hitherto  nothing  in  this  reign  but  plots,  trea- 
sons, insurrections,  inipostures,  and  executions  5  and  it  is  proba- 
ble that  Henry's  severity  proceeded  from  the  continual  alarms  ia 
which  they  held  him.  It  is  certain  that  no  prince  ever  loved 
peace  more  than  he  ;  and  much  of  the  ill-will  of  his  subjects  arose 
from  his  attempts  to  repress  their  inclinations  for  war.  The  usual 
preface  to  all  his  treaties  was,  "  That  when  Christ  came  into  the 
world,  peace  was  sung ;  and  when  he  went  out  of  the  world, 
peace  was  bequeathed."  He  had  no  ambition  to  extend  his  pow- 
er, except  only  by  treaties  and  by  wisdom :  by  these  he  rendered 
himself  much  more  formidable  to  his  neighbours  than  his  prede- 
cessors had  by  their  victories  ;  they  became  terrible  to  their  own 
subjects,  he  was  chiefly  dreaded  by  rival  kings. 

He  had  all  along  two  points  principally  in  view  j  one  to  repress 
the  nobility  and  clergy,  and  the  other  to  exalt  and  humanise 
the  populace.  From  the  ambition  and  turbulence  of  the  former, 
and  from  the  wretchedness  and  credulity  qf  the  latter,  all  the 
troubles  in  the  former  reigns  had  taken  their  original.  In  the 
feudal  times,  evei-y  nobleman  was  possessed  of  a  certain  number 
of  subjects,  over  whom  he  had  an  absolute  power  j  and,  ujpou 


HENEir  Vli.         '  855 

every  slight  disgust,  he  was  able  to  influence  them  to  join  him  in 
his  revolt  or  disobedience.  Henry,  therefore,  wisely  considered^ 
that  the  giving  these  petty  tyrants  a  power  of  selling  their  estates^ 
which  before  this  time  were  unalienable,  would  greatly  weaken 
their  interest.  With  this  view  he  procured  an  act,  by  which  the 
nobility  were  granted  a  power  of  disposing  of  their  estates ;  a  law 
infinitely  pleasing  to  the  commons,  and  not  disagreeable  even  to 
the  nobles,  since  they  had  thus  an  immediate  resource  for  supply- 
ing their  taste  for  prodigality,  and  answering  the  demands  of  their 
creditors.  The  hlnw  reached  them  in  their  posterity  alone ;  but 
they  were  two  ignorant  to  be  affected  by  such  distant  distresses* 

His  next  scheme  was  to  prevent  their  giving  liveries  to  many 
hundreds  of  their  dependents,  who  v/ere  thus  retained  to  serve 
their  lord,  and  kept  like  the  soldiers  of  a  standing  army,  to  be 
ready  at  the  command  of  their  leader.  By  an  act  passed  in  this 
reign,  none  but  menial  servants  were  permitted  to  weAt  a  livery 
under  severe  penalties ;  and  this  law  was  enforced  with  the  most 
punctual  observance.  The  king,  one  day  paying  a  visit  to  the 
earl  of  Oxford,  was  entertained  by  him  with  all  possible  splen- 
dour and  hospitality.  When  he  was  ready  to  depart,  he  saw 
ranged  upon  both  sides  a  great  number  of  men  dressed  up  in  very 
rich  liveries,  apparently  to  do  him  honour.  The  king,  surprised 
at  such  a  number  of  servants,  as  he  pretended  to  suppose  them, 
asked  lord  Oxford  whether  he  entertained  such  a  large  number  of 
domestics ;  to  which  the  earl,  not  perceiving  the  drift  of  the 
question,  replied  that  they  were  only  men  whom  he  kept  in  pay 
to  do  him  honour  upon  such  occasions.  At  this  the  king  started 
back,  and  said,  "  By  my  faith^  my  lord,  I  thank  you  for  your 
good  cheer ;  but  I  must  not  suffer  the  laws  to  be  broken  in  my 
sight ;  my  attorney -general  must  talk  with  you."  Oxford  is  said 
to  have  paid  no  less  than  fifteen  thousand  marks  as  a  compensa- 
tion for  his  offence* 

We  have  already  seen,  in  numerous  instances,  what  a  per- 
verted use  was  made  of  monasteries,  and  other  places  alppropria- 
ted  to  religious  worship,  by  the  number  of  criminals  who  found 
sanctuary  and  protection  there.  This  privilege  the  clergy  as- 
sumed as  their  Undoubted  right ;  and  those  places  of  pretended 
sanctity  were  now  become  the  abode  of  murderers,  robbers,  and 
conspirators.     Witches  and  magicians  were  the  only  persons  that 


356  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

were  forbidden  to  avail  themselves  of  the  security  these  sanctua» 
ries  afforded ;  and  they  whose  crimes  were  only  fictitious  were 
the  only  people  who  had  not  the  benefit  of  such  a  retreat.  Henry 
used  all  his  interest  with  the  pope  to  get  these  sanctuaries  abolish- 
ed ;  but  was  not  able  to  succeed.  All  that  he  could  procure  was, 
that  if  thieves,  murderers,  or  robbers,  registered  as  sanctuary 
men,  should  sally  out  and  commit  fresh  oiFences,  and  retreat 
again,  in  suclx  cases  they  might  be  taken  out  of  the  sanctuary, 
and  delivered  up  to  justice. 

Henry  was  not  remiss  in  abridging  the  pope's  power,  while  at 
the  same  time  he  professed  the  utmost  submission  to  liis  com- 
mands, and  the  gi-eatest  respect  for  the  clergy.  The  pope  at  one 
time  was  so  far  imposed  upon  by  his  seeming  attachment  to  the 
church,  that  he  even  invited  him  to  renew  the  crusades  for  recov- 
ering the  Holy  Land.  Henry's  answer  deserves  to  be  remem- 
bered. He  assured  his  holiness  that  no  prince  in  Christendom 
would  be  more  forward  to  undertake  so  glorious  and  necessary 
an  expedition  ;  but,  as  his  dominions  lay  vei-y  distant  from  Con- 
stantinople, it  would  be  better  to  apply  to  the  kings  of  France 
and  Spain  for  their  assistance  5  and  in  the  mean  time  he  would 
,  go  to  their  aid  himself,  as  soon  as  all  the  differences  between  the 
Christian  princes  should  be  brought  to  an  end.  This  was  at  once 
a  polite  refusal,  and  an  oblique  reproach. 

But  while  he  thus  employed  his  power  in  lowering  the  influ- 
ence of  the  nobles  and'  clei'gy,  he  was  using  every  art  to  extend 
the  privileges  of  the  people.  In  former  reigns  they  were  sure  to 
suffer,  on  whatever  side  they  fought,  when  they  were  unsuccess- 
ful. This  rendered  each  party  despei-ate.  in  a  declared  civil  war, 
as  no  hopes  of  pardon  remained,  and  consequently  terrible  slaugh- 
ters were  seen  to  ensue.  He  therefore  procured  an  act,  by  which 
it  was  established,  that  no  person  should  be  impeached  or  attaint- 
ed for  assisting  the  king  for  the  time  being,  or,  in  other  words, 
the  sovereign  who  should  be  then  actually  in  possession  of  the 
throne.  This  excellent  statute  served  to  repress  the  desire  of 
civil  war,  as  several  would  naturally  take  arms  in  defence  of  that 
side  on  which  they  were  certain  of  losing  nothing  by  a  defeat  j 
and  numbers  would  serve  to  intimidate  rebellion.  Thus  the  com- 
mon people,  no  longer  maintained  in  vicious  idleness  by  their  su- 
periors,^ were  obliged  to  become  industrious  for  their  supports 


"llENRY  VII.  S57 

The  nobility,  instead  of  vying  with  each  other  in  the  number  and 
boldness  of  their  retainers,  acquired  by  degrees  a  more  civilized 
species  of  emulation ;  and  endeavoured  to  excel  in  the  splendour 
and  elegance  of  their  equipages,  houses,  and  tables-  In  fact,  the 
king's  greatest  efforts  were  directed  to  promote  trade  and  com- 
merce, because  this  naturally  introduces  a  spirit  of  liberty  among 
the  people,  and  disengaged  them  from  all  dependence,  except  upon 
the  laws  and  the  king.  Before  this  great  sera,  all  our  towns  owed 
their  original  to  some  strong  castle  in  the  neighbourhood,  where 
some  powerful  lord  generally  resided.  These  were  at  once  for- 
tresses for  protection,  and  prisons  for  all  sorts  of  criminals.  In 
this  castle  there  was  usually  a  garrison  armed  and  provided,  de- 
pending entirely  on  the  nobleman's  support  and  assistance.  To 
these  seats  of  protection,  artificers,  victuallers,  and  shop-keepers, 
naturally  rpsortpd,  and  settled  on  some  adjacent  spot  to  furnish 
the  lord  and  his  attendants  with  all  the  necessaries  they  might  re- 
quire. The  farmers  also,  and  the  husbandmen  in  the  neighbour- 
hood, built  their  houses  there,  to  be  protected  against  the  nume- 
rous gangs  of  robbers,  called  Robertsmen,  that  hid  themselves  in 
the  woods  by  day,  and  infested  the  open  country  by  night.  Hen- 
ry endeavoured  to  bring  the  towns  from  such  a  neighbourhood,  by 
inviting  the  inhabitants  to  a  more  commercial  situation.  He  at- 
tempted to  teach  them  frugality,  and  a  just  payment  of  debts,  by 
his  own  example ;  and  never  once  omitted  the  rights  of  the  mer- 
chant, in  all  his  treaties  with  foreign  princes. 

But,  it  must  not  be  concealed,  that  from  a  long  contemplation 
upon  the  relative  advantages  of  money,  he  at  last  grew  into  a 
habit  of  considering  it  as  valuable  for  itself  alone.  As  he  grew 
old,  his  avarice  seemed  to  preponderate  over  his  ambition  ;  and 
the  methods  he  took  to  increase  his  treasures  cannot  be  justified 
by  his  most  ardent  admirers.  He  had  found  two  ministers,  Emp- 
son  and  Dudley,  perfectly  qualified  to  second  his  avjfricious  in- 
tentions. They  were  both  lawyers  ;  the  first  of  mean  birth,  bru- 
tal manners,  and  an  unrelenting  temper ;  the  second  better  born 
and  better  bred,  but  equally  severe  and  inflexible.  It  was  their 
usual  practice  to  commit,  by  indictment,  such  persons  to  prison 
as  they  intended  to  oppress  ;  who  could  rarely  recover  their  lib- 
erty, but  by  paying  heavy  fines,  which  wers  called  mitigations 
and  compositions.    By  degrees,  as^  the  ministers  became  more 


358  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

hardened  in  oppression,  the  very  forms  of  law  were  omitted  j 
thej  determined  in  a  summary  way  upon  the  properties  of  the 
subject,  and  confiscated  their  effects  to  the  royal  treasury.  But 
the  chief  instruments  of  oppression  employed  by  Empson  and  his 
associate  were  the  penal  statutes,  which,  without  consideration  of 
rank,  quality,  or  services,  were  rigidly  put  in  execution  against 
all  men. 

In  this  manner  was  the  latter  part  of  this  active  monarch's 
reign  employed  in  schemes  to  strengthen  the  power  of  the  crown, 
by  amassing  money,  and  extending  the  power  of  the  people.  He 
ri501 1  ^^^  ^^^^  satisfaction,  about  that  time,  of  completing  a 
marriage  between  Arthur,  the  prince  of  Wales,  and  the 
infanta  Catharine  of  Spain,  which  had  been  projected  and  nego- 
tiated during  the  course  of  seven  years.  But  this  marriage  prov- 
ed, in  the  event,  unprosperous.  The  young  princp:  sickened  and 
J--  _^^  1  died  in  a  few  months  after,  very  much  regretted  by 
the  whole  nation  ;  and  the  princess  was  obliged  shortly 
after  to  marry  his  second  son  Henry,  who  was  created  prince  of 
Wales  in  the  room  of  his  brother.  The  prince  himself  made  all 
the  opposition  which  a  youth  under  twelve  years  of  age  was  ca- 
pable of ;  but  as  the  king  persisted  in  his  resolution,  the  marriage 
was,  by  the  pope's  dispensation,  shortly  after  solemnised. 

The  magnificence  of  these  nuptials  was  soon  after  eclipsed  by 
the  accidental  arrival  of  the  archduke  Philip,  with  Joan  his  con- 
sort. These  personages  had  embarked  for  Spain  during  the  win- 
ter, in  order  to  take  the  advantage  of  an  invitation  from  the  Cas- 
tilians,  who  wished  to  confer  the  administration  upon  Philip, 
Meeting,  however,  with  a  violent  tempest  in  their  voyage,  they 
were  obliged  to  take  shelter  in  Weymouth  harbour,  where  they 
were  honourably  received  by  sir  John  Trenchard,  a  gentleman  of 
n  ^0(\  1  ^^thority  in  the  county  of  Dorset.  The  king,  being 
soon  informed  of  their  arrival,  sent  the  earl  of  Arundel 
to  compliment  them  on  their  escape,  and  to  inform  them  that  he 
intended  shortly  paying  them  a  visit  in  person.  Philip  knew  that 
this  was  but  a  polite  method  of  detaining  him  ;  and,  for  the  sake 
of  dispatch,  he  resolved  to  anticipate  his  visit,  and  to  have  an 
interview  with  him  at  Windsor.  Henry  received  him  witli  all 
the  magnificence  possible,  and  with  all  seeming  cordiality :  but 
resolved  to  reimburse  himself  for  the  expense  of  his  pageauts,  by 


HENRY  VII;  S59 

advantages  that  would  be  more  substantially  conducive  to  his  own 
interests  and  those  of  the  nation.  There  had  been  some  years 
before  a  plot  carried  on  against  him  by  the  earl  of  Suffolk ;  for 
which  sir  James  Tyrrel  and  sir  James  Windham  had  been  con- 
demned and  executed,  while  Suffolk,  the  original  contriver,  had 
made  his  escape  into  the  Low  Countries,  where  he  found  protec- 
tion from  Philip.  But  he  was  now  given  up,  at  Henry's  request  j 
and,  being  brought  over  to  England,  he  was  imprisoned  in  the 
Tower.  A  treaty  of  commerce  was  also  agreed  upon  between 
the  two  sovereigns  ;  which  was  at  that  time  of  the  greatest  bene- 
fit to  England,  and  continues  to  remain  the  grouud-work  of  com- 
mercial treaties  to  this  day. 

Henry, — having  thus  seen  England  in  a  great  measure  civilised 
by  his  endeavours,  his  people  paying  their  taxes  without  con- 
straint, the  nobles  confessing  a  just  subordination,  the  laws  alone 
inflicting  punishment,  the  towns  beginning  to  live  independent  of 
the  powerful,  commerce  every  day  increasing,  the  spirit  of  faction 
extinguished,  and  foreigners  either  fearing  England  or  seeking  its 
alliance, — ^began  to  perceive  the  approaches  of  his  end.  He  then 
resolved  to  reconcile  himself  to  heaven;  and,  by  distributing 
alms,  founding  religious  houses,  and  granting  a  general  pardon  to 
all  his  subjects,  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  errors  of  his  reign. 
It  was  in  this  disposition  that  he  died  with  the  gout  in  p.  ^.^g  -■ 
the  stomach,  having  lived  fifty 4wo  years,  and  reigned 
twenty-three.  Since  the  times  of  Alfred,  England  had  not  seen 
such  another  king.  He  rendered  his  subjects  powerful  and  hap- 
py, and  wrought  a  greater  change  in  the  manners  of  the  people 
than  it  was  possible  to  suppose  could  be  effected  in  so  short  a 
time.  If  he  had  any  fault  that  deserves  to  be  marked  with  re- 
proach, it  was  that,  having  begun  his  reign  with  economy,  as  he 
grew  old  his  desires  seemed  to  change  their  object  from  the  use  of 
money  to  the  pleasure  of  hoarding  it.  But  he  ought  in  this  to 
be  pardoned,  as  he  only  saved  for  the  public ;  the  royal  coffers 
being  then  the  only  treasury  of  the  state ;  and  in  proportion  to 
the  king's  finances,  the  public  might  be  said  to  be  either  rich  or 
indigent. 

About  this  time  all  Europe,  as  well  as  England,  seemed  to 
rouse  from  the  long  lethargy  in  which  it  had  continued  for  above 
twelve  hundred  years.    France,  Spain,  Portugal,  and  Sweden, 


S60  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

enjoyed  excellent  monarchs,  who  encouraged  and  pi'otceted  the 
rising  arts,  and  spread  the  means  of  happiness.  The  Portug-uese 
sailed  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  under  the  command  of 
Vasquez  de  Gama,  and  the  Spaniards,  under  the  conduct  of  Co- 
lumbus, had  made  the  discoveiy  of  the  new  world  of  America.  It 
was  by  accident  only  that  Henry  had  not  a  considerable  share  in 
these  great  naval  discoveries ;  for  Columbus,  after  meeting  with 
many  repulses  from  the  courts  of  Portugal  and  Spain,  sent  his 
brother  Bartholomew  into  England,  in  oi-der  to  explain  his  pro- 
jects to  the  king,  and  to  crave  his  protection  for  the  executiou  of 
them.  Heuiy  invited  Columbus  to  England :  but  his  brother,  in 
returning,  being  taken  by  pirates,  was  detained  in  his  voyage ;  and 
Columbus,  in  the  mean  time,  succeeding  with  Isabella,  happily 
effected  his  enterprise.  Henry  was  not  discoujaged  by  this  dis» 
appointment;  he  fitted  out  Sebastian  Cabot,  a  Venetian,  dwelling 
ri4Q7T  ^^  Bristol,  and  sent  him  westward  in  search  of  new 
countries.  This  adventurer  discovered  the  main  land 
of  America  to  the  north ;  then  sailed  southward,  along  the  coast, 
and  discovered  Newfoundland  and  other  countries ;  but  returned 
without  making  any  settlement.  The  king,  soon  after,  expended 
fourteen  thousand  pounds  in  building  one  ship,  called  the  Great 
Harry.  This  was,  properly  speaking,  the  first  ship  in  the  En^ 
glish  navy.  Before  this  period,  when  the  king  wanted  a  fleet,  he 
had  no  other  expedient  but  to  hire  ships  froift  the  merchants. 


CHAP.  xxm. 

HENRY  Vm- 

Aprll  21  ^°  prince  ever  came  to  the  throne  witli  a  conjuncture 
1509.  of  circumstances  more  in  his  favour  than  Henry  VIII., 
who  now,  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  his  age,  undertook  the  gov- 
ernment of  the  kingdom.  His  prudent  father  left  him  a  peaceful 
throne,  a  well-stored  treasury,  and  an  undisputed  succession. 
By  his  father's  side  he  claimed  from  the  house  of  Lancaster,  and 
by  his  mother's  from  that  of  York.  He  was  in  friendship  with 
all  the  powers  of  Europe,  and  his  subjects  were  every  day  grow- 


HENRY  VIIL  361 

ing  more  powerful  and  more  wealthy ;  commerce  and  arts  had  for 
some  time  been  introduced  into  the  kingdom,  and  the  English 
seemed  willing  to  give  them  a  favourable  reception.  The  young 
king  himself  was  beautiful  in  person,  expert  in  polite  exercises,  * 
open  and  liberal  in  his  air,  and  loved  by  all  his  subjects.  The 
old  king,  who  was  himself  a  scholar,  had  him  instructed  in  all  the 
learning  of  the  times  :  so  that  he  was  an  adept  in  school  divinity 
before  the  age  of  eighteen. 

But,  favourable  as  these  circumstances  were,  Henry  soon  show- 
ed that  they  went  but  a  short  way  in  forming  a  good  character  ; 
they  were  merely  the  gifts  of  nature,  or  accomplishments  im- 
planted by  the  assiduity  of  his  father  5  but  he  wanted  the  more 
solid  advantages,  which  were  to  be  of  his  own  formation,— a  good 
heart,  and  a  sound  understanding.  The  learning  he  had,  if  it 
may  deserve  that  appellation,  served  only  to  inflame  his  pride, 
but  not  control  his  vitious  affections  5  the  love  of  his  subjects 
broke  out  in  their  flattei'y ;  and  this  was  another  meteor  to  lead 
him  astray.  His  vast  wealth,  instead  of  relieving  the  public,  or 
increasing  his  power,  only  contributed  to  supply  his  debauche- 
ries, or  gratify  the  rapacity  of  the  ministers  of  his  pleasuresj 
But  it  would  have  been  happy  for  his  people,  if  his  faults  had 
rested  here  :  he  was  a  tyrant ;  humanity  takes  the  alarm  at  his 
cruelties ;  and,  however  fortunate  some  of  his  measures  might 
prove  in  the  event,  every  good  man  must  revolt  at  his  motives, 
and  the  means  he  took  for  their  accomplishment. 

The  first  action  which  showed  that  the  present  reign  was  to  be 
very  different  from  the  former,  was  the  punishment  of  Empson. 
and  Dudley,  who  were  obnoxious  to  the  populace  for  having  been 
the  ready  instruments  of  the  late  king's  rapacity.  They  were 
immediately  cited  before  the  council,  in  order  to  answer  for  their 
conduct;  but  Empson  in  his  defence  alleged,  that,  far  from  de- 
serving censure,  his  actions  rather  merited  reward  and  approba- 
tion. Though  a  strict  execution  of  the  law  was  the  crime  of 
which  he  and  Dudley  were  accused ;  although  these  laws  had 
been  established  by  the  voluntary  consent  of  the  people ;  not- 
withstanding all  their  expostulations,  Empson  and  Dudley  were 
sent  to  the  Tower,  and  soon  after  brought  to  their  trial.  As  the 
strict  discharge  of  their  duty,  in  executing  the  laws,  r^r-ini 
could  not  be  alleged  against  them  as  a  crime,  to  grati- 
voL.  I,  46 


562  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

f  J  the  people  with  their  punishment  they  were  accused  of  having 
entered  into  a  conspiracy  against  the  present  king,  and  of  inten- 
tions to  seize  by  force  the  administration  of  government.  Noth- 
ing could  be  more  improbable  and  unsupported  than  such  a 
charge  ;  nevertheless  the  jury  v^ere  so  far  infected  with  popular 
prejudice,  tliat  tliey  gave  a  verdict  against  them  ;  and  they  were 
both  executed  some  time  after,  by  a  warrant  from  the  king. 

This  measure,  which  betrayed  an  unjust  compliance  with  popu- 
lar clamour,  was  followed  by  another  still  more  detrimental  to  the 
nation,  although  still  more  pleasing  to  the  people.    Julius  the  Sec- 
ond was  at  that  time  pope,  and  had  filled  all  Europe  with  his  in- 
trigues and  ambition ;  but  his  chief  resentment  was  levelled  against 
Lewis  the  Twelfth,  king  of  France,  who  was  in  possession  of  some 
valuable  provinces  of  Italy,  from  which  he  hoped  by  his  intrigues 
to  remove  him.   For  this  purpose  he  entered  into  a  treaty  with  Fer- 
dinand, king  of  Spain,  and  Henry  of  England  ;  to  each  of  whom 
he  offered  such  advantages  as  were  most  likely  to  inflame  their 
ambition,  in  case  they  fell  upon  Lewis  on  their  respective  quar- 
ters ;  while  he  undertook  himself  to  find  him  employment  in  Ita- 
ly.    Henry,  who  had  no  other  motives  but  the  glory  of  the  expe- 
dition, and  the  hopes  of  receiving  the  title  of  the  Most  Christian 
King,  which  the  pope  assured  him  would  soon  be  wrested  from 
P^_^g  -|    Lewis  to  be  conferred  upon  him,  readily  undertook  ta 
""       defend  his  cause  ;  and  his  parliament,  being  summonedy 
as  readily  granted  supplies  for  a  purpose  so  much  favoured  by 
the  people.     The  spirit  of  chivalry  and  foreign  conquest  was  not 
yet  quite  extinguished  in  England ;  the  kingdom  of  France  was 
still  an  object  they  desired  to  possess;  and  Henry,  in  compliance 
with  their  wishes,  gave  out  that  he  intended  striking  for  the 
crown.     It  was  in  vain  that  one  of  his  old  prudent  counsellors 
objected,  that  conquests  on  the  continent  would  only  drain  the 
kingdom  without  enriching  it ;  and  that  England,  from  its  situa- 
tion, was  not  fitted  to  enjoy  extensive  empire  :  the  young  king, 
deaf  to  all  remonstrances,  and  burning  with  military  ardour,  re- 
solved to  undertake  the  war.     The  marquis  of  Dorset  was  first 
sent  over,  wit!)  a  large  body  of  forces,  to  Fontarabia,  to  assist  the 
operations  of  Ferdinand  :  but  that  faithless  and  ci'afty  monarch 
had  no  intentions  of  eftectually  seconding  their  attempts ;  where- 
fore they  were  obliged  to  return  hojne  without  effect. 


HENRY  VIII.  563 

A  considerable  fleet  was  equipped,  some  time  after,    ri^^Q  i 
to  annoy  the  enemy  by  sea,  and  the  command  intrusted 
to  sir  Edward  Howard ;  who,  after  scouring  the  Channel  for  some 
time,  presented  himself  before  Brest,  where  the  French  navy  lay, 
and  challenged  them  to  combat.     As  the  French  were  unequal 
to  the  enemy,  they  determined  to   wait  for   a   reinforcement, 
which  they  expected,  under  the  command  of  Prejent  de  Bidoux, 
from  the  Mediterianean.     But  in  this  the  gallant  Howard  was 
resolved  to  disappoint  them ;  and  upon  the  appearance  of  Prejent 
with  six  gallies,  who  had  time  to  take  refuge  behind  some  batte- 
ries wliich  were  planted  on  the  rocks  that  lay  on  each  side  of 
him,  he  boldly  rowed  up  with  two  gallies,  followed  by  barges  filled 
with  officers  of  distinction.     Upon  coming  up  to  Prejent's  ship, 
he  immediately  fastened  upon  it,  and  leaped  on  board,  followed 
by  one  Carroz,  a  Spanish  cavalier,  and  seventeen  Englishmeno 
The  cable,  mean  while,  which  fastened  both  ships  together,  was 
cut  by  the  enemy,  and  the  admiral  was  thus  left  in  the  hands  of 
the  French ;  but  as  he  still  continued  to  fight  with  great  gallant- 
ry, he  was  pushed  overboardfby  their  pikes,  and  perished  in  the 
sea.     Upon  this  misfortune  the  fleet  retired  from  before  Brest  5 
and  the  French  navy  for  a  while  kept  possession  of  the  sea. 

This  slight  repulse  only  served  to  inflame  the  king's  ardour  to 
i;ake  revenge  upon  the  enemy ;  and  he  soon  after  sent  a  body  of 
eight  thousand  men  to  Calais,  under  the  command  of  the  earl  of 
Shrewsbury ;  and  another  body  of  six  thousand  followed  shortly 
after,  under  the  conduct  of  lord  Herbert.  He  prepared  to  fol- 
low himself  with  the  main  body  and  rear ;  and  arrived  at  Calais, 
attended  by  numbers  of  the  English  nobility.  But  he  soon  had 
an  attendant,  who  did  him  still  more  honour.  This  was  no  less 
a  personage  than  Maximilian,  emperor  of  Germany,  v/ho  had 
stipulated  to  assist  him  with  eight  thousand  men  ;  but,  being  un^ 
able  to  perform  his  engagements,  joined  the  English  army  with 
some  German  and  Flemish  soldiers,  who  were  useful  in  giving  an 
example  of  discipline  to  Henry's  new-levied  soldiers.  He  even 
enlisted  himself  in  the  English  service,  wore  the  cross  of  St. 
George,  and  received  pay,  a  hundred  crowns  per  day,  as  one  of 
Henry's  subjects  and  captains. 

Henry  being  now  at  the  head  of  a  formidable  arhiy,  fifty  thou- 
sand strong,  it  was  supposed  that  France  must  fall  a  victim  to  his 


S64  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

ambition.  But  that  kingdom  was  not  threatened  by  him  alone ; 
the  Swiss,  on  another  quarter,  with  twenty-five  thousand  men, 
were  preparing  to  invade  it;  while  Ferdinand  of  Arragon,  whom 
no  treaties  could  bind,  was  only  waiting  for  a  convenient  oppor- 
tunity of  attack  on  his  side  to  advantage.  Never  was  the  French 
monarchy  in  so  distressed  a  situation ;  but  the  errors  of  its  as- 
sailants procured  its  safety.  The  Swiss  entered  into  a  treaty 
with  Trimouille,  the  French  general,  who  gave  them  their  own 
terms,  satisfied  that  his  master  would  rescind  them  all,  as  not  hav- 
ing given  him  any  powers  to  treat ;  Ferdinand  continued  to  re- 
main a  quiet  spectator,  vainly  waiting  for  some  effectual  blow  to 
be  struck  by  his  allies  ;  and  Henry  spent  his  time  in  the  siege  of 
towns,  which  could  neither  secure  his  conquests,  nor  advance  his 
reputation. 

The  first  siege  was  that  of  Terouenne,  in  Picardy,  which  kept 
Lim  employed  for  more  than  a  month,  although  the  garrison 
scarcely  amounted  to  two  thousand  men.  The  besieged,  after 
8ome  time,  being  in  want  of  provisions,  a  very  bold  and  desperate 
attempt  was  made  to  supply  them,  which  was  attended  with  suc- 
cess. A  French  captain,  whose  name  was  Fontrailles,  led  up  a 
body  of  eight  hundred  men,  each  of  whom  carried  a  bag  of  gun- 
powder and  two  quarters  of  bacon  behind  him.  With  this  small 
force  he  made  a  fierce  and  unexpected  irruption  into  the  English 
camp ;  and,  surmounting  all  resistance,  advanced  to  the  ditch  of 
the  town,  where  each  horseman  threw  down  his  burthen.  Then 
immediately  returning  upon  the  gallop,  they  were  again  so  fortu- 
nate as  to  break  through  the  English  without  any  great  loss  in  the 
undertaking.  But  the  cavalry  sent  to  cover  the  retreat  were  not  so 
successful.  Though  they  were  commanded  by  the  boldest  and 
bravest  captains  of  the  French  army,  yet  on  sight  of  the  English 
they  were  seized  with  such  an  unaccountable  panic,  that  they 
immediately  fled,  and  had  many  of  their  best  ofiicers  taken  pris- 
oners. This  action  was  called  by  the  French  the  battle  of  Guine- 
gate,  from  the  place  where  it  was  fought ;  but  by  the  English  the 
battle  of  the  Spurs,  as  the  French,  on  that  day,  made  more  use  of 
their  spurs  than  their  swords,  to  procure  safety.  ^ 

After  this  victory,  which  might  have  been  followed  with  very 
important  consequences,  had  the  victors  marched  forward  to  Paris, 
Henry  sat  down  to  make  sure  of  the  little  town  which  had  mada 


HENRY  VIII.  365 

such  an  obstinate  resistance ;  and  found  himself,  when  it  was 
obliged  to  surrender,  master  of  a  place  which  neither  recompensed 
the  blood  nor  the  delay  that  were  expended  in  the  siege. 

From  one  error  Henry  went  on  to  another.  He  was  persuaded 
to  lay  siege  to  Tournay,  a  great  and  rich  city  of  Flanders,  which 
at  that  time  was  in  possession  of  the  French.  This  siege,  though 
it  took  up  little  time,  yet  served  to  retard  the  great  object,  which 
was  the  conquest  of  France  ;  and  Henry  hearing  that  the  Swiss 
had  returned  home,  and  being  elated  with  his  trifling  successes, 
resolved  to  transport  his  army  back  to  England,  where  flattery 
was  put  to  the  torture  to  make  him  happy  in  the  glory  of  his  ridic- 
ulous expedition.  A  peace  was  concluded  soon  after  between  the 
two  kingdoms ;  and  Henry  continued  to  dissipate,  in  more  peace- 
ful follies,  those  immense  sums  which  had  been  amassed  by  his 
predecessor  for  very  different  purposes. 

The  success  which,  during  his  foreign  expedition,  attended  his 
arms  in  the  north  of  England,  was  much  more  important  and  de- 
cisive. A  war  having  been  declared  between  the  English  and 
Scots,  who  ever  took  the  opportunity  to  fall  on  when  their  neigh- 
bours were  embroiled  with  France,  the  king  of  that  country  sum- 
moned out  the  whole  force  of  his  kingdom  ;  and,  having  passed 
the  Tweed  with  a  body  of  fifty  thousand  men,  ravaged  those  parts 
of  Northumberland  which  lay  along  the  banks  of  that  river.  But 
as  his  forces  were  numerous,  and  the  country  barren,  he  soon  fe- 
gan  to  want  provisions  j  so  that  many  of  his  men  deserted,  ^d 
returned  to  their  native  country.  In  the  mean  time  the  ear%)f 
Surry,  at  the  head  of  twenty-six  thousand  men,  approached  tlie 
Scots,  who  were  encamped  on  a  rising  ground  near  the  hills^f 
Cheviot.  The  river  Till  ran  between  the  armies,  and  prevented 
an  engagement ;  wherefore  the  earl  of  Surry  sent  a  herald  to  the 
Scotish  camp,  challenging  the  enemy  to  descend  into  Flodden 
plain,  and  there  to  try  their  valour  on  equal  ground.  This  offer 
not  being  accepted,  he  made  a  feint,  as  if  he  intended  marching 
towards  Berwick  5  which  putting  the  Scots  in  motion  to  ann^y 
his  rear,  he  took  advantage  of  a  great  smoke  caused  by  the  firing 
their  huts,  and  passed  the  little  river  which  had  hitherto  prevent- 
ed the  engagement.  Both  armies  now  perceiving  that  a  combat 
was  inevitable,  they  prepared  for  the  onset  with  great  composure 
pind  regularity.    The  English  divided  their  army  into  two  lines  ? 


S66  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

lord  Thomas  Howard  led  the  main  body  of  the  first  line ;  sir  Ed- 
mund Howard  the  right  wing,  and  sir  Marmaduke  Constable 
the  left ;  the  earl  of  Surry  himself  commanded  the  m^n  body  of 
the  second  line,  assisted  by  lord  Dacres  and  sir  Edward  Stanley 
to  the  right  and  the  left.  The  Scots,  on  the  other  hand,  present- 
ed three  divisions  to  the  enemy ;  the  middle  commanded  by  the 
king  himself,  the  right  by  the  earl  of  Huntley,  and  the  left  by  the 
earls  of  Lenox  and  Argyle ;  a  fourth  division,  under  the  earl  of 
Bothwell,  made  a  body  of  reserve.  Lord  Huntley  began  the  on- 
set, charging  the  division  of  sir  Marmaduke  Constable  with  such 
fury,  that  it  was  immediately  put  to  confusion  :  but  it  w  as  so  sea- 
sonably supported,  that  the  men  rallied,  and  the  battle  became 
general.  Both  sides  fought  a  long  time  with  incredible  impetuos- 
ity, until  the  Highlanders,  being  galled  by  the  English  artillery, 
broke  in  sword  in  hand  upon  the  main  body  commanded  by  the 
earl  of  Surry ;  and  at  the  head  of  these  James  fought  with  the 
most  forward  of  the  nobility.  They  attacked  with  such  velocity, 
that  the  hinder  line  could  not  advance  in  time  to  sustain  them,  so 
that  a  body  of  English  intercepted  their  retreat.  James,  being 
thus  almost  surrounded  by  the  enemy,  refused  to  quit  the  field 
while  it  was  yet  in  his  power  j  but,  alighting  from  his  horse, 
formed  his  little  body  into  an  orb,  and  in  this  posture  fouglit  with 
such  desperate  courage  as  restored  the  battle.  The  English 
therefore  were  again  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  their  artillery 
^nd  arrows,  which  made  a  terrible  havock ;  but  night  separating 
the  combatants,  it  was  not  till  the  day  following  that  lord  Howard 
perceived  that  he  had  gained  a  great  and  glorious  victory.  The 
English  lost  no  persons  of  note ;  but  the  flower  of  the  Scotish  no- 
bility fell.  Ten  thousand  of  the  common  men  were  cut  off;  and 
a  body,  supposed  to  be  that  of  the  king,  was  sent  to  London, 
where  it  remained  unburied,  as  a  sentence  of  excommunication 
still  remained  against  hitft  for  having  leagued  with  France  against 
the  Holy  See.  But  upon  Henry's  application,  who  pretended  that 
James  in  the  instant  before  his  death  had  discovered  some  signs 
of  repentance,  absolution  was  given  him,  and  the  body  was  inter- 
red. However,  the  populace  of  Scotland  still  continued  to  think 
their  king  alive  ;  and  it  was  given  out  among  them  that  he  had 
secretly  gone  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem. 


HENRY  Vlir.  367 

These  successes  only  served  to  intoxicate  Henry ;  and  while  his 
pleasure,  on  the  one  hand,  engrossed  his  time,  the  preparations 
for  repeated  expeditions  exhausted  his  treasures.  As  it  was 
natural  to  suppose  that  the  old  ministers,  who  had  been  appointed 
by  his  father  to  direct  him,  would  not  readily  concur  in  these  idle 
projects,  Henry  had,  for  some  time,  discontinued  asking  their 
advice,  and  chiefly  confided  in  the  counsels  of  Thomas,  after- 
wards cardinal  Wolsey,  who  seemed  to  second  him  in  his  favour- 
ite pursuits.  Wolsey  was  a  minister  who  complied  with  all  his 
master's  inclinations,  and  flattered  him  in  every  scheme  to  which 
his  sanguine  and  impetuous  temper  was  inclined.  He  was  the 
son  of  a  private  gentleman  (and  not  of  a  butcher,  as  is  commonly 
reported)  of  Ipswich.  He  was  sent  to  Oxford  so  early,  that  he 
was  a  bachelor  at  fourteen,  and  Avas  therefore  called  the  boy 
bachelor.  He  arose  by  degrees,  upon  quitting  college,  from  one 
preferment  to  another,  till  he  was  made  rector  of  Lymington  by 
the  marquis  of  Dorset,  whose  children  he  had  instructed.  He 
had  not  long  resided  at  this  living,  when  one  of  the  justices  of  the 
peace  put  him  in  the  stocks  for  being  drunk,  and  raising  distur- 
bances at  a  neighbouring  fair.  This  disgrace,  however,  did  not 
retard  his  promotion ;  for  he  was  recommended  as  chaplain  to 
Henry  the  Seventh ;  and  being  employed  by  that  monarch  in  a 
secret  negotiation  respecting  his  intended  marriage  with  Margaret 
of  Savoy,  he  acquitted  himself  to  that  king's  satisfaction,  and  ob- 
tained the  praise  both  of  diligence  and  dexterity.  That  prince, 
having  given  him  a  commission  to  Maximilian,  who  at  that  time 
resided  at  Brussels,  was  surprised  in  less  than  three  days  after 
to  see  Wolsey  present  himself  before  him ;  and,  supposing  that 
he  had  been  delinquent,  began  to  reprove  his  delay.  Wolsey, 
however,  surprised  him  with  assurance  that  he  had  just  returned 
from  Brussels,  and  had  successfully  fulfilled  all  his  majesty^s 
commands.  His  dispatch  on  that  occasion  procured  him  the 
deanry  of  Lincoln  ;  and  in  this  situation  it  was  that  he  was  in- 
troduced by  Fox,  bishop  of  Winchester,  to  the  young  king's 
notice,  in  hopes  that  he  would  have  talents  to  supplant  the  earl 
of  Surry,  who  was  favourite  at  that  time  :  and,  in  this  respect, 
the  conjectures  of  Fox  were  not  erroneous.  Presently  after  be- 
ing introduced  at  court,  he  was  made  a  privy  counsellor ;  and, 
^  such,  had  frequent  opportunities  of  ingratiating  himself  with 


^8  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

the  young  king,  as  he  appeared  at  once  complying,  submissive, 
and  enterprising.     Wolsey  used  every  art  to  suit  himself  to  the 
royal  temper ;  he  sang,  laughed,  and  danced  with  every  libertine 
of  the  court ;  neither  his  own  years,  which  were  near  forty,  nor 
his  character  of  a  clergyman,  were  any  restraint  upon  him,  or 
tended  to  check,  by  ill-timed   severities,  the  gaiety  of  his  com- 
panions.    To  such  a  weak  and  vitious  monarch  as  Henry,  quali- 
ties of  this  nature  were  highly  pleasing.     Wolsey  was  soon  ac- 
knowledged as  his  favourite,  and  was  intrusted  with  the  chief 
administration  of  affairs.     The  people  began  to  see  with  indigna- 
tion the  new  favourite's  mean  condescensions  to  the  king,  and 
his  arrogance  to  themselves.     They  had  long  regarded  the  vi- 
tious haughtiness  and  the  unbecoming  splendour  of  the  clergy, 
with  envy  and  detestation  ;  and  Wolsey's  greatness  served  to 
bring  a  new  odium  upon  that  body,  already  toc^  much  the  objiect 
of  the  people's  dislike.     His  character,  being  now  placed  in  a 
more  conspicuous  point  of  light,  daily  began  to  manifest  itself  the 
more.     Insatiable  in  his  acquisitions,  but  still  more  magnificent 
in  his  expense  ;  of  extensive  capacity,  but  still  more  unbounded 
in  enterprise ;  ambitious  of  power,  but  still  more  desirous  of  glo- 
ry ;  insinuating,  engaging,  persuasive,  and  at  other  times  lofty, 
elevated,  and  commanding ;  haughty  to  his  equals,  yet  affable  to 
his   dependants ;  oppressive   to  the  people,  but   liberal   to  his 
friends ;  more  generous  than  grateful  ;  he  was  formed  to  take 
the  ascendant  in  every  intercourse,  and  vain  enough  not  to  cover 
his  real  superiority. 

He  had  been  advanced  to  the  bishopric  of  Lincoln  ;  but  this  he 
resigned  on  being  promoted  to  the  archbishopric  of  York.  Upon 
the  capture  of  Tournay,  he  had  been  preferred  to  the  see  of  that 
place ;  but  besides,  he  gained  possession,  at  very  low  leases,  of 
the  revenues  of  Bath,  Worcester,  and  Hereford,  bishoprics  filled 
by  Italians,  who  were  allowed  to  reside  abroad,  and  who  were 
glad  to  compound  for  this  indulgence  by  parting  with  a  consider- 
able share  of  their  profits.  Besides  many  other  church  prefer- 
ments, he  was  allowed  to  unite  with  the  see  of  Yoi'k,  first  that  of 
Durham,  next  that  of  Winchester ;  and  his  appetite  seemed  to 
P^  ;.^  (-  -.  increase  by  the  means  that  were  taken  to  satisfy  it. 
The  pope,  observing  his  great  influence  over  the  king, 
was  desirous  of  engaging  him  in  his  interests,  and  created  him  a 


tiENRY  Vliri  369 

cardinal.  His  train  consisted  of  eight  hundred  servants,  of  whom 
many  were  knights  and  gentlemen.  Some  even  of  the  nobility 
put  their  children  into  his  family  as  a  place  of  education ;  and 
whoever  were  distinguished  by  any  art  or  science,  paid  court  to 
the  cardinal,  and  were  often  liberally  rewarded.  He  was  the 
first  clergyman  in  England  who  wore  silk  and  gold,  not  only  on 
his  habit,  but  also  on  his  saddles,  and  the  trappings  of  his  horses* 

Besides  these  various  distinctions,  the  pope  soon  after  conferred 
upon  him  that  of  legate,  designing  thus  to  make  him  instrumental 
in  draining  the  kingdom  of  money,  upon  pretence  of  employing 
it  in  a  war  against  the  Turks,  but  in  reality  with  a  view  to  fill  his 
own  coffers.  In  this  he  so  well  served  the  court  of  Rome,  that^ 
some  time  after,  the  post  of  legate  was  conferred  upon  him  for 
life ;  and  he  now  united  in  his  person  the  promotions  of  legate, 
cardinal,  archbishop,  and  prime  minister. 

Soon  after  Warham,  chancellor,  and  archbishop  of  Canterbury;, 
a  man  of  a  very  moderate  temper,  chose  rather  to  retire  from  pub- 
lic employment  than  maintain  an  unequal  contest  with  the  haughty 
cardinal.  Wolsey  instantly  seized  the  chancellorship,  and  exercised 
the  duties  of  that  employment  with  great  abilities  and  impai-tiality* 
The  duke  of  Norfolk,  finding  the  king's  treasures  exhausted,  and 
his  taste  for  expense  still  continuing,  was  glad  to  resign  his  office 
of  treasurer,  and  retire  from  court.  Fox,  bishop  of  Winchester, 
who  had  been  instrumental  in  Wolsey's  rise,  withdrew  himself  in 
disgust ;  the  duke  of  Suffolk  also  went  home  with  a  resolution  to 
remain  private ;  whilst  Wolsey  availed  himself  of  their  discontents, 
and  filled  up  their  places  by  his  creatures,  or  his  personal  assidui- 
ty. These  were  vast  stretches  of  power  5  and  yet  the  church- 
man was  still  insatiable.  He  procured  a  bull  from  the  pope,  em- 
powering him  to  make  knights  and  counts,  to  legitimate  bastards, 
to  give  degrees  in  arts,  law,  physic,  and  divinity,  and  to  grant  all 
sorts  of  dispensations.  So  much  pride  and  power  could  not  avoid 
giving  high  offence  to  the  nobility  :  yet  none  dared  vent  their  in- 
dignation ;  so  greatly  were  they  in  terror  of  his  vindictive  temper. 

In  order  to  divert  their  envy  from  his  inordinate  exaltation,  he 
soon  entered  into  a  correspondence  with  Francis  the  First,  of 
France,  who  had  taken  many  methods  to  work  upon  his  vanity, 
and  at  last  succeeded.  In  consequence  of  that  monarch's  wishes, 
Henry  was  persuaded  by  the  cardinal  to  restore  Tournay  to  the 
VOL.  I.  47 


370  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

n  'icn  1    Fi'encli  j  and  he  also  agreed  to  an  interview  with  Fran^' 
^  cis.    This  expensive  congress  was  held  between  Guis- 

nes  and  Ardres,  near  Calais,  within  the  English  pale,  in  compli- 
ment to  Henry  for  crossing  the  sea.  The  two  monarchs,  after 
saluting  each  other  in  the  most  cordial  manner,  retired  into  a 
tent  erected  for  the  purpose,  where  Heniy  proceeded  to  read  the 
articles  of  their  intended  alliance.  As  he  began  to  read  the  first 
words  of  it,  "  I,  Henry,  king,"  he  stopped  a  moment,  and  then 
subjoined  only  "  of  England,"  without  adding  France,  the  usual 
style  of  English  monarchs.  Francis  remarked  this  delicacy,  and 
expressed  his  approbation  by  a  smile.  Nothing  could  exceed  the 
magnificence  of  the  nobility  of  both  courts  on  this  occasion. 
Many  of  them  involved  themselves  in  large  debts  ;  and  the  penury 
of  a  life  was  scarcely  suflicient  to  reimburse  the  extravagance  of 
a  few  days.  Beside,  there  at  first  appeared  something  low  and 
illiberal  in  the  mutual  distrusts  that  were  conspicuous  on  this  oc- 
casion :  the  two  kings  never  met  without  having  the  number  of 
their  guards  counted  on  both  sides ;  every  step  was  carefully  ad- 
justed ;  they  passed  each  other  in  the  middle  point  between  both 
places,  when  they  went  to  visit  their  queens  ;  and  at  the  same 
instant  that  Henry  entered  Ardres,  Francis  put  himself  into  the 
hands  of  the  English  at  Guisnes.  But  Francis,  who  is  considered 
as  the  first  restorer  of  true  politeness  in  Europe,  put  an  end  to 
this  illiberal  method  of  conversing.  Taking  one  day  With  him 
two  gentlemen  and  a  page,  he  rode  directly  into  Guisnes,  crying 
out  to  the  English  guards,  that  they  were  their  prisoners,  and  de- 
siring to  be  carried  to  their  master.  Henry  was  not  a  little  as- 
tonished at  the  appearance  of  Francis ;  and  taking  him  in  his 
arms, "  My  brother,"  said  he,  "  you  have  here  given  me  the  most 
agreeable  surprise ;  you  have  shown  me  the  full  confidence  I  may 
place  in  you ;  I  surrender  myself  your  prisoner  from  this  mo- 
ment." He  then  took  from  his  neck  a  collar  of  pearls  of  great 
value,  and,  putting  it  on  Francis,  begged  him  to  wear  it  for  the 
sake  of  his  prisoner.  Francis  agreed ;  and,  giving  him  a  bracelet 
of  double  the  value  of  the  former,  insisted  on  his  wearing  it  in 
turn.  Henry  went  the  next  day  to  Ardres,  without  guards  or 
attendants  ;  and  confidence  being  now  sufiiciently  established  be- 
tween these  monarchs,  they  employed  the  rest  of  the  time  in 
feasts  and  tournaments. 


HENRY  VIII.  37i 

Some  months  before  a  defiance  had  been  sent  by  the  two  kings 
to  each  other's  court,  and  through  all  the  chief  cities  of  Europe, 
importing  that  Henry  and  Francis,  with  fourteen  aids,  would  be 
ready  in  the  plains  of  Picardy  to  answer  all  comers,  that  were 
gentlemen,  at  tilt  and  tourney.  Accoi'dingly  the  monarchs  now, 
gorgeously  apparelled,  entered  the  lists  on  horseback ;  Francis 
surrounded  with  Henry's  guards,  and  Henry  with  those  of  Fran- 
cis. They  were  both  at  that  time  the  most  comely  personages  of 
their  age,  and  prided  themselves  on  their  expertness  in  the  mili- 
tary exercises.  The  ladies  were  the  judges  in  these  feats  of  chiv- 
alry ;  and  they  put  an  end  to  the  encounter  vphenever  they 
thought  proper.  It  is  supposed  that  the  crafty  French  monarch 
was  willing  to  gratify  Henry's  vanity  by  allowing  him  to  enjoy  a 
petty  pre-eminence  in  these  pastimes.  He  ran  a  tilt  against  Mon-^ 
sieur  Grandeval,  whom  he  disabled  at  the  first  encounter.  He 
engaged  Monsieur  de  Montmorency,  whom,  however,  he  could  not 
throw  from  the  saddle.  He  fought  at  faulchion  with  a  French 
nobleman,  who  presented  him  with  his  courser  in  token  of  sub-= 
mission. 

But  these  empty  splendours  were  not  sufficient  to  r-^  _^^  -, 
appease  the  jealousy  of  the  nobles  at  home,  or  quiet 
the  murmurs  of  the  people.  Among  these,  the  duke  of  Bucking- 
ham, tlie  son  of  him  who  lost  his  life  in  the  reign  of  Richard  the 
Third,  was  the  foremost  to  complain.  He  had  often  been  heard 
to  treat  the  cardinal's  pride  and  profusion  with  just  contempt ; 
and  carrying  his  resentment  perhaps  to  an  improper  length,  some 
low  informers  took  care  that  Wolsey  should  be  apprised  of  all. 
The  substance  of  his  impeachment  was,  that  he  had  consulted  a 
fortune-teller  concerning  his  succession  to  the  crown,  and  had 
aifected  to  make  himself  popular.  This  was  but  a  weak  pretext 
to  take  away  the  life  of  a  nobleman,  whose  father  had  died  in 
defence  of  the  late  king :  but  he  was  brought  to  a  trial ;  and  the 
duke  of  Norfolk,  whose  son  had  married  his  daughter,  was  created 
high-steward  to  preside  at  this  solemn  procedure.  He  was  con= 
demned  to  die  as  a  traitor,  by  a  jury  consisting  of  a  duke,  a  mar- 
quis, seven  earls,  and  twelve  barons.  When  the  sentence  was 
pronouncing  against  him,  and  the  high-steward  came  to  mention 
the  word  traitor,  the  unhappy  prisoner  could  not  contain  his  in= 
dignation.  '<  My  lords,"  cried  he  to  the  judges,  «•'  I  am  no  traitor  ; 


7572  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

and  for  what  you  have  now  done  against  me,  take  my  sincere  for- 
giveness :  as  for  my  life,  I  think  it  ^  not  worth  petitioning  for  ; 
may  God  forgive  you,  and  pity  me  !"  He  was  soon  after  executed 
on  Tower  Hill. 

By  this  time  the  immense  treasures  of  the  late  king  were 
quite  exhausted  on  empty  pageants,  guilty  pleasures,  or  vain 
treaties  and  expeditions.  But  the  king  relied  on  Wolsey  alone 
for  replenishing  his  coiFers  ;  and  no  person  could  be  fitter  for  the 
purpose.  His  first  care  was  to  get  a  large  sum  of  money  from 
the  people,  under  the  title  of  a  benevolence,  which  added  to  its 
being  extorted  the  mortification  of  being  considered  as  a  free  gift. 
Henry  little  minded  the  manner  of  its  being  raised,  pi-ovided  he 
had  the  enjoyment  of  it.  However,  his  minister  met  with  some 
P^  -^j,  -,  opposition  in  his  attempts  to  levy  these  extorted  contri- 
butions. Having,  in  the  first  place,  exacted  a  consider- 
able subsidy  from  the  clergy,  he  next  addressed  himself  to  the 
house  of  commons ;  but  they  only  granted  him  half  the  supplies 
he  demanded.  Wolsey  was  at  first  highly  offended  at  their  par- 
simony, and  desired  to  be  heard  in  the  house  ;  but  as  this  would 
have  destroyed  the  very  form  and  constitution  of  that  august  body, 
they  replied,  that  none  could  be  permitted  to  sit  and  ai-gue  there 
but  such  as  had  been  elected  members.  This  was  the  first  at- 
tempt made  in  this  reign  to  render  the  king  master  of  the  debates 
in  parliament.  Wolsey  first  paved  the  way ;  and,  unfortunately 
for  the  kingdom,  Henry  tQQ  well  iinproved  upon  hjs  plans  soon 
after. 

A  treaty  with  France,  which  threatened  to  make  a  breach  with 
the  emperor,  induced  Henry  to  wish  for  new  supplies  j  or  at  least 
he  made  this  the  pretrext  of  his  demands.  But  as  the  parliament 
had  testified  their  reluctance  to  indulge  his  wishes,  he  followed 
the  advice  of  Wolsey,  and  resolved  to  make  use  of  his  preroga- 
tive alone  for  that  pui'pose.  He  issued  out  commissions  to  all 
the  counties  of  England  for  levying  four  shillings  in  the  pound 
Upon  the  clergy,  and  exacting  three  shillings  and  four  pence  from 
the  laity ;  nor  did  he  attempt  to  cover  the  violence  of  the  meas- 
ure by  giving  it  the  name  either  of  benevolence  or  loan.  This 
unwarrantable  stretch  of  royal  power  was  quickly  opposed  by  the 
people ;  they  were  unwilling  to  submit  to  impositions  unknown 
till  now  5  and  a  general  insurrection  threatened  to  ensue.    Henry 


-.r 


HENRY  Vm.  373 

had  the  prudence  to  stop  short  in  that  dangerous  path  into  wliicli 
he  had  entered  ;  and  declared,  by  ciixular  letters  to  all  the  coun- 
ties, that  what  was  demanded  was  only  by  way  of  benevolence. 
But  the  spirit  of  opposition,  once  roused,  was  not  so  easily  quiet- 
ed ;  the  citizens  of  London  hesitated  on  the  demand ;  and  in 
some  parts  of  the  country  insurrections  were  actually  begun, 
which  were  suppressed  by  the  duke  of  Suffolk.  These  imposts, 
which  were  first  advised  by  Wolsey,  not  happily  succeeding,  he 
began  to  lose  a  little  of  his  favour  with  the  king ;  and  this  displeas- 
ure was  still  more  increased  by  the  complaints  of  the  clergy,  who 
accused  him  of  extortion.  Henry  reproved  Wolsey  in  severe 
terms ;  which  rendered  him  more  cautious  and  artful  for  the  fu- 
ture. As  an  instance  of  his  cunning,  having  built  a  noble  palace, 
called  York-place,  at  Westminster,  for  his  own  use,  fearing  now 
the  general  censure  against  him,  he  made  a  present  of  it  to  the 
king,  assuring  him  that  from  the  first  he  intended  it  as  an  offer 
to  his  majesty.  Thus  Wolsey's  impunity  only  served  to  pave 
the  way  to  greater  extortions.  The  pride  of  this  prelate  was 
great ;  but  his  riches  were  still  greater.  In  order  to  have  a  pre- 
text for  amassing  such  sums,  he  undertook  to  found  two  colleges, 
one  at  Ipswich,  the  other  at  Oxford,  for  which  he  received  every 
day  fresh  grants  from  the  pope  and  the  king.  To  execute  this 
favourite  scheme,  he  obtained  a  liberty  of  suppressing  several 
monasteries,  and  converting  their  revenues  to  the  benefit  of  his 
new  foundations.  Whatever  might  have  been  the  pope's  induce- 
ment to  grant  him  these  privileges,  nothing  could  be  more  fatal 
to  the  pontiff's  interests;  for  Henry  was  thus  himself  taught 
shortly  afterwards  to  imitate  what  he  had  seen  a  subject  perform 
with  impunity. 

Hitherto  the  whole  administration  was  carried  on  by  Wolsey ; 
for  the  king  was  contented  to  lose,  in  the  embraces  of  his  mis- 
tresses, all  the  complaints  of  his  subjects  ;  and  the  cardinal  un- 
dertook to  keep  him  ignorant,  in  order  to  continue  his  own  un- 
controlled authority.  But  now  a  period  was  approaching  that 
was  to  put  an  end  to  this  minister's  exorbitant  power.  One  of 
the  most  extraordinary  and  important  revolutions  that  ever  em- 
ployed the  attention  of  man  was  now  ripe  for  execution.  This 
was  no  less  a  change  than  the  Reformation ;  to  have  an  idea  of 
the  rise  of  which,  it  will  be  proper  to  take  a  cursory  view  of  the 


374  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

state  of  the  church  at  that  time,  and  to  observe  by  what  seemingly 
contradictory  means  Providence  produces  the  most  happy  events. 
The  church  of  Rome  had  now,  for  more  than  a  thousand  years, 
been  corrupting  the  antient  simplicity  of  the  gospel,  and  con- 
verting into  a  temporality  the  kingdom  of  another  world.  The 
popes  had  been  frequently  seen  at  the  head  of  their  own  armies, 
fighting  for  their  dominions  with  the  arm  of  flesh,  and  forgetting, 
in  cruelty  and  detestable  maxims  of  state,  all  the  pretended  sanc- 
tity of  their  characters.  The  cardinals,  prelates,  and  dignitaries 
of  the  church,  lived  in  envied  splendour,  and  were  served  like  vo- 
luptuous princes ;  and  some  of  them  were  found  to  possess  eight 
or  nine  bishoprics  at  once.  Wherever  the  church  governed,  it 
exerted  its  power  with  cruelty ;  so  that  to  its  luxuries  the  crime 
of  tyranny  v/as  usually  added.  As  for  the  inferior  clergy,  both 
popish  and  protestant  writers  exclaim  against  their  abandoned 
and  dissolute  morals.  They  publicly  kept  mistresses,  and  be- 
queathed to  their  illegitimate  children  whatever  they  were  able 
to  save  from  their  pleasures,  or  extort  from  the  poor.  There  is 
still  to  be  seen  a  will  made  by  a  bishop  of  Cambray,  in  which  he 
bequeathed  a  certain  sum  for  the  use  of  the  bastards  he  already 
had,  and  those  which,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  he  might  happen  to 
have.  In  many  parts  of  England  and  Germany,  the  people  oblig- 
ed their  priests  to  have  concubines,  that  the  laity  might  preserve 
their  wives  with  greater  security  ;  while  the  poor  laborious  pea- 
sant and  artisan  saw  all  the  fruits  of  their  toil  go,  not  to  clothe 
and  maintain  their  own  little  families,  but  to  pamper  men  who 
insulted  them  with  lectures  to  which  their  example  appeared  a 
flat  contradiction.  But  the  vices  of  the  clergy  were  not  greater 
than  their  ignorance ;  few  of  them  knew  the  meaning  of  their 
Latin  mass.  Their  sagacity  was  chiefly  employed  in  finding  out 
witches,  and  exorcising  the  possessed  5  but  what  most  increased 
the  hatred  of  the  people  against  them  v/as  the  selling  pardons  and 
absolutions  for  sin,  at  certain  stated  prices.  A  deacon,  or  subr 
deacon,  who  committed  murder,  was  absolved  from  his  crime,  and 
allowed  to  possess  three  benefices,  upon  paying  twenty  crowns. 
A  bishop  or  abbot  might  commit  murder  for  about  ten  pounds  of 
our  money.  Every  crime  had  its  stated  value ;  and  absolutions 
were  given  for  sins  not  only  already  committed,  but  such  as 
should  be  committed  hereafter.    The  wisest  of  the  people  looked 


HENRY  Vllt  375 

with  silent  detestation  on  these  impositions ;  and  the  ignoranfe 
themselves,  whom  fortune  seemed  to  have  formed  for  slavery,  be- 
gan to  open  their  eyes  to  such  glaring  absurdities. 

These  vices  and  impositions  were  now  almost  come  to  a  head ; 
and  the  increase  of  arts  and  learning  among  the  laity,  propagated 
by  means  of  printing,  which  had  been  lately  invented,  began  to 
make  them  resist  that  power  which  was  originally  founded  on 
deceit.  Leo  the  Tenth  was  at  that  time  pope,  and  eagerly  em- 
ployed in  building  the  church  of  St.  Peter  at  Rome.  In  order  to 
procure  money  for  carrying  on  that  expensive  undertaking,  he 
gave  a  commission  for  selling  indulgences,  a  practice  that  had 
been  often  tried  before.  These  were  to  free  the  purchaser  from 
the  pains  of  purgatory ;  and  they  would  serve  even  for  one's 
friends,  if  purchased  with  that  intention.  There  were  every 
where  shops  opened  where  they  were  to  be  sold ;  but  in  general 
they  were  to  be  had  at  taverns,  brothels,  and  gaming-houses.  The 
Augustine  friars  had  usually  been  employed  in  Saxony  to  preach 
the  indulgences,  and  from  this  trust  had  derived  both  profit  and 
consideration  ;  but  the  pope's  minister,  supposing  that  they  had 
found  out  illicit  methods  of  secreting  the  money,  transferred  the 
lucrative  employment  from  them  to  the  Dominicans.  Martin 
Luther,  professor  in  the  university  of  Wittenberg  on  the  Elbe,  was 
an  Augustine  monk,  and  one  of  those  who  resented  this  transfer 
of  the  sale  of  indulgences  from  one  order  to  another.  He  began 
to  show  his  indignation  by  preaching  against  their  efficacy  ;  and 
being  naturally  of  a  fiery  temper,  and  provoked  by  opposition,  he 
inveighed  against  the  authority  of  the  pope  himself.  Being  driven 
hard  by  his  adversaries,  still  as  he  enlarged  his  reading  in  order  to 
support  his  tenets,  he  discovered  some  new  abuse  or  error  in  the 
church  of  Rome.  The  people,  who  had  long  groaned  under  the 
papal  tyranny,  heard  his  discourses  with  pleasure,  and  defended 
him  against  the  authority  and  machinations  of  his  enemies.  Fred- 
eric, elector  of  Saxony,  surnamed  the  Wise,  openly  protected  him ; 
the  republic  of  Zurich  even  reformed  their  church  according  to  tlie 
new  model ;  and  Luther,  a  man  naturally  inflexible  and  vehe- 
ment, was  become  incapable,  either  from  promises  of  advancement 
or  terrors  of  severity,  of  relinquishing  a  sect  of  which  he  was  him- 
self the  founder.  It  was  in  vain,  therefore,  that  the  pope  issued 
out  his  bulls  ao-ainst  Luther :  it  was  in  vain  that  the  Dominicaii 


.  Sf 6  HISTOUY  OF  ENGLAND. 

friars  procured  his  books  to  be  burned  ;  he  boldly  abused  the  Do- 
minicans, and  burned  the  pope's  bull  in  the  streets  of  Witten- 
berg.  In  the  mean  time,  the  dispute  was  carried  on  by  writing 
on  each  side.  Luther,  though  opposed  by  the  pope,  the  conclave, 
and  all  the  clergy,  supported  his  cause  singly,  and  with  success. 
As  the  controversy  was  new,  his  ignorance  of  many  parts  of  the 
subject  was  not  greater  that  theirs  ;  and,  ill  as  he  wrote,  they  an- 
swered still  worse.  Opinions  are  inculcated  upon  the  minds  of 
mankind,  rather  by  confidence  and  perseverance,  than  by  strength 
of  reasoning  or  beauty  of  diction  ;  and  no  man  had  more  confi- 
dence or  more  perseverance  than  he.  In  this  dispute  it  was  the 
fate  of  Henry  to  be  a  champion  on  both  sides.  His  father,  who 
had  given  him  the  education  of  a  scholar,  permitted  him  to  be  in- 
structed in  school  divinity,  which  then  was  the  principal  object  of 
learned  inquiry.  Henry,  therefore,  willing  to  convince  the  world 
of  his  abilities  in  that  science,  obtained  the  pope's  permission  to 
read  the  works  of  Luther,  which  had  been  forbidden  under  pain 
of  excommunication.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  king  defended 
the  seven  sacraments,  out  of  St.  Thomas  Aquinas ;  and  showed 
some  dexterity  in  this  science,  though  it  is  thought  that  Wolsey 
had  the  chief  hand  in  directing  him.  A  book  being  thus  finished 
in  haste,  it  was  sent  to  Rome  for  the  pope's  approbation,  which  it 
is  natural  to  suppose  would  not  be  withheld.  The  pontiff,  i-av- 
ished  with  its  eloquence  and  depth,  compai-ed  it  to  the  labours  of 
St.  Jerome  or  St.  Augustine  ;  and  rewarded  the  author  with  the 
title  of  Defender  of  the  Faith,  little  imagining  that  Henry  was 
soon  to  be  one  of  the  most  terrible  enemies  that  ever  the  church 
of  Rome  had  to  contend  with. 

Besides  these  causes,  which  contributed  to  render  the  Romisk 
church  odious  and  contemptible,  there  were  still  others  proceed- 
ing from  political  measures.  Clement  the  Seventh  had  succeed- 
ed Leo ;  and  the  hereditary  animosity  between  the  emperor  and 
the  pope  breaking  out  into  a  war,  Clement  was  imprisoned  in  the 
castle  of  St.  Angelo,  and  with  thirteen  cardinals,  his  adherents, 
kept  in  custody  for  his  ransom.  As  the  demands  of  the  emperor 
were  exorbitant,  Henry  undertook  to  negotiate  for  the  pope,  and 
was  procuring  him  a  very  favourable  treaty ;  but  his  holiness,  in 
the  mean  time,  corrupting  his  guards,  had  W\e  good  fortune  to 
procure  his  escape  from  confinement  j  and,  leaving  the  treaty 


Henry  viir.  377 

unfinisheci,  sent  Henry  a  letter  of  thanks  for  his  mediation.  The 
violence  of  the  emperor  taught  Henry  that  popes  might  be  injur- 
ed with  impunity ;  and  the  behaviour  of  the  pope  manifested  but 
little  of  that  sanctity  or  infallibility  to  which  the  pontiffs  pretend- 
ed. Besides,  as  Henry  had  laid  the  pope  thus  under  obligations, 
he  supposed  that  he  might,  upon  any  emergency,  expect  a  grate- 
ful return. 

It  was  in  this  situation  of  the  church  and  the  pope,  that  a  new 
scene  was  going  to  be  opened,  which  was  to  produce  endless  dis- 
turbances, and  to  change  the  whole  system  of  Europe.  Henry 
had  now  been  more  than  twenty  years  married  to  Cath- 
arine of  Arragon,  who,  as  we  have  related,  had  been  l^^"'''-^ 
brought  over  from  Spain  to  marry  his  elder  brother,  who  died  a 
few  months  after  cohabitation.  But,  notwithstanding  the  submis- 
sive deference  paid  to  the  indulgence  of  the  church,  Henry's  mar- 
riage with  this  princess  did  not  pass  without  scruple  and  hesita- 
tion. The  prejudices  of  the  people  were  in  general  bent  against 
a  conjugal  union  between  such  near  relations ;  and  the  late  king, 
though  he  had  solemnised  the  espousals  when  his  son  was  but 
twelve  years  of  age,  gave  many  intimations  that  he  intended  to 
annul  them  at  a  proper  opportunity.  These  intentions  might  have 
given  Henry  some  doubts  and  scruples  concerning  the  legitimacy 
of  his  marriage ;  but  as  he  had  three  children  by  the  princess,  and 
as  her  character  and  conduct  were  blameless,  he  for  a  while  kept 
his  suggestions  private.  But  she  was  six  years  older  than  her 
husband ;  and  the  decay  of  her  beauty,  together  with  particular 
infirmities  and  diseases,  had  contributed  to  make  him  desirous  of 
another  consort.  However,  though  he  felt  a  secret  dislike  to  her 
person,  yet  for  a  long  time  he  broke  out  into  no  flagrant  act  of 
contempt ;  being  contented  to  range  from  beauty  to  beauty  among 
the  ladies  of  his  court,  and  his  rank  always  procuring  him  a  ready 
compliance.  But  Henry  was  carried  forward,  though  perhaps 
not  at  first  excited,  by  a  motive  much  more  powerful  than  the 
tacit  suggestions  of  his  conscience.  It  happened  that  among  the 
"maids  of  honour,  then  attending  the  queen,  there  was  one  Anne 
Boleyn,  the  daughter  of  sir  Thomas  Boleyn,  a  gentleman  of  dis- 
tinction, and  related  to  many  of  the  nobility.  He  had  been  em- 
ployed by  the  king  in  several  embassies,  and  was  married  to  a 
daughter  of  the  duke  of  Norfolk.    The  beauty  of  Anne  surpassed 

VOL.  r,  48 


Srs  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

whatever  had  hitherto  appeared  at  this  voluptuous  court ;  and  her 
education,  which  had  been  at  Paris,  tended  to  set  oflFher  personal 
charms.  Her  features  were  regular,  mild,  and  attractive ;  her 
stature  elegant,  though  below  the  middle  size  j  while  her  wit  and 
vivacity  exceeded  even  her  other  allurements.  Henry,  who  had 
never  learned  the  art  of  restraining  any  passion  that  he  desired 
to  gratify,  saw  and  loved  her ;  but,  after  several  efforts  to  indues 
her  to  comply  with  his  criiiiinal  desires,  he  found  that  without 
marriage  he  could  have  no  chance  of  succeeding.  This  obstacle, 
therefore,  he  hardily  undertook  to  remove  ;  and  as  his  own  quee^ 
was  now  become  hateful  to  him, — in  order  to  procure  a  divorce, 
he  alleged  tliat  his  conscience  rebuked  him  for  having  so  long 
lived  in  incest  with  the  wife  of  his  brother.  In  this  pretended 
perplexity  he  applied  to  Clement  tlie  Seventh,  who  owed  him 
many  obligations,  desiring  him  to  dissolve  the  bull  of  the  former 
pope,  which  had  given  him  permission  to  marry  Catharine  ;  and 
to  declare  that  it  was  not  in  the  power  even  of  the  holy  see  to 
dispense  with  a  law  so  strictly  enjoined  in  scripture.  The  un- 
fortunate pope  was  now  in  the  utmost  perplexity  ;  queen  Catha- 
rine was  aunt  to  the  emperor  who  had  lately  made  him  a  prisoner, 
and  whose  resentment  he  dreaded  to  rekindle  by  thus  injuring  so 
near  a  relation ;  besides,  he  could  not  in  prudence  declare  the 
bull  of  the  former  pope  illicit,  for  this  would  be  giving  a  blow  to 
the  doctrine  of  papal  infallibility.  On  the  other  hand,  Henry  was 
his  protector  and  friend  5  the  dominions  of  England  were  the 
chief  resource  from  which  his  finances  were  supplied ;  and  the 
king  of  France,  some  time  before,  had  obtained  a  bull  of  divorce 
in  somewhat  similar  circumstances.  In  this  exigence,  he  thought 
the  wisest  method  would  be  to  spin  out  the  affair  by  a  negotiation ; 
and  in  the  mean  time  sent  over  a  commission  to  Wolsey,  in  con- 
junction with  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  or  any  other  English 
prelate,  to  examine  the  validity  of  the  king's  marriage  and  the 
former  dispensation ;  granting  them  also  a  provisional  dispensa- 
tion for  the  king's  marriage  with  any  other  person.  When  this 
message  was  laid  before  the  council  in  England,  they  prudently 
considered  that  an  advice  given  by  the  pope  in  this  secret  manner 
might  very  easily  be  disavowed  in  public,  and  that  a  clandestine 
marriage  would  totally  invalidate  the  legitimacy  of  any  issue  the 
king  should  have  by  such  a  match.    In  consequence  of  this,  fresh 


HENRY  Vlir.  379 

messengers  were  dispatched  to  Rome,  and  evasive  answers  re- 
turned, the  pope  still  continuing  to  promise,  recant,  dispute,  and 
temporise ;  hoping  that  the  king's  passion  would  never  hold  out 
during  the  tedious  course  of  an  ecclesiastical  controversy.  In  this 
he  was  entirely  mistaken.  Henry  had  been  long  taught  to  dis- 
pute as  well  as  he,  and  quickly  found,  or  wrested,  many  texts  of 
scripture  to  favour  his  opinions  or  his  passions.  To  his  arguments 
he  added  threats,  assuring  the  pope,  that  the  English  were  already 
but  too  well  disposed  to  withdraw  from  the  holy  see ;  and  that, 
if  he  continued  uncomplying,  the  whole  country  would  readily 
follow  the  example  of  a  monarch  who,  stung  by  ingratitude,  should 
deny  all  obedience  to  a  pontiff  by  whom  he  had  always  been 
treated  with  falsehood  and  duplicity.  The  king  even  proposed 
to  his  holiness,  whether,  in  case  of  his  not  being  permitted  to  put 
away  his  present  queen,  he  might  not  have  a  dispensation  for 
having  two  wives  at  a  time. 

The  pope,  perceiving  the  eagerness  of  the  king,  at  one  time  had 
thoughts  of  complying  with  his  solicitations,  and  sent  cardinal 
Campegio,  his  legate,  to  London,  who,  with  Wolsey,  p.  ^oo  -i 
opened  a  court  for  trying  the  legitimacy  of  the  king's 
present  maiTiage,  and  cited  the  king  and  the  queen  to  appear  be- 
fore them.  They  both  presented  themselves  ;  and  the  king  an- 
swered to  his  name  when  called  :  but  the  queen,  instead  of  an- 
swering to  hers,  rose  from  her  seat,  and,  throwing  herself  at  the 
king's  feet,  in  the  most  pathetic  manner  entreated  him  to  have 
pity  upon  her  helpless  situation.  A  stranger,  unprotected,  un- 
friended, she  could  only  rely  on  him  as  her  guardian  and  defend- 
er, on  him  alone  who  knew  her  submission  and  her  innocence, 
and  not  ijpon  any  court  in  which  her  enemies  prevailed,  and 
would  wrest  the  laws  against  her :  she  therefore  refused  the  pres- 
ent trial,  where  she  could  expect  neither  justice  nor  im.partiality. 
Yet,  notwithstanding  the  queen's  objections,  her  trial  went  for- 
ward; and  Henry  shortly  hoped  to  be  gratified  in  his  most  san- 
guine expectations.  The  principal  point  which  came  before  the 
legates  was  the  proof  of  prince  Arthur's  consummation  of  his 
marriage  with  Catharine,  which  some  of  his  own  expressions  to 
that  purpose  tended  to  confirm.  Other  topics  were  preparing, 
tending  to  prove  the  inability  of  the  pope  himself  to  grant  such 
!i.  dispensation ;  a;nd  the  business  seemed  now  to  be  drawing  near 


380  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND; 

a  period,  when,  to  the  great  surprise  of  all,  Campegio,  without 
any  warning,  and  upon  very  frivolous  pretences,  prorogued  the 
court,  and  transferred  the  cause  before  the  court  of  Rome. 

During  the  course  of  these  perplexing  negotiations,  on  the  issue 
of  which  Henry's  happiness  seemed  to  depend,  he  had  at  first 
expected  to  find  in  his  favoui'ite  VVolsey  a  warm  defender  and  a 
steady  adherent ;  but  in  this  he  found  himself  mistaken.  Wol- 
sey  seemed  to  be  nearly  in  the  same  dilemma  with  the  pope.  On 
the  one  hand,  he  was  to  please  his  master  the  king,  from  whom 
he  had  received  a  thousand  marks  of  favour ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  he  feared  to  disoblige  the  pope,  Avhose  servant  he  more  im- 
mediately was,  and  who  besides  had  power  to  punish  his  disobe- 
dience. He  therefore  resolved  to  continue  neuter  in  this  contro- 
versy ;  and,  though  of  all  men  the  most  haughty,  he  gave  way  on 
this  occasion  to  his  colleague  Campegio  in  all  things,  pi'etendi;'g 
a  deference  to  his  skill  in  canon  law.  Wolsey's  scheme  of  te.u- 
porising  was  highly  displeasing  to  the  king ;  but  for  a  while  he 
endeavoured  to  stifle  his  resentment,  until  it  could  act  with  more 
fatal  certainty.  He  for  some  time  looked  out  for  a  man  of  equal 
abilities  and  less  art ;  and  it  was  not  long  before  accident  threw 
in  his  way  one  Thomas  Cranmer,  a  man  of  learning  and  talent, 
and  probably  of  greater  integrity  than  the  cardinal  possessed. 
Cranmer  was  a  doctor  of  divinity,  and  a  professor  at  Cambridge, 
but  had  lost  his  office  upon  marrying  contrary  to  the  institutes  of 
the  canon  law,  which  enjoined  celibacy  to  all  the  clei'gy.  He 
had  travelled  in  his  youth  into  Germany  ;  and  it  was  there  he  be- 
came acquainted  with  Luther's  works,  and  embraced  his  doc- 
trines. This  man  happening  to  fall  one  evening  into  company 
Avith  Gardiner,  secretary  of  state,  and  Fox,  the  king's  almoner, 
the  business  of  the  divorce  became  the  subject  of  conversation. 
He  gave  it  as  his  opinion,  that  the  readiest  way  to  quiet  the 
king's  conscience,  or  to  extort  the  pope's  consent,  would  be  to 
consult  all  the  universities  of  Europe  upon  the  affair ;  an  advice 
which,  being  brought  to  the  king,  pleased  him  so  much,  that  Cran- 
mer was  desired  to  follow  the  court. 

ri529  "1         '^'^^  ^^"§5  finding  himself  provided  with  a  person  who 

could  supply  Wolsey's  place,  appeared  less  reserved 

in  his  resentments  against  that  prelate.     The  attorney-general 

was  ordered  to  prepare  a  b^l  of  indictment  against  him  j  and  he 


HENRY  Vm.  S81 

^vas  soon  after  commanded  to  resign  the  great  seal.  Crimes  are 
easily  found  against  a  favourite  in  disgrace,  and  the  courtiers  did 
not  fail  to  increase  the  catalogue  of  his  errors.  He  was  prdered 
to  depart  from  his  palace  at  Westminster  ;  and  all  his  furniture 
and  plate  were  converted  to  the  king's  use.  The  inventory  of 
his  goods  being  taken,  they  were  found  to  exceed  even  the  most 
extravagant  surmises.  Of  fine  Holland  alone  there  were  found 
a  thousand  pieces ;  the  walls  of  his  palace  were  covered  witli 
cloth  of  gold  and  silver ;  he  had  a  cup-board  of  plate  of  massy 
gold  ;  all  the  rest  of  his  riches  and  furniture  were  in  proportion, 
and  probably  their  greatness  invited  the  hand  of  power.  The 
parliament  soon  after  confirmed  the  sentence  of  the  court  of  Star^ 
chamber  against  him,  and  he  was  ordered  to  retire  to  Esher,  a 
country-seat  which  he  possessed  near  Hampton ;  there  to  await 
the  king's  further  pleasure,  with  all  the  fluctuations  of  hope  and 
apprehension.  Still,  however,  he  was  in  possession  of  the  arch- 
bishopric of  York,  and  bishopric  of  Winchester ;  and  the  king 
gave  him  distant  gleams  of  hope,  by  sending  him  a  ring,  accom- 
panied wirh  a  gracious  message.  Wolsey,  who,  like  every  bad 
character,  vi^as  proud  to  his  equals,  and  mean  to  those  above  him, 
happening  to  meet  the  king's  messenger  on  horseback,  immedi- 
ately alighted,  and,  throwing  himself  on  his  knees  in  the  mire, 
received,  in  that  abject  manner,  those  marks  of  his  majesty's  con- 
descension. But  his  hopes  were  soon  overturned ;  for,  after  he 
had  remained  some  time  at  Esher,  he  was  ordered  to  remove  to 
his  see  of  York,  where  he  took  up  his  residence  at  Ca-  ri  cqn  t 
wood,  and  rendered  himself  very  popular  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood by  his  affability.  He  was  not  allowed  to  remain  long 
unmolested  in  this  retreat.  He  was  arrested  by  the  earl  of  Nor- 
thumberland, at  the  king's  command,  for  high-treason  ;  and  prep* 
arations  were  made  for  conducting  him  to  London,  in  order  to 
his  trial.  He  at  first  refused  to  comply  with  the  requisition,  as 
being  a  cardinal ;  but  finding  the  earl  bent  on  performing  his  com- 
mission, he  complied,  and  set  out,  by  easy  journeys,  for  London, 
to  appear  as  a  criminal  where  he  had  acted  as  a  king.  In  his 
way  he  staid  a  fortnight  at  the  mansion  of  the  earl  of  Shrewsbury; 
where  one  day  at  dinner  he  was  taken  ill,  not  without  violent 
suspicions  of  having  poisoned  himself.  Being  thence  brought 
forward,  he  with  much  difficulty  reached  Leicester  abbey ;  where 


982  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

the  monks  coming  out  to  meet  him,  he  said, «  Father  Abbot,  I  am 
come  to  lay  my  bones  among  you  j"  and  immediately  ordered 
his  bed  to  be  prepared.  As  his  disorder  increased,  an  officer  be- 
ing placed  near,  at  once  to  guard  and  attend  him,  he  spoke  to 
him,  a  little  before  he  expired,  to  this  effect  :  "  I  pray  you  have 
me  heartily  recommended  unto  his  royal  majesty;  he  is  a  prince 
of  a  most  royal  carriage,  and  hath  a  princely  heart ;  and  rather 
than  he  will  miss  or  want  any  part  of  his  will,  he  will  endanger 
one  half  of  his  kingdom.  I  do  assure  you  I  have  kneeled  before 
him,  for  three  hours  together,  to  persuade  him  from  his  will  and 
appetite  but  could  not  prevail.  Had  I  but  served  God  as  dili- 
gently as  I  have  served  the  king,  he  would  not  have  given  me 
over  in  my  gray  hairs.  But  this  is  the  just  reward  that  I  must 
receive  for  my  indulgent  pains  and  study,  not  regarding  my  ser- 
vice to  God,  but  only  to  my  prince."  He  died  soon  after,  iii  all 
the  pangs  of  remorse,  and  left  a  life  which  he  had  all  along  ren- 
,dered  turbid  by  ambition,  and  wretched  by  mean  assiduities.  He 
left  two  natural  children  ;  one  of  whom,  being  a  priest,  was  load- 
ed with  church  preferments. 

Henry  being  now  freed  from  the  control  of  a  person  who  had 
for  some  time  been  an  obstacle  to  his  intentions,  by  Cranmer's 
advice  he  had  the  legality  of  his  present  marriage  canvassed  in 
the  most  noted,  universities  of  Europe.  It  was  very  extraordi- 
nary to  see  the  king  on  one  side  soliciting  the  universities  to  be 
favourable  to  his  passion ;  and,  on  the  other,  the  emperor  press- 
ing them  with  equal  ardour  to  be  favourable  to  his  aunt.  Henry 
liberally  rewarded  those  doctors  who  declared  on  his  side ;  and 
the  emperor  granted  benefices  to  sucli  as  voted  in  conformity  to 
his  wishes.  Time  has  discovered  these  intrigues.  In  one  of 
Henry's  account-books  we  find  the  disbursements  he  made  on 
these  occasions.  To  a  sub-deacon  he  gave  a  crown,  to  a  deacon 
two  crowns ;  and  he  also  gratified  the  rest,  in  proportion  to  the 
consequence  of  their  station  or  opinion.  The  person,  however, 
who  bribed  on  these  occasions,  excused  himself  by  declaring  tliat 
he  never  paid  the  money  till  after  the  vote  was  given.  In  this 
contest,  the  liberalities,  and  consequently  the  votes,  of  Henry 
prevailed ;  his  intrigues  for  a  favourable  decision  being  better  car- 
ried on,  as  he  was  most  interested  in  the  debate.  All  the  col- 
leges of  Italy  and  France  unanimously  declared  his  present  mar- 


HENRY  VItt  S8S 

1-iage  to  be  repugnant  to  all  laws  divine  and  human ;  and  there- 
fore alleged,  that  it  wa&  not  in  the  power  of  the  pope  himself  to 
grant  a  dispensation.  The  only  places  where  this  decision  was 
most  warmly  opposed,  were  at  Oxford  and  Cambridge  :  but  they 
also  concurred  in  the  same  opinion  at  last,  having  furnished  out 
the  formality  of  a  debate.  But  the  agents  of  Henry  were  nat 
content  with  the  suffrages  of  the  universities  alone  ;  the  opinions 
of  the  Jewish  rabbles  were  also  demanded  :  however,  their  votes 
were  easily  bought  up. 

Henry,  being  thus  fortified  by  the  suffrages  of  the  uni-  r^  ^n^  -t 
versities,  now  resolved  to  oppose  even  the  pope  himself; 
and  began  in  parliament  by  reviving  an  old  law  against  the  cler- 
gy, by  which  it  was  decreed,  that  all  those  who  had  submitted  to 
the  legantine  authority  had  incurred  severe  penalties.  The  cler- 
gy, to  conciliate  the  king's  favour,  were  compelled  to  pay  a  fine 
of  a  hundred  and  eighteen  thousand  pounds.  A  confession  was 
likewise  extorted  from  them,  that  the  king  was  protector  and  su- 
preme head  of  the  church  and  the  clergy  of  England.  These 
concessions  cut  off  a  great  part  of  the  profits,  and  still  more  of 
the  power,  of  the  church  of  Rome.  An  act  soon  after  was  passed 
against  levying  the  first-fruits,  or  a  year's  rent,  of  all  r-ft^ng  i 
the  bishoprics  that  became  vacant.  The  tie  that  held 
Henry  to  the  church  being  thus  broken,  he  resolved  to  keep  no 
further  measures  with  the  pontiff.  He  therefore  privately  mar- 
ried Anne  Boleyn,  whom  he  had  created  marchioness  of  Pem- 
broke ;  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  uncle  to  the  new  queen,  her  father, 
mother,  and  doctor  Cranmer,  being  present  at  the  ceremony. 
Soon  after  finding  the  queen  pregnant,  he  publicly  owned  his 
maiTiage ;  and,  to  colour  his  disobedience  to  the  pope  with  an  ap- 
pearance of  triumph,  he  passed  with  his  beautiful  bride  through 
London,  with  a  magnificence  greater  than  had  been  ever  known 
before.  The  streets  were  strewed,  the  walls  of  the  houses  were 
hung  with  tapestry,  the  conduits  ran  with  wine,  and  an  universal 
joy  was  diffused  among  the  people,  who  were  contented  rather 
with  the  present  festivity  than  solicitous  to  examine  the  motives 
of  it.  Catharine,  who  had  all  along  supported  her  claims  with 
resolution,  and  yet  with  modesty,  was  cited  to  a  trial ;  but,  re- 
fusing to  appear,  she  was  pronounced  contumacious ;  and  judg- 
ment was  given  against  the  validity  of  her  marriage  with  the  king. 


354  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

At  length,  finding  the  inutility  of  further  resistance,  she  retired 
to  Ampthill,  near  Dunstable,  where  she  passed  the  rest  of  her 
1  ife  in  pi-ivacy  and  peace. 

When  this  intelligence  was  conveyed  to  Rome,  the  conclave 
was  in  a  rage ;  and  the  pope,  incited  by  the  ardour  of  the  cardi- 
nals, and  frightened  also  by  the  menaces  of  the  emperor,  published 
a  sentence,  declaring  queen  Catharine  alone  to  be  Henry's  lawful 
wife ;  and  requiring  him  to  take  her  again,  with  a  denunciation 
of  censures  in  case  of  refusal.  On  the  other  hand,  Henry,  finding 
that  his  subjects  of  all  ranks  had  taken  part  with  him,  and  had 
willingly  complied  with  his  attempts  to  break  a  foreign  depend- 
ence, resolved  no  longer  to  continue  those  submissions  which  no 
power  could  extort.  The  people  had  been  prepared  by  degrees 
for  this  great  innovation :  care  had  been  taken  for  some  years  to 
inculcate  the  doctrine,  that  the  pope  was  entitled  to  no  authority 
beyond  the  limits  of  his  own  diocese.  The  king,  therefore,  no 
longer  delayed  his  meditated  scheme  of  separating  entirely  from 
the  church  of  Rome.  The  parliament  was  at  his  devotion  ;  the 
majority  of  the  clergy  were  in  his  interest,  as  they  had  already 
declared  against  the  pope,  by  decreeing  in  favour  of  the  divorce  ; 
and  the  people,  above  all,  wished  to  see  the  church  humbled, 
which  had  so  long  controlled  them  at  pleasure,  and  grown  opu- 
lent by  their  labours  and  distresses.  Thus  all  things  conspiring  to 
co-operate  with  his  designs,  he  ordered  himself  to  be  declared  by 
n  fi'Xd  1  ^^^  clergy  the  supreme  head  of  the  church  ;  the  parlia- 
ment  confirmed  the  title,  abolished  all  authority  of  the 
pope  in  England,  voted  all  tributes  formerly  paid  to  the  holy  see 
as  illegal,  and  intrusted  the  king  with  the  collation  to  all  ecclesi- 
astical benefices.  The  nation  came  into  the  king's  measures 
with  joy,  and  took  an  oath,  called  the  oath  of  supremacy;  all  the 
credit  of  the  pope,  that  had  subsisted  for  ages,  was  now  at  once 
overthrown ;  and  none  seemed  to  I'epine  at  the  revolution,  except 
those  who  were  immediately  interested  by  their  dependance  on 
the  court  of  Rome. 

But  though  Henry  had  thus  separated  from  the  church,  he  had 
not  addicted  himself  to  the  system  of  any  other  reformer.  The 
idea  of  heresy  still  appeared  detestable  as  well  as  formidable  to 
him ;  and  whilst  his  resentment  against  the  see  of  Rome  had  re- 
moved one  part  of  his  early  prejudices,  he  made  it  a  point  never 


HENRY  VIII.  383 

to  relinquish  the  rest.  Separate  as  he  stood  from  the  catholic 
church,  and  from  the  Roman  pontiff,  the  head  of  it,  he  still  valued 
himself  on  maintaining  the  catholic  doctrines,  and  on  guarding  by 
fire  and  sword  the  imagined  purity  of  its  establishments.  His 
ministers  and  courtiers  were  of  as  motley  a  character  as  his  con- 
duct; and  seemed  to  waver,  during  the  whole  reign,  between  the 
antient  and  the  new  religion.  The  young  queen,  engaged  by  in- 
terest as  well  as  inclination,  favoured  the  cause  of  the  reformers  ; 
Thomas  Cromwell,  who,  from  being  a  creature  of  Wolsey,  had,  by 
an  admirable  defence  of  the  conduct  of  his  old  master,  procured  the 
favour  and  confidence  of  the  king,  embraced  the  same  views.  Be- 
ing a  man  of  prudence  and  ability,he  was  very  successful  in  promot- 
ing the  reformation,  though  in  a  concealed  manner*  Cranmer,  who 
was  now  become  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  had  all  along  adopted 
the  protestant  tenets,  and  had  gained  Henry's  friendship  by  his 
candour  and  sincerity.  On  the  other  hand,  the  duke  of  Norfolk 
adhered  to  the  old  mode  of  worship ;  and  by  the  greatness  of  his 
rank,  as  well  as  by  his  talents  for  peace  and  war,  he  had  great 
weight  in  the  king's  council.  Gardiner,  lately  created  bishop  of 
Winchester,  had  enlisted  himself  in  the  same  party;  and  the 
suppleness  of  his  chai'acter,  and  the  dexterity  of  his  conduct,  had 
rendered  him  extremely  useful  to  it.  The  king,  mean  while,  who 
held  the  balance  between  these  contending  factions,  was  enabled, 
by  the  courtship  paid  him  by  both  protestants  and  catholics,  to 
assume  an  immeasurable  authority. 

As  the  mode  of  religion  was  not  as  yet  known,  and  as  the 
minds  of  those  who  were  of  opposite  sentiments  were  extremely 
exasperated,  it  naturally  followed  that  several  must  fall  a  sacri^ 
fice  in  the  contest  between  antient  establishments  and  modern 
reformation.  The  reformers  were  the  first  who  were  exhibited 
as  unhappy  examples  of  the  vindictive  fury  of  those  who  were 
for  the  continuance  of  antient  superstitions.  One  James  Bain- 
ham,  a  gentleman  of  the  Temple,  being  accused  of  favouring  the 
doctrines  of  Luther,  had  been  brought  before  sir  Thomas  More 
during  his  chancellorship ;  and,  after  being  put  to  the  torture,  was 
condemned  as  a  relapsed  heretic,  and  was  burned  in  Smithfield. 
Thomas  Bilney,  a  priest,  had  embraced  the  new  doctrine ;  but, 
being  terrified  into  an  abjuration,  he  was  so  stung  with  remorse, 
that  he  went  into  Norfolk,  publicly  recanting  his  former  conduct^ 
VOL.  I,  49 


S86  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

and  exposing  the  errors  of  popery.  He  was  soon  seized,  tried  in 
the  bishop's  court,  condemned  as  a  relapsed  heretic,  and  burned 
accordingly.  On  the  other  hand,  Henry  was  not  remiss  in  pun- 
ishing such  as  disowned  the  propriety  of  his  late  defection  from 
Ronje;  and,  as  the  monks  suftered  most  by  the  reformation,  so 
they  were  most  obnoxious,  from  their  free  manner  of  speaking,  to 
the  royal  resentment. 

To  assist  him  in  bringing  these  to  punishment,  the  parliament 
liad  made  it  capital  to  deny  his  supremacy  over  the  church ;  and 
many  priors  and  ecclesiastics  lost  their  lives  for  this  new  species 
of  crime.  But  of  those  who  fell  a  sacrifice  to  this  stern  and  un- 
just law,  none  are  so  much  to  be  regretted  as  John  Fisher,  bishop 
of  Rochester,  and  the  celebrated  sir  Thomas  More.  Fisher  was 
a  prelate  eminent  for  his  learning  and  morals  ;  but  so  firmly  at- 
tached to  antient  opinions,  that  he  was  thrown  into  prison,  and 
depi'ived  of  his  ecclesiastical  revenues  j  so  that  he  had  scarcely 
even  rags  to  cover  him  in  his  severe  confinement.  He  was  soon 
P^  -^ ;-  -1  after  indicted  for  denying  the  king's  supremacy,  con- 
demned, and  beheaded. 

Sir  Thomas  More  is  entitled  to  still  greater  pity,  as  his  merits 
were  greater.  This  extraordinary  man,  who  was  one  of  the  re- 
vivers of  antient  literature,  and  incontestably  the  foremost  writer 
of  his  age,  had,  for  some  time,  refused  to  act  in  subserviency  to 
the  capricious  passions  of  the  king.  He  had  been  created  chan- 
cellor ;  but  gave  up  that  high  office  rather  than  concur  in  the 
breach  with  the  church  of  Rome.  The  austerity  of  this  man's 
virtue,  and  the  sanctity  of  his  manners,  had  in  no  wise  encroached 
on  the  gentleness  of  his  temper ;  and  even  in  the  midst  of  poverty 
a,nd  disgrace,  he  could  preserve  that  natural  gaiety  which  was 
probably  inspired  by  conscious  innocence.  But  on  the  present 
occasion,  being  put  into  confinement,  no  entreaties  or  arguments 
could  prevail  upon  him  to  pronounce  an  entire  acknowledgment 
of  the  justice  of  the  king's  claims.  One  Rich,  who  was  then  so- 
licitor-general, Avas  sent  to  confer  Avitii  him ;  and  in  his  presence 
he  was  inveigled  to  say,  that  any  question  with  regard  to  the  law 
which  established  that  prerogative,  was  like  a  two-edged  sword  : 
if  a  person  answered  one  way,  it  would  confound  his  soul ;  if 
another,  it  would  destroy  his  body.  These  words  were  sufficient 
for  the  base  informer  to  hang  an  accusation  upon  j  and,  as  trials 


HENRY  Vm.  SQ7 

at  that  time  were  mere  formalities,  the  jury  gave  sentence  against 
More,  who  had  long  expected  liis  fate.     His  natural  cheerfulness 
attended  him  to  the  last ;  Avhen  he  was  mounting  the  scaffold,  he 
said  to  one,  «  Friend,  help  me  up  ;  and  when  I  go  down  again, 
let  me  shift  for  myself."    The  executioner  asking  his  forgiveness, 
he  granted  the  request,  but  told  him,  "  You  will  never  get  credit 
by  beheading  me,  my  neck  is  so  short."     Then  laying  his  head 
on  the  block,  he  bade  the  executioner  stay  till  he  had  put  aside 
his  beard ;  «  for,"  said  he,  "  that  has  never  committed  treason." 
The  concurrence  which  the  people  seemed  to  lend  to  these  se- 
verities, added  to  the  great  authority  which  Henry,  from  his  se- 
vere administration,  possessed,  induced  him  to  proceed  still  far- 
ther in  his  scheme  of  innovation.     As  the  monks  had  all  along 
shown  him  the  greatest  resistance,  he  resolved  at  once  to  deprive 
them  of  future  pOwer  to  injure  him.     He  accordingly  empowered 
Cromwell,  secretary  of  state,  to  send  commissioners  into  the  sev- 
eral counties  of  England  to  inspect  the  monasteries  5  and  to  re- 
port,  with  rigourous  exactness,  the  conduct  and  deportment  of 
such  as  were  resident  there.     This  employment  was  readily  un- 
dertaken by  some  creatures  of  the  court,  namely,  Layton,  Lon- 
don, Price,  Gage,  Petre,  and  Belasis,  who  are  said  to  have  dis- 
covered monstrous  disorders  in  many  of  the  religious  houses ; — 
whole  convents  of  women  abandoned  to  all  manner  of  lewdness ; 
friars  accomplices  in  their  crimes ;  pious  frauds  every  where  praC" 
tised  to  increase  the  devotion  and  liberality  of  the  people ;  and 
cruel  and  inveterate  factions  maintained  between  the  members  of 
many  of  these  institutions.     These  accusations,  whether  true  or 
false,  were  urged  with  great  clamour  against  these  communities  j 
and  a  general  horror  was  excited  in  the  nation  against  them. 
-    The  king  now  thought  he  might  with  safety,  aud  even  some 
degree  of  popularity,  abolish  these  institutions  ;  but,  willing  to 
proceed  gently  at  first,  he  gave  directions  to  the  parliament  to 
go  no  farther  at  present  than  to  suppress  the  smaller  monasteries, 
which  possessed  revenues  below  the  value  of  two  huu-    rjgog  -1 
dred  pounds  a-year.    By  this  act  three  hundred  and 
seventy-six  monasteries  were  suppressed;  and  their  revenues, 
amounting  to  thirty -two  thousand  pounds  a-year,  were  granted  to 
the  king, besides  their  goods  and  plate, computed  atahundied  thou- 
isand  pounds,  more,.    But  this  was  only  the  beginning  of  his  coU" 


388  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND- 

£scations ;  for,  about  two  years  after,  he  resolved  upon  the  entire: 
destruction  of  all  monasteries  whatsoever.  A  new  visitation  was 
therefore  appointed,  and  fresh  crimes  were  also  produced  ;  so 
that  his  severities  were  conducted  with  such  seeming  justice  and 
success,  that  in  less  than  two  years  he  became  possessed  of  the 
i^venues  of  all  the  monastic  foundations.  These,  on  the  whole, 
amounted  to  six  hundred  and  forty -five,  of  which  twenty -eight 
had  abbots  who  enjoyed  a  seat  in  parliament.  Ninety  collegiate 
institutions,  two  thousand  three  hundred  and  seventy-four  chan- 
tries and  free  chapels,  and  a  hundred  and  ten  hospitals,  were 
likewise  suppressed.  The  whole  revenue  of  these  establishments 
amounted  to  one  hundred  and  sixty -one  thousand  pounds — ^less 
than  a  twentieth  pai-t  of  the  national  income.  The  loss  which 
was  sustained  by  the  clergy  upon  this  occasion,  was  by  no  means 
so  great  or  mortifying  as  the  cruel  insults  and  reproaches  to  which 
they  were  exposed  for  their  former  frauds  and  avarice.  The 
numberless  relics  which  they  had  amassed  to  delude  and  draw 
money  from  the  people,  were  now  brought  forward,  and  exposed 
before  the  populace  with  the  most  poignant  contempt : — -an  angel 
with  one  wing,  that  brought  over  the  head  of  the  spear  which 
pierced  the  side  of  Christ ;  coals  that  had  roasted  St.  Laurence  j 
the  parings  of  St.  Edmund's  toes ;  certain  relics  to  prevent  rain  j 
others  to  stop  the  generation  of  weeds  among  corn.  There  was 
a  crucifix  at  Boxley  in  Kent,  distinguished  by  the  appellation  of 
the  Rood  of  Grace,  which  had  been  long  in  reputation  for  bend- 
ing, raising,  rolling  the  eyes,  and  shaking  the  head.  It  was 
brought  to  London,  and  broken  to  pieces  at  Paul's  Cross ;  and 
the  wheels  and  springs  by  which  it  was  actuated  were  shown  to 
the  people.  At  Hales,  in  Gloucestershire,  the  monks  had  carried 
on  a  profitable  traffic  with  the  pretended  blood  of  Christ  in  a  ciys- 
tal  phial.  This  relic  was  no  other  than  the  blood  of  a  duck  killed 
weekly,  and  exhibited  to  the  pilgrim :  if  his  prayers  were  accept- 
ed, the  blood  was  shown  him;  if  supposed  to  be  rejected,  the 
phial  was  turned ;  and,  being  on  one  side  opake,  the  blood  was  no 
longer  to  be  seen.  But  the  spoils  of  St.  Thomas  a  Becket's  shrine, 
at  Canterbury,  exceed  what  even  imagination  might  conceive. 
The  shrine  was  broken  down  ;  and  the  gold  that  adorned  it  filled 
two  large  chests,  which  eight  strong  men  could  hardly  carry  out 
of  the  church.    The  king  even  cited  the  saint  himself  to  appear. 


HENRY  Vlir.  S89 

and  to  be  tried  and  condemned  as  a  traitor.  He  ordered  hiis 
name  to  be  struck  out  of  the  calendar,  his  bones  to  be  burned,  and 
the  office  for  his  festival  to  be  struck  out  of  the  Breviaiy. 

Such  were  the  violent  measures  with  which  the  king  proceeded 
against  these  seats  of  indolence  and  imposture  ;  but  as  great  mur- 
murs were  excited  upon  this  occasion,  he  took  care  that  all  those 
who  could  be  useful  to  him,  or  even  dangerous  in  cases  of  opposi- 
tion, should  be  sharers  in  the  spoil.  He  either  made  a  gift  of  the 
revenues  of  the  convents  to  his  principal  courtiers,  or  sold  them 
at  low  prices,  or  exchanged  them  for  other  lands  on  very  disad- 
vantageous terms.  He  erected  six  new  bishoprics,  Westminster, 
Oxford,  Peterborough,  Bristol,  Chester,  and  Gloucester,  of  which 
the  last  five  still  continue.  He  also  settled  salaries  on  the  abbots 
and  priors,  proportioned  to  their  former  revenues  or  their  merits ; 
and  each  monk  was  allowed  a  yearly  pension  of  eight  marks  for 
his  subsistence. 

But  though  the  king  had  entirely  separated  himself  from  Rome, 
he  was  unwilling  to  follow  any  guide  in  conducting  a  new  system. 
He  would  not  therefore  wholly  abolish  those  practices  by  which 
priestcraft  had  been  carried  to  such  a  pitch  of  absurdity.  The 
invocation  of  saints  was  not  yet  abolished  by  him,  but  only  re- 
strained. He  procured  an  act,  or,  more  properly  speaking,  gave 
orders,  to  have  the  Bible  translated  into  the  vulgar  tongue ;  but 
it  was  not  permitted  to  be  put  into  the  hands  of  the  laity.  It 
was  a  capital  crime  to  believe  in  the  pope's  supremacy,  and  yet 
equally  heinous  to  be  of  the  reformed  religion,  as  established  in 
Germany.  His  opinions  were  at  length  delivered  in  a  law,  which, 
from  its  horrid  consequences,  was  afterwards  termed  the  Bloody 
Statute,  by  which  it  was  ordained,  that  whoever,  by  word  or  writ- 
ing, should  deny  transubstantiation,  whoever  should  persist  in  af- 
firming that  the  communion  in  both  kinds  was  necessary,  that  it 
was  lawful  for  priests  to  marry,  that  vows  of  chastity  might  be 
broken,  that  private  masses  were  unprofitable,  or  that  auricular 
confession  was  unnecessary,  should  be  found  guilty  of  heresy,  and 
burned  or  hanged  as  the  court  should  determine.  As  the  people 
were  at  that  time  chiefly  composed  of  those  who  followed  the 
opinions  of  Luther,  and  such  as  still  adhered  to  the  pope,  this 
statute,  with  Henry's  former  decrees,  in  some  measure  included 
both,,  and  opened  a  field  for  persecution,  which  soon  after  pro. 
duced  its  dreadful  harvests. 


390  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

These  severities,  however,  were  preceded  by  one  of  a  diffdreHt 
nature,  arising  neither  from  religious  nor  political  causes,  but 
merely  from  tyrannical  caprice.  Anne  Boleyn,  his  queen,  had 
been  always  a  favourer  of  the  Reformation,  and  consequently  had 
many  enemies  on  that  account,  who  only  waited  a  convenient  oc- 
casion to  destroy  her  credit  with  the  king ;  and  that  occasion  too 
soon  presented  itself.  The  king's  passion  was  by  this  time  palled 
by  satiety.  As  the  only  desire  he  ever  had  for  her  arose  from  that 
brutal  appetite  which  enjoyment  soon  destroys,  he  had  now  fal- 
len in  love,  if  we  may  so  prostitute  the  expression,  with  another, 
and  languished  for  the  possession  of  Jane  Seymour,  who  had  for 
some  time  been  maid  of  honour  to  the  queen. 

As  soon  as  the  queen's  enemies  perceived  the  king's  disgust, 
they  resolved  on  taking  the  first  opportunity  of  gratifying  his  in- 
clination to  get  rid  of  her,  by  producing  crimes  against  her,  which 
his  passions  would  quickly  make  real.  The  viscountess  Roch- 
ford  in  particular,  who  was  mari'ied  to  the  queen's  brother,  her- 
self a  woman  of  infamous  character,  began  with  the  most  cruel 
insinuations  against  the  reputation  of  her  sister-in-law.  She  pre- 
tended that  her  own  husband  was  engaged  in  an  incestuous  cor- 
respondence with  his  sister ;  and,  not  contented  with  this  insinu- 
ation, represented  all  the  harmless  levities  of  the  queen  as  favours 
of  a  criminal  nature.  The  king's  jealousy  first  appeared  openly 
in  a  tilting  at  Greenwich,  where  the  queen  happened  to  drop  her 
handkerchief,  as  was  supposed,  to  one  of  her  minions  to  wipe  his 
face,  after  having  over-heated  himself  in  the  exercise.  Though 
this  might  have  been  very  harmless,  the  king  abruptly  retired  from 
the  place,  and  sent  orders  to  have  her  confined  to  her  apartment. 
Anne  smiled  at  first,  thinking  the  king  was  in  jest;  but  when  she 
found  it  was  a  very  serious  affair,  she  received  the  sacrament  in 
her  closet,  sensible  of  what  little  mercy  she  had  to  expect  from 
so  furious  a  tyrant. 

In  the  mean  time  her  enemies  were  not  remiss  in  inflaming  the 
accusation  against  her.  The  duke  of  Norfolk,  from  his  attach- 
ment to  the  old  religion,  took  care  to  produce  several  witnesses, 
accusing  her  of  incontinency  with  some  of  the  meaner  servants 
of  the  court.  Four  persons  were  particularly  pointed  out  as  her 
paramours ;  Henry  Norris,  groom  of  the  stole,  Weston  and  Bre- 
reton,  gentlemen  of  the  king's  bed-chamber,  together  with  Mark 


HENRY  Vin.  *  591 

Smeton  a  musician.  As  these  had  served  her  with  much  assidu- 
ity, their  respect  might  have  been  construed  by  suspicion  into 
more  tender  attachments.  The  next  day  the  queen  was  sent  to 
the  Tower,  earnestly  protesting  her  innocence,  and  sending  up 
prayers  to  heaven  for  assistance  in  this  extremity.  She  in  vaia 
begged  to  be  admitted  into  the  presence  of  the  king ;  the  lady 
Boleyn,  her  uncle's  wife,  who  had  always  hated  her,  was  ordered 
to  continue  in  the  same  chamber,  and  she  made  a  report  of  all  the 
incoherent  ravings  of  the  afflicted  prisoner.  She  owned  that  she 
had  once  rallied  Norris  on  his  delaying  his  marriage,  and  had 
told  him  tha^  he  probably  expected  her  when  she  should  be  a  wid- 
ow. She  had  reproved  Weston,  she  said,  for  his  aifection  to  a 
kinswoman  of  hers,  and  his  indifference  towards  hjs  wife ;  but 
he  told  her  that  she  had  mistaken  the  object  of  his  affection,  for 
it  was  herself.  She  affirmed,  that  Smeton  had  never  been  in  her 
chamber  but  twice,  when  he  played  on  the  harpsichord ;  but  she 
acknowledged  that  he  once  had  the  boldness  to  tell  her,  that  a 
fook  sufficed  him. 

Every  person  at  court  now  abandoned  the  unhappy  queen  in 
her  distress,  except  Cranmer,  who,  though  forbidden  to  come  into 
the  king's  presence,  wrote  a  letter  to  him  in  behalf  of  the  queen ; 
but  his  intercession  had  no  effect.  When  Norris  and  the  other 
prisoners  were  tried  in  Westminster-hall,  Smeton  was  prevailed 
upon,  by  the  promise  of  a  pardon,  to  confess  a  criminal  correspon- 
dence with  the  queen :  but  he  was  not  confronted  with  her ;  and 
his  executioiji  with  the  rest,  shortly  after,  served  to  acquit  her  of 
the  charge.  Norris,  who  had  been  much  in  the  king's  favour,  liad 
an  offer  of  his  life,  if  he  would  confess  his  crime  and  accuse  his 
mistress ;  but  he  rejected  the  proposal  with  contempt,  and  died 
professing  her  innocence  and  his  own. 

In  the  mean  time  the  queen,  who  saw  the  terrible  appearance 
of  her  fortunes,  attempted  to  soften  the  king  by  every  endeavour 
to  spare  the  lives  of  the  unfortunate  men  whose  deaths  were  de- 
creed. But  his  was  a  stern  jealousy  fostered  by  pride ;  and  no- 
thing but  her  removal  could  appease  him.  Her  letter  to  him,  up- 
on this  occasion,  written  from  the  Tower,  is  full  of  the  tenderest 
expostulations,  and  too  remarkable  to  be  omitted  here ;  as  its 
manner  serves  at  once  to  mark  the  situation  of  her  mind,  and 


392  *      HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

allows  to  what  a  pitch  of  refinement  she  had  even  tlien  earned 
the  language.     It  is  as  follows  : 
«  Sir, 

"  Your  grace's  displeasure,  and  my  imprisonment,  are  things 
80  strange  unto  me,  as  what  to  write,  or  what  to  excuse,  I  am 
altogether  ignorant.  Whereas  you  send  unto  me  (willing  me  to 
confess  a  truth  and  so  obtain  your  favour)  by  such  an  one,  whom 
you  know  to  be  mine  antient  professed  enemy,  I  no  sooner  re- 
ceived this  message  by  him,  than  I  rightly  conceived  your  mean- 
ing ;  and  if,  as  you  say,  confessing  a  truth  indeed  may  procure 
my  safety,  I  shall  with  all  willingness  and  duty  perform  your 
command. 

"  But  let  not  your  grace  ever  imagine  that  your  poor  wife  will 
ever  be  brought  to  acknowledge  a  fault,  where  not  so  much  as  a 
thought  thereof  preceded.  And  to  speak  a  truth,  never  prince 
had  wife  more  loyal  in  all  duty,  and  in  all  true  affection,  than 
you  have  ever  found  in  Anne  Boleyn ;  with  which  name  and 
place  I  could  willingly  have  contented  myself,  if  God  and  your 
grace's  pleasure  had  been  so  pleased.  Neither  did  I  at  any  time 
so  far  forget  myself  in  my  exaltation,  or  received  queenship,  but 
that  I  always  looked  for  such  an  alteration  as  I  now  find  ;  for  the 
ground  of  my  preferment  being  on  no  surer  foundation  than  your 
grace's  fancy,  the  least  alteration  I  knew  was  fit  and  sufiicient  to 
draw  that  fancy  to  some  other  object.  You  have  chosen  me,  from 
a  low  estate,  to  be  your  queen  and  companion,  far  beyond  my 
desert  or  desire.  If  then  you  found  me  worthy  of  such  honour, 
good  your  grace,  let  not  any  light  fancy,  or  bad  counsel  of  mine 
enemies,  withdraw  your  princely  favour  from  me ;  neither  let 
that  stain,  that  unworthy  stain  of  a  disloyal  heart  towards  your 
good  gi-ace,  ever  cast  so  foul  a  blot  on  your  most  dutiful  wife, 
and  the  infant  princess  your  daughter.  Try  me,  good  king ;  but 
let  me  have  a  lawful  trial,  and  let  not  my  sworn  enemies  sit  as 
my  accusers  and  judges  ;  yea,  let  me  receive  an  open  trial,  for 
my  truth  shall  fear  no  open  shame :  then  shall  you  see  either 
mine  innocence  cleared,  your  suspicion  and  conscience  satisfied, 
the  ignominy  and  slander  of  the  world  stopped,  or  my  guilt  open- 
ly declared  :  so  that  whatsoever  God  or  you  may  determine  of 
me,  your  grace  may  be  freed  from  an  open  censure  5  and  mine 
offence  being  so  lawfully  proved,  your  grace  is  at  liberty  both 


KENRY  VIII.  •  693 

before  God  and  man,  not  only  to  execute  worthy  punishment  on 
me  as  an  unlawful  wife,  but  to  follow  your  affection  already  set- 
tled on  that  party,  for  whose  sake  I  am  now  as  I  am,  whose  name 
I  could  some  good  while  since  have  pointed  unto,  your  grace  not 
being  ignorant  of  my  suspicion  therein. 

"  But  if  you  have  already  determined  of  me,  and  that  not  only 
my  death,  but  an  infamous  slander,  must  bring  you  the  enjoying 
of  your  desired  happiness,  then  I  desire  of  God  that  he  will  par- 
don vour  sreat  sin  therein,  and  likewise  mine  enemies,  the  instru- 
ments  thereof;  and  that  he  will  not  call  you  to  a  strict  account 
for  your  unprincely  and  cruel  usage  of  me  at  his  general  judg- 
ment-seat, wliere  both  you  and  myself  must  shortly  appear,  and 
in  whose  judgment,  I  doubt  not  (whatsoever  the  world  may  think 
of  me)  mine  innocence  shall  be  openly  known  and  sufficiently 
cleared. 

"  My  last  and  only  request  shall  be,  that  myself  shall  only 
bear  the  burthen  of  your  grace's  displeasure ;  and  that  it  may  not 
touch  the  innocent  souls  of  those  poor  gentlemen,  who  (as  I  un- 
derstand) are  likewise  in  strait  imprisonment  for  my  sake.  If 
ever  I  have  found  favour  in  your  sight,  if  ever  the  name  of  Anne 
Boleyn  hath  been  pleasing  in  your  ears,  then  let  me  obtain  this 
request ;  and  I  will  so  leave  to  trouble  your  grace  any  further, 
with  mine  earnest  prayers  to  the  Trinity,  to  have  your  grace  in 
his  good  keeping,  and  to  direct  you  in  all  your  actions.  From 
my  doleful  prison  in  the  Tower,  this  sixth  of  May. 
Your  most  loyal, 

and  ever  faithful  wife, 

Anne  Boleyn." 
It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  eloquence  could  prevail  on  a 
tyrant,  whose  passions  were  to  be  influenced  by  none  of  the  no- 
bler motives.  The  queen  and  her  brother  were  tried  by  a  jury  of 
peers  ;  but  upon  what  proof  or  pretence  the  crime  of  incest  was 
urged  against  them,  is  unknown ;  the  chief  evidence,  it  is  said, 
amounted  to  no  more  than  that  Rochford  had  been  seen  to  lean 
on  her  bed  before  some  company.  Part  of  the  charge  against  her 
was,  that  she  had  declared  to  her  attendants,  that  the  king  never 
had  her  heart;  which  was  considered  as  a  slander  upon  the 
throne,  and  strained  into  a  breach  of  a  late  statute,  by  which  it 
was  declared  criminal  to  throw  any  slander  upon  the  king,  queen j 
VOL,  I,  50 


S94  HISTORY  OF  ENGJLAND.  , 

01-  their  issue.  The  unhappy  queen,  though  unassisted  by  coun- 
sel, defended  herself  with  great  judgment  and  presence  of  mind ; 
and  the  spectators  could  not  forbear  declaring  her  entirely  inno- 
cent. She  answered  distinctly  to  all  the  charges  brought  against 
her :  but  the  king's  authority  was  not  to  be  controlled  ;  she  was 
declared  guilty,  and  her  sentence  ran,  that  she  should  be  burned 
or  beheaded,  at  the  king's  pleasure.  When  this  terrible  sentence 
was  pronounced  against  her,  she  could  not  help  offering  up  a 
prayer  to  Heaven,  vijtidicating  her  innocence ;  and,  in  a  most  pa- 
thetic speech  to  her  judges,  averred  the  injustice  of  her  condem- 
nation. But  the  tyrant,  not  satisfied  with  this  vengeance,  was 
desirous  also  of  having  her  daughter  declared  illegitimate  ;  and, 
remembering  the  report  of  a  contract  between  her  and  Percy  eaTi 
of  Northumberland,  prevailed  upon  the  queen,  either  by  promise 
of  life,  or  executing  the  sentence  in  all  its  rigour,  to  confess  such 
a  contract.  The  afflicted  primate,  who  sat  as  judge,  thought  him- 
self obliged,  by  this  confession,  to  pronounce  the  marriage  null; 
and  Henry,  in  the  transports  of  his  malignant  prosecution,  did 
Bot  see,  that  if  her  marriage  had  been  invalid  from  the  beginning, 
the  sentence  of  adultery  must  have  been  invalid  also. 

She  who  had  been  once  the  envied  object  of  royal  favour,  was 
now  going  to  give  a  melancholy  instance  of  the  capriciousness  of 
fortune  :  upon  her  returning  to  prison,  she  once  more  sent  pro- 
testations of  her  innocence  to  tlie  king.  "  You  have  raised  me," 
said  she,  "  from  privacy  to  make  me  a  lady  j  from  a  lady  you 
made  me  a  countess ;  from  a  countess  a  queen ;  and  from  a  queen 
I  shall  shortly  become  a  saint  in  heaven."  On  the  morning  of 
her  execution  she  sent  for  Kingston,  the  keeper  of  the  Tower,  to 
whom,  upon  entering  the  prison,  she  said,  "  Mr.  Kingston,  I  hear 
I  am  not  to  die  tiH  noon,  and  I  am  sorry  for  it ;  for  I  thought  to 
be  dead  before  this  time,  and  free  from  a  life  of  pain."  The 
keeper  attempting  to  comfort  her,  by  assuring  her  the  pain  would 
be  very  little  ;  she  replied,  "  I  have  heard  the  executioner  is  very 
expertj  and  (clasping  her  neck  with  her  hands,  laughing),  I  have 
but  a  little  neck."  When  brought  to  the  scaffold,  from  a  consid- 
eration of  her  child  Elizabeth's  welfare,  she  would  not  inflame 
the  minds  of  the  spectators  against  her  persecutors,  but  content- 
ed herself  with  saying  "  that  she  was  come  to  die  as  she  was  sen- 
tenced by  the  law."    She  would  accuse  none,  nor  say  any  thing 


HENllY  Vlir.  395 

©f  the  ground  upon  which  she  was  judged;  she  prayed  heartily 
for  the  king  ;  called  him  "  a  most  merciful  and  gentle  prince ;" 
declared  that  he  had  always  been  to  her  a  good  and  gracious 
sovereign;  and,  if  any  one  should  think  proper  to  canvass  her 
cause,  she  desired  him  to  judge  the  best.  She  was  beheaded  by 
the  executioner  of  Calais,  who  was  brought  over  as  much  more 
expert  than  any  in  England.  Her  body  was  negligently  thrown 
into  a  common  chest  of  elm-tree,  made  to  hold  arrows,  and  was 
buried  in  the  Tower.  Anne  Boleyn  seemed  to  be  guilty  of  no 
other  crime  than  that  of  having  survived  the  king's  affections ;  and 
although  many  crowned  heads  had  already  been  put  to  death  in 
England,  she  was  the  first  who  underwent  all  the  forms  of  law, 
and  was  beheaded  on  a  scaffold. 

The  people,  in  general,  beheld  her  fate  with  pity;  but  still 
more,  when  they  discovered  the  cause  of  the  tyrant's  impatience 
to  destroy  her ;  for,  the  very  next  day  after  her  execution,  he 
married  the  lady  Jane  Seymour,  his  cruel  heart  being  no  way 
softened  by  the  wretched  fate  of  one  who  had  been  so  lately  the 
object  of  his  warmest  affections.  He  also  ordered  his  parliament 
to  give  him  a  divorce  between  her  sentence  and  execution  ;  and 
thus  he  endeavoured  to  bastardise  Elizabeth,  the  only  child  he 
had  by  her,  as  he  had  in  the  same  manner  formerly  bastardised 
Mary,  his  only  surviving  child  by  queen  Catharine. 

It  is  easy  to  imagine  that  such  various  innovations  and  capri= 
cious  cruelties  were  not  felt  by  the  people  without  indignation  ; 
but  their  murmurs  were  fruitless,  and  their  complaints  disregard- 
ed. Henry  now  made  himself  umpire  between  those  of  the  an- 
tient  superstition  and  tlie  modern  reformation ;  both  looked  up 
to  him  for  assistance,  and,  at  mutual  enmity  with  each  other,  he 
took  the  advantage  of  all.  Beside,  he  had  all  tlie  powerful  men 
of  the  nation  on  his  side,  by  the  many  grants  he  had  made  them 
of  the  lands  and  goods  of  which  he  had  despoiled  the  monaste- 
ries. It  was  easy  for  him,  therefore,  to  quell  the  various  insur- 
rections which  his  present  arbitrary  conduct  produced,  as  they 
were  neither  headed  by  any  powerful  man,  nor  conducted  with 
any  kind  of  foresight,  but  were  merely  the  tumultuary  effints  of 
anguish  and  despair.  The  first  rising  was  in  Lincolnshire,  headed 
by  doctor  Mackrel,  prior  of  Barlings ;  and  though  this  tumultu- 
ary army  amounted  to  twenty  thousand  men,  upon  a  proclama- 


S9G  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

tion  being  made  with  assurances  of  pardon,  the  populace  dispers- 
ed ;  and  the  prior  and  some  of  his  chief  confederates,  falling  into 
the  king's  hands,  were  put  to  death.  Another  rising  followed 
soon  after  in  the  north,  amounting  to  thirty  thousand  men,  who 
xvere  preceded  by  priests  carrying  the  ensigns  of  their  functions 
before  the  army,  and  seemed  chiefly  inspired  with  an  enmity 
against  Cromwell,  whom  they  considered  as  the  instigator  of  the 
king's  severities.  But  these  also  were  soon  dispersed,  upon  find- 
ing that  provisions  became  scarce  among  them  ;  after  having  in 
vain  endeavoured  to  attack  the  duke  of  Norfolk's  army,  which 
was  sent  against  them,  and  from  which  they  were  separated  by  a 
rivulet  that  was  swollen  by  heavy  rains.  A  new  insurrection 
broke  out  shortly  after,  headed  by  Musgrave  and  Tilby ;  but  the 
insurgents  w^cre  dispersed  and  put  to  flight  by  the  duke  of  Nor- 
folk. Besides  one  Aske,  who  led  the  former  insurrection  in  the 
north,  lord  D'Arcy,  sir  Robert  Constable,  sir  John  Bulmer,  sir 
Thomas  Percy,  sir  Stephen  Hamilton,  Nicholas  Tempest,  and 
William  Lumley,  were  thrown  into  prison  ;  and  most  of  these 
suffered  death.  Henry,  enraged  by  multiplied  revolts,  resolved 
to  put  no  bounds  to  his  severities ;  and  the  birth  of  a  prince  (af- 
terwards Edward  the  Sixth)  and  the  death  of  the  queen,  who  sur- 
vived this  joyful  occasion  but  two  days,  made  but  a  small  pause 
in  the  fierce  severity  with  which  those  were  treated  who  were 
found  to  oppose  his  wilL 

r-j  cnr  1  111  the  midst  of  these  commotions,  the  fires  of  Smith- 
field  were  seen  to  blaze  with  unusual  fierceness.  Those 
%vho  adhered  to  the  pope,  or  those  who  followed  the  doctrines  of 
Luther,  were  equally  the  objects  of  royal  vengeance  and  ecclesi- 
astical persecution.  From  the  multiplied  alterations  in  the  na- 
tional systems  of  belief,  mostly  drawn  up  by  Henry  himself,  few 
knew  what  to  think,  or  what  to  profess.  They  were  ready  enough, 
indeed,  to  follow  his  doctrines,  how  inconsistent  or  contradictory 
soever ;  but  as  he  was  continually  changing  them  himself,  they 
could  hardly  pursue  so  fast  as  he  advanced  before  them.  Thomas 
Cromwell,  raised  by  the  king's  caprice  from  being  a  blacksmith's 
son  to  be  a  royal  favourite  (for  tyrants  ever  raise  their  favourites 
from  the  lowest  of  the  people),  together  with  Cranmer,  now  be- 
come archbishop  of  Canterbury,  were  both  seen  to  favour  the  Re- 
tormation  with  all  their  endeavours.    0|i  the  other  hand,  Gar- 


HENRY  VIII.  397 

diner,  bishop  of  Winchester,  and  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  were  for 
leading  the  king  back  to  his  original  superstition.  In  fact,  Henry 
submitted  to  neither  ;  his  pride  had  long  been  so  inflamed  by 
flattery,  that  he  thought  himself  entitled  to  regulate,  by  his  single 
opinion,  the  religious  faith  of  the  whole  nation. 

In  this  universal  terror  and  degeneracy  of  mankind,  ^^  -, 
during  which  the  severities  of  one  man  alone  seemed  to 
be  sufficient  to  keep  millions  in  awe,  there  was  a  school-master  in 
London,  who  boldly  stood  up  for  the  rights  of  humanity,  and  ven- 
tured to  think  for  himself.  This  man's  name  was  John  Lambert, 
who  hearing  doctor  Taylor  preach  in  support  of  the  real  presence 
in  the  sacrament,  presented  him  with  his  reasons  for  contradict- 
ing that  doctrine.  The  paper  was  carried  to  Cranmer  and  Lati- 
mer, who  were  then  of  the  opinion  of  Luther  on  that  head,  and 
endeavoured  to  bring  him  over  to  their  opinions.  But  Lambert 
remained  steady  in  his  belief  5  and  they  were  mortified  when,  in- 
stead of  recanting,  he  appealed  to  the  king  himself.  This  was 
a  challenge  that  pleased  Henry's  vanity ;  and,  willing  at  once  to 
exert  his  supremacy,  and  display  his  leariiing,  he  accepted  the 
appeal ;  and  public  notice  was  given  of  his  intended  disputation. 
For  this  purpose,  scaffolds  were  erected  in  Westminster -hall  for 
the  accommodation  of  the  audience,  and  Henry  appeared  on  his 
throne,  accompanied  v>'ith  all  the  ensigns  of  majesty.  The  pre- 
lates were  placed  on  his  right  hand,  the  temporal  peers  on  his  left. 
The  judges,  and  most  eminent  lawyers,  had  a  place  assigned  to 
them  behind  the  bishops  ;  the  courtiers  of  the  greatest  distinction 
sat  behind  the  peers.  Poor  Lambert  was  produced  in  the  midst 
of  this  splendid  assembly,  with  not  one  creature  to  defend  or 
support  him.  The  bishop  of  Chichester  opened  the  conference 
by  declaring,  that  the  king,  notwithstanding  any  slight  alterations 
he  had  made  in  the  rights  of  tlie  churqh,  was  yet  determined  to 
maintain  the  purity  of  the  catholic  faith,  and  to  punish,  with  the 
utmost  severity,  all  departure  from  it.  After  this  preamble,  suf- 
ficient to  terrify  the  boldest  disputant,  the  king  asked  Lambert, 
with  a  stern  countenance,  what  his  opinion  was  of  transubstan- 
tiation  ?  AVhen  Lambert  began  his  oration  with  a  compliment  to 
his  majesty,  Henry  rejected  his  praise  with  disdain  and  indigna- 
tion. He  afterwards  entered  upon  the  discussion  of  that  abstruse 
question,  and  endeavoured  to  press  Lambert  with  some  argu- 


598  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

ments  drawn  from  the  scriptures  and  the  schoolmen.     At  every 
word  the  audience  were  ready  to  second  him  with  their  applause 
and  admiration.     Lambert,  however,  no  way  discouraged,  was 
not  slow  to  reply;  but  here  Cranmer  stepped  in,  and  seconded 
the  king's  proofs  by  some  new  topics.     Gardiner  entered  the  lists 
in  support  of  Cranmer;  Tonstal  took  up  the  argument  after  Gar- 
diner ;  Stokesly  brought  fresh  aid  to  Tonstal.     Six  bishops  more 
appeared  successively  in  the  field  against  the  poor  solitary  dis- 
putant, who  for  five  hours  attempted  to  vindicate  his  doctrines, 
tdl,  at  last,  fatigued,  confounded,  brow-beaten,  and  abashed,  he 
was  reduced  to  silence.     The  king,  then  returning  to  the  charge, 
demanded  if  he  was  convinced ;  and  whether  he  chose  to  gain 
life  by  recantation,   or  to  die  for  his  obstinacy  ?  Lambert,  not 
intimidated,  replied,  that  he  cast  himself  wholly  on  his  majesty's 
clemency ;  to  which  Henry  replied,  that  he  would  never  protect 
a  heretic;  and  therefore,  if  that  was  his  final  answer,  he  must  ex- 
pect to  be  committed  to  the  flames.     Lambert,  not  yet  terrified, 
heard  Cromwell  read  the  sentence,  by  which  he  was  condemned 
to  be  burned  alive,  with  the  utmost  composure  ;  and,  as  if  his  per- 
secutors were  resolved  to  try  his  fortitude,  the  executioners  were 
ordered  to  make  his  punishment  as  painful  as  they  could.     He 
was,  therefore,  burned  at  a  slow  fire,  his  legs  and  thighs  being  first 
consumed;  and  when  there  appeared  no  end  of  his  tortures,  "some 
of  the  guards,  more  merciful  than  the  rest,  lifted  him  on  their  hal- 
berts ;  and  while  he  yet  continued  to  cry  out,  «  None  but  Christ! 
None  but  Christ)"  he  was  wholly  consumed  by  the  surrounding 
fire. 

This  poor  man's  death  seemed  to  be  only  a  signal  for  that  of 
many  more.  Adulation  had  inspired  the  king  with  such  an  opin- 
ion of  his  own  ability,  that  he  now  resolved  to  punish  rigorously 
all  who  should  presume  to  differ  from  him  in  opinion,  without 
making  distinction  between  Catholics  and  Lutherans.  Soon  af- 
[1539.]  *^^''  "^  ^^^^  *'^^"  ^^^  hundred  persons  were  imprisoned 
for  contradicting  the  opinions  delivered  in  the  Bloody 
Statute,  and  received  protection  only  from  the  lenity  of  Crom- 
well. Doctor  Barnes,  who  had  been  instrumental  in  Lambert's 
execution,  felt,  in  his  turn,  the  severity  of  the  persecuting  spirit ; 
and,  by  a  bill  in  parliament,  without  any  trial,  was  condemned  to 
the  flames,  discussing  theological  questions  at  the  very  stake. 


HENRY  VIIL  S99 

With  Barnes  were  executed  one  Gerard  and  Jerome,  for  the 
same  opinions.  Three  catholics  also,  whose  names  were  r-^ ^.^  -. 
Abel,  Fetherstone,  and  Powel,  were  dragged  upon  the 
game  hurdles  to  execution ;  and  declared,  that  the  most  grievous 
part  of  their  punishment  was  the  being  coupled  with  such  hereti- 
cal miscreants  as  were  united  in  the  same  calamity. 

During  these  horrid  transactions  Henry  was  resolved  to  take 
another  queen ;  and,  after  some  negotiation  upon  the  continent, 
he  contracted  a  marriage  with  Anne  of  Cleves,  his  aim  being  by 
her  means  to  fortify  his  alliances  with  the  princes  of  Germany. 
Nor  was  he  led  into  this  match  without  a  most  scrupulous  exam- 
ination, on  his  side,  of  the  lady's  personal  accomplishments.  He 
was  assured  by  his  envoy  that  she  was  of  a  very  large  person, 
which  was  the  more  pleasing  to  him,  as  he  was  at  that  time  be- 
come very  corpulent,  and  consequently  required  a  similar  figure 
in  a  wife.  He  was  still  farther  allured  by  her  picture,  in  which 
Holbein,  who  drew  it,  was,  it  seems,  more  a  friend  to  his  art 
than  to  truth ;  for  he  greatly  flattered  her.  The  king,  upon  her 
landing,  went  privately  to  meet  her  at  Rochester,  where  he  was 
very  much  damped  in  his  amorous  ardour.  He  found  her  big  in= 
deed,  and  tall  as  he  could  wish,  but  utterly  devoid  of  grace  and 
beauty  j  she  could  also  speak  but  one  language,  her  native  Ger- 
man ;  so  that  her  conversation  could  never  recompense  the  de- 
fects of  her  person.  He  swore  she  was  a  great  Flanders  mare  ; 
and  added,  that  he  could  never  settle  his  affections  upon  her. 
However,  sensible  that  he  would  greatly  disoblige  her  brother  the 
duke,  and  consequently  all  the  German  princes  in  his  alliance, 
he  resolved  to  marry  her  j  and  he  told  Cromwell,  who  was  chiefly 
instrumental  in  this  affair,  that,  since  he  had  gone  so  far,  he 
would  put  his  neck  into  the  yoke,  whatever  it  cost  him.  The 
marriage  was  accordingly  celebrated  :  but  the  king's  disgust  was 
only  increased  by  it ;  he  told  Cromwell  the  next  morning  that  he 
hated  hec  more  than  ever ;  and  even  suspected  her  not  to  be  a 
true  maid ;  a  circumstance  in  which  he  thought  himself  extremely 
skilful.  Cromwell  saw  the  danger  he  incurred  by  having  been 
instrumental  in  forming  this  union  ;  but  he  endeavoured,  by  his 
assiduity  and  humble  adulation,  to  keep  the  king  from  coming  to 
extremities  with  him. 

But  he  should  have  known  that  a  tvrant  once  offended  is  im- 


400  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

placable.    Henry's  aversion  to  the  queen  secretly  increased  every 
day  ;  and  he  at  length  resolved  to  get  rid  of  her  and  his  prime- 
minister  together.     The   fall  of  this  favourite  was  lona:  and  ar- 
dently  wished  for  by  a  great  part  of  the  nation.     The  nobility 
hated  a  man  who,  from  such  mean  beginnings,  was  placed  before 
the  first  persons  in  the  kingdom  ;  for,  besides  being  made  vicar- 
general,  which  gave  him  almost  absolute  authority  over  the  clergy, 
he  was  lord  privy -seal,  lord-chamberlain,  and  master  of  the  rolls. 
He  had   also  obtained  the  order  of  the  Garter,  a  dignity  which 
had  hitherto  been  conferred  on  only  the  most  illustrious  families  ; 
and  to  carry  his  exaltation  still  higher,  he  had  been  made  earl  of 
Essex.     The  protestants  disliked  him  for  his  concurrence  with 
the  king's  will  in  their  persecution ;  and  the  papists  detested  him 
as  the  inveterate  enemy  of  their  religion.     It  only  remained, 
therefore,  with  the  king  to  hasten  or  retard  the  punishment  of  a 
man  who  had  scarcely  a  partisan  in  the  nation  except  himself. 
But  he  had  a  strong  cause  of  dislike  to  him  for  his  late  unpropi- 
tious  alliance  ;  and  a  new  motive  was  soon  added  for  increasing 
his  displeasure.     He  had  fixed  his  affection  on  Catharine  How- 
ard, niece  to  the  duke  of  Norfolk  5  and  the  only  method  of  gratify- 
ing this  new  passion  was,  as  in  former  cases,  discarding  the  pres- 
ent queen  to  make  room  for  a  nev/  one.     The  duke  of  Norfolk 
had  long  been   Cromwell's  mortal  enemy,  and  eagerly  embi-aced 
this  opportunity  to  destroy  a  man  he  considered  as  his  rival. 
He  therefore  made  use  of  all  his  niece's  arts  to  ruin  the  favour- 
ite 5  and  when  his  project  w^as  ripe  for  execution,  he  obtained  a 
commission  from  the  king  to  arrest  Cromwell  for  high-treason. 
His  disgrace  Mas  no  sooner  known  than  all  his  friends  forsook 
him,  except  Cranmer,  who  wrote  such  a  letter  to  Henry  in  his 
behalf  as  no  other  man  in  the  kingdom  would  have  presumed  to 
offer.     However,  he  was  accused  in  parliament  of  heresy  and 
treason,  and,  without  being  heard  in  his  own  defence,  was  con- 
demned to  suffer  the  pains   of  death,  as  the  king  should  think 
proper  to  direct.     Cromwell's  fortitude  seemed  to  forsake  him  in 
this  dreadful  exigency.     He  wrote  to  the  king  for  pardon  ;  said, 
that  the  frail  flesh  incited  liim  continually  to  apply  to  his  grace 
for  mercy ;  and  subscribed  his  epistle  with   a  heavy  heart  and  a 
trembling  hand,  "  from  the  king's  most  miserable  prisoner  and 
poor  slave  at  the  Tower,  Thomas  Cromwell.     Mercy,  mercy? 
mercy !" 


HENRY  VlII,  401 

Cromwell's  letter  touched  the  hard  heart  of  the  monarch  ;  he 
ordered  it  to  be  read  to  him  three  times ;  and  then,  as  if  willing 
to  gain  a  victory  over  all  his  softer  feelings,  he  signed  the  warrant 
for  beheading  him  upon  Tower -hill.  When  Cromwell  was  bi-ought 
to  the  scaffold,  his  regard  for  his  son  hindered  him  from  expatia- 
ting upon  his  own  innocence  ;  he  thanked  God  for  bringing  him  to 
that  death  for  his  transgressions ;  confessed  he  had  often  been  se- 
duced, but  that  he  now  died  in  the  catholic  faith.  It  was  thus 
that  Henry,  not  satisfied  with  the  death  of  those  whom  he  chose 
to  punish,  repressed  their  complaints  also,  and  terrified  the  un- 
happy sufferers  from  the  last  consolation  of  the  wretched,  the  sat- 
isfaction of  upbraiding  their  persecutors.  In  this  manner  the  un- 
happy sufferer,  having  spent  some  time  in  his  private  devotions, 
submitted  his  neck  to  the  executioner,  who  mangled  him  in  a  most 
terrible  manner.  A  few  days  after  his  death  a  number  of  people 
were  executed  together  upon  very  different  accusations;  some 
for  having  denied  the  king's  supremacy,  and  others  for  having 
maintained  the  doctrines  of  Luther. 

About  a  month  after  the  death  of  Cromwell,  the  king  declared 
his  marriage  with  Catharine  Howards  whom  he  had  some  time  be- 
fore privately  espoused.  This  was  regarded  as  a  very  favourable 
incident  by  the  catholic  party ;  and  the  subsequent  events  for  a 
while  turned  out  to  their  wish.  The  king's  councils  being  now 
entirely  directed  by  Norfolk  and  Gardiner,  a  furious  persecution 
commenced  against  the  protestants,  and  the  law  of  the  six  articles 
was  executed  with  rigour ;  so  that  a  foreigner,  who  then  resided 
in  England,  had  reason  to  say,  that  those  who  were  against  the 
pope  were  burned,  and  those  who  were  for  him  were  hanged.  The 
king,  with  an  ostentatious  impartiality,  reduced  both  parties  to  an 
equal  share  of  subordination,  and  infused  terror  into  every  breast. 

But  the  measure  of  his  severities  was  not  yet  filled  up.  He 
had  thought  himself  very  happy  in  his  new  marriage.  He  was  so 
captivated  with  the  queen's  accomplishments,  that  he  gave  public 
thanks  for  his  felicity,  and  desired  his  confessor  to  join  with  hira 
in  the  same  thanksgiving.  This  joy,,  however,  was  of  very  short 
duration.  While  the  king  was  at  York,  upon  an  intended  con- 
ference with  the  king  of  Scotland,  a  man  of  the  name  of  rj^^j  -i 
Lascelles  had  waited  upon  Cranmer  at  London ;  and 

from  the  information  of  this  man's  sister,  who  had  been  servant  to 
VOL.  r.  51 


402  '  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

the  duchess-dowager  of  Norfolk,  he  gave  a  very  surprising  account 
of  the  queen's  incontinence.  He  averred  that  she  led  a  very  lewd 
life  before  her  marriage,  and  had  carried  on  a  scandalous  corres- 
pondence with  two  men,  called  Derham  and  Mannock ;  and  that 
slie  continued  to  indulge  herself  in  the  same  criminal  pleasures 
since  she  had  been  raised  to  her  present  greatness.  Cranmer 
was  equally  surprised  and  embarrassed  at  this  intelligence,  which 
he  communicated  to  the  chancellor,  and  some  other  members  of 
the  privy -council,  who  advised  him  to  make  the  king  acquainted 
with  the  whole  affair  on  his  return  to  London.  The  archbishop 
knew  the  hazards  he  ran  by  intermeddling  in  such  delicate  points  ? 
but  he  also  knew  the  dangers  he  incurred  by  suppressing  his  in- 
formation. He  therefore  resolved  to  communicate  what  he  had 
heard,  by  writing,  in  the  form  of  a  memorial ;  and  this  he  shortly 
after  delivered  into  the  king's  own  hand,  desiring  his  majesty  to 
read  it  in  private.  Henry  at  first  disbelieved,  or  pretended  to 
disbelieve,  the  report ;  he  ordered  the  keeper  of  the  privy -seal  to 
examine  Lascelles,  who  persisted  in  his  former  narrative,  and 
even  produced  his  sister  to  confirni  his  account.  Upon  this  Der- 
ham and  Mannock  were  arrested ;  and  they  quickly  confessed 
their  own  gurlt,  and  the  queen's  incontinence.  They  went  still 
farther,  by  impeaching  lady  Rochford,  who  had  fijrmerly  been  so 
instrumental  in  procuring  the  death  of  Anne  Boleyn.  They  al- 
leged that  this  lady  had  introduced  one  Culpepper  into  the  queen's 
bedchamber,  who  staid  with  her  from  eleven  at  night  till  four  in 
the  morning.  When  the  queen  was  first  examined,  she  denied 
the  charge ;  but  afterwards,  finding  that  her  accomplices  were 
her  accusers,  she  confessed  her  incontinence  before  marriage,  but 
denied  her  having  dishonoured  the  king's  bed  since  their  union. 
But  three  maids  of  honour,  who  were  admitted  to  her  secrets, 
still  fartlier  alleged  her  guilt;  and  some  of  them  confessed  having 
passed  the  night  in  the  same  bed  with  her  and  her  lovers.  The 
king  was  so  affected  at  this  discovery  that  he  burst  into  a  flood 
of  tears,  and  bitterly  lamented  his  misfortune.  Derham  and  Cul- 
-pepper  were  convicted  and  executed ;  but  he  was  resolved  to 
throw  the  odium  of  the  queen's  death  upon  the  parliament,  who 
had  always  shown  themselves  the  ready  ministers  of  all  his  severi- 
ties. These  servile  creatures,  upon  being  informed  of  the  queen's 
crime  and  confession,  found  her  quickly  guilty,  and  petitioned  the 


HENRY  VIH.  403 

ting  that  she  might  be  punished  with  death  ;  that  the  r-.  -.a  t 
same  penalty  might  be  inflicted  on  the  ladj  Rochford, 
the  accomplice  of  her  debaucheries  ;  and  that  her  grandmother, 
the  duchess-dowager  of  Norfolk,  together  with  her  uncle  and 
his  wife,  also  the  countess  of  Bridgewater,  and  nine  others,  as 
having  been  privy  to  the  queen's  irregularities,  should  participate 
in  her  punishment.  With  this  petition  the  king  was  most  gra- 
ciously pleased  to  agree  ;  they  were  condemned  to  death  by  an 
act  of  attainder,  which,  at  the  same  time,  made  it  capital  for  ail 
persons  to  conceal  their  knowledge  of  tlie  debaucheries  of  any 
future  queen.  It  was  also  enacted,  that  if  the  king  married  any 
woman  who  had  been  incontinent,  taking  her  for  a  true  maid,  she 
sliouid  be  guilty  of  treason  in  case  she  did  not  previously  reveal 
her  guilt  Tlie  people  made  merry  with  this  absurd  and  brutal 
statute ;  and  it  was  said,  that  the  king  must  henceforth  l<)ok  out 
for  a  widow.  After  ^,11  these  laws  were  passed,  in  which  the 
most  wonderful  circumstance  is,  that  a  body  of  men  could  ever 
be  induced  to  give  their  consent,  the  queen  was  beheaded  on 
Tower -hill,  together  with  the  lady  Rochford,  who  found  no  great 
degree  of  compassion,  as  she  had  herself  before  tampered  in  blood. 
The  queen  was  more  pitied,  as  she  owned  that  she  had  led  a  dis- 
solute life  before  marriage ;  but  denied  in  her  last  moments,  and 
with  the  utmost  solemnity,  that  she  had  ever  been  untrue  since 
her  marriage  with  the  king.  The  public  esclainied  so  loudly 
against  the  severity  of  the  act,  which  brought  in  so  many  act 
complices  of  her  guilt,  that  the  king  did  not  think  proper  to  exe- 
cute sentence  upon  them,  though  some  of  them  were  long  detained 
m  confinement, 

Henry  having  thus,  by  various  acts  of  tyranny,  shown  that  h^ 
had  abandoned  all  ideas  of  justice,  morals,  or  humanity,  at  last 
took  it  into  his  head  to  compose  a  book  of  religion,  which  was  to 
be  the  code  by  which  his  subjects  should  for  the  future  regulate 
^11  their  belief  and  actions.  Having  procured  an  act  of  parlia- 
ment for  this  purpose,  in  which  all  spiritual  supremacy  was  de- 
clared to  be  vested  in  him,  he  published  a  small  volume  soon  af- 
ter, called  The  Institution  of  a  Christian  Man^  which  was  receiv- 
ed by  the  convocation,  and  voted  to  be  the  infallible  standard  of 
orthodoxy.  All  the  abstruse  points  of  justification,  faith,  free-will, 
gpo^  worksj  and  grace,  are  there  defined,  with  a  learning  towards 


404  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

the  opiuion  of  the  reformers  ;  while  the  sacraments,  which  a  few 
years  before  were  only  allowed  to  be  three,  are  there  increased 
to  their  original  number  of  seven,  conformably  to  the  sentiments 
of  the  catholics.  But  the  king  was  not  long  satisfied  with  this 
code  of  belief;  for  he  soon  after  procured  a  new  book  to  be  com- 
posed, called  The  Erudition  of  a  Christian  Man,  which  he  pub- 
lished upon  his  own  authority  ;  and  though  this  new  creed  dif- 
fered a  great  deal  from  the  former,  yet  he  was  no  less  positive  in 
requiring  assent  to  this  than  he  had  been  to  the  former.  In  both 
these  books  he  was  very  explicit  ii\  enforcing  the  doctrine  of  passive 
obedience ;  so  that  his  institutions  were  not  likely  to  weaken 
what  he  so  powerfully  enforced  by  his  severities. 

But  his  authority  in  religion  was  not  more  uncontrolled  than 
in  temporal  concerns.  An  alderman,  one  Read,  who  had  refused 
to  assist  him  with  a  benevolence,  was  pressed  as  a  private  soldier, 
and  sent  to  sei've  in  an  army  which  was  levied  against  an  incur- 
sion of  the  Scots.  In  this  manner  all  who  opposed  his  will  were 
either  pressed  or  imprisoned,  happy  if  they  escaped  with  such 
slight  punishments.  His  parliament  made  a  law,  by  which  the 
king's  proclamations  were  to  have  the  same  force  as  statutes ;  and 
to  facilitate  the  execution  of  this  act,  by  which  all  shadow  of  liberty 
was  totally  removed,  they  appointed  that  any  nine  of  the  privy- 
council  should  form  a  legal  court  for  punishing  disobedience  to  all 
proclamations.  Thus  the  king  was  empowered  to  issue  a  pro- 
clamation to  destroy  the  lives,  or  take  away  the  properties,  of  any 
of  his  subjects ;  and  the  only  mode  of  application  for  redress  was 
to  himself  in  council. 

In  about  a  year  after  the  death  of  the  last  queen,  Henry  once 
r-tsAc^-]  more  changed  his  condition,  by  marrying  his  sixth  and 
last  wife,  Catliarine  Parr,  who,  according  to  the  ridicu- 
lous suggestions  of  the  people,  was  in  fact  a  widow.  She  was 
the  wife  of  the  late  lord  Latimer,  and  was  considered  as  a  woman 
of  discretion  and  virtue.  She  had  already  passed  the  meridian 
of  life,  and  managed  the  temper  of  this  capricious  tyrant  with 
prudence  and  success.  His  amiable  days  had  long  been  over : 
lie  w^as  almost  choked  with  fat,  and  had  contracted  a  morose  air, 
very  far  from  inspiring  aifection.  Nevertheless,  this  woman,  sa- 
crificing her  appetites  to  her  ambition,  so  far  prevailed  in  gaining 
his  confidence,  that  she  was  appointed  regent  of  the  kingdom 


HENRY  vm;         '  405 

during  his  absence  in  France,  whither  he  passed  over  at  the  head 
of  thirty  thousand  men,  to  prosecute  a  war  which  had  r]^544i 
been  declared  between  him  and  the  French  king.  He 
there  behaved,  as  in  all  his  former  undertakings,  with  ineffectual 
ostentation.  Instead  of  marching  into  the  heart  of  the  country, 
he  sat  down  before  Boulogne,  which  was  obliged  to  capitulate ; 
and  his  ally,  the  ennperor,  making  a  separate  peace,  Henry  was 
obliged  to  return  with  his  army  into  England,  where  he  found  his 
subjects  ready  to  offer  him  their  accustomed  adulation,  and  to 
praise  him  for  an  enterprise  in  which,  at  an  infinite  charge,  h© 
had  made  an  acquisition  that  was  of  no  manner  of  benefit. 

But  of  all  his  subjects  none  seemed  more  abandoned  and  base- 
ly servile,  than  the  members  of  the  two  houses  of  parliament,  who, 
it  might  be  reasonably  supposed,  would  rather  have  been  the  pro- 
tectors of  the  people  than  the  slaves  of  the  crown.     Upon  his  re- 
turn from  his  expensive  French  expedition,  after  professions  of 
the  greatest   submission   and   profound   acknowledgment,  they 
granted  him  a  subsidy  equal  to  his  demands,  and  added  to  it  a 
gift,  which  Avill  make  their  memory  odious  to  the  most  distant 
posterity.     By  one  vote  they  bestowed  upon  him  all  the  reve- 
nues of  the  two  universities,  as  well  as  some  other  places  of  edu- 
cation and  public  worship.      But,  rapacious  as  this    monarch 
M'as,  jhe  refrained  from  despoiling  those  venerable  seminaries  of 
their  antient  endowments :  however,  they  owed  their  safety  to 
his  lenity,  and  not  to  the  protection  of  this  base  and  degenerate 
parliament.     Nor  was  he  less  just  upon  another  occasion,  witli 
regard  to  the  suggestions  of  his  council,  who  had  long  conceived 
a  hatred  against  Cranmer,  and  laboured  to  destroy  him.     This 
just  and  moderate  man  had  all  along  owed  his  safety  to  his  integ- 
rity ;  and,  scorning  intrigue  himself,  was  therefore  the  less  liable 
to  be  circumvented  by  the  intrigues  of  others.     The  catholic  par- 
ty had  long  represented  to  the  king  that  Cranmer  was  the  secret 
cause  of  most  of  the  divisions  which  tore  the  nation,  as  his  exam- 
ple and  support  were  the  chief  props  of  heresy.     Henry  seeing 
the  point  to  which  they  tended,  and  desirous  of  knowing  how  far 
they  would  carry  their  intrigues,  feigned  a  compliance  with  their 
wishes,  and  ordered  the  council  to  make  inquiry  into  the  pri- 
mate's conduct  and  crimes.    All  the  world  concluded  that  his 
disgrace  was  certain^  and  his  death  inevitable.    His  old  friends. 


406  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

who  from  mercenary  motives  had  been  attached  to  him,  now  be- 
gan to  treat  lum  with  mortifying  neglect ;  he  was  obliged  to  stand 
several  hours  among  the  servants  at  the  door  of  the  council  cham- 
ber before  the  members  deigned  to  admit  him  ;  and  he  made  his 
appearance  among  them  only  to  be  informed  that  they  had  de- 
termined to  send  him  to  the  Tower.  But  Cranmer  was  not  to 
be  intimidated  by  their  menaces  ;  he  appealed  to  the  king  ;  and 
when  that  was  denied  him,  he  produced  a  ring,  wliich  Henry  had 
given  him  to  make  use  of  upon  that  emergency.  The  privy- 
counsellors  were  confounded ;  and  still  more  so,  when,  in  the 
presence  of  the  king,  they  found  themselves  severely  reproved, 
and  Cranmer  taken  into  more  than  former  favour.  Henry  obliged 
them  all  to  embrace,  as  a  sign  of  their  reconciliation ;  and  Cran- 
mer, from  his  gentle  nature,  rendered  this  reconciliation  more 
sincere  on  his  part  than  is  usual  in  such  forced  compliances. 

Still,  however,  the  king's  severity  to  the  rest  of  his  subjects 
continued  as  fierce  as  ever.  For  some  time  he  had  been  incom- 
moded by  an  ulcer  in  his  leg ;  tlie  pain  of  which,  added  to  his 
corpulence  and  other  infirmities,  increased  his  natural  irascibility 
to  such  a  degree,  that  scarcely  any  even  of  his  domestics  approached 
Mm  without  terror.  It  was  not  to  be  expected,  therefore,  that 
any/who  differed  from  him  in  opinion  should,  at  this  time  partic- 
n  ^46  1  ularly,  hope  for  pardon.  Among  the  many  whose  un- 
merited sufferings  excite  our  pity  and  indignation,  tlie 
fate  of  Anne  Askew  deserves  to  be  particulai'ly  remembered. 
This  lady  was  a  woman  of  merit  as  well  as  beauty,  and  connect- 
ed with  many  of  the  principal  ladies  at  court.  It  is  said  that  she 
kept  up  a  correspondence  with  the  queen  herself,  who  secretly 
favoured  the  Reformation  ;  and  this  correspondence  only  served 
to  hasten  this  poor  woman's  ruin,  the  chancellor  being  known  to 
be  her  enemy.  However  this  be,  she  happened  to  difler  from  the 
established  code  of  belief,  particularly  in  the  article  of  the  real 
presence ;  and,  notwithstanding  the  weakness  of  her  sex  and  age, 
she  was  thrown  into  prison,  and  accused  of  heresy.  In  this  situ- 
ation, with  courage  far  beyond  vrhat  might  be  expected,  she  em- 
ployed her  time  in  composing  prayers  and  discourses,  and  vindi- 
cating the  truth  of  her  opinions.  The  chancellor  Wriothesly, 
who  was  much  attached  to  the  catholic  party,  was  sent  to  exam- 
ine her  with  regard  to  her  abetters  at  court  j  but  she  maiijtaine4 


HENRY  Vin.  407 

the  utmost  secrecy,  and  would  accuse  rioiie.  In  consequence  of 
this  contumacy,  as  it  was  called,  the  poor  young  lady  was  put  to 
the  torture  ;  but  she  still  continued  resolute,  and  her  silence  tes- 
tified her  contempt  of  their  petty  cruelties.  The  chancellor, 
therefore,  became  outrageous,  and  ordered  the  lieutenant  of  the 
Tower,  who  executed  this  punishment,  to  stretch  the  rack  still 
harder  ;  which  he  refusing  to  do,  and,  though  menaced,  still  per- 
sisting in  a  refusal,  the  chancellor,  intoxicated  with  religious  zeal, 
grasped  the  cords  himself,  and  drew  it  so  violently  that  the  wo- 
man's body  was  almost  torn  asunder.  But  her  constancy  was 
greater  than  the  barbarity  of  her  persecutors ;  so  that,  finding  no 
other  method  to  subdue  her,  she  was  condemned  to  be  burned 
alite.  She  received  this  sentence  with  a  transport  of  joy,  as  a 
release  from  a  state  of  the  greatest  pain  to  the  greatest  felicity. 
As  her  joints  had  been  dislocated  by  the  rack,  so  that  she  could 
not  stand,  she  was  carried  to  the  place  of  execution  in  a  chair. 
Together  with  her  were  brought  Nicholas  Belenian,  a  priest,  John 
Lascelles,  of  the  king's  household,  and  John  Adams,  a  taylor,  who 
had  all  been  condemned  for  the  same  crime.  They  were  tied  to 
the  stake  ;  and  in  that  dreadful  situation  informed,  that,  if  they 
would  recant,  their  lives  would  be  spared.  But  they  refused  a 
life  that  was  to  be  gained  by  such  prostitution ;  and  they  saw 
with  tranquillity  the  executioner  kindle  the  flames  which  consum- 
ed them. 

From  this  indiscriminate  severity  the  queen  was  not  herself 
entirely  secure.  She  had  for  some  time  attended  the  king  in 
his  indisposition,  and  endeavoured  to  sooth  him  by  her  arts  and 
assiduity.  His  favourite  topic  of  conversation  was  theology  5 
and  Catharine,  who  was  tinctured  with  the  spirit  of  the  times, 
would  now  and  then  enter  into  a  debate  with  him  upon  many 
,  speculative  tenets  that  were  then  in  agitation  between  the  Catho- 
lics and  Lutherans.  Henry,  highly  provoked  that  she  should 
presume  to  differ  from  him,  made  complaints  of  her  obstinacy  to 
Gardiner,  wiio  gladly  laid  hold  of  the  opportunity  to  inflame  the 
quarrel.  ^  Even  articles  of  impeachment  were  drawn  up  against 
her,  which  were  brought  to  the  king  by  the  chancellor  to  be  sign- 
ed ;  but,  in  returning  home,  he  happened  to  drop  the  paper.  It 
was  very  lucky  for  the  queen  that  the  person  who  found  it  was 
in  her  interests:  it  was  immediately  carried  to  her^  and  the  eon- 


408  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

,tents  soon  made  her  sensible  of  the  danger  to  wluch  she  was  ex- 
posed. In  this  exigence,  she  was  resolved  to  work  upon  the  king; 
and  paying  him  her  customary  visit,  he  led  Iier  as  usual  to  the 
subject  of  theology,  which  at  first  she  seemed  to  decline,  but  in 
which  she  afterwards  engaged,  as  if  merely  to  gratify  his  inclina- 
tions. In  the  course  of  her  conversation,  however,  she  gave  him 
to  know,  that  her  whole  aim  in  talking  was  to  receive  his  instruc- 
tions, and  not  to  controvert  them ;  that  it  was  not  for  her  to  set 
her  opinions  in  opposition  to  those  which  served  to  direct  the  na- 
tion ;  but  she  alleged,  she  could  not  help  trying  every  art  that 
could  induce  the  king  to  exert  that  eloquence  which  served,  for 
the  time,  to  mitigate  his  bodily  pain.  Henry  seemed  channed  at 
this  discovery  j  "  And  is  it  so,  sweet  heart  ?"  cried  he :  "  then 
we  are  perfect  friends  again."  Just  after  this  reconciliation,  the 
chancellor  made  his  appearance,  with  forty  pursuivants  at  his 
heels,  prepared  to  take  the  queen  into  custody.  But  the  king  ad- 
vanced to  meet  him,  and  seemed  to  expostulate  with  him  in  the 
severest  terms.  The  queen  could  overhear  the  terms,  knave, 
fool,  and  beast,  which  he  very  liberally  bestowed  upon  that  mag- 
istrate, and  his  being  ordered  to  depart.  When  he  was  gone,  she 
interposed  in  his  defence ;  but  the  king  could  not  help  saying, 
^'  Poor  soul,  you  know  not  how  little  entitled  this  man  is  to  your 
good  offices."  Thenceforth  the  queen  was  careful  not  to  offend 
Henry's  humour  by  contradiction :  she  was  contented  to  suffei* 
the  divines  to  dispute,  and  the  executioner  to  destroy.  The 
fires  accordingly  were  kindled  against  the  heretics  of  both  sides, 
as  usual ;  during  which  dreadful  exhibitions,  the  king  would  fre- 
quently assemble  the  houses  of  parliament,  and  harangue  them 
with  florid  orations,  in  which  he  would  aver,  that  never  prince 
had  a  greater  affection  for  his  people,  nor  ever  people  had  a 
greater  affection  for  their  king.  In  every  pause  of  these  extraor- 
dinary orations,  some  of  his  creatures,  near  his  person,  would 
begin  to  applaud ;  and  this  was  followed  by  loud  acclamations 
from  the  rest  of  the  audience. 

But  though  his  health  was  declining  apace,  yet  his  implacable 
cruelties  were  not  the  less  frequent.  His  resentments  were  dif- 
fused indiscriminately  to  all  :  at  one  time  a  protestant,  and  at  an- 
other a  catholic,  were  the  objects  of  his  severity.  The  duke  of 
Norfolk,  and  his  gon  the  earl  of  Surry*  were  the  last  that  felt  the 


HENRY  Vlir.  409 

injustice  of  the  tyrant's  gi'oundless  suspicions.     The  duke  was  a 
nobleman  who  had  served  the  king  with  talents  and  fidelity  : 
his  son  was  a  young  man  of  the  most  promising  hopes,  who  excell- 
ed in  every  accomplishment  that  became  a  scholar,  a  courtier,  and 
a  soldier.     He  excelled  in  all  the  military  exercises  which  were 
then  in  request :  he  encouraged  the  fine  arts  by  his  practice  and 
example  5  and  it  is  remarkable,  that  he  was  the  first  who  brought 
our  language,  in  his  poetical  pieces,  to  any  degree  of  refinement. 
He  celebrated  the  fair  Geraldina  in  all  his  sonnets,  and  maintained 
her  superior  beauty  in  all  places  of  public  contention.     These 
qualifications,  however,  were  no  safeguard  to  him  against  Henry's 
suspicions :  he   had   dropped    some   expressions  of  resentment 
against  the  king's  ministers,  upon  being  displaced  from  the  gov- 
ernment of  Boulogne  5  and  the  whole  family  had  become  obnox- 
ious from  the  late  incontinency  of  Catharine  Howard,  the  queen, 
who  was  executed.     From  these  motives,  therefore,  private  orders 
were  given  to  arrest  the  father  and  son ;  and  accordingly  they 
were  arrested  both  on  the  same  day,  and  confined  in  the  Towej*. 
Surry  being  a  commoner,  his  trial  was  the  more  expeditious ;  and 
as  to  proofs,  there  were  many  informers  base  enough  to  betray 
the  intimacies  of  private  confidence,  and  all  the  connections  of 
blood.     The  duchess  dowager  of  Richmond,  Surry's  own  sister, 
enlisted  herself  among  the  number  of  his  accusers  5  and  sir  Rich- 
ard Southwell  also,  his  most  intimate  friend,  charged  him  with 
infidelity  to  the  king.     It  would  seem  that,  at  this  dreary  period, 
there  was  neither  faith  nor  honour  to  be  found  in  all  the  nation. 
Surry  denied  the  charge,  and  challenged  his  accuser  to  single 
combat.     This  faAt»ur  was  refused  him  ;  and  it  was  alleged,  tliat 
he  had  quartered  the  arms  of  Edward  the  Confessor  on  his  es- 
cutcheon, which  alone  was  sufiicient  to  convict  him  of  aspiring  to 
the  crown.     To  this  he  could  make  no  reply  :  and  indeed  any 
answer  would  have  been  needless ;  for  neither  parliaments  nor 
juries,  during  this  reign,  seemed  to  be  guided  by  any  other  proofs 
than  the  will  of  the  crovt^n.     This  young  nobleman  was,  therefore, 
condemned  for  high  treason,  notwithstanding  his   eloquent  and 
spirited  defence ;  and  the  sentence  was  soon  after  executed  upon 
him  on  Tower-hill.     In  the  mean  time  the  duke  endeavoured  to 
mollify  the  king  by  letters  and  submissions ;  but  the  monster's 
hard  heart  ^Yas  rarely  subject  to  tender  impressions.     As  soon  as 
VOL.  I.  52 


410  HISTOllY  OF  ENGLANX>, 

tlic  parliament  re-assembled,  a  bill  of  attainder  was  found  against 
tlie  duke,  as  it  was  thought  he  could  riot  so  easily  have  been  con- 
victed on  a  fair  hearing  by  his  peers.  The  only  crime  that  his 
accusers  could  allege  against  him  was,  that  he  had  once  said  that 
the  king  was  sickly,  and  could  not  hold  out  long  5  and  the  king- 
dom was  likely  to  be  toni  between  the  contending  parties  of  dif- 
ferent persuasions.  Cranmer,  though  engaged  for  many  years  in 
an  opposite  pai-ty  to  Norfolk,  and  though  he  had  received  many 
and  great  injuries  from  him,  would  have  no  hand  in  so  unjust  a 
prosecution  ;  but  retired  to  his  seat  at  Croydon.  However,  the 
death-warrant  was  made  out,  and  immediately  sent  to  the  lieu- 
tenant of  the  Tower.  The  duke  prepared  for  death,  as  the  fol- 
lowing morning  was  to  be  his  last ;  but  an  event  of  greater  con- 
sequence to  the  kingdom  intervened,  and  prevented  his  execution. 
The  king  had  been  for  some  time  approaching  fast  towards  his 
end  ;  and  for  several  days  all  those  about  his  person  plainly  saw 
that  his  speedy  death  was  inevitable.  The  disorder  in  his  leg 
was  now  grown  extremely  painful ;  and  this,  added  to  his  mon- 
strous corpulency,  which  rendered  him  unable  to  stir,  made  him 
more  furious  than  a  chained  lion.  He  had  been  ever  stern  and 
severe :  he  was  now  outrageous.  In  this  state  he  had  continued 
for  near  four  years  before  his  death,  the  terror  of  all,  and  the  tor- 
mentor of  himself;  his  courtiers  having  no  inclination  to  make  au 
enemy  of  him,  as  they  were  more  ardently  employed  in  conspiring 
the  death  of  each  other.  In  this  manner,  therefore,  he  was  suf- 
fered to  struggle,  without  any  of  his  domestics  having  the  courage 
to  warn  him  of  his  approaching  end,  as  more  than  once,  during 
this  reign,  persons  had  been  put  to  death  for  foretelling  the  death 
of  the  king.  At  last,  sir  Anthony  Denny  had  the  courage  to  dis- 
close to  him  this  dreadful  secret ;  and,  contrary  to  his  usual  cus- 
torn,  he  received  the  tidings  with  an  expression  of  resignation. 
His  anguish  and  remorse  were  at  this  time  greater  than  can  be 
expressed  :  he  desired  that  Cranmer  might  be  sent  for ;  but,  be- 
fore that  prelate  could  arrive,  >he  was  speechless.  Cranmer  de- 
siring him  to  give  some  sign  of  his  dying  in  the  faith  of  Christ,  be 
squeezed  his  hand,  and  immediately  expired,  after  a  reign  of 
thirty -seven  years  and  nine  months,  in  the  fifty -sixth  year  of  his 
n  fidr  1  ^S^'  ^^"^6  kings  have  been  tyrants  from  contradiction 
and  revolt,  some  from  being  mijjied  by  favourites,  and 


HENRY  Vfll.  411 

9Qme  from  a  spirit  of  party :  but  Henry  was  cruel  from  a  depraved 
disposition  alone ;  cruel  in  government,  cruel  in  religion,  and 
cruel  in  his  family.  Our  divines  have  taken  some  pains  to  vindi^- 
cate  the  character  of  this  brutal  prince,  as  if  his  conduct  and  our 
Reformation  had  any  connexion  with  each  other.  There  is  noth- 
ing so  absurd  as  to  defend  the  one  by  the  other ;  the  most  noble 
de&igns  are  brought  about  by  the  most  vitious  instruments ;  for 
we  see  even  that  cruelty  and  injustice,  were  thought  necessary  to 
be  employed  in  our  holy  redemption. 

With  regard  to  foreign  states,  Henry  made  some  espeditions 
into  France,  which  were  attended  with  vast  expense  to  the  nation, 
and  brought  it  no  kind  of  advantage.  However,  he  all  along 
maintained  an  intercourse  of  friendship  with  Francis,  which  ap- 
peared disinterested  and  sincere.  Against  tlie  Scots  he  was  rather 
more  successful ;  his  generals  having  worsted  their  incursive  ar- 
mies on  several  occasions.  But  that  which  gave  England  the 
greatest  ascendency  over  that  nation,  was  the  spirit  of  concord 
which  soon  after  seemed  to  prevail  between  the  two  kingdoms ; 
and  tlmt  seemed  to  pave  the  way  for  their  being  in  time  united 
under  the  same  sovei^eign.  There  were  ten  parliaments  sum- 
moned in  this  reign,  and  twenty -three  sessions  held ;  but  the 
whole  time  in  which  these  parliaments  sat,  during  this  loi)greign5, 
<lid  not  exceed  three  years  and  a  half.  The  foreign  commerce  of 
England,  during  this  age,  was  mostly  .confined  to  the  Netherlands. 
The  merchants  of  the  Low-Countries  bought  the  English  com- 
modities, and  distributed  them  into  the  other  parts  of  Europe, 
These  commodities,  however,  were  generally  little  more  than  the 
natural  productions  of  the  country,  witjiout  any  manufactures ; 
for  it  must  be  observed  at  this  time,  tli^t  foreign  jartificers  much 
surpassed  the  English  in  dexterity,  industry,  and  frugality ;  and 
jt  is  said  that  at  one  time  not  less  than  fifteen  thousand  artisans^ 
.of  the  Flemish  nation  alone,  were  settled  in  London. 


412  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

CHAP.  XXIV. 
EDWARP  yi. 

Henry  the  Eighth  Avas  succeeded  on  the  throne  by  his  only  son, 
Edward  the  Sixth,  then  in  the  tenth  year  of  his  age.  The  late 
king  in  his  will,  which  he  expected  Avould  he  absolutely  obeyed, 
fixed  his  majority  of  the  prince  at  the  completion  of  the  eighteenth 
year;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  appointed  sixteen  executors  of 
his  will,  to  whom,  during  the  minority,  he  intrusted  the  govern- 
ment of  the  king  and  kingdom.  But  the  vanity  of  his  aims  was 
soon  discovered ;  for  the  first  act  of  the  executors  was  to  choose 
the  earl  of  Hertford,  who  was  afterwards  made  duke  of  Somerset, 
as  protector  of  the  realm ;  and  in  him  was  lodged  all  the  regal 
power,  together  with  a  privilege  of  naming  whom  he  would  for  his 
privy-council. 

This  was  a  favourable  season  for  those  of  the  reformed  religion ; 
and  the  eyes  of  the  late  king  were  no  sooner  closed  than  all  of 
that  persuasion  congratulated  themselves  on  the  event.     They  no 
longer  suppressed  their  sentiments,  but  maintained  their  doc- 
trines openly,  in  preaching  and  teaching,  even  while  the  laws 
against  them  continued  in  full  force.     The  protector  had  long 
been  regarded  as  the  secret  partisan  of  the  reformers ;  and,  being 
iiow  freed  from  restraint,  he  scrupled  not  to  express  his  intention 
of  correcting  all  the  abuses  of  the  antient  religion,  and  of  adopt- 
ing still  more  the  doctrines  propagated  by  Luther.     His  power 
was  not  a  little  strengthened  by  his  military  success.     He  wish- 
ed to  compel  the  Scots  to  give  their  young  queen  (the  unfortu- 
nate Mary)  in  marriage  to  Edward  ;  and,  attacking  a  part  of  their 
army,  he  slew  about  eight  hundred  men.     The  popularity  which 
he  gained  upon  this  occasion  seconded  his  views  in  the  propaga- 
tion of  the  new  doctrines.     But  the  character  of  Somerset  did 
not  stand  in  need  of  the  mean  supports  of  popularity  acquired  in 
this  manner,  as  he  was  naturally  humble,  civil,  affable,  and  cour- 
teous, to  the  meanest  suitor,  while  his  actions  were  in  general 
directed  by  motives  of  piety  and  honour. 

The  protector,  in  his  schemes  for  advancing  the  Reformation, 
had  always  recourse  to  the  counsels  of  Cramner,  M'ho,  being  a 


EDWARD  VI.  413 

man  of  moderation  and  prudence,  was  averse  to  violent  changes, 
and  determined  to  bring  over  the  people  by  insensible  innova- 
tions to  his  own  peculiar  system.  The  person  who  opposed  with 
the  greatest  autliority  any  further  advances  towards  reformation, 
was  Gardiner,  bishop  of  Winchester,  who,  though  he  had  not  ob- 
tained a  place  at  the  council-board,  yet,  from  his  age,  experience, 
and  capacity,  was  regarded  by  most  men  with  some  degree  of 
veneration.  Upon  a  general  visitation  of  the  church,  which  had 
been  commanded  by  the  primate  and  protector,  Gardiner  defend- 
ed the  use  of  images,  which  the  protestants  now  openly  attacked : 
he  even  wrote  an  apology  for  holy  water  j  but  he  particularly  al- 
leged, that  it  was  unlawful  to  make  any  change  in  religion  during 
the  king's  minority.  This  opposition  of  Gardiner  drew  on  him 
the  indignation  of  the  council ;  and  he  was  sent  to  the  Fleet  pris- 
on, where  he  was  treated  with  harshness  and  severity. 

These  internal  regulations  were  in  some  measure  retarded  by 
the  war  with  Scotland,  which  still  continued  to  rage  with  some 
violence.  But  a  defeat  which  that  nation  suffered  at  Mussel- 
burgh, in  which  above  ten  thousand  perished  in  the  field  of  bat- 
tle, induced  them  to  sue  for  peace,  in  order  to  gain  time ;  and 
the  protector  returned  to  settle  the  business  of  the  Reformation, 
which  was  as  yet  only  begun.  But,  though  he  acquired  great  pop- 
ularity by  this  expedition,  he  did  not  fail  to  attract  the  envy  of 
several  noblemen,  by  procuring  a  patent  from  the  young  king,  his 
nephew,  to  sit  in  parliament  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne,  and. 
to  enjoy  the  same  honours  and  privileges  which  had  usually  been 
granted  to  the  uncles  of  kings  in  England.  However,  he  stili 
drove  on  his  favourite  schemes  of  reformation,  and  gave  more 
consistency  to  the  tenets  of  the  church.  The  cup  was  restored 
to  the  laity  in  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  supper;  private  mass- 
es were  abolished ;  the  king  was  empowered  to  create  bishops 
by  letters -patent ;  vagabonds  were  adjudged  to  be  slaves  for  two 
years,  and  to  be  marked  with  a  red-hot  iron ;  an  act  commonly 
supposed  to  be  levelled  against  the  strolling  priests  and  friars. 
It  was  enacted  also,  that  all  who  denied  the  king's  supremacy, 
or  asserted  that  of  the  pope,  should,  for  the  first  offence,  forfeit 
their  goods  and  chattels,  and  suffer  imprisonment  during  pleas- 
ure ;  that,  for  the  second  offence,  they  should  incur  the  pain  of 
premunire ;  and.  for  the  third,  be  attainted  of  treason.     Orders 


414  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

were  soon  after  issued  by  the  council,  that  candles  should  no 
longer  be  carried  about  on  Candlemas-day,  ashes  on  Ash-Wednes- 
day, or  palms  on  Palm-Sunday.  These  were  antient  super- 
stitious practices,  which  led  to  immoralities  that  it  was  thought 
proper  to  restrain.  An  order  also  was  issued  for  the  removal  of 
all  images  from  the  churches ;  an  innovation  which  was  much  de- 
sired by  the  reformers,  and  which  alone,  with  regard  to  the  pop- 
ulace, amounted  almost  to  a  change  of  the  established  religion. 
The  people  had  for  some  time  been  extremely  distracted  by  the 
opposite  opinions  of  their  preachers ;  and  as  they  were  totally 
incapable  of  judging  of  the  arguments  advanced  on  eitker  side, 
and  naturally  regarded  every  thing  they  heard  at  church  as  of 
the  greatest  authority,  much  confusion  and  fluctuation  resulted 
from  this  uncertainty.  The  council  first  endeavoured  to  remove 
tlie  inconvenience  by  laying  some  restraints  upon  preaching  :  but 
finding  this  expedient  fail,  they  imposed  a  total  silence  upon 
preachers  j  which,  however,  was  removed  by  degrees,  in  propor?- 
tion  as  the  Reformation  gained  ground  among  the  people. 

But  these  innovations,  evidently  calculated  for  the  good  of  tlie 
people,  were  not  brought  about  without  some  struggles  at  home, 
while  the  protector  was  but  too  busily  employed  against  the 
Scots,  who,  united  with,  and  seconded  by,  France,  still  pushed 
on  their  inroads  with  unremitting  animosity.  Besides,  there  was 
still  an  enemy  that  he  had  yet  to  fear  more  than  any  of  the  for- 
mer;  and  this  was  his  own  brother,  loi'd  Thomas  Seymour,  the 
admiral,  a  man  of  uncommon  talents,  but  proud,  turbulent,  and 
intractable.  This  nobleman  could  not  endure  tlie  distinction 
which  the  king  had  always  made  between  him  and  his  elder 
brother ;  so  that  they  divided  the  whole  court  and  the  kingdom 
by  their  opposite  cabals  and  pretensions.  By  his  flattery  and  ad- 
ilress  he  had  so  insinuated  himself  into  the  good  graces  of  the 
queen-dowager,  that,  forgetting  her  usual  prudence  and  decency, 
she  married  him  immediately  upon  the  decease  of  the  late  king. 
This  match  was  particularly  displeasing  to  the  elder  brother's 
wife,  who  now  saw  that,  while  her  husband  liad  the  precedency 
in  one  place,  she  was  obliged  to  yield  it  in  another.  His  next 
step  was  to  cabal  and  make  a  party  among  the  nobility,  who,  as 
they  hated  his  brother,  fomented  his  ambition.  He  then  bribed 
tlie  king's  domestics  to  his  interest;  and  young   Edward  fre- 


EDWARD  VL  415 

qiiently  went  to  his  house,  on  pretence  of  visiting  the  queen. 
There  he  ingratiated  himself  with  his  sovereign,  by  the  most 
officious  assiduities,  particularly  by  supplying  him  with  money  to 
distribute  among  his  servants  and  favourites,  without  the  knowl- 
edge of  his  governor.  In  the  protector's  absence  with  the  army 
in  Scotland,  he  made  it  his  business  to  redouble  all  his  arts  and 
insinuations ;  and  thus  obtained  a  new  patent  for  admiral,  with 
an  additional  appointment.  Sir  William  Paget,  perceiving  the 
progress  he  daily  made  in  the  king's  aifeetion,  wrote  on  the  sub- 
ject to  the  protector,  who  finished  the  campaign  in  Scotland  with 
all  possible  dispatch,  that  he  might  return  in  time  to  counterwork 
his  machinations.  But  before  he  could  arrive  in.  England,  his 
brother  had  engaged  in  his  party  several  of  the  principal  nobility, 
and  had  even  prevailed  on  the  king  himself  to  write  a  letter  to 
the  two  houses  of  parliament  with  his  own  hand,  desiring  that 
the  admiral  might  be  appointed  his  governor ;  but  the  council,  be- 
ing apprised  of  his  schemes,  sent  deputies  to  assure  him,  that,  if 
he  did  not  desist,  they  would  deprive  him  of  his  office,  send  him 
prisoner  to  the  Tower,  and  prosecute  him  on  the  last  act  of  par- 
liament, by  which  he  was  subject  to  the  penalty  of  liigh-treason, 
for  attempting  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the  government.  It  was 
not  without  some  severe  struggles  within  himself,  and  some  men- 
aces divulged  among  his  creatures,  that  he  thought  proper  to  sub- 
mit, and  desired  to  be  reconciled  to  his  brother.  But  he  still 
nourished  the  same  designs  in  secret ;  and  his  brother,  suspecting 
his  sincerity,  employed  spies  to  inform  him  of  all  his  private 
transactions. 

It  was  not  in  the  power  of  persuasions  or  menaces  to  shake  the 
admiral's  unalterable  views  of  ambition.  His  spouse,  the  queen- 
dowager,  had  died  in  child-bed  ;  and  this  accident,  far  from  re- 
pressing his  scheines,  only  seemed  to  promote  them.  He  made 
his  addresses  to  the  princess  Elizabeth,  afterwards  so  revered  by 
the  English  ;  and  it  is  said  that  she  listened  to  his  insinuations, 
contrary  to  the  will  of  her  father,  who  had  excluded  her  from  the 
succession,  if  she  should  marry  without  the  consent  of  the  coun- 
cil. The  admiral,  however,  it  is  observed,  had  formed  a  scheme 
calculated  to  remove  that  objection;  and  his  professions  seemed 
to  give  reason  to  believe  that  he  intended  aiming  at  regal  authori- 
ty.   By  promises  and  persuasions  he  brought  over  many  of  the 


416  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

principal  nobility  to  his  party  ;  he  neglected  not  even  the  most 
popular  persons  of  inferior  rank  ;  and  he  computed  that  he  could 
on  occasion  command  the  service  often  thousand  men  amonjrhis 
servants,  tenants,  and  retainers.  He  had  already  provided  arms 
for  their  use  ;  and  having  engaged  in  his  interests  sir  John  Shar- 
ington,  master  of  the  mint  at  Bristol,  a  very  coiTupt  man,  he  flat- 
tered himself  that  money  would  not  be  wanting. 
ri548  1         Somerset,  being  well  ascertained  of  all  these  alarming 

circumstances,  endeavoured,  by  every  expedient  that  his 
power  or  his  near  connection  could  suggest,  to  draw  him  from  his 
designs.  He  reasoned,  he  threatened  ;  he  heaped  new  favours 
upon  him  5  but  all  to  no  purpose.  At  length  he  resolved  to  make 
use  of  the  last  dreadful  remedy,  and  to  attaint  his  own  brotlier  of 
high  treason.  In  consequence  of  this  resolution,  and  secretly 
advised  to  it  by  Dudley  earl  of  AVarwick,  a  wicked  ambitious 
man,  who  expected  to  rise  upon  the  downfall  of  the  two  brothers, 
he  deprived  him  of  his  office  of  high-admiral,  and  signed  a  war- 
rant for  committing  him  to  the  Tower.  Yet  still  the  2>i"otector 
suspended  the  blow,  and  showed  reluctance  to  ruin  one  so  nearly 
connected  with  himself:  he  offered  once  more  to  be  sincerely 
reconciled,  and  give  him  his  life,  if  he  would  be  contented  to 
spend  the  remainder  of  his  days  in  retirement  and  repentance. 
But  finding  himself  unable  to  work  on  the  inflexible  temper  of  his 
brother  by  any  methods  but  severity,  he  ordered  a  charge  to  be 
drawn  up  against  him,  consisting  of  thirty -three  articles  ;  and  the 
whole  to  be  brouglit  into  parliament,  which  was  now  the  instru- 
ment used  by  ministers  for  the  punishment  of  their  enemies. 
The  charge  being  brought  first  into  tlie  house  of  lords,  several 
peers,  rising  up  in  their  places,  gave  an  account  of  what  tliey 
knew  concerning  lord  Seymour's  conduct,  and  his  criminal  words 
n  ^14^  1    ^^^  actions.     There  was  greater  difficulty  in  managing 

the  prosecution  in  the  house  of  commons  ;  but  upon  re- 
ceiving a  message  from  the  king,  requiring  them  to  proceed,  the 
bill  passed  in  a  very  full  house,  near  four  hundred  voting  for  itj 
and  not  above  nine  or  ten  against  it.  The  sentence  was  soon  af- 
ter executed  by  beheading  him  on  Tower-hill.  His  death,  how- 
ever, was,  in  general,  disagreeable  to  the  nation,  who  considered 
the  lord  Seymour  as  hardly  dealt  with,  in  being  condemned  upon 
general  allegations^  without  having  an  opportunity  of  making  a 


EDWARD  TL  41?- 

defence,  or  confronting  his  accusers.  But  the  cliief  odium  fell 
upon  the  protector ;  and  it  must  be  owned  that  there  was  no  rea» 
son  for  carrying  his  severity  to  such  a  length  as  he  did. 

This  obstacle  being  removed,  the  protector  v>^ent  on  to  reform 
and  regulate  the  new  system  of  religion,  which  was  now  become 
the  chief  concern  of  the  nation.  A  committee  of  bishops  and  di- 
vines had  been  appointed  by  the  council  to  frame  a  liturgy  for  the 
service  of  the  church ;  and  this  work  was  executed  with  great 
moderation,  precision,  and  accuracy.  A  law  was  also  enacted? 
permitting  priests  to  marry ;  the  ceremony  of  auricular  confession, 
though  not  abolished,  was  left  at  the  discretion  of  the  people,  who 
were  not  displeased  at  being  freed  from  the  spiritual  tyranny  of 
their  instructors ;  the  doctrine  of  the  real  presence  was  the  last 
tenet  of  popery  that  was  wholly  abandoned  by  the  people,  as  both 
the  clergy  and  laity  were  loth  to  renounce  so  miraculous  a  benefit 
as  it  was  asserted  to  be.  However,  at  last,  not  only  this,  but  all 
the  pi'incipal  opinions  and  practices  of  the  catholic  religion,  con- 
trary to  what  the  scripture  authorises,  were  abolished ;  and  the 
Reformation,  such  as  we  have  it,  was  almost  entirely  completed 
in  England.  In  these  innovations  the  majority  of  the  people  and 
clergy  acquiesced ;  and  Gardiner  and  Bonner  were  the  only  per- 
sons whose  opposition  was  thought  of  any  weight ;  they  were, 
therefore,  sent  to  the  Tower,  and  threatened  with  the  king's  fur- 
ther displeasure  in  case  of  disobedience. 

But  it  had  been  well  for  the  credit  of  the  reformers,  had  they 
stopped  at  imprisonment  only.  They  also  resolved  to  become 
persecutors  in  turn  ;  and  although  the  very  spirit  of  their  doc- 
trines arose  from  a  freedom  of  thinking,  they  could  not  bear  that 
any  should  controvert  what  they  had  been  at  so  much  pains  to 
establish.  A  commission  was  granied  to  the  primate  and  some 
others,  to  search  after  all  anabaptists,  heretics,  or  contemners  of 
the  new  liturgy.  Among  the  number  of  those  who  were  suppos- 
ed to  incur  guilt  upon  this  occasion,  was  one  Joan  Boucher,  com- 
monly called  Joan  of  Kent ;  who  was  so  extremely  obstinate, 
that  the  commissioners  could  gain  nothing  upon  her.  She  had 
maintained  an  abstruse  metaphysical  sentiment,  that  Christ,  as 
man,  was  a  sinful  man  ;  but,  as  the  Word,  he  was  free  from  sin, 
and  could  be  subject  to  none  of  the  frailties  of  the  flesh  with  which 
he  was  clothed.     For  maintaining  this  doctrine,  which  none  o( 

VOL.  I,  53 


41S  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

them  could  understand,  this  poor  ignorant  woman  was  condemned 
to  be  burned  to  death  as  a  heretic.  The  young  king,  who,  it 
seems,  had  more  sense  than  his  ministers,  refused  at  first  to  sign' 
the  death-warrant ;  but,  being  at  last  pressed  by  Cranmer,  and 
vanquished  by  his  importunities,  he  reluctantly  complied  ;  de- 
claring that,  if  he  did  wrong,  the  sin  should  be  on  the  head  of 
those  who  had  persuaded  him  to  it.  The  primate  made  a  new 
effort  to  reclaim  the  woman  from  her  opinions  ;  but,  finding  her 
obstinate  against  all  his  arguments,  he  at  last  committed  her  to 
the  flames.  Some  time  after,  one  Van  Paris,  a  Dutchman,  being 
accused  of  Arianism,  was  condemned  to  the  same  punishment. 
He  suffered  with  so  much  satisfaction,  that  he  hugged  and  ca- 
ressed the  faggots  that  were  consuming  him,  and  died  exulting 
in  his  situation. 

Although  these  measures  were  intended  for  the  benefit  of  the 
nation,  and  in  the  end  turned  out  entirely  to  the  advantage  of 
society,  yet  they  were  at  tliat  time  attended  with  many  inconven- 
iences, to  which  all  changes  whatsoever  are  liable.  When  the 
monasteries  were  suppressed,  a  prodigious  number  of  monks  were 
obliged  to  earn  their  subsistence  by  their  labour ;  so  that  all  kinds 
of  business  were  overstocked.  The  lands  of  the  monasteries  also 
had  been  formerly  farmed  out  to  the  common  people,  so  as  to  em- 
ploy a  great  number  of  hands  ;  and  the  rents  being  moderate,  they 
were  able  to  maintain  their  families  on  the  profits  of  agricul- 
culture.  But  now  these  lands  being  possessed  by  the  nobility, 
the  rents  were  raised ;  and  the  farmers,  perceiving  that  wool 
was  a  better  commodity  than  corn,  turned  all  their  fields  into 
pasture.  In  consequence  of  this  practice,  the  price  of  meal  rose, 
to  the  unspeakable  hardship  of  the  lower  class  of  people.  Beside, 
as  few  hands  were  required  to  manage  a  pasture  farm,  a  great 
number  of  poor  people  were  utterly  deprived  of  subsistence,  while 
the  nation  was  filled  with  murmurs  and  complaints  against  the 
nobility,  who  were  considered  as  the  sources  of  the  general  ca- 
lamity. To  add  to  these  complaints,  the  rich  proprietors  of  lands 
proceeded  to  enclose  their  estates  ;  while  the  tenants,  regarded 
as  an  useless  burthen,  were  expelled  from  their  habitations.  Cot- 
tagers, deprived  of  the  commons  on  which  they  formerly  fed  their 
cattle,  were  reduced  to  misery  5  and  a  great  decay  of  people,  and 
diminution  of  provisions,  v.ere  observed  in  every  part  of  the  king- 


EDWARD  VI.  419 

dom.  To  add  to  this  picture  of  general  calamity,  all  the  good 
coin  of  the  kingdom  was  hoarded  up  or  exported ;  while  a  base 
metal  was  coined,  or  imported  from  the  continent  in  great 
abundance ;  and  this  the  poor  were  obliged  to  receive  in  pay- 
ment, but  could  not  disburse  at  an  equal  advantage..  Thus  an 
universal  diffidence  and  stagnation  of  commerce  took  place  5 
and  loud  complaints  were  heard  in  every  quarter. 

The  protector,  who  knew  that  his  own  power  was  to  be 
founded  on  the  depression  of  the  nobility,  espoused  the  cause 
of  the  sufferers.  He  appointed  commissioners  to  examine 
whether  the  possessors  of  the  church-lands  had  fulfilled  the  con- 
ditions on  which  those  lands  had  been  sold  by  the  crown  ;  and 
ordered  all  late  enclosures  to  be  laid  open  on  an  appointed  day. 
As  the  object  of  this  commission  was  very  disagreeable  to  the  gen^ 
try  and  nobility,  they  called  it  arbitrary  and  illegal ;  while  the 
common  people,  fearing  it  would  be  eluded,  and  being  impatient 
for  redress,  rose  in  great  numbers,  and  sought  a  remedy  by  force 
of  arms.  The  rising  began  at  once  in  several  parts  of  England, 
as  if  an  universal  conspiracy  had  been  formed  among  the  people. 
The  rebels  in  Wiltshire  were  dispersed  by  sir  William  Herbert ; 
those  of  Oxford  and  Gloucester,  by  lord  Grey  of  Wilton  ;  the 
commotions  in  Hampshire,  Sussex,  Kent,  and  other  counties, 
were  quieted  by  gentle  methods ;  but  the  disorders  in  Devonshire 
and  Norfolk  were  the  most  obstinate,  and  threatened  the  great- 
est danger.  In  the  former  of  these  counties,  the  insurgents, 
amounting  to  ten  thousand  men,  were  headed  by  one  Humphry 
Arundel,  an  experienced  soldier ;  and  they  were  still  more  en- 
couraged by  sermons,  which  gave  their  revolt  the  air  of  a  religious 
confederacy.  They  accordingly  sent  a  set  of  articles  to  court, 
which,  in  general,  demanded  an  abolition  of  the  statutes  lately 
made  in  favour  of  the  Reformation ;  but  the  ministry  rejected 
their  demands  with  contempt,  at  the  same  time  offering  a  pardon 
to  all  who  would  lay  down  their  arms  and  return  to  their  habita- 
tions. But  the  insurgents  were  now  too  far  advanced  to  recede ; 
and,  still  encouraged  by  the  monks  who  were  with  them,  they 
laid  siege  to  Exeter,  carrying  before  them  crosses,  banners,  holy- 
water,  candlesticks,  and  other  implements  of  their  antient  super- 
stition ;  but  the  town  was  gallantly  defended  by  the  inhabitants, 
in  the  mean  time,  lord  Russel  had  been  sent  against  them  with  a 


420  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

small  body  ot  forces ;  and,  being  reinforced  by  lord  Grey  and 
others,  he  attacked  and  drove  them  from  all  their  entrenchments. 
Great  slaughter  was  committed  upon  these  deluded  creatures, 
both  in  the  action  and  the  pursuit.  Arundel,  their  leader,  and 
several  others,  were  sent  to  London,  where  they  were  condemned 
and  executed.  Many  of  the  inferior  sort  were  put  to  death  by 
martial  law.  The  vicar  of  St.  Thomas,  one  of  the  principal  in- 
cendiaries, was  hanged  on  the  top  of  his  own  steeple,  arrayed  in 
his  popish  habit,  with  his  beads  at  his  girdle. 

The  sedition  in  Norfolk  Appeared  still  more  alarming.  The 
insurgents  there  amounted  to  twenty  thousand  men  ;  and,  as 
their  forces  were  numerous,  their  demands  were  exorbitant. 
They  required  the  suppression  of  the  gentry,  the  placing  new 
counsellors  about  the  king,  and  the  re-establishment  of  their  an- 
tient  religious  ceremonies.  One  Ket,  a  tanner,  had  assumed  a 
priority  among  them  ;  he  erected  his  tribunal  near  Norwich,  un- 
der an  old  oak,  which  was  termed  the  Oak  of  Reformation.  He 
afterwards  undertook  the  siege  of  Norwich ;  which  having  re- 
duced, he  imprisoned  the  mayor,  and  some  of  the  principal  citi- 
zens. The  marquis  of  Northampton  was  first  sent  down  against 
them,  but  met  with  a  repulse  ;  the  earl  of  Warwick  followed  soon 
after,  at  the  head  of  six  thousand  men,  and,  coming  to  a  general 
engagement,  put  them  entirely  to  the  rout.  Two  thousand  of 
them  fell  in  the  fight  and  pursuit  j  Ket  was  hanged  at  Norwich 
castle,  nine  of  his  followers  on  the  boughs  of  the  Oak  of  Reforma- 
tion ;  and  the  insurrection,  which  was  the  last  in  favour  of  pope- 
j?y,  was  thus  entirely  suppressed. 

But  tliough  the  suppression  of  these  insurrections  seemed  to 
be  very  favourable  to  the  interests  of  the  protector,  the  authority 
which  the  eai'l  of  AVarwick  gained  in  quelling  that  of  Norfolk 
terminated  in  Somerset's  ruin.  Of  all  the  ministers  at  that  time 
in  the  council,  Dudley,  earl  of  Warwick,  was  the  most  artful, 
^.mbitious,  and  unprincipled.  Resolved  at  any  rate  to  possess 
^he  principal  place  under  the  king,  he  cared  not  what  means  were 
to  be  used  in  acquiring  it.  Howevej:,  unwilling  to  throw  off  the 
mask,  he  covered  the  most  exorbitaii^  views  under  the  fairest  ap- 
pearances. Having  associated  himself  with  the  earl  of  South- 
ampton, he  formed  a  strong  party  in' the  council,  who  were  de- 
termined to  free  themselves  from  the  control  the  protector  assum^ 


EDWARD  VI.  421 

ed  over  them.  That  nobleman  was,  in  fact,  now  grown  obnox- 
ious to  a  very  prevailing  party  in  the  kingdom.  He  was  hated 
by  the  nobles  for  his  superior  magnificence  and  power ;  he  was 
hated  by  the  catholic  party  for  his  regard  to  the  Reformation ;  he 
was  disliked  by  many  for  his  severity  to  his  brother  :  besides,  the 
great  estate  he  had  raised  at  the  expense  of  the  church  and  the 
crown  rendered  him  obnoxious  to  all.  The  palace  which  he  was 
then  building  in  the  Strand,  served  also,  by  its  magnificence,  and 
still  more  by  the  unjust  methods  that  were  taken  to  raise  it,  to 
expose  him  to  the  censures  of  the  public.  The  parish  church  of 
St.  Mary,  and  three  bishops'  houses,  were  pulled  down,  to  fur- 
nish ground  and  materials  for  the  structure.  Several  other  church- 
es were  demolished,  to  have  their  stones  employed  for  the  same 
purpose  ;  and  it  was  not  without  an  insurrection  that  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  parish  of  St.  Margaret,  Westminster,  prevented  their 
church  from  being  pulled  down  to  make  room  for  the  new  fabric. 

These  imprudences  were  soon  exaggerated  and  enlarged  upon 
by  Somerset's  enemies.  They  represented  him  as  a  parricide,  a 
sacrilegious  tyrant,  and  an  unjust  usurper  upon  the  privileges  of 
the  council  and  the  rights  of  the  king.  In  consequence  of  this, 
the  lord  St.  John,  president  of  the  council,  the  earls  of  Warwick, 
Southampton,  and  Arundel,  with  five  counsellors  more,  met  at 
Ely -house ;  and,  assuming  to  themselves  the  whole  power  of  the 
council,  began  to  act  independently  of  the  protector,  whom  they 
pretended  to  consider  as  the  author  of  every  public  grievance. 
They  wrote  letters  to  the  chief  nobility  and  gentry  of  England, 
informing  them  of  the  present  measures,  and  requiring  their  as- 
sistance. They  sent  for  the  mayor  and  aldermen  of  London,  and 
enjoined  them  to  concur  in  their  measures,  which  they  represent- 
ed as  the  only  means  of  saving  the  nation.  The  next  day  sever- 
al others  of  the  council  joined  the  seceding  members ;  and  the 
protector  now  began  to  tremble,  not  merely  for  his  authority,  but 
for  his  life. 

He  had  no  sooner  been  informed  of  these  transactions  than  he 
sent  the  king  to  Windsor,  and  armed  the  inhabitants  of  Hampton 
and  Windsor  also  for  his  security.  Bjit  finding  that  no  man  of 
rank,  except  Cranmer  ai\d  Paget,  adhered  to  him,  and  that  the 
people  did  not  rise  at  his  summons ;  perceiving  that  he  was  in  a 
manner  deserted  by  all.  and  that  all  resistance  was  fruitless ;  h^ 


432  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

resolved  to  apply  to  his  enemies  for  pardon.  This  gave  fresh 
strength  and  confidence  to  the  party  of  Warwick ;  they  assured 
the  king,  with  the  humblest  professions  of  obedience,  that  their 
only  aim  was  to  put  the  council  on  the  same  footing  on  which  it 
liad  been  ordained  by  the  will  of  their  late  sovereign,  and  to  res- 
cue his  authority  from  the  hands  of  a  man  who  had  assumed  all 
power  to  himself.  The  king,  who  had  little  regard  for  Somerset, 
gave  their  address  a  favourable  reception  ;  and  the  potector  was 
sent  to  the  Tower,  with  some  of  his  friends  and  partisans. 
Meanwhile  the  council  ordered  six  lords  to  act  as  governors  to 
the  king,  two  at  a  time  officiating  alternately.  It  was  then,  for 
the  first  time,  that  the  earl  of  Warwick's  ambition  began  to  ap- 
pear in  full  splendour  ;  he  set  himself  forward  as  the  principal 
promoter  of  the  protector's  ruin  ;  and  the  other  members,  with- 
out tlie  least  opposition,  permitted  him  to  assume  the  reins  of 
government. 

It  was  now  concluded  that  Somerset's  fate  was  fixed,  as  his 
enemies  were  numerous,  and  the  charges  against  him  were  sup- 
posed to  be  of  a  very  heinous  nature.  The  chief  article  of  which 
he  was  accused  was  his  usurpation  of  the  government,  and  the 
taking  all  power  into  his  own  hands  ;  several  others  of  a  slighter 
tint  were  added  to  invigorate  this  accusation  ;  but  none  of  them 
could  be  said  to  amount  to  the  crime  of  high-treason.  In  conse- 
nt -  „  -,  quence  of  these,  a  bill  of  attainder  was  preferred  against 
him  in  the  house  of  lords;  but  Somerset  contrived,  for 
this  time,  to  elude  the  rigour  of  their  sentence,  by  having  previ- 
ously, on  his  knees,  confessed  the  charge  before  the  members  of 
the  council.  This  confession,  which  he  signed  with  his  own  hand, 
was  alleged  and  read  against  him  at  the  bar  of  the  house,  who 
sent  a  deputation  to  him,  to  know  whether  the  confession  was 
voluntary  or  extorted.  Somerset  thanked  them  for  their  can- 
dour ;  owned  that  it  was  his  voluntary  act,  but  strenuously  in- 
sisted, that  he  had  never  harboured  a  sinister  thought  against  the 
king  or  the  commonwealth.  In  consequence  of  this  confession, 
he  was  deprived  of  all  his  offices  and  goods,  together  with  a  great 
part  of  his  landed  estate,  which  was  forfeited  to  the  use  of  the 
crown.  This  fine  on  his  estate  was  soon  after  remitted  by  the 
king ;  and,  contrary  to  the  expectation  of  all,  he  recovered  his 
liberty.  He  was  even  re-admitted  into  the  council :  happy  for 
liim  if  his  ambition  had  not  revived  with  his  security  I 


EDWARD  VI.  423 

The  catholics  were  extremely  elevated  at  the  protector's  fall  5 
and  they  began  to  entertain  hopes  of  a  revolution  in  their  favour. 
But  they  were  mistaken  in  their  opinion  of  Warwick,  who  now 
took  the  lead,  as  ambition  was  the  only  principle  in  his  breast ; 
and  to  that  he  was  resolved  to  sacrifice  all  others.  He  soon  gave 
an  instance  of  his  disregard  to  their  sect,  in  permitting  Gardiner 
to  undergo  the  penalties  prescribed  against  disobedience.  Many 
of  the  prelates,  and  he  among  the  rest,  though  they  made  some 
compliance,  were  still  addicted  to  their  antient  communion.  A 
resolution  was  therefore  taken  to  deprive  them  of  their  sees ;  and 
it  was  thought  proper  to  begin  with  him,  in  order  to  strike  a  ter- 
ror into  the  rest.  He  had  been  now  for  two  years  in  prison,  for 
having  refused  to  inculcate  the  duty  of  obedience  to  the  king  dur- 
ing his  minority ;  and  the  council  took  this  opportunity  to  send 
him  several  articles  to  subscribe,  among  which  was  one,  acknowl- 
edging the  justice  of  the  order  for  his  confinement.  He  was 
likewise  to  own  that  the  king  was  supreme  head  of  the  church; 
that  the  power  of  making  and  dispensing  holidays  was  a  part  of 
the  prerogative  ;  and  that  the  Common  Prayer  Book  was  a  godly 
and  commendable  form.  Gardiner  was  willing  to  put  his  hand 
to  all  the  articles,  except  that  by  which  he  accused  himself;  which 
he  refused  to  do,  justly  perceiving  that  their  aim  was  either  to 
ruin  or  dishonour  him.  For  this  offence  he  was  deprived  of  his 
bishopric,  and  committed  to  close  custody ;  his  books  and  papers 
were  seized ;  all  company  was  denied  him ;  and  he  was  not  even 
permitted  the  use  of  pen  and  ink.  This  severity,  in  some  meas- 
ure, countenanced  those  which  this  prelate  had  afterwards  an  op- 
portunity of  retaliating  when  he  came  into  power. 

But  the  reformers  did  not  stop  here;  the  rapacious  r-,r^-i  -1 
courtiers,  never  to  be  satisfied,  and  giving  their  violence 
an  air  of  zeal,  deprived,  in  the  same  manner.  Day,  bishop  of  Chi- 
chester, Heath  of  Worcester,  and  Vesey  of  Exeter.  The  bishops 
of  Llandaff,  Salisbury,  and  Coventry,  came  off  rather  less  disad- 
vantageously,  by  sacrificing  the  most  considerable  share  of  their 
ecclesiastical  revenues.  Not  only  the  revenues  of  the  church,  but 
the  libraries  also,  underwent  a  severe  scrutiny.  The  libraries  of 
Westminster  and  Oxford  were  ordered  to  be  ransacked,  and 
purged  of  the  Romish  missals,  legends,  and  other  superstitious 
volumes ;  in  which  search  greai  devastation  was  made  even  m 


424  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

useful  literature.  Many  volumes,  clasped  in  silver,  were  de- 
stroyed for  the  sake  of  their  rich  bindings ;  many  of  geometry 
and  astronomy  were  supposed  to  be  magical,  and  met  no  mercy. 
The  university,  unable  to  stop  the  fury  of  those  barbarians,  si- 
lently looked  on,  and  trembled  for  its  own  security. 

Warwick  was  willing  to  indulge  the  nobility  with  these  hu- 
miliations of  the  church  3  and  perceiving  that  the  king  was  ex- 
tremely attached  to  the  Reformation,  he  supposed  that  he  could 
not  make  his  court  to  the  young  monarch  better  than  by  a  seem- 
ing zeal  in  the  cause.  But  he  was  still  steadfastly  bent  on  en- 
larging his  own  power ;  and,  as  the  last  earl  of  Northumberland 
died  without  issue  or  heirs,  Warwick  procured  for  himself  a  grant 
of  his  ample  possessions,  and  obtained  the  title  also  of  duke  of 
Northumberland.  The  duke  of  Somerset  was  now  the  only  per- 
son he  wished  to  have  entirely  removed ;  for,  fallen  as  he  was  by 
his  late  spiritless  conduct,  yet  he  still  preserved  a  share  of  popu- 
larity that  rendered  him  formidable  to  this  aspirer.  Indeed  Som- 
erset was  not  always  upon  his  guard  against  the  arts  of  Northum- 
berland, but  could  not  help  now  and  then  bursting  out  into  invec- 
tives, which  were  quickly  carried  to  his  secret  6nemy.  As  he 
was  surrounded  by  the  creatures  of  the  new  duke,  they  took  care 
to  reveal  all  the  schemes  which  they  had  themselves  suggested ; 
and  Somerset  soon  found  the  fatal  effects  of  his  rival's  resentment. 
He  was,  by  Northumberland's  command,  arrested,  with  many 
more  accused  of  being  his  partisans  ;  and  he  was,  with  his  wife 
the  duchess,  thrown  into  prison.  He  was  now  accused  of  having 
conspired  to  raise  an  insurrection  in  the  North,  to  attack  the 
trained-bands  on  a  muster-day,  secure  the  Tower,  and  excite  a 
rebellion  in  London.  These  charges  he  strenuously  denied  5  but 
he  confessed  one  of  as  heinous  a  nature,  which  was,  that  he  had 
laid  a  project  for  murdering  Northumberland,  Northampton,  and 
Pembroke,  at  a  banquet  which  was  to  be  given  them  by  lord 
Paget.  He  was  soon  after  brought  to  a  trial  before  the  marquis 
of  Winchester,  who  sat  as  high-steward  on  the  occasion,  with 
twenty-seven  peers  more,  including  Northumberland,  Pembroke, 
and  Northampton,  who  were  at  once  his  judges  and  accusers. 
He  was  accused  of  an  intention  to  secure  the  person  of  the  king, 
and  re-assume  the  administration  of  affairs ;  to  assassinate  the 
duke  of  Northumberland,  and  raise  an  insurrection  in  the  city. 


EDWARD  VI:  -  42$ 

He  pleaded  "  not  guilty"  to  the  first  part  of  the  charge,  and  of 
this  he  was  accordingly  acquitted ;  but  he  was  found  guilty  of 
conspiring  the  death  of  a  privy  counsellor,  which  crime  had  been 
made  felony  in  the  reign  of  Henry  the  Seventh  ;  and  for  this  he 
was  condemned  to  death.  The  populace,  seeing  him  reconveyed 
to  the  Tower  without  the  axe,  which  was  no  longer  carried  be- 
fore him,  imagined  that  he  had  been  entirely  acquitted,  and  in 
repeated  shouts  and  acclamations  manifested  their  joy;  but  this 
was  suddenly  damped,  when  they  were  better  informed  of  his 
doom.  Care,  in  the  mean  time,  had  been  taken  to  prepossess  the 
young  king  against  his  uncle ;  and,  lest  he  should  relent,  no  ac- 
cess was  given  to  any  of  Somerset's  friends,  while  the  prince  was 
kept  from  reflection  by  a  series  of  occupations  and  amusements. 
At  last  the  prisoner  was  brought  to  the  scaffold  on  Tower-hill, 
where  he  appeared  without  the  least  emotion,  in  the  midst  of  a 
vast  concourse  of  the  populace,  by  whom  he  was  beloved.  He 
spoke  to  them  with  great  composure,  protesting  that  he  had  al- 
ways promoted  the  service  of  his  king,  and  the  interests  of  true 
religion,  to  the  best  of  his  power.  The  people  attested  their  be- 
lief to  what  he  said,  by  crying  out,  "  It  is  most  true."  As  an 
universal  tumult  was  beginning  to  take  place  among  x\'^^'^~\ 
them,  Somerset  desired  them  to  be  still,  and  not  to  in- 
terrupt his  last  meditations,  but  to  join  with  him  in  prayer :  he 
then  laid  down  his  head,  and  submitted  t^i  the  stroke  of  the  exe- 
cutioner. Sir  Ralph  Vane  and  sir  Miles  Partridge  were  hanged  ; 
sir  Michael  Stanhope  and  sir  Thomas  Arundel  were  beheadedj 
as  being  his  accomplices. 

Nothing  could  have  been  more  unpopular  than  the  measure  of 
destroying  Somerset,  who,  though  some  actions  of  his  life  were 
very  exceptionable,  consulted  the  good  of  the  people.  The  house 
of  commons  was  particularly  attached  to  him ;  and  of  this  North-* 
umberland  was  very  sensible.  He  therefore  advised  the  king  to 
dissolve  the  parliament,  and  call  another  that  would  be  more  ob- 
sequious to  his  will.  Edward  was  even  prevailed  upon  to  write 
circular  letters  to  all  the  sheriffs,  in  which  he  enjoined  them  to 
choose  such  men  as  he  and  the  privy-council  should  recommend. 
"With  this  despotic  mandate  the  sheriffs  readily  complied ',  and 
the  members  returned  fully  answered  Northumberland's  expecta- 
tions.   He  had  long  aimed  at  the  first  authority :  and  the  infirm 

VOL.  I.  54 


4£6  IllsrOllY  OF  ENGLAND. 

riSS"  1  ^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  king's  health  opened  the  prospects  of  hfe 
ambition.  He  represented  to  that  young  prince  that  his 
sisters  Mary  and  Elizabeth,  who  were  appointed  by  Henry's  wiM 
to  succeed  on  the  failure  of  direct  heirs  to  the  crown,  had  been 
both  declared  illegitimate  by  parliament ;  that  the  queen  of  Scot- 
land was  excluded  by  the  king's  will,  and,  being  an  alien  also, 
lost  all  right  of  succeeding ;  that  as  the  three  princesses  were 
thus  legally  excluded,  the  succession  naturally  devolved  to  the 
marchioness  of  Dorset  (niece  of  Henry),  whose  heir  was  the  lady 
Jane  Grey,  a  lady  every  way  accomplished  for  government,  as 
well  by  the  charms  of  her  person  as  the  virtues  and  acquirements 
of  her  mind.  The  king,  who  had  long  submitted  to  all  the  politic 
views  of  this  designing  minister,  agreed  to  have  the  succession 
submitted  to  council,  where  Northumberland  hoped  to  procure  an 
easy  concurrence^ 

In  the  mean  time,  as  the  king's  health  declined,  the  minister 
laboured  to  strengthen  his  own  interests  and  connexions.  His  first 
aim  was  to  secure  the  interest  of  the  marquis  of  Dorset,  father  to 
lady  Jane  Grey,  by  procuring  for  him  the  title  of  duke  of  Suffolk, 
which  was  lately  become  extinct.  Having  thus  obliged  this  no- 
bleman, he  then  proposed  a  match  between  his  fourth  son,  lord 
Guilford  Dudley,  and  the  lady  Jane  Grey,  whose  interests  she  had 
been  at  so  much  pain*  to  advance.  Still  bent  on  spreading  his 
interests  as  widely  as  possible,  he  married  his  own  daughter  to 
lord  Hastings,  and  had  these  marriages  solemnized  with  all  pos^- 
sible  pomp  and  festivity.  Mean  while,  Edward  continued  to  lan- 
guish ;  and  several  fatal  symptoms  of  a  consumption  began  to  ap^- 
pear.  It  was  hoped,  however,  that  his  youth  and  temperance 
might  get  the  better  of  his  disorders  ;  and  from  their  love  the  peo- 
ple were  unwilling  to  think  him  in  danger.  It  had  been  remark- 
ed indeed  by  some,  that  his  health  was  visibly  seen  to  decline 
from  the  time  that  the  Dudleys  were  brought  about  his  person. 
The  character  of  Northumberland  might  have  justly  given  some 
colour  to  suspicion;  and  his  removing  all,  except  his  own  emissa- 
ries, from  about  the  king,  still  further  increased  the  disgusts  of  the 
people.  Northumberland  was  no  way  uneasy  at  their  murmurs ; 
he  was  assiduous  in  his  attendance  upon  the  king,  and  professed 
the  most  anxious  concern  for  his  safety,  but  still  drove  forward 
his  darling  scheme  of  transferring  the  succession  to  his  owa 


EDWARD  VI.  427 

« 

daughter-in-law.  The  judges  who  were  appointed  to  draw  up 
the  king's  letters-patent  for  that  purpose  warmly  ohjected  to  the 
measure,  and  gave  their  reasons  before  the  council.  They  begged 
that  a  parliament  might  be  summoned,  both  to  give  it  force,  and 
to  free  its  partisans  from  danger ;  they  said,  that  the  form  was 
invalid,  and  would  not  only  subject  the  judges  who  drew  it,  but 
evex-y  counsellor  who  signed  it,  to  tlie  pains  of  treason.  North- 
umberland could  not  brook  their  demurs ;  he  threatened  them 
v/ith  the  dread  of  his  authority  ;  he  called  one  of  them  a  traitor, 
and  said  that  he  would  fight  in  his  shirt  with  any  man  in  so  just 
a  cause  as  that  of  the  lady  Jane's  succession.  A  method  was 
tlierefoi'e  found  out  of  screening  the  judges  from  danger,  by  grant- 
ing them  the  king's  pardon  for  what  they  should  draw  up;  and 
at  length,  after  much  deliberation,  and  some  refusals,  the  patent 
for  changing  the  succession  was  completed.  By  this  patent, 
Mary  and  Elizabeth  were  set  aside,  and  the  crown  was  settled  on 
tiie  h^irs  of  the  duchess  of  Suffolk ;  for  the  duchess  herself  was 
contented  to  forego  her  claim. 

Northumberland,  having  thus  far  suceeeded,  thought  physicians 
were  no  longer  serviceable  in  the  king's  complaint ;  they  were 
dismissed  by  his  advice ;  and  Edward  was  put  into  the  hands  of 
an  ignorant  woman,  who  very  confidently  undertook  his   cure. 
After  the  use  of  her  medicines,  all  the  bad  symptoms  increased 
to  a  most  violent  degree  ;    he  felt  a  difficulty  of  speech   and 
breathing;  his  pulse  failed,  his  legs  swelled,  his  colour  became 
livid,  and  many  other  symptoms  appeared  of  his  ap^    j^,    ^ 
proaching  end.     He  expired  at  Greenwich,  in  the  six-       1553. 
teenth  year  of  his  age,  and  the  seventh  of  his  reign,  greatly  re- 
gretted by  all,  as  his  early  virtues  gave  a  prospect  of  the  contin- 
uance of  a  happy  reign.     What  were  the  real  qualities  of  this 
young  prince's  heart,  there  was  not  time  to   discover  ;  but  the 
cultivation  of  his  understanding,  if  we  may  credit  historians,  was 
amazing.     He  was  said  to  understand  the  Greek,  Latin,  French, 
Italian,  and  Spanish  languages.     He  was  versed  in  logic,  music, 
natural  philosophy,  and  theology.     Cardan,  the  extraordinary 
scholar  and  physician,  happening  to  pay  a  visit  to  the  English 
court,  was  so  astonished  at  his  early  progress,  that  he  extols  him 
as  a  prodigy  of  nature.     It  is  probable,  however,  that  so  much 
flattery  as  he  received  would  have  contributed  to  cornipt  him,  as 
it  had  formerly  corrupted  his  fatlier. 


428  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

CHAP.  XXV. 

WARY. 

JL  HE  death  of  Edward  only  served  to  prepare  fresh  troubles  for 
a  people  that  had  hitherto  greatly  suffered  from  the  depravity  of 
their  kings,  or  the  turbulence  of  their  nobility.  The  succession 
to  the  throne  had  hitherto  been  obtained  partly  by  lineal  descent, 
and  pai'tly  by  the  aptitude  for  government  in  the  person  chosen. 
Neither  quite  hereditary,  nor  quite  elective,  it  had  made  ances- 
try the  pretext  of  right,  while  the  consent  of  the  people  was  ne- 
cessary to  support  all  hereditary  pretensions.  In  fact,  when 
wisely  conducted,  this  is  the  best  species  of  succession  that  can 
be  conceived,  as  it  prevents  that  aristocracy  which  is  ever  the 
result  of  a  government  entirely  elective,  and  that  tyranny  which 
is  too  often  established,  where  there  is  never  an  infringement  of 
hereditary  claims. 

Whenever  a  monarch  of  England  happened  to  be  arbitrary,  and 
to  enlarge  the  prerogative,  he  generally  considered  the  kingdom 
as  his  property,  and  not  himself  as  a  servant  of  the  people.  In 
such  a  case,  it  was  natural  for  him  at  his  decease  to  bequeath  his 
dominions  as  he  thought  proper,  making  his  own  will  the  stan- 
dard of  his  subjects'  happiness.  Henry  the  Eighth,  in  conformity 
to  this  practice,  made  his  will,  in  which  he  settled  the  succession 
merely  according  to  his  caprice.  In  that,  Edward  his  son  was 
the  first  nominated  to  succeed  him  ;  then  Mary,  his  eldest  daugh- 
ter by  Catharine  of  Spain  ;  but  with  a  special  mark  of  condescen- 
sion, by  which  he  would  intimate  her  illegitimacy.  The  next 
that  followed  was  Elizabeth,  his  daughter  by  Anne  Boleyn,  with 
the  same  marks,  intimating  her  illegitimacy  also.  After  his  own 
children,  his  sisters'  children  were  mentioned  :  the  issue  of  his 
younger  sister  the  duchess  of  Suffolk  were  prefen-ed  to  those  of 
kis  elder  sister  the  queen  of  Scotland ;  which  preference  was 
thought  by  all  to  be  neither  founded  in  justice,  nor  supported  by 
reason.  This  will  was  now,  however,  set  aside  by  the  intrigues 
of  Northumberland,  by  whose  advice  a  will  was  made,  as  we  have 
seen,  in  favour  of  lady  Jane  Grey,  in  prejudice  of  all  other  claim- 
ants.   Thus,  after  the  death  of  thi§  young  monarch,  there  were 


MARY,  429 

MO  fewer  than  four  princesses  who  coyld  assert  their  pretensions 
to  the  crown  :  Mary,  who  was  the  first  upon  Henry's  will,  but 
who  had  been  declared  illegitimate  by  an  act  of  parliament,  which 
had  not  been  repealed :  Elizabeth  was  next  to  succeed ;  and 
though  she  had  been  declared  illegitim.ate,  yet  she  had  been  re- 
stored to  her  rights  during  her  father's  life.  The  young  queen 
of  Scotland,  grand-daughter  of  Henry's  eldest  sister,  was  first  in 
right,  supposing  the  two  daughters  illegitimate,  while  lady  Jane 
Grey  might  allege  the  will  of  the  late  king  in  her  own  favour. 

Of  these,  however,  only  two  put  in  their  pretensions  to  the 
crown ;  Mary,  relying  on  the  justice  of  her  cause,  and  lady  Jane 
upon  the  support  of  the  duke  of  Northumberland,  her  father-in- 
law.  Mary  was  strongly  bigoted  to  the  popish  superstitions,  hav- 
ing been  bred  up  among  churchmen,  and  having  been  even  taught 
to  prefer  martyrdom  to  a  denial  of  belief.  As  she  had  lived  in 
continual  restraint,  she  was  reserved  and  gloomy ;  she  had,  even 
during  the  life  of  Henry,  the  resolution  to  maintain  her  senti- 
ments, and  refused  to  comply  with  his  new  institutions.  Her 
zeal  had  rendered  her  furious;  and  she  Avas  not  only  blindly  at- 
tached to  her  religious  opinions,  but  even  to  the  popish  clergy 
who  maintained  them.  On  the  other  hand,  Jane  Gi-ey  was  strong- 
ly attached  to  the  reformers  ;  and,  though  yet  but  sixteen,  her 
judgment  had  attained  to  such  a  degree  of  maturity  as  few  have 
been  found  to  possess.  All  historians  agree  that  the  solidity  of 
her  understanding,  improved  by  continual  application,  rendered 
her  the  wonder  of  her  age.  Ascham,  tutor  to  Elizabeth,  informs 
us,  that,  having  visited  lady  Jane  at  her  father's  house  in  Leices- 
tershire, he  found  her  reading  Plato's  works  in  Greek,  while  all 
the  rest  of  the  family  were  hunting  in  the  park.  Upon  his  tes- 
tifying his  surprise  at  her  situation,  she  assured  him  that  Plato 
was  a  higher  amusement  to  her  than  tlie  most  studied  refinements 
of  sensual  pleasure ;  and  she,  in  fact,  seemed  born  for  philoso- 
phy, and  not  for  ambition. 

Such  were  the  present  rivals  for  power ;  but  lady  Jane  had 
the  start  of  her  antagonist.  Northumberland,  now  resolving  to 
secure  the  succession,  carefully  concealed  the  death  of  Edward, 
in  hope  of  securing  the  person  of  Mary,  who,  by  an  order  of 
council,  had  been  required  to  attend  her  brother  during  his  ill- 
ness ;  but  being  informed  of  his  death,  she  immediately  prepared 


4S0  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

to  assert  her  pretensions  to  the  crown.  This  crafty  minister, 
tlierefore,  finding  that  further  dissimulation  was  needless,  went 
to  Sion-house,  accompanied  by  the  duke  of  Suffolk,  the  earl  of 
Pembroke,  and  others  of  the  nobility,  to  salute  lady  Jane  Grey, 
who  resided  there.  Jane  was  in  a  great  measure  ignorant  of  all 
these  transactions  ;  and  it  was  with  equal  grief  and  surprise  that 
she  received  intelligence  of  them.  She  shed  a  flood  of  tears,  ap- 
peared inconsolable,  and  it  was  not  without  the  utmost  difliculty 
that  she  yielded  to  the  entreaties  of  Northumberland  and  the 
duke  her  father.  At  lengtli,  however,  they  exhorted  her  to  con- 
sent, and  next  day  conveyed  her  to  the  Tower,  where  it  was 
usual  for  the  sovereigns  of  England  to  pass  some  days  after  their 
accession.  Thither  also  all  the  members  of  the  council  were 
obliged  to  attend  her ;  and  thus  were  in  some  measure  made 
prisoners  by  Northumberland,  whose  will  they  were  under  a  ne- 
cessity of  obeying.  Orders  were  also  given  for  proclaiming  her 
throughout  the  kingdom;  but  these  were  very  remjssly  obeyed. 
When  she  was  proclaimed  in  the  city,  the  people  heard  her  ac- 
cession made  public  without  any  signs  of  pleasure  :  no  applause 
ensued,  and  some  even  expressed  their  scorn  and  contempt. 

In  the  mean  time  Mary,  who  had  retired,  upon  the  news  of  the 
king's  death,  to  Kenning-IIall  in  Norfolk,  sent  circular  letters 
to  all  the  great  towns  and  nobility  in  the  kingdom,  reminding 
tliem  of  her  right,  and  commanding  them  to  proclaim  her  without 
delay-  Having  taken  these  steps,  she  retired  to  Framlingham- 
Castle  in  Suffolk,  that  she  might  be  near  the  sea,  and  escape  to 
Flanders  in  case  of  failure.  But  she  soon  found  her  affairs  wear 
the  most  promising  aspect.  Tiie  men  of  Suffolk  came  to  pay 
her  their  homage ;  and,  being  assured  by  her  that  she  would  de- 
fend the  laws  and  the  religion  of  her  predecessor,  they  enlisted 
themselves  in  her  cause  with  alacrity  and  affection.  The  people 
of  Norfolk  soon  after  came  in  j  the  earls  of  Bath  and  Sussex,  and 
the  eldest  sons  of  lord  Wharton  and  lord  Mord  aunt,  joined  her; 
and  lord  Hastings,  with  four  thousand  men,  who  had  been  raised 
to  oppose  her,  revolted  to  her  side.  Even  a  fleet,  that  had  been 
sent  to  lie  off  the  coast  of  Suffolk  to  prevent  her  escaping,  en- 
gaged in,  her  service ;  and  now,  but  too  late,  Northumberland  saw 
the  deplorable  end  of  all  his  schemes  and  ambition. 

This  minister,  with  the  consent  of  the  council,  had  assembled 


MAKV,  431 

some  troops  at  Newmarket,  had  set  on  foot  new  levies  in  Lon- 
don, and  appointed  the  duke  of  Suffolk  general  of  the  army,  that 
he  might  himself  continue  with  and  over-awe  the  deliberations  of 
the  council.  But  he  was  diverted  from  this  mode  of  managing 
his  affairs,  by  considering  how  unfit  Suffolk  was  to  head  the  army  5 
so  that  he  was  obliged  himself  to  take  upon  him  the  military- 
command.  It  was  now,  therefore,  tlfiit  the  council,  being  free 
from  his  influence,  and  no  longer  dreading  his  immediate^  author- 
ity, began  to  declare  against  him.  The  earl  of  Arundel  led  the 
opposition,  by  representing  the  injustice  and  cruelty  of  North- 
umberland, and  the  exorbitancy  of  his  ambition,  Pembroke  sec- 
onded him  with  declarations  that  he  was  ready  to  fight  all  of  a 
contrary  opinion ;  the  mayor  and  aldermen,  who  were  sent  for, 
readily  came  into  the  same  measures  ;  the  people  expressed  their 
approbation  by  shouts  and  applauses  ;  and  even  Suffolk  himself, 
finding  all  resistance  fruitless,  threw  open  the  gates  of  the  Tower, 
and  joined  in  the  general  cry.  Mary's  claims  now  became  in-e^ 
aistible :  in  a  little  time  she  found  herself  at  the  head  of  a  pow- 
erful army ;  while  the  few  who  attended  Northumberland  con- 
tinued irresolute ;  and  he  even  feared  to  lead  them  to  the  en- 
counter. 

Lady  Jane,  thus  finding  that  all  was  lost,  resigned  her  royalty^ 
which  she  had  held  but  nine  days,  with  marks  of  real  satisfaction^, 
and  retired  with  her  mother  to  her  own  habitation.  Northum- 
berland also,  who  found  his  affairs  desperate,  and  that  it  was  im- 
possible to  stem  the  tide  of  popular  opposition,  attempted  to  quit 
the  kingdom ;  but  he  was  prevented  by  the  band  of  pensioner 
guards,  who  informed  him  that  he  must  stay  to  j;ustify  their  con- 
duct in  being  led  out  against  their  lawful  sovereign.  Thus  cir- 
cumvented on  all  sides,  his  cunning  was  now  his  only  resource  5. 
and  he  began  by  endeavouring  to  recommend  himself  to  Mary, 
by  the  most  extravagant  protestations  of  zeal  in  her  service.  He 
repaired  to  the  market-place  in  Cambridge,,  proclaimed  her  queen 
of  England,  and  was  the  first  to  throw  up  his  cap  in  token  of  joy. 
But  he  reaped  no  advantage  from  this  mean  duplicity  ;  he  was 
the  next  day  arrested  in  the  queen's  name  by  the  earl  of  Arundel, 
at  whose  feet  he  fell  upon  his  knees,  begging  protection  with  the 
most  abject  submission.  Three  of  his  sons,  his  brother,  and  some 
more  of  his  followers^  were  arrested  with  him.  and  committed  ta 


432  HISTORY  or  ENGLAND. 

the  Tower  of  London.  Soon  after,  the  lady  Jane  Grey,  the  duke 
of  Suffolk  her  father,  and  lord  Guilford  Dudley  her  husband,  were 
made  prisoners  by  order  of  the  queen,  whose  authority  was  now 
confirmed  by  universal  assent. 

Northumberland  was  the  first  who  suiFered  for  opposing  her, 
and  was  the  person  who  deserved  the  punishment  the  most- 
When  brought  to  his  trial,  he  openly  desired  pernussicn  to  ask 
two  questions  of  the  peers  who  were  appointed  to  sit  on  his  jury : 
*'  Whether  a  man  could  be  guilty  of  treason,  who  obeyed  orders 
given  him  by  the  council  under  the  great  seal ;  and  whether  those 
involved  in  the  same  guilt  with  himself  could  act  as  his  judges  ?" 
Being  told  that  the  great  seal  of  an  usurper  was  no  authority,  and 
that  his  judges  were  proper,  as  they  were  unimpeached,  he  ac- 
quiesced, and  pleaded  Guilty.  At  his  execution,  he  owned  him- 
self a  papist,  and  exhorted  the  people  to  return  to  the  catholic 
faith,  as  they  hoped  for  happiness  and  tranquillity.  Sir  John 
Gates  and  sir  Thomas  Palmer,  two  of  the  infamous  tools  of  his 
power,  suffered  with  him ;  and  the  queen's  resentment  was  ap- 
peased by  the  lives  of  three  men,  who  had  forfeited  them  by  sev- 
eral former  crimes.  Sentence  was  pronounced  against  lady  Jane 
and  lord  Guilford,  but  without  any  intention  for  the  present  of 
putting  it  in  execution  :  the  youth  and  innocence  of  the  persons, 
neither  of  M'hom  had  completed  their  seventeenth  year,  pleaded 
powerfully  in  their  favour. 

Mary  now  entered  London,  and,  with  very  little  effusion  of 
blood,  saw  herself  joyfully  proclaimed,  and  peaceably  settled  on 
the  throne.  This  was  the  crisis  of  English  happiness  :  a  queen 
"whose  right  was  the  most  equitable,  in  some  measure  elected  by 
the  people,  the  aristocracy  of  the  last  reign  almost  wholly  sup- 
pressed, the  house  of  commons  by  this  means  reinstated  in  its  an- 
tient  autliority,  the  pride  of  the  clergy  humbled,  and  their  vices 
detected,  peace  abroad,  and  unanimity  at  home ;  this  was  the 
flattering  prospect  on  Mary's  accession :  but  soon  this  pleasing 
phantom  was  dissolved.  Mary  was  morose,  and  a  bigot ;  she  was 
resolved  to  give  back  their  former  power  to  the  clergy,  and  thus 
once  more  to  involve  the  kingdom  in  all  the  horrors  it  had  just 
emerged  from.  The  queen  had  pr-omised  the  men  of  Suffolk,  who 
first  came  to  declare  in  her  favour,  that  she  would  suffer  religion 
to  remain  in  the  situation  in  \\liich  she  found  it.     This  promise- 


MARY.  43S 

however,  she  by  no  means  intended  to  perform ;  she  had  deter- 
mined on  bringing  the  sentiments  of  the  people  to  correspond 
with  her  own ;  and  her  extreme  ignorance  rendered  her  utterly 
incapable  of  doubting  her  own  belief,  or  of  granting  indulgence  to 
the  doubts  of  others.  Gardiner,  Bonner^  Tonstal,  Day,  Heath, 
and  Vesey,  who  had  been  confined,  or  suffered  losses,  for  their 
catholic  opinions,  during  the  late  reigns,  were  taken  from  prison, 
reinstated  in  their  sees,  and  their  former  sentences  repealed. 
On  pretence  of  discouraging  controversy,  she  silenced,  by  her 
prerogative,  all  preachers  throughout  England,  except  such  as 
should  obtain  a  particular  licence,  which  she  was  previously  de- 
termined to  grant  only  to  those  of  her  own  persuasion.  Men 
now  foresaw  that  the  Reformation  was  to  be  overturned ;  and 
though  the  queen  still  pretended  that  she  would  grant  a  general 
toleration,  yet  no  great  favour  could  be  expected  by  those  whom 
from  inveterate  prejudice  she  hated. 

The  first  step  that  caused  an  alarm  among  the  protestants  was 
the  severe  treatment  of  Cranmer,  whose  moderation,  integrity, 
and  virtues,  had  made  him  dear  even  to  most  of  the  catholic  party, 
A  report  being  spread,  that  this  prelate,  in  order  to  make  his 
court  to  the  queen,  had  promised  to  officiate  in  the  Latin  service, 
he  drew  up  a  declaration,  in  which  he  entirely  cleared  himself  of 
the  aspersion,  but  incurred  what  was  much  more  terrible,  the 
queen's  resentment.  On  the  publication  of  this  paper,  Cranmer 
was  thrown  into  prison,  and  tried  for  the  part  he  had  acted,  in 
concurring,  among  the  rest  of  the  council,  to  exalt  lady  Jane,  and 
set  aside  the  rightful  sovereign.  This  guilt  he  had  in  fact  incur- 
red ;  but  as  it  was  shared  with  a  large  body  of  men,  most  of  whom 
■were  not  only  uncensured,  but  even  taken  into  favour,  the  malig- 
nancy of  the  prosecution  was  easily  seen  through.  Sentence  of 
high  treason  was,  therefore,  pronounced  against  him ;  but  it  was 
not  then  executed,  as  this  venerable  man  was  reserved  for  a  more 
dreadful  punishment.  Shortly  after,  Peter  Martyr,  a  German 
reformer,  who  had  in  the  late  reign  been  invited  over  to  England, 
seeing  how  things  were  likely  to  go,  desired  leave  to  return  to 
his  native  country.  But  the  zeal  of  the  catholics,  though  he  had 
escaped  them,  was  malignantly,  though  harmlessly,  wreaked  up- 
on the  body  of  his  wife,  which  had  been  interred  some  years  be- 
fore at  Oxford  :  it  was  dug  up  by  public  order,  and  buried  in  a 

VOL.  I,  55 


434  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

dunghill.  The  bones  also  of  Bucer  and  Fagius,  two  foreign  re- 
formers, were  about  the  same  time  committed  to  the  flames  at 
Cambridge.  The  greater  part  of  the  foreign  protestants  took 
early  precautions  to  leave  the  kingdom ;  and  many  arts  and  man- 
ufactures fled  with  them.  Nor  were  their  fears  without  founda- 
tion ;  a  parliament,  Avhich  the  queen  called  soon  after,  seemed 
willing  to  concur  in  all  her  measures ;  they  at  one  blow  repealed 
all  the  statutes  with  regard  to  religion,  which  had  passed  during 
the  reign  of  her  predecessor ;  so  that  the  national  religion  was 
again  placed  on  the  same  footing  on  which  it  stood  at  the  death 
of  Henry  the  Eighth. 

While  religion  was  thus  returning  to  its  pristine  abuses,  the 
queen's  ministers,  who  were  willing  to  strengthen  her  power  by  a 
catholic  alliance,  had  been  for  some  time  looking  out  for  a  proper 
consort.  The  person  on  whom  her  own  affections  seemed  chiefly 
placed  was  the  earl  of  Devonshire ;  but  that  nobleman,  either  dis- 
liking her  person,  or  having  already  placed  his  affections  on  her 
sister  Elizabeth,  neglected  all  overtures  to  such  an  alliance. 
Pole,  who,  though  a  cardinal,  was  not  a  priest,  and  was  therefore 
at  liberty  to  marry,  was  proposed  as  a  husband  for  the  queen,  as 
he  was  a  person  of  high  character  for  virtue,  generosity,  and  at- 
tachment to  the  catholic  religion.  But,  as  he  was  in  the  decline 
of  life,  Mary  soon  dropped  all  thoughts  of  him.  The  person  last 
thought  of,  and  who  succeeded,  was  Philip  prince  of  Spain,  son 
of  the  celebrated  Charles  the  Fifth.  In  order  to  avoid  any  disa- 
rt  ^Td  "1  gJ'cs^.ble  remonstrances  from  the  people,  the  articles  of 
marriage  were  drawn  as  favourably  as  possible  to  the 
interests  and  honour  of  England  ;  and  this,  in  some  measure,  still- 
ed the  clamours  that  had  already  arisen  against  it.  It  was 
agreed,  that,  though  Philip  should  have  the  title  of  king,  the  ad- 
ministration should  be  entirely  in  the  queen  ;  that  no  foreigner 
should  be  capable  of  enjoying  any  office  in  the  kingdom  ;  that  no 
innovation  should  be  made  in  the  English  laws,  customs,  and 
privileges  ;  that  her  issue  should  inherit,  together  with  England, 
Burgundy  and  the  Low-Countries ;  and  that  if  Don  Carlos,  Phi- 
lip's son  by  a  former  marriage,  should  die,  the  queen's  issue  should 
enjoy  all  the  dominions  possessed  by  the  king.  Such  was  the 
treaty  of  marriage,  from  which  politicians  foresaw  very  great 
changes  in  the  system  of  Europe ;  but  which  in  the  end  came  to 
nothing,  by  the  queen's  having  no  issue. 


MARY.  435 

The  people,  however,  who  did  not  see  so  far,  were  much  more 
just  in  their  surmises  that  it  might  be  a  blow  to  their  liberties  and 
religion.  They  loudly  murmured  against  it,  and  a  flame  of  dis- 
content was  kindled  over  the  whole  nation.  Sir  Thomas  Wyatt, 
a  Roman-catholic,  at  the  head  of  four  thousand  insurgents,  march- 
ed from  Kent  to  Hyde  Park,  publishing,  as  he  went  forwartl,  a 
declaration  against  the  queen's  evil  counsellors,  and  against  the 
Spanish  match.  His  first  aim  was  to  secure  the  Tower ;  but  this 
rashness  undid  him.  As  he  marched  forward  through  the  city  of 
London,  and  among  the  nai'row  streets,  without  suspicion,  care 
was  taken  by  the  earl  of  Pembroke  to  block  up  the  way  behind 
him  by  ditches  and  chains  thrown  across,  and  guards  were  placed 
at  all  tbe  avenues,  to  prevent  his  return.  In  this  manner  did  the 
bold  rebel  pass  onward ;  and  he  supposed  himself  ready  to  reap 
the  fruits  of  his  undertaking,  when,  to  his  utter  confusion,  he  found 
that  he  could  neither  go  forward,  nor  yet  make  good  his  retreat, 
He  now  perceived  that  the  citizens,  from  whom  he  had  expected 
assistance,  would  not  join  him ;  and,  losing  all  courage  in  this  ex- 
igency, he  surrendered  at  discretion. 

The  duke  of  Suffolk  was  not  less  guilty  also  ;  he  had  joined  in  a 
confederacy  with  sir  Peter  Carew,  to  excite  an  insurrection  in  the 
counties  of  Warwick  and  Leicester ;  but  his  confederate's  impa- 
tience engaging  him  to  rise  in  arms  before  the  day  appointed,  the 
duke  vainly  endeavoured  to  excite  his  dependants.  He  was  so 
closely  pursued  by  the  earl  of  Huntingdon,  that  he  was  obliged  to 
disperse  his  followers ;  and,  being  discovered  in  his  retreat,  was 
led  prisoner  to  London,  where  he,  together  with  Wyatt,  and 
seventy  persons  more,  suffered  by  the  hand  of  the  executioner. 
Four  hundred  were  conducted  before  the  queen  with  ropes  about 
their  necks ;  and,  falling  on  their  knees,  received  pardon,  and 
were  dismissed. 

But  what  excited  the  compassion  of  the  people  most  of  all,  was 
the  execution  of  lady  Jane  Grey,  and  her  husband  lord  Guilford 
Dudley,  who  were  involved  in  the  punishment,  though  not  in  the 
guilt,  of  this  insurrection.  Two  days  after  Wyatt  was  appre- 
hended, lady  Jane  and  her  husband  were  ordered  to  prepare  for 
death.  Lady  Jane,  who  had  long  before  seen  the  threatened  blow, 
was  no  way  surprised  at  the  message,  but  bore  it  with  heroic  res- 
olution 5  and  being  informed  that  she  had  three  days  to  prepare^ 


436  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

she  seemed  displeased  at  so  long  a  delay.  On  the  day  of  her  ex- 
ecution, her  husband  desired  permission  to  see  her ;  but  this  she 
refused,  as  she  knew  the  parting  would  be  too  tender  for  her  for- 
titude to  withstand.  The  place  at  first  designed  for  their  execu- 
tion was  without  the  Tower  ;  but  their  youth,  beauty,  and  inno- 
cence, being  likely  to  raise  an  insurrection  among  the  people,  or- 
ders were  given  that  they  should  be  executed  within  the  verge  of 
that  fortress.  Lord  Dudley  was  the  first  that  suftered  ;  and 
while  the  lady  Jane  was  proceeding  to  the  place  of  execution,  the 
officers  of  the  Tower  met  her,  bearing  along  the  headless  body  of 
her  husband  streaming  with  blood,  in  order  to  be  interred  in  the 
Tower-chapel.  She  looked  on  the  corpse  for  some  time  without 
any  emotion ;  and  then,  with  a  sigh,  desired  them  to  proceed. 
Sir  John  Gage,  constable  of  the  Tower,  as  he  led  her  to  execution, 
desired  her  to  bestow  on  him  some  small  present,  which  he  might 
keep  as  a  perpetual  memorial  of  her.  She  gave  him  her  tablets, 
where  she  had  just  written  three  sentences  on  seeing  her  hus- 
band's dead  body,  one  in  Greek,  one  in  Latin,  and  one  in  En- 
glish, importing  that  human  justice  was  against  his  body,  but  di- 
vine mercy  would  be  favourable  to  his  soul ;  and  that  God  and 
posterity,  she  hoped,  would  do  justice  to  them  and  their  cause. 
On  the  scaffold  she  made  a  speech,  in  which  she  alleged  that  her 
offence  was  not  the  having  laid  her  hand  upon  the  crown,  but  the 
not  rejecting  it  with  suflicient  constancy ;  that  she  had  less  erred 
through  ambition  than  filial  obedience ;  that  she  willingly  accept- 
ed death,  as  the  only  atonement  she  could  make  to  the  injured 
state ;  and  was  ready,  by  her  punishment,  to  show  that  innocence 
is  no  plea  in  excuse  for  deeds  that  tend  to  injure  the  community. 
After  speaking  to  this  effect,  she  caused  herself  to  be  disrobed  by 
her  women,  and  with  a  steady  serene  countenance  submitted  to 
the  executioner. 

The  enemies  of  the  state  being  thus  suppressed,  the  theatre  was 
now  opened  for  the  pretended  enemies  of  religion.  The  queen, 
being  freed  from  apprehensions  of  an  insurrection,  began  by  as- 
sembling a  parliament,  which,  upon  this  as  upon  most  occasions, 
seemed  only  met  to  give  countenance  to  her  various  severities. 
The  nobles,  whose  only  religion  was  that  of  tlie  pi-ince  who  gov- 
erned, were  easily  gained  over  ;  and  the  house  of  commons  had 
long  been  passive  under  all  the  variations  of  regal  caprice.     But 


MARY.  437 

a  new  enemy  had  started  up  against  the  reformers,  in  the  person 
of  the  king,  who,  though  he  took  all  possible  care  to  conceal  his 
aversion,  yet  secretly  influenced  the  queen,  and  inflamed  all  her 
proceedings.  Philip  had  for  some  time  been  in  England,  and  had 
used  every  endeavour  to  increase  that  share  of  power  which  had 
been  allowed  to  him  by  parliament,  but  without  effect.  The 
queen,  indeed,  who  loved  him  with  a  foolish  fondness,  that  sat 
but  ill  on  a  person  of  her  years  and  disagreeable  person,  endeav- 
oured to  please  him  by  every  concession  she  could  make  or  pro- 
cure ;  and  finding  herself  incapable  of  satisfying  his  ambition,  she 
was  not  remiss  in  concurring  with  his  zeal  5  so  that  heretics  began 
to  be  persecuted  with  inquisitorial  severity.  The  old  sanguinary 
laws  were  now  revived  :  orders  were  given  that  the  bishops  and 
priests  who  had  married  should  be  ejected  ;  that  the  mass  should 
be  restored ;  that  the  pope's  authority  should  be  establislied  ;  and 
that  the  church  and  its  privileges,  all  but  their  goods  and  estates, 
should  be  put  upon  the  same  foundation  on  which  they  were  be- 
fore the  commencement  of  the  Reformation.  As  the  gentry  and 
nobles  had  already  divided  the  church-lands  among  them,  it  was 
thought  inconvenient,  and  indeed  impossible,  to  make  a  restora- 
tion of  these.  , 

At  the  head  of  those  who  drove  such  measures  forward,  but  not 
in  an  equal  degree,  were  Gardiner,  bishop  of  Winchester,  and 
cardinal  Pole,  who  had  lately  arrived  in  England  from  the  con- 
tinent. Pole,  who  was  nearly  allied  by  birth  to  the  royal  family, 
had  always  conscientiously  adhered  to  the  catholic  religion,  and 
had  incurred  Henry's  displeasure,  not  only  by  refusing  his  as- 
sent to  his  measures,  but  by  writing  against  him.  It  was  for  this 
adherence  that  he  was  cherished  by  the  pope,  and  now  sent  over 
to  England  as  legate  from  the  holy  see.  Gardiner  was  a  man  of 
a  very  different  character  :  his  chief  aim  was  to  please  the  reign- 
ing prince,  and  he  had  shown  already  many  instances  of  his  pru- 
dent conformity.  He  now  perceived  that  the  king  and  queen 
were  for  I'igorous  measures ;  and  he  knew  that  it  would  be  the 
best  means  of  paying  his  court  to  them,  even  to  outgo  them  in 
severity.  Pole,  who  had  never  varied  in  his  principles,  declared 
in  favour  of  toleration  ;  Gardiner,  who  had  often  changed,  was 
for  punishing  those  changes  in  others  witli  tlie  utmost  rigour. 
However,  he  was  too  prudent  to  appear  at  the  head  of  a  persecu- 


438  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

tion  in  person  ;  he  therefore  consigned  that  odious  office  to  Bon- 
ner, bishop  of  London,  a  cruel,  brutal,  and  ignorant  man. 
p^  ^  _-  -j  This  bloody  scene  began  by  the  martyrdom  of  Hooper, 
bishop  of  Gloucester,  and  Rogers,  prebendary  of  St. 
Paul's.  They  were  examined  by  commissioners  appointed  by 
the  queen,  with  the  chancellor  at  the  head  of  them.  It  was  ex- 
pected that  by  their  recantation  they  would  bring  those  opinions 
into  disrepute  which  they  had  so  long  inculcated  :  but  the  perse- 
cutors were  deceived  ;  they  both  continued  steadfast  in  their  be- 
lief; and  they  were  accordingly  condemned  to  be  burned,  Rogers 
in  Smithfield,  and  Hooper  in  his  own  diocese  at  Gloucester.  Ro- 
gers, beside  the  care  of  his  own  preservation,  lay  under  very  pow- 
erful temptations  to  deny  his  principles,  and  save  his  life  ;  for  he 
had  a  wife  whom  he  tenderly  loved,  and  ten  children ;  but  noth- 
ing could  move  his  resolution.  Such  was  his  serenity  after  con- 
demnation, that  the  jailors,  we  are  told,  waked  him  from  a  sound 
sleep  upon  the  approach  of  the  hour  appointed  for  his  execution. 
He  desired  to  see  his  wife  before  he  died  ;  but  Gardiner  told  him, 
that  being  a  priest  lie  could  have  no  wife.  When  the  faggots 
were  placed  around  him,  he  seemed  no  way  daunted  at  the  pre- 
paration, but  cried  out,  "  I  resign  my  life  with  joy,  in  testimony 
of  the  doctrine  of  Jesus!"  When  Hooper  was  tied  to  the  stake, 
9,  stool  was  set  before  him  with  the  queen's  pardon  upon  it,  in 
case  he  should  recant ;  but  he  ordered  it  to  be  removed,  and  pre- 
pared cheerfully  to  suffer  his  sentence,  which  was  executed  in  its 
full  severity.  The  fire,  either  from  malice  or  neglect,  had  not 
been  sufficiently  kindled ;  so  that  his  legs  and  thighs  were  first 
burned,  and  one  of  his  hands  dropped  off,  while  with  the  other  he 
continued  to  beat  his  breast.  He  was  three  quarters  of  an  hour 
in  torture,  which  he  bore  with  inflexible  constancy. 

Sanders  and  Taylor,  two  other  clergymen,  whose  zeal  had 
been  distinguished  in  carrying  on  the  Reformation,  were  the  next 
that  suffered.  Taylor  was  put  into  a  pitch-barrel ;  and,  before 
the  fire  was  kindled,  a  faggot  from  an  unknown  hand  was  thrown 
at  his  head,  which  made  it  stream  with  blood.  Still,  however,  he 
continued  undaunted,  singing  the  thirty-first  Psalm  in  English ; 
which  one  of  the  spectators  observing,  struck  him  a  blow  on  the 
side  of  the  head,  and  commanded  him  to  pray  in  Latin.  Taylor 
continued  a  few  minutes  silent,  and  with  his  eyes  steadfastly  fixed 


MARY.  439 

upward  5  when  One  of  the  guards,  either  through  impatience  or 
compassion,  struck  him  down  with  his  halberd,  and.  thus  happily 
put  an  end  to  his  torments. 

The  death  of  these  only  served  to  increase  the  savage  appetite 
of  the  popish  bishops  and  monks  for  fresh  slaughter.  Bonner, 
bloated  at  once  with  rage  and  luxury,  let  loose  his  vengeance 
without  restraint,  and  seemed  to  take  a  pleasure  in  the  pains  of 
the  unhappy  sufferers ;  while  the  queen,  by  her  letters,  exhorted 
him  to  pursue  the  pious  work  without  pity  or  interruption.  Soon 
after,  in  obedience  to  her  commands,  Ridley,  bishop  of  London, 
and  the  venerable  Latimer,  bishop  of  Worcester,  were  condemned 
together.  Ridley  had  been  one  of  the  ablest  champions  for  the 
Reformation  ;  his  piety,  learning,  and  solidity  of  judgment,  were 
admired  by  his  friends,  and  dreaded  by  his  enemies.  The  night 
before  his  execution,  he  invited  the  mayor  of  Oxford  and  his  wife 
to  see  him ;  and  when  he  beheld  them  melted  into  tears,  he  him- 
self appeared  quite  unmoved,  inwardly  supported  and  comforted 
in  that  hour  of  agony.  When  he  was  brought  to  the  stake  to  be 
burned,  he  found  his  old  friend  Latimer  there  before  him.  Of  all 
the  prelates  of  that  age,  Latimer  was  the  most  remarkable  for  his 
unaffected  piety,  and  the  simplicity  of  his  manners.  He  had 
never  learned  to  flatter  in  courts ;  and  his  open  rebuke  was 
dreaded  by  all  the  great,  who  at  that  time  too  much  deserved  it. 
His  sermons,  which  remain  to  this  day,  show  that  he  had  some 
learning  and  much  wit ;  and  there  is  an  air  of  sincerity  running 
through  them  not  to  be  found  elsewhere.  When  Ridley  began  to 
comfort  his  antient  friend,  Latimer,  on  his  part,  was  as  ready  to 
return  the  kind  office,  "  Be  of  good  cheer,  brother,"  cried  he, 
"  we  shall  this  day  kindle  such  ar torch  in  England,  as,  I  trust  in 
God,  shall  never  be  extinguished."  A  furious  bigot  ascended  to 
preach  to  them  and  the  people  while  the  fire  was  preparing;  and 
Ridley  gave  a  most  serious  attention  to  his  discourse.  No  way 
distracted  by  tlie  preparations  about  him,  he  heard  him  to  the 
last,  and  then  told  him  that  he  was  ready,  to  answer  all  that  he 
had  preached  upon,  if  a  short  indulgence  should  be  permitted : 
but  this  was  refused  him.  At  length  fire  was  set  to  the  pile : 
Latimer  was  soon  out  of  pain ;  but  Ridley  continued  to  suffer 
much  longer,  his  legs  being  consumed  before  the  fire  reached  his 
vitals. 


I 


440  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND, 

One  Thomas  Haiikes,  when  conducted  to  the  stake,  had  agi'eed 
with  his  friends,  that  if  he  found  the  torture  supportable,  he  would 
make  them  a  signal  for  that  purpose  in  the  midst  of  the  flames. 
His  zeal  for  the  cause  in  which  he  suffered  was  so  strong,  that 
when  the  spectators  thought  him  near  expiring,  by  stretching  out 
his  arms  he  gave  his  fiiends  the  signal  that  the  pain  was  not  too 
great  to  be  borne.  This  example,  with  many  others  of  the  like 
constancy,  encouraged  multitudes  not  only  to  suffer,  but  even  to 
aspire  after  martyrdom. 

But  women  seemed  persecuted  with  as  mucli  severity  even  as 
men.  A  woman  in  Guernsey,  condemned  for  heresy,  was  deliv- 
ered of  a  child  in  the  midst  of  the  flames.  Some  of  the  spectators 
humanely  ran  to  snatch  the  infant  from  danger;  but  the  magis- 
trate, who  was  a  papist,  ordered  it  to  be  flung  in  again ;  and 
there  it  was  consumed  with  the  mother. 

Cranmer's  death  followed  soon  after,  and  struck  the  whole  na- 
tion with  horror.  This  prelate,  whom  Ave  have  seen  acting  so 
very  conspicuous  a  part  in  the  Reformation  during  the  two  pre- 
ceding reigns,  had  been  long  detained  a  prisoner,  in  consequence 
of  his  imputed  guilt  in  obstructing  the  queen's  succession  to  the 
crown.  But  it  was  now  resolved  to  bring  him  to  punishment ; 
and,  to  give  it  all  its  malignity,  the  queen  ordered  that  he  should 
be  punished  for  heresy  rather  than  for  treason.  He  was  accord- 
ingly cited  by  the  pope  tp  stand  his  trial  at  Rome  ;  and  though  he 
was  kept  a  prisoner  at  Oxford,  yet,  upon  his  not  appearing,  he 
v/as  condemned  as  contumacious.  But  his  enemies  were  not 
satisfied  with  his  tortures,  without  adding  to  them  the  poignancy 
of  self-accusation.  Persons  were,  therefore,  employed  to  tempt 
him  by  flattery  and  insinuation,  by  giving  him  hopes  of  once  more" 
being  received  into  favour,  to  sign  his  recantation,  by  which  he 
acknowledged  the  doctrines  of  the  papal  supremacy  and  the  real 
presence.  His  love  of  life  prevailed.  In  an  unguarded  moment 
he  was  induced  to  sign  this  paper;  and  now  his  enemies,  as  we 
are  told  of  the  devil,  after  having  rendered  him  completely 
wretched,  resolved  to  destroy  him.  But  it  was  determined,  be- 
fore they  led  him  out  to  execution,  that  they  should  try  to  induce 
him  to  make  a  recantation  in  the  church  before  the  people.  The 
unfortunate  prelate,  either  having  a  secret  intimation  of  their 
design,  or  having  recovered  the  native  vigour  of  his  mind,  en- 


MARY;  441 

tered  the  church  prepared  to  surprise  the  whole  audience  by  a 
contrary  declaration.  When  he  had  been  placed  in  a  conspicu- 
ous part  of  the  church,  a  sermon  was  preached  by  Cole,  provost 
of  Eton,  in  which  he  magnified  Cranmer's  conversion  as  the  im- 
mediate work  of  heaven  itself.  He  assured  the  archbishop,  that 
nothing  could  have  been  so  pleasing  to  God,  the  queen,  or  the 
people  ;  he  comforted  him,  by  intimating,  that,  if  he  should  suf- 
fer, numberless  dirges  and  masses  should  be  said  for  his  soul ; 
and  that  his  own  confession  of  his  faith  would  still  more  secure 
his  soul  from  the  jjains  of  purgatory.  During  the  whole  rhapsody 
Cranmer  expressed  the  utmost  agony,  anxiety,  and  internal  agita- 
tion ;  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  he  shed  a  torrent  of  tears, 
and  groaned  with  unutterable  anguish.  He  uttered  a  prayer,  fill- 
ed with  the  most  pathetic  expressions  of  horror  and  remorse.  He 
then  said  he  was  well  apprised  of  his  duty  to  his  sovereign ;  but 
that  a  superior  duty,  the  duty  which  he  owed  his  Maker,  obliged 
him  to  declare  that  he  had  signed  a  paper  contrary  to  his  con- 
science ;  that  he  took  this  opportunity  of  atoning  for  his  error  by 
a  sincere  and  open  recantation  :  he  was  willing,  he  said,  to  seal 
with  his  blood  that  doctrine,  which  he  firmly  believed  to  be  com- 
municated from  heaven  ;  and  that,  as  his  hand  had  erred  by  be- 
traying his  heart,  it  should  undergo  the  first  punishment.  The 
assembly,  consisting  chiefly  of  papists,  who  hoped  to  triumph  in 
the  last  words  of  such  a  convert,  were  equally  confounded  and 
incensed  at  this  declaration.  They  called  aloud  to  him  to  leave 
off  dissembling ;  and  led  him  forward,  amidst  the  insults  and  re- 
proaches of  his  audience,  to  the  stake  at  which  Latimer  and  Rid- 
ley had  suffered.  He  resolved  to  triumph  over  their  insults  by 
his  constancy  and  fortitude  ;  and,  the  fire  beginning  to  be  kind- 
led round  him,  he  stretched  forth  his  right  hand,  and  held  it  in 
the  flames  till  it  was  consumed,  while  he  frequently  cried  out  in 
the  midst  of  his  sufferings,  "  That  unworthy  hand  !"  at  the  same 
time  exhibiting  no  appearance  of  pain  or  disorder.  When  the 
fire  attacked  his  body,  he  seemed  to  be  quite  insensible  of  his  tor- 
tures ;  his  mind  was  occupied  wholly  upon  the  hop*es  of  a  future 
reward.  After  his  body  was  destroyed,  his  heart  was  found  en- 
tire :  an  emblem  of  the  constancy  with  which  he  suffered. 

These  persecutions  were  now  become  odious  to  the    p^  ^/.f.  -> 
whole  nation :  and,  as  it  may  be  easily  supposed,  tlie 

VOL.  I.  56 


44Q  HISTORY  OF  ENGLANiD. 

perpetrators  of  them  were  all  willing  to  throw  the  odium  from 
themselves  upon  others.  Philip,  sensible  of  the  hatred  which  he 
must  incur  upon  this  occasion,  endeavoured  to  remove  the  re- 
proach from  himself  by  a  very  gross  artifice.  He  ordered  his 
confessor  to  deliver  in  his  presence  a  sermon  in  favour  of  tolera- 
tion ;  but  Bonner,  in  his  turn,  would  not  take  the  whole  of  the 
blame,  and  retorted  the  severities  upon  the  court.  In  fact,  a  bold 
step  was  taken  tojntroduce  a  court  similar  to  that  of  the  Spanish 
inquisition,  that  should  be  empowered  to  try  heretics,  and  con- 
demn them  without  any  other  form  of  law  than  its  own  autliority. 
But  even  this  was  thought  a  method  too  dilatory  in  the  present 
exigence  of  aftairs.  A  proclamation,  issued  against  books  of 
heresy,  treason,  and  sedition,  declared,  that  all  persons  who  had 
such  books  in  their  possession,  and  did  not  burn  them  without 
reading,  should  be  deemed  rebels,  and  suffer  accordingly.  This^ 
as  might  be  expected,  was  attended  with  bloody  effects :  whole 
crowds  were  executed,  till  even  at  last  the  very  magistrates,  who 
had  been  instrumental  in  these  cruelties,  refused  to  lend  their 
assistance.  It  was  computed  that,  during  this  persecution,  two 
hundred  and  seventy -seven  persons  suffered  by  fire,  besides  those 
punished  by  imprisonment,  fines,  and  confiscations.  Those  who 
suffered  by  fire  were  five  bishops,  twenty-one  clergymen,  eight 
lay-gentlemen,  eighty-four  tradesmen,  one  hundred  husbandmen, 
fifty -five  women,  and  four  children. 

All  this  was  terrible  ;  and  yet  the  temporal  affairs  of  the  king- 
dom did  not  seem  to  be  more  successful.  From  Philip's  first  ar- 
rival in  England  the  queen's  pregnancy  was  talked  of ;  and  her 
own  extreme  desire  that  it  should  be  true,  induced  her  to  favour 
the  report.  When  Pole,  the  pope'&  legate,  was  first  introduced 
to  her,  she  fancied  the  child  stirred  in  her  womb  ;  and  this  her 
flatterers  compared  to  the  leaping  of  John  the  Baptist  in  his  mo- 
ther's belly,  at  the  salutation  of  the  Virgin.  The  catholics  were 
confident  that  she  was  pregnant ;  they  assured  tl^mselves  that 
this  child  would  be  a  son ;  they  were  even  confident  that  heaven 
would  render  him  beautiful,  vigorous,  and  witty ^  But  it  soon 
turned  out  that  all  their  confidence  was  ill-founded  |  for  the 
queen's  supposed  pregnancy  was  only  the  beginning  of  a  dropsy, 
which  the  disordered  state  of  her  health  had  brought  upon  her. 

This  opinion  of  the  queer's  pregnancy  was  carefully  kept  up 


MARY.  443 

by  Philip,  as  it  was  an  artifice  by  which  he  hoped  to  extend  his 
authority  in  the  kingdom.  But  he  was  mistaken  :  the  English 
parliament,  however  lax  in  their  principles  at  that  time,  harbour- 
ed a  continual  jealousy  against  him,  and  passed  repeated  acts  by 
which  they  ascertained  the  limits  of  his  power,  and  confirmed 
the  authority  of  the  queen.  Ambition  was  his  only  ruling  pas- 
sion ;  and  the  extreme  fondness  of  the  queen  for  his  person  was 
rather  permitted  by  him  than  desired.  He  only  wanted  to  make 
her  inclination  subservient  to  the  purposes  of  his  power ;  but 
finding  her  unable  to  satisfy  him  in  that  hope,  he  no  longer  treat- 
ed her  with  any  return  of  affection,  but  behaved  to  her  with  ap- 
parent indifference  and  neglect :  at  length,  tired  with  her  impor- 
tunities and  jealousies,  and  finding  his  authority  extremely  limit- 
ed in  England,  he  took  the  first  opportunity  of  leaving  her,  and 
went  over  to  the  emperor  his  father  in  Flanders.  In  the  mean  time 
the  queen's  passion  increased  in  proportion  to  the  coolness  with 
which  it  was  returned.  She  passed  most  of  her  time  in  solitude  5 
she  gave  vent  to  her  sorrows,  either  by  tears  or  by  writing  fond 
epistles  to  Philip,  who,  except  when  he  wanted  money,  seldom 
returned  her  any  answer.  To  supply  his  demands  upon  these 
occasions,  she  took  several  very  extorting  methods,  by  loans 
which  were  forced  from  many  whom  she  thought  most  affection- 
ate to  her  person,  or  best  able  to  spare  it.  She  offered  the  En- 
glish merchants  at  Antwerp  fourteen  per  cent,  for  a  loan  of  thirty 
thousand  pounds,  and  yet  was  mortified  by  a  refusal ;  but  she  at 
length  prevailed,  when  the  corporation  of  London  became  suretj* 
for  her. 

She  was  more  successful  in  her  attempts  to  engage  the  English 
in  a  war  with  France,  at  the  instigation  of  her  husband,  although 
in  the  end  it  turned  out  to  her  utter  confusion.  A  war  had  just 
been  commenced  between  Spain  and  that  kingdom ;  and  Philip, 
who  took  this  occasion  to  come  over  to  England,  declared,  that  if 
he  were  not  seconded  by  England  at  this  crisis,  he  would  never 
see  the  country  more.  This  declaration  greatly  heightened  the 
queen's  zeal  for  promoting  his  interests ;  and  though  she  was 
warmly  opposed  in  this  measure  by  cardinal  Pole  and  the  rest  of 
her  council,  yet,  by  threatening  to  dismiss  them  all,  she  at  last 
succeeded.  War  was  declared  against  France,  and  rttfc'- 1 
preparations  w^te  every  where  made  for  attacking  that  ■" 


444  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

kingdom  with  vigour.  An  army  was  levied,  to  the  amount  often 
thousand  men,  who,  when  their  wants  had  been  supplied  by  va- 
rious methods  of  extortion,  were  sent  over  into  Flanders. 

A  battle  gained  by  the  Spaniards  at  St.  Quintin  seemed  to 
promise  great  success  to  the  allied  arms ;  but  soon  an  action  per- 
formed by  the  duke  of  Guise,  in  the  midst  of  winter,  turned  the 
scale  in  favour  of  France  5  and  affected,  if  not  the  interests,  at 
least  the  honour  of  England  in  the  tenderest  point.  Calais  had 
now  for  above  two  hundred  years  been  in  possession  of  the  En- 
glish ;  it  had  been  made  the  chief  market  for  wool,  and  other 
British  commodities ;  it  had  been  strongly  fortified  at  different 
times,  and  was  then  deemed  impregnable.  But  all  the  fortifica- 
tions which  were  raised  before  gunpowder  was  found  out,  were 
very  ill  able  to  resist  th^  attacks  of  a  regular  battery  from  can- 
non ;  and  they  only  continued  to  enjoy  an  antient  reputation  for 
strength,  which  they  were  very  ill  able  to  maintain.  Coligny,  the 
French  general,  had  remarked  to  the  duke  of  Guise,  that  as  the 
town  of  Calais  was  surrounded  by  marshes,  which  during  winter 
were  impassable,  except  over  a  dyke  guarded  by  two  castles,  St. 
Agatha  and  Newnham-Bridge,  the  English  were  of  late  accus- 
tomed, to  save  expense,  to  dismiss  a  great  part  of  the  garrison  at 
the  approach  of  winter,  and  recall  them  in  spring.  The  du?ke  of 
Guise  upon  this  made  a  sudden  and  unexpected  march  towards 
Calais,  and  assaulted  the  castle  of  St.  Agatha  with  tliree  thou 
sand  arquebusiers.  The  gan-ison  were  soon  obliged  to  retreat  to 
the  other  castle,  and  shqrtly  after  compelled  to  quit  that  post, 
and  to  take  shelter  in  the  city.  Meanwhile  a  small  fleet  was 
sent  to  block  up  the  entrance  of  the  harbour ;  and  thus  Calais 
was  invested  by  land  and  sea.  The  governor,  lord  Wentworth, 
made  a  brave  defence  ;  but  his  garrison,  being  very  weak,  could 
not  effectually  resist  an  assault  given  by  the  French,  who  made  a 
lodgement  in  the  castle.  On  the  night  following  Wentworth  at- 
tempted to  recover  this  post ;  but  having  lost  two  hundred  men 
(-^  __„  -,  in  the  attapk,  he  was  obliged  to  capitulate  :  so  that,  in. 
less  than  eight  days,  the  duke  of  Guise  recovered  a  city 
that  had  been  in  possession  of  the  English  sinpe  the  time  of  Ed- 
ward the  Third,  and  whicli  he  had  spent  eleven  months  in  be- 
sieging. This  loss  filled  the  whole  kingdom  with  murmurs,  and 
the  quefen  with  despair ;  she  Avas  heard  to  say,  that,  when  dead^ 
the  name  of  Calais  would  be  found  engraven  on  her  heart. 


MARY.  443 

These  complicated  evils, — a  murmuring  people,  an  increasing 
heresy,  a  disdainful  husband,  and  an  unsuccessful  war,— made 
dreadful  depredations  on  Mary's  constitution.  She  began  to  ap-* 
pear  consumptive ;  and  this  rendered  her  mind  still  more  morose 
and  bigoted.  The  people  now  therefore  began  to  turn  their 
thoughts  to  her  successor ;  and  the  princess  Elizabeth  came  into 
a  greater  degree  of  consideration  than  before.  Dming  this  whole 
reign  the  nation  was  in  continual  apprehensions  with  regard  not 
only  to  the  succession  but  the  life  of  this  princess.  The  violent 
hatred  of  the  queen  broke  out  upon  every  occasion ;  while  Eliza- 
beth, conscious  of  her  danger,  passed  her  time  wholly  in  reading 
and  study,  entirely  detached  from  business.  Proposals  of  mar- 
riage had  been  made  to  her  by  the  Swedish  embas^or,  in  his 
master's  name ;  but  she  referred  him  to  the  queen,  who  leaving  it 
to  her  own  choice,  she  had  the  magnanimity  to  reserve  herself  for 
better  fortune.  Nor  was  she  less  prudent  in  concealing  her  sen- 
timents of  religion,  and  eluding  all  questions  relative  to  that  dan- 
gerous subject.  She  was  obnoxious  to  Mary  for  two  reasons  :  as 
she  was  next  heir  to  the  throne,  it  was  feared  she  might  aspire  to 
it  during  her  sister's  lifetime  ;  but  it  was  still  more  reasonably 
apprehended  that  she  would,  if  ever  she  came  to  the  crown,  make 
an  innovation  in  that  religion  which  Mary  took  such  pains  to  es- 
tablish. The  bishops,  who  had  shed  such  a  deluge  of  blood,  fore- 
saw this ;  and  often  told  Mary  that  her  destroying  meaner  here- 
tics was  of  no  advantage  to  the  state,  while  the  body  of  the  tree 
was  suffered  to  remain.  Mary  saw  and  acknowledged  the  cogen- 
cy of  their  arguments,  confined  her  sister  with  proper  guards,  and 
only  waited  for  some  fresh  insurrection,  or  some  favourable  pre- 
text, to  destroy  her.  Her  own  death  prevented  the  perpetration 
of  her  meditated  cruelty. 

Mary  had  been  long  in  a  declining  state  of  health ;  and  having 
mistaken  her  dropsy  for  a  pregnancy,  she  made  use  of  an  improper 
regimen,  which  had  increased  the  disorder.  Every  reflection  now 
tormented  her.  The  consciousness  of  being  hated  by  her  subjects, 
the  prospect  of  Elizabeth's  succession,  whom  she  hated,  and,  above 
all,  her  anxiety  for  the  loss  of  her  husband,  who  never  intended  to 
return, — all  these  preyed  upon  her  mind,  and  threw  her  into  a  lin- 
gering fever,  of  which  she  died,  after  a  short  and  unfortunate  reign 
qf  five  years  four  months  and  eleven  days,  in  the  forty -third  yea^ 


440  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

of  her  age.  Cardinal  Pole,  whose  gentleness  in  power  we  have 
had  occasion  to  mention,  survived  her  but  one  day.  She  was  bu- 
ried in  Henry  the  Seventh's  chapel,  according  to  the  rites  of  the 
church  of  Rome. 


CHAP,  XXVI. 

ELIZABETH. 

Nov.  17,  vv  ERE  we  to  adopt  the  maxim  of  the  catholics,  that 
1558.  Qy[\  i^ay  be  done  for  the  production  of  good,  one  might 
say  that  the  persecutions  in  Mary's  reign  were  permitted  only  to 
bring  the  kingdom  more  generally  over  to  the  protestant  religion. 
Nothing  could  preach  so  effectually  against  the  cruelty  and  vices 
of  the  monks  as  the  actions  of  the  monks  themselves.  Wherever 
heretics  were  to  be  burned,  the  monks  were  always  present,  re- 
joicing at  the  flames,  insulting  the  fallen,  and  frequently  the  first 
to  thrust  the  flaming  brand  against  the  faces  of  the  sufferers. 
The  English  were  effectually  converted,  by  such  sights  as  these, 
from  their  antient  superstitions.  To  bring  the  people  over  to  any 
opinion,  it  is  only  necessary  to  persecute  instead  of  attempting 
to  convince.  The  people  had  formerly  been  compelled  to  em- 
brace the  protestant  religion,  and  their  fears  induced  them  to 
conform  ;  but  now  almost  the  whole  nation  were  protestants  from 
inclination. 

Nothing,  therefore,  could  exceed  the  joy  that  was  diffused 
among  the  people  upon  the  accession  of  Elizabeth,  who  now  came 
to  the  throne  without  any  opposition.  She  was  at  Hatfield,  when 
informed  of  her  sister's  death ;  and,  hastening  to  London,  was 
received  by  the  multitude  with  universal  acclamations.  Eliza- 
beth had  her  education  iu  that  best  school,  the  school  of  adversi- 
ty ;  and  she  had  made  the  proper  use  of  her  confinement.  Being 
debarred  the  enjoyment  of  pleasures  abroad,  she  sought  for  knowl- 
edge at  home ;  she  cultivated  her  understanding,  learned  the 
languages  and  sciences ;  but  of  all  the  arts  which  she  acquired, 
that  of  concealing  her  opinions,  of  checking  her  inclinations,  of 


'      ELIZABETH.  447 

displeasing  none,  and  of  learning  to  reign,  were  the  most  benefi- 
cial to  her. 

This  virgin  monarch,  as  some  historians  have  called  her,  upon 
entering  the  Tower  according  to  custom,  could  not  refrain  from 
remarking  on  the  difference  of  her  present  and  her  former  for- 
tune, when  she  was  sent  there  as  a  prisoner.  She  had  also  been 
scarcely  proclaimed  queen,  when  Philip,  who  had  been  married 
to  Mary,  but  who  ever  testified  a  partiality  in  favour  of  Elizabeth, 
ordered  his  embassador  in  London,  the  duke  of  Feria,  to  make 
her  proposals  of  marriage  from  his  master.  What  political  mo- 
tives Elizabeth  might  have  against  this  marriage,  are  not  mention- 
ed ;  but  certain  it  is,  that  she  neither  liked  the  person  nor  the  re^ 
ligion  of  her  admirer.  She  was  willing  at  once  to  enjoy  the 
pleasures  of  independence,  and  the  vanity  of  numerous  solicita- 
tions. But  Mobile  these  were  her  views,  she  returned  him  a  very 
obliging  though  evasive  answer ;  and  he  still  retained  such  hopes 
f>i  success,  that  he  sent  a  messenger  to  Rome,  with  orders  to  so- 
licit the  dispensation. 

Elizabeth  had,  from  the  beginning,  resolved  upon  reforming  the 
church,  even  while  she  was  held  in  the  constraints  of  a  prison ; 
and  now,  upon  coming  to  the  crown,  she  immediately  set  about 
it.  But  not  to  alarm  the  partisans  of  the  catholic  religion  all  at 
once,  she  retained  eleven  of  her  sister's  council ;  and,  in  order  t» 
balance  their  authority,  added  eight  more,  who  were  known  to  be 
affectionate  to  the  protestant  religion.  Her  particular  adviser^ 
however,  was  sir  William  Cecil,  secretary  of  state,  a  man  more 
earnestly  employed  in  the  business  than  the  speculations  of  the 
times  ;  and  whose  temper  it  was  to  wish  for  any  religion  that  he 
thought  would  contribute  to  the  welfare  of  the  state.  By  his  ad- 
vice, therefore,  she  immediately  recalled  all  exiles,  and  gave  lib- 
erty to  all  prisoners  who  were  confined  on  account  of  religion. 
She  next  published  a  proclamation,  by  which  she  forbade  all 
preaching  without  a  special  licence.  She  also  suspended  the  laws 
so  far  as  to  have  a  great  part  of  the  service  to  be  read  in  English, 
and  forbade  the  host  to  be  elevated  in  her  presence.  p^__qT 
A  parliament  soon  after  completed  what  the  preroga- 
tive had  begun  ;  various  acts  were  passed  in  favour  of  the  Refor- 
mation ;  and  in  a  single  session  the  form  of  religion  was  estab  - 
lished  as  we  at  present  have  the  happiness  to  enjoy  it. 


443  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

The  opposition  which  Avas  nude  to  these  religious  establish- 
ments, was  furious,  but  feeble.  A  conference  of  nine  doctors  on 
each  side  was  proposed  and  agreed  to,  in  presence  of  the  lord- 
keeper  Bacon.  They  were  to  dispute  publicly  upon  either  side 
of  the  question  ;  and  it  was  resolved  that  the  people  should  hold 
to  that  which  came  off  with  the  victory.  Disputations  of  this 
kind  never  carry  conviction  to  either  party ;  so  much  is  to  be 
said,  and  so  wide  is  the  field  that  both  sides  have  to  range  in,  that 
the  strength  of  both  is  exhausted  before  the  engagement  may  be 
properly  said  to  begin.  The  conference  therefore  came  to  noth- 
ing ;  the  catholics  declare  that  it  was  not  in  their  power  to  dis- 
pute a  second  time  upon  topics  on  which  they  had  gained  a  former 
victory ;  while  the  protestants,  on  the  other  side,  ascribed  their 
caution  to  their  fears. 

Of  nine  thousand  four  hundred  beneficed  clergymen,  which  was 
the  number  of  those  in  the  kingdom,  only  fourteen  bishops,  twelve 
deans,  as  many  archdeacons,  fifty  prebendaries,  fifteen  heads  of 
colleges,  and  about  eighty  of  the  parochial  clergy,  chose  to  quit 
their  preferments  rather  than  give  up  their  religion.  Thus  En- 
gland was  seen  to  change  its  belief  in  religion  four  times  since  the 
beginning  of  the  reign  of  Henry  the  Eighth.  "  Strange,"  says  a 
foreign  writer,  "  that  a  people  so  resolute  should  be  guilty  of  so 
much  inconstancy  ;  that  the  same  people  who  this  day  assisted 
at  the  execution  of  heretics  should,  the  next,  not  only  think  them 
guiltless,  but  conform  to  their  systems  of  thinking." 

Elizabeth  was  now  fixed  upon  a  protestant  throne,  and  had  con- 
sequently all  the  catholic  powers  of  Europe  her  open  or  secret 
enemies.  France,  Scotland,  the  pope,  and  even  Spain  itself,  be- 
gan to  think  of  combining  against  her.  Her  subjects  of  Ireland 
were  concealed  enemies  ;  and  the  catholic  party  in  England, 
though  professing  obedience,  were  yet  ready  to  take  advantage  of 
her  slightest  misfortunes.  These  were  the  dangers  she  had  to 
fear ;  nor  had  she  formed  a  single  alliance  to  assist  her,  nor  pos- 
sessed any  foreign /riends  that  she  could  safely  rely  on.  In  this 
situation  she  could  hope  for  no  other  resource  than  what  proceed- 
ed from  the  affection  of  her  own  subjects,  her  own  insight  into 
her  affairs,  and  the  wisdom  of  her  administration.  From  the  be- 
ginning of  her  reign,  she  seemed  to  aim  at  two  very  difficult  at- 
tainments ',  to  make  herself  loved  by  her  subjects,  and  feared  by 


ELIZABETH.  449 

her  courtiers.  She  resolved  to  be  frugal  of  her  treasure,  and  still  ' 
more  sparing  in  her  rewards  to  favourites.  This  at  once  kept  the 
people  in  good  humour,  and  the  great  too  poor  to  shake  oiF  their 
dependance.  She  also  showed  that  she  knew  how  to  distribute 
both  rewards  and  punishments  with  impartiality ;  that  she  knew 
when  to  soothe,  and  when  to  upbraid  ;  that  she  could  dissemble 
submission,  but  preserve  her  prerogatives.  la  short,  she  seemed 
to  have  studied  the  people  she  was  born  to  govern,  and  even 
showed  that  she  knew  when  to  flatter  their  foible's  to  secure  their 
affections. 

Her  chief  minister  was  Robert  Dudley,  son  to  the  late  duke  of 
Northumberland,  whom  she  seemed  to  regard  from  capricious 
motives,  as  he  was  possessed  neither  of  abilities  nor  virtue.  But 
to  make  amends,  the  two  favourites  next  in  power  were  the  lord- 
keeper  Bacon  and  Cecil,  men  of  great  capacity  and  infinite  appli- 
cation 5  they  regulated  the  finances,  and  directed  the  political 
measures  with  foreign  courts,  that  were  afterwards  followed  with 
so  much  success. 

A  state  of  permanent  felicity  is  not  to  be  expected  here  ;  and 
Mary  Stuart,  commonly  called  Mary  queen  of  Scots,  was  thei 
first  person  that  excited  the  fears  or  the  resentment  of  Elizabethi 
We  have  already  mentioned,  that  Henry  the  Seventh  married 
his  eldest  daughter,  Margaret,  to  James  the  Fourth,  king  of  Scot-' 
land,  whose  son  and  successor  left  no  issue  that  came  to  matu- 
rity, except  Mary.  At  a  very  early  age,  this  princess,  being  pos- 
sessed of  every  accomplishment  of  person  and  mind,  was  married 
to  Francis  the  dauphin,  afterwards  king  of  France,  who,  dying, 
left  her  a  widow  at  the  age  of  eighteen.  As  Elizabeth  had  been 
declared  illegitimate  by  Henry  the  Eighth,  Francis,  in  right  of 
his  wife,  began  to  assume  the  title  of  king  of  England  ;  nor  did 
the  queen  of  Scots,  his  consort,  seem  to  decline  sliaring  this 
empty  appellation.  But  though  nothing  could  have  been  more 
unjust  than  such  a  claim,  or  more  unlikely  to  succeed,  Elizabeth, 
knowing  that  such  pretensions  might  produce  troubles  in  England, 
sent  an  embassador  to  France,  complaining  of  the  behaviour  of 
that  court  in  this  instance.  Francis,  however,  was  not  upon  such 
good  terms  Avith  Elizabeth  as  to  forego  any  claims  that  would  dis- 
tress her  ;  and  her  embassador  was  sent  home  without  satisfae- 

VOL.  I.  57  ■ 


450  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

n  (^fin  1    ^^^^^'    ^P^"  *^^^  death  of  Francis,  Mary,  the  widow, 
'-  still  seemed  disposed  to  keep  up  the  title ;  but  finding 

herself  exposed  to  the  persecutions  of  the  dowager  queen,  wha 
now  began  to  take  the  lead  in  France,  she  determined  to  return 
to  Scotland,  and  demanded  a  safe  passage  from  Elizabeth  through 
England.  But  it  was  now  Elizabeth's  turn  to  refuse ;  and  she 
sent  back  a  very  haughty  answer  to  Mary's  request.  From  this 
n  'Tfii  1  ^^^^^  ^  determined  personal  enmity  began  to  prevail  be- 
tween the  rival  queens,  which  subsisted  for  many  years 
after,  until  at  last  the  superior  fortune  of  Elizabeth  prevailed. 

As  the  transactions  of  this  unfortunate  queen  make  a  distin- 
guished part  in  Elizabeth's  history,  it  will  be  necessary  to  give 
them  greater  room  than  I  have  hitherto  given  to  the  occurrences 
of  Scotland.  The  Reformation  in  England  having  taken  place, 
in  Scotland  also  that  work  was  begun,  but  with  circumstances  of 
greater  animosity  against  the  antient  superstitions.  The  mutual 
resentment  of  the  two  parties  in  that  kingdom  knew  no  bounds  ; 
and  a  civil  war  was  likely  to  end  the  dispute.  It  was  in  this  di- 
vided state  of  the  people  that  Elizabeth,  by  giving  encouragement 
to  the  reformers,  gained  their  affections  from  their  natural  queen, 
who  was  a  catholic,  and  who  consequently  favoured  those  of  that 
persuasion.  Thus  religion  at  last  effected  a  sincere  friendship 
between  the  English  and  Scots,  which  neither  treaties  nor  mar- 
riages, nor  the  vicinity  of  situation,  were  able  to  produce.  The 
reformers,  to  a  man,  considered  Elizabeth  as  their  patroness  and 
defender,  and  Mary  as  their  persecutor  and  enemy. 

It  was  in  this  state  of  affairs  that  Mary  returned  from  France 
to  reign  in  Scotland,  entirely  attached  to  the  customs  and  man- 
ners of  the  people  she  had  left,  and  consequently  very  averse  to 
the  gloomy  severity  which  her  reformed  subjects  affected,  and 
which  they  fancied  made  a  proper  ingredient  in  religion.  A  dif- 
ference in  religion  betvv^een  the  sovereign  and  the  people  is  ever 
productive  of  bad  effects  ;  since  it  is  apt  to  produce  contempt  on 
one  side,  and  jealousy  on  the  other.  Mary  could  not  avoid  re- 
garding the  sour  manners  of  the  reformed  clergy,  'who  now  bore 
sway  among  the  people,  with  a  mixture  of  ridicule  and  hatred  » 
while  they,  on  the  other  hand,  could  not  look  tamely  on  the  gai- 
eties and  levities  which  she  introduced  among  them,  without  ab- 
horrence and  resentinent.    The  jealousy  thus  excited,  began  every 


ELIZABETH.  451 

day  to  grow  stronger ;  the  clergy  only  waited  for  some  indiscre- 
tion in  the  queen,  to  fly  out  into  open  opposition  ;  and  her  indis- 
cretion too  Soon  gave  them  suflicient  oppoi'tunity. 

After  two  years  had  been  spent  in  altercation  and  reproach  be- 
tween Mary  and  her  subjects,  it  was  resolved  at  last  by  her 
council,  that  she  should  look  out  for  some  alliance,  by  which  she 
might  be  sheltered  and  protected  against  the  insolence  and  mis- 
guided zeal  of  her  spiritual  instructors.  After  some  ^^5541 
deliberation,  the  lord  Darnley,  son  to  the  earl  of  Lenox, 
wa?  the  person  in  whom  their  opinions  and  wishes  centred.  He 
had  been  born  and  educated  in  England,  was  now  in  his  twen- 
tieth year,  was  cousin-german  to  the  queen;  and,'  what  perhaps  she 
might  admire  still  more,  he  was  extremely  tall.  Elizabeth  was 
secretly  no  way  averse  to  this  marriage,  as  it  freed  her  from  the 
dread  of  a  foreign  alliance ;  but  when  informed  that  it  was  actu- 
ally concluded  and  consummated,  she  pretended  to  testify  the 
utmost  displeasure  :  she  menaced,  complained,  protested ;  seized 
the  English  estate  of  the  earl  of  Lenox,  and  threw  the  countess 
and  her  second  son  into  the  Tower.  This  duplicity  of  conduct 
was  common  enough  with  Elizabeth ;  and,  on  the  present  occa- 
sion, it  served  her  as  a  pretext  for  refusing  to  acknowledge 
Mary's  title  to  the  succession  of  England,  which  that  princess 
had  frequently  urged,  but  in  vain. 

Notwithstanding  Elizabeth's  complaints  and  resentment,  Mary 
resolved  to  indulge  her  own  inclinations  5  and,  struck  with  the 
beauty  of  Darnley's  figure,  the  match  was  driven  forward  with 
all  expedition.  Some  of  the  first  weeks  of  their  connection  seem- 
ed to  promise  a  happy  union  for  the  rest  of  their  lives.  Howev- 
er, it  was  not  without  some  opposition  from  the  reformers  that 
this  marriage  was  completed.  It  was  agitated,  whether  the  queen 
could  marry  without  the  consent  of  the  people.  Some  lords  rose 
up  in  arms  to  prevent  it ;  but  being  pursued  by  a  superior  force, 
they  found  themselves  obliged  to  abandon  their  country  and  take 
refuge  in  England.  Thus  far  all  was  favourable  to  Mary ;  and 
thus  far  she  kept  within  the  bounds  of  strict  virtue,  p.  -g^  -| 
Her  enemies  were  banished,  her  rival  overruled,  and 
she  herself  married  to  the  man  she  loved. 

While  Mary  had  been  dazzled  by  the  pleasing  exterior  of  her 
new  lover,  she  had  entirely  forgotten  to  examine  his  mental  ac- 


45Q  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

complishments.     Darnley  was  a  weak  and  ignorant  man ;  vio* 

lent,  yet  variable  in  liis  enterprises ;  insolent,  yet  credulous,  and, 
easily  governed  by  flatterers ;  devoid  of  all  gratitude,  because  he 
thought  no  favours  equal  to  his  merit ;  and  being  addicted  to  low 
pleasures,  he  was  equally  incapable  of  all  true  sentiments  of  love 
and  tenderness.  Mary,  in  the  first  eiFusions  of  her  fondness,  had 
taken  a  pleasure  in  exalting  him  beyond  measure :  but  having  lei- 
sure afterwards  to  remark  his  weakness  and  his  vices,  she  began 
to  convert  her  admiration  into  disgust;  and  Darnley,  eni'aged  at 
her  increasing  coldness,  pointed  his  vengeance  against  every  per- 
son to  whose  suggestions  he  attributed  this  change  in  her  senti- 
ments and  behaviour. 

There  was  then  in  the  court  one  David  Rizzio,  the  son  of  a 
jnusician  at  Turin,  himself  a  musician ;  who,  finding  it  difficult 
to  subsist  by  his  art  in  his  own  country,  had  followed  the  embas- 
sador from  that  court  into  Scotland,  As  he  understood  music 
to  perfection,  and  sung  a  good  bass,  he  was  introduced  into  the 
queen's  concert,  who  was  so  pleased  with  him,  that  she  desired 
the  embassador,  upon  his  departure,  to  leave  Rizzio  behind.  The 
excellence  of  his  voice  soon  procured  him  greater  familiarities  ; 
and,  although  he  was  by  no  means  handsome,  but  rather  ugly,  the 
queen  seemed  to  place  peculiar  confidence  in  him,  and  ever  kept 
him  next  her  person.  Her  secretary  for  French  dispatches  having 
some  time  after  fallen  under  her  displeasure,  she  promoted  Rizzio 
to  that  office,  wbo,  being  shrewd,  sensible,  and  aspiring  beyond  his 
rank,  soon  after  began  to  entertain  hopes  of  being  promoted  to 
the  impoi'tant  office  of  chancellor  of  the  kingdom.  He  was  con- 
sulted on  all  occasions ;  no  favours  could  be  obtained  but  by  his 
intercession  ',  and  all  suitors  were  first  obliged  to  gain  Rizzio  to 
their  interests,  by  presents,  or  by  flattery.  It  was  easy  to  per- 
suade a  m^n  ofDarnley's  jealous  uxorious  temper,  that  Rizzio 
was  the  person  ^  who  had  estranged  the  queen's  affections  from 
him  ;  and  a  surmise  once  conceived  became  to  him  a  certainty. 
He  soon,  therefore,  consulted  with  some  lordg  of  his  party,  stung 
as  he  was  with  envy,  rage,  and  resentment ;  and  they  not  only 
fanned  tlie  conflagration  in  his  mind,  but  offered  their  assistance 
PlcQg-i  to  dispatch  Rizzio.  George  Doxiglas,  natural  brother 
to  the  countess  of  Lenox,  the  lords  Ruthven  and  Lind- 
say, settled  the  circumstances  of  this  poor  creature's  assassination 


ELIZABETH.  455 

among  them,  and  determined  that,  as  a  punishment  for  the 
queen's  indiscretions,  the  murder  should  be  committed  in  her 
presence.  Mary  was  at  this  time  in  the  sixth  month  of  her  preg- 
nancy, and  was  then  supping  in  private,  at  table  with  the  coun- 
tess of  Argyle,  her  natural  sister,  some  other  servants,  and  her 
favourite  Rizzio.  Lord  Darnley  led  the  way  into  the  apartment 
by  a  private  staircase,  and  stood  for  some  time  leaning  at  the 
back  of  Mary's  chair.  His  fierce  looks  and  unexpected  intrusion 
greatly  alarmed  the  queen,  who  nevertheless  kept  silence,  not 
daring  to  call  out.  A  little  after,  lord  Ruthven,  George  Doug- 
las, and  the  other  conspirators,  rush6d  in,  all  armed,  and  showing 
in  their  looks  the  brutality  of  their  intentions.  The  queen  could 
no  longer  restrain  her  terrors,  but  demanded  the  reason  of  this 
bold  intrusion.  Ruthven  made  her  no  answer ;  but  ordered  her 
favourite  to  quit  a  place  of  which  he  was  unworthy.  Rizzio  in- 
stantly saw  that  he  was  the  object  of  their  vengeance ;  and,  trem- 
bling with  apprehension,  took  hold  of  the  queen's  robes  to  put 
himself  under  her  protection,  while,  on  her  part,  she  strove  to  in- 
terpose between  him  and  the  assassins.  Douglas,  in  the  mean- 
time had  reached  the  unfortunate  Rizzio  ;  and  snatching  a  dag- 
ger from  the  king's  side,  while  the  queen  filled  the  room  with  her 
cries,  plunged  it  into  the  bosom  of  Rizzio,  who,  screaming  with 
fear  and  agony,  was  torn  from  Mary  by  the  other  conspirators, 
and  dragged  into  the  ante-chamber,  where  he  was  dispatched 
with  fifty-six  wounds.  The  unhappy  princess  continued  her  la- 
mentations ;  but,  being  informed  of  his  fate,  at  once  dried  her 
tears,  and  said  she  would  weep  no  more,  for  she  would  now  think 
of  revenge.  The  insult  indeed  upon  her  person  and  honour,  and 
the  danger  to  which  her  life  was  exposed  on  account  of  her  preg- 
nancy, were  injuries  so  atrocious  and  so  complicated,  that  they 
scarcely  left  room  for  pardon. 

This  act  of  violence  was  only  to  be  punished  by  temporising ; 
she  pretended  to  forgive  so  great  a  crime ;  and  exerted  the  force 
of  her  natural  allurements  so  powerfully,  that  her  husband  sub- 
mitted implicitly  to  her  will.  He  soon  gave  up  his  accomplices 
to  her  resentment,  and  retired  with  her  to  Dunbar  ;  while  she, 
having  collected  an  army  which  the  conspirators  had  no  power  to 
resist,  advanced  to  Edinburgh,  and  obliged  them  to  fly  into  En- 
gland, where  they  lived  in  great  poverty  and  distress.    They 


454  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

made  application,  however,  to  the  earl  of  Bothwell,  a  new  favour- 
ite of  Mary's  ;  and  that  nobleman  desirous  of  strengthening  his 
party  by  the  accession  of  their  interest,  was  able  to  pacify  her  re- 
sentment J  and  he  soon  after  procured  them  liberty  to  return 
Jiome. 

The  vengeance  of  the  queen  was  implacable  to  her  husband 
alone ;  his  person  was  before  disagreeable  to  her ;  and  having  per- 
suaded him  to  give  up  his  accomplices,  she  treated  him  with  mer- 
ited disdain  and  indignation.  But  it  would  have  been  well  for 
her  character  and  happiness  had  she  rested  only  in  despising :  — 
she  secretly  resolved  on  a  severer  revenge.  The  earl  of  Bothwell, 
who  was  now  become  her  favourite,  was  of  a  considerable  family 
in  Scotland  :  and  though  not  distinguished  by  any  talents,  civil  or 
military,  yet  he  made  some  noise  in  the  dissensions  of  the  state? 
and  was  an  opposer  of  the  Reformation.  He  was  a  man  of  prof- 
ligate manners,  had  involved  his  fortune  in  great  debts,  and  had 
reduced  himself  to  beggary  by  his  profusion.  This  nobleman,  not- 
withstanding, had  ingratiated  himself  so  far  with  the  queen,  that 
all  her  measures  were  entirely  directed  by  his  advice  and  author- 
ity. Reports  were  even  spread  of  more  particular  intimacies ;  and 
these  gave  such  uneasiness  to  Darnley,  that  he  left  the  court,  and 
retired  to  Glasgow,  to  be  no  longer  a  spectator  of  her  supposed 
excesses.  But  this  was  not  what  the  queen  aimed  at ;  she  was 
determined  upon  more  am.ple  punishment.  Shortly  after,  all  those 
who  wished  well  to  her  character,  or  repose  to  their  country,  were 
extremely  pleased,  and  somewhat  surprised,  to  hear  that 
|_i  joZ.J  j^^j^,  tgi^idei-^ess  for  her  husband  was  revived,  and  that  she 
had  taken  a  journey  to  visit  him  during  his  sickness.  Darnley 
was  so  far  allured  by  her  behaviour  on  this  occasion,  that  he  re- 
solved to  part  with  her  no  move  ;  he  put  himself  under  her  protec- 
tion, and  soon  after  attended  her  to  Edinburgh,  which  it  %vas 
thought  would  be  a  place  more  favourable  to  his  declining  health. 
She  lived  in  Holyrood-house  5  but  as  the  situation  of  that  place 
was  low,  and  the  concourse  of  persons  about  the  court  necessarily 
attended  with  noise,  which  might  disturb  him  in  his  present  infirm 
state,  she  fitted  up  an  apartment  for  him  in  a  solitary  house  at  some 
distance,  called  the  Kirk  of  Field.  Mary  there  gave  him  marks 
of  kindness  and  attachment ;  she  conversed  cordially  with  him, 
and  she  lay  some  nights  in  a  room  under  him.    It  was  on  the 


ELIZABETH.  455 

ninth  of  February  that  she  told  him  she  would  pass  the  night  in 
the  palace,  because  the  marriage  of  one  of  her  servants  was  to  be 
there  celebrated  in  her  presence.  But  dreadful  consequences  en- 
sued. About  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  the  whole  city  was 
much  alarmed  at  hearing  a  great  noise ;  the  house  in  which  Darn- 
ley  lay  was  blown  up  Avith  gun-powder.  His  dead  body  wasy 
found  at  some  distance  in  a  neighbouring  field,  but  without  any 
marks  of  violence  or  contusion.  No  doubt  could  be  entertained 
thatDarnley  was  murdered;  and  the  general  suspicion  fell  upon 
Bothwell  as  the  perpetrator. 

All  orders  of  the  state,  and  the  whole  body  of  the  people,  be- 
gan to  demand  justice  on  the  supposed  murderer ;  the  queen  her- 
self was  not  entirely  exempt  from  the  general  suspicion  ;  and 
papers  were  privately  stuck  up  every  where,  accusing  her  of  be- 
ing an  accomplice.  Mary,  more  solicitous  to  punish  others  than 
defend  herself,  offered  rewards  for  the  discovery  of  those  who  had 
spread  such  reports  ;  but  no  rewards  were  offered  for  the  discov- 
ery of  the  murderers.  One  indiscretion  led  on  to  another ;  Both- 
well,  though  accused  of  being  stained  with  her  husband's  blood, 
though  universally  odious  to  the  people,  had  the  confidence,  while 
Mary  was  on  her  way  to  Stirling  on  a  visit  to  her  son,  to  seize 
lier  at  the  head  of  a  body  of  eight  hundred  horse,  and  to  carry  her 
to  Dunbar,  where  he  forced  her  to  yield  to  his  purposes.  It  was 
then  thought  by  the  people  that  the  measure  of  his  crimes  was 
complete ;  and  that  he  who  was  supposed  to  have  murdered  the 
queen's  husband,  and  to  have  offered  violence  to  her  person^ 
could  expect  no  mercy :  but  they  were  astonished  upon  finding, 
instead  of  disgrace,  that  Bothwell  was  taken  into  more  than  for- 
mer favour ;  and,  to  crown  all,  that  he  was  married  to  the  queen, 
having  divorced  his  own  wife  to  procure  this  union. 

This  was  a  fatal  alliance  to  Mary ;  and  the  people  were  now 
wound  up  by  the  complication  of  her  follies,  to  pay  very  little 
deference  to  her  authority.  The  protestant  teachers,  who  had 
great  power,  had  long  borne  great  animosity  towards  her ;  the 
opinion  of  her  guilt  was  by  their  means  more  widely  diffused, 
and  made  the  deeper  impression.  The  principal  nobility  met  at 
Stirling;  and  an  association  was  soon  formed  for  protecting  the 
young  prince,  and  punishing  the  king's  murderers.  Lord  Hume 
was  the  first  in  arms;  and,  with  a  body  of  eight  hundred  horse, 


456  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

he  suddenly  sui-rounded  the  queen  and  Bothwell  in  the  castle  of 
Borthvvick.  They  found  means,  however,  to  make  their  escape  ; 
and  Bothwell,  at  the  head  of  a  few  forces,  meeting  the  associators 
within  about  six  miles  of  Edinburgh,  was  obliged  to  capitulate, 
while  Mary  was  conducted  by  the  prevailing  party  into  Edinburgh, 
amidst  the  insults  and  reproaches  of  the  populace.  Thence  she 
was  sent  a  prisoner  to  the  castle  of  Lochleven,  situated  in  a  lake 
of  that  name,  where  she  suffered  all  the  severities  of  an  unkind 
keeper,  and  an  upbraiding  conscience,  with  a  feeling  heart. 
Bothwell  was  more  fortunate  ;  he  fled,  during  the  conference, 
unattended,  to  Dunbar ;  and,  fitting  out  a  few  small  ships  in  that 
port,  he  subsisted  among  the  Orkneys  for  some  time  by  piracy. 
Being  pursued  thither,  and  his  domestics  taken,  who  made  a  full 
discovery  of  his  crimes,  he  escaped  in  an  open  boat  to  Denmark, 
where  he  was  thrown  into  px'ison,  lost  his  senses,  and  died  miser- 
ably about  ten  years  afterwards. 

In  this  situation,  Mary  was  not  entirely  without  protection  and 
friends.  Elizabeth,  who  now  saw  her  rival  entirely  humbled,  be-^ 
gan  to  relent;  she  reflected  on  the  precarious  state  of  royal 
grandeur,  and  the  danger  of  encouraging  rebellious  subjects;  she 
therefore  sent  sir  Nicholas  Throgmorton  as  her  embassador  to 
Scotland,  to  interpose  in  the  queen's  behalf;  but  the  associated 
lords  thought  proper  to  deny  him,  after  several  aifected  delays, 
all  access  to  Mary's  person.  However,  though  he  could  not  con- 
fer with  her,  he  procured  her  the  best  terms  with  the  rebellious 
lords  that  he  could;  which  were,  that  she  should  resign  the 
crown  in  favour  of  her  infant  son  ;  that  she  should  nominate  the 
earl  of  Murray  (who  had  from  the  beginning  testified  a  hatred  to 
lord  Darnley)  regent  of  the  kingdom;  and,  as  he  was  then  in 
France,  tliat  she  should  appoint  a  council  till  his  arrival.  Mary 
could  not  think  of  resigning  all  power,  without  a  plentiful  effusion 
of  tears;  but  at  last  signed  what  was  brought  to  her,  even  with- 
out inspection.  In  consequence  of  this  forced  resignation,  the 
young  prince  was  proclaimed  king,  under  the  title  of  James  the 
Sixth.  The  queen  had  now  no  hopes  but  from  the  kindness  of 
the  earl  of  Murray ;  but  even  in  that  respect  she  was  disappoint- 
ed; the  earl,  upon  his  return,  instead  of  comforting  her,  loaded 
her  with  reproaches,  which  reduced  her  almost  to  despair. 


ELIZABETH,  45/ 

iThe  calamities  of  the  great,  even  though  deserved,  nggg  i 
seldom  fail  of  creating  pity,  and  procuring  friends. 
Mary,  by  her  charms  and  promises,  had  engaged  a  young  gentle- 
man, whose  name  was  George  Douglas,  to  assist  her  in  escaping 
from  the  place  where  she  was  confined  :  and  this  he  effected^  by 
conveying  her  in  disguise  in  a  small  boat,  rowed  by  himself,  ashore* 
It  was  now  that  the  news  of  her  enlargement  being  spread  abroad, 
all  the  loyalty  of  the  people  seemed  to  revive.  As  Bothwell  was 
no  longer  associated  in  her  cause,  many  of  the  nobility,  who  ex- 
pected to  succeed  him  in  favour,  signed  a  bond  of  association  for 
her  defence ;  and  in  a  few  days  she  saw  herself  at  the  head  of 
six  thousand  men. 

The  earl  of  Murray  was  not  slov/  in  assembling  his  forces ;  and 
although  his  army  was  inferior  in  number  to  that  of  the  queen  of 
Scots,  he  boldly  took  the  field  against  her.     A  battle  was  fought 
at  Langside  near  Glasgow,  which  was  decisive  in  his  favour  5  and 
he  seemed  to  merit  victory  by  his  clemency  after  the  action. 
Mary,  now  totally  ruined,  fled  to  the  southward  from  the  field  of 
battle  with  great  precipitation  ;  and  came  with  a  few  attendants 
to  the  borders  of  England,  where  she  hoped  for  protection  from 
Elizabeth.     With  this  hope  she  embarked  on  board  a  fishing- 
boat  in  Galloway,  and  landed  the  same  day  at  Workington  in 
Cumberland,  about  thirty  miles  distant   from  Carlisle,  whence 
she  immediately  dispatched  a  messenger  to  London,  craving  pro- 
tection, and  desiring  liberty  to  visit  the  queen.     Elizabeth,  being- 
informed  of  her  misfortunes  and  retreat,  deliberated  for  some 
time  upon  the  proper  methods  of  proceeding,  and  resolved  at  last 
to  act  in  a  friendly  yet  cautious  manner.     She  immediately  sent 
orders  to  lady  Scrope,  sister  to  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  a  lady  who 
lived  in  that  neighbourhood,  to  attend  on  the  queen  of  Scots ;  and 
soon  after  dispatched  lord  Scrope  himself,  and  sir  Francis  Knolles, 
to  pay  her  all  possible  respect.     Notwithstanding  these  marks  of 
distinction,  the  queen  refused  to  admit  Mary  into  her  presence, 
until  she  had  cleared  her  character  from  the  many  foul  aspersions 
with  which  it  was  stained.     It  might,  perhaps,  have  been  Eliza- 
beth's duty  to  protect,  and  not  to  examine,  her  royal  fugitive. 
However,  she  acted  entirely  under  the  direction  of  her  council, 
w^o  observed,  that  if  the  crimes  of  the  Scotish  princess  were 
really  so  great  as  they  were  represented,  the  treating  her  with 
VOL.  I.  58 


458  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

friendship  would  but  give  them  a  sanction  ;  if  she  should  be  found 
guiltless  upon  trial,  every  enterprise  which  friendship  should  in- 
spire in  her  defence,  would  be  considered  as  laudable  and  glorious. 
Mary  was  now,  though  reluctantly,  obliged  to  admit  her  antient 
rival  as  an  umpire  in  her  cause  ;  and  the  accusation  was  readily 
undertaken  by  Murray  the  regent,  who  expected  to  remove  so 
powerful  an  assistant  as  Elizabeth,  by  the  atrociousness  of  Mary's 
offences.  This  extraordinary  conference,  respecting  the  conduct 
of  a  foreign  queen,  was  managed  at  York  ;  three  commissionei-s 
being  appointed  by  Elizabeth,  seven  by  the  queen  of  Scots,  and 
live  by  the  regent,  among  whom  he  himself  was  included.  These 
conferences  were  carried  on  for  some  time  at  the  place  first  ap- 
pointed; but,  after  a  while,  Elizabeth,  either  unwilling  to  decide, 
as  she  would  thus  give  up  the  power  she  was  now  possessed  of,  or 
perhaps  desirous  of  throwing  all  light  possible  upon  Mary's  con- 
duct, ordered  the  commissioners  to  continue  their  conferences  at 
Hampton-court,  where  they  were  spun  out  by  affected  delays. 
Whatever  might  have  been  the  cause  of  protracting  this  confer- 
ence in  the  beginning,  is  not  known ;  but  many  of  the  proofs  of 
Mary's  guilt,  which  were  suppressed  at  York,  made  their  appear- 
ance before  the  board  at  Hampton-court.  Among  other  proofs, 
were  many  letters  and  sonnets  written  in  Mary's  own  hand  to 
Bothwell,  in  which  she  discovers  her  knowledge  of  Darnley's  in- 
tended murder,  and  her  contrivance  to  marry  Bothwell,  by  pre- 
tending a  forced  compliance.  These  papers,  it  must  be  owned, 
are  not  free  from  the  suspicion  of  forgery ;  yet  the  reasons  for 
their  authenticity  seem  to  prevail.  However  this  be,  the  proofs 
of  Mary's  guilt  appearing  stronger,  it  was  thought  proper  to  en- 
gage her  advocates  to  give  answers  to  them  ;  but  they,  contrary 
to  expectation,  refused,  alleging,  that  as  Mary  was  a  sovereign 
princess,  she  could  not  be  subject  to  any  tribunal;  not  consider- 
ing that  the  aim  of  this  conference  was  not  punishment,  but  re- 
conciliation ;  that  it  was  not  to  try  Mary  in  order  to  inflict  pen- 
alties, but  to  know  whether  she  was  worthy  of  Elizabeth's  friend- 
ship and  protection.  Instead  of  attempting  to  justify  her  con- 
duct, the  queen  of  Scots  laboured  nothing  so  much  as  to  obtain 
an  interview  with  Elizabeth,  conscious  that  her  insinuations,  arts, 
■and  address,  of  all  which  she  M^as  a  perfect  mistress,  would  be 
sufficient  to  persuade  her  royal  sister,  and  stand  in  place  of  inno- 


ELIZA.BETH.  459 

cence.  But  as  she  still  persisted  in  a  resolution  to  make  no  de- 
fence, this  demand  was  finally  refused  her.  She  continued,  how- 
ever, to  demand  Elizabeth's  protection ;  she  desired  that  either 
she  might  be  assisted  in  lier  endeavours  to  recover  her  authority, 
or  that  liberty  should  be  given  her  for  retiring  into  Finance,  there 
to  make  trial  of  tlie  friendship  ofother  princes.  But  Elizabeth, 
sensible  of  the  danger  which  attended  either  of  these  proposals, 
was  secretly  resolved  to  detain  lier  in  captivity;  and  she  was  ac- 
cordingly sent  to  Tutbury  castle,  in  the  county  of  Stafford,  where 
she  was  put  under  the  custody  of  the  earl  of  Shrewsbury ;  there 
she  gave  her  royal  prisoner  hopes  of  one  day  coming  into  favour? 
and  that,  unless  her  own  obstinacy  prevented,  an  accommodation 
might  at  last  take  place. 

But  this  unhappy  woman  was  fated  to  nothing  but  misfortunes  j 
and  those  hopes  of  accommodation  which  she  had  been  taught  to 
expect  were  still  put  off  by  some  sinister  accident.  The  factions 
of  her  own  subjects  in  Scotland  tended  not  a  little  to  alarm  the 
jealousy  of  Elizabeth,  and  increase  tlie  rigours  of  Mary's  confine- 
ment. The  regent  of  Scotland,  who  had  been  long  her  invete- 
rate enemy,  happening  to  be  assassinated,  in  revenge  of  a  private 
injury,  by  a  gentleman  of  the  name  of  Hamilton,  upon  his  death 
the  kingdom  relapsed  into  its  former  anarchy.  Mary's  party 
once  more  assembled,  and  became  masters  of  Edinburgh.  They 
■  even  ventured  to  approach  the  borders  of  England,  where  they 
committed  some  disorders,  which  called  upon  the  vigilance  of 
Elizabeth  to  suppress.  She  quickly  sent  an  army  commanded  by 
the  earl  of  Sussex  5  who,  entering  Scotland,  severely  chastised 
the  partisans  of  the  captive  queen,  under  a  pretence  that  they 
had  offended  his  mistress  by  harbouring  English  rebels. 

But  the  designs  and  arts  of  Elizabeth  did  not  rest  here  :  while 
she  kept  up  the  most  friendly  correspondence  with  Mary,  and 
the  most  warm  protestations  of  sincerity  passed  between  them, 
she  was  far  from  either  assisting  her  cause,  or  yet  from  render- 
ing it  desperate.  It  was  her  interest  to  keep  the  factions  in  Scot^ 
land  still  alive,  to  restrain  the  power  of  that  restless  and  trouble- 
some nation :  for  this  purpose  she  weakened  the  reviving  party 
of  the  queen  by  tedious  negotiations  and  other  arts  ;  and  in  the 
mean  time  procured  the  earl  of  Lenox  to  be  appointed  regent,  iji 
the  room  of  Murray. 


460  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

This  attempt,  which  promised  to  be  favourable  to  Mary,  proved 
thus  unsuccessful,  as  well  as  another,  which  was  concerted  near 
the  place  of  her  captivity.  The  duke  of  Norfolk  was  the  only 
peer  who  enjoyed  that  highest  title  of  nobility  in  England  ;  and 
the  qualities  of  his  mind  corresponded  to  his  high  station.  Be- 
neficent, affable,  and  generous,  he  had  acquired  the  affections  of 
the  people  ;  and  yet,  from  his  moderation,  he  had  never  alarmed 
th.e  jealousy  of  his  sovereign.  He  was  at  this  time  a  widower ; 
and  being  of  a  suitable  age  to  espouse  the  queen  of  Scots,  her  own 
attractions,  as  well  as  his  interests,  made  him  desirous  of  the 
match.  But  the  obtaining  Elizabeth's  consent,  previous  to  their 
nuptials,  was  considered  as  a  circumstance  essential  to  his  aims. 
While  he  made  almost  all  the  nobility  of  England  confidants  to 
his  passion,  he  never  had  the  prudence,  or  the  courage,  to  open 
his  full  intentions  to  the  queen  herself.  On  the  contrary,  in  or- 
der to  Suppress  the  surmises  that  were  cuiTcntly  reported,  he 
spoke  contemptuously  of  Mary  to  Elizabeth ;  affirmed  that  his 
estates  in  England  were  of  more  value  than  the  revenue  of  the 
whole  kingdom  5  and  declared  that,  when  he  amused  himself 
in  his  own  tennis-court  at  Norwich,  he  was  a  more  magnificent 
prince  than  a  Scotish  king.  This  duplicity  only  served  to  in- 
flame the  queen's  suspicions,  and  finding  that  she  gave  his  pro- 
fessions no  great  degree  of  credit,  he  retired  from  the  court 
in  disgust.  Repenting,  however,  soon  after  this  measure,  he  re- 
n  'ifiQ  1  soJ^^^'l  ^^  return,  with  a  view  of  regaining  the  queen's 
good  graces ;  but  on  the  way  he  was  stopped  by  a  mes- 
senger from  the  queen,  and  soon  committed  to  the  Tower,  under 
the  custody  of  sir  Henry  Nevil. 

But  the  duke  of  Norfolk  was  too  much  beloved  by  his  parti-^ 
sans  in  the  North,  to  be  confined  without  an  effort  made  for  his 
release.  The  earls  of  Westmorland  and  Northumberland  had 
prepared  measures  for  a  rebellion ;  had  communicated  their  in- 
tentions to  Mary  and  her  ministers ;  had  entered  into  a  corres- 
pondence with  the  duke  of  Alva,  governor  of  the  Low-Countries, 
and  had  obtained  his  promise  of  men  and  ammunition.  But  the 
vigilance  of  Elizabeth's  ministers  was  not  to  be  eluded  :  orders 
were  immediately  sent  for  their  appearance  at  court  j  and  now 
the  insurgent  lords,  perceiving  their  schemes  discovered,  were 
obliged  to  begin  their  revolt  before  matters  were  entirely  pre- 


ELTZABETIi.  461 

pared  for  its  opening.  They  accordingly  published  a  manifesto, 
in  which  they  alleged  that  no  injury  was  intended  against  the 
queen,  to  whom  they  vowed  unshaken  allegiance  ;  but  that  their 
sole  aim  was  to  re-establish  the  religion  of  their  ancestors,  to  re- 
move all  evil  counsellors  from  about  the  queen's  person,  and  to 
restore  the  duke  of  Norfolk  to  his  liberty  and  the  queen's  favour. 
Their  number  amounted  to  four  thousand  foot,  and  sixteen  hun- 
dred horse ;  and  they  expected  to  be  joined  by  all  the  catholics 
in  England.  But  they  soon  found  themselves  miserably  unde- 
ceived ;  the  queen's  conduct  had  acquired  the  general  good-will 
of  the  people,  and  she  now  perceived  that  her  surest  support  was 
the  justice  of  her  actions.  The  duke  of  Norfolk  himself,  for 
whose  sake  they  had  revolted,  used  every  method  that  his  cir- 
cumstances would  permit,  to  assist  and  support  the  queen  ;  the 
insurgents  were  obliged  to  retire  before  her  forces  to  Hexham  ; 
and  hearing  that  reinforcements  were  upon  their  march  to  join 
the  royal  army,  they  found  no  other  expedient  but  to  disperse 
themselves  without  a  blow.  Northumberland  fled  into  Scotland, 
and  was  confined  by  the  regent  to  the  castle  of  Lochleven  : 
Westmorland,  after  attempting  to  excite  the  Scots  to  revolt,  was 
obliged  to  escape  into  Flanders,  where  he  found  protection. 
This  rebellion  was  followed  by  another,  led  on  by  Leonard  DacreSj 
but  with  as  little  success.  Some  severities  were  used  against 
these  revolters  ;  and  it  is  said  that  no  less  than  eight  hundred 
persons  suffered  by  the  hands  of  the  executioner  on  this  occasion, 
Tlie  queen  was  so  well  pleased  with  the  duke's  behav-  r-^  --.^  -» 
iour,  that  she  now  released  him  from  the  Tower,  and  al- 
lowed him  to  return  home,  only  exacting  a  promise  from  him,  not 
to  proceed  in  his  pretensions  to  the  queen  of  Scots. 

But  the  queen's  confidence  was  fatal  to  this  brave,  but  unde- 
signing  nobleman.  He  had  not  scarcely  been  released  a  year, 
when  new  projects  were  set  on  foot  by  the  enemies  of  the  queen 
and  the  reformed  religion,  secretly  fomented  by  Rodolphi,  an  iur 
strument  of  the  court  of  Rome,  and  the  bishop  of  Ross,  Mary's 
minister  in  England.  It  was  concerted  by  them  that  Norfolk 
should  renew  his  designs  upon  Mary,  to  which  it  was  probable  he 
was  prompted  by  passion ;  aHdy|this  nobleman  entering  into  their 
gchemes,  he,  from  being  at  first  only  ambitious,  now  became  crim- 


462  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND- 

riS"!  1  "^'^^*  I^  was  mutually  agreed,  therefore,  that  the  duke 
should  enter  into  all  Mary's  interests ;  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  duke  of  Alva  promised  to  transport  a  body  of  six 
thousand  foot,  and  four  thousand  horse,  to  join  Norfolk,  as  soon 
as  he  should  be  ready  to  begin.  This  scheme  was  so  secretly 
laid,  that  it  had  hitherto  entirely  escaped  the  vigilance  of  Eliza- 
beth, and  that  of  her  secretary  Cecil,  who  now  bore  the  title  of 
lord  Burleigh.  It  was  found  out  merely  by  accident ;  for  the 
duke,  having  sent  a  sum  of  money  to  lord  Herries,  one  of  Mary's 
partisans  in  Scotland,  omitted  trusting  the  servant  with  the  con- 
tents of  his  message  ;  and  he  finding,  by  the  i\^eight  of  the  bag, 
that  it  contained  a  larger  sum  than  the  duke  mentioned  to  him, 
began  to  mistrust  some  plot,  and  brought  the  money,  with  the 
duke's  letter,  to  the  secretary  of  state.  It  was  by  the  artifices  of 
that  great  statesman  that  the  duke's  servants  were  brought  to 
make  a  full  confession  of  their  master's  guilt ;  and  the  bishop 
of  Ross  soon  after,  finding  the  whole  discovered,  did  not  scru- 
ple to  confirm  their  testimony.  The  duke  was  instantly  com- 
mitted to  the  Tower,  and  ordered  to  prepare  for  his  trial.  A  jury 
n  'i72  1  ^^  twenty-five  peejs  unanimously  passed  sentence  up- 
on him  5  and  the  queen,  four  months  after,  reluctantly 
signed  the  warrant  for  his  execution.  He  died  with  great  calm- 
ness and  constancy ;  and  though  he  cleared  himself  of  any  dis- 
loyal intentions  against  the  queen's  authority,  he  acknowledged 
the  justice  of  the  sentence  by  which  he  suffered.  A  few  months 
after,  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  being  delivered  up  by  the  rer 
gent,  underwent  a  similar  trial,  and  was  brought  to  the  scaffold 
for  his  rebellion.  All  these  ineffectual  struggles  in  favour  of  the 
unfortunate  queen  of  Scots  seemed  only  to  rivet  the  chains  of  her 
confinement ;  and  she  now  found  relief  only  in  the  resources  of 
her  own  mind,  which  distress  had  contributed  to  soften,  refine, 
and  improve.  Henceforth  she  continued  for  many  years  a  preca- 
rious dependant  on  Elizabeth's  suspicions ;  and  only  waited  for 
some  new  effort  of  her  adherents,  to  receive  that  fate,  which  po? 
litical  and  not  merciful  motives  seemed  to  suspend. 


^Pf" 


^^m 


ELIZABETH.  463 

CHAP.  XXVH. 

/ 

EJilZABETH  (Continued.) 

Having  thus  far  attended  the  qtieen  of  Scotland,  whose  con- 
duct and  misfortunes  makes  such  a  distinguished  figure  in  this 
reign,  we  now  return  to  some  transactions,  prior  in  point  of  time, 
but  of  less  consideration. 

In  the  beginning  of  this  i-eign,  the  Huguenots,  or  re-  pi  egg  t 
formed  party  in  France,  were  obliged  to  call  in  the  pro-  "" 
tection  of  the  English ;  and,  in  order  to  secure  their  confidence, 
as  they  were  possessed  of  the  greatest  part  of  Normandy,  they 
offered  to  put  Havre  de  Grace  into  the  queen's  hands ;  a  prof- 
fer which  she  immediately  accepted.  She  wisely  considered, 
that,  as  that  port  commanded  the  mouth  of  the  river  Seine,  it  was 
of  much  greater  importance  than  Calais;  and  she  could  thus 
have  the  French  still  in  her  power.  Accordingly  three  thousand 
English  took  possession  of  Havre,  under  the  command  of  sir 
Adrian  Poinings ;  and  an  equal  number  landed  at  Dieppe.  The 
latter  place  was  found  so  little  capable  of  defence,  that  it  was  soon 
abandoned :  but  Havre  was  retained  until  the  summer  p^  -^.,  -, 
of  the  following  year.  It  was  fiercely  assaulted  by  the 
French :  but  it  felt  a  severer  enemy  within  its  walls ;  for  the 
plague  had  made  its  way  into  the  town,  and  committed  such 
havock  among  the  soldiers,  that  a  hundred  were  commonly  seen 
to  die  of  it  in  one  day.  The  garrison  being  thus  dispirited,  and 
diminished  to  fifteen  hundred  men,  finding  the  French  indefati- 
gable in  their  approaches,  were  obliged  to  capitulate ;  and  thus 
the  English  lost  all  hopes  of  making  another  establishment  in  the 
kingdom  of  France.  This  misfortune  was  productive  of  one  still 
more  dreadful  to  the  nation  ;  for  the  English  army  carried  back 
the  plague  with  them  to  London,  which  made  such  ravages,  that 
twenty  thousand  persons  died  there  in  one  year. 

This,  if  we  except  the  trou^lesraised  upon  the  account  of  Mary, 
seems  to  have  been  the  on!||^Msaster  that,  for  thirty  years, 
contributed  to  disturb  the  peace  of  this  reign.  Elizabeth,  ever 
vigilant,  active,  and  resolute,  attended  to  the  slightest  alarms, 
and  repressed  them  before  they  were  capable  of  producing  their 


464  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

effect.  Her  frugality  kept  her  independent,  and  her  dissimu- 
lation made  her  beloved.  The  opinion  of  the  royal  preroga- 
tive was  such,  that  her  commands  were  obeyed  as  statutes  ; 
and  she  took  care  that  her  parliament  should  never  venture  to 
circumscribe  her  power.  In  her  schemes  of  government  she  was 
assisted  by  lord  Burleigh,  and  sir  Nicholas  Bacon,  two  of  the 
most  able  ministers  that  ever  directed  the  affairs  of  England  ;  but 
while  she  committed  to  them  all  the  drudgery  of  duty,  her  fa- 
vourite, Robert  Dudley,  earl  of  Leicester,  engrossed  all  her  fa- 
vour, and  secured  all  the  avenues  to  preferment.  All  requests 
were  made  through  him ;  and  nothing  given  away  without  his  con- 
sent and  approbation.  His  merits,  however,  were  by  no  means 
adequate  to  his  successes  ;  he  was  weak,  vain,  and  boastful ;  but 
these  qualities  did  no  injury  to  the  state,  as  his  two  co-adjutors 
were  willing,  while  he  maintained  all  the  splendour  of  office,  to 
secure  to  themselves  the  more  solid  emoluments. 

During  this  peaceable  and  uniform  government,  England  fur- 
nishes but  few  materials  for  history.  While  France  was  torn 
with  internal  convulsions  ;  while  above  ten  thousand  of  the  Hu- 
guenots were  massacred  in  one  night,  in  cool  blood,  on  the  feast 
of  St.  Bartholomew,  at  Paris ;  while  the  inhabitants  of  the  Low- 
Countries  had  shaken  off"  the  Spanish  yoke,  and  were  bravely  vin- 
dicating their  rights  and  their  religion  ;  while  all  the  rest  of  Eu- 
rope was  teeming  with  plots,  seditions,  and  cruelty  ;  the  English, 
under  their  wise  queen,  were  enjoying  all  the  benefits  of  peace, 
extending  commerce,  improving  manufactures,  and  setting  an  ex- 
ample of  arts  and  learning  to  all  the  rest  of  the  world.  Except 
the  small  part,  therefore,  which  Elizabeth  took  in  foreign  trans- 
actions, there  scarcely  passed  any  occurrence  which  requires  a 
particular  detail. 

There  had  for  some  time  arisen  disgusts  between  the  court  of 
England  and  that  of  Spain.  Elizabeth's  rejection  of  the  suit  of 
Philip  might  probably  have  given  rise  to  these  disgusts  ;  and  Ma- 
ry's claiming  the  protection  of  that  monarch  tended  to  widen  the 
breach.  This  began,  as  usual,  on  each  side,  with  petty  hostili- 
ties :  the  Spaniards,  on  their  part,  had  sent  into  Ireland  a  body 
of  seven  hundred  of  their  nation  and  Italians,  who  built  a  fort 
there,  but  were  soon  after  cut  off  to  a  man,  by  lord  Grey.  On  the 
pther  hand,  the  English,  under  the  conduct  of  $ir  Francis  Drake, 


ELIZABETH.  46S 

assaulted  the  Spaniards  in  the  place  Avhere  they  deemed  them» 
selves  most  secure — in  the  New  World.  This  was  the  first  En- 
glishman that  sailed  round  the  globe ;  and  the  queen  was  so 
well  pleased  with  his  valour  and  success,  that  she  accepted  a  ban- 
quet from  him  at  Deptford,  on  board  the  ship  which  had  achieved 
so  memorable  a  voyage. 

In  this  manner,  while  hostilities  were  daily  multiplying  be^ 
tween  Spain  and  England,  and  while  the  power  of  Spain,  as  Vv-ell 
as  the  monarch's  inclinations,  were  very  formidable  to  the  queen, 
she  began  to  look  out  for  an  alliance  that  might  support  her 
against  such  a  dangerous  adversary.  The  duke  of  Anjou  had 
long  made  pretensions  to  Elizabeth ;  and  though  she  was  near 
twenty -five  years  older  than  that  prince,  he  took  the  resolution  to 
prefer  his  suit  in  person,  and  paid  her  a  visit  in  secret  at  Green- 
wich. It  appears  that,  though  his  figure  was  not  advantageous, 
his  address  was  pleasing.  The  queen  ordered  her  ministers  to 
fix  the  terms  of  the  contract ;  a  day  was  appointed  for  the  solem- 
nization of  the  nuptials,  and  every  thing  seemed  to  speak  an  ap= 
proaching  union.  But  Elizabeth  could  not  be  induced,  as  that 
event  appeared  to  approach,  to  change  her  condition ;  she  was 
doubtful,  irresolute,  and  melancholy ;  she  was  observed  to  pass 
several  nights  without  any  sleep,  till  at  last  her  settled  habits  of 
prudence  prevailed  over  her  ambition,  and  the  duke  of  Anjou  was 
dismissed. 

The  queen,  thus  depriving  herself  of  a  foreign  ally,  looked  for 
approbation  and  assistance  from  her  own  subjects  at  home.  Yet 
even  here  she  was  not  without  numberless  enemies,  who  either 
hated  her  for  religion,  or  envied  her  for  success.  There  were 
several  conspiracies  formed  against  her  life,  many  of  which  were 
imputed  to  the  intrigues  of  the  queen  of  Scots :  at  least  it  is  certain 
that  her  name  was  used  in  all.  Henry  Percy,  earl  of  Northum- 
berland, brother  to  the  peer  who  had  been  beheaded  some  years 
before,  and  Philip  Howard,  earl  of  Arundel,  son  of  the  unfortunate 
duke  of  Norfolk,  fell  under  suspicion ;  and  the  latter  was,  by  order 
of  council,  confined  to  his  own  house.  Francis  Throgmorton,  a 
private  gentleman,  was  committed  to  custody,  jon  account  of  a 
letter  which  he  had  writtenaHlk  queen  of  Scots ;  and  shortly 
after  confessing  his  guilt,  he^JP^ndemned  and  executed.  Soon 
after,  William  Parry,  a  catholic  gentleman,  who  had  on  a  former 

VOL.  I,  59 


46&  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

occasion  received  the  queen's  pardon,  was  found  engaged  in  a 
desperate  conspiracy  to  assassinate  his  sovereign  and  benefactor. 
He  had  consulted  upon  the  justice  and  expediency  of  this  vile 
measure  both  with  the  pope's  nuncio  and  legate,  who  exhorted 
him  to  persevere  in  his  resolution,  and  extremely  applauded  his 
design.  He  therefore  associated  himself  with  one  Nevil,  who  en- 
tered zealously  into  the  design  ;  and  it  was  determined  to  shoot 
the  queen,  while  she  was  taking  the  air  on  horseback.  But  while 
they  were  watching  an  opportunity  for  the  execution  of  their  pur- 
pose, the  earl  of  Westmorland  happened  to  die  in  exile  j  and  as 
Nevil  was  next  heir  to  the  family,  he  began  to  entertain  hopes, 
that,  by  doing  some  acceptable  sei'vice  to  the  queen,  he  might  re- 
cover the  estate  and  honours  which  had  been  forfeited  by  the  re- 
bellion of  the  last  earl.  He  betrayed  the  whole  conspiracy  to  the 
ministers ;  and  Parry,  being  thrown  into  prison,  confessed  the 
guilt  both  to  them,  and  to  the  jury  who  tried  him.  He  was  short- 
ly after  condemned  and  executed. 

These  attempts,  which  were  entirely  set  on  foot  by  the  catholic 
party,  served  to  increase  the  severity  of  the  lav/s  against  them. 
Popish  priests  were  banished ;  those  who  harboured  or  relieved 
them  were  declared  guilty  of  felony ;  and  many  were  executed 
iu  consequence  of  this  severe  edict.  Nor  was  the  queen  of  Scots 
herself  without  some  share  of  the  punishment.  She  was  removed 
from  the  care  of  the  earl  of  Shrewsbury,  who  had  always  been 
indulgent  to  his  prisoner,  particularly  with  regard  to  air  and  ex- 
ercise ;  and  she  was  committed  to  the  custody  of  sir  Amias  Paulet, 
and  sir  Drue  Drury,  men  of  honour,  but  inflexible  and  rigid  in 
their  care  and  attention. 

These  conspiracies  served  to  prepare  the  way  for  Mary's  ruin, 
whose  greatest  misfortunes  proceeded  rather  from  the  violence  of 
her  friends  than  the  malignity  of  her  enemies.  Elizabeth's  minis- 
Fl  "86  1  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^^S  been  waiting  for  some  signal  instance  of 
the  captive  queen's  enmity,  which  they  could  easily 
convert  into  treason ;  and  this  was  not  long  wanting.  John  Bal- 
lard, a  popish  priest,  who  had  been  bred  in  the  English  seminary 
at  Rheims,  resolved  to  compass^j^death  of  a  queen  whom  he 
considered  as  the  enemy  of  ^j^^^vion ;  and  with  that  gloomy 
resolution  came  over  into  En^iW^  the  disguise  of  a  soldier, 
\with  the  assumed  name  of  captain  Fortescue.     He  bent  his  en- 


ELIZABETH.  467 

deavours  to  bring  about  at  once  the  project  of  an  assassination, 
an  insurrection,  and  an  invasion.  The  first  person  he  addressed 
liimself  to  was  Anthony  Babington,  of  Dethick  in  the  county  of 
Derby,  a  young  gentleman  of  good  family,  and  possessed  of  a 
very  plentiful  fortune.  This  person  had  been  long  remarkable 
for  his  zeal  in  the  catholic  cause,  and  his  attachment  to  the  cap- 
tive queen.  He,  therefore,  came  readily  into  the  plot,  and  pro- 
cured the  concurrence  and  assistance  of  some  other  associates  in 
this  dangerous  undertaking ;  Barnwell,  a  person  of  a  noble  family 
in  Ireland ;  Charnock,  a  gentleman  of  Lancashire ;  Abington, 
whose  father  had  been  cofferer  to  the  household  5  and,  chief  of 
all,  John  Savage,  a  man  of  desperate  fortune,  who  had  served  in 
the  Low-Countries,  and  came  into  England  under  a  vow  to  de- 
stroy the  queen.  He  indeed  did  not  seem  to  desire  any  associate 
in  the  bold  enterprise,  and  refused  for  some  time  to  permit  any 
to  share  with  him  in  what  he  esteemed  his  greatest  glory. 
He  challenged  the  whole  to  himself;  and  it  was  with  some  diffi- 
culty that  he  was  induced  to  depart  from  his  preposterous  ambi- 
tion. The  next  step  was  to  apprise  Mary  of  the  conspiracy 
formed  in  her  favour  ;  and  this  they  effected  by  conveying  their 
letters  to  her  (by  means  of  a  brewer  that  supplied  the  family  with 
ale)  through  a  chink  in  the  wall  of  her  apartment.  In  these,  Ba- 
bington informed  her  of  a  design  laid  for  a  foreign  invasion,  the 
plan  of  an  insurrection  at  home,  the  scheme  for  her  delivery,  and 
the  conspiracy  for  assassinating  the  usurper,  by  six  noble  gentle- 
men, as  he  termed  them,  all  of  them  his  private  friends,  who, 
from  the  zeal  which  they  box-e  the  catholic  cause,  and  her  majes- 
ty's service,  would  undertake  the  tragical  execution.  To  these 
Mary  replied,  that  she  approved  highly  of  the  design ;  that  the 
gentlemen  might  expect  all  the  rewards  which  it  should  ever  be 
in  her  power  to  confer ;  and  that  the  death  of  Elizabeth  was  a 
necessary  cii-cumstance,  previous  to  any  further  attempts  either 
for  her  delivery,  or  the  intended  insurrection. 

Such  was  the  scheme  laid  by  the  conspirators ;  and  nothing 
seemed  so  certain  as  its  secresy  and  its  success.  But  they  were 
all  miserably  deceived ;  the  active  and  sagacious  ministers  of 
Elizabeth  were  privy  to  it  in^-fflffity  stage  of  its  growth,  and  only 
a-etarded  their  discovery  till  the  meditated  guilt  was  ripe  for  pun- 
ishment  and  conviction.    Ballard  was  actually  attended  by  one 


468  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

Maude,  a  catholic  priest,  who  was  a  spy  in  pay  with  Walsing- 
ham,  secretary  of  state.  One  Polly,  another  of  his  spies,  had 
found  means  to  insinuate  himself  among  the  conspirators,  and  to 
give  an  exact  account  of  their  proceedings.  Soon  after,  one  Gif- 
fard,  a  priest,  came  over,  and,  discovering  the  whole  conspiracy 
to  the  bottom,  made  a  tender  of  his  service  to  Walsingham.  It 
was  he  that  procured  the  letters  to  be  conveyed  through  the  wall 
to  the  queen,  and  received  her  answers ;  but  he  had  always  taken 
care  to  show  them  to  the  secretary  of  state,  who  had  them  deci- 
phered, and  took  copies  of  them  all. 

The  plot  being  thus  ripe  for  execution,  and  the  evidence  against 
the  conspirators  incontestable,  Walsingham  resolved  to  suspend 
their  punishment  no  longer.  A  warrant  was  accordingly  issued 
out  for  the  apprehending  of  Ballard ;  and  this  giving  the  alarm 
to  Babington,  and  the  rest  of  the  conspirators,  they  covered  them- 
selves with  various  disguises,  and  endeavoured  to  keep  themselves 
concealed.  But  they  were  soon  discovered,  thrown  into  prison, 
and  brought  to  trial.  In  their  examination,  they  contradicted 
each  other ;  and  the  leaders  were  obliged  to  make  a  full  confes- 
sion of  the  truth.  Fourteen  were  condemned  and  executed,  seven 
of  whom  died  acknowledging  their  crime. 

The  execution  of  these  wretched  men  only  pwpared  the  way 
for  one  of  still  greater  importance,  in  which  a  captive  queen  was 
to  submit  to  the  unjust  decisions  of  those  who  had  no  right,  but 
that  of  power,  to  condemn  her.  Though  all  England  was  ac- 
quainted with  the  detection  of  Babing-ton's  conspiracy,  every  ave- 
nue to  the  unfortunate  Mary  was  so  strictly  guarded,  that  she 
remained  in  utter  ignorance  of  the  whole  matter.  But  her  aston- 
ishment was  equal  to  her  anguish,  when  sir  Thomas  Gorges,  by 
Elizabeth's  order,  came  to  inform  her  of  the^fate  of  her  unhappy 
confederates.  She  was  at  that  time  mounted  on  horseback,  going 
to  hunt ;  and  was  not  permitted  to  return  to  her  former  place  of 
abode,  but  conducted  from  one  gentleman's  house  to  another,  till 
she  was  lodged  in  Fotheringay  castle,  in  Northamptonshire,  where 
the  last  scene  of  hpr  miserable  tragedy  was  to  be  performed. 

The  council  of  England  was  divided  in  opinion  about  the  meas- 
ures to  be  taken  against  the  queen  of  Scots.  Some  members  pro- 
posed, that,  as  her  health  was  very  infirm,  her  life  might  be  short- 
ened by  close  confinement ;  and  the  earl  of  I^eicester  advised  that 


ELIZABETH.  469 

she  should  be  dispatched  by  poison  ;  but  the  majority  insisted  on 
her  being  put  to  death  by  legal  process.  Accordingly  a  commis- 
sion was  issued  for  forty -one  peers,  with  five  judges,  or  the  major 
part  of  them,  to  try  and  pass  sentence  upon  Mary,  daughter  and 
heir  of  James  the  Fifth,  king  of  Scotland,  commonly  called  queen 
of  Scots,  and  dowager  of  France. 

Thirty-six  of  these  commissioners  arriving  at  the  castle  of  Foth- 
eringay,  presented  her  with  a  letter  from  Elizabeth,  commanding 
her  to  submit  to  a  trial  for  her  late  conspiracy.  Mary  perused 
the  letter  with  great  composure  ;  and,  as  she  had  long  foreseen 
the  danger  that  hung  over  her,  received  the  intelligence  without 
emotion  or  astonishment.  She  said,  however,  that  she  wondered 
the  queen  of  England  should  command  her  as  a  subject,  who  was 
an  independent  sovereign,  and  a  queen  like  herself.  She  would 
never,  she  said,  stoop  to  any  condescension  Avhich  would  lessen 
her  dignity,  or  prejudice  the  claims  of  her  posterity.  The  laws 
of  England,  she  observed,  were  unknown  to  Jier;  she  was  destitute 
of  counsel ;  nor  could  she  conceive  who  were  to  be  her  peers,  as 
she  had  but  one  equal  in  the  kingdom.  She  added,  that,  instead 
of  enjoying  the  protection  of  the  laws  of  England,  as  she  had 
hoped  to  obtain,  she  had  been  confined  in  prison  ever  since  her 
arrival  in  the  kingdom ;  so  that  she  derived  neither  benefit  nor 
security  from  them.  When  the  commissioners  pressed  her  to 
submit  to  the  queen's  pleasure,  otherwise  they  would  proceed 
against  her  as  contumacious,  she  declared  she  would  rather  suffer 
a  thousand  deaths  than  own  herself  a  subject  to  any  prince  on 
earth :  that,  however,  she  was  ready  to  vindicate  herself  in  a  full 
and  free  parliament ;  as,  for  aught  she  knew,  this  meeting  of  com- 
missioners was  devised  against  her  life,  on  purpose  to  take  it 
away  with  a  pretext  of  justice.  She  exhorted  them  to  consult 
their  own  consciences,  and  to  remember  that  the  theatre  of  the 
world  was  much  more  extensive  than  that  of  the  kingdom  of  En- 
gland. At  length  the  vice  chamberlain  Hatton  vanquished  her  ob- 
jections, by  representing  that  she  injured  her  reputation  by  avoid- 
ing a  trial,  in  which  her  innocence  might  be  proved  to  the  satis- 
faction of  all  mankind.  Tl^j^rvation  made  such  an  impression 
upon  her,  that  she  agreed  tlH,  if  they  would  admit  and  allow 
her  protest,  of  disallowing  all  subjection.  This,  however,  they 
refused ;  but  they  satisfied  her,  by  entering  it  upon  record ;  and 
thus  they  proceeded  to  a  trial. 


470  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

Oct  14  '^^^^  principal  charge  against  her  was  urged  by  ser- 
158G.  jeant  Gaudy,  who  accused  her  of  knowing,  approving, 
and  consenting  to  Babington's  conspiracy.  This  charge  was  sup- 
ported by  Babington's  confession ;  by  the  copies  which  were  taken 
of  their  correspondence,  in  which  her  approbation  of  the  queen's 
murder  was  expressly  declared  ;  by  the  evidence  of  her  own  sec- 
retaries, Nau  a  Frenchman,  and  Curie  a  Scotchman,  who  swore 
that  she  received  the  letters  of  that  conspirator,  and  that  they 
had  answered  them  by  her  orders.  These  allegations  were  cor- 
roborated by  the  testimony  of  Ballard  and  Savage,  to  whom  Bab- 
ington  had  shown  some  letters,  declaring  them  to  have  come  from 
the  captive  queen.  To  these  charges  Mary  made  a  sensible  and 
resolute  defence  ;  she  said  Babington's  confession  was  produced 
by  his  fears  of  the  torture;  which  was  really  the  case:  she  alleged 
that  the  letters  Avere  forgeries  ;  and  she  defied  her  secretaries  to 
persist  in  their  evidence,  if  brought  into  her  presence.  She  owned, 
indeed,  that  she  had  used  her  best  endeavours  to  recover  her  lib- 
erty, which  was  only  pursuing  the  dictates  of  nature ;  but  as  for 
harboui'ing  a  thought  against  the  life  of  the  queen,  she  treated  the 
idea  with  horror.  In  a  letter  which  was  read  during  the  trial, 
mention  was  made  of  the  earl  of  Arundel  and  his  brothers.  On 
hearing  their  names,  she  shed  a  flood  of  tears,  exclaiming, "  Alas! 
what  hath  the  noble  house  of  Howard  endured  for  my  sake !"  She 
took  occasion  also  to  observe,  that  this  letter  might  have  been  a 
base  contrivance  of  AValsingham,  who  had  frequently  practised 
both  against  her  life  and  that  of  her  son.  Walsingham,  thus  ac- 
cused, rose  up,  and  protested  that  his  heart  was  free  from  malice; 
that  he  had  never  done  any  thing  unbecoming  an  honest  man  iii 
his  private  capacity,  nor  aught  unworthy  of  the  place  he  occupied 
in  the  state.  Mary  declared  herself  satisfied  of  his  innocence, 
and  begged  he  would  give  as  little  credit  to  the  malicious  accusa- 
tions of  her  enemies,  as  she  now  gave  to  the  reports  which  she 
had  heard  to  his  prejudice. 

Whatever  might  have  been  this  queen's  offences,  it  is  certain 
that  her  treatment  was  very  severe.  She  desired  to  be  put  in 
possession  of  such  notes  as  she  liadjaken  preparative  to  her  trial; 
but  this  was  refused  her.  SJie  <^||Hpded  a  copy  of  her  protest; 
but  her  request  was  not  complied  with :  she  even  required  an  ad- 
vocate to  plead  her  cause  against  so  many  learned  lawyei'S  as  had 


ELIZABETH.  471 

undertaken  to  urge  her  accusations ;  but  all  her  demands  were 
rejected ;  and  after  an  adjournment  of  some  days,  sentence  of 
death  was  pronounced  against  her  in  the  Star-chamber  in  West- 
minster, all  the  commissioners  except  two  being  present.  At  the 
same  time  a  declaration  was  published  by  the  commissioners,  im- 
plying, that  the  sentence  against  her  did  in  no  wise  derogate  from 
the  title  and  honour  of  James,  king  of  Scotland,  son  to  the  attaint- 
ed queen. 

Though  the  condemnation  of  a  sovereign  princess  at  a  tribunal 
to  which  she  owed  no  subjection  was  an  injustice  that  must  strike 
the  most  inattentive,  yet  the  parliament  of  England  did  not  fail 
to  approve  the  sentence,  and  to  go  still  farther,  in  pre-  Qet.  29 
senting  an  address  to  the  queen,  desiring  that  it  might  1586. 
speedily  be  put  into  execution.  But  Elizabeth  still  possessed,  or 
pretended  to  possess,  an  horror  for  such  precipitate  severity.  Shife 
entreated  the  two  houses  to  find  some  expedient  to  save  her  from 
the  necessity  of  taking  a  step  so  repugnant  to  her  inclination. 
But  at  the  same  time  she  seemed  to  dread  another  conspiracy  to 
assassinate  her  within  a  month ;  which  probably  was  only  an  ar- 
tifice of  her  ministers  to  increase  her  apprehensions,  and,  conse- 
quently, her  desire  of  being  rid  of  a  rival  that  had  given  her  so 
much  disturbance.  The  parliament,  however,  reiterated  their  so- 
licitations, arguments,  and  entreaties ;  and  even  remonstrated, 
that  mercy  to  the  queen  of  Scots  was  cruelty  to  them,  her  sub- 
jects, and  her  children.  Elizabeth  affected  to  continue  inflexible, 
but  at  the  same  time  permitted  Mary's  sentence  to  be  made  pub- 
lic ;  and  lord  Buckhurst,  and  Beale,  clerk  to  the  council,  were 
sent  to  the  unhappy  queen  to  apprise  her  of  the  sentence,  and  of 
the  popular  clainour  for  its  speedy  execution. 

Upon  receiving  this  dreadful  information,  Mary  seemed  no  way 
moved ;  but  insisted,  that  since  her  death  was  demanded  by  the 
protestants,  she  died  a  martyr  to  the  catholic  religion.  She  said, 
that  as  the  English  often  embrued  their  hands  in  the  blood  of  their 
own  sovereigns,  it  v/as  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  they  exercised 
their  cruelty  towards  her.  She  wrote  her  last  letter  to  Elizabeth, 
not  demanding  her  life,  which  she  now  seemed  willing  to  part  with, 
but  desiring  thatj  after  her  ^mies  should  be  satiated  with  her 
innocent  blood,  her  body  might  be  consigned  to  her  servants,  and 
conveyed  to  France,  there  to  repose  in  a  catholic  country,  with 
the  sacred  remains  of  her  mother. 


4rC  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

In  the  mean  time,  accounts  of  this  extraordinary  sentence  were  1 
spread  into  all  parts  of  Europe ;  and  the  king  of  France  was  among 
the  foremost  who  attempted  to  avert  the  threatened  blow.  He  sent 
over  Believre  as  an  extraordinary  embassador,  with  a  professed  in- 
tention of  interceding  for  the  life  of  Mary.  But  James  of  Scotland, 
her  son,  was,  as  in  duty  obliged,  still  more  pressing  in  her  behalf. 
He  dispatched  Keith,  a  gentleman  of  his  bed-chamber,  with  a  let—  i 
ter  to  Elizabeth,  conjuring  her  to  spare  the  life  of  his  parent,  and 
mixing  threats  of  vengeance  in  case  of  a  refusal.  Elizabeth  treat- 
ed his  remonstrances  with  the  utmost  indignation ;  and  when  the 
Scotish  embassador  begged  that  the  execution  might  be  put  off  for 
a  week,  the  queen  answered  with  great  emotion,  "  No,  not  for  an 
hour."  Thus  Elizabeth,  when  solicited  by  foreign  princes  to  par- 
don the  queen  of  Scots,  seemed  always  disposed  to  proceed  to 
extremities  against  her ;  but  when  her  ministers  urged  her  to 
sti'ike  the  blow,  her  scruples  and  her  reluctance  seemed  to  return. 

Whether  the  queen  was  really  sincere  in  her  reluctance  to  ex- 
ecute Mary,  is  a  question  which,  though  usually  given  against  her, 
I  will  not  take  upon  me  to  determine.  Certainly  there  were 
great  arts  used  by  her  courtiers  to  determine  her  to  the  side  of 
severity ;  as  they  had  every  thing  to  fear  from  the  resentment  of  j 
Mary,  in  case  of  her  succeeding  to  the  throne.  Accordingly  the  > 
kingdom  was  now  filled  with  rumours  of  plots,  treasons,  and  in- 
surrections ;  and  the  queen  was  continually  kept  in  alarm  by  fic- 
titious dangers.  She  therefore  appeared  to  be  in  great  terror 
and  perplexity ;  she  was  observed  to  sit  much  alone,  and  to  mut- 
ter to  herself  half-sentences,  importing  the  difficulty  and  distress 
to  which  she  was  reduced.  In  this  situation,  she  one  day  call^ 
her  seci;etary,  Davidson,  whom  she  ordered  to  draw  out  secretly 
the  warrant  for  Mary's  execution,  informing  him,  that  she  intend- 
ed to  keep  it  by  her  in  case  any  attempt  should  be  made  for  the 
deliverjf  of  that  princess.  She  signed  the  warrant,  and  then  com- 
manded it  to  be  carried  to  the  chancellor  to  have  the  seal  affixed 
to  it.  Next  morning,  however,  she  sent  two  gentlemen  succes- 
sively to  desire  that  Davidson  would  not  go  to  the  chancellor,  un- 
til she  should  see  him ;  but  the  secretary  telling  her  that  the  war- 
rant had  been  already  sealed,  she  seemed  displeased  at  his  pre- 
cipitation. Davidson,  who  probabfy  wished  to  see  the  sentence 
executed,  laid  the  affair  befora  the  council,  who  unanimously  re- 


ELIZABETH*  475 

solved,  that  the  \Varrant  should  be  immediately  put  in  execution, 
and  prondsed  to  justify  Davidson  to  the  queen.  Accordingly,  the 
fatal  instrument  was  delivered  to  Beale,  who  summoned  the  no- 
blemen to  whom  it  was  directed,  namely,  the  earls  of  Shrewsbury, 
Derby,  Kent,  and  Cumberland  5  and  these  together  set  out  for 
Fotheringay  castle,  accompanied  by  two  executioners,  to  dispatch 
their  bloody  commission. 

Mary  heard  of  the  arrival  of  her  executioners,  who  ordered  her 
to  prepare  for  death  by  eight  o'clock  the  next  morning.  Without 
any  alarm,  she  heard  the  death-warrant  read  with  her  usual  com:- 
posure,  though  she  could  not  help  expressing  her  surprise,  that 
the  queen  of  England  should  consent  to  her  execution.  She  even 
abjured  her  being  privy  to  any  conspiracy  against  Elizabeth,  by 
laying  her  hand  upon  a  New  Testament,  which  happened  to  lie 
on  the  table.  She  desired  that  her  confessor  might  be  permitted 
to  attend  her ;  which,  however,  these  zealots  refused.  After  the 
earls  had  retired,  she  ate  sparingly  at  supper,  while  she  comforted 
her  attendants  (who  continued  weeping  and  lamenting  the  fate 
of  their  mistress)  with  a  cheerful  countenance,  telling  them,  they 
ought  not  to  mourn,  but  to  rejoice,  at  the  prospect  of  her  speedy 
deliverance  from  a  world  of  misery.  Towards  the  end  of  supper, 
she  called  in  all  her  servants,  and  drank  to  tliem ;  they  pledged 
her  in  order  on  their  knees,  and  craved  her  pardon  for  any  past 
neglect  of  duty.  She  craved  mutual  forgiveness  ;  and  a  plenti- 
ful effusion  of  tears  attended  this  last  solemn  separation. 

After  this,  she  reviewed  her  will,  and  perused  the  inventory  of 
her  effects.  These  she  bequeathed  to  different  individuals,  and 
divided  her  money  among  her  domestics,  recommending  them  in 
letters  to  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Guise.  Then  going 
to  bed  at  her  usual  hour,  she  passed  part  of  the  night  in  uninter- 
rupted repose,  and,  rising,  spent  the  remainder  in  prayer  and  acts 
of  devotion.  Towards  morning,  she  dressed  herself  in  a  rich 
habit  of  silk  and  velvet,  the  only  one  which  she  had  reserved  for 
this  solemn  occasion.  Thomas  Andrews,  theunder-sheriff  of  the 
county,  then  entering  the  room,  informed  her  that  the  hour  was 
come,  and  that  he  must  attend  her  to  the. place  of  exe-  -peh,  8 
cution.  She  replied,  that  she  was  ready  |  and  bidding  i587. 
her  servants  farewell,  she  proceeded,  supported  by  two  of  her 
guards,  and  followed  the  sheriff  with  a  serene  composed  aspect^ 

VOL.  I.  60 


474  mSTORV  OF  ENGLAND. 

with  a  long  veil  of  linen  on  her  head,  and  in  her  hand  a  cinicifis 
of  ivory.  In  passing  thi'Oiigh  a  hall  adjoining  to  her  chamber,  sir 
Andrew  Melvil,  master  of  her  household,  fell  upon  his  knees, 
and,  shedding  a  flood  of  tears,  lamented  his  misfortune  in  being 
doomed  to  carry  the  news  of  her  unhappy  fate  to  Scotland. 
"  Lament  not,"  said  she,  "but  rather  rejoice.  Mary  Stuart  will 
soon  be  freed  from  all  her  cares.  Tell  my  friends  that  I  die  con- 
stant in  my  religion,  and  firm  in  my  affection  and  fidelity  to  Scot- 
land and  France.  God  forgive  them  that  have  long  desired  my 
end,  and  have  thirsted  for  my  blood  as  the  hart  panteth  for  the 
water-brook !  Thou,  O  God,  who  art  truth  itself,  and  perfectly 
understandest  the  inmost  thoughts  of  my  heart,  knov.est  how 
greatly  I  have  desired  that  the  realms  of  Scotland  and  England 
might  be  united.  Commend  me  to  my  son,  and  assure  him  I  have 
done  nothing  prejudicial  to  the  state  or  the  crown  of  Scotland. 
Admonish  him  to  persevere  in  amity  and  friendship  with  the  queen 
of  England;  and,  for  thy  own  part,  do  him  faithful  service.  And 
so,  good  Melvil,  farewell ;  once  again  farewell,  good  Melvil,  and 
grant  the  assistance  of  thy  prayers  to  thy  queen  and  thy  mistress." 
In  this  place  she  was  received  by  the  four  noblemen,  who  with 
great  difficulty  were  prevailed  upon  to  allow  Melvil,  with  her 
physician,  apothecary,  and  two  female  attendants,  to  be  present 
at  her  execution.  She  then  passed  (the  noblemen  and  the  sheriff 
going  before,  and  Melvil  bearing  up  her  train)  into  another  hall, 
where  was  a  scaffold  erected  and  covered  with  black. 

As  soon  as  she  was  seated,  Beale  began  to  read  the  warrant  for 
her  execution.  Then  Fletcher,  dean  of  Peterborough,  standing 
without  the  rails,  repeated  a  long  exhortation,  which  she  desired 
him  to  forbear,  as  she  was  firmly  resolved  to  die  in  the  catholic 
religion.  The  room  was  crowded  with  spectators,  who  beheld 
her  with  pity  and  distress,  while  her  beauty,  though  dimmed  by 
age  and  afiiiction,  gleamed  through  her  sufferings,  and  was  still 
remarkable  in  this  fatal  moment.  The  earl  of  Kent,  observing 
that  in  her  devotions  she  made  frequent  use  of  the  crucifix,  could 
not  forbear  reproving  her,  exhorting  her  to  have  Christ  in  her 
heart,  not  in  her  hand.  She  replied,  with  presence  of  mind,  that 
it  was  difficult  to  hold  such  an  object  in  her  hand,  without  feeling 
her  heart  touched  for  the  sufferings  of  him  whom  it  represented. 
She  now  began,  with  the  aid  of  her  two  women,  to  undress  for 


ELIZABETH.  475  ' 

the  block  ;  and  the  executioner  also  lent  his  hand  to  assist  them. 
She  smiled,  and  said  that  she  was  not  accustomed  to  undress  her- 
self before  so  large  a  company,  or  to  be  attended  by  such  servants. 
Her  women  bursting  into  tears  and  loud  exclamations  of  sorrow, 
she  turned  about  to  them,  put  her  finger  upon  her  lips,  as  a  sign 
of  imposing  silence  upon  them ;  and,  having  given  tliem  her  bless- 
ing, desired  their  prayers  in  return.  The  two  executioners  kneel- 
ing, and  asking  her  pardon,  she  said  she  forgave  them,  and  all  the 
authors  of  her  death,  as  freely  as  she  hoped  forgiveness  of  her 
Maker ;  and  once  more  made  a  solemn  protestation  of  her  inno- 
cence. Her  eyes  were  then  covered  with  a  linen  handkerchief; 
she  laid  herself  down  without  any  fear  or  trepidation  ;  and  when 
she  had  recited  a  psalm,  and  repeated  a  pious  ejaculation,  her 
head  was  severed  from  her  body  at  two  strokes.  The  execution- 
er instantly  held  it  up  to  the  spectators,  streaming  with  blood,  and 
agitated  with  the  convulsions  of  death.  The  dean  of  Peterbo- 
rough alone  exclaimed,  "  So  perish  all  queen  Elizabeth's  ene- 
mies !"  The  earl  of  Kent  replied  Amen,  while  the  rest  of  the 
spectators  wept  and  sighed  at  this  affecting  spectacle ;  for  flattery 
and  zeal  alike  gave  place  to  stronger  and  better  emotions.  Thus 
died  Mary,  in  the  forty -fifth  year  of  her  age,  and  the  nineteenth 
of  her  captivity — a,  princess  unmatched  in  beauty,  and  unequalled 
in  misfortunes.  In  contemplating  the  contentions  of  mankind, 
we  find  almost  ever  both  sides  culpable ;  Mary,  who  was  stained 
with  crimes  that  deserved  punishment,  was  put  to  death  by  a 
pi'incess  who  had  no  right  to  inflict  punishment  on  her  equal. 

It  is  difficult  to  be  certain  of  the  true  state  of  Elizabeth's  mind, 
when  she  received  the  first  account  of  the  death  of  Mary.  His- 
torians in  general  are  willing  to  ascribe  the  extreme  sorrow  she 
testified  on  that  occasion  to  falsehood  and  deep  dissimulation. 
But  where  is  the  necessity  of  ascribing  to  bad  motives,  what  seems 
to  proceed  from  a  more  generous  source  ?  There  is  nothing  more 
certain  than  that,  upon  hearing  the  news,  she  testified  the  utmost 
surprise  and  indignation.  Her  countenance  changed,  her  speech 
faltered  and  failed  her,  and  she  stood  fixed  for  a  long  time  in  mute 
astonishment.  When  the  first  burst  of  sorrow  was  over,  she  still 
persisted  in  her  resentment  against  her  ministers,  none  of  whom 
dared  to  approach  her.  She  committed  Davidson  to  prison,  and 
ordered  Mm  to  be  tried  in  tlie  Star-chamber  for  his  misdemean« 


476  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND; 

our.  He  was  condemned  to  imprisonment  during  the  queen's 
pleasure,  and  to  pay  a  fine  of  ten  thousand  pounds ;  in  conse- 
quence of  which  he  remained  a  long  time  in  custody ;  and  the  fine, 
though  it  reduced  him  to  want  and  beggary,  was  rigorously  levied 
upon  him.  It  is  likely,  therefore,  that  Elizabeth  was  sincere 
enough  in  her  anger  for  the  fate  of  Mary,  as  it  was  an  event  likely 
to  brand  her  reign  with  the  character  of  cruelty ;  and  though  she 
might  have  desired  her  rival's  death,  yet  she  must  certainly  have 
been  shocked  at  the  manner  of  it. 

But  the  uneasiness  the  queen  felt  from  this  disagreeable  for- 
wardness of  her  ministry  was  soon  lost  in  one  much  greater.  Phi- 
lip, vt'ho  had  long  meditated  the  destruction  of  England,  and 
whose  extensive  power  gave  him  grounds  to  hope  for  success, 
now  began  to  put  his  projects  into  execution.  The  point  on  which 
he  rested  his  glory,  and  the  perpetual  object  of  his  schemes,  was 
to  support  the  catholic  religion,  and  exterminate  the  Reforma- 
tion. The  revolt  of  his  subjects  in  the  Netherlands  inflamed  his 
resentment  against  the  English,  as  they  had  encouraged  that  in- 
surrection, and  assisted  the  revolters.  He  had,  therefore,  for 
3ome  time  been  making  preparations  to  attack  England  by  apow- 
erflH  invasion ;  and  now  every  part  of  his  vast  empire  resounded 
with  the  noise  of  armaments,  and  every  art  was  used  to  levy  sup* 
plies  for  that  great  design.  The  marquis  of  Santa  Cruz,  a  sea- 
n  TfiR  1  ^^'^^'^  *^^  great  reputation  and  experience,  was  destined 
to  command  the  fleet,  which  consisted  of  a  hundred  and 
thirty  vessels,  of  a  greater  size  than  any  that  had  been  hitherto 
seen  in  Europe.  The  duke  of  Parma  was  to  conduct  the  sol- 
diers, twenty-thousand  of  whom  were  on  board  the  fleet,  and 
thirty -four  thousand  moi-e  were  assembled  in  the  Netherlands, 
ready  to  be  transported  into  England.  The  most  renowned  no- 
bility and  princes  of  Italy  and  Spain  were  ambitious  to  share  in 
the  honour  of  this  great  enterprise,  Don  Amadseus  of  Savoy, 
Don  John  of  Medicis,  Gonzaga  duke  of  Sabionetta,  and  others, 
hastened  to  join  this  great  equipment ;  no  doubt  was  entertained 
of  its  success,  and  it  was  ostentatiously  styled  the  Invincible 
Armada.  It  carried  on  board,  beside  the  land  forces,  eight  thour 
sand  four  hundred  mariners,  two  thousand  galley-slaves,  and  two 
thousand  six  hundred  and  thirty  great  pieces  of  brass  ordnance. 
It  was  victualled  for  six  months,  and  was  attended  with  twenty 
smaller  ships,  called  caravels,  and  ten  salves. 


ELIZABETH.  4ff 

Nothing  could  exceed  the  terror  and  consternation  which  all 
ranks  of  people  felt  in  England  upon  news  of  this  terrible  Ar- 
mada beina:  under  sail  to  invade  them.  A  fleet  of  not  above  thir- 
tj  ships  of  war,  and  those  very  small  in  comparison,  was  all  that 
was  to  oppose  it  by  sea  5  and  as  for  resisting  by  land,  that  v/as 
supposed  to  be  impossible,  as  the  Spanish  army  was  composed  of 
men  well  disciplined,  and  long  inured  to  danger.  The  queeri 
alone  seemed  undismayed  in  this  threatening  calamity :  sh.e  is- 
sued all  her  orders  with  tranquillity  5  animated  her  people  to  a 
steady  resistance  ;  and  the  more  to  excite  the  martial  spirit  of 
the  nation,  she  appeared  on  horseback  in  the  camp  at  Tilbury,  ex- 
horting the  soldiers  to  their  duty,  and  promising  to  share  the 
same  dangers  and  the  same  fate  with  them.  "  I  myself,"  cried 
she,  *'  will  be  your  general,  your  judge,  and  the  rewarder  of  every 
one  of  your  virtues  in  the  field.  Your  alacrity  has  already  de- 
served its  rewards,  and,  on  the  word  of  a  prince,  they  shall  be 
duly  paid  you.  Persevere  then  in  your  obedience  to  command  ; 
show  your  valour  in  the  field  ;  and  we  shall  soon  have  a  glorious 
victory  over  those  enemies  of  my  God,  my  kingdom,  and  my 
people."  The  soldiers  with  shouts  proclaimed  their  ardour,  and 
only  wished  to  be  led  onto  conquest. 

Nor  were  her  preparations  by  sea  driven  on  with  less  alacrity : 
although  the  English  fleet  was  much  inferior  in  number  and  size 
of  shipping  to  that  of  the  enemy,  yet  it  was  much  more  managea- 
ble, the  dexterity  and  courage  of  the  mariners  being  greatly  su- 
perior. Lord  Howard  of  Efiingham,  a  man  of  great  courage  and 
capacity,  as  lord  admiral,  took  on  him  the  command  of  the  navy, 
Drake,  Hawkins,  and  Frobisher,  the  most  renowned  seamen  in 
Europe,  served  under  him  ;  while  a  small  squadron,  consisting  of 
forty  vessels,  English  and  Flemish,  commanded  by  lord  Henry 
Seymour,  lay  oiF  Dunkirk,  in  order  to  intercept  the  duke  of  Par- 
ma. This  was  the  preparation  made  by  the  English ;  while  all 
the  protestant  powers  of  Europe  regarded  this  enterprise  as  the 
critical  event  which  was  to  decide  forever  the  fate  of  their  reli- 
gion. 

While  the  Spanish  Armada  was  preparing  to  sail,  the  admiral, 
Santa  Cruz,  died,  as  likewise  the  vice-admiral  Paliano  ;  and  the 
command  of  the  expedition  was  given  to  the  duke  de  Medina 
Sidonia,  a  person  utterly  inexperienced  in  sea-affairs ;  and  this, 


478  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

in  some  measure,  served  to  frustrate  the  design.  But  some  other 
accidents  also  contributed  to  its  failure.  Upon  leaving  the  port 
of  Lisbon,  the  Armada  next  day  met  with  a  violent  tempest,  which 
sunk  some  of  the  smallest  of  the  shipping,  and  obliged  the  fleet  to 
put  back  into  harbour.  After  some  time  spent  in  refitting,  they 
again  put  to  sea,  where  they  took  a  fisherman,  who  gave  them  in- 
telligence that  the  English  fleet,  hearing  of  the  dispersion  of  the 
Armada  in  a  storm,  had  retired  into  Plymouth  harbour,  and  that 
most  of  the  mariners  were  discharged.  From  this  false  intelli- 
gence, the  Spanish  admiral,  instead  of  going  directly  to  tlie  coast 
of  Flanders  to  take  in  the  troops  stationed  there,  as  he  had  been 
instructed,  resolved  to  sail  to  Plymouth,  and  destroy  the  shipping 
laid  up  in  that  harbour.  But  Effingham,  the  English  admiral,  was 
very  well  prepared  to  receive  them  ;  he  had  just  weighed  anchor, 
when  he  saw  the  Spanish  Armada  coming  full  sail  towards  him, 
disposed  in  the  form  of  a  half  moon,  and  stretching  seven  miles 
from  one  extremity  to  the  other.  However,  the  English  admiral, 
Drake,  Hawkins,  and  Frobisher,  attacked  the  Armada  at  a  dis- 
tance, pouring  in  their  broadsides  with  admirable  dexterity. 
They  did  not  choose  to  engage  the  enemy  more  closely,  because 
they  were  greatly  inferior  in  the  number  of  ships,  guns,  and 
weight  of  metal  ;  nor  could  they  pretend  to  board  such  lofty 
ships  without  manifest  disadvantage.  However,  two  Spanish 
galleons  were  disabled  and  taken.  As  the  Armada  advanced  up 
the  Channel,  the  English  still  followed  and  infested  its  x-ear; 
and  their  fleet  continually  increasing  from  different  ports,  they 
soon  found  themselves  in  a  capacity  to  attack  the  Spaniards  more 
nearly ;  and  accordingly  fell  upon  them  while  they  were  taking 
shelter  in  the  port  of  Calais.  To  increase  their  confusion,  How- 
ard took  eight  of  his  smaller  ships,  and,  filling  them  with  combus- 
tible materials,  sent  them,  as  if  they  had  been  fire-ships,  one  after 
the  other  into  the  midst  of  the  enemy.  The  Spaniards,  taking 
tliem  for  what  they  seemed  to  be,  immediately  took  flight  in  great 
disorder  ;  while  the  English,  profiting  by  their  panic,  took  or  de- 
stroyed about  twelve  of  the  enemy's  ships. 

This  was  a  fatal  blow  to  Spain  :  the  duke  de  Medina  Sidonia 
being  thus  driven  to  the  coast  of  Zealand,  held  a  council  of  war, 
in  which  it  was  resolved,  that,  as  their  ammunition  began  to  fail, 
as  their  ships  had  received  great  damage,  and  as  the  duke  of 


ELIZABETH.  479 

Pai-ma  had  refused  to  venture  his  armj  under  their  protection, 
they  should  return  to  Spain  by  sailing  round  the  Orkneys,  as 
the  winds  M'ere  contrary  to  his  passage  directly  back.  Accord- 
ingly they  proceeded  northward,  and  were  followed  by  the  En- 
glish fleet  as  far  as  Flamborough-head,  where  they  were  terribly 
shattered  by  a  storm.  Seventeen  of  the  ships,  having  five  thou- 
sand men  on  board,  were  afterwards  cast  away  upon  the  Western 
Isles  and  the  coast  of  Ireland.  Of  the  whole  Armada,  three-and- 
fifty  ships  only  returned  to  Spain,  in  a  miserable  condition :  and 
the  seamen  as  well  as  soldiers  who  remained,  only  served,  by 
their  accounts,  to  intimidate  their  countrymen  from  attempting 
to  renew  so  dangerous  an  expedition. 

These  disasters  of  the  Spanish  Armada  served  only  to  excite 
the  spirit  and  courage  of  the  English  to  attempt  invasions  in  their 
turn.  It  would  be  endless  to  relate  all  the  advantages  obtained 
over  the  enemy  at  sea,  where  the  capture  of  every  ship  must  have 
been  made  a  separate  narrative  ;  or  their  various  descents  upon 
different  parts  of  the  coast,  which  were  attended  with  effects  too 
transient  for  the  page  of  history.  It  is  sufficient  to  observe,  that 
the  sea-captains  of  that  reign  are  still  considered  as  the  boldest 
and  most  enterprising  set  of  men  that  England  ever  produced ; 
and  among  this  number  we  reckon  our  Raleigh  and  Howard,  our 
Drake,  our  Cavendish,  and  Hawkins.  The  English  navy  then 
began  to  take  the  lead,  and  has  since  continued  irresistible  in  all 
parts  of  the  ocean. 

One  of  those  who  made  the  most  signal  figure  in  these  depre- 
dations upon  Spain,  was  the  young  earl  of  Essex,  a  nobleman  of 
great  bravery,  generosity,  and  genius;  and  fitted,  not  only  for 
the  foremost  ranks  in  war  by  his  valour,  but  to  conduct  the  in- 
trigues of  a  court  by  his  eloquence  and  address.  But  with  all 
these  endowments  both  of  body  and  mind,  he  wanted  prudence; 
being  impetuous,  haughty,  and  totally  incapable  of  advice  or  con- 
trol. The  earl  of  Leicester  had  died  some  time  before,  and  now 
left  room  in  the  queen's  affections  for  a  new  favourite,  v/hich  she 
was  not  long  in  choosing,  since  the  merit,  the  bravery,  and  the 
popularity  of  Essex  were  too  great  not  to  engage  her  attention. 
Elizabeth,  though  she  rejected  a  husband,  yet  appeared  always 
passionately  desirous  of  a  lover ;  and  flattery  had  rendered  her 
so  insensible  to  her  want  of  beauty,  and  the  depredations  of  age, 


480  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

that  she  still  thought  herself  as  powerful  by  her  personal  acconi= 
plishments  as  by  her  authority.  The  new  favourite  was  young, 
active,  ambitious,  witty,  and  handsome ;  in  the  field,  and  at  courts 
he  always  appeared  with  superior  lustre.  In  all  the  masques  which 
were  then  performed,  he  and  Elizabeth  were  generally  coupled 
as  partners ;  and  although  she  was  older^  by  thirty -four  years, 
than  the  earl,  her  vanity  overlooked  the  disparity ;  the  world  told 
her  that  she  was  young,  and  she  herself  was  willing  to  think  so. 
This  young  earl's  interest  in  the  queen's  affections,  as  may  natur- 
ally be  supposed,  promoted  his  interests  in  the  state ;  and  he  con- 
ducted all  things  at  his  discretion.  But,  young  and  inexperienced 
as  he  was,  he  at  length  began  to  fancy  that  the  popularity  he  pos- 
sessed, and  the  flatteries  he  received,  were  given  to  his  merits 
and  not  to  his  favour.  His  jealousy  also  of  lord  Burleigh,  who 
was  his  only  rival  in  power,  made  him  still  more  intractable ; 
and  the  many  successes  he  had  obtained  against  the  Spaniards 
increased  his  confidence.  In  a  debate  before  the  queen,  between 
him  and  Burleigh,  about  the  choice  of  a  governor  for  Ireland,  he 
was  so  heated  in  the  argument,  that  he  entirely  forgot  the  rules 
both  of  duty  and  civility.  He  turned  his  back  on  the  queen  in  a 
contemptuous  manner ;  which  so  provoked  lier  resentment,  that 
she  instantly  gave  him  a  box  on  the  ear.  Instead  of  recollecting 
himself,  and  making  the  submission  due  to  her  sex  and  station, 
he  clapped  his  hand  to  his  sword,  and  swore  he  would  not  bear 
such  usage  even  from  her  father.  This  offence,  though  very 
great,  was  overlooked  by  the  queen ;  her  partiality  was  so  preva- 
lent, that  she  re-instated  him  in  his  former  favour,  and  her  kind- 
P^  ^Qo  -1  ^^^ss  seemed  to  have  acquired  new  force  from  that  short 
interruption  of  anger  and  resentment.  The  death  also 
of  his  rival  lord  Burleigh,  which  happened  shortly  after,  seemed 
to  confirm  his  power. 

But  though  few  men  were  possessed  of  Essex's  talents  both  for 
M^ar  and  peace,  yet  he  had  not  art  enough  to  guard  against  the 
intrigues  of  a  court;  his  temper  was  too  candid  and  open,  and 
gave  his  enemies  many  advantages  over  him.  At  that  time  the 
earl  of  Tyrone  headed  the  rebellious  natives  of  Ireland ;  wlio,  not 
yet  thoroughly  brought  into  subjection  to  the  English,  took  every 
opportunity  of  making  incursions  upon  the  more  civilized  inhabit- 
ants, and  slew  all  they  were  able  to  overpower.  To  subdue  these  was 


ELIZABETH.  481 

an  employment  that  the  earl  thought  worthy  of  his  ambition ;  nor 
were  his  enemies  displeased  at  thus  removing  a  man  from  court, 
who  obstructed  all  their  private  aims  of  preferment.  But  it  end- 
ed in  his  ruin. 

Essex,  upon  entering  on  his  new  command  in  Ireland, 
employed  his  friend  the  earl  of  Southampton,  who  was  L  *J 
long  obnoxious  to  the  queen,  as  general  of  horse ;  nor  was  it  till 
after  repeated  orders  from  Elizabeth  that  he  could  be  prevailed 
on  to  displace  him.  This  indiscretion  was  followed  by  another  : 
instead  of  attacking  the  insurgents  in  their  grand  retreat  in  Ulster, 
he  led  his  forces  into  the  province  of  Munster,  where  he  only 
exhausted  his  strength,  and  lost  his  opportunity  against  a  people 
that  submitted  at  his  approach,  but  took  up  arms  again  when  he 
retired.  It  may  easily  be  supposed  that  these  miscarriages  were 
urged  by  the  enemies  of  Essex  at  home ;  but  they  had  still  greater 
reason  to  attack  his  reputation,  when  it  was  known  that,  instead 
of  humbling  the  rebels,  he  had  only  treated  with  them ;  and 
instead  of  forcing  them  to  a  submission,  he  had  concluded  a  ces- 
sation of  hostilities.  This  issue  of  an.  enterprise,  from  which 
much  was  expected,  did  not  fail  to  provoke  the  queen  most  sensi- 
bly ;  and  her  anger  was  heightened  by  the  peevish  and  impatient 
letters  which  he  wrote  to  her  and  the  council.  But  her  resent- 
ment against  him  was  still  more  justly  let  loose,  when  she  found 
that,  leaving  the  place  of  his  appointment,  without  any  permis- 
sion demanded  or  obtained,  he  had  returned  from  Ireland  to  make 
his  complaints  to  herself  in  person. 

At  first,  indeed,  Elizabeth  was  pleased  at  seeing  a  favourite 
come  back  whom  she  longed  to  see ;  but  the  momentary  satisfac- 
tion of  his  unexpected  appearance  being  over,  she  reflected  on 
the  impropriety  of  his  conduct  with  greater  severity,  and  ordered 
him  to  remain  a  prisoner  at  ]^s  own  house.  This  was  a  recep- 
tion Essex  was  not  unprepared  for  :  he  used  every  expression  of 
humiliation  and  sorrow,  and  tried  once  more  the  long-unpractised 
arts  of  insinuation  that  had  brought  him  into  favour.  The  queen 
still  continuing  inflexible,  he  resolved  to  give  up  every  prospect 
of  ambition  ;  but  previous  to  his  retiring  into  the  country,  he  as- 
sured the  queen  that  he  could  never  be  happy  till  he  again  saw 
those  eyes  which  were  used  to  shine  upon  him  with  such  lustre  ; 
that,  in  expectance  of  that  happy  moment,  he  would,  like  another 

VOL.   I.  61 


482  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

Nebuchadnezzar,  dwell  with  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  be  wet 
with  the  dew  of  heaven,  till  she  again  propitiously  took  pity  on  ' 
his  sufterings.  This  romantic  message,  which  was  quite  in  the 
breeding  of  the  times,  seemed  peculiarly  pleasing  to  the  queen  : 
she  thought  him  sincere  from  the  consciousness  of  her  own  sincer- 
ity ;  she  therefore  replied,  that,  after  some  time,  when  convinced 
of  his  sincerity,  something  might  be  expected  from  her  lenity. 
When  these  symptoms  of  her  retuiniing  affection  were  known, 
they  equally  renewed  the  fears  of  his  real  enemies  and  the  assi- 
duities of  his  pretended  friends.  He  did  not  therefore  decline  an 
examination  of  his  conduct  before  the  council,  secure  in  his  mis- 
tress' favour  and  their  impotence  to  do  him  a  real  injury.  In 
consequence  of  this  he  was  only  sentenced,  for  his  late  miscon- 
duct, to  resign  his  employments,  and  to  continue  a  prisoner  in 
his  own  house,  till  her  majesty's  further  pleasure  should  be 
known. 

rifinm  He  now  had  in  some  measure  triumphed  over  his 
*"  enemies ;  and  the  discretion  of  a  few  months  might 

have  reinstated  him  in  all  his  former  employments ;  but  the  im- 
petuosity of  his  character  would  not  suffer  him  to  wait  for  a  slow 
redress  of  what  he  considered  as  wrongs  ;  and  the  queen's  refus- 
ing his  request  to  continue  him  in  the  possession  of  a  lucrative 
monopoly  of  sweet  wines,  which  he  had  long  enjoyed,  spurred  him 
on  to  the  most  violent  and  guilty  measures.  Having  long  built 
with  fond  credulity  on  his  great  popularity,  he  began  to  hope, 
from  the  assistance  of  the  giddy  multitude,  that  revenge  upon 
his  enemies  in  the  council,  which  he  supposed  was  denied  him 
from  the  tkrone.  With  these  aims  he  began  to  increase  the 
general  propensity  in  his  favour,  by  a  hospitality  little  suited  to 
his  situation  or  his  circumstances.  He  entertained  men  of  all 
ranks  and  professions ;  but  particularly  the  military,  who,  he 
hoped,  in  his  present  views,  might  be  serviceable  to  him.  But 
his  greatest  dependance  was  upon  the  professions  of  the  citizens 
of  London,  whose  schemes  of  religion  and  government  he  appear- 
ed entirely  to  approve ;  and  while  he  gratified  the  puritans  by 
railing  at  the  government  of  the  church,  he  pleased  the  envious 
by  exposing  the  faults  of  those  in  power.  However,  the  chief 
severity  of  his  censure  was  heard  to  rest  upon  the  queen,  whom 
he  did  not  hesitate  to  ridicule ;  and  of  whom  he  declared  that 


ELIZABETH.  485 

she  was  now  become  an  old  woman,  and  that  her  mind  was  grown 
as  crooked  as  her  body,  -[;  '- 

It  may  well  be  supposed  that  none  of  these  indiscre-  r-.  ^.^^  -:, 
tions  were  concealed  from  the  queen  :  his  enemies,  and 
her  emissaries,  took  care  to  bring  her  information  of  all  his  re- 
sentments and  aims,  and  to  aggravate  his  slightest  reflections 
into  treason.  Elizabeth  was  ever  remarkably  jealous  where  her 
beauty  was  in  question ;  and,  though  she  was  now  in  her  sixty- 
eighth  year,  yet  she  eagerly  listened  to  all  the  flattery  of  her  cour- 
tiers, when  they  called  her  a  Venus,  or  an  angel.  She  therefore  be- 
gan to  consider  him  as  unwoi'thy  of  her  esteem,  and  permitted 
his  enemies  to  drive  him  to  those  extremities  to  which  he  was 
naturally  inclined  to  proceed.  He  had,  in  fact,  by  this  time  col- 
lected a  select  council  of  malcontents,  who  flattered  him  in  his 
wild  projects ;  and  supposing  their  adherents  much  more  nume- 
rous than  they  really  were,  they  took  no  pains  to  conceal  their 
intentions.  Among  other  criminal  projects,  the  result  of  blind 
rage  and  despair,  they  resolved  at  last  that  sir  Christopher 
Blount,  one  of  his  creatures,  should,  with  a  choice  detachment, 
possess  himself  of  the  palace  gates  ;  that  sir  John  Davies  should 
seize  the  hall,  sir  Charles  Davers  the  guard-chamber,  while  Essex 
himself  would  rush  from  the  Mews,  attended  by  a  body  of  his 
partisans,  into  the  queen's  presence,  intreat  her  to  remove  his 
and  her  enemies,  to  assemble  a  new  parliament,  and  to  correct 
the  defects  of  the  present  administration. 

It  was  the  fortune  of  this  queen's  reign,  that  all  projects  against 
it  were  frustrated  by  a  timely  notice  of  their  nature  and  intent. 
The  queen  and  council,  alarmed  at  the  great  resort  of  people  to 
Essex-house,  and  having  some  intimations  of  the  earl's  design, 
sent  secretary  Herbert  to  require  his  appearance  before  the  coun- 
cil, which  was  assembled  at  the  lord  keeper's.  While  Essex  was 
deliberating  upon  the  manner  in  which  he  should  proceed,  vv^hether 
to  attend  the  summons  or  to  fly  into  open  rebellion,  he  received 
a  private  note,  by  which  he  was  warned  to  provide  for  his  safety. 
He  now,  therefore,  consulted  with  his  friends  on  the  emergency  of 
their  situation ;  they  were  destitute  of  arms  and  ammunition,  while 
the  guards  at  the  palace  were  doubled,  so  that  any  attack  upon  it 
would  be  fruitless.  While  he  and  his  confidants  were  in  consul- 
tation, a  person,  probably  employed  by  his  enemies,  came  in  as  u 


484  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

messenger  from  the  citizens,  with  tenders  of  friendship  and  as* 
sistance  against  all  his  adversaries.  Wild  as  the  project  was  of 
raising  the  city, in  the  present  terrible  conjuncture,  it  was  resolved 
on  ;  but  the  execution  of  it  was  delayed  till  the  day  following. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  next  day  he  was  attended  by  his 
friends  the  earls  of  Rutland  and  Southampton,  the  lords  Sandys, 
Parker,  and  Monteagle,  with  three  hundred  persons  of  distincf  | 
tion.  The  doors  of  Essex-house  were  immediately  locked,  to 
prevent  all  strangers  from  entering  ;  and  the  earl  now  discovered 
his  scheme  for  raising  the  city  more  fully  to  the  conspirators. 
In  the  mean  time,  sir  Walter  Raleigh  sending  a  message  to  sir 
Ferdinando  Gorges,  this  ofl&cer  had  a  conference  with  him  in  a 
boat  on  the  Thames,  and  there  discovered  all  their  proceedings. 
The  queen  being  informed  of  the  Avhole,  sent  in  the  utmost  haste 
Egerton,  the  lord  keeper,  sir  William  KnoUys,  the  comptroller, 
Popham,  the  lord  chief  justice,  and  the  earl  of  Worcester,  to 
Essex -house,  to  demand  the  cause  of  these  unusual  proceedings. 
Jt  was  some  time  before  they  received  admittance  through  the 
wicket  into  the  house ;  and  it  was  not  without  some  degree  of 
fury  that  they  ordered  Essex  and  his  adherents  to  lay  down  their 
arms.  While  they  continued  undaunted  in  the  discharge  of  their 
duty,  and  the  multitude  around  them  clamoured  loudly  for  their 
punishment,  the  earl  of  Essex,  who  now  saw  that  all  was  to  be 
hazarded,  resolved  to  leave  them  prisoners  in  his  house,  and  to 
sally  forth  to  make  an  insurrection  in  the  city.  But  he  had  made 
p,  very  wrong  estimate  in  expecting  that  popularity  alone  could 
aid  him  in  time  of  danger ;  he  issued  out  with  about  two  hundred 
followers,  armed  only  with  swords ;  and  in  his  passage  to  the 
city  was  joined  by  the  earl  of  Bedford  and  lord  Cromwell,  As 
he  passed  through  the  streets,  he  cried  aloud,  '« For  the  queen! 
for  the  queen !  a  plot  is  laid  for  my  life  !"  hoping  to  engage  the 
populace  to  rise  :  but  they  had  received  orders  from  the  mayor  to 
keep  within  their  houses  ;  so  that  he  was  not  joined  by  a  single 
person.  He  then  proceeded  to  the  house  of  Smith,  the  sheriff, 
on  whose  aid  he  greatly  depended ;  but  the  crowd  gathered  round 
him  rather  to  satisfy  their  curiosity  than  to  lend  him  any  assist- 
ance. Essex  now  perceived  that  he  was  quite  undone  ;  and  hear- 
ing that  he  was  proclaimed  a  traitor  by  the  earl  of  Cumberland 
and  lord  Burleigh,  he  began  to  think  of  retreating  to  his  own 


ELIZABETH.  485 

house,  there  to  sell  his  life  as  dearly  as  he  could.  But  he  was 
prevented  in  his  aims  even  there ;  the  streets  in  his  way  were 
barricaded,  and  guarded  by  the  citizens,  under  the  command  of 
s.ir  John  Levison.  In  fighting  his  way  through  this  obstruction, 
Henr}'  Tracy,  a  young  gentleman  for  whom  he  had  a  singular  af- 
fection, was  killed,  and  sir  Christopher  Blount  wounded  and  taken. 
The  earl  himself,  attended  by  a  few  of  his  followers,  the  rest 
having  privately  retired,  made  towai^ds  the  river :  and,  taking 
a  boat,  arrived  once  more  at  Essex-house,  where  he  began  to 
make  preparations  for  his  defence.  But  his  case  was  too  desper- 
ate for  any  remedy  from  valour ;  wherefore,  after  demanding  in 
vain  for  hostages  and  conditions  from  his  besiegers,  he  surrender- 
ed at  discretion,  requesting  only  civil  treatment,  and  a  fair  and 
impartial  hearing. 

Essex  and  Southampton  were  immediately  carried  to  the  arch- 
bishop's palace  at  Lambeth,  whence  they  were  next  day  conveyed 
to  the  Tower,  and  tried  by  their  peers  on  the  nineteenth  of  Feb- 
ruary. Little  could  be  urged  in  their  defence ;  their  guilt  was 
too  flagrant  ;  and  though  it  deserved  pity,  it  could  not  meet  an 
acquittal.  Essex,  after  condemnation,  was  visited  by  that  reli- 
gious horror  which  seemed  to  attend  him  in  all  his  disgraces.  He 
was  terrified  almost  to  despair  by  the  ghostly  remonstrances  of  his 
own  chaplain ;  he  was  reconciled  to  his  enemies,  and  made  a  full 
confession  of  his  conspiracy.  It  is  alleged  upon  this  occasion 
that  he  had  strong  hopes  of  pardon,  from  the  irresolution  which 
the  queen  seemed  to  discover  before  she  signed  the  warrant  for 
his  execution.  She  had  given  him  formerly  a  ring,  which  she  de- 
sired him  to  send  her  in  any  emergency  of  this  nature,  and  that 
it  should  procure  his  safety  and  protection.  This  ring  was  actu- 
ally sent  to  her  by  the  countess  of  Nottingham,  who,  being  a  con- 
cealed enemy  to  the  unfortunate  earl,  never  delivered  it;  while 
Elizabeth  secretly  fired  at  his  obstinacy  in  making  no  applica- 
tions for  mercy  and  forgiveness.  The  fact  is,  she  appeared  her- 
self as  much  an  object  of  pity,  as  the  unfortunate  nobleman  she 
was  induced  to  condemn.  She  signed  the  warrant  for  his  execu- 
tion ;  she  countermanded  it ;  she  again  resolved  on  his  death, 
and  again  felt  a  new  return  of  tenderness.  At  last  she  gave  her 
consent  to  his  execution,  and  was  never  seen  to  enjoy  one  happy 
day  more., 


486  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

After  the  beheading  of  Essex,  which  death  he  suffered  in  the 
thirty -fifth  year  of  his  age,  some  of  his  associates  were  brought  in 
like  manner  to  their  trials.  Cuffe,  his  secretary,  a  turbulent 
man,  but  possessed  of  great  learning,  Davers,  Blount,  and  Meric, 
were  condemned  and  executed;  the  queen  pardoned  the  rest,  be- 
ing persuaded  that  they  were  culpable  only  from  their  friendship 
to  their  benefactor. 

The  remaining  events  of  this  reign  are  not  considerable  enough 
to  come  into  a  picture  already  crowded  with  great  ones.  With 
the  death  of  her  favourite  Essex,  all  Elizabeth's  pleasures  seemed 
to  expire  :  she  afterwards  went  through  the  business  of  the  state 
merely  from  habit ;  but  her  satisfactions  were  no  more.  She  had 
fallen  into  a  profound  melancholy,  which  all  the  advantages  of 
her  high  fortune,  all  the  glories  of  her  prosperous  reign  were  una- 
ble to  remove.  She  had  now  found  out  the  falsehood  of  the  coun- 
tess of  Nottingham ;  who,  on  her  death-bed,  sent  for  the  queen, 
and  informed  her  of  the  fatal  circumstance  of  the  ring,  which  she 
had  neglected  to  deliver.  This  information  only  served  to  awak- 
en all  that  passion  which  the  queen  had  vainly  endeavoured  to 
suppress.  She  shook  the  dying  countess  in  her  bed,  crying  out, 
that  "  God  might  pardon  her,  but  she  never  would."  She  then 
broke  from  her,  and  resigned  herself  to  the  dictates  of  her  fixed 
despair.  She  refused  food  and  sustenance  ;  she  contin- 
>-  "^'-J  ued  silent  and  gloomy ;  sighs  and  groans  were  the  only 
vent  she  gave  to  her  despondence  ;  and  she  lay  for  ten  days  and 
nights  upon  the  carpet,  leaning  on  cushions  which  her  maids 
brought  her.  Perhaps  the  faculties  of  her  mind  were  impaired 
by  long  and  violent  exercise  ;  perhaps  she  reflected  with  remorse 
on  some  past  actions  of  her  life,  or  perceived  but  too  strongly  the 
decays  of  nature  and  the  approach  of  her  dissolution.  She  saw 
her  courtiers  remitting  their  assiduity  to  her,  in  order  to  pay  their 
court  to  James,  the  apparent  successor.  Such  a  concurrence  of 
causes  was  more  than  sufficient  to  destroy  the  remains  of  her  con- 
stitution ;  and  her  end  visibly  approached.  Feeling  a  perpetual 
lieat  in  her  stomach,  attended  with  an  unquenchable  thirst,  she 
drank  without  ceasing,  but  refused  the  assistance  of  her  physi- 
cians. Her  distemper  gaining  ground,  sir  Robert  Cecil,  and  the 
lord  admiral,  desired  to  know  her  sentiments  with  regard  to  the 
succession.    To  this  she  replied,  that  as  the  crown  of  England 


ELIZABETH.  487 

had  always  been  held  by  kings,  it  ought  not  to  devolve  upon  any 
inferior  character,  but  upon  her  immediate  heir,  the  king  of  Scot- 
land. Being  then  advised  by  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  to 
fix  her  thoughts  upon  God,  she  replied,  that  her  thoughts  did 
not  in  the  least  wander  from  him.  Her  voice  soon  after  left  her  ; 
she  fell  into  a  lethargic  slumber,  which  continued  some  hours, 
and  she  expired  gently  without  a  groan  in  the  seventieth  year  of 
her  age,  and  the  forty -fifth  of  her  reign.  Her  character  differed 
with  her  circumstances ;  in  the  beginning,  she  was  moderate  and 
humble ;  towards  the  end  of  her  reign,  haughty  and  severe.  But 
ever  prudent,  active,  and  discerning,  she  procured  for  her  sub- 
jects that  happiness  which  was  not  entirely  felt  by  those  about 
her.  She  was  indebted  to  her  good  fortune,  that  her  ministers 
were  excellent ;  but  it  was  owing  to  her  indiscretion  that  the  fa- 
vourites, who  were  more  immediately  chosen  by  herself,  were 
unworthy.  Though  she  was  possessed  of  excellent  sense,  she 
never  had  the  discernment  to  discover  that  she  wanted  beauty  ; 
and  to  flatter  her  charms  at  the  age  of  sixty -five,  was  the  surest 
road  to  her  favour  and  esteem. 

But  whatever  were  her  personal  defects,  as  a  queen  she  is  to  be 
ever  remembered  by  the  English  with  gratitude.  It  is  true,  in- 
deed, that  she  carried  her  prerogative  in  parliament  to  its  highest 
pitch  ;  so  that  it  was  tacitly  allowed  in  that  assembly,  that  she 
was  above  all  laws,  and  could  make  and  unmake  them  at  her 
pleasure ;  yet  still  she  was  so  wise  and  good,  as  seldom  to  exert 
that  power  which  she  claimed,  and  to  enforce  few  acts  of  her 
prerogative,  which  were  not  for  the  benefit  of  the  people.  It  is 
true,  in  like  manner,  that  the  English  during  her  reign  were  put 
in  possession  of  no  new  or  splendid  acquisitions ;  but  commerce 
was  daily  growing  up  amongst  them,  and  the  people  began  to  find 
that  the  theatre  of  their  truest  conquests  was  to  be  on  the  bosom 
of  the  ocean.  A  nation  which  hitherto  had  been  the  object  of 
every  invasion,  and  a  prey  to  every  plunderer,  now  asserted  its 
strength  in  turn,  and  became  terrible  to  its  invaders.  The  suc- 
cessful voyages  of  the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese  began  to  excite 
their  emulation ;  and  they  fitted  out  several  expeditions  for  dis- 
covering a  shorter  passage  to  the  East  Indies.  The  famous  sir 
Walter  Raleigh,  without  any  assistance  from  government,  colo- 
nised Virginia  in  North-America,  while  internal  commerce  was 


488  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

making  equal  improvements  ;  and  many  Flemings,  persecuted  in 
their  native  country,  found,  together  with  their  arts  and  industry, 
an  easy  asylum  in  England.  Thus  the  whole  island  seemed  as  if 
roused  from  her  long  habits  of  barbarity ;  arts,  commerce,  and 
legislation,  began  to  acquire  new  strength ;  and  such  was  the 
state  of  learning  at  the  time,  that  some  fix  this  period  as  the  Au- 
gustan age  of  England.  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  and  Hooker,  are 
considered  as  among  the  first  improvers  of  our  language.  Spen- 
ser and  Shakspeare  are  too  well  known  as  poets,  to  be  praised 
here;  but  of  all  mankind,  Francis  Bacon,  lord  Verulam,  who 
flourished  in  this  reign,  deserves,  as  a  philosopher,  the  highest 
applause ;  his  style  is  copious  and  correct,  and  his  wit  is  only 
surpassed  by  his  learning  and  penetration.  If  we  look  through 
history,  and  consider  the  rise  of  kingdoms,  we  shall  scarcely  find 
an  instance  of  a  people  becoming,  in  so  short  a  time,  wise,  power- 
ful, and  happy.  Liberty,  it  is  true,  still  continued  to  fluctuate  ; 
Elizabeth  knew  her  own  power,  and  stretched  it  to  the  very  verge 
of  despotism :  but  now  that  commerce  was  introduced,  liberty 
soon  followed ;  for  there  never  was  a  nation  perfectly  commercial, 
that  submitted  long  to  slavery. 


CHAP.  XXVIII. 

JAMES  L 

James,  the  Sixth  of  Scotland  and  the  First  of  England,  the  son' 
of  Mary,  came  to  the  throne  with  the  approbation  of  all  orders  of 
the  state,  as  in  his  person  was  united  every  claim  that  either  de- 
scent, bequest,  or  parliamentary  sanction  could  confer.  He  had 
every  reason,  therefore,  to  hope  for  a  happy  reign ;  and  he  was 
taught,  from  his  infancy,  that  his  prerogative  was  uncontrollable, 
and  his  right  transmitted  from  heaven.  These  sentiments  he 
took  no  care  to  conceal ;  and  even  published  them  in  many  parts 
of  those  works  which  he  had  written  before  he  left  Scotland. 

But  he  was  greatly  mistaken  in  the  spirit  of  thinking  of  the 
times ;  for  new  systems  of  government,  and  new  ideas  of  liberty, 
had  for  some  time  been  stealing  in  with  the  Reformation ',  and 


JAMES  I.  ^  489 

only  wanted  the  reign  of  a  weak  or  merciful  monarch  to  appear 
without  control.  In  consequence  of  the  progress  of  knowledge, 
and  a  familiar  acquaintance  with  the  governments  of  antiquity, 
the  old  Gothic  forms  began  to  be  despised  ;  and  an  emulation 
took  place  to  imitate  the  freedom  of  Greece  and  Rome.  The  se- 
vere though  popular  government  of  Elizabeth  had  confined  this 
rising  spirit  within  very  narrow  bounds  ;  but  when  a  new  sover- 
eign and  a  new  family  appeared,  less  dreaded  and  less  loved  by 
the  people,  symptoms  immediately  began  to  be  seen  of  a  more 
free  and  independent  genius  in  the  nation. 

James  had  scarcely  entered  England  when  he  gave  disgust  to 
many.  The  desire  in  all  to  see  their  new  sovereign  was  ardent 
and  natural ;  but  the  king,  who  loved  retirement,  forbade  the  con- 
course that  attended  on  his  journey  from  Scotland,  pretending 
that  this  great  resort  of  people  would  produce  a  scarcity  of  pro- 
visions. To  this  offence  to  the  people  he  added,  soon  after,  what 
gave  disgust  to  the  higher  orders  of  the  state,  by  prostituting  titles 
of  honour,  so  that  they  became  so  common  as  to  be  no  longer 
marks  of  distinction.  A  pasquinade  was  fixed  up  at  St.  Paul's, 
declaring  that  there  would  be  a  lecture  given  on  the  art  of  assist- 
ing short  memories,  to  retain  the  names  of  the  new  nobility. 

But  though  his  countrymen  shared  a  part  of  these  honours,  yet 
justice  must  be  done  the  king,  by  confessing  that  he  left  almost  all 
the  great  offices  in  the  hands  in  v/hich  he  found  them.  Among 
these,  Cecil,  created  earl  of  Salisbury,  was  continued  prime  min- 
ister and  chief  counsellor.  This  crafty  statesman  had  been  too 
cunning  for  the  rest  of  his  associates ;  and  while,  during  Eliza- 
beth's reign,  he  was  apparently  leagued  against  the  earl  of  Essex, 
whom  James  protected,  yet  he  kept  up  a  secret  correspondence 
with  that  monarch,  and  secured  his  interests  without  forfeiting 
the  confidence  of  his  party. 

But  it  was  not  so  fortunate  with  lord  Grey,  lord  Cobham,  and 
sir  Walter  Raleigh,  who  had  been  Cecil's  associates.  They  felt 
immediately  the  efiects  of  the  king's  displeasure,  and  were  dis- 
missed from  their  employments.  These  three  seemed  to  be  mark- 
ed out  for  peculiar  indignation ;  for,  soon  after,  they  were  accused 
of  entering  into  a  conspiracy  against  the  king ;  neither  the  proofs 
of  which,  nor  its  aims,  have  reached  posterity  :  all  that  is  certain 
is,  that  they  were  condemned  to  die,  but  had  their  sentence  miti- 

VOL.  1=  62 


490  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

gated  by  the  king.  Cobham  and  Grey  were  pardoned,  after  they 
had  laid  their  heads  on  the  block.  Raleigh  was  reprieved,  but  re- 
mained in  confinement  many  years  afterwards,  and  at  last  suffered 
for  this  offence,  which  was  never  proved. 

This  mercy,  shown  to  those  supposed  delinquents,  was  very 
ri  fin4  "1  P^^^sing  to  the  people  ;  and  the  king,  willing  to  remove 
''  all  jealousy  of  his  being  a  stranger,  began  his  attempts 

in  parliament  by  an  endeavour  to  unite  both  kingdoms  into  one. 
However,  the  minds  of  the  people  were  not  yet  ripe  for  this  coa- 
lition ;  they  were  apprehensive  that  the  posts  and  employments, 
which  were  in  the  gift  of  the  court,  would  be  conferred  on  the 
Scots,  whom  they  were  as  yet  taught  to  regard  as  foreigners., 
By  the  repulse  in  this  instance,  as  well  as  by  some  exceptions 
the  house  of  commons  took  to  the  form  of  his  summons  to  parlia- 
ment, James  found  that  the  people  he  came  to  govern  were  very 
different  from  those  he  had  left  behind ;  and  perceived  that  he 
must  give  reasons  for  every  measure  he  intended  to  enforce. 

He  now,  therefore,  attempted  to  correct  his  former  mistake, 
and  to  peruse  the  English  laws,  as  he  had  formerly  done  those  of 
his  own  country  ;  and  by  these  he  resolved  to  govern.  But  even 
here  he  again  found  himself  disappointed.  In  a  government  so 
fluctuating  as  that  of  England,  opinion  was  ever  deviating  from 
law  ;  and  what  was  enacted  in  one  reign  was  contradicted  by 
custom  in  another.  The  laws  had  all  along  declared  in  favour  of 
an  almost  unlimited  prerogative,  while  the  opinions  of  the  people 
were  guided  by  instructors  who  began  to  teach  opposite  principles. 
All  the  kings  and  queens  before  him,  except  such  as  were  con- 
trolled by  intestine  divisions,  or  awed  by  foreign  invasion,  rather 
issued  their  commands  to  parliament  than  gave  their  reasons. 
James,  unmindful  of  this  alteration  in  the  opinions  of  the  people, 
resolved  to  govern  in  the  antient  manner ;  while  the  people,  on 
the  contrary,  having  once  gotten  an  idea  of  the  inherent  privi- 
leges of  mankind,  never  gave  it  up,  sensible  that  they  had  reason 
and  power  also  on  tlieir  side. 

Numberless  were  the  disputes  between  the  king  and  his  parlia- 
ment during  this  reign  ;  the  one  striving  to  keep  the  privileges 
of  the  crown  entire,  tlie  other  aiming  at  abridging  the  dangerous 
part  of  the  prerogative ;  the  one  labouring  to  preserve  customs 
established  for  time  immemorial,  the  other  equally  assiduous  in 


JAMES  I.  491 

defending  the  inherent  privileges  of  humanity.  Thus  we  see 
laudable  motives  actuating  the  disputants  on  both  sides  of  the 
question,  and  the  principles  of  both  founded  either  in  law  or  in 
reason.  When  the  parliament  would  not  grant  a  subsidy,  James 
had  examples  enough  among  his  predecessors,  which  taught  him 
to  extort  a  benevolence.  Edward  the  Fourth,  Henry  the  Eighth, 
and  queen  Elizabeth  herself,  had  often  done  so ;  and  precedent 
undoubtedly  entitled  him  to  the  same  privilege.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  house  of  commons,  who  found  their  growing  power  to 
protect  the  people,  and  not  suffer  the  impositions  of  the  crown, 
considered  tlmt  this  extorted  benevolence  might  at  length  render 
the  sovereign  entirely  independent  of  the  parliament,  and  there- 
fore complained  of  it,  as  an  infringement  of  their  privileges. 
These  attempts  of  the  crown,  and  these  murmurings  of  the  com- 
mons, continued  through  this  whole  reign,  and  first  gave  rise  to 
that  spirit  of  party  which  has  ever  since  subsisted  in  England ;  the 
one  for  preserving  the  antient  constitution,  by  maintaining  the 
prerogative  of  the  king,  the  other  for  trying  an  experiment  to  im- 
prove it,  by  extending  the  liberties  of  the  people. 

During  these  contests,  James,  who  supposed  no  arguments  suf- 
ficient to  impair  the  prerogative,  seemed  entirely  secure  that  none 
would  attempt  to  allege  any.  He  continued  to  entertain  his  par- 
liament with  set  speeches  and  florid  harangues,  in  which  he  urged 
his  divine  right  and  absolute  power  as  things  incontestable :  to 
these  the  commons  made  as  regular  answers,  not  absolutely  de- 
nying his  pretensions,  but  slowly  and  regularly  abridging  his 
power. 

However,  though  James  persevered  in  asserting  his  prerogative, 
and  threatened  those  who  should  presume  to  abridge  it,  yet  his 
justice  and  clemency  were  very  apparent  in  the  toleration  which 
he  gave  to  the  teachers  of  different  religions  throughout  the  king- 
dom. The  minds  of  the  people  had  long  been  irritated  against 
one  another,  and  each  party  persecuted  the  rest,  as  it  happened 
to  prevail ;  it  was  expected,  therefore,  that  James  would 
strengthen  the  hands  of  that  which  was  then  uppermost ;  and 
that  the  catholics  and  sectaries  should  find  no  protection.  But 
this  monarch  wisely  observed,  that  men  should  be  punished  for 
actions,  and  not  for  opinions ;  a  decision  which  gave  general  dis- 
satisfaction ;  but  the  complaint  of  every  sect  was  the  best  argUr. 
ment  of  his  moderation  towards  all. 


493  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

Yet  mild  as  this  monarch  was,  there  was  a  project  contrived  in 
the  very  beginning  of  his  reign  for  the  re-establishment  of  pope- 
ry, which,  were  it  not  a  fact  knoAvn  to  all  tlie  world,  could 
scarcely  be  credited  by  posterity.  This  was  the  gunpowder  plot ; 
than  which  a  more  horrid  or  terrible  scheme  never  entered  into 
the  human  heart  to  conceive  ;  and  which  shows  at  once  that  the 
most  determined  courage  may  be  united  with  the  most  execrable 
intentions. 

The  Roman  catholics  had  expected  great  favour  and  indulgence 
on  the  accession  of  James,  both  as  a  descendant  from  Mary,  a 
rigid  catholic,  and  also  from  his  having  shown  some  partiality  to 
that  religion  in  his  youth.  But  they  soon  discovered  their  mis- 
take, f|,nd  were  at  once  surprised  and  enraged  to  find  James  ou 
all  occasions  express  his  resolution  of  strictly  executing  the  laws 
enacted  against  them,  and  of  persevering  in  the  conduct  of  his  pre- 
decessor. This  declaration  determined  them  upon  more  desper- 
ate measures  ;  and  they  at  length  formed  a  resolution  of  destroy- 
ing the  king  and  both  houses  of  parliament  at  a  blow.  The 
scheme  was  first  broached  by  Robert  Catesby,  a  gentleman  of  good 
parts  and  antient  family,  Avho  conceived  that  a  train  of  gunpow- 
der might  be  so  placed  under  the  parliament-house,  as  to  blow  up 
the  king  and  all  the  members  at  once.  He  opened  his  intention 
to  Thomas  Percy,  a  decendant  from  the  illustrious  house  of  North- 
umberland, who  was  charmed  with  the  project,  and  readily  came 
into  it.  Thomas  Winter  was  next  intrusted  with  the  dreadful 
secret ;  and  he  went  over  to  Flanders  in  quest  of  Guy  Fawkes, 
an  ofiicer  in  the  Spanish  service,  with  whose  zeal  and  courage 
the  conspirators  were  thoroughly  acquainted.  When  they  enlist- 
ed any  new  zealot  into  their  plot,  the  more  firmly  to  bind  him  to 
secresy,  they  always,  together  with  an  oath,  employed  the  sacra- 
ment, the  most  sacred  rite  of  religion.  Every  tender  feeling, 
and  all  pity,  were  banished  from  their  breasts ;  and  Garnet,  a 
Jesuit,  superior  of  the  order  in  England,  absolved  their  conscien- 
ces from  every  scruple. 

How  horrid  soever  the  contrivance  might  appear, 
L  '-I  every  member  seemed  faithful  and  secret  in  the  league ; 
and  they  hired  a  house  in  Percy's  name,  adjoining  to  that  in 
which  the  parliament  was  to  assemble.  Their  first  intention  was 
to  bore  a  way  under  the  parliament -house,  from  that  which  they 


JAMES  1.  493 

occupied,  and  they  set  themselves  laboriously  to  the  task ;  but 
when  they  had  pierced  the  wall,  which  was  three  yards  in  thick- 
ness, they  were  surprised  to  find,  on  approaching  the  other  side, 
that  the  house  was  vaulted  underneath,  and  that  coals  were  usu- 
ally deposited  there.  From  their  disappointment  on  this  account 
they  were  soon  relieved,  by  information  that  the  coals  were  in  a 
course  of  sale,  and  that  the  A^ault  would  be  then  let  to  the  highest 
bidder.  They  therefore  seized  the  opportunity  of  hiring  the  place, 
and  bought  the  remaining  quantity  of  coals  with  which  it  was  then 
stored,  as  if  for  their  own  use.  The  next  thing  done  was  to  con- 
vey thither  thirty -six  barrels  of  gunpowder,  which  had  been  pur- 
chased in  Holland  ;  and  the  whole  was  covered  with  the  coals 
and  with  faggots  brought  for  that  purpose.  Then  the  doors  of  the 
cellar  were  boldly  flung  open,  and  eveiy  body  admitted,  as  if  it 
contained  nothing  dangerous. 

Confident  of  success,  they  now  began  to  plan  the  remaining 
part  of  their  project.  The  king,  the  queen,  and  prince  Henry, 
the  king's  eldest  son,  were  all  expected  to  be  present  at  the  open- 
ing of  the  parliament.  The  king's  second  son,  by  reason  of  his 
tender  age,  would  be  absent,  and  it  was  resolved  that  Percy 
should  seize  or  assassinate  him.  The  princess  Elizabeth,  a  child 
likewise,  was  kept  at  lord  Harrington's  house,  in  Warwickshire  ; 
and  sir  Everard  Digby  was  to  seize  her,  and  immediately  pro- 
claim her  queen. 

The  day  for  the  sitting  of  parliament  now  approached.  Never 
was  treason  more  secret,  or  ruin  more  apparently  inevitable  ;  the 
hour  was  expected  with  impatience,  and  the  conspirators  gloried 
in  their  meditated  guilt.  The  dreadful  secret,  though  communi- 
cated to  above  twenty  persons,  had  been  religiously  kept  during 
the  space  of  near  a  year  and  a  half;  but,  when  all  the  motives  of 
pity,  justice,  and  safety,  were  too  weak,  a  remorse  of  private 
friendship  saved  the  kingdom. 

Percy,  one  of  the  conspirators,  had  conceived  a  design  of  sav- 
ing the  life  of  lord  Monteagle,  his  intimate  friend  and  compan- 
ion, who  also  was  of  the  same  persuasion  with  himself.  About 
ten  days  before  the  meeting  of  parliament,  this  nobleman,  upoi; 
his  return  to  town,  received  a  letter  from  a  person  unknown,  and 
delivered  by  one  who  fled  as  soon  as  he  had  discharged  his  mes- 
§age.     The  letter  was  to  this  effect :  "  My  lord,  stay  away  from 


49*  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

ibis  parliament ;  for  God  and  man  have  concurred  to  punish  the 
wickedness  of  the  times.  And  think  not  slightly  of  this  adver- 
tisement, but  retire  yourself  into  your  country,  where  you  may 
expect  the  event  in  safety.  For  though  there  be  no  appearance 
of  any  stir,  yet  I  say  they  will  receive  a  terrible  blow  this  par- 
liament ;  and  yet  they  shall  not  see  who  hurts  them.  This  coun- 
sel is  not  to  be  contemned ;  because  it  may  do  you  good,  and  can 
do  you  no  harm.  For  the  danger  is  past  as  soon  as  you  have 
burned  the  letter." 

The  contents  of  this  mysterious  letter  surprised  and  puzzled 
the  nobleman  to  whom  it  was  addressed ;  and  though  inclined  to 
think  it  a  foolish  attempt  to  fright  and  ridicule  him,  yet  he  judged 
it  safest  to  carry  it  to  lord  Salisbury,  secretary  of  state.  That 
minister  was  inclined  to  give  little  attention  to  it,  yet  thought 
proper  to  lay  it  before  the  king,  who  came  to  town  a  few  days 
after.  None  of  the  council  were  able  to  make  any  thing  of  it, 
although  it  appeared  serious  and  alarming.  In  this  universal  agi- 
tation between  doubt  and  apprehension,  the  king  was  the  first 
who  penetrated  the  meaning  of  this  dark  epistle.  He  concluded 
that  some  sudden  danger  was  preparing  by  gunpowder ;  and  it 
was  thought  adviseable  to  inspect  all  the  vaults  below  the  houses 
of  parliament.  This  care  belonged  to  the  earl  of  Suffolk,  lord 
chamberlain,  who  purposely  delayed  the  search  till  the  day  before 
Xov.  5      f'^e  meeting  of  parliament.     He  remarked  those  great 

1605.  piles  of  faggots  which  lay  in  the  vault  under  the  house 
of  peers;  and  he  cast  his  eye  upon  Fawkes,  who  stood  in  a  dark 
corner,  and  who  passed  himself  for  Percy's  servant.  That  dar- 
ing determined  courage  for  which  he  had  long  been  noted,  even 
among  the  desperate,  was  fully  painted  in  his  countenance,  and 
struck  the  lord  chamberlain  with  strong  suspicion.  The  great 
quantity  of  fuel  also  kept  tliere  for  the  use  of  a  person  seldom  in 
town  did  not  pass  unnoticed  ;  and  he  resolved  to  take  his  time 
to  make  a  more  exact  scrutiny.  About  midnight,  therefore,  sir 
Thomas  Knevet,  a  justice  of  the  peace,  was  sent  with  pi'oper  at- 
tendants ;  and  just  at  the  entrance  of  the  vault  he  seized  a  man 
preparing  for  the  terrible  enterprise,  dressed  in  a  cloak  and  boots, 
and  a  dark  lantern  in  his  hand.  This  was  no  other  than  Guy 
Fawkes,  who  had  just  disposed  every  part  of  the  train  ior  its 
taking  fire  the  next  morning ;  the  matches  and  other  combusti- 


JAMES  I.  495 

bles  being  found  in  his  pockets.  The  whole  of  the  design  was 
now  discovered ;  but  the  atrociousness  of  his  guilt,  and  the  de- 
spair of  pardon,  inspiring  him  with  resolution,  he  told  the  officers 
of  justice,  with  an  undaunted  air,  that  had  he  blown  them  and 
himself  up  together,  he  had  been  Imppy.  Before  the  council,  he 
displayed  the  same  intrepid  fii-mness,  mixed  even  with  scorn  and 
disdain  ;  refusing  to  discover  his  associates,  and  showing  no  con- 
cern but  for  the  failure  of  his  enterprise.  But  his  bold  spirit  was 
at  length  subdued  ;  being  confined  to  the  Tower  for  two  or  three 
days,  and  tbe  rack  just  shown  him,  his  courage,  fatigued  with  so 
long  an  effort,  at  last  failed  him,  and  he  made  a  full  discovery  of 
all  his  accomplices. 

Catesby,  Percy,  and  the  conspirators  who  were  in  London, 
hearing  that  Fawkes  was  arrested,  fled  with  all  speed  into  War- 
wickshire, where  sir  Everard  Digby,  relying  on  the  success  of  the 
plot,  was  already  in  arms,  in  order  to  seize  the  pi'incess  Elizabeth. 
But  the  country  soon  began  to  take  the  alarm ;  and  wherever 
they  turned,  they  found  a  superior  force  ready  to  oppose  them. 
In  this  exigence,  beset  on  all  sides,  they  resolved,  to  about  the 
number  of  eighty  persons,  to  fly  no  further,  but  make  a  stand  at 
a  house  in  Warwickshire,  to  defend  it  to  the  last,  and  sell  their 
lives  as  dearly  as  possible.  But  even  this  miserable  consolation 
was  denied  them  :  a  spark  of  fire  happening  to  fall  among  some 
gunpowder  that  was  laid  to  dry,  it  blew  up,  and  so  maimed  the 
principal  conspirators,  that  the  sui'vivors  resolved  to  open  the 
gate  and  sally  out  against  the  multitude  that  surrounded  the 
house.  Some  were  instantly  cut  to  pieces;  Catesby;  Percy,  and 
Winter,  standing  back  to  back,  fought  long  and  desperately,  till 
in  the  end  the  two  first  fell  covered  with  wounds,  and  Winter 
was  taken  alive.  Those  that  survived  the  slaughter  were  tried 
and  convicted ;  several  fell  by  the  hands  of  the  execu- 
tioner, and  others  experienced  the  king's  mercy.  The  l1"'^""J 
Jesuits,  Garnet  and  Oldcorn,  who  were  privy  to  the  plot,  suiFered 
with  the  rest ;  and,  notwithstanding  the  atrociousness  of  their 
treason.  Garnet  was  considered  by  his  party  as  a  martyr,  and 
miracles  were  said  to  have  been  wrought  by  his  blood. 

Such  was  the  end  of  a  conspiracy  that  brought  ruin  on  its  con- 
trivers, and  utterly  supplanted  that  religion  it  was  intended  to 
establish.     Yet  it  is  remarkable,  that,  before  this  audacious  at- 


496  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

tempt,  the  chief  conspirators  had  borne  a  fair  reputation  :  Cates- 
bj  was  loved  by  all  his  acquaintance ;  and  Digby  was  as  highly 
respected,  both  for  his  honour  and  integrity,  as  any  man  in  the 
nation.  However,  such  are  the  lengths  to  which  superstition  and 
early  prejudice  can  drive  minds  originally  well  formed,  but  im- 
pressed by  a  wrong  direction. 

The  king's  moderation,  after  the  extinction  of  this  conspiiacy, 
was  as  great  as  his  penetration  in  the  prevention  of  it.  The  ha- 
tred excited  in  the  nation  against  the  catholics  knew  no  bounds  ; 
and  nothing  but  a  total  extinction  of  those  who  adhered  to  that 
persuasion  seemed  capable  of  satisfying  the  greater  part  of  the 
people.  James  bravely  rejected  all  violent  measures,  and  nobly 
declared  that  the  late  conspiracy,  however  atrocious,  should  never 
alter  his  plans  of  government ;  but  as,  on  the  one  hand,  he  was 
determined  to  punish  guilt,  so,  on  the  other,  he  would  still  sup- 
port and  protect  innocence. 

This  moderation  was  at  that  time  no  way  pleasing  to  the  peo- 
ple ;  and  the  malignant  part  of  his  subjects  were  willing  to  as- 
cribe this  lenity  to  the  papists  to  his  being  himself  tinctured  with 
their  superstitions.  However  this  be,  he  still  found  his  parlia- 
ments refractory  to  all  the  measures  he  took  to  support  his  au- 
thority at  home,  or  his  desire  of  peace  with  foreign  states.  His 
speeches,  indeed,  betrayed  no  want  of  resolution  to  defend  his 
rights  ;  but  his  liberality  to  his  favourites,  and  the  insufficiency 
of  his  finances  to  maintain  the  royal  dignity,  still  rendered  him 
dependant  upon  his  parliament  for  money,  and  they  took  care  to 
keep  him  in  indigence.  Thus  he  was  often  forced  into  conces- 
sions, which,  when  once  granted,  could  never  be  recalled ;  and, 
while  he  supposed  himself  maintaining  the  royal  prerogative,  it 
was  diminishing  on  every  side. 

It  was,  perhaps,  the  opposition  which  James  met  with  from  his 
people,  that  made  him  place  his  affections  upon  different  persons 
about  the  court,  whom  he  rewarded  with  a  liberality  that  bordered 
ri6l2l  ^^  profusion.  The  death  of  prince  Henry,  a  youth  of 
great  hopes,  gave  him  no  very  great  uneasiness,  as  his 
affections  were  rather  taken  up  by  newer  connexions.  In  tlie 
first  rank  of  these  stood  Robert  Carre,  a  youth  of  a  good  family 
in  Scotland,  who,  after  having  passed  some  time  in  his  travels, 
arrived  in  London,  at  about  twenty  years  of  age.     All  his  natu- 


JAMES  I.  497 

fal  accomplishments  consisted  in  a  pleasing  visage  5  all  his  ac- 
quired abilities,  in  an  easy  and  graceful  demeanour.  This  youth 
came  to  England  with  letters  of  recommendation,  to  see  his 
countryman  lord  Hay ;  and  that  nobleman  took  an  opportunity 
of  assigning  him  the  office  of  presenting  the  king  his  buckler  at  a 
match  of  tilting.  When  Cai-re  was  advancing  to  execute  his  of- 
fice, he  was  thrown  by  his  horse,  and  his  leg  was  broken  in  the 
king's  presence.  James  approached  him  with  pity  and  concern, 
and  ordered  him  to  be  lodged  in  the  palace,  till  his  cure  was 
completed.  He  himself,  after  tilting,  paid  him  a  visit  in  his 
chamber,  and  returned  frequently  during  his  confinement.  The 
ignorance  and  simplicity  of  the  youth  confirmed  the  king's  affec- 
tions, as  he  disregarded  learning  in  his  favourites,  of  which  he 
found  very  little  use  in  his  own  practice.  Carre  was  therefore 
soon  considered  as  the  most  rising  man  at  court :  he  was  knight- 
ed, created  viscount  Rochester,  honoured  with  the  order  of  the 
Garter,  made  a  privy-counsellor  ;  and,  to  raise  him  to  the  highest 
pitch  of  honour,  he  was  at  last  created  earl  of  Somerset. 

This  was  an  advancement  which  some  regarded  with  envy ;  but 
the  wiser  part  of  mahkind  looked  upon  it  with  contempt  and  rid- 
icule, sensible  that  ungrounded  attachments  are  seldom  of  long 
continuance.  Nor  was  it  long  before  the  favourite  gave  proofs  of 
his  being  unworthy  of  the  place  he  held  in  the  king's  affections. 
Among  the  friends  whom  he  consulted  at  court,  was  sir  Thomas 
Overbury,  a  man  of  great  abilities  and  learning  :  among  the  mis- 
tresses whom  he  addressed,  was  the  young  countess  of  Essex, 
whose  husband  had  been  sent  by  the  king's  command  to  travel, 
until  the  young  couple  should  arrive  at  the  age  of  puberty.  But 
the  assiduities  of  a  man  of  such  personal  accomplishments  as  the 
favourite  possessed  were  too  powerful  to  be  resisted  ;  a  criminal 
correspondence  was  commenced  between  the  countess  and  the 
earl ;  and  Esses,  upon  his  return  from  his  travels,  found  his  wife 
beautiful  and  lovely  indeed,  but  her  affections  entirely  placed 
upon  another.  But  this  was  not  all ;  not  contented  with  deny- 
ing him  all  the  rights  of  a  husband,  she  resolved  to  procure  a  di- 
vorce, and  then  to  marry  the  favourite  to  whom  she  had  granted 
her  heart.  It  was  upon  this  occasion  that  Overbury  was  consult- 
ed by  his  friend,  and  that  this  honest  counsellor  declared  himself 
utterly  averse  to  the  match.  He  described  the  countess  as  an  in- 
voL.  I.  63 


498  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

famous  and  abandoned  woman  ;  and  went  so  far  as  to  threaten 
the  earl  that  he  would  separate  himself  from  him  forever,  if  he 
could  so  far  forget  his  honour  and  his  interest  as  to  prosecute  the 
intended  marriage.  The  consequence  of  this  advice  was  fatal  to 
the  giver.  The  countess,  being  made  acquainted  with  his  expos- 
tulations, urged  her  lover  to  ruin  him.  In  consequence  of  this 
P^gjj,-,  command,  the  king  was  persuaded  by  the  favourite  to 
order  Overbury  on  an  embassy  into  Russia ;  sir  Thomas 
was  persuaded  by  the  same  adviser  to  refuse  going;  the  delin- 
quent was  shut  up  in  the  Tower,  and  there  he  was  poisoned,  by 
the  direction  of  the  countess,  in  a  tart. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  divorce,  which  had  been  with  some  diffi- 
culty procured,  took  place,  and  the  marriage  of  the  favourite  was 
solemnised  with  all  imaginable  splendour.  But  the  suspicion  of 
Overbury's  being  poisoned  every  day  grew  stronger,  and  reached 
the  favourite,  amidst  all  the  glare  and  splendour  of  seeming  hap- 
piness and  success.  The  graces  of  his  youth  gradually  disap- 
peared ;  the  gaiety  of  his  manners  was  converted  into  sullen  si- 
lence ;  and  the  king,  whose  affections  had  been  engaged  by  these 
superficial  accomplishments,  began  to  cool  to  a  man  who  no  long- 
er contributed  to  his  amusement.  But  the  adoption  of  another 
favourite,  and  the  discovery  of  Somerset's  guilt,  soon  removed  all 
remains  of  affection  which  the  king  might  still  harbour  for  him. 

An  apothecary's  apprentice,  who  had  been  employed  in  making 
up  the  poison,  having  retired  to  Flushing,  divulged  the  secret 
there ,;  and  the  affair  being  thus  laid  before  the  king,  he  com- 
manded sir  Edward  Coke,  lord  chief  justice,  to  sift  the  affair  to 
the  bottom,  with  rigorous  impartiality.  This  injunction  was  ex- 
ecuted with  great  industry  and  severity ;  and  the  whole 
L  'J  complication  of  guilt  was  carefully  unravelled.  The 
lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  and  some  of  the  inferior  criminals, 
were  condemned  and  executed ;  Somerset  and  his  countess  were 
soon  after  found  guilty,  but  reprieved  and  pardoned,  after  some 
years  of  strict  confinement.  The  king's  duplicity  and  injustice 
on  this  occasion  are  urged  as  very  great  stains  upon  his  charac- 
ter. Somerset  was  in  his  presence  at  the  time  the  officer  of  jus- 
tice came  to  apprehend  him  ;  and  boldly  reprehended  that  min- 
ister's presumption  for  daring  to  arrest  a  peer  of  the  realm  before 
the  king.    But  James,  being  informed  of  the  cause,  said  with  a 


JAMES  I.  499 

smile,  *'Naj,  nay,  you  must  go;  for,  if  Coke  should  send  for  my- 
self,  I  must  comply."  He  then  embraced  him  at  parting,  begged 
he  would  return  immediately,  and  assured  him  he  could  not  live 
without  his  company  ;  yet  he  had  no  sooner  turned  his  back,  than 
he  exclaimed,  "  Go !  and  the  devil  go  with  thee !  I  shall  never 
see  thy  face  again."  He  was  also  heard  to  wish,  some  time  after, 
that  God's  curse  might  fall  upon  him  and  his  family,  if  he  should 
pardon  those  whom  the  law  should  condemn.  However,  he  af- 
terwards restored  them  both  to  liberty,  and  granted  them  a  pen- 
sion, with  which  they  retired,  and  languished  out  the  remainder 
of  their  lives  in  guilt,  infamy,  and  mutual  recrimination. 

But  the  king  had  not  been  so  improvident  as  to  part  with  one 
favourite  before  he  had  provided  himself  with  another.  This  was 
George  Villiers,  a  younger  brother  of  a  good  family,  who  had  re- 
turned from  his  travels  at  the  age  of  twenty -two,  and  whom  the 
enemies  of  Somerset  had  taken  occasion  to  throw  in  the  king's 
way,  certain  that  his  beauty  and  fashionable  manners  would  do 
the  rest.  Accordingly  he  had  been  placed  in  a  comedy  full  in 
the  king's  view,  and  immediately  caught  the  monarch's  affections. 
The  history  of  the  time,  which  appears  not  without  some  degree 
of  malignity  against  this  monarch,  does  not  however  insinuate  any 
thing  flagitious  in  these  connections,  but  imputes  his  attachment 
rather  to  a  weakness  of  understanding  than  to  any  perversion  of 
appetite.  Villiers  was  immediately  taken  into  the  king's  service, 
and  the  office  of  cup-bearer  was  bestowed  upon  him.  It  was  in 
vain  that  .Somerset  had  used  all  his  interest  to  depress  him ;  his 
stern  jealousy  only  served  the  more  to  interest  the  king  in  the 
young  man's  behalf. 

After  Somerset's  fall,  the  favour  of  James  was  wholly  turned 
upon  young  Villiers  ;  in  the  course  of  a  few  years  he  created  him 
viscount  Villiers,  earl,  marquis,  and  duke  of  Buckingham,  knight 
of  the  garter,  master  of  the  horse,  chief  justice  in  eyre,  warden  of 
the  cinque  ports,  master  of  the  king's -bench  office,  steward  of 
Westminster,  constable  of  Windsor,  and  lord  high-admiral  of 
England.  His  mother  obtained  the  title  of  countess  of  Bucking- 
ham ;  his  brother  was  created  viscount  Purbeck  ;  and  a  numerous 
train  of  needy  relations  were  all  pushed  up  into  credit  and  au^ 
thority.  It  may,  indeed,  be  reckoned  among  the  most  capricious 
qircumstances  of  tliis  monarch's  reign,  that  he,  who  was  bred  a 


500  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

scholar,  should  choose  for  his  favourites  the  most  illiterate  persons 
about  his  court;  that  he,  whose  personal  courage  was  greatly  sus^- 
pected,  should  lavish  his  honours  upon  those  whose  only  accom- 
plishments were  a  skill  in  the  warlike  exercises  of  the  times. 

When  unworthy  favourites  were  thus  advanced,  it  is  not  to  be 
■wondered  at  if  the  public  concerns  of  the  kingdom  were  neglect- 
ed, and  men  of  real  merit  left  to  contempt  and  misery.  Yet  such 
was  the  case  at  present,  with  regard  to  the  cautionary  towns  in 
Holland,  and  the  brave  sir  Walter  Raleigh  at  home. 

In  the  preceding  reign,  Elizabeth,  when  she  gave  assistance  to 
the  Dutch,  at  that  time  shaking  oft"  the  Spanish  yoke,  was  not  so 
disinterested,  upon  her  lending  them  large  sums  of  money,  as  not 
to  require  a  proper  deposite  for  being  repaid.  The  Dutch,  there- 
fore, put  into  her  hands  the  three  important  fortresses  of  Flush- 
ing, Brille,  and  Ramekins,  which  were  to  be  restored  upon  pay- 
ment of  the  money  due,  which  amounted  in  the  whole  to  eight 
hundred  thousand  pounds.  But  Jaines,  in  his  present  exigence, 
having  to  supply  a  needy  favourite,  and  a  craving  court,  agreed 
to  evacuate  these  fortresses,  upon  the  payment  of  a  third  part  of 
the  money  which  was  strictly  due.  The  cautionary  towns 
L  ■-!  were  evacuated,  which  had  held  the  states  in  total  subjec- 
tion, and  which  an  ambitious  or  enterprising  prince  would  have  re- 
garded as  his  most  valuable  possessions. 

The  universal  murmur  which  this  impolitic  measure  produced 
was  soon  after  heightened  by  an  act  of  severity  which  still  con- 
tinues as  the  blackest  stain  upon  this  monarch's  memory.  The 
brave  and  learned  Raleigh  had  been  confined  in  the  Tower  almost 
from  the  beginning  of  James's  accession,  for  a  conspiracy  which 
had  never  been  proved  against  him ;  and  in  that  abode  of  wretch- 
edness he  wrote  several  valuable  performances,  which  are  still  in 
the  highest  esteem.  His  long  sufterings,  and  his  ingenious  writ- 
ings, had  now  turned  the  tide  of  popular  opinion  in  his  favour; 
and  they  who  once  detested  the  enemy  of  Essex,  could  not  help 
pitying  the  long  captivity  of  this  philosophical  soldier.  He  him- 
self still  struggled  for  fi'eedom  ;  and  perhaps  it  was  v/ith  this  de- 
sire that  he  spread  the  report  of  his  having  discovered  a  gold  mine 
in  Guiana,  which  was  sufficient  not  only  to  enrich  the  adventur- 
ers that  should  seize  it,  but  to  afford  immense  treasures  to  the 
nation.    The  king,  either  believing  his  assertions,  or  willing  to 


JAMES  I.  sot 

subject  him  to  further  disgrace,  granted  him  a  commission  to  try 
his  fortune  in  quest  of  these  golden  schemes  ;  but  still  reserved 
his  former  sentence  as  a  check  upon  his  future  behaviour. 

Ralei.n-h  was  not  long  in  making  preparations  for  this  adven- 
ture, which,  from  the  sanguine  manner  in  which  he  carried  it  on, 
many  believed  he  thought  to  be  as  promising  as  he  described  it. 
He  bent  his  course  to  Guiana;  and  remaining  himself  at  the  mouth, 
of  the  river  Oroonoko  with  five  of  the  largest  ships,  he  sent  the 
rest  up  the  stream,  under  the  command  of  his  son  and  of  captain 
Keymis,  a  person  entirely  devoted  to  his  interests.  But  instead 
of  a  country  abounding  in  gold,  as  the  adventurers  were  taught 
to  expect,  they  found  the  Spaniards  vv^arned  of  their  approach,  and 
prepared  in  arms  to  receive  them.  Young  Raleigh,  to  encourage 
his  men,  called  out  that  "  This  was  the  true  mine,"  meaning  the 
town  of  St.  Thomas,  which  he  was  approaching ;  "  and  that  none 
but  fools  looked  for  any  other  :"  but  just  as  he  was  speaking,  he 
received  a  shot,  of  which  he  immediately  expired.  This  was  fol- 
lowed by  another  disappointment:  for,  when  the  English  took 
possession  of  the  town,  they  found  nothing  in  it  of  any  value. 

It  was  Keymis  who  pretended  that  he  had  seen  the  mine,  and 
gave  the  first  account  of  it  to  Raleigh  :  but  he  now  began  to  re- 
tract ;  and  though  he  was  within  two  hours'  march  of  the  place, 
he  refused,  on  the  most  absurd  pretences,  to  take  any  effectual 
step  towards  finding  it.  He  returned,  therefore,  to  Raleigh  with 
the  melancholy  news  of  his  son's  death ;  and  then  going  into  his 
cabin,  put  an  end  to  his  ov/n  life  in  despair. 

Raleigh,  in  this  forlorn  situation,  found  now  that  all  his  hopes 
were  over  ;  but  saw  his  misfortunes  aggravated  by  the  reproaches 
of  those  whom  he  had  undertaken  to  command.  Nothing  could 
be  more  deplorable  than  his  situation,  particularly  when  he  was 
told  that  he  must  be  carried  back  to  England  to  answer  for  his 
conduct  to  the  king.  It  is  pretended  that  he  employed  many  ar- 
tifices, first  to  engage  his  men  to  attack  the  Spanish  settlements 
at  a  time  of  peace ;  and,  on  failure  of  that  sclieme,  to  make  his  es- 
cape into  Fi'ance.  But  all  these  proving  unsuccessful,  he  was 
delivered  into  the  king's  hands,  and  strictly  examined,  as  well  as 
his  fellow-adventurers,  before  the  privy-council.  Count  Gon- 
domar,  the  Spanish  embassador,  made  heavy  complaints  against 
the  expedition ;  and  the  king  declared  that  Raleigh  had  express 


502  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

orders  to  avoid  all  disputes  and  hostilities  against  the  Spaniards  : 
wherefore,  to  give  the  court  of  Spain  a  particular  instance  of  his 
rtri9  1  attachment,  he  signed  a  warrant  for  his  exectition,  not 
for  the  present  offence,  but  for  his  former  conspiracy  ; 
thus  showing  liimself  guilty  of  complicated  injustice ;  unjust  in 
originally  having  condemned  him  without  proof;  unjust  in  having 
trusted  a  man  with  a  commission,  without  a  pardon  expressive  of 
that  confidence  ;  unjust  in  punishing  with  death  a  transgression 
that  did  not  deserve  it ;  but  most  unjust  of  all,  when  he  refused  a 
new  trial,  and  condemned  him  upon  an  obsolete  sentence.  This 
great  man  died  with  the  same  fortitude  that  he  had  testified 
through  life  ;  he  observed,  as  he  felt  the  edge  of  the  axe,  that  it 
was  a  sharp  but  a  sure  remedy  for  all  evils ;  his  harangue  to  the 
people  was  calm  and  eloquent ;  and  he  laid  his  head  on  the  block 
with  the  utmost  indifference.  His  death  ensured  him  that  popu- 
larity which  his  former  intrepidity  and  his  sufferings,  so  much 
greater  than  his  crimes,  had  tended  to  procure  him  ;  and  no  meas- 
ure in  this  reign  was  attended  with  so  much  public  dissatisfaction. 
The  death  of  this  great  man  was  soon  followed  by  the  disgrace  of 
a  still  greater,  namely,  the  chancellor  Bacon,  who  was  accused 
of  receiving  bribes  in  his  office;  and,  pleading  guilty,  was  degraded 
and  fined  forty  thousand  pounds ;  but  his  fine  was  afterwards  re- 
mitted by  the  king. 

The  reasons  for  James's  partiality  to  the  court  of  Spain  in  the 
case  of  Raleigh  soon  appeared.  This  monarch  had  entertained  an 
opinion,  which  M'as  peculiar  to  himself,  that  in  marrying  his  soa'^ 
Charles,  the  prince  of  Wales,  any  alliance  below  that  of  royalty 
would  be  unworthy  of  him ;  he  therefore  was  obliged  to  seek, 
either  in  the  court  of  France  or  Spain,  a  suitable  match ;  and  he 
was  taught  to  think  of  the  latter.  Gondomar,  perceiving  thig 
weak  monarch's  partiality  to  a  crowned  head,  made  an  offer  of  the 
second  daughter  of  Spain  to  prince  Charles :  and  that  he  might 
render  the  temptation  irresistable,  he  gave  hopes  of  an  immense 
fortune  which  should  attend  the  princess.  However,  this  was  a 
negotiation  which  was  not  likely  soon  to  be  concluded  ;  and  from 
the  time  the  idea  was  first  started,  James  saw  five  years  elapse 
without  bringing  the  treaty  to  any  kind  of  conclusion. 

A  delay  of  this  kind  was  very  displeasing  to  the  king,  who  had 
all  along  an  eye  on  the  great  fortune  of  the  princess ;  nor  was  it 


JAMES  I,  50S 

less  disagreeable  to  prince  Charles,  who,  bred  up  with  ideas  of 
romantic  passion,  was  in  love  without  ever  seeing  the  object  of 
his  affections.  In  this  general  tedium  of  delay,  a  project  enter- 
ed the  head  of  Villiers  (who  had  for  some  years  ruled  the  king 
with  absolute  authority),  that  was  fitter  to  be  conceived  by  the 
knight  of  a  romance,  than  by  a  minister  and  a  statesman.  It  was 
nothing  less  than  that  the  prince  should  travel  in  disguise  into 
Spain,  and  visit  the  object  of  his  affections  in  person.  Bucking- 
ham, who  wished  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the  prince,  offered  to 
be  his  companion ;  and  the  king,  whose  business  it  was  to  check 
so  wild  a  scheme,  gave  his  consent  to  this  hopeful  proposal.  Their 
adventures  on  this  strange  project  could  fill  novels,  and  have  ac- 
tually been  made  the  subject  of  many.  Charles  was  the 
knight-errant,  and  Buckingham  was  his  'squire.  They  11"-^^^ 
travelled  through  France  in  disguise,  assuming  the  names  of  Jack 
and  Tom  Smith.  They  went  to  a  ball  at  Paris,  where  the  prince 
first  saw  the  princess  Henrietta,  whom  he  afterwards  married, 
and  who  was  then  in  the  bloom  of  youth  and  beauty.  They  were 
received  at  the  court  of  Spain  with  all  possible  demonstrations  of 
respect ;  but  Buckingham  filled  the  whole  city  with  intrigues,  ad- 
ventures, serenades,  challenges,  and  jealousy.  To  complete  the 
catalogue  of  his  follies,  he  fell  in  love  with  the  countess  of  Oliva- 
rez,  the  prime  minister's  wife,  and  insulted  that  minister  in  per- 
son. These  levities  were  not  to  be  endured  at  such  a  court  as 
that  of  Spain,  where  jealousy  is  so  prevalent,  and  decorum  so 
much  observed ;  the  match  was  therefore  broken  off.  Historians 
do  not  assign  the  reason ;  but  if  we  may  credit  the  novelists  of 
that  time,  the  prince  had  already  fixed  his  affections  upon  the 
French  princess. 

In  fact,  a  match  for  this  prince  was  soon  after  negotiated  with 
Henrietta,  who  was  the  daughter  of  the  great  Henry  the  Fourth  ; 
and  this  met  with  better  success  than  the  former.  However,  the 
king  had  not  the  sante  allurements  in  prosecuting  this  match  as 
the  former,  as  the  portion  promised  him  was  much  smaller ;  but, 
willing  that  his  son  should  not  be  altogether  disappointed  of  a 
liride,  as  the  king  of  France  demanded  only  the  same  terms  which 
had  been  offered  to  the  court  of  Spain,  James  consented  to  com- 
ply. In  an  ai'ticle  of  his  treaty  of  marriage,  it  was  stipulated 
that  the  education  of  the  children,  till  the  age  of  thirteen,  should 


504  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

belong  to  the  mother ;  and  this  probably  gave  that  turn  towards 
poperj,  which  has  since  been  the  ruin  of  that  unfortunate  family. 

Indeed  a  variety  of  causes  seemed  to  conspire  with  their  own 
imprudence  to  bring  down  upon  them  those  evils  which  they  af- 
terwards experienced.  The  house  of  commons  was  by  this  time 
become  quite  unmanageable ;  the  prodigality  of  James  to  his  fa- 
vourites had  made  his  necessities  so  many,  that  he  was  contented 
to  sell  the  different  branches  of  his  prerogative  to  the  commons, 
one  after  the  other,  to  procure  supplies.  In  proportion  as  they 
perceived  his  wants,  they  found  out  new  grievances  ;  and  every 
grant  of  money  was  sure  to  come  with  a  petition  for  redress. 
The  struggles  between  him  and  his  parliament  had  been  growing 
more  and  more  violent  every  session ;  and  the  last  advanced  their 
pretensions  to  such  a  degree,  that  he  began  to  take  the  alarm  ; 
but  those  evils,  to  which  the  weakness  of  this  monarch  had  con- 
tributed to  give  birth,  fell  upon  his  successor. 

These  domestic  troubles  were  attended  by  others  still  more 
important  in  Germany,  and  which  produced  in  the  end  the  most 
dangerous  effects.  The  king's  eldest  daughter  had  been  married 
to  Frederic,  the  elector  palatine  of  Germany  ;  and  this  pi'ince, 
having  accepted  the  Bohemian  crown  from  the  rebellious  subjects 
of  the  emperor  Ferdinand  the  Second,  was  defeated  in  a  deci- 
sive battle,  and  obliged  to  take  refuge  in  Holland.  His  affinity  to 
the  English  crown,  his  misfortunes,  but  particularly  the  protestant 
religion  for  which  he  had  contended,  were  strong  motives  for  the 
people  of  England  to  wish  well  to  las  cause ;  and  frequent  ad- 
dresses were  sent  from  the  commons  to  spur  up  James  to  take 
a  part  in  the  German  contest,  and  to  replace  tlie  exiled  prince 
upon  the  throne  of  his  ancestors.  James  at  first  attempted  to 
ward  off  the  misfortunes  of  his  son-in-law  by  negotiations  ;  but 
these  proving  utterly  ineffectual,  it  was  resolved  at  last  to  rescue 
the  Palatinate  from  the  emperor,  by  force  of  arms.  Accordingly 
war  was  declared  against  Spain  and  the  emperor ;  six 
L  'J  thousand  men  were  sent  over  into  Holland,  to  assist 
prince  Maurice  in  Ms  schemes  against  those  powers  ;  the  people 
were  every  where  elated  at  the  courage  of  their  king,  and  were 
satisfied  with  any  war  which  was  to  exterminate  the  papists. 
This  army  was  followed  by  another  consisting  of  twelve  thousand 
men,  commanded  by  count  Mansfeldt  5  and  the  coui:t  of  France 


JAMES  L  505 

promised  its  assistance.  But  the  English  were  disappointed  in 
all  their  views.  The  troops,  sailing  to  Calais,  found  no  orders 
for  their  admission.  After  waiting  in  vain  for  some  time,  they 
were  obliged  to  sail  towards  Zealand,  where  no  proper  measures 
were  yet  taken  for  their  disembarkation.  Meanwhile  a  pestilen- 
tial distemper  crept  in  among  the  forces,  so  long  cooped  up  in 
narrow  vessels ;  half  the  army  died  while  on  board,  and  the  other 
half,  weakened  by  sickness,  appeared  too  small  a  body  to  march 
into  the  Palatinate  ;  and  thus  ended  this  ill-concerted  and  fruit- 
less expedition. 

Whether  this  misfortune  had  any  effect  upon  the  constitution 

of  the  king,  is  uncertain ;  but  he  was  soon  after  seized 

.  .  .        ri625.1 

with  a  tertian  ague.     When  his  courtiers  assured  him   >     ""  '-^ 

from  the  proverb  that  it  was  health  for  a  king,  he  replied,  that 
the  proverb  was  meant  for  a  young  king.  After  some  fits,  he 
found  himself  extremely  weakened,  and  sent  for  the  prince,  whom 
he  exhorted  to  persevere  in  the  protestant  religion  ;  then  prepar^^ 
ing  with  decency  and  courage  to  meet  his  end,  he  expired,  after  a 
reign  over  England  of  twenty -two  years,  and  in  the  fifty -ninth 
year  of  his  age.  With  regard  to  foreign  negotiations,  James 
neither  understood  nor  cultivated  them ;  and  perhaps  in  a  king- 
dom so  situated  as  England,  domestic  politics  are  alone  sufficient* 
His  reign  was  marked  with  none  of  the  splendours  of  triumph, 
nor  with  any  new  conquests  or  acquisitions  ;  but  the  arts  were 
nevertheless  silently  going  on  to  improvement.  Reason  was  ex- 
tending her  influence,  and  discovering  to  mankind  a  thousand 
errors  in  religion,  in  morals,  and  in  government,  that  had  long 
been  reverenced  by  blind  submission.  The  Reformation  had  pro- 
duced a  spirit  of  liberty,  as  well  as  of  investigation,  among  all 
ranks  of  mankind,  and  taught  them  that  no  precedents  could 
sanctify  fraud,  tyranny,  or  injustice.  James  taught  them  by  his 
own  example  to  argue  upon  the  nature  of  the  king's  prerogative, 
and  the  extent  of  the  subject's  liberty.  He  first  began  by  setting 
up  the  prescriptive  authority  of  kings  against  the  natural  privi- 
leges of  the  people  ;  but  when  the  subject  was  submitted  to  a  con- 
troversy, it  was  soon  seen  that  the  monarch's  was  the  weaker 
side. 

VOL.  I.  64 


506  HISTOUY  OF  ENGLAND, 


CHAP.  XXIX. 
CHARLES  I. 

March  27  ^  ^^  princes  have  ascended  a  throne  with  more  appa- 
1625.  rent  advantages  than  Charles  ;  and  none  ever  encoun- 
tered more  real  difficulties.  The  advantages  were  such  as  might 
flatter  even  the  most  cautious  prince  into  security ;  the  difficul- 
ties were  such  as  no  abilities  could  surmount.  He  found  himself, 
upon  coming  to  the  crown,  possessed  of  a  peaceful  and  flourish- 
ing kingdom,  his  right  undisputed,  his  power  strengthened  by  an 
alliance  with  one  of  the  most  potent  nations  in  Europe,  his  abso- 
lute authority  tacitly  acknowledged  by  one  part  of  his  subjects, 
and  enforced  from  the  pulpit  by  the  rest.  To  add  to  all  this,  he 
was  loved  by  his  people,  whose  hearts  he  had  gained  by  his  vir- 
tues, his  humility,  and  his  candour. 

But  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  picture  we  are  presented  with 
a  very  different  scene.  Men  had  begun  to  think  of  the  different 
rights  of  mankind,  and  found  that  all  had  an  equal  claim  to  the 
inestimable  blessings  of  freedom.  The  spirit  of  liberty  was 
roused ;  and  it  was  resolved  to  oppose  the  antient  claims  of  mon- 
archs,  who  usurped  their  power  in  times  of  ignorance  or  danger, 
and  who  pleaded  in  succeeding  times  their  former  encroachments 
as  prescriptive  privileges.  Charles  had  been  taught  from  his  in- 
fancy, to  consider  the  royal  prerogative  as  a  sacred  pledge, 
which  it  was  not  in  his  power  to  alienate,  much  less  his  duty  to 
abridge.  His  father,  who  had  contributed  so  much  to  sink  the 
claims  of  the  crown,  had,  nevertheless,  boldly  defended  them  in 
his  writings,  and  taught  his  son  to  defend  by  the  sword  what  he 
had  only  inculcated  by  the  press.  Charles,  though  a  prince  of 
tolerable  understanding,  had  not  comprehension  enough  to  see 
that  the  genius  and  disposition  of  his  people  had  received  a  total 
change ;  he  resolved  therefore  to  govern,  by  old  maxims  and  pre- 
cedents, a  people  who  had  lately  found  out  that  these  maxims 
were  established  in  times  of  ignorance  and  slavery. 

In  the  foregoing  reigns,  I  have  given  very  little  of  the  parlia- 
nientary  history  of  the  times,  which  would  have  led  me  out  of  the 
way  ;  but  in  the  present  it  will  be  proper  to  point  out  the  trans- 


CHARLES  I.  507 

actions  of  every  parliament,  as  they  make  the  principal  figure  in 
this  remarkable  eera,  in  which  we  see  genius  and  courage  united 
in  opposing  injustice,  seconded  by  custom,  and  backed  by  power. 

Charles  undertook  the  reins  of  government  with  a  fixed  per- 
suasion that  his  popularity  was  sufficient  to  carry  every  measure. 
He  was  burthened  with  a  treaty  for  defending  the  Palatinate,  con- 
cluded in  the  late  reign  ;  and  the  war  declared  for  that  purpose 
was  to  be  carried  on  with  vigour  in  this.  But  war  was  more  ea- 
sily declared,  than  supplies  were  granted.  After  some  reluc- 
tance, the  commons  voted  him  two  subsidies ;  a  sum  far  from  be- 
ing sufficient  to  support  him  in  his  intended  equipment,  to  assist 
his  brother-in-law ;  and  to  this  was  added  a  petition  for  punishing 
papists,  and  redressing  the  grievances  of  the  nation.  Bucking- 
ham, who  had  been  the  late  king's  favourite,  and  who  was  still 
more  caressed  by  the  present  monarch,  did  not  escape  their  cen- 
sures ;  so  that,  instead  of  granting  the  sums  requisite,  they  em- 
ployed the  time  in  disputations  and  complaints,  till  the  season  for 
prosecuting  the  intended  campaign  was  elapsed.  Charles,  there- 
fore, wearied  with  their  delays,  and  offended  at  the  refusal  of 
his  demands,  thought  proper  to  dissolve  a  parliament  which  he 
could  not  bring  to  reason. 

To  supply  the  want  of  parliamentary  aids,  Charles  had  recourse 
to  some  of  the  antient  methods  of  extortion,  practised  by  sover- 
eigns when  in  necessitous  circumstances.  That  kind  of  tax 
called  a  benevolence  was  ordered  to  be  exacted,  and  privy -seals 
were  issued  accordingly.  Jn  order  to  cover  the  rigour  of  this 
step,  it  was  commanded  that  none  should  be  asked  for  money  but 
such  as  were  able  to  spare  it ;  and  he  directed  letters  to  different 
persons,  mentioning  the  sums  he  desired.  With  this  the  people 
were  obliged,  though  reluctantly,  to  comply  ;  it  was  in  fact  au- 
thorised by  many  precedents  ;  but  no  precedents  whatsoever 
could  give  a  sanction  to  injustice. 

With  this  money,  a  fleet  was  equipped  against  Spain,  carrying 
ten  thousand  men  ;  the  command  of  which  army  was  intrusted 
to  lord  Wimbleton,  who  sailed  directly  to  Cadiz,  and  found  the 
bay  full  of  ships  of  great  value.  But  he  failed  in  making  himself 
master  of  the  harbour,  while  his  undisciplined  army  landing,  in- 
stead of  attacking  the  town,  could  not  be  restrained  from  indulg- 
ing themselves  in  the  wine,  which  they  found  in  great  abundance 


508  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

on  shore.  Further  stay  therefore  appeared  fruitless ;  they  were 
re-embarked ;  and  the  plague  attacking  the  fleet  soon  afterwards, 
they  were  obliged  to  abandon  all  hopes  of  success,  and  return  to 
England.  Loud  complaints  were  made  against  the  court,  for  in- 
trusting so  important  a  command  to  a  person  who  was  judged  so 
unqualified  for  the  undertaking. 

This  ineffectual  expedition  was  a  great  blow  to  the  court :  and 
to  retrieve  the  glory  of  the  nation,  another  attempt  was  to  be 
made,  but  with  a  more  certain  prospect  of  success.     New  supplies 
therefore  being  requisite,  the  king  was  resolved  to  obtain  them 
in  a  more  regular  and  constitutional  manner  than  before.     An- 
other parliament  was  accordingly  called ;   and  though 
L         J    some  steps  were  taken  to  exclude  the  more  popular 
leaders  of  the  last  house  of  commons,  by  nominating  them  as 
sheriffs  of  counties,  yet  the  present  parliament  seemed  more  re- 
fractory than  the  former.     When  the  king  laid  before  the  house 
his  necessities,  and  asked  for  a  supply,  they  voted  him  only  three 
subsidies,  which  amounted  to  about  a  hundred  and  sixty  thousand 
pounds  ?  a  sum  no  way  adequate  to  the  importance  of  the  war, 
or  the  necessities  of  the  state.     But  even  this  was  not  to  be  grant- 
ed until  the  grievances  of  the  state  were  redressed.     Their  chief 
indignation  was  levelled  against  Buckingham,  a  minister  who  had 
no  real  merit,  and  the  great  infelicity  of  being  the  king's  favour- 
ite.    Whenever  the  subjects  resolve  to  attack  the  royal  preroga- 
tive, they  begin  with  the  favourites  of  the  crown ;  and  wise  mon- 
archs  seldom  have  any.     Charles  was  not  possessed  of  the  art  of 
making  a  distinction  between  friends  and  ministers ;  and  whoever 
was  his  friend  was  always  trusted  with  the  administration  of  his 
affairs.     He  loved  the  duke,  and  undertook  to  protect  him ;  air 
tliough  to  defend  a  person  so  obnoxious  to  the  people,  was  to  share 
his  reproach.     The  commons  undertook  to  impeach  him  in  the 
lower  house,  while  the  earl  of  Bristol,  who  had  returned  from  his 
embassy  in  Spain,  accused  him  among  his  peers.     The  purport  of 
the  charge  against  him  amounted  to  little  more  than  that  he  had 
engrossed  too  much  power  for  himself  and  his  relations  ;  that  he 
had  neglected  to  guard  the  seas  with  the  fleet ;  and  that  he  had 
applied  a  plaster  to  the  late  king's  side,  which  was  supposed  to  be 
poisonous,  and  to  hasten  his  end.     These  frivolous  accusations 
mu!»t  have  sunk  of  themselves,  had  they  not  been  intemperatelj 


CHARLES  I.  509 

opposed  by  the  royal  authority.  The  king  gave  orders  to  the 
lord-keeper  to  command  the  commons  expressly  in  his  name  not 
to  meddle  with  his  minister  and  servant  Buckingham.  The  more 
to  enrage  them,  he  had  him  elected  chancellor  of  the  university 
of  Cambridge,  and  wrote  that  body  a  letter  of  thanks  for  their 
compliance.  He  assured  the  commons,  that  if  they  would  not  com- 
ply with  his  demands,  he  would  try  new  counsels.  But  what 
justly  enraged  them  beyond  all  sufferance,  was,  when  two  of  their 
members,  sir  Dudley  Digges  and  sir  John  Elliot,  complained  of 
this  partiality  in  favour  of  a  man  odious  to  the  nation,  the  king 
ordered  both  to  be  committed  to  prison  for  seditious  behaviour. 
This  was  an  open  act  of  violence,  and  should  have  been  support- 
ed, or  never  attempted. 

It  was  now  that  the  commons  justly  exclaimed  that  their  priv- 
ileges were  infringed,  and  all  freedom  of  debate  destroyed.  They 
protested  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  that  neither  of  their  mem- 
bers had  said  any  thing  disrespectful  of  the  king  ;  and  they  made 
preparations  for  publishing  their  vindication.  The  king,  whose 
character  it  was  to  show  a  readiness  to  undertake  harsh  measures, 
but  not  to  support  them,  released  the  two  members ;  and  this 
compliance  confirmed  that  obstinacy  in  the  house  which  his  inju- 
ries had  contributed  to  give  rise  to.  The  earl  of  Arundel,  for  be- 
ing guilty  of  the  same  offence  in  the  house  of  lords,  was  rashly 
imprisoned,  and  as  tamely  dismissed  by  the  king.  Thus,  the  two 
houses  having  refused  to  answer  the  intentions  of  the  court  with- 
out previous  conditions,  the  king,  rather  than  give  up  his  favour- 
ite, chose  to  be  without  the  supply,  and  therefore  once  more  dis- 
solved the  parliament. 

The  new  counsels  which  Charles  had  mentioned  to  the  parlia- 
ment were  now  to  be  tried,  in  order  to  supply  his  necessities. 
Instead  of  making  peace  with  Spain,  and  thus  trying  to  abridge 
his  expenses,  since  he  could  not  enlarge  his  income,  he  resolved 
to  carry  on  the  war,  and  to  keep  up  a  standing  army  for  this  pur- 
pose. Perhaps,  also,  he  had  a  further  view  in  keeping  his  army 
in  pay,  which  was  to  seize  upon  the  liberty  of  his  subjects,  when 
he  found  matters  ripe  for  the  execution.  But  at  present  his  forces 
were  new  levied,  ill  paid,  and  worse  disciplined ;  so  that  the  mi- 
litia of  the  country,  that  could  be  instantly  led  out  against  him, 
were  far  his  superiors.     In  order,  therefore,  to  gain  time  and 


5 JO  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

.money,  a  commission  was  openly  gi'anted  to  compound  with  the 
catholics,  and  agree  for  a  dispensation  of  the  penal  laws  against 
them.  He  borrowed  a  sum  of  money  from  the  nobility,  whose 
contributions  came  in  but  slowly.  But  the  greatest  stretch  of  his 
power  was  in  the  levying  of  ship-money.  In  order  to  equip  a  fleet 
(at  least  this  was  the  pretence  made),  every  maritime  town  was 
required,  with  the  assistance  of  the  adjacent  counties,  to  arm  a 
certain  number  of  vessels.  The  city  of  London  was  rated  at 
twenty  ships.  This  was  the  commencement  of  a  tax,  which  after- 
wards, being  carried  to  very  violent  lengths,  created  such  great 
discontents  in  the  nation.  But  the  extortions  of  the  ministry  did 
not  rest  here.  Persons  of  birth  and  rank,  who  refused  the  loan, 
were  summoned  before  the  council ;  and,  upon  persisting  in  a  re- 
fusal, were  put  into  confinement.  Thus  we  see  here,  as  in  every 
civil  war,  something  to  blame  on  one  side  and  the  other;  both  sides 
guilty  of  injustice,  yet  each  actuated  by  general  motives  of  virtue; 
the  one  contending  for  the  inherent  liberties  of  mankind,  the  other 
for  the  prescriptive  privileges  of  the  crown ;  both  driven  to  all 
the  extremes  of  falsehood,  rapine,  and  injustice,  and.  by  a  fate  at- 
tendant on  humanity,  permitting  their  actions  to  degenerate  from 
the  motives  which  first  set  them  in  motion. 

Hitherto  the  Avill  of  the  monarch  was  reluctantly  obeyed :  most 
of  those  who  refused  to  lend  their  money  Ivere  thrown  into  pris- 
on, and  patiently  submitted  to  confinement,  or  applied  by  petition 
to  the  king  for  their  release.  Five  persons  alone  undertook  to 
defend  the  cause  of  the  public;  and,  at  the  hazard  of  their  whole 
fortunes,  were  resolved  to  try  whether  tlie  king  legally  had  a  right 
to  confine  their  persons  without  an  infringement  of  any  law.  The 
names  of  these  patriots  were  sir  Thomas  Darnel,  sir  John  Corbet, 
sir  Walter  Earl,  sir  John  Heveningham,  and  sir  Edward  Hamp- 
den. Their  cause  M'as  brought  to  a  solemn  trial  before  tlie  King's 
Bench,  and  the  whole  kingdom  was  attentive  to  the  result  of  so 
important  a  trial. 

■j^^^  By  the  debates  on  this  subject  it  appeared  that  per- 

[1626.]  sonal  liberty  had  been  secured  by  no  less  than  six  dif- 
ferent statutes,  and  by  an  article  of  the  Great  Charter  itself ; 
that  in  times  of  tui-bulence  and  sedition,  the  princes  infringed 
those  laws;  and  of  this  also  many  examples  were  produced. 
The  difficulty  then  lay  to  determine  when  such  violent  measures 


*  CHARLES  I.  '511 

were  expedient ;  but  of  that  the  court  pretended  to  be  the  su- 
preme judge.  As  it  was  legal,  therefore,  that  these  five  gentle- 
men should  plead  the  statute,  by  which  they  might  demand  bail, 
so  it  was  expedient  in  the  court  to  remand  them  to  prison,  with- 
out determining  on  the  necessity  of  taking  bail  for  the  present. 
This  was  a  cruel  evasion  of  justice,  and,  in  fact,  satisfied  neither 
the  court  nor  the  country  party.  The  court  insisted  that  no  bail 
could  be  taken  :  the  country  exclaimed  that  the  prisoners  should 
be  set  free. 

The  king  being  thus  embroiled  with  his  parliament,  his  people, 
and  some  of  the  most  powerful  foreign  states,  it  was  not  without 
amazement  that  all  men  saw  him  enter  into  a  war  with  r-^  ^^^  -, 
France,  a  kingdom  with  which  hB  had  but  lately  formed 
the  most  natural  alliance.  This  monarch,  among  the  foibles  of  a 
good  disposition,  relied  too  much  on  the  sincerity  of  his  servants  5 
and,  among  others,  permitted  Buckingham  to  lead  him  as  he 
thought  proper.  All  historians  agree  that  this  minister  had  con- 
ceived hopes  of  gaining  the  heart  of  the  queen  of  France,  while, 
at  the  same  time,  cardinal  Richelieu  aspired  to  the  same  honour. 
The  rivalry  of  these  favourites  produced  an  inveterate  enmity  be- 
tween them  ;  and,  from  a  private  quarrel,  they  resolved  to  involve 
their  respective  nations  in  the  dispute.  However  this  be,  war 
was  declared  against  France ;  and  Charles  was  taught  to  hope, 
that  hostilities  with  that  kingdom  would  be  the  surest  means  of 
producing  unanimity  at  home. 

But  fortune  seemed  to  counteract  all  this  monarch's  attempts. 
A  fleet  vras  sent  out,  under  the  command  of  Buckingham,  to  re- 
lieve Rochelle,  a  maritime  town  in  France,  that  had  long  enjoyed 
its  privileges  independent  of  the  French  king,  but  which  had  for 
some  years  embraced  the  reformed  religion,  and  now  was  besieg- 
ed by  a  formidable  army.  This  expedition  was  as  unfortunate  as 
that  on  the  coast  of  Spain.  The  duke's  measures  were  so  ill  con- 
cei'ted,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  shut  their  gates,  and  refused 
to  adm.it  allies,  of  whose  coming  they  were  not  previously  inform- 
ed. Instead  of  attacking  the  island  of  Oleron,  which  was  fertile 
and  defenceless,  he  bent  his  course  to  the  isle  of  Rhe,  which  was 
garrisoned,  and  well  fortified.  He  attempted  there  to  starve  out 
the  garrison  of  St.  Martin's  castle,  which  was  copiously  supplied 
with  provisions  by  sea.     By  that  time  the  French  had  landed  their 


512  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

forces  privately  at  another  part  of  the  island;  so  that  Bucking- 
ham was  at  last  obliged  to  retreat,  but  with  such  precipitation^ 
that  two  thousand  of  his  men  were  cut  to  pieces  before  he  could 
re -embark,  though  he  was  the  last  of  the  whole  army  tlmt  quitted 
the  shore.  This  proof  of  his  personal  courage,  however,  was  but 
a  small  subject  of  consolation  for  the  disgrace  which  his  country 
had  sustained ;  and  his  own  person  would  have  been  the  last  they 
would  have  regretted. 

The  bad  success  of  this  expedition  served  to  render  the  duke 
n  fi98  ~l  ^^^^^  niore  obnoxious,  and  the  king  more  needy.  He 
therefore  resolved  to  call  a  third  parliament ;  for  money 
was  to  be  had  at  any  rate.  In  his  first  speech,  he  intimated  to 
the  two  houses,  that  they  were  convoked  on  purpose  to  grant  the 
supplies  ;  and  that,  if  they  should  neglect  to  contribute  what  was 
necessary  for  the  support  of  the  state,  he  would,  in  discharge  of 
his  conscience,  use  those  means  which  God  had  put  into  his 
hands,  for  saving  that  which  the  folly  of  certain  persons  would 
otherwise  endanger.  But  the  king  did  not  find  his  commons  in- 
timidated by  his  threats,  or  by  those  of  the  lord-keeper,  who  com- 
mented upon  what  he  said.  They  boldly  inveighed  against  his 
late  arbitrary  measures,  forced  loans,  benevolences,  taxes  without 
consent  of  parliament,  arbitrary  imprisonments,  billeting  soldiers, 
tnartial  laws ;  these  were  the  grievances  complained  of,  and 
against  these  they  insisted  that  an  eternal  remedy  should  be  pro- 
vided. An  immunity  from  these  vexations  they  alleged  to  be  the 
inherent  right  of  the  subject;  and  their  new  demands  they  resolv- 
ed to  call  a  petition  of  right,  as  implying  privileges  they  had  al- 
ready been  possessed  of.  Nothing  could  be  more  just  tlian  the 
enactment  of  the  contents  of  this  petition  of  right.  The  Great 
Charter,  and  tlie  old  statutes,  were  sufficiently  clear  in  favour  of 
liberty ;  but  as  all  the  kings  of  England,  in  cases  of  necessity 
or  expediency,  had  been  accustomed  at  intervals  to  elude  them  ; 
and  as  Charles,  in  a  complicationof  instances,  had  lately  violated 
them  ;  it  was  requisite  to  enact  a  new  law,  which  might  not  be 
eluded  or  violated  by  any  authority,  or  any  precedent  to  the  con- 
trary. 

But  though  this  was  an  equitable  proposal,  and  though  a  ready 
compliance  with  it  might  have  prevented  many  of  the  disorders 
that  were  about  to  ensue,  Cliarles  was  taught  to  consider  it  as  the 


CHARLES  I.  513 

most  violent  encroachment  on  his  prerogative,  and  used  at  first 
every  method  to  obstruct  its  progress.  When  he  found  that  no- 
thing but  his  assent  would  satisfy  the  house,  he  gave  it ;  but  at 
first  in  such  an  ambiguous  manner  as  left  him  still  in  possession 
of  his  former  power.  At  length,  however,  to  avoid  their  indigna- 
tion, and  still  more  to  screen  his  favourite,  he  thought  proper  to 
give  them  full  satisfaction.  He  came  therefore  to  the  house  of 
peers,  and  pronouncing  the  usual  form  of  words,  "  Soit  fait  conime 
il  est  desire^  Let  it  be  law  as  it  is  desired,"  he  gave  the  petition 
of  right  all  the  sanction  that  was  necessary  to  pass  it  into  a  law= 
The  acclamations  with  which  the  house  resounded,  sufficiently 
testified  the  joy  of  the  people ;  and  a  bill  for  five  subsidies,  which 
passed  soon  after,  was  the  sti'ongest  mark  of  their  gratitude. 

But  the  commons,  finding  their  perseverance  crowned  with 
success  in  this  instance,  were  resolved  to  carry  the  scrutiny  into 
every  part  of  government  which  they  considered  as  defective* 
The  leaders  of  the  house  of  commons  at  this  time  were  very  dif- 
ferent from  those  illiterate  barbarians  who,  a  century  or  two  be- 
fore, came  up  to  the  capital,  not  to  grant  supplies,  but  to  consider 
where  supplies  were  to  be  procured ;  not  to  debate  as  legislators, 
but  to  receive  commands  as  inferiors.  The  men  of  whom  the 
present  parliaments  were  composed,  were  persons  of  great  know- 
ledge and  extensive  learning,  of  undaunted  courage  and  inflexi- 
ble perseverance. 

A  little  before  the  meeting  of  this  parliament,  a  commission  had 
been  granted  to  thirty -three  of  the  principal  officers  of  state,  em- 
powering them  to  meet  and  concert  among  themselves  the  meth- 
ods of  levying  money  by  impositions  or  otherwise.  The  com- 
mons applied  for  cancelling  that  commission;  and  indeed  the 
late  statute  of  the  petition  of  rights  seemed  to  render  such  a  com- 
mission entirely  unnecessary.  They  objected  to  another  com- 
mission for  raising  money  for  the  introduction  of  a  thousand  Ger- 
man horse,  which,  with  just  reason,  they  feared  might  be  turned 
against  the  liberties  of  the  people.  They  resumed  also  their  cen- 
sure of  Buckingham,  whom  they  resolved  implacably  to  pursue. 
They  also  openly  asserted,  that  the  method  of  levying  money 
used  by  the  king,  called  tonnage  and  poundage,  without  the  con- 
sent of  parliament,  was  a  palpable  violation  of  the  liberties  of  the 
people.     All  these  grievances  were  preparing  to  be  drawn  up  in 

VOL.  I.  65 


514  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

a  remonstrance  to  his  majesty,  when  the  king,  hearing  of  their 
intentions,  came  suddenly  to  the  house,  and  closed  the  sessiono 

But  they  were  not  so  easily  to  be  intimidated  in  their  schemes 
ri629  ~\  ^^^  ^'^^  liberty  of  the  people.  They  urged  their  claims 
with  still  more  force  on  their  next  sitting ;  and  the  duty 
of  tonnage  and  poundage  M^as  discussed  with  greater  pi-ecision 
than  befoi-e.  This  tax  upon  merchandise  was  a  duty  of  very 
early  institution,  and  had  been  conferred  on  Henry  the  Fifth,  and 
all  succeeding  princes,  during  life,  in  order  to  enable  them  to 
maintain  a  naval  force  for  the  protection  of  the  kingdom.  But 
the  parliament  had  usually  granted  it  as  of  their  special  favour, 
in  the  beginning  of  each  reign,  except  to  Henry  the  Eighth,  who 
had  it  not  conferred  on  him  by  parliament  till  the  sixth  year  of 
his  sitting  on  the  throne.  Although  he  had  continued  to  receive 
it  from  the  beginning,  yet  he  thought  it  necessary  to  have  the 
sanction  of  parliament  to  ensure  it  to  him  5  which  certainly  im- 
plied that  it  was  not  an  inherent  privilege  of  the  crown.  Upon 
this  argument  the  commons  founded  their  objections  to  the  levy- 
ing of  it  in  the  present  reign ;  it  was  a  tax  which  they  had  not 
yet  granted,  and  it  had  been  granted  by  them  in  every  preceding 
reign.  They  refused,  therefore,  to  grant  it  naw ;  and  insisted 
that  the  king  could  not  levy  it  without  their  permission. 

This  bred  a  long  contest,  as  may  be  supposed,  between  the 
commons  and  the  crown.  The  officers  of  the  custom-house  were 
summoned  before  the  commons,  to  give  an  account  by  what  au- 
thority they  seized  the  goods  of  the  merchants  who  had  refused 
to  pay  these  duties.  The  barons  of  the  Exchequer  were  ques- 
tioned with  regard  to  their  decrees  on  that  head ;  and  the  sheriff 
of  London  was  committed  to  the  Tower  for  his  activity  in  sup- 
porting the  custom-house  officers.  These  were  bold  measures ; 
but  the  commons  went  still  farther,  by  a  resolution  to  examine 
into  religious  grievances;  and  a  new  spirit  of  intolerance  began 
to  appear.  The  king,  therefoi-e,  resolved  to  dismiss  a  parliament 
which  he  found  himself  unable  to  manage ;  and  sir  John  Finch, 
the  speaker,  just  as  the  question  concerning  tonnage  and  pound- 
age was  going  to  be  put,  rose  up,  and  informed  the  house  that  he 
had  a  command  from  the  king  to  adjourn. 

Nothing  could  exceed  the  consternation  and  indignation  of  the 
commons  upon  this  information.    Just  at  the  time  they  were  car- 


CHARLES  I.  515 

rying  their  most  favourite  points  to  a  bearing,  to  be  thus  adjourn- 
ed, and  the  parliament  dissolved,  rendered  them  furious.  The 
house  was  in  an  uproar ;  the  speaker  was  pushed  back  into  his 
chair,  and  forcibly  held  in  it  by  Holies  and  Valentine,  till  a  short 
remonstrance  was  framed,  and  passed  by  acclamation  rather  than 
vote.  In  this  hasty  production.  Papists  and  Arminians  were  de- 
clared capital  enemies  to  the  state  ;  the  obnoxious  duty  was  con- 
demned as  contrary  to  law ;  and  not  only  those  who  raised  it, 
but  those  who  paid  it,  were  considered  as  guilty  of  a  high  crime. 

In  consequence  of  this  violent  procedure,  sir  Miles  Hobart,  sir 
Peter  Hayman,  Selden,  Coriton,  Long,  and  Strode,  were,  by  the 
king's  order,  committed  to  prison,  under  pretence  of  sedition. 
But  the  same  temerity  that  impelled  Charles  to  imprison  them, 
induced  him  to  grant  them  a  release.  Sir  John  Elliot,  Holies, 
and  Valentine,  were  summoned  before  the  King's  Bench ;  but 
they  refusing  to  appear  before  an  inferior  tribunal,  for  faults 
committed  in  a  superior,  were  condemned  to  be  imprisoned  dur* 
ing  the  king's  pleasure,  to  pay  a  fine,  the  two  former  of  a  thousand 
pounds  each,  and  the  latter  of  five  hundi-ed,  and  to  find  sureties 
for  their  good  behaviour.  The  members  triumphed  in  their  suf-» 
ferings,  while  they  had  the  whole  kingdom  as  spectators  and  ap^ 
plauders  of  their  fortitude. 

While  the  king  was  thus  distressed  by  the  obstinacy  of  the 
commons,  he  felt  a  much  severer  blow  in  the  death  of  the  duke  of 
Buckingham,  who  fell  a  sacrifice  to  his  unpopularity.  It  had  been 
resolved  once  more  to  undertake  the  raising  of  the  siege  of  Ro" 
chelle ;  and  the  earl  of  Denbigh,  brother-in-law  to  Buckingham, 
had  been  sent  thither  in  the  year  1628,  but  returned  without  ef- 
fecting any  thing.  In  order  to  repair  this  disgrace,  the  duke  of 
Buckingham  went  in  person  to  Portsmouth,  to  hurry  on  another 
expedition,  and  to  punish  such  as  had  endeavoured  to  defraud  the 
crown  of  the  legal  assessments.  In  the  general  discontent  that 
prevailed  against  this  nobleman,  it  was  daily  expected  that  some 
severe  measures  would  be  resolved  on  ;  and  he  was  stigmatised 
as  the  tyrant  and  the  betrayer  of  his  country.  There  was  one 
Felton,  who  caught  the  general  contagion, — lan  Irishman  of  a  good 
family,  who  had  served  under  the  duke  as  lieutenant,  but  had  re- 
signed on  being  refused  his  rank  on  the  death  of  his  captain,  who 
was  killed  at  the  isle  of  Rhe.    This  man  was  naturally  melan^ 


SIQ  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

choly,  courageous,  and  enthusiastic ;  he  felt  for  his  country,  as  if 
labouring  under  a  calamity  which  he  thought  it  in  the  power  of 
his  single  arm  to  remove.  He  therefore  resolved  to  kill  the  duke, 
and  thus  revenge  his  own  private  injuries,  while  he  did  service 
also  to  God  and  man.  Animated  in  this  manner  with  gloomy 
zeal  and  mistaken  patriotism,  he  travelled  down  to  Portsmouth 
alone,  and  entered  the  town  while  the  duke  was  surrounded  by 
his  levee,  and  giving  out  the  necessary  orders  for  embarkation. 
He  was  at  that  time  engaged  in  conversation  with  Soubise,  and 
other  French  gentlemea;  and  a  difference  of  sentiment  having 
arisen  in  the  conference,  it  was  attended  with  all  those  violent 
gesticulations  with  which  foreigners  generally  enforce  their  Clean- 
ing, The  conversation  being  finished,  the  duke  drew  towards 
the  door  j  and  while  he  was  speaking  to  one  of  his  colonels,  Fel- 
ton  struck  him  over  that  officer's  shoulder  in  the  breast  with  his 
knife.  The  duke  had  only  time  to  say,  <<  The  villain  has  killed 
me,"  when  he  fell  at  the  colonel's  feet,  and  instantly  expired. 
No  one  had  seen  the  blow,  or  the  person  who  gave  it ;  but  in  the 
confusion  it  was  generally  supposed  that  he  was  murdered  by 
one  of  the  Frenchmen  who  appeared  so  violent  in  their  motions 
but  a  little  before.  They  were  accordingly  secured,  as  for  certain 
punishment ;  but  in  the  mean  time  a  hat  was  picked  up,  on  the 
inside  of  which  was  sewed  a  paper  containing  four  or  five  lines 
of  the  remonstrance  of  the  commons  against  the  duke ;  and  un- 
der these  lines  a  short  ejaculation,  desiring  aid  in  the  attempt. 
It  was  now  concluded  that  this  hat  must  belong  to  the  assassin ; 
and  while  they  were  employed  in  conjecture^  whose  it  could  be, 
a  man  without  a  hat  was  seen  walking  very  composedly  before 
the  door,  and  was  heard  to  cry  out,  "  I  am  he."  He  disdained 
denying  a  murder  in  which  he  gloried ;  and  averred  that  he  looked 
upon  the  duke  as  an  enemy  to  his  country,  and  as  such  deserving 
to  suffer.  When  asked  at  whose  instigation  he  had  performed 
that  horrid  deed,  he  answered,  that  they  needed  not  trouble  them- 
selves in  that  inquiry;  that  his  conscience  was  his  only  prompter; 
and  that  no  man  on  earth  could  dispose  him  to  act  against  its 
dictates.  He  suffered  with  the  same  degree  of  constancy  to  the 
last ;  and  there  were  many  who  admired  not  only  his  fortitude, 
but  the  action  for  which  he  suffered. 

The  king  had  always  the  highest  regard  for  Buckingham,  and 


CHARLES  I.  517 

was  extremely  mortified  at  his  death ;  he  began  to  perceive  that 
the  tide  of  popularity  was  entirely  turned  from  him,  and  that  the 
behaviour  of  the  house  of  commons  only  served  to  increase  the 
general  discontent.  He  felt  therefore  a  disgust  against  parlia- 
ments ;  and  he  was  resolved  not  to  call  any  more,  till  he  should 
see  greater  indications  of  a  compliant  disposition  in  the  nation. 
Having  lost  his  favourite,  he  became  more  his  own  minister,  and 
never  afterwards  reposed  such  unlimited  confidence  in  any  other. 
But,  though  the  minister  of  the  crown  was  changed,  the  measures 
still  continued  the  same  ;  the  same  disregard  to  the  petitions  of 
the  people,  the  same  desire  of  extending  and  supporting  the  pre- 
rogative, the  same  temerity,  and  the  same  weakness  of  conde- 
scension. 

His  first  measure,  however,  now  being  left  without  a  minister 
and  a  parliament,  was  a  prudent  one.  He  made  peace  with  the 
two  crowns  against  whom  he  had  hitherto  waged  war,  which  had 
been  entered  upon  without  necessity,  and  conducted  without  glo- 
ly.  Being  freed  from  these  embarrassments,  he  bent  his  whole 
attention  to  the  management  of  the  internal  policy  of  the  king- 
dom, and  took  two  men  as  his  associates  in  this  task,  who  still 
acted  an  under-part  to  himself.  These  were  sir  Thomas  Went- 
worth,  whom  he  created  earl  of  Strafford,  and  Laud,  afterwards 
archbishop  of  Canterbury. 

Strafford,  by  his  eminent  talents  and  abilities,  merited  all  the 
confidence  which  the  king  reposed  in  him.  His  character  was 
stately  and  austere  ;  more  fitted  to  procure  esteem  than  love ;  his 
fidelity  to  the  king  was  unshaken ;  but,  in  serving  the  interests  of 
the  crown,  he  did  not  consider  himself  as  an  agent  also  for  the 
benefit  of  the  people.  As  he  now  employed  all  his  counsels  to 
support  the  prerogative,  which  he  formerly  endeavoured  to  dimin- 
ish, his  actions  were  liable  to  the  imputation  of  self-interest  and 
ambition ;  but  his  good  character  in  private  life  made  up  for  that 
seeming  duplicity  of  public  conduct. 

Laud  was  in  the  church  somewhat  resembling  Strafford  in  the 
state,  rigid,  severe,  punctual  and  industrious.  His  zeal  was  un- 
relenting in  the  cause  of  religion  ;  and  the  forms,  as  established 
in  the  reign  of  queen  Elizabeth,  seemed  essentially  connected  with 
it.  His  desire  to  keep  these  on  their  former  footing  was  impru- 
dent and  severe  :  but  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  furious  oppo- 
sition he  met  with  was  sufficient  to  excite  his  resentment. 


518  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

Since  the  times  of  Elizabetli,  a  new  religious  sect  had  been 
gaining  ground  in  England  ;  and  its  members,  from  the  supposed 
greater  purity  of  their  manners,  were  called  Puritans.  Of  all 
other  sects,  this  was  the  most  dangerous  to  monarchy ;  and  the 
tenets  of  it  more  calculated  to  support  that  imagined  equality 
which  obtains  in  a  state  of  nature.  The  partisans  of  this  religion, 
being  generally  men  of  warm,  obstinate  tempers,  pushed  their 
sentiments  into  a  total  opposition  to  those  of  Rome  ;  and  in  the 
countries  where  their  opinions  had  taken  place,  not  only  a  reli- 
gious but  a  political  freedom  began  to  be  established.  All  enthu- 
siasts, indulging  themselves  in  rapturous  flights,  ecstasies,  visions, 
and  inspirations,  have  a  natural  aversion  to  all  ceremonies,  rites, 
or  forms,  which  are  but  external  means  of  supplying  that  devo« 
tion  which  they  want  no  prompter  but  their  hearts  to  inspire. 
The  same  bold  and  daring  spirit  which  accompanied  them  in  their 
addresses  to  the  divinity,  appeared  in  their  political  speculations ; 
and  the  principles  of  civil  liberty,  which  had  hitherto  been  almost 
totally  unknown  in  Europe,  began  to  shoot  forth  in  this  ungracious 
soil.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  therefore,  that  kings  and  bish- 
ops were  eager  to  suppress  the  growth  of  opinions  so  unfavoura- 
ble to  their  authority ;  and  that  Laud,  who  of  all  men  alive  was 
the  most  attached  to  ceremony  and  show,  should  treat  with  zngour 
men  who  braved  him  into  severity.  The  truth  is,  that,  in  the 
histories  of  the  times,  we  find  the  great  cause  of  the  present  con- 
test between  the  king  and  his  people  to  arise  not  from  civil  but 
religious  motives ;  not  from  a  desire  on  the  one  hand  of  extending 
power,  and  on  the  other  of  promoting  liberty  ;  but  merely  from 
tlie  ardour  of  the  king  in  supporting  bishops,  surplices,  and  other 
ceremonies  of  the  church,  and  the  fury  of  the  puritans  in  abolish- 
ing those  distinctions  as  remnants  of  popish  idolatry.  Those  dis- 
tinctions in  religion,  at  this  day,  are  regarded  with  more  uncon- 
cern ;  and,  therefore,  we  are  more  apt  to  impute  the  disorders  of 
those  times  to  civil  motives  of  establishing  liberty,  which,  in  real- 
ity>  made  but  a  very  subordinate  consideration. 

The  humour  of  the  nation  ran,  at  that  time,  into  that  extreme 
which  was  opposite  to  superstition  5  and  those  antient  ceremonies 
to  which  men  had  been  accustomed  in  England,  since  the  com- 
mencement of  the  Reformation,  were  in  general  considered  as 
impious  and  idolatrous.    It  was,  therefore,  the  most  impolitic 


CHARLES  I.  519 

time  in  the  world  for  Laud  to  think  of  introducing  new  ceremo- 
nies and  observances,  which  could  not  fail  of  being  treated  with 
utter  detestation.  Nevertheless,  he  Avent  on  boldly  with  his  in- 
junctions for  the  observance  of  those  rites  which  in  themselves 
were  of  no  moment,  and  were  as  unnecessary  to  be  urged  by  him, 
as  ridiculous  in  being  opposed  by  the  puritans. 

Orders  were  given,  and  rigorously  insisted  on,  that  the  com- 
munion-table should  be  removed  from  the  middle  of  the  church 
where  it  hitherto  stood  since  the  Reformation,  to  the  east  end ; 
where  it  should  be  railed  in  and  denominated  the  altar.  The 
kneeling  at  the  altar,  and  the  using  of  copes  (embroidered  vest- 
ments used  in  popish  countries),  were  introduced,  to  the  great 
discontent  of  the  people.  Some  pictures  were  again  admitted  into 
the  churches  by  his  command.  All  such  clergy  as  neglected  to 
observe  every  ceremony,  were  suspended,  and  deprived  by  the 
high-commission  court.  And  to  mortify  the  puritans  still  more, 
orders  were  issued  from  the  council,  forbidding  any  controversy, 
either  fj-Om  the  pulpit  or  the  press,  on  the  points  in  dispute  between 
them  and  their  opponents,  concerning  free  will  and  predestina- 
tion. At  the  same  time  that  they  obtained  the  king's  protection 
for  carrying  on  these  measures,  the  clergy  took  care  to  repay  the 
monarch  by  magnifying  on  every  occasion  the  regal  authority,  and 
treating  all  pretensions  to  independence  as  a  puritanical  innova- 
tion. The  king's  divine,  hereditary,  and  indefeasible  right  was 
the  theme  of  every  sermon ;  and  those  who  attempted  to  question 
such  doctrines  were  considered  as  making  an  attack  upon  religion 
itself.  The  king,  who  had  now  resolved  to  call  no  more  parlia- 
ments (to  which  resolution  he  adhered  for  the  space  of  eleven 
years),  was  very  well  satisfied  with  these  doctrines,  as  they  were 
the  only  means  of  facilitating  his  measures  of  government,  and 
procuring  those  pecuniary  supplies  which  he  had  no  legal  means 
of  obtaining. 

While  Laud,  therefore,  during  this  long  interval,  ruled  the 
church,  the  king  and  Strafford  undertook  to  manage  the  temporal 
interests  of  the  nation.  A  proclamation  was  issued,  in  which 
Charles  declared,  "  That  whereas,  for  several  ill  ends,  the  calling 
again  of  a  parliament  is  divulged ;  yet  the  late  abuses  having  for 
the  present  unwillingly  driven  him  out  of  that  course,  he  will  ac- 
count it  presumption  for  any  one  to  prescribe  to  him  any  time 


520  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

for  calling  tliat  assembly."  This  was  generally  construed  as  a 
declaration,  that,  during  that  i-eign,  no  more  parliaments  would 
be  summoned  ;  and  every  measure  of  the  king  seemed  to  confirm 
the  suspicion. 

It  was  now  that  the  people,  without  a  defender,  or  hopes  of  re- 
dress, saw  themselves  at  the  mercy  of  a  monarch,  who,  though 
good  and  gentle  in  his  own  nature,  might  at  any  time  change  in 
his  conduct.  They  now  saw  the  constitution  at  one  blow  wholly 
overthrown,  and  one  branch  of  the  legislature  assuming  those 
rights  which  had  been  divided  between  three.  Tonnage  and 
poundage  were  continued  to  be  levied  by  royal  authority  alone  : 
custom-house  officers  received  orders  from  the  council  to  entei* 
any  house  whatever  in  search  of  suspected  goods  ;  compositions 
were  openly  made  with  papists  ;  and  their  religion  was  become  a 
regular  part  of  the  revenue.  The  court  of  Star-chamber  exercised 
its  power,  independent  of  any  law,  upon  several  bold  innovators 
in  liberty,  who  only  gloried  in  their  sufferings,  and  contributed  to 
render  government  odious  and  contemptible.  Sir  David  Foulis 
was  fined  by  this  court  five  thousand  pounds,  merely  for  dis- 
suading a  friend  from  compounding  with  the  commissioners  who 
called  upon  him  to  take  up  the  title  of  knighthood.  Prynne,  a 
barrister  of  Lincoln's  inn,  had  written  an  enormous  quarto  of  a 
thousand  pages,  which  was  entitled  Histriomastix,  or  a  Scourge 
for  the  Stage.  In  this,  beside  much  paltry  declamation  against 
the  stage,  he  took  occasion  to  blame  the  ceremonies  and  late  in- 
novations of  the  church ;  and  this  was  an  offence  that  Laud  waS 
not  likely  to  forgive.  He  was  condemned  by  the  Star-chamber 
n  e.'Xd  1  *^  ^^  degraded  from  the  bar ;  to  stand  in  the  pillory,  in 
two  places,  Westminster  and  Cheapside;  to  lose  his 
ears,  one  at  each  place  ;  to  pay  five  thousand  pounds  to  the  king, 
and  to  be  imprisoned  during  life.  This  sentence,  which  was 
equally  cruel  and  unjust,  was  rigorously  executed ;  and  Prynne 
gloried  in  his  sufferings.  Burton,  a  divine,  and  Bastwick,  a  phy- 
sician, were  tried  before  this  tribunal  for  schismatical  libels,  in 
which  they  attacked,  with  great  severity  and  intemperate  zeal, 
the  ceremonies  of  the  church  of  England.  They  were  condemned 
to  the  same  punishment  that  had  been  inflicted  upon  Prynne ; 
and  Prynne  himself  was  also  tried  for  a  new  offence,  for  which 
he  was  fined  five  thousand  pounds  more,  and  sentenced  to  lose 


CHARLES  T,  521 

tlie  remainder  of  his  ears.  The  answers  which  these  bold  dema- 
gogues  gave  into  court,  were  so  full  of  contumacy  and  invective 
that  no  lawyer  could  be  prevailed  with  to  sign  them.  The  rig- 
eurs,  however,  which  they  underwent,  being  so  unworthy  of  men 
of  their  profession,  gave  general  oifence  ;  and  the  patience,  or 
rather  alacrity,  with  whicli  they  suftered,  increased  still  further 
the  public  indignation. 

The  puritans  restrained  in  England  shipped  themselves  off  for 
America,  where  they  laid  the  foundations  of  a  new  government, 
agreeable  to  their  systems  of  political  freedom.  But  the  govern- 
ment, unwilling  that  the  nation  should  be  deprived  of  its  useful 
members,  or  dreading  the  unpopularity  of  these  emigrations,  at 
length  issued  a  proclamation,  debari'ing  these  devotees  from  ac- 
cess even  to  those  inhospitable  regions.  Eight  ships,  lying  in 
the  Thames,  and  ready  to  sail,  were  detained  by  order  of  coun- 
cil ;  and  in  these  were  embarked  sir  Arthur  Haselrig,  John  Hamp- 
den, and  Oliver  Cromwell,  who  had  resolved  forever  to  abandon 
their  native  country.  This  may  stand  as  a  proof  of  the  sincerity 
these  men  afterwards  testified  in  the  cause  for  which  they  fought ; 
and  is  a  clear  proof  that  hypocrisy,  with  which  they  were  charged 
in  the  beginning  at  least,  was  not  among  the  motives  of  their  op- 
position. 

Every  year,  every  month,  every  day,  gave  fresh  instances, 
during  this  long  intermission  of  parliaments,  of  the  resolution  of 
the  court  to  throw  them  off  forever :  but  the  levying  of  ship-money, 
as  it  was  called,  being  a  general  burthen,  was  universally  com- 
plained of  as  a  national  grievance.  This  was  a  tax  which  had, 
in  former  reigns,  been  levied  without  the  consent  of  parliament  | 
but  then  the  exigency  of  the  state  demanded  such  a  supply.  As 
the  necessity  at  present  was  not  so  apparent,  and  the  impost 
might  excite  murmurs  among  the  people,  a  question  was  proposed 
by  the  king  to  the  judges,  whether,  in  a  case  of  necessity,  for  the 
defence  of  the  kingdom,  he  might  not  levy  this  tax  ?  and  whether 
he  was  not  sole  judge  of  this  necessity  ^  To  this  the  judges  re- 
plied that  he  might ;  and  that  he  was  sole  judge  of  the  necessity. 
In  this  universal  appearance  of  obedience  to  the  king's  injunc- 
tions, John  Hampden,  a  gentleman  of  fortune  in  Buckingham- 
shire, refused  to  comply  with  the  tax,  and  resolved  to  bring  it  to 
a  legal  determination.    He  had  been  rated  at  twenty  shillings 

VOL.  I.  66 


52a  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

for  his  estate,  which  he  refused  to  pay ;  and  the  case  was  argued! 
twelve  days  in  the  Exchequer-chamber,  before  all  the  judges  of 
England.  The  nation  regarded,  with  the  utmost  anxiety,  the 
result  of  a  trial  that  was  to  fix  the  limits  of  the  king's  power  : 
but  after  the  former  opinion  of  the  judges  on  this  subject,  the 
event  might  have  been  easily  foreseen.  All  the  judges,  four  only 
excepted,  gave  sentence  in  favour  of  the  crown  ;  while 
L  "^  *J  Hampden,  who  lost  his  cause,  was  more  than  suffi- 
ciently recompsRsed  by  the  applauses  of  the  people.  Nothing 
now  was  heard  in  every  company  bu.t  murmuTS  against  govern- 
ment, ami  encomiums  on  him  who  had  withstood  its  usurpations. 
It  was  now  alleged  that  tyranny  was  confirmed  into  system ; 
and  that  there  was  no  redress  except  in  sullen  patience  or  con- 
tented slavery.  Ecclesiastical  tyranny  was  thought  to  give  aid 
to  political  injustice ;  and  all  the  rights  of  the  nation,  transmitted 
through  so  many  ages,  secured  by  so  many  laws,  and  purchased 
by  the  blood  of  so  many  heroesj,  now  lay  prostrate  in  undistin- 
guished neglect.  In  this  universal  state  of  despondence,  or 
clamour,  an  accident  gave  the  people  of  England  an  opportunity 
of  vindicating  their  antient  privileges,  and  even  of  acquiring 
greater  than  it  was  compatible  with  the  subjects'  happiness  to 
possess. 

The  Scots  had,  during  the  reign  of  James  the  First,  shown  a 
strong  attachment  to  puritanical  principles ;  and  though  they  still 
continued  to  allow  of  bishops,  yet  they  were  reduced  to  poverty, 
and  treated  with  contempt.  James,  indeed,  had  seen  the  low 
estate  of  episcopacy  in  that  kingdom,  and  had  endeavoured  to 
exalt  and  establish  it  once  more  ;  but  he  died  in  the  midst  of  his 
endeavours.  It  was  the  fate  of  Charles  forever  to  aim  at  projects 
which  were  at  once  impracticable  and  unnecessary ;  he  resolved 
therefore  to  complete  what  his  father  had  begun.  This  ill-judged 
attempt  served  to  alienate  the  affections  of  his  Scotish  subjects 
as  much  as  his  encroachments  on  liberty  had  rendered  him  un- 
popular in  England.  The  flame  of  sedition  in  Scotland  passed 
from  one  town  to  another,  while  the  puritans  formed  a  Covenant, 
to  support  and  defend  their  opinions,  and  resolved  to  establish 
their  doctrines,  or  overturn  the  state.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
king  was  determined  to  establish  the  liturgy  of  the  church  of 
England ;  and  both  sides  being  obstinate  in  opinion,  those  sai-- 


CHARLES  I.  523 

girinary  measures  were  soon  begun  in  Scotland,  which  had  hith- 
erto been  only  talked  of  among  the  English. 

The  discontent  and  opposition  which  Charles  met  with  in 
maintaining  episcopacy  among  his  English  subjects  might,  one 
would  think,  deter  him  from  attempting  to  introduce  it  among 
those  of  Scotland ;  but  such  was  his  ardour,  that  he  was  resolved 
to  have  it  established  in  every  part  of  his  dominions.  When  he 
had  published  an  order  for  reading  the  liturgy  in  their  principal 
church  in  Edinburgh,  the  people  received  it  with  clamours  and 
imprecations.  The  court  party,  indeed,  with  great  justice, 
blamed  their  obstinacy,  as  the  innovations  were  but  trifling  ;  but 
the  people  might  have  retorted  with  still  greater  force  the  folly  of 
their  thus  earnestly  attempting  the  establishment  of  trifles.  The 
seditious  disposition  in  that  kingdom,  which  had  hitherto  been 
kept  within  bounds,  was  now  too  furious  for  restraint,  and  the 
insurrection  became  general  over  the  country. 

Yet  still  the  king  could  not  think  of  desisting  from  his  design ; 
and  so  prepossessed  was  he  in  favour  of  royal  right,  that  he 
thought  the  very  name  of  king,  when  forcibly  urged,  would  in- 
duce the  people  to  return  to  their  duty.  But  he  was  soon  unde- 
ceived ;  the  puritans  of  Scotland  were  republicans  in  principle  as 
well  as  those  in  England;  and  they  only  wished  to  see  the  bish- 
ops first  humbled,  in  order  to  make  a  more  successful  attack  upon 
unguarded  monarchy,  Charles  therefore  finding  them  in  arms, 
and  that  they  insisted  on  displacing  the  bishops,  considered  theii' 
demands  as  an  open  declaration  of  war ;  and  accordingly  sum«- 
moned  such  of  the  nobility  of  England  as  lield  lands  of  the  crown, 
to  furnish  him  with  a  proper  number  of  forces  to  oppose  them. 
To  add  to  these  supplies,  he  demanded  a  voluntary  contribution 
from  the  clergy,  as  he  was  in  fact  fighting  their  cause ;  and  by 
means  of  his  queen,  the  catholics  were  also  pressed  for  their  as= 
sistance.  By  these  methods  he  soon  found  himself  at  the  heaij 
of  an  undisciplined  and  reluctant  army,  amounting  to 
about  twenty  thousand  men,  and  commanded  by  gener-  L  '^  "J 
als  less  willing  to  fight  than  to  negotiate.  His  superiority  in 
numbers,  however,  gave  him  the  manifest  advantage  over  his  re- 
bellious subjects,  who  were  no  way  slow  in  marching  to  give  him 
battle.  But  Charles,  who  inherited  the  peaceable  disposition  of 
his  father,  was  unwilling  to  come  to  extremities,  although  a  blow 


524  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

then  strvick  with  vigour  might  have  prevented  many  of  his  suc- 
ceeding misfortunes.  Instead  of  fighting  with  his  opponents,  he 
entered  upon  a  treaty  with  them ;  so  that  a  suspension  of  arms 
was  soon  agreed  upon,  and  a  treaty  of  peace  concluded,  which 
neitli^-  side  intended  to  observe  ;  and  then  both  parties  agreed 
to  disband  their  forces.  This  step  of  disbanding  the  army  was  a 
fatal  measure  to  Charles,  as  he  could  not  levy  a  new  army  with- 
out great  labour  and  expense ;  while  the  Scotish  insurgents,  who 
all  were  volunteers  in  the  service,  could  be  mustered  again  at 
pleasure.  Of  this  the  heads  of  the  malcontents  seemed  sensible; 
for  they  lengthened  out  the  negotiations  with  affected  difficulties, 
and  threw  in  obstructions  in  proportion  as  they  were  confident  of 
their  own  superiority.  At  length,  after  much  altercation,  and 
many  treaties  signed  and  broken,  both  parties  once  more  had  re- 
course to  arms,  and  nothing  but  blood  could  satiate  the  contenders. 
AVar  being  thus  resolved  on,  the  king  took  every  method,  as 
before,  for  raising  money  to  support  it.  Ship-money  was  levied 
as  usual ;  some  other  arbitrary  taxes  were  exacted  from  the  re- 
luctant people  with  great  severity ;  but  one  method  of  raising 
tiie  supplies  reflects  immortal  honour  on  those  who  contributed. 
The  counsellors  and  servants  of  the  crown  lent  the  king  whatever 
sums  they  could  spare,  and  distressed  their  private  fortunes  to 
gratify  their  sovereign.  These  were  the  resources  of  the  crown 
to  prepare  an  army;  but  they  were  far  from  being  sufficient; 
and  there  now  remained  only  one  method  more,  the  long-ne- 
glected method  of  parliamentary  supply. 

r-icic  -I  It  was  now  about  eleven  years  since  the  king  had 
called  a  parliament.  The  fierce  and  ungovernable  spi- 
rit of  the  last  had  taught  him  to  hate  and  to  fear  such  an  assem- 
bly ;  but  all  resources  being  exhausted,  and  great  debts  contract- 
ed, he  was  obliged  to  call  another  parliament,  from  which  he  had 
no  great  reason  to  expect  any  favour.  The  many  illegal  and  the 
numerous  imprudent  steps  of  tlie  crown,  the  hardships  which  sev- 
eral persons  had  suffered,  and  their  constancy  in  undergoing  pun- 
ishment, had  as  much  alienated  the  affections  of  the  king's  En- 
glish as  of  his  Scotish  subjects.  Instead  of  supplies,  the  king 
\vas  harassed  with  murmurs  and  complaints.  The  zealous  ini-e- 
ligion  were  pleased  with  the  distresses  of  the  crown,  in  its  at- 
tempts against  their  brethren  in  opinion;  and  the  real  friends  to 


CHARLES  I.  -  525 

the  liberties  of  mankind  saw,  with  their  usual  penetration,  that 
the  time  was  approaching  when  the  roval  authority  must  fall  into 
a  total  dependance  on  popular  assemblies,  when  public  freedoni 
must  acquire  a  full  ascendant. 

The  house  of  commons  could  not  be  induced  to  treat  the  Scots, 
who  were  of  the  same  principles  with  themselves,  and  contended 
against  the  same  ceremonies,  as  enemies  to  the  state.  They  re- 
garded them  as  friends  and  brothers,  who  first  rose  to  teach  them 
a  duty  which  it  was  incumbent  on  all  virtuous  minds  to  imitate. 
The  king,  therefore,  could  reap  no  other  fruits  from  this  assembly 
than  murmurings  and  complaints.  Every  method  he  had  taken 
to  supply  himself  with  money  was  declared  an  abuse,  and  a 
breach  of  the  constitution.  Tonnage  and  poundage,  ship-money, 
the  sale  of  monopolies,  the  billeting  soldiers  upon  refractory  cit- 
izens, were  all  condemned  as  stretches  of  arbitrary  power.  The 
king,  finding  no  hopes  of  redress  from  the  commons,  had  recourse 
to  the  house  of  peers ;  but  this  was  equally  ineffectual  with  the 
former  application.  The  king,  finding  no  hopes  of  a  compliance 
with  his  request,  but  recrimination  instead  of  redress,  dissolved 
the  parliament,  to  try  more  feasible  methods  of  removing  his  ne- 
cessities. 

The  king  having  now  made  enemies  of  his  Scotish  subjects  by 
controlling  them  in  their  mode  of  worship,  and  of  the  commons 
by  dissolving  them,  it  remained  to  exasperate  the  city  of  London 
against  him  by  some  new  imprudence.  Upon  their  refusing  to 
lend  money  to  carry  on  the  war  against  the  Scots,  he  sued  the 
citizens  in  the  Star-chamber  for  some  lands  in  Ireland,  and  made 
them  pay  a  considerable  fine.  He  continued  also  to  exact  all  the 
taxes  against  which  every  former  parliament  had  remonstrated  | 
but  all  was  insufiicient.  A  loan  of  forty  thousand  pounds  was 
extorted  from  the  Spanish  merchants,  who  had  bullion  in  the 
Tower,  exposed  to  the  attempts  of  the  king.  Coat  and  conduct 
money  for  the  soldiers  was  levied  on  the  counties;  an  antient 
practice,  but  supposed  to  be  abolished  by  the  petition  of  righto 
All  the  pepper  was  bought  from  the  East  India  company  upon 
trust,  and  sold  at  a  great  discount  for  ready  money.  A  schenie 
was  proposed  for  coining  two  or  three  hundred  thousand  pounds 
of  base  money  ;  and  yet  all  these  methods  were  far  from  being  ef- 
fectual.    The   Scots,  therefore,  sensible   of  the  extremities   to 


526  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

which  he  was  reduced,  led  on  an  ainny'of  twenty  thousand  men  as 
far  as  Newcastle-upon-Tyne,  to  lay  their  grievances  before  their 
sovereign,  as  they  were  pleased  to  term  their  rebellion.  One  of 
the  most  disgusting  strokes  in  the  puritanical  character  of  the 
times  was  this  gentle  language,  and  humble  cant,  in  the  midst  of 
treason,  and  their  flattery  to  their  prince  while  they  were  at- 
tempting to  dethrone  and  destroy  him. 

To  these  troops,  inspired  by  religion,  flushed  with  some  slight 
victories  obtained  over  straggling  parties  of  the  royalists,  and  en- 
couraged by  the  English  themselves,  among  whom  they  continued, 
the  king  was  able  only  to  oppose  a  smaller  force,  new  levied,  un- 
disciplined, seditious,  and  ill  paid.  Being,  therefore,  in  despair 
of  stemming  the  torrent,  he  at  last  yielded  to  it.  He  first  sum- 
moned a  great  council  of  peers  to  York ;  and,  as  he  foresaw  that 
they  would  advise  him  to  call  a  parliament,  he  told  them  in  his 
first  speech  that  he  had  already  taken  that  resolution.  Having 
]sj-„v.  3  thus  prepared  for  his  misfortunes,  he  a  short  time  after 
1640  called  that  long  parliament  which  did  not  discontinue 
fitting  till  his  ruin  had  been  accomplished, 


CHAP,  XXX. 

CHARLES  I.  (ContinuedO 

A  HE  ardent  expectations  of  men  witli  regard  to  a  parliament, 
at  such  a  critical  juncture,  and  during  such  general  discontents, 
miglit  naturally  engage  the  attendance  of  the  members  on  their 
duty.  The  house  of  commons  was  never,  from  its  first  institu- 
tion, observed  to  be  so  numerous,  or  the  assiduity  of  its  members 
greater.  Without  any  interval,  therefore,  they  entered  upon 
business ;  and,  by  unanimous  consent,  they  struck  a  blow  that 
might  be  regarded  as  decisive.  Instead  of  granting  the  demand- 
ed subsidies,  they  impeached  the  earl  of  Strafford,  the  king's  first 
minister,  of  high  treason.  Pym,  a  tedious  but  sensible  speakei-, 
who  at  first  opened  the  accusation  against  him  in  the  house  of 
commons,  was  sent  up  to  defend  it  at  the  bar  of  the  house  of  lords; 
and  most  of  the  house  accompanied  their  member  on  so  agreeable 
an  errand. 


CHARLES  I.  527 

To  bestow  the  greatest  solemnity  on  this  important 


trial,  scaifolds  were  erected  in  Westminster-Hall,  where 


[1641.] 

both  houses  sat,  the  one  as  judges,  the  other  as  accusers.  Beside 
the  chair  of  state,  a  close  gallery  was  prepared  for  the  king  and 
queen,  who  attended  during  the  whole  trial.  The  articles  of  im- 
peachment against  him  were  twenty -eight  in  number ;  the  sub- 
stance of  which  was,  that  he  had  attempted  to  extend  the  king's 
authority  at  home,  and  had  been  guilty  of  several  exactions  in 
Ireland.  But  though  four  months  were  employed  by  the  mana- 
gers in  framing  the  accusation,  yet  there  appears  very  little  just 
cause  of  blame  in  him,  since  the  stretches  of  the  king's  power 
were  made  before  he  came  into  authority.  However,  the  mana- 
gers for  the  house  of  commons  pleaded  against  him  with  vehe- 
mence stronger  than  their  reasons,  and  summed  up  their  argu- 
ments by  insisting,  that  though  each  article  taken  separately  did 
not  amount  to  a  proof,  yet  the  whole  taken  together  might  be 
fairly  concluded  to  carry  conviction.  This  is  a  method  of  arguing 
frequently  used  in  the  English  courts  of  justice  even  to  this  day  ; 
and  perhaps  none  can  be  more  erroneous ;  for  almost  every  false- 
hood may  be  found  to  have  a  multiplicity  of  weak  reasons  to  sup- 
port it.  In  this  tumult  of  aggravation  and  clamour,  the  earl  him- 
self, whose  parts  and  wisdom  had  been  long  respectable,  stood 
unmoved  and  undaunted.  He  defended  his  cause  with  all  the  pres- 
ence of  mind,  judgment,  and  sagacity,  that  could  be  expected 
from  innocence  and  ability.  His  children  were  placed  beside  him^ 
as  he  was  thus  defending  his  life,  and  the  cause  of  his  master. 
After  he  had  in  a  long  and  eloquent  speech,  delivered  without 
premeditation,  confuted  all  the  accusations  of  his  enemies  5  after 
he  had  endeavoured  to  show,  that,  during  his  government  in  Ire- 
land, he  had  introduced  the  arts  of  peace  among  the  savage  part 
of  the  people,  and  that,  if  his  measures  in  England  were  harsh, 
he  had  been  driven  into  them  by  necessity  5  after  he  had  clearly 
refuted  the  argument  upon  the  accumulated  force  of  his  guilt,  he 
thus  drew  to  a  conclusion  :  "  But,  my  lords,  I  have  troubled  you 
too  long ;  longer  than  I  should  have  done,  but  for  the  sake  of  these 
dear  pledges,  which  a  saint  in  heaven  has  left  me."^ — Upon  this 
he  paused,  dropped  a  tear,  looked  upon  his  children,  and  proceed- 
ed : — "  What  I  forfeit  for  myself  is  a  trifle ;  that  my  indiscretions 
should  reach  my  posterity,  wounds  me  to  the  heart. — Pa:rdon  my 


528  IIISTOUY  OF  ENGLAND. 

infirmity. — Something  I  should  have  added,  but  am  not  able; 
therefore  let  it  pass.  And  now,  my  lords,  for  myself ;  I  have 
long  been  taught  that  the  afflictions  of  this  life  are  overpaid  by 
that  eternal  weight  of  glory  which  waits  the  innocent ;  and  so, 
my  lords,  even  so,  with  the  utmost  tranquillity,  I  submit  myself 
to  your  judgment,  whether  that  judgment  be  life  or  death;  not 
my  will  but  thine,  0  God,  be  done  !"  His  eloquence  and  inno- 
cence induced  those  judges  to  pity  who  were  the  most  zealous  to 
condemn  him.  The  king  himself  went  to  the  house  of  lords,  and 
spoke  for  some  time  in  his  defence ;  but  the  spirit  of  vengeance, 
that  had  been  chained  for  eleven  years,  was  now  roused,  and  no- 
thing but  his  blood  could  give  the  people  satisfaction.  He  was 
found  guilty  by  both  houses  of  parliament  5  and  nothing  remained 
but  for  the  king  to  give  his  consent  to  the  bill  of  attainder.  But, 
in  the  present  commotions,  the  consent  of  the  king  was  a  thing 
that  would  very  easily  be  dispensed  with ;  and  imminent  dangers 
might  attend  his  refusal.  Yet  still  Charles,  who  loved  Strafford 
tenderly,  hesitated,  and  seemed  reluctant,  trying  every  expedient 
to  put  off  so  dreadful  a  duty  as  that  of  signing  the  warrant  for  his 
execution.  While  he  continued  in  this  agitation  of  mind,  not 
knowing  how  to  act,  his  doubts  were  at  last  silenced  by  an  act 
of  heroic  bravery  in  the  condemned  lord.  He  received  a  letter 
from  that  unfortunate  nobleman,  desiring  that  his  life  might  be 
made  the  sacrifice  of  a  mutual  reconciliation  between  the  king 
and  his  people ;  adding,  that  he  was  prepared  to  die,  and  to  a 
willing  mind  there  could  be  no  injury.  This  instance  of  noble 
generosity  was  ill  repaid  by  his  master,  who  complied  with  his 
request.  He  consented  to  the  signing  the  fatal  bill  by  commis- 
sion; Straftord  was  beheaded  on  Tower-hill,  behaving  with  all 
that  composed  dignity  of  resolution  that  was  expected  from  his 
character.  The  people,  taught  by  his  death  to  trample  upon  the 
rights  of  humanity,  soon  after  resolved  to  shed  blood  that  was 
still  more  precious. 

But  the  commons  did  not  stop  their  impeachments  here.  Laud 
also,  after  a  deliberation  which  did  not  continue  half  an  hour,  was 
considered  as  sufficiently  culpable  to  incur  the  same  accusation, 
and  was  committed  to  custody.  Finch,  the  lord-keeper,  was  also 
impeached  ;  but  he  had  the  precaution  to  make  his  escape,  and 
retire  into  Holland,  as  did  sir  Francis  Windebank,  the  secretary, 
into  France. 


CHARLES  I.  5g9 

The  crown  being  thus  deprived  of  the  services  of  its  ministers  j 
the  commons  next  proceeded  to  attack  the  few  privileges  it  still 
possessed.  Dm-ing  the  late  military  operations,  several  powers 
had  been  exerted  by  the  lieutenants  and  deputy -lieutenants  of 
counties,  who  were  all  under  the  influence  of  the  crown.  These 
were,  therefore,  voted  Delinquents  ;  a  term  now  first  used  to  sig- 
nify transgressors  whose  ci'imes  were  not  as  yet  ascertained  by 
law.  The  sheriffs  also,  who  had  obeyed  the  king's  mandate  in 
raising  ship-money,  were  voted  to  be  delinquents.  All  the  far- 
mers and  officers  of  the  customs,  who  had  been  employed  during 
so  many  years  in  levying  tonnage  and  poundage,  were  subjected 
to  the  same  imputation,  and  only  purchased  their  safety  by  pay- 
ing a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pounds.  Every  discretionary 
or  arbitrary  sentence  of  the  Star-chamber  and  High-commission 
courts  underwent  a  severe  scrutiny  5  and  all  those  who  had  any 
hand  in  such  sentences  were  voted  to  be  liable  to  the  penalties  of 
the  law.  The  judges  who  had  declared  against  Hampden,  in  the 
trial  of  ship-money,  were  accused  before  the  peers,  and  obliged 
to  find  security  for  their  appearance.  All  those  monopolies  which 
had  been  lately  granted  by  the  crown  were  now  annihilated  by 
the  order  of  the  commons  ;  and  they  carried  their  detestation  of 
that  grievance  so  far  as  to  expel  from  their  own  house  all  such 
members  as  had  been  monopolists  or  projectors. 

Hitherto  we  have  seen  the  commons  in  some  measure  the  pa- 
trons of  liberty  and  of  the  people  ;  boldly  opposing  the  stretches 
of  illegal  power,  or  repressing  those  claims  which,  though  found- 
ed on  custom,  were  destructive  of  freedom.  Thus  far  their  aims, 
their  struggles,  were  just  and  honourable:  but  the  general  pas- 
sions of  the  nation  were  now  excited;  and  having  been  once  put 
into  motion,  they  soon  passed  the  line,  and  knew  not  where  to 
stop.  Had  they  been  contented  with  resting  here,  after  abridg- 
ing all  those  privileges  of  monarchy  which  were  capable  of  injur- 
ing the  subject,  and  leaving  it  all  those  prerogatives  that  could 
benefit,  they  would  have  been  considered  as  the  great  benefactors 
of  mankind,  and  would  have  left  the  constitution  nearly  on  the 
same  footing  on  v/hich  we  enjoy  it  at  present.  But  they  either 
were  willing  to  revenge  their  former  sufferings,  or  thought  that 
some  terrible  examples  were  necessary  to  deter  others  from  at- 
tempting to  enslave  their  country.  The  horrors  of  a  civil  war 
VOL.  I.  67 


530  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

were  not  sufficiently  attended  to ;  and  they  precipitately  involved 
the  nation  in  calamities  which  they  themselves  were  the  first  to 
repent. 

,  The  whole  nation  was  thrown  into  a  general  ferment.  The 
harangues  of  the  memberSj  now  first  published  and  dispersed, 
kept  alive  the  horrors  which  were  felt  for  the  late  administration. 
The  pulpits,  delivered  over  to  the  puritanical  preachers,  whom 
the  commons  arbitrarily  placed  in  all  considerable  churches,  re- 
sounded with  faction  and  fanaticism.  The  press,  freed  from  all 
fear  or  restraint,  swarmed  with  productions,  dangerous  by  their 
sedition  and  calumny  more  than  by  their  eloquence  or  style. 

In  this  universal  uproar  against  the  crown,  Prynne,  Burton, 
and  Bastwick,  who  had  some  years  before  suffered  so  sevei'ely  for 
their  licentious  abuses,  and  had  been  committed  to  remote  prisons, 
were  set  at  liberty  by  order  of  the  commons,  and  were  seen  mak- 
ing their  triumphant  entry  into  the  capital.  Bastwick  had  been 
confined  in  Scilly,  Prynne  in  Jersey,  and  Burton  in  Guernsey : 
and  upon  landing  at  their  respective  places,  they  were  received 
by  the  acclamations  of  the  people,  and  attended  by  crowds  to 
liondon.  Boughs  were  carried  in  this  tumultuous  procession ; 
the  roads  were  strewed  with  flowers,  their  sufferings  were  aggra- 
vated, and  their  persecutors  reviled.  Every  person  who  had 
been  punished  for  seditious  libels  during  the  foregoing  adminis- 
tration, now  recovered  their  liberty,  and  had  damages  given  them 
upon  those  who  had  decreed  their  punishment. 

Grievances,  no  doubt,  and  heavy  ones,  had  been  endured  dur- 
ing the  intermission  of  parliament;  but  the  very  complaints 
against  tliem  now  became  one  of  the  greatest  grievances.  So 
many  were  offered  within  doors,  and  petitioned  against  without, 
that  the  house  was  divided  into  above  forty  committees,  charged 
each  of  them  with  the  examination  of  its  respective  complaints. 
The  torrent  rising  to  so  dreadful  and  unexpected  a  height,  des- 
pair seized  all  those  who,  from  interest  or  habit,  were  attached  to 
monarchy;  w-hile  the  king  himself  saw,  with  amazement,  the 
whole  fabric  of  government  overturned,  "  You  have  taken," 
said  he  to  the  parliament,  "  the  whole  machine  of  government  to 
pieces ;  a  practice  frequent  with  skilful  artists,  when  they  desire 
to  clear  the  wheels  from  any  rust  which  may  have  grown  upon 
them.     The  engine  may  be  restored  to  its  former  use  and  mo* 


CHARLES  I.  531 

tioiis,  provided  it  be  fitted  up  entire,  so  as  not  a  pin  be  wanting." 
But  the  commons,  in  their  present  temper,  were  much  better 
adapted  to  destroy  than  to  fit  up ;  and  having  taken  the  machine 
asunder,  they  soon  found  an  expeditious  set  of  workmen  ready  to 
step  in  and  take  the  whole  business  off  their  hands. 

But  in  this  universal  rage  for  abolishing  the  former  constitu- 
tion, the  parliament  fell  with  great  justice  on  two  courts,  which 
had  been  erected  under  arbitrary  kings,  and  had  seldom  been 
employed  but  in  cases  of  necessity.  These  were  the  High-com- 
mission court,  and  tiie  court  of  Star-chamber.  A  bill  unanimously 
passed  the  houses  to  abolish  both ;  and  in  them  to  annihilate  the 
principal  and  most  dangerous  articles  in  the  king's  prerogative. 
The  former,  which  was  instituted  for  defending  the  establish- 
ments of  the  church,  had  great  power  in  all  ecclesiastical  mat- 
ters ;  and  the  judges  in  that  court  were  entirely  arbitrary  in  what- 
ever punishments  or  fines  they  thought  proper  to  inflict.  The 
Star-chamber  had  given  force  to  the  king's  proclamations,  and 
punished  such  as  ventured  to  transgress  them ;  but  that  being 
now  taken  away,  his  proclamations  were  of  no  effect,  and  might 
be  opposed  with  impunity.  Such  were  the  transactions  of  this 
first  session  of  the  long  parliament ;  and  though  in  some  cases 
they  acted  with  anger,  and  in  others  with  precipitation,  yet  their 
merits  so  much  overbalanced  tlieir  mistakes,  that  they  deserve 
the  highest  gratitude  from  posterity. 

After  this  the  parliament  seemingly  adjourned  ^  but  a  commit- 
tee of  both  houses,  a  thing  altogether  unprecedented,  was  ap- 
pointed to  sit  during  the  recess,  v/ith  very  ample  powers,  and 
very  little  less  than  those  of  the  parliament  in  the  plenitude  of 
its  authority.  Pym  was  appointed  chairman  of  the  lower  house  ; 
in  this,  further  attempts  were  made  for  assuming  the  sovereign  ex- 
ecutive powers,  and  publishing  the  ordinances  of  this  committee 
as  statutes  enacted  by  all  the  branches  of  the  legislature.  In  the 
mean  time,  the  king  went  to  pay  a  visit  to  his  subjects  in  Scotland. 

In  the  midst  of  these  troubles,  the  papists  of  Ireland  fancied 
they  had  found  an  opportunity  of  throwing  oft'  the  English  yoke. 
There  was  a  gentleman  called  Roger  More,  who,  though  of  a  nar- 
row fortune,  was  descended  from  a  very  antient  Irish  family,  and 
was  very  much  celebrated  among  his  countrymen  for  his  valour 
and  capacity.    This  man  first  formed  the  project  of  expelling  the 


582  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

English,  and  asserting  the  independency  of  his  native  countrj. 
The  occasion  was  favourable ;  the  English,  vvarmly  engaged  in 
domestic  animosities,  were  unable  to  attend  to  a  distant  insur- 
rection ;  and  those  of  that  nation  who  resided  among  them,  wei*e 
too  feeble  to  resist.  Struck  with  these  motives,  sir  Phelim 
O'Neale  entered  into  a  conspiracy ;  lord  Macguire  came  into  his 
designs,  and  soon  after  all  the  chiefs  of  the  native  Irish  promised 
their  concurrence. 

Their  plan  was  laid  accoi'dingly,  which  was,  that  sir  Phelim 
O'Neale,  and  the  other  conspirators,  should  all  begin  an  insur- 
rection on  one  day  throughout  the  provinces;  should  destroy  all 
the  English,  while  lord  Macguire  and  Roger  More  should  surprise 
the  castle  of  Dublin,  They  had  fixed  on  the  approach  of  winter 
for  this  revolt ;  the  day  was  appointed,  every  thing  in  readiness, 
the  secret  profoundly  kept,  and  the  conspirators  promised  them- 
selves a  certainty  of  success.  The  earl  of  Leicester,  who  had 
been  appointed  lord  lieutenant,  was  then  in  London.  Sir  William 
Parsons,  and  sir  John  Borlase,  the  two  lords  justices,  were  men. 
of  mean  intellects  ;  and,  without  attending  to  the  interests  of  their 
country,  indulged  themselves  in  the  most  profound  tranquillity 
on  the  brink  of  ruin. 

The  very  day  before  the  intended  seizure  of  the  castle  of  Dub- 
lin, the  plot  was  discovered  by  one  O'Conolly,  an  Irishman,  but 
a  protestant,  to  the  justices,  who  fled  to  the  castle,  and  alarmed 
all  the  protestant  inhabitants  of  the  city  to  prepare  for  their  de- 
fence. Macguire  was  taken,  but  INIore  escaped  ;  and  new  infor- 
mations being  every  hour  added  to  those  already  received,  the 
project  of  a  general  insurrection  was  no  longer  a  secret. 

But  though  the  citizens  of  Dublin  had  just  time  enough  to  save 
themselves  from  danger,  the  protestants,  dispersed  over  the  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  country,  were  taken  unprepared.  O'Neale 
and  his  confederates  had  already  taken  arms  in  Ulster.  The 
Irish,  every  where  intermingled  with  the  English,  needed  but  a 
hint  from  their  leaders  and  priests  to  massacre  a  people  whom 
they  hated  for  their  religion,  and  envied  for  their  riches  and  pros- 
perity. The  insurrections  of  a  civilised  people  are  usually  mark- 
ed with  very  little  cruelty ;  but  the  revolt  of  a  savage  nation  gen- 
erally aims  at  extermination.  The  Irish  accordingly  resolved  to 
cut  off  all  the  protestants  of  the  kingdom  at  a  stroke  j  so  that 


CHARLES  I.  533 

neither  age,  sex,  nor  condition,  received  any  pity.  In  such  indis- 
criminate slaughter,  neither  former  benefits,  nor  alliances,  nor 
authority,  were  any  protection :  numberless  were  the  instances 
of  friends  murdering  their  intimates,  relations  their  kinsmen,  and 
servants  their  masters.  In  vain  did  flight  save  from  the  first  as- 
sault ;  destruction,  which  had  an  extensive  spread,  met  the  hunt- 
ed victims  at  every  turn.  Not  only  death,  but  studied  cruelties 
were  inflicted  on  the  unhappy  sufferers  ;  the  very  avarice  of  the 
revolters  could  not  restrain  their  thirst  for  blood,  and  they  burned 
the  inhabitants  in  their  own  houses,  to  increase  their  punishment. 
Several  hundreds  were  driven  upon  a  bridge,  and  thence  obliged, 
by  these  barbarians,  to  leap  in  the  water,  where  they  were  drown- 
ed. The  English  colonies  were  totally  annihilated  in  the  open 
country  of  Ulster  ;  but  in  the  other  provinces  the  rebels  pretend- 
*ed  to  act  with  great  humanity. 

The  protestants  were  driven  there  from  their  houses,  to  meet 
the  severity  of  the  weather,  without  food  or  raiment  5  and  num- 
bers of  them  perished  with  the  cold,  which  happened  at  that  time 
to  be  peculiarly  severe.  By  some  computations,  those  who  per- 
ished by  all  these  cruelties  are  made  to  amount  to  a  hundred  and 
fifty  or  two  hundred  thousand ;  but,  by  a  moderate  computation, 
they  could  not  have  been  less  than  forty  thousand. 

In  the  meantime,  the  English  Pale,  as  it  was  called,  consisting 

of  the  old  English  catholics,  who  had  first  come  over,  joining  with 

the  native  Irish,  a  large  army  was  formed,  amounting  to  above 

twenty  thousand  men,  which  threatened  a  total  extermination  of 

the  English  power  in  that  island.     The  king  was  in  Scotland  when 

he  received  the  first  account  of  this  rebellion  :  and  though  he  did 

all  in  his  power  to  induce  his  subjects  there  to  lend  assistance  to 

the  protestant  cause,  he  found  them  totally  averse  to  sending  any 

succours  into  Ireland.     Their  aim  was  to  oblige  the  parliament  of 

England  with  what  succours  they  could  spare,  and  not  to  obey 

the  injunctions  of  their  sovereign.     They  went  still  farther,  and 

had  the  assurance  to  impute  a  part  of  these  dreadful  massacres  to 

the  king's  own  contrivance.     In  fact,  the  rebels  of  Ireland  did 

not  fail  to  show  a  royal  patent,  authorising  their  attempts  ;  and 

it  is  said  that  sir  Phelim  O'Neale,  having  found  a  royal  patent  in 

the  house  of  lord  Caulfield,  whom  he  had  murdered,  tore  off  the 

seal,  and  affixed  it  to  a  commission  which  he  had  forged  for  him^ 

self. 


534  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

However  tliis  be,  the  king  took  all  the  precautions  in  his  pow- 
er to  show  his  utter  detestation  of  these  bloody  proceedings  ;  and  ' 
being  sensible  of  his  own  inability  to  suppress  the  rebellion,  he 
had  once  more  recourse  to  his  English  parliament,  and  craved 
their  assistance  for  a  suppl3^  But  here  he  found  no  hopes  of  as- 
sistance; many  insinuations  were  thrown  out,  that  he  had  him- 
self fomented  this  rebellion,  and  no  money  could  be  spared  for 
the  extinction  of  distant  dangers  when  they  pretended  that  the 
kingdom  was  threatened  with  greater  at  home. 

It  was  now  that  the  republican  spirit  began  to  appear  without 
any  disguise  in  the  present  parliament ;  and  that  party,  instead 
of  attacking  the  faults  of  the  king,  resolved  to  destroy  monarchy. 
They  had  seen  a  republican  system  of  government  lately  estab- 
lished in  Holland,  and  attended  with  very  noble  effects ;  they 
began  therefore  to  wish  for  a  similar  system  at  home  ;  and  many 
productions  of  the  press  at  that  time  sketched  out  the  form.  It 
would  be  unjust  to  deny  these  men  the  praise  of  being  guided  by 
honest  motives ;  but  it  would  be  unwise  not  to  say  also,  that  they 
w^ere  swa3-ed  by  wrong  ones.  In  the  compai'ison  between  a  re- 
public and  a  limited  monarchy,  the  balance  entirely  inclines  to 
the  latter,  since  a  real  republic  never  yet  existed,  except  in  spec- 
ulation ;  and  that  liberty  which  demagogues  promise  to  their  fol- 
lowers, is  generally  only  sought  after  for  themselves.  The  aim 
in  general  of  popular  leaders  is  rather  to  depress  the  great  than 
exalt  the  humble ;  and  in  such  governments,  the  lower  ranks  of 
people  are  too  commonly  the  most  abject  slaves.  In  a  republic, 
the  number  of  tyrants  are  capable  of  supporting  each  other  in 
their  injustice  ;  while  in  a  monarchy  there  is  one  object,  who,  if 
he  offends,  is  easily  punishable,  and  ought  to  be  brought  to  justice. 

The  leaders  of  the  opposition  began  their  operations  by  a  resolu- 
tion to  attack  episcopacy,  which  was  one  of  the  strongest  bulwarks 
oftliei'oyal  power;  but  previously  framed  a  remonstrance  in  which 
tlicy  summed  up  all  their  former  grievances.  These  they  ascribed 
to  a  regular  system  of  tyranny  in  the  king,  and  asserted  that  they 
amounted  to  a  total  subversion  of  the  constitution.  This,  when 
drawn  up  by  a  tumultuous  majority  of  the  house,they  ordered  to  be 
printed  and  published,  without  being  carried  up,  as  is  usual  in  such 
cases,  to  the  house  of  peers,  for  their  assent  and  approbation.  The 
commons,  havingthus  endeavoured  to  render  the  king's  administra= 


CHARLES  I.  535 

tion  universally  odious,  began  upon  the  hierarchy.  Their  first  meas- 
ure M'as,  by  their  own  single  authority,  to  suspend  all  the  laws  which 
had  been  made  for  the  observance  of  public  worship.  They  particu- 
larly forbade  bowing  at  the  name  of  Jesus.  They  complained  of 
the  king's  filling  five  vacant  bishoprics ;  and  considered  it  as  an 
insult  upon  them,  that  he  should  complete  and  strengthen  an  or- 
der which  they  were  resolved  to  abolish.  They  accused  thirteen 
bishops  of  high-treason,  for  enacting  canons  without  the  consent 
of  parliament;  and  endeavoured  to  prevail  upon  the  house  of 
peers  to  exclude  all  the  prelates  from  their  seats  and  votes  in 
that  august  assembly.  But,  notwithstanding  all  their  efforts,  the 
lords  refused  their  concurrence  to  this  law,  and  to  all  such  as  any 
way  tended  to  the  further  limitation  of  royal  authority.  The 
majority  of  the  peers  adhered  to  the  king;  and  plainly  foresaw 
the  depression  of  the  nobility  as  a  necessary  consequence  of 
the  popular  usurpations  on  the  crown.  The  commons  murmured 
at  their  refusal,  mixed  threats  with  their  indignation,  and  began, 
for  the  first  time,  to  insinuate  that  the  business  of  the  state  could 
be  carried  on  without  them. 

In  order  to  intimidate  the  lords  into  their  measures,  the  popu- 
lace were  let  loose  to  insult  and  threaten  them.  Multitudes  of 
people  flocked  every  day  towards  Westminster,  and  insulted  the 
prelates  and  such  lords  as  adhered  to  the  crown.  Some  seditious 
apprentices  being  seized  and  committed  to  prison,  the  house  of 
commons  immediately  ordered  them  to  be  set  free.  Encouraged 
by  the  countenance  of  the  house,  the  populace  crowded  about 
White -hall,  and  threw  out  insolent  menaces  against  the  king  him- 
self. It  was  at  this  time  that  several  reduced  officers,  aud  stu- 
dents of  the  inns  of  court,  offered  their  services  to  the  king,  to  re- 
press the  rioters  ;  aud  many  frays  ensued,  not  without  bloodshed. 
The  rabble,  by  way  of  reproach,  were  called  Roundheads,  from 
the  manner  of  wearing  their  hair ;  and  the  gentlemen,  Cavaliers. 
These  names  afterwards  served  to  distinguish  the  partisans  of 
either  side,  and  served  still  more  to  divide  the  nation. 

The  fury  of  tlie  commons,  and  also  of  the  populace,  did  not 
fail  to  intimidate  the  bishops  :  they  saw  the  storm  that  was  gath- 
ering against  them  ;  and,  probably  to  avert  its  effects,  they  re- 
solved to  attend  their  duty  in  the  house  of  lords  no  longer ;  but 
drew  up  a  protest,  which  was  signed  by  twelve  of  them,  in  which 


536  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

they  declared,  that,  being  hindered  by  the  populace  from  attend- 
ing at  the  house  of  lords,  they  resolved  to  go  there  no  more  till 
all  commotions  should  be  appeased ;  protesting,  in  the  mean 
time,  against  all  such  laws  as  should  be  enacted  in  their  absence. 

This  secession  of  the  bishops  from  the  house  of  lords  was  what 
the  commons  most  ardently  wished  for  ;  and  they  seized  the  op- 
portunity with  pleasure.  An  impeachment  of  high-treason  was 
immediately  sent  up  against  them,  as  guilty  of  subverting  the  fun- 
damental laws,  and  invalidating  the  legislative  authority.  In 
consequence  of  this,  they  were  by  the  lords  excluded  from  parlia- 
ment, and  committed  to  custody  ;  no  man  in  either  house  daring 
to  speak  a  w^ord  in  their  vindication.  One  of  the  lords,  indeed, 
was  heard  to  say,  that  he  did  not  believe  they  were  guilty  of 
treason,  but  thought  they  were  mad,  and  therefore  were  fitter  for 
confinement  than  a  seat  in  parliament. 

This  was  a  fatal  blow  to  the  royal  interest ;  but  it  soon  felt  a 
much  greater  from  the  king's  own  imprudence.  Charles  had  long 
suppressed  his  resentment,  and  only  strove  to  satisfy  the  com- 
mons by  the  greatness  of  his  concessions ;  but,  finding  that  all 
hi^  compliance  had  but  increased  their  demands,  he  could  no 
longer  contain.  He  gave  orders  to  Herbert,  his  attorney -general, 
to  enter  an  accusation  of  high-treason,  in  the  house  of 
■-  '-'  peers,  against  lord  Kimbolton,  one  of  the  most  popular 
men  of  his  party,  together  with  five  commoners,  sir  Arthur  Has- 
elrig^  Holies,  Hampden,  Pym,  and  Strode.  The  articles  were, 
that  they  had  traitorously  endeavoured  to  subvert  the  fundamen- 
tal laws  and  government  of  the  kingdom,  to  deprive  the  king  of 
his  regal  power,  and  to  impose  on  his  subjects  an  arbitrary  and 
tyrannical  authority ;  that  they  had  invited  a  foreign  army  to  in- 
vade the  kingdom ;  that  they  had  aimed  at  subverting  the  very 
rights  and  being  of  parliaments,  and  had  actually  raised  and 
countenanced  tumults  against  the  king.  Men  had  scarcely  lei- 
sure to  wonder  at  the  precipitancy  and  imprudence  of  this  im- 
peachment, when  they  were  astonished  by  another  measure,  still 
more  rash  and  more  unsupported.  A  serjeant  at  arms,  in  the 
king's  name,  demanded  of  the  house  the  five  members,  and  was 
sent  back  without  any  positive  answer.  This  was  followed  by  a 
conduct  still  more  extraordinary.  The  next  day  the  king  him- 
self was  seen  to  enter  the  house  of  commons  alone,  advancing 


CHARLES  r.  537 

through  the  hall,  while  all  the  members  stood  up  to  receive  him. 
The  speaker  withdrew  from  his  chair,  and  the  king  took  posses- 
sion of  it.  Having  seated  himself,  and  looked  round  him  for 
some  time,  he  told  the  house  that  he  was  sorry  for  the  occasion 
that  forced  him  thither ;  that  he  was  come  in  person  to  seize  the 
members  whom  he  had  accused  of  high-treason,  seeing  they  would 
not  deliver  them  up  to  his  serjeant  at  arras.  Addressing  himself 
to  the  speaker,  he  desired  to  know  whether  any  of  them  were  in 
the  house  ;  but  the  speaker,  falling  on  his  knees,  replied,  that  he 
had  neither  eyes  to  see,  nor  tongue  to  speak,  in  that  place,  but  as 
the  house  was  pleased  to  direct  him ;  and  he  asked  pardon  for 
being  able  to  give  no  other  answer.  He  then  sat  for  some  time, 
to  see  if  the  accused  were  present;  but  they  had  escaped  a  few 
minutes  before  his  entry.  Thus  disappointed,  perplexed,  and 
not  knowing  on  whom  to  rely,  he  next  proceeded,  amidst  the 
clamours  of  the  populace,  who  continued  to  cry  out  "  Privilege ! 
privilege  !"  to  the  common-council  of  the  city,  and  made  his  com- 
plaint to  them.  The  common-council  only  answered  his  com- 
plaint with  a  contemptuous  silence ;  and  on  his  return  one  of  the 
populace,  more  insolent  than  the  rest,  cried  out,  "  To  your  tents, 
O  Israel !"  a  watch-word  among  the  Jews,  when  they  intended 
to  abandon  their  princes. 

When  the  commons  were  assembled  the  next  day,  they  affect- 
ed the  greatest  terror,  and  passed  an  unanimous  vote  that  the  king 
had  violated  their  privileges,  and  they  could  not  assemble  again 
in  the  same  place  till  they  should  have  obtained  satisfaction,  with, 
a  guard  for  their  security.  They  ascribed  the  last  measure  of 
the  king  to  the  counsels  of  the  papists ;  and  the  city  was  thus 
filled  with  groundless  consternation. 

As  the  commons  had  artfully  kept  up  their  panic,  in  order  to 
inflame  the  populace,  and  as  the  city  was  now  only  one  scene  of 
confusion,  the  king,  afraid  of  exposing  himself  to  any  fresh  insult 
from  the  fury  of  the  populace,  retired  to  Windsor,  overwhelmed 
with  grief,  shame,  and  remorse.  There  he  began  to  reflect  on 
the  rashness  of  his  former  proceedings,  and  now  too  late  resolved 
to  make  some  atonement.  He  therefore  wrote  to  the  parliament, 
informing  them  that  he  desisted  from  his  former  proceedings 
against  the  accused  members ;  and  assured  them,  that  upon  a^ 
occasions  he  would  be  as  careful  of  their  privileges  as  of  his  life 

VOL.  I.  68 


538  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

or  his  crown.  Thus  his  former  violence  had  rendered  him  hateful 
to  his  commons,  and  his  present  submission  now  rendered  him 
contemptible. 

The  commons  had  already  stripped  the  king  of  almost  all  his 
privileges;  the  bishops  ^vere  fled,  the  judges  were  intimidated: 
it  now  only  remained  that,  after  securing  the  church  and  the  law, 
they  should  get  possession  of  the  sword  also.  The  power  of  apr 
pointing  governors,  generals,  and  levying  armies,  was  still  a  re^ 
tnaining  prerogative  of  the  crown.  Having,  therefore,  first  mag- 
nified their  terrors  of  popery,  which  perhaps  they  actually  dreaded, 
they  proceeded  to  petition  that  the  Tower  might  be  put  into  their 
hands,  and  that  Hull,  Portsmouth,  and  the  fleet,  should  be  in^ 
trusted  to  persons  of  their  choosing.  These  were  requests,  the 
complying  with  which  would  level  all  that  remained  of  the  antient 
constitution  :  however,  such  was  the  necessity  of  the  times,  that 
they  were  at  first  contested,  and  then  granted.  At  last,  every 
compliance  only  increasing  the  avidity  of  making  fresh  demands, 
the  commons  desired  to  have  a  militia  raised,  and  governed  by 
such  oflBcers  and  commanders  as  they  should  nominate,  under 
pretext  of  securing  them  from  the  Irish  papists,  of  whom  they 
were  in  great  apprehensions. 

It  was  here  that  Charles  first  ventured  to  put  a  stop  to  his  con- 
cessions ;  and  that  not  by  a  refusal,  but  a  delay.  He  was  at  that 
time  at  Dover,  attending  the  queen,  and  the  princess  of  Orange, 
who  had  thought  it  prudent  to  leave  the  kingdom.  He  replied 
to  the  petition  of  the  commons,  that  he  had  not  now  leisure  to 
consider  a  matter  of  such  great  importance,  and  therefore  would 
defer  an  answer  till  his  return.  But  the  commons  were  well 
aware,  that,  though  this  was  depriving  him  even  of  the  shadow 
qf  power,  yet  they  had  now  gone  too  far  to  recede,  and  were 
therefore  desirous  of  leaving  him  no  authority  whatsoever,  as  her 
ing  conscious  that  themselves  would  be  the  first  victims  to  its 
fury.  They  alleged  that  the  dangers  and  distempers  of  the  na- 
tion were  such  as  could  endure  no  longer  delay ;  and  that,  unless 
the  king  would  speedily  comply  with  their  demands,  they  should 
be  obliged,  both  for  his  safety  and  that  of  the  kingdom,  to  dis- 
pose of  the  militia  by  the  authority  of  both  houses,  and  were  re- 
solved to  do  it  accordingly.  In  their  remonstrances  to  the  king, 
they  desired  even  to  be  permitted  to  command  the  army  for  au 


CHARLES  I.  539 

appointed  time ;  which  so  exasperated  him,  that  he  exclaimed, 
"  No,  not  for  an  hour !"  This  peremptory  refusal  broke  off  all 
further  treaty ;  and  both  sides  were  now  resolved  to  have  recourse 
to  arms. 

Charles,  taking  the  prince  of  Wales  with  him,  retired  to  Yorkj 
where  he  found  the  people  more  loyal,  and  less  infected  with  the 
religious  phrensy  of  the  times.  He  found  his  cause  there  backed 
by  a  more  numerous  party  than  he  had  expected  among  the  peo- 
ple* The  queen,  who  was  in  Holland,  was  making  successful 
levies  of  men  and  ammunition,  by  selling  the  crown  jewels.  But 
before  war  was  openly  declared,  the  shadow  of  a  negotiation  was 
carried  on,  rather  to  serve  as  a  pretence  to  the  people  than  with 
a  real  design  of  reconciliation.  The  king  offered  proposals  to  the 
commons  which  he  knew  they  would  not  accept ;  and  they  in  re- 
turn submitted  nineteen  propositions  to  his  consideration,  which, 
if  complied  with,  would  have  rendered  him  entirely  subservient 
to  their  commands.  Their  import  was,  that  the  privy -council, 
the  principal  officers  of  state,  the  governors  of  the  king's  chil- 
dren, the  commanders  of  the  forts,  his  fleet  and  army,  should  be 
all  appointed  by,  and  under  the  control  of,  parliament ;  that  pa- 
pists should  be  punished  by  their  authority ;  that  the  church  and 
liturgy  should  be  reformed  at  their  discretion ;  and  that  such 
members  as  had  been  displaced  should  be  restored.  These  pro- 
posals, which,  if  they  had  been  complied  with,  would  have  mould- 
ed the  government  into  an  aristocracy,  Were,  happily  for  posterity, 
rejected  by  the  king.  *•  Should  I  grant  these  demands,"  said  he 
in  his  reply,  "  I  might  be  waited  on  bare-headed  ;  I  might  have 
my  hand  kissed,  the  title  of  majesty  be  continued  to  me,  and  the 
king's  authority  be  signified  by  both  houses  of  parliament  might 
be  still  the  style  of  your  commands ;  I  might  have  swords  and 
maces  carried  before  me,  and  please  myself  with  the  sight  of  a 
crown  and  sceptre  (though  even  these  twigs  would  not  long 
flourish,  when  the  stock  upon  which  they  grew  was  dead)  :  but 
as  to  true  and  real  power,  I  should  remain  but  the  outside,  but 
the  picture,  but  the  sign  of  a  king."  War  on  any  terms,  there- 
fore, was  esteemed  preferable  to  such  an  ignominious  peace. 
Thus  the  king  and  his  parliament  reproached  each  other  for  be- 
ginning a  scene  of  slaughter,  of  which  both  were  equally  culpable^^ 


540  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

CHAP.  XXXI. 
CHARLES  I.   (Continued.) 

.  „  02     No  period  since  England  began  could  show  so  many 

1642.  '  instances  of  courage,  abilities,  and  virtue,  aS  the  present 
fatal  opposition  called  forth  into  action.  Now  was  the  time  when 
talents  of  all  kinds,  unchecked  by  authority,  were  called  from 
the  lower  ranks  of  life,  to  dispute  for  power  and  pre-eminence. 
Both  sides,  equally  confident  of  the  justice  of  their  cause,  appealed 
to  God  to  judge  of  the  rectitude  of  their  intentions.  The  parlia- 
ment was  convinced  that  it  fought  for  heaven,  by  asserting  its 
regards  for  a  peculiar  mode  of  worship ;  and  the  king  was  not 
less  convinced  that  his  claims  were  sacred,  as  he  had  ever  been 
taught  to  consider  them  as  of  divine  original.  Thus  passion  and 
enthusiasm  on  each  side  animated  the  combatants  ;  and  courage 
rather  than  conduct,  among  these  undisciplined  troops,  decided 
tiie  fortune  of  the  day. 

Never  was  contest  more  apparently  unequal  than  this  seemed 
at  first  to  be ;  the  king  being  almost  destitute  of  every  advantage. 
His  revenue  had  been  seized  by  his  opponents  :  all  the  sea-port 
towns  were  in  their  hands,  except  Newcastle ;  and  thus  they 
were  possessed  of  the  customs  which  these  could  supply ;  the 
fleet  was  at  their  disposal  5  all  magazines  of  arms  and  ammuni- 
tion were  seized  for  their  use ;  and  they  had  the  wishes  of  all  the 
most  active  members  of  the  nation. 

To  oppose  this,  the  king  had  that  acknowledged  reverence 
which  was  paid  to  royalty,  to  give  sanction  to  his  cause.  The 
greater  part  of  the  nobility  adhered  to  him,  as  their  distinctions 
must  rise  or  fall  with  the  source  of  honour.  Most  of  the  men  of 
education  also,  and  the  antient  gentry,  still  considered  loyalty 
as  a  virtue,  and  armed  their  tenants  and  servants  in  his  cause. 
With  these  followers  and  hopes  he  resolved  to  take  the  field,  and 
erected  the  royal  standard  at  Nottingham. 

Manifestoes  on  the  one  side  and  the  other  were  now  dispersed 
througliout  the  kingdom ;  and  the  whole  nation  composed  two 
factions,  distinguished  by  the  names  of  Cavaliers  and  Roundheads. 
..The  king,  to  bind  himself  by  the  most  solemn  engagements  to 


CHARLES  I.  *  541 

his  people,  made  the  following  protestation  before  his  whole  army : 

"  I  do  promise,  in  the  presence  of  almighty  God,  and  as  I  hope 
for  his  blessing  and  protection,  that  I  will,  to  the  utmost  of  my 
power,  defend  and  maintain  the  true  reformed  protestant  reli- 
gion, established  in  the  church  of  England ;  and,  by  the  grace  of 
God,  in  the  same  will  live  and  die. 

<'I  desire  that  the  laws  may  be  ever  the  measure  of  my  gov- 
ernment, and  that  the  liberty  and  property  of  the  subject  maybe 
preserved  by  them  with  the  same  care  as  my  own  just  rights. 
And  if  it  please  God,  by  his  blessing  on  this  army  raised  for  my 
necessary  defence,  to  preserve  me  from  the  present  rebellion,  I 
do  solemnly  and  faithfully  promise,  in  the  sight  of  God,  to  main- 
tain the  just  privileges  and  freedom  of  parliament,  and  to  govern, 
to  the  utmost  of  my  power,  by  the  known  statutes  and  customs 
of  the  kingdom  ;  and  particularly  to  observe  inviolably  the  laws 
to  which  I  have  given  my  consent  this  parliament.  Meanwhile, 
if  this  emergence,  and  the  great  necessity  to  which  I  am  driven, 
beget  any  violation  of  law,  I  hope  it  shall  be  imputed  by  God  and 
man  to  the  authors  of  this  war,  not  to  me,  who  have  so  earnestly 
laboured  to  preserve  the  peace  of  the  kingdom. 

"  When  I  willingly  fail  in  these  particulars,  I  shall  expect  no 
aid  or  relief  from  man,  nor  any  protection  from  above.  But  in 
this  resolution  I  hope  for  the  cheerful  assistance  of  all  good  men, 
and  am  confident  of  the  blessing  of  heaven." 

The  sincerity  with  which  this  speech  was  delivered,  and  the 
justice  of  its  contents,  served  to  strengthen  the  king's  cause.  At 
first  he  appeared  in  a  very  low  condition  ;  besides  the  trained 
bands  of  the  county,  raised  by  sir  John  Digby,  the  sheriff,  he  had 
not  assembled  above  three  hundred  infantry.  His  cavalry,  which 
composed  his  chief  strength,  exceeded  not  eight  hundred,  and 
were  very  ill  provided  with  arms.  Indeed,  he  was  soon  rein- 
forced ;  but  not  being  then  in  a  condition  to  face  his  enemies,  he 
thought  it  prudent  to  retire  by  slow  marches  to  Derby,  and 
thence  to  Shrewsbury,  in  order  to  countenance  the  levies  which 
his  friends  were  making  in  those  quarters. 

In  the  mean  time  his  enemies  were  not  remiss  in  preparations. 
They  had  a  magazine  of  arms  at  Hull,  and  sir  John  Hotham  was 
appointed  governor  of  that  place  by  parliament.  Charles  had 
some  time  before  presented  himself  before  that  town,  but  was  re- 


542  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND, 

fused  admission ;  and  from  this  they  drew  their  principal  resour-* 
ces.  The  forces  also,  which  had  been  every  where  raised  on 
pretence  of  the  service  of  Ireland,  were  now  more  openly  enlist- 
ed by  the  parliament  for  their  own  purposes  ;  and  the  command 
given  to  the  earl  of  Essex,  a  bold  man,  who  rather  desired  to  see 
monarchy  abridged  than  totally  destroyed.  In  London  no  less 
than  four  thousand  men  were  enlisted  in  one  day ;  and  the  par- 
liament voted  a  declaration,  which  they  required  every  member 
to  subscribe,  that  they  would  live  and  die  with  their  general.  Or- 
ders were  also  issued  out  for  loans  of  money  and  plate,  which 
were  to  defend  the  king  and  both  houses  of  parliament ;  for  they 
still  preserved  this  style.  This  brought  immense  quantities  of 
plate  to  the  treasury ;  and  so  great  was  men's  ardour  in  the  cause, 
that  there  was  more  than  they  could  find  room  for.  By  these 
means  they  found  themselves  in  a  short  time  at  the  head  of  sixteen 
thousand  men ;  and  the  earl  of  Essex  led  them  towards  North- 
ampton against  the  king. 

The  army  of  the  royalists  did  not  equal  that  of  Essex  in  num- 
ber :  however,  it  was  supposed  to  be  better  disciplined,  and  bet- 
ter conducted.  The  two  sons  of  the  unfortunate  elector  Palatine^ 
prince  Rupert  and  prince  Maurice,  offered  to  the  king  their  ser- 
vices, which  were  gladly  accepted.  A  slight  advantage  gained  by 
prince  Rupert  over  colonel  Sandys,  in  the  beginning,  gave  great 
hopes  of  his  future  activity,  and  inspired  the  army  with  resolution 
to  hazard  a  battle.  So  little  were  both  armies  skilled  in  the  arts 
and  stratagems  of  war,  that  they  were  within  six  miles  of  each 
other  before  they  were  acquainted  with  their  mutual  approach ; 
and,  what  is  remarkable,  they  had  been  ten  days  within  twenty 
miles  of  each  other  without  knowing  it. 

Edge-Hill  was  the  first  place  where  the  two  armies  were  put 
in  an-ay  against  each  other,  and  the  country  first  drenched  in 
civil  slaughter.  It  was  a  dreadful  sight,  to  see  above  thirty  thou- 
sand of  the  bravest  men  in  the  world,  instead  of  employing  their 
courage  abroad,  turning  it  against  each  other,  while  the  dearest 
friends,  and  the  nearest  kinsmen,  embraced  opposite  sides,  and 
prepared  to  bury  their  private  regards  in  factious  hatred.  In  the 
beginning  of  this  engagement,  sir  Faithful  Fortescue,  who  had 
levied  a  troop  for  the  Irish  war,  but  had  been  obliged  to  serve  iu 
the  parliamentary  army,  deserted  to  the  royalists,  and  so  intim- 


CHARLES  I.  543 

idated  the  parliamentary  forces,  that  the  whole  body  of  cavalry' 
fled.  The  right  wing  of  their  army  followed  their  example  ;  but, 
the  victors  too  eagerly  pursuing,  Essex's  body  of  reserve  wheeled 
upon  the  rear  of  the  pursuers,  and  made  great  havoc  among  them. 
After  the  royalists  had  a  little  recovered  from  their  surprise,  they 
made  a  vigorous  stand  %  and  both  sides  for  a  time  stood  gazing  at 
each  other,  without  sufficient  courage  to  renew  the  attack.  They 
all  night  lay  under  arms,  and  next  morning  found  themselves  in 
sight  of  each  other :  this  was  the  time  for  the  king  to  strike  a  de- 
cisive blow :  he  lost  the  opportunity ;  and  both  sides  separated 
with  equal  loss.  Five  thousand  men  are  said  to  have  been  found 
dead  on  the  field  of  battle. 

It  would  be  tedious,  and  no  way  instructive,  to  enter  into  the 
marchings  and  counter-marchings  of  these  undisciplined  and  ill- 
conducted  armies :  war  was  a  new  trade  to  the  English,  as  they 
had  not  seen  a  hostile  engagement  in  the  island  for  near  a  centu- 
ry before.  The  queen  came  to  reinforce  the  royal  party  ;  she  had 
brought  soldiers  and  ammunition  from  Holland,  and  immediately 
departed  to  procure  more.  But  the  parliament  who  knew  its  own 
strength  felt  no  discouragement.  Their  demands  seemed  to  in- 
crease in  proportion  their  losses  ;  and  as  they  were  repressed  in 
the  field,  they  grew  more  haughty ^n  the  cabinet.  Such  govern- 
ors as  gave  up  their  fortresses  to  the  king  were  attainted  of  high- 
treason.  It  was  in  vain  for  the  king  to  send  proposals  after  any 
success  ;  this  only  raised  their  pride  and  their  animosity.  But 
though  this  desire  in  the  king  to  make  peace  with  his  subjects  was 
the  highest  encomium  on  his  humanity,  yet  his  long  negotiations, 
one  of  which  he  carried  on  at  Oxford,  were  faulty  as  a  warrior. 
He  wasted  that  time  in  altercation  and  treaty  which  he  should 
have  employed  in  vigorous  exertions  in  the  field. 

However,  the  two  first  campaigns,  upon  the  whole,  wore  a  fa- 
vourable aspect.  One  victory  followed  another  :  Cornwall  was 
reduced  to  peace  and  obedience  under  the  king :  a  vie-  p.  /, ._  -. 
tory  was  gained  over  the  parliamentarians  at  Stratton-  "^ 

hill,  in  Devonshire  5  another  at  Round-way  down,  near  the  De- 
vizes ;  and  a  third  in  ChalgraVe^field.  Bristol  was  besieged  and 
taken ;  and  Gloucester  was  besieged  :  the  battle  of  Newbury  was 
favourable  to  the  royal  cause ;  and  great  hopes  of  success  were 
formed  from  an  army  in  the  north,  raised  by  the  marquis  of  New- 
castle. 


544  HISTORY  OF  ENGLANJ>. 

But,  in  the  second  of  these  campaigns,  the  two  bravest  and 
greatest  men  of  their  respective  parties  were  killed  ;  as  if  it  Avas 
intended,  by  the  kindness  of  Providence,  that  they  should  be  ex- 
empted from  seeing  the  miseries  and  the  slaughter  which  were 
shortly  to  ensue.  These  were  John  Hampden,  and  Lucius  Cary, 
lord  Falkland. 

In  an  incursion  made  by  prince  Rupert  to  within  about  two 
miles  of  the  enemy's  quarters,"a  great  booty  was  obtained.  This 
the  parliamentarians  attempted  to  rescue ;  and  Hampden,  at  their 
head,  overtook  the  royalists  in  Chalgrave-field.  As  he  ever  was 
the  first  to  enter  into  the  thickest  of  the  battle,  he  was  shot  in  the 
shoulder  with  a  brace  of  bullets,  and  the  bone  broken.  Some 
days  after,  he  died  in  great  pain ;  nor  could  his  whole  party,  had 
their  army  met  a  total  overthrow,  have  been  cast  into  greater 
consternation.  Even  Chai'les,  his  enemy,  felt  for  his  disastej-, 
and  offered  his  own  surgeon  to  assist  his  cure.  Hampden,  whom 
we  have  seen,  in  the  beginning  of  these  troubles,  refused  to  pay 
ship-money,  gained,  by  his  inflexible  integrity,  the  esteem  even 
of  his  enemies.  To  these  he  added  affability  in  conversation, 
temper,  art,  eloquence  in  debate,  and  penetration  in  council. 

But  Falkland  was  still  a  greater  loss,  and  a  greater  character. 
He  added  to  Hampden's  sevA-e  principles  a  politeness  and  ele- 
gance but  then  beginning  to  be  known  in  England.  He  had 
boldly  withstood  the  king's  pretensions,  while  he  saw  him  mak- 
ing a  bad  use  of  his  power ;  but  when  he  perceived  the  design  of 
the  parliament  to  overturn  the  religion  and  the  constitution  of  his 
country,  he  changed  his  side,  and  steadfastly  attached  himself  to 
the  crown.  From  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  his  natural 
cheerfulness  and  vivacity  forsook  him ;  he  became  melancholy, 
sad,  pale,  and  negligent  of  his  person.  When  the  two  armies 
were  in  sight  of  each  other,  and  preparing  for  the  battle  of  New- 
bury, he  appeared  desirous  of  terminating  his  life,  since  he  could 
not  compose  the  miseries  of  his  country.  Still  anxious  for  his 
country  alone,  he  dreaded  the  too  prosperous  success  of  his  own 
party  as  much  as  that  of  the  enemy ;  and  he  professed  that  its 
miseries  had  broken  his  heart.  His  usual  cry  among  his  friends, 
after  a  deep  silence,  and  frequent  sighs,  was,  "  Peace !  Peace !" 
He  now  said,  upon  the  morning  of  the  engagement,  tliat  he  was 
weary  of  the  times,  and  should  leave  them  before  nisrht.    He  was 


CHARLES  I.  545 

shot  by  a  musket-ball  in  the  belly  ;  and  his  body  was  next  morn- 
ing found  among  a  heap  of  slain.  His  writings,  his  eloquence, 
his  justice,  and  his  courage,  deserved  such  a  death  of  glory  j  and 
they  found  it. 

The  king,  that  he  might  make  preparations  during  the  winter 
for  the  ensuing  campaign,  and  to  oppose  the  designs  of  the  West- 
minster parliament,  called  one  at  Oxford  ;  and  this  was  the  first 
time  that  England  saw  two  parliaments  sitting  at  the  same  time. 
His  house  of  peers  was  pretty  full ;  his  house  of  com-  ^  -  -, 
mons  consisted  of  about  a  hundred  and  forty,  which  L  *-' 
amounted  to  not  above  half  of  the  other  house  of  commons.  From 
this  shadow  of  a  parliament  he  received  some  supplies ;  after 
■which  it  was  prorogued,  and  never  after  assembled.  In  the  mean 
time  the  parliamentarian  leaders  were  equally  active  on  their 
side.  They  passed  an  ordinance,  commanding  all  the  inhabitants 
of  London  and  its  neighbourhood  to  retrench  a  meal  a  week,  and 
to  pay  the  value  of  it  for  the  support  of  the  public  cause.  But, 
what  was  much  more  effectual,  the  Scots,  who  considered  their 
claims  as  similar,  led  a  strong  army  to  their  assistance.  The 
two  houses  levied  an  army  of  fourteen  thousand  men  in  the  east, 
under  the  earl  of  Manchester ;  they  had  an  army  often  thousand 
men  under  Essex,  and  another  of  nearly  the  same  force  under  sir 
William  Waller.  These  were  superior  to  any  force  the  king 
could  bring  into  the  field,  and  were  well  appointed  with  ammu- 
nition, provisions,  and  pay. 

Hostilities,  which  even  during  the  winter-season  had  not  been 
■wholly  discontinued,  were  renewed  in  spring  with  their  usual  fury, 
and  served  to  desolate  the  kingdom  without  deciding  victory. 
Each  county  joined  that  side  to  which  it  was  addicted  from  mo- 
tives of  conviction,  interest,  or  fear.  Some,  however,  petitioned 
for  peace ;  and  all  the  wise  and  good  were  earnest  in  the  cry. 
What  particularly  deserves  remark,  was  an  attempt  of  the  women 
of  London,  who,  to  the  number  of  two  or  three  thousand,  went 
in  a  body  to  the  house  of  commons,  earnestly  demanding  a  peace. 
*'  Give  us  those  traitors,"  said  they,  "  that  are  against  a  peace  5 
give  them,  that  we  may  tear  them  in  pieces."  The  guards  found 
some  diflBculty  in  quelling  this  insurrection,  and  one  or  two  women 
lost  their  lives  in  the  fray. 

The  battle  of  Marston-moor  was  the  beginning  of  the  king's 

VOL.  r.  69 


546  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

misfortunes  and  disgrace.  The  Scots  and  parliamentarian  army 
had  joined,  and  were  besieging  York,  when  prince  Rupert,  joined 
by  the  marquis  of  Newcastle,  determined  to  raise  the  siege.  Both 
sides  drew  up  on  Marston-moor,  to  the  number  of  fifty  thousand, 
and  the  victory  seemed  long  undecided  between  them.  Rupert, 
who  commanded  the  right  wing  of  the  roj^alists,  was  opposed  by 
Oliver  Cromwell,  who  now  first  came  into  notice,  at  the  head  of 
a  body  of  troops  whom  he  had  taken  care  to  levy  and  discipline. 
Cromwell  was  victorious ;  he  pushed  his  opponents  off  the  field, 
followed  the  vanquished,  returned  to  a  second  engagement,  and 
a  second  victory ;  the  prince's  whole  train  of  artillery  was  taken  j 
and  the  royalists  sustained  irreparable  injury. 

While  the  king  was  unfortunate  in  the  field,  he  was  not  more 
successful  in  negotiation.  A  treaty  was  begun  at  Uxbridge,  which, 
like  all  others,  came  to  nothing.  The  puritans  demand- 
L  *-J  ed  a  total  abolition  of  the  episcopacy  and  all  church  cer- 
emonies ;  and  this  Charles,  from  conviction,  from  interest,  and 
persuusion,  was  not  willing  to  permit.  He  had  all  along  adhered 
to  the  episcopal  jurisdiction,  not  only  because  it  was  favourable 
to  monarchy,  but  because  all  his  adherents  were  passionately  de- 
voted to  it.  He  esteemed  bishops  as  essential  to  the  christian 
church ;  and  thought  himself  bound,  not  only  by  temporal  but  sa- 
cred ties,  to  defend  them.  The  parliament  was  as  obstinately 
bent  upon  removing  thi&  order;  and,  to  show  their  resolution^ 
began  with  the  foremost  of  the  number. 

William  Laud,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  as  we  have  already 
seen,  had  been  imprisoned  in  the  Tower  at  the  same  time  with 
Strafford ;  and  he  had  patiently  endured  so  long  a  confinement 
without  being  brought  to  any  trial.  He  was  now,  therefore,  ac- 
cused of  high-treason,  in  endeavouring  to  subvert  the  fundamen>- 
tal  laws,  and  of  other  high  crimes  and  misdemeanours.  The  ground- 
less charge  of  popery,  which  his  life  and  afterwards  his  death  be- 
lied, was  urged  against  him.  In  his  defence  he  spoke  severat 
hours  with  that  courage  which  seems  the  result  of  innocence  and 
integrity.  The  lords,  who  were  his  judges,  appeared  willing  to 
acquit  him :  but  the  commons,  his  accusers,  finding  how  his  trial 
was  likely  to  go,  passed  aa  ordinance  for  his  execution,  and  ter- 
rified the  lords,  who  continued  obstinate,  to  give  their  consent. 
Seven  peers  alone  voted  in  this  important  question ;  all  the  rest, 


CHARLES  I.  54T 

either  from  shame  or  fear,  did  not  appear.  "When  brought  to  the 
scaiFold,  this  venerable  prelate,  without  any  terror,  but  in  the 
usual  tone  of  his  exhortations  from  the  pulpit,  made  the  people 
a  long  speech.  He  told  them  that  he  had  examined  his  heart ; 
and  thanked  God  that  he  found  no  sins  there  which  deserved  the 
death  he  was  going  to  suffer.  The  king,  he  said,  had  been  tra- 
duced by  some,  as  labouring  to  introduce  popery ;  but  he  believed 
him  as  sound  a  protestant  as  any  man  in  the  kingdom  ;  and  as  for 
parliaments,  though  he  disliked  the  conduct  of  one  or  two,  yet  he 
never  designed  to  change  the  laws  of  his  country,  or  the  protes- 
tant religion.  After  he  had  prayed  for  a  few  minutes,  the  execu- 
tioner severed  his  head  at  a  blow.  It  is  a  melancholy  considera* 
tion,  that,  in  these  times  of  trouble,  the  best  men  were  those  on 
either  side  who  chiefly  suffered. 

The  death  of  Laud  was  followed  by  a  total  alteration  of  the 
ceremonies  of  the  church.  The  Liturgy  was,  by  a  public  act,  abol- 
ished on  the  day  of  his  death,  as  if  he  had  been  the  only  obstacle 
to  its  formal  removal.  The  church  of  England  was  in  all  respects 
brought  to  a  conformity  to  the  puritanical  establishment ;  while 
the  citizens  of  London,  and  the  Scotch  army,  gave  public  thanks 
for  so  happy  an  alteration. 

The  abolition  of  the  reformed  religion,  as  established  by  queen 
Elizabeth,  seemed  at  first  to  promise  vigour  and  consistence  to 
the  counsels  of  the  parliamentarians.  But  such  is  the  nature  of 
man,  that  if  he  does  not  find,  he  makes  opposition.  Fi'om  the 
moment  the  puritans  began  to  be  apparently  united,  and  ranked 
under  one  denomination  of  presbyterians,  they  began  to  divide 
into  frdsh  parties,  each  professing  different  views  and  interests. 
One  part  of  the  house  was  composed  of  presbyterians,  strictly  so 
called  ;  the  other,  though  a  minority,  of  independents,  a  new  sect 
that  had  lately  been  introduced,  and  gained  ground  surprisingly. 

The  difference  between  these  two  sects  would  be  hardly  worth 
mentioning,  did  not  their  religious  opinions  influence  their  polit- 
ical conduct.  The  church  of  England,  as  we  have  seen,  had  ap? 
pointed  bishops  of  clerical  ordination,  and  a  bpok  of  common- 
prayer.  The  presbyterians  exclaimed  against  both ;  they  were 
for  having  the  church  governed  by  clergymen  elected  by  the  peo- 
ple, and  prayers  made  without  premeditation.  The  independents 
went  still  farther  j  they  excluded  all  the  clergy ;  they  maintainetj 


§^^  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

that  every  man  might  pray  in  public,  exhort  his  audience,  and 
explain  the  scriptures.  Their  political  system  kept  pace  with 
their  religious.  Not  contented  with  reducing  the  king  to  a  first 
magistrate,  which  was  the  aim  of  the  presbyterians,  this  sect  as-? 
pired  at  the  abolition  not  only  of  all  monarchy,  but  of  all  subor- 
dination. They  maintained,  and  they  maintained  right,  that  all 
men  were  born  equal ;  but  they  alleged  also,  that  no  accidental 
or  artificial  institutions  could  destroy  this  equality ;  and  there 
they  were  deceived.  Could  such  a  plan  of  government  as  theirs 
be  practicable,  it  would,  no  doubt,  be  the  most  happy;  but  the 
wise  and  industrious  must  in  every  countiy  prevail  over  the 
weak  and  idle ;  and  the  bad  success  of  the  independent  scheme 
soon  after  showed  how  ill  adapted  such  speculative  ideas  were 
to  human  infirmity.  Possessed,  however,  with  a  high  idea  of 
their  own  rectitude  both  in  religion  and  politics,  they  gave  way 
to  a  surly  pride,  which  is  ever  the  result  of  narrow  manners  and 
solitary  thinking. 

These  were  a  body  of  men  that  were  now  growing  into  con- 
sideration ;  their  apparent  sanctity,  their  natural  courage,  ex- 
cited by  enthusiasm,  and  their  unceasing  perseverance,  began  to 
work  considerable  eftects;  and,  though  they  were  out-numbered 
in  the  house  of  commons,  which  was  composed  of  more  enlight" 
ened  minds,  they  formed  a  majority  in  the  army,  made  up  chiefly 
of  the  lowest  of  the  vulgar. 

The  royalists  endeavoured  to  throw  a  ridicule  on  this  fanati- 
cism, without  being  sensible  how  much  reason  they  had  to  ap- 
prehend its  dangerous  consequences.  The  forces  of  the  king 
were  united  by  much  feebler  ties;  and  license  among  them, 
which  had  been  introduced  by  the  want  of  pay,  had  risen  to  a 
dangerous  height,  i-endering  them  as  formidable  to  their  friends 
as  their  enemies.  To  increase  this  unpopularity,  the  king,  find- 
ing the  parliament  of  Scotland  as  well  as  that  of  England  declar- 
ing against  him,  thought  proper  to  make  a  truce  with  the  papists 
of  Ireland,  in  order  to  bring  over  the  English  forces  who  served 
in  that  kingdom.  With  these  troops  he  also  received  some  of 
the  native  Irish  into  his  service,  who  still  retained  their  fierceness 
and  their  barbarity.  This  gave  the  parliament  a  plausible  op- 
portunity of  upbraiding  him  with  taking  papists  into  his  service, 
and  gave  a  colour  to  the  antient  calumny  of  his  having  excited 


CHARLES  I.  549 

them  to  rebel.  Unfortunately,  too  soon  after,  it  was  found  that 
they  rather  increased  the  hatred  of  his  subjects  than  added  to 
the  strength  of  his  army.  They  were  routed  by  Fairfax,  one  of 
the  generals  of  the  parliament  army;  and,  though  they  threw 
down  their  arms,  they  were  slaughtered  without  mercy.  It  is 
said  that  several  women  were  found  among  the  slain,  who  with 
long  knives  had  done  considerable  execution ;  but  the  animosity 
of  the  English  against  these  wretches  at  that  time  might  have 
given  rise  to  the  report. 

These  misfortunes  were  soon  after  succeeded  by  another. 
Charles,  who  had  now  retired  to  Oxford,  found  himself  at  the 
head  of  a  turbulent  seditious  army,  who,  from  wanting  pay,  were 
scarcely  subject  to  control  5  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  parlia- 
mentarians were  well  supplied  and  paid,  and  held  together  from, 
principle.  The  parliament,  to  give  them  an  example  of  disinter- 
estedness in  their  own  conduct,  passed  an  act,  called  the  self- 
denying  ordinance,  which  deserved  all  commendation.  They  re- 
solved, lest  it  should  be  suggested  by  the  nation  that  their  intent 
was  to  make  themselves  masters,  that  no  member  of  their  house 
should  have  a  command  in  the  army.  The  former  generals  were, 
therefore,  changed ;  the  earls  of  Essex,  Denbigh,  and  Manches- 
ter, gave  up  their  commissions ;  and  Fairfax,  now  appointed  gen- 
eral with  Cromwell,  who  found  means  to  keep  at  once  liis  seat  and 
his  commission,  new-modelled  the  army.  This,  which  might  at 
first  have  seemed  to  weaken  their  forces,  gave  them  new  spirit ; 
and  the  soldiers,  become  more  confident  in  their  new  comman- 
ders, were  irresistible. 

Never  was  a  more  singular  army  assembled  than  that  which 
now  drew  the  sword  in  the  parliamentary  cause.  The  officers 
exercised  the  office  of  chaplains;  and,  during  the  intervals  of  ac- 
tion, instructed  their  troops  by  sermons,  prayers,  and  exhorta- 
tions. Rapturous  ecstasies  supplied  the  place  of  study  and  re- 
flection; and  while  they  kindled  as  they  spoke,  they  ascribed 
their  own  warmth  to  a  descent  of  the  spirit  from  heaven.  The 
private  soldiers,  seized  with  the  same  spirit,  employed  their  va- 
cant hours  in  prayer,  in  perusing  the  holy  scriptures,  in  ghostly 
conferences.  When  marching  to  the  field  of  battle,  the  hymn 
and  the  ejaculation  mixed  their  notes  with  those  of  the  trumpet. 
An  army  thus  actuated  became  invincible. 


550  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

June  14,  The  well-disputed  battle  which  decided  the  fate  of- 
1645.  Charles,  was  fought  at  Nascbj,  a  village  in  Northamp- 
tonshire. The  main  body  of  the  royal  army  was  commanded  by 
lord  Astley ;  prince  Rupert  led  the  right  wing,  sir  Marmaduke 
Langdale  the  left,  and  the  king  himself  headed  the  body  of  re- 
serve. On  the  opposite  side,  Fairfax  and  Skippon  commanded 
the  main  body ;  Cromwell  led  on  the  right  wing,  and  Ireton,  his 
son-in-law,  the  left.  Prince  Rupert  attacked  the  left  wing  with 
his  usual  impetuosity  and  success  :  they  were  broken,  and  pur- 
sued as  far  as  the  village ;  but  he  lost  time  in  attempting  to  make 
himself  master  of  their  artillery.  Cromwell,  in  the  mean  time, 
was  equally  successful  on  his  side,  and  broke  through  the  enemy's 
horse  after  a  very  obstinate  resistance.  While  these  were  thus 
engaged,  the  infantry  on  both  sides  maintained  the  conflict  with 
equal  ardour  j  and,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  Fairfax  and  Skippon, 
their  battalions  began  to  give  way.  But  it  was  now  that  Crom- 
well returned  with  his  victorious  forces,  and  charged  the  king's 
infantry  in  flank  with  such  vigour,  that  a  total  rout  began  to  en- 
sue. By  this  time  prince  Rupert  had  rejoined  the  king  and  the 
small  body  of  reserve ;  but  his  troops,  though  victorious,  could 
not  be  brought  to  a  second  charge.  They  were  at  all  times  Ht  . 
centious  aud  ungovernable  ;  but  they  were  now  intimidated  ;  for 
the  parliamentarians,  having  recovered  from  the  first  shock,  stood 
ready  in  order  of  battle  to  receive  them.  The  king  was  desirous 
of  charging  them  at  the  head  of  his  reserve  ;  but  the  earl  of  Carn- 
wath,  ivho  rode  by  his  majesty's  side,  seizing  the  bridle  of  his 
horse,  turned  him  round,  saying,  with  a  loud  oath,  "  Will  you  go 
upon  your  death  in  an  instant  P^  The  troops  seeing  this  motion 
wheeled  to  the  right,  and  rode  off  in  such  confusion  that  they 
could  not  be  rallied  during  the  rest  of  the  day.  The  king,  per- 
ceiving the  battle  wholly  lost,  was  obliged  to  abandon  the  field  to 
his  enemies,  who  took  all  his  cannon,  baggage,  and  above  five 
thousand  prisoners. 

From  this  fatal  blow  the  king  never  after  recovered ;  his  army 
was  dispersed,  and  the  conquerors  made  as  many  captives  as 
they  thought  proper.  Among  the  other  spoils  taken  on  this  oc- 
casion, the  king's  cabinet  was  seized,  in  which  was  contained  all 
his  private  correspondence  with  the  queen.  The  letters  were 
shortly  after  published  by  the  command  of  the  parliament,  who 


CHARLES  I.  551 

took  a  vulgar  and  brutal  pleasure  in  ridiculing  all  those  tender  ef- 
fusions which  were  never  drawn  up  for  the  public  eye. 

The  battle  of  Naseby  put  the  parliamentarians  in  possession  of 
almost  all  the  strong  towns  of  the  kingdom — Bristol,  Bridgewater, 
Chester,  Sherborn,  and  Bath.  Exeter  was  besieged ;  and  all  the 
king's  troops  in  the  western  counties  being  entirely  dispersed, 
Fairfax  pressed  the  place,  and  it  surrendered  at  discretion.  The 
king's  interests  seemed  going  to  ruin  in  every  quarter.  The  Scot- 
ish  army,  which,  as  has  been  said,  took  part  with  the  parliament, 
having  made  themselves  masters  of  Carlisle,  after  an  obstinate 
siege,  marched  to  the  southward,  and  laid  siege  to  Hereford. 
Another  engagement  followed  between  the  king  and  the  parlia- 
mentarians, in  which  his  forces  were  put  to  the  rout  by  colonel 
Jones,  a  thousand  of  his  men  made  prisoners,  and  five  hundred 
slain.  Thus  harassed  on  every  side,  he  retreated  to  Oxford, 
which  in  all  conditions  of  his  fortune  had  been  steady  to  his 
cause ;  and  there  he  resolved  to  offer  new  terms  to  his  victorious 
pursuers. 

Nothing  could  be  more  affecting  than  the  king's  situation  dur- 
ing his  abode  at  Oxford.  Saddened  by  his  late  melancholy  dis- 
asters, impressed  with  the  apprehensions  of  such  as  hung  over 
him,  harassed  by  the  murmurs  of  those  who  had  followed  his 
cause,  and  stung  with  sorrow  for  his  incapacity  to  relieve  them, 
he  now  was  willing  to  grant  the  parliament  their  own  terms,  and 
at  any  rate  to  procure  a  reconciliation.  He  therefore  sent  them 
repeated  messages  to  this  purpose ;  but  they  did  not  deign  to 
make  him  the  least  reply.  At  last,  after  reproaching  him  with 
the  blood  spilt  during  the  war,  they  told  him  that  they  were  pre- 
paring some  bills,  to  which  if  he  would  consent,  they  would  then 
be  able  to  judge  of  his  pacific  inclinations. 

In  the  mean  time,  Fairfax  was  approaching  with  a 
powerful  and  victorious  army,  and  was  taking  the  L^ "•*"*] 
proper  measures  for  laying  siege  to  Oxford,  which  promised  an 
easy  surrender.  To  be  taken  captive,  and  led  in  triumph  by  his 
insolent  subjects,  was  what  Charles  justly  abhorred ;  and  eveiy 
insult  and  violence  might  be  dreaded  from  the  soldiery,  who  had 
felt  the  effects  of  his  opposition.  In  this  desperate  extremity,  he 
embraced  a  measure  which,  in  any  other  situation,  might  justly 
lie  under  the  imputation  of  imprudence  and  indiscretion.    He 


53Z  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND- 

resolved  to  give  himself  up  to  the  Scotish  army,  who  had  never 
testified  such  implacable  animosity  against  him,  and  to  trust  to 
their  loyalty  for  the  rest. 

That  he  might  the  better  conceal  his  design  from  the  people  of 
Oxford,  orders  were  given  at  every  gate  of  the  city  for  allowing 
three  persons  to  pass.  In  the  night,  the  king,  accompanied  by 
doctor  Hudson  and  Mr.  Ashburnham,  took  the  road  towards  Lon- 
don, travelling  as  Ashburnham's  servant.  He,  in  fact,  came  so 
near  London,  that  he  once  entertained  some  thoughts  of  entering 
that  city,  and  of  throwing  himself  on  the  mercy  of  the  parliament. 
At  last,  after  passing  through  many  cross-roads  and  by-ways,  he 
arrived  at  the  Scotish  camp  before  Newark,  and  discovered  him- 
self to  lord  Leven,  the  general. 

The  Scots,  who  had  before  given  him  some  general  assurances 
of  their  fidelity  and  protection,  now  seemed  greatly  surprised  at 
his  arrival  among  them.  Instead  of  bestowing  a  thought  on  his 
interests,  they  instantly  entered  into  a  consultation  upon  their 
own.  The  commissioners  of  their  army  sent  up  an  account  of 
the  king's  arrival  to  the  parliament ;  and  declared  that  his  com- 
ing was  altogether  uninvited  and  unexpected.  In  the  mean  time, 
they  prevailed  upon  the  king  to  give  directions  for  surrendering 
all  his  garrisons  to  the  parliament ;  with  which  he  complied.  In 
return  for  this  condescension,  they  treated  him  with  very  long 
sermons  among  the  ecclesiastics,  and  with  the  most  cautious  re- 
serve, but  very  different  from  respect,  among  the  ofiicers.  The 
preachers  of  the  party  indeed  insulted  him  from  the  pulpit ;  and 
one  of  them,  after  reproaching  him  to  his  face  with  his  miscon- 
duct, ordered  that  psalm  to  be  sung  which  begins, 
"  Why  dost  thou,  tyrant,  boast  thyself, 
Thy  wicked  deeds  to  praise  ?" 
The  king  stood  up,  and  called  for  that  psalm  which  begins  with 
these  words, 

"  Have  mercy,  Lord,  on  me,  I  pray. 
For  men  would  me  devour." 
The  audience  accordingly  sang  this  psalm  in  compassion  to  majes- 
ty in  distress. 

The  parliament  being  informed  of  the  king's  captivity,  imme- 
diately entered  into  a  treaty  with  the  Scots,  about  delivering  up 
their  prisoner.    The  Scots  had,  from  their  firsjt  entrance  into 


CHARLES  I.  55S 

England,  been  allowed  pay  by  the  parliament,  in  order  to  pre- 
vent their  plundering  the  country  :  much  of  this,  however,  remain- 
ed unpaid,  from  the  unavoidable  necessities  of  the  times;  and 
much  more  was  claimed  by  the  Scots  than  was  really  due.  Nev- 
ertheless, they  now  saw  that  this  was  a  convenient  time  for  in- 
sisting on  their  arrears  ;  and  they  resolved  to  make  the  king  the 
instrument  by  which  this  money  was  to  be  obtained.  After  vari- 
ous debates  upon  this  head  between  them  and  the  parliament,  in 
which  they  pretended  to  great  honour,  and  insisted  upon  many 
punctilios,  they  agreed,  that  upon  payment  of  four  hundred  thou- 
sand pounds  they  would  deliver  up  the  king  to  his  enemies  :  and 
this  was  cheerfully  complied  with.  An  action  so  atrocious  may 
be  palliated,  but  can  never  be  defended :  they  returned  home, 
laden  with  plunder,  and  the  reproaches  of  all  good  men. 

From  this  period  to  the  despotic  government  of  Cromwellj  the 
constitution  was  convulsed  with  all  the  agitations  of  faction,  guilt, 
ignorance,  and  enthusiasm.  The  kingly  power  being  laid  low, 
the  parliament  attempted  to  assume  the  reins ;  but  they  were 
soon  to  submit  in  turn  to  the  military  power,  which,  like  all  de- 
mocracies, was  turbulent,  transient,  feeble,  and  bloody. 


CHAP,  xxxir. 

CHAKLES  I.  (Continued.) 


[i64r.] 


X  HE  king  being  delivered  over  by  the  Scots  to  the  par- 
liamentary commissioners,  he  was  conducted  under  a 
guard  to  Holdenby  Castle  in  Northamptonshire.  They  treated 
him  in  confinement  with  the  most  rigorous  severity,  dismissing  all 
his  antient  servants,  debarring  him  from  all  visits,  and  cutting  off 
all  communication  with  his  friends  and  family. 

The  civil  war  was  now  over ;  the  king  had  absolved  his  fol- 
lowers from  their  allegiance,  and  the  parliament  had  now  no  en- 
emy to  fear,  except  those  very  troops  by  which  they  had  extend- 
ed their  overgrown  authority.  But  in  proportion  as  the  terror  pf 
the  king's  power  diminished,  the  division  between  the  indepen- 
dents and  the  presbyterians  became  more  apparent.  The  major- 
voL.  I.  70 


554  HlsrOllY  OF  ENGLAND. 

itj  in  the  house  were  of  the  presbyterian  sect ;  but  the  majority 
of  the  army  were  staunch  independents.  At  the  head  of  this  sect 
was  Cromwell,  who  secretly  directed  its  operations,  and  invigo- 
rated all  their  measures. 

Oliver  Cromwell,  whose  talents  now  began  to  appear  in  full 
lustre,  was  the  son  of  a  private  gentleman  of  Huntingdon ;  but 
being  the  son  of  a  second  brother,  he  inherited  a  very  small  pa- 
ternal fortune.  He  had  been  sent  to  Cambridge ;  but  his  inclina- 
tions not  at  that  time  turning  to  the  calm  occupations  of  elegant 
literature,  he  was  remarkable  only  for  the  profligacy  of  his  con- 
duct, and  the  dissipation  of  his  paternal  fortune.  It  was,  perhaps, 
his  poverty  that  induced  him  to  fall  into  the  opposite  extreme  short- 
ly after ;  for,  from  being  one  of  the  most  debauched  men  in  the 
kingdom,  he  became  the  most  rigid  and  abstemious.  The  same 
vehemence  of  temper  which  had  transported  him  into  the  extremes 
of  pleasure,  now  distinguished  his  religious  habits.  He  endeav- 
oured to  improve  his  shattered  fortunes  by  agriculture  ;  but  this 
expedient  served  only  to  plunge  him  into  farther  difficulties.  He 
Was  even  determined  to  go  over  and  settle  in  New-England  ;  but 
was  prevented  by  the  king's  ordinance  to  the  contrary.  From 
accident  or  intrigue,  he  was  chosen  member  for  the  town  of  Cam- 
bridge, in  the  long  parliament ;  but  he  seemed  at  first  to  possess 
no  talents  for  oratory,  his  person  being  ungraceful,  his  dress  slov- 
enly, his  elocution  homely,  tedious,  obscure,  and  embarrassed. 
He  made  up,  however,  by  zeal  and  perseverance,  what  he  want- 
ed in  natural  powers ;  and  being  endowed  with  unshaken  intre- 
pidity, much  dissimulation,  and  a  thorough  conviction  of  the  rec- 
titude of  his  cause,  he  rose,  through  the  gradations  of  preferment, 
to  the  post  of  lieutenant-general  under  Fairfax ;  but,  in  reality, 
possessing  the  supreme  command  over  the  whole  army. 

Soon  after  the  retreat  of  the  Scots,  the  presbyterian  party,  see- 
ing every  thing  reduced  to  obedience,  began  to  talk  of  dismissing 
a  considerable  part  of  the  army,  and  sending  the  rest  to  Ireland. 
It  may  easily  be  supposed,  that  for  every  reason  the  troops  were 
as  unwilling  to  be  disbanded  as  to  be  led  over  into  a  country  as 
yet  uncivilised,  uncultivated,  and  barbarous.  Cromwell  took  care 
to  inspire  them  with  a  horror  of  either ;  they  loved  him  for  his 
bravery  and  religious  zeal,  and  still  more  for  his  seeming  affection 
to  them.    Instead,  therefore,  of  submitting,  they  resolved  to  pe- 


CHARLES  I.  555 

tition  5  and  they  began  by  desiring  an  indemnity,  ratified  by  the 
king,  for  any  illegal  actions  which  they  might  have  committed 
during  the  war.  This  the  commons,  in  turn,  treated  with  great 
severity ;  they  voted,  that  this  petition  tended  to  introduce  muti- 
ny, to  put  conditions  upon  the  parliament  to  obstruct  the  relief  of 
the  kingdom  of  Ireland ;  and  they  threatened  to  proceed  against 
the  promoters  of  it  as  enemies  to  the  state,  and  disturbers  of  the 
public  peace. 

The  army  now  began  to  consider  themselves  as  a  body  distinct 
from  the  commonwealth  ;  and  complained,  that  they  had  secured 
the  general  tranquillity,  while  they  were,  at  the  same  time,  de- 
prived of  the  privileges  of  Englishmen.  In  opposition,  therefore, 
to  the  parliament  at  Westminster,  a  military  parliament  was  form- 
ed, composed  of  the  officers  and  common  soldiers  of  each  regiment. 
The  principal  officers  formed  a  council  to  represent  the  body  of 
peers ;  the  soldiers  elected  two  men  out  of  each  company  to  rep- 
resent the  house  of  commons ;  and  these  were  called  the  Agita- 
tors of  the  army.  Cromwell  took  care  to  be  one  of  the  number, 
and  thus  contrived  an  easy  method  under -hand  of  conducting  and 
promoting  the  sedition  of  the  army. 

This  fierce  assembly,  having  debated  for  a  very  short  time,  de- 
clared that  they  found  many  grievances  to  be  redressed ;  and  be- 
gan by  specifying  such  as  they  desired  to  be  most  speedily  re- 
moved. The  very  same  conduct  which  had  formerly  been  used 
with  success  by  the  parliament  against  their  sovereign,  was  now 
put  in  practice  by  the  army  against  the  parliament.  As  the  com- 
mons granted  every  request,  the  agitators  rose  in  their  demands ; 
the  former  accused  the  army  of  mutiny  and  sedition  ;  the  army 
retorted  the  charge,  and  alleged  that  the  king  had  been  deposed 
only  to  make  way  for  their  usurpations. 

The  unhappy  king,  in  the  mean  time,  continued  a  prisoner  at 
Holdenby  Castle  ;  and  as  his  countenance  might  add  some  author- 
ity to  that  side  which  should  obtain  it,  Cromwell,  who  secretly 
conducted  all  the  measures  of  the  army  while  he  apparently  ex- 
claimed against  their  violence,  resolved  to  seize  the  king's  person. 
Accordingly  a  party  of  five  hundred  horse  appeared  at  the  castle, 
under  the  command  of  one  Joyce,  who  had  been  originally  a  tailor, 
but  who,  in  the  present  confusion  of  all  ranks  and  orders,  was 
advanced  to  the  rank  of  cornet.    Without  any  opposition,  he  en» 


556  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

tered  the  king's  apartment,  armed  with  pistols,  and  told  him  that 
he  must  prepare  and  go  with  him.  "Whither  ?"  said  the  king.  "  To 
the  army,"  replied  Joyce.  "  By  what  warrant  ?"  asked  the  king. 
Joyce  pointed  to  his  followers.  "  Your  warrant,"  replied  Charles, 
"  is  written  in  fair  characters."  And  then,  without  further  de- 
lay, he  went  into  his  coach,  and  was  safely  conducted  to  the  army, 
who  were  hastening  to  their  rendezvous  at  Triploe-heath,  near 
Royston.  The  next  day  Cromwell  arrived  among  them,  where  he 
TV  as  received  v/ith  acclamations  of  joy,  and  was  instantly  invest- 
ed with  the  supreme  command. 

It  was  now  that  the  commons  perceived  a  settled  design  in  the 
army  to  prescribe  laws  to  their  employers  ;  and  they  did  not  fail 
to  spread  the  alarm  through  the  city.  But  it  was  too  late  to  re- 
sist 5  the  army,  with  Cromwell  at  their  head,  advanced  with  pre- 
cipitation, and  arrived  in  a  few  days  at  St.  Alban's ;  so  that  the 
commons  now  began  to  think  of  temporising.  The  declaration  by 
which  they  had  voted  the  military  petitioners  enemies  to  the  state, 
was  recalled  and  erased  from  their  journal-book.  But  all  submis- 
sion was  vain ;  the  army  still  rose  in  their  demands,  in  proportion 
as  those  demands  were  gratified,  until  at  last  they  entirely  threw 
oft'  the  mask,  and  claimed  a  right  of  modelling  the  whole  govern- 
ment, and  settling  the  nation. 

But  as  too  precipitate  an  assumption  of  authority  might  appear  in- 
vidious, Cromwell  began  by  accusing  eleven  members  of  the  house 
as  guilty  of  high-ti'eason,  and  enemies  to  the  army.  The  members 
accused  were  the  leaders  of  the  presbyterian  party,  the  very  men 
who  had  prescribed  such  rigorous  measures  to  the  king,  and  now, 
in  their  turn,  were  threatened  with  popular  resentment.  As  they 
were  the  leading  men  in  the  house,  the  commons  were  willing  to 
protect  tliem ;  but  the  army  insisting  on  their  dismission,  they 
voluntarily  left  the  house  rather  than  be  compelled  to  withdraw. 

At  last  the  citizens  of  London,  who  had  been  ever  foremost  in 
sedition,  began  to  open  their  eyes,  and  to  perceive  that  the  con- 
stitution was  totally  overturned.  They  saw  an  oppressive  parlia- 
ment now  subjected  to  a  more  oppressive  army ;  they  found  their 
l-eligion  abolished,  their  king  a  captive,  and  no  hopes  of  redress 
but  from  another  scene  of  slaughter.  In  this  exigence,  therefore, 
the  common -council  assembled  the  militia  of  the  city;  the  works 
were  manned,  and  a  manifesto  published?  aggravating  the  hostile 


CHARLES  I.  S5f 

intentions  of  the  army.  Finding  that  the  house  of  commons,  in 
compliance  with  the  request  of  the  army,  had  voted  that  the  city 
militia  should  be  disbanded,  the  multitude  rose,  besieged  the  door 
of  the  house,  and  obliged  them  to  reverse  that  vote  which  they 
had  passed  so  lately. 

In  this  manner  was  this  wretched  house  intimidated  on  either 
side ;  obliged  at  one  time  to  obey  the  army,  at  another  to  comply 
with  the  clamours  of  the  city  rabble.  This  assembly  was,  in  con- 
sequence, divided  into  parties,  as  usual ;  one  part  siding  with  the 
seditious  citizens,  while  the  minority,  with  the  two  speakers  at 
their  head,  were  for  encouraging  the  army.  In  such  an  universal 
confusion,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  any  thing  less  than  a  sep- 
aration of  the  parties  could  take  place ;  and  accordingly  the  two 
speakers,  with  sixty -two  members,  secretly  retired  from  the  house, 
and  threw  themselves  under  the  protection  of  the  army,  then  en- 
camped upon  Hounslow  heath.  They  were  received  with  shouts 
and  accclamations  ;  their  integrity  was  extolled  ;  and  the  whole 
body  of  the  soldiery,  a  formidable  force  of  twenty  thousand  men, 
now  moved  forward  to  reinstate  them. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  remaining  members  resolved  to  act  with 
vigour,  and  resist  the  encroachments  of  the  army.  They  chose 
new  speakers  ;  they  gave  orders  for  enlisting  troops  ;  they  order- 
ed the  trained  bands  toman  the  lines;  and  the  whole  city  boldly 
resolved  to  resist  the  invasion.  But  this  resolution  only  held  while 
the  enemy  was  thought  at  a  distance  ;  for,  when  the  formidable 
force  of  Cromwell  appeared,  all  was  obedience  and  submission  5 
the  gates  were  opened  to  the  general,  who  attended  the  two  speak- 
ers, and  the  rest  of  the  members,  peaceably  to  their  habitations. 
The  eleven  impeached  members,  being  accused  as  causes  of  the 
tumult,  were  expelled,  and  most  of  them  retired  to  the  continent. 
The  mayor,  slieriff,  and  three  aldermen,  were  sent  to  the  Tower  | 
several  citizens,  and  officers  of  militia,  were  committed  to  prison, 
and  the  lines  about  the  city  were  levelled  to  the  ground.  The 
command  of  the  Tower  was  given  to  Fairfax,  the  general ;  and 
the  parliament  ordered  him  their  hearty  thanks  for  having  diso- 
beyed their  commands. 

It  now  only  remained  to  dispose  of  the  king,  who  had  been 
sent  by  the  army  a  prisoner  to  Hampton-Court.  The  independ- 
ent army,  at  the  head  of  v;hom  was  Cromwell,  on  one  hand,  and 


558  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

the  presbyterians  in  the  name  of  either  house,  on  the  other  hand, 
treated  separately  with  him  in  private.  He  had  at  one  time  even 
hopes,  that,  in  these  struggles  for  power,  he  might  have  been 
chosen  mediator  in  the  dispute ;  and  he  expected  that  the  king- 
dom, at  last  sensible  of  the  miseries  of  anarchy,  would,  like  a 
froward  child,  hushed  with  its  own  importunities,  settle  intoits 
former  tranquil  constitution.  However,  in  all  his  miseries  and 
doubts,  though  at  first  led  about  with  his  army,  and  afterwards 
kept  a  prisoner  by  them  at  Hampton,  such  was  his  admirable 
equality  of  temper,  that  no  difference  was  perceived  in  his  coun- 
tenance and  behaviour.  Though  a  captive  in  the  hands  of  his 
most  inveterate  enemies,  he  still  supported  the  dignity  of  a  mon- 
arch ;  and  he  never  one  moment  sunk  from  the  consciousness  of 
his  own  superiority. 

It  is  true,  that  at  first  he  was  treated  with  some  flattering  marks 
of  distinction  ;  he  was  permitted  to  converse  with  his  old  ser^ 
vants,  his  chaplains  were  admitted  to  attend  him,  and  celebrate 
divine  service  their  own  way.  But  the  most  exquisite  pleasure 
he  enjoyed  was  in  the  company  of  his  children,  with  whom  he 
had  several  interviews.  The  meeting  on  these  occasions  was  so 
pathetic,  that  Cromwell  himself,  who  was  once  present,  could 
not  help  being  moved  ;  he  was  heard  to  declare,  that  he  had  never 
beheld  such  an  affecting  scene  before  :  and  we  must  do  justice  to 
this  man's  feelings,  as  he  was  himself  a  tender  father. 

But  those  flattering  instances  of  respect  and  submission  were 
of  no  long  continuance.  As  soon  as  the  army  had  gained  a  com- 
plete victory  over  the  house  of  commons,  the  independents  began 
to  abate  of  their  expressions  of  duty  and  respect.  The  king, 
therefore,  was  now  more  strictly  guarded;  they  would  hardly 
allow  his  domestics  to  converse  with  him  in  private,  and  spies 
were  employed  to  mark  all  his  words  and  actions.  He  was  ev- 
ery hour  threatened  with  false  dangers  of  Cromwell's  contrivance  ; 
by  which  he  Avas  taught  to  fear  for  his  personal  safety.  The 
spies  and  creatures  of  that  artful  man  were  sedulously  employed 
in  raising  the  king's  terrors,  and  representing  to  him  the  danger 
of  his  situation.  These  at  length  prevailed,  and  Charles  resolved 
to  withdraw  himself  from  the  army.  Cromwell  considered,  that 
if  he  should  escape  from  the  kingdom,  there  would  be  then  a 
theatre  open  to  his  ambition ;  if  he  should  be  apprehended,  the 


CHARLES  I.  559 

late  attempt  would  aggravate  his  guilt,  and  apologise  for  any  suc- 
ceeding severity. 

Early  in  the  evening,  the  king  retired  to  his  chamber,  on  pre- 
tence of  being  indisposed  5  and  about  an  hour  after  midnight,  he 
went  down  the  back-stairs,  attended  by  Ashburnham  and  Legge, 
both  gentlemen  of  his  bed-chamber.  Sir  John  Berkeley  waited 
for  him  at  the  garden -gate  with  horses,  which  they  instantly 
mounted,  and  travelling  through  the  Forest  all  night,  arrived  at 
Tichfield,  the  seat  of  the  earl  of  Southampton.  Before  he  arrived 
at  this  place,  he  had  gone  towards  the  shore,  and  expressed  great 
anxiety  that  a  ship,  which  Ashburnham  had  promised  to  be  in 
readiness,  was  not  to  be  seen.  At  Tichfield  he  deliberated  with 
his  friends  upon  his  next  excursion,  and  they  advised  him  to 
cross  over  to  the  Isle  of  Wight,  where  Hammond  was  governor  ; 
who,  though  a  creature  of  Cromwell,  was  yet  a  nephew  of  doctor 
Hammond,  the  king's  chaplain.  To  this  inauspicious  protector 
it  was  resolved  to  have  recourse ;  Ashburnham  and  Berkeley 
were  sent  before  to  exact  a  promise  from  this  officer,  that,  if  he 
Avould  not  protect  the  king,  he  would  not  detain  him.  Hammond 
seemed  surprised  at  their  demand ;  expressed  his  inclination  to 
serve  his  majesty,  but  at  the  same  time  alleged  his  duty  to  his 
employers.  He  therefore  attended  the  king's  gentlemen  to 
Tichfield,  with  a  guard  of  soldiers,  and  remained  in  a  lower  apart- 
ment while  Ashburnham  went  up  to  the  king's  chamber.  Charles 
no  sooner  understood  that  Hammond  was  in  the  house  with  a 
body  of  troops,  than  he  exclaimed,  "  0  Jack  !  thou  hast  undone 
me  !"  Ashburnham  shed  a  flood  of  tears,  and  offered  to  go  down 
and  dispatch  the  governor  5  but  the  king  repressed  his  ardour. 
When  Hammond  came  into  his  presence,  he  repeated  his  profes- 
sions of  regard ;  Charles  submitted  to  his  fate  ;  and,  without  fur- 
ther delay,  attended  him  to  Carisbrook  castle,  in  the  Isle  of 
Wight,  were  he  at  first  found  himself  treated  with  marks  of  duty 
and  respect. 

While  the  king  continued  in  this  forlorn  situation,  the  parlia- 
ment, new  modelled  as  it  was  by  the  army,  became  every  day 
more  feeble  and  factious.  Cromwell,  on  the  other  hand,  was 
strengthening  the  army,  and  taking  every  precaution  to  repress 
any  tendency  to  factious  division  among  them.  Nor  were  his 
fears  without  just  cause  ;  for,  had  it  not  been  for  the  quickness  of 


560  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

his  penetration,  and  the  boldness  of  his  activity,  the  whole  armj 
would  have  been  thrown  into  a  state  of  ungovernable  phrensy. 

Among  the  independents,  who,  in  general,  were  for  having  no 
ecclesiastical  subordination,  a  set  of  men  grew  up  called  Levellers, 
who  disallowed  all  subordination  whatsoever,  and  declared  that 
they  would  have  no  other  chaplain,  king,  or  general,  but  Christ. 
They  declared  that  all  men  were  equal;  that  all  degrees  and 
ranks  should  be  levelled,  and  an  exact  partition  of  property  estab- 
lished in  the  nation.  This  ferment  spread  through  the  array; 
and  as  it  was  a  doctrine  well  suited  to  the  poverty  of  the  daring 
soldiery,  it  promised  every  day  to  become  more  dangerous  and 
fatal.  Several  petitions  were  presented,  urging  the  justice  of  a 
partition,  and  threatening  vengeance  on  a  refusal  of  redress. 

Cromwell  now  saw  that  he  was  upon  the  point  of  losing  all  the 
fruits  of  his  former  schemes  and  dangers;  and  dreaded  this  new 
faction  still  more,  as  they  turned  his  own  pretended  principles 
against  himself.  Thus  finding  all  at  stake,  he  resolved,  by  one 
resolute  blow,  to  disperse  the  faction,  or  perish  in  the  attempt. 
Having  intimation  that  the  levellers  were  to  meet  at  a  certain 
place,  he  unexpectedly  appeared  before  the  terrified  assembly,  at 
the  head  of  his  red  regiment,  which  had  been  hitherto  invincible. 
He  demanded,  in  the  name  of  God,  what  these  meetings  and  mur- 
murings  meant ;  he  expostulated  with  them  upon  the  danger  and 
consequence  of  their  precipitate  schemes,  and  desired  them  im- 
mediately to  depart.  But  instead  of  obeying,  they  returned  an 
insolent  answer ;  wherefore,  rushing  on  them  in  a  fury,  he  laid, 
with  his  own  hands,  two  of  them  dead  at  his  feet.  His  guards 
dispersing  the  rest,  he  caused  several  of  them  to  be  hanged  upon 
the  spot ;  he  sent  other  prisoners  to  London ;  and  thus  dissipated 
a  faction,  no  otherwise  criminal  than  in  having  followed  his  own 
example. 

This  action  served  still  more  to  increase  the  power  of  Crom- 
well in  the  camp  and  in  the  parliament ;  and  while  Fairfax  was 
nominally  general  of  the  troops,  Oliver  was  invested  with  all  the 
power.  But  his  authority  soon  became  irresistible,  in  conse- 
quence of  a  new  and  unexpected  addition  to  his  successes.  The 
Scots,  perhaps  ashamed  of  the  reproach  of  having  sold  their  king, 
and  stimulated  by  the  independents,  who  took  all  occasions  to 
mortify  them,  raised  an  army  in  his  favour,  and  ^hq  chief  coin-- 


CHARLES  I.  561 

inand  was  given  to  the  duke  of  Hamilton  5  while  Langdale,  who 
professed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  more  bigoted  party,  who  had 
taken  the  covenant,  marched  at  the  head  of  his  separate  body, 
and  both  invaded  the  North  of  England.  Their  two  ar-  r-^  p^^q  n 
mies  amounted  to  about  twenty  thousand  men.  But 
Cromwell,  at  the  head  of  eight  thousand  of  his  hardy  veterans, 
feared  not  to  give  them  battle ;  he  attacked  them  one  after  the 
other,  routed  and  dispersed  them,  took  Hamilton  prisoner,  and, 
following  his  blow,  entered  Scotland,  where  he  settled  the  gov- 
ernment entirely  to  his  satisfaction.  An  insurrection  in  Kent 
was  quelled  by  Fairfax  at  the  same  time  with  the  same  ease ;  and 
nothing  but  success  attended  all  this  bold  usurper's  criminal  at- 
tempts. 

During  these  contentions,  the  king,  who  was  kept  a  prisoner 
at  Carisbrook,  continued  to  negotiate  with  the  parliament  for  set- 
tling the  unspeakable  calamities  of  the  kingdom.  The  parliament 
saw  no  other  method  of  destroying  military  power,  but  to  depress 
it  by  the  kingly.  Frequent  proposals  for  an  accommodation  pass- 
ed between  the  captive  king  and  the  commons ;  but  the  great  ob- 
stacle which  had  all  along  stood  in  the  way,  still  kept  them  from 
agreeing.  This  was  the  king's  refusing  to  abolish  episcopacy, 
though  he  consented  to  the  liturgy  of  the  churehi  However,  the 
treaty  was  still  carried  on  with  vigour,  as  the  parliament  had 
more  to  apprehend  from  the  designs  of  their  generals  than  from 
the  attempts  of  the  king;  and,  for  the  first  time,  they  seemed  in 
earnest  to  conclude  their  negotiations. 

But  all  was  now  too  late  ;  their  power  was  soon  totally  to  ex- 
pire ;  for  the  i-ebellious  army,  crowned  with  success,  had  returned 
from  the  destruction  of  their  enemies,  and,  sensible  of  their  own 
power,  with  furious  remonstrances  began  to  demand  vengeance  on 
the  king.  At  the  same  time  they  advanced  to  Windsor  ;  and, 
sending  an  officer  to  seize  the  king's  person,  where  he  was  lately 
sent  under  confinement,  they  conveyed  him  to  Hurst  castle,  in 
Hampshire,  opposite  the  Isle  of  Wight.  It  was  in  vain  that  the 
parliament  complained  of  this  harsh  proceeding,  as  being  contrary 
to  their  approbation ;  it  was  in  vain  that  they  began  to  issue  ordi- 
nances for  a  more  effectual  opposition  ;  they  received  a  message 
from  Cromwell,  that  he  intended  paying  them  a  visit  the  next  day 

VOL.   I.  71 


562  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

with  his  army ;  and  in  the  mean  time  he  ordered  them  to  levy 
forty  thousand  pounds  upon  the  city  of  London  for  the  public  use. 

The  commons,  though  destitute  of  all  hopes  of  prevailing,  had 
still  courage  to  resist,  and  attempted,  in  the  face  of  the  whole  ar- 
my, to  close  their  treaty  with  the  king.  They  had  taken  into 
consideration  the  whole  of  his  concessions  5  and  though  they  had 
formerly  voted  them  unsatisfactory,  they  now  renewed  the  con- 
sultation with  fresh  vigour.  After  a  violent  debate,  which  had 
lasted  three  days,  it  was  carried  in  the  king's  favour  by  a  major- 
ity of  a  hundred  and  twenty -nine  against  eighty-three,  that  his 
concessions  were  a  foundation  for  the  houses  to  proceed  upon,  in 
the  settlement  of  the  kingdom.  This  was  the  last  attempt  in  his 
favour  :  for  the  next  day  colonel  Pride,  at  the  head  of  two  regi- 
ments, blockaded  the  house,  and  seized  in  the  passage  forty -one 
members  of  the  presbyterian  party,  and  sent  them  to  a  low  room 
belonging  to  the  house,  that  passed  by  the  denomination  of  Hell. 
Above  a  hundred  and  sixty  members  more  were  excluded  ;  and 
none  were  allowed  to  enter  but  the  most  furious  and  determined 
of  the  independents,  in  all  not  exceeding  sixty.  This  atrocious 
invasion  of  the  parliamentary  rights  commonly  passed  by  the 
name  of  Pride's  Purge  ;  and  the  remaining  members  were  called 
the  Rump.  These  soon  voted,  that  the  transactions  of  the  house, 
a  few  days  before,  were  entirely  illegal,  and  that  the  conduct  of 
their  general  was  just  and  necessary. 

Nothing  now  remained,  after  the  constitution  had  been  de- 
stroyed, after  the  parliament  had  been  ejected,  after  the  religion 
of  the  country  had  been  abolished,  after  the  bravest  and  the  best 
of  its  subjects  had  been  slain,  but  to  murder  the  king !  This  vile 
parliament,  if  it  now  deserves  the  name,  was  composed  of  a  med- 
ley of  the  most  obscure  citizens,  and  the  ofiicers  of  the  array.  In 
this  assembly,  a  committee  was  appointed  to  bring  in  a  charge 
against  the  king  ;  and,  on  their  report,  a  vote  passed,  declaring,  it 
treason  in  a  king  to  levy  war  against  his  parliament.  It  was 
therefore  resolved,  that  a  high  court  of  justice  should  be  appoint- 
ed to  try  his  majesty  for  this  new-invented  treason.  For  the 
sake  of  form,  they  desired  the  concurrence  of  the  few  remaining 
lords  in  the  other  house ;  but  here  there  was  virtue  enough  left 
unanimously  to  reject  the  horrid  proposal. 


CHARLES  I.  563 

But  the  commons  were  not  to  be  stopped  by  so  small  pjg^g  -i 
an  obstacle.  They  voted,  that  the  concurrence  of  the 
house  of  lords  was  unnecessary  ;  they  voted  that  the  people  were 
the  origin  of  all  just  power;  a  fact  which,  though  true,  they  never 
could  bring  home  to  themselves.  To  add  to  their  zeal,  a  woman 
of  Hertfordshire,  illuminated  by  prophetical  visions,  desired  ad- 
mittance, and  communicated  a  revelation  which  she  had  received 
from  heaven.  She  assured  them  that  their  measures  were  conse- 
crated from  above,  and  ratified  by  the  sanction  of  the  Holy  Ghosto 
This  intelligence  gave  them  great  com-fort,  and  much  confirmed 
them  in  their  present  resolutions. 

Colonel  Harrison,  the  son  of  a  butcher,  was  commanded  to  con- 
duct the  king  from  Hurst  castle  to  Windsor,  and  thence  to  Lon- 
don. His  afilicted  subjects,  who  ran  to  have  a  sight  of  their 
sovereign,  were  greatly  affected  at  the  change  that  appeared  in 
his  face  and  person.  He  had  allowed  his  beard  to  grow;  his  hair 
had  become  venerably  grey,  l-ather  by  the  pressure  of  anxiety 
than  the  hand  of  time ;  while  the  rest  of  his  apparel  bore  the 
marks  of  misfortune  and  decay.  Thus  he  stood  a  solitary  figure 
of  majesty  in  distress,  which  even  his  adversaries  could  not  be- 
hold without  reverence  and  compassion.  He  had  been  long  at- 
tended only  by  an  old  decrepit  servant,  whose  name  was  sir  Philip 
Warwick,  who  could  only  deplore  his  master's  fate,  without  be- 
ing able  to  revenge  his  cause,  All  the  exterior  symbols  of  sover- 
eignty were  now  withdrawn  ;  and  his  new  attendants  had  orders 
to  serve  him  without  ceremony.  The  duke  of  Hamilton,  who  waS 
reserved  for  the  same  punishment  with  his  master,  having  leave 
to  take  a  last  farewell  as  he  departed  from  Windsor,  threw  him- 
self at  the  king's  feet,  crying  out,  '<  My  dear  master  !"  The  un- 
happy monarch  raised  him  up,  and,  embracing  him  tenderly,  re- 
plied, while  the  tears  ran  down  his  cheeks,  "  I  have  indeed  been 
a  dear  master  to  you."  These  were  severe  distresses :  however, 
he  could  not  be  persuaded  that  his  adversaries  would  bring  hinx 
to  a  formal  trial ;  but  he  every  moment  expected  to  be  dispatched 
by  private  assassination. 

From  the  sixth  to  the  twentieth  of  January  was  spent  in  mak- 
ing preparations  for  this  extraordinary  trial.  The  court  of  justice 
consisted  of  a  hundred  and  thirty-three  persons  named  by  the 
commons ;  but  of  these  never  above  seventy  met  upon  the  trial. 


564  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

.The  membets  ^vho  attended  were  the  chief  officers  of  the  army, 
most  of  them  of  very  mean  birth,  together  with  some  of  the  lower 
house,  fiud  a  few  citizens  of  London.  Bradshaw,  a  lawyer,  was 
t  ho:-ien  president ;  Coke  was  appointed  solicitor  for  the  people  of 
F.ngland ;  Dorislaus,  Steele,  and  Aske,  were  named  assistants. 
The  court  sat  in  Westminster-hall. 

The  king  was  now  conducted  from  Windsor  to  St.  James's  and, 
the  next  day,  was  brought  before  the  higli  court  to  take  his  trial. 
While  the  crier  was  calling  over  the  names  of  the  commissioners 
for  trying  him,  nobody  answering  for  lord  Fairfax,  a  female  voice 
from  the  gallery  was  heard  to  cry  out,  "  He  has  more  wit  than  to 
be  here."  When  the  impeachment  was  read  in  the  name  of  the 
people  of  England,  the  same  voice  exclaimed,  "  No,  nor  a  tentli 
part  of  them."  Axtel,  the  officer  who  guarded  the  court,  giving 
orders  to  fire  into  the  box  from  which  the  voice  proceeded,  it  was 
discovered  that  these  bold  answers  came  from  the  lady  Fairfax, 
who  alone  had  courage  to  condemn  their  proceedings.  ' 

When  the  king  was  brought  before  the  court,  he  was  conducted 
by  the  mace -bearer  to  a  chair  placed  within  the  bar.  Though 
long  detained  a  prisoner,  and  now  produced  as  a  criminal,  he  still 
sustained  the  dignity,  of  a  king ;  he  surveyed  the  members  of  the 
court  with  an  intrepid  haughty  air ;  and,  without  moving  his  hat, 
sat  do\yn,  while  the  members  also  were  covered.  His  charge  was 
then  read  by  the  solicitor,  accusing  him  of  having  been  the  cause 
of  all  the  bloodshed  which  followed  since  the  commencement  of 
the  war:  at  that  part  of  the  charge  he  could  not  suppress  a  smile 
of  contempt  and  indignation.  After  the  charge  was  finished, 
iSradshaw  directed  his  discourse  to  the  king,  and  told  him  that  the 
court  expected  his  answer. 

The  king  with  great  temper  entered  upon  his  defence,  by  der 
dining  the  authority  of  the  court.  He  represented,  that  having 
been  engaged  in  treaty  with  his  two  houses  of  parliament,  and 
liaving  finished  almost  every  article,  he  expected  a  different  treat- 
ment from  that  which  he  now  received.  He  perceived,  he  said, 
no  appearance  of  an  upper  house,  which  was  necessary  to  eonsti^ 
tute  a  just  tribunal;  observed  that  he  was  himself  the  king  and 
fountain  of  law,  and  consequently  could  not  be  tried  by  laws  to 
which  he  had  never  given  his  assent ;  that,  having  been  entrust- 
ed with  the  liberties  of  the  people,  he  -would  not  now  betray 


CHARLES  I.  565 

tliem,  by  i-ecognizing  a  power  founded  in  usurpation ;  that  he 
was  willing  before  a  proper  tribunal  to  enter  into  the  particu- 
lars of  his  defence ;  but  that  before  them  he  must  decline  any 
apology  for  his  innocence,  iest  he  should  be  considered  as  the 
betrayer  of,  and  not  a  martyr  for,  the  constitution. 

Bradshaw,  in  order  to  support  the  authority  of  the  court,  in- 
sisted that  they  had  received  their  power  from  the  people,  the 
source  of  all  right.  He  pressed  the  prisoner  not  to  decline  the 
authority  of  the  court,  that  was  delegated  by  the  commons  of 
England  ;  and  interrupted  and  over-ruled  the  king  in  his  attempts 
to  reply. 

In  this  manner  the  king  was  three  times  produced  before  the 
court,  and  as  often  persisted  in  declining  its  jurisdiction.  The 
fourth  and  last  time  he  was  brought  before  this  self-created  court, 
as  he  was  proceeding  thither  he  was  insulted  by  the  soldiers  and 
the  mob,  who  exclaimed,  "  Justice  !  justice  !  Execution  !  execu- 
tion !"  but  he  continued  undaunted.  His  judges  having  now  ex- 
amined some  witnesses,  by  whom  it  was  proved  that  the  king  had 
appeared  in  arms  against  the  forces  commissioned  by  parliament, 
they  pronounced  sentence  against  him.  He  seemed  very  anx- 
ious at  this  time  to  be  admitted  to  a  conference  with  the  two 
houses  ;  and  it  was  supposed  that  he  intended  to  resign  the 
crown  to  his  son  :  but  the  court  refused  compliance,  and  con- 
sidered his  request  as  an  artifice  to  delay  justice. 

The  conduct  of  the  king,  under  all  these  instances  of  low-bred 
malice,  was  great,  firm,  and  equal ;  in  going  through  the  hall 
from  this  execrable  tribunal,  the  soldiers  and  rabble  were  asain 
instigated  to  cry  out  Justice  and  Execution.  They  reviled  him 
with  the  most  bitter  reproaches.  Among  other  insults,  one  mis- 
creant presumed  to  spit  in  the  face  of  his  sovereign.  He  patient- 
ly bore  their  insolence.  "  Poor  souls,"  cried  he,  "  they  would 
treat  their  generals  in  the  same  manner  for  sixpence."  Those 
of  the  populace,  who  still  retained  the  feelings  of  humanity,  ex- 
pressed their  sorrow  in  sighs  and  tears.  A  soldier,  more  com- 
passionate than  the  rest,  could  not  help  imploring  a  blessing  upon 
his  royal  head.  An  officer  overhearing  him  struck  the  honest 
sentinel  to  the  ground  before  the  king,  who  could  not  help  say- 
ing, that  the  punishment  exceeded  the  offence. 

At  his  return  to  Whitehall,  he  desired  the  permission  of  th^. 


56&  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

house  to  see  his  children,  and  to  be  attended  in  liis  private  de- 
votions by  doctor  Juxon,  late  bishop  of  London.  These  requests 
were  granted,  and  also  three  days  to  prepare  for  the  execution  of 
the  sentence.  All  that  remained  of  his  family  now  in  England 
were  the  princess  Elizabeth,  and  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  a  child 
of  eight  years  of  age.  After  many  seasonable  and  sensible  ex- 
hortations to  his  daughter,  he  took  his  little  son  in  his  arms,  and, 
embracing  him,  "  My  child,"  said  he,  "  they  will  cut  off  thy 
father's  head ;  yes,  they  will  cut  off  my  head,  and  make  thee  a 
king.  But  mark  what  I  say ;  thou  must  not  be  a  king  as  long 
as  thy  brothers  Charles  and  James  are  alive.  They  will  cut  off 
their  heads  when  tliey  can  take  them,  and  thy  head  too  they  will 
cut  off  at  last,  and  therefore  I  charge  thee  do  not  be  made  a  king 
by  them."  The  child,  bursting  into  tears,  replied,  "  I  will  be 
torn  in  pieces  first." 

Every  night,  during  the  interval  between  his  sentence  and  ex- 
ecution, the  king  slept  soundly  as  usual,  though  the  noise  of  the 
workmen,  employed  in  framing  the  scaffold,  continually  resound- 
ed  in  his  ears.  The  f^tal  morning  being  at  last  arrived,  he  rose 
early,  and  calling  one  of  his  attendants,  he  bade  him  employ  more 
than  usual  care  in  dressing  him,  and  preparing  him  for  so  great 
and  joyful  a  solemnity.  The  street  before  Whitehall  was  the 
place  destined  for  his  execution  j  for  it  was  intended  that  this 
should  increase  the  severity  of  his  punishment.  He  was  led 
through  tbe  Banqueting-house  to  the  scaffold  adjoining  to  that 
edifice,  attended  by  his  friend  and  servant  bishop  Juxon,  a  man 
endowed  with  the  mild  and  steady  virtues  of  his  master.  The 
scaffold,  which  was  covered  with  black,  was  guarded  by  a  reg- 
iment of  soldiers  under  the  command  of  colonel  Tomlinson,  and 
on  it  were  to  be  seen  the  block,  the  axe,  and  two  executioners  in 
masques.  The  people  in  great  crowds  stood  at  a  greater  dis- 
tance, in  dreadful  expectation  of  the  event.  The  king  surveyed 
all  these  solemn  preparations  with  calm  composure;  and  as  he 
could  not  expect  to  be  heard  by  the  people  at  a  distance,  he  ad- 
dressed himself  to  the  few  persons  who  stood  round  him.  He 
there  justified  his  own  innocence  in  the  late  fatal  wars  5  and  ob- 
served, that  he  had  not  taken  arms  till  after  the  parliament  had 
shown  him  the  example ;  that  he  had  no  other  object  in  his  war- 
like preparations  than  to  preserve  that  authority  entire  which  had 


CHARLES  I.  56? 

been  transmitted  to  him  by  his  ancestors ;  but,  though  innocent 
towards  his  people,  he  acknowledged  the  equity  of  his  execution 
in  the  eyes  of  his  Maker.  He  owned  that  he  was  justly  punished 
for  having  consented  to  the  execution  of  an  unjust  sentence  upon 
the  earl  of  Strafford.  He  forgave  all  his  enemies,  exhorted  the 
people  to  return  to  their  obedience,  and  acknowledged  his  son  as 
his  successor ;  and  signified  his  attachment  to  the  protestant  re- 
ligion as  professed  in  the  church  of  England.  So  strong  was  tlie 
impression  his  dying  words  made  upon  the  few  who  could  hear 
him,  that  colonel  Tomlinson  himself,  to  whose  care  he  had  been 
committed,  acknowledged  himself  a  convert. 

"While  he  was  preparing  himself  for  the  block,  bishop  Juxon 
called  out  to  him :  "  There  is,  sir,  but  one  stage  more,  which, 
though  turbulent  and  troublesome,  is  yet  a  very  short  one.  It 
will  soon  carry  you  a  great  way  :  it  will  carry  you  from  earth  to 
heaven;  and  there  you  will  find,  to  your  great  joy,  the  prize  to 
which  you  hasten — a  crown  of  glory."  "  I  go,"  replied'  the 
king,  "  from  a  corruptible  to  an  incorruptible  crown,  where  no 
disturbance  can  have  place."  "You  exchange,"  replied  the 
bishop,  "  a  temporal  for  an  eternal  crown — -a  good  exchange." 
Charles,  having  taken  off  his  cloak,  delivered  his  George  to  the 
prelate,  pronouncing  the  word,  "  Remember."  Then  he  laid  his 
neck  on  the  block ;  and,  when  he  had  stretched  out  his  hands  as 
a  signal,  one  of  the  executioners  severed  his  head  from  his  body 
at  a  blow,  while  the  other,  holding  it  up,  exclaimed,  "  This  is  the 
head  of  a  traitor  !"  The  spectators  testified  their  horror  at  the 
sad  spectacle  in  sighs,  tears,  and  lamentations ;  the  tide  of  their 
duty  and  affection  began  to  return,  and  each  blamed  himself  either 
for  active  disloyalty  to  his  king,  or  a  passive  compliance  with  his 
destroyers.  The  very  pulpits,  that  used  to  resound  with  inso- 
lence and  sedition,  were  now  bedewed  with  tears  of  unfeigned 
repentance;  and  all  united  in  their  detestation  of  those  dark 
hypocrites,  who,  to  satisfy  their  own  enmity,  involved  a  whole 
nation  in  the  guilt  of  treason. 

Charles  was  executed  in  the  forty-ninth  year  of  his    j^^^  g^ 
age,  and  the  twenty -fourth  of  his  reign.     He  was  of  a      1649. 
middling  stature,  robust,  and   well   proportioned.     His  visage 
was  pleasing,  but  melancholy ;  and  it  is  probable  that  the  con- 
tinual troubles  in  which  he  was  involved  might  have  made  that 


568  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

impression  on  his  countenance.  As  for  his  character,  the  readei' 
will  deduce  it  with  more  precision  and  satisfaction  to  himself 
from  the  detail  of  his  conduct,  than  from  any  summary  given  of 
it  by  the  historian.  It  will  suffice  to  say,  that  all  his  faults  seem  to 
have  arisen  from  the  error  of  his  education  ;  while  all  his  virtues 
(and  he  possessed  many)  were  the  genuine  offspring  of  his  heart. 
Pie  lived  at  a  time  when  the  established  exercise  of  the  preroga- 
tive was  at  variance  with  the  genius  of  the  people  ;  and,  govern- 
ing by  old  rules  and  precedents,  instead  of  accommodating  him- 
self to  the  changes  of  the  times,  he  fell,  and  drew  down,  as  he 
sunk,  the  constitution  in  ruins  round  him.  Many  kings  before 
him  expired  by  treason  or  assassination ;  but  never,  since  the 
times  of  Agis  the  Lacedeemonian,  was  there  any  other  sacrificed 
by  his  subjects  with  all  the  formalities  of  justice.  Many  were 
the  miseries  sustained  by  the  nation  in  bringing  this  monarch  to 
the  block ;  and  more  were  yet  to  be  endured  previous  to  the  set- 
tlement of  the  constitution  :  yet  these  struggles  were  ultimately 
productive  of  domestic  happiness  and  security ;  the  laws  became 
more  precise,  the  monarch's  privileges  better  ascertained,  and  the 
subject's  duty  better  delineated ;  all  became  more  peaceable,  as- 
if  a  previous  fermentation  in  the  constitution  was  necessary  for 
its  subsequent  refinement. 


EKD  OF  VOLCilE  I. 


C.  Stcbhins,  Printer.