rr  S>amutl  Halt; ra 
IGthrartj 


MEMOIRS 

OF 

THE  REIGN  OF 

GEORGE   THE   SECOND, 

FROM 

HIS  ACCESSION  TO  THE  DEATH 
OF 

QUEEN    CAROLINE. 

BY  JOHN,  LORD  HEEVEY. 


EDITED, 

FROM  THE   ORIGINAL  MANUSCRIPT  AT  ICKWORTH, 
BY 

THE  RIGHT  HON.  JOHN  WILSON  CROKER, 

LL.D.,  F.R.S. 


IN    TWO    VOLUMES. 
VOL.  I. 


LONDON: 
JOHN   MURRAY,   ALBEMARLE  STREET. 

1848. 


V  ^ 

JAN  1 1 12:5    )) 


:  a  q  Q  o  ^  A 

I  if  o  o  o  *  " 


Luiulou:  1'nnted  by  \\  ILLJAM  Ctowss  aud  SON?,  Stamford  Street, 


CONTENTS    OF    VOL.    I. 


Prefatory  and  Biographical  Notice      .....         Page  ix 

CHAPTER  I. 

Introduction — State  and  Views  of  Parties  at  the  death  of  George  I. : 
Whigs,  Tories,  Hanoverians,  Jacobites — Characters  of  Pulteney,  Boling- 
broke,  Walpole,  and  Wyndham 1 

CHAPTER  II. 

Accession  of  George  II. — Sir  Spencer  Compton  designated  as  First 
Minister — His  incapacity  and  blunders— Aspect  of  the  Court — Walpole 
supported  by  the  Queen,  and  continued  in  office — Hervey's  attachment  to 
Walpole — Civil  List  and  Queen's  Jointure  settled — Few  official  changes 
— Sir  William  Yonge — Lord  Berkeley — Lord  Torrington — The  battle 
of  Cape  Passaro — Motives  of  the  King's  adoption  of  Walpole — Mrs. 
Howard — Mary  Bellenden — Superior  influence  of  the  Queen  .  30 

CHAPTER  III. 

Foreign  affairs — The  Quadruple  Alliance — Duke  of  Ripperda — Treaty  of 
Vienna  of  1725 — Treaty  of  Hanover — State  of  France — Louis  XV. — 
Cardinal  Fleury — The  King  of  Prussia — Forces  of  the  respective  parties 
to  the  Treaties  .  66 


CHAPTER  IV. 

New  Parliament — The  Coronation — Creation  of  Peers — Mrs.  Clayton — 
Queen's  Management  of  the  King — Libels — Character  of  Lord  Scar- 
borough and  of  Lord  Chesterfield  compared 88 

CHAPTER  V. 

Meeting  of  Parliament — Speaker  Onslow — Iniquitous  decision  of  Election 
Petitions — Preliminary  Articles  of  Peace — Vote  of  Credit — Sir  Thomas 
Hanmer— Congress  of  Soissons — Rupture  bpfwppn  Walpnle  and  Tnyn- 
shend — Its  causes — Character  of  Townshend — Houghton — Townshend 

Party^-Miss  Skerrett .      100 

a2 


iv  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  I. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Complaints  against  Spain— The  Beggars'  Opera— Duchess  of  Queensbeny 
forbidden  the  Court— Deficiency  in  the  Civil  List— Sir  Paul  Methuen— 
Dispute  between  George  II.  and  the  King  of  Prussia— Royal  duel- 
Lord  Hervey's  return  from  Italy— His  political  position— Breaks  with 
Mr.  Pulteney— Treaty  of  Seville — Debate  on  the  Hessian  Troops— De- 
bate on  Dunkirk,  and  Lord  Hervey's  Pamphlet— Townshend  resigns— 
Lord  Hervey  Vice-Chamberlain Page  119 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Attempt  of  the  Dissenters  to  repeal  the  Test  and  Corporation  Acts— 
Walpole  wishes  to  suppress  it— Engages  the  Queen  to  induce  Bishop 
Hoadley  to  dissuade  the  Dissenters— Hoadley's  difficulties— Wai  pole's 
arguments — Negotiation  between  the  Dissenters  and  the  Cabinet  .  144 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  Excise  Scheme — Alarm  of  the  Country — Walpole's  resolution — Ses- 
sion of  Parliament— The  Army  voted— Cabal  of  the  Lords— Lord  Stair's 
Remonstrance  with  the  Queen — Queen's  Reply — Repeated  to  Lord 
Hervey — General  clamours  against  the  Excise— Popular  delusion  .  1 59 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Mobs  at  Westminster — The  Excise  unpopular  in  the  House— Majorities 
decrease — Anxiety  of  the  King — His  views  of  Government — Influenced 
by  the  Queen — Lord  Scarborough's  remonstrance— Walpole  hesitates, 
and  offers  to  retire — Spirit  of  the  King  and  Queen — Opposition  at 
Court — Her  notions  of  official  discipline — The  Excise  Scheme  abandoned 
— Riots — Complained  of  in  Parliament,  and  turned  to  the  advantage  of 
the  Minister 179 

CHAPTER  X. 

Walpole  resolves  to  punish  official  mutineers — Lords  Chesterfield  and 
Clinton  dismissed — Character  of  the  other  Ministers  and  Courtiers— The 
Prince  of  Wales  and  his  Friends  hostile — Walpole  assembles  his  Party 
and  harangues  them — Triumph  in  the  Commons — South  Sea  Question  in 
the  Lords — Deserters — Bishop  Hoadley 206 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Efforts  of  the  Court  to  obtain  a  Majority  in  the  Peers — The  Queen  and 
Bishop  Hoadley — Marriage  of  Princess  Royal — Portrait  of  the  Prince  of 
Orange — Dissatisfaction  of  the  Prince  of  Wales — Defeat  of  Ministers 
in  the  Lords  on  the  South  Sea  affair — The  Opposition  go  too  far — Are 
checked,  and  sign  offensive  Protests — Lord  Hervey  called  to  the  House 
of  Peers— The  Session  closes,  and  the  Court  goes  out  of  Town  .  229 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  I.  v 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Affairs  of  Poland — Bival  claims  of  the  Elector  of  Saxony  and  Stanislaus 
Leczinski — The  Emperor  and  the  Czarina  support  the  former,  France 
the  latter — Stanislaus  elected  by  intrigue  and  violence — Approved  by 
Lord  Hervey  and  Walpole,  but  distasteful  to  the  King  and  Newcastle — 
Stanislaus  expelled,  and  Augustus  elected — War  between  France  and  the 
Emperor — Treaty  between  France  and  Savoy — Opinion  of  George  II. 
on  it — The  French  seize  Lorraine — Royal  Hunting — Lord  Hervey 's 
intercourse  and  conversation  with  the  King  and  Queen — Advocates 
neutrality  :  so  does  Walpole — Negotiation  in  London  between  the  Em- 
peror and  Spain — Delays  of  the  Emperor — Spain  concludes  with  France 
— The  Emperor  loses  Italy Page  247 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

Marriage  of  Princess  Royal — Arrival  of  Prince  of  Orange — King's  treat- 
ment of  him — Lord  Hervey  reports  ill  of  his  person,  but  well  of  his 
mind — Behaviour  of  the  Princess — Prince  falls  dangerously  ill — Prince 
of  Wales's  dissension  with  the  King — His  revenue — Lord  Hervey 's 
advice — The  Queen's  answer — King's  Speech — Lord  Hervey  moves  the 
Address — New  Peerages — Lord  Chancellor  Talbot — Lord  Chief-Justice 
Hardwicke — Lord  Chancellor  King — Dukes  of  Marlborough  and  Bed- 
ford— Bill  to  make  Army  Commissions  for  life — King's  ungiving  dispo- 
sition— Duke  of  Richmond — "  Court  Drudge" — Further  particulars  of 
the  Queen's  character  and  conduct 271 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Proceedings  in  Parliament — The  Prince  of  Wales's  Affairs  and  his  Cha- 
racter —  Increase  of  the  Army — Vote  of  Confidence — Lord  Hervey 
disapproves  of  both — High  state  of  Literature — Marriage  of  the  Princess 
Royal — Figure  of  the  Bridegroom — Pretensions  of  the  Irish  Peers — 
Horace  Walpole — End  of  the  Session — Speaker  Onslow  Treasurer  of 
the  Navy — Lord  Stair  dismissed — Prince  and  Princess  of  Orange  depart 
— Miss  Vane — Elections — Dissatisfaction  of  the  King  and  Queen — Lord 
Isla  and  the  Duke  of  Argyle 296 

CHAPTER  XV. 

Foreign  affairs — War  on  the  Continent—  Campaign  in  Italy — Pretender  in 
the  Spanish  army — Conquest  of  Sicily — Historical  Account  of  Sicily — 
Battles  of  Parma  and  Guastalla — War  in  Germany— Siege  of  Philips- 
burg — Siege  and  surrender  of  Dantzic — Gallantry  of  Count  Plelo — 
Flight  of  King  Stanislaus— Policy  of  Cardinal  Fleury  and  of  Sir  Robert 
Walpole — Counteracted  by  Hatolf  and  the  Hanoverian  Interest,  and  by 
the  Queen — Opinion  of  the  English  Ministers— Character  of  Count 
Kinski — Peace  preserved 338 


vi  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.   I. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Increased  Favour  of  Lord  Hervey — Addresses  a  Political  Letter  to  the 
Queen— Mission  of  M.  Wasner— Extraordinary  History  and  Proceedings 
of  Strickland,  Bishop  of  Namur — Lord  Hervey 's  Conference  with  Sir  R. 
Wai  pole— Walpole's  Management  of  the  King  ano^Q.ug£n — Apology  for 
Egotism— Sir  R.  Walpole's  System  of  Government  .  .  Page  382 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

Reception  of  the  Prince  and  Princess  of  Orange  in  Holland — Horace 
Walpole's  unsuccessful  Negotiations — Details  and  tracasseries  about  the 
Princess  of  Orange's  lying-in — She  sets  out  for  Harwich — Suddenly  re- 
turns— Illness  of  the  Queen — Confidential  Communication  of  Sir  Robert 
to  her  Majesty — Alarm  lest  the  King  should  have  overheard  it  .  404 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Lady  Suffolk — Rupture  with  the  King — Goes  to  Bath — Resolves  to  retire 
— Sentiments  of  the  Royal  Family,  Wai  pole,  and  the  Public  on  this  change 
— Dodington  discarded  by  the  Prince — Favour  of  Lyttelton — Princess  of 
Orange  puts  to  sea  from  Harwich,  but  returns — Proceeds  at  last  by 
Calais — Foreign  Affairs — Marriage  of  Don  Carlos — Church  Promotions 
— Hoadley  reluctantly  advanced  to  Winchester — Struggle  for  and  against 
Rundle — Benson  and  Seeker  appointed  to  Gloucester  and  Bristol,  and 
Rundle  to  Derry 423 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Household  Offices — Duke  of  Richmond  Master  of  the  Horse ;  Lord  Pem- 
broke Groom  of  the  Stole  ;  Lord  Godolphin's  Pension  and  Peerage — 
Characters  of  these  two  Lords — Ideal  Marriage  of  the  Prince  of  Wales — 
Parliament  meets — 30,000  Seamen  voted — Reasons  for  and  against — Sir 
Joseph  Jekyll — Marlborough  Election — Miss  Skerrett — Election  Peti- 
tion of  the  Scotch  Peers — Debate  in  the  Lords  on  the  Troops— JKaipale. 
resists  the  disposition  of  the  King  and  Queen  to  War — Public  Expenses 
— Finance — Sinking  Fund — Ministerial  Changes — Messrs.  Winnington 
and  Fox  recommended  by  Lord  Hervey — King's  Journey  to  Hanover 
opposed  by  Wai  pole  in  vain — Madame  de  Walmoden — Strange  confi- 
dences to  the  Queen 456 

APPENDIX  505 


(      vii      ) 


ADDENDA  ET  CORRIGENDA. 


VOLUME   I. 

Page  25,  note  17 — Sir  W.  Wyndham  was  born  in  1686. 

Page  51,  note  20 — After  hardly  credible  add — if  it  had  not  received  confirma- 
tion from  the  Queen  herself,  post,  ii.  478. 

Page  56,  note  25 — add — see  post,  i.  430,  and  Chesterfield's  '  Character'  of  Lady 
Suffolk. 

Page  96,  note  8 — He  himself  in  his  'Letters'  (24th  May,  1750)  lets  us  know 
that  his  height  was  under  5  feet  8,  but  does  not  specify  how  much — perhaps 
an  inch  or  two.  He  mentions  also  (15th  February,  1754)  the  early  dis- 
colour of  his  teeth. 

Page  129,  note  1 1— -for  increased  read — offered  to  increase. 

Page  131— for  1703  read— 1730. 

Page  206,  note  I—for  Lincoln  read — Clinton. 

Page  228,  note  14— /or  a  great  genius  read — no  great  genius. 

Page  273,  note  2— for  p.  319  read — p.  321. 

Page  298,  note— -for  1750  read— 1751. 

Page  325,  note  19 — add — but  the  character  of  Addison,  to  which  this  line  be- 
longs, had  been  printed  earlier. 

Page  337,  note— -for  245  read—  210. 

Page  347— for  assidiis  read — assiduis. 

Page  389,  note  5— add  after  Wassenaar — He  was  afterwards  Austrian  Minister 
at  our  court. 

Page  443,  line  23— for  Mr.  C.  Cn.  read— Mrs.  Clayton. 

Page  473,  note  4 — I  find  the  two  sitting  Members  were  in  opposition  both  to  the 
Court  and  Lord  Hertford,  but  I  still  cannot  account  for  the  other  discre- 
pancies. 


PREFATORY  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE. 


THE  existence  of  Lord  Hervey's  '  Memoirs  from  his 
first  coming  to  Court  to  the  Death  of  the  Queen ' l  was 
announced  to  the  world  in  1757  in  Walpole's  '•Cata- 
logue of  Royal  and  Noble  Authors,'  and  in  1788  we 
find  Lord  Hailes,  in  a  note  to  his  compilation  of  the 
Opinions  of  the  Duchess  of  Marlborough,  saying,  with 
reference  to  the  quarrel  between  George  II.  and 
Frederick  Prince  of  Wales — 

"  I  cannot  discover  what  was  the  real  cause  of  this  unhappy 
quarrel.  The  Duchess  seems  to  think  that  it  originated  in  the 
motion  for  augmenting  the  Prince's  revenue.  It  is  probable  that 
the  whole  matter  will  be  explained  to  posterity  should  the  Memoirs 
of  Lord  Hervey  ever  see  the  light.  I  have  reason  to  believe  they 
are  written  with  great  freedom.  And  here  I  must  be  permitted 
to  observe,  that  they  who  suppress  such  memorials  of  modern 
times  do  all  that  in  them  lies  to  leave  the  history  of  the  eigh- 
teenth century  in  darkness.  In  the  sixteenth  century  it  was  the 
fashion  to  preserve  original  papers,  during  the  eighteenth  it  is 
the  fashion  to  destroy  them.  Hence  we  know  more  of  the 
reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth  than  we  do  of  the  reign  of  George  I." 
—  Opinions. 

Mr.  Bowles,  in  his  Life  of  Pope  (1806),  says  : — 

1  Lord  Hervey's  own  title  is  given  at  the  head  of  the  Memoirs. 
VOL.  I.  6 


x  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

"  Lord  Hervey  wrote  Memoirs  of  his  Own  Time,  with  strict 
injunctions  that  they  were  not  to  be  published  until  the  decease 
of  his  present  Majesty  (George  III.).  They  are  now  in  the 
possession  of  Lord  Hervey's  son,  General  Hervey,  and  will  be 
published  as  soon  as  the  event  mentioned  takes  place." 

This  injunction  was  not  given  by  Lord  Hervey, 
but  in  the  will  of  his  son  Augustus,  third  Earl  of 
Bristol ;  and  Lord  Hailes  himself,  if  he  had  seen  the 
MS.,  would,  no  doubt,  have  been,  as  every  reader  will 
now  be,  of  opinion  that  the  reserve  of  the  possessors 
of  the  Memoirs  was  dictated  by  unquestionable  feelings 
of  delicacy  and  duty.  The  prescribed  period,  however, 
has  been  now  exceeded  by  a  quarter  of  a  century,  and 
it  is  hoped  that  after  the  lapse  of  1 10  years  since  it 
was  written,  this  contribution  to  the  history  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  so  desiderated  by  Lord  Hailes 
and  in  itself  so  curious,  may  be  at  last,  without  impro- 
priety, given  to  the  public. 

The  MS.,  which  is  wholly  autograph,  is  remarkably 
clear  and  legible,  and  it  is  now  presented  to  the  reader 
in  extenso,  with  the  following  exceptions. 

There  are  some  chasms  in  the  MS.,  occasioned  by 
former  possessors  having  destroyed  several  sheets  here 
and  there,  that  appear  to  have  contained  additional 
details  of  the  dissensions  in  the  Royal  Family;  of 
which,  however,  so  much  still  remains  that  we  need 
hardly,  I  think,  regret  the  want  of  more.  These  omis- 
sions have  spared  us,  no  doubt,  some  scandal ;  but 
they  have  not,  it  is  believed,  essentially  diminished  the 
historical  value  of  Lord  Hervey's  work.  On  this, 
however,  the  reader  will  be  in  some  degree  enabled  to 
form  his  own  conjectures;  for  the  places  and  extent 


PREFATORY  NOTICE.  xi 

of  the  omissions  are  almost  everywhere  noted,2  and 
the  context  will  generally  indicate  the  character  of 
what  is  lost. 

My  own  deviations  from  the  MS.  have  been  the 
correction  of  the  somewhat  lax  and  antiquated  ortho- 
graphy— the  suppression  here  and  there  of  an  indelicate 
expression,  and  the  substitution  of  a  more  decent  equi- 
valent. It  must  be  recollected  that  the  style  of  the 
day,  both  in  conversation  and  correspondence,  was 
often  very  coarse — the  best  bred  men  and  the  most 
elegant  women  talked  and  wrote  in  a  style  that  has 
been  long  banished  from  good  society.  They  were  in 
the  habit,  as  Swift  said  and  practised,  of  "  calling  a 
spade  a  spade ;"  and  without  asserting  dogmatically 
(what,  nevertheless,  there  seems  good  reason  to  hope) 
that  both  the  morals  and  manners  of  modern  society 
are  essentially  improved,  we  may  at  least  venture  to 
say  that  they  are  more  decorous.  Lord  Holland, 
in  editing  Walpole's  first  Memoirs,  and  every  one,  I 
suppose,  who  has  had  to  perform  that  office  for  any 
familiar  letters  of  the  earlier  part  of  the  last  century, 
has  been  obliged  to  retrench  or  correct  many  verbal 
breaches  of  decorum.  The  total  suppression  of  such 
passages  would  be  an  obvious  remedy,  and  the  most 
satisfactory,  but  for  one  consideration — the  very  in- 
delicacies are  important  items  towards  the  history 
of  general  manners  and  the  estimate  of  individual 


2  I  find,  on  comparing  the  copy  supplied  to  me  with  the  original  manu- 
script, that  four  or  five  of  these  omissions  were  not  noticed.  One  of  the 
longest  of  these  occurred  at  p.  315  of  vol.  i.,  after  the  mention  of  the 
Prince  and  Lord  Hervey ;  but  they  all  evidently  are  of  the  character 
mentioned  in  the  text.  ,*, 

b  2 


xn  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

character,  and  to  omit  them  altogether,  or  to  smooth 
down  such  irregularities  to  our  more  decent  level,  would 
really  be  a  deception.  They  should  be  suppressed,  but 
not  concealed.  Whenever,  therefore,  any  such  instances 
occur  (and  they  are  not  very  numerous),  I  have  noted, 
as  Lord  Holland  did,  the  place  of  the  omission,  and 
have  distinguished  any  substituted  words  by  brackets, 
thus  [  ].  On  this  point  the  most  serious  criticism  that 
I  expect  to  hear  is  that  I  have  not  gone  far  enough  ; 
and  though  I  hope  I  have  removed  every  expression 
positively  offensive  to  a  delicate  mind,  I  acknowledge 
that  there  is  a  great  deal — particularly  as  to  the  feel- 
ings and  temper  of  the  Royal  Family — which  I  wish  I 
could  have  felt  myself  authorised  to  suppress:  that, 
however,  would  have  been  an  unpardonable  distortion 
— indeed,  a  falsification — of  my  materials ;  and  after  all 
a  useless  one — for  Walpole's  Reminiscences  and  Memoirs 
and  the  recently  published  extracts  from  the  Diaries  of 
Lord-Chancellors  King  and  Hardwicke  reveal,  though 
not  in  such  detail  as  Lord  Hervey  gives,  the  sub- 
stantial facts  that  I  should  have  been  most  anxious  to 
suppress. 

I  have  therefore,  on  the  whole,  thought  it  my  duty 
to  exhibit  the  Memoirs  as  Lord  Hervey  himself  had 
left  them  for  publication,  with  the  exceptions  I  have 
just  stated  ;  though  few  readers,  I  believe,  would  regret 
if  some  other  episodes  of  a  very  different  character  had 
been  omitted — I  mean  sundry  digressions  on  foreign 
affairs,  which,  however  interesting  in  the  court  of 
George  II.,  are  now  wholly  obsolete,  and  contain 
nothing  that  is  not  already  to  be  found  in  all  the 
ordinary  histories. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE. 


After  these  introductory  observations,  I  proceed  to 
give  the  reader  the  best  account  I  can  of  the  extra- 
ordinary author  of  this  extraordinary  work. 


A  knowledge  of  the  personal  partialities  of  an  his- 
torian, even  when  he  deals  with  remote  periods  and 
persons,  sometimes  helps  to  elucidate  his  works.  But 
with  those  who  write  the  history  of  their  own  times 
and  of  affairs  to  which  they  have  been  active  and 
interested  parties,  we  can  hardly  have  too  intimate  an 
acquaintance,  and  every  detail  of  their  lives  becomes 
important  to  the  value  of  their  evidence.  For  this 
reason  I  have  endeavoured  (at  the  risk  of  being  in 
other  respects  tedious)  to  collect  as  much  as  I  could  of 
the  private  life  and  character  of  Lord  Hervey  as 
a  useful,  and  indeed  essential,  preliminary  to  his 
Memoirs. 

He  was  the  eldest  son  of  John,  first  Earl  of  Bristol, 
by  his  second  wife  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Sir  Thomas 
Felton  and  Lady  Elizabeth  Howard,  daughter  and 
heiress  of  the  third  Earl  of  Suffolk. 

An  elder  son,  by  a  former  marriage,  Carr,  Lord 
Hervey — "was  reckoned,"  said  Horace  Walpole,  "to 
have  had  parts  superior  to  those  of  his  more  cele- 
brated brother;"  and  Pope,  in  one  of  his  sarcastic 
appeals  to  the  second  Lord  Hervey,  professes  his  plea- 
sure at  paying  to  the  memory  of  the  first  "  the  debt 
I  owed  to  his  friendship,  whose  early  death  deprived 
your  family  of  as  much  wit  and  honour  as  he  left  behind 
him  in  any  branch  of  it."  But  these  good  qualities 
were  obscured  by  great  irregularities  of  conduct,  and 
extinguished  by  an  early  death. 


xiv  LORD  HERVE'Y'S  MEMOIRS. 

Carr,  Lord  Hervey,  is  said,  in  Lady  Louisa  Stuart's 
introductory  observations  to  Lord  Wharncliffe's  edition 
of  the  Works  of  her  grandmother,  Lady  Mary  Wortley 
Montagu,  to  have  been  notoriously  the  father  of  Horace 
Walpole — an  opinion  strongly  supported  by  various 
circumstances  mentioned  by  Lady  Louisa,  and  further 
corroborated  by  the  revelations,  in  the  following 
Memoirs,  of  Sir  Kobert  Walpole's  almost  incredible 
laxity  in  both  the  principle  and  practice  of  conjugal 
fidelity.  The  resemblance,  indeed,  of  Horace  to  that 
remarkable  family,  whose  peculiar  originality  of  mind 
and  character  gave  rise  to  Lady  Mary's  division  of 
the  human  species  into  "  Men,  Women,  and  Hervey  s" 
is  very  striking,  and  these  Memoirs  will,  I  think,  add 
considerably  to  the  general  likeness. 

The  father  of  the  young  Lords,  John  Hervey, 
Esquire,  of  Ickworth,  near  Bury  in  Suffolk,  a  country 
gentleman  of  ancient  family  and  ample  fortune,  repre- 
sented that  borough — as  he  and  his  ancestors  had  done 
for  a  long  series  of  parliaments — till  March,  1703, 
when,  through  the  friendship  of  the  Duke  of  Marl- 
borough  and  the  influence  of  the  Duchess,3  he  was 
created  Lord  Hervey,  a  title  which  had  already  existed 
and  become  extinct  in  a  junior  branch  of  his  family  ;4 

3  The  Duchess  distinctly  states  in  her  'Account  of  her  Conduct,'  that  she 
did  it  altogether  at  the  request  of  Sir  Thomas  Felton,  Mrs.  Hervey's 
father — to  whom  she  had  promised  it.     Lord  Bristol,  however,  acknow- 
ledges his  obligation  to  the  Duke,  and  even  says  in  one  of  his  letters  to 
his  Grace,  9th  July,  1704,  that  he  had  on  his  peerage  retained  the  motto 
of  "  Je  n'oublierayjamais"  with  special  reference  to  his  gratitude  to  his 
Grace. 

4  William  Hervey,  second  son  of  John  Hervey  of  Ickworth,  was   an 
eminent  naval  and  military  officer.     He  distinguished  himself  in  the  defeat 
of  the  Armada;  was  knighted  in  1596 ;  created  a  baronet  in  1619 ;  next  year, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xv 

and  at  the  accession  of  George  I.  he  was  created  Earl 
of  Bristol ;  his  wife  was  appointed  a  Lady  of  the  Prin- 
cess's Bedchamber,  and  his  eldest  son  a  Lord  of  the 
Prince's. 

Lord  Bristol  appears,  from  a  large  collection  of  his 
correspondence  which  has  been  carefully  preserved,  to 
have  been  one  of  the  best  of  men,  though  not  without 
some  share  of  that  peculiar  character  just  alluded  to. 
He,  however,  seems  to  have  had  the  better  parts 
only  of  this  piquant  originality.  He  was  highly  ac- 
complished— an  elegant  scholar,  and  what  might  even 
be  called  learned,  for  his  reading  was  extensive  and 
uncommon.  He  was  familiar  with  the  best  classical 
and  modern  poets,  and  wrote 5  verses  himself.  Though 
evidently  a  fine  gentleman  in  taste  and  manners,  he 
was,  in  the  habits  and  occupations  of,  at  least,  the 
latter  half  of  his  life,  a  good  deal  of  the  country  squire. 
In  his  family  he  seems  to  have  been  the  fondest,  most 
indulgent,  and  most  patient  of  husbands  and  fathers  under 
many  hard  trials  of  his  temper  in  both  those  capacities, 
and,  to  complete  this  amiable  character,  he  was,  from 
first  to  last,  a  very  peculiar  example  of  Christian  piety. 


Lord  Ross,  in  Ireland ;  and  in  1627,  Lord  Hervey,  in  England.  He  died 
in  1642,  and  was  buried,  with  great  pomp,  in  Westminster  Abbey.  He 
left  an  only  daughter,  who  married  her  cousin,  John  Hervey,  uncle  of  the 
first  Lord  Bristol,  whose  father  Sir  Thomas — his  brother  leaving  no  issue — 
succeeded  to  Ickworth. 

5  I  find  in  his  letter-book  several  of  his  copies  of  verses :  they  are  in  the 
affected  style  of  Cowley,  to  which  his  family  friendship  for  that  poet  might 
have  naturally  led  him.  His  grandfather  had  been  a  patron  of  Cowley, 
whose  elegy  on  his  great  uncle,  William  Hervey ,  is  one  of  the  best  of  his 
works ;  and  though  neither  it  nor  Lycidas  (which  it  much  resembles) 
can  be  altogether  defended  from  some  of  the  matter-of-fact  criticisms  of 
Johnson,  I  wonder  that  any  one  having  eye,  ear,  or  heart,  could  be  insen- 
sible to  the  imagery,  music,  and  tenderness  of  both. 


xvi  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

In  all  the  events  of  his  life,  painful  or  fortunate,  the 
first  and  sometimes  very  enthusiastic  effusions  of  his 
grief  or  his  gratitude  were  towards  Heaven.  Of  his 
father,  Sir  Thomas  Hervey,  he  writes  to  the  tutor  of 
one  of  his  sons : — "  His  piety,  chastity,  charity,  truth, 
and  justice,  mixed  with  wonderful  wit  and  innocent  mirth, 
made  singularly  his  own  that  comprehensive  character — • 
Ita  in  singulis  virtutibus  eminebat  quasi  cceteras  non 
haberet."  His  own  son  has  said  as  much  of  him. 

In  politics  Lord  Bristol  was  a  Whig  of  the  old  school ; 
and  of  course — while  professing  "  to  hold  an  equal  ba- 
lance between  the  prerogatives  of  the  Crown  and  the  pri- 
vileges of  the  people,  and  maintain  the  monarchy  and 
hierarchy  in  their  just  and  legal  rights  " — he  was  a  warm 
supporter  of  Revolution  principles  and  of  the  Hanover 
succession,  and  his  promotion  to  the  Earldom  (19th  Oc- 
tober, 1714)  was  one  of  the  earliest  acts  of  the  new 
reign ;  but  after  that  event — whether  resenting  the  ne- 
glect shown  to  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  or  thinking 
that  the  Whigs  were  deviating  from  their  earlier  prin- 
ciples, particularly  in  the  maintenance  of  a  standing 
army,  or  from  any  more  personal  motive6 — he  appears 


6  I  know  not  whether  he  would  have  accepted  office,  but  I  think  he 
would  have  been  pleased  to  have  had  the  offer.  He  gives  early  hints  of 
dissatisfaction  with  the  Minister ;  and  in  one  letter,  of  December,  171(5,  to 
his  son  John,  then  at  Hanover,  he  warns  him,  that  if  he  should  come  home 
in  the  King's  train,  he  may  chance,  being  an  unofficial  follower,  to  have 
sorry  accommodation,  "should  those  who  attend  the  King  there  take  no 
more  care  in  providing  for  the  son,  than  others  whom  his  Majesty  has 
thought  fit  to  entrust  here  ever  did  for  the  father.  However,  be  to  them, 
I  conjure  you,  like  your  constant  father — 

'  True  as  the  dial  to  the  sun, 
Although  you  are  not  shined  upon.'  " 

This  seems  rather  unreasonable  from  one  who  had  been  so  lately  raised 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xvii 

to  have  taken  little  part  in  public  affairs,  and  to  have 
adopted  in  private  a  strong  tone  of  opposition  to  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  and  his  administration. 

This  portrait,  sketched  from  a  large  mass  of  private 
letters  which  evolve  all  the  thoughts  and  transactions  of 
his  life,  very  closely  resembles  that  given  of  him  by  his 
son  towards  the  close  of  the  Memoirs  (post,  ii.  437), 
and  I  introduce  it  the  rather  because  it  seems  pro- 
bable that  Lord  Hervey  derived  from  this  almost  for- 
gotten but  remarkable  man  all  the  better  as  well  as 
some  of  the  more  brilliant  peculiarities  of  his  cha- 
racter. 

Differing  in  political  opinion,  in  the  habits  of  their 
lives,  and,  unfortunately  for  the  son,  still  more  in  moral 
conduct  and  religious  impressions,  there  seems  to  have 
been  a  strong  resemblance  in  their  styles,  tastes,  man- 
ners, and  turns  of  thought;  and  it  is  not  the  least 
peculiar  circumstance  of  their  history  that,  notwith- 
standing this  opposition  of  principles  and  similarity 
of  tempers,  they  lived  together  in  the  most  unbounded 
and  uninterrupted  confidence  and  affection. 

John  Hervey  was  educated  at  Westminster  School 
under  Dr.  Friend,  whence  he  was  removed,  the  20th 


to  the  peerage,  and  advanced  to  an  Earldom  within  two  years — "  the  only 
favour," — writes  Lord  Hervey  in  an  epitaph  prepared  for  his  father — 

"  The  only  favour  that  the  Crown  could  give, 
He  thought  worth  asking,  or  would  e'er  receive ; 
The  name  of  servant  was  too  near  to  slave." 

Gage's  Suffolk. 

Yet  he  did  not  disdain  that  name  for  his  lady  and  four,  at  least,  of  his 
sons,  who  had  Court  places,  while  the  Earl  fancied  himself  and  his  family 
neglected.  But  this  grumbling  on  paper,  whilst  he  was  in  his  daily  devo- 
tions thanking  Heaven  for  his  worldly  prosperity  and  success,  was  one  of 
the  peculiarities  of  the  good  man. 


xviii  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

November,  1713,  to  Clare  Hall,  Cambridge,  where  he 
graduated  M.A.  as  a  nobleman  in  1715.  In  his 
vacations  he  often  attended  his  father  (at  that  time  a 
distinguished  patron  of  the  turf)  to  Newmarket,  and 
showed  a  turn  and  talent  for  jockeyship,  which  his 
father's  sagacity  was  willing  to  encourage  as  tending  to 
manly  tastes  and  habits.  On  one  occasion  he  was  to 
have  ridden  a  celebrated  match,  but  the  fond  terrors  of 
his  mother  overruled  his  own  and  his  father's  wishes : 
it  was,  however,  some  consolation  to  both,  that  the 
substituted  jockey  won  the  race  by  following  the  judi- 
cious advice  of  the  younger,  in  preference  to  the  orders 
of  his  elder  master. 

In  the  summer  of  1716  he  visited  Paris,  and  after 
spending  some  months  there  was  directed  by  his  father 
to  proceed  through  Austrian  Flanders  to  pay  his  court 
at  Hanover,  where  George  I.  then  was.  His  brother, 
Carr,  had  been  sent  on  a  like  politic  errand  in  Queen 
Anne's  time,  and  had  ingratiated  himself  with  the 
Elector,  and  more  particularly  with  his  son  Prince 
George,  and  on  the  accession  had  been  appointed  one  of 
his  Eoyal  Highness's  Lords  of  the  Bedchamber.  The 
old  Lord  anticipated  a  similar  good  result  from  this 
visit,  and  was  much  pleased  to  find  that  "  dear  Jack  " 
had  laid  a  sure  foundation  in  the  favour  of  his  Majesty's 
grandson,  Prince  Frederick — of  "  the  blooming  beauties 
of  whose  person  and  character"  the  young  traveller  had 
given  his  father  a  lively  description. 

It  had  been  intended  that  he  should  proceed  through 
Germany  to  Italy,  but  "  the  fears  and  tears"  of  his 
mother  forced  his  reluctant  father  to  give  up  that  project 
and  recall  him  to  England.  At  this  time  "  his  genius 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xix 

tended  to  some  military  employ,"  and  his  mother — 
whose  apprehensions,  it  seems,  were  for  his  health  and 
morals  rather  than  of  personal  risk — suggests  his  pre- 
ferring a  petition,  in  her  name  and  with  his  own  graces, 
to  a  certain  great  lady  (the  Duchess  of  Kendal  proba- 
bly) to  obtain  for  him  a  commission  in  the  Guards.7 

How  Hervey  occupied  his  time  after  his  return  to 
England  does  not  appear,  but  all  idea  of  the  army  or 
any  other  profession  seems  to  have  been  soon  aban- 
doned, and  he  spent  much  of  his  time  with  his  father 
in  the  retirement  of  Ick worth,  and  the  rest,  probably, 
in  the  fashionable  and  literary  circles  of  the  metro- 
polis. He  even  then  cultivated  his  own  poetical  taste 
so  assiduously  as  to  induce  his  anxious  father  to  urge 
him  to  prepare  himself  for  public  and  especially  par- 
liamentary life,  by  more  serious  and  useful  studies 
than  "the  perpetual  pursuit  of  poetry." 

During  the  waiting  of  his  mother  and  his  brother  he 
was  a  frequent  visitor  to  the  Court  of  the  Prince  and 
Princess  at  Richmond,  where  he  soon  became  a  great 
personal  favourite ;  and  here  he  made  those  acquaint- 
ances which  biassed  in  various  ways  his  future  career. 
At  this  period  Pope  and  his  literary  friends  were  in  great 
favour  at  this  young  court,  of  which,  in  addition  to  the 
handsome  and  clever  Princess  herself,  Mrs.  Howard, 
Mrs.  Selwyn,  Miss  Howe,  Miss  Bellenden,  and  Miss 


7  In  this  request  Lord  Bristol,  in  spite  of  his  aversion  to  a  standing  army, 
directly  concurred,  and  did,  in  fact,  procure  commissions  for  two  younger 
sons ;  though  his  prejudice  became  afterwards  so  strong  that  the  only 
serious  difference  I  have  discovered  between  him  and  Lord  Hervey  was 
in  consequence  of  the  latter's  putting  his  son  George  into  the  Guards. — 
Scepost,  ii.  593. 


xx  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

Lepell,  with  Lords  Chesterfield,  Bathurst,  Scarborough, 
and  Hervey,  were  the  chief  ornaments.  Above  all  for 
beauty  and  wit  were  Miss  Bellenden  and  Miss  Lepell,8 
who  seem  to  have  treated  Pope,  and  been  in  return 
treated  by  him,  with  a  familiarity  that  appears  rather 
strange  in  our  more  decorous  days.  These  young 
ladies  probably  considered  him  as  no  more  than  what 
Aaron  Hill  described  him  :< — 

"  Tuneful  Alexis  on  the  Thames'  fair  side, 
The  ladies'  plaything  and  the  Muses'  pride." 

Very  intimate  and  very  familiar  they  certainly  became 
with  him,  and  with  his  friend  Lady  Mary  Wortley 
Montagu,  who  at  his  suggestion  had  now  taken  a  villa 
at  Twickenham. 

In  this  gay  and  giddy  society  John  Hervey  soon 
attached  himself  to  Miss,  or,  as  it  was  then  the  fashion 
to  say,  Mrs.  Lepell — the  daughter  and  heiress  of  Bri- 
gadier-General Nicholas  Lepell.  Of  her  person,  mind, 
and  manners  there  is  from  all  her  contemporaries  a 
chorus  of  praise :  even  Pope,  when  he  subsequently  so 
unmercifully  libelled  Lord  Hervey,  made  his  satire 
the  keener  by  praising  his  wife;  and  Lady  Louisa 
Stuart,  who  happily  preserves  to  our  age  the  tradi- 


8  The  books  state  that  she  was  born  26th  September,  1700 ;  but  Pope, 
in  a  letter  that  mentions  the  recent  death  of  Dr.  Radcliffe,  who  died  6th 
November,  1714,  describes  her  and  her  friend  Miss  Bellenden  as  then 
maids  of  honour  to  the  Princess.  If  all  this  be  so,  Miss  Lepell  was  a  maid 
of  honour  when  she  was  barely  fourteen.  She  was  of  the  family  to  whom 
belonged  the  little  Channel  Island  of  Sark.  I  find  in  the  Magazines  for 
1743  the  death  of  'Nicholas  Lepell,  Esq.,  Lord  Proprietor  of  Sark.' 
The  natives  of  Sark  are  more  than  half  French,  and  this  probably  gave  the 
French  tinge  to  Lady  Hervey's  tastes  and  manners — a  subject  of  frequent 
pleasantry  with  her  friends  and  herself. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xxi 

tions  of  the  last,  says  of  her  that  it  might  be  suspected 
that 

"  Lord  Hervey's  avowed  enemies — Pope  for  one — went  out 
of  their  way  to  compliment  and  eulogise  her.  However,  their 
praises  were  not  unmerited :  by  the  attractions  she  retained 
in  age  she  must  have  been  singularly  captivating  when  young, 
gay,  and  handsome  ;  and  never  was  there  so  perfect  a  model  of 
the  finely  polished,  highly  bred,  genuine  woman  of  fashion. 
Her  manners  had  a  foreign  tinge  which  some  called  affected, 
but  they  were  gentle,  easy,  dignified,  and  altogether  exquisitely 
pleasing."9 — Introductory  Anecdotes,  ubi  supra, 

To  her  more  solid  merits  as  a  daughter,  a  wife,  and 
a  mother  we  have  the  earlier,  and  nearer,  and  more 
valuable  testimony  of  Lord  Bristol,  who  seems  to  have 
been  enchanted,  not  more  by  the  brilliant  than  the 
amiable  qualities  of  his  daughter-in-law,  and  to  have 
endeavoured,  with  a  growing  affection  and  admiration, 
to  render  less  irksome  to  her  the  occasional  vivacities 
of  his  Countess  —  a  lady  of  considerable  talents — a 
very  lively  but  not  equable  temper,  and  of  so  ready 
and  sharp  a  wit,  that  in  one  of  her  letters  she 
triumphantly  tells  Lord  Bristol  that  she  had  answered 
some  impertinencies  at  Court  so  cleverly,  that  the 


9  See  also  a  similar  character  of  tLady  Hervey  in  Chesterfield's  Letters 
to  his  Son,  22nd  Oct.  1750 ;  and  another,  if  possible  more  favourable,  in 
H.  Walpole's  Letter  to  Mann,  22  Sept.  1768.  He  also  wrote  an  epitaph 
on  her  tomb  at  Ickworth,  with  little  poetry  but  with  feeling  and  truth. 
Churchill  thus  celebrates  her  daughter  Lady  Caroline: — 

"  That  face,  that  form,  that  dignity  and  ease — 
Those  powers  of  pleasing,  and  that  wish  to  please — 
By  which  Lepell,  even  in  her  youthful  days, 
Had  from  the  currish  Pope  extracted  praise, 
We  see,  transmitted,  in  her  daughter  shine, 
And  view  a  new  Lepell  in  Caroline." 


xxu  LORD  HERVEY' S  MEMOIRS. 

Queen  said,  "she  saw  that  Lord  Hervey  had  derived 
his  talent  at  repartee  from  his  mother? 

From  her  too,  as  well  as  from  his  father,  he  may 
have  inherited  some  of  his  indefatigable  turn  for 
versification ;  for  the  gods  had  also  made  her — after 
a  manner — poetical.  There  are,  in  a  volume  of  family 
correspondence,  several  copies  of  love  verses  addressed 
to  her  husband  both  before  and  after  marriage,  and 
one  more  remarkable  poem  of  about  one  hundred  and 
fifty  lines,  with  this  title,  '  An  imperfect  Sketch  of 
the  Earl  of  Bristol's  Character ;  collected  from  several 
Authors  by  the  Countess  of  Bristol'  The  lines  are 
selected  with  judgment,  and  moulded  together  with 
considerable  ingenuity  and  success ;  and  at  the  end  of 
this  elaborate  and  affectionate  cento,  she  adds,  of  her 
own  composition, — 

"  Could  I  like  Cowley  think  or  Dry  den  write, 
In  Otway's  tender  words  my  soul  indite, 
I  then  in  verse  might  hope  to  soar  above 
All  other  mortals — as  I  do  in  love !" 

And  this  seems  to  have  been  no  hyperbole :  the  whole 
correspondence  between  Lord  and  Lady  Bristol  during 
their  occasional  separations,  from  their  marriage  in 
1695  to  1737,  has  been  preserved,  and  it  exhibits  a 
series  of  love  letters,  by  almost  every  post,  of  a  pas- 
sionate fondness  that  would  seem  excessive  after  a  few 
months'  matrimony.  Lord  Bristol  was — in  all  tender 
emotions  at  least — something  of  an  enthusiast,  and  the 
Countess  was  vehement  in  all  her  feelings. 

There  was  some  mystery  about  the  marriage  of 
Mr.  Hervey  and  Miss  Lepell :  the  publications  of  the 
day  and  all  the  peerages  date  it  as  of  the  25th  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xxiii 

October,  1720,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  was  only 
then  publicly  declared ;  but  there  is  extant  a  letter  of 
Lord  Bristol,  dated  the  20th  of  May  preceding,  con- 
gratulating the  lady  in  the  most  affectionate  terms  on 
her  marriage,  which,  however,  he  calls  a  "  secret." 
In  the  summer  of  that  year  the  young  lady  (still 
no  doubt  under  her  maiden  name)  paid  a  visit  to 
Ickworth,  and  in  two  letters  after  this  visit,  but 
prior  to  the  25th  of  October,  Lord  Bristol  again 
addresses  her  "  by  the  endearing  title  of  daughter." 
I  have  not  been  able  to  discover  in  what  month  of 
1720  Gay's  curious  and  characteristic  verses  called 
'  Mr.  Popes  Welcome  from  Greece '  (that  is,  on  his 
having  finished  the  translation  of  the  Iliad)  were  pub- 
lished, but  it  must  have  been  written  during  the 
courtship  and  before  the  declaration  of  the  marriage ; 
for  among  Pope's  congratulating  friends  we  find  the 
lovers  :— 

"  Now  Hervey,  fair  efface,  I  mark  full  well, 
With  thee,  youth's  youngest  daughter,  sweet  Lepell." 

All  the  editors  of  Pope,  misled  by  the  terms  fair  of 
face,  tell  us  that  "  Hervey  "  meant  Lady  Hervey ;  but 
they  fail  to  tell  us  who  then  was  "  sweet  Lepell ;"  10  but, 
in  fact,  "  Hervey "  was  Lord  Hervey,  whose  counte- 
nance was  remarkably,  though  rather  effeminately 
handsome.  So,  in  a  ballad  celebrated  in  its  day,  we 
read : — 


10  Mr.  Roscoe,  who  adopts  the  first  blunder,  makes  a  second  by  sup- 
posing a  younger  Miss  Lepell,  who,  I  believe,  never  existed.  I  must 
observe  that  most  of  the  personal  notes  in  all  editions  of  Pope,  Swift,  and 
Gay,  are  very  unsatisfactory,  but  on  this  little  poem,  where  they  are  so 
necessary,  they  are  peculiarly  meagre  and  remarkably  erroneous. 


xxiv  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

"  For  Venus  had  never  seen  bedded 

So  perfect  a  beau  and  a  belle, 
As  when  Hervey  the  handsome  was  wedded 
To  the  beautiful  Molly  Lepell"  u 

What  then  delayed  the  announcement  of  their  union  ? 
It  is  hard  to  guess,  but  there  is  a  clue.  It  will  be  seen 
in  Walpole's  Reminiscences  and  in  these  Memoirs  that 
the  Prince  had  been  smitten  by  Miss  Lepell's  lively  and 
beautiful  friend  and  colleague  Mary  Bellenden,  who 
had  rejected  the  royal  but  not  very  delicate  advances. 
Walpole  adds — 

"  In  fact  her  heart  was  engaged,  and  so  the  Prince,  finding 
his  love  fruitless,  suspected.  He  was  even  so  generous  as  to 
promise  her  that  if  she  would  discover  the  object  of  her  choice 
and  not  marry  without  his  privity,  he  would  consent  to  the 
match  and  be  kind  to  her  husband.  She  gave  him  the 
promise  without  acknowledging  the  person,  and  then,  lest  his 
Highness  should  throw  any  obstacle  in  the  way,  she  married 
without  his  knowledge  Colonel  Campbell  (long  afterwards 
Duke  of  Argyle),  one  of  the  grooms  of  his  bedchamber." — 
Reminiscences, 

Now  it  turns  out  that  the  announcements  of  the  mar- 
riages of  Miss  Bellenden  and  Miss  Lepell  were  made 
about  the  same  time,  the  former  dated  the  22nd,  the 
latter  the  25th  of  October,  and  we  know,  from  Walpole 


11  Arbuthnot,  in  a  letter  to  Swift,  8th  November,  1726,  gives  us  the 
birth  and  parentage  of  this  ballad.  "  I  gave  your  service  to  Lady 
Hervey.  She  is  in  a  little  sort  of  a  miff  about  a  ballad  that  was  writ  on  her 
to  the  tune  of  '  Molly  Mogg,'  and  sent  her  in  the  name  of  a  begging  poet. 
She  was  bit,  and  wrote  a  letter  to  the  begging  poet,  and  desired  him  to 
change  two  double  entendres ;  which  the  authors — Mr.  Pulteney  and  Lord 
Chesterfield — changed  into  single  entendres.  I  was  against  that,  though  I 
had  a  hand  in  the  first.  She  is  not  displeased,  I  believe,  with  the  ballad, 
but  only  with  being  bit"  But  the  work  of  these  great  wits  is  (to  say 
nothing  of  its  indelicacy)  a  very  poor  trifle  —  and  has  no  other  stanza 
worth  quoting. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xxv 

and  the  Suffolk  Papers1*  as  to  Miss  Bellenden,  and 
from  Lord  Bristol  as  to  Miss  Lepell,  that  both  were 
post-dated;  and  may  we  not  fairly  infer  that  they  in- 
fluenced each  other  ? — that  all  parties  might  be  fearful 
of  having  offended  by  making  a  choice  without  the 
consent  of  their  royal  patrons,  and  that  they  for  mutual 
support  agreed  to  brave  the  storm  together,  and  an- 
nounced their  marriages  and  consequent  resignations 
just  previous  to  the  courtly  epoch  of  the  birthday,  the 
30th  of  October,  when  we  find  that  two  other  young 
ladies  were  appointed  in  their  room  ? 

Lady  Louisa  Stuart's  Anecdotes  represent  the  young 
couple  as  from  the  outset  leading  a  very  fashionable 
life,  rather  after  the  French  than  the  English  fashion ; 
but  one  or  two  random  touches  of  her  grandmother's 
satirical  pen  cannot  detract  from  a  character  so  uni- 
versally respected  as  Lady  Hervey's,  and  in  fact  these 
very  passages,  if  closely  looked  at,  contradict  the  im- 
putation they  seem  to  raise.     But,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  is  too  clear  that  the  gentleman's  conjugal  principles 
and  practice  were  very  loose,  and  that  his  lady,  if  she 
had  not  had  an  innate  sense  of  propriety,  might  have 
pleaded  the  example  and  the  provocation  of  her  hus- 
band's infidelity. 

And  here  it  may  be  as  well  to  state  that  Lord 
Hervey's  laxity  of  morals  was  accompanied,  if  not 
originally  produced,  by  scepticism  in  religion.  How 
a  son  so  dutiful  and  affectionate,  and  resembling  a 


12  Vol.  i.  p.  68.  It  should  perhaps  be  added,  that  the  eldest  child  of 
Lady  Hervey  was  born  on  the  31st  August,  1721,  and  that  of  Mrs.  Campbell 
(Caroline,  afterwards  wife  of  Marshal  Conway,  and  mother  of  Mrs.  Darner) 
not  before  October,  1721.  See  Suffolk  Papers,  i.  82. 

VOL.  I.  C 


xx vi  LORD  HERVEY' S  MEMOIRS. 

singularly  pious  father  iu  so  many  other  points,  was 
led  into  such  opposite  courses,  we  have  no  distinct 
trace;  but  about  the  time  that  he  exchanged  the 
paternal  converse  of  Ickworth  for  the  society  of  Lon- 
don and  the  free-thinking  Court  of  the  Princess,  Tindal, 
Toland,  Collins,  and  Woolston  were  in  high  vogue, 
and  it  is  too  certain  that  Lord  Hervey  adopted  all 
their  anti-Christian  opinions,  and,  by  a  natural  conse- 
quence, a  peculiar  antipathy  to  the  Church  and  Church- 
men. This  feeling,  which  breaks  out  in  most  of  his 
writings,  is  visible  in  the  Memoirs  on  every  occasion 
where  it  could  introduce  itself;  and  in  at  least  one 
separate  publication  he  expressly  promulgated  it.  It  is 
stated  in  Walpole's  Catalogue  and  conjecturally  in  the 
Biographies  that  a  deistical  defence  (1732)  of  Mande- 
ville's  Fable  of  the  Bees  in  answer  to  Berkeley's  Minute 
Philosopher,  though  professing  to  be  the  work  of  "a 
Country  Clergyman"  was  by  Lord  Hervey.  I  am  sorry 
to  be  obliged  to  confirm  the  fact ;  and  of  the  pamphlet 
itself  I  need  only  add  that  there  is  no  more  of  taste, 
truth,  or  candour  in  the  conduct  of  the  argument 
than  there  was  in  the  composition  of  the  title-page. 

On  the  15th  of  November,  1723,  by  the  death  of  his 
elder  brother  Carr,  he  succeeded  to  the  title  of  LORD 
HERVEY,  and  in  March,  1725,  was  elected  Member  for 
Bury.  I  find  no  mention  of  him  in  Parliament,  or  in 
politics,  or  even  in  society  till  January,  1728,  when,  on 
the  meeting  of  George  II. 's  first  Parliament,  he  moved 
the  Address  in  the  House  of  Commons.  But  it  appears 
from  his  confidential  letter  to  Sir  R.  Walpole  (post,  i.  42) 
that  he  had  previously  attracted  the  Minister's  notice 
and  favour;  and  both  he  and  Lord  Bristol  were 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xxvn 

certainly  disappointed  at  his  not  having  been  included 
in  the  official  arrangements  of  the  new  reign. 

And  here,  though  it  in  some  degree  anticipates  the 
course  of  events,  I  must  observe — with  reference  to  the 
tone  and  feeling  of  his  Memoirs  from  the  first  page 
to  the  last,  and  indeed  to  the  colour  and  character  of 
his  whole  life — that  it  seems  to  have  been  a  long, 
rankling,  and  by  no  means  unreasonable  mortification 
to  a  young  nobleman  of  lively  talents,  strong  ambition, 
unusual  diligence,  and  a  decided  turn  for  politics  and 
business,  that — neither  at  the  outset,  nor  during  twelve 
or  fourteen  years  of  an  assiduous,  able,  and  even  bril- 
liant advocacy  of  the  Ministry  in  both  Houses  of  Par- 
liament— should  he  have  been  thought  deserving  of  any 
efficient  office,  or  (as  he  himself,  at  the  Queen's  death, 
sharply  complained)  of  any  higher  duty  than  the 
almost  menial  services  of  a  Vice-Chamberlain. 
Paradoxical  as  it  may  sound,  it  was,  I  believe,  his 
high  favour  with  both  the  Queen  and  the  Minister 
that  occasioned  this,  we  may  rather  call  it  injustice  than 
neglect:  the  truth  seems  to  be  that  he  had  obtained  so 
much  familiarity  and  favour  with  her  Majesty,  and  was 
so  essentially  useful  to  Walpole  in  that  all-important 
quarter,  that  though  Sir  Robert,  in  1733,  gratified  his 
friend  and  strengthened  the  Administration  by  calling 
him  up  to  the  House  of  Lords  and  assigning  him  a  con- 
fidential share  in  its  debates,  he  was  unwilling  or  afraid 
to  lose  his  more  delicate  services  at  the  ear  of  the 
Queen.  Lord  Hervey  had  talents  which  might  pro- 
bably have  been  more  advantageously  developed  on  a 
graver  scene ;  but,  however  that  may  be,  there  is  reason 
to  suppose  that  his  own  dissatisfaction,  and  we  know 

c  2 


xxviii  LOUD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

that  of  Lord  Bristol,  went  on  increasing,  till  on  the 
Queen's  death  the  obstacle  (according  to  my  hypo- 
thesis) was  removed,  and  Lord  Hervey  was,  probably 
as  soon  as  Walpole  could  make  the  arrangement,  ap- 
pointed to  a  high  cabinet  office — too  late,  however,  to 
add  much  to  the  strength  of  his  tottering  party,  or  to 
his  own  reputation  as  a  practical  statesman.  But  we 
must  return  to  an  earlier  period. 

Lord  Hervey,  who  seems  to  have  had  delicate  health 
even  in  his  youth,  became  as  he  grew  up  a  valetu- 
dinarian. This,  though  probably  constitutional,  Lord 
Bristol  ascribes  to  the  use  of  "  that  detestable  and  poison- 
ous plant — tea,  which  had  once  brought  him  to  death's 
door,  and  if  persisted  in  would  carry  him  through 
it ;"  and  he  implores  him  in  the  most  pathetic  terms 
to  give  it  up.  Lord  Hervey,  however,  had  more  faith 
in  a  change  of  climate — which,  besides  its  influence 
on  his  bodily  ailments,  would  remove  him  for  a  season 
from  the  House  of  Commons,  the  scene  of  his  recent 
political  disappointment — and  very  shortly  after  he 
had  moved  the  Address,  he  set  out  for  Italy,  ac- 
companied by  Mr.  Stephen  Fox,  whose  chief  induce- 
ment to  the  journey  was — we  are  told  in  a  poetical 
epistle  addressed  to  him  by  Lord  Hervey  at  Florence 
— to  attend  the  invalid.13  In  this  piece,  after  expa- 
tiating on  the  gratitude  which  he  owes  to  his  friend, 
and  describing  some  of  the  scenes  they  had  visited,  he 
at  last  turns  his  thoughts  homewards. 

13  It  at  first  sight  seems  that  he  might  have  been  more  suitably  accom- 
panied by  Lady  Hervey,  but  we  must  recollect  that  she  had  already  four 
young  children  to  look  after.  We  find  in  one  of  Lord  Bristol's  letters  to 
Lord  Hervey,  while  abroad,  affectionate  mention  of  "  the  number  and 
length  of  his  letters  to  Lady  Hervey,"  but  none  of  them  have  been  found. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xxix 

"  O  !  would  kind  Heaven,  these  tedious  sufferings  past, 
Permit  me  Ickworth,  rest,  and  health  at  last, 
In  that  lov'd  shade,  my  youth's  delightful  seat, 

My  early  pleasure  and  my  late  retreat. 

***** 

There  might  I  trifle  carelessly  away 
The  milder  evening  of  life's  clouded  day ; 
From  business  and  the  world's  intrusion  free, 

With  books,  with  love,  with  beauty,  and  with  thee. 

***** 

But  if  the  Gods,  sinister  still,  deny 

To  live  in  Ickworth,  let  me  there  but  die  ; 

Thy  hands  to  close  my  eyes  in  death's  long  night, 

Thy  image  to  attract  their  latest  sight ; 

Then  to  the  grave  attend  thy  poet's  hearse, 

And  love  his  memory  as  you  loved  his  verse." 

To  this  sentimental  effusion — more  like  the  address 
of  a  lover  of  twenty  to  his  mistress,  than  of  a  man  of 
thirty-three  to  his  friend — Lady  Mary  Wortley,  when 
it  reached  her,  subjoined  this  commentary : — 
"  So  sung  the  poet  in  a  humble  strain, 
With  empty  pockets  and  a  head  in  pain, 
When  the  soft  clime  inclined  the  soul  to  rest, 
And  pastoral  images  inspired  the  breast ; 
Apollo  listened  from  his  heavenly  bower, 
And,  in  his  health  restored,  expressed  his  power. 
***** 

Returning  vigour  glowed  in  every  vein, 
And  gay  ideas  fluttered  through  the  brain  ; 
Back  he  returns  to  breathe  his  native  air, 
And  all  his  late  resolves  are  melted  there."14 


I*  Both  poems  may  be  seen  at  length  in  Lady  Mary's  Works,  iii.  376. 
Lord  Hervey's  Epistle  is  in  Dodsley's  Collection,  iii.  181,  and  is  followed 
by  another,  also  addressed  to  Mr.  Fox,  dated  1731,  less  commendable  for 
either  morals  or  poetry.  The  four  best  lines  in  it  are  marked  by  Lord 
Hervey's  turn  for  antithesis — 

"  For  life  has  joys  adapted  to  each  stage ; 

Love  for  our  youth,  ambition  for  our  age  ; 

But  wilful  man,  inverting  her  decrees, 

When  young  would  govern,  and  when  old  would  please." 
The  versification  of  all  these  poems  seems  to  me  very  much  superior  to 
the  rugged  specimens  we  shall  see  in  the  Memoirs. 


xxx  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

Lady  Mary  was  right.  He  came  home,  and  never 
again  willingly  visited  Ickworth;  nor  was  it  till  his 
dismissal  from  office  that  he  began  to  imagine  the 
possibility  of  enduring  that  banishment;  which,  on 
the  contrary,  the  old  Earl  seldom  mentions  without 
some  affectionate  epithet,  as  "  dear  Ickworth  " — "  sweet 
Ickworth." 

I  cannot  exactly  ascertain  the  dates  of  the  Four 
Epistles  after  the  manner  of  Ovid  (nor,  indeed,  of  some 
other  pieces),  which  appear  as  Lord  Hervey's  in  the 
4th  vol.  of  Dodsley's  '  Collection,'  on  which  so  much 
of  his  poetical  reputation  was  founded.15  That  which 
Walpole  prefers,  *  Monimia  to  Pliilodes,'  was  written, 
I  suppose,  before  he  went  abroad.  It  was  designed, 
Walpole  says,  for  the  giddy  and  unfortunate  Sophia 
Howe,  Maid  of  Honour  to  the  Princess  (who  died  in 
1726)  and  Mr.  Anthony  Lowther;  and  seems  to  have 
more  of  reality  and  truth  mingled  with  its  tenderness 
than  the  general  run  of  those  pedantic  imitations  which 
Pope's  '  Sappho  to  PhaonJ  and  still  more,  his  *  Eloisa' 
had  brought  into  fashion.  Hervey's  other  epistles  are 
much  inferior.  But  there  is  another  piece  in  the  same 
volume,  purporting  to  be  an  *  Answer,'  by  Lord  Hervey, 
in  the  character  of  Miss  Dashwood,16  to  the  least  frigid 

15  Besides  the  pieces  of  Lord  Hervey's  mentioned  by  Walpole  and  Park 
{Noble  Authors),  the  following  are  to  be  found  in  the  '  New  Foundling 
Hospital  for  Wit,'  i,  239,  et  seq.     '  Verses  to  Mr.  Poyntz,  with  Seeker's 
Sermon  on  Education,'  the  '  Epigram  on  Chiswich '  (post,  vol.  ii.  p,  145), 
and  a  longer  satire  on  the  same  villa. 

16  Amidst  this  gossip  of  the  last  century,  I  shall,  perhaps,  be  forgiven 
for  recording  that  my  old  acquaintance,  Lady  Corke,  who  died  in  1840,  at 
the  age  of  ninety-four,  told  me  that  she  had  known  Kitty  Dashwood  very 
well,  and  that  Hammond  undoubtedly  died  for  love;  "the  only  instance 
of  the  kind,"  she  said,  "  that  she  had  ever  known  in  her  long  life."    Kitty 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xxxi 

of  Hammond's  Elegiacal  addresses  to  his  Delia,  which 
is  in  a  better  style,  both  of  poetry  and  good  sense,  and 
which  even  now  may  be  read  with  pleasure.  There 
seems,  however,  some  mystery  as  to  the  authorship  of 
this  poem.  It  is  stated  expressly  in  Dodsley  (p.  79) 
to  be  "  by  the  late  Lord  Hervey ;"  but  I  have  before 
me  a  volume  from  the  library  at  Ickworth,  in  which 
Lord  Hervey  had  collected  several  poems  attributed  to 
himself  and  Lady  Mary  Wortley,  and  in  this  volume 
I  find,  under  the  date  of  1743,  what  seems  the  first 
edition  of  this  ' Answer,'  purporting  on  the  original  title- 
page  to  be  "  by  a  LADY,  author  of  the  Verses  to  the  Imi- 
tator of  Horace."  Was  this  a  false  title-page,  or  was 
Lady  Mary  the  author  ?  or  was  it  a  conjoint  produc- 
tion ?  I  postpone  the  discussion  of  these  questions  till 
we  arrive  at  the  '  Verses  to  the  Imitator  of  Horace," 
about  which  the  same  kind  of  difficulty  hangs. 

Before  Lord  Hervey's  return  from  Italy,  George  II. 
had  been  most  reluctantly  driven  into  bringing  Prince 
Frederick,  now  just  of  age,  to  England,  and  creating 
him  Prince  of  Wales ;  and  I  need  make  no  apology  for 
giving  the  earliest  portrait  I  have  found  of  a  person 
who  occupies  so  large  a  share  in  Lord  Hervey's  per- 
sonal history  as  well  as  in  his  Memoirs.  Lady  Bristol 
writes  on  the  7th  of  January,  1729,  to  her  Lord  whom 
she  had  just  left : — 

"  My  three  days'  journey  [from  Ickworth  to  town]  was  sup- 
ported by  as  many  doses  of  laudanum,  the  strength  of  which 

had  at  first  accepted,  but  afterwards  rejected  him,  on — Lady  Corke,  and 
indeed  all  Kitty's  contemporaries,  thought— prudential  reasons ;  and  this 
is  the  tone  of  Lord  Hervey's  answer.  Hammond  died  in  1742,  and  Miss 
Dashwood  in  1779,  bedchamber-woman  to  Queen  Charlotte. 


xxxii  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

enabled  me  to  go  to  Court  yesterday,  where  /  was  most  gra- 
ciously received  and  you  kindly  inquired  after.  I  introduced 
Lady  Hervey  to  the  Prince  of  Wales — the  most  agreeable 
young  man  it  is  possible  to  imagine,  without  being  the  least 
handsome ;  his  person  little,  but  very  well  made,  and  genteel ; 
a  liveliness  in  his  eyes  that  is  indescribable,  and  the  most 
obliging  address  that  can  be  conceived ;  but  toe  crown  of  all 
his  perfection  is,  that  great  duty  ana  regara  ne  pays  the  King 
and  Queen,  with  such  a  mixture  of  affection,  as  if  obliging 
them  were  the  greatest  pleasure  of  his  life,  and  they  receive 
it  with  the  utmost  joy  and  satisfaction,  and  the  father's  fond- 
ness seems  to  equal  the  tenderness  of  the  mother ;  so  that,  I 
believe,  the  world  never  produced  a  royal  family  so  happy  in 
one  another.  Pray  God  long  to  continue  it." 

It  did  not  long  continue ;  and  the  tardy  coming  of 
the  Prince,  as  well  as  some  other  circumstances  (post,  ii. 
412),  give  us  reason  to  suspect  that,  even  at  the  outset, 
all  was  not  as  cordial  as  it  appeared. 

Lord  Hervey  returned  from  Italy  about  the  middle 
of  September,  1729,  and  he  appears  to  have  soon  im- 
proved the  impression  he  had  made  on  the  Prince  at 
Hanover  into  great  intimacy  and  favour.  There  is  an 
expression  in  the  Memoirs  referring  to  the  time  when 
Lord  Hervey  "first  came  about  him  "  (vol.  ii.  p.  384), 
which  seems  to  imply  that  he  had  belonged  officially 
to  the  Prince's  family,  but  there  is  no  other  trace  of 
any  such  employment,  and  his  having  a  pension  of 
1000/.  a-year  from  the  King,  who  was  a  strict  economist 
in  such  matters,  seems  inconsistent  with  his  holding  also 
a  place.  The  studied  silence  in  which  Lord  Hervey 
buries  his  earlier  intercourse  and  subsequent  quarrel 
with  the  Prince  (post,  i.  159,  n.),  leaves  the  details  ol 
their  friendship  and  their  enmity  in  much  obscurity: 
certain  it  is  that  a  short  but  close  intimacy  was  followed 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xxxiii 

by  a  deep  and  lasting  hatred ;  of  which  a  rivalry  for, 
and,  what  is  worse,  a  community  in,  the  favour  of  the 
unfortunate  Miss  Vane,  had  no  doubt  a  large  share  : 17 
but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  there  were  also  some 
political  tracasseries  between  them.  However  this  may 
be,  it  is  certain  that  the  dark  picture  the  Memoirs 
give  us  of  the  Prince  must  be  received  with  a  large 
allowance  for  the  prejudice  of  the^  painter. 

We  now  come  to  the  busy  part  of  his  life  where  the 
Memoirs  begin,  but  they  are  written,  as  the  reader 
will  see,  with  much  reserve  as  to  his  personal  history ; 
all  that  they  in  their  present  state  tell  us  of  this  period 
is,  that  he  broke  away  from  Pulteney,  enlisted  heartily 
under  Walpole,  and  was  soon  after  rewarded  with  the 
office  of  Vice-Chamberlain.  This  summary  requires 
both  retrospective  and  prospective  explanation. 

At  his  marriage  Lord  Hervey's  personal  and  political 
interests  and  feelings  were  in  unison ;  his  mother,  his 
brother,  and  his  wife  held  offices  in  the  Prince's  Court, 
which  was  in  declared  Opposition ;  Lord  Bristol,  too, 
was  dissatisfied  with  the  Ministry.  Pulteney  was  the 
intimate  friend  both  of  Hervey  and  his  wife,  and  shortly 
before  the  time  of  his  breaking  with  Walpole  and 
taking  the  lead  of  the  Opposition,  he  stood  sponsor 
to  Hervey's  eldest  daughter.  Lords  Chesterfield, 
Bolingbroke,  and  Bathurst,  Pope,  Gay,  Arbuthnot, 
and  latterly  Swift,  with  the  ladies  of  the  Prince's 
Court,  completed  a  circle  at  Richmond  and  Twicken- 
ham, very  factious,  no  doubt,  against  Walpole,  but 
very  agreeable  in  itself.  On  the  death,  however,  of 


n  See  post,  i.  329;  ii.  20,385, 


xxxiv  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

George  I.,  when  the  ascendancy  of  the  Queen  had  con- 
firmed Sir  Robert  in  power,  the  scene  changed,  and 
Lord  Hervey,  already,  it  is  evident,  a  favourite  with 
her  Majesty,  naturally  followed  her,  as  did  most  of  her 
Court,  into  the  Ministerial  camp,  and  was  gratified,  but 
certainly  not  satisfied,  with  a  pension  given  him,  no 
doubt  instead  of  a  place.  On  his  return  from  abroad, 
however,  he  was,  we  shall  see,  undecided  what  course 
to  take,  and  Walpole  and  Pulteney  seem  to  have  both 
bidden  for  him :  a  chasm  in  the  Memoirs  (almost  the 
only  one  that  I  regret)  has  deprived  us  of  the  details  of 
this  struggle  ;  but  Walpole  carried  off  the  prize,  and  on 
the  7th  of  May,  1730,  Lord  Hervey  received  the  gold 
key  of  Vice-Chamberlain  to  the  King — Inde  irce  I 

The  celebrated  party-paper  the  '  Craftsman '  had 
been  set  up  in  the  last  year  of  the  late  reign  to 
oppose  Walpole,  and  it  now  became  the  vehicle  of  all 
the  exasperated  animosity  of  Pulteney  and  Bolingbroke. 
Against  this  formidable  antagonist  of  the  Ministry  to 
which  he  now  belonged,  Lord  Hervey  drew  a  sharp 
and  ready  pen  in  numerous  pamphlets,  which  Horace 
Walpole — probably  with  some  partiality  to  the  partisan 
of  Sir  Robert — thought  "  equal  to  any  that  ever  were 
written"  Some  of  them  have  certainly  considerable 
literary  merit,  though  their  subjects  are  now  obsolete; 
and  one  of  them — one  at  least  imputed  to  him — had 
consequences  very  important  to  his  private  as  well  as 
his  political  character.  In  the  first  days  of  1731  ap- 
peared a  pamphlet  in  answer  to  the  'Craftsman,'  under 
the  title  of  '  Sedition  and  Defamation  displayed,'  to 
which  was  prefixed  a  clever  and  caustic  '  Dedication  to 
the  Patrons  of  the  Craftsman,'  that  is,  Pulteney  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xxxv 

Bolingbroke.  This,  Pulteney  attributed  to  Hervey,  and 
in  a  few  days  published,  under  the  signature  of  the 
Craftsman,  '  A  proper  Reply  to  a  late  scurrilous  Libel.' 
This  Reply  was  no  doubt  thought  very  pungent  in  its 
day,  but  it  now  seems  coarse,  weak,  and  even  dull ; 
very  much  beneath  the  dignity  of  a  person  in  Pulte- 
ney's  position,  and  very  inferior  to  a  brilliant  pamphlet 
which  he  soon  after  published  against  Walpole  himself. 
This  latter  pamphlet  revealed  some  coarse  expressions 
which  Walpole  in  their  former  intimacy  had  used  to 
him  against  the  King  when  Prince,  which  so  exaspe- 
rated his  Majesty — not  against  Walpole,  as  Pulteney 
no  doubt  expected,  but — against  himself,  that  the  King 
struck  his  name  out  of  the  Privy  Council. 

Pulteney 's  '  Reply '  affects  to  treat  Hervey  as  a 
thing  below  contempt — makes  his  personal  appearance 
an  excuse  for  calling  him  a  half-man  half-woman  in  the 
most  indecent  terms,  and,  in  short,  affords  the  original 
hints  for  all  the  insinuations  and  insults  which  Pope 
afterwards  introduced  into  the  famous  character  of 
Sporus.  A  duel  ensued,  and  certainly,  considering 
the  peculiar  nature  of  the  offence,  one  can  hardly 
imagine  a  more  justifiable  occasion  for  such  an  appeal. 
Of  this  event  we  have  the  following  account  in  a  letter 
from  Mr.  Thomas  Pelham  to  Lord  Waldegrave,  then 
Ambassador  at  Paris  : — 

"  London,  28th  Jan.,  1731. 

"  Lord  Hervey  sent  a  message  to  Mr.  Pulteney,  desiring  to 
know  whether  he  wrote  the  late  pamphlet  called  '  The  Reply '  to 
that  of  (  Sedition  and  Defamation  displayed;'  in  answer  to  which 
Pulteney  said  he  would  not  satisfy  Lord  Hervey  till  he  knew 
whether  his  Lordship  was  the  author  of  the  *  Dedication '  to  the 


xxxvi  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

latter.  Accordingly,  Lord  Hervey  sent  him  word  that  he 
was  not :  and  Mr.  Fox,  who  carried  this  message,  asked 
Mr.  Pulteney  what  answer  he  would  give  about  *  The  Reply  f 
to  which  Mr.  Pulteney  said,  that  since  Lord  Hervey  did 
not  write  the  'Dedication'  he  was  satisfied.  But  Fox  in- 
sisting upon  some  other  answer  with  relation  to  *  The  Re- 
ply J  Pulteney  then  said  that  he  might  tell  Lord  Hervey 
that  whether  he  (Pulteney)  was  the  author  of  '  The  Reply ' 
or  not,  he  was  ready  to  justify  and  stand  by  the  truth  of  any 
part  of  it  at  what  time  and  wherever  Lord  Hervey  pleased. 
This  last  message  your  Lordship  will  easily  imagine  was  the 
occasion  of  the  duel ;  and,  accordingly,  on  Monday  last  the 
25th,  at  between  three  and  four  o'clock,  they  met  in  the  Upper 
St.  James's  Park,18  behind  Arlington  Street,  with  their  two 
seconds,  who  were  Mr.  Fox  and  Sir  J.  Rushout.  The  two 
combatants  were  each  of  them  slightly  wounded,  but  Mr.  Pul- 
teney had  once  so  much  the  advantage  of  Lord  Hervey,  that  he 
would  have  infallibly  run  my  Lord  through  the  body  if  his  foot 
had  not  slipped,  and  then  the  seconds  took  an  occasion  to  part 
them.  Upon  which  Mr.  Pulteney  embraced  Lord  Hervey,  and 
expressed  a  great  deal  of  concern  at  the  accident  of  their  quar- 
rel, promising  at  the  same  time  that  he  would  never  personally 
attack  him  again,  either  with  his  mouth  or  his  pen.  Lord  Hervey 
made  him  a  bow,  without  giving  him  any  sort  of  answer,  and 
(to  use  the  common  expression)  thus  they  parted." — Coxe,App. 

Mr.  Pelham,  who  in  this  narration  professes  only  to 
"  give  the  talk  of  the  town,  as  well  as  he  has  been  able  to 
collect  it"  records  what  I  suppose  must  be  a  mistake  in 
making  Lord  Hervey  deny  the  authorship  of  the  Dedica- 
tion, which  it  seems  certain  that  he  wrote.  What  Lord 
Hervey  might  have  denied  was  the  Pamphlet,  which  was, 
in  fact,  not  his,  but  probably  Sir  William  Yonge's ;  and 
this  confusion  between  the  Pamphlet  and  the  Dedication 
(which  Pulteney  himself  suspected  to  have  been  bydif- 

18  Now  the  Green  Park. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xxxvii 

ferent  hands)  has  hitherto  obscured  this  story,  and  made 
it  appear  as  if  this  celebrated  duel  had  been  fought  under 
an  entire  mistake.  Coxe  says,  and  has  been  copied  by 
subsequent  writers,  that  "  it  afterwards  appeared  that 
Lord  Hervey  did  not  compose  this  pamphlet,  which  was 
really  written  by  Sir  W.  Yonge,  as  he  himself  confessed 
to  Lord  Hardwicke ;  and  Pulteney  acknowledged  his 
mistake,  and  imputed  it,  without  sufficient  authority, 
to  Walpole  himself."—  (Coxe,  i.  362.)  This  is  not  in- 
consistent with  Lord  Hervey's  having  written  the  De- 
dication ;  but  Pulteney  himself,  in  his  second  pamphlet 
(before  mentioned),  charges  Walpole  with  being  the 
sole  author  of  Defamation  Displayed,  and  with  having 
endeavoured  to  pass  it  off  as  "a  Noble  Lord's,"  which, 
he  says,  led  to  the  duel ;  and  he  reproaches  Walpole 
with  the  mischief  that  might  have  ensued  from  that 
mistake — making  no  distinction  (as  he  had  done  in 
the  '  Reply ')  between  the  Dedication  and  the  Pamphlet, 
and  acquitting  Lord  Hervey  of  the  whole.  This  would 
seem  conclusive,  even  against  the  strong  internal  evi- 
dence of  the  Dedication ;  but  a  marginal  note  in  the 
copy  of  the  pamphlet  at  Ickworth,  apparently  in  Lord 
Hervey's  own  hand,  states  that  the  Dedication  was  by 
him.  Now  if  this  was,  as  I  believe,  the  fact,  it  seems 
that  Lord  Hervey  was  the  aggressor ;  and  Pulteney, 
in  the  '  Reply ','  states,  moreover,  that  this  was  not 
Hervey's  first  offence.  It  is  indeed  true  that  his  attack 
was  merely  political,  with  as  little  personality  as  might 
be,  and  that  Pulteney's  retort  had  too  large  an  inter- 
mixture of  ribaldry  and  venom  ;  but  in  measuring  the 
blame  of  such  scuffles  the  question  with  the  world  will 
always  be — as  Lord  Hervey  himself  afterwards  urged 


xxxviii  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

in  his  quarrel  with  Pope — who  struck  the  first  blow  ? 
and,  as  far  as  we  can  now  see,  it  was  Lord  Hervey. 

But  such  was  not  the  case  in  his  quarrel  with 
Pope.  Pope  had  long  professed  the  utmost  admiration 
and  affection  for  Lady  Mary  Wortley.  Some  of  his 
sweetest  verses  are  in  her  praise,  as  the  most  disgusting 
he  ever  wrote  were  afterwards  pointed  at  her.  Lady 
Mary  had  always  been  the  intimate  friend  of  Lady 
Bristol,19  and  she  was,  both  hereditarily  as  it  were, 
and  by  taste,  from  youth  to  age  the  friend  of  Lord 
Hervey.  We  know  nothing  of  the  precise  state  or 
cause  of  the  rupture  between  Pope  and  Lady  Mary, 
in  which  Lord  Hervey  became  implicated.  It  has 
been  ascribed  to  the  "  rivalry "  of  the  gentlemen  "for 
the  good  graces  of  the  Lady ;"  but  I  can  trace  no  evi- 
dence for  this  statement,  and  there  is  some  against  it. 
Spence  gives  us  Lady  Mary's  own  account  of  the 
quarrel  thus : — 

"  I  have  got  fifty  or  sixty  of  Mr.  Pope's  letters  by  me.  You 
shall  see  what  a  goddess  he  makes  of  me  in  them,  though  he 
makes  such  a  devil  of  me  in  his  writings  afterwards,  without 
any  reason  that  I  know  of.  I  got  a  third  person  to  ask  him 
why  he  had  left  off  visiting  me  :  he  answered,  negligently,  that 
he  went  as  often  as  he  used  to  do.  I  then  got  Dr.  Arbuthnot 
to  ask  him  what  Lady  Mary  had  done  to  him  ?  He  said  that 
Lady  Mary  and  Lord  H.  [Hervey]  had  pressed  him  once 
together — (and  I  do  not  remember  that  we  ever  were  together  with 
him  in  our  lives) — to  write  a  satire  on  certain  persons ;  that  he 
refused  it,  and  that  this  had  occasioned  the  breach  between  us." 
— Spence's  Anecdotes,  31. 

It  would  be  now  idle  to  seek  for  a  cause  of  quarrel 


19  To  Lady  Bristol  were  addressed  some  of  her  most  celebrated  letters 
from  the  East. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xxxix 

which  the  parties  were,  an  hundred  years  ago,  unable 
or  unwilling  to  explain  ;  but  may  it  not  be  sufficiently 
accounted  for  by  the  jealousies  almost  inevitable 
between  persons  of  such  similar  and  therefore  dis- 
cordant tastes  and  tempers,  living  together  in  a  circle 
of  tittle-tattle,  scandal,  and  pasquinades  ?  "  It  must 
be  owned,"  says  Lord  Chesterfield  (Characters),  "that 
Pope  was  the  most  irritable  of  all  the  genus  irritabile 
vatum,  offended  with  trifles,  and  never  forgetting  or 
forgiving  them."  Pope  himself  admits  that  he  disconti- 
nued his  acquaintance  with  his  noble  friends  "  merely 
because  they  both  had  too  much  wit  for  him"  He  dates 
his  estrangement  from  Lord  Hervey  so  early  as  1 725 ; 
and  we  may  easily  conceive  how  much  these  personal 
differences  must  have  been  sharpened  by  political  ani- 
mosity, when,  in  1727,  the  new  Court  discarded  its  old 
Opposition  connexions  and  adopted  Walpole. 

But,  whatever  may  have  been  their  private  feuds, 
the  first  public  offence  was  undoubtedly  given  by  Pope. 
In  his  'Miscellanies'  (1727)  Lord  Hervey  is  sneered 
at  in  several  passages,  both  covertly  and  under  his  ini- 
tials. In  the  first  edition  of  the  '  Dunciad  '  (1728)  we 
find- 

"  And  high-born  Howard,  more  majestic  sire, 

Impatient  waits  till   *     *  [Hervey]  joins  the  quire." 

These  were,  however,  slight  touches ;  and  though  no 
one  could  doubt  who  was  meant,  they  afforded  Hervey 
no  ground  of  public  complaint.  But  towards  the  close 
of  1732  appeared  the  *  Imitation  of  the  2nd  Satire  of 
the  1st  Book  of  Horace,'  in  which  Pope  attacked  Lady 
Mary  by  the  name  of  '  Sappho,'  in  the  most  brutal  and 
indecent  couplet  ever  printed,  and  Lord  Hervey  twice 


xl  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

over  by  the  contemptuous  designation  of  '  Lord  Fanny? 
Pope,  indeed,  subsequently  denied20  that  *  Sappho*  and 
'  Lord  Fanny '  were  meant  for  Lady  Mary  or  his 
Lordship ;  but  this  denial,  which  everybody  saw  to 
be  a  mean  untruth,  only  put  Pope  still  more  in  the 
wrong. 

In  retaliation  for  these  attacks  there  soon  appeared  a 
sharp  retort  under  the  title  of  *  Verses  to  the  Imitator  of 
Horace,'  which  made  a  great  deal  of  noise,  and  were 
generally  thought  to  be  the  joint  production  of  Lady 
Mary  and  Lord  Hervey.     Lord  Wharncliffe,  on  the 
faith  of  "finding  the  poem  copied  into  a  book  verified 
by  her  own  hand  as  written  by  her,"  is  inclined  to  con- 
clude that  they  were  hers  alone ;  and  they  were  adver- 
tised, and  Pope  so  quotes  them,  as  being  written  "  by 
a  Lady  of  Quality  ,*"  but  there  is,  on  the  other  hand, 
some  evidence  that  would  lead  to  a  different  conclu- 
sion.    The  original  edition  (in  the  Ickworth  volume) 
makes  no  mention  of  "  a  Lady  "  on  the  title-page,  but 
has  a  manuscript  preface  and  several  manuscript  cor- 
rections and  additions,  with  a  new  manuscript  title- 
page,  prepared  "  by  the  author  "  for  a  second  edition, 
all  of  which  are  in  Lord  Hervey's  own  hand.     This 
creates   a   strong  presumption   that  he  was   the  sole 
author,  though  it  is  perhaps  not  altogether  conclusive, 
and  I   must  own  that  these  "  Verses"  are  smoother, 
keener,  and  in   every  way  better  than  any  of  Lord 
Hervey's  single-handed  productions — except  (if  that  be 
one)  the  "  Answer "  to  Hammond  before  mentioned. 


20  See   '  Letter  to  a  Noble  Lord,'  November,  1733,  in  Pope's  Works, 
vol.  iii.  p.  395  (Bowles's  Edition). 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xli 

I  cannot  pretend  to  explain  the  mystery  of  those  title- 
pages  ;  but  thus  much  appears  in  my  judgment  certain, 
that  the  two  pieces  in  connexion  with  which  the  Lady 
is  mentioned,  have  a  marked  superiority  over  Lord 
Hervey's  other  works,  both  in  vigour  and  polish — and 
especially  over  a  piece,  avowedly  by  him  alone,  on  the 
same  subject  as  the  '  Verses  to  the  Imitator,'  and  pub- 
lished about  the  same  time,  entitled,  '  Letter  from  a 
Nobleman  at  Hampton  Court  to  a  Doctor  of  Divinity? 
To  this  piece,  which  has  some  strong  thoughts  in  rather 
rugged  metre,  the  noble  author  had  also  made,  in  the 
copy  at  Ickworth,  a  manuscript  addition  of  half  a  dozen 
lines,  which  I  think  it  right  to  preserve,  as  they  have 
not  been  printed,  and  as  they  are  a  kind  of  apology  for 
his,  as  he  says,  reluctant  share  in  this  controversy : — 

"  So  much  for  Pope — nor  this  I  would  have  said, 
Had  not  the  spider  first  his  venom  shed  ; 
For,  the  first  stone  I  ne'er  unjustly  cast, 
But  who  can  blame  the  hand  that  throws  the  last  ? 
And  if  one  common  foe  the  wretch  has  made 
Of  all  mankind — his  folly  on  his  head  !" 

Alas,  however,  for  Lord  Hervey,  this  was  not  to  be 
the  "  last  stone ;"  and  very  different  both  in  weight  and 
impetus  was  Pope's  retort.  He  in  the  first  instance 
replied  to  Lord  Hervey  by  the  celebrated  prose  *  Letter' 
before  mentioned,  "  which, "  says  Johnson,  "  though 
never  sent,  is  printed  amongst  his  letters,  but  to  a  cool 
reader  of  the  present  time  exhibits  nothing  but  tedious 
malignity."  I  cannot  agree  with  Johnson  :  he  was  partial 
to  the  Herveys.21  Thomas  and  Henry,  Lord  Hervey's 


21  That  is  after  his  acquaintance  with  Henry,  who  had  married  his  friend 
Miss  Aston  :  before  that  he  had  followed  in  the  track  of  Pope,  and  in  his 

VOL.  I.  d 


xlii  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

younger  brothers,  were  his  friends,  and  in  a  small  way- 
hut  when  small  things  were  great  to  him — his  benefac- 
tors ;  and  he  gratefully  told  Boswell,  "  If  you  call  a  dog 
Hervey,  I  shall  love  him."  He  therefore  took  no  great 
pains  to  understand  the  sly,  deep,  and  complicated  sa- 
tire of  this  *  Letter,'  which  has  seemed  to  other  critics 
one  of  the  most  remarkable  specimens  of  ironical  sar- 
casm in  our  language.  From  it  a  patient  and  intelli- 
gent reader  may  glean  every  foible,  folly,  or  fault  that 
truth  or  scandal  ever  attached  to  Lord  Hervey,  brought 
together  with  an  artful  and  polished  malignity  that  may 
be  odious,  but  can  never,  I  think,  be  "tedious."  It 
remains,  however,  a  much  severer  weight  on  the  cha- 
racter of  Pope  than  of  his  antagonist — for  it  is  alto- 
gether built  on  the  false  and  mean  denial  of  what 
every  one  knew  to  be  true. 

Prudential  reasons  probably  prevented  the  publication 
of  this  libel,  of  which  the  affected  civility  and  smooth 
irony  would  have  probably  not  deceived  a  legal  tribunal ; 
but  Pope  took  an  early  opportunity  of  exhibiting  its 
essence  in  a  form  still  more  striking,  more  lasting,  more 
brilliant,  and  to  himself  more  safe.  This  was  the  cha- 
racter of  Sporus  (in  the  Epistle  to  Arbuthnot,  published 
at  the  close  of  1734),  which,  injurious  and  unjust  as  it 
undoubtedly  is,  is  too  large  an  item  in  Lord  Hervey's 
history  to  be  omitted  even  from  this  sketch  :— 

P.  Let  Sporus  tremble — 

A.  What !  that  thing  of  silk  ? 
Sporus  !  that  mere  white  curd  of  ass's  milk  ? 
Satire  or  sense,  alas !  can  Sporus  feel  ? 
Who  breaks  a  butterfly  upon  a  wheel  ? 

'  London  '  had  sneered  at  "  Hervey's  jest,"  which  he  afterwards  changed 
to  "  Clodio's  jest." 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xliii 

P.  Yet  let  me  flap  this  bug  with  gilded  wings, 
This  painted  child  of  dirt  that  stinks  and  stings  ! 
Whose  buzz  the  witty  and  the  fair  annoys ; 
Yet  wit  ne'er  tastes  and  beauty  ne'er  enjoys  ; 
As  well-bred  spaniels  civilly  delight 
In  mumbling  of  the  game  they  dare  not  bite. 
Eternal  smiles  his  emptiness  betray, 
As  shallow  streams  run  dimpling  all  the  way. 
Whether  in  florid  impotence  he  speaks, 
And  as  the  prompter  breathes  the  puppet  squeaks ; 
Or  at  the  ear  of  EVE,  familiar  toad  ! 
Half  froth  half  venom  spits  himself  abroad, 
In  pun  or  politics,  or  tales,  or  lies, 
Or  spite,  or  smut,  or  rhymes,  or  blasphemies. 
His  wit  all  see -saw  between  that  and  this, 
Now  high,  now  low,  now  master  up,  now  miss, 
And  he  himself  one  vile  antithesis. 
Amphibious  thing  !  that  acting  either  part, 
The  trifling  head  or  the  corrupted  heart, 
Fop  at  the  toilet,  flatterer  at  the  board, 
Now  trips  a  lady,  and  now  struts  a  lord. 
Eve's  tempter  thus  the  rabbins  have  express'd, 
A  cherub's  face — a  reptile  all  the  rest ! 
Beauty  that  shocks  you,  parts  that  none  can  trust, 
Wit  that  can  creep,  and  pride  that  licks  the  dust !" 

Though  the  substance  and  many  of  the  sharpest 
points  of  this  bitter  invective  as  well  as  of  the  prose 
1  Letter '  were  originally  taken,  as  I  have  sa'id,  from 
Pulteney's  libel,  the  brilliancy  is  all  the  poet's  own ; 
and  it  is  impossible  not  to  admire,  however  we  may 
condemn,  the  art  by  which  acknowledged  wit,  beauty, 
and  gentle  manners — the  Queen's  favour — and  even  a 
valetudinary  diet,  are  travestied  into  the  most  odious 
defects  and  offences.  The  only  trait  perhaps  of  the 
whole  that  is  not  either  false  or  overcharged  is  Her- 
vey's  love  for  antithesis,  which  Pulteney  had  already 
ridiculed.  This  turn  he  seems  to  have  inherited  from 

d  2 


xliv  LORD  HERVEY' S  MEMOIRS. 

Lord  Bristol,  and  as  the  reader  of  the  Memoirs 
will  see,  it  was  habitual  in  both  his  writing  and  speak- 
ing. His  parliamentary  speeches  were,  as  Warton 
says,  very  far  above  "florid  impotence ;  but  they 
were  in  favour  of  the  Ministry,  and  that  was  suffi- 
ciently offensive  to  Pope."  Smollett  too,  led  away,  no 
doubt,  by  the  satirist,  calls  his  speeches  "pert  and 
frivolous."  Those  that  have  been  preserved  are  surely 
of  a  very  different  character ;  and  Tindal,  a  brother 
historian,  rather  reproaches  them  with  being  too  "grave 
and  solemn"  But  pert  speeches,  if  such  they  were,  and 
even  the  foppery  and  affectation  of  a  young  man  of 
fashion,  are  very  subordinate  offences,  while  that  more 
serious  defect,  which  might  have  been  really  charged 
upon  him,  and  which  was  strongly  hinted  at  in  the  un- 
published '  Letter' — laxity  of  moral  and  religious  prin- 
ciple— has  here  altogether — or  nearly  so — escaped  the 
censure  of  the  satirist.  Was  it  too  fashionable  and  too 
general — or  in  the  eyes  of  the  friend  of  Bolingbroke 
too  venial — to  be  made  an  object  of  reproach  ? 

The  poetical  war  slumbered,  as  far  as  we  know,  for 
some  years  on  the  part  of  Hervey,  while  Pope  took 
frequently  opportunities  of  insulting  both  him  and 
his  nearest  friends ;  particularly  in  the  satire  entitled 
' 1738,'  in  which  Hervey,  Stephen  and  Henry  Fox,  and 
even  the  deceased  Queen,22  were  grossly  or  severely 
handled;  but  at  last  in  1742  his  Lordship  produced  a 
poem  entitled,  '  The  Difference  between  Verbal  and 
Practical  Virtue,  exemplified  in  some  Instances  both 


22  See  the  two  allusions  to  the  Queen  in  this  poem  noticed,  post,  i.  473, 
n  9,  and  ii.  529,  n.  10. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xlv 

ancient  and  modern?  As  this  poem  was  not  noticed 
in  the  controversy  which  arose  some  years  since  on  the 
character  of  Pope,  and  as  it  is  now  very  scarce,  the 
reader  may  be  glad  to  see  a  specimen  of  the  last  serious 
effort  of  Lord  Hervey's  muse.  It  begins : — 

"  What  awkward  judgments  must  they  make  of  men 
Who  think  their  hearts  are  pictured  by  their  pen  ! 
Few  authors  tread  the  path  they  recommend, 
Or,  when  they  show  the  road,  pursue  the  end  ; 
Few  give  examples  where  they  give  advice, 
Or,  though  they  scourge  the  vicious,  shun  the  vice." 

The  ancient  instances  are  Horace,  Sallust,  and  Se- 
neca, whose  mean  personal  conduct  he  contrasts  with 
the  exalted  precepts  of  their  writings.  The  modern 
example,  and  that  for  whose  exposure  the  piece  is  evi- 
dently written,  is  Pope — whose  delight  it  is — 

"  To  cast  a  shadow  o'er  the  spotless  fame, 
Or  dye  the  cheek  of  innocence  with  shame  ; 
To  swell  the  breast  of  modesty  with  care, 
Or  force  from  beauty's  eye  a  secret  tear ; 
And,  not  by  decency  or  honour  sway'd, 
Libel  the  living  and  asperse  the  dead. 
Prone,  where  he  ne'er  received,  to  give  offence, 
But  most  averse  to  merit  and  to  sense  : 
Base  to  his  foe,  but  baser  to  his  friend  ; 
Lying  to  blame,  and  sneering  to  commend  : 
Then  let  him  boast  that  honourable  crime 
Of  making  those  who  fear  not  God,  fear  HIM, — 23 
When  the  great  honour  of  that  boast  is  such, 
That  hornets  and  mad  dogs  may  boast  as  much. 
Such  is  th'  injustice  of  his  daily  theme, 
And  such  the  lust  that  breaks  his  nightly  dream, 
That  vestal  fire  of  undecaying  hate, 
Which  time's  cold  tide  itself  can  ne'er  abate." 


23  "  Yes,  I  am  proud,  and  must  be  proud  to  see 

Those  not  afraid  of  God  afraid  of  me." — Pope. 


xlvi  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

This,  it  must  be  confessed,  is — as  to  the  strength  of 
the  bow,  whatever  we  may  think  of  the  venom  of  the 
shaft — impar  congressus  Achilli. 

Coxe,  Warton,  Bowles,  and  indeed  every  other 
writer  (except  Smollett),  make  a  generous  and  sub- 
stantially a  successful  defence  of  Lord  Hervey  against 
Pope's  malevolence ;  but  where  did  Coxe  find  that 
his  Lordship's  "manners  and  figure  were  highly  forbid- 
ding ?"  In  youth,  we  have  seen,  he  was  eminently  hand- 
some; and  Pope's  lines  which  so  prominently  allow 
him  that  quality  were  published  but  eight  years  before 
his  death.  It  is  true  that  in  1737,  only  two  years 
later,  the  old  Duchess  of  Marlborough,  who  had  now 
taken  a  mortal  aversion  to  him,  both  on  personal  and 
political  grounds,  gives  a  most  unfavourable  picture  of 
both  his  morals  and  appearance  : — 

"  Lord  Hervey  is  at  this  time  always  with  the  King  and  in 
vast  favour.  He  has  certainly  parts  and  wit,  but  is  the  most 
wretched  profligate  man  that  ever  was  born,  besides  ridicu- 
lous; a  painted  face,  and  not  a  tooth  in  Ms  head." — Opinions. 

Lord  Hailes,  who  published  the  Duchess's  Opinions, 
subjoins  to  the  foregoing  passage  this  note  : — 

"  Lord  Hervey  having  felt  some  attacks  of  epilepsy  entered 
upon  and  practised  a  very  strict  regimen,  and  thus  stopped  the 
progress  and  prevented  the  effects  of  that  dreadful  disease. 
His  daily  food  was  a  small  quantity  of  asses'  milk  and  a  flour 
biscuit ;  once  a  week  he  indulged  himself  with  eating  an  apple : 
he  used  emetics  daily.  Mr.  Pope  and  he  once  were  friends,  but 
they  quarrelled  and  persecuted  each  other  with  virulent  satire. 
Pope,  knowing  the  abstemious  regimen  which  Lord  Hervey  ob- 
served, was  so  ungenerous  as  to  call  him  '  a  mere  cheese  curd 
of  asses'  milk.'  Lord  Hervey  used  paint  to  soften  his  ghastly 
appearance.  Mr.  Pope  must  have  known  this  also,  and  there- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  xlvii 

fore  it  was  unpardonable  in  him  to  introduce  it  into  liis  cele- 
brated portrait." —  Opinions. 

It  is  possible — and  I  suppose  we  must  take  the 
angry  Duchess's  word  for  it — though  we  might  have 
hesitated  as  to  the  evidence  of  Pope's  poetical  epithets 
— that  to  paint  his  face  was  one  of  Lord  Hervey's 
fopperies,  or  it  may  have  been  practised,  as  Lord 
Hailes  suggests,  to  soften  the  traces  of  a  constitutional 
infirmity  which  he  was  naturally  anxious  to  conceal. 
However  that  may  be,  there  is  a  portrait  of  him  in  the 
last  years  of  his  life,  in  which  his  countenance  is  still 
very  handsome,  and  the  very  reverse  of  either  ghastly 
or  forbidding.  Lord  Hailes's  account  of  his  regimen 
is  an  exaggeration.  It  is  true  that  he  was  subject  to 
epilepsy,  and  in  a  letter  to  Stephen  Fox,  who,  having 
accompanied  him  in  his  sick  tour,  was  no  doubt  in  the 
secret,  he  gives  the  following  description  of  one  of  these 
attacks : — 

"St.  James's,  December  7,  1731. 

"  I  have  been  so  very  much  out  of  order  since  I  writ  last, 
that  going  into  the  Drawing  Room  before  the  King,  I  was  taken 
with  one  of  those  disorders  with  the  odious  name,  that  you  know 
happen'd  to  me  once  at  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields  play-house.  I  had 
just  warning  enough  to  catch  hold  of  somebody  (God  knows  who) 
in  one  side  of  the  lane  made  for  the  King  to  pass  through,  and 
stopped  till  he  was  gone  by.  I  recovered  my  senses  enough  im- 
mediately to  say,  when  people  came  up  to  me  asking  what  was 
the  matter,  that  it  was  a  cramp  took  me  suddenly  in  my  leg, 
and  (that  cramp  excepted)  that  I  was  as  well  as  ever  I  was  in 
my  life.  I  was  far  from  it ;  for  I  saw  everything  in  a  mist,  was 
so  giddy  I  could  hardly  walk,  which  I  said  was  owing  to  my 
cramp  not  quite  gone  off.  To  avoid  giving  suspicion  I  stayed 
and  talked  with  people  about  ten  minutes,  and  then  (the  Duke 
of  Grafton  being  there  to  light  the  King)  came  down  to  my 


xlviii  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

lodgings,  where  *  *  *  I  am  now  far  from  well,  but  better,  and 
prodigiously  pleased,  since  I  was  to  feel  this  disorder,  that  I  con- 
trived to  do  it  a  I'insu  de  tout  le  monde.  Mr.  Churchill  was 
close  by  me  when  it  happened,  and  takes  it  all  for  a  cramp. 
The  King,  Queen,  &c.  inquired  about  my  cramp  this  morning, 
and  laughed  at  it ;  I  joined  in  the  laugh,  said  how  foolish  an 
accident  it  was,  and  so  it  has  passed  off ;  nobody  but  Lady  Her- 
vey  (from  whom  it  was  impossible  to  conceal  what  followed) 
knows  anything  of  it." 

For  this  "  disorder "  he  naturally  adopted  the 
remedy  of  a  strict  regimen,  which,  though  not  quite  so 
strange  as  stated  by  Lord  Hailes,  is  sufficiently  curious. 
He  writes  to  his  physician,  Dr.  Cheyne,  the  celebrated 
advocate  for  vegetable  diet : — 

"  St.  James's,  December  9,  1 732. 

"  *  *  To  let  you  know  that  I  continue  one  of  your  most 
pious  votaries,  and  to  tell  you  the  method  I  am  in.  In  the  first 
place,  I  never  take  wine  nor  malt  drink,  or  any  liquid  but  water 
and  milk-tea ;  in  the  next,  I  eat  no  meat  but  the  whitest, 
youngest,  and  tenderest,  nine  times  in  ten  nothing  but  chicken, 
and  never  more  than  the  quantity  of  a  small  one  at  a  meal.  I 
seldom  eat  any  supper,  but  if  any,  nothing  absolutely  but  bread 
and  water ;  two  days  in  the  week  I  eat  no  flesh  ;  my  breakfast 
is  dry  biscuit  not  sweet,  and  green  tea  ;  I  have  left  off  butter 
as  bilious  ;  I  eat  no  salt,  nor  any  sauce  but  bread  sauce.  I  take 
a  Scotch  pill  once  a  week,  and  thirty  grains  of  Indian  root  when 
my  stomach  is  loaded,  my  head  giddy,  and  my  appetite" gone. 
I  have  not  bragged  of  the  persecutions  I  suffer  in  this  cause ; 
but  the  attacks  made  upon  me  by  ignorance,  impertinence,  and 
gluttony  are  innumerable  and  incredible." 

This  really  was  a  heroic  sacrifice  to  Hygseia ;  but  he 
had  to  undergo,  as  we  have  seen,  a  still  more  grievous 
martyrdom  for  his  abstinence,  in  Pope's  immortal 
satire. 

On  the  Queen's  death  he  displayed  his  sorrow  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE,  xlix 

his  scholarship  in  a  long  and  highly  eulogistic  epitaph 
in  Latin  and  in  English.  In  his  Letter  to  the  Doctor 
of  Divinity  he  pleads  that  he 

"  long 

Had  taken  leave  of  Greek  or  Latin  song, 
All  that  I  learned  from  Dr.  Friend  at  school, 
By  Gradus,  Lexicon,  or  grammar  rule, 
Has  quite  deserted  this  poor  John- Trot  head, 
And  left  plain  native  English  in  its  stead." 

This  Pope,  in  his  reply,  affected  to  believe,  and  ridi- 
culed very  successfully  his  Lordship's  confessed  want  of 
scholarship — but  in  truth  few  men  had  retained  more 
of,  at  least,  Latinity.  He  used  to  correspond  in  Latin 
with  Henry  Fox;  his  Epitaphium  Regince  Carolina 
was  approved  by  very  competent  scholars;  and  his 
correspondence  with  Dr.  Middleton  is  creditable  to 
his  classical  learning. 

It  was,  I  fear,  a  community  of  scepticism  that  pro- 
duced, about  1732,  an  intimate  acquaintance  and  lite- 
rary correspondence  between  Lord  Hervey  and  Dr. 
Middleton.  In  the  early  part  of  1735,  Hervey  having 
proposed  to  Middleton  some  questions  on  the  mode  of 
electing  the  Roman  Senate,  a  regular  discussion  of  that 
obscure  and  curious  question  ensued  between  them. 
Middleton  published  his  share  of  the  correspondence 
in  1747;  but  Lord  Bristol  would  not  permit  him 
to  include  Lord  Hervey's  letters.  The  complete 
correspondence  was,  however,  printed  in  1778,  from 
which  it  appears  that  Hervey  showed  himself  by 
no  means  Middleton's  inferior  in  the  classical  studies 
which  had  occupied  so  large  a  portion  of  the  Doctor's 
life.  Lord  Hervey  exerted  himself  with  large  success 


LOUT)  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

to  procure  subscribers  to  Middleton's  '  Life  of  Cicero ;' 24 
and  Middleton  showed  his  gratitude  by  dedicating  the 
work  to  his  patron  in  a  more  laboured  panegyric  than 
Hervey's  own  taste  approved,  and  for  which  Pope 
gladly  hitched  them  both  into  the  fourth  book  of  the 
Dunciad : — 

"  Narcissus,  praised  with  all  a  parson's  power, 
Look'd  a  white  lily  sunk  beneath  a  shower." 

This  sarcasm  was  the  last  blow  of  this  celebrated  con- 
flict, which  does  little  honour  to  Pope's  taste  or  truth, 
and  not  much  more  to  Lord  Hervey's  talents  or  temper. 

We  must  now  return  to  his  political  life.  The 
Memoirs  will  tell  all  that  is  known  of  it  up  to  the 
Queen's  death.  He  had  been  from  the  outset  dis- 
satisfied with  his  household  place  ;  and  the  loss  of  Her 
who  had  distinguished  him  with  peculiar  favour,  and 
to  whom  he  was  sincerely  attached,  rendered  it  addi- 
tionally irksome,  and  he  pressed  Walpole  for  a  change 
of  office,  but  without  any  immediate  effect.  Walpole 
felt  the  justice  of  his  claim,  and  had  resolved  to  bring 
him  into  the  Cabinet ;  but  was  met  by  a  long  and 
vigorous  opposition  from  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  who 
even  threatened  to  resign  rather  than  submit  to  so 
incompatible  a  colleague. 

During  this  suspense,  I  find  from  the  private  corre- 
spondence that  he  was  assiduous  in  his  attendance  in 
the  House  of  Lords,  and  we  have  in  the  Parl.  Hist. 
two  or  three  of  his  speeches  on  the  discussions  with 

24  It  has  been  said  (Park's  Noble  Authors,  iv.  186),  on  the  very  loose 
authority  of  Seward's  Anecdotes,  vol.  v.,  p.  78,  that  the  extracts  from 
Cicero's  Orations  in  Middleton's  Life  were  translated  by  Lord  Hervey ; 
but  his  correspondence  with  Middleton  (preserved  at  Ickworth)  com- 
pletely disproves  any  such  co-operation  :  so  do  Lady  Hervey's  Letters. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  li 

Spain.  On  ojne  of  those  occasions,  2nd  May,  1738,  "a 
party  of  Amazons,"  as  Lady  Mary  W.  Montagu  calls 
them,  headed  by  the  Duchesses  of  Queensberry  and 
Ancaster,  stormed  the  House  of  Lords,  and  disturbed 
the  debate,  "not  only  by  smiles  and  winks,  but  by 
noisy  laughs  and  apparent  contempts,  which  is  sup- 
posed," she  adds,  "to  be  the  true  reason  why  poor 
Lord  Hervey  spoke  so  miserably." 

At  length,  however,  Walpole  overcame  the  difficul- 
ties that  had  delayed  his  advancement,  and  in  April, 

1740,  Lord  Godolphin   was  made   Constable  of  the 
Tower,  and  Lord  Hervey  Privy  Seal  in  his  room. 

A  few  memoranda  made  on  his  entrance  into  this 
new  office  will  be  found  in  a  supplemental  chapter  to 
the  Memoirs ;  but  they  are  so  limited  as  to  have  little 
other  value  than  as  a  specimen  of  how  Cabinet  business 
was  transacted. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  Lord  Hervey 's  papers 
afford  us  no  further  insight  into  either  his  personal 
history  or  the  public  transactions  during  the  two  im- 
portant years  that  preceded  Walpole's  defeat.  The 
ministerial  and  parliamentary  intrigues  of  that  period 
would  have  been  exceedingly  curious  and  probably  im- 
portant— there  is  no  part  of  Walpole's  history  with 
which  we  are  now  so  imperfectly  acquainted  as  his  de- 
cline and  fall. 

On  the  assembling  of  a  new  Parliament  in  December, 

1741,  Sir  Robert  found  himself  in  repeated  minorities, 
and  was  forced  reluctantly  to  retire.     On  the  9th  of 
February  he  was  created  Earl  of  Orford,  and  on  the 
llth  resigned.     Horace  Walpole  attributes  his  fall  to 
the  treachery  of  his  colleagues,  and  particularly  of  New- 


lii  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

castle  ;  and  we  shall  see  in  the  following  pages  evidence 
enough  that  Sir  Robert  and  the  Duke  were  latterly  on 
very  uncomfortable  terms ;  but  Walpole  really  fell  be- 
cause, from  age,  indolence,  and  a  too  long  possession  of 
power,  he  was  ripe  for  falling.  He  would,  however, 
have  probably  fallen  somewhat  later,  if  the  heir-appa- 
rent had  not  "  lent  his  arm  to  shake  the  tree." 

Lord  Hervey  had  no  inclination,  it  appears,  to  fol- 
low him  in  his  retreat ;  and  two  long  letters  to  his 
father  (in  the  supplemental  chapter)  will  best  explain 
the  circumstances  under  which — after  a  long  and  vigor- 
ous struggle  either  to  keep  the  Privy  Seal  or  to  obtain 
some  satisfactory  equivalent  or  compensation  for  it — 
he  was,  on  the  12th  of  July,  at  length  dismissed,  and 
replaced  by  Lord  Gower — who,  from  being  almost  a 
Jacobite,  had  joined  the  Whig  coalition,  to  the  great 
scandal  of  all  the  Tories  and  the  mortification  of  at 
least  one  of  the  Whigs. 

This  reluctance  to  share  the  fate  of  his  patron  must 
have  seriously  offended  him ;  and  we  cannot  wonder 
that  Horace  Walpole's  Reminiscences  of  this  period, 
derived  from  Sir  Robert,  are  very  unfavourable  to 
Lord  Hervey. 

"  The  memorable  Lord  Hervey  had  dedicated  himself  to  the 
Queen,  and  certainly  towards  her  death  had  gained  great 
ascendance  with  her.  She  had  made  him  Privy  Seal ;  and  as 
he  took  care  to  keep  as  well  with  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  no  man 
stood  in  a  more  prosperous  light.  But  Lord  Hervey,  who 
had  handled  all  the  weapons  of  a  Court,  had  also  made  a  deep 
impression  on  the  heart  of  the  virtuous  Princess  Caroline ;  and 
as  there  was  a  mortal  antipathy  between  the  Duke  of  Grafton 
and  Lord  Hervey,  the  Court  was  often  on  the  point  of  being 
disturbed  by  the  enmity  of  the  favourites  of  the  two  Princesses. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  liii 

The  death  of  the  Queen  deeply  affected  her  daughter  Caro- 
line ;  and  the  change  of  the  ministry  four  years  after  dislodged 
Lord  Hervey,  whom,  for  the  Queen's  sake,  the  King  would  have 
saved,  and  who  very  ungratefully  satirized  the  King  in  a  bal- 
lad, as  if  he  had  sacrificed  him  voluntarily.  Disappointment, 
rage,  and  a  distempered  constitution  carried  Lord  Hervey  off, 
and  overwhelmed  his  Princess :  she  never  appeared  in  public 
after  the  Queen's  death,  and  being  dreadfully  afflicted  with  the 
rheumatism  never  stirred  out  of  her  apartment,  and  rejoiced  at 
her  own  dissolution  some  years  before  her  father." — Reminis. 

There  is  here  some  inaccuracy.  Lord  Hervey  was 
not,  as  we  have  seen,  made  Privy  Seal  by  the  Queen, 
nor  till  between  two  and  three  years  after  her  death ; 
nor  does  it  seem  that  he  handled  all  the  weapons 
of  a  courtier  with  any  great  advantage  to  himself, 
as  he  continued,  notwithstanding  his  high  favour  and 
very  distinguished  talents,  for  ten  years  in  the  same 
very  subordinate  station  in  which  he  had  begun.  The 
'  Ballad '  alluded  to  is  to  be  found,  under  the  title  of 
*  The  Patriots  are  come,'  in  '  The  foundling  Hospital 
for  Wit,'  and  was  reprinted  by  Lord  Dover  in 
H.  Walpole's  Letters  to  Mann,  i.  245.  Walpole  at 
first  doubted  from  the  negligence  of  the  style  whether 
it  was  Lord  Hervey 's ;  but  it  certainly  was.  It  rallies 
the  new  and  old  courtiers  very  much  in  the  spirit  in 
which  his  pamphlets  deal  with  them.  The  most  ori- 
ginal line  in  it  is  where  Carteret  is  made  to  say  of 
"  weathercock  Pulteney  "  that — 

"  To  cheat  such  a  colleague  demands  all  my  arts ; 
For,  though  he's  a  fool,  he's  a  fool  of  great  parts." 

The  ingratitude  to  the  King  on  this  occasion  was  not 
very  serious ;  for  in  truth  his  Majesty  is  treated  in  the 
ballad  with  hardly  more  freedom  than  in  Lord  Her- 


liv  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

vey's  direct  expostulations  pending  the  negotiation  for 
his  removal.  It  is,  however,  true  that  Lord  Hervey 
blames  him  unjustly  both  in  the  correspondence  and 
the  ballad  for  a  compliance  with  circumstances  which 
he  had  no  power  to  resist. 

I  do  not  find  any  ground,  beyond  Walpole's  asser- 
tion, for  imputing  his  death  in  any  degree  to  "  rage 
and  disappointment"  For  many  years  his  health  was 
so  bad,  that  the  only  wonder  is  that  he  had  lasted  so 
long.  He  was  very  ill  at  the  time  of  Walpole's  fall, 
and  the  crisis  seems  rather  to  have  revived  him.  In 
the  short  interval  between  his  dismissal  and  his  death 
he  distinguished  himself  by  exertions  both  in  Parlia- 
ment and  in  the  press,  equal,  if  not  superior,  to  any  he 
had  ever  made.  They  might  be  attributed  to  rage  and 
disappointment,  but  not  his  death. 

The  statement  as  to  the  Princess  Caroline  will  be 
elucidated  by  several  passages  in  the  Memoirs ;  but 
it  is  proper  to  observe  that  she  survived  her  mother 
twenty  years,  and  Lord  Hervey  fourteen ;  that  Wai- 
pole  himself — who  treats  the  Princess  Amelia,  in  after- 
life a  personal  friend  of  his  own,  with  so  much  freedom 
— negatives  the  suspicion  of  any  personal  impropriety  in 
the  attachment  of  the  amiable  and  "virtuous"  Caroline 
to  the  favourite  of  her  mother,  and  this  evidence  seems 
morally  confirmed  by  the  continued  affection  which  Lady 
Hervey  showed  for  the  Princess  after  her  Lord's  death. 

Of  his  private  life  after  the  change  of  ministry  I 
find  no  traces,  but  in  some  letters  to  his  old  friend  and 
associate  Lady  Mary  Wortley,25  then  at  Avignon  : — 

25  We  owe  their  preservation,  no  doubt,  to  an  incident  related  by  Lady 
Louisa  Stuart.    "  Lord  Ilervey  dying  a  few  years  after  Lady  Mary  settled 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  lv 

"  Kensington  Gravel  Pits,  May  20  (31),  1742. 

"  I  must  now  (since  you  take  so  friendly  a  part  in  what  con- 
cerns me)  give  you  a  short  account  of  my  natural  and  political 
health ;  and  when  I  say  I  am  still  alive,  and  still  Privy  Seal,  it 
is  all  I  can  say  for  the  pleasure  of  one  or  the  honour  of  the 
other ;  for  since  Lord  Orford's  retiring,  as  I  am  too  proud  to 
offer  my  service  and  friendship  where  I  am  not  sure  they  will 
be  accepted  of,  and  too  inconsiderable  to  have  those  advances 
made  to  me  (though  I  never  forgot  or  failed  to  return  any  obli- 
gation I  ever  received),  so  I  remain  as  illustrious  a  nothing  in 
this  office  as  ever  filled  it  since  it  was  erected.  There  is 
one  benefit,  however,  I  enjoy  from  this  loss  of  my  Court  in- 
terest, which  is,  that  all  those  flies  which  were  buzzing  about 
me  in  the  summer  sunshine  and  full  ripeness  of  that  interest, 
have  all  deserted  its  autumnal  decay,  and,  from  thinking  my 
natural  death  not  far  off  and  my  political  demise  already  over, 
have  all  forgot  the  deathbed  of  the  one  and  the  coffin  of  the 
other.  I  must  let  you  know,  too,  that  since  the  death  of  my 


abroad,  his  eldest  son  (George  Lord  Hervey)  sealed  up  and  sent  her  her 
letters  with  an  assurance  that  none  of  them  had  been  opened.  She  wrote  him 
a  letter  of  thanks  for  his  honourable  conduct,  adding  that  '  she  could  almost 
regret  he  had  not  glanced  his  eye  over  a  correspondence  which  would  have 
shown  him  what  so  young  a  man  might  perhaps  be  inclined  to  doubt — the 
possibility  of  a  long  and  steady  friendship  subsisting  between  two  persons 
of  different  sexes  without  the  least  mixture  of  love.'"  (Works,  i.  66.)  I 
presume  that  Lady  Mary  at  the  same  time  returned  a  considerable  number  of 
Lord  Hervey 's  which  are  at  Ickworth,  and  which  generally  are  (as  might 
be  expected  from  letters  so  preserved  and  so  returned)  of  the  same  platonic 
character — but  they  belong  only  to  the  last  fourteen  years  of  an  acquaint- 
ance that  had  lasted  almost  twice  as  long,  and  there  are  here  and  there  a 
few  phrases  of  a  freer  kind.  In  a  letter  of  his  (1737),  in  answer  to  one  of 
hers  in  which  she  seems  to  have  complained  that  she  was  too  old  to  inspire  a 
passion,  he,  after  a  compliment  to  her  charms  more  gallant  than  decorous, 
goes  on  to  say  :  "  I  should  think  anybody  a  great  fool  that  said  he  liked 
spring  better  than  summer  merely  because  it  is  further  from  autumn,  or 
that  they  loved  green  fruit  better  than  ripe  only  because  it  was  further  from 
being  rotten.  I  ever  did,  and  believe  ever  shall,  like  woman  best 

Just  in  the  noon  of  life — those  golden  days 
When  the  mind  ripens  ere  the  form  decays." 

Lady  Mary  was  full  ripe,  being  then  forty-seven — six  years  older  than  he. 
The  lines  are  from  a  poem  of  his  own. 


Ivi  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

mother26  and  my  mother-in-law,  my  circumstances  are  so  easy, 
or  rather  indeed  affluent,  that  with  regard  to  my  pecuniary  in- 
terest in  being  in  or  out,  I  am  as  indifferent  as  I  can  be  whether 
my  hat  is  laced  or  plain ;  and  with  regard  to  any  ambitious 
view,  almost  as  indifferent  from  age  and  infirmity  about  the 
honour  of  the  one  or  the  look  of  the  other." 

These  philosophical  and  self-denying  professions  are 
somewhat  inconsistent  with  the  strenuous  endeavours 
he  was  then  making  to  retain  office,  and  the  deep  re- 
sentment which  he  showed  at  the  loss  of  it. 

Smollett  says  that  "when  Lord  Hervey  and  Lord 
Gower  changed  places  they  changed  principles.  The 
first  was  hardened  into  a  sturdy  patriot;  the  other 
suppled  into  an  obsequious  courtier."  Lord  Hervey 
immediately  took  a  foremost  place  in  the  new  Opposi- 
tion, and  never,  it  seems,  spoke  better  nor  was  better 
heard.  He  opposed  the  New  Gin  Act  in  several 
speeches,  which  had  a  considerable  effect,  and  were 
separately  printed ;  and  Walpole  tells  us  that  on  the 
31st  March,  1743,  he  "spoke  for  an  hour  and  a 
half,  with  the  greatest  applause,  against  the  Hano- 
verians." He  wrote  also  two  able  pamphlets,  '  Mis- 
cellaneous Thoughts  on  the  present  Posture  of  Foreign 
and  Domestic  Affairs '  and  '  The  Question  stated  with 
regard  to  our  Army  in  Flanders?  The  first  is  a  very 
able  exposure  of  the  men  and  measures  of  the  new 
administration,  and  even  after  this  lapse  of  time  may 
be  still  read  with  interest. 

But  these  were  his  last  efforts.  On  the  15th  April, 
1 743,  he  writes  to  Lady  Mary : — 

26  Lady  Bristol  died  1st  May,  1741. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.  Ivii 

"  St.  James's  Square. 

"  I  have  been  confined  these  three  weeks  by  a  fever,  which 
is  a  sort  of  annual  tax  my  detestable  constitution  pays  to  our 
detestable  climate  at  the  return  of  every  spring ;  it  is  now  much 
abated,  though  not  quite  gone  off.  I  wrote  to  you  about  a 
month  ago,  to  tell  you  of  my  daughter's87  marriage  to  the 
Duchess  of  Buckingham's  grandson ;  I  gave  her  but  3000/., 
for  which  she  has  1200/.  per  annum  jointure,  and  the  other 
settlements  in  proportion.  The  Duchess  of  Buckingham  is 
since  dead,  by  which  my  son-in-law  is  come  into  a  great  inherit- 
ance. She  has  left  me  Buckingham  House  with  all  the  furni- 
ture and  all  her  plate  for  my  life,  but  I  am  so  well  lodged  where 
I  am  that  I  have  no  thoughts  of  removing.  Adieu !  my  head 
is  still  so  weak  that  it  turns  round  with  what  I  have  written.  I 
will  write  again  when  I  grow  stronger.  The  public  affairs  are 
in  a  strange  posture  ;  and  I  believe  you  know  as  much  of  them 
where  you  are,  and  what  we  would  be  at,  as  any  minister  in  the 
cabinet.  I  am  sure  I  know  no  more  than  if  I  had  been  born  an 
idiot." 

The  following  is  the  last  letter  of  this  correspond- 
ence, and,  judging  by  the  date  as  well  as  by  the  feeble- 
ness and  tremor  of  the  hand,  was  evidently  one  of  the 
last  he  ever  wrote  : — 

"  Ick worth  Park,  June  18,  1743. 

"  The  last  stages  of  an  infirm  life  are  filthy  roads,  and  like 
all  other  roads  I  find  the  farther  one  goes  from  the  capital  the 
more  tedious  the  miles  grow  and  the  more  rough  and  disagree- 
able the  way.  I  know  of  no  turnpikes  to  mend  them ;  medi- 
cine pretends  to  be  such,  but  doctors  who  have  the  management 
of  it,  like  the  commissioners  for  most  other  turnpikes,  seldom 
execute  what  they  undertake  :  they  only  put  the  toll  of  the  poor 
cheated  passenger  in  their  pockets,  and  leave  every  jolt  at  least 
as  bad  as  they  found  it,  if  not  worse.  '  May  all  your  ways  (as 
Solomon  says  of  wisdom)  be  ways  of  pleasantness,  and  all  your 

27  Lepell,  his  eldest  daughter,  married  to  Mr.  Constantine  Phipps,  after- 
wards Lord  Mulgrave :  "a  fine  black  girl,"  says  H.  Walpole,  "but  as 
masculine  as  her  father  ought  to  be." — Lett.  7  January,  1742. 

VOL.  i.  e 


Iviii  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

paths  peace ;'  and  when  your  dissolution  must  come,  may  it 
be  like  that  of  your  lucky  workman.88     Adieu  ! " 

On  the  8th  August,  1743,  he  died ;  and  his  death 
was  thus  recorded  in  the  i  London  Magazine :' — 

"  Died. — The  Right  Honourable  John  Lord  Hervey,  late 
Lord  Privy  Seal,  and  eldest  son  of  the  Earl  of  Bristol ;  a 
famous  speaker  in  Parliament  under  the  late  administration 
and  in  the  Opposition  to  the  present." 

With  regard  to  one  who  deals  so  freely  with  the 
actions  and  motives  of  others,  and  who  is  likely  to 
become  an  historical  authority,  I  have  thought  it  my 
duty  and  have  endeavoured  to  bring  before  my  readers, 
with  perfect  impartiality,  all  the  circumstances  that 
seemed  most  likely  to  guide  them  to  a  true  appreciation 
of  his  own  character — I  have  submitted  to  them  the 
grounds  upon  which  any  opinion  of  mine  could  be 
formed,  and  I  shall  therefore  not  further  venture  to 
anticipate  their  judgment  of  the  man,  than  to  remind 
them  that  almost  all  we  know  of  him  has  been  trans- 
mitted by  the  ablest  and  bitterest  personal  and  political 
enemies,  whose  charges  are  obviously  and  assuredly 
liable  to  large  abatements ;  while  on  the  other  side 
we  have  the  accidental  and  less  detailed,  but  infi- 
nitely more  important,  evidence  of  the  undeviating 
approbation  and  affection  of  his  excellent  father,  and 
the  fond  and  long-enduring  attachment  to  his  person 
and  his  memory  of  his  admirable  wife. 

Lord  Bristol  survived  this  deeply-felt  loss  to  the  20th 
January,  1751 ;  and  Lady  Hervey  to  the  2nd  Septem- 
ber, 1768. 

28  Lady  Mary  was  altering  an  old  mill  near  Avignon  into  a  kind  of 
Belvedere,  and  I  suppose  one  of  her  workmen  had  died  in  some  enviable 
way. 


PREFATORY  NOTICE.  lix 

It  is  now  necessary  to  add  a  few  words  upon  the 
Memoirs  themselves. 

Lord  Hervey  himself  fairly  admits  that  impartiality 
in  such  cases  as  his  is  not  to  be  expected,  and  he  jus- 
tifies that  confession  to  its  fullest  extent ;  but  though 
we  see  that  his  colouring  may  be  capricious  and  exag- 
gerated— no  one  can  feel  the  least  hesitation  as  to  the 
substantial  and,  as  to  mere  facts,  the  minute  accuracy  of 
his  narrative.  He  may,  and  I  have  no  doubt  too  often 
does,  impute  a  wrong  motive  to  an  act,  or  a  wrong  mean- 
ing to  a  speech ;  but  we  can  have  no  doubt  that  the  act 
or  the  speech  themselves  are  related  as  he  saw  and  heard 
them :  and  there  are  many  indications  that  the  greater 
part  was  written  from  day  to  day  as  the  events  occurred. 

I  know  of  no  such  near  and  intimate  picture  of  the 
interior  of  a  court ;  no  other  memoirs  that  I  have  ever 
read  bring  us  so  immediately,  so  actually  into  not 
merely  the  presence,  but  the  company  of  the  personages 
of  the  royal  circle.  Lord  Hervey  is,  may  I  venture 
to  say,  almost  the  Boswell  of  George  II.  and  Queen 
Caroline — but  Boswell  without  his  good  nature.  He 
seems  to  have  taken — perhaps  under  the  influence  of 
that  "  wretched  health  "  of  which  he  so  frequently  com- 
plained— a  morbid  view  of  mankind,  and  to  have  had 
little  of  the  milk  of  human  kindness  in  his  temper. 

In  a  '  Satire '  of  his,  '  after  the  manner  of  Persius,' 
in  Dodsley's  Collection,  we  find  the  commonplace  in- 
vectives against  mankind,  sharpened  with  something 
of  more  personal  misanthropy : — 

"  Mankind  I  know,  their  nature  and  their  art, 
Their  vice  their  own,  their  virtue  but  a  part 
111  played  so  oft,  that  all  the  cheat  can  tell, 
And  dangerous  only  when  'tis  acted  well." 

e2 


Ix  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

And,  after  a  long  tirade  in  this  style,  he  adds : — 

"  To  such  reflections  when  I  turn  my  mind, 
/  loathe  my  being,  and  abhor  mankind" 

And,  in  fact,  whether  in  his  jeux  d'esprit,  his  graver 
verses,  his  pamphlets,  or  his  memoirs,  satire — perhaps 
I  might  say  detraction — seems  to  have  been,  as  with 
Horace  Walpole,  the  natural  bias  of  his  mind.  There 
is,  I  think,  in  all  his  writings,  no  one  of  whom  he 
speaks  uniformly  and  heartily  well,  or  to  whom  he  is 
willing  to  allow  a  good  motive  for  anything  they  say  or 
do,  but  his  father  and  the  Princess  Caroline.  It  must 
be  owned  few  others  of  his  personages  deserved  it  so 
well:  but  the  result  is  that  all  his  portraits,  not  ex- 
cepting even  his  own,  are  of  the  Spagnoletto  school. 

A  more  impartial  painter  might,  without  concealing 
or  extenuating  the  prejudices,  frailties,  or  faults  of 
George  II.,  have  allowed  him  honour,  honesty,  truth, 
good  intentions,  and  substantial  good  sense.  I  do  not 
mean  to  say  that  Lord  Hervey  deviates  in  any  parti- 
cular from  truth,  or  even  exaggerates  the  King's  de- 
fects ;  but  the  sketches  of  his  Majesty's  character  which 
we  have  by  Lords  Chesterfield  and  Waldegrave  and 
Lady  M.  W.  Montagu,  all  close  and  certainly  not  par- 
tial observers,  seem  to  prove  that  Lord  Hervey  had  a 
strong  personal  dislike  to  the  King,  and  has  done 
scanty  justice  to  his  good  qualities. 

I  also  cannot  but  think  that,  had  he  not  been  so 
deeply  prejudiced  against  Frederick  Prince  of  Wales, 
the  character  of  the  Queen — the  person  whom  of  all 
others  he  seems  disposed  to  treat  most  favourably— 
would  have  appeared  in  more  amiable  colours.  Lord 
Hervey  gives  us  (may  I  not  say  ?)  an  odious  and  un- 


PREFATORY  NOTICE.  Ixi 

natural  picture  of  the  animosity  of  a  mother  against 
her  son,  without  explaining  in  any  way  its  original 
cause,  and  often,  I  think,  omitting,  perhaps  disguising, 
some  recurrence  of  maternal  feeling.  In  what  way 
Prince  Frederick  had  at  first  (and  even,  as  it  seems, 
before  he  came  to  England)  alienated  the  affection  of 
his  parents,  no  one  has  yet  guessed ;  and  these  Memoirs, 
which  so  strongly  exhibit  the  animosity,  aiford  (con- 
trary to  Lord  Hailes's  expectation)  nothing  like  a  suf- 
ficient reason  for  it.  After  he  came  to  England,  and 
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Opposition,  we  see  abundant 
causes  of  estrangement,  and  yet  even  then  not  enough 
to  justify  such  extreme  resentment  as  the  Memoirs 
ascribe,  and  no  doubt  truly,  to  the  parents.  There 
is  a  circumstance,  however,  which  may  have  influenced 
the  later  stages  of  the  quarrel,  which  Lord  Hervey 
does  not  notice,  and  to  which,  but  for  his  silence,  I 
should  be  inclined  to  attribute  some  influence. 

There  was  published  in  the  year  1735  a  small  volume 
called  '  Histoire  du  Prince  Titi:  A\llegorie~\  R\pyale'].'> 
Two  translations  of  it,  under  the  title  of  '  The  History 
of  Prince  Titi,  a  royal  allegory,  in  three  parts:  with  an 
Essay  on  Allegorical  Writing,  and  a  Key,  by  the  Hon. 
Mrs.  Stanley,'  were  advertised  in  February,  1736. 
In  this  work  (as  is  stated  in  the  last  edition  of  Bos- 
well's  Johnson,  p. 461,  n. 4),  "amidst  the  puerility  and 
nonsense  of  a  very  stupid  fairy  tale,  it  is  clear  enough 
that,  under  the  names  of  Prince  Titi,  King  Ginguet,  and 
Queen  Tripasse,aYe  meant  Prince  Frederick,  George II., 
and  Queen  Caroline ;"  and  to  this  I  may  add  that 
the  title  Allegorie  Royale  and  portraits,  not  to  be  mis- 
taken, of  the  two  Walpoles29  as  ministers  of  Ginguet, 

*°  For  instance,  the  following  description  of  old  Horace  might  pass  for  a 


Ixii  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

and  allusions  to  the  younger  brother,  and  even  to  the 
important  secret  of  the  design  of  placing  him  on 
the  throne,30  leave  no  doubt  as  to  what  was  meant 
— wherever  there  is  any  meaning.  Those  acquainted 
with  the  lingua  balatronica,  or  vulgar  dictionary  of 
France,  know  that  the  application  of  the  term  Gin- 
guet  to  the  King  and  of  Tripasse  to  the  Queen  were 
gross  personal  insults,  and,  from  a  combination  of  cir- 
cumstances, peculiarly  so  to  the  Queen.31  The  French 
author  to  whom  this  work  is  attributed,  one  Themiseul 
de  St.  Hyacinthe,  was  what  is  called  a  bookseller's 
hack,  and  it  is  known  that  he  spent  the  couple  of  years 
immediately  preceding  the  publication  in  London, 
where,  no  doubt,  this  absurd  but  offensive  romance  was 
concocted.  I  know  of  no  copy  in  England  of  the  origi- 
nal French  but  one  in  the  British  Museum,  and  that  is 
of  only  the  first  of  three  parts.32  My  best  diligence 

translation  of  what  Lord  Hervey  says  of  him,  post,  5.  324 : — "  On  chargea 
de  cet  ambassade  le  frere  du  Premier  Ministre.  Ce  frere  etoit  un  echappe 
de  paysan.  II  avoit  etc  employe  en  differens  negotiations  par  le  credit  du 
Ministre  ;  mais  il  n'avoit  fait  qu'ajouter  k  sa  rusticite  naturelle  1'arrogance 
que  donnent  les  grandes  places.  II  faisoit  le  gausseur  et  le  diseur  de  bon 
mots.  Ce  n'etoient  que  des  grossieretes  qu'on  lui  passoit  k  causes  de  ses 
emplois,  et  que  ne  servoient  qu'k  rendre  sa  personne  plus  meprisable." 

30  "  La  Reine  etait  desesperee  de  voir  qu'elle  n'osait  tenter  de  faire 
publiquement  declarer  Titi  dechu  de  ses  droits  k  la  couronne  pour  la  faire 
passer  sur  la  tete  de  son  frere  cadet  quoigue  I'acte  en  fut  formellement 
dresse."     See  the  explanation  of  this  passage  post,  ii.  417. 

31  Ginguet  means,  in  its  different  applications,  sour,  short,  or  shabby. 
Tripasse  I  can  only  venture  to  explain  by  saying  that  it  is  equivalent  to 
the  coarsest  term  that  Prince  Henry  gives,  in  one  of  the  tavern  scenes 
(1  Hen.  IV.  ii.  4),  to  the  obesity  of  Falstaff. 

32  There  is  a   perfect  copy  in  the  national  library  in  Paris ;  and  the 
whole  of  this  tedious  and  nearly  unintelligible  stuff  is  reprinted,  to  the 
extent  of  six  or  seven  hundred  octavo  pages,  in  the  Cabinet  des  Fees  (Paris, 
1784-6)    under  the  notion  that  St.  Hyacinthe's  work  was  really  meant 
for  a  fairy  tale,  and  it  has  been  abridged  in  at  least  one  later  collection 
into  about  thirty  pages,  containing  all  of  the  original  which  has  any  resem- 
blance to  a  Fairy  tale.     I  know  not  whether  there  ever  was  any  genuine 
child's  story,  under  the  title  of  Prince  Titi,  on  which  Prince  Frederick  or 


PREFATORY  NOTICE.  Ixiii 

has  not  been  able  to  find  either  of  the  English  trans- 
lations, and  I  am  therefore  inclined  to  suspect  the 
whole  were  bought  up.  We  are  told  (Park's  *  Noble 
Authors,'  i.  171)  that  '  MS.  Memoirs  of  his  own 
Time,'  written  by  Prince  Frederick,  under  the  name 
of  Prince  Titi — perhaps  the  original  of  the  work  before 
published,  or  a  continuation  or  amplification  of  it — 
were,  after  the  Prince's  death,  given  up  by  the  exe- 
cutors of  Ralph,  his  secretary,  to  the  Princess-Dow- 
ager. But  whatever  the  manuscript  may  have  been, 
it  is  certain  that  the  printed  book  exists ;  and  if  the 
King — and  above  all  the  Queen — knew  of  it  (and  can 
we  doubt  that  they  did  ?),  they  must  have  resented 
in  the  highest  degree  a  libel,  of  which  the  "  stupidity 
and  childish  absurdity "  would  not,  to  them  at  least, 
have  counterbalanced  its  indecency  and  insult.  I  am 
surprised  at  finding  no  allusion  whatsoever  to  this  work 
in  Lord  Hervey's  Memoirs ;  for  I  should  have  supposed 
that  he — curious  in  literary  scandal — must  have  known 
it.  He  may  perhaps  have  had  some  special  motive  for 
not  alluding  to  it ;  or  perhaps  his  notice  of  it  may  have 
occurred  in  one  of  the  passages  relating  to  the  dissen- 
sions of  the  Royal  Family  which  have  been  destroyed. 
All  this,  however,  I  submit  to  my  readers'  judgment, 
as  the  best — though  still  a  very  unsatisfactory — con- 
jecture I  can  make  on  this  mysterious  subject. 

In  another  point  also  these  Memoirs  give  an  impres- 
sion as  to  Queen  Caroline  very  injurious  to  her  cha- 

St.  Hyacinthe  embroidered  the  Allegoric  Hoi/ale.  I  have  not  discovered 
any.  It  is  observable  that  when  the  editor  of  the  Cabinet  des  Fees  adopted 
this  as  a  fairy  tale,  he  changed  the  offensive  name  given  in  the  original  to 
the  Queen  from  Tripasse  to  Tripalle,  and  the  subsequent  editor  omitted  the 
name  altogether. 


Ixiv  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

racter — and  which,  if  truth  is  ever  to  be  veiled,  might 
have  been  spared  on  this  occasion.  The  general  fact  is 
from  many  other  sources  too  notorious,  but  the  details 
are  odious.  The  motive  which  Lord  Hervey,  Horace 
Walpole,  and  Lord  Chancellor  King  suggest  for  the 
Queen's  complaisance — that  she  did  it  to  preserve  her 
power  over  her  husband — would  be,  in  truth,  the  reverse 
of  an  excuse.  But  may  not  a  less  selfish  motive  be  sug- 
gested ?  What  could  she  have  done  ?  The  immoralities 
of  kings  have  been  always  too  leniently  treated  in  public 
opinion ;  and  in  the  precarious  possession  which  the 
Hanoverian  family  were  thought  to  have  of  the  throne 
until  the  failure  of  the  rebellion  of  1745 — could  the 
Queen  have  prudently  or  safely  taken  measures  of 
resistance,  which  must  have  at  last  ended  in  separation 
or  divorce,  or  at  least  a  scandal  great  enough,  perhaps, 
to  have  overthrown  her  dynasty ;  and  in  such  a  course 
her  prudery,  as  it  might  have  been  called,  would  pro- 
bably have  met  little  sympathy  in  those  dissolute  times. 
But  even  in  this  case  we  must  regret  that  she  had  not 
devoured  her  own  humiliation  and  sorrow  in  absolute 
silence,  and  submitted  discreetly,  and  without  con- 
fidants, to  what  she  could  not  effectually  resist.  But 
neither  the  selfish  motives  imputed  by  former  writers, 
nor  the  extenuating  circumstance  of  expediency  which  I 
thus  venture  to  suggest,  can  in  any  degree  excuse  the 
indulgence  and  even  encouragement  given,  as  we  shall 
see,  on  her  death-bed  to  the  King's  vices ;  and  we  are 
forced,  on  the  whole,  to  conclude  that  moral  delicacy 
as  well  as  Christian  duty  must  have  had  very  little  hold 
on  either  her  mind  or  heart.  I  have  ventured  to  say 
(post,  vol.  ii.  p.  528)  that  "  she  had  read  and  argued 


PREFATORY  NOTICE.  Ixv 

herself  into  a  very  low  and  cold  species  of  Christian- 
ity ;"  but  Lord  Chesterfield  (who,  however,  personally 
disliked  her)  goes  rather  farther,  and  says, — "  After 
puzzling  herself  with  all  the  whimsies  and  fantastical 
speculations  of  different  sects,  she  fixed  herself  ulti- 
mately in  deism — believing  in  a  future  state.  Upon 
the  whole  the  agreeable  woman  was  liked  by  most 
people,  while  the  Queen  was  neither  esteemed,  beloved, 
nor  trusted  by  any  one  but  the  King." 

In  the  general  aspect  of  the  Memoirs,  the  first  thing 
that  will  strike  every  reader  conversant  with  the  his- 
tory of  the  time  is,  their  extraordinary  coincidence 
with  and  confirmation  of  Horace  Walpole's  Reminis- 
cences, Letters,  and  Memoirs.  I  have  long  balanced 
on  the  question  whether  Walpole  had  seen  these  Me- 
moirs. We  are  told  by  Mr.  Bowles  that  Mr.  Hans 
Stanley  had  read  them.  This  is  very  probable.  Mr. 
Stanley  was  a  particular  friend  of  Lady  Hervey's, 
but  not  more  so  than  Walpole ;  and  I  do  not  think 
she  would  have  refused  the  son  of  Sir  Robert  an 
indulgence  which  she  allowed  to  Mr.  Stanley ;  parti- 
cularly as  she  must  certainly  have  contributed  to  the 
'  Royal  and  Noble  Authors '  the  list  of  Lord  Hervey's 
works  in  which  the  Memoirs  are  mentioned.  It  is 
also  to  be  remarked  that  the  anecdotes  of  these  Me- 
moirs and  the  Reminiscences  are  so  frequently  iden- 
tical, or  differing  only  by  such  slight  variations,  as  to 
create  a  strong  impression  that  they  must  have  been 
derived  from  the  same  source.  On  the  other  hand, 
it  must  be  recollected  that  Horace  professes  to  have 
heard  all  those  matters  from  Sir  Robert — from  whom 

VOL.  i.  / 


LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS. 

also  Lord  Hervey  heard  the  most  of  what  he  did  not 
himself  see  and  to  whom  he  repeated  all  that  he  had 
in  Sir  Robert's  absence  observed  ;  and  there  are  some 
instances  in  which  the  narratives  differ,  without  contra- 
dicting each  other,  in  circumstances  which  could  hardly 
have  varied  if  Horace  had  been  copying  Hervey.  But 
whichever  way  our  opinions  may  incline  upon  this 
point,  the  result  must  be  to  confer  on  Walpole's 
anecdotes  much  more  credit  for  authenticity  and 
accuracy  than  they  have  hitherto  had.  I  for  one  must 
confess,  that  most  of  my  former  doubts  of  Walpole's 
accuracy  have  been  entirely  removed  by  Lord  Hervey's 
Memoirs ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  some 
things  in  the  Memoirs  which  I  should  have  deemed 
incredible,  if  we  had  not  been  in  some  measure  prepared 
for  them  by  the  previous  revelations  of  Walpole. 


Of  my  own  small  share  in  the  following  pages  I  have 
little  to  say.  My  notes  may  to  different  readers  appear 
too  many,  or  too  few,  or  not  of  the  right  sort ;  but  they 
are  such  as  I  thought  might  be  convenient  to  an 
ordinary  reader,  and  as  I  myself  would  have  been  glad 
to  find  in  a  publication  of  this  kind — errors  of  course 
excepted,  of  which  I  fear  there  may  be  more  than  I 
have  corrected  in  the  errata.  I  have  not  deemed  it 
my  duty  to  excuse,  controvert,  or  enforce  my  author's 
statements  or  opinions,  though  I  hope  I  shall  be  for- 
given for  having  in  a  few  special  instances  ventured  to 
point  out  a  mistake  or  endeavoured  to  correct  an 
injustice  ;  but,  as  a  general  rule,  I  have  attempted  illus- 
tration rather  than  comment. 

J.  W.  C. 


of  Lord  Hervey 
fourt  of  Of  letter  to  his  Mother. 


of  OL Portion  of  Lord  Harvey  #  Memoirs, 
the  death  of  the 


jc  . 


(Hs~tJL 


J 


WLM^rnn*        A* 

'      /bt  <fi       ^/  ' 

W     (/.    i^si^-ru^ 

-      (rvUI 


r\\ 

V    / 


I 

a*, 


HA, 


y     a 
^t^ixr-  ft-f*~ 


/7^_ 


SOME    MATERIALS 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN 


KING  GEORGE  THE  SECOND. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Introduction — State  and  Views  of  Parties  at  the  death  of  George  I. :  Whigs, 
Tories,  Hanoverians,  Jacobites — Characters  of  Pulteney,  Bolingbroke, 
Wai  pole,  and  Wyndham. 

BOASTING  of  intelligence  and  professing  impartiality  are 
such  worn-out  prefaces  to  writings  of  this  kind,  that  I 
shall  not  trouble  my  readers  nor  myself  with  any  very 
long  exordium  upon  these  topics  5  all  I  shall  say  for  my 
intelligence  is,  that  I  was  lodged  all  the  year  round  in 
the  Court,1  during  the  greater  part  of  these  times  con- 
cerning which  I  write ;  and  as  nobody  attended  more 
constantly  in  public,  or  had  more  frequent  access  at 
private  hours  to  all  the  inhabitants,  I  must  have  been 
deaf  and  blind  not  to  have  heard  and  seen  several  little 
particularities  which  must  necessarily  be  unknown  to 
such  of  my  contemporaries  as  were  only  acquainted 

1  He  means,  that  while  most  of  the  royal  household  waited  periodically, 
his  attendance  was  constant.  The  apartments  in  the  Palaces  assigned  to  the 
members  of  the  Household  were  called  lodgings, 

VOL.  I.  B 


2  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAV.  I. 

with  the  chief  people  of  this  Court  in  the  theatrical 
pageantry  of  their  public  characters,  and  never  saw 
them  when  that  mask  of  constraint  and  hypocrisy,  es- 
sential to  their  stations,  was  enough  thrown  off  for  some 
natural  features  to  appear. 

As  to  my  being  partial,  whatever  professions  I  make 
to  disclaim  it  can  be  of  no  weight,  since  whoever  is  so 
must  always  be  it,  either  without  knowing  or  without 
owning  it.  To  confess  it  would  be  to  defeat  the  purpose 
for  which  they  are  so.  But  as  it  is  generally  flattery 
or  interest  which  makes  people  either  partial  or  dis- 
honest in  their  reports,  I  am  certainly  under  neither  of 
these  influences,  as  it  will  be  impossible  for  me  to  pub- 
lish these  memoirs  whilst  I  live,  and  consequently  I 
should  gain  no  advantage  from  my  hostility  nor  reap 
any  reward  for  my  flattery.  Those  who  expect  I  should 
be  very  choice  in  my  language  or  methodical  in  my 
arrangement,  will  be  extremely  mistaken,  for  I  seek 
rather  to  please  people's  curiosity  than  to  promote  my 
own  reputation ;  to  inform  rather  than  to  be  praised ; 
and  shall  set  things  of  public  and  of  private,  national  and 
personal,  foreign  and  domestic  concern,  promiscuously 
down  just  as  they  occur,  without  troubling  myself  about 
the  accuracy  of  the  style  in  which  I  relate  them,  or  the 
chronological  exactness  in  which  I  range  them. 

The  things  that  might  be  commonly  known  I  shall 
conclude  too  are  so,  and  may  therefore  perhaps  often 
neglect  reciting  what  is  as  public  as  the  contents  of  a 
gazette,  though  it  might  be  thought  necessary  to  illus- 
trate the  accounts  I  shall  give  of  more  private  trans- 
actions, and  connect  little  incidents  less  likely  to  be  in- 
serted in  all  other  records  of  this  reign. 


1727.  INTRODUCTION.  3 

As  to  the  disagreeable  egotisms  with  which  almost 
all  memoir- writers  so  tiresomely  abound,  I  shall  endea- 
vour to  steer  as  clear  of  them  as  I  can,  and  whenever  I 
must  give  into  them,  I  shall  have  recourse  to  the  old 
refuge  of  speaking  always  of  myself  in  the  third  person, 
in  order  to  make  them  less  glaring,  and  to  prevent  the 
natural  imputation  of  pursuing  the  thread  of  my  history 
of  others,  only  from  a  foolish  vanity  and  impertinent 
desire  of  troubling  the  world  with  my  own,  which,  in- 
deed, would  be  of  as  little  use  to  me  as  to  my  readers, 
and  conduce  no  more  to  my  profit  than  to  their  enter- 
tainment. I  leave  those  ecclesiastical  heroes  of  their 
own  romances — De  Retz  and  Burnet — to  aim  at  that 
useless  imaginary  glory  of  being  thought  to  influence 
every  considerable  event  they  relate  ;  and  I  very  freely 
declare  that  my  part  in  this  drama  was  only  that  of  the 
Chorus's  in  the  ancient  plays,  who,  by  constantly  being 
on  the  stage,  saw  everything  that  was  done,  and  made 
their  own  comments  upon  the  scene,  without  mixing 
in  the  action  or  making  any  considerable  figure  in  the 
performance. 

Thus  much  I  thought  it  right  to  say  with  regard  to 
what  I  propose  in  undertaking  this  work  and  the  man- 
ner in  which  I  intend  to  pursue  it ;  and  as  factions  and 
party  have  in  all  ages  been  the  principal  engine  in  all 
governments,  and  as  they  are  generally  of  most  force 
where  the  state  is  most  free,  I  think  it  will  not  be  im- 
proper to  add  to  this  exordium  a  short  account  of  the 
factions  and  parties  subsisting  in  England  at  the  era  I 
have  chosen  for  the  commencement  of  these  memoirs. 


B  2 


LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  I. 


WHIG  and  TORY  had  been  the  denominations  by 
which  men  opposite  in  their  political  views  had  distin- 
guished themselves  for  many  years  and  through  many 
reigns.  Those  who  were  called  Whigs  had  been  in 
power  from  the  first  accession  of  the  Hanover  Family 
to  the  Crown ;  but  the  original  principles  on  which  both 
these  parties  were  said  to  act,  altered  so  insensibly  in 
the  persons  who  bore  the  names,  by  the  long  prosperity 
of  the  one,  and  the  adversity  of  the  other,  that  those 
who  called  themselves  Whigs  arbitrarily  gave  the  title  of 
Tory  to  every  one  who  opposed  the  measures  of  the 
administration,  or  whom  they  had  a  mind  to  make  dis- 
agreeable at  Court ;  whilst  the  Tories  (with  more  jus- 
tice) reproached  the  Whigs  with  acting  on  those  very 
principles  and  pushing  those  very  points  which,  to 
ingratiate  themselves  with  the  people  and  to  assume  a 
popular  character,  they  had  at  first  set  themselves  up  to 
explode  and  abuse. 

The  two  chief  characteristics  of  the  Tories  originally 
were  the  maintenance  of  the  prerogative  of  the  Crown 
and  the  dignity  of  the  Church ;  both  which  they  pre- 
tended were  now  become,  if  not  by  profession,  at  least 
by  practice,  much  more  the  care  of  the  Whigs.  Nor 
were  the  Whigs  quite  innocent  of  this  imputation ;  long 
service  and  favour  had  gradually  taught  them  a  much 
greater  complaisance  to  the  Crown  than  they  had  for- 
merly paid  to  it,  and  the  power  of  the  Crown  beiog  an 
engine  at  present  in  their  own  hands,  they  were  not  very 
reluctant  to  keep  up  an  authority  they  exercised,  and 
support  the  prerogative  which  was  their  own  present 
though  precarious  possession.  The  assistance  likewise 


1727.  WHIG  AND  TORY.  5 

which  the  Whigs  in  power  had  received  from  the  bench 
of  bishops  in  parliamentary  affairs,  had  made  them  show 
their  gratitude  in  return,  by  supporting  both  them 
and  the  inferior  clergy  in  all  ecclesiastical  concerns  (ex- 
cept the  suffering  the  Convocation  to  sit),  with  as  much 
vigour  and  firmness  as  the  most  zealous  of  those  who  are 
called  the  Church  Party  could  have  done.  The  increase 
of  the  army  and  civil  list,  the  repeated  suspension  of  the 
Habeas  Corpus  Act,  and  frequent  votes  of  credit  in  the 
late  reign,  were  further  instances  that  were  often  and 
not  unreasonably  given  by  the  Tories  of  the  Whigs  de- 
viating in  their  conduct  from  their  original  profession 
and  principles. 

Both  Whigs  and  Tories  were  subdivided  into  two 
parties :  the  Tories  into  Jacobites  and  what  were  called 
Hanover  Tories ;  the  Whigs  into  patriots  and  courtiers, 
which  was  in  plain  English  "  Whigs  in  place"  and 
"  Whigs  out  of  place."  The  Jacobite  party  was  fallen 
so  low,  from  the  indolence  of  some,  the  defection  of 
others,  and  the  despair  of  all,  that  in  reality  it  con- 
sisted only  of  a  few  veterans  (and  those  very  few)  who 
were  really  Jacobites  by  principle,  and  some  others  who, 
educated  in  that  calling,  made  it  a  point  of  honour  not 
to  quit  the  name,  though  their  attachment  to  the  person 
of  the  Pretender  was  not  only  weakened  but,  properly 
speaking,  entirely  dissolved — their  consciences  quiet 
about  his  title,  and  their  reverence  to  his  character,  their 
compassion  for  his  misfortunes,  and  their  hopes  of  his 
success  quite  worn  out. 

That  which  kept  this  party  still  alive,  and  gave  it 
that  little  weight  it  yet  retained  in  the  kingdom,  was, 
that  all  those  who  were  by  private  views  piqued  at  the 


6  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  I. 

administration  without  being  disaffected  to  the  govern- 
ment joined  the  Jacobites  in  Parliament,  and  pushed 
the  same 'points,  though  on  different  motives  ;  these  only 
designing  to  distress  the  ministers,  and  those  catching 
at  anything  that  might  shake  the  establishment  of  the 
Hanover  family,  and  tend  to  the  subversion  of  the  whole. 

By  these  means  men  oftentimes  seemed  united  in 
their  public  conduct  who  differed  as  much  in  their  pri- 
vate wishes  and  views  from  one  another  as  they  did 
from  those  they  opposed ;  and  whilst  they  acted  in  con- 
cert together,  both  thought  they  were  playing  only  their 
own  game,  and  each  looked  upon  the  other  as  his  dupe. 

This  was  the  state  of  the  Jacobite  party  at  the  death 
of  the  late  King  [George  I.],  and  without  these  recruits, 
raised  by  the  defection  of  Whigs  upon  interested  mo- 
tives and  contention  for  power,  I  am  of  opinion  that 
the  Pretender's  party  would  by  that  time  have  been  as 
dead  in  this  kingdom  as  if  he  himself  had  been  so.  The 
little  interest  he  had  in  any  Court  abroad  made  his  par- 
tisans expect  little  external  assistance,  and  the  notion  of 
hereditary  right  at  home  had  been  so  long  ridiculed  and 
exploded,  that  there  were  few  people  whose  loyalty  was 
so  strong,  or  whose  understanding  was  so  weak,  as  to 
retain  and  act  upon  it.  The  conscientious  attachment 
to  the  natural  right  of  this  or  that  king,  and  the  reli- 
gious reverence  to  God's  anointed,  was  so  far  eradicated 
by  the  propagation  of  revolutionary  principles,  that 
mankind  was  become  much  more  clear-sighted  on  that 
score  than  formerly,  and  so  far  comprehended  and  gave 
into  the  doctrine  of  a  king  being  made  for  the  people 
and  not  the  people  for  the  king,  that  in  all  their  steps 
it  was  the  interest  of  the  nation  or  the  interest  of  par- 


1727.  WHIG  AND  TORY.  7 

ticular  actors  that  was  considered,  and  never  the  separate 
interest  of  one  or  the  other  king.  And  though  one 
might  be  surprised  (if  any  absurdity  arising  from  the 
credulity  and  ignorance  of  mankind  could  surprise  one) 
how  the  influence  of  power  could  ever  have  found  means 
to  establish  the  doctrine  of  Divine  right  of  kings,  yet  no 
one  can  wonder  that  the  opinion  lost  ground  so  fast  when 
it  became  the  interest  even  of  the  princes  on  the  throne 
for  three  successive  reigns  to  expel  it.  The  clergy,  who 
had  been  paid  for  preaching  it  up,  were  now  paid  for 
preaching  it  down ;  the  Legislature  had  declared  it  of 
no  force  in  the  form  of  our  government,  and  contrary  to 
the  fundamental  laws  and  nature  of  our  Constitution ; 
and  what  was  more  prevailing  than  all  the  rest,  it  was 
no  longer  the  interest  of  the  majority  of  the  kingdom 
either  to  propagate  or  act  on  this  principle,  and  conse- 
quently those  who  were  before  wise  enough  from  policy 
to  teach  it,  were  wise  enough  now  from  the  same  policy 
to  explode  it ;  and  those  who  were  weak  enough  to  take 
it  up  only  because  they  were  told  it,  were  easily 
brought  to  lay  it  down  by  the  same  influence. 

It  will  not  be  difficult,  from  what  has  been  said  of 
the  state  of  party  at  this  juncture  in  England,  to  perceive 
that  the  chief  struggle  now  lay,  not  between  Jacobites 
and  Hanoverians,  or  Tories  and  Whigs,  but  between 
Whigs  and  Whigs,  who,  conquerors  in  the  common 
cause,  were  now  split  into  civil  contest  among  them- 
selves, and  had  no  considerable  opponents  but  one 
another. 

The  heads  of  these  two  Whig  parties  were  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  and  Mr.  Pulteney.2  The  first  was  Chancellor 

2  Walpole  was  born  26th  August,  1676 ;  and  educated  at  Eton  and  King's 


8  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  I. 

of  the  Exchequer,  First  Commissioner  of  the  Treasury, 
and  Prime  Minister.  The  other  had  been  Secretary- 
at-War  ;  disgraced,  retaken  into  the  administration  as 
Cofferer,  but  failing  in  his  endeavours  to  be  made  Secre- 
tary of  State  [on  Lord  Carter  et's  retiring  in  1724],  had 
set  himself  at  the  head  of  the  opposition  to  the  Court, 
and  meditated  nothing  but  the  ruin  of  Sir  Kobert  Wai- 
pole,  to  whose  account  he  placed  the  irremissible  sin  of 
putting  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  into  that  employment 
he  had  pretended  to. 

The  reasons  why  Sir  Kobert  Walpole  had  given  the 
preference  to  the  Duke  upon  this  occasion,  I  believe 
were  these : — He  thought  his  Grace's  quality  and  estate, 


College,  Cambridge.  He  came  into  Queen  Anne's  first  Parliament  for 
Lynn,  for  which  he  sat  till  his  peerage.  In  1708  he  succeeded  St.  John 
as  Secretary-at-War,  and  in  1710  became  Treasurer  of  the  Navy.  On  the 
change  of  ministry  he  was  accused,  and  by  the  House  of  Commons  voted 
guilty,  of  corruption  in  the  War  Office,  expelled  the  House  and  sent  to 
the  Tower.  On  the  accession  of  George  I.  he  was  appointed  Paymaster  of 
the  Forces,  and  in  October,  1715,  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  and  Chan- 
cellor of  the  Exchequer,  Lord  Townshend,  his  brother-in-law,  being  Secre- 
tary of  State,  and  considered  as  First  Minister.  In  April,  1717,  they  were 
overthrown  by  Lord  Sunderland,  and  Walpole  went  into  strong  opposition  ; 
but  in  June,  1720,  was  re-appointed  Paymaster,  and  employed  (insidi- 
ously, it  was  suspected)  by  Lord  Sunderland  to  repair  the  mischiefs  of 
the  South  Sea  scheme  :  in  which,  however,  Sunderland  himself  was  found 
to  be  implicated,  and  being  forced  to  resign,  Walpole  was  re-appointed 
(April,  1721)  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  and  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer : 
in  these  offices  he  continued  till  1742,  when  he  was  out-voted  in  Parlia- 
ment, resigned,  and  was  created  Earl  of  Orford,  and  died  on  the  18th 
March,  1745,  set.  sixty-eight.  At  the  commencement  of  these  Memoirs 
in  1727  he  was  therefore  about  fifty-one. 

William  Pulteney  was  born  in  1682,  elected  into  Queen  Anne's  last 
Parliament,  and,  on  the  King's  accession,  made  Secretary-at-War ;  dis- 
missed, with  Walpole  and  Townshend,  in  1717 ;  made  Cofferer  of  the 
Household  in  1723,  but  resigned  next  year,  as  stated  in  the  text;  and 
thenceforward  became  and  continued  leader  of  the  Opposition  till  1742, 
when,  like  his  great  antagonist,  he  retired  to  the  House  of  Lords,  and  the 
Earl  of  Bath  soon  sank  into  neglect,  and  almost  oblivion.  He  died  in 
1762  :  at  the  commencement  of  the  Memoirs  he  was  forty-five. 


1727.  PULTENEY.  9 

his  popularity  in  the  country,  and  the  great  influence 
he  had  in  Parliament  by  the  number  of  boroughs  he 
commanded,  were  qualifications  and  appurtenances  that 
would  always  make  him  a  useful  friend  to  any  minister ; 
and  looked  upon  his  understanding  to  be  such  as  could 
never  let  him  rise  into  a  dangerous  rival.  Mr.  Pulteney 
he  knew  was  a  man  of  parts,  but  not  to  be  depended 
upon;  one  capable  of  serving  a  minister,  but  more  capable 
of  hurting  him  from  desiring  only  to  serve  himself.  He 
was  a  man  of  most  inflexible  pride,  immeasurable  am- 
bition, and  so  impatient  of  any  superiority,  that  he 
grudged  the  power  of  doing  good  even  to  his  benefac- 
tor, and  envied  the  favour  of  the  Court  to  one  who  called 
him  in  to  share  it.  He  had  as  much  lively  ready  wit 
as  ever  man  was  master  of;  and  was,  before  politics 
soured  his  temper  and  engrossed  his  thoughts,  the  most 
agreeable  and  coveted  companion  of  his  time :  he  was 
naturally  lazy,  and  continued  so  till  he  was  out  of  em- 
ployment :  his  resentment  and  eagerness  to  annoy  first 
taught  him  application;  application  gave  him  know- 
ledge, but  knowledge  did  not  give  him  judgment,  nor 
experience,  prudence :  he  was  changeable  in  his  wishes, 
vehement  in  the  pursuit  of  them,  and  dissatisfied  in  the 
possession.  He  had  strong  passions ;  was  seldom  sin- 
cere but  when  they  ruled  him :  cool  and  unsteady  in 
his  friendships,  warm  and  immovable  in  his  hate :  na- 
turally not  generous,  and  made  less  so  by  the  influence 
of  a  wife  whose  person  he  loved,  but  whose  understand- 
ing and  conduct  neither  had  nor  deserved  his  good  opi- 
nion, and  whose  temper  both  he  and  every  other  body 
abhorred — a  weak  woman  with  all  the  faults  of  a  bad 
man ;  of  low  birth,  a  lower  mind,  and  the  lowest  man- 


10  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  I. 

ners,  and  without  any  one  good,  agreeable,  or  amiable 
quality  but  beauty.3 

It  was  very  remarkable  in  Mr.  Pulteney,  that  he 
never  liked  the  people  with  whom  he  acted  chiefly  in 
his  public  character,  nor  loved  those  with  whom  he 
passed  his  idler  hours.  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  with  whom 
he  was  first  leagued,  he  has  often  declared  both  in  public 
and  in  private,  in  conversation  and  in  print,  he  never 
esteemed ;  and  Lord  Bolingbroke,  with  whom  he  was 
afterwards  engaged,  neither  he  nor  any  other  body 
could  esteem.  Lord  Chesterfield  and  Mr.  George  Berke- 
ley,4 with  whom  he  lived  in  the  most  seeming  intimacy, 
he  mortally  hated ;  but  continued  that  seeming  intimacy 
long  after  he  did  so,  merely  from  a  refinement  of  pride, 
and  an  affectation  of  being  blind  to  what  nobody  else 
could  help  seeing.  They  had  both  made  love  to  his 
wife,  and  though,  I  firmly  believe,  both  unsuccessfully, 
yet  many  were  of  a  contrary  opinion  ;  for  her  folly,  her 
vanity,  her  coquetry,  had  given  her  husband  the  same 
jealousy,  and  the  world  the  same  suspicion,  as  if  she 
had  gone  all  those  lengths  in  private,  which  her  public 
conduct,  without  one's  being  very  credulous,  would 
naturally  have  led  one  to  believe. 


3  Anna  Maria   Gumley.      Sir  C.  H.  Williams  treats  her  very  disre- 
spectfully :  Pulteney,  he  says, — in  becoming  Lord  Bath, — 

" trucked  the  fairest  fame 

For  a  right  honourable  name 
To  call  his  vixen  by." 

And,  again,  he  calls  her"  Bath's  ennobled  Doxy,"  and  has  several  allusions 
to  her  stinginess  and  corruption  ;  but  her  personal  beauty  was  universally 
admitted. 

4  Youngest  son  of  the  second  Earl  of  Berkeley,  M.P.  for  Dover  from 
1720  to  1734,  and  for  Hedon,  by  Pulteney's  influence,  from  1734  to  his 
death  in  1746  ;  second  husband  of  Lady  Suffolk. 


1727.  PULTENEY.  H 

Between  Mr.  Pulteney  and  Sir  William  Wyndham 
(the  head  of  the  Hanover  Tories  and  his  colleague  in 
all  public  affairs)  there  was  such  a  serious  rivalry  for 
reputation  in  oratory,  interest  with  particulars,5  know- 
ledge in  business,  popularity  in  the  country,  weight  in 
Parliament,  and  the  numbers  of  their  followers,  that  the 
superior  enmity  they  bore  to  men  in  power  alone  hin- 
dered that  which  they  felt  to  one  another  from  eclating. 

Lord  Hervey  lived  in  friendship  and  intimacy  with 
him  many  years,  but  the  manner  in  which  Mr.  Pul- 
teney broke  with  him 6  showed  that  his  attachment  there 
was  not  much  deeper  rooted  in  his  heart  than  that  ar- 
tificial kindness  he  wore  towards  those  who  deserved  no 
real  affection  at  his  hands* 

Those  who  thought  that  Mr.  Pulteney  was  never  good- 
humoured,  pleasing,  honourable,  friendly,  and  benevolent, 
knew  him  not  early  •,  those  who  never  thought  him  other- 
wise, knew  him  not  long  ;  for  no  two  men  ever  differed 
more  from  one  another,  in  temper,  conduct,  and  charac- 
ter, than  he  from  himself  in  the  compass  of  a  few  years. 

From  what  has  been  said,  it  will  be  easy  to  perceive 
there  were  many  ingredients  in  Mr.  Pulteney 's  com- 
position that  might  deter  Sir  Robert  Walpole  from 
making  such  a  man  Secretary  of  State ;  but  one  very 
material  objection,  besides  what  has  already  been 
mentioned,  I  believe  was  this  : — 

When,  in  1724,  the  animosity  between  Lord  Towns* 


8  A  Gallicism — particuliers — for  "  individual  "or  "  private  persons."  It 
is  frequent  throughout  these  Memoirs. 

6  We  shall  see  by  and  by  that  the  quarrel  arose  from  a  difference  in  politics 
on  Lord  Hervey's  joining  Walpole,  which  ripened  into  a  war  of  scurrilous 
pamphlets,  and  a  duel  (25  January,  1731)  between  these  former  friends. 


12  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  I. 

hend  and  Lord  Carteret,  the  two  Secretaries  of  State 
at  that  time,  was  grown  to  such  a  height  that  it  was 
impossible  for  them  to  serve  longer  together,  and  that 
each  of  them  was  struggling  to  subvert  the  other,  Mr. 
Pulteney  thought,  by  his  dexterity,  so  to  manage  his 
affairs  that,  whoever  was  the  sacrifice,  he  should  be  the 
successor :  to  this  end  he  entered  into  a  secret  corre- 
spondence and  treaty  with  Lord  Carteret,  of  which  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  got  intelligence,  and  from  that  moment 
resolved,  since  Mr.  Pulteney  had  endeavoured  to  secure 
himself  an  entrance  at  this  other  door  in  case  it  was 
opened,  that  at  least  he  should  never  come  in  where  he 
held  the  key. 

It  is  very  possible  that  I  may  be  thought  to  dwell  too 
long  upon  this  part  of  my  introduction  ;  but  as  the  anger 
of  this  Achilles  made  so  considerable  a  figure,  and  for 
so  long  a  time,  in  England,  I  thought  the  particulars  of 
its  rise,  and  the  whole  character  of  this  remarkable  and, 
with  all  his  imperfections,  certainly  great  man,  would 
not  be  an  unsatisfactory  digression  to  posterity. 

And  since  I  look  upon  this  introduction  as  a  sort  of 
Dramatis  Personce  to  the  following  work,  and  that  the 
chief  actors  in  the  political  part  of  it  are  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  and  Mr.  Pulteney,  Sir  William  Wyndham  and 
Lord  Bolingbroke,  I  shall  add  a  short  sketch  also  of 
the  three  other  characters, — at  least  so  far  as  shall 
enable  the  reader  to  guess,  by  what  passed  antecedent 
to  this  reign,  the  distant  springs  and  causes  of  many 
events  that  happened  in  it. 

Lord   Bolingbroke7  was  first  employed,   in  Queen 

7  Bolingbroke  was  born  in  1678  (not  1672,  as  commonly  supposed)  and 
died  in  1751.     He  was  now  about  forty-nine. 


1727.  BOLINGBROKE.  13 

Anne's  reign,  by  the  Duke  of  Marlborough  and  the 
Lord  Treasurer  Godolphin,  whom  he  abandoned  at  the 
change  of  her  Whig  ministry.  He  was  again  brought 
into  business  and  power  by  the  Lord  Treasurer  Oxford, 
whom  he  undermined,  supplanted  in  the  Queen's  fa- 
vour, and  turned  out.  Few  people  disputed,  and  fewer 
still  doubted,  his  having  been  in  the  Pretender's  in- 
terest before  the  death  of  the  Queen.  As  soon  as  the 
Hanover  family  came  to  the  Crown,  he  was  impeached 
of  high  treason,  did  not  dare  to  stand  his  trial,  fled,  and 
was  attainted.  He  then  entered  immediately,  publicly, 
and  avowedly,  into  the  Pretender's  service,  but  was 
soon  discarded  by  him,  and  returned  to  France.  The 
occasion  of  this  disgrace  was  said  to  be  his  having  be- 
trayed the  Pretender  in  order  to  gain  his  pardon  at  the 
Court  of  England.  But  as  this  was  a  fact  difficult  in 
its  nature  to  be  proved  against  him  by  those  who  were 
not  concerned  in  it,  and  very  improper  to  be  proved  by 
those  who  were,  he  always  denied  it,  though  without  con- 
vincing anybody  that  he  was  guiltless  of  the  charge. 

The  Queen  herself  told  me,  eight  years  after  she  came 
to  the  Crown,  that  Madame  de  Villette,8  at  Leicester- 
house,  had  made  a  merit  to  her  of  Lord  Bolingbroke's 
having  entered  into  the  Pretender's  service,  because  she 
said  he  had  done  it  with  no  other  view  than  to  serve 
the  Court  of  London,  and  earn  his  pardon.  "That 
was,  in  short  (said  the  Queen,  when  she  told  me  this), 


8  Marie  Claire  Deschamps  de  Marcilly,  niece  of  Madame  de  Maintenon 
and  widow  of  the  Marquis  de  Villette,  second  wife  of  Lord  Bolingbroke. 
The  marriage,  secret  and  even  disclaimed,  as  we  shall  see,  for  some  years, 
was  thought  to  have  taken  place  soon  after  the  death  of  the  first  Lady 
Bolingbroke  in  October  1718. 


14  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  i. 

to  betray  the  Pretender ;  for  though  Madame  de  Villette 
softened  the  word,  she  did  not  soften  the  thing ;  which 
I  own  (continued  the  Queen)  was  a  speech  that  had  so 
much  villainy  and  impudence  mixed  in  it,  that  I  could 
never  bear  him  nor  her  from  that  hour ;  and  could 
hardly  hinder  myself  from  saying  to  her — '  And  pray, 
Madam,  what  security  can  the  King  have  that  my  Lord 
Bolingbroke  does  not  desire  to  come  here  with  the  same 
honest  intent  that  he  went  to  Rome  ?  Or  that  he  swears 
he  is  no  longer  a  Jacobite  with  more  truth  than  you 
have  sworn  you  are  not  his  wife.'  " 9  That  Lady  Boling- 
broke made  this  confession  to  the  Queen,  I  learned,  as  I 
have  said  before,  from  the  Queen  herself;  and  it  was 
universally  believed  that  he  betrayed  the  Pretender. 
It  is  very  sure  that  from  that  period  the  stanch  Jaco- 
bites always  hated  and  vilified  him  as  much  as  the 
stanchest  Whigs.  Everybody  knew  that  in  Lord  Sun- 
derland's  administration,  and  by  his  mediation,  Lord 
Bolingbroke  obtained  the  King's  pardon,  and  (as  he 
pretended)  an  absolute  promise  of  the  full  reversal  of 
his  attainder,  with  the  restitution  of  his  honour  and 
estate ;  but  on  what  conditions  and  for  what  considera- 
tion he  could  receive  this  full  forgiveness,  and  even 
promise  of  reward,  those  who  deny  bis  having  betrayed 
the  Pretender  would  be  puzzled  to  say  :  for  the  twelve 
thousand  pounds  given  by  Madame  de  Villette  (niece  to 
Madame  de  Maintenon),  whom  he  married  in  France, 
to  Lady  Walsingham  (niece10  to  the  King's  mistress,  the 


9  The  explanation  of  this  circumstance  will  appear  in  p.  16. 

1°  Or,  as  was  rather  suspected,  her  daughter,  by  George  I.  She  was 
created  Countess  of  Walsingham  in  1722,  married  the  celebrated  Lord 
Chesterfield  in  1733,  and  died  in  1778. 


1727.  LADY  BOLINGBROKE.  15 

Duchess  of  Kendal),  was  never  paid,  nor  offered,  nor 
negotiated  for,  till  seven  years  after  this  promise  was 
obtained.  Lord  Sunderland  died  [1722];  but  Lord 
Bolingbroke,  notwithstanding,  came  back  to  England  in 
1723,  by  virtue  of  an  Act  of  Parliament,  which  enabled 
him  to  inherit  his  father's  estate,  but  did  not  restore  his 
dignity,  and  entailed  the  estate,  in  case  he  had  not  chil- 
dren, on  his  brother,  leaving  him  a  power  of  raising  no 
more  than  10,000/.  upon  it.  Sir  Robert  Walpole  was 
then  at  the  head  of  the  Ministry,  and  on  him  fell  all 
the  resentment  of  Lord  Bolingbroke  for  this  failure  in 
two  such  material  articles  of  what  he  pretended  had 
been  promised  him ;  though  it  is  certain  the  King  never 
owned  he  had  made  such  a  promise ;  and  if  he  had,  the 
cry  of  the  whole  nation  at  that  time  ran  so  strong 
against  Lord  Bolingbroke,  that  most  people  were  then 
of  opinion,  if  it  had  been  proposed  in  Parliament,  it 
would  not  only  have  shaken  the  Whig  interest,  by 
splitting  and  tearing  the  party  to  pieces,  but  have  proved 
too  much  for  the  influence  of  the  Court  to  have  carried 
through,  as  omnipotent  as  some  at  that  time  might 


imagine  it. 


Madame  de  Villette,  who  was  then  in  England  soli- 
citing his  cause  at  Court,  instead  of  being  satisfied  with 
the  bargain  of  this  Act  of  Parliament  for  her  12,000^., 
carried  her  resentment  of  it  so  high  that  she  declared 
publicly  to  every  one  she  met,  that  the  Ministers  had 
not  only  made  the  King  break  his  word,  but  had  so 
clogged  and  loaded  what  they  called  benefits,  que  les 
faveurs  du  Roi  etoient  des  affronts ;  and  that  if  she 
knew  Lord  Bolingbroke  at  all,  she  was  sure  he  had 
rather  live  an  exile  all  his  days  than  submit  to  an  ini- 


16  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  I. 

perfect  restoration  on  such  cramped,  dishonourable 
terms.  The  sequel  showed  she  either  did  not  know 
him,  or  pretended  not  to  know  him ;  for  home  he  came, 
and  only  on  these  terms.  The  first  thing  he  did  when 
he  came  to  England  was  so  like  the  last  thing  he  did 
before  he  left  it,  that — notwithstanding  all  the  declara- 
tions he  made  of  his  ambition  being  quite  extinct — of 
his  seeking  and  desiring  nothing  but  quiet,  oblivion,  re- 
tirement, and  a  harbour  from  the  political  storms  in 
which  he  had  been  so  long  tossed — he  began  imme- 
diately to  enter  anew  into  Court  intrigues,  Parliament- 
ary cabals,  and  paper  war,  and  retrace  all  the  paths 
that  had  before  brought  him  to  the  brink  of  ruin.  He 
began  again,  by  pamphlets,  to  attack  the  conduct  of 
public  affairs,  both  foreign  and  domestic ;  to  endeavour 
to  turn  the  persons  of  those  concerned  in  the  adminis- 
tration into  ridicule,  their  understandings  into  con- 
tempt, and  their  actions  into  errors  and  crimes.  Soon 
after  his  return,  he  acknowledged  Madame  de  Villette 
as  his  wife,  which  everybody  knew  she  had  been  for 
some  time,  though  not  a  year  before  she  had  solemnly 
forsworn  her  being  so  in  a  court  of  judicature,  in  order 
to  draw  a  sum  of  money  out  of  the  hands  of  a  banker  u 
who  pretended  (very  likely  only  for  the  advantage  of 

11  Sir  Matthew  Decker.  Bolingbroke  writes  to  Wyndham  in  explanation 
of  this  affair,  22nd  May,  1724,  "  Madame  de  Villette  will  appear  [in  that 
name  or  as  Lady  Bolingbroke]  as  she  finds  it  necessary  on  account  of  her 
money,  which  John  Drummond  put  and  kept  unjustifiably  in  that  rascal 
Decker's  hands.  If  it  is  not  yet  paid,  she  is  only  Madame  de  Villette,  and 
has  nothing  to  do  with  my  affairs  ;  for  surely  any  dissimulation  is  allowable 
to  get  out  of  the  hands  of  robbers  and  assassins." —  Coxe,  ii.  331.  Sir  Mat- 
thew Decker  had  a  great  reputation  for  probity  and  piety,  and  may  have 
acted  bond  fide,  for  it  seems  next  to  certain  that  the  money  was  originally 
Bolingbroke's  own,  and,  at  all  events,  would  have  become,  by  the  marriage, 
legally  his. 


1727.  LADY  BOLINGBROKE.  17 

fingering  the  money  a  little  longer)  that  without  a  de- 
cree in  Chancery  he  could  not  be  secure  in  delivering 
it.  The  banker  said,  if  she  was  Lord  Bolingbroke's 
wife,  as  was  currently  reported  and  by  everybody  be- 
lieved, her  money  was  his ;  and  as  his  was  forfeited  by 
his  attainder  to  the  Government,  consequently  any 
banker  in  whose  hands  it  was  lodged  would,  notwith- 
standing the  repayment  to  his  wife,  be  accountable  to 
the  Government  for  it. 

This  chicane  of  the  banker's  put  her  ladyship  under 
the  disagreeable  difficulty  of  either  risking  her  52,000/. 
(for  the  sum  was  no  less),  or  denying  that  upon  oath, 
which  in  a  few  months  would  be  owned,  and  was  al- 
ready known,  to  all  the  world ;  however,  her  conscience 
and  her  interest  had  no  long  struggle ;  she  forswore  her 
marriage  and  received  her  money.  The  pious  Duchess 
of  Kendal  pretended  to  be  extremely  shocked  at  this 
conduct;  but  the  sore  it  made  carried  its  own  cure 
along  with  it;  for  the  money  Lady  Bolingbroke  was 
by  this  means  enabled  to  give  to  Lady  Walsingham, 
and  the  influence  Lady  Walsingham  (whose  conscience 
was  less  delicate)  had  over  her  aunt,  soon  set  matters  to 
right,  so  that  Lady  Bolingbroke  had  again  access  to  the 
Duchess,  and  by  the  force  of  a  great  deal  of  insinuation 
and  dexterity  (for  nobody  ever  had  more)  she  took 
such  fast  hold  of  this  old,  simple,  easy,  honest  woman, 
and  her  avaricious  fury  of  a  niece,  that  Lord  Boling- 
broke got  what  he  pleased  suggested  by  his  wife  to  the 
Duchess,  and  by  the  Duchess  to  the  King.  He  did 
not  fail  to  make  use  of  this  canal  to  convey  all  the  bad 
impressions  he  could  of  Sir  Eobert  Walpole  ;•  and  he 
had  so  far  gained  her  Grace,  that  he  prevailed  with  her 

VOL.  i.  c 


18  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  I. 

to  deliver  a  letter  to  the  King  that  contained  a  com- 
pendium of  every  accusation  laid  before  or  after  in  that 
weekly  philippic  the  '  Craftsman  Journal ;'  and  this  at 
the  very  time  when  he  was  constantly  telling  Sir  Robert 
that  the  very  air  he  breathed  was  the  gift  of  his  bounty, 
and  that  without  his  assistance  he  must  have  passed  his 
whole  life  in  proscription,  poverty,  and  exile.  The 
letter  concluded  with  a  petition  to  the  King  to  see  him 
at  the  Duchess  of  Kendal's  lodgings,  a  promise  to  prove 
in  detail  all  he  had  advanced  in  the  letter,  and  a  desire, 
if  he  did  not  convince  his  Majesty  in  that  audience 
that  Sir  Robert  was  the  weakest  minister  any  prince 
ever  employed  abroad,  and  the  wickedest  that  ever  had 
the  direction  of  affairs  at  home,  that  the  King  would 
never  hear  nor  see  him  any  more.  The  first  use  the 
King  made  of  this  letter  was  to  show  it  to  Sir  Robert, 
and  ask  him  what  answer  he  should  give  to  it ;  Sir 
Robert  advised  him  to  see  Lord  Bolingbroke,  and  hear 
all  he  had  to  say,  which  the  King  absolutely  refused  ;  but 
as  Sir  Robert  imagined,  in  case  he  should  advise  the 
King  to  stick  to  that  refusal,  or  not  press  him  to  retract 
it,  that  his  enemies  would  insinuate  it  was  his  fear  of 
what  Lord  Bolingbroke  had  to  say  that  made  him  con- 
trive to  shut  the  King's  ear  to  his  accuser,  he  prevailed 
with  his  Majesty  to  consent  to  this  interview.  Sir 
Robert,  who  was  now  in  possession  of  the  letter,  found 
out  that  it  was  the  Duchess  of  Kendal  who  had  given  it 
to  the  King,  and  as  it  was  delivered  open,  he  knew  she 
must  have  been  acquainted  with  the  contents,  and  con- 
sequently could  not  have  been  much  averse  to  its  suc- 
ceeding. It  did  so  far  succeed  that  the  King  saw  Lord 
Bolingbroke — but  for  the  last  time,  and  his  Majesty 


1727.  BOLINGBROKE'S  INTRIGUES.  19 

told  Sir  Robert  everything  that  passed  at  this  inter- 
view. 

After  his  lordship  had  in  a  very  long,  florid  exordium 
set  forth  his  own  merit,  knowledge,  and  abilities,  and 
entered  into  general  accusations  and  invectives  against 
Sir  Robert,  the  King  asked  him  what  particular  charge 
he  could  advance  and  prove,  to  make  good  these  gene- 
ral assertions ;  for  that  much  more  was  requisite  than 
what  he  had  yet  heard,  to  weaken  his  favour  or  alter 
his  opinion  of  a  minister  whose  services  he  had  already 
found  so  beneficial  to  him,  in  whose  counsels  he  had 
so  much  confidence,  and  of  whose  judgment  he  had 
experienced  so  many  proofs.  To  this  Lord  Bolingbroke 
made  no  other  reply  than  recapitulating  the  same  in- 
vectives in  different  words,  telling  the  King  how  odious 
Sir  Robert  was  to  the  people  in  general,  how  insolent 
to  particulars;  how  ignorant  he  was  thought  in  the 
foreign,  how  corrupt  in  the  domestic ;  and,  in  short, 
that  he  was  so  despised  abroad  and  hated  at  home,  that, 
if  continued  in  power,  he  would  bring  his  Majesty's 
negotiations  into  irretrievable  difficulties,  and  make  the 
King  at  last  as  unpopular  in  this  country  as  himself. 
To  which  the  King  made  no  other  answer  than  coolly 
asking  him  whether  that  was  all  he  had  to  say,  and  then 
dismissed  him.12 

But  Sir  Robert,  notwithstanding  this  material  in- 
stance of  the  strength  of  his  interest  in  the  closet,  could 
not  but  be  much  alarmed  to  find  that  below  stairs 13  he 


!2  I  relate  this  whole  story  just  as  it  was  told  to  me  by  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
himself. — Lord  Hervey.  It  is  told  in  the  '  Reminiscences '  more  succinctly, 
and  with  some  not  important  variations  in  the  details. 

13  The  King's  closet  was  on  the  first  floor  of  the  palace  of  St.  James's  ;  the 
Duchess  of  Kendal's  and  Lady  Walsingham's  on  the  ground-floor,  next  the 
garden. 

c  2 


20  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  I. 

had  two  such  formidable  enemies,  and  Lord  Boling- 
broke  two  such  powerful  advocates,  as  the  Duchess  and 
her  niece.  He  consulted  with  Lord  Townshend  what 
was  to  be  done  ;  he  found  Lady  Bolingbroke  had  con- 
stant access  to  the  Duchess,  knew  she  had  credit  there, 
and  very  reasonably,  of  course,  feared  that  what  had 
made  no  impression  at  first  might,  by  repeated  ap- 
plications, come  to  have  its  effect  at  last.  His  jea- 
lousies and  suspicions  increased  so  much  that,  just  before 
the  last  time  the  King  set  out  for  Hanover,  he  told  the 
King  what  he  apprehended  from  the  Duchess's  favour 
to  Lord  Bolingbroke  and  interest  with  his  Majesty. 
And  as  it  had  been  very  sanguinely  insinuated  by  Lord 
Bolingbroke  to  his  friends,  and  buzzed  about  in  whispers 
even  at  Court,  that  his  Majesty  was  at  last  prevailed 
upon  to  discard  him,  and  that  the  stroke  already  re- 
solved upon  was  to  be  struck  when  he  was  at  Hanover, 
he  begged  only  to  know  from  his  Majesty  what  founda- 
tion there  was  for  such  suggestions  ;  and  if  he  was  come 
to  any  resolution  of  that  sort,  that  he  would  be  so  kind 
as  to  execute  it  before  his  departure.  The  King  assured 
him  he  had  no  such  intentions,  and  went  so  far  as  to 
say  he  took  it  ill  of  Sir  Robert  that  he  could  believe 
him  so  weak  as  to  be  wrought  upon  by  any  persuasion 
or  interest  whatever  to  change  a  servant  he  loved  and 
valued,  for  a  knave  whose  conduct,  character,  and  prin- 
ciples he  had  always  abhorred.14 

Thus  stood  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  credit  and  Lord 
Bolingbroke's  hopes  at  Court  when  the  late  King  went 


34  This  corroborates  directly  what  Horace  Walpole  only  inferred  from 
circumstances. — Reminiscences. 


1727.  BOLINGBROKE'S  CHARACTER.  21 

last  over.  As  to  Lord  Bolingbroke's  general  character, 
it  was  so  mixed  that  he  had  certainly  some  qualifications 
that  the  greatest  men  might  be  proud  of,  and  many 
which  the  worst  would  be  ashamed  of:  he  had  fine 
talents,  a  natural  eloquence,  great  quickness,  a  happy 
memory,  and  very  extensive  knowledge :  but  he  was 
vain,  much  beyond  the  general  run  of  mankind,  timid, 
false,  injudicious,  and  ungrateful ;  elate  and  insolent  in 
power,  dejected  and  servile  in  disgrace :  few  people  ever 
believed  him  without  being  deceived,  or  trusted  him 
without  being  betrayed  :  he  was  one  to  whom  prosperity 
was  no  advantage,  and  adversity  no  instruction :  he  had 
brought  his  affairs  to  that  pass  that  he  was  almost  as 
much  distressed  in  his  private  fortune  as  desperate  in 
his  political  views,  and  was  upon  such  a  foot  in  the 
world  that  no  king  would  employ  him,  no  party  support 
him,  and  few  particulars  defend  him ;  his  enmity 
was  the  contempt  of  those  he  attacked,  and  his  friend- 
ship a  weight  and  reproach  to  those  he  adhered  to. 
Those  who  were  most  partial  to  him  could  not  but 
allow  that  he  was  ambitious  without  fortitude,  and  en- 
terprising without  resolution ;  that  he  was  fawning 
without  insinuation,  and  insincere  without  art ;  that  he 
had  admirers  without  friendship,  and  followers  without 
attachment ;  parts  without  probity,  knowledge  without 
conduct,  and  experience  without  judgment.  This  was 
certainly  his  character  and  situation ;  but  since  it  is  the 
opinion  of  the  wise,  the  speculative,  and  the  learned, 
that  most  men  are  born  with  the  same  propensities, 
actuated  by  the  same  passions,  and  conducted  by  the 
same  original  principles,  and  differing  only  in  the  man- 
ner of  pursuing  the  same  ends,  I  shall  not  so  far  chime 


22  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  I. 

in  with  the  bulk  of  Lord  Bolingbroke's  contemporaries 
as  to  pronounce  he  had  more  failings  than  any  man 
ever  had  ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  see  all  that  is  written, 
and  hear  all  that  is  said  of  him,  and  not  allow  that  if  he 
had  not  a  worse  heart  than  the  rest  of  mankind,  at 
least  he  must  have  had  much  worse  luck. 

It  will  not  be  necessary  to  say  much  on  the  character 
of  Sir  Eobert  Walpole  ;  the  following  work  will  de- 
monstrate his  abilities  in  business  and  his  dexterity 
in  Courts  and  Parliaments  to  have  been  much  su- 
perior to  his  contemporaries.  He  had  a  strength  of 
parts  equal  to  any  advancement,  a  spirit  to  struggle 
with  any  difficulties,  a  steadiness  of  temper  immoveable 
by  any  disappointments.  He  had  great  skill  in  figures, 
the  nature  of  the  funds,  and  the  revenue ;  his  first  ap- 
plication was  to  this  branch  of  knowledge  ;  but  as  he 
afterwards  rose  to  the  highest  posts  of  power,  and  con- 
tinued longer  there  than  any  first  minister  in  this 
country  since  Lord  Burleigh  ever  did,  he  grew,  of 
course,  conversant  with  all  the  other  parts  of  govern- 
ment, and  very  soon  equally  able  in  transacting  them : 
the  weight  of  the  whole  administration  lay  on  him ; 
every  project  was  of  his  forming,  conducting,  and  exe- 
cuting :  from  the  time  of  making  the  Treaty  of  Hanover, 
all  the  foreign  as  well  as  domestic  affairs  passed  through 
his  hands :  and,  considering  the  little  assistance  he  re- 
ceived from  subalterns,  it  is  incredible  what  a  variety 
and  quantity  of  business  he  dispatched ;  but  as  he  had 
infinite  application  and  long  experience,  so  he  had  great 
method  and  a  prodigious  memory,  with  a  mind  and 
spirit  that  were  indefatigable :  and  without  every  one  of 
these  natural  as  well  as  acquired  advantages,  it  would  in- 


1727.  WALPOLE.  23 

deed  have  been  impossible  for  him  to  go  through  half  what 
he  undertook. 

No  man  ever  was  blessed  with  a  clearer  head,  a  truer 
or  quicker  judgment,  or  a  deeper  insight  into  mankind ; 
he  knew  the  strength  and  weakness  of  everybody  he 
had  to  deal  with,  and  how  to  make  his  advantage  of 
both ;  he  had  more  warmth  of  affection  and  friendship 
for  some  particular  people  than  one  could  have  believed 
it  possible  for  any  one  who  had  been  so  long  raking  in 
the  dirt  of  mankind  to  be  capable  of  feeling  for  so 
worthless  a  species  of  animals.  One  should  naturally 
have  imagined  that  the  contempt  and  distrust  he  must 
have  had  for  the  species  in  gross,  would  have  given  him 
at  least  an  indifference  and  distrust  towards  every  parti- 
cular. Whether  his  negligence  of  his  enemies,  and  never 
stretching  his  power  to  gratify  his  resentment  of  the 
sharpest  injury, was  policy  or  constitution,  I  shall  not  de- 
termine :  but  I  do  not  believe  anybody  who  knows  these 
times  will  deny  that  no  minister  ever  was  more  outraged, 
or  less  apparently  revengeful.  Some  of  his  friends,  who 
were  not  unforgiving  themselves,  nor  very  apt  to  see  ima- 
ginary faults  in  him,  have  condemned  this  easiness  in  his 
temper  as  a  weakness  that  has  often  exposed  him  to  new 
injuries,  and  given  encouragement  to  his  adversaries  to 
insult  him  with  impunity.  Brigadier  Churchill, !  5  a  worthy 
and  good-natured,  friendly  and  honourable  man,  who 
had  lived  Sir  Robert's  intimate  friend  for  many  years, 
and  through  all  the  different  stages  of  his  power  and 

15  Charles  Churchill,  a  natural  son  of  a  brother  of  the  great  Duke  of 
Marlborough,  Colonel  1707 — Major-General  1735.  His  natural  son  by 
Mrs.  Oldfield  married  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  natural  daughter  by  Miss 
Skerritt,  to  whom,  on  her  father's  peerage  in  1742,  was  scandalously  given 
the  rank  of  an  Earl's  daughter. 


24  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  I. 

retirement,  prosperity  and  disgrace,  has  often  said  that 
Sir  Robert  Walpole  was  so  little  able  to  resist  the 
show  of  repentance  in  those  from  whom  he  had  re- 
ceived the  worst  usage,  that  a  few  tears  and  promises  of 
amendment  have  often  washed  out  the  stains  even  of 
ingratitude. 

In  all  occurrences,  and  at  all  times,  and  in  all  diffi- 
culties, he  was  constantly  present  and  cheerful ;  he  had 
very  little  of  what  is  generally  called  insinuation,  and 
with  which  people  are  apt  to  be  taken  for  the  present, 
without  being  gained;  but  no  man  ever  knew  better 
among  those  he  had  to  deal  with  who  was  to  be  had, 
on  what  terms,  by  what  methods,  and  how  the  acquisi- 
tion would  answer.  He  was  not  one  of  those  projecting 
systematical  great  geniuses  who  are  always  thinking 
in  theory,  and  are  above  common  practice :  he  had  been 
too  long  conversant  in  business  not  to  know  that  in  the 
fluctuation  of  human  affairs  and  variety  of  accidents  to 
which  the  best  concerted  schemes  are  liable,  they  must 
often  be  disappointed  who  build  on  the  certainty  of  the 
most  probable  events ;  and  therefore  seldom  turned  his 
thoughts  to  the  provisional  warding  off  future  evils 
which  might  or  might  not  happen ;  or  the  scheming  of 
remote  advantages,  subject  to  so  many  intervening 
crosses ;  but  always  applied  himself  to  the  present  oc- 
currence, studying  and  generally  hitting  upon  the  pro- 
perest  method  to  improve  what  was  favourable,  and  the 
best  expedient  to  extricate  himself  out  of  what  was  dif- 
ficult. There  never  was  any  minister  to  whom  access 
was  so  easy  and  so  frequent,  nor  whose  answers  were 
more  explicit.  He  knew  how  to  oblige  when  he  be- 
stowed, and  not  to  shock  when  he  denied ;  to  govern 


1727.  WYNDHAM.  25 

without  oppressing,  and  conquer  without  triumph.  He 
pursued  his  ambition  without  curbing  his  pleasures,  and 
his  pleasures  without  neglecting  his  business;  he  did 
the  latter  with  ease,  and  indulged  himself  in  the 
other  without  giving  scandal  or  offence.16  In  private 
life,  and  to  all  who  had  any  dependence  upon  him,  he 
was  kind  and  indulgent ;  he  was  generous  without  os- 
tentation, and  an  economist  without  penuriousness ;  not 
insolent  in  success,  nor  irresolute  in  distress;  faithful 
to  his  friends,  and  not  inveterate  to  his  foes. 

Sir  William  Wyndham,17  who  was  at  the  head  of  those 
who  called  themselves  Hanover  Tories  at  the  death  of 


i6  This  is  not  exact.  It  gave  great  scandal,  and  excited  both  ridicule 
and  reproach.  The  rest  of  the  character  is  just  enough.  Pope,  to  whom 
he  had  granted  a  private  favour,  has  immortalized  his  good  humour  and  good 
nature : — 

"  Seen  him  I  have,  but  in  his  happier  hour 

Of  social  pleasure  ill-exchanged  for  power — 

Seen  him,  incumbent  with  the  venal  tribe, 

Smile  without  art,  and  win  without  a  bribe." 

And  Lady  Mary   Wortley  Montagu  wrote  the  following   lines  on   his 
portrait : — 

"  These  were  the  lively  eyes  and  rosy  hue 

Of  Robin's  face  when  Robin  first  I  knew  ; 

The  gay  companion  and  the  favourite  guest, 

Loved  without  awe,  and  without  views  caress'd. 

His  cheerful  smile  and  honest  open  look 

Added  new  graces  to  the  truths  he  spoke. 

Then  every  man  found  something  to  commend, 

The  pleasant  neighbour  and  the  worthy  friend  ; 

The  generous  master  of  a  private  house, 

The  tender  father  and  indulgent  spouse. 

The  hardest  censors,  at  the  worst,  believed 

His  temper  was  too  easily  deceived  : 

A  consequential  ill  good-nature  draws  ; 

A  bad  effect,  but  from  a  noble  cause  ! " 

I?  I  do  not  find  the  exact  date  of  Wyndham's  birth  ;  but  as  he  was  first 
married  in  July,  1708,  and  was  brought  forward  in  office  1711,  "  at  a  very 
early  age,"  he  was  probably  born  about  1685.  He  died  in  1740,  before  the 
triumph  of  his  party  over  Wai  pole. 


- 


26  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  I. 

the  late  King,  was  first  brought  into  the  political  world 
by  Lord  Bolingbroke  in  the  latter  end  of  Queen  Anne's 
reign,  and,  of  course,  began  the  world,  if  not  an  avowed 
Jacobite,  at  least  a  Jacobite  very  little  disguised.  He 
was  a  man  of  family,  fortune,  and  figure,  but  pushed 
up  to  the  employment  of  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer 
by  the  favour  of  Lord  Bolingbroke,  at  a  time  when 
neither  his  years,  his  experience,  his  talents,  his  know- 
ledge, nor  his  weight  could  give  him  any  pretence  to 
the  distinction  of  so  great  a  post.  But  though  the 
eclat  of  this  advancement  might  flatter  his  ambition  at 
first,  yet  the  gratitude  which  he  showed  to  his  bene- 
factor by  linking  his  fortune  with  his  became  a  clog  to 
that  ambition  ever  after,  and  made  the  friendship  that 
first  raised  him  above  his  desert  keep  him  afterwards 
down  as  much  below  it.  In  the  beginning  of  the  late 
reign  nobody  doubted  his  being  one  of  the  chief  pro- 
moters of  that  disaffection  and  those  commotions  in  the 
West  which  ended  in  an  open  rebellion :  his  conduct  at 
that  time  is  not  to  be  justified ;  to  raise  a  spirit  of 
Jacobitism  and  sedition  in  a  parcel  of  unhappy  wretches 
who  were  led  by  his  judgment  and  trusted  to  his  pro- 
tection, and  to  leave  them  at  that  very  crisis  when  the 
spirit  he  had  fomented  brought  them  to  action,  was  a 
conduct  for  which  his  best  friends  must  think  his 
timidity  the  best  excuse.  However,  his  not  appearing 
now  in  open  rebellion  did  not  prevent  the  Government, 
as  they  were  informed  of  his  previous  clandestine  steps, 
from  sending  a  messenger  to  apprehend  him ;  he  was 
seized  at  his  own  house,  Witham,  in  Somersetshire, 
but  made  his  escape  out  of  the  messenger's  hands  upon 
having  leave  given  him  to  bid  his  wife  adieu  in  the 


1727.  WYNDHAM.  27 

next  room,  and  giving  his  honour  to  Colonel  Hurst,  as 
the  messenger  affirms  and  he  denies,  to  return  imme- 
diately and  surrender  himself  into  custody.  He  fled  in 
a  clergyman's  habit ;  but,  at  the  instigation  of  his  father- 
in-law,  the  Duke  of  Somerset,  in  a  little  time  surren- 
dered himself  to  the  Government,  was  kept  prisoner 
some  months  in  the  Tower,  then  admitted  to  bail,  but 
never  brought  to  a  trial.  Just  before  Lord  Boling- 
broke  returned  from  France  it  was  thought  he  was 
capitulating  with  the  administration ;  but  his  attach- 
ment to  his  old  friend  and  patron,  the  influence  that 
friend  had  over  him,  and  the  irreconcilable  enmity 
Lord  Bolingbroke  bore  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  utterly 
put  an  end  to  those  dealings,  if  ever  there  were  such 
on  foot ;  his  behaviour  at  the  time  of  the  rebellion,  and 
his  taking  all  opportunities  afterwards  to  declare  him- 
self a  strong  Hanoverian,  made  the  Jacobites  not  love 
him,  though  they  did  not  care  to  separate  from  him. 

He  was  far  from  having  first-rate  parts,18  but  by  a  gen- 
tleman-like general  behaviour  and  constant  attendance 
in  the  House  of  Commons,  a  close  application  to  the  busi- 
ness of  it,  and  frequent  speaking,  he  had  got  a  sort  of 
Parliamentary  routine,  and  without  being  a  bright 
speaker  was  a  popular  one,  well  heard,  and  useful  to 
his  party.  Lord  Bolingbroke's  closet  was  the  school  to 
which  he  owed  all  his  knowledge  of  foreign  affairs,  and 
where  he  made  himself  master  of  many  facts  that  got 
him  attention  and  gave  him  reputation  in  Parliament, 


18  Speaker  Onslow,  influenced  probably  by  Wyndham's  weight  in  the 
House,  gives  a  much  higher  estimate  of  his  parts: — "  He  was  in  my  opi- 
nion most  made  for  a  great  man  of  any  one  that  I  have  known  in  this  age, 
— every  thing  about  him  seemed  great,"  &c. — Coxe,  562. 


28  LORD  HEEVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  I. 

though  they  were  not  introduced  with  that  art,  ex- 
pressed with  that  energy,  nor  set  off  with  that  eloquence 
that  would  have  attended  them  could  his  schoolmaster 
have  delivered  them  there  without  a  proxy. 

When  Mr.  Pulteney  and  Sir  William  Wyndham  were 
at  the  head  of  the  opposition  to  the  Court,  Sir  William's 
antagonists  contributed  much  more  than  his  friends  to 
the  advancement  of  his  reputation ;  for  as  there  was  a 
secret  rivalry  and  jealousy  between  these  two  Consuls  of 
the  Patriots  (for  so  they  were  pleased  to  christen  their 
faction),  and  that  pique  Sir  Robert  Walpole  had  to 
Mr.  Pulteney  was  infinitely  greater  than  any  enmity 
he  bore  to  the  other — so  all  Sir  Robert  Walpole's 
people,  to  flatter  him  and  mortify  Mr.  Pulteney,  took 
every  opportunity  to  compliment  Sir  William  Wynd- 
ham in  public  assemblies,  and  give  him  the  preference 
to  his  colleague  whenever  they  were  compared  in  pri- 
vate companies ;  though  it  was  impossible  for  any  im- 
partial body  to  think  that  Mr.  Pulteney  was  not  as  much 
Sir  William  Wyndham's  superior  in  parts,  knowledge, 
eloquence,  and  every  other  qualification  but  temper 
requisite  to  make  a  formidable  enemy  or  a  useful 
friend,  as  he  was  in  fortune,  in  writing,  and  even  in 
reputation,  notwithstanding  the  partiality  of  their  own 
party  and  the  affectation  of  the  other  exerted  itself  so 
evidently  to  brighten  the  character  of  the  one  and 
obscure  the  fame  of  the  other.  The  public  was  on  this 
occasion,  as  on  most  others,  much  juster  than  any  of 
the  particulars  that  compose  it,  and  decided  so  much  in 
favour  of  Mr.  Pulteney,  that  as  his  name  at  home  was 
mentioned  in  conversation,  in  print,  at  Court,  and  by 
the  populace  twenty  times  for  once  that  the  other  was 


1727.  WYNDHAM.  29 

ever  thought  of,  so  in  foreign  courts  it  was  as  familiarly 
known  as  in  that  of  England  itself,  where  the  other 
was  never  heard  of. 

This  was  the  state  of  party  and  faction  in  England, 
and  these  their  leaders,  at  the  time  of  the  accession  of 
King  George  II.  to  the  crown. 


30  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 


CHAPTER  II. 

Accession  of  George  II. — Sir  Spencer  Compton  designated  as  First  Minis- 
ter— His  incapacity  and  blunders — Aspect  of  the  Court — Wai  pole  sup- 
ported by  the  Queen,  and  continued  in  office—  Her vey's  attachment  to 
Wai  pole — Civil  List  and  Queen's  Jointure  Settled — Few  official  changes 
— Sir  William  Yonge — Lord  Berkeley — Lord  Torrington — the  Battle  of 
Cape  Passaro — Motives  of  the  King's  adoption  of  Walpole  —  Mrs. 
Howard — Mary  Bellenden — Superior  influence  of  the  Queen. 

THE  late  King  died  on  the  road  to  Hanover,  on  the 
llth  of  June,  1727,  at  Osnaburg,  in  the  very  same 
room  where  he  was  born.  On  Wednesday,  June  14, 
news  was  brought  by  an  express  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole, 
who  was  at  dinner  at  Chelsea l  when  it  arrived ;  he 
went  immediately  to  Richmond  (where  the  Prince  of 
Wales  then  was)  to  acquaint  him  with  what  had  hap- 
pened, and  receive  his  orders.  The  Prince  was  laid  to 

i  Where  Sir  Robert  Walpole  had  a  villa.  "  On  the  death  of  King 
George  I.,"  says  Horace  Walpole,  "my  father  killed  two  horses  in  carrying 
the  tidings  to  his  successor ;  and  kneeling  down  asked  '  who  should  com- 
pose his  Majesty's  speech  ?  '  [to  the  council].  The  King  told  him  to  go  to 
Sir  Spencer  Compton.  That  gentleman,  unused  to  public  business,  was 
forced  to  send  for  Sir  Robert  to  help  him  in  the  composition.  The  Queen 
upon  this  asked  the  King  if  he  had  not  better  employ  his  father's  minister, 
who  could  manage  his  business  without  the  help  of  another.  My  father 
was  instantly  appointed." — Walpoliana,  §  104.  I  suspect  that  in  this 
case  (as  in  some  others)  Horace  Walpole  has  not  been  quite  accurately 
reported  by  the  editor  of  Walpoliana.  It  seems  hardly  credible  that  Sir 
Robert  should  have  killed  two  horses  between  Chelsea  and  Richmond  ; 
nor,  as  we  shall  see  presently,  were  the  other  steps  of  the  affair  so  rapid 
as  thus  stated.  Nor  do  I  think  that  Horace  Walpole  could  have  repre- 
sented Compton  as  unused  to  public  business:  he  was  now  turned  of  fifty  ; 
he  had  been  all  his  political  life  in  office,  had  succeeded  Walpole  himself 
as  Paymaster,  and  had  been  Speaker  in  three  Parliaments.  It  was,  there- 
fore, not  the  habits  of  business  that  he  wanted,  but  sagacity  and  talents. 
He  was  a  younger  son  of  the  third  Earl  of  Northampton. 


1727.  NEW  MINISTER.  31 

sleep  (as  his  custom  had  been  for  many  years  after 
dinner),  and  the  Princess  was  in  the  bed-chamber  with 
him,  when  the  Duchess  of  Dorset,  the  lady-in-waiting, 
went  in  to  let  them  know  Sir  Robert  Walpole  was 
there,  who  was  immediately  brought  in ;  all  he  said 
was,  "  I  am  come  to  acquaint  your  Majesty  with  the 
death  of  your  father."  The  King  seemed  extremely 
surprised,  but  not  enough  to  forget  his  resentment  to 
Sir  Robert  one  moment ;  neither  his  confusion  nor  his 
joy  at  this  great  change,  nor  the  benevolence  so 
naturally  felt  by  almost  everybody  towards  the  mes- 
senger of  such  good  news,  softened  his  voice  or  his 
countenance  in  one  word  or  look.  Whatever  ques- 
tions Sir  Robert  asked  him  with  regard  to  the  council 
being  summoned,  his  being  proclaimed,  or  other  things 
necessary  immediately  to  be  provided,  the  King  gave 
him  no  other  answer  than  "  Go  to  Chiswick  and  take 
your  directions  from  Sir  Spencer  Compton." 

This  interview  therefore  was  very  short ;  Sir  Robert 
went  as  commanded  to  Chiswick,  and  the  King  and 
Queen  immediately  to  London. 

As  Sir  Robert  Walpole  had  not  the  least  hope  of 
making  his  peace  so  far  as  to  be  employed  in  the  new 
reign,  he  did  not  endeavour  to  disguise  to  Sir  Spencer 
Compton  any  one  circumstance  that  had  passed  at 
Richmond,  but  naturally  and  openly  told  him : — 

"The  King,  Sir,  has  sent  me  to  you  in  such  a 
manner  as  declares  he  intends  you  for  his  minister,  and 
has  commanded  me  to  receive  all  my  instructions  from 
your  mouth.  It  is  what  I  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the 
world  expected  would  be  whenever  this  accident  hap- 
pened. You  have  been  the  Prince's  Treasurer  ever 


32  LOKD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

since  he  came  to  England ;  it  is  a  natural  promotion  to 
continue  you  upon  his  being  King  ;  your  services 
entitle  you  to  that  mark  of  his  favour,  and  your  abilities 
and  experience  in  business  will  both  enable  you  to 
support  the  employment  and  justify  him  in  bestowing 
it.  Everything  is  in  your  hands ;  I  neither  could 
shake  your  power  if  I  would,  nor  would  I  if  I  could. 
My  time  has  been,  yours  is  beginning ;  but  as  we  all 
must  depend  in  some  degree  upon  our  successors,  and 
that  it  is  always  prudent  for  these  successors  by  way  of 
example  to  have  some  regard  for  their  predecessors, 
that  with  the  measure  they  mete  it  may  be  measured 
to  them  again — for  this  reason  I  put  myself  under  your 
protection,  and  for  this  reason  I  expect  you  will  give 
it.  I  desire  no  share  of  power  or  business;  one  of 
your  white  sticks,2  or  any  employment  of  that  sort,  is 
all  I  ask  as  a  mark  from  the  crown  that  I  am  not 
abandoned  to  the  enmity  of  those  whose  envy  is  the 
only  source  of  their  hate,  and  who  consequently  will 
wish  you  no  better  than  they  have  done  me  the 
moment  you  are  vested  with  those  honours  and  that 
authority,  the  possession  of  which  they  will  always 
covet,  and  the  possessor  of  which,  of  course,  they  will 
always  hate." 

Sir  Spencer  Compton  was  at  this  time  Speaker  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  Treasurer  to  the  Prince,  and 
Paymaster  to  the  army;  he  was  a  plodding,  heavy 
fellow,  with  great  application,  but  no  talents,  and  vast 
complaisance  for  a  Court  without  any  address  ;  he  was 
always  more  concerned  for  the  manner  and  form  in 

2  Household  officers — Chamberlain,  Vice-Chamberlain,  Steward,  Trea- 
surer, Cofferer,  &c. — distinguished  by  carrying  a  white  wand. 


1727.  NEW  MINISTER.  33 

which  a  thing  was  to  be  done  than  about  the  propriety 
or  expediency  of  the  thing  itself;  and  as  he  was  calcu- 
lated to  execute  rather  than  to  project,  for  a  subaltern 
rather  than  a  commander,  so  he  was  much  fitter  for  a 
clerk  to  a  minister  than  for  a  minister  to  a  Prince ; 
whatever  was  resolved  upon,  he  would  often  know  how 
properly  to  perform,  but  seldom  how  to  advise  what 
was  proper  to  be  resolved  upon.  His  only  pleasures 
were  money  and  eating;  his  only  knowledge  forms 
and  precedents ;  and  his  only  insinuation  bows  and 
smiles. 

But  as  he  did  not  want  pride  or  ambition,  though  he 
wanted  parts  to  feed  them,  he  was  extremely  pleased 
with  this  speech  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole's,  and  looking 
upon  himself  dazzled  with  the  lustre  of  so  bright  a 
prospect,  as  possessed  already  of  all  the  favour  and 
power  of  this  new  Court,  he  promised  Sir  Robert  Wai- 
pole  his  protection ;  and  asked  in  return  the  assistance 
of  Sir  Robert's  experience  to  enlighten  him  on  the 
present  state  of  affairs,  and  to  instruct  him  in  the  future 
conduct  of  them. 

They  went  together  forthwith  to  London,  and  first 
to  the  Duke  of  Devonshire's,3  who  was  then  President 
of  the  Council,  but  laid  up  with  the  gout  and  not  able 
to  attend  there.  The  Duke  of  Devonshire  was  a  man 
who  had  no  uncommon  portion  of  understanding  ;  and 
as  his  chief  skill  lay  in  painting,  medals,  and  horses, 
he  was  more  able  as  a  virtuoso  than  a  statesman,  and 
a  much  better  jockey  than  he  was  a  politician.  He 
had  a  fair  character,  the  dignity  of  a  man  of  quality, 

3   William,  second  Duke— born  about  1674 — died  in  1729. 
VOL.  I.  D 


34  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

and  was  justly  more  considered  than  most  people  of  the 
same  great  rank  and  fortune  (who,  perhaps,  had  better 
abilities),  from  having  been  always  steady  to  his  party 
and  constant  to  his  friends. 

There  was  nobody  present  at  this  meeting  but  these 
two  knights,  the  master  of  the  house,  my  Lord  Chan- 
cellor King,  Lord  Trevor,  keeper  of  the  Privy  Seal, 
and  Sir  Paul  Methuen,  and  all  that  was  concerted 
there  was  the  common  forms  that  were  to  be  observed 
in  the  meeting  of  the  Council. 

Whilst  these  things  were  regulating,  Sir  Spencer 
Compton  took  Sir  Robert  Walpole  aside  and  desired 
him,  as  a  speech  would  be  necessary  on  the  occasion  to 
be  made  in  council  by  the  King,  and  as  Sir  Robert 
was  so  much  more  accustomed  to  this  sort  of  compo- 
sitions than  himself,  that  he  would  be  so  good  to  go 
into  another  room  and  make  forthwith  a  draught  of 
what  would  be  proper  for  the  King  to  say,  whilst  he 
went  to  Leicester  Fields  to  receive  His  Majesty's 
commands. 

Sir  Robert  at  first  seemed  to  decline  this  office,  but 
Sir  Spencer  Compton  insisting  upon  it  as  a  favour  to 
him,  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  who  was  the  last  man  in 
England  he  ought  to  have  employed  on  this  occasion, 
undertook  at  his  request  that  which,  if  Sir  Spencer 
Compton  had  had  common  sense  or  foresight,  he  would 
have  known  the  better  it  was  done  the  worse  it  would 
be  for  himself. 

That  which  made  this  step  yet  more  absurd  was,  that 
if  this  precedent-monger  had  only  turned  to  the  old 
Gazettes  published  at  the  beginning  of  the  former 
reigns,  he  might  have  copied  full  as  good  a  declaration 


1727.  NEW  MINISTER.  35 

from  these  records  as  any  Sir  Robert  Walpole  could 
give  him. 

Sir  Robert,  retiring  into  a  room  by  himself,  went 
immediately  to  work,  and  Sir  Spencer  Compton  to 
Leicester  Fields,  where  the  King  and  Queen  were 
already  arrived,  and  receiving  the  compliments  of  every 
man  of  all  degrees  and  all  parties  in  the  town ;  the  square 
was  thronged  with  multitudes  of  the  meaner  sort  and 
resounded  with  huzzas  and  acclamations,  whilst  every 
room  in  the  house  was  filled  with  people  of  higher 
rank,  crowding  to  kiss  their  hands  and  to  make  the 
earliest  and  warmest  professions  of  zeal  for  their  ser- 
vice ;  but  the  common  face  of  a  Court  at  this  time  was 
quite  reversed,  for  as  there  was  not  a  creature  in  office, 
excepting  those  who  were  his  servants  as  Prince,  who 
had  not  the  most  sorrowful  and  dejected  countenance 
of  distress  and  disappointment,  so  there  was  not  one 
out  of  employment  who  did  not  already  exult  with  all 
the  insolence  of  the  most  absolute  power  and  settled 
prosperity. 

As  soon  as  Sir  Spencer  Compton  had  been  with  the 
King  in  his  closet,  he  returned  to  his  coach  through  a 
lane  of  bowers  in  the  ante-chambers  and  on  the  stairs, 
who  were  all  shouldering  one  another  to  pay  adoration 
to  this  new  idol,  and  knocking  their  heads  together  to 
whisper  compliments  and  petitions  as  he  passed. 

At  his  return  to  Devonshire  House  he  found  the 
declaration  for  the  King  already  drawn  ;  he  approved 
it,  desired  Sir  Robert's  leave  to  copy  it,  and  begged 
that  he  would  not,  even  to  the  people  in  the  next  room, 
say  anything  of  his  having  done  it:  it  was  first  read  to 
the  company  at  Devonshire  House,  approved  of  there 

n2 


36  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  H. 

without  any  objections,  and  then  carried  by  Sir  Spencer 
Compton  in  his  own  hand-writing  to  the  King.  Sir 
Robert  followed  to  Leicester  Fields,  where  he  found 
Sir  Spencer  Compton  a  good  deal  embarrassed  by  the 
King's  desiring  him  to  alter  one  passage  in  the  declara- 
tion, which  Sir  Spencer  wished  should  stand,  and 
which  if  he  had  not  he  did  not  know  how  to  go  about 
to  change.  He  desired  Sir  Robert  to  go  into  the  King 
and  persuade  him  to  leave  it  as  it  was  originally  drawn, 
which  office  Sir  Robert  readily  accepted,  and  was 
thanked  by  Sir  Spencer  for  the  success  he  ought  to 
have  apprehended.4 

The  council  met,  and  the  King's  declaration  there 
was  as  follows : — 

"  At  the  Court  at  Leicester  House, 
"  14th  June,  1727. 

"  The  sudden  and  unexpected  death  of  the  King,  my 
dearest  father,  has  filled  my  heart  with  so  much  concern  and 
surprise  that  I  am  at  a  loss  how  to  express  myself  upon  this 
great  and  melancholy  occasion. 

"  I  am  sensible  of  the  weight  that  immediately  falls  upon 
me  by  taking  the  government  of  a  nation  so  powerful  at  home 
and  of  such  influence  and  consequence  abroad,  but  my  love 
and  affection  to  this  country,  from  my  knowledge  and  expe- 
rience of  you,  makes  me  resolve  cheerfully  to  undergo  all 
difficulties  for  the  sake  and  good  of  my  people. 

"  The  religion,  laws,  and  liberties  of  the  kingdom  are  most 
dear  to  me,  and  the  preservation  of  the  constitution  in  Church 
and  State  as  it  is  now  happily  established,  shall  be  my  first  and 
always  my  chief  care. 

"  And  as  the  alliances  entered  into  by  the  late  King,  my 

4  This  was  the  opportunity  for  the  Queen's  recommendation  of  Walpole : 
"  She,  a  better  judge  than  her  husband  of  the  capacities  of  the  two  men, 
and  who  had  silently  watched  for  a  proper  moment  for  overturning  the  new 
designations,  did  not  lose  a  moment  in  observing  to  the  King  how  preju- 
dicial it  would  be  to  his  affairs  to  prefer  a  man  in  whose  own  judgment  his 
predecessor  was  the  fittest  person  to  execute  the  office." — Reminiscences. 


1727.  ASPECT  OF  THE  COURT.  37 

father,  with  foreign  powers  have  contributed  to  the  restoring 
the  tranquillity  and  preserving  the  balance  of  Europe,  I  shall 
endeavour  to  cultivate  those  alliances,  and  to  improve  and 
perfect  this  great  work  for  the  honour,  interest,  and  security 
of  my  people." 

The  King  stayed  four  days  in  town,  during  which 
period  Leicester  House,  which  used  to  be  a  desert, 
was  thronged  from  morning  to  night,  like  the  'Change 
at  noon.  But  Sir  Eobert  Walpole  walked  through 
these  rooms  as  if*  they  had  been  still  empty;  his  pre- 
sence, that  used  to  make  a  crowd  wherever  he  ap- 
peared, now  emptied  every  corner  he  turned  to,  and 
the  same  people  who  were  officiously  a  week  ago  clear- 
ing the  way  to  flatter  his  prosperity,  were  now  getting 
out  of  it  to  avoid  sharing  his  disgrace.5  Everybody 
looked  upon  it  as  sure,  and  whatever  professions  of 
adherence  and  gratitude  for  former  favours  were  made 
him  in  private,  there  were  none  among  the  many  his 
power  had  obliged  (excepting  General  Churchill  and 
Lord  Hervey)  who  did  not  in  public  as  notoriously 
decline  and  fear  his  notice  as  they  used  industriously  to 
seek  and  covet  it.  These  two  men  constantly  attended 
him,  and  never  paid  so  much  as  the  compliment  of  a 
visit  to  Sir  Spencer  Compton,  who  had  already  opened 
a  levee  and  received  the  solicitations  of  the  whole  world 
as  the  only  channel  to  the  King's  ear.  Among  these 
herds  was  Mr.  Dodington,  one  of  the  Lords  of  the 

5  "  My  mother  (says  Horace  Walpole),  Sir  Spencer's  designation,  and  not 
its  evaporation,  being  known,  could  not  make  her  way  [to  pay  her  respects 
to  the  King  and  Queen]  between  the  scornful  backs  and  elbows  of  her  late 
devotees,  nor  could  approach  nearer  to  the  Queen  than  the  third  or  fourth 
row ;  but  no  sooner  was  she  descried  by  her  Majesty,  than  the  Queen  cried 
aloud,  There  1  am  sure  1  see  a  friend!  The  torrent  divided  and  shrunk  to 
either  side ;  '  and  as  I  came  away,'  said  my  mother,  '  I  might  have  walked 
over  their  heads  if  I  had  pleased.'  " — Reminiscences, 


38  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

Treasury,  whose  early  application  and  distinguished 
assiduity  at  this  juncture  to  the  supposed  successor  of 
his  former  patron  and  benefactor  was  never  forgiven.8 

Sir  Eobert  Walpole,  his  brother,  Mr.  Horace  Wai- 
pole,  Ambassador  to  France,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle, 
and  Lord  Townshend,  the  two  Secretaries  of  State, 
who  were,  properly  speaking,  the  whole  old  administra- 
tion at  the  death  of  the  late  King,  expected  themselves 
and  were  expected  by  the  whole  world  hourly  to  be 
displaced. 

The  first  of  these  the  present  King  had,  in  the  latter 
years  of  his  father's  reign,  called  rogue  and  rascal,  with- 
out much  reserve,  to  several  people,  upon  several  occa- 
sions ;  to  Horace  Walpole  he  had  as  liberally  and  as 
publicly  dispensed  the  appellations  of  scoundrel  and 
fool ;  and  for  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  the  King,  when 
Prince,  had  been  so  personally  disobliged7  by  him,  that 

6  This  baseness  of  Dodington — a  sample  of  his  whole  life — was  the  more 
remarkable,  because  he  had  addressed  a  panegyrical  epistle  to  Sir  Robert, 
in  which  he  had  promised — in  a  couplet  sneered  at  by  Pope — a  very  dif- 
ferent conduct.     "  I,"  he  said, 

"  To  share  thy  adverse  fate  alone  pretend  ; 
In  power  a  servant,  out  of  power  a  friend." 

7  This  was   a  branch,  and  indeed  the  acme,  of  the  quarrel  between 
George  1.  and  his  son.     "  The  Prince  had  intended  his  uncle,  the  Duke  of 
York,  to  be  godfather,  with  the  King,  to  his  second  son,  William,  Duke  of 
Cumberland,  born  15th  April,  1721.      Nothing  could  equal  the  Prince's 
indignation  when  the  King  named  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  for  the  second 
sponsor,  and  would  hear  of  no  other.     The  christening  took  place,  as  usual, 
in  the  Princess's  bedchamber.     No  sooner  had  the  bishop  closed  the  cere- 
mony, than  the  Prince,  crossing  the  foot  of  the  bed,  stepped  up  to  the  Duke 
of  Newcastle,  and  holding  up  his  hand  and  forefinger  in  a  menacing  attitude, 
said,  '  You  are  a  rascal,  but  I  shall  find  you ;'  meaning,  in  broken  English, 
'  I  shall  find  a  time  to  be  revenged.'     The  King  was  so  provoked  at  this 
outrage  in  his  presence,  that  he  pretended  to  understand  it  as  a  challenge, 
and  the  Prince  was  actually  put  under  arrest.     The  arrest  was  soon  taken 
off;  but  at  night  the  Prince  and  Princess  were  ordered  to  leave  St.  James's 
Palace,  and  retired  to  the  house  of  his  chamberlain,  the  Earl  of  Grantham, 
in  Albemarle  Street." — Reminiscences. 


1727.  ASPECT  OF  THE  COURT.  39 

he  had  sworn  a  thousand  times  he  never  would  forgive 
him ;  and,  joined  to  this  resentment  of  the  particular 
injuries  he  thought  he  had  received  from  him,  he  had, 
as  to  his  public  character,  his  parliamentary  abilities 
and  knowledge  in  business,  the  same  just  contempt 
which  most  other  people  had  contracted  for  his  Grace, 
either  by  their  own  observation  or  the  deference  they 
paid  to  the  opinion  of  the  public.  For  Lord  Towns- 
hend,  the  King  looked  upon  him  as  no  more  an  honest 
man  than  as  an  able  minister ;  and  attributed  to  the 
warmth  of  his  temper  and  his  scanty  genius,  the 
strength  of  his  passions  and  weakness  of  his  under- 
standing, all  the  present  intricacy,  uncertainty,  and 
confusion  in  the  affairs  of  Europe. 

The  whole  world  knowing  this  to  be  His  Majesty's 
opinion  of  these  four  governors  of  this  kingdom,  that, 
as  I  have  just  related,  he  used  always  to  speak  of  the 
first  as  a  great  rogue ;  of  the  second,  as  a  dirty  buf- 
foon ;8  of  the  third,  as  an  impertinent  fool ;  and  of  the 
fourth,  as  a  choleric  blockhead ;  it  was  very  natural 
to  expect  the  reins  of  power  would  not  long  be  left  in 
their  hands :  and  when  Lord  Malpas,9  son-in-law  to  Sir 
Robert  Walpole,  was  turned  out  of  the  Mastership  of 
the  Robes,  and  not  in  the  softest  manner,  the  day  after 
the  King  came  to  the  crown — it  was  concluded  he  led 
a  dance  which  the  rest  were  soon  to  follow. 

If  it  had  not  been  for  the  stupidity  of  Sir  Spencer 
Compton,  who  did  not  know  his  own  strength,  or  what 

8  The  same  terms  that  his  nephew  Horace  often  applies  to  him.     He 
was  created  Lord  Walpole,  and  was  the  ancestor  of  the  present  house  of 
Orford. 

9  George,  third  Lord  Cholmondeley,  married  Sir  Robert's  only  legiti- 
mate daughter :  their  issue  are  Sir  Robert's  heirs,  and  inherit  Houghton. 


40  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

use  to  make  of  it,  they  had  all — but  certainly  at  least 
Sir  Kobert  Walpole — been  displaced  the  very  day  after 
the  King  came  to  the  crown ;  but  as  this  awkward 
statesman  was  either  blind  to  his  own  interest  or  igno- 
rant of  his  own  power,  he  suffered  that  opportunity  to 
slip  through  his  hands,  which,  if  he  had  had  skill  to  im- 
prove, or  resolution  to  seize,  he  might  indisputably  have 
been  what  he  was  equally  ambitious  of  and  unfit  for. 

But  as  the  King  was  not  pressed  to  the  taking  of  this 
step,  and  that  his  Civil  List  (which  was  at  present  the 
chief  object  in  his  view)  was  in  less  than  a  fortnight  to 
be  settled  in  Parliament,  he  very  naturally  deferred  any 
change  in  the  administration  till  that  great  and  favourite 
point  was  determined ;  and  that  it  might  be  adjusted  to 
his  satisfaction  with  the  unanimous  concurrence  of  all 
parties,  he  very  prudently  chose  not  to  make  the  one 
desperate,  though  he  gave  the  others  hopes ;  and  kept 
the  interest  of  every  other  body  in  suspense,  that  his 
own  might  be  pursued  without  opposition :  though  per- 
haps, like  many  other  refining  historians,  I  attribute 
that  to  prudence  which  was  only  owing  to  accident — 
two  things  often  mistaken  one  for  the  other.  But 
whether  it  was  the  effect  of  policy  or  the  natural  conse- 
quence of  the  present  juncture  of  the  affairs,  whatever 
was  the  cause  of  his  conduct,  this  was  certainly  the 
effect — that  his  postponing  thus  the  gratification  of  his 
resentment  facilitated  the  success  of  his  own  affairs  in 
Parliament,  gave  him  time  to  cool,  the  Queen  time  to 
think,  and  Sir  Robert  time  to  work. 

One  other  very  material  reason  which  might  induce 
the  King  to  suspend  the  change  of  his  ministry  I  must 
not  omit  here  to  relate.  Mr.  Walpole,  who  (as  I  be- 


1727.  INFLUENCE  OF  FRANCE.  41 

fore  observed)  was  ambassador  in  France  at  the  de- 
mise of  the  late  King,  immediately  upon  his  receiving 
the  news  of  the  King's  death  went  to  Versailles,  to  the 
Cardinal  de  Fleury,  then  first  minister,  and  got  him 
to  write  a  letter  to  our  new  King,  full  of  assurances  of 
the  inviolable  fidelity  with  which  he  was  determined 
to  adhere  to  all  treaties  and  engagements  entered  into 
with  his  father,  provided  the  King  on  his  part  was  in- 
clined to  act  on  the  same  plan,  and  to  pursue  the  same 
measures,  that  his  father  had  done ;  and  as  the  interest 
both  of  France  and  England  at  this  important  critical 
juncture  depended  on  the  harmony  and  good  under- 
standing which  he  wished  to  preserve  between  the  two 
kingdoms,  he  hoped  His  Majesty  would  not  give  the 
other  powers  of  Europe  such  an  advantage  over  them 
as  to  weaken  that  union  which  might  give  laws  to  the 
rest  of  the  world  whilst  it  subsisted,  but  must  expose 
the  two  kingdoms  to  receive  laws  from  others  whenever 
it  was  broken. 

With  this  letter  Mr.  Walpole  arrived  in  England 
the  Sunday  after  the  news  came  of  the  King's  death 
[June  \§ih~\  ;  and  though  his  coming  was  not  the  only 
thing  that  turned  the  scale  in  favour  of  the  old  mi- 
nistry, yet  it  certainly  threw  in  a  considerable  weight 
whilst  it  was  in  balance. 

On  the  19th  the  Court  removed  to  Kensington, 
where  the  King,  by  the  audiences  that  were  asked  and 
the  offers  that  were  made  to  him  by  the  great  men  of  all 
denominations,  found  himself  set  up  at  auction,  and 
every  one  bidding  for  his  favour  at  the  expense  of  the 
public. 

The  greatest  offer,  and  the  most  infamous  for  the 


42  LORD  IIERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

bidder,  was  made  by  that  affected  patriot  Mr.  Pulteney, 
who  proposed  to  the  King  the  same  800,000/.  per 
year  for  his  Civil  List  which  was  afterwards  given, 
with  the  additional  advantage — which  was  not  given — 
of  taking  off  that  tax  of  sixpence  in  the  pound  on 
all  Civil  List  salaries  and  pensions,  and  charging 
the  Sinking  Fund,  in  lieu  of  the  Civil  List  establish- 
ment, with  that  30,000/.  a  year.10 

The  saddling  the  Sinking  Fund  with  this  tax  would 
certainly  have  been  detrimental  to  the  nation,  as  it 
must  of  course  have  protracted  its  debts  by  lessening 
the  sum  appropriated  for  the  payment  of  them ;  nor 
was  it  very  politicly  calculated  even  for  the  purpose 
it  was  designed  for.  As  it  would  only  have  increased  a 
little  the  salaries  of  the  King's  servants,  without  being 
any  gain  to  the  King  himself,  His  Majesty,  whose 
avarice  he  sought  to  tickle  and  allure  by  this  proposal, 
was  not  likely  to  be  much  obliged  by  it. 

And  now  the  great  stroke  of  displacing  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  being  so  long  suspended,  his  enemies  began  to 
fear,  and  his  friends  to  hope,  that  this  protracted  re- 
prieve might  at  last  turn  into  an  absolute  pardon. 
Whilst  it  hung  in  this  equilibrium  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
received  the  following  letter  from  an  unknown  hand : — 

"  I  am  one  of  the  many  you  have  obliged,11  and  one  of  the 
few  that  will  never  forget  it.  My  gratitude  for  these  obliga- 
tions, and  the  desire  I  have  to  do  you  service,  is  the  sole 

10  Here  seems  some  mistake  :  6d.  in  the  pound  on  the  whole  Civil  List 
would  have  been  but  20,000/.  a  year ;  and  as  it  was  payable  only  on  salaries, 
pensions,  &c.,  it  would  have  been  proportionably  less. 

n  It  appears  subsequently  that  Lord  Hervey  had  a  pension  of  1000/. — 
but  would  have  preferred  office,  and  was,  I  think,  disappointed  and  vexed 
at  not  being  included  in  Sir  Robert's  official  arrangements.  He  soon  after 
went  to  Italy,  where  he  remained  for  a  year  and  a-half. 


1727.  ANONYMOUS  LETTER.  43 

occasion  of  this  letter ;  nor  have  I  so  mean  an  opinion  of  your 
understanding,  or  so  good  a  one  of  my  own,  as  to  imagine  that, 
at  this  very  important  crisis,  you  can  want  my  advice  how  to 
act.  But  though  you  are  too  skilful  to  want  counsel,  yet  the 
most  skilful  may  want  intelligence :  and  there  are  certainly 
schemes  on  foot  to  impose  upon  you.  The  new  King's  sole 
thought  and  care  at  present  is  the  establishment  of  his  Civil 
List,  which  he  is  advised  (and  perhaps  by  your  chief  anta- 
gonist) to  commit  to  your  care.  He  is  told  that  your  appre- 
hensions are  such  that  at  this  juncture  you  dare  refuse  him 
nothing ;  that  some  hopes  thrown  in,  and  a  show  of  favour,  will 
bind  you  still  faster  to  his  interest ;  in  short,  the  Queen  speaks 
to  you  through  his  mouth :  but  this  point  once  settled,  you 
are  to  be  dropt ;  neither  would  you  be  allowed  this  share  in 
the  administration,  but  that  in  case  their  demands  should  be 
thought  exorbitant,  you  may  incur  all  the  odium  with  the 
people,  though  you  are  to  be  deprived  of  all  the  merit  towards 
the  King.  Others  are  to  have  the  advantage  of  disposing  of 
this  money,  though  you  are  to  undergo  all  the  unpopular  diffi- 
culty of  providing  it.  You  are  to  plough  the  field,  and  others 
are  to  reap  and  distribute  the  harvest.  It  is  already  given  out 
that  you  are  bidding  with  the  public  money  to  buy  your  peace 
with  the  King :  in  a  word,  Lord  Sunderland's  policy  in  1720 
is  revived  :12  may  it  have  the  same  fate  ;  and  end  as  much  to 
your  advantage  as  it  is  designed  for  your  ruin.  I  have  no 
notion  but,  where  you  have  access,  you  must  have  credit,  and 
that  your  being  esteemed  must  always  be  the  consequence  of 
your  being  heard.  The  things  I  have  here  told  you,  came 
to  my  knowledge  merely  by  accident,  and  the  babbling  in- 
discretion of  a  fool  who  wishes  you  ill.  Your  enemies  un- 
doubtedly take  this  to  be  your  present  situation  at  court ; 
whether  well  founded  in  their  opinion  or  not,  I  know  not.  All 
happiness,  success,  and  prosperity  attend  you.  If  this  letter 


18  This  alludes  to  Walpole's  having  been  employed  by  Sunderland's 
ministry  in  1720  to  extricate  the  finances  of  the  country  from  the  diffi- 
culties created  by  the  South  Sea  bubble.  It  seems  from  this  hint  that 
Sunderland  had  hoped  that  Walpole's  popularity  might  be  damaged  by 
that  commission. 


44  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

proves  of  any  use  to  you,  I  shall  be  glad ;  if  it  is  of  none, 
I  shall  not  be  ashamed,  because  you  will  never  know  from 
whence  it  comes.  And  I  am  sure  I  mean  it  well." 

This  letter  Sir  Eobert  Walpole  afterwards  found  out 
had  been  written  by  Lord  Hervey.  Sir  Robert  erased 
that  passage  where  it  said  "  The  Queen  speaks  to  you 
through  the  King's  mouth,"  and  then  showed  the  letter 
to  the  Queen,  to  let  her  know  what  his  friends  thought 
and  the  world  said  of  his  present  situation.  The  Queen 
assured  him  she  believed  no  man  so  capable  of  serving 
the  King  as  himself;  that  her  interest,  if  she  had  any, 
should  never  be  employed  for  any  other  body ;  that  she 
was  sure  the  King's  intentions  were  to  continue  him ; 
and  that  she  thought  the  term  of  "  policy  "  given  in  that 
letter  to  the  scheme  suggested  to  be  at  present  the 
foundation  of  the  King's  seeming  favour  to  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  would  be  much  too  soft  a  word  for  so  much 
deceit  and  treachery.  When  the  King  desired  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  to  fix  the  Civil  List  revenue  in  the 
way  I  shall  presently  relate,  he  took  him  by  the  hand, 
and  among  many  other  things  that  he  said,  intimating 
his  designs  to  continue  him  in  his  service,  he  made  use 
of  this  very  strong  expression :  "  Consider,  Sir  Robert, 
wliat  makes  me  easy  in  this  matter  will  prove  for  your 
ease  too;  it  is  for  my  life  it  is  to  he  fixed,  and  it  is  for 
your  life" 

On  the  27th  June  the  Parliament  met,  when  the  Civil 
List,  unopposed  by  any  body  but  Mr.  Shippen,13  the 

!3  William  Shippen,  of  the  Middle  Temple,  was  in  Parliament  (with 
one  short  interval)  from  1707  to  1743.  In  1717  he  was  sent  to  the  Tower 
for  saying  that  "  the  second  paragraph  of  the  King's  speech  seemed  rather 
calculated  for  the  meridian  of  Germany  than  Great  Britain.  The  King  is 
a  stranger  to  our  language  and  constitution."  In  allusion  to  this  plain 
speaking,  Pope  calls  him  "Downright  Shippen." 


1727.  CIVIL  LIST.  45 

head  of  the  veteran  stanch  Jacobites,  was  settled  in  the 
following  manner : — The  produce  of  those  funds  that 
had  been  tied  down  for  the  provision  of  700,000/. 
a  year  on  the  late  King,  and  100,000/.  more  on  the 
Prince  of  Wales,  was  now  given  entirely  to  the  present 
King,  without  a  deduction  of  100,000/.  to  the  present 
Prince  of  Wales,  but  leaving  the  provision  for  him  to 
the  discretion  and  generosity  of  his  father,14  and  without 
giving  the  overplus  of  800,000/.  to  the  Sinking  Fund, 
which  was  the  use  to  which  the  surplus  of  these  funds 
in  the  late  reign  was  appropriated  after  the  700,000/. 
was  paid :  so  that  this  King  had  the  whole  produce  of 
these,  which  was  then  computed  at  an  average  to 
amount  to  900, OOO/.  a  year ;  and  if  that  computation 
had  proved  true,  the  Civil  List  of  this  King  would  have 
been,  by  200,000/.  a  year,  a  greater  revenue  than  any 
King  of  England  was  ever  known  to  have  before.  The 
ridiculous  reasons  given  for  this  exorbitant  augmentation 
of  it  were,  the  expense  of  a  wife  and  a  great  many  chil- 
dren— as  if  no  King  of  England  before  had  ever  been 
married,  or  to  a  pregnant  wife ;  and  the  other  sensible 
argument  was,  things  being  so  much  dearer  than  they 
used  to  be,  and  consequently  housekeeping  so  much 
more  expensive ; — good  excuses  for  a  farmer's  backward- 
ness in  paying  his  rent,  but  not  things  that  could  be 
much  felt  in  the  manner  of  living  of  a  king:  but 


i*  The  cause,  or  at  least  a  reasonable  excuse,  of  this  difference,  may 
have  been  that  George  II.  came  over  at  his  father's  accession,  at  the  age 
of  thirty-one,  with  his  wife  and  daughters,  and  necessarily  required  a 
separate  establishment.  Prince  Frederic,  on  the  contrary,  was  at  his  father's 
accession  about  twenty,  a  bachelor,  had  not  yet  come  to  England — and, 
in  fact,  did  not  arrive  for  near  a  year  and  a-half  later,  when  he  was  created 
Prince  of  Wales. 


46  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

unreasonable  as  it  was  thought  to  settle  the  Civil  List 
in  this  extravagant  manner,  yet  the  bill  passed  the 
House  of  Commons  without  one  negative  but  Mr. 
Shippen's.  No  one  thought  it  reasonable,  yet  no  one 
opposed  it;  no  one  wished  for  it,  and  no  one  voted 
against  it:  and  I  believe  it  is  the  single  instance  that 
can  be  given,  of  a  question  carried  there,  without  two 
opponents  or  well-wishers. 

At  the  same  time  the  Queen's  jointure  was  settled ; 
for  the  provision  of  which,  in  this  fit  of  generosity,  these 
frugal  dispensers  of  the  people's  money  were  pleased  to 
bestow  upon  her,  besides  Somerset-House  and  Rich- 
mond-Lodge, 100,000^.  a  year,  which  was  just  double 
what  any  Queen  of  England  had  ever  had  before;  to 
such  a  pitch  of  extravagance  did  these  contending  par- 
liamentary bidders  raise  the  price  of  Court  favour  at 
this  royal  auction.15 

When  these  two  great  and  laudable  works  were  per- 
fected, the  old  Parliament  was  to  be  dissolved  and 
a  new  one  chosen.  It  was  at  their  dismission,  that  the 
decisive  stroke  was  struck  in  the  contention  for  power 
between  Sir  Robert  Walpole  and  Sir  Spencer  Compton  : 
the  King  had  ordered  them  both  to  make  him  a  speech, 
and  when  he  came  to  choose,  shook  his  head  at  poor 
Sir  Spencer's,  and  approved  of  Sir  Robert's. 

The  only  two  things  that  were  done  during  this  short 
interregnum  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole's,  contrary  to  his 
inclination,  were,  first,  the  displacing  of  his  son-in-law, 
Lord  Malpas,  which  I  have  already  mentioned ;  and, 
secondly,  the  turning  a  Sir  William  Yonge,  a  known 
creature  of  his,  out  of  the  Commission  of  Treasury. 

15  The  Jointure  vote  passed  nem.  con.,  and  so  did  the  Civil  List  Bill. 


1727.  YONGE.  47 

The  King  used  always  to  call  him  "  Stinking  Yonge," 
and  had  conceived  and  expressed  such  an  insurmount- 
able dislike  to  his  person  and  character,  that  no  interest 
nor  influence  was  potent  enough  at  this  time  to  prevail 
with  His  Majesty  to  continue  him. 

Sir  William  Yonge  was  certainly  a  very  remarkable 
instance  how  much  character  and  reputation  depend 
sometimes  on  unaccountable  accidents  and  the  caprice 
of  mankind ;  and  an  undeniable  exception  to  what  I 
think  (some  few  cases  excepted)  a  pretty  general  rule — 
that  is,  that  however  prejudiced  some  particulars  may 
be  for,  and  others  against,  such  men  in  public  stations 
and  characters,  yet  the  true  merit  of  such  men  com- 
monly finds  and  settles  its  own  weight,  as  much  as  any 
commodity  in  a  market ;  and  is  generally  rated  accord- 
ing to  its  real  value  in  public  opinion,  as  much  as  the 
other  in  public  sale. 

I  acknowledge  Sir  William  Yonge  an  exception  to 
this  maxim ;  for,  without  having  done  anything  that  I 
know  of  remarkably  profligate — anything  out  of  the 
common  track  of  a  ductile  courtier  and  a  parliamen- 
tary tool — his  name  was  proverbially  used  to  express 
everything  pitiful,  corrupt,  and  contemptible.16  It  is 
true  he  was  a  great  liar,  but  rather  a  mean  than  a 
vicious  one.  He  had  been  always  constant  to  the  same 
party ;  he  was  good-natured  and  good-humoured — 
never  offensive  in  company;  nobody's  friend — nobody's 
enemy.  He  had  no  wit  in  private  conversation ;  but 

is  Sir  Robert  Walpole  used  to  say  of  him,  that  nothing  but  so  bad  a  cha- 
racter could  have  kept  down  his  talents,  and  nothing  but  his  talents  have 
kept  up  his  character.  Both  Horace  Walpole  and  Lord  Hervey  seem  to 
have  been  strongly  prejudiced  against  Yonge  ;  and  Pope  makes  many  dis- 
paraging allusions  to  him. 


48  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

was  remarkably  quick  in  taking  hints  to  harangue 
upon  in  Parliament ;  he  had  a  knack  of  words  there 
that  was  surprising,  considering  how  little  use  they 
were  to  him  anywhere  else.  He  had  a  great  command 
of  what  is  called  parliamentary  language,  and  a  talent 
of  talking  eloquently  without  a  meaning,  and  expa- 
tiating agreeably  upon  nothing,  beyond  any  man,  I 
believe,  that  ever  had  the  gift  of  speech. 

These  advantages  made  him  very  useful  to  Sir 
Kobert  Walpole,  who  caressed  him  without  loving  him, 
and  employed  him  without  trusting  him ;  but  the  eclat 
even  of  this  great  minister's  favour  could  neither  whiten 
Sir  William  Yonge's  character  nor  keep  him  in  em- 
ployment: the  one  was,  in  my  opinion,  unreasonably 
run  down,  and  the  other  unreasonably  taken  from  him ; 
for  he  had  done  nothing  at  all  to  deserve  to  forfeit  the 
latter,  and  nothing  more  to  deserve  to  lose  the  first, 
than  what  a  thousand  other  people  had  done  without 
losing  either.  However,  Sir  Kobert  advised  him,  upon 
this  disgrace,  to  be  patient,  not  clamorous — to  sub- 
mit, not  resent  or  oppose — to  be  as  subservient  to 
the  Court  in  attendance,  and  give  the  King  his  assist- 
ance as  constantly  and  as  assiduously  in  Parliament  as 
if  he  was  paid  for  it :  telling  him  and  all  the  world  what 
afterwards  proved  true,  that  whatever  people  might 
imagine,  Yonge  was  not  sunk,  he  had  only  dived,  and 
would  yet  get  up  again.17 

This  was  the  single  alteration  made  after  the  disso- 
lution of  the  Parliament,  contrary  to  the  will  and 

17  He  was  re-appointed  to  the  Treasury  in  1730,  and  thence  promoted  to 
be  Secretary-at-War  in  1735,  which  he  held  till  1746.  He  was  the  father 
of  Sir  George  Yonge,  also  Secretary-at-War  in  1795.  The  father  and  son 
represented  Honiton  in  thirteen  successive  parliaments. 


1727.  LORD  BERKELEY.  49 

representation  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole ;  and  though  this 
was  a  proof  that  he  was  forced  to  bend  in  one  instance, 
yet  every  other  change  demonstrated  his  influence. 

His  son-in-law,  Lord  Malpas,  was  put  into  the  Admi- 
ralty ;  his  great  rival  and  enemy,  Mr.  Pulteney,  denied 
leave  to  stand  candidate  upon  the  interest  of  the  Court 
for  Westminster — never  consulted  in  the  closet,  and 
always  very  coldly  received  in  the  Drawing-room  ;  a 
whole  race  of  Chetwynds,18  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  declared 
ill-wishers,  were  turned  out  in  a  lump ;  and,  what  was 
reckoned  the  strongest  demonstration  of  his  power, 
Lord  Berkeley  removed  from  the  head  of  the  Admi- 
ralty, and  Lord  Torrington  appointed  to  succeed  him. 
Lord  Berkeley  was  the  admiral  who  brought  the  late 
King  over;  born  and  educated  a  stanch  Whig,  and 
had  never  deviated  a  moment  one  step  of  his  life  from 
these  principles.  He  had  been  of  the  late  King's  bed- 
chamber, and  at  the  head  of  the  fleet  during  all  the  late 
reign.  He  was  a  man  of  great  family  and  great  quality, 
rough,  proud,  hard,  and  obstinate,  with  excellent  good 
natural  parts,  but  so  uncultivated  that  he  was  totally 
ignorant  of  every  branch  of  knowledge  but  his  pro- 
fession. He  was  haughty  and  tyrannical,  but  honour- 
able, gallant,  observant  of  his  word ;  but  equally  in- 
capable of  flattering  a  prince,  bending  to  a  minister,  or 
lying  to  anybody  he  had  to  deal  with.  Lord  Torring- 
ton was  more  supple  and  more  tractable ;  he  had  re- 
ceived the  honour  of  peerage  in  the  late  reign  as  a 

18  Lord  Chetwynd  from  the  Rangership  of  St.  James's  Park — William 
Chetwynd  from  the  Admiralty — John  from  the  Board  of  Trade,  &c.  It 
appears  by  a  complaining  letter  from  Lady  Chetwynd  in  the  Suffolk  Cor. 
(i.  151)  that  they  had  put  their  trust  in  Sir  Spencer  Compton  and  Mrs. 
Howard. 

VOL.  I.  E 


50  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

reward  for  an  action,  for  which  he  ought  to  have  lost 
his  head — which  was  his  attacking,  without  orders 
countersigned  by  a  Secretary  of  State,  the  Spanish  fleet 
in  the  Mediterranean,  in  favour  of  the  Emperor,  of 
whom  our  King  wanted  to  buy,  with  Sicily,  the  in- 
vestiture of  Bremen  and  Verden ;  which,  by  the  by, 
he  was  never  able  to  obtain.  Voltaire,  in  his  '  History 
of  Charles  XII.  of  Sweden,"  says,  "  Le  Roi  George 
n'avoit  aucun  but  en  toutes  ses  actions  que  la  possession 
de  ces  deux  places,  sur  lesquelles  il  n'avoit  aucun  droit, 
que  de  les  avoit  achete  a  vil  prix  aux  Danois,  a  qui 
elles  n'appartenaient  pas." 

Lord  Torrington,  who  knew  the  late  King's  mind, 
and  never  had  "  aucun  but  pour  aucune  action  "  but  the 
making  his  court  and  his  fortune,  undertook  this  affair 
in  the  Mediterranean  upon  very  unsafe  and  unwarrant- 
able clandestine  orders,  transmitted  to  him  from  the 
late  King,  through  the  hands  of  Bernsdor£  his  Ger- 
man minister.  Lord  Torrington  succeeded,  beat  the 
Spaniards,  put  the  Emperor  in  possession  of  Sicily,  got 
vast  sums  of  money,  cheated  the  sailors,  and  returned 
home,  thanked,  caressed,  and  rewarded,  instead  of 
being  censured,  broke,  or  hanged ;  which,  indisputably, 
he  ought  to  have  been,  for  risking  an  English  fleet  with- 
out a  legal  English  authority.19 


is  This  is  altogether  a  mistake,  into  which,  I  see  by  old  Lord  Bristol's 
letters,  that  he  may  have  led  Lord  Hervey,  who  was  himself  too  young  to 
have  been  acquainted  with  the  details  of  the  affair.  It  appears  from  '  An 
Account  of  the  Expedition,'  §r.,  published  in  1739  (which  is  confirmed 
by  official  documents),  that  Sir  George  Byng  had  regular  orders  from  the 
Admiralty,  dated  12th  May,  1718,  to  follow  such  instructions  as  he  should 
receive  from  his  Majesty  through  his  Secretary  of  State — a  form  not  unusual 
for  matters  in  which  great  secrecy  or  despatch  might  be  necessary.  These 
instructions  were  signed  by  the  King  on  the  26th  May,  and  officially  con- 


1727.  LORD  TORRINGTON.  51 

This  was  the  man  appointed  to  succeed  Lord 
Berkeley.  He  had  been  in  his  youth  a  resolute,  able, 
enterprising  fellow ;  mercenary  and  knowing  in  his 
business;  but  now  so  declining  in  a  very  advanced 
age,  that  the  edge  of  all  these  qualities,  except  his 
avarice,  was  pretty  well  blunted.  He  was  now  nothing 
more  than  an  inferior  man,  weakened  both  in  body  and 
mind,  neither  able  to  execute  or  project  any  great 
things,  and  fit  only  to  direct  in  the  common  routine  of 
the  sea  affairs,  which  long  experience  in  that  business 
made  him  as  capable  of  as  any  other  man  in  the  fleet. 
And  as  there  had  always  been  a  jealousy,  and  no  very 
cordial  friendship,  between  him  and  Lord  Berkeley,  I 
believe  Lord  Torrington  was  pitched  upon  for  this  post, 
not  so  much  from  desiring  to  show  him  favour  as  to 
embitter  Lord  Berkeley's  disgrace.  The  little  friend- 
ship Lord  Berkeley  had  ever  professed  to  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  and  the  little  complaisance  he  had  ever  shown 
him,  were  certainly  very  natural  reasons  for  Sir  Robert 
to  dislike,  and  to  desire  to  remove  him ;  and  Lord 
Berkeley's  great  intimacy  with  and  attachment  to  Lord 
Bolingbroke  were  the  means  he  put  into  Sir  Robert's 
hands  to  overturn  his  interest  with  the  King,  who  mor- 
tally hated  Lord  Bolingbroke  and  everybody  that  had 
to  do  with  him.20 

veyed  to  Byng  by  Mr.  Secretary  Craggs,  in  a  letter  dated  the  27th,  which 
states  that  they  had  been  personally  discussed  the  day  before  between  the 
Admiral,  Lord  Sunderland,  Lord  Stanhope,  and  Craggs.  There  is  no  trace 
of  any  Hanoverian  minister  in  the  affair. — See  Campbell's  Adm.,  iv.  433. 

20  Horace  Walpole  gives  an  explanation  of  this  disgrace  very  different, 
and  so  strange  as  to  be  hardly  credible :  "  On  the  death  of  George  I., 
Queen  Caroline  found  in  his  cabinet  a  proposal  of  the  Earl  of  Berkeley,  then, 
I  think,  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  to  seize  the  Prince  of  Wales,  and  con- 
vey him  to  America,  whence  he  should  never  be  heard  of  more.  George  I. 
was  too  humane  to  listen  to  such  an  atrocious  deed." — Reminiscences. 


52  LOUD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

However,  this  incident,  as  well  as  every  other  mate- 
rial occurrence  at  this  time,  proved  to  all  mankind  that 
the  little  transient  interruption  that  diverted  the  stream 
of  Sir  Robert's  power  was  now  borne  down ;  and  that 
the  current  was  brought  back  again  and  flowed  quietly 
in  its  former  channel.  It  was  now  understood  by  every- 
body that  Sir  Robert  was  the  Queen's  minister ;  that 
whoever  he  favoured,  she  distinguished ;  and  whoever 
she  distinguished,  the  King  employed.  His  reputed 
mistress  Mrs.  Howard,  and  the  Speaker  his  reputed 
minister,  were  perceived  to  be  nothing ;  and  Mr.  Pul- 
teney  and  Lord  Bolingbroke,  in  the  algebraical  phrase, 
less  than  nothing :  that  is,  it  appeared  very  plain  that 
his  Majesty  had  no  political  regard  for  the  first,  no 
opinion  of  the  capacity  of  the  second,  a  dislike  for  the 
conduct  of  the  third,  and  an  abhorrence  for  the  cha- 
racter of  the  last. 

But  as  Sir  Spencer  Compton  had  conceived  too 
strong  hopes  of  being  Sir  Robert's  superior  ever  to 
serve  in  the  House  of  Commons  quietly  under  him,  and 
that  it  might  be  dangerous,  consequently,  to  suffer  him 
in  the  chair  of  a  new  Parliament,  Sir  Robert  advised 
the  making  him  a  peer;  accordingly  he  was  created 
Baron  of  Wilmington ;  and  on  this  occasion,  I  think, 
he  might  have  said,  like  Agrippina,  the  mother  of  Nero, 
in  Racine's  '  Britannicus,' — 

"  Tous  ces  presens,  helas !  irritent  mon  depit, 
Je  vois  mes  honneurs  croitre,  et  tomber  mon  credit." 

It  was  just  his  case ;  but  he  did  not  seem  to  feel  the  ridi- 
cule or  the  contemptibleness  of  his  situation :  that  snow- 
ball levee  of  his,  which  had  opened  and  that  gathered 
so  fast,  melted  away  at  as  quick  a  pace ;  his  visionary 


1727.  MRS.  HOWARD.  53 

prospects  of  authority  and  grandeur  vanished  into  air  ;21 
and  yet  he  seemed  just  as  well  satisfied  to  be  bowing 
and  grinning  in  the  antechamber,  possessed  of  a  lucrative 
employment  without  credit,  and  dishonoured  by  a  title 
which  was  the  mark  of  his  disgrace,  as  if  he  had  been 
dictating  in  the  closet,  sole  fountain  of  Court  favour 
at  home,  and  regulator  of  all  the  national  transactions 
abroad. 

Mrs.  Howard  (afterwards  Countess  of  Suffolk)  felt 
her  situation  in  a  very  different  manner;  and  though 
she  was  too  wise  and  too  prudent  to  have  given  herself 
the  air  of  a  favourite,  without  feeling  she  was  so,  or  to 
have  affected  the  appearance  of  power,  without  knowing 
whether  she  should  be  able  to  maintain  it;  yet,  without 
doubt,  she  had  tried  her  strength  in  private,  and  was 
mortified  to  find  she  had  tried  it  to  so  little  purpose,22 
well  knowing  that  some  degree  of  contempt  would 
attend  the  not  having  what  in  her  situation  the  world 
would  expect  her  to  have,  though  she  had  never  pre- 
tended to  be  possessed  of  it ;  and  that  a  mistress  who 
could  not  get  power  was  not  a  much  more  agreeable  or 
respectable  character  than  a  minister  who  could  not 
keep  it 

21  Swift,  in  one  of  his  playful  letters  to  Patty  Blunt,  alludes  to  the  state 
of  abandonment  in  which  poor  Sir  Spencer  was  left: — "How  will  you 
pass  this  summer,  for  want  of  a  squire  to  Ham  Common  or  Walpole's  Lodge  ? 
— for  as  to  Richmond  Lodge  and  Marble  Hill,  they  are  abandoned  as  much 
as  Sir  Spencer  Compton." 

22  This,  though  also  so  stated  in  the  '  Reminiscences,'  seems  not  quite 
exact.     The  first  peer  of  the  first  batch  made  by  the  new  King  was  Mrs. 
Howard's  brother,  Sir  John  Hobart ;  and  while  endeavouring  to  accom- 
plish this  great  object  for  her  own  family,  she  was  probably  little  inclined 
to  risk  her  favour  or  her  interest  for  the  political  objects  of  persons  with 
whom  she  had  no  other  tie  than  social  acquaintance.     See  the  Biographical 
Notice  to  the  Suffolk  Papers. 


54  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

Mrs.  Howard  was  of  a  good  family,  but  of  so  nu- 
merous a  one,  that  her  fortune  originally  was  a  very 
small  one.23  She  was  sister  to  Lord  Hobart,  and  had 
been  married  very  young  to  Mr.  Howard,  a  wrong- 
headed,  ill-tempered,  obstinate,  drunken,  extravagant, 
brutal  younger  brother  of  the  Earl  of  Suffolk's  family. 
This  ill-matched,  unfortunate  couple  were  in  a  few  years 
reduced  to  such  low  circumstances  that  they  could  not 
remain  in  England,  and  went,  almost  in  despair,  to 
make  their  court  and  seek  their  fortune,  in  Queen 
Anne's  time,  at  Hanover.  Mrs.  Howard  was  there 
taken  into  the  present  Queen's  service,  and  laid  the 
foundation  of  that  interest  (such  as  it  is)  which  she  is 
now  possessed  of.  Though  the  present  King  was  never 
then  said  to  think  of  her  as  a  mistress,  and  when,  im- 
mediately upon  his  first  coming  over,  he  attached  him- 
self to  Mrs.  Bellenden,24  a  Maid  of  Honour  to  the 
Princess,  Mrs.  Howard  was  always  third  of  that  party, 
and  upon  a  very  different  foot  from  that  on  which  her 
correspondence  with  the  King  is  now  thought  to  stand. 
Mrs.  Bellenden,  who  was  afterwards  married  to  Co- 
lonel Campbell,  was  incontestably  the  most  agreeable, 
the  most  insinuating,  and  the  most  likeable  woman  of 
her  time ;  made  up  of  every  ingredient  likely  to  engage 
or  attach  a  lover.  But  as  she  had  to  do  with  a  man  in- 
capable of  being  engaged  by  any  charm  but  habit,  or 
attached  to  any  woman  but  his  wife ;  a  man  who  was 

23  Horace  Walpole  also  calls  her  fortune  "a  slender  one-"  but  she  had 
6000/., — no  inconsiderable  sum  in  those  days. 

24  Mary,  youngest  daughter  of  the  second  Lord  Bellenden.     Her  hus- 
band became  after  her  death  fifth  Duke  of  Argyll.     See  more  of  this 
charming  woman  (celebrated  also  by  Gay  and  Pope)  in  the  Reminiscences 
and  the  Suffolk  Correspondence. 


1727.  MARY  BELLENDEN.  55 

better  pleased  with  the  air  of  an  intrigue  than  any  other 
part  of  it — and  who  did  not  care  to  pay  a  valuable 
consideration  even  for  that — she  began  to  find  out  that 
her  situation  was  only  having  the  scandal  of  being  the 
Prince's  mistress  without  the  pleasure,  and  the  confine- 
ment without  the  profit:  she,  therefore,  very  wisely, 
resolved  to  withdraw  her  own  neck  as  well  as  she  could, 
little  by  little,  out  of  this  unpleasant  yoke;  and  by 
this  conduct  she  left  Mrs.  Howard,  who  had  more 
steadiness  and  more  perseverance,  to  try  what  she 
could  make  of  a  game  which  the  other  had  found  so 
tedious  and  so  unprofitable,  that  she  had  no  pleasure 
in  playing  it,  and  saw  little  to  be  won  by  continu- 
ing it. 

The  Prince  passed,  every  evening  of  his  life,  three 
or  four  hours  in  Mrs.  Howard's  lodging,  who,  as  dresser 
to  the  Princess,  always  in  waiting,  was  lodged  all  the 
year  round  in  the  Court.  Mrs.  Bellenden  continued  to 
be  now  and  then  of  these  parties,  till  she  married 
[about  1720],  but  after  that  time  these  visits  became 
uninterrupted  tete-a-tetes  with  Mrs.  Howard,  that  sub- 
sist to  this  hour ;  and  yet  I  know  many  of  those  who 
are  most  conversant  and  best  acquainted  with  the  in- 
trigues, anecdotes,  and  transactions  of  this  Court  who 
doubt,  notwithstanding  these  appearances,  the  King's 
ever  having  entered  into  any  commerce  with  her,  that 
he  might  not  innocently  have  had  with  his  daughter. 
It  is  certain  that  nobody  belonging  to  the  Court  ever 
believed  he  had  succeeded  with  Mrs.  Bellenden;  and 
though  all  appearances  (the  duration  of  them  excepted) 
were  exactly  the  same  with  regard  to  both  these  ladies, 
yet  there  are  many  people  (which  seems  very  unac- 


56  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

countable)  who  never  suspected  his  success  with  the 
one,  and  never  doubted  it  with  the  other.25 

Mrs.  Howard  had  the  misfortune  of  hearing  so  ill 
that  the  quickness  of  her  apprehension  was  in  mixed 
companies  of  little  use  to  her ;  for,  unless  the  conver- 
sation was  particularly  addressed  to  her,  and  in  a  tone 
of  voice  much  above  the  common  pitch  of  speaking, 
she  had  no  share  in  it :  so  that  by  this  infirmity  she 
was  deprived  not  only  of  the  pleasure  but  the  advan- 
tage of  the  ordinary  commerce  of  public  and  general 
acquaintance,  and  lost  half  the  benefit  of  the  many 
qualifications  she  possessed,  so  necessary  to  a  thorough 
good  companion,  and  so  rarely  united  in  one  person. 
Good  sense,  good  breeding,  and  good  nature  were 
qualities  which  even  her  enemies  could  not  deny  her ; 
nor  do  I  know  any  one  good  or  agreeable  quality  which 
those  who  knew  her  more  intimately  would  not  as 
readily  allow  her.  She  was  civil  to  everybody,  friendly 
to  many,  and  unjust  to  none :  in  short,  she  had  a  good 
head  and  a  good  heart,  but  had  to  do  with  a  man  who 
was  incapable  of  tasting  the  one  or  valuing  the  other.26 


25  I  noticed,  in  the  Preface  to  the  Suffolk  Papers,  with  perhaps  too 
much  indulgence,  the  opinion  that  the  friendship  between  the  King  and 
Mrs.  Howard  was  platonic ;  but  I  am  somewhat  surprised  to  find  Lord 
Hervey  countenancing  the  same  paradox,  as  I  must  candidly  call  it.     The 
account  that  both  he  and  H.  Walpole  give  of  the  matter  seems  very  strange 
— that  the  Prince  should  have  waited  for  the  marriage  of  Miss  Bellenden 
to  attach  himself  to  a  lady  who  had  been  in  his  family  for  so  many  years 
before  he  ever  saw  Miss  Bellenden.     It  is  more  probable  that  the  attach- 
ment began  earlier. 

26  This  is  a  large  encomium  from  Lord  Hervey,  who  was  of  the  opposite 
faction  in  Court.     Horace  Walpole  relates— as  we  shall  see  Lord  Hervey 
also  does— that  when  the  Queen  rather  opposed  Lady  Suffolk's  leaving  the 
Court,  the  King  complained  to  her  that  she  "  would  not  let  him  part  with 
a  deaf  old  woman  that  he  was  weary  of." — Reminiscences.     Pope  turned 
the  infirmity  to  a  compliment : — 

"Has 


1727.  MRS.  HOWARD.  57 

When  the  King  came  to  the  crown,  Mrs.  Howard  was 
about  forty  years  old,27  an  age  not  proper  to  make  con- 
quests, though  perhaps  the  most  likely  to  maintain  them, 
as  the  levity  of  desiring  new  ones  is  by  that  time  gene- 
rally pretty  well  over,  and  the  maturity  of  those  quali- 
ties requisite  to  rivet  old  ones  in  their  fullest  perfection  ; 
for  when  the  beauty  that  creates  passion  begins  to  decay, 
women  commonly  look  out  for  some  preservative  charms 
to  substitute  in  its  place ;  they  begin  to  change  their 
notion  of  their  right  to  being  adored,  into  that  of  think- 
ing a  little  complaisance  and  some  good  qualities  as 
necessary  to  attach  men  as  a  little  beauty  and  some 
agreeable  qualities  are  to  allure  them ;  and  as  experi- 
ence teaches  them  that  the  insolence  and  negligence  of 
security  often  loses  what  the  humility  and  circumspection 
of  diffidence  helps  them  to  preserve,  so  they  begin  to 
find  out  that  a  solicitude  to  oblige  is  as  essential  to  a 
woman's  being  loved  and  esteemed,  as  a  capacity  of 
pleasing  is  to  her  being  liked  and  admired.28  Mrs.  How- 
ard was  so  sensible  of  this  truth,  that  her  conduct  tal- 
lied exactly  with  these  sentiments  ;  but  notwithstanding 
her  making  use  of  the  proper  tools,  the  stuff  she  had  to 
work  with  was  so  stubborn  and  so  inductile  that  her 
labour  was  in  vain,  and  her  situation  was  such  as  would 
have  been  insupportable  to  any  one  whose  pride  was  less 

"  Has  she  no  faults,  then  (Envy  says),  sir? 

Yes,  she  has  one,  I  must  aver : 
When  all  the  world  conspire  to  praise  her, 
The  woman 's  deaf,  and  will  not  hear." 

27  She  was  born,  it  seems,  about  1688. — Suffolk  Papers,  vol.  i.  p.  v.  The 
King  was  forty-four. 

28  See  Dean  Swift's  Character  of  Mrs.  Howard,  and  the  explanation  of 
H.  Wai  pole's  misapprehension  and  misrepresentation  on  that  subject  which 
had   been  adopted   by   all   succeeding  writers. — Suffolk  Correspondence^ 
vol.  i.  p.  xxxvii. 


58  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

supple,  whose  passions  less  governable,  and  whose  suf- 
ferance less  inexhaustible ;  for  she  was  forced  to  live  in 
the  constant  subjection  of  a  wife  with  all  the  reproach 
of  a  mistress ;  to  flatter  and  manage  a  man  whom  she 
must  see  and  feel  had  as  little  inclination  to  her  person 
as  regard  to  her  advice ;  and  added  to  this  she  had  the 
mortification  of  knowing  the  Queen's  influence  so  much 
superior  to  hers,  that  the  little  show  of  interest  she 
maintained  was  only  a  permitted  tenure  dependent  on  a 
rival  who  could  have  overturned  it  any  hour  she  pleased. 
But  the  Queen,  knowing  the  vanity  of  her  husband's 
temper,  and  that  he  must  have  some  woman  for  the 
world  to  believe  his  mistress,  wisely  suffered  one  to  re- 
main in  that  situation  whom  she  despised  and  had  got 
the  better  of,  for  fear  of  making  room  for  a  successor 
whom  he  might  really  love,  and  that  might  get  the  bet- 
ter of  her.  On  the  other  hand,  Mrs.  Howard  was  in 
the  right  to  continue  there  even  on  this  foot,  since  she 
could  not  put  herself  on  any  better ;  for  though  she  had 
not  all  the  advantages  which  the  sole  mistress  to  a  king 
might  expect,  yet  it  enabled  her  at  least  to  gain  that  very 
material  point  of  bettering  her  fortune;  and  the  ex- 
changing indigence  and  distress  for  affluence  and  pros- 
perity was  a  consideration  that  no  doubt  often  comforted 
her  in  the  many  mortifications,  disappointments,  and 
rebukes  which  her  ambition  met  with  when  she  endea- 
voured to  join  the  eclat  and  power  of  a  king's  mistress 
to  those  less  agreeable  appurtenances  of  that  character, 
the  scandal  and  confinement.29 

However,  these  quotidian  visits  which  his  Majesty 

29  Compare  H.  Walpole's  portrait  and  character  of  Mrs.  Howard  in  the 
Reminiscences. 


1727.  THE  QUEEN'S  INFLUENCE.  59 

when  Prince  was  known  to  bestow  upon  her,  of  so  many 
hours  in  the  four-and-twenty,  and  for  so  many  years 
together,  had  made  many  superficial  courtiers  conclude 
that  one  who  possessed  so  large  a  portion  of  his  time 
must  have  some  share  in  his  heart.  This  way  of  rea- 
soning induced  many  to  make  their  court  to  her,  and 
choose  that  channel  to  recommend  themselves  to  the 
Prince.  The  most  considerable  of  those  who  had  done 
so  were  the  Duke  of  Argyle,  Lord  Isla  his  brother,  the 
Duke  of  Dorset,  and  Lord  Wilmington,  who  none  of 
them  could  persuade  themselves  of  such  inconsistencies 
and  absurdities  in  any  man's  character,  as  to  imagine 
the  Prince  could  give  all  his  leisure  hours  to  a  pretty 
and  agreeable  woman  who  had  no  weight  in  his  coun- 
sels ;  nor  was  it  more  reasonable  for  them  to  imagine 
that  any  man  would  be  so  absolutely  governed  by  his 
wife  who  took  the  liberty,  in  appearance  at  least,  of 
being  devoted  to  her  chamber-maid ;  or  to  believe  that 
he  -would  receive  no  impressions  in  private  but  from 
the  opinion  of  a  woman  whom  he  took  such  frequent 
opportunities  to  snub,  rebuke,  and  contradict,  whenever 
she  delivered  it  before  any  standers  by. 

Whilst  the  King  was  Prince  there  were  so  few  occa- 
sions for  the  Queen  to  show  her  credit  with  him,  that 
some  were  apt  to  imagine  this  latent  dormant  power 
was  much  less  than  it  proved  itself  when  the  time  came 
that  made  it  worth  her  while  to  try,  show,  and  exert  it. 
But  as  soon  as  ever  the  Prince  became  King,  the  whole 
world  began  to  find  out  that  her  will  was  the  sole  spring 
on  which  every  movement  in  the  Court  turned :  and 
though  his  Majesty  lost  no  opportunity  to  declare  that 
the  Queen  never  meddled  with  his  business,  yet  nobody 


60  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP..!!. 

was  simple  enough  to  believe  it ;  and  few  besides  him- 
self would  have  been  simple  enough  to  hope  or  imagine 
it  could  be  believed,  since  everybody  who  knew  there 
was  such  a  woman  as  the  Queen,  knew  she  not  only 
meddled  with  business,  but  directed  everything  that 
came  under  that  name,  either  at  home  or  abroad. 
Her  power  was  unrivalled  and  unbounded — how  dearly 
she  earned  it  will  be  the  subject  of  future  consideration 
in  these  papers. 

At  present,  as  everybody  will  be  curious  to  learn 
what  could  induce  the  King  to  continue  an  adminis- 
tration whose  every  step  he  had  disapproved,  and  heap 
favour  on  men  whom  he  had  so  lately  loaded  with  re- 

V 

proach — what  motives  he  could  have  to  lodge  power 
in  the  hands  of  those  whom  he  had  heretofore  so  fre- 
quently and  openly  censured  for  the  abuse  of  it ;  and 
how  he  as  King  came  to  consult  those  whom  he  never 
would  speak  to  as  Prince;  and  to  admit  no  farther 
than  the  drawing-room  at  St.  James's  those  favourites 
who  had  ever  been  of  the  cabinet  at  Leicester-House : 
in  short — how  he  came  to  pursue  the  very  same  mea- 
sures in  his  own  reign  which  he  had  been  constantly 
censuring  and  exploding  in  his  father's; — since  every 
one,  I  say,  will  be  curious  to  learn  what  could  give  so 
unexpected  a  turn  to  his  Majesty's  way  of  thinking,  talk- 
ing, and  acting,  I  shall  relate  all  the  different  ways  I 
heard  of  accounting  for  it  at  the  time  it  happened ;  but 
whether  any  of  the  reasons  given  were  the  real  ones,  or 
whether  all  of  them  accumulated  had  some  share  in  this 
event,  I  shall  not  pretend  to  determine. 

For  my  own  part,  I  have  the  conduct  of  princes  in 
so  little  veneration,  that  I  believe  they  act  yet  oftener 


1727.  ESTIMATE  OF  STATESMEN.  61 

without  design  than  other  people,  and  are  insensibly 
drawn  into  both  good  and  bad  situations  without  know- 
ing how  they  came  there.  Those  authors  and  com- 
mentators, then,  must  oftener  than  any  others  lose 
their  time  and  their  labour  who  will  always  be  looking 
out  for  great  causes  to  great  events  — by  neglecting 
trifles  they  overlook  truth,  and  by  continual  examens 
lose  what  they  seek.  I  hold  Epicurus's  opinion  of  the 
system  of  the  universe  so  strong  with  regard  to  almost 
all  political  revolutions  in  it,  and  think  the  fortuitous 
influence  of  chance  so  much  more  decisive  of  the 
success  or  miscarriage  of  statesmen's  schemes,  than 
the  skill  or  dexterity  of  the  most  able  and  most  artful 
of  them,  that  I  am  apt  to  attribute  much  less  to  the 
one,  and  much  more  to  the  other,  than  the  gene- 
rality of  historians,  either  from  prejudice  to  their 
heroes  or  partiality  to  their  own  conjectures,  are  willing 
to  allow.  I  think  most  of  these  political  contenders  for 
profit  and  power  are,  like  Catiline  and  Caesar,  actuated 
by  the  same  principles  of  ambition  and  interest,  and  that 
as  their  success  determines  their  characters,  so  accident 
determines  their  success.  Had  Caesar  fallen  in  the 
plains  of  Pharsalia,  like  Catiline  in  those  of  Pistoia, 
they  had  both  been  remembered  in  the  same  manner ; 
the  different  fortune  of  those  battles  is  what  alone  con- 
stitutes the  different  characters  of  these  two  men,  and 
makes  the  one  always  mentioned  as  the  first  and  the 
other  as  the  last  of  mankind. 

But  to  return  to  our  English  history.  Some  were  of 
opinion  that  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  continuance  was 
owing  merely  to  the  Speaker's  want  of  resolution  to 
displace  him,  he  apprehending  himself  unequal  to  the 


62  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

charge,  and  fearing  to  undertake  what  he  should  not  be 
able  to  execute  with  credit,  consequently  not  able  to 
maintain  for  any  time.  Others  imagine  that  he  thought 
it  would  always  be  in  his  power  to  take  the  reins  into  his 
own  hand,  and  only  left  them  in  Sir  Robert  Walpole"s 
till  his  rival  had  driven  through  the  dirty  road  of  the 
Civil  List ;  proposing  by  these  means,  that  whatever 
odium  was  incurred  by  that  regulation,  it  might  all  fall 
on  Sir  Robert's  shoulders,  without  sullying  the  rising 
lustre  of  those  ministers  who  would,  after  this  was  over, 
take  the  whole  conduct  and  direction  of  affairs  in  the 
new  system.30 

Others  think  that  Sir  Robert  found  means  to  gain 
the  Queen,31  by  making  all  his  court  solely  to  her,  and 
that  he  did  not  weaken  his  interest  with  her  by  add- 
ing those  two  agreeable  bribes  of  making  her  jointure 
(as  before  related)  just  double  what  had  ever  been  given 
to  a  Queen  of  England  before  ;  and  persuading  the  King 
to  make  her  present  establishment  60,000?.  a  year, 
which  would  have  been  20,000?.  more  than  the  Speaker 
had  given  her,  who  proposed  putting  her  establishment 
on  the  same  footing  with  King  Charles  II.'s  Queen. 
Sir  Robert's  solicitation,  and  the  King's  economy,  split 
this  difference,  and  settled  her  revenue  at  50,000?., 

30  Coxe  states,  on  the  authority  of  Sir  Robert,  from  the  Etough  Papers, 
that  Compton  himself  declined  the  King's  pressing  offer  on  the  score  of 
incapacity  ;  but  it  seems  as  if  this  was  only  a  civil  mode  of  allowing  him  the 
honour  of  refusing  what  the  King  had  now  resolved  not  to  bestow. 

31  The  Walpoliana  date  Sir  Robert's  favour  with  the  Queen  earlier; 
stating  that  the  Princess  was  angry  with  him  for  having  called  her  in  his 
coarse  way  a  fat  bitch — but  that  on  the  question  of  her  jointure  as  Princess, 
50,000/.  being  proposed,  Sir  Robert  moved  and  obtained  100,000/.,  upon 
which  she  good-humouredly  sent  him  word  that    "  the  fat  bitch  had  for- 
given him." — $  104.   But  this  must  be  inaccurate.     It  was  not  as  Princess, 
but  as  Queen,  that  the  100,OOW.  jointure  was  granted. 


1727.  QUEEN'S  VIEWS.  63 

which  was  still  10,000£.  more  than  any  other  Queen  Con- 
sort had  ever  had,  or  the  Speaker  had  cut  out  for  her. 
Besides  this,  as  Sir  Spencer  Compton  and  his  reputed 
adherents  had  always  in  the  late  reign  made  their 
court  more  to  Mrs.  Howard  than  the  Princess,  it  was 
not  thought  unlikely  that  her  Royal  Highness,  as  soon 
as  she  was  Queen,  might  be  influenced  a  little  by  her 
own  resentment,  though  she  persuaded  the  King  to 
stifle  his,  and  like  to  punish  the  neglect  these  people 
had  been  guilty  of  towards  her  by  letting  them  feel 
their  error,  and  at  once  showing  them  her  own  power, 
Mrs.  Howard's  impotence,  and  their  mistake. 

Whether  or  no  these  reasons  induced  the  Queen  to 
make  choice  of  Sir  Robert  may  be  disputable,  but  it  is 
an  undoubted  fact  that  she  did  make  choice  of  him,  and 
that  by  her  influence  the  King — without  getting  the 
better  of  his  dislike  to  him,  at  least  at  first — employed 
him. 

It  is  very  probable  that  when  he  talked  to  the  King 
and  Queen  upon  business  (which  it  was  necessary  for 
him  at  first  to  do,  in  order  to  acquaint  them  with  the 
situation  of  affairs),  that  they  found  him  much  more 
clear,  more  sensible,  and  more  intelligible  than  the  rest 
of  them,  and  consequently  believed  him  more  able ; 
that  when  he  came  to  tell  his  own  tale,  to  plead  his  own 
cause,  and  to  describe  the  steps  he  had  taken  at  home 
and  abroad,  in  his  own  colours,  the  King  and  the  Queen 
did  not  think  his  measures  so  ill-concerted,  or  the 
affairs  of  the  nation  in  so  bad  a  posture  as  his  enemies 
had  represented,  and  they  perhaps  expected  to  find 
them. 

The  arguments  the  Queen  made  use  of  in  his  behalf 


64  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  II. 

to  the  King,  to  be  sure  were,  that  his  long  experience 
and  approved  abilities  would  certainly  enable  him  to 
serve  the  King  better  than  any  other  body ;  that  his 
being  so  much  in  their  power  would  also  make  him 
more  humble  and  submissive  than  any  other  minister ; 
that  his  having  made  a  vast  fortune  already  would  make 
him  less  solicitous  about  his  own  interest,  and  more  at 
liberty  to  mind  the  King's,  than  any  that  could  succeed 
him ;  that  new  leeches  would  not  be  less  hungry,  and 
that  whoever  the  King  employed  would  at  first  be  look- 
ing only  after  gain,  and  treading  those  paths  which  most 
people  frequent  at  their  entrance  into  power :  whereas 
Sir  Robert  Walpole's  fortune  being  already  made,  he 
would  have  nothing  in  view  but  the  obliging  his  prince 
and  securing  the  government,  in  order  for  him  and  his 
family  to  possess  what  he  had  already  acquired  in  safety 
and  tranquillity.32  This  being  the  case,  no  doubt  she 
told  his  Majesty  that  wise  princes  always  made  their 
resentment  yield  to  their  prudence,  and  their  passion  to 
their  interest ;  and  that  enmity  as  well  as  friendship  in 
royal  breasts  should  always  give  way  to  policy;  and 
that  whatever  would  strengthen  his  hands,  confirm  his 
power,  and  establish  his  government,  should  be  consulted 
preferably  to  any  other  views  whatever. 

This  doctrine  of  stifling  his  dislike  and  moderating 
his  resentment  was  the  language  she  had  always  talked 


32  This  reminds  one  of  the  naif  saying  of  one  of  the  French  Ministers 
of  Finance  whom  the  King  dismissed  for  some  peculations: — "  Sa 
Majeste  a  tort ;  f  avals  fais  mes  affaires,  et  fallal  falre  les  siennes."  The 
Count  de  Broglie,  the  French  Ambassador,  writes  confidentially  to  his 
Court,  20  July,  1724,  that  "  Mr.  Walpole  is  immensely  rich,  and  disposed 
to  retire  from  business,  to  enjoy  his  wealth." — Coxe,  ii.  303.  His  paternal 
estate  was  a  little  over  2000/.  a  year. — Ib.,  i  6. 


1727.  QUEEN'S  VIEWS.  65 

to  him  during  his  quarrel  with  his  father  when  he  was 
Prince ;  and  by  frequently  inculcating  such  principles, 
she  had  prevailed  with  him  in  the  late  reign  so  far  to 
suppress  the  natural  warmth  and  vehemence  of  his  tem- 
per, as  not  to  push  things  to  an  extremity  that  could 
have  done  him  little  good  at  present,  and  might  have 
endangered  his  future  succession :  and  as  he  had  once 
found  the  benefit  of  these  mollifying,  palliative  counsels 
by  a  quiet  and  popular  accession  to  the  Crown,  he  was 
more  easily,  perhaps,  brought  to  feel  the  force  and  pro- 
priety of  such  arguments  in  the  present  juncture  of 
affairs,  though  very  repugnant  and  unpalatable  to  his 
natural  prompt  disposition. 


VOL.  I. 


66  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  in. 


CHAPTER  III. 

Foreign  Affairs — The  Quadruple  Alliance — Duke  of  Ripperda — Treaty  of 
Vienna  of  1725— Treaty  of  Hanover— State  of  France— Louis  XV.— 
Cardinal  Fleury — The  King  of  Prussia — Forces  of  the  respective  parties 
to  the  Treaties. 

THE  situation  of  affairs  abroad  was  no  doubt  another 
prevalent  argument  made  use  of  by  the  Queen  in  favour 
of  Sir  Robert :  for  as  England  was  at  this  time  in  alli- 
ance with  no  power  in  Europe  of  any  weight  but 
France,  a  change  of  the  English  administration  might 
have  alarmed  France  with  the  apprehension  of  a  change 
of  measures  too,  which  as  it  would  have  weakened  the 
harmony  and  good  intelligence  subsisting  between  these 
two  crowns,  so  it  would  also  have  increased  the  demands 
and  strengthened  the  hands  of  the  common  enemy. 

Spain  had  already  conceived  such  hopes  of  this  change 
upon  the  demise  of  the  late  King,  that  though  the  pre- 
liminary articles  for  opening  the  Congress  at  Soissons 
were  already  signed,  and  brought  to  England  the  very 
same  day  with  the  news  of  the  King's  death ;  yet  by  a 
forced  construction  of  the  words  in  the  article  relating 
to  Gibraltar,  Spain  raised  a  cavilling  objection  which  put 
a  stop  to  all  proceedings  at  the  Congress  as  effectually 
as  if  the  preliminary  articles  had  not  been  signed  at  all. 

But  in  order  to  illustrate  the  situation  of  foreign 
affairs  at  this  time,  it  will  be  necessary  in  a  little  short 
deduction  of  facts  to  take  one  cursory  view  of  all  the 
negotiations  and  transactions  of  the  great  Powers  of 


1727.  FOREIGN  AFFAIRS.  67 

Europe  from  the  time  of  the  first  Vienna  Treaty  in 
1725,  between  the  Emperor  and  Spain,  which  laid  the 
foundation  of  all  the  subsequent  treaties,  and  was  the 
fountain  of  all  the  troubles  and  wrangles  in  which 
Europe  had  been  involved  from  that  time  to  this. 

It  will  also  be  necessary  afterwards,  for  the  further 
explanation  of  these  aifairs,  to  give  a  transient  narrative 
of  the  state  and  policy  of  every  particular  Court  at  this 
period,  and  to  relate  by  whom  these  Courts  were  in- 
fluenced, on  what  views  they  acted,  and  how  these  views 
were  pursued. 

The  Treaty  of  Utrecht  was  the  basis  on  which  the 
peace  of  all  the  great  Powers  of  Europe  stood  when 
King  George  I.  came  to  the  Crown ;  but  notwithstand- 
ing that  treaty,  there  remained  many  material  points 
relating  to  the  jarring  interests  of  King  Philip  [of 
Spain]  and  the  Emperor  still  unadjusted ;  and  the  mu- 
tual enmity  that  had  subsisted  between  these  two  princes 
during  their  contention  for  the  crown  of  Spain  in  the 
late  war,  was  so  ill  reconciled,  that  the  bringing  them 
to  temper  with  one  another  was  a  difficulty  not  yet  got 
over. 

But  in  the  Treaty  of  London  made  in  1718  (a  con- 
vention entered  into  between  France,  England,  Hol- 
land, and  the  Emperor,  and  thence  commonly  called 
the  Quadruple  Alliance),  an  expedient  was  thought  of 
to  bring  this  reconciling  project  to  bear ;  and  indeed 
without  this  reconciliation  it  was  impossible  to  put  the 
peace  of  Europe  on  any  solid  or  lasting  foundation. 

The  expedient  fixed  upon  was  this : — The  Emperor 
looking  upon  the  kingdom  of  Naples  as  an  insecure  and 
precarious  possession  whilst  Sicily  was  in  any  hands 

F2 


68  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  III. 

but  his  own,  it  was  proposed,  in  order  to  oblige  and  ac- 
commodate him,  that  the  King  of  Sicily,  to  whom  Sicily 
was  given  by  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht,  should  yield  that 
island  to  the  Emperor ;  that  in  lieu  of  it  Spain  should 
give  up  the  island  of  Sardinia  to  the  King  of  Sicily ;  and 
that  Spain  should  be  recompensed  for  that  cession  by 
settling  the  eventual  succession  to  the  Duchies  of  Tus- 
cany, Parma,  and  Placentia,  in  case  the  present  posses- 
sors died  without  sons,  on  Don  Carlos,  second  son  to  the 
King  of  Spain,  and  eldest  son  to  the  present  Queen ; 
and  this  succession  was  to  be  secured  to  Don  Carlos  by 
the  introduction  of  six  thousand  neutral  Swiss  troops 
(in  the  joint  pay  of  France,  England,  and  Spain),  who 
were  to  garrison  the  chief  ports  and  strong  towns  of 
these  duchies.1 

These  two  material  and  favourite  points  of  the  Courts 
of  Vienna  and  Madrid  once  agreed  to  and  settled,  it  was 
proposed,  in  order  to  adjust  any  little  remaining  punc- 
tilios and  disputes  between  the  two  Courts,  that  a  Con- 
gress should  be  opened  at  Cambray,  and  that  the  Crowns 
of  France  and  England  should  there  mediate  between 
them. 

Holland,  though  mentioned  in  the  preamble  to  this 
treaty  as  one  of  the  principal  contracting  parties,  never 
acceded  to  it;  and  the  accession  of  Spain  was  not  made 
till  two  years  after  the  treaty  had  been  concluded. 

The  public  reasons  given  on  all  hands  for  entering 
into  this  treaty  were,  that  it  was  a  treaty  only  explana- 

1  Philip  V.'s  first  wife  was  Mary  of  Savoy,  by  whom  he  had  two  sons 
— Lewis,  whom  he  seated  on  his  own  throne,  but  who  died  soon  after,  when 
Philip  resumed  it — and  Ferdinand  VI.  By  his  second  wife,  Elizabeth  of 
Parma,  he  had  Don  Carlos,  heir  in  her  right  to  the  Duchies  of  Parma  and 
Placentia,  who  eventually  became  Charles  III.  of  Spain. 


1727.  TREATY  OF  VIENNA.  69 

tory  of  that  article  of  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht  relating  to 
the  neutrality  of  Italy,  and  necessary  to  settle  the 
balance  of  Europe. 

The  motive  of  the  Emperor  to  this  alliance  was  evi- 
dent, as  it  tended  to  put  him  immediately  in  possession 
of  Sicily ;  and  the  chief  if  not  the  only  view  of  the  King 
of  Great  Britain,  I  believe,  was  to  oblige  the  Emperor 
in  this  point,  in  order  to  purchase  by  such  good  offices 
the  investiture  of  Bremen  and  Yerden,  which  he  so 
much  wished  and  had  so  long  solicited  in  vain. 

The  reason  why  France  gave  into  it  was  certainly 
because  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  who  was  then  Kegent  of 
France,  and  by  the  act  of  renunciation2  next  heir  to  the 
crown,  in  case  the  King  died  without  children,  was  glad 
to  enter  into  any  treaty  in  which  that  act  of  King 
Philip's  renunciation  was  so  formally  and  so  strongly 
renewed :  nor  was  he  averse  at  this  time  and  for  this 
reason  to  the  doing  anything  that  would  engage  the 
Emperor  and  England  to  be  more  firmly  his  friends, 
in  case  that  accident  happened. 

The  reasons  Spain  had  for  being  backward  to  accede 
to  this  alliance  were,  first,  the  King's  being  unwilling 
to  renew  and  strengthen  the  renunciation  to  the  Crown 
of  France ;  and  next,  the  desire  Spain  had  to  possess  her- 
self, if  she  could  by  force,  of  Sicily,  as  she  had  done,  two 
years  before,  of  Sardinia. 

In  order  to  compass  this  seizure,  after  the  Quadruple 
Alliance  was  concluded,  Spain  sent  a  great  fleet,  under 


2  The  renunciation  of  the  Crown  of  France  by  Philip  V.,  who  was  next 
heir  to  that  Crown.  It  has  been  surmised  that  Philip's  strange  resigna- 
tion of  the  Crown  of  Spain  to  his  son  was  influenced  by  some  design  of 
retracting  this  renunciation. 


70  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  III. 

the  command  of  Admiral  Castinetti,  into  the  Mediterra- 
nean ;  at  the  same  time  England  sent  another  to  oppose 
them,  under  Lord  Torrington :  they  fought — England 
was  victorious,  and  Sicily  put  into  the  hands  of  the 
Emperor.3 

And  here  lay  the  great  defect  either  in  the  plan  or 
the  execution  of  the  chief  stipulations  in  the  Quadruple 
Alliance ;  for  as  the  putting  the  Emperor  into  the  pos- 
session of  Sicily,  and  the  introduction  of  the  six  thousand 
Swiss  troops  for  the  security  of  Don  Carlos's  succession, 
were  conditional  articles,  and  dependent  upon  one  an- 
other, so  the  contracting  parties  to  this  alliance  ought 
never  to  have  suffered  a  distinct  and  separate  execution 
of  the  one  without  the  other.  The  permitting  the  im- 
perial troops  to  enter  Sicily  before  the  neutral  troops 
entered  into  Parma  and  Tuscany  was  the  occasion  of 
all  the  subsequent  difficulties  that  arose  upon  that  point ; 
as  it  gave  the  Emperor  an  occasion  of  making  a  thou- 
sand demurs  and  disputes,  which  he  never  would  have 
thought  of  had  they  suspended  at  the  same  time  the 
perfecting  what  he  had  so  much  at  heart  as  the  acqui- 
sition of  Sicily. 

This  attempt  of  Spain  on  that  island  having  miscar- 
ried, the  Queen  of  Spain  now  turned  her  thoughts  solely 
to  the  interest  of  her  son  Don  Carlos ;  and  not  a  little 
piqued,  no  doubt,  at  England,  who  had  thrown  this  bar 
in  her  way  when  she  thought  to  have  possessed  herself 
of  Sicily,  and  treated  upon  the  establishment  of  Don 
Carlos  in  Italy  with  that  powerful  mediator  in  her 

3  It  is  strange  that  Lord  Hervey  did  not  see  that  this  historic  series  of 
circumstances  effectually  contradicts  the  imputation  (ante,  p.  50)  that  Sir 
George  Byng's  defence  of  Sicily  was  unauthorized. 


1727.  RIPPERDA.  71 

hands.  However,  this  design  having  proved  abortive,  she 
at  last  acceded  to  the  Quadruple  Alliance ;  acquiesced 
under  the  dispositions  therein  made  for  the  security  of 
her  son's  eventual  succession  to  Parma  and  Tuscany ; 
consented  to  the  opening  of  the  Congress  at  Cambray, 
and  left  the  mediation  there  between  Spain  and  the 
Emperor  entirely  to  France  and  England. 

But  whilst  this  mock  Congress  was  carrying  on,  the 
Duke  de  Ripperda,  a  projecting,  speculating,  enter- 
prising, inconsiderate,  hot-headed  fellow,  with  great 
views  rather  than  great  parts,  was  sent  by  the  Queen  of 
Spain  to  Vienna,  and  there  privately  concluded  a  treaty 
between  the  Emperor  and  Spain.4 

It  would  be  both  tedious  and  uninteresting  here  to 
enter  into  the  detail  of  all  the  writings  of  these  times 
for  and  against  the  English  ministers,  in  which  one  side 
asserted  and  the  other  denied  what  was  the  purport  of 
the  secret  articles  of  this  treaty :  it  is  possible  the  Eng- 
lish ministers  might  say  more  than  was  true,  in  order  to 
justify  their  precipitate  entrance  into  the  Treaty  of 
Hanover ;  but  it  is  certain  that  their  opponents  allowed 


4  Seethe  history  of  this  extraordinary  adventurer  in  Coxe's  '  Wai  pole'  (c. 
35).  He  was  by  birth  a  Dutch  Protestant,  sent  in  1715  Envoy  from  Holland 
to  Madrid,  where  he  insinuated  himself  into  the  good  graces  of  Cardinal 
Alberoni,  under  whose  advice  and  countenance  he  turned  Roman  Catholic, 
and  obtained  employment  in  Spain,  where  he  at  length  became  first  minis- 
ter, and  was  created  Duke  de  Ripperda,  but  in  a  few  months  was  disgraced, 
and  imprisoned  for  fifteen  months  in  the  tower  of  Segovia,  whence  he 
escaped  (by  means  of  and  with  a  female  servant,  whom  he  attached  to  his 
fortunes)  to  England,  where  he  lived  a  couple  of  years  in  great  splendour, 
and  was  foolish  enough  to  flatter  himself  for  a  while  that  he  might  become 
minister  here.  At  length,  in  1731,  he  returned  to  Holland ;  and  subse- 
quently, to  revenge  himself  on  Spain,  entered  the  service  of  the  Emperor  of 
Marocco,  turned  Mahometan,  became  Prime  Minister  and  General-in-Chief, 
but  was,  on  another  turn  of  fortune,  disgraced,  and  he  died  at  Tetuan  in 
1737,  at  a  very  advanced  age. 


72  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  HI. 

a  great  deal  too  little  when  they  at  first  denied  that 
there  was  any  secret  treaty  at  all ;  and  never  to  the  last 
allowed  that  the  tenor  of  those  secret  articles,  if  there 
were  any,  was  such  as  affected  the  immediate  interest  of 
Great  Britain,  or  ought  to  have  alarmed  us. 

That  there  was  some  secret  treaty  was  evident  at 
first  from  the  tendency  of  all  the  articles  of  the  public 
treaty  being  only  in  favour  of  the  Emperor,  as  the 
guarantee  of  the  hereditary  dominions  of  the  House  of 
Austria,  privileges  of  trade,  subsidies,  &c. ;  and  through- 
out the  whole  public  treaty  not  the  least  mention  made 
of  Don  Carlos's  succession  to  Parma  and  Tuscany ; 
which  was  a  demonstration  that  there  must  be  some 
secret  stipulations  in  his  favour,  otherwise  this  favourite 
point  would  not  have  been  neglected.  Besides  this, 
when  Gibraltar  came  to  be  demanded  by  Spain,  and 
that  we  upbraided  the  Emperor  with  having  entered 
into  engagements  to  assist  Spain  with  force  to  regain 
that  place,  in  case  amicable  applications  failed,  Count 
Staremberg,  the  Emperor's  ambassador  at  London, 
showed  the  article  relating  to  Gibraltar  in  the  secret 
treaty,  to  clear  the  Emperor  of  having  promised  any- 
thing more  than  his  good  offices  and  mediation  upon 
that  head ;  which  was  so  far  indiscreetly  done,  as  it  was 
a  confession  that  there  was  some  secret  treaty,  which 
hitherto  had  been  denied. 

But,  without  expatiating  further  on  this  dispute  be- 
tween the  English  ministers  and  their  opponents,  I 
shall  relate  the  matter  of  fact  as  I  conceive  it  from  the 
best  lights  I  have  been  able  to  get  on  reading  the  whole 
controversy  on  both  sides. 

Between  the  public  and  private  stipulations  of  this 


1727.  TREATY  OF  VIENNA.  73 

Treaty  of  Vienna,  I  take  the  substance  of  it  to  have 
been  this: — that  the  Emperor  and  Spain  were  to  give 
one  another  reciprocal  assistance  in  the  maintenance  of 
the  Ostend  Company,5  and  the  restitution  of  Gibraltar; 
Spain  was  to  guarantee  the  indivisible  succession  of  the 
Austrian  dominions  to  the  Emperor's  eldest  daughter  ; 
the  Queen  of  Spain's  two  eldest  sons  were  to  marry  the 
two  archduchesses ;  vast  subsidies  were  to  be  paid  by 
Spain  to  the  Emperor ;  and  all  the  same  advantages  of 
trade  to  either  Indies  were  to  be  allowed  by  Spain  to 
the  Emperor  that  were  granted  by  former  treaties  either 
to  England  or  Holland. 

It  is  easy  to  imagine  that  France  and  England,  who 
had  been  appointed  mediators  between  Spain  and  the 
Emperor,  did  not  like  the  figure  they  made  upon  this 
occasion,  though  none  of  the  articles  or  stipulations  of 
this  treaty  openly  avowed  were  contradictory  to  any  in 
the  Quadruple  Alliance.  However,  Spain  was  so  con- 
scious that  some  apology  was  necessary  for  appointing 
France  and  England  the  pageant  mediators  in  a  quarrel 
which,  notwithstanding  that  appointment,  was  made  up 
without  their  privity,  that  she  excused  herself  by  say- 
ing she  took  her  cause  into  her  own  hands  on  account 
of  the  affront  put  upon  her  by  France  in  sending  back 
the  Infanta6  and  annulling  that  marriage  with  the  King 
of  France ;  and  that  England  having  refused,  after  this 
affront,  to  accept  of  the  sole  mediation  and  to  act  alone, 


5  The  Ostend  Company  was  a  Belgian  East  India  Company,  which  the 
Emperor  was  desirous  of  establishing  in  rivalry  to  the  English  and  Dutch. 

6  The  Infanta  Mary  Anne,  born  in  1718,  sent  to  France  in  1721,  as  the 
betrothed  wife  of  the  young  Louis  XV.,  was  sent  back  by  the  Duke  of 
Bourbon  in  1725. 


74  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  III. 

Spain  was  obliged  either  to  act  in  this  manner  or  not  to 
have  her  affairs  with  the  Emperor  settled  at  all. 

But  this  was  only  a  plausible  excuse  for  her  conduct 
on  this  occasion,  dates  and  facts  proving  that  these  were 
not  her  motives ;  for  the  sending  back  the  Infanta  was 
a  measure  not  taken  till  the  beginning  of  March,  1725, 
and  by  the  end  of  the  April  following  the  Treaty  of 
Vienna  was  concluded,  signed,  and  arrived  at  Madrid ; 
which  could  not  have  been,  if  it  had  only  been  pro- 
jected in  resentment  of  that  step  taken  by  the  Court  of 
France :  and  as  to  England's  refusal  of  the  sole  media- 
tion, that  refusal  being  of  a  yet  later  date,  it  could  have 
no  sort  of  influence  in  setting  the  Treaty  of  Vienna  on 
foot ;  so  far  from  it,  that  this  treaty  was  signed  in  form 
at  Vienna,  April  30,  1725,  which  was  but  a  week 
after  the  King  of  England's  refusal  of  the  sole  media- 
tion was  known  at  Madrid,  and  long  before  it  could  be 
known  at  Vienna  [through  MadridJ.  Besides  this,  the 
Duke  de  Ripperda's  full  powers  for  making  this  treaty 
had  been  signed  in  November,  1724,7  which  was  six 
months  before  the  sending  back  the  Infanta  was  thought 
of;  and,  consequently,  as  long  before  the  sole  mediation 
could  have  been  proposed.  So  that  the  making  this 
excuse  only  showed  they  thought  some  excuse  neces- 
sary, and  could  not  find  one  that  would  justify  or  avail 
them. 

I  have  dwelt  longer  on  this  point,  as  the  not  accept- 
ing the  sole  mediation  is  the  great  fault  imputed  to  our 
ministers  by  all  those  writers  who  have  arraigned  their 
conduct ;  but  I  think  one  may,  with  a  great  deal  of 

7  Coxe  says  as  early  as  October. 


1727.  TREATY  OF  VIENNA.  75 

candour,  pronounce  that,  if  our  ministers  had  accepted 
of  the  sole  mediation  at  the  time  it  was  offered,  they 
would  have  been  guilty  of  a  much  greater  error,  both 
in  justice  and  interest,  and  consequently  in  policy,  than 
any  that  can  now  be  laid  to  their  charge.  As  to  the 
justice  of  disjoining  themselves  from  France  upon  this 
occasion,  it  can  never  be  alleged  that  France  having 
disobliged  Spain  was  any  reason  why  England  should 
disoblige  France ;  and  of  course  no  plea  for  England 
acting  alone  in  a  transaction  which  they  had  undertaken 
together.  Thus  much  is  to  be  said  for  the  equity  of 
the  refusal,  which  in  national  transactions,  I  may  be 
told  perhaps,  neither  is  nor  ought  ever  to  be  consi- 
dered. But  supposing  the  interest  of  England  only  to 
be  considered,  it  would  certainly  never  have  turned 
out  for  the  advantage  of  England  to  have  accepted  this 
proposal,  because  it  could  have  given  a  very  reason- 
able disgust  to  the  Court  of  France  (with  whom  we 
were  then  in  the  strictest  alliance),  without  giving  us 
any  merit  towards  Spain  or  the  Emperor,  whose  recon- 
ciliation was  already  agreed  on,  and  not  left  to  be  the 
work  of  our  hands.  So  that  our  giving  in  to  this  pro- 
posal would  have  turned  to  no  other  account  than 
proving  ourselves  the  dupes  of  Spain,  who  could  make 
this  offer  (all  circumstances  considered)  with  no  other 
view  than  to  weaken  the  union,  sow  jealousies,  and 
create  a  coolness  at  this  important  crisis  between  France 
and  England ;  and  would  at  least  have  made  England 
engross  all  the  ridicule  of  being  chosen  public  arbitrator 
in  a  quarrel  already  privately  made  up. 

As  for  the  real  reasons  the  Courts  of  Madrid  and 
Vienna  had  for  entering  into  this  treaty,  if  we  will  con- 


76  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  III. 

sider  the  situation,  the  policy,  and  views  of  these  two 
Courts  at  this  period  of  time,  and  how  far  the  stipula- 
tions and  articles  contained  in  this  treaty  were  reci- 
procal gratifications  of  all  the  favourite  points  of  the 
contracting  parties,  there  want  no  refining  conjectures 
to  account  for  the  setting  such  a  scheme  on  foot,  or  the 
solicitude  that  each  of  these  powers  showed  for  putting 
it  in  execution. 

The  Emperor,  as  he  is  a  prince  who  has  very  exten- 
sive and  scattered  territories,  a  great  number  of  troops, 
and  very  little  money,  is  always  negotiating  for  the 
latter,  in  order  to  maintain  the  two  others.  He  has 
generally  very  able  servants  both  in  civil  and  military 
affairs ;  and  never  had  two  more  able  than  Prince 
Eugene  and  Zinzendorff,  his  principal  counsellors  at 
that  time. 

But  by  the  whole  tenor  of  the  conduct  of  the  court 
of  Vienna,  their  maxims  seem  to  be,  to  say  anything, 
to  promise  anything,  or  to  sign  anything — that  will  serve 
the  present  purpose ;  to  get  what  they  can,  without  ever 
considering  afterwards  by  whom,  how,  or  when  they 
were  obliged ;  and,  in  short,  to  be  just  or  unjust,  grate- 
ful or  ungrateful,  say  and  unsay,  make  and  unmake 
treaties,  just  as  the  present  occurrence  requires ;  and 
as  money  can  be  got  by  their  entering  into  any  engage- 
ments, adhering  to  them  or  departing  from  them.  The 
vast  personal  obligations  the  present  Emperor  had  to 
England  on  account  of  the  last  long  war8  never  seemed 


8  The  Succession  War,  for  placing  Charles  on  the  throne  of  Spain.  But 
such  obligations  are  generally,  as  here,  much  exaggerated.  England  fought 
for  what  she  thought  her  own  interests,  and  not  for  the  individual  Charles 
of  Austria. 


1727.  TREATY  OF  VIENNA.  77 

to  have  any  weight  in  his  Imperial  Majesty's  resolutions, 
conduct,  or  counsels,  for  one  moment,  in  any  one  step, 
or  any  one  instance,  ever  after.  The  part  England 
had  taken  in  his  cause  during  that  expensive  war  in 
Spain  was  soon  forgot  by  him,  though  the  effects  of  that 
friendship  remained  too  heavy  a  burden  on  the  people 
of  England,  in  debts  and  taxes,  not  to  be  still  felt  and 
remembered  by  them.  The  putting  Sicily  into  his 
hands,  though  a  more  recent  obligation,  was  not  better 
acknowledged  or  remembered;  for  the  investiture  of 
Bremen  and  Yerden,  for  which  Lord  Cadogan  nego- 
tiated and  Lord  Torrington  fought,  was  not  granted, 
though  promised,  and  probably  was  kept  back  in  order  to 
be  held  out  once  more  as  a  bait  to  the  next  job  in  which 
the  interposition  of  England  should  be  wanted.  The 
great  and  favourite  points  of  the  Court  of  Vienna  were, 
getting  money  and  subsidies — at  any  rate  securing  the 
undivided  succession  of  the  hereditary  Austrian  domi- 
nions in  case  the  Emperor  had  no  sons — the  suffering 
no  other  power,  if  they  could  help  it,  to  get  footing  in 
Italy — and  the  establishment  of  the  Ostend  Company. 
On  these  views  the  Emperor  entered  into  this  Treaty 
of  Vienna  with  Spain  in  1725,  which  answered  them 
every  one,  for  by  the  articles  of  this  treaty  he  was  to 
have  immense  subsidies  paid  to  him  by  Spain  for  troops 
he  was  to  furnish  to  besiege  Gibraltar ;  he  was  to  be 
supported  in  the  establishment  of  the  Ostend  Company; 
and,  by  the  marriage  of  his  eldest  daughter9  to  Don 
Carlos,  the  Queen  of  Spain's  eldest  son,  he  was  to  keep 
the  hereditary  Austrian  dominions  entire,  and  see  his 
daughter's  husband,  who  was  eventual  successor  to  the 

»  Maria  Theresa,  afterwards  Queen  of  Hungary  and  Empress. 


78  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  III. 

duchies  of  Parma  and  Tuscany,  sole  possessor  of  all 
Italy.  But  this  treaty,  by  getting  him  too  much,  got 
him  nothing  (saving  the  subsidies) ;  for  when  all  the 
rest  of  Europe  saw  how  very  formidable  a  power  might 
arise  on  this  foundation  —  some  justly,  and  others,  I 
think,  unjustly  alarmed — judged  it  their  joint  interest 
to  crush  this  project  in  the  embryo.  The  English  mi- 
nisters pretend  to  affirm,  that  in  this  treaty,  in  case 
England  should  oppose  the  execution  of  it  and  the 
marriage  of  Don  Carlos  with  the  eldest  archduchess, 
there  was  a  secret  article  to  impose  the  Pretender  upon 
us,  and  make  his  concurrence  to  this  treaty  the  condi- 
tion of  his  restoration.  Whether  this  really  was  so,  or 
whether  it  was  a  story  trumped  up  to  excuse  their  very 
precipitate  entrance  into  the  Treaty  of  Hanover,  is  a 
point  that  never  has,  and  in  all  probability  never  will,10 
be  cleared  :  it  is  certain  that  the  Duke  de  Ripperda,  who 
then  governed  Spain,  did,  both  at  Madrid  and  Vienna, 
in  very  big  blustering  terms,  often  declare  this  to  be 
his  scheme ;  and  that,  if  England  was  not  quiet,  she 
should  repent  her  opposition,  and  be  made  to  receive 
a  King  who  would  be  more  tractable,  or  at  least  more 
passive. 

This  was  the  situation  of  the  Court  of  Vienna  :  as  to 
that  of  Spain,  it  has  partly  been  explained  by  the 
account  of  the  other.  The  crown  of  Spain  being  on 

10  I  know  not  that  this  point  has  been  yet  fully  cleared  up.  Sir  R. 
Walpole,  on  secret  information,  as  he  said — probably  that  of  Ripperda — 
asserted  the  existence  of  this  stipulation  in  his  speech,  29  March,  1734. 
Coxe  states  that  the  documents  to  which  he  had  access  prove  it ;  but  he 
does  not  produce  any  such  document.  Lord  Mahon  also  adopts  these  state- 
ments, but  has  not  confirmed  them  by  any  additional  authority.  The  fact 
is  very  probable ;  but  it  is  observable  that  Lord  Hervey,  who  at  least  revised 
these  memoirs  some  years  later,  and  was  so  long  in  the  full  confidence  of 
Walpole,  still  speaks  very  doubtfully  of  it. 


1727.  TREATY  OF  HANOVER.  79 

the  head  of  a  man  who  had  once  abdicated  it,  then 
taken  it  again,  and  again  wished  to  lay  it  aside — one 
who  was  half  fool  and  half  madman — he  had  little 
or  no  share  in  any  act  of  that  Court ;  he  was  governed 
entirely  by  his  wife,  an  Italian  by  birth,  whose  sole 
view  was  aggrandizing  her  own  children,  and  securing 
herself  a  retreat  in  Italy  in  case  she  outlived  her  hus- 
band, whose  brains  and  constitution  were  equally  crazy 
and  broken.  The  Prince  of  Asturias  [Ferdinand],  her 
husband's  son  by  a  former  wife,  being  heir  to  the  crown 
of  Spain,  she  never  considered  the  interest  of  that  king- 
dom in  any  of  her  negotiations  ;  and  though  her  eldest 
and  favourite  son,  Don  Carlos,  had  the  eventual  suc- 
cession of  Parma  and  Tuscany  secured  to  him  by  the 
Quadruple  Alliance,  yet  the  Duke  de  Ripperda  had  so 
extended  her  views  for  Don  Carlos's  grandeur,  by  this 
scheme  of  the  Vienna  Treaty,  that,  lured  and  elated  by 
those  hopes  of  marrying  him  to  the  archduchess,  making 
him  Emperor,  and  getting  him  all  Italy,  she  lost  sight 
of  what  was  feasible  in  order  to  pursue  what  was  im- 
practicable; and  draining  the  treasures  of  Spain  (though 
supplied  by  the  Indies)  to  bribe  the  favour  and  supply 
the  indigence  of  the  Court  of  Vienna,  she  ran  away 
with  this  extravagant  chimerical  scheme,  forgot  or  neg- 
lected the  succession  of  Parma  and  Tuscany,  as  little 
things  not  worth  thinking  of,  and  alarmed  and  em- 
broiled all  Europe  with  this  project,  which  a  mad 
minister  had  put  into  the  head  of  this  mad  Queen, 
whose  influence  over  her  mad  husband  was  sufficient  to 
lead  him  blindfold  into  this  or  any  other  mad  project 
she  thought  fit. 

But   to   oppose   the    execution   of  this    Treaty   of 


80  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  III. 

Vienna,  France  and  England  entered  immediately, 
in  1725,  into  the  Treaty  of  Hanover,  called  a  defen- 
sive treaty:  the  chief  object  of  it  was,  I  believe,  a 
piece  of  flattery  of  Lord  Townshend's  to  the  late  King, 
who  was  piqued  at  not  having  been  able  to  obtain  the 
investiture  of  Bremen  and  Verden,  looked  upon  him- 
self as  the  Emperor's  dupe,  and  was  glad  to  lay  hold 
of  the  first  pretence  he  could  find  to  do  anything  that 
would  thwart  his  Imperial  Majesty's  inclination,  com- 
bat his  interest,  or  mortify  his  pride.  The  public  rea- 
sons given  out  for  setting  this  Treaty  of  Hanover  on 
foot  were, — the  alarm  all  Europe  had  taken  upon  the 
sudden,  unnatural,  clandestine,  and  formidable  conjunc- 
tion of  these  two  great  powers,  the  Empire  and  Spain  ; 
the  expediency  of  forming  some  counter-alliance  to 
make  a  stand  against  the  union,  and  preserve  the  ba- 
lance of  power  in  Europe ;  and  the  necessity  there  was 
of  putting  a  stop  to  the  intended  marriage  of  Don  Carlos, 
by  early  protesting  against  it.  The  dangerous  conse- 
quences which  the  contracting  parties  to  the  Treaty  of 
Hanover  said  all  Europe  might  apprehend  from  this 
match  were  these : — first,  that  it  would  demonstrably 
and  inevitably  unite  all  Italy  to  the  Empire  after  the 
death  of  the  present  Emperor ;  in  the  next  place,  as 
there  was  only  the  Prince  of  Asturias's  life  between 
Don  Carlos  and  the  crown  of  Spain,  so  very  probably 
Spain  might  be  added  to  those  vast  possessions ;  and, 
besides  this,  the  King  of  France  having  then  no 
children,  there  was  a  possibility  even  of  that  crown  also 
devolving  to  Don  Carlos,  and  his  being  consequently, 
if  not  universal  monarch  of  Europe,  at  least  a  power 
too  strong  for  any  of  the  rest,  or  all  of  them  put  toge- 


1727.  TREATY  OF  HANOVER.  81 

ther,  to  contend  with.  All  these  contingencies  and 
possible  events  considered,  the  allies  of  Hanover  in- 
sisted on  this  match  being  repugnant  to  the  interest  of 
every  state  in  Europe,  and  consequently  the  business 
of  all  Europe  to  oppose  and  prevent  it.  In  the  mean 
time,  pursuant  to  the  stipulations  of  the  Treaty  of 
Vienna,  immense  remittances  were  made  to  the  Em- 
peror :  soon  after,  Gibraltar  was  demanded  by  Spain, 
in  consequence  of  an  equivocal  promissory  letter, 
written  by  the  late  King11  to  the  King  of  Spain;  and 
those  demands  not  being  complied  with,  the  siege  of 
Gibraltar  was  opened. 

In  consequence  of  this  Treaty  of  Hanover,  three 
great  fleets  were  immediately  fitted  out  on  the  part  of 
England  ;  one  of  which  was  sent  to  the  coast  of  Spain 
to  protect  our  merchant-ships  and  to  be  ready  to  defend 
Gibraltar ;  another  was  ordered  to  the  West  Indies  to 
block  up  the  galleons  in  Porto  Bello,  and  prevent  the 
arrival  of  money  in  Spain,  without  which  the  allies  of 
the  Vienna  Treaty  could  not  put  the  articles  of  it  in 
execution ;  and  the  third  sailed  into  the  Baltic  to 
secure  (as  was  pretended)  the  pacification  of  the  North 
and  defend  Sweden  in  case  she  acceded  to  the  Treaty 
of  Hanover  from  the  resentment  of  the  Moscovite,  who 
was  joined  with  the  Emperor  and  would  have  been 
glad  of  any  pretence  to  attack  her.  These  were  the 
reasons  given  for  the  equipment  of  this  third  expensive 
fleet,  whilst  the  strongest,  which  was  the  security  and 
defence  of  Bremen  and  Verden,  operated  only  in 
secret. 

11  The  details  of  this  very  questionable  transaction  are  to  be  found  in 
Coxe,  i.  308,  &c. 

VOL.  I.  G 


82  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  III. 

France  was  at  this  time  governed  entirely  by  Car- 
dinal Fleury ;  he  was,  though  not  nominally,  yet  vir- 
tually, First  Minister,  and  with  undivided  sway ;  he 
had  been  about  the  King  from  his  infancy,  and  had 
such  full  possession  of  him,  that  from  the  time  of  Mon- 
sieur le  Due's 12  disgrace  nobody  but  the  Cardinal  ever 
spoke  to  him  of  any  business  whatever.  This  monopoly 
of  the  King's  ear  and  confidence  the  Cardinal  owed 
partly  to  his  Majesty's  opinion  of  him  and  an  habitual 
attachment  that  people  mistook  for  affection,  and  partly 
to  the  King's  natural  laziness  and  dislike  to  letting 
many  people  know  how  ignorant  he  was  in  his  own 
affairs,  which  was  a  defect  he  had  just  sense  enough  to 
feel  and  be  ashamed  of,  but  not  resolution  and  appli- 
cation enough  to  correct  and  amend.  I  cannot,  by  the 
best  accounts  I  have  had,  or  by  what  I  have  myself 
seen  of  this  insensible  piece  of  royalty,  venture  abso- 
lutely to  say  that  he  was  of  a  good  or  a  bad  disposition, 
for,  more  properly  speaking,  he  was  of  no  disposition 
at  all ;  he  was  neither  merciful  nor  cruel,  without 
affection  or  enmity,  gratitude  or  resentment,  and,  to 
all  appearances,  without  pleasure  or  pain.  Whatever 
he  did  seemed  rather  the  mechanical  operations  of  an 
automaton  than  the  result  of  the  will  and  direction  of  a 
rational  being.  The  state  of  his  mind  on  all  occasions 
seemed  still  to  be  an  entire  apathy,  unacting  and  un- 
moved ;  if  he  had  any  passion  it  was  avarice,  and  if  he 
took  pleasure  in  any  amusement  it  was  in  gaming. 
He  had  not  any  share  in  that  epidemical  gaiety  and 
alacrity  that  runs  through  the  generality  of  the  French 

J2  The  Duke  de  Bourbon,  who  succeeded  the  Regent  as  First  Minister 
in  1723,  was  dismissed  in  1726,  and  died  in  1740. 


1727.  CARDINAL  FLEURY.  83 

nation;  but  seemed  to  take  as  little  pleasure  as  he 
gave,  to  live  to  as  little  purpose  to  himself  as  to  any- 
body else,  and  to  have  no  more  joy  in  being  King 
than  his  people  had  advantages  from  being  his 
subjects. 

It  was  lucky  for  France  that  the  sole  management  of 
this  regal  puppet  fell  at  last  [1726]  into  the  Cardinal's 
hands ;  for  though  his  Eminence  was  not  a  man  of  the 
first-rate  parts,  the  brightest  talents,  or  the  most 
elevated  genius,  yet  he  had  a  good  plain  practical 
understanding,  was  a  prudent  minister,  and  an  honest 
man.  He  was  disinterested  and  conscientious,  candid, 
open,  steady,  and  unfeignedly  pious.  He  loved  the 
King  with  the  affection  of  a  parent  as  well  as  the  duty 
of  a  subject,  served  his  country  with  the  zeal  of  the 
warmest  patriot,  and  considered  mankind  with  the 
justice  and  charity  of  the  strictest  Christian;  what 
faults  he  had  were  emanations  from  his  virtues ;  for 
his  support  of  the  .Jesuits  to  a  degree  that  might  be 
called  an  oppression  and  persecution  of  their  great 
opponents,  the  Jansenists,  proceeded  only  from  too 
strict  an  adherence  to  what  he  thought  the  truth,  the 
safety  of  the  Government,  and  the  welfare  of  the 
people.  He  always  believed  the  principles  of  the 
Jansenists  to  be  as  strong  for  liberty  in  State  as  in 
Church  matters,  and  that  if  ever  they  were  given  way 
to  in  the  one,  they  would  quickly  gain  ground  in  the 
other,  and  cause,  of  course,  such  convulsions  in  the 
Government  that  nobody  could  foresee  where  the  con- 
sequences of  such  a  spirit  would  end,  nor  how  far  it 
might  operate  when  assisted  by  the  particular  vivacity 
of  the  French  nation  and  the  general  love  of  innova- 


84  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  III. 

lion  and  freedom  in  all  mankind.  Those  actions  which 
got  him  the  character  of  a  covetous,  griping  minister 
were  only  the  consequences  of  rather  too  sparing  and 
frugal  a  dispensation  of  the  King's  treasure,  which  he 
found  in  so  dissipated  a  condition  at  his  entrance  into 
power,  that  it  required  at  first  the  strictest  economy  to 
bring  it  into  any  order,  method,  or  credit. 

He  had  no  view  in  what  he  saved  to  enriching  him- 
self or  his  family  ;  the  nepotism  of  other  Cardinals  and 
almost  all  Popes  had  no  influence  in  his  conduct,  for 
he  had  but  two  nephews,  one  in  the  marine  and  the 
other  in  the  church,  and  to  avoid  the  reproach  of  par- 
tiality to  his  own  blood  at  the  expense  of  the  public, 
he  neglected  their  advancement,  even  to  a  fault. 

His  great  principle  in  politics  was  to  keep  peace  13  in 
Europe  as  long  as  it  was  possible,  and  by  his  adherence 
to  this  principle  France,  during  his  administration,  re- 
covered all  the  havoc  and  distress  and  misery  that  had 
been  brought  upon  her  by  a  series  of  so  many  years' 
mismanagement  in  his  predecessors'.  She  no  longer 
groaned  under  the  consequences  of  the  imprudent, 
obstinate,  and  boundless  ambition  of  Lewis  XIV.,  nor 
the  misfortunes  generally  entailed  on  the  people  by 
long,  expensive,  and  unsuccessful  wars.  The  profligacy, 
extravagance,  and  dissipation  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans' 
regency,  and  the  confusion  of  Mr.  Law's  Mississippi 
scheme,  were  no  longer  felt,  any  more  than  the  bad 
effects  of  the  succeeding  times,  when  the  Government, 
falling  into  the  hands  of  that  weak,  ignorant,  and  in- 
dolent Prince,  Monsieur  le  Due,  France  suffered  all 
those  hardships  which  must  naturally  and  unavoid- 

is  "  Peace  is  my  dear  delight — not  Fleury's  more." — Pope. 


1727.  STATE  OF  FRANCE.  85 

ably  be  brought  on  a  nation  when  the  supineness  of 
such  a  governor  leaves  the  rapaciousness  of  such  an 
abandoned,  unfeeling,  and  unprincipled  a  woman  as  his 
mistress,  Madame  de  Prie,  full  scope  and  plenitude 
of  power  to  act  all  the  follies,  oppressions,  and  injustices 
that  passion,  avarice,  vanity,  and  insolence  can  suggest. 

This  was  the  state  of  France  when  the  Cardinal 
came  into  the  Hanover  Treaty,  which,  without  being 
repugnant  to  his  pacific  principles,  was  consonant  to 
the  inherent  and  fundamental  policy  of  all  Frenchmen, 
who  are  naturally  jealous  of  the  power  of  the  House  of 
Austria,  and  always  ready  to  enter  into  any  measures 
to  check  and  confine  it. 

To  oppose  the  execution  then  of  the  Vienna  Treaty 
made  between  the  Emperor  and  Spain,  France  and 
England  formed  the  Hanover  Treaty,  September  3, 
1727,  when  the  late  King  was  at  Hanover.  As  soon 
as  this  treaty  was  concluded,  to  which  England,  France, 
and  Prussia  were  the  original  contracting  parties, 
copies  of  it  were  sent  to  all  the  Courts  and  little  States 
in  Europe ;  and  whilst  the  Emperor  and  Spain  were 
soliciting,  on  one  hand,  for  accessions  to  their  Treaty 
of  Vienna,  England  and  France  were,  on  the  other, 
strengthening,  by  as  many  powers  as  they  could  list, 
the  alliance  of  Hanover. 

The  defection  of  the  King  of  Prussia  from  the  latter 
was  a  sudden  turn,  and  proceeded  partly  from  a  fear  of 
his  superior,  the  Emperor,  and  partly  from  a  sullen, 
envious  hatred  he  bore  to  his  father-in-law,  the  King 
of  England,  who,  from  the  time  of  his  advancement  to 
that  crown,  sank  in  his  son-in-law's  favour,  just  in  the 
same  proportion  as  he  rose  above  him  in  grandeur. 


86  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  III. 

This  was  a  great  loss  to  the  allies  of  Hanover,  the 
King  of  Prussia  having  a  standing  force  of  70,000 
men.  The  forces  of  Spain  were  about  60,000,  besides 
their  naval  power ;  and  the  army  of  the  Emperor  in  all, 
after  the  new  levies,  about  200,000.  Muscovy  was  the 
only  considerable  power,  besides  Prussia,  that  acceded 
to  the  Treaty  of  Vienna ;  for  whilst  the  Czarina  alone 
obliged  herself,  in  case  of  a  rupture,  to  furnish  30,000 
men,  the  Electors  of  Bavaria,  Cologne,  and  Treves, 
besides  several  other  little  German  Princes  that  his 
Imperial  Majesty  had  bullied,  cajoled,  or  bought  into 
his  party,  could  muster  no  more  than  27,000  men  when 
all  their  forces  were  clubbed  together. 

To  the  Hanover  alliance  came  in  Holland,  Sweden, 
and  Denmark.  Holland  augmented  her  forces  from 
30,000  to  50,000  men  by  land,  and  by  sea  had  eighteen 
men-of-war  ready  to  sail.  The  quota  of  Sweden,  by 
virtue  of  their  treaty,  was  5000  men,  and  10,000  more 
they  were  to  have  ready  in  consideration  of  a  yearly 
subsidy  of  100,000/.  for  three  years,  paid  jointly  by 
France  and  England.  Denmark  was  to  have  24,000 
men  standing  troops,  and  for  a  subsidy  paid  by  France 
for  four  years  was  to  augment  their  forces  to  30,000 
if  required.  France  increased  her  regular  troops 
30,000  men,  which  made  them  in  all  amount  to 
160,000.  They  had  also  a  disciplined  militia  of  60,000 
men,  sea-magazines,  artillery,  and  ammunition  ready 
to  take  the  field,  and  for  sea-services  they  fitted  out 
this  year  twelve  men-of-war. 

The  King  of  England,  as  Elector,  increased  his 
troops  from  16,000  to  22,000  men,  and  as  King  of 
England  from  18,000  to  26,000  men;  20,000  men 


1727.  FOKCES  OF  EACH  PARTY.  87 

were  also  voted  by  the  Parliament  that  year  for  the 
sea-service,  and  12,000  Hessians  were  taken  into  the 
pay  of  Great  Britain  alone,  at  an  expense  of  240,  OOO/. 
a  year.  This  subsidy  caused  so  much  clamour  in 
Parliament  and  so  much  disaffection  throughout  the 
whole  nation,  that  I  shall  speak  of  it  hereafter  more  at 
large. 

Thus  almost  all  the  powers  of  Europe  were  engaged 
directly  or  indirectly  in  support  of  the  Treaty  of 
Vienna  or  Hanover  respectively,  whilst  the  accumu- 
lated land-forces  of  the  first  and  all  their  allies  amounted 
to  about  387,000  men,  and  of  the  latter  to  about 
315,000  men. 

In  this  perplexed,  entangled,  and  amphibious  state  of 
broken  peace  and  undeclared  war  did  King  George  II. 
at  his  accession  to  the  throne  find  the  political  affairs 
of  Europe. 


88  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IV. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

New  Parliament — The  Coronation — Creation  of  Peers — Mrs.  Clayton — 
Queen's  Management  of  the  King — Libels — Character  of  Lord  Scar- 
borough and  of  Lord  Chesterfield  compared. 

As  soon  as  his  Civil  List  was  settled  the  old  Parliament 
was  dismissed,  and  soon  after  a  new  one  called.  The 
choice  of  this  new  Parliament  was  consigned  entirely 
to  the  care  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  which  confirmed 
the  whole  world  in  the  opinion  of  the  King's  being 
determined  to  continue  him  First  Minister,  everybody 
being  capable,  without  much  penetration  or  refinement, 
to  reason,  that  a  man  who  was  to  have  his  friends,  fol- 
lowers, and  adherents  removed  from  Court  would  never 
have  Court-money  given  him  to  bring  them  into  Par- 
liament. 

In  October  the  ceremony  of  the  Coronation  was  per- 
formed with  all  the  pomp  and  magnificence  that  could 
be  contrived ;  the  present  King  differing  so  much 
from  the  last,  that  all  the  pageantry  and  splendour, 
badges  and  trappings  of  royalty,  were  as  pleasing  to  the 
son  as  they  were  irksome  to  the  father.  The  dress  of 
the  Queen  on  this  occasion  was  as  fine  as  the  accumu- 
lated riches  of  the  City  and  suburbs  could  make  it ;  for 
besides  her  own  jewels  (which  were  a  great  number 
and  very  valuable)  she  had  on  her  head  and  on  her 
shoulders  all  the  pearls  she  could  borrow  of  the  ladies 
of  quality  at  one  end  of  the  town,  and  on  her  petticoat 


1727.  QUEEN'S  POWER.  89 

all  the  diamonds  she  could  hire l  of  the  Jews  and 
jewellers  at  the  other;  so  that  the  appearance  and  the 
truth  of  her  finery  was  a  mixture  of  magnificence  and 
meanness  not  unlike  the  eclat  of  royalty  in  many  other 
particulars  when  it  comes  to  be  nicely  examined  and 
its  sources  traced  to  what  money  hires  or  flattery 
lends. 

Soon  after  the  King  came  to  the  crown2  he  made 
Sir  John  Hobart,  Sir  Thomas  Wentworth,  Sir  William 
Monson,  and  Sir  Thomas  Coke  peers  by  the  titles  of 
Lord  Hobart,  Lord  Malton,  Lord  Monson,  and  Lord 
Lovel. 

When  first  the  Queen's  power  with  the  King  began 
to  appear  (which  was  as  soon  as  ever  he  was  King) 
people  made  great  court  to  Mrs.  Clayton,  one  of  the 
women  of  her  bedchamber.  This  lady  ha /ing  been 
always  thought  her  favourite  when  Princess,  and  from 
her  first  coming  over  constantly  in  her  service,  and 
seemingly  in  her  confidence,  everybody  imagined  she 
would  have  power  in  the  new  reign ;  but  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  either  jealous  of  her  interest  from  not  be- 
lieving her  cordially  in  his,  or  thinking  he  wanted  no 
assistance,  soon  clipped  the  wing  of  her  ambition,  and 
showed  the  world  that  as  he  wanted  no  pinions  but  his 
own  to  support  him,  so  he  would  suffer  no  other  to 
approach. 

Mrs.  Clayton 3  had  a  head  fitter  for  a  Court  than 

1  There  was  some  little  excuse  for  this.     "  At  the  death  of  Queen  Anne, 
such  a  clearance  had  been  made  of  her  Majesty's  jewels,  or  the  new  King 
had  so  instantly  distributed  them  among  his  German  favourites,  that  Lady 
Suffolk  told  me  Queen  Caroline  never  obtained  of  the  late  Queen's  jewels 
but  one  pearl  necklace.'' — Reminiscences. 

2  This  creation  was  in  May,  1728. 

3  Charlotte  Dyves,  wifeof  William  Clayton,  a  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  created 

VOL.  I.  G  3 


90  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAV.  IV. 

her  temper,  her  passions  being  to  the  full  as  strong  as 
her  understanding ;  and  as  the  one  hindered  her  from 
being  blind  to  people's  faults,  the  other  often  hindered 
her  too  from  seeming  so.  She  had  sense  enough  to 
perceive  what  black  and  dirty  company,  by  living  in  a 
Court,  she  was  forced  to  keep ;  had  honour  enough  to 
despise  them,  and  goodness  enough  to  hate  them,  and 
not  hypocrisy  enough  at  the  same  time  to  tell  them 
they  were  white  and  clean.  I  knew  her  intimately, 
and  think  she  had  really  a  warm,  honest,  noble,  gene- 
rous, benevolent,  friendly  heart;  and  if  she  had  the 
common  weakness  of  letting  those  she  wished  ill  to  see 
it,  she  had  in  recompense  the  uncommon  merit  of 
letting  those  she  wished  well  to  not  only  see,  but  feel 
it.  She  had  so  great  a  pleasure  in  doing  real  good 
that  she  frequently  employed  the  interest  she  had  at 
Court  in  favour  of  people  who  could  no  way  repay  her, 
and  often  for  such  as  had  not  even  solicited  it ;  and  by 
this  conduct  reversed  the  manners  and  maxims  of  most 
courtiers  and  politicians,  as  she  seemed  generally  in  the 
obligations  she  conferred  to  consider  more  who  wanted 


in  1735  Baron  Sundon  of  Ireland,  was  of  the  same  Court  faction  as  Lord 
Hervey,  and  therefore  his  report  may  have  been  partial ;  that  of  Horace 
Walpole  is  not  so  complimentary.  He  calls  her  "an  absurd,  pompous 
simpleton,"  whose  favour  with  the  Queen  arose  from  her  "  having  wormed 
herself  into  the  secret  of  her  Majesty's  being  afflicted  with  a  rupture,  which 
no  other  person  knew  but  the  King  and  her  German  nurse  :"  but  the  favour 
had  preceded  the  alleged  ground  of  it  many  years.  Walpole  states  she  em- 
ployed her  interest  corruptly.  "  Lady  Sundon  had  received  a  pair  of  diamond 
ear-rings  as  a  bribe  for  procuring  a  considerable  post  in  Queen  Caroline's 
family  for  a  certain  peer  [Lord  Pomfret]  ;  and,  decked  with  these  jewels, 
paid  a  visit  to  old  Sarah  Duchess  of  Marl  borough,  who  as  soon  as  she  was 
gone  said — '  What  an  impudent  creature,  to  come  here  with  her  bribe  in 
her  ear!'  '  Madam,'  replied  Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montagu,  who  was  pre- 
sent, '  how  should  people  know  where  wine  is  sold  unless  a  bush  is  hung 
out?'  "  But  see  post,  i.  448,  n.  11,  ii.  184,  n.  5,  and  506,  n.  12. 


1727.  MRS.  HOWARD  AND  MRS.  CLAYTON.  91 

her  than  whom  she  wanted — a  way  of  thinking  very 
different  from  that  of  her  master  and  mistress,  who 
looked  upon  human  kind  as  so  many  commodities  in  a 
market,  which,  without  favour  or  affection,  they  con- 
sidered only  in  the  degree  they  were  useful,  and  paid 
for  them  in  that  proportion  —  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
being  sworn  appraiser  to  their  Majesties  at  all  these 
sales. 

Mrs.  Clayton  and  Mrs.  Howard  hated  one  another 
very  civilly  and  very  heartily,  but  not  in  equal  constraint ; 
for  whilst  Mrs.  Clayton  was  every  moment  like  Mount 
Etna,  ready  to  burst  when  she  did  not  flame,  Mrs. 
Howard  was  as  much  mistress  of  her  passions  as  of  her 
limbs,  and  could  as  easily  prevent  the  one  from  showing 
she  had  a  mind  to  strike,  as  she  could  the  other  from 
giving  the  blow :  her  passions,  if  I  may  be  allowed  the 
comparison,  were  like  well-managed  horses,  at  once 
both  hot  and  tractable.  The  enmity  between  these  two 
ladies  was  a  very  natural  consequence  of  their  situa- 
tions, the  one  having  been  always  attached  to  the  mas- 
ter, and  the  other  to  the  mistress :  each  was  jealous  of 
the  other's  interest,  and  each  over-rated  it ;  for  as  soon 
as  their  power  (had  they  had  any)  came  to  have  an 
opportunity  of  showing  itself,  the  whole  world  perceived 
that  the  reputed  favourite  of  the  Princess  had  as  little 
real  weight  with  the  Queen  as  the  reputed  mistress  of 
the  Prince  had  with  the  King. 

And  as  people  now  plainly  saw  that  all  Court  interest, 
power,  profit,  favour,  and  preferment  were  returning  in 
this  reign  to  the  same  track  in  which  they  had  travelled 
in  the  last,  lampoons,  libels,  pamphlets,  satires,  and  bal- 
lads were  handed  about,  both  publicly  and  privately, 


92  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IV. 

some  in  print  and  some  in  manuscript,  abusing  and 
ridiculing  the  King,  the  Queen,  their  Ministers,  and  all 
that  belonged  to  them :  the  subject  of  most  of  them  was 
Sir  Robert's  having  bought  the  Queen,  and  the  Queen's 
governing  the  King  ;  which  thought  was  over  and  over 
again  repeated  in  a  thousand  different  shapes  and 
dresses,  both  of  prose  and  verse.  And  as  the  '  Crafts- 
man '4  had  not  yet  lashed  their  Majesties  out  of  all  feel- 
ing for  these  transitory  verbal  corrections  that  smart 
without  wounding  and  hurt  without  being  dangerous, 
so  the  King's  vehemence  and  pride,  and  the  Queen's 
apprehension  of  his  being  told  of  her  power  till  he 
might  happen  to  feel  it,  made  them  both  at  first  exces- 
sively uneasy.  However,  as  the  Queen  by  long  study- 
ing and  long  experience  of  his  temper  knew  how  to 
instil  her  own  sentiments,  whilst  she  affected  to  receive 
his  Majesty's,  she  could  appear  convinced  whilst  she 
was  controverting,  and  obedient  whilst  she  was  ruling ; 
and  by  this  means  her  dexterity  and  address  made  it 
impossible  for  anybody  to  persuade  him  what  was  truly 
his  case — that  whilst  she  was  seemingly  on  every  oc- 
casion giving  up  her  opinion  and  her  will  to  his,  she 
was  always  in  reality  turning  his  opinion  and  bending 
his  will  to  hers.  She  managed  this  deified  image  as 
the  heathen  priests  used  to  do  the  oracles  of  old,  when, 
kneeling  and  prostrate  before  the  altars  of  a  pageant  god, 
they  received  with  the  greatest  devotion  and  reverence 
those  directions  in  public  which  they  had  before  instilled 
and  regulated  in  private.  And  as  these  idols  conse- 
quently were  only  propitious  to  the  favourites  of  the 
augurers,  so  nobody  who  had  not  tampered  with  our 

4  This  celebrated  paper  had  commenced  only  the  year  before. 


1727.  ROYAL  FAVOURITES.  93 

chief  priestess  ever  received  a  favourable  answer  from 
our  god :  storms  and  thunder  greeted  every  votary  that 
entered  the  temple  without  her  protection ;  calms  and 
sunshine  those  who  obtained  it.  The  King  himself  was 
so  little  sensible  of  this  being  his  case,  that  one  day 
enumerating  the  people  who  had  governed  this  country 
in  other  reigns,  he  said  Charles  I.  was  governed  by 
his  wife;  Charles  II.  by  his  mistresses;  King  James  by 
his  priests ;  King  William  by  his  men — and  Queen  Anne 
by  her  women — favourites.  His  father,  he  added,  had 
been  by  anybody  that  could  get  at  him.  And  at  the 
end  of  this  compendious  history  of  our  great  and  wise 
monarchs,  with  a  significant,  satisfied,  triumphant  air, 
he  turned  about,  smiling,  to  one  of  his  auditors,  and 
asked  him — "And  who  do  they  say  governs  now?" 
Whether  this  is  a  true  or  a  false  story  of  the  King,  I 
know  not,  but  it  was  currently  reported  and  generally 
believed.  The  following  verses  will  serve  for  a  speci- 
men of  the  strain  in  which  the  libels,  satires,  and  lam- 
poons of  these  days  were  composed : — 

"  You  may  strut,  dapper5  George,  but  't  will  all  be  in  vain  ; 
We  know  'tis  Queen  Caroline,  not  you,  that  reign — 
You  govern  no  more  than  Don  Philip  of  Spain. 
Then  if  you  would  have  us  fall  down  and  adore  you, 
Lock  up  your  fat  spouse,  as  your  dad  did  before  you.''  6 

This  was  one  of  the  poetical  pasquinades  that  were 


5  George  II.  was  very  short.     One  of  the  lampoons  on  him  describes 
the  pleasure  with  which  he  received  Mr.  (afterwards  Lord)  Edgcumbe, 
who  was  very  low  in  stature  : — 

"  Rejoiced  to  find  within  his  court 
One  shorter  than  himself!" 

6  Sophia  Dorothea  of  Zell,  wife  of  King  George  1.,  was  confined  by  her 
husband  in  the  castle  of  Ahlen  for  thirty-two  years,  and  died  there  only 
seven  months  before  the  King. 


94  LORD  HEEVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IV. 

handed  about  in  manuscript  at  this  time.  There  was 
another  that  began — 

"  Since  England  was  England,  there  never  was  seen 
So  strutting  a  King,  and  so  prating  a  Queen,"  &c. 

and  several  more  of  the  same  stamp  and  in  the  same 
style.  People  found  they  galled,  and  that  increased  the 
number  of  them.  The  first  of  those  I  have  cited  had 
like  to  have  been  fatal  to  Lord  Scarborough.  Upon 
being  taxed  by  the  King  with  having  seen  it,  he  con- 
fessed he  had  so,  but  refused  absolutely  to  say  by  whom 
it  had  been  shown  him,  assuring  his  Majesty  that  pre- 
viously to  his  reading  it  or  to  the  knowing  what  it  was, 
he  had  given  his  honour  never  to  tell  through  whose 
hands  he  received  it.  The  King,  with  great  warmth 
and  anger,  said  to  him — "Had  I  been  Lord  Scarbo- 
rough in  this  situation  and  you  King,  the  man  should 
have  shot  me,  or  I  him,  who  had  dared  to  affront  me, 
in  the  person  of  my  master,  by  showing  me  such  inso- 
lent nonsense."  Lord  Scarborough  replied,  he  had 
never  told  his  Majesty  that  it  was  a  man  from  whom 
he  had  it,  and  persisting  in  the  concealment  he  had 
promised,  left  the  King  (who  never  spoke  to  him  for 
some  months  after)  almost  as  much  irritated  against 
him  as  the  author. 

Lord  Scarborough  had  been  in  the  King's  service  as 
Master  of  the  Horse,  when  he  was  Prince,  from  the  time 
the  Hanover  family  first  came  into  England ;  on  the 
King's  accession  to  the  throne  he  was  continued  in  that 
post,  and  the  first  officer  declared :  he  was  a  man  of 
worth,  family,  quality,  sense,  figure,  character,  and 
honour :  he  had  the  Garter  given  him  in  the  late  reign  ; 
was  bred  in  a  camp,  and  from  thence  brought  to  Court, 


1727.  LORD  SCARBOROUGH.  95 

and  had  all  the  gallantry  of  the  one  and  the  politeness 
of  the  other :  he  was  amiable  and  beloved,  two  things 
which,  though  they  ought,  do  not  always  meet ;  he  was 
of  the  Cabinet  Council,  and  was  equally  fit  to  be  trusted 
in  the  most  important  affairs,  or  advised  with  in  the 
most  delicate ;  having  knowledge,  application,  and  ob- 
servation, an  excellent  judgment,  and  (without  the  bril- 
liant eclat  of  showy  parts)  a  discerning,  practical,  use- 
ful, sound  understanding.  His  education  had  inclined 
him  a  little  too  much  to  the  love  of  an  army.7 
He  was  one  of  the  best  speakers  of  his  time  in  the 
House  of  Lords;  clear  in  his  matter,  forcible  in  his 
expression,  and  gave  weight  not  only  by  his  words,  but 
by  his  character,  to  any  cause  he  maintained,  or  any 
opinion  he  inclined  to. 

When  first  the  King  came  to  the  Crown,  Lord  Ches- 
terfield was  thought  to  have  interest.  The  accident  of 
his  being  in  waiting  at  that  time  as  Lord  of  his  Bed- 
chamber gave  him  that  appearance  of  interest  to  those 
who  judge  of  Courts  by  appearances ;  and  his  having 
been  long  a  declared  enemy  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole's, 
made  the  speculative  part  of  the  world  conclude  it. 
Lord  Chesterfield  was  allowed  by  everybody  to  have 
more  conversable  entertaining  table-wit  than  any  man 
of  his  time ;  his  propensity  to  ridicule,  in  which  he  in- 
dulged himself  with  infinite  humour  and  no  distinction, 
and  with  inexhaustible  spirits  and  no  discretion,  made 
him  sought  and  feared,  liked  and  not  loved,  by  most  of 
his  acquaintance;  no  sex,  no  relation,  no  rank,  no 
power,  no  profession,  no  friendship,  no  obligation,  was 

'  Lord  Hervey  had  been  brought  up  by  his  father  in  the  old  Whig  pre- 
judice against  a  standing  army. 


96  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IV. 

a  shield  from  those  pointed,  glittering  weapons,  that 
seemed  to  shine  only  to  a  stander-by,  but  cut  deep  in 
those  they  touched.  All  his  acquaintance  were  indif- 
ferently the  objects  of  his  satire,  and  served  promiscu- 
ously to  feed  that  voracious  appetite  for  abuse  that  made 
him  fall  on  everything  that  came  in  his  way,  and  treat 
every  one  of  his  companions  in  rotation  at  the  expense 
of  the  rest.  I  remember  two  lines  in  a  satire  of  Boi- 
leau's  that  fit  him  exactly : — 

"  Mais  c'est  un  petit  fou  qui  se  croit  tout  permis, 
Et  qui  pour  un  bon  mot  va  perdre  vingt  amis." 

And  as  his  lordship,  for  want  of  principle,  often  sa- 
crificed his  character  to  his  interest,  so  by  these  means 
he  as  often,  for  want  of  prudence,  sacrificed  his  interest 
to  his  vanity.  With  a  person  as  disagreeable  as  it  was 
possible  for  a  human  figure  to  be  without  being  de- 
formed, he  affected  following  many  women  of  the  first 
beauty  and  the  most  in  fashion;  and,  if  you  would  have 
taken  his  word  for  it,  not  without  success ;  whilst  in 
fact  and  in  truth  he  never  gained  any  one  above  the 
venal  rank  of  those  whom  an  Adonis  or  a  Vulcan  might 
be  equally  well  with,  for  an  equal  sum  of  money.  He 
was  very  short,  disproportioned,  thick,  and  clumsily 
made  ;  had  a  broad,  rough-featured,  ugly  face,  with 
black  teeth,  and  a  head  big  enough  for  a  Polyphemus.8 
One  Ben  Ashurst,  who  said  few  good  things,  though 
admired  for  many,  told  Lord  Chesterfield  once  that  he 
was  like  a  stunted  giant — which  was  a  humorous  idea 


8  This  is  very  different  from  his  portraits,  which  represent  a  handsome 
and  intellectual  countenance,  and  indicate  a  fine,  or  at  least  an  elegant, 
figure  and  air.  Even  admitting  that  the  painters  flattered,  and  that  Lord 
Hervey  caricatured,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  account  for  so  violent  a  contrast. 


1727.  LORD  CHESTERFIELD.  97 

and  really  apposite.  Such  a  thing  would  disconcert 
Lord  Chesterfield  as  much  as  it  would  have  done  any- 
body who  had  neither  his  wit  nor  his  assurance  on  other 
occasions ;  for  though  he  could  attack  vigorously,  he 
could  defend  but  weakly,  his  quickness  never  showing 
itself  in  reply,  any  more  than  his  understanding  in 
argument. 

Part  of  the  character  which  Bishop  Burnet  gives  of 
his  grandfather,  the  Marquis  of  Halifax,  seems  to  be 
a  prophetic  description  of  Lord  Chesterfield, — at  least 
he  has  an  hereditary  title  to  it : — 

"  The  liveliness  of  Lord  Halifax's  imagination  (says  the 
Bishop)  was  always  too  hard  for  his  judgment :  a  severe  jest 
was  preferred  by  him  to  all  arguments  whatsoever ;  and  if  he 
could  find  a  new  jest  to  make  even  what  he  himself  had  sug- 
gested in  counsel  just  before  seem  ridiculous,  he  could  not  hold, 
but  would  study  to  raise  the  credit  of  his  wit,  though  it  made 
others  call  his  judgment  in  question." 

When  the  distribution  of  places,  changes,  and  promo- 
tions was  making  at  the  beginning  of  this  reign,  the 
King  told  Sir  Robert  Walpole  he  would  have  something 
done  for  Chesterfield.  Sir  Robert,  who  did  not  dislike 
removing  so  declared  an  enemy  to  a  little  distance  from 
the  King's  ear,  proposed  sending  Lord  Chesterfield 
Ambassador  to  Holland ;  and  Lord  Chesterfield,  afraid 
to  act  against  Sir  Robert,  and  ashamed  to  act  under 
him,  gave  in  to  this  proposal ;  thinking  it  would  allow 
people  time  to  forget  the  declarations  he  had  made  of 
never  forgiving  Sir  Robert,  and  save  him  from  a  little 
of  that  ridicule  which  the  laughers  of  his  acquaintance 
would  be  apt  to  lavish  upon  him  when  they  saw  him 
listed  again  under  the  banner  of  a  man  he  had  formerly 

VOL.  i.  H 


98  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IV. 

deserted,  and  against  whom  he  had  so  long  fought  with 
his  wit,  that  only  weapon  with  which  he  cared  for 
fighting.9 

If  anybody  had  a  friendship  for  Lord  Chesterfield,  it 
was  Lord  Scarborough ;  yet  it  was  impossible  to  see  a 
stronger  contrast  of  character  in  any  two  men,  who 
neither  wanted  understanding,  but  the  sort  of  under- 
standing each  of  them  possessed  was  almost  as  different 
as  sense  and  nonsense :  Lord  Scarborough  always 
searching  after  truth,  loving  it,  and  adhering  to  it ; 
whereas  Lord  Chesterfield  looked  on  nothing  in  that 
light — he  never  considered  what  was  true  or  false,  but 
related  everything  in  which  he  had  no  interest  just  as 
his  imagination  suggested  it  would  tell  best ;  and,  if  by 
sinking,  adding,  or  altering  any  circumstance,  it  served 
either  the  purpose  of  his  interest,  his  vanity,  or  his 
enmity,  he  would  dress  it  up  in  that  fashion  without  any 
scruple,  and  oftentimes  with  as  little  probability;  by 
which  means,  as  much  as  he  piqued  himself  on  being 
distinguished  for  his  wit,  he  often  gave  people  a  greater 
opinion  of  the  copiousness  of  his  invention  and  the 
fertility  of  his  imagination  than  he  desired — an  idle 
schoolboy  being  as  capable  of  changing  facts  as  a 
Socrates  or  a  Cicero.  Lord  Scarborough  had  under- 
standing, with  judgment,  and  without  wit ;  Lord  Ches- 
terfield, a  speculative  head,  with  wit,  and  without 


9  Lord  Mahon  says  {Preface  to  Works) — "  The  first  outset  of  Lord 
Chesterfield  in  public  life  was  his  embassy  to  Holland  ;"  but  (besides  having 
long  been  a  Lord  of  the  Prince's  Bedchamber)  he  was  in  17'23,  while  Lord 
Stanhope,  made  Captain  of  the  Gentlemen  Pensioners,  which  he  resigned 
in  1725,  on  some  difference  with  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  which,  as  well  as 
a  speech  of  his  to  the  King,  I  presume  on  the  same  occasion,  made  a  noise 
at  the  time.  The  details  have  not  reached  us. — See  Stiff".  Cor.,  i.  183. 


1121.     SCARBOROUGH  AND  CHESTERFIELD  COMPARED.       99 

judgment.  Lord  Scarborough  had  honour  and  prin- 
ciple ;  Lord  Chesterfield,  neither :  the  one  valued  them 
wherever  he  saw  them ;  the  other  despised  the  reality, 
and  believed  those  who  seemed  to  have  most,  had 
generally  only  the  appearance,  especially  if  they  had 
sense.  Patriotism,  adherence  to  a  party,  the  love  of 
one's  country,  and  a  concern  for  the  public,  were  his 
common  topics  for  ridicule ;  he  would  not  scruple  to 
own  that  he  thought  the  laws  of  honour  in  men,  and 
the  rules  of  virtue  in  women,  like  the  tenets  of  an 
established  religion,  very  proper  things  to  inculcate,  but 
what  the  people  of  sense  and  discernment,  of  both  sexes, 
professed  without  regarding,  and  transgressed  whilst 
they  recommended.  Nor  were  the  tempers  of  these 
two  men  more  alike  than  their  understanding  or  their 
principles ;  Lord  Scarborough  being  generally  splenetic 
and  absent ;  Lord  Chesterfield  always  cheerful  and  pre- 
sent :  everybody  liked  the  character  of  the  one,  without 
being  very  solicitous  for  his  company ;  and  everybody 
was  solicitous  for  the  company  of  the  other,  without 
liking  his  character.  In  short,  Lord  Scarborough  was 
an  honest,  prudent  man,  capable  of  being  a  good  friend ; 
and  Lord  Chesterfield  a  dishonest,  irresolute,  impru- 
dent creature,  capable  only  of  being  a  disagreeable 
enemy. 


H2 


100  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAF.  V. 


CHAPTER  V. 

Meeting  of  Parliament — Speaker  Onslow — Iniquitous  decision  of  Election 
Petitions — Preliminary  Articles  of  Peace — Vote  of  Credit — Sir  Thomas 
Hanmer — Congress  of  Soissons — Rupture  between  Walpole  and  Town- 
shend — Its  causes — Character  of  Townshend — Houghton — Townshend 
Party — Miss  Skerrett. 

ABOUT  the  middle  of  January,  1728,  the  Parliament 
met ;  Sir  Spencer  Compton,  who  had  been  Speaker 
fourteen  years,  being  now  created  Lord  Wilmington,  a 
new  one  was  to  be  chosen,  and  Mr.  Onslow  pitched 
upon  to  be  the  man.  As  he  had  no  great  pretensions 
to  it,  from  his  age,  his  character,  his  weight  in  the 
House,  or  his  particular  knowledge  of  the  business,  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  imagined  that  he  must  look  upon  his 
promotion  entirely  as  an  act  of  his  favour,  and  conse- 
quently think  himself  obliged,  in  honour,  interest,  and 
gratitude,  to  show  all  the  complaisance  in  his  power  to 
his  patron  and  benefactor.  However,  Mr.  Onslow  had 
just  that  degree  of  fitness  for  this  office,  when  he  was 
first  put  into  it,  that  hindered  the  world  from  exclaim- 
ing against  him,  and  yet  was  not  enough  for  him  to 
take  it  as  his  due.  He  was  a  man  naturally  eloquent, 
but  rather  too  florid ; !  was  as  far  from  wanting  parts  or 


1  "  It  has  been  observed  that  the  Chair  of  the  House  of  Commons  sel- 
dom fails  to  impart  to  its  occupants  a  certain  florid  stateliness  of  diction  and 
demeanour,  like  what  would  be  called  in  common  life  pomposity." — Quar- 
terly Review  of  the  Life  of  Lord  Sidmouth,  vol.  79,  p.  485.  It  might  have 
been  added,  that  a  predisposition  to  this  florid  manner  seems  sometimes  to 
have  attracted  the  choice  of  the  House. 


1728.  SPEAKER  ONSLOW.  101 

application,  as  he  was  from  possessing  prudence  or 
judgment ;  he  had  kept  bad  company  of  the  collegiate 
kind,  by  which  he  had  contracted  a  stiffness  and  pe- 
dantry in  his  manner  of  conversing ;  and  whilst  he  was 
thoroughly  knowing  in  past  times,  was  totally  ignorant 
of  the  modern  world.  No  man  ever  courted  popularity 
more,  and  to  no  man  popularity  was  ever  more  coy: 
he  cajoled  both  parties,  and  obliged  neither ;  he  dis- 
obliged his  patron  by  seeming  to  favour  his  opponents, 
and  gained  no  credit  with  them  because  it  was  only 
seeming.  He  had  one  merit  truly  and  sincerely  (as  I 
believe,  at  least),  which  was  an  attachment  to  the  con- 
stitution of  England,  and  a  love  of  liberty  that  never 
gave  way  ;  and  was  certainly  no  favourer  of  the  power 
of  the  Crown  or  the  Church.  But  these  true  Whig  and 
laudable  principles  were  so  daubed  by  canting,  fulsome, 
bombast  professions,  that  it  was  as  hard  to  find  out 
whether  there  was  anything  good  at  bottom,  as  it  would 
be  to  find  out  real  beauty  in  a  painted  lady.  In  general 
he  was  passionate  in  his  temper,  violent  in  his  manner, 
coxcomical  in  his  gestures,  and  injudicious  in  his 
conduct.2 

The  King  was  forced  to  meet  his  Parliament  with  a 
sort  of  hereditary  speech,  for  it  was  just  in  the  same 
strain  with  the  last  half-dozen  of  his  father's, —  the 
topics  of  which  were  the  uncertain  state  of  Europe,  the 
intricacy  of  affairs,  the  natural  protraction  of  treaties, 
the  hopes  of  a  happy  conclusion  being  near  at  hand, 
and  the  dependence  he  had  in  the  loyalty  and  goodwill 
of  his  Parliament  for  supporting  him  with  money  and 

2  He  was  Speaker  for  thirty-three  years  (1728 — 1761),  in  five  parlia- 
ments, with  universal  approbation. 


102  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  V. 

troops.  He  concluded  this  part  of  royal  oratory  with 
recommending  unanimity  in  their  proceedings,  and 
desiring  (not  in  so  many  words,  but  by  strong  impli- 
cation) an  entire  confidence  in  him  and  his  ministers ; 
and  an  implicit  belief  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to 
take  any  step  that  was  not  for  the  welfare  and  pros- 
perity of  his  people.3 

There  was  little  business  to  do  in  this  Session  besides 
that  of  giving  the  supplies  for  the  current  service  of  the 
year,  and  hearing  petitions  on  elections.4  As  to  the 
first,  they  were  granted  with  a  most  liberal  hand ;  and 
as  to  their  proceedings  with  regard  to  the  last  of  these 
occupations,  I  believe  the  manifest  injustice  and  glaring 
violation  of  all  truth  in  the  decisions  of  this  Parliament 
surpass  even  the  most  flagrant  and  infamous  instances 
of  any  of  their  predecessors.  They  voted  in  one  case 
forty  more  than  ninety;  in  another  they  cut  off  the 
votes  of  about  seven  towns  and  some  thousand  voters, 
who  had  not  only  been  determined  to  have  voices  by 
former  committees  of  elections,  but  had  had  their  right 
of  voting  confirmed  to  them  by  the  express  words  of  an 
Act  of  Parliament  and  the  authority  of  the  whole  legis- 
lature. There  was  a  string  of  these  equitable  deter- 
minations in  about  half  a  dozen  instances,  so  unwar- 
rantable and  indefensible  that  people  grew  ashamed  of 
pretending  to  talk  of  right  and  wrong,  laughed  at  that 
for  which  they  ought  to  have  blushed,  and  declared  that 


3  It  seems  strange  that  Lord  Hervey  should  sneer  at  this  speech,  which 
seems  appropriate  to  the  occasion,  and  to  which  he  himself  moved   the 
responsive  address,  31st  January;    but  he  was  probably  somewhat  out  of 
humour  at  not  having  had  office. 

4  There  were  near  seventy  election  petitions  this  Session. 


1728.  PRELIMINARIES  OF  PEACE.  103 

in  elections  they  never  considered  the  cause,  but  the 
men,  nor  ever  voted  according  to  justice  and  right,  but 
from  solicitation  and  favour.  At  the  same  time  these 
honest  gentlemen,  by  an  extraordinary  and  unaccount- 
able casuistry,  fancied  that,  whilst  they  were  every  day 
defrauding  people  of  what  they  had  purchased  with  so 
considerable  a  part  of  their  fortune,  that  they  should 
have  scruples  about  picking  a  pocket  or  robbing  on  the 
highway;  and  flattered  themselves  that  a  conscience 
which  could  digest  the  one  without  hesitation,  would 
have  found  any  argument  against  the  other  but  the  slight- 
ness  of  the  temptation  or  the  fear  of  the  punishment. 

During  this  session  of  Parliament  the  preliminary 
articles  for  a  general  peace,  which  had  been  signed 
some  months  before  [31st  May,  1727]  by  the  Emperor, 
France,  England,  and  Holland,  were  agreed  to  by  the 
Court  of  Spain.  The  substance  of  these  articles  was, 
that  all  hostilities  for  the  space  of  seven  years  should 
cease,  and  that  the  traffic  of  theOstend  Company  should 
be  suspended  for  the  same  term ;  that  all  the  articles  of 
the  Quadruple  Alliance  should  be  observed  and  ad- 
hered to ;  that  all  treaties  relating  to  commerce  made 
before  the  year  1725  should  subsist  in  their  full  force; 
that  the  pacification  of  the  North  should  be  discussed 
at  the  Congress ;  that  the  English  fleet  should  retire 
from  before  Portobello  and  depart  from  the  Spanish 
West  Indies ;  and  that  reparation  should  be  made  to 
the  merchants  on  both  sides  for  damages  that  had  been 
done  and  the  losses  they  had  sustained.  All  further 
disputes  and  subordinate  particulars  were  to  be  referred 
to  the  plenipotentiaries  at  the  Congress,  and  to  be 
adjusted  there. 


104  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  V. 

The  Emperor's  having  signed  these  articles  without 
the  consent  or  privity  of  the  Crown  of  Spain,  caused  a 
coolness  between  these  two  Courts,  and  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  that  breach  which  was  the  occasion  of  all  others 
being  healed.  Spain,  finding  that  the  consideration  of 
her  interest,  and  the  provisions  made  for  her  in  those 
preliminaries,  fell  so  much  short  of  the  hopes  she  had 
entertained,  and  the  advantages  she  had  proposed  to 
herself,  thought  her  cause  neglected  by  the  Emperor ; 
and  that,  his  own  coffers  being  filled  beforehand  by  the 
mad  liberality  of  a  profuse  Queen,  he  did  not  trouble 
himself  much  about  procuring  for  Spain  what  those 
vast  sums  had  been  remitted  to  purchase  and  secure. 
These  jealousies  and  disgusts  enabled  England  to  treat 
separately  with  these  two  Powers,  and  made  them 
hearken  to  terms  which,  if  they  had  continued  united, 
in  all  probability  they  would  never  have  listened  to ; 
but  the  jealousy  each  of  these  Crowns  had  conceived  of 
the  other's  complying  first,  and  those  who  stood  out  last 
being  consequently  left  alone  against  all  Europe,  made 
each  of  these  Powers  as  ready  to  accept  of  an  accom- 
modation as  England  to  propose  it. 

The  indolent,  pacific,  and  tractable  disposition  of  the 
Cardinal  gave  England  little  trouble  from  that  quarter, 
and  left  our  ministers  full  liberty  to  make  what  advan- 
tage they  pleased  of  this  conjuncture ;  which  was  a 
lucky  accident  for  us,  but  no  justification  of  those  who 
threw  us  so  absolutely  into  their  power,  and  left  the 
arbitration  of  our  fortune  entirely  in  their  hands.5 

The  Congress  was  at  first  appointed  to  meet  at  Aix- 

5  This  latter  passage  seems  very  obscure.    It  appears  in  the  MS.  to  have 
been  added  to  the  original. 


1728.  VOTE  OF  CREDIT.  105 

la-Chapelle,  but  Cardinal  Fleury,  desiring  to  have  the 
scene  of  business  near  to  him,  and  being  unable  to 
leave  the  King,  fixed  it  at  Soissons :  it  was  to  open  in 
June.  Horace  Walpole,  ambassador  in  France,  Mr. 
Stanhope,  vice-chamberlain  to  the  King,  who  had  been 
ambassador  in  Spain,  and  Mr.  Poyntz,  an  eleve  of 
Lord  Townshend's,  were  appointed  plenipotentiaries  on 
the  part  of  England. 

Before  the  King  put  an  end  to  this  session  of  Parlia- 
ment he  desired  and  insisted  upon  it  to  his  ministers 
that  they  should  procure  him,  by  a  vote  of  credit,  the 
same  mark  of  confidence  from  this  House  of  Commons 
that  his  father  had  so  often  received  from  their  prede- 
cessors. The  ministers  were  not  at  all  inclined  to  ask 
this  compliment,  and  the  Parliament  as  little  inclined 
to  bestow  it ;  but,  notwithstanding  the  reluctance  both 
of  the  managers  and  donors,  the  thing  was  done,  as 
unwillingly  asked  and  granted  as  it  was  willingly  re- 
ceived. I  cannot  better  illustrate  the  nature  of  the 
complaisant  trusts  reposed  in  the  Crown  by  these  votes 
of  credit  than  by  repeating  what  was  said  formerly  in 
one  of  these  debates  by  Sir  Thomas  Hanmer,6  a  sensible, 
impracticable,  honest,  formal,  disagreeable  man,  whose 
great  merit  was  loving  his  country,  and  whose  great 
weakness  loving  the  parsons.  His  speeches  in  Parlia- 
ment were  always  fine  pieces  of  oratory,  but  never  of 
any  signification  ;  for,  as  he  was  eloquent  without  per- 
suading, he  was  admired  without  being  followed,  and 
pleased  people's  ears  without  influencing  their  opinions. 
With  all  his  sense,  what  he  brought  himself  to  at  last, 

6  The  editor  of  Shakespeare.  He  had  been  Speaker  in  Queen  Anne's  last 
Parliament.  He  was  a  relation  and  most  intimate  friend  of  Lord  Bristol. 


106  LORD  IIERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  V. 

by  a  wavering  odd  conduct,  was,  to  be  neither  of  use  to 
one  party  nor  a  terror  to  the  other,  arid  to  be  disliked 
at  Court,  without  being  beloved  in  the  country. 

What  he  urged  against  the  late  practice  of  Parlia- 
ment in  votes  of  credit  was  this  : — 

"  Our  ancestors,"  said  he,  "  had  two  ways  of  giving  extra- 
ordinary sums  of  money  to  the  Crown  on  extraordinary  occa- 
sions :  the  one  was  by  voting  a  sum  certain,  without  an  account 
required  of  the  disposal  of  it ;  the  other  was  the  giving  credit 
to  the  Crown  for  an  indefinite  sum,  making  the  Crown  account- 
able the  next  year  for  the  use  that  had  been  made  of  this  dis- 
cretionary power,  and  the  manner  in  which  the  money  had  been 
employed.  These  were  anciently  the  methods  practised  by  our 
ancestors ;  but  the  modern  manner  of  giving  money  to  the 
Crown  has  conciliated  both  the  inconveniences  of  these  two  ways, 
by  neither  limiting  the  sum  given,  nor  examining  the  account 
of  what  has  been  expended." 

This  was  certainly  not  ill  said,  and  put  the  conduct 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  with  regard  to  that  most 
material  branch  of  all  their  power,  the  giving  of  money, 
in  a  light  which  any  one  man  would  have  been  ashamed 
to  appear  in  ;  but  when  shame  comes  to  be  divided 
among  five  hundred,  the  portion  of  every  individual  is 
so  small  that  it  hurts  their  pride  as  little  as  it  discon- 
certs their  countenances. 

As  soon  as  the  King  had  put  an  end  to  this  session 
of  Parliament,  he  went  to  Richmond,  as  he  said,  because 
it  was  an  old  acquaintance:  he  went  afterwards  to 
Hampton  Court  and  Windsor,  as  others  said,  because 
they  were  new  acquaintances.  He  would  fain  have 
persuaded  both  himself  and  other  people  that  he  loved 
leisure  and  retirement ;  but  whenever  he  tried  them  he 
was  always  uneasy  and  impatient  to  return  to  a  circle, 


1728.          RUPTURE  OF  WALPOLE  AND  TOWNSHEND.  107 

and  never  did  retire  in  order  to  convince  people  he 
liked  it,  without  convincing  himself  that  he  did  not,  and 
that  he  was  no  more  turned  to  live  alone  agreeably  to 
himself  than  he  was  to  live  in  company  agreeably  to 
other  people. 

The  Congress  was  opened  this  summer  at  Soissons, 
but  the  cooks  of  the  Plenipotentiaries  had  much  more 
business  there  than  their  secretaries,  for  all  the  em- 
ployment of  these  great  national  and  regal  representa- 
tives was  giving  and  receiving  visits  and  dinners.7 

It  was  this  summer,  too,  that  that  coolness,  which 
afterwards  ended  in  a  total  breach,  began  to  show  itself 
between  Lord  Townshend  and  Sir  Robert  Walpole: 
it  was  not  yet  grown  to  such  a  height  as  to  be  manifest 
to  those  moles  of  a  Court  who  are  always  drudging  on 
in  their  own  interested  little  paths  without  seeing  what 
passes  every  day  around  them,  but  those  few  alert 
courtiers  who,  like  cautious  and  skilful  sailors,  see  every 
cloud  as  soon  as  it  rises  and  watch  every  wind  as  fast 
as  it  changes,  already  perceived  the  signs  of  this  gather- 
ing tempest,  prepared  for  its  bursting,  and  began  to  set 
their  sails  in  such  a  manner  as  should  enable  them  to 
shift  to  the  gale  that  was  most  favourable,  and  put 
them  in  a  readiness  to  pursue  the  course  they  were  in 
or  tack  about,  just  as  the  weather  should  require,  and 
to  that  point  of  the  compass  where  sunshine  was  most 
likely  to  appear. 

7  It  opened  on  the  14th  of  June,  but,  after  a  few  weeks,  the  principal 
ministers  dispersed,  and  the  meetings  became  few  and  irregular,  the  real 
negotiations  having  been  transferred  for  the  convenience  of  Cardinal  Fleury 
to  Fontainebleau  and  Paris.  Such  of  the  ministers  as,  for  form's  sake,  re- 
mained at  Soissons,  continued  to  give  entertainments,  to  which  Lord  Hervey 
alludes,  till  the  middle  of  October,  when  the  farce  seems  to  have  ended. 


108  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  V. 

Posterity  will  certainly  be  curious  to  learn  what  ex- 
traordinary cause  there  could  be  for  this  rupture  between 
two  men  who,  joined  to  the  alliance  of  brotherhood, 
had  for  thirty  years  together  lived  in  an  uninterrupted 
intimacy  of  the  strictest  friendship.  But  those  who 
knew  his  lordship's  impracticable  temper  would  rather 
wonder  that  this  union  continued  so  long,  than  that  it 
was  at  last  dissolved.  No  man  was  ever  a  greater  slave 
to  his  passions  than  Lord  Townshend ;  few  had  ever  less 
judgment  to  poise  his  passions ;  none  ever  listened  less 
to  that  little  they  had.  He  was  rash  in  his  under- 
takings, violent  in  his  proceedings,  haughty  in  his  car- 
riage, brutal  in  his  expressions,  and  cruel  in  his  disposi- 
tion ;  impatient  of  the  least  contradiction,  and  as  slow 
to  pardon  as  he  was  quick  to  resent.  He  was  so  cap- 
tious that  he  would  often  take  offence  where  nobody 
meant  to  give  it ;  and,  when  he  had  done  so,  was  too 
obstinate  in  such  jealousies,  though  never  so  lightly 
founded,  to  see  his  error,  and  too  implacable  ever  to 
forgive  those  against  whom  they  were  conceived.  He 
was  much  more  tenacious  of  his  opinion  than  of  his 
word  ;  for  the  one  he  never  gave  up,  and  the  other  he 
seldom  kept;  anybody  could  get  promises  from  him, 
but  few  could  prevail  with  him  to  perform  them.  It 
was  as  difficult  to  make  him  just  as  to  make  him  rea- 
sonable ;  and  as  hard  to  obtain  anything  of  him  as  to 
convince  him.  He  was  blunt  without  being  severe,  and 
false  without  being  artful ;  for  when  he  designed  to  be 
most  so,  he  endeavoured  to  temper  the  natural  inso- 
lence of  his  behaviour  with  an  affected  affability,  which 
sat  so  ill  upon  him  that  the  insinuating  grin  he  wore 
upon  those  occasions  was  more  formidable  than  his 


1728.         RUPTURE  OF  WALPOLE  AND  TOWNSHEND.  109 

severest  frown ;  and  would  put  anybody  to  whom  he 
pretended  friendship  more  upon  their  guard  than  those 
to  whom  he  professed  enmity. 

He  had  been  so  long  in  business,  that,  notwithstand- 
ing his  slow,  blundering  capacity,  he  might  have  got 
through  the  routine  of  his  employment  if  he  had  not 
thought  himself  as  much  above  that  part  of  a  statesman 
as  all  mankind  thought  any  other  above  him.    He  loved 
deep  schemes  and  extensive  projects,  and  affected  to 
strike  what  is  commonly  called  great  strokes  in  politics 
— things  which,  considering  the  nature  of  our  govern- 
ment, a  wise  minister  would  be  as  incapable  of  concert- 
ing, without  the  utmost  necessity,  as  Lord  Townshend 
would  have  been  of  executing  them,  if  there  was  a  ne- 
cessity.    He  had  been  the  most  frequent  speaker  in  the 
House  of  Lords  for  many  years,  and  was  as  little  im- 
proved as  if  there  had  been  no  room  for  it.     Those 
who  were  most  partial  to  him  (or  rather,  those  who  pre- 
tended to  be  so  whilst  he  was  in  power)  would  not  deny 
that  he  talked  ill,   but  used  to  say  he  undertalked  his 
capacity,  that  his  conception  was  much  superior  to  his 
utterance,  and  that  he  made  a  much  better  figure  in 
private  deliberations  than  in  public  debates.     But  when 
he  lost  his  interest  at  Court,  he  lost  these  palliatives 
for  his  dullness  in  the  world,  and  people  were  as  ready 
then  to  give  up  his  understanding  as  they  had  formerly 
been  to  give  up  his  oratory.     He  either  conferred  fewer 
obligations  or  met   with  more   ingratitude   than   any 
man  that  ever  had  been  so  long  at  the  top  of  an  admi- 
nistration, for  when  he  retired  he  went  alone,  and  as 
universally  unregretted  as  unattended.    These  Memoirs 
are  such  a  medley,  that  nothing  can  properly  be  called 


110  LORD  HEHVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  V. 

foreign  to  them ;  and  for  that  reason  I  shall  here  insert 
a  little  epigram  on  Lord  Townshend's  disgrace : — 

"  With  such  a  head  and  such  a  heart, 
If  Fortune  fails  to  take  thy  part, 
And  long  continues  thus  unkind, 
She  must  be  deaf  as  well  as  blind ; 
And  quite  reversing  every  rule, 
Nor  see  the  knave,  nor  hear  the  fool." 

I  believe  the  first  dispute  between  Lord  Townshend 
and  Sir  Robert  Walpole  began  upon  making  the 
Treaty  of  Hanover,  which  Sir  Robert  Walpole  always 
disapproved,  and  would  have  prevented,  though  he  was 
forced,  when  the  measure  was  once  taken,  either  to 
maintain  it  or  break  entirely  with  Lord  Townshend — a 
rupture  which  at  that  time  would  probably  have  ended 
in  his  own  disgrace ;  though,  in  the  subsequent  reign, 
it  terminated  in  Lord  Townshend's ;  for  Sir  Robert's 
power  then  subsisted  as  much  upon  Lord  Townshend's 
superior  favour  at  Court  as  Lord  Townshend's  success 
subsisted  by  Sir  Robert's  superior  capacity.  Sir  Ro- 
bert Walpole's  great  objection  to  this  treaty  was  its 
throwing  us  so  entirely  into  the  arms  of  France,  who 
naturally  could  never  be  long  or  cordially  our  friends, 
and  its  putting  us  so  absolutely  into  her  power  if  she 
pleased  to  be  a  dangerous  enemy.  Another  objection 
to  it  was,  that  it  engaged  us  in  all  the  expenses  of  a 
war  at  the  same  time  that  it  put  us  in  no  possibility  of 
expecting  any  of  those  advantages  that  were  to  be 
reaped  from  one,  and  kept  us  in  all  the  inaction  of 
peace  without  the  benefit  of  tranquillity.  Thus  the  real 
situation  in  which  this  treaty  put  England  indisputably 
was,  declaring  ourselves  enemies  to  those  Powers  who 
might  be  our  friends,  and  engaging  in  alliance  with  one 
that  never  could.  It  put  us  to  all  the  charge  necessary 


1728.  CAUSES  OF  THE  RUPTURE.  HI 

to  defend  our  possessions  abroad,  and  yet  left  them  open 
to  the  discussion  of  future  treaties ;  and  was  just  such  a 
degree  of  warfare  as  provoked  Spain  to  molest  us  in 
our  commerce,  without  going  far  enough  to  enable  us  to 
do  ourselves  justice  by  reprisals.  Till  the  making  of 
this  treaty  Sir  Robert  Walpole  never  meddled  at  all 
with  foreign  affairs ;  they  were  left  entirely  to  Lord 
Townshend,  whilst  Sir  Robert's  province  was  confined 
solely  to  parliamentary  and  domestic  concerns.  But 
when  Sir  Robert  found  the  clamour  against  this  treaty 
so  great  at  home,  and  the  difficulties  so  many  in  which 
it  entangled  us  abroad,  he  began  to  think  it  necessary 
to  take  some  cognizance  of  what  gave  him  immediately 
more  trouble  than  all  his  own  affairs  put  together.  For 
though  Lord  Townshend  only  was  the  transactor  of 
these  peace  and  war  negotiations,  yet  the  labouring  oar 
in  their  consequences  always  fell  on  Sir  Robert ;  it  was 
he  was  forced  to  stand  the  attacks  of  parliamentary 
inquiry  into  the  prudence  of  making  these  treaties ;  it 
was  he  was  to  provide  the  means  necessary  to  support 
them ;  on  him  only  fell  the  censure  of  entering  into  them, 
and  on  him  lay  all  the  difficulty  of  getting  out  of  them. 

I  shall  not  digress  farther  on  the  first  heart-burnings 
between  these  two  friends  and  brothers  in  the  late 
reign,  having  said  enough  to  show  how  unavoidable  it 
was  for  Sir  Robert  Walpole  on  this  occasion  to  disgust 
Lord  Townshend  in  the  two  material  points  of  not 
approving  what  had  been  done,  and  daring  for  the 
future  to  offer  his  advice  in  what  was  to  be  done. 

Another  great  mortification  to  LordTownshend's  pride 
was  the  seeing  and  feeling  every  day  that  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  who  came  into  the  world,  in  a  manner,  under 


112  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  V. 

his  protection,  and  inferior  to  him  in  fortune,  quality, 
and  credit,  was  now,  by  the  force  of  his  infinitely 
superior  talents,  as  much  above  him  in  power,  interest, 
weight,  credit,  and  reputation.  All  application  was 
made  to  him ;  his  house  was  crowded  like  a  fair  with  all 
sorts  of  petitioners,  whilst  Lord  Townshend's  was  only 
frequented  by  the  narrow  set  of  a  few  relations  and 
particular  flatterers ;  and  as  Lord  Townshend  in  the 
late  reign  had  nothing  but  personal  favour  at  Court  to 
depend  upon  in  any  disputes  that  might  arise  between 
him  and  Sir  Robert,  he  could  not  but  grieve  to  find 
that  resource  in  the  new  reign  entirely  taken  away,  the 
scene  quite  inverted,  and  himself  as  much  dependent 
now  upon  Sir  Robert's  personal  interest  as  Sir  Robert 
had  formerly  been  upon  his:  for  as  the  Duchess  of 
Kendal  never  loved  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  and  was 
weak  enough  to  admire  and  be  fond  of  Lord  Town- 
shend, so  in  any  nice  points  that  were  to  be  insinuated 
gently  and  carried  by  favour  in  the  last  reign,  the 
canal  of  application  to  the  royal  ear  had  always  been 
from  Lord  Townshend  to  the  Duchess  and  from  the 
Duchess  to  the  King ;  whereas  now  everything  that 
passed  to  the  present  King  through  the  Queen  (who 
was  to  the  son  at  least  what  the  Duchess  of  Kendal  had 
been  to  the  father)  was  suggested  by  Sir  Robert,  and 
nothing  pushed  or  received  by  her  from  any  other  hand. 
In  enumerating  the  seeds  of  Lord  Townshend's  dis- 
gust to  Sir  Robert  Walpole  there  is  another  occurs  to 
me,  which,  trivial  as  it  may  seem,  I  cannot  help  men- 
tioning, because  I  firmly  believe  it  was  a  circumstance 
that  operated  so  powerfully  on  the  weak  brain  and 
strong  vanity  of  this  great  and  noble  Lord,  that  it  con- 


1728.  HOUGHTON.  113 

tributed  more  than  all  the  rest  put  together  to  settle 
these  little  jealousies  and  distastes  into  a  fixed  insur- 
mountable aversion. 

What  I  mean  is,  the  great  house  which  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  built  at  Houghton,  in  Lord  Townshend's 
neighbourhood  in  Norfolk ;  and  though  it  may  seem  to 
some  too  ridiculous  and  inconsiderable  a  mouse  to  have 
put  this  ministerial  mountain  in  labour,  yet  those  who 
fancy  the  passions  of  princes,  the  quarrels  of  heroes, 
and  wrangles  of  great  men  are  not  often  at  first  stirred 
by  as  mean  engines  and  lighted  by  as  small  sparks  as 
the  dissensions  of  their  most  obscure  inferiors,  must 
have  been  little  conversant  with  such  people,  or  con- 
versed with  them  (if  knowing  them  be  the  end  of  con- 
versing with  them)  to  very  little  purpose. 

Before  Sir  Robert  Walpole  built  this  house  (which 
was  one  of  the  best,  though  not  of  the  largest,  in  Eng- 
land) Lord  Townshend  looked  upon  his  own  seat  at 
Raynham  as  the  metropolis  of  Norfolk,  was  proud  of 
the  superiority,  and  considered  every  stone  that  aug- 
mented the  splendour  of  Houghton  as  a  diminution  of 
the  grandeur  of  Raynham.  Had  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
raised  this  fabric  of  fraternal  discord  in  any  other 
county  in  England,  it  might  have  escaped  the  envy  of 
this  wise  rival ;  but  Sir  Robert's  partiality  to  the  solum 
natale,  the  scene  of  his  youth  and  the  abode  of  his 
ancestors,  made  that  neighbourhood,  to  which  the  acci- 
dental commencement  of  his  friendship  with  Lord 
Townshend  was  first  owing,  the  cause  also  of  its  dis- 
solution. 

As  the  misunderstanding  between  these  two  ministers 
increased,  Lord  Townshend  began  to  think  of  forming1 

VOL.  I.  I 


114  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  V. 

a  separate  party  at  Court,  and  attaching  some  particular 
people  to  himself  whom  he  could  look  upon  as  his  per- 
sonal friends,  who  should  go  under  the  denomination 
of  Townshend's  men,  and  on  whom  he  might  depend 
in  case  these  dissensions  should  come  to  a  total 
breach. 

Among  these  was  Lord  Trevor,8  then  Privy  Seal, 
and  afterwards  President  of  the  Council,  an  able  man 
in  his  way  and  bred  to  the  law.  He  had  been  em- 
ployed by  the  Tory  ministry  at  the  end  of  Queen 
Anne's  reign,  and  was  by  principle  (if  he  had  any 
principle)  a  Jacobite.  However,  from  interest  and 
policy,  he  became,  like  his  brother-convert  and  brother- 
lawyer,  Lord  Harcourt,  as  zealous  a  servant  to  the 
Hanover  family  as  any  of  those  who  had  never  been 
otherwise ;  for  as  these  two  men  were  too  knowing  in 
their  trade  to  swerve  from  the  established  principles  of 
their  profession,  they  acted  like  most  lawyers,  who 
generally  look  on  princes  like  other  clients,  and,  with- 
out any  regard  to  right  or  wrong — the  equity  or  in- 
justice of  the  cause — think  themselves  obliged  to  main- 
tain whoever  fees  them  last  and  pays  them  best. 

There  was  an  occurrence  at  the  latter  end  of  this 
summer  at  Windsor  relating  to  the  court  Lord  Town- 
shend  then  made  to  Lord  Trevor,  which  I  shall  relate, 
because  I  think  it  will  give  a  short  but  strong  sketch 
both  of  Lord  Townshend's  and  Sir  Robert  Walpole's 
temper;  but  before  I  begin  my  relation  I  must  pre- 


8  Thomas  first  Lord  Trevor,  Solicitor-General  in  1692,  Attorney  in 
1695,  Chief  Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas  in  1701,  Privy  Seal  in  1725, 
and  President  of  the  Council  in  1730.  Lord  Harcourt  had  been  Lord 
Chancellor  in  Queen  Anne's  Tory  ministry. 


1728.  MISS  SKERRETT.  115 

mise  that  Sir  Robert  Walpole  at  this  time  kept  a  very 
pretty  young  woman,  daughter  to  a  merchant,  whose 
name  was  Skerrett,  and  for  whom  he  was  said  to  have 
given  (besides  an  annual  allowance)  5000Z.  as  entrance- 
money.9 

One  evening  at  Windsor  the  Queen  asking  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  and  Lord  Townshend  where  they  had 
dined  that  day,  the  latter  said  he  had  dined  at  home 
with  Lord  and  Lady  Trevor  ;10  upon  which  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  said  to  Her  Majesty,  smiling,  "  My  Lord, 


9  Maria  Skerrett  was,  however,  a  young  lady  of  more  distinction  than 
Lord  Hervey's  statement  would  seem  to  indicate.     She  was  a  familiar  friend 
of  Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montagu,  the  second  of  whose  celebrated  letters 
(5th  August,  1716)   was  addressed  to  her;  and  we  find  her  mentioned 
subsequently : — 

"  Twickenham,  1725, — Miss  Skerrit  is  in  the  house  with  me." 

"  Cavendish  Square,  1725, — Miss  Skerrit  stayed  all  the  remainder  of  the 
summer  with  me,  and  we  are  now  come  to  town." 
And  again — 

"  /  see  everybody,  but  converse  with  nobody  but  des  amis  choisis ;  in  the 
first  rank  of  these  are  Lady  Stafford  and  dear  Molly  Skerrit." 

It  is  stated  in  a  note  to  Lady  Mary's  Letters  that  "  she  was  maid  of  honour 
to  the  Queen."  This  seems  hardly  consistent  with  the  terms  in  which  we 
find  the  Queen  speaking  of  her,  and  I  have  not  been  able  to  trace  her 
name  in  any  of  the  lists  of  the  household.  Sir  Robert  married  her  in 
February  or  March,  1738,  in  six  or  seven  months  after  his  first  wife's  death  ; 
and  it  is  stated  in  the  periodicals  of  the  day  that  she  had  "  80,000/. 
fortune."  If  this  was  not  either  a  sneer  or  a  blind,  it  would  seem  to  con- 
tradict the  additional  scandal,  that  Sir  Robert  had  bought  her.  She  died 
in  three  months  after  her  marriage,  leaving  an  only  daughter,  born 
long  before,  and  for  whom  Sir  Robert,  when  created  a  peer,  obtained 
the  rank  of  an  Earl's  daughter,  and  she  married  a  natural  son  of  General 
Churchill,  mentioned  ante,  p.  23.  The  whole  affair,  which  seems  to  our 
present  notion  almost  incredibly  scandalous,  gave  peculiar  poignancy  to  the 
satire  of  the  '  Beggars'  Opera,'  where  Macheath,  Lucy,  and  Polly  reminded 
the  public  of  Walpole,  his  lady,  and  "  Molly  Skerrett." 

10  Lord  Trevor  was  now  70  years  old,  and  his  wife,  Anne  Weldon,  was 
probably  not  much  less.     She  had  been  a  widow  before  her  marriage  with 
Lord  Trevor,  and  her  eldest  son  by  him  was  now  27  years  of  age.    So  that 
Sir  Robert's  pleasantry  would  have  been  very  innocent  if  it  had  not  been 
embittered  by  the  political  sneer. 

i  2 


116  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  V. 

Madam,  I  think  is  grown  coquet  from  a  long  widow- 
hood, and  has  some  design  upon  my  Lady  Trevor's 
virtue,  for  his  assiduity  of  late  in  that  family  is  grown 
to  be  so  much  more  than  common  civility,  that  without 
this  solution  I  know  not  how  to  account  for  it."  What 
made  this  raillery  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  very  ex- 
cusable and  impossible  to  shock  my  Lord's  prudery, 
let  him  pique  himself  ever  so  much  on  the  chastity  of 
his  character,  was,  that  my  good  Lady  Trevor,  besides 
her  strict  life  and  conversation,  was  of  the  most  vir- 
tuous forbidding  countenance  that  natural  ugliness,  age, 
and  small-pox  ever  compounded.  However,  Lord 
Townshend,  affecting  to  take  the  reproach  literally,  and 
to  understand  what  Sir  Robert  meant  to  insinuate  of 
the  political  court  he  paid  to  the  husband  as  sensual 
designs  upon  the  wife,  with  great  warmth  replied, 
"  No,  Sir,  I  am  not  one  of  those  fine  gentlemen  who 
find  no  time  of  life,  nor  any  station  in  the  world,  pre- 
servatives against  follies  and  immoralities  that  are 
hardly  excusable  when  youth  and  idleness  make  us 
most  liable  to  such  temptations.  They  are  liberties, 
Sir,  which  I  can  assure  you  I  am  as  far  from  taking 
as  from  approving;  nor  have  I  either  a  constitution 
that  requires  such  practices,  a  purse  that  can  support 
them,  or  a  conscience  that  can  digest  them."  Whilst 
he  uttered  these  words  his  voice  trembled,  his  coun- 
tenance was  pale,  and  every  limb  shook  with  passion. 
But  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  always  master  of  his  temper, 
made  him  no  other  answer  than  asking  him  with  a 
smile,  and  in  a  very  mild  tone  of  voice,  "  What,  my 
Lord,  all  this  for  my  Lady  Trevor  ?" 

The    Queen   grew  uneasy,   and,   to   prevent   Lord 


1728.  DEFENCE  OF  DETAILS.  117 

Townshend's  replying  or  the  thing  being  pushed  any 
farther,  only  laughed,  and  began  immediately  to  talk 
on  some  other  subject.11 

If  I  am  thought  to  be  too  particular  in  relating  little 
circumstances  of  this  kind,  all  I  can  say  for  myself  is, 
that  I  have  no  guide  to  guess  at  what  will  please  other 
people  in  reading  these  papers  but  what  I  find  pleases 
myself  best  in  works  of  the  like  nature ;  and  one  good 
authority,  I  am  sure,  I  have  for  believing  these  sort 
of  incidents  are  generally  not  disagreeable,  because 
Machiavel,  I  remember,  in  the  proem  to  his  History  of 
Florence,  speaking  of  such  little  particulars,  says : — 

"  Se  niuna  cosa  diletta  o  insigna  nella  historla,  e  quella  che 
particolarmente  si  discrivi ;  se  niuna  lettione  e  utile  a  quelli 
chi  governano  le  republiche,  e  quella  che  dimostra  la  cagioni 
de  gli  odii  e  delle  division! ;  accioche  possano,  con  il  pcricolo 
d'  altri  diventati  savi,  mantenersi  uniti ;  e  se  ogni  essempio  di 


11  It  is  odd  that  Lord  Hervey  should  not  allude  (if  it  had  ever  hap- 
pened) to  the  much  more  remarkable  altercation  and  persoruzl  scuffle  between 
Walpole  and  Townshend,  said  to  have  occurred  at  Mrs.  Selwyn's,  in 
Cleveland  Court,  and  supposed  to  have  been  the  original  of  the  celebrated 
quarrel  scene  between  Peachem  and  Lockit  in  the  '  Beggars'  Opera.'  Coxe, 
who  (as  far  as  I  know)  first  told  the  story,  does  not  specify  his  authority, 
and  dates  it  in  1729.  Lord  Mahon  repeats  it,  but  assigns  no  authority, 
and  places  it  under  the  date  of  1730,  just  before  Townshend's  resignation. 
This  would  seem  the  more  probable,  as  after  such  a  scene  it  is  hard  to 
imagine  the  parties  could  have  continued  to  sit  in  the  same  cabinet ;  but  as 
the  '  Beggars'  Opera'  was  played  on  the  29th  January,  1728,  it  is  certain 
either  that  the  date  of  the  historians  is  an  anachronism,  or  that  Gay  alluded 
to  some  earlier  dispute,  or  that  the  story  was  made  from  the  scene. 

I  must  here  observe  that  the  first  appearance  of  the  '  Beggars'  Opera'  has 
been  commonly  placed  in  November,  1727,  and  on  what  looks  like  con- 
clusive authority, — a  letter  of  Swift's  to  Gay,  dated  27th  November,  which 
talks  of  the  opera  as  then  both  played  and  printed  :  but  this  letter  will  be 
seen,  on  close  examination,  to  be  a  fusion  of  two  letters — one  written  in 
November,  1727,  and  the  second  three  months  later ;  or  the  Dean  may 
have  kept  the  letter  three  months  before  he  finished  it.  This  difficulty  is 
not  noticed  by  any  of  the  editors. 

VOL.  I.  I  3 


118  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAT.  V. 

republica  muove,  quelli  che  si  leggono  della  propria,  muovono 
molto  piu,  e  molto  piu  sono  utili." 

"  If  there  is  anything  in  history  which  either  delights  or 
instructs,  it  is  particular  description.  If  anything  be  useful  to 
those  citizens  who  have  the  government  of  the  commonwealth 
in  their  hands,  it  is  that  which  represents  the  causes  of  former 
feuds  and  dissensions,  that  they  may  become  wise  at  other 
people's  expense  and  keep  themselves  united ;  and  if  examples 
from  other  countries  make  an  impression  on  the  reader,  cer- 
tainly those  drawn  from  his  own  country  must  affect  him  much 
stronger  and  be  much  more  useful." 


1729.  COMPLAINTS  AGAINST  SPAIN.  119 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Complaints  against  Spain — The  Beggars'  Opera — Duchess  of  Queensberry 
forbidden  the  Court — Deficiency  in  the  Civil  List — Sir  Paul  Methuen — 
Dispute  between  George  II.  and  the  King  of  Prussia — Royal  duel — 
Lord  Hervey's  return  from  Italy — His  political  position — Breaks  with 
Mr.  Pulteney — Treaty  of  Seville — Debate  on  the  Hessian  Troops — De- 
bate on  Dunkirk,  and  Lord  Hervey's  Pamphlet — Townshend  resigns — 
Lord  Hervey  Vice-Chamberlain. 

WHEN  the  Parliament  met  this  year  [21st  January]  the 
affairs  of  Europe  were  as  unsettled  as  ever,  so  that  the 
same  complaints  were  continued  by  the  Opposition,  and 
the  same  defence  made  by  the  Administration  ;  that  is, 
the  opponents  and  malcontents  complained  that  our 
peace  was  imperfect,  and  the  ministers  insisted  that  the 
most  imperfect  peace  was  better  than  a  certain  war. 
The  complaints  of  the  merchants,  however,  upon  the  in- 
terruption they  everywhere  met  with  in  their  trade,  and 
particularly  upon  the  depredations  of  the  Spaniards  in 
the  West  Indies,  were  so  loud  and  so  numerous,  that 
it  was  impossible  for  the  ministers  to  prevent  them 
stating  their  grievances  to  the  Parliament  and  asking 
that  redress  from  them  which  they  had  in  vain  solicited 
at  Court. 

The  ministers  and  their  party  in  Parliament  were 
imprudent  enough,  when  the  affair  came  to  be  examined 
there,  to  seem  to  take  the  part  of  the  Spaniards  against 
our  own  merchants,  and  to  endeavour  to  soften  the 
injustice  of  the  one  and  to  lessen  the  losses  of  the  other. 
This  conduct  was  very  unpopular  without  doors,  but 

VOL.  i. 


120  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VI. 

the  ministers  carried  their  point  within,  and  prevented 
the  Parliament  from  coming  to  any  vigorous  resolutions 
of  ordering  reprisals,  or  from  doing  anything  more  than 
making  a  general  address  to  the  King  to  recommend 
the  merchants  and  the  trade  of  his  kingdom  to  his 
care  and  protection. 

It  was  in  this  winter,  just  before  the  Parliament  met, 
that  the  King  was  prevailed  upon  to  send  for  his  son 
from  Hanover.  His  ministers  told  him  that  if  the 
Prince's  coming  were  longer  delayed,  an  address  from 
Parliament  and  the  voice  of  the  whole  nation  would 
certainly  oblige  his  Majesty  to  send  for  him,  and  con- 
sequently he  would  be  necessitated  to  do  that  with  a 
bad  grace  which  he  might  now  do  with  a  good  one.1 
*  *  #  # 

Among  the  remarkable  occurrences  of  this  winter  I 
cannot  help  relating  that  of  the  Duchess  of  Queens- 
berry  being  forbid  the  Court,  and  the  occasion  of  it. 
One  Gay,  a  poet,  had  written  a  ballad  opera,  which 
was  thought  to  reflect  a  little  upon  the  Court,  and  a 
good  deal  upon  the  Minister.2  It  was  called  the 
'  Beggars'  Opera,'  had  a  prodigious  run,  and  was  so 
extremely  pretty  in  its  kind,  that  even  those  who  were 
most  glanced  at  in  the  satire  had  prudence  enough  to 


1  Prince  Frederick  (born  in  1707)  arrived  in  England  on  the  4th  of 
December,  1728,  and  was  soon  after  created  Prince  of  Wales,  and  sworn  of 
the  Privy  Council.     Some  pages  of  the  MS.  are  here  wanting. 

2  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  this ;  but  we  know,  from  Gay's  letter  to 
Swift,  22nd  October,  1727,  that  his  opera  had  been  finished  before  his  dis- 
appointment from  and  final  breach  with  Wai  pole  and  the  Court.     There 
was  of  course  time  enough  between  this  disappointment  and  the  representa- 
tion of  the  piece  to  add  some  satiric  touches  against  the  minister ;   it  would 
else  be  inconceivable  that  Gay  should  have  written  such  a  piece  while  he 
was  soliciting  and  expecting  a  place  at  Court. 


1Y29.  DUCHESS  OF  QUEENSBERRY.  121 

disguise  their  resentment  by  chiming  in  with  the  uni- 
versal applause  with  which  it  was  performed.  Gay, 
who  had  attached  himself  to  Mrs.  Howard,  and  been 
disappointed  of  preferment  at  Court,  finding  this 
couched  satire  upon  those  to  whom  he  imputed  his 
disappointment  succeed  so  well,  wrote  a  second  part  to 
this  opera,  less  pretty,  but  more  abusive,  and  so  little 
disguised,  that  Sir  Robert  Walpole  resolved,  rather  than 
suffer  himself  to  be  produced  for  thirty  nights  together 
upon  the  stage  in  the  person  of  a  highwayman,  to  make 
use  of  his  friend  the  Duke  of  Grafton's  authority  as 
Lord  Chamberlain  to  put  a  stop  to  the  representation 
of  it.3  Accordingly  this  Theatrical  Craftsman  was  pro- 
hibited at  every  playhouse.  Gay,  irritated  at  this 
bar  thrown  in  the  way  both  of  his  interest  and  his  re- 
venge, zested  the  work  with  some  supplemental  invec- 
tives, and  resolved  to  print  it  by  subscription.  The 
Duchess  of  Queensberry4  set  herself  at  the  head  of  this 
undertaking,  and  solicited  every  mortal  that  came  in 
her  way,  or  in  whose  way  she  could  put  herself,  to 
subscribe.  To  a  woman  of  her  quality,  proverbially 


3  I  am  at  a  loss  to  account  for  this  statement,  which,  though  it  accords 
with  that  generally  received,  seems  to  me  wholly  erroneous.  '  Polly'  is 
very  stupid,  and  equally  inoffensive :  the  scene  is  placed  in  the  West 
Indies,  where  Macheath,  under  the  name  of  Morano,  becomes  a  Spanish 
pirate,  appears  but  little  on  the  scene,  and  is  hanged ;  while  Polly,  after 
being  kidnapped  and  sold  as  a  slave,  marries  an  Indian  Prince.  The 
piece  seems  to  me  to  be  as  free  from  all  political  allusion  as  it  is 
destitute  of  any  kind  of  dramatic  merit.  Lord  Hervey's  description 
applies  to  the  '  Beggars'  Opera'  itself,  but  not  at  all  to  '  Potty.'  Nor 
can  I  understand  why  the  latter  should  have  been  prohibited,  except  to 
punish  the  author  for  his  former  sallies.  Gay,  in  a  preface,  asserts 
that  he  had  no  satirical  design,  and  certainly  the  printed  piece  justifies  his 
statement. 

*  Lady  Catherine  Hyde,  granddaughter  of  Lord  Chancellor  Clarendon, 
a  lady  of  great  beauty  and  eccentricity,  who  retained  some  traces  of  the 
former,  and  strong  symptoms  of  the  latter,  to  her  death  in  1777. 


122  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VI. 

beautiful,  and  at  the  top  of  the  polite  and  fashionable 
world,  people  were  ashamed  to  refuse  a  guinea,  though 
they  were  afraid  to  give  it.  Her  solicitations  were  so 
universal  and  so  pressing,  that  she  came  even  into  the 
Queen's  apartment,  went  round  the  Drawing-room,  and 
made  even  the  King's  servants  contribute  to  the  print- 
ing of  a  thing  which  the  King  had  forbid  being  acted. 
The  King,  when  he  came  into  the  Drawing-room, 
seeing  her  Grace  very  busy  in  a  corner  with  three  or 
four  men,  asked  her  what  she  had  been  doing.  She 
answered,  "  What  must  be  agreeable,  she  was  sure,  to 
anybody  so  humane  as  his  Majesty,  for  it  was  an  act 
of  charity,  and  a  charity  to  which  she  did  not  despair 
of  bringing  his  Majesty  to  contribute."  Enough  was 
said  for  each  to  understand  the  other,  and  though  the 
King  did  not  then  (as  the  Duchess  of  Queensberry 
reported)  appear  at  all  angry,  yet  this  proceeding  of 
her  Grace's,  when  talked  over  in  private  between  his 
Majesty  and  the  Queen,  was  so  resented,  that  Mr.  Stan- 
hope, then  Vice- Chamberlain  to  the  King,  was  sent  in 
form  to  the  Duchess  of  Queensberry  to  desire  her  to 
forbear  coming  to  Court;  his  message  was  verbal. 
Her  answer,  for  fear  of  mistakes,  she  desired  to  send 
in  writing,  wrote  it  on  the  spot,  and  this  is  the  literal 
copy : — 

"  Feb.  27,  1728-9. 

"  That  the  Duchess  of  Queensberry  is  surprised  and  well 
pleased  that  the  King  hath  given  her  so  agreeable  a  command 
as  to  stay  from  Court,  where  she  never  came  for  diversion,  but 
to  bestow  a  great  civility  on  the  King  and  Queen ;  she  hopes 
by  such  an  unprecedented  order  as  this  is,  that  the  King  will 
see  as  few  as  he  wishes  at  his  Court,  particularly  such  as  dare 
to  think  or  speak  truth,  I  dare  not  do  otherwise,  and  ought 
not  nor  could  have  imagined  that  it  would  not  have  been  the 


1729.  DUCHESS  OF  QUEENSBERRY.  123 

very  highest  compliment  that  I  could  possibly  pay  the  King  to 
endeavour  to  support  truth  and  innocence  in  his  house,  parti- 
cularly when  the  King  and  Queen  both  told  me  that  they  had 
not  read  Mr.  Gay's  play.  I  have  certainly  done  right,  then, 
to  stand  by  my  own  words  rather  than  his  Grace  of  Grafton's, 
who  hath  neither  made  use  of  truth,  judgment,  nor  honour, 
through  this  whole  affair,  either  for  himself  or  his  friends. 

"  C.  QUEENSBERRY." 

When  her  Grace  had  finished  this  paper,  drawn  with 
more  spirit  than  accuracy,  she  gave  it  to  Mr.  Stanhope, 
who  desired  her  to  think  again,  asked  pardon  for 
being  so  impertinent  as  to  offer  her  any  advice,  but 
begged  she  would  give  him  leave  to  carry  an  answer 
less  rough  than  that  she  had  put  into  his  hands.  Upon 
this  she  wrote  another,  but  so  much  more  disrespectful, 
that  he  desired  the  first  again  and  delivered  it. 

Most  people  blamed  the  Court  upon  this  occasion. 
What  the  Duchess  of  Queensberry  did  was  certainly 
impertinent;  but  the  manner  of  resenting  it  was 
thought  impolitic.  The  Duke  of  Queensberry  laid 
down  his  employment  of  Admiral  of  Scotland  upon  it, 
though  very  much  and  very  kindly  pressed  by  the 
King  to  remain  in  his  service. 

This  employment  some  time  after  was  given  to  Lord 
Stair  upon  his  writing  the  most  submissive  and  suppli- 
cating letter  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  setting  forth  the 
convenience  it  would  be  to  his  distressed,  broken  for- 
tune, desiring  Sir  Robert's  good  nature  to  draw  a  veil 
over  all  that  was  past,  and  giving  the  strongest  as- 
surances of  his  future  good  behaviour. 

Towards  the  end  of  this  session  of  Parliament  [23rd 
April}  was  made  that  most  unpopular  and  famous 


124  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VI. 

demand  of  the  115,000^,  to  make  good  the  pretended 
deficiency  in  the  Civil  List  funds,  which,  by  an  unfair 
way  of  calculating  and  stating  the  accounts,  as  well  as 
a  forced  construction  of  the  Act  of  Parliament,  were 
said  to  have  fallen  so  much  short  of  800, 000 £  a-year, 
designed  at  all  hazards  to  be  secured  to  his  Majesty 
when  the  Civil  List  was  settled. 

The  truth  of  the  matter  was,  that  in  the  first  place 
there  was  not  the  deficiency,  and  in  the  next,  if  there 
had  been,  it  was  doubtful  by  the  wording  of  the  Act 
whether  the  Parliament  was  obliged  to  make  it  up,  and 
whether  these  funds  had  not  been  given  to  the  King  at 
his  own  desire  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  not  as  a 
sum  certain,  but  for  better  for  worse,  for  more  or  for 
less.  Sir  Robert  Walpole  always  denied  the  having 
advised  this  demand,  and  scrupled  not  to  excuse  himself 
to  his  friends  by  saying  he  had  opposed  it  so  long  and 
so  strenuously,  that  the  King  had  intimated  to  him,  if 
he  could  not  or  would  not  do  it,  his  Majesty  would 
find  those  who  were  both  able  and  willing.  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  always  said  it  was  Lord  Wilmington  who  had 
put  the  King  upon  this  measure,  with  the  double  view 
of  making  his  own  court  and  prejudicing  Sir  Robert 
Walpole ;  his  Lordship  knowing  that  he  should  have 
the  merit  to  the  King  of  forming  this  project,  and  Sir 
Robert  the  demerit  first  of  opposing  it,  and  then  all  the 
trouble  and  unpopularity  of  bringing  it  to  bear.  But 
this  conjecture,  I  believe,  was  doing  Lord  Wilming- 
ton's dexterity  too  much  honour  ;  his  views  were  never 
so  extended  or  so  complicated  ;  they  were  generally 
more  simple,  and  his  reasoning,  I  dare  say,  went  no 
farther  than  this :  "  The  King  loves  money,  and  will 


1729.  SIR  PAUL  METHUEN.  125 

love  me  if  I  tell  him  how  he  may  get  some"  In 
short,  got  it  was,  but  with  great  difficulty  and  great 
clamour  [by  a  majority  of  214  to  104],  no  one  body 
who  voted  for  it  thinking  it  a  proper  grant  or  a  reason- 
able demand. 

His  Royal  Highness  [Prince  Frederick],  who  began  to 
hate  his  father  very  heartily  and  not  very  secretly,5  was 
extremely  flippant  in  his  comments  on  this  measure,  and, 
though  he  would  have  done  the  same  thing  in  the  same 
situation,  pretended  to  disapprove  entirely  his  father's 
conduct  on  this  occasion ;  by  which  means  he  con- 
trived to  be  doubly  in  the  wrong — in  the  first  place, 
for  saying  what  he  ought  only  to  have  thought,  and, 
in  the  next,  for  not  thinking  what  he  ought  not  to  have 
said. 

The  end  of  this  Session  was  remarkable  only  for  one 
change,  which  was  Sir  Paul  Methuen's  quitting  the 
employment  of  Treasurer  of  the  Household.  His  pre- 
tence for  quitting  was  disliking  the  conduct  of  the 
Court  in  general ;  but  his  true  reason  was  his  disap- 
probation, not  of  any  actual  sin,  but  their  sin  of  omis- 
sion in  not  making  him  Secretary  of  State,  an  employ- 
ment he  had  once  unaccountably  in  the  late  reign 
obtained,6  and  quitted  when  Lord  Townshend  and  Sir 


s  Horace  Walpole  remarks,  that  the  dissension  between  father  and  son  is 
remarkable  in  the  Souse  of  Hanover.  The  fact  of  the  dissension  is  unde- 
niable, but  it  arises,  I  think,  not  from  any  peculiarity  in  that  family,  but 
from  the  nature  of  a  representative  constitution,  which  generates  parties, 
and,  if  one  party  has  the  confidence  of  the  King,  the  other  endeavours,  and 
generally  succeeds,  in  captivating  the  favour  of  the  heir-apparent. 

6  He  became  Secretary  of  State  in  the  absence  of  Mr.  Stanhope,  under 
the  first  Townshend-and- Walpole  ministry,  in  June,  1716,  and  went  out 
with  them  in  April,  1717  ;  and  in  1725  returned  to  office  as  Treasurer  of 

VOL.  I. 


126  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VI. 

Robert  Walpole  were  disgraced.  The  character  of 
this  man  was  a  very  singular  one :  it  was  a  mixture  of 
Spanish  formality  and  English  roughness,  strongly 
seasoned  with  pride,  and  not  untinctured  with  honour. 
He  was  romantic  in  his  turn  to  the  highest  degree  of 
absurdity;  odd,  impracticable,  passionate,  and  obsti- 
nate ;  a  thorough  coxcomb,  and  a  little  mad.  As  to 
the  affair  of  party,  he  called  himself  always  a  Whig ; 
after  he  had  quitted  he  went  too  often  to  Court  to  be 
well  with  the  Opposition,  and  too  seldom  to  Parliament 
to  be  well  with  either  side — a  conduct  which  procured 
him  the  agreeable  mixed  character  of  courtier  without 
profit,  and  a  country  gentleman  without  popularity. 

This  summer  \\7th  May]  the  King  went  to 
Hanover  for  the  first  time,  to  take  possession  there  and 
settle  his  affairs.  He  left  the  Queen  Regent,  which 
his  son  took  extremely  ill.7  Lord  Townshend  went 
with  the  King  to  Hanover,  and  gained  a  little  ground 
there,  which  he  soon  lost  again  at  his  return ;  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  and  he  being  irreconcilable,  and  the 
first  trying  to  support  himself  by  the  Queen,  the  other 
by  the  King. 

It  was  said,  but  not  truly,  though  generally  believed, 
that  the  Queen's  powers  as  Regent  were  abridged  by 
orders  sent  from  the  King  as  soon  as  he  got  into  Hol- 
land, at  the  instigation  of  Lord  Townshend. 


the  Household.  He  was  the  son  of  Mr.  Methuen,  who  had  been  long 
minister  in  Portugal,  and  negotiated  the  famous  treaty  that  went  by  his  name. 
7  George  II.,  when  Prince,  had  been,  on  his  father's^rsJ  visit  to  Ger- 
many, left  Regent ;  but  then  George  I.  had  no  queen.  We  know  nothing 
of  what  offence  might  have  been  given  or  taken  on  that  occasion,  but  the 
Prince  was  never  after  appointed  Regent ;  and  he  himself  never  appointed 
his  own  son. 


1729.  THE  KING'S  VISIT  TO  HANOVER.  127 

Whilst  the  King  was  at  Hanover  he  had  several  little 
German  disputes  with  his  brother  of  Prussia,8  the  par- 
ticulars of  which  being  about  a  few  cart-loads  of  hay,  a 
mill,  and  some  soldiers  improperly  enlisted  by  the  King 
of  Prussia  in  the  Hanoverian  state,  I  do  not  think  them 
worthy  of  being  considered  in  detail ;  and  shall  say  no- 
thing further  about  these  squabbles  than  that,  first  or 
last,  both  of  them  contrived  to  be  in  the  wrong.  And 
as  these  two  princes  had  some  similar  impracticabilities  in 
their  temper,  so  they  were  too  much  alike  ever  to  agree, 
and  from  this  time  forward  hated  one  another  with 
equal  imprudence,  inveteracy,  and  openness. 

It  was  reported,  and  I  believe  not  without  foundation, 
that  our  Monarch  on  this  occasion  sent  or  would  have 
sent  a  challenge  of  single  combat  to  his  Prussian  Ma- 
jesty ;  but  whether  it  was  carried  and  rejected,  or  whe- 
ther the  prayers  and  remonstrances  of  Lord  Townshend 
prevented  the  gauntlet  being  actually  thrown  down,  is  a 
point  which  to  me  at  least  has  never  been  cleared. 

There  was  another  subject  of  dispute  between  the 
Kings  of  England  and  Prussia,  which  I  forgot  to  enu- 
merate, though  it  was  the  only  one  really  of  conse- 
quence, and  that  was  with  regard  to  the  affairs  of  Meck- 
lenburg. The  short  statement  of  their  differences  on  this 
article  was,  whether  the  Prussian  or  Hanoverian  troops 
(both  ordered  into  Mecklenburg  by  a  decree  of  the 
Aulic  Council)  should  have  the  greatest  share  (under 
the  pretence  of  keeping  peace)  in  plundering  the  people 
and  completing  the  ruin  of  that  miserable  duchy,  already 

8  The  King  of  Prussia  had  married,  14th  November,  1706,  Dorothea 
Sophia,  the  only  daughter  of  George  I.  Between  him  and  George  II. 
there  was  almost  Theban  enmity. 


128  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VI. 

reduced  to  such  a  state  of  calamity  by  the  tyrannical 
conduct  of  their  most  abominable,  deposed,  or  rather 
suspended  duke. 

Just  after  the  King's  return  from  Hanover  \\lth 
Sept.],  Lord  Hervey,  after  having  been  abroad  a  year 
and  a  half  for  his  health,  returned  from  Italy.9  He 
loved  Mr.  Pulteney,  and  had  obligations  to  Sir  Robert 
Walpole ;  he  had  lived  in  long  intimacy  and  personal 
friendship  with  the  former,  and  in  his  public  and  poli- 
tical conduct  he  always  attached  himself  to  the  latter. 
But  as  the  dissensions  of  these  two  men  were  now  grown 
to  such  a  height  that  it  was  impossible  for  anybody  to 
live  well  with  both,  Lord  Hervey  at  his  return  found 
he  should  be  brought  to  the  long-feared  disagreeable 
necessity  of  quitting  the  one  or  the  other. 

His  wife  loved  Mr.  Pulteney  and  hated  Sir  Robert 
Walpole.  Sir  Robert  had  formerly  made  love  to  her, 
but  unsuccessfully,10  which  had  produced  the  mutual  en- 
mity generally  consequential  on  such  circumstances — 
love  in  these  cases  being  like  a  ball,  which  the  greater 
strength  it  comes  with,  if  it  meets  with  resistance  the 
farther  it  rebounds  back  from  the  point  at  which  it  was 
aimed.  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  therefore,  detested  Lady 
Hervey  and  Lady  Hervey  him.  So  that  all  her  interest 
in  her  husband  was  employed  to  draw  him  off  from  Sir 
Robert  Walpole,  and  attach  himself  to  Mr.  Pulteney ; 
and  as  she  knew  her  husband's  affection  to  Mr.  Pulteney, 


9  He  must  then  have  set  out  very  soon  after  moving  the  address  in 
January,  1728. 

10  I  cannot  refrain  from  noticing  this  expression ;  which,  considering  the 
position  of  all  the  parties,  and  the  exemplary  character  of  Lady  Hervey, 
seems  to  me  strangely  tame  and  nonchalant. 


1729.  LORD  HERVEY'S  POLITICAL  POSITION,  129 

she  was  certain  nothing  but  the  weight  of  interest  could 
turn  the  scale  in  this  contest  on  the  side  of  Sir  Robert 
Walpole. 

In  order,  therefore,  to  lighten  the  balance  of  interest, 
or  rather  to  counterbalance  it,  Pulteney  and  she  together 
had  formed  a  scheme,  before  Lord  Hervey  came  over, 
to  induce  Lord  Bristol11  to  make  his  son  such  an  allow- 
ance as  should  indemnify  him  for  throwing  up  a  pen- 
sion of  WOOL  a-year,  which  he  now  received  from  the 
Court. 

This  project,  by  the  joint  endeavours  of  Pulteney  and 
the  dowager  Duchess  of  Marlborough,  who  would  have 
done  anything  to  gain  him  over  from  the  Court,12  *  * 
[at  last  so  far  succeeded,  that  Lord  Hervey  wrote  to 
Sir  Robert  Walpole  a  letter,  in  which,  after  some 
introductory  matter,  he  saidj, — 

"  You  know  the  situation  of  my  affairs  and  my  opinion  so 
well,  that  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  say,  notwithstanding  the 
King's  favour  must  be  very  convenient  to  me  in  one  sense,  yet 
the  receiving  no  mark  of  it  but  in  the  manner  I  have  formerly 
done  is  what  I  must  decline. 

"  All  I  have  at  present  therefore,  Sir,  to  beg  of  you  is,  that 
you  would  have  the  goodness  to  assure  the  King  of  the  grati- 
tude with  which  I  think  of  his  goodness  towards  me ;  that  I 
received  what  he  bestowed  upon  me  with  double  satisfaction, 
as  I  imagined  it  an  earnest  (in  case  I  lived)  of  some  future 

11  Lord  Bristol  was  extremely  generous  in  such  matters.     When  Lord 
Hervey  was  finally  turned  out  in  1742,  he  was  offered  a  pension  of  3000/., 
which  he  rejected,  so  much  to  the  satisfaction  and  pride  of  Lord  Bristol,  that 
he  immediately  increased  Lord  Hervey's  already  liberal  income  by  that  sum. 

12  Here  a  sheet  of  the  MS.  is  unfortunately  lost :  it  evidently  detailed 
the  proceedings  of  Lady  Hervey,  the  Duchess,  and  Pulteney,  to  separate 
Lord  Hervey  from  Sir  Robert  Walpole — circumstances  very  important  to 
his  personal  history,  and  which  produced  the  resignation  of  his  pension 
and  his  letter  to  Walpole. 

VOL.  I.  K 


130  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VI. 

mark  of  his  distinction,  and  was  not  insensible  to  that  part  of 
the  obligation  of  its  being  conferred  at  a  time  when  I  was  in- 
capable of  deserving  it  by  any  present  services,  and  so  unlikely 
to  repay  it  by  any  future  ones.  But  as  I  am  now  capable  of 
attending  in  Parliament,13  and  that  those  who  either  speak  or 
vote  there  under  my  circumstances  are  exposed  to  disagree- 
able insinuations  and  reflections  upon  one's  conduct  from  mali- 
cious and  envious  blockheads,  who  perhaps  could  find  no  other 
answer  to  one's  arguments ;  so  I  must  entreat  the  King,  when- 
ever he  shall  think  proper,  to  consider  me  in  some  manner 
which  I  shall  not  be  ashamed  to  own,  and  in  the  mean  time  to 
give  me  leave  to  serve  him  without  those  inducements  that  must 
take  off  the  merit  of  those  little  services  towards  him,  that  make 
them  liable  to  be  misconstrued  by  the  rest  of  the  world,  and 
consequently  less  cheerfully  performed  by  myself. 

"  I  know  the  King's  reception  of  this  message  will  depend 
so  entirely  on  the  person  who  conveys  it,  and  the  manner  of  its 
being  represented,  that  I  feel  a  security  (from  the  repeated 
marks  and  professions  of  your  friendship  for  me)  in  its  going 
through  your  hands,  which  no  other  method  of  delivering  it 
could  give  me. 

"  I  am  persuaded  you  will  assure  him  (notwithstanding  what 
is  reported u)  that  my  taking  this  step  proceeds  from  no  ill 
humour,  distaste,  or  coolness  to  his  service,  and  that  my  future 
conduct  will  be  a  proof  how  ill  such  reports  are  founded. 

"  I  am  convinced,  too,  that  you  think  what  I  am  doing  right, 
as  it  will  set  my  character  in  a  better  light  towards  him  and 
towards  the  world,  as  it  will  exempt  my  conduct  from  all  im- 
pertinent reflections  upon  it,  set  my  own  mind  more  at  ease, 
and  permit  me  on  all  occasions  with  less  constraint  to  show 
myself,  "  Dear  Sir, 

"  Your  most  obedient,  &c. 

"  HERVEY." 


13  Lord  Hervey  had  been  in  Parliament  for  Bury  since  March,  1725, 
but  it  does  not  appear  that  he  ever  spoke,  except  in  moving  the  address  in 
January,  1728. 

n  An  allusion  no  doubt  to  rumours  of  his  communications  with  Pulteney. 


1729.  TEEATY  OF  SEVILLE.  131 

This  letter  was  far  from  pleasing  either  Sir  Robert 
or  Mr.  Pulteney ;  the  first  looked  upon  it  as  a  gentle 
preface  to  forsaking  his  service,  the  other  as  a  bond  for 
continuing  in  it ; 15  especially  as  Lord  Hervey,  at  the 
same  time  he  told  Mr.  Pulteney  of  this  letter,  thanked 
him  for  the  trouble  he  had  given  himself  in  the  nego- 
tiation with  his  father,  but  said  the  same  desire  of  being 
at  his  liberty  that  had  made  him  throw  up  his  pension, 
must  prevent,  too,  his  acceptance  of  his  father's  allow- 
ance, since  the  conditions  were  his  immediately  opposing 
the  measures  of  the  Court  in  Parliament. 

From  this  time  the  friendship  between  Lord  Hervey 
and  Mr.  Pulteney  began  to  cool,  and  soon  after  turned 
into  the  other  extreme ;  but  Lord  Hervey,  on  his  return 
out  of  the  country,  finding  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  upon 
the  step  he  had  taken,  suspected  his  defection,  assured 
him  he  would  take  the  first  opportunity  on  the  meeting 
of  the  Parliament  publicly  to  demonstrate  himself  as 
much  attached  to  his  interest  as  ever. 

Before  the  Parliament  met  [13th  January,  1703], 
Sir  Robert  Walpole  had  the  skill  to  contrive  and  the 
good  fortune  to  conclude  a  treaty  with  Spain,  which 
extremely  facilitated  the  business  of  the  Court  this  year 
in  Parliament,  strengthened  the  power  and  credit  of 
Sir  Robert  both  in  the  one  and  the  other,  and  revived 
the  spirits  of  all  his  friends,  followers,  and  adherents. 

This  treaty,  called  the  Treaty  of  Seville  (from  the 
Court  of  Spain  residing  there  when  it  was  made),  was 


15  And  so  it  seems.  It  plainly  says,  that  if  Lord  Hervey  does  not  get 
some  agreeable  office  he  will  go  into  Opposition — which  would  of  course 
displease  Walpole  ;  but  that  if  he  should,  he  will  join  the  Administration — 
which  of  course  would  displease  Pulteney. 

K  2 


132  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VI. 

negotiated  by  Mr.  Vice-Chamberlain  Stanhope,16  then 
Ambassador  and  Plenipotentiary  in  Spain  from  this 
Court,  and  concluded  November  8,  N.S.  1729.  The  plan 
of  this  treaty  was  Sir  Robert  Walpole's,  and  the  sub- 
stance of  it  absolute  peace  between  the  three  Crowns  of 
France,  Spain,  and  England;  reciprocal  guarantee  of 
their  respective  possessions,  all  former  treaties  of  com- 
merce to  be  again  in  force,  reparations  to  be  made  to  the 
merchants  of  England  for  captures,  seizures,  injuries, 
depredations,  &c. ;  and  this  account  to  be  settled  within 
the  space  of  three  years  by  commissioners  appointed  for 
that  purpose.  But  the  principal  article  that  induced  the 
Court  of  Spain  to  come  into  this  treaty  was,  the  ex- 
changing the  six  thousand  neutral  troops,  who,  by  the 
Quadruple  Alliance,  were  to  secure  the  eventual  succes- 
sion of  Don  Carlos  to  the  states  of  Tuscany,  Parma,  and 
Placentia,  into  six  thousand  Spaniards,  who  were  forth- 
with to  be  introduced  into  Italy,  to  garrison  Leghorn, 
Porto-ferraio,  Parma,  and  Placentia,  in  the  same  man- 
ner that  by  the  Quadruple  Alliance  these  places  were  to 
be  garrisoned  by  the  neutral  Swiss  troops. 

Immediately  upon  the  conclusion  of  this  treaty,  the 
standing  forces  in  England  were  reduced  above  five 
thousand  men,  but  not  in  the  manner  that  gave  satis- 
faction any  more  than  the  number ;  the  latter  not  being 
thought  sufficient,  and  no  corps  being  broken,  but  the 
whole  reduction  made  by  lessening  the  number  of  pri- 
vate men  in  different  regiments. 

However,  the  treaty  and  the  reduction  were  both 
mightily  bragged  of  by  the  Court,  and  even  from  the 

16  Afterwards  Lord  Harrington,  of  whom  we  shall  see  much  more  in  the 
sequel. 


1729.  DEBATE  ON  THE  TREATY.  133 

Throne  itself  at  the  opening  of  the  subsequent  Session ; 
and  notwithstanding  the  various  objections  made  to  this 
treaty,  considering  all  things,  it  was  certainly  a  very 
advantageous  treaty  for  England,  as  it  revived  our  de- 
clining trade,  put  a  stop  to  all  the  inconveniences  com- 
plained of  in  the  West  Indies,  and  an  end  to  all  preten- 
sions to  Gibraltar,  notwithstanding  that  place  was  only 
virtually  included  and  not  specifically  mentioned  in  the 
treaty.  Nor  indeed  would  it  have  been  possible  to  have 
obtained  this  peace  with  Spain,  had  it  not  been  for  the 
Queen  of  Spain's  having  nothing  at  heart  but  the  secu- 
rity of  her  son's  succession  in  Italy,  and  being  ready  to 
grant  any  terms,  provided  England  and  France  would 
consent  immediately  to  the  introduction  of  the  Spanish 
troops.  She  saw  all  her  golden  dreams  of  grandeur 
from  the  Vienna  Treaty  vanished,  was  exasperated  to  the 
last  degree  at  the  shuffling  conduct  of  the  Emperor,  and 
resolved  therefore,  if  possible,  to  secure  the  only  thing 
which  she  found  was  now  attainable  for  her  son. 

When  this  treaty  came  under  consideration  in  Par- 
liament, it  was  objected,  first,  that  this  exchange  of  neu- 
tral for  Spanish  troops  was  an  absolute  violation  of  the 
Quadruple  Alliance,  and  so  derogatory  to  the  honour  and 
interest  of  the  Emperor,  that  it  was  impossible  for  him 
ever  to  acquiesce  under  it,  and  consequently  that  this 
boasted  peace  was  nothing  more  than  the  herald  of  a  war. 

In  the  next  place  it  was  said,  that  sufficient  care  had 
not  been  taken  of  the  merchants,  and  that  the  quiet 
possession  of  Gibraltar  was  not  fully  secured,  for  want 
of  a  specific  resignation  of  it  in  the  treaty. 

To  the  first  of  these  objections  it  was  answered,  that 
the  variation  from  the  Quadruple  Alliance  was  only  more 


134  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VI. 

effectually  to  secure  that  to  Don  Carlos  which  was  de- 
signed for  him  by  the  Quadruple  Alliance ;  consequently, 
that  this  treaty  was  conformable  to  the  spirit  if  not  to 
the  letter  of  the  other ;  that  it  would  prevent  the  further 
suspension  of  the  execution  of  that  article  of  the  Qua- 
druple Alliance  which  had  been  so  many  years,  unjustly 
to  Spain,  delayed  by  the  Emperor ;  that  it  would  save 
England  the  third  part  of  the  expense  of  the  neutral  troops 
which,  by  the  former  treaty,  she  was  bound  to  bear ;  and 
that  as  for  the  Emperor's  refusing  to  acquiesce  under 
this  disposition,  all  the  great  Powers  in  Europe  resolving 
to  execute  it,  the  Emperor  must  know  his  opposition  to 
it  would  be  vain — consequently,  he  would  certainly  not 
think  of  making  any.  It  was  further  said,  that  as  all 
treaties  must  be  founded  on  reciprocal  advantages  to 
the  contracting  parties,  so  it  was  not  to  be  imagined 
Spain,  out  of  mere  love  to  England,  would  renounce 
her  pretensions  to  Gibraltar,  restore  us  the  long  inter- 
rupted advantages  of  our  commerce,  and  promise  re- 
paration for  the  losses  of  our  merchants,  without  some 
benefit  proposed  to  herself  in  return ;  and  as  that  benefit 
was  nothing  more  than  the  confirmation  of  that  which 
she  had  already  a  right  to,  the  King  of  England  must 
have  been  very  ill-advised  if  he  had  demurred  one 
moment  upon  the  acceptance  of  those  conditions. 

To  the  objection  that  sufficient  care  had  not  been 
taken  of  the  merchants,  it  was  answered,  that  all  the 
care  was  taken  that  the  nature  of  such  a  transaction 
would  admit;  that  the  accounts  of  the  losses  were  to  be 
stated,  the  adjustment  of  them  to  be  referred  to  com- 
missaries, and  that  it  would  have  been  the  highest  im- 
prudence to  have  deferred  the  signing  of  this  treaty  and 


1729.  DEBATE  ON  THE  TREATY.  135 

deprived  ourselves  of  all  the  intermediate  advantages  of 
it  till  this  affair  could  have  been  terminated,  which 
everybody  knows  must  be  a  work  of  time. 

As  to  Gibraltar,  it  was  said  that  though  Gibraltar 
was  not  particularly  named,  yet  there  could  not  be  the 
least  room  to  dispute  its  being  included  in  this  treaty ; 
and  if  there  was  any  little  delicacy  in  the  Spanish  Court 
from  a  point  of  honour,  that  might  make  them  shy  of 
naming  it,  yet  if  England  could  effectually  and  securely 
get  the  thing  she  wanted,  sure  it  would  not  be  very  jus- 
tifiable to  have  refused  it,  merely  on  a  cavil  upon  the 
words  by  which  it  was  granted  and  consigned. 

Upon  the  whole,  after  many  proposals  made  in  the 
House  of  Lords  to  cast  censure  on  the  Treaty  of  Seville, 
which  were  all  rejected,  it  was  voted  beneficial,  safe, 
and  honourable.  In  the  House  of  Commons,  though 
often  incidentally  mentioned,  no  vote  ever  passed  in  its 
favour  or  condemnation. 

There  was  another  thing  strongly  urged  for  the 
honour  of  the  King  in  making  this  treaty,  and  in  con- 
tradiction  to  the  insinuations  frequently  made  of  his 
acting  on  all  occasions  more  as  Elector  of  Hanover  than 
King  of  England ;  and'  this  was^  that  when,  by  the  divi- 
sion of  the  Courts  of  Vienna  and  Spain,  it  was  in  the 
King's  power  to  come  to  accommodation  with  which  of 
the  two  he  pleased,  it  was  very  evident  that  he  chose  to 
make  up  with  the  Power  whose  friendship  was  most  bene- 
ficial to  England,  and  as  evident  fchat  if  he  had  considered 
himself  as  Elector  of  Hanover  only,  he  would  certainly 
have  made  his  first  overtures  of  reconciliation  to  the 
Emperor,  and  not  have  taken  a  step  to  irritate  him 
further. 


136  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VI. 

When  the  debate  of  the  Hessians  came  on  [14th 
February],  everything  Pulteney  had  said  to  Lord 
Hervey 17  was  insinuated,  but  much  more  gently  than 
he  had  suggested  and  most  people  expected.  The 
arguments  against  these  troops  were,  the  great  expense 
of  them,  their  being  unnecessary  if  the  Treaty  of  Seville 
was  so  advantageous  as  its  advocates  represented,  and, 
if  kept  up  for  the  defence  of  Hanover,  a  violation  of  the 
Act  of  Settlement. 

In  answer  to  these  arguments,  the  expense  was  ad- 
mitted, but  the  question  said  to  be  not  what  the  expense 
was,  but  whether  necessary  or  not ;  and  that  the  Empe- 
ror's not  having  yet  agreed  to  the  Treaty  of  Seville  did 
make  it  necessary ;  that  these  troops  being  kept  up  by 
the  consent  of  Parliament  obviated  the  objection  of  their 
being  maintained  in  contravention  of  the  Act  of  Settle- 
ment, even  though  it  were  allowed  that  their  only  use 
was  to  defend  the  Hanover  dominions.  This  proved 
the  legality  of  continuing  them  in  our  pay  for  that  pur- 
pose ;  and  as  for  the  equity  of  it,  though  nobody  would 
wish  England  engaged  in  a  war  for  the  sake  of  Hanover, 
yet  if  Hanover  was  attacked  for  the  sake  of  England, 
no  Englishman  with  honour  or  common  justice  would 
desire  to  see  Hanover  in  that  case  abandoned  and  un- 
succoured  by  those  on  whose  account  it  was  attacked. 
That  this  had  been  the  sense  of  a  former  Parliament,  a 
vote  having  been  passed  to  assure  the  late  King  that  if 
reprisals  were  attempted  to  be  made  on  his  Majesty  as 
Elector  of  Hanover,  for  the  steps  he  had  taken  as  King 
of  England,  the  Parliament  would  take  care  as  vigor- 

i'  This  no  doubt  refers  to  some  communication  between  Pulteney  and 
Lord  Hervey,  probably  related  in  the  lost  sheet  (ante,  p.  129). 


1729.  DEBATE  ON  THE  HESSIANS.  137 

ously  to  defend  that  country,  in  such  a  case,  as  their 
own. 

It  was  further  urged  for  the  continuance  of  these 
12,000  Hessians,  that  there  could  be  nothing  more  con- 
tradictory to  what  had  been  advanced  concerning  the 
Treaty  of  Seville  being  productive  of  a  war,  than  the 
advice  now  given  by  the  same  people  to  disband  the 
Hessians ;  since  if  any  disturbance  was  expected  to  be 
given  by  the  Emperor,  these  troops  were  absolutely 
necessary  to  prevent  any  such  design  taking  effect. 
Whether,  therefore,  he  intended  to  make  any  diversion 
in  the  North  to  prevent  the  execution  of  the  Treaty  of 
Seville  in  Italy,  or  whether  he  might  give  the  Dutch 
any  trouble  in  resentment  for  their  acceding  to  it,  the 
Hessians  must  be  the  principal  check  upon  him  in  one 
case,  and  what  the  Dutch  had  to  depend  upon  in  the 
other. 

It  was,  therefore,  asserted  by  those  who  spoke  for 
the  Court,  to  be  not  only  for  the  honour  of  England  to 
continue  those  troops,  as  it  enabled  the  King  to  fulfil 
his  engagements  with  his  allies,  but  that  it  was  also 
right  in  an  interested  prudential  light,  as  it  might  deter 
the  Court  of  Vienna  from  entering  into  measures  to 
defeat  the  hopes  of  a  general  pacification,  and  spare  the 
future  expense  which  an  ill-timed  economy  at  this 
critical  juncture  might  afterwards  draw  upon  us. 

The  debate  lasted  till  ten  o'clock,  and  the  question 
was  at  last  carried  for  the  Court  by  a  great  majority.18 

In  a  few  days  after  this  debate  Sir  William  Wynd- 
ham  moved  the  House  to  appoint  a  day  to  consider  the 

18  248  to  169,  Lord  Hervey  being  one  of  the  ministerial  tellers. 


138  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VI. 

state  of  the  nation,  which  could  not  be  refused  by  the 
Court  party,  though  they  would  have  been  very  glad 
to  avoid  it,  scrutinies,  examinations,  and  siftings  seldom 
turning  to  the  account  of  those  who  have  the  reins  of 
power  and  the  care  of  the  public  in  their  hands. 

When  the  day  came  the  ministry  were  totally 
ignorant  in  what  quarter  and  on  what  point  they 
should  be  attacked ;  but  concluded  it  would  either  be 
on  the  Treaty  of  Seville,  the  national  debt,  or  the  com- 
plaints of  the  merchants.  To  their  great  surprise  it 
proved  to  be  upon  the  state  of  Dunkirk ;  which  har- 
bour was  proved  by  many  witnesses  at  the  bar  of  the 
House  to  be  so  well  repaired,  that  ships  of  burden,  con- 
trary to  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht,  could  go  in  and  out 
with  the  same  ease  as  before  the  demolition  of  it. 

This  thing  was  so  well  opened  by  Sir  William 
Wyndham,  and  the  facts  he  asserted  so  fully  proved, 
that  the  whole  House  was  in  a  flame,  and  the  ministry 
stronger  pushed  than  they  had  ever  been  on  any  occa- 
sion before.  In  order  to  ground  a  vote  of  censure  on 
Mr.  Walpole  for  suffering  our  present  friends,  the 
French,  in  this  barefaced  manner  to  violate  their  treaty 
with  us,  an  account  was  demanded  of  all  his  transac- 
tions with  regard  to  this  affair  during  his  residence 
as  Ambassador  at  the  Court  of  France ;  copies  of  the 
memorials  he  had  presented  there,  and  the  letters  that 
had  passed  between  him  and  the  Secretaries  of  State 
here,  were  likewise  demanded ;  and,  in  short,  so  many 
papers  were  asked  for,  that  the  Opposition  overshot 
the  mark,  for,  time  being  necessary  to  lay  these  papers 
before  the  House,  and  time  being  everything  to  those 
in  power,  the  further  consideration  of  this  affair,  after 


1729.  DUNKIRK.  139 

a  debate  that  lasted  till  four  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
was  adjourned  for  eight  days,  and  in  that  space  matters 
were  so  well  contrived,  so  successfully  carried  on,  and 
so  expeditiously  executed  by  the  ministry,  that  the 
first  paper  that  was  read  in  the  House  on  the  day  ap- 
pointed for  the  further  consideration  of  the  state  of 
Dunkirk  was  the  copy  of  an  absolute  order  from  the 
King  of  France  to  the  Governor  of  Dunkirk  to  put 
that  harbour  in  the  situation  it  ought  to  be  by  the 
article  relating  to  it  in  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht ;  and  if 
any  works  contrary  to  the  Treaties  of  Utrecht  and  the 
Hague  had  been  erected,  this  order  enjoined  them 
forthwith  to  be  demolished. 

The  true  state  of  this  affair  was,  that  the  inhabitants 
of  Dunkirk,  from  the  year  1718  to  the  present  time,  had, 
at  their  own  expense,  and  though  not  by  the  command, 
yet  by  the  connivance  of  the  Court  of  France,  con- 
stantly and  gradually  been  working  at  this  harbour  to 
repair  it,  and  had  so  far  succeeded  that,  the  fortifica- 
tions excepted,  it  was  in  almost  as  good  a  state  as  be- 
fore the  demolition. 

Mr.  Walpole  (as  appeared  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons) had  made  several  remonstrances  at  the  Court  of 
France  against  this  proceeding,  and  had  received 
several  promises  of  justice  being  done ;  but  could  never 
obtain  satisfaction  by  the  performance  of  them.  The 
close  league  in  which  we  then  were  with  the  French, 
and  had  been  from  the  time  of  the  Treaty  of  Hanover, 
the  want  we  had  of  them,  the  fear  of  breaking  with 
them  when  we  were  well  with  no  other  Power  in 
Europe,  and  our  earnest  desire  to  conclude  the  Treaty 
of  Seville,  had  all  concurred  to  make  Mr.  Walpole  less 


140  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VI. 

pressing  on  the  affair  of  Dunkirk  than  he  would  other- 
wise have  been,  and  perhaps  than  he  ought  to  have 
been ;  but  as  soon  as  he  had  obtained  that  very  explicit 
order  from  the  Cardinal  which  I  have  already  men- 
tioned, this  Dunkirk  storm,  that  was  very  near  ship- 
wrecking the  Administration,  entirely  blew  over ;  and 
those  who  raised  it  had  nothing  to  comfort  them  for 
not  having  demolished  the  Walpoles,  but  the  glory  of 
bragging  that  their  industry  had  re-demolished  Dunkirk. 

A  more  particular  account  of  this  affair  may  be  seen 
in  a  pamphlet,  entitled  '  A  Summary  Account  of  the 
State  of  Dunkirk,'  &c.,  written  by  Lord  Hervey.19 

There  being  no  supplemental  money-job  to  be  done 
for  the  Court  at  the  end  of  this  Session,  such  as  the 
115,000/.  or  a  vote  of  credit,  all  Sir  Robert  Walpole's 
Parliamentary  trouble  for  this  year  finished  with  the 
Dunkirk  business ;  but  his  distress  in  the  palace  kept 
him  still  anxious.  Lord  Townshend's  quarrel  with 
him  being  got  to  that  height  that  Lord  Townshend 
would  neither  act  on  with  him  nor  go  out ;  he  talked 
every  day  of  retiring,  but  did  not  stir ;  the  King  was 
brought  so  far  that  he  had  consented  to  let  him  go,  but 
would  not  force  him  out ;  the  Queen  wished  him  gone, 
but  knew  not  how  to  make  him  go ;  and  Lord  Towns- 
hend, who,  by  quarrelling  with  Sir  Robert  Walpole  and 

19  Lord  Hervey  intended  that  this,  and  some  others  of  his  pamphlets, 
should  form  an  Appendix  to  these  Memoirs,  and  he  had  stated  in  the  original 
MS. — "  I  have  two  reasons  for  referring  thus  to  papers  in  an  appendix  :  the 
one  is,  that,  by  not  inserting  the  substance  of  them  in  the  main  body  of  this 
work,  people  may  with  more  ease  reject  the  reading  of  them,  if  their 
curiosity  leads  them  not  to  more  minute  explanations  on  those  subjects  they 
treat  of;  the  other  is,  that  it  saves  me  the  trouble  of  making  extracts." 

But  the  pamphlets  are  too  numerous  and  bulky,  and  appear  too  obsolete, 
to  justify  their  reproduction  in  these  volumes. 


1729.  LORD  TOWNSHEND  RETIRES.  141 

retiring  into  the  country,  thought  to  step  quietly  out  of 
a  sinking  ship,  when  he  found  the  storm  subsiding  and 
the  ship  not  likely  to  sink,  began  to  repent  his  having 
turned  his  eyes  to  the  shore,  and  had  a  mind  to  remain 
on  board.  However,  it  was  now  too  late,  and  Lord 
Townshend  having  positively  declared  to  the  King  in 
the  winter  that  he  would  quit,  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
had  got  the  King's  leave  to  tell  Mr.  Stanhope  that  he 
should  succeed  Lord  Townshend  as  Secretary  of  State. 
Mr.  Stanhope,  as  a  reward  for  his  good  services  in  con- 
cluding the  Treaty  of  Seville,  had  been  immediately 
after  created  a  Peer,  by  the  title  of  Lord  Harrington, 
and  was  now  at  Paris  settling  at  that  Court  a  plan  for 
the  execution  of  the  Treaty  of  Seville  by  force,  in  case 
the  Emperor  should  by  force  oppose  it. 

Lord  Hervey  was  to  succeed  Lord  Harrington  as 
Vice-Chamberlain,  and  because  it  would  have  been  a 
great  inconvenience  to  have  the  borough  of  Bury  lie 
open  all  the  summer,  it  was  necessary  to  give  Lord 
Hervey  the  gold  key  before  the  breaking  up  of  the 
Parliament,  that  he  might  be  rechosen  immediately. 
This  enabled  Sir  Robert  Walpole  to  ask  the  King's 
leave  to  send  for  the  key  from  Lord  Harrington,  and 
to  promise  him  the  seals  in  lieu  of  it  as  soon  as  he 
came  to  England,  which,  of  course,  pushed  Lord 
Townshend  out  without  Sir  Robert  seeming  to  take 
this  step  directly  to  precipitate  Lord  Townshend's  de- 
parture. Accordingly,  the  key  was  sent  for,  and  given 
to  Lord  Hervey  [7th  May,  1730]  ;  soon  after  Lord 
Harrington  came  over  he  received  the  seals,  and  Lord 
Townshend  retired  into  the  country.  Never  was  any 
minister  more  gently  disgraced,  yet  never  was  any  dis- 


142  LOUD  HKRVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VI. 

graced  minister  more  thinly  attended,  not  one  man 
sharing  his  fortune  or  seeming  to  repine  at  it.20  He  had 
made  his  court  to  the  Prince  by  telling  him  that  his 
only  reason  for  continuing  in  so  long  was  in  hopes  of 
finishing  before  he  went  the  negotiation  then  on  foot 
for  his  Royal  Highness's  marriage  with  a  daughter  of 
Prussia.  Lord  Carteret  was  turned  out  of  the  Lieu- 
tenancy of  Ireland  at  the  same  time,  though  not  as  a 
friend  of  Lord  Townshend's,  for  they  hated  one  another 
mortally ;  Lord  Carteret  having  been,  six  years  before, 
removed  from  being  Secretary  of  State  and  sent  into 
this  honourable  Irish  exile  on  Lord  Townshend's  re- 
fusing to  act  with  him  in  the  Secretary's  office.  Lord 
Carteret  had  the  offer  of  the  [Lord]  Steward's  Staff  at 
his  return  from  Ireland,  but  refused  it ;  it  was  vacated 
by  the  Duke  of  Dorset's  being  made  Lord-Lieutenant  of 
Ireland,  and  given,  on  Lord  Carter et's  declining  it,  to 
Lord  Chesterfield,  who,  on  this  occasion,  made  the 
warmest  professions  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole  that  it  was 
possible  to  utter,  acknowledging  that  his  attachment 
this  winter  to  Lord  Townshend  gave  him  no  right  to 
expect  this  favour,  and  he  concluded  with  saying,  "  I 


20  Sir  Robert  Walpole  explained  the  cause  of  the  original  difference 
between  them  in  a  few  words  :  "As  long  as  the  firm  was  Townshend  and 
Walpole,  all  went  well ;  as  soon  as  it  became  Walpole  and  Townshend, 
things  went  wrong." — Coxe,  i.  339. 

"  Lord  Townshend,"  says  Lord  Mahon,  "  left  office  with  a  most  un- 
blemished character,  and,  what  is  still  less  common,  a  most  patriotic  mode- 
ration. When  Lord  Chesterfield  went  to  Raynham  on  purpose  to  persuade 
him  to  attend  in  the  House  of  Lords  on  an  important  question,  Townshend 
answered,  '  I  have  irrevocably  determined  to  engage  no  more  in  politics. 

I  know  I  am  extremely  warm,  and  I  am  apprehensive  1  may  be 

hurried  away  by  my  temper  and  my  personal  animosities  to  adopt  a  line  of 
conduct  which  in  my  cooler  moments  I  may  regret.' " — Mahon's  '  Hist,  of 
England,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  208,  209. 


1729.  LORD  WILMINGTON — MR.  PELHAM.  143 

had  lost  the  game,  but  you  have  taken  my  cards  into 
your  hand  and  recovered  it."  Upon  Lord  Carteret's 
disgrace  Lord  Winchelsea  quitted  the  Comptroller's 
staff,  having  been  always  attached  to  Lord  Carteret, 
and  in  most  things  governed  by  him,  though  on  this 
occasion  he  certainly  governed  Lord  Carteret,  who  had 
always  declared  that  any  man  who  hoped  to  get  power, 
or  hurt  those  who  possessed  it,  had  better  be  a  Gen- 
tleman Usher  within  the  palace  than  leave  it  open  to 
his  rivals  by  retiring  out  of  it. 

Lord  Wilmington,  who  had  been  kicked  in  the  be- 
ginning of  the  reign  out  of  the  House  of  Commons  into 
the  House  of  Lords,  received  a  promotion  of  the  same 
kind  at  this  time ;  he  was  made  an  Earl  and  Privy 
Seal,  to  make  way  for  Mr.  Pelham21  in  the  lucrative 
employment  of  Paymaster  to  the  army,  and  was  soon 
after,  on  the  death  of  Lord  Trevor,  made  President  of 
the  Council. 

Mr.  Pelham,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle's  only  brother, 
was  strongly  attached  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  and  more 
personally  beloved  by  him  than  any  man  in  England. 
He  was  a  gentleman-like  sort  of  man,  of  very  good 
character,  with  moderate  parts,  in  the  secret  of  every 
transaction,  which,  added  to  long  practice,  made  him 
at  last,  though  not  a  bright  speaker,  often  a  useful  one ; 
and  by  the  means  of  a  general  affability  he  had  fewer 
enemies  than  commonly  falls  to  the  share  of  one  in  so 
high  a  rank. 

21  Henry  Pelham,  afterwards  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  and  Chan- 
cellor of  the  Exchequer  from  1743  to  his  death  in  March,  1754. 


144  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VH. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Attempt  of  the  Dissenters  to  repeal  the  Test  and  Corporation  Acts — 
Walpole  wishes  to  suppress  it — Engages  the  Queen  to  induce  Bishop 
Hoadley  to  dissuade  the  Dissenters — Hoadley's  difficulties — Walpole's 
arguments — Negotiation  between  the  Dissenters  and  the  Cabinet. 

THE  latter  end  of  this  summer,  1730,  a  design  was 
projected  among  all  the  Dissenters  of  England  to 
petition  the  Parliament  in  the  next  Session  for  the 
repeal  of  the  Corporation  and  Test  Acts,  or  at  least 
for  an  explanation  of  them  in  behalf  of  the  Presby- 
terians, so  far  as  these  acts  comprehended  or  affected 
them. 

The  Dissenters'  plea  for  asking  this  favour  of  the 
Parliament  seemed  very  natural  and  reasonable ;  they 
said  they  had  for  above  forty  years  shown  themselves 
steady  friends  to  the  constitution  of  England  in  the 
State,  and  constant  supporters  of  the  established 
government  on  Revolution  principles  ;  they  had  served 
hitherto  without  any  reward,  and  now  desired  no  other 
gratuity  than  the  bare  removal  of  that  unjust  distinction 
made  between  them  and  the  rest  of  their  fellow-subjects 
under  which  they  had  so  long  laboured  and  by  which 
they  were  excluded  from  all  employments  of  trust  or 
profit.  They  said  what  made  this  request  more  rea- 
sonable was,  that  the  hardship  they  now  complained  of 
had  never  been  laid  upon  them  at  all,  had  they  not 
originally  consented  to  it  themselves,  and  that  the  rea- 


1730.  TEST  ACT.  145 

son  of  their  consenting  to  it  had  been  merely  for  the 
public  good  and  the  common  Protestant  cause ;  circum- 
stances at  that  time  requiring  their  voluntary  submis- 
sion  to  this  self-denial  act   in  order  to  facilitate  the 
exclusion  of  Papists  from  all  places  of  power  when  this 
kingdom  was  on  the  brink  of  being  subjected  to  their 
sway  under  the  authority  of  a  Popish  successor.     They 
further  added  that   they  had  not  only  always  shown 
themselves  unwavering  and  indefatigable  champions  for 
the  Protestant  succession,   but  that  they  had  equally 
proved   themselves  firm  and   constant  friends  to  what 
was  called  the  Whig  party,  and  the  set  of  men  now  in 
power ;  consequently,  if  they  could  not  get  rid  of  this 
stigmatising  brand  of  reproach  that  declared  them  unfit 
to  be  trusted  with  any  employment  in  the  executive 
part  of  the  civil  government  under  a  Whig  Parliament, 
they  could  never  hope  for  relief  at  all,  since  the  other 
set  of  men,  who  called  themselves  the  Church  party, 
and  whom  they  had  always  opposed,  should  they  come 
into  power,  would  not  only  from  principle  forbear  to 
show  the  Dissenters  any  favour,  but  would   certainly 
from   resentment  go   still   further,  and  probably  load 
them   with   some    new   oppression.      Experience    had 
already  proved  the  probability  of  this  conjecture  by  the 
Schism  Act  and  other  violent  measures  taken  to  op- 
press them  in    the  four  last  years  of  Queen  Anne's 
reign.     In  this  manner  they  expressed  their  pretensions 
to  the  favour  they  solicited ;  and  the  reason  they  gave 
for  choosing  to  push  this  point  immediately  was,  that 
as  the  time  of  election  for  a  new  Parliament  was  now 
drawing  near,   they  thought  it  but  reasonable  to  try 
whether  those  who  had  been  so  long  receiving  favours 

VOL.  I.  L 


146  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VII. 

at  their  hands  were  ready  to  repay  those  favours  with  a 
piece  of  common  justice,  and  if  they  were  not,  that  the 
Presbyterians  might  in  the  ensuing  elections  have  the 
prudence  at  least  of  being  quiet,  and  forbear  making 
enemies,  since  they  were  to  despair  of  making  friends. 

This  design  of  the  Presbyterians  put  the  Adminis- 
tration under  great  difficulties  and  into  great  apprehen- 
sions ;  they  saw  the  injustice  of  opposing  their  petition 
if  it  came  into  Parliament,  and  the  danger  there  was, 
on  the  other  hand,  of  showing  it  any  countenance ; 
they  knew  it  would  seem  the  last  ingratitude  in  any 
who  called  themselves  Whigs  to  reject  it,  and  the 
highest  imprudence  to  receive  it;  for  though  the  clergy 
had  hitherto  been  kept  pretty  quiet  by  nothing  being 
attempted  either  to  restrain  their  power  or  to  favour 
their  adversaries,  yet  the  ministers  were  sure  that  if 
any  step  was  taken  that  looked  like  encouragement  to 
the  Dissenters,  it  would  inevitably  turn  all  the  parsons, 
to  a  man,  in  the  approaching  elections,  against  every 
one  that  should  appear  to  forward  it,  and  as  to  those 
who  did  not  forward  it,  the  [Dissenting]  ministers 
would  never  give  them  a  vote  again ;  and  though  in 
every  county  in  England  and  at  every  election  since 
the  Revolution  the  Dissenters  had  hitherto  stood  by 
the  Whigs  with  a  firmness  like  that  of  the  Triarii l  of 
the  Roman  legion,  they  would  certainly  for  the  future 
be  as  little  to  be  depended  upon  as  any  of  the  tempo- 
rary mercenary  auxiliaries  of  a  Cornish  borough. 

Sir  Robert  Wai  pole,  therefore,  to  avoid  this  dilemma, 
resolved,  if  possible,  to  prevail  with  the  Presbyterians 

i  The  most  trustworthy  veterans,  who  formed  the  third  line,  or  reserve. 


1730.  BISHOP  HOADLEY.  147 

to  postpone  bringing  their  petition  to  Parliament  till 
some  more  proper  opportunity  offered. 

He  knew  Hoadley,  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  was  the 
only  man  that  could  do  him  service  upon  this  occasion, 
or  at  least  that  he  was  the  most  able,  both  from  his 
capacity  and  the  interest  he  had  among  this  sect.  But 
the  misunderstanding  and  coldness  which  the  disposition 
of  the  Bishopric  of  Durham 2  had  created  between  the 
Bishop  of  Salisbury  and  Sir  Robert  Walpole  made  him 
ashamed  to  ask  a  favour  of  him,  and  a  little  diffident  of 
its  being  granted  in  case  he  did  ask  it. 

It  was  therefore  agreed  that  the  Queen  herself  should 
send  for  Bishop  Hoadley  and  make  it  her  request 
that  he  would  do  all  in  his  power  to  divert  this  im- 
pending storm.  Accordingly,  he  came  to  her  one 
evening  to  Kensington,  where,  with  profusion  of  affa- 
bility, she  began  with  telling  the  Bishop  the  occasion 
on  which  she  had  sent  for  him  ;  and  that  her  reason  for 
pitching  upon  him  was  her  knowing  him  to  be  not  only 
the  ablest  man  to  serve  the  King  in  this  point,  but  be- 
cause she  looked  upon  him  as  one  of  the  readiest  to 
serve  him  in  all  others;  that  his  long  uninterrupted 
known  zeal  for  his  family,  and  the  many  services  he 
had  already  done  them,  were  sufficient  to  convince  her 
of  this  truth :  but  she  assured  him  at  the  same  time 
that  she  did  not  depend  on  his  personal  attachment  to 


*  In  1721  Dr.  Talbot  was  translated  from  Salisbury  to  Durham,  Dr.  Willis 
from  Gloucester  to  Salisbury,  and  Hoadley  from  Bangor  (where  he  had 
made  himself  remarkable  by  what  was  called  the  Bangorian  Controversy) 
to  Hereford.  In  1723  he  was  translated  to  Salisbury.  The  "  coldness  "  no 
doubt  arose  from  Chandler's  being  chosen,  in  1730,  to  succeed  Talbot  in 
Durham  ;  but  in  1734  Hoadley  was  finally  placed  at  Winchester.  Lord 
Hervey  was  a  particular  friend  of  Hoadley. 

L   2 


148  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VII. 

the  King,  or  his  fidelity  to  the  interest  of  their  family, 
so  far  as  to  expect  anything  of  him  that  should  not  be 
perfectly  consistent  with  the  whole  tenor  of  his  conduct 
with  regard  to  all  his  other  principles,  writings,  and 
professions  ;  and  for  this  reason,  she  told  him,  she  had 
not  sent  for  him  to  desire  he  would  act,  write,  or  speak 
on  this  occasion  in  the  least  tittle  contradictory  to  his 
former  sentiments ;  but  to  put  him  in  a  way  both  to 
serve  the  Government  and  the  Dissenters  at  the  same 
time.  She  told  him  that  she  did  not  want  to  know  his 
opinion  upon  the  Repeal  of  the  Corporation  and  Test 
Acts,  but  believed  she  could  convince  him  that,  as  all 
times  were  not  proper  even  to  do  proper  things,  so  it 
was  impossible  for  the  Dissenters,  either  for  their  own 
or  for  the  Whig  interest,  to  choose  one  more  improper 
than  the  present  to  try  their  strength  and  their  friends 
on  this  favourite  point.  His  Lordship,  she  said,  could 
not  but  be  sensible  of  the  divisions  there  were  already 
subsisting  in  the  Whig  party,  and  that  this  question,  if 
brought  to  a  trial,  must  inevitably  make  another  sub- 
division in  the  common  friends  to  the  Government  and 
her  family ;  for,  as  they  were  already  split  into  minis- 
terial and  anti-ministerial  Whigs,  there  would  naturally 
sprout  up  a  third  class  on  this  debate,  who  would  call 
themselves  Church  Whigs,  and  who  would  profess 
themselves  as  great  enemies  to  this  innovation  as  any 
of  the  High  Church  men  among  the  Tories.  To  her 
knowledge,  she  said,  there  were  very  many  able,  sensi- 
ble, and  honest  men  who  were  as  zealous  for  the  tolera- 
tion on  the  foot  it  now  stood,  as  they  were  for  the 
Revolution,  and  the  Protestant  Government  in  the 
manner  it  was  now  constituted ;  but  that  they  would 


1730.  QUEEN'S  APPEAL  TO  HOADLEY.  149 

no  more  consent  to  break  in  on  the  power  of  the 
Church,  by  further  encroachments  on  the  ecclesiastical 
authority,  than  they  would  attempt  any  new  restric- 
tions on  the  prerogative  of  the  Crown,  and  as  little 
contribute  to  introduce  a  universal  unlimited  freedom  of 
worship  in  the  Church  as  a  commonwealth  in  the  State. 

This  being  the  case,  his  Lordship,  she  said,  must  see 
the  ill  consequences  which  this  bone  of  contention  at 
this  time  must  produce  even  among  the  friends  to 
the  Government;  nor  would  the  ill  effects  of  it  stop 
there,  for  as  the  clergy  had  hitherto  been  kept  quiet  by 
a  promise  of  everything  in  their  province  remaining  as 
it  was,  so  consequently,  when  that  promise  was  broken, 
it  would  set  all  the  turbulent  spirits  and  ill  humours  of 
that  body  again  afloat,  and  no  one  could  foresee  the 
infinite  difficulty  which  that  might  bring  upon  the  Go- 
vernment, or  the  confusion  in  which  it  might  involve 
the  whole  kingdom  :  but,  besides  these  remote  incon- 
veniences that  were  to  be  apprehended,  the  immediate 
havoc  it  would  make  in  the  approaching  elections  was 
certain ;  and,  in  her  opinion,  if  a  Parliamentary  decision 
of  the  affair  now  under  consideration  could  not  be  pre- 
vented, the  bringing  of  it  to  a  final  determination  at 
present  would  so  split  and  tear  the  Whig  party,  and 
would  make  some  of  them  so  unpopular  among  their 
friends,  and  others  so  obnoxious  to  neutral  persons,  that 
it  would  be  very  improbable,  if  not  impossible,  for  a 
Whig  Parliament  to  be  chosen. 

Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  what  she  desired  of  his 
Lordship  was  that  he  would  use  his  interest  with  the 
Dissenters  to  postpone  this  request  to  the  Parliament 
till  such  time  as  those  who  were  really  their  friends. 


150  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VII. 

should  dare  to  show  themselves  so,  and  not  be  intimi- 
dated from  espousing  the  interest  of  the  Dissenters  in 
Parliament  by  an  apprehension  of  losing  their  own 
interest  in  the  country. 

The  Bishop  assured  her  Majesty  that  she  was  not 
mistaken  in  the  opinion  she  had  of  his  readiness  to 
serve  the  King  and  her  on  all  occasions;  and  that 
whatever  his  little  power  could  do  to  extricate  them 
out  of  any  difficulties,  at  any  time,  should  be  done  with 
the  greatest  cheerfulness,  diligence,  and  fidelity.  But 
as  he  had  set  out  in  the  world  with  a  declared  attach- 
ment both  to  ecclesiastical  and  civil  liberty,  and  that  he 
had  so  often  given  his  opinion  in  conversation  and  in 
print  with  regard  to  the  unreasonableness  of  these  laws 
in  a  social  light,  and  the  profaneness  of  them  theologi- 
cally considered,  so  it  would  be  impossible  for  him  ever 
to  contradict  what  he  had  so  often  asserted ;  and  there- 
fore he  must  plainly  and  honestly  tell  her  Majesty,  that 
whenever  the  repeal  of  them  came  to  be  proposed  in 
Parliament,  he  must  always  be  for  it,  and  forward  as 
much  as  in  him  lay  a  step  which  he  thought  but  com- 
mon justice  from  this  Government  to  its  long-oppressed 
and  long-faithful  friends.  He  further  told  her  Majesty, 
that  as  he  had  always  declared  himself  so  explicitly 
and  distinguished  himself  so  zealously  on  this  point, 
it  would  be  impossible,  even  though  he  were  profli- 
gate enough  to  desire  it,  for  common  prudence  ever  to 
permit  him  to  speak  in  any  other  strain  on  these  mat- 
ters. However,  as  a  common  friend  both  to  the  Whigs 
and  the  Dissenters,  if  it  should  appear,  upon  feeling 
people's  pulse  with  regard  to  this  thing,  that  the  present 
proposal  of  it  in  Parliament  might  prejudice  the  one 


1730.  HOADLEY'S  DIFFICULTIES.  151 

without  advantaging  the  other,  he  should  be  very  glad 
to  employ  all  the  interest  he  had  among  the  Dissenters 
to  divert  the  immediate  trying  of  this  point,  and  would 
speak  his  opinion  to  the  Dissenters  as  freely  upon  the 
success  they  were  now  likely  to  have,  as  he  had  now 
done  to  her  Majesty  of  the  success  he  thought  they 
ought  to  have. 

This  was  the  substance  of  her  Majesty's  first  confer- 
ence with  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury  on  this  chapter ;  but, 
soon  after  this  conversation,  there  was  a  report  spread, 
both  in  town  and  country,  that  the  Queen  had  sent  for 
the  Bishop  of  Salisbury  and  convinced  him  that  this 
request  of  the  Dissenters  was  so  unreasonable,  that  he 
had  promised  her  not  to  support  them  in  it.  Whoever 
was  sanguine  enough  to  circulate  this  report,  it  was  cer- 
tainly as  little  consistent  with  good  policy  as  with  truth ; 
since,  if  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury  had  been  inclined 
(which  he  was  not)  to  favour  the  Administration  by 
espousing  their  interest  in  preference  to  the  Dissenters, 
this  report,  instead  of  promoting  such  a  design,  would 
have  made  the  execution  of  it  less  practicable,  as  it 
would  have  made  the  Dissenters  look  upon  the  Bishop 
of  Salisbury  as  less  their  friend,  and  consequently  made 
any  advice  he  should  give  them  of  less  weight. 

The  Bishop  was  so  reasonably  angry  and  vexed  at 
what  had  been  given  out,  that  he  went  to  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  and  very  fairly  told  him  that  those  who  had 
endeavoured  to  propagate  this  opinion  he  believed 
meant  only  hurt  to  himself,  but  in  effect  it  would  do 
the  Administration  no  service.  Since  whatever  use  he 
might  have  been  of  to  the  Government  on  this  occa- 
sion, it  would  certainly  be  necessary  now  for  him  to  act 


152  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHA.I-.  VII. 

with  the  utmost  caution,  for  fear  of  giving  any  colour 
of  truth  by  his  own  conduct  to  these  suggestions  that 
had  been  made  so  little  to  his  advantage.  He  further 
told  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  that  he  could  not  help  own- 
ing his  first  consideration  would  now  be  the  care  of  his 
own  reputation  and  character ;  he  knew  how  nice  the 
situation  was  in  which  he  stood  at  present,  and  how 
hard  a  part  he  had  to  act  both  as  to  the  Court  and  as 
to  the  Dissenters,  from  the  jealousy  there  would  be  on 
both  sides  of  his  partiality ;  but  that,  at  all  hazards,  he 
was  determined  to  clear  up  that  point  of  his  having 
received  conviction  from  the  Queen  that  the  Dissenters' 
now  making  this  request  to  Parliament  was  unreason- 
able ;  and  said  he  was  sure  Sir  Robert  Walpole  him- 
self must  approve  his  solicitude  to  disculpate  himself  of 
such  an  imputation,  since  in  common  sense  and  plain 
language  such  suggestions  could  bear  no  other  con- 
struction than  that  he  had  been  tampered  with  at  Court 
till  he  had  submitted  to  temporize  with  its  authority, 
at  the  expense  both  of  his  opinion  and  his  integrity. 
Sir  Robert  Walpole,  after  making  the  Bishop  a  great 
many  professions  of  the  cordiality  of  his  friendship 
towards  him,  and  telling  him  with  what  gratitude  he 
thought  of  all  the  obligations  he  had  formerly  had  both 
to  his  affection  and  his  capacity,  assured  him  that  as 
much  as  the  Administration  wanted  his  assistance  in 
this  important  affair,  if  he  thought  it  could  prejudice 
his  own  character  to  give  it  them,  he  would  be  the  last 
man  in  England  to  ask  or  desire  it ;  that  as  to  this 
report  of  his  Lordship's  having  been  convinced  by  the 
Queen  of  the  Dissenters'  plea  being  unreasonable,  he 
had  never  heard  it,  and  thought,  if  there  was  any  such 


1730.  WALPOLE'S  ARGUMENTS.  153 

report,  it  was  below  his  Lordship  to  regard  it ;  for 
though  there  always  would  be  some  idle  people  on  all 
occasions  ready  to  make  stories,  and  some  few  weak 
and  credulous  enough  to  believe  them,  yet  his  Lord- 
ship's sentiments  were  too  well  known,  and  his  charac- 
ter too  well  established,  for  any  sensible  body  ever  to 
doubt  of  the  one  or  receive  any  ill  impressions  of  the 
other.  That  as  to  the  main  question,  whether  this 
thing  ought  to  be  done  for  the  Dissenters  or  not,  he  was 
sure  the  Bishop  did  not  want  to  know  his  thoughts 
upon  it ;  though  he  looked  on  the  application  at  this 
time  as  unseasonable,  yet  he  was  far  from  thinking 
the  request  itself,  abstractedly  considered,  unreason- 
able. But,  notwithstanding  this,  let  his  private 
opinion  be  what  it  would,  people  in  his  station,  he  said, 
must  now  and  then  act  a  little  with  regard  to  what 
others  thought  right,  as  well  as  what  they  thought  right 
themselves  \  and  that  he  had  sounded  many  of  the 
firmest  friends  to  the  Government  upon  this  point,  and 
found  so  many  against  it  in  opinion,  as  thinking  it  bore 
the  appearance  of  breaking  in  on  the  Established 
Church,  and  so  many  more  against  it  for  prudential 
and  personal  reasons  with  regard  to  their  interest  in 
the  country,  that  he  was  sure,  if  the  point  was  now  to 
be  tried,  it  could  not  be  carried  ;  and  that  for  this  rea- 
son, how  grateful  soever  the  Court  might  be  to  the 
Dissenters  for  the  services  they  had  done  this  Govern- 
ment, and  how  well  so  ever  it  might  wish  them,  yet  the 
Administration  must  run  such  risks,  and  incur  so  much 
ill  will,  if  at  this  juncture  it  appeared  for  them,  that  no 
prudent  man  could  advise  the  King  to  take  the  unpo- 
pular part  of  espousing  them,  especially  with  so  little 


154  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VII. 

prospect  of  success.  As  to  himself,  in  private  and  in 
confidence,  he  would  not  scruple  to  own  to  the  Bishop 
that  his  heart  was  with  them ;  but  in  this  country,  which 
was  in  reality  a  popular  Government  that  only  bore  the 
name  of  monarchy,  and  especially  in  this  age  where 
clamour  and  faction  were  so  prevalent  over  reason  and 
justice,  he  said,  a  minister  sometimes  must  swim  with 
the  tide  against  his  inclination,  and  that  the  current  was 
too  strong  at  present  against  this  proposal  of  the  Dis- 
senters for  any  judicious  minister  to  think  of  stemming 
it.  He  further  added,  that  if  he  were  wholly  uncon- 
cerned as  a  minister,  and  only  considered  this  thing  as 
a  friend  to  the  Dissenters,  he  should  certainly  rather 
advise  them  to  try  it  at  the  beginning  of  a  new  Parlia- 
ment than  at  the  end  of  an  old  one,  as  people  would 
be  less  afraid  of  the  ferment  in  the  country  seven  years 
before  elections  were  again  to  come  on,  than  one ;  and 
consequently  those  who  were  friends  to  the  Dissenters 
would  have  the  principal  check  to  their  showing  them- 
selves such,  removed  to  so  great  a  distance  that  it 
would  be  almost  the  same  thing  as  being  entirely  taken 
away. 

The  Bishop  asked  Sir  Robert  if,  in  making  use  of 
this  argument  to  the  Dissenters,  he  might  give  them 
hopes  of  finding  more  favour  from  the  Court  in  case 
they  would  adjourn  their  pretensions  till  the  opening  of 
a  new  Parliament ;  but  Sir  Robert  avoided  hampering 
himself  by  any  promise  of  that  kind  by  saying,  that  as 
such  a  promise  could  never  be  kept  a  secret,  so  its 
being  known  to  be  given  for  the  future  would  have  just 
the  same  ill  effects  as  the  performance  of  it  in  present; 
and,  for  that  reason,  whatever  he  thought  might  be 


1730.  LORD  BARRINGTON.  155 

done,  he  would  not,  nor  dare  not,  say  it  should  be 
done. 

The  Bishop  plainly  saw  through  this  artifice,  and  at 
the  same  time  perceived  that  his  encouraging  the  Dis- 
senters to  proceed  further  in  this  affair  at  present  would 
only  ruin  his  own  little  remnant  of  interest  at  Court, 
without  availing  them,  and  therefore  resolved  plainly 
to  represent  to  them  what  they  had  to  expect,  and 
advise  them  not  to  push  a  point  which  might  force 
many  who  were  thought  their  friends  to  desert  them, 
and  hurt  many  who  would  stand  by  them,  and  give 
their  enemies  advantage  without  a  possibility  of  pro- 
curing any  benefit  to  themselves.  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
in  this  interview  reproved  the  Bishop  often  for  acting 
with  Lord  Barrington,  an  Irish  dissenting  peer,  who 
set  himself  at  the  head  of  the  Presbyterians  on  this 
occasion,  and  who,  Sir  Robert  told  the  Bishop,  had 
neither  parts  to  serve  the  cause  nor  reputation  to  give 
it  weight :  and,  in  truth,  Lord  Barrington's  character 
was  not  the  brightest  in  understanding,  nor  the  most 
unsullied  in  integrity.3  The  Bishop  had  several  more 
conferences  on  this  subject  both  with  the  Queen  and 
Sir  Robert  Walpole,  but  as  they  were  all  to  the  same 
effect  with  those  I  have  related,  I  shall  not  recapitulate 
them. 

The  Dissenters  were  so  sanguine  all  over  England 
in  this  project,  that  in  every  county  and  great  town  in 
the  kingdom  they  had  meetings  to  consult  upon  it  and 
methodise  the  execution  of  it,  and  deputations  were 

3  He  had  been  expelled  the  House  of  Commons  in  1723  for  "an  infa- 
mous fraudulent  project "  called  the  Harburgh  lottery. — Ti'ndal;  and  Wal- 
poliana,  §  68. 


156  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VII. 

sent  from  every  quarter  to  communicate  their  resolu- 
tions to  the  body  of  the  Dissenters  in  London,  on 
whom  they  relied  for  the  solicitation  and  management 
of  the  whole. 

This  enabled  Sir  Robert  Walpole  to  defeat  the  pro- 
ject entirely  •,  for  out  of  the  body  of  the  London  Dis- 
senters a  committee  was  to  be  chosen,  to  treat  and 
confer  with  the  ministers ;  and  as  the  honest  gentlemen 
who  composed  that  committee  were  all  monied  men  of 
the  city  and  scriveners,  who  were  absolutely  dependent 
on  Sir  Robert,  and  chosen  by  his  contrivance,  they 
spoke  only  as  he  prompted,  and  acted  only  as  he 
guided. 

However,  to  save  appearances,  everything  was  to  be 
carried  on  with  the  utmost  seeming  formality ;  this 
packed  committee  was  to  meet  the  Lord  Chancellor 
[King],  Mr.  Onslow,  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  the  Lord  President  of  the  Council  [Wil- 
mington], the  two  Secretaries  of  State  [Duke  of  New- 
castle and  Lord  Harrington],  and  Sir  Robert  Walpole, 
in  order  to  ask  and  learn  from  these  great  men  what 
the  Presbyterians,  in  case  they  brought  their  petition 
now  into  Parliament,  had  to  hope  from  the  Court,  the 
House  of  Lords,  and  the  House  of  Commons. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole  at  this  meeting  began  with  a 
dissertation  on  the  subject  on  which  they  were  con- 
vened, and  repeated  most  of  the  things  he  had  before 
said  to  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury.  The  Speaker  avoided 
giving  his  opinion  on  the  thing  itself,  but  was  very 
strong  and  explicit  on  the  inexpediency  of  bringing  it 
now  before  the  Parliament,  and  the  little  probability, 
if  it  was  brought  there,  of  its  success.  My  Lord  Presi- 


1730.  THE  DESIGN  QUASHED.  157 

dent  looked  wise,  was  dull,  took  snuff,  and  said  nothing. 
Lord  Harrington  took  the  same  silent,  passive  part. 
The  Lord  Chancellor  and  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  had 
done  better  had  they  followed  that  example  too ;  but 
both  spoke  very  plentifully,  and  were  both  equally  un- 
intelligible, the  one  from  having  lost  his  understanding,4 
and  the  other  from  never  having  had  any. 

The  result  of  this  conference  was  reported  by  the 
committee  to  a  general  assembly  of  all  the  Dissenters 
in  London,  convened  for  that  purpose  ;  and  upon  that 
report  this  assembly  came  to  the  following  resolu- 
tions:— 

First,  That  if  a  petition  was  to  be  now  preferred  to  Parlia- 
ment in  their  favour,  that  there  was  no  prospect  of  success. 

Secondly,  That  the  present  was  consequently  an  improper 
time  for  any  application  to  Parliament  of  that  kind. 

And,  Thirdly,  It  was  resolved  to  communicate  the  negotia- 
tions of  the  committee,  and  the  resolutions  of  this  assembly 
thereupon,  to  all  the  Dissenters  in  England. 

In  this  manner  this  storm  that  threatened  the  Admi- 
nistration from  the  Presbyterian  party  blew  over.  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  conducted  the  whole  affair  on  his  part 
with  great  skill,  temper,  and  dexterity :  but  the  Presby- 
terians, as  well  as  many  who  were  unconcerned,  saw 
plainly  that  the  Dissenters'  cause  was  betrayed,  and 
their  interests  sold,  by  their  factors  in  London.  The 
Bishop  of  Salisbury  had  the  misfortune,  though  he 
acted  with  the  greatest  caution  and  the  strictest  can- 
dour both  towards  the  Court  and  towards  the  Dissent- 


4  Lord  Chancellor  King  had  been  reputed  an  able  lawyer;  but  about  this 
time  began  to  show  strong  symptoms  of  a  (probably  constitutional)  failure  of 
intellect,  which  soon  incapacitated  him  for  the  woolsack. 


158  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.          CHAP.  vn. 

ers,  to  please  neither ;  the  latter  thought  he  had  pressed 
their  cause  too  little,  and  the  other  that  he  had  sup- 
ported it  too  much.  So  that  it  happened  to  him  on 
this  occasion,  as  it  happens  to  most  people  of  honesty 
in  such  delicate  situations,  that  the  more  pains  they 
take  not  to  be  in  the  wrong,  the  less  either  side  are 
willing  to  acknowledge  them  to  be  in  the  right;  no- 
body, who  desires  partiality,  being  capable  of  owning 
they  received  justice,  though  it  be  ever  so  strictly  per- 
formed. 


1733.  THE  EXCISE  SCHEME.  159 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  Excise  Scheme — Alarm  of  the  Country — Walpole's  resolution — Ses- 
sion of  Parliament — The  Army  voted — Cabal  of  the  Lords — Lord  Stair's 
Remonstrance  with  the  Queen — Queen's  Reply — Repeated  to  Lord 
Hervey — General  clamours  against  the  Excise — Popular  delusion. 

BUT  this  flame  was  no  sooner  extinguished  in  the 
nation l  than  another  was  kindled,  and  one  that  was 
much  more  epidemical,  and  raged  with  much  greater 
fury.  Faction  was  never  more  busy  on  any  occasion ; 
terrors  were  never  more  industriously  scattered,  and 
clamour  never  more  universally  raised. 

That  which  gave  rise  to  these  commotions  was  a 
project  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  to  ease  the  land-tax 
of  one  shilling  in  the  pound,  by  turning  the  duty  on 
tobacco  and  wine,  then  payable  on  importation,  into 
inland  duties ;  that  is,  changing  the  Customs  on  those 
two  commodities  into  Excises ;  by  which  scheme,  joined 

1  It  is  remarkable  that  Coxe  (iii.  48)  passes,  in  two  lines,  the  period 
from  May,  1730,  to  January,  1733,  as  wholly  unmarked  by  any  public  event, 
and  dedicates  the  interval  to  a  biography  of  Pulteney,  and  some  account  of 
his  controversy  and  duel  with  Lord  Hervey.  Lord  Hervey's  Memoirs  make 
exactly  the  same  leap,  without  making  a  similar  compensation — though 
there  appears  no  hiatus  in  the  manuscript ;  and  it  seems  by  the  words 
which  connect  the  "  Dissenters'  claims"  with  the  "  Excise  scheme" 
that  his  Lordship  intentionally  skips  over  two  and  a  half  of  the  most 
interesting  years  of  his  life.  These  years  include  his  quarrel  with 
Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales  ;  the  publication  of  the  pamphlet  which  Pulte- 
ney resented  as  Lord  Hervey's  in  a  virulent  reply,  and  their  consequent 
duel ;  and  Pope's  libel  on  him  as  Sporus.  I  am  at  a  loss  to  account  for 
Coxe's  silence  as  to  the  events  of  these  two  years,  and  more  so  for  Lord 
Hervey's ;  but  most  of  all  that  they  should  happen  to  be  simultaneous. 


160  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAF.  VIII. 

to  the  continuation  of  the  salt-duty,  he  proposed  to  im- 
prove the  public  revenue  500,000/.  per  annum,  in  order 
to  supply  the  abatement  of  one  shilling  in  the  pound 
on  land,  which  raises  about  that  sum. 

The  landed  men  had  long  complained  that  they  had 
ever  since  the  Revolution  borne  the  heat  and  burden 
of  the  day  for  the  support  of  the  Revolution  Govern- 
ment ;  and  as  the  great  pressure  of  the  last  war  had 
chiefly  lain  on  them  (the  land  ha-ving  for  many  years 
been  taxed  to  four  shillings  in  the  pound),  they  now 
began  to  say,  that  since  the  public  tranquillity  both  at 
home  and  abroad  was  firmly  and  universally  esta- 
blished, if  ease  was  not  at  this  time  thought  of  for  them, 
it  was  a  declaration  from  the  Government  that  they 
were  never  to  expect  any,  and  that  two  shillings  in  the 
pound  on  land  was  the  least  that  they  or  their  posterity, 
in  the  most  profound  peace  and  fullest  tranquillity, 
were  ever  to  hope  to  pay. 

This  having  been  the  cry  of  the  country  gentlemen 
and  landowners  for  some  time,  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
thought  he  could  not  do  a  more  popular  thing  than  to 
form  a  scheme  by  which  the  land-tax  should  be  reduced 
to  one  shilling  in  the  pound,  and  yet  no  new  tax  be 
substituted  in  the  lieu  thereof,  no  new  duty  laid  on  any 
commodity  whatsoever,  and  the  public  revenue  improved 
500,000/.  per  annum,  merely  by  this  alteration  in  the 
method  of  management. 

The  salt-duty,  which  had  been  revived  the  year  before 
[1732],  could  raise  only  in  three  years  what  one  shil- 
ling in  the  pound  on  land  raised  in  one  year ;  conse- 
quently, as  that  tax  was  an  equivalent  only  to  one-third 
of  a  shilling  on  land,  if  the  remission  of  that  shilling  on 


1733.  THE  EXCISE  SCHEME.  161 

land  was  further  and  annually  continued,  some  other 
fund  must  be  found  to  supply  the  other  two-thirds. 

This  of  Excising  tobacco  and  wine  was  the  equivalent 
projected  by  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  but  this  scheme,  in- 
stead of  procuring  him  the  popularity  he  thought  it 
would,  caused  more  clamour  and  made  him  even,  whilst 
the  project  was  only  talked  of  and  in  embryo,  more  vili- 
fied and  abused  by  the  universal  outcries  of  the  people, 
than  any  one  act  of  his  whole  administration. 

The  art,  vigilance,  and  industry  of  his  enemies  had 
so  contrived  to  represent  this  scheme  to  the  people,  and 
had  so  generally  in  every  county  and  great  town 
throughout  all  England  prejudiced  their  minds  against 
it;  they  had  shown  it  in  so  formidable  a  shape  and 
painted  it  in  such  hideous  colours,  that  everybody  talked 
of  the  scheme  as  a  general  Excise ;  they  believed  that 
food  and  raiment,  and  all  the  necessaries  of  life,  were  to 
be  taxed ;  that  armies  of  Excise  officers  were  to  come 
into  any  house  and  at  any  time  they  pleased ;  that  our 
liberties  were  at  an  end,  trade  going  to  be  ruined, 
Magna  Charta  overturned,  all  property  destroyed,  the 
Crown  made  absolute,  and  Parliaments  themselves  no 
longer  necessary  to  be  called. 

This  was  the  epidemic  madness  of  the  nation  on  this 
occasion ;  whilst  most  of  the  boroughs  in  England,  and 
the  city  of  London  itself j  sent  formal  instructions  by  way 
of  memorials  to  their  Representatives,  absolutely  to  op- 
pose all  new  Excises  and  all  extension  of  Excise  laws,  if 
proposed  in  Parliament,  though  introduced  or  modelled 
in  any  manner  whatsoever. 

It  is  easy  to  imagine  that  this  reception  of  a  scheme 
by  which  Sir  Robert  Walpole  proposed  to  ingratiate 

VOL.  I.  M 


162  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VIII. 

himself  so  much  with  the  people,  must  give  him  great 
disquiet.  Some  of  his  friends,  whose  timidity  passed 
afterwards  for  judgment,  advised  him  to  relinquish  it, 
and  said,  though  it  was  in  itself  so  beneficial  a  scheme 
to  the  public,  yet  since  the  public  did  not  see  it  in  that 
light,  that  the  best  part  he  could  take  was  to  lay  it  aside. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole  thought,  since  he  was  so  far  em- 
barked, that  there  was  no  listening  to  such  advice  with- 
out quitting  the  King's  service,  for  as  it  was  once  known 
that  he  designed  to  execute  this  scheme,  had  he  given 
it  up,  everything  that  had  been  said  of  its  tendency 
would  have  been  taken  for  granted ;  and  the  same  men 
who  had  prepossessed  the  minds  of  the  people,  so  far  as 
to  have  these  things  credited,  would  very  naturally  and 
easily  have  persuaded  them  that  their  rescue  from  ruin, 
and  the  stop  that  had  been  put  to  this  impending  blow, 
were  entirely  owing  to  their  patriotism ;  that  it  was  the 
stand  they  had  made  had  prevented  the  universal  de- 
struction that  had  been  threatened  to  the  liberties  and 
fortunes  of  the  people. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole,  therefore  (who,  if  he  could  have 
foreseen  the  difficulties  in  which  this  scheme  involved 
him,  would  certainly  never  have  embarked  in  it  at  all), 
in  this  disagreeable  dilemma  chose  what  he  thought  the 
least  dangerous  path,  and  resolved,  since  he  had  under- 
taken it,  to  try  to  carry  it  through.  His  manner  of 
reasoning  was,  that  if  he  had  given  way  to  popular 
clamour  on  this  occasion,  it  would  be  raised,  right  or 
wrong,  on  every  future  occasion  to  thwart  and  check 
any  measure  that  could  be  taken  by  the  Government 
whilst  he  should  have  the  direction  of  affairs,  and  that 
the  consequence  of  that  must  be,  his  resignation  of 


1733.  CABAL  OF  THE  LORDS.  163 

his   employment    or   his    dismissal    from   the   King's 
service. 

About  the  middle  of  January  the  Parliament  met  as 
usual :  the  King  in  his  speech  set  forth  the  happy  situa- 
tion of  affairs  both  at  home  and  abroad,  asked  nothing 
but  the  ordinary  supplies  for  the  current  service  of  the 
year,  and  concluded  as  usual  with  a  universal  recom- 
mendation of  temper  and  unanimity  to  the  Commons  in 
all  their  debates,  desiring  them  to  avoid  all  heat  and 
animosities,  and  praying  them  not  to  be  diverted  by  any 
specious  pretences  whatsoever  from  raising  the  supplies 
in  the  easiest  manner  to  his  people. 

The  two  great  affairs  of  this  Session  were  the  army 
and  these  Excises ;  and  the  reception  these  two  points 
met  with  in  the  world  plainly  shows  on  what  capricious 
and  unreasonable  foundations  popular  clamour  is  gene- 
rally raised ;  for  considering  our  constitution  and  the 
present  situation  of  our  affairs  both  at  home  and  abroad, 
there  was  as  little  to  be  urged  in  defence  of  the  measure 
of  keeping  up  the  same  number  of  troops  as  there  was 
in  fair  arguing  against  the  Excise  scheme ;  yet  on  the 
chapter  of  Excise  the  whole  nation  was  put  into  aflame, 
whilstThe  army  was  scarcely  mentioned  in  the  country, 
and  passed  through  the  House  little  more  disputed 
than  the  malt-tax,  or  any  other  of  the  ordinary  annual 
supplies. 

It  was  hoped  by  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  enemies,  more 
than  feared  by  his  friends,  that  the  defection  among  the 
Lords  on  this  point  of  the  Excise  would  be  very  consi- 
derable, and  that  several  who  had  long  wished  him  ill  in 
secret,  though  in  public  they  had  abetted  all  his  mea- 
sures, would  take  this  opportunity  to  strike  at  him. 

M  2 


164  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VIII. 

Of  this  number  were  reckoned  the  Duke  of  Argyle,  the 
Duke  of  Montrose,  Earl  of  Stair,  Earl  of  Marchmont, 
Duke  of  Bolton,  Lord  Chesterfield,  Lord  Clinton,  and 
Lord  Cobham.2  There  were  frequent  meetings,  intrigues, 
consultations,  and  cabals  among  these  Lords,  in  what 
manner  they  should  show  their  opposition,  and  what 
previous  steps  were  necessary  to  be  taken  to  make 
it  most  effectual. 

Among  many  other  things  it  was  resolved  that  some 
one  of  them  should  ask  an  audience  of  the  Queen  in 
order  to  try  how  far  they  could  work  either  on  her  rea- 
son or  her  fear,  by  telling  her  in  the  strongest  terms  the 
unfitness  and  unpopularity  of  the  point  pushed  by  her 
favourite,  by  setting  forth  the  hazards  she  ran  in  main- 
taining him  in  it,  and  endeavouring  to  persuade  her  of 
the  impossibility  there  was,  in  this  universal  discontent, 
that  he  should  be  able  to  carry  it  through. 

Lord  Stair  was  pitched  upon  to  be  the  ambassador 
from  the  faction  to  her  Majesty  on  this  occasion.  A 
man  in  years  and  of  experience,  one  of  the  sixteen 
Scotch  peers,  who  had  been  ambassador  in  France  in 
the  ticklish  times  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans'  regency,  and 
had  acted  there  with  skill  and  credit  to  himself,  and  to 
the  honour  and  benefit  of  his  country.3 

He  was  reckoned  a  man  of  honour  and  integrity,  and 
though  he  had  much  more  of  the  profusion  of  money  in 
his  conduct  than  is  common  to  his  countrymen,  yet  the 
desire  of  getting  it  was  as  predominant  in  his  corn- 

2  These  Lords  were  all  in  civil  or  military  removeable  offices. 

3  John,  second  Earl  of  Stair,  a  man  of  considerable  reputation  both  as  a 
soldier  and  a  statesman.     Born  in  1673  ;  he  died  in  1747.    He  served  as  a 
general  officer  in  Marlborough's  latter  campaigns  ;  and  after  an  interval  of 
thirty  years  commanded  the  allied  army  at  Dettingen  in  1743. 


1733.  LORD  STAIR'S  REMONSTRANCE.  165 

position  as  in  the  most  thrifty  Scotchman  of  them  all. 
He  had  been  ill  with  Sir  Eobert  Walpole  some  years 
ago,  but  upon  the  Duke  of  Queensberry's  resigning  his 
employment  of  Vice- Admiral  of  Scotland,  his  Lord- 
ship, forgetting  all  former  wrongs  and  resentment,  wrote 
a  most  submissive  letter  to  Sir  Robert,  full  of  the  strongest 
professions  of  future  friendship  and  good  behaviour,  and 
desired  to  succeed  the  Duke  of  Queensberry.  He  did 
so;  but  notwithstanding  this  boon  being  granted,  he 
soon  recurred  to  grumbling,  complaining,  and  every 
other  mark  of  his  former  discontent,  except  retiring  to 
Scotland.  His  Lordship  was  of  a  very  warm,  prompt 
temper,  and  when  he  was  angry  did  not  hesitate  to 
express  his  being  so  in  very  strong  and  irritating  terms. 
In  the  audience  he  asked  of  the  Queen,  he  opened 
his  embassy  by  telling  her,  that  he  had  long  thought 
himself  neglected  and  ill  used  by  those  who  were  at  the 
head  of  the  Administration,  but  he  assured  her  Majesty 
it  was  not  that  which  now  prompted  him  to  give  her 
this  trouble ;  for,  notwithstanding  that  ill  usage,  whilst 
the  King's  measures  and  the  points  proposed  by  his 
ministers  in  Parliament  had  been  such  as  were  not  de- 
trimental to  the  nation,  her  Majesty  was  very  sensible 
that  he  had  never  from  pique  or  ill  humour  given  any 
opposition  or  aimed  at  obstructing  whatever  had  been 
thought  proper  to  be  done.  He  hoped,  he  said,  that 
her  Majesty  would  give  herself  the  trouble  one  moment 
to  reflect  on  his  past  conduct,  and  was  sure  she  could 
not  then  help  being  so  just  to  him  as  to  own  that  this  was 
strictly  true ;  and  since  it  was  so,  he  hoped  her  Majesty 
would  likewise  have  candour  enough  to  believe,  that  the 
strong  declarations  he  had  made  against  the  great  point 


166  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VIII. 

of  Excise  now  in  debate,  had  been  entirely  owing  to  a 
thorough  conviction  that  if  the  personal  enemies  of  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  and  the  most  determined  Jacobites  in 
the  kingdom  had  been  to  suggest  a  measure  that  would 
be  the  surest  to  serve  their  cause,  to  ruin  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  and  endanger  even  the  security  of  her  family 
in  this  kingdom,  they  could  not  have  pitched  on  a  scheme 
more  conducive  to  these  ends.  The  scheme,  he  told 
her,  was  injudiciously  at  first  concerted  and  hastily  un- 
dertaken ;  that  it  was  known  to  have  been  so  now  even 
by  Sir  Robert  himself,  and  was  only  at  present  pushed 
by  him  in  obstinacy,  because  he  would  not  own  himself 
guilty  of  an  error,  which  must  end  in  his  disgrace  or  the 
total  ruin  of  the  nation.  But  as  Sir  Robert  was  reduced 
by  his  rashness,  by  a  wantonness  in  power,  or  by  a  want 
of  judgment  to  this  fatal  option ;  self-preservation,  ob- 
stinacy, and  pride  had  made  him  choose  even  to  risk 
his  master's  Crown  by  alienating  the  affections  of  his 
subjects  and  forcing  a  scheme  upon  them  contrary  to 
their  universal  remonstrances,  rather  than  submit  to 
own  that  he  had  been  deceived,  and  in  consequence  of 
that  deception  had  endeavoured  to  deceive  her  Majesty 
and  the  King.  "But,  Madam,  though  your  Majesty 
knows  nothing  of  this  man  but  what  he  tells  you  him- 
self, or  what  his  creatures  and  flatterers,  prompted  by 
himself,  tell  you  of  him,  yet  give  me  leave  to  assure 
your  Majesty  that  in  no  age,  in  no  reign,  in  no  country 
was  ever  any  minister  so  universally  odious  as  the  man 
you  support.  He  is  hated  by  the  army,  because  he  is 
known  to  support  them  against  his  will,  and  hated  by 
the  country  for  supporting  them  at  all ;  he  is  hated  by 
the  clergy,  because  they  know  the  support  they  receive 


1733.  LORD  STAIR'S  REMONSTRANCE.  167 

from  him  is  policy,  contrary  to  his  principles  of  Whig- 
gism,  and  a  support  he  makes  them  earn  at  a  dear  rate ; 
he  is  hated  by  the  city  of  London,  because  he  never  did 
anything  for  the  trading  part  of  it,  nor  aimed  at  any 
interest  of  theirs  but  a  corrupt  influence  over  the  direc- 
tors and  governors  of  the  great  monied  companies ;  he  is 
hated  by  all  the  Scotch  to  a  man,  because  he  is  known  to 
have  combated  every  mark  of  favour  the  King  has  been 
so  good  to  confer  on  any  of  that  nation ;  and  he  is  little 
better  beloved  by  many  Englishmen,  even  of  those  who 
vote  with  him  and  serve  under  him.  His  power  being 
thus  universally  dreaded,  and  his  measures  being  thus 
universally  disliked,  and  your  Majesty  being  thought 
his  protectress ;  give  me  leave  to  say,  Madam,  the  odium 
incurred  by  his  oppressions  and  injustice  is  not  entirely 
confined  to  his  own  person :  and  as  everybody,  Madam, 
does  imagine  that  he  cannot  be  so  blind,  so  deaf,  and  so 
insensible  as  not  to  see,  hear,  and  know  himself  obnoxi- 
ous to  the  people  of  all  ranks  and  denominations  in  the 
kingdom — so  it  is  thought  the  only  resource  he  now  has 
is  to  throw  power  into  the  hands  of  the  Crown,  where 
he  must  take  refuge,  and  from  whence  alone  he  can 
hope  for  protection.  People  are  confirmed  in  this 
opinion  by  this  enslaving  scheme  of  Excises,  which  they 
neither  do  nor  can  think  upon  in  any  other  light.  And 
if  your  Majesty  thinks  the  English  so  degenerated,  and 
the  minds  of  the  people  so  enslaved,  as  to  receive  chains 
without  struggling  against  those  who  endeavour  to 
fasten  them ;  if  you  are  willing  to  risk  the  power  the 
law  has  given  to  the  Crown,  in  order  to  add  an  illegal 
authority  inconsistent  with  the  fundamental  principles 
of  this  Government ;  if  you  wish  to  do  it  and  think  it 


168  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VIII. 

can  be  done,  you  are  in  the  right  to  persevere  in  the 
maintenance  of  this  project  and  projector,  and  in  con- 
tradiction to  the  manifest  bent  of  the  nation,  in  con- 
tempt of  the  universal  clamour  of  the  kingdom,  in  de- 
fiance of  an  irritated  people,  and  in  a  thorough  disregard 
to  the  nature  of  the  Constitution  and  the  laws  of  a  free 
country.  That  he  absolutely  governs  your  Majesty 
nobody  doubts,  and  very  few  scruple  to  say  ;  they  own 
you  have  the  appearance  of  power,  and  say  you  are  con- 
tented with  the  appearance,  whilst  all  the  reality  of  power 
is  his,  derived  from  the  King,  conveyed  through  you, 
and  vested  in  him.  The  King  is  looked  upon  as  the 
engine"  of  his  minister's"ambltion,  and  your  interest  and 
influence  over  him  as  the  secret  springs  by  which  this 
minister  gives  motion  to  all  his  master's  actions.  No 
greater  proof  can  be  given  of  the  infinite  sway  this  man 
has  usurped  over  you,  Madam,  than  in  the  very  in- 
stance I  have  given  of  his  first  personal  injury  to  me, 
which  is  the  preference  he  has  given  Lord  Isla  to  me 
on  every  occasion,  both  here  and  in  Scotland :  for  what 
cannot  that  man  persuade  you  to,  who  can  make  you, 
Madam,  love  a  Campbell  ?  The  only  two  men  in  this 
country  who  ever  vainly  hoped  or  dared  to  attempt  to 
set  a  mistress's4  power  up  in  opposition  to  yours  were 
Lord  Isla  and  his  brother  the  Duke  of  Argyle ;  yet 
one  of  the  men  who  strove  to  dislodge  you  by  this  me- 
thod from  the  King's  bosom,  is  the  man  your  favourite 
has  thought  fit  to  place  the  nearest  to  his ;  a  man,  too, 
who  is  as  little  useful  in  his  public  character  as  amiable 
in  his  private  one ;  one  as  mean  in  his  conduct  as  in 

4  Mrs.  Howard.       See  the  grounds  for  this  statement,  in  the  Remi- 
niscences and  the  Suffolk  Correspondence,  i.  40,  &c. 


1733.  LORD  STAIR'S  REMONSTRANCE.  159 

his  aspect,  and  who  acts  no  more  like  a  man  of  quality 
than  he  looks  like  one ;  a  man  of  as  little  weight  as 
principle,  and  no  more  fit  to  be  trusted  with  any  com- 
mission that  requires  ability  and  judgment  than  with 
one  that  requires  honesty  and  fidelity." 

Here  the  Queen  interrupted  the  thread  of  Lord  Stair's 
invectives,  and  told  him,  in  the  first  place,  with  regard 
to  Lord  Isla  and  himself,  that  she  neither  was  nor  de- 
sired to  be  informed  of  the  causes  of  the  misunderstand- 
ings between  them ;  that  she  should  be  a  very  incom- 
petent judge  of  the  particulars  if  they  were  before  her, 
and  desired  not  to  be  made  acquainted  with  them,  be- 
cause she  should  be  as  unwilling  to  speak  her  opinion  if 
she  had  been  able  to  form  one,  as  she  was  now  to  enter 
into  the  dispute  without  having  any  opinion  about  it  at 
all ;  that  it  was  not  her  business  to  canvass  the  private 
characters  and  quarrels  of  those  the  King  thought  fit  to 
employ,  and,  therefore,  whenever  his  Lordship  spoke  of 
Lord  Isla  to  her,  she  desired  he  would  remember  he  was 
speaking  of  the  King's  servant  and  to  the  King's  wife. 

This  rebuke  silenced  Lord  Stair  on  Lord  Isla's  chap- 
ter, and  when  he  resumed  his  speech,  he  told  her  Ma- 
jesty, that  his  reason  for  saying  what  he  had  done,  was 
not  so  much  from  his  own  personal  resentment  to  Lord 
Isla,  as  to  let  her  Majesty  know  what  sort  of  men  these 
were,  and  how  the  world  thought  of  them,  who  had  the 
happiness  of  being  most  distinguished  by  the  honest  and 
judicious  minister  she  maintained ;  and  though  he  was 
not  allowed  to  tell  the  faults  of  those  this  minister  es- 
poused, he  hoped  at  least  he  might  be  at  liberty  to  speak 
the  merit  of  those  he  endeavoured  to  depress ;  and  if  he 
had  that  liberty,  the  list  would  consist  of  the  names  of 


170  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VIII. 

every  man  of  worth,  honour,  and  probity  in  her  Court. 
"  Your  Majesty  little  thinks  of  the  defection  there  will  be 
among  the  nobility  on  this  point.  I  know  it  to  be  such 
(for  it  is  not  conjecture)  as  will  startle  not  only  your 
minister  when  it  breaks  out,  but  even  his  master  and 
yourself.  I  know  it  will  be  such  as  will  make  it  impos- 
sible for  this  Bill  to  pass  the  Lords,  though  power  and 
corruption  may  force  it  through  the  Commons.  This 
being  the  case,  I  would  oppose  it  even  in  policy,  were 
my  conscience  quite  out  of  the  question ;  but  if  policy 
were  as  strong  on  the  other  side,  yet,  Madam,  I  think 
it  so  wicked,  so  dishonest,  so  slavish  a  scheme,  that  my 
conscience  would  no  more  permit  me  to  vote  for  it  than 
his  ought  to  have  permitted  him  to  project  it." 

When  Lord  Stair  talked  of  his  conscience  with  such 
solemnity,  the  Queen  (the  whole  conversation  being  in 
French)  cried  out — "  Ah,  my  Lord  I  ne  me  parlez  point 
de  conscience ;  vous  mefaites  e'vanouir."  Lord  Stair  was 
extremely  shocked  and  nettled  at  this  exclamation,  and 
said  he  hoped  no  action  of  his  had  ever  betrayed  any 
want  either  of  conscience  or  honour,  and  that  his  whole 
life  had  been  guided  by  the  strictest  laws  of  both :  and 
since  it  had  been  so,  he  assured  her  Majesty,  he  had  no 
notion  that  the  profligacy  of  mankind  could  be  such,  as 
to  make  it  possible  for  her  favourite  to  find  a  majority 
of  the  House  of  Commons  who,  with  repeated  obstinate 
injustice  and  a  shameless  violation  of  their  trust,  would 
persevere  in  passing  a  Bill  so  evidently  opposite  to  the 
inclinations  of  their  constituents,  so  destructive  of  their 
interests  and  their  liberties,  and  so  contradictory  to 
their  express  instructions  and  commands. 

"  Surely,  my  Lord,"  replied  the  Queen,  "  you  think 


1733.  THE  QUEEN'S  REPLY.  171 

you  are  either  talking  to  a  child  or  to  one  that  doats ; 
for  supposing  this  Bill  to  be  everything  which  you  have 
described  it  to  be,  do  you  imagine  I  should  be  weak 
enough  to  believe  that  you  would  oppose  it  for  the  rea- 
sons you  have  given  ?  or  that  it  would  be  natural  for 
you  to  think  that  these  arguments  you  have  mentioned 
would  weigh  with  anybody  ?  Do  you,  my  Lord,  pre- 
tend to  talk  of  the  opinion  of  electors  having  any  influ- 
ence on  the  elected  ?  You  have  made  so  very  free  with 
me  personally  in  this  conference,  my  Lord,  that  I  hope 
you  will  think  I  am  entitled  to  speak  my  mind  with 
very  little  reserve  to  you ;  and  believe  me,  my  Lord,  I 
am  no  more  to  be  imposed  upon  by  your  professions 
than  I  am  to  be  terrified  by  your  threats.  I  must  there- 
fore once  more  ask  you,  my  Lord,  how  you  can  have  the 
assurance  to  talk  to  me  of  your  thinking  the  sense  of 
constituents,  their  interest,  or  their  instructions  any 
measure  or  rule  for  the  conduct  of  their  representatives 
in  Parliament ;  or  if  you  believe  I  am  so  ignorant  or  so 
forgetful  of  all  past  proceedings  in  Parliament,  as  not 
to  know  that  in  the  only  occasion  where  these  consi- 
derations should  have  biassed  you,  you  set  them  all  at 
nought  ?  Remember  the  Peerage  Bill,  my  Lord.  Who 
then  betrayed  the  interest  of  their  constituents  ?  Who 
gave  up  the  birthright  of  their  constituents  ?  Who  de- 
prived their  constituents  of  all  chance  of  ever  taking 
their  turn  with  those  whom  they  then  sent  to  Parlia- 
ment ?  The  English  Lords  in  passing  that  Bill  were 
only  guilty  of  tyranny,  but  every  Scotch  Lord  was 
guilty  of  the  last  treachery;  and  whether  you  were  one 
of  the  sixteen  traitors,  your  own  memory,  I  believe,  will 
serve  to  tell  you  without  the  assistance  of  mine.  To 


172  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VIII. 

talk,  therefore,  in  the  patriot  strain  you  have  done  to 
me  on  this  occasion,  can  move  me,  my  Lord,  to  nothing 
but  laughter.  Where  you  get  your  lesson,  I  do  not 
want  to  know :  your  system  of  politics  you  collect  from 
the  *  Craftsman ;'  your  sentiments,  or  rather  your  pro- 
fessions, from  my  Lord  Bolingbroke  and  my  Lord 
Carteret — whom  you  may  tell,  if  you  think  fit,  that  I 
have  long  known  to  be  two  as  worthless  men  of  parts  as 
any  in  this  country,  and  whom  I  have  not  only  been 
often  told  are  two  of  the  greatest  liars  and  knaves  in  any 
country,  but  whom  my  own  observation  and  experience 
have  found  so.  If  you  think,  you  may  also,  by  way  of 
supplement,  let  Lord  Carteret  know  that  I  am  not  yet 
reduced  to  wanting  his  protection,  though  I  hear  he 
bragged  of  having  had  the  generosity  to  bestow  it  upon 
me  when  the  affair  of  the  Charitable  Corporation  was 
under  prosecution  in  the  House  of  Lords,  and  that  he 
saved  me  from  being  exposed  there.  For  the  rest,  my 
good  Lord,  as  an  old  acquaintance,  the  best  advice  I 
can  give  you,  if  you  are  a  friend  to  the  King,  is  to  de- 
tach yourself  from  his  enemies;  if  you  are  a  friend 
to  truth,  to  take  your  intelligence  for  the  future  from 
those  who  deal  in  it;  if  you  are  a  friend  to  honesty,  not 
to  herd  with  those  who  disclaim  it ;  and,  if  you  are  a 
friend  to  our  family,  never  to  cabal  with  those  who  look 
on  ours  and  the  Jacobites'  cause  as  things  indifferent  in 
themselves,  and  to  be  espoused  or  combated  in  no 
other  view,  and  on  no  other  motive,  than  as  this  or  that 
may  least  or  most  conduce  to  thwarting  or  gratifying 
their  own  private  avarice  and  ambition." 

Lord  Stair  said  he  perceived  her  Majesty  was  deter- 
mined ;  but  that  she  would  see  her  error,  and  he  hoped 


1733.  THE  QUEEN'S  REPLY.  173 

before  it  was  too  late.  He  worked  himself  up  again 
into  a  violent  passion,  and  took  his  leave  in  saying 
Madame,  vous  etes  trompee,  et  le  Roi  est  trahi. 

The  Queen,  one  evening  when  Lord  Hervey  came 
to  give  her  an  account  of  some  debate  in  the  House  of 
Lords  or  Commons  (which  he  did  constantly  through 
the  whole  Session),  told  him  every  circumstance  of  this 
conversation  in  the  manner  it  is  here  related  (except- 
ing that  of  Lord  Isla  and  the  Duke  of  Argyle  having 
set  up  the  power  of  a  mistress  in  opposition  to  hers, 
which  she  did  not  mention ;  that  was  a  particular  which 
Lord  Hervey  had  from  Sir  Robert  Walpole)  :  and  this 
account  agreeing  in  every  essential  part  with  that  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  gave  Lord  Hervey  of  the  rest  of  the 
conversation,  as  well  as  with  the  report  Lord  Stair 
made  of  it  to  his  friends,  I  believe  there  can  be  no 
doubt  but  that  the  greatest  and  most  material  part  of 
what  I  have  related  concerning  this  extraordinary  con- 
ference is  strictly  and  literally  true.  At  the  same  time 
that  the  Queen  let  Lord  Hervey  into  this  anecdote,  she 
told  him  Lord  Stair  had  desired  that  the  particulars  of 
this  conference  might  be  kept  secret,  which  she  pro- 
mised to  do  on  her  part  as  long  as  he  submitted  to  do 
so  on  his ;  but  finding,  by  private  intelligence,  joined 
to  a  public  incident,  that  Lord  Stair  had  bragged  to 
Lord  Carteret,  as  well  as  many  others,  of  the  strong 
things  he  had  said  to  her,  and  that  he  had  given  out  he 
had  staggered  her,  she  told  Lord  Hervey  she  looked 
upon  herself  as  freed  from  that  promise  of  secrecy — 
et  fai  pris  d'abord  la  premiere  occasion  d'egosiller 
tout. 

The  public  incident  which  convinced  her  Majesty  that 


174  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VIII. 

Lord  Stair  had  acquainted  Lord  Carteret  with  what 
had  passed  was  this : — in  debate  in  the  House  of  Lords 
on  the  affair  of  the  troops  for  this  year,  some  few  days 
after  this  interview,  Lord  Carteret,  by  a  little  declama- 
tory digression,  took  occasion  to  inveigh  against  Excises 
and  evil  ministers,  and  found  means  this  way  to  inter- 
weave in  his  speech  an  account  that,  when  France 
was  ruled  and  oppressed  by  Cardinal  Mazarin  sup- 
ported by  the  Queen  Mother  (then- Regent),  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  clamour  of  the  people  and  inclination  of 
the  whole  kingdom,  that  the  greatest  general  of  his  time, 
and  a  man  of  the  first  consideration  at  the  Court,  asked 
an  audience  of  the  Queen,  and  in  that  interview  told 
her,  "  Madam,  you  maintain  a  man  at  the  helm  that 
should  be  rowing  in  your  galleys" 

When  Lord  Hervey  told  the  Queen  of  this,  she  asked 
if  there  was  nobody  of  the  Court  side  in  the  House 
who  was  well  read  enough  in  the  history  of  those  times 
to  tell  Lord  Carteret,  from  the  Memoirs  of  the  Cardinal 
de  Retz,  that  the  Prince  of  Conde  (who  was  the  general 
Lord  Carteret  meant)  never  opposed  the  measures  of 
Cardinal  Mazarin  till  the  Cardinal  found  his  ambition 
so  insatiable  that  it  was  impossible  to  content  him,  and 
that  the  audience  that  Prince  asked  of  the  Queen  was 
in  order  to  impose  upon  her  in  the  same  manner  he 
had  endeavoured  to  impose  on  all  France,  which  was 
by  trying  to  persuade  everybody  that  the  effects  of  his 
private  resentment  were  only  the  consequences  of  his 
zeal  for  the  King  and  the  public  ? 

Lord  Hervey  said  he  was  sorry  none  of  her  servants 
were  so  capable  of  answering  Lord  Carteret  on  this 
part  of  French  history  as  he  found  her  Majesty  would 


1733.  CLAMOUR  AGAINST  THE  EXCISE.  175 

have  been ;  and  wished  she  had  been  present,  to  have 
given  any  of  them  this  hint,  and  to  have  said,  like 
Agrippina, — 

" Demure  une  voile,  invisible  et  presente, 

Je  fus  de  ce  grand  corps  1'anie  toute  puissante."  5 

The  Queen  laughed,  did  not  dislike  the  compliment, 
and  said  that  she  did  not  doubt  but  that  he  was  as  well 
versed  in  De  Retz  as  Racine,  and  that  if  he  had  been 
there,  she  should  not  have  been  wanted :  but,  said  she, 
as  you  often  tell  me  of  my  pride,  I  will  now  confess 
to  you  an  instance  of  it,  and  to  carry  on  the  parallel 
you  have  drawn  between  me  and  Agrippina,  will  own 
to  you  that  I  very  often  feel  myself,  in  conference  avec 
ces  impertinens — 

"  Fille,  femme,  et  mere  de  vos  maitres." 

Lord  Hervey  said  he  was  very  glad  her  pride  had  so 
great  a  pleasure  in  reflecting  on  that  which  all  her 
subjects  had  so  great  an  advantage  in  her  being. 

Lord  Stair  boasted  much  to  all  his  party,  who  circu- 
lated the  history,  of  the  bold  truths  he  told  the  Queen, 
and  the  strong  effect  they  seemed  to  have  upon  her. 
At  the  same  time  many  pamphlets  were  written  and 
dispersed  in  the  country,  setting  forth  the  dangerous 
consequences  of  extending  the  Excise  Laws,  and  in- 
creasing the  number  of  Excise-officers;  showing  the 
infringement  of  the  one  upon  liberty,  and  the  influence 
the  other  must  necessarily  give  the  Crown  in  elections. 
And  so  universally  were  these  terrors  scattered  through 
the  nation,  and  so  artfully  were  they  instilled  into  the 
minds  of  the  people,  that  this  project,  which  in  reality 

5  Britannicus,  a.  i.  s.  1. 


176  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VIII. 

was  nothing  more  than  a  mutation  of  two  taxes  from 
Customs  to  Excises,  with  an  addition  of  only  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty-six  officers  in  all  England  for  the  col- 
lection of  it,  was  so  represented  to  the  whole  country, 
and  so  understood  by  the  multitude,  that  there  was 
hardly  a  town  in  England,  great  or  small,  where  nine 
parts  in  ten  of  the  inhabitants  did  not  believe  that  this 
project  was  to  establish  a  general  Excise,  and  that  every- 
thing they  eat  or  wore  was  to  be  taxed ;  that  a  colony 
of  Excise-officers  was  to  be  settled  in  every  village  in 
the  kingdom,  and  that  they  were  to  have  a  power  to 
enter  all  houses  at  all  hours ;  that  every  place  and 
every  person  was  to  be  liable  to  their  search ;  and  that 
such  immense  sums  of  money  were  to  be  raised  by  this 
project,  that  the  Crown  would  no  longer  be  under  the 
necessity  of  calling  Parliaments  for  annual  grants  to 
support  the  Government,  but  be  able  to  provide  for 
itself,  for  the  most  part ;  and  whenever  it  wanted 
any  extraordinary  supplies,  that  the  Excise-officers,  by 
their  power,  would  be  able  at  any  time  to  choose  just 
such  a  Parliament  as  the  Crown  should  nominate  and 
direct. 

The  effect  these  suggestions,  inculcated  and  believed, 
must  have  on  the  minds  of  a  people  jealous  of  their 
liberties,  susceptible  of  impressions,  and  prone  to 
clamour,  is  easy  to  conceive.  Every  alarm  sounded 
from  the  faction  in  London  came  reverberated  by  a 
thousand  echoes  from  every  part  of  the  country ;  the 
whole  nation  was  in  a  flame,  and  fresh  fuel  was  con- 
stantly supplied  by  those  who  first  kindled  it,  to  keep 
it  blazing. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole   delayed  as  long  as  he  could 


1733.  POPULAR  DELUSION.  177 

bringing  the  proposal  into  Parliament,  in  hopes  the 
clamour  might  subside,  and  the  members  consequently 
be  less  intimidated  by  the  remonstrances  of  their  con- 
stituents ;  pamphlets  were  written,  too,  during  this 
delay,  on  the  side  of  Government,  and  sent  all  over 
England  by  the  Administration,  to  show  the  people  they 
had  been  imposed  upon,  blown  up  by  false  insinuations, 
and  that  the  project  was  nothing  more  than  a  scheme 
to  correct  frauds  committed  in  these  two  branches  of 
the  revenue,  tobacco  and  wine,  by  which  means  it  was 
proposed  to  raise  the  revenue  enough  to  continue  the 
reduction  of  the  land-tax  at  one  shilling  in  the  pound 
without  imposing  any  new  tax  on  the  subject  and  with- 
out increasing  any  tax  already  laid ;  but  merely  by 
this  alteration  in  the  method  of  collecting  two  duties 
already  granted,  which  the  consumer  and  fair  trader 
now  paid,  and  of  which  the  public  was  defrauded  by 
the  evaders  of  the  laws  and  the  illicit  dealers  in  these 
commodities. 

But  all  this  reasoning  was  to  no  purpose ;  the  people 
would  neither  hear  arguments,  examine  facts,  nor  believe 
demonstration  ;  and  the  universal  cry  of  the  kingdom 
was,  No  slavery — no  Excise — no  wooden  shoes! 

I  cannot  help  here  remarking,  that  upon  all  the 
Excise  duties  laid  by  Parliament  since  the  Restoration 
(and  some  there  have  been  in  every  reign  from  that 
time  to  this),  there  never  was  the  least  clamour  raised 
in  the  country,  or  any  opposition  to  them  in  Parlia- 
ment, on  any  other  foot  than  a  dispute  whether  they 
would  answer  the  charge  of  collection  by  their  produce. 
Those,  therefore,  who  accuse  Sir  Robert  Walpole  of 
want  of  penetration  in  not  foreseeing  the  difficulties 

VOL.  i.  N 


178  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  VIII. 

into  which  this  scheme  would  lead  him,  are  of  that  class 
(and  a  numerous  one  it  is)  who  imagine  that  every 
event  is  so  little  casual,  that  whatever  is,  could  not  have 
been  otherwise ;  and  of  course,  with  equal  folly,  impute 
all  success  to  prudence,  and  all  disappointments  to  indis- 
cretion. But  it  is  not  to  such  fools  that  I  write,  though, 
to  my  sorrow,  it  is  with  such  I  daily  converse — crea- 
tures who,  though  they  laugh  at  magic,  have  a  faith  in 
a  sort  of  terrestrial  astrology  (if  I  may  be  allowed  the 
expression),  and  fancy  every  incident  resulting  really 
from  accident  the  necessary  consequence  of  a  chain  of 
causes,  which  every  able  political  astrologer  might  fore- 
see: and  though  these  refining  commentators  have  a 
thousand  times  found  themselves  in  situations  both  of 
prosperity  and  distress,  without  being  able  to  account 
how  they  came  there,  yet  experience  teaches  them  in 
vain  the  fallacy  of  their  opinion,  and  they  still  continue 
to  impute  the  success  of  the  prosperous  to  contrivance, 
and  the  miscarriage  of  the  unfortunate  to  imprudence. 


1733.  MOBS  AT  WESTMINSTER.  179 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Mobs  at  Westminster — The  Excise  unpopular  in  the  House — Majorities 
decrease — Anxiety  of  the  King — His  views  of  Government — Influenced 
by  the  Queen — Lord  Scarborough's  remonstrance — Walpole  hesitates 
and  offers  to  retire — Spirit  of  the  King  and  Queen — Opposition  at 
Court — Her  notions  of  official  discipline — The  Excise  Scheme  abandoned 
— Riots — Complained  of,  in  Parliament,  and  turned  to  the  advantage 
of  the  Minister. 

AT  last  the  day  came  [  Wednesday,  14th  of  March'] 
when  this  Excise  proposition  was  to  be  canvassed  in 
Parliament;  it  was  reported,  the  night  before,  that 
thousands  of  people  would  come  down  next  day  to  the 
door  of  the  House  of  Commons,  to  petition  the  Mem- 
bers, as  they  passed,  to  reject  it:  and  menaces  were 
whispered  about  to  terrify  all  who  should  appear  for  it. 

To  prevent  the  mischief  that  might  be  apprehended 
from  such  multitudes  gathering  together  and  falling 
into  riot  and  tumult,  proper  directions  were  given  to 
the  justices  of  the  peace,  constables,  and  civil  magis- 
trates, to  attend  and  keep  the  peace ;  and  secret  orders 
were  likewise  given  both  to  the  horse  and  foot  Guards 
to  be  in  readiness  to  march,  in  case  of  exigence  and 
extremity,  at  a  moment's  warning. 

The  mob  came  down  to  Westminster,  but  not  in  so 
numerous  a  body  as  was  expected,  and  in  much  better 
order :  however,  there  were  enough  so  to  throng  and 
crowd  the  lobby  and  Court  of  Requests,  that  it  was  with 
the  utmost  difficulty  that  the  Members  of  the  House 
could  pass  in  and  out. 

N2 


180  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IX. 

After  a  long  debate,  which  lasted  till  one  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  the  question  was  carried  in  a  committee  of 
the  whole  House,  for  the  Excise  scheme,  by  a  majority 
of  61 ;  the  numbers  were  204  and  265. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole,  by  the  advice  of  all  his  friends, 
to  avoid  the  insults  that  some  of  this  rabble  might  have 
offered  him,  went  out  of  the  House  the  back  way,  through 
the  Speaker's  chamber,  to  Lord  Halifax's,1  where  he 
supped,  from  whence  he  came  away  privately,  after  the 
multitude  was  dispersed  and  all  quiet. 

This  multitude  was  kept  in  so  good  order,  that,  ex- 
cepting now  and  then  a  hiss  upon  some  of  the  Court 
party  when  they  came  out,  a  little  pointing  and  a  loud 
whisper  of  That 's  one  of  them !  there  was  very  little 
indecency  or  disorder  committed.  One  there  was  among 
these  people  ruder  than  the  rest,  whom  General  Wade 
took  by  the  collar,  but,  upon  his  submission  and 
entreaty,  the  General  let  him  go  again,  telling  him  he 
was  a  scoundrel  and  below  his  further  notice. 

Lord  Hervey  went,  as  soon  as  the  House  was  up,  to 
give  the  King  an  account  of  all  that  had  passed  within 
doors  and  without ;  the  King  was  so  anxious  and  so 
impatient,  that  he  had  made  Lord  Hervey  write  to  him 
from  the  House  at  five  o'clock  to  tell  him  what  face 
matters  wore. 

As  soon  as  Lord  Hervey  came  to  St.  James's  the 
King  carried  him  into  the  Queen's  bed-chamber,  and 
there  kept  him  without  dinner  till  near  three  in  the 
morning,  asking  him  ten  thousand  questions,  relating 

1  Lord  Halifax,  as  Auditor  of  the  Exchequer,  had  an  official  residence 
adjoining  the  House  of  Commons — the  same,  I  believe,  that  was  subse- 
quently appropriated  to  the  Speaker. 


1733.  EXCISE  UNPOPULAR.  181 

not  only  to  people's  words  and  actions,  but  even  to 
their  looks. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole  had  so  prepossessed  the  King 
in  favour  of  this  scheme,  that  if  it  had  been  an  act  to 
secure  and  settle  the  Crown  of  England  on  him  and 
his  posterity,  he  could  not  have  been  more  eager  in  the 
measure,  more  anxious  for  its  fate,  or  more  solicitous 
for  its  success. 

The  light  in  which  Sir  Robert  Walpole  had  repre- 
sented this  scheme  to  the  King  was,  that  since  he  had 
settled  the  peace  of  Europe  and  regulated  the  preten- 
sions of  all  the  great  Princes — since  he  had  shown  him- 
self absolute  master  of  that  balance  of  power  which 
England  ought  to  hold — and  that  the  wisdom  and  pru- 
dence of  his  counsels  had  adjusted  all  difficulties  and 
got  over  all  obstacles  arising  from  the  various  views 
and  claims  of  foreign  Princes — that  it  might  be  ex- 
pected of  him  he  should  now  turn  his  thoughts  towards 
making  the  best  use  he  could  of  this  success  abroad  by 
letting  it  contribute  to  the  ease  of  his  subjects  at  home ; 
that  to  do  that  in  the  most  popular  and  most  effectual 
manner  would  be  to  give  ease  in  the  land-tax,  as  it  was 
the  most  unequal  tax,  and  the  most  generally  com- 
plained of,  of  any  tax  now  subsisting;  and  as  this 
measure  would  make  every  landowner  and  country 
gentleman  a  zealous  friend  to  his  Government,  so  it 
would  be  the  glory  of  his  reign,  and  one  not  to  be 
paralleled  by  any  reign  since  the  Revolution ;  that  he 
had  reduced  the  land-tax  to  one  shilling  in  the  pound, 
which  was  not  only  lower  than  ever  it  had  been  since 
it  was  first  laid,  but  lower  than  the  most  sanguine  land- 
owner in  the  kingdom  ever  hoped  to  see  it. 


182  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IX. 

But,  besides  the  glory  and  the  popularity  of  this 
scheme,  there  was  a  consideration  which,  I  believe,  had 
its  weight  with  his  Majesty,  and  that  was,  that  if  this 
scheme  took  effect,  one-sixth  of  the  duties  on  tobacco 
and  wine  being  part  of  the  Civil  List  funds,  that  part 
of  his  revenue  would  of  course  be  increased  one-sixth 
of  whatever  gain  should  accrue  to  the  public  by  this 
mutation.  For  though,  to  cover  this  acquisition  to  the 
Crown,  it  was  made  part  of  the  scheme  that  the  Civil  List 
duty  should  still  be  payable  at  the  Customs,  yet  people 
easily  saw  through  that  thin  veil,  and  could,  without 
great  penetration,  reason  that  whatever  measures  were 
taken  to  prevent  the  running  of  these  commodities,  by 
making  them  liable  to  an  inland  duty  after  they  had  got 
clear  of  the  ports,  would  increase  this  duty  in  the  Cus- 
toms in  the  same  proportion  that  it  would  be  raised  in 
the  Excise,  since  the  merchant  and  proprietor  of  these 
commodities  would  never  run  any  risk  or  be  at  any 
expense  to  evade  the  Custom-house  officer  at  the  first 
gate,  when  at  so  many  more  afterwards  he  would  be 
equally  exposed  to  be  catched  by  the  Excise-officer. 

As  this  consideration  of  increasing  the  Civil  List 
had  weighed  with  the  King  to  espouse  this  scheme,  so 
Sir  Robert  Walpole  made  a  second  use  of  it  by  telling 
the  King  it  was  the  chief  reason  why  the  adverse  party 
opposed  it;  by  which  means  his  Majesty  was  induced 
to  look  on  this  opposition  to  the  scheme  as  more  per- 
sonal to  himself  than  to  his  minister,  as  there  was  an 
advantage  evidently  to  accrue  to  the  one,  without  the 
least  appearance  of  emolument  to  the  other. 

During  the  whole  progress  of  this  Bill,  which  lasted 
about  three  weeks,  the  King  was  under  the  greatest 


1733.  KING'S  ANXIETY.  183 

anxiety  for  the  event  of  it.  Lord  Hervey  and  Mr. 
Pelham  were  with  Him  and  the  Queen  almost  every 
day  to  give  them  accounts,  not  only  how  people  voted 
and  talked  in  the  House,  but  how  they  looked  and  how 
they  spoke,  and  how  they  caballed  in  the  town.  Every 
division  showing  a  decrease  in  the  majority,  the  King 
grew,  every  division,  more  and  more  uneasy.  Upon 
his  saying  one  night  to  Lord  Hervey  that  he  never 
knew  the  Opposition,  on  any  occasion  in  his  reign,  so 
strong,  so  sanguine,  and  so  insolent,  Lord  Hervey,  who 
had  a  mind  to  soften  the  difficulties  he  knew  the  Admi- 
nistration was  in,  put  his  Majesty  in  mind  of  the  Dun- 
kirk year,  and  said  he  thought  the  opposing  party  was 
much  stronger,  their  spirits  much  higher,  and  the 
ground  they  fought  on  much  better,  at  that  junction 
than  he  had  ever  known  them  at  any  other.  The  King 
with  some  warmth  replied,  "Pooh!  you  talk  of  a  time 
when  my  servants  lay  under  all  the  disadvantages  it 
was  possible  for  a  ministry  to  be  exposed  to.  In  the  first 
place,  it  was  so  early  in  my  reign,  that  nobody  knew 
whether  I  had  any  resolution  in  my  temper,  or  any 
steadiness  in  my  counsels,  or  not.  In  the  next  place,  the 
ministry  were  divided  and  torn  by  contention  among 
themselves ;  that  was  at  a  time  when  Townshend  was 
in  place,  and  was  giving  Walpole  all  the  trouble  he 
could,  both  in  the  Parliament  and  in  my  closet : 
Carteret  was  not  yet  discharged — there  were  a  thousand 
different  parties  among  my  ministers,  and  nobody  knew 
whom  I  would  support :  at  such  a  time  it  was  no  won- 
der my  business  met  with  obstructions,  or  that  it  was 
neglected,  when  every  one  that  should  have  done  it  had 
his  own  private  business  to  mind,  and  knew  not  what 


184  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IX. 

he  had  to  trust  to.  A  prince  who  will  be  well  served 
in  this  country,  must  free  his  minister  from  all  appre- 
hensions at  Court,  that  the  minister  may  give  all  his 
attention  to  the  affairs  of  his  master ;  which,  with  all 
the  support  that  master  can  give  him,  are  still  liable, 
from  the  nature  of  this  Government  and  the  capricious- 
ness  of  the  people,  to  ten  thousand  accidents  and  diffi- 
culties unknown  in  other  countries." 

I  mention  this  passage  to  show  how  much  the  Queen, 
by  frequently  inculcating  her  doctrine,  had  in  five 
years  changed  his  Majesty's  first  plan  of  government. 
His  design  at  his  first  accession  to  the  throne  was  cer- 
tainly, as  Boileau  says  of  Louis  XIV., — 

"  Seul,  sans  ministre,  k  1'exemple  des  Dieux, 
Faire  tout  par  sa  main  et  voir  tout  de  ses  yeux." 

He  intended  to  have  all  his  ministers  in  the  nature  of 
clerks,  not  to  give  advice,  but  to  receive  orders ;  and 
proposed,  what  by  experiment  he  found  impracticable, 
to  receive  applications  and  distribute  favours  through 
no  principal  channel,  but  to  hear  from  all  quarters,  and 
employ  indifferently  in  their  several  callings  those  who 
by  their  stations  would  come  under  the  denomination 
of  ministers.  But  it  was  very  plain,  from  what  I  have 
just  now  related  from  the  King's  own  lips,  as  well  as 
from  many  other  circumstances  in  his  present  conduct, 
that  the  Queen  had  subverted  all  his  notions  and 
schemes,  and  fully  possessed  his  Majesty  with  an 
opinion  that  it  was  absolutely  necessary,  from  the 
nature  of  the  English  Government,  that  he  should  have 
but  one  minister ;  and  that  it  was  equally  necessary, 
from  Sir  Robert's  superior  abilities,  that  he  should  be 
that  one.  But  this  work,  which  she  now  saw  com- 


1733.  KING'S  VIEWS.  185 

pleted,  had  been  the  work  of  long  time,  much  trouble, 
and  great  contrivance ;  for  though,  by  a  superiority  of 
understanding,  thorough  knowledge  of  his  temper,  and 
much  patience  in  her  own,  she  could  work  him  by  de- 
grees to  any  point  where  she  had  a  mind  to  drive  him, 
yet  she  was  forced  to  do  it  often  by  slow  degrees,  and 
with  great  caution ;  for,  as  he  was  infinitely  jealous  of 
being  governed,  he  was  never  to  be  led  but  by  invisible 
reins ;  neither  was  it  ever  possible  for  her  to  make  him 
adopt  her  opinion  but  by  instilling  her  sentiments  in 
such  a  manner  as  made  him  think  they  rose  originally 
from  himself.  She  always  at  first  gave  into  all  his 
notions,  though  never  so  extravagant,  and  made  him 
imagine  any  change  she  wrought  in  them  to  be  an 
afterthought  of  his  own.  To  contradict  his  will 
directly,  was  always  the  way  to  strengthen  it;  and  to 
labour  to  convince,  was  to  confirm  him.  Besides  all 
this,  he  was  excessively  passionate,  and  his  temper  upon 
those  occasions  was  a  sort  of  iron  reversed,  for  the 
hotter  it  was  the  harder  it  was  to  bend,  and  if  ever  it 
was  susceptible  of  any  impression  or  capable  of  being 
turned,  it  was  only  when  it  was  quite  cool. 

At  the  same  time  that  the  Queen  had  changed  his 
maxims  of  policy,  she  had  by  degrees  too  entirely 
altered  both  his  opinion  of  his  servants  and  his  affec- 
tion for  them.  Lord  Wilmington  and  Lord  Towns- 
hend,  whom  he  had  loved  and  admired,  he  now  con- 
temned and  disliked ;  the  one  he  had  discharged  from 
his  confidence,  though  he  still  kept  him  in  employment, 
and  the  other  he  had  dismissed  from  both.  His  way  of 
thinking,  and  his  behaviour  towards  Sir  Robert,  was 
full  as  much,  and  as  visibly,  changed  as  to  the  other 


186  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IX. 

two  ;  for,  instead  of  betraying  (as  formerly)  a  jealousy 
of  being  thought  to  be  governed  by  him — instead  of 
avoiding  every  opportunity  of  distinguishing  and  speak- 
ing to  him  in  public — instead  of  hating  him  whilst  he 
employed  him,  and  grudging  every  power  with  which 
he  armed  him  —  he  very  apparently  now  took  all 
occasions  to  declare  him  his  first,  or  rather  his  sole, 
minister ;  singled  him  out  always  in  the  Drawing-room  ; 
received  no  application  (military  affairs  excepted)  but 
from  him ;  and  most  certainly,  if  he  loved  anybody  in 
the  world  besides  the  Queen,  he  had  not  only  an  opi- 
nion of  the  statesman,  but  an  affection  for  the  man. 
Of  this  affection  he  gave  many  little  instances,  in  talk- 
ing of  him,  much  easier  to  be  perceived  than  described, 
as  they  are  things  that  would  make  no  figure  in  repeti- 
tion ;  but,  by  the  manner  and  at  the  times  in  which 
they  were  said,  it  was  very  plain  he  loved  as  well  as 
admired  him.  When  Lord  Hervey  (often  to  try  him) 
gave  him  accounts  of  attacks  that  had  been  made  on 
Sir  Robert  Walpole  in  the  House,  and  the  things  Sir 
Robert  had  said  in  defence  of  himself  and  in  retaliation 
on  his  adversaries,  the  King  would  often  cry  out,  with 
colour  flushing  into  his  cheeks  and  tears  sometimes  in 
his  eyes,  and  with  a  vehement  oath,  "  He  is  a  brave 
fellow ;  he  has  more  spirit  than  any  man  I  ever  knew." 
The  Queen,  if  she  was  by,  always  joined  in  chorus  upon 
such  occasions :  and  Lord  Hervey,  in  these  partial  mo- 
ments, never  failed  to  make  the  most  he  could  of  his 
friend  and  patron's  cause.2 

2  Lord  Hervey  adds  that  "  the  night  after  the  first  debate  on  the  To- 
bacco Bill  he,  amongst  many  other  things  which  had  passed  in  the  debate, 
told  the  King  and  Queen  that  Mr.  Pulteney  had  said  in  his  speech  that 


1733.  LORD  SCARBOROUGH'S  REMONSTRANCE.  187 

On  the  Monday  morning  [Sth  April]  before  that 
Wednesday  that  was  appointed  for  the  second  reading 
of  the  Bill,  Lord  Scarborough  came  to  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  to  let  him  know  that  he  found  the  clamour  so 
hot  and  so  general,  that  it  was  his  opinion  the  Adminis- 
tration ought  to  yield  to  it ;  that,  for  his  own  part,  how 
right  soever  he  might  think  this  scheme  in  an  abstracted 
light,  yet,  considering  the  turn  it  had  taken,  he  was 
determined  not  to  contribute  to  cram  it  down  the 
people's  throats ;  and  came  to  tell  Sir  Robert  that,  if  it 
should  be  forced  through  the  House  of  Commons,  and 
brought  into  the  House  of  Lords,  he  would  oppose 
it  there.  He  said,  by  the  best  information  he  could 
get,  the  dislike  of  this  scheme  was  almost  as  universal 
among  the  soldiery  as  the  populace,  and  that  the  mili- 
tary part  of  the  commonalty  were  as  much  prejudiced 
against  it  as  the  mercantile  people.  The  soldiers,  he 
said,  had  got  a  notion  that  it  would  raise  the  price  of 
tobacco,  and  upon  this  notion  were  so  universally  set 
against  the  scheme,  that  they  cursed  the  Administration 
and  the  Parliament,  murmured  treason  even  under  the 
walls  of  the  palace,  and  were  almost  as  ripe  for  mutiny 
as  the  nation  for  rebellion. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole  heard  him  with  a  great  deal  of 
temper  and  patience,  and  at  last  said,  "  My  dear  Lord, 
you  have  too  much  honesty  to  suspect,  and  consequently 
to  see,  how  little  there  is  in  some  who  bring  you  these 
tales,  or  get  them  conveyed  to  you,  and  are,  without 
knowing  it,  influenced  by  men  who  are  as  much  inferior 

the  inscription  on  Sir  R.  Walpole's  tomb  should  be,  "  This  is  the  man  who 
would  have  enslaved  his  country  by  an  Excise  !  "  at  which  the  King  was 
very  indignant. 


188  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IX. 

to  you  in  understanding  as  in  integrity.  We  both 
understand  one  another,  and  whatever  may  be  the  fate  of 
this  Bill,  I  have  nothing  but  this  to  desire  of  you — as  I 
am  your  friend,  and  wish  to  have  you  continue  mine — 
when  those  who  have  kindled  this  flame  and  fomented 
these  discontents  till  they  have  brought  things,  as  you  say, 
even  at  the  door  of  the  palace,  to  the  brink  of  rebellion — 
when  they  shall  receive  their  reward  for  that  conduct — 
do  not  you  make  their  cause  your  own,  or  sacrifice  your 
interest  to  those  who  have  throughout  this  whole  pro- 
ceeding had  no  regard  to  yours,  or  to  anything  but  the 
gratification  of  their  own  capricious  resentment." 

Lord  Hervey  came  into  the  room  just  as  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  had  pronounced  these  words,  and  soon  after 
Lord  Scarborough  took  his  leave.  Sir  Robert  imme- 
diately told  Lord  Hervey  what  had  passed,  who  said 
he  was  not  so  much  surprised  as  Sir  Robert  seemed  to 
be ;  "  For  you  know,  Sir,  I  long  ago  told  you  Lord 
Chesterfield  governed  him  as  absolutely  as  he  does 
any  of  his  younger  brothers :  and  though  you  may 
think  Lord  Scarborough  loves  you  personally,  which 
was  the  security  you  told  me  you  depended  upon  for 
his  never  undertaking  or  joining  in  anything  against 
your  interest,  yet  I  own  I  see  very  little  difference 
between  that  attachment  not  existing  at  all  or  existing 
in  a  degree  inferior  to  the  influence  of  those  who  wish 
to  prevent  its  operating.  But,  upon  the  whole,  Sir, 
what  resolution  will  you  take,  or  have  you  taken,  with 
regard  to  dropping  or  going  on  with  the  Bill  ?  "  Sir 
Robert  said  he  must  see  the  King  and  the  Queen,  and 
be  determined  what  course  to  steer  by  the  temper  and 
disposition  in  which  he  found  them. 


1733.  CONFERENCE  WITH  THE  KING.  189 

Had  Lord  Scarborough,  from  apprehension  only, 
said  this  in  private  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  it  would 
have  left  people  some  room  to  excuse  his  conduct,  and 
think  his  proceeding  fair  and  honourable ;  but  before 
he  made  this  declaration  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole  he 
had  already  told  his  opinion  and  the  resolution  to 
several  people,  who  had  circulated  the  news  of  this  con- 
siderable deserter  through  all  the  town.  He  certainly 
ought  not,  after  the  part  he  had  acted,  to  have  opened 
his  lips  on  this  subject  to  any  one  but  Sir  Robert ;  for, 
as  he  had  been  so  warm  a  promoter  of  this  scheme,  and, 
till  three  days  before  it  was  laid  aside,  on  all  occasions 
asserting  the  propriety  of  it,  most  people  were  of 
opinion  his  defection  proceeded  from  the  increased 
number  of  objectors  to  the  Bill,  and  not  from  the  dis- 
covery of  any  new  objections. 

This  evening  [9th  April]  Sir  Robert  Walpole  saw 
the  King  in  the  Queen's  apartment,  just  before  the 
Drawing-room,  and  the  final  resolution  was  then  taken 
to  drop  the  Bill ;  but,  as  there  was  a  petition  to  come 
from  the  City  of  London  against  it  the  next  day,  it  was 
resolved  that  the  Bill  should  not  be  dropped  till  that 
petition  was  rejected,  lest  it  should  be  thought  to  be 
done  by  the  weight  and  power  of  the  City. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole,  in  coming  from  this  conference, 
called  on  Lord  Hervey  (whose  lodgings  were  just  at 
the  foot  of  the  Queen's  back  staircase),  to  let  him  know 
what  had  passed.  Sir  Robert  was  extremely  disconcerted, 
and  seemed  under  full  as  much  anxiety  as  he  described 
the  King  and  the  Queen :  Lord  Hervey  told  him  he  had 
been  twice  sent  for  that  afternoon  by  the  King,  but, 
not  knowing  in  what  strain  to  talk  to  him,  as  he  was 


190  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IX. 

ignorant  whether  Sir  Robert  intended  to  go  forward  or 
retreat,  and  that  he  should  be  asked  millions  of  ques- 
tions relating  to  what  he  saw,  what  he  heard,  and  what 
he  thought,  so,  to  avoid  the  difficulties  this  catechism 
would  lay  him  under,  he  had  kept  out  of  the  way.  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  bade  him  be  sure  to  stick  to  the  neces- 
sity there  was  of  not  seeming  to  yield  this  point  at  the 
instigation  of  the  City,  and  left  all  the  rest  to  his  own 
discretion.  But  though  Sir  Robert  communicated  to 
Lord  Hervey  many  particulars  of  the  conversation  he 
had  just  held  with  the  Queen,  there  was  one  very  mate- 
rial circumstance,  as  natural  for  Lord  Hervey  to  guess 
as  for  the  Minister  to  be  a  little  ashamed  and  reluctant 
to  repeat,  on  which  he  was  quite  silent ;  a  circumstance 
which  the  Queen  afterwards  told  Lord  Hervey,  and 
which  Sir  Robert  Walpole  never  knew  Lord  Hervey  had 
been  made  acquainted  with ;  for  as  the  one  from  pride 
or  shame  had  forborne  to  communicate,  so  the  other  in 
policy  did  not  care  to  let  his  benefactor  and  friend  have 
the  mortification  of  knowing  that  what  he  wished  should 
be  a  secret  to  everybody  was  not  so  to  him ;  and  though 
many  people  would  have  reasoned  differently  on  this 
occasion,  and  have  acquainted  Sir  Robert  Walpole  with 
what  they  had  learned,  in  order  to  make  a  merit  of 
their  taciturnity  afterwards ;  yet  Lord  Hervey  judged 
otherwise,  and  looked  upon  this  secret  to  be  of  the 
nature  of  some  which  all  those  concerned  in  them  hate 
you  more  for  having  it  in  your  power  to  tell,  than  they 
can  love  you  for  not  making  use  of  that  power. 

The  circumstance  concealed  was  this: — when  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  told  the  Queen  the  clamour  against 
this  Bill  was  grown  to  that  height  that  there  was  no 


1733.  OFFERS  TO  RETIRE.  191 

contending  with  it  any  longer,  he  said  there  were  two 
ways  of  trying  to  appease  it,  the  one  by  dropping  the 
Bill  (which  would  not  be  sure  to  quiet  the  commotions 
the  prosecuting  of  it  had  caused),  the  other  was  by  drop- 
ping the  projector  as  well  as  the  project ;  which,  whatever 
bad  consequences  such  yielding  to  clamour  might  have 
in  futurity,  would  certainly  have  this  immediate  good 
effect, — that  for  the  present,  at  least,  all  troubles  would 
subside,  and  everything  be  calm  and  still.  What 
troubles  the  struggles  for  power,  among  those  who  had 
raised  these  storms  to  subvert  his  interest,  might  occa- 
sion in  the  Palace,  and  how  headstrong  this  concession 
to  a  mob  might  afterwards  make  that  mob  in  future 
administrations,  were  considerations,  he  said,  which  he 
would  not  suggest,  for  fear  he  might  be  thought  to  urge 
them  as  arguments  for  his  own  continuance  in  employ- 
ment :  whereas  he  was  so  far  from  desiring  to  be  in  her 
Majesty's  service,  if  she  thought  it  was  not  for  her  ser- 
vice, that  he  should  lay  down  and  retire  with  all  the 
satisfaction  in  the  world ;  and,  if  her  Majesty  thought 
it  for  the  advantage  of  the  King's  affairs,  or  that  it 
would  facilitate  in  any  manner  the  King's  business  in 
Parliament,  that  he  was  ready  that  very  night  to  quit ; 
and  should  never  impute  his  disgrace  to  her  Majesty's 
want  of  kindness  towards  him,  but  merely  to  his  own 
ill  fortune.  The  Queen  chid  him  extremely  for  having 
so  ill  an  opinion  of  her  as  to  think  it  possible  for  her  to 
be  so  mean,  so  cowardly,  and  so  ungrateful,  as  to  accept 
of  such  an  offer ;  and  assured  him  that  as  long  as  she 
lived  she  would  not  abandon  him.  When  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  made  the  same  offer  to  the  King,  his  Majesty 
(as  the  Queen  told  me)  made  the  most  kingly,  the 


192  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IX. 

most  sensible,  and  the  most  resolute  answer  that  it  was 
possible  for  a  wise,  a  just,  and  a  great  prince  to  make, 
to  the  most  able  and  to  the  most  meritorious  servant: 
but  whether  she  dictated  the  words  before  he  spoke 
them,  or  embellished  them  afterwards,  I  know  not.  As 
well  as  I  can  remember  them,  they  were  to  this  effect : — 
That  Sir  Robert  had  served  him  honestly  and  faith- 
fully ;  that  his  Majesty  knew  all  this  bustle  was  owing 
to  personal  enmity  or  contention  for  power  in  the  admi- 
nistration of  his  affairs ;  that  he  knew  Sir  Robert  Wai- 
pole's  reason  for  concerting  the  land-tax  scheme  was, 
that  it  might  be  the  glory  of  his  reign  to  take  off  the 
land-tax,  which  had  been  a  burden  laid  on  the  landed 
interest  in  consequence  of  the  Revolution,  and  which 
never  since  the  Revolution  any  prince  had  been  able  to 
remit ;  that  it  was  true  he  had  miscarried  in  that  de- 
sign, but  that  his  having  done  so  had  made  his  Majesty 
not  angry  with  him  for  failing  in  this  undertaking,  but 
with  those  who  had  obstructed  it :  he  said  he  was  very 
sensible  Sir  Robert  Walpole  could  have  had  no  interest 
of  his  own  in  concerting  or  pushing  this  scheme,  and 
that  since  he  had  done  it  only  for  the  honour  and  ser- 
vice of  his  master,  that  that  master  would  never  forsake 
him,  but  that  they  should  stand  or  fall  together.  This, 
as  the  Queen  told  me,  was  the  King's  answer  to  Sir 
Robert  when  he  made  him  the  offer  of  quitting ;  and 
that  Sir  Robert  should  be  more  reluctant  to  own  to 
Lord  Hervey  that  he  had  made  this  offer  of  resigning, 
than  ready  to  boast  of  its  being  so  received,  I  think  was 
odd,  but  so  it  was. 

When  Lord  Hervey  went  up  to  the  Drawing-room 
he  saw  her  Majesty  had  been  weeping  very  plentifully ; 


1733.  OPPOSITION  AT  COURT.  193 

and  found  her  so  little  able  to  disguise  what  she  felt, 
that  she  was  forced  to  pretend  head-ache  and  vapours, 
and  break  up  her  quadrille  party  sooner  than  the  usual 
hour. 

When  the  Drawing-room  was  over,  the  King,  after 
dismissing  the  rest  of  his  servants,  called  Lord  Hervey 
into  the  Queen's  bed-chamber,  and  began  with  great 
eagerness  to  ask  him  where  he  had  been  all  day,  whom 
he  had  seen,  and  what  he  had  heard,  and  how  our 
friends  and  how  our  foes  both  looked  ?  Lord  Hervey 
told  him  he  found  the  most  zealous  friends  to  the  Excise 
began  to  be  of  opinion  that,  considering  what  had  hap- 
pened at  this  end  of  the  town,  the  clamour  at  the  other 
grew  too  hot  to  be  struggled  with.  The  King  asked 
him  what  he  meant  by  "  the  things  that  had  happened 
at  this  end  of  the  town."  Lord  Hervey  said  he  meant 
only  what  was  reported,  and  did  not  pretend  to  say 
how  far  those  reports  were  grounded  upon  truth. 
"  Why,  what  is  reported  ?"  "  Since  your  Majesty  com- 
mands me  to  tell  you,  I  shall.  It  is  reported,  Sir,  by 
the  enemies  to  this  Bill,  that  several  of  the  Cabinet 
Council  and  several  of  your  Majesty's  domestic  ser- 
vants have  asked  audiences  to  let  your  Majesty  know 
that  they  will  not  positively  vote  for  the  Bill ;  and  the 
comment  that  is  made  on  this  report  is,  that  if  those 
who  have  the  honour  to  serve  your  Majesty  in  such 
near  and  high  stations  did  not  know  this  declaration 
would  not  be  displeasing  to  you,  they  would  certainly 
not  have  ventured,  so  explicitly  at  least,  to  have  made 
it.  This  being  told  and  almost  generally  believed,  the 
dependence  on  so  strong  a  party  at  the  present  juncture 
under  your  Majesty's  roof  has  given  the  Opposition 

VOL.  i.  o 


194  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IX, 

such  spirits  and  such  strength  that  it  is  my  firm  opinion 
the  Bill  cannot  be  carried,  and,  consequently,  that 
the  friends  to  it  had  better  consent  to  the  dropping 
it,  than  fight  till  its  enemies  grow  strong  enough  to 
reject  it." 

The  King  asked  "  whom  of  his  Council  and  his 
family  people  named  for  having  made  these  declara- 
tions." Lord  Hervey  said  several  of  those  whom  his 
Majesty,  when  he  had  done  him  the  honour  to  talk  on 
this  subject  before,  had  himself  named  as  no  well- 
wishers  to  the  scheme ;  but  that  the  two  that  people 
talked  most  of  at  present,  as  they  were  reckoned  the 
last  that  had  absolutely  declared  themselves,  were  Lord 
Clinton  [a  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber]  and  Lord  Scarbo- 
rough [Master  of  the  Horse].  The  King  replied  with 
great  warmth,  "  It  is  a  lie ;  those  rascals  in  the  Opposi- 
tion are  the  greatest  liars  that  ever  spoke.  Clinton  has 
been  with  me,  but  Scarborough  never  has  mentioned 
the  Excise  to  me  at  all,  and  for  these  last  five  or  six 
days  he  has  kept  out  of  my  way.  I  have  not  so  much 
as  seen  him,  nor  have  any  of  my  servants  dared  to  tell 
me  they  would  not  do  what  I  would  have  them." 

The  King,  after  walking  about  the  room  in  great 
anger  and  disorder  for  some  time,  and  saying  several 
things  with  great  vehemence  that  showed  plainly  he 
was  both  vexed  and  staggered,  dismissed  Lord  Hervey 
and  charged  him  to  write  an  account  next  day,  from  the 
House  of  Commons  during  the  debate,  what  face  things 
wore,  what  turn  they  were  like  to  take,  and  how  both 
our  friends  and  our  foes  behaved. 

The  petition  of  the  City  was  presented  the  next 
morning  [IQth  April~\,  and  attended  by  the  citizens  in 


1733.  CITY  PETITION.  195 

a  train  of  coaches  that  reached  from  Westminster  to 
Temple  Bar.  The  prayer  of  the  petition  was,  that  they 
might  be  heard  by  their  counsel  against  the  Bill.  The 
debate  upon  it  lasted  till  midnight,  and  though  this  was 
the  strongest  point  for  the  Court  that  had  yet  been  de- 
bated in  the  whole  progress  of  the  Bill,  as  it  was  contrary 
to  the  rules  and  orders  of  the  House  to  comply  with 
petitions  of  this  nature  against  taxes  that  are  going  to 
be  laid,  yet  even  on  this  point  the  Court  party  was  so 
weak  that  the  rejection  of  this  extraordinary  demand 
was  carried  by  a  majority  only  of  seventeen  voices  [214 
to  197]. 

The  Opposition  was  so  elate  on  this  victory  (for  such 
it  was,  properly  speaking)  that  they  concluded  nothing 
less  was  to  happen  upon  it  than  a  total  change  of  the 
Administration,  commencing  by  the  immediate  dismis- 
sion and  disgrace  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  who  was 
never  more  struck  with  any  defeat  or  less  able  to  dis- 
guise his  being  so  than  this  night.  He  stood  some 
time  after  the  House  was  up,  leaning  against  the  table 
with  his  hat  pulled  over  his  eyes,  some  few  friends  with 
melancholy  countenances  round  him,  whilst  his  enemies 
with  the  gaiety  of  so  many  bridegrooms  seemed  as 
just  entering  on  the  enjoyment  of  what  they  had  been 
so  long  pursuing. 

As  soon  as  the  whole  was  over,  Mr.  Pelham  went  to 
the  King,  and  Lord  Hervey  to  the  Queen,  to  acquaint 
them  with  what  had  passed.  When  Lord  Hervey  at 
his  first  coming  into  the  room  shook  his  head  and  told 
her  the  numbers,  the  tears  ran  down  her  cheeks  and 
for  some  time  she  could  not  utter  a  word ;  at  last  she 
said  "  It  is  over,  we  must  give  way ;  but,  pray,  tell  me  a 

o  2 


196  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IX. 

little  how  it  passed."  Lord  Hervey  said,  that  without 
any  partiality  he  could  assure  her  Majesty,  in  point  of 
argument,  reasoning,  and  good  speaking,  that  the 
Court  party  had,  without  any  comparison,  entirely  the 
victory  in  the  debate ; 3  but  that  he  thought  this  no 
comfort,  since  the  only  inference  to  be  drawn  from  it 
was,  how  determined  our  foes  and  how  faltering  our 
friends  must  be  when  in  such  a  point  the  one  could 
venture  so  strenuously  to  attack  and  the  other  were 
reduced  so  faintly  to  defend  us ;  but  he  said  it  was  not 
to  be  wondered  at  that  the  numbers  of  the  opponents  to 
this  Bill  should  increase  when  everybody  now  believed 
that  the  majority  of  the  King's  Council  had  ranged 
themselves  in  that  class,  and  that  my  Lord  Boling- 
broke's  party  at  St.  James's  was  more  numerous  than 
at  Dawley.4  "  A  great  many  in  the  King's  service, 
Madam,  are  said  openly  to  have  declared  themselves 
against  this  measure,  and  many  more  are  thought  to 
have  taken  the  quiet  part  of  lying  by  only  till  things 
are  ripe  for  a  revolution  in  the  ministry,  at  which  junc- 
ture it  is  expected  they  will  break  forth  and  show 
themselves  not  less  inveterate  enemies  to  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  than  the  others,  though  they  have  had  a  little 

3  All  the  prominent  men  at  each  side  spoke  : — 

For  the  Petition.  Against  it. 

Sir  John  Bernard.  Sir  Robert  Walpole. 

Mr.  Sandys.  Mr.  Horace  Walpole. 

Mr.  Gibbon.  Mr.  Winnington. 

Mr.  Bootle.  Solicitor-general  Talbot. 

Mr.  Pulteney.  Attorney-general  Yorke. 

Sir  William  Wyndham.  Sir  William  Yonge. 

Mr.  Plumer.  Mr.  Henry  Pelham. 

Mr.  Heathcote. 

Mr.  Wyndham. 
*  Bolingbroke's  country-house. 


1733.  OFFICIAL  DISCIPLINE.  197 

more  caution  in  appearing  so ;"  but  thus  much  Lord 
Hervey  said  he  would  venture  to  affirm,  that  neither 
Sir  Robert  Walpole  nor  any  minister  who  should  suc- 
ceed him  would  ever  be  able  to  carry  on  the  King's 
business  upon  that  foot ;  for  if  the  subordinate  ministers 
were  to  play  a  safe  game,  by  either  underhand  op- 
posing or  acting  a  lukewarm  part  in  sustaining  what 
was  thought  expedient  for  the  King's  service,  in  such 
cases,  though  the  minister  would  always  be  the  first 
sacrifice,  yet  the  power  of  the  Crown  must  in  some 
degree  suffer  too ;  and  what  ruined  the  one  must  at  the 
same  time  greatly  distress  the  other.  The  Queen  said 
he  was  certainly  in  the  right ;  that  discipline  was  as 
necessary  in  an  administration  as  an  army;  that  mutiny 
must  no  more  go  unpunished  in  the  one  than  the  other, 
and  that  refusing  to  march  or  deserting  ought  to  be 
looked  upon  in  the  same  light. 

Whilst  she  was  saying  this  the  King  (who  had  dis- 
missed Mr.  Pelham)  came  in,  and  the  Queen  made 
Lord  Hervey  repeat  to  the  King  all  he  had  been  saying 
to  her.  The  King  heard  willingly,  but  that  night  said 
very  little;  he  asked  many  questions,  but  was  much 
more  costive  than  usual  in  his  comments  upon  the 
answers  he  received  to  them ;  however,  when  he  asked 
Lord  Hervey  if  he  could  remember  some  of  those  who 
had  swelled  the  defection  that  day,  as  Lord  Hervey 
repeated  the  following  names,  his  Majesty  tacked  the 
following  remarks  to  them : — Lord  James  Cavendish, 
"  a  fool ,-"  Lord  Charles  Cavendish,  "  he  is  half  mad ;" 
Sir  William  Lowther,  "a  whimsical  fellow ;"  Sir  Tho- 
mas Prendergast,  "an  Irish  blockhead ,•"  Lord  Tyr- 
connel,  "  a  puppy  that  never  votes  twice  together  on  the 


198  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IX. 

same  side"'*  There  were  more,  which  I  have  now 
forgot,  but  something  in  the  same  style  his  Majesty  had 
to  say  on  every  deserter  that  was  named.  As  soon  as 
Lord  Hervey  was  dismissed  he  went  to  supper  at  Sir 
Robert  Walpole's,  who  had  assembled  about  a  dozen 
friends  to  communicate  the  resolution  taken  of  giving 
up  the  Bill.  After  supper,  when  the  servants  were 
gone,  Sir  Robert  opened  his  intentions  with  a  sort  of 
unpleased  smile,  and  saying  "  This  dance  it  will  no  far- 
ther go,  and  to-morrow  I  intend  to  sound  a  retreat; 
the  turn  my  friends  will  take  will  be  to  declare  they 
have  not  altered  their  opinion  of  the  proposition,  but 
that  the  clamour  and  the  spirit  that  has  been  raised 
makes  it  necessary  to  give  way,  and  that  what  they  now 
do  is  not  owning  what  they  have  done  to  be  wrong, 
but  receding  for  prudential  reasons  from  what  they  still 
think  as  right  as  ever." 

On  this  text  he  preached  for  some  time  to  this  select 
band  of  his  firmest  friends,  and  then  sent  them  to  bed 
to  sleep  if  they  could. 

On  the  morrow  [  1 1  tli  April\  when  the  order  of  the  day 
for  the  second  reading  of  the  Tobacco  Bill  was  read,  Sir 
Robert  got  up  arid,  after  a  very  long  and  artful  speech, 
proposed  the  putting  it  off  for  two  months.  The  anti- 
Excise  party,  not  satisfied  with  this  victory,  but  flushed 
with  conquest,  insolent  in  their  success,  and  solicitous 
to  push  their  triumph,  said  it  was  not  sufficient  to  drop 
such  a  Bill  in  this  soft  manner;  that  so  wicked  an 
attack  upon  the  liberties  of  British  subjects  ought  to 
be  treated  in  a  different  manner ;  that  it  ought  to  be 
stigmatized  with  every  mark  of  ignominy  that  could  be 

5  They  had  all  originally  voted  for  the  Bill. 


1733.  KIOTS.  199 

put  upon  it;  that  rejecting  it  in  the  most  peremptory 
manner  was  the  part  which  it  became  a  House  of 
Commons,  jealous  of  the  rights  and  tenacious  of  the 
liberties  of  the  people,  to  act  on  this  occasion;  and 
that  nothing  less  would  appease  the  nation.  Sir 
William  Wyndham,  therefore  (who  led  the  van  of 
these  florid  declaimers  on  this  popular  topic),  insisted 
on  a  previous  question,  whether  the  postponing  question 
proposed  by  Sir  Robert  should  be  then  put  or  not,  and 
declared  his  reason  for  being  against  putting  the  main 
question  then  was,  because  he  intended  afterwards  to 
move  that  of  rejection. 

But  this  conduct,  though  it  did  not  weaken  their 
triumph  without  doors,  lost  them  many  friends  within ; 
several  of  those  who  had  been  originally  for  the  Bill 
and  were  now  come  to  wish  it  laid  aside,  being  much 
more  desirous  to  carry  that  point  without  a  division, 
than  to  be  forced  to  appear  against  what  at  first  they 
had  so  zealously  espoused.6  After  a  long  debate,  there- 
fore, the  opposing  party,  perceiving  they  had  endea- 
voured to  lead  their  new  troops  farther  than  they  cared 
to  advance,  gave  up  the  rejecting  the  Bill,  and  sub- 
mitted without  a  division  to  the  gentler  method  at  first 
proposed  by  Sir  Robert  Walpole  of  postponing  the 
farther  consideration  of  it  for  two  months. 

The  anti-Excise  mob,  who  had  filled  the  lobby  and 
Court  of  Requests7  rather  fuller  to-day  than  any  other 


6  Twenty-seven  Members  who  had  supported  the  Bill  changed  their 
votes. — Hist.  Reg. 

7  The  Court  of  Requests  was  a  large  and  very  ancient  hall  of  the  palace 
of  Westminster,  subsequently  appropriated  to  the  House  of  Lords,  who  sat 
there  till  the  fire  of  1834.     It  has  been,  since  that  event,  occupied  by  the 
Commons. 


200  LOUD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IX. 

in  which  this  affair  had  been  under  consideration,  fol- 
lowed the  example  of  their  friends  within  doors,  and 
with  correspondent  insolence  in  their  demeanour  greeted 
every  member  as  he  passed  whom  they  knew  to  have 
been  for  the  Excise  with  ironical  thanks,  hissings,  halloo- 
ing, and  all  other  insults  which  it  was  possible  to  put 
upon  them  without  proceeding  to  blows. 

Brigadier  Churchill  and  Lord  Hervey  having  run 
this  mercantile  gauntlet,  had  both  (though  separately) 
the  same  thought,  and  concluded  the  agreeable  distinc- 
tions paid  to  them  would  naturally  be  heaped  sevenfold 
on  their  friend  and  patron ;  they  both,  therefore, 
stemmed  this  torrent  back  again,  returned  into  the 
House,  told  Sir  Robert  what  had  passed,  and  prepared 
him  for  what,  if  he  would  expose  himself,  he  must  ex- 
pect to  meet.  They  desired  him  to  avoid  it  as  he  had 
done  the  first  night,  and  go  through  Lord  Halifax's ; 
but  he  said  there  was  no  end  of  flying  from  such 
menaces,  and  that  the  meeting  dangers  of  this  kind  was 
the  only  way  to  put  an  end  to  them,  reasoning,  perhaps, 
as  Suetonius  says  Caasar  was  thought  to  do  when  he  was 
desired  to  avoid  giving  opportunity  to  conspirators 
against  his  life :  "  Insidias  undique  imminentis  subire 
semel  confessum  satius  essequam  cavere  semper "  ("  It 
is  better  once  to  confront  danger  than  to  be  always 
avoiding  it "). 

Surrounded,  therefore,  by  Lord  Isla,  Lord  Hervey, 
Brigadier  Churchill,  his  son  [Edward],  two  or  three 
more  friends,  and  two  servants,  he  presented  himself  to 
these  rioters,  who  made  so  great  a  disorder,  notwith- 
standing the  protection  of  this  circle  immediately  round 
him,  and  in  spite  of  a  lane  of  forty  or  fifty  constables, 


1733.  WALPOLE  ASSAULTED.  201 

who  were  placed  there  to  secure  every  member  a  free 
and  unmolested  passage,  that  between  the  pressings  of 
the  mob  to  insult  him  and  the  zeal  of  the  civil  magis- 
trates to  defend  him,  there  was  such  jostling  and 
struggling,  that  had  anybody  fallen  down  they  must  in- 
evitably have  been  trampled  to  death.  The  oaken 
sticks  and  constables'  staffs  were  so  flippant  over  the 
heads  of  friends  and  enemies,  without  any  possibility  of 
distinction,  that  many  blows  were  given  and  received  at 
random.  But  nobody  of  the  Walpole  faction  was  hurt 
or  wounded  excepting  one,  Mr.  Cunningham,8  a  Scotch- 
man, in  the  breast,  Mr.  Ned  Walpole  in  the  arm,  and 
Lord  Hervey  on  the  forehead. 

With  much  difficulty  Sir  Robert  at  last  got  to  his 
coach  and  went  home.  Lord  Hervey  went  to  St. 
James's,  stayed  with  the  King  and  Queen  two  hours, 
and  told  them  everything  that  had  passed  in  the  House, 
but  said  not  one  word  of  what  had  happened  out  of  it, 
not  knowing  whether  Sir  Robert  Walpole  would  think 
it  most  for  his  interest  to  complain  of  the  injury  or  to 
sink  the  affront.  Lord  Hervey  knew  it  would  always 
be  time  enough  to  tell  the  story,  but  if  once  told  there 
would  be  no  recalling  it ;  and  therefore  left  it  in  Sir 
Robert's  option  to  determine,  as  his  own  judgment  and 
inclination  should  direct,  whether  it  should  be  secreted 
or  published. 

The  next  morning  early  he  went  to  Sir  Robert  Wal- 
pole to  acquaint  him  with  the  silent  part  he  had  acted, 
and  his  reasons  for  it.  Sir  Robert  thanked  him  ex- 

s  I  presume  Henry  Cunningham,  M.P.  for  Stirlingshire,  "Commissary- 
General  in  Scotland," — "  who,"  says  Tindal,  "  had  the  courage  to  draw  his 
sword  and  keep  off  the  mob  till  his  friend  escaped.'' 


202  LOUD  IIEIiVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IX. 

tremely,  but  said  the  resolution  was  taken  to  complain 
in  the  House  of  what  had  passed  ;  and,  pursuant  to  this 
resolution,  this  incident  was  so  well  managed,  the  insult 
to  the  House  so  artfully  set  forth,  and  every  part  so  well 
acted  by  the  dramatis  personse  in  this  Parliamentary 
farce,  that  on  the  relation  made  first  by  Lord  Hervey, 
then  by  Mr.  Pelham,  and  then  by  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
to  the  House,  this  accidental  scuffle  was  treated  as  a 
deep-laid  scheme  for  assassination,9  whilst  the  resentment 
against  such  proceedings  was  so  well  improved,  and  the 
whole  thing  taken  up  with  so  high  a  hand,  that  the 
House  came  nemine  contradicente  into  three  or  four 
resolutions,  that  condemned,  in  the  strongest  terms,  all 
actors,  abettors,  promoters,  or  encouragers  of  these 
riotous,  tumultuous  transactions ;  and,  to  crown  all,  a 
supplemental  order  was  made  by  the  House  that  the 
City  members  should  carry  copies  of  these  resolutions  to 
the  Lord  Mayor  that  he  might  communicate  them 
throughout  his  jurisdiction.  Sir  John  Bernard,  one  of 
the  City  members,  having  the  day  before  declared  that 
he  wished  this  multitude  at  the  doors  of  the  House  were 
ten  thousand,  and  the  citizens  all  along  having  fomented 
the  riots  and  encouraged  these  applications  to  Parlia- 
ment, it  was  particularly  mortifying  to  them  and  their 
representatives  to  have  their  triumph  on  this  occasion 

9  Horace  Walpole,  of  course,  adopted  that  version,  but  mistakes  the  night 
of  the  event.  After  mentioning  a  former  not  very  probable  design  of  having 
Sir  Robert  murdered  by  a  mob,  he  proceeds  :  "  Such  an  attempt  was  ac- 
tually made  in  1733,  at  the  time  of  the  famous  Excise  Bill.  As  the  minister 
descended  the  stairs  of  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  night  on  which  he 
carried  the  bill,  he  was  guarded  on  one  side  by  his  son  Edward,  and  on  the 
other  by  General  Charles  Churchill,  but  the  crowd  behind  endeavoured  to 
throw  him  down,  as  he  was  a  bulky  man,  and  trample  him  to  death  ;  and  that 
not  succeeding,  they  tried  to  strangle  him  by  pulling  his  red  cloak  tight,  but 
fortunately  the  strings  broke  by  the  violence  of  the  tug." — Reminiscences. 


1733.  LORD  HERVEY'S  SPEECH.  203 

turned  into  a  vote  of  censure ;  but  as  strong  as  the  City 
party  had  been  two  days  before  in  the  House,  the  cur- 
rent was  now  turned,  and  the  stream  too  strong  against 
them  for  the  rhetoric  of  any  of  their  advocates  and  par- 
tisans to  divert  its  course. 

The  illuminations,  mobs,  bonfires,  and  disorders  that 
there  had  been  in  the  City  the  night  before,  when  Sir 
Robert  Walpole,  with  a  fat  woman  (meant  for  the 
Queen),  were  burnt  in  effigy,  contributed  almost  as 
much  as  what  had  happened  in  the  Court  of  Requests 
to  exasperate  every  body  against  the  conduct  of  the 
citizens. 

The  general  cry  was  that  the  liberty  of  speech,  the 
freedom  of  debate,  and  the  very  essence  of  Parliament 
were  at  an  end  if  the  House  of  Commons  suffered  itself 
to  be  actuated  by  any  foreign  influence  whatever,  or 
permitted  anything  but  their  own  wisdom  to  turn  the 
balance  in  their  determinations;  that  much  had  been 
formerly  said  in  debates  on  the  Pension  Bill  how  neces- 
sary it  was  to  ward  against  the  pecuniary  corrupt  in- 
fluence of  the  Crown,  but  that  the  intimidating  influence 
of  a  mob  at  the  doors  of  the  House,  though  the  other 
extreme,  was  equally  destructive  of  that  authority  and 
independence  which  the  Commons  ought  to  maintain, 
and  which  was  essential  not  only  to  their  dignity  as  part 
of  the  legislature,  but  essential  also  to  the  preservation 
of  the  constitution  on  the  free  and  flourishing  foot  upon 
which  it  now  stood. 

Lord  Hervey  in  his  speech  said,  that  if  these  insolent 
encroachments  of  the  populace  were  suffered  to  grow 
and  were  given  way  to  in  this  manner — if  the  opinion  of 
the  rabble  was  to  be  taken  on  the  subject-matter  of 


204  LOliD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  IX. 

everything  debated  here,  and  their  clamour,  and  not  our 
judgment,  to  make  decisions — in  a  little  time  he  should 
expect  to  see  Acts  of  Parliament  passed  in  London  as 
the  Plebiscite10  were  passed  in  Rome ;  and  instead  of  the 
representatives  of  the  people  with  decency  and  method 
considering  what  was  proper  and  fit  to  be  done,  that  he 
supposed  he  should  see  the  Speaker  at  Charing-Cross  or 
the  Stocks-market  proposing  laws  to  a  tumultuous  mob, 
who,  like  the  Roman  plebeians,  would  enact,  rescind, 
promulgate,  and  repeal,  make,  and  break  laws,  just  as 
the  caprice  of  their  present  temper  and  the  insinuations 
of  their  present  leaders  should  instigate  and  direct.  In 
short,  this  incident  had  given  such  a  turn  to  the  spirit 
of  the  Commons,  that  the  Court  party  this  day  might 
have  done  whatever  they  would.  But  as  this  was  the 
first  time,  so  I  believe  one  may  venture  to  say  it  will  be 
the  last  that  ever  a  first  minister  found  any  advantage 
from  being  mobbed. 

As  it  was  universally  believed  that  this  riot  was  fo- 
mented by  the  upper  sort  of  citizens,  and  put  in  practice 
by  the  inferior,  so  the  names  of  merchants  and  traders 
that  had  all  this  winter,  whenever  they  were  mentioned, 
put  the  whole  House  in  an  uproar  with  zeal  in  their 
favour,  had  now  lost  all  their  virtue.  The  Commons, 
and  the  country  gentlemen  in  particular,  grew  jealous  of 
their  own  power,  were  afraid  of  the  ill  effects  that  might 
attend  the  letting  any  class  of  men  in  to  share  it,  and 
began  to  think  it  was  high  time  to  curb  that  spirit  which 
they  had  contributed  to  raise. 

Besides  this,  as  there  were  many  who  had  been  for 
dropping  this  Bill  merely  from  apprehending  the  danger 

1°  Laws  passed  by  the  people  without  the  concurrence  of  the  Senate. 


1733.  JACOBITE  REJOICINGS.  205 

of  riot  and  clamour — many  more  who,  without  being 
enemies  to  Sir  Kobert  Walpole,  were  against  it  from 
prudential  views  to  their  elections,  and  because  they  did 
not  dare  to  be  for  it ;  so  both  these  classes  of  people — the 
first  from  a  desire  to  discountenance  tumult,  and  the 
other  from  regard  to  him  whom  they  had  opposed  with 
regret — were  ready  to  join  in  any  resolutions  that  should 
demonstrate  their  opposition  to  the  Bill  not  to  have 
been  personal  or  to  raise  clamour,  and  that  should  show 
their  dislike  was  to  the  project  and  not  to  the  projector. 

For  a  fortnight  after  the  rejection  of  this  Bill,  nothing 
was  heard  of  but  rejoicings  in  all  the  great  towns,  and 
various  indications  of  the  people's  enmity  to  the  scheme 
and  its  abettors,  as  well  as  their  joy  on  its  miscarriage 
and  their  gratitude  to  its  opponents.  This  joy  was  car- 
ried so  far  at  Oxford,  that  for  three  nights  together, 
round  the  bonfires  made  there,  the  healths  of  Ormond, 
Bolingbroke,  and  James  the  Third  were  publicly  drank ; 
and  so  much  treason  talked,  and  so  many  disorders  com- 
mitted, by  the  students  as  well  as  the  townsmen,  that  the 
Vice-Chancellor's  authority,  joined  to  that  of  the  civil 
magistracy,  were  hardly  sufficient  to  quell  the  tumults. 

These  treasonable  riots,  and  mixing  the  Crown  in  the 
present  disputes,  gave  the  friends  of  the  minister  an 
opportunity  of  saying  that  the  Excise  scheme  was  not 
the  real  cause  of  all  the  clamour  that  sheltered  itself 
under  that  pretence,  but  that  the  disaffected  to  this 
Government  took  this  occasion,  and  made  that  their 
plea,  for  raising  disturbances  and  kindling  feuds  in  the 
kingdom,  by  which  they  hoped  to  distress  if  not  to  over- 
turn the  Government. 


206  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  X. 


CHAPTER  X. 

Walpole  resolves  to  punish  official  mutineers— Lords  Chesterfield  and 
Clinton  dismissed — Character  of  the  other  Ministers  and  Courtiers — The 
Prince  of  Wales  and  his  Friends  hostile — Walpole  assembles  his  Party 
and  harangues  them — Triumph  in  the  Commons — South  Sea  Question  in 
the  Lords — Deserters — Bishop  Hoadley. 

IN  the  mean  time  Sir  Robert  Walpole  having  experi- 
enced how  dangerous  it  had  been  to  suffer  his  enemies 
at  Court  to  be  talking  and  plotting  against  him  with  im- 
punity, and  to  leave  them  at  quiet  in  their  employments 
whilst  they  were  making  him  so  uneasy  in  his,  resolved 
to  show  that  the  lenity,  indolence,  fear,  or  policy  that 
had  hitherto  prevailed  so  far  as  to  make  him  acquiesce 
under  such  usage,  was  now  at  an  end,  and  that  he  was 
able  both  to  discern  and  punish  all  those  who  ventured 
to  treat  him  in  this  manner.  The  first  sacrifices  made 
to  these  his  new  maxims  of  government  were  Lord 
Chesterfield  and  Lord  Clinton.1  The  Duke  of  Grafton 
was  sent  from  the  King  (the  very  next  day  after  the 
House  of  Commons  came  to  those  resolutions  concerning 
the  riots)  to  demand  the  Steward's  staff  of  the  first ;  and 
one  of  the  Secretaries  of  State  was  at  the  same  time 
ordered  to  write  to  the  last,  to  let  him  know  the  King 
had  no  farther  occasion  for  his  services  either  as  Lord 


1  Hugh  Fortescue,  in  whose  favour  the  dormant  barony  of  Clinton  was 
called  out  of  abeyance  in  1721,  and  who  was  in  1746  created  Earl  of  Lin- 
coin.  He  died  without  issue. 


1733.  DISMISSALS.  207 

of  the  Bedchamber  or  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Devonshire.2 
It  was  as  much  a  matter  of  wonder  in  the  town,  how  so 
insignificant  a  creature  as  Lord  Clinton,  when  he  was 
dismissed  from  Court,  could  contrive  to  make  himself 
considerable  enough  to  be  turned  out,  as  it  was  at  his 
entrance  there  how  he  had  been  thought  of  consequence 
enough  ever  to  be  taken  in.  A  more  moderate  genius 
could  not  be  found  in  all  the  hereditary  possessors  of 
ennobled  folly  throughout  the  whole  peerage,  his  kins- 
man, my  Lord  Falmouth,  not  excepted.  He  was  a  man 
of  a  mean  aspect,  a  meaner  capacity,  but  meanest  of  all 
in  his  inclinations :  his  dialect  and  his  whole  conversation 
was  a  heap  of  vulgarisms,  both  as  to  sentiment  and 
expression,  and  his  only  mark  of  thinking  was  his 
pursuit  and  love  of  money. 

Lord  Chesterfield  wrote  the  King  a  letter  next  morn- 
ing, of  which  he  gave  me  the  following  copy.3  The 
King  sent  him  no  answer ;  and  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  to 
whom  the  King  showed  it,  and  who  did  not  know  I  had 
seen  it,  told  me  that  Chesterfield  had  written  the  King 
a  letter,  extremely  laboured,  but  not  well  done. 

As  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole  pushing  out  Lord  Ches- 
terfield, and  at  this  juncture,  he  was  certainly  not  to  be 
blamed  for  it,  since  it  was  indeed  full  time  for  him,  if  he 
had  power,  to  make  some  examples  among  those  who 
distressed  and  opposed  him  at  Court ;  for  hitherto,  in  this 
reign,  all  his  known  ill-wishers  faring  as  well  as  his  friends, 


2  Sir  Robert  gave  an  additional  proof  of  his  Court  favour  and  power  by 
the  appointment  of  his  son,  Lord  Walpole,  to  the  Lord  Lieutenancy  of 
Devon,  vice  Lord  Clinton. 

3  This  copy  does  not  appear. 


208  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  X. 

it  became  the  interest  of  every  one  to  be  thought  his  foe, 
since  without  losing  them  anything  in  present,  that  cha- 
racter secured  them  a  reversionary  interest  in  case  of  a 
change  with  those  who  should  succeed.  As  affairs  now 
stood  at  Court,  almost  all  the  great  offices  and  employ- 
ments were  filled  up  by  men  who,  though  they  did  not 
directly  vote  against  the  present  measures,  yet  took  the 
liberty  of  talking  very  freely  against  them ;  and  neither 
had,  nor  desired  to  be  thought  to  have,  any  great  cordi- 
ality towards  Sir  Robert  Walpole.  The  Dukes  of 
Devonshire,  Grafton,4  and  Newcastle  were  the  only 
three  I  can  name  who  either  professed  themselves  his 
friends  or  acted  as  such — a  triumvirate  whose  friendship 
was  much  more  considerable  from  their  titles  and  estates 
than  from  any  assistance  their  judgment  was  capable  of 
giving  in  private  council,  or  their  oratory  in  public 
assemblies.  The  two  first  were  mutes,  and  the  last 
often  wished  so  by  those  he  spoke  for,  and  always  by 
those  he  spoke  to. 

As  to  Lord  Harrington,  the  other  Secretary  of  State, 
he  had  reduced  himself  to  a  state  of  annihilation :  he 
was  absolutely  nothing — nobody's  friend,  nobody's  foe, 
of  use  to  nobody,  and  of  prejudice  to  nobody.  There 
was  something  very  singular  both  in  this  man's  acquisi- 
tion of  fame  and  his  loss  of  it ;  for  when  he  was  at  the 
Court  of  Spain,  without  doing  anything  there  that  might 
not  have  been  transacted  by  a  common  clerk,  all  parties 


4  Charles,  second  duke,  born  in  1683,  now  Lord  Chamberlain — "  a 
pretty  gentleman"  says  Mackay — "  a  slobberer  without  one  good  quality," 
adds  Swift. 


1733.  MALCONTENTS.  209 

at  home  flattered  and  courted  him.  People  talked, 
heard,  and  read  of  nothing  but  Lord  Harrington ;  and 
as  soon  as  he  came  over,  and  was  made  Secretary  of 
State,  the  sound  of  his  name  began  to  die  away :  he  was 
forgotten  in  his  eminence — seen  every  day,  and  never 
mentioned. 

As  for  my  Lord  President  of  the  Council,  the  con- 
temptible Earl  of  Wilmington,  he  hated  Sir  Robert  in 
his  heart ;  and  though  he  did  not  dare  to  speak  against 
him  himself,  approved  and  caressed  those  that  did ;  and 
if  anybody  else  should  have  courage  enough  to  attack 
him,  or  strength  enough  to  pull  him  down,  no  man  in 
England  wished  better  success  to  such  an  undertaking 
than  Lord  Wilmington,  or  would  be  more  ready  to 
trample  on  Sir  Robert  if  it  prevailed. 

The  Duke  of  Dorset,  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland, 
was  in  the  same  situation  and  way  of  thinking  as  my 
Lord  President.  He  hated  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  without 
having  received  any  injury,  and  wished  him  out,  without 
proposing  any  advantage  from  it;  for  let  who  would 
succeed  him,  the  Duke  of  Dorset  or  Lord  Wilmington 
could  not  be  more,  and  in  all  probability  would  have 
been  less.  When  Lord  Chesterfield  was  turned  out,  he 
said  people  might  imagine  his  conduct  had  been  rash 
and  indiscreet;  but  that  if  my  Lord  Wilmington  and 
the  Duke  of  Dorset  had  not  acted  like  real  knaves,  he 
had  not  behaved  like  a  seeming  fool.  This  declaration, 
as  well  as  many  other  occurrences  at  that  time,  made 
people  imagine  that  these  two  men  had  given  great  hope, 
if  not  strong  assurances,  to  the  opposing  party,  that 
when  matters  were  ripe  for  a  revolt  they  would  join 
them. 

VOL.  I.  P 


210  LOUD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  X. 

The  Duke  of  Argyle,5  who  was  at  this  time  Master 
of  the  Ordnance,  Governor  of  Portsmouth,  and  had  a 
regiment  of  horse,  was  not  better  satisfied  than  the  rest. 
As  he  was  an  ambitious  man,  he  envied  Sir  Robert 
Walpole ;  as  he  was  a  military  man,  he  disliked  him ; 
and  as  a  Scotchman,  he  hated  him.  His  pride  made 
him  detest  the  possessor  of  any  power  superior  to  his 
own ;  and  as  the  opinion  of  his  own  weight  and  merit, 
joined  to  an  insatiable  avarice,  made  him  think  he  never 
could  have  his  due  in  honorary  employments  or  enough 
in  lucrative  ones,  so  he  was  always  asking  and  always 
receiving,  yet  never  obliged  and  never  contented. 

The  Duke  of  Bolton's  being  out  of  humour,  and  Sir 
Robert  Walpole's  declared  enemy,  considering  what  he 
held  from  the  favour  of  the  Court  under  this  administra- 
tion, would  have  been  more  extraordinary  than  all  the 
rest,  if  it  had  not  been  for  that  great  and  common  solu- 
tion for  the  many  otherwise  unaccountable  riddles  in 
people's  conduct,  which  was  his  being  a  great  fool ;  but 
this  explains  a  multitude  of  difficulties  in  judging  of 
multitudes  of  people,  as  well  as  the  Duke  of  Bolton, 
for  when  one  can  once,  without  hesitation,  pronounce  a 
man  absolutely  a  fool,  to  wonder  at  any  of  his  actions 
afterwards,  or  seek  a  reason  for  them,  is  only  putting 
oneself  in  his  class ;  and  I  am  no  more  surprised  to  see 

5  John,   second,  and  usually  called  the   great,  Duke  of  Argyle,  cele- 
brated by  Pope — 

"  Argyle  the  state's  whole  thunder  born  to  wield, 
And  shake  alike  the  senate  and  the  field." 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  Lord  Hervey's  testimony  seems  to  corroborate  the 
judgment  passed  on  him  in  the  notes  to  the  Suffolk  Correspondence,  that 
there  was  reason  to  suspect  "that  this  great  duke  was,  in  his  political 
life,  but  a  petty  intriguer,  a  greedy  courtier,  and  a  factious  patriot." — 
vol.  ii.  p.  119. 


1733.  MALCONTENTS.  211 

an  interested  fool  act  against  his  interest,  than  I  am  to 
see  a  blind  man  go  out  of  his  way.  The  Duke  of 
Bolton  was  at  this  time  Governor  of  the  Isle  of  Wight, 
Hanger  of  the  New  Forest,  and  had  a  regiment ;  yet 
with  all  this  the  Duke  of  Bolton  was  not  satisfied,  for 
being  as  proud  as  if  he  had  been  of  any  consequence 
besides  what  his  employments  made  him,  as  vain  as  if 
he  had  some  merit,  and  as  necessitous  as  if  he  had  no 
estate,  so  he  was  troublesome  at  Court,  hated  in  the 
country,  and  scandalous  in  his  regiment.  The  dirty 
tricks 6  he  played  in  the  last  to  cheat  the  Government 
of  men,  or  his  men  of  half-a-crown,  were  things  unknown 
to  any  Colonel  but  his  Grace,  no  griping  Scotsman 
excepted.  As  to  his  interest  in  Parliament  by  the 
members  he  nominally  made  there,  these  were  all  virtu- 
ally made  by  the  Court,  as  they  were  only  made  by  him 
in  consequence  of  the  powerful  employments  he  held 
from  the  Court.7 

In  all  this  Excise  affair  the  Prince  in  public  acted  a 
silent,  quiet  part ;  and  Dodington,  as  his  first  minister, 
followed  an  example  which  in  all  probability  was  set 
him  by  his  own  dictates.  However,  by  Dodington's 
never  speaking  in  the  House  for  the  Excise,  and  by  Mr. 

6  This  is  alluded  to  in  one  of  the  satiric  ballads  attributed  to  Sir  C.  H. 
Williams — 

"  Now  Bolton  comes  with  beat  of  drums, 

Though  fighting  be  his  lothing, 
He  much  dislikes  both  guns  and  pikes, 
But  relishes  the  clothing." 

7  Coxe  places  at  this  time,  and  to  the  immediate  account  of  the  Excise 
scheme,  the  dismissal  of  the  Dukes  of  Bolton  and  Montrose,  and  of  the 
Lords  Burlington,  Marchmont,  Stair,  and  Cobham  ;  but  we  shall  see  that 
these  dismissals  (though  no  doubt  originally  influenced  by  the  opposition 
of  those  Lords  to  the  Excise)  took  place  somewhat  later,  and  on  a  different 
point. 

p2 


212  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  X. 

Townshend8  (domestic  favourite  and  Groom  of  the  Bed- 
chamber to  the  Prince)  voting  against  it,  and  by  the 
distinctions  the  Prince  showed  on  all  occasions  to  Lord 
Cobham,  Lord  Stair,  Lord  Chesterfield,  and  all  that 
were  the  most  violent  against  this  scheme,  it  was  not 
difficult  to  guess  what  his  Eoyal  Highness's  opinion  of 
it  was,  or  which  way  his  wishes  pointed.  The  King,  as 
Sir  Robert  Walpole  told  me,  made  him  the  offer  of 
obliging  the  Prince  to  turn  out  Mr.  Townshend,  which 
Sir  Robert  refused.  He  at  the  same  time  told  me,  that 
if  it  were  not  for  fear  of  making  a  breach  between  the 
King  and  his  son,  he  both  could  and  would  turn  out 
Dodington ;  "  for  this,"  added  he,  "  is  the  second  time 
that  worthy  gentleman  has  proposed  to  rise  by  treading 
upon  my  neck." 

But  notwithstanding  this  disposition  of  most  of  the 
great  officers  of  the  Crown  towards  Sir  Robert  Walpole, 
and  notwithstanding  the  unpopularity  which  all  ministers 
incur  who  have  been  long  vested  with  power — notwith- 
standing the  particular  run  against  him  in  the  country 
on  account  of  the  Excise  scheme,  and  notwithstanding 
his  defeat  in  the  prosecution  of  it  in  Parliament — yet 
the  absolute  declaration  of  the  Crown  in  his  favour,  by 
these  early  and  explicit  marks  (the  dismissions  of  Lord 
Chesterfield  and  Lord  Clinton),  saved  the  Ministry ;  for 
this  put  a  damp  on  people's  expectations  of  a  change, 
which  expectations,  joined  to  the  clamours  of  the  dis- 
obliged, and  the  vigorous  attacks  of  those  who  reckoned 

8  Colonel  William  Townshend,  third  son  of  Charles  Viscount  Towns- 
hend. He  had  also  the  lucrative  office  of  Usher  of  the  Exchequer,  which, 
on  his  death  in  1738,  Sir  Robert  gave  to  his  son  Horace,  and  that  with  two 
or  three  other  smaller  sinecures  made  him  an  income  of  above  6000/.  a  year. 
—  Quart.  Rev.  vol.  Ixxiv.  p.  399. 


1733.  THE  COURT  SUPPORTS  WALPOLE.  213 

themselves  next  oars,  would,  without  this  express  de- 
claration of  the  Crown  to  support  Sir  Robert,  have  in- 
fallibly got  the  better  of  him. 

Many  thought  that  the  Queen  imagined  her  power 
with  the  King  depended  at  this  time  on  her  being  able 
to  maintain  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  consequently  that  she 
looked  on  his  cause  as  her  own,  and  thought  their  inte- 
rests were  so  inseparably  interwoven,  that  whatever  hurt 
the  one  must  strike  at  the  other ;  but  these  conjectures 
were  mistaken :  the  Queen  knew  her  own  strength  with 
the  King  too  well  to  be  of  this  opinion,  or  to  apprehend 
the  loss  of  her  power  would  have  been  the  consequence 
of  the  loss  of  his.  The  future  Ministry  would  certainly 
have  been  of  her  nomination,  in  case  of  a  change,  as 
much  as  the  present,  and  if  they  had  subsisted,  as  much 
at  her  devotion,  for  had  she  found  them  less  so,  their 
reign  would  not  have  been  long. 

But  it  is  very  probable  her  pride  might  be  somewhat 
concerned  to  support  a  minister  looked  upon  in  the 
world  as  her  creature,  and  that  she  might  have  a  mind 
to  defeat  the  hope  Lady  Suffolk  *  might  have  conceived 
of  being  'able  to  make  any  advantage  of  the  King's 
seeing  himself  reduced  by  the  voice  of  the  people  to 
dismiss  a  man  whom  her  private  voice  had  so  long  con- 
demned. Besides  this,  both  the  King  and  the  Queen 
were  possessed  with  an  opinion  that  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
was,  by  so  great  a  superiority,  the  most  able  man  in  the 
kingdom;  that  he  understood  the  revenue,  and  knew 
how  to  manage  that  formidable  and  refractory  body, 
the  House  of  Commons,  so  much  better  than  any  other 

9  Mrs.  Howard  had  become  Lady  Suffolk  in  1731. 


214  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  X. 

man,  that  it  was  impossible  for  the  business  of  the  Crown 
to  be  well  done  without  him. 

However,  the  Opposition  having  gained  this  victory 
over  him  and  his  Excise  scheme,  notwithstanding  the 
obstinacy  of  the  Court  in  maintaining  him,  thought  they 
should  still  carry  their  point  and  force  the  Court  to  give 
him  up,  provided  they  could  show  the  King  that  the 
representatives  of  the  people  were  as  much  against  this 
man  in  their  hearts  as  the  people  themselves,  and  that 
the  Parliament  was  not  better  inclined  to  him  than  the 
mob. 

In  order  to  effect  this,  a  motion  was  made  in  the 
House  by  the  Opposition  for  appointing  a  committee  of 
one-and-twenty  persons  to  be  chosen  by  ballot  to 
examine  into  the  frauds  committed  in  the  Customs. 

This  motion  Mr.  Pelham  unwarily  gave  into ;  for  the 
very  same  people  to  deny  a  committee  being  appointed 
to  examine  into  these  frauds,  which,  to  justify  the  Excise 
scheme,  they  had  represented  so  notorious,  was  certainly 
impossible;  but  what  the  Court  party  ought  to  have 
insisted  on  was,  that  this  committee  should  be  a  com- 
mittee of  the  whole  House — they  ought  to  have  stuck 
to  that,  and  not  at  this  juncture  to  have  trusted  the  de- 
termination of  so  important  an  affair  to  the  dark  juggle 
of  a  ballot. 

The  consenting  to  this  motion  was  an  imprudence  in 
the  Court  party,  but  not  a  greater  than  that  committed 
by  those  who  might  have  reaped  the  advantage  of  it ; 
for  when  this  ballot  was  agreed  to,  the  opponents,  instead 
of  lying  by  for  this  battle  in  masquerade,  which  was  to 
be  fought  the  week  after,  led  their  troops  to  fight  in  the 
interim  with  bare  faces  on  a  petition  from  the  druggists 


1733.  WALPOLE'S  SPEECH.  215 

to  relax  the  Excise  laws,   on  which  question   the  anti- 
courtiers  were  beaten  by  a  majority  of  250  to  100. 

I  shall  say  nothing  more  on  what  passed  previous  to 
this  ballot,  or  what  was  thought  of  it,  or  what  was  ex- 
pected from  it,  because  I  cannot  explain  it  better  than 
by  giving  a  copy  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  speech  to  the 
Whigs,  who,  the  night  before  this  ballot,  were  all  sum- 
moned to  a  meeting 10  at  the  Cockpit,  in  order  to  agree 
on  the  list  that  should  be  sworn  in  by  them  the  next 
day.  As  I  only  took  this  speech  down  from  my 
memory,  and  never  saw  one  word  of  it  but  that  night  at 
the  Cockpit,  it  will  be  very  imperfect,  and  must  want 
much  of  the  energy  and  many  of  the  ornaments  with 
which  it  was  pronounced.  I  begged  Sir  Robert  to  give 
me  a  copy,  but  he  assured  me,  upon  his  word  and 
honour,  that  he  had  never  put  one  syllable  of  it  in 
writing. 

SIR  ROBERT  WALPOLE'S  SPEECH. 

"  GENTLEMEN, — The  reason  of  your  being  assembled  here 
is  to  consider  of  a  ballot  appointed  for  to-inorrow,  to  choose  a 
committee  to  examine  into  the  frauds  and  abuses  in  the  Cus- 
toms to  the  prejudice  of  trade  and  diminution  of  the  Revenue. 
These  are  the  words  of  the  Resolution  of  the  House  on  Thurs- 
day, and  this  the  pretence  for  appointing  this  committee.  The 
true  reason  of  this  question  having  been  proposed  to  the  House 
nobody  in  this  company,  and  few  people  out  of  it,  I  believe  are 
at  a  loss  to  guess.  Late  incidents  in  Parliament  have  so  flushed 
those  who  generally  differ  in  opinion  with  this  company,  with 

1°  This  is  no  doubt  the  meeting  which  Coxe,  and  after  him  Lord  Mahon, 
on  the  authority  of  Mr.  White,  M.P.  for  Retford,  state  to  have  been  held 
previous  to  abandoning  the  Excise  scheme.  Mr.  White's  memory  certainly 
failed  him  :  there  was  no  meeting  about  the  Excise  scheme,  when  it  would 
have  been  useless,  if  not  mischievous ;  and  there  was  on  this  ballot,  when  it 
became  necessary  to  rally  every  individual  vote  of  the  party. 


216  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  X 

such  hopes  of  success,  and  put  them  upon  pushing  what  they 
call  their  triumph  so  far,  that  their  common  and  open  boastings 
are,  that  they  had  but  to  procure  this  ballot  to  show  all  the  world 
that  though  they  always  voted  in  a  minority  barefaced,  yet 
whenever  there  should  be  an  opportunity  for  the  majority  to 
show  their  hearts  and  their  sentiments  without  restraint,  that 
all  mankind  would  then  perceive  that  the  present  measures 
were  as  much  disapproved  by  those  who  were  forced  from  secret 
and  indirect  influence  to  give  a  sanction  to  them,  as  by  those  who 
always  avowedly  and  openly  appeared  in  opposition  to  them. 
If  I  said  this  was  their  only  view,  I  should  misstate  the  case, 
because  I  believe  they  did  think  that  those  who  generally  differ 
from  them  might  possibly  have  done  so  in  this  proposition,  and 
that  then  it  would  have  appeared  in  the  votes  throughout  all  the 
kingdom  that  those  concerned  in  the  Government  and  called 
the  Court  party,  after  pretending  to  set  a  scheme  on  foot  for 
the  correction  of  fraud  which  they  had  so  loudly  complained  of, 
did,  as  soon  as  inspection  into  those  frauds  was  proposed,  refuse 
to  come  into  that  proposition,  and  put  a  negative  upon  it ;  the 
consequence  of  which  would  have  been,  that  the  worthy  gentle- 
men, who  have  made  it  their  business  to  traduce  and  defame 
those  concerned  either  in  forming  or  promoting  this  scheme, 
would  have  said  it  was  very  plain  from  the  proceeding,  that 
the  frauds  were  not  so  great  as,  to  serve  the  present  turn,  they 
had  been  represented ;  or  that  in  reality  the  design  of  those 
who  had  complained  of  them  was  not  to  apply  a  remedy  to 
them.  This  was  the  consequence  they  hoped  from  the  pro- 
posal if  it  was  rejected,  and  the  other  was  the  advantage  they 
expected  to  make  of  its  being  received.  Designing,  therefore, 
to  avail  themselves  of  the  ferment  in  which  they  had  put  the 
nation,  and  reluctant  to  let  that  dangerous  storm  they  had  so 
industriously  blown  up  subside,  this  question  was,  at  a  general 
meeting  of  their  amphibious  party,  proposed  and  agreed  to. 
When  it  came  to  be  offered  in  the  House,  whether  it  was  from 
accident,  from  surprise,  or  from  judgment,  that  it  was  given 
in  to,  I  shall  not  inquire,  nor  is  that  inquiry  material,  or  the 
subject  of  your  present  consideration ;  but  when  it  passed 
nemine  contradicente,  they  did  flatter  themselves  their  party  was 


1733.  WALPOLE'S  SPEECH.  217 

so  strong  in  the  House  that  they  should  be  able  to  carry  their 
list  modelled  and  filled  up  in  what  manner  they  thought  fit. 
Their  lists,  therefore,  were  settled  and  agreed  to  that  night, 
and  given  out  in  the  House  next  morning.  Elate  with  what 
had  already  happened,  and  sanguine  in  the  expectation  of  what 
was  to  happen,  they  had  already  given  out  that  the  indiscretion 
of  their  adversaries  in  permitting  this  pitched  battle  in  masque- 
rade, had  fixed  their  victory  and  your  defeat,  and  they  still 
(vainly,  I  hope)  imagine  that  you  are  to  be  tricked  or  cajoled 
into  a  Declaration,  under  your  own  hands,  that  for  the  six  years 
that  this  Parliament  has  sat  you  have  been  constantly  aiding, 
abetting,  avowing,  and  supporting  men  and  measures,  which 
you  were  glad  of  the  first  opportunity  to  prove  you  thought 
ought  not  to  be  encouraged  or  pursued,  and  that  you  would 
show  you  disapproved  the  one  and  wished  destruction  to  the 
other.  This,  if  they  were  to  carry  their  list,  must  and  will  be 
the  interpretation  put  upon  your  conduct ;  and  the  next  step 
they  will  take  will  be  to  arm  this  committee  with  such  powers 
as  shall  throw  the  conduct  of  everything  into  the  hands  of  those 
who  compose  it,  and,  consequently,  delegate  the  whole  sway 
and  authority  of  the  House  of  Commons  to  the  particulars  of 
this  list.  However,  the  ill  success  of  the  druggists'  petition 
made  them  repent  their  precipitation  in  publishing  their  list, 
and  showed  them  they  had  flattered  themselves  and  proceeded 
on  a  deception,  when  they  thought  they  were  strong  enough  to 
carry  that  list  in  the  manner  it  now  stands,  and  that  the  com- 
plexion of  this  Parliament  was  enough  changed  to  desire  to 
fight  under  the  banner  of  such  leaders.  When  I  have  said 
this,  Gentlemen,  I  desire  you  would  cast  your  eyes  on  that  list, 
and  examine  one  moment  the  names  of  which  it  is  composed : 
there  are  ten  of  the  highest  denomination  of  Tories,  ten  discon- 
tented Whigs,  and  one  who  has  acted  so  often  in  both  these 
characters  that  it  is  hard  to  say  what  it  is.  The  conjunction 
and  union  of  such  men,  almost  as  different  in  their  views  and 
principles  from  one  another  as  from  those  to  whom  I  am  speak- 
ing, show's  plainly,  that  to  break  into  the  Whig  party  and  over- 
turn the  present  system  of  Government,  there  is  nothing  that 
any  of  these  opponents  will  not  do,  and  that  there  is  no  associa- 


218  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  X. 

tion  they  will  not  enter  into,  though  never  so  unnatural,  to  pro- 
secute that  main  point  and  play  the  power  out  of  the  hands  in 
which  it  is  at  present  lodged  into  those  where  they  wish  to  place 
it.  But  let  not  the  firmness  and  resolution  of  your  adversaries 
so  far  surpass  yours,  as  to  make  it  appear  that  they  have  virtue 
and  abilities  to  attack  you  with,  which  you  want  for  your  de- 
fence ;  let  them  see  they  have  to  do  with  such  as  are  neither 
blind  to  the  designs  of  their  enemies  nor  to  the  paths  of  their 
own  interest ;  that  you  have  too  great  a  regard  for  the  peace 
and  prosperity  of  your  country  to  commit  the  care  of  it  to  such 
heads ;  that  you  do  not  desire  to  consign  the  Government  of  this 
kingdom  to  a  set  of  men,  half  of  which,  if  they  act  on  any  prin- 
ciples, act  on  a  principle  to  overturn  the  Government,  whilst 
the  other  half  are  at  least  ignorantly  promoting  the  ends  and 
playing  the  game  of  the  enemies  to  that  Government  and  Esta- 
blishment to  which  they  profess  themselves  well-wishers  and 
friends,  and  have  no  way  left  to  excuse  their  conduct,  whilst 
they  are  every  day  and  every  hour  consulting  with  Jacobites, 
taking  directions  from  Jacobites,  and  promoting  Jacobite  mea- 
sures, but  barely  professing  that  they  mean  no  advantage  or 
assistance  to  the  Jacobite  cause  ;  and  consequently  reduce  their 
behaviour  to  this  option,  that  they  must  either  confess  they  have 
been  overreached  and  induced  to  do  what  they  do  not  mean,  or 
that  they  do  really  mean  that  which  they  dare  not  own. 

"  This,  Gentlemen,  is  the  true  state  of  the  present  case  and 
the  true  character  of  this  motley  party  you  have  to  deal  with : 
patriotism  is  the  preamble  to  all  their  harangues,  patriotism  is 
the  rudder  by  which  they  pretend  to  steer  all  their  actions  ;  but 
the  contention  of  this  ballot  is  in  plain  and  intelligible  language 
for  dominion,  for  dominion  between  Whigs  and  Tories,  and  the 
sole  design  of  it  is  to  feel  the  pulse  of  this  Parliament,  whether 
they  wish  for  a  change  or  not :  and  though  some  may  pretend  the 
contest  lies  between  contented  and  discontented  Whigs,  yet  let 
anybody  examine  the  adverse  list ;  let  them  see  whether  it  is 
composed  of  discontented  Whigs  or  equal  parts  of  Tories  and 
such  as  call  themselves  Whigs  whilst  they  are  doing  all  the 
work  of  those  who  profess  quite  contrary  principles ;  let  them 
reflect  who,  in  the  unnatural  assemblage  of  this  opposition,  has 


1733.  WALPOLE'S  SPEECH.  219 

taken  the  lead  in  all  debates  and  in  all  measures — Whig 
or  Tory?  let  them  consider  who  has  dictated  and  who  has 
governed  whilst  they  have  been  the  minority,11  and,  conse- 
quently, who  would  govern  were  they  to  become  the  majority ; 
let  Gentlemen,  I  say,  reflect  on  these  few  self-evident  truths, 
and  then  let  them  say  whether  the  present  contention  for 
power  is  between  Whigs  and  Whigs,  or  between  Whigs  and 
Jacobites. 

"  Nobody  can  imagine  that  the  Whigs  in  opposition  could  be 
so  weak  as  not  to  know  that  some  names  inserted  in  this  list 
would  do  them  more  hurt,  and  fight  our  battle  more  strongly, 
than  any  arms  we  could  provide  for  ourselves.  How  then  came 
they  inserted  ?  Why,  the  Jacobites  insisted,  and  the  Whigs 
were  forced  to  give  way  ;  and  if  in  these  preliminaries  to  domi- 
nion, if  in  these  dawnings  of  power  (as  they  call  the  present  in- 
cidents, and  believe  them  to  be),  if  in  this  first  step,  I  say,  the 
Jacobites  assumed  authority  and  carried  their  point,  can  it  be 
imagined  but  what  they  were  able  to  do  in  a  list  for  this  com- 
mittee, they  would  be  able  to  do  in  a  list  for  an  administration ; 
and  if  they  found  themselves  at  the  helm  there,  does  anybody 
that  hears  me  want  to  be  told  what  must  become  of  the  Whig 
cause,  party,  and  principles  ?  What  must  become  of  all  the 
Revolution  measures  that  have  been  pursued  with  so  much  stea- 
diness and  maintained  with  so  much  glory  for  above  forty  years  ? 
What  must  become  of  this  Government  and  this  Family,  and 
the  true  freedom,  liberty,  welfare,  and  prosperity  of  this 
country  ? 

"  I  shall  avoid  everything  that  is  personal  as  far  as  I  can ; 
as  for  myself,  I  am  but  one,  and  what  becomes  of  one  man  is  of 
very  little  importance  to  the  public  or  to  any  class  of  men ;  but 
as  I  have  always  fought  on  Whig  principles,  I  will  never  desert 
them  ;  as  I  have  risen  by  Whigs,  I  will  stand  or  fall  with  them ; 
if  I  am  not  to  be  supported  or  cannot  be  supported  by  them,  I 
scorn  to  ask  or  take  support  from  any  other  party  ;  and  I  will 
never  condescend  to  seek  refuge  among  those  to  whom  I  have 


11  He   means   Wyndhatn  and  the  Jacobites — and  above  all,  Boling- 
broke. 


220  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  X. 

so  often  bid  defiance ;  it  is  in  Whig  principles  I  have  lived,  and 
in  Whig  principles  I  will  die  ;  it  is  by  the  assistance  and  favour 
of  Whigs,  joined  to  a  great  deal  of  undeserved  good  fortune, 
that  I  am  raised  to  the  height  where  I  now  stand ;  in  gratitude 
I  have  always  to  the  utmost  of  my  power  obliged,  maintained, 
and  favoured  that  party  to  whom  I  could  give  nothing,  because 
I  owed  everything ;  and  to  whom,  if  my  situation  enables  me 
to  be  useful  and  serviceable,  I  was  not  conferring  obligations 
but  paying  debts,  and  returning  those  kindnesses  which  I  had 
first  received.  I  am  now  therefore,  Gentlemen,  not  pleading 
my  own  cause,  but  the  cause  of  the  Whig  party  ;  I  entreat  you 
for  your  own  sakes,  for  the  sake  of  this  Government  and  this 
Family,  for  the  sake  and  for  the  cause  of  liberty,  to  exert  your- 
selves with  spirit  and  with  unanimity  on  this  occasion,  that  you 
may  defeat  and  render  abortive  the  scheme  of  those  malevolent 
spirits  that  for  want  of  hope  and  prospect  of  success  have  been 
long  dormant,  and  have  now  taken  this  favourable  opportunity, 
as  they  think  it,  to  break  forth  :  but  with  you  it  lies,  and  in 
your  power  it  is,  to  disperse  these  hopes  as  fast  as  they  gather, 
and  to  render  that  assistance  ineffectual  with  which  the  rage, 
malevolence,  disappointment,  and  revenge  of  some  deserters 
from  your  cause  have  furnished  these  common  enemies  of  this 
party,  this  country,  and  this  establishment. 

"  I  have  often  borne  the  reproach  of  many  here  present  for 
having  been  instrumental  in  opening  the  spring  to  all  the  dis- 
turbances that  have  for  some  years  last  past  overflowed  this  king- 
dom— I  mean,  for  contributing  to  the  restoration  of  one  [Boling- 
broke]  who  has  made  the  lenity,  indulgence,  and  mercy  of  this 
country  the  means  of  working  its  disquiet,  if  not  its  destruction  ; 
who  has  returned  such  evil  for  the  good  he  has  received,  that 
nothing  less  will  content  him  than  the  ruin  of  those  who  prevented 
his,  by  softening  the  justice  of  an  offended  nation  into  mercy, 
and  by  converting  its  wrath  into  forgiveness.  At  the  time  that 
I  contributed  to  this  step  taken  by  Parliament,  matters  were  so 
circumstanced  that  the  thing  was  unavoidable  ;  I  will  not  by  a 
fruitless  retrospect  prove  to  you  now,  Gentlemen,  that  it  was 
so ;  but  give  me  leave  to  say  so  much  in  mitigation  of  this  much 
repented  fault  of  mine — so  much  in  excuse  of  the  share  and  part 


1733.  WALPOLE'S  SPEECH.  221 

I  had  in  this  measure  ;  that  my  reason  for  submitting  to  it  was, 
that  I  did  not  then  believe  it  was  possible  for  any  individual  in 
human  nature  to  be  entirely  devoid  of  all  shame,  truth,  or  gra- 
titude, and  unless  the  man  I  mean,  and  whom  I  need  not  name, 
had  been  so,  and  proved  himself  so,  the  consequences  that  have 
followed  from  this  error  committed  at  that  time  in  his  favour 
could  never  have  happened.  But  let  not  those  by  whom  I  am 
blamed  on  this  head  be  so  inconsistent  with  themselves  as  to 
lodge  additional  power  in  those  hands  which  have  already  abused 
the  favour  of  their  former  benefactors ;  and  do  not  you  blindly 
and  inconsistently  contribute  now  to  let  the  Legislature  by  proxy 
receive  laws  from  him,  whose  crimes  have  made  you  divest  him 
of  that  share  which  the  Crown  once  thought  fit  to  give  him  in 
all  the  deliberations  of  Parliament. 

"  I  need  say  no  more,  I  believe,  to  induce  you  to  reject  a 
list  of  his  nomination ;  and  all  I  will  add  in  commendation  of 
this  now  put  into  your  hands  is,  that  to  execute  the  purpose 
mentioned  in  the  Resolution  no  men  can  be  fitter  than  your  own 
friends.  That  the  twenty-one  here  named  are  no  more  fit  for 
this  distinction  than  every  one  of  those  to  whom  I  am  speaking, 
I  readily  allow  ;  that  you  are  all  equally  worthy  of  having  your 
names  there,  is  certain ;  but  since  it  is  necessary,  by  the  nature 
and  circumstances  of  this  affair,  that  only  twenty-one  should  be 
selected,  and  that  the  success  of  the  whole  depends  on  your 
unanimity  on  this  occasion,  I  do  hope  and  desire  that  none 
upon  any  motive  whatever  will  garble  this  list,  or  alter  any 
name  in  it,  but  that  you  will  all  be  firm,  true,  zealous,  and 
unanimous." 

This  speech  had  so  good  an  effect  on  those  to  whom 
it  was  addressed,  that  for  two  or  three  days  there  seemed 
to  be  a  resurrection  of  that  party  spirit  which  had  so 
long  been  dormant,  that  most  people  imagined  it  was 
quite  extinct ;  and  the  next  day  in  the  House,  where 
the  industry  of  both  parties  had  contributed  to  bring 
above  five  hundred  members,  the  Court  list  was  carried 


222  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  X. 

by  a  majority  of  ninety,12  most  of  the  lists  on  both  sides 
being  entire. 

This  was  the  decisive  and  final  stroke  in  the  House  of 
Commons  this  Session,  for  the  day  after  this  ballot- 
struggle  was  over  most  of  the  members  decamped  into 
the  country. 

However,  as  there  had  been  a  strong  party  made 
against  the  ministry  in  the  House  of  Lords,  in  case  the 
Excise  Bill  had  come  there,  those  who  had  been  at  the 
trouble  of  working  this  defection,  since  they  were  disap- 
pointed of  showing  their  strength  and  the  good  effects  of 
their  cabals  on  that  occasion,  began  to  look  out  for  some 
other  point  to  squabble  upon. 

An  inquiry  into  the  state  of  the  South  Sea  Company 
was  the  subject  chosen,  and  the  reason  of  its  being  chosen 
was  Lord  Scarborough's  having  declared  the  last  year 
that  as  there  were  great  murmurs  in  the  world  against 
those  who  had  been  concerned  in  the  management  of 
the  great  moneyed  companies,  and  doubts  arising  in  the 
minds  of  the  proprietors  with  regard  to  the  value  of 
their  property  there  ;  that  in  order  to  ease  those  doubts, 
to  quiet  the  clamours,  and  let  people  know  what  they 
had  to  depend  upon,  whenever  a  scrutiny  of  these  matters 
should  be  proposed  by  Parliament,  he  should  be  strenu- 
ously for  it,  and  if  any  fraud  was  proved  on  those  who 
had  been  intrusted  with  the  management  of  any  of 
these  companies,  that  no  one  should  go  farther  than 
he  would  towards  the  punishment  of  such  delinquents 

!2  The  highest  name  on  the  Court  list  had  294  votes,  and  the  highest  on 
the  Opposition  209.  18  of  the  Opposition  and  only  10  of  the  Courtiers 
varied  any  name  in  the  lists. 


1733.  SOUTH  SEA  COMPANY.  223 

and  procuring  satisfaction  to  those  who  had  been  de- 
frauded. 

This  declaration  was  casually  and  digressively  thrown 
out  by  Lord  Scarborough,  when  the  affair  of  the 
Charitable  Corporation  was  under  consideration  the  year 
before ;  but  it  was  too  explicit  not  to  pin  him  down 
when  anything  of  this  nature  should  be  proposed,  to  be 
for  it. 

The  true  and  short  state  of  this  Company  was  this : — 
The  annual  ship,  trading  to  the  South  Seas  by  virtue  of 
the  treaty  with  Spain,  was,  by  that  treaty,  confined  to 
be  of  a  measure  not  exceeding  500  tons;  whatever, 
therefore,  she  carried  beyond  that  measure  was  an  in- 
fraction of  the  treaty  and  forfeiture  of  the  privilege 
allowed  by  it.  But  as  the  Directors  of  the  South  Sea 
Company  found  means  to  evade  this  treaty  by  carrying 
on  a  clandestine  and  illicit  trade,  so  they  cheated  Spain 
by  carrying  merchandise  and  effects  to  a  greater  weight 
than  they  had  a  right  to  do  by  treaty ;  and  they  cheated 
the  Company  by  selling  the  goods  of  their  own  private 
trade  first,  and  leaving  those  of  the  Company  to  be  dis- 
posed of  at  any  price  that  could  be  got  for  them  after 
the  best  of  the  market  was  over.  Besides  this,  if  any 
goods  were  damaged,  or  any  were  left  unsold,  or  if  any 
loss  whatever  was  sustained,  it  was  always  put  to  the 
account  of  the  Company,  by  which  means  the  Company 
was  never  any  year  the  better  and  was  often  the  worse 
for  having  any  trade  thither  at  all. 

This  was  so  great  a  hardship  upon  the  proprietors  of 
the  16,000,000£  of  South  Sea  stock  (for  that  was  their 
capital),  that  it  was  not  wonderful  they  should  complain. 
The  reason  the  ministry  gave  for  opposing  inquiry  into 


224  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  X. 

the  affairs  of  the  Company  (though  they  did  not  pretend 
to  be  ignorant  of  the  facts)  was,  that  though  a  scrutiny 
of  this  nature  might  be  a  private  benefit  to  the  proprie- 
tors of  the  stock,  yet  it  would  be  a  national  loss,  and 
consequently  that  it  was  not  advisable  for  the  legislature 
to  unveil  all  this  scene  of  mingled  iniquity,  but  to  let 
their  national  policy  prevail  over  their  personal  justice, 
and  permit  a  set  of  annual  rascals  to  cheat  the  Company 
without  being  punished,  in  order  to  let  England  cheat 
Spain  without  being  discovered. 

But  besides  this  particular  reason  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
had  another  general  one  (and  the  weakest  part  of  his 
character  and  policy  in  my  opinion),  which  was  on  all 
occasions,  let  the  wrong  be  never  so  extensive,  or  the 
circumstances  of  it  never  so  flagrant,  to  oppose  all  Par- 
liamentary inquiries.  He  pursued  this  maxim  from  a 
fear  of  making  this  retrospective  manner  of  inquiry,  by 
the  frequency  of  it,  so  familiar  to  Parliament,  that  one 
time  or  other  it  might,  in  any  reverse  of  fortune  and  by 
the  rage  of  party,  affect  himself,  his  family,  and  pos- 
terity ;  but  by  too  strict  an  adherence  to  this  principle 
he  was  often  smeared  with  the  filth  of  other  people,  and 
gave  his  enemies  occasion  to  say  that  whoever  had  a 
mind  to  plunder  the  public  or  defraud  particulars,  they 
had  but  to  keep  out  of  the  reach  of  the  slow,  uncertain 
hands  of  Westminster  Hall,  and  let  the  notoriety  of 
their  crimes  be  never  so  manifest  or  the  nature  of  them 
never  so  enormous,  they  would  be  secure  of  protection 
in  Parliament  whilst  Sir  Robert  Walpole  had  any  power 
there.  His  conduct  in  the  affair  of  the  Charitable  Cor- 
poration, his  opposition  to  a  Bill  for  vacating  the  fraudu- 
lent sale  of  Lord  Derwentwater's  estate  (by  which  the 


1733.  SOUTH  SEA  DIRECTORS.  225 

trustees  for  the  sale  of  forfeited  estates  had  cheated  the 
public  of  an  immense  sum  and  by  acting  in  flat  contra- 
diction to  an  Act  of  Parliament)  ;  his  doing  all  he  could 
to  prevent  the  Parliament  taking  cognizance  of  the 
frauds  committed  by  the  Directors  of  the  York  Build- 
ings Company,  and  his  having  actually  put  a  stop  to  this 
inquiry  into  the  South  Sea  affairs  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  had  given  but  too  just  grounds  for  these 
reflections  to  be  thrown  out  against  him,  and  left  his 
friends  too  little  room  to  justify  him  when  his  adver- 
saries represented  him  as  the  universal  encourager  of 
corruption  and  the  sanctuary  of  the  corrupt. 

But  all  his  power  was  not  sufficient  to  prevent  this 
inquiry  in  the  House  of  Lords.  In  the  first  place  the 
objections  against  a  general  inquiry  for  prudential  rea- 
sons with  regard  to  Spain  were  of  no  weight  to  stop  the 
inquiry  now  proposed  by  the  House  of  Lords,  because 
the  clandestine  trade  carried  on  by  the  Directors  in  the 
annual  ship  was  not  the  point  the  Lords  proposed  to  go 
upon.  The  inquiry  they  proposed  was  to  see  in  what 
manner  the  money  arising  from  the  sale  of  the  forfeited 
estates  of  the  South  Sea  Directors  in  1720  had  been 
disposed  of;  and  whether  the  trustees,  in  the  disposition 
they  had  made  of  it,  had  observed  the  rules  prescribed 
by  that  Act  of  Parliament  that  gave  the  produce  of 
these  estates  to  the  proprietors  of  the  South  Sea  stock. 
In  the  next  place,  this  objection  being  removed,  the 
curiosity  of  mankind,  the  natural  propensity  of  Parlia- 
ments to  inquiry,  and  the  defection  on  the  Excise 
scheme,  and  the  pride  of  the  young  Lords,  who  had 
heard  their  whole  body  so  long  treated  as  ciphers,  all 
combined  to  strengthen  the  party  for  going  into  this 

VOL.  I.  Q 


226  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  X. 

business,  and  filled  the  nets  that  had  been  spread  by  the 
opponents  to  catch  these  deserters;  among  which,  be- 
sides those  I  have  already  mentioned,  were — the  Duke  of 
St.  Alban's,  one  of  the  weakest  men  either  of  the  legiti- 
mate or  spurious  brood  of  Stuarts ;  the  Duke  of  Man- 
chester, one  as  like  him  in  his  degree  of  understanding 
as  of  quality ;  Lord  Pomfret,  Master  of  the  Horse,  who 
pretended  to  be  guided  by  his  conscience  in  voting  on 
an  account  he  did  not  understand ;  Lord  Falmouth,  a 
blundering  blockhead,  who,  in  the  two  most  material 
questions  in  this  affair,  spoke  on  one  side  and  voted  on 
the  other,  which  gave  occasion  to  some  laughers  to  say 
that  Lord  Falmouth  was  determined  to  do  the  ministers 
all  the  hurt  he  could,  for  he  spoke  for  them  and  voted 
against  them;  Lord  Onslow  ditto;  and  the  Duke  of 
Kent,  who  had  been  a  Yes-and-No  hireling  to  a  Court 
for  forty  years,  and  took  it  into  his  head  at  threescore  to 
turn  patriot.  There  were  more,  but  none  either  of  note 
or  of  any  more  consideration  than  all  other  ciphers  are, 
which,  though  ciphers,  increase  materially  every  number 
to  which  they  are  added. 

One  other  considerable  deserter  there  was  (whom  I 
had  almost  forgot  to  mention),  who  became  such  on 
the  disposal  of  Lord  Chesterfield's  staff  to  the  Duke  of 
Devonshire— this  was  Lord  Burlington,  then  Captain  of 
the  Band  of  Pensioners,  who,  having  solicited  the 
Steward's  staff,  and  being  refused  it,  threw  up  his  own 
together  with  the  Lieutenancy  of  Yorkshire  and  Vice- 
Treasurership  of  Ireland,  and  listed  himself  immediately 
in  the  Opposition.  It  was  at  first  reported  about  town 
that  Lord  Burlington  declared  his  resignation  did  not 
proceed  from  any  dislike  to  the  measures  of  the  Adminis- 


1733.  LOKD  AND  LADY  BURLINGTON.  227 

tratiori,  or  any  quarrel  with  the  ministers,  but  that  his  sole 
objection  was  to  the  King,  who  had  told  him  a  lie  and 
broke  his  word,  having  promised  him  the  first  white  staff 
that  should  be  vacant,  and  yet  given  this  to  the  Duke 
of  Devonshire.  The  fact,  I  believe,  was  that  the  King, 
on  giving  Lord  Burlington  the  Pensioners'  staff,  had 
said  he  hoped  soon  to  put  one  into  his  hand  that  would 
be  better  worth  his  acceptance,  which  compliment  Lord 
Burlington  understood,  or  pretended  to  understand,  as 
an  absolute  promise  of  the  next  white  staff  that  should 
fall,  and  for  the  non-performance  of  this  supposed  pro- 
mise he  quitted  the  King's  service ;  but  though  in  great 
wrath  he  threw  up  all  his  own  employments,  yet  he 
suffered  his  wife13  (who  was  Lady  of  the  Bed-chamber  to 
the  Queen)  still  to  keep  hers,  which  made  his  con- 
duct doubly  simple,  the  first  folly  being  to  quit  his  own 
post  without  juster  offence,  and  the  second,  when  the 
first  was  committed,  to  let  my  Lady  retain  hers.  Her 
desiring  to  do  so  did  not  proceed  from  too  little  pride, 
or  the  weakness  of  her  resentment  of  her  Lord's  usage, 
but  from  a  stronger  passion  of  another  kind :  she  liked 
the  Duke  of  Grafton,  and  had  she  left  the  Queen  she 
must  have  left  her  lover,  or  at  least  have  lost  many 
favourable  opportunities  which  her  employment  gave 
her  of  seeing  him  and  which  her  own  ingenuity  more 
than  her  lover's  assiduity  always  improved.  My  Lady, 
therefore,  choosing  rather  to  mortify  her  pride  than  her 
inclination  and  sacrificing  the  great  lady  to  the  woman, 
consulted  her  heart  and  not  her  character,  her  lover  and 
not  her  husband  in  this  difficulty,  and  whilst  she  laud- 
's Dorothy  Saville,  daughter  and  co-heiress  of  the  last  Marquis  of  Ha- 
lifax. 

Q2 


228  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  x. 

ably  in  reality  gave  up  everything  to  her  passion,  she 
seemed  so  meanly  to  have  considered  only  her  pin- 
money  and  her  interest. 

When  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  was  made  Lord 
Steward,  Lord  Lonsdale14  succeeded  him  in  the  employ- 
ment of  Privy  Seal,  which  was  a  great  mortification  to 
all  the  Opposition,  who  had  always  reverenced  Lord 
Lonsdale  as  a  sort  of  political  idol,  and  looking  upon 
him  as  their  own,  had  always  spoken  of  him  as  a  man  of 
such  rigid  virtue  and  so  true  a  judgment,  that  whatever 
measures  he  abetted  he  must  approve,  and  whatever  he 
approved  must  be  right.  He  was  certainly  an  honest 
and  a  sensible  man  ;  but  his  integrity  inclined  him  now 
and  then  to  be  whimsical,  and  his  understanding  to  be 
rather  too  disputative. 

14  "  Henry  Lowther,  last  Viscount  Lonsdale  of  the  first  creation,  was 
made  Constable  of  the  Tower  and  Lord  Privy  Seal,  which  he  resigned 
without  going  into  Opposition.  He  was  of  very  conscientious  and  dis- 
interested honour — a  great  disputer — a  great  refiner — and  a  great  genius." 
—H.  Walpole. 


1733.  QUEEN  AND  HOADLEY.  229 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Efforts  of  the  Court  to  obtain  a  Majority  in  the  Peers — The  Queen  and 
Bishop  Hoadley — Marriage  of  Princess  Royal — Portrait  of  the  Prince  of 
Orange — Dissatisfaction  of  the  Prince  of  Wales — Defeat  of  Ministers  in 
the  Lords  on  the  South  Sea  affair — The  Opposition  go  too  far — Are 
checked,  and  sign  offensive  Protests — Lord  Hervey  called  to  the  House 
of  Peers — The  Session  closes,  and  the  Court  goes  out  of  Town. 

BETWEEN  the  time  when  it  was  debated  whether  the 
House  of  Lords  should  call  for  papers  and  enter  at  all 
into  the  examination  of  the  state  of  the  South  Sea  Com- 
pany, and  the  day  fixed  for  the  taking  this  matter  into 
consideration,  many  Lords  were  closeted,  schooled,  and 
tampered  with  by  the  ministers,  some  by  the  King  and 
more  by  the  Queen.  Among  the  latter  was  Hoadley, 
Bishop  of  Salisbury,  whom  she  had  sent  for  merely  on 
suspicion,  for  he  had  never  left  the  Court  in  any  one 
vote,  nor  altered  his  public  conduct,  whatever  he  might 
have  done  in  his  private  conversation.  She  told  him  that 
his  enemies  had  been  suggesting  at  St.  James's  that  his 
affection  for  those  for  whom  he  used  to  profess  the 
warmest  attachment  was  quite  changed,  and  that  he  had 
disapproved  of  everything  that  had  been  done  lately,  but 
particularly  the  Excise  scheme ;  that  he  had  been  very 
slack  in  his  attendance  in  the  House  of  Lords  this 
winter,  and  that  most  people  talked  of  him  as  one  whom 
the  opponents  expected  every  day  to  declare  himself  of 
the  number  of  deserters.  But  as  she  was  determined 
never  to  believe  so  improbable  a  story  merely  on  the 


230  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XL 

credit  of  Court  whispers,  and  that  she  thought  the  best 
way  for  people  who  wished  and  meant  well  to  one 
another  was  always  to  have  such  misunderstandings  ex- 
plained before  they  gathered  strength  enough  from 
repetition  to  grow  into  distrusts,  so  she  had  sent  for  him 
to  let  him  know  what  she  had  heard,  what  many  said, 
and  what  some  believed. 

The  Bishop  told  her  Majesty  that  he  was  extremely 
surprised  and  not  less  concerned  to  find  it  was  possible 
for  her  to  have  given  so  much  regard  to  such  groundless 
and  malicious  insinuations  as  to  think  they  wanted  any 
further  contradiction  than  their  own  improbability,  or  to 
imagine  that  after  so  many  years  spent  in  the  service  of 
her  Majesty's  family,  and  what  was  called  the  Whig 
cause,  he  should  think  it  either  for  his  credit  or  his 
interest  in  the  close  of  his  life  to  desert  principles  and 
men  whom,  in  the  most  difficult  times,  he  had  always 
stood  by  and  supported,  manifestly  against  his  interest 
on  some  occasions,  and,  if  scandal  and  reproach  can 
hurt  a  character,  as  much  to  the  hazard  of  his  reputation 
on  others.  He  said  if  ever  he  had  taken  anything  ill  of 
Sir  Robert  Walpole,  he  could  assure  her  Majesty  he 
thought  it  would  be  convincing  the  world  he  had  de- 
served to  be  neglected  and  ill-used  by  him,  if  he  were 
capable  of  forgetting  all  the  former  obligations  he  had 
had  to  him,  because  Sir  Robert  had  not  added  another 
to  which,  perhaps,  he  might  think  he  had  had  some 
title;1  he  further  added,  that  he  thought  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  the  ablest  and  best  minister  the  King  could 
employ,  and  that,  directly  or  indirectly,  he  had  never 

1  Alluding  to  the  disposal  of  Durham,  ante,  p.  147. 


1733.  QUEEN  AND  HOADLEY.  231 

had  the  least  correspondence  with  any  one  of  those  who 
were  thought  to  be  his  rivals  for  power ;  that  he  had  no 
opinion  of  their  capacity,  no  esteem  for  their  principles, 
and  was  far  from  approving  of  their  conduct ;  that  as 
to  the  Excise  scheme,  he  always  had  and  always  should 
declare  that  he  thought  it  a  right  one,  intended  for  the 
good  of  the  nation,  and  what  would  have  proved  so 
could  it  have  been  put  into  execution,  but  considering 
the  light  in  which  it  had  been  represented  to  the  people 
and  in  which  they  saw  it,  he  had  often  wished  that  it 
had  been  dropped  sooner;  that  Lord  Hervey  (with 
whom  he  had  often  spoken  on  this  subject)  could  witness 
these  to  have  been  his  sentiments,  and  to  him  he 
appealed  for  the  truth  of  what  he  had  now  told  her 
Majesty. 

"  Lord  Hervey  (the  Queen  said)  is  extremely  your 
friend,  and  speaks  of  you  always  with  the  greatest 
esteem ;  but  on  this  subject  I  have  not  yet  talked  with 
him,  and  I  assure  you  it  was  not  by  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
I  was  told  anything  I  have  now  said  to  you."  The 
Bishop  said,  "  I  wish,  then,  your  Majesty  would  have 
taken  my  justification  from  Sir  Robert,  since  he  was  not 
my  accuser ;  for  Sir  Robert  must  know  that  if  I  were 
knave  enough  to  desire  to  bely  all  my  professions  and 
run  counter  to  all  my  former  conduct,  I  must  be  the 
weakest  as  well  as  the  worst  of  mankind  to  throw  myself 
now  into  the  arms  of  a  party  to  whom  I  must  know  I 
am  not  less  obnoxious  than  he  himself,  and  from  whom 
I  neither  desire  any  favour  nor  can  expect  any  quarter ; 
and  for  my  attendance  in  Parliament,  he  could  have 
told  your  Majesty  likewise  that  it  has  been  as  constant 
this  year  as  any  other  of  my  life,  though,  from  a  very 


232  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XI. 

bad  state  of  health,  no  year  of  my  life  I  have  been  less 
able  to  bear  it."  The  Queen  said  she  was  extremely 
glad  to  hear  this  from  his  own  mouth,  for  though  she 
was  too  well  acquainted  with  his  worth  to  believe  any- 
thing lightly  to  his  disadvantage,  "yet"  (said  she)  "you 
know  one  is  sometimes  brought  by  one's  own  weakness 
and  other  people's  wickedness  to  entertain  suspicion  of 
one's  friends,  which,  in  reason  and  justice,  perhaps,  one 
ought  never  to  have  given  ear  to." 

The  Bishop  of  Salisbury  dined  at  Lord  Hervey's 
lodgings  the  day  after  this  conference,  related  it  to  him, 
and  complained  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  who  undoubt- 
edly, he  said,  had  put  the  Queen  upon  talking  to  him  in 
this  manner,  though  she  denied  it ;  but  he  desired  Lord 
Hervey  to  tell  Sir  Robert  that  he  thought  leaving  any 
man  or  any  party  by  whom  one  had  been  obliged,  merely 
for  not  being  more  obliged,  was  so  pitiful  and  dishonour- 
able a  part,  that  he  might  depend  on  him  for  any  service 
he  could  do  him  as  securely  as  ever,  and  that  the  more 
Sir  Robert  was  pressed  by  his  enemies  and  the  harder 
things  bore  upon  him,  the  surer  he  might  be  of  any 
assistance  he  could  give  him. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole  went  to  see  the  Bishop  soon  after 
this,  but  behaved,  as  the  Bishop  told  Lord  Hervey,  with 
a  shyness,  a  coldness,  and  a  reserve  that  he  had  never 
had  about  him  till  after  the  Durham  affair,  and  which 
from  the  time  of  that  incident  he  had  never  been  with- 
out. 

It  was  in  this  interval,  before  the  South  Sea  debate 
came  on  in  the  House  of  Lords,  that  the  King  com- 
municated by  a  message  to  both  Houses  the  intended 
marriage  of  his  eldest  daughter,  the  Princess  Royal,  to 


1733.  THE  PRINCE  OF  ORANGE.  233 

the  Prince  of  Orange — a  miserable  match  both  in  point 
of  man  and  fortune,  his  figure  being  deformed2  and  his 
estate  not  clear  1 2,000 1.  a-year.  It  was,  indeed, 
nominally  double  that,  but  the  debts  with  which  it  was 
encumbered  and  other  drawbacks  reduced  it  to  what  I 
say.  The  turn,  therefore,  which  good  courtiers  gave  to 
this  match,  and  which  good  subjects  believed  to  be  the 
case,  was,  that  the  father,  for  the  sake  of  this  country, 
and  the  daughter,  to  ingratiate  herself  with  the  people, 
had  consented  to  take  up  with  this  marriage  to  strengthen 
on  contingencies  the  Protestant  succession  to  this  crown, 
and  renew  an  alliance  with  a  family  and  a  name  always 
dear  to  this  nation — an  alliance  from  which  this  nation 
had  formerly  received  many  benefits,  and  from  which  it 
would  not  now  be  liable  to  incur  those  disadvantages 
which,  if  ever  the  crown  should  be  this  Princess's 
inheritance,  might  attend  her  being  married  to  a 
greater  prince,  who  should  have  larger  territories  of  his 
own. 

This  sounded  so  well,  that  these  fictitious  merits  were 
most  eloquently  displayed  by  all  who  spoke  on  this 
subject,  either  in  the  House  of  Lords  or  Commons,  in 
order  to  make  the  fortune  it  was  expected  the  Parlia- 
ment should  give,  come  so  much  the  easier;  but  the 
true  reason  for  this  match  was,  that  there  was,  indeed, 
no  other  for  the  Princess  in  all  Europe,  so  that  her 
Royal  Highness's  option  was  not  between  this  Prince 
and  any  other,  but  between  a  husband  and  no  husband 
— between  an  indifferent  settlement  and  no  settlement 
at  all ;  and  whether  she  would  be  wedded  to  this  piece 

2  See  post,  p.  273. 


234  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XI. 

of  deformity  in  Holland,  or  die  an  ancient  maid  im- 
mured in  her  royal  convent  at  St.  James's. 

On  one  side,  her  pride  made  her  often  reflect  on  the 
parting  with  her  guards,  and  several  other  abatements 
of  state  consequential  to  this  match ;  on  the  other,  she 
was  to  consider,  whenever  her  father  died,  what  a  dis- 
agreeable situation  she  would  be  in,  dependent  on  her 
brother's  bounty  for  a  maintenance,  and  exposed  to  the 
mercy  of  a  sister-in-law,  who,  she  knew  from  her  bro- 
ther's weakness,  could  not  fail  of  being  both  his  mistress 
and  hers.  These  considerations  led  her  to  that  deter- 
mination which,  grounded  on  private  and  personal 
reasons,  was  to  wear  the  countenance  of  national  and 
popular  motives,  whilst  the  good  people  of  England 
were  to  express  their  gratitude  for  what  was  no  obliga- 
tion, and  to  extol  that  conduct  as  an  heroic  sacrifice  to 
their  interest,  which  was  in  reality  a  well-weighed  con- 
sultation and  prudential  concern  for  her  own. 

The  fortune  given  her  by  Parliament  was  80,000/., 
which,  like  her  mother's  jointure,  and  not  very  unlike 
her  father's  Civil  List,  was  just  double  what  had  ever 
before  been  given  on  the  like  occasion.  There  was 
upwards  of  that  sum  at  this  time  lying  in  the  Exchequer, 
arising  from  the  sale  of  St.  Christopher's,3  and  unappro- 
priated by  Parliament,  which  facilitated  this  generosity 
— the  public  on  this  occasion  resembling  some  particulars 
who  are  much  more  willing  to  give  out  of  their 
stewards'  hands  than  out  of  their  own  pockets,  and 
ready  enough  to  assign  what  they  do  not  see,  though 
they  cannot  part  with  what  they  do. 

3  Sale  of  lands  in  the  Island  of  St.  Christopher's. 


1733.  PRINCESS  ROYAL.  235 

The  Prince  of  Orange's  figure,  besides  his  being 
almost  a  dwarf,  was  as  much  deformed  as  it  was  possible 
for  a  human  creature  to  be  ;  his  face  was  not  bad,  his 
countenance  was  sensible,  but  his  breath  more  offensive 
than  it  is  possible  for  those  who  have  not  been  offended 
by  it  to  imagine.  These  personal  defects,  unrecom- 
pensed  by  the  eclat  of  rank  or  the  more  essential  com- 
forts of  great  riches,  made  the  situation  of  the  poor 
Princess  Royal  so  much  more  commiserable ;  for  as 
her  youth  and  an  excellent  warm  animated  constitution 
made  her,  I  believe,  now  and  then  remember  she  was  a 
woman,  so  I  can  answer  for  her  that  natural  and  ac- 
quired pride  seldom  or  never  let  her  forget  she  was  a 
Princess;  and  as  this  match  gave  her  little  hope  of 
gratifying  the  one,  so  it  afforded  as  little  prospect  of 
supporting  the  other. 

There  is  one  of  two  inconveniences  that  generally 
attends  most  marriages :  the  one  is  sacrificing  all  con- 
sideration of  interest  and  grandeur  for  the  sake  of 
beauty  and  an  agreeable  person  ;  and  the  other,  that  of 
sacrificing  all  consideration  of  beauty  and  person  to 
interest  and  grandeur.  But  this  match  most  unfortu- 
nately conciliated  the  inconveniences  of  both  these 
methods  of  marrying,  and  consequently  without  the  ad- 
vantages of  either;  however,  as  she  apprehended  the 
consequences  of  not  being  married  at  all  must  one  time 
or  other  be  worse  than  even  the  being  so  married,  she 
very  prudently  submitted  to  the  present  evil  to  avoid  a 
greater  in  futurity. 

The  Princess  Royal's  personal  beauties  were  a  lively 
clean  look  and  a  very  fine  complexion,  though  she  was 
marked  a  good  deal  with  the  small-pox ;  the  faults  of 


236  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XI. 

her  person  were   that  of  being  very  ill   made  and  a 
great  propensity  to  fat. 

As  those  who  had  now  the  ear  of  the  Prince  of 
Wales  lost  no  opportunity  to  irritate  and  blow  him  up 
against  his  father,4  so  this  marriage  gave  them  occasion 
to  make  his  Royal  Highness  think  it  very  hard  that  the 
first  establishment  provided  by  Parliament  for  one  of 
the  Royal  progeny  should  be  for  any  but  the  heir- 
apparent  to  the  Crown.  He  was  so  very  uneasy,  that 
to  everybody  his  looks  told  he  was  so,  and  to  many  his 
words. 

The  day  the  message  was  brought  to  both  Houses  it 
was  whispered  about  that  some  friend  to  the  Prince  or 
enemy  to  the  King  would  take  this  opportunity  of 
making  a  proposal  in  the  House  of  Commons  to  address 
his  Majesty  for  the  settlement  of  100,000£  a-year  to  be 
made  on  the  Prince,  which,  at  the  time  the  Civil  List 
was  given,  everybody  understood  and  had  taken  for 
granted  was  designed  to  be  done  as  soon  as  he  should 
come  over ;  but  nobody,  when  it  came  to  the  push, 
being  either  zealous  enough  for  the  service  of  the  son, 
or  desperate  enough  with  the  father  to  care  to  begin 
it,  there  was  not  the  least  mention  made  of  this  measure 

4  We  are  nowhere  told,  that  I  know  of,  what  the  original  cause  of  differ- 
ence was  between  George  II.  and  Frederick  Prince  of  Wales.  It  arose 
perhaps  in  some  degree  from  the  bad  example  given  by  George  II.  him- 
self when  Prince  of  Wales.  Frederick  was  brought  late,  and  on  his 
father's  part  reluctantly,  to  England.  There  he  fell  into  the  hands  of 
Opposition — always  ready  to  speculate  on  the  favour  of  heirs-apparent — and 
the  King's  displeasure,  whatever  was  its  original  cause,  would  have  been 
naturally  and  justly  increased,  if  the  story  that  Horace  Walpole  tells  be 
true,  that  shortly  after  the  Prince's  coming  over  he  was  about  to  have 
secretly  and  suddenly  married  Lady  Diana  Spencer — a  plot  of  her  grand- 
mother the  old  Duchess  of  Marl  borough,  which  Sir  Robert  Walpole  dis- 
covered in  time  to  prevent. 


1733.  SOUTH  SEA  AFFAIRS.  237 

in  public,  though  it  had  been  so  much  discoursed  of  in 
private.  Nor  was  it  in  the  least  to  be  wondered  at  that 
this  project  should  never  be  brought  to  execution :  in 
the  first  place,  because  the  danger  every  one  ran  of 
being  betrayed  who  entered  into  any  negotiation  with 
his  Royal  Highness,  made  few  people  care  to  begin  one ; 
and,  in  the  next  place,  because  the  instability  of  his 
conduct  and  the  contempt  that  attended  his  character 
made  him  so  little  worth  getting,  that  no  wise  or  pru- 
dent man  cared  to  run  any  risk  for  an  acquisition  that 
was  likely  to  prove  of  so  small  a  value  and  so  short  a 
duration. 

When  the  great  day  \24th  May\  for  the  debate  on  the 
South  Sea  affair  came  on  in  the  House  of  Lords,  the  num- 
bers in  the  first  division  were  equal  [75]  ;  but  the  debate 
being  on  a  previous  question,  whether  a  question  of  the 
Duke  of  Newcastle's  should  be  then  put,  and  the  rule  of 
the  House  in  that  case  being  presumitur  pro  negante, 
this  equality  proved  in  effect  a  decision  against  the  Court. 
The  Queen  seemed  much  more  concerned  at  this  de- 
fection and  rebellion  in  the  House  of  Lords  than  the 
King,  and  Sir  Robert  more  so  than  either  of  them. 
The  part  he  had  to  act  was  a  very  delicate  and  dis- 
agreeable one,  for  he  knew  the  fatal  consequences  of 
such  mutiny  if  unpunished,  and  yet  was  forced  to  be 
tender  of  urging  to  the  King  the  necessity  of  further 
punishment,  because  he  did  not  care  to  represent  this 
defeat  to  him  in  so  strong  a  light  as  that  in  which  he 
saw  it  himself.  Had  he  owned  to  the  King  that  this 
was  a  point  of  that  importance  to  the  Ministry  which  he 
thought  it,  it  is  possible  that  the  King's  seeing  a  ques- 
tion so  laboured  as  the  Excise  had  been,  go  against  his 


238  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XI. 

Minister  in  the  House  of  Commons,  and  this  inquiry  in 
spite  of  him  brought  into  the  House  of  Lords,  might 
have  made  his  Majesty  imagine  that  Sir  Robert's  in- 
terest ran  too  weak  in  these  two  material  assemblies  to 
be  long  sustained.  To  the  King,  therefore,  he  treated 
this  incident  as  a  trifle,  saying  that  it  was  of  no  import- 
ance to  the  Court  which  way  it  went ;  and  that,  as  to 
the  revolters,  he  knew  the  reasons  and  the  price  of  every 
one  of  them ; 5  but  that  the  one  was  not  worth  consider- 
ing, nor  the  other  worth  paying. 

The  truth  was,  Sir  Robert  made  this  a  point  of  im- 
portance by  meddling  with  it  at  all,  for  had  he  let  it 
take  its  course,  the  Court  or  the  Ministry  could  have 
been  no  way  affected  by  it ;  but  his  having  once  shown 
a  desire  to  keep  it  off,  that  alone  made  it  necessary  for 
him,  if  he  could,  to  have  done  it. 

But  after  this  victory  over  him  in  the  South  Sea 
inquiry  the  opposing  Lords  fell  into  just  the  same  error 
that  the  opposing  Commoners  had  done  in  the  case  of 
the  Excise  Bill ;  for,  not  content  with  their  first  con- 
quest, they  aimed  at  extending  it,  and  by  that  means  lost 
part  of  the  ground  they  had  gained  :  they  never  carried 
a  question  after  the  first  day,  and  by  seasoning  every 
one  stronger  and  stronger,  their  numbers  grew  weaker 
and  weaker,  till  on  the  last  question  [2d  June~\,  which 
was  for  appointing  a  joint  committee  of  further  inquiry 
into  the  South  Sea  Company's  affairs,  composed  of 
twelve  Lords  and  twenty-four  Commoners,  to  be  chosen 

5  This  seems  to  corroborate  an  explanation  of  Horace  Walpole's  : — "  It 
has  been  reported  that  Sir  Robert  Wai  pole  had  so  bad  an  opinion  of  man- 
kind, as  to  have  said  '  All  men  have  their  price.'  This  is  not  the  fact :  what 
he  said  was,  'All  these  men  have  their  price,'  alluding  to  a  particular 
case." —  Walpoliana. 


1733.  LORDS'  PROTEST.  239 

by  ballot  and  to  sit  during  the  recess  of  Parliament,  the 
desertion  of  the  deserters  was  so  great  that  they  did  not 
dare  to  stand  a  division. 6  However,  they  protested, 
and  in  so  strong  a  manner,  that  it  was  hardly  possible 
for  words  to  make  up  a  more  severe  invective  on  those 
who  had  opposed  the  appointment  of  this  committee ; 
but  I  believe  it  was  the  first  instance  on  the  books 
where  a  minority  has  been  suffered  in  such  plain  terms 
to  call  a  majority  *'  a  pack  of  ignorant  corrupt  slaves  to 
an  ignorant  corrupt  minister." 

The  two  last  articles  of  this  protest  were  so  very 
extraordinary,  that  I  cannot  help  transcribing  them  : — 

"  Because  the  arts  made  use  of  to  divert  us  from  our  duty 
and  defeat  this  inquiry  give  us  reasons  to  prosecute  it  with 
double  vigour.  For  impunity  of  guilt  (if  any  such  there  is)  is 
the  strongest  encouragement  to  the  repetition  of  the  same  prac- 
tices in  future  times,  by  chalking  out  a  safe  method  of  com- 
mitting the  most  flagitious  frauds  under  the  protection  of  some 
corrupt  and  all-screening  minister." 

"  For  these  reasons  we  think  ourselves  under  an  indispen- 
sable obligation  to  vindicate  our  own  honour,  by  leaving  our 
testimonies  in  the  Journals  of  this  House,  that  we  are  not  under 
the  influence  of  any  man  whatsoever,  whose  safety  may  depend 
on  the  protection  of  fraud  and  corruption,  and  that  we  entered 
upon  this  inquiry  with  a  sincere  and  just  design  of  going  to  the 
bottom  of  the  evil,  and  applying  to  it  the  most  proper  and 
effectual  remedies."7 

A  resolution  was  once  taken  to  expunge  this  protest, 
but  Sir  Robert  declaring  he  had  rather  expunge  the 
protesters,  and  most  people  being  of  opinion  that  unless 
the  expunction  could  be  carried  by  a  great  majority, 

6  It  is  stated  in  the  Journals  that  there  was  a  division,  75  to  70. 

7  It  was  signed  by  twenty-two  peers,  including  most  of  those  mentioned 
in  the  preceding  pages  as  deserters. 


240  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XI. 

the  protest  had  better  remain,  this  resolution  was  laid 
aside :  had  it  been  prosecuted,  it  would  have  certainly 
drawn  them  into  new  inconveniences ;  for  the  present 
temper  and  disposition  of  the  House  would  not  have 
permitted  the  Court  to  execute  this  design  with  a  high 
hand ;  and  had  it  been  executed  at  all,  it  would  not  only 
have  contributed  to  make  the  fame  of  it  spread  still 
wider,  but  given  occasion  to  the  entry  of  a  second  pro- 
test against  the  expunction,  in  which  the  first  would 
have  been  recited,  and  which  Lord  Carteret  (who  drew 
the  other)  had  declared  he  had  ready  to  insert,  and  con- 
ceived in  much  stronger  terms  than  its  predecessor :  so 
that  the  measure  of  expunction,  besides  prolonging  the 
life  of  the  thing  it  was  intended  to  destroy,  would  have 
helped  it  to  generate  and  produce  an  offspring  yet  more 
offensive  than  the  parent. 

This  privilege  of  protesting  with  reasons  is  one  which 
the  Lords  seem  proud  and  fond  of,  but  of  all  Parlia- 
mentary privileges,  forms,  customs,  or  institutions,  it 
seems  to  me  the  most  unaccountable  and  absurd,  as  it 
must  always  carry  along  with  it  a  censure  on  the  con- 
duct of  the  majority  of  the  House,  and  is  generally 
nothing  more  than  an  authorised  libel  on  the  people 
then  in  power :  by  which  means,  if  protests  have  any 
effect  on  posterity,  they  must  have  a  bad  one,  supposing 
it  to  be  of  any  consequence  what  future  times  think  of 
the  equity  or  wisdom  of  the  former  ;  for  as  they  always 
urge  the  strongest  reasons  against  what  is  done,  without 
ever  being  compared  with  those  on  the  other  side,  they 
must  make  every  one  in  futurity  who  is  unacquainted 
with  the  motives  of  the  legislature  for  the  laws  they 
enacted,  imagine  they  either  did  not  understand  the 


1733.  DISMISSALS.  241 

interests  of  their  country,  or,  from  some  mean  corrupt 
views,  sacrificed  it  to  their  own. 

When  the  political  day  of  judgment  came  for  the 
disposition  of  rewards  and  punishments  at  the  end  of 
this  Session,  the  signing  this  protest  was  looked  upon  as 
the  sin  which  was  not  to  be  forgiven ;  accordingly, 
therefore,  the  Duke  of  Montrose  and  Lord  Marchmont 
and  Lord  Cobham,  the  only  three  still  left  in  employ- 
ment who  had  been  guilty  of  this  irremissible  sin,  re- 
ceived letters  of  dismission  the  day  after  the  Parliament 
rose.  As  Lord  Cobham  had  nothing  but  his  regiment 
that  could  be  taken  from  him  (his  government  of  Jersey 
being  for  life),  his  disgrace  made  much  more  noise  than 
that  of  the  other  two.  Lord  Stair's  regiment  was  not 
taken,  for  two  reasons :  in  the  first  place,  because  they 
had  already  divested  him  of  the  employment  of  Ad- 
miral of  Scotland ;  and,  in  the  next  place,  because  with- 
out his  regiment  he  must  have  starved ;  so  that  besides 
doubling  the  popular  clamour  upon  breaking  old  officers 
for  voting  in  Parliament  (which  was  never  approved 
of),  the  Court  would  have  incurred  the  further  odium 
of  carrying  their  resentment  to  the  utter  ruin  of  those 
who  had  disobliged  them,  and,  of  course,  drawn  on  the 
reproaches  of  all  that  numerous  class  among  mankind 
who  are  always  readiest  to  show  their  compassion  to  the 
oppressed  by  railing  at  the  oppressor,  and  find  a  much 
greater  pleasure  in  loading  the  one  with  reproaches  than 
they  would  in  administering  relief  to  the  other. 

A  little  before  the  Parliament  rose  Sir  Robert  Wai- 
pole  came  to  Lord  Hervey  and  said  he  had  so  much 
business  upon  his  hands  that  he  begged  of  him  to  draw 
up  a  speech  for  the  King  to  conclude  the  Session  :  Lord 

VOL.  I.  R 


242  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XI. 

Hervey  did  so.8  But  Sir  Robert  told  him  that  this 
speech  was  full  of  douceurs  to  the  Parliament,  which  he 
thought  they  did  not  deserve,  and  such  as  he  was  sure 
the  King  (though  he  were  to  be  advised  to  it)  would 
never  consent  to  bestow  upon  them ;  and  as  to  the  con- 
clusion, that  flattery  to  the  people  (he  said)  was  what 
the  King  at  this  time  would  as  little  submit  to  as  the 
other.  Lord  Hervey  said  Sir  Robert  was  a  much 
better  judge  than  he  could  pretend  to  be,  either  of  what 
the  King  would  do  or  what  he  ought  to  do ;  but  that 
for  his  part  he  did  not  think  these  were  times  for  any 
good  to  be  expected  from  the  King's  huffing  his  Parlia- 
ment or  seeming  out  of  humour  with  them  ;  and  that  as 
to  the  people,  considering  the  notions  that  had  been 
infused  into  their  minds,  of  the  double  attack  made  on 
their  liberties  by  a  standing  army  and  the  Excise,  and 
considering  the  deep  and  general  impression  these  sug- 
gestions had  made  on  the  minds  of  the  people,  that  the 
King  could  not  be  too  explicit  in  declaring  all  these 
suggestions  entirely  false  and  groundless,  and  that  he 
was  too  careful  of  their  interest  and  too  sensible  of  his 
own  ever  to  entertain  a  thought  of  ruling  them  but  by 
the  known  and  ancient  laws  of  the  Constitution. 

Lord  Hervey  further  added  that  if  such  sweetening 
declarations  and  little  verbal  cajoleries  were  ever  ex- 
pedient and  proper  to  be  made  from  the  Throne  to  the 


s  Lord  Hervey  had  here  given  in  his  MS.  his  project  as  well  as  the 
speech  actually  delivered  :  the  former,  which  is  very  long,  is  hardly  worth 
copying ;  it  concluded  with  some  commonplaces  about  "  the  liberties  of 
the  people  being  inseparable  from  the  grandeur  of  the  Sovereign,"  and,  on 
the  whole,  only  proves,  notwithstanding  Lord  Hervey's  paternal  partiality 
for  his  own  performance,  that  Sir  Robert  Walpole  was  in  every  way  a  much 
better  writer  of  king's  speeches  than  Lord  Hervey. 


1733.  KING'S  SPEECH.  243 

people,  they  never  could  be  more  so  than  at  present ; 
and  that  though  the  King  might  be  wrong-headed 
enough  to  feel  a  little  reluctance  from  his  pride  to  make 
such  professions  to  his  subjects,  or  think  at  first  that  it 
was  bending  too  much  or  letting  down  his  grandeur, 
yet  he  thought  it  would  be  very  easy  to  show  him  that 
such  sort  of  condescension  might  often  contribute  to 
advance  the  interest  and  strengthen  the  authority  of  the 
Crown  by  putting  the  people  in  good  humour ;  whereas 
it  being  nothing  more  than  the  transient  show  of  conde- 
scension, it  could  no  more  really  cheapen  his  dignity 
than  it  could  essentially  hurt  his  prerogative. 

Sir  Robert,  however,  would  not  take  this  advice ;  the 
indignities  that  had  lately  been  offered  to  him  all  over 
the  kingdom,  made  him  have  a  mind  to  draw  the  King 
in  to  show  some  resentment  of  them,  and  declare  him- 
self so  little  satisfied  with  this  conduct,  that  he  was  not 
better  pleased  with  his  people  than  his  people  seemed 
to  be  with  his  Minister.  He,  therefore,  drew  up  another 
speech,  which  the  King  spoke  on  the  llth  of  June,  and 
was  as  follows  : — 

"  MY  LORDS  AND  GENTLEMEN, — The  season  of  the  year 
and  the  dispatch  you  have  given  to  the  public  business  make  it 
proper  for  me  to  put  an  end  to  this  Session  of  Parliament. 

"  GENTLEMEN  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  COMMONS, — I  return  you 
my  thanks  for  the  provisions  you  have  made  for  the  service  of 
the  present  year.  I  have  never  demanded  any  supplies  of  my 
people,  but  what  were  absolutely  necessary  for  the  honour, 
safety,  and  defence  of  me  and  my  kingdom,  and  I  am  always 
best  pleased  when  the  public  expenses  are  supplied  in  a  manner 
least  burdensome  to  ray  subjects. 

"  MY  LORDS  AND  GENTLEMEN, — I  cannot  pass  by  unob- 
served the  wicked  endeavours  that  have  lately  been  made  use 

R2 


244  LORD  HERVEY' S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XI, 

of  to  inflame  the  minds  of  the  people,  and  by  the  most  unjust 
representations  to  raise  tumults  and  disorders  that  almost 
threatened  the  peace  of  the  kingdom  ;  but  I  depend  upon  the 
force  of  truth  to  remove  the  groundless  jealousies  that  have 
been  raised  of  designs  carrying  on  against  the  liberties  of  my 
people,  and  upon  your  known  fidelity  to  defeat  and  frustrate 
the  expectations  of  such  as  delight  in  confusion.  It  is  my  in- 
clination, and  has  always  been  my  study,  to  preserve  the  reli- 
gious and  civil  rights  of  all  my  subjects  ;  let  it  be  your  care  to 
undeceive  the  deluded,  and  to  make  them  sensible  of  their  pre- 
sent happiness,  and  the  hazard  they  run  of  being  unwarily 
drawn  by  specious  pretences  into  their  own  destruction." 

Just  before  the  Parliament  rose  Lord  Hervey  was 
called  up  by  writ  to  the  House  of  Peers  \$th  June], 
where  there  was  so  great  a  want  of  speakers,  that  the 
Court  determined  to  make  a  recruit  by  next  winter  and 
began  with  this.  Lord  Cholmondely  (formerly  Lord 
Malpas),  who  was  just  come  into  the  House  of  Lords  by 
the  death  of  his  father,  and  was  so  vain  as  to  think  that 
the  side  on  which  he  fought  could  want  no  reinforcement, 
did  all  he  could  to  obstruct  this  promotion ;  and  the 
Duke  of  Newcastle,  who  was  simple  enough  not  to  be 
able  to  bear  the  receiving  an  assistance  which  the  whole 
world  knew  he  was  simple  enough  to  want,  joined  with 
Lord  Cholmondely  in  this  opposition ;  but  Lord  Her- 
vey's  interest  at  Court  was  at  present  too  good  for  this 
point  to  be  carried  against  him ;  for  as  the  King  and 
Queen  had  both  a  mind  to  have  him  in  the  House  of 
Lords,  and  that  Sir  Robert  had  proposed  it  first  to 
Lord  Hervey  without  being  solicited  by  him,  it  was 
impossible  for  Sir  Robert,  if  he  had  been  inclined  to  it, 
to  go  back.  Besides,  as  Lord  Hervey 's  pride  and 
vanity  were  fed  with  the  air  of  being  called  out  of  the 


1733.  LORD  HERVEY  CALLED  UP.  245 

whole  House  of  Commons  upon  this  occasion,  and  as 
he  had  a  mind  to  strengthen  the  interest  of  his  family 
in  Parliament  by  bringing  one  of  his  brothers  into  his 
place  [at  Bury],  so  he  embraced  this  offer  with  too  much 
readiness,  and  pushed  the  immediate  execution  of  it  with 
too  much  warmth,  for  the  envy  or  ill-will  of  his  adver- 
saries to  be  able  to  stop  it.9 

The  day  before  the  Parliament  rose  [\2th  June]  the 
three  vacant  Garters  were  given  to  the  Prince  of  Orange, 
the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  and  Lord  Wilmington,  and  the 
day  after  it  rose  the  Court  went  for  a  month  to  Rich- 
mond, where  the  King  and  Queen  were  always  so  much 
in  private  (and  indeed  the  House  would  not  allow  them 
to  be  much  in  public)  that  they  saw  nobody  but  their 
servants. 

From  hence  they  went  to  Hampton  Court,  and  soon 
after  they  came  there  the  Duke  of  Bolton  was  dis- 
missed from  all  his  employments.10  In  the  Government 
of  the  Isle  of  Wight  he  was  succeeded  by  the  Duke  of 


9  This  was  a  sudden  resolution,  not  communicated  to  Lord  Bristol,  who 
had  a  strong  feeling  against  Walpole  and  his  administration,  and,  notwith- 
standing his  general  indulgence  for,  and  admiration  of  Lord  Hervey,  disap- 
proved this  step.  "  As  I  am  "  (he  writes  from  Ickworth  9th  June,  1733) 
"  a  stranger  to  the  many  secret  motives  which  must  have  influenced  your 
choice  so  suddenly  to  exchange  the  important  house  you  was  a  member  of 
for  so  insignificant  a  one  as  your  friend  and  you  have  endeavoured  to  make 
that  you  are  to  be  translated  to,  I  will  not  take  upon  me  to  determine 
whether  it  was  on  the  whole  well  judged  or  not."  Lord  Bristol  intimates 
his  opinion  that  Lord  Hervey,  instead  of  submitting  to  be  "  kicked  up 
stairs,"  should  have  had  efficient  office  as  a  reward  for  the  ability  and  zeal 
he  had  shown  in  the  late  arduous  session. 

1°  From  a  regiment  of  dragoons  (given  to  the  Duke  of  Argyll)  ;  the 
Lord-Lieutenancy  of  Hampshire  (given  to  Lord  Lymington)  ;  and  the 
Government  of  the  Isle  of  Wight.  The  dismissal  of  his  Grace  and  Lord 
Cobham  from  their  regiments  made  a  great  outcry.  The  great  Lord 
Chatham  was  similarly  dismissed  from  a  cornetcy  in  1736. 


246  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XI. 

Montague,  a  man  of  little  more  consequence  than  his 
being  a  Duke,  who  had  been  long  wavering  between  the 
Court  and  the  Opposition,  and  took  this  opportunity  to 
sell  himself  for  full  as  much  as  he  was  worth,  by  getting 
the  income  of  this  employment  increased  to  15001.  a- 
year.11 


11  There  is  here  some  erasure  in  the  MS.,  and  a  page  or  two  seems 
wanting.  From  the  few  words  visible,  it  seems  to  have  related  to  the 
increasing  "  coldness  between  the  Prince  and  his  parents,"  of  which  we 
shall  see  enough  hereafter. 


1733.  AFFAIRS  OF  POLAND.  247 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Affairs  of  Poland — Rival  claims  of  the  Elector  of  Saxony  and  Stanislaus 
Leczinski — The  Emperor  and  the  Czarina  support  the  former,  France 
the  latter — Stanislaus  elected  by  intrigue  and  violence — Approved  by 
Lord  Hervey  and  Walpole,  but  distasteful  to  the  King  and  Newcastle — 
Stanislaus  expelled,  and  Augustus  elected — War  between  France  and  the 
Emperor — Treaty  between  France  and  Savoy — Opinion  of  George  II. 
on  it — The  French  seize  Lorraine — Royal  Hunting — Lord  Hervey's 
intercourse  and  conversation  with  the  King  and  Queen — Advocates 
neutrality :  so  does  Walpole — Negotiation  in  London  between  the  Em- 
peror and  Spain — Delays  of  the  Emperor — Spain  concludes  with  France 
— The  Emperor  loses  Italy. 

THE  competitors  for  the  crown  of  Poland,  upon  the 
demise  of  King  Augustus  [1  Feb.,  1733],  were  the 
Elector  of  Saxony  [Frederic  Augustus],  son  to  the  late 
King,  and  Stanislaus  Leczinski,  father  to  the  Queen  of 
France.  Stanislaus  had  been  formerly  made  King  of 
Poland  by  Charles  XII.  of  Sweden,  when  that  madman 
deposed  King  Augustus,  and,  after  the  defeat  of  the 
King  of  Sweden,  had  been  himself  deposed  by  King 
Augustus,  who  again  regained  the  crown  of  Poland  and 
died  in  possession  of  it. 

The  Emperor  [Charles  VI.]  on  this  occasion  op- 
posed the  party  of  Stanislaus,  and  espoused  that  of  the 
Elector  of  Saxony,  for  a  double  reason:  the  one  was, 
to  prevent  France  from  having  any  interest  in  so  near 
and  powerful  a  neighbour ;  and  the  other,  his  desiring 
to  set  a  Prince  on  the  throne  of  Poland  who  would 


248  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XII. 

enter  into  the  guarantee  of  the  Pragmatic  Sanction,1 
and  this  the  Elector  of  Saxony  had  promised  to  do, 
though  he  had  married  one  of  the  daughters  of  the 
Emperor  Joseph,  and  consequently  gave  away  by  this 
guarantee  all  the  right  his  wife  might  pretend  to  any 
share  of  the  Austrian  dominions;  and  as  she  was 
daughter  to  the  elder  brother  of  the  present  Emperor, 
her  claim  and  that  of  the  Electress  of  Bavaria,  her 
younger  and  only  sister,  were  certainly  the  strongest 
that  could  be  pleaded  in  bar  to  the  undivided  suc- 
cession of  the  eldest  daughter  to  the  present  Emperor, 
on  whom  all  that  great  inheritance,  by  this  settlement 
of  the  Pragmatic  Sanction,  was  to  fall. 

The  Czarina  joined  with  the  Emperor  in  concerting 
measures  to  defeat  the  pretensions  of  Stanislaus  and 
promote  those  of  the  Elector  of  Saxony.  The  interest 
Muscovy  had  in  preventing  Stanislaus  from  reascending 
the  throne  was  for  fear,  as  Sweden  had  formerly  made 
him  King,  he  might  be  inclined,  or  think  himself  in 
gratitude  obliged,  as  soon  as  he  became  so  again,  to 
assist  the  Swedes  in  recovering  what  the  Muscovites 
had  taken  from  them  by  conquest  and  still  retained, 
particularly  Livonia,  which  was  the  loss  under  which 
they  were  the  most  impatient. 

France  had  no  other  interest  in  this  affair  than  the 
glory  of  presiding  in  it,  increasing  the  grandeur  of  the 
father-in-law  to  her  own  King,  and  establishing  a 
monarch  in  Poland,  who,  by  the  ties  both  of  blood  and 


i  The  Pragmatic  Sanction  was  the  settlement  made  by  the  Emperor 
Charles  VI.  in  1722  of  his  hereditary  dominions  upon  his  daughter  Maria 
Theresa,  which  had  been  confirmed  by  the  diet  of  the  Empire,  and  gua- 
ranteed by  England,  France,  and  Holland,  and  most  of  the  other  powers. 


1733.  AFFAIRS  OF  POLAND.  249 

gratitude,  she  was  sure,  in  any  future  disputes  that 
should  arise  in  Europe,  must  always  give  her  cause  the 
preference  and  her  interest  assistance. 

The  Primate  of  Poland,2  who  had  been  gained  by  the 
money  of  France  to  the  interest  of  Stanislaus,  in  his 
first  step  towards  an  election  proposed  an  oath  to  be 
taken  by  all  the  Electors  not  to  choose  a  foreigner. 
This  oath,  which,  by  the  strength  of  the  party  of  Stanis- 
laus and  the  authority  of  the  Primate,  was  forced  on 
the  people,  entirely  set  aside  the  Elector  of  Saxony. 
The  Emperor,  therefore,  and  the  Czarina  ordered  their 
ministers  at  Warsaw  to  protest  against  it,  both  of  them 
pretending  that  it  abridged  the  freedom  of  the  Poles, 
who  had  a  right  to  choose  what  King  they  thought  fit, 
and  for  the  maintenance  of  which  freedom  of  election 
the  Emperor  said  he  was  by  treaty  a  guarantee.  The 
Czarina  went  still  farther,  for  she  absolutely  protested 
against  the  election  of  Stanislaus,  who  she  insisted  by 
a  treaty  now  subsisting  between  Russia  and  Poland  was 
for  ever  proscribed  and  made  incapable  of  reascending 
the  throne.  When  the  Muscovite  Ambassador  at 
Warsaw  made  this  protest  to  the  Primate,  he  did  it 
attended  only  with  a  few  domestics,  and  at  the  same 
time  told  the  Primate  publicly,  if  the  remonstrances 
were  not  listened  to,  that  there  were  thirty  thousand 
Russians  then  on  the  confines  of  Poland,  who  should 
penetrate  his  country,  lay  waste  whatever  they  found  in 
their  way,  march  directly  to  Warsaw,  and  make  their 
whole  city  a  scene  of  blood,  confusion,  and  ruin. 

2  The  Archbishop  of  Gnesna,  Primate  of  Poland  (at  this  time  Theodore 
Potocki),  exercised,  in  right  of  that  see,  the  sovereign  authority  of  the 
State  during  any  interregnum. 


250  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XII. 

This  defiance  being  thrown  out  at  an  assembly  of  the 
Poles,  in  a  field  where  great  numbers  were  met  to  con- 
sult on  some  point  relating  to  the  present  critical  junc- 
ture of  affairs,  the  Muscovite  Ambassador  had  like  to 
have  been  murdered  on  the  spot,  and  was  with  great 
difficulty  rescued  by  his  own  train  out  of  the  hands  of 
some  warm  partisans  of  King  Stanislaus,  who  were 
already  advanced  to  destroy  him. 

After  these  verbal  representations  and  arguments, 
these  two  great  powers,  the  Emperor  and  Czarina,  pro- 
ceeded to  the  ratio  ultima  regum,  and  prepared  two 
great  armies  to  march  to  the  frontiers  of  Poland,  the 
Czarina  on  the  side  of  Lithuania  and  the  Emperor  on 
that  of  Silesia ;  whereupon  France  also  marched  sixty 
thousand  men,  under  the  command  of  Marshal  Berwick, 
natural  son  to  King  James  II.  of  England,  to  the  banks 
of  the  Rhine,  and  threatened,  if  the  Emperor  entered 
Poland,  or  any  way  by  force  pretended  to  influence  the 
election,  that  he  himself  should  be  immediately  at- 
tacked, either  by  the  siege  of  Luxembourg  or  in  what- 
ever quarter  he  should  be  found  most  vulnerable  or 
most  exposed. 

The  Emperor,  finding  that  neither  Holland,  who  had 
signed  a  treaty  of  neutrality  with  France,  nor  England, 
who  did  not  care  to  be  drawn  into  any  dispute  in  this 
affair,  would  stand  by  him  in  the  point  he  was  pushing, 
began  to  think  of  retreating  as  fast  as  he  could  from  the 
unadvised  hasty  steps  he  had  taken.  But  the  same 
thing  happened  in  this  occurrence  among  the  great 
powers  of  Europe  that  often  happens  in  private  trans- 
actions among  people  of  inferior  rank,  which  was,  that 
after  beginning  to  dispute  on  a  trifle,  to  which  they 


1733.  AFFAIRS  OF  POLAND.  251 

either  were,  or  at  least  ought  to  have  been,  very  indif- 
ferent, by  little  and  little  they  worked  themselves  up  to 
be  so  much  in  earnest,  and  each  of  them  piqued  them- 
selves so  much  on  that  point  of  honour  which  everybody 
makes  to  himself  of  going  through  with  what  he  under- 
takes, that  all  Europe  was  now  upon  the  very  verge  of 
being  embroiled  in  a  war,  which  no  one  power  in  Eu- 
rope was  either  inclined  to  or  in  a  condition  to  under- 
take. France  was  drained  of  all  her  specie,  which  had 
been  expended  in  corrupting  the  Piastes3  at  Warsaw, 
and  Cardinal  Fleury,  both  in  principle  and  interest, 
was  so  much  averse  to  a  war,  that  nothing  but  the  im- 
possibility of  avoiding  it  could  bring  him  ever  to  consent 
to  declare  it. 

The  Emperor  was  still  less  disposed  to  it,  having  no 
money,  his  troops  dispersed,  and  weak  in  every  place 
where  he  had  anything  to  maintain :  he  had  been  for 
two  years  evacuating  Italy ;  he  was  able  to  make  no 
opposition  to  the  French  on  the  Rhine  ;  and  was  so  de- 
stitute of  forces,  ammunition,  provisions,  and  everything 
necessary  to  resist  a  siege  in  the  Netherlands,  that  if 
the  French  had  not  known  that  neither  the  English  nor 
the  Dutch  could  suffer  that  barrier  to  be  broken,  they 
might  have  taken  all  he  possessed  in  Flanders  in  half  a 
campaign. 

This  Imperial  bully,  therefore,  the  series  of  whose 
conduct  for  several  years  past  had  always  been  either 
making  promises  he  did  not  perform  or  throwing  out 
menaces  he  did  not  dare  to  execute,  now  grew  fright- 
ened, and  that  he  might  not  give  France  an  open  handle 

3   Piastus  was  an  old  Polish  sovereign  and  saint  (A.D.  850),  after  whom 
native  sovereigns  and  those  who  favoured  that  principle  were  called  Piastes. 


252  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XII. 

for  attacking  him,  or  a  pretence  for  passing  the  Rhine, 
countermanded  the  marching  those  troops  that  were  in 
Silesia,  and  ordered  them  not  to  advance  towards 
Poland,  but  to  keep  in  an  absolute  state  of  inaction. 

But  the  Russians  having  already  entered  Lithuania, 
and  continuing  their  march  towards  Warsaw,  the 
French  said  that  as  the  Russians  were  put  in  motion  by 
the  contrivance  of  the  Emperor,  and  took  their  mea- 
sures underhand  in  concert  with  him,  so  whatever  im- 
pediment was  made  by  the  Muscovites  to  the  election 
of  Stanislaus,  they  should  look  upon  it  in  the  same  light 
as  if  it  were  done  by  the  Imperial  troops,  and  conse- 
quently resent  it  accordingly. 

In  the  meantime  the  French  fitted  out  a  squadron  of 
fourteen  men-of-war  for  the  conveyance,  as  they  pre- 
tended, of  King  Stanislaus  to  Dantzic,  which  fleet,  to 
carry  on  the  grimace,4  actually  sailed  to  the  Baltic,  as  if 
he  had  been  on  board,  whilst  in  reality  he  went  incog- 
nito by  land,  and  lay  concealed  in  Warsaw  till  the  day 
of  election  in  the  house  of  M.  Monti,  the  French  Am- 
bassador. 

Some  time  before  the  election  another  party  began 
to  gather  strength  in  Poland — a  party  that  was  not  for 
choosing  either  Stanislaus  or  the  Elector  of  Saxony, 
but  who  proposed  some  third  man  to  be  taken,  who 
should  be  a  nobleman  and  native  of  their  own,  in  order 
to  avoid  a  scission  (which  is  the  term  the  Poles  have  to 
express  an  election  decided  by  arms  and  not  by  voices). 

4  The  Chevalinr  de  Thiange,  in  the  costume  of  Stanislaus,  and  in  his 
coach,  travelled  to  Brest,  and  there  embarked  under  a  royal  salute,  while 
Stanislaus,  in  a  mean  disguise  and  by  many  artifices,  crossed  Germany  and 
Prussia,  and  arrived  at  Warsaw  on  the  8th  of  September,  where  he  re- 
mained concealed  till  his  election  of  the  llth. 


1733.  ELECTION  OF  STANISLAUS.  253 

Many  people  were  of  opinion  that  the  Primate  under- 
hand encouraged  this  party,  who  were  for  choosing  a 
Piaste,  or  noble  native  of  Poland,  hoping  by  that 
means  to  make  the  election  fall  on  his  own  nephew ; 
but  whether  this  project  was  ever  in  his  thoughts,  or 
whether  he  only  could  not  bring  it  to  bear,  is  what  I  do 
not  pretend  to  determine ;  though,  considering  the 
character  of  the  man,  I  think  the  last  conjecture  the 
most  probable. 

When  the  day  of  election  came  [_\\th  September^ 
the  Primate  rode  into  the  field,  preceded  by  Ponia- 
towski,  Regimentary  of  the  Crown,  who  harangued  the 
nobles  in  favour  of  Stanislaus,  and  told  them  it  was  the 
only  choice  that  could  prevent  a  scission  and  preserve 
the  tranquillity  of  the  kingdom.  Others  said  that  the 
election  of  a  Piaste  only  could  have  these  effects,  and 
put  in  nomination  Prince  Wisnowieski,  Castellan  of 
Cracow.  Prince  Lubomirski,  Palatine  of  Sendomir, 
declared  also  against  Stanislaus,  and  said  to  the  Count 
de  Tarlo,  Palatine  of  Lublin,  "  You  used  to  threaten 
death  to  any  that  should  oppose  Stanislaus  in  the  field 
of  election ;  if  you  dare  to  prosecute  your  threats, 
behold  in  me  the  man  who  opposes  him  and  bids  you 
defiance."  The  Starost  Opoczinski  went  still  further, 
and  openly  in  the  field  of  election  said  to  the  whole 
collected  party  of  Stanislaus,  "  I  speak  in  favour  of 
liberty  and  against  any  election  made  in  consequence 
of  a  restraining  oath;  and  if  this  is  being  an  enemy 
to  my  country,  let  him  who  thinks  so  strike  me  to 
the  heart,"  in  pronouncing  which  words  he  bared  his 
breast  and  presented  it  to  the  stroke.  But  a  little 
tumult  arising  upon  it,  and  some  of  the  party  of  Stanis- 


254  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XII. 

laus  advancing  to  take  him  at  his  word,  he  was  hurried 
out  of  the  field  by  some  of  his  own  suite,  whilst  the  rest 
of  his  party  put  themselves  between  him  and  his  assail- 
ants. Immediately  after  this  all  the  Palatines  who 
were  against  Stanislaus,  finding  they  were  likely  to  be 
overpowered,  retired  to  the  other  side  of  the  River 
Vistula,  after  which  the  Primate  brought  on  the  elec- 
tion, and  Stanislaus  was  chosen ;  six  people  of  condition 
who  were  against  him,  and  had  not  retired  with  the 
rest,  being  cut  to  pieces  on  the  spot  for  opposing  him  : 
notwithstanding  which,  the  election  was  notified  by  the 
French  minister  at  every  Court  in  Europe  as  unani- 
mous. 

As  soon  as  the  election  was  over,  the  Electors,  with 
the  Primate  and  Regimentary  of  the  Crown  at  their 
head,  went  to  the  House  of  the  French  Ambassador  to 
acquaint  Stanislaus  with  his  being  once  more  King  of 
Poland,  and  pay  their  homage  to  their  new  sovereign ; 
from  thence  he  was  conducted  to  the  castle,  with  all 
those  honours  and  acclamations  generally  given  to 
royal  idols  when  attended  only  by  their  own  votaries. 

But  upon  coming  to  the  castle  and  looking  out  of 
the  windows,  when  he  saw  how  numerous  the  party 
appeared  that  had  passed  the  Vistula,  and  were  col- 
lected at  Praga,  his  joy  was  extremely  abated,  and 
turning  to  the  Primate,  he  said,  "How  much  you  de- 
ceived me  when  you  told  me  my  election  was  unani- 
mous !" 

However,  after  the  news  was  spread  of  his  being 
chosen,  most  people  were  of  opinion  that  the  lowering 
clouds  of  war  that  had  hung  over  Europe  during  the 
suspension  of  the  election  would  soon  be  dispersed,  and 


1733.  ELECTION  OF  STANISLAUS.  255 

many  incidents  contributed,  besides  that  of  Stanislaus 
being  now  actually  King  (which  alone  made  opposition 
a  more  up-hill  game),  to  make  the  world  imagine  that 
this  sudden-raised  tempest  would  as  suddenly  subside. 
The  one  was,  that  the  Emperor,  finding  he  was  not  likely 
to  be  supported  by  any  of  the  Southern  powers,  himself 
gave  but  cold  encouragement  to  the  Russians  to  pro- 
ceed, though  he  had  been  so  zealous  in  pushing  them  on 
to  the  undertaking.  In  the  next  place,  both  the 
Muscovites  and  the  Emperor  were  likely  to  have  more 
material  business  of  their  own  upon  their  hands :  the 
first  being  under  apprehensions  of  the  approach  of  a 
great  body  of  Tartars,  who  had  made  a  descent  on  the 
side  of  Muscovy ;  and  the  last  fearing  that  a  late  vic- 
tory gained  by  the  Turks  over  the  Persians,  might  in- 
duce those  ancient  enemies  of  his  Imperial  Majesty  to 
turn  their  arms  to  this  part  of  the  globe. 

This  being  the  present  situation  of  affairs,  every  man 
in  England  who  had  the  interest  of  his  country  at  heart 
and  understood  it,  was  glad  when  the  news  came  that 
the  election  was  over  and  made  in  favour  of  Stanislaus : 
in  the  first  place,  because  everybody  of  the  thin  class  I 
have  mentioned  (that  is,  who  both  mean  and  know  what 
is  right)  is  always  thoroughly  convinced  that  the  most 
pernicious  circumstances  his  country  can  be  in  are  those 
of  war,  as  we  must  be  great  losers  whilst  the  war  lasts, 
and  can  never  be  great  gainers  when  it  ends ;  in  the 
next  place,  those  who  had  the  least  degree  of  foresight 
could  easily  perceive  that  as  matters  stood  at  this  time, 
the  success  of  Stanislaus  was  the  only  thing  that  could 
possibly  prevent  a  war.  For  had  he,  like  the  Prince 


256  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XII. 

of  Conti  at  the  last  election,5  been  sent  back  to  France, 
who  could  imagine  that  that  Court,  after  the  vast  ex- 
pense made  in  his  favour  at  Warsaw,  and  with  such  an 
army  on  the  Rhine,  would  acquiesce  under  the  disap- 
pointment and  pocket  the  disgrace,  and  sit  down  the 
quiet  dupe  of  the  Court  of  Vienna,  with  this  rod  of 
vengeance  in  their  hands,  and  the  backs  of  their  anta- 
gonists so  exposed  to  correction? 

But  notwithstanding  our  interest  was  thus  conse- 
quentially so  much  concerned  in  this  event,  few  people 
in  England  were  pleased  with  it ;  the  honest  patriots 
in  opposition  to  the  Court,  on  one  side,  being  sorry  that 
so  unpopular  an  incident  as  the  breaking  out  of  a  war 
would  have  been  for  the  Government  at  this  time,  was 
likely  to  be  prevented ;  and  the  wise  courtiers,  on  the 
other  part,  who  knew  the  inveterate  hatred  our  King 
bore  to  the  French  at  this  time,  being  rather  desirous 
to  risk  their  own  power,  and  perhaps  his  crown,  than 
not  make  their  court  to  the  unreasonable  prejudices  of 
their  warm  ignorant  master. 

For  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  he  always  talked  as  the 
King  talked ;  and  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  who,  to  give 
him  his  due,  seldom  slipped  an  occasion  to  manifest  his 
good  judgment,  was  foremost  in  his  declarations  on  this 
occasion  ;  Lord  Hervey  (who  had  acted  more  prudently 
to  have  been  glad  in  private,  than  to  declare  his  joy) 
said,  for  his  part  he  owned  he  thought  the  success  of 
Stanislaus  the  best  news  he  had  heard  a  good  while, 

6  In  1697,  after  the  death  of  Sobieski,  the  Prince  de  Conti,  after  being 
elected,  was  ousted  by  Augustus  of  Saxony,  but  Poland  was  obliged  to 
make  amende  both  in  money  and  verbal  apologies  to  France. 


1733.  ELECTION  OF  STANISLAUS.  257 

The  King  took  him  up  very  short,  and  said  it  was  no 
great  proof  of  his  justice  to  rejoice  at  the  good  fortune 
of  a  man  that  had  been  a  traitor  and  a  rebel  to  his 
lawful  sovereign,  and  had  usurped  his  crown.  Lord 
Hervey  assured  the  King  he  neither  considered  the 
justice  of  Stanislaus'  former  nor  present  pretensions  to 
the  crown  ;  that  all  the  reason  he  had  for  being  glad  on 
this  occasion  was,  having  the  welfare  of  England  and 
the  ease  of  his  Majesty's  Government  more  at  heart 
than  any  other  consideration. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole,  who  generally  thought  and  acted 
with  better  sense  than  anybody  about  him  or  against 
him,  kept  his  opinion  to  himself,  wished  success  to 
Stanislaus  internally,  and  in  a  quiet  way  did  all  he 
could  to  procure  it.  Besides  the  national  aversion 
which  all  Germans  are  born  with  to  the  French,  the 
King  had  other  little  motives  to  wish  them  disappointed 
on  this  occasion ;  which  were,  first,  the  making  another 
Elector  a  King,  and  next  the  aggrandizing  the  Em- 
peror, whom,  as  Elector  of  Hanover,  he  always  looked 
upon  as  his  chief: — reasons  that  would  have  had  but 
small  weight  in  a  great  mind ;  but  as  weak  ones  are 
generally  actuated  by  weak  principles,  so  the  strongest 
biasses  in  narrow  souls  generally  consist  of  such  trifles. 

The  Queen  herself  was  enough  prejudiced  too  on  this 
side,  till  Sir  Robert  Walpole  unwarped  her  from  it,  and 
made  her  see  how  much  this  inclination  jarred  with  her  own 
interest.  He  convinced  her  that  the  Emperor  had  been 
originally  in  the  wrong  in  the  treaty  made  between  him, 
Muscovy,  and  Denmark,  for  the  exclusion  of  Stanislaus  ; 
that  it  was,  moreover,  extremely  impolitic  in  his  Im- 

VOL.  i.  s 


258  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XII. 

perial  Majesty  to  run  the  risk  of  losing  Italy  for  the 
sake  of  nominating  a  King  of  Poland ;  that  his  suffering 
his  Ambassador  to  act  constantly  in  conjunction  with 
that  of  Muscovy  at  Warsaw  and  go  with  him  in  person 
to  the  Primate,  bidding  him  choose  Stanislaus  at  his 
peril,  were  steps  not  to  be  justified.  He  further  told 
her  that  nothing  could  do  the  King  so  much  disservice 
at  this  time  as  engaging  in  war ;  first,  as  the  name  of 
war  was  seldom  acceptable  in  this  country,  but  that  a 
war  on  account  of  a  King  of  Poland  was  certainly  what 
the  nation  could  never  be  brought  to  think  necessary  or 
expedient ;  and  as  the  elections  were  now  coming  on, 
the  ferment  in  the  country  so  great,  and  every  circum- 
stance that  could  blacken  the  Government  so  indus- 
triously improved,  it  was  absolutely  necessary  for  us  to 
keep  out  of  the  squabble,  and  that  the  only  part  for  us 
to  take  was  to  remain  in  an  absolute  state  of  inaction, 
without  entering  into  any  obligation  of  neutrality ;  for 
to  advise  giving  the  Emperor  any  assistance  on  this 
occasion  would  be  (all  these  circumstances  considered) 
as  great  an  imprudence  in  the  English  ministers  as  it  was 
in  the  Imperial  counsellors  to  bring  their  master  into  a 
situation  that  made  assistance  so  necessary.  This  was 
the  language  Sir  Robert  Walpole  talked  to  the  Queen. 
In  the  meantime  the  Muscovites  continuing  their 
march  towards  Warsaw,  and  having  called  in  the 
Cossacks  and  Kalmucs  to  their  assistance  and  being 
joined  by  the  Malcontents  of  Poland,  King  Stanislaus, 
the  Primate  and  their  party,  who  were  in  no  condition 
to  make  any  resistance,  were  obliged  to  leave  Warsaw 
and  retire  to  Dantzic ;  soon  after  which  the  party  of 


1733.  KING  OF  SARDINIA.  259 

the  Elector  of  Saxony  proceeded  to  an  election  of  their 
own,  and  chose  him  King. 

France  was  so  much  irritated  at  this  proceeding,  that 
war  against  the  Emperor  was  now  declared  in  form ; 
Marechal  Berwick  passed  the  Rhine  and  besieged  Fort 
Kehl ;  and  an  army  of  40,000  men,  under  the  command 
of  Marshal  Villars,  passed  the  Alps  (late  as  it  was  in 
the  year)  in  order  to  attack  the  Emperor  in  Italy :  this 
step  was  taken  in  consequence  of  a  treaty  concluded 
between  the  Courts  of  France  and  Turin,  by  which 
treaty  the  King  of  Sardinia  obliged  himself  to  give  free 
passage  through  his  territories  to  the  French  troops.  I 
cannot  help  observing  here,  how  very  impertinently 
Lord  Essex,  the  English  Ambassador  at  Turin,  was 
treated  on  this  occasion  by  that  Court :  as  it  was  the 
desire  of  England  at  this  time  to  keep  the  possessions 
of  Italy  in  the  hands  they  now  were,  and  to  preserve 
the  tranquillity  of  that  country,  Lord  Essex  was  ordered 
from  his  Court  to  propose  an  accommodation  between 
the  Emperor  and  the  King  of  Sardinia,  the  plan  of 
which  accommodation  the  Sardinian  ministers  desired 
his  Lordship  to  state  to  them  in  writing  three  weeks 
after  they  had  actually  signed  a  treaty  with  the  Court 
of  France,  by  which  they  obliged  themselves  to  join 
with  France  in  attacking  him. 

The  King,  in  telling  Lord  Hervey  this  circumstance, 
one  morning  at  breakfast  in  the  garden  at  Hampton 
Court,  when  nobody  was  present  but  the  Queen,  said 
that  the  King  of  Sardinia's  conduct  appeared  to  him  to 
be  full  as  weak  with  regard  to  his  own  interest  as  it  was 
impertinent  with  regard  to  England,  and  that  he  would 
soon  find  he  had  exchanged  an  ally  for  a  master.  "  His 

s2 


260  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XII. 

Sardinian  Majesty,"  replied  Lord  Hervey,6  "  is  so  poor 
a  creature,  that  very  few  testimonies  of  his  folly  could 
surprise  me ;  but  this  step  would  prove  all  the  people 
about  him  equal  fools  to  their  master,  if  one  imagined 
they  advised  this  measure  as  thinking  it  for  the  interest 
of  their  country:  for  which  reason  (continued  Lord 
Hervey)  I  cannot  help  believing  he  must  have  been 
secretly  sold  to  France  by  some  Minister  in  whom  he 
has  confided  upon  this  occasion." 

"  That  may  easily  be,"  the  King  answered,  "  if  he  is 
really  so  poor  a  creature  as  you  say."  Lord  Hervey 
assured  his  Majesty  that  it  was  impossible  to  describe 
either  the  aspect  or  the  understanding  of  this  King  as 
meaner  than  it  had  appeared  to  him,  and  that  the  short 
acquaintance  he  had  had  with  him  five  years  ago  at  the 
Court  of  Turin,  during  the  life  and  before  the  abdica- 
tion of  his  father,  had  given  him  so  low  an  opinion  of  his 
abilities,  that  he  could  imagine  no  error  too  gross  for  his 
Sardinian  Majesty  to  be  capable  of  committing.  The 
Queen  asked  Lord  Hervey  if  this  was  said  to  be  merely 
owing  to  his  natural  want  of  understanding,  or  if  his 
father  had  ever  been  reproached  with  neglecting  his 
education.  Lord  Hervey  told  her  Majesty  that  his 
father  had  always,  as  he  had  heard,  kept  him  in  great 
subjection,  but  that  no  pains  had  been  spared  to  form 
him  or  to  make  something  of  him,  if  there  had  been  any 
materials  to  work  upon. — Here  the  King  interrupted, 
and  colouring  with  a  mixture  of  anger  and  hatred,  said, 


6  Lord  Hervey's  recent  visit  to  Italy  had  made  him  personally  acquainted 
with  those  Courts ;  but  his  low  estimate  of  the  personal  character  of  the 
King  of  Sardinia  is  not  borne  out  either  by  the  historians— nor  apparently 
by  the  events. 


1733.  FRENCH  INVADE  LORRAINE.  261 

"  I  do  not  want  to  know  that  there  may  be  people  on 
whom  all  pains  and  care  in  education  are  thrown  away." 7 
— Upon  which  the  Queen  winked  at  Lord  Hervey  to 
make  no  reply,  and  immediately  turned  the  conversa- 
tion. 

At  the  same  time  that  the  French  were  attacking 
the  Emperor  in  Italy,  they  also  sent  15,000  men  to  take 
possession  of  the  duchy  of  Lorraine,  whilst  his  Most 
Christian  Majesty,  to  excuse  the  abrupt  roughness  of  so 
uncharitable  a  deed,  was  pleased  to  send  this  message  to 
his  Welsh  aunt,8  the  Duchess-Dowager  of  that  country, 
who  was  then  at  Luneville  : — 

"  That  reasons  of  State  had  forced  him  very  unwillingly  to 
take  this  step,  but  that  if  her  Serene  Highness,  till  the  present 
storm  in  Europe  should  be  blown  over,  would  please  to  take 
up  her  residence  in  any  part  of  his  dominions,  she  had  but  to 
name  the  place,  and  he  would  take  care  to  have  it  prepared  for 
her  with  all  the  respect  due  to  her  birth,  as  a  grand- daughter 
of  France,  and  that  she  might  depend  on  every  mark  of  affec- 
tion she  could  claim  from  a  Prince  who  was  so  nearly  related 
to  her." 

Her  Highness  received  this  regal  compliment  as  it 
deserved,  and,  with  a  magnanimity  worthy  of  any 
Spartan  heroine,  sent  the  King  of  France  this  answer : — 

"  That  she  did  not  think  it  at  all  proper  for  the  mother  to 
take  sanctuary  in  the  dominions  of  the  man  who  had  so  un- 
equitably  seized  the  son's,  and  that  she  should  never  hope  to 
receive  favours  where  she  had  not  found  justice." 

After  which  she  retired  with  her  younger  son  and  her 
two  daughters  to  Brussels. 

'  Allusion  to  Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales.  See  the  close  of  the  last 
chapter. 

8  She  was  sister  of  the  Regent  Duke  of  Orleans. 


262  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XII. 

During  all  these  transactions  Lord  Hervey,  who  was 
as  much  in  Sir  Kobert  Walpole's  way  of  thinking  as  he 
was  in  his  interest,  and  vehemently  against  engaging 
England  in  this  war,  had  more  frequent  opportunities 
than  any  other  person  about  the  Court  of  learning  the 
Queen's  sentiments  on  these  affairs,  and  conveying  to 
her  his  own.  Wednesdays  and  Saturdays,  which  were 
the  King's  days  for  hunting,  he  had  her  to  himself  for 
four  or  five  hours,  her  Majesty  always  hunting  in  a 
chaise,  and  as  she  neither  saw  nor  cared  to  see  much  of 
the  chase,  she  had  undertaken  to  mount  Lord  Hervey 
the  whole  summer  (who  loved  hunting  as  little  as  she 
did),  so  that  he  might  ride  constantly  by  the  side  of 
her  chaise,  and  entertain  her  whilst  other  people  were 
entertaining  themselves  with  hearing  dogs  bark  and 
seeing  crowds  gallop. 

Sunday  and  Monday  Lord  Hervey  lay  constantly  in 
London  ;  every  other  morning  he  used  to  walk  with  the 
Queen  and  her  daughters  at  Hampton  Court.  His  real 
business  in  London  was  pleasure ;  but  as  he  always  told 
the  King  it  was  to  pick  up  news,  to  hear  what  people 
said,  to  see  how  they  looked,  and  to  inform  their  Ma- 
jesties what  was  thought  by  all  parties  of  the  present 
posture  of  affairs,  he  by  these  means  made  his  pleasure 
in  town  and  his  interest  at  Court  reciprocally  conducive 
to  each  other. 

These  excursions  put  it  also  in  his  power  to  say 
things  as  from  other  people's  mouths,  which  he  did  not 
dare  to  venture  from  his  own,  and  often  to  deliver  that 
as  the  effect  of  his  observation  which  in  reality  flowed 
only  from  his  opinion.  However,  that  he  might  not 
draw  on  others  the  anger  which  by  this  method  he 


1733.  CONVERSATIONS  WITH  THE  KING.  263 

diverted  from  himself,  he  used,  both  to  the  King  and 
the  Queen,  to  say  he  would  willingly  let  them  know 
everything  he  heard,  but  must  beg  leave  always  to  be 
excused  from  telling  where  he  had  it  or  from  whom ; 
and  as  it  was  of  much  more  use  to  their  Majesties  to 
know  what  was  said  than  by  whom,  so  he  hoped  they 
would  give  him  leave,  whilst  for  their  sakes  he  com- 
municated the  one,  for  his  own  to  be  silent  upon  the 
other. 

On  these  terms  they  accepted  of  his  intelligence,  and 
by  these  preliminaries  he  was  in  possession  of  saying 
the  most  disagreeable  truths  without  either  being  re- 
proved or  being  called  upon  for  his  authors. 

The  two  great  topics  on  which  at  present  the  inquiries 
of  the  King  and  Queen  chiefly  turned  were  the  elec- 
tions9 and  the  war.  As  to  the  first,  their  Majesties 
always  used  to  ask  if  the  Opponents  seemed  in  spirits 
and  in  hopes ;  to  which  Lord  Hervey  generally  replied 
that  as  it  was  so  much  their  business  to  appear  pleased 
and  sanguine,  it  was  very  difficult  to  perceive  whether 
they  were  really  so  or  not,  but  as  it  was  very  certain  no 
party  at  any  time  was  ever  more  indefatigable  in  their 
attacks  on  a  Government  than  the  anti-courtiers  were 
at  present  in  every  quarter  of  the  kingdom,  so  if  one 
might  guess  at  their  hopes  of  success  by  their  assiduity 
in  pursuing  their  objects,  no  party  could  ever  think 
themselves  more  secure  of  prevailing  ;  "  though  for  my 
own  part  (said  he),  whenever  any  of  them  have  talked 
to  me  in  a  strain  as  if  they  flattered  themselves  there 

9  He   means  the  prospect  of  the  general   elections  in   the  following 
spring. 


264  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XII. 

would  be  any  change  in  the  complexion  of  the  next 
Parliament,  my  answer  has  always  been,  '  The  Court 
have  truth  and  money  on  their  side — two  things  which, 
if  rightly  managed,  must  in  conjunction  ever  prevail; 
and  if  our  friends  have  not  skill  enough  to  point  out  the 
force  of  the  one  or  dexterity  enough  to  insinuate  the 
persuasions  of  the  other,  in  my  opinion  they  deserve  to 
be  beaten  ;  but  as  almost  all  mankind  are  either  to  be 
convinced  or  to  be  bought,  so  having  sense  enough 
among  us  to  open  our  mouths  arid  resolution  enough  to 
open  our  purses,  what  real  foundation  you  gentlemen  in 
the  Opposition  have  to  build  your  hopes  upon  is  past 
my  finding  out.' " 

"And  what,"  replied  the  King,  "do  the  puppies 
answer  to  this  ?  Do  they  not  look  silly  ?  They  did  not 
expect,  I  suppose,  to  find  me  so  firm.  The  fools  ima- 
gined, perhaps,  they  could  frighten  me  ;  but  they  must 
not  think  they  have  got  a  Stuart  upon  the  throne,  or  if 
they  do,  they  will  find  themselves  mistaken." 

Lord  Hervey  said  he  had  no  great  opinion  of  their 
knowledge  or  their  penetration,  and,  therefore,  could 
not  easily  determine  what  was  too  absurd  for  such 
people  to  believe  or  hope  to  propagate.  People  were  of 
opinion  that  nothing  could  keep  up  the  flame  kindled 
in  the  nation  till  the  next  elections  without  new  fuel 
being  added  to  it,  and  that  no  fuel  could  be  so  effectual 
as  that  of  a  war.  "  In  the  next  place,  Sir,  they  say 
that  besides  war  being  generally  unpopular,  England 
entering  into  a  war  for  a  King  of  Poland  would  make 
the  cause  as  subject  to  ridicule  as  the  effect  would  be  to 
dislike,  and  consequently  give  the  enemies  to  your 
Majesty's  Government  a  double  handle  for  censure 


1733.  CONVERSATIONS  WITH  THE  KINO.  265 

and  invective."  "What  party,  then  (said  the  King), 
do  people  who  wish  well  to  Government  hope  I  will 
take  ?"  "  That  of  neutrality  and  inaction,  Sir  (replied 
Lord  Hervey),  from  engaging  on  neither  side.  They 
say  your  Majesty  has  nothing  to  apprehend  at  home  or 
abroad ;  till  you  have  declared,  both  sides  will  court 
you ;  and  that  if  your  Majesty  were  to  declare,  you 
would  lose  all  advantages  you  at  present  have  from  the 
friendship  of  the  one,  without  augmenting  the  number 
of  those  you  enjoy  from  the  other.  It  is  further  said,  if 
it  shall  be  necessary  at  last  for  your  Majesty  to  arbitrate 
in  this  quarrel,  when  the  contending  parties  shall  be  so 
weakened  by  the  duration  of  their  contest,  their  troops 
declined,  and  their  treasure  diminished,  they  will  more 
easily  submit  to  what  your  Majesty  shall  decree,  or  more 
readily  agree  to  what  you  shall  propose  when  so  re- 
duced, than  in  the  first  warmth  of  their  resentment 
and  in  the  freshest  vigour  of  their  strength  at 
setting  out.  In  the  meantime  each  Power  hoping  to 
win  you  to  their  friendship,  your  Majesty's  subjects  will 
exercise  their  commerce  freely  all  over  Europe,  will 
enjoy  the  benefits  of  peace,  whilst  their  neighbours  are 
harassed  by  war ;  and  after  receiving  favours  on  all 
hands,  whilst  others  are  receiving  blows,  will,  by  these 
means,  be  able  in  opulence  and  prosperity  to  give  laws 
to  those  who  will  have  brought  themselves  into  poverty 
and  distress.  This  is  the  manner  in  which  your  Ma- 
jesty's friends  talk  on  the  present  conjuncture ;  and  as 
one  may  gather  information  as  well  from  the  discourse 
of  one's  enemies  as  from  that  of  one's  friends,  and  that 
what  the  one  wishes  one  should  not  do,  may  possibly  be 
as  good  a  rule  to  judge  by,  as  what  the  other  wishes  one 


266  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAJ?.  XII. 

should,  so  I  own  the  eager  desire  and  the  great  expect- 
ation I  see  among  some  people  to  have  your  Majesty 
engaged  in  this  war  is  as  strong  a  confirmation  to  me 
in  the  opinion  that  you  ought  not  to  be  so,  as  any  I  hear 
among  our  own  friends  in  behalf  of  peace.  I  could  not 
help  saying,  Sir,  the  other  day,  to  one  who,  with  more 
zeal  than  prudence,  assured  me  that  the  present  posture 
of  affairs  would  certainly  be  the  ruin  of  my  friends,  that 
he  would  find  himself,  I  believed,  extremely  mistaken, 
and,  on  the  contrary,  if  these  occurrences  were  rightly 
managed,  which  I  doubted  not  but  they  would  be,  that 
he  would  see  the  situation  of  affairs  abroad  would  be  so  far 
from  obstructing  your  Majesty's  measures  this  winter  at 
home,  that  it  would  certainly  make  them  go  on  easier  than 
if  these  broils  upon  the  Continent  had  not  happened,  as 
they  would  silence  all  the  clamour  the  Opponents  hoped 
to  raise  next  Session  against  keeping  up  the  present 
army,  and  yet  not  be  of  a  nature  sufficient  to  require 
the  increase  of  it,  by  which  means  the  Court  would  be 
able  to  avoid  either  the  unpopularity  of  entering  into  a 
war,  or  that  of  keeping  up  what  were  last  year  called 
useless  troops  in  time  of  peace.  I  further  told  this 
person,  Sir,  that  I  knew  the  Opponents  had  laid  schemes 
to  have  addresses  this  next  Session  against  the  army, 
as  last  year  against  the  Excise,  from  every  place  in 
England  where  they  could  obtain  them,  with  the  most 
positive  instructions  from  constituents  to  their  repre- 
sentatives to  vote  against  the  present  number  of 
troops  that  it  was  possible  to  draw  up;  all  which 
well  laid  and  dexterously  laboured  scheme  must  now 
be  overturned  and  defeated,  as  no  man  of  common 
sense  could  attempt  to  propose  a  reduction  of  the 


1733.  CONVERSATIONS  WITH  THE  QTIEEN.  267 

forces,  because  no  one  of  common  sense  would  regard 
him  if  he  did." 

Lord  Hervey  (bent  on  dissuading  the  King  as  far  as 
his  power  could  go  from  running  the  English  hastily 
into  this  Polish  squabble)  was  constantly,  whenever  he 
had  opportunity  of  talking  to  his  Majesty,  plying  him 
in  this  strain  ;  nor  was  he  less  busy  in  endeavouring  to 
bring  the  Queen  into  a  pursuit  of  these  measures, 
though  the  way  he  took  to  influence  her  was  in  some 
particulars  different.  He  tried  to  pique  her  pride  into 
espousing  what  he  thought  right,  by  telling  her  that 
everybody  in  town  was  of  opinion  that  her  Majesty  saw 
plainly  it  was  the  interest  of  the  nation  and  the  interest 
of  the  Court  for  the  King,  as  long  as  it  was  possible,  to 
keep  us  out  of  this  war,  for  which  reason  she  was  con- 
stantly labouring  to  bring  his  Majesty  to  forbear  urging 
matters  to  extremity ;  but  that  in  this  point  people 
said  she  would  be  overruled,  and  her  prudence  forced 
to  give  way  to  his  impetuosity,  and  her  will,  though 
hitherto  absolute  in  the  State,  now  made  to  yield  to  his. 
By  inculcating  these  things  Lord  Hervey  endeavoured 
to  make  her  engage  in  pursuing  what  was  not  her 
inclination,  lest  people  should  think  it  was,  and  that  she 
wanted  power  to  fulfil  it. 

But  whilst  I  relate  these  things  said  by  Lord  Hervey 
on  this  occasion,  I  am  far  from  meaning  to  insinuate 
that  they  were  conveyed  to  their  Majesties  only  from 
him,  or  that  he  was  the  secret  spring  on  which  many 
great  events  moved.  That  was  not  the  case ;  for  Sir 
Kobert  Walpole  constantly,  and  with  much  more  weight, 
talked  in  the  same  strain.  My  reason,  therefore,  for 
putting  these  arguments  into  Lord  Hervey's  mouth  in 


268  LOBD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XII. 

this  narrative  is,  because  I  know  they  were  said  by  him, 
and  only  conjecture  their  being  said  by  any  other  per- 
son. And  as  he  was  the  only  man  of  common  sense, 
not  upon  the  foot  of  a  minister,  who  had  access  to 
them  at  their  private  and  leisure  hours,  he  had  more 
opportunities  of  saying  things  than  many  of  those  who 
held  the  same  sentiments,  and  had  more  understanding 
than  many  of  those  who  had  the  same  opportunities. 

Spain  had  not  yet  adventured  herself  either  in  league 
against  the  Emperor  in  Italy  or  in  a  resolution  to  de- 
fend him,  nor  was  she  determined  to  maintain  a  neu- 
trality ;  and  as  much  depended  on  the  part  she  would 
act,  strenuous  endeavours  were  used  on  both  sides  to 
gain  her.  The  King  having  undertaken  to  negotiate 
this  affair  between  the  Courts  of  Vienna  and  Spain, 
the  whole  transaction  was  carried  on  at  the  Court  of 
England,  where  the  Conde  de  Montijo,  Ambassador 
from  Spain  to  this  Court,  was  set  up  at  auction,  whilst 
M.  de  Chavigny,  the  French  minister,  and  Count 
Kinski,  the  Imperial  Ambassador,  bid  for  him. 

What  I  am  going  to  relate  I  had  directly  from  the 
mouth  of  the  Queen,  who  being  always  partial  to  the 
Emperor,  one  may  be  sure  his  faults  in  this  relation 
are  not  exaggerated. 

The  plan  of  accommodation  and  alliance  between 
the  Imperial  and  Spanish  Courts  was  drawn  up  by  Sir 
Robert  Walpole,  and  these  were  the  terms : — that  on 
condition  the  Emperor  would  give  the  second  Arch- 
Duchess  with  the  kingdom  of  Naples  and  Sicily  as 
dower,  that  Spain  should  support  the  Emperor  in  the 
possession  of  every  other  country  he  was  master  of  in 
Italy,  and  even  of  these  during  his  life. 


1733.  AFFAIRS  OF  EUROPE.  2G9 

This  proposal  was  given  in  writing  to  Montijo  and 
Kinski,  and  despatched  by  them  to  their  respective 
Courts.  Montijo  received  full  powers  to  sign,  whilst 
Kinski  received  nothing  in  answer  but  inexplicable 
instructions,  that  bore  no  marks  of  anything  plainly  to 
be  understood  but  the  pride  and  folly  of  the  present 
head  of  the  Austrian  family,  who  seemed  to  regulate 
his  whole  conduct  on  the  haughty  maxims  of  Charles  V., 
without  either  his  understanding  or  his  purse. 

However,  as  things  grew  every  hour  worse  and 
worse  for  the  Emperor ;  as  the  arms  of  France  both 
in  Italy  and  on  the  Rhine  made  such  quick  work  in 
defeating  him ;  and  as  so  much  time  would  be  neces- 
sary, if  fresh  instances  were  sent  to  Vienna,  for  the 
Emperor's  assent  to  this  accommodation,  and  the  re- 
turn of  that  messenger  waited  for ;  and  as  the  Spanish 
Ambassador  had  powers  to  sign  and  offered  to  make 
use  of  them  ;  the  King  of  England  pressed  Kinski  ex- 
tremely to  strike  whilst  the  iron  was  hot,  showed  him 
the  danger  of  delay,  and  offered  to  write  with  his  own 
hand  to  the  Emperor  to  indemnify  him  ;  but  neither 
the  King,  the  Queen,  nor  any  of  our  ministers  could 
prevail  with  him  to  conclude  this  matter  without  send- 
ing for  further  powers  and  instructions.  But  before  this 
messenger  returned,  Spain,  irritated  by  these  delays  of 
the  Emperor,  had  joined  with  France,  and  when 
Kinski,  on  the  arrival  of  this  last  courier,  offered  to 
sign  the  treaty,  the  Spanish  minister  refused,  said  it 
was  now  too  late,  that  his  master  had  concluded  a 
treaty  with  the  King  of  France,  and  had  already  given 
orders  for  his  troops  immediately  to  join  those  of  France 
and  Sardinia  in  Italy. 


270  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XII. 

By  this  absurd  conduct  of  the  Emperor,  therefore, 
he  first  lost  the  advantages  he  might  have  had  rather 
than  lower  his  pride,  and  then  had  the  mortification  of 
quitting  his  pride  without  the  benefit  of  getting  any- 
thing by  so  doing. 

The  consequence  of  which  reasonable  and  judicious 
behaviour  was,  that  before  the  Parliament  met  this 
year,  which  was  in  the  middle  of  January,  the  war  in 
Italy  was  prosecuted  with  so  much  vigour  by  this  triple 
alliance  of  France,  Spain,  and  Sardinia,  that  the  Em- 
peror was  not  master  of  one  single  place  in  Italy  on 
this  side  the  Ecclesiastical  State  but  the  Mantuan.  His 
affairs  having  been  so  well  managed,  that  with  13,000 
men  in  Lombardy,  and  provisions  for  double  that  num- 
ber and  ammunition  in  proportion,  these  essentials  of 
war  were  so  disposed  and  scattered,  that  wherever 
there  were  provisions  there  was  no  ammunition,  and 
where  there  was  ammunition  there  were  no  provisions, 
and  where  there  were  men  there  was  neither  ammuni- 
tion nor  provisions. 


1733.  MARRIAGE  OF  PRINCESS  ROYAL.  271 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

Marriage  of  Princess  Royal — Arrival  of  Prince  of  Orange — King's  treat- 
ment of  him — Lord  Hervey  reports  ill  of  his  person,  but  well  of  his 
mind — Behaviour  of  the  Princess — Prince  falls  dangerously  ill — Prince 
of  Wales's  dissension  with  the  King— His  revenue — Lord  Hervey 's 
advice — The  Queen's  answer — King's  Speech — Lord  Hervey  moves  the 
Address — New  Peerages — Lord  Chancellor  Talbot — Lord  Chief-Justice 
Hardwicke — Lord  Chancellor  King — Dukes  of  Marlborough  and  Bed- 
ford— Bill  to  make  Army  Commissions  for  life — King's  ungiving  dispo- 
sition— Duke  of  Richmond — "Court  Drudge" — Further  particulars  of 
the  Queen's  character  and  conduct. 

THE  summer  now  drawing  to  a  conclusion,  the  marriage 
of  the  Princess  Eoyal  began  again  to  be  talked  of,  and 
those  necessary  previous  stipulations  were  anew  taken 
into  consideration  which  the  dilatoriness  of  the  King, 
the  indifference  of  his  Ministers,  and  the  tardy  phlegm 
of  Dutch  negotiators  had  left  unadjusted  for  more 
months  than  they  really  required  days  to  be  settled  in 
if  proper  diligence  had  been  used.  At  last  everything 
was  finished,  and  a  yacht  ordered  to  Holland  to  bring 
the  Prince  of  Orange  over.  Horace  Walpole,  under 
the  pretence  of  going  to  attend  his  Highness  hither, 
was  sent  to  concert  measures  with  the  ministers  of  the 
States,  and  agree  what  part  England  and  Holland 
should  take  at  this  very  critical  conjuncture  of  affairs. 

But  this  finesse  was  as  coarse  as  it  was  ridiculous  and 
unnecessary,  everybody  the  moment  he  was  nominated 
for  this  voyage  discerning  the  reason  of  it,  and  every- 
body knowing  that — whether  Horace  was  sent  to  Hoi- 


272  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIII. 

land  or  not — it  was  natural,  reasonable,  necessary,  and 
sure  that  Holland  and  England  ought,  must,  and  would 
act  in  concert  upon  this  occasion. 

The  beginning  of  November  [the  7tK]  the  Prince  of 
Orange  arrived,  and  was  lodged  in  Somerset  House: 
almost  all  the  nobility  and  people  of  distinction  in  Eng- 
land went  to  wait  upon  him  there ;  several  were  of  that 
number  who  did  not  come  to  Court.  He  came  the  next 
morning  to  St.  James's  through  crowded  streets  and  un- 
ceasing acclamations,  though  the  equipage  the  King 
sent  to  fetch  him  was  only  one  miserable  leading  coach 
with  only  a  pair  of  horses.1 

The  palace  was  so  thronged  that  he  could  hardly  get 
up  stairs  or  pass  from  one  room  to  another,  most  people 
having  a  curiosity  to  see  him,  and  few  having  yet  found 
out  that  making  their  court  to  him  was  not  making  it 
at  all  to  his  future  father-in-law. 

The  maxim  the  King  seemed  to  have  laid  down  to 
govern  his  conduct  towards  this  Prince,  and  the  opinion 
he  seemed  to  desire  tacitly  to  inculcate  was,  that  the 
Prince  of  Orange  was  a  nothing  till  he  had  married  his 
daughter,  and  that  being  her  husband  made  him  every- 
thing. 

Conformable  to  this  maxim  he  suffered  no  sort  of 
public  honours  to  be  paid  to  the  Prince  on  his  arrival, 
and  behaved  himself  with  scarce  common  civility 


1  Strange  to  say,  the  peculiar  meaning  of  "  a  leading  coach  "  has  been 
lost  in  the  Master  of  the  Horse's  office,  though  these  offices  are  usually  so 
conservative  of  etiquette.  It  seems,  however,  that  Lord  Hervey's  com- 
plaint was  unfounded  ;  for  the  last  record  found  of  a  "  leading  coach  "  is  the 
sending  one  in  1797  for  the  Prince  of  Wirtemberg,  then  come  over  to 
marry  the  Princess  Royal — so  that  the  leading  coach  seems  to  have  been 
the  proper  equipage. 


1733.  PRINCE  OF  ORANGE.  273 

towards  him,  which  the  Prince  of  Orange  had  sense 
enough  to  feel  and  to  seem  not  to  see.  The  Tower 
guns  were  not  allowed  to  salute  him,  nor  was  the  guard 
permitted  to  turn  out  upon  his  arrival.2  Lord  Lovelace 
was  sent  with  one  of  the  King's  coaches  to  receive  him 
at  his  landing,  and  with  great  difficulty  the  King  was 
persuaded,  the  night  the  Prince  came  first  to  Somerset 
House,  to  send  Lord  Hervey  to  him  with  his  compli- 
ments. 

The  Queen  desired  Lord  Hervey  the  instant  he  re- 
turned to  come  directly  to  her  apartment,  and  let  her 
know  without  disguise  what  sort  of  hideous  animal  she 
was  to  prepare  herself  to  see.  Lord  Hervey,  when  he 
came  back,  assured  her  he  had  not  found  him  near  so 
bad  as  he  had  imagined ;  that  she  must  not  expect  to 
see  an  Adonis,  that  his  body  was  as  bad  as  possible, 
but  that  his  countenance  was  far  from  disagreeable,  and 
his  address  sensible,  engaging,  and  noble ;  that  he 
seemed  entirely  to  forget  his  person,  and  to  have  an 
understanding  to  make  other  people  forget  it  too.3 

2  Lord  Hervey  is  here  again,  I  think,  rather  hypercritical.     The  Prince 
did  not  receive  these  or  similar  honours  at  home,  and  was  not  yet  the  King's 
son-in-law  ;  and  so  was  not  entitled  to  be  received  with  royal  state  : — which, 
moreover,  would  have  needlessly  increased  the  jealousy,  already  felt  in  Hol- 
land, of  this  alliance.     See  post,  p.  319. 

3  The  Prince  was  about  twenty-two.     Lord  Hervey  gives  subsequently 
a  worse  account  of  his  person  ;  but  Lord  Chesterfield's  portrait  in  1729, 
when  the  match  was  first  thought  of,  is  more  favourable : — 

"  Tlie  Hague,  18th  Feb. — The  Prince  of  Orange  arrived  here  last  night. 
I  went  to  wait  upon  him,  and,  as  far  as  I  arn  able  to  judge  from  half  an 
hour's  conversation  only,  I  think  he  has  extreme  good  parts.  He  is  per- 
fectly well  bred,  and  civil  to  everybody,  and  with  an  ease  and  freedom  that 
is  seldom  acquired  but  by  a  long  knowledge  of  the  world.  His  face  is 
handsome  ;  his  shape  is  not  so  advantageous  as  could  be  wished,  though  not 
near  so  bad  as  I  had  heard  represented.  He  assumes  not  the  least  dignity, 
but  has  all  the  affability  and  insinuation  that  is  necessary  for  a  person  who 
would  raise  himself  in  a  popular  government." — Chest.  Cor.  iii.  48. 
VOL.  I.  T 


274  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIII. 

Lord  Hervey  said  he  fancied  the  Princess  must  be 
in  a  good  deal  of  anxiety ;  but  the  Queen  told  him  he 
was  extremely  mistaken,  that  she  was  in  her  own  apart- 
ment at  her  harpsichord  with  some  of  the  Opera 
people,4  and  that  she  had  been  as  easy  all  that  afternoon 
as  she  had  ever  seen  her  in  her  life.  "  For  my  part," 
said  the  Queen,  "  I  never  said  the  least  word  to  en- 
courage her  to  this  marriage  or  to  dissuade  her  from  it ; 
the  King  left  her,  too,  absolutely  at  liberty  to  accept  or 
reject  it ;  but  as  she  thought  the  King  looked  upon  it 
as  a  proper  match,  and  one  which,  if  she  could  bear  his 
person,  he  should  not  dislike,  she  said  she  was  resolved, 
if  it  was  a  monkey,  she  would  marry  him." 

From  the  Queen  Lord  Hervey  went  to  the  Prin- 
cesses, who  were  very  impatient  for  a  description  of 
their  new  brother-in-law,  and  asked  if  they  were  more 
likely  to  have  a  true  one  for  his  being  in  the  same 
town  than  they  were  from  one  who  had  only  seen  him 
in  Holland. 

The  Princess  Royal's  behaviour  next  day,  and  in- 
deed every  day,  with  the  eyes  of  the  whole  nation  upon 
her,  was  something  marvellous  for  propriety,  sense,  and 
good  breeding.  The  Monday  following  was  the  day 
fixed  for  the  ceremony;  but  the  Prince  being  taken  ill 
of  a  fever  the  day  before,  it  was  put  off.  He  continued 
ill  a  long  time;  was  thought  at  first  in  immediate 
danger,  and  for  a  considerable  time  in  a  languishing 
condition  from  which  it  was  impossible  he  should  ever 
recover. 

During  this  tedious  and  dangerous  illness  no  one  of 

4  The  Princess  Royal  was  a  good  musician,  and  a  warm  and  constant 
patroness  of  Handel,  who  had  been  her  music-master. 


1734.  PRINCE  OF  WALES.  275 

the  Royal  Family  went  to  see  him.  The  King  thought 
it  below  his  dignity,  and  the  rest,  whatever  they 
thought,  were  not  allowed  to  do  it. 

The  Prince  of  Orange  could  not  but  be  extremely 
concerned  at  this  treatment ;  but  had,  however,  the 
prudence  to  be  silent  on  a  chapter  which  his  Dutch 
booby  retinue  had  the  imprudence  to  preach  upon  all 
day  and  in  all  companies. 

As  soon  as  he  was  able  to  go  out  he  went  to  St. 
James's,  and  by  chance  dined  with  the  Princesses,  who 
were  forbid  to  invite  him  any  more.  He  removed  to 
Kensington  for  the  air,  and  was  from  thence  sent  to 
the  Bath.  But — on  his  arrival  in  England — on  the  day 
for  the  marriage  being  appointed — on  its  being  put  off — • 
on  his  illness — on  his  recovery — on  his  being  in  danger 
— or  on  his  being  out  of  it — the  countenance  of  the 
Princess  Royal  to  the  nicest  examiners  appeared  exactly 
the  same ;  which  surprised  everybody  so  much  the  more 
as  she  was  known  to  be  of  a  temper  to  which  nothing 
was  really  indifferent,  whatever  it  appeared. 

1734. — On  new-year's  day  the  Prince  of  Wales 
was  persuaded  by  Mr.  Dodington  to  go  to  the  King's 
levee,  where  he  had  not  made  his  appearance  for 
some  months,  and  was  now  induced  to  it  not  from  a 
desire  to  show  respect  to  his  father,  but  in  order  (hoping 
the  King  would  not  speak  to  him)  to  show  the  world 
how  ill  he  was  used  and  what  little  encouragement  he 
had  to  pay  his  father  any  compliment  of  that  kind. 
Lord  Hervey,  who  knew  from  Mr.  Hedges  (the  Prince's 
treasurer)  the  night  before  that  the  Prince  intended 
going  to  the  King's  levee,  told  the  Queen  of  it,  and 

T2 


276  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIII. 

desired  her  to  contrive  the  King's  speaking  to  him,  to 
prevent  what  they  proposed,  telling  her  how  useful  it 
would  be  towards  stopping  the  report  of  the  Prince's 
ill  usage,  and  what  a  damp  it  would  cast  upon  the 
schemes  of  those  who  built  their  hopes  of  annoyance 
this  winter  upon  the  expectation  of  an  open  rupture  in 
the  family. 

This  intimation  had  its  effect ;  the  Prince  was  spoken 
to  in  the  presence  of  that  numerous  appearance  of 
bowing  nobility  and  gentry  who  generally  thronged 
the  palace  on  those  days,  and  the  report  of  no  inter- 
course either  of  words  or  visits  passing  between  these 
two  great  personages  was,  of  course,  refuted. 

Lord  Hervey  took  the  opportunity  of  this  interview 
with  the  Queen  and  the  Prince's  name  being  men- 
tioned, to  tell  her  that  even  the  best  friends  to  her,  the 
King,  and  the  Administration  were  of  opinion  that  the 
Prince  had  not  money  enough  allowed  him,  and  that 
whilst  he  was  so  straitened  in  his  circumstances  it  was 
impossible  he  should  ever  be  quiet.  "  Ah  !"  said  the 
Queen,  "  that  people  will  always  be  judging  and  de- 
ciding upon  what  they  know  nothing  of;  who  are  these 
wise  people  ?"  Lord  Hervey  desired  to  be  excused, — 
and  she  went  on.  "Pray,  when  you  hear  them,  my 
Lord,  talk  their  nonsense  again,  tell  them  that  the 
Prince  costs  the  King  50,000^.  a-year,  which,  till  he  is 
married,  I  believe  any  reasonable  body  will  think  a 
sufficient  allowance  for  him.  But,  poor  creature,  with 
not  a  bad  heart,  he  is  induced  by  knaves  and  fools  that 
blow  him  up  to  do  things  that  are  as  unlike  an  honest 
man  as  a  wise  one.  I  wonder  what  length  those  mon- 
sters wish  to  carry  him :  but  talk  to  me  no  more  of  his 


1734.  PRINCE  OF  WALES.  277 

usage ;  I  wish  he  was  as  right  towards  the  King  as  the 
King  is  towards  him."  Lord  Hervey  said  he  did  not 
at  all  dispute  the  fact  of  the  Prince's  costing  the  King 
50,0001.  a-year;  but  if  her  Majesty  would  give  him 
leave,  he  would  only  ask  why,  instead  of  the  King's 
being  at  half  that  expense  invisibly,  he  would  not 
choose  rather  to  let  the  Prince  keep  his  own  table  and 
give  him  that  allowance  in  a  lump,  which  everybody 
would  acknowledge  to  be  sufficient,  and  which,  given 
in  this  manner,  would  be  at  once  more  useful  and 
satisfactory  to  the  Prince,  and  more  creditable  as  well 
as  less  troublesome  to  the  King.  When  she  was 
pressed  upon  this  point  she  had  nothing  to  answer,  but 
that  the  King  did  not  choose  it  should  be  so. 

This  being  the  Prince's  present  situation,  his  nume- 
rous creditors  being  importunate,  and  his  treasury 
empty,  the  clandestine  correspondence  between  him 
and  the  Opposition  continued  in  full  force,  he  hoping 
to  make  some  use  of  their  despair,  and  they  of  his  dis- 
tress. The  great  points  that  were  expected  to  be 
pushed  this  Session  in  Parliament  by  the  Opposition 
were  this  affair  of  the  Prince's,  a  scrutiny  into  the  debt 
of  the  Navy,  which  was  1,800,000?.,  and  the  repeal  of 
the  Septennial  Bill. 

Upon  foreign  affairs  the  Craftsman  and  his  whole  party 
were  quite  silent,  not  caring,  till  the  Court  had  declared 
what  part  it  would  act,  to  say  what  they  thought  right, 
because  they  would  be  at  liberty,  whatever  that  part 
should  be,  to  pronounce  it  wrong. 

It  was  the  business  of  Sir  Robert  Wai  pole,  therefore, 
to  keep  his  designs  in  the  dark  as  long  as  he  could, 
but  everybody  concluded  that  at  the  opening  of  the 


278  LORD  HERVEY' S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIII. 

Session  in  the  King's  Speech  he  would  be  obliged  to 
declare  one  way  or  other.  How  dexterously  and  judi- 
ciously he  avoided  that  declaration  can  never  be  told  so 
well  by  anything  as  the  Speech  itself.5 

Lord  Hervey  was  pitched  upon  in  the  House  of 
Lords,  much  against  the  Duke  of  Newcastle's  will,  to 
move  the  address  to  the  King's  Speech ;  and  as  what 
he  said  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  language  talked  at 
this  time  by  all  the  advocates  for  the  Administration,  I 
shall  give  it  at  length  [in  the  Appendix]. 

He  concluded  with  the  motion  for  the  address,  which 
I  need  not  repeat ;  addresses  of  this  kind,  at  the  begin- 
ning of  a  session,  being  never  anything  more  than 
echoing  back  the  words  of  the  throne,  with  general 
assurances  of  zeal  and  fidelity,  confidence  in  his  Ma- 
jesty's wisdom  and  goodness,  and  a  sort  of  promissory 
note  for  compliance  with  his  demands.  The  address  of 
the  Commons  was  to  the  same  effect ;  and  both  passed 
without  opposition. 

Before  I  proceed  to  the  relation  of  what  passed  this 
session  in  Parliament  I  must  give  a  short  account  of 
the  changes  made  in  the  House  of  Lords  in  favour 
of  the  Court  since  the  ruffle  on  the  South  Sea  affair 
last  year. 

In  the  first  place,  all  those  who  had  not  been  turned 
out  of  their  employments  for  that  elopement  were  re- 
turned to  the  yoke  from  which  they  had  started,  and 
drew  as  quietly  as  if  they  had  never  been  restive. 

In  the  next  place,  four  new  lords  were  added  to  this 

5  Delivered  17th  January,  1734.  Lord  Hervey  had  here  inserted  the 
printed  speech  ;  but  as  it  may  be  found  in  the  Journals  and  Magazines,  it 
seems  not  worth  while  to  reprint  it. 


1734.  NEW  PEERS.  279 

body — Lord  Hinton,  Lord  Talbot,  Lord  Hardwicke, 
and  Lord  Hervey.  Lord  Hinton  was  eldest  son  to 
Earl  Poulet,  a  man  of  a  great  estate,  who  had  been 
Lord  Steward  in  the  four  last  years  of  Queen  Anne's 
reign,  and  was  this  year  gained  over  to  the  Court  on 
his  son's  being  made  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber,  and 
called  up  to  the  House  of  Peers.  Lord  Hardwicke  and 
Lord  Talbot  were  two  as  great  and  eminent  lawyers  as 
this  country  ever  bred ;  the  first  had  been  Attorney- 
General,  and  the  last  Solicitor.  Upon  the  corporal 
death  of  my  Lord  Chief  Justice  Raymond,  and  the 
intellectual  demise  of  Lord  Chancellor  King,  these  two 
men,  Sir  Philip  Yorke  and  Mr.  Talbot,  were  destined 
to  succeed  them ;  but  the  voracious  appetite  of  the  law 
in  these  days  was  so  keen,  that  these  two  morsels  with- 
out any  addition  were  not  enough  to  satisfy  these  two 
cormorant  stomachs.  Here  lay  the  difficulty:  Sir 
Philip  Yorke,  being  first  in  rank,  had  certainly  a  right 
to  the  Chancellor's  seals ;  but  Mr.  Talbot,  who  was  an 
excellent  Chancery  lawyer  and  knew  nothing  of  the 
Common  law,  if  he  was  not  Chancellor,  would  be 
nothing.  Yorke  therefore,  though  fit  for  both  these 
employments,  got  the  worst,  being  prevailed  upon  to 
accept  that  of  Lord  Chief  Justice,  on  the  salary  being 
raised  from  3000/.  to  4000£.  a-year  for  life,  and  WOOL 
more  paid  him  out  of  the  Chancellor's  salary  by  Lord 
Talbot.  This  was  a  scheme  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole's, 
who,  as  Homer  says  of  Ulysses,  was  always  fertile  in 
expedients,  and  thought  these  two  great  and  able  men 
of  too  much  consequence  to  lose  or  disoblige  either. 
Sir  Robert  communicated  this  scheme  secretly  to  the 
Queen,  she  insinuated  it  to  the  King,  and  the  King 


280  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIII. 

proposed  it  to  Sir  Kobert  as  an  act  of  his  own  ingenuity 
and  generosity. 

Lord  Talbot  had  as  clear,  separating,  distinguishing, 
subtle,  and  fine  parts  as  ever  man  had.  Lord  Hard- 
wicke's  were  perhaps  less  delicate,  but  no  man's  were 
more  forcible.  No  one  could  make  more  of  a  good 
cause  than  Lord  Hardwicke,  and  no  one  so  much  of  a 
bad  one  as  Lord  Talbot.  The  one  had  infinite  know- 
ledge, the  other  infinite  ingenuity:  they  were  both 
excellent,  but  very  different ;  both  amiable  in  their  pri- 
vate characters,  as  well  as  eminent  in  their  public  capa- 
cities ;  both  good  pleaders,  as  well  as  upright  judges  •,  and 
both  esteemed  by  all  parties,  as  much  for  their  temper 
and  integrity  as  for  their  knowledge  and  abilities. 

There  was  something  very  singular  in  the  fortune 
of  the  deposed  Chancellor,  Lord  King,  as  he  was  per- 
haps the  only  instance  that  can  be  given  of  a  man  raised 
from  the  most  mean  and  obscure  condition  to  the 
highest  dignity  in  the  state  without  the  malice  of  one 
enemy  ever  pretending  to  insinuate  that  the  partiality 
of  his  friends,  in  any  one  step  of  this  rise,  had  pushed  him 
beyond  his  merit.  He  was  made  Chancellor  as  much 
by  the  voice  of  the  public  as  by  the  hand  of  power ;  but 
his  entrance  on  that  employment  proved  the  vertical 
point  of  his  glory,  for  from  the  moment  he  possessed  it 
his  reputation,  without  the  least  reflection  upon  his 
integrity,  began  to  sink ;  and  had  the  seals  been  taken 
from  him,  even  before  his  imbecility  occasioned  by  his 
apoplectic  fits,  it  would  have  been  with  the  same  uni- 
versal approbation  with  which  they  were  conferred. 
Expedition  was  never  reckoned  among  the  merits  of 
the  Court  of  Chancery ;  but  whilst  Lord  King  pre- 


1734.  LORD  CHANCELLOR  KING.  281 

sided  there  the  delays  of  it  were  insupportable.  He 
had  such  a  diffidence  of  himself  that  he  did  not  dare  to 
do  right,  for  fear  of  doing  wrong  ;  decrees  were  always 
extorted  from  him ;  and  had  he  been  let  alone  he  would 
never  have  given  any  suitor  his  due,  for  fear  of  giving 
him  what  was  not  so.  This  actual  injustice  was  all  he 
avoided  to  commit;  never  reflecting  that  the  suspen- 
sion of  justice,  in  keeping  people  long  out  of  their 
rights,  was  a  negative  injury,  which,  considering  the 
trouble,  the  expense,  the  anxiety,  and  the  thousand 
other  inconveniences  that  attended  those  delays,  was 
almost  as  bad  as  the  total  privation  of  it. 

His  understanding  was  of  that  balancing,  irresolute 
kind  that  gives  people  just  light  enough  to  see  diffi- 
culties and  form  doubts,  and  not  enough  to  surmount 
the  one  or  remove  the  other;  which  sort  of  under- 
standing was  of  use  to  him  as  a  pleader,  though  a  trouble 
to  him  as  a  judge,  and  made  him  make  a  great  figure 
at  the  bar,  but  an  indifferent  one  upon  the  Chancery 
bench  ;  the  same  knowledge  and  talents  that  helped  him 
to  puzzle  other  judges  when  they  were  to  decide,  con- 
tributed to  puzzle  himself  when  it  was  his  turn  to  do  so. 
The  Queen  once  said  of  him,  and  very  truly,  as  well 
as  agreeably,  that  *'  He  was  just  in  the  law  what  he  had 
formerly  been  in  the  Gospel — making  creeds6  upon  the 
one  without  any  steady  belief,  and  judgments  in  the 
other  without  any  settled  opinion  :  but  the  misfortune," 
said  she,  "  for  the  public  is,  that,  though  they  could 
reject  his  silly  creeds,  they  are  forced  often  to  submit 
to  his  silly  judgments." 

6  Lord  King  had  dabbled  in  divinity,  and  published  in  1702  a  History 
of  the  Apostles'  Creed. 


282  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIII. 

Soon  after  he  was  Chancellor  complaints  were  made 
that  all  the  equity  of  the  nation  was  at  a  full  stand ; 
but  till  he  had  in  a  great  measure  lost  his  senses7  by 
repeated  attacks  of  apoplexy  and  palsy  the  Court  did 
not  displace  him ;  and  even  then,  though  he  had  a 
pension  of  3000?.  a-year  given  him  on  his  dismission, 
he  was  as  much  out  of  humour  as  if  they  had  given  him 
nothing,  and  as  angry  at  being  out  of  his  employment 
as  if  he  had  been  still  fit  to  exercise  the  duties  of  it. 
The  next  summer  he  died,  little  regretted  by  anybody, 
but  least  of  all  by  His  Majesty,  who  saved  3000?.  a-year 
by  it. 

Notwithstanding  all  the  menaces  thrown  out  by  the 
Opposition  previous  to  the  opening  of  this  session,  and 
the  vigorous  attacks  expected  consequently  to  be  made 
upon  the  ministry,  no  session  ever  passed  off  more 
quietly ;  nor  did  the  business  of  the  Court  any  year 
ever  meet  with  fewer  rubs. 

This  was  owing  principally  to  the  Opponents  laying 
their  chief  stress  on  a  point  full  as  unpopular  as  any 
proposal  that  ever  came  from  the  Administration,  which 
was  bringing  in  a  bill  to  make  the  commissions  of  the 
officers  of  the  army  commissions  for  life ;  to  take  away 
the  power  of  breaking  any  officer  of  the  army  from 
the  Crown,  and  to  lodge  that  power  solely  in  a  court 
martial.  For  the  arguments  against  this  proposal  I 
refer  my  readers  to  a  pamphlet  written  by  Lord  Her- 
vey,  at  the  desire  of  the  King  and  Queen,  corrected  by 
Sir  Robert  Walpole,  and  entitled  '  The  Conduct  of  the 
Opposition  and  the  Tendency  of  Modern  Patriotism, 

7  See  ante,  p.  1 57. 


1734.  DUKE  OF  BOLTON.  283 

&c.' ;  which  pamphlet  I  shall  put  into  the  Appendix  to 
these  Memoirs.8  The  bill  to  make  the  officers'  com- 
missions for  life  was  moved  in  both  Houses  the  same 
day,  and  rejected  in  both  by  a  great  majority. 

Immediately  after  the  bill  was  rejected  a  motion  was 
made  in  both  Houses  to  address  the  King,  to  know  who 
advised  him  to  take  away  the  regiments  of  the  Duke  of 
Bolton  and  Lord  Cobham,  which  motion  had  the  same 
fate  as  its  predecessor  the  bill.  In  the  debate  upon 
this  second  question,  the  Duke  of  Argyle,  with  the 
Duke  of  Bolton  staring  in  his  face  all  the  while  he  was 
speaking,  took  occasion  to  say,  he  could  not  imagine 
what  lords  meant  by  coupling  these  two  men  together 
when  they  talked  of  the  hardship  of  their  being  broke ; 
"  They  are  both  men  (said  he)  of  great  quality,  it  is  true ; 
and  it  is  very  certain  that  two  colonels  were  broke,  but 
of  these  two  colonels  I  know  of  but  one  soldier."  There 
had  been  an  old  grudge  between  the  Duke  of  Argyle 
and  the  Duke  of  Bolton,  which  provoked  the  first  to 
say  this ;  but  the  Duke  of  Argyle  was  not  commended 
for  it,  it  being  thought  no  great  honour  for  him  to  try 
his  wit  or  his  courage  with  the  Duke  of  Bolton,  who 
was  so  little  suspected  of  either.9  Besides,  as  there 
were  many  men  of  rank,  honour,  courage,  and  character 
at  present  in  the  army,  who  had  never  served  abroad 
(a  necessary  consequence  of  twenty  years'  peace),  the 
Duke  of  Argyle  did  not  make  his  court  much  to  them 
by  this  definition  of  a  soldier,  which  was  (when  he  was 
called  upon  by  the  Duke  of  Bolton  to  explain  himself), 
that  he  could  reckon  nobody  a  soldier  that  had  never 

s  For  the  reasons  already  given,  p.  144,  this  pamphlet  is  not  reprinted. 
9  See  ante,  p.  211,n. 


284  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIII. 

served  but  in  peace.  In  short,  the  Duke  of  Argyle  got 
no  honour  by  offering  this  injury;  and  the  Duke  of 
Bolton  only  lost  none  in  his  tame,  cool  manner  of 
resenting  it,  because  he  had  none  to  lose. 

The  bill  to  make  the  commissions  of  the  officers  for 
life  was  brought  into  the  House  of  Lords  by  the  Duke 
of  Marlborough,  to  whom  the  King,  whilst  he  was  Lord 
Sunderland,  had  always  shown  a  family  dislike  on  his 
father's  account ;  but  this  step  so  strengthened  his  Ma- 
jesty's enmity,  that  "  scoundrel,  rascal,  or  blackguard," 
whenever  he  spoke  of  him  in  private  after  that  occur- 
rence, never  failed  of  being  tacked  to  his  name.10  The 
Duke  of  Bedford,11  who  had  married  Lady  Dye  Spencer, 
the  Duke  of  Marlborough's  sister,  rose  little  better  in 
the  King's  good  graces  than  his  brother-in-law,  being 
equally  violent  at  this  time  in  his  opposition  to  the 
Court,  and,  like  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  under  the 
absolute  direction  and  government  of  Lord  Carteret. 

These  two  young  dukes  were  of  great  consideration 
from  their  quality  and  their  estates,  and  were  as  much 
alike  in  pride,  violence  of  temper,  and  their  public  con- 
duct, as  they  were  different  in  their  ways  of  thinking 
and  acting  in  private  life :  the  Duke  of  Marlborough 
was  profuse,  and  never  looked  into  his  affairs ;  the 
Duke  of  Bedford  covetous,  and  the  best  economist  in 
the  world :  the  Duke  of  Bedford  was  of  such  a  turn  as 
to  have  been  able  to  live  within  his  fortune  if  it  had 


10  May  not  some  of  this  enmity  be  attributed  to  the  intended  marriage  of 
Lady  Diana  with  the  Prince  of  Wales  (ante,  p.  236,  n.) — a  secret  with 
which  Lord  Hervey  was  perhaps  not  acquainted  ? 

11  John,  fourth  Duke,  born  in  1710,  married  in  1731,  who  for  the  rest  of 
this  reign  and  the  beginning  of  the  next  played  a  considerable  part  in  the 
political  world. 


1734.         DUKES  OF  BEDFORD  AND  MARYBOROUGH.  285 

been  fifty  times  less ;  and  the  Duke  of  Marlborough  to 
have  run  his  out  had  it  been  fifty  times  greater.  This 
made  Lord  Hervey  often  pay  his  court  to  the  King 
(who  hated  them  both)  by  saying  his  Majesty  would 
in  a  very  few  years  see  these  two  men  as  inconsiderable 
as  any  two  in  the  kingdom — the  one  from  giving  no- 
thing, and  the  other  from  having  nothing  to  give. 
These  two  brothers  were  as  unlike  in  their  understand- 
ings as  in  the  particulars  I  have  already  mentioned : 
the  understanding  of  the  Duke  of  Marlborough  was 
quite  uncultivated,  and  that  of  the  Duke  of  Bedford 
extremely  cultivated  without  being  the  better  for  it; 
the  one  was  incapable  of  application,  the  other  had  a 
great  deal.  The  Duke  of  Marlborough  wanted  mate- 
rials, the  Duke  of  Bedford  to  know  how  to  use  them ; 
and  as  the  one  in  company,  conscious  of  his  ignorance, 
was  generally  diffident  and  silent,  the  other  was  always 
assured,  talkative,  and  decisive:  so  that  the  Duke  of 
Marlborough  was  sensible  he  wanted  knowledge,  whilst 
the  Duke  of  Bedford  had  knowledge  and  was  not  sensi- 
ble he  wanted  parts. 

The  proposal  I  have  mentioned,  of  making  the  offi- 
cers' commissions  for  life,  being  not  agreeable  to  the 
people,  and  a  thing  that  seemed  rather  calculated  per- 
sonally to  insult  the  King  than  to  distress  or  attack  his 
ministers,  posterity  will  naturally  be  surprised  that  so 
many  great  and  able  men  as  were  now  embarked  in 
the  Opposition  could  make  so  injudicious  a  step  and 
pitch  upon  so  improper  a  point  to  labour.  It  proceeded 
in  part  from  a  desire  to  make  a  compliment  to  Lord 
Cobham,  and  to  revive  the  clamour  raised  on  the  dis- 
mission of  so  old  and  creditable  an  officer ;  but  the 


286  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIII. 

chief  reason  of  it  was  this — the  Opposition  did  not  yet 
despair  of  gaining  Lord  Scarborough  over  to  their 
party ;  and  Lord  Chesterfield  having  told  them  all  that 
in  the  late  reign,  when  this  thing  was  very  near  being 
brought  into  Parliament,  Lord  Scarborough  had -de- 
clared vehemently  for  it,  they  all  concluded  that  Lord 
Scarborough  would  be  catched  in  this  business,  as  he 
had  been  in  the  South  Sea  affair  the  preceding  year, 
and  think  himself  bound  to  promote  that  in  public 
which  he  had  professed  approving  in  private. 

But  this  scheme,  well  as  it  was  laid,  did  not  take 
effect ;  for  Lord  Scarborough  not  only  voted  but  spoke 
very  warmly  against  the  bill.  He  owned  in  his  speech 
that  he  had  formerly  been  of  a  different  opinion  in  this 
matter  when  cursorily  examined,  but  that  upon  mature 
deliberation  he  had  changed  his  mind ;  and  though  he 
once  only  considered  this  scheme  in  the  light  of  a  point 
gained  upon  the  Crown  that  would  incapacitate  any 
prince  from  abusing  this  power  of  displacing  officers, 
yet,  when  he  came  to  reflect  on  the  inconveniences  that 
would  attend  the  lodging  that  power  in  the  hands  pro- 
posed, he  found  those  inconveniences  much  greater,  and 
attended  with  more  danger  to  the  liberties  of  the  people, 
than  leaving  it  where  it  was,  as  it  would  create  an  in- 
dependency in  the  army  that  might  in  time  make  it 
capable  of  overturning  the  whole  civil  government. 

However,  Lord  Scarborough  was  not  satisfied  with 
this  public  declaration ;  he  was  afraid,  notwithstanding, 
that  people  might  impute  his  speaking  and  acting  in 
this  manner  to  interest,  rather  than  conviction,  and 
resolved  to  prove  that  interest  was  not  his  motive.  In 
order  to  do  so,  the  morning  before  the  debate  came  on 


1734.  LORD  SCARBOROUGH'S  DIFFICULTIES.  287 

he  wrote  a  letter  to  the  King  to  tell  him  the  situation 
he  was  in,  and,  as  the  only  way  he  had  left  to  show  the 
world,  who  might  be  busy  with  his  character  on  this 
occasion,  that  his  behaviour  was  the  result  of  his  opi- 
nion, and  not  of  any  mean  complaisance  to  keep  his 
employments,  he  begged  to  resign  them ;  assuring  the 
King  at  the  same  time  that  he  did  not  take  this  step 
from  any  mixture  of  disgust  or  want  of  zeal  for  his  ser- 
vice ;  that  he  was  as  firmly  attached  as  ever  in  affection 
to  his  Majesty's  person,  and  as  zealous  to  promote 
and  as  ready  to  declare  he  approved  all  his  measures 
as  formerly ;  that  he  had  not  the  least  complaint 
against  any  of  his  ministers ;  and  that  he  would  con- 
vince the  world,  by  doubling  if  possible  his  assiduity  in 
his  Majesty's  service  in  Parliament,  that  he  had  110 
other  reason  for  taking  this  resolution  of  quitting  his 
employments  but  to  avoid  the  trap  which  he  saw  laid 
for  him,  and  out  of  which  he  had  no  other  way  of  ex- 
tricating himself  with  honour  and  reputation. 

The  day  after  he  wrote  this  letter  the  King  desired 
to  see  him,  made  him  great  professions  of  kindness  and 
esteem,  and  insisted  on  his  taking  a  few  days  more  to 
consider  of  this  business  before  he  came  to  any  final  de- 
termination. The  Queen  saw  him  too,  and  talked  to  him 
in  the  same  strain :  she  said  afterwards  that  she  never 
saw  any  man  in  such  agitation  and  perplexity  in  her 
life ;  and  that  Lord  Scarborough  had  told  her  he  had 
not  possessed  himself,  or  been  able  to  sleep,  since  he 
knew  of  this  business  being  certainly  to  come  into  the 
House,  from  the  anxiety  he  was  in,  and  the  not  know- 
ing how  to  act  in  such  a  manner  as  should  do  justice 
both  to  his  opinion  and  to  his  character.  Sir  Robert 


288  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XHL 

Walpole,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  Mr.  Pelham,  and 
Lord  Lonsdale,  all  pressed  him  extremely  to  change 
his  resolution,  saying  it  would  certainly  be  thought  by 
all  mankind  that  discontent  had  induced  him  to  take 
it ;  consequently,  his  persisting  in  it  must  hurt  those  to 
whom  he  wished  well,  and  give  credit  and  strength  to 
the  party  who  endeavoured  to  distress  the  Court  and 
destroy  the  Administration. 

These  representations  so  far  prevailed,  that  he  was 
persuaded  to  keep  his  regiment  and  remain  of  the 
Cabinet  Council,12  but  his  Mastership  of  the  Horse  he 
resigned  in  form  the  following  week. 

The  parting  between  his  master  and  him  on  this 
occasion  was  so  tender,  that  they  embraced  like  equals 
and  wept  like  lovers.  The  Opposition  triumphed  a 
good  deal  on  the  first  news  of  Lord  Scarborough's 
having  quitted,  but  their  triumph  was  short,  for  he  soon 
after  took  occasion  in  the  House  to  declare  himself 
more  warmly  in  the  interest  of  the  Court  than  he  had 
ever  done  before,  and  continued  so  to  do,  upon  every 
point  in  debate,  during  the  whole  session. 

This  made  every  man  who  opposed  the  Court  con- 
demn his  conduct,  and  say  he  had  tied  himself  down  a 
greater  slave  to  the  Administration  by  this  strange,  in- 
judicious manner  of  quitting  an  employment  than  any 
the  most  mercenary  tool  had  ever  done  by  accepting  one. 
Some  said  it  was  a  sort  of  Don  Quixotism  in  politics  ; 
others,  who  had  a  mind  to  be  more  abusive,  called  him 
the  Sir  Paul  Methuen  of  the  House  of  Lords ;  and  Sir 

12  The  great  officers  of  the  Household  were  at  this  time  usually  mem- 
bers of  what  was  called  the  Cabinet  Council.  See  at  the  end  of  the  Me- 
moirs Lord  Hervey's  account  of  the  Cabinet. 


1734.  KING'S  CHARACTER.  289 

Kobert  Walpole  himself,  in  speaking  of  Lord  Scar- 
borough's behaviour  at  this  time  to  Lord  Hervey, 
laughed,  shrugged  his  shoulders,  shook  his  head,  and 
pointed  to  his  forehead.13 

The  Duke  of  Richmond  asked  the  King  immediately 
to  succeed  Lord  Scarborough,  and  the  King  was  not 
averse  to  granting  his  request  any  further  than  he  was 
always  averse  to  giving  anything  to  anybody.  Many 
ingredients  concurred  to  form  this  reluctance  in  his 
Majesty  to  bestowing.  One  was  that,  taking  all  his 
notions  from  a  German  measure,  he  thought  every  man 
who  served  him  in  England  overpaid  ;  another  was,  that 
while  employments  were  vacant  he  saved  the  salary; 
but  the  most  prevalent  of  all  was  his  never  having  the 
least  inclination  to  oblige.  I  do  not  believe  there  ever 
lived  a  man  to  whose  temper  benevolence  was  so  abso- 
lutely a  stranger.  It  was  a  sensation  that,  I  dare  say, 
never  accompanied  any  one  act  of  his  power ;  so  that 
whatever  good  he  did  was  either  extorted  from  him,  or 
was  the  adventitious  effect  of  some  self-interested  act  of 
policy:  consequently,  if  any  seeming  favour  he  conferred 
ever  obliged  the  receiver,  it  must  have  been  because 
the  man  on  whom  it  fell  was  ignorant  of  the  motives 
from  which  the  giver  bestowed.  I  remember  Sir  Ro- 
bert Walpole  saying  once,  in  speaking  to  ine  of  the 
King,  that  to  talk  with  him  of  compassion,  considera- 
tion of  past  services,  charity,  and  bounty,  was  making 
use  of  words  that  with  him  had  no"  meaning.  This 
habit  of  keeping  employments  vacant  drew  him  often 

13  Lord  Scarborough's  death  soon  after,  by  his  own  hand,  as  well  as  the 
inconsistency  of  his  semi-resignation,  and  some  other  circumstances,  seem 
to  justify  Sir  Robert's  suspicion.  See  Suffolk  Cor.,  ii.  87. 

VOL.  I.  U 


290  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIII. 

into  great  difficulties,  and  was  necessarily  attended  with 
many  inconveniences;  for,  as  delay  on  such  occa- 
sions always  begets  competitors,  so  of  course  it  not 
only  increases  the  number  of  the  refused,  and  conse- 
quently of  the  disobliged,  whenever  the  disposal  is 
made,  but  also  lessens,  if  not  cancels,  the  obligation 
even  towards  them  whose  solicitation  at  last  prevails ; 
people  very  naturally  and  very  reasonably  thinking 
themselves  not  bound  to  do  much  towards  repaying 
any  benefit  when  they  have  been  made  to  do  a  great 
deal  towards  earning  it:  they  consider  all  that  previous 
trouble  as  so  much  advanced  in  part  of  payment,  and 
never  fail  to  make  allowances  for  it  when  they  come  to 
balance  the  account  in  what  they  think  they  remain  in 
debt  to  their  benefactor. 

The  King's  neither  giving  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
this  employment  immediately,  nor  directly  promising 
it,  embarrassed  his  Majesty  afterwards  extremely,  when 
Lord  Pembroke14  asked  it,  as  it  laid  him  under  the 
necessity  of  giving  the  preference  to  one  of  them  in  his 
choice,  when  he  need  have  given  the  preference  only  to 
the  first  comer,  which  the  last  cannot  or  ought  not  ever 
to  take  ill. 

Lord  Pembroke's  pretensions  to  this  office  were  cer- 
tainly very  reasonable,  as  he  was  a  man  of  great  quality, 
of  an  extreme  good  character,  beloved  by  everybody 
who  knew  him,  and  had  served  the  King  twenty 
years  in  the  bedchamber,  without  any  other  prefer- 
ment than  a  regiment,  in  exchange  for  which  he  had 

14  Henry,  ninth  Earl.  Lord  Chesterfield,  who  was  very  anxious  for 
Lord  Pembroke's  success,  says  (Stiff.  Corr.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  81)  that  the 
question  had  been  decided  in  the  Duke's  favour  as  early  as  July,  though 
not  announced  till  Lord  Pembroke  was  satisfied. 


1734.  DUKE  OF  RICHMOND.  291 

quitted  a  troop  of  Guards,    for  which   he   had   paid 
10,0007. 

The  Duke  of  Richmond's  plea  was  not  weaker  as  to 
character,  and  was  stronger  as  to  quality,  especially  at 
this  Court,  where  the  difference  of  coronets  was  often 
much  more  considered  than  the  difference  of  the  heads 
that  wore  them.  He  made  great  expenses,  too,  in 
elections,  and  was  thoroughly  zealous  both  for  the  Go- 
vernment and  the  Administration.  There  never  lived 
a  man  of  a  more  amiable  composition  ;  he  was  friendly, 
benevolent,  generous,  honourable,  and  thoroughly  noble 
in  his  way  of  acting,  talking,  and  thinking ;  he  had 
constant  spirits,  was  very  entertaining,  and  had  a  great 
deal  of  knowledge,  though,  not  having  had  a  school- 
education,  he  was  a  long  while  reckoned  ignorant  by  the 
generality  of  the  world,  who  are  as  apt  to  call  every 
man  a  blockhead  that  does  not  understand  Greek  and 
Latin,  as  they  are  to  think  many  of  those  no  block- 
heads who  understand  nothing  else.  His  being  grand- 
son to  King  Charles  II.,  I  must  confess,  prejudiced 
people  much  more  reasonably  against  his  understand- 
ing,15 and  contributed  extremely  to  its  being  underrated 
till  he  came  to  be  thoroughly  known ;  for,  as  fish  with 
wings,  instead  of  fins,  would  hardly  be  a  greater  prodigy 
than  a  Stuart  with  sense,  so  people  had  the  utmost 
difficulty  without  their  own  auricular  conviction  to  con- 
ceive there  could  be  one  Lot  of  sense  out  of  that  Sodom 
of  fools. 

15  This  is  surely  a  strange  remark  when  coupled  with  the  name  of 
Charles  II.,  who  was  certainly  no  "fool;"  it  was  prompted,  I  think,  by 
Lord  Hervey's  dislike  of  his  colleague  the  Duke  of  Grafton.  "  There  was," 
says  Horace  Wai  pole,  "  a  mortal  antipathy  between  the  Duke  of  Grafton 
and  Lord  Hervey,  and  the  Court  was  often  on  the  point  of  being  disturbed 
by  their  enmities." — Reminis. 

u2 


292  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIII. 

I  cannot  help  mentioning,  before  I  quit  this  head  of 
the  King's  ungiving  disposition,  two  instances,  which 
I  think  such  strong  proofs  of  it,  that,  to  people  who 
know  not  the  millions  of  corroborating  testimonies  one 
might  bring,  they  would  be  alone  sufficient  to  demon- 
strate it. 

The  instances  I  mean  are  my  Lord  Lifford,  and  his 
sister,  Lady  Charlotte  deRoussie.16  These  two  people, 
born  in  France,  having  more  religion  than  sense,17  left 
their  native  country  on  account  of  being  Protestants  ; 
and  being  of  great  quality,  and  not  in  great  circum- 
stances, had,  during  four  reigns,  subsisted  upon  the 
scanty  charity  of  the  English  Court :  they  were 
constantly — every  night  in  the  country,  and  three 
nights  in  the  week  in  town — alone  with  the  King  and 
Queen  for  an  hour  or  two  before  they  went  to  bed, 
during  which  time  the  King  walked  about  and  talked 
to  the  brother  of  armies,  or  to  the  sister  of  genealo- 
gies, whilst  the  Queen  knotted  and  yawned,  till  from 
yawning  she  came  to  nodding,  and  from  nodding  to 
snoring. 

These  two  poor  miserable  Court  drudges  were  in 
more  constant  waiting  than  any  of  the  pages  of  the 
back  stairs,  were  very  simple  and  very  quiet,  did 
nobody  any  hurt,  nor  anybody  but  his  Majesty  any 
pleasure,  who  paid  them  so  ill  for  all  their  assiduity  and 
slavery,  that  they  were  not  only  not  in  affluence,  but 

16  They  were  the  children  of  Frederic  Charles  de  Roye  de  la  Roche- 
foucaud,  Count  de  Roye  et  de  Rowy,  a  French  Protestant,  who  came  into 
England  in    1688,   and  was  created  Earl  of  Lifford  in   Ireland.     Lady 
Charlotte  de  Roye,  "  commonly  called  de  Roucy"  was  Gouvernante  to 
the  younger  children  of  George  II. 

17  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  Lord  Hervey  was  so  unfortunate  as  to 
be  what  was  called  a  Freethinker,  and  never  fails  to  sneer  at  religion. 


1734.  THE  QUEEN.  293 

laboured  under  the  disagreeable  burdens  of  small  debts 
(which  a  thousand  pounds  would  have  paid),  and  had 
not  an  allowance  from  the  Court  that  enabled  them  to 
appear  there  even  in  the  common  decency  of  clean 
clothes.  The  King,  nevertheless,  was  always  saying 
how  well  he  loved  them,  and  calling  them  the  best 
people  in  the  world.  But,  though  he  never  forgot  their 
goodness,  he  never  remembered  their  poverty ;  and  by 
giving  them  so  much  of  his  time,  which  nobody  but 
him  would  have  given  them,  and  so  little  of  his  money, 
which  everybody  but  him  in  his  situation  would  have 
afforded  them,  he  gave  one  just  as  good  an  opinion 
of  his  understanding  by  what  he  bestowed,  as  he  did 
of  his  generosity  by  what  he  withheld.  The  Queen, 
whose  most  glaring  merit  was  not  that  of  giving, 
was  certainly  with  regard  to  this  poor  woman  as 
blameable  as  the  King.  For  the  playthings  of 
princes,  let  them  be  ever  so  trifling,  ought  always  to 
be  gilt,  those  who  contribute  to  their  pleasure  having  a 
right  to  their  bounty.  To  most  people,  however,  it 
was  a  matter  of  wonder  how  the  King  and  Queen  could 
have  such  persons  constantly  with  them.  The  truth  of 
the  case  was,  that  the  King  had  no  taste  for  better 
company,  and  the  Queen,  though  she  had  a  better 
taste,  was  forced  to  mortify  her  own  to  please  his.  Her 
predominant  passion  was  pride,  and  the  darling  plea- 
sure of  her  soul  was  power;  but  she  was  forced  to 
gratify  the  one  and  gain  the  other,  as  some  people  do 
health,  by  a  strict  and  painful  regime,  which  few 
besides  herself  could  have  had  patience  to  support, 
or  resolution  to  adhere  to.  She  was  at  least  seven 
or  eight  hours  tete-a-tete  with  the  King  every  day, 


294  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIII. 

during  which  time  she  was  generally  saying  what  she 
did  not  think,  assenting  to  what  she  did  not  believe, 
and  praising  what  she  did  not  approve ;  for  they  were 
seldom  of  the  same  opinion,  and  he  too  fond  of  his  own 
for  her  ever  at  first  to  dare  to  controvert  it  ("  consilii 
quamvis  egregii  quod  ipse  non  afferret,  inimicus :" — 
"  An  enemy  to  any  counsel,  however  excellent,  which 
he  himself  had  not  suggested." — Tacitus)  ;18  she  used  to 
give  him  her  opinion  as  jugglers  do  a  card,  by  changing 
it  imperceptibly,  and  making  him  believe  he  held 
the  same  with  that  he  first  pitched  upon.  But  that 
which  made  these  tete-a-tetes  seem  heaviest  was  that 
he  neither  liked  reading  nor  being  read  to  (unless  it 
was  to  sleep) :  she  was  forced,  like  a  spider,  to  spin  out 
of  her  own  bowels  all  the  conversation  with  which  the 
fly  was  taken.  However,  to  all  this  she  submitted  for 
the  sake  of  power,  and  for  the  reputation  of  having  it ; 
for  the  vanity  of  being  thought  to  possess  what  she 
desired  was  equal  to  the  pleasure  of  the  possession 
itself.  But,  either  for  the  appearance  or  the  reality, 
she  knew  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  have  interest  in 
her  husband,  as  she  was  sensible  that  interest  was  the 
measure  by  which  people  would  always  judge  of  her 
power.  Her  every  thought,  word,  and  act  therefore 
tended  and  was  calculated  to  preserve  her  influence 
there ;  to  him  she  sacrificed  her  time,  for  him  she  mor- 
tified her  inclination ;  she  looked,  spake,  and  breathed 
but  for  him,  like  a  weathercock  to  every  capricious 
blast  of  his  uncertain  temper,  and  governed  him  (if 

!8  Lord  Hervey  in  his  quotations  sometimes  makes  variances  from  the  re- 
ceived texts,  which,  being  either  slight  or  made  to  suit  the  subject,  I  leave 
unaltered.  He  generally  accompanies  them  with  a  translation  :  where  he 
sometimes  omits,  I  have  supplied  it. 


1734.  THE  QUEEN.  295 

such  influence  so  gained  can  bear  the  name  of  govern- 
ment) by  being  as  great  a  slave  to  him  thus  ruled,  as 
any  other  wife  could  be  to  a  man  who  ruled  her.  For 
all  the  tedious  hours  she  spent  then  in  watching  him 
whilst  he  slept,  or  the  heavier  task  of  entertaining 
him  whilst  he  was  awake,  her  single  consolation  was  in 
reflecting  she  had  power,  and  that  people  in  coffee- 
houses and  ruelles™  were  saying  she  governed  this  coun- 
try, without  knowing  how  dear  the  government  of  it 
cost  her.20 

19  "  Ruelles:  espace  qu'on  laisse  entre  le  lit  et  la  muraille.     On  appclait 
autrefois  ruelles  les  alcoves,  et  en  general  les  lieux  pares,  ou  les  dames, 
soit  au  lit,  soit  debout,  recevaient  leurs  visitcs." — Diet,  Franqais.     Hence 
the  word  came  to  be  used  generally  for  any  circle  of  chit-chat  or  gossiping. 

20  It  seems  at  first  sight  unfair  to  exclude,  so  completely  as  Lord  Hervey 
does,  the  possibility  that  duty  and  affection  towards  so  fond  a  husband — the 
father  of  her  many  children — might  have  had  some  share  in  the  Queen's 
submissive  and  patient  conduct ;  but  we  shall  see,  by  and  by,  that  she  con- 
descended to  compliances  with  the  King's  temper  and  passions  that  cannot 
be  thus  palliated. 


296  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.          CHAP.  xiv. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Proceedings  in  Parliament — The  Prince  of  Wales's  Affairs  and  his  Cha- 
racter—  Increase  of  the  Army — Vote  of  Confidence — Lord  Hervey 
disapproves  of  both — High  state  of  Literature — Marriage  of  the  Princess 
Royal — Figure  of  the  Bridegroom — Pretensions  of  the  Irish  Peers — 
Horace  Walpole — End  of  the  Session — Speaker  Onslow  Treasurer  of 
the  Navy — Lord  Stair  dismissed — Prince  and  Princess  of  Orange  depart 
— Miss  Vane — Elections — Dissatisfaction  of  the  King  and  Queen — Lord 
Isla  and  the  Duke  of  Argyle. 

BUT  to  return  from  this  digression  to  the  proceedings 
of  the  Parliament  this  winter,  I  must  relate  how  the 
three  points  most  apprehended  went  off.  The  debt 
of  the  navy  the  Opponents  could  make  nothing  of. 
1,200,000/.  was  given  out  of  the  sinking-fund  towards 
the  discharge  of  part  of  it ;  and  this  in  debate  was 
called  a  misapplication  of  the  sinking-fund ;  but  nobody 
in  either  House  pretended  to  find  any  material  fault  in 
the  manner  in  which  the  debt  had  been  incurred — not 
that  there  were  no  faults  to  be  found,  but  the  intricacy 
of  the  account,  and  the  ignorance  of  those  who  had  un- 
dertaken to  sift  it,  kept  those  faults  from  the  light. 

The  bill  for  Triennial  Parliaments  was  proposed  in 
the  House  of  Commons  [13th  March^,  but  rejected  by 
a  great  majority  [247  to  184],  and  never  brought  at 
all  into  the  House  of  Lords. 

The  Prince's  affair  was  often  talked  of  in  private,  but 
never  mentioned  in  either  House.  He  contrived  to 
irritate  the  Court  by  alarming  them  with  caballing,  and 
to  disoblige  those  with  whom  he  caballed  by  stopping 


1734.  PllINCE  OF  WALES'S  CHARACTER.  297 

there,  and  not  giving  his  consent  to  have  it  prosecuted 
in  Parliament.  The  Tories  and  discontented  Whigs 
were  so  dissatisfied  with  his  conduct,  that  they  abused 
him  more  than  they  did  his  father ;  and  said  that  he 
had  only  drawn  them  in  to  make  the  offer  of  standing 
by  him,  that  he  might  make  a  merit  to  his  father  of 
rejecting  that  offer  and  betraying  them.  On  the  other 
hand,  his  father  and  mother,  though  they  were  fright- 
ened out  of  their  senses  whenever  they  thought  their 
son's  name  was  near  being  mentioned  in  Parliament, 
whenever  these  fears  abated,  treated  him  in  the  most 
provoking  manner,  and  spoke  of  him  in  the  most 
contemptuous  terms. 

The  Prince's  character  at  his  first  coming  over, 
though  little  more  respectable,  seemed  much  more 
amiable  than,  upon  his  opening  himself  further  and 
being  better  known,  it  turned  out  to  be ;  for  though  there 
appeared  nothing  in  him  to  be  admired,  yet  there  seemed 
nothing  in  him  to  be  hated — neither  anything  great 
nor  anything  vicious  ;  his  behaviour  was  something  that 
gained  one's  good  wishes,  though  it  gave  one  no  esteem 
for  him ;  for  his  best  qualities,  whilst  they  prepossessed 
one  the  most  in  his  favour,  always  gave  one  a  degree  of 
contempt  for  him  at  the  same  time ;  his  carriage,  whilst 
it  seemed  engaging  to  those  who  did  not  examine  it, 
appearing  mean  to  those  who  did :  for  though  his  man- 
ners had  the  show  of  benevolence  from  a  good  deal  of 
natural  or  habitual  civility,  yet  his  cajoling  everybody, 
and  almost  in  an  equal  degree,  made  those  things  which 
might  have  been  thought  favours,  if  more  judiciously 
or  sparingly  bestowed,  lose  all  their  weight.  He  car- 
ried this  affectation  of  general  benevolence  so  far  that 
he  often  condescended  below  the  character  of  a  Prince ; 


298  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

and  as  people  attributed  this  familiarity  to  popular, 
and  not  particular  motives,  so  it  only  lessened  their 
respect  without  increasing  their  good  will,  and  instead 
of  giving  them  good  impressions  of  his  humanity,  only 
gave  them  ill  ones  of  his  sincerity.  He  was  indeed  as 
false  as  his  capacity  would  allow  him  to  be,  and  was 
more  capable  in  that  walk  than  in  any  other,  never 
having  the  least  hesitation,  from  principle  or  fear  of 
future  detection,  in  telling  any  lie  that  served  his  pre- 
sent purpose.  He  had  a  much  weaker  understanding, 
and,  if  possible,  a  more  obstinate  temper,  than  his 
father ;  that  is,  more  tenacious  of  opinions  he  had  once 
formed,  though  less  capable  of  ever  forming  right  ones. 
Had  he  had  one  grain  of  merit  at  the  bottom  of  his 
heart,  one  should  have  had  compassion  for  him  in  the 
situation  to  which  his  miserable  poor  head  soon  reduced 
him;  for  his  case,  in  short,  was  this: — he  had  a  father 
that  abhorred  him,  a  mother  that  despised  him,  sisters 
that  betrayed  him,  a  brother  set  up  against  him,  and  a 
set  of  servants  that  neglected  him,  and  were  neither  of 
use,  nor  capable  of  being  of  use  to  him,  nor  desirous  of 
being  so. 

Dodington,1  who  governed  him,  at  present  was  afraid 
of  having  him  quite  reconciled  to  the  King,  or  quite 
broke  with  him,  foreseeing  that  in  either  of  these 
situations  the  Prince  would  be  inevitably  taken  out  of 


1  George  Bubb,  author  of  the  celebrated  Diary,  the  son,  according  to 
one  version,  of  an  apothecary,  or,  according  to  another,  of  an  Irish  fortune- 
hunter  (perhaps  the  same  person).  He  inherited  from  his  uncle,  George 
Dodington,  a  great  estate  in  Dorsetshire,  and  assumed  his  name  (ante, 
p.  38).  After  quarrelling  with  the  Prince,  as  we  shall  see  presently,  he 
was  subsequently  reconciled  to  him,  and  in  1749  became  again  his  prime 
adviser.  After  the  Prince's  death  in  1750,  he  attached  himself  to  the  Prin- 
cess Dowager;  and  George  III.  rewarded  his  services  to  his  parents  by 
creating  him,  in  1761,  Lord  Mclcombc.  He  died  in  July,  1762. 


1734.  ARMY  ESTIMATES.  299 

his  hands.  In  the  one  he  would  be  governed  by  his 
mother,  and  consequently  by  Sir  Robert  Walpole  ;  in 
the  other  by  Pulteney,  Lord  Chesterfield,  or  Lord 
Carteret,  who,  as  heads  of  the  party,  could  never  have 
submitted  to  act  a  subordinate  part  to  Mr.  Dodington, 
whom  no  man  but  himself  would  have  thought  of  a 
rank  above  them. 

Other  questions  that  were  started  by  the  Opposition 
during  this  session,  as  they  were  too  immaterial  to  give 
much  disturbance,  so  they  were  of  too  little  conse- 
quence to  be  repeated.  Nor  ought  anybody  to  wonder 
that  things  were  no  better  concerted  or  managed 
against  the  Court,  when  those  who  naturally  ought  to 
have  acted  in  concert  for  the  management  of  these 
affairs  were  most  of  them  as  ill  with  one  another  as 
with  those  they  opposed.  Lord  Carteret  and  Lord 
Bolingbroke  had  no  correspondence  at  all ;  Mr.  Pul- 
teney and  Lord  Bolingbroke  hated  one  another ;  Lord 
Carteret  and  Pulteney  were  jealous  of  one  another ; 
Sir  William  Wyndham  and  Pulteney  the  same ;  whilst 
Lord  Chesterfield  had  a  little  correspondence  with 
them  all,  but  was  confided  in  by  none  of  them. 

In  pursuance  of  estimates  given  in  from  the  Crown, 
20,000  men  were  voted  this  year  in  Parliament  for  the 
sea  service,  and  an  augmentation  of  1800  for  the  land 
forces.  The  demand  for  the  sea  service  met  with  no 
opposition,  and  the  other  with  much  less  than  it  would 
have  done  had  the  true  reason  for  asking  such  an  aug- 
mentation been  avowed  or  known. 

The  pretence  for  asking  it  was  this  : — Two  years  be- 
fore, when  the  Spaniards  made  their  ridiculous  expe- 
dition to  Oran,  the  garrison  of  Gibraltar  consisted  only 
of  2400  men ;  and  as  Spain,  whilst  she  was  making 


300  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

these  vast  preparations  and  armaments  both  by  sea  and 
land,  thought  it  proper  not  to  declare  for  what  purpose 
they  were  designed,  the  English  ministers,  not  knowing 
but  some  new  attack  upon  Gibraltar  might  be  intended, 
sent  over  three  regiments  upon  the  English2  establish- 
ment, in  all  1800  men,  to  strengthen  that  garrison. 

Soon  after,  when  the  Spanish  storm  broke  upon  the 
African  coast,  and  Gibraltar  was  thought  in  safety, 
these  troops  were  ordered  back ;  but,  before  those  orders 
were  executed,  new  troubles  arising  in  Europe  on  the 
death  of  the  King  of  Poland,  and  the  turn  Spain  would 
take  not  being  known,  the  orders  for  the  return  of  these 
three  regiments  were  retracted.  The  demand  now 
made  in  Parliament  therefore  was  explained  to  be  in 
reality  an  augmentation  for  the  garrison  of  Gibraltar, 
since  these  1800  men  were  only  desired  to  complete 
the  number  voted  the  year  before  for  the  English  esta- 
blishment, and  to  supply  those  three  regiments  the 
King  had  thought  fit  to  remove  from  home  for  the 
security  of  that  place. 

This  sounded  plausibly;  and  in  order  to  make  the 
grant  of  this  demand  come  easier,  instead  of  three  new 
regiments  being  raised,  it  was  proposed  to  make  the 
augmentation  by  the  cheaper  way  of  adding  private 
men  only  to  every  company. 

But  the  true  reason  of  this  augmentation  was  to 
secure  the  Ministry  and  strengthen  the  hands  of  the 
Government  in  case  of  insurrections,  or  any  disturb- 
ances that  might  arise,  whilst  the  nation  was  in  the 
ferment  of  elections  for  a  new  Parliament.  Sir  Robert 
Walpole's  apprehensions  were  very  strong  upon  this 

2  The  army  used  to  be  voted  on  English,  Irish,  and  Colonial  establish- 
ments. 


1734.  VOTE  OF  CONFIDENCE.  301 

score,  and  his  reason  for  making  the  augmentation  by 
adding  private  men  to  corps,  instead  of  raising  new 
entire  corps,  was  not  because  he  thought  it  the  cheapest 
method,  but  because  he  looked  upon  it  as  the  speediest 
and  most  effectual ;  new-raised  regiments  being  in  his 
opinion  never  of  any  use  the  first  year,  and  the  first 
year  in  this  case  being  the  time  when  he  expected  to 
have  most  use  for  them.3 

The  King  and  the  Queen,  who  always  considered 
soldiers  as  the  principal  supports  both  of  their  grandeur 
and  their  power,  were  glad  of  any  pretence  to  increase 
their  number,  and  caressed  Sir  Robert  Walpole  ex- 
tremely for  tracing  out  a  way  by  which  a  thing  they 
were  so  desirous  of,  and  the  whole  nation  so  averse  to, 
could  be  done  with  so  little  difficulty.  So  that  he  con- 
trived to  have  all  the  merit  of  inventing  this  scheme  to 
their  Majesties,  and  to  avoid  all  the  odium  of  it  among 
those  of  his  adherents  who  disliked  it,  by  saying  it  was 
a  point  on  which  the  King  was  so  peremptory  and  so 
obstinate,  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  avoid  giving 
in  to  it ;  by  which  means  he  at  once  made  his  court  to 
the  King  and  Queen,  his  excuse  to  his  friends,  and  a  pro- 
vision for  his  own  security. 

But  this  provision  did  not  yet  seem  sufficient,  and 

3  All  this  seems  strange  from  a  ministerial  pen.  A  war  had  broken  out 
on  the  Continent  that  seemed  likely  to  embroil  England  and  Spain — the  pre- 
jwration  at  Gibraltar  was  therefore  indispensable.  As  to  the  motive  Lord 
Hervey  attributes  to  Walpole,  it  is  enough  to  observe  that  the  bill  passed 
in  March,  and  the  dissolution  was  in  April,  so  that  the  new  levies,  if  such  a 
thing  were  ever  credible,  were  not  very  likely  to  be  employed  at  these  elec- 
tions. The  opposition  tone  which  Lord  Hervey  here  and  hereabouts 
takes,  and  which  is  in  direct  contradiction  to  his  votes  and  speeches,  may 
be  attributed  to  his  ill  humour,  subsequently  avowed,  at  not  being  in 
political  office  :  he  cavils  at  the  decisions  of  a  Cabinet  to  which  he  thought 
he  ought  to  belong. 


302  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

before  the  dissolution  of  the  Parliament,  at  the  very  end 
of  the  session,  he  made  this  expiring  Parliament  on  its 
deathbed  leave  him  a  legacy  that  was  a  full  antidote 
to  all  his  fears.  This  legacy  (a  vote  of  credit  being  an 
obnoxious  title)  was  christened  a  vote  of  confidence — a 
name  it  richly  deserved,  for  never  in  time  of  peace  was 
so  unlimited  a  confidence  lodged  in  the  hands  of  the 
Crown  before.  This  vote  of  confidence  not  only  gave 
the  King  a  power  during  the  interval  of  Parliament 
to  augment  his  forces  without  limitation,  both  by  land 
and  sea,  but  a  promissory  note  was  tacked  to  it,  of 
making  good  any  engagements  made  or  to  be  made 
by  his  Majesty  for  the  interest,  honour,  and  safety 
of  the  nation,  or  as  the  exigence  of  affairs  should 
require.  Authority  by  Act  of  Parliament  also  was 
given  him  to  apply  what  sum  he  thought  fit  out  of 
all  the  money  granted  for  the  current  service  of 
the  year  for  these  purposes,  and  all  the  security  the 
Parliament  had  for  no  misapplication  being  made  of 
this  credit,  nor  any  abuse  of  this  power,  was  a  little 
cajolery  (inserted  at  the  end  of  the  message  sent 
from  the  Crown  to  make  this  demand)  that  promised 
an  account  should  be  laid  before  the  next  Parliament 
of  the  use  that  had  been  made  of  the  generosity  of 
its  predecessor. 

This  message  was  sent  to  both  Houses,  and  the  de- 
bates in  both  Houses  upon  it  were  very  warm.  Those 
who  objected  to  this  unlimited  confidence  being  placed 
in  the  Crown  said,  though  this  vote  was  not  called  a 
vote  of  credit,  yet  it  was  in  effect  the  most  extensive, 
and  consequently  the  most  improper  credit  that  was 
ever  given  to  the  Crown  ;  that  it  would  have  been  more 


1734.  VOTE  OF  CONFIDENCE.  303 

for  the  honour  of  Parliament,  and  less  dangerous  to  the 
liberties  of  the  people,  to  have  voted  any  sum  of  money 
or  any  number  of  troops  in  the  common  Parliamentary 
methods  at  the  beginning  of  the  session,  than  to  allow 
one  man  or  one  shilling  to  be  raised  in  a  manner  so 
repugnant  to  the  nature  of  our  Constitution ;  that  it 
was  sapping  the  foundation  and  defeating  the  very  end 
of  Parliaments,  as  it  was  making  a  farce  of  granting 
money  upon  estimates,  ifj  by  an  unappropriating  clause, 
a  power  was  afterwards  given  to  the  King  of  applying 
what  was  beneficially  granted  for  one  use  to  any  other 
purpose  he  should  think  fit ;  and  if  promises  were  made, 
when  that  money  was  squandered  in  unnecessary  ex- 
penses, that  they  would  afterwards  find  more,  to  defray 
those  charges  that  were  necessary. 

It  was  more  than  hinted,  too,  that  this  credit  was 
asked  by  the  King  only  to  get  money  to  buy  a  Parlia- 
ment at  the  next  elections,  which  Parliament  would 
afterwards  no  doubt  have  gratitude  enough  to  pass  any 
account  brought  by  their  benefactor,  or  discharge  any 
debt  contracted  in  their  service. 

Those  who  spoke  for  this  vote  of  confidence  said  that 
the  reason  why  more  money  and  troops  were  not  de- 
manded at  the  beginning  of  the  session  was,  that,  as  the 
King  could  not  know  beforehand  what  situation  the 
affairs  of  Europe  would  be  in  at  the  opening  of  the  cam- 
paign, so  the  most  that  could  possibly  be  wanted  must 
have  been  asked  had  the  demand  been  made  then, 
whereas,  a  discretionary  power  being  now  lodged  in  the 
Crown  to  measure  the  expenses  of  the  nation  by  the 
necessity  of  the  occasion,  and  to  proportion  it  to  the 
call,  the  least  that  could  be  wanted  might  be  applied : 


304  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

consequently,  in  one  case  the  nation  might  have  been 
put  to  an  unnecessary  charge ;  in  the  other,  without  an 
abuse  of  this  power  supposed,  there  need  not  one 
farthing  be  expended  more  than  the  circumstances  of 
the  times  absolutely  require. 

That  as  to  the  misapplication  of  money,  as  an  account 
was  to  be  laid  before  Parliament  of  all  that  was  dis- 
bursed in  consequence  of  this  vote,  so  the  Parliament 
would  be  as  good  judges,  by  a  subsequent  account  as  by 
a  previous  estimate,  whether  the  expense  was  necessarily 
incurred  or  not :  and  a  minister  would  be  as  much  re- 
sponsible with  his  head  for  any  abuse  that  should  be 
made  of  it  as  he  would  be  for  taking  any  sum  of  money 
granted  for  one  purpose  and  applying  it  to  another. 

It  was  further  urged  that,  the  French  fleet  lying  then 
in  sight  of  our  coasts,  if  the  enemies  to  this  Govern- 
ment had  counselled  France  to  take  the  opportunity 
of  the  confusion  of  elections  and  the  interval  of  Parlia- 
ment to  give  us  any  molestation,  it  would  not  be  very 
advisable  to  seem  improvident  against  such  an  under- 
taking; nor  could  it  be  called  a  blow  to  the  Consti- 
tution for  the  Parliament  previously  to  counsel  the 
King  in  such  circumstances  to  do  that  in  defence  of 
his  crown  and  people,  which,  if  occasion  required,  he 
must  do  without  their  counsel. 

After  a  very  long  debate  in  both  Houses,  the  question 
was  carried  in  both  by  a  great  majority.  In  the  House 
of  Lords  a  very  strong  protest  was  made  against  it,  but 
strong  protests  were  grown  so  frequent  that  they  were 
little  regarded.  The  only  use  they  were  of  was,  when 
they  were  printed  at  the  end  of  the  session,  and  dis- 
persed like  pamphlets  about  the  country,  to  raise  clamour 


1734.  MARRIAGE  OF  THE  PRINCESS  ROYAL.  305 

against  the  Administration,  and  create  disaffection  to  the 
Government;  and  as  these  ennobled  "  Craftsmen"  signed 
with  the  names  of  thirty  or  forty  people  of  the  first 
quality  and  consideration  in  the  kingdom,  tallied  with 
the  anonymous  "  Craftsmen,"  so  these  annual  invectives 
gave  weight  to  those  weekly  libels,  and  added  the  force 
of  authority  to  the  natural  insinuation  of  censure  and 
calumny. 

Nor  was  writing  ever  in  England  at  a  higher  pitch, 
either  for  learning,  strength  of  diction,  or  elegance  of 
style,  than  in  this  reign.  All  the  good  writing,  too,  was 
confined  to  political  topics,4  either  of  civil,  military,  or 
ecclesiastical  government,  and  all  the  tracts  on  these 
subjects  printed  in  pamphlets.  It  might  very  properly 
be  called  the  Augustan  age  of  England  for  this  kind  of 
writing ;  not  that  there  was  any  similitude  between  the 
two  princes  who  presided  in  the  Roman  and  English 
Augustan  ages  besides  their  names,  for  George  Au- 
gustus neither  loved  learning  nor  encouraged  men  of 
letters,  nor  were  there  any  Maecenases  about  him.  There 
was  another  very  material  difference  too  between  these 
two  Augustuses — as  personal  courage  was  the  only 
quality  necessary  to  form  a  great  prince  which  the 
one  was  suspected  to  want,  so  I  fear  it  was  the  only 
one  the  other  was  ever  thought  to  possess. 

I  must  now  give  an  account  of  the  marriage  of  the 
Princess  Royal,  which  I  ought  to  have  done  previously 


4  Though  many  of  the  pamphlets  of  the  day  were  very  able,  and  Lord 
Hervey's  own  amongst  the  ablest,  yet  it  is  too  much  to  say  that  "  all  good 
writing  was  confined  to  political  topics."  And  in  truth,  the  two  preceding 
reigns  are  more  commonly  admitted  to  have  been  our  Augustan  age — while 
that  of  George  II.  is  generally  thought  the  lowest  of  any  in  literary  merit. 

VOL.  I.  X 


306  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

to  the  account  of  the  vote  of  confidence,  as  it  preceded 
it  about  three  weeks. 

The  Prince  of  Orange  returned  to  Somerset  House 
from  the  Bath  the  beginning  of  March  in  perfect  health, 
and  on  the  14th  of  that  month  he  was  married.  A 
covered  gallery  (through  which  the  procession  passed) 
was  built  from  the  King's  apartment  quite  round  the 
palace  garden  to  the  little  French  chapel  adjoining 
to  St.  James's  House  (where  the  ceremony  was  per- 
formed).5 The  gallery  held  four  thousand  people,  was 
very  finely  illuminated,  and,  by  the  help  of  three  thou- 
sand men  who  were  that  day  upon  guard,  the  whole 
was  performed  with  great  regularity  and  order,  as  well 
as  splendour  and  magnificence.  Lord  Hervey  had  the 
care  of  the  ceremonial,  and  drew  the  plan  for  the  order 
of  the  procession,  with  which  nobody  but  the  Irish 
peers  was  dissatisfied.  They  insisted  on  walking  in 
the  procession,  every  class  of  them,  at  the  end  of  the 
English  and  Scotch  peers  of  the  same  rank ;  but  as  the 
English  Barons  would  not  give  place  to  the  Irish  Earls 
and  Viscounts,  Lord  Hervey  chose  rather  to  disoblige 
these  than  the  English  peers,  who  declared  they  would 
not  walk  at  all  if  any  of  the  Irish  were  placed  before 
them.  Upon  Lord  Hervey's  sticking  to  the  point 
of  leaving  them  quite  out  of  the  procession  unless  they 
would  walk  all  together  in  a  separate  body  (which  he 
offered  and  they  refused),  they  presented  a  petition  to 

5  The  old  Duchess  of  Marlborough,  who  could  see  this  gallery  from  her 
windows,  and  who  liked  none  of  the  parties  to  the  pageant,  was  indignant 
at  its  standing  so  long  during  the  delay  of  the  wedding.  "  I  wonder,"  she 
asked,  "when  my  neighbour  George  will  remove  his  orange-chest"  — 
"  which  in  fact,"  adds  Horace  Walpole,  who  was  old  enough  to  remem- 
ber it,  "  it  did  resemble." — Reminiscences. 


1734.  IRISH  PEERS.  307 

the  King  to  do  them  what  they  called  justice.  The 
King  and  the  Queen  were  both  inclined  to  comply 
with  their  request ;  but  upon  Lord  Hervey's  telling  the 
Queen  that  if  they  were  indulged  in  this  demand  no 
English  peer  below  the  rank  of  an  Earl 6  would  appear 
at  all,  and  that  the  whole  body  of  the  English  peerage 
would  take  it  ill,  the  King  only  referred  the  petition  of 
the  Irish  peers  to  the  Cabinet  Council,  gave  no  answer 
to  it,  arid  let  the  matter  drop.  The  House  of  Lords 
was  not  thought  at  this  time  to  be  in  such  a  temper  or 
situation  with  regard  to  the  Court  as  made  it  advisable 
to  run  any  risk  of  disobliging  them  (for  this  dispute 
arose  in  October,  when  the  wedding-day  was  first  ap- 
pointed, and  before  the  Parliament  met).  All  the 
indignation  of  the  Irish  peers  fell  on  Lord  Hervey ;  the 
Duke  of  Grafton  (the  Chamberlain),  who  loved  tem- 
porising, having  insinuated  to  them  that  he  had  nothing 
to  do  with  this  affair,  and  that  Lord  Hervey  had  taken 
the  whole  into  his  hands.  When  Lord  Gage,  an  Irish 
Viscount,  and  a  petulant,  silly,  busy,  meddling,  profli- 
gate fellow,  asked  Lord  Hervey  why  he  had  made  no 
mention  of  the  Irish  peers  in  the  ceremonial,  Lord 
Hervey  said,  because,  the  Irish  House  of  Lords  being 
now  sitting,  he  concluded  they  were  all  at  Dublin,  and 
that  no  Englishman  could  suppose  them  capable  of 
being  in  two  places  at  once.7  Lord  Gage  said  it  was 
very  hard  they  might  not  have  the  same  privileges  on 
this  occasion  that  they  had  on  others.  Lord  Hervey 
answered  that  the  last  time  this  thing  had  been  disputed 

6  There  being  then  no  Irish  peers  above  the  rank  of  Earl. 

7  This  pleasantry  was,  after  all,  the  best  argument  that  could  be  alleged 
against  the  Irish  peers. 

x  2 


308  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

was  on  the  creation  of  the  Knights  of  the  Bath ;  that 
the  younger  sons  of  English  Earls  had  then  refused  to 
give  place  to  the  Irish  Earl  of  Inchiquin  and  the  Irish 
Viscount  Tyrconnel ;  and  that  the  expedient  then  found 
out  to  adjust  the  dispute  was  giving  the  ribbon  to  these 
two  noble  Lords  by  themselves  the  day  after  all  the 
others  received  it :  if,  therefore,  the  Irish  Lords  pleased 
to  terminate  the  present  dispute  the  same  way,  he  said 
he  had  no  objection  to  it;  the  gallery  should  be  left 
standing,  and  the  Irish  Lords,  if  they  pleased,  should 
walk  the  next  day.  Lord  Gage  and  all  the  other  Irish 
Lords  to  whom  he  repeated  this  conversation  were  very 
angry,  as  may  easily  be  imagined,  with  Lord  Hervey, 
and,  had  they  not  said  a  thousand  impertinent  things 
before  of  Lord  Hervey,  he  would  certainly  have  been 
in  the  wrong  to  have  said  this.  The  Scotch  and  Eng- 
lish Lords,  however,  were  extremely  pleased  with  his 
conduct  in  this  affair,  and  as  much  displeased  with  my 
Lord  Chamberlain's ;  applauding  the  one  for  having  so 
strenuously  asserted  the  rights  of  the  Peers  of  Great 
Britain,  and  equally  condemning  the  other  for  having 
shown  himself  so  ready  to  give  them  up.  His  Grace 
acted  on  this  occasion  as  he  did  on  most  others,  which 
was  to  decline  acting  at  all,  and  consequently  to  disoblige 
those  most  who  were  most  in  the  right ;  people  who 
have  justice  on  their  side  always  looking  upon  neu- 
trality as  injury,  and  being  to  the  full  as  much  piqued 
against  those  whose  business  it  is  to  stand  by  them  for 
not  declaring  for  them  as  if  they  declared  against 
them. 

The  King  once  told  the  Duke  of  Grafton  upon  an- 
other occasion,  that  his  Grace  was  always    balancing 


1734.  MARRIAGE  OF  THE  PRINCESS  ROYAL.  309 

whether  he  should  speak  truth  or  flatter  those  whom 
truth  would  disoblige. 

His  Grace's  maxim  was  never  to  give  a  direct  an- 
swer either  to  the  most  material  or  most  indifferent 
question ;  so  that  the  natural  cloud  of  his  understanding, 
thickened  by  the  artificial  cloud  of  his  mistaken  Court 
policy,  made  his  meaning  always  as  unintelligible  as  his 
conversation  was  unentertaining.  By  coming  very 
young  into  the  great  world,  being  of  great  quality,  and 
formerly  very  handsome,  he  had  always  kept  the  best 
company ;  and  by  living  perpetually  at  Court  he  had 
all  the  routine  of  that  style  of  conversation  which  is  a 
sort  of  gold-leaf,  that  is  a  great  embellishment  where  it 
is  joined  to  anything  else,  but  makes  a  very  poor 
figure  by  itself.  To  pass  one's  time  with  people  who 
have  only  that  agrement,  in  my  opinion  surfeits  one  as 
soon  as  feeding  upon  sugar ;  which,  though  it  heightens 
the  relish  of  many  things  it  is  mixed  with,  would 
quickly  turn  one's  stomach  if  one  was  to  eat  it  alone. 

The  hour  appointed  for  all  those  who  were  to  walk 
in  the  procession  to  assemble  was  seven  at  night.  The 
bridegroom,  with  all  the  men,  was  in  the  Great  Council 
Chamber ;  the  bride,  with  all  the  ladies,  in  the  Great 
Drawing-room ;  and  the  King  and  Queen,  with  their 
children  and  servants,  in  the  King's  lesser  Drawing- 
room.  The  Prince  of  Orange's  whole  retinue  was  as 
magnificent  as  gold  and  silver  varied  in  brocade  lace 
and  embroidery  could  make  them,  and  the  jewels  he 
gave  the  Princess  of  immense  value,  particularly  the 
necklace,  which  was  so  large  that  twenty-two  diamonds 
made  the  whole  round  of  her  neck.8  *  * 

»  Lord  Hervey  had  thought  it  worth  while  to  insert  here  the  order  of 


310  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

The  chapel  was  fitted  up  with  an  extreme  good  taste, 
and  as  much  finery  as  velvets,  gold  and  silver  tissue, 
galloons,  fringes,  tassels,  gilt  lustres  and  sconces  could 
give.  The  King  spared  no  expense  on  this  occasion ; 
but  if  he  had  not  loved  a  show  better  than  his  daughter, 
he  would  have  chosen  rather  to  have  given  her  this 
money  to  make  her  circumstances  easy,  than  to  have 
laid  it  out  in  making  her  wedding  splendid. 

He  behaved  himself  well  during  the  ceremony ;  but 
her  mother  and  sisters  were  under  so  much  undisguised 
and  unaffected  concern  the  whole  time,  that  the  pro- 
cession to  the  chapel,  and  the  scene  there,  looked  more 
like  the  mournful  pomp  of  a  sacrifice  than  the  joyful 
celebration  of  a  marriage ;  and  put  one  rather  in 
mind  of  an  Iphigenia  leading  to  the  altar  than  of  a 
bride. 

The  Prince  of  Orange  was  a  less  shocking  and  less 
ridiculous  figure  in  this  pompous  procession  and  at  supper 
than  one  could  naturally  have  expected  such  an  JEsop, 
in  such  trappings  and  such  eminence,  to  have  ap- 
peared. He  had  a  long  peruke  like  hair  that  flowed  all 
over  his  back,  and  hid  the  roundness  of  it ;  and  as  his 
countenance  was  not  bad,  there  was  nothing  very  strik- 
ingly disagreeable  about  his  stature. 

But  when  he  was  undressed,  and  came  in  his  night- 
gown and  nightcap  into  the  room  to  go  to  bed,9  the 

the  procession,  extracted  from  the  'London  Gazette,'  16th  March,  1734, 
with  a  reference  to  which  the  reader  will,  I  hope,  be  satisfied. 

9  The  grossness  of  this  sort  of  exhibition  used  to  be  carried  even  further. 
The  Duke  de  St.  Simon,  who  in  1722  accompanied  Mdlle.  d'Orleans  to 
Spain  to  be  married  to  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias,  takes  great  praise  to 
himself  for  having  over  persuaded  "  the  modesty  and  gravity"  of  Spanish 
etiquette  to  submit  on  that  occasion  to  the  French  custom  of  having  the 
whole  Court  introduced  to  see  the  young  couple  actually  in  bed :  and  we 


H34.  PRINCE  OF  ORANGE.  311 

appearance  he  made  was  as  indescribable  as  the  asto- 
nished countenances  of  everybody  who  beheld  him. 
From  the  shape  of  his  brocaded  gown,  and  the  make  of 
his  back,  he  looked  behind  as  if  he  had  no  head,  and 
before  as  if  he  had  no  neck  and  no  legs.  The  Queen, 
in  speaking  of  the  whole  ceremony  next  morning  alone 
with  Lord  Hervey,  when  she  came  to  mention  this  part 
of  it,  said,  "  Ah  I  mon  Dieu  I  quand  je  voiois  entrer  ce 
monstre,  pour  coucher  avec  ma  fille,  fai  pense  meva- 
nouir ;  je  chancelois  auparavant,  mais  ce  coup  la  m'a 
assommee.  Dites  moi,  my  Lord  Hervey,  avez  vous  bien 
remarque  et  considers  ce  monstre  dans  ce  moment  ?  et 
riaviez  vous  pas  bien  pitie  de  la  pauvre  Anne  ?  Bon 
Dieu !  c'est  trop  sotte  en  moi,  mais  fen pleure  encore" 
Lord  Hervey  turned  the  discourse  as  fast  as  he  was 
able,  for  this  was  a  circumstance  he  could  not  soften 
and  would  not  exaggerate.  He  only  said,  "  Oh !  Ma- 
dam, in  half  a  year  all  persons  are  alike  ;  the  figure  of 
the  body  one's  married  to,  like  the  prospect  of  the 
place  one  lives  at,  grows  so  familiar  to  one's  eyes,  that 
one  looks  at  it  mechanically,  without  regarding  either  the 
beauties  or  deformities  that  strike  a  stranger."  "  One 
may,  and  I  believe  one  does  (replied  the  Queen),  grow 
blind  at  last;  but  you  must  allow,  my  dear  Lord 
Hervey,  there  is  a  great  difference,  as  long  as  one  sees, 
in  the  mariner  of  one's  growing  blind." 

The  sisters  spoke  much  in  the  same  style  as  the 
mother,  with  horror  of  his  figure,  and  great  commisera- 
tion of  the  fate  of  his  wife.  Princess  Emily  said  (how 
truly  is  doubtful),  nothing  upon  earth  should  have  in- 

shall  see  by  and  bye,  on  the  occasion  of  Prince  Frederic's  marriage,  that  it 
w  as  also  a  custom  of  the  English  Court. 


312  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

duced  her  to  marry  the  monster.  Princess  Caroline, 
in  her  soft  sensible  way,  spoke  truth,  and  said  she  must 
own  it  was  very  bad ;  but  that,  in  her  sister's  situation, 
all  things  considered,  she  believed  she  should  have 
come  to  the  same  resolution. 

What  seems  most  extraordinary  was,  that,  from  the 
time  of  their  being  married  till  they  went  out  of  Eng- 
land, Lord  Hervey  (who  was  perpetually  with  them, 
and  at  whose  lodgings  they  passed  whole  evenings) 
said  that  she  always  behaved  to  him  as  if  he  had  been 
an  Adonis,  and  that  he  hardly  ever  took  any  notice  at 
all  of  her.  She  made  prodigious  court  to  him,10  ad- 
dressed everything  she  said  to  him,  and  applauded 
everything  he  said  to  anybody  else. 

The  Prince  of  Wales  forced  himself  to  be  tolerably 
civil  to  the  Prince  of  Orange  during  his  stay  here ;  but 
with  the  Queen  and  the  Princess  Royal  he  kept  so 
little  measure,  that  the  one  he  never  saw  but  in  public, 
and  the  other  he  hardly  ever  spoke  to  either  in  public 
or  private. 

One  of  his  wise  quarrels  with  the  Princess  Royal  was 
her  daring  to  be  married  before  him,  and  consenting  to 
take  a  portion  from  the  Parliament,  and  an  establish- 
ment from  her  father,  before  those  honours  and  favours 
were  conferred  upon  him.  As  if  her  being  married  pre- 
vented his  being  so,  or  that  the  daughter  should  decline 
being  settled  because  her  father  declined  the  settling 
of  her  brother.11 

i°  Nor  did  Lord  Hervey  himself  omit  to  make  his  court.  He  solicited 
the  Prince  to  stand  sponsor  with  the  Princesses  Emily  and  Caroline  to  a 
new-born  daughter,  who  in  consequence  was  christened  Emily-Caroline- 
Nassau.  She  died  unmarried  in  1814,  aet.  80. 

11  Lord  Hervey  does  not  mention  an  interview  which  the  Prince  had 
with  the  King  about  this  time,  which  made  some  noise,  and  rather,  it 


1734.  PRINCE  OF  WALES.  313 

Another  judicious  subject  of  his  enmity  was  her 
supporting  Handel,  a  German  musician  and  composer 
(who  had  been  her  singing  master,  and  was  now  under- 
taker of  one  of  the  operas),  against  several  of  the 
nobility  who  had  a  pique  with  Handel,  and  had  set  up 
another  person  to  ruin  him ;  or,  to  speak  more  properly 
and  exactly,  the  Prince,  in  the  beginning  of  his  enmity 
to  his  sister,  set  himself  at  the  head  of  the  other  opera 
to  irritate  her,  whose  pride  and  passions  were  as  strong 
as  her  brother's  (although  his  understanding  was  so 
much  weaker),  and  could  brook  contradiction,  where 
she  dared  to  resent  it,  as  little  as  her  father. 


seems,  widened  the  breach.  About  the  beginning  of  July,  M.  de  Loss, 
the  Saxon  minister,  wrote  to  his  Court — 

"  Ten  or  twelve  days  ago  the  Prince  of  Wales  went  to  the  ante-chamber 
and  requested  an  audience,  which  he  obtained  as  soon  as  Sir  Robert  Walpole, 
whom  the  King  had  sent  for,  was  gone  out  of  the  closet.  This  audience  is 
much  talked  of,  and  turned,  as  it  is  said,  on  the  following  points : — 

"  1.  To  have  permission  of  serving  a  campaign  on  the  Rhine  ;  2.  To 
request  an  augmentation  of  his  income,  the  Prince  insinuating  that  he  was 
in  debt.  (N.B.  Of  100,000/.  granted  to  the  Prince  by  Parliament  out  of 
the  Civil  List,  only  36,000/.  is  paid  to  him,  the  remainder  is  appropriated 
by  the  King.)  3.  He  represented  the  necessity  of  a  proper  marriage. 

"  To  the  first  the  King  made  no  reply.  In  regard  to  the  second,  the 
King  is  said  to  have  given  some  hopes,  on  condition  that  he  would  behave 
better  to  the  Queen.  It  is  reported  the  King  was  displeased  with  this  step. 
Many  persons  suspect  that  the  Opposition  advised  the  Prince  to  act  in  this 
manner.  Relata  refero." 

And  on  the  16th  July  M.  Johnn,  the  Danish  envoy,  writes — 

"  The  Queen  strives  to  prevent  the  ill  consequences  likely  to  result  from 
the  late  conversation  between  the  King  and  Prince  of  Wales.  Hopes  are 
entertained  of  satisfying  the  Prince  by  a  sum  of  money  for  the  payment  of 
his  debts ;  but  as  the  article  of  his  marriage  is  that  which  most  interests 
him,  and  as  it  is  precisely  that  which  will  not  be  granted,  it  will  be  ex- 
tremely difficult  to  prevent  the  business  from  being  laid  before  the  ensuing 
Parliament.  Those  who  advised  the  Prince  to  take  this  step  probably  cal- 
culated that  an  irreconcileable  quarrel  would  have  been  the  consequence  ; 
but  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  whom  the  King  consulted  before  he  admitted  the 
Prince,  disposed  his  Majesty  to  moderation  on  so  delicate  an  occasion." — 
Coxe's  Walpole,  iii.  169. 


314  LORD  HEKVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

What  I  have  related  may  seem  a  trifle  ;  but  though 
the  cause  was  indeed  such,  the  effects  of  it  were  no 
trifles.  The  King  and  Queen  were  as  much  in  earnest 
upon  this  subject  as  their  son  and  daughter,  though 
they  had  the  prudence  to  disguise  it,  or  to  endeavour 
to  disguise  it,  a  little  more.  They  were  both  Handel- 
ists,  and  sat  freezing  constantly  at  his  empty  Hay- 
market  Opera,  whilst  the  Prince  with  all  the  chief  of 
the  nobility  went  as  constantly  to  that  of  Lincoln's  Inn 
Fields.  The  affair  grew  as  serious  as  that  of  the 
Greens  and  the  Blues  under  Justinian  at  Constanti- 
nople; an  anti-Handelist  was  looked  upon  as  an  anti- 
courtier  ;  and  voting  against  the  Court  in  Parliament 
was  hardly  a  less  remissible  or  more  venial  sin  than 
speaking  against  Handel  or  going  to  the  Lincoln's  Inn 
Fields  Opera.  The  Princess  Royal  said  she  expected 
in  a  little  while  to  see  half  the  House  of  Lords  playing 
in  the  orchestra  in  their  robes  and  coronets ;  and  the 
King — though  he  declared  he  took  no  other  part  in  this 
affair  than  subscribing  1000?.  a-year  to  Handel — often 
added  at  the  same  time  that  "  he  did  not  think  setting 
oneself  at  the  head  of  a.  faction  of  fiddlers  a  very  ho- 
nourable occupation  for  people  of  quality  ;  or  the  ruin  of 
one  poor  fellow  [Handel]  so  generous  or  so  good-natured 
a  scheme  as  to  do  much  honour  to  the  undertakers,  whe- 
ther they  succeeded  or  not ;  but  the  better  they  succeeded 
in  it,  the  more  he  thought  they  would  have  reason  to 
be  ashamed  of  it."  The  Princess  Royal  quarrelled 
with  the  Lord  Chamberlain  for  affecting  his  usual  neu- 
trality on  this  occasion,  and  spoke  of  Lord  Delaware, 
who  was  one  of  the  chief  managers  against  Handel, 
with  as  much  spleen  as  if  he  had  been  at  the  head  of 


1734.  LORD  CHESTERFIELD.  315 

the  Dutch  faction  who  opposed  the  making  her  husband 
Stadtholder.12 

Another  cause  of  the  Prince  of  Wales 's  wrath  to  his 
mother  and  his  sisters  was  the  having  Lord  Hervey 
perpetually  with  them ;  and  a  gold  snuff-box  the  Queen 
bespoke,  with  Arts  and  Sciences  engraved  upon  it,  and 
gave  to  Lord  Hervey,  the  Prince  said  was  less  in 
favour  to  Lord  Hervey,  than  to  insult  and  outrage 
him. 

But  to  return  to  the  chapter  of  the  marriage.  The 
two  Houses  on  this  occasion  addressed  the  King,  and 
sent  messages  of  congratulation  to  the  Queen.  Lord 
Scarborough,  in  the  House  of  Lords,  moved  the  mes- 
sage to  the  Queen,  and  Lord  Chesterfield,  officiously 
thrusting13  himself  in  to  second  him,  was  appointed 
by  the  House  with  Lord  Scarborough  and  Lord  Hard- 
wicke  to  carry  it. 

Lord  Chesterfield  being  the  eldest  Peer,  it  was  his 
right  to  deliver  the  message  and  speak  to  the  Queen  : 
as  he  had  never  been  at  Court  since  the  day  after  he 
was  turned  out,  nor  had  ever  been  presented  upon  his 
marriage,  the  Queen  determined  to  receive  him  as  an 
Earl  sent  by  the  House  of  Lords  whom,  she  had  never 
seen  before  in  her  life.  He  said  he  designed  this  step 
as  a  compliment  to  the  Queen,  and  to  show  that  he  had 
no  rancour  except  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole  ;  but  she,  who 
knew  how  he  talked  of  her,  and  hated  him  as  heartily 


12  The  great  question  depending  in  Holland,  whether  the  Prince  of 
Orange  should  be  declared  Stadtholder.     See  Chesterfield  Correspondence, 
iii.  40. 

13  Lord  Chesterfield's  recent  employment  at  the  Hague,  and  his  concern 
in  the  preliminaries  of  this  marriage,  justified  his  interference — though  no 
doubt  it  had  a  tinge  of  opposition  in  it. 


316  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

as  he  did  her,  spoke  of  his  conduct  in  presuming  to 
force  himself  into  this  embassy  as  the  greatest  imperti- 
nence that  he  could  be  guilty  of,  and  said  that,  as  his 
capacity  was  capable  of  nothing  but  making  jokes,  so 
he  had  a  mind  to  turn  a  compliment  paid  to  her  by  the 
House  of  Lords  into  one ;  or  that  he  imagined  perhaps 
his  august,  considerable  figure  would  awe  and  dis- 
concert her;  but  that  he  would  find  it  was  as  little 
in  his  power  for  his  presence  to  embarrass  her,  as  for 
his  raillery  behind  her  back  to  pique  her,  or  his  con- 
summate skill  in  politics  to  distress  the  King  or  his 
ministers. 

The  Queen  was  to  receive  this  message  in  her  bed- 
chamber, with  nobody  present  but  the  three  messengers, 
her  children,  and  the  servants  in  waiting ;  but  Lord 
Hervey,  thinking  the  interview  would  be  something 
curious,  asked  her  leave  (which  she  granted)  to  stand 
behind  her. 

Lord  Chesterfield's  speech  was  well  written  and  well 
got  by  heart,  and  yet  delivered  with  a  faltering  voice, 
a  face  as  white  as  a  sheet,  and  every  limb  trembling 
with  concern. 

The  Queen's  answer  was  great  and  natural,  and  de- 
livered with  the  same  ease  that  she  would  have  spoken 
to  the  most  indifferent  person  in  her  circle. 

She  always  disliked  Lord  Chesterfield,  owned  it, 
and  used  to  say  that  it  was  because  he  had  always 
disliked  her.  "  Dicax  enim,  illam  acerbis  facetiis  irri- 
dere  solitus,  quarum  apud  prcepotentes  in  longum  me- 
moria  est :" — "  He  had  a  ready  wit,  and  was  in  the 
habit  of  ridiculing  her  with  bitter  jests,  which  stick 
long  and  deep  in  the  memory  of  the  great." — (Ta- 


1734.  ADDRESSES.  317 

citus.}  This  remark  was  verified  between  the  Queen 
and  Lord  Chesterfield,  by  whom  she  had  been  often 
this  way  provoked,  and  never  forgot  it  nor  forgave 
it.  She  has  often  told  me  that  she  knew  at  Lei- 
cester Fields,14  he  used  formerly  to  turn  her  into 
ridicule ;  but  that  she  had  then  frequently  between  jest 
and  earnest  advised  him  not  to  provoke  her;  telling 
him  at  the  same  time  that,  though  she  acknowledged 
he  had  more  wit  than  her,  yet  she  would  assure  him 
she  had  a  most  bitter  tongue,  and  would  certainly  pay 
him  any  debts  of  that  kind  with  most  exorbitant  in- 
terest. She  said  he  always  used  to  deny  the  fact,  and 
do  it  again  the  moment  he  got  out  of  the  room,  or  if 
she  turned  her  head,  without  staying  till  he  had  turned 
his  back.  For  a  man  of  parts,  the  choosing  to  make 
his  court  to  the  King  rather  than  to  the  Queen,  and  to 
Lord  Townshend  rather  than  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  was 
a  most  unaccountable  conduct,  unless  he  thought  the 
people  that  were  easiest  deceived  were  the  likeliest  for 
him  to  please,  and  that  nobody  was  capable  of  being 
made  his  friend  but  in  the  same  degree  that  they  were 
capable  of  being  made  his  dupes. 

The  City  of  London,  the  University  of  Oxford,  and 
several  other  disaffected  towns  and  incorporated  bodies, 
took  the  opportunity  of  the  Princess  Royal's  marriage 
to  say  the  most  impertinent  things  to  the  King,  under 
the  pretence  of  complimental  addresses,  that  ironical 
zeal  and  couched  satire  could  put  together.  The  tenor 
of  them  all  was  to  express  their  satisfaction  in  this 
match,  from  remembering  how  much  this  country  was 

14  Lord  Chesterfield  was  of  the  Court  of  George  II.  when  Prince  of 
Wales. 


318  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

indebted  to  a  Prince  who  bore  the  title  of  Orange ; 
declaring  their  gratitude  to  his  memory,  and  inti- 
mating, as  plainly  as  they  dared,  how  much  they 
wished  this  man  might  follow  the  example  of  his 
great  ancestor,  and  one  time  or  other  depose  his  father- 
in-law  in  the  same  manner  that  King  William  had 
deposed  his. 

The  address  of  the  City  of  London  was  thus  epito- 
mised in  verse : — 

"  Most  gracious  Sire,  behold  before  you 
Your  prostrate  subjects  that  adore  you — 
The  Mayor  and  Citizens  of  London, 
By  loss  of  trade  and  taxes  undone, 
Who  come  with  gratulation  hearty, 
Altho'  they  're  of  the  Country  Party, 
To  wish  your  Majesty  much  cheer 
On  Anna's  marriage  with  Myn'heer. 
Our  hearts  presage,  from  this  alliance, 
The  fairest  hopes,  the  brightest  triumphs  ; 
For  if  one  Revolution  glorious 
Has  made  us  wealthy  and  victorious, 
Another,  by  just  consequence, 
Must  double  both  our  power  and  pence : 
We  therefore  hope  that  young  Nassau, 
Whom  you  have  chose  your  son-in-law, 
Will  show  himself  of  William's  stock, 
And  prove  a  chip  of  the  same  block." 

By  a  blunder  of  the  Duke  of  Grafton's — who  always 
blundered  nor  ever  knew  what  he  was  about,  and  had 
lived  in  a  Court  all  his  life  without  knowing  even  the 
common  forms  of  it — when  the  City  of  London  brought 
their  address,  none  of  those  who  presented  it  had  the 
honour  to  kiss  the  King's  hand.  This  was  immediately 
told  all  over  the  kingdom ;  not  as  the  effect  of  my 
Lord  Chamberlain's  negligence  and  ignorance,  which 
indeed  it  was,  but  as  a  mark  of  the  King's  resentment 
of  the  purport  of  the  City  of  London's  address :  and 


1734.  UNPOPULARITY  OF  THE  COURT.  319 

everybody  who  believed  the  thing  in  this  manner 
condemned  the  King  for  giving  those  who  meant  to  be 
impertinent  to  him  the  pleasure  of  seeing  he  under- 
stood them. 

It  is  certain  at  this  time  the  Court  was  very  unpo- 
pular, that  the  King  and  Queen  were  as  much  person- 
ally hated  as  Sir  Kobert  Walpole,  and  both  spoken  and 
wrote  against  with  as  much  freedom:  but  they  were 
not  so  sensible  as  he  was  of  the  situation  they  were  in ; 
particularly  the  King,  who  imagined  those  courtiers 
and  flatterers  that  were  perpetually  incensing  his  altars 
in  the  palace,  spoke  the  sentiments  of  all  his  subjects, 
though  in  reality  they  were  as  far  from  speaking  the 
opinion  of  the  nation  as  their  own,  and  were  no  more 
the  echoes  of  other  people's  words  than  they  were  the 
communicators  of  their  own  thoughts. 

What  I  am  going  to  say  may  sound  paradoxical ;  but 
it  is  my  firm  opinion,  though  I  know  not  how  to  ac- 
count for  it,  that,  although  money  and  troops  are  gene- 
rally esteemed  the  nerves  and  sinews  of  all  the  regal 
power,  and  that  no  king  ever  had  so  large  a  civil 
list  or  so  large  an  army  in  time  of  peace  as  the  pre- 
sent King,  yet  that  the  Crown  was  never  less  capable 
of  infringing  the  liberties  of  this  country  than  at  this 
time  ;  and  that  the  spirit  of  liberty  was  so  universally 
breathed  into  the  breasts  of  the  people,  that,  if  any  vio- 
lent act  of  power  had  been  attempted,  at  no  era 
would  it  have  been  more  difficult  to  perpetrate  any  un- 
dertaking of  that  kind.  The  King  was  often  told,  both 
in  Parliament  and  in  print,  that  his  crown  had  been 
the  gift  of  the  people ;  that  it  was  given  on  conditions ; 


320  LOUD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

and  that  it  behoved  him  to  observe  those  conditions, 
as  it  would  be  both  as  easy  and  as  lawful,  in  case  he 
broke  any  of  them,  for  the  people  to  resume  that  gift, 
as  it  had  been  for  them  to  bestow  it. 

The  Prince,  who  always  imagined  himself  the  idol 
of  the  people,  was  to  the  full  as  unpopular  as  his  pa- 
rents. And  though  on  this  occasion  of  the  Prince  of 
Orange's  wedding,  he  might  plainly  have  seen  that  he 
was  quite  dropped,  and  that  those  who  wished  to  get 
rid  of  his  father  never  desired  to  exchange  his  father 
for  him,  yet  nothing  could  open  his  eyes,  the  bandage 
of  vanity  bound  them  so  close,  and  so  determined  he 
was  to  believe  that  every  discontent  centered  in  the 
King,  the  Queen,  and  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  and  that 
all  the  nation  wished  as  much  as  he  himself,  that  the 
time  was  come  for  him  to  ascend  the  throne. 

Some  mortification,  however,  he  could  not  help  feel- 
ing, and  showing  in  his  countenance,  when,  upon  going 
to  the  play  once  or  twice  with  the  Prince  of  Orange, 
the  galleries  when  he  came  into  the  box  only  made  a 
little  clapping  as  usual  with  their  hands,  and  the  mo- 
ment the  Prince  of  Orange  appeared  the  whole  house 
rung  with  peals  of  shouts  and  huzzas. 

The  King  himself  began  before  the  Prince  of 
Orange  went  away  to  be  very  uneasy  at  distinctions  of 
this  kind  that  were  paid  him,  and  could  not  contentedly 
see,  every  opera-night  from  his  own  window,  the  coach 
of  the  Prince  of  Orange  surrounded  by  crowds  and 
ushered  out  of  Court  with  incessant  hallooing,  whilst 
his  own  chair  followed  the  moment  after  through  empty 
and  silent  streets. 


1734.  PRINCE  OF  ORANGE.  321 

Nor  were  the  States  of  Holland  less  jealous  of  the 
Prince  of  Orange's  popularity  in  that  country  than  the 
King  was  concerned  at  it  in  this ;  but  the  jealousy  of 
the  one,  and  the  concern  of  the  other,  were  not  equally 
well  founded;  there  being  but  little  danger  of  the 
Prince  of  Orange's  subverting  the  Government  here 
and  making  himself  King,  whereas  the  inferior  people 
in  Holland  were  so  strenuous  in  his  cause,  and  the 
spirits  of  his  party  so  raised  by  his  new  alliance,  that 
his  being  one  day  or  other  Stadtholder  there  was  an 
event  whose  probability  made  apprehension  much  more 
justifiable. 

This  being  his  present  position  both  in  England  and 
Holland,  the  King  grew  in  haste  to  be  rid  of  him, 
whilst  those  who  had  the  power  there  were  unwilling 
to  receive  him :  so  unwilling  they  were  and  so  afraid 
of  his  presence  causing  an  immediate  insurrection  of 
the  populace  in  his  favour,  that  it  was  privately  inti- 
mated to  him  here  from  the  chief  people  of  that 
country,  who  then  presided  in  the  government  of  it, 
that  they  hoped  he  would  not  think  of  passing  through 
Holland  to  Friesland,18  but  go  directly  thither  by  sea. 

Horace  Walpole,  who  the  year  before  was  sent  into 
Holland  to  treat  of  the  affairs  of  Europe,  under  the 
pretence  of  going  to  fetch  the  Prince  of  Orange,  now 
made  the  affairs  of  Europe  a  pretence  for  going  to 
settle  those  of  the  Prince ;  but  all  he  could  obtain  for 

15  Of  which  province,  as  is  stated  in  the  next  page,  he  was  hereditary 
Stadtholder.  The  authorities  of  the  province  of  Holland,  and  especially  of 
Amsterdam,  were  opposed  to  the  election  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  while 
the  people  were  all  for  him ;  and  his  very  passage  through  the  province 
became  a  source  of  danger  to  the  existing  Government.  See  ante, 
p.  273,  n.  2,  where  the  reference  should  have  been  to  this  page. 

VOL.  I.  Y 


322  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

the  Prince  was  a  permission  to  land  with  his  bride  at 
Rotterdam,  and  pass  to  Amsterdam  with  the  utmost 
expedition  and  privacy,  in  order  to  re-embark  there  for 
Friesland.  One  thing  more  he  obtained  for  the  Princess 
Royal,  which  was,  that,  when  she  came  to  the  Hague 
in  her  return  to  England,  she  was  to  have  the  offer  of  a 
guard  on  condition  she  would  refuse  it;  and  a  further 
stipulation  there  was  for  the  making  the  offer,  which 
was,  that  the  Prince  of  Orange  should  not  be  in  the 
way  when  she  received  the  military  ambassador  who 
brought  it,  because,  in  that  case,  this  messenger  would 
be  obliged  to  distinguish  between  the  husband  and  the 
wife,  and  assure  the  first  he  was  not  designed  to  have 
any  share  in  this  compliment  paid  to  the  last. 

The  Prince  of  Orange  was  hereditary  Stadtholder 
of  Friesland,  and  Stadtholder  by  election  of  Grb'ningen 
and  Guelderland. 

Though  the  principal  reason  of  Horace  Walpole's 
expedition  to  Holland  was  the  regulation  of  the  Prince 
of  Orange's  reception  there,  yet  he  took  occasion  at 
the  same  time  to  feel  anew  the  pulse  of  the  Pensionary 
[^SlingelandtJ  and  great  people  there  with  regard  to 
the  present  situation  of  Europe,  and  was  extremely 
mortified  to  find  them  beat  so  calmly  that  there  was  no 
hope  of  raising  that  fever  of  war  with  which  he  wished 
so  much  to  infect  them.  Besides  the  making  his  court 
to  the  King  and  Queen  by  endeavouring  to  bring  the 
Dutch  to  more  vigorous  measures,  he  had  a  personal 
interest  in  it ;  for,  as  he  felt  himself  ignorant  of  do- 
mestic affairs,  and  fancied  himself  perfectly  master  of 
foreign  negotiations ;  as  he  declared  he  made  no  figure 
in  Parliament,  or  rather  a  ridiculous  one ;  and  that  he 


1734.  HORACE  WALPOLE.  323 

flattered  himself  he  shone  brighter  than  any  man  in 
embassies  and  despatches,  so  he  wished  to  turn  the 
scene  of  business  entirely  on  that  side,  and  desired  to 
do  by  England  as  he  did  by  himself,  which  was  to  have 
it  engaged  to  its  discredit  rather  than  lie  idle — though 
in  France  it  must  be  owned,  by  the  interest  he  had  in 
the  Cardinal,  he  did  England  service ;  but  how  he  got 
that  interest  in  the  Cardinal  was  very  extraordinary. 
The  two  things  in  Mr.  Walpole  which  his  Eminence 
told  Monsieur  Chavigny16  gained  most  upon  him  were 
his  blunt  behaviour  and  his  manner  of  living  with  his 
wife :  the  one  he  said  gave  him  a  good  opinion  of 
Mr.  Walpole's  sincerity,  and  the  other  of  his  morality ; 
so  that  Horace  had  the  good  fortune  to  succeed  abroad 
by  the  very  two  qualities  which  drew  the  most  con- 
tempt and  ridicule  upon  him  at  home,  which  were  the 
coarseness  of  his  manners  and  the  depravity  of  his 
taste.  For  the  wife  to  whom  he  showed  all  this  good- 
ness was  a  tailor's  daughter,  whom  he  had  married  for 
interest,  with  a  form  scarce  human,  as  offensive  to  the 
nose  and  the  ears  as  to  the  eyes,  and  one  to  whom  he 
was  kind,  not  from  any  principle  of  gratitude,  but  from 
the  bestiality  of  his  inclination.17 

Horace  Walpole,  with  all  his  defects,  was  certainly  a 
very  good  treaty-dictionary,  to  which  his  brother  often 

16  At  this  time  French  Minister  in  London. 

n  She  was,  says  the  Peerage,  the  daughter  of  "  Peter  Lombard,  Esq.," 
whom  the  old  Duchess  of  Marlborough  used  to  delight  to  call  "  my  tailor." 
I  know  not  what  her  person  may  have  been,  but  Horace  the  younger,  who 
hated  her,  admitted  that  she  on  one  occasion  at  least  exhibited  a  temper  and 
good  taste  "  almost  sublime."  When  presented  at  the  Court  of  France, 
the  Queen  asked  her  "  De  quelle  famille  etes-vous,  Madame  ? "  Mrs. 
Walpole  answered  modestly,  "  D'aucune."  The  paragraph  in  the  text 
does,  I  think,  more  discredit  to  Lord  Hervey's  taste  than  to  Mr.  Walpole's. 

Y    2 


324  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

referred  for  facts  necessary  for  him  to  be  informed  of, 
and  of  which  he  was  capable  of  making  good  use ;  but 
to  hear  Horace  himself  talk  on  these  subjects  unre- 
strained, and  without  being  turned  to  any  particular 
point,  was  listening  to  a  rhapsody  that  was  never  co- 
herent, and  often  totally  unintelligible.18  This  made 
his  long  and  frequent  speeches  in  Parliament  uneasy  to 
his  own  party,  ridiculous  to  the  other,  and  tiresome  to 
both.  He  loved  business,  had  great  application,  and 
was  indefatigable;  but,  from  having  a  most  unclear 
head,  no  genius,  no  method,  and  a  most  loose  incon- 
clusive manner  of  reasoning,  he  was  absolutely  useless 
to  his  brother  in  every  capacity  but  that  which  I  have 
already  mentioned  of  a  dictionary.  He  was  a  very 
disagreeable  man  in  company,  noisy,  overbearing, 
affecting  to  be  always  jocose,  and  thoroughly  the  mau- 
vais plaisant ;  as  unbred  in  his  dialect  as  in  his  apparel, 
and  as  ill  bred  in  his  discourse  as  in  his  behaviour  and 
gestures ;  with  no  more  of  the  look  than  the  habits  of  a 
gentleman.  A  free,  easy,  cheerful  manner  of  convers- 
ing made  some  people  mistake  him  enough  to  think 
him  good-natured ;  but  he  was  far  from  it,  and  did 
many  ill  offices  to  people,  and  never  that  I  heard  of 
any  good  ones.  Nor  did  he,  with  all  the  credit  he  was 
known  to  have  with  his  brother,  ever  make  one  friend. 
Sir  Eobert  was  really  humane,  did  friendly  things,  and 
one  might  say  of  him,  as  Pliny  said  of  Trajan,  and  as 
nobody  could  say  of  his  brother  or  his  master,  "  amicos 

IH  I  think  Lord  Hervey  was  somehow  personally  biassed  against  Mr. 
Walpole,  whose  letters  and  despatches  give  a  very  much  better  impression 
of  his  abilities  and  judgment.  I  must,  however,  admit  that  his  Lordship's 
estimate  is  nearly  identical  with  that  of  Mr.  Walpole's  nephew  and  name- 
sake. 


1734.  HORACE  WALPOLE.  325 

habuit,  quia  amicus  fuit:" — "  He  had  friends,  because 
he  was  a  friend."  Horace  was  envious,  revengeful,  in- 
veterate, and  implacable ;  but,  from  being  afraid  of  his 
enemies,  he  had  a  behaviour  towards  them  which  many 
of  them  called  good-humour,  mistaking  his  timidity  for 
serenity,  and  thinking,  because  he  did  not  dare  to 
strike,  that  he  did  not  wish  to  wound.19 

Whilst  Horace  was  in  Holland  the  Parliament  was 
dissolved ;  the  job  of  the  vote  of  confidence  being  over, 
and  a  bill  to  enable  the  King  to  settle  5000/.  a-year 
out  of  the  civil-list  revenues  on  the  Princess  Royal 
for  her  life  being  passed,  the  Court  had  no  further  oc- 
casion for  the  Parliament  sitting,  and  everybody  grew 
impatient  to  put  an  end  to  their  expense  and  trouble  by 
hastening  to  the  new  elections  and  getting  them  over. 

After  all  the  solicitude  the  Opposition  had  shown 
to  pay  compliments  to  the  Prince  of  Orange  by  taking 
the  lead  in  proposing  a  bill  for  his  naturalization,  they 
were  weak  and  imprudent  enough  in  the  House  of 
Commons  to  oppose  this  bill  for  the  Princess  Royal,  and 
to  divide  upon  it.  The  Prince  [of  Wales]  disliked  it  in 
his  heart ;  but  when  some  of  those  who  opposed  it  in  the 
House  said  they  were  against  it  because  it  looked  like 
a  distrust  of  her  brother,  Dodington,  as  first  Minister 
to  the  Prince,  got  up  and  told  the  House  he  had  au- 
thority from  the  Prince  to  give  his  Royal  Highness's 
assent  to  this  bill,  and  declare  his  approbation  of  it. 

The  King's  Speech  at  the  end  of  this  session  of  Par- 
is "  Willing  to  wound,  and  yet  afraid  to  strike." 

It  is  curious  to  find  this  allusion,  which  could  hardly  have  been  acci- 
dental, to  the  same  satire  of  Pope's  in  which  Lord  Hervey  himself  figures 
as  Sporus.  The  satire  appeared  in  1734,  and  Lord  Hervey  must  have  written 
this  portion  of  the  Memoirs  very  shortly  after. 


326  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

liament  was  on  Tuesday  the  16th  day  of  April,  1734  ;20 
and  the  day  after  the  Speech  two  Proclamations  came 
out,  the  one  for  the  dissolution  of  this  Parliament,  and 
the  other  for  calling  a  new  one. 

Upon  the  rising  of  the  Parliament,  Mr.  Onslow,  the 
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons,21  was  made  Trea- 
surer of  the  Navy,  in  the  room  of  Lord  Torrington.22 
Lord  Torrington  was  not  disgraced,  but  was  put  into 
the  Vice-Treasurership  of  Ireland,  in  the  place  of  Lord 
Falmouth,  who  had  talked  and  voted  himself  out  of  a 
better  employment  than  he  ever  deserved,  or  would 
ever  be  able  to  talk  or  vote  himself  into  again.  His 
agreeable  and  respectable  situation  at  present  was 
being  despised  as  insignificant  by  those  he  aban- 
doned, and  laughed  at  for  a  fool  by  those  to  whom  he 
deserted. 

Lord  Stair,  at  the  same  time,  had  his  regiment  taken 
from  him,  the  King  saying  he  would  never  let  a  man 
keep  anything  by  favour  who  had  endeavoured  to  keep 
it  by  force — alluding  to  Lord  Stair's  having  voted  for 
the  bill  to  make  the  officers'  commissions  for  life.  Lord 
Stair,  as  soon  as  he  was  broke,  wrote  a  letter  to  the 
Queen,  and  gave  it  to  her  Lord  Chamberlain 23  to  deliver 
to  her.  Lord  Grantham,  who  was  for  ever  in  doubt 
what  he  should  do,  and  always  at  last  determined  to 

20  Lord  Hervey  had  again  extracted  the  speech  from  the  Gazette,  where, 
as  well  as  in  all  the  books  of  reference,  the  curious  reader  may  find  it. 

21  Until  the  Speakership  of  Mr.  Addington  in  1789,  when  first  there  was 
a  fixed  salary  voted  for  that  office,  it  was  very  objectionably  paid  by  fees, 
and  by  some  lucrative  office  under  the  Crown. 

22  Pattee,  second  Lord  Torrington. 

23  Henry  de  Nassau  d'Auverquerque,  second  Earl  of  Grantham,  Lord 
Chamberlain  to  the  Queen.     He  was  the  son  of  one  of  King  William's 
generals,  (a  branch  of  the  Nassau  family,)  so  created  in  1698. 


1734.  DEPARTURE  OF  THE  PRINCESS  ROYAL.  327 

do  what  he  should  not,  charged  himself  with  this  letter, 
and,  without  saying  from  whom  he  had  it,  carried  it  to 
the  Queen.  The  Queen,  opening  it  and  looking  im- 
mediately at  the  name,  fell  upon  Lord  Grantham  for 
drawing  her  into  this  unpleasant  scrape,  and,  without 
reading  the  letter,  bid  Lord  Grantham  carry  it  imme- 
diately to  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  and  desired  him  to 
show  it  the  King ;  by  which  means  she  very  dexter- 
ously avoided  the  danger  of  concealing  such  a  letter 
from  the  King,  or  giving  Sir  Robert  Walpole  any 
cause  of  jealousy  from  showing  it.  The  letter  set  forth 
the  deplorable  state  of  this  country,  both  from  the 
power  of  France  abroad  and  from  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
at  home ;  and  all  the  effect  it  had  on  the  King  was 
making  him  call  Lord  Stair  a  puppy  for  writing  it,  and 
Lord  Grantham  a  fool  for  bringing  it. 

In  a  few  days  after  the  Parliament  was  up  [22raZ 
April],  the  Princess  Royal  and  Prince  of  Orange  em- 
barked at  Greenwich  for  Holland :  never  was  there  a 
more  melancholy  parting  than  between  her  Royal  High- 
ness and  all  her  family,  except  her  brother — who  took 
no  leave  of  her  at  all,  and  desired  the  Prince  of  Orange 
to  let  her  know  his  reason  for  omitting  it  was  the  fear  of 
touching  her  too  much.  Her  father  gave  her  a  thousand 
kisses  and  a  shower  of  tears,  but  not  one  guinea. 

Her  mother  never  ceased  crying  for  three  days ;  but 
after  three  weeks  (excepting  on  post-days)  her  Royal 
Highness  seemed  as  much  forgotten  as  if  she  had  been 
buried  three  years.  So  quick  a  smoother  is  absence  of 
the  deepest  impressions  royal  minds  are  capable  of 
receiving.  Impressions  that  are  only  to  be  preserved 


328  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

by  an  effort  of  memory  and  reflection  are  indeed,  in 
all  human  compositions,  like  characters  written  in  sand, 
that,  if  they  are  not  perpetually  retained  by  our  senses, 
they  are  seldom  of  any  great  duration,  and  are  easily 
effaced,  though  ever  so  strongly  marked. 

Whilst  the  Princess  lay  wind-bound  at  Gravesend 
Lord  Hervey  went,  by  her  desire,  to  make  her  a  visit : 
and  here  it  was,  by  being  closeted  two  or  three  hours 
with  the  Prince  of  Orange,  Lord  Hervey  found  his 
bride  had  already  made  him  so  well  acquainted  with 
this  Court,  that  there  was  nobody  belonging  to  it  whose 
character,  even  to  the  most  minute  particulars,  was  not 
as  well  known  to  him  as  their  face.  The  Prince  of 
Orange  had  a  good  deal  of  drollery,  and,  whilst 
Lord  Hervey  was  delivering  the  compliments  of 
St.  James's  to  him,  he  asked  him,  smiling,  what  mes- 
sage he  had  brought  from  the  Prince  ?  Lord  Hervey 
said  his  departure  was  so  sudden  that  he  had  not  seen 
the  Prince.  "If  you  had  "  (replied  the  Prince  of  Orange), 
"  it  would  have  been  all  one,  since  he  was  not  more 
likely  to  send  his  sister  a  message  than  he  was  to  make 
your  Lordship  his  ambassador."  Lord  Hervey  was  a 
good  deal  surprised  to  hear  the  Prince  of  Orange  speak 
so  freely  on  this  subject,  and  did  not  think  it  very  dis- 
creet in  him ;  but  he  was  still  more  surprised  when  his 
Highness  proceeded  to  open  himself  so  much  on  the 
Prince  of  Wales's  character  as  made  it  not  hard  to  dis- 
cover that  his  affection  to  the  Prince's  person,  his 
opinion  of  his  understanding,  his  dependence  on  his 
truth,  and  his  esteem  for  his  integrity,  were  all  much 
at  the  same  pitch.  He  told  Lord  Hervey  what  the 


1734.  VISIT  TO  THE  PRINCE  OF  ORANGE.  329 

Prince  had  said  about  taking  leave  of  his  sister,  at 
which  they  both  smiled.  He  then  acquainted  Lord 
Hervey  how  often  the  Prince  had  entertained  him  with 
the  recital  of  his  Lordship's  ingratitude — a  subject  on 
which  Lord  Hervey  begged  his  Highness  to  spare  him, 
since  it  must  be  extremely  disagreeable  to  anybody  to 
listen  to  one's  own  accusation  when  they  were  deter- 
mined never  to  enter  into  their  defence.  The  Prince 
of  Orange,  however,  went  on,  and  talked  of  Miss 
Vane,24  and  bade  Lord  Hervey  not  be  too  proud  of 
that  boy,  since  he  had  heard  from  very  good  authority 
it  was  the  child  of  a  triumvirate,  and  that  the  Prince 
and  Lord  Harrington  had  full  as  good  a  title  to  it  as 
himself.  Lord  Hervey  told  the  Prince  of  Orange  that 
his  speaking  to  him  in  this  strain  was  not  only  the 
most  effectual,  but  the  most  disagreeable  method  he 
could  take  to  impose  silence  upon  him,  and  begged 
they  might  either  change  the  topic  of  their  conversation 
or  go  to  the  company  below  stairs.  The  Prince  of 


24  This  unfortunate  lady  was,  Horace  Walpole  tells  us,  the  cause  of  the 
quarrel  between  the  Prince  and  Lord  Hervey. — Reminiscences.  "  Miss 
Vane,  one  of  the  maids  of  honour  to  the  Queen,  was  sister  of  the  first  Lord 
Darlington,  and  mistress  of  Frederick  Prince  of  Wales,  by  whom  she  had 
a  son,  publicly  christened,  in  1732,  Fitz- Frederick  Vane.  She  lay-in 
with  little  mystery  in  St.  James's  Palace,  and  yet  it  was  doubted  whether 
the  Prince  was  really  the  parent.  Lord  Hervey  was  suspected  of 
being  a  still  more  favoured  lover ;  and  Horace  Walpole  says  that  the 
Prince,  Lord  Hervey,  and  the  first  Lord  Harrington,  each  confided  to  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  that  he  was  the  father  of  the  child.  It  died  in  1736,  and 
its  unhappy  mother  in  a  few  months  after." — Suffolk  Cor.,  i.  407.  The 
coolness  between  the  Prince  and  Lord  Hervey  seems  to  have  begun  to- 
wards the  close  of  1731,  and  its  progress  may  be  traced  in  a  few  expressions 
of  his  private  letters,  but  he  carefully  omits  all  reference  to  the  cause  of 
quarrel.  We  shall  see,  however,  by  and  by,  that  Miss  Vane  had  probably 
a  great  share  in  it. 


330  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

Orange,  seeing  him  really  uneasy  and  embarrassed, 
began  to  talk  of  the  affairs  of  Europe,  and  showed  he 
was  as  well  informed  of  the  interests  of  all  foreign 
Courts  as  he  was  of  the  anecdotes  of  this. 

When  Lord  Hervey  took  his  leave  of  the  Princess 
Royal,  she  bid  him  be  sure  to  do  his  utmost  to  prevent 
a  peace  being  made,  and  to  make  her  mamma  warm. 
The  reason  was,  because,  the  war  continuing,  the  Prince 
of  Orange  was  to  go  a  tour  this  campaign  to  the  Impe- 
rial Army,  and  she  in  that  case  would  return  during 
his  absence  to  England.  Besides  this,  if  the  war  con- 
tinued, she  thought  Holland  would  be  brought  into  it ; 
and  if  Holland  was  brought  into  it,  a  Stadtholder  would 
be  more  likely  to  be  made.  So  that  her  pleasure  in 
present,  and  her  ambition  in  future,  were  both  con- 
cerned in  her  solicitude  for  no  end  to  be  put  to  the 
murder,  rapine,  distress,  and  calamity  that  at  present 
raged  in  Europe.  And  when  one  reflects  on  the  in- 
fluence the  counsels  of  England  had  at  this  time  on  the 
fate  of  Europe — the  influence  the  Queen  had  on  those 
counsels,  and  the  influence  her  daughter  then  had  upon 
her — when,  by  this  chain  of  causes,  one  considers  what 
might  turn  the  scale,  and  decide  upon  the  lives  and 
deaths  of  thousands,  the  destruction  or  preservation 
of  many  cities,  the  tranquillity  or  distress  of  whole 
nations,  and  the  prosperity  or  adversity  of  half  Europe 
— what  respect  it  must  give  one  for  the  hands  of  the 
few  who  regulate  these  great  events ;  and  with  what 
confidence,  resignation,  content,  and  security  must  sub- 
jects commit  the  welfare  of  kingdoms  to  the  justice  and 
judgment  of  those  mortal  deities,  their  Princes,  when 


1734.  THE  ELECTIONS.  331 

they  see  and  know  them  actuated  by  such  motives,  and 
determined  by  such  reasons ! 25 

The  day  the  Princess  set  sail  from  Gravesend  the 
King  and  Queen  retired  to  Richmond,  where  they 
waited  the  account  of  every  election  under  as  much 
anxiety  as  if  their  Crown  had  been  at  stake.  The 
complexion  of  the  new  Parliament  was,  indeed,  of  great 
moment  to  them ;  for  never  was  an  opposing  party 
more  exasperated  against  a  Court,  or  a  stiffer  struggle 
made  to  distress  it. 

Notwithstanding  the  severe  Act  passed  in  the  year 
1729  to  prevent  bribery  and  corruption  in  elections,  yet 
money,  though  it  had  been  formerly  more  openly  given, 
was  never  more  plentifully  issued  than  in  these.  Every 
election  that  went  against  the  Court  the  King  imputed 
to  the  fault  of  those  who  lost  it,  and  much  too  fre- 
quently, and  too  publicly,  accused  the  Whigs  of  negli- 
gence ;  saying,  at  the  same  time,  that  if  the  Tories  had 
had  a  quarter  of  the  support  from  the  Government 
that  the  Whigs  had  received  from  it  for  twenty  years 
together,  they  would  never  have  suffered  the  Crown  to 
be  pushed  and  the  Court  to  be  distressed  in  the  manner 
it  now  was:  and  generally  added  to  these  declarations, 
that  he  could  not  help  saying,  for  the  honour  of  the 
Tories,  that  they  were  always  much  firmer  united,  and 


2*  I  wonder  that  Lord  Hervey  could  attach  so  much  importance  to  such  a 
phrase  as  this,  addressed  to  a  Vice- Chamberlain  by  a  young  princess,  not 
even  a  sovereign,  going  abroad  for  the  first  time,  and  anxious  to  revisit 
her  mamma  and  sisters.  There  is  abundant  proof  in  these  Memoirs  that 
the  Princess  Royal  had  no  such  influence  over  the  King,  or  even  the 
Queen,  as  Lord  Hervey  suggests.  On  fitter  occasions  his  deprecation  of 
war  is  forcible  and  just. 


332  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

much  more  industrious  and  circumspect,  than  the 
Whigs. 

That  the  King  often  dropped  things  of  this  kind  was 
no  secret  to  either  party,  and  as  it  piqued  the  one  it 
animated  the  other;  hurting  the  cause  of  those  he 
espoused,  and  promoting  the  interest  of  those  he  wished 
to  depress. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole  was  now  in  Norfolk,  pushing  the 
county  election  there,  which  the  [Ministerial]  Whigs 
lost  by  six  or  seven  voices,  to  the  great  triumph  of 
the  Opposition.  After  the  election  was  over  he  stayed 
some  time  at  Houghton,  solacing  himself  with  his 
mistress,  Miss  Skerrett,  whilst  his  enemies  were  working 
against  him  at  Richmond,  and  persuading  the  King 
and  Queen  that  the  majority  of  the  new  Parliament 
would  infallibly  be  chosen  against  the  Court. 

Lord  Hervey,  who  was  every  day  and  all  day  at 
Richmond,  saw  this  working,  and  found  their  Majesties 
staggering ;  upon  which  he  wrote  an  anonymous  letter 
to  Sir  Robert  Walpole  with  only  these  few  words  in  it, 
quoted  out  of  a  play : — 

"  Whilst  in  her  arms  at  Capua  he  lay, 
The  world  fell  mouldering  from  his  hand  each  hour" 

Sir  Robert  knew  the  hand,  understood  the  meaning, 
and,  upon  the  receipt  of  this  letter,  came  immediately 
to  Richmond.  Lord  Hervey,  upon  his  return,  told  him 
what  he  had  heard ;  but  that,  the  King  and  Queen  both 
talking  in  the  same  strain  with  regard  to  the  neglect 
and  remissness  of  the  Whigs,  and  the  firmness  and  in- 
dustry of  the  Tories,  he  could  not  tell  from  which  of 
them  these  notions  had  been  communicated  to  the  other, 


1734.  SIR  ROBERT  WALPOLE.  333 

or  who  had  infused  them  originally  in  either.  He 
said,  if  they  came  from  the  King,  he  guessed  my  Lord 
President  for  their  source ;  if  from  the  Queen,  that  the 
Bishops  Hare  and  Sherlock26  had  propagated  them ;  and 
he  was  more  inclined  to  think  they  came  this  way  for 
two  reasons :  in  the  first  place,  because  the  King  was 
more  likely  to  receive  impressions  from  the  Queen  than 
to  make  them ;  and  in  the  next,  because  he  knew  what 
Sherlock  said  had  more  weight  with  her  than  anything 
that  came  from  any  mouth  but  Sir  Robert's  had  with 
the  King.  Sir  Robert  said  he  did  not  believe  it  was 
Sherlock.  Lord  Hervey  told  him  both  Hare  and 
Sherlock  had  been  with  her ;  that  Sherlock  was  a  great 
favourite ;  hated  the  Bishop  of  London,  and  knew  Sir 
Robert's  partiality  to  him ;  had  himself  an  eye  to  Lam- 
beth, and  was  sensible  he  had  no  chance  to  go  there  in 
case  of  a  vacancy  if  Sir  Robert's  power  could  send  the 
other.  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  however,  persisted  in  say- 
ing he  did  not  think  these  arrows  came  out  of  Sher- 
lock's quiver,  and  that  he  could  guess  the  hand  that 
threw  them ;  however,  he  did  not  tell  whom  he  sus- 
pected, and  I  believe  was  in  doubt,  though  he  pre- 
tended he  was  not.  But  he  told  Lord  Hervey  that 
this  was  ever  his  fate,  and  that  he  never  could  turn  his 
back  for  three  days  that  somebody  or  other  did  not 
give  it  a  slap  of  this  kind.  And  how,  indeed,  could  it 
ever  be  otherwise,  for,  as  he  was  unwilling  to  employ 
anybody  under  him,  or  let  anybody  approach  the  King 
and  Queen  who  had  any  understanding,  lest  they  should 

26  Francis  Hare,  Bishop  of  Chichester,  and  Thomas  Sherlock,  then 
Bishop  of  Bangor,  but  shortly  afterwards  translated  to  Salisbury,  and 
subsequently  to  London. 


334  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

employ  it  against  him,  so,  from  fear  of  having  dan- 
gerous friends,  he  never  had  any  useful  ones,  every  one 
of  his  subalterns  being  as  incapable  of  defending  him  as 
they  were  of  attacking  him,  and  no  better  able  to  sup- 
port than  to  undermine  him  ? 

Many  who  lost  their  elections,  and  particularly  the 
Duke  of  Dorset,  whose  eldest  son  was  thrown  out  in 
Kent,  imputed  every  miscarriage  of  the  Court  candi- 
dates to  the  Excise  scheme ;  but  as  soon  as  Sir  Robert 
came  back  he  set  everything  right,  resumed  his  power, 
and  effaced  every  impression  that  had  been  made  either 
in  the  mind  of  the  King  or  Queen  to  his  disadvantage, 
or  in  distrust  of  the  new  Parliament.  The  Ministers' 
list  in  the  election  of  the  Scotch  Peers,  notwithstand- 
ing the  efforts  made  to  subvert  the  Court  interest,  was 
carried  by  the  industry  and  dexterity  of  Lord  Isla 
by  a  very  great  majority ;  the  minority  protested  against 
the  illegality  of  the  election.  The  substance  of  the 
protest  was,  that  the  Minister  had  sent  an  agent  down 
with  money  to  corrupt  the  electors ;  that  the  sixteen 
who  were  returned  were  chosen  entirely  by  that  undue 
influence,  and  consequently  had  no  right  to  sit.27 

Lord  Isla  was  the  man  on  whom  Sir  Robert  Wai- 
pole  depended  entirely  for  the  management  of  all 
Scotch  affairs :  a  man  of  parts,  quickness,  knowledge, 
temper,  dexterity,  and  judgment  —  a  man  of  little 
truth,  little  honour,  little  principle,  and  no  attachment 

2"  Lord  Marchmont  was  one  of  the  rejected ;  and  a  curious  passage  in  a 
letter  from  Lord  Chesterfield  to  him  on  the  occasion — suggesting  the  bribing 
"  two  or  three  of  the  lowest  of  those  venal  peers  "  to  confess  that  they  had 
received  biibes  from  the  other  side — shows  that  the  Opposition  was  not 
more  scrupulous  than  the  Ministry  they  censured. —  Chesterfield  Cor.,  iii. 
p.  94. 


1734.  LORD  ISLA.  335 

but  to  his  interest — a  pedantic,  dirty,  shrewd,  unbred 
fellow  of  a  college,  with  a  mean  aspect,  bred  to  the 
sophistry  of  the  civil  law,  and  made  a  peer,  would  have 
been  just  such  a  man.  His  great  maxim  on  which  he  re- 
gulated his  whole  political  conduct  with  regard  to  persons 
was,  "  so  to  love  that  he  might  hate,  and  so  to  hate 
that  he  might  love  :"  that  is,  never  so  far  to  confide  as 
not  to  dare  to  break,  nor  ever  so  far  to  outrage  as  to 
make  it  impossible  to  be  reconciled.  With  all  his  Par- 
liamentary skill  and  accomplishments,  his  ungraceful 
manner  of  speaking,  his  prolixity,  his  disagreeable  voice 
and  bad  elocution  made  all  he  said  lose  its  force;  and 
what  everybody  would  have  owned  a  good  dissertation 
if  they  had  read  it,  was  never  an  affecting  speech  when 
they  heard  it :  it  was  not  animated  enough  to  persuade, 
nor  attended  to  enough  to  convince.  Sir  Robert  Wai- 
pole,  with  all  the  influence  he  had  upon  the  Queen's 
opinions  of  things  and  inclination  to  persons,  could 
never  make  her  love  Lord  Isla ;  and  though  she  gene- 
rally measured  her  favours  if  not  her  affection  to  people 
according  to  the  public  use  they  were  of  to  the  King's 
affairs,  yet  Lord  Isla's  services,  great  as  they  were, 
could  never  wash  out  the  stains  of  his  former  misde- 
meanours. The  Queen  had  habituated  herself  to  hating 
him  on  his  having  formerly,  for  a  long  while  together, 
made  his  court  to  Lady  Suffolk;  Lady  Suffolk  now 
hated  him  as  much  for  having  neglected  her  in  order 
to  gain  the  Queen,  which  he  could  never  effect.  So 
that  his  unfortunate  situation  with  both  was,  being  dis- 
liked as  much  by  the  one  for  what  he  was,  as  by  the 
other  for  what  he  had  been  ;  the  one  quite  forgetting 
how  much  she  had  once  been  obliged,  and  the  other 


336  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIV. 

always  remembering  how  much  she  had  been  disobliged. 
The  Duke  of  Argyle  was  in  still  a  worse  situation  in 
her  affections  than  his  brother,  and  for  the  same  reason;28 
for,  Sir  Robert  Walpole  not  loving  his  Grace,  and 
wishing  to  increase  the  Queen's  dislike  to  him  rather 
than  to  remove  it,  it  continued  without  the  least  abate- 
ment ;  whilst  Sir  Robert,  by  perpetually  working  in 
Lord  Isla's  favour,  had  a  little  softened  her  resentment 
towards  him,  though  he  could  never  quite  eradicate  it. 
Lord  Isla's  behaviour,  and  the  service  he  did  the  King 
in  those  last  Scotch  elections,  set  forth  in  all  its  lustre, 
made  the  Queen  more  willing  to  allow  his  merit  than 
she  had  ever  been  on  any  other  occasion. 

The  behaviour  of  these  two  brothers  to  one  another 
was  the  most  extraordinary  correspondence  ever  heard 
of:  they  had  had  a  private  and  personal  quarrel  ten 
years  ago,  and  from  that  time  to  this  had  been  so 
exasperated  against  each  other,  that  they  had  not  ex- 
changed one  word ;  yet  were  always  in  the  same  interest 
and  perpetually  convened  to  the  same  political  meet- 
ings, and  by  the  means  of  a  Mr.  Stewart  (who  went 
between  them),  a  Scotch  gentleman,  an  adroit  fellow 
and  a  common  friend  to  them  both,  they  acted  as  much 
in  concert  as  if  they  had  been  the  most  intimate  and 
most  cordial  friends. 

The  Duke  of  Argyle  was  of  great  consequence  in 
Scotland,  and  the  interest  of  the  Campbell  family  kept 
these  two  brothers  united.  His  Grace  commanded  a 
great  many  followers  in  the  House  of  Commons,  and, 
by  being  often  hungry  and  often  fed,  was  often  in  and 

28  See  ante,  p.  168. 


1734.  DUKE  OF  ARGYLE.  337 

often  out  of  humour  with  the  Administration.  He  was 
haughty,  passionate,  and  peremptory;  gallant,  and  a 
good  officer ;  with  very  good  parts,  and  much  more 
reading  and  knowledge  than  generally  falls  to  the  share 
of  a  man  educated  a  soldier  and  born  to  so  great  a 
title  and  fortune.29 

The  tumult  of  the  elections  being  now  over,  and  the 
King,  Queen,  and  Ministers  pretty  well  satisfied  with 
the  complexion  of  the  new-born  Parliament,  the  Court 
removed  for  its  summer  residence  to  Kensington,  and 
all  the  conversation  of  it  was  turned  from  domestic  to 
foreign  affairs :  I  shall  therefore  now  give  a  short 
account  of  the  transactions  of  the  campaign. 

29  See  ante,  p.  245. 


VOL.  I. 


338  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV 


CHAPTEK  XV. 

Foreign  affairs — War  on  the  Continent— Campaign  in  Italy — Pretender  in 
the  Spanish  army — Conquest  of  Sicily — Historical  Account  of  Sicily — 
Battles  of  Parma  and  Guastalla — War  in  Germany — Siege  of  Philips- 
burg — Siege  and  surrender  of  Dantzic — Gallantry  of  Count  Plelo — 
Flight  of  King  Stanislaus— Policy  of  Cardinal  Fleury  and  of  Sir  Robert 
Wai  pole — Counteracted  by  Hatolf  and  the  Hanoverian  Interest,  and  by 
the  Queen— Opinion  of  the  English  Ministers  — Character  of  Count 
Kinski — Peace  preserved. 

THE  Emperor  sent  into  Italy  near  50,000  men,the 
flower  of  the  Imperial  troops,  under  the  command  of 
Count  Merci,  an  old  brutal,  hot-headed  German  of 
fourscore,  who  had  lost  his  sight,  and  had  all  the  in- 
firmities of  age  without  the  experience,  and  all  the 
heat  of  youth  without  the  vigour  of  it. 

To  the  Rhine  he  sent  Prince  Eugene  with  only 
22,000  men  to  oppose  100,000,  and  to  wait  there  the 
arrival  of  the  quotas  to  be  furnished  by  the  princes  of 
the  empire,  who  were  as  slow  to  send  them  as  he  was 
pressing  to  demand  them.  This  disposition  of  affairs 
made  Count  Staremberg  tell  his  Imperial  Majesty  at 
Vienna  that  he  had  sent  an  army  without  a  general 
into  Italy,  and  a  general  without  an  army  to  the  Rhine. 
A  reflection  very  well  applied,  which  he  borrowed  from 
Suetonius ;  for  when  Caesar  was  going  into  Spain  to 
make  war  there  on  the  Lieutenants  of  Pompey,  and 
intended  upon  their  reduction  to  return  and  follow 
Pompey  into  Greece,  Suetonius  reports  Caesar  to  have 


1734.  CAMPAIGN  IN  ITALY.  339 

said,  "  Ire  se  ad  exercitum  sine  dtice,  et  inde  rever- 
surum  ad  ducem  sine  exercitu :" — "  That  he  would  first 
go  to  the  army  without  a  general,  and  would  thence 
return  to  the  general  without  an  army." 

The  consequence  of  this  disposition  of  affairs  to  the 
Emperor  was,  that  Italy  was  soon  lost:  30,000  Spa- 
niards, commanded  by  Count  Montemar,  marched 
through  the  Ecclesiastical  States  to  Naples,  soon  sub- 
dued it,  and  set  Don  Carlos  (who  went  at  the  head 
of  them  their  titular  general)  on  the  throne  of  that 
kingdom.  The  Emperor  had  12,000  men  (as  good 
troops  as  any  in  the  world)  then  in  Naples ;  but  as 
they  were  commanded  by  Visconti,  then  Viceroy  of 
Naples,  an  old  timid  dotard,  who  knew  little  of  civil, 
and  nothing  of  military  affairs,  these  troops  were  so 
disposed  that  no  defence  was  made  against  the  Spa- 
niards that  gave  any  lustre  to  the  wreaths  of  their 
triumph. 

This  ignorant,  superannuated  coward,  taken  out  of 
the  Cabinet  of  the  Archduchess  at  Brussels  (where 
he  had  nothing  to  do  but  raise  taxes  and  keep  up  Aus- 
trian formality),  and  set  at  the  head  of  this  Govern- 
ment in  this  difficult  conjuncture,  knew  not  which  way 
to  turn,  or  what  measures  to  take ;  and,  instead  of  col- 
lecting his  forces  to  make  any  stand  against  the  first 
invasion  of  the  Spaniards,  he  shut  up  4000  men  in 
Gaeta,  4000  more  in  Capua,  and  with  the  other  4000 
deserted  Naples,  and  ran  he  knew  not  whither  up  into 
the  country  towards  Apulia,  with  what  effects  of  his 
own  he  could  carry  off,  leaving  his  master's  affairs  to 
take  care  of  themselves. 


340  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

By  these  means  about  17,000  Spaniards,  very  bad 
troops,  who  advanced  before  the  rest,  and  might  easily 
have  been  defeated  by  the  Imperialists  led  on  by  an 
able  general,  took  possession  of  Naples,  and  there 
crowned  Don  Carlos  without  striking  a  blow;  they 
then  pursued  the  Viceroy,  who  narrowly  escaped  him- 
self by  the  mountains,  whilst  every  man  of  his  miserable 
little  army  was  either  killed  or  taken  prisoner. 

This  battle  [25th  May]  was  called  the  Battle  of  Bi- 
tonto ;  and  the  Count  Montemar,  in  consequence  of  this 
and  all  his  other  services,  was  created  Duke  of  Bitonto 
by  Don  Carlos  as  soon  as  ever  Don  Carlos  was  crowned 
King  of  Naples.  Gaeta  and  Capua  were  soon  after  be- 
sieged and  taken,  which  left  the  new  King  of  Naples  in 
absolute  and  quiet  possession  of  the  whole  kingdom, 
save  only  two  or  three  little  inconsiderable  places,  very 
improperly  called  forts,  which  were  soon  after  reduced. 
The  son  of  the  Pretender  was  sent  a  volunteer  to  the 
siege  of  Gaeta  in  great  state,  and  received  with  great 
honours  and  distinctions  by  Don  Carlos :  his  retinue 
consisted  of  a  governor,  a  master  of  the  horse,  four 
gentlemen  of  the  bedchamber,  and  inferior  domestics  in 
proportion.  Gratitude  from  princes  nobody  expects — 
at  least  who  knows  them;  it  was  therefore  (in  that 
light  merely  considered)  no  wonder  to  see  Don  Carlos 
making  those  troops  which  the  King  of  England's  fleet 
had  brought  two  years  before  into  Italy  treat  the  pre- 
tended heir  to  his  crown  as  if  he  had  been  the  true 
one ;  but  what  the  policy  of  the  counsels  of  Spain  could 
be  in  permitting  this  step  is  inconceivable. 

As  soon  as  Mr.  Keene,  the  English  Minister  at  the 


1734.  THE  YOUNG  PRETENDER.  341 

Court  of  Spain,  heard  of  this  proceeding,  he  complained 
of  it  to  Patinho,1  and  said,  though  he  had  received  no 
orders  yet  from  England  to  mention  it,  he  did  not  be- 
lieve it  would  be  well  taken.  Patinho  immediately,  as 
first  Minister,  told  Mr.  Keene  that  his  Court  would  ab- 
solutely disavow  the  measure :  he  declared  in  the  name 
of  his  master  that  no  offence  was  meant  to  be  given 
to  the  King  of  England,  and  that,  since  Mr.  Keene 
thought  offence  would  be  taken  at  it,  he  would  immedi- 
*ately  despatch  a  courier  to  Naples  (which  accordingly 
he  did)  to  order  the  Pretender's  son  to  be  sent  back. 
At  the  same  time,  Patinho  told  Mr.  Keene  that  in  a 
private  character  he  would  own  to  him  exactly  the 
manner  in  which  this  thing  had  come  about.  The 
Duke  of  Liria,  he  said,  [second]  son  to  the  Duke  of 
Berwick,  who  was  cousin-german  to  this  boy,2  had,  when 
in  Don  Carlos's  army,  asked  leave  of  the  Court  of 
Spain  to  bring  his  cousin  there  a  volunteer,  and  the 
Court  of  Spain,  not  thinking  it  an  affair  of  any  conse- 
quence, had  obliged  the  Duke  of  Liria  in  this  request ; 
but  that,  for  receiving  the  boy  as  Prince  of  Wales,  or 
paying  him  any  honours  as  a  king's  son,  he  was  sure  no 
such  thing  had  been  done. 

Nevertheless,  it  was  currently  reported  and  gene- 
rally believed  to  be  otherwise,  and  that  the  boy  had 
been  received  by  Don  Carlos  with  all  the  honours  and 
distinctions  that  could  be  showed  to  him.  Particulars 
too  were  told  that  confirmed  people  in  this  opinion, 


1  Don  Joseph  Patinho,  prime  minister  of  Spain. 

2  Charles  Edward,  the  young  Pretender,  was  born  on  the  last  day  of 
1720,  and  was  therefore  really  no  more  than  a  boy. 


342  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

especially  one,  which  was,  that  Don  Carlos  and  this 
boy  coming  back  together  to  Naples  in  a  galley  from 
Gaeta,  the  hat  of  the  young  Pretender  fell  into  the  sea, 
and,  the  mariners  going  to  take  it  up,  Don  Carlos  cried 
out,  "  It  is  no  matter,  it  floats  towards  England,  and 
the  owner  will  soon  go  fetch  it ;  and,  that  I  may  have 
something  to  fetch  too,  mine  shall  accompany  it." 
Upon  that  he  threw  his  own  hat  into  the  sea,  whilst 
the  whole  retinue  of  both  Princes  set  up  a  huzza,  all 
threw  their  hats  into  the  sea,  and  cried  "  Al  Inghilterra ! 
al  Inghilterra !" 

Montijo,  at  London,  took  the  same  turn  that  Pa- 
tinho  did  at  Madrid ;  he  absolutely  denied  that  Spain 
had  countenanced  this  measure,  and  said  to  the  Duke 
of  Newcastle  that  orders  were  sent,  as  soon  as  the  thing 
was  known,  to  have  the  boy  recalled. 

However,  this  excuse  in  reality  was  a  very  insuffi- 
cient recompense,  the  affront  having  been  public  and 
the  reparation  private. 

The  King  and  Queen  too  were  both  extremely  hurt 
at  it ;  but  Sir  Robert  Walpole  very  wisely  told  them 
there  was  no  medium  to  be  held  in  their  conduct,  arid 
they  must  either  seem  quite  satisfied  with  the  apology 
made  for  the  affront,  or  must  thoroughly  resent  it,  and 
forbid  Montijo  the  Court.  He  said  their  Majesties' 
situation  was  such,  that,  if  they  had  a  mind  to  quarrel 
with  Spain,  this  incident  no  doubt  gave  them  a  handle 
to  do  it ;  but  if  they  had  no  mind  to  it,  he  thought 
the  excuse  that  had  been  made  for  the  impertinence  of 
Spain  was  sufficient  to  justify  their  honour  in  over- 
looking it :  the  latter  was  the  part  they  took. 

After  the  reduction  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples  the 


1734.  HISTORY  OF  SICILY.  343 

resolution  was  taken  by  the  Spaniards  of  making  an 
immediate  descent  upon  Sicily :  accordingly  an  army  of 
**,000  foot  and  2000  horse,  under  the  command  of 
the  Duke  of  *  *  3,  with  a  fleet  of  30  sail,  was  sent  to 
make  that  conquest.  They  soon  completed  it,  the  three 
towns  of  Messina,  Trapani,  and  Syracuse,  which  held 
out  longer  than  the  rest,  only  excepted.4 

And  here  I  cannot  help  remarking  that  this  un- 
happy island  seems  from  the  beginning  of  its  existence, 
at  least  from  the  earliest  accounts  that  history  unmixed 
with  fable  affords  us  of  its  fortune,  to  have  been  marked 
out  by  Heaven  as  an  object  of  successive  calamities. 
And  even  those  things  which  are  called  blessings  to 
other  countries  have  proved  such  curses  to  this  that 
they  have  contributed  chiefly  to  sharpen  and  promote 
the  series  of  its  misfortunes.  I  mean  by  these  com- 
monly esteemed  blessings  the  apt  situation  of  Sicily  for 
trade;  the  fertility  of  her  fields,  than  which,  says 
Justin,  "nulla  terra  feracior  fuit — there  was  no  more 
fruitful  soil ;"  the  plenteousness  of  her  harvests,  her 
vineyards,  and  her  olive-trees ;  the  strength  of  her 
cities,  and  the  opulence  of  her  people — all  which  have 
constantly  drawn  the  eyes  of  her  neighbours  upon  her, 
excited  their  envy,  and  made  them  turn  their  arms  to 
so  tempting  and  desirable  an  acquisition — 

"  Populus  Romanus,  mox  quum  videret  opulentissimam  in 
proximo  pr&dam,  quodammodb  Italics  suce  abscissam  et  quasi 

3  These  blanks  are  caused  by  defects  in  the  manuscript,  but  may  from 
the  contemporaneous  gazettes  be  filled  up  with  "  18,000  "  foot — and  Duke 
of  "  Bitanto  " — who  was  next  year  created  Duke  of  Montemar. 

<   Messina  fell  in  February,  Syracuse  in  June,  and  Trapani  soon  after. 


344  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHA.I-.  XV. 

revulsam,  adeb  cupiditate  ejus  exarsit  ut  quatenus  nee  mole 
jungi  nee  pontibus  posset,  armis  belloque  jungenda  et  ad  conti- 
nentem  suam  revocanda  hello  videretur." — "The  Roman  people 
seeing  so  rich  a  prey  so  near  at  hand,  which  had  been  cut 
off,  and,  as  it  were,  torn  away  from  their  own  Italy,  were 
inflamed  with  such  a  desire  of  possessing  it,  that,  as  it  could 
not  be  reunited  by  moles  or  bridges,  they  were  resolved  to 
restore  it  to  the  continent  by  arms  and  war."  (Florus.} 

"  Hujus  ob  discordias  perpetuas  potentiorum  injuriis  exposita 
pulchritudo  invitamt" — "  The  beauty  of  the  island  invited, 
while  the  perpetual  discords  of  the  native  powers  exposed  it  to 
attack."  (Livy.) 

Whenever  Sicily  was  under  a  democratic  govern- 
ment, intestine  violence,  jarring  factions,  popular  tu- 
mults, and  civil  contests  disturbed  her  peace,  laid  waste 
her  plains,  destroyed  her  cities,  and  thinned  her  in- 
habitants with  a  rage  equal  to  that  of  foreign  wars,  and 
produced  events  not  less  fatal  than  those  consequential 
to  the  entrance  of  a  conquering  external  foe.  When- 
ever Sicily  has  been  a  province  to  other  states,  it  has 
proved  the  common  fate  of  all  other  provinces  in  being 
drained  by  the  prince  and  harassed  by  his  vicegerent. 
When  every  great  city  of  the  island  had  a  prince  of  its 
own,  or  when  the  greatest  part  of  the  island  was  under 
the  dominion  of  one  king,  the  government  was  espe- 
cially grievous,  oppressive,  and  cruel ;  whilst  such  a 
numerous  succession  of  these  royal  spoilers  was  in- 
flicted on  this  miserable  country,  that  the  name  of  a 
Sicilian  king  has  been  made  proverbial  to  this  day. 
"  Sicuti  per  annos  sane  multos  externa  simul  ac  civilia 
bella,  et  nocentius  utrisque  malum,  tyrannidem  passi :" — 
"  The  Sicilians  had  suffered  for  many  years  both  ex- 


1734.  HISTORY  OF  SICILY.  345 

ternal  and  civil  war,  and  an  evil  worse  than  either — a 
tyrannical  government."  (Livy.} 

A  tyrant  originally  meant  nothing  more  than  an 
absolute  ruler ;  but  absolute  rule  being  so  apt  to  de- 
viate into  oppression,  the  title  of  Tyrant,  which  was  at 
first  only  synonymous  to  King,  by  the  general  conduct 
of  kings  became  at  last  synonymous  to  an  oppressor. 
The  little  verbal  distinctions  between  absolute,  arbi- 
trary, and  destructive  sway  were  lost  in  practice — they 
were  one  and  the  same  thing ;  and  for  this  reason  the 
name  of  Tyrant,  or  Tvpawos,  was  not  more  feared  or 
detested  by  the  Greeks  than  that  of  King  or  Rex  was 
by  the  Romans.  Among  the  last,  even  those  men  who, 
in  the  height  of  the  Roman  grandeur  and  the  decline 
of  Roman  virtue,  usurped  the  most  unlimited  power, 
avoided  still  the  odium  of  calling  themselves  by  that 
hateful  and  detested  name,  but,  sheltering  themselves 
under  the  less  formidable  titles  of  Emperor  and  Prince 
of  the  Senate,  and  vested  with  the  authority  of  the 
Tribunitian  power,  less  obnoxious  than  that  of  regal 
sway,  they  failed  not,  under  another  denomination  of 
government,  to  act  all  those  injustices  which  the 
people,  ever  more  intent  on  names  than  things,  would 
not  perhaps  have  borne  had  they  been  inflicted  by  a 
magistrate  under  a  different  appellation.  The  accounts 
we  have  of  this  island  prolong  the  hardships  of  foreign 
invasion  and  dominion  till  the  descent  made  there  by 
the  Carthaginians  a  little  before  the  time  of  expulsion 
of  the  kings  out  of  Rome. 

Xerxes,  when  he  meditated  the  conquest  of  all 
Greece,  fomented  these  wars  of  the  Carthaginians  in 
Sicily  in  order  to  draw  forces  out  of  Greece  to  main- 


346  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAV.  XV. 

tain  what  the  Greeks  there  possessed,  and  of  course  to 
leave  Greece  itself  more  exposed  to  the  irruptions  he 
designed  there. 

Three  years  the  Carthaginians  spent  in  preparations 
for  this  descent  on  Sicily,  and  then  attacked  it  with  an 
array  of  300,000  men  and  2000  ships  of  war.  How 
the  address  and  bravery  of  Gelon,  Tyrant  of  Syracuse, 
saved  Sicily  from  ruin  by  the  destruction  of  this  vast 
Carthaginian  fleet  and  army  everybody  knows,  and 
that  the  Carthaginians  and  Xerxes,  who  had  entered 
into  this  mutual  alliance  in  order  to  make  the  conquest 
of  all  Sicily  for  the  first  and  all  Greece  for  the  last, 
were  both  defeated  on  the  same  day,  the  one  near 
Palermo,  the  other  at  Thermopylae,  by  the  memorable 
sacrifice  of  300  Spartans.  Sicily  after  this  became 
the  theatre  of  a  fierce  and  bloody  contest  between  the 
Athenians  and  Lacedemonians,  the  last  sending  suc- 
cours to  the  Syracusians  to  defend  them  against  the 
assaults  of  the  first.  "  Totius  Grcecice  bettum  in 
Siciliam  translatum  erat:" — "  The  whole  war  was  trans- 
ferred from  Greece  to  Sicily."  (Justin.) 

The  Carthaginians  under  the  first  Hannibal  amply 
revenged  the  destruction  they  had  suffered  from  the 
hand  of  Gelon ;  they  made  a  new  descent  on  Sicily, 
and  with  innumerable  unspeakable  cruelties  destroyed 
and  dismantled  many  of  their  cities,  and  put  all  the 
inhabitants  to  the  sword. 

Peace  was  then  made  with  the  Carthaginians  by 
Dionysius  the  Elder,  but  it  was  short,  and  only  made 
in  order  to  prepare  for  the  long  and  sanguine  war  that 
soon  followed. 

Immense  were  the  sufferings  of  Sicily  during  this  war, 


1734.  HISTORY  OF  SICILY.  347 

as  well  from  their  own  kings  as  from  their  enemies,  but 
particularly  after  the  accession  of  the  Tyrant  Diony- 
sius  the  Younger,  who,  in  the  alternate  fortunes  of 
sovereignty,  banishment,  restoration,  and  re-exile,  was 
equally  fatal  to  this  distressed  country  (see  Diod.  Sic., 
b.  xvi.)  ;  for  at  that  time  Icetas,  Tyrant  of  the  Leon- 
tines,  and  Tirnoleon,  General  of  the  Corinthians  (both 
called  in  to  assist  the  two  different  factions  then  in 
Sicily),  together  with  the  Carthaginians  (who  hoped  to 
make  advantage  of  these  divisions),  were  all  three 
afflicting  and  rending  this  miserable  island  at  once. 

Pyrrhus,  King  of  Epirus,  made  a  descent  into  Sicily, 
and  in  the  space  of  one  year  or  little  more  won  it  and 
lost  it. 

"  Siculi  tradentes  Pyrrho  totius  insulce  imperium  quoe  assi- 
diis  Carthaginiensium  bellis  vexabatur :" — "  The  Sicilians  gave 
up  to  Pyrrhus  the  entire  dominion  of  the  island,  which  was  so 
worried  by  the  constant  wars  of  the  Carthaginians."  (Justin.} 

"  Pyrrho  in  Sicilia  omnia  sibi  prona  reperiente :" — "  Pyrrhus 
finding  that  everything  in  Sicily  was  favourable  to  him." 
(Livy.) 

"  Pyrrhus  maxima  Siculorum  alacritate  exceptus  est  oppida, 
agros,  pecunias,  naves,  certatim  tradentium :" — "  Pyrrhus  was  re- 
ceived with  the  greatest  alacrity  by  the  Sicilians,  who  vied  with 
each  other  in  surrendering  towns,  lands,  money,  and  ships." 
(Livy.) 

"  Pyrrhus  imperium  tarn  cito  amisit  quam  acquisierat :" — 
"  Pyrrhus  lost  the  country  as  rapidly  as  he  had  acquired  it." 
(Justin.) 

His  arrival  and  his  departure  were  both  marked 
with  those  traces  of  slaughter  and  devastation  that 
always  attend  such  sudden  revolutions  in  a  country 
where  the  prize  contested  for  is  so  valuable  and  the 
contesting  parties  so  powerful.  That  such  causes  con- 


348  LOUD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

stantly  produce  such  effects  was,  in  all  probability, 
the  opinion  of  Pyrrhus  himself  when  upon  quitting 
Sicily  he  said  to  his  courtiers — "  0,  amid,  qualem 
Romanis  et  Carthaginiensibus  palcestram  relinquimus  /" 
—  "Oh,  my  friends,  what  a  fine  field  for  combat  do  we 
abandon  to  the  Romans  and  Carthaginians !"  (Livy.} 
"  Affectabat  enim  ut  Pcenus,  ita  Romanus  Siciliam ;  et 
eodem  tempore,  paribus  uterque  votis  ac  viribus,  imperium 
orbis  agitabat :" — "  The  Romans  and  the  Carthaginians 
equally  coveted  Sicily,  and  at  the  same  time  with  the 
same  object  and  equal  forces  then  contended  for  the 
empire  of  the  world."  (Florus^) 

Pyrrhus's  prophecy  was  quickly  verified :  "  Quod 
presagium  paulo  post  longa  inter  hos  bella  tot  utrimque 
submersce  classes  tot  acies  ccesce  satis  superque  impleve- 
runt :" — "Which  prophecy  the  long  wars  that  soon 
followed,  with  such  a  destruction  of  fleets  and  such  a 
slaughter  of  armies,  sufficiently,  and  more  than  suffi- 
ciently, fulfilled."  (Livy.*)  Sicily  was  not  only  the  first, 
but  the  fiercest  theatre  of  that  deplorable  war  between 
the  Romans  and  Carthaginians  which  lasted  so  many 
years,  and  was  pursued  with  a  vigour  equal  to  the  incite- 
ment, which  was  nothing  less  than  an  universal  dominion 
of  what  was  then,  though  unjustly,  called  the  world. 

For  this  great  prize  Sicily  was  made  the  first  stage 
of  combat,  and  suffered  all  those  misfortunes  which  two 
of  the  greatest,  the  bravest,  the  most  potent,  and  most 

*  *  of  nations  of  any  age  in  alternate  conquests 
must  necessarily  inflict  on  that  country  that  most  im- 
mediately feels  the  fluctuations  of  such  power. 

At  length  the  Romans  became  sole  masters  of  this 
island,  and  were  the  first  masters  that  ever  possessed  it 


1734.  HISTORY  OF  SICILY.  349 

entire.  What  the  fertility  of  its  harvests  must  have  been 
is  easy  to  conceive,  when  it  was  called  in  the  most 
flourishing  time  of  the  empire  "  Romce  Granarium  " — 
"  the  granary  of  Rome." 

To  the  Romans  it  long  continued  a  province,  taxed, 
squeezed,  impoverished,  oppressed,  exhausted. 

On  the  declension  of  the  Roman  empire  in  the  year 
739  and  the  reign  of  Theodosius  the  Younger,  Sicily 
was  subdued  and  ravaged  by  that  great  conqueror 
Genseric,  King  of  the  Spanish  Vandals.  Under  the 
dominion  of  these  barbarians  Sicily  groaned  for  near  a 
hundred  years ;  after  which  space  it  was  in  the  time  of 
the  Emperor  Justinian  reconquered  by  his  renowned 
General,  Belisarius. 

In  the  year  827  the  Saracens  got  possession  of 
Sicily,  established  themselves  there,  and  maintained 
the  government  of  the  island,  at  least  of  Palermo,  for 
above  two  hundred  years  under  their  Emirs. 

The  Saracens  were  driven  out  by  the  Normans 
under  the  command  of  the  two  brothers  Robert  and 
Roger  Guischard:  the  last  of  these,  called  Roger  the 
Humpbacked,  made  himself  absolute  master  of  Sicily, 
and  took  the  title  of  Earl.  In  the  person  of  his  son,5 
who  succeeded  him,  and  was  for  his  tyranny,  avarice, 
and  cruelties  called  William  the  Bad,  the  ancient  spirit 
of  a  Dionysius  or  an  Agathocles  seemed  to  revive,  as 
if  cruelty  and  oppression  always  attached  to  the  regal 
dignity,  and  that  their  governor  was  always  to  be  their 
oppressor,  and  their  guardian  their  destroyer. 

5  This  is  an  error  :  William  was  son  of  Roger  II.,  King  of  Sicily, 
who  himself  was  grandson  of  Roger  I. 


350  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.          CHAP.  xv_ 

On  the  death  of  William,  the  son  of  this  King,  this 
island,  for  want  of  a  legitimate  son  to  that  Prince,  was 
plunged  again  into  all  the  calamities  and  horrors  of 
civil  contests.  Tancred  the  Bastard  usurped  the 
throne,  and  after  a  short  disturbed  reign  of  three  years 
resigned  his  crown  with  his  life,  leaving  a  son,  who, 
after  having  had  his  eyes  put  out,  died  in  prison. 

To  these  troubles  soon  after  succeeded  those  occa- 
sioned by  Manfred,  natural  son  to  the  Emperor  Fre- 
deric II.,  which  Frederic,  in  right  of  his  mother,  Con- 
stance, daughter  of  William  the  Bad  of  Sicily  and  wife 
to  the  Emperor  Henry  VI.,  died  in  possession  of  this 
island. 

Manfred  smothered  his  father,  the  Emperor  Fre- 
deric, with  a  pillow,  and  poisoned  his  brother  Conrad, 
who  was  the  legitimate  son  of  Frederic,  and  in  pos- 
session of  Sicily — exploits  that  showed  he  had  quali- 
ties which,  in  case  he  made  himself  master  of  Sicily, 
would  prevent  him  deviating  from  the  character  of  a 
true  Sicilian  King.  Under  the  pretence  of  making 
himself  tutor  to  Conradinus,  the  son  of  Conrad,  he 
usurped  the  government,  and  after  a  reign  of  eleven 
years,  almost  as  troublesome  to  himself  as  to  his  sub- 
jects, he  was  slain  in  battle,  after  having  been  excom- 
municated by  Pope  Urban  IV.,  who  was  the  occasion 
of  his  overthrow  by  calling  in  Charles  of  Anjou  to 
depose  him,  which  Charles,  in  prejudice  of  Conradin, 
the  true  heir,  was  by  the  Pope  invested  with  the 
sovereignty  of  Naples  and  Sicily. 

The  daughter  of  the  bastard  and  usurper  Manfred, 
being  married  to  Peter  III.  of  Arragon,  entailed  on 


1734.  HISTORY  OF  SICILY.  351 

Sicily  the  disputes  and  misfortunes  which  her  father 
had  opened  there ;  for  by  this  pretended  right  to  Sicily, 
conveyed  through  Constance,  daughter  of  Manfred, 
to  the  Princes  of  Arragon,  the  successors  of  Charles  of 
Anjou  were  in  perpetual  war  with  the  Arragonians,  till, 
in  the  year  1282,  the  Sicilians  acted  that  bloody  tra- 
gedy called  the  Sicilian  Vespers,  in  which  every 
Frenchman  in  the  island  was  massacred  in  one  night. 
After  this  massacre  the  possession  of  the  island  fell  into 
the  hands  of  the  Spaniards,  who  from  that  time  to  the 
Treaty  of  Utrecht  governed  it  by  viceroys.  At  the 
Treaty  of  Utrecht  in  1713  it  was  given  with  the  title 
of  King  to  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  who  was  crowned  at 
Palermo,  but  kept  the  possession  of  Sicily  only  five 
years.  Philip  V.,  the  present  King  of  Spain,  who  had 
yielded  this  island  with  reluctance  by  treaty,  tried  in 
the  year  1718  to  regain  it  by  force.  How  he  was  pre- 
vented from  making  himself  master  of  it  by  the 
English  fleet,  and  why  and  how  it  was  given  to  the 
Emperor,  is  already  related  in  these  papers. 

The  Germans  from  that  time  to  this  have  behaved 
themselves  there  with  that  insolence,  brutality,  and 
avarice,  so  natural  to  a  proud  fierce  people,  that  the 
Sicilians  were  not  sorry  to  try  again  their  old  masters 
the  Spaniards,  bad  as  they  were  ;  and  at  this  moment 
in  which  I  am  now  writing  Sicily  is  again  the  cause 
and  seat  of  war  between  the  Germans  and  Spaniards, 
the  one  trying  to  maintain  the  possession  of  the  island, 
the  other  to  acquire  it. 

The  rapaciousness  and  cruelty  of  all  these  successive 
plunderers  and  tyrants  made  Sicily  miserably  sensible 
that  in  all  the  changes  of  her  masters  she  was  never  to 


352  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

taste  any  change  in  her  adversity ;  and,  whatever  rota- 
tion there  was  in  the  fortunes  of  her  oppressors,  that 
there  never  was  to  be  any  in  the  fate  of  those  they 
oppressed.  Carthaginians,  Romans,  Vandals,  Saracens, 
French,  Spaniards,  and  Germans,  united  in  demon- 
strating this  melancholy  truth  ;  and,  how  different 
soever  they  were  in  other  respects,  in  this  particular  at 
least  they  all  resembled  one  another. 

But  to  return  from  the  history  of  the  many  misfor- 
tunes of  Sicily  to  that  of  the  present  misfortunes  of  the 
Emperor,  I  must  come  to  relate  that  his  Imperial 
Majesty's  affairs  were  not  under  much  better  manage- 
ment, and  met  with  little  better  success,  in  the  upper 
part  of  Italy  than  they  did  in  the  lower. 

The  blindness,  the  infirmity,  and  incapacity  of 
Count  Merci  had  made  the  Court  of  Vienna  determine 
to  recall  him,  and  send  Count  Konigseg  in  his  stead ; 
but  whilst  Konigseg  was  on  the  road,  Merci  resolved  to 
strike  a  stroke  that  should  either  make  the  Court  of 
Vienna  ashamed  to  disgrace  him,  or  by  which  he 
would  lose  his  life  as  well  as  his  command.  In  short, 
he  called  a  council  of  war,  and  determined,  against  the 
opinion  and  remonstrances  of  all  the  general  officers, 
to  give  battle  to  the  army  of  the  allies.  Prince  Louis 
of  Wirtemberg,  cousin  to  the  Queen  of  England,  was 
the  only  general  officer  who  did  not  oppose  this  under- 
taking, and  he  rather  acquiesced  than  approved.  He 
had  had  a  long  quarrel  with  Merci  ever  since  his  arrival 
in  Italy,  was  but  just  reconciled  to  him,  and  for  fear  of 
being  thought  desirous,  or  at  least  too  ready,  to  open 
again  that  new-healed  wound,  he  rather  avoided  oppo- 
sition than  gave  his  assent.  When  others,  who  were 


1734.  BATTLE  OF  PARMA.  353 

not  in  the  same  difficulties  of  opposing  as  the  Prince  of 
Wirtemberg,  remonstrated  against  the  weakness  of  this 
attempt,  enumerated  the  dangers  that  must  attend  such 
an  undertaking,  and  told  Merci  it  was  running  his  head 
against  a  wall,  Merci's  answer  was,  "  J'aimerais  mieux 
avoir  dix  livres  de  plomb  a  la  tete,  qu'une  livre  de 
chagrin  au  casur:" — "  I  had  rather  have  ten  pounds  of 
lead  in  my  head  than  one  pound  of  sorrow  at  my  heart." 
When  they  urged  the  profusion  of  blood  and  waste  of 
lives  that  this  measure  would  make,  he  said,  "  Generals 
were  accountable  for  their  courage  and  for  their  fidelity, 
but  not  for  blood  or  lives." 

When  the  King  told  this  particular  to  Lord  Hervey, 
he  owned  it  was  very  true  that  the  Emperor  never 
looked  upon  the  loss  of  private  soldiers  as  anything. 
Lord  Hervey  said  it  was  well  for  mankind  that  the 
Emperor's  way  of  reasoning  was  not  more  general ;  and 
that  for  his  part  there  was  not  anybody  he  had  not 
rather  be  than  a  prince  capable  of  thinking  in  that 
manner,  except  it  was  one  of  his  subjects ;  nor  could  he 
comprehend  this  way  of  reasoning,  which  was  no  more 
justifiable  in  point  of  policy  than  it  was  reconcilable 
with  humanity,  since  in  his  opinion  a  king  could  no 
more  look  upon  any  who  lavished  the  lives  of  his  sub- 
jects as  fit  for  a  general,  than  he  could  esteem  one  who 
squandered  his  revenue  proper  for  a  treasurer. 

This  battle  was  fought  [29#A  June]  under  the  walls 
of  Parma,  and  from  Parma  received  its  name. 

Merci  made  a  short  speech  to  his  troops  before  he 
gave  the  word  to  charge,  and  concluded  it  with  telling 
them — "  llfaut  diner  en  Parme  ou  souper  en  Paradis" 
He  promises  them,  too,  in  case  of  victory,  the  plunder 

VOL.  i.  2  A 


354  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

of  Parma  for  three  days.  A  man  who  never  read  the 
particular  account  of  a  battle  without  being  tired  of  it 
must  be  so  improper  an  author  to  relate  one,  that  I 
shall  say  nothing  more  of  this  than  that  it  began  at 
nine  in  the  morning  and  lasted  till  it  was  dark ;  that  it 
was  fought  across  a  narrow  canal  with  great  fury  and 
great  slaughter  on  both  sides;  and  that  the  army  of 
the  allies  was  reckoned  to  have  gained  a  complete 
victory,  though  they  had  no  other  advantage  from  it 
than  the  remaining  masters  of  the  field  of  battle.  The 
loss  of  the  allies  was  computed  to  be  about  7000  men 
and  700  officers ;  that  of  the  Germans  about  the  same 
number,  with  the  death  of  their  General,  Count  Merci, 
who  ordered  himself  to  be  carried  into  the  thickest 
ranks  and  where  the  engagement  was  hottest,  and 
seemed  to  have  no  other  design  in  giving  this  order 
than  gracing  his  exit  with  the  slaughter  of  those  whose 
lives  had  been  committed  to  his  care. 

The  disordered,  precipitate  retreat  of  the  Imperial- 
ists after  the  battle  made  their  defeat  deserve  that  name 
more  than  the  number  of  men  they  lost.  They  left  all 
the  wounded  as  well  as  the  dead  upon  the  field  of 
battle,  and  crossed  four  rivers  in  their  haste  to  run 
from  the  enemy  before  they  stopped,  and  left  [1200] 
men  behind  them  in  Guastalla,  who  were  all  made 
prisoners  of  war  in  a  few  days  after.  The  leaving  the 
wounded  on  the  spot  to  take  care  of  themselves,  it 
seems,  is  the  common  humane  manner  of  the  Austrians 
in  victory  as  well  as  in  defeat ;  and  the  compassionate, 
just  reason  they  give  for  it  is,  the  bad  economy  there 
would  be  in  giving  more  money  to  cure  a  sick  man 
than  is  necessary  to  buy  a  well  one. 


1734.  CAMPAIGN  IN  ITALY.  355 

The  army  of  the  allies  was  commanded  in  this  action 
by  Monsieur  de  Coigny,  and  under  him  Monsieur  de 
Broglio — the  same  who  was  formerly  Ambassador  from 
France  at  the  Court  of  England.  Both  these  Generals 
had  been  just  made  Marshals  of  France  upon  the  death 
of  Marshal  Villars,  who,  upon  a  constant  misunder- 
standing and  perpetual  squabbles  with  the  King  of  Sar- 
dinia, had  been  recalled  from  his  command  of  the  army, 
and  died  on  his  return  home  at  Turin.  He  died  [21st 
June,  cet.  83]  sole  Marshal  of  France,  the  Duke  of 
Berwick  having  been  killed  a  few  days  before  in  the 
trenches  at  the  siege  of  Philipsburg.  When  the  news 
of  the  Duke  of  Berwick's  death  by  a  cannon-ball  was 
brought  to  Marshal  Villars  (then  dying  a  lingering 
death  of  fever,  chagrin,  and  of  a  bloody  flux),  he  said — 
"  Monsieur  de  Berwick  etoit  toujours  heureux :  il  Vest 
autant  dans  sa  mart  qu'il  I1  etoit  dans  sa  vie" 

Though  public  rejoicings  were  ordered  throughout 
all  France  for  this  victory  in  Italy,  yet  it  cost  the  lives 
of  so  many  people  of  condition  that  half  Paris  at  this 
season  was  in  private  mourning ;  all  the  old  women 
weeping  their  husbands  or  their  sons,  and  all  the  young 
ones  a  father,  a  lover,  or  a  brother. 

The  King  of  Sardinia  was  not  present  at  the  battle. 
The  Queen,  who  died  a  few  months  after,  was  then 
ill  at  [Turin].  The  King,  not  expecting  any  im- 
mediate action,  came  thither  to  make  her  a  visit,  and 
returned  to  the  camp  the  day  after  the  action.  The 
conduct  of  Count  Merci  on  this  occasion  was  con- 
demned by  everybody  except  the  Emperor,  who 
naturally,  one  might  have  imagined,  would  have  con- 
demned it  most.  But  when  his  Imperial  Majesty 
heard  his  courtiers  censuring  his  behaviour  as  rash  and 

2  A2 


356  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

injudicious,  he  very  unexpectedly  and  roughly  cut 
them  short  by  saying,  "Lesmorts,  Messieurs,  onttoujours 
tort" 

Monsieur  de  Konigseg,  at  his  arrival  in  Italy,  found 
the  Imperial  army  in  the  most  miserable  condition,  and 
near  17,000  men  wanting  to  complete  the  number  of 
which  it  consisted  when  the  Germans-  took  the  field  at 
the  beginning  of  the  campaign. 

It  was  remarkable  that  he  found  these  two  armies 
just  in  the  same  situation  in  which  they  had  been  in 
1703,  when  he  served  under  Marshal  Staremberg,  and 
the  Duke  of  Yendome  commanded  the  French,  who 
were  then,  as  now,  just  going  to  besiege  Mirandola. 
Not  long  after  Monsieur  de  Konigseg  took  the  com- 
mand of  the  Imperial  army,  the  Germans  again  gave 
battle  to  the  allies.  The  army  of  the  allies  was  en- 
camped in  two  separate  bodies,  and  on  different  sides 
of  a  small  river  called  the  Sechia :  that  body  of  troops 
which  was  encamped  the  nearest  to  the  Imperial  army 
consisted  of  [25  or  30]  battalions  under  the  command 
of  Marshal  Broglio,  whom  Monsieur  de  Konigseg  one 
night  \_l4th  Sept.]  surprised  in  his  quarters  and  entirely 
defeated,  killing  many  of  his  men,  taking  many  pri- 
soners, and  putting  the  rest  to  the  most  confused  flight. 
Their  whole  baggage,  amounting  to  a  great  value,  was 
the  booty  of  the  German  soldiers,  who,  like  the  rest  of 
their  countrymen,  never  slip  any  occasion  to  lay  hold 
of  any  seizable  half-crown.  This  was,  as  some  think, 
the  occasion  of  the  army  of  the  allies  not  being  entirely 
routed ;  for  many  were  of  opinion  that,  had  the  Impe- 
rialists, immediately  after  this  action,  attacked  the 
other  part  of  the  camp  of  the  allies  whilst  the  great 
consternation  spread  throughout  the  troops  by  this 


1734.  MARSHAL  BROGLIO'S  ESCAPE.  '357 

blow  was  fresh  and  unrecovered,  they  might  have  safely 
cut  off  the  whole  of  the  enemy;  but  that,  whilst  the 
German  soldiers  were  plundering,  and  the  Austrian 
General  deliberating,  three  days  elapsed,  and  the 
attack  was  made  [19th  Sept.]  too  late  on  a  recovered 
and  entrenched  enemy.  This  battle,  called  the  Battle 
of  Guastalla,  was  fought  with  great  bravery  and  great 
slaughter  on  both  sides.  In  these  two  actions,  between 
which  there  was,  as  I  have  said,  only  the  space  of  three 
days,  many  officers  of  distinction  were  killed  in  both 
armies,  and  about  8000  men  on  each  side. 

The  Marshal  Broglio's  disgrace  for  having  been  sur- 
prised in  his  quarters,  and  losing,  for  want  of  common 
guard  and  watch,  all  the  men  committed  to  his  care, 
was  not  only  the  subject  of  every  Gazette  in  Europe, 
but  the  topic  of  every  conversation,  and  the  burden  of 
ten  thousand  ballads  that  were  sung  in  all  Paris  and  all 
France  to  ridicule  his  negligent  conduct  and  his  extra- 
ordinary flight,  which  was  made  in  his  shirt  upon  a 
cart-horse,  his  breeches  in  his  hand,  and  his  two  sons 
riding  before  him.  He  was  fast  asleep  when  a  sentinel 
at  the  door  of  his  tent  first  came  in  to  tell  him  the 
Germans  were  in  his  camp ;  and  he  had  just  time  to 
make  his  escape  in  the  manner  which  I  have  described. 
It  was  said,  that,  whilst  he  was  in  the  stable  in  his  shirt 
bridling  his  cart-horse,  he  was  seized  as  a  prisoner  by 
one  of  the  German  soldiers,  who  knew  him  not,  nor  in 
the  least  imagined  this  prize  to  be  a  Marshal  of  France. 
The  Marshal  told  the  German  trooper  he  was  an  under- 
cook  in  Monsieur  de  Broglio's  kitchen,  not  worth  his 
care,  and  begged  his  release  •,  upon  which  the  trooper 
gave  him  a  kick  and  let  him  go. 


358  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

The  Marshal  de  Broglio's  situation  on  this  occasion 
was  just  that  of  Cerialis,  thus  described  by  Tacitus : — 
"  Dux  semisomnus,  ac  prope  intectus,  err  ore  hostium 
servatur,  et  quamquam  periculum  captivitatis  evasisset, 
infamiam  non  vitavit :" — "  The  General,  half  asleep 
and  almost  naked,  was  saved  by  a  mistake  of  the 
enemy;  but  though  he  avoided  the  danger  of  being 
taken  prisoner,  he  did  not  escape  the  infamy  of  his 
own  negligence." 

Thus  went  affairs  in  Italy.  I  must  now  go  back  to 
the  opening  of  the  campaign  on  the  Rhine,  when 
Marshal  Berwick  divided  his  army,  which  consisted 
of  above  100,000  men,  into  two  bodies,  with  one  of 
which  he  besieged  Philipsburg,  and  with  the  other 
(which  was  strongly  entrenched)  he  covered  the  be- 
sieging army. 

As  soon  as  the  auxiliaries  joined  Prince  Eugene,  the 
first  of  which  were  6000  Hanoverians,  he  marched 
towards  Philipsburg  with  his  whole  army,  which  now, 
with  the  Hanoverians,  the  Danes,  the  Prussians,  the 
Suabians,  the  Franconians,  and  other  quotas  furnished 
by  the  Princes  and  Circles  of  the  Empire,  amounted 
nominally  to  about  fourscore  thousand  men.  Both 
armies  continued  for  some  weeks  within  musket-shot  of 
each  other,  during  which  time  all  Europe  expected 
every  day  to  hear  they  were  engaged  in  a  general 
battle,  and  the  whole  world  seemed  to  agree  it  was  im- 
possible they  should  separate  without  an  action — who- 
ever moved  first  running  the  risk  of  being  cut  in  pieces. 
When  Marshal  Berwick's  head  was  shot  off  by  a  ran- 
dom shot  in  the  trenches,  it  was  concluded  that  Prince 
Eugene  would  take  advantage  of  the  consternation 


1734.  SIEGE  OF  PHILIPSBURG.  359 

which  the  loss  of  a  general  always  occasions  in  an 
army  to  attack  the  French  camp;  but  whether  he 
found  it  too  strongly  entrenched  to  venture  such  an 
undertaking,  or  thought  the  Emperor's  affairs  in  such  a 
situation  that  hazarding  a  battle  at  the  gate  of  Ger- 
many was  playing  too  deep,  I  know  not.  Whatever 
his  motive  was,  it  is  certain  he  remained  in  inaction, 
and  had  the  mortification  of  being  forced  to  suffer 
Philipsburg  to  be  taken  in  his  sight,  though  he  had 
promised  the  Governor  to  relieve  him. 

I  know  the  French  did  not  expect  to  have  carried 
their  point  with  so  little  resistance,  Monsieur  Cha- 
vigny,  a  little  before  the  town  surrendered,  having 
shown  me  a  letter  from  Monsieur  de  Belleisle  (who  for- 
merly commanded  at  the  siege  of  Strasburg),  in  which 
I  remember  these  words, — "  Une  mollesse  surprenante 
regne  par  tout  dans  les  troupes  Imperiales,  mais  nous 
ne  pouvons  pas  esperer  que  cette  mollesse  puisse  se  re- 
pandre  a  un  tel  point  que  Monsieur  le  Prince  Eugene 
nous  verraprendre  Philipsbourg,  les  bras  croises" 

On  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Berwick,  Monsieur 
d'Asfeldt  and  Monsieur  de  Noailles  were  created  Mar- 
shals of  France,  and  the  principal  command  of  the 
army  on  the  Rhine  (where  they  both  were)  was  given 
to  the  former. 

Monsieur  Witgenau,  Governor  of  Philipsburg,  be- 
haved extremely  well,  but  the  garrison  infamously  ill, 
there  being  near  4000  men  in  the  place,  with  ammuni- 
tion and  provisions  sufficient  to  have  held  out  a  month 
longer,  when  the  garrison  obliged  the  Governor  to  sur- 
render [\&th  July\,  and  refused  to  strike  another  stroke 
to  defend  the  town,  though  the  walls  of  the  main  body 


360  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

of  the  place  were  still  entire,  and  nothing  but  the  horn 
and  crown  works  and  out-fortifications  yet  taken. 

The  besiegers  were  so  much  inconvenienced  by  the 
overflowings  of  the  Rhine,  so  afflicted  by  sickness,  and 
so  distressed  by  the  scarcity  of  provisions,  that  the 
French  said,  notwithstanding  the  fortitude  and  resolu- 
tion with  which  the  troops  behaved,  in  case  the  town 
had  held  out  a  week  longer,  they  must  have  raised  the 
siege. 

When  the  Prince  of  Conti  complimented  the  Go- 
vernor after  the  capitulation,  as  he  was  marching  out 
of  the  town,  upon  the  brave  defence  he  had  made,  the 
Governor  said,  with  great  civility  to  his  enemies  and 
great  indignation  against  his  own  men,  that,  had  he 
had  Frenchmen  to  command,  the  town  had  been  yet 
untaken. 

The  night  the  news  came  to  England  that  Philips- 
burg  was  taken,  the  Princess  Royal,  as  Lord  Hervey 
was  leading  her  to  her  own  apartment  after  the  draw- 
ing-room, shrugged  up  her  shoulders  and  said,  "  Was 
there  ever  anything  so  unaccountable  as  the  temper  of 
papa?  He  has  been  snapping  and  snubbing  every 
mortal  for  this  week,  because  he  began  to  think  Phi- 
lipsburg  would  be  taken ;  and  this  very  day  that  he 
hears  it  actually  is  taken  he  is  in  as  good  humour  as 
ever  I  saw  him  in  my  life.  Mais,  pour  vous  dire  la 
ve'rite,  je  trouve  cela  si  bizarre,  et  (entre  nous)  si  sot, 
que  f enrage  de  sa  bonne  humeur  encore  plus  que  je  ne 
faisois  de  sa  mauvaise"  "Perhaps,"  answered  Lord 
Hervey,  "  he  may  be  about  Philipsburg  as  David  was 
about  the  child,  who,  whilst  it  was  sick,  fasted,  lay  upon 
the  earth,  and  covered  himself  with  ashes ;  but,  the 


1734.  BOTH  ARMIES  KETREAT.  361 

moment  it  was  dead,  got  up,  shaved  his  beard,  and 
drank  wine."  "  It  may  be  like  David "  (replied  the 
Princess  Royal),  "but  lam  sure  it  is  not  like  Solomon" 

It  was  reported  at  this  time  that  the  Emperor,  not- 
withstanding all  the  disadvantages  under  which  Prince 
Eugene  must  have  forced  the  French  to  an  engagement 
before  Philipsburg,  blamed  him  for  not  doing  it ;  there 
being  at  that  time  a  strong  faction  against  Prince 
Eugene  at  Vienna,  and  this  being  the  way  of  reasoning 
with  which  they  had  possessed  the  Emperor : — That  in 
case  the  Imperialists  could  beat  the  French,  they  might 
march  into  France  and  do  what  they  pleased ;  and  in 
case  they  were  beaten,  that  the  maritime  powers,  who 
as  yet  remained  neuter,  would  be  obliged  to  take  part 
in  his  quarrel.  In  Prince  Eugene's  camp  there  were, 
besides  several  other  great  princes,  the  King  of  Prussia, 
his  eldest  son,  and  the  Prince  of  Orange.  When  the 
last  went  thither  the  Princess  Royal  returned  [29^/i 
June]  to  England. 

After  the  surrender  of  Philipsburg,  the  French 
and  the  Imperialists,  notwithstanding  the  impossi- 
bility insisted  on  by  all  mankind  of  their  parting  with- 
out blows,  separated  very  quietly  by  a  mutual  retreat : 
so  easy  is  it  in  any  situation  for  two  great  armies 
to  find  means  either  to  fight  or  let  it  alone,  when 
each  antagonist  wills  the  same  thing.  The  sickness 
that  raged  in  the  French  camp,  and  the  fatigue  the 
troops  had  undergone  during  the  siege,  made  them 
in  all  probability  ready  enough  to  decline  a  general 
battle ;  and  their  army  being  able,  besides  the  strength 
of  their  entrenchments  before,  to  fortify  themselves  now 
behind,  by  retiring  under  the  cannon  of  Philipsburg, 


362  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  xv. 

made  the  disadvantage  on  which  Prince  Eugene  must 
have  attacked  them  too  great  for  him  to  undertake  it. 
The  same  policy  too  that  made  the  Court  of  Vienna 
desire  a  battle  might  perhaps  induce  the  Court  of 
France  to  avoid  it ;  the  latter  fearing  perhaps  as  much 
as  the  first  wished  to  bring  things  to  such  an  extremity 
as  should  oblige  England  and  Holland  to  take  part  in 
this  squabble,  farther  than  by  their  pacific  good  offices 
to  compose  it. 

Nor  was  it  wonderful  that  Prince  Eugene  should  be 
slow  to  take  any  hints  given  him  from  his  Court  to 
pursue  more  violent  and  more  hazardous  measures; 
since  nothing  could  be  more  natural  than  for  a  man  of 
his  age  and  character  to  fear  bringing  the  one  into 
disgrace,  and  throwing  any  shade  over  the  lustre  of  the 
other.6 

Whilst  these  things  were  doing  on  the  Rhine,  I  must 
now  relate  how  matters  were  carried  on  in  the  North. 
King  Stanislaus,  with  the  Primate,  and  Monti,  the 
French  ambassador,  were  retired  to  Dantzic,  received 
by  the  magistrates  of  that  place,  and  shut  up  there  by  the 
Russians,  who,  after  burning,  pillaging,  and  laying  waste 
every  town  and  field  in  Poland,  marched  to  Dantzic 
under  the  command  of  their  General,  Count  Munich, 
summoned  the  Dantzicers  to  surrender  the  town  and 
give  up  Stanislaus,  and,  upon  their  refusal,  formed  the 
siege  of  that  place. 

The  Dantzicers,  having  taken  money  from  France  to 

6  Prince  Eugene  was  now  seventy-one,  and  the  historians  quote  this 
affair  of  Philipsburg  as  a  proof  that  he  had  no  longer  the  energy  and 
activity  necessary  for  command.  They  add  (which  indeed  is  saying  the 
same  thing  in  other  words)  that  he  was  afraid  of  risking  his  former  repu- 
tation. 


1734.  SIEGE  OF  DANTZIC.  363 

receive  Stanislaus,  and  expecting  succours  from  thence 
every  hour  to  relieve  them,  stood  the  siege  with  great 
firmness,  bravery,  and  resolution  —  the  attack  was 
formed,  and  the  defence  made,  with  equal  vigour  on 
both  sides. 

The  Elector  of  Saxony,  in  the  mean  time,  choosing, 
whilst  the  Muscovites  marched  to  Dantzic,  rather  to  be 
fought  for  than  to  fight,  took  a  short  turn,  and  to  the 
astonishment  of  all  Europe,  left  the  Russian  army  just 
at  this  juncture,  and  went  to  Dresden  to  settle  the 
affairs  of  his  electorate,  which,  as  he  pretended,  required 
his  immediate  presence. 

This  happening  to  be  the  season  too  for  the  fair  of 
Leipsic,  and  his  presence  being  equally  necessary  there, 
his  Electoral  Highness  took  this  opportunity  to  go  and 
partake  of  those  recreations,  and,  whilst  the  Russians 
were  cannonading  and  bombarding  Dantzic  in  his 
cause,  he  was  diverting  himself  with  seeing  harlequin- 
ades and  rope-dancers,  and  buying  snuff-boxes  and 
toothpick-cases  for  the  Polish  ladies  at  the  fair.  By 
which  means,  the  worthy  cause  of  all  this  strife,  who 
had  first,  like  a  fool,  drawn  himself  into  this  quarrel 
when  he  should  have  kept  out  of  it,  now,  like  a  coward, 
drew  himself  out  of  it  when  he  ought  to  have  kept  in 
it,  and  acted  as  much  contrary  to  his  honour  in  not  en- 
deavouring, when  he  was  embarked,  to  maintain  the 
crown  of  Poland,  as  he  had  acted  contrary  to  his  in- 
terest in  ever  attempting  to  acquire  it. 

When  one  sees  the  blood  of  brave  and  honest  fellows 
shed,  and  hears  of  the  lives  of  thousands  devoted  to  the 
foolish  glory  and  mistaken  interest  of  such  princely 
idols,  even  in  this  enlightened  age  of  the  world,  how 


364  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

can  one  be  surprised  if  superstition  and  bigotry  in  the 
earlier  and  darker  ages  of  it  could  induce  Egyptian 
fathers  to  sacrifice  their  sons  to  onions  and  monkeys  ? 
or  how  can  one  have  a  greater  reverence  for  those  who 
are  so  stupidly  loyal  than  for  those  who  were  so  igno- 
rantly  pious  ? 

I  cannot  here  pass  over  in  silence  a  very  gallant 
action  of  Count  Plelo,7  a  man  bred  in  camps,  but  now 
ambassador  from  France  at  the  Court  of  Denmark.  A 
miserable  little  succour  of  about  1800  men  was  sent 
by  France  to  throw  themselves,  if  they  could,  into 
Dantzic;  they  attempted  it,  were  repulsed,  and,  as 
Count  Plelo  thought,  with  too  little  resistance ;  he  there- 
fore undertook  to  rally  them,  put  himself  at  their  head, 
and  marched  first,  showed  them  the  way  to  the  only 
open  entrance  into  the  town,  and  endeavoured  to  ani- 
mate them  by  words  as  well  as  example.  But  whilst 
he  was  exciting  them  to  face  and  brave  the  dangers  that 
opposed  this  attempt  of  entering  the  town,  by  perpe- 
tually crying  out  "  Avancez  I  avancez  /"  he  was  slain  by 
several  wounds,  which  it  is  generally  thought  he  received 
not  from  the  enemy,  but  from  his  own  followers,  who 
were  instigated,  as  it  was  conjectured,  to  this  infamous 
act  by  some  of  their  superiors,  who  had  been  piqued  at 
the  reproaches  of  Count  Plelo,  and  grudged  him  the 
chance  of  gaining  that  reputation  in  renewing  this 
attempt,  which  they  had  lost  by  giving  it  up. 

When  the  King  of  England  related  this  history  of 

7  Louis  Hyppolite  de  Brehan,  Count  de  Plelo,  a  gentleman  of  Brittany, 
though  "  bred  in  camps,"  had  already  attained  a  certain  distinction  in  litera- 
ture by  some  astronomical  tracts,  and  by  eome  light  poetry.  He  was  killed 
at  the  age  of  thirty-five.  The  French  corps,  not  being  able  to  make  their 
way  into  Dantzic,  soon  after  capitulated  to  the  number  of  2700. 


1734.  SURRENDER  OF  DANTZIC.  265 

Count  Plelo  to  his  courtiers  at  Richmond,  he  said, 
with  tears  in  his  eyes,  "  It  was  a  brave  action ;  he  was 
a  fine  fellow.  I  think  a  prince  is  too  happy  who  has 
such  servants."  He  to  whom  his  Majesty  addressed 
this  discourse  replied,  "  I  think,  Sir,  those  subjects  still 
more  happy  who  are  governed  by  a  prince  that  de- 
serves such  servants."  The  King  loved  heroism  and 
flattery  both  so  well,  that  he  seemed  almost  as  much 
pleased  with  the  answer  as  with  the  action. 

Soon  after  this  adventure,  the  fort  of  Wechsel* 
munde,  that  commands  the  mouth  of  the  Vistula,  on 
which  Dantzic  is  situated,  being  taken  by  the  Musco- 
vites [23rd  June\,  all  communication  with  the  town 
from  the  sea  (which  was  the  only  communication  it 
had  long  had)  was  cut  off,  and  Dantzic  at  last,  after  a 
brave  and  obstinate  defence,  was  obliged  to  capitulate 
[7th  July}. 

The  night  before  the  chamade  was  beat,  Stanislaus 
made  his  escape  to  Koningsberg  in  the  habit  of  a  pea- 
sant, and  attended  by  only  one  valet  de  chambre,  leav- 
ing behind  him  a  letter  of  thanks  to  the  magistrates  for 
the  favours  he  had  received  at  their  hands,  and  declar- 
ing in  the  most  pathetic  terms  the  concern  with  which 
he  found  himself  obliged  to  desert  those  whom  no 
hardships,  no  fears,  and  no  threats  had  been  able  to 
prevail  with  to  abandon  him.8 

The  conditions  on  which  the  Russian  General  obliged 
the  Dantzicers  to  surrender  were  very  severe,  with  re- 
gard to  the  vast  sum  he  forced  them  to  pay  towards 

8  There  is  in  the  '  Historical  Register '  for  1736  a  long  and  curious  letter 
from  King  Stanislaus,  giving  an  account  of  his  very  difficult  flight  and  nar- 
row escape. 


366  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

the  expenses  of  the  war  (four  million  rix  dollars),  and 
all  of  them  were  constrained  to  acknowledge  King  Au- 
gustus, and  to  take  an  oath  of  allegiance  to  him  as  their 
lawful  sovereign. 

The  Primate  alone  refused  to  take  the  oath,  and 
was  for  this  refusal  sent  close  prisoner  to  Elbing,  and 
afterwards  to  Thorn,  where  he  persisted,  unterrified  by 
threats  and  un allured  by  promises,  in  constant  fidelity 
to  King  Stanislaus.  His  behaviour  was  great,  and  his 
conduct  uniform.  Monti  was  also  confined  with  the 
Primate,  contrary,  as  the  French  alleged,  to  the  law 
of  nations,  and  in  violation  of  the  sacred  title  of  ambas- 
sador. The  Russians  excused  this  step  by  saying  that 
the  French  had  been  the  aggressors  in  taking  a  frigate 
of  theirs  without  any  previous  declaration  of  war  ;  and 
by  Monti's  acting  in  opposition  to  them. 

Whilst  the  arms  of  France  were  thus  employed  in 
Italy  and  on  the  Rhine,  and  thus  unemployed  at 
Dantzic,  there  were  great  murmurs  throughout  all 
that  kingdom  against  the  Cardinal's  conduct,  and  great 
fault  found  with  the  orders  and  instructions  he  had  given 
in  every  part  of  the  world  where  France  was  concerned. 

In  the  first  place  he  was  extremely  censured  for  per- 
mitting the  Spaniards  to  separate  themselves  in  Italy 
from  the  army  of  the  Allies,  and  suffering  them  to  go 
and  do  their  own  particular  business  in  seating  Don 
Carlos  on  the  throne  of  Naples  before  the  common 
cause  was  served  and  the  Emperor  driven  out  of  the 
upper  part  of  Italy. 

In  the  next  place,  his  instructions  to  the  generals  on 
the  Rhine  were  no  better  approved  than  his  passive 
conduct  with  regard  to  the  separation  of  the  Spaniards 


1734.  POLICY  OF  CARDINAL  FLEURY.  367 

in  Italy.  Everybody  could  see  and  blame  the  error  of 
not  suffering  Prince  Eugene  to  be  attacked  before  the 
auxiliaries  joined  him,  when  he  had  only  an  army  of 
22,000  men ;  and  people  equally  condemned  his  order- 
ing the  useless  siege  of  Philipsburg  to  be  undertaken, 
instead  of  this  stroke,  which,  as  the  French  said,  would 
have  put  them  into  a  condition  of  making  what  irrup- 
tions they  pleased  into  the  empire,  or  of  putting  an 
honourable  and  immediate  end  to  the  war,  and  making 
peace  with  the  Emperor  on  what  terms  they  thought 
lit. 

The  Cardinal  was  likewise  reproached  with  giving 
up  the  honour  of  France  in  the  most  essential  point  by 
sending  no  succours  to  Dantzic.  There  was  nobody  in 
Paris  who  did  not  descant  on  the  infamy  it  brought 
upon  the  King  to  suffer  his  father-in-law  to  be  so  aban- 
doned and  exposed ;  and  how  little  justice  or  gratitude 
there  was,  in  permitting  those  who  had  so  hospitably 
received  and  so  bravely  defended  him  to  be  given  up 
to  the  resentment  of  the  common  enemy.  They 
further  added,  that  France  must  rather  incur  ridicule 
than  acquire  glory  by  sending  her  forces,  like  so  many 
Don  Quixotes,  to  make  conquests  and  gain  kingdoms 
for  other  princes,  whilst  the  father  of  their  own  Queen 
was  hunted  out  of  his ;  and  the  chief  cause  of  the  war 
so  ill  prosecuted  and  maintained,  that  the  only  point 
France  pretended  originally  to  have  in  view,  or  in 
which  she  was  really  concerned,  was  given  up  and 
carried  against  her. 

The  Cardinal  excused  himself,  with  regard  to  Italy, 
by  saying  he  had  protested  against  the  separation  of 
the  Spaniards,  but  had  not  been  able  to  prevent  it. 


368  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

The  Queen  of  Spain  was  so  bent  on  that  expedition 
for  her  son,  that  his  Eminence  said  there  was  no 
middle  way  for  him  to  take ;  he  was  obliged  either  to 
consent  to  the  attack  of  Naples,  or  to  dissolve  the 
triple  alliance.  As  to  the  neglect  of  giving  battle  to 
Prince  Eugene  when  he  was  at  the  head  of  only 
22,000  men,  the  Cardinal  said  he  had  never  desired  to 
push  this  war  to  extremities,  nor  to  do  anything  that 
should  look  as  if  the  ruin  of  the  empire,  or  enlarging 
the  dominions  of  France,  was  designed ;  all  he  desired 
was  to  humble  the  pride  of  the  Court  of  Vienna  and 
the  House  of  Austria,  and  to  do  justice  to  the  insulted 
honour  of  his  master  in  maintaining  the  rights  of  the 
King  his  father-in-law. 

This  made  people  say  that  the  scheme  of  his  Emi- 
nence then  was  to  put  France  to  the  expense  of  armies 
without  allowing  them  the  liberty  to  fight;  and  that, 
according  to  this  way  of  reasoning,  he  was  so  pacifically 
and  charitably  inclined,  that  he  was  as  much  afraid  of 
hurting  his  enemies  as  his  friends,  and  more  appre- 
hensive of  giving  too  much  annoyance  to  the  first  than 
procuring  too  little  benefit  to  the  last. 

But  most  people  imagined  the  Cardinal's  reason  at 
this  time  for  acting  as  he  did  was  (as  I  have  already 
mentioned)  the  fear  of  bearing  so  hard  on  the  Emperor 
as  might  alarm  England  and  Holland,  and  induce 
those  two  powers,  who  were  now  mediators  for  peace, 
to  make  themselves  parties  in  the  war.  It  was  cer- 
tainly no  oversight  in  the  French  councils  that  pre- 
vented Prince  Eugene  being  attacked ;  the  Duke  of 
Berwick  having  made  the  proposal  to  the  Cardinal, 
and  the  Cardinal,  at  the  same  time  that  he  rejected  it, 


1734.  POLICY  OF  CARDINAL  FLEURY.  369 

making  a  merit  to  the  ministers  of  England  and  Hol- 
land of  his  moderation  in  so  doing. 

But  that  which  was  most  of  all  cried  out  against  was 
the  sending  no  succours  to  Dantzic ;  and  as  the  Car- 
dinal in  his  justification  could  not  publicly  give  the  real 
reasons  for  this  seeming  negligence  and  dishonourable 
omission,  he  was  forced  to  stand  all  the  irksome  re- 
proach of  it  in  a  patient  and  passive  silence. 

The  true  state  of  this  case,  I  believe,  was,  though 
France  had  at  this  time  a  fleet  of  about  ninety  sail 
riding  in  the  Channel,  ready  to  convey  troops  to  Dantzic, 
yet,  the  English  lying  at  the  same  time  in  the  Downs  in 
sight  of  the  French  coasts,  the  Cardinal  did  not  dare 
to  leave  the  shores  of  France  naked,  for  fear  the  Eng- 
lish, who  were  then  offering  their  mediation  to  adjust 
the  disputes  of  Europe,  might  have  taken  that  oppor- 
tunity to  oblige  France  to  accept  of  what  terms  of 
accommodation  they  thought  proper,  by  threatening,  in 
case  France  refused  to  comply,  to  make  a  descent  into 
their  country  on  the  west,  whilst  all  their  forces  were 
employed  in  the  east  and  the  south,  and  their  fleet 
sailed  into  the  north.9 

Some  people  imagined  that  Spain  had  at  present  so 
great  an  influence  on  the  councils  of  France,  that  she 
insisted  on  the  French  fleet  continuing  where  it  was  to 


9  This  conjecture  is  altogether  improbable— indeed  almost  absurd  :  there 
was  no  colour  of  danger  from  England ;  nor  was  it  necessary  to  have  sent 
ninety  sail  to  convey  succours  to  Dantzic.  A  better  reason  would  have  been, 
that  the  holding  out  of  Dantzic  would  have  cost  money  and  lives,  without 
any  change  in  the  ultimate  result  of  the  contest  except,  perhaps,  a  little  more 
discredit ;  and,  after  all,  2700  men  would  have  been  no  inconsiderable  rein- 
forcement to  a  garrison  ;  but  Lord  Hervey,  who  had  hoped  so  sanguinely 
for  Stanislaus's  success,  seems  to  have  been  personally  piqued  at  his  failure, 
and  to  have  looked  at  the  whole  affair  with  a  prejudiced  eye. 
VOL.  I.  2B 


370  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

keep  the  English  in  awe,  and  prevent  our  fleet  sailing 
to  the  Mediterranean ;  the  Spaniards  still  remembering 
the  year  eighteen,  when  they  had  then,  as  now,  a  de- 
sign of  invading  Sicily,  and  were  defeated  in  that 
design  by  the  interposition  of  Lord  Torrington.  It 
was  said,  the  Spaniards  feared  the  same  game  might  be 
played  over  again,  and  therefore  pressed  France  to 
keep  this  check  upon  England  at  home,  that  England 
might  be  none  upon  them  in  the  Mediterranean. 

This  I  give  only  as  conjecture,  for,  whether  it  was 
the  fears  of  Spain  for  the  success  of  their  intended 
expedition  to  Sicily,  or  the  apprehensions  of  France  in 
leaving  their  own  coasts  defenceless,  or  both  combined, 
that  prevented  the  French  fleet  from  sailing  to  the 
relief  of  Dantzic,  was  never  certainly,  or  at  least  pub- 
licly and  generally,  known. 

During  these  transactions  abroad,  the  King  was  in 
the  utmost  anxiety  at  home.  The  battles  of  Bitonto 
and  Parma,  the  surrender  of  Philipsburg,  and  the  bad 
situation  of  the  Emperor's  affairs  in  every  quarter, 
gave  his  Majesty  the  utmost  solicitude  to  exert  himself 
in  the  defence  of  the  House  of  Austria,  and  to  put 
some  stop  to  the  rapid  triumphs  of  the  House  of  Bour- 
bon. For  though  the  King  was  ready  to  allow  all  the 
personal  faults  of  the  Emperor,  and  was  not  without 
resentment  for  the  treatment  he  himself  had  met  with 
from  the  Court  of  Vienna,  yet  his  hatred  to  the  French 
was  so  strong,  and  his  leaning  to  an  Imperial  cause  so 
prevalent,  that  he  could  not  help  wishing  to  distress 
the  one  and  support  the  other,  in  spite  of  all  inferior, 
collateral,  or  personal  considerations. 

In  all  occurrences  he  could  not  help  remembering  that, 


1734.  THE  KING  EAGER  FOR  WAR.  371 

as  Elector  of  Hanover,  he  was  a  part  of  the  Empire,  and 
the  Emperor  at  the  head  of  it;  and  these  prejudices, 
operating  in  every  consideration  where  his  interest  as 
King  of  England  ought  only  to  have  been  weighed,  gave 
his  Minister,  who  consulted  only  the  interest  of  Eng- 
land, perpetual  difficulties  to  surmount,  whenever  he 
was  persuading  his  Majesty  to  adhere  solely  to  that. 

The  King's  love  for  armies,  his  contempt  for  civil 
affairs,  and  the  great  capacity  he  thought  he  possessed 
for  military  exploits,  inclined  him  still  with  greater 
violence  to  be  meddling,  and  warped  him  yet  more  to 
the  side  of  war.  He  used  almost  daily  and  hourly, 
during  the  beginning  of  this  summer,  to  be  telling  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  with  what  eagerness  he  glowed  to  pull 
the  laurels  from  the  brows  of  the  French  generals, 
to  bind  his  own  temples ;  that  it  was  with  the  sword 
alone  he  desired  to  keep  the  balance  of  Europe ;  that 
war  and  action  were  his  sole  pleasures ;  that  age  was 
coming  fast  upon  him ;  and  that,  if  he  lost  the  oppor- 
tunity of  this  bustle,  no  other  occasion  possibly  might 
offer  in  which  he  should  be  able  to  distinguish  himself, 
or  gather  those  glories  which  were  now  ready  at  his 
hand.  He  could  not  bear,  he  said,  the  thought  of  grow- 
ing old  in  peace,  and  rusting  in  the  cabinet,  whilst  other 
princes  were  busied  in  war  and  shining  in  the  field ; 
but  what  provoked  him  most  of  all,  he  confessed,  was 
to  reflect  that,  whilst  he  was  only  busied  in  treaties, 
letters,  and  despatches,  his  booby  brother,  the  brutal 
and  cowardly  King  of  Prussia,10  should  pass  his  time  in 
camps,  and  in  the  midst  of  arms,  neither  desirous  of  the 

10  See  ante,  p.  127. 

2  B2 


372  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

glory  nor  fit  for  the  employment ;  whilst  he,  who  coveted 
the  one  and  was  trained  for  the  other,  was,  for  cold 
prudential  reasons,  debarred  the  pleasure  of  indulging 
his  inclination,  and  deprived  of  the  advantage  of  show- 
ing his  abilities. 

This  was  the  language  he  perpetually  held,  and  in 
this  manner  was  he  for  ever  declaiming  to  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  whilst  all  private  business  and  domestic  affairs 
were  at  a  full  stand,  and  no  answer  to  be  got  from  him 
to  the  solicitation  of  any  person  whatsoever.  When- 
ever Sir  Robert  Walpole,  with  the  business  of  twenty 
different  people  taken  down  in  abridgment  upon  his 
paper  of  notes,  went  into  the  King's  closet  to  speak  to 
him  on  those  heads,  the  King  always  began  to  harangue 
on  the  military  topic,  and,  after  a  declamation  of  about 
an  hour  long,  dismissed  Sir  Robert  without  one  of  the 
things  settled  on  which  he  came  prepared  to  speak,  and 
often  without  giving  him  opportunity  barely  to  men- 
tion them.11 

This  conduct  bore  every  way  hard  upon  Sir  Robert 
Walpole — in  the  first  place,  as  it  pressed  him  so  close 
to  come  into  the  measure  of  war,  which  he  was  deter- 
mined to  keep  out  of;  and  in  the  next,  as  it  forced 
him  to  find  repeated  excuses  to  put  people  off  who  were 
every  day  teazing  him  for  answers  to  their  solicitations ; 
for,  as  everybody  is  anxious  in  their  own  case,  and  all 
imagined  that  decision  depended  entirely  on  Sir 
Robert's  will,  so  whatever  pains  they  felt  from  suspense 


11  All  the  ministers  of  George  II. 's  great-grandson,  George  IV.,  could 
bear  witness  to  the  adroitness  and  success  with  which  he  so  turned  conversa- 
tions as  to  prevent  their  entering  on  any  subject  disagreeable  to  him,  which, 
with  a  wonderful  sagacity,  he  used  to  foresee. 


1734.  THE  QUEEN  WISHES  FOR  WAR.  3/3 

were  placed  to  his  account.  The  hopes  he  gave  and 
the  promises  he  made  them  were  looked  upon  as  minis- 
terial arts  to  palliate  delay,  and  whatever  failed  or  was 
postponed  from  his  want  of  power  to  prevent  it  was  im- 
puted to  him  as  the  effect  of  negligence  or  insincerity. 
But  the  circumstance  that  gave  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
the  most  trouble  of  all  was  that  with  regard  to  the  war 
he  found  the  Queen  as  unmanageable  and  opinionated 
as  the  King.  There  are  local  prejudices  in  all  people's 
composition,  imbibed  from  the  place  of  their  birth,  the 
seat  of  their  education,  and  the  residence  of  their  youth, 
that  are  hardly  ever  quite  eradicated,  and  operate  much 
stronger  than  those  who  are  influenced  by  them  are 
apt  to  imagine ;  and  the  Queen,  with  all  her  good 
sense,  was  actuated  by  these  prejudices  in  a  degree 
nothing  short  of  that  in  which  they  biassed  the  King. 
Wherever  the  interest  of  Germany  and  the  honour  of 
the  Empire  were  concerned,  her  thoughts  and  reasonings 
were  often  as  German  and  Imperial  as  if  England  had 
been  out  of  the  question  ;  and  there  were  few  incon- 
veniences and  dangers  to  which  she  would  not  have 
exposed  this  country  rather  than  give  occasion  to  its 
being  said  that  the  Empire  suffered  affronts  unretorted, 
and  the  House  of  Austria  injuries  unrevenged,  whilst 
she,  a  German  by  birth,  sat  upon  this  throne  an  idle 
spectatress,  able  to  assist  and  not  willing  to  interpose. 

Besides  her  natural  propensity  to  the  interest  of 
Germany,  she  was  constantly  plied  on  this  side  of  the 
question,  and  warmed  as  fast  as  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
cooled  her,  by  one  Hatolf,  the  King's  sole  minister  in 
England  for  the  affairs  of  his  Electorate — a  clear- 
sighted, artful  fellow,  who  was  devoted  to  the  interest 


374  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

of  Germany  and  the  Court  of  Vienna,  and  had  more 
weight  with  the  Queen  next  to  Sir  Robert  than  any  man 
that  had  access  to  her.  He  was  a  man  of  great  temper, 
and  could  reason  with  decency;  and  yet  was  full  as  hard 
to  be  either  convinced  or  persuaded  as  his  master. 

The  Queen,  tired  of  going  between  this  man  and 
Sir  Robert  Walpole  to  report  and  interpret,  and  not 
being  so  much  mistress  of  their  arguments  in  detail, 
made  Monsieur  Hatolf  put  his  system  of  politics  and 
his  plan  for  the  conduct  of  England  at  this  juncture 
into  writing.  In  this  paper,  though  the  substance  of  it 
was  little  better  than  treating  England  as  a  province 
to  the  Empire,  yet  he  reasoned  so  artfully  and  so  con- 
formably to  the  Queen's  sentiments  and  inclination, 
gave  up  the  interest  of  this  country  so  plausibly,  and 
argued  so  strongly  for  the  Emperor  on  the  foot  of 
preserving  the  balance  of  Europe,  that  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  told  Lord  Hervey  he  never  saw  any  memorial 
better  drawn,  or  more  dexterously  calculated,  by  im- 
proving the  Queen's  partiality  and  piquing  her  pride, 
to  carry  the  point  he  was  labouring  to  bring  about. 

Hatolf  set  forth  in  the  most  formidable  colours  the 
growing  power  of  France  and  the  House  of  Bourbon ; 
he  said  all  the  reasons  that  induced  this  country  to 
engage  in  King  William's  and  Queen  Anne's  war  ought 
to  operate  much  stronger  now,  as  France  was  more 
powerful  and  in  better  circumstances,  and  that,  this 
nation  having  so  cheerfully  come  into  those  wars,  he 
could  not  conceive  why  Sir  Robert  Walpole  should 
imagine  people  would  reason  so  differently  now.  He 
insisted  upon  it  that  without  help  from  England  the 
Empire  was  absolutely  at  the  mercy  of  France ;  and 


1734.  ARGUMENTS  FOR  PEACE  AND  WAR.  375 

though  the  lenity  or  indolence  of  the  Cardinal  had 
prevented  France  from  the  exertion  of  her  power,  yet, 
as  the  Cardinal  was  above  fourscore  years  of  age,  his 
life  was  but  a  bad  tenure  for  the  balance  of  Europe, 
and  that  a  more  active  successor  would  quickly  prove 
how  fatally  we  had  neglected  to  oppose  what  might 
then  be  too  strong  for  us  to  stop. 

This  paper,  written  in  French,  the  Queen  gave  to 
Sir  Robert  Walpole,  ordering  him  to  consider  it  and 
give  her  his  answer  to  it  in  English.  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  answered  it  paragraph  by  paragraph,12  and  in 
this  answer  had  an  opportunity  of  methodizing,  reca- 
pitulating, and  enforcing  every  argument  he  had  before 
made  use  of  either  to  the  King  or  the  Queen  to  deter 
them  from  following  their  inclination  and  taking  part 
in  this  war. 

When  Sir  Robert  Walpole  gave  Lord  Hervey  an 
account  of  these  two  papers,  he  said  he  had  at  the  same 
time  told  the  Queen  that  she  knew  it  had  been  always 
his  opinion  ever  since  this  quarrel  began  in  Europe 
that  England  ought  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  it  but 
to  compose  it ;  that  if  it  continued  and  England  took 
any  part  in  it,  her  crown  would  at  last  as  surely 
come  to  be  fought  for 13  as  the  crown  of  Poland ;  and 

12  See  in  Coxe's  Appendix  several  papers  of  Sir  Robert's  own  in  de- 
fence of  his  policy. 

is  Sir  Robert  more  than  once  warned  George  II.  that  his  British  crown 
would  be  fought  for  on  British  ground — a  prophecy  fulfilled  a  few  months 
after  his  death  in  1745.  Posterity  is  pretty  well  agreed  in  approving 
the  peaceable  policy  pursued  by  Walpole,  and  advocated  by  Lord  Hervey, 
under  the  then  circumstances ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  admitted 
that  the  acquisition  of  Lorraine  by  France  disturbed  the  balance  of  Europe 
to  a  degree  that  Europe  never  has  recovered  ;  and,  as  a  general  question,  it 
cannot  be  doubted  that  Austria  is  a  natural  ally  of  England,  because  France 
has  been,  and  always  must  be,  the  most  formidable  enemy  to  both. 


376  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

then  bade  her  judge  and  determine  whether  the  Em- 
peror in  justice  or  in  policy  ought  to  receive  that 
support  from  her  that  she  seemed  so  desirous  to  give 
him. 

Lord  Hervey  approved  of  everything  Sir  Robert 
had  written,  but  still  more  of  what  he  had  said,  and 
told  him  his  last  argument,  in  his  opinion,  was  much 
the  most  likely  to  prevail ;  for,  notwithstanding  her 
partiality  to  the  Empire,  "  if  I  know  anything  of  her 
Majesty,  the  shadow  of  the  Pretender  will  beat  the 
whole  Germanic  body." 

Sir  Robert  said  it  was  true,  and  that  he  had  always 
recourse  to  that  argument  whenever  he  found  his  others 
make  less  impression  than  he  wished.  This  great 
minister,  besides  the  interest  of  England  (which  I 
think  he  had  sincerely  at  heart),  was  induced  by  some 
personal  considerations  to  stick  firm  to  the  point  of 
keeping  this  nation  out  of  the  war  if  possible.  In  the 
first  place,  to  avoid  the  unpopularity  of  advising  war 
and  creating  new  clamour  against  his  Administration ; 
in  the  next,  he  knew  the  ungrateful  task  of  raising 
money  to  support  war  would  all  fall  to  his  share ;  and 
added  to  this,  I  believe  he  was  not  without  apprehen- 
sion that  more  military  business  might  throw  the  power 
he  now  possessed  into  the  hands  of  military  men. 
Whatever  his  reasons  and  motives  were,  it  is  certain 
he  was  always  counsel  on  the  side  of  peace ;  and  though 
he  pleaded  that  cause  singly  against  the  King,  the 
Queen,  and  all  about  them,  hitherto  he  carried  his 
point  and  kept  things  quiet.  The  Duke  of  Newcastle, 
who  always  talked  as  his  master  talked,  echoed  back 
all  the  big  words  his  Majesty  uttered,  and  expatiated 


1734.  OPINIONS  OF  THE  CABINET.  377 

for  ever  on  regaining  Italy  for  the  Emperor,  chas- 
tising Spain,  and  humbling  the  impertinent  pride  of 
France.  His  Grace's  predominant  sensation  was  fear ; 
and  though  the  moment  the  war  had  been  declared  all 
the  difficulties  appendent  to  that  measure  would  have 
kept  him  in  incessant  panics,  yet,  the  fear  of  contra- 
dicting the  King  being  the  present  fear,  and  the 
present  fear  in  all  weak  minds  getting  the  better  of 
every  other,  he  promoted  that  from  timidity  which,  had 
he  had  foresight  sufficient  to  discern  consequences, 
the  same  motive  would  have  made  him  the  first  to 
oppose. 

The  Duke  of  Grafton,  who  loved  making  his  court 
as  well  as  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  talked  in  the  same 
strain  and  for  the  same  reasons,  but  could  never  make 
any  great  compliment  to  the  King  and  Queen  of  em- 
bracing their  opinion,  as  he  never  understood  things 
enough  to  have  one  of  his  own  to  sacrifice,  and  was 
rather  obliged  to  them  for  giving  him  the  appearance 
of  an  opinion,  when  without  that  assistance  he  would 
have  been  as  much  at  a  loss  what  to  say  as  what  to 
think. 

Lord  Grantham  was  a  degree  still  lower,  and  had 
the  animal  gift  of  reasoning  in  so  small  a  proportion 
that  his  existence  was  barely  distinguished  from  a  ve- 
getable. His  Lordship  never  got  further  upon  this 
chapter  than  to  declare  and  often  to  repeat,  in  very 
bad  English,  "  I  hate  the  French,  and  I  hope  as  we 
shall  beat  the  French."  Mr.  Poyntz,  Governor  to  the 
Duke,14  a  man  of  learning,  of  sense,  and  of  reputation, 


14  The  Right  Honourable  Stephen  Poyntz  had  been  one  of  the  ministers 
to  the  Congress  at  Soissons. 


378  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

was  another  who  helped  to  strengthen  her  Majesty  in 
this  way  of  thinking ;  but  whether  he  spoke  his  opinion 
or  only  aimed  at  making  his  court  I  know  not — Sir 
Robert  Walpole  thought  the  first,  I  thought  the  last. 

Lord  Harrington,  who  with  all  his  seeming  phlegm 
was  as  tenacious  of  an  opinion  when  his  indolence 
would  suffer  him  to  form  one  as  any  man  living,  leaned 
strongly  to  the  side  of  war ;  but  his  credit  at  Court  ran 
very  low,  and  little  deference  was  ever  paid  to  his 
sentiments  either  by  the  King  or  Queen  but  when  they 
tallied  with  their  own,  and  in  that  case  their  Majesties 
would  sometimes  seem  to  do  what  I  fear  is  too  common 
with  all  mankind,  which  is  to  flatter  ourselves  that  we 
show  some  regard  to  the  judgment  of  others,  when  in 
reality  we  only  pay  it  to  the  rebound  of  our  own. 

Lord  Harrington's  understanding  had  very  odd  luck 
in  the  world,  for  it  was  as  much  underrated  after  he 
came  to  be  Secretary  of  State  as  it  had  been  overrated 
before.  The  public  seemed  to  be  stating  a  sort  of 
account  debtor  and  creditor  to  his  capacity,  and  to  be 
determined  to  take  from  it  now  in  the  same  proportion 
that  it  had  added  to  it  formerly.  His  parts  in  reality 
were  of  the  common  run  of  mankind.  He  was  well 
bred,  a  man  of  honour,  and  fortunate,  loved  pleasure, 
and  was  infinitely  lazy.  The  Queen  once  in  speaking 
of  him  said,  "  There  is  a  heavy  insipid  sloth  in  that 
man  that  puts  me  out  of  all  patience.  He  must  have 
six  hours  to  dress,  six  more  to  dine,  six  more  for  his 
mistress,  and  six  more  to  sleep,  and  there,  for  a  minis- 
ter, are  the  four-and-twenty  admirably  well  disposed  of; 
and  if  now  and  then  he  borrows  six  of  those  hours  to 
do  anything  relating  to  his  office,  it  is  for  something 


1734. 


LORD  HARRINGTON.  379 


that  might  be  done  in  six  minutes  and  ought  to  have 
been  done  six  days  before." 

Horace  Walpole  was,  for  the  reasons  I  have  before 
mentioned,  as  much  for  war  as  his  brother  was  against 
it,  and  was  as  busy  in  Holland  to  make  the  Dutch  act 
against  their  interest  as  he  was  ready  at  home  to  sacri- 
fice ours ;  but  happily  for  this  country  he  succeeded  no 
better  than  he  judged. 

It  is  no  great  matter  what  posterity  thinks  or  says  of 
one,  but  if  it  were  I  would  pay  less  deference  to  truth 
and  more  to  my  own  reputation  in  the  characters  I 
give  of  people,  since  no  one  who  did  not  live  in  these 
times  will,  I  dare  say,  believe  but  some  of  those  I 
describe  in  these  papers  must  have  had  some  hard  fea- 
tures and  deformities  exaggerated  and  heightened  by 
the  malice  and  ill-nature  of  the  painter  who  drew  them. 
Others  perhaps  will  say  that  at  least  no  painter  is 
obliged  to  draw  every  wart  or  wen  or  hump-back  in 
its  full  proportion,  and  that  I  might  have  softened 
these  blemishes  where  I  found  them.  But  I  am  deter- 
mined to  report  everything  just  as  it  is,  or  at  least  just 
as  it  appears  to  me ;  and  those  who  have  a  curiosity 
to  see  courts  and  courtiers  dissected  must  bear  with  the 
dirt  they  find  in  laying  open  such  minds  with  as  little 
nicety  and  as  much  patience  as  in  a  dissection  of  their 
bodies,  if  they  wanted  to  see  that  operation,  they  must 
submit  to  the  disgust. 

Count  Kinski,  the  Emperor's  Ambassador  at  this 
Court  (who  possessed  the  two  Imperial  characteristics 
of  dulness  and  pride  in  the  supreme  degree),  notwith- 
standing the  distress  his  master's  affairs  were  in,  was  as 
refractory  when  anything  was  asked  of  him,  and  as 


380  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XV. 

peremptory  when  he  demanded  anything  of  anybody 
else,  as  he  could  have  been  had  the  Emperor  gained  as 
many  victories  as  he  had  suffered  defeats.  The  Queen, 
as  he  was  riding  by  her  chaise  one  day  at  a  stag-chase, 
reproached  him  with  this  stiffness,  and  said  people 
when  they  wanted  anything  mightily  should  only  think 
of  the  means  to  obtain  it.  This  was  said  with  regard 
to  the  haughty  and  impertinent  manner  in  which  the 
Emperor  asked,  or  rather  expected,  at  this  time  the 
assistance  of  the  Dutch.  "  If  a  handkerchief  lay  before 
me,"  said  the  Queen,  "  and  I  felt  I  had  a  dirty  nose, 
my  good  Count  Kinski,  do  you  think  I  should  beckon 
the  handkerchief  to  come  to  me,  or  stoop  to  take 
it  up?" 

Kinski  was  at  this  time  so  exasperated  against  Sir 
Robert  Walpole,  to  whose  counsels  and  power  he 
thought  it  was  owing  that  the  Emperor  was  unassisted, 
that  he  would  hardly  pay  him  the  common  civility  of 
a  bow ;  and  every  letter  that  he  wrote  to  Vienna  that 
was  intercepted  by  the  Government  here  was  found  as 
full  of  invectives  against  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  conduct 
as  any  of  the  '  Craftsmen? 

The  reason  of  this  was  that  the  King,  loving  to  make 
a  figure  to  others  by  adopting  those  things  for  his  own 
that  had  been  said  to  him  with  weight,  used  to  talk  of 
the  Emperor's  absurd  conduct  to  Kinski  in  the  draw- 
ing-room in  German,  in  the  very  same  strain  that  Sir 
Robert  had  talked  of  it  to  him  in  English  in  the  closet ; 
and  this  being  a  style  so  very  different  from  the  lan- 
guage the  King  had  held  some  months  ago,  Kinski 
had  just  sense  enough  to  discern  who  must  have 
wrought  this  change,  and  abused  Sir  Robert  for  it  as 


1734.  PEACE  PRESERVED.  381 

violently  as  he  hated  him.  This  made  Sir  Robert 
odious  at  Vienna,  but  it  had  so  little  effect  here  that  bv 
the  latter  end  of  this  summer  Sir  Robert  had  brought 
the  King  so  much  into  his  way  of  thinking  that  the 
King  one  day  said  to  him,  "  I  have  followed  your  ad- 
vice, Walpole,  in  keeping  quiet,  contrary  often  to  my 
own  opinion,  and  sometimes  I  have  thought  contrary 
even  to  my  honour ;  but  I  am  convinced  you  advised 
me  well :  the  overtures  of  friendship  that  are  now 
made  to  me  by  every  party  in  this  formidable  alliance, 
and  the  solicitations  I  receive  from  all  quarters  to 
mediate  in  the  present  disputes,  show  me  plainly  that 
hitherto  we  are  right,  and  I  acknowledge  it  is  all  en- 
tirely owing  to  your  judgment  and  prudence  that  we 
are  so." 

Whether  this  was  said  quite  so  strongly  as  I  relate 
it  I  doubt,  it  being  so  very  unlike  the  King's  style  on 
other  occasions  ;  but  I  relate  it  literally  as  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  related  it  to  me. 


382  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVI. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

Increased  Favour  of  Lord  Hervey — Addresses  a  Political  Letter  to  the 
Queen — Mission  of  M.  Wasner — Extraordinary  History  and  Proceed- 
ings of  Strickland,  Bishop  of  Namur — Lord  Hervey's  Conference  with 
Sir  Robert  Walpole — Walpole's  Management  of  the  King  and  Queen — 
Apology  for  Egotism — Sir  R.  Walpole's  System  of  Government. 

LORD  HERVEY  was  this  summer  in  greater  favour  with 
the  Queen,  and  consequently  with  the  King,  than  ever ; 
they  told  him  everything,  and  talked  of  everything 
before  him.  The  Queen  sent  for  him  every  morning 
as  soon  as  the  King  went  from  her,  and  kept  him, 
while  she  breakfasted,  till  the  King  returned,  which 
was  generally  an  hour  and  a  half  at  least.  By  her 
interest,  too,  she  got  the  King  to  add  a  thousand 
pounds  a-year  to  his  salary,  which  was  a  new  subject 
for  complaint  to  the  Prince.  She  gave  him  a  hunter ; 
and  on  hunting-days  he  never  stirred  from  her  chaise. 
She  called  him  always  her  "child,  her  pupil,  and  her 
charge ;"  used  to  tell  him  perpetually  that  his  being  so 
impertinent  and  daring  to  contradict  her  so  conti- 
nually, was  owing  to  his  knowing  she  could  not  live 
without  him ;  and  often  said,  "  It  is  well  I  am  so  old, 
or  I  should  be  talked  of  for  this  creature." 

Lord  Hervey   made  prodigious  court  to  her,    and 
really  loved  and  admired  her.2     He  gave  up  his  sole 


1  The  Queen  was  fourteen  years  older  than  Lord  Hervey. 

2  It  seems  that  he  really  did.    There  are  private  letters  of  his,  long  after 
her  death,  that  prove  the*sincerity  of  his  affection  and  admiration. 


1734.  LORD  HERVEY'S  LETTER  TO  THE  QUEEN.  383 

time  to  her  disposal ;  and  always  told  her  he  devoted 
it  in  winter  to  her  business,3  and  in  summer  to  her 
amusement.  But,  in  the  great  debate  at  present  on 
the  affairs  of  Europe,  and  the  part  this  country  ought 
to  act  with  regard  to  peace  and  war,  Lord  Hervey 
differed  with  her  Majesty  in  opinion  toto  ccelo ;  and,  in 
speaking  that  opinion  to  her  too  freely,  often  met  with 
very  short  and  very  rough  answers.  One  hunting-day, 
particularly,  he  found  the  Queen,  after  a  long  dispute  on 
this  subject  by  the  side  of  her  chaise,  so  much  dissatis- 
fied with  his  persisting  to  combat  her  opinion,  that  as 
soon  as  he  came  home  he  wrote  the  following  paper, 
and  gave  it  her  at  night  as  she  rose  from  play,  after 
having  previously  insisted  on  her  promising  not  to 
show  it  to  anybody  whatever  : — 

"  MADAM, 

"  I  CANNOT  help  beginning  this  paper  with  complaining 
that  your  Majesty  forces  me  to  speak  on  the  topic  you  intro- 
duced this  morning  on  purpose  to  hear  my  sentiments  and 
what  I  can  allege  in  support  of  them  and  then  are  angry 
with  me  for  declaring  them  or  urging  anything  in  their  justi- 
fication :  and  did  I,  like  most  courtiers,  manage  your  favour 
more  than  I  consult  your  interest,  I  should  perhaps,  like  them, 
run  as  little  risk  of  losing  the  one,  and  be  as  little  faithful  to 
the  other,  but  chime  in  with  everything  your  Majesty  says, 
and  never  let  you  know  the  objections  that  would  be  made  to 
any  measure  you  had  a  mind  to  take  till  it  was  too  late  to 
alter  it.  But,  for  following  a  contrary  conduct  and  telling 
your  Majesty  what  is  and  will  be  said  to  combat  your  inclina- 
tion in  this  point,  your  Majesty  treats  me  as  you  would  one  of 
the  most  determined  Jacobites  in  the  Opposition,  who  was  only 
saying  those  things  to  tbwart  your  will  and  to  distress  your 
affairs  in  Parliament.  That  which  hurts  me  most  upon  this 
occasion  is,  tbat  when  I  feel  I  wish  nothing  so  much  as  to  pro- 

3  Meaning  in  Parliament. 


384  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVI. 

mote  your  Majesty's  pleasure,  and  to  contribute  all  in  my 
small  power  to  the  security  and  prosperity  of  your  Government, 
I  am  always  answered  as  if  I  was  arguing  against  both,  and  as 
if  I  was  pleading  for  the  interest  of  England  in  opposition  to 
your  Majesty's  ;  when  in  reality  I  use  the  terms  of  your  interest 
and  the  interest  of  England  indifferently,  and  as  synonymous, 
and  look  upon  them,  not  only  in  this  question  but  in  all  others, 
as  insuperably  blended  and  united. 

"  If  your  Majesty  was  never  to  be  told  what  would  be  urged 
in  objection  to  any  measure  you  had  a  mind  to  take,  how  could 
you  be  provided  with  answers  to  such  objections  ?  — and  if  those 
objections  are  of  real  weight,  do  those  serve  you  best  who, 
to  avoid  your  displeasure,  suffer  them  to  be  made  by  your 
enemies,  too  late  for  you  to  profit  by  them,  or  those  who  venture 
to  incur  your  displeasure  by  representing  them  whilst  it  is  yet 
in  your  power  to  avoid  being  exposed  to  them  ?  Would  your 
Majesty  choose  to  hear  an  objection  to  a  measure  you  have 
taken  from  the  lips  of  those  who  wish  ill  to  your  Government, 
when  it  must  come  as  a  reproach ;  or  from  the  mouth  of  those 
who  wish  well  to  all  your  measures,  and  when  that  objection 
may  come  time  enough  to  be  a  warning  ?  In  my  situation  it 
is  impossible  for  me  to  have  any  interest  separate  from  that  of 
your  Majesty  and  your  family  ;  and,  besides  being  the  weakest 
of  mankind  if  I  thought  I  had,  I  must  be  also  the  most  un- 
grateful, considering  all  the  distinctions  you  honour  me  with, 
and  the  obligations  you  are  daily  heaping  upon  me,  if  my  duty 
to  your  Majesty  was  not  always  the  first  consideration  in  my 
thoughts. 

"  This  is  a  very  long  preface  to  the  business  I  proposed  to 
treat  of  in  this  paper,  but  your  Majesty  will,  I  hope,  have 
some  indulgence  to  my  gratifying  the  earnest  desire  I  feel  to 
set  my  real  motives  for  all  I  ever  say  on  this  subject  in  a  true 
light ;  and  whatever  you  find  in  this  paper  which  you  dislike 
or  disapprove,  I  beg  your  Majesty  would  impute  to  the  error 
of  my  judgment,  not  my  want  of  affection,  and  correct  the  im- 
perfections of  the  one  without  punishing  me  as  you  would  do, 
and  as  I  should  deserve,  if  there  were  any  deficiency  in  the 
other.  I  know  the  whole  plan  of  my  conduct  since  your  Ma- 
jesty has  allowed  me  the  honour  of  being  near  you  has  been  to 


1734.  LORD  HERVEY'S  LETTER  TO  THE  QUEEN.  385 

please  and  serve  you ;  and  I  must  have  very  ill  luck  if  that 
penetration,  which  makes  you  know  so  well  the  characters  of  all 
about  you,  permits  you  so  far  to  mistake  mine  as  to  doubt  one 
moment  of  this  truth.  But  to  come  at  last  to  the  political 
point  on  which  I  have  the  misfortune  to  differ  from  your 
Majesty,  I  own  my  great  and  short  maxim  with  regard  to 
peace  and  war  for  this  country  is,  that  we  can  never  be  gainers 
at  the  end  of  a  war  ;  and  that  we  are  always,  whilst  it  lasts, 
both  actual  losers  by  the  expense  of  it  and  negative  losers  by 
the  suspense  of  our  trade ;  which  is  so  much  the  vital  breath 
of  this  nation  that  the  one  cannot  subsist  whenever  the  other  is 
long  stopped.  The  best  exit,  therefore,  England  can  ever 
hope  to  make  at  the  end  of  war  is  to  conclude  it  in  as  good  a 
situation  as  she  began  it.  But,  notwithstanding  this  general 
rule,  I  do  not  say  it  is  such  a  one  as  is  never  to  be  departed 
from  ;  the  question  therefore  at  present  is  whether  this  is  one 
of  those  occasions  in  which  this  rule  ought  to  operate  or  no  ? 
Your  Majesty  says  it  ought  not ;  and  the  reason  you  give  for 
it  is  '  the  balance  of  power  in  Europe,  which  England  ought 
always  to  keep,  because  sooner  or  later  England  must  feel  the 
ill  effects  of  that  balance  being  broken.' 

"  In  answer  to  this,  I  cannot  help  saying,  that  it  was  often, 
and  sometimes  I  think  not  quite  unjustly,  objected  to  the  con- 
duct of  some  ministers  in  the  late  reign,  that  we  were  generally 
so  much  in  haste  to  be  meddling  with  every  little  dispute  upon 
the  Continent,  that  we  frequently,  instead  of  holding  the  balance 
of  Europe,  were  jumping  ourselves  into  the  scale,  and  becom- 
ing parties  where  we  ought  only  to  have  been  umpires. 

"  As  to  the  present  dispute,  I  have  often  told  your  Majesty, 
and  have  often  been  reproved  for  it  without  being  yet  con- 
vinced, that  I  cannot  see  it  is  of  any  great  importance  to  Eng- 
land in  particular,  or  to  the  balance  of  Europe  in  general, 
whether  Italy  be  in  the  hands  of  the  Emperor  or  not.  If  the 
dispute  lay  merely  between  the  Houses  of  Austria  and 
Bourbon,  Naples  and  Sicily  being  taken  from  the  Emperor 
and  given  to  Don  Carlos  would  certainly  make  a  considerable 
variation  in  the  balance  of  grandeur  in  those  two  families ;  but 
as  it  is  the  power  of  France  and  the  power  of  the  Emperor 
which  it  is  our  business  to  preponderate,  so  I  own  I  look  upon 
VOL.  i.  2  c 


386  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVI, 

this  change  of  the  dominion  of  Italy  as  very  immaterial — in 
the  first  place,  as  it  is  no  acquisition  to  France  ;  and,  in  the 
next,  as  I  think  it  very  disputable  whether  it  be  any  loss  to 
the  Emperor.  The  possession  of  Italy  enabled  the  Emperor 
to  enrich  a  Viceroy  of  Naples  and  a  Governor  of  Milan,  but  he 
got  little  or  nothing  by  it  himself:  and  the  occurrences  of  this 
year  have  shown  that  the  money  he  raised  on  these  countries 
was  not  sufficient  to  pay  for  their  defence  and  defray  the  charge 
of  keeping  forces  enough  on  foot  to  maintain  the  possession  of 
them.  Would  it  then  be  advisable,  if  this  be  the  case,  to 
engage  this  nation  in  a  war  (the  bent  of  the  people  and  the  im- 
mediate interests  of  the  nation  being  against  it)  only  to  regain 
Italy  for  the  Emperor,  and  merely  to  satisfy  the  pride  of  a  man 
who  has  made  that  quality  so  often  troublesome  to  your  king- 
doms, Madam,  and  to  your  family  ? 

"  I  grant  there  is  a  national  hatred  among  the  people  of 
England  to  France  ;  but  personal  hatreds  are  always  stronger 
than  national  enmities,  and  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  any 
foreign  prince  can  be  more  universally  hated  in  this  country 
than  the  Emperor  is  at  present.  His  behaviour  with  regard  to 
the  Ostend  Company,  and  in  the  first  Treaty  of  Vienna,  and 
indeed  the  whole  series  of  his  conduct  towards  England  since 
the  last  war  to  this  hour,  has  been  the  occasion  of  implanting 
these  seeds  of  dislike,  and  of  their  taking  such  deep  root. 

"  The  people  of  England  think  he  has  infinite  obligations  to 
them,  and  they  infinite  disobligations  to  him ;  they  talk  of  him 
in  every  coffeehouse  as  the  proudest,  the  weakest,  and  most 
ungrateful  of  mankind ;  and,  with  the  scars  of  the  last  war  still 
marked  upon  us  in  a  debt  of  fifty  millions,  it  would,  in  my 
opinion,  be  very  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  persuade  this 
nation  to  open  new  wounds  that  should  leave  the  marks  of  fifty 
millions  more,  only  to  pleasure  a  prince  on  whom  they  would 
be  glad,  if  they  could  do  it  without  hurting  themselves,  to  in- 
flict any  mortification,  or  to  bring  any  disgrace. 

"  I  will  now  suppose,  for  argument's  sake,  that  it  is  material 
for  the  balance  of  Europe  that  Italy  should  be  possessed  by 
the  Emperor ;  and  were  it  so,  could  England  engage  in  a  war 
to  regain  Italy  for  the  Emperor  without  Holland? — No. 
Why  ? — Because,  in  the  first  place,  it  would  in  all  probability 


1734.  LORD  HERVEY'S  LETTER.  387 

be  ineffectual ;  and,  in  the  next,  because  it  must  indisputably 
throw  the  trade  of  all  Europe  into  the  hands  of  Holland,  if 
Holland  remained  neuter.  Can  you  persuade  Holland  into  the 
war  ? — No.  Your  Majesty  says,  by  Horace's  letters  of  late, 
you  think  yes.  But  is  not  Horace  sanguine  in  his  reports  ?  and 
will  not  one  of  the  strongest  reasons  which  induce  your  Majesty 
to  wish  Holland  engaged  in  a  war  be  one  of  the  strongest  in 
the  breast  of  those  who  now  govern  Holland  to  keep  out  of 
it  ?  I  mean  (to  speak  very  plain)  the  obligation  you  think 
Holland  would  be  under,  in  case  of  war,  to  make  a  stadtholder. 
We  tell  the  Dutch  ministers,  that,  if  we  and  they  put  no 
stop  to  the  progress  of  the  arms  of  France,  and  do  not  prevent 
the  too  great  reduction  of  the  Emperor's  strength,  Holland  and 
England  will  only  have  the  poor  comfort  of  being  last  ruined. 
But  people  in  power  fear  no  ruin  like  the  loss  of  their  power  ; 
and,  consequently,  the  Dutch  ministers  will  never  come  into 
any  measure  by  which  they  apprehend  they  must  begin  with 
giving  up  what  they  would  last  part  with. 

"  If  England  and  Holland  do  not  come  into  a  war,  what 
will  be  the  consequence  ?  France  is  weary  of  a  war  by  which 
she  gets  nothing  but  the  honour  of  conquering  for  others; 
Spain  will  be  glad,  by  a  peace,  to  secure  what  they  have  got 
by  the  war ;  and  the  Emperor  to  regain  to  a  daughter  what  he 
himself  has  lost.  How  will  that  be  done  ? — By  the  marriage 
of  an  archduchess  to  Don  Carlos.  Your  Majesty  and  the 
King  I  know  are  both  averse  to  giving  a  prince  of  the  House 
of  Bourbon  any  chance  to  sit  on  the  Imperial  throne.  But  if 
you  will  not  or  cannot  assist  the  Emperor  to  regain  what  he 
has  lost  by  war,  how  can  you  object  to  his  doing  the  best  he 
can  for  himself  by  peace  ? — and  what  is  it  that  gives  your 
Majesty  such  a  reluctance  to  seeing  a  prince  of  that  House 
Emperor  ?  Your  Majesty  cannot  imagine  that  when  he  is  Em- 
peror the  ties  of  blood  will  ever  hold  princes  together  whom 
views  of  interest  separate.  The  Emperor  for  the  time  being 
and  the  King  of  France,  though  they  were  brothers,  could 
never  be  friends  ;  mutual  jealousies  and  national  interests  would 
get  the  better  of  all  consanguinity  or  former  personal  friend- 
ships. It  never  was,  nor  ever  will  be  otherwise :  and,  if  I 
may  take  the  liberty  to  give  an  example  in  your  own  family, 

2  c2 


388  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVI. 

Madam,  I  would  be  glad  to  ask  whether  your  Majesty  would 
not  laugh  at  anybody  that  apprehended  any  bad  consequences 
from  the  too  close  union  of  the  King  of  England  and  his  cousin- 
german  and  brother  the  King  of  Prussia. 

"  This  way  of  reasoning,  I  own,  Madam,  would  prevent  my 
being  afraid  of  aggrandizing  the  House  of  Bourbon  by  a  mar- 
riage of  an  archduchess  with  Don  Carlos,  even  if  the  Emperor, 
to  preserve  the  indivisibility  of  his  hereditary  Austrian  domi- 
nions, should  desire  to  give  him  his  eldest  daughter ;  and  I  am 
very  sure  there  is  nothing  I  should  apprehend  so  much  as 
bringing  this  country  into  the  calamities  of  war  without  the 
utmost  necessity;  as  putting  your  Majesty's  Government  under 
the  extreme  difficulty  of  finding  money  to  support  it — as  ex- 
posing you  to  the  unpopularity  of  declaring  war — and  raising 
such  clamour  and  discontent  in  this  country,  as,  joined  to  the 
resentment  of  foreign  powers,  might  bring  your  own  crown  at 
last  into  dispute,  and  your  present  security  into  danger. 

"  I  shall  say,  Madam,  but  one  thing  more  on  this  subject, 
which  is,  that,  though  your  Majesty's  friends  may  be  divided  in 
their  opinion  with  regard  to  your  entering  into  this  war,  your 
foes  are  united  in  theirs ;  since  I  do  not  believe  there  is  one 
enemy  in  this  country  to  your  Majesty's  person  and  Govern- 
ment, one  man  whom  disappointment  or  disobligation  has 
estranged  to  your  interest,  or  one  whom  principle  or  hope  of 
reward  has  attached  to  the  interest  of  the  Pretender  to  your 
crown,  who  does  not  secretly  wish  this  measure  concluded,  and 
is  only  silent  on  the  subject  at  present  for  fear  of  diverting 
your  Majesty  from  a  step  by  which  they  hope  to  inflame  the 
minds  of  your  subjects,  alienate  their  affections,  and  perhaps 
stir  them  to  sedition. 

"  These  are  the  crude,  indigested  notions  of  a  very  zealous 
and  faithful  servant,  which  I  have  drawn  into  so  great  a  length 
that  I  will  not  add  to  that  transgression  by  making  any  other 
excuse  for  them  than  saying  they  are  the  result  of  a  mind  con- 
stantly active  for  your  Majesty's  service,  and  the  overflowings 
of  a  heart  warm  with  duty,  gratitude,  and  affection." 

The  inaccuracy  with  which  this  paper  is  drawn,  and 
the  little  method  observed  in  laying  the  substance  of  it 


1734.  WASNER'S  MISSION.  389 

together,  sufficiently  show  how  hastily  it  was  written ; 
but  I  chose  rather  to  give  it  incorrect  and  genuine,  than 
better  dressed  and  not  original.  And  though  the  po- 
litical tenets  of  it  were  so  repugnant  to  the  opinion  of 
the  Queen,  yet  the  dutiful  and  affectionate  terms  in 
which  those  tenets  were  delivered  operated  so  strongly, 
that  she  was  more  taken  by  the  one  than  irritated  by  the 
other ;  and,  after  the  receipt  of  this  letter,  behaved  to 
Lord  Hervey  rather  with  added  than  diminished  favour. 

There  is  one  thing  which  I  cannot  help  remarking 
here,  very  different  from  the  common  style  of  memoir- 
writers,  and  that  is,  the  difficulty  and  sometimes  the 
impossibility  of  coming  at  truth,  even  for  those  who 
have,  to  all  appearance,  the  best  information.  For 
example,  in  the  paper  Lord  Hervey  gave  the  Queen, 
he  takes  notice  of  her  having  told  him  that  Horace 
Walpole's  letters  gave  information  of  the  Dutch  not 
being  now  so  averse  to  taking  part  in  the  war  as  they 
had  been;  and  when  Lord  Hervey  told  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  that  he  wondered  Horace  would  write  in  that 
style,  since  it  must  make  Sir  Robert's  part  in  keeping 
out  of  the  war  more  difficult,  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
utterly  denied  it,  and  said,  the  style  of  Horace's  late 
despatches  was  so  very  different  from  what  the  Queen 
had  reported  them,  that  the  King  but  the  day  before 
had  told  Sir  Robert  Walpole  that  his  brother  talked 
more  like  the  Pensionary  of  Holland 4  than  the  Minis- 
ter of  England. 

About  this  time  one  Wasner,5  a  sensible  man,  in 

*  The  Pensionary  Slingelandt  was  opposed  to  our  policy,  as  he  was  to 
the  House  of  Orange. 

5  So  both  Lord  Hervey  and  Horace  Walpole  spell  the  name ;  in  the 
despatches  in  Coxe,  it  is  Wassenaar. 


390  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVI. 

great  favour  with  the  Emperor,  was  sent  here,  without 
any  character,  to  sound  the  King  and  Queen,  and  to 
confer  with  Sir  Robert  Walpole ;  in  short,  to  pick  up 
what  intelligence  he  could,  and  report  at  Vienna  the 
situation  in  which  he  found  this  country,  as  well  as  the 
disposition  he  discovered  in  the  Prince,  the  Minister, 
or  the  people,  with  regard  to  the  part  England  should 
act  in  the  present  circumstances  of  Europe. 

The  King  and  Queen  declined  seeing  him  in  private 
for  fear  of  giving  umbrage  to  Kinski,  by  the  discredit  it 
would  bring  upon  him  to  have  it  thought  the  affairs  of 
the  Emperor  here  were  to  be  transacted  by  other  hands; 
they  therefore  corresponded  with  him  privately  by 
messages,  carried  backward  and  forward  by  Mr.  Poyntz, 
which  gave  great  disquiet  to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle, 
who  saw  perpetual  whispers  and  secrets  going  on  be- 
tween the  King  and  Poyntz,  and  knew  not  the  subject 
of  them.  Of  this  disquiet  the  Queen  (one  day  whilst 
the  King  was  speaking  to  Poyntz  in  a  corner  of  the 
drawing-room)  took  notice  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  and 
said,  smiling,  "  I  beg  you  see  the  uneasiness  of  the 
Duke  of  Newcastle  at  that  whispering ;  if  Lord  Har- 
rington was  alarmed  I  should  not  wonder."  The  latter 
part  of  what  she  said  alarmed,  I  think,  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  who  did  not  like  a  growing  interest  of  this 
kind,  which  seemed  to  be  nourished  merely  from  its 
own  root. 

Poyntz,  as  I  have  said  before,  differed  in  opinion, 
or  at  least  in  discourse,  from  Sir  Robert  Walpole  on 
the  measure  of  war ;  however,  he  reported  fairly  to 
the  King  and  Queen  that  Wasner  owned  he  was  so 
pleased  with  what  Sir  Robert  Walpole  had  said  to  him 


1734.  BISHOP  OF  NAMUR.  391 

on  this  subject,  and  so  much  convinced  by  Sir  Robert's 
reasoning  that  accommodation  was  the  interest  of  the 
Emperor,  that  he  wished  his  master  listened  to  such 
counsellors,  and  could  hear  Sir  Robert  Walpole  talk  on 
this  subject  only  one  hour  at  Vienna. 

Wasner  (as  he  told  Poyntz)  transmitted  to  the 
Emperor  everything  he  had  heard  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
say. 

But  the  Queen,  tenacious  of  her  own  opinion  and 
impatient  to  have  her  will  fulfilled,  was  not  at  all 
satisfied  with  the  result  of  this  conference  between 
Wasner  and  Sir  Robert.  She  proposed  Wasner 
should  have  persuaded  Sir  Robert  into  her  measures, 
and  not  that  Sir  Robert  should  have  convinced  Was- 
ner of  the  propriety  of  his  own.  When  Sir  Robert 
told  me  this,  and  complained  of  the  Queen's  con- 
duct, he  farther  added,  that  her  Majesty,  finding 
Wasner  more  tractable  than  Kinski,  had  sent  him 
away,  which  he  said  was  unfair  and  below  her.  But 
I  think  in  this  he  did  not  do  the  Queen  justice;  for 
Wasner  (as  I  told  Sir  Robert)  did,  at  his  first 
coming  here,  declare  his  stay  was  to  be  short,  and 
that  he  was  to  go,  as  he  now  did,  from  hence  to 
Portugal,  to  settle  some  business  the  Emperor  had  at 
that  Court. 

Soon  after  Wasner's  departure  a  new  engine  was 
played :  the  Bishop  of  Namur,  under  the  name  of 
Mr.  Mosley,  arrived  in  England  from  Vienna,6  upon  the 
same  errand  that  Wasner  came,  but  undertaken  and 


6  See  an  account,  agreeing  substantially  with  Lord  Hervey's,  of  this 
strange  man  and  his  mission,  in  the  Walpole  Papers,  and  particularly  in 
Mr.  Walpole's  letter  to  his  brother,  22nd  October,  1734.  (Coxe,  iii.  184.) 


392  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVI. 

executed  in  a  very  different  manner — Wasner  having 
been  chosen  by  the  Emperor  as  a  proper  man  for  such 
a  commission,  and  the  other  having  offered  himself 
and  solicited  an  employment  to  which  he  was  altogether 
unequal.  The  real  name  of  the  Bishop  of  Namur  was 
Strickland :  he  was  an  Englishman  by  birth,  but  born 
of  Roman  Catholic  parents  and  educated  in  that 
religion  abroad.  Nobody  could  say  he  was  a  fool 
without  being  unacquainted  with  him  or  so  well  ac- 
quainted with  his  profligate  manners  as  to  be  prejudiced 
against  his  understanding ;  but  he  had  only  those  sort 
of  parts  that  put  people  on  many  projects,  and  make 
them  apter  to  despise  difficulties  than  to  get  over 
them. 

Notwithstanding  his  profession,  and  the  great  rise  he 
made  in  it,  he  had  passed  his  whole  life  in  gluttony, 
drunkenness,  and  the  most  infamous  debauchery.  Nor 
was  his  dissolute  conduct  confined  to  one  country ;  for, 
as  he  had  been  in  most  Courts  of  Europe,  so  in  every 
one  of  them  he  had  left  the  fame  of  his  abandoned 
profligacy. 

In  the  reign  of  the  late  King  he  came  into  England, 
and  by  the  credit  he  then  had  amongst  the  Roman 
Catholics  here,  under  the  pretence  of  serving  them, 
was  of  use  to  the  Government  by  betraying  all  their 
counsels :  in  return  for  which  honest  services  he  got  to 
be  nominated  by  the  late  King  of  Poland,  at  the  inter- 
cession of  the  late  King  of  England,  for  a  Cardinal's 
hat ;  which  nomination  he  sold  to  the  Emperor  for  one 

The  Bishop,  who  died  and  was  buried  at  Namur  in  1743,  was  the  youngest 
son  of  Thomas  Strickland,  who  had  been  Privy  Purse  to  Charles  II.,  and 
followed  James  II.  into  France. 


1734.  BISHOP  OF  NAMTJR.  393 

of  his  favourites,  for  a  sum  of  money  and  the  presenta- 
tion to  the  Bishopric  of  Namur. 

He  obtained  leave  of  the  Emperor  at  this  time  to  go 
into  England,  by  telling  his  Imperial  Majesty  that  the 
reason  why  England  had  not  yet  engaged  in  his  quarrel 
was,  that  the  ignorance  and  stupidity  of  Kinski  made 
him  incapable  of  managing  this  great  negotiation ;  and, 
in  the  next  place,  that  Kinski  was  so  disagreeable  to 
the  English  Court,  that  his  desiring  anything  was  suf- 
ficient alone  to  make  the  English  Ministers  averse  to  it. 
To  these  arguments  he  added  that  of  his  own  interest 
at  the  Court  of  England  being  so  good,  that  with  the 
assistance  of  his  dexterity,  which  he  placed  in  no  mean 
rank,  there  were  few  things  he  was  not  capable  of  bring- 
ing about. 

The  reward  he  proposed  for  his  services,  if  he  suc- 
ceeded, was  a  new  nomination  to  a  Cardinal's  hat,  and 
with  these  views  he  came  to  England,  thinking,  after 
he  came  hither,  to  impose  upon  our  Ministers  by  brag- 
ging of  his  interest  at  Vienna,  as  he  had  imposed  upon 
the  Emperor  by  boasting  of  his  interest  here,  in  order 
to  be  sent  hither. 

That  one  single  man  could  hope  to  play  these  two 
Courts  in  this  manner  upon  one  another,  at  a  time  that 
he  knew,  too,  he  was  obnoxious  to  the  ministers  of  both, 
may  sound  very  extraordinary,  but  it  was  certainly 
fact ;  and  his  embassy  met  with  the  fate  that  anybody 
but  himself  might  have  expected,  and,  consequently, 
nobody  but  such  a  coxcomical  adventurer  in  politics 
would  have  tempted. 

At  his  first  coming  over  he  had  an  audience  of  the 
King  that  lasted  two  hours,  in  which  he  failed  not  to 


394  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVI. 

set  forth,  in  the  most  advantageous  descriptions,  the 
great  favour  in  which  he  stood  with  the  Emperor,  and 
the  influence  he  had  at  present  in  all  the  counsels  of 
Vienna ;  intimating,  too,  that  at  his  return  from  this 
embassy  he  should  immediately  be  declared  First 
Minister.  He  told  the  King  at  the  same  time  that  his 
affection  to  his  native  country,  and  his  gratitude  to  his 
Majesty's  father  and  family,  would  always  make  him 
look  on  the  interests  of  England  and  his  Majesty  as 
what  he  ought  to  consider  equal  to  that  even  of  his 
master  ;  and  that  he  hoped  for  these  reasons  the  King 
and  the  Queen,  in  answer  to  the  letters  he  had  brought 
from  the  Emperor  and  the  Empress,  would  have  the 
goodness  to  speak  of  him  as  a  man  not  disagreeable  to 
this  Court. 

The  King,  as  his  custom  always  was  upon  such  occa- 
sions, took  care  to  hamper  himself  by  no  particular  pro- 
mises, but  in  general  said  many  civil  things  to  the  Bishop, 
talked  at  large  on  the  present  situation  of  Europe,  and 
dismissed  him  from  this  audience  better  satisfied  with 
the  situation  of  his  affairs  than  he  ever  was  after. 

Sir  Eobert  Walpole,  having  got  the  better  of  Kinski 
and  Wasner,  was  not  for  encouraging  the  growth  of 
these  hydras'  heads,  and  therefore  resolved  to  give 
no  assistance,  or  even  countenance,  to  the  Bishop  of 
Namur ;  and  the  Bishop,  at  every  conference  he  had 
with  Sir  Robert,  finding  him  not  to  be  shaken  in  his 
resolutions  against  war,  perceived  he  should  certainly 
fail  in  the  promise  he  had  made  the  Emperor  of  bring- 
ing England  into  it.  He  therefore  tried  another  way, 
and  by  caballing  underhand  with  his  former  friend 
Mr.  Pulteney,  and  others  in  the  Opposition,  endeavoured 


1734.  BISHOP  OF  NAMTJR  FAILS.  395 

to  distress  the  Minister  as  much  as  the  Minister  had 
distressed  him. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole,  having  dogged  and  traced  him 
to  every  place  he  had  frequented  from  his  first  coming 
to  England,  soon  found  what  he  drove  at,  and  told  the 
King  and  Queen  he  suspected  some  double  game 
playing  by  the  Emperor,  and  that  the  Bishop  had 
been  sent  here  to  foment  discontents,  and  form  intrigues 
to  disturb  the  Government,  in  case  he  found  the  Court 
determined  not  to  enter  as  rashly  into  his  quarrel  as  he 
wished  they  should. 

He  had  likewise  dogged  the  Bishop  (though  now 
near  three-score)  several  times  to  a  little  scrub  house  of 
no  good  reputation,  where  he  used  to  go  late  at  night 
on  foot,  and  wrapped  up  in  a  red  rug  riding-coat. 
This  he  told  also  to  the  King  and  Queen,  knowing  how 
useful  it  is  to  throw  ridicule  on  those  whom  one  wishes 
to  depreciate,  and  how  serviceable  it  is  in  such  cases 
to  add  contempt  to  dislike. 

At  last  Sir  Robert  Walpole  got  leave  to  have  letters 
written  to  Vienna  to  acquaint  the  Emperor  with  the 
Bishop's  clandestine  correspondence  with  the  enemies 
of  the  Government ;  to  complain  of  it ;  and  desire,  if  the 
Emperor  did  not  mean  to  countenance  such  practices, 
and  had  given  him  no  authority  for  taking  these  steps, 
that  he  might  be  recalled :  which  he  was,  by  very  ex- 
plicit and  peremptory  orders  from  the  Emperor,  im- 
mediately after  the  receipt  of  these  letters. 

Kinski,  who  had  been  jealous  of  the  Bishop  of 
Namur  from  his  first  arrival  here,  and  hated  him 
heartily,  was  so  pleased  with  Sir  Robert  Walpole  for 
not  protecting  him  and  getting  him  recalled,  that  this 


396  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVI. 

incident  reconciled  them  entirely ;  Kinski,  as  ignorant 
people  are  apt  to  do,  looking  on  the  contingent  benefit 
he  drew  from  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  policy  as  a  favour 
he  received  from  his  friendship. 

In  this  manner  finished  the  embassy  of  the  Bishop 
of  Namur,  whose  indigested,  wild  schemes  might  have 
been  just  pardonable  errors  in  a  young,  hot-headed, 
enterprising  fellow  of  five-and-twenty,  but  in  a  hoary 
fool  of  five-and-fifty  were  altogether  inexcusable.  A 
man  like  him,  practised  in  Courts,  and  long  acquainted 
with  the  mysteries  of  state,  as  well  as  of  the  church, 
ought  to  have  known  that  the  proficients  in  the  one  as 
well  as  the  other,  how  easy  soever  they  may  find  it  to 
deceive  their  inferiors,  never  deceive  one  another. 

The  only  sign  of  cleverness  the  Bishop  of  Namur 
showed  in  the  whole  course  of  this  transaction  was  in 
the  excuse  he  made  to  the  Emperor  for  holding  any 
correspondence  with  those  who  were  in  opposition  to 
the  Court.  The  reason  he  gave  for  it  was  that  he 
found  the  King  and  Queen  inclined  to  the  war,  but 
overruled  by  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  whom  no  arguments 
or  persuasions  could  shake ;  if  therefore  he  could  have 
broke  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  power,  he  said,  the  future 
Ministers,  to  whom  he  had  promised  the  support  of  the 
Court  of  Vienna,  he  had  obliged  in  return  to  promise 
their  support  to  the  Emperor  in  the  war.  But  this 
availed  him  little  :  the  Emperor  wanted  succours,  and 
the  Bishop  a  cardinal's  hat ;  and  the  Bishop,  being  un- 
able to  procure  for  the  Emperor  what  he  desired,  was 
unable  to  obtain  from  him  what  he  himself  desired. 

All  this  summer  the  Queen  used  to  see  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  every  Monday  evening  regularly,  and  at  other 


1734.  WALPOLE'S  MANAGEMENT.  397 

times  casually ;  but  at  every  conference  she  had  with 
him  (as  he  told  me),  though  she  always  said  he  had 
convinced  her,  and  that  she  would  give  in  to  the  accom- 
modation, yet  day  after  day,  for  three  weeks  together, 
she  made  him  put  off  the  setting  on  foot  those  measures 
which  ought  to  have  been  taken  in  consequence  of  that 
conviction.  And  what  is  very  surprising,  yet  what  I 
know  to  be  true,  the  arguments  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole, 
conveyed  through  the  Queen  to  the  King,  so  wrought 
upon  him,  that  they  quite  changed  the  colour  of  his 
Majesty's  sentiments,  though  they  did  not  tinge  the 
channel  through  which  they  flowed.  When  Lord 
Hervey  told  Sir  Robert  he  had  made  this  observation, 
Sir  Robert  said  it  was  true,  and  agreed  with  him  how 
extraordinary  it  was  that  she  should  be  either  able  or 
willing  to  repeat  what  he  said  with  energy  and  force 
sufficient  to  convince  another  without  being  convinced 
herself.  However,  said  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  "  I  shall 
carry  my  point  at  last ;  but  you,  my  Lord,  are  enough 
acquainted  with  this  Court  to  know  that  nothing  can  be 
done  in  it  but  by  degrees ;  should  I  tell  either  the  King 
or  the  Queen  what  I  propose  to  bring  them  to  six 
months  hence,  I  could  never  succeed.  Step  by  step  I 
can  carry  them  perhaps  the  road  I  wish ;  but  if  I  ever 
show  them  at  a  distance  to  what  end  that  road  leads, 
they  stop  short,  and  all  my  designs  are  always  defeated. 
For  example,  if  we  cannot  make  peace,  and  yet  I  can 
keep  this  nation  out  of  the  war  a  year  longer,  I  know 
it  is  impossible  but  England  must  give  law  to  all 
Europe :  yet  this  I  dare  not  say,  since  even  this  consi- 
deration would  not  keep  them  quiet  if  they  thought 
peace  could  not  be  obtained ;  and  for  that  reason  I  graft 


398  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVI. 

as  yet  all  my  arguments  on  the  supposition  that  peace 
will  be  effected.  I  told  the  Queen  this  morning,  *  Ma- 
dam, there  are  fifty  thousand  men  slain  this  year  in 
Europe,  and  not  one  Englishman ;  and  besides  the  satis- 
faction it  is  to  one's  good  nature  to  make  this  reflection, 
considering  they  owe  their  safety  and  their  lives  to  those 
under  whose  care  and  protection  they  are,  sure,  in  point 
of  policy,  too,  it  is  no  immaterial  circumstance  to  be  able 
to  say,  that,  whilst  all  the  rest  of  Europe  has  paid  their 
share  to  this  diminution  of  their  common  strength,  Eng- 
land remains  in  its  full  and  unimpaired  vigour.  Your 
Majesty  accuses  me  always  (if  I  may  call  it  an  accusa- 
tion) of  partiality  to  England,  and  considering  nothing 
else ;  but  whatever  motives  of  partiality  sway  me,  ought 
they  not  naturally  with  double  weight  to  bias  you,  who 
have  so  much  more  at  stake  ?' " 

Lord  Hervey  asked  him  if  these  things  made  no  im- 
pression upon  her  ?  He  said,  "  Yes,  for  a  time  ;  but 
the  partiality  she  has  to  her  own  opinions,  or  to  the  gra- 
tification of  her  own  will,  sometimes  even  against  her 
opinion,  turns  her  again;  and  if  that  bias  or  her  inclina- 
tion can  make  her  own  opinion  bend,  you  cannot  won- 
der, my  Lord,  if  it  proves  too  strong  sometimes  for 
mine." 

Lord  Hervey  said,  "  For  your  own  sake,  Sir,  I  wish 
the  people  of  England  could  know  the  obligations  they 
have  to  you,  and  how  often  you  risk  the  favour  that 
supports  you,  to  employ  it,  whilst  you  are  possessed  of 
it,  for  their  welfare  and  advantage ;  but  I  own  to  you, 
considering  the  disaffection  there  is  already  in  the  king- 
dom to  those  we  serve,  and  how  much  it  is  the  interest 
of  us  all  to  keep  that  disaffection  from  spreading,  I  had 


1754.  APOLOGY  FOR  EGOTISM.  399 

rather,  as  well  as  I  love  you,  that  you  should  lose  the 
popularity  of  being  known  so  to  fight  the  people's  cause 
than  have  it  known  at  the  same  time  against  whom  you 
are  obliged  to  combat.  For  if  we  who  wish  them  well, 
and  whose  interest  and  inclination  it  is  to  support  them, 
cannot  help  feeling  something  within  us  that  recoils  on 
these  occasions,  what  effect  must  the  same  reflections 
have  on  the  minds  of  those  who  are  as  much  prejudiced 
against  them  as  we  are  prepossessed  for  them ;  and 
would  be  as  glad  of  a  handle  to  abuse  their  conduct  and 
blacken  their  characters  as  we  should  be  of  the  means  to 
defend  the  one  or  brighten  the  other !" 

I  cannot  help  here  making  a  short  digression  by  way 
of  apology  for  the  frequent  use  I  find  myself  obliged  to 
make  of  my  own  name,  notwithstanding  all  the  resolu- 
tions I  made  against  it  when  I  undertook  this  work,  the 
promises  with  which  I  set  forth  to  avoid  it,  and  the  en- 
deavours which  in  the  progress  of  it  I  have  often  made 
use  of  to  comply  with  so  decent  and  proper  a  rule  laid 
down  to  myself.  In  reading  the  works  of  other  memoir- 
writers,  I  own  I  have  frequently  been  shocked  with  the 
same  behaviour;  and  knowing,  by  corresponding  accounts 
of  the  times  they  treated  of,  how  much  an  inferior  figure 
they  made  in  the  picture  when  drawn  by  other  hands 
than  when  painted  by  their  own,  I  have  imputed  to 
their  vanity  what  from  experience  I  now  find  may 
have  been  owing  to  necessity ;  for,  as  authors  in  these 
cases  must  chiefly  relate  such  transactions  as  they 
themselves  have  had  some  little  concern  in,  and  for  the 
satisfaction  of  their  readers,  even  in  facts  where  they 
were  not  concerned,  are  forced  to  introduce  their  own 
name  to  clear  up  the  manner  in  which  those  facts 


400  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVI. 

came  to  be  known  to  them ;  so  it  is  impossible  but  the 
authors  of  such  writings,  let  them  be  ever  so  inconsi- 
derable, must,  in  transmitting  things  to  posterity,  men- 
tion themselves  much  oftener  than  at  first  may  seem 
necessary  to  the  readers ;  and,  consequently,  from  rea- 
sons very  different  from  those  to  which  the  readers 
may  ascribe  them,  and  from  which,  considering  the 
universal  propensity  mankind  have  to  talk  of  them- 
selves, it  may  be  very  natural  for  posterity  to  think 
such  manner  of  writing  proceeds. 

And  since  I  am  entered  into  apologies  for  the  defects 
of  this  work,  I  cannot  omit  making  one  for  the  loose,  un- 
methodized,  and  often  incoherent  manner,  in  which  it 
is  put  together.  This  is  owing  to  the  little  leisure  I  have 
for  writing  or  correcting ;  the  incapacity,  consequently, 
I  am  under  of  recopying  my  first  draughts ;  and  my 
setting  down  day  by  day  the  things  herein  contained, 
just  as  they  occur  and  whilst  they  are  fresh  in  my  me- 
mory. But  now  my  excuse  is  made,  I  must  add,  too, 
in  favour  of  this  work,  that  by  these  means,  though  the 
style  may  be  less  pure,  the  transitions  less  natural,  and 
the  facts  less  artfully  connected,  yet  that  for  which  such 
sort  of  writings  ought  to  be  most  valued,  which  is 
fidelity  in  the  recital,  will  certainly  be  better  preserved 
than  it  could  be  in  any  other  way  of  compiling  and 
transmitting  them.  By  what  I  have  said  I  find  I  have 
done  as  people  generally  do  when  they  voluntarily 
confess  any  fault  in  themselves,  which  is  making  it  a 
prelude  to  bragging  of  some  merit  which  they  are  more 
proud  of  than  they  are  ashamed  of  the  other ;  hoping 
at  the  same  time  that  under  the  plausible  show  of 
ingenuity  in  the  one  they  may  bias  their  commenta- 


1734.  WALPOLE'S  SYSTEM.  401 

tors   to  have  a  better  opinion  of  their  truth   in   the 
other. 

If  I  was  much  concerned  for  the  pleasure  people  will 
take  in  reading  these  papers  when  pleasure  and  pain 
will  be  sensations  no  longer  known  to  me,  I  should 
lament,  too,  the  little  importance  of  the  occurrences 
and  incidents  belonging  to  the  times  in  which  I  write 
and  of  which  I  treat.  Few  readers  give  great  attention 
but  to  great  events,  and  such  were  not  the  growth  of 
this  country  in  the  age  I  am  describing;  a  minister 
ruled  it  who  was  more  anxious  to  keep  his  power  than 
to  raise  his  fame,  and  wisely  lived  to  his  present  in- 
terest, and  not  to  the  embellishment  of  a  page  in  future 
story :  he  knew  that  palliatives,  delays,  and  gentle  me- 
thods were  the  ways  to  keep  power,  though  active  and 
enterprising  steps  may  sometimes  be  the  means  to  gain 
it,  and,  in  imminent  dangers,  violent  remedies  neces- 
sary to  restore  it.  But  this  was  not  his  case — "  Callistus 
prioris  quoque  regice  peritus,  et  potentiam  cautis  quam 
acrioribus  consiliis  tutius  haberi :" — "Callistus,  with  the 
experience  of  the  former  Court,  thought  that  power 
was  more  safely  maintained  by  cautious  than  by  more 
violent  counsels." — (Tacitus.)  He  knew,  whatever  hap- 
pened, he  could  be  nothing  greater  than  what  he 
was;  and,  in  order  to  remain  in  that  situation,  his 
great  maxim  in  policy  was  to  keep  everything  else  as 
undisturbed  as  he  could,  to  bear  with  some  abuses 
rather  than  risk  reformations,  and  submit  to  old  incon- 
veniences rather  than  encourage  innovations.  From 
these  maxims,  v/hich  in  my  opinion  he  sometimes  car- 
ried too  far,  he  would  never  lend  his  assistance  nor 
give  the  least  encouragement  to  any  emendation  either 

VOL.  i.  2  D 


402  LOUD  HERVEY'S  MEMO1KS.  CHAP.  XVI. 

of  the  law  or  the  church,   though  the   expenses  and 
hardships  of  the  first,  and  the  tyranny  and  injustice  of 
the  last  in  the  ecclesiastical  courts,  were  got  to  an  excess 
wholly  unjustifiable  and  almost  insupportable.     From 
this  way  of  reasoning  he  opposed  the  inquiry  into  the 
South  Sea  affair,  the  bill  to  vacate  the  infamous  sale 
of  Lord  Derwentwater's  estate,  the  .examination  of  the 
House  of  Commons  into  the  affairs  of  the  charitable 
corporations  and  the  abuses  in  the  gaols,  besides  many 
other  crying  instances  of  flagrant  injustice  and  oppres- 
sion, which  he  could  not  defend,  and  yet  declined  to 
correct  by  an  extraordinary  method,  though,   in  the 
ordinary  course  of  justice,  he  and  all  the  world  knew  it 
was  impossible  to  come  at  the  offenders,  put  any  stop 
to  the  offences,  or  give  any  redress  to  the  injured.    One 
might  with  great  truth  say  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole  what 
Tacitus   does  of  Tiberius,  — "  Nihil  ceque    Tiberium 
anxium  habebat  quam  ne  composita  turbarentur  :" — "  Ti- 
berius's  greatest  anxiety  was,  that  what  was  settled  should 
not  be  disturbed."7   This  apprehension,  long  experience 
and  thorough  knowledge  of  this  country  and  this  Go- 
vernment had  taught  him ;  and  in  this  way  of  thinking, 
the  unsuccessful  deviation  he  had  made  from  it  in  the 
Excise   scheme   had   now  more  than  ever   confirmed 
him.     But,  how  right  soever  this  policy  might  be  in 
general,  it  exposed  him  to  very  severe  censures  in  par- 
ticular cases ;  his  enemies  often  asserting,  too  plausibly, 
that    there   was   not   a   knave    in   the   kingdom   who 
might  not  reckon  upon  his  protection  and  be  sure  of 

7  Horace  Walpole  says,  "  Sir  Robert's  grand  maxim  of  government  was 
Quieta  ne  movete—a.  maxim  quite  opposite  to  those  of  our  days." —  Wul- 
poliuna,  §  107. 


1734.  COURT  HISTORIES.  403 

escaping   if  parliamentary   inquiry   was   necessary   to 
convict  him. 

To  whom  then  can  a  history  of  such  times  be  agree- 
able or  entertaining,  unless  it  be  to  such  as  look  into 
courts  and  courtiers,  princes  and  ministers,  with  such 
curious  eyes  as  virtuosos  in  microscopes  examine 
flies  and  emmets,  and  are  pleased  with  the  dissected 
minute  parts  of  animals,  which  in  the  gross  herd  they 
either  do  not  regard  or  observe  only  with  indifference 
and  contempt  ? 


2D2 


404  LOUD  HEllVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVII. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

Reception  of  the  Prince  and  Princess  of  Orange  in  ,  Holland — Horace 
Walpole's  unsuccessful  Negotiations — Details  and  tracasseries  about  the 
Princess  of  Orange's  lying-in — She  sets  out  for  Harwich — Suddenly 
returns — Illness  of  the  Queen — Confidential  Communication  of  Sir 
Robert  to  her  Majesty — Alarm  lest  the  King  should  have  overheard  it. 

BUT  to  return  to  my  narrative  of  the  transactions  of 
this  summer.  Horace  Walpole,  who  had  been  sent  to 
prepare  the  way  of  the  Princess  Royal  on  her  first 
going  to  Holland,  soon  after  her  arrival  there  returned 
to  England,  ashamed  of  all  his  disappointments,  and 
at  the  same  .time  boasting  of  his  success.  When  he 
bragged  to  Lord  Hervey  how  well  he  had  managed 
matters,  and  assured  him  that  the  Dutch  would  do 
nothing  without  us,  Lord  Hervey,  who  had  no  mind  to 
let  Horace  believe  him  his  dupe,  said,  "  We  knew  that 
before  you  went ;  but  will  they  do  anything  with  us  ?  " 
To  which  Horace,  under  the  ministerial  refuge  of 
affecting  to  know  more  than  he  would  tell,  only  replied, 
"  That  you  will  see.1' 

How  the  Princess  Royal  was  received  in  Holland, 
or  what  she  did  there,  is  little  worthy  of  any  particu- 
larising account.  She  felt,  I  suppose,  as  unabated 
pride  generally  feels  in  diminished  grandeur ;  and  as 
she  did  not  care  to  let  down  that  pride  to  cajole  the 
people  of  the  country,  nor  the  people  of  the  country  care 
to  do  anything  to  gratify  it,  she  neither  pleased  there  nor 
was  pleased.  She  passed  a  solitary  life,  with  music  and 


1734.  PRINCE  AND  PRINCESS  OF  ORANGE.  405 

books,  and  found   no  consolation   for  having   quitted 
England  but  the  prospect  of  soon  returning  thither. 

There  was  something  very  remarkable  passed  in 
Holland  previous  to  her  arrival  there,  which  I  forgot 
before  to  relate.  The  governing  people  in  Holland 
were  so  apprehensive  of  an  insurrection  of  the  populace 
on  the  arrival  of  the  Prince  and  Princess  of  Orange  at  the 
Hague,  that  they  determined  to  frame  some  excuse  for 
taking  measures  to  prevent  any  bustle,  and  yet  to  im- 
pute those  measures  to  some  other  cause  than  the  true 
one,  which  they  did  not  care  to  own.  The  reason  given 
was  this :  they  pretended  the  common  people  were  so 
possessed  with  fear  upon  account  of  an  ancient  prophecy 
foretelling  that  this  year,  in  the  month  of  May,  all  the 
Protestants  would  be  massacred  by  the  Papists,  that,  in 
order  to  prevent  disorders  consequent  to  the  appre- 
hensions the  people  were  in  of  the  completion  of  this 
prophecy,  some  measures  to  preserve  the  peace  ought 
to  be  taken ;  whereupon  they  ordered  a  strong  guard  to 
patrole  night  and  day  about  the  town,  who  upon  the 
least  tumult  were  to  seize  every  man  concerned  in  it. 
But,  notwithstanding  these  precautions,  the  Prince  of 
Orange's  coach,  when  he  came  to  the  Hague,  was  sur- 
rounded by  a  mob  of  several  hundred  people;  and 
whilst  those  at  a  distance  only  hallooed  out  his  name 
with  common  acclamations  and  huzzas,  some  of  those 
who  hung  at  his  coach-doors  told  him  they  wished  for 
nothing  so  much  as  to  see  him  Stadtholder,  and  asked 
him  if  they  should  go  and  pull  down  or  fire  the  houses 
of  all  those  who  opposed  him.  The  Prince  of  Orange, 
knowing  the  strength  of  these  his  partisans  not  to  be 
equal  to  their  zeal,  nor  their  power  to  serve  him  ade- 


406  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVII. 

quate  to  their  good  wishes,  was  forced  to  reprove  them 
for  what  he  secretly  thanked  them,  and  wisely  took  the 
turn  of  seeming  solicitous  to  correct  and  keep  down 
that  spirit  which,  if  it  had  been  more  general  or  less 
impotent,  he  would  have  doubled  his  endeavours  to 
stimulate  and  inflame. 

Soon  after  this  (as  I  have  before  said)  the  Prince  of 
Orange  went  to  the  Rhine,  and  the  Princess  Royal 
returned  to  England.  As  soon  as  she  arrived  in  Eng- 
land she  declared  herself  with  child,  which  she  said  she 
had  not  done  in  Holland  lest  it  should  have  been  made 
a  pretence  for  keeping  her  there. 

Horace  Walpole,  soon  after  she  came  over,  was 
again  sent  this  summer  to  Holland,  and  now  in  the 
character  of  ambassador.  But  Mr.  Finch,1  who  was  at 
this  same  time  at  the  Hague  in  the  character  of  envoy, 
was  so  disobliged  at  this  coadjutor  being  sent  thither, 
that  he  desired  to  be  recalled,  and  quitted  the  King's 
service  •,  thinking  his  capacity  (which  was  a  very  mean 
one)  equal  to  the  most  delicate  transactions  of  state, 
and  not  comprehending,  though  it  had  been  as  good  as 
he  thought  it,  that  yet  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  considering 
the  present  circumstances  of  things,  might  choose 
rather  to  confide  in  his  own  brother  in  an  affair  where 
the  utmost  secrecy  was  required  than  in  a  brother  to 
my  Lord  Winchelsea,  and  one  who  was  brought  into 
the  world  by  Lord  Carteret,  owed  everything  to  his 
favour,  and  still  lived  with  him  in  the  strictest  friend- 
ship. 

Horace  was  every  way  unsuccessful  in  this  embassy. 

1  The  Right  Honourable  William  Finch,    brother  to  the  seventh  and 
father  to  the  eighth  Earl  of  Winchelsea,  long  minister  at  the  Hague. 


1734.  HORACE  WALPOLE'S  NEGOTIATIONS.  407 

In  the  first  place  he  went  over  with  a  new  scheme  to 
bring  the  Dutch  into  the  war:  this  miscarried.  Then 
he  made  a  strange,  tedious,  complicated,  injudicious 
plan  of  accommodation :  that  was  disapproved ;  and, 
after  being  discussed  here  and  considered  at  Paris,  was 
laid  aside,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  our  King,  who 
told  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  "  I  am  glad  there  is  an  end 
of  Horace's  stuff,  which  I  never  thoroughly  understood, 
but  what  I  did  understand  of  it  I  disliked."  Horace 
then  tried  his  skill  upon  a  more  private  affair,  and 
wrote  to  the  Princess  Royal  to  tell  her  all  the  Dutch 
who  wished  well  to  her  and  her  husband  were  very 
uneasy  at  her  staying  in  England,  for  fear  (though 
they  were  told  the  contrary)  that  she  should  intend 
to  lie-in  here.  He  gave  it  as  his  humble  opinion, 
too,  that  the  Prince  of  Orange  would  take  it  better 
if  she  came  over  and  waited  his  return  from  the 
camp  in  Holland,  than  if  she  stayed  in  England  till 
he  sent  for  her.  And  at  the  end  of  this  well-judged 
epistle  he  desired  her  Royal  Highness  to  make  her 
own  use  of  this  hint  without  showing  his  letter  to  the 
Queen.2 

The  Princess  Royal,  who  hated  the  thoughts  of  re- 

8  Lord  Hervey's  judgment  must  have  been  warped  by  the  influence  of 
the  royal  ladies  when  he  thus  sneered  at  Mr.  Walpole's  very  judicious 
advice ;  and  that  he  did  not  volunteer,  but  was  invited  by  the  Princess 
herself  to  give  his  opinion  (which  he  knew  would  displease),  is  shown  by 
one  of  his  own  letters  to  his  brother : — 

"Hague,  Oct.  22,  1734. — The  Princess  Royal  now  complains  to  my 
wife  of  me  for  not  writing  to  her ;  I  can't  tell  how  to  do  it,  because  I  don't 
know  what  is  offensive  and  what  is  inoffensive :  this  I  know,  what  is  most 
for  their  interest  is  not  most  to  their  minds,  and  I  have  not  ill  nature  enough 
to  advise  anybody,  when  they  ask  my  opinion,  to  act  against  their  interest." — 
Coxe,  iii.  184.  We  shall  see  presently  that  Lord  Hervey,  and  everybody 
else  save  the  Princess,  soon  came  round  to  Mr.  Walpole's  opinion. 


408  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVII. 

turning  to  Holland,  cried  the  whole  morning  after 
receiving  this  letter,  and,  as  soon  as  ever  she  had  read 
it,  carried  it  with  red  eyes  and  wet  cheeks  to  her 
mother.  The  Queen,  who  was  almost  as  unwilling  to 
part  with  her  daughter  as  she  was  to  go,  called  Horace 
an  officious  fool,  and  wrote  to  him,  half  in  jest  and  half 
in  earnest,  to  bid  him  mind  his  politics,  not  meddle 
with  what  he  did  not  understand,  and  leave  the  regula- 
tion of  her  daughter's  conduct  to  her  own  prudence, 
who  knew  much  better  what  was  proper  than  he  could 
tell  her.  She  asked  him  if  he  thought  her  daughter 
had  nothing  to  do  but  to  be  crossing  the  seas  for  his 
pleasure,  and  said  she  was  sure  his  only  reason  for 
giving  this  fine  advice  was  his  being  ennuye  in  Holland 
and  wanting  the  Princess  to  come  and  play  at  whist 
with  him. 

The  King  tipped  Horace  the  "puppy"  once  or 
twice  upon  this  occasion,  and  Sir  Robert,  finding  the 
stumble  his  brother  had  made  and  not  being  able 
seriously  to  take  his  part,  joined  in  the  laugh  against 
him.  The  imagining  that  such  advice  would  be  wel- 
come to  the  Princess  Royal,  or  that  she  would  conceal 
such  a  letter  from  the  Queen,  were  two  suppositions 
extraordinary  even  for  Horace's  judgment  to  proceed 
upon.  But  his  itch  of  meddling  and  his  awkwardness 
in  touching  drew  him  into  eternal  difficulties  and 
scrapes,  out  of  which  his  brother's  power  and  dexterity 
united  were  oftentimes  barely  sufficient  to  extricate 
him.  Horace  hated  following  directions,  though  they 
were  ever  so  good,  and  loved  giving  them,  though  they 
were  ever  so  bad ;  but  with  such  perverse  obstinacy  in 
one  case,  and  such  unfortunate  impotence  in  the  other, 


1734.    ARRANGEMENTS  FOR  THE  PRINCESS'S  LYING-IN.     409 

one  must  wonder  at  his  great  rise  in  the  world,  though 
one  cannot  at  the  ridiculous  figure  he  made  when  so 
unbecomingly  exalted.  For  he  was  of  that  class  of  men 
to  whom  court  honours  and  royal  favours,  instead  of 
lessening  contempt,  add  to  it  by  making  the  qualities 
that  first  procure  contempt  more  conspicuous,  and 
putting  them  in  an  eminence  that  makes  ridicule  uni- 
versal ;  half  the  world  laughing  at  him  from  knowing- 
he  deserved  it,  and  the  other  half  doing  it  upon  trust, 
and  because  it  was  the  fashion. 

Nor  would  Horace  take  warning  from  this  disgrace 
he  met  with  upon  meddling  with  the  Princess  Royal's 
conduct  with  regard  to  her  going  back  immediately  to 
Holland,  but  would  try  his  skill  again  upon  the  same 
subject ;  and,  as  people  generally  do  when  they  try  to 
mend,  only  made  the  rent  still  wider.  That  she  was  to 
lie-in  in  Holland  was  determined ;  but  the  dispute  was 
whether  at  Lewarden  or  the  Hague :  the  Princess  her- 
self had  a  mind  to  the  Hague,  for  convenience,  society, 
and  assistance ;  Horace  advised  Lewarden  ;  and  the 
wise  reason  he  gave  for  it  was,  that,  as  the  people  of 
Friesland  were  entirely  devoted  to  the  Prince  of 
Orange,  and  at  the  Hague  there  was  a  strong  party 
against  him,  so  it  would  be  much  more  just  and  reason- 
able to  please  those  who  were  firm  in  his  interest  than 
those  who  were  divided  and  but  imperfectly  so  ;  where- 
as I  fear,  in  policy,  whatever  gratitude  may  suggest, 
Princes  ought,  where  people  are  to  be  gained,  to  argue 
very  differently,  and  bestow  their  favours  rather  in  bribes 
to  acquire  friends  than  in  rewards  tQ  those  who  are 
under  an  incapacity  of  acting  in  any  other  character. 
The  Prince  of  Orange  himself,  M.  Duncan  his  first 


410  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CRAP.  XVII. 

Minister,  and  all  his  best  friends,  were  united  in  their 
opinions  for  the  Princess's  lying-in  at  the  Hague  ;  and 
Duncan  went  so  far  as  to  say  he  supposed  Mr.  Walpole 
wanted  something  of  Monsieur  *  *  *3  (the  Prince  of 
Orange's  great  enemy)  to  be  done  for  England,  which 
he  proposed  to  buy  by  sacrificing  the  Prince  of  Orange's 
interest  in  this  point  to  obtain  it. 

At  last,  however,  it  was  settled  by  the  King  and 
Queen,  who  thought  it  for  the  dignity  as  well  as  interest 
of  their  daughter,  that  she  should  lie-in  at  the  Hague ; 
and,  notwithstanding  Her  Royal  Highness's  reluctance 
to  quit  England,  the  time  was  now  come  that  made  it 
necessary  for  her  to  take  that  grating  resolution.  The 
Prince  of  Orange,  who  had  already  quitted  the  Imperial 
camp,  and  was  making  a  short  tour  in  Germany,  sent 
M.  Grovestein  (one  of  the  gentlemen  of  his  bed-cham- 
ber) to  England  to  let  the  Princess  Royal  know  he 
should  be  at  the  Hague  in  a  fortnight,  and  ready  to  re- 
ceive her.  The  tears  she  shed  on  this  occasion  were 
carefully  hidden  from  Grovestein,  but  flowed  in  great 
abundance  whenever  he  was  not  present. 

After  a  consultation  of  physicians,  midwives,  and 
admirals,  about  the  manner  of  her  voyage,  it  was  de- 
termined she  should  embark  at  Harwich,  and  the  yachts 
were  accordingly  sent  thither  to  wait  for  her. 

The  Queen  was  most  unaffectedly  concerned  to  part 
with  her  daughter,  and  her  daughter  as  unaffectedly  con- 
cerned to  leave  England,  and  exchange  the  crowds  and 
splendour  of  this  Court  for  the  solitude  and  obscurity  of 
her  own.  Lord  Hervey  was  with  her  in  the  morning 

3  A  blank  in  the  original  MS. ;  probably  Slingelandt. 


1734.  THE  PRINCESS  SETS  OUT  FOR  HARWICH.  411 

[2lst  Oct.~\  before  she  set  out,  the  only  man  (except  her 
favourite,  Mr.  Schutz4)  whom  she  desired  to  attend  her ; 
and,  whilst  he  led  her  to  her  coach,  she  insisted  on  his 
writing  to  her  constantly,  to  give  her  an  account  how 
all  those  hours  passed  in  which  she  used  to  have  her 
share.  She  had  Handel  and  his  opera  so  much  at 
heart,  that  even  in  these  distressful  moments  she  spoke 
as  much  upon  his  chapter  as  any  other,  and  begged 
Lord  Hervey  to  assist  him  with  the  utmost  attention. 
In  an  hour  after  she  went  Lord  Hervey  was  sent  for 
as  usual  to  the  Queen,  who  was  really  ill,  but  was 
thought  to  say  she  was  so,  only  from  a  desire  to  lay  the 
disorder  occasioned  by  the  departure  of  the  Princess  on 
some  other  cause,  and  was  therefore  now  as  little  credited 
when  she  said  she  was  sick  as  she  had  often  been  when 
she  said  she  was  well.  Lord  Hervey  found  her  and 
the  Princess  Caroline  together,  drinking  chocolate, 
drowned  in  tears,  and  choked  with  sighs.  Whilst  they 
were  endeavouring  to  divert  their  attention  by  begin- 
ning a  conversation  with  Lord  Hervey  on  indifferent 
subjects,  the  gallery  door  opened,  upon  which  the 
Queen  said,  "  Is  the  King  here  already  ?"  and,  Lord 
Hervey  telling  her  it  was  the  Prince,  the  Queen,  not 
mistress  of  herself,  and  detesting  the  exchange  of  the 
son  for  the  daughter,  burst  out  anew  into  tears,  and 
cried  out,  "  Oh  I  my  God,  this  is  too  much."  How- 
ever, she  was  soon  relieved  from  this  irksome  company 


4  This  was,  I  ^presume,  Augustus,  the  elder  of  two  sons  of  Baron  Schutz, 
a  German  who  came  over  with  George  I.  and  settled  his  family  in  Eng- 
land. Augustus  had  been  equerry  to  George  II.  when  Prince,  and  be- 
came Master  of  the  Robes  and  Privy  Purse  to  the  King,  with  whom  he 
was  in  great  personal  favour. 


412  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVII. 

by  the  arrival  of  the  King,  who,  finding  this  unusual 
and  disagreeable  guest  in  the  gallery,  broke  up  the 
breakfast,  and  took  the  Queen  out  to  walk.  Whenever 
the  Prince  was  in  a  room  with  the  King,  it  put  one  in 
mind  of  stories  one  has  heard  of  ghosts  that  appear  to 
part  of  the  company  and  are  invisible  to  the  rest:  and 
in  this  manner,  wherever  the  Prince  stood,  though  the 
King  passed  him  ever  so  often  or  ever  so  near,  it  al- 
ways seemed  as  if  the  King  thought  the  place  the  Prince 
filled  a  void  space. 

The  Princess  Royal,  who  in  her  way  to  Harwich  was 
to  lie  the  first  night  at  Colchester,  on  her  arrival  there 
found  letters  from  the  Prince  of  Orange  to  let  her  know 
he  could  not  be  at  the  Hague  by  some  few  days  so  soon 
as  he  intended ;  and  upon  the  receipt  of  these  letters  she 
took  the  resolution  of  going  back  the  next  day  [22/zc? 
Oct.^\  to  Kensington.  The  first  intelligence  the  King 
and  Queen  had  of  her  designing  to  return  was  seeing 
her  actually  returned,  and  entering  the  room  where  they 
were,  when  they  thought  her  at  sea :  the  Queen  received 
her  with  a  thousand  kisses  and  tears  of  joy,  the  King 
with  smiles  and  open  arms ;  a  reception  she  bragged  of 
afterwards  to  everybody,  and  one  she  was  more  pleased 
with,  from  the  doubts  and  anxiety  she  had  felt  on  the 
road  of  its  not  being  so  favourable. 

This  step,  indeed,  was  approved  by  nobody,  and 
only  not  censured  by  the  King  and  Queen.  It  was 
thought  not  very  obliging  either  to  the  Prince  of  Orange 
or  the  people  of  Holland,  nor  very  prudent  with  regard 
to  her  own  circumstances  to  double  the  fatigue  of  such 
a  journey ;  the  wind,  too,  when  she  turned  back,  was 
as  fair  as  it  could  blow ;  and  what  increased  the  con- 


1734.  SUDDEN  RETURN  OF  THE  PRINCESS.  413 

demnation  of  her  conduct  was,  that  the  Prince  of  Orange, 
hearing  of  the  time  she  was  to  set  forward,  travelled 
himself  night  and  day  to  meet  her,  and  was  actually 
at  Helvoetsluys  expecting  her  arrival  as  soon  as  it 
was  possible  for  her,  had  she  gone  on,  to  have  landed 
there. 

The  day  [29th  Oct.']  before  the  birthday  the  Court 
removed  from  Kensington  to  London  ;  and  the  Queen, 
who  had  long  been  out  of  order  with  a  cough  and  a 
little  lurking  fever,  notwithstanding  she  had  been  twice 
blooded,  grew  every  hour  worse  and  worse :  however, 
the  King  lugged  her  the  night  she  came  from  Kensing- 
ton, the  first  of  Farinelli's  performances,  to  the  opera, 
and  made  her  the  next  day  go  through  all  the  tiresome 
ceremonies  of  drawing-rooms  and  balls,  the  fatigues  of 
heats  and  crowds,  and  every  other  disagreeable  appur- 
tenance to  the  celebration  of  a  birthday.  There  was  a 
strange  affectation  of  an  incapacity  of  being  sick  that  ran 
through  the  whole  Royal  Family,  which  they  carried  so 
far  that  no  one  of  them  was  more  willing  to  own  any 
other  of  the  family  ill  than  to  acknowledge  themselves 
to  be  so.  I  have  known  the  King  get  out  of  his  bed, 
choking  with  a  sore  throat,  and  in  a  high  fever,  only 
to  dress  and  have  a  levee,  and  in  five  minutes  undress 
and  return  to  his  bed  till  the  same  ridiculous  farce  of 
health  was  to  be  presented  the  next  day  at  the  same 
hour.  With  all  his  fondness  for  the  Queen,  he  used  to 
make  her  in  the  like  circumstances  commit  the  like 
extravagances,  but  never  with  more  danger  and  uneasi- 
ness than  at  this  time.  In  the  morning  drawing-room 
she  found  herself  so  near  swooning  that  she  was  forced 


414  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CH.U-.  XVII. 

to  send  Lord  Grantham  to  the  King  to  beg  he  would 
retire,  for  that  she  was  unable  to  stand  any  longer. 
Notwithstanding  which,  at  night  he  brought  her  into 
still  a  greater  crowd  at  the  ball,  and  there  kept  her  till 
eleven  o'clock. 

On  the  birthday,  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  who  had  been 
ill  of  a  flying  gout  for  some  time,  told  Lord  Hervey  he 
did  not  care  to  go  to  any  of  the  feasts,  and  would  come 
and  dine  with  him,  by  which  means  he  should  be  ready 
with  less  trouble  to  go  up  to  the  Queen  in  the  evening, 
when  he  could  catch  her  at  leisure. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole  used  always  to  go  into  Norfolk 
twice  in  a  year,  for  ten  days  in  the  summer  and  twenty 
in  November,  and  generally  set  out  for  his  second  ex- 
pedition the  day  after  the  King's  birthday  :  he  was  to 
do  so  now,  and  therefore  to  take  his  leave  this  evening 
of  the  Queen.  Between  six  and  seven  he  went  up  to 
her  from  Lord  Hervey's  lodgings,  and  stayed  there  near 
two  hours.  After  inquiring  much  of  the  state  of  her 
health,  and  finding  it  very  indifferent,  he  entreated  her 
to  take  care  of  herself,  and  told  her,  "  Madam,  your 
life  is  of  such  consequence  to  your  husband,  to  your 
children,  to  this  country,  and  indeed  to  many  other 
countries,  that  any  neglect  of  your  health  is  really  the 
greatest  immorality  you  can  be  guilty  of:  when  one 
says  these  sort  of  things  in  general  to  princes,  I  know, 
Madam,  they  must  sound  like  flattery ;  but  consider 
particular  circumstances,  and  your  Majesty  will  quickly 
find  what  I  say  to  be  strictly  true.  Your  Majesty  knows 
that  this  country  is  entirely  in  your  hands — that  the 
fondness  the  King  has  for  you,  the  opinion  he  has  of 


1734.        WALPOLE'S  CONFERENCE  WITH  THE  QUEEN.         415 

your  affection,  and  the  regard  he  has  for  your  judgment, 
are  the  only  reins  by  which  it  is  possible  to  restrain  the 
natural  violences  of  his  temper,  or  to  guide  him  through 
any  part  where  he  is  wanted  to  go.  Should  any  accident 
happen  to  your  Majesty,  who  can  tell  into  what  hands 
he  would  fall — who  can  tell  what  would  become  of  him, 
of  your  children,  and  of  us  all  ?  Some  woman,  your  Ma- 
jesty knows,  would  govern  him  ;  for  the  company  of 
men  he  cannot  bear.  Who  knows  who  that  woman 
would  be,  or  what  she  would  be  ?  She  might  be  ava- 
ricious ;  she  might  be  profuse  ;  she  might  be  ambitious  ; 
she  might,  instead  of  extricating  him  out  of  many  diffi- 
culties (like  her  predecessor),  lead  him  into  many,  and 
add  those  of  her  own  indiscretions  to  his :  perhaps, 
from  interested  views  for  herself  and  her  own  children 
(if  she  happened  to  have  any),  or  from  the  natural  and 
almost  universal  hatred  that  second  marriages  bear  to  all 
the  consequences  of  a  first,  she  might  blow  up  the  father 
against  the  son ;  irritate  the  son  against  the  father,  the 
brothers  against  one  another ;  and  might  add  to  this 
the  ill  treatment  and  oppression  of  the  sisters,  who, 
with  their  youth  and  bloom  worn  off,  without  husbands, 
without  fortunes,  without  friends,  and  without  a  mother, 
might,  with  all  the  eclat  of  their  birth  and  the  grandeur  of 
their  education,  end  their  lives  as  much  objects  of  pity 
as  they  began  them  objects  of  envy.  To  these  divisions 
in  the  palace,  the  natural  consequences  would  be  divi- 
sions in  the  kingdom ;  and  what  the  consequences  of 
those  would  be,  it  is  much  more  terrible  to  think  of 
than  difficult  to  foresee.'' 

The  Queen  wept  extremely  whilst  Sir  Robert  was 
speaking  to  her,  and  then  answered  in  this  manner : — 


416  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.'         CHAP.  xvn. 

"  Your  partiality  to  me,  my  good  Sir  Robert,  makes 
you  see  many  more  advantages  in  having  me,  and 
apprehend  many  greater  dangers  from  losing  me,  than 
are  indeed  the  effects  of  the  one,  or  than  would  be  the 
consequences  of  the  other.  That  the  King  would  marry 
again,  if  I  died,  I  believe  is  sure,  and  I  have  often  ad- 
vised him  so  to  do ;  but  his  good  sense,  and  his  affection 
for  his  family,  would  put  a  stop  to  any  such  attempts 
as  you  speak  of  in  a  second  wife,  or  at  least  would 
prevent  their  coming  to  the  height  you  describe ;  and 
as  for  his  political  government,  he  has  now  such  a  love 
for  you,  and  so  just  a  value  for  your  services,  as  well  as 
such  an  opinion  of  your  abilities,  that,  were  I  removed, 
everything  would  go  on  just  as  it  does.  You  have 
saved  us  from  many  errors,  and  this  very  year  have 
forced  us  into  safety,  whether  we  would  or  no,  against 
our  opinion  and  against  our  inclination.  The  King 
sees  this,  and  I  own  it ;  whilst  you  have  fixed  your- 
self as  strongly  in  favour  by  an  obstinate  and  wise  con- 
tradiction to  your  Prince,  as  ever  any  other  minister 
did  by  the  blindest  and  most  servile  compliance." 

Sir  Robert  thanked  her  extremely  for  all  her  good- 
ness and  kind  thoughts  of  him :  "  But  you  know, 
Madam  (said  he),  I  can  do  nothing  without  you ; 
whatever  my  industry  and  watchfulness  for  your  interest 
and  welfare  suggest,  it  is  you  must  execute :  you, 
Madam,  are  the  sole  mover  of  this  Court ;  whenever 
your  hand  stops,  everything  must  stand  still,  and,  when- 
ever that  spring  is  changed,  the  whole  system  and 
every  inferior  wheel  must  be  changed  too.  If  I  can 
boast  of  any  success  in  carrying  on  the  King's  affairs, 
it  is  a  success,  I  am  very  free  to  own,  I  never  could 


1734.       WALPOLE'S  CONFERENCE  WITH  THE  QUEEN.         417 

have  had  but  by  the  mediation  of  your  Majesty ;  for  if 
I  have  had  the  merit  of  giving  any  good  advice  to  the 
King,  all  the  merit  of  making  him  take  it,  Madam,  is 
entirely  your  own  ;  and  so  much  so  that  I  not  only 
never  did  do  anything  without  you,  but  I  know  I  never 
could ;  and  if  this  country  have  the  misfortune  to  lose 
your  Majesty,  I  should  find  it  as  impossible,  divested  of 
your  assistance,  to  persuade  the  King  into  any  measure 
he  did  not  like,  as,  whilst  we  have  the  happiness  of  pos- 
sessing your  Majesty,  any  minister  would  find  it  to 
persuade  him  into  a  step  which  you  did  not  approve." 

After  this  Sir  Robert  Walpole  proposed  putting  off 
his  journey,  which  the  Queen  insisted  he  should  not 
do  ;  he  then  said  he  would  desire  Lord  Hervey  to  give 
him  every  post  an  exact  account  of  her  health,  and 
begged  her  Majesty  would  order  Lord  Hervey  to  send 
it  from  her  own  mouth  undisguised. 

From  the  Queen's  apartment  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
returned  directly  to  Lord  Hervey 's,  sent  for  him  from 
his  company  into  a  private  room,  and  there  told  him 
everything  that  had  passed  above ;  adding  at  the  same 
time  how  uneasy  he  was  at  the  condition  in  which  he 
had  found  the  Queen,  and  was  obliged  to  leave  her, 
coughing  incessantly,  complaining  extremely  (which  in 
slight  indispositions  she  never  did),  her  head  aching 
and  heavy,  her  eyes  half  shut,  her  cheeks  flushed,  her 
pulse  quick,  her  flesh  hot,  her  spirits  low,  her  breathing 
oppressed,  and,  in  short,  all  the  symptoms  upon  her  of 
a  violent  and  universal  disorder. 

He  told  Lord  Hervey  he  had  proposed  to  the  Queen 
to  defer  his  journey  into  Norfolk,  and  said,  notwith- 
standing all  she  said  against,  that  he  would  stay, 

VOL.  i.  2  E 


418  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVII. 

did  he  not  think  that,  in  his  own  state  of  health,  the 
air  and  exercise  of  this  expedition  was  absolutely  ne- 
cessary to  fit  him  for  going  through  the  parliamentary 
fatigues  of  the  winter. 

Lord  Hervey  said  he  saw  no  use  Sir  Robert  Walpole 

could  be  of  to  the  Queen  in  her  illness,  but  that  he 

owned  he  was  sorry  the  foreign  affairs  were  not  better 

settled  before  his  departure.     Sir  Robert  Walpole  said, 

"  I  am  sure  there  will  be  no  alteration  made  in  them 

in  my  absence ;  the  King  having  given  orders  for  the 

letter  to  be  sent  which  is  to  carry  his  consent  to  Don 

Carlos's  marriage  with  the  Archduchess,  and  the  Queen 

has   promised   me   there   shall    be   no  expressions   in 

the  letter  that  can  be  construed  by  the  Emperor  to  be 

any  promise  of  assistance  by  force  from   England,  in 

case  the  mediation  of  England  for  peace  should  prove 

ineffectual.     I    convinced   her  how  proper   it  was  to 

steer  clear  of  such  engagements,  by  telling  her  it  would 

always  be  time  enough  to  give  the  Emperor  assistance 

with  force,  if  it  should  in  futurity  be  thought  expedient 

and  advisable  so  to  do ;  but  that  there  could  be  no 

good  in  making  promise  of  it  beforehand,  or  even  in 

giving  such  hints  as  might  make  assistance  expected ; 

in  the  first  place,  because  such  hopes  might  make  the 

Emperor   more   refractory   in   schemes    proposed    for 

accommodation ;  and  in  the  next,  because  they  might 

afford  him  a  handle  to  reproach  England  in  case  we  did 

not  assist  him,  that  it  was  upon  account  of  the  hopes  given 

that  we  would  that  he  had  resolved  to  run  the  hazard 

of  another  campaign  ;  in  which  event,  whatever  losses 

he  sustained,  his  resentment  against  those  by  whom  he 

would  say  he  was  drawn  in  to  suffer  such  misfortunes 


1734.          HERVEY'S  CONFERENCE  WITH  WALPOLE.  419 

and  disgrace  would  be  full  as  great  as  against  those  by 
whom  they  were  actually  inflicted. 

Lord  Hervey  told  him  he  firmly  believed  the  Queen 
now  intended  to  do  what  Sir  Robert  Walpole  had 
advised;  "  But  consider,  Sir,  "continued  he,  "  how  often 
she  has  advanced,  and  how  often  retreated ;  consider, 
too,  what  effects  the  opportunity  of  your  absence  and 
the  importunity  of  those  who  differ  from  you  may  have 
on  her  mind,  and  consequently  on  the  King's  counsels, 
when,  talking  the  sentiments  of  her  heart  and  the  dic- 
tates of  his  inclination,  they  shall  try,  with  such 
powerful  auxiliaries  on  their  side,  to  efface  the  im- 
pressions you  have  left  upon  her  reason — impressions 
made  with  so  much  difficulty  and  received  with  so 
much  reluctance.  You  know  how  often  this  letter  has 
been  ordered,  and  how  often  countermanded ;  how 
often  it  has  actually  been  written,  and  yet  not  sent, 
from  being  conceived  in  terms  either  not  approved 
by  those  who  counselled  its  being  written,  or  by  those 
who  were  so  unwillingly  persuaded  to  order  it.  You 
yourself  once  told  me  that,  when  first  this  scheme  of 
accommodation  was  proposed,  the  King  said  he  would 
rather  risk  his  Crown  than  suffer  a  Prince  of  the  House 
of  Bourbon  to  have  any  chance  to  sit  on  the  Imperial 
Throne.  This  you  got  over,  and  gained  his  consent : 
when  you  had  done  so,  and  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  had 
orders  to  say  to  the  Court  of  France  that  the  King  had 
consented  to  the  match,  you,  in  order  to  make  this  mea- 
sure seem  a  little  consistent  with  the  language  that  had 
been  talked  to  that  Court  at  the  time  of  the  Treaty  of 
Hanover,  were  forced  to  dress  up  this  letter  with  many 
palliative  expressions,  pleading  the  necessity  of  the 

2  E2 


420  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVII. 

times,  the  alteration  of  circumstances,  the  exigency  of 
affairs,  and  several  other  particulars  that  were  to  recon- 
cile these  opposite  ways  of  acting  in  different  seasons, 
and  that  looked  as  if  this  was  a  measure  to  which  Eng- 
land was  rather  forced  than  inclined.  Accordingly, 
when  this  letter  so  drawn  was  sent  to  the  King,  his 
Majesty,  who  was  not  under  the  same  obligations  as  his 
Ministers  to  manage  appearances  and  reconcile  this 
step  with  that  of  the  Hanover  Treaty,  sent  back  the 
letter  to  his  Grace  of  Newcastle  with  no  other  comment 
than  these  words  written  at  the  bottom  of  it : — '  I  do  not 
like  this  despatch,  and  will  not  have  it  go.'  Upon  this  the 
Duke  of  Newcastle  fretted,  the  King  stormed,  and  you 
were  forced  to  be  quiet;  reproached  by  his  Grace, 
snapped  by  his  Majesty,  and  your  distress  laughed  at 
by  the  Queen,  who  was  glad  to  see  that  accidentally 
postponed  which  you  had  worried  her  into  forwarding." 

Sir  Robert  Walpole  to  this  replied,  that  Lord 
Hervey  went  back  to  a  season  when  the  Queen  rather 
yielded  than  concurred,  and  acquiesced  without  being 
convinced ;  but  he  assured  him  that  now  she  was 
brought  over  entirely  to  his  way  of  thinking :  in  which 
opinion  he  either  flattered  himself  (deceived  by  the 
Queen,  and  the  propensity  everybody  has  to  believe 
they  convince  when  they  persuade),  or  he  endeavoured 
to  deceive  Lord  Hervey  by  saying  what  he  wished,  and 
not  what  he  thought. 

During  this  conference  Lord  Hervey  told  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  that  he  feared  the  King  had  over- 
heard everything  that  had  passed  this  evening  between 
him  and  the  Queen.  Sir  Robert  started  at  this,  and 
said,  "  If  he  has,  it  is  impossible  he  can  ever  forgive  me ; 


1734.  WALPOLE'S  ALARM.  421 

but  what  reason  have  you,  my  dear  Lord,  to  think  so  ?" 
"I  will  tell  you,"  replied  Lord  Hervey.  "As  soon  as 
you  left  me,  having  something  to  say  to  the  Princess 
Caroline,  and  knowing  she  always  left  the  Queen  when 
you  came  to  her,  I  went  up  to  her  apartment  to  take 
that  opportunity  of  speaking  to  her:  not  finding  her 
there,  I  went  to  the  Queen's  pages,  asked  of  them 
where  she  was,  and  from  them  I  learned  that  the  King, 
with  his  three  eldest  daughters,  when  you  came  to  the 
Queen,  went  into  the  bed-chamber,  which  you  know  is 
the  next  room  to  that  where  the  Queen  and  you  were 
together.  When  I  heard  this,  and  reflected  on  what  you 
once  told  me  at  Kensington  of  his  shutting  himself  up 
in  a  closet,  and  leaving  the  door  ajar  to  listen  to  a  con- 
ference between  the  Queen  and  you,  I  immediately 
concluded  that  from  the  same  curiosity  he  had  now 
done  the  same  thing."  "  for  God's  sake  (said  Sir 
Robert  Walpole),  find  out  whether  it  was  so  or  not, 
and  let  me  know  before  I  set  out  to-morrow  morning 
for  Norfolk"  Accordingly  Lord  Hervey,  going  im- 
mediately up  to  the  ball,  there  told  Princess  Caroline 
that  he  had  been  at  her  apartment  this  evening,  had 
not  found  her  at  home,  and  wondered  where  she  had 
been :  upon  which  she  presently  told  him,  that  as  soon 
as  Sir  Robert  Walpole  came  to  the  Queen,  the  King, 
with  her  and  her  sisters,  went  through  the  Queen's  bed- 
chamber and  the  younger  Princesses'  apartment  down 
to  their  governess's  lodgings,  my  Lady  Deloraine. 

Lord  Hervey  was  not  a  little  pleased  to  find  his  con- 
jectures had  been  false,  and  quickly  made  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  easy  by  a  short  note  to  tell  him  what  the  case 


422  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVII. 

had  been :  the  next  day  Sir  Robert  set  out  for  Norfolk, 
and  soon  after  the  Princess  Eoyal  again  for  Harwich, 
where  I  shall  leave  her  for  some  time,  and  return  in 
my  narrative  to  St.  James's. 


The  following  passage,  evidently  a  fragment  of  a 
somewhat  undutiful  criticism  of  the  Princess  Royal  on 
her  father,  appears  in  the  MS.,  but  the  words  that 
should  have  connected  it  with  the  text  are  lost : — 

*  *  *  "his  giving  himself  airs  of  gallantry;  the  im- 
possibility of  being  easy  with  him ;  his  affectation  of 
heroism ;  his  unreasonable,  simple,  uncertain,  disagree- 
able, and  often  shocking  behaviour  to  the  Queen ;  the 
difficulty  of  entertaining  him ;  his  insisting  upon 
people's  conversation  who  were  to  entertain  him  being 
always  new,  and  his  own  being  always  the  same  thing 
over  and  over  again  ;  in  short,  all  his  weaknesses,  all  his 
errors,  and  all  his  faults  were  the  topics  upon  which  at 
Kensington,  the  summer  after  she  was  married  (when 
she  was  most  with  Lord  Hervey),  she  was  for  ever 
expatiating." 


1734.  LADY  SUFFOLK.  423 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Lady  Suffolk — Rupture  with  the  King — Goes  to  Bath — Resolves  to  retire 
— Sentiments  of  the  Royal  Family,  Wai  pole,  and  the  Public  on  this  change 
— Dodington  discarded  by  the  Prince — Favour  of  Lyttelton — Princess  of 
Orange  puts  to  sea  from  Harwich,  but  returns — Proceeds  at  last  by 
Calais — Foreign  Affairs — Marriage  of  Don  Carlos — Church  Promotions 
— Hoadley  reluctantly  advanced  to  Winchester — Struggle  for  and  against 
Rundle — Benson  and  Seeker  appointed  to  Gloucester  and  Bristol,  and 
Rundle  to  Derry. 

THE  interest  of  Lady  Suffolk  with  the  King  had  been 
long  declining:  his  nightly  visits  all  last  winter  had 
been  much  shorter  than  they  used  to  be,  and  not  with- 
out sometimes  a  total  intermission.  His  morning 
walks,  too,  this  last  summer  resembled  his  nightly  visits 
the  preceding  winter ;  and  all  those  who  saw  them  to- 
gether at  the  commerce-table  in  the  evening  in  his  pri- 
vate apartment  plainly  perceived  they  were  so  ill 
together  that,  when  he  did  not  neglect  her,  the  notice 
he  took  of  her  was  still  a  stronger  mark  of  his  dislike 
than  his  taking  none.  At  Richmond,  where  the  house 
is  small,  the  walls  thin,  and  what  is  said  in  one  room 
may  be  often  overheard  in  the  next,  I  was  told  by  Lady 
Bristol,  mother  to  Lord  Hervey,  the  lady  of  the  bed- 
chamber then  in  waiting  (whose  apartment  was  sepa- 
rated from  Lady  Suffolk's  only  by  a  thin  wainscot),  that 
she  often  heard  the  King  talking  there  in  a  morning  in 
an  angry  and  impatient  tone;  and  though  generally 
she  could  only  distinguish  here  and  there  a  word,  yet 


424  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

one  morning  particularly,  whilst  Lady  Suffolk,  who 
always  spoke  in  a  low  voice,  seemed  to  be  talking  a 
long  while  together,  the  King  every  now  and  then  in- 
terrupted her  by  saying  over  and  over  again,  "  That  is 
none  of  your  business,  madam ;  you  have  nothing  to  do 
with  that."  The  lady  who  told  me  this,  being  a  little 
addicted  to  weave  fable  in  her  narratives,  I  should  not 
have  given  credit  enough  to  her  story  to  insert  it  had  she 
not  related  it  to  me  before  the  transactions  of  the  sum- 
mer, and  consequently  when  she  could  not  do  it  from 
that  vanity,  as  natural  perhaps  to  her  as  to  many  other 
people,  who  love,  upon  the  arrival  of  a  remarkable  in- 
cident which  few  expected,  to  tell  you  some  circum- 
stances by  which  they  endeavour  to  show  they  were,  by 
their  great  sagacity  or  good  intelligence,  much  earlier 
apprised  of  it  than  the  gross  herd  of  the  world. 

Towards  the  latter  end  of  the  summer  Lady  Suffolk, 
who  had  long  borne  his  Majesty's  contempt,  neglect, 
snubs,  and  ill  humour  with  a  resignation  that  few  people 
who  felt  so  sensibly  could  have  suffered  so  patiently,  at 
last  resolved  to  withdraw  herself  from  these  severe 
trials,  from  which  no  advantage  accrued  but  the  con- 
scious pride  of  her  own  fortitude  in  supporting  them 
with  prudence. 

On  the  pretence,  therefore,  or,  more  properly 
speaking,  on  the  plea  of  ill  health,  she  asked  leave 
to  go  for  six  weeks  to  drink  the  Bath  waters ;  from 
thence  she  returned  the  day  before  the  birthday  [30th 
Oct.~\  to  St.  James's,  but  the  King  went  no  more  to  her 
apartment;  and  when  he  met  her  in  the  Queen's 
dressing-room  spoke  to  her  with  the  same  indifference 
that  he  would  have  done  to  any  other  lady  of  the 


1734.  LADY  SUFFOLK.  425 

Queen's  family,  asking  her  only  some  slight  common 
drawing-room  question. 

That  the  King  went  no  more  in  an  evening  to  Lady 
Suffolk  was  whispered  about  the  Court  by  all  that  be- 
longed to  it,  and  was  one  of  those  secrets  that  everybody 
knows,  and  everybody  avoids  publicly  to  seem  to  know. 

Various  were  the  sentiments  of  people  on  this  oc- 
casion. The  Queen  was  both  glad  and  sorry :  her 
pride  was  glad  to  have  even  this  ghost  of  a  rival 
removed ;  and  she  was  sorry  to  have  so  much  more  of 
her  husband's  time  thrown  upon  her  hands,  when  she 
had  already  enough  to  make  her  often  heartily  weary 
of  his  company,  and  to  deprive  her  of  other  company 
which  she  gladly  would  have  enjoyed. 

I  am  sensible,  when  I  say  the  Queen  was  pleased 
with  the  removal  of  Lady  Suffolk  as  a  rival,  that  I  seem 
to  contradict  what  I  have  formerly  said  in  these  papers 
of  her  being  rather  desirous  (for  fear  of  a  successor)  to 
keep  Lady  Suffolk  about  the  King,  than  solicitous  to 
banish  her ;  but,  in  describing  the  sentiments  of  the 
same  people  at  different  times,  human  creatures  are  so 
inconsistent  with  themselves,  that  the  inconsistencyof 
such  descriptions  often  arises,  not  from  the  mistakes  or 
forgetfulness  of  the  describer,  but  from  the  instability 
and  changeableness  of  the  person  described. 

The  Prince,  I  believe,  wished  Lady  Suffolk  removed, 
as  he  would  have  wished  anybody  detached  from  the 
King's  interest ;  and,  added  to  this,  Lady  Suffolk 
having  many  friends,  it  was  a  step  that  he  hoped  would 
make  his  father  many  enemies  ;  neither  was  he  sorry, 
perhaps,  to  have  so  eminent  a  precedent  for  a  prince's 
discarding  a  mistress  he  was  tired  of. 


426  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

The  Princess  Emily  wished  Lady  Suffolk's  disgrace 
because  she  wished  misfortune  to  most  people;  the 
Princess  Caroline,  because  she  thought  it  would  please 
her  mother  :  the  Princess  Royal  was  violently  for  having 
her  crushed ;  and  when  Lord  Hervey  said  he  wondered 
she  was  so  desirous  to  have  this  lady's  disgrace  pushed 
to  such  extremity,  she  replied,  "Lady  Suffolk, 's conduct 
with  regard  to  politics  has  been  so  impertinent  that  she 
cannot  be  too  ill  used;"1  and  when  Lord  Hervey  inti- 
mated the  danger  there  might  be,  from  the  King's 
coquetry,  of  some  more  troublesome  and  powerful  suc- 
cessor, she  said  (not  very  judiciously  with  regard  to 
her  mother,  nor  very  respectfully  with  regard  to  her 
father),  "  I  wish,  with  all  my  heart,  he  would  take  some- 
body else,  that  Mamma  might  be  a  little  relieved  from  the 
ennui  of  seeing  him  for  ever  in  her  room"  At  the  same 
time  the  King  was  always  bragging  how  dearly  his 
daughter  Anne  loved  him. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole  hated  Lady  Suffolk,  and  was 
hated  by  her,  but  did  not  wish  her  driven  out  of  St. 
James's,  imagining  somebody  would  come  in  her  place 
who,  from  his  attachment  to  the  Queen,  must  hate  him 
as  strongly,  and  might  hate  him  more  dangerously. 

The  true  reasons  of  her  disgrace1  were  the  King's 


i  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  her  marriage  with  Mr.  George  Berkeley 
— to  which  her  retiring  from  Court  was  a  necessary  preliminary — must  have 
been  already  settled,  though  it  did  not  take  place  till  next  year;  as  it  seems 
from  the  '  Suffolk  Correspondence,'  that  the  journey  to  Bath  was  made  with 
his  privitj7  and  advice,  and  he  accompanied  her  thither,  where  there  was 
assembled  a  society  of  her  old  friends  that  could  not  be  very  agreeable  to 
the  Court — Chesterfield,  Pulteney,  Pope,  &c.  It  is  very  likely  that  she 
might  not  have  thought  of  this  marriage  if  she  had  not  felt  her  favour  on 
the  decline,  but  it  was  calculated  to  reflect  back  on  her  resignation  some- 
thing of  a  natural  and  voluntary  character. 


1734.  LADY  SUFFOLK  RETIRES.  427 

being  thoroughly  tired  of  her,  her  constant  opposition 
to  all  his  measures,  her  wearying  him  with  her  per- 
petual contradiction  ;  her  intimacy  with  Mr.  Pope,  who 
had  published  several  satires,  with  his  name  to  them,  in 
which  the  King  and  all  his  family  were  rather  more 
than  obliquely  sneered  at ;  the  acquaintance  she  was 
known  to  have  with  many  of  the  opposing  party,  and 
the  correspondence  she  was  suspected  to  have  with 
many  more  of  them ;  and,  in  short,  her  being  no 
longer  pleasing  to  the  King  in  her  private  capacity, 
and  every  day  more  disagreeable  to  him  in  her  public 
conduct. 

About  a  fortnight,  therefore,  after  her  return  from 
the  Bath,  finding  the  King  persist  in  withholding  his 
usual  visits,  she  took  the  resolution  of  quitting  the 
Court.2  She  neither  had,  nor  desired  to  have  (that  I 
ever  heard,  at  least),  any  eclaircissement  with  the 
King,  or  to  take  any  leave  of  him  ;  but  asked  an  audi- 
ence of  the  Queen,  with  whom  she  was  above  an  hour 
and  a  half  alone,  and  resigned  her  employment  of 
Mistress  of  the  Robes.  The  next  day  she  left  the 
Palace  and  went  to  her  brother  my  Lord  Hobart's 
house  in  St.  James's  Square. 

2  Lady  Suffolk  left  Bath  on  the  26th  of  October,  arrived  in  town  the  29th, 
and  resigned  on  the  llth  of  November. — Suff".  Cor.,  ii.  119.  The  Duke 
of  Newcastle  thus  announces  the  event  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  then  in 
Norfolk  :— 

u  Nov.  13,  1734. — You  will  see  by  the  newspapers  that  Lady  Suffolk 
has  left  the  Court.  The  particulars  that  I  had  from  the  Queen  are,  that 
last  week  she  acquainted  the  Queen  with  her  design,  putting  it  upon  the 
King's  unkind  usage  of  her.  The  Queen  ordered  her  to  stay  a  week, 
which  she  did,  but  last  Monday  had  another  audience  ;  complained  again  of 
her  unkind  treatment  from  the  King — was  very  civil  to  the  Queen — and 
went  that  night  to  her  brother's  house  in  St.  James's  Square."—  Core,  iii. 
209. 


428  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

What  she  said  to  the  Queen  I  never  could  learn, 
and,  considering  all  circumstances,  it  must  be  very 
difficult  to  guess  ;  since  I  cannot  imagine  the  mistress 
could  say  to  the  wife,  "  Your  husband  not  being  so  kind 
to  me  as  he  used  to  be,  I  cannot  serve  you  any  longer  ,•" 
and  for  any  other  reasons  Lady  Suffolk  could  allege 
for  quitting  the  Queen's  service,  I  am  as  much  at  a  loss 
to  comprehend  what  they  could  be  as  I  believe  she  was 
to  invent  them. 

This  great  Court  revolution  was  for  some  time  the 
talk  of  the  whole  town.  Those  who  were  inclined  to 
make  it  a  topic  of  invective  against  the  King  said  it 
showed  the  hardness  of  his  nature,  that,  after  Lady 
Suffolk  had  undergone  twenty  years'  slavery  to  his  dis- 
agreeable temper  and  capricious  will,  after  she  had 
sacrificed  her  time,  her  quiet,  her  reputation,  and  her 
health  to  his  service  and  his  pleasure,  he  could  use  a 
woman  of  her  merit,  prudence,  and  understanding  so  ill 
as  to  force  her  to  this  step,  and  for  no  other  reasons 
than  her  having,  contrary  to  the  servile  conduct  of  most 
courtiers,  risked  his  favour  in  consulting  his  interest, 
and  ventured  to  tell  him  those  disagreeable  truths  which 
few  favourites  have  honesty  and  regard  enough  for  their 
benefactors  to  impart,  and  fewer  princes  sense  enough 
to  bear  being  informed  of,  though  for  want  of  such  in- 
formation in  time  so  many  princes  have  been  at  last 
undone. 

To  have  heard  Lady  Suffolk's  friends,  or  rather  the 
King's  enemies,  comment  on  this  transaction,  one  would 
have  imagined  that  the  King,  instead  of  dropping  a 
mistress  to  give  himself  up  entirely  to  a  wife,  had  re- 
pudiated some  virtuous,  obedient,  and  dutiful  wife,  in 


1734.     COMMENTS  ON  LADY  SUFFOLK'S  RETIREMENT.       429 

order  to  abandon  himself  to  the  dissolute  commerce  and 
dangerous  sway  of  some  new  favourite. 

Those  who  justified  the  King  upon  this  occasion 
said  it  was  very  natural  for  a  man  of  so  uxorious  a 
turn,  and  so  passionately  fond  of  his  wife,  to  think 
little  of  any  other  woman,  especially  at  his  time  of 
life ;  and  that  nobody  surely  could  imagine  there 
was  any  great  immorality  or  any  great  injustice 
in  his  giving  those  hours  to  the  Queen  which  he 
used  to  pass  with  Lady  Suffolk ;  nor  was  it  very  sur- 
prising that,  in  consulting  his  pleasure  only,  he  should 
prefer  the  conversation  of  a  woman  who  was  all  cheer- 
fulness, resignation,  and  compliance,  to  that  of  another 
who  was  for  ever  thwarting  his  inclinations,  reflecting 
on  his  conduct,  and  contradicting  his  opinion ;  that  he 
should  like  one  who  was  always  flattering  him  better 
than  one  who  was  always  finding  fault  with  him  ;  or  be 
more  pleased  with  her  who  was  always  solving  difficul- 
ties than  with  her  who  was  always  starting  them.  It  was 
further  added,  that,  since  the  King  intended  to  continue 
Lady  Suffolk's  pension,  sure  she  had  no  reason  to  com- 
plain, or  to  think  the  punishment  inflicted  on  her  for 
censuring  his  Ministers  and  condemning  all  his  mea- 
sures a  very  severe  one,  since  it  was  nothing  more  than 
his  withdrawing  himself  from  hearing  what  he  could 
not  prevent  her  from  uttering. 

The  malcontents  were  extremely  pleased  with  this 
new  acquisition  to  their  party,  and  exulted  much  in  the 
hopes  of  this  ungrateful  conduct  of  the  King's,  as  they 
called  it,  towards  Lady  Suffolk,  occasioning  great 
clamour,  and  increasing  the  odium  which  these  indus- 


430  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.         CHAP.  xvm. 

trious  anti-courtiers  lost  no  opportunity  of  propagating 
against  him  ;  but  it  was  a  great  alloy  to  their  joy,  and 
a  great  satisfaction  to  those  they  opposed,  to  see  this 
back  door  to  the  King's  ear  (the  only  way  by  which 
any  reflections  on  his  Ministers  could  be  conveyed)  at 
last  shut  up :  nor  was  it  matter  of  less  sorrow  to  one 
party  than  joy  to  the  other  to  imagine  that,  after  so 
signal  a  sacrifice  to  the  Administration,  few  people  in 
the  palace,  though  ever  so  well  disposed  to  the  Oppo- 
nents or  disaffected  to  the  Minister,  would  venture,  by 
the  same  remonstrances  to  the  King,  to  incur  the  same 
fate ;  everybody,  both  friends  and  foes,  being  equally 
persuaded  that  the  example  of  this  wreck  would  deter 
any  other  person  from  sailing  near  those  rocks  on  which 
Lady  Suffolk  had  split. 

As  to  the  clamour  this  event  would  occasion,  they 
must  know  very  little  of  the  nature  of  Courts  or  man- 
kind who  flatter  themselves  that  the  disgrace  of  one 
person,  let  that  person  be  ever  so  amiable  or  consider- 
able, would  be  anything  more  than  the  novel  of  a  fort- 
night, which  everybody  would  recount  and  everybody 
forget ;  or  that  an  enemy  out  of  the  Court  would  ever 
be  able  to  give  material  disturbance  to  those  whom 
they  vainly  endeavoured  to  molest  whilst  they  were 
in  it. 

In  this  manner,  then,  after  twenty  years'  duration, 
ended  the  nominal  favour  and  enervate  reign  of  poor 
Lady  Suffolk,  who  never  had  power  enough  to  do  good 
to  those  to  whom  she  wished  well,  though,  by  working 
on  the  susceptible  passions  of  him  whom  she  often 
endeavoured  to  irritate,  she  had  just  influence  enough, 


1734.          DODINGTON  DISCARDED  BY  THE  PRINCE.  431 

by  watching  her  opportunities,   to  distress  those  some- 
times to  whom  she  wished  ill. 

About  the  time  of  this  disgrace  there  happened 
another,  in  the  Prince's  Court,  of  a  very  different  na- 
ture ;  I  mean  that  of  Mr.  Dodington,  which  began 
now  to  be  commonly  known  and  publicly  talked  of,  but 
in  a  manner  very  unlike  that  in  which  people  spoke  of 
Lady  Suffolk's.  For  as,  in  Lady  Suffolk's  case,  many, 
from  political  considerations,  rejoiced  at  her  removal, 
though  none  from  personal  enmity  rejoiced  at  her  mis- 
fortunes, so  with  regard  to  Mr.  Dodington  it  was  just 
the  reverse :  nobody  in  a  political  light  thinking  it  of 
any  consequence  whether  he  was  in  or  out  of  the 
Prince's  favour ;  and  everybody,  from  personal  dislike 
to  the  man,  being  glad  of  his  meeting  with  any  morti- 
fication. Mr.  Dodington,  whilst  some  people  have  the 
je  ne  sais  quoi  in  pleasing,  possessed  the  je  ne  sais  quoi 
in  displeasing,  in  the  strongest  and  most  universal 
degree  that  ever  any  man  was  blessed  with  that  gift — 
being,  with  good  parts  aud  a  great  deal  of  wit,  as  far 
from  agreeable  in  company  as  he  was,  notwithstanding 
his  knowledge  and  his  great  fortune,  from  being  es- 
teemed by  any  party,  or  making  any  figure  in  the 
State.  He  was  one  of  those  unfortunate  people  whom 
it  was  the  fashion  to  abuse,  and  ungenteel  to  be  seen 
with  ;  and  many  people  really  despised  him,  who  natu- 
rally, one  should  have  imagined,  were  rather  in  a  situa- 
tion to  envy  him.  His  vanity  in  company  was  so  over- 
bearing, so  insolent,  and  so  insupportable,  that  he 
seemed  to  exact  that  applause  as  his  due  which  other 
people  solicit,  and  to  think  he  had  a  right  to  make 
every  auditor  his  admirer. 


432  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

The  reason  the  Prince  gave  for  disliking  and  dis- 
carding him  was,  "  that  he  hated  those  trimming  das- 
tard souls  that  had  not  resolution  enough  to  oppose 
those  whom  they  were  always  condemning ;  and  could 
never  think  such  men  honest  as  were  always  abetting 
those  measures  in  public  which  they  were  always  cen- 
suring in  private ;  any  more  than  he  could  ever  ap- 
prove people's  conduct  who  were  perpetually  acting 
openly  in  concert  with  the  very  men  that  they  were 
for  ever  secretly  abusing  and  defaming." 

Right  sentiments  these,  and  pompous  expressions;  but 
the  Prince's  heart  was  no  more  capable  of  giving  birth 
to  such  sentiments,  than  his  capacity  was  of  clothing 
them  in  such  words.  Lord  Chesterfield  had  repeated 
these  sayings  till  the  Prince  had  got  them  by  heart, 
and  then  gave  them  as  his  own  reasons  for  doing,  from 
honesty  and  judgment,  that  which  in  reality  he  did 
from  levity  and  weakness. 

The  Prince  used  to  say,  too,  that  it  was  impossible 
but  that  there  must  be  something  very  wrong  in  a  man 
who  not  only  had  no  friend,  but  whom  everybody  who 
mentioned  him  at  all  spoke  of  as  an  enemy. 

Mr.  Lyttelton,3  a  nephew  of  Lord  Cobham's,  whom 
Dodington  had  brought  about  the  Prince,  had  con- 
tributed too  to  this  disgrace ;  for  Dodington,  from  irre- 
solution, or  fear  of  throwing  the  Prince  (as  I  have  said 
before)  into  the  hand  of  those  who  were  at  the  head  of 
the  opposing  party,  had  dissuaded  the  Prince  from 
going  those  lengths  to  which  Lord  Cobham  and  Lord 
Chesterfield,  who  were  exasperated  to  the  last  degree 

3  Afterwards  Sir  George  and  Lord  Lyttelton,  now  about  25  years  old. 


1734.  LYTTELTON.  433 

against  the  Court,  wished  to  drive  him.  Lyttelton, 
therefore,  who  did  and  said  everything  his  uncle,  Lord 
Cobham,  wished  he  should,  was  for  ever,  by  proxy  from 
Lord  Cobham,  suggesting  at  one  ear  what  Lord  Ches- 
terfield was  administering  in  person  at  the  other,  both 
of  them  inculcating  that  Dodington's  game  was  so  to 
play  the  Prince's  favour  as  to  keep  him  in  a  sort  of 
equilibre  till  he  found  to  which  party  he  could  sell  his 
Royal  Highness  to  the  best  advantage. 

Among  many  other  things  which  Lyttelton  suggested 
to  the  Prince  to  depreciate  Dodington,  he  once  said  to 
him,  "  Though  I  hate  Sir  Robert  Walpole  myself,  and 
think  him  a  bad  man  and  a  bad  Minister,  yet,  when  I 
reflect  how  partial  he  has  formerly  been  to  Dodington, 
the  favours  he  has  conferred  upon  him,  the  manner  in 
which  he  brought  him  into  the  world,  and  the  credit  in 
which  he  supported  him  there,  I  own  I  am  shocked 
when  I  hear  Dodington  railing  at  him  ;  and  though  all 
he  says  may  be  true,  yet  the  obligations  he  has  to  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  make  me  hate  the  ungrateful  man 
who  can  forget  them ;  and  I  feel  myself  more  exasper- 
ated against  Dodington  for  publishing  and  exaggerat- 
ing Sir  Robert  Walpole's  faults  than  I  am  against  Sir 
Robert  for  committing  them." 

Whilst  Lyttelton  was  saying  these  things  to  the 
Prince,  he  never  reflected  that  it  was  Dodington  who 
brought  him  first  to  that  ear  into  which  he  was  now 
pouring  them  ;  and  that  he  himself  was,  consequently, 
in  a  stronger  degree,  the  very  thing  to  Dodington 
which  he  was  so  vehemently  reviling  Dodington  for 
being  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole. 

This  new  favourite,  Mr.  Lyttelton,  was,  in  his  figure, 
VOL.  i.  2  F 


434  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

extremely  tall  and  thin  ;4  his  face  was  so  ugly,  his  per- 
son so  ill  made,  and  his  carriage  so  awkward,  that  every 
feature  was  a  blemish,  every  limb  an  incumbrance,  and 
every  motion  a  disgrace ;  but,  as  disagreeable  as  his 
figure  was,  his  voice  was  still  more  so,  and  his  address 
more  disagreeable  than  either.  He  had  a  great  flow 
of  words  that  were  always  uttered  in  a  lulling  mono- 
tony, and  the  little  meaning  they  had  to  boast  of  was 
generally  borrowed  from  the  commonplace  maxims 
and  sentiments  of  moralists,  philosophers,  patriots,  and 
poets,  crudely  imbibed,  half  digested,  ill  put  together, 
and  confusedly  refunded. 

Dodington's  house,  in  Pall-Mali,  stood  close  to  the 
garden6  the  Prince  had  bought  there  of  Lord  Chester- 
field ;  and  during  Dodington's  favour  the  Prince  had 
suffered  him  to  make  a  door  out  of  his  house  into  this 
garden,  which,  upon  the  first  decay  of  his  interest,  the 
Prince  shut  up — building  and  planting  before  Doding- 
ton's house,  and  changing  every  lock  in  his  own  to 
which  he  had  formerly  given  Dodington  keys.  Dod- 
ington,  when  he  found  Lord  Chesterfield  had  sup- 
planted and  Lyttelton  undermined  him,  retired  into 
the  country  unaccompanied  and  as  much  unpitied  in 
his  disgrace  as  unenvied  in  his  prosperity. 

I  shall  now  return  to  the  Princess  Royal,  who,  the 
day  after  she  came  to  Harwich  [  Wednesday,  6th  Nov."], 


4  Thus  described  in  a  caricature  and  doggrel  lampoon  of  the  day : — 

"  But  who  is  dat  bestride  a  pony, 
So  long,  so  lean,  so  lank,  so  bony  ? 
Dat  be  the  great  orator  Lytteltony  !  " 

5  Part  of  what  was  in  our  day  the  garden  of  Carlton  House,  since  built 
on  with  little  taste,  and  less  regard  to  public  interests. 


1734.  PRINCESS  ROYAL  RETURNS.  435 

embarked  there  for  Holland.  When  she  had  been  some 
time  at  sea  she  grew  so  ill  that  she  either  was,  or  made 
all  those  about  her  say  she  was,  in  convulsions  ;  and  the 
wind  not  being  quite  fair,  she  obliged  the  Captain  of  the 
yacht,  after  lying  several  hours  at  anchor,  to  tack  about 
and  put  her  again  on  shore  at  Harwich.  As  soon  as  she 
arrived  there  she  despatched  a  courier  to  London  with 
letters  (written,  as  it  was  supposed,  by  her  own  absolute 
command)  from  her  physician,  her  man-midwife,  and 
her  nurse,  to  say  she  was  so  disordered  with  this  expe- 
dition that  she  could  not  be  stirred  these  ten  days  from 
her  bed  without  running  the  greatest  danger  of  mis- 
carrying, nor  put  to  sea  again  at  all  without  the  hazard 
both  of  her  child's  life  and  her  own.  All  her  train 
wrote  in  the  same  style ;  and  the  same  judgment  was 
made  on  these  proceedings  by  the  King  and  Queen, 
the  whole  Court,  and  the  whole  kingdom — which  was, 
that  her  Royal  Highness  was  determined,  if  possible, 
to  persuade,  entreat,  or  fright  her  husband  and  her 
parents  into  consenting  that  she  should  lie-in  in 
England. 

The  King  and  Queen,  though  she  wrote  for  orders 
what  she  should  do,  declined  giving  any,  but  said  the 
Prince  of  Orange  ought  to  be  consulted,  and  his  direc- 
tions followed.  The  Prince  of  Orange  was  written  to 
by  the  same  people  who  had  written  to  the  King  and 
Queen,  and  in  the  same  strain ;  but  he,  knowing  of 
what  prejudice  it  would  be  to  his  affairs  to  have  the 
Princess  Royal  lie-in  in  England,  and  seeing  plainly  it 
was  that  she  drove  at,  wrote  to  his  wife  to  propose  her 
coming  by  Calais,  and  to  the  Queen  to  beg  of  her  not 
only  not  to  oppose  this  proposal,  but  to  expostulate  with 

2  F2 


436  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

her  daughter,  and  forward  this  expedient,  in  case  she 
found  the  Princess  averse  to  it. 

These  delays  made  the  King,  who  was  always  im- 
patient under  unavoidable  difficulties,  but  outrageous 
with  those  who  started  any  unnecessary  ones,  so  peevish 
with  his  daughter  that  he  made  the  Queen  write  to  say 
she  must  and  should  lie-in  in  Holland  ;  and,  since  the 
Prince  of  Orange  desired  she  might  go  by  Calais,  and 
that  it  was  thought  for  her  safety  she  should  do  so, 
he  consented  to  it :  but  this  was  much  against  his  will, 
on  account  of  the  uncertain  terms  upon  which  this 
Court  now  was  with  the  Court  of  France.  At  the 
same  time  that  the  King  ordered  the  Duke  of  New- 
castle to  let  M.  Chavigny  know  that  the  Prince  of 
Orange  desired  the  Princess  Royal  might  go  by  France 
into  Holland,  he  charged  his  Grace  to  insist  on  her 
being  received  there  entirely  as  a  private  person ;  and 
that  there  might  not  at  St.  James's  be  all  the  bustle  of 
a  new  parting,  which  must  have  been  the  consequence 
of  a  new  meeting,  he  ordered  the  Princess  Royal  to  go 
across  the  country  the  nearest  way  from  Harwich  to 
Dover,  without  coming  by  London.  But  his  Majesty 
being  afterwards  informed  that  those  roads  were  im- 
passable at  this  time  of  the  year  in  a  coach,  he  said, 
then  she  might  come  to  London  and  go  over  the 
bridge ;  but  that  positively  she  should  not  lie-in  in  Lon- 
don, nor  come  to  St.  James's.  Accordingly,  after  all 
her  tricks  and  schemes  to  avoid  going  to  Holland,  and 
to  get  back  to  London,  she  was  obliged  to  comply  with 
these  orders,  and  had  the  mortification  and  disgrace  to 
go,  without  seeing  any  of  her  family,  over  London 
Bridge  to  Dover  [2lst  Nov.],  from  whence,  by  Calais 


1734.        PRINCESS  ROYAL'S  CONDUCT  CONDEMNED.  437 

(where  the  Prince  of  Orange  met  her),  she  went  through 
Flanders  to  Holland. 

Everybody  condemned  her  conduct  in  this  whole 
affair,  in  which  her  passions  and  her  inclinations 
entirely  got  the  better  of  her  reason  and  her  under- 
standing. In  the  first  place,  everybody  wondered 
she  should  mistake  her  own  interest,  and  sacrifice  her 
husband's,  so  far  as  to  desire  to  lie-in  here ;  and,  in  the 
next  place,  that  she  should  judge  so  ill  as  to  imagine, 
though  she  was  imprudent  enough  to  desire  it,  that  it 
would  be  possible  for  her  to  compass  it ;  or  that  she 
should  not  be  deterred  by  her  love  to  England  from 
showing  there  were  so  many  difficulties  attended  her 
coming  hither.  Already  the  resolution  was  taken  and 
declared,  both  by  the  King  and  Queen,  that  upon  no 
account  would  they  ever  give  her  leave  to  come  here 
again  when  she  was  with  child.  The  Queen  saw  all  the 
false  steps  her  daughter  had  made,  and,  as  she  could  not 
quite  disown  them,  blamed  them  a  little,  but  repined 
at  them  more.  The  King,  teased  with  the  difficulties 
attending  this  journey,  and  not  extremely  pleased  with 
the  expense  of  it  (which  amounted  to  20,000£),  said 
he  would  positively  hear  no  more  about  it,  and  snapped 
everybody  who  mentioned  the  Princess  Royal's  name. 
The  Princess  Emily,  as  much  as  she  dared,  censured 
and  condemned  her  sister's  conduct;  the  Princess 
Caroline,  as  much  as  she  could,  excused  and  softened 
it.  The  Princess  Emily  told  Mrs.  Clayton  she  was 
very  glad  her  sister  was  to  lie-in  in  Holland,  not  only 
for  the  sake  of  the  Prince  of  Orange's  affairs,  for  which 
she  thought  it  absolutely  necessary,  but  because  she  was 
sure  her  brother  would  have  disliked,  of  all  things,  her 


438  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

sister's  being  brought  to  bed  in  England.  Mrs.  Clayton 
very  pertinently  and  reasonably  replied,  "  I  cannot 
imagine,  Madam,  how  it  can  affect  the  Prince  at  all 
where  she  lies-in,  since,  with  regard  to  those  who  wish 
none  of  your  Royal  Highness's  family  on  the  throne,  it 
is  no  matter  whether  she  is  brought  to  bed  here  or  in 
Holland,  or  of  a  son  or  a  daughter,  or  whether  she  has 
any  child  at  all ;  and,  with  regard  to  those  who  wish 
all  your  family  well,  for  your  sakes,  Madam,  as  well  as 
our  own,  we  shall  be  very  glad  to  take  any  of  you  in 
your  turn,  but  not  one  of  you  out  of  it."6 

During  all  these  transactions  the  Queen,  though 
mending,  continued  ill  enough  to  keep  her  room,  and 
did  so  till  the  end  of  November. 

When  Sir  Robert  Walpole  came  back  from  Norfolk 
he  affected  talking  of  Lady  Suffolk's  abdication  as  a 
thing  that  had  greatly  surprised  him  when  he  heard  it, 
disclaiming  entirely  the  having  had  any  hand  in  her 
disgrace,  though  he  knew,  he  said,  it  had  been  imputed 
to  his  cabals.  But  this  was  giving  himself  a  very  un- 
necessary trouble;  few  people  believing  that  he  had 
not  done  Lady  Suffolk  all  the  ill  offices  he  could,  and 
of  those  few  not  one  imagining  that,  if  he  had  not  done 
his  utmost  to  drive  her  from  the  palace,  it  was  from 
any  tenderness  towards  her  that  he  had  desired  she 
should  remain  there. 

But,  whatever  pleasure  Sir  Robert  Walpole  might 
find  from  this  domestic  incident,  it  was  much  over- 

6  There  seems  to  have  been  in  this  conversation  a  latent  allusion  to  the 
Princess  Royal's  prospect  of  the  throne,  neither  of  her  brothers  being 
married ;  and  this  perhaps  may  account  for  the  Princess's  (otherwise  un- 
reasonable) anxiety  to  lie-in  in  England. 


1734.  MR.  ROBINSON.  439 

balanced  by  the  concern  he  felt  from  a  foreign  trans- 
action ;  for,  notwithstanding  he  was  so  sanguine  when 
he  went  into  Norfolk,  and  so  secure  that  nothing  could 
happen  to  defeat  the  proposal  he  had  at  last  brought 
their  Majesties  to  make  at  Vienna,  of  marrying  the 
second  Archduchess  to  Don  Carlos,  yet  his  back  was 
no  sooner  turned  but  the  King  and  Queen  (as  Lord 
Hervey  told  him  they  would)  relapsed  into  their  former 
reluctance,  or  rather  abhorrence,  to  this  union :  nor  was 
it  unsuspected  by  Sir  Robert,  though  he  could  never 
prove  it,  that  the  King  himself,  either  by  Lord  Harring- 
ton or  by  a  juggle  through  some  German  hand,  did 
convey  some  hint  to  Mr.  Robinson7  (the  English  minis- 
ter at  Vienna)  not  to  be  too  pressing  to  bring  this 
affair  of  the  marriage  to  a  successful  issue.  When  Mr. 
Robinson's  answer  came  back  which  was  to  give  an 
account  of  the  conference  he  had  held  with  the  Impe- 
rial Ministers  in  consequence  of  the  commission  he  had 
received  to  treat  of  this  marriage,  his  despatch  was  cer- 
tainly, for  the  purpose  it  was  to  serve,  extremely  well 
drawn  ;  that  is,  it  was  impossible  more  plausibly  to  de- 
feat what  his  public  orders  were  to  promote,  or  more 
artfully  to  gloss  over  a  series  of  reasoning  which, 
stripped  of  the  florid  poetical  ornaments  with  which 
Mr.  Robinson's  despatches  always  abounded,  and  re- 
duced to  a  plain  narrative,  seemed  rather  to  be  the  pro- 
duction of  a  German  courtier,  flattering  the  unreason- 
able pride  of  an  Austrian  prince,  than  of  an  English 
minister,  concerned  for  the  service  of  his  master,  the 
interest  of  his  country,  or  the  repose  of  Europe. 

7  Afterwards  for  a  short  time  Secretary  of  State  at  home,  and  created 
Lord  Grantham  in  1761. 


440  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

When  Sir  Kobert  Walpole  went  into  the  King's 
closet  the  day  after  this  despatch  arrived  from  Robin- 
son,  the  first  thing  the  King  said  to  Sir  Kobert  Walpole 
was,  "  You  find  me  with  Robinson's  letter  in  my  hand, 
which  I  have  just  been  reading  again  for  the  third 
time,  and  I  think  it  the  ablest  despatch  and  the  best 
drawn  paper  I  ever  read  in  my  life."  Sir  Robert 
smiled  and  made  no  answer ;  upon  which  the  King 
asked  him  why  he  did  not  speak,  and  desired  him  to 
give  his  thoughts  freely  upon  it.  Sir  Robert  said,  the 
reason  why  he  made  no  answer  was  because  he  would 
never  speak  anything  but  his  thoughts,  and  that  those, 
unless  he  was  commanded  to  deliver  them,  it  was  some- 
times more  respectful  as  well  as  more  prudent  to  keep 
to  himself.  "  What  do  you  mean  ?  "  replied  the  King. 
"  I  mean,  Sir,"  said  Sir  Robert,  "  that  this  is  either 
the  weakest  or  the  ablest  despatch  I  ever  saw;  but 
which  of  the  two  it  is,  your  Majesty  can  only  determine. 
If  Mr.  Robinson  had  no  orders  but  what  the  Duke  of 
Newcastle  conveyed  to  him,  and  I  was  consulted  in, 
Mr.  Robinson  ought  to  be  recalled  by  the  next  messen- 
ger that  goes  to  Vienna,  and  disgraced :  if  he  had  any 
others,  those  who  are  ignorant  what  those  orders  were 
can  never  be  proper  judges  how  well  or  how  ill  they 
have  been  executed."  The  King  seemed  disconcerted, 
and  neither  denied  nor  avowed  any  secret  instructions 
conveyed  to  Robinson ;  but  said  he  thought  the  letter 
was  a  very  sensible  account  of  those  difficulties,  unfore- 
seen here,  which  very  naturally  arose  in  the  councils  of 
Vienna  to  a  proposal  certainly  little  for  their  honour, 
and  very  doubtfully  for  their  interest.  The  King 
turned  the  conversation,  immediately  after  he  had  said 


1734.  HOADLEY.  441 

this,  to  some  domestic  subject,  and  never  entered  upon 
it  afterwards.  But  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  when  I  have 
spoken  to  him  of  this  match  being  the  only  natural  and 
safe  termination  of  these  squabbles,  has  always  answered, 
"  This  match  had  long  ago  been  perfected,  had  it  not 
been  for  Mr.  Robinson,  who  deserved  hanging  for  his 
conduct  in  that  affair :"  adding,  that  he  was  as  obstinate 
a  German  and  as  servile  an  Imperialist  as  Hatolf. 

There  happened  this  year  some  commotions  in  the 
Church,  proceeding  from  promotions  to  be  made  there, 
which  I  must  not  pass  over  in  silence.  The  two  vacant 
sees  of  Gloucester  and  Winchester  gave  rise  to  these 
contests.  But  though  Winchester  was  one  of  the  best, 
and  Gloucester  one  of  the  worst  bishoprics  in  England, 
yet  the  latter  occasioned  much  the  greatest  struggle, 
contrary  to  the  common  course  of  ecclesiastical  dis- 
putes, where  the  degree  of  contention  is  generally  pro- 
portioned to  the  degree  of  profit  annexed  to  the  thing 
contended  for. 

The  bishopric  of  Winchester,  whenever  it  should  fall, 
had  been  long  promised,  both  by  the  Queen  and  Sir 
Robert  Walpole,  to  Bishop  Hoadley,  to  palliate  the 
disappointment  and  the  injustice,  as  he  thought  it,  and 
most  people  called  it,  of  Durham  having  been  given  to 
another.  This  promise  had  been  solemnly  and  fre- 
quently renewed  to  him  during  the  time  in  which  the 
Court  had  applied  to  him  to  divert  the  storm,  already 
mentioned,  that  threatened,  two  years  ago,  from  the 
Presbyterian  quarter  about  the  Test  Act.  Lord  Hervey, 
who  had  great  friendship  for  Bishop  Hoadley,  knew 
that  neither  the  King,  Queen,  nor  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
loved  him,  and  would  be  glad,  if  they  could  have  found 


442  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

any  way  to  put  him  by,  not  to  confer  this  benefice  upon 
him.  Immediately,  therefore,  upon  hearing  that  the 
Bishop  of  Winchester  [Willis]  was  seized  with  an  apo- 
plectic fit,  of  which  it  was  impossible  he  should  recover, 
Lord  Hervey  despatched  a  messenger  to  Salisbury, 
where  Bishop  Hoadley  then  was,  with  the  following 
letter  :• — 


"  Kensington,  Aug.  7,  1734. 
"  MY  DEAR  LORD, 

"  I  HAVE  often  sent  you  letters  of  no  consequence, 
merely  for  the  pleasure  of  conversing  with  you,  but,  for  the 
first  time  in  my  life,  I  hope  now  to  send  you  one  that  may  be 
of  use  to  you. 

"  In  short,  the  Bishop  of  Winchester  is  certainly  dying,  and 
this  messenger  comes  to  charge  you,  on  this  critical  conjunc- 
ture, not  to  let  your  natural  modesty,  and  hitherto  insuperable 
awkwardness  in  solicitation,  so  far  get  the  better  of  your  pru- 
dence as  to  induce  you,  Mahomet  like,  to  sit  still  and  fancy 
the  mountain  of  preferment  will  walk  to  you  to  Salisbury : 
come  up  immediately,  and  in  the  mean  time,  since  application 
must  be  made  I  need  not  tell  you  where  (you  know  the  K.'s 
two  ears 8  as  well  as  I  do),  apply  to  them  both  ;  and,  if  I  may 
advise,  act  as  if  you  were  not  secure,  and  write  to  them  as  if 
you  were.  Be  sure  you  exert  yourself  on  this  occasion,  and 
remember  you  are  now  shaking  that  die  upon  the  cast  of  which 
the  future  happiness  of  your  life  depends  :  the  odds  are  of 
your  side,  but,  as  long  as  there  is  a  possibility  of  losing,  no- 
body with  so  great  a  stake  depending  can  play  too  cautiously. 
Do  not  talk  to  me  of  security  from  former  promises ;  I  know 
Court  promises  too  well  to  believe  they  are  ever  kept,  though 
ever  so  solemnly  made,  without  being  claimed  ;  the  best  Court 
paymaster  must  be  dunned,  and  dunned  a  good  deal — they  pay 
few  debts  for  the  honour  of  paying  them ;  their  memories,  too,  are 
abominable — I  mean  to  debts  of  gratitude,  not  of  resentment. 

8  The  Queen  and  Walpole. 


1734.  HOADLEY.  443 

"  Remember  how  you  failed  of  Durham — at  least,  that 
you  were  told  you  failed  from  silence.  Write  therefore  now, 
come,  speak,  dun,  and  behave,  not  as  your  laziness  inclines 
you,  but  as  your  interest  directs,  as  common  prudence  dictates, 
as  your  friends  advise,  and  as  what  you  owe  to  yourself  and 
your  family  requires. 

"  Adieu,"  &c. 

The  Bishop  of  Salisbury's  answer  was  as  follows : — 

"  Salisbury,  Aug.  8,  1734. 
"  MY  DEAR  LORD, 

"  ALL  the  entertainment  you  have  ever  given  me  by 
your  former  letters  (which  has  been  in  truth  as  great  as  one 
ought  in  reason  to  wish  for)  bears  no  proportion  to  the  real 
pleasure  I  had  in  reading  yours  this  morning ;  the  part  you 
take  in  my  interest,  the  spirit  of  friendship  which  breathes  in  it, 
the  voluntary  advising  me  in  what  in  truth  I  need  advice — 
these  feel  to  me  more  tenderly  pleasant,  as  well  as  more 
rationally  agreeable,  than  all  that  wit  and  humour  which  in 
you  I  think  are  inexhaustible.  The  kind  and  good  advice  you 
give  me  is  the  advice  of  all  the  packets  from  my  friends  at 
London,  and  of  every  heart  except  my  own.  But  I  now  yield 
up  that,  and  am  resolved  to  come  up  to  London ;  and,  as  our 
friend  Mr.  CCn.  particularly  advised  me  if  this  case  hap- 
pened, to  write  to  the  Q.  herself,  as  well  as  to  Sir  R.,  from 
both  whom  I  have  had  as  express  assurance  of  the  thing  as  if 
one  of  their  messengers,  with  a  postboy  before  him  and  a  grey- 
hound upon  his  breast,  were  sent  down  to  me,  upon  the  pro- 
spect of  a  vacancy,  with  a  strong  letter  in  form.  Particularly 
Sir  R.  gave  me  the  kindest  reception  at  Chelsea  just  before  I 
came  hither,  and,  resolved  to  speak  plainly,  said  these  or  like 
words : — *  If  that  vacancy  should  happen,  you  are  as  sure  of 
succeeding  as  if  you  were  now  in  possession.'  After  such  words, 
and  so  many  promises  to  me,  repeated  to  all  my  friends,'!  can 
no  more  doubt  of  that  great  man's  knowing  it  to  be  certainly 
fixed,  or  of  his  hearty  and  effectual  concurrence  in  it,  than  I 
can  of  the  plainest  thing  in  the  world.  But,  however,  as  I  have 
the  most  express  promises,  given  and  renewed  without  my  ask- 


444  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

ing,  to  claim  upon,  I  can  more  easily  prevail  upon  myself  to 
work  for  myself  than  I  could  in  a  former  case  in  which  that 
particular  happiness  was  wanting.  I  should  be  glad  of  stronger 
nerves  and  more  courage.  Methinks  I  could  go  on  prating  to 
your  Lordship  a  great  while  longer  (though  long  enough 
already  you  feel)  were  it  not  that  I  have  several  letters  to 
write  by  the  post  of  to-day ;  I  therefore  must  despatch  your 
messenger  back  again  immediately.  Adieu.  Go  on  to  give 
me  the  pleasure  of  such  friendship ;  and  believe  me,  wherever 
I  am,  whether  nailed  down  to  the  beauties  of  this  place  or 
removed  to  those  of  another,  whether  at  Sarum  still  or  at 
Farnham,  I  am  truly,  my  Lord, 

"  Yours,  &c. 

"  I  hope  to  be  in  Grosvenor  Street  on  Saturday  night.  I 
design  to  thank  Lady  Hervey  myself  for  her  very  obliging 
answer  to  what  I  sent  her." 


Bishop  Hoadley  took  Lord  Hervey's  advice,  and 
wrote  two  letters — one  to  be  given  immediately  to  the 
Queen,  and  the  other  to  be  given  to  Sir  Robert  as  soon 
as  ever  the  Bishop  of  Winchester  was  dead.  Both  these 
letters  I  saw,  but  have  no  copies  of  them.  The  sub- 
stance of  them  was  not  solicitation,  but  a  modest  claim 
of  the  promise  that  had  been  made  him.  Lord  Hervey 
came  to  the  Queen  just  after  she  had  received  this 
letter,  and  found  her  in  that  froward  disposition  towards 
Bishop  Hoadley  which  people  generally  feel  when  they 
find  themselves  pressed  to  do  that  which  they  would 
but  cannot  avoid.  She  asked  Lord  Hervey  if  he  did 
not  blush  for  the  indecent  conduct  of  his  friend  in  this 
early  and  pressing  application  for  a  thing  not  yet 
vacant.  Lord  Hervey  assured  her  it  was  vacant,  for 
that  the  Bishop  of  Winchester  was  actually  dead,  and 
that  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury  had  done  nothing  but 


1734.       HOADLEY'S  TRANSLATION  TO  WINCHESTER.          445 

what  all  his  friends  had  advised  him  to,  contrary  to  the 
dictates  of  his  own  natural  modesty  and  backwardness 
upon  those  occasions.  He  added,  too,  that  one  of  the 
reasons  formerly  alleged  for  Bishop  Hoadley  missing 
of  the  bishopric  of  Durham  was  his  not  having  asked 
it;  and  that  it  would  be  very  hard  he  should  have 
failed  in  one  case  for  having  made  no  application,  and 
be  reproached  in  another  for  the  contrary  conduct. 
Whilst  Lord  Hervey  was  speaking  the  King  came  in ; 
and  as  long  as  the  conversation  was  continued  upon 
this  topic,  both  the  King  and  Queen  spoke  of  the 
Bishop  in  such  a  manner  as  plainly  showed  they 
neither  esteemed  nor  loved  him.  It  is  true  the  prin- 
ciples which  Hoadley  professed,  and  the  doctrines  he 
propagated,  could  be  agreeable  to  few  princes,  as  they 
could  only  please  such  as  preferred  the  prosperity  of 
their  people  to  the  grandeur  of  their  Crown,  the  liber- 
ties of  their  subjects  to  the  increase  of  their  own  power, 
the  rights  and  privileges  of  mankind  to  the  usurpation 
of  sovereigns,  the  true  end  of  government  to  the  capa- 
city of  abusing  it,  and  the  cause  of  justice  to  the  lust  of 
dominion.  Potter,  Bishop  of  Oxford,  a  great  favourite 
of  the  Queen's,  strongly  solicited  at  this  time  the  vacant 
bishopric  of  Winchester ;  and,  as  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
told  me,  had  certainly  obtained  it,  had  he  not  inter- 
posed and  told  the  Queen  that  the  engagements  she 
was  under  to  Hoadley  were  such  that  it  would  be  scan- 
dalous for  her  to  break  through  them.  Whether  this 
was  strictly  true  I  know  not,  but  that  Hoadley  was  at 
last  made  Bishop  of  Winchester  is  certain ;  and  as  cer- 
tain it  is,  so  extraordinary  are  some  Court  events,  that 
this  preferment,  one  of  the  best  in  the  gift  of  the 


446  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

Crown,  was  conferred  upon  a  man  hated  by  the  King, 
disliked  by  the  Queen,  and  long  estranged  from  the 
friendship  of  Sir  Eobert  Walpole.  The  truth  was,  that 
to  palliate  a  present  disappointment  they  had  made  re- 
versionary promises  which  they  neither  cared  to  keep 
nor  dared  to  break.  This  Hoadley  guessed  to  be  the 
situation  of  his  affairs,  and  therefore  received  with  no 
great  thankfulness  what  was  bestowed  with  so  little 
good  will — "apud  eum plus  prior  offensa  valuisset  quam 
recentia  beneficial — "With  him  the  prior  offence  had 
greater  weight  than  the  recent  favour." — (Tacitus?) 
And  Winchester,  now  reluctantly  conferred,  atoned  not 
for  Durham,  formerly  unjustly  conferred  upon  another. 
However,  when  this  thing  was  done,  the  King, 
Queen,  and  Sir  Robert,  all  three  acted  perfectly  in 
character — the  King  not  speaking  one  word  to  him 
either  when  he  kissed  his  hand  or  did  homage,  but 
contriving,  as  was  often  his  way,  to  shock  whilst  he 
granted,  and  to  disoblige  whilst  he  preferred.  The 
Queen,  on  the  other  hand,  when  she  found  she  could 
not  put  him  by,  resolved  to  make  the  most  of  pro- 
moting him ;  told  him  how  glad  she  was  to  see  him 
advanced  as  high  in  dignity  and  profit  as  he  had  long 
been  in  merit  and  reputation,  and  assured  him  with 
what  pleasure  she  embraced  this  occasion  of  proving  to 
him  the  sincerity  of  all  her  former  professions.  She 
acted  this  part  so  well  too,  that  the  Bishop  afterwards 
bragged  to  Lord  Hervey  of  the  kind  manner  in  which 
the  Queen  had  received  him ;  and  with  all  his  under- 
standing was  the  dupe  of  that  insincerity  to  which  he 
was  so  near  being  a  sacrifice.  In  the  mean  time  Sir 
Robert  Walpole,  by  hints  to  the  Bishop  himself,  and 


1734.  RUNDLE.  447 

by  plainer  intimations  through  his  friends,  arrogated 
the  whole  merit  of  this  promotion  to  himself;  and  more 
than  insinuated  that  he  had  not  been  able  to  incline 
the  King  and  Queen  to  this  choice,  but  forced  them  to 
make  it,  even  against  their  inclination. 

Sherlock  succeeded  Hoadley  at  Salisbury ;  but  the 
Bishop  of  London,  though  Sherlock  and  he  lived  better 
together  of  late  than  they  had  done,  was  pleased  with 
neither  of  these  translations. 

To  the  bishopric  of  Gloucester,  which  had  now  been 
vacant  above  a  twelvemonth,  the  Lord  Chancellor 
[Talbot],  whilst  he  was  Solicitor-General,  had  recom- 
mended one  Dr.  Bundle,9  a  chaplain  of  his  father's 
the  late  Bishop  of  Durham,  and  a  particular  friend  of 
his  own.  This  man  lay  under  the  suspicion  of  Arian- 
ism ;  but  as  this  was  a  crime  that  could  not  be  proved 
upon  him,  the  objection  the  Bishop  of  London  made 
to  him  was,  that  about  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  ago 
he  had  in  private  company  spoken  disrespectfully  of 
Abraham,  which  one  Venn,10  a  parson  then  in  company, 
had  told  to  the  Bishop  of  London,  and  was  ready  to 
testify  against  Bundle  upon  oath.  Those  who  were  in- 
clined to  soften  the  conduct  of  honest  Mr.  Venn,  said  the 
man  had  done  this  out  of  his  enthusiastical  zeal  for  the 
cause  of  the  Church,  and  from  the  simple  dictates  of  a 
good  conscience,  to  prevent  so  improper  a  pastor  from 

9  Pope,  always  ready  to  join  in  the  opposition  to  the  minister,  the  court, 
and  the  church,  endeavoured  to  disparage  the  other  bishops  by  selecting  the 
obnoxious  Rundle  for  the  peculiar  praise  of  "  having  a  heart" — 
"  Even  in  a  bishop  I  can  spy  desert ; 

Seeker  is  decent — Rutidle  has  a  heart." — ED. 

Such  praise  was  contemptuous  to  those  named,  and  meant  to  stigmatize 
all  the  others  as  having  neither  decency  nor  feeling. 

10  Richard  Venn,  the  father  of  the  more  celebrated  Henry  Venn. 


443  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

being  intrusted  with  episcopal  authority  and  a  Chris- 
tian flock.  Those  who  put  the  worst  construction,  and 
I  believe  the  truest,  upon  this  proceeding,  said  that 
Venn  had  acted  in  concert  with  the  Bishop  of  London 
to  make  his  court  there,  and  in  order  to  forward  his 
own  preferment  in  the  Church  by  thus  obstructing 
Bundle's.  Nobody  doubted  but  that  the  Bishop  of 
London's  sole  n  reason  for  opposing  Bundle  was  because 
my  Lord  Chancellor  had  made  application  to  the  Court 
in  his  favour,  not  through  the  Bishop  of  London,  but 
merely  upon  his  own  weight  and  interest ;  and  as  the 
Bishop  of  London  had  always  disliked  what  he  called 
lay  recommendations,  he  was  determined  to  make  a 
stand  upon  this  occasion,  thinking,  if  he  could  show 
that  even  so  great  a  man  as  my  Lord  Chancellor  could 
not  get  any  one  preferred  in  the  Church  without 
applying  to  him,  for  the  future  no  other  person  would 
attempt  it.  But  as  these  reasons  for  opposing  Bundle's 
preferment  were  such  as  the  Bishop  of  London  could 


n  There  seem  no  grounds  for  imputing  this  against  Bishop  Gibson,  as 
his  sole  or  even  his  principal  motive.  At  best  it  could  only  have  been  a 
suspicion  or  inference  of  Lord  Hervey's  own  ;  and  surely  there  was  in  the 
fact  stated  (and  Lord  Hervey  understates  it)  a  sufficient  cause  of  objection 
to  Rundle.  But  in  the  whole  of  this  narrative  the  reader  should  bear  in 
mind  Lord  Hervey's  anti-church  prejudices  ;  and  his  partiality  to  Hoadlcy 
and  Rundle  will  certainly  not  tend  to  the  removal  of  the  suspicions  enter- 
tained of  their  orthodoxy. 

Horace  Walpole  gives  us  the  clue  to  Queen  Caroline's  patronage  of  this 
class  of  divines.  "The  Queen's  chief  study  was  divinity,  and  she  had 
rather  weakened  her  faith  than  enlightened  it.  She  was  at  least  not  ortho- 
dox ;  and  her  confidant,  Lady  Sundon,  an  absurd  and  pompous  simpleton, 
swayed  her  countenance  to  the  less  believing  clergy.  *  *  *  As  Sir  Robert 
maintained  his  influence  over  the  clergy  by  Gibson  Bishop  of  London,  he 
often  met  troublesome  obstructions  from  Lady  Sundon,  who  espoused,  as  I 
have  said,  the  heterodox  clergy,  and  Sir  Robert  never  could  shake  her 
credit. ' ' — Reminiscences. 


1734.  RUNDLE'S  CASE.  449 

neither  urge  nor  avow,  others  were  to  be  given  to 
weigh  with  the  Administration,  though  these  only 
weighed  with  him.  He  therefore  declared  he  had  no 
objection  to  my  Lord  Chancellor's  recommendation, 
though  he  had  to  the  man  recommended ;  neither  had 
he  any  one  himself  to  recommend,  or  any  article  to 
insist  upon  in  this  promotion  but  one,  which  was  to 
beg,  for  the  love  of  God,  that  the  King  at  least  would 
vouchsafe  to  give  the  bench  a  Christian. 

Whilst  this  contest  grew  every  day  more  warm  be- 
tween my  Lord  Chancellor  and  the  Bishop  of  London, 
many  ranged  themselves  in  the  party  of  the  first,  from 
regard  to  his  character,  but  many  more  from  disregard 
to  that  of  the  latter ;  and  most  of  those  who  pretended 
the  greatest  commiseration  for  the  hard  measure  given 
to  Bundle,  acted  on  this  occasion  as  mankind  every 
day  act  on  many  others,  which  is,  pretending  compas- 
sion for  the  oppressed  only  that  they  may  inveigh  with 
a  better  grace  against  the  oppressor,  whom  they  affect 
to  dislike  for  abusing  power,  whilst  they  really  hate 
him  chiefly  for  having  it. 

The  Bishop  of  London,  by  his  intrigues,  got  most  of 
the  other  bishops  to  join  with  him,  and  easily  persuaded 
the  majority  of  the  inferior  clergy  to  talk  in  his  strain ; 
for  much  eloquence  is  never  wanting  to  induce  any 
class  of  men  to  list  themselves  under  the  banner  of  that 
leader  who  has  the  chief  power  of  distributing  those 
rewards  in  the  hopes  of  which  they  all  enter  the  service. 
By  these  means  his  Lordship  himself  first  blew  the 
flame  against  Bundle  among  the  clergy,  and  then  made 
use  of  that  flame  as  an  argument  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
to  strengthen  the  suggestions  and  solicitations  of  that 

VOL.  i.  2  G 


450  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

very  resentment  which  had  raised  it.  Many  pamphlets 
were  written,  and  with  great  virulence,  on  both  sides ; 
but  the  two  principals  were  very  differently  treated  in 
these  productions,  for,  whilst  my  Lord  Chancellor's 
name  was  never  mentioned  but  with  decency,  the 
Bishop  of  London  was  pelted  with  all  the  opprobrious 
language  that  envy  and  malice  ever  threw  at  eminence 
and  power.12 

Sir  Robert  Walpole,  who  feared  to  disoblige  either 
of  these  great  men,  but  was  much  more  desirous  to 
oblige  the  one  than  the  other,  went  to  my  Lord  Chan- 
cellor, and  begged  of  him  to  relinquish  his  suit  in  favour 
of  Bundle,  offering  him  at  the  same  time  to  make 
Rundle  a  Dean,  or  whenever  the  bishopric  of  Derry 
in  Ireland  should  fall,  which  was  now  possessed  by 
[Henry  Downs],  a  crazy  old  fellow  of  four  score,  and 
worth  30001.  a-year,  to  send  Rundle  thither.  He 
assured  him,  too,  that  the  King  was  inclined,  as  well 
as  himself,  to  do  anything  at  his  request  that  was  rea- 
sonable or  safe ;  but  as  this  promotion  was  so  violently 
opposed  by  the  clergy  in  general,  and  the  bishops  in 
particular,  the  King  could  not,  without  manifest  danger 
to  his  own  affairs  in  Parliament,  venture  to  gratify  his 
Lordship  on  this  occasion.  He  further  added  that  he 
was  sure  his  Lordship  wished  so  well  to  the  King's 
affairs  and  to  the  common  cause,  that,  however  unrea- 
sonable he  might  think  the  opposition  made  to  Rundle, 
yet  he  would  not  press  his  promotion  to  this  bishopric 
if  the  consequence  of  it  must  be  the  dividing  a  weight 
in  the  House  of  Lords  that  had  hitherto  gone  entire, 
and  was  so  essential  to  the  ease  of  carrying  on  the 

12  This,  seeing  how  Lord  Hervey  joins  in  the  cry,  is  at  least  candid. 


1734.  BUNDLE'S  CASE.  451 

King's  business ; — at  the  same  time  desiring  my  Lord 
Chancellor  to  recollect  what  trouble,  in  the  last  Parlia- 
ment, a  defection  only  of  five  or  six  Scotch  lords  had 
given,  and  how  much  more  dangerous  consequently  it 
would  be  for  the  Court  to  do  anything  that  might 
make  any  breach  or  produce  any  revolt  among  the 
bishops.  He  told  him,  too,  that  the  Bishop  of  London 
had  absolutely  refused  to  consecrate  Rundle  in  case 
the  King  persisted  in  making  him  a  bishop.  To  which 
my  Lord  Chancellor  replied,  that  the  Bishop  of  London 
must  know,  if  he  did  refuse  to  consecrate  Rundle,  that 
he  incurred  a  premunire.  Sir  Robert  said  no,  for,  as  it 
was  the  Archbishop's  business  to  consecrate  him,  it  was 
he  would  incur  that  penalty  in  case  of  refusal ;  but  the 
Archbishop  [Wake]  being  ill,  and  the  Bishop  of  London 
only  acting  as  his  deputy,  no  man  can  oblige  another 
to  act  by  a  delegated  power;  and  consequently  the 
Bishop  of  London,  by  refusing  to  accept  of  the  dele- 
gation, would  not  be  liable  to  the  same  penalty  that  the 
Archbishop  would  incur  in  case  he  were  able  to  offi- 
ciate and  refused  it.  My  Lord  Chancellor  then  said 
other  bishops  might  be  found  to  do  this  office,  if  the 
Bishop  of  London  would  not.  "  And  would  you,  my 
Lord,"  replied  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  "  advise  or  desire 
the  King  to  do  that  which  should  bring  this  question 
to  be  debated,  and  draw  a  point  of  his  prerogative  into 
dispute  that  has  never  yet  been  controverted  ?  I  am 
sure  I  will  not  advise  the  King  to  such  a  step;  and 
whilst  I  have  the  honour  to  serve  the  Crown,  and  have 
any  influence  in  the  King's  councils,  I  will  rather 
advise  the  King  never  to  fill  up  the  see  of  Gloucester 
than  to  do  it  with  such  consequences  attending  it. 

2o2 


452  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

My  Lord  Chancellor  said,  "  According  to  this  way  of 
reasoning,  the  Bishop  of  London  then  must  have  a 
negative  on  every  man  the  King  ever  nominated  to  a 
bishopric ;  and  if  this  manner  of  arguing  was  to  prevail, 
instead  of  the  election  made  by  a  Dean  and  Chapter 
being  only  a  matter  of  form,  the  King's  recommenda- 
tion itself  would  become  only  a  form,  and  the  Bishop 
of  London  must  give  the  King  a  conge  to  nominate 
before  the  King  could  ever  order  a  conge  d'elire." 

Sir  Robert  Walpole  said  that  the  case  of  Rundle  was 
a  particular  case ;  and  though  the  Bishop  of  London 
could  not  now  relinquish  his  opposition  without  losing 
his  interest  with  the  clergy,  yet  he  believed,  as  the 
Bishop  was  heartily  sorry  he  had  embarked  in  this 
opposition,  so,  instead  of  its  being  an  encouragement  to 
give  the  same  disturbance  another  time,  he  believed  it 
would  prevent  him  from  ever  falling  into  the  same 
error  again. 

"  You  acknowledge  it,  then,  to  be  an  error  ?  "  inter- 
rupted my  Lord  Chancellor.  "  I  do,"  said  Sir  Robert, 
"  but  it  is  one  which  I  fear  it  is  now  too  late  to  remedy. 
For  your  Lordship,  you  have  certainly  acquitted  your- 
self to  Rundle  by  the  strenuous  part  you  have  taken 
in  soliciting  his  cause ;  but,  if  I  may  take  the  liberty 
of  saying  it,  I  think  there  is  a  duty  you  owe  the  King 
as  well  as  a  duty  to  your  friend.  You  have  discharged 
the  one,  and  I  am  persuaded  you  will  never  neglect 
the  other ;  and  if  the  King,  in  the  most  gracious  and 
the  kindest  manner,  does  get  it  intimated  that  he  wishes 
you,  in  regard  to  him  (unwilling  to  refuse  you  and 
afraid  to  comply),  to  urge  this  suit  no  farther,  perhaps 
he  may  expect,  when  the  dispute  comes  to  be  between 


1734.  BUNDLE'S  CASE.  453 

the  endangering  his  interest  or  the  giving  up  Bundle,  that 
your  Lordship  would  not  give  Rundle  the  preference." 

My  Lord  Chancellor  said  Sir  Hobert  Walpole  had 
very  artfully  brought  this  matter  to  a  point  where  he 
must  be  silent,  but  that  he  looked  upon  his  honour  to 
be  so  much  engaged  for  Rundle  that  his  silence  was  no 
sign  of  acquiescence. 

This  conversation  passed  between  my  Lord  Chan- 
cellor and  Sir  Robert  Walpole  in  the  summer,  and 
was  partly  related  to  me  by  Sir  Robert  himself,  and 
partly  by  Bishop  Hoadley,  who  had  it  from  my  Lord 
Chancellor. 

Many  people  (indeed  most  people)  blamed  Sir  Robert 
for  his  compliance  with  the  Bishop  of  London's  unrea- 
sonable objections  on  this  occasion ;  and  said  he  would 
one  day  or  other  repent  consigning  to  the  Bishop  of 
London  that  absolute  authority  which  he  now  suffered 
him  to  exercise  in  Church  matters,  and  of  which  he 
did  not  yet  feel  the  inconveniences. 

Sir  Robert  excused  himself  by  saying,  whoever  had 
as  much  power  as  the  Bishop  of  London  would  create 
as  much  envy,  and  consequently  excite  as  much  clamour 
against  them  ;  arid  as  for  the  Bishop  of  London's 
stickling  for  Church  power,  Church  discipline,  and 
Church  tenets,  he  thought  him  in  the  right,  since  who- 
ever would  govern  any  class  of  men  must  appear  to  be 
in  their  interest.  "  And  I  would  no  more,"  said  he, 
"  employ  a  man  to  govern  and  influence  the  clergy 
who  did  not  flatter  the  parsons,  or  who  either  talked, 
wrote,  or  acted  against  their  authority,  their  profit,  or 
their  privileges,  than  I  would  try  to  govern  the  soldiery 
by  setting  a-  General  over  them  who  was  always  ha- 
ranguing against  the  inconveniences  of  a  standing  army, 


454  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XVIII. 

or  than  I  would  make  a  man  Lord  Chancellor  who  was 
constantly  complaining  of  the  grievances  of  the  law, 
and  threatening  to  rectify  the  abuses  of  Westminster 
Hall." 

Notwithstanding  the  resolution  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
made  and  declared  to  everybody  in  the  summer,  of 
keeping  the  bishopric  of  Gloucester  vacant  till  this  dis- 
pute between  the  Lord  Chancellor  and  the  Bishop  of 
London  could  be  adjusted,  and  one  of  them  be  brought 
to  temper  and  prevailed  with  to  recede,  he  changed 
his  mind ;  and  the  Bishop  of  London  insisting  on  its 
being  filled  up,  and  not  with  Bundle,  Sir  Eobert  Wal- 
pole went  in  form,  about  a  month  before  the  Parliament 
was  to  meet,  from  the  King  to  my  Lord  Chancellor,  to 
let  him  know  how  sorry  his  Majesty  was  that  it  was 
impossible  he  could  be  gratified  in  Bundle's  being  made 
a  bishop ;  but  that  the  King,  to  show  the  regard  he  had 
for  my  Lord  Chancellor,  was  willing  and  ready  to 
prefer  any  other  person  whatever  whom  his  Lordship 
would  nominate  to  that  benefice. 

My  Lord  Chancellor  replied  that  he  could  not  so  far 
abet  the  injustice  done  to  the  character  of  Bundle  on 
this  occasion  as  to  give  his  consent  to  Bundle's  being 
put  by,  and  by  naming  another  man  seem  tacitly  at 
least  to  admit  that  he  had  before  named  an  improper 
man;  that  he  might  be  conquered  by  the  Bishop  of 
London,  but  could  not  yield  to  him ;  and  must  submit 
to  an  absolute  decision  against  his  friend,  but  would 
not,  nor  could  not  in  honour,  listen  to  any  compromise. 

Thus  ended  this  conversation.  Soon  after  Dr.  Benson 
was  made  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  and  Dr.  Seeker  Bishop 
of  Bristol — both  of  them  learned  and  ingenious  men, 
of  unexceptionable  characters,  and  both  of  them  for- 


1734.  RUNDLE'S  CASE.  455 

merly  chaplains  to  my  Lord  Chancellor's  father,  the 
late  Bishop  of  Durham.  This  last  circumstance  was 
thought  to  have  been  weighed  in  the  choice  of  these 
men,  as  a  sugar-plum  to  put  the  taste  of  those  bitters 
out  of  my  Lord  Chancellor's  mouth  which  they  had 
made  him  swallow  by  the  rejection  of  Rundle ;  and 
the  Irish  bishopric  of  Derry,  before  mentioned,  soon 
after  becoming  vacant,  Rundle  was  sent  into  that  lucra- 
tive episcopal  exile.13 


13  In  which  he  died  in  1743,  scarcely  sixty  years  old,  having,  we  are 
told,  overcome,  by  his  amiable  qualities,  the  unpopularity  of  his  nomination. 
Swift  celebrated  Bundle's  promotion  in  a  copy  of  verses,  which  Gilbert 
Wakefield's  anti-church  prejudices  thought  "  excellent,"  but  I  think  nearly 
the  worst  he  ever  wrote,  and  which,  like  Pope's  praise  of  Rundle's  heart, 
had  no  object  but  to  insult  the  other  bishops,  the  clergy,  and  the  Ministry. 
Indeed,  the  tone  of  this  defence  is  a  sufficient  justification  of  Gibson's 
objections,  and  aggravates  the  scandal  of  making  a  man  a  bishop  in  Ireland 
because  he  was  supposed  not  to  be  fit  for  one  in  England. 

"  Make  Rundle  bishop ! — fye — for  shame ! 
An  Arian  to  usurp  that  name ! 
Dare  any  of  the  mitred  host 
Confer  on  him  the  Holy  Ghost, 
In  Mother  Church  to  breed  a  variance, 
By  coupling  orthodox  and  Arians  ?     *     * 
Rundle  a  bishop ! — well  he  may, 
He  's  still  a  Christian  more  than  they. 
We  know  the  subject  of  their  quarrels, 
The  man  has  learning,  sense,  and  morals — 
There  is  a  reason  still  more  weighty — 
'Tis  granted  he  believes  a  Deity ; 
Has  every  circumstance  to  please  us, 
Though  fools  may  doubt  his  faith  in  Jesus  ; 
But  why  should  he  with  that  be  loaded 
Now  twenty  years  from  Court  exploded  ? 
And  is  not  this  objection  odd 
From  rogues  who  ne'er  believed  in  God  ?" 

These  were  the  dregs  of  Swift,  and  do  no  honour  either  to  him  or  Rundle. 
It  is  worth  remarking  that  3000/.  was  then  considered  a  lucrative  bishopric, 
but  Derry  was  returned  to  the  Ecclesiastical  Commission,  in  1834,  at  above 
14,000/.  Lord  Hervey's  third  son,  Frederic,  afterwards  fourth  Earl  of 
Bristol,  held  this  see  from  1768  to  his  death  in  1803. 


45t>  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

Household  Offices — Duke  of  Richmond  Master  of  the  Horse ;  Lord  Pem- 
broke Groom  of  the  Stole  ;  Lord  Godolphin's  Pension  and  Peerage — 
Characters  of  these  two  Lords — Ideal  Marriage  of  the  Prince  of  Wales — 
Parliament  meets — 30,000  Seamen  voted — Reasons  for  and  against — Sir 
Joseph  Jekyll — Marlborough  Election — Miss  Skerrett — Election  Peti- 
tion of  the  Scotch  Peers — Debate  in  the  Lords  on  the  Troops — Walpole 
resists  the  disposition  of  the  King  and  Queen  to  War — Public  Expenses 
— Finance — Sinking  Fund — Ministerial  Changes — Messrs.  Winnington 
and  Fox  recommended  by  Lord  Hervey — King's  Journey  to  Hanover 
opposed  by  Walpole  in  vain — Madame  de  Walmoden — Strange  confi- 
dences to  the  Queen. 

THE  new  year  was  opened  with  an  expedient  which 
put  an  end  to  the  long  contest 1  between  the  Duke  of 
Richmond  and  Lord  Pembroke  for  the  Mastership  of 
the  Horse.  The  expedient  was  this :  Lord  Godolphin 
having  often  told  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  his  old  and  in- 
timate friend,  that  the  holding  such  an  employment  as 
Groom  of  the  Stole — to  which  so  much  attendance  be- 
longed, and  to  which  he  paid  so  little — made  him 
extremely  uneasy,  and  that  there  was  another  thing  he 
wanted  to  obtain  as  much  as  he  wanted  to  get  rid  of 
this,  which  was  his  peerage  to  be  continued  to  the  col- 
lateral branch  of  his  own  family  of  Godolphin,2  Sir 

1  It  had  apparently  been  in  suspense  since  the  preceding  Midsummer 
(ante,  p.  290),  though,  in  fact,  the  Duke  of  Richmond  had  been  fixed  on, 
but  it  was  kept  secret  till  Lord  Pembroke  could  be  satisfied. 

2  The  second  Earl  of  Godolphin  had  married  the  great  Duke  of  Marl- 
borough's  eldest  daughter,  Henrietta,  who  succeeded  to  the  Duke's  titles 
and  estates  ;  but,  having  lost  their  only  son,  the  Marlborough  peerages  would 
pass  to  the  Spencers,  children  of  the  Duke's  second  daughter,  and  the  Go- 
dolphin  title  would  become  extinct.     Lord  Godolphin  was  therefore  anxious 
to  continue  a  peerage  in  his  own  family,  and  accordingly  was  created,  in 


1735.  HOUSEHOLD  OFFICES.  457 

Robert  Walpole  took  advantage  of  these  sentiments  to 
propose  to  the  King  the  making  of  Lord  Pembroke 
Groom  of  the  Stole,  and  the  Duke  of  Richmond  Mas- 
ter of  the  Horse,  without  letting  the  King  know  that 
Lord  Godolphin  had  a  mind  to  quit,  but  proposing  to 
the  King  to  buy  his  consent  to  this  accommodation  by 
offering  him  the  peerage  to  be  entailed  on  his  cousin, 
Godolphin,  after  his  death. 

But  there  were  two  great  difficulties  attended  the 
gaining  his  Majesty's  consent  to  this  scheme :  the  one 
was,  that  the  King  would  be  at  no  additional  expense, 
whilst  Lord  Godolphin,  if  he  quitted,  must  have  a  pen- 
sion ;  the  other  was,  that  the  King  did  not  at  all  relish 
the  entailing  a  peerage  on  Mr.  Godolphin,  who  had 
married  a  daughter  of  Lady  Portland,  to  whom  both 
the  King  and  Queen  bore  a  most  irreconcilable  hatred 
for  accepting  the  employment  of  governess  to  their 
daughter  in  the  late  reign  without  their  consent,  at  the 
time  they  had  been  turned  out  of  St.  James's,  and  the 
education  of  their  children,  who  were  kept  there,  taken 
from  them. 

Lord  Godolphin's  salary  as  Groom  of  the  Stole  was 
5000/.  a-year ;  and  Lord  Pembroke's,  as  Lord  of  the 
Bedchamber,  100(K.  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  therefore, 
prevailed  with  Lord  Godolphin,  in  consideration  of  the 
peerage  which  he  had  so  much  at  heart,  to  accept  of  a 
pension  of  3000?.  a-year,  and  Lord  Pembroke  to  take 
the  key,  with  3000/.  more,  which  reduced  the  expense 
of  this  jumble  within  the  limited  sum.  When  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  had  proceeded  thus  far  in  the  negotia- 

1735,  Baron  Ilelstone,  with  remainder  to  the  heirs  of  his  first-cousin, 
Henry,  Provost  of  Eton,  whose  son  Francis  dying  without  issue  in  1785, 
that  peerage  also  became  extinct. 


458  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

tion,  he  acquainted  the  King  with  what  he  had  done, 
who  still  boggled  at  giving  the  peerage,  and,  not  caring 
to  own  the  true  reason,  said,  there  was  a  time  that  the 
Lord  Treasurer  Godolphin  had  been  as  great  a  Jacob- 
ite as  any  man  in  the  kingdom,3  and  yet  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  was  now  urging  him  to  bestow  this  honour  on 
the  heir  of  his  odious  family.  Sir  Robert  said  it  was 
true,  as  the  Lord  Treasurer  Godolphin  had  been  page 
to  King  James  the  Second,  he  was  suspected,  whilst 
his  old  master  lived,  to  whom  he  had  had  so  many  and 
so  great  obligations,  to  have  a  partiality  towards  him  ; 
but  all  that  partiality  had  died  with  King  James,  and 
that  nobody  had  ever  accused  or  suspected  the  late 
Lord  Godolphin  of  any  attachment  to  his  Son,  the 
present  Pretender.  Sir  Robert  added  to  this  plea  that 
of  the  present  Lord  Godolphin's  firm,  undoubted,  and 
uninterrupted  attachment  to  his  Majesty's  family ;  and 
said  to  the  King,  "  Sir,  for  my  sake  I  beg  your  Majesty 
would  grant  this  boon  to  Lord  Godolphin,  and  give  me 
leave  to  look  upon  it  as  a  particular  favour  done  to  one 
of  the  best  friends  I  have  in  the  world,  at  my  request" 

The  King  made  answer,  "  You  are  always  teasing  me 
to  do  things  that  are  disagreeable  to  me,  and  for  people 
I  dislike"  However,  with  much  ado  Sir  Robert  got 
his  consent,  thanked  him  for  it,  and  did  not  leave  him 
time  to  repent ;  but,  the  moment  he  went  out  of  the 
closet,  sent  to  all  the  three  Lords  to  let  them  know 
they  might  come  the  next  morning  to  kiss  the  King's 
hand,  which  accordingly  they  did — Duke  of  Richmond 
as  Master  of  the  Horse,  Lord  Pembroke  as  Groom  of 

3  Lord  Godolphin  had  been  not  for  deposing  James,  but  for  substituting 
the  Princess  of  Orange  as  regent — a  scheme  which  would  have  excluded  the 
Hanover  family. 


1735.  LORDS  GODOLPH1N  AND  PEMBROKE.  459 

the  Stole,  and  Lord  Godolphin  for  his  Barony  entailed 
on  his  cousin-german. 

Lord  Godolphin  was  a  very  singular  character,  for, 
though  he  was  a  man  of  undoubted  understanding  and 
strict  honour,  yet  he  passed  his  whole  life  with  people 
who  had  neither.  Natural  modesty,  indolence,  and 
laziness,  made  him  exert  himself  but  little  in  the  great 
and  the  busy  world;  and  his  chief,  if  not  his  only 
pleasures,  being  wine  and  running  horses,  he  passed 
almost  all  his  time  in  low  company,  who  could  talk 
sense  in  no  character  but  that  of  jockeys ;  and  acted, 
even  in  that  character,  as  little  like  gentlemen  as  they 
talked. 

Lord  Pembroke's  character  was  a  very  different  one ; 
not  that  he  wanted  sense,  or  that  he  was  not  very  justly 
esteemed  a  man  of  the  nicest  and  strictest  honour,  but 
he  was  quite  illiterate ;  whereas  Lord  Godolphin  was 
an  extremely  good  scholar,  and  had  a  great  deal  of 
knowledge :  the  one,  too,  was  always  in  bad  company, 
whilst  the  other  was  always  in  the  best ;  and,  as  Lord 
Pembroke,  being  much  known,  was  generally  esteemed 
and  had  many  friends,  so  the  other,  from  the  obscurity 
of  his  way  of  life,  was  so  far  from  having  many  friends, 
that,  out  of  the  very  narrow  compass  of  his  own  low 
acquaintance,  he  was  hardly  known  to  exist. 

The  points  that  were  expected  to  give  the  Adminis- 
tration most  trouble  this  year  in  Parliament  were,  an 
address  for  the  Prince's  marriage  and  settlement,  the 
opposition  to  the  augmentation  of  the  land  forces,  and 
the  petition  of  the  Scotch  Peers.  As  to  the  first  of 
these,  it  was  crushed  by  the  Queen,  who,  authorized  by 
the  King,  told  the  Prince  it  was  his  Majesty's  intention 
to  marry  him  forthwith ;  and  that,  whoever  the  Prince 


460  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

had  a  mind  to  make  this  alliance  with,  the  King  would 
not  only  give  his  consent  but  his  utmost  assistance  to 
complete  it.  In  consequence  of  this  declaration  the 
Queen  talked  publicly  every  day  of  the  Prince's  being 
immediately  to  be  married,  though  nobody  could  ever 
learn  to  whom ;  and  bespoke  her  clothes  for  the  wed- 
ding, and  sent  perpetually  to  jewellers  to  get  presents 
for  this  ideal  future  Princess  of  Wales. 

As  to  the  affair  of  the  Scotch  petition,  it  gave  as 
much  trouble  to  the  Opposition  as  to  the  courtiers :  the 
latter  knowing  how  sore  a  place  it  was  if  it  could  be 
laid  open ;  and  the  former,  at  the  same  time  they  were 
sensible  how  much  was  expected  from  them  by  the  world 
on  this  head,  being  conscious,  too,  how  little  they  were 
able  to  answer  those  expectations  when  they  came  to 
collect  their  materials,  and  found  how  weakly  their 
proofs  would  answer  their  charge.4  The  English  Lords 
in  opposition  had  a  great  mind  to  drop  the  prosecution ; 
but  the  Scotch  Peers  who  were  concerned  in  it,  and 
had  lost  both  their  employments  and  their  seats  in  Par- 
liament, insisted  on  being  supported,  or  at  least  being 
fought  for.  They  said  they  did  not  understand  the 
equity  of  having  been  set  in  the  front  of  the  attack 
upon  the  Administration,  like  the  forlorn  hope,  being 
sacrificed  for  the  sake  of  the  Party,  and  then  deserted 
by  those  for  whom  they  had  been  exposed.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  English  Lords  said  in  their  defence 
that  they  had  lost  their  employments  as  well  as  the 
Scotch  ;  and  that,  for  their  seats  in  Parliament,  if  they 
held  those  upon  a  different  tenure,  it  was  what  the 
Scotch  knew  before  they  embarked ;  that  what  each  of 
them  had  to  lose,  they  had  both  ventured  and  both  lost ; 

4  See  ante,  p.  334,  n.  27. 


1735.  ELECTION  PETITION  OF  SCOTCH  PEERS.  461 

that  if  there  was  the  least  glimmering  of  daylight  to  be 
seen  from  this  prosecution,  any  advantage  to  be  pro- 
posed, or  any  success  to  be  hoped  for,  they  would  gladly 
pursue  it  to  the  utmost ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  they  said, 
as  their  proofs  were  so  deficient,  so  to  bring  this  affair 
to  a  public  trial  would  be  matter  of  triumph  rather 
than  annoyance  to  the  common  enemy,  and  contribute 
more  to  the  disgrace  than  the  advantage  of  their  com- 
mon friends. 

However,  the  Scotch  Peers  insisted  and  prevailed ; 
but  Lord  Carteret,  and  Lord  Winchelsea  by  his  in- 
fluence, refused  positively  to  take  any  other  part  in 
pursuing  this  unfruitful  affair,  or  to  give  any  other 
assistance,  than  their  attendance  and  their  votes ;  and 
accordingly  they  declined  after  this  going  to  any  of  the 
meetings  previous  to  the  bringing  this  affair  before  the 
House  of  Lords;  nor  did  either  of  them,  after  it  came 
to  that  (as  loquacious  as  they  were  on  all  other  occa- 
sions, both  in  public  and  private),  open  their  lips  in 
support  of  the  petition  during  the  whole  progress  of  its 
presentation,  suspense,  and  dismission. 

Lord  Carteret  had  more  reasons  than  one  for  declin- 
ing fighting  on  this  ground.  In  the  first  place,  he  had 
always  in  his  eye  the  prospect  of  being  himself  in 
power,  and  did  not  care  for  weaving  fetters  for  his  own 
hands  when  he  came  to  be  possessed  of  that  much-de- 
sired post ;  in  the  next,  he  was  not  very  fond  of  being 
enrolled  as  a  lieutenant  under  my  Lord  Chesterfield, 
who  had  long  been  looked  upon  as  Commander-in- 
Chief  of  this  Scotch  brigade. 

Many  people  imagined  that  Lord  Carteret's  coolness 
on  this  occasion  proceeded  from  his  being  then  secretly 
negotiating  his  peace  with  the  Court.  When  I  in- 


462  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

quired  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole  if  there  was  any  truth  in 
this  report,  he  asked  me  "  if  I  thought  him  mad 
enough  ever  to  trust  such  a  fellow  as  that  on  any  con- 
sideration, or  on  any  promises  or  professions,  within  the 
walls  of  St.  James's.  I  had  some  difficulty,"  added  he, 
"  to  get  him  out ;  but  he  shall  find  much  more  to  get 
in  again."  He  told  me,  too,  at  the  same  time,  that,  to 
his  knowledge,  Lord  Carteret  had  opened  two  canals  to 
the  Queen's  ear,  but  that  he  hoped  to  prevent  either 
stream  having  water  enough  to  turn  his  mill,  though  he 
knew  one  of  them  ran  much  stronger  than  the  other. 
The  two  people  Sir  Robert  meant  were  Mrs.  Clayton 
and  Bishop  Sherlock,  the  last  of  whom  he  alluded  to 
when  he  spoke  of  the  strongest  interest.  He  owned 
this  winter,  too,  to  Lord  Hervey,  that  his  Lordship  had 
been  in  the  right  in  what  he  had  told  him  the  year 
before  at  Richmond  relating  to  the  Bishop  pushing  at 
his  interest;  "but,  my  Lord,"  said  he,  "it  is  not  on 
the  Bishop  of  London's  account  that  he  pushes  at  me — 
it  is  Walpole,  not  Gibson,  that  he  envies ;  for  his  eyes 
are  not  half  so  wistfully  turned  to  Lambeth  as  they  are 
to  St.  James's,  nor  is  it  more  his  ambition  to  be  at  the 
head  of  the  Church  than  at  the  head  of  the  State." 5 


5  Sir  Robert  could  hardly  have  been  serious  in  this  statement.  Smarting 
under  some  obstruction  to  his  wishes,  created  by  Sherlock's  influence  with 
the  Queen,  he  may  have  said  testily  that  the  bishop  aimed  at  being  minis- 
ter, but  he  could  not  have  thought  it.  Sherlock  may  have  been  busy  and 
ambitious  at  this  period  (aetat.  57),  but  was  too  sensible  a  man  to  dream 
of  being  minister.  His  professional  aspirings  were  noticed  while  he  was 
yet  only  Master  of  the  Temple  in  the  well-known  epigram — 

"  As  Sherlock  at  Temple  was  taking  a  boat, 
The  waterman  ask'd  him  which  way  he  would  float  ? 
'  Which  way  ?'  says  the  Doctor,  '  why,  fool,  with  the  stream,' 
To  PauVs  or  to  Lambeth ;  'tis  all  one  to  him." 

He  did  reach  St.  Paul's,  but  in  1747  he  had,  we  are  told,  the  moderation 

and  prudence  to  refuse  Lambeth. 


1735.  SHERLOCK'S  AMBITION.  463 

Lord  Hervey  said  he  believed  there  were  very  few 
things  which  the  sanguine  vanity  of  most  people  did  not 
bring  them  to  think  were  attainable  by  their  dexterity, 
and  not  superior  to  their  merit ;  but  that  any  man  who 
flattered  himself  this  country  was  in  a  disposition  to 
bear  a  Parson-Minister  must  know  very  little  of  the 
temper  of  the  present  generation. 

It  is  certain,  however,  that  Sherlock's  interest  at  this 
time  with  the  Queen  was  strong  enough  to  give  some 
trouble  to  Sir  Robert,  but  still  more  to  the  Bishop  of 
London,  who  had  disobliged  many  of  the  Whig  clergy, 
and  saw  himself  every  day  more  and  more  deserted  by 
the  Tory  clergy  that  were  running  under  the  wing  of 
Sherlock  and  soliciting  his  protection. 

Sherlock  now  and  then,  too,  endeavoured  to  do  Lord 
Carteret  service  at  Court,  but  hitherto  without  suc- 
cess ;  the  manner  in  which  the  King  and  Queen  this 
winter  spoke  of  him  being  not  in  the  least  softened,  and 
the  "  knave  "  and  the  "  liar  "  as  often  tacked  to  his  name 
as  usual.  The  Queen,  however,  in  speaking  of  him 
and  Lord  Chesterfield,  always  gave  him  the  preference. 
She  said  Lord  Carteret  was  a  coquin  dans  le  grand,  but 
Chesterfield  was  a  coquin  dans  le  petit ; — that  the  last 
was  incapable  of  being  a  very  useful  servant  to  his 
Prince  if  he  would  ;  but  that  Lord  Carteret  had  really 
something  in  him,  though  he  was  not  to  be  trusted. 
She  said  Lord  Carteret  was  like  a  candle  that,  if  he 
was  well  watched,  could  give  one  some  light,  but  that 
it  was  dangerous  to  trust  the  one  as  the  other  out  of 
one's  sight ;  and  that  both  were  full  as  capable  of  firing 
one's  house  if  they  were  not  taken  care  ofj  as  of  being 
useful  if  they  were. 


464  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

Lord  Carteret  and  Lord  Chesterfield  were  in  some 
things  very  much  alike — in  others  very  different :  they 
were  both  of  them  most  abominably  given  to  fable,  and 
both  of  them  often  unnecessarily,  and  consequently  indis- 
creetly, so ;  for  whoever  would  lie  usefully  should  lie 
seldom:  they  both  of  them,  too,  treated  all  principles 
of  honesty  and  integrity  with  such  open  contempt,  that 
they  seemed  to  think  the  appearance  of  those  qualities 
would  be  of  as  little  use  to  them  as  the  reality,  which 
must  certainly  be  impolitic,  since  always  to  ridicule 
those  who  are  swayed  by  such  principles  was  telling  all 
their  acquaintance,  "  If  you  do  not  behave  to  me  like 
knaves,  I  shall  either  distrust  you  as  hypocrites  or  laugh 
at  you  as  fools." 

They  had  both  of  them  good  parts,  but  parts  that 
were  of  a  very  different  style :  Lord  Carteret  had  a 
much  better  public  and  Court  understanding  than  Lord 
Chesterfield,  and  Lord  Chesterfield  a  much  better  pri- 
vate and  social  understanding  than  Lord  Carteret ;  so 
that  this  was  as  much  superior  to  the  other  in  the  Se- 
nate and  the  Cabinet  as  the  other  was  superior  to  him 
at  table  and  in  ruelles  [ante,  p.  295] . 

When  the  Parliament  met  this  winter  the  King 
opened  the  Session  [23rd  January~\  with  telling  them 
that  the  Powers  at  war  had  consented  that  England 
and  Holland  should  try  what  they  could  do  towards 
making  a  scheme  of  accommodation,  and  that  accord- 
ingly his  Majesty  and  his  good  friends  the  States- 
General  were  drawing  a  plan  (every  article  of  which 
was  a  secret),  which  he  rather  wished  than  hoped  might 
prevent  the  opening  of  another  campaign,  and  therefore 
desired  the  Parliament  would  give  him  a  great  deal  of 


1735.  VOTE  OF  SEAMEN.  465 

money,  a  great  many  ships,  and  a  great  many  troops, 
in  order  to  enable  him  to  act  roughly  in  case  talking 
mildly  should  prove  to  no  purpose. 

Pursuant  to  these  hints  from  the  Throne,  thirty  thou- 
sand men  were  proposed  this  year  in  Parliament  for  the 
sea  service.  Those  in  opposition  said  twenty  thousand 
were  sufficient,  and  argued  that  there  was  no  necessity 
for  voting  a  greater  number  this  year  than  had  been 
granted  the  last ;  that  the  Dutch  had  made  no  aug- 
mentation either  by  sea  or  land  this  year ;  and  that,  as 
our  interests  were  mutual  in  the  present  troubles,  so,  if 
no  augmentation  was  necessary  for  Holland,  none  could 
be  more  necessary  for  England.  It  was  urged,  too,  that 
as  a  war  was  chiefly  to  be  avoided  on  account  of  the 
detriment  it  would  be  to  trade,  so  that  reason  ought  to 
operate  against  an  increase  of  seamen,  since  the  mer- 
chants last  year  had  complained  grievously  of  the 
scarcity  of  seamen,  and  consequently  of  the  high  wages 
they  were  forced  to  pay  them;  and  if  this  year  ten 
thousand  more  were  to  be  employed,  that  inconve- 
nience must  be  stronger  felt,  and  make  our  merchants 
trade  under  such  a  burden  and  such  a  disadvantage  that 
the  Dutch  would  run  away  with  all  the  profits  of  the 
trade  of  Europe  in  almost  as  great  a  degree  as  they 
would  engross  it  in  case  we  were  engaged  in  a  war  without 
them.  It  was  said,  too,  that  our  naval  armaments  had 
been  the  occasion  of  so  great  a  fleet  being  fitted  out  by 
France,  arid  of  that  fleet  being  kept  on  the  western  shore 
of  France,  within  sight  of  our  coasts,  which  otherwise 
would  have  been  sent  to  Dantzic.  It  was  also  strongly 
insisted  upon  that  the  nation  was  in  no  condition  to 
bear  additional  expenses ;  that  if  the  fatal  time  should 

VOL.  i.  2  H 


466  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

come  when,  to  prevent  the  total  subversion  of  the 
balance  of  power  in  Europe,  we  should  be  necessitated 
to  take  a  part  in  this  war,  it  did  behove  us  not  wantonly 
before  that  time  came  to  squander  our  treasure  and  im- 
pair our  strength,  but  to  keep  ourselves  in  reserve  now, 
and  then  exert  to  the  utmost  of  our  power.  It  was 
likewise  said  that  the  King  in  his  speech,  and  the  Minis- 
ters in  debate,  seemed  to  speak  of  the  contending 
Powers  accepting  our  good  offices  as  a  thing  of  great 
moment,  and  a  promising  circumstance ;  but  if  the 
manner  in  which  that  acceptation  was  made  by  either 
came  to  be  scanned  and  set  in  a  true  light,  that  little 
was  to  be  expected  from  it  but  a  short  amusement  for 
the  winter,  nor  could  any  but  transient  and  delusive 
hopes  of  peace  be  built  on  such  a  foundation.  The 
manner  in  which  France  had  accepted  the  good  offices 
of  the  Maritime  Powers  was  nothing  more  than  by  say- 
ing she  was  willing  to  hear  any  proposals  of  accommo- 
dation we  could  make,  provided  we  kept  ourselves  in 
such  an  absolute  state  of  impartiality  as  enabled  us  to 
bear  the  name  of  mediators.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
was  true  the  Court  of  Vienna  had  accepted  the  good 
offices,  but  with  an  absolute  promise  that  the  Emperor 
was  not  by  that  acceptation  to  be  excluded  (in  case  this 
proposal  of  accommodation  did  not  succeed)  from  any 
right  he  had  by  former  treaties  to  receive  the  succours 
therein  stipulated,  and  already,  in  pursuance  of  those 
treaties,  by  him  claimed  and  demanded. 

Those  on  the  side  of  the  Court  who  spoke  for  the 
augmentation  answered  these  objections  in  the  following 
manner : — 

In  the  first  place,  with  regard  to  no  augmentation 


1735.  VOTE  OF  SEAMEN.  467 

having  been  made  by  the  Dutch  since  these  troubles 
began,  it  was  said  to  be  no  true  proposition ;  for 
as  thirty  thousand  men  are  reckoned  by  Holland  a 
sufficient  standing  force  for  the  defence  of  that  country 
in  time  of  peace,  so  their  having  fifty-two  thousand  men 
now  on  foot  must  be  reckoned  as  an  augmentation  on 
account  of  the  troubles,  especially  since  everybody 
knew  that  after  the  conclusion  of  the  last  Treaty  of 
Vienna  the  Dutch  had  determined  to  make  a  reduction 
of  twenty-two  thousand  men  in  two  years — twelve  the 
first  and  ten  the  second ;  and  on  the  breaking  out  of 
this  war  had  changed  that  resolution. 

It  ought  farther,  too,  the  Court  party  said,  to  be 
considered,  that  though  Holland  had  made  no  augmen- 
tation by  sea,  yet,  as  their  natural  defence  was  land- 
forces,  as  ours  was  naval  armaments,  so  no  parallel  ought 
to  be  drawn  between  us  and  them  with  regard  to  an 
augmentation  by  sea,  but  the  comparison  to  be  made 
(if  any)  between  what  we  were  doing  by  sea  and  what 
they  actually  had  done  by  land. 

As  to  the  interests  of  England  and  Holland  being 
mutual  on  this  occasion,  as  urged  by  those  who  opposed 
this  augmentation,  it  was  undeniable  that  they  were  so; 
but  if  two  Powers,  though  in  the  same  interest,  were  in 
different  circumstances,  different  measures  must  be 
taken  by  them ;  and  if  the  English  Parliament  should 
declare,  or  give  it  to  be  understood,  that  they  would 
consent  to  no  step  to  be  taken  by  England  but  what 
was  taken  by  Holland,  it  would  be  making  the  counsels 
of  England  so  dependent  upon  those  in  Holland,  that, 
if  any  foreign  Power  had  any  influence  in  the  counsels 
of  Holland  (which  often  happens  in  many  States),  such 

2  H2 


468  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

a  declaration  or  intimation  of  the  English  Parliament 
would  be  to  assure  that  Power  that,  provided  they  could 
gain  Holland,  they  must  govern  England,  and  conse- 
quently must  tie  up  our  hands  as  effectually  as  if  Eng- 
land had  acceded  to  the  Treaty  of  Neutrality. 

As  to  the  inconvenience  the  merchants  suffered  from 
the  scarcity  of  seamen,  it  was  admitted  to  be  an  incon- 
venience, but  one  which,  for  the  foregoing  reasons  and 
the  present  circumstances  of  Europe,  was  unavoidable, 
and  that,  if  the  armaments  of  England  were  not  strong 
by  sea,  that  trade  would  not  only  suffer  inconveniences, 
but  would  be  entirely  stopped ;  for  as  the  French  and 
Spanish  fleets  together  did  consist  of  between  sixty  and 
seventy  ships  of  the  line-of-battle,  that  is,  from  50 
to  80  guns,  —  so,  if  England  had  not  a  naval  force 
ready  to  make  head  against  such  a  power,  that  we  must 
give  up  the  empire  of  the  seas,  as  well  as  the  balance 
of  power  by  land,  and  of  course  our  trade  would  not 
only  be  inconvenienced,  but  become  entirely  preca- 
rious. 

As  to  our  naval  armaments  last  year  having  been  the 
occasion  of  those  made  by  France,  it  was  false  in  fact, 
those  maritime  preparations  having  been  made  by 
France,  and  their  fleet  fitted  out,  before  ours  was  or- 
dered or  our  seamen  were  voted  ;  and  if  the  consequence 
of  our  fleet  being  fitted  out  was  the  prevention  of  the 
French  fleet  leaving  the  coast  of  France  and  sailing  to 
the  north,  it  was  a  consequence  rather  to  be  rejoiced  at 
than  regretted,  unless  any  one  thought  it  for  the  interest 
of  Europe  that  France  should  have  been  as  successful 
at  Dantzic  as  at  Philipsburg  or  in  Italy,  and  that 
she  would  be  more  inclined  to  peace  from  having  made 


1735.  THIRTY  THOUSAND  SEAMEN  VOTED.  469 

greater  acquisitions  by  war,  and  having  nothing  but 
what  she  was  already  possessed  of  to  expect  from  treaty 
and  negotiation. 

As  to  what  was  said  of  the  little  satisfaction  it  could 
be  to  anybody  to  hear  of  the  good  offices  being  accepted 
by  the  contending  Powers  because  no  plan  of  accom- 
modation was  very  likely  to  succeed,  it  was  answered 
that  the  King  himself  had  in  his  speech  acknowledged 
the  uncertainty  there  was  of  success  in  a  negotiation 
where  so  many  jarring  pretensions  were  to  be  satisfied 
and  so  many  conflicting  interests  to  be  adjusted ;  but 
that  it  was  still  reasonable,  since  a  general  accommoda- 
tion was  so  much  to  be  wished,  that  people  should  have 
some  satisfaction  in  the  first  step  to  that  desirable  end 
being  on  all  sides  submitted  to. 

It  was  said,  too,  by  those  who  argued  on  this  side  of 
the  question,  that  as,  in  consequence  of  the  vote  of  confi- 
dence of  last  year,  there  were  now  twenty-eight  thou- 
sand seamen  actually  in  pay,  so  the  voting  only  twenty 
thousand  this  year  was  in  reality  not  only  voting  against 
an  augmentation,  but  for  an  actual  and  immediate 
reduction  of  eight  thousand  men ;  and  whether  in  the 
present  conjuncture  any  reduction  of  seamen  was  a 
proper  measure  to  be  taken,  was  submitted  to  the  con- 
sideration of  every  man  in  the  kingdom,  within  doors 
and  without. 

At  last,  after  a  very  long  debate  [7th  February],  the 
question  was  put,  and  thirty  thousand  seamen  were 
voted  by  256  against  183. 

On  the  question  for  the  army  there  was  little  more  said 
in  the  House  of  Commons  than  a  recapitulation  of  the 


470  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

same  things  that  had  been  thrown  out  in  the  debate  upon 
the  navy;  but  though  the  debate  on  the  land-forces 
was  much  colder  than  that  on  the  fleet,  the  minority 
was  much  stronger ;  the  question  on  the  estimate  for 
twenty-five  thousand  men  for  the  land-service  of  this 
year  being  carried  only  by  261  against  208.  The  only 
public  point,  besides  these  I  have  already  mentioned, 
that  was  much  contested  in  the  House  of  Commons  this 
session,  was  the  treaty  between  the  Kings  of  England 
and  Denmark,  by  which  the  latter,  in  consideration  of  a 
subsidy  of  80,000^.  a-year,  obliged  himself  to  furnish  the 
former  with  six  thousand  men,  in  case  England  entered 
into  the  war.  The  old  story  of  the  Hessians  was 
revived  on  this  occasion,  and  the  beaten  topic  of  lavish 
treaty-making  ministers  again  displayed  and  laboured. 
However,  this  subsidy  was  at  last  provided  for,  as  well 
as  every  other  money  demand  made  by  the  Court ;  and 
the  measure  in  general,  considering  the  present  situation 
of  Europe,  was  not  thought  improper  or  unreasonable ; 
since,  the  south  being  so  much  in  the  power  of  the  Triple 
Alliance,  it  was  judged  not  impolitic  to  keep  as  many 
of  the  Princes  of  the  north  as  we  could  in  another  in- 
terest, and  not  leave  the  Czarina  alone  in  her  opposition 
to  the  encroachments  of  France  and  support  of  the 
cause  of  the  House  of  Austria. 

But  whilst  these  State  points  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons went — though  contested,  yet  at  last  all  of  them — 
according  to  the  desire  of  the  Court,  it  was  not  so  with 
the  election  [petitions],  the  Court  not  getting  above  two 
Members  this  session  upon  the  balance  of  that  account ; 
and  losing  several  questions  on  these  points  that  were 


1735.  MARLBOROUGH  ELECTION.  471 

most  industriously  solicited,  warmly  debated,  and  stre- 
nuously pushed.  That  which  made  the  defeat  of  the 
Court  and  the  triumph  of  the  Opposition  more  remark- 
able on  these  occasions  was,  that  most  of  these  disgraces 
happened  at  the  bar  of  the  House,6  and  on  the  debates, 
that  lasted  not  only  several  days,  but  till  nine,  ten,  and 
eleven  o'clock  at  night.  The  King,  who  could  never 
bear  with  common  patience  the  loss  of  any  question  he 
had  a  mind  to  carry,  was  as  much  out  of  humour  upon 
every  disappointment  of  this  kind  as  he  could  have 
been  on  the  most  important  defeat;  and  the  Queen, 
who  liked  disappointment  in  what  she  had  once  pro- 
posed as  little  as  her  consort,  though  she  concealed  her 
mortifications  better,  was  thoroughly  dissatisfied,  and 
in  private  let  some  expressions  escape  her  which  be- 
trayed her  being  so ;  and  even  Sir  Robert,  which  was 
very  rare,  did  not  escape  without  receiving  some  tokens 
of  her  dissatisfaction,  saying  that  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
"  either  neglected  these  things,  and  judged  ill  enough 
to  think  they  were  trifles,  though  in  Government,  and 
especially  in  this  country,  nothing  was  a  trifle  ;  or  per- 
haps," says  she,  "  there  is  some  management  I  know 
nothing  of,  or  some  circumstances  we  none  of  us  are 
acquainted  with ;  but,  whatever  it  is,  to  me  these  things 
seem  very  ill  conducted." 

The  Marlborough  election,  though  strongly  solicited, 
heard  at  the  bar,  and  made  a  point  of  by  the  Court, 
went  against  the  Court,  in  a  very  odd  manner,  and 


*  Election  petitions  were  then  treated  avowedly  as  mere  party  questions, 
and  the  more  important  cases  were  heard  at  the  bar  of  the  House.  A. 
division  on  the  Chippenham  election  petition  in  1742  was  the  final  blow  to 
Wai  pole's  administration. 


472  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

without  a  division.  Sir  Joseph  Jekyll,  the  Master  of 
the  Rolls,  who  spoke  against  the  Court  at  twelve  o'clock 
at  night,  after  a  hearing  and  debate  of  two  days,  was 
the  occasion  of  the  Court  at  last  giving  it  up ;  he  started 
a  point  of  law,  on  which  he  said  the  whole  turned,  and 
threw  out  a  defiance  to  any  man  who  understood  the 
law  to  contradict  him.  All  the  lawyers  on  the  side  of 
the  Court  were  mute  ;  upon  which  Mr.  Pelham  pressed 
Sir  Robert  Walpole  (who  yielded  to  him)  not  to  stand 
a  division ;  and,  as  the  Attorney  and  Solicitor  Gene- 
ral,7 who  did  not  open  their  mouths  to  contradict  the 
Master  of  the  Rolls  that  night,  declared  some  days 
after,  on  examination  of  their  books,  that  the  Master 
was  wrong  in  his  point  of  law,  they  caused  great  con- 
fusion and  many  disputes  and  complaints  among  the 
Court  party:  everybody  blamed  the  Attorney  and 
Solicitor  for  their  ignorance  in  not  being  able  to  answer 
the  Master  on  the  spot,  and  for  their  imprudence,  since 
they  had  not  done  it  then,  for  showing  afterwards  that 
they  might  have  done  it,  and  for  proving  the  situation 
of  this  case  to  have  been  like  one  mentioned  in  Livy, 
when  he  says,  "  Non  defuit  quid  responderetur  sed 
deerat  qui  responsum  daret :" — "  that  there  was  wanting 
not  a  response,  but  a  respondent." 

The  bulk  of  the  Court  party  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, even  whilst  they  thought  they  were  in  the  wrong 
in  the  point  of  law,  were  extremely  angry  that  they 
were  not  allowed,  by  a  division,  to  show  their  zeal 
against  law,  which  seldom  had  any  weight  in  the  de- 
cision of  elections :  when  they  heard  the  law  was  with 

7  Sir  John  Willes  and  Sir  Dudley  Ryder,  both  afterwards  Chief  Justices, 
the  first  of  the  Common  Pleas,  the  latter  of  the  King's  Bench. 


1735.  SIR  JOSEPH  JEKYLL.  473 

them,  or  at  least  doubtful,  they  were  outrageous.  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  was  angry  with  Mr.  Pelham,  whose 
timidity  and  affectation  of  popularity,  he  said,  ever 
made  him  in  a  hurry  to  drop  his  friends  and  cajole  his 
enemies.  The  Queen,  who  (at  the  solicitation  of  Lord 
and  Lady  Hertford,8  the  first  one  of  the  Captains  of  the 
Horse  Guard  to  the  King,  the  other  one  of  her  Ladies 
of  the  Bedchamber)  had  pressed  extremely  the  carrying 
this  election,  was  very  much  out  of  humour  when  first 
it  miscarried,  but  more  so  when  she  learned  in  what 
manner  it  had  been  lost.  She  was  displeased  with  Sir 
Robert,  more  so  with  Mr.  Pelham,  and  most  of  all  with 
the  Master  of  the  Rolls,9  whom  she  was  always  cajoling, 
always  abusing,  always  hoping  to  manage,  and  always 
finding  she  was  deceived  in.  He  was  an  impracticable 
old  fellow  of  four  score,  with  no  great  natural  perspi- 
cuity of  understanding,  and  had,  instead  of  enlighten- 
ing that  natural  cloud,  only  gilded  it  with  knowledge, 

8  I  cannot  reconcile  Lord  Hervey's  statement  with  that  of  the  Journals, 
where  it  appears  that  there  was  a  division,  176  to  172  in  favour  of  the 
sitting  members,  one  at  least  of  whom,  Mr.  Seymour,  would  seem  to  have 
been  the  friend  of  Lord  Hertford ;  and  the  tellers  for  the  minority  were 
certainly  strong  anti-courtiers. 

9  Pope  ironically  permits  to  a  courtier  satirist 

"  A  horse  laugh,  if  you  please,  on  honesty  ; 
A  joke  on  Jekyll,  or  some  odd  old  Whig 
Who  never  changed  his  principles  or  wig." 
To  which  he  adds  this  note  : — 

"  Sir  Joseph  Jekyll,  a  true  Whig  in  his  principles,  and  a  man  of  the 
utmost  probity.  He  sometimes  voted  against  the  Court,  which  drew  upon 
him  the  laugh  here  described  of  ONE  who  bestowed  it  equally  on  religion 
and  honesty." 

None  of  Pope's  annotators  attempt  to  explain  this  passage.  I  believe 
the  "  ONB  "  means  Queen  Caroline,  both  from  the  mode  of  printing  the 
word,  and  because  Lord  Hervey  (the  only  other  person,  I  think,  that 
could  have  been  meant)  is  three  or  four  times  distinctly  pointed  out  by 
name  and  nickname  in  the  same  poem,  and  would  not  have  been  spared  in 
the  note. 


474  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

reading,  and  learning,  and  made  it  more  shining,  but 
not  less  thick :  study  had  made  many  doubts  occur, 
and  solved  none ;  and  the  desire  of  appearing  in  the 
right,  more  than  the  desire  of  being  so,  forced  him  often 
in  Parliament  to  balance  in  points  where  vanity  wore 
the  appearance  of  integrity,  and  where  the  bias  of  popu- 
larity drew  him  against  the  Court  without  any  other 
weight  to  incline  him  to  that  side.  He  was  always 
puzzled  and  confused  in  his  apprehension  of  things, 
more  so  in  forming  an  opinion  upon  them,  and  most  of 
all  in  his  expression  and  manner  of  delivering  that 
opinion  when  it  was  formed ;  so  that  his  brain,  from  a 
very  uncommon  formation,  was,  in  conceiving  senti- 
ments and  forming  judgments,  like  some  women,  who, 
instead  of  plain,  natural,  and  profitable  births,  are  for 
ever  subject  to  false  conceptions  and  miscarriages,  or, 
if  they  go  out  their  time,  bring  a  dead  offspring  or  a 
child  turned  the  wrong  way.  His  principal  topics  for 
declamation  in  the  House  were  generally  economy  and 
liberty ;  and,  though  no  individual  in  the  House  ever 
spoke  of  him  with  esteem  or  respect,  but  rather  with  a 
degree  of  contempt  and  ridicule,  yet,  from  his  age,  and 
the  constant  profession  of  having  the  public  good  at 
heart  beyond  any  other  point  of  view,  he  had  worked 
himself  into  such  a  degree  of  credit  with  the  accumu- 
lated body  that  he  certainly  spoke  with  more  general 
weight,  though  with  less  particular  approbation,  than 
any  other  single -man  in  that  assembly :  and  as  some 
people  who  speak  in  public,  though  they  have  no  great 
respect  for  the  particular  people  who  compose  their 
audience,  feel,  notwithstanding,  an  awe  for  them  in  their 
aggregate  capacity,  so  he,  without  being  esteemed  by 


1735.  MISS  SKERRETT.  475 

particulars,  had  the  reverence  of  the  corporate  body 
which  those  particulars  composed. 

The  balance  of  the  Marlborough  election  was  turned, 
as  well  as  many  other  points,  merely  by  his  weight 
being  thrown  into  the  anti-Court  scale.  And  there 
was  one  odd  circumstance  that  made  the  Queen  think 
this  affair  of  much  more  importance,  and  more  mortify- 
ing to  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  than  it  really  was ;  for, 
after  Sir  Robert,  the  next  day,  had  been  giving  her  an 
account  of  it,  Lord  Hervey  happening  to  be  with  her 
that  evening,  she  told  him  she  never  saw  anything  so 
managed  as  this  business  had  been,  nor  Sir  Robert  Wal- 
pole ever  so  much  struck  and  cast  down  on  any  occasion 
in  her  life :  "  He  has  just  been  here,"  said  she,  "  and 
appeared  quite  confounded  and  moped,  had  neither  life 
nor  spirit,  and  seemed  more  shocked  (which  you  know 
he  is  not  apt  to  be)  than  I  ever  saw  any  man,  and  even 
more  than  he  was  at  the  bustle  of  the  Excise."  Lord 
Hervey,  who  knew  that  nothing  was  so  likely  to  bring 
Sir  Robert  into  difficulty  in  the  palace  as  being  thought 
to  feel  himself  in  any  out  of  it,  told  her  Majesty 
that  he  believed  she  had  misconstrued  Sir  Robert's 
confusion,  and  imputed  it  to  a  cause  very  different  from 
that  which  had  really  occasioned  it ;  and  then  told  her 
Majesty  that  his  mistress,  Miss  Skerrett,  was  extremely 
ill  of  a  pleuritic  fever,  in  great  danger,  and  that  Sir 
Robert  was  in  the  utmost  anxiety  and  affliction  for  her. 

The  Queen,  who  was  much  less  concerned  about  his 
private  afflictions  than  his  ministerial  difficulties,  was 
glad  to  hear  his  embarrassment  thus  accounted  for, 
and  began  to  talk  on  Sir  Robert's  attachment  to  this 
woman,  asking  Lord  Hervey  many  questions  about 


476  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

Miss  Skerrett's  beauty  and  understanding,  and  his  fond- 
ness and  weakness  towards  her.10  She  said  she  was  very 
glad  he  had  any  amusement  for  his  leisure  hours,  but 
could  neither  comprehend  how  a  man  could  be  very 
fond  of  a  woman  who  was  only  attached  to  him  for  his 
money,  nor  ever  imagine  how  any  woman  would  suffer 
him  as  a  lover  from  any  consideration  or  inducement 
but  his  money.  "  She  must  be  a  clever  gentlewoman," 
continued  the  Queen,  "  to  have  made  him  believe  she 
cares  for  him  on  any  other  score ;  and  to  show  you 
what  fools  we  all  are  in  some  point  or  other,  she  has 
certainly  told  him  some  fine  story  or  other  of  her  love 
and  her  passion,  and  that  poor  man — avec  ce  gros  corps, 
ces  jambes  en/lees,  et  ce  vilain  venire — believes  her. 
Ah !  what  is  human  nature ! "  While  she  was  saying 
this,  she  little  reflected  in  what  degree  she  herself  pos- 
sessed all  the  impediments  and  antidotes  to  love  she 
had  been  enumerating,  and  that  "  Ah  !  what  is  human 
nature !"  was  as  applicable  to  her  own  blindness  as  to  his. 
However,  her  manner  of  speaking  of  Sir  Robert  on 
this  occasion  showed  at  least  that  he  was  not  just  at 
this  time  in  the  same  rank  of  favour  with  her  that  he 
used  to  be ;  for  though  she  might  not  always  before 
have  been  blind  to  these  defects  and  these  weak- 
nesses, at  least  she  had  been  so  indulgent  to  them  as 
to  have  been  always  dumb  upon  that  chapter,  and  to 
let  these  things  escape  her  communicated  reflections,  if 
they  had  not  escaped  her  private  observation. 


10  This  passage  satisfies  me  that  the  original  annotator  of  Lady  Mary 
W.  Montagu,  as  well  as  Lord  Wharncliffe,  who  followed  him,  were  mis- 
taken in  describing  Miss  Skerrett  as  one  of  the  Queen's  maids  of  honour. 
See  ante,  p.  115. 


1735.  ELECTION  PETITION  OF  SCOTCH  PEERS.  477 

The  petition  of  the  Scotch  Peers,  which  had  been 
so  long  expected,  and  often  said  to  be  dropped, 
was  at  last  [on  the  13th  February']  presented  by  the 
Duke  of  Bedford,  and  conceived  in  the  following 
terms : — 

"To  the  Lords  Spiritual  and  Temporal,  &c. 

"  The  humble  petition  of  James  Duke  of  Hamilton  and 
Brandon,  Charles  Duke  of  Queensberry  and  Dover,  James 
Duke  of  Montrose,  Thomas  Earl  of  Dundonald,  Alexander 
Earl  of  Marchmont,  and  John  Earl  of  Stair,  sheweth 

"  That  at  the  last  election  of  sixteen  peers  to  serve  in  the 
present  Parliament  for  that  part  of  Great  Britain  called  Scot- 
land, the  majority  of  votes  was  obtained  for  the  Duke  of  Buc- 
cleuch,  &c.  — who  were  returned  accordingly. 

"  Your  petitioners,  however,  conceive  it  their  duty  to  repre- 
sent to  your  Lordships,  that  several  undue  methods  and  illegal 
practices  were  used  towards  carrying  on  this  election,  and  to- 
wards engaging  Peers  to  vote  for  a  list  of  Peers  to  represent 
the  Peerage  of  Scotland,  such  as  are  inconsistent  with  the 
freedom  of  Parliaments,  dishonourable  to  the  Peerage,  con- 
trary to  the  design  and  intention  of  those  laws  that  direct  the 
election  of  sixteen  Peers  for  that  part  of  Great  Britain  called 
Scotland,  and  such  as  may  prove  subversive  of  our  happy  con- 
stitution ;  instances  and  proofs  whereof  we  are  able  to  lay  before 
your  Lordships  in  such  manner  as  your  Lordships  shall  direct. 

"  Wherefore  your  petitioners  humbly  pray  that  your  Lord- 
ships will  be  pleased  to  take  this  important  affair  into  your 
most  serious  consideration,  to  allow  those  instances  and  proofs 
to  be  laid  before  you,  and  to  do  therein  as  in  your  great 
wisdoms  shall  seem  most  proper  to  maintain  the  dignity  of  the 
Peerage  and  the  freedom  of  the  election  of  the  Peers  for  that 
part  of  Great  Britain  called  Scotland,  and  to  preserve  the  con- 
stitution and  independency  of  Parliaments." 

As  soon  as  this  petition  had  been  read,  the  Duke  of 
Bedford  moved  the  House,  that  the  petitioners  should 


478  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

be  appointed  to  prove  the  allegations  of  it  that  day 
month. 

This  motion  was  opposed  by  the  Lord  Chancellor, 
who  said  the  House  was  not  ripe  for  such  a  resolution, 
and  moved  that  the  petition  might  be  taken  into  consi- 
deration on  that  day  se'nnight,  which  after  a  short  de- 
bate was  agreed  to  without  a  division. 

When  the  day  for  taking  the  petition  into  considera- 
tion [20#A  February^  was  come,  Lord  Hardwicke,  after 
a  very  long,  well-studied,  and  well-digested  speech, 
moved  the  House  to  order  the  Lords  petitioners  to 
declare  whether  they  meant  by  this  petition  to  con- 
trovert the  seats  of  the  sixteen  sitting  Lords ;  to  which 
the  Duke  of  Bedford  answered  by  pulling  a  paper  out 
of  his  pocket  and  reading  it  to  the  House,  the  purport 
of  which  was  to  acquaint  the  House  that  he  was  em- 
powered by  the  Lords  petitioners  to  declare  they  did 
not  mean  to  dispute  the  seats  of  the  sitting  sixteen,  nor 
any  one  of  them. 

It  was  said  that  the  House  could  not,  consistently 
with  its  usual  and  proper  forms,  receive  this  oral  decla- 
ration of  the  Duke  of  Bedford  as  authentic,  though 
every  one  Lord  was  far  from  doubting  his  having  full 
authority  for  what  he  had  said.  But  as  the  petition 
was  in  writing,  and  signed,  so  any  explanation  of  it  must 
come  the  same  way.  The  further  consideration  there- 
fore of  this  affair  was  adjourned  to  the  next  day  [on 
a  division  of  90  to  51],  and  the  Lord  Chancellor 
was  ordered  in  the  mean  time  to  write  to  the  Lords 
petitioners  for  this  explanation,  to  be  given  in  to  the 
House  in  the  proper  form,  which  was  in  writing,  and 
signed. 


1735.  ELECTION  PETITION  OF  SCOTCH  PEERS.  479 

The  next  day  the  petitioners  sent  this  declaration  of 
not  contesting  the  seats  of  the  sixteen,  nor  any  one  of 
them,  in  the  form  prescribed. 

Then  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  moved  the  House 
that  the  Lords  petitioners  might  be  directed  to  lay 
before  the  House  the  instances  of  those  undue  methods 
and  illegal  practices  complained  of  in  their  petition,  and 
the  names  of  those  persons  by  whom  they  had  been  prac- 
tised. 

There  was  a  long  debate  on  this  question ;  those 
against  the  question  representing  the  difficulties  under 
which  it  would  put  the  Lords  petitioners ;  and  those 
who  supported  the  question  saying  it  was  inconsistent 
with  all  natural  justice  and  the  practice  of  all  courts  of 
justice  whatsoever  (except  the  Inquisition)  to  hear  a 
cause  ex  parte,  and  to  suffer  evidence  to  be  brought 
against  any  person  in  a  criminal  prosecution  without 
that  person  having  notice  of  such  accusation,  and  being 
allowed,  at  the  same  time  that  evidence  was  brought  to 
accuse  him,  to  bring  evidence  likewise  for  his  defence. 

The  question  was  at  last  carried  by  a  great  majority 
[90  to  48]. 

The  answer  of  the  Lords  petitioners  was  very  long 
and  evasive ;  naming  but  one  fact,  which  was  that  of 
the  regiment11  being  drawn  out  on  the  day  of  election, 
and  without  naming  one  person.  The  reason  they 
gave  for  their  non-compliance  with  the  orders  was  the 

11  "  That  on  the  day  of  election  a  battalion  of  Hall's  forces  was  drawn 
up  in  the  Abbey  court  of  Edinburgh,  and  three  companies  of  it  were 
marched  from  Leith  (a  place  one  mile  distant)  to  join  the  rest  of  the  bat- 
talion, and  kept  under  arms  from  nine  in  the  morning  to  nine  at  night, 
without  any  cause  or  occasion  that  your  petitioners  could  foresee  other  than 
the  overawing  the  election." — Hist.  Reg.  1736,  115. 


480  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

impossibility  of  complying  without  becoming  accusers, 
which  they  declared  they  never  designed  to  be. 

Upon  this  answer  being  read,  Lord  Cholmondeley 
moved  the  House  to  come  to  the  following  resolu- 
tion :  That  the  petitioners  have  not  complied  with  the 
order  of  this  House,  by  which  they  were  directed  to  name 
the  facts  of  which  they  complained,  and  by  whom  those 
facts  were  committed. 

There  was  a  debate  on  this  question,  but  it  passed  at 
last  by  a  great  majority  [90  to  47]. 

The  moment  after  this  division  Lord  Hervey  got 
up  and  made  a  speech12  and  motion  that  "  the  petition 
be  dis'tnissed" 

Accordingly  the  petition  was  dismissed  ;  and  in  this 
manner  ended  an  affair  that  was  grown  at  last  almost 
as  troublesome  to  those  who  prosecuted  it  as  it  had  been 
at  first  to  those  whom  it  was  undertaken  to  distress ; 
the  people  in  opposition  being  divided  in  their  opinions 
and  sentiments  upon  it,  and  the  scent  lying  very  cold 
by  which  they  were  to  trace  the  Administration  through 
the  dirty  roads  that  lead  to  Scotch  elections,  but  where 
it  was  as  hard  to  follow  them  as  it  would  be  for  strangers 
to  pursue  any  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  charming  coun- 
try into  their  own  Highlands. 

The  King  and  Queen  acted  on  this  occasion  as  their 
custom  was  on  many  others — that  is,  by  treating  the 
danger  of  this  ruffle,  after  it  was  over,  with  a  sort  of 
Falstaff  bravery,  and  pretending  always  to  have  despised 
the  kindling  of  this  flame  as  much  as  they  now  did 

12  Which  I  insert  at  length  [in  the  Appendix],  to  illustrate  the  whole 
progress  of  this  affair  from  commencement  of  it  to  its  determination. — LORD 
HEEVET. 


1735.  DEBATE  ON  THE  ARMY.  481 

its  ashes ;  but  of  the  apprehensions  they  were  in  whilst 
this  business  was  depending  I  was  often  both  an  eye 
and  ear  witness,  though  they  spoke  of  it  afterward  even 
to  me  in  a  way  that  looked  as  if  they  imagined  my 
memory  must  be  as  bad  as  they  wished  it,  and  that  it 
was  as  impossible  for  me  to  reflect  on  what  I  had  seen  and 
heard  as  it  would  have  been  impolitic  and  impolite  to 
have  mentioned  it ;  or  perhaps  they  did  in  this  occurrence 
what  princes  are  very  apt  to  do,  which  is,  concluding 
those  courtiers  who  are  politically  dumb  to  be  naturally 
deaf  and  blind :  yet  in  the  morning  before  this  petition 
was  to  be  presented,  the  Queen  was  so  anxious  to  know 
what  was  said,  thought,  done,  or  expected  on  this  occa- 
sion, that  she  sent  for  Lord  Hervey  whilst  she  was  in 
bed ;  and  because  it  was  contrary  to  the  queenly  eti- 
quette to  admit  a  man  to  her  bedside  whilst  she  was  in 
it,  she  kept  him  talking  on  one  side  of  the  door  which 
opened  just  upon  her  bed  whilst  she  conversed  with  him 
on  the  other  for  two  hours  together,  and  then  sent  him  to 
the  King's  side13  to  repeat  to  his  Majesty  all  he  had  re- 
lated to  her. 

When  the  question  of  the  troops  came  to  be  debated 
in  the  House  of  Lords  [\3th  March"],  the  objections 
made  to  this  augmentation  were  much  the  same,  in  all 
the  strong  parts  of  them,  as  those  that  had  been  urged 
in  the  House  of  Commons.  Lord  Strafford,14  a  loqua- 
cious, rich,  illiterate,  cold,  tedious,  constant  haranguer 


13  The  King's  or  Queen's  separate  apartments  were  called  the  King's  or 
Queen's  "SIDE." 

14  Thomas  Wentworth,  first  Lord  Strafford  of  the  second  creation.     He 
had  been  ambassador  to  Russia  and  Holland,  and  was  one  of  the  plenipo- 
tentiaries at  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht.     He  died  in  1739. 

VOL.  I.  2  I 


482  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

in  the  House  of  Lords,  who  neither  spoke  sense  nor 
English,  and  always  gave  an  anniversary  declamation 
on  this  subject,  went  upon  the  trite  topic  of  the  danger 
of  standing  armies  to  a  free  state,  and  knew  as  little 
how  to  adapt  his  arguments  to  the  particular  circum- 
stances, or  the  times,  or  the  particular  temper  of  his 
audience,  as  he  did  how  to  give  a  proper  pronunciation 
to  the  few  words  he  was  master  of,  or  proper  words  to 
the  few  things  that  came  within  the  narrow  limits  of 
his  Lordship's  knowledge :  in  short,  there  was  nothing 
so  low  as  his  dialect  except  his  understanding,  nor  any- 
thing so  tiresome  as  his  public  harangues  except  his 
private  conversations.  There  was  but  one  Ciceronian 
quality  (vanity  excepted)  which  I  ever  discovered  in  this 
orator,  and  that  was,  that  the  one  did  not  oftener  weave 
into  his  orations  the  history  of  his  consulship  and  Cati- 
line's conspiracy,  than  the  other  introduced  some 
account  of  his  embassy  in  Holland  at  the  time  of  the 
Treaty  of  Utrecht,  when  he  had  the  double  honour  of 
being  a  very  dirty  executor  of  a  very  dirty  errand. 

The  motion  for  altering  the  number  of  forces  for 
the  service  of  this  year  from  twenty-five  thousand  to 
eighteen  thousand  men  was  made  by  this  ingenious  Lord 
— digna  causa  meliore  puero ;  nor  did  the  cause  want 
good  advocates  though  it  had  no  better  a  propounder, 
for  Lord  Carteret  and  Lord  Chesterfield  spoke  excel- 
lently well  in  support  of  this  question ;  and  though  they 
only  made  use  of  arguments  that  had  already  been 
urged  in  the  House  of  Commons,  yet  the  one  advanced 
them  with  so  much  strength,  knowledge,  and  eloquence, 
the  other  with  so  much  wit,  satire,  and  ingenuity,  and 
both  with  so  much  applause  and  popularity,  that  each 


1735.  DEBATE  ON  THE  ARMY.  483 

of  them  in  their  different  style,  even  without  that  great 
charm  of  novelty,  gained  credit,  and  spoke  almost  as 
much  to  the  satisfaction  of  their  audience  on  this  occa- 
sion as  they  ever  did  on  all  occasions  to  their  own. 

I  wish  I  had  copies  of  their  speeches  to  insert  here  ;15 
but  as  I  have  not,  I  can  only  give  [in  the  Appendix] 
what  was  said  in  answer  to  them  by  Lord  Hervey,  who 
closed  the  debate. 

After  this,  the  question  was  put  and  the  greater 
number  of  forces  voted  by  a  majority  of  two,  yet  I  can- 
not help  confessing  that  a  more  unreasonable  vote,  in 
my  humble  opinion,  was  never  passed — as  that  short 
argument  of  these  troops  being  too  many  if  England 
was  not  to  be  engaged  in  the  war,  and  too  few  if  she 
was,  seems  to  me  unanswerable  ;  I  am  sure  at  least  it 
was  unanswered.16 

But  the  true  reason  for  taking  this  measure  was,  that 
Sir  Robert  Walpole,  who  would  willingly  have  spared 
himself  both  the  unpopularity  of  keeping  up  so  large  a 
body  of  forces,  and  the  trouble  of  finding  money  to  de- 
fray so  great  and  unnecessary  an  expense,  was  obliged 
to  give  in  to  this  measure  in  order  to  flatter  the  military 
genius  of  the  King,  who  was  always  as  insatiably  covet- 
ous of  troops  as  money,  thought  he  could  never  have 
enough  of  either,  and  could  seldom  be  prevailed  with 

15  In  the  '  Parliamentary  History '  the  several  speeches  are  lumped  to- 
gether into  one  argument  on  each  side. 

16  Lord  Hervey  is  here  unjust  to  his  own  side :  common  sense  points  out 
that  an  amount  of  force  not  equal  to  all  the  exigencies  of  eventual  hostilities 
might  yet  be  a  very  cogent  argument  towards  the  preservation  of  peace, 
and  a  very  important  preparative  for  war.     But  Lord  Hervey  thus  dis- 
parages his  own   success,  either  from  his  own  hereditary  antipathy   to 
standing  armies,  or  in  compliance  with  Sir  R.  Walpole's  pacific  policy,  or 
perhaps  from  the  motive  stated  ante,  p.  301,  n.  3. 

2  i  2 


484  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

to  part  with  either,  though  he  had  more  of  both  than  he 
had  any  occasion  to  employ,  or  any  use  for  farther  than 
to  review  the  one  and  count  the  other ;  and  as  his  Ma- 
jesty was  vehemently  for  taking  a  part  in  this  war,  his 
Minister  had  no  way  of  keeping  him  out  of  it  but  by 
this  composition,  which  was  the  putting  the  means  of 
war  into  his  hands  at  the  same  time  that  he  tied  them 
up  from  using  them,  and  giving  his  Majesty  the  satis- 
faction of  brandishing  a  sword  in  the  scabbard  which 
he  would  not  permit  him  to  draw. 

In  this  manner  was  this  great  and  able  statesman 
often  obliged  to  purchase  great  points  by  yielding  in 
small  ones,  and  of  course  incurred  the  imputation  of 
acting  injudiciously  in  things  which,  abstractedly  con- 
sidered, he  certainly  could  not  justify,  but,  weighed  with 
their  connection  to  other  matters  which  he  could  not 
have  brought  about  but  upon  these  conditions,  were  so 
far  from  being  any  reflection  on  his  conduct,  that  they 
were  proofs  of  his  skill ;  and  if  men  may  now  and  then 
be  allowed  in  policy  to  deviate  a  little  from  that  in- 
junction in  the  Gospel  of  not  doing  evil  that  good  may 
come  of  it,  there  was  hardly  any  measure  ever  taken 
with  regard  to  the  army  (excepting  that  number  of 
troops  raised  by  his  timidity  the  election-year)  which  I 
do  not  think  I  could  account  for  without  Sir  Robert 
Walpole's  being  really  to  blame. 

There  was  one  negative  circumstance  which  favoured 
his  endeavours  to  prevent  the  King  and  Queen  involv- 
ing England  this  year  in  the  war  which  I  must  not 
omit  to  relate,  and  that  was  M.  Hatolf 's  being  so  ill 
all  winter  that  he  could  not  once  come  to  the  Queen  to 
blow  that  militant  flame  in  her  Majesty  which  Sir  Ro- 


1735-  PUBLIC  CHARGES.  485 

bert,  with  all  the  political  buckets  he  was  continually 
throwing  upon  it,  could  never  quite  extinguish,  though 
he  kept  it  from  blazing  out  in  the  vehement  manner  she 
wished  to  let  it  rage. 

The  expenses  for  the  current  service  of  this  year,  even 
without  going  into  the  war,  were  very  great,  amounting 
to  no  less  than  3,250,000/. : — 

Land-tax  at  2s.  in  the  pound    .          .  £1,000,000 

The  Sinking  Fund           .          .          .  1,000,000 

Malt-tax 750,000 

Borrowed  on  the  salt-duty        .          .  500,000 

.£3,250,000 

Which  sum,  added  to  2,000,0007.  that  went  to  the  pay- 
ment of  the  interest  of  the  National  Debt,  and  including 
also  the  revenue  of  the  King's  Civil  List,  reckoned  at 
but  800,000/.,  together  with  1,500,000/.  at  least  raised 
by  the  poor's  tax,  makes  7,550,000/.17  which  was  raised 
this  year  by  this  poor,  indigent,  undone  nation  (as  I 
hear  it  every  day  called)  for  the  annual  services.  Not 
that  I  would  be  thought  by  what  I  am  saying  to  ap- 
prove the  conduct  of  those  who  make  this  country  in 
time  of  peace  pay  these  vast  sums  for  its  annual  sup- 
port, any  more  than  I  do  the  nonsense  of  those  either 
ignorant  or  hypocritical  lamenters  who  talk  of  our  being 

n  Current  Service       .         .         .  £3,250,000 

Interest  of  National  Debt          .  2,000,000 

Civil  List        ....  800,000 

Poor's  Tax       .        .         .  1,500,000 


£7,550,000.— Lord  Hervey. 

Lord  Hervey's  mode  of  stating  this  account  is  not  precisely  accurate, 
and  he  confuses  a  little  the  Supply  and  the  Ways  and  Means ;  but  the  result 
is  substantially  correct:  the  Supply  was  3,150,452/. 


486  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

ruined :  I  think  the  practice  of  the  one  as  false  policy 
as  I  think  the  assertions  of  the  other  false  theory ;  for 
if  this  country  in  all  its  prosperity,  and  after  five-and- 
twenty  years'  peace,  is  but  two  millions  in  fifty  less  in 
debt  than  it  was  at  the  determination  of  Queen  Anne's 
war,  I  cannot  but  acknowledge  that  to  my  weak  under- 
standing the  economy  of  the  Government  in  its  domestic 
calling  does  not  seem  to  me  to  have  been  very  laudably 
exercised ;  nor  do  I  at  all  approve  the  situation  which, 
according  to  this  way  of  acting  (if  continued),  this  na- 
tion must  ever  be  in,  and  that  is,  that  in  time  of  war  its 
debts  are  always  to  be  increased,  and  in  time  of  peace 
never  to  be  lessened. 

To  look,  therefore,  upon  the  situation  of  England  at 
present  in  a  true  light,  at  least  as  I  conceive  its  situa- 
tion to  be,  and  to  reduce  it  to  the  parallel  circumstances 
of  a  single  private  person  (which  kind  of  familiar  in- 
stances tend  always  to  illustrate  these  sort  of  cases),  I 
consider  England  in  its  present  circumstances  not  in 
the  least  as  a  necessitous  bankrupt  who  has  neither 
money  enough  to  pay  his  creditors  nor  to  provide  for 
his  own  subsistence,  as  it  is  represented  by  the  igno- 
rant, the  irritating,  and  the  clamorous,  to  serve  private 
ends  and  gratify  personal  pique — but  I  look  upon  Eng- 
land at  present  as  a  man  in  vast  affluence,  who  inherits 
and  possesses  a  large  estate  chargeable  with  a  great  debt, 
and  tenant  for  life  only  in  that  estate,  without  a  power  to 
raise  more  money,  or  very  little  more,  upon  it  than  that 
with  which  it  already  stands  charged ;  and  though  this 
estate  yields  him  a  produce  sufficient  to  pay  the  interest 
of  that  debt,  and  to  live  in  great  ease,  magnificence, 
credit,  and  expense  at  the  same  time,  yet,  as  his  con- 


1735.  FINANCIAL  STATE  ILLUSTRATED.  487 

stant  way  of  living  calls  for  the  whole  surplus  of  his 
revenue  after  the  interest  of  the  debt  is  paid,  so,  in  case 
of  any  exigence  or  contingent  call  for  any  sum  of  money, 
I  look  upon  him  under  an  absolute  incapacity  of  pro- 
viding for  such  wants  without  either  retrenching  his 
former  expenses  in  some  article,  or  making  himself  ex- 
tremely uneasy  as  long  as  he  lives ;  and  as  it  is  full  as 
improbable  that  any  country  should  for  ever  be  in  a 
condition  that  will  not  call  for  greater  expenses  than  are 
necessary  in  a  state  of  profound  peace  as  it  is  to  sup- 
pose that  many  generations  should  follow  one  another 
without  some  demands  upon  their  estates  of  the  nature 
of  those  I  have  enumerated,  so  I  hold  it  to  be  very  bad 
economy  and  the  highest  imprudence  for  any  govern- 
ment to  persist  in  keeping  up  its  expenses  to  the  full 
stretch  of  its  purse  in  those  seasons  when  it  ought  to  be 
discharging  the  debts  contracted  by  former  extrava- 
gances, and  providing  for  the  charge  of  future  necessities. 
Yet  this  imprudence  is  indisputably  our  case  at  present, 
since,  as  far  as  I  am  master  of  the  state  of  our  debts 
and  expenses  of  our  annual  disbursements,  and  our 
power  to  augment  the  revenue,  I  do  not  see  how  it 
would  be  possible,  on  any  exigence,  or  for  the  support 
of  the  most  necessary  war,  for  England  to  raise  above 
1,000,000/.  a-year  more  than  it  now  raises, 18  which 
would  be  by  increasing  the  land-tax  from  2s.  to  4s.  in 
the  pound. 

And  there    is  one  circumstance  that   reflects   very 


is  What  would  my  father  have  said  had  he  lived  to  these  days,  1777, 
and  seen  seventeen  millions  raised  in  a  year  ? — Note  by  the  third  Earl. 

What  would  either  have  said  to  our  raising  for  1846,  a  year  of  peace, 
ffty-three  millions? 


488  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

strongly  on  the  economy  of  our  present  governors, 
which,  as  I  am  determined  to  give  my  opinion  impar- 
tially on  every  subject  treated  in  these  papers,  I  will 
not  pass  over  in  silence ;  and  that  is,  that  the  nation 
now  annually  pays  more  for  the  current  service  of 
the  year,  without  being  engaged  in  the  present  war, 
than  it  did  during  the  first  two  or  three  years  when  it 
was  a  principal  in  King  William's  and  Queen  Anne's 
wars. 

I,  therefore,  am  far  from  justifying  the  prudential 
part  of  taking  the  Sinking  Fund  for  the  current  service 
in  the  manner  it  has  lately  been  done,  though  I  have, 
both  in  public  and  private,  justified  the  legality  of  it. 

The  public  has  certainly  a  right  to  dispose  of  those 
surpluses  called  the  Sinking  Fund,  after  the  interest 
of  the  national  debt  is  paid,  in  what  manner  the  public 
thinks  fit,  as  those  surpluses  are,  by  the  words  of  the 
Acts  of  Parliament  which  constitute  the  contract  between 
the  public  and  the  creditors  of  the  public,  absolutely 
and  explicitly  reserved  for  the  future  disposition  of  Par- 
liament ;  and  when  the  clause  in  one  of  those  Acts, 
called  the  General  Fund  Act,  does  dispose  of  these  sur- 
pluses as  fast  as  they  arise  for  the  payment  of  part  of 
the  principal  of  the  national  debts  incurred  before  the 
year  1716,  it  is  very  evident  that  the  Parliament  in 
that  case  acts  as  a  steward  for  the  public,  and  not  as  a 
contractor  for  the  public ;  that  its  acts  are  consequently 
only  declaratory  and  prudential  for  itself,  not  obligatory 
and  binding  upon  future  Parliaments ;  and  can  no 
more  be  construed  to  tie  down  future  Parliaments  than 
any  other  Act  made  by  Parliament,  which  is  merely 
discretionary,  not  bargaining,  and  consequently  revoc- 


1735.  VACANT  OFFICES.  489 

able,  alterable,  and  rescindable  by  any  future  Parlia- 
ment.19 

At  the  end  of  this  Session  of  Parliament  the  Scrip- 
ture parable  was  reversed ;  for  the  harvest  of  Court 
favours  was  small  and  the  labourers  were  many,  there 
being  many  Lords  and  Commoners  who  were  very  de- 
sirous to  reap  those  favours,  and  but  two  employments 
to  be  disposed  of — that  of  Privy  Seal,  vacated  by  the 
resignation  of  Lord  Lonsdale,  and  that  of  Secretary-at- 
War,  that  became  void  by  the  dismission  of  Sir  William 
Strickland,  who  had  already  kept  the  office  above  a 
year  longer  than  he  was  capable  of  doing  the  duty  of  it, 
and  was  now  become  so  weak  in  mind  as  well  as  body, 
that  his  head  was  as  much  in  its  second  infancy  as  his 
limbs.20 

Lord  Lonsdale,21  when  he  resigned  the  Privy  Seal, 
declared,  not  only  to  the  King  but  to  everybody  else, 
that  he  quitted  from  no  personal  disgust  either  to  his 
Master  or  his  Ministers,  nor  any  disapprobation  either 
of  their  foreign  or  domestic  measures ;  but  merely  on 
account  of  his  health  and  his  natural  love  for  retirement, 
both  which  made  him  equally  unfit  for  living  in  town 
or  about  a  Court.  He  was  a  speculative,  splenetic, 
honest  man,  who  always  wanted  to  make  practice  tally 
with  theory,  and,  as  he  was  out  of  humour  with  the 
world  when  he  could  not,  I  need  not  add  that  he  was 
seldom  pleased ;  and,  as  melancholy  people  who  study 


19  See  Lord  Carteret's  and  Lord  Hervey's  speeches  on  the  Sinking 
Fund. — Note  by  Lord  Hervey. 

20  The  fourth  baronet.     He  died  Jst  September,  1735,  shortly  after  his 
resignation,  at  the  age,  the  Baronetage  says,  of  only  forty-nine. 

21  See  ante,  p.  228,  Horace  Walpole's  character  of  him. 


490  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

books  of  physic  and  anatomy  are  apt  to  fancy  they  have 
every  distemper  they  read  of,  and  that  their  own  body, 
from  the  delicacy  of  its  texture,  is  in  danger  of  falling 
to  pieces  every  time  they  stir  a  leg  or  an  arm,  so  this 
theoretic  Lord,  from  a  natural  gloom  in  his  temper 
that  made  him  see  everything  in  a  much  deeper  shade 
than  cheerful  eyes  would  ever  have  beheld  them,  in 
ruminating  on  the  corruption  of  the  present  times,  and 
the  disaffection  of  the  nation  to  the  present  Royal 
Family,  used  to  foresee  nothing  but  tumults,  seditions, 
insurrections,  rebellions,  revolutions ;  and  would  often 
say  to  those  who  were  in  his  confidence,  that,  as  it  was 
impossible  for  things  long  to  hold  together  upon  the 
foot  they  now  were,  and  that  approaching  confusion 
must  soon  be  the  lot  of  his  poor  unfortunate  country, 
so  he  desired  to  retire  out  of  a  world  which  he  was 
unable  to  mend,  unfit  to  bustle  in,  and  unwilling  to  see 
torn  to  pieces ;  adding,  on  these  occasions,  that  England 
was  brought  to  the  dilemma  of  being  undone  by  the 
expenses  of  war,  if  it  took  that  part ;  or  by  the  turbu- 
lence of  faction,  luxury,  and  corruption,  if  it  remained 
in  the  inactivity  of  peace.  These  reflections,  he  said, 
joined  to  very  ill  health,  made  him  so  unhappy  whilst 
he  remained  a  near  spectator  of  these  impending  mis- 
fortunes, that  he  was  determined  to  go  abroad,  in  order 
to  mend  the  one  and  to  remove  the  disagreeable  pros- 
pect of  the  other,  and,  accordingly,  soon  after  he  went 
into  the  south  of  France.  His  brother,22  too,  who  very 

22  The  Honourable  Anthony  Lowther,  younger  brother  of  Lord  Lons- 
dale  (whom  he  predeceased),  a  commissioner  of  Irish  revenue,  and  a  man 
of  fashionable  celebrity  in  his  day.  The  Monimia  and  Philocles  of  Lord 
Hervey's  poetical  epistle  were  the  unfortunate  Sophia  Howe,  maid  of 
honour  to  the  Princess,  and  Antliony — or,  as  he  was  familiarly  called,  Nanty 
— Lowther. 


1735.  VACANT  OFFICES.  491 

unreasonably  thought  his  merit  superior  to  an  employ- 
ment of  WOOL  a-year  in  Ireland,  and  for  that  reason 
quitted  it,  contributed  to  strengthen  these  opinions, 
hoping  that  his  brother's  dislike  of  things  would  grow 
into  a  dislike  of  persons,  and  that  he  should  blow  him 
up  to  be  an  enemy  to  those  whom  his  own  vanity  had 
induced  him  to  think  had  not  been  enough  his  friends. 

Lord  Lonsdale's  employment  was  given  immediately 
to  Lord  Godolphin — not  from  a  desire  in  the  King  to 
show  him  favour,  but  from  a  principle  of  economy ;  for 
by  this  means  the  King  saved  a  pension  of  3000/.  a- 
year,  which  Lord  Godolphin  had  enjoyed  ever  since  he 
quitted  the  employment  of  Groom  of  the  Stole. 

Sir  William  Yonge  was  made  Secretary-at-War, 
which  left  a  vacancy  in  the  Treasury.  Lord  Hervey 
pressed  Sir  Robert  Walpole  extremely  to  put  his  friend 
Mr.  Wilmington23  into  this  vacancy,  which  would  have 


23  Thomas  Winnington,  successively  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  and  Trea- 
sury- Cofferer,  and  lastly  Paymaster,  in  which,  on  his  death  in  1746,  he 
was  succeeded  by  Mr.  Pitt.  He  was  very  clever,  and  very  amiable,  though 
versatile  and  inconsistent  in  politics.  Horace  Walpole,  in  a  letter  of  25th 
April,  1746,  announcing  his  death,  says  of  him — "  He  was  one  of  the  first 
men  in  England  from  his  parts  and  his  employment.  I  was  familiarly 
acquainted  with  him  ;  loved  and  admired  him,  for  he  had  great  good  nature, 
and  a  quickness  of  wit  most  peculiar  to  himself;  and,  for  his  public  talents, 
he  has  left  nobody  equal  to  him,  as  before  nobody  was  superior  to  him  but 
my  father." — Letters,  ii.  118.  In  his  Memoirs,  however,  he  adds  to  a 
similar  eulogium  a  little  alloy : — "  His  jolly  way  of  laughing  at  his  own 
want  of  principle  revolted  the  graver  sort  of  politicians.  He  had  infinitely 
more  wit  than  any  man  I  ever  knew,  and  it  was  as  ready  and  quick  as  it  was 
constant  and  unpremeditated.  His  style  was  a  little  brutal ;  his  courage 
not  at  all  so  ;  his  good  humour  was  inexhaustible ;  it  was  impossible  to  hate 
or  to  hurt  him." — Mem.  Geo.  If.,  i.  151.  He  was  a  dear  friend  of  Lord 
Hervey  and  Henry  Fox  ;  as  well  as  of  Sir  C.  H.  Williams,  whose  epitaph 
on  Winnington  is  his  best  and  indeed  only  good  serious  verses : — 
"  Near  his  paternal  seat  here  buried  lies 

The  grave,  the  gay,  the  witty,  and  the  wise ; 

Forrn'd 


492  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

made  one  in  the  Admiralty,  where  Mr.  Campbell,24 
another  of  his  friends,  would  of  course  have  come  in. 
The  Duke  of  Newcastle  and  Mr.  Pelham  solicited  the 
Treasury  for  Mr.  Clutterbuck  ;25  and  Sir  Robert  Walpole, 
not  caring  to  decide  between  these  two,  put  in  neither, 
which,  in  my  opinion,  was  at  this  time  one  of  the  most 
impolitic  unministerial  acts  I  ever  knew  him  guilty  of. 
Winnington's  pretensions  were  certainly  superior  every 
way  to  Clutterbuck's ;  he  was  his  senior  in  the  Admiral- 
ty, and  besides  that,  was,  from  his  party-knowledge  and 
application,  of  infinite  use  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole  in  the 
House  of  Commons.  Clutterbuck  was  sensible,  be- 
loved, and  had  a  good  character,  but  was  lazy,  indolent, 
and  mute,  and  of  no  use  in  Parliament  but  counting 
one  in  a  division. 

The  way  that  Sir  Robert  Walpole  took  to  avoid  dis- 
obliging one  of  these  two  men  disobliged  them  both,  for 
he  took  his  son-in-law,  Lord  Cholmondeley,  into  the 
Treasury ;  and  though  neither  of  them  could  complain 
of  Lord  Cholmondeley's  being  preferred  to  them,  yet 


Form'd  for  all  parts,  in  all  alike  he  shined  ; 
Variously  great — a  genius  unconfined — 
In  converse  bright,  judicious  in  debate, 
In  private  amiable,  in  public  great,"  &c. 

Williams's  Works,  ii.  83. 

Mr.  Winnington  was  but  just  fifty  when   he  died,  or  was  killed,  as 
Walpole  says,  by  the  ignorance  of  Dr.  Thompson. 

24  John  Campbell  of  Cawdor,  M.P.  for  Pembrokeshire,  successively  a 
Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  1736,  and  of  the  Treasury  in  1746.    He  was  grand- 
father of  the  first  Lord  Cawdor. 

25  Thomas  Clutterbuck,  Esq.,  had  been  secretary  to  Lord  Carteret  as 
Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  became  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  in  May,  1732, 
in  which  office  he  remained  till,  in  May,  1742,  he  was  made  Treasurer  of 
the  Navy,  but  died  shortly  after.     He  married,  in  1731,  the  only  sister  of 
tiie  third  Earl  of  Dysart,  who  himself  married  the  eldest  daughter  of  Lord 
Carteret. 


1735.  VACANT  OFFICES.  493 

both  of  them  saw  he  was  put  there  only  to  avoid  a  de- 
cision between  their  claims. 

The  reason  Sir  Robert  gave  for  putting  Lord  Chol- 
mondeley  there  was,  that  his  Lordship  was  so  uneasy  in 
the  Prince's  service,  and  had  so  long  pressed  him  to  be 
removed  out  of  it,  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  longer 
to  withstand  that  solicitation,  especially  since  it  was 
upon  his  account  Lord  Cholmondeley  was  so  ill  used 
by  the  Prince ;  nor  could  he,  with  any  decency  to  the 
Prince,  take  Lord  Cholmondeley  out  of  his  service 
upon  any  pretence  but  that  of  putting  him  into  a  place 
of  business;  for  which  reason,  when  the  King  had 
offered  to  make  Lord  Cholmondeley  a  Lord  of  his 
Bedchamber,  Lord  Cholmondeley  had  declined  it.  By 
this  odd  measure,  therefore,  of  putting  Lord  Cholmon- 
deley into  the  Treasury,  the  Prince  was  disobliged,  by 
Lord  Cholmondeley  quitting  his  service  ;  the  King  was 
disobliged,  because  he  had  declined  the  Bedchamber  ; 
Mr.  Winnington  and  Mr.  Clutterbuck  were  disobliged, 
because  their  hopes  of  the  Treasury  were  defeated ;  and 
Campbell  was  disobliged,  because,  after  ten  years'  ser- 
vice, an  opportunity  of  providing  for  him  offered  and 
was  not  taken. 

Lord  Hervey  remonstrated  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
against  this  step,  for  all  these  accumulated  reasons ; 
adding,  that  Sir  Robert  was  always  feeling  the  weight 
of  all  the  young  men  in  the  House  of  Commons  taking 
a  part  against  him,  and  yet  on  every  occasion  showed 
that  they  could  get  nothing  by  being  attached  to  him. 
Sir  Robert  said  that  it  was  not  his  fault  that  there  were 
not  more  things  in  his  gift.  To  which  Lord  Hervey 
answered,  that  was  very  true ;  but  it  was  a  fault,  not 


494  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

only  to  his  friends  but  even  to  himself,  if  he  did  not 
make  the  best  disposition  he  could  of  those  favours  that 
were  in  his  power ;  and  added  further,  that,  let  him  be 
ever  so  able  a  Minister,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to 
alter  universal  principles  in  human  nature,  and  the 
fundamental  inducements  of  mankind  not  only  to  serve 
one  another  but  even  to  serve  Heaven  itself;  that  the 
strength  of  all  government,  like  the  foundation  of  all 
religions,  was  rewards  and  punishments ;  and  that  the 
one  was  as  necessary  to  encourage  one's  friends  and 
keep  them  firm,  as  the  other  was  to  intimidate  one's 
enemies  and  keep  them  quiet.  "  But,  Sir,"  continued 
he,  "  if  I  may  take  the  liberty  to  say  so,  you  are  at 
present  breaking  through  both  these  rules  by  showing 
the  world  that  your  known  and  almost  avowed  enemies 
may  be  your  enemies  with  impunity,  and  enjoy  the  best 
employments  in  the  kingdom  ;  whilst  your  friends  have 
nothing  to  reward  them  but  that  unpopularity  which 
always  attends  serving  power,  without  the  profit  that 
should  be  annexed  to  it ;  and  if  Mr.  Campbell  and  Mr. 
Fox,26  after  serving  you  seven  years  for  that  disagreeable 
Leah,  are  to  serve  you  seven  more  for  Rachel,  who, 
among  the  youth  that  has  his  senses,  if  he  thinks  of  his 
interest  (and  I  believe  you  have  lived  too  long  in  the 
world  and  in  power  to  expect  people  should  embark  in 
any  party  without  thinking  of  it),  will  ever  list  in  your 
service  with  such  a  prospect  and  such  examples  before 
their  eyes  ?" 


26  Stephen  Fox,  afterwards  Lord  Ilchester  ;  who  seems  from  Lord  Her- 
vey's  private  letters  to  have  been  the  nearest  and  dearest  friend  he  ever  had. 
The  younger  brother,  Henry  Fox,  afterwards  Lord  Holland,  was  also  a  very 
great  friend. 


1735.  VACANT  OFFICES.  495 

Sir  Kobert  said  all  this  was  very  true,  but  that 
Lord  Hervey  knew  he  had  always  declared  Mr.  Camp- 
bell and  Mr.  Fox  should  be  the  two  first  people  he 
would  provide  for ;  that  he  thought  them  not  only  use- 
ful but  creditable  friends,  as  their  integrity  was  not 
inferior  to  their  understandings,  nor  their  characters  to 
their  fortunes.  "  But,  my  Lord,  you  see  my  difficulty  : 
Campbell  could  not  be  brought  into  the  Admiralty 
without  Wilmington  or  Clutterbuck  being  removed, 
and  one  of  those  could  not  be  removed  without  the 
other  being  lost.  I  am  inclined  to  Winnington,  but 
you  know  I  am  the  only  friend  (yourself  excepted)  he 
has  in  the  Court,  and  that  both  the  King  and  Queen 
have  great  prejudices  against  him." 

"  One  of  these  things,"  replied  Lord  Hervey,  "is  the 
consequence  of  the  other :  he  has  no  friend  in  the 
palace  but  you,  because  he  has  attached  himself  to  no- 
body but  you;  and  the  people  who  are  angry  he  has 
made  court  only  to  you  are  those  who  have  given 
the  King  and  Queen  those  prejudices  against  him ;  so 
that  I  think  you  in  honour  and  justice,  and  indeed  in 
interest  (unless  you  will  let  people  know  it  is  not  safe 
to  attach  themselves  wholly  to  you),  bound  to  remove 
any  ill  impressions  that  may  have  been  given  of  Win- 
nington at  Court,  since  you  must  know  that  their  being 
made  so  strong  has  proceeded  chiefly  from  his  being  so 
strongly  and  undividedly  your  humble  servant."  "  As 
to  what  you  said  "  (interrupted  Sir  Robert  Walpole) 
"  about  my  enemies  being  such  with  impunity,  I  have 
told  Dodington  this  very  morning  that  I  will  no  longer 
bear  his  shuffling,  fast-and-loose  conduct,  and  will  rather 
risk  the  entering  into  the  next  Session  of  Parliament 


496  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

with  a  majority  only  of  forty  or  fifty  than  go  on  in  this 
way;  I  desired,  therefore,  we  might  understand  one 
another,  and  he  has,  with  the  greatest  submission,  pro- 
mised everything  I  could  require  with  regard  to  his 
future  good  behaviour.  As  for  the  Duke  of  Dorset,  I 
have  got  the  Queen  at  last  to  consent  to  remove  him 
from  his  Lieutenancy  in  Ireland:  Lord  Scarborough  I 
design  should  succeed  him,  and  your  friend  Mr.  Fox, 
if  he  likes  it,  shall  go  Secretary ;  but  though  I  com- 
mission you  to  propose  this  to  him,  it  is  under  the  in- 
junction of  the  strictest  secrecy,  for  neither  the  Duke 
of  Dorset  yet  knows  he  is  to  quit  this  employment,  nor 
Lord  Scarborough  that  he  is  to  have  it." 

Sir  Robert  Walpole,  in  order  to  raise  the  value  to 
Lord  Hervey  of  what  he  had  cut  out  for  his  friend 
Mr.  Fox,  told  him  the  employment  of  Secretary  was 
worth  2000/.  a-year,  which  it  was  not  by  near  the  half. 
However,  nothing  else  offering,  Lord  Hervey  advised 
Mr.  Fox  to  accept  it,  and  he  did  so ;  but  when  the  offer 
of  the  Lieutenancy  was  made  to  Lord  Scarborough,  to 
the  great  surprise  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  as  well  as  of 
the  King  and  Queen,  he  refused  it ;  acknowledging,  at 
the  same  time,  great  obligations  for  the  honour  they 
had  done  him  in  offering  it ;  but  saying  it  was  impos- 
sible he  could  expose  his  character  to  the  censure  of  the 
world  so  far  as  to  give  any  handle  for  a  suspicion  or 
insinuation  that  he  had  quitted  his  employment  one  year 
only  in  order  to  get  a  more  profitable  one  the  next. 

But  what  was  more  extraordinary  still  than  Lord 
Scarborough's  refusal  of  this  great  post,  was  that  it 
never  took  air  that  the  offer  of  it  had  been  made  to 
him  ;  and  the  Duke  of  Dorset  went  to  Ireland  again 


1735.  KING'S  VISIT  TO  HANOVER.  497 

as  satisfied  with  his  own  security  as  if  he  had  owed  it 
to  his  own  strength. 

Sir  Robert  Walpole  took  a  little  ill  the  strong 
manner  in  which  Lord  Hervey  had  pressed  Mr.  Win- 
nington  and  Mr.  Campbell's  advancement  on  this  occa- 
sion ;  and  Lord  Hervey  certainly  went  much  farther 
than  he  would  have  done  had  he  known,  as  he  did 
afterwards,  that  the  measure  of  putting  Lord  Chol- 
mondeley  into  the  Treasury  was  at  that  time  unalter- 
ably resolved  upon. 

Winnington's  rough  behaviour  to  Sir  Robert  Wal- 
pole on  the  disappointment  did  Lord  Hervey,  who 
had  appeared  so  zealous  for  him,  still  more  hurt,  and 
himself  no  good.  Mr.  Clutterbuck's  resentment  went 
so  far  that  he  absented  himself  entirely  from  Sir 
Robert  Walpole ;  and  Wilmington  was  going  on  in  the 
same  simple  middle  way  with  Mr.  Clutterbuck — that 
is,  voting  in  public  with  Sir  Robert,  and  talking  in 
private  against  him — when  Lord  Hervey  insisted  on 
his  making  the  option  of  either  quitting  his  employ- 
ment and  being  thoroughly  disobliged,  or  keeping  it 
and  being  thoroughly  reconciled.  He  advised  the  last, 
and  his  advice  was  followed. 

This  being  the  third  summer  since  the  King's  last 
journey  to  Hanover,  and  this  triennial  journey  one 
among  the  many  things  which  the  King  continued  to 
do  because  he  had  once  done  them,  his  Majesty  de- 
clared, a  little  before  the  Parliament  rose,  his  intention  of 
visiting,  as  soon  as  it  should  rise,  his  foreign  dominions. 
His  Ministers  in  England  were  one  and  all  extremely 
desirous  to  divert  his  Majesty  from  this  resolution,  but 
did  not  succeed.  It  is  certain  it  would  have  been 

VOL.  i.  2  K 


498  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

much  for  the  despatch  as  well  as  for  the  convenience  of 
foreign  negotiations,  which  were  likely  to  be  the  chief 
business  of  this  summer,  that  the  King  should  have 
remained  in  England,  in  order  to  prevent  every  paper, 
which  in  that  case  might  be  regulated  by  a  short  jour- 
ney only  from  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  house  at  Chelsea 
to  the  King's  palace  at  Kensington,  being  obliged  to 
make  a  voyage  or  two  from  England  to  Hanover  before 
it  could  be  settled.  Neither  would  it  have  been  a  very 
agreeable  incident  for  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  after 
a  month's  residence  at  Hanover,  to  be  running  back 
again  through  Westphalia  to  England  with  seventy 
thousand  Prussians  at  his  heels ;  and  yet,  considering 
the  terms  he  and  the  King  of  Prussia  were  upon  at 
present,  this  might  easily  have  happened,  and  was 
suggested  by  Sir  Robert  Walpole  to  deter  his  Majesty 
from  this  expedition ;  but  to  their  remonstrances  his 
Majesty  always  answered,  "  Pooh ! "  and  "  Stuff ! "  or, 
"  You  think  to  get  the  better  of  me,  but  you  shall  not ;" 
and,  in  short,  plainly  showed  that  all  efforts  to  divert 
him  from  this  expedition  would  be  fruitless. 

The  English  Ministers  apprehended,  too,  that  if  the 
King  went  into  Germany,  his  German  Ministers,  being 
all  of  them  Imperialists,  might  make  the  difficulties  of 
keeping  his  Majesty  out  of  the  war,  in  case  the  propo- 
sition for  peace  did  not  take  place,  still  more  trouble- 
some and  harder  to  be  surmounted  than  they  had 
hitherto  found  them,  which  might  be  of  fatal  consequence 
when  the  English  Ministers,  by  experience,  knew  their 
influence  was  barely  a  match  for  such  difficulties  even 
in  their  former  degree,  and  combated  on  this  side  of 
the  water. 


1735.  MADAME  DE  WALMODEN.  499 

But  that  which  prevented  the  English  Ministers  from 
succeeding  in  their  attempts  to  prevent  his  Majesty's 
intended  journey,  in  my  opinion,  was  the  Queen,  through 
whom  they  chiefly  worked,  not  being  heartily  desirous 
they  should  succeed — not  that  her  Majesty  could  not 
foresee  some  inconveniences  in  his  going,  but  the 
danger  of  blowing  up  his  warlike  disposition,  which  was 
one  of  the  things  that  alarmed  our  Ministers  the  most, 
disturbed  her  the  least ;  and  to  compensate  the  trouble 
of  transacting  all  business  with  him  at  that  distance  by 
letter,  she  had  the  pleasure  that  resulted  to  her  pride 
from  the  eclat  of  the  regency,  and  the  convenience  and 
ease  of  being  mistress  of  all  those  hours  that  were  not 
employed  in  writing,  to  do  what  she  pleased,  which  was 
never  her  case  for  two  hours  together  when  the  King 
was  in  England ;  and  besides  these  agremens,  she  had 
the  certainty  of  being,  for  six  months  at  least,  not  only 
free  from  the  fatigue  of  being  obliged  to  entertain  him 
twenty  hours  in  the  twenty-four,  but  also  from  the 
more  irksome  office  of  being  set  up  to  receive  the  quo- 
tidian sallies  of  a  temper  that,  let  it  be  charged  by 
what  hand  it  would,  used  always  to  discharge  its  hottest 
fire,  on  some  pretence  or  other,  upon  her. 

But  there  was  one  trouble  arose  on  the  King's  going 
to  Hanover  which  her  Majesty  did  not  at  all  foresee, 
which  was  his  becoming,  soon  after  his  arrival,  so  much 
attached  to  one  Madame  Walmoden,27  a  young  married 
woman  of  the  first  fashion  at  Hanover,  that  nobody  in 
England  talked  of  anything  but  the  declining  power 

27  Amelia  Sophia  dc  Walmoden,  created,  after  Queen  Caroline's  death, 
Countess  of  Yarmouth.  She  died  in  1765.  Lord  Hervey  always  calls  her 
either  Walmoudeor  Valmoude.  I  have  everywhere  restored  the  real  name. 

2  K2 


500  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

of  the  Queen,  and  the  growing  interest  of  this  new 
favourite.  By  what  I  could  perceive  of  the  Queen,  I 
think  her  pride  was  much  more  hurt  on  this  occasion 
than  her  affections,  and  that  she  was  much  more  un- 
easy from  thinking  people  imagined  her  interest  de- 
clining than  from  apprehending  it  was  so. 

It  is  certain,  too,  that,  from  the  very  beginning  of 
this  new  engagement,  the  King  acquainted  the  Queen 
by  letter  of  every  step  he  took  in  it — of  the  growth  of 
his  passion,  the  progress  of  his  applications,  and  their 
success — of  every  word  as  well  as  every  action  that 
passed — so  minute  a  description  of  her  person,  that 
had  the  Queen  been  a  painter  she  might  have  drawn 
her  rival's  picture  at  six  hundred  miles'  distance.28  He 

28  These  strange  confidences  are  also  stated  by  Horace  Walpole  : — 
"  Madame  Walmoden  was  the  King's  mistress  at  Hanover  during  his  latter 
journeys,  and  with  the  Queen's  privity ;  for  he  always  made  her  the  con- 
fidante of  his  amours;  which  made  Mrs.  Selwyn  (bedchamber- woman, 
mother  of  the  famous  George,  and  herself  of  much  vivacity,  and  pretty, 
p.  73)  once  tell  him  that  he  should  be  the  last  man  with  whom  she  would 
have  an  intrigue,  as  she  knew  he  would  tell  the  Queen.  In  his  letters 
from  Hanover  he  said  to  her,  '  You  must  love  the  Walmoden,  for  she  loves 
me.'  " — Reminiscences,  96.  In  Lord  Campbell's  Life  of  Lord  Chancellor 
King  we  find  another  corroboration  of  these  incredible  confessions.  Lord 
King  notes  that  he  dined  with  Sir  Robert : — "  On  this  occasion  he  let  me 
into  several  secrets  relating  to  the  King  and  Queen — that  the  King  con- 
stantly wrote  to  her  long  letters  of  two  or  three  sheets,  being  generally  of 
all  his  actions,  what  he  did  every  day,  even  to  minute  things,  and  par- 
ticularly of  his  amours,  what  women  he  admired  *  *  *  and  that  the  Queen, 
to  continue  him  in  a  disposition  to  do  what  she  desired,  returned  as  long 
letters,  and  approved  even  of  his  amours ;  not  scrupling  to  say  that  she 
was  but  one  woman  and  an  old  woman,  and  that  he  might  love  more 
and  younger  women  *  *  *  by  which  perfect  subserviency  to  his  will,  she 
effected  whatever  she  desired,  without  which  it  was  impossible  to  keep  him 
in  bounds." — Lives  of  the  Chancellors,  iv.  633.  Lord  Campbell  says  he 
has  put  asterisks  in  lieu  of  "  expressions  imputed  to  her  Majesty  too  coarse 
to  be  copied"  and  he  adds  a  very  natural  doubt  whether  the  whole  of  this 
strange  story  was  not  "  a  fiction  of  Walpole's  over  his  wine  to  mystify  the 
Chancellor;"  but  the  concurrent  and  still  more  detailed  evidence  of  Lord 
Hervey  unfortunately  puts  these  scandalous  transactions  beyond  all  doubt. 


1735.         THE  KING'S  CONFIDENCES  TO  THE  QUEEN.  501 

added,  too,  the  account  of  his  buying  her,  and  what  he 
gave  her,  which,  considering  the  rank  of  the  purchaser, 
and  the  merits  of  the  purchase  as  he  set  them  forth,  I 
think  he  had  no  great  reason  to  brag  of,  when  the  first 
price,  according  to  his  report,  was  only  one  thousand 
ducats — a  much  greater  proof  of  his  economy  than  his 
passion. 

But  notwithstanding  all  the  Queen's  philosophy  on 
this  occasion,  when  she  found  the  time  for  the  King's 
return  put  off  so  late  in  the  year  that  for  six  weeks  to- 
gether the  orders  for  the  yacht  were  by  every  post  and 
courier  in  vain  expected,  she  grew  extremely  uneasy ; 
and,  by  the  joy  she  showed  when  the  orders  arrived, 
plainly  manifested  that  she  had  felt  more  anxiety  than 
she  had  suffered  to  appear  whilst  they  were  deferred. 

Yet  all  this  while  the  King,  besides  his  ordinary 
letters  by  the  post,  never  failed  sending  a  courier  once 
a-week  with  a  letter  of  sometimes  sixty  pages,  and 
never  less  than  forty,  filled  with  an  hourly  account  of 
everything  he  saw,  heard,  thought,  or  did,  and  crammed 
with  minute  trifling  circumstances,  not  only  unworthy 
of  a  man  to  write,  but  even  of  a  woman  to  read,  most 
of  which  I  saw,  and  almost  all  of  them  heard  reported 
by  Sir  Robert,  to  whose  perusal  few  were  not  com- 
mitted, and  many  passages  in  them  were  transmitted  to 
him  by  the  King's  own  order,  who  used  to  tag  several 
paragraphs  with  "  Montrez  ceci  et  consultez  la-dessus  le 
gros  homme"  Among  many  extraordinary  things 
and  expressions  these  letters  contained,  there  was  one 
in  which  he  desired  the  Queen  to  contrive,  if  she  could, 
that  the  Prince  of  Modena,  who  was  to  come  the  latter 
end  of  the  year  to  England,  might  bring  his  wife  with 


502  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

him  ;29  and  the  reason  he  gave  for  it  was,  that  he  heard 
her  Highness  was  pretty  free  of  her  person,  and  that 
he  had  the  greatest  inclination  imaginable  to  pay  his 
addresses  to  a  daughter  of  the  late  Eegent  of  France, 
the  Duke  of  Orleans— "  un  plaisir"  (for  he  always 
wrote  in  French)  "  que  je  suis  swr,  ma  chere  Caroline, 
vous  serez  bien  aise  de  me  procurer,  quand  je  vous  dis 
combienje  le  souhaite" 

Such  a  request  to  his  wife  respecting  a  woman  he 
never  saw,  and  during  his  connection  with  Madame 
Walmoden,  speaks  much  stronger  in  a  bare  narrative 
of  the  fact  than  by  any  comment  or  reflections ;  and 
is  as  incapable  of  being  heightened  as  difficult  to  be 
credited. 


\_During  the  summer  Lord  Hervey  made  a  visit  to  some 
friends  in  the  West,  and  wrote  to  the  Queen  the  following  fanciful 
account  of  his  tour,  which  I  introduce  here  to  show  the  terms  on 
which  he  was  with  her  Majesty,  and  as  a  prelude  to  some  plea- 
santries of  the  same  class  which  we  shall  see  presently. .] 

To  THE  QUEEN. 

THOROUGHLY  sensible  of  all  the  gracious  distinctions  and  in- 
numerable favours  with  which  your  Majesty  honoured  me 
when  I  was  alive,  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  give  your  Majesty 
some  notice  of  my  death.  On  Saturday  the  14th  June,  about 
five  minutes  after  eleven,  I  died.  Some  malicious  people  per- 

2tf  Francis  d'Este,  hereditary  Prince  of  Modena,  married,  in  1720,  Char- 
lotte Aglai,  younger  daughter  of  the  Regent  Duke  of  Orleans.  The 
accounts  we  read  of  the  morals  of  the  lady's  family  are  almost  incredible, 
but  not  more  so  than  the  shameful  anecdote  recorded  in  the  text,  of  which 
not  the  least  wonderful  part  is  the  Queen's  communicating  such  a  monstrous 
proposal  to  Lord  Hervey — which,  without  the  corroborating  evidence  of 
Lord  King  and  Horace  Walpole  as  to  similar  confidences,  we  should  hardly 
venture  to  credit. 


1735.          LORD  HERVEY'S  LETTER  TO  THE  QUEEN.  503 

haps  may  give  out  that  I  died  drunk ;  for  as  I  departed  this 
life  just  as  I  took  leave  of  your  Majesty  when  you  retired  out 
of  your  gallery,  I  cannot  deny  but  that  I  expired  with  a  drop 
in  my  eye.  The  next  morning  my  corpse  was  carried  down  to 
Salisbury,  where  Bishop  Sherlock  of  that  diocese  read  the 
funeral  service  over  me  ;  from  thence  the  body  was  carried  to 
Mr.  Fox's30  and  there  privately  interred  ;  it  had  not  rested  there 
a  week,  when  my  poor  carcase  was  taken  up  again  and  con- 
veyed to  lie  in  state  at  the  family  seat  of  Lord  Poulet ;  my 
body  was  there  exhibited  to  the  view  of  all  the  country,  and, 
according  to  the  custom  of  Italy,  in  the  same  dress  I  wore 
when  I  was  alive.  My  Lord  Poulet  himself  was  the  under- 
taker, and  the  obsequies  were  performed  (though  far  in  the 
West)  with  all  the  pomp  and  magnificence  of  the  East :  the  bed 
on  which  the  body  of  the  defunct  was  laid  was  velvet,  laced 
with  gold,  adorned  with  plumes  of  feathers ;  the  staircase  by 
which  all  those  who  were  admitted  to  see  my  body  ascended, 
was  vaulted  with  lapis-lazuli ;  they  passed  through  five  large 
rooms  before  they  came  to  my  mausoleum ;  near  thirty  men 
in  the  same  livery  were  perpetually  watching  the  corpse,  and 
prayers  were  read  over  it  regularly  every  night  at  nine  o'clock. 

But  whilst  my  body,  Madam,  was  thus  disposed  of,  my 
spirit  (as  when  alive)  was  still  hovering,  though  invisible,  round 
your  Majesty,  anxious  for  your  welfare,  and  watching  to  do 
you  any  little  services  that  lay  within  my  power. 

On  Monday,  whilst  you  walked,  my  shade  still  turned  on  the 
side  of  the  sun  to  guard  you  from  its  beams. 

On  Tuesday  morning,  at  breakfast,  I  brushed  away  a  fly  that 
had  escaped  Teed's31  observation,  and  was  just  going  to  be  the 
taster  of  your  chocolate. 

On  Wednesday  in  the  afternoon  I  took  off  the  chilness  of 
some  strawberry -water  your  Majesty  was  going  to  drink,  as 
you  came  in  hot  from  walking ;  and  at  night  I  hunted  a  bat 
out  of  your  bed-chamber,  and  shut  a  sash  just  as  you  fell 
asleep,  which  your  Majesty  had  a  little  indiscreetly  ordered 
Mrs.  Purcel 32  to  leave  open. 

so  At  Redlynch,  in  Somersetshire,  whence  he  had  visited  Lord  Poulet  at 
Ilinton.  31  One  of  the  Queen's  attendants. 

32  The  Queen's  dresser  and  ordinary  attendant. 


504  LORD  HERVEY'S  MEMOIRS.  CHAP.  XIX. 

On  Thursday,  in  the  drawing-room,  I  took  the  forms  and 
voices  of  several  of  my  acquaintance,  made  strange  faces,  put  my- 
self into  awkward  postures,  and  talked  a  good  deal  of  nonsense, 
whilst  your  Majesty  entertained  me  very  gravely,  raccommoded 
me  very  graciously,  and  laughed  at  me  internally  very  heartily. 

On  Friday  (being  post-day)  I  proposed  to  get  the  best  pen 
in  the  other  world  for  your  Majesty's  use,  and  slip  it  invisibly 
into  your  standish,  just  as  Mr.  Shaw33  was  bringing  it  into  your 
gallery  for  you  to  write,  and  accordingly  I  went  to  Voiture 
and  desired  him  to  lend  me  his  pen,  but  when  I  told  him  for 
whom  it  was  designed,  he  only  laughed  at  me  for  a  blockhead, 
and  asked  me  if  I  had  been  at  Court  for  four  years  to  so  little 
purpose  as  not  to  know  that  your  Majesty  had  a  much  better 
of  your  own. 

On  Saturday  I  went  on  the  shaft  of  your  Majesty's  chaise  to 
Richmond ;  as  you  walked  there  I  went  before  you,  and  with 
an  invisible  wand  I  brushed  the  dew  and  the  worms  out  of 
your  path  all  the  way,  and  several  times  uncrumpled  your  Ma- 
jesty's stocking. 

This  very  day  at  chapel  I  did  your  Majesty  some  service,  by 
tearing  six  leaves  out  of  the  parson's  sermon,  and  shortening 
his  discourse  six  minutes. 

Your  Majesty  sees  how  ready  I  am  to  boast  of  the  small  ser- 
vices I  am  capable  of  doing  you :  but  little  geniuses  must 
submit  to  little  occupations,  and  those  who  wish  to  do  you  any 
services,  if  they  are  not  able  to  do  you  all  they  would,  must 
at  least  perform  all  they  can ;  and  if  your  Majesty  thinks, 
after  this  purgatory  I  have  gone  through,  I  deserve  my  re- 
ward, do  but  pronounce  my  sentence,  and  say  Je  vous  laisse 
vivre,  my  revival  will  immediately  ensue,  and  the  life  of  your 
presence  be  again  enjoyed  by,  Madam,  &c. — HERVEY. 

33  Mr.  John  Shaw,  one  of  the  pages  of  the  back  stairs. 


APPENDIX. 


No.  I. 

Speech  of  Lord  Hervey  in  moving  the  Address  in  the 
House  of  Lords  on  the   17 tk  of  January,   1734.— 
See  ante,  p.  278.1 

MY  LORDS, 

I  AM  so  new  to  the  honour  of  sitting  in  this  assembly, 
that  very  few  occasions  could  offer  in  which  I  should  not  much 
sooner  wish  to  be  attentive  in  order  to  form  my  opinion  than 
forward  to  deliver  it. 

But  as  many  opportunities  have  presented  themselves  to 
your  Lordships  (which  you  have  never  failed  to  improve)  of 
testifying  your  affection  and  duty  to  his  Majesty's  person  and 
Government,  your  zeal  for  the  service  of  the  State,  your 
attachment  to  its  interest,  and  your  resolution  to  protect  and 
defend  all  the  rights,  liberties,  and  privileges  of  this  wise  and 
happy  Constitution,  of  which  your  Lordships  are  the  chief 
support  and  guardians ;  as  your  Lordships  have  not  only  at  all 
times  professed  these  to  be  your  sentiments,  but  proved  they 
were  the  principles  that  constantly  actuate  your  conduct,  I 
hope  I  shall  be  forgiven  if,  in  order  to  follow  such  laudable 
examples,  an  extreme,  and  what  on  every  other  occasion  I 
should  call  an  improper,  eagerness  now  prompts  me  to  make 
the  earliest  declarations  to  your  Lordships  that,  in  these  par- 
ticulars at  least,  how  deficient  soever  I  am  ready  to  confess 
myself  in  every  other,  I  will  never  prove  unworthy  of  being 

1  I  think  the  two  speeches  here  given  will  refute  the  character  of 
"florid  impotence  "  given  to  Lord  Hervey's  speeches  by  Pope,  and  repeated 
by  Smollett.  The  truth  is,  his  speeches  were  by  no  means  florid,  and  are 
as  well  reasoned  as  any  others  of  the  period  that  have  reached  us. 


506  APPENDIX. — I. 

admitted  into  this  great  society  of  which  I  have  now  the 
honour  to  be  a  member. 

What  encourages  me  still  farther  to  hope  for  your  Lord- 
ships' indulgence  on  this  occasion  is,  that  considering  the  pre- 
sent situation  of  England,  either  with  regard  to  its  foreign  or 
domestic  interest,  considering  what  has  just  now  been  delivered 
from  the  Throne,  and  considering  the  characters  of  those  to 
whom  I  am  speaking,  it  is  impossible  for  me  not  to  imagine 
that  every  one  of  your  Lordships  is  already  desirous  to  pro- 
mote what  I  shall  only  have  the  good  fortune  to  be  the  first  in 
proposing,  and  consequently  whilst  I  am  speaking  my  own 
thoughts  I  cannot  help  flattering  myself  that  I  am  only  antici- 
pating and  delivering  the  thoughts  of  your  Lordships. 

And  as  general  acknowledgments  to  his  Majesty  for  the 
regard  he  has  on  all  occasions  shown  for  the  welfare  of  his 
subjects  and  the  interests  of  these  realms  as  expressing  a  gra- 
titude for  his  past  and  a  reliance  on  his  future  care,  and  a 
thorough  satisfaction  in  his  wise  and  prosperous  government — 
as  this  is  all  I  shall  take  the  liberty  to  propose  to  your  Lord- 
ships, many  words,  I  think,  cannot  be  necessary ;  a  very  few 
reflections  on  the  series  of  policy  pursued  from  the  commence- 
ment of  his  Majesty's  reign  to  this  hour,  a  very  short  deduction 
of  known  facts,  will  surely  suffice  to  prove  the  propriety  of 
such  a  proposal  at  this  time  and  the  reasonableness  of  hoping 
for  your  Lordships'  concurrence  in  it. 

That  peace  is  the  essence  of  prosperity  to  a  trading  nation 
I  believe  is  a  position  will  no  more  be  denied  me  than  that  the 
whole  tenor  of  his  Majesty's  conduct  since  he  first  mounted  the 
throne  has  demonstrated  his  desire,  on  one  continued  uniform 
plan,  to  procure  that  invaluable  blessing  to  his  people,  and 
establish  it  on  as  lasting  a  foundation  as  human  prudence  can 
form,  or  the  natural  vicissitude  and  instability  of  human  affairs 
subject  to  so  many  and  such  unforeseen  accidents  will  admit. 

The  very  delicate  and  unsettled  situation  in  which  his 
Majesty  found  the  affairs  of  Europe  at  his  first  accession  to 
the  Crown ;  the  unwearied  application  and  unalterable  steadi- 
ness with  which  he  has  wrought  in  order  to  fix  them  on  a 
firmer  foot ;  the  success  that  did  attend  those  endeavours  and 
does  still  attend  them  with  regard  to  the  particular  tranquillity 


LORD  HERVEY'S  SPEECH  IN  MOVING  THE  ADDRESS.     507 

and  prosperity  of  his  own  dominions,  are  considerations  which, 
if  duly  weighed,  will,  I  am  convinced,  not  only  entitle  him  to 
the  thanks  of  all  those  of  whose  interests  he  has  the  care  and 
of  whose  security  he  is  the  guardian,  but  must  likewise  pro- 
cure him  at  least  the  tacit  applause  and  approbation  of  all 
mankind. 

As  to  the  first  of  these  considerations,  I  need  not  trouble 
your  Lordships  with  particularly  describing  the  very  intricate, 
complicated,  and  entangled  disposition  of  the  affairs  of  all  the 
great  powers  of  Europe  at  the  period  I  have  just  now  men- 
tioned. The  various  views  and  conflicting  pretensions,  the 
jarring  demands  and  contradictory  claims,  of  the  different 
princes  concerned  in  the  disputes  at  that  time  depending, 
sufficiently  set  forth  the  difficulty  of  the  part  his  Majesty  had 
then  to  act.  Nor  were  the  immediate  and  particular  interests 
of  England  unaffected.  At  this  time  there  was  a  union  sub- 
sisting between  two  great  confederated  powers,  a  union 
grounded  on  reciprocal  advantages  proposed  to  each  other, 
which  were  to  be  gained  by  mutual  aids  stipulated,  and  assist- 
ance promised,  not  only  in  opposition  to  the  interests  of  the 
British  nation,  but  in  manifest  invasion  of  her  absolute  and 
established  rights ;  I  mean,  my  Lords,  by  one  of  these  powers 
bringing  again  into  dispute  the  possessions  of  England  abroad 
(confirmed  to  us  by  so  many  treaties),  whilst  the  other  endea- 
voured to  lessen  the  advantages  of  our  trade  by  interfering  in 
one  of  the  most  valuable  and  beneficial  branches  of  it. 

However,  by  the  steady  conduct,  the  firmness,  and  pru- 
dence of  his  Majesty,  peremptory  as  these  powers  were  in  their 
demands,  and  stiff  in  maintaining  what  they  had  undertaken, 
means  were  found  to  baffle  these  attacks  and  defeat  these  pre- 
tensions ;  the  rights  and  possessions  of  England  abroad  were 
again  confirmed  by  a  new  treaty  and  agreements  with  one  of 
these  powers,  the  rival  of  our  trade  was  no  longer  supported 
by  the  other,  and  the  full  exercise  of  every  other  branch  of 
our  commerce  was  again  restored  and  amply  enjoyed. 

Nor  did  his  Majesty's  labours  for  the  service  of  mankind 
end  there  ;  he  now  took  into  his  thoughts  the  general  peace  of 
Europe,  though  he  made  it  a  second  consideration  to  that  of 
the  particular  interest  of  his  own  subjects,  and  postponed  all 


508  APPENDIX. — I. 

other  views  till  that  was  accomplished.  By  his  wise  mediation 
and  friendly  interposition  the  tranquillity  of  Europe  was 
restored  ;  points  that  had  been  disputed  during  many  years  of 
unsuccessful  negotiation  were,  by  his  skill,  happily  adjusted 
and  settled  ;  points  that  had  so  long  kept  all  Europe  in  that 
uneasy  situation  of  impending  rupture,  that  amphibious  state 
of  war  and  peace,  by  which  every  country  concerned  was 
plunged  in  all  the  expenses  of  the  one,  yet  detained  in  all 
the  inaction  of  the  other.  However,  such  was  the  good  for- 
tune of  his  Majesty,  that  to  this  long-disturbed  prospect  suc- 
ceeded an  entire  calm  :  Spain  was  satisfied,  the  Emperor  was 
made  easy,  Holland  consented,  and  France  was  quiet. 

But  as  the  best  concerted  schemes  are  still  imperfect,  and 
the  most  permanent  liable  to  change,  so,  by  accidents  impos- 
sible to  be  foreseen,  and  consequences  of  those  accidents  as 
impossible,  perhaps,  to  be  prevented,  though  they  had  been 
foreseen,  new  troubles  began,  new  clouds  arose,  and  a  new 
storm  broke  out  upon  the  Continent.  The  choice  of  a  suc- 
cessor to  the  deceased  King  of  Poland  employed  the  attention 
of  all  the  great  powers  of  Europe — an  event  about  which  it  was 
natural  to  imagine  the  princes  who  at  present  dispute  upon  it 
would  never  have  so  far  concerned  themselves  as  to  risk  what 
they  now  stake  and  expose. 

But  it  happened  among  them,  as  it  often  happens  among 
people  of  inferior  rank,  that  what  was  a  trifle  in  the  beginning 
became  in  the  conclusion  an  essential :  they  engaged  them- 
selves unwarily  by  little  and  little  till  they  found  they  were 
advanced  too  far  to  recede  ;  what  was  not  a  point  of  interest 
at  first  became  a  point  of  honour  at  last,  and  they  perceived 
themselves  too  late  in  that  situation  into  which  (if  they  had 
foreseen  the  inconveniences)  they  never  would  have  brought 
themselves  by  the  original  embarking. 

However,  I  cannot  but  observe  to  your  Lordships  that, 
whilst  most  countries  in  Europe  are  exposed  to  the  calamities 
of  war,  and  groan  under  its  weight — whilst  every  country  is 
sensible  of  the  oppressive  expenses  of  it — this  island,  still  happy 
in  her  situation,  nor  less  happy  in  her  guardian  and  protector, 
by  the  caution,  prudence,  and  foresight  of  his  Majesty  in  the 
engagements  by  which  he  has  bound  himself,  has  still  her 


LORD  HERVEY'S  SPEECH  IN  MOVING  THE  ADDRESS.     509 

choice  of  peace  or  war,  what  party  she  will  espouse,  if  any, 
whom  she  will  assist,  and  whom  she  will  withstand. 

Her  friendship  by  every  State  courted  and  coveted ;  her 
enmity  by  every  Court  dreaded  and  apprehended  ;  her  com- 
merce, the  source  of  her  prosperity,  extended  to  all  parts  of 
the  known  world,  successful  and  unmolested ;  her  ships  laden 
with  riches,  every  sea  free  to  their  passage  and  open  to  their 
reception. 

And  as  this  scene  of  happiness,  the  being  prosperous  at 
home  and  considerable  abroad,  as  every  blessing  we  can  boast 
of,  in  my  opinion,  proceeds  from  the  harmony  subsisting  be- 
tween his  Majesty  and  his  Parliament,  so  I  am  persuaded  it  is 
wholly  unnecessary  for  me  to  recommend  to  your  Lordships 
the  preservation  of  that  harmony,  as  your  own  thoughts  will 
naturally  suggest  to  you  that  the  best  and  surest  method  to 
continue  these  blessings  and  advantages  to  the  state  is  to  con- 
tinue the  means  by  which  they  have  been  procured. 

And  as  the  best  security  for  the  fidelity  of  alliances  is  to 
make  it  as  much  their  interest  by  whom  national  faith  is 
plighted  to  have  it  preserved  as  theirs  to  whom  it  is  given — 
as  the  best  security  against  any  perfidious  attacks  upon  our 
rights  or  invasions  of  our  tranquillity  is  to  show  those  who 
may  meditate  any  such  design  how  unsuccessful  it  is  like  to 
prove,  and  that  the  assailant  would  be  the  sufferer,  and,  in  few 
words,  my  Lords,  that  we  may  depend  as  much  on  the  fear 
as  the  faith  of  all  our  neighbours,  I  doubt  not  but  your  Lord- 
ships will  think  it  expedient  to  put  the  nation  in  such  a  posture 
of  defence  as  shall,  in  these  general  troubles  and  commotions, 
preserve  the  honour  and  dignity  of  the  Crown  from  any  insult, 
the  safety  of  the  people  from  any  danger,  and  the  peace  of  the 
kingdom  from  any  at  least  successful  attempts  to  molest  it. 
Such  steps  are,  I  think,  what  prudence,  interest,  justice,  and 
wisdom  now  require  from  your  Lordships ;  such  steps  are  con- 
sequently consistent  with  yourselves ;  and  as  I  cannot  help 
thinking  that  the  proceedings  of  your  Lordships  have  been  such 
that  the  best  rule  for  your  future  behaviour  is  the  example  of 
your  past  conduct,  so  I  shall  take  the  liberty  to  make  a  motion 
to  your  Lordships  drawn  as  near  as  I  could  copy  it  upon  that 
plan. 


510  APPENDIX. — II. 


No.  II. 


Speech  of  Lord  Hervey  on  the  Petition  of  the  Scotch 
Lords,  on  the  2lst  of  February,  1735 — ante,  p.  480. 

MY  LORDS, 

THOUGH  the  motion  I  intend  to  make  would,  I 
think,  be  sufficiently  warranted  hy  the  resolution  your  Lord- 
ships have  just  now  come  to,  as  it  is,  in  my  opinion,  the  natural 
and  unavoidable  consequence  of  that  resolution  ;  yet,  as  I  al- 
ways desire  to  justify  in  the  most  ample  manner  any  proposal 
I  ever  take  the  liberty  to  make  to  your  Lordships,  so,  before  I 
give  my  opinion  on  the  step  your  Lordships  ought  next  to  take, 
I  shall  beg  your  indulgence  whilst  in  the  shortest  and  clearest 
manner  I  am  able  I  just  state  the  progressive  steps  of  this 
whole  affair  from  its  first  rise  to  the  present  time,  since  it  is 
on  that  very  extraordinary  gradation,  and  the  collected  and 
compared  circumstances  of  so  uncommon  a  proceeding,  that  I 
found  that  motion  which  I  shall  afterward  have  the  honour  to 
make. 

1  need  not  be  very  particular  in  describing  the  almost  uni- 
versal flame  raised  in  the  nation  at  the  time  when  the  election 
of  the  sixteen  peers  now  sitting  with  your  Lordships  was  made  ; 
the  bare  naming  of  the  remarkable  era  will  bring  back  to  the 
memory  of  every  Lord  who  now  hears  me  the  stories  that  were 
then  in  the  mouths  of  most  people,  and  in  the  ears  of  all,  of  the 
enormous  corruption,  the  flagrant  illegality,  and  even  of  the  un- 
warrantable violences  made  use  of  in  this  transaction. 

What  effect  the  propagating  these  reports  over  the  whole 
island  produced  in  the  minds  of  the  people,  your  Lordships  are 
equally  well  apprised  of;  for,  notwithstanding  the  majority  for 
the  sixteen  Lords  now  sitting  in  this  House  was  so  great  that, 
taking  out  of  the  sixteen  each  list  who  voted  for  themselves, 


LORD  HERVEY'S  SPEECH  ON  THE  SCOTCH  PETITION.    511 

the  proportion,  at  a  medium,  between  the  two  lists  appeared  to 
be  as  42  to  9,  yet  it  was  currently  reported,  and  by  many  be- 
lieved, that  the  return  was  made  in  favour  of  the  sixteen  now 
sitting  by  the  weight  of  power,  and  contrary  to  all  the  right  of 
a  free  election. 

In  order  to  spread,  strengthen,  and  confirm  this  opinion, 
pamphlets  of  the  Protests  made  at  the  Scotch  election  were 
written  and  dispersed  over  the  whole  United  Kingdoms  to  assert 
this  fact,  and  to  declare  the  return  unduly  made :  I  mean  not 
by  these  pamphlets  the  anonymous  scandal  of  sixpenny  books, 
or  the  yet  cheaper  calumny  of  weekly  or  daily  journals ;  but 
pamphlets  of  far  superior  authority,  with  great  and  noble  names 
affixed  to  them,  and  not  in  the  manner  that  many  great  and 
noble  names  are  used — covertly  described,  or  hinted  at  by  ini- 
tial letters,  but  written  at  length,  and  consequently  in  such 
manner  as  those  who  made  use  of  them,  had  they  not  been 
authorised,  would  have  been  punished  for  so  doing,  or  at  least 
disavowed. 

In  these  pamphlets  the  election  for  the  sixteen  returned  was 
declared  void  and  null,  and  a  return  claimed  for  the  other  list ; 
a  declaration  was  made,  equally  attested,  that  several  Lords 
had  voted  for  these  sixteen  unduly  returned  who  had  no  right 
to  vote,  and  that  several  others  who  had  a  right  to  vote  were 
induced,  by  a  corrupt  influence,  to  make  use  of  that  right  in 
favour  of  the  Lords  now  sitting.  To  these  assertions  were 
added  that  of  a  capacity  of  proving  them  at  a  proper  time  and 
in  a  proper  place  :  as  everybody  understood  that  proper  time  to 
be  the  meeting  of  the  Parliament,  and  that  proper  place  the  great 
Assembly  to  which  I  am  now  speaking,  the  whole  world  was  im- 
patient till  that  interval  between  the  election  and  the  meeting 
of  the  Parliament  was  expired,  and  big  with  expectation  to 
have  these  illegal  and  unjust  practices  set  forth  before  the  pro- 
per judges,  that  the  practisers  of  them  might  be  punished  and 
the  injured  be  redressed. 

And  as  there  could  be  but  two  reasons  for  believing  this  re- 
turn had  been  made  unduly — the  one  the  notoriety  of  the  facts, 
the  other  the  concluding  it  from  the  unfitness  of  those  returned 
to  enjoy  the  honour  of  representing  the  Peerage  of  Scotland  ; 
and  as  no  one  could  think  the  last,  so  every  one  concluded  it 


512  APPENDIX. — II. 

must  be  the  first :  and  since  I  have  mentioned  this  circumstance, 
I  must  beg  leave,  in  justice  to  the  sixteen  Lords  who  are  sitting 
here,  to  ask,  unless  undue  influence  manifestly  had  appeared 
and  could  be  proved,  why  it  should  be  supposed  to  have  been 
necessary,  to  procure  a  choice  of  representatives  for  the  Peerage 
of  Scotland  which  the  whole  world  must  own  to  be  so  properly 
made  ?  If  birth,  if  rank,  if  ancient  families,  if  property,  if  ho- 
nour, if  integrity,  if  blameless  and  unexceptionable  characters  can 
give  man  a  claim  to  the  honour  of  representing  the  Peerage  of 
Scotland,  where  can  sixteen  more  proper  for  that  honour  be 
found  ?  I  will  not  enter  into  the  copious  theme  of  the  parti- 
cular merits  of  each  of  these  Lords,  because  what  is  so  well 
known  to  your  Lordships  is  unnecessary  to  be  repeated,  and 
because  encomiums  of  that  kind,  I  am  sensible,  must  be  dis- 
agreeable to  those  Lords  themselves,  as  such  praise  is  always 
most  uneasy  to  the  ears  of  those  by  whom  it  is  most  de- 
served. 

To  return,  then,  to  what  happened  at  the  meeting  of  the  Par- 
liament, when  all  mankind  expected  these  tales  that  had  been  cir- 
culated through  the  kingdom  should  be  brought  to  some  point ; 
when  it  was  expected  that  general  assertions  would  be  reduced  to 
particular  facts,  that  general  invectives  would  be  thrown  into  par- 
ticular accusations,  and  general  complaints  brought  home  to  par- 
ticular delinquents — how  were  these  expectations  of  mankind 
answered  ?  The  Parliament  had  been  sitting  near  a  month  before 
any  complaint  at  all  was  brought ;  and  at  last,  when  a  complaint 
was  made  that  seemed  to  be  rather  extorted  by  the  expectations 
of  the  public  than  founded  on  just  cause  of  complaint — when  a 
petition  was  presented  by  the  complainants,  how  was  that  peti- 
tion signed,  and  what  did  it  contain  ?  It  was  signed  only  by  six 
Lords  of  all  those  who  had  before  thought  themselves  ag- 
grieved ;  no  direct  proof,  I  own,  that  the  rest  had,  on  delibera- 
tion and  better  information,  changed  their  opinion  ;  but  no 
very  unnatural  cause,  sure,  to  believe  that  they  had  done  so  ? 
for  if  these  six  Lords,  thinking  themselves  duly  elected,  com- 
plain as  candidates  of  a  return  made  in  their  wrong,  why  are 
the  names  of  the  other  ten,  who  are  in  the  same  situation,  not 
added  to  these  ?  If  the  petitioners  complain  of  wrong  done 
them  as  electors,  why  are  not  the  names  of  nineteen  more  in  the 


LORD  HERVEY'S  SPEECH  ON  THE  SCOTCH  PETITION.    51£f 

same  situation  added  to  these  ?  And  can  it  be  thought  any 
unfair  interpretation,  any  forced  construction  of  this  circum- 
stance, to  say  it  ought  to  be  presumed  that  those  who  would 
have  been  partakers  in  the  injury  suffered,  if  there  had  been 
any,  by  not  joining  in  the  complaint  on  maturer  deliberation, 
are  convinced,  notwithstanding  their  first  thoughts,  that  there 
has  no  injury  been  done,  and  that  there  is  no  ground  for  com- 
plaint ? 

So  much  I  could  not  help  saying  with  regard  to  the  man- 
ner of  signing  this  petition.  As  to  the  matter  contained  in  it, 
it  is  so  far  from  reducing  generals  to  particulars,  it  comes  so 
far  short  of  the  substance  of  former  complaints,  and  is  con- 
ceived in  such  loose,  indeterminate,  ambiguous  terms,  that  no 
one  particular  crime  or  criminal  is  mentioned  in  the  complaint ; 
yet  at  the  same  time  such  extensive  terms  of  ^complaint  used 
in  this  petition,  that  I  think  there  is  no  species  of  crime  that 
may  not  be  covertly  comprehended  in  it. 

Notwithstanding,  therefore,  the  rebuke  I  met  with1  in  the  first 
debate  on  this  petition  for  calling  this  petition  an  unintelligible 
one,  I  shall  persist  in  the  expression,  and  think  myself  warranted 
in  doing  so  by  the  best  authority  I  can  have,  which  is  the  au- 
thority of  this  House  ;  for  if  the  House  thought  this  petition 
wanted  explanation,  it  is  evident  it  was  unintelligible  to  them 
as  well  as  to  me  ;  nay,  it  was  unintelligible  even  in  the  most 
material  point,  which  was  the  right  of  the  sixteen  Lords  re- 
turned to  their  seats  in  this  House.  An  explanation,  there- 
fore, of  this  point  was  ordered  by  the  House  to  be  made  by  the 
petitioners.  And  here  I  must  make  use  of  another  word  for- 
merly objected  to  me,  by  calling  this  permission  of  explaining 
allowed  to  the  petitioners  an  indulgence  towards  them ;  since, 
without  the  most  particular  regard  to  the  rank  and  merit  of  the 
noble  persons  who  signed  this  petition,  and  a  desire  to  come  to 
the  bottom  of  reports  that  had  made  so  much  noise  in  this 
island,  I  presume  your  Lordships  would  not  in  common  cases 
think  yourselves  obliged  to  be  counsel  to  petitioners  at  your 
bar  to  make  that  intelligible  at  last  which  all  petitioners  ought 
to  make  so  at  first,  or  to  reduce  that  to  a  practicable  form  which, 


1  From  my  Lord  Gower  and  Lord  Abington. — Note  by  Lord  Hervey. 
VOL.  I.  2  L 


514  APPENDIX. — II. 

without  your  Lordships'  assistance,  was  absolutely  incapable  of 
being  proceeded  upon  at  all ;  and  for  these  reasons  I  called, 
and  continue  to  call,  this  petition,  as  originally  presented,  not 
only  a  petition  of  an  extraordinary  and  unintelligible  nature, 
but  one  to  which  your  Lordships  have  shown  extraordinary 
marks  of  indulgence. 

And  notwithstanding  former  declarations  made  by  those  who 
had  signed  this  petition,  that  the  election  for  the  sixteen  re- 
turned Peers  was  null  and  void,  the  first  explanation  made  by 
the  petitioners  upon  your  Lordships'  order  was, — that  they  did 
not  so  much  as  contest  the  right  of  the  sixteen,  or  any  one  of 
them,  nor  mean  in  any  way  to  controvert  their  seats  in  this 
House. 

This  explanation  naturally  and  necessarily  drew  on  an- 
other ;  for  as  this  explanation  only  discharged  the  petition  of 
one  part  of  its  ambiguity,  your  Lordships  were  obliged  to  re- 
quire a  farther  explanation  of  what  facts  were  complained  of, 
and  by  whom  those  facts  were  committed — an  order  which  I 
beg  leave  to  say  was  so  far  from  being  a  hardship  on  the  peti- 
tioners, that  it  is  a  direct  compliance  with  part  of  the  prayer 
of  their  petition  ;  for  as  the  Noble  Lords,  your  petitioners,  do 
say,  after  general  complaints  made,  that  they  are  able  to  lay 
instances  and  proofs  before  your  Lordships  of  these  general 
complaints  in  the  manner  you  shall  be  pleased  to  direct,  what 
is  your  order  but  a  compliance  with  their  request,  and  desiring 
that  to  be  done  which  they  affirm  they  are  able  and  willing 
to  do? 

Nor  can  I  help  thinking  that  even  this  order  was  a  second 
mark  of  your  Lordships'  indulgence,  notwithstanding  the  offence 
taken  at  my  making  use  of  that  word ;  for,  had  a  petition  of 
the  like  nature  been  presented  to  the  House  of  Commons  (the 
only  case  that  can  justly  be  compared  to  this) — had  a  petition, 
I  say,  from  any  electors  been  presented  there,  declaring  that 
such  petition  did  not  mean  to  dispute  the  seat  of  the  sitting 
Member,  it  is  indisputable  that  the  House  of  Commons  would 
immediately  have  rejected  it.  Would  the  House  of  Commons 
(the  right  of  the  sitting  Member  uncontested)  ever  have  admitted 
any  number  of  the  electors  to  come  and  give  a  narrative  only 
of  what  had  passed  at  the  election  ?  Would  the  House  of 


LORD  HERVEY'S  SPEECH  ON  THE  SCOTCH  PETITION.    515 

Commons  admit  any  person  or  number  of  persons  to  come  and 
recount  at  their  bar  particular  circumstances  of  transactions  at 
an  election  that  were  declared  not  in  any  manner  to  affect  the 
seat  of  any  of  their  Members  ?  Would  the  House  of  Commons 
give  any  attention  to  petitioners  who  only  came  and  said  in  ge- 
neral terms — We  have  been  informed  that  some  things  have 
been  done  by  some  persons  somewhere,  which,  if  examined 
into,  we  believe  might  be  of  use  to  the  House  to  know  ;  though 
what  has  been  done,  where,  or  by  whom,  we  are  unable  to  inform 
you  ?  Does  anybody  imagine  that  in  the  House  of  Commons 
any  further  notice  would  be  taken  of  such  a  petition  than  to 
reject  it  ?  or  will  anybody  say  that,  if  the  Commons  were  to 
treat  petitions  of  this  sort  in  any  other  manner — that,  consider- 
ing the  number  of  elections  that  go  to  the  constituting  their 
body,  their  whole  seven  years  must  not  be  entirely  taken  up  in 
hearing  them,  if  any  regard  at  all  was  paid  to  the  purport  of 
them? 

The  second  order,  therefore,  which  your  Lordships  gave  to 
your  petitioners,  I  do  say  was  a  further  indulgence,  as  well  in 
the  substance  of  it  as  in  (the  Lords'  petitioners  written  to  by 
the  Lord  Chancellor,  by  order  of  the  House)  the  manner  by 
which  both  this  and  the  former  order  were  conveyed  ;  a  manner 
denoting  such  particular  regard  for  the  Noble  Lords,  your  pe- 
titioners, that  no  example  throughout  all  your  journals  can  be 
found  of  a  compliment  of  the  like  nature. 

I  shall  not  here  enter  into  any  vindication  of  this  your  Lord- 
ships' second  order  directing  the  petitioners  to  specify  the  facts 
complained  of  under  the  general  terms  of  undue  methods  and 
illegal  practices,  and  the  names  of  the  persons  by  whom  such 
undue  methods  and  illegal  practices  were  used ;  the  equity  of 
that  order,  from  all  the  principles  of  natural  justice,  and  from 
the  customs  of  all  courts  of  judicature  in  all  countries  and  all 
ages,  to  avoid  hearing  any  criminal  prosecution  ex  parte,  was 
sufficiently  demonstrated  in  the  long  debate  that  preceded  the 
making  of  that  order ;  I  shall  therefore  now  consider  only  in 
what  situation  the  noncompliance  with  that  order  has  put  your 
Lordships,  and  cursorily  take  notice  of  the  answer  made  to  that 
order. 

A  noble  Lord  (Lord  Anglesey)  has  been  pleased  to  say  that 

2  L2 


516  APPENDIX. II. 

it  was  not  in  the  power  of  the  petitioners  to  comply  with  this 
order  ;  but  I  beg  leave  to  observe,  that  in  so  saying  the  Noble 
Lord  alleges  that  for  the  petitioners  which  they  have  not  in 
their  answer  alleged  for  themselves.  The  petitioners  do  not 
say  that  they  are  under  an  inability  to  comply  with  your  Lord- 
ships' order,  but  they  say  they  cannot  comply  with  it 
unless  they  will  submit  to  be  accusers,  which  they  never  de- 
signed to  be  :  this  answer,  therefore,  evidently  implies  that,  if 
they  would  submit  to  be  accusers,  they  could  comply  with  your 
order ;  and  indeed,  my  Lords,  the  nice  distinction  made  by  the 
petitioners  between  informers  and  accusers  is  a  distinction  which 
I  know  but  one  way  to  solve  ;  and  that  is  this, — if  the  informa- 
tion they  intend  to  give  your  Lordships  be  an  information  of 
no  criminal  fact,  it  may  certainly  be  an  information  without 
being  an  accusation  ;  but  then  it  will,  I  presume,  be  thought 
no  very  material  information,  and  consequently  not  worth  em- 
ploying much  of  your  Lordships'  time  :  but  if  the  information 
be  consistent  with  every  other  part  of  their  proceedings  and 
declarations,  either  at  the  time  of  the  election  or  since,  it  must 
not  only  be  an  accusation,  but  an  accusation  of  the  strongest 
nature.  And  though  another  Noble  Lord  (Lord  Chesterfield) 
was  pleased  to  say  the  petitioners  never  designed  to  name  per- 
sons, and  were  not  able  to  say  what  persons  were  concerned  in 
the  transactions  they  complain  of,  I  must  beg  leave  to  answer, 
that,  though  in  some  papers  I  have  already  mentioned  (the 
Scotch  Lords'  Protest),  they  have  not  actually  named  persons, 
yet  they  have  so  described  persons  that,  if  they  cannot  be  jus- 
tified in  naming  them  when  ordered  by  your  Lordships,  I  am 
sure  they  are  much  less  to  be  justified  in  having  voluntarily  so 
described  them  that  every  man  in  England  knows  who  they 
mean,  whilst  the  petitioners  themselves  are  conscious  they 
cannot  make  out  what  is  there  laid  to  the  charge  of  those 
persons. 

Another  Noble  Lord  (Lord  Bathurst)  says  the  petitioners 
only  desire  your  Lordships  to  go  into  an  inquiry,  and  argues 
upon  the  reasonableness  of  your  going  into  that  inquiry  with- 
out insisting  on  a  specification  of  facts  and  persons,  from  these 
two  examples  : — Suppose  (says  he)  a  man  comes  to  a  justice  of 
the  peace  and  tells  him,  Here  has  been  a  murder  committed ;  a 


LORD  HERVEY'S  SPEECH  ON  THE  SCOTCH  PETITION.    517 

corpse  lies  bleeding  and  butchered  in  the  street,  and  we  desire  your 
warrant  to  search  for  the  murderer.  Would  the  justice  of  peace 
say,  No,  I  will  not  give  my  warrant  till  you  name  the  man  you 
would  search  for  ?  To  this  supposition  of  the  Noble  Lord's  I 
answer — No.  Certainly  the  justice  of  the  peace  would  not 
delay  an  inquiry  ;  but  in  this  case  the  fact,  at  least,  is  evident ; 
and  there  is  that  wide  difference  between  the  supposed  case 
and  the  present  case,  that  in  the  one  there  is  no  doubt  of  the 
murder  having  been  committed,  whilst  in  the  other  there  is  no 
more  certainty  of  the  murder  than  there  is  of  the  murderer. 

The  other  example  the  Noble  Lord  brought  was  the  inquiry 
your  Lordships  made  two  years  ago  into  the  South  Sea  affair  ; 
to  which  I  cannot  help  saying  that  I  have  often  heard  that  all 
parallels  limp  a  little ;  but  this  parallel,  my  Lords,  has  not  one 
leg  to  go  upon ;  for  in  the  South  Sea  affair  both  facts  and  per- 
sons were  named  :  the  fact  was  the  embezzling  or  misapplying 
the  public  money,  the  persons  were  those  who  had  embezzled 
or  misapplied  it ;  and  those  persons  who  had  done  so  (if  it 
were  done)  could  only  be  the  Directors  of  the  South  Sea  Com- 
pany, who  were  immediately,  in  the  first  step  of  this  proceeding, 
acquainted  with  the  charges,  and  ordered  to  prepare  their 
defence. 

These  examples,  therefore,  though  brought  as  parallels  to 
the  present  case,  I  think,  on  examination,  plainly  appear  to  be 
no  parallels  at  all.  But  this  Noble  Lord,  and  another  (Lord 
Bathurst  and  Lord  Anglesey)  who  spoke  just  after  him  in  the  de- 
bate on  the  last  question  (which  is  so  blended  with  the  present 
question  that  it  is  impossible  to  separate  them),  did  desire 
your  Lordships  would  consider  yourselves  in  the  double  capa- 
city of  legislators  and  judges,  and  that  it  was  as  much  the 
business  of  this  House  to  provide  against  wrongs  that  may  be 
committed,  as  to  punish  wrongs  that  have  been  committed.  I 
join  with  those  Lords,  and  admit  that  your  Lordships  may  act 
either  in  a  legislative  or  a  judicial  capacity  ;  but  I  am  far  from 
thinking  that  in  these  two  capacities  your  manner  of  proceeding 
ought  not  to  be  extremely  different.  When  your  Lordships 
act  as  legislators,  you  will,  as  all  legislators  ought  to  do, 
consider  the  depravity  of  mankind — the  iniquity  of  mankind  by 
their  propensity  to  commit  wrong ;  and  your  Lordships  in  that 


518  APPENDIX. — II. 

case  will  act  in  such  a  manner  as  to  obviate,  by  salutary  and 
preventive  laws,  the  evils  that  may  be  apprehended  to  flow 
from  those  qualities  in  mankind,  if  unrestrained  and  unintimi- 
dated.  But  though  in  your  legislative  capacity  you  are  to  con- 
clude all  mankind,  considered  in  gross,  bad  and  prone  to  evil, 
yet,  in  your  judicial  capacity,  I  beg  leave  to  say  you  are  to 
conclude  just  the  reverse.  When  you  come  in  that  capacity  to 
sit  upon  particulars,  you  are  to  conclude  every  man  good  till 
he  is  proved  to  be  bad,  and  are  to  take  it  for  granted  he 
has  done  right  till  it  is  manifested  that  he  has  done  wrong ;  but 
to  what  purpose  are  your  Lordships  to  make  that  conclusion  if 
you  will  proceed  in  such  a  manner  to  try  such  persons,  that, 
let  their  innocence  be  ever  so  clear,  they  can  have  no  power  to 
show  that  innocence  at  the  time  it  is  called  in  question  ?  and 
how  can  they  have  that  power  if  the  prosecution  is  heard  ex 
parte  ? 

I  know  it  will  be  answered  that  a  time  will  be  given  to  the 
accused  to  make  their  defence  ;  but  to  apply  that  answer  to  the 
present  case, — if  the  petitioners,  who  have  had  this  prosecution 
in  view  these  seven  or  eight  months,  still  want  a  month  longer 
to  prepare  their  evidence,  how  much  time  after  that  may  be 
necessary  for  the  persons  accused  to  prepare  proper  evidence 
for  their  defence  ?  My  Lords,  there  must  such  a  singularity 
attend  this  manner  of  proceeding,  that  the  more  innocent  those 
persons  are  who  are  accused,  the  more  difficult  it  will  be  for 
them  to  make  their  defence ;  for  those  who  were  conscious  of 
having  done  wrong  might,  by  the  suggestions  of  their  own  con- 
sciences, have  some  light  to  direct  them  what  path  they  ought 
to  take  for  their  defence,  whereas  those  who  are  conscious  of 
no  wrong  committed  would  be  entirely  in  the  dark. 

What,  then,  would  be  the  state  of  those  persons  who  in  the 
course  of  this  manner  of  proceeding  should  stand  charged  with 
any  criminal  practice?  Their  accusers  would  be  heard  ex  parte 
at  your  Lordships'  bar  ;  witnesses  produced  whose  characters, 
as  well  as  the  matter  of  their  evidence,  might  perhaps  be  ob- 
jected to  (if  there  was  an  opportunity)  by  those  they  charge  :  a 
calumniating  history  might  be  plausibly  told ;  and  this  history, 
under  an  impossibility  during  a  long  interval  of  being  refuted, 
would  be  circulated  through  the  whole  kingdom  ;  and  though 


LORD  HERVEY'S  SPEECH  ON  THE  SCOTCH  PETITION.    519 

hereafter  perhaps  no  assertion  in  this  charge  would  be  better 
supported  when  it  came  to  be  examined  than  the  assertion 
made  in  Scotland  of  the  election  for  the  sixteen  being  void, 
yet  to  everybody  in  the  interim  those  assertions  would  be  told : 
by  the  credulous  they  would  be  believed ;  by  the  malignant 
they  would  be  improved ;  by  the  discontented  they  would  be 
attested  ;  and  by  the  clamorous  they  would  be  trumpeted  and 
inculcated  through  the  whole  kingdom ;  whilst  the  light  the 
House  of  Lords  would  then  stand  in  must  be,  abetting,  by  the 
in-equity  of  their  proceedings,  the  factious  clamours  of  those 
whom  they  ought  rather  to  censure  and  punish. 

Nay,  I  will  go  still  further :  perhaps  even  this  House  itself 
might  partake  of  this  dangerous  taint ;  for  though  your  Lord- 
ships' justice  and  candour  would  prevent  your  doing  any  cor- 
porate act,  or  giving  any  corporate  opinion,  on  a  cause  heard  in 
this  manner  ex  parte,  yet  who  can  answer  for  the  involuntary 
conviction  of  his  own  private  opinion,  or  say  that,  after  hear- 
ing one  side,  making  a  formal  accusation  supported  by  evi- 
dence (which  always  bears  some  appearance  of  proof),  that  he 
will  or  can  suspend  his  belief  till  he  hears  what  can  be  said  on 
the  other  ?  and  how  many  plausible  falsehoods  does  everybody 
every  day  hear  advanced,  to  which,  till  the  answer  is  heard,  it 
is  imagined  there  can  be  none  ! 

Upon  the  whole,  my  Lords,  as  your  Lordships  from  the  ori- 
ginal rise  of  this  complaint  to  the  present  hour  have  seen  this 
complaint  on  every  explanation  grow  weaker  and  weaker ;  that 
these  representations  of  monstrous  enormities  and  injustices 
committed  at  the  Scotch  election,  like  stories  of  witches  and 
ghosts,  though  eagerly  and  generally  received  by  the  vulgar 
at  first,  have  lost  their  credit  the  nearer  they  have  been  traced 
and  the  more  nicely  they  have  been  examined  and  sifted ;  as 
the  petition  is  so  much  weaker  than  the  first  general  assertions, 
and  every  explanation  of  the  petition  so  much  weaker  than  the 
petition  itself ;  as  your  Lordships  have  endeavoured  to  throw 
what  was  presented  impracticable  into  a  practicable  form ;  as  you 
gave  an  order  for  that  purpose,  and  have  just  come  to  a  reso- 
lution that  that  order  has  been  disobeyed  ;  I  think  the  single 
question  remaining  for  your  Lordships  to  consider  is,  whether 
you  will  adhere  to  your  own  order  or  recede  from  it — whether 


520  APPENDIX. — II. 

you  will  direct  your  petitioners  in  what  manner  they  shall  speak, 
or  whether  they  shall  dictate  to  your  Lordships  in  what  manner 
you  shall  hear  :  and  as  your  Lordships,  after  this  refusal  to 
obey  your  order,  cannot  possibly,  without  receding  from  it, 
proceed  upon  this  petition ;  and  as  you  cannot  recede  from 
that  order,  so  deliberately  and  equitably  made,  either  consist- 
ently with  your  honour  or  your  justice,  my  humble  motion  to 
your  Lordships  is,  That  the  petition  be  dismissed. 


\It  is  stated  in  p.  483  that  Lord  Herveys  speech  on 
the  number  of  the  forces,  1735,  would  be  given  in  the 
Appendix ;  but  I  find  it  so  long,  and  the  topics  so  obso- 
lete, that  I  think  the  reader  will  be  satisfied  with  the  two 
specimens  of  his  Lordship's  parliamentary  oratory  above 
given.  I  must  add,  however,  that  this  other  speech  is  a 
grave  and  statesmanlike  argument,  and  a$  unlike  the 
character  that  Pope  and  Smollett  give  of  Lord  Herveys 
speaking  as  it  is  possible  to  conceive.^ 


END  OF  VOL.  I. 


London :  1'rinted  by  WILLIAM  CLOWES  and  SONS,  Stamford  Street. 


f 


005204714092 


Wallace 
Room 


Hervey,   John  Hervey,   baron 
Memoirs  of  the  reign  of 
George  the  Second 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


WALLACE  ROOM
