Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


®« 


HARVARD 

COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


MEMOIRS 


OF 


COLONEL    HUTCHINSON. 


\ 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  LIFE 

COLONEL  HUTCHINSON 

GOVERNOR  OF  NOTTINGHAM 

By  his  Widow  LUCY 

EDITED  PROM  THE  ORIGINAL  MANUSCRIPT 

By  the  rev.  JULIUS    HUTCHINSON 

TO  WHICH  ARB  ADDBD  THE  LETTERS  OF  COLONEL  HUTCHINSON 

AND  OTHER  PAPERS 

RETISBD  WITH  ADDITIONAL  NOTES 

By    C.    H.    firth,    M.A. 
fnun  Zvx  €ectcQ  Poctrtie^  of  €mfnciit  Ptr^ontsc^ 

IN  TWO  VOLUMES 
VOL  I. 


LONDON 
JOHN    C.     NIMMO 
14,    KING  WILLIAM  STREET,  STRAND,  W.C. 

188s 
/ 


^ 


3r     ISSS.3^.^ 


PUBLISHER'S  NOTE. 

Thru  hundred  copies  of  this  booh  printed  for  England, 
imd  two  hundred,  with  an  American  Imprint,  for  sale  in 
that  country.    No  more  will  be  printed. 


HARVARD 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBPARY 


"ZV  23  1974 


LIST  OF   ETCHED   PORTRAITS. 


■♦■ 


VOL.  I. 

cou  HUTCHINSON         ....  FrontispUce 

JAMES  I Page  112 

LORD  BYRON ,,    164 

LORD  CHAWORTH „   200 

SIR  JOHN  HOTHAM     .     .     .  „    22S 


INTRODUCTION. 


None  of  the  memoirs  which  relate  to  the  troubled 
history  of  the  English  civil  wars  have  obtained  a 
greater  popularity  or  been  more  widely  read  than 
this  Life  of  Col.  Hutchinson^  by  his  wife.  Since 
the  first  publication  of  this  book  it  has  been  many 
times  reprinted^  and  it  has  also  been  translated  into 
French.^  Yet  these  different  editions  have  been  mere 
reprints  of  the  edition  of  1806^  nor  has  any  attempt 
been  made  either  to  supplement  the  annotations 
of  the  original  editor^  or  to  collect  the  scattered 
letters  of  Col.  Hutchinson.  The  aim  of  the  present 
edition  is  to  bring  together  the.  documents  which 
relate  to  the  subject  of  these  Memoirs^  in  order  to 
illustrate  and  explain  them,  and^  so  far  as  possible^ 
to  estimate  their  value  and  authority. 

1  London,  1806, 4to ;  1808,  4to ;  1810^  2  toIs.  8vo  ;  1822, 2  vols. 
8vo;  1846,  I  YoL  post  8vo,  Bohn's  Standard  Library;  1845,  '^^ 
the  Travellers*  Library;  translated  inj  Guizot*8  "Collection  des 
Mtooites  relatiis  k  la  R^volation  d'Angleterre/'  with  a  valuable 
preface ;  London,  1880,  Bell,  post  8vo,  tenth  edition. 


X  Introduction. 

The  Reverend  Julius  Hutchinson^  in  publishing 
the  first  edition^  gave  the  following  account  of  the 
manner  in  which  the  manuscript  of  the  Memoirs 
came  into  his  hands.  ''The  Memoirs  of  the  Life 
of  Col.  Hutchinson  had  been  seen  by  many  persons, 
as  well  as  the  editor,  in  the  possession  of  the  late 
Thomas  Hutchinson,  Esquire,  of  Owthorpe,  in  Not- 
tinghamshire, and  of  Hatfield  Woodhall,  in  Hert- 
fordshire ;  and  he  had  been  frequently  solicited  to 
permit  them  to  be  published,  particularly  by  the 
late  Mrs.  Catherine  Macaulay,  but  had  uniformly 
refused.  This  gentleman  dying  without  issue,  the 
editor,  his'nephew,  inherited  some  part  of  his  estates 
which  were  left  unsold,  including  his  mansion-house 
of  Hatfield  Woodhall.  In  the  library  he  found  the 
following  books  written  by  Mrs.  Lucy  Hutchinson: 
— 1st.  The  Life  of  Col.  Hutchinson.  2d.  A  book 
without  a  title,  but  which  appears  to  have  been  a 
kind  of  diary  which  she  had  kept,  and  afterwards 
made  use  of  when  she  came  to  write  the  Life  of 
Col.  Hutchinson.  3d.  A  fragment  giving  an 
account  of  the  early  part  of  her  own  life.  This 
book  clearly  appears  to  have  been  Mrs.  Hutchin- 
son's first  essay  at  composition,  and  contains,  be- 
sides the  story  of  her  life  and  family,  several  short 
copies  of  verses,  some  finished,  some  unfinished,  many 
of  which  are  above  mediocrity.  4th.  Two  books 
treating  entirely  of  religious   subjects;   in  which. 


Introduction.  xi 

although  the  fancy  may  be  rather  too  much  indulged^ 
the  judgment  still  maintains  the  ascendency,  and 
sentiments  of  exalted  piety,  liberality,  and  benevo- 
lence are  delivered  in  terms  apposite,  dignified,  and 
perspicuous." 

These  works,  continues  the  editor,  had  all  been 
carefully  read  and  annotated  by  Julius  Hutchinson, 
father  of  the  Thomas  Hutchinson  mentioned  above, 
and  remarks  which  Lady  Catherine  Hutchinson  (his 
grandmother,  the  secotid  wife  of  Sir  Thomas  Hut- 
chinson and  stepmother  of  Col.  Hutchinson)  had 
communicated  to  him  had  been  occasionally  inserted 
in  the  form  of  notes.  From  these  sources  he  had 
derived  material  for  some  of  his  own  notes. 

Of  the  works  mentioned  in  this  list,  numbers  one 
and  three  were  published  by  the  Rev.  Julius  Hut- 
chinson under  .the  title  of  Memoirs  of  the  Life  of 
Col.  Hutchinson ;  number  four  was  also  published 
by  him  in  1817,  under  the  title  of  Principles 
of  the  Christian  Religion ;  and  number  two  is 
now  in  the  possession  of  the  British  Museum 
(MSS.  Adds.  25,901),  though  it  is  unfortunately 
a  fragment,  a  portion  of  it  having  been  lost  or 
destroyed.  The  portion  preserved  embraces  the 
period  extending  from  October  1642  to  February 
1645,  ^^^  ^^^  dialogue  relating  to  the  attempt  to 
seize  the  Nottinghamshire  powder  magazine,  which 
the  Rev.  Julius  Hutchinson  gives  in  a  footnote,  is 


xii  Introduction. 

not  contained  in  this  portion^  though  it  appears 
from  a  line  or  two  on  the  first  page  of  the  manu- 
script to  have  immediately  preceded  it.  The  manu- 
script is  thus  described  in  a  pencil  note  by  Charles 
Hutchinson,  youngest  son  of  the  Rev.  Julius. 
^'This  MS.  commences  about  page  105  of  the  quarto 
edition  of  the  Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson,  but  it 
differs  from  the  printed  Memoirs  in  many  particu- 
lars, generally  but  not  always  entering  more  at 
length  into  statements  and'  circumstances.  The 
MS.  is  probably  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  earlier  sketch 
or  journal  of  events,  since  the  editor  of  the  Memoirs, 
who  had  all  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  MSS.  in  his  posses- 
sion, has  followed  one  differing  from  this.'' 

Mr.  Charles  Hutchinson  is  right  in  terming  this 
volume  the  first  sketch  of  the  Memoirs,  but.it  can 
hardly  be  called  a  journal.  It  is  an  account  of 
events  in  chronological  order,  but  the  blanks  fre- 
quently left  for  dates  seem  to  show  that  it  was 
written  some  little  time  after  the  events  described 
in  it. 

The  narrative  given  in  the  Note-Book,  as  it  may 
be  termed,  is  frequently  repeated  word  for  word  in 
the  published  Memoirs,  and  in  most  cases  is  sub- 
stantially the  same.  But  the  Note-Book  gives  the 
names  of  persons  and  places  when  the  Memoirs  do 
not,  and  particularises  when  the  Memoirs  gene- 
ralise.    I   have  inserted   most  of  these  particular 


Introduction.  xiii 

mentions  of  persons  and  places  in  the  notes.  Occa- 
sionally the  Note-Book  supplies  detailed  accounts 
of  occurrences  only  casually  mentioned  in  the 
Memoirs.  As  some  of  these  passages  throw  con- 
siderable light  on  the  character  of  Col.  Hutchinson, 
and  the  history  of  the  civil  war  in  Nottingham- 
shire, I  have  given  several  longer  extracts  in  the 
Appendix. 

I  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  reprint  the 
narrative  of  Col.  Hutchinson's  arrest  and  im- 
prisonment, which  he  wrote  whilst  in  the  Tower, 
and  succeeded  in  getting  printed  before  he  was 
removed  to  Sandown  Castle.  It  was  reprinted  in 
the  third  volume  of  the  Harleian  Miscellany,  and 
is  therefore  easily  accessible.  Moreover  it  was 
evidently  before  the  eyes  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson  when 
she  wrote  the  Memoirs,  and  is  copied  by  her  in 
them  with  merely  verbal  changes.  The  narrative 
itself,  tested  by  the  documents  relating  to  the 
subject  amongst  the  Domestic  State  Papers,  is 
perfectly  accurate. 

The  Appendix  contains  also  a  collection  of  letters 

by  Col.  Hutchinson  and  some  of  the  other  persons 

mentioned  in  the  book,  gathered  from  the  Tanner 

MSS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library,  and  from  newspapers 

and  pamphlets  of  the  time.    To  these  are  added  his 

petitions  to  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament  at  the 

Restoration,  the  one  to  the  House  of  Commons 
vou  L  b 


xiv  Introduction. 

from  the  State  Paper  Office^  that  to  the  Lords  from 
the  papers  of  the  House  of  Lords. 

By  means  of  this  Note-Book,  and  by  the  aid  of  the 
documents  in  the  Appendix^  it  is  possible  to  esti- 
mate more  exactly  the  degree  of  credit  due  to  the 
Memoirs^  and  to  the  account  of  events  given  in 
them  by  Mrs.  Hutchinson.  It  is  not  possible  to 
ascertain  the  exact  date  at  which  the  Memoirs  were 
composed^  but  it  can  be  fixed  approximately.  Mrs. 
Hutchinson  relates  that  at  the  time  of  the  colonePs 
arrest  Captain  Wright  and  Lieutenant  Franck  were 
also  arrested  and  brought  to  Newark,  ''  where  they 
are  yet  prisoners,  and  to  this  day  know  not  why '' 
(Memoirs,  vol.  ii.  p.  287).  Mr  Bailey,  in  his  Annals 
of  Nottinghamshire,  points  out  that  as  Captain 
Wright  was  arraigned  before  Judge  Hale  at  the 
King's  Bench  on  July  the  7th,  167 1,  and  then  dis- 
charged for  lack  of  evidence,  the  Memoirs  must 
obviously  have  been  written  between  that  date  and 
the  date  of  Col.  Hutchinson's  death.  Mrs.  Hut- 
chinson commenced  writing  the  Memoirs  almost 
immediately  after  the  death  of  her  husband,  for  the 
purpose  of  describing  his  life  and  character  for  the 
information  and  example  of  his  children.  ''While 
I  am  studying  which  way  to  moderate  my  woe,  and 
if  it  were  possible  to  augment  my  love,  I  can  for 
the  present  find  out  none  more  just  to  your  dear 
father,  nor  consolatory  to  myself  than  the  preserva- 


Introduction.  xv 

tion  of  his  memory/'  She  goes  on  to  represent 
herself  as ''  desiring^  if  my  treacherous  memory  have 
not  lost  the  dearest  treasure  ever  I  committed  to  its 
trusty  to  relate  to  you  his  holy^  virtuous^  honourable 
life." 

To  this  great  object  all  other  aims  were  sub- 
ordinate.    She  neither  desired  to  reveal  the  secret 
springs  of  events^  nor  to  give  a  picture  of  the  times^ 
but  when   it  appeared    necessary   to    explain   her 
husband's   position  or   the   progress   of    events   in 
Nottinghamshire^  she  did  not  shrink  from  narrat- 
ing public  aflTairs.     On  these  occasions  Mrs.  Hut- 
chinson generally  explains  the  object  of  her  digres- 
sion from  the  proper  subject  of  her  story.     "  Here," 
she  writes^  when  she  begins  her  description  of  the 
state  of  England  in  1642,  ''here  T  must  make  a 
short    digression    from    our   particular   actions   to 
sum  up  the  state  of  the   kingdom  at  that  time, 
which,  though   I   cannot  do  exactly,  I  can  truly 
relate  what  I  was  then  able  to  take  notice  of;  but 
I    shall   only  mention    what   is   necessary   to    be 
related  for  the  better  carrying  on  of  my  purpose" 
(vol.  i.  p.  98). 

And  again, ''  It  being  necessary  to  carry  on  the 
main  story  for  the  better  understanding  the  motion 
of  those  lesser  wheels  that  moved  within  the  great 
orb,  I  shall  but  name  in  what  posture  things  were 
abroad  in  the  kingdom  while  these  affairs  I  relate  were 


xvi  Introduction. 

transacted  at  Nottingham ''  (vol.  i.  p.  210).    These 
digressions  on  public  affairs  appear  to  have  been 
later  additions  to  the  original  sketch  of  her  hus- 
band's life  drawn  up  by  Mrs.  Hutchinson;  at  least 
in  the  fragmentary  Note-Book  before  referred  to, 
which  extends  from  1643  to  1644,  they  are  absent. 
For  the  substance  of  her  accounts  of  public  afiairs, 
Mrs.  Hutchinson  mainly  relies  on  the  authority  of 
May,  making  use  both  of  his  History  of  the  Parlia- 
ment, and  his  Breviary  of  the  History  of  the  Parlia- 
ment  of   England.      She   pronounces   Mr.   May's 
history  to  be  ^^  impartially  true,  so  far  as  he  hath 
carried  it  on,  saving  some  little  mistakes  in  his  own 
judgment,  and  misinformations  which  some  vain 
people  gave  of  the  State,  and  more  indulgence  to 
the  king's  guilt  than  can  justly  be  allowed"  (vol.  i. 
p.   136).     Accordingly  she  follows  May's  account 
of  the  campaigns   of   \6^%   and    1643,  sometimes 
echoing  his   phrases,  and  even   copying  his  error 
in  making  the  queen   land   at   Sunderland.     She 
takes  much  the  same  view  of  the  policy  of  James 
I.  and   the   earlier  part   of  the   reign  of  Charles 
I.,  and  quotes  with  approval  a  remark  of  May's 
about  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.     On  some  ques- 
tions, however,  she  was  better  informed  than  May. 
For  instance,  in   her  account  of  the  Short   Par- 
liament she  gives  the  true  cause  of  its  dissolution^ 
when    May   does   not     ''The   king,"   she   states. 


Introduction.  xvii 

''suffered  it  to  sit  but  ii  days^  and  broke  it  up 
again,  apprehending  that  if  he  had  suffered  them 
to  sit  a  day  longer  they  would  have  voted  against 
the  war  with  Scotland,  which  he  was  violently  bent 
to  prosecute/' 

Mrs.  Hutchinson  mentions  also  amongst  her 
authorities  the  printed  papers  of  the  Parliament, 
which  she  had  no  doubt  studied  with  her  husband. 
She  tells  us  that  he  '*  applied  himself  to  understand 
the  things  then  in  dispute,  and  read  all  the  public 
papers  that  came  forth  between  the  king  and  Parlia^ 
ment,  besides  many  other  private  treatises,  both 
concerning  the  present  and  foregoing  times/' 

It  was  from  these  authorities  she  gathered  her 
general  conception  of  the  questions  at  issue  when 
the  civil  wars  broke  out,  and  the  materials  for  her 
general  survey  of  England  in  1640.  But  she  made 
no  attempt  to  imitate  May's  impartiality ;  indeed, 
as  we  have  seen,  she  even  blames  him  for  it.  Nor 
does  she  hesitate  to  echo  the  most  odious  of  the 
charges  which  contemporary  libellers  brought 
against  James  I.  and  the  Duke  of  Buckingham. 
Still  on  the  whole,  so  far  as  her  knowledge  extends, 
she  is  truthful  and  accurate.  Her  account  of  the 
civil  war  in  Nottinghamshire  especially  is  confirmed 
in  almost  every  point  by  the  evidence  of  newspapers, 
letters,  and  State  papers.  Mr.  Bailey  in  his  '* Annals 
of  Nottinghamshire"  attempted  to  disprove  Mrs. 


xviii  Introduction. 


I 


Hutchinson's  account  of  the  attempt  to  seize  the 
powder  of  the  county^  and  expressed  his  disbelief 
in  the  story  of  the  offers  made  by  the  Marquis  of 
Newcastle  to  induce  Col.  Hutchinson  to  surrender 
Nottingham  ("Annals  of  Nottinghamshire/'  vol.  ii, 
pp.  650^  971)*  I  have  tried  to  show  that  the  first 
of  these  doubts  is  based  on  a  misunderstanding  of 
the  text^  and  the  second  is  sufficiently  refuted  by 
the  correspondence  of  the  chief  actors  {vide  Vol.  I.^ 
Appendix  IV.  and  XIX.)  A  writer  in  ''  Notes  and 
Queries ''  (July  19^  1884)  ^^  pointed  out  what  seems 
to  be  an  extraordinary  mistake  in  Mrs.  Hutchinson's 
account  of  her  mother^  in  the  earlier  part  of  the 
Memoirs.  On  the  other  hand^  a  full  confirmation 
of  the  remarkable  story  told  about  Sir  Thomas 
Hutchinson  and  Sir  Germaine  Poole^  is  to  be  found 
in  a  letter  from  Chamberlain  to  Carleton  (^'  Cotirt 
and  Times  of  James  I./'  vol.  i.  p.  231.)  The  sketches 
given  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  characters  of  Col. 
Hutchinson's  opponents  in  the  Nottingham  Com- 
mittee are  naturally  extremely  prejudiced,  but 
many  of  the  statements  made  in  them  are  borne 
out  by  independent  evidence.  Several  of  the  charges 
brought  against  Sir  John  Gell  and  Colonel  Chad- 
wick  are  thus  confirmed.  The  accusation  of  atheism 
brought  against  Dr.  Plumptre^  which  Mr.  Bailey 
asserts  to  be  a  groundless  slander,  was  generally 
accepted    as    true.      Gervase    Holies,    writing    in 


Introduction.  xix 

1658^  describing  the  last  illness  of  the  Earl  of  Clare 
in  1637,  says  that  Pluniptre  was  accounted  the 
best  physician  in  Nottingham^  '^  otherwise  a  pro- 
fessed atheist/'  Many  of  the  other  statements 
made  concerning  these  personages  are  also  inci- 
dentally confirmed  j  and  it  should  be  remembered 
that  Lord  Fairfax^  the  Derby  House  Committee^ 
and  the  House  of  Commons^  all  substantially  agreed 
in  deciding  for  the  governor  against  the  committee 
of  Nottingham.  Still  it  must  be  admitted  that 
Mrs.  Hutchinson  frequently  exaggerates  the  part 
played  by  her  husband  in  public  events,  and  even  in 
less  important  transactions.  The  share  she  assigns 
to  him  in  the  resistance  to  the  Scotch  invasion  in 
1651  is  an  instance  of  the  former,  and  her  accounts 
of  the  capture  of  Sir  Marmaduke  Langdale,  and  the 
saving  of  Sir  John  Owen,  illustrate  the  latter.  In 
the  Memoirs  she  omits  certain  facts  she  had 
recorded  in  her  Note-Book,  which  appeared  to 
her  on  further  consideration  unfavourable  to  her 
husband's  character, — such  as  the  story  of  his  in- 
sulting message  to  Sir  Roger  Cooper,  and  his  tor- 
turing of  the  spies  from  Newark.  When  she  comes 
to  speak  of  her  husband's  escape  at  the  Restoration, 
Mrs.  Hutchinson  conceals  much  of  the  truth, 
and  misrepresents  many  of  the  facts.  Col.  Hut- 
chinson owed  his  escape  at  the  Restoration  to 
what  the  Journals  of  the  House  of  Commons  term 


XX  Introduction. 

his  '' signal  repentance/'  and  to  the  exertions  of 
his  friends  on  his  behalf.  They  were  able  to  plead 
with  truth  his  recent  exertions  against  Lambert's 
party,  to  which  they  added  a  number  of  good- 
natured  fictions  about  earlier  actions  in  favour  of 
the  Royalist  cause  during  the  Protectorate.  Ludlow, 
however,  who  states  that  Col.  Hutchinson  "  having 
joined  in  Monk's  treacherous  design,  had  obtained 
a  pardon  from  the  king  whilst  he  was  beyond  sea," 
makes  far  too  much  of  the  slight  services  Hutchin- 
son could  have  rendered  Monk,  and  his  statement 
about  the  pardon  is  certainly  erroneous.  Mrs. 
Hutchinson  puts  into  her  husband's  mouth  an 
extremely  guarded  expression  of  regret  for  the 
king's  death,  and  even  speaks  of  his  ^'  not  answer- 
ing the  Court  expectations  in  public  recantations 
and  dissembled  repentance."  But  no  more  abject 
expression  of  penitence,  no  more  humble  and  dis- 
honouring petition  for  life  could  be  uttered  than 
Col.  Hutchinson's  letter  to  the  Speaker,  which  was 
publicly  read  in  the  House  of  Commons.  Mrs. 
Hutchinson  states  that  she  contrived  and  wrote 
this  letter,  signed  with  her  husband's  name,  and 
ventured  to  send  it  to  the  Speaker,  ''being  used 
sometimes  to  write  the  letters  he  dictated,  and  her 
character  not  much  diflTering  from  his."  This  is 
confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  letter  in  question 
found  its  way  into  the  State  Paper  Office  through 


Introduction.  xxi 

being  sent  by  Sir  Allen  Apsley  to  Secretary  Bennet 
as  a  specimen  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  handwriting. 

At  first  Mrs.  Hutchinson  tells  us  her  husband 
was  desirous  of  being  made  a  public  sacrifice,  but 
she  prevailed  with  him  to  retire,  wrought  with  him 
not  to  deliver  himself  up,  and  finally  devised  this 
expedient  to  save  him  against  his  will.  ''  She  who 
thought  she  had  never  deserved  so  well  of  him  as  in 
the  endeavours  and  labours  she  exercised  to  bring 
him  ofi^  never  displeased  him  more  in  her  life,  and 
had  much  ado  to  persuade  him  to  be  contented 
with  this  deliverance.^'  Unfortunately  the  existence 
of  a  second  petition,  that  to  the  House  of  Lords, 
dated  six  weeks  later,  seems  to  prove  that  Col. 
Hutchinson's  share  in  this  matter  was  not  confined 
to  the  passive  and  silent  acceptance  of  his  wife's 
expedient.  It  was  probably  the  knowledge  of  these 
recantations  which  caused  the  suspicion  with  which 
Col.  Hutchinson's  old  fellow-soldiers  regarded  him, 
and  led  in  1663  to  the  rumour  that  he  had  betrayed 
them.  This  explains  also  the  expressions  used  by 
Algernon  Sidney  regarding  him.  '^  If  I  could  write 
and  talk  like  Col.  Hutchinson  or  Sir  Gilbert 
Pickering,''  he  says  in  a  letter  dated  Aug.  30,  1660, 
'^  I  believe  I  might  be  quiet.  Contempt  might 
procure  my  safety,  but  I  had  rather  be  a  vagabond 
all  my  life  than  buy  my  being  in  my  own  country 
at  so  dear  a  rate."     Col.  Hutchinson  soon  repented 


xxii  Introduction. 

of  his  conduct.  "  When  the  colonel  saw  how  the 
other  gentlemen  were  trepanned  that  were  brought 
in  by  proclamation  •  .  •  he  looked  upon  himself  as 
judged  in  their  judgment  and  executed  in  their 
execution;  and  although  he  was  most  thankful 
to  God^  yet  he  was  not  well  satisfied  in  himself 
for  accepting  the  deliverance/^  He  must  have 
shared  also  the  feelings  of  the  unhappy  prisoners 
described  by  Mrs.  Hutchinson^  -'a  thousand  times 
more  miserable  than  those  that  died^  who  were  there- 
by preserved  from  the  eternal  infamy  and  remorse^ 
which  hope  of  life  and  estate  made  these  poor  men 
bring  upon  themselves^  by  base  and  false  recantations 
of  their  own  judgment,  against  their  consciences'' 

(".  257). 
Thus,  '^  whilst  he  saw  others  suffer  he  suffered 

in  his  mind."  In  the  depression  which  the  ruin 
of  the  cause,  and  the  apostacy  of  so  many  of 
his  old  associates,  had  produced  in  him,  he  had 
doubted  the  justice  of  the  cause.  Now,  ^'he  again 
reflected  seriously  upon  all  that  was  past,''  and 
'^  examined  the  cause  from  the  first,"  and  ''set  him- 
self to  a  more  diligent  study  of  the  Scriptures,"  and 
was  confirmed  in  his  old  principles.  Finally,  he  came 
to  believe  that  he  had  been  preserved  for  some  Divine 
purpose,  ''  that  he  was  yet  kept  for  some  eminent 
service  or  suffering  in  this  cause"  (ii.  262-264).  In 
this  temper  he  lived,  ''in  silence  and  retiredness, 


a 


Introduction.  xxiii 

longing  for  the  time  to  come  when  he  should  be 
free  from  the  obligations  which  the  clemency  of  the 
government  had  imposed  upon  him.  So  when  he 
was  again  arrested^ ''  it  was  the  happiest  release  in 
the  world  to  him.'^  For  before^  although  he  had 
made  no  express  engagement,  yet,  in  regard  his 
life  and  estate  had  been  freely  left  him,  he 
thought  himself  obliged  to  sit  still  all  the  while  this 
king  reigned,  whatever  opportunity  he  might  have; 
but  now  he  thought  this  usage  had  utterly  dis- 
obliged him  from  all  ties  either  of  honour  or  con- 
science, and  that  he  was  free  to  act  as  prudence 
should  hereafter  lead  hijn,  and  thought  not  his 
liberty  out  of  prison  worth  the  purchase  of  any 
future  engagement,  which  would  again  fetter  him 
in  obligations  to  such  persons  as  every  day  more 
and  more  manifested  themselves  enemies  to  all  just 
and  godly  interests.  He  therefore  charged  his  wife 
that  she  should  not  make  applications  to  any  person 
whatsoever,  and  made  it  his  earnest  request  to  Sir 
Allen  Apsley  to  let  him  stand  and  fall  to  his  own 
innocency,  and  to  undertake  nothing  for  him, 
which,  if  he  did,  he  told  him  he  would  disown*  Mrs. 
Hutchinson,  remembering  how  much  she  had  dis- 
pleased him  in  saving  him  before,  submitted  now  to 
suffer  with  him  according  to  his  own  will ''  (ii.  313). 
Thus  CoK  Hutchinson  sought  to  redeem  his 
former  weakness,  and,  by  patiently  suffering  for  the 


xxiv  Introduction. 

cause  he  had  denied  and  disowned^  to  regain  the 
right  to  defend  it.  The  story  of  his  recantation  is 
incomplete  without  the  story  of  his  expiation.  To 
some  it  may  appear  that  the  cowardice  of  his 
conduct  in  1660  no  subsequent  repentance^  endur- 
ance^ or  courage  could  outweigh.  Others  will  rather 
sympathise  with  his  struggles,  and  admire  his  final 
victory.  ''  I  count  not  each  man  valiant  that  dares 
die/'  says  a  Puritan  poet. 

"  Give  me  that  heart  which  in  itself  doth  war 
With  many  frailties  (who  like  traitors  are 
In  some  besieged  fort),  and  hath  to  do 
With  outward  foes  and  inward  terrors  too ; 
Yet  of  himself  and  them  a  conquest  makes, 
And  still  proceeds  in  what  he  undertakes.*' 

How  long  Mrs.  Hutchinson  survived  her  husband 
is  uncertain.  It  is  possible  to  gather  from  her 
other  writings  some  little  information  to  add  to  the 
fragment  of  autobiography  prefixed  to  the  Memoirs. 
We  see  her  in  1670  struggling  bravely  with  the 
pecuniary  difficulties  which  the  civil  wars  had 
brought  upon  the  Hutchinson  family.  We  can 
gather  also  from  her  own  words  to  her  daughter  that 
she  had  to  contend  with  family  troubles  of  another 
kind.  ''My  infirmities  and  imperfections/^  she 
complains^  ''joined  with  my  outward  ill-successes, 
have  much  weakened  my  authority,  and  made  it  of 
no  force  with  all  persons."  The  preface  to  her 
translation  of  Lucretius,  given  in   the  Appendix, 


Introduction.  xxv 

and  the  two  religious  treatises,  printed  in  1817, 
supply  a  few  interesting  glimpses  of  her  life  and  her 
opinions.  The  translation  of  Lucretius  was  written 
in  her  "vainly  curious  youth/'  in  the  time  when 
she  ''was  not  convinced  of  the  vanity  of  conver- 
sation which  was  not  scandalously  wicked/'  and 
had  not  opened  her  eyes  to  ''the  sin  of  amusing 
herself  with  such  vain  philosophy/'  She  had  heard 
the  doctrines  of  Epicurus  and  the  atomic  theory 
talked  of,  and  out  of  curiosity  and  the  desire  to 
instruct  herself  read  and  translated  the  six  books  of 
the  De  Rerum  Natura.  "  I  turned  it  into  English 
in  a  room  where  my  children  practised  the  several 
qualities  they  were  taught  with  their  tutors,  and  I 
numbered  the  syllables  of  my  translation  by  the 
threads  of  the  canvas  I  wrought  in,  and  set  them 
down  with  a  pen  and  ink  that  stood  by  me.'^  In 
1675  Mrs.  Hutchinson  presented  this  translation, 
at  his  own  request,  to  Arthur  Annesley,  Earl  of 
Anglesea.  But  by  this  time  she  had  grown  more 
rigid  in  her  views,  and  repented  ever  occupying 
herself  in  such  studies.  In  the  dedication  to  the 
work  she  entreats  the  Elarl  "to  conceal  it  as  a 
shame/'  hopes  it  may  never  become  known,  and 
expresses  her  hatred  and  contempt  for  all  the 
heathen  philosophers.  All  their  writings  show  the 
vanity  of  earthly  wisdom,  and  the  powerlessness 
of  human  reason   to  attain  to  the  knowledge  of 


xxvi  Introduction. 

things  divine.  Lucretius  himself  she  terms  an 
atheist  and  a  lunatic  and  refers  to  him  as  ''this 
dog/*  There  is  much  in  her  general  judgment  of 
the  Greek  and  Roman  philosophers  that  reminds  one 
of  the  opinions  expressed  by  Milton  in  the  fourth 
book  of ''  Paradise  Regained."  She  herself  expresses 
the  same  views  more  at  length  in  her  two  theo- 
logical treatises  when  she  comes  to  discuss  the 
question  of  natural  and  revealed  religion.  In  these 
two  works,  probably  her  last,  she  displays  a  very 
wide  range  of  reading,  and  quotes  not  only  theo- 
logical writers,  but  classical  authors  also.  Besides 
Pocockianus  and  Rabbi  David  Kimchi,  Juvenal 
and  Horace,  Sallust  and  Cicero,  Epictetus  and 
Euripides  are  all  laid  under  contribution,  nor  is 
Chaucer  forgotten.  Her  object,  however,  was  merely 
to  instruct  her  daughter.  '*  I  write,'*  she  says, ''  not 
for  the  press,  but  to  imprint  on  your  heart  the 
characters  I  have  received' of  God."  These  princi- 
ples of  the  Christian  religion  she  commands  her 
daughter  to  instil  into  her  family.  ''  Exercise  your 
own  knowledge  therein  by  instructing  your  children 
and  servants,  for  I  assure  you  I  have  by  that  means 
learnt  more  than  by  all  my  hearing  and  study,  hav- 
ing found  the  Lord  to  open  my  own  understanding, 
and  to  warm  my  heart,  while  I  conscientiously 
laboured  to  communicate  the  light  He  gave  me.** 
She  goes  on  to  explain,  in  words  which  ought  to 


Introduction.  xxvii 

vindicate  her  from  the  charge  of  want  of  modesty 
which  Guizot  brings  against  her^  that  it  is  parti- 
cularly necessary  for  women  to  be  well  grounded^  in 
the  faith.  -  ^'  The  Apostle  reproaches  the  weakness 
of  our  sex  more  than  the  other,  when,  speaking  of 
the  prevalency  of  seducers,  he  says  they  lead  about 
silly  women,  who  are  ever  learning  and  never  able 
to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth ;  therefore 
every  wise  and  holy  woman  ought  to  watch  strictly 
over  herself  that  she  become  not  one  of  these ;  but 
as  our  sex,  through  ignorance  and  weakness  of 
judgment,  which  in  the  most  knowing  women  is 
inferior  to  the  masculine  understanding  of  men,  are 
apt  to  entertain  fancies,  and  be  pertinacious  in 
them,  so  we  ought  to  watch  over  ourselves  in  such 
a  day  as  this,  and  embrace  nothing  r98hly ;  but,  as 
our  own  imbecility  is  made  known  to  us,  to  take 
heed  of  presumption  in  ourselves,  and  to  lean  by 
faith  upon  the  strength  of  the  Lord,  and  to  beg  His 
protection,  that  we  may  not  be  led  into  error.*' 

Thus,  in  the  investigation  of  religious  and  theo- 
logical questions,  Mrs.  Hutchinson  occupied  herself 
during  the  last  years  of  her  life;  we  see  her,  '^in  a 
drolling)  and  degenerate  age,  that  hath  hissed  out 
all  sober  and  serious  studies,''  ever  anxious  to  learn 
and  to  teach,  but  falling  more  and  more  under  the 
influence  of  a  narrowing  creed,  a  type  of  Puritanism 
alike  in  her  strength  and  her  weakness. 


xxviii  Introduction. 

In  this  edition  the  spelling  of  the  original  has 
been  modernised,  and  some  alterations  have  been 
made  in  the  punctuation.  In  other  respects  the 
text  is  unchanged.  As  Mrs.  Hutchinson  occasion- 
ally spells  the  name  of  the  same  person  in  two  or 
three  different  ways,  the  method  of  spelling  used  by 
the  persons  themselves  has  been,  when  possible, 
adopted.  The  notes  added  to  the  text  by  the  Rev. 
Julius  Hutchinson  are  distinguished  by  the  letters 
J.  H. ;  for  the  rest  of  the  notes  and  for  the  index 
the  present  editor  is  responsible. 


THE    LIFE 

OF 

MRS.  LUCY  HUTCHINSON, 

WRITTEN   BY   HERSELF. 
AFRAOMBNT. 


The  Almighty  Author  of  all  beings,^  in  his  various 
providences,  whereby  he  conducts  the  lives  of  men 
from  the  cradle  to  the  tomb,  exercises  no  less 
wisdom  and  goodness  than  he  manifests  power  and 
greatness,  in  their  creation ;  but  such  is  the  stu- 
pidity of  blind  mortals,  that  instead  of  employing 
their  studies  in  these  admirable  books  of  providence, 
wherein  God  daily  exhibits  to  us  glorious  characters 
of  his  love,   kindness,  wisdom,   and  justice,   they 

^  That  noble  turn  of  thought  which  led  Mrs.  Hutchinson 
to  open  her  work  with  thanks  to  her  Maker,  instead  of 
apologies  to  the  readers,  besides  the  claim  it  has  to  their 
respect  instead  of  their  indulgence,  will  probably  by  its 
originality  recommend  itself,  and  prevent  the  distaste  which 
the  air  of  religion  it  wears  might  give  to  many,  in  times 

VOL.  I.  A 

if 


? 


2  Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson. 

ungratefully  regard  them  not,  and  call  the  most 
wonderful  operations  of  the  great  God  the  common 
accidents  of  human  life,  especially  if  they  be  such 
as  are  usual,  and  exercised  towards  them  in-  ages 
wherein  they  are  not  very  capable  of  observation, 
and  whereon  they  seldom  employ  any  reflection ; 
for  in  things  great  and  extraordinary,  some,  perhaps, 
will  take  notice  of  God's  working,  who  either  forget 
or  believe  not  that  he  takes  as  well  a  care  and 
account  of  their  smallest  concernments,  even  the 
hairs  of  their  heads. 

Finding  myself  in  some  kind  guilty  of  this  gene- 
ral neglect,  I  thought  it  might  be  a  means  to 
stir  up  my  thankfulness  for  things  past,  and  to 
encourage  my  faith  for  the  future,  if  I  recollected 
as  much  as  I  have  heard  or  can  remember  of  the 
passages  of  my  youth,  and  the  general  and  particular 
providences  exercised  to  me,  both  in  the  entrance 
and  progress  of  my  life.*     Herein  I  meet  with  so 


when  it  is  so  little  in  fashion.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind 
that  the  usage  of  the  times  in  which  it  was  written  was  so 
very  different  from  the  present,  that  those  who  wish  to  read 
with  pleasure  the  works  then  written,  will  do  well  to  set 
their  taste  according  to  that  standard. 

Through  the  whole  of  both  these  works,  moral  and  reli- 
gious reflections  will  be  seen  to  abound,  but  so  as  neither 
to  confuse  nor  fetter,  but  rather  elevate  the  mind. — ^J.  H. 

^  The  purpose  of  this  sketch  of  her  ow(k  life  is  here 
stated  by  Mrs.  Hutchinson,  viz.,  to  call  to  recollection  the 


Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson.  3 

many  special  indulgences  as  require  a  distinct  consi- 
deration, they  being  all  of  them  to  be  regarded 
as  talents  intrusted  to  my  improvement  for  God's 
glory.  The  parents  by  whom  I  received  my  life, 
the  places  where  I  began  and  continued  it,  the 
time  when  I  was  brought  forth  to  be  a  witness  of 
God's  wonderful  workings  in  the  earth/  the  rank 
that  was  given  me  in  my  generation,  and  the  ad- 
vantages I  received  in  my  person,  each  of  them 
carries  along  with  it  many  mercies  which  are  above 
my  utterance,  and  as  they  give  me  infinite  cause  of 
glorifying  God's  goodness,  so  I  cannot  reflect  on 
them  without  deep  humiliation  for  the  small  im- 
provement I  have  made  of  so  rich  a  stock ;  which, 
that  I  may  yet  by  God's  grace  better  employ,  I 
shall  recall  and  seriously  ponder :  and,  first,  as  far 
as  I  have  since  learnt,  set  down  the  condition  of 
things  in  the  place  of  my  nativity,  at  that  time 
when  I  was  sent  into  the  world.  It  was  on  the 
29th  day  of  January,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord 
1619-20,  that  in  the  Tower  of  London,  the  prin- 
cipal city  of  the  English  isle,  I  was,  about  four  of 
the  clock  in  the  morning,  brought  forth  to  behold 

passages  of  her  youth,  and  "the  general  and  particular 
providences"  exercised  to  her.  The  first  of  these  provi- 
dences is  the  place  of  her  birth  (pp.  3-9) ;  the  second  is 
the  time  of  her  birth  (pp.  9-10) ;  the  third  is  her  parentage 
(pp.  1 1-22).  The  last  three  pages  (pp.  22-26)  are  devoted 
to  the  passages  of  her  youth. 


4  Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson. 

the  ensuing  light.  My  father  was  Sir  Allen  Apsley, 
lieutenant  of  the  Tower  of  London ;  my  mother,  his 
third  wife,  was  Lucy,  the  youngest  daughter  of  Sir 
John  St.  John,  of  Lidiard  Tregooze,  in  Wiltshire,  by 
his  second  wife.  My  father  had  then  living  a  son 
and  a  daughter  by  his  former  wives,  and  by  my 
mother  three  sons,  I  being  her  eldest  daughter. 
The  land  was  then  at  peace  (it  being  towards  the 
latter  end  of  the  reign  of  King  James),  if  that  quiet- 
ness may  be  called  a  peace,  which  was  rather  like 
the  calm  and  smooth  surface  of  the  sea,  whose  dark 
womb  is  already  impregnated  with  a  horrid  tempest. 
Whoever  considers  England,  will  find  it  no  small 
favour  of  God  to  have  been  made  one  of  its  natives, 
both  upon  spiritual  and  outward  accounts.  The 
happiness  of  the  soil  and  air  contribute  all  things 
that  are  necessary  to  the  use  or  delight  of  man's 
life.  The  celebrated  glory  of  this  isle's  inhabitants, 
ever  since  they  received  a  mention  in  history,  con- 
fers some  honour  upon  every  one  of  her  children, 
and  with  it  an  obligation  to  continue  in  that  mag- 
nanimity and  virtue,  which  hath  famed  this  island, 
and  raised  her  head  in  glory  higher  than  the  great 
kingdoms  of  the  neighbouring  continent.  Britain 
hath  been  as  a  garden  enclosed,  wherein  all  things 
that  man  can  wish,  to  make  a  pleasant  life,  are 
planted  and  grow  in  her  own  soil,  and  whatsoever 
foreign  countries  yield,  to  increase  admiration  and 
delight,  are  brought  in  by  her  fleets.     The  people, 


Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson.  5 

by  the  plenty  of  their  country,  not  being  forced  to 
toil  for  bread,  have  ever  addicted  themselves  to  more 
generous  employments,  and  been  reckoned,  almost 
in  all  ages,  as  valiant  warriors  as  any  part  of  the 
world  sent  forth :  insomuch,  that  the  greatest 
Roman  captains  thought  it  not  unworthy  of  their 
expeditions,  and  took  great  glory  in  triumphs  for 
imperfect  conquests.  Lucan  upbraids  Julius  Caesar 
for  returning  hence  with  a  repulse,  and  it  was  two 
hundred  years  before  the  land  could  be  reduced 
into  a  Roman  province,  which  at  length  was  done, 
and  such  of  the  nation,  then  called  Picts,  as  scorned 
servitude,  were  driven  into  the  barren  country  of 
Scotland,  where  they  have  ever  since  remained,  a 
perpetual  trouble  to  the  successive  inhabitants  of 
this  place.  The  Britons,*  that  thought  it  better  to 
work  for  their  conquerors  in  a  good  land,  than  to 
have  the  freedom  to  starve  in  a  cold  or  barren 
quarter,  were  by  degrees  fetched  away,  and  wasted 
in  the  civil  broils  of  these  Roman  lords,  till  the 
land,  almost  depopulated,  lay  open  to  the  incursions 
of  every  borderer,  and  were  forced  to  call  a  stout 
warlike  people,  the  Saxons,  out  of  Germany,  to 
their  assistance.  These  willingly  came  at  their 
call,  but  were  not  so  easily  sent  out  again,  nor 
persuaded  to  let  their  hosts  inhabit  with  them,  for 
they  drove  the  Britons  into  the  mountains  of  Wales, 
and  seated  themselves  in  those  pleasant  countries 
which  from  the  new  masters  received  a  new  name, 


6  Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson. 

and  ever  since  retained  it,  being  called  England; 
and  on  which  the  warlike  Dane  made  many  attempts, 
with  various  success,  but  after  about  two  or  three  * 
hundred  years'  vain  contest,  they  were  for  ever 
driven  out,  with  shame  and  loss,  and  the  Saxon 
Heptarchy  melted  into  a  monarchy,  which  con- 
tinued till  the  superstitious  prince,  who  was  sainted 
for  his  ungodly  chastity,  left  an  empty  throne  to 
him  that  could  seize  it.  He  who  first  set  up  his 
standard  in  it,  could  not  hold  it,  but  with  his  life 
left  it  again  for  the  Norman  usurper,  who  partly  by 
violence,  partly  by  falsehood,  laid  here  the  founda- 
tion of  his  monarchy  in  the  people's  blood,  in  which 
it  hath  swum  about  five  hundred  years,  till  the 
flood  that  bore  it  was  ploughed  into  such  deep 
furrows  as  had  almost  sunk  the  proud  vessel.  Of 
those  Saxons  that  remained  subjects  to  the  Norman 
conqueror,  my  father's  family  descended ;  of  those 
Normans  that  came  in  with  him,  my  mother's  was 
derived ;  both  of  them,  as  all  the  rest  in  England, 
contracting  such  affinity,  by  mutual  marriages,  that 
the  distinction  remained  but  a  short  space;  Nor- 
mans and  Saxons  becoming  one  people,  who  by 
their  valour  grew  terrible  to  all  the  neighbouring 
princes,  and  have  not  only  bravely  acquitted  them- 
selves in  their  own  defence,  but  have  showed  abroad 
how  easily  they  could  subdue  the  world,  if  they 
did  not  prefer  the  quiet  enjoyment  of  their  own 
part  above  the  conquest  of  the  whole. 


Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson.  7 

Better  laws  and  a  happier  constitution  of  govern- 
ment no  nation  ever  enjoyed,  it  being  a  mixture  of 
monarchy,  aristocracy,  and  democracy,  with  suffi- 
cient fences  against  the  pest  of  every  one  of  those 
forms — tyranny,  faction,  and  confusion ;  yet  is  it 
not  possible  for  man  to  devise  such  just  and  ex- 
cellent bounds,  as  will  keep  in  wild  ambition,  when 
princes'  flatterers  encourage  that  beast  to  break  his 
fence,  which  it  hath  often  done,  with  miserable  con- 
sequences both  to  the  prince  and  people ;  but  could 
never  in  any  age  so  tread  down  popular  liberty,  but 
th&t  it  arose  .again  with  renewed  vigour,  till  at 
length  it  trod  on  those  that  trampled  it  before. 
And  in  the  just  bounds,  wherein  our  kings  were 
so  well  hedged  in,  the  surrounding  princes  have 
with  terror  seen  the  reproof  of  their  usurpations 
over  their  free  brethren,  whom  they  rule  rather  as 
slaves  than  subjects,  and  are  only  served  for  fear, 
but  not  for  love;  whereas  this  people  have  ever 
been,  as  affectionate  to  good,  as  unpliable  to  bad 
sovereigns. 

Nor  is  U  only  valour  and  generosity  that  renown 
this  nation ;  in  arts  we  have  advanced  equal  to  our 
neighbours,  and  in  those  that  are  most  excellent, 
exceeded  them.  The  world  hath  not  yielded  men 
more  famous  in  navigation,  nor  ships  better  built 
or  furnished.  Agriculture  is  as  ingeniously  prac- 
tised ;  the  English  archers  were  the  terror  of  Chris- 
tendom, and  their  clothes  the  ornament ;  but  these 


8  Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson. 

low  things  bounded  not  their  great  Spirits,  in  all 
ages  it  hath  yielded  men  as  famous  in  all  kinds  of 
learning,  as  Greece  or  Italy  can  boast  of. 

And  to  complete  the  crown  of  all  their  glory, 
reflected  from  the  lustre  of  theijr  ingenuity,  valour, 
wit,  learning,  justice,  wealth,  and  bounty,  their 
piety  and  devotion  to  God,  and  his  worship,  hath 
made  them  one  of  the  most  truly  noble  nations  in 
the  Christian  world,  God  having  as  it  were  en- 
closed a  people  here,  out  of  the  waste  common  of 
the  world,  to  serve  him  with  a  pure  and  undefiled 
worship.  Lucius  the  British  king  was  one  of  the 
first  monarchs  of  the  earth  that  received  the  faith 
of  Christ  into  his  heart  and  kingdom ;  ^  Henry  the 
Eighth,  the  first  prince  that  broke  the  antichristian 
yoke  off  from  his  own  and  his  subjects'  necks. 
Here  it  was  that  the  first  Christian  emperor  re- 
ceived his  crown ;  here  began  the  early  dawn  of 
gospel  light,  by  Wickliffe  and  other  faithful  wit- 
nesses, whom  God  raised  up  after  the  black  and 
horrid  midnight  of  antichristianism ;  and  a  more 
plentiful  harvest  of  devout  confessors,  constant 
martyrs,  and  holy  worshippers  of  God,  hath  not 
grown  in  any  field  of  the  church,  throughout   all 

^  On  Lucius  see  Bede,  *'  Historia  Ecclesiastica  Gentis 
Anglonun,"  lib.  i.  cap.  iv.  Bede  says  Lucius  sent  a  letter 
to  Pope  Eleutherius,  begging  to  be  made  a  Christian,  and 
places  the  date  of  this  event  somewhere  between  177  and 
180  A.D. 


Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson.  9 

ages,  than  those  whom  God  hath  here  glorified  his 
name  and  gospel  by.  Yet  hath  not  this  wheat 
been  without  its  tares;  God  in  comparison  with 
other  countries  hath  made  this  ad  a  paradise,  so, 
to  complete  the  parallel,  the  serpent  hath  in  all 
times  been  busy  to  seduce,  and  not  unsuccessful ; 
ever  stirring  up  opposers  to  the  infant  truths  of 
Christ. 

No  sooner  was  the  faith  of  Christ  embraced  in 
this  nation,  but  the  neighbouring  heathens  invaded 
the  innocent  Christians,  and  slaughtered  multitudes 
of  them ;  and  when,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  the  con- 
quering Pagans  were  afterwards  converted,  and  that 
there  were  none  left  to  oppose  the  name  of  Christ 
with  open  hostility,  then  the  subtle  serpent  put  off 
his  own  horrid  appearance,  and  comes  out  in  a 
Christian  dress,  to  persecute  Christ  in  his  poor 
prophets,  that  bore  witness  against  the  corruption 
of  the  times.  This  intestine  quarrel  hath  been  more 
successful  to  the  devil,  and  more  afflictive  to  the 
church,  than  all  open  wars ;  and,  I  fear,  will  never 
happily  be  decided,  till  the  Prince  of  Peace  come  to 
conclude  the  controversy,  which  at  the  time  of  my 
birth  was  working  up  into  that  tempest,  wherein  I 
have  shared  many  perils,  many  fears,  and  many 
sorrows;  and  many  more  mercies,  consolations, 
and  preservations,  which  I  shall  have  occasion  to 
mention  in  other  places. 

From  the  place  of  my  birth  I  shall  only  desire 


lo  Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson. 

to  remember  the  goodness  of  the  Lord,  who  hath 
caused  my  lot  to  fall  in  a  good  ground ;  who  hath 
fed  me  in  a  pleasant  pasture,  where  the  well-springs 
of  life  flow  to  all  that  desire  to  drink  of  them.  And 
this  is  no  small  favour,  if  I  consider  how  many  poor 
people  perish  among  the  heathen,  where  they  never 
hear  the  name  of  Christ ;  how  many  poor  Chris- 
tians spring  up  in  countries  enslaved  by  Turkish 
and  antichristian  tyrants,  whose  souls  and  bodies 
languish  under  miserable  slavery.  None  knows  what 
mercy  it  is  to  live  under  a  good  and  wholesome 
law,  that  have  not  considered  the  sad  condition  of 
being  subject  to  the  will  of  an  unlimited  man ;  and 
surely  it  is  too  universal  a  sin  in  this  nation,  that 
the  common  mercies  of  God  to  the  whole  land  are 
so  slightly  regarded,  and  so  inconsiderately  passed 
over ;  certainly  these  are  circumstances  which  much 
magnify  God's  loving-kindness  and  his  special  favour 
to  all  that  are  of  English  birth,  and  call  for  a  greater 
return  of  duty  from  us  than  from  all  other  people  of 
the  world. 

Nor  is  the  place  only,  but  the  time  of  my  coming 
into  the  world,  a  considerable  mercy  to  me.  It  was 
not  in  the  midnight  of  popery,  nor  in  the  dawn  of 
the  gospel's  restored  day,  when  light  and  shades 
were  blended  and  almost  undistinguished,  but  when 
the  Sun  of  truth  was  exalted  in  his  progress,  and 
hastening  towards  a  meridian  glory.  It  was,  indeed, 
early  in  the  morning,  God  being  pleased  to  allow 


Lif^  of  Mrs.  Hulchifison.  1 1 

me  the  privilege  of  beholding  the  admirable  growth 
of  gospel  light  in  my  days :  and  oh !  that  my  soul 
may  never  forget  to  bless  and  praise  his  name  for 
the  wonders  of  power  and  goodness,  wisdom  and 
truth,  which  have  been  manifested  in  this  my  time. 

The  next  blessing  I  have  to  consider  in  my 
nativity  is  my  parents,  both  of  them  pious  and 
virtuous  in  their  own  conversation,  and  careful 
instructors  of  my  youth,  not  only  by  precept  but 
example;  which,  if  I  had  leisure  and  ability,  I 
should  have  transmitted  to  my  posterity,  both  to 
give  them  the  honour  due  from  me  in  such  a  grate- 
ful memorial,  and  to  increase  my  children's  improve- 
ment of  the  patterns  they  set  them;  but  since  I 
shall  detract  from  those  I  would  celebi^te,  by  my 
imperfect  commemorations,  I  shall  content  myself  to 
sum  up  some  few  things  for  my  own  use,  and  let 
the  rest  alone,  which  I  either  knew  not,  or  ha^e 
forgotten,  or  cannot  worthily  express. 

My  grandfather  by  the  father's  side  was  a  gentle- 
man of  a  competent  estate,  about  £700  or  ;f  8(X)  a 
year,  in  Sussex.  He  being  descended  of  a  younger 
house,  had  his  residence  at  a  place  called  Pul- 
borough ;  the  family  out  of  which  he  came  was  an 
Apsley  of  Apsley,  a  town  where  they  had  been 
seated  before  the  Conquest,  and  ever  since  con- 
tinued, till  of  late  the  last  heir  male  of  that  eldest 
house,  being  the  son  of  Sir  Edward  Apsley,  died 
without  issue,  and  his  estate  went  with  his  sister's 


\ 


l» 


of  I^'"  ^     ^^c^""?  > 


X-i^ 


d--«^f  taV  ^-"^Tre^o^ 


...  Ae»<-^» 


x»        -led  a*;   ^  cotvtt'^^^^ttYie^^ 


.,as  a^*;  ^ad  ^^  vvves  at  1g^^^  to^2    ^^t  1 


att' 


atcea 
v»as 


viertO' 


*<=*--  tvot  W  ^^^get 


trvV^^i  !  '\\^tvg  »^ 


Gontvg.^^  Weatd  °^ J^utors.  t^°^,^  so^^^  ^,  gave 


,tvd  ^V  ''"'    artie*  ""-.  j^efi-  °'"'   ^p8\ey.  ^:'-  great 


ta?^.         gave 


sucV^  CO.- ;^,  be  *;  ^,  «., 


lVvo^it 
to 


tbe 


\ecc 


to 


H\\e  a^^'V^rita^'^*'      Aoo  a  V«*;  £30  a  P^'=^,^, 
^^  *   ot  '^^^     »  aV>o>it  ^     „lt\es  ot  J2-lv»a»^^ 


*t»*«  °1  'except  a^-^  arvtvu^^J^^xjeto^ 


Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson.  13 

but  I  have  heard  very  honourable  mention  of  him  in 
our  family.  The  rest  of  my  father's  brothers  went 
into  the  wars  in  Ireland  and  the  Low  Countries, 
and  there  remained  none  of  them,  nor  their  issues, 
when  I  was  bom,  but  only  three  daughters  who 
bestowed  themselves  meanly,  and  their  generations 
are  worn  out,  except  two  or  three  unregarded 
children.  My  father,  at  the  death  of  my  grand- 
father, being  but  a  youth  at  school,  had  not  patience 
to  stay  the  perfecting  of  his  studies,  but  put  him- 
self into  present  action,  sold  his  annuity,  bought 
himself  good  clothes,  put  some  money  in  his  purse, 
and  came  to  London ;  and  by  means  of  a  relation 
at  court,  got  a  place  in  the  household  of  Queen 
Elizabeth,  where  he  behaved  himself  so  that  he 
won  the  love  of  many  of  the  court;  but  being 
young,  took  an  affection  to  gaming,  and  spent  most 
of  the  money  he  had  in  his  purse.  About  that 
time,  the  Earl  of  Essex  was  setting  forth  for  Cales 
voyage,^  and  my  father,  that  had  a  mind  to  quit  his 
idle  court  life,  procured  an  employment  from  the 
victualler  of  the  navy,  to  go  along  with  that  fleet. 
In  which  voyage  he  demeaned  himself  with  so  much 
courage  and  prudence,  that  after  his  return  he  was 
honoured  with  a  very  noble  and  profitable  employ- 
ment in  Ireland.     There  a  rich  widow,  that  had 


^  f>.,  the  expedition  of  the  Earl  of  Essex  to  Cadiz  in 
1596. 


14  Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson. 

many  children,  cast  her  affections  upon  him,  and 
he  married  her ;  but  she  not  living  many  years  with 
him,  and  having  no  children  by  him,  after  her  death 
he  distributed  all  her  estate  among  her  children, 
for  whom  he  ever  preserved  a  fatherly  kindness, 
and  some  of  her  grandchildren  were  brought  up  in 
his  house  after  I  was  bom.  He,  by  God's  bless- 
ing, and  his  fidelity  and  industry,  growing  in  estate 
and  honour,  received  a  knighthood  from  King  James 
soon  after  his  coming  to  the  crown,  for  some 
eminent  service  done  to  him  in  Ireland,  which,  hav- 
ing only  heard  in  my  childhood,  I  cannot  perfectly 
set  down.  After  that,  growing  into  a  familiarity 
with  Sir  George  Carew,  made  now  by  the  king 
Earl  of  Totness,  a  niece  of  this  earl's,  the  daughter 
of  Sir  Peter  Carew,  who  lived  a  young  widow  in- 
her  uncle's  house,  fell  in  love  with  him,  which  her 
uncle  perceiving,  procured  a  marriage  between  them. 
She  had  divers  children  by  my  father,  but  only 
two  of  them,  a  son  and  daughter,  survived  her, 
who  died  whilst  my  father  was  absent  from  her  in 
Ireland.  He  led,  all  the  time  of  his  widowhood,  a 
very  disconsolate  life,  careful  for  nothing  in  the 
world  but  to  educate  and  advance  the  son  and 
daughter,  the  dear  pledges  she  had  left  him,  for 
whose  sake  he  quitted  himself  of  his  employments 
abroad,  and  procured  himself  the  office  of  Victualler 
of  the  Navy,  a  place  then  both  of  credit  and  great 
revenue.     His    friends,    considering    his    solitude. 


Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson.  1 5 

had  procured  him  a  match  of  a  very  rich 
widow,  who  was  a  lady  of  as  much  discretion  as 
wealth ;  but  while  he  was  upon  this  design  he 
chanced  to  see  my  mother,  at  the  house  of  Sir 
William  St.  John,  who  had  married '  her  eldest 
sister;  and  though  he  went  on,  his  journey,  yet 
something  in  her  person  and  behaviour  he 
carried  along  with  him,  which  would  not  let  him 
accomplish  it,  but  brought  him  back  to  my 
mother.  She  was  of  a  noble  family,  being  the 
youngest  daughter  of  Sir  John  St.  John,  of  Lidiard 
Tregooze  in  the  county  of  Wilts;  her  father  and 
mother  died  when  she  was  not  above  five  years 
of  age,  and  yet  at  her  nurse's,  from  whence  she 
was  carried  to  be  brought  up  in  the  house  of 
the  Lord  Grandison,  her  father's  younger  brother ; 
an  honourable  and  excellent  person,  but  married  to 
a  lady  so  jealous  of  him,  and  so  ill-natured  in  her 
jealous  fits,  to  anything  that  was  related  to  him, 
that  her  cruelties  to  my  mother  exceeded  the  stories 
of  stepmothers.  The  rest  of  my  aunts,  my  mother's 
sisters,  were  dispersed  to  several  places,  where  they 
grew  up  till  my  uncle.  Sir  John  St.  John,  being 
married  to  the  daughter  of  Sir  Thomas  Laten,  they 
were  all  again  brought  home  to  their  brother's  house. 
There  were  not  in  those  days  so  many  beautiful 
women  found  in  any  family  as  these,  but  my  mother 
was  by  the  most  judgments  preferred  before  all  her 
elder  sisters,  who,  something  envious  at  it,  used 


1 6  Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson. 

her  unkindly.  Yet  all  the  suitors  that  came  to 
them  still  turned  their  addresses  to  her,  which  she 
in  her  youthful  innocency  neglected,  till  one  of 
greater  name,  estate,  and  reputation  than  the  rest, 
happened  to  fall  deeply  in  love  with  her,  and  to 
manage  it  so  discreetly,  that  my  mother  could  not 
but  entertain  him.  My  uncle's  wife,  who  had  a 
mother's  kindness  for  her,  persuaded  her  to  remove 
herself  from  her  sisters'  envy,  by  going  along  with 
her  to  the  Isle  of  Jersey,  where  her  father  was 
governor ;  which  she  did,  and  there  went  into  the 
town,  and  boarded  in  a  French  minister's  house,  to 
learn  the  language,  that  minister  having  been,  by 
the  persecution  in  France,  driven  to  seek  his  shelter 
there.  Contracting  a  dear  friendship  with  this  holy 
man  and  his  wife,  she  was  instructed  in  their 
Geneva  discipline,  which  she  liked  so  much  better 
than  our  more  superstitious  service,  that  she  could , 
have  been  contented  to  have  lived  there,  had  not 
a  powerful  passion  in  her  heart  drawn  her  back. 
But  at  her  return  she  met  with  many  afflictions; 
the  gentleman  who  had' professed  so  much  love  to 
her,  in  her  absence  had  been,  by  most  vile  practices 
and  treacheries,  drawn  out  of  his  senses,  and  into 
the  marriage  of  a  person,  whom,  when  he  recovered 
his  reason,  he  hated.  But  that  served  only  to  aug- 
ment his  misfortune,  and  the  circumstances  of  that 
story  not  being  necessary  to  be  here  inserted,  I 
shall  only  add  that  my  mother  lived  in  my  uncle's 


Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson.  1 7 

house,  secretly  discontented  at  this  accident,  but 
was  comforted  by  the  kindness  of  my  uncle's  wife, 
who  had  contracted  such  an  intimate  friendship 
with  her,  that  they  seemed  to  have  but  one  soul. 
And  in  this  kindness  she  had  some  time  a  great 
solace,  till  some  malicious  persons  had  wrought 
some  jealousies,  which  were  very  groundless,  in 
my  uncle  concerning  his  wife ;  but  his  nature  being 
inclinable  to  that  passion,  which  was  fomented  in 
him  by  subtle  wicked  persons,  and  my  mother 
endeavouring  to  vindicate  injured  innocence,  she 
was  herself  not  well  treated  by  my  uncle,  where- 
upon she  left  his  house,  with  a  resolution  to  with- 
draw herself  into  the  island,  where  the  good  minister 
was,  and  there  to  wear  out  her  life  in  the  service 
of  God.  while  she  was  deliberating,  and  had  fixed 
upon  it  in  her  own  thoughts,  resolving  to  impart  it 
to  none,  she  was  with  Sir  William  St.  John,  who 
had  married  my  aunt,  when  my  father  accidentally 
came  in  there,  and  fell  so  heartily  in  love  with  her, 
that  he  persuaded  her  to  marry  him,  which  she  did, 
and  her  melancholy  made  her  conform  cheerfully  to 
that  gravity  of  habit  and  conversation,  which  was 
becoming  the  wife  of  such  a  person,  who  was  then 
forty-eight  years  of  age,  and  she  not  above  sixteen. 
The  first  year  of  their  marriage  was  crowned  with 
a  son,  called  after  my  father's  name,^  and  born  at 

^  The  second  Sir  Allen  Apsley :  vide  the  interesting  sketch 

VOL.  I.  B 


1 8  Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson. 

East  Smithfield,  in  that  house  of  the  king's  which 
belonged  to  my  father's  employment  in  the  navy. 
The  next  year  they  removed  to  the  Tower  of  London, 
whereof  my  father  was  made  lieutenant,  and  there 
had  two  sons  more  before  me,  and  four  daughters, 
and  two  sons  after;  of  all  which  only  three  sons 
and  two  daughters  survived  him  at  the  time  of  his 
death,  which  was  in  the  sixty-third  year  of  his 
age,  after  he  had  three  years  before  languished  of  a 
consumption,  that  succeeded  a  fever  which  he  got 
in  the  unfortunate  voyage  to  the  Isle  of  Rh6. 

He  died  in  the  month  of  May,  1 630,  sadly  be- 
wailed by  not  only  all  his  dependants  and  relations, 
but  by  all  that  were  acquainted  with  him ;  for  he 
never  conversed  with  any  to  whom  he  was  not  at 
some  time  or  in  some  way  beneficial;  and  his  nature 
was  so  delighted  in  doing  good,  that  it  won  him  the 
love  of  all  men,  even  his  enemies,  whose  envy  and 
malice  it  was  his  custom  to  overcome  with  obli- 
gations. He  had  great  natural  parts,  but  was  too 
active  in  his  youth  to  stay  the  heightening  of  them 
by  study  of  dead  writings ;  but  in  the  living  books 
of  men's  conversations  he  soon  became  so  skilful 
that  he  was  never  mistaken,  but  where  his  own 
good  would  not  let  him  give  credit  to  the  evil  he 

of  his  life  by  Mr.  S.  L.  Lee  in  the  '*  Dictionary  of  National 
Biography,"  and  see  also  on  his  education  Sir  Allen's  letter 
of  March  20,  1628,  to  Lord  Dorchester:  Forster,  Life  of 
Eliot,  iL  472. 


Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson.  1 9 

discerned  in  others.  He  was  a  most  indulgent 
husband,  and  no  less  kind  to  his  children ;  a  most 
noble  master,  who  thought  it  not  enough  to  main- 
tain his  servants  honourably  while  they  were  with 
him,  but,  for  all  that  deserved  it,  provided  offices 
or  settlements,  as  for  children.  He  was  a  father 
to  all  his  prisoners,  sweetening  with  such  compas- 
sionate kindness  their  restraint,  that  the  affliction  of 
a  prison  was  not  felt  in  his  days.^  He  had  a 
singular  kindness  for  all  persons  that  were  eminent 
either  in  learning  or  arms,  and  when,  through  the 
ingratitude  and  vice  of  that  age,  many  of  the  wives 
and  children  of  Queen  Elizabeth's  glorious  captains 
were  reduced  to  poverty,  his  purse  was  their  com- 
mon treasury,  and  they  knew  not  the  inconvenience 
of  decayed  fortunes  till  he  was  dead  :  many  of  those 
valiant  seamen  he  maintained  in  prison,  many  he 
redeemed  out  of  prison,  and  cherished  with  an  extra- 
ordinary bounty.  If  among  his  excellencies  one 
outshined  the  rest,  it  was  the  generous  liberality  of 

^  Mr.  Forster,  in  his  Life  of  Sir  John  Eliot,  who  was  ono 
of  Sir  Allen  Apsley's  prisoners,  quotes  facts  and  letters  which 
hardly  bear  out  this  account  of  the  Lieutenant's  indulgence. 
*'  He  was  an  honest,  plain-spoken  man,  with  no  disposition 
to  be  harsh  or  unjust;  but  he  was  a  king's  man  to  the 
backbone ;  his  only  law  was  that  of  obedience  to  the  master 
he  was  serving  under ;  and  the  career  in  naval  and  military 
service  which  had  made  him  a  disciplinarian,  had  neither 
sharpened  nor  refined  his  sympathies." — Forster,  Eliot,  ii. 
468.     See  also  Selden's  Petition,  ibid.  p.  469. 


20  Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson. 

his  mind,  wherein  goodness  and  greatness  were  so 
equally  distributed  that  they  mutually  embellished 
each  other.  Pride  and  covetousness  had  not  the 
least  place  in  his  breast.  As  he  was  in  love  with 
true  honour,  so  he  contemned  vain  titles;  and 
though  in  his  youth  he  accepted  an  addition  to  hi^ 
birth,  in  his  riper  years  he  refused  a  barondry,^ 
which  the  king  offered  him.  He  was  severe  in  the 
regulating  of  his  family,  especially  would  not  endure 
the  least  immodest  behaviour  or  dress  in  any  woman 
under  his  roof.  .There  was  nothing  he  hated  more 
than  an  insignificant  gallant,  that  could  only  make 
his  legs  and  prune  himself,  and  court  a  lady,  but 
had  not  brains  to  employ  himself  in  things  more 
suitable  to  man's  nobler  sex.  Fidelity  in  his  trust, 
love  and  loyalty  to  his  prince,  were  not  the  least  of 
his  virtues,  but  those  wherein  he  was  not  excelled 
by  any  of  his  own  or  succeeding  times.  The  large 
estate  he  reaped  by  his  happy  industry,  he  did 
many  times  over  as  freely  resign  again  to  the 
king's  service,  till  he  left  the  greatest  part  of  it  at 
his  death  in  the  king's  hands.  All  his  virtues 
wanted  not  the  crown  of  all  virtue,  piety  and  true 
devotion  to  God.  As  his  life  was  a  continued  exer- 
cise of  faith  and  charity,  it  concluded  with  prayers 

^  **  Barondry  "  probably  means  barony.  Halliwell's  '*  Dic- 
tionary of  Archaic  and  Provincial  Words '^  gives  **  baronady," 
"the  dignity  of  baron."  In  Bohn's  edition  ** baronetcy "  is 
substituted  for  the  word  in  the  text,  but  no  authority  given. 


Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson.  2 1 

and  blessings,  which   were   the  only  consolations 
his   desolate   family   could    receive    in    his    death. 
Never  did  any  two  better  agree  in  magnanimity 
and  bounty  than  he  and  my  mother,  who  seemed 
to  be  actuated  by  the  same  soul,  so  little  did  she 
grudge  any  of  his  liberalities  to  strangers,  or  he 
contradict  any  of  her  kindness  to  all  her  relations ; 
her  house  being  a  common  home  to  all  of  them, 
and  a  nursery  to  their  children.     He  gave  her  a 
noble  allowance  of  ;f  3CX)  a  year  for  her  own  private 
expense,  and  had  given  her  all  her  own  portion 
to  dispose  of  how  she  pleased,  as  soon  as  she 
was   married;    which  she  suffered   to  increase  in 
her  friends'  hands;    and  what  my  father  allowed 
her  she  spent  not  in   vanities,  although  she  had 
what  was  rich  and  requisite  upon   occasions,  but 
she  laid  most  of  it  out  in  pious  and  charitable  uses. 
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  and  Mr.  Ruthven  being  prisoners 
in  the  Tower,  and  addicting  themselves  to  chemistry, 
she  suffered  them  to  make  their  rare  experiments  at 
her   cost,  partly  to  comfort  and  *  divert  the  poor 
prisoners,  and  partly  to  gain  the  knowledge  of  their 
experiments,  and  the  medicines  'to  help  such  poor 
people  as  were  not  able  to  seek  physicians.     By 
these   means   she  acquired   a  great  deal   of  skill, 
which  was  very   profitable   to   many  all  her   life. 
She  was  not  only  to  these,  but  to  all  the  other 
prisoners  that  came  into  the  Tower,  as  a  mother. 
All  the  time  she  dwelt  in  the  Tower,  if  any  were 


22  Life  of  Mrs,  Hutchinson. 

sick  she  made  them  broths  and  restoratives  with 
her  own  hands,  visited  and  took  care  of  them,  and 
provided  them  all  necessaries ;  if  any  were  afilicted 
she  comforted  them,  so  that  they  felt  not  the  incon- 
venience of  a  prison  who  were  in  that  place.  She 
was  not  less  bountiful  to  many  poor  widows  and 
orphans,  whom  officers  of  higher  and  lower  rank 
hadieft  behind  them  as  objects  of  charity.  Her 
own  house  was  filled  with  distressed  families  of  her 
relations,  whom  she  supplied  and  maintained  in  a 
noble  way.  The  care  of  the  worship  and  service  of 
God,  both  in  her  soul  and  her  house,  and  the  educa- 
tion of  her  children,  was  her  principal  care.  She 
was  a  constant  frequenter  of  week-day  lectures,  and 
a  great  lover  and  encourager  of  good  ministers,  and 
most  diligent  in  her  private  reading  and  devotions. 
When  my  father  was  sick  she  was  not  satisfied 
with  the  attendance  of  all  that  were  about  him,  but 
made  herself  his  nurse,  and  cook,  and  physiciah, 
and,  through  the  blessing  of  God,  and  her  inde- 
fatigable labours  and  watching,  preserved  him  a 
great  while  longer  than  the  physicians  thought  it 
possible  for  his  Aature  to  hold  out.  At  length, 
when  the  Lord  took  him  to  rest,  she  showed  as 
much  humility  and  patience,  under  that  great  change, 
as  moderation  and  bounty  in  h^r  more  plentiful  and 
prosperous  condition,  and  died  in  my  house  at 
Owthorpe,  in  the  county  of  Nottingham,  in  the 
year  1659.     The  privilege  of  being  bom  of,  and 


Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchifison.  2  3 

educated  by,  such  excellent  parents,  I  have  often 
revolved  with  great  thankfulness  for  the  mercy,  and 
humiliation  that  I  did  no  more  improve  it  After 
my  mother  had  had  three  sons,  she  was  very 
desirous  of  a  daughter,  and  when  the  women  at 
my  birth  told  her  I  was  one,  she  received  me  with 
a  great  deal  of  joy;  and  the  nurses  fancying, 
because  I  had  more  complexion  and  favour  than  is 
usual  in  so  young  children,  that  I  should  not  live, 
my  mother  became  fonder  of  me,  and  more  en- 
deavoured to  nurse  me.  As  soon  as  I  was  weaned 
a  French  woman  was  taken  to  be  my  dry-nurse, 
and  I  was  taught  to  speak  French  and  English 
together.  My  mother,  while  she  was  with  child  of 
me,  dreamed  that  she  was  walking  in  the  garden  ^ 
with  my  father,  and  that  a  star  came  down  into  her 
hand,  with  other  circumstances,  which,  though  I 
have  often  heard,  I  minded  not  enough  to  remember 
perfectly ;  only  my  father  told  her,  her  dream  sig- 
nified she  should  have  a  daughter  of  some  extra- 
ordinary eminency;  which  thing,  like  such  vain 
prophecies,  wrought  as  far  as  it  could  its  own 
accomplishment :  ^  for  my  father  and  mother  fancy- 

^  This  is  an  ingenious  way  of  accounting  for  the  fulfil- 
ment of  superstitious  predictions  and  expectations,  which 
might  frequently  with  close  attention  be  traced  to  their 
source,  as  is  here  done.  It  is  clear  that  in  the  present  case 
it  occasioned  a  peculiar  care  to  be  taken  of  her  education  ; 
and  this  again  caused  her  mind  and  disposition  to  take  that 


24  Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson. 

ing  me  then  beautiful,  and  more  than  ordinarily 
apprehensive/ applied  all  their  cares,  and  spared  no 
cost  to  improve  me  in  my  education,  which  pro- 
cured me  the  admiration  of  those  that  flattered  my 
parents.  By  the  time  I  was  four  years  old  I  read 
English  perfectly,  and  having  a  great  memory,  I 
was  carried  to  sermons ;  and  while  I  was  very 
young  could  remember  and  repeat  them  exactly, 
and  being  caressed,  the  love  of  praise  tickled  me, 
and  made  me  attend  more  heedfuUy.  When  I  was 
about  seven  years  of  age,  I  remember  I  had  at 
one  time  eight  tutors  in  several  qualities,  languages, 
music,  dancing,  writing,  and  needlework;  but  my 
genius  was  quite  averse  from  all  but  my  book,  and 
that  I  was  so  eager  of,  that  my  mother  thinking  it 
prejudiced  my  health,  would  moderate  me  in  it ;  yet 
this  rather  animated  me  than  kept  me  back,  and 
every  moment  I  could  steal  from  my  play  I  would 
employ  in  any  book  I  could  find,  when  my  own 
were  locked  up  from  me.  After  dinner  and  supper 
I  still  had  an  hour  allowed  me  to  play,  and  then  I 
would  steal  into  some  hole  or  other  to  read.  My 
father  would  have  me  learn  Latin,  and  I  was  so  apt 

singular  stamp  which  attracted  the  notice  of  Mr.  Hutchinson, 
and  led  her  to  the  highest  situation  that  she  could  wish  for, 
that  of  the  lady  of  a  counsellor  of  state  in  her  beloved,  but 
short-lived,  republic.  When  the  reader  shall  have  followed  her 
to  the  end  of  her  labours,  let  him  judge  whether  there  could 
be  any  situation  to  which  she  was  not  adequate. — ^J.  H. 


Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson.  25 

that  I  outstripped  my  brothers  who  were  at  school, 
although  my  father's  chaplain,  that  was  my  tutor, 
was  a  pitiful  dull  fellow.  My  brothers,  who  had  a 
great  deal  of  wit,  had  some  emulation  at  the  pro- 
gress I  made  in  my  learning,  which  very  well 
pleased  my  father ;  though  my  mother  would  have 
been  contented  I  had  not  so  wholly  addicted  my- 
self to  that  as  to  neglect  my  other  qualities.  As 
for  music  and  dancing,  I  profited  very  little  in  them, 
and  would  never  practise  my  lute  or  harpsichords 
but  when  my  masters  were  with  me ;  and  for  my 
needle  I  absolutely  hated  it.  Play  among  other 
children  I  despised,  and  when  I  was  forced  to 
entertain  such  as  came  to  visit  me,  I  tired  them 
with  more  grave  instructions  than  their  mothers, 
and  plucked  all  their  babies  to  pieces,  and  kept  the 
children  in  such  awe,  that  they  were  glad  when  I 
entertained  myself  with  elder  company ;  to  whom 
I  was  very  acceptable,  and  living  in  the  house  with 
many  persons  that  had  a  great  deal  of  wit,  and  very 
profitable  serious  discourses  being  frequent  at  my 
father's  table  and  in  my  mother's  drawing-room,  I 
was  very  attentive  to  all,  and  gathered  up  things 
that  I  would  utter  again,  to  great  admiration  of 
many  that  took  my  memory  and  imitation  for  wit. 
It  pleased  God  that,  through  the  good  instructions 
of  my  mother,  and  the  sermons  she  carried  me  to, 
I  was  convinced  that  the  knowledge  of  God  was  the 
most  excellent  study,  and  accordingly  applied  my- 


26  Life  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson. 

self  to  it|  and  to  practise  as  I  was  taught.  I  used 
to  exhort  my  mother's  maids  much,  and  to  turn 
their  idle  discourses  to  good  subjects ;  but  I  thought, 
when  I  had  done  this  on  the  Lord's  day,  and  every 
day  performed  my  due  tasks  of  reading  and  praying, 
that  then  I  was  free  to  any  thing  that  was  not  sin ; 
for  I  was  not  at  that  time  convinced  of  the  vanity 
of  conversation  which  was  not  scandalously  wicked. 
I  thought  it  no  sin  to  learn  or  hear  witty  songs  and 
amorous  sonnets  or  poems,  and  twenty  things  of 
that  kind,  wherein  I  was  so  apt  that  I  became  the 
confidante  in  all  the  loves  that  were  managed  among 
my  mother's  young  women ;  and  there  was  none  of 
them  but  had  many  lovers,  and  some  particular 
friends  beloved  above  the  rest.  Among  these  I 
have  ^  .  .  .  Five  years  after  me  my  mother  had  a 
daughter  that  she  nursed  at  her  own  breast,  and 
was  infinitely  fond  of  above  all  the  rest;  and  I 
being  of  too  serious  a  temper  was  not  so  pleasing 
to  my  *  .  .  . 

^  At  this  place  is  a  great  chasm,  many  leaves  being  torn 
out,  apparently  by  the  writer  herself. — ^J.  H. 
•  Here  the  story  of  herself  abruptly  ends,— J.  H, 


MRS.  HUTCHINSON  TO  HER  CHILDREN 
CONCERNING  THEIR  FATHER. 


"TO  MY  CHILDREN." 

They  who  dote  on  mortal  excellencies,  when  by 
the  inevitable  fate  of  all  things  frail,  their  adored 
idols  are  taken  from  them,  may  let  loose  the  winds 
of  passion  to  bring  in  a  flood  of  sorrow,  whose 
ebbing  tides  carry  away  the  dear  memory  of  what 
they  have  lost;  and  when  comfort  is  essayed  to 
such  mourners,  commonly  all  objects  are  removed 
out  of  their  view,  which  may  with  their  remem- 
brance renew  the  grief;  and  in  time  these  remedies 
succeed,  and  oblivion's  curtain  is  by  degrees  drawn 
over  the  dead  face,  and  things  less  lovely  are  liked, 
while  they  are  not  viewed  together  with  that  which 
was  most  excellent.  But  I  that  am  under  a  com- 
mand not  to  grieve  at  the  common  rate  of  desolate 
women,^  while  I  am  studying  which  way  to  moderate 

*  The  command  of  her  husband  at  his  death.     It  will  be 
readily  admitted  that  she  does  indeed  not  grieve  after  any 


28      Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children. 

my  woe,  and  if  it  were  possible  to  augment  my  love, 
can  for  the  present  find  out  none  more  just  to  your 
dear  father  nor  consolatory  to  myself  than  the  pre- 
servation of  his  memory;  which  I  need  not  gild 
with  such  flattering  commendations  as  the  hired 
preachers  do  equally  give  to  the  truly  and  titularly 
honourable.  A  naked  undressed  narrative,  speak- 
ing the*  simple  truth  of  him,  will  deck  him  with 
more  substantial  glory,  than  all  the  panegyrics  the 
best  pens  could  ever  consecrate  to  the  virtues  of 
the  best  men.^ 


common  rate,  but  with  that  noble  sorrow  which  raises 
instead  of  depressing  the  soul:  it  would  be  an  affront  to 
the  reader's  taste  to  point  out  the  beauties  of  this  dirge; 
but  it  is  only  a  just  commendation  of  our  authoress's  judg- 
ment and  modesty  to  observe,  that  having  shown  her  ability 
to  ornament  and  embellish,  she  confines  herself  to  such 
occasions  as  are  most  suitable,  and  employs  the  greatest 
simplicity  in  her  narrative. — ^J.  H. 

^  M.  Guizot,  in  his  introduction  to  these  Memoirs,  com- 
pares them  to  Madame  de  Momay's  Memoirs  of  her  hus- 
band, Duplessis  Momay,  written  also  for  the  instruction 
of  her  son,  but  whilst  the  father  whose  life  they  contained 
was  yet  alive.  '*  I  see  you,"  she  writes  to  her  son,  ^  ready  to 
depart  to  go  and  see  the  world,  and  make  yourself  acquainted 
with  the  manners  of  men  and  the  state  of  nations.  You 
are  young,  my  son,  and  divers  fantasies  present  themselves 
to  youth  ;  bear  in  mind  always  the  words  of  the  Psalmist : 
'  Thy  testimonies,  O  Lord,  shall  be  the  men  of  my  counsel' 
But  that  you  may  never  be  without  a  guide,  here  is  one 
that  I  give  you  by  the  hand  and  written  by  my  own  hand, 


Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children.      29 

Indeed,  that  resplendent  body  of  light,  which  the 
beginning  and  ending  of  his  life  made  up,  to  dis- 
cover the  deformities  of  this  wicked  age,  and  to 
instruct  the  erring  children  of  this  generation,  will, 
through  my  apprehension  and  expression,  shine  as 
under  a  very  thick  cloud,  which  will  obscure  much 
of  their  lustre ;  but  there  is  need  of  this  medium 
to  this  world's  weak  eyes,  which  I  fear  hath  but 
few  people  in  it  so  virtuous  as  can  believe  (because 
they  find  themselves  so  short),  that  any  other  could 
make  so  large  a  progress  in  the  race  of  piety, 
honour,  and  virtue  :  but  I  am  almost  stopped  before 
I  set  forth  to  trace  his  steps ;  finding  the  number 
of  them,  by  which  he  still  outwent  himself,  more 
than  my  imperfect  arithmetic  can  count,  and  the 
exact  figure  of  them  such  as  my  unskilful  pen  can- 
not describe.  I  fear. to  injure  that  memory  which 
I  would  honour,  and  to  disgrace  his  name  with  a 

- 

to  accompany  you  ;  it  is  the  example  of  your  father,  which 
I  adjure  you  always  to  keep  before  your  eyes,  as  far  as  I 
have  been  able  to  know  his  life,  notwithstanding  that  our 
company  has  frequently  been  interrupted  by  the  misfortunes 
of  the  times.  I  am  infirm,  and  I  do  not  think  that  God  will 
leave  me  long  in  this  world  :  so  you  will  keep  this  writing 
in  memory  of  me.  And  when  God  shall  please  to  take  me 
from  you,  I  desire  that  you  should  finish  what  I  have  begun 
to  write  of  the  course  of  our  life  ;  but  above  all,  my  son,  I 
shall  believe  that  you  will  remember  when  I  shall  hear  it 
said  that,  in  whatever  place  you  are,  you  serve  God  and 
imitate  your  father." 


30      Mrs,  Hutchinson  to  her  Children. 

poor  monument ;  but  when  I  have  beforehand  laid 
this  necessary  caution,  and  ingenuously  confessed 
that  through  my  inability  either  to  receive  or  ad- 
minister much  of  that  wealthy  stock  of  his.  glory 
that  I  was  intrusted  with  for  the  benefit  of  all,  and 
particularly  his  own  posterity,  I  must  withhold  a 
great  part  from  them,  I  hope  I  shall  be  pardoned 
for  drawing  an  imperfect  image  of  him ;  especially 
when  even  the  rudest  draft  that  endeavours  to 
counterfeit  him,  will  have  much*  delightful  loveli- 
ness in  it. 

Let  not  excess  of  love  and  delight  in  the  stream 
make  us  forget  the  fountain ;  he  and  all  his  excel- 
lencies came  from  God,  and  flowed  back  into  their 
own  spring :  there  let  us  seek  them,  thither  let  us 
hasten  after  him;  there  having  found  him,  let  us 
cease  to  bewail  among  the  dead  that  which  is  risen, 
or  rather  was  immortal.  His  soul  conversed  with 
God  so  much  when  he  was  here,  that  it  rejoices  to 
be  now  eternally  freed  from  interruption  in  that 
blessed  exercise;  his  virtues  were  recorded  in 
heaven's  annals,  and  can  never  perish ;  by  them 
he  yet  teaches  us  and  all  those  to  whose  know- 
ledge they  shall  arrive.  It  is  only  his  fetters,  his 
sins,  his  infirmities,  his  diseases,  that  are  dead 
never  to  revive  again,  nor  would  we  have  them ; 
they  were  his  enemies  and  ours ;  by  faith  in  Christ 
he  vanquished  them.  Our  conjunction,  if  we  had 
any  with  him,  was  indissoluble;  if  we  were  knit 


,Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children.      3 1 

together  by  one 'spirit  into  one  body  of  Christ,  we 
are  so  still ;  if  we  were  mutually  united  in  one  love 
of  God,  good  men,  and  goodness,  we  are  so  still. 
What  is  it  then  we  wail  in  his  remove  ?  the  dis- 
tance ?  Faithless  fools  I  sorrow  only  makes  it. 
Let  us  but  ascend  to  God  in  holy  joy  for  the  great 
grace  given  his  poor  servant,  and  he  is  there  with 
us.  He  is  only  removed  from  the  malice  of  his 
enemies,  for  which  we  should  not  express  our 
love  to  him  in  being  afflicted :  we  may  mourn  for 
oiu^elves  that  we  come  so  tardily  after  him,  that 
we  want  his  guide  and  assistance  in  our  way ;  and 
yet  if  our  tears  did  not  put  out  our  eyes  we  should 
see  him  even  in  heaven,  holding  forth  his  flaming 
lamp  of  virtuous  examples  and  precepts,  to  light 
us  through  the  dark  world.  It  is  time  that  I  let 
in  to  your  knowledge  that  splendour  which  while 
it  cheers  and  enlightens  your  heavy  senses,  let 
us  remember  to  give  all  his  and  all  our  glory  to 
God  alone,  who  is  the  father  and  fountain  of  all 
light  and  excellence. 

Desiring,  if  my  treacherous  memory  have  not 
lost  the  dearest  treasure  that  ever  I  committed  to 
its  trust,  to  4:^ate  to  you  his  holy,  virtuous,  honour- 
able life,  I  would  put  his  picture  in  the  front  of  his 
book,  but  my  unskilful  hand  will  injure  him.  Yet 
to  such  of  you  as  have  not  seen  him  to  remember 
his  person,  I  leave  this — 


32       Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children. 


HIS  DESCRIPTION. 

He  was  of  a  middle  stature,  of  a  slender  and 
exactly  well-proportioned  shape  in  all  parts,  hia 
complexion  fair,  his  hair  of  light  brown,  very  thick 
set  in  his  youth,  softer  than  the  finest  silk,  and 
curling  into  loose  great  rings  at  the  ends ;  his  eyes 
of  a  lively  grey,  well-shaped  and  full  of  life  and 
vigour,  graced  with  many  becoming  motions;  hia 
visage  thin,  his  mouth  well-made,  and  his  lips  very 
ruddy  and  graceful,  although  the  nether  chap  shut 
over  the  upper,  yet  it  was  in  such  a  manner  as 
was  not  unbecoming;  his  teeth  were  even  and 
white  as  the  purest  ivory ;  his  chin  was  something 
long,  and  the  mould  of  his  face ;  his  forehead  was 
not  very  high;  his  nose  was  raised  and  sharp; 
but  withal  he  had  a  most  amiable  countenance, 
which  carried  in  it  something  of  magnanimity  and 
majesty  mixed  with  sweetness,  that  at  the  same 
time  bespoke  love  and  awe  in  all  that  saw  him; 
his  skin  was  smooth  and  white,  his  legs  and  feet 
excellently  well-made;  he  was  quick  in  his  pace 
and  turns,  nimble  and  active  and  graceful  in  all 
his  motions;  he  was  apt  for  any  bodily  exercise, 
and  any  that  he  did  became  him ;  he  could  dance 
admirably  well,  but  neither  in  youth  nor  riper  years 
made  any  practice  of  it;  he  had  skill  in  fencing, 
such  as  became  a  gentleman ;  he  had  a  great  love 


Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children.      33 

of  music,  and  often  diverted  himself  with  a  viol,  on 
which  he  played  masterly;  and  he  had  an  exact 
ear  and  judgment  in  other  music ;  he  shot  excel- 
lently in  bows  and  guns,  and  much  used  them  for 
his  exercise ;  he  had  great  judgment  in  paintings, 
graving,  sculpture,  and  all  liberal  arts,  and  had 
many  curiosities  of  value  in  all  kinds;  he  took 
great  delight  in  perspective  glasses,  and  for  his 
other  rarities  was  not  so  much  affected  with  the 
antiquity  as  the  merit  of  the  work ;  he  took  much 
pleasure  in  improvement  of  grounds,  in  planting 
groves,  and  walks,  and  fruit-trees,  in  opening 
springs  and  making  fish-ponds ;  of  country  recrea- 
tions he  loved  none  but  hawking,  and  in  that  was 
very  eager  and  much  delighted  for  the  time  he  used 
it,  but  soon  left  it  off;  he  was  wonderfully  neat, 
cleanly,  and  genteel  in  his  habit,  and  had  a  very 
good  fancy  in  it,  but  he  left  off  very  early  the 
wearing  of  anything  that  was  costly,  yet  in  his 
plainest  negligent  habit  appeared  very  much  a 
gentleman ;  he  had  more  address  than  force  of 
l^yi  yc^  ^he  courage  of  his  soul  so  supplied  his 
members  that  he  never  wanted  strength  when  he 
.  found  occasion  to  employ  it ;  his  conversation  was 
very  pleasant,  for  he  was  naturally  cheerful,  had 
a  ready  wit  and  apprehension ;  he  was  eager  in 
everything  he  did,  earnest  in  dispute,  but  withal 
very  rational,  so  that  he  was  seldom  overcome ; 
everything  that  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  do  he 
vou  I.  c 


34      Mrs,  Hutchinson  to  her  Children. 

did  with  delight,  free  and  unconstrained ;  he  hated 
ceremonious  complimenti  but  yet  had  a  natural 
civility  and  complaisance  to  all  people ;  he  was  of 
a  tender  constitution,  but  through  the  vivacity  of 
his  spirit  could  undergo  labours,  watchings,  and 
journeys,  as  well  as  any  of  stronger  compositions ; 
he  was  rheumatic,  and  had  a  long  sickness  and 
distemper  occasioned  thereby,  two  or  three  years 
after  the  war  ended,  but  else,  for  the  latter  half 
of  his  life,  was  healthy  though  tender ;  in  his  youth 
and  childhood  he  was  sickly,  much  troubled  with 
weakness  and  toothaches,  but  then  his  spirits 
carried  him  through  them ;  he  was  very  patient 
under  sickness  or  pain,  or  any  common  accidents, 
but  yet,  upon  occasions,  though  never  without  just 
ones,  he  would  be  very  angry,  and  had  even  in  that 
such  a  grace  as  made  him  to  be  feared,  yet  he  was 
never  outrageous  in  passion ;  he  had  a  very  good 
faculty  in  persuading,  and  would  speak  very  well, 
pertinently,  and  effectually  without  premeditation 
upon  the  greatest  occasions  that  could  be  offered, 
for  indeed,  his  judgment  was  so  nice,  that  he  could 
never  frame  any  speech  beforehand  to  please  him- 
self; but  his  invention  was  so  ready,  and  wisdom 
so  habitual  in  all  his  speeches,  that  he  never  had 
reason  to  repent  himself  of  speaking  at  any  time 
without  ranking  the  words  beforehand ;  he  was  not 
talkative,  yet  free  of  discourse;  of  a  very  spare 
diet,  not  given  to  sleep,  and  an  early  riser  when  in 


Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children.      35 

health ;  he  never  was  at  any  time  idle,  and  hated 
to  see  any  one  else  so ;  in  all  his  natural  and  ordi- 
nary inclinations  and  composure,  there  was  some- 
thing extraordinary  and  tending  to  virtue,  beyond 
what  I  can  describe,  or  can  be  gathered  from  a  bare 
dead  description;  there  was  a  life  of  spirit  and 
power  in  him  that  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  copy 
drawn  from  him.  To  sum  up,  therefore,  all  that 
can  be  said  of  his  outward  frame  and  disposition, 
we  must  truly  conclude,  that  it  was  a  very  hand- 
some and  well-furnished  lodging  prepared  for  the 
reception  of  that  prince,  who  in  the  administration 
of  all  excellent  virtues  reigned  there  a  while,  till 
he  was  called  back  to  the  palace  of  the  universal 
emperor. 

HIS  VIRTUES. 

To  number  his  virtues  is  to  give  the  epitome  of 
his  life,  which  was  nothing  else  but  a  progress 
from  one  degree  of  virtue  to  another,  till  in  a  short 
time  he  arrived  to  that  height  which  many  longer 
lives  could  never  reach ;  and  had  I  but  the  power 
of  rightly  disposing  and  relating  them,  his  single 
example  would  be  more  instructive  than  all  the 
rules  of  the  best  moralists,  for  his  practice  was  of 
a  jnore  divine  extraction,  drawn  from  the  word  of 
God,  and  wrought  up  by  the  assistance  of  his 
Spirit;  therefore  in  the  head  of  all  his  virtues  I 


36      Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children. 

shall  set  that  which  was  the  head  and  spring  of 
them  all,  his  Christianity — for  this  alone  is  the 
true  royal  blood  that  runs  through  the  whole  body 
of  virtue,  and  every  pretender  to  that  glorious 
family,  who  hath  no  tincture  of  it,  is  an  impostor 
and  a  spurious  brat.  This  is  that  sacred  fountain 
which  baptizeth  all  the  gentle  virtues  that  so  im- 
mortalise the  names  of  Cicero,  Plutarch,  Seneca, 
and  all  the  old  philosophers;  herein  they  are  re- 
generated, and  take  a  new  name  and  nature.  Dug 
up  in  the  wilderness  of  nature,  and  dipped  Jn  this 
living  spring,  they  are  planted  and  flourish  in  the 
paradise  of  God.^ 

By  Christianity  I  intend  that  universal  habit  of 
grace  which  is  wrought  in  a  soul  by  the  regenerat- 
iilg  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  the  whole  creature  is 
resigned  up  into  the  divine  will  and  love,  and  all 
its  actions  designed  to  the  obedience  abd  glory  of 
its  Maker.  As  soon  as  he  had  improved  his 
natural  understanding  with  the  acquisition  of  learn- 
ing, the  first  studies  he  exercised  himself  in, 
were  the  principles  of  religion,  and  the  first  know- 
ledge  he  laboured   for  was  a  knowledge  of  God, 

^  Compare  the  views  expressed  by  Mrs.  Hutchinson  in 
her  dedication  to  the  translation  of  Lucretius,  and  also  in 
her  treatise  on  theology.  In  the  latter  she  says  :  ''The 
vanity  of  men's  minds  is  not  more  evident  in  any  of  them 
than  in  this  science  [of  morality :  not  one  true  virtue  is 
truly  taught  in  all  Aristotle's  books  to  Nichomachus." 


Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children.       37 

which  by  a  diligent  examination  of  the  Scripture, 
and  the  several  doctrines  of  great  men  pretending 
that  ground,  he  at  length  obtained.  Afterwards, 
when  he  had  laid  a  sure  and  orthodox  foundation 
in  the  doctrine  of  the  free  grace  of  God  given  us 
by  Jesus  Christ,  he  began  to  survey  the  super- 
structures, and  to  discover  much  of  the  hay  and 
stubble  of  men's  inventions  in  God's  worship,  which 
his  spirit  burned  up  in  the  day  of  their  trial.  His 
faith  being  established  in  the  truth,  he  was  full  of 
love  to  God  and  all  his  saints.^  He  hated  perse- 
cution for  religion,  and  was  always  a  champion  for 
all  religious  people  against  all  their  great  oppressors. 
He  detested  all  scoffs  at  any  practice  of  worship, 
though  such  a  one  as  he  was  not  persuaded  of  it. 
Whatever  he  practised  in  religion  Was  neither  for 
faction  nor  advantage,  but  contrary  to  it,  and  purely 
for  conscience'  sake.  As  he  hated  outsides  in 
religion,  so  could  he  worse  endure  those  apostacies 
and  those  denials  of  the  Lord  and  base  compliances 
of  his  adversaries,  which  timorous  men  practise 
under  the  name  of  prudent  and  just  condescensions 
to  avoid  persecution.  Christianity  being  in  him  as 
the  fountain  of  all  his  virtues,  and  diffusing  itself 
in  every  stream,  that  of  his  prudence  falls  into  the 
next  mention.     He  from  a  child  was  wise,   and 

^  Saints.    An  expression  commonly  used  in  that  time  to 
signify  good  and  religious  people. — J.  H. 


38      Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children. 

sought  to  by  many  that  might  have  been  his  fathers 
for  counsel,  which  he  could  excellently  give  to  him- . 
self  and  others ;  and  whatever  cross  event  in  any 
of  his  affairs  may  give  occasion  to  fools  to  overlook 
the  wisdom  of  the  design,  yet  he  had  as  great  a 
foresight,  as  strong  a  judgment,  as  clear  an  appre- 
hension of  men  and  things  as  no  man  more.  He 
had  rather  a  firm  impression  than  a  great  memory, 
yet  he  was  forgetful  of  nothing  but  injuries.  His 
own  integrity  made  him  credulous  of  other  men% 
till  reason  and  experience  convinced  him,  and 
as  unapt  to  believe  cautions  which  could  not  be 
received  without  entertaining  ill  opinions  of  men ; 
yet  he  had  wisdom  enough  never  to  commit  himself 
to  a  traitor,  though  he  was  once  wickedly  betrayed 
by  friends  whom  necessity  and  not  mistake  forced 
him  to  trust.^  He  was  as  ready  to  hear  as  to  give 
counsel,  and  never  pertinacious  in  his  will  when 
his  reason  was  convinced.  There  was  no  opinion 
which  he  was  most  settled  in,  either  concerning 
divine  or  human  things,  but  he  would  patiently  and 
impartially  hear  it  debated.  In  matters  of  faith 
his  reason  always  submitted  to  the  Word  of  God, 
and    what    he    could    not    comprehend,   he   would 

^  It  is  not  known  what  peculiar  transaction  this  refers  to, 
though  it  may  be  conjectured  to  refer  to  the  false  protesta- 
tions of  Monk  and  Sir  Ashley  Cooper  at  the  Restoration ; 
whom  he  and  many  others  trusted  much  against  their 
will— J.  H. 


Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children,      39 

believe  because  it  was  written;  but  in  all  other 
things,  the  greatest  names  in  the  world  could 
never  lead  him  without  reason :  he  would  delibe- 
rate when  there  was  time,  but  never  lost  an 
opportunity  of  anything  that  was  to  be  done  by 
tedious  dispute.  He  would  hear  as  well  as  speak, 
and  yet  never  spoke  impertinently  or  unseason- 
ably. He  very  well  understood  himself  his  own 
advantages,  natural  parts,  gifts,  and  acquirements, 
yet  so  as  neither  to  glory  of  them  to  others,  nor 
overvalue  himself  for  them;  for  he  had  an  excel- 
lent virtuous  modesty,  which  shut  out  all  vanity  of 
mind,  and  yet  admitted  that  true  understanding  of 
himself  which  was  requisite  for  the  best  improve- 
ment of  all  his  talents.  He  no  less  understood 
and  was  more  heedful  to  remark  his  defects,  im- 
perfections, and  disadvantages,  but  that  too  only  to 
excite  his  circumspection  concerning  them,  not  to 
damp  his  spirit  in  any  noble  enterprise.  He  had 
a  noble  spirit  of  government,  both  in  civil,  military, 
and  oecumenical^  administrations,  which  forced 
even  from  unwilling  subjects  a  love  and  reverence 
of  him,  and  endeared  him  to  the  souls  of  those 
rejoiced  to  be  governed  by  him.  He  had  a  native 
majesty  that  struck  an  awe  of  him  into  the  hearts 
of  men,  and  a  sweet  greatness  that  commanded 
love.     He  had  a  clear  discerning  of  men's  spirits, 

*  OEcumenical,  f.^.,  domestic 


40      Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children. 

and  knew  how  to  give  every  one  their  just  weight. 
He  contemned  none  that  were  not  wicked,  in  what- 
ever low  degree  of  nature  or  fortune  they  were 
otherwise :  wherever  he  saw  wisdom,  learning,  or 
other  virtues  in  men,  he  honoured  them  highly, 
and  admired  them  to  their  full  rate,  but  never  gave 
himself  blindly  up  to  the  conduct  of  the  greatest 
master.  Love  itself,  which  was  as  powerful  in  his 
as  in  any  soul,  rather  quickened  than  blinded  the 
eyes  of  his  judgment  in  discerning  the  imperfec- 
tions of  those  that  were  most  dear  to  him.  His 
soul  ever  reigned  as  king  in  the  internal  throne, 
and  never  was  captive  to  his  sense ;  religion  and 
reason,  its  two  favoured  counsellors,  took  order 
that  all  the  passions  kept  within  their  own  just 
bounds,  there  did  him  good  service,  and  furthered 
the  public  weal.  He  found  such  felicity  in  that 
proportion  of  wisdom  that  he  enjoyed,  as  he  was  a 
great  lover  of  that  which  advanced  it — learning  and 
the  arts ;  which  he  not  only  honoured  in  others, 
but  had  by  his  industry  arrived  to  be  himself  a  far 
greater  scholar  than  is  absolutely  requisite  for  a 
gentleman.  He  had  many  excellent  attainments, 
but  he  no  less  evidenced  his  wisdom  in  knowing 
how  to  rank  and  use  them,  than  in  gaining  them. 
He  had  wit  enough  to  have  been  subtle  aild  cun- 
ning, but  he  so  abhorred  dissimulation  that  I  cannot 
say  he  was  either.  Greatness  of  courage  would 
not  suffer  him  to  put  on  a  vizard,  to  secure  him 


Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children.      4 1 

from  any ;  to  retire  into  the  shadow  of  privacy  and 
silence  was  all  his  prudence  could  effect  in  him. 
It  will  be  as  hard  to  say  which  was  the  pre- 
dominant virtue  in  him,  as  which  is  so  in  its  own 
nature.  He  was  as  excellent  in  justice  as  in 
wisdom ;  the  greatest  advantage,  nor  the  greatest 
danger,  nor  the  dearest  interest  or  friend  in  the  world, 
could  not  prevail  on  him  to  pervert  justice  even 
to  an  enemy.  He  never  professed  the  thing  he 
intended  not,  nor  promised  what  he  believed  out  of 
his  own  power,  nor  failed  the  performance  of  any- 
thing that  was  in  his  power  to  fulfil.  Never  fear- 
ing anything  he  could  suffer  for  the  truth,  he  never 
at  any  time  would  refrain  a  true  or  give  a  false 
witness;  he  loved  truth  so  much  that  he  hated 
even  sportive  lies  and  gulleries.  He  was  so  just 
to  his  own  honour  that  he  many  times  forbore 
things  lawful  and  delightful  to  him,  rather  than  he 
would  give  any  one  occasion  of  scandal.  Of  all 
lies  he  most  hated  hypocrisy  in  religion ;  either  to 
comply  with  changing  governments  or  persons, 
without  a  real  persuasion  of  conscience,  or  to 
practise  holy  things  to  get  the  applause  of  men  or 
any  advantage;  As  in  religion  so  in  friendship,  he 
never  professed  love  when  he  had  it  not,  nor  dis- 
guised hate  or  aversion,  which  indeed  he  never  had 
to  any  party  or  person,  but  to  their  sins :  and  he 
loved  even  his  bitterest  enemies  so  well,  that  I  am 
witness  how  his  soul  mourned  for  them,  and  how 


42      Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children. 

heartily  he  desired  their  conversion.  If  he  were 
defective  in  any  part  of  justice,  it  was  when  it  was 
in  his  power  to  punish  those  who  had  injured  him ; 
whom  I  have  so  often  known  him  to  recompense 
with  favours  instead  of  revenge,  that  his  friends 
used  to  tell  him,  if  they  had  any  occasion  to  make 
him  favourably  partial  to  them,  they  would  provoke 
him  by  an  injury.  He  was  as  faithful  and  constant 
to  his  friends  as  merciful  to  his  enemies :  nothing 
grieved  him  more  than  to  be  obliged  where  he 
could  not  hope  to  return  it.  He  that  was  a  rock 
to  all  assaults  of  might  and  violence,  was  the 
gentlest,  easiest  soul  to  kindness,  of  which  the 
least  warm  spark  melted  him  into  anything  that 
was  not  sinful.  There  never  was  a  man  more 
exactly  just  in  the  performance  of  duties  to  all 
relations  and  all  persons.  Honour,  obedience,  and 
love  to  his  father,  were  so  natural  and  so  lasting  in 
him,  that  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  a  better  son 
than  he  was ;  and  whoever  would  pray  for  a 
blessing  in  children  to  any  one,  could  but  wish 
them  such  a  son  as  he.  He  never  repined  at  his 
father's  will  in  anything,  how  much  soever  it  were 
to  his  prejudice,  nor  would  endure  to  hear  any  one 
say  his  father  was  not  so  kind  to  him  as  he  might 
have  been ;  but  to  his  dying  day  preserved  his 
father's  memory  with  such  tender  affection  and 
reverence  as  was  admirable,  and  had  that  high 
regard  for  his  mother-in-law  and  the  children  she 


Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children.       43 

brought  his  father,  as  he  could  not  have  been 
more  dearly  concerned  in  all  their  interest  if  she 
had  been  his  own  mother — which,  all  things  con- 
sidered, although  they  were  deserving  persons,  was 
an  example  of  piety  and  goodness  that  will  not 
easily  be  matched.  For  conjugal  affection  to  his 
wife,  it  was  such  in  him,  as  whosoever  would  draw 
out  a  rule  of  honour,  kindness,  and  religion,  to  be 
practised  in  that  estate,  need  no  more,  but  exactly 
draw  out  his  example  ;  never  man  had  a  greater 
passion  for  a  woman,  nor  a  more  honourable  esteem 
of  a  wife ;  yet  he  was  not  uxorious,  nor  remitted 
not  that  just  rule  which  it  was  her  honour  to  obey, 
but  managed  the  reins  of  government  with  such 
prudence  and  aifection  that  she  who  would  not 
delight  in  such  an  honourable  and  advantageable 
subjection,  must  have  wanted  a  reasonable  soul. 
He  governed  by  persuasion,  which  he  never 
employed  but  to  things  honourable  and  profitable 
for  herself;  he  loved  her  soul  and  her  honour  more 
than  her  outside,  and  yet  he  had  even  for  her 
person  a  constant  indulgence,  exceeding  the  common 
temporary  passions  of  the  most  uxorious  fools.  If 
he  esteemed  her  at  a  higher  rate  than  she  in  her- 
self could  have  deserved,  he  was  the  author  of  that 
virtue  he  doated  on,  while  she  only  reflected  his  own 
glories  upon  him ;  all  that  she  was,  was  Af'm,  while 
he  was  here,  and  all  that  she  is  now  at  best  but 
his  pale  shade.     So  liberal  was  he  to  her,  and  of 


44      Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children. 

so  generous  a  temper,  that  he  hated  the  mention 
of  severed  purses;  his  estate  being  so  much  at 
her  disposal,  that  he  never  would  receive  an  account 
of  anything  she  expended ;  so  constant  was  he  in 
his  love,  that  when  she  ceased  to  be  young  and 
lovely,  he  began  to  show  most  fondness ;  he  loved 
her  at  such  a  kind  and  generous  rate  as  words 
cannot  express;  yet  even  this,  which  was  the 
highest  love  he  or  any  man  could  have,  was  yet 
bounded  by  a  superior,  he  loved  her  in  the  Lord  as 
his  fellow-creature,  not  his  idol,  but  in  such  a 
manner  as  showed  that  an  affection,  bounded  in 
the  just  rules  of  duty,  far  exceeds  every  way  all 
the  irregular  passions  in  the  world.  He  loved  God 
above  her,  and  all  the  other  dear  pledges  of  his 
heart,  and  at  his  command  and  for  his  glory  cheer- 
fully resigned  them.  He  was  as  kind  a  father,  as 
dear  a  brother,  as  good  a  master,  and  as  faithful  a 
friend  as  the  world  had,  yet  in  all  these  relations,  the 
greatest  indulgence  he  could  have  in  the  world  never 
prevailed  on  him  to  indulge  vice  in  any  the  dearest 
person ;  but  the  more  dear  any  were  to  him,  the  more 
was  he  offended  at  anything  that  might  take  off  the 
lustre  of  their  glory.  As  he  had  great  severity 
against  errors  and  follies  pertinaciously  pursued,  so 
had  he  the  most  merciful,  gentle,  and  compassionate 
frame  of  spirit  that  can  be  imagined  to  those  who 
became  sensible  of  their  errors  and  frailties,  although 
had  they  been  never  so  injurious  to  himself^ 


Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children.      45 

Nor  was  his  soul  less  shining  in  honour  than 
in  love.  Piety  being  still  the  bond  of  all  his  other 
virtues,  there  was  nothing  he  durst  not  do  or 
suffer,  but  sin  against  God ;  and  therefore,  as  he 
never  regarded  his  life  in  any  noble  and  just  enter- 
prise, so  he  never  staked  it  in  any  rash  or  un- 
warrantable hazard.  He  was  never  surprised, 
amazed,  nor  confounded  with  great  difficulties  or 
dangers,  which  rather  served  to  animate  than  dis- 
tract his  spirits ;  he  had  made  up  his  accounts  with 
life  and  death,  and  fixed  his  purpose  to  entertain 
both  honourably,  so  that  no  accident  ever  dismayed 
him,  but  he  rather  rejoiced  in  such  troublesome  con- 
flicts as  might  signalise  his  generosity.  A  truer 
or  more  lively  valour  there  never  was  in  any  man, 
but  in  all  his  actions  it  ever  marched  in  the  same 
file  with  wisdom.  He  understood  well,  and  as  well 
performed  when  he  undertook  it,  the  military  art  in 
all  parts  of  it ;  he  naturally  loved  the  emplbyment, 
as  it  suited  with  his  active  temper  more  than  any, 
conceiving  a  mutual  delight  in  leading  those  men 
that  loved  his  conduct;  and  when  he  commanded 
soldiers,  never  was  man  tnore  loved  and  reverenced 
by  all  that  were  under  him ;  for  he  would  never 
condescend  to  them  in  anything  they  mutinously 
sought,  nor  suffer  them  to  seek  what  it  was  fit  for 
him  to  provide,  but  prevented  them  by  his  loving 
care ;  and  while  he  exercised  his  authority  no  way 
but  in  keeping  them  to  their  just  duty,  they  joyed 


46      Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children. 

as  much  in  his  commands  as  he  in  their  obedience. 
He  was  very  liberal  to  them,  but  ever  chose  just 
times  and  occasions  to  exercise  it.  I  cannot  say 
whether  he  were  more  truly  magnanimous  or  less 
proud ;  he  never  disdained  the  meanest  person,  nor 
flattered  the  greatest ;  he  had  a  loving  and  sweet 
courtesy  to  the  poorest,  and  would  often  employ 
many  spare  hours  with  the  commonest  soldiers  and 
poorest  labourers,^  but  still  so  ordering  his  familiarity 
as  it  never  raised  them  to  a  contempt,  but  enter- 
tained still  at  the  same  time  a  reverence  with  love 
of  him ;  he  ever  preserved  himself  in  his  own  rank, 
neither  being  proud  of  it  so  as  to  despise  any 
inferior,  nor  letting  fall  that  just  decorum  which  his 
honour  obliged  him  to  keep  up.     He  was  as  far 


^  Mr.  J.  R.  Green  claims  that  one  of  the  gifts  of  Puri- 
tanism to  England  was  a  new  conception  of  social  equality, 
and  cites  this  passage  in  illustration  of  it.  '*  Their  common 
calling,  their  common  brotherhood  in  Christ,  annihilated 
in  the  mind  of  the  Puritans  that  overpowering  sense  of 
social  distinctions  which  characterised  the  ^ge  of  Elizabeth. 
There  was  no  open  break  with  social  traditions ;  no  open 
revolt  against  the  social  subordination  of  class  to  class. 
But  within  these  forms  of  the  older  world  beat,  for  the  first 
time,  the  spirit  which  was  to  characterise  the  new.  The 
meanest  peasant  felt  himself  ennobled  as  a  child  of  God. 
The  proudest  noble  recognised  a  spiritual  equality  in  the 
poorest  'saint.'  The  great  social  revolution  of  the  Civil 
Wars  and  the  Protectorate  was  already  felt  in  the  demeanour 
of  English  gentlemen." 


Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children.      47 

from  envy  of  superiors  as  from  contemning  them 
that  were  under  him ;  he  was  above  the  ambition 
of  vain  titles,  and  so  well  contented  with  the  even 
ground  of  a  gentleman,  that  no  invitation  could 
have  prevailed  upon  him  to  advance  one  step  that 
way;  he  loved  substantial  not  airy  honour.  As 
he  was  above  seeking  or  deh'ghting  in  empty  titles 
for  himself,  so  he  neither  denied  nor  envied  any 
man's  due  precedency,  but  pitied  those  that  took  a 
glory  in  that  which  had  no  foundation  of  virtue. 
As  little  did  he  seek  after  popular  applause,  or 
pride  himself  in  it,  if  at  any  time  it  cried  up  his 
just  deserts ;  he  more  delighted  to  do  well  than  to 
be  praised,  and  never  set  vulgar  commendations  at 
such  a  rate,  as  to  act  contrary  to  his  own  conscience 
or  reason  for  the  obtaining  them ;  nor  would  he 
forbear  a  good  action  which  he  was  bound  to, 
though  all  the  world  disliked  it,  for  he  ever  looked 
on  things  as  they  were  in  themselves,  not  through 
the  dim  spectacles  of  vulgar  estimation.  As  he 
was  far  from  a  vain  affectation  of  popularity,  so  he 
never  neglected  that  just  care  that  an  honest  man 
ought  to  have  of  his  reputation,  and  was  as  careful 
to  avoid  the  appearances  of  evil  as  evil  itself;  but 
if  he  were  evil  spoken  of  for  truth  or  righteousness' 
sake,  he  rejoiced  in  taking  up  the  reproach ;  which 
all  good  men  that  dare  bear  their  testimony  against 
an  evil  generation  must  suffer.  Though  his  zeal 
for  truth  and  virtue  caused  the  wicked,  with  the 


48      Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children.  . 

sharp  edges  of  their  malicious  tongues,  to  attempt  to 
shave  off  the  glories  from  his  head,  yet  his  honour 
springing  from  the  fast  root  of  virtue,  did  but  grow  the 
thicker  and  more  beautiful  for  all  their  endeavours 
to  cut  it  off.^  He  was  as  free  from  avarice  as  from 
ambition  and  pride.  Never  had  any  man  a  more 
contented  and  thankful  heart  for  the  estate  that 
God  had  given,  but  it  was  a  very  narrow  compass 
for  the  exercise  of  his  great  heart.  He  loved  hos- 
pitality as  much  as  he  hated  riot ;  he  could  content- 
edly be  without  things  beyond  his  reach,  though  he 
took  very  much  pleasure  in  all  those  noble  delights 
that  exceeded  not  his  faculties.  In  those  things 
that  were  of  mere  pleasure,  he  loved  not  to  aim  at 
that  he  could  not  attain;  he  would  rather  wear 
clothes  absolutely  plain,  than  pretend  to  gallantry ; 
and  would  rather  choose  to  have  none  than  mean 
jewels  or  pictures,  and  such  other  things  as  were 
not  of  absolute  necessity.  He  would  rather  give 
nothing  than  a  base  reward  or  present,  and  upon 
that  score  he  lived  very  much  retired,  though  his 
nature  was  very  sociable,  and  delighted  in  going 
into  and  receiving  company ;  because  his  fortune 
would  not  allow  him  to  do  it  in  such  a  noble 
manner  as  suited  with  his  mind.  He  was  so  truly 
magnanimous,  that  prosperity  could  never  lift  him 
up  in  the  least,  nor  give  him  any  tincture  of  pride 

>  Samson  and  Delilah. 


Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children.       49 

or  vain-glory,  nor  diminish  a  general  affability, 
courtesy,  and  civility,  that  he  had  always  to  all 
persons.  When  he  was  most  exalted,  he  was 
most  merciful  and  compassionate  to  those  that 
were  humbled.  At  the  same  time  that  he  van- 
quished any  enemy,  he  cast  away  all  his  ill-will  to 
him,  and  entertained  thoughts  of  love  and  kindness 
as  soon  as  he  ceased  to  be  in  a  posture  of  opposi- 
tion. He  was  as  far  from  meanness  as  from  pride, 
as  truly  generous  as  humble,  and  showed  his  noble 
spirit  more  in  adversity  than  in  his  prosperous  con- 
dition ;  he  vanquished  all  the  spite  of  his  enemies 
by  his  manly  suffering,  and  all  the  contempts  they 
could  cast  upon  him  were  their  shame,  not  his. 

His  whole  life  was  the  rule  of  temperance  in 
meat,  drink,  apparel,  pleasure,  and  all  those  things 
that  may  be  lawfully  enjoyed ;  and  herein  his 
temperance  was  more  excellent  than  in  others,  in 
whom  it  is  not  so  much  a  virtue,  but  proceeds  from 
want  of  appetite  or  gust  of  pleasure ;  in  him  it  was 
a  true,  wise,  and  religious  government  of  the  desire 
and  delight  he  took  in  the  things  he  enjoyed.  He 
had  a  certain  activity  of  spirit  which  could  never 
endure  idleness  either  in  himself  or  others,  and 
that  made  him  eager,  for  the  time  he  indulged  it, 
as  well  in  pleasure  as  in  business ;  indeed,  though 
in  youth  he  exercised  innocent  sports  a  little  while, 
yet  afterwards  his  business  was  his  pleasure.  But 
how  intent  soever  he  were  in  anything,  how  much 

VOL.  I.  D 


50      Mrs.  Hutchinson  to  her  Children. 

soever  it  delighted  him,  he  could  freely  and  easily 
cast  it  away  when  God  called  him  to  something 
else.  He  had  as  much  modesty  as  could  consist 
with  a  true  virtuous  assurance,  and  hated  an  impu- 
dent person.  Neither  in  youth  nor  riper  age  could 
the  most  fair  or  enticing  women  ever  draw  him  so 
much  as  into  unnecessary  familiarity  or  vain  converse 
or  dalliance  with  them;  yet  he  despised  nothing  of 
the  female  sex  but  their  follies  and  vanities ;  wise 
and  virtuous  women  he  loved,  and  delighted  in  all 
pure,  holy,  and  unblameable  conversation  with  them, 
but  so  as  never  to  excite .  scandal  or  temptation. 
Scurrilous  discourse  even  among  men  he  abhorred ; 
and  though  he  sometimes  took  pleasure  in  wit  and 
mirth,  yet  that  which  was  mixed  with  impurity  he 
never  would  endure.  The  heat  of  his  youth  a  little 
inclined  him  to  the  passion  of  anger,  and  the  good- 
ness of  his  nature  to  those  of  love  and  grief,  but 
reason  was  never  dethroned  by  them,  but  continued 
governess  and  moderator  in  his  soul.^ 

^  In  this  place  Mrs.  Hutchinson  has  written,  ''All  this 
and  more  is  true,  but  I  so  much  dislike  the  manner  of 
relating  it,  that  I  will  make  another  essay."  And  accord- 
ingly she  proceeds  to  write  his  character  over  again,  but  it 
has  the  appearance  of  being  much  more  laboured^  and  much 
less  characteristic^  and  therefore  the  former  is  preferred. 

At  the  same  place  is  written :  ''  This  book  was  written  by 
Lucy,  the  widow  and  relict  of  CoL  John  Hutchinson,  of 
Owthorp."— J.  H. 

(Julius  Hutchinsoni  grandfather  of  the  Editor.) 


THE 

LIFE  OF  JOHN  HUTCHINSON, 

OF  OWTHORPB,  IN  THE  COUNTY  OF  NOTTINGHAM,  ESQUIRE. 


He  was  the  eldest  surviving  son  of  Sir  Thomas 
Hutchinson,  and  the  Lady  Margaret,  his  first  wife, 
one  of  the  daughters  of  Sir  John  Biron,  of  New- 
stead,  in  the  same  county,  two  persons  so  eminently 
virtuous  and  pious  in  their  generations,  that  to 
descend  from  them  was  to  set  up  in  the  world  upon 
a  good  stock  of  honour,  which  obliged  their  posterity 
to  improve  it,  as  much  as  it  was  their  privilege  to 
inherit  their  parents'  glories.  Sir  Thomas  was  he 
that  removed  his  dwelling  to  Owthorp>e ;  his  father, 
though  he  was  possessor  of  that  lordship,  having 
dwelt  at  Cropwell,  another  town,  within  two  miles 
of  which  he  had  an  inheritance,  which,  if  I  mistake 
not,  was  the  place  where  those  of  the  family  that 
began  to  settle  the  name  in  this  county,  first  fixed 
their  habitation.  The  family  for  many  generations 
past  have  been  of  good  repute  in  Yorkshire,  and 


5  2  Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1616. 

there  is  yet  a  gentleman  in  that  county,  descendant 
of  the  elder  house,  that  possesses  a  fair  estate 
and  reputation  in  his  father's  ancient  inheritance.^ 
They  have  been  in  Nottinghamshire  for  genera- 
tions ;  wherein  I  observe  that  as  if  there  had  been 
an  Agrarian  law  in  the  family,  as  soon  as  they 
arrived  to  any  considerable  fortune  beyond  his 
who  was  first  transplanted  hither,  they  began 
other  houses,  of  which  one  is  soon  decayed  and 
worn  out  in  an  unworthy  branch  (he  of  Basford), 
another  begins  to  flourish,  and  long  may  it  prosper.' 
It  is  further  observable  in  their  descent  that  though 
none  of  them  before  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson  ad- 
vanced beyond  an  esquire,  yet  they  successively 
matched  into  all  the  most  eminent  and  noble 
families  in  the  country ;  which  shows  that  it  was 
the  unambitious  genius  of  the  family  rather  than 
their  want  of  merit,  which  made  them  keep  upon  so 
even  a  ground,  after  their  first  achievements  had 
set  them  on  a  stage  elevated  enough  from  the  vulgar, 
to  perform  any  honourable  and  virtuous  actions.  I 
spoke  with  one  old  man  who  had  known  five  gene- 
rations of  them  in  these  parts,  where  their  hospi- 

*  At  Wykeham  Abbey,  in  the  county  of  York,  where  it  is 
believed  they  still  reside. — J.  H. 

'  It  stood  only  two  generations ;  the  last  possessor,  who 
was  the  great-grandson  of  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson,  direct- 
ing by  his  will  the  estate  to  be  sold,  and  the  produce  given 
to  strangers. — J.  H. 


i6i6.i       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         53 

tality,  their  love  to  their  country,  their  plain  and 
honest  conversation  with  all  men,  their  generous 
and  unambitious  inclinations,  had  made  the  family 
continue  as  well  beloved  and  reputed  as  any  of  the 
prouder  houses  in  the  country.*  Although  they 
changed  not  their  titles,  yet  every  succession  in- 
creased the  real  honour  of  their  house.  One  dis- 
advantage they  had,  that  few  of  them  were  so  long 
lived  as  to  prevent  their  sons  from  the  bondage  of 
wardship,  whereby  they  fell  into  the  hands  of 
wicked  guardians,  that  defaced  instead  of  cultivating 
their  seats,  and  made  every  heir  a  new  planter. 
Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson,  as  I  have  heard,  was  not 
above  eight  years  of  age  when  his  father  died,  and 
his  wardship  fell  into  the  hands  of  an  unworthy 
person.  Sir  Germaine  Poole,  who  did  him  so  many 
injuries,  that  he  was  fain,  after  he  came  of  age,  to 
have  suits  with  him.  This  so  raised  the  malice  of 
the  wicked  man  that  he  watched  an  opportunity  to 
assassinate  him  unawares,  and  as  Sir  Thomas  was 
landing  out  of  a  boat  at  the  Temple  stairs  in 
London,  Poole  having  on  a  private  coat,  with  some 
wicked  assistants,  before  he  was  aware,  gave  him 
some  cuts  on  the  head  and  his  left  hand  that  was 
upon  the  boat;  but  he  full  of  courage  drew  his 
sword,  ran  at  Poole  and  broke  his  weapon,  which 


^  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson's  son  and  grandson  fell  no  way 
short  of  him  in  this.— J.  H. 


54         Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [i6i6. 

could  not  enter  his  false  armour ;  whereupon  he 
run  in  to  him,  resolved  not  to  be  murdered  without 
leaving  some  mark  on  the  villain,  bit  off  his  nose, 
and  then,  by  the  assistance  God  sent  him  of  an 
honest  waterman,  being  rescued,  he  was  carried 
away  so  sorely  wounded  that  his  life  was  in  some 
danger :  but  the  fact  being  made  public,  his  honour- 
able carriage  in  it  procured  him  a  great  deal  of 
glory,  and  his  adversary  carried  the  .mark  of  his 
shame  to  the  grave.*  After  this,  returning  into  the 
country,  he  there  lived  with  very  much  love,  honour, 
and  repute ;  but  having  been  tossed  up  and  down 
in  his  youth,  and  interrupted  in  his  studies,  he  grew 
into  such  an  excessive  humour  for  books,  that  he 
wholly  addicted  himself  to  them ;  and  deeply  engag* 


^  This  is  a  singular  tale,  and  savours  almost  too  much 
of  the  ridiculous  for  the  gravity  of  an  historian :  however, 
Rushworth  recites  a  story  of  this  same  man  not  a  little 
resembling  it,  in  the  appendix  to  his  second  vol.  ^  Sir  German 
Poole  vowed  revenge  against  a  Mr.  Brighthouse,  shot  two 
pistols  at  him  out  of  a  window,  set  two  servants  on  him 
with  swords,  who  ran  him  through  the  cloak  between  the 
arm  and  body,  but  killed  him  not,  he  defending  himself 
eflfectually  till  Sir  German  came  on,  who  wounded  him,  and 
for  which  he  and  another  were  committed  to  the  Fleet, 
fined  ;£iioo,  &c."  .  This  does  not  seem  to  have  cured  him ; 
perhaps  the  mark  set  on  him  by  Sir  Thomas  H.  succeeded 
better.  Did  Charles  the  Second  take  the  hint  from  this 
when  he  set  assassins  to  slit  Mr.  Coventry's  nose,  which 
caused  the  Coventry  act  to  pass  ? — ^J.  H. 


i6i6.]        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.  55 

ing  in  school  divinity,  spent  even  his  hours  of  meat 
and  sleep  among  his  books,  with  such  eagerness, 
that  though  he  himself  attained  a  high  reputation  of 
learning  thereby,  and  indeed  a  great  improvement 
in  wisdom  and  piety,  yet  he  too  much  deprived 
his  dear  friends  and  relations  of  his  conversa- 
tion. When  he  was  entered  into  this  studious 
life,  God  took  from  him  his  dear  wife,  who  left  him 
only  two  weak  children ;  and  then  being  extremely 
afflicted  for  so  deplorable  a  loss,  he  entertained  his 
melancholy  among  the  old  fathers  and  schoolmen, 
instead  of  diverting  it ;  and  having  furnished  him- 
self with  the  choicest  library  in  that  part  of  England, 
it  drew  to  him  all  the  learned  and  religious  men 
thereabouts,  who  found  better  resolutions  from  him 
than  from  any  of  his  books.  Living  constantly  in 
the  country,^  he  could  not  be  exempted  from  ad- 
ministering justice  among  them,  which  he  did  with 
such  equity  and  wisdom,  and  was  such  a  defender 
of  the  country's  interest,  that,  without  affecting  it 
at  all,  he  grew  the  most  popular  and  most  beloved 
man  in  the  country,  even  to  the  envy  of  those 
prouder  great  ones  that  despised  the  common 
interest.  What  others  sought,  he  could  not  shun, 
being  still  sought  by  the  whole  county,  to  be  their 
representative,    to    which    he   was    several    times 


^  Country  here  and  in  many  other  places  in  these  Memoirs 
signifies  county. 


56         Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1616. 

elected,  and  ever  faithful  to  his  trust  and  his 
country's  interest,  though  never  approving  violence 
and  faction.  He  was  a  man  of  a  most  moderate 
and  wise  spirit,  but  still  so  inclined  to  favour  the 
oppressed  saints  and  honest  people  of  those  times, 
that,  though  he  conformed  to  the  government,  the 
licentious  and  profane  encroachers  upon  common 
native  rights  branded  him  with  the  reproach  of  the 
world,  though  the  glory  of  good  men — Puritanism ; 
yet  notwithstanding  he  continued  constant  to  the 
best  interest,  and  died  at  London  in  the  year  1643, 
a  sitting  member  of  that  glorious  Parliament  that 
so  generously  attempted,  and  had  almost  effected, 
England's  perfect  liberty.  He  was  a  person  of 
great  beauty  and  comeliness  in  all  ages,^  of  a 
bounteous  and  noble  nature,  of  clear  courage,  sweet 
and  affable  conversation,  of  a  public  spirit,  of  great 
prudence  and  reputation,  a  true  lover  of  all  pious 
learned  persons,  and  no  less  of  honest  plain  people ; 

^  His  picture  remained  at  Owthorpe,  and  very  well  jus« 
tified  this  description,  and  is  now  in  the  editor^s  possession 
in  high  preservation.  For  the  bounty  and  nobleness  of  his 
nature  take  this  instance  from  Thoroton's  History  of  Notts. 
*'  Henry  Sacheverell,  Esq.,  being  dissatisfied  with  his  only 
daughter  for  an  improper  marriage,  left  the  whole  estate  at 
RatdifT  upon  Soar  to  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson,  his  sister^s 
son,  who  willingly  divided  it  with  the  disinherited  lady." 
His  moiety  came  afterwards  to  Alderman  Ireton,  being 
sacrificed  to  him  through  necessity  by  Col  Hutchinson, 
as  will  hereafter  be  shown. — ^J.  H. 


i6i6.]        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.  5  7 

of  a  most  tender  conscience^  and  therefore  declaring 
much  for  and  endeavouring  moderation,  if  it  had 
been  possible  in  the  beginning  of  our  wars  that  the 
greatest  wisdom  could  have  cast  on  any  drops  of 
healing  counsel,  to  have  allayed  the  furious  rage  of 
both  parties.  Though  never  man  was  a  deeper  nor 
truer  mourner  than  he  for  his  first  wife,  yet  that 
long  dropping  grief  did  but  soften  his  heart  for  the 
impression  of  a  second  love,  which  he  conceived  for 
a  very  honourable  and  beautiful  lady,  who  was 
Katherine  the  youngest  daughter  of  Sir  John  Stan- 
hope, of  Elvaston,  a  noble  fatnily  in  Derbyshire,  by 
whom  he  had  a  son  and  two  daughters  surviving 
him,  not  unworthy  of  their  family. 

Mr.  John  Hutchinson,  the  eldest  of  his  surviving 
sons,  by  his  first  wife,  was  bom  at  Nottingham  in 
the  month  of  September,  in  the  year  1616.^  That 
year  there  had  been  a  great  drought,  by  reason  of 
which  the  country  would  not  afibrd  his  father  any 
provision  for  his  stables,  so  that  he  was  forced  to 
remove  from  Owthorpe  to  winter  in  the  town  of 
Nottingham,  somewhat  before  his  lady's  time  of 
account.  She  being  in  the  coach  on  her  way 
thither,  and  seeing  her  husband  in  some  danger  by 

^  Mrs.  Hutchinson  is  here  in  error.  The  great  drought 
took  place  in  1615  ;  and  it  also  appears  from  the  registers  of 
St.  Mary's,  Nottingham,  that  John,  son  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Hutchinson,  was  bom  on  September  18, 161 5.  Vide  Brown, 
"  Worthies  of  Nottinghamshire,"  p.  190* 


58  Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        [1619. 

reason  of  a  mettled  horse  he  rid  upon,  took  a 
fright,  and  was  brought  to  bed  the  next  day,  as 
they  imagined  some  three  weeks  before  her  time, 
and  they  were  confirmed  in  that  opinion  by  the 
weakness  of  the  child,  which  continued  all  his 
infancy.  When  he  was  bom  there  was  an  elder 
brother  in  the  family,  but  he  died  a  child.  Two 
years  and  a  half  after  this  Mr.  George  Hutchinson, 
his  younger  brother,  was  bom  at  Owthorpe;  and 
half  a  year  after  his  birth  the  two  Children  lost 
their  mother,  who  died  of  a  cold  she  had  taken, 
and  was  buried  at  Owthorpe.  She  was  a  lady  of 
as  noble  family  as  any  in  the  county,  of  an  in- 
comparable shape  and  beauty,  embellished  with  the 
best  education  those  days  afforded ;  and  above  all 
had  such  a  generous  virtue  joined  with  attractive 
sweetness,  that  she  captivated  the  hearts  of  all 
that  knew  her.  She  was  pious,  liberal,  courteous, 
patient,  kind  above  an  ordinary  degree,  ingenuous 
to  all  things  she  would  apply  herself  to ;  and  not- 
withstanding she  had  had  her  education  at  court, 
was  delighted  in  her  own  country  habitation,  and 
managed  all  her  family  affairs  better  than  any  of 
the  homespun  housewifes,  that  had  been  brought 
up  to  nothing  else.  She  was  a  most  affectionate 
wife,  a  great  lover  of  her  father's  house,  showing 
that  true  honour  to  parents  is  the  leading  virtue, 
which  seldom  wants  the  concomitancy  of  all  the 
rest    of   honour's    train.       She   was   a   wise   and 


1619.I        Metnoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.  59 

bountiful  mistress  in  her  family,  a  blessing  to  her 
tenants  and  neighbourhood,  and  had  an  indulgent 
tenderness  to  her  infants ;  bbt  death  veiled  all  her 
mortal  glories  in  the  26th  year  of  her  age.  The 
stories  I  have  received  of  her  have  been  but  scanty 
epitaphs  of  those  things  which  were  worthy  of  a 
large  chronicle,  and  a  better  recorder  than  I  can 
be ;  I  shall  therefore  draw  again  the  sable  curtain 
before  that  image  which  I  have  ventured  to  look  at 
a  little,  but  dare  not  undertake  to  discover  to  others. 
One  that  was  present  at  her  death  told  me  that 
she  had  an  admirable  voice,  and  skill  to  manage  it ; 
and  that  she  went  away  singing  a  psalm,  which 
this  maid  apprehended  she  sung  with  so  much 
more  than  usual  sweetness,  as  if  her  soul  had  been 
already  ascended  into  the  celestial  choir. 

There  is  a  story  of  her  father  and  mother  so 
memorable  that  though  it  be  not  altogether  per- 
tinent to  their  grandchild's  affairs,  which  I  only 
intend,  yet  I  shall  here  put  it  in,  since  the  third 
generation,  for  whom  I  make  this  collection,  is  not 
altogether  unconcerned  in  the  great  grandfather. 
He  (the  great  grandfather)  was  not  the  eldest  son 
of  his  father  Sir  John  Biron,  but  had  an  elder 
brother  who  had  married  a  private  gentleman's 
daughter  in  the  country,  and  so  displeased  his 
father  in  that  match;  that  he  intended  an  equal  part 
of  his  estate  to  this  Sir  John  Biron,  his  younger  son, 
and  thereupon  married  him  to  a   young  lady  who 


6o         Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [i6i^ 

was  one  of  the  daughters  of  my  lord  Fitzwilliam, 
that  had  been  deputy  of  Ireland  in  the  reign 
of  Queen  Elizabeth,  and  lived  as  a  prince  in 
that  country.^  This  daughter  of  his  having  an 
honourable  aspiring  to  all  things  excellent,  and 
being  assisted  by  the  great  education  her  father 
gave  her,  attained  to  a  high  degree  of  learning 
and  language,  to  such  an  excellency  in  music 
and  poetry,  that  she  made  rare  compositions 
in  both  kinds;  and  there  was  not  ^y  of  those 
extraordinary  qualities,  which  are  therefore  more 
glorious  because  more  rare  in  the  female  sex,  but 
she  was  excellent  in  them :  and  besides  all  these 
ornaments  of  soul,  she  had  a  body  of  as  admirable 
form  and  beauty,  which  justly  made  her  husband 
so  infinitely  enamoured  of  her  as  never  man  was 
more.  She  could  not  set  too  high  a  value  on  her- 
self if  she  compared  herself  with  other  women  of 
those  times ;  yet  it  was  an  alloy  to  her  glories  that 
she  was  a  little  grieved  that  a  less  woman,  the 
elder  brother's  wife,  was  superior  to  her  in  regard 

^  By  mistake  Mrs.  Hutchinson  calls  him  lord.  The  per- 
son here  meant  was  Sir  William  Fitzwilliam,  appointed 
governor  of  Ireland  seven  times  with  the  different  titles  of 
Lord  Justice  and  Lord  Deputy,  by  that  distinguishing  and 
judicious  princess.  A  sufficient  eulogy !  From  him  descends 
in  a  direct  line  the  present  Earl  Fitzwilliam.  Fortes  creaniur^ 
fortibus  et  bonis.  The  reader  will  most  likely  find  this 
episode  too  beautiful  and  affecting  to  think  it  needs  the 
apology  the  writer  makes.^J.  H. 


1619.I        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         6 1 

of  her  husbandy  though  inferior  in  regard  of  her 
birth  and  person ;  but  that  grief  was  soon  removed 
by  a  sad  accident.  That  marriage  wherein  the 
father  had  not  been  obeyed  was  fruitless,  and  the 
young  gentleman  himself  being  given  to  youthful 
vanity,  as  he  was  one  day  to  go  out  a  hunting  with 
his  father,  had  commanded  something  to  be  put 
under  the  saddle  of  a  young  serving  man,  that  was 
to  go  out  with  them,  to  make  sport  at  his  affright 
when  his  horse  should  prove  unquiet.  The  thing 
succeeded  as  it  was  designed,  and  made  them  such 
sport,  that  the  young  gentleman,  in  the  passion  of 
laughter,  died,  and  turned  their  mirth  into  mourn- 
ing ;  leaving  a  sad  caveat  by  his  example,  to  take 
heed  of  hazarding  men's  precious  lives  for  a  little 
sport.  The  younger  brother  by  this  means  became 
the  heir  of  the  family,  and  was  father  of  a  nume- 
rous and  hopeful  issue.  But  while  the  incomparable 
mother  shined  in  all  the  human  glory  she  wished, 
and  had  the  crown  of  all  outward  felicity  to  the 
full,  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  mutual  love  of  her 
most  beloved  husband,  God  in  one  moment  took  it 
away,  and  alienated  her  most  excellent  understand- 
ing in  a  difficult  child-birth ;  wherein  she  brought 
forth  two  daughters  which  lived  to  be  married,  and 
one  more  that  died  I  think  as  soon  or  before  it  was 
bom.^     But  after    that,   all    the    art  of   the   best 

^  The  twins  here  mentioned  as  daughters  are  said  by 


62         Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1619. 

physicians  in  England  could  never  restore  her 
understanding :  yet  she  was  not  frantic,  but  had 
such  a  pretty  deliration,  that  her  ravings  were  more 
delightful  than  other  women's  most  rational  con- 
versations. Upon  this  occasion  her  husband  gave 
himself  up  to  live  retired  with  her,  as  became  her 
condition,  and  made  haste  to  marry  his  son ;  which 
he  did  so  young  that  I  have  heard  say  when  the 
first  child  was  born,  the  father,  mother,  and  child, 
could  not  make  one-and-thirty  years  old.  The 
daughters  and  the  rest  of  the  children  as  soon  as 
they  grew  up  were  married  and  dispersed.  I  think 
I  have  heard  she  had  some  children  after  that  child- 
birth which  distempered  her,  and  then  my  lady 
Hutchinson  must  have  been  one  of  them,  for  she 
was  the  youngest  daughter,  and  at  nine  years  old 
so  taking,  and  of  such,  an  amiable  conversation, 
that  the  lady  Arabella  ^  would  needs  take  her  from 
her  parents,  along  with  her  to  the  court;  where 
she  minded  nothing  but  her  lady,  and  grew  up  so 


Thoroton  to  have  been  sons,  viz.,  Sir  John,  presently  herein 
spoken  of  as  the  brother-in-law  of  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson, 
and  Sir  Nicholas,  who  served  Charles  the  First  with  the 
same  zeal  as  the  rest  of  that  family. — ^J.  H. 

^  Arabella  Stuart,  daughter  of  Lord  Darnle/s  younger 
brother,  and  consequently  cousin  of  James  I.  She  married, 
in  May  1610,  William  Seymour,  son  of  Lord  Beauchamp, 
a  descendant  of  Mary,  the  younger  sister  of  Henry  VI IL 
Being  herself  a  descendant  of  his  elder  sister  Margaret, 


1619.I       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.  63 

intimate  in  all  her  counsels,  that  the  princess  was 
more  delighted  in  her  than  in  any  of  the  women 
about    her;    but    when    she   (the    princess)    was 
carried    away    from    them    to    prison,    my    lady's 
brother  fetched  her  home  to  his  house,  and  there, 
although   his  wife,  a  most   prudent   and  virtuous 
lady,  laboured  to  comfort  her  with  all  imaginable 
kindness,  yet  so  constant  was  her  friendship  to  the 
unfortunate  princess,  that  I  have  heard  her  servants 
say,  even  after  her  marriage,  she  would  steal  many 
melancholy  hours  to  sit  and  weep  in  remembrance 
of  her.     Meanwhile  her  parents  were  driving  on 
their  age,  in   no   less   constancy  of  love  to  each 
other ;  for  even  that  distemper  which  bad  estranged 
her  mind  in  all  things  else,  had  left  her  love  and 
obedience  entire  to  her  husband,  and  he  retained 
the  same  fondness  and  respect  for  her,  after  she 
was  distempered,  as  when  she  was  the  glory  of  her 
age.     He  had  two  beds  in  one  chamber,  and  she 
being  a  little  sick,   two  women   watched  by  her, 
some  time  before  she  died.     It  was  his  custom,  as 
soon  as  ever  he  unclosed  his  eyes,  to  ask  how  she 
did ;  but  one  night,  he  being  as  they  thought  in  a 
deep  sleep,  she  quietly  departed  towards  the  morn- 
James,  who  had  forbidden  this  marriage,  committed  both 
the  culprits  to  prison,  July  1610,  where  she  died  September 
27,  161 5. 

See  Gardiner's  History  of  England,  vol.  ii.  pp.  11 3-1 19, 
and  Miss  Cooper's  "  Letters  and  Life  of  Arabella  Stuart." 


64  Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1619. 

ing.  He  was  that  day  to  have  gone  a  hunting,  his 
usual  exercise  for  his  health,  and  it  was  bis  custom 
to  have  his  chaplain  pray  with  him  before  he  went 
out ;  and  the  women,  fearful  to  surprise  him  with 
the  ill  news,  knowing  his  dear  affection  to  her,  had 
stolen  out  and  acquainted  the  chaplain,  desiring 
him  to  inform  him  of  it.  Sir  John  waking,  did  not 
on  that  day,  as  was  his  custom,  ask  for  her,  but 
called  the  chaplain  to  prayers,  and  joining  with 
him,  in  the  midst  of  the  prayer,  expired,  and  both 
of  them  were  buried  together  in  the  same  grave. 
Whether  he  perceived  her  death,  and  would  not 
take  notice,  or  whether  some  strange  sympathy  in 
love  or  nature,  tied  up  their  lives  in  one,  or  whether 
God  was  pleased  to  exercise  an  unusual  providence 
towards  them,  preventing  them  both  from  that 
bitter  sorrow  which  such  separations  cause,  it  can 
be  but  conjectured ;  but  the  thing  being  not  ordi- 
nary, and  having  received  it  from  the  relation  of 
one  of  his  daughters  and  his  grandchild,  I  thought 
it  not  impertinent  here  to  insert.  I  shall  now 
proceed  to  our  own  story. 

As  soon  as  my  lady  Hutchinson  ^  was  dead,  her 
brother.  Sir  John  Biron,  came  over  and  found  the 
most  desolate  afflicted  widower  that  ever  was  be- 
held, and  one  of  his  sisters,  the  lady  RatcliiTe,  who 
was  the  dear  sister  of  the  dead  lady,  scarce  alive 

^  The  mother  of  Col.  Hutchinson  :  see  p.  59. 


1619.I       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         65 

for  sorrow;  and  indeed  such  an  universal  lamen- 
tation in  the  house  and  neighbourhood,  that  the 
protraction  of  their  griefs  for  such  a  funeral  as  was 
intended  her,  might  possibly  have  made  them  all 
as  she :  Sir  John  therefore  the  next  morning 
privately,  unknown  to  her  husband,  with  only  her 
own  family,  carried  her  to  the  church,  which  was 
but  the  next  door,  and  interred  her  without  further 
ceremony.  It  booted  not  Sir  Thomas  to  be  angry 
at  her  friend's  care  of  him;  who  pursued  it  so 
far,  that  the  next  day  he  carried  away  Sir  Thomas, 
lady  RadclifTe,  and  Mr.  John  Hutchinson,  towards 
his  own  house  at  Bulwell,  leaving  Mr.  George  at 
his  nurse's.  But  the  horses  of  the  coach  being 
mettled,  in  the  halfway  between  Owthorpe  and 
Nottingham  run  away,  overthrew  it,  and  slightly 
hurt  all  that  were  in  the  coach ;  who  all  got  out, 
one  by  one,  except  the  maid  that  had  the  child 
in  her  arms,  and  she  stayed  as  long  as  there  was 
any  hope  of  preventing  the  coach  from  being  torn 
to  pieces :  but  when  she  saw  no  stop  could  be 
given  to  the  mad  horses,  she  lapped  him  as  close 
as  she  could  in  the  mantle,  and  flung  him  as  far  as 
she  could  from  the  coach  into  the  ploughed  lands, 
whose  furrows,  were  at  that  time  very  soft ;  and 
by  the  good  providence  of  God  the  child,  reserved 
to  a  more  glorious  death,  had  no  apparent  hurt. 
He  was  taken  up  and  carried  to  Bulwell,  where  his 
aunt  had  such  a  motherly  tenderness  for  him  that 

VOL.  I.  E 


66  Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1619. 

he  grew  and  prospered  in  her  care.  As  the  fresh 
memory  and  excessive  love  they  bore  the  mother, 
endeared  the  young  child  to  all  her  relations  at  the 
first,  so  as  he  grew,  he  discovered  so  much  grow- 
ing wisdom,  agility,  and  pretty  sprightfulness,  had 
such  a  natural  gravity  without  suUenness,  and 
such  sweet  innocence,  that  every  child  of  the  family 
loved  him  better  than  their  own  brothers  and 
sisters,  and  Sir  John  Biron  and  my  lady  were  not 
half  so  fond  of  any  of  their  own.  When  it  was 
time  for  them  to  go  to  school,  both  the  brothers 
were  sent  to  board  with  Mr.  Theobalds/  the 
master  of  the  free  school  at  Nottingham,  who  was 
an  excellent  scholar ;  but  having  no  children,  some 
wealth,  and  a  little  living  that  kept  his  house, 
he  first  grew  lazy,  and  after  left  oiT  his  school. 
Sir  Thomas  then  removed  his  sons  to  the  free 
school  at  Lincoln,  where  there  was  a  master  very 
famous  for  learning  and  piety,  Mr.  Clarke ;  but  he 
was  such  a  supercilious  pedant,  and  so  conceited 
of  his  own  pedantic  forms,  that  he  gave  Mr. 
Hutchinson  a  disgust  of  him,  and  he  profited  very 

^  In  the  Nottingham  records,  under  the  year  161 5,  is  the 
following  entry,  ''Mr.  Theobald,  recommended  by  the 
master  and  fellows  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  chosen 
the  new  master  at  the  free  school,  at  a  salary  of  twenty 
marks  per  annum,  with  the  house,  and  liberty  of  taking 
boarders.** — Bailey,  "Annals  of  Nottinghamshire,"  voL  iL 

P-590- 


1619-36.]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         67 

little  there.  At  this  place  it  was  that  God  began 
early  to  exercise  him  with  affliction  and  tempta- 
tion ;  he  was  deprived  of  the  attendance  and  care 
he  had  been  used  to,  and  met  with  many  inconveni- 
ences unsuitable  to  his  tender  and  nice  constitution  ; 
but  this  was  little,  for  he  had  such  discretion  in 
his  childhood  that  he  understood  what  was  fit 
for  him  to  require,  and  governed  wherever  he 
lived ;  for  he  would  not  be  denied  reasonable,  and 
would  not  ask  other  things.  He  was  as  a  father 
over  his  brother,  and  having  some  advantage 
of  years,  took  upon  him  to  be  the  guide  of  his 
youth,  yet  with  such  love,  that  never  were  children 
more  commendable  and  happy  in  mutual  affections. 
But  it  pleased  God  to  strike  his  brother  with  a  sad 
disease,  the  falling  sickness,^  wherein  Mr.  Hut- 
chinson most  carefully  attended  him  while  he  con- 
tinued at  Lincoln ;  which  his  father  permitted  him 
to  do,  for  the  opportunity  of  Dr.  Pridgeon,  one  of 
the  best  physicians  in  those  parts.  When  he  had 
in  vain  exercised  all  his  art  on  the  young  gentle- 
man, and  found  no  success  in  it,  he  advised  he 
should  return  to  his  father's  house,  and  be  enter- 
tained with  all  the  sports  that  could  be  found  to 
delight  his  mind  or  exercise  his  body.  Accordingly 
he  was  carried  home,  and  had  a  pack  of  hounds, 
huntsmen,  and  horses  kept  for  him,  and  was  some- 

^  f./.,  epilepsy. 


68        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1619-36. 

thing  recreated,  but  not  cured  thereby;  till  after- 
wards it  pleased  God  to  effect  that  cure  by  a  young 
practitioner,  which  the  ablest  physidans  of  the 
country  could  not  work.  This  separation  from  his 
brother,  to  whom  he  had  such  an  entire  affection, 
considered  with  the  sad  occasion  of  it,  was  a  great 
affliction  to  the  elder  brother ;  who  remained  in  a 
place  where  he  had  little  to  delight  him,  having  an 
aversion  to  his  austere,  pedantic  master,  increased 
by  an  opinion  that  his  severity  had  been  the  cause 
of  his  dear  brother's  distemper. 

The  great  encouragement  Sir  Thomas  had  to 
trust  his  sons  in  this  town  was,  because  at  that 
time  a  gentleman  inhabited  it  who  had  married  his 
uncle's  widow,  and  had  been  his  fellow-sufferer  in 
a  confinement  in  Kent,  when  King  Charles  the  First 
had  broken  up  a  parliament  to  the  disgust  of  the 
people,  and  durst  not  trust  those  gentlemen  that 
had  been  most  faithful  defenders  of  their  countries' 
interests,  to  return  for  some  time  to  their  own 
countries,  for  which  they  served.^     Of  these  worthy 


^  Sir  Thomas  Grantham  was  a  member  of  both  the  first  and 
second  Parliaments  of  Charles  I.  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson 
represented  the  county  of  Nottingham  in  the  first  Parlia- 
ment of  Charles  I.  The  imprisonment  referred  to  in  the 
text  probably  took  place  after  the  dissolution  of  the  second 
Parliament,  when,  says  Rushworth,  voL  i.  p.  428,  *^  those 
gentlemen  who  stood  conunitted  for  not  parting  with  monies 
upon  the  Commissions  for  Loans,  were  appointed  to  several 


161^36.]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hulchinson.        69 

patriots.  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson  and  Sir  Thomas 
Grantham,  the  gentleman  of  whom  I  am  speaking, 
were  confined  from  Nottingham  and  Lincolnshire 
to  the  house  of  one  Sir  Adam  Newton  in  Kent; 
the  good  father  little  thinking  then,  that  in  that  fatal 
country  his  son  should  suffer  an  imprisonment  upon 
the  same  account,  to  the  destruction  of  his  life  and 
family.  Sir  Thomas  Grantham  was  a  gentleman 
of  great  repute  in  his  country,  and  kept  up  all  his 
life  the  old  hospitality  of  England,  having  a  great 
retinue  and  a  noble  table,  and  a  resort  for  all  the 
nobility  and  gentry  in  those  parts.  He  had  only 
two  sons,  whereof  the  eldest  was  a  fine  gentleman, 
bred  beyond  the  seas,  according  to  the  best  edu- 
cation of  those  times;  the  other  was  a  foolish 
youth,  schoolfellow  with  Mr.  Hutchinson,  who 
every  Saturday  night  was  fetched  from  school  to 
Sir  Thomas  Grantham's,  and  returned  again  the 
Monday  morning.  Upon  the  intimate  friendship  be- 
tween Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson  and  this  gentleman, 
Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson  had  a  lodging  always  kept 
for  him  at  Lincoln,  and  was  very  oflen  there.  My 
Lady  Grantham  had  with  her  a  very  pretty  young 
gentlewoman,  whom  she  brought  with  her  out  of 

confinements,  not  in  their  own  but  foreign  counties."  Rush- 
worth  gives  a  list  in  which  he  states  that  ''Sir  Thomas 
Grantham,  and  some  others  in  the  county  of  Lincoln,  were 
removed  and  secured  in  the  countyof  Dorset."  Sir  Thomas 
Hutchinson  is  not  mentioned  by  name. 


70        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1619-36. 

Kenti  the  daughter  of  Sir  Adam  Newton;  my 
lady's  design  was  to  begin  an  early  acquaintance, 
which  might  after  draw  on  a  marriage  between 
her  and  Mr.  Hutchinson,  and  it  took  such  effect 
that  there  was  a  great  inclination  in  the  young 
gentlewoman  to  him;  and  so  much  good-nature 
on  his  side,  as  amounted  to  a  mutual  respect, 
and  to  such  a  friendship  as  their  youth  was 
capable  of,  which  the  parents  and  others  that 
wished  so,  interpreted  to  be  a  passion  of  love; 
but  if  it  were  so,  death  quenched  the  flame,  and 
ravished  the  young  lady  from  him  in  the  sweet 
blooming  of  her  youth.  That  night  she  died,  he 
lay  in  his  father's  chamber,  and  by  accident  being 
very  sick,  it  was  imputed  to  that  cause;  but  he 
himself  least  perceived  he  had  any  more  of  love  for 
her  than  gratitude  for  her  kindness  to  him,  upon 
which  account  her  death  was  an  affliction  to  him, 
and  made  that  house  which  had  been  his  relief 
from  his  hated  school  less  pleasant  to  him ;  espe- 
cially when  he  met  there  continual  solicitations  to 
sin  by  the  travelled  gentleman,  who,  living  in  all 
seeming  sobriety  before  his  father,  was  in  his 
own  chamber  not  only  vicious  himself,  but  full  of 
endeavour  to  corrupt  Mr.  Hutchinson,  who  by  the 
grace  of  God  resisted,  and  detested  his  frequent 
temptations  of  all  kinds.  The  advantage  he  had 
at  this  school,  there  being  very  many  gentle- 
men's sons  there,  an  old  Low-country  soldier  was 


1619-36.]     Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         7 1 

entertained  to  train  them  in  arms,  and  they  ail 
bought  themselves  weapons;  and,  instead  of  childish 
sports,  when  they  were  not  at  their  books,  they 
were  exercised  in  all  their  military  postures,  and  in 
assaults  and  defences;  which  instruction  was  not 
useless  a  few  years  after,  to  some  of  them.  Colonel 
Thomhagh,  who  was  now  trained  in  this  sportive 
militia,  with  Colonel  Hutchinson,  afterwards  was 
his  fellow-soldier  in  earnest,  when  the  great  cause 
of  God's  and  England's  rights  came  to  be  disputed 
with  swords  against  encroaching  princes.  Sir 
Thomas  Grantham  dying,  Mr.  Hutchinson  was  re- 
moved from  Lincoln  to  the  free-school  at  Notting- 
ham, where  his  father  married  a  second  wife,  and 
for  a  while  went  up  to  London  with  her ;  leaving 
his  son  at  board  in  a  very  religious  house,  where 
new  superstitions  and  pharisaical  holiness,  straining 
at  gnats  and  swallowing  camels,  gave  him  a  little 
disgust,  and  was  for  a  while  a  stumbling-block  in 
his  way  of  purer  profession,  when  he  saw  among 
professors  such  unsuitable  miscarriages.  There  was 
now  a  change  in  the  condition  and  contentment 
of  his  life ;  he  was  old  enough  to  be  sensible  that 
his  father's  second  love  and  marriage  to  a  person  of 
such  quality,  as  required  a  settlement  for  her  son, 
must  needs  be  a  lessening  to  his  expectation ;  but 
he  was  so  affectionate  to  his  father  that  he  received 
it  very  contentedly,  and  rejoiced  in  his  removal, 
coming  from  a  supercilious  pedant  to  a  very  honest 


72        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutckinsan.     [161^36^ 

man,  who  using  him  with  respect,  advanced  him 
DKure  in  one  month  than  the  other  did  in  a  year. 
This  tied  him  to  no  observation,  noc  restrained  him 
from  no  pleasure,  noc  needed  not,  for  he  was  so 
moderate  wh^i  he  was  left  at  his  liberty,  that  he 
needed  no  regulation.  The  familiar  kindness  of  his 
master  made  him  now  b^;in  to  love  that  whidi  the 
other^s  austerity  made  him  loath ;  and  in  a  yeai^s 
time  he  advanced  exceedingly  in  learning,  and  was 
sent  to  Cambridge.  He  was  made  a  fdlow-com- 
moner  of  Peter  House,  under  the  tuition  of  one 
Mr.  Norwich,  an  admirable  scholar,  who  by  his  dvfl 
demeanour  to  him  won  so  mudi  upcm  his  good 
nature,  that  he  loved  and  reverenced  him  as  a  father, 
and  betook  himself  with  such  delight  to  his  studies 
that  he  attained  to  a  great  height  of  learning,  per- 
formed public  exercises  in  his  collie  with  mudi 
ai^lause,  and  upon  their  importunity  took  a  degree 
in  the  university ;  whereof  he  was  at  that  time  the 
grace,  there  not  being  any  gentleman  in  the  town 
that  lived  with  such  r^ularity  in  himself,  and  sudi 
general  love  and  good  esteem  of  all  persons  as  he 
did.  He  kept  not  company  with  any  of  the  vain 
young  persons,  but  mth  the  graver  men,  and  those 
by  whose  conversation  he  might  gain  improvem^it 
He  was  constant  at  their  chapel,  where  he  began 
to  take  notice  of  their  stretching  superstition  to 
idolatry;  and  was  courted  much  into  a  more  solemn 
practice  of  it  than  he  could  admit,  though  as  yet 


i6i9-36^]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         73 

he  considered  not  the  emptiness  and  carnality,  to 
say  no  more,  of  that  public  service  which  was  then 
in  use.  For  his  exercise  he  practised  tennis,  and 
played  admirable  well  at  it ;  for  his  diversion,  he 
chose  music,  and  got  a  very  good  hand,  which  after- 
wards he  improved  to  a  great  mastery  on  the  viol. 
There  were  masters  that  taught  to  dance  and  vault, 
whom  he  practised  with,  being  very  agile  and  apt 
for  all  such  becoming  exercises.  His  father  stinted 
not  his  expense,  which  the  bounty  of  his  mind  made 
pretty  large,  for  he  was  very  liberal  to  his  tutors 
and  servitors,  and  to  the  meaner  officers  of  the 
house.  He  was  enticed  to  bow  to  their  great  idol, 
learning,  and  had  a  higher  veneration  for  it  a  long 
time  than  can  strictly  be  allowed;  yet  he  then 
looked  upon  it  as  a  handmaid  to  devotion,  and  as 
the  great  improver  of  natural  reason.  His  tutor 
and  the  masters  that  governed  the  college  while  he 
was  there,  were  of  Arminian  principles,  and  that 
college  was  noted  above  all  for  popish  superstitious 
practices ;  ^  yet  through  the  grace  of  God,  notwith- 


^  Dr.  Gardner  speaks  of  Peter  House  as  ''  the  college  of 
Cosin  and  Crashaw,  the  college  which,  more  than  any 
other,  attempted  to  exorcise  the  spirit  of  Puritanism" 
("  Fall  of  the  Monarchy  of  Charles  I.,"  i.  28).  It  might  have 
been  expected  that  the  son  of  Puritan  parents  would  be 
entered  rather  at  Sidney  Sussex  or  Emmanuel  Sidney 
Sussex  was  the  college  at  which  Cromwell  and  the  Earl  of 
Manchester  were  educated.    But  Emmanuel  was,  par  excel' 


74        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1636-38. 

standing  the  mutual  kindness  the  whole  household 
had  for  him  and  he  for  them,  he  came  away,  after 
five  years  study  there,  untainted  with  those  prin- 
ciples or  practices,  though  not  yet  enlightened  to 
discern  the  spring  of  them  in  the  rights  and  usages 
of  the  English  church. 

When  he  came  from  the  university,  he  was  about 
twenty  years  of  age,  and  returned  to  his  father's 
house,  who  had  now  settled  his  habitation  at  Not- 
tingham ;  but  he  there  enjoyed  no  great  delight, 
another  brood  of  children  springing  up  in  the 
house,  and  the  servants  endeavouring  with  tales 
and  flatteries  to  sow  dissension  on  both  sides. 
Therefore,  having  a  great  reverence  for  his  father, 
and  being  not  willing  to  disturb  him  with  com- 
plaints, as  soon  as  he  could  obtain  his  leave  he 
went  to  London.  In  the  meantime  the  best  com- 
pany the  town  afforded  him,  was  a  gentleman  of  as 
exquisite   breeding  and    parts   as   England's   court 

Unce^  the  Puritan  college.  ^  In  the  house  of  pure  Emmanuel," 
says  Corbet's  " Mad  Zealot"— 

'*  I  had  my  education. 
Where  my  friends  surmise 
I  dazzled  mine  eyes, 
With  the  light  of  Revelation." 

Laud,  in  his  ^  Considerations  presented  to  the  King  for  better 
settling  the  Church  Government"  (1628),  complained  of 
these  two  colleges  as  nurseries  of  Puritanism.  On  the 
Popish  Practices  at  Peter  House,  vide  Prynne,  ''Canter- 
bury's Doom,"  pp.  73,  74. 


1636-38.]     Memoirs  of  Cof.  Hutchinson.         75 

ever  enjoyedi  one  that  was  now  married,  and 
retired  into  this  town ;  one  of  such  admirable  power 
of  language  and  persuasion  as  was  not  any  where 
else  to  be  found ;  but  after  all  this,  discontents,  or 
the  debaucheries  of  the  times,  had  so  infected  him, 
that  he  would  not  only  debauch  himself,  but  make 
a  delight  to  corrupt  others  for  his  sport.  Some  he 
would  commend  into  such  a  vain-glorious  humour, 
that  they  became  pleasantly  ridiculous;  some  he 
would  teach  apish  postures,  and  make  them  believe 
themselves  rare  men ;  some  he  would  encourage  to 
be  poets,  and  laugh  at  their  ridiculous  rhymes; 
some  young  preachers  he  would  make  stage-players 
in  their  pulpits ;  and  several  ways  sported  himself 
with  the  follies  of  most  of  the  young  men  that  he 
conversed  with.  There  was  not  any  way  which  he 
left  unpractised  upon  Mr.  Hutchinson ;  but  when, 
with  all  his  art  and  industry  he  found  he  could  not 
prevail,  then  he  turned  seriously  to  give  him  such 
excellent  advice  and  instructions  for  living  in  the 
world,  as  were  not  afterwards  unuseful  to  him.^ 
*There  was  besides  this  gentleman,  a  young  phy- 
sician, who  was  a  good  scholar  and  had  a  great 
deal  of  wit,  but  withal  a  professed  atheist,  and 
so  proud,  insolent  a  scurrilous  fellow,  daring  to 
abuse  all  persons  how  much  soever  above  him,  that 

^  Who  the  first  gentleman  was  does  not  appear.  The 
physician  here  meant  is  Dr.  Plumtre,  of  whom  much  more 
will  be  said  in  this  work. — ^J.  H. 


76        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1636-38. 

he  was  thrown  out  of  familiarity  with  the  great 
people  of  the  country,  though  his  excellency  in  his 
profession  made  him  to  be  taken  in  again.  There 
was  also  an  old  man,  who  had  been  Mr.  Hutchin- 
son's first  schoolmaster,  a  person  once  of  great 
learning,  but  afterwards  becoming  a  cynic,  yet  so 
pleasantly  maintaining  that  kind  9f  humour,  that 
his  conversation  was  sometimes  a  good  diversion. . 
These  were  Mr.  Hutchinson's  companions,  yet, 
through  the  grace  of  God,*  they  had  not  power  to 
infect  him,  who,  like  a  bee,  sucked  a  great  deal  of 
honey  from  these  bitter  flowers.  At  that  time  there 
was  in  the  town  a  young  maid,  beautiful,  and 
esteemed  to  be  very  rich,  but  of  base  parentage 
and  penurious  education,  though  else  ingenuous 
enough.  She  was  the  grandchild  of  an  old  physi- 
cian, and  from  her  childhood  having  been  acquainted 
with  Mr.  Hutchinson,  who  used  to  visit  her  grand- 
mother, she  had  conceived  a  kindness  for  him,  which 
though  he  civilly  resented,^  his  great  heart  could 
never  stoop  to  think  of  marrying  into  so  mean  a 
stock ;  yet  by  reason  of  some  liking  he  showed  fop 
her  company,  and  the  melancholy  he  had,  with  some 
discontents  at  home,  she  was  willing  to  flatter  her- 
self it  was  love  for  her,  wherein,  when  she  dis- 


^  Resent,  in  English,  never  used  but  in  a  bad  sense ;  in 
French,  ressentir  is  used  to  signify  a  reciprocal  sentiment 
of  kindness  as  well  as  unkindness. — ^J.  H. 


1636-38.1     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         77 

covered  her  mistake,  it  was  a  great  grief.  However, 
she  was,  without  much  love  on  either  side,  married 
to  an  earl's  son,  and  both  of  them,  wanting  the 
ground  of  happiness  in  marriage,  mutual  love,  en- 
joyed but  little  felicity,  either  in  their  great  fortunes 
or  in  one  another.^ 

In  the  house  with  Mr.  Hutchinson  there  was  a 
young  gentlewoman  of  such  admirable  tempting 
beauty,  and  such  excellent  good  nature,  as  would 
have  thawed  a  rock  of  ice,  yet  even  she  could  never 
get  an  acquaintance  with  him.  Wealth  and  beauty 
thus  in  vain  tempted  him,  for  it  was  not  yet  his 
time  of  love ;  but  it  was  not  far  off.  He  was  now 
sent  to  London,  and  admitted  of  Lincoln's  Inn, 
where  he  was  soon  coveted  into  the  acquaintance 
of  some  gentlemen  of  the  house ;  but  he  found  them 
so  frothy  and  so  vain,  and  could  so  ill  centre  with 
them  in  their  delights,  that  the  town  began  to  be 
tedious  to  him,  who  was  neither  taken  with  wine, 
nor   game,  nor  the   converse   of  wicked   or  vain 

^  It  is  written  in  the  margin  by  Julius  Hutchinson,  Esq., 
probably  from  the  information  given  him  by  Lady  Catharine 
Hutchinson,  that  this  lady's  name  was  Martin,  and  the 
gentleman  who  married  her  Mr.  Pierrepont  It  would  not 
have  been  thought  worth  while  to  inform  the  reader  of  these 
minute  particulars  in  a  note,  but  for  the  sake  of  pointing 
out  the  accuracy  with  which  Mr.  Julius  Hutchinson  read 
and  remarked  upon  this  history,  and  the  full  knowledge  he 
had  of  all  the  circumstances  of  Colonel  Hutchinson's  life. — 
J.  H. 


78        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.     [1636-38. 

women;  to  all  which  he  wanted  not  powerful 
tempters,  had  not  the  power  of  God's  grace  in  him 
been  above  them.  He  tried  a  little  the  study  of 
the  law,  but  finding  it  unpleasant  and  contrary  to 
his  genius,  and  the  plague  that  spring  beginning  to 
drive  people  out  of  the  town,  he  began  to  think  of 
leaving  it,  but  had  no  inclination  to  return  home, 
finding  his  father's  heart  so  set  upon  his  second 
family,  that  his  presence  was  but  disturbance :  yet 
his  father  was  wonderfully  free  and  noble  to  him 
in  allowance,  at  all  places,  as  large  as  any  of  his 
quality  had  made  to  them;  and  it  was  very  well 
bestowed  on  him,  who  consumed  nothing  in  vain 
expense,  but  lived  to  the  honour  of  his  friends  and 
family.  For  his  diversion  he  exercised  himself  in 
those  qualities  he  had  not  had  such  good  oppor- 
tunities for  in  the  country,  as  dancing,  fencing,  and 
music,  wherein  he  had  great  aptness  and  address ; 
and  entertaining  the  best  tutors,  was  at  some 
expense  that  way,  and  loth  to  leave  them  off  before 
he  had  perfected  himself.  However,  many  things 
putting  him  into  the  thoughts  of  quitting  the  town, 
while  he  was  in  deliberation  how  to  dispose  of  him- 
self, and  had  some  reflections  upon-  travel,  a  cousin- 
german  of  his,  a  French  merchant,  came  to  visit 
him  one  morning,  and  told  him  he  was  immediately 
going  into  France,  and  understanding  Mr.  Hut- 
chinson had  some  such  inclination,  had  almost 
persuaded  him  to  go  along  with  him.     The  only 


1636-38.1     Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         79 

obstacle  in  the  way,  was  that  his  father  could  not 
be  acquainted  with  it  time  enough  to  receive  his 
answer  before  they  went.  While  he  was  in  this 
deliberation,  his  music-master  came  in,  to  whom 
he  communicated  his  thoughts;  and  the  man  told 
him  it  was  better  to  go  into  France  at  the  latter 
end  than  the  beginning  of  summer,  and  that  if  he 
pleased,  in  the  mean  time,  to  go  to  Richmond,  where 
the  Prince's  court  was,  he  had  a  house  there,  where 
he  might  be  accommodated ;  and  there  was  very 
good  company  and  recreations,  the  king's  hawks 
being  kept  near  the  place,  and  several  other 
conveniences.  Mr.  Hutchinson  considering  this, 
resolved  to  accept  his  offer;  and  that  day  telling 
a  gentleman  of  the  house  whither  he  was  going,  the 
gentleman  bid  him  take  heed  of  the  place,  for  it 
was  so  fatal  for  love,  that  never  any  young  dis- 
engaged person  went  thither,  who  returned  again 
free.  Mr.  Hutchinson  laughed  at  him,  but  he  to 
confirm  it  told  him  a  very  true  story  of  a  gentle- 
man who  not  long  before  had  come  for  some  time 
to  lodge  there,  and  found  all  the  people  he  came 
in  company  with,  bewailing  the  death  of  a  gentle- 
woman that  had  lived  there.  Hearing  her  so  much 
deplored,  he  made  inquiry  after  her,  and  grew  so 
in  love  with  the  description  that  no  other  discourse 
could  at  first  please  him,  nor  could  he  at  last 
endure  any  other ;  he  grew  desperately  melancholy, 
and  would  go  to  a  mount  where  the  print  of  her 


8o        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.     [1636-38. 

foot  was  cut|  and  lie  there  pining  and  kissing  of  it 
all  the  day  long,  till  at  length  death,  in  some  months' 
space,  concluded  his  languishment.  This  story  was 
very  true ;  but  Mr.  Hutchinson  was  neither  easy  to 
believe  it,  nor  frighted  at  the  example,  thinking 
himself  not  likely  to  make  another.  He  therefore 
went  to  Richmond,  where  he  found  a  great  deal  of 
good  young  company,  and  many  ingenuous  persons 
that,  by  reason  of  the  court,  where  the  young  princes 
were  bred,  entertained  themselves  in  that  place,  and 
had  frequent  resort  to  the  house  where  Mr.  Hutchin- 
son tabled.  The  man  being  a  skilful  composer  in 
music,  the  rest  of  the  king's  musicians  often  met 
at  his  house  to  practise  new  airs  and  prepare  them 
for  the  king;  and  divers  of  the  gentlemen  and 
ladies  that  were  affected  with  music,  came  thither 
to  hear ;  others  that  were  not,  took  that  pretence 
to  entertain  themselves  with  the  company.  Mr. 
Hutchinson  was  soon  courted  into  their  acquaint- 
ance, and  invited  to  their  houses,  where  he  was 
nobly  treated,  with  all  the  attractive  arts  that  young 
women  and  their  parents  use  to  procure  them 
lovers ;  but  though  some  of  them  were  very  hand- 
some, others  wealthy,  witty,  and  well  qualified,  and 
all  of  them  set  out  with  all  the  gaiety  and  bravery 
that  vain  women  put  on  to  set  themselves  off,  yet 
Mr.  Hutchinson  could  not  be  entangled  in  any  of 
their  fine  snares,  but  without  any  taint  of  incivility, 
in    such    a    way   of    handsome   raillery   reproved 


1636-38.]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        8 1 

their  pride  and  vanity,  as  made  them  ashamed  of 
their  glory,  and  vexed  that  he  alone,  of  all  the  young 
gentlemen  that  belonged  to  the  court  or  neighbour- 
hood,  should   be  insensible  of  their  charms.     In 
the  same  hoiise  with  him  there  was  a  younger 
daughter  of  Sir  Allen  Apsley,  late  lieutenant  of  the 
Tower,  tabled  for  the  practice  of  her  lute,  till  the 
return  of  her  mother,  who  was  gone  into  Wiltshire 
for  the  accomplishment  of  a  treaty  that  had  been 
made  some  progress  in,  about  the  marriage  of  her 
elder  daughter  with  a  gentleman  of  that  country, 
out  of  which  my  lady  herself  came,  and  where  her 
brothers.  Sir  John  St.  John  and  Sir  Edward  Hunger- 
ford,  living  in  great  honour  and  reputation,  had  in- 
vited her  to  a  visit  of  them.    This  gentlewoman,  that 
was  left  in  the  house  with  Mr.  Hutchinson,  was  a 
very  child,   her   elder   sister    being   at  that  time 
scarcely  passed  it ;  but  a  child  of  such  pleasantness 
and  vivacity  of  spirit,  and  ingenuity  in  the  quality 
she  practised,  that  Mr.  Hutchinson  took  pleasure 
in  hearing  her  practise,  and  would  fall  in  discourse 
with  her.     She  having  the  keys  of  her  mother's 
house,  some  half  a  mile  distant,  would  sometimes 
ask  Mr.  Hutchinson,  when  she  went  over,  to  walk 
along  with  her.     One  day  when  he  was  there, 
looking  upon  an  odd  by-shelf  in  her  sister^s  closet, 
he  found  a  few  Latin  books;  asking  whose  they 
Were,   he  was   told  they  were  her  elder  sister's; 

whereupon,  inquiring  more  after  her,  he  began  first 
vou  I.  F 


8  2         Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1636-38. 

to  be  sorry  she  was  gone,  before  he  had  seen  her, 
and  gone  upon  such  an  account  that  he  was  not 
likely  to  see  her.  Then  he  grew  to  love  to  hear 
mention  of  her,  and  the  other  gentlewomen  who 
had  been  her  companions  used  to  talk  much  to  him 
of  her,  telling  him  how  reserved  and  studious  she 
was,  and  other  things  which  they  esteemed  no  advan- 
tage. But  it  so  much  inflamed  Mr.  Hutchinson's 
desire  of  seeing  her,  that  he  began  to  wonder  at 
himself,  that  his  heart,  which  had  ever  had  so 
much  indifferency  for  the  most  excellent  of  woman- 
kind, should  have  such  strong  impulses  towards  a 
stranger  he  never  saw ;  and  certainly  it  was  of  the 
Lord  (though  he  perceived  it  not),  who  had  ordained 
him,  through  so  many  various  providences,  to  be 
yoked  with  her  in  whom  he  found  so  much  satis- 
faction. There  scarcely  passed  any  day  but  some 
accident  or  some  discourse  still  kept  alive  his  desire 
of  seeing  this  gentlewoman ;  although  the  mention 
of  her,  for  the  most  part,  was  inquiries  whether  she 
had  yet  accomplished  the  marriage  that  was  in 
treaty.  One  day  there  was  a  great  deal  of  company 
at  Mr.  Coleman's,  the  gentleman's  house  where  he 
tabled,  to  hear  the  music ;  and  a  certain  song  was 
sung,  which  had  been  lately  set,  and  gave  occasion 
to  some  of  the  company  to  mention  an  answer  to  it, 
which*  was  in  the  house,  and  upon  some  of  their 
desires,  read.  A  gentleman  saying  it  was  believed 
that  a  woman  in  the  neighbourhood  had  made  it. 


1636-38.]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        83 

it  was  presently  inquired  who ;  whereupon  a  gentle- 
man, then  present,  who  had  made  the  first  song, 
said,  there  were  but  two  women  that  could  be  guilty 
of  it,  whereof  one  was  a  lady  then  among  them,  the 
other  Mrs.  Apsley.  Mr.  Hutchinson,  fancying  some- 
thing of  rationality  in  the  sonnet  beyond  the  cus- 
tomary reach  of  a  she-wit,  although,  to  speak  truth, 
it  signified  very  little,  addressed  himself  to  the 
gentleman,  and  told  him  he  could  scarcely  believe 
it  was  a  woman's ;  whereupon  this  gentleman,  who 
was  a  man  of  good  understanding  and  expression, 
and  inspired  with  some  passion  for  her  himself, 
which  made  him  regard  all  her  perfections  through  a 
multiplying-glass,  told  Mr.  Hutchinson,  that  though, 
for  civility  to  the  rest,  he  entitled  another  lady  to 
the  song,  yet  he  was  confident  it  was  Mrs.  Apsley's 
only,  for  she  had  sense  above  all  the  rest ;  and  fell 
into  such  high  praises  of  her,  as  might  well  have 
begotten  those  vehement  desires  of  her  acquaintance, 
which  a  strange  sympathy  in  nature  had  before  pro- 
duced. Another  gentleman,  that  sat  by,  seconded 
this  commendation  with  such  additions  of  praise  as 
he  would  not  have  given  if  he  had  known  her.  Mr. 
Hutchinson  hearing  all  this,  said  to  the  first  gentle- 
man, "  I  cannot  be  at  rest  till  this  lady's  return, 
that  I  may  be  acquainted  with  her."  The  gentle- 
man replied,  "Sir,  you  must  not  expect  that,  for 
she  is  of  a  humour  she  will  not  be  acquainted 
with  any  of  mankind;  and  however  this  song  is 


84        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1636-38. 

stolen  forth,  she  is  the  nicest  creature  in  the  world 
of  suffering  her  perfections  to  be  known ;  she  shuns 
the  converse  of  men  as  the  plague ;  she  only  lives 
in  the  enjoyment  of  herself,  and  has  not  the 
humanity  to  communicate  that  happiness  to  any  of 
our  sex."  "Well/'  said  Mr.  Hutchinson,  "but  L 
will  be  acquainted  with  her : "  and  indeed  the  infor- 
mation of  this  reserved  humour  pleased  him  more 
than  all  else  he  had  heard,  and  filled  him  now  with 
thoughts  how  he  should  attain  the  sight  and  know- 
ledge of  her.  While  he  was  exercised  in  this,  many 
days  passed  not,  but  a  footboy  of  my  lady  her 
mother's  came  to  young  Mrs.  Apsley  ^  as  they  were 
at  dinner,  bringing  news  that  her  mother  and  sister 
would  in  a  few  days  return;  and  when  they  in- 
quired of  him,  whether  Mrs.  Apsley  was  married ; 
having  before  been  instructed  to  make  them  believe 
it,  he  smiled,  and  pulled  out  some  bride  laces,  which 
were  given  at  a  wedding,  in  the  house  where  she 
was,  and  gave  them  to  the  young  gentlewoman  and 
the  gentleman's  daughter  of  the  house,  and  told  them 
Mrs.  Apsley  bade  him  tell  no  news,  but  give  them 
those  tokens,  and  carried  the  matter  so,  that  all  the 
company  believed  she  had  been  married.  Mr. 
Hutchinson  immediately  turned  pale  as  ashes,  and 


^  It  was  the  custom  at  that  time  to  call  young  ladies 
Mistress,  not  Miss.  Shakespeare  calls  Ann  Page,  Mrs. 
Ann. — ^J.  H. 


1636-38.]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        85 

felt  a  fainting  to  seize  his  spirits  in  that  extraordi- 
nary manner,  that,  finding  himself  ready  to  sink  at 
table,  he  was  fain  to  pretend  something  had  offended 
his  stomach,  and  to  retire  from  the  table  into  the 
garden ;  where  the  gentleman  of  the  house  going 
with  him,  it  was  not  necessary  for  him  to  feign 
sickness,  for  the  distemper  of  his  mind  had  infected 
his  body  with  a  cold  sweat,  and  such  a  dispersion 
of  spirit,  that  all  the  courage  he  could  at  present 
recollect,  was  little  enough  to  keep  him  alive.  His 
host  was  very  troublesome  to  him,  and  to  be  quit 
of  him  he  went  to  his  chamber,  saying  he  would  lie 
down.  Little  did  any  of  the  company  suspect  the 
true  cause  of  his  sudden  qualm,  and  they  were  all 
so  troubled  at  it,  that  the  boy  then  passed  without 
further  examination.  When  Mr.  Hutchinson  was 
alone  he  began  to  recollect  his  wisdom  and  his 
reason,  and  to  wonder  at  himself,  why  he  should 
be  so  concerned  in  an  unknown  person ;  he  then 
remembered  the  story  was  told  him  when  he 
came  down,  and  began  to  believe  there  was  some 
magic  in  the  place,  which  enchanted  men  out  of 
their  right  senses;  but  it  booted  him  not  to  be 
angry  at  himself,  nor  to  set  wisdom  in  her  reproving 
chair,  nor  reason  in  her  throne  of  council,  the  sick 
heart  could  not  be  chid  nor  advised  into  health. 
This  anxiety  of  mind  affected  him  so,  that  it  sent 
him  to  his  bed  that  afternoon,  which  indeed  he  took 
to  entertain   his    thoughts  alone    that  night,   and 


86        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1636-38. 

having  fortified  himself  with  resolution,  he  gat  up 
the  next  day ;  but  yet  could  not  quit  himself  of  an 
extravagant  perplexity  of  soul  concerning  this  un- 
known gentlewoman,  which  had  not  been  admir- 
able in  another  light  person,  but  in  him,  who  was 
from  his  childhood  so  serious  and  so  rational  in  all 
his  considerations,  it  was  the  effect  of  a  miraculous 
power  of  Providence,  leading  him  to  her  that  was 
destined  to  make  his  future  joy.  While  she  so  ran 
in  his  thoughts,  meeting  the  boy  again,  he  found 
out,  upon  a  little  stricter  examination  of  him,  that 
she  was  not  married,  and  pleased  himself  in  the 
hopes  of  her  speedy  return ;  when  one  day,  having 
been  invited  by  one  of  the  ladies  of  that  neighbour- 
hood to  a  noble  treatment  ^  at  Sion  Garden,  which 
a  courtier,  that  was  her  servant,  had  made  for  her 
and  whom  she  would  bring,  Mr.  Hutchinson,  Mrs. 
Apsley,  and  Mr.  Coleman's  daughter  were  of  the 
party,  and  having  spent  the  day  in  several  pleasant 
divertisements,  at  evening  when  they  were  at 
supper,  a  messenger  came  to  tell  Mrs.  Apsley  her 
mother  was  come.  She  would  immediately  have 
gone,  but  Mr.  Hutchinson,  pretending  civility  to 
conduct  her  home,  made  her  stay  till  the  supper 
was  ended,  of  which  he  ate  no  more,  now  only 
longing  for  that  sight  which  he  had  with  such  per- 
plexity expected.     This  at  length  he  obtained ;  but 

^  !>.,  treat,  entertainment 


1636-38.]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        87 

his  heart,  being  prepossessed  with  his  own  fancy, 
was  not  free  to  discern  how  little  there  was  in  her 
to  answer  so  great  an  expectation.  She  was  not 
ugly  in  a  careless  riding-habit,  she  had  a  melancholy 
negligence  both  of  herself  and  others,  as  if  she 
neither  affected  to  please  others,  nor  took  notice  of 
anything  before  her ;  yet,  in  spite  of  all  her  indif- 
ferency,  she  was  surprised  with  some  unusual  liking 
in  her  soul  when  she  saw  this  gentleman,  who  had 
hair,  eyes,  shape,  and  countenance  enough  to  beget 
love  in  any  one  at  the  first,  and  these  set  off  with 
a  graceful  and  generous  mien,  which  promised  an 
extraordinary  person.  He  was  at  that  time,  and 
indeed  always  very  neatly  habited,  for  he  wore  good 
and  rich  clothes,  and  had  a  variety  of  them,  and 
had  them  well  suited  and  every  way  answerable ; 
in  that  little  thing,  showing  both  good  judgment 
and  great  generosity,  he  equally  becoming  them  and 
they  him,  which  he  wore  with  such  unaffected- 
ness  and  such  neatness  as  do  not  often  meet  in 
one.  Although  he  had  but  an  evening  sight  of  her 
he  had  so  long  desired,  and  that  at  disadvantage 
enough  for  her ;  yet  the  prevailing  sympathy  of  his 
soul  made  him  think  all  his  pains  well  paid,  and 
this  first  did  whet  his  desire  to  a  second  sight, 
which  he  had  by  accident  the  next  day,  and  to  his 
joy  found  that  she  was  wholly  disengaged  from  that 
treaty,  which  he  so  much  feared  had  been  accom- 
plished;   he  found  withal,   that  though   she  was 


88        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [163&-38. 

modest,  she  was  accostable,  and  willing  to  entertain 
his  acquaintance.  This  soon  passed  into  a  mutual 
friendship  between  them,  and  though  she  innocently 
thought  nothing  of  love,  yet  was  she  glad  to  have 
acquired  such  a  friend,  who  had  wisdom  and  virtue 
enough  to  be  trusted  with  her  councils,  for  she  was 
then  much  perplexed  in  mind.  Her  mother  and 
friends  had  a  great  desire  she  should  marry,  and 
were  displeased  that  she  refused  many  offers 
which  they  thought  advantageous  enough ;  she  was 
obedient,  loth  to  displease  them,  but  more  herself, 
in  marrying  such  as  she  could  find  no  inclination 
to.  The  troublesome  pretensions  of  some  of  the 
courtiers,  had  made  her  willing  to  try  whether  she 
could  bring  her  heart  to  her  mother's  desire ;  but 
being,  by  a  secret  working  which  she  then  under- 
stood not,  averted,  she  was  troubled  to  return,  lest 
some  might  believe  it  was  a  secret  liking  for  them 
which  had  caused  her  dislike  of  others ;  and  being 
a  little  disturbed  with  these  things  and  melancholy, 
Mr.  Hutchinson,  appearing,  as  he  was,  a  person  of 
virtue  and  honour,  who  might  be  safely  and  advan- 
tageously conversed  with,  she  thought  God  had 
sent  her  a  happy  relief.  Mr.  Hutchinson,  on  the 
other  side,  having  been  told,  and  seeing  how  she 
shunned  all  other  men,  and  how  civilly  she  enter- 
tained him,  believed  that  a  secret  power  had  wrought 
a  mutual  inclination  between  them,  and  daily  fre- 
quented her  mother's  house,  and  had  the  oppor- 


1636-38.1     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        89 

tunity  of  conversing  with  her  in  those  pleasant 
walks,  which,  at  that  sweet  season  of  the  spring, 
invited  all  the  neighbouring  inhabitants  to  seek 
their  joys ;  where,  though  they  were  never  alone, 
yet  they  had  every  day  opportunity  for  converse 
with  each  other,  which  the  rest  shared  not  in, 
while  every  one  minded  their  own  delights. 

They  had  not  six  weeks  enjoyed  this  peace,  but 
the  young  men  and  women,  who  saw  them  allow 
each  other  that  kindness  which  they  did  not  afford 
commonly  to  others,  first  began  to  grow  jealous  and 
envious  at  it,  and  after  to  use  all  the  malicious 
practices  they  could  invent  to  break  the  friendship. 
Among  the  rest,  that  gentleman  who  at  the  first 
had  so  highly  commended  her  to  Mr.  Hutchinson, 
now  began  to  caution  him  against  her,  and  to  dis- 
parage her,  with  such  subtle  insinuations,  as  would 
have  ruined  any  love  less  constant  and  honourable 
than  his.  The  women,  with  witty  spite,  represented 
all  her  faults  to  him,  which  chiefly  terminated  in 
the  negligence  of  her  dress  and  habit,  and  all 
womanish  ornaments,  giving  herself  wholly  up  to 
study  and  writing.  Mr.  Hutchinson,  who  had  a 
very  sharp  and  pleasant  wit,  retorted  all  their  malice 
with  such  just  reproofs  of  their  idleness  and  vanity, 
as  made  them  hate  her,  who,  without  affecting  it, 
had  so  engaged  such  a  person  in  her  protection,  as 
they  with  all  their  arts  could  not  catch.  He,  in  the 
meanwhile,  prosecuted  his  love  with  so  much  discre- 


90        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson,     [1636-38. 

tion,  duty,  and  honour,  that  at  the  length,  through 
many  difficulties,  he  accomplished  his  design.  I 
shall  pass  by  all  the  little  amorous  relations,  which,  if 
I  would  take  the  pains  to  relate,  would  make  a  true 
history  of  a  more  handsome  management  of  love  than 
the  best  romances  describe ;  ^  but  these  are  to  be  for- 
gotten as  the  vanities  of  youth,  not  worthy  of  mention 
among  the  greater  transactions  of  his  life.  There  is 
this  only  to  be  recorded,  that  never  was  there  a  pas- 
sion more  ardent  and  less  idolatrous  ;  he  loved  her 
better  than  his  life,  with  inexpressible  tenderness  and 
kindness,  had  a  most  high  obliging  esteem  of  her, 
yet  still  considered  honour,  religion,  and  duty  above 
her,  nor  ever  suffered  the  intrusion  of  stich  a  dotage 
as  should  blind  him  from  marking  her  imperfec- 
tions ;  these  he  looked  upon  with  such  an  indulgent 
eye  as  did  not  abate  his  love  and  esteem  of  her, 
while  it  augmented  his  care  to  blot  out  all  those 
spots  which  might  make  her  appear  less  worthy  of 
that  respect  he  paid  her ;  and  thus  indeed  he  soon 
made  her  more  equal  to  him  than  he  found  her ; 
for  she  was  a  very  faithful  mirror,  reflecting  truly, 
though  but  dimly,  his  own   glories  upon  him,  so 


^  What  Mrs.  Hutchinson  passes  by,  a  modem  author  has 
ventured  to  attempt : — The  True  and  Romantic  Love  Story 
of  Colonel  and  Mrs.  Hutchinson.  A  drama  in  verse,  by  J. 
Antisell  Allen.  Elliot  Stock.  1882.  The  drama  is  as  bad 
as  might  be  expected. 


1636-38.1     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         91 

long  as  he  was  present ;  but  she,  that  was  nothing 
before  his  inspection  gave  her  a  fair  figure,  when 
he  was  removed,  was  only  filled  with  a  dark  mist, 
and  never  could  again  take  in  any  delightful  object, 
nor  return  any  shining  representation.  The  greatest 
excellency  she  had  was  the  power  of  apprehending 
and  the  virtue  of  loving  his ;  so  as  his  shadow  she 
waited  on  him  everywhere,  till  he  was  taken  into 
that  region  of  light  which  admits  of  none,  and  then 
she  vanished  into  nothing.  It  was  not  her  face  he 
loved,  her  honour  and  her  virtue  were  his  mis- 
tresses ;  and  these  (like  Pygmalion's)  images  of  his 
own  making,  for  he  polished  and  gave  form  to  what 
he  found  with  all  the  roughness  of  the  quarry  about 
it;  but  meeting  with  a  compliant  subject  for  his 
own  wise  government,  he  found  as  much  satisfaction 
as  he  gave,  and  never  had  occasion  to  number  his 
marriage  among  his  infelicities.  That  day  that  the 
friends  on  both  sides  met  to  conclude  the  marriage, 
she  fell  sick  of  the  small-pox,  which  was  many 
ways  a  great  trial  upon  him.  First,  her  life  was 
almost  in  desperate  hazard,  and  then  the  disease,  for 
the  present,  made  her  the  most  deformed  person  that 
could  be  seen,  for  a  great  while  after  she  recovered ; 
yet  he  was  nothing  troubled  at  it,  but  married  her 
as  soon  as  she  was  able  to  quit  the  chamber,  when 
the  priest  and  all.  that  saw  her  were  afirighted  to 
look  on  her ;  but  God  recompensed  his  justice  and 
constancy  by  restoring  her,  though  she  was  longer 


92        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [163&-38. 

than  ordinary  before  she  recovered,  as  well  as 
before.  One  thing  is  very  observable,  and  worthy 
imitation  in  him:  although  he  had  as  strong  and 
violent  affections  for  her,  as  ever  any  man  had,  yet 
he  declared  it  not  to  her  till  he  had  acquainted  first 
his  father;  and  afterwards  he  never  would  make 
any  engagement  but  what  his  love  and  honour 
bound  him  in ;  wherein  he  was  more  firm  and  just 
than  all  the  promissory  oaths  and  ties  in  the  world 
could  have  made  him,  notwithstanding  many  power- 
ful temptations  of  wealth  and  beauty,  and  other 
interests,  that  were  laid  before  him.  For  his  father 
had  concluded  another  treaty,  before  he  knew  his 
son's  inclinations  were  this  way  fixed,  with  a  party 
in  many  things  much  more  advantageous  for  his 
family,  and  more  worthy  of  his  liking;  but  his 
father  was  no  less  honourably  indulgent  to  his  son's 
affection,  than  the  son  was  strict  in  the  observance 
of  his  duty ;  and  at  length,  to  the  full  content  of 
all,  the  thing  was  accomplished,  and  on  the  third 
day  of  July,  in  the  year  1638,  he  was  married  to 
Mrs.  Lucy  Apsley,  the  second  daughter  of  Sir  Allen 
Apsley,  late  lieutenant  of  the  Tower  of  London,  at 
St.  Andrew's  church  in  Holborn.  He  lived  some 
time  in  this  neighbourhood  with  her  mother,  but 
four  months  were  scarce  past  after  their  marriage 
before  he  was  in  great  danger  to  have  lost  her,  when 
she  lost  two  children  she  had  conceived  by'  him. 
Soon  after  conceiving  again   she  grew  so  sickly, 


1639-41J     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         93 

that  her  mdulgent  mother  and  husband,  for  the 
advantage  of  her  health,  removed  their  dwelling  out 
of  the  city,  to  a  house  they  took  in  Enfield  Chase, 
called  the  Blue  House,  where,  upon  the  third  of 
September,  1639,  she  was  brought  to  bed  of  two 
sons,  whereof  the  elder  he  named  after  his  own 
father,  Thomas,  the  younger  was  called  Edward, 
who  both  survived  him.  September,  1641,  she 
brought  him  another  son,  called  by  his  own  name, 
John,  who  lived  scarce  six  years,  and  was  a  very 
hopeful  child,  full  of  his  father's  vigour  and  spirit, 
but  death  soon  nipped  that  blossom. 

Mr.  Hutchinson,  after  about  fourteen  months' 
various  exercise  of  his  mind,  in  the  pursuit  of  his 
love,  being  now  at  rest  in  the  enjoyment  of  his 
wife,  his  next  design  was  to  draw  her  into  his  own 
country ;  but  he  would  not  set  upon  it  too  roughly, 
and  therefore  let  her  rest  a  while,  when  he  had 
drawn  her  ten  miles  nearer  it,  out  of  the  city  where 
she  had  her  birth  and  education,  and  where  all  her 
relations  were  most  conversant,  and  which  she  could 
not  suddenly  resolve  to  quit  altogether,  to  betake 
herself  to  the  north,  which  was  a  formidable  name 
among  the  London  ladies.  While  she  was  weaning 
from  the  friends  and  places  she  had  so  long  con- 
versed in,  Mr.  Hutchinson  employed  his  time  in 
making  an  entrance  upon  the  study  of  school 
divinity,  wherein  his  father  was  the  most  eminent 
scholar  of  any  gentleman  in  England,  and  had  a 


94        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1639-41. 

most  choice  library/  valued  at  a  thousand  pounds ; 
which  Mn  Hutchinson,  mistakingly  expecting  to  be 
part  of  his  inheritance,  thought  it  would  be  very 
inglorious  for  him  not  to  understand  how  to  make 
use  of  his  father's  books. .  Having  therefore  gotten 
into  the  house  with  him  an  excellent  scholar  in  that 
kmd  of  learning,  he  for  two  years  made  it  the  whole 
employment  of  his  time.  The  gentleman  that 
assisted  him  he  converted  to  a  right  belief  in  that 
great  point  of  predestination,  he  having  been  before 
of  the  Arminian  judgment,  till,  upon  the  serious 
examination  of  both  principles,  and  comparing  them 
with  the  Scriptures,  Mr.  Hutchinson  convinced  him 
of  the  truth,  and  he  grew  so  well  instructed  in  this 
principle,  that  he  was  able  to  maintain  it  against 
any  man.  At  that  time,  this  great  doctrine  grew 
much  out  of  fashion  with  the  prelates,  but  was 
generally  embraced  by  all  religious  and  holy 
persons  in  the  land.  Mr.  Hutchinson  being  desi- 
rous to  inform  himself  thoroughly  of  it,  when  he 


^  This  is  spoken  of  in  the  preface,  and  did  in  fact  remain 
at  Owthorpe,  but  probably  was  placed  there  by  Charles, 
the  son  of  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson  by  his  second  wife :  it 
was  of  excessively  small  value  when  taken  possession  of 
in  the  year  1776. 

It  is  apparent,  from  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson  being  upon 
all  the  committees  for  religion,  as  may  be  seen  in  Rush- 
worth's  collection,  that  he  was  in  repute  for  this  kind  of 
knowledge. — ^J.  H. 


I639-4I*]     Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        95 

was  able  to  manage  the  questioiii  offered  it  to  his 
father ;  but  Sir  Thomas  would  not  declare  himself 
on  the  point  to  him,  nor  indeed  in  any  other,  as 
we  conceived,  lest  a  father's  authority  should  sway 
against  his  children's  light,  who  he  thought  ought 
to  discern  things  with  their  own  eyes,  and  not  with 
his.  Mr.  Hutchinson,  taking  delight  in  the  study 
of  divinity,  presently  left  off  all  foolish  nice  points, 
that  tended  to  nothing  but  vain  brangling,^  and 
employed  his  whole  study  in  laying  a  foundation  of 
sound  and  necessary  principles,  among  which  he 
gave  the  first  place  to  this  of  God's  absolute  decrees. 
This  was  so  far  from  producing  a  carelessness  of  life 
in  him,  a  thing  generally  objected  against  this  faith, 
that,  on  the  other  side,  it  excited  him  to  a  more  strict 
and  holy  walking  in  thankfulness  to  God,  who  had 
been  pleased  to  choose  him  out  of  the  corrupted 
mass  of  lost  mankind,  to  fix  his  love  upon  him, 
and  give  him  the  knowledge  of  himself  by  his  ever- 
blessed  Son.  This  principle  of  love  and  life  in 
God,  which  had  been  given  him  when  he  discerned 
not  what  it  was  in  himself,  had  from  a  child  pre- 
served him  from  waUowing  in  the  mire  of  sin  and 
wickedness,  wherein  most  of  the  gentry  of  those 


^  f>.,  wrangling.  This  word  is  also  used  by  Defoe.  "  In 
all  the  unhappy  contentions  among  parties  and  factions  in 
this  brangling  nation,"  &c. — ^A  New  Test  of  the  Church  of 
England's  Loyalty. 


96        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [i6i9-4i* 

times  were  miserably  plunged,  except  a  few,  that 
were  therefore  the  scorn  of  mankind;  and  there 
were  but  few  of  those  few,  that  had  not  natural 
and  superstitious  follies,  that  were  in  some  kind 
justly  ridiculous  and  contemptible.  It  was  a  re- 
markable providence  of  God  in  his  life,  that  must 
not  be  passed  over  without  special  notice,  that  he 
gave  him  these  two  years'  leisure,  and  a  heart  so 
to  employ  it,  before  the  noise  of  war  and  tumult 
came  in  upon  him.  Yet  about  the  year  1639,  the 
thunder  was  heard  afar  off  rattling  in  the  troubled 
air,  and  even  the  most  obscured  woods  were  pene- 
trated with  some  flashes,  the  forerunners  of  the 
dreadful  storm  which  the  next  year  was  more 
apparent;  but  Mr.  Hutchinson  was  not  yet  awak- 
ened till  it  pleased  God  to  deliver  him  from  a  danger 
into  which  he  had  run  himself,  had  not  mercy  pre- 
vented him.  His  wife  having  already  two  sons, 
and  being  again  with  child,  considered  that  it  would 
be  necessary  to  seek  an  augmentation  of  revenue, 
or  retire  into  a  cheaper  country ;  and  more  inclin- 
ing to  the  first,  than  to  leave  at  once  her  mother, 
and  all  the  rest  of  her  dear  relations,  she  had  pro- 
pounded to  him  to  buy  an  office,  which  he  was  not 
of  himself  very  inclinable  to ;  but,  to  give  her  and 
her  mother  satisfaction,  he  hearkened  to  a  motion 
that  was  made  him  in  that  kind.  Sir  William 
Pennyman,  who  had  married  his  cousin-german,  a 
very  worthy  gentleman,  who  had  great  respect  both 


I639HI*]    Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinstm.        97 

for  and  from  his  father,  had  purchased  the  chief 
office  in  the  Star-chamber;  the  gentleman  who 
held  the  next  to  him  was  careless  and  debauched, 
and  thereby  a  great  hindrance  of  Sir  William's  pro- 
fits, who  apprehended  that  if  he  could  get  an  honest 
man  into  that  place,  they  might  mutually  much 
advantage  each  other;  whereupon  he  persuaded 
Mr.  Hutchinson  to  buy  the  place,  and  offered  him 
any  terms,  to  go  any  share  with  him,  or  any  way 
he  could  desire.  Mr.  Hutchinson  treated  with  the 
gentleman,  came  to  a  conclusion,  went  down  into 
the  country,  provided  the  money,  and  came  up 
again,  thinking  presently  to  enter  into  the  office; 
but  the  gentleman  that  should  have  sold  it,  being 
of  an  uncertain  humour,  thought  to  make  the 
benefit  of  another  term  before  he  sold  his  place; 
and  it  pleased  God,  in  the  mean  time,  that  arbitrary 
court  was,  by  the  parliament  then  sitting,  taken 
away.^  Mr.  Hutchinson  was  very  sensible  of  a 
peculiar  providence  to  him  herein,  and  resolved  to 
adventure  no  more  such  hazards;  but  to  retire  to 


^  It  is  strange  that  the  son  of  a  member  of  the  popular 
party  should  ever  have  contemplated  purchasing  a  post  in 
the  Star-chamber.  It  was  no  doubt,  as  Mrs.  Hutchinson 
'  hints,  a  result  of  the  influence  of  her  family,  which  was 
thoroughly  royalist  in  feeling,  and  accustomed  to  live  by  the 
king's  service.  Offices  were  very  generally  bought  and  sold. 
Sir  Allen  Apsley  paid  ;£24oo  for  the  Lieutenancy  of  the 
Tower. — "  Court  and  Times  of  James  I,"  vol.  i.  p.  388. 
VOL.  I.  G 


98        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1639-41* 

that  place  whither  God  seemed  to  have  called  him 
by  giving  him  so  good  an  interest  there,  and  to 
study  how  he  was  to  improve  that  talent.  His 
wife,  convinced  by  this  kind  check  which  God  had 
given  to  her  desires,  that  she  ought  to  follow  her 
husband  where  the  Lord  seemed  to  call  him,  went 
along  with  him,  and  about  October  1641,  they  came 
to  their  house  at  Owthorpe.  Here  Mr.  George 
Hutchinson  (Sir  Thomas  being  then  chosen  knight 
for  Nottinghamshire,  and  sitting  in  the  parliament  at 
London)  came  and  gave  a  glad  entertainment  of  his 
brother  and  sister  into  the  country,  by  his  good  com- 
pany ;  and  they  were  for  a  few  months  peaceful  and 
happy  in  their  own  house,  till  the  kingdom  began  to 
blaze  out  with  the  long-conceived  flame  of  civil  war. 
But  here  I  must  make  a  short  digression  from  our 
particular  actions,  to  sum  up  the  state  of  the  kingdom 
at  that  time,  which  though  I  cannot  do  exactly,  yet 
I  can  truly  relate  what  I  was  then  able  to  take  notice 
of;  and  if  any  one  have  a  desire  of  more  particular 
information,  there  were  so  many  books  then  written, 
as  will  sufficiently  give  it  them.  And  although 
those  of  our  enemies  are  all  fraught  with  abominable 
lies,  yet  if  all  ours  were  suppressed,  even  their  own 
writings,  impartially  considered,  would  be  a  sufficient 
chronicle  of  their  injustice  and  oppression;  but  I 
shall  only  mention  what  is  necessary  to  be  remem- 
bered, for  the  better  carrying  on  of  my  purpose. 
When  the  dawn  of  the  gospel  began  to  break 


I639HI-]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        99 

upon  this  isle,  after  the  dark  midnight  of  papacy, 
the  morning  was  more  cloudy  here  than  in  other 
places  by  reason  of  the  state-interest,  which  was 
mixing  and  working  itself  into  the  interest  of  reli- 
gion, and  which  in  the  end  quite  wrought  it  out. 
King  Henry  the  Eighth,  who  by  his  royal  authority 
cast  out  the  pope,  did  not  intend  the  people  of  the 
land  should  have  any  ease  of  oppression ;  but  only 
changed  their  foreign  yoke  for  home-bred  fetters, 
dividing  the  pope's  spoils  between  himself  and  his 
bishops,  who  cared  not  for  their  father  at  Rome, 
so  long  as  they  enjoyed  their  patrimony  and  their 
honours  here  under  another  head  :  so  that  I  can- 
not subscribe  to  those  who  entitle  that  king  to  the 
honour  of  the  reformation.  But  even  then  there 
wanted  not  many  who  discerned  the  corruptions 
that  were  retained  in  the  church,  and  eagerly  applied 
their  endeavours  to  obtain  a  purer  reformation ; 
against  whom,  those  who  saw  no  need  of  further 
reformation,  either  through  excess  of  joy  for  that 
which  was  already  brought  forth,  or  else  through 
a  secret  love  of  superstition  rooted  in  their  hearts, 
thought  this  too  much, — were  bitterly  incensed, 
and;  hating  that  light  which  reproved  their  dark- 
ness, everywhere  stirred  up  spirits  of  envy  and 
persecution  against  them.  Upon  the  great  revolu- 
tion which  took  place  at  the  accession  of  Queen 
Elizabeth  to  the  crown,  the  nation  became  divided 
into  three  great  factions,  the  Papist,  the  State-pro- 


I  cxD      Memoirs  of  Col.  H^ttchinson.     [1639-41. 

testant,  and  the  more  religious  zealots,  who  after- 
wards were  branded  with  the  name  of  Puritan.^ 
In  vain  it  was  for  these  to  address  the  queen  and 
the  parliament ;  for  the  bishops,  under  the  specious 
pretences  of  uniformity  and  obedience,  procured 
severe  punishments  to  be  inflicted  on  such  as  durst 
gainsay  their  determinations  in  all  things  concern- 
ing worship,  whereupon  some  even  in  those  godly 
days  lost  their  lives. 

The  papists  had  a  most  inveterate  hatred  to  all 
the  protestants,  but  especially  to  those  who  were 
godly ; '  and  they  again  many  of  them  suffered  their 


^  The  full  significance  of  these  terms  is  set  forth  in  a 
political  poem  published  in  1622,  ''The  Interpreter,  wherein 
three  principal  terms  of  state  much  mistaken  by  the  vulgar 
are  clearly  unfolded."  It  is  a  satire  expounding,  from  a 
Puritan  point  of  view,  the  views  on  foreign  and  domestic 
policy  of  the  parties  defined  by  these  three  names.  A 
Puritan  (*'  so  nicknamed,  but  indeed  the  sound  Protestant ") 
is  one  whose  character  abridged  is,  '*he's  one  that  would  a 
subject  be,  no  slave."  A  Protestant  ('Vso  will  the  formalist  be 
named")  *' makes  within  his  heart  God  of  the  king,"  is  ''  an 
indifferent  man,  that  with  all  faiths  or  none  hold  quarter 
can,"  **one  that  hath  no  eye  beyond  his  private  profit;" 
in  short,  '*  he's  one  that's  no  true  subject,  but  a  slave.''  A 
Papist  is  '*  Spain's  subject  and  a  Romish  slave." 

''The  Interpreter"  is  reprinted  in  the  sixth  volupe  of  Mr. 
Arber's  "  English  Garner." 

*  Godly.  The  name  always  given  by  the  Puritans  to 
those  of  their  own  party,  and  not  unfrequently  so  used  by 
different  sectaries  at  the  present  day. — ^J.  H. 


1639-41.]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       loi 

zeal  to  run  out  into  bitter  personal  hate.  Between 
these  two  extremes,  the  common  protestants  were 
in  the  middle,  though  I  cannot  reckon  them  as  a 
virtuous  medium ;  for  of  them  the  more  profane  and 
ignorant  only  left  popery  because  it  grew  out  of 
fashion,  but  in  their  hearts  inclined  that  way;  those 
who  were  peaceable,  conscientious,  or  moral  persons, 
inclined  to  the  Puritans,  of  whom  there  were  many 
that  unwillingly  bore  the  burden  of  the  ceremonies, 
for  quietness'  sake,  and  through  false  doctrine  of 
their  unfaithful  teachers,  as  well  as  some  that  dis- 
cerned the  base  and  carnal  minds  of  those  seducers, 
and  would  not  be  persuaded  by  them  to  defile  their 
consciences.  The  former  sort  of  these,  in  zeal  to 
reduce  the  whole  land  from  their  idolatrous  prac- 
tices, procured  laws  and  invented  oaths  to  suppress 
popery,  which  they  little  thought,  but  we  now  sadly 
find,  are  the  bitterest  engines  to  batter  down  the 
pure  worship  and  destroy  the  pure  worshippers  of 
God ;  ^  which  I  have  often  looked  upon  as  an  evi- 
dence that  God  is  not  pleased  with  the  conversions 
that  are  enforced  by  men's  laws.  We  have  spiritual 
weapons  given  us  for  spiritual  combats,  and  those 
who  go  about  to  conquer  subjects  for  Christ  with 


^  This  is  probably  an  allusion  to  the  Corporation  Act, 
passed  in  December  1661,  by  which  the  holders  of  muni- 
cipal offices  were  obliged  to  receive  the  sacrament  according 
to  the  usage  of  the  Church  of  England. 


I02      Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.     [1639-41. 

swords  of  steel,  shall  find  the  base  metal  break  to 
shivers  when  it  is  used,  and  hurtfully  fly  in  their 
own  faces. 

About  the  time  of  the  reformation,  there  was  a 
great  change  in  the  civil  interest  of  all  that  part  of 
the  world  which  had  long  lain  under  the  bondage 
of  the  Roman  prelate  and  his  tyrannical  clergy. 
These  had  by  degrees  so  encroached  upon  all  the 
secular  princes,  that  they  were  nothing  but  vassals 
and  hangmen  to  the  proud  insolent  priest.  Obtain- 
ing his  empire  by  fraud,  false  doctrine,  lies,  and 
hypocrisy,  he  maintained  it  by  blood  and  rapine, 
till  it  pleased  God  to  cause  that  light  to  break  forth 
about  Luther's  time,  which  hath  ever  since  been 
increasing;  and,  notwithstanding  all  the  attempts 
of  Satan  and  his  ministers,  it  will  in  the  end  grow 
up  to  a  glorious  flame  and  quite  devour  that  bloody 
city.  When  the  wrath  of  princes  and  priests  was 
in  vain  at  first  blown  up  against  the  professors  of 
the  gospel,  and  their  blood  and  ashes  became  fruit- 
ful seed  in  God's  field,  then  the  old  fox  comes  into 
the  fold  as  a  lamb,  and  seduces  some  of  them  that 
saw  the  approach  of  Christ's  kingdom,  to  set  it 
up  irregularly ;  and,  indeed  (though  I  know  not 
whether  they  perceived  their  own  delusion),  to  set 
up  themselves  in  Christ'9  throne,  casting  down  the 
thrones  of  all  other  magistrates,  and  destroying  the 
properties  of  men,  and  ruling  by  their  own  arbitrary 
lust,  which  they  brought  forth  in  the  name  of  God's 


I659-4I-]     Memoirs  of  CoL  HtUchinson.       103 

law.^  This  example  was  so  threatening  to  all 
mankind,  that  the  gospel  itself,  from  the  adver- 
saries thereof,  suffered  much  reproach  upon  this 
miscarriage;  whereupon  the  Protestants,  in  all 
places,  to  clear  themselves  from  the  just  aspersions 
which  the  Munster  anabaptists  and  others  had 
occasioned,  fell  into  an  error  on  the  other  hand,  not 
much  less  hurtful  in  the  consequence  ;  for  to  flatter 
the  princes  of  the  world,  whether  popish  or  protes- 
tant,  they  invested  them  with  God's  prerogative,  and 
preached  to  them  and  the  people  such  doctrines  as 
only  changed  the  idol,  but  left  the  idolatry  still  in 
practice.' 

^  A  description  of  the  principles  of  the  most  extravagant 
of  those  whom  in  history  they  call  Fifth  Monarchy  Men, 
from  their  affecting  to  set  up  the  empire  of  Christ  as  the 
fifth  ;  the  Assyrian,  Persian,  Grecian,  and  Roman,  being 
the  first  four. — J.  H. 

'  Two  good  instances  of  this  practice  in  England  occurred 
in  two  sermons  preached  in  1627.  Dr.  Sibthorpe,  preaching 
on  the  text,  '*  Render  therefore  to  all  their  dues,"  asserted 
that  ''the  prince  doth  whatever  pleaseth  him.  If  princes 
command  anything  which  subjects  may  not  perform,  because 
it  is  against  the  laws  of  God  or  nature,  or  impossible,  yet 
subjects  are  bound  to  undergo  the  punishment  without 
either  resistance  or  railing,  and  so  to  yield  a  passive 
obedience  where  they  cannot  exhibit  an  active  one."  At 
the  same  time  Dr.  Manwaring  taught  that  '*  the  king  is  not 
bound  to  observe  the  laws  of  the  realm  concerning  the 
subject's  rights  and  liberties,  but  that  his  royal  will  and 
command  in  imposing  loans  and  taxes  without  common 


104      Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.     [1639-41. 

The  popes  of  Rome  had  for  many  ages  challenged 
and  practised  a  power  to  disthrone  princes,  to  give 
away  their  realms,  to  interdict  whole  kingdoms  and 
provinces,  and  devote  them  to  slaughter,  to  loose 
subjects  from  all  bonds  and  oaths  of  allegiance  to 
their  sovereigns,  and  to  stir  up  both  princes  and 
people  to  the  mutual  murder  of  each  other ;  which 
abominable  courses  had  been  justly  cast  upon 
them  as  reproach,  they  pretending  to  do  all  these 
things  for  the  propagation  of  the  true  worship  and 
the  advance  of  God's  glory.  This  reproach  they 
retorted  when  some  protestants,  upon  the  same 
pretence,  did  maintain  that  idolatrous  princes  were 
to  be  removed,  and  such  magistrates  set  up  as 
feared  God,  who  were  guardians  of  both  tables,  and 
bound  to  compel  all  their  people  to  the  right  religion. 
This  confusion  was  there  among  the  sons  of  dark- 
ness at  the  first  appearance  of  gospel  light. 

About  this  time  in  the  kingdom  of  Scotland  there 
was  a  wicked  queen,  daughter  of  a  mother  that  came 
out  of  the  bloody  house  of  Guise,^  and  brought  up  in 


consent  in  Parliament,  doth  oblige  the  subjects'  conscience, 
on  pain  of  eternal  damnation."  See  also  the  longer  pas- 
sages quoted  by  Mr.  Gardiner  from  Manwaring's  sermon 
('*  England  under  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  and  Charles  I.," 
iL  175).  James  had  discouraged  such  utterances :  with  his 
son  they  marked  out  the  preacher  from  whom  they  came 
for  speedy  promotion. 
*  Mary,  Queen  of  Scots. — ^J.  H. 


I639-4I*]    Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       105 

the  popish  religion,  which  she  zealously  persevered 
in,  as  most  suitable  to  her  bloody  lustful  temper ; 
she  being  guilty  of  murders  and  adulteries,  and 
hateful  for  them  to  the  honestest  of  the  people,  was 
deposed,  imprisoned,  and  forced  to  fly  for  her  life ; 
but  her  son  was  received  into  the  throne,  and 
educated  after  the  strictest  way  of  the  protestant 
religion  according  to  Calvin's  form.  Those  who 
were  chiefly  active  and  instrumental  in  the  justice 
executed  on  this  wicked  queen,  were  the  reformers 
of  religion  in  Scotland,  which  made  the  neighbour- 
ing idolatrous  princes  to  fear  them  of  the  same  faith. 
About  the  same  time  likewise,  the  provinces  of 
the  Netherlands  united  themselves  in  a  resistance 
against  the  king  of  Spain,  and  cast  ofi*  that  yoke 
wherewith  he  had  most  barbarously  galled  them. 
The  king  of  France,  persecuting  his  protestant 
subjects  with  much  inhuman  violence,  forced  them 
to  defend  themselves  against  his  unsanctified  League, 
and  much  blood  was  shed  in  those  civil  wars ;  till 
at  length  those  who  had  had  so  much  experience 
of  God's  providence  in  delivering  them  from  their 
cruel  princes,  were  persuaded  to  make  up  an  alliance 
with  the  enemies  of  God  and  religion,  and  by  the 
treacherous  foe  drawn  into  his  snares,  where  they 
were  most  wickedly  and   barbarously   massacred.^ 

^  The  famous  massacre  on  St.  Bartholomew's  Day  at 
Paris. — ^J.  H. 


io6      Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.     [i639-4u 

Now,  although  religion  were  the  main  ground  of 
those  bloody  quarrelsi  yet  there  were,  in  all  these 
countries,  many  disputes  of  civil  right,  which  for 
the  most  part  bore  the  face  of  the  wars,  whereat  I 
have  only  hinted,  in  this  survey  of  the  condition 
of  other  states,  and  their  interests  in  those  days 
and  since;  which  is  something  necessary  to  be 
known  for  the  better  understanding  of  our  own, 
with  which  I  shall  now  proceed. 

The  civil  government  of  England,  from  the  time 
called  the  Conquest,  had  been  administered  by  a 
King,  Lords,  and  Commons,  in  a  way  of  Parlia- 
ments ;  the  parliament  entrusted  with  the  legislative, 
and  the  king  with  the  executive  power  ;  but  several 
of  the  kings,  not  satisfied  with  their  bounded  mon- 
archy, made  attempts  to  convert  it  into  an  abso- 
lute sovereignty,  attempts  fatal  both  to  themselves 
and  their  people,  and  ever  unsuccessful.  For  the 
generous  people  of  England,  as  they  were  the  most 
free  and  obsequious  subjects  in  the  world  to  those 
princes  that  managed  them  with  a  kind  and  tender 
hand,  commanding  them  as  freemen,  not  as  slaves, 
so  were  they  the  most  untameable,  invincible  people, 
in  defence  of  their  freedoms  against  all  those  usurp- 
ing lords  that  scorned  to  allow  them  liberty.  The 
nobility  of  the  realm  having  at  first  the  great  balance 
of  the  lands,  and  retaining  some  of  that  free  honour- 
able virtue,  for  which  they  were  exalted  above  the 
vulgar,  ever  stood  up  in  the  people's  defence  and 


1639-41]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       107 

curbed  the  wild  ambition  of  the  tyrants,  whom  they 
sometimes  reduced  to  moderation,  and  sometimes 
deposed  for  their  misgovernments ;  till,  at  length 
the  kings,  eager  to  break  this  yoke,  had  insensibly 
worn  out  the  interest  of  the  nobility,  by  drawing 
them  to  their  courts,  where  luxuries  melted  away 
the  great  estates  of  some,  others  were  destroyed 
by  confiscations  in  divers  civil  wars,  and  others 
otherwise  mouldered  with  time.  While  the  kings 
were  glad  to  see  the  abatement  of  that  power, 
which  had  been  such  a  check  to  their  exorbitancies, 
they  perceived  not  the  growing  of  another  more 
dangerous  to  them;  and  that  when  the  nobility 
shrunk  into  empty  names,  the  throne  lost  its  sup- 
porters, and  had  no  more  but  a  little  puff  of  wind 
to  bear  it  up,  when  the  full  body  of  the  people  came 
rolling  in  upon  it.  The  interest  of  the  people, 
which  had  been  many  years  growing,  made  an 
extraordinary  progress  in  the  days  of  King  Henry 
the  Eighth,  who  returning  the  vast  revenues  of 
the  church  into  the  body  of  the  people,  cast  the 
balance  clear  on  their  side,  and  left  them  now  only 
to  expect^  an  opportunity  to  resume  their  power 
into  their  own  hands;  and  had  not  differences  in 
religion  divided  them  among  themselves,  and  thereby 
prolonged  the   last   gasps  of  expiring  monarchy, 


^  Expect,  a  Latinism  ;  expectare,  to  wait  for ;  or,  Italian, 
aspettare,  id. — ^J.  H. 


io8      Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.     [1639-41. 

they  had  long  since  exercised  it  in  a  free  common- 
wealth, 

England  was  not  an  idle  spectator  of  the  great 
contest  between  the  papist  and  protestant,  in  which 
all  Christendom  seemed  to  be  engaged.  During  the 
reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  the  protestant  interest, 
being  her  peculiar  interest,  that  princess  became  not 
only  glorious  in  the  defence  of  her  own  realm,  but 
in  the  protection  she  gave  to  the  whole  protestant 
cause  in  all  the  neighbouring  kingdoms;  where- 
fore, as  if  it  had  been  devolved  upon  her  person, 
the  Pope  shot  all  his  arrows  at  her  head,  and  set 
on  many  desperate  assassinations  against  her,  which, 
by  the  good  providence  of  God,  were  all  frustrated, 
and  she,  not  only  miraculously  delivered  from  those 
wretches,  but  renowned  at  home  and  abroad  for 
successes  against  her  rebellious  subjects  in  England 
and  Ireland,  and  for  the  assistance  of  her  distressed 
neighbours;  but,  above  all,  for  the  mercy  which 
it  pleased  God  to  afford  her  and  this  realm  in 
the  year  1588,  when  the  invading  Spaniard  had 
devoured  us  in  his  proud  hopes,  and  by  the  mighty 
hand  of  God  was  scattered  as  a  mist  before  the 
morning  beams.  That  which  kept  alive  the  hopes 
of  the  papists,  most  part  of  her  reign,  was  the  ex- 
pectation of  the  Queen  of  Scots,  who,  entering  into 
confederacy  with  them,  lost  her  head  for  the  forfeit, 
wherein  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  suffered  also  for  her 
the  loss  of  his.     The  Queen  of  England  was  very 


1639-41.]     Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       109 

loath  to  execute  this  necessary  justice;  but  the 
true-hearted  protestants  of  her  council,  foreseeing 
the  sad  effects  that  might  be  expected  if  ever  she 
arrived  to  the  crown,  urged  it  on ;  and  after  the 
death  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  the  wiser  of  them  much 
opposed  the  admission  of  her  son.  But  he,  dis- 
sembling the  resentment  of  his  mother's  death,  by 
bribes  and  greater  promises,  managed  a  faction 
in  the  court  of  the  declining  queen,  which  pre- 
vailed on  her  dotage  to  destroy  the  Earl  of  Essex, 
the  only  person  who  would  have  had  the  courage 
to  keep  out  him  they  thought  it  dangerous  to  let 
in.  So  subtlely  brought  they  their  purpose  about, 
that  wise  counsel  was  in  vain  to  a  blinded  and 
betrayed  people.  The  anti-prelatical  party  hoping 
that,  with  a  king  bred  up  among  the  Calvinists, 
they  should  now  be  freed  from  the  episcopal  yoke, 
were  greedy  of  entertaining  him,  but  soon  cured 
of  their  mistake ;  when,  immediately  after  his 
entry  into  the  kingdom,  himself  being  moderator 
at  a  dispute  between  both  parties,^  the  noncon- 
formists were  cast  out  of  doors,  the  offensive 
ceremonies,  instead  of  being  removed,  were  more 
strictly  imposed,  the  penalties  against  papists 
relaxed,  and  many  of  them  taken  into  favour,  those 
families  who  suffered  for  his  mother  were  graced 
and  restored  as  far  as  the  times  would  bear,  and 

^  At  the  Hampton  Court  Conference. 


no      Metnoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.     [i639-4«- 

those  who  consented  any  way  to  the  justice  done 
upon  her,  disfavoured.  A  progress  was  made 
suitable  to  this  beginning,  the  protestant  interest 
abroad  was  deserted  and  betrayed,  the  prelates  at 
home  daily  exalted  in  pride  and  pomp,  and  declin- 
ing in  virtue  and  godliness.  Arminianism  crept  in 
to  the  corruption  of  sound  doctrine,  till  at  length 
they  had  the  impudence  to  forbid  the  preaching  of 
those  great  and  necessary  truths  concerning  the 
decrees  of  God ;  secret  treaties  were  entertained 
with  the  court  of  Rome ;  and,  notwithstanding  that 
hellish  powder  plot,  the  papists  lost  not  their  credit 
at  court,  where  they  now  wrought  no  longer  by 
open  and  direct  ways,  but  humouring  the  king  and 
queen  in  their  lusts  and  excesses,  they  found  the 
most  ready  way  to  destroy  the  doctrine  of  the 
gospel  was  to  debauch  the  professors.  The  court 
of  this  king  was  a  nursery  of  lust  and  intempe- 
rance ;  he  had  brought  in  with  him  a  company  of 
poor  Scots,  who,  coming  into  this  plentiful  kingdom, 
were  surfeited  with  riot  and  debaucheries,  and  got 
all  the  riches  of  the  land  only  to  cast  away.  The 
honour,  wealth,  and  glory  of  the  nation,  wherein 
Queen  Elizabeth  left  it,  were  soon  prodigally  wasted 
by  this  thriftless  heir ;  and  the  nobility  of  the  land 
was  utterly  debased  by  setting  honours  to  public 
sale,  and  conferring  them  on  persons  that  had 
neither  blood  nor  merit  fit  to  wear,  nor  estates  to 
bear  up  their  titles,  but  were  fain  to  invent  projects 


1639-41.]    Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       1 1 1 

to  pill^  the  people,  and  pick  their  purses  for  the 
maintenance  of  vice  and  lewdness.  The  generality 
of  the  gentry  of  the  land  soon  learned  the  court 
fashion,  and  every  great  house  in  the  country 
became  a  sty  of  uncleanness.  To  keep  the  people 
in  their  deplorable  security,  till  vengeance  overtook 
them,  they  were  entertained  with  masks,  stage 
plays,  and  sorts  of  ruder  sports.  Then  began 
murder,  incest,  adultery,  drunkenness,  swearing, 
fornication,  and  all  sort  of  ribaldry,  to  be  no 
concealed  but  countenanced  vices,  because  they 
held  such  conformity  with  the  court  example. 
Next  to  this,  a  great  cause  of  these  abominations 
was  the  mixed  marriages  of  papist  and  protestant 
families,  which,  no  question,  was  a  design  of  the 
popish  party  to  compass  and  procure ;  and  so  suc- 
cessful, that  I  have  observed  that  there  was  not 
one  house  in  ten,  where  such  a  marriage  was 
Inade,  but  the  better  party  was  corrupted,  the 
children's  souls  were  sacrificed  to  devils,  the  wor- 
ship of  God  was  laid  aside  in  that  family,  for 
fear  of  distasting  the  idolater ;  the  kindred,  tenants, 
and  neighbours,  either  quite  turned  from  it,  or 
cooled  in  their  zeal  for  religion.  As  the  fire  is 
most  fervent  in  a  frosty  season,  so  the  general 


^  f.^.,  pillage,  plunder  ;  compare  Shakspere,  Richard  IL^ 
Act  it  so.  2,  '*  The  commons  hath  he  pilled  with  grievous 
taxes,  and  quite  lost  their  hearts." 


112      Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.     [1639-41* 

apostacy  from  holiness,  if  I  may  so  call  it,  and 
defection  to  lewdness,  stirred  up  sorrow,  indigna- 
tion, ^nd  fear,  in  all  that  retained  any  love  of  God 
in  the  land,  whether  ministers  or  people ;  the 
ministers  warned  the  people  of  the  approaching 
judgments  of  God,  which  could  not  be  expected  but 
to  follow  such  high  provocations ;  God  in  his  mercy 
sent  his  prophets  into  all  comers  of  the  land,  to 
preach  repentance,  and  cry  out  against  the  ingrati- 
tude of  England,  who  thus  requited  so  many  rich 
mercies  that  no  nation  could  ever  boast  of  more ; 
and  by  these  a  few  were  everywhere  converted  and 
established  in  faith  and  holiness ;  but  at  court  they 
were  hated,  disgraced,  and  reviled,  and  in  scorn 
had  the  name  of  Puritan  fixed  upon  them.  And 
now  the  ready  way  to  preferment  there,  was  to 
declare  an  opposition  to  the  power  of  godliness, 
under  that  name ;  so  that  their  pulpits  might  justly 
be  called  the  scomer's  chair,  those  sermons  only 
pleasing  that  flattered  them  in  their  vices,  and  told 
the  poor  king  that  he  was  Solomon,  and  that  his 
sloth  and  cowardice,  by  which  he  betrayed  the 
cause  of  God  and  honour  of  the  nation,  was  gospel 
meekness  and  peaceableness ;  for  which  they  raised 
him  up  above  the  heavens,  while  he  lay  wallowing 
like  a  swine  in  the  mire  of  his  lust.  He  had  a 
little  learning,  and  this  they  called  the  spirit  of 
wisdom,  and  so  magnified  him,  so  falsely  flattered 
him,  that  he  could  not  endure  the  words  of  trutli 


1639-41.]    Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       113 

and  soundness,  but  rewarded  these  base,  wicked, 
unfaithful  fawners  with  rich  preferments,  attended 
with  pomps  and  titles,  which  heaved  them  up  above 
a  human  height.  With  their  pride,  their  envy 
swelled  against  the  people  of  God,  whom  they 
began  to  project  how  they  might  root  out  of  the 
land ;  and  when  they  had  once  given  them  a  name, 
whatever  was  odious  or  dreadful  to  the  king,  they 
fixed  upon  the  Puritan,  who,  according  to  their 
character,  was  nothing  but  a  factious  hypocrite. 

The  king  had  upon  his  heart  the  dealings  both 
of  England  and  Scotland  with  his  mother,  and 
harboured  a  secret  desire  of  revenge  upon  the  godly 
in  both  nations,  yet  had  not  courage  enough  to 
assert  his  resentment  like  a  prince,  but  employed 
a  wicked  cunning  he  was  master  of,  and  called 
kingcraft,  to  undermine  what  he  durst  not  openly 
oppose, — the  true  religion ;  this  was  fenced  with  the 
liberty  of  the  people,  and  so  linked  together,  that  it 
was  impossible  to  make  them  slaves,  till  they  were 
brought  to  be  idolaters  of  royalty  and  glorious  lust ; 
and  as  impossible  to  make  them  adore  these  gods, 
while  they  continued  loyal  to  the  government  of 
Jesus  Christ.  The  payment  of  civil  obedience  to 
the  king  and  the  laws  of  the  land  satisfied  not ;  if 
any  durst  dispute  his  impositions  in  the  worship  of 
God,  he  was  presently  reckoned  among  the  seditious 
and  disturbers  of  the  public  peace,  and  accordingly 
persecuted ;  if  any  were  grieved  at  the  dishonour 

VOL.  I.  H 


114      Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1639-41. 

of  the  kingdom,  or  the  griping  of  the  poor,  or  the 
unjust  oppressions  of  the  subject,  by  a  thousand 
ways,  invented  to  maintain  the  riots  of  the  courtiers, 
and  the  swarms  of  needy  Scots  the  king  had  brought 
in  to  devour  like  locusts  the  plenty  of  this*land,  he 
was  a  Puritan ;  ^  if  any,  out  of  mere  morality  and  civil 
honesty,  discountenanced  the  abominations  of  those 
days,  he  was  a  Puritan,  however  he  conformed  to 
their  superstitious  worship;  if  any  showed  favour 
to  any  godly  honest  person,  kept  them  company, 
relieved  them  in  want,  or  protected  them  against 
violent  or  unjust  oppression,  he  was  a  Puritan;  if 
any  gentleman  in  his  country  maintained  the  good 
laws  of  the  land,  or  stood  up  for  any  public  interest, 
for  good  order  or  government,  he  was  a  Puritan : 
in  short,  all  that  crossed  the  views  of  the  needy 
courtiers,  the  proud  encroaching  priests,  the  thievish 
projectors,  the  lewd  nobility  and  gentry — whoever 
was  zealous  for  God's  glory  or  worship,  could  not 
endure  blasphemous  oaths,  ribald  conversation,  pro- 
fane scoffs,  Sabbath-breaking,  derision  of  the  word 


^  Compare  Sir  Benjamin  Rudyard's  speech  in  the  Long 
Parliament.  *'  Whosoever  squares  his  actions  by  any  rule, 
either  divine  or  human,  he  is  a  Puritan ;  whosoever  would 
be  governed  by  the  king's  laws,  he  is  a  Puritan.  He  that 
will  not  do  whatsoever  men  would  have  him  do,  he  is  a 
Puritan.  Their  great  work,  their  masterpiece  now,  is  to 
make  all  those  of  the  religion  to  be  the  suspected  party  of 
the  kingdom." 


i639-4>-]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       117 

The  Puritan  party  being  weak  and  oppressed, 
had  not  faith  enough  to  disown  all  that  adhered  to 
them  for  worldly  interests,  and  indeed  it  required 
more  than  human  wisdom  to  discern  at  the  least  all 
of  them;  wherefore  they,  in  their  low  condition, 
gladly  accepted  any  that  would  come  over  to  them, 
or  incline  towards  them  ;  and  their  enemies,  through 
envy  at  them,  augmented  much  their  party,  while, 
with  injuries  and  reproaches,  they  drove  many,  that 
never  intended  it,  to  take  that  party ;  which  in  the 
end  got  nothing  but  confusion  by  those  additions. 
While  these  parties  were  thus  counter-working,  the 
treasure  of  the  kingdom  being  wasted  by  court- 
caterpillars,  and  parliaments  called  to  re-supply 
the  royal  coffers,  therein  there  wanted  not  some, 
that  retained  so  much  of  the  English  spirit  as  to 
represent  the  public  grievances,  and  desire  to  call 
the  corrupt  ministers  of  state  to  an  account.  But 
the  king,  grudging  that  his  people  should  dare  to 
gainsay  his  pleasure,  and  correct  his  misgovernment 
in  his  favourites,  broke  up  parliaments,  violated 
their  privileges,  imprisoned  their  members  for  things 
spoken  in  the  house,  and  grew  disaffected  to  them, 
and  entertained  projects  of  supply  by  other  grievances 
of  the  people.  The  prelates,  in  the  meantime,  find- 
ing they  lost  ground,  meditated  reunion  with  the 
popish  faction,  who  began  to  be  at  a  pretty  agree- 
ment with  them ;  and  now  there  was  no  more 
endeavour  in  their  public  sermons  to  confute  the 


1 1 8      Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1639-41. 

errors  of  that  church,  but  to  reduce  our  doctrines 
and  theirs  to  an  accommodation.  The  king,  to 
bring  it  about,  was  deluded  into  the  treaty  of  a 
match  for  his  son  with  the  Infanta  of  Spain ;  and 
the  prince,  with  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  was 
privately  sent  into  Sp&in,  from  whence  he  came 
back  with  difficulty,  but  to  the  great  rejoicing  of  the 
whole  people  in  general,  who  were  much  afflicted 
at  his  going  thither.  During  this  treaty  the  papists 
got  many  advantages  of  the  king,  to  the  prejudice 
of  the  protestant  interest  at  home  and  abroad,  and 
the  hearts  of  all  but  the  papists  were  very  much 
saddened;  and  the  people  loath  to  lay  the  mis- 
carriages of  things  at  the  king's  own  door,  began  to 
entertain  a  universal  hatred  of  the  Duke  of  Buck- 
ingham, raised  from  a  knight's  fourth  son  '  to  that 
pitch  of  glory,  and  enjoying  great  possessions, 
acquired  by  the  favour  of  the  king,  upon  no  merit 
but  that  of  his  beauty  and  his  prostitution.  The 
parliament  had  drawn  up  a  charge  against  him,  and 
though  the  king  seemed  to  protect  him,  yet  knowing 
the  fearfulness  of  his  nature,  and  doubting  his  con- 
stancy, it  was  believed  he  added  some  help  to  an 
ague  that  killed  that  king ;  ^  however  the  king  died, 

1  According  to  Mr.  Gardiner,  the  suspicion  was  founded 
on  the  following  facts.  During  the  last  illness  of  King 
James,  **he  remembered,  or  was  reminded,  that  when 
Buckingham  had  been  ill  in  the  spring,  he  had  been  bene- 
6ted  by  some  remedies  recommended  by  a  country  doctor 


1639-41.]    Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       119 

and  the  duke  continued  as  high  in  the  favour  of  the 
next  succeeding  as  of  the  deceased  prince ;  where- 
upon one,  not  unaptly,  says  of  him,  "  he  seemed  as 
an  unhappy  exhalation,  drawn  up  from  the  earth, 
not  only  to  cloud  the  setting,  but  the  rising  sun."  ^ 
The  face  of  the  court  was  much  changed  in  the 
change  of  the  king,  for  King  Charles  was  temperate, 
chaste,  and  serious ;  so  that  the  fools  and  bawds, 
mimics  and  catamites,  of  the  former  court,  grew  out 
of  fashion;  and  the  nobility  and  courtiers,  who 
did  not  quite  abandon  their  debaucheries,  had  yet 
that  reverence  to  the  king  to  retire  into  comers  to 
practise  them.     Men  of  learning  and  ingenuity  in 

living  at  Dunmow.  Under  the  directions,  it  would  seem, 
of  Buckingham's  mother,  a  messenger  was  despatched  to 
Dunmow,  and  the  result  was  a  posset  drink  given  by  the 
duke  himself,  and  sonfe  plaister  applied  to  the  king's 
stomach  and  wrists  by  the  countess,  with  all  the  zeal  which 
elderly  ladies  are  apt  to  throw  into  the  administration  of 
remedies  suggested  by  themselves."  These  remedies  do 
not  seem  to  have  injured  the  king,  but  they  did  him  no 
good,  and  naturally  roused  the  objection^  of  his  physicians. 
The  story  got  abroad,  and  it  became  an  article  of  belief 
amongst  the  people,  that  Buckingham  and  his  mother  had 
poisoned  the  king.  See  the  following  pamphlets — "The 
Forerunner  of  Revenge,''  by  George  Eglisham,  Harleian 
Miscellany,  ii.  6i  ;  and  "  Strange  Apparitions,  or  the  Ghost 
of  King  James,"  Harleian  Miscellany,  iv.  501. 

^  "  Like  an  unhappy  vapour,  exhaled  from  the  earth  to  so 
great  a  height,  as  to  cloud  not  only  the  setting  but  the 
rising  sun." — May,  "  History  of  the  Long  Parliament,"  p.  6. 


1 20      Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [i639-4i« 

all  arts  were  in  esteem,  and  received  encouragement 
from  the  king,  who  was  a  most  excellent  judge  and 
a  great  lover  of  paintings,  carvings,  gravings,  and 
many  other  ingenuities,  less  offensive  than  the 
bawdry  and  profane  abusive  wit  which  was  the  only 
exercise  of  the  other  court.  But,  as  in  the  primitive 
times,  it  is  observed  that  the  best  emperors  were 
some  of  them  stirred  up  by  Satan  to  be  the  bitterest 
persecutors  of  the  church,  so  this  king  was  a  worse 
encroacher  upon  the  civil  and  spiritual  liberties  of 
his  people  by  far  than  his  father.  He  married  a 
papist,  a  French  lady,  of  a  haughty  spirit,  and  a 
great  wit  and  beauty,  to  whom  he  became  a  most 
uxorious  husband.  By  this  means  the  court  was 
replenished  with  papists,  and  many  who  hoped  to 
advance  themselves  by  the  change,  turned  to  that 
religion.  All  the  papists  in  the  kingdom  were 
favoured,  and,  by  the  king's  example,  matched  into 
the  best  families ;  the  Puritans  more  than  ever  dis- 
countenanced and  persecuted,  insomuch  that  many 
of  them  chose  to  abandon  their  native  country,  and 
leave  their  dearest  relations,  to  retire  into  any 
foreign  soil  or  plantation,  where  they  might,  amidst 
all  outward  inconveniences,  enjoy  the  free  exercise 
of  God's  worship.  Such  as  could  not  flee  were 
tormented  in  the  bishops'  courts,  fined,  whipped, 
pilloried,  imprisoned,  and  suffered  to  enjoy  no  rest, 
so  that  death  was  better  than  life  to  them ;  and 
notwithstanding  their  patient  sufferance  of  all  these 


I639-4I-]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       1 2 1 

things,  yet  was  not  the  king  satisfied  till  the  whole 
land  were  reduced  to  perfect  slavery.  The  example 
of  the  French  king  was  propounded  to  him,  and  he 
thought  himself  no  monarch  so  long  as  his  will  was 
confined  to  the  bounds  of  any  law ;  but  knowing 
that  the  people  of  England  were  not  pliable  to  an 
arbitrary  rule,  he  plotted  to  subdue  them  to  his 
yoke  by  a  foreign  force,  and  till  he  could  effect  it, 
made  no  conscience  of  granting  anything  to  the 
people,  which  he  resolved  should  not  oblige  him 
longer  than  it  served  his  turn ;  for  he  was  a  pnnce 
that  had  nothing  of  faith  or.  truth,  justice  or  gene- 
rosity, in  him.  He  was  the  most  obstinate  person 
in  his  self-will  that  ever  was,  and  so  bent  upon 
being  an  absolute,  uncontrollable  sovereign,  that  he 
was  resolved  either  to  be  such  a  king  or  none.  His 
firm  adherence  to  prelacy  was  not  for  conscience  of 
one  religion  more  than  another,  for  it  was  his  prin- 
ciple that  an  honest  man  might  be  saved  in  any 
profession;  but  he  had  a  mistaken  principle  that 
kingly  government  in  the  state  could  not  stand 
•without  episcopal  government  in  the  church ;  and, 
therefore,  as  the  bishops  flattered  him  with  preach- 
ing up  his  sovereign  prerogative,  and  inveighing 
against  the  Puritans  as  factious  and  disloyal,  so  he 
protected  them  in  their  pomp  and  pride,  and  in- 
solent practices  against  all  the  godly  and  sober 
people  of  the  land.  In  the  first  parliament  after 
he  came  to  the  crown,  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  was 


122      Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.     [1639-41. 

impeached  concerning  the  death  of  King  James,  and 
other  misdemeanours;  but  the  present  king,  who 
had  received  him  into  the  same  degree  of  favour 
that  he  was  with  the  former,  would  not  endure 
the  question  of  his  favourite,  and,  to  deliver 
him  from  it,  broke  up  the  parliament,  which  gave 
too  just  a  suspicion  that  he  favoured  the  prac- 
tice ;  for  it  is  true  that  the  duke's  mother,  with- 
out the  consent  of  the  physicians,  had  made  an 
application  to  the  wrists  of  the  king  for  his  ague, 
after  which  he  died  in  his  next  fit.^  Some  other 
parliaments  there  were,  but  still  abruptly  broken  up 
when  they  put  forth  any  endeavour  to  redress  griev- 
ances. The  protestants  abroad  were  all  looked  upon 
as  Puritans,  and  their  interests,  instead  of  being 
protected,  sadly  betrayed ;  ships  let  out  to  the 
French  king  to  serve  against  them ;  all  the  flower 
of  the  English  gentry  were  lost  in  an  ill-managed 
expedition  to  the  Isle  of  Rh6,  under  pretence  of 
helping  them,  but  so  ordered  that  it  proved  the  loss 
of  Rochelle,  the  strong  fort  and  best  defence  of  all 
the  protestants  in  France.  Those  in  Germany  were 
no  less  neglected  in  all  treaties,  although  his  own 
sister  and  her  children  were  so  highly  concerned. 
The  whole  people  were  sadly  grieved  at  these  mis- 
governments,  and,  loath  to  impute  them  to  the  king, 
cast  all  the  odium  upon  the  Duke  of  Buckingham, 


^  See  note,  p.  118. 


«63^4i.l     Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       123 

whom  at  length  a  discontented  person  stabbed, 
believing  he  did  God  and  his  country  good  service 
by  it.  All  the  kingdonii  except  the  duke's  own 
dependents  and  kindred,  rejoiced  in  the  death  of 
this  duke ;  but  they  found  little  cause,  for  after  it 
the  king  still  persisted  in  his  design  of  enslaving 
them,  and  found  other  ministers  ready  to  serve  his 
self-willed  ambition^  such  as  were  Noy,  his  attorney- 
general,  who  set  on  foot  that  hateful  tax  of  ship- 
money,  and  many  more  illegal  exactions ;  and  ten 
of  the  judges,  who  perverted  judgment  in  the  cause 
of  those  who  refused  the  iUegal  imposition;  although 
there  were,  even  in  that  time,  found  two  honest 
judges,*  who  durst  judge  rightly  against  the  king, 
although  he  had  changed  the  words  usual  in  their 
commissions,  which  were  Quamdiu  bene  se  gesserint,^ 
into  another  form,  Durante  bene  plactto.  Besides 
these,  and  a  great  rascally  company  of  flatterers  and 
projectors,  there  were  all  the  corrupted,  tottering 
bishops,  and  others  of  the  proud,  profane  clergy  of 
the  land,  who,  by  their  insolencies,  grown  odious  to 
the  people,'  bent  their  strong  endeavours  to  dis- 

^  f>.,  Hutton  and  Croke. 

'  *'  Quamdiii  bene  se  gesserint,''  during  good  behaviour, 
as  long  as  they  act  right.  *'  Durante  bene  placito,''  during 
the  king's  good  pleasure. — J.  H. 

'  At  the  opening  of  the  Long  Parliament,  Nottingham- 
shire sent  up  a  petition  very  hostile  to  episcopacy  and  the 
existing  form  of  church  government.    It  was  read  by  the 


1 24      Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1639-41. 

affect  the  prince  to  his  honest,  godly  subjectSi  and 
to  get  a  pretence  of  power  from  him,  to  afflict  those 
who  would  not  submit  to  their  insolent  dominion. 
But  there  were  two  above  all  the  rest,  who  led  the 
van  of  the  king's  evil  counsellors,  and  these  were 
Laud,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  a  fellow  of  mean 
extraction^  and  arrogant  pride,  and  the  Earl  of 
Strafford,  who  as  much  outstripped  all  the  rest  in 
favour  as  he  did  in  abilities,  being  a  man  of  deep 
policy,  stem  resolution,  and  ambitious  zeal  to  keep 
up  the  glory  of  his  own  greatness.  In  the  begin- 
ning of  this  king's  reign,  this  man  had  been  a  strong 
asserter  of  the  liberties  of  the  people,  among  whom 
he  had  gained  himself  an  honourable  reputation,  and 
was  dreadful  to  the  court  party;  who  thereupon 
strewed  snares  in  his  way,  and  when  they  found 
a  breach  at  his  ambition,  his  soul  was  that  way 
entered  and  captivated.  He  was  advanced  first  to 
be    lord    president    of   the  council    in   the    north, 


House  of  Commons  on  April  21,  164 1,  and  referred  to  the 
committee  for  the  Ministers'  Remonstrance.  It  was  printed 
at  the  time,  in  the  form  of  a  pamphlet,  under  the  following 
title :  '*  A  Petition  presented  to  Parliament  from  Notting- 
hamshire, complaining  of  grievances  under  the  ecclesiastical 
government  of  archbishops,  bishops,  &c.,  with  a  schedule 
of  grievances,  subscribed  by  above  fifteen  hundred  hands 
of  esquires,  gentlemen,  and  yeomen.''  The  list  of  grievances 
is  extremely  minute  and  exhaustive. 
^  He  was  the  son  of  a  clothier  at  Reading. 


I639-4I-]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       125 

to  be  a  baron,  after  an  earl,  then  deputy  of 
Ireland;  the  nearest  to  a  favourite  of  any  man 
since  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  who 
was  raised  by  his  first  master,  and  kept  up  by 
the  second,  upon  no  account  of  personal  worth  or 
any  deserving  abilities  in  him,  but  only  from  the 
violent  and  private  inclinations  of  the  princes.  But 
the  Earl  of  Strafford  wanted  not  any  accomplish- 
ment that  could  be  desired  in  the  most  serviceable 
minister  of  state :  besides,  he  having  made  himself 
odious  to  the  people  by  his  revolt  from  their  interest 
to  that  of  the  oppressive  court,  he  was  now  obliged 
to  keep  up  his  own  interest  with  his  new  party,  by 
all  the  malicious  practices  that  pride  and  revenge 
could  inspire  him  with.^  But  above  all  these  the 
king  had  another  instigator  of  his  own  violent  pur- 
pose, more  powerful  than  all  the  rest,  and  that  was 
the  queen,  who,  grown  out  of  her  childhood,  began 
to  turn  her  mind  from  those  vain  extravagancies 
she  lived  in  at  first,  to  that  which  did  less  become 
her,  and  was  more  fatal  to  the  kingdom ;  which  is 
never  in  any  place  happy  where  the  hands  which 
were  made  only  for  distaffs  affect  the  management 
of  sceptres. — If  any  one  object  the  fresh  example  of 
Queen  Elizabeth,  let  them  remember  that  the  felicity 
of  her  reign  was  the  effect  of  her  submission  to  her 


^  Called   by  Lord   Digby  the   grand    apostate    of   the 
Commonwealth. — J.  H. 


1 26      Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1639-41. 

masculine  and  wise  counsellors ;  but  wherever  male 
princes  are  so  effeminate  as  to  suffer  women  of 
foreign  birth  and  different  religions  to  intermeddle 
with  the  affairs  of  state,  it  is  always  found  to  pro- 
duce sad  desolations ;  and  it  hath  been  observed 
that  a  French  queen  never  brought  any  happiness 
to  England.  Some  kind  of  fatality,  too,  the  English 
imagined  to  be  in  her  name  of  Marie,  which,  it  is 
said,  the  king  rather  chose  to  have  her  called  by 
than  her  other,  Henrietta,  because  the  land  should 
find  a  blessing  in  that  name,  which  had  been  more 
unfortunate ;  but  it  was  not  in  his  power,  though  a 
great  prince,  to  control  destiny.  This  lady  being 
by  her  priests  affected  with  the  meritoriousness  of 
advancing  her  own  religion,  whose  principle  it  is 
to  subvert  all  other,  applied  that  way  her  great  wit 
and  parts,  and  the  power  her  haughty  spirit  kept 
over  her  husband,  who  was  enslaved  in  his  affection 
only  to  her,  though  she  had  no  more  passion  for 
him  than  what  served  to  promote  her  designs. 
Those  brought  her  into  a  very  good  correspondence 
with  the  archbishop  and  his  prelatical  crew,  both 
joining  in  the  cruel  design  of  rooting  the  godly  out 
of  the  land.  The  foolish  protestants  were  medi- 
tating reconciliations  with  the  church  of  Rome,  who 
embraced  them  as  far  as  they  would  go,  carrying 
them  in  hand,  as  if  there  had  been  a  possibility  of 
bringing  such  a  thing  to  pass;  meanwhile  they 
carried  on  their  design  by  them,  and  had  so  ripened 


I639-4I*]     Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       127 

it,  that  nothing  but  the  mercy  of  God  prevented  the 
utter  subversion  of  protestantism  in  the  three  king- 
doms.— But  how  much  soever  their  designs  were 
framed  in  the  dark,  God  revealed  them  to  his  ser- 
vants, and  most  miraculously  ordered  providences 
for  their  preservation.  About  the  year  1639,  the 
Scots,  having  the  English  service-book  obtruded 
upon  them  violently,  refused  it,  and  took  a  national 
covenant  against  it,  and  entered  England  with  a 
great  army,  to  bring  their  complaints  to  the  king, 
which  his  unfaithful  ministers  did,  as  they  sup- 
posed, much  misreport.  The  king  himself  levied 
an  army  against  them,  wherein  he  was  assisted 
by  the  nobility  and  gentry,  but  most  of  all  by  the 
prelates,  insomuch  that  the  war  got  the  name  of 
"  bellum  episcopale ;  "  but  the  commonalty  of  the 
nation,  being  themselves  under  grievous  bond- 
age, were  loath  to  oppose  a  people  that  came  only 
to  claim  their  just  liberties.  When  the  king  was 
at  York,  the  chief  of  the  Scotch  covenanters  came, 
under  a  pretence  of  treating  with  the  king,  but 
their  principal  intent  was  to  disabuse  the  nobility 
of  England,  and  to  take  off  their  edge  against  them, 
by  remonstrating  upon  those  grievances  and  oppres- 
sions of  the  prelatical  innovators,  which  had  forced 
them  thus  to  defend  their  religion  and  liberties.^ 


^  Mrs.  Hutchinson  seems  to  have  confused  the  negotia- 
tions which  took  place  at  Berwick  in  1639,  with  those  which 


128      Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.     [1639-41. 

This  they  did  so  effectually,  that  the  hearts  of  the 
English  were  much  moved  towards  them,  and  the 
king  perceiving  it,  by  their  mediations,  consented 
to  a  dissembled  peace  for  that  time,  and  returned 
home.  But  the  Scots,  unsatisfied  in  the  perform- 
ance of  their  articles,  made  preparation  for  a  second 
return  into  England;  whereupon  the  king,  in  his 
anger  and  necessity,  was  forced  to  have  recourse 
to  the  long  neglected  remedy  of  parliaments,  and 
assembled  one  at  Westminster  the  13th  of  April, 
1640,  which  he  suffered  to  sit  but  twenty-one  days, 
and  broke  it  up  again,  apprehending  that  if  he  had 
suffered  them  to  sit  a  day  longer,  they  would  have 
voted  against  the  war  with  Scotland,  which  he  was 
violently  bent  to  prosecute. 

The  bishops  at  that  time  devised  as  an  anti- 
covenant,  in  their  convocation  house,  that  execrable 
oath  known  by  the  name  of  the  et  catera,  wherein 
all  ministers  were  required  to  swear  to  uphold  the 
government  of  the  church  of  England  by  arch- 
bishops, deans,  archdeacons,  &c.  After  this  the 
Scots  enter  England,  the  king  makes  a  second 
expedition  into  the  north  against  them,  and  sends 
part  of  his  army  to  keep  the  passes  upon  the  river 


took  place  at  Ripon  in  1640.  Possibly  she  was  thinking  of 
the  letter  sent  by  the  covenanters  to  the  Earl  of  Essex 
while  he  was  at  York  in  1639.  See  Gardiner,  *'  Fall  of  the 
Monarchy  of  Charles  I.,"  vol.  1.  p.  213. 


I639-4I*]     Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       1 29 

Tyne ;  but  the  soldiers  being  raw  and  heartless  in 
this  war,  and  the  commanders  themselves  inex- 
perienced, they  >Yere  vanquished/  and  the  Scots 
forced  their  way,  after  they  had  been  refused  to 
pass  quietly  by,  with  their  petitions  in  their  hands, 
and  thus  possessed  themselves  of  Newcastle  and 
Durham.  At  that  time  the  Scots  had  put  forth  a 
declaration,  wherein  they  had  affirmed  their  inten- 
tions not  to  lay  down  arms  till  the  reformed  religion 
was  settled  in  both  nations  upon  sure  grounds,  and 
the  causers  of  these  present  troubles  brought  to 
public  justice,  and  that  in  a  parliament.  This  was 
so  plausible  to  the  English,  that  the  king,  finding 
both  the  hearts  and  hands  of  his  people  fail  him 
in  this  occasion,  was  induced  to  grant  the  petition 
of  twelve  noble  lords,^  who  at  that  time  interposed ; 
and,  calling  together  all  his  lords  at  York,  agreed 
upon  a  parliament  at  London,  to  convene  on  the 
third  of  November  foUowing.  In  the  meantime, 
a  treaty  was  condescended  to,  of  sixteen  lords  of 
each  side,  Scotch  and  English,  who  agreed  upon 
a  cessation  between  both  armies  for  the  present,  in 
order  to  a  peace,  to  be  concluded  at  London  with 
the  parliament,  who  met,  as  appointed,  in  November. 
They  began  with  throwing  down  monopolies,  and 

^  At  Newbum,  August  28,  164a 

'  Viz.,  Bedford,  Essex,  Brooke,  Warwick,  Saye,  Mande- 
ville,  Hertford,  Rutland,  Mulgrave,  Exeter,  Howard  of 
Escrick,  and  Bolingbroke. 

VOL.    I.  I 


1 30      Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.     [1639-41. 

then  impeached  the  Earl  of  Strafford  of  high  treason, 
who,  after  a  solemn  trial  and  hot  disputes  on  both 
sides,  was  at  length  attainted  of  treason,  and  the 
king,  against  his  own  mind,  to  serve  his  ends,  gave 
him  up  to  death.*  The  archbishop  of  Canterbury 
was  also  made  prisoner  upon  an  accusation  of 
high  treason,  for  which  he  after  suffered;  Wren, 
bishop  of  Norwich,  was  likewise  committed  to  the 
Tower;  several  other  prelatical  preachers  were 
questioned  for  popish  and  treasonable  doctrines; 
the  Star  Chamber,  an  unjust  and  arbitrary  court, 
was  taken  away,  and  the  High  Commission 
Court ;  an  act  was  procured  for  a  triennial  parlia- 
ment, and  another  for  the  continuation  of  this,  that 
it  should  not  be  broken  up  without  their  own  con- 
sent. There  were  great  necessities  for  money  by 
reason  of  the  two  armies  that  were  then  maintained 
in  England,  and  the  people  would  give  the  king 
no  money  without  some  ease  of  grievances,  which 
forced  him,  against  his  inclination,  to  grant  those 
bills,  with  which,  after  he  had  granted,  he  found 
he  had  bound  up  his  own  hands,  and  therefore 
privately  encouraged  plots  that  were  in  those  times 

^  It  is  only  fair  to  g^ve  the  king's  own  account  of  his 
motives.  ^  If  my  own  person  only  were  in  danger,"  he 
told  the  council,  *'  I  would  gladly  venture  it  to  save  Lord 
Strafford's  life ;  but  seeing  my  wife,  children,  and  all  my 
kingdom  are  concerned  in  it,  I  am  forced  to  give  way 
unto  it" 


1639-4 1- ]     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       131 

contrived  against  the  parliament.  One  of  them 
was  to  have  rescued  the  Earl  of  Strafford  out  of 
prison,  and  put  him  at  the  head  of  eight  thousand 
Irish,  which  the  king  would  not  consent  to  disband, 
when  the  parliament  had  some  time  before  moved 
him  to  it :  then  the  English  army  in  the  north  was 
to  have  been  brought  up  and  engaged  against  the 
parliament  itself  upon  a  pretence  of  maintaining  the 
king's  prerogative,  episcopacy,  and  some  other  such 
things.  This  plot  was  managed  by  Percy,  Jermyn, 
Goring,  Wilmot,  Ashburnham,  Pollard,  Suckling, 
O'Neale,  and  others,  of  whom  some  confessed  and 
impeached  their  fellows,  others  fled,  others  were 
put  in  prison.  While  this  parliament  was  sitting, 
the  king  would  needs,  contrary  to  their  desires, 
take  a  journey  to  Scotland,  and  passed  by  the  two 
disbanding  armies  in  his  journey,  where  some  re- 
port that  he  secretly  attempted  to  urge  the  Scotch 
army  against  the  parliament,  which  then  succeeded 
not.  The  houses  had  rejourned  for  some  time, 
and  left  a  standing  committee  of  fifty  to  prepare 
business.^  About  that  time  a  plot  was  discovered 
to  them  from  Scotland,  against  the  lives  of  some  of 
the  greatest  peers  of  that  kingdom,'  the  committee, 

^  The  names  of  this  committee  are  given  in  Kushwortb, 
HI.  1.387. 

'  The  plot  known  as  "The  Incident"  It  was  directed 
against  Argyle  and  Hamilton.  Montrose  offered  to  prove 
Hamilton  guilty  of  high  treason,  whilst  the  Earl  of  Crawford 


132       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.     [1639-41. 

fearing  the  like  attempts  from  the  same  spring, 
placed  strong  guards  in  divers  parts  of  the  city  of 
London.  The  king's  design  in  going  to  Scotland 
was  variously  conjectured ;  but  this  was  a  certain 
effect  of  it,  that  it  retarded  all  the  affairs  of  the 
government  of  England,  which  the  king  had  put 
into  such  disorder  that  it  waLs  not  an  easy  task 
to  reform  what  was  amiss,  and  redress  the  real 
grievances  of  the  people;  but  yet  the  parliament 
showed  such  a  wonderful  respect  to  the  king,  that 
they  never  mentioned  him,  as  he  was,  the  sole 
author  of  all  those  miscarriages,  but  imputed  them 
to  evil  counsellors,  and  gave  him  all  the  submissive 
language  that  could  have  been  used  to  a  good 
prince,  fixing  all  the  guilt  upon  his  evil  counsellors 
and  ministers  of  state,  which  flattery  I  fear  they 
have  to  answer  for :  I  am  sure  they  have  thereby 
exposed  themselves  to  much  scandal.^  While  the 
king  was  in  Scotland,  that  cursed  rebellion  in  Ire- 
land broke  out,  wherein  above  200,000  were  mas- 


planned  the  violent  seizure,  and  if  necessary,  assassination 
of  the  two  noblemen.  See  Gardiner,  *^  Fall  of  the  Monarchy 
of  Charles  L,"  ii.  260. 

^  This  is  an  oversight  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson's,  of  which  she 
is  seldom  guilty.  Good  policy  required  then,  as  it  does 
now,  that  the  king  should  be  held  incapable  of  wrong,  and 
the  criminality  fixed  on  ministers,  who  are  amenable  to  the 
law.  If  the  patriots  of  that  day  were  the  inventors  of  this 
maxim,  we  are  highly  obliged  to  them. — ^J.  H. 


1639-41.I     Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       133 

aiacred  in  two  months'  space,^  being  surprised,  and 
many  of  them  most  inhumanly  butchered  and  tor- 
mented ;  and  besides  the  slain,  abundance  of  poor 
families  stripped  and  sent  naked  away  out  of  all 
their  possessions  ;  and,  had  not  the  providence  of 
God  miraculously  prevented  the  surprise  of  Dublin 
Castle  the  night  it  should  have  been  seized,  there 
had  not  been  any  remnant  of  the  protestant  name 
left  in  that  country.  As  soon  as  this  sad  news 
came  to  the  parliament,  they  vigorously  set  them- 
selves to  the  work  of  relieving  them ;  but  then  the 
king  returned  from  Scotland,  and  being  sumptuously 


^  Mrs.  Hutchinson  here  seems  to  take  May  as  her 
authority,  who  states  that  "  the  persons  of  above  200,000 
men,  women,  and  children  were  murdered,  many  of  them 
with  exquisite  and  unheard-of  tortures,  within  the  space  of 
one  month."  May  himself  relies  chiefly  on  the  "  faithful 
relation  of  Sir  John  Temple.**  Clarendon,  Rushworth,  and 
Whitdock  give  equally  high  figures.  Mr.  Gardiner  esti- 
mates the  number  of  persons  slain  in  cold  blood  at 
the  outbreak  of  the  rebellion  at  4000,  and  thinks  that 
about  double  that  number  may  have  perished  from  ill- 
treatment.  The  depositions  have  been  recently  examined 
and  criticised  by  Mr.  Gilbert  in  the  appendix  to  the  eighth 
report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  Historical  Manu- 
scripts. Miss  Hickson,  in  the  work  entitled  **  Ireland  in 
the  Seventeenth  Century,**  has  reprinted  a  selection  from 
the  depositions,  with  a  commentary  in  which  she  success- 
fully refutes  some  of  Mr.  Gilbert*s  statements  about  the 
depositions,  and  gives  reasons  for  fixing  the  number  of 
sufferers  higher  than  the  estimate  of  Mr.  Gardiner. 


1 34       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         [1641. 

welcomed  home  by  the  city,  took  courage  thereby 
against  the  parliament,  and  obstructed  all  its  pro- 
ceedings for  the  effectual  relief  of  Ireland.  Long 
was  he  before  he  could  be  drawn  to  proclaim  these 
murderers  rebels,  and  when  he  did,  by  special 
command,  there  were  but  forty  proclamations 
printed,  and  care  was  taken  that  they  should  not 
be  much  dispersed ;  which  courses  afflicted  all  the 
good  protestants  in  England,  and  confirmed  that 
the  rebellion  in  Ireland  received  countenance  from 
the  king  and  queen  of  England.  The  parlia- 
ment, beset  with  so  many  difficulties,  were  forced 
for  their  own  vindication  to  present  the  king  with 
a  petition  and  a  remonstrance  of  the  state  of  the 
kingdom,  wherein  they  spared  him  as  much  as 
truth  would  bear,  and  complained  only  of  his  ill 
counsellors  and  ministers;  but  this,  instead  of 
admonishing,  exasperated  him,  and  was  answered 
with  another  declaration  of  his ;  and  upon  several 
occasions  the  parliament  being  enforced  to  justify 
their  proceedings  publicly,  and  the  king  setting 
forth  replies,  these  open  debates  were  but  the  pro- 
logue to  the  ensuing  tragedy.  The  city,  declaring 
their  good  affections  to  the  parliament  by  a  petition, 
gave  the  king  distrust,  and  he  was  observed  to 
entertain  an  extraordinary  guard  of  cavaliers,  who 
killed  and  wounded  some  of  the  poor  unarmed  men 
that  passed  by  his  house  at  Whitehall ;  and  the 
parliament,  conceiving  themselves  not  safe,  desired 


1641O       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         135 

a  guard  might  be  allowed  them  under  the  command 
of  the  Elarl  of  Essex ;  but  he  refused  it,  with  an 
assurance  that  he  would  command  such  a  guard  to 
wait  upon  them  as  he  would  be  responsible  to 
Almighty  God  for,  and  that  the  safety  of  all  and 
every  one  of  them  was  as  dear  to  him  as  that  of 
his  own  person  and  children.  Yet  the  very  next 
day  after  this  false  message,  he  came  to  the  House 
of  Commons,  attended  with  his  extraordinary  guard, 
of  about  four  hundred  gentlemen  and  soldiers, 
armed  with  swords  and  pistols,  and  there  demanded 
five  of  their  members,  whom  not  finding  there  (for 
a  great  lady  at  court  ^  had  before  informed  one  of ' 
them  of  his  coming,  and  the  house  ordered  them  to 
retire),  he  returned,  leaving  the  house  under  a  high 
sense  of  this  breach  of  their  privilege.  At  this 
time  the  people  began  in  great  numbers  to  bring 
petitions  to  the  king  and  parliament,  to  beg  a  more 
cheerful  concurrence  between  them  for  the  relief  of 
Ireland,  and  to  encourage  the  parliament  in  their 
honourable  endeavours  for  the  relief  of  both  king- 
doms. The  king  was  offended  at  this,  and  retired 
first  to  Hampton  Court,  then  went  with  the  queen 
lo  Canterbury,  whom  he  sent  from  thence  into 
Holland  with  her  daughter,  lately  married  to  the 
Prince  of  Orange,  under  pretence  of  conducting  her 
to  her  own  court,  but  really  to  manage  his  business 

1  Lady  Carlisle. 


1 36        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        [1641. 

abroad,  and  procure  arms  to  be  employed  against 
the  parliament,  by  the  sale  of  the  crown  jewels, 
which  she  carried  over  with  her.  After  her  depar- 
ture, the  king,  taking  the  prince  and  the  Duke  of 
York  with  him,  went  to  Theobalds,  whither  the 
parliament  sent  a  petition  to  him  to  return  to  his 
parliament  and  abide  near  London,  and  that  he 
would  not  carry  the  prince  away  with  him,  and 
that  he  would  grant  the  militia  of  the  kingdom  to 
be  put  into  such  hands  as  the  parliament  should 
recommend,  and  might  confide  in;  all  which  he 
denied,  and  went  immediately  to  Newmarket,  and 
from  thence  to  York;*  all  this  while,  by  many 
false  pretences,  really  obstructing  the  relief  of 
bleeding  Ireland,  and  seducing  many  of  the  poor 
people  of  England  into  blood  and  ruin. 

In  conducting  the  state  of  England,  in  those 
days,  wherein  he,  whose  actions  I  am  tracing, 
began  to  enter  into  his  part  in  this  great  tragedy, 
I  have  been  too  long  for  that  I  intended,  and  too 
short  to  give  a  clear  understanding  of  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  parliament's  cause;  which  I  shall 
desire  you  to  inform  yourselves  better  of  by  their 
own  printed  papers,  and  Mr.  May's  history,  which 
I  find  to  be  impartially  true,  so  far  as  he   hath 

^  The  queen  sailed  on  February  asth.  The  king  was  at 
Theobalds  from  February  28th  to  March  3d.  From  the  7th 
to  the  14th  of  the  same  month  the  king  remained  at  New- 
market, reaching  York  on  March  19th.— /^  Carolinum. 


1641.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         137 

carried  it  on,  saving  some  little  mistakes  in  his 
own  judgment,  and  misinformations  which  some 
vain  people  gave  of  the  state,  and  more  indulgence 
to  the  king's  guilt  than  can  justly  be  allowed. 

To  take  up  my  discourse  of  Mr.  Hutchinson 
where  I  left  it :  he  was  now  come  to  his  own 
house  at  Owthorpe,  about  the  time  when  the  Irish 
massacre  was  acted,  and  finding  humours  begin  to 
be  very  stirring,  he  applied  himself  to  understand 
the  things  then  in  dispute,  and  read  all  the  public 
papers  that  came  forth  between  the  king  and 
parliament,  besides  many  other  private  treatises, 
both  concerning  the  present  and '  foregoing  times. 
Hereby  he  became  abundantly  informed  in  his 
understanding,  and  convinced  in  conscience  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  parliament's  cause  in  point  of 
civil  right;  and  though  he  was  satisfied  of  the 
endeavours  to  reduce*  popery  and  subvert  the 
true  protestant  religion,  which  indeed  was  apparent 
to  every  one  that  impartially  considered  it,  yet  he 
did  not  think  that  so  clear  a  ground  for  the  war 
as  the  defence  of  the  just  English  liberties ;  and 
although  he  was  clearly  swayed  by  his  own  judg- 
ment and  reason  to  the  parliament,  he,  thinking  he 
had  no  warrantable  call  at  that  time  to  do  any- 
thing more,  contented  himself  with  praying  for 
peace.     At  that  time  Mr.  Henry  Ireton  was  in  the 

^  Reduce,  Latin  reducere^  to  bring  back,  restore,  revive. 
—J.  H. 


1 38        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1641. 

country,  and  being  a  kinsman  of  Mr.  Hutchinson's, 
and  one  that  had  received  so  much  advantage 
to  himself  and  his  family  in  the  country  by 
Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson's  countenance  and  pro- 
tection, that  he  seemed  a  kind  of  dependent  upon 
him,  and  being  besides  a  very  grave,  serious, 
religious  person,  there  was  a  great  league  of 
kindness    and    good-will    between    them.^       Mr. 

^  As  it  will  be  seen  in  the  sequel  that  Mr.  Hutchinson 
reposed  a  very  g^at  confidence  in  Ireton,  and  even  allowed 
to  the  information  he  received  from  him  such  weight  in 
forming  his  judgment  as  he  did  to  that  of  no  one  else,  it 
may  be  well  to  examine  how  far  the  one  was  deserving,  and 
the  other  discerning,  in  this. 

The  question  will  be  probably  decided  to  general  satis- 
faction upon  the  testimony  of  Whitelock  and  Ludlow,  men 
of  very  different  dispositions,  but  both  of  great  good  sense 
and  knowledge  of  their  subject.  Whitelock,  in  speaking 
of  some  reforms  proposed  in  the  election  and  composition 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  says,  'Mreton  was  chiefly 
employed  in  them,  having  learned  some  grounds  of  law, 
and  having  a  laborious  and  working  brain  and  fancy." 
When  he  comes  to  speak  of  the  reforms  of  the  law  which 
Ireton  likewise  meditated,  he  says,  **he  was  a  man  full  of 
invention  and  industry,  who  had  a  little  knowledge  of  the 
law,  which  led  him  into  the  more  errors."  But  when  by 
his  death  the  jealousy  lest  he  should  bring  about  those 
reforms  which  Whitelock,  and  most  of  the  lawyers,  were 
averse  to,  had  ceased,  he  says  of  him,  page  516  :  "This  gen- 
tleman was  a  person  very  active,  industrious,  and  stiff  in 
his  ways  and  purposes  ;  he  was  of  good  abilities  for  council 
as  well  as  action,  made  much  use  of  his  pen,  and  was  very 
forward  to  reform  the   proceedings  in  law,  wherein  his 


1641.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         1 39 

Ireton  being  very  active  in  promoting  the  parlia- 
ment, and  the  godly  interest  in  the  country,  found 
great  opposition  from^  some  projectors,  and  others 
of  corrupt  interest  that  were  in  the  commission  of 
the  peace;  whereupon,  making  complaint  at  the 
parliament,  he  procured  some  of  them  to  be  put  out 
of  the  commission,  and  others,  better  affected,  to  be 
put  in  their  rooms,^  of  which  Mr.  Hutchinson  was 

having  been  bred  a  lawyer  was  a  great  help  to  him.  He 
was  stout  in  the  field,  and  wary  and  prudent  in  councils ; 
exceedingly  forward  as  to  the  business  of  a  commonwealth. 
Cromwell  had  a  great  opinion  of  him,  and  no  man  could 
prevail  so  much,  nor  order  him  so  far,  as  Ireton  could.** 
But  Ludlow,  who  viewed  him  more  constantly  and  closely 
in  a  post  of  great  power  and  temptation,  that  of  deputy  of 
Ireland,  being  himself  next  in  command  to  him,  gives  the 
following  account  of  his  conduct  in  one  instance,  which  will 
render  all  others  superfluous  :  "  The  parliament  also  ordered 
an  act  to  be  brought  in  for  settling  two  thousand  per  annum 
on  the  lord-deputy  Ireton,  the  news  of  which  being  brought 
over  was  so  unacceptable  to  him,  that  he  said,  they  had 
many  just  debts,  which  he  desired  they  would  pay  before 
they  made  any  such  presents ;  that  he  had  no  need  of  their 
land,  and  would  not  have  it ;  and  that  he  should  be  more 
contented  to  see  them  doing  the  service  of  the  nation,  than 
so  liberal  in  disposing  of  the  public  treasure." — ^J.  H. 

^  See  the  journals  of  the  House  of  Commons  for  February 
28,  1642.  Ireton  presented  a  petition  from  Nottinghamshire, 
complaining  of  the  obstructions  caused  by  Gilbert  Boone, 
serjeant-at-law,  to  the  last  petition  presented  by  the  county, 
and  the  house  ordered  that  Boone  should  be  put  out  of  the 
commission  of  the  peace. 


1 40        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1641. 

one ;  but  he  then  forbore  to  take  his  oath,  as  not 
willing  to  launch  out  rashly  into  public  employments, 
while  such  a  storm  hung  threatening  overhead. 
Yet  his  good  affections  to  godliness  and  the  interest 
of  his  country,  being  a  glory  that  could  not  be 
concealed,  many  of  his  honest  neighbours  made 
applications  to  him,  and  endeavoured  to  gain  his 
conduct,  which  he  at  first  in  modesty  and  prudence 
would  not  too  hastily  rush  into.  The  parliament 
had  made  orders  to  deface  the  images  in  all  churches.^ 
Within  two  miles  of  his  house  there  was  a  church, 
where  Christ  upon  the  cross,  the  Virgin,  and  John, 
had  been  fairly  set  up  in  a  window  over  the  altar, 
and  sundry  other  superstitious  paintings,  of  the 
priest's  own  ordering,  were  drawn  upon  the  walls. 
When  the  order  for  rasing  out  those  relics  of  super- 
stition came,  the  priest  only  took  down  the  heads 
of  the  images,  and  laid  them  carefully  up  in  his 
closet,  and  would  have  had  the  church  officers  to 
have  certified  that  the  thing  was  done  according  to 
order;  whereupon  they  came  to  Mr.  Hutchinson, 
and  desired  him  that  he  would  take  the  pains  to 
come  and  view  their  church,  which  he  did,  and  upon 

^  This  probably  refers  to  the  declaration  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  on  September  8th,  1641,  on  the  subject  of  eccle- 
siastical innovations.  It  contained  an  order  that  all  cruci- 
fixes, scandalous  pictures  of  one  or  more  persons  of  the 
Trinity,  and  all  images  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  shall  be  taken 
away  and  abolished. 


164a.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         141 

discourse  with  the  parson,  persuaded  him  to  blot  out 
all  the  superstitious  paintings,  and  break  the  images 
in  the  glass ;  which  he  consented  to,  but  being  ill- 
afTected,  was  one  of  those  who  began  to  brand  Mr. 
Hutchinson  with  the  name  of  puritan. 

At  that  time  most  of  the  gentry  of  the  country 
were  disaffected  to  the  parliament ;  most  of  the 
middle  sort,  the  able  substantial  freeholders,  and  the 
other  commons,  who  had  not  their  dependence  upon 
the  malignant  nobility  and  gentry,  adhered  to  the 
parliament  These,  when  the  king  was  at  York, 
made  a  petition  to  him  to  return  to  the  parliament, 
which,  upon  their  earnest  entreaty,  Mr.  Hutchinson 
went,  with  some  others,  and  presented  at  York ;  ^ 
where,  meeting  his  cousins  the  Birons,  they  were 
extremely  troubled  to  see  him  there  on  that  account. 
After  his  return.  Sir  John  Biron  being  likewise 
come   to  his  house  at  Newstead,  Mr.  Hutchinson 

^  The  petition  is  printed  tinder  the  following  title  :  '*  A 
Petition  presented  to  the  King's  Majesty  at  York,  the  ist  of 
April,  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  county  of  Nottingham,  and 
the  county  of  the  town  of  Nottingham,  subscribed  by  four 
thousand  five  hundred  and  forty  hands  of  knights,  esquires, 
gentlemen,  freeholders,  and  the  mayor,  aldermen,  and  other 
inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Nottingham."  The  royalists  of 
the  county  replied  to  this  petition  by  a  joint  letter  to  the 
knights  serving  for  the  county,  urging  them  to  join  and 
comply  with  the  king.  It  was  signed  by  Sir  John  Digby  and 
eighty  knights  and  gentlemen.  See,  on  the  presentation  of 
the  petition,  Joseph  Widmerpoole's  Letter  in  the  Appendix. 


142        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [164*. 

went  to  visit  them  there,  and  not  finding  him, 
returned  to  Nottingham,  five  miles  short  of  his  own 
house.  There,  going  to  the  mayor  to  hear  some 
news,  he  met  with  such  as  he  expected  not,  for  as 
soon  as  he  came  in,  the  mayor's  wife  told  him,  that 
the  sheriff  of  the  county  was  come  to  fetch  away  the 
magazine  that  belonged  to  the  trained  bands  of  the 
county,  which  was  left  in  her  husband's  trust,^  and 
that  her    husband    had    sent    for    the  country   to 

• 

acquaint  them,  but  she  feared  it  would  be  gone 
before  they  could  come  in.  Whereupon  Mr. 
Hutchinson,  taking  his  brother  from  his  lodgings 
along  with  him,  presently  went  to  the  town-hall, 
and  going  up  to  my  Lord  Newark,^  lord  lieutenant, 

^  On  the  date  of  this  attempt  to  obtaia  possession  of  the 
powder,  and  the  question  of  the  truth  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson's 
narrative,  see  the  discussion  in  the  Appendix. 

'  Eldest  son  of  the  Earl  of  Kingston,  and  brother  of  two 
Mr.  Pierreponts  mentioned  in  this  work ;  this  nobleman 
was  afterwards  created  Marquis  of  Dorchester,  and  will  be 
spoken  of  under  that  title  in  the  sequel.  In  the  diary  men- 
tioned in  the  preface,  the  dialogue  between  Lord  Newark 
and  Mr.  Hutchinson  is  set  down  at  full  length,  and  as  it 
may  be  an  object  of  curiosity  to  some  of  our  readers,  it  is 
here  inserted  in  smaller  type. 

Mr.  Hutchinson  asking  who  were  above,  was  told  that 
the  lord-lieutenant,  my  Lord  Newark,  was  there,  to  whom 
he  sent  his  name  and  desired  to  speak  with  him ;  and  being 
come  up,  found  in  the  room,  where  the  powder  was  weigh- 
ing, my  Lord  Newark,  the  sheriff  Sir  John  Digby,  and  two 


1642.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         143 

told  him,  that  hearing  some  dispute  concerning  the 
country's  powder,  he  was  come  to  wait  on  his  lord- 
ship, to  know  his  desires  and  intents  concerning  it. 
My  lord  answered  him,  that  the  king,  having  great 
necessities,  desired   to  borrow   it  of  the  country. 

or  three  captains  :  Mr.  Hutchinson,  addressing  himself  to 
my  lord  only,  spoke  to  him  : — 

H,  My  lord,  hearing  that  there  were  some  question  con- 
cerning the  county's  powder,  I  am  come  to  kiss  your  lord- 
ship's hands,  and  to  beseech  you  that  I  may  know  what 
your  desires  and  intents  are  concerning  it  ? 

A^.  Cousin,  the  king  desires  to  borrow  it  of  the  country, 
to  supply  his  great  necessities. 

H*  I  beseech  your  lordship,  what  commission  have  you 
to  demand  this  ? 

A^.  Upon  my  honour,  I  have  a  commission  from  his 
majesty,  but  it  is  left  behind  me  ;  but  I  will  engage  my 
honour  it  shall  be  repaid  the  country. 

H,  Your  lordship's  honour  as  an  engagement,  would  be 
accepted  for  more  than  I  am  worth  ;  but  in  such  an  occa- 
sion as  this,  the  greatest  man's  engagement  in  the  kingdom 
cannot  be  a  satisfaction  to  the  countrv. 

N,  The  king's  intents  are  only  to  borrow  it,  and  if  the 
country  will  not  lend  it,  he  will  pay  for  it. 

/T.  My  lord,  it  is  not  the  value  of  the  powder  we 
endeavour  to  preserve,  but  in  times  of  danger,  as  these  are, 
those  things  which  serve  for  our  defence,  are  not  valuable 
at  any  price,  should  you  give  as  many  barrels  of  gold  as 
you  take  barrels  of  powder. 

A^.  Upon  my  faith  and  honour,  cousin,  it  shall  be  restored 
in  ten  days. 

H.  My  lord,  such  is  the  danger  of  the  times,  that  for 
aught  we  know,  we  may  in  less  than  four  days  be  ruined 


144        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        [164*- 

Mr.  Hutchinson  asked  my  lord  what  commission  he 
had  from  his  majesty.  My  lord  told  him  he  had 
one,  but  he  had  left  it  behind.  Mr.  Hutchinson 
replied,  that  my  lord's  affirmation  was  satisfactory 
to  him,  but  the  country  would  not  be  willing  to 

for  want  of  it ;  and  I  beseech  your  lordship  to  consider 
how  sad  a  thing  it  is  in  these  times  of  war,  to  leave  a  poor 
country  and  the  people  in  it,  naked  and  open  to  the  injury  of 
every  passenger ;  for  if  you  take  our  powder,  you  may  as  well 
take  our  arms,  without  which  we  are  unable  to  make  use  of 
them,  and  I  hope  your  lordship  will  not  disarm  the  country. 

A^.  Why,  who  should  the  country  fear  ?  I  am  their  lord- 
lieutenant,  and  engaged  with  my  life  and  honour  to  defend 
them  1    What  danger  are  they  in  ? 

H,  Danger  !  yes,  my  lord,  great  danger ;  there  is  a  troop 
of  horse  now  in  the  town,  and  it  hath  often  happened  so 
that  they  have  committed  great  outrages  and  insolencies, 
calling  divers  honest  men  puritans  and  rogues,  with  divers 
other  provoking  terms  and  carriages.  I  myself  was  abused 
by  some  of  them,  as  I  passed  on  the  road.  I  chanced  to 
meet  some  of  these  gentlemen,  who,  as  soon  as  I  was  past, 
inquired  my  name,  and  being  told  it,  gave  me  another, 
saying  among  themselves,  that  I  was  a  puritan  and  a 
traitor ;  as  two  or  three  honest  men  that  came  behind  told 
me.  Besides,  your  lordship  may  be  far  off,  and  we  ruined 
before  you  can  come  to  us,  being  unarmed,  and  not  able  to 
defend  ourselves  from  anybody,  and  this  country  being  a 
road  through  which,  under  the  name  of  soldiers,  rude  people 
daily  pass  from  the  north  to  south,  and  terrify  the  country  ; 
which  if  they  knew  to  be  naked  and  unarmed,  they  would 
thereby  be  encouraged  to  greater  insolencies  and  mischiefs. 

A^.  The  king's  occasions  are  such,  and  so  urgent,  as  I  can- 
not dispense  with  it  for  any  reasons,  but  must  needs  have  it 


1642.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         145 

part  with  their  powder  in  so  dangerous  a  time, 
without  an  absolute  command.  My  lord  urged  that 
he  would  restore  it  in  ten  days.  Mr.  Hutchinson 
replied,  they  might  have  use  for  it  sooner,  and  he 
hoped  my  lord  would  not  disarm  his  country  in  such 

H.  I  hope  your  lordship  will  not  deny  that  the  country 
hath  a  right,  interest,  and  property  in  it. 

A^.  I  do  not  deny  it. 

H.  Then,  my  lord,  I  hope  his  majesty  will  not  command 
it  from  them. 

N,  No,  he  doth  but  desire  to  borrow  it, 

H.  Then,  I  hope,  if  he  do  but  desire  to  borrow  it,  his 
majesty  hath  signified  his  request  to  those  that  have  interest 
in  it,  under  his  hand. 

A^.  Upon  my  honour  he  hath,  but  I  left  it  behind  me. 

H.  I  beseech  your  lordship,  then,  that  you  would  not 
take  it  away  till  you  have  acquainted  the  country  with  it, 
who  only  have  power  to  lend  it ;  and  if  your  lordship  be 
pleased  to  do  this,  I  will  engage  myself  that  by  to-morrow 
at  twelve  of  the  clock,  that  part  of  the  country  who  have 
interest  in  the  powder  shall  all  wait  on  your  lordship,  and 
give  you  their  resolutions. 

A^.  The  king's  occasions  cannot  admit  of  that  delay. 

H,  I  beseech  of  your  lordship,  yet  t>e  pleased'  to  consider 
the  dangerous  consequence  of  taking  it  without  the  country's 
consent,  and  be  pleased  but  to  stay  till  they  can  come  in. 

A^.  That  time  is  more  than  his  majesty's  necessities  can 
dispense  withaL 

With  that  Mr.  Hutchinson  went  down  stairs,  where  by 
that  time  a  good  company  of  the  country  were  gathered 
together,  to  whom  Mr.  Hutchinson  told  what  my  lord  had 
said  to  him,  and  they  desired  him  that  he  would  but  stand 
to  them,  and  they  would  part  with  every  drop  of  blood  out 

VOL.  I.  K 


146        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       (164a. 

a  time  of  danger.  My  lord  contemned  the  mention 
of  danger,  and  asked  what  they  could  fear  while  he 
was  their  lord-lieutenant,  and  ready  to  serve  them 
with  his  lifeJ  Mr.  Hutchinson  told  him  they  had 
some  grounds  to  apprehend  danger  by  reason  of  the 

of  their  bodies  before  he  should  have  it ;  and  said  besides, 
that  they  would  go  up  and  break  my  lord's  neck  and  the 
sheriffs  out  of  the  windows  ;  but  Mr.  Hutchinson  desired 
them  to  stay  below,  till  he  had  once  more  spoken  to  my 
lord,  and  then,  taking  only  one  or  two  more  with  him,  went 
up  and  spoke  to  my  lord. 

//*.  My  lord,  I  am  again,  at  the  request  of  the  country, 
that  are  below,  come  to  your  lordship,  and  do  once  more 
humbly  beseech  you  to  consider  the  business  you  are  about, 
before  you  proceed  further  in  it,  for  it  may  prove  of  dan- 
gerous consequence  if  you  go  on. 

A^.  Cousin,  I  am  confident  it  cannot,  for  the  country  will 
not  deny  this  to  the  king. 

H.  \i%  very  probable  they  will  not,  if  your  lordship 
please  to  have  patience  till  they  can  be  called  in,  that  they 
may  be  acquainted  with  his  majesty's  desire. 

N,  His  majesty  is  very  well  assured  of  the  willingness 
and  cheerfulness  of  the  greater  part  of  the  country  to  it. 

//l  My  lord,  I  do  not  know  what  assurance  his  majesty 
hath  of  it,  but  if  you  please  to  look  out  of  this  window 
(pointing  to  the  countrymen  below  in  the  streets),  you  will 
see  no  inconsiderable  number  gathered,  who,  I  fear,  will 
not  be  willing  to  part  with  it. 

A^.  Those  are  but  some  few  factious  men,  not  to  be  con- 
sidered. 

//*.  My  lord,  we  have  been  happy  yet,  in  these  unhappy 
differences,  to  have  had  no  blood  shed,  and  I  am  confident 
your  lordship  is  so  noble  and  tender  of  your  country,  that 


164a.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         147 

daily  passing  of  armed  men  through  the  country, 
whereof  there  was  now  one  troop  in  the  town,  and 
that  before  they  could  repair  to  my  lord,  they  might 
be  destroyed  in  his  absence,  and  withal  urged 
to  him  examples  of  their  insolence ;  but  my  lord 

it  would  very  much  trouble  you  to  have  a  hand  in  the  first 
man's  blood  that  should  be  spent  in  this  quarrel. 

N.  Cousin,  it  cannot  come  to  that,  fear  it  not  (this  was 
spoken  very  slightly  and  contemptuously),  his  majesty's 
occasions  are  urgent,  and  must  be  served. 

(With  that,  the  country  came  very  fast  up,  which  when 
the  cavalier  captains  saw,  they  slunk  down.) 

H.  Why  then,  my  lord,  I  must  plainly  tell  you,  not  one 
here  but  will  lose  every  drop  of  blood  in  his  body,  before 
he  will  part  with  one  com  of  it,  without  your  lordship  can 
show  either  a  command  or  a  request  for  it  under  his 
majesty's  hand  and  seal,  or  that  the  country  be  called 
together  to  give  their  free  consent  to  it,  for  we  have  all 
property  and  interest  in  it,  being  members  of  this  county, 
and  it  being  bought  with  our  money,  for  the  particular 
defence  and  safety  of  the  same. 

My  lord  desired  to  borrow  part  of  it,  but  that  being 
denied,  he  turned  to  Sir  John  Digby  and  took  him  to  the 
window,  where,  after  he  had  whispered  with  him  a  while. 
Sir  John  Digby  laid  down  his  pen,  ink,  and  paper,  with 
which  he  had  been  taking  an  account  of  the  powder,  match, 
and  bullet  The  countrymen  desired  my  lord  aloud,  that 
he  would  not  take  away  their  powder  out  of  the  country ; 
upon  which,  turning  to  them,  he  thus  spoke : — 

"  Gentlemen, — His  majesty  was  assured  by  some  of  the 
cheerfulness  of  this  country's  affections  to  him,  which  I  am 
very  sorry  to  see  them  so  much  failing  in,  and  that  the 
pountry  should  come  so  much  short  of  this  town,  which 


148        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [164a. 

replied  to  all,  the  urgency  of  the  king's  occasions 
for  it^  which  were  such  that  he  could  not  dispense 
with  it.  It  was  in  vain  to  argue  with  him  the  pro- 
perty the  country  had  in  it,  being  bought  with  their 
money,  and  therefore  not  to  be  taken  without  their 

hath  cheerfully  lent  his  majesty  one  barrel  of  powder,  but 
it  seems  he  can  have  none  from  you ;  I  pray  God  you  do 
not  repent  this  carriage  of  yours  towards  his  majesty,  which 
he  must  be  acquainted  withal." 

A  countryman,  standing  forth,  asked  his  lordship  this 
question,  ''Whether,  if  he  were  to  take  a  journey  into  a 
place  where  probably  he  might  be  set  upon  by  thieves  and 
robbers,  and  having  a  charge  about  him,  if  any  friend 
should  ask  him  to  lend  his  sword,  he  would  part  with  it 
and  go  himself  without  ?  My  lord,  the  case  is  ours ;  our 
wives,  children,  and  estates,  all  depend  upon  this  country's 
safety ;  and  how  can  it  be  safe  in  these  dangerous  times, 
when  so  many  troops  and  companies  pass  through  and 
commit  outrages  and  abuses  among  us,  if  we  have  not  arms 
and  powder  wherewith  to  defend  us  ?  ** 

My  lord  made  no  reply,  but  bade  the  men  whom  he  had 
employed  to  weigh  up  the  powder  desist ;  and  so  went 
down  the  stairs.  Mr.  Hutchinson  followed  him,  and  as  he 
went,  an  ancient  gentleman,  who  was  with  my  lord,  whose 
face  and  name  were  both  unknown  to  him,  came  to  him 
and  said  these  words :  ''  Stand  to  it ;  Til  warrant  you, 
gentlemen,  it  is  well  done."  And  as  they  passed  through  a 
low  room,  my  lord  took  Mr.  Hutchinson  aside,  and  said,  -- 

N.  Cousin,  I  must  acquaint  the  king  with  this  ? 

H.  My  lord,  it  is  very  likely  you  must,  being  employed 
upon  his  majesty's  service,  give  him  an  account. 

A^.  Nay,  cousin  (smiling),  I  mean  not  so ;  but  I  must 
acquaint  him,  and  I  am  sorry  I  must,  that  you  are  the  h^d 


1642.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        149 

consent;  my  lord  declared  himself  positively  re- 
solved to  take  it,  whereupon  Mr.  Hutchinson  left 
him.  There  were  in  the  room  with  him  Sir  John 
Digby,  the  high  sheriff  of  the  county,  who  was 
setting  down  the  weight  of  the  powder  and  match, 

and  ringleader  of  a  faction,  whereby  you  hinder  his  majesty's 
service. 

/T.  My  lord,  I  do  not  conceive  how  this  can  be  a  faction, 
I  speaking  only,  out  of  the  noble  respect  and  honour  I  bear 
your  lordship,  in  private  to  you,  to  prevent  a  mischief,  the 
sense  of  these  men,  who  I  perceived  were  come  to  know  by 
what  authority,  and  why,  their  powder,  which  is  their  proper 
goods,  and  only  means  of  safety  in  these  times  of  danger, 
should  be  taken  from  them ;  and  if  it  were  a  faction,  I  am 
not  the  head  of  it ;  I,  accidentally  coming  to  town  from  Sir 
John  Biron's  last  night,  and  neither  knowing  nor  imagining 
any  of  this  business,  was  this  morning  importuned  to  wait 
on  your  lordship,  at  the  town's  hall,  by  many  countrymen, 
who  informed  me  you  were  taking  away  their  powder  out  of 
the  country. 

N.  Cousin,  if  you  can  answer  it  I  shall  be  glad  of  it ;  but 
I  will  assure  you  I  must  let  his  majesty  know. 

H.  If  his  majesty  must  know  it,  I  am  very  happy  I  spoke 
to  none  but  your  lordship ;  who,  I  am  confident,  is  so 
noble,  that  you  will  neither  add  nor  diminish  anything  to 
my  prejudice ;  and  then  I  am  confident  the  justness  and 
reasonableness  of  what  I  have  said,  with  my  own  innocency 
in  speaking  it,  will  bear  me  out. 

N,  I,  cousin,  but  your  name  is  up  already. 

/f.  It  may  be  so,  my  lord ;  and  I  believe  those  that  set 
it  up  had  no  good  wishes  to  me  ;  and  as  it  rose,  so,  in  the 
name  of  God  let  it  fall ;  for  I  know  my  own  clearness  and 
innocency  in  anything  that  can  be  objected  against  roe. 


1 50        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [i64«. 

and  two  or  three  captains  and  others,  that  were 
busy  weighing  the  powder.  By  the  time  Mr. 
Hutchinson  came  down,  a  good  company  of  thd 
country  was  gathered  together;  whom  Mr.  Hutchin- 
son acquainted  with  what  had  passed  between  him 
and  my  lord,  and  they  told  him  that  if  he  would  but 
please  to  stand  by  them,  they  W/Ould  part  with  all 
their,  blood  before  he  should  have  a  com  of  it ;  and 
said,  moreover,  they  would  go  up  and  tumble  my 
lord  and  the  sheriff  out  of  the  windows.  Mr. 
Hutchinson,  seeing  them  so  resolved,  desired  them 
to  stay  below  while  he  went  up  yet  once  again  to 
my  lord,  which  they  did ;  and  he  told  my  lord  some 
of  the  country  were  come  in,  at  whose  request  he 
was  again  come  to  beseech  his  lordship  to  desist 
from  his  design,  which  if  pursued  might  be  of 
dangerous  consequence.  My  lord  replied,  it  could 
not  be,  for  the  king  was  very  well  assured  of  the 
cheerful  compliance  of  the  greatest  part  of  the 
country  with  his  service.  Mr.  Hutchinson  told 
him,  whatever  assurance  his  majesty  might  have,  if 

A^.  Well,  cousin,  well ;  I  am  glad  of  your  good  resolution. 

And  so  my  lord  left  him.  The  gentlemen  of  the  country 
that  were  there,  upon  consideration,  what  they  should  do 
with  their  powder,  determined  to  return  my  lord  thanks  for 
sparing  it,  and  to  lock  it  up  with  two  locks,  whereof  the 
sheriff  should  have  one  key,  and  the  mayor  another  ;  which 
accordingly  was  done ;  but  Mr.  Hutchinson  came  no  more 
to  my  lord, — J.  H. 


164*.]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        151 

his  lordship  pleased  to  look  out,  he  might  see  no 
inconsiderable  number  below  that  would  not  wil* 
lingly  part  with  it  My  lord  replied,  they  were  but 
a  few  factious  men;  whereupon  Mr.  Hutchinson 
told  him,  since  it  was  yet  the  happiness  of  these 
unhappy  times  that  no  blood  had  been  spilt,  he 
should  be  sorry  the  first  should  be  shed  upon  my 
lord's  occasion,  in  his  own  country.  My  lord  scorn- 
fully replied.  Fear  it  not,  it  cannot  come  to  that, 
the  king's  occasions  are  urgent  and  must  be  served. 
Whereupon  Mr.  Hutchinson,  looking  out  at  the 
countrymen,  they  came  very  fast  up  the  stairs; 
and  Mr.  Hutchinson  told  him,  however  he  slighted 
it,  not  one  was  there  but  would  part  with  every 
drop  of  his  blood  before  they  would  part  with  it, 
except  he  could  show  a  command  or  request  for  it 
under  the  king's  hand,  or  would  stay  till  the  country 
were  called  in  to  give  their  consent;  for  it  was 
their  property,  and  all  had  interest  in  it,  as  bought 
with  their  money  for  the  particular  defence  of  the 
country.  Then  my  lord  fell  to  entreaties  to  borrow 
part  of  it,  but  that  being  also  denied,  he  took  the 
sheriff  aside,  and,  after  a  little  conference,  they  put 
up  their  books  and  left  the  powder;  when  my  lord, 
turning  to  the  people,  said  to  them,  "Gentlemen, 
his  majesty  was  by  some  assured  of  the  cheer- 
fulness of  this  country's  affections  to  him,  whereof 
I  am  sorry  to  see  so  much  failing,  and  that  the 
county  should  fall  so  much  short  of  the  town,  who 


152        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson^       [164a. 

have  cheerfully  lent  his  majesty  one  barrel  of 
powder,  but  it  seems  he  can  have  none  from  you ; 
I  pray  God  you  do  not  repent  this  carriage  of  yours 
towards  his  majesty,  which  he  must  be  acquainted 
withal."  A  bold  countryman  then  stepping  forth, 
by  way  of  reply,  asked  my  lord,  whether,  if  he  were 
to  take  a  journey  with  a  charge  into  a  place  where 
probably  he  should  be  set  upon  by  thieves,  if  any 
friend  should  ask  to  borrow  a  sword  he  would  part 
with  it :  my  lord,  said  he,  the  case  is  ours ;  our 
lives,  wives,  children,  and  estates,  all  depend  upon 
this  country's  safety;  and  how  can  it  be  safe  in 
these  dangerous  times,  when  so  many  rude  armed 
people  pass  daily  through  it,  if  we  be  altogether 
disarmed  ?  My  lord  made  no  reply,  but  bade  the 
men  who  were  weighing  the  powder  desist,  and 
went  down.  Mr.  Hutchinson  followed  him  down 
the  stairs,  when  an  ancient  gentleman,  that  was 
sitting  with  my  lord,  came  and  whispering  him, 
commended  his  and  the  country's  zeal,  and  bade 
them  stand  to  it,  and  they  would  not  be  foiled. 
As  they  passed  through  a  long  room  below,  my 
lord  told  Mr.  Hutchinson  he  was  sorry  to  find  him 
at  the  head  of  a  faction.  Mr.  Hutchinson  replied, 
he  could  not  tell  how  his  lordship  could  call  that  a 
faction  which  arose  from  the  accident  of  his  being 
at  that  time  in  the  town ;  where,  hearing  what  was 
in  hand,  and  out  of  respect  to  his  lordship,  he  only 
came  to  prevent  mischief  and  danger,  which  he  saw 


1641.1       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         153 

likely  to  ensue.  My  lord  replied,  he  must  inform 
the  king,  and  told  him  his  name  was  already  up ; 
to  which  Mr.  Hutchinson  answered,  that  he  was 
glad,  if  the  king  must  receive  an  information  of  him, 
that  it  must  be  from  so  honourable  a  person ;  and 
for  his  name,  as  it  rose,  so  in  the  name  of  God  let 
it  fall ;  and  so  took  his  leave  and  went  home.  The 
rest  of  the  country  that  were  there,  determined  to 
give  my  lord  thanks  for  sparing  their  ammunition, 
and  locked  it  up  with  two  locks,  whereof  the  key 
of  the  one  was  entrusted  with  the  mayor  of  Notting- 
ham, the  other  with  the  sheriff  of  the  county,  which 
accordingly  was  done.^ 

In  the  mean  time,  at  York,  the  king  had  sent  the 
parliament  a  message,  that  he  intended  to  go  in 
person  to  Ireland,  and  to  raise  a  guard  for  his  own 
person,  about  West  Chester,  which  he  would  arm 
out  of  his  magazine  at  Hull.  But  the  parliament, 
having  before  intercepted  a  letter  of  the  Lord 
Digby's,  sent  to  the  queen  from  Middleburgh  in 
Zealand,  wherein  he  intimated,  that,  if  the  king 
would  retire  to  some  safe  place,  and  declare  him- 
self, he   should   be   able   to  wait   upon   him  from 

'  How  my  lord  may  have  reported  this  matter  to  the  king 
signifies  little ;  but  he  probably  remembered  as  a  kindness 
Mr.  Hutchinson's  interposition  between  him  and  the  more 
rough  arguments  of  the  countrymen ;  for  there  appears  to 
have  existed,  on  all  suitable  occasions,  an  intercourse  of 
friendship  during  the  remainder  of  their  lives. — J.  H. 


154        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

thence,  &c.  Upon  this  letter,  and  other  presump- 
tions, they  suspected  that  the  chief  end  of  the  king's 
going  northward  was  to  seize  the  magazine  at  Hulli 
and  arm  himself  from  thence  against  them ;  where- 
fore they  sent  a  petition,  for  leave  to  remove  that 
magazine  to  the  Tower  of  London,  and  accordingly 
had  sent  Sir  John  Hotham  thither  to  do  it.  Sir 
John  prevented  the  Earl  of  Newcastle,  whom  the 
king  had  sent  for  the  same  purpose,  to  seize  the 
magazine,  and  kept  him  out;  at  which  the  king 
was  much  incensed,  and  on  the  23d  of  April,  1642, 
went  himself  to  Hull,  attended  with  some  noblemen, 
gentlemen,  and  soldiers,  and  demanded  entrance; 
but  the  gates  were  shut;  and  Hotham,  kneeling 
upon  the  wall,  entreated  the  king  not  to  command 
that  which,  without  breach  of  trust,  he  could  not 
obey. 

In  conclusion,  the  king  not  getting  entrance, 
proclaimed  Hotham  a  traitor,  and  sent  a  complaint 
of  the  affront  to  the  parliament.  The  parliament 
justified  Hotham.  Many  declarations  about  it  were 
published  on  both  sides,  and  many  cross-commands  ; 
the  parliament  authorizing  Hotham  to  issue  out 
warrants  to  constables  and  other  officers,  to  come 
in  armed  to  the  defence  of  Hull,  the  king  for- 
bidding it.  The  king  meanwhile  in  the  north, 
summoned  divers  of  the  nobility  and  gentry  to 
attend  him,  and  made  speeches  to  them  to  desire  a 
guard  for  his  person,  pretending  danger  from  the 


160.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        155 

parliament.  He  then  began  to  entertain  soldiers, 
and  was  much  encouraged  by  the  defection  of  divers 
lords  and  many  of  the  Commons'  house,  who  for- 
sook their  trust  and  came  to  him  at  York ;  where- 
upon he  called  those  who  remained  only  a  faction, 
a  pretended  parliament,  and  such  names ;  but  they 
continued  still  petitioning  to  him,  and  the  well- 
affected  and  godly,  in  all  countries,  did  the  like, 
that  he  would  return  to  his  parliament  The  papists 
all  over  England  were  high  partakers  with  him  and 
promoters  of  his  designs,  and  all  the  debauched 
nobility  and  gentry,  and  their  dependents,  and  the 
lewder  rout  of  people;  yet  even  of  these  there 
were  some  that  had  English  hearts,  who  came  in  to 
the  parliament;  but  finding  afterwards  that  the 
advance  of  liberty  and  righteousness  could  not 
consist  with  riot  and  ungodliness,  they  forsook 
their  party,  and  were  content  to  be  the  king's 
slaves  rather  than  divorce  themselves  from  those 
lusts,  which  found  countenance  from  both  priests 
and  princes  on  one  side,  and  on  the  other  were 
preached  down  by  the  ministers,  and  punished  by 
the  magistrates. 

Towards  the  end  of  May,^  the  parliament  sent 
the  king  word,  that  if  he  would  not  disband  his 
forces,  and  rely  upon  the  laws  and  affections  of  his 
people  for  his  security,  as  all  good  princes  before 

^  /'./.,  May  20th. 


156        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [164a* 

him  had  done,  they  held  themselves  bound  in  duty 
to  God  and  the  people's  trust  reposed  in  them,  and 
by  the  fundamental  laws,  to  employ  their  utmost 
care  and  power  for  securing  the  parliament  and 
preserving  the  kingdom's  peace.  Whereupon  they 
voted,  "That  it  seems  that  the  king,  seduced  by 
wicked  counsel,  intends  a  war  against  the  par- 
liament, &c. 

"  That  whensoever  the  king  makes  war  upon  the 
parliament,  it  is  a  breach  of  the  trust  reposed  in 
him  by  the  people,  contrary  to  his  oath,  and  tend- 
ing to  the  dissolution  of  this  government. 

"That  whosoever  shall  assist  him  in  such  wars 
are  traitors,  by  the  fundamental  laws  of  this  king- 
dom, and  have  been  so  adjudged  in  two  acts  of 
parliament,  1 1  Richard  II.  and  i  Henry  IV. ;  and 
that  such  persons  ought  to  suffer  as  traitors." 

Hereupon  nine  of  the  lords,  that  first  went  to 
the  king,  were  summoned  to  return ;  ^  who,  sending 
a  letter  of  denial,  were,  by  the  whole  house  of  peers, 
sentenced  to  be  incapable  of  ever  sitting  again  as 
members  of  that  house,  or  of  benefit  or  privilege 
of  parliament,  and  to  suffer  imprisonment  during 
pleasure.  Then  the  lord  keeper,  who  had  appeared 
firm  to  the   parliament,  and  voted  with   them,  for 

^  The  Earls  of  Northampton,  Devonshire,  Dover,  and 
Monmouth  ;  Lx>rds  Howard  of  Charleton,  Rich,  Grey  of 
Ruthyn,  Coventry,  and  CapeL  The  summons  was  sent  on 
May  30th. 


1642.]       Memoirs  of  Col:  Hutchinson.         157 

settling  the  militia  by  ordinance  of  parliament^  run 
away  to  the  king,  after  he  had  delivered  up  his 
seal,  the  day  before,  to  one  the  king  sent  for  it.^ 
The  king,  having  this,  issued  out  many  proclama- 
tions, and  among  the  rest,  one  that  no  man  should 
obey  the  parliament's  warrants  about  settling  the 
militia.  The  parliament,  on  the  other  side,  made 
ordinances  forbidding  all  men  to  raise  arms,  by 
warrant  from  the  king,  without  authority  of  parlia- 
ipent.  And  now  they  began  to  settle  the  kingdom's 
militia,  both  by  land  and  sea,  and  made  the  Earl  of 
Warwick  admiral ;  which  place  the  king  had  con- 
ferred upon  Sir  John  Pennington,  in  the  room  of 
the  Earl  of  Northumberland,  and  commanded  my 
lord  of  Warwick  to  resign ;  but  he  chose  to  obey 
the  parliament,  and  got  the  fleet  at  length  wholly 
into  his  hands,  and  took  a  ship  with  ammunition 
coming  to  the  king  out  of  Holland.  The  parlia- 
ment now,  despairing  of  the  king's  return,  made 
an  ordinance  for  money  and  plate  to  be  brought  in 
for  raising  arms  for  the  cause,'  which  came  in,  in 
great  abundance,  upon  public  faith,  and  likewise 
horses  and  arms  for  the  service.  The  king,  who 
had  received  money,  arms,  and  ammunition,  which 
the  queen  had  procured  in  Holland,  by  pawning  the 

'  Lord  Keeper  Littleton  delivered  up  the  seal  to  Tom 
Elliot,  groom  of  the  privy-chamber  to  the  king,  on  May 
a2d,  and  fled  himself  on  May  23d. 

'  This  ordinance  was  made  on  June  loth. 


1 58        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [164^. 

crown  jewels,  sent  out  commissions  of  array,  to  arm 
the  people  in  all  counties ;  and  mocked  the  parlia- 
ment, using  their  own  words,  wherein  they  invited 
men  to  arm  for  the  defence  of  the  protestant  reli- 
gion, the  king's  person,  dignity,  and  authority,  the 
laws  of  the  land,  the  peace  of  the  kingdom,  and 
privilege  of  parliament;  and  thus  deceived  many 
people,  and  got  contributions  of  plate,  money,  and 
arms  in  the  country.  While  these  things  were  in 
transaction,  the  king  made  a  solemn  protestation 
before  the  lords,  as  in  the  presence  of  God,  declaring 
that  he  would  not  engage  them  in  any  war  against 
the  parliament,  but  only  for  his  necessary  defence ; 
that  his  desire  was  to  maintain  the  protestant  reli- 
gion, the  liberties  of  the  subject,  and  privilege  of 
parliament.  But  the  next  day  he  did  some  action, 
so  contrary  to  this  protestation,  that  two  of  the 
lords  durst  not  stay  with  him,  but  returned  to  the 
parliament ;  and  one  of  them,  coming  back  through 
Nottinghamshire,  acquainted  Mr.  Hutchinson  with 
the  sad  sense  he  had  discovering  that  falsehood  in 
the  king. 

Now  had  the  king  raised  an  army  of  three 
thousand  foot  and  one  thousand  horse,  with  which 
he  went  to  Beverley,  in  order  to  besiege  Hull.* 
When  he  was  within  two  hours'  march  of  the  place, 
Sir  John  Hotham  floated  the  country  about  it,  and 

*  July  27th  to  July  30th. 


1642]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         159 

Sir  John  Meldrum,  sallying  out  of  the  town,  with 
five  hundred  townsmen,  made  the  king's  party  re- 
treat to  Beverley.  But,  however,  they  beleaguered 
the  town,  into  which  the  parliament  sent  a  relief  of 
five  hundred  men,  by  water,  with  whom  Meldrum 
made  another  sally,  routed  the  leaguer-soldiers, 
killed  some,  made  others  prisoners,  took  the  maga- 
zine of  arms  and  ammunition,  which  was  in  a  barn, 
with  their  fire  balls,  and  fired  the  bam.  Hereupon 
the  king's  council  of  war  broke  up  the  siege,  from 
whence  the  king  went  back  to  York,  and  about  the 
middle  of  August  came  to  Nottingham,  where  he 
set  up  his  standard  royal ;  ^  and  hither  his  two 
nephews.  Prince  Rupert  and  Prince  Maurice,  came 
to  him,' and  were  put  into  commands.  The  king, 
marching  through  Nottingham,  Derby,  and  Leicester- 
shire, called  together  the  trained  bands,  to  attend 
him,  disarmed  those  counties,  and  marched  to 
Shrewsbury,'  and  there  set  up  a  mint,  and  coined 
the  plate  that  had  been  brought  in  to  him.  Here 
a  great  many  men  came  in  to  him,  with  whom, 
marching  into  Warwickshire,  he  there  fought  his 
first  battle  at  a  village  called  Keynton ; '  it  not 
being  yet  agreed  who  gained  the  victory  that  day. 

^  On  August  22d. 

'  The  king  reached  Shrewsbury  on  September  20th. 

'  Commonly  called  Edge-hill  fight.  Both  king  and  par- 
liament claimed  the  victory,  but  our  authoress  shows  rather 
more  candour  than  either.     The  king's  main  design  of 


1 60        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        [1642. 

As  the  king,  on  his  part,  made  this  progress,  so 
the  parh'ament,  on  theirs,  upon  the  twelfth  of  July, 
voted  an  army  to  be  raised,  and  the  Earl  of  Essex 
to  be  general  of  it.  Divers  of  the  lords,  and 
several  members  of  the  House  of  Commons,  took 
commissions,  and  raised  regiments  and  companies 
under  his  command,  who  marched  with  his  army 
of  about  fourteen  thousand  horse  and  foot  to  his 
rendezvous  at  Northampton,  whither  the  parliament 
sent  a  petition  to  him,  to  be  delivered  to  the  king, 
in  a  safe  and  honourable  way ;  the  sum  of  which 
was,  to  beseech  him  to  forsake  those  wicked  people 
with  whom  he  was,  and  not  to  mix  his  danger  with 
theirs,  but  to  return  to  his  parliament,  &c.  The 
king,  intending  to  make  Worcester  a  garrison,  sent 
Prince  Rupert  thither;  the  Earl  of  Essex,  to 
prevent  him,  sent  other  forces,  between  whom  there 
was  some  skirmish,^  but  the  prince  left  the  town  at 
their  approach.  My  lord  of  Essex  left  a  garrison 
in  Northampton,  put  others  into  Coventry  and 
Warwick,  and  went  to  Worcester.  Here  he  made 
some  stay,  till  the  king  marching  from  Shrewsbury, 
there  was  some  apprehension  of  his  going  up  to 
London ;  for  which  cause  my  lord  left  part  of 
his   artillery  behind  him,  and  followed  the  king's 

marching  to  London  was,  however,  frustrated,  and  therefore 
the  parliament  might  be  most  properly  termed  gainers. — 
J.  H. 
^  At  Powick  Bridge,  September  22d. 


164a.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        161 

motions,  which  the  king  perceiving,  took  an  oppor- 
tunity, before  his  artillery  and  the  foot  left  with  it 
were  come  up  to  him,^  and  resolved  to  give  him 
battle,  which  was  not  declined  on  the  other  side, 
but  fought  with  doubtful  success,  the  circumstances 
whereof  may  be  read  at  large  in  the  stories  of  those 
things.  The  king's  general  was  slain,  and  his 
standard  was  taken  though  not  kept;  but  on  the 
other  side  also  there  were  many  brave  men  slain 
and  prisoners.  My  lord  of  Essex  marched  to 
Coventry;  the  king  took  up  his  winter  quarters 
at  Oxford,'  from  whence  Prince  Rupert  flew  about 
the  country  with  his  body  of  horse,  plundered  and 
did  many  barbarous  things ;  insomuch  that  London, 
growing  into  apprehensions  of  the  king's  army,  the 
parliament  called  back  the  Earl  of  Essex  to  quarter 
about  London ; '  and  he  being  returned  thither,  the 
king  was  advanced  as  far  as  Colebrooke,  where  he 
was  presented  with  a  petition  from  the  parliament 
for  accommodation,  to  which  he  answered,  with  a 

\  ^^  By  reason  of  the  suddenness  of  his  march  and  diligence 
to  follow  the  king's  army,  he  had  left  behind  two  regiments 
of  his  foot,  one  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Grantham, 
the  other  of  Colonel  Hampden,  together  with  eleven  troops 
of  horse,  behind  but  one  day's  march,  and  left  to  bring  on 
the  artillery,  which  was  seven  pieces  of  cannon  with  great 
store  of  ammunition.'' — May,  Long  Parliament,  p.  257. 

*  The  king  entered  Oxford  on  October  39th. 

'  Essex  came  to  Westminster  on  November  7th,  and 
received  the  thanks  of  the  Parliament 

VOL.   I.  L 


1 62        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1642. 

protestation  to  God,  how  much  he  was  grieved  for 
his  subjects'  sufferings,  and,  in  order  to  peace,  was 
willing  to  reside  near  London,  to  receive  their  pro- 
positions, and  to  treat  with  them.  As  soon  as  ever 
the  commissioners  were  gone,  the  king  advanced, 
with  his  horse  and  artillery,  towards  London,^  and, 
taking  the  advantage  of  a  great  mist,  fell  upon  a 
broken  regiment  of  Colonel  HoUis's,  quartered  at 
Brentford,  and  killed  many  of  them,  and  had  de- 
stroyed them  all,  but  that  Brooke's  and  Hampden's 
regiments,  by  Providence^  came  seasonably  to  their 
rescue ;  and  then  so  many  forces  flocked  with  the 
general,  out  of  London,  that  the  king  was  enclosed, 
and  the  war  had  been  ended,  but  that,  I  know  not ' 
how,  three  thousand  of  the  parliament's  forces  were 
called  away  by  their  procurement  who  designed  the 
continuance  of  the  war ;  and  so  the  king  had  a  way 
of  retreat  left  open,  by  which  he  got  back  to 
Oxford,  and  the  parliament's  general  was  sent  out 
again  with  their  army ;  whose  proceedings  I  shall 
take  up  again  in  their  due  places,  so  far  as  is 
necessary  to  be  remembered,  for  the  story  I  most 
particularly  intend. 

^  November  12th.  The  general  rendezvous  mentioned  a 
few  lines  later,  took  place  at  Tumham  Green  on  Sunday,' 
November  13th.  The  troops  occupying  Kingston,  being 
called  away  to  join  the  main  body,  the  king's  retreat  was 
left  free ;  in  the  words  of  May,  ''a  fatal  door  was  opened  to 
let  out  the  enclosed  king." 


x&p.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       163 

Before  the  flame  of  the  war  broke  out  in  the  top 
of  the  chimneys,  the  smoke  ascended  in  every 
country;  the  king  had  sent  forth  commissions  of 
array,  and  the  parliament  had  given  out  commissions 
for  their  militia,  and  sent  off  their  members  into  all 
counties  to  put  them  in  execution.  Between  these, 
in  many  places,  there  were  fierce  contests  and 
disputes,  almost  to  blood,  even  at  the  first ;  for  in 
the  progress  every  county  had  the  civil  war,  more 
or  less,  within  itself.  Some  counties  were  in  the 
beginning  so  wholly  for  the  parliament,  that  the 
king's  interest  appeared  not  in  them;  some  so 
wholly  for  the  king,  that  the  godly,  for  those  gene- 
rally were  the  parliament's  friends,  were  forced  to 
forsake  their  habitations,  and  seek  other  shelters : 
of  this  sort  was  Nottinghamshire.  All  the  nobility 
and  gentry,  and  their  dependents,  were  generally 
for  the  king ;  the  chief  of  whose  names  I  shall  sum 
up  here,  because  I  shall  often  have  occasion  to 
mention  them.  The  greatest  family  was  the  Earl 
of  Newcastle's,^  a  lord  once  so  much  beloved  in  his 
country,  that  when  the  first  expedition  was  against 
the   Scots,  the  gentlemen  of  the  country  set  him 

^  William  Cavendish,  earl  and  afterwards  marquis  (27th 
October  1643},  ^^d  Duke  (March  16,  1664)  of  Newcastle. 
See  his  Life  by  his  second  wife,  1667.  The  Duchess  says, 
*'  he  raised  himself  a  volunteer  troop  of  horse,  which  con- 
sisted of  one  hundred  and  twenty  knights  and  gentlemen  of 
quality." 


1 64        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1642. 

forth  two  troops,  one  all  of  gentlemen,  the  other  of 
their  men,  who  waited  on  him  into  the  north  at  their 
own  charges.  He  had,  indeed,  through  his  great 
estate,  his  liberal  hospitality,  and  constant  residence 
in  his  country,  so  endeared  them  to  him,  that  no  man 
was  a  greater  prince  in  all  that  northern  quarter ; 
till  a  foolish  ambition  of  glorious  slavery  carried  him 
to  coiu-t,  where  he  ran  himself  much  into  debt,  to 
purchase  neglects  of  the  king  and  queen,  and  scorns 
of  the  proud  courtiers.  Next  him  was  the  Earl  of 
Kingston,  a  man  of  vast  estate,  and  no  less  covetous, 
who  divided  his  sons  between  both  parties,  and 
concealed  himself;  till  at  length  his  fate  drew  him 
to  declare  himself  absolutely  on  the  king's  side, 
wherein  he  behaved  himself  honourably,  and  died 
remarkably.^  His  eldest  son  '  was  lord-lieutenant 
of  the  county,  and  at  that  time  no  nobleman  had 
a  greater  reputation  in  the  court  for  learning  and 
generosity  than  he,  who  was  so  high  in  the 
king's  party,  that  the  parliament  was  very  much 
incensed  against  him.  Lord  Chesterfield,  and  all 
his  family,  were  highly  of  the  royal  party ;  so  was 
the  Lord  Chaworth.     The  Earl  of  Clare  was  very 


^  Clarendon  tells  an  amusing  story  of  the  Earl  of  King- 
ston's parsimony. — Rebellion,  vi.  59. 

*  Lord  Newark,  before  spoken  of.  In  Collins's  Peerage, 
under  the  tide  of  Duke  of  Kingston,  there  are  cited  singular 
proofs  of  this  nobleman's  learning. — ^J.  H. 


1643.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        1 65 

often  of  both  parties,  and,  I  think,  never  advan- 
taged either.  All  the  popish  gentry  were  wholly 
for  the  king,  whereof  one  Mr.  Golding,  next  neigh- 
bour to  Mr.  Hutchinson,  had  been  a  private  collector 
of  the  catholics'  contributions  to  the  Irish  Rebellion, 
and  for  that  was,  by  the  queen's  procurement,  made 
a  knight  and  baronet.*  Sir  John  Biron,  after- 
wards Lord  Biron,  and  all  his  brothers,  bred  up  in 
arms,  and  valiant  men  in  their  own  persons,  were 
all  passionately  the  king's.'  Sir  John  Savill,  a  man 
of  vast  estate,  was  the  like :  so  were  Sir  Gervase 
Eyre,  Sir  John  Digby,   Sir  Matthew  Palmer,  Sir 


^  Mr.  Golding  should  rather  be  called  one  of  the  collectors 
for  raising  the  contributions  of  the  Roman  Catholics  for 
carrying  on  the  late  war  against  the  Scots.  See  Rushworth, 
III.  iL  160-3.  Mr.  Golding  is  mentioned  by  Rushworth  as 
one  of  the  collectors  for  Leicestershire. 

■  Lloyd,  in  his  "  Memoirs  of  Excellent  Personages,"  p.  487, 
gives  a  brief  account  of  Sir  John  Biron.  He  was  one  of 
the  best  soldiers  in  the  king's  service,  but  his  skill  was 
sullied  by  cruelty.  In  the  winter  of  1643  he  was  appointed 
Field  Marshal  of  Cheshire,  Shropshire,  and  North  Wales, 
and  held  out  in  Chester  till  February  1646.  In  one  of  his 
letters  he  thus  relates  the  capture  of  a  church  occupied  by 
the  parliamentary  troops, ''  I  put  them  all  to  the  sword,  which 
I  find  the  best  way  to  proceed  with  these  kind  of  people, 
for  mercy  to  them  is  cruelty." 

There  are  many  of  his  letters  in  the  Clarendon  corre- 
spondence, and  in  Carte's  collection  of  original  letters  and 
papers.  He  was  succeeded  in  the  title  by  his  brother 
Richard  in  1652. 


1 66        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1642. 

Thomas  Williamson,  Sir  Roger  Cowper,  Sir  W. 
Hickman,  Sir  Hugh  Cartwright,  Sir  T.  Willoughby, 
Sir  Thomas  Smith,  Sir  Thomas  Blackwell,  Markham, 
Perkins,  Tevery,  Pearce,  Palme,  Wood,  Sanderson, 
Moore,  Mellish,  Butler,  with  divers  others.*  Of 
the  parliament  men,  Mr.  Sutton,  afterwards  Lord 
Lexington,'  and  Sir  Gervase  Clifton,  forsook  the 
parliament,  went  to  the  king,  and  executed  his 
commission  of  array.  Mr.  William  Stanhope  left 
the  parliament,  and  came  home  disaffected  to  them ; 
whose  eldest  son  was  afterwards  slain  in  the  king's 
service.     Mr.  William   Pierrepont,*  second  son  of 

^  These  names,  and  those  of  others  not  here  mentioned, 
are  to  be  found  annexed  to  the  letter  to  the  knights  of  the 
shire,  in  reply  to  the  petition  of  the  county,  which  has 
been  before  mentioned. 

*  Robert  Sutton,  bom  1594,  died  1668,  created  Lord 
Lexington  in  1645.  ^^  ^^s  one  of  the  leaders  in  the  defence 
of  Newark,  and  after  its  surrender  paid  £^^000  to  compound 
for  his  estates.  Major-General  Whalley  writes  of  him  in 
1655. — ^^  He  is  in  this  county  termed  the  devil  of  Newark  ; 
he  exercised  more  cruelty,  as  I  am  informed,  than  any,  nay, 
than  all  that  garrison  against  the  parliament  soldiers,  when 
they  fell  into  his  power. — Thurloe  Papers,  iv.  364. 

'  From  this  gentleman  the  present  Earl  Manvers  is 
descended.  Mr.  Sanford  in  his  ^  Studies  and  Illustrations 
of  the  Great  Rebellion  "  (p.  400)  thus  describes  his  position 
and  character  : — *'  William  Pierrepont,  if  any  value  is  to  be 
attached  to  the  general  testimony  of  his  contemporaries  of 
all  parties,  was  a  man  of  very  superior  mind  and  remarkable 
soundness  of  judgment    In  his  family  he  was  distinguished 


164a.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        167 

the  Earl  of  Kingston,  was  of  the  parliament,  though 
he  served  not  for  his  own  country,  to  which  not- 
withstanding he  was  an  ornament,  being  one  of  the 
wisest  counsellors  and  most  excellent  speakers  in 
the  house,  and  by  him  was  that  bill  promoted  and 
carried  on  which  passed  for  the  continuation  of  this 
parliament.  He  had  a  younger  brother  living  at 
Nottingham,  who  coldly  owned  the  parliament  Sir 
Thomas  Hutchinson  continued  with  the  parliament, 
was  (irm  to  their  cause,  but  infinitely  desirous  that 
the  difference  might  rather  have  been  composed  by 

by  the  soubriquet  of '  Wise  William ; '  and  the  title  appears 
to  have  had  a  positive  as  well  as  a  relative  signification. 
Yet,  personally,  we  know  next  to  nothing  of  him ;  and  his 
influence  on  public  events,  whatever  its  extent,  seems  to 
have  been  a  still  more  silent  one  than  that  of  Hampden. 
He  was  always  greatly  respected  and  consulted  on  great 
crises  by  men  of  the  most  opposite  tendencies ;  but  his 
opinion  seems  to  have  been  as  often  rejected  as  followed, 
and  his  own  political  conduct  is  marked  by  no  little  inde- 
cision and  some  inconsistency.  We  may,  perhaps,  conclude 
that  the  aid  of  his  calm  and  dispassionate  judgment  was  sought 
by  many  of  the  leaders  of  the  Parliament,  rather  as  a  means 
of  opening  up  any  subject  thoroughly  to  their  own  minds, 
and  as  a  pledge  of  moderation  to  others,  than  with  any 
purpose  of  being  entirely  guided  by  his  judgment,  or  of 
carrying  practically  into  effect  the  exact  line  of  policy  he 
recommended.  In  his  religious  opinions  he  belonged  to  the 
party  of  tolerance,  and  ranked  himself  with  Vane  and 
Cromwell ;  on  civil  questions  he  frequently  took  a  less 
decided  and  practical  view.**  Pierrepont  was  member  for 
Great  Wenlock. 


1 68        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [i64«. 

accommodation,  than  ended  by  conquest ;  and 
therefore  did  not  improve  his  interest  to  engage 
the  country  in  the  quarrel,  which,  if  he  could  have 
prevented,  he  would  not  have  had  come  to  a  war. 
He  was,  however,  clearly  on  the  parliament's  side, 
and  never  discouraged  his  two  sons,  who  thought 
this  prudential  tardiness  in  their  father  was  the 
declension  of  that  vigour  which  they  derived  from 
him,  and  which  better  became  their  youth.  It  is 
true,  they  were  the  foremost  in  point  of  time  and 
in  degree,  except  a  piece  of  a  nobleman  that 
was  after  drawn  in,  who  owned  the  parliament's 
interest  in  their  country.  Mr.  Henry  Ireton,  their 
cousin,  was  older  than  they,  and  having  had  an 
education  in  the  strictest  way  of  godliness,  and 
being  a  very  grave  and  solid  person,  a  man  of  good 
learning,  great  understanding,  and  other  abilities, 
to  which  was  joined  a  willing  and  zealous  heart  in 
the  cause  and  his  country,  he  was  the  chief  pro- 
moter of  the  parliament's  interest  in  the  county,* 
but  finding  it  generally  disaffected,  all  he  could  do, 
when  the  king  approached  it,  was  to  gather  a  troop 


^  On  June  30th,  1642,  Henry  Ireton  was  nominated  cap- 
tain of  the  horse  troop,  and  George  White  captain  of  the 
foot  company  of  the  forces  of  the  town  of  Nottingham,  and 
on  the  first  of  July,  on  the  petition  of  the  Mayor  of  Notting- 
ham, and  of  Ireton  himself,  leave  was  given  to  the  latter  to 
carry  down  arms  for  the  service  of  the  town. — ^Journals  of 
the  House  of  Commons. 


1642.]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        169 

of  those  godly  people  which  the  cavaliers  drove  out, 
and  with  them  to  go  into  the  army  of  my  lord  of 
E^sex ;  which  he,  being  a  single  person,  might  the 
better  do.  Mr.  Hutchinson  was  not  willing  so  soon 
to  quit  his  house,  to  which  he  was  so  lately  come, 
if  he  could  have  been  suffered  to  live  quietly  in  it ; 
but  his  affections  to  the  parliament  being  taken 
notice  of,  he  became  an  object  of  envy  to  the  other 
party. 

Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson,  a  little  before  the 
standard  was  set  up,  had  come  to  Nottingham, 
where  his  house  was,  to  see  his  children  and  re- 
fresh himself;  when,  hearing  of  the  king's  inten- 
tions to  come  to  the  town,  he,  some  days  before 
his  coming,  went  over  to  Owthorpe,  his  son's 
house,  to  remain  there  till  he  could  fit  himself 
to  return  to  the  parliament.  One  day,  as  Mr. 
Hutchinson  was  at  dinner,  the  mayor  of  Notting- 
ham sent  him  word  that  the  high-sheriff  had  broken 
open  the  lock  of  the  country's  ammunition,  which 
was  left  in  his  trust,  and  was  about  to  take  it 
away.  Mr.  Hutchinson  immediately  went  in  all 
haste  to  prevent  it,  but  before  he  came  to  the  town 
it  was  gone,  and  some  of  the  king's  soldiers  were 
already  come  to  town,  and  were  plundering  all  the 
honest  men  of  their  arms.  As  one  of  them  had 
taken  a  musket,  seeing  Mr.  Hutchinson  go  by,  he 
said  he  wished  it  loaded  for  his  sake,  and  hoped 
the  day  would  shortly  come  when  all  such  Round- 


1 70        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [164a. 

heads  would  be  fair  marks  for  them.  This  name 
of  Roundhead  coming  so  opportunely  in,  I  shall 
make  a  little  digression  to  tell  how  it  came  up. 
When  Puritanism  grew  into  a  faction,  the  zealots 
distinguished  themselves,  both  men  and  women,^  by 
several  affectations  of  habit,  looks,  and  words,  which, 
had  it  been  a  real  forsaking  of  vanity,  and  an  em- 
bracing of  sobriety  in  all  those  things,  would  have 
been  most  commendable  in  them ;  but  their  quick 
forsaking  of  those  things,  when  they  were  where 
they  would  be,  showed  that  they  either  never  took 
them  up  for  conscience,  or  were  corrupted  by  their 
prosperity  to  take  up  those  vain  things  they  durst 
not  practice  under  persecution.  Among  other 
affected  habits,  few  of  the  Puritans,  what  degree 
soever  they  were  of,  wore  their  hair  long  enough 
to  cover  their  ears,  and  the  ministers  and  many 
others  cut  it  close  round  their  heads,  with  so  many 
little  peaks,  as  was  something  ridiculous  to  behold ; 
whereupon  Cleaveland,  in  his  Hue  and  Cry  afler 
them,  begins, 

^  With  hair  in  Characters  and  lugs  in  Text,"  &c. 

From  this  custom  of  wearing  their  hair,  that  name 
of  Roundhead  became  the  scornful  term  given  to 
the  whole  parliament  party,  whose  army  indeed 
marched  out  so,  but  as  if  they  had  been  only  sent 
out  till  their  hair  was  grown.  Two  or  three  years 
after,  any  stranger  that  had  seen  them,  would  have 


164*.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        171 

• 

inquired  the  reason  of  that  name.^  It  was  very 
ill  applied  to  Mr.  Hutchinson,  who,  having  naturally 
a  very  fine  thickset  head  of  hair,  kept  it  clean  and 
handsome,  so  that  it  was  a  great  ornament  to  him ; 
although  the  godly  of  those  days,  when  he  em- 
braced their  party,  would  not  allow  him  to  be 
religious  because  his  hair  was  not  in  their  cut,  nor 
his  words  in  their  phrase,  nor  such  little  formalities 
altogether  fitted  to  their  humour ;  who  were,  many 
of  them,  so  weak  as  to  esteem  rather  for  such  insig- 
nificant circumstances,  than  for  solid  wisdom,. piety, 
and  courage,  which  brought  real  aid  and  honour  to 
their  party.  But  as  Mr.  Hutchinson  chose  not 
them,  but  the  God  they  served,  and  the  truth  and 
righteousness  they  defended,  so  did  not  their  weak- 
nesses, censures,  ingratitude,  or  discouraging  be- 
haviour, with  which  he  was  abundantly  exercised 
all  his  life,  make  him  forsake  them  in  any  thing 
wherein  they  adhered  to  just  and  honourable  prin- 
ciples or  practices ;  but  when  they  apostatised  from 
these,  none  cast  them  off  with  greater  indignation, 
how  shining  soever  the  profession  was  that  gilt, 
not  a  temple  of  living  grace,  but  a  tomb,  which 
only   held    the    carcase   of   religion.      Instead   of 

*  The  portraits  of  the  parliamentary  leaders  in  Vicars* 
'* England's  Worthies'*  (1647),  and  Ricraft's  "Survey  of 
England's  Champions  "  (1647),  supply  an  excellent  illustra- 
tion of  this  statement  Not  one  man  is  represented  with 
short  hair. 


172        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       [i64«. 

digressing,  I  shall  ramble  into  an  inextricable  wilder- 
ness,  if  I  pursue  this  sad  remembrance :  to  return 
therefore  to  his  actions  at  that  time. 

When  he  found  the  powder  gone,  and  saw  the 
soldiers  taking  up  quarters  in  the  town,  and  heard 
their  threats  and  revilings,  he  went  to  his  father's 
house  in  the  town,  where  he  had  not  been  long  be- 
fore an  uncivil  fellow  stepped  into  the  house,  with 
a  carabine  in   his  hand.     Mr.   Hutchinson  asked 
what  he  would  have ;  the  man  replied,  he  came  to 
take  possession  of  the  house ;  Mr.  Hutchinson  told 
him,  he  had  the  possession  of  it,  and  would  know 
on  what  right  it  was  demanded  from  him ;  the  man 
said,  he  came  to   quarter  the    general  there;  Mr. 
Hutchinson  told  him,  except  his  father  and  mother, 
and  their  children,  were  turned  out  of  doors,  there 
was    no    room.     The    quarter-master,    upon    this, 
growing  insolent,  Mr.  Hutchinson  thrust  him  out  of 
the  house,  and  shut  the  doors  upon  him.     Imme- 
diately my  lord  of  Lindsey  came  himself,  in  a  great 
chafe,    and    asked   who    it    was    that    denied    him 
quarter  ?     Mr.  Hutchinson  told  him,  he  that  came 
to  take  it  up  for  him  deserved  the  usage  he  had,  for 
his  uncivil  demeanour ;  and  those  who  had  quartered 
his  lordship  there  had  much  abused  him,  the  house 
being  no  ways  fit  to  receive  a  person  of  his  quality, 
which,  if  he  pleased  to  take  a  view  of  it,  he  would 
soon  perceive.     Whereupon  my  lord,  having  seen 
the  rooms,  was  very  angry  they  had  made  no  better 


1642,]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        1 73 

provision  for  him,  and  would  not  have  lain  in  the 
house,  but  they  told  him  the  town  was  so  full  that 
it  was  impossible  to  get  him  room  any  where  else. 
Hereupon  he  told  Mr.  Hutchinson,  if  they  would 
only  allow  him  one  room,  he  would  have  no  more ; 
and  when  he  came  upon  terms  of  civility,  Mr. 
Hutchinson  was  as  civil  to  him,  and  my  lord  only 
employed  one  room,  staying  there  with  all  civility 
to  those  that  were  in  the  house.  As  soon  as  my 
lord  was  gone,  Mr.  Hutchinson  was  informed  by  a 
friend,  that  the  man  he  had  turned  out  of  doors  was 
the  quarter-master  general,  who,  upon  his  com- 
plaint, had  procured  a  warrant  to  seize  his  person ; 
whereupon  Mr.  Hutchinson,  with  his  brother,  went 
immediately  home  to  his  own  house  at  Owthorpe. 
About  four  or  five  days  after,  a  troop  of  cavaliers, 
under  the  command  of  Sir  Lewis  Dives,  came  to 
Stanton,  near  Owthorpe,  and  searched  Mr.  Need- 
ham's  house,  who  was  a  noted  Puritan  in  those 
days,  and  a  colonel  in  the  parliament's  service, 
and  governor  of  Leicester:  they  found  not  him, 
for  he  hid  himself  in  the  gorse,  and  so  escaped 
them.  His  house  being  lightly  plundered,  they 
went  to  Hickling,  and  plundered  another  Puritan 
house  there,  and  were  coming  to  Owthorpe,  of 
which  Mr.  Hutchinson  having  notice,  went  away  to 
Leicestershire;  but  they,  though  they  had  orders 
to  seize  Mr.  Hutchinson,  came  not  at  that  time 
because  the  night  grew  on.     But  some  days  ailer 


1 74        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [164a. 

he  was  gone,  another  company  came  and  searched 
for  him  and  for  arms  and  plate,  of  which  finding 
none,  they  took  nothing  else. 

Two  days  after  Mr.  Hutchinson  was  in  Leicester- 
shire, he  sent  for  his  wife,  who  was  then  big  with 
child,  to  come  thither  to  him ;  where  she  had  not 
been  a  day,  but  a  letter  was  brought  him  from 
Nottingham,  to  give  him  notice  that  there  was  a 
warrant  sent  to  the  sheriff  of  Leicestershire  to  seize 
his  person.  Upon  this  he  determined  to  go  the 
next  day  into  Northamptonshire,  but  at  five  of  the 
clock  that  evening,  the  sound  of  theif  trumpets  told 
him  a  troop  was  coming  into  the  town.  He  stayed 
not  to  see  them,  but  went  out  at  the  other  end  as 
they  came  in ;  who,  by  a  good  providence  for  his 
wife  (somewhat  afflicted  to  be  so  left  alone  in  a 
strange  place),  proved  to  be  commanded  by  her 
own  brother.  Sir  Allen  Apsley,  who  quartered  in 
the  next  house  to  that  where  she  was,  till  about 
two  or  three  days  before  all  the  king's  horse  that 
were  thereabouts  marched  away,  being  commanded 
upon  some  service  to  go  before  the  rest. 

Mr.  Hutchinson,  in  the  mean  time,  was  carried 
by  a  servant  that  waited  on  him,  to  the  house  of  a 
substantial  honest  yeoman,  who  was  bailiff  to  the 
lord  of  the  town^  of  Kelmarsh,  in  Northamptonshire. 


^  It  is  customary,  in  Nottinghamshire,  to  call  every  village 
of  any  size  a  town.— J.  H. 


I643-]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        175 

This  man  and  his  wife,  being  godly,  gave  Mr. 
Hutchinson  very  kind  entertainment,  and  prevailed 
upon  him  to  be  acquainted  with  their  master,  who 
had  just  then  made  plate  and  horses  ready  to  go  in  to 
the  king,  that  had  now  set  up  his  standard  at  Not- 
tingham; but  Mr.  Hutchinson  diverted  him,  and 
persuaded  him  and  another  gentleman  of  quality,  to 
carry  in  those  aids  they  had  provided  for  the  king, 
to  my  lord  general  Essex,  who  was  then  at  North- 
ampton, where  Mr.  Hutchinson  visited  him,  and 
would  gladly  at  that  time  have  engaged  with  him, 
but  that  he  did  not  then  find  a  dear  call  from  the 
Lord;  and  therefore,  intelligence  being  brought  of  the 
king's  remove,  he  was  now  returning  to  his  wife, 
when  unawares  he  came  into  a  town,  where  one  of 
Prince  Rupert's  troops  was ;  which  he  narrowly 
escaped,  and  returning  to  his  former  honest  host, 
sent  a  letter  to  his  wife,  to  acquaint  her  what  hazard 
he  was  in  by  attempting  to  come  to  her,  but  that 
as  soon  as  the  horse  was  marched  away,  he  would 
be  with  her.  This  letter  was  intercepted  at  Prince 
Rupert's  quarters,  and  opened  and  sent  her.  There 
was  with  Prince  Rupert,  at  that  time,  one  Captain 
Welch,  who  having  used  to  come  to  Captain  Apsley, 
and  seen  Mrs.  Hutchinson  with  him,  made  a  pretence 
of  civility  to  visit  her  that  day  that  all  the  prince's 
horse  marched  away.  They  marched  by  the  door 
of  the  house  where  she  was,  and  all  the  household 
having  gone  out  to  see  them,  had  left  her  alone  in 


1 76        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [164a. 

the  house,  with  Mr.  George  Hutchinson,  who  was 
in  her  chamber  when  Captain  Welch  came  in,  and 
she  went  down  into  the  parlour  to  receive  him. 
He,  taking  occasion  to  tell  her  of  her  husband's 
letter,  by  way  of  compliment,  said  it  was  a  pity  she 
should  have  a  husband  so  unworthy  of  her,  as  to 
enter  into  any  faction  which  should  make  him  not 
dare  to  be  seen  with  her;  whereat  she  being 
piqued,  and  thinking  they  were  all  marched  away, 
told  him  he  was  mistaken,  she  had  not  a  husband 
that  would  at  any  time  hide  himself  from  him,  or  that 
durst  not  show  his  face  where  any  honest  man 
durst  appear;  and  to  confirm  you,  said  she,  he 
shall  now  come  to  you.  With  that  she  called 
down  her  brother,  who,  upon  a  private  hint,  owned  - 
the  name  of  husband,  which  she  gave  him,  and  re- 
ceived a  compliment  from  Welch,  that  in  any  other 
place  he  had  been  obliged  to  make  him  a  prisoner, 
but  here  he  was  in.  sanctuary ;  and  so,  after  some 
little  discourse,  went  away.  When  the  gentleman 
of  the  house  and  the  rest  of  the  family,  that  had 
been  seeing  the  march,  were  returned,  and  while 
they  sat  laughing  together,  at  those  that  went  to 
see  the  prince,  telling  how  some  of  the  neighbouring 
ladies  were  gone  along  with  him,  and  Mrs.  Hutchin- 
son telling  how  she  had  abused  the  captain,  with 
Mr.  Hutchinson  instead  of  her  husband,  the  captain 
came  back,  bringing  another  gentleman  with  him ; 
and  he  told  Mr.  Hutchinson,  that  his  horse  having 


1642.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         177 

lost  a  shoe,  he  must  be  his  prisoner  till  the  smith 
released  him.  But  they  had  not  sat  long,  ere  a 
boy  came  in  with  two  pistols,  and  whispered  the 
captain,  who  desired  Mr.  Hutchinson  and  the 
gentleman  of  the  house  to  walk  into  the  next  room, 
seized  Mr.  George,  in  the  name  of  Mr.  John 
Hutchinson.  It  booted  not  for  them  both  to  en- 
deavour to  undeceive  him,  by  telling  him  Mr.  John 
was  still  at  Northampton,  for  he  would  not,  at  least 
would  seem  not,  to  believe  them,  and  carried  him 
away,  to  be  revenged  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson,  at  whom 
he  was  vexed  for  having  deluded  him.  So,  full  of 
wicked  joy,  to  have  found  an  innocent  gentleman, 
whom  he  knew  the  bloodhounds  were  after,  he 
went  and  informed  the  prince,  and  made  it  of  such 
moment,  as  if  they  had  taken  a  much  more  con- 
siderable person.  The  prince  had  sent  back  a 
troop  of  dragoons  to  guard  him  to  them,  which 
troop  had  beset  the  house  and  town,  before  Welch 
came  in  to  them  the  second  time;  and,  notwith- 
standing all  informations  of  his  error,  he  carried  away 
Mr.  Hutchinson,  and  put  his  sister  into  affright  and 
distemper  with  it ;  which,  when  the  women  about 
her  saw,  they  railed  at  him  for  his  treachery  and 
baseness,  but  to  no  purpose.  As  soon  as  he  over- 
took the  body  of  horse  with  his  prisoner,  there  was 
a  shout  from  one  end  to  the  other  of  the  soldiers. 
Mr.  Hutchinson,  being  brought  to  the  prince,  told 
him  he  was  the  younger  brother,  and  not  the  person 

VOL.    L  M 


178        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1642. 

he  sent  for,  which  three  or  four  of  the  Birons,  his 
cousin-germans,  acknowledged  to  be  so ;  yet  Welch 
outswore  them  all  that  it  was  Mr.  John  Hutchinson. 
The  Lord  Viscount  Grandison,  a  cousin-german  of 
Mrs.  Hutchinson's,  was  then  in  the  king's  army,  to 
whom  she  immediately  despatched  a  messenger,  to 
entreat  him  to  oblige  her  by  the  procurement  of  her 
brother's  liberty,  who,  upon  her  imprudence,  had 
been  brought  into  that  trouble.  My  lord  sent  her 
word,  that,  for  the  present,  he  could  not  obtain  it, 
but  he  would  endeavour  it  afterwards;  and  in  the 
meantime  he  gave  her  notice  that  it  was  not  safe 
for  her  husband  to  return,  there  being  forty,  men 
left  to  lie  close  in  the  country,  and  watch  his  coming 
to  her.  So  Mr.  George  Hutchinson  was  carried  to 
Derby,  and  there,  with  some  difficulty,  his  liberty 
was  obtained  by  the  interposition  of  my  Lord 
Grandison  and  the  Birons.  They  would  have  had 
him  give  them  an  engagement,  that  he  would  not 
take  arms  with  the  parliament;  but  he  refused, 
telling  them  that  he  lived  peaceably  at  home,  and 
should  make  no  engagement  to  do  anything  but 
what  his  conscience  led  him  to;  that  if  they  pleased, 
they  might  detain  him,  but  it  would  be  no  advantage 
to  them,  nor  loss  to  the  other  side;  upon  which 
considerations  they  were  persuaded  to  let  him  go. 
Immediately  after  his  release,  he  went  to  London 
to  his  father,  where  his  elder  brother  was  before 
him ;  for  as  soon  as  he  understood  from  his  wife 


1642.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         1 79 

what  his  brother  suffered  in  his  name,  he  took  post 
to  London  to  procure  his  release ;  and  there  they 
both  stayed  till  they  received  assurance  that  the 
king's  forces  were  quite .  drawn  out  of  the  country, 
and  then  they  together  returned  to  Leicestershire, 
where  Mrs.  Hutchinson,  within  a  few  days  after 
her  brother  was  taken,  was  brought  to  bed  of  her 
eldest  daughter ;  which,  by  reason  of  the  mother's 
and  the  nurse's  griefs  and  frights,  in  those  trouble- 
some times,  was  so  weak  a  child  that  it  lived  not 
four  years,  dying  afterwards  in  Nottingham  Castle. 
When  Mr.  Hutchinson  came  to  his  wife,  he  carried 
her  and  her  children,  and  his  brother,  back  again 
to  his  house,  about  the  time  that  the  battle  was 
fought  at  Edge  Hill.  After  this  the  two  brothers, 
going  to  Nottingham,  met  there  most  of  the  godly 
people,  who  had  been  driven  away  by  the  rude- 
ness of  the  king's  army,  and  plundered  upon  the 
account  of  godliness,  who  were  now  returned  to 
their  families,  and  desirous  to  live  in  peace  with 
them ;  but  having,  by  experience,  found  they  could 
not  do  so,  unless  the  parliament  interest  were  main- 
tained, they  were  consulting  how  to  raise  some 
recruits  for  the  Earl  of  Essex,  to  assist  in  which, 
Mr.  Hutchinson  had  provided  his  plate  and  horses 
ready  to  send  in.^ 

^  The  narrative  contained  in  the  manuscript  note-book, 
preserved  in  the  British  museum,  commences  at  this  point. 


1 80        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [164a, 

About  this  time  Sir  John  Gell,^  a  Derbyshire 
gentleman,  who  had  been  sheriff  of  the  county,  at 
that  time  when  the  illegal  tax  of  ship-money  was 
exacted,  and  was  so  violent  in  the  prosecution  of 
it,  that  he  starved  Sir  John  Stanhope's  cattle  in 
the  pound,  and  would  not  suffer  any  one  to  relieve 
them  there,  because  that  worthy  gentleman  stood 
out  against  that  unjust  payment;  and  he  had  by 
many  aggravating  circumstances,  not  only  concern- 
ing his  persecution  of  Sir  John  Stanhope,  but  others, 
so  highly  misdemeaned  himself  that  he  looked  for 
punishment  from  the  parliament ;  to  prevent  it,  he 
very  early  put  himself  into  their  service,  and  after 
the  king  was  gone  out  of  these  countries,  he  pre- 
vented the  cavalier  gentry  from  seizing  the  town 
of  Derby,  and  fortified  it,  and  raised  a  regiment  of 
foot.  These  were  good,  stout,  fighting  men,  but 
the  most  licentious,  ungovernable  wretches,  that 
belonged  to  the  parliament.  He  himself,  no  man 
knows  for  what  reason  he  chose  that  side ;  for  he 
had  not  understanding  enough  to  judge  the  equity 
of  the  cause,  nor  piety  or  holiness ;  being  a  foul 
adulterer  all  the  time  he  served  the  parliament,  and 
so  unjust,  that  without  any  remorse,  he  suffered 
his  men  indifferently  to  plunder  both  honest  men 
and  cavaliers;  so  revengeful,  that  he  pursued  his 
malice  to  Sir  John  Stanhope,  upon  the  foremen- 

^  See  the  note  in  the  Appendix,  on  the  character  of  Sir  John 
Cell,  and  the  truth  of  the  charges  here  brought  against  him. 


1642.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         1 8 1 

tioned  account,  with  such  barbarism  after  his  death, 
that  he,  pretending  to  search  for  arms  and  plate, 
came  into  the  church  and  defaced  his  monument 
that  cost  six  hundred  pounds,  breaking  off  the  nose 
and  other  parts  of  it  He  dug  up  a  garden  of 
flowers,  the  only  delight  of  his  widow,  upon  the 
same  pretence ;  and  then  wooed  that  widow,^  who 
was  by  all  the  world  believed  to  be  the  most 
prudent  and  affectionate  of  womankind,  till,  being 
deluded  by  his  hypocrisies,  she  consented  to  marry 
him,  and  found  that  was  the  utmost  point  to  which 
he  could  carry  his  revenge,  his  future  carriage 
making  it  apparent  he  sought  her  for  nothing  else 
but  to  destroy  the  glory  of  her  husband  and  his 
house.  This  man  kept  the  diurnal-makers  in  pen- 
sion, so  that  whatever  was  done  in  the  neighbouring 
counties,  against  the  enemy,  was  attributed  to  him ; 
and  thus  he  hath  indirectly  purchased  himself  a 
name  in  story,  which  he  never  merited.*  He  was 
a  very  bad  man,  to  sum  up  all  in  that  word,  yet  an 
instrument  of  service  to  the  parliament  in  those 
parts.  I  thought  it  necessary  to  insert  this  little 
account  of  him   here,  because   there  will  be  often 

^  Mary,  daughter  of  Sir  John  RadclyfTe  of  Ordsal. — 
Collins's  "  Peerage.'* 

*  "There  are  more  puppets  that  move  by  the  wire  of  a 
Diurnal,  as  Brereton  and  Gell,  two  of  Mars  his  petty-toes, 
such  snivelling  cowards,  that  it  is  a  favour  to  call  them  so." — 
Cleveland,  •*  Character  of  a  London  Diurnal." 


1 8  2        Memoirs  of  Col*  Hutchinson.       [164a. 

occasion  to  mention  him  in  my  following  discourse ; 
and  because,  although  there  never  was  any  personal 
acquaintance  between  him  and  Mr.  Hutchinson, 
yet  that  natural  antipathy  which  is  between  good 
and  evil,  rendered  him  a  very  bad  neighbour  to 
Mr.  Hutchinson's  garrison,  and  one  that,  under  the 
name  of  a  friend  and  assistant,  spoiled  our  country, 
as  much  as  our  enemies.  He  indeed  gave  his  men 
leave  to  commit  all  insolences  without  any  restraint ; 
whereas  Mr.  Hutchinson  took  up  arms  to  defend 
the  country  as  much  as  was  possible  from  being  a 
prey  to  rude  soldiers,  and  did  oftentimes  preserve 
it  both  from  his  and  other  rude  troops,  which 
stirred  up  in  him  envy,  hate,  and  ill-will  against 
his  neighbour.  He  was  not  wise  in  ordering  the 
scouts  and  spies  he  kept  out,  and  so  had  the  worst 
intelligence  in  the  world.  Mr.  Hutchinson,  on  the 
other  side,  employed  ingenuous  persons,  and  was 
better  informed  of  the  true  state  of  things,  so 
oftentimes  he  communicated  those  informations  to 
the  chief  commanders,  which  proved  the  falsehood 
of  his  ;  and  that  was  another  cause  of  envy.  Some 
that  knew  him  well,  said  he  was  not  valiant,  though 
his  men  once  held  him  up,  among  a  stand  of  pikes, 
while  they  obtained  a  glorious  victory,  when  the 
Earl  of  Northampton  was  slain ;  certain  it  is  he 
was  never  by  his  good  will  in  a  fight,  but  either 
by  chance  or  necessity ;  and  that  which  made  his 
courage  the  more  questioned  was,  the  care  he  took. 


1642.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         183 

and  the  expense  he  was  at,  to  get  it  weekly  men- 
tioned in  the  journals,  so  that  when  they  had 
nothing  else  to  renown  him  for,  they  once  put  in 
that  the  troops  of  that  valiant  commander,  Sir  John 
Gell,  took  a  dragoon  with  a  plush  doublet.  Mr. 
Hutchinson,  on  the  other  side,  that  did  well  for 
virtue's  sake,  and  not  for  the  vainglory  of  it,  never 
would  give  anything  to  buy  the  flatteries  of  those 
scribblers ;  and  when  one  of  them  had  once,  while 
he  was  in  town,  made  mention  of  something  done 
at  Nottingham,  with  falsehood,  and  given  Gell 
the  glory  of  an  action  wherein  he  was  not  con- 
cerned, Mr.  Hutchinson  rebuked  him  for  it,  where- 
upon the  man  begged  his  pardon,  and  told  him  he 
would  write  as  much  for  him  the  n^xt  week ;  but 
Mr.  Hutchinson  told  him  he  scorned  his  mercenary 
pen,  warning  him  not  to  dare  to  lie  in  any  of  his 
concernments,  whereupon  the  fellow  was  awed,  and 
he  had  no  more  abuse  of  that  kind. 

But  to  turn  out  of  this  digression  into  another, 
not  altogether  impertinent  to  the  story  which  I 
would  carry  on.  In  Nottinghamshire,  upon  the 
edge  of  Derbyshire,  there  dwelt  a  man,  who  was  of 
mean  birth  and  low  fortunes,  yet  had  kept  company 
with  the  underling  gentry  of  his  neighbourhood. 
This  man  had  the  most  factious,  ambitious,  vainglori- 
ous, envious,  and  malicious  nature  that  is  imaginable ; 
but  he  was  the  greatest  dissembler,  flatterer,  traitor, 
and  hypocrite  that  ever  was,  and  herein  had  a  kind 


1 84        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [164a- 

of  wicked  policy ;  knowing  himself  to  be  inferior  to 
all  gentlemen,  he  put  on  a  vizard  of  godliness  and 
humility,  and  courted  the  common  people  with  all 
the  plausibility  and  flattery  that  could  be  practised. 
All  this  while  he  was  addicted  to  many  lusts,  espe- 
cially to  that  of  women,  but  practised  them  so 
secretly,  that  they  were  not  vulgarly  taken  notice 
of,  though  God,  to  shame  him,  gave  him  up  to 
marry  a  wench  out  of  one  of  the  ale-houses  he 
frequented ;  but  to  keep  up  a  fame  of  godliness,  he 
gave  large  contributions  to  puritan  preachers,  who 
had  the  art  to  stop  the  people's  mouths  from  speak- 
ing ill  of  their  benefactors.  By  a  thousand  arts 
this  fellow  became  popular,  and  so  insinuated  him- 
self into  all  the  gentlemen  that  owned  the  parlia- 
ment's party,  that  till  he  was  discovered  some  years 
after,  they  believed  him  a  most  true-hearted,  faith- 
ful, vigilant,  active  man  for  the  godly  interest ;  but 
he  could  never  climb  higher  than  a  presbyterian 
persecutor,  and  in  the  end,  fell  quite  off  to  a 
declared  cavalier.  In  Sir  George  Booth's  business, 
thinking  he  could  sway  the  scales  of  a  country, 
he  raised  a  troop,  brought  them  into  Derby,  and 
published  a  declaration  of  his  own  for  the  king; 
then  ran  away  to  Nottingham,  and  lost  all  his  troop 
in  the  route  there,  and  hid  himself  till  the  king^ 

^  By  the  king  is  here  meant  Charles  the  Second ;  the 
Rebellion  under  Sir  George  Booth  having  taken  place  in 
1659,  after  the  death  of  Cromwell. — y  H. 


1643.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         185 

came  in,  when  he  was  rewarded  for  his  revolt  with 
an  ojfiice,  which  he  enjoyed  not  many  months,  his 
wife  and  he,  and  some  of  his  children,  dying  alto- 
gether in  a  few  days  of  a  fever  little  less  than  a 
plague.  This  man,  called  Charles  White,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  civil  war,  got  a  troop  of  dragoons, 
who  armed  and  mounted  themselves  out  of  devotion 
to  the  parliament's  cause,  and  being  of  his  neigh- 
bourhood, marched  forth  in  his  conduct,  he  having 
procured  a  commission  to  be  their  captain ;  but 
they,  having  stocks  and  families,  were  not  willing 
to  march  as  far  as  the  army,  but  joined  themselves 
to  those  who  were  already  in  arms  at  Derby.^ 

After  the  battle  at  Edge-hill,  Sir  John  Digby,  the 
high  sheriff  of  Nottinghamshire,  returned  from  the 
king,  and  had  a  design  of  securing  the  county 
against  the  parliament ;  whereupon  he  sent  out 
summons  to  all  the  gentlemen  resident  in  the 
country  to  meet  him  at  Newark.  Mr.  Hutchinson 
was  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Francis  Pierrepont,  the 
Earl  of  Kingston's  third  son,  when  the  letter  was 
delivered  to  him,  and  another  of  the  same  to  Mr. 

*  *f  On  October  31, 1642,  Sir  John  Gell  marched  to  Derby, 
and  there  began  to  give  out  commissions.  Some  five  days 
after  Captain  White  came  to  him  out  of  Nottinghamshire, 
with  a  company  of  dragoons,  consisting  of  about  twenty- 
seven,  but  before  he  departed  he  made  them  up  one  hun- 
dred and  forty,  all  well  armed,  under  the  command  of  the 
said  Sir  John  Gell."— Cell's  True  Relation,  Glover's  Derby- 
shire, voL  i.,  Appendix,  p.  52. 


1 86        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        1164a. 

Pierrepont ;  and  while    they  were   reading  them, 
and  considering  what  might  be  the  meaning  of  this 
summons,  an  honest  man,  of  the  sherifTs  neigh- 
bourhood,  came   and   gave   them   notice,   that   the 
sheriff  had  some  design  in  agitation ;  for  he  had 
assembled  and  armed  about  fourscore  of  his  neigh- 
bours, to  go  out  with  him  to  Newark,  and,  as  they 
heard,  from  thence  to  Southwell,  and  from  thence  to 
Nottingham,  through  which  town  many  armed  men 
marched  day  and  night,  to  their  great  terror.     Mr. 
Hutchinson,  upon  this  intimation,  went  home,  and, 
instead  of  going  to  meet  the  sheriff,  sent  an  excuse 
by  an  intelligent  person,  well  acquainted  with  all  the 
country,  who  had  orders  to  find  out  their  design ; 
which  he  did  so  well,  that  he  assured  Mr.  Hutchinson 
if  he  and  some  others  had  gone  in,  they  would  have 
been  made  prisoners;  for  the  sheriff  came  into  Newark 
with  a  troop  of  eighty  men,  with  whom  he  was  gone 
to  Southwell,  and  was  to  go  the  next  day  to  Not- 
tingham, to  secure  those  places  for  the  king.     Mr. 
Hutchinson  immediately  went  with  his  brother  and 
acquainted  them  at  Nottingham  with  his  intelligence, 
which  they  had  likewise  received  from  other  hands. 
Although  the  town  was  generally  more  malignant 
than  well  affected,  yet  they  cared  not  much  to  have 
cavalier  soldiers  quarter  with  them,  and  therefore 
agreed  to  defend  themselves  against  any  force  which 
should  come  against  them ;  and  being  called  hastily 
together,   as    the    exigence    required,   about    seven 


i64a.l       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         187 

hundred  listed  themselves,  and  chose  Mr.  George 
Hutchinson  for  their  captain,  who  having  lived 
among  them,  was  very  much  loved  and  esteemed 
by  them.  The  sheriff  hearing  this,  came  not  to 
Nottingham,  but  those  who  were  now  there  thus 
became  engaged  to  prosecute  the  defence  of  them- 
selves, the  town,  and  country,  as  far  as  they  could. 
They  were  but  few,  and  those  not  very  consider- 
able, and  some  of  them  not  very  hearty;  but  it 
pleased  God  here,  as  in  other  places,  to  carry  on 
his  work  by  weak  and  unworthy  instruments. 
There  were  seven  aldermen  in  the  town,  and  of 
these  only  Alderman  James,  then  mayor,  owned 
the  parliament.  He  was  a  very  honest,  bold  man, 
but  had  no  more  than  a  burgher's  discretion ;  he 
was  yet  very  well  assisted  by  his  wife,  a  woman 
of  great  zeal  and  courage,  and  with  more  under- 
standing than  women  of  her  rank  usually  have. 
All  the  devout  people  of  the  town  were  very 
vigorous  and  ready  to  offer  their  lives  and  families, 
but  there  was  not  half  the  half  of  the  town  that 
consisted  of  these ;  the  ordinary  civil  sort  of  people 
coldly  adhered  to  the  better,  but  all  the  debauched, 
and  such  as  had  lived  upon  the  bishops'  persecuting 
courts,  and  had  been  the  lackeys  of  projectors  and 
monopolizers  and  the  like,  they  were  all  bitterly 
malignant;  yet  God  awed  them,  that  they  could 
not  at  that  time  hinder  his  people,  whom  he  over- 
ruled some  of  their  greatest  enemies  to  assist,  such 


1 88        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [164a. 

as  were  Chadwick  and  Plumptre,  who,  at  the  first, 
put  themselves  most  forward  in  the  business. 
Plumptre  was  a  doctor  of  physic,  an  inhabitant  of 
Nottingham,  who  had  learning,  natural  parts,  and 
understanding  enough  to  discern  between  natural 
civil  righteousness  and  injustice;  but  he  was  a 
horrible  atheist,  and  had  such  an  intolerable  pride 
that  he  brooked  no  superiors,  and  having  some  wit, 
took  the  boldness  to  exercise  it  in  the  abuse  of 
all  the  gentlemen  wherever  he  came.^  Sir  Thomas 
Hutchinson  first  brought  him  into  credit  and 
practice  in  the  country,  it  having  pleased  God  to 
make  him  instrumental  in  the  cure  of  Mr.  George 
Hutchinson,  who  had  in  vain  tried  the  skill  of  the 
best  doctors  in  England  against  an  epileptic  dis- 
ease, under  which  he  laboured  some  years.  Upon 
this  occasion.  Sir  Thomas  and  both  his  sons  gave 
him  much  respect,  and  this  cure  gave  him  reputa- 

^  It  said  of  him,  in  Thoroton's  History  of  Notts,  **  He 
was  a  person  eminent  in  his  profession,  of  great  note  for  wit 
and  learning,  as  he  had  formerly  been  for  poetry,  when  he 
printed  a  book  of  epigrams : "  a  species  of  composition 
which  the  more  it  pleases  the  reader,  the  less  it  renders  the 
author  beloved.  This  inclination  to  sport  with  the  feelings 
of  others  was  not  at  all  likely  to  recommend  him  to  Mr. 
Hutchinson,  nor  make  him  a  good  associate  in  weighty  and 
serious  business. — ^J.  H. 

Dr.  Plumptre  died  on  June  23d,  i66a  An  account  of 
him  is  given  in  Bailey's  ''Annals  of  Nottinghamshire,**  p. 
869.     See  also  Wood's  "  Fasti "  under  the  year  1656. 


1642.1       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         189 

tion,  and  introduced  him  into  practice  in  all  the 
gentlemen's  houses  in  the  country ;  which  he  soon 
lost  again  by  his  most  abusive  tongue  and  other 
ill  carriages,  and  was  even  got  out  of  favour  with 
Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson  himself,  for  some  abusive 
scoffs  *  given  out  against  his  lady.  But  Mr. 
Hutchinson  and  his  brother,  in  pity  to  him,  and 
in  remembrance  of  what  God  had  done  through 
him,  still  owned  him,  and  protected  him  a  little 
against  the  bitter  zealots,  though  it  was  impossible 
for  his  darkness  and  their  light  long  to  continue 
mixed.  This  man  had  seen  enough  to  approve  the 
parliament's  cause,  in  point  of  civil  right,  and  pride 
enough  to  desire  to  break  the  bonds  of  slavery, 
whereby  the  king  endeavoured  to  chain  up  a  free 
people ;  and  upon  these  scores,  appearing  high  for 
the  parliament's  interest,  he  was  admitted  into  the 
consultations  of  those  who  were  then  putting  the 
country  into  a  posture  of  defence.^     Chadwick  was 

^  Doubtless  many  adhered  to  the  parliament's  side  merely 
on  a  civil  and  political  account,  and  these  would  naturally 
unite  with  the  independents,  as  having  no  inclination  to 
support  the  pretensions  of  the  presbyterians.  It  is  said  by 
Clarendon,  that  many  deists  took  part  with  the  indepen- 
dents ;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  Dr.  Plumptre  might 
have  an  inclination  at  least  to  scepticism,  as  sarcasm  was 
his  talent,  and  for  this  he  was  termed  an  atheist  by  Mrs. 
Hutchinson,  who  was  a  rigorist. 

After  the  deaths  of  Colonel  Hutchinson  and.Dr.  Plumptre, 
there  began  a  great  friendship  between  their  families,  which 


T  90        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [i64«- 

a  fellow  of  a  most  pragmatical  temper,  and,  to  say 
truth,  had  strangely  wrought  himself  into  a  station 
unfit  for  him.  He  was  at  first  a  boy  that  scraped 
trenches  in  the  house  of  one  of  the  poorest  justices 
in  the  county,  but  yet  such  a  one  as  had  a  great 
deal  of  formality  and  understanding  of  the  statute 
law,  from  whom  this  boy  picked  such  ends  of  law, 
that  he  became  first  the  justice's,  then  a  lawyer's 
clerk ;  then,  I  know  not  how,  got  to  be  a  parcel- 
judge   in    Ireland,^    and    came   over   to    his   own 


lasted  many  generations.  Charles,  the  half-brother  of 
Colonel  Hutchinson,  and  his  successor  in  his  estate  at 
Owthorpe  and  in  the  borough  of  Nottingham,  was  guardian 
of  Dr.  Plumptre's  son,  and  is  represented  by  Thoroton  to 
have  executed  his  trust  with  great  fidelity. 

The  Editor  has  in  his  possession  several  pieces,  in  verse 
and  prose,  written  by  the  late  Dr.  Charles  Hutchinson,  in 
favour  of  the  last  Mr.  Plumptre,  who  represented  the  town 
of  Nottingham,  and  in  vindication  of  him  against  a  party 
headed  by  Lang^ord  Collin,  Esq.,  a  lineal  descendant  of 
Colonel  Hutchinson's  master  gunner,  who  will  be  spoken 
of  hereafter :  they  are  all  in  a  jocose  or  satirical  style ;  but 
one  of  them,  a  short  advertisement,  which  too  well  described 
Mr.  Collin,  was  deemed  libellous,  and  cost  Dr.  Hutchinsoq 
^£500,  which  was  well  repaid  by  Mr.  Plumptre's  obtaining 
for  him  a  king's  living  of  £^^0  per  annum.  Ac  this  time 
Mr.  Plumptre  and  Mr.  Hutchinson's  families  were  of  the 
Whig  or  Hanover  party,  Mr.  Collin  of  the  Tory  or  Jacobite. 
—J.  H. 

^  There  is  a  mention  of  Chadwick  in  Strafford's  Cor- 
respondence.   Laud  was  induced  to  recommend  him  to 


1642.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         1 9 1 

country  swelled  with  the  reputation  of  it,  and  set 
on  foot  a  base,  obsolete,  arbitrary  court  there,  which 
the  Conqueror  of  old  had  given  to  one  Peverel,  his 
bastard,  which  this  man  entitling  my  lord  Goring 
unto,  executed  the  office  under  him,  to  the  great 
abuse  of  the  country.^  At  the  beginning  of  the 
parliament  they  would  have  prosecuted  him  for  it, 


Strafford  for  a  second  baron's  place  in  the  Exchequer. 
Strafford  replied,  "  Mr.  Chadwick  is  not  held  here  so  fit  as 
yet  for  the  bench :  nay  the  chief  baron  hath  a  very  mean 
opinion  of  his  judgment  in  his  own  profession." — Strafford, 
Correspondence,  I  268-299. 

^  On  the  history  of  the  court  of  the  Honour  of  Peveril, 
see  Briscoe's  **  Old  Nottinghamshire,**  first  series,  p.  91. 
Nottingham  had  been  exempted  from  this  court  by  the 
charter  of  Edward  II.  in  1321.  It  was  purchased  from  the 
Eland  family  by  a  branch  of  the  Hutchinson  family  which 
settled  at  Basford,  and  by  this  "  unworthy  branch,"  as  Mrs. 
Hutchinson  calls  it,  it  was  allowed  to  fall  into  disuse.  The 
king  revived  the  court  in  1638,  for  the  benefit  of  Lord 
Goring.  At  the  opening  of  the  Long  Parliament,  its  juris- 
diction again  came  to  a  stop.  In  1658  Whalley  attempted 
to  restore  it,  but  on  a  letter  from  the  corporation  of  Notting- 
ham the  design  was  given  up.  On  August  i,  1659,  there 
was  read  in  the  House  of  Commons,  "  the  humble  petition 
of  divers  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  counties  of  Nottingham 
and  Derby,  against  setting  up  a  Court  of  Record  and 
Court  of  Equity  in  the  county  of  Nottingham,  by  the  steward 
of  the  Honour  of  Peveril.*'  It  was  referred  to  a  committee, 
of  which  Colonel  Hutchinson  was  one.  A  petition  against 
Colonel  Chadwick  had  also  been  presented  on  February  13, 
1657  (Journals  of  the  House  of  Commons). 


192        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [164a. 

but  my  lord  Goring  begged  of  Sir  Thomas  Hutchin- 
son to  spare  him,  and  4>romised  to  lay  it  down  for 
ever ;  so  from  the  beginning  of  the  parliament  he 
executed  not  that  office,  but  having  an  insinuating 
wit  and  tongue,  procured  himself  to  be  deputy  re- 
corder of  Nottingham,  my  lord  of  Clare  being  chief. 
When  the  king  was  in  town  a  little  before,  this 
man  so  insinuated  himself  into  the  court,  that, 
coming  to  kiss  the  king's  hand,  the  king  told  him 
he  was  a  very  honest  man  ;  ^  yet  by  flatteries  and 
dissimulations  he  kept  up  his  credit  with  the  godly, 
cutting  his  hair,  and  taking  up  a  form  of  godliness, 
the  better  to  deceive.  In  some  of  the  corrupt  times 
he  had  purchased  the  honour  of  a  barrister,  though 
he  had  neither  law  nor  learning,  but  he  had  a 
voluble  tongue,  and  was  crafty ;  and  it  is  almost 
incredible  that  one  of  his  mean  education  and 
poverty  should  arrive  to  such  things  as  he  reached. 
He  was  very  poor,  although  he  got  abundance  of 
money  by  a  thousand  cheats  and  other  base  ways, 
wherein  he  exercised  all  his  life ;  but  he  was  as 


^  Mr.  Bailey  gives  the  following  extract  from  the  Hull 
Book  of  Nottingham,  which  explains  the  incident  alluded 
to.  The  king  arrived  at  Nottingham  on  July  21,  1642. 
'*  July  21,  1642.  This  company  (f.^.  the  mayor  and  corpora- 
tion) do  hold  it  fitting  to  present  the  prince  with  fifty 
pounds  in  gold  and  a  purse ;  and  Mr.  Chad  wick,  at  the 
request  of  the  company,  is  content  to  prepare  a  speech  to  the 
prince's  highness,  and  to  present  the  same  purse  and  gold." 


1642.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         1 93 

great  a  prodigal  in  spending  as  knave  in  getting, 
and  among  other  villanies  which  he  secretly  prac- 
tised, he  was  a  libidinous  goat,  for  which  his  wife, 
they  say,  paid  him  with  making  him  a  cuckold  ;  yet 
were  there  not  two  persons  to  be  found  that  pre- 
tended more  sanctity  than  these  two,  she  having 
a  tongue  no  less  glavering  and  false  than  his. 
Such  baseness  he  had,  that  all  the  just  reproaches 
in  the  world  could  not  move  him,  but  he  would 
fawn  upon  any  man  that  told  him  of  his  villanies 
to  his  face,  even  at  the  very  time.  Never  was  a 
truer  Judas,  since  Iscariot's  time,  than  he,  for  he 
would  kiss  the  man  he  had  in  his  heart  to  kill ; 
he  naturally  delighting  in  mischief  and  treachery, 
and  was  so  exquisite  a  villain,  that  he  destroyed 
those  designs  he  might  have  thriven  by,  with  over- 
laying them  with  fresh  knaveries.^  I  have  been  a 
little  tedious  in  these  descriptions,  yet  have  spoken 
very  little  in  comparison  of  what  the  truth  would 
bear ;  indeed,  such  assistants  as  these  were  enough 

^  Major-general  Whalley  gives  a  much  more  favourable 
character  of  Chadwick.  *'The  business  for  ejecting  ministers 
goes  on  very  well  in  Lincolnshire ;  I  had  almost  forgot  to 
tell  you  that  Colonel  Chadwick  is  very  forward  to  serve  his 
highness  in  this  business,  both  at  Nottingham  and  Derby, 
being  recorder  for  both  the  towns,  and  being  very  able  and 
well-esteemed  of,  even  amongst  honest  and  godly  men,  as 
far  as  I  can  hitherto  learn.  Certainly  it  was  not  a  true 
character  that  was  given  of  him  to  his  highness." — Letter 
to  Thurloe^  November  17,  1655. 

VOL.   I.  N 


194        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.     ,  (164a. 

to  disgrace  the  best  cause  by  their  owning  of  it ; 
but  the  truth  of  God  being  above  the  testimony  of 
men,  could  neither  receive  credit  from  the  good, 
nor  discredit  from  the  worst  men ;  but  they  were 
not  all  such,  who  first  offered  themselves  to  carry 
on  the  Lord's  work  with  him  of  whom  we  chiefly 
treat.  There  was  then  dwelling  at  Nottingham  a 
third  son  of  the  Earl  of  Kingston,  a  man  of  good 
natural  parts,  but  not  of  education  according  to  his 
quality,  who  was  in  the  main  well  affected  to  honest 
men  and  to  righteous  liberty;  a  man  of  a  very 
excellent  good  nature,  and  full  of  love  to  all  men ; 
but  his  goodness  received  a  little  allay  by  a  vain- 
glorious pride,  which  could  not  well  brook  that  any 
other  should  outstrip  him  in  virtue  and  estimation.^ 
Mr.  Francis  Thomhagh,  the  eldest  son  of  Sir 
Francis  Thomhagh,  was  a  man  of  a  most  upright 
faithful  heart  to  God  and  his  people,  and  to  his 
country's  true  interest,  comprehended  in  the  parlia- 
ment's cause ;  a  man  of  greater  valour  or  more 
noble  daring,  fought  not  for  them,  nor  indeed  ever 
drew  sword  in  any  cause ;  he  was  of  a  most  excel- 
lent good  nature  to  all  men,  and  zealous  for  his 
friend ;  he  wanted  counsel  and  deliberation,  and  was 

^  Mr.  Francis  Pierrepont,  who  will  frequently  be  men- 
tioned again  in  the  course  of  the  story,  when  it  will  be 
clearly  seen  that  Mrs.  Hutchinson  here  speaks  with  candour, 
or  rather  favour  of  him,  though  he  was  her  husband's 
opponent. — ^J.  H. 


164a.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         195 

sometimes  too  facile  to  flatterers,  but  had  judgment 
enough  to  discern  his  errors  when  they  were  repre- 
sented to  him,  and  worth  enough  not  to  persist  in 
an  injurious  mistake  because  he  had  once  entertained 
it*  Mr.  Pigott  was  a  very  religious,  serious,  wise 
gentlemen,  true-hearted  to  God  and  his  country, 
of  a  generous  and  liberal  nature,  and  who  thought 
nothing  too  dear  to  expose,  nor  too  difficult  to  un- 
dertake, for  his  friend ;  one  that  delighted  not  in 
the  ruin  of  his  neighbours,  biit  could  endure  it, 
rather  than  the  destruction  of  religion,  law,  and 
liberty;  one  that  wanted  not  courage,  yet  chose 
rather  to  venture  himself  as  a  single  person  than 
as  a  leader  in  arms,  and  to  serve  his  country  in 
counsel  than  in  action ;  no  man  in  his  nature, 
and  his  whole  deportment,  showed  himself  more  of 
a  gentleman  than  he.'     There  was  one  Mr.  Wid- 


^  Colonel  Thornhagh  is  often  mentioned  by  other  writers, 
and  always  with  praise  in  his  military  capacity,  in  which 
only  he  was  known  to  the  public.  Mrs.  Hutchinson  here 
delineates  with  a  masterly  hand  a  frank,  open,  unsuspecting, 
amiable  soldier.  The  family  of  Colonel  Thornhagh  con- 
tinued to  flourish  in  the  county  of  Nottingham  so  late  as 
the  year  1750,  at  which  time  one  of  them  represented 
the  county ;  they  are  believed  to  be  now  extinct  in  the 
male  line,  and  their  possessions  to  have  centered  in  a 
female  who  was  the  lady  of  Francis  Ferrand  Foljambe, 
E«q.— J.  H. 

*  Mr.  Pigott  survived  Colonel  Hutchinson  about  five  years. 
He  was  summoned  to  parliament  by  Cromwell,  but  it  is 


1 96        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [164*. 

merpoole,  a  man  of  good  extraction,  but  reduced  to 
a  small  fortune,  had  declined  all  the  splendour 
of  an  old  house,  and  sunk  into  the  condition 
of  the  middle  men  of  the  country,  yet  had  a 
perfect  honest  heart  to  God,  his  country,  and  his 
friend ;  he  had  a  good  discretion,  and  though 
older  than  all  the  rest,  was  so  humble  as  to  be 
content  to  come  in  the  rear  of  them  all ;  having 
through  the  declining  of  his  family,  the  slendemesa 
of  his  estate,  and  the  parsimony  of  his  nature,  less 
interest  in  the  country.^     To  yoke  with  him,  there 


very  uncertain  whether  he  condescended  to  sit  or  not  to 
sit.  Thoroton,  in  his  "  History  of  Nottinghamshire,"  says  of 
him  that  ''he  was  a  person  of  great  parts,  natural  and 
acquired ;  he  was  sheriff  of  the  county  in  1669,  and  died 
presently  after  the  summer  assizes  ;  at  which  time,  being  in 
mourning  for  his  daughter  Mary,  wife  of  Robert,  eldest  son 
of  Sir  Francis  Burdett,  of  Formark,  he  gave  his  attendants 
black  liveries  with  silver  trinmiings,  which  served  for  his 
own  funeral.  His  sobriety,  ingenuity,  generosity,  piety, 
and  other  virtues,  few  of  his  rank  will  ever  exceed,  if  any 
equal." 

It  is  thought  necessary  to  take  more  particular  notice  of 
what  may  appertain  to  Ireton,  Colonel  Thornhagh,  and  Mr. 
Pigott,  because  they  are  the  three  persons  who  enjoyed  the 
greatest  share  in  the  friendship  and  esteem  of  Colonel 
Hutchinson,  and  made  him  a  due  return. — ^J.  H. 

^  The  pedigree  of  the  family  of  Widmerpoole,  in  Thoroton, 
shows  him  to  have  been  of  very  ancient  and  good  descent ; 
his  ancestor  represented  the  town  of  Nottingham  in  the 
reign  of  Edward  the  Third. — ^J.  H. 


i64a.l       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         197 

was  a  very  honest  man,  who  could  not  be  reckoned 
among  the  gentry,  though  he  was  called  by  the 
name  of  Mr.  Lomax/  he  was  in  the  strength  and 
perfection  of  his  age,  a  stout  and  an  understanding 
man,  plain  and  blunt,  but  withal  godly,  faithful  to 
his  country,  and  honest  to  all  men.  There  lived 
at  Nottingham,  a  man  called  Mr.  Salusbury,  who 
had  very  good  abilities  with  his  pen,  upon  which  he 
was  taken  in  to  be  their  secretary;  but  he  proved 
ambitious  and  froward,  and  being  poor,  when  he 
was  after  made  treasurer,  fell  into  some  temp- 
tation ;  but  carried  at  first  a  fair  colour  of  re- 
ligion and  honesty.  These  were  they  with  whom 
Mr.  Hutchinson  was  first  mated,  whose  character  it 
was  necessary  thus  far  to  hint  at,  for  the  better 
carrying  on  of  his  story. 

Sir  John  Digby  having  notice  that  they  had  pre- 
vented him,  by  getting  arms  in  their  hands  before, 
came  not  to  Nottingham ;  where  they,  having  now 
taken  up  the  sword,  saw  it  was  not  safe  to  lay 
it  down  again,  and  hold  a  naked  throat  to  their 
enemy's  whetted  knives.  Whereupon,  upon  the 
parliament's  commission  for  settling  the  militia 
sometime  before,  there  having  been  three  colonels 
nominated,  viz.  Sir  Francis  Thomhagh,  Sir  Francis 
Molineuz,  and  Mr.   Francis   Pierrepont,  they  pro- 

*  A  letter  by  Mr.  Loniax  is  printed  in  the  •*  Fairfax  Cor- 
respondence, Memorials  of  the  Civil  Wars,"  vol.  i.  p.  229. 


198        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       [164a. 

pounded  to  them  to  raise  their  regiments.  Sir 
Francis  Molineux  altogether  declined;  Sir  Francis 
Thomhagh  appointed  his  son  for  his  lieutenant- 
colonel,  and  began  to  raise  a  regiment  of  horse, 
with  whom  many  of  the  honest  men  that  first 
enlisted  themselves  with  Mr.  George  Hutchinson, 
became  troopers,  Mr.  John  Hutchinson  and  his 
brother  were  persuaded  to  be  lieutenant-colonel 
and  major  to  Colonel  Pierrepont's  regiment  of  foQt ; 
and  accordingly  Mr.  George  Hutchinson  had  imme- 
diately a  very  good  standing  company  of  foot, 
formed  out  of  those  townsmen  who  first  came  in  to 
list  under  him.  Mr.  John  Hutchinson  had  a  full 
company  of  very  honest,  godly  men,  who  came  for 
love  of  him  and  the  cause,  out  of  the  country.  It 
was  six  weeks  before  the  colonel  could  be  per- 
suaded to  put  on  a  sword,  or  to  list  any  men, 
which  at  length  he  did,  of  substantial  honest  towns- 
men ;  and  Mr.  Poulton,  a  nephew  of  Sir  Thomas 
Hutchinson,  a  stout  young  gentleman,  who  had 
seen  some  service  abroad,  was  his  captain-lieu- 
tenant. There  were  two  companies  more  raised, 
one  under  Captain  Lomax,  and  another  under  one 
Captain  Scrimpshire.  The  first  thing  these  gentle- 
men did  was  to  call  home  Captain  White  with  his 
dragoons,  raised  in  Nottinghamshire,  to  the  service 
of  his  own  country ;  for  Sir  John  Gell,  at  Derby, 
had  received  from  Hull  a  regiment  of  grey  coats, 
who  were  at  first  sent  down  from  London,  for  the 


i642.]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         199 

assistance  of  that  place,  when  the  king  attempted 
it.  They  also  sent  to  the  Earl  of  Essex,  to  desire 
that  Captain  Ireton,  with  a  troop  of  horse,  which 
he  had  carried  out  of  the  country  into  his  excel- 
lency's army,  might  be  commanded  back,  for  the 
present  service  of  his  country,  till  it  was  put  into 
a  posture  of  defence;  which  accordingly  he  was, 
and  was  major  of  the  horse  regiment.  They  sent 
also  to  the  parliament,  and  received  from  them  a 
commission,  with  instructions,  whereby  they  were 
empowered  to  levy  forces  and  to  raise  contributions 
for  maintaining  them  ;  with  all  authority  for  seizing 
delinquents,  sequestring,  and  the  like.  The  com- 
mittee appointed  were  the  parliament-men  that 
served  for  the  county,  Mr  Francis  Pierrepont,  Mr. 
John  Hutchinson,  Mr.  Francis  Thornhagh,  Mr. 
Gervase  Pigott,  Mr.  Henry  Ireton,  Mr.  George 
Hutchinson,  Mr.  Joseph  Widmerpoole,  Mr.  Gervase 
Lomax,  Dr.  Plumptre,  the  mayor  of  Nottingham, 
Mr.  James  Chadwick,  and  Mr.  Thomas  Salusbury. 
Then  did  neighbouring  counties  everywhere  asso- 
ciate for  the  mutual  assistance  of  each  other;  and 
the  parliament  commissioned  major-generals,  who 
commanded  in  chief,  and  gave  out  commissions 
to  the  several  commanders  of  the  regiments.  Not- 
tinghamshire was  put  into  the  association  with 
Leicestershire  and  other  counties,  whereof  Lord 
Grey  of  Grooby,  eldest  son  of  the  Earl  of  Stam- 
ford,  was  commander-in-chief,  and  from  him  the 


200        Memoirs  of  CoL  HtUchinson.        (i64«' 

gentlemen  of  Nottingham  took  their  first  commis- 
sions.^ 

The  high  sheriff  and  the  malignant  gentry,  find- 
ing an  opposition  they  expected  not,  wrote  a  letter 
to  Mr.  Francis  Pierrepont  and  Mr.  John  Hutchin« 
son,  excusing  the  sherifTs  force,  that  he  brought 
with  him,  and  desiring  a  meeting  with  them,  to 
consult  for  the  peace  of  the  country,  security  of 
their  estates,  and  such  like  fair  pretences ; '  which 
letter  was  civilly  answered  them  again,  and  the 
treaty  kept  on  foot  some  fourteen  days,  by  letters 
signed  by  the  Lord  Chaworth,  Sir  Thomas  William- 
son, Mr.  Sutton,  Sir  Gervase  Eyre,  Sir  John  Digby, 
Sir  Roger  Cooper,  Mr.  Palmer,  Mr.  John  Millington. 
At  length  a  meeting  was  appointed  at  a  village  in 
the  country,  on  the  forest  side,  where  Mr.  Sutton 
should  have  met  Mr.  John  Hutchinson.  Mr. 
Hutchinson  came  to  the  place,  but  found  not  Mr. 
Sutton  there,  only  the  Lord  Chaworth  came  in  and 
called  for  sack,  and  treated  Mr.  Hutchinson  very 
kindly;  when  Mr.  Hutchinson,  telling  my  lord  he 


^  The  ordinance  for  the  association  of  the  counties  of 
Northampton,  Leicester,  Derby,  Rutland,  Nottingham, 
Huntingdon,  Bedford,  and  Buckingham  is  given  in  Rush- 
worth,  Vol  III.  ii  119.     It  is  dated  January  16,  1643. 

*  The  correspondence  relative  to  the  proposed  treaty  of 
neutrality  for  Nottinghamshire  is  printed  in  the  appendix, 
from  the  copies  in  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  Note- Book  in  the 
British  Museum. 


164a.]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         201 

was  come  according  to  appointment,  to  conclude 
the  treaty  which  had  been  between  Nottingham 
and  Newark,  my  lord  told  him  he  knew  nothing  of 
it.  Whereupon,  Mr.  Hutchinson  being  informed 
that  some  of  my  Lord  Newcastle's  forces  were  to 
be  in  that  town  that  night,  and  that  Mr.  Sutton 
was  gone  to  meet  them,  and  conduct  them  into  the 
country,  returned  to  Nottingham,  where  he  received 
a  kind  of  lame  excuse  from  Mr.  Sutton  for  his  dis- 
appointing of  him,  and  for  their  bringing  strange 
soldiers  into  Newark,  which  they  pretended  was  to 
save  the  town  from  the  plunder  of  some  Lincoln- 
shire forces.  But  Mr.  Hutchinson,  seeing  all  their 
treaties  were  but  a  snare  for  him,  would  no  longer 
amuse  himself  about  them;  but  being  certainly 
informed  that  Henderson,  who  commanded  the 
soldiers  at  Newark,  if  he  were  not  himself  a  papist, 
had  many  Irish  papists  in  his  troops,  he,  with  the 
rest  of  the  gentlemen,  sent  notice  to  all  the  towns 
about  Nottingham,  desiring  the  well-affected  to 
come  in  to  their  assistance;  which  the  ministers 
pressing  them  to  do,  upon  Christmas-day,  1642, 
many  came  to  them,  and  stayed  with  them  till  they 
had  put  themselves  into  some  posture  of  defence.^ 

*  On  the  14th  of  December  the  corporation  of  Nottingham 
subscribed  ;£ioo,  and  the  members  of  the  committee  ;£3oo, 
for  the  payment  of  the  soldiers  then  in  the  town.  On  the 
1 8th  the  members  of  the  corporation,  in  company  with  ten 
other  gentlemen,  held  a  meeting  at  the  Guildhall,  when  it 


202        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [i64«- 

As  soon  as  these  strange  soldiers  were  come 
into  Newark,  they  presently  began  to  block  up  and 
fortify  the  town,  as  on  the  other  side,  they  at 
Nottingham  began  works  about  that  town ;  but 
neither  of  them  being  yet  strong  enough  to  assault 
each  other,  they  contented  themselves  to  stand 
upon  their  own  defence.  The  Earl  of  Chesterfield 
had  raised  some  horse  for  the  king,  and  was  in  the 
vale  of  Belvoir  with  them,  where  he  had  plundered 
some  houses  near  Mr.  Hutchinson's;  whereupon 
Mr.  Hutchinson  sent  a  troop  of  horse  in  the  night, 
for  they  were  not  strong  enough  to  march  in  the 

was  unanimously  agreed  to  invite  the  g^entlemen  of  the 
county  to  join  with  the  townspeople  for  the  defence  of  the 
town. — Bailey,  "  Annals  of  Notts,"  p.  973. 

The  troops  in  the  town  at  this  time  seem  to  have  been 
mainly  Derbyshire  men.  Cell's  ''True  Relation"  says, 
''Derbyshire  being  cleared.  Captain  White  went  to  Not- 
tingham Castle,  seized  upon  all  the  arms,  and  sent  to  Sir 
John  Cell  immediately  to  assist  him  with  some  foot,  where- 
upon he  sent  his  Major  Mollanus  with  three  hundred  foot, 
when  he  began  to  fortify  Nottingham,  and  set  them  in  a 
posture  of  defence,  and  assisted  Colonel  Pierrepont  to  make 
up  his  regiment  of  foot,  and  we  continued  there  some  nine 
or  ten  days."  After  their  departure  Sir  John  Henderson 
writes  from  Newark  on  January  5,  1643 :  "There  is  no  force 
at  all  in  Nottingham  except  Captain  White's,  who  has 
retired  to  the  castle  and  victualled  it.  They  have  cast 
three  pieces  of  ordinance  in  Nottingham  which  lie  as  yet 
in  the  town." — Sixth  Report  of  Hist.  MSS.  Commission, 
p.  I  (where  it  is  wrongly  dated  1644). 


164a-]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         203 

< 
day,  and  fetched   away  his  wife   and   children   to 

Nottingham. 

The  preservation   of  this   town   was   a   special 

service  to  the  parliament,  it  being  a  considerable 

pass  into  the  north,  which,  if  the  enemy  had  first 

possessed  themselves  of,  the  parliament  would  have 

been  cut  off  from  all  intercourse  between  the  north 

and  south ;  especially  in  the  winter  time,  when  the 

river  Trent  is  not  fordable,  and  only  to  be  passed 

over  by  the  bridges  of  Nottingham  and  Newark, 

and   up   higher  at   a  place  called   Wilden    Ferry, 

where    the    enemy    also    had    a    garrison.^     The 

attempting  to  preserve  this  place,  in  the  midst  of 

so  many  potent  enemies,  was  a  work  of  no  small 

difficulty;  and  nothing  but  an  invincible  courage, 

and  a  passionate  zeal  for  the  interest  of  God  and 

his  country,  could  have  engaged  Mr.   Hutchinson, 

who  did  not,  through  youthful  inconsideration  and 

improvidence,  want   a   foresight  of  those  dangers 

and  travails  he  then   undertook.      He   knew  well 

enough  that  the  town  was  more  than  half  disaffected 

to  the  parliament;  that  had  they  been  all  other- 

^  In  the  place  of  Wilden  Ferry  has  been  substituted  in 
modem  days  a  very  beautiful  bridge,  called  Cavendish 
Bridge,  with  a  good  and  firm  road  of  considerable  length  at 
each  end  to  approach  it ;  it  is  about  midway  on  the  high 
road  between  Loughborough  and  Derby.  There  is  near  to 
it  a  place  called  Sawley  Ferry,  little  used,  and  hardly  at 
all  practicable  in  winter. — J.  H. 


204        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [i64«- 

wise,  they  were  not  half  enough  to  defend  it 
against  any  unequal  force ;  that  they  were  far  from 
the  parliament  and  their  armies,  and  could  not 
expect  any  timely  relief  or  assistance  from  them ; 
that  he  himself  was  the  forlorn  hope  of  those  who 
were  engaged  with  him,  and  had  then  the  best 
stake  among  them ;  that  the  gentlemen  who  were 
on  horseback,  when  they  could  no  longer  defend 
their  country,  might  at  least  save  their  lives  by  a 
handsome  retreat  to  the  army ;  but  that  he  must 
stand  victorious,  or  fall,  tying  himself  to  an  inde- 
fensible town.  Although  his  colonel  might  seem 
to  be  in  the  same  hazard,  yet  he  was  wise  enough 
to  content  himself  with  the  name,  and  leave  Mr. 
Hutchinson  to  act  in  all  things,  the  glory  of 
which,  if  they  succeeded,  he  hoped  to  assume; 
if  they  failed,  he  thought  he  had  a  retreat.  But 
Mr.  Hutchinson,  though  he  knew  all  this,  yet  was 
he  so  well  persuaded  in  his  conscience  of  the  cause, 
and  of  God's  calling  him  to  undertake  the  defence 
of  it,  that  he  cast  by  all  other  considerations,  and 
cheerfully  resigned  up  his  life,  and  all  other  par- 
ticular interests,  to  God's  dispose,  though  in  all 
human  probability  he  was  more  like  to  lose  than 
to  save  them. 

He  and  his  brother  were  so  suddenly  called  into 
this  work,  that  they  had  not  time  beforehand  to 
consult  their  father  ;  but  they  sent  to  him  to  buy 
their  armour    and    useful    swords,   which   he  did. 


1643.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         205 

giving  them  no  discouragement,  but  promoting  all 
their  desires  to  the  parliament  very  effectually.^ 

By  reason  of  the  coldness  of  the  colonel,'  the 
affairs  of  the  war  at  Nottingham  went  on  more 
tardily  than  else  they  would  have  done ;  but  the 
gentlemen  there,  thinking  it  would  be  easier  to  pre- 
vent Newark  from  being  made  a  fortified  garrison, 
than  to  take  it  when  it  was  so,  sent  over  to  Lincoln 
and  Derby,  to  propound  the  business  to  them.'  At 
length,  about  Candlemas,  it  was  agreed  and  ap- 
pointed that  the  forces  of  Nottingham  and  Derby 
should  come  on  their  side  of  the  town,  and  those  of 
Lincoln  on  the  other.  All  the  disaffected  gentry 
of  both  those  countries,  were  at  that  time  gone  into 
Newark,  and  one  Ballard,  a  gentleman  who,  decayed 


^  The  reader  is  desired  to  bear  this  in  mind,  as  it  tends 
much  to  invalidate  the  credibility  of  an  assertion  made  by 
the  stepmother  of  these  gentlemen,  which  will  be  noticed  in 
its  proper  place.  It  is  said,  in  a  note  by  Julius  Hutchinson, 
Esq.,  that  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson  bought  his  two  sons 
armour,  though  he  knew  not  of  their  accepting  commissions 
against  the  king.  What  was  the  armour  for?  Was  it  to 
serve  the  king  against  the  parliament  ? — ^}.  H. 

'  f>.,  Colonel  Francis  Pierrepont. 

'  "  February  24th,  1643,  by  an  order  from  his  excellence 
the  late  Earl  of  Essex,  he  was  commanded  to  send  what 
strength  he  could  well  spare  under  the  command  of  Major- 
general  Ballard  against  Newark,  whereupon  he  sent  Major 
Mollanus  with  500  foot."—"  A  True  Relation  of  what  Service 
hath  been  done  by  Colonel  Sir  John  GelL" 


2o6        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1643- 

in  his  family,  and  owing  his  education  to  many  of 
them,  had  been  bred  up  in  the  wars  abroad,  was 
commander-in-chief  for  the  parliament  in  Lincoln- 
shire. Much  ado  had  the  gentlemen  of  that  county 
to  engage  him  in  the  design  against  Newark ;  but 
when  he  could  not  divert  them,  he  was  resolved  to 
cast  them  away  rather  than  ruin  his  old  benefactors. 
He  had  appointed  the  forces  of  Nottingham  and  Derby 
to  come  to  a  rendezvous  within  a  mile  of  Newark, 
upon  Saturday,  upon  which  day,  all  the  persuasion 
the  Lincolnshire  gentlemen  could  use,  could  not 
prevail  with  him  to  march  out,  according  to  appoint- 
ment ;  which  those  at  Newark  had  notice  of,  and 
had  prepared  an  ambuscade  to  have  cut  off  all  those 
forces  if  they  had  then  come  to  the  place ;  but  by 
providence  of  an  extraordinary  stormy  season, 
they  marched  not  till  the  next  day,  and  so  were 
preserved  from  that  danger,  which  no  doubt  was 
treacherously  contrived.  As  soon  as  they  came, 
being  about  a  thousand  horse,  foot,  and  dragoons, 
the  Lincolnshire  commanders  informed  ours  of  the 
sloth  and  untoward  carriage  of  Ballard,  and  told 
them  how  that  day  he  had  played  his  ordinance  at 
a  mile's  distance  from  the  town  ;  and  how,  when 
the  Newark  horse  came  out  to  face  them,  upon  the 
Beacon  Hill,  he  would  not  suffer  a  man  of  the 
Lincolnshire  troops  to  fall  upon  them,  though  the 
Lincoln  horse  were  many  more  in  number  than 
they,    and    in  all    probability  might    have    beaten 


1643.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         207 

them.^  The  next  day,  notwithstanding  Mr.  Hutchin- 
son went  to  him,  to  give  him  an  account  of  the  forces 
they  had  brought,  and  to  receive  orders,  he  could 
have  none,  but  a  careless  answer  to  stand  at  such  a 
Side  of  the  town  and  fall  on  as  they  saw  occasion. 
Accordingly  they  did,  and  beat  the  enemy  from  their 
works,  with  the  loss  of  only  four  or  five  men,  and 
entrenched  themselves  ;  the  night  coming  on  upon 
them,  they  provided  straw  to  have  lodged  in  their 
trenches  all  the  night.  On  the  other  side  of  the 
town,  Captain  King,  of  Lincolnshire,'  had  taken  a 
street,  cut  up  a  chain,  and  placed  a  drake'  in  a 
house;  whereupon    the    Newark    gentlemen   were 

1  Saturday  was  the  25th  of  February.  Ballard's  united 
forces  came  before  Newark  on  Monday,  February  27th. 
On  that  day,  says  the  royalist  account,  Henderson  having 
no  guns,  planted  his  cavalry  on  Beacon  Hill  to  delay  the 
advance  of  the  parliamentarians.  ''The  enemy  seeing  him 
so  planted,  advanced  upon  him  with  the  whole  body  of 
their  army,  and  still  as  they  came  forwards,  forced  him  to 
retire  by  the  advantage  of  their  cannon,  which  he  wanted ; 
till  at  length,  by  three  removes  he  drew  more  near  unto  his 
works,  and  so  at  last  unto  the  town." 

A  brief  relation  of  the  remarkable  occurrences  in  the 
northern  parts,  viz.,  the  landing  of  the  Queen's  Majesty  at 
Burlington  Bay,  and  the  repulse  given  unto  the  rebels  at 
the  town  of  Newark. 

'  Probably  the  Colonel  King  whose  quarrel  with  Lord 
Willoughby  is  recorded  in  the  Journals  of  the  House  of 
Lords  for  1644,  vol.  vi.,  pp.  528,  536,  543,  558. 

'  Drake,  a  piece  of  cannon  so  called. — J.  H. 


>o8        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643- 

ilmost  resolved  to  yield  up  the  town,  and  some  of 
hem  began  to  fly  out  of  it,  but  Ballard  would  not 
suffer  the  horse  to  pursue  them ;  only  one  captain 
went  out  without  his  leave  and  took  fifty  horses, 
and  turned  back  Mr.  Sutton  and  many  others  that 
were  flying  out  of  the  town.  At  length,  when  he 
:ould  no  other  way  preserve  his  old  patrons,  but  by 
oetraying  his  friends,  he  ordered  Captain  King  to 
retreat ;  whereupon  the  whole  force  of  Newark  fell 
jpon  the  forces  of  Nottingham  and  Derby,  in  their 
xenches,  where  they  fought  very  resolutely,  till  a 
Lincolnshire  trooper  came  and  bade  them  fly  for 
their  lives,  or  else  they  were  all  lost  men.^  At  this, 
two  hundred  Lincolnshire  men,  whom  Ballard  with 
much  entreaty  had  sent  to  relieve  them,  first  ran 
away,  and  then  Sir  John  Cell's  grey  coats  made 
their  retreat  after  them.  Major  Hutchinson  and 
Captain  White  all  this  while  kept  their  trenches, 

'  This  account  is  confirmed  by  Sir  John  Cell's  "True 
Relation,"  where  it  is  stated  that  Major  Mollanus,  being 
asked  on  his  return  bow  they  had  fared  at  Newark,  said, 
'*  That  he  readily  thought  they  were  betrayed  by  the  com- 
mander-in-chief, which  was  Major-general  Ballard,  for  that 
they  had  entered  the  town  and  mastered  the  works,  and 
then  commanded  back  by  the  said  Ballard,  without  doing 
anything  at  all,  and  so  returned  with  the  loss  of  some  men 
and  one  drake,  and  had  not  Nottingham  men  and  his  stood 
against  the  said  Ballard's  will,  closely  one  to  another,  they 
had  lost  all  their  ordnance,  which  they  fetched  off,  whether 
he  would  or  not." 


1643-1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        209 

and  commanded  their  Nottingham  men  not  to  stir, 
who  accordingly  shot  there,  till  all  their  powder  was 
spent.  The  lieutenant-colonel  in  vain  importuned 
Ballard  to  send  them  ammunition  and  relief,  but 
could  obtain  neither,  and  so  they  were  forced, 
unwillingly,  to  retreat,  which  they  did  in  such  good 
order,  the  men  first,  and  then  their  captains,  that 
they  lost  not  a  man  in  coming  off.  The  town  was 
sallying  upon  them,  but  they  discharged  a  drake 
and  beat  them  back.^  The  next  day  all  the 
captains  importuned  Ballard  that  they  might  fall 
on  again,  but  he  would  neither  consent  nor  give 
any  reason  of  his  denial ;  so  that  the  Nottingham 
forces  returned  with  great  dissatisfaction,  though 
Ballard,  to  stop  their  mouths,  gave  them  two  pieces 
of  ordnance.' 


^  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  Note-Book  gives  a  few  details. 
"  There  was  a  drake  planted  by  them  against  the  enemy, 
which  when  they  could  by  no  means  procure  any  horses  to 
draw  off,  a  dragooner  of  Nottingham  charged  with  a  double 
charge,  and  rammed  it  up  to  the  mouth  with  stones,  and 
discharged  it  upon  the  enemy  as  they  began  to  sally  forth, 
which  made  them  retreat  into  the  town." 

'  "  Mercurius  Aulicus  "  of  April  5th  mentions  that  the  com- 
mittee of  Nottingham  have  sent  two  gentlemen  to  complain 
of  Ballard  and  request  his  removal.  The  Journals  of  the 
House  of  Commons  show  that  this  deputation  appeared 
before  the  House  on  March  30th,  1643,  ^nd  their  complaints 
about  Ballard  were  then  referred  to  the  Committee  of  Safety. 
On  April  19th,  a  petition  from  the  Nottingham  Committee 

VOL.  I.  O 


2  lo        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1643- 

It  being  necessary  to  carry  on  the  main  story,  for 
the  better  understanding  the  motion  of  those  lesser 
wheels  that  moved  within  the  great  orb,  I  shall  now 
name  in  what  posture  things  were  abroad  in  the 
kingdom,  while  these  affairs  I  relate  were  trans- 
acted at  Nottingham.  After  the  retreat  from 
Brainford  fight,  a  treaty  was  ineffectually  carried 
on  between  the  king  and  parliament  from  the- 
31st  of  January,  1643,  to  the  17th  of  April,  1643; 
after  which  my  Lord  of  Essex  marched  to  Reading, 
where  the  king  had  a  garrison,  and  besieged  it. 
The  king's  horse  came  to  relieve  it,  and  had 
an  encounter  with  my  lord's  army,  wherein  many 
gentlemen  of  quality  fell  on  the  king's  side,  the  king 
himself  being  in  a  place  where  he  saw  them.  A 
few  days  after,  Reading  was  yielded  upon  composi- 
tion to  the  Earl  of  Essex,  whose  soldiers  having 
been  promised  their  pay  and  a  gratuity  to  spare  the 
plunder  of  the  town,  fell  into  a  mutiny  upon  the 
failing  of  the  performance,  and  many  of  them  dis- 
banded.^    Among  those  who  remained  there  was  a 


was  presented  by  Colonel  Hutchinson,  and  in  answer  to  it 
the  Committee  of  Safety  were  ordered  ^to  appoint  and 
despatch  away  a  commander-in-chief,  such  as  the  gentlemen 
of  Nottinghamshire,  upon  perusal  of  the  list  of  reformado 
officers  with  the  clerk  of  that  committee,  shall  make  choice 
of."  The  despatch  of  Sir  John  Meldrum  in  June  was  the 
result  of  this. 
^  Reading  was  taken  on  April   27th.     The  encounter 


1643.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         211 

great  mortality,  occasioned  by  the  infected  air  in 
the  town  of  Reading ;  insomuch  that  my  lord  was 
forced  to  return  and  quarter  his  sick  and  weak  army 
about  Kingston  and  those  towns  near  London. 
And  now  were  all  the  countries  in  England  no 
longer  idle  spectators,  but  several  stiiges,  whereon 
the  tragedy  of  the  civil  war  was  acted  ;  except  the 
eastern  association,  where  Mr.  Oliver  Cromwell,  by 
his  diligence,  prevented  the  designs  of  the  royal 
party ;  these  were  so  successful  the  first  year  in  all 
other  places,  and  the  parliament's  condition  appeared 
so  desperate,  as  many  of  the  members  of  both 
houses  ran  away  to  Oxford  to  the  king,  and  others 
sat  among  them  conspiring  against  them.  One  plot, 
conducted  by  Mr.  Waller,  and  carried  on  among 
many  disaffected  persons  in  the  city,  was  near  tak- 
ing effect,  to  the  utter  subversion  of  the  parliament 
and  people;  but  that  God,  by  his  providence,  brought 
it  timely  to  light,  and  the  authors  were  condemned, 
and  some  of  them  executed  ;  but  Waller,  for  being 
more  a  knave  than  the  rest,  and  peaching  his  accom- 
plices, was  permitted  to  buy  his  life  for  ten  thousand 

---   —  I  I        -  ' '  -  —      —  - 

referred  to  took  place  at  Caversham  Bridge  on  April  25th. 
May  thus  explains  the  mutiny,  "the  parliament,  before 
Reading  was  delivered  up,  had  approved  of  the  conditions 
and  promised  to  the  Lord- General's  soldiers,  to  forbear 
plundering,  twelve  shillings  a  man,  besides  their  pay.  But 
neither  of  those  were  then  performed." — "  History  of  the 
Long  Parliament,"  p.  279. 


2 1 2        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

pounds.  This  summer  all  the  west  was  reduced 
by  the  king,  the  Earl  of  Stamford  yielding  up 
Exeter,  and  Colonel  Fiennes  Bristol.  Sir  William 
Waller  had  lost  all  his  army,  which  had  been 
victorious  in  many  encounters.^  The  king  was  master 
of  all  or  moist  part  of  Wales,  and  the  parliament 
had  no  army  left  in  the  field,  so  that  had  he  taken 
the  opportunity  to  have  gone  immediately  to  London 
that  summer,  he  had  accomplished  his  design ;  but 
being  denied  the  town  of  Gloucester,  and  taking  it 
in  disdain,  that  that  town,  in  the  heart  of  the  land, 
should  make  a  resistance  when  the  greater  cities 
were  yielded  to  him,  he  stopped  his  course  to  take 
in  that  place,  where  he  stayed  to  turn  the  tide  of 
his  good  fortune,  as  his  general,  my  Lord  of  New- 
castle, did  at  the  siege  of  Hull.'     My  Lord  New- 


^  Waller^s  plot  was  detected  on  May  31st,  1643.  The 
battle  of  Roundway  Down,  in  which  Waller's  army  was 
"utterly  defeated,  scattered,  and  ruined,"  was  fought  on 
July  13th.  Bristol  was  taken  on  July  26th,  and  Exeter  on 
September  4th.  With  regard  to  the  resistance  of  Gloucester 
May  uses  an  expression  rather  similar  to  Mrs.  Hutchinson's, 
"the  king  was  full  of  indignation  that  such  a  forlorn  city 
should  stand  out  against  him." 

'  The  impolicy  of  this  measure  is  more  fully  noticed  and 
explained,  and  the  cause  of  it  set  down  by  Sir  Philip  War- 
wick, in  his  Memoirs,  p.  260.  "One  or  the  like  counsel  in 
both  quarters,  north  and  west,  soon  blasted  the  prosperity 
in  each  place,  for  the  king  pitched  upon  that  fatal  resolu- 
tion, recommended  to  him  by  Lord  Culpeper,  of  besieging 


1643.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         2 1 3 

castle  was  general  of  the  north,  and  master  of  all 
the  strong  places  to  the  very  borders  of  Scotland, 
and  formidable  to  all  the  neighbouring  counties. 
Only  the  Lord  Fairfax,  with  his  son  Sir  Thomas, 
headed  all  the  religious,  honest  Englishmen  they 
could  raise  in  those  parts,  and  with  a  far  inferior 
force,  kept  him  in  play,  and  in  several  skirmishes 


Gloucester,  thinking  it  a  good  policy  not  to  leave  a  strong 
town  behind  him  :  but  the  counsel  proved  fatal,  for  had  the 
king  at  that  time  resolved  in  himself  to  have  struck  at  the 
proud  head  of  London,  and  had  had  authority  enough  at 
that  time  to  have  required  the  Earl  of  Newcastle  to  have 
joined  with  him,  humanly  speaking,  he  had  raised  such 
confusion  among  the  two  houses  and  the  Londoners,  that 
they  had  either  sent  him  his  own  terms,  or  if  they  had 
fought  him,  most  probably  he  had  been  victorious.  But 
the  king  fixes  on  Gloucester  and  the  Earl  of  Newcastle 
upon  Hull,  upon  the  advice  of  his  Lieutenant-General,  King, 
who  was  suspected." 

A  few  pages  further,  he  reckons  among  the  king's  mis- 
fortunes the  Earl  of  Newcastle's  too  much  affecting  inde- 
pendency, which  may  serve  to  account  for  some  other 
matters  which  will  occur ;  but  it  is  here  natural  to  observe, 
that  the  king  having,  by  separating  himself  from  his  par- 
liament, lost  his  acknowledged  and  unquestionable  authority, 
he  retained  only  a  very  precarious  one  over  the  different 
chiefs  of  his  party :  which,  on  many  occasions,  turned  to 
the  disadvantage  of  his  cause.  After  all,  it  is  in  no  way 
certain  that  his  march  to  London  would  have  been  so 
effectual  and  so  little  opposed,  as  it  is  here  taken  for  granted 
it  would  have  been. — ^J.  H. 


2 1 4        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643- 

came  off  conquerors.^  But  as  the  fortune  of  the 
parliament  declined  in  other  places,  so  those  who 
had  not  principle  strong  enough  to  hold  them  fast  to 
a  just,  though  falling  cause,  sought  early  to  secure 
their  lives  by  treasons  which  destroyed  them.  The 
Earl  of  Newcastle's  army  was  judged  to  be  about 
eight  thousand,  horse  and  foot ;  my  Lord  Fairfax 
had  not  above  two  thousand  one  hundred  foot,  and 
seven  troops  of  horse.  After  this  there  was  a 
great  accession  of  strength  to  my  Lord  Newcastle, 
by  the  coming,  first  of  the  Lord  Groring,  with  many 
old  commanders ;  then  of  General  King,  with  six 
thousand  arms,  from  beyond  the  seas ;  then  of  the 
qu^en  herself,  who,  in  February,  1643,^  landed  near 
Sunderland,  coming  out  of  Holland,  with  large  pro- 
visions of  arms,  ammunition,  and  commanders  of 
note,  with  which  she  was  convoyed,  by  the  Earl  of 
Newcastle,  to  York;  and  thither  came  to  her  the  E^l 
of  Montrose,  out  of  Scotland,  with  a  hundred  and 
twenty  horse :  *  then  Sir  Hugh  Cholmly,  governor 

^  In  fact,  the  resistance  so  long  maintained,  and  fre- 
quently with  such  success,  by  Lord  Fairfax  and  his  sons, 
against  so  superior  a  force,  has  been  always  thought  next 
to  miraculous,  and  marked  out  Sir  Thomas  as  the  fittest 
man  in  the  kingdom  to  command  the  forces  and  fix  the 
fortunes  of  the  parhament.-^J.  H. 

*  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  figures  seem  to  be  derived  from 
May,  who  mentions  the  landing  of  Lord  Goring  with^aoo 
commanders  from  Holland,  that  of  General  King  with  6000 
arms,  and  the  coming  of  Montrose  with  120  horse.    The 


I64S-]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        215 

of  Scarborough,  revolted  from  the  parliament,  where- 
of he  wad  a  member,  and  came  to  the  queen,  with 
three  hundred  men.  Browne  Bushell  also,  who  was 
left  in  charge  with  the  town,  yielded  it  up.  Then 
had  the  queen's  practices  wrought  so  upon  the  two 
Hothams,  that  their  treason  was  not  altogether 
undiscemed;  but  my  Lord  Fairfax,  having  only 
strong  presumptions,  and  no  power  to  secure  them, 
while  they  had  the  strong  town  of  Hull  in  their 
hands,  it  was  all  he  could  do  was  to  be  vigilant  and 
silent,  till  God  should  give  opportunity  to  secure  that 
great  danger.  My  Lord  of  Newcastle  had  given 
the  papists  in  the  north  commissions  to  arm  in  the 
king's  defence,^  and  now  the  queen  was  preparing 

• 

queen  landed  at  Bridlington  on  February  22d,  but  Mrs. 
Hutchinson  follows  May  even  in  his  errors.  He  writes  'Mn 
the  same  month  also  the  queen  landing  from  Holland,  near 
to  Sunderland,  with  great  provision  of  arms  and  ammunition, 
and  many  commanders  of  note  in  her  retinue,''  &c. 

1  The  king  instructed  Newcastle  to  do  so  by  a  letter 
dated  September  23d,  1642. 

"  Newcastle,— This  is  to  tell  you  that  the  rebellion  is 
grown  to  that  height,  that  I  must  not  look  what  opinion 
men  are  who  at  this  time  are  willing  and  able  to  serve  me. 
Therefore  I  do  not  only  permit,  but  command  you,  to  make 
use  of  all  my  loving  subjects'  services,  without  examining 
their  consciences,  more  than  their  loyalty  to  us,  as  you 
shall  find  most  to  conduce  to  the  upholding  of  my  just 
regal  power.    So  I  rest  your  most  assured  faithful  friend, 

"  Charles  R." 
— Warburton's  **  Prince  Rupert,"  v.  317. 


2 1 6        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1643- 

to  march  up  with  the  assistance  she  had  gotten  to 
the  king.  Those  countries  through  which  she  was 
to  pass,  could  not  but  be  sensible  of  their  danger, 
especially  the  gentlemen  at  Nottingham,  who  were 
but  a  few  young  men,  environed  with  garrisons  of 
the  enemy,  and  scarcely  firm  among  themselves, 
and  hopeless  of  relief  from  above,  where  the  parlia- 
ment, struggling  for  life,  had  not  leisure  to  bind  up 
a  cut  finger.  But  God  was  with  them  in  these 
difficulties,  and  gave  an  unexpected  issue. 

The  Earl  of  Kingston  a  few  months  stood  neuter, 
and  would  not  declare  himself  for  either  party,  and 
being  a  man  of  great  wealth  and  dependencies,  many 
people  hung  in  suspense,  by  his  example ;  where- 
upon the  gentlemen  of  Nottingham  often  spoke  to 
his  son,  to  persuade  his  father  to  declare  himself; 
but  he  told  them,  he  knew  his  father's  affections 
were  firm  to  the  parliament,  that  he  had  encouraged 
him  to  join  with  them,  and  promised  him  money  to 
carry  it  on,  and  such  like  things,  which  he  continu- 
ally assured  them ;  till  the  colonel's  cold  behaviour, 
and  some  other  passages,  made  them  at  length, 
those  at  least  who  were  firm  to  the  cause,  jealous 
both  of  the  father  and  the  son.  Hereupon,  when 
the  danger  grew  more  imminent,  and  my  lord  lay 
out  a  brave  prey  to  the  enemy,  they  sent  Captain 
Lomax,  one  of  the  committee,  to  understand  his 
affections  from  himself,  and  to  press  him  to  declare 
for  the  parliament,   in  that  so  needful  a  season. 


1643-1       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        2 1 7 

My  lord,  professing  himself  to  him  as  rather  desirous 
of  peace,  and  fully  resolved  not  to  act  on  either 
side,  made  a  serious  imprecation  on  himself  in  these 
words :  "  When,"  said  he,  "  I  take  arms  with  the 
king  against  the  parliament,  or  with  the  parliament 
against  the  king,  let  a  cannon-bullet  divide  me  be- 
tween them ; "  which  Grod  was  pleased  to  bring  to 
pass  a  few  months  after ;  for  he,  going  to  Gains- 
borough, and  there  taking  up  arms  for  the  king, 
was  surprised  by  my  Lord  Willoughby,  and,  after 
a  handsome  defence  of  himself,  yielded,  and  was 
put  prisoner  into  a  pinnace,  and  sent  down  the 
river  to  Hull :  *  when  my  Lord  Newcastle's ,  army 
marching  along  the  shore,  shot  at  the  pinnace,  and 
being  in  danger,  the  Earl  of  Kingston  went  up  on 
the  deck  to  show  himself  and  to  prevail  with  them  ' 
to  forbear  shooting ; '  but  as  soon  as  he  appeared,  a 
cannon-bullet  flew  from  the  king's  army,  and  divided 
him  in  the  middle,  being  then  in  the  parliament's 
pinnace,  who  perished  according  to  his  own  unhappy 
imprecation.  His  declaring  himself  for  the  king,  as  it 
enforced  the  royal,  so  it  weakened  the  other  party. 

^  Gainsborough  was  taken  July  16,  1643.  The  Earl  of 
Kingston's  death  took  place  July  50th. 

*  This  is  a  most  singular  story,  and  no  doubt  peculiarly 
gratifying  to  a  fatalist  to  recite  ;  it  is  however  assuredly 
true,  being  mentioned  by  several  historians,  with  only  the 
difference  of  his  being  said  to  be  under,  instead  of  on,  the 
deck ;  the  latter  of  which  is  by  far  the  most  probable.— J.  H. 


2 1 8        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643- 

Sir  Richard  Byron  was  come  to  be  governor  of 
Newark.  A  house  of  my  Lord  Chaworth's  in  the 
vale  was  fortified,  and  some  horse  put  into  it,  and 
another  house  of  the  Earl  of  Chesterfield's,  both  of 
them  within  a  few  miles  of  Nottingham.^  Ashby 
de  la  Zouch,  within  eighteen  miles  of  Nottingham,  on 
the  other  side,  was  kept  by  Mr.  Hastings.  On  the 
forest  side  of  the  country,  the  Earl  of  Newcastle's 
house  had  a  garrison,  and  another  castle  of  his, 
within  a  mile,  was  garrisoned.  Sir  Roger  Cooper's 
house,  at  Thurgaton,  was  also  kept ;  so  that  Notting- 
ham, thus  beleaguered  with  enemies,  seemed  very 
unlikely  to  be  able  either  to  resist  the  enemy  or 
support  itself.'  Therefore  the  gentlemen,  upon 
the  news  of  my  Lord  Newcastle's  intended  approach 
that  way,  sent  up  Mr.  John  Hutchinson  to  acquaint 
the  parliament  with  their  condition;  who  so 
negotiated  their  business  that  he  procured  an  order 
for  Colonel  Cromwell,  Colonel  Hubbard,  my  Lord 
Grey,  and  Sir  John  Gell,  to  unite  their  forces,  and 
rendezvous  at  Nottingham,  to  prevent  the  queen 
from  joining  with  the  king,  and  to  guard  those 
parts  against   the  cavaliers.^     Accordingly,  in  the 

^  Wiverton  House  and  Shelford  Manor. — y  H. 

'  In  a  letter  to  the  king,  the  queen  writes  from  Newark 
that  '^all  the  force  the  parliament  had  in  those  parts  was 
only  one  thousand  men  in  Nottingham." — J.  H. 

'  Lieutenant-colonel  Hutchinson  presented  a  petition 
from  the  Nottingham  Committee  to  the  House  of  Commons 


"643-1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        219 

Whitsun  holidays,  1643,  they  all  came,  and  the 
younger  Hotham  also  brought  some  more  rude 
troops  out  of  Yorkshire,  and  joined  himself  to  them.^ 
The  forces  now  united  at  Nottingham  were  about 
five  or  six  thousand,  my  Lord  Grey  being  their 
commander-in-chief.  Upon  the  urgency  of  the 
gentlemen  at  Nottingham,  he  drew  them  out 
against  Wiverton-house  in  the  vale,  but,  upon  a 
groundless  apprehension,  quitted  it,  when  they 
might  in  all  probability  have  taken  it,  and  retreated 
to  Nottingham,  where,  two  or  three  days  after,  the 
enemy's  horse  faced  them  ;  but  they  would  not  be 
prevailed  upon  to  go  out,  though  they  were  not 
inferior  to  them.  Young  Hotham,  at  that  time, 
carried  on  a  private  treaty  with  the  queen,  and 
every  day  received  sind  sent  trumpets,  of  which  he 
would  give  no  account.  Then  was  Nottingham 
more    sadly  distressed    by   their   friends   than    by 


on  April  19,  1643.  The  House  ordered  ''that  Mr.  Milling- 
ton  do  prepare  a  letter  to  be  sent  to  the  Lord  Grey,  the 
son  of  the  Earl  of  Stamford  ;  to  Sir  John  Gell,  and  to  the 
committee  of  Lincoln  respectively,  to  desire  them  to  send 
what  aid  and  assistance  they  can  to  the  town  of  Nottingham, 
the  House  having  a  special  regard  of  that  place,  as  a  place 
of  great  importance  to  be  preserved."  On  April  28th  the 
House  approved  the  draft  of  a  letter  to  be  sent  to  the  Lord- 
general  to  take  special  care  for  the  preservation  of  Notting- 
ham. See  Appendix. 
^  See  note  on  the  rendezvous  at  Nottingham  in  Appendix. 


220        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1643. 

their  enemies;  for  Hotham's  and  Cell's  men  not 
only  lay  upon  free  quarter,  as  all  the  rest  did,  but 
made  such  a  havoc  and  plunder  of  friend  and  foe, 
that  it  was  a  sad  thing  for  any  one  that  had  a 
generous  heart  to  behold  it.  When  the  committee 
offered  Hotham  to  assign  him  quarters  for  his  men, 
because  they  were  better  acquainted  with  the 
country,  he  would  tell  them  he  was  no  stranger  in 
any  English  ground.  He  had  a  great  deal  of 
wicked  wit,  and  would  make  sport  with  the  miseries 
of  the  poor  country;  and,  having  treason  in  his 
heart,  licensed  his  soldiers,  which  were  the  scum  of 
mankind,  to  all  the  villanies  in  the  country  that 
might  make  their  party  odious.  Mr.  Hutchinson 
was  much  vexed  to  see  the  country  wasted,  and  that 
little  part  of  it,  which  they  could  only  hope  to  have 
contribution  from,  eaten  up  by  a  company  of  men 
who,  instead  of  relieving  them,  devoured  them ;  and 
Hotham's  soldiers,  having  taken  away  goods  from 
some  honest  men,  he  went  to  him  to  desire  restitu- 
tion of  them,  and  that  he  would  restrain  his  soldiers 
from  plunder ;  whereupon  Hotham  replied,  "  he 
fought  for  liberty,  and  expected  it  in  all  things." 
Replies  followed,  and  they  grew  to  high  language ; 
Hotham  bidding  him,  if  he  found  himself  grieved,  to 
complain  to  the  parliament.  Mr.  Hutchinson  was 
passionately  concerned,  and  this  being  in  the  open 
field,  Colonel  Cromwell,  who  had  likewise  had 
great  provocations  from  him,  began  to  show  him- 


«643.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        221 

self  affected  with  the  country's  injuries,  and  the  idle 
waste  of  such  a  considerable  force,  through  the 
inexperience  of  the  chief  commander,  and  the  dis- 
obedience and  irregularities  of  the  others.  So  they, 
at  that  time,  being  equally  zealous  for  the  public 
service,  advised  together  to  seek  a  remedy,  and 
despatched  away  a  post  to  London,  who  had  no 
greater  joy  in  the  world  than  such  employments  as 
tended  to  the  displacing  of  great  persons,  whether 
they  deserved  it  or  not ;  *  him  they  sent  away 
immediately  from  the  place,  to  inform  the  parlia- 
ment of  Hotham's  carriages,  and  the  strong  pre- 
sumptions they  had  of  his  treachery,  and  the  ill 
management  of  their  forces.  This  they  two  did, 
without  the  privity  of  any  of  the  other  gentlemen 
or  commanders;  some  of  whom  were  little  less 
suspected  themselves,  and  others,  as  my  Lord 
Grey,  through  credulous  good  nature,  a  too  great 
favourer  of  Hotham.  The  messenger  was  very 
diligent  in  his  charge,  and  returned,  as  soon  as  it 
was  possible,  with  a  commitment  of  Hotham ;  who 
accordingly  was  then  made  prisoner  in  Nottingham 
Castle,  and  Sir  John  Meldrum  was  sent  down  to 
be  commander-in-chief  of  all  those  united  forces. 
When  they  marched   away,  a  troop  of  my   Lord 


^  The  messenger  was   Captain  White,  whose  name  is 
given  in  the  Note-Book. 


222        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       [1633. 

Grey's,  having  the  charge  of  guarding  Hotham 
towards  London,  suffered  him  to  escape,  and  thereby 
put  the  town  of  Hull  into  a  great  hazard ;  but  that 
the  father  and  son  were  there  unexpectedly  surprised, 
sent  up  prisoners  to  London,  and  after  some  time 
executed.  Those  who  knew  the  opinion  Cromwell 
afterwards  had  of  Mr.  Hutchinson,  believed  he 
registered  this  business  in  his  mind  as  long  as  he 
lived,  and  made  it  his  care  to  prevent  him  from 
being  in  any  power  or  capacity  to  pursue  him  to 
the  same  punishment,  when  he  deserved  it;  but 
from  that  time,  growing  into  more  intimate  acquaint- 
ance with  him,  he  always  used  to  profess  the  most 
hearty  affections  for  him,  and  the  greatest  delight 
in  his  plainness  and  open-heartedness  that  was 
imaginable. 

As  soon  as  Sir  John  Meldrum  came  down  to  his 
charge  at  Nottingham,  the  queen's  forces  came  and 
faced  the  town ;  whereupon  the  cannon  discharging 
upon  them,  the  Duke  of  Vendome's  son  and  some 
few  others  were  slain.^  The  parliament  horse  drew 
out  of  Nottingham  to  receive  the  queen's,  but  they 
came  not  on,  after  this  execution  of  the  cannon,  for 
in  the  meantime  the  queen  was  passing  by,  and 
although  the  parliament  horse  pursued  them,  yet 
they  would  not  engage,  for  it  was  not  their  busi- 


^  Vendome,  as  I  have  explained  in  the  Appendix,  is  pro- 
bably a  mistake  for  Von  Dohna. 


1643- ]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         223 

ness ;  so  when  they  saw  they  had  lost  their  design, 
the  horse  returned  again  to  Nottingham,  where  the 
foot  had  stayed  all  the  while  they  were  out.  When 
the  Earl  of  Kingston  declared  himself  for  the  king, 
he  raised  what  forces  he  could,  and  went  into  Gains- 
borough, a  town  in  Lincolnshire,  situated  upon  the 
river  Trent.  There,  before  he  was  fortified,  my 
Lord  Willoughby,  of  Parham,  surprised  the  town 
and  all  his  soldiers,  who  disputed  it  as  long  as  they 
could,  but  being  conquered,  were  forced  to  yield ; 
and  the  earl  himself  retreated  into  the  strongest 
house,  which  he  kept  till  it  was  all  on  flame  round 
him,  and  then  giving  himself  up  only  to  my  Lord 
Willoughby,  he  was  immediately  sent  prisoner  to 
Hull,  and  shot  according  to  his  own  imprecation. 
Immediately  part  of  my  Lord  Newcastle's  army, 
with  all  that  Newark  could  make,  besieged  my  Lord 
Willoughby  in  Gainsborough ;  and  General  Essex 
sent  a  command  to  Sir  John  Meldrum  to  draw  all 
the  horse  and  foot  he  could  out  of  Nottingham,  to 
relieve  my  lord,  leaving  only  a  garrison  in  the 
castle  of  Nottingham.  Sir  John  Meldrum  called  the 
committee  of  Nottingham  together,  to  consult  what 
was  to  be  done  for  the  settlement  of  the  place, 
which  upon  deliberation  he  had  judged  not  fit  to 
leave  in  the  hands  it  was,  nor  in  Colonel  Pierre- 
pont's,  who,  with  some  appearance,  lay  under 
suspicion  at  that  time;  and  therefore  conceiving 
Mr.  Hutchinson  the  most  able  to  manage,  and  the 


224        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchuisan.       [1643- 

most  responsible  for  it/  both  Sir  John  and  the 
whole  committee  ordered  him  to  take  the  castle 
into  his  charge;  which,  though  there  were  many 
causes  why  he  should  decline,  yet  believing  that 
God  hereby  called  him  to  the  defence  of  his 
country,  and  would  protect  him  in  all  the  dangers 
and  difficulties  he  led  him  into,  he  accepted  it, 
and  on  the  29th  June,  1643,  received  an  order 
for  that  government  from  Sir  John  Meldrum  and 
the  whole  committee.  Whereunto  Col.  Pierrepont 
subscribed,  though  with  a  secret  discontent  in 
his  heart ;  not  from  any  ill  opinion  or  ill  affection 
he  had  to  Mr.  Hutchinson's  person,  but  for  that 
he  resented  it  as  a  great  affiront  that  himself 
was  passed  by.  It  is  true  that  this  discontent 
produced  some  envious  and  malicious  practices, 
secretly  in  him,  against  Mr.  Hutchinson,  who 
however  in  the  end  overcame  him,  with  so  many 
good  offices,  in  requital  of  his  bad  ones,  that  he 
lived  and  died  full  of  love,  and  acknowledgment  of 
kindness  to  him. 

The  castle  was  built  upon  a  rock,  and  nature 
had  made  it  capable  of  very  strong  fortification, 
but  the  buildings  were  very  ruinous  and  uninhabit- 
able, neither  affording  room  to  lodge  soldiers  nor 

^  The  Note-Book  gives  this  further  explanation  of  respon- 
sible. *' Captain  Lomax,  that  was  in  the  castle,  though 
esteemed  a  very  honest  man,  yet  Sir  John  Meldrum  said 
his  estate  in  the  county  was  not  responsible  for  it." 


1643.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         225 

provisions.  The  castle  stands  at  one  end  of  the 
town,  upon  such  an  eminence  as  commands  the 
chief  streets  of  the  town.  There  had  been  enlarge- 
ments made  to  this  castle  after  the  first  building 
of  it.  There  was  a  strong  tower,  which  they 
called  the  old  tower,  built  upon  the  top  of  all  the 
rock,  and  this  was  that  place  where  Queen  Isabel, 
the  mother  of  King  Edward  the  Third,  was  sur- 
prised with  her  paramour  Mortimer,  who,  by  secret 
windings  and  hollows  in  the  rock,  came  up  into  her 
chamber  from  the  meadows  lying  low  under  it, 
through  which  there  ran  a  little  rivulet,  called  the 
Line,  almost  under  the  castle  rock.  At  the  en- 
trance of  this  rock  there  was  a  spring,  which  was 
called  Mortimer's  Well,  and  the  cavern  Mortimer's 
Hole.  The  ascent  to  the  top  is  very  high,  and 
not  without  some  wonder  that  at  the  top  of  all 
the  rock  there  is  a  spring  of  water.  In  the 
midway  to  the  top  of  this  tower  there  is  a  little 
piece  of  the  rock,  on  which  a  dove-coat  had  been 
built,  but  the  governor  took  down  the  roof  of  it, 
and  made  it  a  platform  for  two  or  three  pieces  of 
ordnance,  which  commanded  some  streets  and  all 
the  meadows  better  than  the  higher  tower.  Under 
that  tower,  which  was  the  old  castle,  there  was  a 
larger  castle,  where  there  had  been  several  towers 
and  many  noble  rooms,  but  the  most  of  them  were 
down;  the  yard  of  that  was  pretty  large,  and  without 
the  gate  there  was  a  very  large  yard  that  had  been 

VOL,   L  p 


2  26        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        [1643- 

walled,  but  the  walls  were  all  down,  only  it  was  situ- 
ated upon  an  ascent  of  the  rock,  and  so  stood  a  pretty 
height  above  the  streets ;  and  there  were  the  ruins 
of  an  old  pair  of  gates,  with  turrets  on  each  side. 

Before  the  castle,  the  town  was  on  one  side  of  a 
close,  which  commanded  the  fields  approaching  the 
town ;  which  close  the  governor  afterwards  made 
a  platform.  Behind  it  was  a  place  called  the  Park, 
that  belonged  to  the  castle,  but  then  had  neither 
deer  nor  trees  in  it,  except  one  tree,  growing  under 
the  castle,  which  was  almost  a  prodigy,  for  from 
the  root  to  the  top,  there  was  not  a  straight  twig 
or  branch  in  it ;  some  said  it  was  planted  by  King 
Richard  the  Third,  and  resembled  him  that  set  it. 
On  the  other  side  the  castle,  was  the  little  river  of 
Line,  and  beyond  that,  large  flat  meadows,  bounded 
by  the  river  Trent.  In  the  whole  rock  there  were 
many  large  caverns,  where  a  great  magazine  and 
many  hundred  soldiers  might  have  been  disposed,  if 
they  had  been  cleansed  and  prepared  for  it,  and  might 
have  been  kept  secure  from  any  danger  of  firing 
the  magazines  by  any  mortar-pieces  shot  against  the 
castle.  In  one  of  these  places,  it  is  reported,  that  one 
David,  a  Scotch  king,  was  kept  in  cruel  durance,  and 
with  his  nails  had  scratched  on  the  wall  the  story 
of  Christ  and  his  twelve  apostles.  The  castle  was 
not  flankered,^  and  there  were  no  works  about  it, 

^  Flankered,  f>.,  there  were  no  flanking  works  or  outworks. 


1643- ]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         227 

when  Mr.  Hutchinson  undertook  it,  but  only  a 
little  breastwork,  before  the  outermost  gate.  It 
was  as  ill  provided  as  fortified,  there  being  but  ten 
barrels  of  powder,  eleven  hundred  and  fifty  pounds 
of  butter,  and  as  much  cheese,  eleven  quarters  of 
bread  com,  seven  beeves,  two  hundred  and  fourteen 
flitches  of  bacon,  five  hundred  and  sixty  fishes,  and 
fifteen  hogsheads  of  beer.  As  soon  as  the  governor 
received  his  charge,  he  made'  proclamation  in  the 
town,  that  whatsoever  honest  persons  desired  to 
secure  themselves  or  their  goods  in  the  castle, 
should  have  reception  there,  if  they  would  repair 
their  quarters ;  which  divers  well-affected  men 
accepting,  it  was  presently  made  capable  of  receiv- 
ing 400  men  commodiously. 

In  the  beginning  of  July,  1643,  Sir  John 
Meldrum,  with  all  the  force  that  was  quartered  in 
Nottingham,  marched  forth  to  the  relief  of  Gains- 
borough, leaving  the  town  to  be  guarded  by  few 
more  than  the  very  townsmen.^     There  had  been 


^  Meldrum  had  already  made  one  brief  expedition  from 
Nottingham  to  join  Gell  in  besieging  Tulbury ;  immediately 
on  his  return  he  was  summoned  to  relieve  Gainsborough. 
"So  soon  as  Sir  John  Meldrum  came  to  Nottingham,  he 
drew  out  all  the  forces  then  in  the  town,  excepting  some 
four  hundred,  which  he  left  in  the  castle  with  Colonel 
Hutchinson,  and  marched  southwards  towards  Peterborough; 
but  Nottingham  townsmen  sent  forward  to  Colonel  Gell  to 
assist  them,  while  they  were  removing  their  goods  into  the 


228        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1643. 

large  works  made  about  it,  which  would  have 
required  at  least  three  thousand  men  to  man  and 
defend  well,  and  upon  these  works  there  were 
about  fourteen  guns,  which  the  governor,  when 
the  forces  were  marching  away,  before  they  went, 
drew  up  to  the  castle ;  whereupon  the  townsmen, 
especially  those  that  were  ill-affected  to  the  parlia- 
ment, made  a  great  mutiny,  threatening  they  would 
pull  the  castle  down,  but  they  would  have  their 
ordnance  again  upon  their  works,  and  wishing  it 
on  fire  and  not  one  stone  upon  another.  Here- 
upon the  governor  sent  Alderman  Drury,  with 
fourteen  more,  that  were  heads  of  this  mutiny, 
prisoners  to  Derby,  whither  Major  Ireton  convoyed 
them  with  his  troop.  The'  reasons  which  made 
the  governor  carry  the  ordnance  from  the  town- 
works  up  into  the  castle  were,  1st  That  the 
town,  being  so  ill  affected,  the  ordnance  remaining 
in  it,  would  but  be  an  invitation  to  the  enemy  to 
come  to  take  them  away,  and  a  booty  for  them  if 
they  should.  2ndly.  He  had  often  visited  the 
guards,  and  found  them   much  exposed   by  their 

castle,  for  they  were  left  in  a  most  miserable  condition :  he 
presently  made  ready  three  hundred  dragoons  and  sent 
thither  his  said  Major  Mollanus,  to  continue  there  till  they 
had  removed  their  goods  into  the  castle,  and  left  the  town 
desolate,  but  some  few  of  the  townsmen  within." — GelPs 
*'True  Relation,"  Glover's  Derbyshire,  vol.  i.  Appendix, 
p.  64. 


1643-1       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         229 

cardessness,  wherefore  he  thought  it  his  duty  to 
preserve  them,  by  soldiers  more  under  his  com- 
mand. 3rdly.  Intelligence  was  brought  to  the 
committee,  by  a  friend,  then  with  the  Earl  of 
Newcastle,  that  Mr.  Francis  Pierrepont  kept  intelli- 
gence with  his  mother,  the  Countess  of  Kingston, 
carrying  on  a  design  for  betraying  the  town  to 
the  earl ;  and  that  letters  were  carried  between 
them  by  a  woman,  who  often  came  to  town  to  the 
colonel ;  and  that  two  aldermen  and  a  chief  officer, 
employed  about  the  ordnance,  were  confederates  in 
the  plot;  whereupon  a  suspected  cannonier  was 
secured,  who,  as  soon  as  he  obtained  his  liberty, 
ran  away  to  Newark.  4thly.  When  the  town  was 
full  of  troops,  there  had  been  several  attempts  to 
poison  and  betray  them,  which,  if  it  should  be 
again  attempted,  after  the  most  of  the  forces  were 
gone,  might  prove  effectual.  Sthly.  The  main 
reason  was,  that  if  the  town  should  be  surprised 
'or  betrayed  (which  was  then  most  to  be  feared), 
the  ordnance  would  be  useless;  if  any  consider- 
able force  came  against  the  town,  it  was  impossible 
then  to  keep  the  works  against  them,  with  so  few 
men,  and  it  would  be  difficult,  at  such  a  time,  to 
draw  off  the  artillery ;  if  any  force  they  were  able 
to  deal  with  came,  it  would  then  be  time  enough, 
after  the  alarm  was  given, .  to  draw  them  to  the 
works,  unless  they  were  surprised. 

It    was    not    only    the    town    malignants    that 


230        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       [1643- 

murmured  at  the  drawing  up  of  the  ordnance, 
but  Dr.  Plumptre,  hearing  that  the  forces  were 
to  march  away,  was  raging  at  it ;  whereupon 
being  answered,  that  it  was  more  for  the  public 
interest  of  the  cause,  in  great  passion  he  replied, 
"  What  is  the  cause  to  me  if  my  goods  be 
lost?"  The  governor  told  him,  he  might  pre- 
vent that  hazard  and  secure  them  in  the  castle. 
He  replied,  "  It  pitied  Kim  to  soil  them,  and  he  had 
rather  the  enemy  had  them,  than  they  should  be 
spoiled  in  removing."  While  this  was  boiling 
upon  his  spirit,  he  met  the  governor,  with  some 
other  gentlemen,  in  the  street,  and  began  to  rail 
at  him  for  countenancing  the  godly  townsmen, 
whom  he  called  a  company  of  puritanical  prick- 
eared  rascals,  and  said,  that  the  worst  of  the 
malignants  the  governor  had  sent  out  of  the 
town,  were  honester  men  than  the  best  of  those 
he  favoured;  and  in  spite  of  his  teeth  he  would 
have  three  of  the  most  eminent  of  them  turned 
out  of  the  castle.  The  governor  telling  him, 
he  would  maintain  them  as  the  most  faithful 
friends  to  the  cause,  Plumptre  replied  he  was 
as  honest  to  the  cause  as  the  governor.  "No," 
said  the  governor  (who  was  not  ignorant  of  his 
atheism),  ''that  you  cannot  be,  for  you  go  not 
upon  the  same  principles."  The  doctor  told  him, 
it  was  false,  with  such  uncivil  insolence,  that  the 
governor  struck  him,  at  which  he  departed  quietly 


1643-1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         231 

home;  and  after  two  or  three  days,  retired  with  his 
wife  and  children  to  the  house  of  Mr.  Parkyns  of 
Bunney,  who  was  at  that  time  in  arms  against  the 
parliament,  where  he  stayed  till  the  parliament- 
forces  were  routed,  and  Nottingham  castle  sum- 
moned and  preparing  for  a  siege ;  and  then  he  sent 
a  ridiculous  challenge  to  the  governor,  with  all  the 
foolish  circumstances  imaginable,  which  the  governor, 
at  that  present,  only  answered  with  contempt.  The 
pretence  he  made  was  a  distress,  wherein  the  com- 
mittee had  employed  some  of  the  governor's  soldiers, 
for  the  levying  of  an  assessment,  which  his  brother 
would  not  pay,  and  this  distress  he  called  the 
governor's  affront  to  his  family.*     Though  these 


^  The  cause  of  the  challenge  is  explained  more  in  detail 
in  the  Note-Book.  ''About  the  beginning  of  September, 
there  came  a  base,  insolent  challenge  to  the  governor  from 
Dr.  Plumptre,  which  he  neglected  and  gave  no  answer  to 
at  that  time.  The  occasion  that  stirred  his  chole^  into  such 
a  rage  was  this.  Mr.  N  icholas  Plumptre,  the  doctor's  brother, 
had  a  long  time  before  been  assessed  by  the  committee, 
and  they  having  great  occasion  of  money  sent  to  him  for 
it,  which  he  having  with  delays  from  day  to  day  put  off, 
they  sent  some  of  the  governor's  own  soldiers  with  a  cart 
to  distrain  for  it,  which  the'  governor  knew  not  of,  but  when 
the  goods  were  in  the  cart,  Dr.  Plumptre's  sister  came  and 
compounded,  so  that  they  were  not  brought  up.  This  Dr. 
Plumptre  in  his  challenge  termed  an  affront  from  the 
governor,  to  whom  he  allowed  not  the  style  of  a  gentleman, 
an  affront  to  his  family.^^ai  b. 


232        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       [i&is- 

passages  may  seem  too  impertinent  here,  yet  they 
having  been  grounds  and  beginnings  of  injurious 
prosecutions,  wherewith  the  governor  was  after- 
wards much  exercised,  it  was  not  altogether  un- 
necessary  to  insert  them ;  since  even  these  little 
things  were  links  in  the  chain  of  providences  which 
measured  out  his  life. 

All  the  horse  that  had  been  raised  in  Notting- 
hamshire, marched  away  with  Sir  John  Meldrum, 
which  were  Colonel  Thomhagh,  Major  Ireton, 
Captain  White,  and  Captain  Farmer's  troops ;  who, 
together  with  Captain  Lomax  and  Captain  Schrimp- 
shire's  foot  companies,  joining  with  Colonel  Crom- 
well's men,  marched  to  Gainsborough,  and  engaged 
those  that  besieged  it,  and  were  victorious,  killing 
their  general.  Sir  Charles  Cavendish,  with  many 
more  commanders,  and  some  hundreds  of  soldiers ;  ^ 
and  this  was  opportunely  done,  while  my  Lord  New- 


^  Cromwell  writes,  '*  I  marched  after  the  taking  of 
Burleigh  House  upon  Wednesday  to  Grantham,  where  I 
met  about  three  hundred  horse  and  dragooners  from  Not- 
tingham ;  with  these  by  agreement  we  met  the  Lincolners 
at  North  Scarle,  which  is  about  ten  miles  from  Gains- 
borough, upon  Thursday,  in  the  evening." 

The  battle  took  place  on  Friday,  July  28th,  1643.  ''The 
Lincoln  troops  had  the  van,  two  Northampton  and  three 
small  troops  of  Nottingham  the  battle,  and  Colonel  Crom- 
well the  rear."— Carlyle's  **  Cromwell : "  Cromwell's  Twelfth 
Letter,  and  letter  in  Appendix  V. 


I643-]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         233 

castle  was  hastening  to  come  over  the  water  and 
join  them,  who,  by  a  bridge  of  boats,  passed  all 
his  army  over,  and  came  near  Gainsborough,  just  in 
a  season  to  behold  the  rout  of  all  his  men.  The 
parliament's  forces  expected  he  would  have  fallen 
upon  them,  and  drew  up  in  a  body  and  faced  him, 
but  he  advanced  not ;  so  they  contented  themselves 
to  relieve  Gainsborough,  and  made  a  very  honour- 
able retreat  to  Lincoln ;  but  Gainsborough  not  being 
fortified,  nor  provided,  this  relief  did  not  much 
advantage  them,  for  my  Lord  Newcastle  again 
besieged  it,  which  was  rendered  to  him,  after  eight 
days,  upon  Conditions  honourable  for  the  defendants, 
though  they  were  not  performed  by  the  besiegers ; 
for  all  my  Lord  Willoughby's  men  were  disarmed 
contrary  to  articles,^  and  with  them,  some  of  the 
Nottingham  soldiers  that  had  gone  into  the  town  to 
refresh  themselves,  and  so  were  shut  up  with  them, 
when  my  lord  laid  siege  to  it ;  the  rest  had  gone  to 
Lincoln.  They  had  behaved  themselves  very  well 
in  the  fight,  when  Captain  White  received  a  wound 
in  his  hand  in  the  forlorn  hope ;  Colonel  Thornhagh, 
who  had  fought  very  gallantly,  was  taken  prisoner, 
and  after  he  was  stripped  of  his  arms  and  coat,  a 
major  of  the  enemy's,  whom  the  colonel  had  slightly 
wounded  in  the  fervour  of  the  light,  came  and 
basely  wounded   the  colonel,   being   disarmed,   so 

^  Particularly  noticed  by  Whitelock. 


234        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       I1643. 

that  he  left  him  for  dead.  But  by  the  good 
providence  of  God,  that  wound,  by  which  the  enemy 
intended  to  give  him  death,  gave  him  liberty ;  for 
coming  to  himself  a  little  after  his  hurt,  he  crept 
into  one  of  his  own  tenant's  houses,  and  there  had 
his  wounds  bound  up,  and  found  means  to  get  to 
Lincoln,  from  whence  all  the  forces  that  went  from 
Nottingham  dispersed  into  different  services.  Major 
Ireton  quite  left  Colonel  Thomhagh's  regiment,  and 
began  an  inseparable  league  with  Colonel  Crom- 
well, whose  son-in-law  he  after  was.^  None  of 
them  could  return  to  Nottingham,  by  reason  of  my 
Lord  Newcastle's  army,  which  lay  between  them 
and  home. 

And  now  it  was  time  for  them  at  Nottingham  to 
expect  my  Lord  Newcastle,  which  the  governor 
made  provision  for  with  all  the  diligence  that  it  was 
possible  under  so  many  difficulties  and  obstacles, 
which  would  to  any  one  else  have  been  discourage- 
ments ;  but  he  had  so  high  a  resolution  that  nothing 
conquered  it  The  townsmen,  through  discontent 
at  the  drawing  out  of  the  forces,  whereby  their 
houses,  families,  and  estates  were  exposed,  began 
to  enyy,  then  to  hate  the  castle,  as  grieved  that 
anything  should  be  preserved  when  all  could  not ; 
and  indeed  those  who  were  more  concerned  in 
private  interests  than  in  the  cause  itself,  had  some 

*  Ireton  married  Bridget  Cromwell  on  June  15,  1646. 


1643-1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        235 

reason,  because  the  neighbourhood  of  the  castle, 
when  it  was  too  weak  to  defend  them,  would 
endanger  them.  In  this  hate  and  discontent,  all 
the  soldiers  being  townsmen,  except  some  of  the 
governor's  own  company,  they  resolved  they  would 
not  go  into  the  castle  to  behold  the  ruin  of  their 
houses ;  little  considering  that  when  the  governor 
first  came  into  Nottingham  to  defend  them,  at  their 
earnest  desire,  he  left  a  house  and  a  considerable 
estate  to  the  mercy  of  the  enemy,  rather  desiring  to 
advance  the  cause  than  to  secure  his  own  stake ; 
but  their  mean  and  half-affected  hearts  were  not 
capable  of  such  things.  The  governor,  perceiving 
this  defection,  set  some  of  the  most  zealous  honest 
men  to  find  out  how  many  there  were  in  the  town 
who,  neglecting  all  private  interests,  would  cheer- 
fully and  freely  come  in  and  venture  all  with  him ; 
intending,  if  he  could  not  have  found  enough  to 
defend  the  place,  that  he  would  have  sent  to  other 
neighbouring  garrisons  to  have  borrowed  some. 
Upon  this  inquiry,  it  was  found  that  many  of 
Colonel  Pierrepont's  own  company  were  desirous  to 
come  in,  but  first  wished  to  know  their  colonel's 
resolution  as  to  how  he  would  dispose  of  them ; 
whereupon  a  hall  was  called,  and  the  danger  of  the 
place  declared  to  the  whole  town,  that  they  might 
have  time  to  provide  for  their  goods  and  persons 
before  the  enemy  came  upon  them.  The  colonel 
being  present,   his   company  asked   him  what   he 


236        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

would  advise  them  to  do;  to  whom  his  answer 
was,  "You  have  but  three  ways  to  choose,  either 
leave  the  town  and  secure  yourselves  in  some 
other  parliament-garrisons,  or  list  into  the  castle/ 
or  stand  on  the  works  and  have  your  throats 
cut."  Two  or  three  days  after  this  he  went  to 
his  mother's,  and  carried  his  children  with  part  of 
his  goods,  and  sent  his  wife  to  Sir  Gervase  Clifton's 
house.  Notwithstanding  this  public  resolution  in 
the  hall  to  his  company,  he  told  them,  and 
many  others  in  private,  that  he  preferred  the 
interest  of  the  town  above  that  of  his  life,  and 
would  expose  his  life  for  the  good  of  it,  and  stand 
on  the  works  of  the  town  as  long  as  they  could  be 
defended,  and  when  they  could  no  longer  be  kept, 
he  would  retire  to  some  other  parliament-garrison. 
Others  he  told,  he  scorned  thdt  his  colours  should 
serve  in  the  castle ;  that  if  his  company  went  up 
thither  he  would  get  him  a  new  one,  which  should 
follow  him  wherever  he  went,  and  many  more  such 


^  The  particular  account  which  has  before  been  spoken 
of,  has  in  this  place  a  little  difference  of  expression,  which 
yet  perhaps  signifies  much.  There  Colonel  Pierrepont  says, 
''  List  into  the  castle  with  Johnf  for  so  in  a  jesting  way  he 
used  to  call  Colonel  Hutchinson,  alluding  no  doubt  to  his 
frank  and  downright  mode  of  speaking  and  acting. — ^J.  H. 

This  question  proves  ''  the  particular  account "  which  the 
Rev.  Julius  Hutchinson  had  before  him  to  be  the  Note- Book, 
at  present  in  the  British  Museum. 


1643-1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        237 

things  in  private;  but  he  openly,  both  to  the 
governor  and  others,  approved  and  encouraged  their 
going  into  the  castle.  According  to  his  advice,  the 
townsmen,  as  they  were  diversely  affected,  disposed 
of  themselves ;  the  malignants  all  laid  down  their 
arms  and  stayed  in  the  town ;  some  honest  and  well 
affected,  but  not  bold  enough  to  stand  the  hazard, 
went  to  other  parliament-garrisons  and  served 
there;  others  secured  themselves,  their  goods,  and 
families  in  the  country ;  some  enlisted  into  the 
castle ;  one  Alderman  -Nix,  captain  of  two  hundred, 
gave  up  his  commission  ;  his  men  all  disbanded 
except  about  forty,  who  came  into  the  castle  and 
filled  up  the  broken  companies  there.  At  length, 
out  of  all  the  four  companies  and  the  whole  town, 
about  300  men  enlisted  into  the  castle. 

The  governor  had  procured  forty  barrels  of 
powder,  and  two  thousand  weight  of  match  from 
London,  and  had  increased  the  store  of  provision 
as  much  as  the  present  poverty  of  their  condition 
would  permit  him.  Then  the  committee  of  Notting- 
ham, so  many  of  them  as  were  remaining  in  the 
town,  and  all  the  ministers  of  the  parliament's  party 
there,  came  up  to  the  castle,  and,  with  the  officers 
of  the  garrison,  ate  at  the  governor's,  to  his  very 
great  charge ;  considering  that  he  was  so  far  from 
receiving  pay  at  that  time,  that  all  the  money  he 
could  procure  of  his  own  credit,  or  take  up  with 
others,  he  was  forced  to  dispend  for   the  several 


238        Metnoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643- 

necessities  of  the  soldiers  and  garrison ;  yet  were 
the  soldiers  then,  and  a  long  time  after,  kept  to- 
gether as  long  as  they  could  live,  without  any  pay, 
and  after  paid  part  in  victuals,  and  the  rest  run 
on  in  arrears. 

The  townsmen  who  came  into  the  castle  disposed 
their  families  into  several  villages  in  the  country ; 
and  at  length  a  trumpet  was  sent,  for  a  safe-conduct 
for  a  gentleman,  from  my  Lord  Newcastle ;  ^  and 
having  it.  Major  Cartwright  came  from  him, 'with  a 
summons  for  the  delivery  of  the  town  and  castle, 
to  which  the  committee  for  the  town,  and  the 
governor  for  the  castle,  returned  a  civil  defiance  in 
writing,  about  the  loth  day  of  August.  Cartwright, 
having  received  it,  and  being  treated  with  wine  by 
the  governor  and  the  rest  of  the  officers,  grew  bold 
in  the  exercise  of  an  abusive  wit  he  had,  and 
told  both  Mr.  Hutchinsons  that  they  were  sprightly 

^  "To  the  commander-in-chief  and  the  rest  of  the  gen- 
tlemen at  Nottingham,  these. 

^  Gbntlembn, — I  have  received  a  message  in  writing  from 
my  Lord  General  with  command  to  send  it  unto  you,  which 
I  hold  fit  to  do  by  a  gentleman,  and  to  that  end  I  desire  a 
safe-conduct  for  Major  Cartwright,  which  not  doubting  of 
I  shall  rest,— Your  servant,  RlCH.  BiRON. 

**  Nbwark,  this  6tb  of  August,  1643." 

This  letter,  which  is  copied  in  the  Note-Book,  was  sent  by 
a  trumpet  on  Au£^st  7th.  Major  Cartwright's  visit  took 
place  on  August  9th. 


1643.1       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         239 

young  men,  but  when  my  lord  should  come  with 
his  army,  he  would  find  them  in  other  terms, 
beseeching  my  lord  to  spare  them,  as  misled  young 
men,  and  to  suffer  them  to  march  away  with  a 
cudgel,  and  ''  then,"  said  he,  "  shall  I  stand  behind 
my  lord's  chair  and  laugh."  ^  At  which  the 
governor,  being  angry,  told  him  he  was  much  mis- 
taken, for  he  scorned  ever  to  yield  on  any  terms, 
to  a  papistical  army  led  by  an  atheistical  general. 
Mr.  George  Hutchinson  told  him,  "  If  my  lord  would 
have  that  poor  castle  he  must  wade  to  it  in  blood." 
Which  words  they  say  he  told  his  general.'  After 
these  summonses  were  received,  the  governor  drew 
all  his  soldiers  into  the  castle,  and  committed  the 
guard  of  the  town  to  the  aldermen,  who  were  to 
set  guards  of  fifty  in  a  night,  according  to  their 
wards.  Then  calling  together  his  soldiers,  he  once 
again  represented  to  them  their  condition,  and  told 
them,  that  being  religious  and  honest  men,  he  could 
be  assured  no  extremity  would  make  them  fail  in 
what  they  found  themselves  strong  enough  to 
undertake ;  and  therefore  he  should  not  fear  to  let 
them  freely  understand  their  danger,  which  yet  they 
had  power  to  shun,  and  therefore  whatever  misery 
might  be  the  issue  of  their  undertaking,  they  could 

^  "  Then  will  I  hold  up  my  finger  at  you  and  laugh." — 
Note-Book. 

*  The  Note-Book  gives  also  a  message  sent  by  the  governor 
to  Sir  Roger  Cooper.    See  Appendix. 


240        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

• 

not  justly  impute  it  to  him,  it  being  their  own 
election.  For  after  this  summons  they  must  ex- 
pect the  enemy,  and  to  be  reduced  to  the  utmost 
extremity  by  them  that  thought  could  reach.  It 
must  not  move  them  to  see  their  houses  flaming, 
and,  if  need  were,  themselves  firing  them  for  the 
public  advantage,  to  see  the  pieces  of  their  families 
cruelly  abused  and  consumed  before  them;  they 
must  resolve  upon  hard  duty,  fierce  assaults,  poor 
and  sparing  diet,  perhaps  famine,  and  the  want  of 
all  comfortable  accommodations.  Nor  was  there 
very  apparent  hope  of  relief  at  last,  but  more  than 
common  hazard  of  losing  their  lives,  either  in 
defence  of  their  fort  or  of  the  place;  which,  for 
want  of  good  fortifications,  and  through  disadvantage 
of  a  neighbouring  mount  and  building,  was  not,  in 
human  probability,  tenable  against  such  an  army  as 
threatened  it.  All  which,  for  his  own  part,  he  was 
resolved  on ;  and  if  any  of  them  found  his  courage 
failing,  he  only  desired  they  would  provide  for  their 
safety  in  time  elsewhere,  and  not  prejudice  him  and 
the  public  interest  so  highly,,  as  they  would  do,  to 
take  upon  them  the  defence  of  the  castle,  except 
they  could  be  content  to  lay  down  their  lives  and  all 
their  interests  in  it.  The  soldiers  were  none  of 
them  terrified  at  the  dangers  which  threatened  their 
undertaking ;  but  at  the  latter  end  of  August  took, 
upon  the  solemn  fast-day,  the  national  covenant, 
and  besides  it,  a  particular  mutual  covenant  between 


i643«l       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         24 1 

them  and  the  governor,  to  be  faithful  to  each  other, 
and  to  hold  out  the  place  to  the  death,  without 
entertaining   any   parley,   or    accepting   any   terms 
from  the  enemy.     This  the  governor  was  forced  tc 
do  to  confirm  them,  for  he  had  his  experience  not 
only  of  the  ungodly  and  ill-affected,  but  even  of  the 
godly  themselves,  who  thought  it  scarcely  possible 
for  any  one  to  continue  a  gentleman,  and  firm  to  a 
godly  interest,  and  therefore  repaid  all  his  vigilancy 
and  labours  for  them  with  a  very  unjust  jealousy. 
The  governor  of  Newark  was  his  cousin-german, 
to  whom  he  was  forced,  against  his  nature,  to  be 
more  uncivil  than  to  any  others  that  were  governors 
in  that  place.     Whether  it  were  that  the  dissension 
of  brethren  is  always  most  spitefully  pursued,  or 
that  Sir  Richard  Biron,  as  it  was  reported,  suffered 
under  the  same  suspicions  on  his  side,  it  is  true 
they  were  to  each  other  the  most  uncivil  enemies 
that  can  be  imagined.    After  this  summons,  my  Lord 
Newcastle  came  not,  according  to  their  bravadoes, 
but  diverted  his  army  to  Hull,  to  besiege  my  Lord 
Fairfax  there ;  they  of  Newark  having  gotten  him 
to  send  this    summons  upon    confidence,  knowing 
the  condition  of  the  place,  that  it  would  have  been 
yielded  to  a  piece  of  paper.     The  governor  imme- 
diately set  upon  the  fortification  of  his  castle,  made 
a  work  behind  it,  another  on  the  Line  side,  turned 
the  dovecote  into  a  platform,  and  made  a  court  of 
guard  in  Mortimer's  Hole, 
vou  1.  Q 


242        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       [1643- 

At  this  time  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson  died  in 
London,^  and  gave  all  his  personal  estate,  and  all 
that  was  unsettled  at  Mr.  Hutchinson's  maniagei 
to  his  second  wife  and  her  children ;  ^  at  which  his 
two  sons  had  not  the  least  repining  thought,  but 
out  of  tender  love,  were  very  much  afflicted  for  his 
loss,  and  procured  a  pass  from  Newark  for  Mr. 
George  Hutchinson,  to  go  to  London,  to  visit  his 
mother  and  fetch  mournings,  which  accordingly  he 
did ;  and  upon  a  letter  the  committee  sent  up  by 
him,^  he  brought  down  an  order  of  parliament  to 
allow  a  table  to  the  governor  and  committee,  whom 
Mr.  Hutchinson  had  till  that  time  entertained  at  his 
own  cost,  with  all  the  officers  of  the  garrison  and 
the  ministers,  which  were  no  small  charge  to  him ; 
who  he  had  a  noble  heart,  and  could  not  basely 


^  August  18,  1643,  as  appeared  by  his  tombstone,  under 
the  communion  table  in  St.  Paul's,  Covent  Garden,  London, 
and  that  he  was  55  when  he  died. — J.  H. 

A  marginal  note,  written  by  Julius  Hutchinson,  grand- 
father of  the  editor. 

*  The  estate  was  much  impaired  by  the  war,  for  on 
November  17,  1645,  the  House  of  Commons  resolved  "that 
the  Lady  Catherine  Hutchinson,  widow  of  Sir  Thomas 
Hutchinson,  late  a  member  of  this  house,  who  hath  lost  all 
and  been  ruined  by  the  king's  forces,  for  her  great  and 
constant  affections  to  the  parliament,  shall  have  four  pounds 
allowed  to  her  weekly  for  her  present  support  out  of  the 
king's  revenue." — Journals  of  the  House  of  Commons. 

'  The  letter  is  dated  August  26,  1643,  vide  Appendix. 


i643«l       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         243 

evade  the  expense,  which  that  place  necessarily 
drew  upon  him,  not  only  by  the  constant  entertain- 
ment of  the  committee,  officers,  and  ministers,  and 
all  parliament  officers,  that  came  and  went  through 
the  garrison,  but  by  relieving  the  poor  soldiers,  who 
had  such  short  pay,  that  they  were,  for  the  most 
part,  thirty  weeks  and  more  behind;  and  when 
they  marched  out  at  any  time,  the  governor  would 
not  suffer  them  to  take  a  cup  of  drink,  unpaid  for, 
in  the  country,  but  always,  wherever  they  took  any 
refreshment  in  their  marches,  paid  it  himself.  He 
besides  gave  them  much  from  his  own  house,  espe- 
cially when  any  of  them  were  sick  or  wounded,  and 
lent  money  to  those  who  were  most  necessitous. 
All  this  run  him  into  a  great  private  debt,  besides 
many  thousands  of  pounds,  which  he  engaged  him- 
self in  with  other  gentlemen,  and  taken  up  for  the 
supply  of  the  garrison  and  carrying  on  of  the  public 
service.  Although  the  allowance  for  his  table  was 
much  envied  by  those  mean  fellows,  that  never 
knew  what  the  expense  of  a  table  was,  and  although 
it  was  to  him  some  ease,  yet  it  did  not  defray  the 
third  part  of  his  expense '  in  the  service,  being  but 
ten  pounds  a  week  allowed  by  the  state ;  and  his 
expenses  all  that  time,  only  in  the  public  service, 
and  not  at  all  in  any  particular  of  his  own  family, 
being,  as  it  was  kept  upon  account,  above  fifteen 
hundred  pounds  a  year.  As  soon  as  his  father  was 
dead,  and  rents  became  due  to  him,  the  enemies,  in 


244        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       [1643- 

the  midst  of  whom  his  estate  lay,  fetched  in  his 
tenants  and  imprisoned  them,  and  took  his  rents ; 
his  estate  was  begged  and  promised  by  the  king ; 
those  who  lived  not  upon  the  place,  flung  up  his 
grounds,  and  they  lay  unoccupied,  while  the  enemy 
prevailed  in  the  country.  He  was  not  so  cruel  as 
others  were  to  their  tenants,  who  made  them  pay 
over  again  those  rents  which  the  enemy  forced  them 
to  redeem  themselves  out  of  prison  withal,  but  lost 
the  most  part  of  his  rents,  all  the  while  the  country 
was  under  the  adverse  power.  He  had  some  small 
stock  of  his  own  plundered,  and  his  house,  by  the 
perpetual  haunting  of  the  enemy,  defaced,  and  for 
want  of  inhabitation,  rendered  almost  uninhabitable. 
For  these  things  he  had  some  subscriptions/  but 


^  By  subscriptions  are  here  meant  acknowledgments  or 
certificates  given  by  the  committees,  which  parliament  pro- 
fessed to  make  good,  but  many  times  did  not.  But  Colonel 
Hutchinson's  disinterestedness  and  devotion  to  the  cause 
did  not  suffice  to  exempt  him  from  calumny,  for  in  Walker's 
^  History  of  Independency,**  p.  166,  et  seg.,  a  list  is  given  of 
members  of  parliament,  who  were  unduly  returned,  who 
held  commands  contrary  to  the  self-denying  ordinance,  or 
had  moneys  or  offices  given  them.  And  Colonel  Hutchinson 
is  accused  of  all  three;  how  absurdly  and  unjustly  every 
one  must  perceive.  He  was  regularly  elected  to  parliament 
in  place  of  his  father  deceased :  he  had  a  regiment  which 
he  raised,  and  in  a  gpreat  degree  subsisted  himself ;  he  had 
a  government,  which  at  the  time  of  his  undertaking  it,  was 
a  charge  others  feared  to  accept,  and  which  for  a  long  time 


t643-]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         245 

never  received  one  penny  of  recompense ;  and  his 
arrears  of  pay,  which  he  received  after  all  the 
war  was  done,  did  not  half  pay  the  debts  those 
services  contracted.  But  when  he  undertook  this 
engagement,  it  was  for  the  defence  of  his  country's 
and  God's  cause,  and  he  offered  himself  and  all  he 
had  a  willing  sacrifice  in  the  service;  and  rather 
praised  God  for  what  was  saved,  than  repined  at 
what  was  spent,  it  being  above  his  expectation,  that 
deliverance  which  God  gave  him  out  of  his  enemies' 
hands.  He  might  have  made  many  advantages  by 
the  spoil  of  his  enemies,  which  was  often  brought 
in,  and  by  other  encroachments  upon  the  country, 
which  almost  all  the  governors,  on  both  sides, 
exacted  everywhere  else,  but  his  heart  abhorred 
it :  all  prize  the  soldiers  had,  and  he  never  shared 
with  them ;  all  the  malignants'  goods  the  committee 
disposed  of;  and  it  ever  grieved  his  heart  to  see 
the  spoil  of  his  neighbours,  how  justly  soever  they 
deseryed  it ;  but  he  chose  all  loss,  rather  than  to 
make  up  himself^  by  violence  and  rapine.  If  in  a 
judicial  way,  he  was  forced  at  any  time,  in  discharge 


was  a  loss  and  a  detriment  to  him,  and  at  the  end  of  all 
he  fell  far  short  of  receiving  as  much  as  he  had  expended. 
In  the  same  place,  Mr.  William  Pierrepont  is  most  invi- 
diously accused  of  getting  £40^000— dut  how  f  it  was  the 
personal  estate  of  his  own  father  I — ^J.  H. 

^  Make  himself  up,  make  himself  whole,  reimburse  him- 
self.—J.  H. 


246        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643- 

of  his  trust,  to  sign  any  harsh  orders  against  any 
of  the  gentlemen  of  the  country,  it  was  with  grief 
that  they  should  deserve  that  severity;  but  this 
testimony  is  a  truth  of  him,  that  in  his  whole 
actings  in  this  cause,  he  never  prosecuted  any 
private  lust,  either  of  revenge,  ambition,  avarice, 
or  vain  glory,  under  a  public  vizard,  but  was  most 
truly  public  -  spirited.  Conscience  to  God,  and 
truth  and  righteousness,  according  to  the  best  in- 
formation he  could  get,  engaged  him  in  that  party 
he  took;  that  which  engaged  him,  carried  him 
through  all  along,  though  he  encountered  no  less 
difficulties  and  contradictions  from  those  of  his  own 
party,  that  were  not  of  the  same  spirit  he  was,  than 
from  his  enemies. 

The  death  of  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson  made 
every  way  a  great  reverse  in  the  afiairs  of  his 
eldest  son,  who  had  before  been  looked  upon  as 
his  father's  heir,  and  reverenced  as  much,  or  rather 
more,  upon  his  father's  score,  than  his  own,  so  that 
no  man  durst  attempt  to  injure  him,  whom  they 
looked  upon  as  under  such  a  powerful  protection. 
Sir  Thomas  and  his  fathers  before  him  had  ever 
deserved  very  well  of  their  country,  and,  as  lovers 
of  their  country,  their  neighbours  had  an  implicit 
faith  in  all  their  dictates  and  actions,  insomuch  that 
Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson's  single  authority  swayed 
with  many,  more  than  all  the  greater  names  of  the 
country.     But  he  at  his  death  having  divided,  all 


I643-]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        247 

things  considered,  his  estate  between  the  children 
of  his  two  wives,  though  it  be  true  the  latter 
deserved  more  than  they  had,  yet  it  is  as  true  the 
first  deserved  not  to  be  so  much  lessened  as  they 
were :  and  Mr.  Hutchinson  having  been  known 
to  be  the  most  pious  and  obedient  son,  from  his 
childhood,  that  ever  any  father  was  blessed  in, 
when  it  came  to  be  known  that  his  father  had  given 
away  all  that  was  in  his  power  to  give  from  him, 
those  that  had  a  great  reverence  and  esteem  for 
Sir  Thomas  would  not  believe  him  to  be  so  de- 
fective in  justice  as  to  do  this  without  some  secret 
cause;  and  therefore  it  was  given  out  that  he 
was  displeased  with  his  son's  engagement,  and  for 
that  cause,  disposed  away  so  much  of  his  estate 
from  them.  But  that  was  not  so ;  indeed,  at  the 
time  of  his  death  the  parliament's  interest  was  so 
low,  that  he  might  well  look  upon  them  as  lost 
persons,  and  so  what  he  gave  away  to  the  un- 
engaged infant  he  might  well  look  upon  as  all  that 
could  be  preserved.  Mr.  Hutchinson  had  only  an 
allowance  from  his  father,  while  he  lived,  which 
was  duly  paid  him  ;  but  as  soon  as  he  died  all  his 
estate  was  seized  by  the  enemy,  who  had  so  much 
desire  not  to  injure  publicly  a  person  so  popular, 
that  they  disturbed  not  Sir  Thomas  his  tenants  while 
he  lived,  though  he  continued  with  the  parliament, 
and  faithful  to  their  interest ;  because  he  was 
moderate,  and  one  that  applied  all  his  endeavours 


248        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1643- 

to  peace,  which  he  did  not  out  of  policy,  but  out 
of  conscience  to  his  country,  and  by  a  wise  fore- 
sight of  the  sad  consequences  of  a  conquest  by 
either  side ;  for  he  hath  often  expressed,  that  accom- 
modation was  far  more  desirable  than  war,  and 
he  dreaded  that  the  spirits  of  those  men  would  be- 
come most  insolent  after  conquest,  who  were  so 
violently  bent  to  prosecute  a  war;  that  some  of 
them  whom  we  have  since  known  to  be  vile 
apostates,  then  professed  they  abhorred  accommo- 
,  dation.  This  report  of  Sir  Thomas  his  dislike  of 
his  son's  engagement  was  raised  and  dispersed  by 
those  who  themselves  were  ill-afiected  to  it ;  but, 
however,  it  abated  all  the  respect  men  had  for  him, 
upon  any  account  but  his  own.  Those  who  had 
entertained  a  secret  envy  of  him,  now  feared  not 
to  manifest  it,  and  began  to  work  secret  mines,  to 
blow  him  up  on  all  sides ;  but  God  was  with  him, 
and  disappointed  all  his  enemies,  and  made  his 
virtues  more  illustrious  by  the  oppositions  they 
encountered,  and  by  the  removal  of  all  those  props 
of  wealth  and  power  which  are  necessary  to  hold 
up  weaker  fabrics.* 

^  Here  is  in  the  original  a  marginal  note  in  the  following 
words:  ''The  division  of  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson's  estate. 
Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson  being  mightily  beloved  in  the 
country,  and  a  moderate  man,  using  all  his  endeavours  for 
peace,  his  estate  was  never  plundered  in  his  lifetime ;  and 
though  it  is  here  falsely  insinuated  that  he  approved  of  his 


1643.]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson,         249 

Soon  after  the  death  of  his  father,  one  Mr. 
Ayscough,  a  gentleman  of  the  country,  allied  to 
Sir  Richard,  since  Lord  Biron,  then  governor  of 
Newark,  came  to  the  governor  of  Nottingham,  and 
told  him  that  Sir  Richard  Biron,'  out  of  that 
tender,  natural  affection  which  he  ever  had  for 
him,  and  still  preserved,  desired  him  now  to  con- 
sider his  wife  and  children,  and  the  loss  of  his 
whole  estate,  which  was  inevitable,  if  he  persisted 
in  the  engagement  he  was  in ;  that  some  had 
already  been  suing  to  the  Earl  of  Newcastle  for  it ; 
but  if  he  would  return  to  his  obedience  to  the  king, 
he  might  not  only  preserve  his  estate,  but  have 


son's  conduct  in  taking  arms  against  the  king,  it  is  most 
true  that  he  was  extremely  afflicted  at  it,  being  altogether 
for  peace,  and  condemned  such  rash  counsels  as  arms  on 
both  sides ;  and  the  miseries  he  saw  his  king  and  country 
involved  in  were  certainly  the  occasion  of  his  death :  and 
though  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson  sat  longer  in  the  house 
than  many  honest  men,  it  was  only  in  hopes  by  his  moderate 
counsels  to  effect  a  happy  peace  between  his  king  and 
country.  All  this  I  have  heard  attested  by  his  lady  and 
relict,  my  grandmother.  Teste  J.  Hutchinson."  This  is 
that  testimony  of  Lady  Katharine  Hutchinson  which  was 
spoken  of  in  the  preface,  and  which,  in  attempting  to 
impeach  the  veracity  of  the  author  in  a  single  point,  con- 
tributes largely  to  corroborate  it  in  all.  In  the  very  instance 
before  us  there  seems  much  more  reason  for  the  opinion  of 
Mrs.'  Hutchinson  than  of  Lady  Katharine:  Sir  Thomas 
Hutchinson  had  before  been  imprisoned  for  his  opposition 
to  the  court ;  was  in  this  parliament  on  all  committees  for 


250        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

what  reward  he  pleased  to  propound  for  so  doing. 
To  which  the  governor  telling  him  this  was  a  thing 
he  ought  to  scorn,  Mr.  Ayscough  told  him  that 
Sir  Richard  had,  only  out  of  love  and  tender  com- 
passion to  him,  given  him  this  employment,  with 
many  protestations  how  much  Sir  Richard  desired 
to  employ  all  his  interest  to  save  him,  if  it  were 
possible,  and  therefore  begged  of  him  that  if  he 
would  still  persist  in  this  party,  that  he  would  yet 
quit  himself  of  this  garrison,  and  go  into  my  Lord 
of  Essex's  army  ;  for  there,  he  said.  Sir  Richard 
would  find  pretence  to  save  his  rents  for  him  for 
the  present,  and  his  estate  for  the  future  ;  for,  said 


the  reform  of  religion ;  sat  with  the  parliament  after  the 
war  was  deeply  engaged  in ;  sent  his  sons  arms,  and  pro- 
moted their  desires  to  the  parliament :  it  is  incredible  that 
he  should  have  any  great  objection  to  the  part  they  took, 
other  than  the  general  one  of  regretting  that  arms  were 
taken  on  either  side.  The  most  probable  thing  is  that  this 
lady,  being  of  the  same  party  and  opinion  as  her  brother 
and  family,  and  jealous  of  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson's  chil- 
dren by  his  former  wife,  influenced  him  to  their  disadvan- 
tage in  the  making  of  his  will,  and  set  up  these  'reasons  to 
countenance  it  after  his  death.  The  other  estates  of  Sir  T. 
Hutchinson  in  Nottinghamshire  were  fully  equal,  if  not 
superior,  in  value  to  that  of  Owthorpe.  This  being  the 
only  instance  wherein  the  truth  of  the  narrative  is  called  in 
question,  and  this  certainly  invidiously,  if  not  unjustly,  we 
may  safely  say  we  have  the  testimony  of  an  adversary  in 
our  favour  to  all  the  rest. — J.  H. 


1643.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        25 1 

he,  he  can  plead,  "you  were  an  inconsiderate 
young  man,  rashly  engaged,  and  dares  assure 
himself  to  beg  your  pardon ;  but  to  keep  a  castle 
agamst  your  king  is  a  rebellion  of  so  high  a  nature, 
that  there  will  be  no  colour  left  to  ask  favour  for 
you."  The  governor  told  him  he  should  deliver 
the  same  propositions,  and  receive  his  answer, 
before  some  witnesses  ;  whereupon  he  carried  the 
gentleman  to  two  of  the  committee,*  before  whom 
he  repeated  his  message,  and  the  governor  bade 
him  return  Sir  Richard  this  answer,  "  That  except 
he  found  his  own  heart  prone  to  such  treachery,  he 
might  consider  there  was,  if  nothing  else,  so  much 
of  a  Biron's  blood  in  him,  that  he  should  very 
much  scorn  to  betray  or  quit  a  trust  he  had  under- 
taken ;  but  the  grounds  he  ,went  on  were  such, 
that  he  very  much  despised  such  a  thought  as  to 
sell  his  faith  for  base  rewards  or  fears,  and  there- 
fore could  not  consider  the  loss  of  his  estate,  which 
his  wife  was  as  willing  to  part  with  as  himself  in 
this  cause,  wherein  he  was  resolved  to  persist,  in 
the  same  place  in  which  it  had  pleased  God  to  call 
him  to  the  defence  of  it." 

About  this  time  a  woman  was  taken,  whereof 
the  committee  had  before  been  informed  that  she 
carried  intelligence  between  Colonel  Pierrepont  and 
his  mother,  the  countess  of  Kingston.     The  woman 

'   Mr.  Salusbury  and  Mr.  Widmerpoole. 


252        Mefnoirs  0/  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

was  now  going  through  Nottingham,  with  letters 
from  the  old  countess  to  her  daughter-in-law,  the 
colonel's  wife,  who  was  then  at  Clifton,  Sir  Gervas 
Clifton's  house.  In  this  packet  there  was  a  letter 
drawn,  which  the  countess  advised  her  daughter  to 
sign,  to  be  sent  to  Colonel.  Stanton,  one  of  the 
king's  colonels,  to  entreat  back  from  him  some 
goods  of  her  husband's,  which  he  had  plundered  ; 
wherein  there  were  these  expressions :  "  That 
though  her  husband  was  unfortunately  engaged  in 
the  unhappy  rebellion,  she  hoped  ere  long  he  would 
approve  himself  a  loyal  subject  to  his  majesty." 
The  committee  having  read  these  letters,  sealed 
them  up  again,  and  enclosed  them  in  another  to 
the  colonel,  then  at  Derby,  telling  him,  that  having 
intercepted  such  letters,  and  not  knowing  whether 
his  wife  might  follow  her  mother's  advice,  which 
if  she  should  would  prove  very  dishonourable  to 
him,  they  had  chosen  rather  to  send  the  letters  to 
him  than  to  her.  The  colonel  was  vexed  that  they 
had  opened  them,  but  for  the  present  took  no 
notice  of  it.  All  the  horse  having  been  drawn  out 
of  Nottingham  to  the  relief  of  Gainsborough,  and 
the  Newarkers,  knowing  that  the  garrison  was 
utterly  destitute,  plundered  all  the  country  even  to 
the  walls  of  Nottingham ;  upon  which  some  godly 
men  offered  themselves  to  bring  in  their  horses, 
and  form  a  troop  for  the  defence  of  the  country, 
and  one  Mr.  Palmer,  a  minister,  had  a  commission 


«643]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         253 

to  be  their  captain.^  This  man  had  a  bold|  ready, 
earnest  way  of  preaching,  and  lived  holily  and 
regularly  as  to  outward  conversation,  whereby  he 
got  a  great  reputation  among  the  godly ;  and  this 
reputation  swelled  his  spirit,  which  was  very  vain- 
glorious, covetous,  contentious,  and  ambitious.  He 
had  so  insinuated  himself  as  to  make  these  godly 
men  desire  him  for  their  captain,  which  he  had 
more  vehement  longing  after  than  they,  yet  would 
have  it  believed,  that  it  was  rather  pressed  upon 
him,  than  he  pressed  into  it ;  and  therefore  being 
at  that  time  in  the  castle  with  his  family,  and  feed- 
ing at  the  governor's  table,  who  gave  him  room  in 
his  own  lodgings,  and  all  imaginable  respect,  he 
came  to  the  governor  and  his  wife,  telling  them 
that  these  honest  people  pressed  him  very  much  to 
be  their  captain,  and  desiring  their  friendly  and 
Christian  advice  whether  he  should  accept  or  refuse 
it.     They  freely  told  him,  that  having  entered  into 


^  The  Thomason  Collection  in  the  British  Museum  con- 
tains a  sermon  by  Mr.  Palmer. 

"St.  Paul's  Politiques,  a  sermon  against  neutrality, 
preached  at' Margaret's,  Westminster,  on  the  Lord's  Day, 
December  18,  1644,  divers  of  the  honourable  House  of 
Commons  being  present.  By  Laurence  Palmer,  Rector  of 
the  mediety  of  Gedling,  in  the  county  of  Nottingham,  and 
captain  of  a  troop  of  horse  raised  for  the  service  of  the  king 
and  pi^rliament"  The  text  is  Phil.  ii.  4,  and  the  sermon  is 
dedicated  to  Gilbert  Millington. 


254        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

a  charge  of  another  kind,  they  thought  it  not  fit  for 
him  to  engage  in  this ;  and  that  he  might  as  much 
advance  the  public  service,  and  satisfy  the  men,  in 
marching  with  them  in  the  nature  of  a  chaplain  as 
in  that  of  a  captain.     He,  that  asked  not  counsel  to 
take  any  contrary  to  his  first  resolve,  went  away 
confused  when  he  found  he  was  not  advised  as  he 
would  have  been,  and  said  he  would  endeavour  to 
persuade  them  to  be  content ;  and  afterwards  said, 
they  would  not  be  otherwise  satisfied,  and  so  he 
was  forced  to  accept  the  commission.     The  gover- 
nor, having  only  declared  his  own  judgment  when 
he  was  asked,  as  a  Christian  ought  to  do  according 
to  his  conscience,  left  the  captain  to  act  according 
to  his  own,  and  censured  him  not,  but  entertained 
him  with  the  same  freedom  and  kindness  he  had 
done  before;    but  the  man,   being  guilty  of  the 
avarice  and  ambition  of  his  own  heart,  never  after- 
wards looked  upon  the  governor  with  a  clear  eye, 
but  sought   to  blow   up  all   factions  against  him 
whenever  he  found  opportunity,  and  in  the  mean- 
time dissembled  it  as  well  as  he  could.     And  now, 
before  his  troop  was  well  raised,  Colonel  Thomhagh 
being  recovered,  brought  back  his  troop  from  Lin- 
coln, and  both  the  troops  quartered  in  the  town, 
which  being  a  bait  to  invite  the  enemy,  the  gover- 
nor gave  charge  to  all  that  belonged  to  the  castle, 
being  about  three  hundred  men,  that  they  should 
not  upon  any  pretence  whatever  be  out  of  their 


I643-]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        255 

quarters;  but  they  having,  many  of  them,  wives 
and  better  accommodations  in  the  town,  by  stealth 
disobeyed  his  commands,  and  seldom  left  any  more 
in  the  castle  than  what  were  upon  the  guard. 

The  townsmen  were  every  night  out  upon  the 
guard  of  the  town,  according  to  the  wards  of  the 
aldermen ;  but  the  most  of  them  being  disaffected, 
the  governor,  fearing  treachery,  had  determined  to 
quarter  the  horse  in  those  lanes  which  were  next 
to  the  castle,  and  to  block  up  the  lanes  for  the 
better  securing  them.  Just  the  night  before  these 
lanes  should  have  been  blocked  up.  Alderman 
Toplady,  a  great  malignant,  having  the  watch,  the 
enemy  was,  by  treachery,  let  into  the  town,  and  no 
alarum  given  to  the  castle.  Though  there  were 
two  muskets  at  the  gate  where  they  entered,  both 
of  them  were  surrendered  without  one  shot  to 
give  notice;  and  all  the  horse,  and  about  two 
parts  of  the  castle  soldiers,  betrayed,  surprised,  and 
seized  on  in  their  beds,  but  there  were  not  above 
fourscore  of  the  castle  foot  taken;  the  rest  hid 
themselves,  and  privately  stole  away,  some  into  the 
country,  some  by  night  came  up  to  the  castle  and 
got  in,  in  disguises,  by  the  river  side ;  but  the  cava- 
liers were  possessed  of  the  town,  and  no  notice  at 
all  given  to  the  castle.  When,  at  the  beating  of 
reveille,  some  of  the  soldiers,  that  had  been  on  the 
watch  all  night,  were  going  down  into  the  town  to 
refresh  themselves,  they  were  no  sooner  out  of  the 


256        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        [1643. 

castle  gates  but  some  of  the  enemy's  musketeers 
discharged  upon  them,  and  they  hasting  back|  got 
in  with  such  care  that  the  enemy  was  prevented  of 
their  design  of  falling  in  with  them.  They  brought 
a  strong  alarum  into  the  castle,  when  the  governor 
coming  forth,  was  exceedingly  vexed  to  find  that 
his  men  were,  so  many  of  them,  contrary  to  his 
command,  wanting  in  their  quarters;  but  it  was 
no  time  to  be  angry,  but  to  apply  himself  to  do 
what  was  possible  to  preserve  the  place;  where- 
tore  he  immediately  despatched  messengers  by  a 
private  sally-port  to  Leicester  and  Derby,  to  desire 
their  assistance,  either  to  come  and  help  to  beat 
the  enemy  out  of  the  town,  or  to  lend  him  some 
foot  to  help  keep  the  castle,  in  which  there  was 
but  fourscore  men,  and  never  a  lieutenant  nor  any 
head  officer  but  his  brother,  nor  so  much  as  a 
surgeon  among  them.  As  soon  as  the  governor 
had  despatched  his  messengers  he  went  up  to  the 
towers,  and  from  thence  played  his  ordnance  into 
the  town,  which  seldom  failed  of  execution  upon 
the  enemy ;  but  there  was  an  old  church,  called  St. 
Nicholas  Church,  v|iose  steeple  so  commanded  the 
platform  that  the  men  could  not  play  the  ordnance 
without  woolpacks  before  them.  From  this  church 
the  bullets  played  so  thick  into  the  outward  castle- 
yard,  that  they  could  not  pass  from  one  gate  to  the 
other,  nor  relieve  the  guards,  but  with  very  great 
hazard ;  and  one  weak  old  man  was  shot  the  first 


1643]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        257 

day,  who,  for  want  of  a  surgeoiii  bled  to  death 
before  they  could  carry  him  up  to  the  governor's 
wife,  who  at  that  time  supplied  that  want  as  well 
as  she  could ;  but  at  night  the  governor  and  his 
men  dug  a  trench  between  the  two  gates,  through 
which  they  afterwards  better  secured  their  passage. 
In  the  meantime  the  cavaliers  that  came  from  New- 
ark, being  about  six  hundred,  fell  to  ransack  and 
plunder  all  the  honest  men's  houses  in  the  town, 
and  the  cavaliers  of  the  town,  who  had  called  them 
in,  helped  them  in  this  work.  Their  prisoners  they 
at  first  put  into  the  sheep-pens  in  the  market-place,^ 
whereupon  an  honest  townsman,  seeing  four  or  five 
commanders  go  into  his  own  house,  procured  a  cun- 
ning boy  that  came  by  him,  while  the  enemy  re- 
garded more  their  plunder  than  their  prisoners,  to 
run  privately  up  to  the  castle  and  give  them  notice, 
who  presently  sent  a  cannon  bullet  into  the  house. 
The  cavaliers  caUed  in  all  the  country  as  soon  as 
they  were  in  the  town,  and  made  a  fort  at  the 
Trent  bridges,  and  thither  they  carried  down  all 
their  considerable  plunder  and  prisoners.  The 
next  day  after  Sir  Richard  Biron  had  surprised 
the  town,  Mr.  Hastings,  since  made  lord  of  Lough- 
borough, then  governor  of  Ashby-de-la-Zouch,  came 


^  It  appears,  by  Deering's  account  of  Nottingham,  that 
these  once  occupied  a  considerable  portion  of  the  market- 
place.— ^J.  H. 

vou  I.  a 


258        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1643. 

with  a  body  of  about  four  hundred  men ;  but  being 
displeased  that  the  plunder  was  begun  before  he 
came,  he  returned  again  and  left  the  Newark  gentle- 
men to  themselves;  who,  as  they  made  a  fort  at 
the  bridges,  threw  down  the  half  moons  and  bul- 
warks that  had  been  raised  about  the  town.  They 
stayed  five  days,  but  very  unquietly,  for  the  cannon 
and  muskets  from  the  castle  failed  not  of  execution 
daily  upon  many  of  them,  and  they  durst  not  in  all 
that  time  go  to  bed.  The  third  day  Major  Cart- 
wright  sent  a  letter,  desiring  the  governor  or  his 
brother  to  come  and  meet  him  in  St.  Nicholas' 
church,  and  promised  them  safe  passage  and  retpm; 
but  the  governor  read  the  letter  to  his  soldiers,  and 
commanded  a  red  flag  to  be  set  upon  the  tpwer  to 
bid  them  defiance,  and  shot  three  pieces  of  cannon 
at  the  steeple  in  answer  to  his  desired  parley. 

Five  days  the  enemy  stayed  in  the  town,  and 
all  that  time  the  governor  and  his  soldiers  were 
none  of  them  ofi"  from  the  guard,  but  if  they  slept, 
which  they  never  did  in  the  night,  it  was  by  them 
that  watched.^  At  length,  on  Saturday,  September 
23d,  in  the  afternoon,  the  governor  saw  a  great 
many  goods  and  persons  going  over  the  Line  bridge, 

1  «  During  the  time  of  the  enemy's  stay  in  the  town  many 
of  those  men  that  lay  hid  came  in  the  night  by  the  Line 
side,  in  women's  apparel  and  other  disguises,  up  to  the 
castle,  so  that  by  Saturday  there  were  about  eight-score 
come." — Note- Book. 


1643.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         259 

and  not  knowing  what  it  meant,  sent  some  cannon 
bullets  after  them ;  when  on  the  other  side  of  the 
town  he  discerned  a  body  of  men,  whom  he  knew 
not  at  first,  whether  to  be  friends  or  foes,  but  having 
at  that  time  about  eightscore  men  in  the  castle,  for 
in  that  five  days'  space  fourscore  were  come  in  by 
stealth,  he  caused  them  all  to  be  drawn  out  in  the 
castle-yard,  and  perceiving  that  those  he  last  saw 
were  friends,  he  sent  out  his  brother,  Major  Hutch- 
inson, with  all  the  musketeers  that  could  be  spared, 
to  help  drive  the  enemy  out  of  the  town.  They 
having  efiected  what  they  came  for,  in  fortifying  the 
bridges,  had  nothing  more  to  do  but  to  get  safe  ofi", 
which  they  endeavoured  with  more  haste  and  dis- 
order than  became  good  and  stout  soldiers.  When 
Major  Hutchinson  came  into  the  town  with  his  men, 
they,  greedy  of  knowing  what  was  become  of  their 
wives  and  houses,  dropped  so  fast  from  behind  him 
to  make  the  inquiry,  that  they  had  left  him  only  in 
the  head  of  sixteen  men,  when  Sir  Richard  Biron, 
with  Captain  Hacker,  followed  by  a  whole  troop  of 
horse  and  a  foot  company,  came  upon  him.  The 
major  commanded  his  men  to  charge  them,  which 
they  did,  but  shot  over;  yet  falling  in  with  them  pell- 
mell,  they  had  gotten  Sir  Richard  Biron  down,  and 
they  had  his  hat,  but  he  escaped,  though  his  horse 
was  so  wounded  that  it  fell  dead  in  the  next  street.^ 

^  Major  Hutchinson  did  not  allow  his  cousinship  to  pre- 


26o        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1643. 

These  men  that  came  to  the  govemor^s  relief 
were  Captain  White  with  his  troop,  who  were 
quartered  at  Leicester,  in  his  return  from  Lin- 
colnshire, from  whence  he  was  coming  back  to 
Nottingham,  and  at  Leicester  met  the  messenger 
the  governor  had  sent  for  assistance,  which  he 
prosecuted  so,  that  from  the  two  garrisons  of  Lei- 
cester and  Derby,  with  his  own  troop,  he  brought 
about  four  hundred  men.^     As  soon  as  they  were 


vent  him  telling  his  men  to  take  or  shoot  Sir  Richard 
Biron ;  he  also  bade  them  ^  not  to  let  him  scape  though 
they  cut  bis  legs  off." — Note-Book. 

^  '^  A  while  after  news  came  that  the  enemy  had  entered 
the  town,  and  had  besieged  the  castle  ;  the  governor  with 
the  committee  did  most  earnestly  send  unto  Colonel  Cell, 
that  he  would  with  all  speed  send  them  assistance,  other- 
wise the  castle  would  be  taken,  because  most  of  their 
soldiers  were  in  the  town,  and  many  an  honest  man  would 
so  be  starved,  who  had  privily  hid  themselves.  Sir  John 
presently  made  ready  all  the  strength  he  could,  and  got 
together  all  the  horses  in  the  country,  and  horsed  some  five 
hundred  musketeers,  with  the  assistance  of  two  or  three 
troops  at  Leicester,  and  so  with  all  that  strength  marched 
to  Nottingham,  Major  MoUanus  being  commander-in-chief. 
The  enemy  was  then  at  least  five  or  six  hundred  in  Not- 
tingham town,  horse  and  foot,  and  stood  all  in  battalio  in 
the  market-place,  and  all  our  forces  were  not  five  hundred. 
The  said  Major  Mollanus,  with  Captain  Hacker,  now  Colonel 
Hacker,  entered  the  town  with  their  horse,  were  presently 
beaten  back,  lost  four  or  five  horses ;  instantly  after  the 
said  Major  broke  through  the  enemy  and  brought  in  the 


I643-]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         261 

come  into  the  town,  Sir  John  Cell's  men,  seeing  the 
cavaliers  had  a  mind  to  be  gone,  interrupted  them 
not,  but  being  as  dexterous  at  plunder  as  at  fight, 
they  presently  went  to  Toplady's  house,  who  had 
betrayed  the  town,  and  plundered  it  and  some  others, 
while  the  governor's  soldiers  were  busy  in  clearing 
the  town  of  the  enemy.  When  they  had  done  this, 
the  governor  did  what  he  could  to  restrain  the 
plunder ;  but  the  truth  is,  Cell's  men  were  nimble 
youths  at  that  work,  yet  there  was  not  very  much 
mischief  done  by  them.  Toplady's  house  fared 
the  worst,  but  his  neighbours  saved  much  of  his 
goods ;  he  himself,  with  several  other  townsmen 
and  countrymen,  who  had  been  very  active  against 
the  well-aiTected,  at  this  time  were  brought  up 
prisoners  to  the  castle.  There  were  not  above  five- 
and-twenty  of  the  Newark  soldiers  taken ;  how 
many  were  slain  at  their  going  off,  and  during  the 
time  of  their  stay,  we  could  not  certainly  tell,  because 

dragoons,  and  entered  the  town  again,  and  drove  the  enemy 
before  them,  many  of  them  slain,  and  one  hundred  and 
sixty  three  taken  prisoners,  but  one  man  of  our  side  slain, 
which  was  one  Captain-lieutenant  Lenerick,  who  led  Colonel 
Cell's  own  troop,  three  men  wounded,  and  some  five  or  six 
horses  killed.  We  relieved  at  the  same  time  at  least  four 
hundred  townsmen  and  soldiers  of  the  castle,  who  were 
almost  famished.  The  remainder  of  the  enemy  fled  to  Not- 
tingham bridge,  which  they  were  then  fortifying." — Cell's 
**True  Relation,"  Glover's  Derbyshire,  voL  i.,  Appendix, 
p.  65. 


262        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1^3. 

they  had  means  of  carrying  them  off  by  the  bridge, 
where  they  left  Captain  Hacker  governor  *  of  their 
new  fort  with  fourscore  men.  Their  prisoners  and 
plunder  they  sent  away  in  boats  to  Newark  ;  many 
of  the  townsmen  went  with  them,  carrying  away 
not  only  their  own  but  their  neighbours'  goods ; 
and  much  more  had  been  carried  away,  but  that  the 
unexpected  sally  from  the  castle  prevented  them. 
Dr.  Plumptre,  one  of  the  committee  of  Nottingham, 
whom  they  found  prisoner  at  the  marshal's  house  in 
the  town,  and  released,  went  out  of  the  town  with 
them.  This  man,  when  he  had  provoked  the 
governor  to  strike  him,  for  his  malicious  and  uncivil 
railings  against  him  for  the  respect  he  showed  to 
the  godly  men  of  the  town,  had  retired  to  the  house 
of  a  malignant  gentleman  in  arms  against  the  parlia- 
ment ;  had  received  a  protection  from  the  governor 
of  Newark,  and  had  divers  meetings  with  the 
Newark  officers ;  yet  after  all  this  had  the  impu- 
dence to  come  into  the  town  of  Nottingham :  and 
in  all  the  taverns  and  ale-houses  he  came  into,  to 


^  The  brother  of  Colonel  Hacker,  who  was  tried,  con- 
demned, and  executed  for  attending  the  execution  of  Charles 
the  First.  This  brother,  who  served  the  king  during  the 
whole  war  with  great  zeal,  could  not  obtain  the  pardon  of 
Colonel  Hacker,  nor  prevent  the  confiscation  of  his  family 
estate,  which  was  granted  to  the  Duke  of  York,  the  king's 
brother,  from  whom  he  was  obliged  to  ransom  it  at  a  high 
rate.     It  lay  at  Colston  Basset,  joining  to  Owthorpe. — ^J.  H. 


'643.1       Memoirs  of  Col  Hutchinson.        263 

belch  out  abominable  scoffs  and  taunts  against  the 
governor  and  the  committee-men,  before  Colonel 
Thomhagh's  face,  who  commanded  him  out  of  the 
room  for  it ;  and  upon  information  of  these  things 
to  the  governor  and  the  committee,  he  was  sent  for 
by  some  musketeers,  and  the  enemy's  protection  for 
himself  and  his  goods  being  found  about  hun,  he 
was  committed  prisoner,  but  there  being  no  good 
accommodation  for  him  in  the  castle,  the  governor, 
in  more  civility  than  he  deserved,  suffered  him  to 
be  in  the  .town,  whence  he  went  with  them,  and 
afterwards  retired  to  Derby.*  At  the  same  time, 
the  cavaliers  having  taken  some  prisoaers  upon  the 
parliament's  score  who  lived  quietly  in  the  country, 
the  committee  had  fetched  in  some  gentlemen's  sons 
of  their  party,  who  were  left  at  their  fathers'  houses ; 
whereof  one  was  remaining  at  the  marshal's  house 
when  the  cavaliers  came  into  the  town,  whom  the 
governor  suffered  to  be  there  upon  his  parole,  there 
being  no  good  accommodation  for  him  in  the  castle 
Him  the  cavaliers  would  have  had  to  have  gone 
away  with  them,  but  he  would  not ;  which  hand- 
some behaviour  so  pleased  the  governor,  that  he 
freely  gave  him  his  liberty  without  exchange. 

^  ''When  they  went  out  of  the  town  he  also  went  out 
with  them,  and  as  he  passed  by  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson's 
house  bade  Mrs.  Cotton,  with  most  nasty  uncivil  term,  tell 
that  proud  Hutchinson  that  in  spite  of  his  teeth  he  was 
now  free." — Note-Book. 


264        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

As  soon  as  the  enemy  was  driven  out  of  the 
town,  the  governor  brought  down  two  pieces  of 
ordnance  to  the  market-place,  and  entreated  the 
soldiers  that  were  come  from  Leicester  and  Derby 
to  march  with  him  immediately,  to  assault  them  in 
their  fort  at  the  bridgeSi  before  they  had  time  to 
put  themselves  in  order,  and  recollect  their  confused 
soulS|  after  their  chase ;  but  the  major  of  Derby, 
an  old  dull-headed  Dutchman,  said  ten  thousand 
men  could  not  do  it,  and  could  by  no  means  be 
entreated  to  go  on,  nor  to  stay  one  day  .longer,  but 
to  stand  by,  while  the  governor  made  the  attempt, 
with  his  own  men.  He.  when  he  saw  he  could  not 
prevail,  thought  it  not  convenient,  at  that  time,  to 
urge  his  men  beyond  their  power,  after  they  had 
had  a  week  of  such  sore  labour,  and  so,  much  dis* 
contented  that  he  could  not  effect  his  desire,  he 
drew  back  his  ordnance  into  the  castle.  Here  his 
women,  while  the  men  were  all  otherwise  employed, 
had  provided  him  as  large  a  supper  as  the  time  and 
present  condition  would  permit,  at  which  he  enter- 
tained all  the  strangers,  and  his  own  officers  and 
gentlemen. 

There  was  a  large  room,  which  was  the  chapel, 
in  the  castle  :  this  they  had  filled  full  of  prisoners, 
besides  a  very  bad  prison,  which  was  no  better  than 
a  dungeon,  called  the  Lion's  Den  ;  and  the  new 
Captain  Palmer,  and  another  minister,  having  noth- 
ing else  to  do,  walked  up  and  down  the  casdeyard, 


1643.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.  -      265 

insulting  and  beating  the  poor  prisoners  as  they 
were  brought  up.  In  the  encounter,  one  of  the 
Derby  captains  was  slain,  and  five  of  our  men  hurt, 
who  for  want  of  another  surgeon,  were  brought  to 
the  governor's  wife,  and  she  having  some  excellent 
balsams  and  plasters  in  her  closet,  with  the 
assistance  of  a  gentleman  that  had  some  skill, 
dressed  all  their  wounds,  whereof  some  were 
dangerous,  being  all  shots,  with  such  good  success, 
that  they  were  all  well  cured  in  convenient  time.^ 
After  our  wounded  men  were  dressed,  as  she  stood 
at  her  chamber-door,  seeing  three  of  the  prisoners 
sorely  cut,  and  carried  down  bleeding  into  the 
Lion's  Den,  she  desired  the  marshal  to  bring  them 
in  to  her,  and  bound  up  and  dressed  their  wounds 
also :  which  while  she  was  doing,  Captain  Palmer 
came  in  and  told  her  his  soul  abhorred  to  see  this 
favour  to  the  enemies  of  God ;  she  replied,  she  had 
done  nothing  but  what  she  thought  was  her  duty. 


*  The  reader  will  remember  that  the  mother  of  Mrs. 
Hutchinson  had  patronised  and  assisted  Sir  Walter  Raleigh, 
when  prisoner  in  the  Tower,  in  his  chemical  experiments, 
and  had  acquired  a  little  knowledge  of  medicine  ;  whether 
her  daughter  had  obtained  instructions  from  her  mother, 
or  the  mother  herself  was  here  (for  she  passed  the  latter 
part  of  her  life  with  her  daughter,  and  died  in  her  house  at 
Owthorpe),  is  uncertain.  Mrs.  Hutchinson  was  certainly 
an  extraordinary  woman,  and  this  is  not  one  of  the  least 
singular,  nor  least  amiable  instances  of  it — J.  H. 


266        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

in  humanity  to  them,  as  fellow-creatures,  not  as 
enemies.  But  he  was  very  ill  satisfied  with  her, 
and  with  the  governor  presently  after,  when  he 
came  into  a  very  large  room  where  a  very  great 
supper  was  prepared,  and  more  room  and  meat 
than  guests ;  to  fill  up  which  the  governor  had  sent 
for  one  "Mr.  Mason,  one  of  the  prisoners,  a  man  of 
good  fashion,  who  had  married  a  relation  of  his, 
and  was  brought  up  more  in  fury,  than  for  any 
proof  of  guilt  in  him,  and  I  know  not  whither  two 
or  three  others  the  governor  had  called  to  meet 
with  them ;  for  which  Captain  Palmer  bellowed 
loudly  against  him,  as  a  favourer  of  malignants  and 
cavaliers.  Who  could  have  thought  this 'godly, 
zealous  man,  who  could  scarce  eat  his  supper  for 
grief  to  see  the  enemies  of  God  thus  favoured, 
should  have  afterwards  entered  into  a  conspiracy, 
against  the  governor,  vdth  those  very  same  persons, 
who  now  so  much  provoked  his  zeal?  But  the 
governor  took  no  notice  of  it,  though  he  set  the 
very  soldiers  a  muttering  against  himself  and  his 
wife,  for  these  poor  humanities. 

The  next  day  the  neighbour  forces  returned 
home.  Colonel  Thornhagh  having  lost  most  of  his 
troop,  went  to  London  to  get  another.  Captain 
White  stayed  at  Nottingham  with  his,  where  intelli- 
gence being  given  that  the  cavaliers  intended  to 
possess  themselves  of  Broztowe  and  WooUerton 
(two  gentlemen's  houses  within  two  miles  apiece  of 


I643-]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        267 

Nottingham),  Captain  Palmer  was  sent,  with  the 
remainder  of  his  men,  to  keep  Broxtowe-house,  and 
the  governor's  captain-lieutenant,^  with  his  company, 
to  WooUerton.  The  governor,  at  Nottingham, 
broke  up  the  Line  Bridge  to  prevent  the  cavaliers 
coming  suddenly  by  that  way  into  the  town ;  then 
he  blocked  up  the  lanes  next  the  castle,  and  cut  up 
all  the  hedges,  that  were  dangerous  to  make  ap- 
proaches to  the  castle ;  and  having  the  experience 
of  the  mischief  of  it,  pulled  down  St  Nicholas' 
church  by  the  advice  of  the  committee.' 

Presently  after  the  cavaliers  were  gone  out  of 
town,  some  naughty  people,  set  on  by  them,  fired 
the  town,  but  it  was  quenched  without  burning 
above  two  or  three  houses ;  yet  for  a  fortnight  to- 
gether it  was  perpetually  attempted,  fire  being  laid 
to  hay- bams  and  other  combustible  places,  insomuch 
that  the  women  were  forced  to  walk  fifty  in  a 
night  to  prevent  the  burning;  which  the  committee 
perceiving  to  be  attempted  by  the  instigation  of  the 
Newark  gentlemen,  they  wrote  them  word,  that  if 
they  forbade  not  their  instruments,  if  so  much  as  one 
house  were  fired,  they  would  fire  all  the  cavaliers' 

^  Captain-lieutenant  Dolphin. — Note-Book. 

*  It  is  said,  in  Deering's  ^  History  of  Nottingham,"  that 
this  church  was  pulled  down  by  Colonel  Hutchinson,  and 
the  bells  carried  to  Owthorpe ;  which  last  was  at  that  time 
impossible,  the  enemy  being  in  possession  of  the  Vale  of 
Belvoir  and  the  ways  to  it    And  moreover,  the  church  at 


268        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

houses  near  them.  The  gentlemen  returned  them  a 
scornful  letter,  full  of  taunts  and  disdain,  bat  after 
that  no  more  houses  were  attempted  with  fire.^ 

The  Derby  soldiers,  when  they  returned  home, 
being  asked  why  they  left  the  cavaliers  at  the 
bridges  unassaulted,  made  answer,  they  would  have 
beaten  them  out,  but  the  governor  would  not  lend 
them  a  piece  of  ordnance  out  of  his  castle ;  which 
false  report,  when  the  governor  heard,  piqued  him 
heartily,  being  so  notorious  a  lie ;  for  he  drew  down 
two  pieces  of  ordnance,  and  could  not  entreat  them 
to  do  more  than  stand  by,  while  he  attempted  it 
with  his  own  men ;  but  their  Major  Molanus,  being 
an  old  soldier,  discouraged  our  soldiers,  and  told 

Owthorpe  was,  as  Deering  in  another  place  observes,  too 
small  to  contain  them.  In  Throsby's  edition  of  Thoroton, 
he  remarks  that  neither  Deering  nor  Thoroton  were  pro- 
perly acquainted  with  the  circumstances  of  that  affair,  and 
mentions,  that  in  digging  near  the  foundation  of  the  present 
tower  (for  the  church  has  been  rebuilt),  a  bell  was  found, 
evidently  broken  to  pieces  at  the  demolition  of  the  church ; 
probably  by  the  cannon-shot  which  was  sent  in  answer  to 
Major  Cart  Wright's  message.  The  situation  of  this  church 
was  both  very  near  to  the  castle,  and  on  a  parallel  height. 
— J.  H. 

The  Note-Book  gives  an  additional  detail  or  two:  ''the 
lofts  were  fired  and  the  walls  undermined,  that  it  might  fall 
more  speedily." 

*  The  Note- Book  describes  the  letter  as  ''a  quibbling 
answer,  in  which  they  utterly  disclaimed  having  any  hand 
in  the  fire.** 


«^3-l       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         269 

them  it  was  a  vain  and  impossible  attempt  For 
this  cause,  the  governor  resolved  he  would  set  upon 
it  alone,  whenever  it  was  seasonable ;  and  watching 
an  opportunity,  he  soon  took  it,  at  a  time  when 
intelligence  was  brought  him  that  all  the  forces 
Newark  could  send  forth,  were  gone  upon  a  design 
into  Lincolnshire.  Then,  on  the  Lord's  day,  under 
colour  of  hearing  a  sermon  at  the  great  church  in 
the  town,  he  went  thither,  and  after  sermon,  from 
the  steeple  took  a  view  of  the  fort  at  the  bridges ; 
no  one  perceiving  his  design  but  his  engineer,  who 
was  with  him,  and  took  a  full  survey  of  Hacker's 
works.  Then,  after  supper,  he  called  the  committee 
together,  and  communicated  his  intentions  to  them, 
which  they  approved  of.  So  all  that  night  he 
spent  in  preparations  against  the  next  morning ;  he 
sent  away  orders  to  the  horse  and  foot  that  lay  at 
Broxtowe  ^  to  come  to  him  in  the  morning  by  eight 
o'clock,  with  all  the  pioneers  they  could  gather  up  in 
the  country ;  he  sent  into  the  town,  and  caused  all 
the  pioneers  there  to  be  brought  up,  under  pretence 
of  making  a  breastwork  before  the  castle-gates,  and 
pretending  to  set  them  upon  the  platforms,  caused 
all  the  cannon-baskets  to  be  filled,  which  he  in- 
tended for  rolling  trenches.  All  things,  betimes  in 
the  morning,  being  gotten   into  perfect  readiness, 


^  ^  The  horse  that  were  in  Broxtowe,  and  a  foot  company 
that  lay  in  WoUerton  House.''^Note-Book. 


270        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       (1643. 

and  so  discreetly  ordered^  that  the  enemy  had  no 
notice  from  any  of  their  friends  in  town,  nor  knew 
anything  of  the  design,  till  it  was  ready;  the 
governor,  about  eleven  o'clock  on  Monday  morning, 
marched  out,  although  the  weather  at  that  time,  being 
very  tempestuous  and  rainy,  seemed  to  have  com- 
bined with  his  enemies  and  withstood  the  attempt ; 
but  the  soldiers  were  rather  animated  than  dis- 
couraged, thinking  that  difficulties,  after  they  were 
vanquished,  would  increase  their  glory.  So  when 
the  ugly  storm  had,  for  three  or  four  hours,  wasted 
itself  in  its  fury  on  them,  it  fell  at  their  feet,  and 
no  more  envious  clouds  obscured  the  cheerful  face 
of  heaven,  so  long  as  they  continued  in  the  field. 
The  governor's  own  company  marched  through  the 
meadows,  and  gave  the  alarm  to  the  enemy's  foot, 
while  Mr.  George  Hutchinson's  company  went 
through  the  lanes,  to  gain  a  nook,  which  was  very 
advantageous  for  the  approaches  of  our  men,  and  of 
which  they  easily  possessed  themselves,  and  then 
advancing,  planted  their  colours  within  musket-shot 
of  the  fort.  Although  they  planted  so  many  colours, 
the  governor  had  but  eightscore  foot,  and  a  hundred 
horse,  in  all  that  went  with  him  out  of  the  castle, 
but  he  set  the  pioneers  fairly  among  them  to  make 
the  better  show. 

When  the  colours  were  thus  planted,  the  pioneers 
were  set  at  work  to  cast  up  a  breastwork;  and 
being  left  in  a  safe  posture  with  the  inferior  officers, 


1643.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         271 

the  governor  and  his  brother  went  up  to  the  castle, 
to  order  the  drawing  down  of  the  ordnance. 
Meanwhile  the  cavaliers  sallied  out  of  their  fort  to 
gain  the  colours,  at  whose  approach  all  the  pioneers 
ran  away  from  their  works ;  but  the  soldiers  kept 
their  ground  and  their  colours,  and  beat  back  the 
enemy  into  their  own  fort,  killing  some  of  them, 
whereof  two  were  left  dead  before  our  men,  whom 
they  thought  it  not  safe  to  carry  off.  Our  horse 
meeting  the  flying  pioneers,  brought  them  back 
again  to  their  works,  which  they  continued  all  that 
day,  and  the  cavaliers  attempted  no  more  sallies. 
At  evening  the  ordnance  were  brought  down 
and  planted  within  musket-shot  of  the  fort,  and 
then  the  governor  despatched  a  messenger  to 
Derby  to  tell  Sir  John  Gell,  if  he  pleased  to  send 
any  of  his  men,  they  might  come  and  see  the  fort 
taken.  Accordingly,  on  Tuesday  the  Dutch  major 
came,    with    about    sixscore    foot    and    dragoons.^ 

^  In  Cell's  two  narratives  a  larger  amount  of  credit  is 
claimed  for  the  Derbyshire  forces.  '*  Within  ten  days  after, 
the  committee  of  Nottingham  again  sent  to  Colonel  Cell, 
that  he  might  needs  send  them  present  aid  and  assistance 
to  beat  the  enemy  from  the  bridge,  otherwise  they  would  be 
so  restrained,  that  they  would  not  be  able  to  keep  the  castle ; 
the  enemy  possessing  the  bridge,  the  castle  was  to  no  eflfect. 
Colonel  Gell  presently  commanded  between  three  and  four 
hundred  horse  and  dragoons  to  march  to  Nottingham  and 
assist  them,  whereof  Major  Mollanus  was  chief  commander; 
and  thither  went  and  drove  the  enemy  away,  so  that  it  will 


272        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

Hard  by  the  fort  at  the  bridges,  and  4t  that  side 
which  our  men  approached,  there  were  two  houses 
full  of  coals,  into  which,  if  the  cavaliers  had  put 
any  men,  they  might  have  done  much  mischief  to 
the  assailants  ;  wherefore  the  governor  sent  two  or 
three  soldiers,  who  very  boldly  went  almost  under 
their  works  and  fired  them  both,  by  the  light  of 
which,  burning  all  night,  the  governor's  men 
wrought  all  that  night  in  their  trenches,  and  cut  a 
trench  in  the  meadows,  some  of  them  calling  to  the 
cavaliers  in  the  fort,  and  keeping  them  in  abusive 
replies,  one  upon  another,  while  the  pioneers  carried 
on  their  works.  The  governor  and  his  brother, 
and  all  the  other  officers,  continuing  all  night  in 
tlie  trenches  with  them,  they  behaved  themselves 
so  cheerfully,  that  the  governor  gave  them  the  next 
morning  twenty  pounds ;  and  they  had  very  good 
drink  and  provisions  brought  them  out  of  the  garri- 
son, which  much  encouraged  them,  but  the  gover- 

be  adjudged  by  any  council  of  war,  that  Nottingham  town 
and  castle  had  been  long  since  in  the  enemy's  possession, 
had  they  not  had  the  assistance  of  Sir  John  Cell  in  driving 
the  enemy  from  them  at  every  time  of  need,  as  the  coloneb 
and  committee  of  Nottingham  did  ever  acknowledge."  In 
Cell's  second  narrative  it  is  said  *'  after  some  time  we  beat 
the  enemy  from  the  bridge,  which  was  of  such  importance 
that  the  governor  of  the  castle  professed  to  Major  Mollanus, 
that  unless  our  soldiers  would  stay  and  take  the  bridge^  he 
would  quit  the  castle,  let  the  parliament  do  with  him  what 
they  would.** 


T(543.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         273 

nor's  presence  and  alacrity  among  them  much  more. 
When  the  Derby  men  came  on  Tuesday,  the  Dutch 
major  came  down  to  the  trenches,  and  told  the 
governor  that  he  wondered  he  would  attempt  the 
fort,  for  it  was  impregnable,  and  therefore  much 
dissuaded  him  from  going  on,  and  said  that  he  and 
his  men  would  return.  The  governor  told  him 
that  he  and  the  soldiers  with  him  were  resolved  to 
leave  their  lives  rather  than  their  attempt ;  and  if 
they  failed  for  want  of  seconding  by  that  force 
which  was  sent  with  him  to  their  assistance,  let  the 
blame  lie  on  him.  When  the  Derby  officers  saw 
him  so  resolute  to  persist,  they,  after  much  dissua- 
sion and  dispute,  determined  to  stay,  and  the  officers 
went  up  with  the  governor  to  supper  in  the  castle, 
and  the  soldiers  to  quarters  provided  for  them  in 
the  town ;  but  after  supper,  the  governor  went 
down  again,  and  stayed  all  night  in  the  trenches 
with  his  men,  and  left  them  not  as  long  as  they 
stayed  there,  but  only  to  fetch  down  what  was 
necessary  for  them.  He,  his  brother,  and  all  the 
officers,  were  every  night  with  them,  and  made 
them  continue  their  custom  of  railing  at  each  other 
in  the  dark,  while  they  carried  on  their  approaches. 
There  was  in  the  Trent,  a  little  piece  of  ground  of 
which,  by  damming  up  the  water,  the  cavaliers  had 
made  an  island ;  and  while  some  of  the  soldiers 
held  them  in  talk,  others  on  Wednesday  night  cut 
the  sluice,  and  by  break  of  day  on  Thursday  mom- 

VOL.  1.  s 


274  Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.  [los- 
ing had  pitched  two  colours  in  the  island,  within 
carbine-shot  of  the  fort,  and  the  governor's  com- 
pany had  as  much  advanced  their  approach  on  the 
other  side.  When  they  in  the  fort  saw,  in  the 
morning,  how  the  assailants  had  advanced,  while 
they  were  kept  secure  in  talk  all  the  night,  they 
were  extremely  mad,  and  swore  like  devils,  which 
made  the  governor  and  his  men  great  sport :  and 
then  it  was  believed  they  in  the  fort  began  to  think 
of  flight ;  which  the  besiegers  not  expecting,  still 
continued  their  approaches,  and  that  day  got  forty 
yards  nearer  to  the  island  and  also  to  the  other 
side.  Although  Sir  John  Cell's  men  came  but  on 
Tuesday,  on  Thursday  the  second  messenger  came 
from  him,  to  call  them  back.  The  governor  en- 
treated them  to  stay  that  night  and  keep  the  trenches, 
while  his  men  refreshed  themselves :  which  they 
did,  but  his  men  would  not  go  out  of  their  trenches, 
but  slept  there  to  fit  themselves  for  the  assault, 
which  the  governor  had  resolved  on  for  the  morn- 
ing, and  for  that  purpose,  after  he  had  left  them 
with  all  things  provided  in  their  trenches,  he  went 
to  the  castle  to  see  the  fire-balls  and  other  neces- 
saries for  the  assault  brought  down,  and  at  three  in 
the  morning  came  to  them,  when  the  soldiers  told 
him  the  cavaliers  in  the  fort  had  for  two  hours  left 
off  shooting.  He  sent  some  soldiers  then  to  the 
work  sides  to  discover  what  this  meant ;  but  they, 
perceiving  the  place  empty,  went  in  and  found  that 


1643-1       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        275 

all  the  garrison  had  stolen  away,  and  had  left  be- 
hind them  fourscore  sheep,  a  hundred  loads  of  coals, 
twenty  quarters  of  oats,  much  hay,  a  great  deal  of 
plundered  lead,  and  a  fort  so  strong,  that  if  they 
had  had  such  courage  as  became  men  of  their  pro- 
fession, they  would  never  have  quitted  it.  They 
left  all  their  works  standing,  and  only  broke  up 
two  arches  of  the  Trent  bridges,  to  hinder  the 
governor's  men  from  following  them.  Their  flight 
was  by  that  means  secured,  the  river  being  so  out 
that  the  horse  could  not  ford  over.  Mr.  George 
Hutchinson  and  his  company  were  appointed  to 
possess  and  keep  the  fort  at  the  bridges,  which  he 
did ;  and  the  next  week  the  garrison  kept  a  day  of 
solemn  thanksgiving  to  God,  for  this  success  and 
the  mercy  in  it,  whereby  all  their  men  were  pre- 
served, notwithstanding  their  very  bold  adventures, 
so  that  not  one  of  them  was  slain,  and  but  four  of 
them  wounded,  whereof  three  were  so  slightly  hurt, 
that  they  returned  again  next  day  into  the  field. 
To  increase  their  thanks  to  God,  news  was  brought 
them  that  the  same  week  the  forces  that  went  out 
from  Newark,  joined  with  Henderson's,  had  received 
a  great  overthrow  by  Cromwell ;  and  that  my  Lord 
Newcastle  had  been  forced  to  raise  his  siege  of 
Hull  with  great  loss  and  dishonour.^     Some  time 

^  The  battle  of  Winceby  or  Horncastle  took  place  on 
October   11,  1643.    On  the  same  day  Lord  Fairfax,  by  a 


276        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

after  the  bridge  was  recoveredi  the  horse  went 
forth  and  brought  in  some  oxen  of  Mr.  John 
Wood's,  a  justice  of  the  county,  disaffected  to  the 
parliament,  but  not  in  action  against  them.  He, 
following  his  oxen,  came  to  the  governor,  and,  after 
he  had  despatched  his  business,  told  him  how  Mr. 
Sutton  would  have  once  employed  him  on  a  mes- 
sage, to  offer  the  governor  any  terms  he  would  ask 
the  king,  to  come  over  to  his  side  and  deliver  up 
the  castle  to  his  use.  Mr.  Wood  told  him  such 
a  message  would  not  obtain  credit,  unless  he 
had  some  propositions  in  writing ;  whereupon 
he  called  for  pen  and  ink,  and  writ  that  he 
should  offer  the  governor,  if  he  would  resign  his 
castle,  not  only  to  be  received  into  favour,  but  to 
have  what  reward  of  honour,  money,  or  command, 
he  himself  would  propound  ;  which  paper  when  Mr. 
Wood  had  received.  Sir  Richard  Biron  came  in, 
and  Mr.  Sutton  told  him  the  business;  to  which 
Sir  Richard  answered,  he  believed  it  would  not 
take  effect,  for  he  himself  had  made  the  like  offers 
to  him,  and  been  rejected  :  which  Mr.  Wood  hear- 
ing, would  not  undertake  the  employment,  but  the 
governor  made  him  declare  the  story  to  two  of  the 
gentlemen  of  the  committee. 

The  governor  not  growing  secure  by  successes, 

successful  sally  from  Hull,  forced  Newcastle  to  raise  the 
siege. 


1643.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        277 

was  but  stirred  up  to  more  active  preparations  for 
the  defence  of  the  place  he  had  undertaken  ;  and 
having  a  very  ingenious  person,  Mr.  Hooper,  who 
was  his  engineer,  and  one  that  understood  all  kind 
of  operations,  in  almost  all  things  imaginable,  they 
procured  some  saltpetre  men  and  other  necessary 
labourers,  and  set  up  the  making  of  powder  and 
match  in  the  castle,  both  of  which  they  made  very 
good ;  they  also  cast  mortar  pieces  in  the  town,  and 
finished  many  other  inventions  for  the  defence  of 
the  place.  The  governor  also  caused  a  mount  near 
the  castle  to  be  bulwarked,  and  made  a  platform 
for  ordnance,  and  raised  a  new  work  before  the 
castle-gates,  to  keep  off  approaches,  and  made  a 
new  in-work  in  the  fort  at  the  bridges.^ 

Sir  Thomas  Fairfax,  being  overmastered  in  the 
north  by  the  Earl  of  Newcastle's  great  army,  after 
his  father  was  retired  into  Hull,  came  with  those 
horse  that  were  left  him,  into  the  Vale  of  Belvoir, 
and  so  visited  Nottingham  Castle ;  where  he  and 
the  commanders  that  were  with  him,  considering  of 
what  advantage  it  was  to  the  parliament  to  keep 
that  place,  by  reason  of  the  commodious  situation 
of  it,  and  the  pass  which  might  be  there  main- 

^  The  Note- Book  is  rather  more  detailed.  ''The  close 
before  the  castle  was  fortified,  and  a  mount  built  there  and 
ordnance  planted  on  it,  and  a  court  of  guard  made  there." 
There  was  also  ^'a  new  inwork  made  and  a  work  on 
Snenton  side." 


278        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1643. 

tained,  between  the  north  and  south,  and  the  happy 
retreat  it  might  afford  to  their  northern  forces, 
very  much  pressed  the  governor  and  the  committee 
to  raise  all  the  force  they  could,  offering  arms  and 
commissions  for  them :  especially  he  pressed  the 
governor  to  complete  a  regiment  for  himself,  whiph 
at  that  time  he  would  not  accept,  because  Colonel 
Pierrepont  had  not  yet  declared  what  he  would 
do  with  his  regiment.  The  colonel  was  then  at 
Derby,  whither  some  of  his  officers  going  to  him, 
to  know  what  they  should  do,  he  dismissed  them ; 
yet  coming  to  the  town,  he  gave  out  strange 
envious  whispers,  and  behaved  himself  so  disin- 
genuously to  the  governor,  that  he  had  just  cause 
to  have  no  more  regard  for  him ;  and  being  again 
importuned  by  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax,  he  received  a 
commission  to  raise  a  regiment  of  twelve  hundred. 
He  presently  recruited  his  own  companies,  and 
began  to  raise  more :  Mr.  George  Hutchinson 
was  his  lieutenant-colonel,  and  one  Mr.  Widmer- 
poole  his  major;  there  was  a  company  raised 
by  one  Captain  Wright ;  there  remained  a  broken 
piece  of  Colonel  Pierrepont's  company,  and  Captain 
Poulton,  who  had  been  their  captain-lieutenant, 
being  dismissed  by  the  colonel,  had  a  new  com- 
mission under  the  governor  for  a  company;  and 
those  soldiers  of  Colonel  Pierrepont's  not  know- 
ing what  to  do,  it  was  determined  at  a  council  of 
war  of  strangers,  whereof  Sir  William  Fairfax  was 


1643.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         279 

president,  that  they  should  enlist  under  Captain 
Poulton.^  Sir  William  and  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax, 
both  of  them,  when  the  governor  made  scruple  of 
passing  by  Colonel  Pierrepont,  assured  him  that 
they  had  intelligence  given  them  in  the  north  of  his 
intentions  to  deliver  Nottingham  to  the  king. 

About  this  time  Chadwick,  the  deputy  recorder 
of  Nottingham,  and  one  of  the  committee,  came  to 
Nottingham,  from  whence  he  went  away,  when  the 
soldiers  were  all  drawn  out,  and  all  that  were 
fearful  went  to  other  places  to  secure  themselves. 
This  fellow  being  sent  on  a  message  to  the  Lord 
Fairfax,  general  of  the  north,  had  received  letters  of 
credence  from  the  committee ;  but  instead  of  pro- 
secuting their  business,  which  was  to  have  procured 
some  force  from  my  lord  to  help  keep  the  place, 
when  my  Lord  Newcastle  was  daily  expected  to 
come  against  it,  he  procured  himself  a  commission 
for  a  regiment,  and  a  joint  commission  for  himself 
and  Colonel  Pierrepont  to  be  governors  of  the  town 
and  castle.  The  last  he  kept  very  private;  the 
first  he  bragged  of  as  a  thing,  which,  my  lord  con- 
sidering his   great    abilities,   would   needs  enforce 

>  The  arrangement  made  is  more  clearly  explained  in 
the  Note-Book.  "  It  was  ordered  that  the  company  which 
was  formerly  in  the  regiment  of  Colonel  Pierrepont  as  his 
own  company,  should  remain  in  the  regiment  of  Colonel 
Hutchinson,  and  receive  for  their  captain,  Captain  Thomas 
Poulton." 


28o        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

upon  him.  In  execution  of  this,  he  raised  seven 
men,  which  were  his  menial  servants,  went  into 
Staffordshire,  possessed  a  papist's  fine  house,  and 
fired  it  to  run  away  by  the  light,  when  the 
enemy  was  thirty  miles  off  from  it,^  and  cheated 
the  country  of  pay  for  I  know  not  how  many 
hundred  men :  for  which,  if  he  had  not  stolen 
away  in  the  night,  he  had  been  stoned ;  and  as 
his  wife  passed  through  the  towns,  she  was  in 
danger  of  her  life,  the  women  flinging  scalding 
water  after  her.  But  before  this,  he  came  to 
Nottingham  at  the  time  the  governor  raised  his 
regiment,  and  coming  up  to  the  castle,  behaving 
himself  somewhat  insolently,  and  casting  out 
mysterious  words  of  his  authority;  the  governor 
set  on  a  person  to  find  out  his  meaning,  to  whom 
he  showed  a  commission  he  had  privately  obtained 
some  four  months  before,  for  himself  and  Colonel 
Pierrepont  to  be  joint   governors  of  the  county. 


'  I  have  not  found  any  confinnation  of  this  story. 
According  to  *'  Mercurius  Aulicus,"  for  December  3,  1643, 
Chadwick  endeavoured  to  raise  forces  to  assist  Sir  John 
Gell  in  the  defence  of  Derby  about  this  time.  That  journal 
notes  the  defeat  of  two  thousand  moorlanders,  ''English 
highlanders,"  near  Leek,  by  a  detachment  from  the  Marquis 
of  Newcastle's  forces  under  Colonel  Dudley.  It  states  that 
five  hundred  prisoners  were  taken,  including  ''their  com- 
mander-in-chief, General  Chadwick,  learned  in  the  law, 
well  known  in  Nottingham.** 


1643.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        281 

town,  and  castle ;  but  neither  did  he  now  declare 
this  to  any  of  the  committee,  but  only  made  some 
private  brags  in  the  town,  that  he  would  shortly 
come  and  take  order  for  the  safety  of  the  place, 
and  so  went  out  of  town  again.  The  governor 
acquainted  the  committee  with  this,  who  seemed 
to  have  great  indignation  at  it,  and  wrote  immedi- 
ately to  Mr.  Millington,  burgess  of  the  town  of 
Nottingham,  to  have  the  government  of  the  castle 
confirmed  to  Colonel  Hutchinson  by  authority  of 
parliament.  Mr.  Salusbury,  their  secretary,  had 
also  put  in  the  government  of  the  town,  but 
Colonel  Hutchinson  caused  him  to  put  it  out ;  and 
the  governor,  being  informed  that  Colonel  Pierre- 
pont,  at  London,  was  labouring  to  obtain  a  regi- 
ment, and  to  be  sent  down  as  governor  of  the 
town,  he  for  the  more  speedy  despatch,  sent  his 
own  chaplain  with  the  committee's  letters  to 
London,  and  sent  other  letters  of  his  own  to  Sir 
Thomas  Fairfax,  to  acquaint  him  how  Chadwick 
had  abused  my  lord,  his  father,  in  the  surreptitious 
procurement  of  this  dormant  commission ;  which, 
during  all  the  time  of  danger,  had  lain  asleep  in  his 
pocket,  and  now  was  mentioned,  as  a  thing,  where- 
by he  might,  when  he  would,  take  that  place  out  of 
Colonel  Hutchinson's  hands,  which  he  had  with  so 
many  labours  and  dangers  preserved,  by  God's 
blessing,  for  the  parliament's  service ;  he  therefore 
desired  a  commission  for  the  castle  only. 


282        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

As  soon  as  Mr.  Allsop  came  to  London,  he  was 
immediatdy  despatched  again  to-  Nottingham,  with 
an  order  of  parliament,  dated  November  20,  1643, 
for  Colonel  Hutchinson  to  be  governor  both  of  the 
town  and  castle  of  Nottingham,  with  an  acknow* 
ledgment  of  the  good  service  he  had  done  in 
preserving  the  place;  and  Mr.  MiUington  said  he 
should  likevrise  have  a  commission  from  the  Earl 
of  Essex.  At  Leicester,  Mr.  Allsop  met  letters, 
directed  to  the  governor,  from  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax, 
wherein  was  a  commission  enclosed  from  his  father, 
then  general  of  all  the  north,  for  the  government  of 
both  the  town  and  castle.  These  coming  both 
together,  although  the  general  and  the  pailiament 
had  added  the  government  of  the  town  to  that  of 
the  castle,  as  more  honour  to  him.  Colonel  Hutchin- 
son was  for  many  reasons  much  troubled  at  it, 
among  which  these  were  some  of  his  considera- 
tions. First,  they  were  almost  all  malignants,  there 
being  scarcely  a  man  left  who  was  to  be  confided 
in,  except  those  who  were  already  listed  into  the 
castle.  Secondly,  they  were  not  so  much  open, 
professed  enemies,  as  close,  hypocritical,  false- 
hearted people ;  amongst  whom  were  some  lead- 
ing eminent  men,  so  subtle  in  their  malignity,  that 
though  their  actions  were  most  prejudicial  to  the 
public  service,^ yet  did  they  cast  such  cunning, 
specious  pretences  over  them  of  public  good,  that 
even  the  most  upright  men  of  the  garrison  were 


I643-]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.         283 

often  seduced  by  their  fair  colours.  Thirdly,  the 
inost  religious  and  the  best  people  were  so  prag- 
matical, that  no  act,  nor  scarcely  word,  could  pass 
without  being  strictly  arraigned  and  judged  at  the 
bar  of  every  common  soldier's  discretion,  and  there- 
after censured  and  exclaimed  at  Fourthly,  the 
townsmen,  being  such  as  had  lived  free  and  plenti- 
fully of  themselves,  could  not  subject  themselves 
to  government ;  but  were  so  saucy,  so  negligent,  and 
so  mutinous,  that  the  most  honourable  person  in 
the  world,  could  expect  nothing  but  scandal,  re- 
proach, and  ingratitude,  for  the  payment  of  his 
greatest  merit;  and  this  the  worthy  governor 
found  sufficiently  from  them.  Lastly,  the  few  good 
men  were  so  easily  blown  up  into  causeless  sus- 
picions and  jealousies,  and  there  were  so  many 
malignant  whispers  daily  spread  abroad  of  every 
one  in  office,  that  it  was  impossible  for  any  man 
so  worthily  to  demean  himself,  but  that  a  jealous 
misconstruction  of  some  inconsiderable  trifle,  was 
enough  to  blast  the  esteem  of  all  his  actions, 
though  never  so  pious  and  deserving;  and  of  all 
things  in  the  world,  nothing  was  so  contrary  to  the 
governor's  dear  and  generous  heart,  as  a  base  and 
causeless  jealousy  of  him.  But  notwithstanding 
these  and  many  other  reasons,  such  as  the  unprofit- 
able expense  of  his  time,  estate,  and  labours,  where  he 
should  reap  neither  glory  nor  advantage  to  himself,  he 
considered,  that  since  he  had  rather  declined  than 


284        Metnoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1643- 

sought  the  enlargement  of  his  power  and  command, 
and  that  the  parliament  and  generals  had  at  such  a 
distance  been  moved  to  put  it,  unsought  for,  upon  him, 
it  was  a  work  which  God  called  him  to,  and  that 
the  Lord,  who  set  him  into  the  employment,  would 
conquer  all  the  difficulties.  For  the  unjust  thoughts 
or  reports  of  men  or  their  ungrateful  returns,  he 
was  as  much  above  the  grief  of  that,  as  the  vain- 
glory of  mutable  popular  applause.  It  was  in  all 
things  his  endeavour  to  do  and  deserve  well ;  and 
then  he  never  regarded  the  praise  or  dispraise  of 
men,  for  he  knew  that  it  was  impossible  to  keep  on 
a  constant  career  of  virtue  and  justice,  and  to 
please  all.  It  sufficed  him,  for  his  inward  peace, 
that  he  did  not  thrust  himself  into  this  and  other 
employments,  for  any  popular,  ambitious,  or  advan- 
tageous interest  of  his  own  ;  but  that  he  was  called 
of  God,  to  the  carrying  on  of  the  interests  of  truth, 
righteousness,  and  holiness,  and  to  the  defence  of 
his  country,  wherein  he  was  faithful,  and  found  the 
Lord's  protection  and  glorious  presence,  not  only  in 
all  he  did,  but  in  all  he  suffered  for  him  and  from  him. 
As  soon  as  the  governor  had  received  his  com- 
mission, he  thought  it  his  duty  to  put  it  into 
execution,  and  to  arm  and  fortify  the  town ;  but  my 
Lord  Newcastle  coming  with  all  his  forces  into 
Nottingham  and  Derbyshire,^  the  governor,  by  the 

'  When  Newcastle  was  forced  to  raise  the  siege  of  Hull 


1643-1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         285 

advice  of  the  committee,  forbore  to  publish  his  new 
commissions,  lest  the  enemy,  perceiving  an  intent 
to  enlarge  the  garrison,  should  utterly  destroy  the 
town,  before  they  were  able  to  defend  it  At  the 
reading  of  his  commission  in  the  committee  chamber. 
Colonel  Thomhagh  showed  much  discontent  and 
was  melancholy  after  it;  whereupon  the  governor 
told  him,  that  as  he  had  not  sought  that  enlarge- 
ment of  command,  so  if  any  of  them  thought  them- 
selves abridged  by  it,  or  any  other  inconvenience 
to  the  public  service,  he  would  resign  it,  and  never 
make  use  of  his  commission.  The  colonel  answered 
with  much  kindness,  that  he  only  wondered  how 
the  town  came  to  be  added,  when  they  wrote  for  the 
castle ;  but  he  was  well  satisfied  with  it,  and  forced 


he  marched  to  York,  ''where,"  says  the  duchess,  "he 
remained  but  a  few  days  to  refresh  his  army,  and  receiving 
intelligence  that  the  enemy  was  got  into  Derbyshire  and 
did  grow  numerous  there,  and  busy  in  seducing  the  people, 
that  country  being  under  my  lord's  command,  he  resolved 
to  direct  his  course  thither,  in  the  beginning  of  November 
1643,  to  suppress  their  further  growth ;  and  to  that  end 
quartered  his  army  in  Chesterfield,  and  in  all  the  parts 
thereabout  for  a  certain  time."  In  December,  she  con- 
tinues, he  marched  "from  Chesterfield  to  Bolsover  in  the 
same  county,  and  from  thence  to  Welbeck  in  Nottingham- 
shire, to  his  own  house  and  garrison,  in  which  parts  he 
staid  some  time,  both  to  refresh  his  army  and  to  settle  and 
reform  some  disorders  he  found  there." — Life  of  the  Duke 
of  Newcastle,  pp.  48-50^  ed.  Rimbault,  1872. 


286        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

himself  to  a  seeming  content,  though  the  truth 
is  he  had  some  emulation  but  not  malice,  to  the 
governor  ;  and  being  of  a  nature  a  little  jealous  and 
easy  to  be  wrought  upon,  the  wicked  enemies  of  the 
cause  endeavoured,  all  they  could,  by  insinuations 
to  work  disaffection  and  division  between  these  two 
gentlemen,  who  were  the  most  faithful,  unbiassed, 
and  zealous  champions  of  the  public  interest,  in 
their  country.  But  after  Colonel  Thomhagh  had 
been  wrought  up  to  declare  his  discontent,  there 
were  many  odd  passages;  by  which  others  also  of 
the  committee,  who  durst  not  before  reveal  their  en- 
vious hearts,  showed  themselves  displeased.  Where- 
upon, when  they  were  all  together,  the  governor, 
who  hated  secret  heart-boilings,  spoke  to  them,  and 
told  them  that  their  carriages  since  the  commission 
came  to  him,  did  manifest  their  dissatisfaction  in  it ; 
and  if  they  would  deal  ingenuously  with  him  and 
let  him  know  it,  as  he  had  not  sought  the  additional 
government  of  the  town,  so  he  would  never  under- 
take it,  if  they  had  any  jealousies  that,  unknown  to 
them,  he  had  procured  it  for  himself,  and  closely 
sought  after  the  enlargement  of  his  own  power, 
by  the  abridgment  of  theirs,  he  assured  them  he 
was  much  mistaken,  and  that  neither  to  Mr 
Millington,  nor  to  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax,  had  he 
mentioned  anything  more  than  the  government  of 
the  castle.  For  that  of  the  town  he  rejoiced  not  in 
it,  but  looked  upon  it  as  a  great  burthen;  yet  since 


1643-1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        287 

it  was  conferred  as  an  honour  upon  him,  he  should 
not  decline  serving  them  therein  that  had  thought  him 
worthy  of  it,  except  it  gave  distaste  to  any  of  those 
present ;  which  if  it  did,  he  would  esteem  it  an 
obligation,  if  they  would  but  declare  it  before  he 
published  his  commission.  They  all  unanimously 
replied,  they  were  not  only  contented,  but  exceed- 
ingly well  pleased  in  it.  Then  the  governor  told 
them,  if  they  were  real/  as  they  professed,  he 
should  expect  their  ready  and  free  concurrence  with 
him,  in  all  affairs  tending  to  the  public  service,  and 
in  those  courses  he  should  apply  himself  to,  for  the 
good  of  the  garrison :  and  again  eamesfly  desired 
them,  if  they  had  any  dislikes,  either  of  himself 
personally,  or  of  the  alteration  of  the  town  out  of 
the  hands  it  had  been  in  the  last  year,  that  they 
would  now  freely  declare  it :  for  as  he  should  take 
it  exceedingly  kindly  of  them,  to  do  so  at  this  time ; 
so  if,  after  he  had  undertaken  the  charge,  there 
should  be  any  thwarting  or  crossing  of  powers  and 
commands  between  them,  he  should  not  bear  it ;  for 
as  he.  should  not  stand  upon  all  punctual  niceties  in 
his  command,  so  he  would  not  be  abridged  of  the 
just  and  lawful  power  due  to  him  in  his  place. 
They  all  unanimously  Unswered,  it  was  very  fit  and 
just   he   should    have    it,    and    they  would  rather 


^  Real— /r.  Vrais— sincere.    The  Note-Book  has  "really 
as  they  professed  themselves." 


288        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.      ,[1643- 

endeavour  to  uphold  him  in  it  than  in  any  way  to 
retrench  it. 

Now  was  my  Lord  Newcastle's  army  come  into 
Derbyshire,  and  having  taken  some  places  there, 
nothing  was  expected  at  Derby  and  Nottingham 
but  a  siege ;  ^  whereupon  Captain  Palmer's  troop 
was  called  away  from  Broxtowe,  and  all  the  rest  of 
the  horse  was  sent  away  into  Leicestershire,  except 
a  few  left  for  scouts ;  and  as  soon  as  they  were 
gone,  my  Lord  Newcastle's  forces  came  and 
quartered  almost  at  the  town  side,  and  in  all 
the  near  towns,  and  Hastings  took  this  oppor- 
tunity to  'make  a  garrison  at  Wilden  Ferry.  By 
the  mercy  of  God  the  enemy  was  restrained  from 
coming  up  to  the  town,  though  it  lay  so  open  that 
they  might  have  come  in  at  their  pleasure ;  and 
they  not  only  miserably  wasted  and  plundered  the 
country  all  about,  but  one  of  them  told  a  malignant, 
where  he  quartered,  that  it  was  their  design  in 
coming  to  those  parts,  to  devour  the  country.  The 
regiments  that  were  quartered  the  nearest  to 
Nottingham  were  Sir  Marmaduke  Langdale's  and 
Colonel  Dacre's,  who  had  been  a  familiar  acquaint- 
ance of  Lieutenant-colonel  Hutchinson's  when  he  was 
in  the  north,  and  they  loved  each  other  as  well  as 


^  At  this  point  occurs  in  the  Note-Book  an  episode  headed 
*'  the  quarrel  between  the  Derby  committee  and  ours  about 
powder.**    The  extract  is  given  in  the  Appendix. 


1643.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        289 

if  they  had  been  brothers.  Colonel  Dacre  sent  a 
trumpet  to  desire  Lieutenant-colonel  Hutchinson  to 
send  him  a  safe  convoy,  that  he  might  come  and 
see  him,  which  he  acquainted  the  committee  with, 
and  would  have  refused,  but  that  the  committee, 
thinking  some  good  use  might  be  made  of  it,  per- 
suaded him  to  suffer  him  to  come ;  accordingly  he 
sent  him  a  ticket  under  his  hand,  promising  him  to 
come  and  go  safely ;  so  upon  Thursday  morning 
he  came,  with  about  eight  more,  to  the  top  of  the 
hill  at  Nottingham,  and  from  thence  sent  his 
trumpet  to  the  governor,  as  if  not  willing  to  trust 
himself  without  his  leave,  to  know  whether  he 
would  permit  him  and  his  two  servants  to  come  into 
his  garrison  to  visit  the  lieutenant-colonel.  The 
governor  sent  him  a  ticket  for  them  to  come  in  ;  and 
though  usually  they  kept  no  sentinels  in  the  town, 
yet  he  sent  down  some  officers 'and  soldiers  to  show 
him  a  guard  at  his  entrance.  When  the  lieutenant- 
colonel  came  to  him,  he  made  many  endearing  ex- 
pressions to  him;  how  much  he  rejoiced  when  his 
regiment  was  designed  for  that  place  where  he  was, 
and  how  kind  an  affection  he  retained  for  him,  not- 
withstanding their  contrary  engagements.  Falling 
into  further  discourse  of  this  kind,  he  said  that  if  he 
could  but  be  convinced  that  the  king  first  entertained 
papists  into  his  army,  and  that  the  parliament  had 
none  in  theirs,  he  would  never  fight  more  on  his 
side.     The  lieutenant-colonel   told   him  he .  should 

VOL.  L  T 


290        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1643- 

easily  be  able  to  do  that.  "Well/'  said  Dacre, 
"you  and  I  must  have  some  discourse  in  private/ 
and  I  shall  be  glad  if  you  can  satisfy  me  in  that." 
Then  the  colonel  desired  some  drink  might  be  sent 
out  to  two  or  three  gentlemen,  that  stayed  on  him. 
upon  the  top  of  the  hill ;  which  the  lieutenant-colonel 
hearing,  sent  some  of  his  own  officers  and  soldiers 
on  horseback  to  fetch  them  down,  who  coming  in 
all  together  with  them,  the  town  rose  in  an  uproar, 
and  came  to  the  governor  with  a  high  complaint, 
that  I  know  not  how  many  cavaliers  were  come 
into  the  town,  and  rode  up  and  down  armed, 
threatening  the  people  to  their  great  terror.  This 
the  governor  thinking  to  be  true,  was  vexed  at  it, 
and  sent  down  an  angry  letter  to  his  brother, 
requiring  him  to  send  up  the  men  that  came  laist 
into  the  town.  Col.  Dacre  hearing  this,  desired 
the  lieutenant-colonel  that  the  gentlemen  might  pass 
as  they  came,  and  offered  to  go  up  himself  and 
answer  for  the  offence  they  had  given.  But  the 
lieutenant-colonel  presently  carried  them  all  out  of 


^  Though  this  may  appear  somewhat  improbable  at  a 
time  when  religious  opinions  have  so  little  effect  upon 
political  ones,  it  was  otherwise  considered  at  that  time ;  for 
nearly  at  this  same  juncture  it  is  to  be  seen,  in  Whitelocke, 
page  81,  that  Sir  £.  Deering  did  on  this  very  account  oif 
there  being  so  many  papists  and  Irish  rebels  entertained  in 
the  king's  army,  quit  him  and  come  into  the  parliament,  who 
admitted  him  to  composition,  being  the  first. — ^J.  H. 


I643-]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        291 

the  town,  and  came  himself  up  to  the  castle,  taking 
it  something  unkindly  that  his  brother  should  write 
such  a  letter  to  him,  and  worse,  that  others  should 
have  suspicions  of  him;  so  that  though  he  had 
made  a  promise  to  dine  the  Saturday  following  at 
Dacre's  quarters,  yet,  to  take  away  all  offence  and 
suspicions,  he  resolved  he  would  have  no  more 
meetings  with  him,  and  to  that  end  wrote  him  a 
very  civil  letter  to  excuse  his  not  coming ;  and  the 
governor  wrote  another  to  excuse  the  mistake,  where- 
upon the  gentlemen  were  sent  for  to  the  castle. 
Dacre  returned  complimental  answers  to  them  both, 
and  writ  another  to  Captain  Poulton,  entreating 
very  earnestly  the  lieutenant-colonel  and  Captain 
Poulton  to  come  and  dine  with  him  on  Wednesday, 
and  desiring  the  governor  he  might  have  the  honour 
to  see  him.  These  letters  being  communicated  to 
the  committee,  they  would  fain  have  had  the  lieu- 
tenant-colonel to  have  gone,  but  he  held  firm  to  his 
resolution  and  would  not;  so  with  their  privity 
Captain  Poulton  only  went  to  excuse  it,  and  two  of 
White's  officers  were  sent  along  with  him,  with 
charge,  if  they  could,  to  find  out  how  the  enemy 
lay.  When  Captain  Poulton  came,  the  colonel 
entertained  him  very  kindly,  and  expressed  a  great 
deal  of  trouble  that  the  lieutenant-colonel  was  not 
come,  and  took  him  aside  and  told  him  that  the 
governor  of  Nottingham  and  his  brother  had  now  an 
opportunity  whereby  they  might  much  advantage 


292        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643- 

themselves,  and  do  the  king  excellent  service.  Cap- 
tain Poulton  asking  him  how,  he  said,  if  the  governor 
would  deliver  up  the  castle  he  should  be  received 
into  favour,  have  the  castle  confirmed  to  him  and 
his  heirs,  have  ten  thousand  pounds  in  money,  and 
be  made  the  best  lord  in  the  country.  If  the  lieu- 
tenant-colonel would  deliver  up  the  bridges  he 
should  have  three  thousand  pounds,  and  what  com- 
mand he  would  ask  in  the  army ;  and  offered  Cap- 
tain Poulton  two  thousand  pounds  to  effect  this* 
The  captain  told  him,  for  his  own  part,  nothing 
should  buy  him  to  such  a  villany,  and  he  believed 
the  same  of  the  governor  and  his  brother,  and  made 
no  question  but  they  had  before  been  attempted. 
The  colonel  told  him  he  did  not  this  without  autho- 
rity, and  thereupon  pulled  a  paper  out  of  his  pocket 
wherein  were  words  to  this  effect :  "  These  are  to 
authorise  Colonel  Dacre  to  treat  with  Colonel  Hut- 
chinson and  Lieutenant-colonel  Hutchinson  for  the 
delivery  of  Nottingham  Castle  and  the  bridges,  and 
to  make  them  large  promises,  which  shall  be  per- 
formed by  W.  Newcastle."  Having  shown  him 
this  warrant,  the  colonel  was  very  importunate  with 
the  captain  to  acquaint  the  governor  and  his  brother, 
and  return  their  answer  to  him  upon  the  Friday 
after,  when  he  offered  to  meet  him,  if  they  would, 
at  a  place  called  St.  Ann's  Well.  Captain  Poulton 
told  the  governor  and  his  brother,  and  they  told 
the  committee,  and   showed  them  very  disdainful 


1643-1        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        293 

refusals  they  all  had  written  to  the  colonel,  and 
sent  him  by  a  drum ;  who  was  not  long  gone  out  of 
the  garrison  but  another  came  from  Colonel  Dacre 
with  a  letter  to  Captain  Poulton,  excusing  himself 
that  he  could  not  stay  in  his  quarters  for  him, 
according  to  appointment,  but  assuring  him  that 
what  he  had  promised  should  be  really  performed. 
The  governor's  drum,  in  the  absence  of  Colonel 
Dacre,  delivered  the  three  letters  to  Langdale,  who 
wrote  them  back  a  good  civil  letter,  saying  that  he 
believed  my  Lord  Newcastle  and  Dacre,  out  of 
familiarity  and  acquaintance  with  them,  might  have 
made  these  offers  in  kindness  to  them,  but  for  his 
part  he  should  otherwise  pursue  the  king's  service.^ 
After  this,  the  weather  being  pretty  fair,  and  the 
moon  shining  at  that  time,  the  governor  sent  out  a 
foot  company  to  beat  up  their  quarters,  and  gave 
them  a  fierce  alarum  throughout,  and  took  twelve 
horses  out  of  one  of  their  stables,  which  they  sent 
home.  On  their  return,  meeting  a  great  body  of 
horse,  they  all  at  once  discharged  upon  them,  and 
killed  some  eight  of  them,  as  we  were  told  in  the 
morning.  After  this  charge  the  horse  immediately 
retreated  and   would   not   stand   another,  and  the 

^  This  correspondence  is  given  in  the  Appendix :  the 
letters  to  Colonel  Dacre  were  published  at  the  time,  and 
reprinted  by  Vicars  in  his  Parliamentary  Chronicle  (God's 
Ark,  p.  144) :  the  original  of  Langdale's  letter  is  in  the 
Bodleian  Library. 


294        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

next  day  removed  their  quarters  further  from  the 
garrison.  Then  the  governor  and  committee  sent 
for  the  Nottingham  horse  back  from  Leicester,  and 
appointed  them  to  bring  five  hundred  muskets  which 
were  come  to  Leicester  for  the  governor.  They 
came,  but  left  the  arms  behind  them.  Besides 
this,  the  colonel  and  all  his  regiment  fell  into  dis- 
putes, that  the  governors  of  the  parliament  garrisonai 
had  no  command  of  the  horse  that  were-  quartered 
in  their  towns;  and  hereupon  the  governor  was 
often  prevented  of  many  opportunities  advantage- 
able  to  the  public  service,  and  much  discouraged  to 
find  such  obstructions  from  the  envious  pride  and 
humour  of  those  who  should  have  been  his  assis- 
tants ;  ^  but  he  bore  with  it  as  long  as  himself  only 
suffered  by  it,  ahd  was  willing  for  quietness'  sake 
to  pass  by  many  injuries  ofiered  himself,  till  the 
public  service  came  to  be  infinitely  prejudiced  by  it. 
In  the  meantime  he  went  on,  as  well  as  he  could, 
through  all  difficulties,  in  the  faithful  and  active 
discharge  of  his  trust.  He  called  a  committee  and 
council  of  war,  where  it  was  put  to  the  question 
and  voted  that  the  town  should  be  fortified.^  Then 
he  applied  himself  to  the  thing,  and  called  a  full 

^  The  Note-Book  specially  mentions  Charles  White  as 
disputing  the  colonel's  command  over  the  horse. 

'  On  the  fortification  of  the  town,  and  the  meeting  held 
to  discuss  it,  see  the  extract  from  the  Note-Book  given  in 
the  Appendix. 


1643.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        295 

Hall  of  all  the  town,  who  declared  sufSciently  their 
disaffection  to  the  parliament,  but  in  such  a  subtle 
way  as  would  have  entrapped  a  less  prudent  person. 
But  the  governor  overlooked  many  things  that  he 
saW|  and  made  use  of  all  the  advantages  they  gave 
him;  and  did  not  manifest  his  resentment  at  any- 
thing which  they  could  cloak  under  a  specious 
pretence,  how  disadvantageably  soever  it  were 
9  designed  against  the  parliament  interest.  The 
whole  town  unanimously  voted  that  the  place 
should  be  fortified,  except  Alderman  Drury,  and 
two  or  three  that  followed  him.  Then  the  governor 
gave  them  encouraging  promises  of  his  protection 
and  care  over  them,  and  his  endeavours  to  preserve 
them  with  his  regiment,  if  they  would  assist  in  their 
own  defence.  The  town  being  well  satisfied,  or  at 
least  seeming  so  (for  he  treated  them  with  that 
dexterity  that  they  could  not  for  shame  openly 
oppose  him,  though  he  was  not  ignorant  that  the 
cavalier  party  cursed  him  in  their  hearts,  as  the 
only  obstacle  in  their  greater  desire  of  having 
declared  themselves  on  the  other  side),  with  general 
outward  cheerfulness,  in  Christmas  week  the  works 
were  begun.^  About  this  time  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax 
being  to  march  into  Staffordshire,  sent  for  some 
arms  he  had  left  in  Nottingham  castle ;  and  by  the 


1  See  Colonel  Hutchinson's  letter   to    Mr.   Millington, 
January  3,  1644,  in  the  Appendix. 


296        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1643. 

same  convoy  that  went  with  them  the  governor 
got  his  five  hundred  muskets  brought  home  from 
Leicester.  Sir  Thomas  sent  orders  to  the  governor 
to  send  him  all  the  horse  in  the  garrison;  but 
when  the  governor  acquainted  them  with  it,  they 
would  none  of  them  obey  him  and  go,  though  Sir 
Thomas  sent  twice  very  earnestly  for  them,  but 
stayed  in  Nottingham,  where  they  would  obey 
no  order  of  the  governor's ;  and  by  doing  things 
that  concerned  the  garrison  without  and  against  his 
orders,  they  made  a  sad  confusion  and  thwarting  of 
powers,  which  the  governor  bore  with  in  respect  to 
Col.  Thomhagh,  who  did  things  not  so  much  out 
of  malice  in  himself,  as  out  of  a  little  emulation, 
which  did  not  destroy  his  kindness  to  the  governor, 
and  by  the  subtle  instigation  of  Capt.  White,  who 
wrought  upon  his  facility  to  do  those  things  which 
his  malice  and  factious  ambition  prompted  him  to 
wish,  but  he  durst  not  himself  attempt.  Although 
the  horse  would  not  obey  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax,  it 
was  not  out  of  cowardice,  .for  the  men  were  very 
stout  and  cheerful  in  the  service,  but  only  had  the 
general  fault  of  all  the  parliament  party,  that  they 
were  not  very  obedient  to  commands,  except  they 
knew  and  approved  their  employment.^     They  had 


^  On  the  representation  of  the  governor  that  the  protec- 
tion of  some  of  the  horse  was  necessary  during  the  fortifica- 
tion of  the  town,  Fairfax  gave  him  permission  to  keep 


1644.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        297 

no  sooner  refused  Sir  Thomas,  but  my  Lord  Grey, 
sending  for  two  troops,  they  went  to  him  to  Melton, 
which  he  had  begun  to  fortify.*  The  governor, 
notwithstanding  these  obstacles  from  secret  enemies 
and  refractory  friends,  carried  on  his  business  with 
good  success,  and  had  many  events  according 
to  his  endeavours.  Among  the  rest,  his  men  en- 
countering a  party  where  Colonel  Frecheville 
and  Sir  Henry  Humlack  were  in  person,  fought 
them,  killed  many  of  their  men,  and  took  Freche- 
ville prisoner;  but  his  captain-lieutenant  Jammot 
came  to  his  rescue  and  freed  him,  though  he  him- 
self was  taken  in  his  stead  and  brought  to  Notting- 
ham.' Here,  after  he  had  been  some  time  kept, 
he  corrupted  a  soldier,  who  disguised  and  led  him 
out,  and  went  away  with  him.  The  man  being  a 
Frenchman  and  a  proper  black  man,  some  would 
needs  report  him  to  be  Prince  Rupert,  and  there- 
upon raised  a  great  clamour  at  the  governor. 

But  before  his  escape,  upon  the  15th  of  January, 
intelligence  was  brought  that  all  the  forces  in 
Newark  were  marched  on  a  design  upon  Sleaford 
in  Lincolnshire.     The  governor,  not  trusting  that 

Captain  White's  troop,  but  reiterated  the  command  to  send 
the  rest — Note- Book,  p.  42  b. 

^  The  two  troops  were  those  of  Captains  Clerk  and 
Taylor.— Note-Book. 

*  A  detailed  account  of  this  skirmish  and  the  incidents 
which  led  to  it  is  given  in  the  Note-Book.    See  Appendix. 


298        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       [1644- 

pretence,  commanded  all  the  soldiers  and  townsmen 
to  sit  up  that  night  and  expect  them ;  and  the  next 
morning,  being  Tuesday,  two  of  his  intelligencers 
came  and  brought  him  word  very  early  that  the 
design  was  against  Nottingham.^  After  them  the 
horse  scouts  came  in  with  the  news  of  their 
approach,  the  enemy's  scouts  and  they  having  fired 
upon  each  other.  Hereupon  a  strong  alarum  was 
given  throughout  the  garrison,  and  a  foot  company 
sent  down  from  the  castle  to  the  works,  and  the 
horse  were  there  set  with  them,  to  dispute  the 
enemy's  entrance  into  the  town ;  but  the  horse  per- 
ceiving the  enemy's  body  to  be  a  great  one,  retreated 
to  the  castle,  and  the  foot  seeing  them  gone,  and  none 
of  the  townsmen  come  forth  to  their  assistance,  made 
also  an  orderly  retreat  back  to  the  castle,  in  which 
there  was  not  a  man  lost  nor  wounded.  The 
works  being  imperfect  and  quitted,  were  easily 
entered,  though  the  cannon  that  played  upon  them 
from  the  castle  took  off  wholly  the  second  file  of 
musketeers  that  entered  the  gates.  The  first  was 
led  up  by  Lieutenant-colonel  Cartwright,  who  two 
days  before  had  sent  to  the  governor  for  a  pro- 
tection  to   come  in    and   lay  down    arms.'      The 

^  Colonel  Hutchinson's  letter  of  January  16-17,  1644, 
gives  a  full  account  of  this  attack.    See  Appendix. 

*  '*  Upon  Sunday  morning,  the  14th  of  January,  Mr.  Philip 
Laycock  came  to  the  governor,  and  showed  him  a  letter 
that  his  brother,  Lieutenant-colonel  Cartwright,  had  written 


1644.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        299 

enemy  being  entered,  possessed  themselves  of  St. 
Peter's  church  and  certain  houses  near  the  castle, 
from  whence  they  shot  into  the  castle-yard  and 
wounded  one  man  and  killed  another,  which  was 
all  the  hurt  that  was  done  our  men  that  day. 

The  governor  was  very  angry  with  the  horse 
for  coming  up  so  suddenly,  and  stirred  them  up  to 
so  a  generous  shame,  that  they  dismounted,  and  all 
took  muskets  to  serve  as  foot,  with  which  they  did 
so  very  good  service,  that  they  exceedingly  well  re- 
gained their  reputations.  Having  taken  foot  arms, 
the  governor  sent  one  of  his  own  companies  with 
part  of  them,  and  they  beat  the  cavaliers  out  of  the 
nearest  lanes  and  houses,  which  they  had  possessed, 
and  so  made  a  safe  way  for  the  rest  to  sally  out 
and  retreat,  as  there  should  be  occasion. 

When  this  was  done,  which  was  about  noon, 
the  governor  sent  out  all  the  rest  of  the  horse 
and  foot,  to  beat  them  out  of  the  town.  Sir 
Charles  Lucas,  who  was  the  chief  commander  of 
all  the  forces  there,  had  prepared  a  letter  to  send 
up  to  the  governor  to  demand  of 'him  the  castle; 

to  him,  wherein  he  entreated  his  brother  to  speak  to  the 
governor  to  grant  him  a  protection  to  lay  down  his  arms, 
and  live  quietly  at  home,  and  to  send  him  word  speedily 
whether  he  could  have  it  or  no,  for  he  was  resolved  to  give 
over,  and  if  he  had  not  this  protection  he  would  try  another 
way.  The  governor  took  time  to  consider  of  it"— Note- 
Book,  44  b. 


300        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       I1644. 

or  if  he  would  not  deliver  it,  that  then  he  should 
send  down  the  mayor  and  aldermen,  threatening, 
that  if  they  came  not  immediately,  he  would  sack 
and  bum  the  town.  There  were,  at  that  time, 
above  a  thousand  cavaliers  in  the  town,  and  as 
many  in  a  body  without  the  town,  to  have  beaten 
off  Derby  and  Leicester  forces,  if  they  should 
have  made  any  attempt  to  come  in,  to  the  assist- 
ance of  their  friends  in  Nottingham.  On  the 
other  side  the  Trent,  were  all  the  forces  Mr. 
Hastings  could  bring  out,  from  his  own  garrison 
and  Belvoir  and  Wiverton,  to  force  the  bridges. 
All  the  cavalier  forces  that  were  about  the  town, 
were  about  three  thousand.  When  Sir  Charles 
Lucas  had  written  his  letter,  he  could  find  none 
that  would  undertake  to  carry  it  to  the  castle, 
whereupon  they  took  the  mayor's  wife,  and  with 
threats,  compelled  her  to  undertake  it;  but  just 
as  she  went  out  of  the  house  from  them,  she 
heard  an  outcry,  that  **  the  roundheads  were  sally- 
ing forth,"  whereupon  she  flung  down  their  letter 
and  ran  away;  and  they  ran  as  fast,  from  four 
hundred  soldiers,  who  came  furiously  upon  them 
out  of  the  castle,  and  surprised  them;  while  they 
were  secure  the  castle  would  not  have  made  so 
bold  an  attempt.  But  the  governor's  men  chased 
them  from  street  to  street,  till  they  had  cleared 
the  town  of  them,  who  run  away  confusedly :  the 
first   that   went    out   shot    their   pistols   into    the 


1644.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        301 

thatched  houses  to  have  fired  them,  but  by  the 
mercy  of  God  neither  that,  nor  other  endeavours 
they  showed  to  have  fired  the  town,  as  they  were 
commanded,  took  effect.  Between  thirty  and  forty 
of  them  were  killed  in  the  streets,  fourscore  were 
taken  prisoners,  and  abundance  of  arms  were 
gathered  up,  which  the  men  flung  away  in  haste, 
as  they  ran ;  but  they  put  some  fire  into  a  hay 
bam  and  hay  mows,  and  all  other  combustible 
things  they  could  discern  in  their  haste,  but  by 
God's  mercy,  the  town,  notwithstanding,  was  pre- 
served from  burning.  Their  horsQ  faced  the  town 
in  a  valley  where  their  reserve  stood,  while  their 
foot  marched  away,  till  towards  evening,  and  then 
they  all  drew  off.  Many  of  them  died  on  their 
return,  and  were  found  dead  in  the  woods  and  in 
the  towns  they  passed  through.  Many  of  them, 
discouraged  with  this  service,  ran  away,  and  many 
of  their  horses  were  quite  spoiled :  for  two  miles 
they  left  a  great  track  of  blood,  which  froze  as  it 
fell  upon  the  snow,  for  it  was  such  bitter  weather 
that  the  foot  had  waded  almost  to  the  middle  in 
snow  as  they  came,  and  were  so  numbed  with  cold 
when  they  came  into  the  town,  that  they  were  fain 
to  be  rubbed  to  get  life  into  them,  and  in  that  con- 
dition were  more  eager  of  fires  and  warm  meat 
than  of  plunder,  which  saved  many  men's  goods, 
and  their  security,  that  did  not  believe  an  enemy, 
who  had  unhandsomely,  to  speak   truth,  suffered 


302        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1644. 

them  to  enter  the  town  without  any  dispute, 
would  have  durst,  at  such  great  odds,  to  have 
set  upon  driving  them  out  Indeed,  no  one  can 
believe,  but  those  that  saw  that  day,  what  a 
strange  ebb  and  flow  of  courage  and  cowardice 
there  was  in  both  parties  that  day.  The  cavaliers 
marched  in  with  such  terror  to  the  garrison,  and 
such  gallantry,  that  they  startled  not  when  one 
of  their  leading  files  fell  before  them,  all  at  once^ 
but  marched  boldly  over  the  dead  bodies  of  their 
friends,  under  their  enemies'  cannon,  and  carried 
such  valiant  dreadfulness  about  them,  as  made 
very  courageous  stout  men  recoil.  Our  horse, 
who  ran  away  frighted  at  the  sight  of  their  foes, 
when  they  had  breastworks  before  them,  and  the 
advantage  of  freshness  to  beat  back  assailants 
already  vanquished  with  the  sharpness  of  the  cold 
and  a  killing  march,  within  three  or  four  hours,  as 
men  that  thought  nothing  too  great  for  them,  re- 
turned fiercely  upon  the  same  men,  after  their 
refreshment,  when  they  were  entered  into  defensible 
houses.  If  it  were  a  romance,  one  should  .say, 
after  the  success,  that  the  heroes  did  it  out  of 
excess  of  gallantry,  that  they  might  the  better 
signalize  their  valour  upon  a  foe  who  was  not 
vanquished  to  their  hands  by  the  inclemency  of  the 
season  :  but  we  are  relating  wonders  of  Providence, 
and  must  record  this  as  one  not  to  be  conceived  of, 
but  by  those  who  saw  and  shared  in  it.     It  was 


1644.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        303 

indeed  a  great  instruction,  that  the  be^t  and  highest 
courages  are  but  the  beams  of  the  Almighty ;  and 
when  he  withholds  his  influence,  the  brave  turn 
cowards,  fear  unnerves  the  most  mighty,  makes  the 
most  generous  base,  and  great  men  to  do  those 
things  they  blush  to  think  on :  when  God  again 
inspires,  the  fearful  and  the  feeble  see  no  dangers, 
believe  no  difficulties,  and  carry  on  attempts  whose 
very  thoughts  would,  at  another  time,  shiver  their 
joints  like  agues.  The  events  of  this  day  humbled 
the  pride  of  many  of  our  stout  men,  and  made  them 
afterwards  more  carefully  seek  God,  as  well  to 
inspire  as  prosper  their  valour ;  and  the  governor's 
handsome  reproaches  of  their  faults,  with  showing 
them  the  way  to  repair  them,  retrieved  their  strag- 
gling spirits,  and  animated  them  to  very  wonderful 
and  commendable  actions. 

The  governor  would  not  let  his  men  pursue  the 
rear,  but  thought  they  might,  in  the  night,  have 
completed  their  day's  work,  if  they  had  fallen  into 
the  enemy's  quarters,  which  he  gave  orders  to  the 
horse  to  do ;  but  Colonel  Thomhagh  would  not 
obey  them,  because  they  came  from  him,  and  so 
lost  a  great  opportunity,  and  contented  himself  with 
praising  God  for  the  great  deliverance  of  the  day, 
wherein  there  was  not  one  townsman  that  came  in 
to  the  assistance  of  the  soldiers. 

The  next  day,  the  governor  called  the  town  to- 
gether, and  represented  to  them  the  mercy  of  God 


304        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1644. 

and  the  malice  of  their  enemies,  who,  without  regard 
of  any  friends  they  had  among  them,  came  pur- 
posely to  fire  the  town,  which  God  alone  preserved ; 
and,  having  showed  them  their  danger,  he  required 
they  should  be  no  longer  slothful  in  their  own 
defence,  but  should  take  arms  to  preserve  their 
families  and  houses.  He  propounded  to  them,  that 
if  they  would  so  do,  they  should  choose  their  own 
captains.  They,  considering  the  just  reasons  and 
motives  with  which  he  urged  them,  at  length 
resolved  to  join  in  their  own  defence,  and  chose 
four  captains ;  ^  but  the  captains  refusing,  the 
soldiers  that  day  went  home  unlisted,  yet  by  the 
governor's  dexterity  in  managing  them,  he  at  last 
brought  four  hundred,  whereof  more  than  half  were 
high  malignants,  to  enlist  themselves  under  one  Mr. 
Coates,  a  minister,  an  honest,  godly  man,  and  Mr. 
Mason,'  an  attorney,  a  great  cavalier,  but  a 
reserved,  silent  man,  who,  for  an  austere  knit  of  his 
brow,  and   a  grave,  severe  countenance,  had   the 


^  The  Note-Book  mentions  five  persons,  viz.,  Mr.  Mayer, 
Mr.  Coates,  Alderman  Dniry,  Mr.  John  Gregory,  and  Mr. 
Mason ;  '*  but  of  all  these  captains  there  was  not  one  but 
Mr.  Coates  that  would  stand,  which  so  discouraged  the 
soldiers  that  they  also  returned  home  unlisted."  Mr.  Mason 
seems  to  have  been  persuaded  to  accept  a  commission  a 
few  days  later. 

'  The  same  whom,  when  put  into  confinement  at  the 
castle,  the  governor  invited  to  his  table. — J.  H. 


1644.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        305 

reputation  of  a  wise  man,  but  was  known  to  be 
disaffected  to  the  parliament,  though  cunning 
enough  not  to  do  anything  that  might  expose  him 
to  sequestration.  Into  these  men's  hands  he  put 
arms,  and  so  ordered  them,  that  at  the  last  they 
grew  fiercer  in  the  service  than  those  who  were 
uprightly  honest. 

The  next  month  the  Lord  Chaworth  sent  a  letter 
to  the  governor,  acquainting  him  that  he  was  sick, 
and  desired  a  protection  to  come  and  remain  at  his 
own  house,  in  order  to  make  his  peace  with  the  par- 
liament; which  protection  the  governor  gave  him.^ 

The  governor  had  acquainted  the  parliament 
with  the  late  successes,  whereupon  they  ordered  a 
thousand  pounds  to  be  sent  to  the  garrison  out  of 
the  sequestrations  of  London,  and  the  excise  of  the 
town  to  go  to  the  payment  of  the  garrison ;  but 
through^  Mr.  Millington's  negligent  prosecution,  the 
thousand  pounds  never  came.' 

The  governor  went  on  again  successfully  in  his 
employment,  and  began  to  endear  himself  to  all  the 
town  as  well  as  to  the  soldiery ;  which  awakening 
White's  sleeping  envy,  he  cast  new  plots  to  disturb 

^  About  the  same  time  the  Earl  of  Care  sought  to  make 
his  peace  with  the  parliament  See  the  extract  from  the 
Note-Book  in  the  Appendix. 

'  The  letter  in  question  is  the  one  already  referred  to. 
About  this  time  occurs  the  capture  of  King's  Mills,  which  is 
described  in  the  Note- Book.    See  extract  in  the  Appendix. 

VOL.  L  U 


3o6        Metnoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1644. 

him ;  and  first  made  a  motion  to  send  to  London 
for  two  hundred  soldiers :  to  which  the  governor 
answered — If  they  were  honest,  there  were  men 
enough  to  keep  the  garrison ;  if  they  were  not,  to 
call  in  other  forces  was  but  to  bait  their  treachery 
with  a  greater  prize;  and  that  to  send  for  more 
force,  while  they  had  such  slender  maintenance  for 
these,  was  to  increase  trouble  without  any  benefit. 

The  same  afternoon  the  committee  sent  the 
governor  a  warrant  to  be  signed,  which  was  before 
subscribed  by  four  of  them.  White  in  the  front^ 
The  warrant  was  to  this  effect : — 


"  To  Mr.  Hooper,  Engineer  of  the  Garrison 

of  Nottingham. 

"You  are  hereby  required  to  make  your 
present  appearance  to  this  committee,  there  to  give 
an  account,  what  you  have  done  about  the  works 
of  the  town,  and  how  far  you  have  proceeded  in 
them ;  how,  and  in  what  manner,  and  by  what  time 
you  intend  to  finish  them ;  and  what  materials  are 
needful  for  the  finishing  of  them,  there  being 
imminent  danger  to  the  garrison." 

As  soon  as  the  governor  received  the  warrant, 
he  took  the  engineer  with  him,  and  went  to  the 

^  The  other  three  signers  of  the  warrant  were  Widmer- 
poole,  Salusbury,  and  James. — Note-Book. 


1644.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        307 

committee,  to  whom  said  he,  "Gentlemen,  I 
received  just  now  such  a  strange  warrant  from  you, 
that  I  can  impute  it  to  nothing  but  a  picked  occa- 
sion for  quarrel.  If  you  desire  to  question  any- 
thing in  the  fortifying  of  the  town,  I  have  not  only 
brought  the  engineer,  but  am  here  myself  to  answer 
it :  if  there  be  money  in  his  hands,  let  him  give 
you  an  account  of  it ;  but  concerning  the  fortifica- 
tions, I  conceive  he  is  only  to  be  accountable  to 
me ;  therefore  why  this  warrant  should  be  made,  I 
cannot  tell,  unless  purposely  to  afiront  me ;  as  for 
that  imminent  danger  you  pretend,  it  is  utterly 
unknown  to  me,  and  if  there  be  any,  I  ought  to 
have  been  made  acquainted  with  it,  and  desire  now 
to  understand  it."  They  answered,  "Were  they 
not  in  daily  peril  ? "  He  replied,  "  That  was 
certain,  but  at  this  time  none  more  imminent  than 
usual  that  he  knew  of;  and  further  desired  them, 
if  he  had  been  negligent  in  those  things  which  con- 
duced to  the  safety  of  the  town,  that  they  would 
article  against  him,  whatever  they  could  accuse  him 
of;  if  he  had  done  nothing  worthy  of  blame,  he 
took  it  exceedingly  ill,  to  be  thus  thwarted  and 
afironted  in  his  just  and  lawful  command."  Upon 
replies  and  debate.  White  said,  "  If  Hooper  did  not 
render  them  an  account  of  his  works,  they  would 
clap  him  by  the  heels."  Whereupon  the  governor, 
addressing  to  him  only,  told  him,  "  that  from  the  first 
opening  of  his  commission  he  had  manifested  his 


3o8        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1644. 

discontent,  and  that  he  had  taken  notice  of  his 
secret  endeavours  to  oppose  him,  and  was  glad  the 
humour  was  now  so  ripe  as  to  vent  itself;  that  for 
the  time  to  come,  since  he  saw  his  condescen- 
sions did  but  encourage  them  to  wrest  all  things 
from  him,  and  to  question  all  his  dues,  he  would 
now  expect  that  full  observance  from  them  all,  that 
was  due  from  the  officers  of  a  garrison  to  the 
governor;  that  he  expected  the  horse  should 
receive  orders  from  him,  and  that  he  would  no 
more  put  up  with  such  affironts  and  neglects  as  he 
had  that  very  day  received,  when,  calling  for  a 
muster,  of  the  horse  to  have  been  sent  out  upon  a 
very  advantageable  design,  a  whole  troop,  unknown 
to  him,  was  by  the  committee  sent  out  for  hay, 
whereby  that  opportunity  was  lost/'  He  told  them 
further,  ''that  protections  charging  officers  and 
soldiers  to  forbear  plunder,  ought  to  be  given  only 
by  him  upon  their  certificate,  and  not  by  them ; 
and,''  said  he,  "  Gentlemen,  I  received  that  affiront 
from  you  lately,  which  no  governor  in  the  world, 
but  myself,  would  have  put  up  with ;  when  at  a 
public  council  of  war,  among  all  the  officers,  enough 
to  have  caused  a  mutiny,  it  was  propounded  how 
far  my  command  extended,  and  questioned  whether 
I  could  command  horse  in  the  garrison  ?  And  all 
of  you,  at  a  council  of  war,  ordered  that  the  booty 
taken  should  be  at  the  disposal  of  the  chief  officer 
that  went  out ;   so  that  if  a  corporal  went  out,  he 


1644.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        309 

must  dispose  of  the  booty,  which  in  all  garrisons  is 
the  governor's  right  to  do." 

While  they  were  in  this  dispute,  the  lieutenant- 
colonel  came  in,  and  seconded  his  brother ;  and  after 
some  smart  disputes  on  both  sides,  they  parted  for 
that  night. 

The  next  morning  ^  the  committee  sent  for  the 
governor,  who  coming  to  them,  one  of  them  drew 
a  paper  out  of  his  pocket,  and  offered  some  pro- 
positions to  the  governor;  which  were,  first,  that 
the  dispute  between  them  might  be  silenced  and 
kept  private ;  next,  that  he  would  join  with  them, 
in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Millington,  to  desire  him  to  get 
the  question  decided  by  the  close  committee.  What 
were  the  several  powers  of  a  governor  and  a  com- 
mittee ?  And,  lastly,  that  he  would  draw  up  what 
he  conceived  his  power  to  be.  To  this  the  gover- 
nor replied,  that  for  silencing  the  thing,  he  was 
very  willing  to  do  it;  for  sending  to  the  close 
committee,  he  very  well  understood  his  own  power, 
and  if  they  questioned  it,  they  might  send  whither 
they  pleased,  to  satisfy  themselves;  for  setting 
down  the  particulars  wherein  he  conceived  his 
power  to  consist,  when  he  did  anything,  which  they 
thought  belonged  not  to  him,  let  them  call  him  to 
question  where  they  pleased,  and  he  should  be 
ready  to  give  an  account  of  his  actions,  but   he 

*  The  13th  of  February.— Note- Book. 


3IO        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        [1644. 

would  not  make  himself  so  ridiculous  as  to  send  for 
satisfaction  in  unquestionable  things ;  yet  for  their 
information  he  would  go  along  with  them,  if  any  of 
them  pleased,  either  to  my  Lord  of  Essex  or  my 
Lord  Fairfax,  to  have  the  power  of  a  governor 
decided.  They  told  him  the  generals  understood 
not  the  power  of  a  committee  so  well  as  the  par* 
liament,  and  therefore  wrote  a  letter  to  Mr.  Milling- 
ton  with  extraordinary  commendations  of  the  gover- 
nor, yet  desiring  to  know  the  extent  of  his  power, 
and  showed  it  to  him.  He  told  them,  if  they  be- 
lieved those  things  they  wrote  of  him,  he  wondered 
whence  all  this  discontent  should  arise,  for  he 
appealed  to  them  all,  whether,  ever  since  he  under- 
took  the  government,  he  had  usurped  any  command 
over  them,  or  done  so  much  as  the  most  incon- 
siderable act  without  acquainting  them,  and  receiv- 
ing their  approbation ;  and  what  should  ail  them, 
he  could  not  imagine,  unless  they  were  discontented 
at  his  being  made  governor ;  which  if  they  were, 
they  might  thank  themselves,  who  put  it  upon  him, 
when  he  received  nothing  but  trouble,  expense,  and 
danger  in  it.  They  all  acknowledged  his  appeal 
true,  and  said  they  had  desired  his  establishment  in 
the  government  of  the  castle,  as  the  man  they 
esteemed  most  worthy  of  it  and  most  fit  for  it.  He 
told  them,  if  the  addition  of  the  town  grieved  them, 
that  was  to  be  transferred  on  the  parliament,  who 
without  his  seeking  had  added  that  to  him.     One 


I644-]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         311 

of  them  replied,  they  had  so  worthy  an  opinion  of 
him,  that  they  wished  the  assessing  of  the  country 
too  might  be  only  put  into  his  power.  He  said  he 
should  have  been  obliged  to  them  had  this  pro- 
ceeded from  anything  but  discontent,  and  that  if 
without  his  own  seeking  he  should  be  honoured 
with  that  trust,  as  he  was  with  this,  he  should 
endeavour  to  discharge  it  faithfully ;  but  he  rather 
desired  it  might  continue  in  the  hands  it  was,  and 
if  he  were  negligent  to  fetch  in  those  assessments, 
which  were  given  him,  then  let  the  blame  lie  on 
him ;  but  for  rating  and  assessing  the  towns,  those 
who  were  acquainted  with  the  country  were  fitted 
for  it ;  and  thus  for  the  present  it  rested. 

The  design  they  prevented  by  sending  out  the 
troop  unknown  to  him,  was,  the  saving  the  town  of 
Southwell  from  being  made  a  garrison  for  the 
king;^  which,  the  town  being  unwilling  to,  sent 
word  to  the  governor,  that  if  he  would  come  and 
assist  them,  they  would  join  with  him  to  beat  out 


^  "  The  design  the  governor  was  then  prevented  of  was  : 
the  cavaliers  had  begun  to  fortify  the  minster  and  the 
bishop's  palace  at  Southwell ;  the  town  being  much  troubled 
at  it,  sent  word  that  there  were  there  but  one  hundred  foot 
and  one  hundred  horse,  and  if  the  force  that  Nottingham 
could  send  out  would  come  and  fall  on  them  in  their 
quarters,  the  town  would  rise  with  them."  The  governor 
intended  to  review  the  horse  on  the  12th,  and  send  them 
out  on  the  13th  February. — Note-Book. 


3 1 2        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        \\t^ 

some  soldiers  that  intended  to  fortify  themselves 
there;  but  the  horse,  by  reason  of  their  employ- 
ment, failing  on  those  two  days,  and  extraordinary 
ill  weather  coming  after,  that  opportunity  was  lost : 
this  was  about  the  middle  of  February.  Captain 
White  continued  still  afterwards  to  prevent  all 
designs  whose  events  might  in  any  way  have  con- 
duced to  the  governor's  honour,  not  weighing  what 
hindrance  it  was  to  the  public  service,  which  was  a 
great  vexation  to  the  governor;  but  his  courage 
was  above  their  malice,  and  his  zeal  to  the  service 
carried  him  vigorously  on,  in  all  things  which  he 
could  accomplish  by  his  own  officers  and  soldiers, 
who  were  more  obedient  to  him;  and,  although 
this  exercised  his  patience,  yet  was  it  also  a  spur  to 
his  diligence,  and  made  his  fidelity  more  illustrious, 
and  kept  him  more  in  waiting  upon  God,  and  more 
strict  in  his  watch  over  all  his  actions,  because  he 
knew  how  all  his  enemies  watched  for  his  fall. 

Upon  the  eleventh  of  February,  Comet  Palmer, 
who  had  been  prisoner  at  Newark,  came  home  and 
told  the  governor  that  he  had  discovered  in  his 
prison  a  design  intended  about  this  time  to  surprise 
the  bridge  by  Hacker's  soldiers,  who  were  to  come 
in  the  habit  of  market  people  the  next  Saturday. 
This  intelligence  was  seconded,  whereupon  the 
governor  sent  his  officers  to  command  all  the 
bridge  soldiers  to  keep  in  their  quarters  that  day : 
he  commanded  also  all  the  horse  in  the  town  to  be 


I644-]       Metnoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        3 1 3 

ready  to  go  out  upon  the  first  sound  of  the  trumpet, 
and  gave  orders  for  all  the  drums  in  the  garrison  to 
beat  betimes  in  the  morning ;  the  lieutenant-colonel 
set  a  guard  beyond  the  bridge,  with  charge  strictly 
to  examine  all  passengers.  About  eleven  of  the 
dock  on  Saturday,  the  17th  of  February,  they  took 
twelve  of  them^  upon  the  bridge,  disguised  like 
market  men  and  women,  with  pistols,  long  knives, 
hatchets,  daggers,  and  great  pieces  of  iron  about 
them ; '  whereupon  they  sent  and  acquainted  the 
governor,  who  being  himself  on  horseback'  at  the 
works,  went  immediately  down  to  the  bridge,  and 
commanded  all  the  horse  to  come  away  and  pursue 
them;  but  the  horse  commanders,  being  always 
slow  in  obeying  his  commands,  came  not  till  the 
enemy's  foot  beyond  the  bridge,  perceiving  their 
fellows  were  taken  upon  the  bridge,  retired  and  got 
safe  off;  only  nine,  who  were  to  have  assassinated 
those  at  the  bridge,  and  had  advanced  forwarder 
than  the  rest  for  that  purpose,  were  overtaken,  and 
with  their  captain  leaped  into  the  Trent  to  have  saved 
themselves,  of  whom  our  men  plucked  four  out  of 
the  water,  five  were  drowned,  and  the  captain  swam 
to  shore  on  the  other  side.  The  governor  was  in 
doubt  whether  these  men,  taken  in  disguises,  were 


^  Hacker's  soldiers. 

'  See  the  portion  of  Colonel  Hutchinson's  letter  given  in 
the  Appendix. 


3 !  4        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1644, 

to  be  released  as  prisoners  of  war,  or  executed  as 
spies  and  assassins  by  martial  law ;  but  though  he 
would  not  have  cared  if  the  bridge-soldiers  had 
turned  them  into  the  Trent  when  they  took  them, 
he  afterwards  released  them  all  upon  exchange, 
except  one  Slater,  a  soldier  of  his  own  that  had  run 
away  to  the  enemy,  and  this  day  was  taken  coming 
into  the  town,  with  a  montero  ^  pulled  close  about 
his  face,  but  denied  that  he  was  of  the  design ;  yet 
after,  upon  trial  at  a  court-martial,  he  was  con- 
demned and  executed.  The  governor  had  sent  out 
some  horse  and  foot,'  to  drive  the  grounds  at  the 
enemy's  garrison  at  Shelford,  which  they  did,  and 
from  under  the  very  works  from  which  the  enemy 
shot  at  them,  brought  away  many  beasts  and 
horses,  that  belonged  to  the  garrison,  and  brought 
them  up  into  the  castle-yard.  The  governor  being 
then  in  the  committee-chamber,  told  them  it  was  fit 
the  soldiers  should  have  a  reward,  whereupon  it 
was  ordered  to  give  them  six  pounds,  and  the 
governor  told  the  soldiers  the  committee  had 
assigned  them  a  reward.  But  when  they  came  to 
receive  it,  Salusbury,  the  treasurer,  tithed  it  out, 
and  gave  the  soldiers  a  groat  a  piece,  and  sixpence 
a  piece  to  the  officers,  which  in  all  came  but  to 


*  A  kind  of  cap  so  called. 

'  **  Six  score  of  his  own  and  the  Major's  foot,  and  Cap- 
tain White's  and  Captain  Palmer's  horse." — Note-Book. 


1644.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        315 

forty  shillings  and  odd  money ;  which  the  soldiers, 
being  madded  at,  flung  back  his  money,  and 
desired  a  council  of  war  to  do  them  right ;  which 
the  governor  assented  to,  and  the  next  day  the 
business  being  heard  at  a  full  council  of  all  the 
officers  of  the  garrison,  it  was  determined  by  the 
unanimous  vote  of  all  but  Mr.  Salusbury,  that  as  the 
enemy  shot  at  them,  when  they  took  the  booty,  it 
did  of  right  belong  to  the  soldiers  that  fought  for 
it,  and  so  they  had  it.  Whereupon  Salusbury 
flung  himself  away  from  the  board  in  a  great  huff 
and  muttering,  for  which  the  governor  rebuked  him, 
and  told  him  such  carriage  ought  not  to  be  suffered 
in  him,  who,  as  an  officer,  ought  to  have  more 
respect  for  the  place  and  them  that  sat  there. 
After  this,  about  eighteen  of  the  lieutenant-colonel's 
men  went  out  and  met  twenty-five  men  in  arms ; 
between  them  there  was  a  brook,  the  bridge-men 
called  to  them,  and  asked  of  what  side  they  were, 
and  perceiving  they  were  cavaliers,  told  them,  after 
some  little  defies  between  them,^  that  though  the 
number  was  unequal,  they  would  fight  with  them ; 
and  passing  over  the  brook,  charged  them,  put  them 
to  flight,  killed  two  of  them,  took  eight  prisoners, 
and  twelve  of  their  horses.  Upon  examination  they 
were  found  to  be  northern  gentlemen,  who  having 
enlisted  themselves  in  the  prince's  own  troop,  after 

^  "  After  some  scolding." — Note-Book. 


3i6        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       [1644- 

the  death  of  Sir  Thomas  Biron  that  commanded 
under  the  princei  were  assigned  to  my  Lord  Went* 
worth,  at  which  being  discontented,  they  were  now 
returning  into  their  own  country,  being  almost  all 
of  them  gentlemen.  Sir  Richard  Biron,  for  his 
brother's  memory,  exchanged  them  for  prisoners 
of  Nottingham,  taken  when  the  town  was  first 
surprised.^ 

At  the  end  of  this  month,  on  the  fast-day,  the 
national  covenant  was  taken,  with  a  great  solemnity, 
both  by  the  soldiers  and  inhabitants,  men  and 
women,  of  the  garrison.'  This  day,  unexpectedly, 
came  Sir  Edward  Hartup,  with  a  thousand  horse 
from  Leicester  and  Derby,  to  which  the  governor 
added  between  five  and  six  himdred ;  Sir  Edward 


^  These  Nottingham  prisoners  had  been  confined  in 
Pontefract  Castle. — Note- Book. 

'  ^'  On  the  fast  day  the  national  covenant  was  generally 
taken  throughout  the  whole  garrison :  the  women  and  those 
that  were  not  soldiers  took  it  at  their  parish  churches. 
After  the  sermon,  which  in  every  church  was  made  pur- 
posely for  that  occasion,  all  the  soldiery,  both  horse  and 
foot,  were  drawn  forth  into  the  field,  and  after  the  covepant 
being  read  and  prayer  made  in  three  several  places,  the 
governor  and  every  captain  in  the  head  of  their  companies, 
with  all  their  soldiers,  solemnly  took  the  covenant,  and  to 
express  their  joy,  there  was  a  general  shout  throughout  the 
whole  field,  and  a  psalm  sung,  after  which  they  went  all 
according  to  their  several  companies  into  the  town  and 
subscribed  it." — Note-Book,  55  a. 


1644.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        3 1 7 

being  appointed  to  command  the  party,  should  have 
gone  with  them  to  take  Muscam  Bridges,  at 
Newark,  before  which  place  Sir  John  Meldrum  was 
now  come,  with  about  seven  thousand  men,  and 
had  laid  siege  to  it.  The  horse  of  Newark,  as 
soon  the  parliament's  forces  came,  made  an  escape 
over  Muscam  Bridge,  which  Sir  Edward  Hartup, 
having  more  mind  to  drink  than  to  fight,  lingering 
a  day  at  Nottingham,^  and  then  marching  to  no 
purpose  against  it,  lost  his  opportunity  of  taking ; 
yet  God,  by  a  providence,  gave  it  up  with  200  men 
that  kept  it  to  the  parliament's  forces,  who,  had 
they  then  pursued  their  success,  might  have  carried 
the  town  too,  but  it  was  not  God's  time  then  to 
deliver  the  country  of  that  pernicious  enemy.  The 
horse  that  were  escaped  out  of  Newark,  went  into 
all  their  garrisons  in  the  Vale  and  Derbyshire,  and 
gathered  up  all  the  force  they  could  make,  to  about 
the  number  of  two  thousand,  and  with  these  they 
cfime  and  quartered  near  Nottingham ;  themselves 
and  the  country  giving  out  that  they  were  about 
four  thousand. 

There  was  a  fast  kept  at  Nottingham,  to  seek 
God  for  his  presence  with  our  armies ;  and  before 
the  first  sermon  was  ended  the  enemy's  horse  came 


^  "They  should  have  marched  the  next  day,  but  Sir 
Edward  Hartup  had  more  mind  to  drink,  and  went  not  till 
Friday."— Note-Book. 


3 1 8        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [16*4. 

to  the  town  side  and  gave  a  strong  alarm/  and 
continued  facing  the  town  till  night,  at  which  time 
they  returned  to  their  quarters,  and  those  horse 
that  were  in  the  garrison  following  their  rear, 
gleaned  up  two  lieutenants  and  two  or  three  other 
officers.  The  next  day  the  body  marched  just  by. 
the  town  side,  and  so  passed  over  the  river  at 
Wilden  Ferry.  After  they  were  gone  from  about 
Nottingham,  the  governor  went  down  to  the 
Leaguer,  at  Newark,  where  Sir  John  Meldrum  had 
made  all  things  ready  for  a  general  assault  on  the 
town ;  but  at  a  council  of  war  that  was  called  in 
the  field,  it  was  determined  that  it  should  not  then 
be,  whereupon  the  governor  of  Nottingham  returned 
to  his  garrison ;  who,  coming  to  take  his  leave  of 
Sir  John  Meldrum,  Sir  John  intreated  him  that  he 
would  return  again  and  be  among  them  as  much  as 
he  could,  making  a  sad  complaint  of  the  envyings, 
heart-burnings,  and  dissensions  that  were  among 
the  several  commanders,  so  that  he  had  much  ado 
to  hold  them  together,  and  had  great  need  of  men 
of  moderation  and  prudence  to  assist  him,  and  to 
help  to  mediate  among  them.  The  forces  that  Sir 
John  Meldrum  commanded  before  this  town,  were 
gathered  out  of  several  associated  counties,  and  the 
commanders  were  so  emulous  of  one  another,  and 

^  **They  all  being  drawn  out  and  come  as  far  as  the 
Lings."— Note-Book. 


1644.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        3 1 9 

so  refractory  to  commands,  and  so  piquing  in  all 
punctilios  of  superiority,  that  it  galled  the  poor  old 
gentleman  to  the  heart;  who,  having  commanded 
abroad,  and  been  used  to  deal  with  officers  that 
understood  the  discipline  of  war,  was  confounded 
among  those  who  knew  not  how  to  obey  any 
orders,  but  disputed  all  his  commands,  and  lost 
their  time  and  honour  in  a  fruitless  expedition, 
through  their  vain  contentions ;  whereas,  had  they 
joined  in  the  assault  when  he  then  would  have 
made  it,  they  might  probably  have  carried  the  town, 
but  missing  that  opportunity,  they  came  off  at  last 
with  loss  and  dishonour.  While  the  governor  was 
at  the  Leaguer,  Sir  John  Meldrum  told  him,  that 
Colonel  Pierrepont  had  been  with  him,  to  get  his 
hand  to  a  paper,  which  should  have  testified,  that 
the  government  of  Nottingham  did  of  right  belong 
to  him ;  but  Sir  John  answered  he  could  not  testify 
any  such  thing,  for  it  was  his  own  act  to  confer 
that  government  where  now  it  was;  with  which 
Colonel  Pierrepont  seemed  very  well  satisfied  at 
that  time.  When  he  could  not  prevail  in  this,  he 
desired  Sir  John  to  set  his  hand  to  another  paper, 
which  should  have  certified,  that  in  all  things  he 
had  approved  himself  most  firm  and  faithful  to  the 
service  of  the  parliament.  Sir  John  said  he  would 
not  injure  him  so  much  as  to  make  any  such  certi- 
ficate of  a  thing  not  called  into  question ;  but  if 
there  should  be  any  doubt  of  it,  he  should  be  ready 


/ 


3  20        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1644. 

to  do  him  all  right.  Colonel  Pierrepont,  moreover, 
went  to  the  governor's  soldiers,  that  had  formerly 
been  of  his  regiment,  and  giving  them  twenty 
shillings  to  drink,  told  them  he  was  to  be  governor 
of  the  town,  and  would  shortly  come  among  them. 

Sir  Edward  Hartup  was  sent  with  the  party  of 
horse  he  before  had  at  Muscam  Bridge,  to  pursue 
those  that  were  gone  out  of  Newark,  and  fight  with 
them,  and  hinder  their  joining  with  Prince  Rupert, 
who  was  expected  to  come  to  raise  the  siege ;  and 
when  Sir  Edward  came  into  Leicestershire  the 
whole  country  rose  with  him,  and  the  governor  of 
Leicester  brought  out  foot  and  cannon  to  assist 
him.^  His  forlorn  hope  being  of  the  Nottingham 
horse,  charged  the  enemy's  forlorn  hope  and  routed 
them,  and  then  fell  into  their  body  of  foot,  which 
they  had  drained  out  of  their  little  garrisons,  and 
routed  them  also,  and  if  Sir  Edward  Hartup  would 
have  come  on  with  his  body,  they  had  all  been  cut 
off;  but  the  knight  would  not  stir,  but  commanded 
the  forlorn  hope  to  retreat,  who  had  slain  and  taken 
many  prisoners  of  the  enemy,  and  among  them 


^  This  account  of  the  behaviour  of  Sir  E.  Hartup  (or 
Hartopp)  is  confinnedy  with  additional  details,  in  the  pam- 
phlet entitled,  '*  A  brief  relation  of  the  siege  at  Newark,  as  it 
was  delivered  to  the  Council  of  State  at  Derby  House  by 
Lieutenant-colonel  Bury,  whom  the  Earl  of  Manchester 
sent  to  report"  Hartup  returned  towards  Newark  on 
Tuesday  night,  and  the  battle  took  place  on  Thursday. 


1644.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         321 

Jammot,  that  had  lately  made  his  escape  out  of 
Nottingham  Castle.  The  enemy  perceiving  Sir 
Edward  would  not  hurt  them,  rallied  again  and 
joined  with  Prince  Rupert ;  of  which,  as  soon  as 
Sir  Edward  had  intelligence,  he  went  back  to 
Newark  with  such  shameful  haste,  that  he  quitted 
Melton  with  all  the  prisoners  the  forlorn  hope  had 
lately  taken.  The  Leicester  forces,  discouraged  at 
this  carriage,  returned  to  their  garrisons  and 
marched  no  more  with  him.^ 

The  governor  of  Nottingham  kept  out  spies 
upon  the  enemy's  motions,  and  sent  word  to  the 
Leaguer,  but  the  gentlemen  there  were  so  over- 
confident, they  would  not  believe  any  force  could 
come  to  raise  their  siege.  At  length,  the  governor 
of  Nottingham  being  there  himself,  word  was 
brought  that  Prince  Rupert  was  come  to  Ashby ; 
wherefore  he,  fearing  some  attempt  upon  his 
garrison,  to  divert  the  forces  at  the  siege,  returned 
home  with  his  brother  to  look  to  their  charge.     It 


^  In  Whitelock's  Memoirs,  p.  85,  there  is  an  account  of 
this  relief,  or  raising  the  siege  of  Newark,  agreeing  with  Mrs. 
Hutchinson's,  except  that  it  is  not  quite  so  particular,  and 
omits  the  account  of  what  befell  Colonel  Thomhagh. 
Whitelocke  attributes  to  the  misconduct  of  Sir  E.  Hartup 
and  Colonel  Bingley  Prince  Rupert's  coming  with  his  forces 
entire  to  the  place,  and  informs  us  that  a  court-martial  was 
directed  to  decide  upon  their  conduct,  but  does  not  state 
what  their  decision  was. — ],  H. 

VOU  L  X 


^2^        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        [1644. 

was  late  upon  Wednesday  night  when  the  governor 
came  home,  and  was  certainly  informed  that  Prince 
Rupert  was,  that  afternoon,  marched  by  to  raise 
the  siege  with  about  six  thousand  men.^  Immedi- 
ately the  governor  sent  two  men,  excellently  well 
mounted  upon  his  own  horses,  to  carry  the  alarm 
to  Sir  John  Meldrum,  who  by  two  of  the  clock  on 
Thursday  morning  delivered  him  their  letters,  and 
he  presently  prepared  to  fight  with  the  prince,  who 
about  nine  or  ten  of  the  clock  came.  Sir  John  had 
drawn  all  his  ordnance  into  the  walls  of  a  ruined 
house,  called  the  Spittle,  and  the  horse  were  the 
first  to  charge  the  enemy.'  Colonel  Thomhagh 
and  Major  Rossiter  gave  them  a  very  brave  charge, 
routed  those  whom  they  first  encountered,  and  took 
prisoners  Major-general  Gerrard  and  others,  and 
had  they  been  seconded  by  the  rest  of  the  horse, 
had  utterly  defeated  the  prince's  army;  but  the 
Lincolnshire  troops  fled  away  before  they  ever 
charged,  and  left  Colonel  Thomhagh  engaged,  with 

^  See  the  pamphlet  entitled,  *'His  Highness  Prince 
Rupert's  Raising  of  the  Siege  at  Newark,  March  21, 1643. 
Written  by  an  eye-witness  to  a  person  of  honour." 

'  "The  Spittle  or  Exeter  House,  a  little  more  than 
musket-shot  from  the  town.** — Prince  Rupert's  Raising  of  the 
Siege,  &c.  In  the  account  of  the  former  siege,  in  February 
1643,  it  is  described  as,  "the  Earl  of  Exeter's  House,  which 
was  an  hospital  heretofore  dependent  on  the  see  of  Lincoln, 
but  now  assured  upon  the  family  by  an  Act  of  Parliament 
made  this  session." 


1644.1       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.         323 

only  his  own  horsci  with  the  prince's  whole  body, 
where,  they  say,  he  charged  the  prince  himself, 
and  made  his  way  and  passed  very  gallantly 
through  the  whole  army,  with  a  great  deal  of 
honour,  and  two  desperate  wounds,  one  in  the  arm, 
the  other  in  the  belly.  After  the  Lincolnshire 
horse  were  run  away,  Sir  John  Meldrum  sent  the 
Derby  horse  and  the  Nottingham  foot,  with  two 
companies  of  Col.  King's,  to  keep  Muscam  Bridge, 
and  Molanus,  the  Derbyshire  major,  to  be  their 
commander.  Colonel  Thomhagh  was  sent  home 
in  a  wagon  to  Nottingham.  Sir  John  himself, 
with  the  few  horse  and  dragoons  that  were  left 
from  Nottingham  and  Derby,  being  about  five 
hundred,  went  into  the  Spittle  to  his  foot.  The 
prince  lost  more  than  Sir  John  in  the  skirmish,  but 
as  soon  as  ever  Sir  John  had  betaken  himself  to 
the  Spittle,  the  prince  sent  horse  and  foot  between 
him  and  Muscam   Bridge.^     The  horse  that  were 

'  Rapin  gives  a  different  account  of  this  matter,  but  to 
those  who  know  or  observe  the  situation  of  the  places, 
Mrs.  Hutchinson's  will  appear  to  be  the  true  one.  Besides 
Muscam  Bridge  there  was  a  bridge  of  boats,  which  enabled 
the  prince's  forces  to  surround  the  guard  left  at  Muscam 
Bridge.  This  guard,  instead  of  deserting^  as  Rapin  says  of 
it,  was  deserted  and  sacrificed  for  want  of  support ;  the  road 
still  lay  open  to  Lincoln,  but  probably  Prince  Rupert  was 
too  strong  and  too  active  to  let  the  besiegers  escape  any 
way,  unless  they  had  acted  with  better  accord  amongst 
themselves. — ^J.  H. 


324       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson^        [1644, 

left  there  to  guard  the  foot  ran  every  man  away, 
so  that  they  had  not  a  horse  left  to  fetch  them  any 
provision.  The  major,  that  commanded  them  tdd 
them  that  he  would  go  to  the  next  town  to  buy 
them  some  bread,  and  with  that  pretence  came 
away  and  never  saw  them  more.  The  enemy  waa 
endeavouring  to  make  a  passage  over  the  river,  to 
come  on  the  other  side  of  them  and  encompass 
them,  which  when  they  saw  and  considered  that 
they  had  no  order  what  to  do,  nor  bread  for  one 
meal|  nor  bullet  more  than  their  muskets  were 
loaded  withal,  and  that  it  was  impossible  for  them 
to  come  off  if  they  stayed  till  the  enemy  enclosed 
them ;  and  further  discovering  that  their  friends  in 
the  Spittle  were  in  parley,  they  conceived  it  their 
best  way  to  come  home,  which  they  plotted  so  to 
do  that  the  enemy  might  not  perceive  it  till  they 
were  out  of  their  reach ;  so  leaving  lighted  matches 
and  squibs  laid  at  certain  distances,  to  deceive  the 
enemy,  they  came  safe  home.^  But  within  less 
than  half  an  hour  after  they  were  gone  the  enemy 
came  on  the  other  side,  and  not  missing  them  till 
morning,  by  reason  of  the  squibs,  they  pursued 
them  not,  by  which  means  they  came  safe  to 
Nottingham ;  which  was  a  very  seasonable  mercy, 

^  The  Note-Book  speaks  of  *' squibs  that  should  go  off 
like  muskets.**  In  Colonel  Bur/s  narrative  the  conduct  of 
this  detachment  in  thus  abandoning  the  bridge  is  severely 
censured. 


1644.1       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        325 

for  had  they  stayed  the  choicest  arms  in  the  garri- 
son had  been  lost,  and  the  best  and  most  confiding 
soldiers  disarmed.  For  Sir  John  agreed  upon 
articles  with  the  princci  to  deliver  up  the  Spittle 
wherein  he  lay,  with  all  the  muskets,  ordnance, 
and  ammunition  in  it ;  the  foot  soldiers  to  march 
away  with  colours  flying,  swords  and  pikes,  the 
horsemen  with  their  horses  and  swords,  and  all  the 
commanders  with  their  pistols;  but  the  prince 
broke  all  these  conditions,  and  pillaged  them  to 
their  shirts,  and  sent  many  captains  quite  naked 
away.* 

The  committee  of  Nottingham  now  began  again 
to  mutter  at  the  governor,  but  he  would  not  take 
notice  of  it,  but  applied  himself  to  take  care  for  the 
securing  of  his  town,  where  the  enemy  now  daily 
threatened  to  come.  So  he  floated  the  meadows 
on  the  Line  side,  where  there  was  no  fortification, 

1  In  the  royalist  narrative  it  is  stated  that  ^for  the 
horsemen's  carrying  away .  their  arms,  and  others  their 
pikes,  with  more  than  was  conditioned,  our  unruly  soldiers 
(especially  those  that  had.  been  so  before  used  at  Lincoln 
by  the  Parliamenteers),  taking  this  occasion  to  quarrel  with 
the  rebels,  took  more  from  them  than  by  the  articles  they 
should  have  done  :  but  for  this  were  divers  of  them  slashed 
by  the  prince,  and  the  rebels'  colours  sent  back  unto  them." 

The  arms  taken  were,  according  to  the  Same  authority, 
"between  three  and  four  thousand  muskets,  and  a  great 
quantity  of  pikes  and  pistols,  also  eleven  fair  brass  pieces, 
two  mortar  pieces,  and  one  basilisk  of  HulL" 


326        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       [1644. 

and  raised  a  fort  in  the  midst  of  the  meadows  to  pre^ 
serve  the  float,  and  fortified  the  Trent  bridges  more 
strongly  ;  and,  expecting  the  enemy  every  houTi  was 
forced  to  let  the  work  go  on  all  the  Lord's  day. 
When,  calling  the  captains  together  to  consult  on 
the  best  way  of  preparing  for  their  defence,  Mason, 
the  new  town  captain,  took  this  time  to  revive  the 
old  mutiny,  and  said  the  townsmen  would  not  stand 
to  their  works  except  the  ordnance  were  drawn 
down  from  the  castle  to  the  town  works;  the 
governor  rebuked  him  for  this  unseasonable  inso- 
lence, as  he  and  his  men  were,  all  the  time  of  this 
great  exigence,  so  backward  that  they  were  rather 
an  obstruction  than  assistance,  and  there  was 
much  ado  to  get  them  either  to  the  works  or  the 
guards.  Indeed  such  a  blow  was  given  to  the 
parliament  interest,  in  all  these  parts,  that  it  might 
well  discourage  the  ill-affected,  when  even  the  most 
zealous  were  cast  down  and  gave  up  all  for  lost ; 
but  the  governor,  who  in  no  occasion  ever  let  his 
courage  fall,  but,  when  things  were  at  the  lowest, 
recollected  all  his  force,  that  his  own  despondency 
might  not  contribute  anything  to  his  malicious 
fortune,  at  this  time  animated  all  the  honest  men, 
and  expressed  such  vigour  and  cheerfulness,  and 
such  stedfast  resolution,  as  disappointed  all  the 
malignants  of  their  hopes.  The  wives,  children, 
and  servants  of  such  as  were  in  the  enemy's 
garrisons  and  armies,  he   thought  it  not  safe  to 


/ 


1644.]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        327 

suffer  any  longer  to  be  in  the  town  in  such  a  time 
of  danger,  and  therefore  commanded  them  all  to 
depart,  not  sparing  even  some  of  his  own  relations ; 
but  though  this  was  done  by  the  concurrence  of 
the  whole  committee,  yet  some  of  them,  who  were 
loath  the  town  should  lose  any  that  wished  ill  to 
the  governor  and  his  undertakings,  privately,  with- 
out his  consent  or  knowledge,  brought  back  several 
persons  that  were  very  dangerous  to  the  place. 

And  now,  upon  the  twenty-fifth  day  of  March,  a 
letter  was  brought  to  the  governor  from  all  the 
commissioners  at  Newark,  telling  him  that  the 
parliament's  forces  had  quitted  Gainsborough,  Lin- 
coln, and  Sleaford ;  and  that  the  prince  intended  to 
advance  against  Nottingham,  and  to  fire  the  town, 
if  he  did  not  immediately  throw  down  the  works, 
which  if  he  should  not  do,  the  world  would  then 
take  notice  of  him  as  the  only  ruin  of  his  native 
country.*  To  which  the  governor  returned  them 
answer,  that  as  he  never  engaged  himself  in  this 


^  This  letter,  together  with  a  letter  from  the  governor  of 
Nottingham  Castle,  was  read  in  the  House  of  Commons 
on  March  29th,  and  referred  to  the  conunittee  of  both 
kingdoms.  I  have  not  been  able  to  find  them.  Colonel 
Hutchinson's  answer  was  amongst  the  letters  in  the  posses- 
sion of  Warburton,  when  he  wrote  his  ^Life  of  Prince 
Rupert"  (see  vol.  i.,  p.  520),  but  it  did  not  pass  into  the 
possession  of  the  British  Museum  as  many  of  those  papers 
did. 


328        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hulchinson.       [1644. 

service,  with  respect  to  the  success  or  actions  of 
other  places,  so  though  the  whole  kingdom  were 
quit  besides  this  town,  he  would  yet  maintain  it 
as  long  as  he  was  able,  and  he  trusted  that  God 
would  preserve  it  in  his  hands ;  but  if  it  perished, 
he  was  resolved  to  bury  himself  in  the  ruins  of 
it,  being  confident  that  God  would  after  vindicate 
him  to  have  been  a  defender,  and  not  a  destroyer 
of  his  country.  The  copy  of  the  letter  which  the 
Newark  commissioners  sent  to  the  governor,  was 
sent  to  one  Francis  Cooke,  a  malignant  inhabitant 
of  the  town,  subscribed  with  all  the  commissioners' 
hands,  and  desiring  him  to  communicate  it  to  the 
whole  town.  The  governor,  having  taken  what 
care  he  could  at  home,  sent  immediately  to  the 
parliament  and  to  the  Earl  of  Essex,  acquainting 
them  with  the  desperate  condition  of  the  place; 
and  desiring  that  they  would  send  him  seasonable 
relief,  if  the  prince  should  besiege  him,  promising 
to  employ  his  utmost  endeavour  to  hold  it  for  them, 
or  to  lose  himself  with  it.  My  lord  general  re- 
turned a  very  civil  encouraging  letter,  and  now  the 
prince,  two  days  after  the  letter,  was  advanced 
within  three  miles  of  Nottingham  ;  when  it  pleased 
God  to  divert  him  from  coming  against  the  town 
by  letters  which  were  brought  him  from  Oxford^ 
which  occasioned  his  hasty  return  into  the  south, 
without  any  attempt  upon  the  place,  which,  by 
God's  mercy,  was  thus  delivered  from  this  threaten- 


I644-]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchifison.        329 

ing  danger.^  However,  their  enemies  at  Newark, 
by  the  late  success,  were  very  much  exalted,  and 
by  the  quitting  of  so  many  parliament  garrisons 
about  them,  increased  in  power,  and  were  left  at 
leisure  to  turn  all  their  designs  against  Nottingham, 
which  being  so  infirm  within  itself,  the  governor 
had  a  very  difficult  task  to  preserve  it ;  while  the 
disaffected,  who  were  subtle,  did  not  clearly  declare 
themselves,  but  watched  all  opportunities  to  work 
the  governor's  disturbance,  by  fomenting  the  ill- 
humours  of  the  factious  committee-men  and  priests ; 
for  they  now  took  occasion  to  fall  in  with  them, 
upon  the  governor's  release  of  his  chief  cannoniers 
out  of  prison,  into  which  he,  by  the  instigation  of 
the  ministers  and  the  godly  people,  whom  they 
animated  almost  to  mutiny,  had  put  them,  for  sepa- 
rating from  the  public  worship,  and  keeping  little 
conventicles  in  their  own  chamber.  It  was  with 
some  rductancy  he  had  committed  them,  for  the 
men,  though  of  different  judgments  in  matter  of 
worship,  were  otherwise  honest,  peaceable,  and  very 
zealous  and  faithful  to  the  cause  ;  but  the  ministers 
were  so  unable  to  sufier  their  separation  and 
spreading  of  their  opinions,  that  the  governor  was 

'  ^  Rupert  returned  by  way  of  Shrewsbury  and  Hereford, 
reaching  Oxford  on  April  25th,  to  take  part  in  an  important 
council  of  war.  Clarendon  says  he  was  called  away  from 
Newark  by  the  Earl  of  Derby's  appeals  for  the  relief  of 
Latham. 


330        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1644- 

forced  to  commit  them ;  yet  during  this  great 
danger^  he  thought  it  not  prudent  to  keep  them 
discontented  and  then  employ  them,  and  therefore 
set  them  at  liberty,  for  which  there  was  a  great 
outcry  against  him  as  a  favourer  of  separatists.^ 

^  The  chief  of  these  cannoniers  was  that  Lawrence 
Collin  mentioned  in  a  former  note.  He  continued  at 
Nottingham  after  all  the  wars  were  over,  but  being  perse- 
cuted on  account  of  his  religion,  applied  to  Cromwell  for 
protection,  and  was  effectually  screened  by  him  from  hit 
persecutors ;  he  lived  to  more  than  ninety  years ;  hit 
descendants  rose  to  opulence,  and  one  of  them  founded  a 
very  handsome  hospital  This  family  united  themselves  to 
that  of  Langford,  and  both  being  molested  on  the  score  of 
nonconformity,  were  peculiarly  protected  by  James  the 
Second,  and  stood  stedfastly  by  him  at  the  revolution,  at 
which  time  he  got  many  sectaries  to  join  the  catholics,  and 
make  common  cause  against  the  church  of  England.  By 
this  turn  of  events  and  opinions,  Langford  Collin,  -Esq. 
before  mentioned,  came  to  be  the  head  of  the  country, 
Jacobite,  or  anti-revolutionist  party,  while  the  Plumptret 
and  Hutchinsons  embraced  the  Hanover  or  Whig  partyi  as 
mentioned  in  the  note,  p.  190,  just  spoken  of. 

Since  the  publication  of  the  first  edition,  there  has  ap- 
peared a  very  candid  critique  of  this  work  in  the  Annual 
Review  for  1806,  containing  the  following  remark :  "  It 
may  be  mentioned  as  an  additional  proof  of  Mr.  Hutchinson's 
rectitude,  that  when  George  Fox,  the  founder  of  the  Quakers, 
was  imprisoned  at  Nottingham,  he  protected  him;  thus 
proving  that,  unlike  the  greater  number  of  those  who  were 
engaged  in  the  same  cause,  he  allowed  that  liberty  of 
conscience  to  others  which  he  claimed  for  himself." 

The  Editor  thought  it  his  duty,  upon  this  suggestion,  to 


1644.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        331 

It  will  not  be  amiss^  in  this  place,  to  carry  on 
the  parliament  story,  that  we  may  the  better  judge 
things  at  home,  when  we  know  the  condition  of 
affairs  abroad.  The  queen,  being  suffered  to  pass 
through  Nottinghamshire  by  those  forces  which 
were  sent  down  thither  to  have  prevented  her, 
joined  with  Prince  Bupert  and  came  to  the  king ; 
and  was  by  the  parliament  voted  traitor  for  many 
actions,  as  pawning  the  crown-jewels  in  Holland, 
encouraging  the  rebellion  in  Ireland,  heading  a 
papistical  army  in  England,  &c. 

make  further  inquiry,  and  has  in  pursuance  of  it  been  fur- 
nished by  a  respectable  friend,  Mr.  Barker,- surgeon,  at 
Colchester,  with  the  two  following  extracts,  together  with 
some  others,  which  will  appear  in  their  proper  places.— 
G.  Fox's  Journal,  fol.  ed.  p.  27.  **  I  went  to  the  Steeple 
House  at  Nottingham,  during  the  time  of  divine  worship, 
addressed  the  people,  and  was  committed  to  prison.  When 
the  assizes  came  on,  there  was  one  moved  to  come  and  offer 
himself  up  for  me,  body  for  body,  yea,  life  also ;  but  when 
I  should  have  been  brought  before  the  judge,  the  sheriff's 
man  being  somewhat  long  in  fetching  me  to  the  sessions- 
house,  the  judge  was  risen  before  I  came,  at  which  I  under- 
stood he  was  somewhat  offended.  So  I  was  returned  to 
prison,  and  put  into  the  common  gaol ;  and  the  Lord's 
power  was  great  among  friends,  but  the  people  began  to  be 
very  rude,  wherefore  the  governor  of  the  castle  sent  down 
soldiers  and  dispersed  them^  and, after  that  they  were  quiets 
Sewell's  Hist  of  Quakers,  fol.  ed.  p.  22.  "  Now  though  the 
people  began  to  be  very  rude,  yet  the  governor  of  the  castle 
was  so  very  moderate^  that  he  sent  down  soldiers  to  disperse 
them.*'—].  H. 


332        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1644. 

The  Earl  of  Essex's  army  lay  sick  about  London 
for  recruits ;  Sir  William  Waller,  after  many  vic- 
tories in  the  west,  was  at  length  totally  routed,  and 
returned  to  London,  Prince  Maurice  and  Sir  Ralph 
Hopton  having  recovered  and  possessed  almost  the 
whole  west  of  England  for  the  king.  The  north 
my  Lord  Newcastle's  army  commanded  so  fully, 
that  they  were  advanced  into  Nottingham  and  Lin- 
colnshire, and  the  adjacent  counties.  The  parlia- 
ment, being  in  this  low  condition,  had  agreed  with 
Scotland,  and  entered  into  a  solemn  national  league 
and  covenant,  which  was  taken  throughout  both 
kingdoms ;  and  the  king  had  made  a  cessation  of 
arms  with  the  Irish  rebels,  and  brought  over  the 
English  army,  that  had  been  honoured  with  so 
many  successes  against  them,  to  serve  him  here* 
But  God  never  blessed  his  afiairs  after  they  came 
to  him,  though  indeed  before  their  arrival  God  had 
begun  to  turn  the  scale ;  for  the  city  of  Gloucester 
stopping,  by  its  faithful  and  valiant  resistance,  the 
career  of  the  king's  victories,  after  Bristol  and 
Exeter  and  all  the  west  was  lost,  the  king,  disdain- 
ing to  leave  it  behind  him  unvanquished,  sat  down 
before  it,  which  employed  him  and  his  whole  army, 
till  the  Earl  of  Essex  and  his  recruited  army, 
assisted  with  the  London  auxiliaries,  came  and 
relieved  it,  and  pursued  the,  king's  army  to  an 
engagement  at  Newbury;  where  the  parliament 
obtained  a  great  and  bloody  victory,  and  the  king 


1644.]       Memoirs  0/  Col.  Hutchinson.        333 

for  ever  lost  that  opportunity  he  lately  had  of 
inarching  up  to  London,  and  in  probability  of  sub- 
duing the  parliament.  My  Lord  Newcastle,  by  9 
like  error,  about  the  same  time,  setting  down  before 
Hull,  missed  the  opportunity  of  wholly  gaining  all 
those  neighbouring  counties,  and  much  wasted  his 
great  and  victorious  army,  being  forced  to  rise 
with  loss  and  dishonour  from  the  unyielding  town. 
After  the  fight  at  Newbury,  Sir  William  Waller, 
having  gotten  a  new  army,  had  divers  successes 
with  it,  and  at  length  totally  routed  all  Hopton's 
army,  about  the  time  that  Prince  Rupert  raised  the 
siege  at  Newark,  and  was  the  occasion  that  called 
the  prince  so  hastily  out  of  those  counties.^ 

The  Earl  of  Essex  pursuing  the  war,  had  a 
design  to  block  up  Oxford,  where  the  king  was, 
and  accordingly  attempted  it,  he  on  one  side,  and 
Waller  on  the  other ;  but  the  king,  with  a  few  light 
horse,  escaped  out  of  the  town,  and  went  to  join 
with  his  greater  armies ;  which  being  done,  Essex 
marched  further  into  the  west,  and  in  Cornwall  was 
besieged,  where  he  lost  all  his  foot,  ammunition, 
and  ordnance,  and  came  dishonourably  home  to 
London.     Waller  unsuccessfully  followed  the  king, 

^  The  first  battle  of  Newbury  took  place  on  September 
20,  1643 ;  the  defeat  of  the  Irish  army  at  Nantwich,  January 
25,  1646;  Waller's  victory  at  Alresford,  March  29,  1644; 
Essex's  surrender  in  Cornwall  on  September  2,  1644 ;  and 
the  battle  of  Marston  on  July  2,  1644. 


334        Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.       I1644. 

and  the  parliament's  affairs,  all  that  summery  were 
very  unprosperous  in  the  west,  south,  and  midland 
counties,  but  contrary  in  the  north,  where  the  Scotch 
army,  under  General  Leven,  advanced,  took  some 
towns  and  forts,  and  wasted  the  Earl  of  Newcastle's 
army  more  by  their  patient  sufferance  of  the  ill 
weather  and  martial  toil,  which  the  English  could 
not  so  well  abide,  than  by  fighting.  Sir  Thomas 
Fairfax,  having  again  taken  the  field  with  his 
father,  after  a  miraculous  victory  they  had  gained 
over  the  Irish  army  which  the  king  had  brought 
over,  joined  the  Scots ;  and  the  Earl  of  Manchester, 
having  raised  a  force  in  the  associated  coimties, 
with  which  he  made  an  expedition  to  Lincoln,  hav-> 
ing  Colonel  Cromwell  for  his  lieutenant-general, 
marched  into  Yorkshire,  and  uniting  with  the  other 
two  armies,  they  all  besieged  the  Earl  of  Newcastle 
in  York.  To  raise  this  siege.  Prince  Rupert  came 
with  a  great  army  out  of  the  south ;  the  besiegers 
rose  to  fight  with  the  prince,  and  Newcastle  drew  all 
his  force  out  of  York  to  join  with  him,  when  both 
armies,  on  a  great  plain  called  Marston  Moor,  had 
a  bloody  encounter,  and  the  Scots  and  Lord  Fairfax 
had  been  wholly  routed,  and  the  battle  lost,  but 
that  Cromwell,  with  five  thousand  men  which  he 
commanded,  routed  Prince  Rupert,  restored  the 
other  routed  parliamentarians,  and  gained  the  most 
complete  victory  that  had  been  obtained  in  the 
whole  war.     The  victors  possessed  all  «the  prince's 


1644.]       Memoirs  of  CoL  Hutchinson.        335 

ordnance,  carriages,  and  baggage;  whereupon  the 
prince  fled,  with  as  many  as  he  could  save,  back 
into  the  south ;  the  Earl  of  Newcastle,  with  some 
of  his  choice  friends,  went  into  Germany,  and  left 
Sir  Thomas  Glenham  governor  of  York,  which  he 
soon  after  surrendered,  and  then  the  three  generals 
parted ;  Leven  went  back  into  the  north,  and  took 
the  town  of  Newcastle,  Fairfax  remained  in  York- 
shire, and  Manchester  returned  into  the  south, 
taking  in  many  small  garrisons  by  the  way  as  he 
passed  through  the  counties. 

The  queen  went  that  summer  into  France,  to 
solicit  foreign  aid  for  her  husband,  but  ineffectually; 
meanwhile  new  treaties  were  carried  on  between 
the  king  and  parliament,  but  to  no  purpose;  for 
the  king's  false  dealing  and  disingenuity  therein 
was  so  apparent  that  they  came  to  nothing,  but  a 
further  discovery  of  the  king's  falsehood,  and  favour 
of  the  Irish  rebels,  with  whom  he  now  employed 
Ormond  to  treat  and  conclude  a  peace.  This  treaty 
was  that  at  Uxbridge,  where  commissioners  met  on 
both  sides,  but  effected  nothing ;  for  the  parliament 
itself  began  to  grow  into  two  apparent  factions  of 
Presbyterians  and  independents,  and  the  king  had 
hope,  by  their  divisions,  to  prevail  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  his  own  ends.^ 

^  Whoever  will  take  the  pains  to  read  the  king's  letters  in 
Clarendon's  State  Papers,  will  see  that  this  is  a  true  repre- 


336        Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.       [1644- 

It  was  too  apparent  how  much  the  whole  parlia- 
ment  cause  had  been  often  hazarded,  how  many 
opportunities  of  finishing  the  war  had  been  over-> 
slipped  by  the  Earl  of  Essex  his  army ;  and  it  was 
believed  that  he  himself,  with  his  commanders, 
rather  endeavoured  to  become  arbiters  of  war  and 
peace,  than  conquerors  for  the  parliament;  for  it 
was  known  that  he  had  given  out  such  expressions. 
Wherefore  those  in  the  parliament,  who  were  grieved 
at  the  prejudice  of  the  public  interest,  and  loath  to 
bring  those  men  to  public  shame,  who  had  once 
well  merited  it  of  them,  devised  to  new-model  the 
army ;  and  an  ordinance  was  made,  called  the  Self- 
denying  Ordinance,  whereby  all  members  of  parlia- 
ment, of  both  houses,  were  discharged  of  their 
commands  in  the  army.  Cromwell  had  a  particular 
exception,  when  Essex,  Manchester,  and  Denbigh, 
surrendered  their  commissions;  and  Sir  Thomas 
Fairfax  was  made  general  of  the  new-modelled 
army,  Cromwell  lieutenant-general,  and  Skippon 
major-general.  The  army  was  reduced  to  twenty- 
one  thousand,  who  prosecuted  the  war  not  with 
design  of  gain  and  making  it  their  trade,  but  to 
obtain  a  righteous  peace  and  settlement  to  the  dis- 


sentation  of  his  sentiments  ;  but  Heylin  pretends  the  failure 
of  the  treaty  arose  from  the  extreme  pertinacity  of  the  rigid 
presbyterians  :  we  may  very  well  allow  both  their  share. 
— J.  H. 


1644.]       Memoirs  of  Col.  Hutchinson.        337 

tracted  kingdom,  and  accordingly  it  succeeded  in 
their  hands.^ 


^  It  is  suggested  by  Rapin  and  others  that  this  new- 
model  and  self-denying  ordinance  arose  not  from  the  motives 
here  set  down,  but  merely  from  intrigue ;  yet  Whitelocke, 
who  even  spoke  against  it,  p.  123,  shows  the  indispensable 
necessity  for  such  a  new  model.  "Some  members  of  the 
house  were  sent  to  their  generals  to  complain  of  their 
remissness.  The  Earl  of  Manchester  was  under  a  kind  of 
accusation,  the  lord-general  in  discontent,  Waller  not  much 
otherwise,  the  forces  not  carefully  ordered,  and  the  par- 
liament business  in  an  unsettled  condition,  so  that  it  was 
high  time  for  some  other  course  to  be  taken  by  them."  Mr. 
Sprigge  demonstrates  this  more  fully.  He  says,  **  Cromwell 
was  absent  in  the  west  when  the  exemption  was  voted  ;  that 
he  had  come  to  Windsor  over-night  to  kiss  the  general's 
hand,  and  take  his  leave  on  quitting  the  service,  but  the 
following  morning,  ere  he  came  from  his  chamber,  those 
commands,  than  which  he  thought  of  nothing  less  in  all  the 
world,  came  to  him  from  the  committee  of  both  kingdoms, 
in  obedience  to  which  he  immediately  marched  away." 
And  further,  '*that  the  house  did  this  for  their  own  happi- 
ness, and  that  of  their  general,  Fairfax." 

Mrs.  Hutchinson  was  sufficiently  observant  of  Cromwell's 
artifices  to  have  accused  him  of  it  on  this  occasion,  if  he 
had  deserved  it. — ^J.  H. 


VOL.  I. 


APPENDIX. 


Extract  from  the  preface  of  the  Rev.  Julius  Hutchinson  to 
the  first  edition  of  the  Memoirs^  giving  an  account  of 
the  descendants  of  Colonel  Hutchinson. 

Colonel  Hutchinson  left  four  sons,  of  which  the  youngest 
only,  John,  left  issue  two  sons  ;  and  there  is  a  tradition  in 
the  family,  that  these  two  last  descendants  of  Colonel 
Hutchinson  emigrated,  the  one  to  the  West  Indies,  or 
America,  the  other  to  Russia;  the  latter  is  said  to  have 
gone  out  with  the  command  of  a  ship  of  war  given  by 
Queen  Anne  to  the  Czar  Peter,  and  to  have  been  lost  at 
sea.  One  of  the  female  descendants  of  the  former  the 
editor  once  met  with  by  accident  at  Portsmouth,  and  she 
spoke  with  great  warmth  of  the  veneration  in  which  his 
descendants  in  the  new  world  held  the  memory  of  their 
ancestor  Colonel  Hutchinson.  Of  the  daughters  little  more 
is  known  than  that  Mrs.  Hutchinson,  addressing  one  of  her 
books  of  devotion  to  her  daughter,  Mrs.  Orgill,  ascertains 
that  one  of  them  was  married  to  a  gentleman  of  that  name. 

The  family  of  Mr.  George  Hutchinson  likewise  became 
extinct  in  the  second  generation. 


342  Appendix. 

Charles  Hutchinson,  only  son  of  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson 
by  Lady  Catharine  Stanhope,  married  one  of  the  daughters 
and  co-heiresses  of  Sir  Francis  Boteler,  of  Hatfield  Wood- 
hall,  Herts ;  which  family  being  zealous  royalists,  and  he 
solicitous  to  gain  their  favour  (which  he  did  so  effectually, 
as  in  the  end  to  obtain  nearly  their  whole  inheritance),  it  is 
probable  that  he  gave  small  encouragement  or  assistance  to 
the  elder  branch  of  the  family  while  they  suffered  for  their 
republican  sentiments  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  certain  that  he 
purchased  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson  and  her  son,  after  the  death 
of  Colonel  Hutchmson,  their  estate  at  Owthorpe,  which, 
joined  to  what  his  father  had  given  him,  and  what  he  obtained 
by  his  marriage,  raised  him  to  more  opulence  than  his  father 
had  ever  possessed ;  and  he  seems  not  to  have  fallen  short 
of  him  in  popularity,  for  he  represented  the  town  of  Notting- 
ham in  parliament  from  the  year  1690  (being  the  first 
general  election  after  the  accession  of  King  William)  till  his 
death. 

His  son  Julius  returned  into  that  line  of  conduct  and 
connexions  which  was  most  natural  for  one  of  his  descent, 
for  he  married  Betty,  daughter  of  Colonel  Norton,  of 
Wellow,  of  the  well-known  patriotic  family  of  that  name  in 
Hampshire,  and  whose  mother  was  a  Fiennes.  He  seems 
to  have  bestowed  a  very  rational  and  well-deserved  attention 
upon  the  writings  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson,  and  there  is  a  tradi- 
tion in  the  family,  that  although  he  had  many  children  of 
his  own,  he  treated  with  kindness  and  liberality  the  last 
descendants  of  his  uncle,  and  assisted  them  with  money  to 
fit  them  out  for  their  emigration.  The  editor  has  seen  a 
written  memorandum  of  his,  expressing  his  regret  at  hearing 
no  more  of  them  after  their  departure. 

From  the  circumstance  of  these,  the  only  grrandchildren 
of  Colonel  Hutchinson,  standing  in  need  of  this  pecuniary 
assistance,  from  the  mention  Mrs.  Hutchinson  makes  of  her 
husband's  debts,  and  from  an  expression  contained  in  that 


Appefidix.  343 

book  which  she  addresses  to  her  daaghter,  Mrs.  Orgill 
desiring  her  not  to  despise  her  advice  though  she  sees  her 
in  adversity,  it  is  highly  probable  that,  even  after  selling  her 
husband's  estates,  the  sum  to  be  divided  left  each  member 
of  the  family  in  strait  circumstances. 

The  affection  and  well-merited  esteem  with  which  Mrs. 
Hutchinson  speaks  of  her  brother  Sir  Allen  Apsley,  will  ex- 
cite an  interest  in  the  reader  to  know  what  became  of  him 
and  his  posterity ;  the  short  pedigree  subjoined  will  show, 
that  by  two  marriages,  and  by  the  death  of  his  grandson  in 
his  minority,  the  family  of  Apsley  entirely  merged  in  the 
noble  family  of  Bathurst,  who  have  adopted  the  name  Apsley 
as  their  second  title ;  there  are  five  or  six  of  the  family  of 
Apsley  entombed  in  Westminster  Abbey,  near  to  the  entrance 
of  Henry  the  Seventh's  ChapeL 


11. 

A  true  relation  of  some  remarkable  passages  concerning  the 
Nottinghamshire  Petition^  dr'r.,  written  from  an 
Esquire  of  Nottinghamshire  {being  one  of  the  gentle- 
men who  presented  their  petition  at  York\  and  sent  to 
his  brother  dwelling  in  London, 

^  Loving  Brother, — I  was  this  last  week  at  York,  with 
twenty  gentlemen  more  and  divers  others,  to  deliver  a  peti- 
tion to  his  majesty,  which  was  done  on  Thursday  last 
being  the  last  of  March ;  and  Lincolnshire  delivered  one 
on  Monday  before:  Yorkshire  delivers  one  about  Tues- 
day next,  and  Derbyshire  about  Wednesday,  or  Thursday 
next ;  all  which  are  much  tending  to  one  effect,  that  is, 
humbly  to  entreat  his  majesty  to  abide  near,  and  hearken 


344  Appendix. 

to  his  parliament,  and  to  remove  evil  counsellors  from  about 
him,  with  some  other  things.  I  have,  copies  of  them  all,  bat 
they  are  too  long  for  me  to  copy  out  at  this  time ;  ours  I  am 
confident  John  Drewrey  showed  you  the  last  week,  if  not, 
Master  Fakingham  can  show  it  you,  and  you  may  show  him 
this  answer  given  to  us  under  the  secretary's  hand  with  his 
majesty's  direction,  and  it  is  the  very  same  Lincolnshire 
gentlemen  received  from  his  majesty  to  their  petition. 
Yorkshire  it  is  said  will  appear  fourteen  thousand  in  person 
to  avow  theirs — the  sheriff  is  a  chief  man  in  it.  Derby  is 
said  to  be  three  hundred  at  least — the  sheriff,  baronets, 
knights,  esquires,  gentlemen,  and  others.  Lincolnshire,  Sir 
Richard  Earle  delivered  it  with  some  twenty  gentlemen  of 
quality,  who  were  scoffed  at  by  the  courtiers  and  citizens 
and  called  Roundheads ;  they  lay  in  York  on  Sunday,  being 
coronation  day,  where  was  bonfires  made  and  much  disorder ; 
and  about  midnight  that  night,  about  three  score  persons 
with  clubs  and  bills  assaulted  the  house  where  they  lay,  and 
swore  they  would  have  the  bloods  of  them ;  the  gentlemen 
being  up,  and  the  rogues  got  into  the  house,  they  were 
forced  to  put  out  their  lights,  and  betake  themselves  to  their 
swords,  which  done  the  unknown  rascals  departed,  giving 
threatening  speeches  that  they  would  cut  the  throats  of  them 
that  came  next ;  yet  I  praise  God  we  had  reasonable  fair 
quarter  with  them.  The  city  of  York  we  perceive  offers 
these  abuses  to  petitioners  on  purpose  to  deter  them  for 
coming  to  the  king,  because  they  would  have  (him)  reside 
with  them  ;  those  that  are  well  affected  (which  are  but  few 
in  comparison  of  the  multitude)  do  join  with  us  willingly 
and  freely,  both  in  judgment  and  matter.  The  court  is  very 
thin  as  yet,  but  increaseth  daily.  The  latter  declaration 
mentioned  in  our  answer  is  not  yet  in  print ;  the  king's  first 
answer  was,  he  refers  us  to  the  Kentish  petition,  but  we 
pressing  for  a  further  and  more  satisfactory  answer,  had  as 
you  may  here  see  with  hopes  still  of  a  better.    The  Kentish 


Appendix.  345 

petition  was  ordered  to  be  printed,  but  speeding  so  badly  at 
London,  it  is  stopped  as  yet ;  much  more  I  could  tell  you 
but  my  occasions  will  not  permit  me,  therefore  with  our  best 
affections  to  you  all,  I  commit  you  to  the  Lord's  protection 
and  rest — ^Your  ever  loving  brother,  while 

Joseph  Widmerpooi^e. 

'*  Report  this  from  me  to  be  a  true  copy  of  our  answer 
there." 

The  pamphlet  also  contains  the  Nottinghamshire  Peti- 
tion, a  brief  answer  from  the  king,  and  the  king's  message 
of  April  8th  to  the  Parliament. 


IIL 

Copy  of  a  letter  from  a  gentleman  near  Nottingham  to  his 

friend  in  London. 

"  I  received  your  last  letter  and  books  for  which  I  thank 
you,  as  also  D.  D.  for  his.  I  came  on  Wednesday  night 
last  from  the  court  at  Nottingham,  where  I  saw  the  king 
set  up  his  standard  on  Monday  night  before.  The  manner 
thereof  was  this  :  His  majesty  came  into  the  castle-yard, 
accompanied  with  the  prince,  duke,  Prince  Robert  and 
Maurice  his  brother,  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and  divers 
other  courtiers  and  cavaliers,  and  finding  out  the  highest 
pointed  hill  in  the  yard,  from  whence  it  might  be  perspicuous, 
the  standard  was  brought  in,  and  there  erected.  At  which 
time  all  the  courtiers  and  spectators  flung  up  their  caps, 
and  whooped,  crying  ^God  save  King  Charles  and  hang 
up  the  Roundheads,"  and  so  whooped  the  king  to  his  lodg- 
ings. After  which,  the  standard  was  thence  removed  to  the 
highest  tower  of  the  castle,  where  it  hangs  blowing,  and  so 
must,  till  the  king  advanceth  his  camp  forward,  then  it 


346  Appendix. 

removes  with  him.  It  is  a  long  pole,  like  a  maypole, 
painted  red  on  the  upper  end,  whereof  hangs  a  large  silk 
flag  (in  form  of  a  scutcheon),  with  a  red  cross  and  two  lions 
passant  upon  two  crowns.  The  Prince  Robert  was  next 
day  made  general  of  the  horse,  and  had  a  ribbon  and  George 
delivered  him ;  and  so  had  the  Duke  of  York.  And  the 
king  made  declaration  that  whoso  would  go  that  afternoon 
with  Prince  Rupert  against  Coventry  and  Warwick,  it 
should  be  acceptable  service.  Whereupon  he  and  divers 
others  went  away  thither,  where  the  king  had  sent  about 
six  hundred  horse  and  foot  a  week  before,  who,  on  Saturday 
and  Sunday  last,  had  been  beaten  by  the  men  of  Coventry 
(who  keep  the  Cavaliers  out),  having  slain  one,  and  wounded 
divers  of  them,  and  themselves  lost  two  or  three.  Warwick 
Castle  keeps  them  off,  where  twelve  men  have  been  slain, 
most  of  the  king's  side.  There  is  no  considerable  party  at 
Nottingham  to  do  anything.  Monday  and  Tuesday,  very 
few  came  in ;  but  there  is  great  expectation  of  multitudes 
from  Wales  and  Westmoreland.  Yorkshire  stands  firm. 
Drums  beat  about  Nottingham  for  volunteers  for  the  king, 
who  will  be  at  Lincoln  this  night,  where  all  the  gentry  are 
summoned  to  meet  him.  Troops  of  horse  are  coming  to  be 
billeted  in  our  county ;  we  fear  outrages  by  thenL  They 
commit  rapine  and  spoil  already  about  Nottingham,  having 
ransacked  gentlemen's  houses,  made  one  Master  Needham's 
own  cart  bring  away  to  Nottingham  bedding,  linen,  pewter, 
butter,  cheese,  and  other  things  out  of  his  house ;  he  is 
accounted  a  Roundhead.  So  at  York ;  sixteen  of  them 
beset  a  knight's  house  (whom  the  king  had  disjusticed), 
broke  in,  sought  for  the  knight,  whom  they  would  have  slain 
(as  themselves  declared),  but  he  getting  away  (by  the  help 
of  his  servants),  they  took  £jo  in  money,  his  plate,  and 
divers  other  things,  and  so  returned.  Some  of  them,  are 
apprehended.  They  give  out  that  Roundheads'  estates 
shall  be  free  prize ;  and  indeed  against  them  is  the  quarrel, 


Appendix.  347 

whom  I  hope  the  Lord  will  protect  My  house  is  much 
threatened  and  I  do  verily  expect  an  assault,  for  which  I 
have  prepared  to  defend  myself.  We  think  the  parliament 
forces  too  slow  in  coming  down." 

Mr.  Bailey,  who  quotes  this  letter  in  his  History  of  Notting- 
hamshire, thinks  that  it  is  by  CoL  Hutchinson,  on  account 
of  the  reference  to  the  plunder  of  Mr.  Needham's  house 
which  is  mentioned  in  the  Memoirs,  and  the  writer's  own 
danger. 

IV. 

The  attempt  to  obtain  possession  of  the  powder  in  the 
magazine  of  the  county  of  Nottinghamshire^  and  other 
incidents  which  took  place  during  the  kin^s  stay  at 
Nottinghamshire. 

Mr.  Bailey  in  his  *'  Annals  of  Nottinghamshire  "  (voL  ii. 
p.  651)  concludes  that  the  account  given  in  these  Memoirs 
of  the  attempt  made  to  seize  for  the  king's  service  the 
powder  belonging  to  the  county,  and  Colonel  Hutchinson's 
successful  intervention  to  save  it,  is  entirely  fictitious.  He 
argues  that  the  story  told  by  Mrs.  Hutchinson  contradicts 
itself,  because  she  represents  her  husband  in  one  place  as 
interfering  in  time  to  prevent  the  powder  being  carried  off, 
in  another  as  being  informed  of  the  attempt  too  late  to 
prevent  it  (voL  i.  pp.  153-169).  He  also  brings  forward  an 
entry  in  the  records  of  the  town  council,  which  states  that 
the  town  willingly  ag^reed  to  lend  the  king  some  powder, 
and  asserts  that  this  disproves  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  narrative. 

But  the  contradiction  referred  to  does  not  in  reality  exist 
at  alL  True  or  untrue,  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  story  is  perfectly 
consistent.  The  two  passages  which  are  cited  as  contradic- 
tory refer,  not  to  the  same,  but  to  different  events.    The 


348  Appendix. 

first  is  the  account  of  an  attempt  which  failed,  the  second 
of  an  attempt  which  succeeded.  Nor  does  the  municipal 
record  disprove  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  statements,  for  the  entry 
in  question  relates  to  the  powder  of  the  town,  whilst  her 
narrative  relates  to  that  of  the  county.  That  entry,  on  the 
contrary,  confirms  her  account,  and  helps  to  fix  the  date  of 
the  events  mentioned  in  it  The  entry  in  the  Hall  Book  of 
the  Corporation  is  as  follows  : — '*  Aug^ust  3d,  1642.  This 
company  are  content  at  my  Lord  Newark's  motion,  to  lend 
out  of  the  town's  magazine  one  barrel  of  powder,  which  is 
promised  to  be  returned  again  within  ten  days  next  ensuing, 
and  also  by  a  note  under  Sir  Nicholas  Byron's  hand,  in  Mr. 
Mayor's  custody."  In  the  dialogue  between  Lord  Newark 
and  Mr.  Hutchinson,  the  former  states  that  the  town  have 
cheerfully  lent  the  king  a  barrel  of  powder,  therefore  this 
attempt  to  obtain  possession  of  the  powder  of  the  county 
probably  took  place  about  the  middle  of  August  Charles 
arrived  at  Nottingham  from  York  on  August  loth,  and 
set  out  again  on  the  i8th  for  Warwickshire.  On  the 
20th  he  made  his  unsuccessful  attempt  to  enter  Coventry. 
It  was  most  likely  during  the  interval  between  August  3d 
and  August  20th  that  the  unsuccessful  attempt  to  ob- 
tain possession  of  the  powder  took  place.  Vicars  in  his 
"  Parliamentary  Chronicle,"  and  several  newspapers  of  the 
time,^  mention  the  king's  unsuccessful  endeavours  to  secure 
the  aid  of  the  Nottingham  train  bands,  and  the  use  of  their 
magazine  for  this  expedition.  A  contemporary  pamphlet 
entitled  '*  The  King's  Majesty's  proposition  to  the  Gentry  and 
Commonalty  of  Nottingham"  (in  the  Thomason  Collection 
in  the  British  Museum,  £.  116)  says  : — 

"  The  king's  most  excellent  majesty  having  within  a  few 
days  taken  into  consideration  the  great  and  manifold  pre- 
parations that  are  now  making  for  war  here  in  the  southi 

^  e.g.y  "  Special  Passages,"  No.  2,*  August  16-23. 


Appendix.  349 

and  in  divers  places  of  this  kingdom,  and  being  informed 
of  some  of  his  council  of  the  proceedings  in  Warwickshire, 
forthwith  resolved  to  send  some  aid  to  the  Earl  of  Nor- 
thampton, so  that  he  might  by  that  means  the  better  perform 
the  trust  reposed  in  him,  and  to  that  end  his  highness 
intended  to  send  out  warrants  to  all  the  adjoining  counties 
for  their  appearance,  to  aid  and  assist  his  majesty  therein, 
but  the  greatest  part  refused  to  come  to  obey  the  warrant. 
His  royal  majesty  being  somewhat  displeased  thereat,  that 
they  should  deny  to  obey  his  command,  sent  out  a  strict 
command  that  they  should  resign  up  their  arms,  and  restore 
them  to  those  which  he  had  appointed  to  take  charge  of 
them ;  and  having  a  great  confidence  of  his  subjects  of 
Nottingham,  thought  it  meet  and  expedient  to  desire  the 
aid  and  assistance  of  the  trained  band  of  that  city  to  guard 
his  royal  person  towards  Coventry,  and  to  that  end  pro- 
pounded these  following  propositions  to  them,  viz. : — 

''  I.  That  they  would  be  pleased  to  go  along  with  him 
towards  Coventry  in  Warwickshire,  for  the  aid  and  assist- 
ance of  his  royal  person  against  all  those  that  should 
presume  to  oppose  him. 

^  3.  That  his  majesty  desired  all  his  loving  subjects  of  that 
county  to  make  their  appearance  at  Nottingham,  where  his 
majesty  hath  now  set  up  his  standard,  to  assist  him  against 
the  rebels  (meaning  the  parliament's  forces),  but  the  county 
refused  the  same,  vowing  to  lose  their  dearest  lives  in  the 
defence  of  his  royal  majesty  and  the  parliament  against  the 
bloodsucking  cavaliers. 

"  3.  His  majesty  propounded  unto  them,  that  the  trained 
band  of  that  county  might  go  along  with  him,  to  guard  his 
royal  person  from  his  foes  and  enemies,  but  they  utterly 
denied  these  his  majesty's  demands,  and  would  by  no  means 
condescend  thereunto. 

^  4.  His  majesty  desired  that  they  would  be  pleased  to  lend 
him  the  magazine  of  the  said  county,  promising  to  see  them 


350  Appendix. 

have  it  again  ere  long  time,  but  they  likewise  denied  this 
his  majesty's  request,  and  would  not  give  their  consenti 
that  it  should  be  transported  out  of  their  own  county." 

Thus  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  statement  that  an  attempt  was 
made  by  the  king  to  obtain  the  powder  in  the  county 
magazine  is  confirmed,  though  she  doubtless  exaggerates 
the  part  played  by  Mr.  Hutchinson  in  protecting  it 

The  newspaper  which  bears  the  name  of  ^  Special  Passages" 
supplies  many  details  respecting  the  king's  stay  at  Not- 
tingham. It  mentions  amongst  other  things  the  plunder  of 
Mr.  MiUington's  house,  and  another  paper  names  Mr.  Piggot 
as  a  sufferer.  The  successful  attempt  to  obtain  possession 
of  the  powder  doubtless  took  place  after  the  raising  of  the 
standard,  when  the  king  had  collected  two  or  three  thousand 
men,  and  disarmed  the  trained  bands.  The  Memoirs,  how- 
ever, seem  to  fix  it  as  taking  place  directly  the  king's  soldiers 
came  to  the  town.  ^  Special  Passages,"  No.  3  (August  22-29), 
states  that  after  the  setting  up  of  the  standard,  ^  the  cavaliers 
having  disarmed  all  the  townsmen  that  had  arms  sent  them 
from  the  parliament,  three  householders  refusing  to  deliver 
arms  which  they  bought  with  their  own  money  were  com- 
mitted to  the  castle."  But  the  general  disarmament  of  the 
Nottinghamshire  trained  bands  took  place  later,  A  letter 
dated  Northampton,  September  12,  gives  the  following 
account  of  it  (A  Continuation  of  our  Weekly  Intelligence 
from  his  Majesty's  Army). 

From  its  full  knowledge  of  events  at  Nottingham,  it  is 
possible  that  this  letter  may  have  been  written  by  Colonel 
Hutchinson,  who  left  Nottingham  a  few  days  earlier,  and, 
after  passing  a  little  time  in  Leicestershire,  visited  Essex  at 
Northampton. 

**  Mv  GOOD  Friend,— I  sent  fuller,  but  it  was  intercepted 
in  the  way.  In  brief,  the  king  wants  money,  the  pay  is 
nothing  but  dollars,  the  town  is  forced  to  take  that  for  six 


Appendix.  351 

shillings  which  is  not  worth  five  shillings, — besides  the  king 
called  the  gentry  of  that  shire  together  to  desire  of  them 
five  hundred  pounds,  a  relic  of  ship-money  left  in  the  then 
high  sheriffs  hands,  the  beginning  of  parliament :  the  middle- 
sized  gentry,  though  they  made  appearance,  were  not  called 
up,  did  not  give  their  consent,  being  discontented ;  however, 
the  five  hundred  pounds  was  taken.  Many  of  the  king's 
servants  go  away  for  want  of  pay ;  for  ordnance  there  is  no 
more  noise  of  any,  only  I  hear  an  inkling,  as  if  they  were 
making  some  iron  ones ;  for  foot  they  have  some  more ;  the 
king  desired  to  see  them  complete,  there  were  of  them  nigh 
three  thousand,  men  and  boys,  but  not  above  half  armed, 
and  eighty  of  them  were  hired  for  one  shilling  a  man  for  a 
day,  and  to  mend  the  matter,  to  deceive  to  the  full,  they 
gave  up  in  a  list  to  the  king  five  thousand.  The  parliament 
army  disquiets  Nottingham,  and  so  they  are  resolved  to  go 
further  off',  to  Derby  first  and  then  westward,  and  perhaps 
north-west  too  therefrom.  I  do  believe  it  is  yet  to  be 
resolved.  It  is  sure  two  pieces  of  ordnance  went  to  Derby 
on  Wednesday  last,  some  arms  and  ammunition ;  on 
Saturday  it  was  expected  more  should  go,  and  this  day  the 
king  was  to  go ;  whether  to  return  it  is  not  yet  resolved, 
but  it  is  most  probable  they  will  leave  Nottingham.  They 
threaten  to  pillage  it  before  they  take  their  leaves,  and  some 
rascals  talk  of  worse,  but  sure  they  dare  not  do  it.  The 
king  soon  moved  the  trained  bands  of  Nottinghamshire,  the 
appearance  was  thin ;  they  told  him  (he  told  them  ?)  he 
never  received  so  much  loyalty  and  affection  from  any 
county ;  and  though  he  called  them  to  appear  in  person 
with  their  arms,  yet  because  of  harvest,  and  because  of  their 
wives  and  children,  it  should  suffice  to  send  him  their  arms, 
and  on  the  word  of  a  king  to  return  them  when  he  had 
settled  his  kingdom  in  peace.  They  cried  out  they  would 
go  with  him  ;  however,  their  arms  were  commanded  to  the 
castle  for  that  night,  and  next  morning  they  were  forced  to 


352  Appendix. 

return  disarmed.  So  they  served  Leicestershire.  I  guess 
his  counsels  vary,  and  did  he  know  how  to  bestow  his 
ordnance,  he  would  be  altogether  in  a  flying  posture,  and 
turn  his  foot  into  dragooners,  which  yet  he  may  do  if  foot 
come  in  no  faster.  They  will  incline  westward  or  north-west, 
and  in  the  way  get  up  what  arms  they  can,  by  speeches  and 
perforces.  Derby  was  forced  to  resign  some,  that  shire  is 
righter  than  most.  We  get  nothing  in  the  counties  by  this 
deliberation,  and  I  find,  if  they  were  not  seeing  people, 
they  would  to  the  cavaliers,  as  Nottingham  and  such  towns, 
when  promises  have  been  made  in  vain."  .  .  • 


V. 

Sir  John  GelL 

Mrs.  Hutchinson's  account  of  Sir.  John  Gell  has  been 
often  quoted  and  often  criticised,  and  seems  therefore  to 
demand  an  examination.  The  first  two  charges  relate  to 
his  treatment  of  Sir  John  Stanhope.  It  should  be  remem* 
bered  that  Sir  Thomas  Hutchinson's  second  wife  was  the 
daughter  of  Sir  John  Stanhope,  and  that  Sir  John  Cell's  ill- 
treatment  of  a  person  so  nearly  allied  to  Mrs.  Hutchinson 
might  well  incline  her  to  look  on  all  his  actions  with  con- 
siderable prejudice.  Sir  John  Gell  was  Sheriff  of  Derby* 
shire  in  1635,  and  in  that  capacity  had  to  raise  ^£3500  from 
the  county.  Mr.  Garrard  in  one  of  his  letters  to  Stafford 
(Jan.  8,  163^ ,  Stafford  Correspondence,  vol  I,  p.  505)  gives 
the  following  account  of  Stanhope's  case : — "  Sir  John  Stan- 
hope was  sent  for  up  by  a  sergeant-at-arms,  his  misde- 
meanour thus  :  the  Sheriff  demanded  of  him  what  he  was 
assessed  at  for  the  shipping-money.  He  answered  he  had 
no  money,  but  offered  to  show  him  plate  or  cattle:  the 


Appendix.  353 

sheriff  took  some  cows  to  raise  the  money  and  drove  them 
away,  not  putting  them  off  suddenly  he  sold  them  under  the 
money  Stanhope  was  set  at,  so  comes  again  to  drive  more. 
Sir  John  Stanhope,  a  choleric  man,  withstands  the  sheriffs 
bailiffs,  gives  them  ill  words,  and  he  and  his  men  rescue  the 
cattle  from  them.  He  is  not  yet  come  to  answer  this  :  the 
sergeant  returned  with  affidavits  from  the  neighbour  justices, 
that  he  is  so  afflicted  with  the  stone  and  pains  of  the  gout, 
that  he  cannot  stir  without  danger  of  his  life."  This  account 
is  confirmed  by  the  notices  in  the  Calendars  of  Domestic 
State  Papers  for  the  years  1635  and  1636.  Sir  John  Stan- 
hope being  unable  to  appear  before  the  council,  entered  into 
a  bond  to  conform  to  their  orders,  a^id  paid  eight  pounds, 
which  may  have  been  the  sum  at  which  he  was  originally 
assessed  or  the  balance  due.  Sir  John  Gell  himself,  claims 
(March  14,  1636)  that  he  was  specially  considerate  in  the 
levy  of  ship-money :  ''  he  had  special  care  that  the  poorer 
sort  paid  nothing  at  all,  and  that  those  who  were  in  debt,  or 
had  charge  of  children,  to  their  desire,  and  any  other  that 
came  or  sent  to  him  was  abated." 

The  account  given  of  his  devastations  at  Elvaston  is  thus 
confirmed  by  "  Mercurius  Aulicus  "  for  Feb.  15, 1643.  From 
Derbyshire  the  carriage  and  behaviour  of  Sir  John  Gell,  the 
ringleader  of  the  rebels  there,  was  certified  in,  these  words 
that  follow : — '*  Sir  John  Gell  with  his  forces  consisting  of 
about  400  men  came  to  Elvaston  in  Derbyshire,  an  house  of 
the  Lady  Stanhope's,  widow  of  Sir  John  Stanhope's,  to  whom 
Gell  (though  never  a  friend),  yet  in  his  lifetime  durst  not 
declare  himself  an  enemy.  But  after  his  death,  making  use 
of  the  power  given  him  by  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  king- 
dom, he  plundered  his  house  of  all  the  arms,  money,  and 
goods  of  worth  he  could  find,  to  the  value  of  jfisoo.  Not 
contented  with  this,  and  to  make  it  more  plainly  appear  that 
his  coming  was  as  much  for  malice  as  plunder,  he  went  into 
the  garden  (in  which  the  good  lady,  taking  very  much 

vou  I.  z 


354  Appendix. 

delight,  had  made  it  a  very  pleasant  place,  with  handsome 
walks  and  diversities  of  the  best  flowers),  which  he  caused 
to  be  digged  up,  and  utterly  ruined.  He  left  not  here,  but 
to  add  more  to  her  vexation,  and  to  please  himself  in  doing 
mischief,  he  went  into  the  church,  where  she  had  lately 
erected  a  tomb  for  her  husband  which  cost  her  £^oo^  that 
he  caused  to  be  demolished,  and  the  stones  to  be  broken 
into  several  pieces,  that  no  possibility  was  left  to  repair  it. 
But  his  act  of  greatest  inhumanity  was  to  go  with  his 
soldiers  into  the  vault,  where  the  dead  of  the  family  were 
usually  buried,  and  to  run  their  swords  through  their  dead 
bodies."  Cell's  soldiers,  like  most  of  the  local  levies  of  the 
parliament,  were  badly  disciplined  and  very  irregularly  paid ; 
they  were  therefore  generally  obliged  to  subsist  by  requisi- 
tions, and  'May  upon  free  quarter,"  as  they  did  whilst  at 
Nottingham.  Sir  John  Cell  in  his  *'True  Relation"  of  his 
services  admits,  whilst  endeavouring  to  excuse,  the  plunder  of 
the  Earl  of  Chesterfield's  house  at  Bretby.  A  letter  of  the 
2d  January,  1643,  ^^'o^n  the  inhabitants  of  various  villages  in 
Derbyshire,  accuses  him  of  plundering  many  other  royalist 
gentlemen.  It  is  given  in  the  Appendix  to  Clover's  Derby- 
shire. 

Mrs.  Hutchinson  also  accuses  Cell  of  cowardice  at  the 
battle  of  Hopton  Heath,  when  *'  some  that  knew  him  well 
said  his  men  held  him  up,  among  a  stand  of  pikes,  while 
they  obtained  a  glorious  victory."  It  is  only  fair  to  quote 
Cell's  own  account  of  the  batUe.  The  horse  with  the  ex- 
ception of  about  200  troopers  fled  and  left  the  foot  to  con- 
tend against  the  Earl  of  Northampton's  victorious  cavalry. 
"  Our  colonel  quit  his  horse  and  went  to  the  foot,  being  then 
in  great  fear  and  disorder,  many  of  them  ready  to  run  and 
standing  with  their  pikes  advanced :  the  colonel,  with  his 
own  hands,  put  down  their  pikes,  encouraged  both  them  and 
the  musketeers,  who  were  all  disorderly  crowded  together ; 
he  speedily  got  them  into  order  and  gave  the  enemy  such  a 


Appendix.  355 

volley  of  shot  upon  their  charge  that  they  first  wheeled  .  .  . 
and  presently  fled."  The  charge  of  cowardice  is  not  sup- 
ported  by  facts,  nor  by  probability.  Gell  seems,  in  short,  to 
have  resembled  his  own  soldiers,  "  good,  stout,  fighting  men, 
bul  licentious,  ungovernable  wretches." 

Another  charge  which  Mrs.  Hutchinson  brings  against 
Gell  is  that  he  pensioned  the  diurnal-makers  in  order  to  pur- 
chase himself  a  name.  Such  an  accusation  it  is  impossible 
to  prove  or  disprove.  It  is  certain  that  Gell  is  more  often 
mentioned  in  the  diumals  than  his  services  seem  to  merit, 
and  that  very  small  exploits  of  his  are  recorded  at  dispro- 
portionate length.  It  is  worth  remarking  also  that  the 
paper  entitled  "Perfect  Occurences"  possessed,  at  least 
during  1644,  a  correspondent  at  Derby  who  hardly  allowed 
a  week  to  pass  without  a  letter  about  the  doings  of  Sir  John 
Gell,  and  even  chronicled  his  capture  of  Major  Hacker's 
charger. 

Two  accounts  of  Sir  John  Gell's  services  were  drawn  up 
under  his  own  supervision  and  are  printed  in  the  Appendix 
to  Glover's  Derbyshire.  One  of  them  is  also  printed  in 
the  Ninth  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  Historical 
Manuscripts,  together  with  numerous  extracts  from  the 
Gell  Papers  at  Hopton  Hall.  Gell's  narratives  supply  many 
valuable  illustrations  of  Nottinghamshire  history  during  this 
period,  but  they  are  both  avowedly  of  the  natvre  of  apologies, 
and  therefore  to  be  used  with  caution. 


356  Appendix. 

VI. 

Six  letters  relating  to  the  proposed  treaty  of  neutrality  for 

Notts.    Dec.  164a. 

From  MSS.  in  t^e  British  Museum,  Na  25,901. 


Sir  John  Digby,  his  summons. 

■  % 

For  his  honoured  friends  I  sham  Perkins  and  yohn  Hutchin- 
son, Esq.,  or  to  either  of  them  this  with  speed. 

Sir,  —  Upon  conference  with  divers  gentlemen  we 
thought  it  very  convenient  that  the  justices  of  this  county 
should  meet  together  to  confer  of  such  things  as  may  best 
tend  in  these  sad  times  to  the  peace  and  safety  of  this  county. 
Wherefore  I  have  thought  it  my  part  to  request  you  whose 
names  are  here  underwritten  to  give  me  meeting  at  the  sign 
of  the  Talbutt,  Newark,  upon  Tuesday  the  tenth  of  this 
month.  There  we  may  together  confer  of  such  things  as  may 
be  fittest  both  according  to  the  law  of  the  land  and  the  law 
of  nature,  for  the  defence  of  our  country  and  safety  of  our 
persons  and  estates. — Hoping  hereof  you  will  not  fail,  I  rest 
your  assured  loving  friend,  John  Digby. 

December  •]  eh,  1642. 

Postscript, — For  Isham  Perkins,  Esq.,  and  John  Hutch- 
inson, Esquire.  I  have  sent  the  like  intimation  to  all  the 
Justices  of  Peace. 

For  John  Hutchinson,  Esquire,  at  Nottingham. 

Sir, — We  received]  a  letter  from  the  high  sheriff,  Sir 
John  Digby,  dated  the  9th  of  this  month,  importing  his 
desire  of  a  meeting  of  all  the  justices  of  this  county,  to  con- 
sider of  such  things  as  might  be  fittest  for  the  peace  and 


Appendix.  357 

safety  of  this  county,  and  safety  of  our  persons  and  estates, 
to  which  efTect  he  informs  us  he  also  writ  to  you.    Accord- 
ing to  which  his  letter,  we,  whose  names  are  here  under- 
written, did  meet  in  hope  of  an  universal  concurrence  of  the 
whole  body  of  the  county  to  so  pious  a  work,  which  might 
avoid  the  effusion  of  blood,  preserve  our  estates  in  peace  for 
the  present,  and  prevent  factions  for  the  future  in  our  pos- 
terities, but  unhappily  we  find  here  a  slender  appearance. 
The  cause  hereof  we  cannot  guess,  unless  it  be  the  report  of 
some  small  forces  which  Mr.  Sheriff  hath  brought  here  for 
the  guard  of  his  own  person,  and  this  meeting,  for  which  he 
hath  good  cause,  as  he  hath  made  appear  to  us  and  will  like- 
wise to  you  upon  your  meeting ;  which  force,  if  you  please 
to  give  a  meeting,  shall  be  forthwith  removed,  with  assur- 
ance upon  our  honour  and  reputation  that  no  other  shall  be 
raised,  if  you,  likewise,  will  give  assurance  upon  your  honour 
and  reputation  that  none  of  your  forces  shall  stir,  nor  any 
other  by  you  be  brought  into  this  county  during  the  present 
treaty;  and  if  you  please  to  come  to  this  town,  where  we  stay 
your  answer,  we  shall  give  you  the  same  assurance  of  safety 
both  in  coming  hither,  staying  here,  and  returning,  and  if 
you  shall  think  any  other  place  more  fit  we  shall  meet  you 
there,  first  receiving  upon  your  honour  and  reputations  the 
same  assurance  of  safety.    We  profess  befgre  Almighty  God 
we  are  here,  as  loyal  hearts  to  his  majesty,  faithful  hearts 
to  the  parliament,  and  compassionate  hearts  for  the  peace 
of  this  county,  and  if  you  shall  meet  us  with  the  like  we  hope 
God  will  be  with  us,  and  his  blessing* 

Chaworth. 
Thomas  Williamson. 
Robert  Sutton. 
Matthew  Palmer. 
Roger  Cooper. 
John  Millington. 


358  Appendix. 

For  the  Honourable  the  Lord  Chaworth  and  the  rest  of  the 

gentlemen  at  Newark. 

Sirs, — We  do  most  joyfully  receive  your  most  favourable^ 
and  we  are  confident  real,  expressions  of  regard  to  us,  and 
especial  care  of  the  general  peace  and  safety  of  this  county, 
which  we  take  God  to  witness  was  the  first  ground  of  the 
course  we  are  now  in,  and  the  only  end  of  the  same,  wherein 
we  beseech  God  to  send  us  success  answerable  to  the  integ- 
rity of  our  hearts.  For  our  giving  you  meeting  we  are  most 
willing  to  do  the  same  in  any  place  secure,  which  we  are 
assured  will  be  to  us  wheresoever  you  shall  pass  your  honour 
and  reputations  for  our  safeties ;  but  yet  we  conceive  no  place 
so  fit  for  the  business  we  all  intend  as  this  town  of  Notting- 
ham, being  the  county  town,  where  we  assure  you  upon  our 
honour  and  reputation,  you  shall  not  only  receive  a  free  and 
glad  admittance,  a  welcome  continuance,  and  a  friendly 
return,  but  a  most  friendly  concurrence  of  us  in  all  things 
for  the  public  good.  Although  we  were  making  us  ready,  as 
well  for  our  own  safeties,  as  also  for  the  mutual  assistance 
of  those  counties,  when  it  shall  be  required,  with  which  we 
have  entered  into  an  association,  yet  we  had  not  so  speedily 
set  ourselves  in  this  posture,  had  not  a  late  warrant  of  so 
strange  a  nature*  issued  forth  through  this  county  from  Sir 
John  Digby,  and  certain  information  being  given  us  of  a 
great  force  which  he  commanded  to  attend  him  from  Mans- 
field to  Southwell  and  Newark,  and  as  we  were  further 
informed  from  thence  to  Nottingham,  which  put  this  town 
and  the  places  adjacent  into  a  great  trouble  and  amazement; 
which  said  posture,  though  most  sorry  for  the  occasion 
thereof,  we  cannot  decline  for  the  reasons  herein  specified ; 
yet  we  intend  not  thereby  the  least  disturbance  of  any  of  you 
performing,  as  we  hope  you  will,  all  good  offices  in  your 
power  for  the  good  and  tranquillity  of  this  country;  in  full 


Appendix.  359 

testimony  whereof  we  do  earnestly  entreat  you  to  lay  aside 
all  endeavours  of  raising  a  force  in  the  country,  and  do  us 
the  favour  to  let  us  attend  you  at  the  place  formerly  desired, 
and  then  we  do  heartily  wish  and  shall  faithfully  endeavour 
a  perfect  union  and  harmony  in  this  whole  county  for  our 
mutual  defence  in  these  miserable  distractions.  The  town 
of  Nottingham  do  most  joyfully  concur  with  us  in  the  said 
course,  as  it  may  appear  to  you  by  a  letter  from  the  town  of 
Nottingham  to  the  corporation  of  Newark.  We  do  earnestly 
entreat  your  speedy  answer. 

Francis  Pierrepont, 

John  Hutchinson. 


To  the  Honourable  Francis  Pierrepont,  and  our  noble  friend 

John  Hutchinson,  Esquire. 

Your  kind  entertainment  of  our  letter  we  are  exceeding 
glad  of,  such  is  our  zeal  to  the  peace  of  this  country.  This 
our  intended  meeting  by  God's  blessing  will  uphold  us,  even 
as  it  were  now  sliding  into  blood  and  faction,  which  meeting 
that  it  may  be  most  free  and  all  scruples  be  removed,  we 
have  entreated  two  gentlemen,  namely,  Mr.  John  Wood  and 
Mr.  Robert  Butler,  of  known  moderation  and  discretion,  to 
bring  to  us  from  you  an  explanation  of  one  part  of  your 
letter,  which  seems  to  be  conditional,  which  words  are, ''  that 
we  intend  not  hereby  the  least  disturbance  of  any  of  you 
performing,  as  we  hope  you  will,  all  good  offices  in  your 
power  by  the  tranquillity  of  this  county;"  by  which  words  of 
your  letter,  you  seem  to  us  to  be  the  judges  whether  we,  or 
any  of  our  carriage,  be  or  have  been,  such  as  be  good  offices 
for  the  tranquillity  of  this  county,  for  if  they  be  not  so 
esteemed  by  you  we  put  ourselves  under  your  power,  you 
keeping  yourselves  in  your  posture  of  force.  Sir,  for  the 
place,  though  it  be  out  of  our  county  and  that,  an  indif- 


360  Appendix. 

ferent  place  was  most  fittest  for  all,  yet  such  is  our  desire  for 
the  peace  and  quiet  of  this  county  as  we  shall  comply  with 
your  desires,  and,  though  all  our  hearts  tell  us  there  is 
nothing  why  we  should  douht,  yet  discretion  certainly  bids 
us  desire  a  clear  explanation  of  those  words.  Then,  sir,  we 
or  at  least  two  of  us,  come  to  you  what  day  you  please  with 
hearts  full  of  hope  for  the  public,  and  rest  with  our  prayers 
to  God  for  a  blessing. 

Chaworth. 
Thomas  Wiluamson. 
Matthew  Palmbr. 
Roger  Cooper. 
Robert  Sutton. 

DecitHbtr  the  15/A,  1642.  JOHN  MiLLINGTON. 


To  our  honourable  good  friends  Francis  Pierrepont  and 
John  Hutchinson,  Esquires,  these  present. 

Honourable  Sir, — Nothing  but  peace,  nothing  but  the 
safety  of  the  county  is  intended  by  us,  we  protest  before 
Almighty  God ;  the  hopes  of  which  was  near  lost  yesternight 
if  this  town  had  been  surprised  by  some  troops  of  Lincoln- 
shire horse  who  presented  themselves  near  the  town;  to  pre- 
vent which  and  to  preserve  this  much  threatened  town  from 
foreigners,  and  the  county  from  this  barbarous  and  never 
enough  to  be  hated  plundering,  the  truth  is  we  were  not 
unwilling  to  continue  those  forces  sent  into  this  town  by  the 
Lord  of  Newcastle  his  excellency ;  which  upon  the  settle- 
ment of  peace  among  us  we  hope  we  shall  be  able  to  prevail 
with  his  excellency  to  remove,  or  place  others,  or  none  at 
all,  as  we  shall  agree  for  the  peace  of  the  country.  Sir, 
unless  you  otherwise  dispose  we  will  wait  on  you  at  the  lodge 


Appendix.  36 1 

formerly  appointed,  betwixt  ten  or  eleven  of  the  clock  or 
thereabouts,  to-morrow,  and  we  do  engage  our  reputations 
that  you  shall  have  all  safety,  in  coming,  staying,  and  return- 
ing, and  the  same  assurance,  sir,  we  desire  to  have  from  you, 
though  we  hope  it  is  needless  from  any  of  us,  our  hearts 
being  so  full  of  integrity  to  the  happy  issue  of  this  work 
which,  all  other  set  aside,  is  the  sole  aim  and  shall  be  endea- 
vour of  your  friends  and  servants,  * 

John  Digby,  Vic.  Com. 
Roger  Cooper. 
Gervase  Eyre. 
Robert  Sutton. 
Newark,  John  Millington. 

^yi  Dicember  1642. 

Postscript, — Noble  Sir, — Upon  the  honourable  parole  of 
a  gentleman  from  me  and  my  troops,  you  shall  be  safe  to 
come  and  go  to  the  place  appointed  during  the  time  of  the 
treaty.    This  I  underwrite  with  my  hand, 

J.  Henderson. 


To  the  Honourable  Mr.  Francis  Pierrepont,  and  to  our  noble 
friend  John  Hutchinson,  Esquire. 

Honourable  Sir, — Your  being  upon  the  place,  as  it 
justifies  you,  so  it  may  seem  to  lay  some  weight  upon  us. 
Give  us  leave  to  assure  you  that  we  are  neither  so  uncivil  to 
yourselves,  or  so  careless  of  our  country's  peace,  as  to  have 
made  the  least  fail  of  our  parts,  but  the  truth  is  we  received 
not  your  letter  until  four  of  the  clock  yesterday,  the  hour 
being  one,  so  as  at  that  distance  there  was  no  possibility  left 
us  either  to  come  or  to  send  our  excuse,  not  being  certain  of 
your  being  there,  and,  however,  certain  that  you  would  be  cer- 


362  Appendix. 

tainly  gone  before  we  could  make  any  address  to  you.  Now 
we  have  thus  excused  ourselves,  we  shall  send  the  gentleman 
who  you  pleased  to  propose  in  your  letter,  to  you,  from 
whom  we  may  receive  what  time  and  place,  you  please  to 
appoint,  which  by  God's  leave  we  will  not  fail  to  attend,  nor 
in  the  meantime  to  supplicate  the  great  God  of  peace  so  to 
direct  our  meeting  as  may  be  to  His  glory,  the  peace  of  this 
country,  in  which  if  we  be  so  happy  for  the  public  we  shall 
not  fail  of  the  blessing  of  peace-makers.  We  shall  trouble 
you  no  more  at  this  time,  but  wait  your  resolutions,  and  rest 
your  assured  friends  and  servants, 

Chaworth. 

Robert  Sutton. 

Gervase  Eyre. 

Newark,  John  Millington. 

December  z^h^  1642. 

Postscript — Though  a  day's  loss  of 'time  is  very  consider- 
able in  this  great  business,  yet  in  respect  to  morrow  is  Christ- 
mas day,  we  shall  spend  it  in  our  devotions  for  a  blessing  to 
our  endeavours,  and  not  send  to  you  until  Monday  morning. 

[Note. — This  letter  was  received  on  Christmas  day  at  noon.] 


VII. 

Letter  to  Lord  Fairfax  instructing  him  to  guard 

Nottingham. 

May  it  please  your  Excellence, — I  am  commanded  by  the 
House  of  Commons  to  represent  unto  you  that  the  town  of 
Nottingham  is  a  piece  of  that  importance,  both  in  regard  of 
the  pass,  being  seated  upon  the  river  of  Trent,  and  in  regard 
of  the  situation  in  relation  to  the  neighbouring  counties. 


Appendix.  363 

that  it  much  deserves  your  consideration  for  a  seasonable  aid 
and  supply.  And  the  rather  in  regard  that  at  this  present 
they  are  improved  with  strong  force  at  Newark  and  Welbeck 
and  elsewhere  of  malignant  enemies :  they  themselves  on 
the  contrary  are  in  a  weak  and  languishing  condition :  it  is 
therefore  the  desire  of  the  House  unto  your  excellence  that 
you  would  be  pleased  to  afford  them  what  aid  you  in  your 
great  wisdom  shall  think  fit  for  the  relief  of  their  pressing 
and  urgent  necessities. — ^And  so  I  rest  your  very  loving 
friend,  ■ 

April  v^h^  1643. 

Tanner  MSS.  voL  Ixil  p.  87.  (The  signature  of  the 
letter  is  missing,  and  the  letter  is  probably  merely  a  draft 
of  the  one  actually  sent.) 

VIII. 
The  rendewaus  at  Nottingham,    Mayandjune^  1643. 

The  original  design  was  that  the  troops  thus  collected 
should,  in  response  to  repeated  appeals,  join  Lord  Fairfax 
in  Yorkshire  (see  Lord  Fairfax's  letter  in  Rushworth  and 
the  Fairfax  Correspondence).  But  directly  they  came  to- 
gether, Hotham  and  the  other  commanders  began  to  hesitate 
and  raise  objections  to  the  plan  of  marching  unto  Yorkshire, 
(see  the  two  letters  of  May  24th  and  June  2d  from  the 
commanders  at  Nottingham  in  the  Fairfax  Correspondence). 
Cromwell,  who  was  eager  to  carry  out  a  scheme  which  might 
have  anticipated  Marston  Moor,  was  in  desperate  straits  for 
want  of  money  to  pay  and  clothe  his  men,  and  obliged  also 
to  act  with  the  other  four  commanders.  Whilst  they  still 
lingered  at  Nottingham,  uncertain  whether  to  join  Fairfax 
or  not,  Lord  Gray  took  the  opportunity  of  attacking 
Wiverton  House.  The  siege  is  thus  described  in  Mrs. 
Hutchinson's  Note-Book  : — "  There  is  a  house  of  my  Lord 


364  Appendix. 

Chaworth's  in  the  Vale  called  Wiverton  House,  this  place 
the  enemy  had  possessed  and  fortified,  and  done  more 
mischief  to  Nottingham,  by  plundering  passengers,  market 
folks,  and  carriers,  than  ever  Newark  did.  My  Lord  Gray 
with  all  the  force,  which  was  at  that  time  about  5000^  went 
against  that  house,  and  beat  them  from  their  outworks,  but 
left  the  house  and  marched  another  way.  Yet  within  a  day 
or  two  returned  again  to  it,  and  planted  their  cannon  against 
it  within  pistol  shot,  and  were  resolved  to  lie  there  that 
night,  but  news  was  brought  that  all  Newcastle's  force  was 
marched  out  with  Newark,  which  news,  though  Major 
Ireton  told  my  Lord  that  it  would  be  a  great  deed  of  dis- 
honour to  him  to  retreat,  and  that  they  were  there  able  to 
fight  with  them  if  they  should  come,  yet  they  all  drew  off 
and  returned  to  Nottingham."  The  Memoirs  mention  also 
that  battle  was  offered  by  the  enemy  and  refused.  This 
incident  is  thus  described  in  the  letter  of  the  five  com- 
manders, dated  June  2d  : — '*  Tuesday  last  there  was  towards 
fifty  troops  of  horse  and  dragooners  appeared  in  a  body  some 
four  miles  from  this  place ;  and  we  hear  behind  them  stood 
their  foot.  We  drew  out  to  fight  them  ;  but  they  had  chosen 
such  a  ground  as  we  could  not  come  to  them  without  great 
disadvantage.  At  night  they  drew  «a way  and  are  still  with- 
in six  or  seven  miles,  hovering  up  and  down  the  country" 
(Fairfax  Correspondence,  Civil  Wars,  i.  46).  The  queen's 
march  to  Newark,  at  which  place  she  arrived  on  June  16th, 
led  finally,  with  the  consent  of  Fairfax,  to  the  abandonment 
of  the  march  unto  Yorkshire.  It  became  an  object  of  the 
first  importance  to  prevent  her  joining  the  king ;  meanwhile 
Hotham's  conduct  had  become  too  suspicious  to  be  left 
unnoticed.  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  Note-Book  .gives  rather  a 
fuller  and  more  detailed  account  of  the  charges  against  him 
than  the  printed  Memoirs,  but  they  agree  in  all  important 
points.  Hotham  was  arrested  on  June  18th,  escaped  almost 
immediately,  and  wrote  on  the  24th  of  June  to  the  Speaker 


Appendix.  365 

from  Lincoln  complaining  of  the  treatment  he  had  received. 
From  Lincoln  he  went  to  his  father  at  Hull,  where  both  were 
seized  and  made  prisoners  on  June  38th.  For  the  charges 
against  Hotham  see  the  *'  Commons  Journals"  of  June  21, 
"  Rushworth,"  part  iii  vol.  iu  pp.  799-800,  and  the  letters 
in  Sanford's  '*  Studies  and  Illustrations,"  pp.  552-556. 

On  June  21,  according  to  Dugdale's  Diary,  the  queen's 
forces  attacked  the  parliamentary  troops.    According  to  the 
statement  of  "  Mercurius  Aulicus  "  they  took  eighty  prisoners 
and  killed  fifty,  '' though  •  with  the  loss  of  a  noble  gentle- 
man who  was  the  Baron  of  Donaw  in  Germany,  who  was 
slain  with  a  piece  of  their  great  ordnance."    This  "  Baron 
of  Donaw,"  or  ''  Baron  Done,"  as  Dugdale  calls  him,  is  evi- 
dently Mrs.  Hutchinson's  Duke  of  Vendome's  son,  which  is 
probably  a  mistake  for  Von  Dohna  (see  Brown's  ^  Annals 
of  Newark,"  p.  167).    The  queen  finally  gave  up  the  idea  of 
forcing  her  way  through  the  enemy  at  Nottingham.     On 
Tuesday,  June  27th,  she  wrote  to  the  king  from  Newark 
announcing  her  intention  of  marching  on  Friday  (''Rush- 
worth,"  V.  274),  and  on  the  2d  of  July  she  took  Burton, 
and  so  made  her  way  to  Oxford,  which  she  entered  on  the 
14th.    The  dispersion  of  the  troops  at  Nottingham  must 
also  have  taken  place  at  the  end  of  June,  for  it  is  notified  in 
''  Mercurius  Aulicus "  for  July  4th.      It  is  there  said  that 
Meldrum,  with  1500  foot  and  seven  troops  of  horse  and 
dragooners,  was  left  in  command  at  Nottingham. 


IX. 

Colonel  HutchinsofCs  quarrel  with  Sir  Roger  Cooper, 

Some  days  before  Sir  Roger  Cooper  had  written  a  letter 
to  Mr.  Wightman,  Master  of  the  Ordnance,  who  was  his 
nephew,  wherein  upon  no  occasion  he  had  railed  most 


366  Appendix. 

bitterly  against  the  whole  committee,  and  given  them  most 
unworthy  terms  and  speeches,  which  the  governor,  taking 
himself  to  have  interest  in,  after  they  had  done  speaking 
with  Major  Cartwright  about  my  Lord  Newcastle,  took 
exception  to  take  notice  of,  and  desired  Major  Cartwright 
to  ask  from  him  that  cuckoldy  ass  Sir  Roger  Cooper,  what 
he  had  to  do  to  abuse  honester  men  than  himself,  as  he 
had  done  the  committee  of  Nottingham  in  his  letter  to  his 
nephew,  and  said  that  he  believed  the  letter  was  indited  by 
that  cowardly  conceited  fellow  his  brother,  himself  not 
having  sense  enough  to  write  it,  which  words  Cartwright 
told  Sir  Roger  Cooper,  who  some  time  after  sent  the 
governor  a  challenge  to  meet  him  in  single  duel,  but  the 
governor  sent  him  another  letter  to  tell  him,  that  if  he  had 
not  known  him  too  much  taken  up  with  the  service  of  the 
state,  to  mend  such  an  inconsiderable  thing  as  he  was,  he 
durst  not  have  written  him  a  challenge ;  that  when  the  state 
was  quiet,  and  he  had  no  better  quarrel  to  venture  his  life 
in,  it  would  be  time  to  satisfy  him — that  if  he,  or  any  of  his 
cavalier  party,  would  come  to  Nottingham  castle,  he  should 
there  receive  the  chastisement  of  his  folly. — Mrs.  Hutchin- 
son's Note  Book,  British  Museum,  Additional  MSS.,  25,901. 


X. 

For  our  honoured  friend  Gilbert  Millington,  Esq, 

Sir, — We  have  been  acquainted  with  a  letter  written 
by  Lieutenant-colonel  Hutchinson  (now  governor  of  this 
castle),  whereby  he  declareth  how  himself  and  this  com- 
mittee are  straitened  and  deprived  of  that  liberty  they 
formerly  enjoyed  with  their  families  in  the  town ;  for  when 
our  horse  dragoons  and  some  foot  were  drawn  out  into 
Lincolnshire,  and  but  two  companies  left  in  town  (not  able 


Appendix.  367 

to  defend  it),  and  many  of  those  soldiers  so  ill  affected  that 
some  are  since  gone  to  the  enemy,  and  the  greatest  part  of 
the  town  so  malignant,  that  they  were  ready  to  deliver  up 
the  town  to  the  enemy,  had  he  made  any  attempt  upon  it, 
we  durst  no  longer  hazard  ourselves  there,  the  watches  and 
guard  being  so  neglected  by  the  soldiery  for  want  of  pay^ 
but  were  forced  to  remove  into  the  castle,  and  dispose  of 
our  wives  and  families  elsewhere.  We  have  great  cause  to 
second  his  motion  for  a  table  at  the  public  charge,  we 
having  hitherto  sustained  our  wives  and  families  out  of  our 
own  estates,  more  than  any  committee  in  England  have 
done  besides  ourselves  (as  we  verily  believe).  We  have 
had  our  houses  and  grounds  plundered  abroad  in  the 
country,  and  almost  all  we  have  taken  away  because  we 
are  engaged  in  this  service  here.  We  are  but  five  or  six 
of  us,  and  a  table  for  so  many,  with  some  few  officers 
besides,  will  not  much  burthen  the  country,  the  charge  of 
the  whole  garrison  being  now  contracted  into  a  narrow 
compass.  We  would  not  presume  to  erect  a  table  of  our- 
selves, without  the  approbation  of  that  honourable  assembly, 
though  there  be  precedent  for  it  not  far  from  us.  We  pur- 
pose to  be  as  thrifty  as  it  may  be  possible,  so  that  the 
charge  of  it  will  not  be  considerable ;  it  will  afford  us  some 
conveniency,  which  is  the  thing  first  moved  us  to  it,  and 
we  humbly  conceive  it  not  to  be  unreasonable. 

Sir,  we  have  hitherto  been  burthened  with  great  and 
chargeable  work  for  fortification  of  the  town  and  otherwise, 
and  having  of  a  long  time  had  no  horse  or  dragoons  to 
fetch  in  means  to  defray  those  charges,  or  for  the  pay  of 
our  soldiers,  are  now  into  arrear  with  them.  If  you  would 
therefore  be  pleased  to  move  the  House  for  some  money  to 
be  allowed  us  from  them,  though  it  were  but  ;^5oo,  we 
never  yet  having  received  one  penny  from  the  parliament 
(though  more  active  than  some  who  have  wasted  vast  sums 
and  done  no  great  service  to  the  public),  we  should  then 


368  Appendix. 

hope  with  God's  assistance  to  defend  this  town  and  castle 
(though  we  have  not  above  three  hundred  soldiers),  and  be 
able  to  render  a  good  account  of  the  trust  reposed  in  us. 

Which  favours,  Sir,  we  earnestly  crave  from  you,  whose 
former  readiness  to  do  us  good,  doth  still  embolden  us  to 
cast  ourselves  upon  your  further  care  of  us. — ^Your  faithful, 
thankful  servants, 

Francis  Thornhaoh. 
George  Hutchinson. 
Joseph  Widicbrpoole. 
NoTTiNGHAii  Castle,  T.  Salusbury. 

26M  August  1643. 

The  original  of  this  letter  is  in  the  Tanner  MSS.  in  the 
Bodleian  Library,  vol.  Ixii.  p.  295. 

The  letter  was  read  in  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  5th 
September,  and  the  request  of  the  committee  granted. — 
Commons  Journals. 


XI. 

Quarrel  between  the  committees  of  Derby  and  Nottingham, 

Derby  at  that  time  being  in  great  danger  they  sent  hither 
for  powder ;  two  of  the  committee  with  two  troops  of  horse 
came  to  borrow  and  convoy  it,  but  their  request  for  ten 
barrels  of  powder  being  so  unreasonable  a  demand  out  of 
the  store  of  our  poor  castle,  the  governor  told  them  that  to 
spare  any  of  their  magazine  in  such  an  extremity  as  this 
was  a  thing  that  no  wise  man  would  do,  but  their  demand 
of  so  many  barrels  was  as  much  as  they  could  have  expected 
from  any  magazine  in  the  kingdom,  yet  so  much  respect  he 
had  to  them  that  what  could  possibly  be  spared  out  of  the 
store  of  the  castle  should  be  allowed  them,  whereupon  hav- 


Appendix.  369 

ing  spoken  with  the  Master  of  the  Magazine  he  told  them 
they  should  have  four  barrels,  but  they  in  a  great  chafe  at 
it  flung  out  of  the  room,  and  went  to  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax 
into  the  Vale.  Yet  the  next  day  returning  they  were  some- 
thing more  calm  and  came  and  desired  five  barrels,  which 
the  governor  having  more  respect  unto  the  public  good 
than  to  their  frowardness  allowed  to  them,  but  Sir  John 
Gell  was  very  ang^  they  had  not  their  full  demand,  and 
from  that  time  grew  into  a  little  more  strangeness  with  the 
governor  and  committee  of  Nottingham,  and  they  were  not  so 
much  troubled  with  his  letters  as  before. — Note-Book,  p.  36. 


XII. 

A  discovery  of  the  treacherous  attempts  of  the  Cavaliers  to 
have  procured  the  betraying  of  Nottingham  Castle^ 
expressed  in  a  letter  sent  to  Mr.  Millington^  and  four 
more  at  the  same  time. 

• 

Sir, — I  have  thrice  been  tempted  upon  the  offers  of  great 
rewards  and  honours,  to  betray  this  castle.  The  first  was  by 
Sir  Richard  Biron,  another  by  Mr.  Sutton,  both  which  I 
acquainted  the  committee  withal,  and  returned  scornful 
refusals  unto  ;  but  now  b^ing  this  third  time  solicited  unto 
it,  I  thought  it  .my  duty  to  acquaint  those  that  have  here 
entrusted  me,  both  for  their  satisfaction  and  my  own  dis- 
charge, if  anything  should  happen  to  my  prejudice  hereafter: 
for  I  expect  that  now  they  see  their  attempts  in  this  kind 
fruitless,  they  will  as  basely  endeavour  to  blemish  with  false 
aspersions  that  honesty  which  with .  bribes  they  cannot 
corrupt ;  be  pleased  therefore  to  understand  the  whole  pro- 
ceeding of  this  last  offer,  and  the  occasion,  which  was  this. 
Colonel  Dacre,  one  which  was  formerly  in  the  north  a*  fami- 
liar friend  and  acquaintance  of  my  brother*s,  sent  to  me  to 

VOL.  l'  3  a 


370  Appendix. 

desire  that  he  might  have  the  liberty  to  see  him,  to  which 
with  the  knowledge  of  the  committee  I  gave  consent ;  and 
then  being  in  his  company,  he  desired  some  words  in  private 
with  my  brother,  pretending  a  desire  to  be  satisfied  in  some 
doubts  of  his  concerning  this  war ;  but  some  accidents  then 
falling  out|  he  was  prevented  of  that  private  conference^  and 
therefore  desired  that  my  brother  some  two  days  after  would 
come  to  his  quarters ;  but  he,  to  prevent  all  suspicions,  would 
not  go,  but  writ  him  a  denial :  after  which  Colonel  Dacre 
writ  very  earnestly  to  him  to  come  again,  and  invited 
Captain  Poulton  to  come  with  him  ;  but  my  brother  would 
not,  only  with  the  leave  of  the  committee  he  sent  Captain 
Poulton  to  excuse  it,.of  whose  going  we  intended  to  make 
such  use,  as,  if  we  could,  to  discover  how  the  enemy  lay,  and 
what  their  intentions  were.  So  soon  as  he  came  thither  he 
was  most  kindly  entertained,  and  Colonel  Dacre  taking  him 
aside,  told  him,  that  now  the  governor  of  Nottingham  and 
his  brother  had  an  occasion  offered  to  gain  themselves  great 
honour,  to  do  the  king  very  good  service,  and  to  receive  a 
great  recompense  for  so  doing  ;  which  he  demanding  how 
that  was,  the  colonel  told  him,  that  if  I  would  deliver  up  the 
castle,  the  command  of  it  should  be  confirmed  to  me  and  my 
heirs,  I  should  receive  ten  thousand  pound,  and  be  well 
assured  of  it  before  ever  I  delivered  the  castle,  and  that  I 
should  be  made  the  best  Lord  in  Nottinghamshire,  that  my 
brother  should  have  three  thousand  pound  to  deliver  the 
bridges,  and  that  Captain  Poulton  should  have  two  thousand 
pound  to  get  this  effected ;  to  which  Captain  Poulton 
answered,  that  he  thought  it  was  an  impossible  thing,  for 
the  governor  had  formerly  been  tempted  with  such  like  ofiers 
and  had  refused  them,  that  we  all  scorned  so  base  an  act, 
and  for  his  own  part,  he  would  starve  and  rot  before  he 
would  betray  his  trust.  The  colonel  was  further  importu- 
nate with  him,  to  move  it  to  me,  and  *'  that  you  may,**  saith 
he,  '<  be  better  assured  I  do  not  this  without  commission,'' 


Appendix.  371 

he  then  pulled  out  of  his  pocket  a  paper  written  with  these 
words,  or  to  this  effect — **  These  are  to  authorise  CoL  Dacre 
to  treat  with  Col.  Hutchinson  and  Lieutenant  -  colonel 
Hutchinson,  for  the  surrendering  up  of  the  castle  and  bridges 
of  Nottingham  for  the  service  of  his  majesty,  and  to  make 
them  large  promises  which  shall  be  performed,"  and  this 
paper  signed  with  W.  Newcastle  at  the  bottom :  and  he 
further  desired  that  he  might  but  come  to  the  castle  to  speak 
with  me.  When  Captain  Poulton  told  him  there  was  no 
hope  of  obtaining  that,  he  entreated  him  that  he  would  but 
deliver  the  message  to  me,  which  he  told  him  he  would  do  ; 
and  the  colonel  told  him,  that  if  I  would  not  deliver  the 
castle,  yet  if  he  himself  would  but  leave  us,  and  come  away, 
he  should  immediately  have  a  regiment  of  horse  delivered 
into  his  command ;  and  earnestly  pressed  that  I  would  send 
him  an  answer :  which  presently  after  both  my  brother  and  I 
did,  the  copies  whereof  I  have  here  sent  you.  There  were 
also  two  officers  of  Captain  White's  troop,  whom  we  sent 
along  with  Captain  Poulton,  whom  Colonel  Dacre  also  took 
aside,  and  made  large  offers,^  both  to  Captain  White,  and 
them,  if  they  would  procure  him  to  turn  to  their  side.  But 
Captain  White  hath  so  often  scorned  and  refused  such 
unworthy  offers,  that  this  did  but  increase  his  contempt  of 
them,  whose  faith  and  honesty  hath  been  apparently  great 
in  this  cause. 

I  confess,  had  it  not  been  for  drawing  a  scandal  or 
jealousy  on  myself,  I  would  have  gone  so  far  as  to  have 
gotten  the  propositions  under  Col.  Dacre  his  hand,  if  not 
under  the  Marquess  his  hand  ;  but  this  I  durst  not  do,  lest  my 
own  honest  intentions  should  in  the  mean  time  have  been 
mistaken  :  I  therefore  thought  it  sufficient  to  make  it  known 
to  the  committee,  and  so  to  acquaint  you  with  it,  and  withal 

1  The  offen  to  Captain  White  were  10,000  IL  and  100  to  his 
officers  to  procure  it — (Marginal  note  in  Vicars.) 


372  Appendix. 

to  assure  you,  that  were  I  certain  we  should  utterly  be 
deserted  and  left  (as,  for  any  relief  I  yet  hear  of,  we  are  like  to 
be,  our  soldiers  being  thirty  weeks  behind  with  pay,  and  the 
whole  country  now  possessed  by  the  enemy),  yet  I  would 
maintain  my  faithfulness  to  the  parliament  so  long  as  I 
have  one  drop  of  blood  left  in  me  :  and  when  I  am  forced  to 
the  last  extremity,  I  am  confident  God  will  give  me  strength 
to  maintain  this  Christian:  resolution,  that  I  have  by  cove- 
nant both  with  God  and  man '  bound  myself  unto  ;  which 
is  that  I. will  rather  choose  to  die  ten  thousand  deaths  with 
a  clear  conscience  to  God,  and  an  honest  heart  to  my 
county,  than  sell  my  soul  for  the  purchase  of  my  life^  and 
all  the  wealth  and  honours  this  world  can -bestow  upon 
me.  -  Your  sons  are  both  well  here  in  the  castle,  and  I  hear 
your  wife  is  so  in  the  county  ;  only  I  hear  your  goods  and 
com  are  wholly  plundered.  What  service  I  am  able  to  do 
for  you  here,  if  you  please,  you  may  command. — Your  friend 
and  servant,   -  John  Hutchinson. 

Nottingham  Castlb, 
December  \%th^  1643. 

Postscript, — Sir,  just  as  my  letters  were  going  to  Colonel 
Dacre,  there  came  one  from  him  to  Captain  Poulton ;  the 
copy  of  which,  with  Captain  Poulton's  answer,  I  have  here 
also  sent  you — the  original  I  preserve  by  me  as  a  testimony 
of  their  unworthy  proffers. 

ft 

To  Colonel  Dacre. 

Sir, — ^You  have  now  convinced  me  of  an  error.  I  once 
thought  it  possible  that  some  rash  misled  young  men  might 
still  among  the  Cavaliers  have  retained  a  sense  of  gallantry 
and  honour,  though  no  religion,  and  have  been  enriched  with 
those  moral  virtues  which  made  the  heathen  famous ;  such  a 
one  I  believed  you  to  be ;  but  since  you  did  attempt  to  buy  me 


Appendix.  373 

to  so  great  a  villany,  as  you  did  in  your  late  propositions  by 
Captain  Poulton,  I  must  needs  be  persuaded  you  would  never 
offer  me  what  you  yourself  would  not  have  done.    'Tis,  I  con- 
fess, strange  to  me  you  could  imagine,  that  a  Christian,  a 
gentleman,  or  a  Commonwealth's-man  could  ever  prove  such 
a  villain  as  for  a  little  gaudy  dirt  to  sell  his  soul,  his  honour, 
and  his  country.    Perish  that  most  contemned  gain  with  all 
that  can  accept  or  offer  it !    Dacre,  'twas  base  in  you  to 
think  so  of  me  ;  I  am  sure  you  cannot  so  misinterpret  any 
act  of  mine,  as  to  receive  from  it  the  lea^t  ground  of  encour- 
agement to  such  an  opinion ;  and  had  you  known  my  brother, 
you  would  have  thought  it  easier  for  you  yourself  alone  to 
have  conquered  all  the  men  now  fighting  in  the  kingdom, 
than  to  corrupt  that  guard  of  virtues  which  prptect  his  con- 
stant soul  from  treacherous  thoughts.  <  Did  you  think  men 
of  sense  will  part  with  real  honour  for  a  title  ?  you  are  not 
capable  of  a  religious  consideration,  or  I  could  tell  you,  that 
our  souls  (redeemed  with  an  unvaluable  price)  are  by  you 
most  unequally  valued  at  a  poor  inconsiderable  sum  of 
money :  look  upon  earth  and  give  me  an  example  where 
ever  any  traitor  preserved  his  foul  name  from  an  horrid 
blot  of  infamy  on  him  and  on  his  house  for  ever  ?    How 
can  you  think,  he  that  will  by  you  be  corrupted  to  betray 
another's  trust,  will  not  by  another  be  again  corrupted  to 
betray  yours  ?    Keep  your  despised  coin  to  tempt  some  frail 
waiting.woman — it  may  work  with  her  to  procure  such  honest 
things  as  you  affect ;  but  desist  these  base  attempts  on  men 
of  noble  spirits,  with  whom  they  will  but  render  you  as  con- 
temptible as  your  offers.    Consider  the  unworthy  message 
you  sent,  and  blush  at  the  remembrance  of  your  guilt  in  it, 
and  if  you  have  so  much  worth  left  in  you  repent  the  injury 
you  did  to  him  that  was  your  friend.    Farewell  that  name 
for  evermore  between  us,  GEORGE  Hutchinson. 

Trent  Bridges, 
Dtetmber  i6,  1645. 


374  Appendix. 


To  Colonel  Dacre. 

'  Sir, — Your  propositions  sent  to  roe  on  Wednesday  last  by 
Captain  Poulton  (for  which  you  showed  him  my  Lord  New- 
castle's commission),  were  so  unworthy  of  a  gentleman,  so 
wicked,  and  base,  that  once  I  thought  in  contempt  and  scorn 
to  have  forgotten  them ;  yet  lest  my  silence  may  receive  too 
favourable  an  interpretation  from  you,  know  and  tell  your 
general  that  set  you  on  this  brave  employment,  that  I  abhor 
the  thought  of  treason  to  my  country,  though  I  might  there- 
by  grow  as  great  for  wickedness  as  he.  Tell  him  I'll  wear 
no  title  but  what  my  faith  and  virtue  purchaseth,  and  I'll 
leave  my  children  an  honest,  though  a  small  inheritance,  to 
whom  my  spotless  name,  not  tainted  with  the  foul  blot 
of  treason,  shall  be  an  ornament,  when  the  remembrance 
of  all  treacherous  apostates  shall  r6t  with  infamy;  and 
I  doubt  not  but  my  gracious  prince,  once  cured  of  his 
mistake,  will  reward  my  constant  faithfulness  to  his  r^al 
power  and  parliament,  with  a  larger  recompense  than  he 
propounds  for  my  corruption  :  if  he  do  not,  virtue  is  its  own 
reward.  Tell  your  most  excellent  general,  his  threats  and 
promises  are  both  alike  contemptible  to  me  ;  I  fear  not  those 
and  I  hate  these.  I  fight  not  to  repair  a  broken  fortune,  but 
to  maintain  a  just  quarrel ;  in  which  may  that  man  perish 
and  fall  low  as  the  depth  of  hell,  that  can  be  hired  to  prove 
unfaithfuL  Tell  him,  if  you  dare,  that  it  had  been  an  em- 
ployment more  beseeming  you,  or  any  gentleman,  had  he 
sent  you  with  ten  thousand  armed  men,  to  assault  our  well- 
defended  walls,  than  with  so  many  pieces  of  contemned 
gold,  to  lay  your  siege  against  an  honest  heart  I  could 
honour  an  enemy  for  performing  brave  and  gallant  things, 
but  such  attempts  as  these  will  render  your  persons  as 
odious  to  all  honest  men,  as  your  rebellion  :  and  I  am  sorry 


Appendix.  375 

you  should  undertake  such  a  service,  as  to  deserve  the  just 
neglect  and  scorn  of  JOHN  Hutchinson. 

Nottingham  Castlk, 
Diamber  18,  1643. . 

Postscript — Pray,  sir,  send  me  word  what  you  should  have 
had  for  the  procuring  this,  that  I  may  know  at  what  rate  the 
enemy  valueth  this  castle. 


To  his  truly  noble  friend,  Captain  Poulton. 

Noble  Sir, — I  was  in  hopes  to  have  waited  on  you  this 
day,  but  indeed  I  received  an  express  last  night  from  my 
Lord  General,  wherein  I  am  commanded  to  wait  on  his 
Excellency  near  Chesterfield  this  day.  Sir,  I  hope  you 
remember  the  business  I  spoke  to  you  of  when  you  were  at 
my  quarter ;  I  will  engage  myself  upon  my  life,  that  what  I 
promised  shall  be  really  performed ;  if  you  please  but  to 
consider  and  truly  value  the  business,  I  make  no  question 
but  I  may  obtain  my  desires ;  which  I  assure  you  is  not  for 
any  particular  ends,  but  in  the  first  place  to  serve  my 
gracious  king  and  then  my  friends,  which  I  will  assure  you 
I  shall  ever  esteem  your  lieutenant-colonel  and  yourself  to 
be ;  desiring  very  much  to  hear  from  you  by  this  bearer, 
wishing  us  all  to  agree,  for  upon  my  word  it  troubles  me  to 
think,  that  all  honest  men  should  not  be  of  one  side,  which 
the  Lord  grant  that  we  may  all  be,  I  remaining  always,  sir — 
Your  most  humble  servant,  Richard  Dacre. 

Watnsll,  Friday  mcmingt 
thi  15M  ofDutmbtr, 

My  humble  service  to  my  truly  noble  friend  your  lieu- 
tenant-colonel|  and  tell  him  I  wish  him  as  my  own  souL 


376  Appendix. 


To  Colonel  Dacre. 

Sir, — Had  the  Cavaliers  since  found  out  away  to  perform 
their  promises  better  than  they  did  at  Bristol|  Gainsborough, 
&&,  you  might  have  had  some  hopes  of  a  young  man  whose 
best  fortune  is  his  sword ;  but  so  unworthy  have  their  deal- 
ings ever  been,  so  little  faith  and  honour  do  you  give  testi- 
mony of,  in  tempting  me  to  act  such  things  as  gallant 
men  would  not  accept,  if  offered,  that  I  must  tell  you  these 
unworthy  ways  you  take  to  advance  your  cause,  are  but  so 
many  confirmations  to  me  in  this  I  do  maintain  against  you. 
He  that  fights  for  honour,  not  for  plunder,  to  which  the 
Dutch  prince  hath  well  trained  all  your  armies,  would  scorn  - 
to  receive  his  enemy's  fort  on  any  conditions,  but  such  as 
were  purchased  by  his  prevailing  .valour,  not  undermining 
treachery :  to  which,  Sir,  I  am  as  inflexible,  as  you  to  worth 
and  goodness.  The  governor  I  believe  and  his  brother  have 
returned  you  their  answers,  and  you  may  in  this  receive 
the  negative  resolution  of,  Thomas  Poulton. 

Nottingham  Castle, 
December  i6,  1643.     . 

The  correspondence  published  in  the  contemporary 
pamphlet,  and  in  the  third  part  of  Vicars'  ^  Parliamentary 
Chronicle,"  is  concluded  in  the  two  following  letters  which 
are  to  be  found  amongst  the  Tanner  MSS.  in  the  Bodleian 
Library,  vol.  62,  p.  467. 


Mr.  Millington. 

The  messenger  by  whom  I  sent  your  letters  staying  some- 
what longer  than  I  thought  he  would,  gave  me  opportunity 
to  send  you  a  copy  of  Colonel  Langdale  his  answer  to  the 
letters  we  sent  to  Colonel  Dacre,  in  whose  absence  Sir 
Marmaduke  Langdale  received,  and  opened,  and  answered 


Appendix.  377 

the  letters,  which  answer  may  confirm  you  in  the  truth  of 
what  before  was  written  to  you,  by  your  most  affectionate 
friend  and  servant,  JOHN  HUTCHINSON. 

Nottingham  Castlb, 
December  19,  1643. 

For  John  Hutchinson  Esquire,  George  Hutchinson,  and 

Thomas  Poulton,  these. 

Gentlemen, — In  the  absence  of  Colonel  Dacre,  I  have 
received  your  letters  and  am  sorry  you  so  much  mistake 
Colonel  Dacre  his  affection  for  you,  in  endeavouring  to 
draw  you  from  that  rebellious  course  of  life  you  seem  to  glory 
in.  If  you  please  to  read  all  the  histories  of  this  nation, 
from  the  conquest  to  this  time,  and  you' shall  find  all  rebels' 
pretences  of  taking  up  arms  against  the  sacred  person  of  the 
king  varnished  over  with  the  title  of  love  to  the  laws  of  the 
land,  liberty  of  the  subject  and  loyalty  to  his  majesty  ;  yea 
in  those  times  when  they  deposed  their  natural  prince  and 
set  up  others ;  wherein  although  the  event  sometimes  suc- 
ceeded for  a  while,  yet  the  authors  had  cause  commonly  to 
repent  before  their  deaths ;  and  certainly  there  never  was 
yet  law  of  this  land,  nor  religion  publicly  professed  here,  did 
ever  allow  subjects  to  take  up  arms  against  their  natural 
sovereign.  For  his  excellency  the  Marquess  of  Newcastle, 
you  are  much  mistaken  in  his  desire  to  corrupt  any  man.  I 
rather  believe  it  was  his  affection  to  you,  having  known  two 
of  your  fathers,  and  his  desire  to  preserve  your  estates  that 
are  now  in  a  lost  condition  by  your  own  follies. '  For  my  own 
part,  as  I  am  not  known  to  you,  so  I  should  never  have  tenderesi 
you  that  good  offer,  but  will  go  on  in  that  way  that  I  doubt 
not  shall  gain  the  king  his  right  forth  of  tl^e  usurper's  hand 
wherever  I  find  it,  wherein  you  shall  find  a  gentleman  called 

Marmaduke  Langdale. 
West  Hallam, 

December  18,  1643. 


378  Appendix. 

This  correspondence,  including  the  letter  from  Langdale, 
was  read  in  the  House  of  Commons  on  December  25,  1643. 

''  Ordered,  that  Mr.  Millington  do  write  a  letter  of  thanks 
from  this  House  to  Colonel  Hutchinson,  for  his  fidelity  to 
religion  and  the  parliament ;  and  to  encourage  him  to  per- 
severe in  his  resolutions  therein  ;  and  that  this  House  will 
not  be  unmindful  of  so  deserving  a  person  :  and  that  he  be 
desired,  that  those  records  which  are  in  Nottingham  be 
safely  kept. 

*^  Ordered,  that  the  Committee  for  the  Safety  do  consider 
how  the  garrison  in  the  castle  of  Nottingham  may  be  sup- 
plied with  all  necessaries,  and  the  care  of  this  is  especially 
reconmiended  to  Mr.  MiUington." — (Commons  Journals.) 


XIII. 

Tcwn  muting  at  Nottingham  to  decide  the  question  of 

fortifying  the  town. 

**  The  governor  so  soon  as  this  was  concluded  on  called  a 
general  and  full  Hall,  wherein  he  read  his  commission,  and 
desired  them  to  choose  out  some  men  among  them  to  come 
upon  all  occasions  to  consult  with  him  in  matter  concern- 
ing the  town,  and  that  they  might  choose  fit  men  he  pro- 
pounded to  them  two  aldermen,  two  very  honest  religious 
men,  and  two  neuters,  rather  Cavaliers  than  other,  that  so 
they  might  be  pleased  of  all  sides  ;  but  they  on  the  contrary 
called  to  their  Hall  Serjeant  Browne,  a  delinquent  to  the 
parliament,  and  put  out  these  honest  men,  and  made  choice 
of  the  most  malignant  among  them,  which  choice  when  the 
governor  saw  he  sent  them  word  that  he  could  not  accept 
their  choice,  nor'  yet  would  he  do  anything  prejudicial  or 
burdensome  to  them  without  their  knowledge,  and  having 
called  another  Hall  he  propounded  to  the  town  whether 
they  were  willing  it  should  be  fortified  or  no,  whereupon 


Appendix.  379 

they  all  in  general  voted  it  should  be  fortified,  only  Alder- 
man Drury  and  some  other  few  malignant  inconsiderable 
rascals,  being  but  a  very  few,  voted  against  it  Whereupon 
the  works  were  presently  set  out,  but  the  governor  at  that 
meeting,  after  he  had  satisfied  all  their  doubts  and  some 
articles  which  they  propounded  to  him,  told  them  that  if 
they  fortified  the  town  they  must  beforehand  weigh  the 
danger  of  it,  which  was  that  if  the  enemy  should  fall  in 
while  the  works  were  imperfect,  which  was  much  to  be 
feared  they  would,  they  still,  though  something  further  off, 
continuing  in  the  country,  they  would  utterly  spoil  the  town 
and  disenable  it  for  ever  being  made  a  garrison  any  more ; 
and  on  the  other  side,  if  it  were  not  fortified  but  lay  open, 
then  all  poor  tradesmen  would  be  undone,  there  being  no 
possibility  of  trading  in  the  town.'' — MSS.  Note-Book,  p. 
41,  a-b. 

A  note  on  p.  42  gives  the  further  information  that  during 
the  fortification  the  horse  were  for  a  fortnight  to  have  free 
quarter  in  the  town,  and  after  that  the  governor  had  pro- 
mised they  should  not  burthen  it.  He  therefore  in  the 
meantime  caused  some  certain  houses  to  be  appointed  for 
their  quarter,  and  a  steward  appointed  to  every  house  to 
see  the  diet  ordered,  a  whole  troop  being  to  be  quartered 
in  every  house. 


XIV. 
Letter  to  Mr.  Millington^  January  3,  1644. 

Sir, — ^Though  I  had  not  in  my  letter  to  you  any  aim  to 
be  made  so  public  as  I  now  am,  but  only  to  clear  myself 
from  all  blemishes  which  my  concealing  those  offers  might 
have  made  me  capable  of,  yet  I  think  myself  happy  that  by 
this  means  the  House  hath  been  pleased  to  take  notice  of 
this  poor  n^lected  garrison,  which  if  the  enemy  could  get 


380  Appendix. 

into  ^  their  possession  you  may  perceive  they  would  make 
much  account  of  it ;  but  I  shall  endeavour,  so  far .  as  God 
enable  me,  to  preserve  it  from  them,  and  if  in  this  low  con- 
dition we   are  now  reduced   to  we  might  receive  some 
assistance  to  re-establish  this  place  in  a  posture  of  defence^ 
it  would  be  a  great  encouragement  both  to  the  commander 
and  soldiers.  -   I  am  now  making  the  works,  but  if  I  cannot 
procure  money  to  pay  the  garrison,  poverty  will  make  us 
unable  to  defend  them.     I  have  now  in  this  castle  five  full 
companies  of  foot  in  pay,  besides  two  which  are  raising  in 
the  town  and  two  more  in  the  country  which  I  am  con- 
fident will  speedily  be  raised ;  here  is  also  four  hundred 
horse  and  more  raising,  but  I  assure  you  these  that  are 
raised  in  so  lamentable  a  condition,  that  they  have  not 
money  to  shoe  their  horses,  and  the  foot  so  miserably  poor, 
being  plundered  of  all  they  have,  that  they  are  almost  xiaked 
for  want  of  clothes,  and  those  which  have  families  see  their 
wives  and  children  ready  to  perish  for  want.    The  country  is 
on  the  north  side  plundered  by  my  Lord  Newcastle's  forces, 
and  so  oppressed  on  the  other  side  by  Newark,  Wiverton, 
Shelford,  and  Belvoir,  all  in  the  enemy's  hand,  that  it  can 
withal  scarcely  provision  to  supply 

the  garrison  if  we  had  a  force  able  to  command  it.  Myself 
and  the  rest  of  the  committee  have  been  so  plundered  in  our 
estates,  which  now  remain  in  the  enemy's  possession,  our  en^ 
gagements  and  layings  out  above  our  abilities  so  great,  that 
both  our  purses  and  credits  are  quite  exhausted ;  nor  did 
we  who  are  commanders  and  gentlemen  of  this  county  ever 
yet  receive  a  farthing  of  pay.  Sir,  it  concerns  me  as  having 
this  garrison  in  my  charge  to  acquaint  you  with  the  condi- 
tion of  it,  and  if  the  House  would  but  now  please  to  look 
upon  it  and  afford  us  some  supply  of  monies  answerable  to 
our  great  necessities  in  any  reasonable  proportion,  I  hope 
by  God's  assistance  we  shall  give  a  good  account  of  it ;  if 
it  were  possible  to  obtain  two  thousand  pounds  we  should  I 
hope  be  in  such  a  condition  as  we  should  not  need  to  crave 


Appendix.  381 

assistance  again.  We  never  yet  received  any,  although 
places  of  less  consequence  have  had  as  large  a  proportion, 
but  our  extremities  are  so  great  that  whatever  the  parlia- 
ment please  to  think  us  worthy  of  would  be  most  exceeding 
welcome  to  us.  Sir,  I  know  your  affections  are  so  good, 
and  your  care  so  great  and  tender  of  us,  that  I  need  not 
press  you  to  use  your  best  endeavours  for  us ;  if  you  can 
procure  us  any  money  it  will  exceedingly  oblige  your 
country  to  you  and  encourage  the  languishing  hopes  of 
your  assured  friend  and  servant, 

John  Hutchinson. 

Nottingham  Castlx, 
Jofmary  3n/,  1644. 

[Tanner  MSS.  IxvL  224,  where  the  letter  is  misdated  1 641.] 

This  letter  was  read  in  the  House  of  Commons  on 
January  15th,  1644,  ^^d  it  was  orcTered  ''  that  the  monies 
coming  from  the  excise  arising  within  the  town  of  Notting- 
haih  and  county  of  the  same,  be  allowed  and  designed  upon 
account  for  the  maintenance  of  the  garrison  in  the  castle 
and  town  of  Nottingham,  and  that  it  be  referred  to  the 
commissioners  of  excise  to  take  care  herein." 


XV. 
Account  of  a  skirmish  in  January  1644. 

At  the  time  that  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax  conmianded.out  the 
troop  there  came  a  woman  with  a  note  to  the  governor  from 
Sir  Miles  Hubbard^  intimating  a  design  he  had  to  fall  upon 
Newark,  and  desiring  that  Nottingham  and  Derby  with  all 
the  horse  and  dragoons  they  could  make  would  fall  upon 
Muscam  and  Kellam  bridges  and  break  them  up  to  pre- 
vent any  assistance  from  coming  to  them  on  this  side. 
Between  Nottingham  and  Derby  there  were  about  800  or 


382  Appendix. 

1000  horse  and  dragoons  prepared  ready  for  the  design,  and 
the  plot  was  laid  and  all  things  necessary  for  the  design 
made  ready,  and  it  was  given  out  that  they  went  to  Wink- 
field  Manor.  The  horse  were  marched  out  and  the  dragoons 
horsed  to  follow  them,  when  the  gentlewoman  came  again 
from  Sir  Miles  Hubbard  to  let  the  governor  know  that 
Newark  had  surprised  300  of  their  horse  so  that  the  design 
could  not  go  forward  at  that  time,  whereupon  the  governor 
dismissed  most  of  the  dragoons,  and  sent  to  the  horse  that 
they  should  go  to  Mansfield  to  gather  a  cessment  (ceaae- 
ment)  there  and  to  Derby  men  that  the  design  held  not. 
The  horse  went  to  Mansfield  but  did  not  gather  their  cess- 
ment, and  Captain  White  sent  that  night  a  messenger  to  the 
governor  to  desire  him  to  send  some  dragoons  and  some 
carts  to  fetch  away  my  Lord  Biron's  goods  at  Newstead, 
which  he  did,  and  there  the  horse  met  them  and  came  along 
homeward  with  them,  bAt  when  they  were  within  four  or  five 
miles  of  home  the  horse  came  all  away  except  about  forty, 
whom  they  left  with  the  dragoons  and  carriages :. there  were 
when  they  were  together  between  five  and  six  hundred  horse 
and  dragoons,  but  they  had  not  left  above  six  score  with  the 
carriages  and  most  of  them  dragoons  without  so  much  as  a 
captain  with  them,  and  in  the  evening  as  they  were  at 
Bescod  Park  a  hundred  of  the  enemy's  horse  fell  into  their 
rear-guard,  but  the  dragoons  got  behind  the  pale  and  shot 
at  them,  and  killed  four  of  them  dead  upon  the  place.  -As 
the  soldiers  were  stripping  two  of  the  slain  Colonel  Freche- 
ville  charged  rashly  among  them,  and  was  engaged  so  that 
he  had  been  taken  prisoner,  if  his  captain-lieutenant  had 
not  ridden  in  and  rescued  him,  who  was  himself  made  a 
prisoner  for  his  pains.  Sir  Henry  Humlock  was  wounded 
in  the  arm,  and  Frecheville  cut  in  the  hand.  Some  of  our 
horse  by  this  time  were  returned  to  them,  which  when  the 
Cavaliers  saw,  without  stop  or  stay  they  ran  as  fast  as  they 
could. 


384  Appendix. 

they  had  buried  in  the  field  before  they  had  entered  the 
towQ ;  we  traced  them  two  miles  in  the  snow  by  much 
blood  which  we  found  spilt,  and  we  hear  that  they  left  dead 
and  wounded  men  in  the  towns  as  they  passed.  I  do  not 
perceive  that  we  have  any  prisoners  above  the  quality  of  a 
captain-lieutenant,  but  the  reason  is,  because  the  com- 
manders ran  away  in  such  haste,  that  they  left  their  own 
and  got  troopers'  horses,  and  took  no  care  of  their  men, 
but  left  them  without  command,  being  happy  who  could 
first  scape  away.  We  lost  not  all  this  day  but  one  man 
slain,  and  two  or  three  wounded.  At  last  the  enemy 
rallied  in  a  valley  about  a  mile  from .  the  town  (where 
they  had  a  body  of  horse  which  never  came  into  the  town) ; 
we  faced  one  another,  but  we,  finding  their  body  so  much 
exceeding  all  our  force,  would  not  hazard  the  whole  garrison 
upon  such  unequal  terms ;  towards  night  the  enemy  marched 
away  to  their  several  garrisons.  Col.  Cartvrright  had  his 
horse  killed  under  him  with  a  cannon  bullet ;  they  say  (but 
I  am  not  certain)  that  he  himself  is  shot  That  you  may 
know  their  devilishness,  give  me  leave  to  acquaint  you  with 
their  design  as  it  was  related  to  us.  They  were  resolved 
to  have  surprised  us  this  morning  by  two  of  the  clock,  but 
the  bitterness  of  the  snowy  weather  which  fell  hindered  so 
speedy  a  march  of  their  foot  as  they  expected ;  therefore^ 
failing  of  that,  their  further  design  was,  to  try  if  they  could 
get  the  town,  which  if  they  could,  they  then  resolved  to 
summon  the  castle,  and  if  they  could  neither  win  nor  have 
it  delivered  up,  they  resolved  to  plunder,  and  then  fire  the 
town.  To  this  purpose  and  with  these  threats  they  had 
prepared  a  letter  to  send  me,  and  when  they  could  find 
none  that  would  venture  to  carry  it,  they  seized  on  Mr. 
Majores,  and  would  with  many  threats  have  compelled 
him  to  carry  it  to  me ;  one  clause  of  it  was  that  if  I  would 
not  send  them  the  mayor  and  aldermen,  nor  deliver  the 
castle,  they  would  proceed  to  plunder  and  fire.  Before 
Mr.  Majores  was  well  out  of  doors  with  his  letter,  there 


Appendix.  385 

was  so  quick  and  unexpected  an  answer  sent  them  by  four 

hundred  musketeers,  which  sallied  out  upon  them,  that 

they  were  in  too  great  haste  to  take  with  them  the  plunder 

of  ^e  town,  so  that  in  that  respect  the  town  escaped  well 

and  lost  nothing  of  value ;  we  must  acknowledge  it  was  a 

wonderful  mercy  of  God  that  it  escaped  firing,  for  they 

cast  a  many  coals  of  fire  amongst  a  great  deal  of  hay,  in 

Captain  White's  quarters,  and  laid  fire  to  divers  houses, 

and  had  prepared  divers  gorse  bushes  to  fire,  and  shot 

muskets  and'pistols  into  the  thatch  of  houses  as  they  passed 

by,  and  into  bams,  but  God  preserved  us  from  all  these 

dangers,  so  that  though  the  fire  was  found,  half  an  hour 

after  they  were  gone,  quick  in  the  hay,  yet  there  was  not 

so  much  as  a  smoke  in  the  town.     The  number  of  these 

forces  were  (as  near  as  we  could  guess,  or  find  out  by  the 

prisoners),  1500  horse  and  foot,  being  all  the  force  that 

could  be   gathered   together  from   Newark,  Sir   Charles 

Lucas,  Colonel  Fretchvile,  with  other  forces  drawn  from 

Bolsover,  and  Welbeck,  and  Shelford :  they  faced  us  on 

the  other  side  of  the  Trent  with  between  two  and  three 

hundred  horse  and  dragoons  which  came  from  Hastings, 

Belvoir,  and  Wiverton.     By  this  you  may  see  how  we  are 

straitened  and  how  over  potent  our  enemies  are,  and  you 

may  imagine  how.  impossible  it  is  for  this  poor  garrison  to 

subsist  without  some  relief  of  money  to  encourage  our 

soldiers,  and,  the  truth  is,  to  make  them  able  to  live  to  do 

the  public  service.    Therefore,  Sir,  I  beseech  you,  prosecute 

my  desires  in  my  last  letter  to  you  as  the  greatest  service 

you  can  do  your  country  and  obligation  you  can  lay  on 

your  loving  friend  and  servant,  J.  H. 

Nottingham  Castlb, 
January^  1643. 

In  all  this  day's  service  we  had  not  any  assistance  from 
the  townsmen  (besides  those  which  have  all  this  year  been 
in  the  castle  with  me),  though  I  had  twice  summoned  them 

VOL.  I.  2   8 


386  Appendix. 

to  receive  arms  for  the  defence  of  the  town,  but  could  not' 
persuade  them  to  do  it ;  but  now  I  am  in  some  hopes  that 
they  will  by  this  be  brought  to  concur  more  cheerfully  with 
me  for  their  own  defence,  and  that  the  Cavaliers  (though 
they  have  no  cause  to  brag  of  this)  will  more  dearly  buy 
their  next  entrance.  I  hear  since  that  most  of  the  enemy's 
foot  are  run  away,  which  were  about  five  or  six  hundred ; 
all  their  foot  flung  their  arms  away,  that  they  might  run 
the  lighter. 

Sir,  since  I  writ  this  letter  I  am  certainly  informed  that 
there  are  above  a  hundred  Cavaliers  lying  dead  in  Thonip 
leigh  and  Sansom  woods,  and  Nottingham  coppice,  the 
weather  being  so  sharp  that  their  wounds  bled  to  death, 
and  some  of  them  starved  with  cold,  and  we  have  since 
found  many  of  them  dead  in  the  town  that  were  wounded, 
and  hid  themselves  in  houses,  and  there  bled  to  death ;  they 
have  left  many  wounded  all  along  the  towns  as  they 
dispersed  themselves  to  their  several  garrisons  from  whence 
they  came.  The  greatness  of  their  loss  is  more  than  yet 
we  can  discover,  and  what  I  related  to  you  is  less  than  we 
know  to  be  true.  We  have  some  prisoners  that  were  in  the 
parliament's  service  in  Ireland,  and  are  now  taken  vrith  the 
enemy ;  I  desire  to  know  the  pleasure  of  the  House  con- 
cerning them — whether  they  shall  be  tried  by  a  council  of 
war,  as  runaways,  or  exchanged,  because  it  may  be  our 
fortune  to  meet  with  more  considerable  men  of  the  same 
kind. — ^Your  servant,  J.  H. 

Nottingham  Castls, 
yanuary  17,  164I. 

On  January  26th,  164},  this  letter  was  read  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  and  it  was  ordered  '<  that  a  thousand 
pound  shall  be  borrowed  from  the  monies  that  come  in  upon 
the  sequestrations  and  employed  for  the  service  of  Notting- 
ham garrison,  and  paid  to  Mr.  Millington,  or  such  as  he 
shall  appoint  to  receive  the  same,  after  that  the  monies 


Appendix.  387 

assigned  to  Sir  Thomas  Middleton  and  the  Earl  of  Denbigh 
out  of  the  sequestrations  shall  be  satisfied  and  complied 
with."  Mr.  Millington  was  at  the  same  time  desired  to  write 
and  inquire  about  the  prisoners  taken,  who  had  come  out 
of  Ireland. — (Journals  of  the  House  of  Commons.)  Mrs. 
Hutchinson  blames  Mr.  Millington  because  the  money 
never  came.  The  cause  of  this,  however,  was  not  his  negli- 
gent prosecution,  but  the  precedent  conditions  on  which 
the  grant  was  made  to  depend. 


To  our  much  honoured  friend,  Gilbert  Millington,  Esquire, 
one  of  the  Members  of  the  House  of  Commons. 

Sir, — In  expression  of  our  thankfulness  to  God  for  His 
great  deliverance  to  this  garrison,  we  desire  to  communicate 
to  yourself,  and  to  our  friends,  in  what  manner  the  Lord  of 
Hosts  was  pleased  to  manifest  Himself  in  our  preservation 
(even  miraculously)  from  the  bloody  hands  of  a  cruel  and 
merciless  enemy,  entreating  you  to  join  with  us  in  returning 
prayers  (praise  ?  )  to  his  sacred  name. 

Sir,  we  drew  forth  the  last  week  to  meet  Derby  forces 
upon  a  design,  which  failing,  we  marched  to  Mansfield, 
and  in  our  retreat  we  sequestered  some  of  the  goods  of  the 
Lord  Biron's  at  Newstead;  whereof  Colonel  Fretchvile, 
and  Colonel  Humblock  having  notice,  they  being  then 
plundering  about  Felley,  with  three  troops  fell  upon  us  in 
our  retreat;  but  our  horse  and  dragoons  facing  about, 
engaged  them,  and  we  took  one  Jammot,  a  Wallon,  captain- 
lieutenant  or  major  to  Colonel  Fretchvile,  with  three  more ; 
killed  one  lieutenant  and  a  comet  with  some  others; 
wounded  both  the  colonels,  with  many  more,  and  but  two 
men  of  ours  wounded,  whereof  one  died  since.  In  revenge 
whereof,  on  Tuesday  morning  last,  the  enemy  gave  us  an 
alarum,  and  about  seven  of  the  clock  approached  near 
the    town,  and  being  betwixt  two   and  three  thousand 


388  Appendix. 

horse  and  foot,  beat  in  our  men,  and  the  fortifications  of 
the  town  being  imperfect  entered  it,  and  forced  our  horse 
and  foot  into  the  castle;  we  then  immediately  put  mus- 
kets into  the  hands  of  our  troopers,  and  by  them  and 
some  foot,  possessed  ourselves  of  some  houses,  which 
played  into  the  market-place,  and  some  other  parts  of 
the  town;  then  we  sallied  out  with  most  of  our  foot, 
considering,  if  we  did  not  make  a  desperate  adventure, 
we  were  in  a  great  hazard;  so  we  fell  upon  the  enemy 
in  several  houses,  killed  divers  of  them  in  the  streets,  in 
which  God's  great  power  did  wonderfully  appear,  for  in 
one  house  three  or  four  of  our  men  took  sixteen,  and  in 
another,  two  took  six,  and  the  like  was  done  in  divers 
places,  whereby  it  pleased  God  to  strike  the  enemy  vrith 
such  a  terror,  that  they  presently  fled,  and  we  pursuing 
them  out  of  the  works,  took  about  eighty  prisoners,  about 
two  hundred  arms,  killed  above  twenty  in  the  town,  besides 
many  who  died  in  the  retreat,  as  we  hear  above  fifty,  and 
very  many  ran  from  their  colours,  and  some  came  to  us 
with  their  arms,  in  all  (according  to  our  intelligence),  the 
enemy  lost  near  three  hundred  men  and  arms ;  in  which 
service  we  lost  but  one  boy,  two  were  slightly  wounded, 
and  not  one  taken  prisoner. 

Sir  Charles  Lucas,  who  reports  himself  general  of  this 
county,  and  Lincolnshire,  did  draw  what  force  he  could 
from  Pontefract,  Wingfield  Manor,  Bolsover,  Welbeck, 
Ashby,  Belvoir,  Newark,  Wiverton,  and  Shelford.  Thus 
they  conspired  our  destruction,  their  plot  being,  to  enter 
the  town,  and  to  summon  the  castle,  and  if  that  was  not 
yielded,  to  plunder  the  town  and  fire  it ;  which  accordingly 
they  attempted,  for  they  put  burning  coals,  lighted  match,* 
and  shot  their  muskets  and  p|stols  into  the  hay,  in  Captain 
White's  quarters  and  divers  other  places,  but  through  God's 
mercy  the  fire  did  not  take  anywhere. 

This  is  a  true  relation  of  the  passages,  although  sundry 
reports  are  given  out  by  the  enemy  which  we  know  to  be 


Appendix.  389 

various  and  false,  as  that  the  town  did  give  them  three  or  ' 
four  thousand  pounds  to  quit  it,  and  that  they  lost  but  three 
men,  and  that  they  were  commanded  away  by  several 
packets,  and  others  of  the  like  nature ;  yet  some  of  their 
commanders  who  were  ingenuous,  did  at  Southwell,  upon 
their  retreat,  confess,  that  they  had  been  upon  most  designs 
with  Prince  Rupert,  yet  did  never  see  hotter  service,  nor 
more  execution  done  with  ordnance.  We  having  this 
experience  of  God's  dealing  with  us,  hope  it  will  encourage 
us,  and  all  others  engaged  in  this  cause,  to  continue  faith- 
ful to  Him,  which  is  and  ever  shall  be,  the  prayers  of  us. 
Sir,  your  faithful  servants, 

John  Hutchinson, 

George  Hutchinson. 

Joseph  Widmerpoolb. 

Charles  White. 

Thomas  Salusbury. 
Nottingham  Castle, 
tkt  Viih  of  January^  1643. 

We  are  credibly  informed  since  the  writing  hereof,  that 
Colonel  Eyre  of  Hassop  was  slain,  one  Captain  Cartwright 
is  not  yet  heard  of,  and  Lieutenant-colonel  Cartwright  and 
some  other  commanders  wounded. 


XVIL 

The  Earl  of  Clare  prepares  to  make  his  peau  with  the 

Parliament, 

The  Earl  of  Gare  sent  to  the  governor  privately  by  Mr. 
West  to  excuse  his  passion  to  him  when  he  was  in  town, 
and  to  tell  him  it  was  much  for  his  advantage,  for  if  he  had 
been  more  familiarly  entertained  the  enemy  was  resolved 


39^  Appendix. 

to  have  taken  him,  hearing  that  he  was  returning  to  the 
parliament ;  and  as  a  matter  of  great  trust  acquainted  the 
governor  that  he  had  an  intent  to  go  immediately  to 
London,  but  that  he  had  some  things  of  value  which  he 
desired  to  secure  in  this  garrison,  and  for  that  purpose 
wanting  trunks  he  desired  leave  to  carry  some  out  of  my  ' 
lady's  house  in  this  town,  which  he  said  he  would  con- 
vey privately  back  again  with  all  the  best  things  he  had, 
and  desired  that  Hooper  might  build  a  room  for  them  at 
his  own  charge  in  the  castle,  with  other  contrivances  that 
he  had  to  carry  his  daughter  to  London  and  to  get  thither 
himself;  which  the  governor  hearing  was  very  willing  to 
consent  to,  but  that  being  to  have  been  done  within  two  or 
three  days  the  governor  heard  no  more  of  him. — Note- 
Book,  54-6. 


XVIIL 
Capture  ofKin^s  Mills. 

*'  Upon  the  melting  of  the  snow  there  being  a  great  flood, 
the  horse  went  out  with  a  design  to  pull  down  Muscam  and 
Kellam  bridges,  but  it  was  discovered  to  the  en^my  over 
night,  so  that  the  design  was  prevented,  but  they  went  to 
Aram  grounds,  and  brought  away  60  fat  oxen  of  Sir 
Richard  Biron's  and  Mr.  Sutton's  and  about  100  horse. 
The  next  week  Sir  John  Gell  sent  to  borrow  all  the  horse 
which  were  sent  to  him,  but  Colonel  Thomhagh  being 
sent  for  by  Sir  John  Meldrum  went  himself  to  Gainsborough. 
The  horse  that  were  at  Derby  marched  out  with  Sir  John 
Gell,  but  they  both  lost  themselves  all  night,  whereupon 
that  design  was  broke.  Yet  the  horse  went  vrith  Sir  John 
Gell  to  King's  Millnes,  hard  by  Wilden  Ferry,  where  there 
is  a  very  strong  house,  wherein  the  enemy  kept  garrison, 


Appendix.  39 1 

against  which  Sir  John  Cell  had  planted  his  ordnance  on 
the  other  side  the  river,  where  his  foot  also  were,  but  his 
horse  and  ours  were  all  on  the  same  side  the  house  stood. 
The  weather  being  very  tempestuous  they  resolved  to  finish 
it  at  once,  and  thereupon  drew  out  five  men  out  of  every 
troop  to  begin  the  assault,  these  five  of  every  troop  made 
thirty  in  all;  they  had  attempted,  but  fruitlessly,  to  fire 
the  house,  so  these  thirty  men  in  the  night  got  over  their 
works,  and  slided  down  the  bank,  which  was  very  steep, 
till  they  came  just  under  the  walls,  which  when  they  within 
the  house  perceived  they  called  for  a  parley,  and  desired  to 
march  out  with  bag  and  baggage,  but  the  soldiers  would 
grant  them  no  conditions  but  to  yield  to  their  mercy,  so 
when  they  were  just  about  to  open  the  door  by  force,  the 
soldiers  within  the  house  let  them  in  and  yielded  themselves, 
there  being  in  the  house  forty-seven,  a  captain,  a  lieutenant, 
and  two  more  officers. 

"  The  captain  that  Jcept  the  house  was  Captain  Daniel, 
uncle  to  Captain  White's  lieutenant,  who  desired  of  Sir 
John  Gell  that  he  might  bring  him  and  his  lieutenant  to 
Nottingham,  which  Sir  John  Gell  condescended  unto." — 
Note-Book,  p.  47  a-b. 


XIX. 
Attempt  to  surprise  Nottingham^  February  17,  1644. 

"The  Kingdom's  Weekly  Intelligencer,"  February  20, 27, 
1 64  j,  contains  the  following : — "  For  the  plot  to  betray  the 
garrison  at  Nottingham  it  hath  been  already  in  part  related. 
I  shall  only  add  some  part  of  a  letter  from  the  valiant 
gentleman  the  governor  of  Nottingham,  dated  the  1 8th  of 
February,  1643,  subscribed  J.  H.,  in  these  words : — 

" '  Sir,  this  day  God  hath  wrought  for  \is  a  great  deliver- 


392  Appendix. 

ance  from  a  design  the*  enemy  had  against  our  bridges, 
which  are  the  very  key  of  our  garrison;   this  being  the 
market  day,  Shelford  and  Wiverton  had  chosen  out  thirty 
of  their  men  who  in  disguises  should  come  like  women  and 
market  people,  and  with  long  knives,  daggers,  hatchets, 
and  such  kind  of  weapons  as  they  had  hid  under  their 
clothes,  seize  on  the  guards,  and  given  a  shout  just  when 
they  had  done,  and  then  the  rest  of  their  horse  and  foot 
should  have  fallen  on  with  those  in  the  disguises,  should 
have  murdered  the  men  at  the  bridge,  and  seized  upon  the 
gates  next  the  town.     But  I,  having  notice  of  this  plot, 
sent  over  night  to  the  lieutenant-colonel  to  be  very  careful, 
and  in.  the  morning  gave  order  that  all  the  horse  and  foot 
should  be  gotten  ready,  but  drew  them  not  out,  because  the 
enemy  should  have  no  knowledge  of  my  warning.     My 
brother  set  out  the  sentries  beyond  the  bridge  and  took  the 
first  twelve  with  their  weapons,  which  were  upon  the  bridge 
and  should  first  have  fallen  upon  the  guards.     Our  horse 
went  out  after,  but  the  enemy  perceiving  the  bustling  at  the 
bridge  when  the  first  were  taken,  ran  away ;  and  in  pursuit 
our  men  took  nine  more,  and  drove  nine  of  them  into  the 
Trent  with  their  captain ;  the  captain  escaped,  but  five  of 
them  were  drowned,  and  three  taken.' " 

An  account  of  this  incident,  rather  different  in  the  details, 
is  given  by  Vicars,  ''  Parliamentary  Chronicle,"  part  iiL, 
p.  163. 


END  OF  VOL.    I. 


PUMTBO  BY  BALLAMTYMBy  MAMflON  AMD  00. 
IKDINMIBGH  AMD  LONDON 


This  preservation  photocopy  was  made  and  hand  bound  at 

BookLab,  Inc.,  in  compliance  with  copyright  law. 

The  paper  is  Weyerhaeuser  Cougar  Opaque 

Natural,  which  exceeds  ANSI 

Standard  Z39.48-1984. 

1993 


TTD78T)18 


The  borrower  must  return  this  item  on  or  before 
the  last  date  stamped  below.  If  another  user 
places  a  recall  for  this  item,  the  borrower  will 
be  notified  of  the  need  for  an  earlier  return. 

Non-receipt  of  overdue  notices  does  not  exempt 
the  borrower  from  overdue  fines. 


Harvard  College  Widener  Library 
Cambridge,  MA  02138        617-495-2413 


W!  OE  NE  R 

CMf, 


Please  handle  with  care. 

Thank  you  for  helping  to  preserve 
library  collections  at  Harvard.
