$A 
¢c eA P. 1, 
Acceffon Of Fames —m—m Treaty with France —m—Confpiracy adhe 
_ the King. Conference at Hampton-Court. A Parliament: 
: emia of peace with Spain. We 
Sie C6 HAP. I 
i Ati he plot. Punifrment of the confpirators —mamParlia~ 
ment ——Report of the King’s death. Subfidies granted by 
parliament m——Toe Spaniards contemn Fames. 23 
Csi AP WE 
Pires. Prorogation. —— Affairs of Holland. ——Re- 


meeting of parliament.——Death of the king of France. 
Prorogation and diffolution of the parliament.—mm Affuirs of 


es | Scotland. 39 
ri ? % Oo tw Psa? TF, 
‘ Rife of Somerfet——Death of prince Henry.——m—Marriage of 
the princefs Elizabeth..~Origin of baronets.——-Parliament. 
ee Diffolution of the parliament ———Overbury s murder mmm 
ae ii Rife of George Villier$.—-amFall of Somerfet. 69 


> | Mae” oe 

"age oppofition.———-Deprived of his office. ecebabieny towns 
delivered. Affairs of Scotland.—Ireland.— Holland.——Sir 
ae ek pegs expedition.— His fatal endo—mHis charater. 97 
ae A eV, 


| Nini With Spaitt.—mm—Commotions in Germany.——Prince 
beer. elected king of Bohemia. Bohemia invaded. Ruin 
Pro- 


igre —— Parliament ——F all of Bacon. 
ation 9 of the Commons me Diffa lution gf the Parliament. 137 
CHAP. 


CO NT NF 8: 


: GOs. Ee Vil, 

Diftreffed fate of the Proteftants.——Unjuft treatment of Sir Edw. 
Coke.———Imprifonment of feveral members of parliament, and 

others. Transfer of the electoral dignity from prince Frederic 
to the duke of Bavaria. Negotiations with Spain. 
of Wales's journey to Madrid. Tranfattions during the prince's. 
flay at Madrid. His return to England. 183, 
€ Aaa Vi 

Influence of Buckingham.——Parliament.——Treaties with Spain 
laid before the houfe.——Rupture with Spain. ——Parliament ° 
prorogued. Marriage-treaty with France. Mansfeild’s- 
expedition. Maffjaere at Amboyna;:——Death of King fames. 
——His charaéter. 22g 

€+H° 4: POX, 

State of the civil and ecclefiaftical government of England at’ the: 
acceffion of the Stewart family. Caufes of the change of go- 
vernment that took place during the adminifiration of the Stewart 
Samily.——State of trade.———State of the finances during the 
reign of King fames. : 270. 


é 


cH 2A RB ES 1. 


Cisse oe: 2. te 
Acceffion of Charles. ——His marriage.——=— parliament at Weft- 
minfler.——Second feffion of parliament at Oxford.——Naval § 
expedition againft Spain. Third fefion of parliament..——Im- 
_ peachment of Buckingham.—Difflution of the parliament. 279. 
C Fi & PP. ~ EL 


- Violent meafures of the court.——A loan exatted,——Commitment 
of many who refufed.———Trial concerning the King’s power of 
commitment.——W ar with France.———Expedition to the Ifle of 
Rhe.——Diftreffed flate of the Rochellers.——Tbird parliament. 
——The judges queftioned by the houfe of Lords. ——Petition of 

, Right-——Prorogation of the Cagheei ae | 348 


Prince — 


——— 


a Fe ~ 
ies 
af 


Bi - a 


INTRODUCTION. 


Tuoucs the rectitude of my intention has hitherto 
been, and, I truft in God, ever will be, my fupport, 
in the laborious tafk of delineating the political hiftory 
of this country, yet I think it incumbent on me to 
give the public my reafons for undertaking a fubject 
which has been already treated by feveral ingenious 
and learned men. From my early youth I have 
read with delight thof hiftories that exhibit Liberty 
in its moft exalted ftate, the annals of the Roman 
and the Greek republics. Studies like thefe excite 

that natural love of Freedom which lies latent in the 
breaft of every rational being, till ftifled by prejudice, 
and extinguifhed by the fordid allurements of private 
intereft. 


Tue effe& which almoft conftantly attends fuch 


reading operated on my inclinations in the ftrongelt 


manner, and Liberty became the object of a fecondary 
worthip in my delighted imagination. A mind thus 
difpofed can never fee through the medium held up 


‘“s. 


i | party-writers ; or incline to that extreme of Sear 
ss ; our 


Vili 


INTRODUCTION. : 


_ dour which, by colouring the enormous vices, and 


magnifying the petty virtues, of wicked men, con- 
found together in one undiftinguifhed groupe, the ex- 
alted patriots. that have illuftrioufly figured in this. 
country, with thofe time-ferving placemen who have 
facrificed the moft effential interefts of the public to: 
the bafenefs of their private affections. 


Tur focieties of the modern. ages of the world are: 
not conftituted with powers to bring to an impartial: 
tribunal. men. trufted in. the higher offices of the ftate. 
Fame is the only reward which, in the prefent times. 
true virtue hath to hope; and the only punifhment 
which the guilty great have to apprehend, is eternal: 
infamy. The weight of punifhment ought ever to be 
determined by the importance of the confequences. 
which attend the crime: In this ballance the vices of 
men in public characters can admit of no alleviation, 
A good citizen, is a credit to his country, and me- _ 
rits the approbation of every virtuous man. Patriots. 
who have facrificed their tender affections, their pro- 
perties, their lives, to the intereft. of fociety, deferve . 
a tribute of praife wamixed with any alloy. With 
regret do I accufe my country of inattention, to the 
moft exalted, of their benefactors: Whilft they: enjoy 
privileges unpoffefled by. other nations, they: have loft 
a juft fenfe of the merit of the men by whofe virtues 


ix: 


INTRODUCTION. 


thefe privileges were attained; men that, with the 
hazard and even the lofs of their lives, attacked the 
_-—s formidable pretenfions of the Stewart family, and {et 
Pe: up the banners of Liberty againft a tyranny which had 
been eftablithed for a feries of more than one hundred 
and fifty years; and this by the exertion of faculties, 
which, if compared with the barren produce of mo- 
ae dern times, appear more than human. Negleét is not 
a the only crime committed againft thefe facred characters. 
: Party prejudice, and the more deteftable principle of 
as F private intereft, have painted the memoirs of paft times 
| ionfe\ fall: a light, that it is with difficulty we can 
a trace features, which, if juftly defcribed, would exalt 
e the worthies of this country beyond the fame of any 
fet of men, which the annals of other nations can at 


any one period produce. 


_—~— Po do juftice therefore to the memory of our illuf- 
tious anceftors to the utmoft extent of my {mall abi 
lities, till having an eye to public Liberty, the ftandard 
*—-_—_siby which I have endeavoured to meafure the virtue of 
_-—-—s thofe charaéters that are treated of in this hiftory, is 
the principal motive that induced me to undertake this 
____ intricate part of the Englifh annals. If the execution 
Be ; i f ah deficient, the intention muft be allowed to be meri- 
mh H nan and if the goodnefs of my head may juftly be ~ 


“app ned, my heart will ig the teft of the moft 
3 critical 


-. Va 
7 


INTRODUCTION: 

critical examination. In this country, where luxury 
has made a great progrefs, it is not to be fuppofed that 
the people of fortune will fathom the depth of politics, 
or examine the voluminous colleétions in which can only 
be found a faithful reprefentation of the important 
tranfactions of paft ages. It is the bufinefs of an hif~ 
torian to digeft thefe, and to give a true and accurate 
fenfe of them to the public. I have ever looked upon 
a fuppofed knowledge of faéts feen in the falfe mirror 
of mifreprefentation as one of the great banes of this - 
country. Individuals may err, but the public judg- 
ment is infallible. They only want.a juft information 
of faé&s to make a proper comment. Labour to at= 
tain truth, integrity to fet it in its full light, are indi 
penfable duties in an hiftorian. I can affirm that I am 
not wanting in thofe duties. The invidious cenfures: 
which may enfue from ftriking into a path of literature 
rarely trodden by my fex, will not permit a felfifh con- 
fideration to keep me mute in the caufe of Liberty and 
Virtue, whilft the doétrine of flavery finds fo many in- 
terefted writers to defend it by fraud and fophiftry, in 
oppofition to the common reafon of mankind and: the 
experience of every age. Abfurd as are the principles 
and notions, on which the doétrine of arbitrary power 
is eftablifhed, there have been ever in this country 
found many to adopt it. The vulgar are at all times 
tale 9 to be deceived, and this nation has ever produced 

d a tanmber 


INTRODUCTION. 


a number of bad citizens, who, prone to be corrupted, 
have been the ready tools of wicked minifters, and the 
_ zealous partizans in a caufe big with the ruin of the 
fate, and the deftruétion of that felicity which the in- 
dividuals of this country have for fome years enjoyed. 
It is juftly remarked by an able writer, ‘‘ That there 
may be a faction for the crown as well as againtt it, 
and confpiracies againft Freedom as well as againft pre- 
rogative.”. Whoever attempts to remove the limita- 
tions neceflary to render monarchy confiftent with Li- 
berty, are rebelsin the worft fenfe ; rebels to the laws 


of their country, the law of nature, the law of reafon, ' 


- and the law of God. Can there be fuch men? was I 
to put the queftion to my own heart, it would an{wer, 
that it was impoflible there fhould be fuch. But the 
annals of this country have a fhameful tale to tell, that 
fuch a faction has ever exifted in this ftate, from the 
earlieft period of our prefent conftitution. 
Tuts faétion has not only prevented the eftablifhing 
any regular fyftem to preferve or improve our liberties ; 
but lie at this time in wait for the firft opportunity that 
_ the imperfections of this government may give them, to 
deftroy thofe rights, which have been purchafed by the 
toil and blood of the moft exalted individuals that ever 
_ adorned humanity. To thew the caufes of fo great 


eign it will be ape to obferve, that there 
2 are 


Xi 


- 


INTRODUCTION 


are in every fociety a number of men towhom tyranny 
is in fome meafure profitable ; men devoid of every 
virtue and qualification requifite to rife in a free fate. 
The emoluments and favours they gain for fupporting 
tyranny, are the only means by which they can obtain | 
diftin@ions, which in every equal government are the 
rewards of public fervice. The felfith affe&tions of 
thefe men, exalted above worthier citizens, fancy a re- 
- compenfe in this exaltation ample enough for the facri- 
fice of their Liberty. To avoid the-cenfures of injured 
pofterity, their children are brought up in the doétrine: 
of a neceffary fervitude, and are taught to regard the 
champions of Liberty as the difturbers of the peace of 
mankind. Hence is produced a numerous clafs of men, 
who having been educated in the principles of flavery,, 
become the deluded inftruments of all the villainous. 
_ purpofes of mean ambition. 


Some there are, who envying the reputation. which: 
illuftrious characters have acquired, bend their endea- 
yours to deftroy the genuine notions of virtue and pub- 
lic utility, on which the fame of great men is built. 
Others, whofe affections are of fo bafe an alloy, that 
they envy the independency which every individual of 
this country may enjoy, and would willingly forfeit 
that natural privilege to fuperior tyrants, provided they 
might have the power of domineering over the lower 
: elafs 


INTRODUCTION. 


clafs of people. Others again, who having drudged 
through what is called a regular education, with much 
learning, or rather reading, but without judgment to 
have acquired real knowledge, become a magazine of 
other mens’ conceits, and commence the difciples of 
the firft do&rine which accident flings in their way. 
Thefe {cholars, in the purfuit of fcience, lofe the dif~ 
tinétions of common fenfe, and are as obftinately fixed 
in the prejudices of the authors with whom they have 
converied, as if thefe prejudices were the produce of 
their own imaginations. Hence proceed thofe oppofite 
opinions among the {peculative part of mankind in re- 
gard to popular and anonarchical privileges. All men 
can acquire the jargon of terms, but the depth of {ci- 
ence is only to be attained by genius. The greater 
proportion. of ignorance there may be in a difputant, 
the more reluétant he is to give way to reafoning that 
contradicts the borrowed opinions which ‘he has taken 
_ in the grofs; he looks with a fovereign contempt on his 
antagonift, not becaufe he can confute his arguments, 
but becaufe his arguments contradiét the tenets that have 
been laid down by Hobbs, and other writers of that 
ftamp. Unequal to the combat, he tkirmifhes at a dif- 
tance, wilfully converfes in generals, and never enters: 
_ intothofe particulars which may inveftigate the fubject. 
- Men like thefe, without the defire of attaining truth,. 
- . wrangle but for victory ; and if they have fenfe enough: 


“ape eee toy 


Xilé 


xiv 


EMT ROD U €-T: POw. 


to fee their miftakes, they never have candor enough 


to acknowledge them. 


Tue general education of the Englifh youth is not 
adapted to cherifh thofe generous fentiments of Inde- 
pendency, which is the only characteriftic of a real gen- 
tleman, The bufinefs of the public {chools is nothing 
more than to teach the rudiments of grammar, and a 
certain degree of perfection in the Latin and Greek 


tongues. Whilft the languages of thefe once-illuftrious - 
" nations are the objects of attention, the divine precepts 


which they taught and pradtifed are totally neglected. 
From the circle of thefe barren ftudies, the {chool-boy 
is tran{planted into the univerfity. Here he is fuppofed 
to be initiated in every branch of knowledge which dif- 
tinguifhes the man of education from the ignorant herd ; 
but here, as I am told and have great reafon to believe, 
are taught doétrines little calculated to form patriots to 
fupport and defend the privileges of the fubjeé in this 
limited monarchy, ‘‘ In thefe feats of education, fays 
an ingenious author, inftead of being formed to love 
their country and conftitution, the laws and liberties of 
it, they are rather difpofed to love arbitrary government, 
and to become flaves to abfolute monarchy. A change 
of intereft, provocation, or fome other confideration, 


_ may fet them right as to the public; but they have no 
inward principle of love to their country and of public 


“ liberty ; 


: 
gd ee SS ee ee eee 2 


INTRODUCTION. xv 
liberty ; fo that they are eafily brought to like flavery, 
The 


Fs they may be made the tools for managing it.’ 
ftudy of hiftory is little cultivated in thefe feminaries, 


a: and not at all thofe fundamental principles of the Eng- 
4 lifh conftitution on which our anceftors founded a fyftem 
_--—s ef government, in which the liberty of the fubjec is as 


BS  abfolutely inftituted as the dignity of the fovereign. 
_--——-—s*-Yet ‘the knowledge of thefe fundamental principles 
; are as neceflary to underftand this fyftem of govern- 
es) ment, as the knowledge of them was neceflary to con~ 
a sig it. 


b ea form of the conftitution may be preferved, 
when the {pirit of it is loft; and nothing is more likely 
to’ happen, ‘whilft thofe. perfons who are appointed to 
. maintain it, are ignorant of thofe fundamental princi- 
_—_—__ ples, on which the. barriers, that defend civil liberty 
. ' from prerogative, are founded, Prejudiced with a love 
of flavery, or at leaft ignorant of the advantages of Li- 
_ beérty, the laft part of the education of the men of 
2 fortune in this country, is what is called the tour of 
Europe, that is, a refidence for two or three years in 
the countries of France and Italy. This is the finifh- 
ing ftroke that renders them ufelefs to all the good pur- 
 potes of preferving the birth-right of an Englifhman. 
one Without being able to diftinguifh the different natures 
Biss is Besos governments, their advantages, their dif- 
advantages ; 


t+ 1 >: Pi 
nis? 


hes bo 


f vd 


-INTRODUCTION. 


advantages ; without being able to coktipirehiend how 
infinitely they affe& the intereft and happinefs of indi- 
viduals, they grow charmed with every thing that is 
foreign, are caught with the gaudy tinfel of a fuperb 
court, the frolic levity of unrefleéting flaves; and 
_ thus deceived by appearances, are rivetted in a tafe for 
fervitude. 


Taese are the caufes which occafion the irrational 
inclinations of many of the Englifh people in regard 
to government: and would to God that thefe, though 
very important in themfelves, were the only ones that 
Liberty had to fear. In forming this government a 
latent evil crept into the vitals of the ftate, and hath 
in the courfe of time poifoned every part of the confti- 
tution. Corruption, that undermining mifchief, hath 
fapped the foundation of a fabric, whofe building was 
cemented with the blood of our beft citizens. . The 
growing evil hath fpread far and wide, tainted the 
minds of men with fuch an incurable degeneracy, that 
the virtue of our forefathers is become the ridicule of 
every modern politician. 


Ir is become an eftablifhed maxim, that corruption 
is a neceflary engine ef government. There are fome 
amongft us who have not been afhamed to fay, that it 
_ is proper for the other parts of the legiflature to depend 


INTRODUCTION. 


on the monarch by corruption. How oppofite this is 
to the genius and fpirit of our conftitution, is too appa- 
rent to need a proof. That the confequences of it are 
already feverely felt in this country, our debts and heavy 
taxes fatally demonftrate: How deftructive it is to 
every virtue that preferves fociety, or dignifies human 
nature, is alfo apparent. ‘This is a fad but certain 
truth, that corruption is fo general amongft us that. it 
has diflolved the facred bonds of mutual truft, By 
_ the influence of bribery, every man in thefe days has 
a triple temptation. to fin againft his country: The 
~ emoluments of favour; the fear of being laughed at 


for his honefty ;, of being abandoned by his affociates, 


and left fingle to. ftand the: infults of a victorious 
faction. 


Ir I have digreffed. from: the fubjeé& I fet out with,. 
which was to. inform the public of my intention in: 
writing this Hiftory, they will, I hope, excufe a 


warmth which national evils have excited in a breaft 


zealous in the caufe of Liberty, and attached with a: 
fervent devotion to the civil rights of my country.. 


There remains nothing now but to aflure my readers 


that I fhall finifh this period of hiftory,. to the eleva- 


tion of the Hanover-Line, with the fame indefatiga- 


ble induftry, that I have executed this {mall part of it: 


c 


and having nothing fo much in view as the inveftiga- 
tion. 


wii = INTRODUCTION 
tion of truth, hall purfue it with an integrity that, I 


think, cannot juftly be called i in Aarts by the moft 
invidious inquifitor, — 


‘Tum inaccuracies of Ayle which may be found in 
this compofition, will, I hope,. find favour from the 
candour of the public; and the defeéts of a female 
hiftorian, in thefe points, not yes ga in the ballance 
of fevere criticifm. 


ADDRESS 


=, 


ADDRESS to LIBERTY. 


H, firft and moft benevolent of powers | 
Come from eternal {plendors; here on earth, © 

Againft defpotic pride, and rage, and luft, 

To thield mankind ; to raife them to affert 

The native rights and honour of their race. 

Teach me, thy loweft fubjeét, but in zeal 


‘Yielding to none, the PROGRESS OF THY REIGN; 


And’with a ftrain from thee enrich the Mufe: 


) | As Tuas alone fhe ferves, her patron Tuou, | 
And great infpirer be! Then will the joy, — 
_ Tho’ narrow life her lot, and private fhade. 


And when her venal voice fhe barters vile, 


Or to thy open or thy fecret foes, 
May ne’er thofe facred raptures touch her more, 


By flavith hearts unfelt ! and may her Worx 


Sink in oblivion with the namelefs crew, 


Vermin of ftate! to thy o’er-flowing light 
That owe their being, yet betray thy caufe: 


THOMSON. 


wet CHA; Bie Lb 
Acceffion Of Fates —mmTreaty with Francem——Confpiracy againft 
the King.——Conference at Hampton-Court.———< Parliament. 
yf rreaty &: peace with Spain. 


N the deceafe of Elizabeth, James VI. of Scot- Ann. 1603, 

land fucceeded to the crown of England. By 

the conne¢tion of the family of the Stewarts with 

the Tudors, through Margaret the daughter of Henry VII. 
he claimed fuperiority of title; but to the nomination of 
Elizabeth he owed his peaceable afcent to the throne. 
This princefs, by a long reign and many favourable 
concurring circumftances, had gained an entire afcen- 
dency over the hearts and opinions of her fubjects, not- 
withftanding that, during the courfe of her government, 


iy me had exerted very arbitrary principles of fovereignty ; 
to which h the was enabled by the yet cherifhed opinion of 


ae 
al prerogative, and the continuation of the fame re- 
B ligious 


- 


2 


/ 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann: 1603. ligious factions which had fupported a like exertion in 


the reign of her father Henry VIII. and her fifter Mary. 


EvizaseTH died on March 24, 1603, after a pro- 
fperous reign of forty-four years. Her good fortune is 
in nothing more confpicuous, than in the unmerited 
fame-it has;t@ this day preferved to her. The vices of 
this. princefs were fuch.as could‘not exift with a good heart, 


- nor her weaknefles with a good head: but to the unac- 


countable caprice of party-zeal fhe owes the reputation 
of qualities that would do honour to a mafeuline mind. 


Six hours after her deceafe, James her fucceflor was 
proclaimed. Great was the impatience of the people to 
behold their new fovereign; no lefs impatient was their 
fovereign to take poffeflion of his new-dignity. His imme- 
diate journey from Edinburgh, to London. followed the 
joyful news of his acceflion*. The concourfe of peo- 
ple which idlenefs, curiofity, and intereft, had brought 
together, was fo. offenfive to him, during» his progrefs, 
that he: iffued out, a proclamation, forbidding fuch a tu+ 
multuous refort. His ignorance of the laws of England, 
andthe high idea he had conceived of his: prefent power 
by. the arbitrary, proceedings of his predeceflors, made 
him, upon his arrival at Newark, guilty, of:the: abfurd: 


* The following is a curious, paflage in a.letter which James, wrote- 
from Edinburgh to the lord-mayor,. aldermen, and common-council of 
London, on hearing that he had been proclaimed King. “ Do all. 
whatfoever things you fhall find neceflary: or’ expedient for’ the’ good! 
government of. the faid city in execution of juftice; as yous have been: 
ufed to do in our dearett fifter’s time, till our pleafure. be, known unto 
you to the contrary.” MSS, in Br. Mufeum, fol. 7021, no, 23. 


I. : ». 


a J AM. s 
violence of hanging a thief without form or trial +. His Ans. 1605. 
Stow’s An- 


feverity was foon after exercifed on Valentine Thomas, peas 


of whom he had complained to Elizabeth that he had p.8z:. 
calumniated his conduct. This unfortunate man was in 

prifon on this account, at the time of James’s acceflion ; 

who immediately brought him to a trial, and obtained his 
condemnation on the pretence of a confpiracy againtt stow, p.s+} 


Elizabeth and fome of her council. 


Tue firft national tranfaction in which he engaged, Treaty with 
was a treaty with France, extorted from him by the im- —_— 
portunity of Rofny*, whom Henry IV. had fent into 
England for that purpofe. The articles contained a de- 
fenfive league between France and England, and offen- 
five, if the Spaniards, who were the then dreaded power 
in Europe, fhould attempt the Netherlands. This fuccefs 
of Rofny was extraordinary, becaufe James had an aver- 
fion, to the Dutch for their principles of freedom. His 


"chief counfellor at this time was Cecil, created by him 


fucceflively lord Effindon, vifcount Cranbourn, and earl 


_ of Salifbury{. The prefent favour of this minifter fur- 


4} The manner in which he was addrefled by his new fubjects did 
not a little contribute to give him romantic notions of his prefent for- 
tune. The letter which the council wrote to him to notify their having 
proclaimed him King, begins with thefe words: « Right high, right 


excellent, and mighty -prince,. and our dread fovereign lord.” 
* Afterwards duc de Sully. It appears frony Sully’s Memoirs that both 
the kings. of France and Spain diftributed large fums among James’s 


minifters.and courtiers, to bribe them to their refpective interefts. 


‘{ James was fo lavith of his:favours, that in the courfe of this year 
he created fourteen’ peers ; and from April 6 to May 20 he had made 
two hundred and thirty-feven knights. The earl of Southampton and 


the young earl of Effex were-reftored to their titles. 
RON > B 2 ied 


7 2 
t ; x om ey 


Ann. 1603. 


Confpira 
again os 


& 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


prifed every body; he was naturally odious to James on ac- 
count of his father’s enmity to Mary, and his own Oppo- 
fition to his partizan the earl of Effex: but this cunning 
courtier had ingratiated himfelf by a fecret_ commerce 
during the latter years of Elizabeth’s life. Not fo was 
the fate of Sir Walter Raleigh, a leader in all the intrigues’ 
in which Cecil had been engaged, excepting the laft. 


Amonc the many difcontented courtiers which a change: 
of royal favour had occafioned, Raleigh and. the lords 
Grey and Cobham were the moft turbulent. Their in- 
difcretion ran fo high as to affect their lives. and fortunes. 
A kind of confpiracy * with Aremberg the Flemifh am- 
baffador was charged againft them and three other com-. 
moners, viz. Sir Griffith Markham, Anthony Copley, andé 
George Brook, brother to the lord Cobham. The 


_ grounds of their accufation were fome bold imprudent 


words fpoken in the height of refentment, The iflue of: 
it was the condemnation of all the accufed; though Sir 
Walter Raleigh could not be brought in guilty, withour 
the violation of. a very effential law in. the conftitution, 
there being no other evidence than a written one + to ap- 


* The purport of the confpiracy-was- to: fét Arabella respi the, 
King’s coufin-german, upon the throne. 

+ This was the lord‘Cobham’s, ‘This nobleman had been eeitieeek 
into an-accufation of Raleigh; but; on afitof ficknefs, he wrote the 
following letter to him: * “Seeing myfelf { near my end, for the: dif 
charge of: my-confcience, and freeing myfelf from your blood, which’ 


elie will cry vengeance againft me, I proteft upon my falvation I never 


practifed with Spain by your procurement: God fo. comfort me in. 
this my affliction, as you.are a true fubjeét- for any thing I'know. I 
will fay as Pilate, Purus fum a fanguine bujus. So God have mercy on 
my foul as I know no treafon by you.”——This letter was produced in 


~ court a Raleigh: but his enemies brought a written evidence, con- 


diculoufly vain. 


2 a & 64 o7 


pear againft him. To all but Brook the fentence of Aan. 16035 


death was ecaeg to Hpaingarrnae a 


“OMI Ss % 


THE plague- at this time raged’ with fuch anfparing 


violence, as toearry off thirty thoufand of the inhabitants Stow, p.857- 


of London f only. To the Roman-Catholics was fuper- 
added ‘another mortification. The bigotry of Mary, the 
mother of James, ‘to their faith, had filled them with a 
flattering aflurance of favour from her fon ; but the de- 
nial of a toleration, which they ftrenuoufly folicited,. 


convinced them thar their hopes were vain: 


-- Or all the qualities which marked the charatter of 
James,’ there’ was none more contemptible than a pedan- 
tic difpofition, which he had attained from a narrow, 
though laborious, education.. Some fehool-learning he 
had, the fruits of’ that‘unwearied application which is 
often united'to mean parts ; of that learning he was ri- 
His vanity was much heightened by 


the flattery he had met with from the minions of his 


tradictory to the fenfé of this letter, figned by the lord Cobham. Ra- 
leigh defired his accufer might be brought face to face; this was de. 
nied, his defence over-ruled, and.the jury, after a quarter of an hour’s : 
confultation, brought him in guilty. Cobham afterwards declared, that 
his name to that letter on which Raleigh was-condemned ‘was fraudu- 
léntly obtained. | State Trials, vol. E. p. 183... Sir Anthony Weldcn’s Court 


id tg egpas 1651; p: 36. Guthrie, vol. III. p. 629. 
* The lord. Cobham, the. lord Grey, and Sir Griffith Markham, 


were. brought to the -block, before the warrant of reprieve was pro- 


duced. They all three lived and died in great penury. Two prietts, 


Watfon and Clerk, were: convicted of being accomplices in this con- 


° and executed. 
city is faid to have contained but one hundred and: fifty 


abitants at this time, 
iy ' Englifha 


6 | HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann.4694. Englifh court. He was eager for an opportunity of dit 
playing it to the whole nation. The opportunity was 
afforded him bya petition from the * Puritans for a refor- 
James gave them hopes of an impartial debate, though 
he mortally hated all the reformers for the reftraints they 
had laid upon him in his Scotch government; reftraints 
which were altogether incompatible with that fond 
idea he had entertained of monarchical power. In this 
debate James was to prefide as judge; and an aflembly 

Conferenceat Of churchmen and minifters met at Hampton-Court for 

Hampton- 

Court. this purpofe. From judge he turned principal difputant, 

- filencing all oppofition by his authority and loquacity. 
The ifflue of the conference was an injunction to the mi- 
nifters to conform. James clofed his many arguments 
with thefe powerful ones: “ That prefbytery agreed as 
well with monarchy as God with the devil; that he 
would not have Tom and Dick and Will meet to: cenfure 
him and his council;” a demonftration ftrong of the im- 
partiality he had promifed. The minifters were obliged 
to acquiefce, without other conviction than that they 
were miftaken in the hopes they had formed from. his 
education. Great was the exultation and adulation of the 
churchmen and courtiers on this occafion. Chancellor Eger- 
ton cried.out, “ He had often heard that the royalty and 
pen were united, but never faw it verified till 
now.” Archbifhop Whitgift carried: his flattery fill far- 
ther ;” “ He verily believed the king fpoke by the fpirit 
of God +.” 

* This petition was figned by feven hundred and fifty. hinged 
Fuller’ s Church Hift, Lond. 1655, b. X. p. 7. 
+ James began the conference by exclaiming againit the Scotch church, é 
SBlefied, be God’s hatio: goodnefs, faid he, who hath brought me into 


’ Sir Valentine Knightly, under whofe proteétion they had thus acted, were 
turned out of the lieutenancy of the county and the commiffion of the- 


places!) Wises Memorials 17255 voleII. p. 36, 48. 


JAMES 2B 


7 


Two proclamations followed this’ decifion s one’ com. Ann: 160% 


manding all jefuits:and priefté that Ind order3 from any 
foreign power to depart thé kingdomy*; the othér enjoin- 


ing’ the Puritans to conform to the eftablifhed’ church. 


In the’ fpitit of the one, James plainly fhewéd that his 


fole objétion to the popifh tetiets was' thdir not allowing” 
his fupremacy’: he intirnared' in’ it' that he would have a 


regard for the tetider confciences: of thofe that could not 


comply with the church: That againft the Puritans ba- 


nithed: all! hopes of a’ like irtdulgence 


the promifediands: whete religion is purely profefied; where I fit among 
grave, reverend, and learned men; not as before elfewhere, a king 
without ftate, without honour, without order, where beardlefs boys would 

ail reafons for James’s zeal for 


btave us to’our face.” ‘There were no fn 
the’ Enieliffi Hieraféliy. Many of the prelatés complimented him with 


unlimited:power; while the diffenters hampered him with the doétrines: 
of law and confcience.. After he had anfwered the objections urged by: 
the prefbyterian minifters with the fame logic as may be found in the 
fpecimens already mentionéd, he added, « If this be all your party hath 
to fay, I will make them conform themfelves, or elfe I will barrie them 
out of the land, or elfe do worfe, only hang them, that’s all.” 

* At the end of this’ proclamation is a hint towards a political uni- 
formity i in matters of religion between all Chriftian monarchs. To this: 


fe eme, which James had early planned, may be imputed many of 


thofe abfurdities which frequently occur in his conduct. 
+ The Puritans about this time fuffered fo fevere a perfecution, that 
they were driven to offer a petition for relief to the King whilft he was 


: taking the diverfion of hunting: James was fomething ftartled at this 


unexpected intrufion, and very gracioufly directed them to depute ten- 
of their members to declare their’ grievances to the council. Thefe’ 


deputies no fooner made. their appearance 'sefore the council, than they 
were fent to jail; and Sir Francis Haftings, Sir Edward Montague, and. 


J4MES 


8 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 160% JAMES now tafted of all the enjoyments he moft 
‘affected ; furrounded with flatterers, he fnuffed up 
continually the incenfe of his own praife*. With 
the reputation of bufinefs he indulged his paflion for 
idlenefs. He affected to decide, by his judgment, all 
affairs both civil and religious ; yet devoted his whole 
time to amufement. His days were {pent in hunting or 
idle compofition ; his evenings in all the variety of en- 
tertainments which the ingenuity of the queen his wife 
could procure him. Of the Scotch gentry, thofe that 
followed the court, or were attached to the hierarchy, 
imitated much the levity and freedom of French manners : 
on the contrary, thofe who were attached to puritanifm 
affected feverity and referve. The prefent fortune and 
favour of James gave many of the firft an opportunity 
of indulging their tafte in a more expenfive manner than 
the narrownefs of their former circumftances would ad- 
mit +. This humour coincided exactly with that of 
their Prince. 


Amonc thenumber of proclamations that were continu- 
ally iffued from royal authority, there was one which or- 
dained an annual feftival in remembrance of the king’s 
deliverance from the famous Gowry confpiracy. This. 


* He was extolled as the Solomon of the age, and was the firft King 
of England flattered with the abfurd title of Sacred Majefty. : 

+ The firft difguft which James gave his Englith fubjeéts, was the» “a 
profufion of favours that he beftowed on his Scotch followers. The | 
duke of Lenox, the earl of Mar, the lord Hume, lord Kinlofs, Sir - 
George Hume, and fecretary Elphingfton, were added to the privy-coun- 
cil. Sir George Hume was created earl of Dunbar; Hay was created 
vifcount Doncafter, then earl of Gatiites and sued was created earl _ 
of Holdernefs. 


$28 SME Rel. a 
was a compliment which the Scotch prefbytery had de- Aan. 1604. 
nied him, under the mortifying circumftance of not con- 

fiding enough in his veracity to be certain of its reality. 


Tue time for the expected meeting of the parliament Proclamation. 
he now approached. A proclamation which came out . 
be with the writs was remarkable for the fairnefs of 
; its afpect, and the pernicioufnefs of its tendency: 
prohibitions that interfered with the fubjects right of 
electing, were veiled with an ‘appearance of candor 


which thaded their confequences from the eyes of the i iB 
norant. 


‘i a 
j On the nineteenth of March, the great council of the Parliament 
4s nation met. James was determined to fhine in the dou- 
ble capacity of king and orator, and addreffed the af- 
ee fembly in a copious harangue. After having thrown 
; out many hints concerning the fufficient right he had at- 
tained from his title ; he exprefled his fatisfaétion for the 
_ cordial reception he had received from his fubjects, ‘on 
his firft entry into his new kingdom. “ Shall I ever, Journals of 
a faid he, nay, can I ever be able, or rather fo unable, in a 
_—~—~—~—s Memory, as to forget your unexpected readinefs and 
ht alacrity, your ever memorable refolution, and your moft 
aA wonderfull conjunction and harmony of your hearts, in 
get declaring and embracing me as your undoubted and 
fay lawfull king and governour ? or fhall it ever be blotted 
out of my mind, how at my firft entry into this king- 
dom, the people of all forts rid and ran, nay rather flew 
to meet me: their eyes flaming nothing but fparkles of 
affe&tion ; their mouths and tongues uttering nothing 
but founds of joy ; their hands, feet, and all the reft of 
Cc _ their 


| Vou, 1. 


to 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


_ their members, in their geftures difcovering a paflionate _ 


longing and carneftnefs to meet and embrace their new 
fovereign.” He then expatiated on the manifold blef 
fings England had received in his perfon, which would 


- make their meafure of happinefs full, if the two nations. 


were united in one kingdom. . “ He was the hufband,. 
he faid, and the whole ifland his lawful wife; and he 
hoped no one was fo unreafonable as to think that a 
Chriftian king under the Gofpel fhould be a polygamitt, 


and hufbandtwo wives.” He opened to them his opinion 


and intentional conduc towards the Papifts and Diflen- 
ters. “ He acknowledged the Roman-Catholic to be the 
mother church, tho defiled with fome impurities. He 
did not with the doun throwing of the temple, but that 
it might be purged and cleanfed from corruption ; he had 
not, like Rehoboam, increafed their burdens, but light. 
ened them, as much as time, occafion, or law, could 
permit; and was even then confidering how fome over- 
tures might be propofed to the prefent parliament, to 
lighten the burden of laws againft them. He would be 
content, for his part, to meet them half way, fo that all 
novelties might be renounced on both fides. As to the 
fects of Puritans and Novellifts, being impatient of fupe- 
riority, they were unfufferable in any well-governed com- 
monwealth; his courfe towards them he remitted to his 

proclamation. made on that fubject.” i 


_Turs fpeech, which was tedioufly prolix, did not gain 
the applaufe, nor produce the fatisfaction which James 
expected; or rather it diffatisfied. every-body. The Ro- 
man-Catholics were not content with his diftinctions, | 
though he had hinted that his only faa ec their 


<6 pita 


i AM Je ae fee 
faith was the fingle tenet of allegiance to the Pope. Ann. 1604. 
‘The Puritans, a then fumerous fect in England, wete s2eiice. 

_ exafperated at his branding them as a peftilent fet of péo- 

ple deftructive to the commion-weal. The Proteftants ifi 

general difliked his favourable declarations to the Papifts, 

_and the whole nation was offended at the hints he threw 

out towards an union with Scotland. 


Casrana fesdpeitiot of the king’s title, the tellin midtion 
of thé Commons was for the redrefs of grievances. The 
a following ones, as the moft notorious, were enumerated 

a | by Sir Robert Wroth: The wardthips of men’s children seine 

ae 2 _ a burthen and fervitude to the fubjects of this kingdom: vol.1.p. 15 te 
ioe 3: The general abufe and grievance of purveyors and cart- 
takers: Particular and private patents, commonly called 
eae: Monopolies *: Difpenfations in penal ftatutes : Tranfpor- 
| tations of ordmance f+ Abufés of the Exchequer, 


a In 4 eonfétence t with the Lords on a project to pe 
__. tition the King for leave to take into confideration a re- 


Sia ~ * On the fubjeé&t of monopolies, it was ordered by the lower Houfe, 
~~: That thofe which find juft caufe of grievance fhould bring in their 
( complaints in writing, to the end they might be underftood and confi- 
dered of by the committees ; and a law framed thereupon according to 

_ the caufe.” * 
es) + This article, which brought to the crown an income of 30001. a 
--__- year, had been often reprefented by the Commons, during the admi- 
oe niftration of Elizabeth, as’ a great grievance to the nation, by fupply- 
SR their enemies the Spaniards with thefe tremendous arms on eafy 


“this cahiedetide was flung out an extraordinary argument for 
e; “ That a people may be without a’King, a‘King cannot be 
mut a people.” Fournals of the Houfe of Commnns, vol. 1. p. 156. 

; C2 - compence 


12 


Parl. Hit: 


& voL V..p. 56. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


compence to be given in exchange for wardfhips *, the 
Lords heartily joined in the caufe, and recdemanetiaed to 
them to comprize in the petition, purveyorfhip, licence 
of alienation, refpite of homage, and other burthens, 
which ftretched prerogative had made intolerable. 


TuEseE fpirited exertions were rendered ufelefs by am 
incident which difturbed the concord now fubfifting be- 
tween the two Houfes. One of the prohibitions in the 
King’s proclamation was, that no outlaw fhould be re- 
turned. Sir Francis Goodwin was pronounced fuch by 
the chancellor, his feat vacated, and Sir John Fortefcue, 
an old fervant of the crown and favourite: with the mi- 
niftry, chofen in his room. The Houfe reverfed. the chan- 
cellor’s decree, and reftored Sir Francis-Goodwin.. The 


_ Lords, by the inftigation of the King, who thought his. 


authority. affected, defired a conference on the fubject. 
The Commons peremptorily refufed it, as the point in 
queftion: regarded. their own privileges.. This occafioned 
expoftulations between the King and the Commons. The 
King faid, “ He was loath to alter his tune, and that he 
fhould now change it into: matter of grief by way of 
conteftation, He did fample it to the murmurs of the 
children of Ifrael. He did not attribute the caufe of his. 
grief to any purpofe in the Houfe to offend him, but only. 
to a miftaking of the law. Me had no. purpofe to im- 


* The Commons appealed to the laws of nature and reafon for the 
equitablenefs. of their demand. in. refpe€t to wardfhips. “ It is but a 
reftitution, faid they, of the original right of all men by the laws of 
God and nature; which is, that children: fhould. be brought up by 
their parents and next of kin, and by them to be direéted in — 
marriage.” _ Journals of the Commons, vol. 1. p. 227. 


Petia Bet eo 13 


peach their privileges ; but fince they derived all matters Ann. 1604. 
of privilege from him, and by his grant, he expected (ume 
that they fhould not be turned againft him. That there ¥-!P- 's* 
- were no precedents did fuit this cafe fully: precedents in 
the times of minors, of tyrants, of women, of fimple 

ea _ kings, not to be credited, becaufe for fome private ends, | 
Hy hee That by the law, the Houfe of Commons ought not to: 

Ee ; meddle with returns, being all made into the chancery,. 

Dee and to be corrected or reformed by that court alone.” _ 


ath 
. Tue debates of the Commons on. this. fubject. were {pi- Debates 

rited. It was faid by one member, That there was jutt. 
fear of fome great abufe in the late election: that the: 
a King had been mifinformed: that he.had too.many mif-. 
eo informers: that now the cafe of Sir John Fortefcue and. 
Y M ; Sir Francis: Goodwin was become the cafe of the whole 

ore kingdom : that old:lawyers forget, and commonly inter-. 
Fe pret the law according to the time: that by fuch a courfe 
, a the free election of the country was taken away, and: 
pile none would from henceforth be chofen but fuch as. 
le. fhould pleafe the King and council. « Let us therefore, 
Se ‘adds he, with fortitude, underftanding, and _fincerity, 
fk feek to maintain. our privilege, which cannot be taken, 
or conftrued any contempt in us; but merely a mainte~ 
nance of our common right; that right which our an- 


f [ , y : . - 
ceftors have left us, and is juft and fit for us to tranfmit 
« We fhould taint ourfelves with three 


to pofterity. 
great blemifhes, faid another member, if we fhould al- | 

‘ter our judgment ; levity, cruelty, and cowardice. No. 
‘ court can reform their own judgment. Every act that 

this Houfe is an act of parliament. Shall juftice 


' “= h 
:; kx up and down? fhall he be a member to-day, and 
| fhalli 


hae 
* ° 7 4 


Saas 
CaP) 


14 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 604° {hall we tear himoff to-morrow ? Let Sir Francis Géodwin: 


ftand as he is. Duty and courage may: ftand together : 
let not the Houfe be inveigled by fuggeftion ; this may 
bd called a qs warranta to feiae all our liberties.” GAs 


Uron the queftion, the Houfe refolved to ftand by. their 
former judgment. James fent them this peremptory mef- 
fage, “* That he commanded, as an abfolute king, a confe- 
rence with the judges*.” To this command, exprefled thus: 
violently and abfurdly, the Commons, tho’ in contradiction 


" Aconference. to their former votes, affented. The iffue of the conference 


urn. Com. 


was favourable to liberty; for the King being prefent, 
by the defire of the Commons, was fo much gravelled at 
the many precedents brought againft him, that he com- 
promifed the affair. Both of the members were fet afide, 
and the Commons obtained’ a firm eftablifhment of the 
effential privilege of judging of returns. The King faid,. 
“ He granted it royally as weigh James, fweetly and 
kindly, out of his ‘good’ nature.” Notwithftanding the: 
conteft ended thus favourably, many of the fpirited 
members were offended at the'conceflion of giving up their 
elected. The committee'}+ who managed the affair. was 
feverely reproached for exceeding their authority im giv- 


ing a confent without having firft confulted the Houfe'; 


_* The judges had given an‘ opinion againft the Commonsi. 
- + Sir Francis Bacon, one of the committee, gave the report of the 


yol.I. p. 168 conference in the following; ftrain: “*« The King, faid he, would be pre- 


fident -himfelf. ‘This attendance renewed the remembrance of the 
Jaft, when we departed with fuch admiration. It was the voice of God! 
in man; the good fpirit of God in the mouth of man We might fay 
as was faid to Solomon, We are glad, O king! that we give account 
to you, becaufe you difcern what is fpoken. _How to” ‘report his mar 
jefty’s fpeech he knew not; the eloquence of a King was inimitable.” 


J Bunk 18. ol Is 
and @ motion was ‘made that it might be done by war- Ann. vane. 
rant, and therein inferted, “ by the requeft of the 


King. ae, 
Propofal of 


pie next bufines, wich took up the attention of the 
Parliament, ‘was a propofal of an union between the two ™°"™ 
kingdoms. James was fo hotly and impatiently fet.on 
this point, that he had already affumed the title of King 
of Great Britain ; iffued out a proclamation to make 
“Scotch | coin current in England ; quartered St. Andrew’s 
crofs with St. George's ; and, to give a general idea of 
its peaceable advantages, the iron doors of the frontier 
“towns were converted into plough-fhares. The Parlia- 


‘compliment and to humour the King, than with any de- 
fign to bring it into execution. James drew up many 


projects with his own hand: he alternately complained 


of and cajoled ‘the Parliament +; but without farther 


_* The outlawry .of Sir Francis‘Goodwin was brought in on purpofe 

to ferve Sir John Fortefcue, as appears ‘by the following paflage in a 
Jetter.:from, Cecil. to Mr. Winwood. “ Sir Francis Goodwyn’ hav- 
-ing laboured to be knight of Buckinghamfhire, to the exclufion of an 
ancient counfellor, Sir John Fortefcue, ic was advifed by the King’s 

_ dearned councill. and judges, whether there were not fome means by 
the laws to avoid it. Whereupon it being found that he was outlawed, 
-and.fo certifyed:by the theriff, confequently a new writ was fent forth, 

__ by virtue whereof Sir John Fortetcue was chofen.” Winwood’s Mems- 
rials, volIl...p. 18, &.feg... It-is to be noted ‘here, that in the difqui- 


ition of this affair, -it appeared that Goodwin’s outlawry was an irre- 
_gular one ; and ‘that if it-had. been regular, it was pardoned by an act 


fof grace. 
oof ‘The following is a Sesicindscam the King to'the parliament on the occa- 


theunion. © ‘Yedee with quhat cleernefs and finceritie I have be- 
i anadie throuch all the progreffe thairof, thoch _ 
I will 


16 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


“ia 1604. fuccefs than to obtain an appointment of forty-four Eng- 
4ifh to meet with thirty-one Scotch commiffioners to de- 


; , ~ Iwill not faye, too littel regairdit br you, but I maye juftlie faye, not 
fo uillinglie embraced by you, as the uorthinefs of the maitter doth 

uell deferve. I protefte to God, the fruits thairof uill chieflie tende 

to yourg owen uell profperitie and increafe of ftrenth and greatnefs: 

- Nothing can ftaye you from harkening unto it, but jaloufie and dif- 

trufte, ather of me the propounder, or of the maitter by me pro- 

pounditt: If of me, then doe ye both me and yourfelfis an infinite 

uronge, my confcience bearing me recorde, that I ever deferved the 

‘contrarie at your handis; but if youre diftrufte be of the maitter it- ~ 

felf, then diftrufte ye nothing but your owin uifdomes or honetties : ‘ 


For as] have gevin over urangling upon uordis with you, focraveI : 
no conclufion to be taken at this tyme heirin, but only a comiffion, i 


that it maye be difputed, confidderid upon, and reported unto you ; 
and then will ye be youre owin cookes, to dreffe it as ye lifte: fo that 
-(as I have alreaddie faid) fince the conclufion thairof can never be 
without youre owin affeintis; if ye be trew to yourefelfis, no man can 
deceave you in it, lett not yourefelfis thairfore be tranfposted with the 
curiofitie of a few giddie headis ; for it is in you nou to make the 
choice, ather by yielding to the providence of God, and embracing | 
that quhiche he hath caftin in youre mouthis, to procure the profpe- a 
ritie and increafe of greatnes to me and myne, you and youres; and 
by the awaye-taking of that partition-uall, quhiche allreaddie, by 4 
Godde’s providence, in my bloode is rent afunder, to eftablifh my 
throne and youre boddie politike, in a perpetuall and floorifhing 
peace ; or ellis contemning Godde’s benefites fo freely ofred unto us, 
to fpitte and blafpheme in his face, by praeferring uarre to peace, 
trouble to quyetnes, hatred to love, ueaknefs to greatnes, and divi- 
fion to union; to fowe the feidis of difcorde to all our pofterities ; to 
difhonoure youre King; to make both me and you a proverbe of re- . 
proche in the mouthis of all ftraingeris and all ennemies to this na- 
tion, and envyers of my greatnes; and oure next laboure to be, to 
take up new guarifons for the bordouris, and to make new fortifica- 
tions thaire. Sed meliora fpero. I hoape that God, in this choice and - 
free uill of youris, uill not fuffer you, withe olde Adame, to choofe ; ; 
the worlte, and fo to procure the defacing of this earthlie paradife ; ‘* 
but by the contrarie, that he fhall infpyre you fo, as, with the fe- , 


J A ME S$ 1. ry 


Their power was not ex- Aon. 1604, 


liberate concerning the terms. 
tended to make any advances towards a final eftablith- 


i “ment. The Commons were at this time warmly fet on 

RPS the redrefs of grievances ; and, in all probability, for 
Basi that price, would have indulged the King in his darling 
ls, Pte project. This matter had been from time to time revived 
5. oe in their committees, during the whole feflion ; and ina 
ai conference with the upper houfe there were certain fums 
aes)” propofed as confiderations for wardfhips, refpite of ho- 
mage, licenfe of alienations, tenures in capite, &c, The 
gleam of public virtue which appeared in the Lords for 
a fhort time at the beginning of the feflion, was now in- 
fue tirely vanifhed. They not only diflented from, but re- 
mics) proached, the Commons, for their proceedings, and termed 
ar% the Propofals, ” taal to the King for felling his 


- prerogative.” 
Tars ill fuccefs did not deter them from proceeding 


+: , 
, with unabated diligence on the abufes in ccclefiaftical 
matters *. A petition was framed for redrefs, but dropt 


WP ie 
nd 3 ~ conde Adame, ye fhall ptoduce peace; and fo bzutifie this eure earth- 
MF - lie kingdome heerwith, as it may reprefente, and be an arles pennie 
‘ unto us, of that zternal peace in that fpirituall kingdome, quhiche is 
prepared for the perpetuall refidence of all his chofen children. Vid. 

Journ. Houfe of Com. vol.1. p. 193, & Seq. 

We __ ™ Their acquiefcence to the royal command, for a conference with 
wait _ the judges in the cafe of returns, had encouraged James to fignify to 
them, in a meffage, a defire that before they intermeddled with the re- 
formation of matters of religion, they would confer with the members 
___—__ f the convecation-houfe. This meflage produced a warm difpute. It 
__ Was urged that there was no precedent of any conference with a convo- 
cation. The conclufion was an offer to the King, that they would be 


_ 


. — on any matter of that nature with the bifhops as lords of 
- Journals of Commons, vol. 1. p. 173. 
me. Mate, a D by 


18 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1604- by the prevailing influence of the court and hierarchy.. 


7 J uly. 


As the Commons had been foiled in all their intentions. 


for the good of the public, they were juftly determined 


that it fhould not be robbed to feed: the avarice and 
luxury of courtiers, A demanded fubfidy was fo vehe- 
mently difputed in the Houfe, that the King fent to de- 


‘fire it might be altogether laid afide ;, and the end of the: 
feffion foon followed *.. F 


* Acts pafied this feffion.. 
1. An aét of recognition of the title to the crown.. 
2. An a@ authorizing certain commiffioners of. England to treat: 
with commiffioners of Scotland, for the weal of both kingdoms. 


3. An aé&t againft the diminution of the poffeffions of archbifhoprics - 


and bifhoprics, and avoiding of dilapidatioas of the fame. 
4. An aét for the due execution of the ftatutes againft jefuits, femi- 
nary priefts, recufants. 


5+ An act to prevent the over-charge of.the people by ftewards of; 


court leets and court barons.. 
6. Anvact for the explanation of the ftatute concerning labourers. 


7- An act for the continuance and explanation of an act for punifh-- 


ment of vagabonds, &c. 


8. An att to take away the benefit of, clergy for fome kinds of man-. 


flaughter. 
g. An ac to reftrain the haunting of. public-houfes, inns, &&c. . 
10. An att for the better execution of juftice. 


it, An act to reftrain all perfons from marriage till their former: 


wives and hufbands be dead.. 
12. An act againft witchcraft, &c.. 


13. An att for new executions to be fued againft any which fhall here-- 


after be delivered out of execution by privilege of parliament, &c. 

14. An act for a remedy for a freeman of London to recover fall . 
debts, &c.. 

15. An aé for the better relief. of creditors againtt fuch ic iacre be- - 
come bankrupts. — 

16, An a& concerning wherrymen. and watermen. . 

17. An a& concerning the making of hats and felts. 


18. An ac concerning ufing or buying. corte 


P Pacer’ 


J oA MTR Sa 


Tae Commons had nobly afferted their privileges in 
feveral inftances. The delivery of Sir Thomas Shirley, 
one of their members, who had been committed to the 


1g 


Ann. 1604s 
Parliam, Hitt. 


Fleet, was demanded and obtained; and the warden pu- © 


nithed for contempt of the Houfe, in refufing to releafe 
his prifoner. 


1g. An act for the well garbling of fpices. 

20. An aét for redrefling of abufes ufed in painting. 

21. An ac againft brokers. 

22. An act concerning tanners, curriers, fhoemakers, &c 

23. An act for the prefervation of the fifhery in Somerfet, &c. 

24. An aét againtt the deceitful making mildernix and powle da- 
vies, &c. 

25. An act for continuing fome and repealing other ftatutes. 

26. An act for the continuance and obfervation of certain exchequer 


orders. 
27. An act for the prefervation of game. 


28, An act concerning the franchifes of the borough of Berwick. 
29. An act concerning eating flefh in Lent. 

30. An aét concerning building a church in Melcombe Regis. 

31. An act for relief of perfons infected with the plague. 

32. An act for paying a certain fum per ton by certain trading 


veffels. 
33. An act for a fubfidy of tonnage and poundage. Vid. Statutes at 


Large. 
. 34 An act for avoiding multiplicity of leafes. 

35. An act againft feandalous and unworthy minifters. 

36. An act for difburthening of clergymen of fuch affairs as may 
hinder them in their divine callings. 

37. An att for the better difcovery and fuppreffing of fimony, and 
‘other corrupt procuring of ecclefiaftical dignities. Vid. Parliam. Hift. 


vol. V. p. 102. 
The tonnage granted ‘was three fhillings on every ton of wine im- 


“ported ; but on {weet wines fix fhillings, On every awm of Rhenih 
one fhilling. The poundage was one fhilling in twenty on goods and 
-merchandize imported or exported ; ‘on woollen manufactures, tin, and 
ypewter, two fhillings in twenty. 


~ oy , . . 
© STD x »< D2 majority 


In this cafe a vote had been carried by a. 


7 


20 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1604. majority of feventeen, for fix of the members to be fent - ‘oe 
by the Houfe with the ferjeant and mace to require the: | 
delivery ; but they were deterred from the refolution by: ; 
a reprefentation of the fpeaker, that the members who. 
entered the prifon in that manner would be by law fub- 
ject to.an action. Sir Herbert Crofts, one of the mem~ 
bers, coming up with others to hear the King’s fpeech, 
was infulted by a yeoman of the guards, who fhut the 
door againft him, faying, “ Goodman burgefs, you come 
not here.” The Commons refented: the infult as an af- 
front upon the whole houfe; and their anger was with. : 
difficulty appeafed by the yeoman’s afking- pardon for — a 
his fault, and receiving on his knees a reprimand from: : 
the {peaker. 


Aw act for the due execution of the ftatutes againft’ 
jefuits, feminary priefts, recufants, &c. met with an ab- 
furd oppofition from.a hot-headéd member of the upper 
houfe, the lord vifcount Montague. He inveighed .againft 
the whole ftate of the eftablifhed’religion, and attempted 
to prove the antiquity of the Popifh, and the novelty of this. 
The Lords thought fit to commit him prifoner to the. 
Fleet; in which place he remained till he had given fatif-. 
faction by confefling his fault. 


ComPpLArntT was brought into the Houfe of Lords ~ 
by the Commons againft Thornborough, bifhop of: 
Briftol, for having written a book in favour of the Union. 
The Lords agreed that the bifhop fhould make a public 
acknowledgment that he had committed an offence. The 
bithop fubmitting to. this determination, the affair was. — 
thus accommodated. ‘<9 


_ Bancrore- 


e 
a 


eit Wak Ss? ok 


2h 


Bancroft had fucceeded Whirgift in his archbifhop- 41.1604 


ric. -He was fo zealous a perfecutor of the puritan 
that many families were obliged to leave their country, 


for foreign abodes ; he endeavoured to perfuade the King. 
to ufurp the power of redrefling the grievances of the 


clergy without confulting the parliament; but James 
was advifed not to-take this dangerous ftep *. 
A TREATY of peace was this fimmer concluded be- 


tween Spain and England {. One of the articles was 


unfavourable to the Dutch, as, That James fhould fix a 


day, before the expiration of which the ftates thould 


make peace with the arch-duke; and, in cafe of refu- 


fal, thould deem himfelf abfolved from former engage- 
ments {. All the terms of: this- peace were much dif- 


* He prefented twenty-five articles; commonly called Articuli Cleri, 


and petitioned the King to grant prohibitions upon them 


+ James: had recalled. all the letters of marque that had been 


granted by Elizabeth, on his acceflion. In his proclamation for this 
purpofe. he. fuppofes that amity with all the princes in Chriftendom 
was attached to his perfon, Although we have made it known by 
public edict that. at our entrance into thefe our kingdoms of England 
and Ireland, we ftood, as {till we do,,in good amity and friendthip 
with all the princes in Chriftendom, .and therefore are carefully to pro- 


vide, as much as in. us lieth, that none of them.or their fubjects 


fhould by any hoftil aétion be endamaged in their perfons, territories, 


or goods, by any of our fubjects, either by land or fea, &c.” Rymer, 
“Ridiculous as is this conceit, James in his firft {fpeech to 


vol. XVI. 
the, parliament mentions this perfonal amity between him and foreign 


| princes, as one of the bleffings which England would enjoy by his ac- 
ceffion ; when at the fame time, his management in confequence of this 


pretended advantage, deprived his people of the power to do them{elves 
.on the fubjeéts of Spain. 


_was fent ambaffidor to Spain to ratify the treaty. 
The 


‘¢ f the beginning of the following year, the earl of Nottingham, 


Treaty of 
peace with» 


Spain. . 


a" HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


‘Aon 1604. liked by the people *. ‘The court difplayed a fumptuous 


“The embaffy, like all others in this reign, was gaudy and pompous, . 
Sixty noblemen and gentlemen of the firft rank accompanied the am- 
‘baflador, befides the others, who with their attendants compofed a 
train of fix hundred and fifty perfons. 

The ceremony of taking leave of the King is a ftrong picture of the 
manners of this age of parade. James being at Greenwich, the am- 
‘baffador with his retinue, all richly drefled, waited on him there. In 

_ the ambaflador’s train were fix trumpeters, clad in orange-coloured da- 
mafk ; fix footmen in orange tawny velvet, alike fuited; fix pages clad 
alfo in orange tawny velvet, with cloaks of the fame colour; thirty 

’ with cloaks of black velvet; fourfcore yeomen apparelled with cloaths 
-of orange cloth, garded with filver and blue filk lace. Guthrie, vol. III. 
P.644. Stow, p..859. Stone, the fool, was whipt at Bridewell for 
faying that there were fixty fools gone to Spain, befides the lord-admiral 
and his two fons. 

Immediately after-the conclufion of this peace, the town of Oftend 
capitulated, It had been three years befieged by the Spaniards. 


* Sir Charles Cornwallis, the King’s refident in Spain, writes thus 
of it to fecretary Cecil, ad June, 1605. 


“ I find here by many arguments that this peace came opportunely 
for this kingdom ; and is admired of all Europe, yea of this kingdom 
itfelf, how it was poffible, with fo advantageous conditions to them, 
and fo little profitable to our realm, it could be effected. The duke 
of Anera difcourfing with one of great privacy and truft with him, 
after that he had heard that the peace was in fuch form concluded, 
faid in plain terms, That the King and counfellors of England had not 
their fenfes, when in fuch fort they agreed upon it; and fome Spaniards 
have lately reported, that the king of Spain’s money purchafed this 

| quiet, otherwife peace with fo good conditions would never nave been 

obtained. 

* * By thofe collections that I have made, and relations of others well 

practifed in this ftate, I find that England never loft fuch an oppor 

- tunity of winning honour and wealth unto it, as by relinquifhing the 

war with Spain. The King and kingdom were reduced to fuch ef- 
tate, as they could not, in all likelihood, have endured the fpace of © 

two years more: His own treafury was exhaufted ; his rents and cuf- 


toms fubfigned for the mob: pt Se papesean ae aa . fee a 
bs i | x 


ree ~ 
oan 


mi >, 
- ” 


he 


2 


J 4& MVE. 8 1 23: 


appearance *, and the charms of finery infected the town, Ann. 1604. 
whilft the pernicious luxury was fanctified under the 
{pecious pretence of cultivating the arts of peace, and. 
extending the commerce of England... 


or. AP: II. 
+: 


Gun-powder plot. Punifhment of the confpirators. Parlia- 
| ttt ——ame Report of the King’s death.——Subfidies granted by. 
 parliament.———The Spaniards contemn Fames. 


o , 
aah pemnelgen parliament had parted mutually difla- 
tisfied with each other. On one fide, the parliament 
by the aét.of recognition had in a manner difavowed- 
his pretenfion of holding the crown of England folely 
by hereditary right. The Commons had made many 
attempts towards the redrefs of grievances ; grievances. 


rowed; his nobility poor and much indebted ; his merchants watted ; 

his peopie of the country in all extremity of neceffity ; his devices of. 

gaining by the increafe of the valuation of.money, .and other fuch of. 

that nature, all played over ; his credit in borrowing, by means of the 

uncertainty of his eftace during the war with England, much decayed ; 

the fubjects of his many diftracted dominions held in obedience by force 
and fear, not by love and duty, and therefore rather a care and burthen 
than.a relief and ftrength to him ; himfelf very young, and in that re- 
with this people in no great veneration, and the lefs for fuffering 


bimfelf to be wholly governed by a man generally hated by his own 


country ; -his ftrength at fea not able to fecure his ports at home, much. 
lefs. his- Indies, or. his. treafury homewards.” Winwood’s Memorials, . 


pera. P- 75>- & feq.. 


ed The entertainment for the conftable of Spain coft James upwards 
3001. a-day, and the duke of Holitein, brother to the queen, had. 


appointment, ; : 
eee which: 


24 HISTORY OF (ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1604: Which James, looked on as wery neceflary parts of his 
prerogative. They had proceeded very flowly and coldly 
_ von his favourite plan of an union, They had, though 
in oppofition to royal authority, vigoroufly exerted their 
privileges; and finally had fhewn an intention to deny © 
. a demanded fubfidy.. On the other hand, James had 
? difplayed a ftrong inclination to encroach on the moft 
effential. rights of the Commons; had pufhed on with 
great earneftnefs the unpopular plan of the union; had © 
declared an averfenefs to comply with their reafonable de- 
mands; had lavifhed out his coffers on his favourites 
and dependants; and by this early difgegard to oecono- 
my, had foreboded the neceflities to which he would be 
often reduced; neceflities which could not be fupplied 
‘without opprefling the fubject. 


| Gon powder | AN incident very extraordinary in its nature, and-from — 

| plot. ‘a very unexpected quarter, united by a fenfe of common 
danger the difpleafed parties. The papifts in general 
‘were much exafperated at the difappointment they had 
met with from the conduct of James. Some of the 
Spanifh partizans laid great ftrefs upon a pretended con- 
veyance of the crown of Britain by Mary of Scots to 
the catholic king. All the difcontented papifts, who 
had been banifhed England, were fupported in the Ne- 
therlands by that monarch, and great fums remitted into 
England for carrying on plots againft the government. 


Tue intended execution of one that had been ma- 
chinating near a year and half, was haftened or rather og 
fixed, from fome feverities the fe€t had fuffered in con- RE 
fequence of an act in their disfavour, which had pafled ; 


the laft feflion of parliamen t. 


THA POAM MTS 6H OFT 


fome of the moft enthufiaftic of the body confpired un: 


‘ der Garnet, the fuperior of the jefuits, who had been the 


manager of ‘all their cabals, to deftroy with one blow the 


_ moft powerful of their enemies. 


~ 


| ‘concerted plan. 


in the reign of Elizabeth for. his. affection to popery, re- 
gies the following letter: Mat of the love I bear to 


| Tue defign was againft the King and parliament; and 


the plan fo far executed, that thirty-fix barrels of gun- 


powder were, by means of the confpirators, lodged in 


fome vaults under the Houfe of Lords, to be fired on 


the firft day of their meeting, when the King was to ha- 
rangue, and the queen and prince of ‘Wales had pro: 
pofed to have been prefent. After the explofion, the reft 
of the royal family were to be feized by the confpira- 
tors; and Elizabeth, James’s youngelt child, to be de- 
clared queen, under a proteétor of their own chufing. 
The vaults had been hired by Piercy, a near relation of 
the earl of Northumberland, under the pretence of a 
lodgment for fuel ; a great number of faggots covered 


ne tremendous depofit. 


“Tae fifth of November, which was the day afligned 


for the meeting of parliament, drew nigh 
the hopes of the “confpirators ; ; but a fatal affurance of 
fuccefs, united to private affection, drew from one of the 


‘party an. indifcretion which happily defeated the well- 


On the twenty-fixth of Odtober, the 
Lord Monteagle, whofe father had‘ been a great fufferer 


Exalted were . 


a5 


Determined on vengeance, Ann: 1605. 


26 =? “His TORS QFE MGLAN D : 

ee Aen. 1605. to devife fome excufe to fhift off your attendance at this. ~ 
: Hela parliament; for God and man have concurred to punifl» 

: ; the wickednefs of this time. And. think not flightly of 

- this advertifement, but retire yourfelf into your country, 

ie where you may expect the event in fafety; for though 

- there be no appearance of any ftir, yet I fay they thall. 

‘aaa receive a terrible blow this parliament, and yet they fhall 

am : not fee who hurts them. This counfel is: not to-be con: 
temned, becaufe it may do you good, and'can do you no. 

| harm, for the danger is paft fo foon as'you have burned 

aes the letter*; andl hope God will give you the grace tomake 

ee good ufe of it) t0 whofe holy protection. I ‘;commend you.” aw 


MonTeacte carried this-letter to Cecil, them earl of 
Salifbury, who either did or pretended to think little of 
it, and, the affair was dropped till the King, who had 
been fome time at Royfton +, returned ‘to town., On. 


o. ; * Rapin.relates, that. both James and his minifter were puzzled at- 
this fentence, ‘* For the danger is paft as foon as you have burned the 
letter.” Cecil ridiculed it as the incongruity of a fool or a madman; 
and James thought it referred to the quick execution of the blow, 
The obvious fenfe of: the words is, “*: That-if the letter was buiried,. 
the receiver could not incur danger from the advice.” 


+ While the King was at Royfton, he devoted himfelf, fo entirely to 
hunting, that he forbade his minifters to difturb his pleafures with any. te 
bufinefs; faying, “ His hunting was neceflary to the ftate; it was be 
good for his health, and “his health was necefffary to the ftate. ” "Thefe ; ‘ 
huntings were great nuifances; they are taken notice of as fuch ina oe 
ce ea, letter from Matthew Hutton, archbifhop of York, to vifcount Cran- |. 
| bourn. ‘I could with,” writes this prelate, « that there was 
wafting: of the treafure of the realm, and more moderation ae 
lawful exercifé of hunting’; both that the poor mens corn may | Jefe > 3 
Spoiled, and. other his, majefty’s ee mpage | Wiwwood’s Me es 
mais vol. II. .&F. 40. : ; : DMege 7s sachet tee 


f JAMES ‘1 27 
co _ 're-canvafling the letter, the gun-powder was {cented. “Molt Anois 09: 
f authors attribute this to the fagacious timidity of James *. . 

i¢ ‘He was fond of the reputation of this difcovery, and 


iat k ety affumed it f. 
‘tr ais ih “THe night before the meeting of the parliament, of- ee 
Re he ~ ficers were fent to fearch the vaults under the houfe of “~~ 
es | Lords: on removing the faggots the gun-powder was 
a difcovered. Guido Fawks +, who, under the guife of 
ae. Piercy’s fervant, was found lurking about the place, was 
aes _ taken, and on fight of the rack confefled the whole plot, 
_ ae with the names and quality of the confpirators. On 
hg this arreft, the criminals that remained in London fled 
ee _. into Warwickthire, where their confederates were pofted 
ee. to feize on the perfon of Elizabeth, fo foon as they 
AG -. fhould hear of the fuccefs of the project. There they 
~~~ made a vigorous defence; but were all taken, except 
hat ‘three, who were killed in the ftruggle; viz. Catefby, 
Bh ___-efteemed to be the inventor of the plot, Thomas Piercy, 
_-——s and Robert Wright. Thefe following were convicted of Confpirstors 
male treafon, and executed: Sir Everard Digby, Guido Fawks, °***'*¢: 


|) _* There are, fome authorities which fay, that Cecil had before re- 
i -ceived intimation of the intended plot from France, and the manner 
: in which it was to be executed, Cecil owns, in a letter to Cornwallis, 
that he had intimation of fome plot in hand. He alfo mentions, that 

the whole affair was difcovered before the letter was communicated to 


James. Winweoa’s Memorials, vol. II. p. 172. 
According toRapin, James's flatterers did not fcruple to fay, he 
- «ould never have difcovered the myftery without the immediate affiftance 


_—_ of the Holy Ghoft. ’ 
a peeinKowks was an officer in the Spanith fervice. He was fent 
der by the confpirators, as a man of tried refolution ana 


Robert 


E 2 


meu! ae Ann. 1605, 


Parliament. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 
Robert and Thomas Winter, John Grant, Ambrofe Rook- 


’ wood, Robert Keys, Thomas Bates, Efqs; and Garner, 
the fuperior of the jefuits, . Francis Trefham.was con-— 


victed likewife, but died of a flrangary in prifon. » Two 


catholic lords, Mordaunt and Sturton, were fined, one ten | 


thoufand, and the other. fix thoufand: poufds 5’ their \ab- 


fence from parliament having begot fufpicion. The eark 


of Northumberland * fuffered the feverer penalty of thirty 
thoufand pounds, and was detained\im|prifon for feverab 
years, becaufe he had admitted, Piercy into. the number of 


: | gentlemen-penfioners without, having exacted the requifite 
oaths. Thefe were the arbitrary. fentences of the ftar~ 


chamber, . The | lord Monteagle was rewarded with am 
sfiats of 2001. ayCar, anda aga of im i 


Tue dettaaians Met on ‘the ee of Ngvetalien Janes & 
{peech on the occafion of the plot is perhaps as remark 
able as the occafion itfelf, the whole of it being, accord 
ing to the genius of the orator, uncommonly prolix. I 
fhall only give the moft anhing pellagnss . 


“« AND now I muft crave a little me of you (that 
fince kings are, in the word of God itfelf,. called gods, 
as being his vicegerents on earth, and fo adorned and 
furnifhed with fome fparkles of divinity) to compare: 
fome of the works of God, the great king, towards. the: 
whole and general world, to fome of his works towards. 
me and this little world af my dominions.” .He then. 


b a7 we OG ‘Lee 


* This nobleman had been fo sells a promoter of James's fuc- 


ceffion to the throne of England, that -he declared he would remove ee : 
pibialSeetDitom) “2 
, sala patente i's tie » Fi 


all ts by the fi and 
i sepa word. Letters. ‘eae 


: Bahl ~~. 
aeade 


£ 


. 4 e : 
ee toe eS 


bios bee JAMES. 29 
; (x . draws a comparifon between the defiruction of the world Ana. 1605, 
s ae 5 * by water, the falvation of Noah, the deftruction of the 
ge world by fire, and the falvation of thé faithful, with his - 
+s @wn dangers and efcapes in the Gowrie and gun-powder 
Row ?.1° conipiracies: _ He diftinguithes the general forts of death 
US (yar which mankind may fuffer.. “ For by three different. 
ra forts | in general may ‘mankind be put to death, The 
fi 


ae firlt, by other men and reafonable creatures, which is 
eof |, leat cruel; for then’ both defence of men againft men 
Seas BS may be .expected, and likewife who knows what pity 
oo _  Godimay ftir up inj the hearts: of the actors at the very 
aaa inftant, befides the many ways and means whereby men 
f ‘« maiay, efcape in fuch a prefent fury. And the fecond way, 
. ea more cruel than that,is by animal. and. unreafonable 
‘hi a creatures ; forvas they have lefs pity than men, fo it is a 
greater horror, and more unnatural for men to deal with 
- at hae them ; but yet, with them both refiftance may avail, and 
m:. alfo fome pity may be had, as was,in the lions, in whole 
den Daniel was thrown, or. that thankful lion that had 
the Roman flave in his mercy. But the third, the moft 
ae cruel and unmerciful of all, is the deftruétion by infen- 
He fible and inanimate things; and amongitt them all, the 
ns moft cruel are the two-clements of water and fire, and 
\ Coy of thofe two the fire is the moft mercilefs.. When the 
—_---Tetter was fhewed to. me by my fecretary, wherein a ge- 
* eral obfcure: advertifement was given of fome danger- 
~ ous blow at this time, I did upon the inftant interpret 
and apprehend fome dark phrafes therein, contrary to 
the ordinary grammar conftruction of them ; and (in 
her fort than I am fure any divine or lawycr in any 
verfity would have taken them) to be meant by this 
” 


He rrible. form of blowing us all up by powder; and 
thereupon: 


° OF de 


dann. 1605. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


thereupon ordered that fearch to be made, whereby the 
matter was difcovered, and the man apprehended. It 
refteth now thatI fhould inform you what is to be done 
hereafter upon the occafion of this horrible accident. As 
for your parts, that are my faithful and loving fubjects 
of all degrees, I know that-your hearts are fo burnt up 


with zeal in this errand, and your tongues fo ready to- 


utter your dutiful affection, and your hands and feet fo 


bent to concur in the execution thereof (for which, as 1 
“need not to {pur you, fo can I not but praife you for the 


fame) as it may very well be poffible, that the zeal of 
your hearts may make fome of you in your fpeeches 
rafhly to blame fuch as may be innocent of the attempt.” 
He then excufes the Papifts in general, and fays, “ That 
many Papifts laying their only truft upon Chrift and his 
merits, at their laft breath, may and oftentimes are faved ; 


detefting in that point, and thinking the cruelty of the 


Puritans worthy of fire, that will admit no falvation to 
the Papifts.”. He charges them “ not to think that any 
foreign princes had a hand in the plot, but to fpeak and 
think of them reverently.” 


In the conclufion of this long fpeech are inftructions 
to the parliament of the nature of their office; that 
they are not to be too bufy in propofing new laws, but 
to confult on thofe which are propofed by the King; that 
they fhould be wary of propofing novelties, but moft of 
all not to propofe any bitter or feditious laws *. | 


* James makes a kind of apology for not having before ant a 
formed the office of a tutor to the parliament. ‘ It could not,” 


he, “* be poffible for me, at my firft entry here, before = Saul 
taught it me, to be able to underftand the _ perieae — eiree 


fo © 8M iE 63 oT 


till Tuefday, 21ft of January, the King rofe again, and 
fhewed the reafons for his nominating that day for the 
- next meeting. “ Since it pleafed God, faid he, to deli- 
ver me upon one day of the week, which was Tuefday, 
and likewife on one day of the month, which was the 
fifth, thereby to teach me, that as it was the fame devil 
that perfecuted me, fo it was the fame God that ftill 
mightily delivered me; I thought it therefore not amifs. 
that the one and twentieth day of January, which falls 
to be upon Tuefday, fhould be the day of this meeting 


“of next feflions of parliament.” 


THe King’s {peech was much applauded by the cour- 
tiers, who found out greatnefs of foul in the expreflions- 


of moderation towards the Papifts. The generality of 
the people were of a-different opinion; they confidered 


_ it as the proofs of an incurable tendernefs to the Roman 
Catholics, and looked with horror and refentment on the 


uncharitable condemnation of the Puritans to fire, for 
Neither’ 


an opinion which had_no relation to the ftate. 


of thefe afligned motives were the real ones that actuated 
James in this. declaration: He was at this time cajoled 
by Spain. with the hopes of a family-alliance, attended 


+ fate. Yet now that I have reigned almoft. three years amongtt you, 
and. have been careful to obferve thofe things that belong to the of- 
fice of a King; albeit that time be but a thort time for experience in 


Bi sothers, yet ina King may it be thought a reafonable long time, efpe- 


cially in me, who, altho’ I be but in a manner a new King here, yet 
ve been long acquainted with the office of a King in fuch another 
as doth neareft of all others agree with the Jaws and cuftoms 


with: 


oF 


_Arrer the chancellor had prorogued the parliament Ann. cm 


se HISTORY OF ENGLAND. ° 
Am. 160. with thefe flattering conditions: That he was to be made 


Winwood’s 


Memorials, the arbiter of all the religious differences in Europe; 
766, wicg that a large part of Flanders, and a yearly penfion of a 
amillion of ducats, were to be the portion of the in- 
fanta ; and that a reddition of fuch towns as he fhould 
demand were to be the fecurity. He, on his fide, was to 
aflift Spain againft the States General. Hence proceeded 
the cautious handling of the Papifts; hence the charge 
to the Commons to think and fpeak reverently of fo- 
reign princes: and hence proceeded many proclamations 
to prevent the public from fufpecting that the confpira- 
tors had been promifed afliftance from fuch powers. 
Nor were thefe all the fleps that James took to reconcile 
the Spaniards to his conduct. - Many Roman Catholics, 
who had taken up arms in Warwickfhire in defence of 
the confpirators, were left: unprofecuted, and an excufe 
_fent to Spain for the fine and. imprifonment of the earl 
of Northumberland *. . 4 
Re-meeting Own the re-meeting of the parliament, the heinoufnefs 
ofparliament. Of the late confpiracy was the firft confideration that en-_ . 
gaged the attention of both houfes: Some of the Com- 
mons propofed that the’ prifoners might be tried before 
the King and parliament; others were for bringing in 
- a bill to enact a more rigorous punifhment than the . : 
law ordained. Both thefe motions were dropped, and ; 
the proceedihgs againft them took their due courfe. The 
Beit of their refentment was an act which. ordained an 


se ie i al ne eee 


“* James gave leave to count it Arundel of: ‘Warttoutyis aie sead- . 
ment of fifteen hundred Englith, and to the earl of Hume to-raife 
another of a thoufand Scots for the fervice of the arch-duke, _ makes 
vol. lil. p. me: 


Pi “ 


ference was now proceeded on. 


Jo4M, EB $51 


annual thankfgiving on the fifth of November; and two Ans. 1605 
. fevere ones againft the body of Papifts, entitled, “ An 

act for difcovering and reprefling Popith recufants; and 

an act to prevent dangers which may grow by Popifh 


recufants.” Thefe ftatutes are yet in force. 


Tue bufinefs of a fapply brought on the demand for 


redrefs of grievances. The King, who heard that the 
Commons were about ecclefiaftical abufes, was deter- 
mined to be before-hand with them, and a meflage was 
delivered to the Lords by the archbifhop of Canterbury 


concerning the abufes of excommunication, with this pro- 


vifo: “ Tho his majefty doth defire that the faid jurifdic- 
tion eclefiaftick may be maintained and upholden in all 
refpects as it is fit.” A meflage from the Commons de- 
fired a conference on thefe articles: The filencing of mi- 
nifters, the multiplicity of ecclefiaftical commiflions, the 
manner of citations, and the point of excommunication. 
The Lords did not anfwer the meflage till fome time after, 
when the Commons were told that they had appointed a 
committee for the conference. Prerogative royal had been 
fo zealoufly maintained in the upper houfe, in a debate 


whether they fhould agree or not to the defired confer- 
ence, that the King fent thanks to all the Lords in general 
The bufinefs of the con- 


for their regard to his power. 
The bifhops were of the 


committee for the Lords, and the affair was determined 
_ according to the fenfe of the King’s meflage. 


eu ‘Tuts point gained, new difficulties arofe. The nui- 


fance of purveyorfhip, and the iniquity of the officers, 
hes ere th a the Commons, that the 
miniftry 


st 


ah: * 
- “Deg Seat We 4 
f : 


33 


é eg 


- ‘ 
gt Mh 


: 34 ; HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


gh ‘Ann. 1605. Mainiftry were confounded, and faid that they would 

ee iy fae join in chafing out purveyors *; but intreated an imme- 
i diate fupply to the King’s necetiees +. A bill for three 
fubfidies and fix fifteenths went on heavily in the lower 
houfe ; the redrefs of grievances was thought very ne- 
ceflary to precede fo large a grant. Thefe were enume- 
rated, and the amount was fo vaft, that James faid 
peevifhly, “ They had fent an O yes through the nation 
to et them.” 


_ Report of the In the heat of the debate, an alarm of the King’s | 
King’sdeath- heing murdered at Oking threw the whole town in con- 
fufion. The citizens were put under arms, and prepa- 


-* Thefe men, by the licence of their office, which was to purvey for 
the King’s houfhold, preffed into their fervice all kind of wheel-car- 
riages and vehicles, in times of the greateft bufinefs, and by fuch means 
extorted money for refpites. T'wo atts to redrefs this grievance pafled 

- the houfe of Commons, but were rejeéted by the Lords. 


+ Sir Thomas Ridgeway was one of the moft zealous members in 
this bufinefs. After having expatiated on the bleffings the ifland en- 
joyed under the prefent government, he enumerated the charges the 
King had fuftained fince his acceffion to the throne; and added, that 
the commonwealth was obliged to lighten the burden ; for, as Mofes. 
faid, How can he alone bear their ftrifes and incumbrances? ~Par/, 
Hift. vol. V. p. 147. 


' James at this time maintained, at a great charge, an ambaflador or 
refident in almoft every court in Europe; his domeftic expences ran 
high ; fome of the mafks that the queen gave coft 30001. James had: 
fcattered his favours with a childifh profufion; and the Commons. 
plainly faw, in enumerating the reafons of his neceffity, that thefe 
caufes might have been avoided. Mr. Holt obferved, that a fubfidy 
was a public contribution, not to be applied to private ules; bounties, 
expences, ceremonies, and the like, Winwood’s ni vale II. 
Pp. 41. > 


35 


JQIMIMVE Bs A. 
The frighted. members Am, 1605." 


l rations made againft a fiege. 
| fent meflage after meflage to the council, to know the _ 
f : truth of the various reports; in a little time they be- - 
. came lefs ftrong, then doubtful, and in fome hours 
‘ James fent word that he intended being in London that 
‘s day. Whilft the minds of men were yet agitated by | 
Wes the double furprize, whilft the tide of affection ran yet 

= tae high on account of the fuppofed accident, the courtiers — 
puthed the fupply fo ftrongly and fo warmly, that not- 
withftanding all that the clear-fighted members could 
do, they carried the motion. The next day, when time 
and reflection had abated over-heated loyalty, the out- 
witted party began to confider of the largenefs of their 
generofity; and fome of the members moved that it 
fhould not pafs till the heavy grievances of the nation 
were redrefled. The courtiers over-ruled this, and the 
bill was fent up to the houfe of Lords, where it met Subfdies 
with a quick and eafy aflent. Nor did the gratification parliament. 
which James enjoyed from the report terminate here 
He was received at Hyde-park by the fpeaker and four 
-members of the houfe of Commons; the city paid him 
the fame compliment ; ; whilft the eafy vulgar were un- 


he . 
' re bounded in their extafies. 


THE union was again brought before the houfes, and par, nia. 
a bill paffed as ineffectual as the former. The Commons 
were in fo little temper for fuch a compliance, that the 
‘country-party in the houfe had drawn up a lift of the 
grievances of church and ftate, and brifkly prefented it, 
while the bill of fupply was pafling the Lords. The 
ei which the fubjeét fuffered from purveyorfhip 


ag was again argued in the houfe, with propofals for taking 
ern 1a ae away 


36 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


_ Ann, 1606, away the arbitrary power of the green-cloth. This drew 


Parliament 


prorogued. . 


ay. 


a meflage from the King, in which he affured them of 
a reformation in this article, and that the fubjeét fhould 
not be brought before the green-cloth, but before the 
juftice-feat: One Parker preached a fermon at St. Paul’s, 
where he abufed the houfe of Commons in the groffeft 
terms for irregular proceedings: he was protected by 
the King, under a promife of correction. This affair 
would have gone farther, if the parliament had not been 
prorogued fuddenly *. 


* Adts paffed this feffion. 


t. An act for an annual thankfgiving on the fifth day of November. 

2. An act for the attainder of divers offenders in the late moft bar- 
barous, monftrous, deteftable, aad damnable treafons. 

3. An act declaratory, explaining the branch of an act authorizing 
certain commiffioners of the realm of England to treat with the com- 
miffioners of Scotland. 

Hie An act for the better difcovering and reprefling of Popifh recu- 
ts. 

5- An act to prevent and avoid dangers which may grow by Popifh 
recufants. 

6. An att to enable his majefty’s fubjeéts of England and Wales to 
trade freely into the dominions of Spain, Portugal, and France. 

7. An act to reform the multitudes and mifdemeanors of attornies 
and folicitors at law. 

8. An aé to avoid unnecefiary delays of executions. | 

9. An at for the relief of fuch as lawfully ufe the trade and handi- 
craft of fkinners. 

10. An act for the rating and levying of the charges for conveying, 
malefactors and offenders to jail. 

11. An act for tranfportation of beer over the feas. 

12. An act for the better prefervation of fea-fith. 

13. An aét againft the unlawful hunting and base of deer au 
conies, . 

14. An att for explanation of the ftatute of fewers. 


ne ‘ 


3 _ s 


Hi sae , Fo Ms 8 Bork, } ay 


Tue friendly difpofition of the Englifh towards the Ann. 1605. 
Dutch occafioned fuch a coldnefs in the Spanifh monarch, | 
that James had reafon to be convinced that he fhould 
enjoy little reality from the glorious offers of that court. 

_ Either through indolence, or want of courage, he was 
fo far from executing his part of the conditions, viz. an 
affiftance againft the States, that be did not prevent his 


Primes. fubjects from inlifting under their banners. The Spa- winwood’s 
Beye. _ niard, defpairing to roufe, the ina¢tivity of his Englith penreerett 


es, ally, and refenting the aid that the United Provinces re- 
Bi ceived from his fubjects, affected to treat him with the 270°? 
hi - utmoft contempt. Cornwallis, the Englifh refident at ™"J*™* 
_ the Spanith court, was told that James had fo entirely 


WG Kae 15. An act for the recovering of {mall debts, and for the relieving 
hearte __ of poor debtors-in London. 
16. An act for the repealing an act made in the fourteenth year of 
Elizabeth’s reign, concerning the length of kerfies. 
pee 17+ An act concerning Welfh cottons. 
‘hin 18. An act for the bringing in of a frefh ftream of running water to 
Neat. the north part of the city of London. 
iy 19. An act concerhing the repairing and impor nage the highway 
Qe leading from Kenfington to Nontuch. 
ii ae E 20. An act how paflage may be made by water from London to 
‘4 Oxford. 
A ei. Auabtied’ refrain the sbules of players. 
_22. An att for the paving of Drury-lane and the town of St. Giles’s 
in ‘the Fields, 
23. An act for repairing. of Chepftowe-bridge, 

24, An aét concerning the bridge over the Severn. 
____ 2g, An aé containing a confirmation of four fubfidies of four fhil- 

ph fe lings in the pound granted to the King by the clergy. 

_ 26. An act granting three entire fubfidies and fix ical granted 
‘ihe kien by the temporality. 

» An act containing a confirmation of the King’s Secasl aie, free 
» with exceptions, Vid. Statutes at Large. 


/ " Po a 7 ; lof& 
fm 3: ae! x 


Leh 4") 1 
1 


= 


‘ 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 


Aan, 1605. loft the hearts of his fubjects, that he had ‘no influence 


over them, and therefore his friendfhip was of little con- 
fequence. Several confpirators who had been engaged in 
the gun-powder plot, now under the protection of the 
King of Spain, were refufed to be given up, and the Eng- 
lifh merchants were perfecuted by the inquifition, on pre- 
tence of retaliation for the fufferings of the Papifts in Eng- 
land *. Notwithftanding thefe infults he did not forbid all 


* Sir Charles Cornwallis, James’s refident in Spain, was at this time 
treated with infolence and inhumanity. See the following letter from 
him on this fubjeé&t to the lords of the privy-council. . 


«« May it pleafe your lordfhips, Madrid, 9 April, 1607, O. S. 

“ Upon the fixth of this prefent I received your lordfhips’ of the 
third of the laft month, together with a letter from his majefty to the 
king here, in relief of Andrew Thibault. Yefterday I had a meflage 
from the king, that this morning about nine of the clock I fhould 
have accefs unto him: I obferved that hour, but was not obferved 
with; for I ftayed till after twelve of the clock, in a little bafe form, 
fuch as I think there are few in the King my matter’s fcullery, which 
are not furnifhed with much better, unaccompanied and unattended 
(as ambaffadors are in England) but left to walk alone, or take my 
feat in the form, when wearinefs fhould enforce me. Yet much fa- 
voured had I been if the poor form had been left me; but one of the 
king’s chamber, either out of want of courtefy and refpect, or of wit 
and good will, caufed my form to be taken away, and carried. into 
the next chamber ; fo as then, for the fpace of one whole hour, I was 
enforced to hold me to my walk; which had been much lefs grievous 
unto me if either the place had been more fpacious, or myfelf as. able 
(as accuftomably I am) to have endured it: but having through dif- 


temper, and much grief in my fpleen, not flept above two hours in 
two nights before, which, had not his majefty’s fervice drawn me out, _ 


would rather have moved me to have kept my bed, than give fo long 
attendance upon a bare pavement in court, together with fo long faft- 
ing, I became exceeding faint, and grieved not a little at fo unrefpec 
five an ufage.” Winwood’s Memorials, vol. I. p. 299. 


~ . 
eS 


64 »-2 


Parliament. —— Prorogation, ———= Affairs of Holland. 


OA NS BoB ok 


39° 


oie of alliance; and James ftill tebe himfelf with Aan. 1606. 


that fantattical delufion, winked at oppreffions, which a 
warlike ‘motion would have entirely put an end to. 


‘es VISIT 7 fram the king of Denmark and the prince 


-Vaudemont, another relation of the queen, helped to 


diffipate the large grants which the King had received 
laft feflions. One continued round of magnificent 
-thews and expenfive amufements filled up the barren 


tranfactions of his court *. 


sak: Ga tie aaa: 
Re- 


Death of the king of France. 
Affairs of 


meeting of parliament. 
Prorogation and diffolution of the pees 


* Scotland. 
ops nation appeared to enjoy a perfect calm; the 

dazzling glitter of the court, whilft it diflipated re- 
fleétion, confounded the fenfe of evil with the allure- 


ment of pleafure; and private grievances were forgot 
in the enjoyment of public amufements. James, wan- 


Vino | find among the manufcripts i in the Britifh Mufeum a letter of 
James to the town of Shrewfbury, recommending Thomas Unton to 
be town-clerk. The corporation of Shrewfbury excufed themfelves 
from complying with this requeft, and petitioned to be left to the free 


exercife of their privileges by charter.. Some time after this, James 
ied in the fame manner to the city of Chefter, in favour of Mr. 


waring to be recorder ; this city, in their anfwer to the King, 
ed the example which had been fet them by the town of Shrewd- 


MSS in the Br. Mufeum, fol. 384, number 2105. 
toning 


40 


Parliament. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Aan, 1606. ‘toning’ in the moft lavith prodigality, would have expe- 
_Fienced the full meafure of happinefs, had he effected 


his darling plan of an union, This event he looked 
on as one of the moft important advantages of his ac- 
ceflion ; and an epocha which would ftrongly mark the 
luftre of his reign; nor did he ever fufpect that his in- 
genuity and eloquence would be baffled in one of the 
moft rational fchemes he had ever projeéted, or that ple- 
beian powers could withftand kingly force and kingly 
wifdom ; befides, the late generofity of the Commons 
had taught him, that if that formidable aflembly was 
difficult of conviction, they were liable to be over-reached 
by the low cunning of court-politics. The next feffions 
he hoped would bring the affair to a favourable iffue; 
and on the eighteenth of November, the day to which 
the parliament had been prorogued, he made a fpeech 
to that effect *. Sir Francis Bacon employed all his 


* In this Speech James admonifhes the parliament to be upon their 
good behaviour: He tells them, That as individuals they are fubjeé& 
to the power of their fovercign; warns them, that their office is not 
perpetual, and compares the diffolution of a parliament to the death of 
kings, who, after the expiration of their reigns with their lives, muft 
give an account of their aétions. ‘“ Beware, adds he, that ye be not 
like Icarus the fon-of Daedalus, that foared fo near the fun with his 
wings of wax, that his wax melted, and his wings failed, and down he 
fell; and therefore I conclude with Neptune in Virgil, Sed motos praftat 
componere fluéius. 1 wifh ye would know me, and obferve me; and if 
any plebeian tribunes fhould incur any offence, or commit any fuch 
errors, that ye would correét them for it, and judge yourfelves, as St. 


Paul faith, that ye be not judged; and that .the whole body receive _ 


not a wound for one ill member thereof.” After having affailed the 
parliament with many importunities concerning the union, he told 
them, that he defired no more than what he had power of himfelf to 


aecomplifh without them. Journals of the Commons, vol. I. p. 314, 


& feq. 


Jo oMO BS ct: 


powers to the fame purpofe; and, in order to foften the Ana. 1606. 


‘members, fome trifling conceflions were made on a few 


of the leaft important articles in the lift of grievances 


offered the laft feffions: but neither could the keennefs 
of the monarch, the favour of his conceflions, nor the 
eloquence of his fervant, Sir Francis Bacon, prevail over 
the determined refolution of the Commons; nor were 


the Lords extremely forward to fhew that devotion which . 


had ever been proof againft the arguments of public 
good. National animofity and perfonal jealoufy now fo 
_ far prevailed, that after many fruitlefs meflages, and as 
fruitlefs conferences, the only point determined was an 
aé for the utter abolition of all memory of hoftilities 
between the two nations; and for reprefling the occafion 
of difcord for the time to come *. James, impatient at 
thefe delays, called together the two houfes at White- 
hall +, where he laboured to-convince them of the utility 


* The Commons thought fit to gratify the King by imprifoning one 
of their members, Sir Chriftopher Pigott, and difmifling him from the 
houfe, for having inveighed with great intemperatenefs againft the 
Scots in a debate on the union. Yournals of the Commons, vol. I. p. 335. 


+ In the fpeech the King made on this occafion, he gives a remark- 
able detail of the extent of his authority in the Scotch government ; 
it is in anfwer to an objection made by the oppofition on the different 
privileges claimed by the Scotch and Englith fubjeéts. “ The Scots, 
fays he, in their pretence to a preferving their own fundamental laws, 
only mean thofe laws by which confufion is avoided, and their King’s 

fucceffion and monarchy maintained; not the common law as you do, 
for the Scots have no law but that which is jus regis.” He boatts, 
that he governs Scotland with his pen; that he does more by a clerk 
of the council than others could do by the fword; that no man there 
s to {peak difhonourably of England, as the Englifh have done of 
tland, for the authority of the chancellor would interrupt him. To 


that had been ftarted, that the king of Scotland had 
G not 


4t 


42 


“HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1606. of the union, and the error of their proceedings ; men- 


tioned a proclamation he had made by the opinion of 
the judges, to naturalize thofe Scotch fubjects born after 
his acceflion, and charges them not to difgrace: either 
his proclamation or his judges; who, when the parlia- 
ment was done, had authority to try their lands and lives: 
laftly, he warned them to think of his power, and not 
to tempt his patience. The important confequences 


which muft attend an incorporation of the two nations 


more than balanced the King’s rhetoric, and deterred 


the parliament from attempting it at a time when his | 


partiality, and the pretenfions of the Scots, forbade all 
hopes of its being done on advantageous or even e483 
ble terms. 


Tue. mortification which the difappointment occafioned 
to James was confiderable; the conviction of his own 
abilities, and the flattery he had met with on his accef- 
fion, made him look on every attempt to be within the 
reach of his powers. He had gone farther in this than 
his prerogative could fecure; its proving abortive would 


make even. his Scotch fubjects look upon his influence . 


in England with contempt, He had mixed entreaty with 
threats, and had condefcended to beg the parliament to 
fave him the difgrace of being fruftrated: his refent- 
ment made him conceive a contempt and averfion for 
thefe affemblies, which continued all the remaining Par 


not a negative voice, but muft pafs the Leb aapned nda s 


and Commons, he affures them, that the form of the Scotch parlia- 
ment is fo little inclined to popularity, that all bills to be exhibited on 


a feffion muft be approved by she Ries Cofineishnaty be propounded b-F 


4 


JOM Mgb Beck 


in their opinion of majefty: James’s mean mif-reprefen- 
tations, his verbal aflurances, his impotent menaces, 
and barren arguments, while they expofed the fhallow- 
nefs of the. modern Solomon, unveiled prerogative itfelf. 
The Commons now with curious eyes looked on a divi- 
nity which they had been taught to worfhip blindly. 
On canvafling its pretenfions, they found them not only 
deftructive to the conflitution, but irreconcileable to every 
rational principle; and that the laws were weak barriers 
againft its unlimited force. Among the many bitter 
things which had been faid during the late conteft, the 
inconvenience of royal refidence was fo often hinted at, 
that James actually offered the parliament to {pend his 
years alternately in Scotland and England, or to remove 
his court to York. The Commons intended to defire’ 
him in an addrefs not to liften to reports, but learn 


the fenfe of the houfe from the {peaker; the King was 


apprized of their intention, and pacified them by a 
meflage importing, “ That he was extremely tender 
of their privileges, and that every member might {peak 
freely, though with modefty and difcretion.” Not be 


ing able to attain the ends for which he permitted the 
parliament to meet, on the fourth of July he pro- neuen 


mare them to oie fixteenth of November *. A pe- 
* Acts pafied this feffion. 


Zo An ag for the utter abolition of all memory of hoftilities, and 
the dependance thereof, between England and Scotland, and for the 


i reprefling the occafions of difcord and diforders for the time to come. 


2, An act for the true ‘making of woollen-cloth. 
» An ad to give ‘colts to the defendant upon a non-fuit of the 


4. An 


G2 


of his reign ; nor were thefe affemblies more favourable Aan. 1607 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


44 
asaesh tition was prefented to the Commons this feflion on the 


_ 4 An ac& to reftrain the utterance ail beer to alehoufe-ke not 
nfed. 


5. An att for repreffing drunkennefs. 

’ 6. An att for repealing one branch of a ftatute concerning tanners. 

' 7. An act for the founding and yiadieg 2 of a free pagent 
fchool in the town of North Leech. 

8. An act touching the drowned marfhes of Lefnes and Fants in the 
county of Kent, 

g. An act to explain a former act entitled, An aét to enable all his 
majefty’s loving fubjects of England and Wales to trade freely into the 
dominion of Spain, Portugal, and France. 

- 10. An act for confirmation of fome part of a charter granted to the 
mayor, &c. of the town of Southampton. 

at. An att for the better provifion of pafture for neceflary mainte- 
nance of hufbandry, &c. 

- 42. An att for the explanation of a ftatute entitled, An act for the 
bringing in of a freth ftream of water to the North parts of the city of 
London. 

13. An act for the draining of certain fens and low grounds in the 
ifle of Ely. 

14. An aé& for the better execution of juftice in the North part of 
the kingdom of England. 

- 15. An act that all fuch as are to be naturalized or reftored in blood 
fhall receive the facrament and then the oath of allegiance. 

16. An aét concerning the employment of money given for the bind- 
ing out of apprentices. 


bs 17. An act for the due execution of divers laws concerning beggars, 
Ce 

18. An act for oe: in pleading fuits profecuted againft juftices, &c.. 

1g. An act for adminiftring the oath of allegiance and reformation 
to married women recufants. 

zo. An act concerning the punifhing of fraud in the wont ‘manu 
facture. 

ai. An’ act ‘to enlarge an att conceming the Reeping of | 
kine, &c. Sb aon ro 


22. An aé& concerning the bringing ce a wi 
- Chelfea-College. a 


—— 


Jk MER Be 


hardfhips inflicted on the Englith merchants by the Spa- Ann. 
niards *. The ing paged took it am that the parlia- * 


23. An act for Sésinetion of alehoufe keepers, . 
24. An aét concerning the prefervation of game. 
25. An act to avoid the double payment of debts. 
26. An act for the explanation of a ftatute concerning game 
- 27. An att for reviving of part of an act concerning the horn trade. 
28, An act concerning fome manner of aflignment of debts to his 


majefty. 
29. An aét concerning the encouragement of poor people employed 
f in the manufacture of coarfe cottons. 
ae. go. An act concerning the burning of Ling-heath, &c. 
gt. An act’concerning the conveyance of fea-fand. 
et 32. An aét for the reparation of a weare on the river Exe. 
ahs * An act concerning the recovery of marfh grounds in the coun- 


33: 
_. ties of Norfolk and Suffolk, overflowed by the fea. 
34. An act concerning the confirmation of decrees to be made in the 


X exchequer-chamber, &c. 
35- An act for a confirmation of a fubfidy granted by the clergy. 
36. An act for one fubfidy and one fifteenth granted by the tem- 


> porality, 

: . 37. An act for a confirmation of the King’s general and free pardon. 
et) Vide Statutes at Large. . 

Tas __ * Many petitions of this fort had been before prefented to the King 
eo, without effect. Thefe hardfhips are mentioned in feveral letters from 
“ie Sir Charles Cornwallis, the refident in Spain, to the earl of Salifbury. 
«« If fome better courfe, writes he in one of thofe letters, be not in- 
_ ftantly taken, I fee no reafon why his majefty fhould fuffer his fubjeéts 
to continue their traffic hither, fo much to their lofs and peril. Occa- 
fion to call all to new queftion will arife out of the cruelty of don Luys 
aye Fyrardo to the merchants taken in the Indies ; fince in the articles there 
fm). is contained no {pecial prohibition. And fure I am, that his majefty 
MG ‘ will not think it for his honour to give fo much way to the Spanifh 
3 _. pride as to confent to deprive his fubjeéts to trade thither. I make no 
doubt but his majefty-will not only require fatisfaction for the lives 
of his fubjects, there flain by Fyrardo, but for the liberty and refti- 
ution © oe. to thofe that remain in their gallies and other ee 
pon 


“Ana. 1607. 


Anr. 1609. 


Affairs o 
Holland. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


ment fhould be petitioned on a fubject within the parti- 


‘cular province of the King and council ; and the Lords 


refufed to concur in proceeding upon it. The remain- 
der of this year and the following is barren of all me- 
morable events. 


'TueE year 1609 is notable for the prevailing influence 
of liberty. The republic of Holland, animated with 


Upon this will arife the queftion (and may be raifed and now war- 
ranted with fafety) of a trade thither by our merchants, till fome 
farther conclufion be had between the two kings. That themfelves 
fhall fend any fleet to difturb them, either this year or the next (if 
the Hollanders continue the courfe they have begun) I fee little or 
no poffibility ; if they here want their treafure from thence, they are 
neither able to maintain their wars abroad, nor themfelves at home. 
If their people there want their neceffaries from hence, neceflity will 
enforce them to caft themfelves into any arms that will fupply them 
by trading with them. To write all I would about this fubjec& would 
exceed all proportion of a letter: to be fhort, their eftates, were they 
now well fet upon, is irrevocable; this peace being an impediment 
to the greateft- advantage and means to enrich our King and. realm 
that in any age hath ever been offered. *”  Winwood’s Memorials, vol. I. 
p. 235) & fey. 

To the merchants petition on the occafion of the wrongs they had 
received from the Spaniards, were fubjoined juft caufes and reafons for 
enabling by law the fubjects of England, by way of letters of mart, 


to recover the damages they had received from this people. Thefe 


reafons. are founded upon the iniquitous proceedings of the Spanifh 
courts of confifcation, where the fame perfon was commonly both 
judge and party, and the Englith were frequently put to the torture to 
make difcovery. They take notice likewife, that it was a common 
praétice with the Spaniards to join themfelves with the Maltefe, who 


were not then in friendfhip with England, and thereby entrap the Eng- 


lifh, and that under pretence of the pope’s prohibiting all commerce 
with infidels, the nol valble techs of hei Lert nd Tak 
trade had been ruined. a eae p66 EPR 


Spars EF 8 dh 


its virtue, from fmall beginnings, had become the afto- Ana. 1609 
nifhment of. mankind; and now, having vanquifhed 
her tyrannical mafter in almoft every quarter of the 
globe, the obliged him to yield his arbitrary pretenfions, 


and declare her independent. The pride of Spain long 
ftruggled before it would give up the point ; after a te- 
dious negotiation, a truce of twelve years was conclud- 
ed, under the mediation of the kings of France and 
England. Henry had fent to offer -his affiftance, and 
James was complimented with the fame diftinction *. 
Cecil, who managed the part that James acted, was on 
one fide fhackled by his mafter’s extreme fear of incur- 
ring the neceflity of making war, his coldnefs to the 
Dutch, whom he termed rebels, his cautioufnefs. of dif- 
obliging Spain; and, on the other fide, by the warm 
inclination of the Englifh fubjeéts towards the States. 
His conduct, influenced by thefe contrarieties, was fo 
lukewarm, that the fear and jealoufy of the Dutch was 
much inflamed by the management practifed with 


Spain, and Spain refented the protection which the 


Dutch, during the courfe of the mediation, were promifed 


* James was afraid of being entirely left out of this bufinefs: He 
fent feveral reprimands to the States for not having confulted him con- 
cerning their intention of a treaty with Spain. To the court of Spain 
‘he intimated, that if they had employed him as a mediator, they 
‘would not have been obliged to have condefcended to the difgraceful 
Winwood's 


terms of yielding their claim of fovereignty over the States. 
The States paid James the compliment he de- 


Memorials, vol. Il. 

“manded with fome reluétance: He had peremptorily refufed to enter 
into a defenfive alliance with France for their protection, and they were 
“well acquainted with the weak attachment which he at this time enter- 


wens “i egie inveterate enemies the Spaniards. 
from 


hi # 


47 


- 


48 
Ana. 1609 from» England *; who, though they were not affifted fo 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


vigoroufly by this power as they ought to have me 


a! James was fo mean as to make ufe of the following arguments to 
pacify the king of Spain. « If it be confidered, writes Salifbury to 


‘Cornwallis, what power his majefty had and hath ftill to crofs this 


treaty now on foot (how far onwards foever it may be taken to be) if 
he would but promite any underhand affiftance to the States, where- 
unto he is often folicited by them, and to whom he fhould give fatif- 
faction if he would but have permitted the French king to have paid 
fome money of his own debts; or if his majefty’s proceeding be but 


. looked into, how temperately he hath carried himfelf therein more 
than others, becaufe he would not give the States any caufe to infift - 


upon any exorbitant conditions in the treaty, infomuch as (I do affure 


" . you) the matter is not yet brought to any final conclufion; of which 


his majefty’s flownefs, thofe that feek to draw a ftrait obligation and 
dependency from the States unto them, ceafe not to make the beft 
ufe they can, comparing their readinefs with -his majefty’s coldnefs.. 
It will appear, if the audit be well caft up, that his majefty deferveth 
better at the king of Spain’s and archduke’s hands, in real and effen- 
tial friendfhip, than he is requited, unlefs they would have left the 
king obnoxious to all the world’s cenfure, and particularly to the 
States’ fufpicion, not only to have refufed any manner of affiftance 
openly or covertly, mediately or immediately, for the war, but to have 
petfuaded peace and truft, and yet have refufed this contract, which 
is of no validity, except peace be made and after broken. And for 
the argument itfelf, of the perpetual friendfhip, you may fay that the 


States’ peace with Spain being likewife perpetual (as it is pretended) — 


can give no prejudice unto it, unlefs they will give it in furmife that 
they intend not to keep the fame, and therefore would have us defift 
from any fuch league with the States. In which particular, as they 
will open themfelves unto you, fo his majefty will conform himfelf ac- 


' cordingly. 


“« Moreover, I muft let you know what ftrange Judgment the world 
doth make of that public reception and fupport given to Mg tk om 


others at Milan, contrary to the king of Spain’s proteftation, both 
livered unto you, and here confirmed if own ambaffador he 


mai» That the King weld. wc, alts sh ae a 


‘infurrection in Ireland. 
_ In another letter Salifbury dilates farther on the fubject of excufing, 


Te Me ke 


be attributed abe. terms they got from Spain, and the 


whereas now the world fees that they are publicly received 


nions ; 

-feafted, and entertained at Milan, with money given them by his pub- 
lic minifter there: In which particular you may reprefent unto the 
. King, what hazard his word and faith runneth in the opinion of others’ 
judgment, though his majetty fufpendeth his own, and what {mall re- 


tribution he giveth to the King our mafter, in thofe and all other his 
moft honourable proceedings towards him. 

« Laftly, if you fhall hear it fpoken of there that the King our ma- 
fter continueth any difburfements to the States, by way of afliftance 
unto them, under the payments which the French king doth yearly af- 
ford unto them, you may confidently affirm (for fo his majefty doth 


take it upon his honour, and I myfelf know it to be true) that his ma- 


jefty never affented to any fuch courfe (fince his peace was concluded 
with Spain) but hath ftill protefted againft it to the French king and 
his minifters, that he would not ftand to any fuch difburfements ; fo 
that if the French ambaffador there fhould inform any fuch matter, you 
may publicly proteft, that the King our mafter does utterly difavow it. 
True it is, that the chief financer de Rofny hath ftill gone about to urge 
it upon our decompts, but his majefty hath from time to time difclaimed 
againft it; fo as this is rather to be accounted a bravery of the financers, 
than a matter in which the French king will truly avow him.” Wn- 


woods Memorials, vol. II. p. 402, & feg. 


On James’s acceffion, there remained a debt due from the French 
king to the crown of England of money which had been advanced by 


Elizabeth. This debt Henry the Fourth wanted to pay on James’s 


account, to the fupport of the States: James always peremptorily re- 
fufed this, on pretence that it would be a breach of his treaty with 


Spain. 

At this period that James was thus meanly courting the good graces 
of the court of Spain, the earls of Tyrone and Tyrconnel, and a great 
number of Britifh and Irith rebels, were received and maintained in 
the Spanifh dominions; and they openly avowed a defign of making an 


«¢ When we 


‘to he court of Spain, James’s conduct in this bufinels. 
od, writes he, that the States (finding themfelves abandoned 
ry | of 


49 


yet to ‘its -perfeverance. in not abandoning them, may Ann, 1609. 


5 


HIST-ORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ana, 1609. being acknowledged a sii flate = all other po- 


tentates *, 


of their expectation for affiftance in the war, were unwilling to proceed 
farther into the peace, unlefs they might have fome kind of warrant 
and affurance from their neighbour princes, whereon they might rely 
im cafe that conditions afterwards fhould not be kept with them) had 
made inftance for a league defenfive, to be made betwixt his majefty, 
the French, and them, which league fhould have relation to the con- 


. clufion of the peace, and not otherwife, his majefty fhewed no fuch 


readinefs to embrace the fame; though, upon fecond inftances made 
in that behalf, as he had no reafon wholly to reject this league, left 
the States might conceive that~his majefty would wholly caft them off 
both in war and peace, fo would he not alfo fuddenly accept of it, 
left the States’ mind might be raifed thereby to ftand upon higher con- 
ditions with Spain; but rather chofe to protract his refolution, under 
pretence of. other circumftances that were depending thereon, for the 
reimburfement of their debt, and fuch like: until afterwards, feeing 
on the one fide the French impatient of delay to have concluded their 
league, and no exceptions taken at all for it from Spain or the arch- 
duke’s ; and on the other fide finding the States continually to prefs 
his majefty for his refolution in it, profeffing otherwife their unwilling- 
nefs to proceed without it into the peace, his majefty gave orders to 
his commiffioners to go onward alfo into this league, but commanded 
them firft to acquaint the arch-duke’s commiffioners with it, and to 
impart unto them the reafons which moved his magi. to doit. Win- 
wood’s Memorials, vol. Il. p. 407. > 
. * He at length concluded a feparate treaty with the States, by 
which he engaged himfelf to furnifh twenty armed veffels, from three 
hundred to fix hundred tons, to be employed againft any power what- 
foever who fhould difturb the intended peace with Spain, in cafe it 
fhould take place. The expence of thefe auxiliaries was to a repaid 
within five years after the war was finifhed. 


The States General bound themfelves to affift James with the fame 
number of fhips, of the like force, four thoufand foot and three hun- 
dred cavalry. The fame terms were ftipulated for their repayment, i 


' This. treaty was to be perpetual; neither party was make peace 
with the aggreffor, without the confent %, the over. This leag 


pet hg 


re 
| 


. 
i ee eee” ae 


J a" 
A“ 

is Sa 

* Cy 
cr 


We 


3 20 CR oe 


Sonat 


1 es 


(joa MITE 8 ds 5a 


‘Tae behaviour of the king of France was neither Ann. 1609, 
In. the beginning of the treaty 


i oe generous nor confiftent. 
3) his offers to the States were high and warm *; but the 
‘ie fear of incurring the whole defence of bis pilien, with 
yh) ~ fome wheedling propofals infinuated to him by the Spa- 
Pee nschcenale +, shadiec him fo cold towards the end of it, 
Ret” ss, 
BRT. ib rots te drejacladl Wiehe tcseative oric made berween the States 
hy a" e- and the king of France. Rymer, vol. XVI. p. 668, 

[ 

a} . * He figned a defenfive league with the States : By this treaty he 
es eae was to furnith the States with ten thoufand men, to be paid by him as 
eas ‘ long as they fhould need them; and if a greater affiftance was necel= 

Aue: fary, he was to furnifh it; the expence of the additional affiftance ‘was 
ED to be repaid him by the States upon the conclufion of the war. The 
x or hs States obliged themielves, in cafe Henry was attacked, to furnifh him | 
Ooo with five thoufand men, either by land or fea, as he fhould require, or 
Poor aa more if there was occafion; the expence of the additionals being de- 
q Bak ss frayed as above. Guthrie, 1751, vol. III. p. 667. . 
ft - _ + Thefe were the renewal of an offer of double marriages between the 

oa courts of France and Spain, with the giving up to France the right of 
: fovereignty over the Low Countries. On this negotiation, Henry abated 


HM much of his zeal for the prefervation, or at leaft for the honour of the 
aM States. He infinuated, that it would be convenient to accept of a long 
truce, without the ftipulation of a direct acknowledgment from Spain 


of independency. His ‘minifter Villeroy wrote in the following ftrain 
to the prefident Jeannin. 

«¢ Nous eftimons le parti de la paix le plus feur & honorable, & au 
defaut d-icelui celui de Ja treve de longues années le meilleur, & 
youlons toujour eviter celui de la guerre, fi l’on ne nous donne tres 


: ay ‘’ 
‘ae grand & utile fujet d’en courre le hazard. Nous rous fouvenous bien 
bers que vous nous aves predit que Lefdits Eftats n’accorderont jamais la- 
’ dite treve que T’on ne leur quitte la fouverainté comme par la paix: 


Nous defirons comme eux qu’ils Pobtiennent, mais nous en difefpe- 
_ rons, & de plus difons, qu'il n’eft pas raifonnable qu’ils opiniaftrent ce 
point; car ce feroit fortir des terms & effets d’une treve, & devront 
antenter d’en avoir l’effet pour le temps qu’elle durera : pour le 


geons nous 1a nous ferions faute de mettre nos affairs en 
He peril 


52 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1609. that they apparently owed their fuccefs to the cordial 


fympathy of the Englifh *. 


peril pour fouftinir une telle caufe & opiniaftreté.” Winwood’s Memo~ 
rials, vol. Il. p. 398, 429, 


* The inclination of the Englifh people to fupport the Dutch, 
grounded on the principles of found policy, from their correfpondent 
interefts in the prefervation of ecclefiaftical and civil liberties, was 
proof againft many provocations. which they fuftained from that re- 
public. The Dutch, from motives of an inexcufable felfifhnefs, em- 
boldened by the pufiilanimity they had obferved in James, infulted the 
Englifh nation with impunity : They burnt their fhips and murdered 
their men, for trading to the ports of Flanders; whilft they fuffered 
their own countrymen to trade there without moleftation. Sir William 
Monjfon’s Naval Traéis. 


The fentiments of the Englifh, on the fubject of this correfpondent 
intereft, is diffeminated in all the letters between the feveral minifters. 
that were employed in the ftate tranfactions of this reign. Sir Henry 
Neville, in a correfpondence with Sir Ralph Winwood, ambaffador at 
the Hague, expreffes himfelf thus. ‘ I am forry to fee that the ftate 
of thofe provinces is. fo weak, that they are not able to fubfift for: 
any imal] time without a peace: Againft fuch a neceffity there is no. 
difputing ; fo whether the king of Spain affent to the truce in the In- 
dies, or what mifchief foever be like to enfue by opening the trade to 


. Antwerp, for any thing | fee they muft make a peace. I much de- 


plore this hard condition. of theirs, and hold them unworthy of fuch. 
an iffue of their troubles, wherein they have acted with fo much wif- 
dom and fortitude ; and I do as much blame all their confederates that. 
have fuffered fuch virtues to mifcarry for want of their affiftance. 
Shame be to France that was able and would not; and woe be to us 
that would and cannot. 


‘< Tam glad to find your ftyle in this laft letter fomewhat altered, as. 
I conceive, from divers of your former; for whereas in them I al~ 
ways found you of opinion, that of neceffity thofe provinces. were to 
make a peace, and could not fubfift without it; in-this laft, methinks, 
I difcern fome more comfort. For my part, I profefs I hold their 


intereft and ours fo nearly conjoined in true reafon of ftate, as Ido 


almoft equally refpeét them, and would as willingly contribute, ev 


| apes and having conceived I know not what opinion of the States,, 


JAMES |. 


beyond all proportion of my means, and co-operate as fincerely with 


my voice and beft endeavour in parliament to enable the King to 
yield them a real affiftance, as I would for the reduction or pacifying 
of Ireland. And fure I am, that the general affection of the fubjeéts 
of England is great unto the confervation of thofe provinces; and 


that they would fooner be drawn to yield him a contribution for that 


end than for any other that can be propofed.” 

Mr. More, one of the fecretaries to the earl of Salifbury, writes thus 
to Sir Ralph Winwood. 

« For the pretended alliances between France and Spain, it is 
here forefeen that they may produce very dangerous effects, prejudi- 
cial to the reft of Chriftendom, but efpecially to this ftate. The ca- 
tholic faction (we fay) may be hereby mightily ftrengthened, Ferdinand 
of Gratz’ pretenfions advanced, and the States enforced to lay down 
their arms, upon fuch conditions as the French king (to the neglect 
and difhonour of his majefty) fhall procure for them, with many other 
mifchievous inconvenients, which your wife imagination can well fug- 
geft, not my pen exprefs. We fee a word for all thefe blows, by tak- 
ing the prefent occafion, @ pied Jevé, to ftrike clofe hands with the 
States ; and now whilft their perplexed minds are charged with doubts 
and jealoufies of the other party’s combinations, to affure them wholly 
to ourfelves, and fo fhould we need not to fear or envy the ftrength 
and glory of the two kings. For religion being hereby reinforced, the 
Proteftants of France taking heart unto them, the King would be no 
lefs afraid and jealous of them than heretofore he hath been of a con- 
trary faction, and we being abfolute matters of the fea, might order 
the traffic of France at our difcretion: And for Spain, we thould not 
only be able to make a fair attempt for both his Indies, but alfo our 
weftern people, with the volunteers ef other coaft towns (together 
with that navy which the States. could eafily maintain upon the coaft 


of Spain) would fo infeft their home trade, that the very traffic be- 


tween Spain and Portugal would, in fhort time, be barred, or become 
unfruitful, But all this difcourfe is but wind : his majefty a lover of 


aa poor,, having not wherewith now to maintain his ordinary 
een lefs to feed a war; which, befides its own confump- 
will, by the abridgment of trade, hinder the profit of cuftoms,, 

the: 


$3 


THe parliament, after feveral prorogations, met 9th ‘Ann. 1609. 
ent. 


an * HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 
ae Ann. 169: February 1609 *. The extreme neceffities of James, 
which had been very infufficiently fupplied by an aid 
exacted for the knighthood of his fon, with a loan of 


200,000l1. extorted by flattery from the city of London, 
urged him to this diflatteful remedy ft. 


ae uinitey ftated the debts of the crown, and not 
only demanded a prefent fupply, but fome neceflary 
means to be confidered for the better fupport of the , 
royal ftate for the time to come. He then intimated the 
king’s intention of creating his fon Henry prince of 
Wales and earl of Chefter. Henry was a great favourite 
of the people, and the fevering from the crown the 
principality of Wales, which yearly brought in the large 
fum of fifty thoufand pounds, was thought tobe a good 
pretence to demand an addition to the royal revenue. 
In a conference between the two Houfes on the demands 
of the King, Salifbury enumerated the obligations, as 
he termed them, which his mafter had lain under to ex- 


the beft part of his majefty’s revenues. Winwood’s Memorials, vol. {1. 
P- 398, 412, & feg. 


* It appears by a letter from Mr. Chamberlain, dated from London 
13 Feb. 1609, to Sir Ralph Winwood, ambaflador at the Hague, that 
feveral members who had acted with fpirit in oppofition to court mea- 
fures, had felt the difpleafure of the miniftry. The paragraph is as 
follows: “*« The parliament is likely to hold on, for young Yelverton 
has made his peace; and divers gentlemen, that were put out of the 
ccommiffion for the peace, for being over bufy the laft feffion, are re- 
ftored ; and Sir Henry Withrington releafed from his reftraint. Wit 
-wood’s “Memorials, vol. II. .p. 117~ . So. pig 


4+ He made frequent vifits to the lord-mayor, accepted of the frees 
_ ‘dom of the clothworkers’ ‘company for Brees and the ba oad y= : 
‘lors’ for his fon,” e” > ay : 


ae 


a 
in 
‘ 


SS, 


Mib $2 &. 


pend very enormous fums *; and faid, “ That fupply- Ann. 1609. 
ing his wants was a mark of efteem which could not 
be denied to a king, who was not only the wifeft of. 


kings, but the very image of an angel.” Thefe and 
many other arguments were urged, but the Commons 
were not fo over-hatty i in yigiding's to them, as to neglect 


the redrefs of Brevaneee, 9 


A FREE enquiry into A and concerning un- 
dertakers for executing oppreflive licences upon the fub- 
ject, drew from James a meflage difapproving their pro- 
ceedings. This was delivered by the fpeaker, who re- 
ceived a fhort reprimand for bringing any meflage to Lyman 
the Houfe from the King, without having been previ- rolel- 0: 4age 
oufly fent to him by themfelves. It was found to be. 
againft due order, and voted no precedent for the future 


‘Tuese incidents, and a {peech which the King made: 
at Whitehall, in which he talked in the higheft ftrains of 
his prerogative, produced an addrefs from the Commons 


to the King, which began with this aflertion of their pri- 


vileges. “ Firft, we hold it an ancient, general, and un- 
doubted right of parliament, to debate freely of all matters 
which do properly concern the fubject, and his right of 
ftate ; which freedom of debate being once foreclofed, the 
effence of the liberty of parliament is withall diffolved.” 

The whole of this addrefs breathes the fame fpirit of Pu28°% 

freedom ; and shongh James highly réefented it, his pre-~ ¥°1?: 43!~ 


is oa In the lift of thefe diners is a burlefque one, of an extraordinary 
to protect the King’s wife and children from being robbed. 


. rad from Edinburgh to London, Wilfom, 1653, Pp. 44+ 
a iP { ; ees f fent 
{ ; 


“a bet tT . 
7 ee nt 


56 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. og fent exigencies obliged him not only to fmother that re- 


Parl. Hitt. 


fentment, but to receive the members who brought it 
with fome degree of complacency *. 


Aw hundred thoufand pounds a-year was agreed to 
be given in lieu of wardfhips, tenures, and purveyor- 


fhips, and the propofal, by the confent of the Lords, 


was delivered to the King +. The bufinefs appeared to 


* We may judge by a private letter, dated 24 May 1610, what was 
the opinion of the people concerning this tranfaction. 

“ Touching parliament matters, I know not what to write, feeing 
they have fat fourteen weeks to fo little purpofe. Of late there have 


been fome tempefts. raifed about their meddling with impofitions, _ 


which, by a meflage from the King, they were forbidden to deal in, 
On the 2ift of this prefent, he made another fpeech to both the 
houfes, but fo little to their fatisfaGtion, that I hear it bred generally 
much. difcontent, to fee our monarchical power and regal preroga- 
tive {trained fo high, and made fo tranfcendent every way, that if 
the practice fhould ‘follow the pofitions, we are not like to leave to our 
fucceffors that freedom we received from our forefathers, nor make 
an account of any thing we have, longer than they lift that govern.” 
Winwood’s Memorials, vol. III. p. 175. 


+ The full fenfe of the houfe of Commons on this fubjeét may be 
feen in the following paragraph of a letter, dated from London 1609, 
to Mr. Trumball, refident at Bruffels. 

“ J cannot entertain you with any other, nor indeed with any wor- 
thier fubjet, than with fuch occurrences as our parliament doth pro- 
duce; which doth now begin to grow very warm about thofe impor- 
tant matters I mentioned in my laft; and, according to the common 
opinion and hope, is like to bring forth very great alteration and re- 
formation in the ftate. Thofe things which by my former I did write 
unto you to have been reciprocally propounded by both the houfes, 
were a8 then but ixformis materia, whereupon they were to work ; and 


as they are both of a pondrous confideration, and laborious effe€ting, — 


fo can they not (as the proverb fays) be caft in a mould, nor fo — 
¢alily be & brought to pafs, as ifehaz mens’ affections and curiofities — 


— L.-T 


FJ aoMeB. Bp A 


be going forward, when the fudden death of Henry of Aan. 16: 7 
eat che 


 Etance, who was murdered in his coach by the hardy 


may defire: For it being in queftion not only to eradicate the ftrongeft 
and moft inveterate difeafes of the ftate, but alfo to admit new feeds 
of temperature or diftemperature in that body, you may think with 
what caution, warinefs, and flownels, they will proceed in fo impar- 
tant a work, and with how much. labour they are like to come at the 
perfecting of the fame; therefore hath there been nothing done al- 


moft hitherto in the parliament, but only contefting the form of their 


propounding and offers: For that after, my lord-treafurer (as I wrote 
"to you by my laft) had concluded his {peech, and, for an inducement 
and better inclining the lower houfe to the granting thofe high and 
extraordinary demands which he made for a fupply and a fupport of 
the king’s neceffities and charges, befides the 200,000]. yearly and 
perpetual, which he demanded for the fupport, he did alfo demand 
600,000. for the fupply. He promifed them, that the King would 
now, to his power, give them fatisfaction in any of thofe grievances 
which they had heretofore propounded, or had now to propound. 
The faid houfe being, on the one fide, very defirous, and -almoft re+ 
folved to do any thing to obtain a redrefs of the faid grievances, and 
a fuppreffion of thofe abufes and rigorous cuftoms wherewith they 
found themfelves opprefled, as with the matters of wardfhips, pur- 


' yeyors, &c. fo on the other fide being very jealous of the power of 


the King’s prerogative, whereunto fome are of opinion thefe things 
ate fo adherent and affeéted, as that he might hereafter refume by 
little and little unto himfelf the right and appropriation of the fame; 
they were very much afraid to engage themfelves in any offers or pro- 
mife of contribution to the King, before they were fure of fome cer- 
tain and found retribution from him: And therefore, after my lord- 
treafurer had propounded his demand of money, thofe of the lower 
houfe did defire-to know what the King would retribute to them for 


. the fame; for the which being checked by my lord-treafurer, as “for 


an unrefpeétful proceeding towards his majefty, of whom they would 


draw the firft proffers of conditions, afore they had fo much as af- 
fared him of their wilis for the fatisfaction of their demands, there 


(and this. but yefterday) a great contention and ftir in the houfe 
the terms and framing of that aflurance which was required 


3 the which at length was conceived and psig in 
I is 


$7 


French king, 


58 
Ann, 1609. 


The King’s 
fon created 
rince of 

ales. 


almoft double the fum * that was at firft Bryne: on the: 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


affaffin Ravillac, threw a damp upon the whole affair, 
the King making ufe of that event to rife on the condi- 
tions of the contract. 


FARTHER Fisibeeatit alfo were flopped for fome time: 
by the pageantry attending the creation of the prince of 


- Wales ; but to keep up a harmony between the parties, 


the Commons granted, on the giving up two or three 
impofitions, one entire fubfidy, one fifteenth, one tenth ; 
and the clergy added their fix fhillings in the pound. 
This liberality was fo far from forwarding the accom- 
plifhment of their defires, that though they agreed to 


this form; That the houfe had an -inclination and sfilliegwefeto give, 
his majefty fatisfaction. But this anfwer was found fo weak.and brit- 
tle by the upper houfe, as not implying any. determination or refolu- 
tion of theirs, as that they were put to another deliberation upon the 
fame : whereupon there grew fuch a conteftation and divifion. in their. 
houfe, as they were there till two of the clock in the afternoon, with-- 
out being able to come to an agreement and. refolution,among them. 
felves about the fame. And howfoever they fhall open themfelves.in. : ae 
this generality, they feem to be refolved not to. proceed otherwife, 
with the King, in the granting of his demands (at the leaft- of the 
fupply) but by way of contract, and upon good affurance of retri- 
bution. So that you may judge, if there hath been fo much difficulty, 
found in the manner of the. propounding, how much, there is like to. 
follow in the debating and reconciling of the matter, which is of fo 
high a nature, and of fo great confequence,. both to the King and to. 
the ftate. And yet it is generally expected, that without doubt there. 
will follow fome great and happy conclufion both for the one and the. 
other, before the diffolution of the BaSlADeRey, Winwood's eh ca 


vol. III. p.124, & /e.. fn ! 
* The parliament was urged to this by the King abage an-- ites 
other 190,000 1, of the city. This fet up a kind of oppe tid 1 between. bi a i 


the trading and ener intereft of the nissan andj 


a4 Pa = “y 


“_* pm, Tee 


is void, or for aire fisidé)- sad Fach like’: 


JAMES. 
terms of making fome additions to their firft demands. 


While they, were in the midft of the proceedings, a pro- 


rogation declared the effect of the precipitate grant *. 
The additions now defired by the Commons were, That 
in cafe of outlawries and attainders, the debts of the 
delinquents fhould, be firft.paid ; that it might be law- 
ful to arreft the King’s fervants without leave, and that 
no man fhould be inforced to lend money to the King, 
or give a reafon why he would not; that in cafes crimi- 
nal, the party accufed might bring in witnefles to clear. 
himfelf ; to repeal a claufe of a ftatute of 34 Hen. VIII. 
whereby the king had power to make arbitrary laws 
over the Welfhmen f. The firft and the laf of thefe 


the wants of the crown made the attainment of the defired conceffions 
more doubtful. The demands of the King arofe to the immoderate 


fum of 300,000]. a-year. 


_ * The Commons, this feflions, had pale a bill abolithing impofi- 
tions ; and in the preceding one, they had _paffed one againtt the eftab- 
lithment of any ecclefiaftical canons, without confent of parliament. 
The Lords, as ufual, oppofed themfelves to thefe limitations on prero- 


gative, and rejected both the bills. 


+ The terms demanded of the King, without thefe additions, were, 
Firft, that the court of wards be diffolved, together with the depen- 
dencies':-2 Item, that the purveyance be quite taken away; and, to 
that end, that the authority of the green-cloth be put down: 3 Item, 
that the informers be put down: 4 Item, that his majefty fhall claim 
no old debts: 5 Item, that he fhall claim to no Jands which have been 
fixty years out of his poffeffion: 6 Item, that, contrary to the pre- 
fent ufe, all his majefty’s patents be ftriétly interpreted again{t the 
King, and favourable for the fubject: 7 Item, that leffees be not turned 
out of poffefion for non-payment: 8 Item, that the fubject may be 

rmitted to plead a general plea againft his majefty: 9 Item, no man 


ed for Jand on defetive titles, on pretence that the patent 
10 Item, no man to be 


eae I2 queftioned 


$9 


Ann, 1610. 


Parliament 
prorogued. 


60 
Ann. 1610, 
Winwood’s 


Memorials, 
vol. {II 


Pp 193. 


their true meaning, Parliam, Hift. vol. V. aah ig ef ts 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


additions were granted; but to the fecond, namely, that 
no man fhould be inforced to lend money, -nor to give — 
a reafon why he would not, the anfwer returned was, 
“ That becaufe the Gommons brought precedents from 
ancient times to ftrengthen their demands, he allowed 
not of any precedents drawn from the times of ufurp- 
ing or decaying princes, or of people too bold and too 
wanton; that he defired not to govern in that common-. 
wealth where fubjects fhould be affured of all things, 
and hope for nothing: it was one thing fubmittere princi- 
patum legibus, and another thing: fubmittere principatum fub- 
ditis; that he would not leave to pofterity fuch a mark. 


queftioned for land gained by the fea, be it antient or new: 11° Item,, 
no man to be queftioned for old debts. 

That on. this contract the King be petitioned, that the four Eng-- 
lifh counties may have a. trial by law concerning their inheritance to. 
the common laws of this realm, and fo to be exempted from the ju- 
rifdiétion of the prefident and council of Wales. TI.. That the King: 
be bound upon demurrers to exprefs the caufe of demurrer for form,’ 
as the fubject is by the ftatute 27 Eliz, Il]. That. the King grant 
out commiffions to declare the juft and due fees of all the courts and. 
officers in this realm, fo far forth as they are to be paid by the fub- 
je&t, and they to be reduced. into a book and printed. IV. That she: 
appoint fome to make a diligent furvey of all. the penal. ftatutes of. 
this realm, to the end that fuch “as are obfolete or unprofitable may be- 
repealed; all fuch as are profitable concerning one matter may be Te~ 
duced into one ftatute, to be paffed in parliament. V.. The Lords to- 
join in petition to his majefty for recompence to be made by his ma~ . 
jelly to all fuch officers of courts as are damnified by this contraét in- 
point of tenures. VI. His majefty to be likewife petitioned that he: — 
will be pleafed not to grant protections contrary to law. That the: 
extent of every article that is decreed for the good of the Commons. 
in this great contraé with his majefty, fhould be expounded and:ex-- 
plained in all cafes doubtful by the houfe of Commons, according tor — 


‘ 


{FoaoOM ESSE 61 


ee of weaknefs upon his reign, and therefore his conclufion Asn. 1610... 
bs be | Beg non placet stags non placet oe: $.. 


Tat uctincaton was fuffered to meet again on the Re-meeting 

, “aie of Oétober, three months after che prorogation, “P*"™" 
ae ” their lat bounty having been already diflipated. Both 
Houfes feemed more determined: than ever to reftrain 
the prerogative; the Lords, ftimulated by the recent 
example of prodigality, and the mortifying addition. 
of its enriching the Scotch nobility, heartily joined with: 
the Commons in this laudable intention. The ,parlia-- 


| a | ment continued fo determined, that the King, who 
load now entertained projects of fupplying the exchequer 
ae without their afliftance, after another prorogation, fud- 


denly diffolved them +.. But before he had taken this itr eae ad 


defperate ftep, he fent for thirty members of the Houfe 
of Commons, and.afked them, “ Whether they thought 


e _ ™ Salifbury,-who delivered this:anfwer, at the fametime informed the 
-. Commons of a conceit of the King’s: That nine {core thoufand pounds, 
~ to which fum they rofe upon their firft offer, he could not accept, be- 
caufe nine was the number of the poets, who were always beggars ; ele- 
ba’, ven was the number of the apoftles when Judas was away, and there- i] 
ae fore might beft be affected by his majefty; but there was a mean num- iI 
ber, which might accord to ‘both, and that was ten, a facred number, 

for fo many were God’s commandments, which tend to virtue-and edifi- | 
_ cation. Winwood’'s Memorials, vol. TI. p. 193.. ; | 


+ I find by an anfwer of the King’s to fome complaints which had 
bien prefented to him, that the Commons had numbered proclama- 
_ tions in their Hift of grievances: He promifes, in this anfwer, a re- 

im the point of proclamations.. Public regulations, fuch as nog | 
¢ peace of the borders, the fafety of the fea,. and others of this: 
, had been all fettled by proclamations; and James had af- 
to give them the force of aéts of parliament. Parliam. Hi/t. 
Bi. 


that: 


62 


‘Ann, yn 
Winwood’s 
Memorials, 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


that be was in want?” Sir Henry Neville, from whom 
the anfwer ae expected, firmly-returned, ‘+ He believed 


vol.II-P.235 that he was.” “ Then, faid the King, tell me, whether 


it belongeth to you that are my fubjects to relieve me 
or not?” To this Sir Henry made this honeft anfwer, 


“ Where your expences grow by the commonwealth we . 
are, otherwife not.” He then put the King in mind ‘of — 


the large fupplies he had received, without relief of 
grievances: And on being preffed to tell what they were, 
he began to enumerate them fo frankly, that one of 
the members took up the fpeech, fearing that Sir Hen- 
ry’s integrity would endanger his perfon. The fudden 


_ diffolution of the parliament was not the only fymp- 


Parl. Hilt. 
vol. V.p.221, 
& feq. 


tom, at this period, that James had fhewn. of an inten- 
tion to attempt abfolute power. Cowel, a civilian, ‘and 
Blackwood, a clergyman, had written two books fubver- 


five of the Englifh conftitution. One attempted to prove, 


that the King was not bound to call parliaments, or to 
obtain their confent to raife fubfidies; the other, that 
the Englifh were all flaves‘from the Norman conqueft. 
Thefe books James had not only licenfed, but had had 


the indifcretion to praife the formerly publicly, with many > 


encomiums on the. civil law, in preference to the com- 
mon law. Both Cowel and Blackwood efcaped the re- 
fentment of parliament; not that the offence pafled 
unnoticed, but it was dropped in the throng of their 


_ bufinefs, on the King’s publifhing a proclamation to 


recal the licence of the books. Ina fpeech to a com- 


mittee of the Houfe concerning thefe books, he compared =~ 


the fovereignty of princes to the’ power’ of the Deity ; 
but concluded with this falvo, that however the fove- 


= ~ | x 
= ae 


reignty of kings was abfolute in general, yet in oe } ie 


63 


J AME 8.5 
ts the kings of Ropland were reftrained by their oath, Ann, 1610. 


tie 
{3 aad the pike of the people %. 
pr i htidi Spite of James’ s extreme paffion. for peace, he Afairs of the 
ae had been obliged to take part in. the feuds upon the Pring 
Ah - continent. The emperor had feized upon the pofleflions 
i Pes; of the duke of Cleves, who. was lately dead ; the heirs 
i implored the affiftance of the proteftant powers. If the 
Cy : houfe of Auftria had fucceeded in their attempts upon 
Ofte "Cleves. and Juliers, . the States muft in all probability 
pal - have fallen again under the fubjection of that power, 
_ + ~ who would have hemmed them in on all fides. The 
___. Englith miniftry were fo. fenfible of this, that they of- 
vine fered to the princes claimant an afliftance of money, or 
te of four thoufand men, that were then in the pay of the 
en States-General +. 


ey 
s, _., ™ This extraordinary. fpeech is only preferved in Wilfon: “ The: 
i King’s heart, he tells them, is in the hand of the Lord, who can creaté 
and deftroy, make and unmake; fo.kings can give life and death, judge 
o 


pe 
1p ee ; * 
att all, and be judged by none. They can exalt low things, and abafe high 
+ ‘@ _ things, making the fubjects like men at chefs, a pawn to take-a bifhop 
eal : oraknight. But that aH kings, who are not tyrants, or perjured, will 
_-_—CSséOb ind themfelves within the limits of their laws’, and that thofe who per- 
iM fuade them to the contrary are vipers and pefts, both againft them and 
ie the commonwealth, Yet, as it is blafphemy to difpute what God may 
Brat; . do, fo it is fedition in fubjeéts to difpute what kings may do, in the 
Fa height of their power.” Wilfon, p. 46. 


Some have fuppofed this fpeech to be made on purpofe to heighten Vol. III. 
the ridicule on the character of the author; but hints of fuch a fpeech p. 136, 141. 
are mentioned in Winwood’s Memorials, and it carries too ftrongly the 

_ marks of the royal orator to bear fuch a fuppofition. 
++ The princes claimant were, the elector of Brandenburgh, the 
te of Newburgh, the duke of Deuxponts, Charles of Auftria, mar- 
"Burgaw, the-eleCtor of Saxony, the duke of Nevers, and the 
count. 


ap 
* ‘er 
ry 


md 


64° 


Ann, 1605. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. ae 


THE king of France was. making great preparations * - 
for the fame purpofe, when he was prevented by death, 
not without fome fufpicions of its having been pro- 
cured by Spanifh machinations. Ravillac, the aflaffin, 
was a poor enthufiaftical friar, whofe zeal for popery 
had been worked up to a pitch of defperate madnefs, 
The Auftrian family were always zealous defenders of 
that faith, Henry was efteemed an heretic in his heart, 


~and was now entered into a proteftant league to leffen 
the power of catholic princes. The court, of France 


was fo far from purfuing his intended plan, that it in- 
timated an intention of not engaging in the German 
war at all. The allies were obliged to have recourfe to 
James as their head, who entered into a league with 


count of La Marck. The powers that oppofed the Auftrian intereft re~ 


duced the number of the competitors to the elector of Brandenburgh ~ 


and the duke of Newburgh, whofe claims were beft founded. The Pro- 
teftant princes of Germany were in alliance with James, and termed 
themfelves the Evangelical League to fupport the Proteftant intereft 
againft the intrigues of the courts of Spain, Vienna, and Rome. 


**Thefe preparations, as Sully pretends, were defigned to execute a 
fcheme which Henry had been projecting for fome years. If there ig 
truth in Sully’s detail of it, it was one of the moft romantic undertak_ 
ings that knight-errantry ever fuggefted; the plan being no lefs vaft, 
than to fubdue the houfe of Auftria, enlarge the bounds of the smenibary, 
which the Chriftians poffefled, and afterwards to make fuch a divifion of 
it as fhould eafily preferve an exact equilibrium between its powers; this: 
to be performed by a general league, when Henry had demontftrated 
to all the Chriftian potentates the utility of his defign. The difficulty, 
and even the impoffibility, of bringing fuch a number of interefted fo- 


vereigns to an uniform inclination, as alfo the difcord which would ine= . _ 
vitably arife on all occafions during the profecution of the plan, is an 


invincible obftacle, that muft occur to every underftanding. Many ob- 


jeCtions lie againft every part of it; but thefe, with the whole of the 


fcheme, would be too copious a work to be inferted: here, 


Poe MVE Bn. x os 


the princes for fix years, on the fame terms as had been Ana. t610. 
agreed on when France was in the alliance. 


Tue refolutions of the French court changed fud- 
denly. They fent a detachment of eight thoufand foot, 
twelve hundred horfe, and eight pieces of cannon, to 
the prince of Orange; who at this time had almoft taken 

-  Juliers: it furrendered foon after. The lofs of fo im- 
_ portant a place obliged the emperor to lay afide his de- 


ages upon this. serrbory: 


THE Jefuits, ents avowed principles * fubjected them 
to the odium of all dark tranfactions, from the terror 
Ha of the late aflaflination, became fo formidable to James, 
Ri any. that he readily complied with a requeft of parliament to 

put in force the laws againft Papifts; and an oath of 
\ ame allegiance was exacted from the fubjects in general f, 
Bist? both men and women. 


c _ Turee feparate courts, the King’s, the queen’s, and 
the prince of Wales’s, difplayed the prodigality and 
pomp of royalty. Expence, fhew, and revelry, were 
the characteriftic of each. Whilft this triple fcene of la- 
vith riot glared in the eye of the public, the courtiers 
had the affurance to condemn with infolence the juft 


_* The Jefuits have been generally reputed the authors of Henry’s 

affaffination. They were recalled to France by the authority of this 

_ prince, and contrary to the exprefs defire of the parliament, who re- 
monftrated againft regiftering the edict for their re eftablifhment. 


; 1@ The Lords had paid the King the compliment of paffing a bill in 
eir houfe, which inflicted exquifite tortures upon any thar attempted 
uis life. | Winwood’s Memzrials, vol. III. p, 194. 


— Vourl. K frugality 


66 — 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1610. frugality of parliamentary fupplies, and with premature 


Affairs of 
Scotland, 


triumph exulted in the diffolution of that aflembly. They 


boafted that the King would find means by his power 
to fupply his neceflities, and thus emancipate his apn 
gative from thofe derogatory reftraints. 


Wui te James dreamed of enjoying an abfolute power 
in England, he actually exercifed it in fome meafure at 
this time in Scotland. In confequence of a former pro- 
hibition, he declared the aflembly of the clergy unlaw- 
ful, profecuted fome of the moft forward members for 
treafon, and obtained their condemnation *. Other 
members he fent for up, and queftioned + them before 
his council, concerning the extent of his power. Not 
meeting with fatisfaCtory anfwers, through the fear of 
the party, he made it a pretence to imprifon them; ther 


* This was effected by the intrigue and illegal management of the 
earl of Dunbar, who was fent down to Scotland, as James’s- commif-- 
fioner on this errand. He packed the jury, and, by the force of pro~- 
mifes and threats, obtained a fentence of condemnation from the judges. 
Original Letters by Sir Dav. Dalrymple, 1762, p.1, & feq.. 


+ Thefe are the queries: Firft, “ If it be lawful to pray publicly 
for perfons convicted by the lawful judge, as perfons being in dif- 
trefs, and afflifted? Second, Whether I may not, being a Chriftian: 
king, by my authority royal, convocate, prorogue, and defert, for 
juft and neceffary caufes, known to myfelf, any affemblies and. meet- 
ings within my dominions? Third, Whether or not may I, by my 
authority, call and convene before me and my council, whatfoever 
perfon or perfons, civil and ecclefiaftical, for whatfoever offences: com- 
mitted by them, in whatfoever place in my dominions ; and if I may 
not take cognizance of the offence, and give fentence ‘thereifi ? And: - 
farther, Whether or not are all my fubjects, being cited to anfwer be- 
fore me and my council, obliged to compear and acknowledge me or: 


them for judges in thefe offences?” y etanig: fol. ed. 167% P4976) 


MAGA CML MO 2 so 


67> 


availing himfelf of the terror ‘of thefe proceedings, he Aun.1610. 


erected a kind of high-commiffion court in Scotland, 
and fent for the archbifhop of Glafgow, and two other 
Scotch prelates, to be confecrated by Englifh bifhops, 
that the epifcopal virtue might be preferved by fucceflion 
in Scotland ; and fuch was his prefent authority and in- 
fluence in this country, that the general aflembly was 
induced to fubmit to their vifitation. 


-Ricuarp Bancrort, the great perfecutor of the Pu- 
ritans, died foon after. He had carried his violence 
fuch a length, that the number of families which deter- 


- mined to feek refuge in Virginia were numerous enough 


to caufe a jealoufy of their power in that colony, and 
‘were detained in England by a proclamation. The enor- 
-mities of the high-commiffion court, that grand {phere 
of regal and ecclefiaftical tyranny, were ftrongly urged 
the laft parliament *, and fome conceflions demanded. 
All the fatisfaction which could be obtained, was a pro- 
mife of a better regulation, though it was well known, 
that there could be little hope-of amendment, while 
the power from whence the enormities flowed, continued 
unreftrained. Bancroft was fucceeded in the archbifhop- 


* A‘bill, that had been rejected by the Lords the two firft feffions 
of this parliament, again paffed the lower houfe, and was read by the 
chancellor’s appointment in the upper houfe. It was intitled, «« An 
aét for reftraining the executions of canons ecclefiaftical not confirmed 
by parliament.” Bancroft advifed the King to prevent fuch a bill from 


‘coming toa vote; as the argument urged for it would call in queftion 


the King’s fupremacy, To this, therefore, among other caufes, may 


_ be attributed the fudden diffolution of the parliament. The prelate ac- 


is advice with a fubfidy extraordinary granted by the clergy. 
ters by Sir David Datrymple, p. 12. 
K 2 ric 


pe ee 


ert 6a HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1610, Fic by George Abbot, a prelate of fo different a mould, 

i that his mild and laudable management fubjeéted him» 
to the hatred of the high party, and the fufpicion of 4 
being tainted with puritanical principles. | 


James, who idolized his imagined powers of contro--. 
verfy, fet a defign this year on foot to erect a college 
for the improvement of that kind of learning; he gave 
towards it all the timber requifite for the building, and 
obtained an act of parliament to enable the truftees to dig 
a trench out of the river Lea, to erect water-works to fup- 
ply the city of London with water. A brief was given 
in their favour to collect money from all the parifhes in 
England. Large contributions were made by many of 
the clergy. James himfelf laid the firft ftone of the 
building, and Bancroft was zealous in the caufe. Not- 
withftanding thefe primary encouragements, it fell af-. 
terwards to nothing, through a jealoufy of the people; 
that it would prove a feminary fubfervient to the pur 
pofes of the court; and, inftead of improving and en- 
lightening, vitiate the morals and darken the opinions. of | 
its pupils. : a 


j A.M © 8: 69 


a. eee. ee ye aN 


; Rife of Somerfet.———Death of prince Henry.——Marriage of 
if the princefs Elizabeth——Origin of baronets.——Parliament. 
ny ——Diffolution of the parliament.——Overbury’s mur der m—— 
Ht Rife of George Villiers-———Feall of Somerfet. 


t i O' the peculiar qualities and foibles which the cha- Ana. 1611. 
a racter of James had difplayed in various lights to . 
_  ——- his Englith fubjeéts, one of the moft ftriking remained | 
-——s«¥yet in obfcurity; but an incident, partly defigned and 

att partly accidental, exhibited an affection as violent as it 

eth was extraordinary. James, though of a very partial dif- 

a pofition, had hitherto extended his favours almoft equally 

mae 7 to all that- were connected with him, by an intimate at- 
tendance on his perfon, or in the way of bufinefs, 


& Tue Scots, who, from a long acquaintance, had’ a 
| aan thorough knowledge of his failings, knew that he could 
not always reftrain himfelf from enjoying the pleafure 
of a favourite, and had often attempted to recommend 
one of their own nation. The Lord Hays at length fuc- 
ceeded: Robert Carr, a youth of a beautiful perfon and Rif of 
graceful air, by the means of this nobleman, prefented *°** “** 
the fhield to the King at a tilting. In performing his 
office, his horfe ftarted, and threw him; the fall broke 
“his leg; extraordinary emotions of compaflion feized 
= King; the lamed youth was, by his directions, car- 


into y his. own palace,: attended conftantly by his own. 
if Bile phyficians,, 


} a _ 


ze 


Ana.1611. phyficians, and he vifited him often during the courfe of 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


his confinement. From this beginning fprang fuch an 


* ardent affection, and current of favour, that on his re- 


covery he was made a knight, and gentleman of the bed- 
chamber. The treafurer’s ftaff of Scotland, the title of 
vifcount Rochefter, privy-counfellor, and knight of the 


garter, followed in a quick fucceflion ; and through this 


channel flowed all preferments. 


Pro 
raife money. 


Tue whole bufinefs of the miniftry at this time was 
the forming projects to bring in requifite fums to fup- 
port the King’s extravagance. A parcel of crown lands 
were fet up to fale, but met with no buyers, from the 
precarioufnefs of their tenure. The city of London was 
tried to no purpofe for a farther loan *. Then refuming 
the crown lands lavifhly granted, pawning the jewels, 
feizing (on various pretences) the effects of foreign mer- 


* The King’s vain endeavours to get money by the way of loan, ap- 
pears by the following letter from Mr. More to Sir Ralph Winwood. 

«“ A few days fince, thirteen of the beft-monied men of this city, 
to whom his majefty is in debt, were fent for to Whitehall ; where my 
lord-treafurer told them, their intereft fhould be readily paid them; — 
and prayed them to forbear their principal for a while longer, and 
withal to lend what more they could furnifh, upon good fecurity. 
But they could not be induced to any further loan, nor very willingly 
to forbear that which is already out of their hands, any longer than 
needs they muft. Since, fome of the exchequer-officers have been 


dealing with divers citizens in particular, to lend upon private fecu- 


rity, but their motions had very fmall effects. Here is now 40001. 


‘more of crown lands fet to fale ;but I fee no undertakers ready to 
entertain the bargain upon fo fhort days payment as are required ; fo 


think my lord will be in fome pain even to furnith the expence of: the 


fad sree te Winwood, vol. YI, p.239. 0 


- of the favourites. 


sé 


FoR Ie GOL 


y A 


chants, engrofling the trade of certain commodities, the Asn. 1612 


bringing in guo warrentos againft corporations and com- 


: panies, to oblige them to fue forth the renewal of their 


writs, were all propofed *; but they were rejected, as. 
either incurring danger, or interfering with the intereft 
The raifing the farms of the reve- 
nue, felling the foreft woods, a benevolence, monopolies, 
extorting money for knighthood, and the circulating the 
privy-feals. all over England, for the fum of 200,000]. f 
were the only ones ventured on. 


* Among the projectors for encreafing the revenues of the crown 
without the affiftance or concurrence of parliament, Sir Francis Bacon 


was the moft forward. He feems to be certain of the infallibity of 


a fcheme he had formed for this purpofe, and tells James in a letter 


on the occafion,’ “ That if any of the particulars fail, it would be ra~ 


ther from want of workmanthip of thofe that fhould deal in them, 
than want of materials in the things themfelves.” Cadala, fol. 1663, 


p- 28. 
- + The refolution is now taken to fend forth the privy-feals, and 


that in fo great a number and meafure as to draw 200,000]. if they 


- fhall be accepted, whereof it is doubted fome difficulty will be made. 


My lord-treafurer is to deal with this city, Middlefex, Hertfordfhire, 
and with the officers of the court of Wards;.and every judge with 


fuch officers and principal pleaders as have relation unto them: Wales 


fhall be exempted, but no fhire of England. I fend your lordthip 
herewith a copy of the privy-feal. In. the minute of his majefty’s let- 
ter to the lieutenants of the fhires, I find thefe points to be obferved : 
That his. majefty declareth never to have had more need than now; 
that though he cannot wholly forbear thofe that lent the laft loan, yet 


they fhall not be charged with fo much as before by a third part; 


that the nobility are not to be recherched, neither yet the clergy, 
who for their temporal livings fhall be dealt with by their metropo- 
litans, and as for their fpiritual livings, they are much lefs than his ma- 
jefty could with them.” Mr. More to Sir Ralph Winwood. Winwood, 
‘vol. IIL, p. 301, | 

Gaede cur THE 


72 


Ana, 1612. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Tue Spanith match, that mine from whence the 
King expected to fupply all his wants, and from the 
hope of which he had diffolved the parliament, was 
now entirely at an end, the Englifh ambaflador having 
at this time received a direct refufal of the promifed al- 
liance. This refufal, which James little expected, was 
given with the infulting addition of an offer of the 
youngeft daughter on the fame flippery foundation, 
which had fo cruelly deceived his expectation. A dou-. 
ble alliance between the courts of France and Spain, 
which was now thought of, and foon after concluded, 
obliged the Spaniard to difcover the infincerity of his 
intention. 


Ner1TuHer the pleafures, the vexations, nor the bufi- 
nefs of his ftation, prevented James from interfering in 
fpeculative points, and expofing his pedantry to all Eu- 
rope. Four years before this he had written a treatife * 
againft the pope’s pretenfions of power over temporal 
princes, and had ordered his ambafladors to prefent it at 
their feveral courts +. This year Conradus Vorftius, di- 


* Cardinal Bellarmine, in an anfwer to this treatife, charges James 
with having written from Scotland a letter to pope Clement the Eighth, 
recommending the bifhop of Vaiffon to a cardinal’s cap, that he 
might manage his affairs at the court of Rome. James denied the 
fact, and the lord Balmerino, his fecretary, had the compliance in a 
public trial to take it upon himfelf, and confefs he had furreptitioufly 
procured his hand to fucha letter. On thefe fuperficial grounds James 
obtained from his fubjeéts a degree of confidence which helped to in- 
troduce epifcopacy in Scotland, 


+ This treatife was called “ A Premonition to all Chriftian Princes.” 
Wooton, the ambaflador at Venice, had fome affurances, that if he 


prefented this book to that ftate at his firft audience, it would be 


S be + 


a" 
ee 
fl ae 


e Pisa oh E88! a. 73 


-vinity profeflor at Leyden, had publithed a Heck in Hol- Ana. 1612. 
land on Arminian principles, and contrary to the com- 
yy mon received tenets of ' free-will and predeftination, 
at James was fo inflamed at the herefy *, that after having 
. commented on the moft offenfive aliases in the book, 
mie he fent an exprefs injunction to the States to. difcharge 
Bilis. -_ ponifie that blafphemous montfter, as he called him f. 


aay > A 
F pi received, re republic of Venice being debs at variance with the 
ae) | ‘pope. Wooton had fuch pofitive orders to prefent it on St. James’s ‘ 
ey) oe day, that he could not comply with the advice. Before St. James’s 
i day came, the difference was made up, and the anfwer that the am- 
1 ‘baffador received was, that the republic of Venice thanked the King 
of England for his good-will, but that they were now reconciled to 
+ the pope, and therefore were refolved not to admit of any change in 


4 

| Wiehe their religion, according to theiragreement with the court of Rome. 
tea Welwood’s Memoirs, 1700, p. 35, & fe. 
Rahs). . We learn from Wilfon, that in the heat of the plague at London, 


ies abi the ceremony of James’s coronation was performed on the day dedi- 
Cees } cated to St. James. Wilfon, p. 5. 


ty vs 
ae ~ * James’s quarrel with Vorftius was a perfonal one: he took of- 
fia _ fence at the ironical manner in which he is treated in a work of this 
itt: author’s. Barnevelt, the republican, patronized Vorttius, and prince 
i * Maurice oppofed him: this circumftance perhaps increafed the mo- 
Bry -narch’s warmth, Salifbury expatiates on his mafter’s zeal in thefe 
Mat se terms: ‘. Almighty God (writes he) doth know the zeal which ftirreth 
2 Flas the King againft that man (Vorftius) fo kindles in him upon every 
Pit) accident of difcourfe, as we have all reafon to blefs God in making 


Wah 380 us fubjects to a king, that, without mixture of glory or private defign, 

Bas taketh fo much to heart the injury that is done to the Blefled Trinity,” 
meebis: Winwoed, vol, III. p. 316. 

ie " + James makes ufe of the following curious argument to the States 
pa propriety of their perfecuting Vorftius on a matter of faith: 

“aes -Finalement, fa majeftie vous exhorte puifque vous avez prix 


eS oe Sse de vos confcience, & ayes tant pati par la 
| dune guerre violente & singh Pefpace de quarante 


miferes, 


74 
Ann, 1612, 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


The States paid fo little regard to his opinion or com- 


mands, that Vorftius was acquitted with honour, and 
continued in his profeflorfhip. This drew from Win- 
wood, James’s ambaflador at the Hague, fo threatening 
a proteft *, that it terrified his mafter, left it fhould draw 
him into the inconveniences of a war, and fo cooled his 
refentment, that he made an excufe to Sir Noel Carron, 
the States’ ambaflador, for the petulance of Winwood f,. 
difclaimed the intention of carrying the affair fo high, 
and defcended at laft to offer to be contented with the 
removal of Vorftius our of Leyden, though the States 


‘miferes, de ne permettre pas, que les difciples a"Arminius fondent 


‘fur Pexemple de vos aétions, la mauvaife doctrine qu’ils trompetent au 
monde de apofiafia faniterum.” Sir Ralph Winwood’s fecond remon- 


. ftrance in the affembly of the States General concerning Voritius. 


Winwood, vol. Ul, p, 304, & feq. 


* Sir Ralph Winwood’s proteftation in the affembly of the States 
General concerning Vorftius, g Decem. 1611, O. S. 

“* De ces enormes indignitéz commifes contre leglife de Dieu, & fa 
perfonne, en preferant la prefence de Vorftius devant fon amitie & 
alliance, le roi mon maitre fe tient obliger de fe refentyr fi repara- 
tion n’en foit faidte, & ce au plutoft; ce que ne peut pas “etre que 


par la renvoy de Vorftius. Par les manifeftes: qu’il faira itmprimer & | 


publier au monde, il fera paroiftre de qu’elle ‘haine il detefte Jes athi-. 
efmes 8 herefies de Vorftius,. & tous ceux qui les ‘maintiennent,°fa- 
vorifent, & fomentent. 


« C’eft ma charge: Vous y penfera s°il vous plaitt; & croyrez, que . 


Yamitie & alliance du roi de la Grande Bretagne, & tes atheifmes & 
herefies de Conradus Vorftius ne font nullement. compatible. 11 ‘de- 


spend de vos jugement d’en. faire choix: Ienceinte des. Provinces ‘ 
Unies ne pourront pas comprendre toutes deux.” Winwood, vol. IN. 


p. 310. 


+ James had fome intention of veiting = ar 


point, and to throw the whole blame of the 
‘Winwood. Winwood, vol. IW. p.332. 


aA ed oe Mi EB S.. 5 75 
thould entertain him at their own expence in any other Ann, 16t2, 
town in their dominions. James had been fo feverein = * 
his proteftations againft Vorftius, that he had thrown 
eut infinuations that his crime deferved the utmoft rigor 
of fecular punifhment. Edward Wightman, and Bar- Two men 
tholomew Legate, were actually burnt in-England by his rie a 
warrant, after haying been convicted of erroneous doc- 
trine, and canonically condemned. by Neal bithop of Co- 


ventay, nl King bifhop of London *, 


Tus sete died Henry, prince of Wales, a youth of Death of 
fo forward a carriage, that he was thought to have be- PivHem 
come difagreeable to his father, though he was natu- 
rally inclined to an indulgent fondnefs for his family, 
and had fhewn great marks of parental affection for 
this fon, The Englifh, who were extremely fond of 
the. prince of Wales, from fome popular fentiments he 
had. highly declared, fancied they had received a great 
lofs in his premature death; but in all probability 


‘the crown was more affected in this refpect than the 


people. A martial monarch is always dangerous to the 
liberties of a commonwealth. Henry much affected 
that reputation; and this, with other f{uperficial princely 
virtues, which draw on the efteem of the injudicious 
populace, would have been great impediments to the 
enlarged plan of Liberty which took place in the fuc- 
«ceeding reign. The people were undoubtedly inclined 
to favour him from his avowed contrariety to his fa- 
ther, who at prefent had incurred fo much popular 


woe she slecey Peaple was lunatic at the time of his con- 
i 2 . odium, 


76 
‘i, "daa. 
Marriage of 


the princefs 
Elizabeth. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


odium, as to be, in the opinion of many oF ed per) 
Se, to his fon’s death. 


He wry’s deceafe was followed by the marriage of 


the princefs Elizabeth to the Elector Palatine. It was ce- 


lebrated with the ufual parade of the court*. The only 
remarkable thing immediately attending it, was the ab- 
furd obfervation of that fuperftitious age: Elizabeth, dur- 
ing the courfe of the ceremony, was elated with a joy 
that burft out into geftures which bordered upon laugh- 
ter; this was reckoned the foreboding of her future mis- 
fortunes ; as if a natural caufe for thefe expreflions of 
gladnefs could not have been properly afcribed to a virgin 


of fifteen, who was marrying a lover fhe liked, and on: 


The fate of 
Arabella 
Stewart. 


the point of being miftrefs of a court. 


THE recent fate of Arabella Stewart was a very con+ 


trary one to’that of her kinfwoman Elizabeth: James, 


to whom fhe was coufin-german, had feized on her 
pofleffions, and reduced her to’ a penfion. The un. 
happy maiden, tired of this dependant ftate, and’ urged 
by youthful inclination, entered into an intrigue with 


Seymour, grandfon to the earl of Hertford, whom, not-' 
withftanding feveral reprimands from’ the high powers, 


fhe privately married. Both the delinquents were feized 
on, but they made their efcape, one on board of a French 


bark, the other on board of a Newcaftle collier.: The | 
mahaPpy Arabella was Hh ai and Pangea to the © 


Gs ¢t9t13 


* The expence of the nuptials amounted to 50,0001. his prin- . 
cefs’s portion was 40,0001. to be paid in two years; her jointure 
was 10,000 1, a-year; and her pin-money 15001. . Ryne, the BN 


Ps 733: 


a eee eee 


J. A M/E 8. 1 
Tower. 
of her treatment, and the keennefs of her difappoint- 
mient, had fo fatal an effect upon her tender conftitu- 
tion, that fhe immediately loft her fenfes, and foon after 


her life. Her hufband did not venture to return to his 
country till after her death. The jealoufy which the 


nearnefs of Arabella’s confanguinity occafioned to the 


crown, was the undoubted, nay the avowed, caufe of her 
melancholy fate ne 


Tue refentment which the Englifh in general con- 
ceived againtt the prefent infolence of the Scots t, required 
fome facrifice: The lord Sanquir, a Scotch peer, who was. 
in no particular favour at court, and had been condemned 
for the murder of a fencing-mafter, was for this reafon 


_ hanged, without hefitation. 


Amone the lofles which James fuftained this year, the 
earl of Salifbury’s death was not the leaft confiderable. 
This minifter was a careful fervant, and, if the intereft 


_ * On the firft news of the flight of this unhappy pair, letters had 
been difpatched to the king and queen of France, and to the arch- 
duke, requiring them to. deliver them up, if they fhould land on their 
territories. The countefs of Shrewfbury, who. had given her affift- 
ance towards the match, was confined in the Tower; and the earl 
her hufband to his own houfe. Sir Francis Bacon difplayed his genius 


Death of 


77 


‘The fatigue fhe had undergone, the feverity Ann. 1612 


Salifbury.. 


in aggravating the fuppofed crimes of all that were concerned in this 


trivial matter. 
-—5? 


he 
Bape Many duels were fought Ni the individuals of | the two na- 
tions. One of the Scotch court-domeftics had offered a grofs affront to 
Another had beaten Philip Herbert, younger 


a bencher at Gray’s-Inn. 
F to the earl of Pembroke, who was rewarded with a peerage for 


ity i in not refenting the affront, 
r of 


58 


"Ann. 161% Of the crown is to be confidered in contradiftinction to 
‘that of. the people, a faithful one; his abilities as a 


Origin of 
baronets. 


HISTORY.OF ENGLAND, 


ftatefman were not defpicable; his qualities as a courtier 
were fawning and pernicious, but they are too common 
to that ftation to be worthy any farther remark. He 
‘was fucceeded in his miniftry by the earl of Suffolk and 
the favorite Rochefter, both men of mean capacities. The 
latter was foon after created earl of Somerfet, and en- 


joyed fo much of James’s affection, that he faid openly 


in his council, That he took more delight in Rochefter’s 
company than in red man’s living. ~ : 


Tue difficulty of railing: money ftill increafing, a 
projeét which had been formed by Salifbury was now 


carried into execution *. An hereditary rank, which — 


fhould take place after a baron’s youngeft fon, and dig- 
nified by the title of Baronet, was purchafed from the 


-crown, at the price of a thoufand pounds +. An infe- 


tior order to them, with the title of Knights of Nova 


*.A commiffion was given to Sir Julius Cefar, Sir Thomas Parry, 
Sir Francis Bacon, Baron Sotherton, Sir George Cary, Sir George 
Moore, Sir Walter Cope, and others, to devife and projeé& the beft 
means to get money. Winwood, vol. ll. p. 385, & feq. 


At this ‘time James made offer of a large parcel of plate, pawned 


to queen Elizabeth by the States General, in 1587, and belonging to 


the houfe of Burgundy, to be redeemed ; threatening, that if ic was 
‘not he would melt it down. Winwood. 


+ Each knight was to maintain thirty foot-foldiers in Ireland for 
three years, at the rate of eight-pence a-day, and to pay the wages 


of one so upon paffing the patent. The whole fum that was raifed 
‘upon thefe baronets was 1095}. as‘a- compofition for their maintain-— 


‘ing the (aldiers in Ulfter. —s peectge 5 1679) 'p. ar i iia 


vol. HI. p. 704. Line mith 


“4% 


PLAC MIE 82.1: 


Scotia, at the price of three hundred pounds. 
nities of baron, vifcount, and earl, were fixed refpec- 


tively at ten, fifteen, and twenty thoufand pounds. 


- ceflive fines, for the King’s ufe, thofe that were cited be- 
a fore them. 


hilt had, in this reign, been totally fubjected to 
the jurifdiction of England. James granted to the city 
of London the liberty of planting a colony in Ulfter ; 
and this-year the civil government of the plantation was 


* new regulated, and Londonderry and Coleraine fortified. 


The abfurd cuftom of duelling had been imported into 


this country from France; there it had taken its rife and 


growth, under that romantic prince, Henry the Fourth 

He had in fome refpect been the occafion of the igno- 
minious fate of the lord Sanquir, by afking him, with 
an air that was. conftrued by the unhappy nobleman fig- 
nificant, “ Whether the fencing-mafter (whom he after- 


wards on this hint murdered, and who had put out his 


eye in a fencing-bout) was yet alive?” 


Four able men were at this time at the head of the 
law: Sir Edward Coke, Sir Henry Hobart, Sir Francis 
Bacon, and Sir Henry Yelverton. This laft had diftin- 
guifhed himfelf very eminently in an oppofition to the 
large grant that was given to the crown in the third 
feflion of parliament. *, Sir Francis Bacon, on his enter- 
ing into the office of Bilcitor peeral, profecuted Prieft 

, and Wright, two duellifts ; he made a fpeech inthe Star- 
chamber on the occafion, that was much admired ; but 
, were of too mean condition to ftrike an im- 

portans 


Star-chamber alfo took every pretext to condemn to ex- 


79 


The dig- Ann, 1613. 


80 


Ann. 1613. 


The body of 


Mary queen 
of Scots re- 
moved. 


HISTORY OF: ENGLAND: 


portant example. Duelling was not the only flagrant 
diforder that had crept into the commonwealth: The 
exceflive love of pleafure that pofleffed the court infected 
all ranks of men; every night produced mafks, in 
which people of fortune engaged; idlenefs, expence, 
and pleafure, took place of induftry, frugality, fimpli- 
city, and learning. Nor was the evil partially extended : 
Spacious buildings were erected for exhibiting theatrical 
performances * to the multitude ; and thefe fhews, that 
carry in them a poifon fubverfive of the virtues on which 
the welfare of large focieties is founded, became the 


idols of the people. 


Tue filial piety of James, which had lain long dor- 
mant, now for the firft time exerted itfelf to ation. The 
body of Mary, queen of Scots, was removed at his ex- 
pence from Peterborough to Weftminfter, and a tomb 
with many pompous in{criptions erected. 


Amonc the regulations enacted this year in the coun- 


cils of Scotland, the following one carries with it too — 


much of the difpofition and turn of thinking of the 


_monarch to be.omitteds The counfellors, to keep their 


Spotfwood. 


perfons and places in great refpect, were commanded to 
ride in the ftreets, either with foot-cloths or in dedhasssepicy 
but never to be feen on foot. 


_ * Thefe were deftruétive to the religious fentiments, as well as the 
morals of the vulgar. A ftatute was enacted in the third year of | 
James’s reign, for the preventing and avoiding of the great abufe of i 
the holy name of God in. ftage-plays, interludes, ma : 
cand fuch-like. Vide Statutes at Large, 
ul dois cord aw <erdo ae 


Mery 
fe 
tt 


_ with poluted eyes, and, as{ may faye, deffyled my mirrore. 


APRA M OBO 8.2401. 
- THe court, notwithflanding the large fums it had ex- Ann. 1613.” 
acted on various pretences, was at length driven into the 


neceflity: of parliamentary refources. A public lottery, 
the firft of its kind in England, afforded a fmall delay; 
but the invention of the miniftry being drained as empty 


Sr 


as the Exchequer, a parliament was called for the fifth Parliament. 


of April, 1614. 
parliament had been a very refractory one: The prefent 


miniftry flattered their mafter, from the boafted ma- 
nagement of elections, that a contrary fpirit would cer- 
tainly prevail in this. It was from fuch aflurances that 
James affented to the trial, and afflumed fo much as to 
demand contribution without bargain; and to declare 
he would rather lofe his life, than the honours and 
flowers of his crown *. The firft bufinefs that the par- 


- liament entered on was the fettlement of the fucceflion 


* The following, which is the exordium to the fpeech he made at 
the opening of the feffion, is in too peculiar a ftyle to be omitted by an 
Ahiftorian. 

“ Tt is the fayeing of the wyfefte king that evere was, that the 
harte of kings weare infcrutable; but in the laft parliament, I mufte 
calle to your remembrance the comparrifone I ufed, whearin I pre- 
fented myfelfe unto you as a mirrore, whearin you mighte cleerlye 
fee the integretye of my purpos for lengtheninge that parliament for 


the generrall good and benefyte of the commonwelthe ; but as I then 


fayd of the nature of a mirrore, that it mighte be deffyled by the eyes 
of the behoulderes, fo did fome of the lowere houfe looke upon me 

I canne 
fay no more nowe than I did then, but to offere you the fame mirrore, 
to looke to, proteftyng, as I fhall anfwere it to Almyghty God, that 
my integretye is like the whitnefs of my roabe, my purety like the 
mettle of golde in my crowne, my firmnefs and clearnefs like the pre- 


~ fious ftones I weare, and my affectyones naturalle, like the rednefs of 


amy harte.” Parl. Hift. vol. V. p. 273. 
_ Vou. 1. M on 


It may be remembered that the laft Ann. 1614. 


i Se HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1614. On the iffue of Elizabeth, in default of the male line *. 
After this, both houfes were fummoned into the royal 
prefence at the Banqueting-houfe at Whitehall ; where. 

Puliam Hit. the monarch, after fome excufes and proteftations upon 
the abufes of the government, recommended to them 

- with earneftnefs, concord with the crown and unanimity 
in granting a fupply +. Notwithftanding the cautious 
endeavours of the miniftry, it quickly appeared that the 
members were not of the proper ftamp to ferve the court * 
purpofes. The oppofition carried a motion againft the 
attorney-general’s ferving as a member of the houfe of 
Commons. In the debates on this fubject, Sir Roger 
Owen fhewed, that no attorney-general was ever chofen ; 
nor, anciently, any privy-counfellor; nor any that took 
livery of the King. The precedent he quoted for this 
was in the feventh year of Richard Il. when a knight 
banneret was rejected on this account. It was refolved 
on the queftion, that the attorney-general fhould remain 


* This fettlement, which was in confequence of a demand of the 
King, and the recognition-bill in the beginning of his reign, are two 
of the remarkable inftances which fhew that the hereditary fucceffion to- 
the crown of England is not abfolute; and that fuch a monarchical claim 
is founded on the neglect of aflerting the right of affent, and not om 
any clearly-proved principles in the conftitution, 


+ The arguments he made ufe of for this purpofe were as follow : 
« That as the lafte parliamente begane with trouble and contenthone,, ‘wa 
and ended fo, fo this maye begine with alacritye and love, and con- 
clude fo lykewife; whaer fafty fhall be abroade, and love at homes and i 
all afperffiones and rumores of difcontente betweene me and my people Het 
fhall be taken awaye, and wee maye fynge togethere, Eece! quam bonum | 
&9 jucundum. And when you fhall retwrne to your contraye, you fhall 
have prayfes, and be approeved in the choyfe made ef you, that you 
have given contente to your King.” Parl. Hyi. vol. V. p. 285. 


ne ie 


; 
* 
/ 


JoAOM E SOL 


83 


in the houfe for this parliament, but that he fhould ne- oa. 164 


ver ferve for the future. James had condefcended to 
folicit the houfe that the attorney-general might keep 
his feat this parliament. The courtiers exhaufted their 
arguments for a fpeedy fupply; but it was determined 
that a redrefs of grievances fhould precede it. Commit- 


tees were appointed for preparing lifts of all the national 


complaints. The indulgence to the Papifts, and fevere 
treatment of the non-conformifts, were vehemently com- 
plained of. A bill was prepared for preventing taxes 
and impofitions on merchants, and the debate on it pro- 
ceeded with becoming warmth. In a queftion whether 
the King had a right of impofing taxes, it was unani- 
moufly carried in the negative; notwithftanding the 


- corruption of the judges had given it againft the people 


Certain patentees for monopolies were ordered to furren- 
der their. patents. Sir Thomas Parry, one of the crea- 
tures of the court, who had been the moft bufy in ma- 


naging elections, was expelled the houfe*. The King 


‘had fent to defire that Sir Thomas's punifhment might 


be left to him, with a promife that it fhould be more 
fevere than the Commons themfelves would inflict. This 
requeft was not granted. Orders were iffued for the of- 
ficers of peace for London and Middlefex to bring in the 


letters they had received in favour of Popifh recufants. 


Ina renewed debate concerning impofitions, Sir Henry pee, 


Wootton, who had been employed as ambaflador to Ve- vol.I. p. 493. 


nl nice, and Winwood, the prefent fecretary of ftate, at- 


‘ -* Warm arguments were urged againft this bufinefs of undertaking. 


| Sa afferted, that it was one of the articles for depofing 
; Mi 2° tempted 


84  -HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1614, tempted to prove, that all hereditary princes had a right 
to impofe taxes, though elective ones had not; and in- 
ftanced the princes of Germany and Italy, with the kings 
of France and Spain; particularly Henry the’ Fourth’s 
raifing 14,800,o00l, by an impofition on falt only. Thefe 
abfurd comparifons between princes, whofe powers and 
prerogatives were different, according to the different li+ © 
mitations of their refpective governments, were ridiculed 
by the houfe. Sir Roger Owen advanced, * That the im- 
pofition laid by the French king was an ufurpation, and 
comtrary to the fundamental laws of France; that the 
dukedoms of Florence and Milan were meer tyrannies.” 
Sir Thomas Roe, “ That if the kings of Spain had+fueh 
a power, they had received it from the cortes, or parlia+ 
ments.” Sir Edwyn Sands obferved, * That the courtiers’ 
arguments made againft themfelves,. fiice: the French 
king had raifed fo immenfe a fum: on his. fubjects from 
fuch an aflumed power; that the kings of France, and 
the reft of the impofing princes, do alfo make laws, 
which in a fhort time will bring all things to a tyranni- 
cal courfe and confufion, both to prince and people: 
witnefs the death of the laft. great impofing prince.” In 
anfwer to the diftinction. between an elective and an he- 
reditary prince, he maintained, “ That all kings were ori- 
ginally elected, except fuch as came in by the fword; : 
whom, for that reafon, it was lawful to expel by the ; 
fword, whenever the people had the power to do it*.” 


'* Sir Edwyn Sands had expreffed: his refeeivan of this! tepaeion 
with great vigor and {pirit, tee the —— of meg was firft ar- 
gue in the houfe. 


- 


JAMES I. 


85 


A demand was made for a conference with the Lords * Ann. 1614 


concerning a remonftrance- againft the King’s impofing 
taxes without the confent of parliament; and the Com- 


mons difplayed an admirable fkill, aptnefs, and judg- 


ment, in drawing up the heads on which they were to 
proceed. The Lords fhewed themfelves extremely jea- 


lous of fo {pirited- an exertion, and refufed their con- 


fent to a conference.. This brought on a complaint 
againft Richard Neile +, bifhop of Lincoln, who, in an 


upon four or five ; this King upon fo many hundreds: they but for a 
few months, and, at the prayer of the Commons in parliament, put 
down; here made perpetual by letters patent.. That this liberty of 
impofing trenches. on the foundation of all our interefts, maketh us 
bondmen, giveth ufe but no propriety; the King may by the fame 
reafons make laws without parliaments.” Fcurnals of Parliament, vol.I. 


P- 472. 

It appears by the Journals, that James, after obtaining the judg- 
ment of the Exchequer, had publifhed certain fettled arbitrary rates and 
impofts upon goods, for himfelf and his heirs for ever. ‘—The Commons 
faid, that this was ftrange, becaufe no proclamation bound longer 
than the King’s life; that the judgment. in the Exchequer was erro- 
neous and unconftitutional; and that the matter was above all judg- 


ment, but that of parliament. Journals, vol. I. p..481, & feg 


* Sir Roger Owen, who was appointed to open the conference, was 
: That the King, in anfwer 


directed to make the following obfervation : 
to the laft petition of the Commons on this head, had referred them 
to the law of the land, and yet in the mean time proceeded to multi- 


ply impofitions. Journals of the Commons, vol.1. p. 481, 
f The following is an anecdote that will ferve to illuftrate the. 


character of this prelate. 
__Neile, bifhop of Lincoln, and Andrews, bifhop of Winchefter, be- 


jag, at dines with, the King in public, James in this fituation had: 
to propofe aloud this queftion, <* Whether he might. 


: ta ke his fubjeéts’ money without confent of parliament?” The: 
/cophant .Neile, replied, *© God forbid you fhould not, for you are: 
the: 


‘ 


. HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, i614, advice to the Lords not to agree with the requeft of the 

Commons, had affirmed, the matter on which the con- 

ference was defired ftruck not only at the branch, but at 

the root of the prerogative ; that it was contrary to the 

oaths of allegiance to confer on it; and that he doubted 

: not but there would proceed fome undutiful and fedi- 
tious {peeches from the committees of that houfe, which 

it would be unfit for them to hear. Many expoftula- 

tions paffed between the two houfes on this fubject*: 


the breath of our noftrils.” Andrews declined anfwering, and faid, 
* He was not fkilled in parliamentary cafes.” On the King’s urg- 
ing him, he replied pleafantly, «* 1 think your majefty has an un- 

_ doubted right to my brother Neile’s money.” Life of Andrews, Bifbop 
of Winchefter. 


* In the debates of the lower houfe, it was propofed to pafs a bill 
to feize his bifhopric for feven years towards a fupply. Many mem- 
bers teftified their concern that the King fhould be befet with fuch 
parafites; Mr. Alford was for carrying their complaint to the King; 
Sir Jerome Horfey faid, That they had had continual interruption all 
this parliament; that this bone amongft the reft was thrown in by 
a devil, if a bifhop might be a devil; he wifhed a fele&t committee 
might be nominated to confider of an immediate meffage to the 
King. Sir Edwyn Sands juftly obferved, that to go immediately to — 
the King would wrong the liberties of the upper houfe. The Com- 
mons were determined by the judicious arguments urged by this 
member. It was ordered, on. the queftion, that.there thould be a 
ceffation of all bufinefs, but proceedings on the bifhop of Lincoln, 
till an aniwer fhould come from the Lords concerning that matter. 
The next day the houfe received an admonitory letter from the King 
to defift from their refolution. They were on the point of coming to 
fome fevere refolution againft mis-informers, when Sir Thomas Lake, 
one of the fecretaries of ftate, difcoyered that the King had been 
fhewn the order by the fpeaker, who received a fevere reprimand 
from the houfe, for his unparliamentary proceeding. The anger of 
the Commons againft this offending prelate was heightened by ad a 
anidlity ia Hee ah . we) 


, 
{ 


‘“ | 
ee 
tla ; 


== 


Sree 
A 


JAMES I 


87 


The Commons refufed to proceed on any bufinefs till Ann, 1614. 


they had received full fatisfaétion, which occafioned an 
angry meflage from the King, threatening to diffolve 
them if they did not proceed on the bufinefs of fupply *. 
Papers of arbitrary projects to govern without parlia- 
ments were every night flung about the ftreets. Neither 
did thefe covered or open threats deter the Commons 
from keeping firm to their refolution. The King finding 
that it was impoflible to obtain a fupply, without remit- 
ting fome of his high pretenfions ; and fearing for his 


ereatures, fhould the parliament continue to fit, diffolved 
them. on the feventh of June, before one ftatute was en- 


acted. 


In. this parliament the oppofition had fallen very 
violently upon the new-created titles, on the lottery, om 


the admiffion of Papifts to offices and honours, and on 


the many propofals which had. been made to marry the 


King’s fon to a Popifh princefs. ‘Neither did the increaf- 


ing growth of luxury, which had been too fuccefsfully 
propagated by the example of the court, efcape the cen- 
fure of the patriot members: A bill againft gold, filver, 


gilding, &c. was brought into the houfe, and received 
with approbation. It was pleaded that this fumptuary 


law was confonant to the ordinances of God and nature ; 


Diffolution of 
parliament. - 


that vain expence in apparel, and other kinds of fhew, 
was the caufe of the want of hofpitality: and’ to con- Journals of 


vince the hhoufe of the enormous height this defpicable 


pofal from the Lords, they scleatea: to their refolution of obliging 
Journals; 


the bithop to anfwer at the bar of the haute of Commons. 


vol. I. p. 496, & feq. 
* ‘On an enquiry into the King’s neceffities it was found, that he was 
1,200,000], in debt, and that upwards of 85,0001, went yearly. 


Common 


88 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Aan, oe vice had arofe to-in that centre of extravagance and folly, 


the court, an example was brought of a great courtier 
having expended eighteen pounds a-year upon fhoe- 
ftrings. James was fo injudicious as to wreak his ven- 
geance on the leading members; and feveral of them 
were thrown into prifon: Thomas Wentworth, after- 
wards earl of Strafford, was one of thefe fufferers *. A 


benevolence was demanded in a very arbitrary manner ; 


but it met with fuch a firm fpirit of oppofition from 
all ranks of men, that it anfwered very indifferently the 
purpofes of the court. - 


Tue king of Denmark paid his brother-in-law an- 
other vifit, and diflipation continued ftrongly to prevail. 
Whilft this monarch was in England, a court cabal be- 
gan to threaten the fortune of the favourite Somerfet ; 
a man who differed in no refpect from the common 
herd, excepting in the degree of his vices, which had 
attained an enormous height from the pampering of a 
luxurious court. A vicioufnefs which had no balance 
from fenfe, experience, or judgment, drove him into ex- 
cefles that at length afforded his enemies a full oregte- 
nity to.effect his ruin, 


* This member had expreffed his difapprobation of the meafures of 
the court, in a manner improper and intemperate: he applied the two 
following verfes from the prophet Daniel to the late king of France 
and the king of England: 

“« Then hall ftand up in his eftate a raifer of taxes in the glory of 
the kingdom ; but within a few days he fhall be i neither i in 
anger nor in battle. 

«© And in his eftate fhall ftand up a vile perfon, to whom they hall 
not give the honour of the kingdom, but he fhall come in peaceably, 


and obtain the kingdom by flatteries.” ent. vol. I. p.493. i 44 


‘ atts +. For the bufinefs itfelf, I- proteft I fall be glad, 
Vou I. N may 


gpk cM: BA: 


89 


Tue lady Frances Howard, daughter to the earl of Ann. 1615. 


Suffolk, was one of the beauties of the court; though 
married while yet a child to the earl of Effex, fhe now 
conceived a violent affection for the favourite. The 
charms of their perfons, the equality of their under- 
flandings, the famenefs of their vices, foon produced a 
reciprocal paflion, which they indulged without referve. 
The earl of Effex was yet on his travels, but returned 
foon after the commerce began. He became one of 
Lady Frances’s admirers, and prefled for the pofleflion of 


his privileges. She, attached to the glittering fortune 


of her paramour, refufed; not without hope, by the 
means of fuch a condutt, to regain her freedom. Ef- 
fex, inftead of attaining the accomplifhment of his ex- 
pected happinefs, found a coldnefs, oppofition, and re- 
ferve, which forbad all hopes of enjoyment. The two 
lovers began to conceive affurances of carrying their 
moft fanguine wifhes into execution ; and a procefs was 
commenced by the countefs againft her hufband for 
infufficiency. James, who condefcended to be a party 
in all the intrigues of his favourites, interefted himfelf 
fo warmly in the affair, that a divorce was obtained 
on this plea *, though Abbot, archbifhop of Canterbury, 


* James was prefent at the trial, and urged many arguments to the 
archbifhop in favour of the divorce. The good prelate, notwithftand- 


ing the King’s vehemence, diffented from the judgment that was 


iven. The earl of Southampton writes thus of it to Sir Ralph Win- 
wood. “ Of the nullity I fee you have heard as much as I can 
write; by which you may difcern the power of a King with judges: 
for of thofe which are now for it, I knew fome of them when I was 
| England were vehemiently againft it, as the bifhops of Ely kes 
if it 


* Neile. 
+ Andrews. 


90 


Ann. 1615. 
_ State Trials. 


- Overbary’s 
murder. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


had declared very ftrongly againft it. The divorce was 
followed by the marriage of lady Frances and the vif- 
count; and kept with fuch oftentation by. the court, that 


the city of London complimented them with an invita- 


tion to dinner. The bridegroom was made on this oc 
cafion earl of Somerfet. 


3 Sir Thomas Overbury, a man of fome abilities, that 
had devoted his talents to the fortune of Somerfet, had 


‘been the friend, the advifer, and the manager of all 


his bufinefs, depending on the freedom and facrednefs 
of fuch a connection, exclaimed ftrongly to him againft 
the folly and infamy of the match. Somerfet had the 


weaknefs to tell his miftrefs; Overbury, from that hour,. 
-was doomed to deftruction *, and, om the firft trivial pre-- 


tence that offered, flung into prifon. In this ftate,; rage 
and defpair drew from him fome indifcreet: threatenings, 
which alarmed the fears of Somerfet. He was confcious 


that Overbury was a formidable enemy, from the na-. 


ture of the fecrets he had been entrufted with. Self- 


-prefervation concurred with refentment; the murder of 


Overbury was determined and. perpetrated. The means 
was an envenomed glifter, but not till after his con- 


may lawfully, that it may go forward; though of. late I have been 


fearful of the confequence, and have had. my. fears increafed by the 


laft letters which came to me;. but howfoever, the manner of inter- 


pofing gives me no caufe of contentment,” State Trials, vol.I. p.226,. 


& feq. Winwood, vol. Il. p. 475. 
* This unhappy victim had been the encourager of the amour 


whilft it carried only the face of gallantry. He was not fo fqueamifh. 
as to be ftartled at vice, though his fenfe and experience made him re- 


, 


je& folly. 


SA, Meek, 6:.-% 


flitution had refitted poifon adminiftred to him in va- Aan, 1615 


rious kinds of food. The unwholefome viands which 


had been given to this unhappy man fhewed their ef- 


fects ftrongly upon his carcafe: the excufe given for 
his immediate burial, without infpection, was the foul- 
nefs of his body, which, it was alledged, proceeded 
from an intemperate life. And the earl of Northamp- 


ton, uncle to the countefs, who was privy to the mur- 
der, mentioned in a letter to this purpofe, “ That God 
was gracious in cutting off evil inftruments before 


their time.” 


Winwoop, the fecretary, obtained the knowledge of 
this dark tranfaction from the apothecary’s boy, whofe 
fhop had fupplied the poifon. The fecret of Overbury’s 
murder was now in the pofleflion of the cabal, who 
dealt it about fo freely, that it became the topic of con- 
verfation in all companies. James began to waver in 
his affections ; he had caft a longing eye towards the 
captivating attractions of George Villiers; but, either 
afhamed of his levity, or fond to an uncommon degree 
of diffimulation, he affected a more than ufual regard 
toSomerfet. His real inclinations did not efcape the pe- 
netration of Abbot, who prefled the queen to recom- 
mend the favoured Villiers. She, out of hatred to So- 
merfet, at length complied, though unwillingly. The 
eafon of her unwillingnefs exhibits a remarkable trait 
of James’s character, ‘“ My lord, faid fhe to the arch- 
bifhop, you and the reft of you know not what you do; 
I know your mafter better than you all; for if this 
young man be once brought in, the firft perfon that he 


will plague muft be you that Jabour for him; yea, I 
Sa. Be fhall 


Rife of 


Villiers. 


£% 


92 - -HISTORY OF ENGLAND, | ‘ 


Ann. 1615. fhall have my part alfo; the King will teach him to de- 

a arg ’ fpife and hardly intreat us all, that he may feem to be 

‘#1721. beholden to none but himfelf.” James affected fagacity 
and defign in his moft trifling concerns, and infifted on 
the ceremony of the queen’s recommending, that he 
might have to fay, upon a complaint of the ill beha- 
viour of his favourite, “ It was long of, yourfelf, for 
you were the party that commended him to me.” The 
queen’s compliance introduced Villiers into the houfhold ; 
he was made a gentleman of the bed-chamber, and de- 
clared favourite in form. Abbot took great pains to form 
the difpofition of the youth to virtue: but the foil which 
James affected was too barren for fuch a production. 


Fall of SoMERsET now perceived, notwithftanding his mafter's: 
Somerfet, 


profound diffimulation, that his favour began to wain. 
He knew the inveteracy of his enemies, and was. 
confcious of the advantages his crimes had given them.. 
Tortured with the fears of guilt, and the precarioufnefs- i 
of his fituation, he folicited for a pardon, which he ob- i 
tained in the fulleft form. It was drawn up by Sir Ro- - ! 
bert Cotton, who copied the manner. of a pardon granted. a 
by Henry the Eighth to Wolfey, with the following quef- | 
tionable claufe: “ That the King, out of his mere mo- — 
tion and efpecial favour, did pardon all and all manner Me 
of treafons, mifprifion of treafons, murders, felonies, 
and outrages whatfoever, by the faid Robert, carl of So-_ oe 
merfet, committed, or to be hereafter committed.” This oi 
pardon, though figned by the King, was impeded from 1 
palling the offices, by the enemies of Somerfet. Jatnes. a 
by this time had received ftrong intimations of the a 
guilty fecret, but ftill acted the part of diffimulation, and - 
-" sal CES oe 


Po MME sy E 


93 


_ retired with his quondam favourite to Theobalds; either Ann. 1615. 


with defign to avoid appearing in the profecution, or 
to fly from the clamorous rumours of murder. From 


thence he went to Royfton, where he continued to treat. 


Somerfet with all the appearances of friendfhip; and. 
at the fame time ordered Sir Edward Coke, lord-chief- 


juftice, and Sir Francis Bacon, the attorney-general, to 


take upon themfelves his profecution. A warrant was 


actually ferved on him whilft James, who had an un- 
feemly way of lolling on his favourite’s neck, was in- 
dulging himfelf in that pofture. Somerfet exclaimed 
 againft the outrage of arrefting him in the King’s pre- 
fence; but James could not be prevailed on to remit it 5 
and feigning an entire ignorance of the affair, cried, 
“ Nay, man, if Coke fends for me I muft go;” then, 
after the moft affectionate farewel, as foon as he was 
carried off, he exclaimed, “ Go, and the deel go with 
thee, for I will neere fee thy face more.” He told the 
- lord-chief-juftice, that Somerfet and his wife had made 
him a pimp, to carry on their bawdry and murder; 
and therefore commanded him to examine the affair 
with ftrict fcrutiny, and to fpare no man whatfoever; 
adding, “ God’s curfe be upon you and yours if you 
fpare any of them, and God’s curfe be upon me and 
mine if I pardon any of them.” Sir Jervis Ellis, lieu- 
tenant of the Tower, Franklin, the apothecary, and other 


delinquents, were apprehended. . 


_ Wuarsver was the nature of the fecret, James’s in- 
timacy with Somerfet had certainly produced an inter- 
courfe which gave him fome uneafinefs, The letters 


that ir Francis Bacon wrote on the occafion of the 
profecution. 


sta? 


94 
Ang, 1615. 


Cabala, p. 36. 


Ib. p- 37+ 


omerfet 
ied, 


HISTORY GF -ENGLAND. 


profecution prove that the criminal was, from this cir- 
cumftance, formidable enough to require management. 
“ He approves of a charm to be infufed into Somerfet’s 
ear, but wifhes it was more enlarged, and that the ut- 
moft favours fhould be continued, on condition of his 
prudent demeanors.” Somerfet continued fo dogged 
and aflured in his carriage, that there were thoughts of 
reftoring him altogether to grace. Bacon, in another 
letter, diffluades the King from fuch an impolitic con- 
duct, and advifes certain hopes to be- given to the cri- 
minal two or three days before the trial; “ But all thefe 
hopes, continues he, of favour and mercy, are to be 
underitood with this limitation; if he does not, by his 
contemptuous and infolent carriage at the bar, make 
himfelf uncapable and unworthy of them.” “ That 
danger, returned James, is well to be forefeen, left. he, 
upon the one part, commit unpardonable errors, and I, 
on the other part, feem to punifh him in the fpirict of 
revenge.” . 


Arter thefe precautions had been ufed, and the cri- 
minal at length convinced that his life depended 
upon his prudent behaviour, the two principals were 
brought to their trial *, The countefs pleaded - 


* Sir Anthony Weldon relates an anecdote he had from Sir George 
More, lieutenant of the Tower. When he (More) came to tell So-_ 
merfet he muft prepare for his tria} on the morrow, he refufed to ap- 
pear, and faid, “« The King durft not bring him to it.” On More’s 
informing the King of thefe expreffions, he burft into tears, and in- 
treated him to ufe his utmoft fkill, and footh the prifoner by whatever 
means into temper and fubmiffion. ‘e b- mS: ry : 

The fame author relates, that More, when Somerfet was brought _ 
to his trial, placed a fervant on each fide of him, with Saoaide nh 


Oe v 


3 j & M? © S I. 
guilty *, and Somerfet made a languid defence. 


95 


They Ann. 1615. 


both received fentence of death, and continued a long condemned, 


time in prifon;. but had afterwards, notwithftanding 


penfion of four thoufand pounds a-year. In one of the © 


letters which Somerfet wrote to James after he was re- 
manded to the Tower, there is this obfcure paragraph: 
¢ I will fay no farther, neither in that which your ma- 


their arms, giving a peremptory order, If Somerfet did any way fly 
out on the King, that they fhould. inftantly hoodwink him with that 
cloak, take him by force from the bar, and carry him off. 

One of the precautions which Bacon. had recommended to James 
was, to be careful to chufe a fteward of judgment, that might be able 
to moderate the evidence, and eut off digreffions; “ For I may inter- 
rupt, adds he, but I cannot filence.” 

On the day of trial, when Somerfet. was on the point of {peaking 
for himfelf, the lord-high-fteward gave him the following caution: 
« My lord of Somerfet, faid he, hath behaved himfelf modeftly in 
the hearing ; and only this (before you {peak for yourfelf) by way of 
advice I will fay unto you, in giving you two examples: Your wife, 
that yefterday confeffed the fact; and there is great hopes of the 
King’s mercy, if you now mar not that which fhe made. On the con- 
trary, Byron, who, when the king of France ufed all the means he 
poflibly could to bring him to the acknowledgment of his offence; 
which if he had done, there was no queftion to be made of the 
King’s grace. And I think there never was, nor is, a more gracious 
and merciful king than our matter. 
denial of the fact, you know his end.” Cadela, fol. ed. 1663, p. 54. 
State Trials, vol. 1. p. 346. 

* At her arraignment appeared feveral Jetters that had paffed be- 
_tween her and her agents; the purpofe of which was the expected fuc- 
_cefs of fome magical courfes which thefe people had undertaken,. and 
this weak woman had depended on, for the ends of debilitating her 
_hbufband, and rendering her lover conftant in his affeétion ; feveral wax 
St brazen images acuided for thefe purpofes were likewife expofed. 


Trials, vol. I, : 
jetty 


“ 
a aa 


cere 
. 202.. 


But Byron {till perfifting in the - 


James’s tremendous execration, a pardon, and enjoyed a ind pardon- 


96 


Aan. 1615. 
7 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


jefty doubted my aptnefs to fall into, for my caufe nor 
my confidence is not in that diftrefs as to ufe that means _ 
of interceffion.” The union of this guilty couple, which 
had been accomplifhed by the violation of the moft fa- 
cred laws of fociety, became, from their mutual diftafte, 
their fevereft punifhment, . 


Tuese following inftruments of the murder, Sir Jer- 
vis Ellis, lientenant of the Tower *, Mrs. Turner, Wef- 


ton, who had been appointed keeper to Overbury, and 


Franklin, the apothecary, were convicted and executed. 
Sir Thomas Monfon, a creature of Somerfet’s, was ac- 
cufed as a party, and brought to his trial, but for pri- 
vate reafons was remanded to prifon +. The earl of 
Northampton, uncle to the countefs, had been privy to 
all the circumftances of the murder, but died a little 


* Sir William Wade was removed from the lieutenancy of the Tower 
immediately before Overbury’s confinement, and this inftrument of So- 
merfet’s villainy fubftituted in his place. 

+ Sir Anthony Weldon tells the following ftory on the fubject of this 
remand. The King being at the game of maw, faid,. « Tomorrow 
comes Tom Monfon to ‘his trial.” « Yea, faid the King’s card- 
holder; where if he does not play his mafter-prize, your majefty fhall 
never truft me.” This fo run in the King’s mind, continues the au- 
thor, as the next game he faid he was fleepy, and would play out that 
fet next night. The gentleman departed to his lodging ; ; but was no 
fooner elle but the King fent for him: what communication they had I 
know not {yet it may be can more eafily guefs than any other) but 
it is moft certain, next under God, that gentleman faved his life ; for 
the King fent a poft prefently to London, to let the lord-chiefijuftice 
know he would fee Monfon’s examination and confeffion, to fee if it 


"were worthy to touch his life for fo fmall a matter. Monfon was too 


wife to fet any thing but fair in his confeffion ; what he would have 
ftabbed with fhould have been (viva voce) at his men i He Rigen 
e 103, & eg. : a 


. . au? Ji wi Imi ®@ § 2 yy 


time after the perpetration of it *. 
the nearnefs of their connection, chief counfellor to So- 
merfet; he was made warden of the Cinque-ports, and, 
by his connivance, the importation of priefts and jefuits 
went on freely. Abbot procured his difgrace by produc- 
ing a letter of his to cardinal Bellarmine, wherein he de- 
oe himfelf wholly devoted to the fee of Rome. - 
aifin ff aioi 


roid Hh aca 
hah chiw Dew 


} JO SIO csv: S172 
Cc BbacAinoBi 2’ V; 


f a> 


{ Coke’ a ii pa rs bis office.—-——Cautionary jens 


' delivered —— Affairs of ‘Scotland, —TIreland.—Holland.——Sir 
W. Raleigh's expedition. ——His fatal end.—— His charatter. 


MY ee difgrace and ruin of the old favourite removed 
all obftruction to the rifing fortune of the new one. 
ooo ee his’ ‘want of es fad hitherto been de. 


-* The following { is the copy of 4 letter from the earl of Northanip. 


ton to Sir Jervis Ellis, lieutenant of the Tower. 
“© Worthy Mr. Lieutenant, let me intreat you to call Lidcote and 
three or four of his friends, if fo many come, to view the body, if they 
have not already done it; and fo foon as it is viewed, without flaying 
, the coming of a meffenger from the court, in any cafe fee it interred in 
a the body of the chapel within the Tower, inftantly. 
| « If they have viewed, then bury it by and bys for it is time, con- 
a . fidering the humours of that damned, crew, that only defire means to 
h be e pity and raife fcandals. Let no man’s inftance move you to make 
‘ ike diy iin any cafe ; and bring me thefe letters when I next fee you. 
- « Fail not a jot herein, as you love your friends; nor after Lidcote 
and his friends have viewed ftay one minute, but let the prieft be 


ready; and if ‘Lidcote be. not there fend for bir een: args 


i will nottarry, © 
hafte at twelve.” Weedlved, vol. IL. fp 482. 


Mon. 3 oO prived 


97 


“He became, “from Ann: 1615. 


en ae HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann.1615.’ Ptived of the pleafure of enriching this. minions — 
fpoils of Somerfet afforded him. that fatisfaction *. 


mage of royal, favour. “James, found. Sn idtaa igpaftien 
of the youth an unbounded. levity, and a ductile licens 
tioufnefs, which promifed, as. glorious -a harveftas: vice 
and folly could defire.., It was imagined, that the change 
of manners in Somerfet, from a trifling obfcene buffoonery 

to a gravity tinctured with fadnefs, was one of the prin- 
cipal caufes of Jamées’s inconftancy, who now enjoyed a 
double felicity in the accor eae of his withes, and 
the ceffation full th his. cat hg mi iar this, ea . 
fome <croffes ill [ thwarted Gahngen Paria WO 


Coke’s oppo- _ LoRD-CHIEEF-JUSTICE, pore man, of. a. bn 
per, from fome, trapfattions, that had happened jduri 
Somerfers, trial, was, extremely, difpleafed with, the counts, 


this difpleafure gave rife to an integrity which had ne- 

ver, yet, appeared, in his. politica). conduct; -He'iformed a 
ftrong party among: the: lawyers, and attacked’ the ufurp- 
ations. of the crown. upon all! occafions. © ‘Part of the 
prerogative concerning? commendams to Tivings’ ‘was. ‘now. 
difputed in’ the ‘Commion-Pleag 5. ; the judges were againft | 
the crown, and had even. the {pirit, to, difregard: a com-)  - 
mand from: the King.to ftop proceedi The: command: 

was delivered in® a letter from the’ artorney-general, Sir 


ar your 
Francis Bacon.’ “The: “judges: pronounced the comma | 
to be SHAY to. Jaw, and, as. inch shey, ween ia © « 


ro’ abe ry 

_.* Thefe. Sgeiltsmpnsiedo slickdonaiagisabbiiete caaPabmapaiee 

19,0001. a-year; an immenfe wealth, if eftimated the value off 

money in pear Tl] Jov An “arbre teflon bn 
: | = 


cidu : “99 


AE gi jf oN Mif § 44,1 


obey, but to proceéd to: judgment as bound by oath. This Agp. 1615. 

roufed James fromihis retreat at Royfton; he fent a bluf- 

tering: reprimand to the judges, in which he highly af 
an ferted his ‘prerogative, and’ treated their oath merely as 
a form devifed by His" predeceflors, which, he faid, could 
never be afieant’as a weapon’ to wound royal power. 

The judges':were convened into thé Star-chamber, and — . 
James’ difplayed his arbitrary pretenfions in a {pecies of 
1 reafoning’ peciliartd ‘+himfelf. Coke maintained the 
juftnefs of the ‘refufal by the authority of two atts of 
patliament; and° when’ Bacon officioufly took up the 
caufe of majeftyy hé excepted againft fuch’ an intérfer- 
ing; as* of an’ oppofite nature ‘to’. the office of attorney- 
general, who was to plead before the judges, not againtt 
: them. . The judges had not the courage longer to refift ; 
peed and, to the great’ diflatisfaction of the chiéf-juftice; 

. meanly fubmitted the café to the judgmént of the privy> 
council, who determined it for the’ prerogative. An an- Maolle’s Life 
fwer of Coke’s:in this debate is\worthy of record. On 
James’s raifing his voice, and afkin®the judgés in a 
peremptory manner, “ Whether if in a cafe depending - 
before thém; he conceived it to coricern him’ in’ profit or 
power, a and thereupon required to confult with them, 
anda ftay of proceedings, whéther they ought not to 
flay them accordingly?” all but the lord-chief-juftice af- 
fented’ to the demanded obligation’; but he’ with dignity, 
réplied, “ That when fuch a cafe happened, he would 


%, chat: wpnch, was fit for a judge to do.” 


adtbeaw; the’ greateht preferment-(eeket of the age, to 


-abufe of his excellent talents, had fought aggran- 
Ever. the 


__ difement by the moft contemptible means. 
O 2 tool 


~ 
+ 
i) 


_ Feo 


Ans 161g 


Cabala, p.29- 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


tool of authority, from the creature of Somerfet he had 
become the creature of Villiers; blind and infenfible to 
the fuperiority of true dignity, he eagerly purfued, in 
the moft difgraceful manner *, that deceitful image of 
it which attracts the vulgar. From Villiers he had now 
the promife of fucceeding the chancellor, who was ina 
vifible decline. In a letter to James, full of the moft fer- 
vile adulation, he begged this place, and aflerted it was 
the intereft of the King to give it him. | He objected to 
Coke’s popularity, and faid, “ That fuch men were no 
fure mounters for his majefty’s faddle; to Hobart, be- 
caufe he was no ftatefman; and if, he and Coke were 
placed at both ends of the council-board, the prerogative 
would be cramped between the two lawyers, who would 
generally agree in exalting law above power. For my- 
felf, fays he, I can only prefent your majefty with gloria 
in obfequio; when adirection is once given; it fhall be pur- 


-- fued and performed, and your majefty only troubled with 


the true care of a King, to. think in chief what ig would. 
Baye done, not howe yates 


Ina Nola between the judges and the: shincelfers 
the jurifdiction of whofe court was already extended to 
the detriment of the law, the chancellor was nie og 


_ * In a letter to James he draws a lively picture of his pooner 
‘© How honeftly ready I have been, moft gracious fovercign, (writes 
he) to do your majefty humble fervice to the beft of my power,. in the 
commiffion of union, and this laft parliament forthe bill of fubfidy, 
both body and preamble, in the bill of attainders, in the matter of 
purveyance, in the ecclefiaftical petitions, in the uenerences and: the 
like ; as I was ever careful, not without good faccefs, fometimes to 


put forward that which was good, fometimes to keep back that w 


was worfe.” Cabala. 102 pine 


' GAAHFOA IME 65 . 101 
for having incurred a premunire * in entertaining a Aan. 1615. 
= caufe that had been adjudged in the court of Common- 
i Pleas. The profecution was fupported by Coke and the . 
- judges +. James was glad of an opportunity to weaken 
the authority of the courts of common law. On the 
fearching of precedents there were found many exam- 
ples of proceedings in Chancery after judgment in thefe 
courts : On this authority, James fummoned the parties Sanderfon, 
into the Stat-chamber,; where he harangued with: his ,f2"' 
iz ufual flights of the power of kings, and obedience of 
, fubjects.. « Kings, he faid, fat in. the throne of God, och inne 
) and from thence all judgment is derived.” He compared Statchamber. 
the power of judgment in Chriftian kings to that of 
Mofes, to whom all profound queftions were left. He 
determined: from thence that there is a conjunction be:- 
tween God and the king upward, and the king and the 
judges downward. ‘ Encroach not upon the preroga- 
tive; deal not in difficult queftions. That which con- 
cerns the myftery of the king’s power is not lawful to 
be difputed, for that. is to.wade into the weaknefs of 
princes, and’ to: take away the myftical reverence that 
belongs to thofe:who fit en the throne of God: It was 
an odious and inept f{peech to fay that a premunire lay 
r againft the court of Chancery; I mean not that the 
| Chancery fhould exceed its limits, but the King only is 


Se 0 
. ‘ 
: 


a : * On the ftatute of Henry IV. that the judgment given in the King’s 
court fhall not be examined in chancery, parliament, or elfewhere, un- 
til it be undone. by attaint or error. 


_ t Some time before this rupture, James, in a converfation with the 
Dee juftice Coke and the lord-chancellor, had charged them to 
refer all difputes to his private decifion. 
Carleton, 1758, Pp. 45: 
QaLrae ad 


Letters from and to Sir Dudley: 


led 


102 


Ann. 1615.0. 


HISTIORY OFMENGLAND. 


to-correctit,,and none. elfe.” : He! commanded that.no 
man. hereafter fhould prefume to fhew a premunire 
againgt: the court of Chancery., Then. inthe moft hy- 


perbolical; frains he praifed the Star-chamber, and after- _ 


wards addrefled: himfelf to the whole auditory, and ad- 
vifed them: “ Not to prefume to meddle with things 
againft the king’s prerogative or honour; for if) they 
did the judges will :punifh them; and in cafe the: judges 
do not, he muft: punifh: both them and the judges. 


Plead. not, continued he, upon puritanical ftrains, that 


~ make all. things opelagy: but keep you within the an- 


cient limits *.” " beyitst 


o] ‘Sir Edward Coke was the: fufferer from this rina 
of James, to whom he was perfonally odious. He was 
profecuted with the utmoft rancour on the following 
heads: Firft, for having concealed a ftatute due to the 
crown of twelve thoufand pounds from the lord-chan: 
cellor Hatton, whofe-widow he had married; fecondly; 
for having exprefled himfelf upon the bench as: if) the 
common law was in danger of being overthrown, with 
snieyh cicies as if the King was its enemy ; spn for 


* Bacen’s einen to the Kings in the bufinels abe the premunire, is 
one. of the innumerable inftances that this contemptible time-feryer 
has given of the fervility and corruptnefs of his heart. ‘ This great 


and public affront, fays he, not only to the reverend and well-deferv-. 


ing perfon of your chancellor (and at a time when he was thought to 
lie on dying, which was barbarous) but to your high court of Chan- 
cery, which is the court of your abfolute power, may not (in my 
opinion) pafs lightly, nor end_only. in, fome formal. BIOnEREDE.» but 
ule is to be. made thereof, for. the fettling your authe 
ening your. prerogative, aepingy to: the. true rul 
Cabala, p. 32. 


OJ 


~) 


(ApoOM MID RaAatTerH Log 


having behaved difrefpectfully to the King in the cafe of Ann. 1615. 
commendams, and injurioufly to the lord-chancellor im rane 
the affair of the premunire.: Though the lord-chief. 

juftice could not be legally convicted on any of’ thefe 

articles, yet, by the fentence of the Star-chamber, he 

was brought upon his: knees, deprived of his office *, ese palin 
and: ordered to retire to a private life, there to review bfie. 
his. Jaw-works,::to —_ one y apg grt had 


cs bas), als \ 36 Lootiv 
: stindin’ vintinktbaeoes in Coke's ‘bieavieter had con= 
‘ etuinbd to draw upon him this: unjuft treatment. | He was: 
not only obnoxious: to James from, the: oppofition he had 
vaifed tothe: ufurpations of \the crown > he had even 
* ventured’ to! offend the’ minion Villiers.! Sir Nicholas: 
Tuftom had: a. patent-place! inthe‘ green-wax: office in the 
King's-Bench, «which the favourite wanted: to fill with’ 
enerofivhis creatures.’ He obtained! the»furrender sof the 
rr place:from: Sir Nicholas by the bribe of a: peerage ; but! 
mse _ metcwitho am obftacle in Coke, »who: igaaresietn to. aaleaiiy a 
clerk. oft Walliers’s: nomination. | °o « En 


a t “ - Pus, 
<otroh mort} sciscay ¢ 1 78012 do 


(Tine recent reba nsbh of thie prerogative: over law-des) 
Pe the: courtiers with the aioe of an» piece 


" 


' 


; 


ih * 9, Coke's being thus deprived. of his. offices Bacon, wilt len 
he been long at variance, wrote him an abufive . railing epittle,. 
with the following exordium: “ That he fuppofed this to be the 
time of his affli€tion, and therefore he took the feafonable advantage 
to fhewihim his imperfections.” ‘The beginning of this letter is written: 
inya ftyle.of | religious} capt that does as little credit to the, genius’ of the, 
east oe ie e which is. in. it does to the qualities of his heart, 


718 Ree 
goterasio 


4 - , 
oO rono;8»n iQ 


tyranny: + 


oq HISTORY OF ‘ENGLAND, 


Ana. 16152. tyranny: What could be more promifing to the enemies 
of civil liberty than’ the increafing jurifdiction of the . 
Chancery, and the confirmed ee us the Star- 
chamber *) in mob a Figg fo 26trbls why 
; moro od peg 5 
Creathin oF AN )ocdafion fe an ve deseraieedbbasty! expence and pagean- 
ales. try offered this year, in the creation of a prince of Wales: 
A profufion of’ titles» followed this ceremony. — Villiers 
obtained that of vifcount, and at the end of. the year 
arcs, was made earl of Buckingham. The great bar to that 
excefs of pomp arid. pleafure the court delighted to revel 
in, was the poverty of the Exchequer ; a malady to which 
the unmeaning prodigality of James continually fub- 
Cautionary jected it. Neceflity reduced the miniftry to part with 
va sla ee thofe towns which had been pledged by the States to 
Elizabeth for the prodigious fum of eight millions of 
florins. This was all.due to the crown of England. 
They were reftoted this -yeat for the fum of two mil-+ 
lions feven hundred and twenty-eight thoufand florins. 
Thefe towns were confidered as keys to the Low-Coun- 
tries: the miniftry of Elizabeth had taken advantage of 
the neceflities of that brave people to make them depen- 
dant on the crown of England. The large fum which 
thefe extorted depofites were pledged for was a payment 
of the whole affiftance of men and money they had re- 
ceived from Elizabeth ; an afliftance which all the ‘wie 

tions of virtue demanded to be a free gift. 


So confiderable a recruit enabled James to perform 
what he had long intended, a vifit to his native coun- 
try; nor was it deférred by any ‘other’ ‘motive but his 
inability, from the want of money, to fhine with an 


« 
Sy eee: 


ea. MR Bhs. 
oftentation worthy the dignity of the king of Britain. Ann 1615. 
- Affairs o 


The Scots were obliged to incur the expence of this 5. 


chargeable gueft. What made the profpect of it very 
difagreeable to them was a jealoufy left this vifit was 
intended with a defign to effect invafions on their eccle- 
fiaftical liberties. To quiet this jealoufy, James wrote a 
letter to the council, in which he aflured them that his 


refolution to vifit this kingdom did proceed of a longing 


he had to fee the place of his breeding, a falmon-like 
inftinét ; and becaufe he knew that evil-difpofed people 
would difperfe rumours as if he came to make altera- 
tions in the civil and ecclefiaftical eftate, he commanded 
proclamation to be made for certifying the fubjects to 
the contrary. It was true that he defired to do fome 
good at his coming, and to have abufes reformed both 
in the church and commonwealth; yet forefeeing the 
impediments that his good intentions would meet with 
and regarding the love of his people no lefs than their 
benefit, he would be loth to give them any difcontent, 
and therefore willed all his good fubjects to lay afide 
their jealoufies, and accommodate themfelves in the beft 
fort they could for his reception, and the entertainment 
of the noblemen of England, who were to accompany 
him in this journey. Notwithftanding thefe affurances, 


the order for employing fome Englifh carpenters to de- 


corate the King’s chapel at Edinburgh with the images 
of the apoftles increafed the jealoufy of the nation to 
fuch a height, that James was intreated in an addrefs by 
their clergy to countermand the order. James {fo far af- 
fented as to ftay the erecting the images, but withal fig- 
nified to them, in a letter full of expreflions of anger 


and contempt, that ne did not do it for the eafe of their 


hearts, 


oe VoL, 7; 


los 


tland. 


Spotfwood, 
1677; p. 529. 


106 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Aah igs hearts, or for confirming them in their errors, but be- 
po’ > 


Pr 53% 


caufe the decorations in that form could not be finifhed 
at the appointed time. Notwithftanding thefe heart- 
burnings, he was received with all the pomp that the 
Scotch government, which had been fome time faving 
for the occafion, could afford. He made ufe of his per- 
fonal authority to get an a& pafled by the lords of the 
articles *, that whatfoever he fhould determine in the 
external government of the church, with the advice of 
the archbifhops, bifhops, and a competent number of 
the miniftry, fhould have the ftrength of a law. This 
act, contrary to the nature and exiftence of prefbytery, 
was even remonftrated againft by the Scotch prelacy, who 


| Knew the difpofition of the people, and feared that the 


total lofs of power would follow the premature exertion 
of itt. James had carried his point fo far as to gain, 


* In a late publicaticn of letters, &e, by Dr. Birch, there is a letter 
to Bacon from a gentleman who attended the King in this journey to 
Scotland, which hath this remarkable defcription of the ftate of the go- 
vernment of that country at this time of James’s vifiting it. 


* « Phe King did perfonally and infallibly fit amongft them of the 
parliament every day, fo that there fell not a word among them but 
his majefty was of council with ir. 


«« The whole affembly, after the wonted manner, was abftracted into 
eight bifhops, eight lords, eight gentlemen knights of the fhire, and. 
eight lay burgefles for towns; and this epitome of the whole parlia- 
ment did meet every day in one room, to treat and debate ef the great: 
affairs of the kingdom. There was exception taken againft fome of the- 
lower houfe, which were returned by the country, being pointed at as: 
men averfe in their appetites and humours to the bufinefs of parliament; 
who were depofed of their attendance by the King’s power, and Bera) 
better affected, by the King’s eleétion, placed in their room.” * : 


+ The bifhops, writes Spotfwood, interceding, did humbly intreat » 
— the article might be better inate A for that in a of eccle- 


$ | APPR OME BE OL | 709 
P with much management, a parliamentary confent; but Ano. 1645." 
other difficulties were not to be furmounted. 
Tus minfters aflembled and drew up a petition Spotfvord, 
againft this innovation, and put the King in mind of °°" *"* 
the letter, in which he afflured them, that his intended 
pe” journey to Scotland was not to produce any alteration in 
_ the civil or ecclefiaftical government of the kingdom. ae 
| oe The proteftation concludes thus: « Thefe and many 
i other reafons have moved us, in all reverence, by this 
our humble fupplication, to entreat your highnefs and 
honourable eftates, not to fuffer the afore-named article, 
or any other prejudicial to our former liberties, to pafs 
at this time, to the grief of this poor church ; that the 
univerfal hope of thoufands in this land, who rejoiced 
A Ss at your majefty’s happy arrival, be not turned into 
at mourning ; wherein, as we are ecarneft fupplicants to 
: . God to incline your majefty’s heart this way, as the 
e ' mioft expedient for the honour of God, and weal of your 
fubjects, fo, if we fhall be fruftrated of this our reafon- 
i able defire, then do we in all humility (with that dutiful 
te _ acknowledgment of our loyalty to your majefty as_be- 
a : cometh) proteft, for ourfelves and all our brethren who 
-fhall adhere to this proteftation, that as we are free of 


fiaftical laws the advice and confent of prefbyters was alfo required. 
\ The King replying, ** That he was not againft the taking of minifters 
gk their advice, and that a competent number of them fhould be called to 
'  affift the bifhops; but to have matters ruled as they have been in your 

general affemblies, I will never agree: for the bifhops muft rule the 

minifters, and the King rule both, in matters indifferent, and not re- 

int to the word of God.” So the article paffed in this form, That 


whatfoever, &c. Spotfwood, p. 531. 
Li. Pi “an or RE 


108 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1615, the fame, fo muft we be forced rather to incur the cen- 
fure of your majefty’s law, than to admit or obtemper 
any impofition that fhall not flow from the church or- 
derly convened, others having power from the fame.” 
This petition and proteftation was fubfcribed but by one 
minifter, in the name of the brethren and fupplicants; __ $ 
but in a feparate paper each minifter that was prefent 
at this aflembly figned his name as a teftimony of his 
concurrence. One Hewit, who, from his preferment, 
had a feat in the parliament-houfe, was the perfon 
pitched on to prefent the petition to the King. The 
archbifhop of St. Andrew’s, a zealous prelate, having 
heard of what was going forward, attempted in the - 
King’s anti-chamber to fnatch the paper out of Hewit’s Ber 
hands, James was made acquainted with this tranfae- 
tion, and came into the anti-chamber, and enquired into 
the particulars of the buftle: The archbifhop anfwered, 
* That a number of minifters having framed a proteft- 
ation againft the article of his majefty’s prerogative, had 
given it to the man whom he had made abbot, to pre- 
fent, and that he had undertaken to do the fame, for 
which he was taking him to tafk, it being an unduti- 
ful part, without fignifying the matter to his ordinary, 
to take fuch a bufinefs in. hand.” : 


a as ~~ = = — 


On this reprefentation, the poor prieft, frighted 
with the terrible looks of the King and the arch- 
bifhop, fell upon his knees, and with a vifible confu- 
fion faid, “ That he fuppofed the proteftation would 
‘not have offended his majefty, and that he had pro- 
mifed to prefent the fame in parliament; but now that _ 


it 


Joke Mab &)-4 


109 | 


it appeared to him otherwife, he would no more meddle Ann. a6 tse 


therewith.” 


Tue King, feeing by the two papers that a number 
had avowed this petition, fufpected that the innovating 
article would be protefted againft in full parliament, and 
commanded the regifter to erafe it as a thing unneceflary, 


it giving no addition to his prerogative. 


He afterwards called together an affembly of the 
clergy, on whom he wanted to impofe thefe four arti- 
cles: That the eucharift fhould be received kneeling ; 
that a private adminiftration of it fhould not be denied 
to fick perfons; that Chriftmas, Eafter, Afcenfion-day, 
and Whit-Sunday, fhould be kept as holy-days; and 
that confirmation fhould be folemnized by the bifhop’s 


blefling. 


James to this aflembly put on a very magifterial air, 
and afked them, why they had difputed admitting that 


power which had been acknowledged by the lords of 


the articles. “ It is a power innate, faid he, and a fpe- 
cial prerogative, which we, that are Chriftian kings, have, 


to order and difpofe of external things in the policy of 
the church; and, Sirs, for your approving or difapprov- 
ing, I will never regard it, unlefs you bring me a reafon 


which I cannot anfwer.” 


_ Tue minifters very prudently waved this difficult tafk, 
and fubmitted the King’s demands to the opinion of the 
general affembly ; and James found that they all mutt 


be: 


110 


Ann. 1616. 


Four articles 
impofed on 
the Scotch 
church, 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND.- 


be fubject to an after-judgment. Symfon, the. minifter 
who drew up and figned the proteftation againft the arti- 
cle that had met with the affent of the Lords, was com- 


mitted to prifon ; and Catherwood, who carried circular | 


letters to the minifters to encourage them to adhere to 
it, was banifhed. The four articles of innovation which 
James would have impofed upon the clergy were rejected 
in the general aflembly that met immediately on hi§ de- 
parture, but were adopted the year after * 


* Before this afiembly met, the bifhops, who had aéted more cau 
tioufly in thefe ‘affairs than was fuitable to the King’s inclination, re- 
ceived the following letter from him : 


“© We were once fully refolved never in our time to have called any 


more affemblies here for ordering things concerning the policy of the ~ 


church, by reafon of the difgrace offered unto us in that late meeting 
of St. Andrew’s, wherein our juft and godly defires were not only 
neglected, but fome of the articles concluded in that fcornful manner, 
as we wifh they had been refufed-with the reft: yet at this time we 
have fuffered ourfelves to be intreated by you our bifhops for a new 
convocation, and have called you together, who are now convened 
for the felf-fame bufinefs which was then urged, hoping affuredly that 
you will have fome better regard to our defires, and not permit the 
unruly and ignorant multitude, after their wonted cuftom, to over- 
{way the better and more judicious fort in evil, which we have gone 
about with much pains to have had amended in thefe affemblies ; and 
for that purpofe, according to God’s ordinance, and the conftant prac+ 
tice of all well-governed churches, we have placed you that are bifhops 
and overfeers of the reft.in the chiefeit rooms. You plead much, 
we perceive, to have things done by confent of minifters, and ‘tell us 


often that what concerneth the church in general fhould be concluded. 


by the advice of the whole; neither do we altogether diflike your opi- 


_nion, for the greater is your confent the better are we contented, But 


we will not have you to think that matters propofed by us, of the na- 
ture whereof thefe articles.are, may not, without fuch a general os 
fent, be enjoined by our authority,  ~ 


a3 ee 


J A-M.E S 


: _ James returned from Scotland very much diffatisfied Ann. 1616. 
with. the little compliance he had received from his 


i ae «¢ This were a mis-knowing of your places, and withal a difclaim- 
. ing of that innate power which we have by our calling from God, 
whereby we have place to difpofe of things external in the Church, -as 

we fhall think them to be convenient and profitable for advancing true 

religion among our fubjects ; wherefore let it be your care, by all man- 

ner. of wife and difcreet perfuafions, to induce them to an obedient 
{ yielding to thefe things, as in duty both to God and us t!ey are bound; 
‘and do not think we will be fatisfied with delays, mitigations, and other 
we know not what fhifts have been propofed, for we will not be content 
with any thing but a fimple and direét acceptation of thefe articles, in 
the form fent by us unto you a long time paft, confidering both the 
DA lawfulnefs and undeniable convenience of them, for the better further- 
1B ance of piety and religion, the eftabhfhing whereof it had rather have 
becomed you to beg of us, than that we fhould have needed thus to 


bay? urge the practice of them upon you. 
© Thefe matters indeed concern you of the ecclefiaftical charge 
rT, chiefly ; neither would we have called noblemen, barons, and others 
of our good fubjects, to the: determination of them, but that we 

underftand the offence of people have been fo much objected, whereia 


pt 

if) . you muft bear with us to fay, that no kingdom doth breed, or hath 

Lees: at this time more loving, dutiful, and obedient fubjects, than we 
ey have in that our native kingdom of Scotland ; and fo, if any difpo- 
Ve fition hath appeared to the contrary in any of them, we hold the fame 
‘ to have proceeded from among you, albeit of all forts of men ye are 


i they that both of duty were bound, and by particular benefits obliged 
to have continued yourfelves, and confirmed others, by found doc- 
trines and exemplary life, in a reverend obedience to our command- 

* ments. What and how many abufes were offered us by divers of the 
miniftry there, before our happy coming to the crown of England, 

we can hardly forget, and yet like not much to remember ; neither 
think we that any prince living fhould have kept himfelf from falling 
ip utter diflike with the profeffion itfelf, confidering the many provo- 
* cations that were given unto us; but the love of God and his truth 


oy upheld us, and will, by his grace, fo do unto the end of our 
“ota patience always in forgetting and forgiving of many faults. 
of 


Bret oe hia’ HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


P _, Ann. 1616. Scotch fubjeéts, whom he imagined he had entirely 
gained by the profufion of favours he had beftowed 
on many of their nobility, and on his domeftic fervants 
of that nation. Though the Scots, from the powerful 
influence of educational prejudices, were apt to entertain 
attachments contrary to reafon and the good of fociety 5 
yet a fpirit of religious faction, impoliticly attacked by 
of that fort, and conftant maintaining of true religion againft the ad- 
verfaries (by whofe hateful practices we live in greater peril than you 
all, or any of you) fhould have produced better effeéts among you than 
, continual refiftance of our beft purpofes. We with that we be no more 
es provoked, nor the truth of God, which you teach and profefs, any 
! fe longer flandered by fuch as, under the cloak of feeming holinefs, walk 
diforderly amongft you, fhaking hands, as it were, and joining in this 
their difobedience to magiftracy, with the upholders of Popery. In 
fum, our hearty defire is, that at this time you make the world fee, 
by your proceedings, what a dutiful refpeét you bear to us your fo- 
vereign prince, and natural king and lord; that as we in love and 
care are never wanting to you, fo ye, in an humble fubmiffion to our 
fo juft demands, be not found inferior to others our iubjeéts, in any 
of our kingdoms; and that the care and zeal of the good of God’s 
church, and of the advancing of piety and truth, doth chiefly incite 
us to the following of thefe matters, God is our witnefs ; the which, 
that it may be before our eyes, and that, according to your callings, 
you may ftrive, in your particular places, and-in this general meeting, 
to do thofe things which may beft ferve to the promoting of the 
Gofpel of Chrift ;-even our prayers are earneft to God for you, requir- 
ing you, in this and other things, to credit the bearer hereof, our fer- 
vant and chaplain, the dean of Winchefter, whom we have exprefly fent . 
thither, that he may bring unto us a certain relation of the particular 
carriages of all matters, and of the happy event of your meeting, 
which, by God’s bleffing (who is the God of order, peace, and truth 
we do affuredly expect; unto whofe gracious direction we comme ; 
you now and for ever. 


“ Given at Theobalds, the ar of July 1616.” nd Syifoné, ‘ wa a 
P. 537 & feq. — ae 


ama af “ | 


<_— 
ad 
at 
: 


Nt al 


I, 113) $ 


} , 
b J A ME Ss 
ting __- James, gave rife.to jealoufies that baffled the power of As». 1516 
1 — §iefes eee pocg ate 


ee 
Paes | Tue cath of Tyrone, the chief of the Popith party Irland. 
t | in Ireland, and a leader in all their rebellions, was pro=. ~ 
}. > eae ‘tected and fupported by the king of Spain. He had 
Sia been-pardoned by Elizabeth, and well received by James *. 


} see * He was brought over into England by thelord Mountjoy in the 
xi firft year of James’s reign. Rory O-Donell, his companion, was cre- 
4 ated earl of Tyrconnel, and himfelf treated with fuch favour that a 
‘ ‘proclamation was iffued, commanding all perfons to fpeak refpeét/ully 
. of him, and carry themfelves civilly towards him. Thefe indul- 
1 tam . gencies did not prevent Tyrone and Tyrconnel from entering into 
: new intrigues with the courts of Spain, Bruffels, and Rome, which 
produced a confpiracy i in Ulfter for murdering the lord-lieutenant and 
aay Se _. the council, and extirpating the Englifh from Ulfter. This confpi- 
r racy was timely difcovered, Tyrone and Tyrconnel fled, and‘ were 
1 well received at the court of Bruffels, obtained money from the court . 
4 of Spain, and retired afterwards to Rome, where they were fupported 


ie: by the pope with large penfions, 
z RA Se On the occafion of their fight, James publifhed a proclamation 
with the following remarkable declarations : «« That they had not their 
creations or pofieffions by any lineal or lawful defcent from anceftors 
of blood or virtue, but were, for reafons of ftate, preferred before 
others of better quality and birth in their country; that they had not 
‘been molefted on account of religion, nor was there any purpofe of pro- 
ceeding againft them on that head, their condition being to think mur- 
- . der no fault, marriage of no ufe, nor any man valiant that does not 
_ glory in rapine and oppreffion ; and therefore it would be an unreafon- 
_ able thing to trouble them for religion before it could be perceived, by 
their converfation, that they had any; that in all matters of contro- 
verly they had been favoured beyond their competitors, except in thole 
cafes wherein was plainly difcerned that their only end was to have 


nt made themfelves by degrees more able to refift lawful authority, when 
‘fhould return to their vomit again, by ufurping a power over other 


= Rymer, vol. XVI. p. 664. 


In 


114 


Ann. 1616, 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 
In the year 1613, fome frefh difcontents that prevailed 


among the Papifts in Ireland gave fuch hopes to the am- — 


bitious chief, that he undertook, with the affiftance of 
his countrymen in the Spanifh fervice, to raife another 
rebellion, The marquis Spinola, efteemed one of the 
beft officers of the age, undertook to head the expedi- 
tion. The defign was difcovered, and Tyrone’s corref- 
pondents taken and executed. 


James was at this time thoroughly convinced, front 


the whole conduct of Spain, that there was no hopes of 
attaining a family-alliance with that imveterate ftate. 
The houfe of Bourbon was next in greatnefs to the 
houfe of Auftria ; and the Englifh monarch difdained to 


match his fon with any family of lefs potency. 


Lord Hays’ 
embafly to 
the French 
court. 


Wilfon,p.gz, 


Tue lord Hays, under the guife of congratulating the 
French court on the King’s marriage, was this year fent 
into France with fuch a propofal; and James, who by his. 
own affections eftimated the importance of fhow, decked 
his ambaflador with a magnificence which furpafled every. 
other fpecies of extravagance that had yet appeared *. 


* The following is a defcription of the parade in which the ambafla- 
dor rode to receive his firft audience at the French court: 

Six trumpeters and two marfhals (in tawney velvet liveries, com- 
pletely fuited, laced all over with gold, richly and clofely laid) led 
the way ; the ambaffador,. followed with a great train of pages and. 
footmen, in the fame rich livery, the ambaffador’s horfe was thod 
with filver fhoes flightly tacked on; the prancing and curveting of the 
horfe difperfed them among the mob; on thefe occafions a farrier.of 
the train, richly drefled, tacked on others in the fame flight manner :: 


_ thefe he took out of a large velvet bag, loaded for the oceafion, Wit 
fon, p. 93, & feq. 


S5k& MiB 4 el 


iy 


Tuts embafly gave an-alarm to the Spanifh court, Ann. 1616. 


They reiterated all their infinuations to draw James 
again to their lure: Sir John Digby, his ambaflador at 
Madrid, was flattered with aflurances that his Catholic 
majefty would remove all impediments to the defired 


| match between the infanta and the prince of Wales ; 


and that even in the point of religion a moderation 
fhould be fo ftri¢tly adhered to, that no terms fhould be 
demanded, inconfiftent with the reputation of James to 
grant, Stale as was this bait, it did not fail of an effect; 
James, inftead of feizing the opportunity of revenging 
the infults he had received from that court by a contemp- 
tuous refufal, countermanded the orders he had given 
Hays to prefs the match with France.- 


Tue States fupported the elector of Brandenburgh, 
one of the princes claimant, in the pofleflion of the 
towns he held in the duchy of Cleves and Juliers, againft 
the houfe of Newburgh and the elector of Saxony, two 
other claimants. The houfe of Newburgh was aflifted 
by the power of Spain *, the elector of Saxony by the 
emperor, James had fome pretence to interfere in this 


bufinefs, by the affiftance he had given towards wrefting 


this territory out of the hands of the houfe of Auftria. 


The States had agreed to give up the towns which their 
troops held in the name of the elector of Branden- 


burgh ; but, when preffed to a performance, they re- 
fufed, on pretence of the rumour of a family-alliance 


 * The duke of Newburgh had abjured Lutheranifin, and embraced 
the Roman Catholic faith, to make ufe of the protection of the Empe- 


Ory and the affiftance of the court of Spain. 


between 


Ann, 1617. 


Shen’ - HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1617. between the crowns of Spain and England. An avifo 
from Spain had given the States intelligence that the 
match had been there debated in the Inquifition, and 

as ae 5 judged proper, in regard it would avail for the introduc- 
ae tion of Popery into England. The States-alleged, that the 

; rights of the competitors not being yet fettled, it would 
be unjuft to'deliver them into the hands of any one 
claimant, dangerous to put them into the hands of the - 
king of Spain or the emperor; and that James, by the ~ 
intended alliance, was alfo begaee a hanes so pb ae 


piace A xinp of diftraction sectaibet in the civil govern- 


ment of France. All the princes of the blood. were ~ 
uniied in a ftrong party againft the power. of the . ot 
queen-mother, who was unfupported by any other par- 
tizans than two worthlefs Italians, the marquis d’Ancre 
and his. wife. Thefe had fo great.an influence’ over 
her weak mind, that, according to the abfurd fuper- 
flition of that time, it was looked on to be the effet end 
of enchantment; and the marchionefs was afterwards 
tried and burned: for witchcraft. James: was extremely 


jealous of the connection between the crowns of. France’ ae 
and Spain, and for this reafon abetted the mal-contents. oe 
On the queen-mother’s putting the: prince of Conde un- . 
der arreft, Hays demanded the:reafon of the imprifon- - on 


ment, a’pacification having been brought about by the a 
mediation of his mafter; on receiving no, fatisfactory | 
anfwer he returned to England. fo Oe 


Sunpay. wasskept-by alk che etlonis!mganeninele aaa 
ration that admitted of no kind of public. amufement. aXe 
James, to fhew a thorough contempt +e fuch opinions, 


< 
, a) 


J 9 cis 


‘ m 
ia ; 
i ia 


foe MI gs 2k 


117 


licenfed the ufe of all fports on that day. A liberty like Ann. 1617. 


this was quite contrary to the cuftom of that time, and 
as difagreeable to many of the moderate church-party as 


‘to the fectaries ; the archbifhop of Canterbury oppofed 


’ 


.it fo ftrongly as to forbid the King’s order for that pur- 


pofe to be read in the church at Croydon. James winked 
at this affront, but revenged it on the minifters in lower 
offices, who were feverely treated: wis the High commif- 


fion court for the like refufal. eee 


| ais time the difcord between the republican 
party in Holland, and that of the prince of Orange, ran 
very high. Barnevelt, the penfionary, was at the head 
of the former, and was fupported by moft of the men 
of property; the prince of Orange by the lower fort. He 
did not find it difficult to perfuade a contempuble canaille 


-that Barnevelt had entered into meafures to betray the 


untry to Spain ; then, taking advantage of a jealoufy 
infpired by his fuggeftions, having the command of the 


army, he marched into Utrecht, feized Barnevelt and Gro- 


tius, and fent them to prifon; turned all the magiftrates 


that were of the contrary faction out of their offices, filled 


van undaunted fpirit. 


up their places with the chiefs of his own party; and 
having thus fecured votes, by the authority of the States 
General he erected an illegal court *, which condemned 
Grotius to perpetual imprifonment, and executed Barne- 


velt t Thus early did an indifcreet confidence threaten 


* This court had no legal jurifdiction over the United States ; every 
province being a fovercignty within itfelf. 
+ This great man at his condemnation and execution behaved with 


On hearing his fentence pronounced, which 
was: 


Affairs of - 
Holland. 


pe Fe 


Ann. 1617. 


“HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


the freedom of this infant fate; and thus early were its 
patriots facrificed to the ambitious views of the Orange 
family. 


was lofs of life and confifcation of goods, he made the following re- 
mark: “ [ have ferved the Generality thirty-three years as advocate of 
Holland, and the town of Rotterdam ten years before, as penfionary ; 
and for my fidelity and diligence deferved better recompence. If you 
will have my blood,.yet methinks you may fpare my goods, without 
ruining, for my fake, my wife and children.” At this time, and at 


’ the moment of his execution, he difplayed the fame high mind that 


had ever marked his character: he prepared himfelf for the block in 
a manner, and with a precipitation that fhewed an indignant hafte to 
lofe with life the memory of his ungrateful country. The following 
is a character of him drawn by a creature and fervant of king James, 
Sir Ralph Winwood, who had tranfacted the Englifh affairs in Holland 
feveral years: ‘“* I know Barnevelt well (writes he) and know that he 
hath great powers and abilities; and malice itfelf muft confefs, that ne- 
ver man hath done more faithful and powerful fervice to his country 
than he.” Letters from and to Sir Dudley Carleton, p. 193+ ; 


Moreri gives the following account and character of this patriot : 
«¢ Barneveldt, fe rendit celebre par fon habilité dans les negociations 
& par les grands fervices qu’il rendit a fa republique, a Vetabliffement 
de la quelle il avoit beaucoup contribué. Henry IV, roi de France, 
Elifabeth reine d’Angleterre, & prefque toutes les autres puiffances 
de Europe, faifoient un extréme cas de ce grand homme, qui avoit 
paflé par les ambaffades les plus celebres, & par les charges les plus 
importantes. Ayant été envoyé en qualité d’ambafladeur aupres de 
Henry IV. il detourna ce prince de faire la paix avec les E ols 
en 1598. On lui donne la gloire d’avoir degagé les places de Ja 
de Fleffingue & de Rammekens des mains des Anglois, ce qui fut — 
un coup tres avantageux pour eviter les effets de la haine & de la j- 
loufie de fes ennemis, & furtout du prince d’Orange & de fes parti- 
fans. Il quitta fa charge en 1608 mais ayant été rappellé par tous les 
Etats d’Hollande, il tranquillifa les affaires, adoucit les efcrits, & 
Jes ramena tous a un meme fentiment. En 1609 il avoit fortement 
confeillé la tréve qui fe conclut pour douze ans, entre Parchiduc & les 


Etats ; & depuis il empecha par fes foins que ces derniers ne priffent 


co. 
ea 


cf ale 


we) 


2 Pu 


_ *ip. 214. 


JAMES LI 


TueEse acts of violence extorted a confent for the Ann. 1617: 
meeting of a general fynod to fettle the former religious por. 


difputes. All the reformed churches fent their deputies 


to this aflembly. James, who had acted as a party in 
- the whole affair, fent his alfo *. 


The upfhot of the 


part dans les troubles de Bohéme. Maurice, prince d’Orange, qui fou- 
haitoit que les Provinces Unies continuafient la guerre par ce quelle 
fervoit a fa fortune, en congut du chagrin contre Barneveldt, & le fit 
eclater au fujet d’Arminius & de Gomar miniftres proteftans, qui 
avoient des fentimens .differens fur la predeftination. Arminius fe mit 
‘a la téte de ceux qu’on nomma Remontrans, & Gomar fut le chef des 
Contre-remontrans. ili 
Provinces Unies. Barneveldt fe declara pour les premiers, qui ne de- 
mandoient que d’etre tollerés, & Je prince d’Orange fut pour les au~ 
tres, qui ne les vouloient pas fouffrir. Le prince fe trouvant le plus 
fort fit venir en 1618 & 1619 le fynode de Dordrecht, ou les Armi- 
miens furent condamnez, Barneveldt ayant été pris eut la téte tran- 
chée a Yage de 72 ans, fous pretexte d’avoir voulu livrer le pays aux 
Efpagnols, quoi quill Je niat conftamment, & qu ’en effet on n’en eut 
wrouvé aucune preuve dans fes papiers. Son crime etoit d’avoir re- 
fufé d’entrer dans le complot, a Ja faveur du quel le prince Maurice 
vouloita ce qu’on dit fe-rendfe maitre des Pays Bas, & d’avoit defendu 
da liberté de fa patrie avec trop de zele. Il fut execute le 13 jour de 
May, r619.” Moreri, vol. II. p. 78. 

Thuanus gives the following teftimony of ‘gens “« Que c’etoit un 


homme tres accredité par les charges qu’il avoit remplies, & par fa 
grande experience dans les affaires.” Thuanus, edit. de la Haye, 1740, 


* The following is a letter from ‘Sir Dudley Carleton, refident at the 
Hague, .to fecretary Nauntoun. 
*« Right Honourable, 
' Your “honour’s ‘letters of the laft of Auguft came to my hands. 
by this 2 Sata William Diefton, the fourth of this prefent, very op- 
fatisfy the prince of Orange, and fuch of the States as. 


rehenfion of Barnevelt, with the reft of their proceed- 


' Ces deux partis troublerent Ja tranquilité des. 


mie and earneft defire to know show his majefty under- 
ings 5 


119 


0: 


120 


Ann, 1617+ 


HISTORY OF*' ENGLAND. ~ 
bufinefs was a condemnation’ of the’ Arminian- teriets”s 
Vorftius was deprived of the profeffor’s chair,-and fen- 
tenced to perpetual baniilagent or George Carleton, 


ings; wherein though _ they, wanted before no comfort.and encourage- 
ment I could give them in private, yet I thought it not fit, in pre- 
fence of tlieir public deputies, to prejudge what fhould come a 
his majefty. 


“ To the fame deputies (who, upon my defire to {peak with them, - 


came unto me by order of the States) I delivered the fame day of 
the teceipt of your honoutr’s ‘letters, what I had in, commandment 
from his majefty in approbation of their doings ; and did let fall unto 
them, by way of difcourfe, upon what point in particular his majefty, 
having yet feen no more than their fhort declaration which was pub- 
lithed in print, did ground his judgment; in that it was apparent to 
his majefty, by that which was prefented to his own view in the de- 
mand of affiftance to the national fynod, the States requiring one thing 
and Barnevelt another, quite oppofite to their defire, that he ran a 
courfe by himfelf, contrary to the public fervice ; whereupon they, 
confefling to have the like advertifements from Paris and Heydelburgh, 


laid hold immediately, as a fit crime to charge him with, amongft 


others of like nature. 


« I took the liberty hereupon to tell them, that though Bicnboete 
had continued in his wonted {tate and authority, yet I had charge 
from his majefty to have let him know how ftrange his majefty found 
this manner of proceeding in a man of his place; that thereby it 
might appear unto them his majefty did not fway with the time, 
but that he faw and condemned his fault, even in the heighth of his 


fortune, 


“« To the prince of Orange I ufed the fame day the like difcourfe ; 3 
and added farther thefe encouragements, which he might well take out 
of the conftancy of his majefty’s favour, and the prefent condition of 
affairs ; in both which he refts fo well fatisfied, that by the help of the 


one-he hopes, in fhort time, to give perfection to the other.” ‘Letters 


from and to Sir Dudley Carleton, p. 290. - 


* This fentence was paffed upon ‘him without his ict ay? per- 
mitted to fpeak for himfelf. Sir Dudley Carleton writes thus of | aa SS 


tranfaétion: « I find there i is a relolation “taken ” oo i 


oa 


Fjk 2 EB OT. 


E21I 


bithop of Landaff, protefted againft the article in the Aan, 1617. 


Belgic creed that affirmed an equality in all the minifters 


cite Vorftius to the fynod, becaufe they much apprehend his entertain- 
ing that affembly with artificial interpretations and delays, and in the 
end deluding them with a counterfeit fubmiffion. But order is taken 
for the cenfuring his books in the fynod, with intention afterwards 
(as they pretend) to proceed with his perfon by way of exile; for 
which I cannot undertake any thing, though it wants not my bett 
endeavours, fince Mathenefle (who was one of his protectors) had 
the boldnefs to fay, when this matter was laft in queftion with the 
States of Holland, that it was tyranny fo to proceed with him.” Car/e- 


ton’s Letters, p. 358. 
The Englith deputies at the fynod of Dort were zealous promoters 
of the profcription of Vorftius: The prefident of the fynod having 


afked them, “* Whether they approved that Vorftius fhould be cited 
to appear in the afflembly ? and what the King of England’s pleafure 


was in that point?” they anfwered, “ That they muft confult his 
ambaffador, and that they thought it would look very ill to condemn 
a man without hearing him.” They added, ‘ That to avoid delays, 
Vorftius ought not to be permitted to defend himfelf, or explain his 
blafphemous propofitions ; and that he ought not to be anfwered any 
otherwife than by Yes or No, nor afked any queftion but whether 
he was ready to abjure?” Afterwards, when the opinions were afked 
concerning the fentence to be paffed upon Vorftius, they declared 
him unworthy of the name and office of an orthodox profeffor, defired 
that his book De Deo fhould be burnt, and read the decree which 
condemned that work to the flames in England. Bayle’s Diff. 1738, 


vol. V. p. 514. 

Moreri writes thus on this condemnation : 
trans fe pleingnirent hautement du Synode, & publierent qu’on avoit 
procedé contr’eux d’une maniere contraire a Pequité 3 que l’on n’avoit 
admis au fynode qu’un petit nombre des leurs; qu’on avoit refulé les 
plus.eclairez de leur parti; qu’on ne les avoit jamais oui en corps, 
mais un a un comme des criminels, dont la fentence etoit deja por- 
tée ; qu’etant venus a Dordrecht fous le fauf-conduit qu ’on leur avoit 
donnée, ils avoient été mis aux arrets. pendant 7 mois entiers, contre 
toute iH donnée, de forte que le fils ne pouvoit pas voir le pases 
R 


« Au refte les Remon- 


‘22 


Anh. 1617. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


of God: but, however, James’s influence, from the bufy 
part he had acted in the difpute, was fo great that his 
deputies, who were all of them dignitaries, were compli- 
mented with a prefent of two hundred pounds a-piece, a 


golden medal, and an acknowledgment of the excellency 


of the conftitution of the church of England, witha re- 
-gret that the conveniency of their own ftate did not ad- 
mit of the fame fyftem of fubordination *. 


An event now offers, which, with all its variety of 
circumftances, expofes to the reader a fubject for con 
tempt, averfion, pity, and applaufe. The univerfal ge- 
nius of the admired Sir Walter Raleigh had found, from 


“his misfortunes, an opportunity to enlarge itfelf in the 


complete review of paft and diftant time: under the op- 
preflive circumftance of a prifon, he had undertaken and 
executed the laborious plan of an univerfal hiftory. But, 
great as were his abilities, great as were their improve- 
ments, he had not yet attained to that exquifite judg- 
ment that diftinguifhes what is truly defirable from 


ou la foeur s’entretenir avec fon frere; que le prefident Bogerman 
leur ennemi, declaré avoit difpofé les chofes uniquement pour. les 
opprimer; que les fecretaires du fynode avoient été choifis parmi les 
adverfaires des Remontrans; que Ficinfius les haiffoit. Mais ils fe re+ 
crierent fur tout, fur ce que la fentence portée contr’eux les condam- 
noit a étre privez de toutes les fonétiones eclefiattiques & academiques ; 
& que quelques uns d’eux avoient meme été exilez. Moreri, xviit. 
ed. Amp. vol. Hl. p. 129, dans Particle Dordrecht (Synododz). 


A letter from Mr. John Hales to Sir Dudley Carleton fhews that 
thefe complaints of the Remonftrants were juftly founded. Carleton’s 


Letters, p. 321, & fe. 


* This compliment was extraordinary, as it was oppolite to the late 
confirmed article of their belief. . . : Biel. s 


Jo Me® Seo 


what is vulgarly efteemed fo; unfatisfied with eafe, un- 
fatisfied with fame, he ftill affected courts and their dif- 
graceful dependencies. Though ufed with a barbarous 
indignity by his fovereign, he feized on every opportu- 
nity to offer his fervices. Much ufeful and ingenious 
advice he had given on many occafions, particularly in 
regard to forming the mind of prince Henry; a fick- 
nefs of the queen procured him the means of ingra- 
tiating himfelf, by undertaking the reftoration of her 
health, from the power of medicines of his own com- 
pofing, the refult of an unlimited knowledge. Thefe 
little arts, and the general applaufe of the nation, forced 


from James a farther mitigation of his unjuft treat- 


The enjoyment of his lands was reftored to 


ment: 
The con- 


him, and fome indulgencies as to liberty. 
fiderable eftate of Sherburn had been fecured to his fa- 
mily by a former conveyance which Raleigh had made 
to his fon: the omiffion of a word in the deed of con- 
veyance made a flaw in young Raleigh’s title; this flaw 
reverted the forfeited lands to the crown; the rapacious 
Somerfet was informed of it, and begged it for himfelf. 
Raleigh’s wife petitioned James on the occafion: the an- 
{wer that he returned was, “ I mun ha the lands, I mun 


ha the lands for Car *.” 


123 


Ann, 1618. 


The Life of 
palit Raleigh 
y Dr. Bir 


es Pp. 65. 


Mallet. 


* On this occafion Somerfet was addrefied in the following pathetic 


forain by Sir Walter Raleigh. 

_ And for you, Sir, feeing your fair day is but in the dawn, mine 
drawn to the fetting, your own virtues and the King’s grace afiuring of 
many fortunes, and much honour; I befeech you begin not your firft 
building upon the ruins of the innocent, and let not mine and their 
forrows attend your firft plantation. I have ever been bound to your 
nation, as well for many other graces as for the true report of my 


wer} to the = Bing’s majefty ; againft whom had I been malignant, the 
R 2 hearing 


124 HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 


Ann. 1618, Tue late coolnefs between the courts of England and 
expedition, Spain had produced an opportunity for Raleigh, who 
now enjoyed full liberty, to offer a project that pro- 
mifed a recruit to his broken fortunes, and flattered the 
infatiable avarice of the King. He had formerly made 
a voyage to Guiana, and, from his experience of the 
country, had entertained a belief that its bowels con- 
tained inexhauftible riches. He had actually marked 
particular parts of the territory, in which he fancied 
were mines of gold. The plan of an expedition that 
promifed mountains of wealth was received with eager- 
nefs by James, though at the fame time he affured Sar- 
miento, the Spanifh ambaflador, that Raleigh fhould be 
bound up by his commiffion from all hoftilities towards 
the fubjects of Spain, and that if any were committed. 


hearing of my caufe would not have changed enemies into friends, 
malice into compaflion, and the minds of the greateft number then: 
prefent into the commileration of mine eftate. It is not the nature 
of foul treafon to beget fuch fair paffions; neither could it agree 

- with the duty and love of faithful fubjeéts (efpecially of your nation) 
to bewail his overthrow that had confpired againft their moft natural 
and liberal lord. I therefore truft, that you will not be the firft that 
fhall kill us outright, cut down the tree with the fruit, and undergo 
the curfe of them that enter the fields of the fatherlefs ; which, if it 
pleafe you to know the truth, is far lefS in value than in fame: But 
that fo worthy a gentleman as yourfelf will rather bind us to you. 
{being fix gentlemen, not bafe in birth and alliance) which have inte- 
reft therein ; and myfelf, with my uttermoft thankfulnefs, will remain 
ready to obey your commandments.”  Cadala, p. 356. 


James had been at length prevailed on to give to Sir Walter Ra- 
leigh’s wife and fon eight thoufand pounds for this eftate of Sherburn. + a A an 
This eight thoufand pounds he calls in his declaration a competent fa- - {all 
tisfadtion for all Sit Walter Raleigh's eftates, Raleigh's Life by Dre 


Birch, p. 64. 


f2a MR BA 


he fhould be delivered up to the refentment of his Ca- Ann. 1618. 
tholic majefty. The commiflion was made out on the 
twenty-fixth of Auguft: It contained no caution againtt 


attacking the Spaniards, and it would have been abfurd 
to fuppofe that the defign could be accomplifhed without 
meeting with an oppofition that would separ spree the in- 


fringement of fuch a reftraint. 


_ Racercn fet fail on the fourteenth of Auguft, 1618. R 
His fleet confifted of fourteen fhips, all fitted out by pri- 
vate perfons *, After a tedious voyage the adventurers 
reached the coaft of Guiana ; they had experienced the 
diftrefles. of ftorms, ficknefs, and want of water. New — 
ebftacles now oppofed the acquifition of the golden fleece: 
The river Oroonoko was found too fhallow for the large 
fhips to fail up; a divifion of the force was unavoida- 
ble; the fmaller veflels, with a detachment of three hun-. 
dred men, were fent in queft of the mine, whilft the 
chief commander, Raleigh, ftaid behind with the larger: 
ones, to receive, in cafe of an attack, the Spanifh gal- 
leons, which were daily expected. The detachment was. 
commanded by his fon, and the pilottage was entrufted 
to his old friend Keymis, who had fome knowledge of 
the coaft. On their landing at the appointed place, 
they were brifkly attacked by the foldiers of a garri- 
foned town newly built by the Spaniards ; they repulfed 
the enemy, took, plundered, and burnt their town; but 
not without the lofs of many of their men, and their 


_ * In this venture Raleigh hazarded the wrecks of his broken fortune, . 
befides an eftate which his wife.had complaifantly given up to him for. 


this purpofe. Raleigh’s Life by Dr. Birch, p. 72. 
. captains 


ae 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


\AeesBin. captain the young Raleigh. Among the plunder were 


Raleigh’s 


Teturn. 


found papers that contained the whole of Raleigh’s 
fcheme: they had been fent to Spain by Sarmiento, to 
whom James had had the weaknefs to communicate it. 
The knowledge of this particular fo enraged the foldiers, 
that, refufing to be conducted farther by Keymis, they 
returned to the place where their commander-lay, with-. 
out having attempted any mine. Raleigh, before the 
arrival of his forces, had heard the news of his accu- 
mulated misfortunes ; misfortunes no lefs fevere than 
the death of his fon, the blaft of his hopes, and the 
danger of his life from the violence committed on the 
Spanifh town, In ‘vain did Keymis attempt an excufe 
for the fatal mifadventure: Raleigh’s chagrin was. too 
great to allow any: Keymis, in defpair, put an end to 
his life; and this increafed the perplexity of the un- 
happy adventurer, who loft in Keymis an evidence to 
juftify the integrity of his conduct. A mutiny amongft 
the crew fucceeded thefe diforders: Some were for re- 
turning to England, fome againft it. The unfortunate 
Raleigh was of the former opinion; and combating the 
other, prevailed fo far as to bring his remaining force. 
home. James was foon made acquainted with all the 
circumftances of the mifcarriage; and the artful Sar- 
miento did not fail to work upon his difappointment 
by reprefenting, in lively colours, a war between the 
two nations, and an eternal breach of the marriage- 
contract. Inflamed and frightened by thefe infinuations,. 
James iffued out a proclamation declaring an abhorrence 
of what had been tranfacted, and condemned the caufe un- 
heard. Notwithfanding the proclamation, Raleigh landed _ 
‘eae — 


gene. 


_ 


(Ageia MAb BAe 


at Plymouth ; and, after having furrendered himfelf, Ano. 1618. . 
wrote a pathetic letter to James, in which he ftated the — | 


cafe in a clear and juft light *. But James was not to 


"ie following is Raleigh’s letter to James on this occafion.. 


*¢ May it pleafe your moft excellent majefty ; 

“¢ If in my journey outward-bound I had my men murdered at the 
ifland, and yet fpared to take revenge, if I did difcharge fome Spa~ 
nifh barks taken, without fpoil ; if I did forbear all parts of the Spa» 
nifh Indies, wherein I might have taken twenty of their towns on the 
fea-coafts, and did only follow the enterprize 1 undertook for Guiana, 
where, without any directions from me, a Spanifh village was burnt, 
which was new fet up within three miles of the mine; by your ma+ 
jefty’s favour, I find no reafon why the Spanith ambaffador fhould com- 
plain of me. 

“< If it were lawful for the Spaniards to murder twenty-fix Englifh- 
men, tying them back to back, and then cutting their throats, when 
they had treated with them a whole month, and come to them on the 
Jand without fo much as one fword; and it may not be lawful for 
your majefty’s fubjects, being charged firft by. them, to repel force by 
force; we may juftly fay, O miferable Englifh ! 

« If Parker and Mecham took Campechie and other places in 
Honduras, feated in the heart of the Spanifh Indies, burnt towns, 
and killed’ the Spaniards, and had nothing faid to them at their re- 
turn; and myfelf, who forbore to look into the Indies, becaufe I 
would not offend, muft be accufed ; I may as juftly fay, O miferable 
Raleigh ! ' 

«“ If I have fpent my poor eftate, loft my fon, fuffered by ficknefs, 
and other ways a world of hardfhips; if I have refifted, with manifold 
hazard of my life, the robberies and {poils with which my companions 
would have made me rich; if, when I was poor, I could have made 
myfelf rich; if, when I had gotten my liberty (which all men and na- 
ture itfelf do much prize) I voluntarily loft it; if, when I was fure 
of my life, I rendered it again; if I might elfewhere have fold my 
fhip and goods, and put- five or fix thovfand pounds in my purfe, and 
~yet brought her into England; I befeech your majefty to believe, that 
all this I have done, becaufe. it fhould not be faid that your majefty 

had. 


128 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 16:8. be moved by confiderations of juftice or compaffion ; — 


the fear of a rupture with Spain was his only actuat- 
ing principle; and that power thought it of the utmoft 
confequence to get fo material a point adjudged in its 
favour. 


Tue death of Raleigh was to be the cement of 
friendfhip between the two courts: how, to compafs it 
with the appearance of legality was the only remaining 
queftion. It is thought that Sarmiento was the perfon 
who inftigated the cutting him off upon his former 
fentence, although the kind of underftanding which 
James poflefled might have furnifhed him with fuch 
an invention. Raleigh had actually, before he fet out 
on his expedition, an offer of the procurement of a par- 
don for the fum of fifteen hundred pounds; but Bacon * 
had diffuaded him from this falutary meafure, by re- 
peated affurances that the power given him by his com- 
miffion would be conftrued, in the eye of the law, a 


had given liberty and truft to a man whofe end was but the recovery of 
his liberty, and who had betrayed your majefty’s truft. 


« My mutineers told me, that if I returned for England I fhould 
be undone; but I believed in your majefty’s goodnefs more than in 
all their arguments.. Sure I am the firft, that being free and able to 
enrich myfelf, yet hath embraced poverty and peril ;- and as fure I 
am that my example fhall make me the laft. But your majefty’s wif- 
dom and goodnefs I have made my judges; who have ever been, and 
fhall ever be, 

Your majefty’s moft humble vafial, 
Walter Raleigh.” 


* Bacon in a letter to James urges the taking him off upon his fen- 


__tence for treafon, as the only judicial way of proceeding againft 7. 
Original Letters, Fc. by Dr. Birch, p. 182, 183. 


- forward it. 


AJ 0M IMIE B44. 


fufficient one. His prefent fituation grew fo interefting Ans. 1618." 


and menacing, that he at length gave way to the re- 
peated inftances of his friends, and attempted his efcape: 
but his heart failing him, even after he had got into 
the boat that was to convey him to a bark fecured for 
the purpofe, he re-furrendered himfelf. Then, after a 
conviction that his fate was already determined, in a fit 
of defpair he applied to one Manourie, a quack, to aflitt 


* him in a fecond attempt: In order to effect it, Manourie 


gave him drugs that flung out upon the whole furface 
of his body innumerable blotches and boils ; and Ra- 
leigh, to forward the fuccefs of the plan, condefcended 
to many unmanly meanneflés. They fo far prevailed, 
that, on account of his apparent ill ftate of health, he 
was fuffered to repair to his own houfe ; but Manourie 
betrayed the fecret to Stuekly, his inveterate keeper, who, 
though a near relation, had been fent down to Plymouth 
by the court for the double purpofe of inveigling him 

to land, and to guard him afterwards. Stuekly, in con- — 
fequence of private orders, feemed to encourage the de- 
fign, and received a confiderable fum from Raleigh to 

The French ambaflador alfo offered him 
the protection of his mafter, and a veflel to carry him 
to France ; thefe tranfactions were fuffered by Stuekly, 
and betrayed: the treacherous diflimulation was carried. 
fo far, that he accompanied Raleigh into a boat, which 
was immediately befet by the officers of the court. 
Stuekly * had the hardened affurance to own the deceit, 


* This infamous wretch was taken in the fact of clipping the very 
coin he had received as a reward for his perfidioufnefs. He was con- 
demned to be hanged for the offence, and was driven to the ftreight 

| cae to his fhirt to purchafe a-pardon.. He withdrew himfelf from 
- OL, I, : S the 


130 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1618,- and carried his kinfman a prifoner to the Tower. The 
bufinefs of the council was to render Raleigh’s tranf- 
actions odious to the people; they particularly enlarged 
on the intention of making an efcape to France. The 
declaration James publifhed on this head begins thus: 
“ That kings are not bound to give account of their ac- 
tions to any but to God; however, he declares, that, he 
is willing to reprefent his proceedings in this cafe to the 
world. It then urges feveral charges againft Sir Walter 
Raleigh; among others, that the mine of Guiana was 
a meer fiction ; that Raleigh’s original and only defign 
was to plunder the Spanifh fettlements, and to furprize 
their fleets ; that he had formed a cruel purpofe to leave 
the land-foldiers on fhore at Guiana ; that, after the de- 
feat of his defigns, he had no intention to return home, 
but to go to the Eaft-Indies, or to fettle at Newfound- 
land; that, after his arrival in England, he contrived 
feveral ftratagems to efcape. The King affirms in this 
declaration, that he, in his own princely judgment, gave 
no, belief to Sir Walter’s affertions, that he had feen and 
tried the gold ore of the mine of Guiana, as being 
perfuaded that in nature there were no fuch mines of 
gold entire, or that the Spaniards, fo induftrious in the 
chace of, treafure, would not have neglected it fo 
long *.” Raleigh. compofed an unanfwerable apology 


the odium of mankind to the ifland of Lundy in the Severn, where 
he died mad, in lefs than two years after Sir Walter Raleigh’s execution. 
Sir Walter Raleigh's Life by Dr. Birch, p. 87. 


* This is an extraordinary acknowledgment of James; the allew- 
ing a fubjeét to go out on a defign which he ftrongly fufpected to be-an 
illegal one, and when the penalty of the crime was to be lof of life, 
But though James affirms that he gave no credit to the reality 


‘ 
a 
’ 
? 4a 
ii 
= . , 
. - « 
f * 
a ; ‘ 4 
iS oay * 
- : * | 
ify 
~ “ . ms - 
7 < —-* iis 
, - 
me | , 
* 


1 


wv 


~— 


Rc eR we: 
‘ 


JOR IMT Ee BH OV 


131 


for his conduct, but was reduced to beg, though in Ann. 1618 


vain, the interceflion of the favourite. On the eighteenth 
of Otober, and in the fixty-fixth year of his age, he 
was taken’ out of his bed; though in a fit of an ague, 
and brought to the King’s-Bench. He attempted to 
make a defence, by explaining the juftnefs of his con- 
duc in the expedition; but was interrupted by the 


court, who told him, that the matter of the voyage had 


nothing to do in the prefent cafe, and that treafon could 
not be pardoned by implication, After fentence was 
pronounced, he addrefled the court in very pathetic 
terms for a refpite of execution for a few days, that he 
might fettle his private affairs, and vindicate his reputa- 
tion. An ordet was produced, ready figned by James, 
though at that time in Hertfordfhire, for his execution 
the next morning. Barbarous as was this hatte, it had 
no effect on the prefent compofed mind of Raleigh. His 
manly philofophical deportment, during the interval of 


his fentence and execution, was admirable ; nor lefs fo His fatal end 


was his behaviour on the f{caffold: He denied, with an 
awful appeal to God, the heavy charges * that had been 


mines, yet, in his a ititiem: he takes care to fecure to himfelf a full 
fifth of all the gold that fhould be found in them. 


-* That Raleigh was innocent of many of the invidious calumnies 
with which he is loaded by the King’s declaration, is, I think, a mat- 


ter of {mall doubt. 


| -Firft, ‘there are the proteftations of a dying man, ftrengthened by 


affeverations not likely to be ufed for the purpofes of deceit, in fo tre- 


mendous a fituation. - 
_ Secondly, arguments to be drawn from the nature of the thing. 


aft. If Sir Walter Raleigh had no other view in the expedition but 
to enrich himfelf by piracy, and that the prime object had been the 
ae the oT, town Tf sig on the coaft of Guiana, it is 
inprdbabie 


132 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


“Ann, 1618, laid againtt him ; then fitting himfelf with compofure 
for the axe, he received the fatal blow with an indif- 


improbable that the attainment of that end would have thrown him 

_ and his friend into fo terrible a confternation, as to induce the one. 
to deftroy himfelf, and the other to prepare for fight; which’ inten- 
tion of flight is one of the facts alleged —e him in the er 
declaration. 


, adly. The plunder of a fingle town was too contemptible an object. 
for the hazard and danger of fo long a voyage. If there were more- 
_ places to plunder on the fame coaft, and that plunder was the end,. 
‘ why not attempt any, other? it may be alleged that the. town was- 
thought to contain vaft riches, that little was found there, and that- 
the defpair arofe from this difappointment. But what could induce a 
fuppofition of fach riches ? not the induftry of the Spaniards; it muft. 

be the perfuafion of mines poffeffed by them, and to be difcovered by: 
the adventurers. The defign of Raleigh could-not be a general- plun- 
der and acknowledged piracy, for he was never taxed with making any, 
propofitions of fuch a tendency; and indeed it would have been a very” 
abfurd chimera to have foppofed that the gentlemen of fortune and fa- 
mily which he had under his command-would have left their country - 
and home-enjoyments for ever, to follow an idle adventurer in the con-- 
ftant purfuit of a precarious gain, to be attained with innumerable hard-- 
fhips, difficulties, and dangers. Could there have been any criminal- 
circumftance proved againft him, why not put his life on that iffue? why. 
cut him off upon his former fentence? That he had-no. certain know- 
ledge where lay the mine, is not to be doubted; that he. knew of the: 
town lately built.by the Spaniards. is clear from his inftruétions to Key- 
mis ; but that the only propofed end of fo expenfive.a preparation, and. 
{o tedious a voyage, was the plunder of a few Spanifh towns.on the coatt. 
of Guiana, is very improbable. 


~ Raleigh was. a. dupe to. his own over-heated larson andiovers 
reached. in the whole affair by the. low cunning;of James. His difpo-. 
Raleigh’sLife fition for adventures had always been expenfive to him: During the 
by Dr. Birch. reign.of Elizabeth the difcavery of Virginia had coft him 40,0001. He: 
had alfo fent out feveral. fhips to, the territory of Guiana for information. 
concerning that country.and the fuppofed.mines. Thele <i , 
which thew, the vanity of his LEE 


Role 


Sir Walter Raleigh. 


JAMES 1 


1-33: 


ference that left ftrong PAOR of veneration on the Ann. 16:8. 


beholders. $i 


ity of his defigns in this laft fatal attempt. The only clew to reconcile: 


gr 
the many contradictions that a variety of circumftances throw upon: this 


affair, is, to fuppofe that Raleigh had a-real confidence of finding mines 
on that coaft, and depended on their treafures as an excufe for the hofti- 


lities committed in their attainment ; and that James fent him out with 


a-halter about his neck, to be, either the means of filling his coffers, 
or the expiatory facrifice for the refentment which the. attempt might. 


pie from Spain.. 


The. ftrongeft. circumftance that appears againit Raleigh’s having a: 
confidence in the difcovery of a mine, is an accufation of | his not, hav-- 
ing taken fufficient implements for the purpofe of mining. But is it. 


certain that. this accufation. is. grounded upon fact? or, if it was, 


might it. not. proceed from neglect, or any. other reafon than the af- 


cribed one? would a man of Raleigh’s ingenuity,. going out with an 


intention to. deceive, have fuffered fuch- an argument. to be produced : 
againft him?. His being entirely filent on the fentence of treafon, on: 
which he actually fuffered, ftrengthens the evidence of his {trong affe-- 
verations on the article of the mine; for had he been determined to» 
clear himfelf, and load his enemies, by daring perjuries. in fo tremen-- 
‘dous a fituation, why make-any diftinétions? why not attempt to clear: 


himfelf by the fame means of all the afperfions that were not undenia- 
bly proved againft him? 


The King’s declaration on: the fubjec&t of Raleigh’s execution is: 
drawn up in fo poor a manner that it evidently expofes the falfenefs 


of its affertions; whereas the unfortunate Keymis.put an.end to his 
life, ‘from defpair occafioned by the cold reception he met with from 
The declaration fays, ** It was much obferved, 


that after that unfortunate return of Keymis, notwithftanding Sir Wal- 


ter Raleigh did publicly give out that he would queftion him for fail- 


ing- to profeute the. mine, he had him at dinner and fupper, and ufed 
him as familiarly and as kindly as before.” 


| One: of the allegations in this declaration. is, “ That Sir Walter 
con Setar ing made him apptehend’ that he fhould, on his: 


/ be‘again' imprifoned in the Tower.” Immediately. 
afters 


o 


44. , HISTORY OFTENGLAND. . aia 


Ana.1618. | Tue favourable opinion’ the whole nation, and even 
James himfelf, had of the man he had fo meanly ; ‘a 


after this we meet with ‘a contradictory affertion: “* That his coun- é‘ 
tenance was much altered when he fufpected this fate from the reading x 
Staekly’s commiffion from the privy-council ;. that the door being half 

open, Manourie faw this alteration from the ftair-head (Raleigh being 

alone in his chamber); that he ftamped with his feet, and pulled him- 

felf by the hair, {wearing in thefe words, «* God’s wounds! is it = 

ble my fortune fhould return upon me thus again?” 1 


James attempts to prove that there was no deceit ufed to trepan 
Sir Walter Raleigh into cultody 5 but Stuekly, in an apology he made . , 
for his condué&t, avers, that in. ufing craft he did but perform the ' 
commiffion he had from the court. 


In the King’s declaration is a minute defcription of Raleigh’s fham 
illnefs, andthe fhifts this great man was enforced to practife in his 
endeavours to fave his life. A prince here exults over an unfortunate 

. fubje&t, caught in the trap which he had laid for him, and cruelly 
triumphs in the accidental weakneffes of a man, whom he had reduced 
into one of thofe interefting fituations that are the fevereft trials of 
human fortitude. 


The following is the reafon the King gives for taking him off 
upon his former fentence: ** And becaufe he could not by law be 
judicially called in queftion, for that his former attainder of treafon is 
the higheft and laft work of the law (whereby he was céviliter mor 
tuus) his majefty was enforced (except attainder fhould become privi- __ 
leges for all fubfequent offences) to refolve to have him executed upon e 
his former attainder,” 


The pitiful evafion of this excule is eafily feen through, fince, if ; 
the-King had been willing to have put his life upon the judgment of =» ‘ 
his country, he might have given him a pardon on his former con- 
demnation, and afterwards tried him on the accufation of piracy; but — 

James did not choofe to truft the affair to this iffue. Circumftances 

were entirely changed fince the time that Raleigh was tried for trea- i, 
fon, and this period of--James’s reign. Raleigh’s caufe was at prefent a 
popular one, and James had now loft that influence which was attained 
OY Se ROT AE PEE: CE a 


JOAC(M 2B SAL 


135 


and unjuftly facrificed, is to be feen in fome paragraphs Ann. 1618. 


of a letter which Buckingham wrote to Cottington, 
James’s agent at the court of Spain. “ His majefty, 
faith Buckingham, hath given them fo many teftimo- 
nies of his fincere intentions towards them, which he 
daily continueth, as now of late by the caufing Sir 
Walter Raleigh to be put to death, chiefly for the giving 
them fatisfaction. His majefty hath ftrained upon the 


affections of his people, and efpecially concerning Sir | 


Walter Raleigh. Farther, you may let them know how 
able a man Sir Walter Raleigh was to have done his 
majefty fervice, if he fhould have been pleafed to em- 
ploy him ;. yet, to give them content, he hath not {pared 
him, when by preferving him he might have given 
great fatisfaction to his fubjects, and had at command, 
upon all occafions, as ufeful a man as ferved any prince 


in Chriftendom *.” 


- RaweicuH was the younger brother of a good family, 

and diftinguifhed himfelf both in the fea and land fer- 
vices. His artful addrefs recommended him early into 
hg favour of Elizabeth, and he maintained it to her death, 


the cafe of Raleigh, occafioned one of the moft iniquitous fentences 
that ftand on the records of this country.. His Majefty’s Reafons for his 
Proceedings again Sir Walter Raleigh, in Somers’s third Colleétion of 
Tras, 1751, p. 166, & feq. Sir Lewis Stuekly’s Apology, entitled, The 
Humble Petition and Information ¢, Sir Lewis Stuekly, &c. ibid. p. 215, 
& feq. 

* James, as Buckingham here afferts, facrificed to the unreafonable 
demands of Spain one of his beft ‘and moft ufeful fubjeéts. But the 
king of Spain, notwith{tanding the repeated folicitations of James’s 
ambaffador, refufed to deliver up to judgment prey Englith. criminal 


is had taken refuge in Spain. 
in 


136 


Aes. 1618. 


Hischaracter, 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


in oppofition to the frequent prevalency of a cnmectii 
faction. On the fair opportunity which the acceffion 
of the Stewarts offered, fome articles were by him inti- 
mated to reftrain the prerogative: Cecil, to make his. 
court effectually, and cruth the man whofe fuperior ta- 
lents were the objects of his envy and his fear, fruftrated 
the attempt, and difcovered it to James. Hence fprung 
the primary motive of that hatred which at length 
brought this refpectable genius to a premature fate. On 


‘his trial for treafon, Cecil, though of the fame faction, 


and an avowed friend, appeared with the invidious ma- 
lice of an inveterate enemy. ‘The fentence of death 
then pafled upon him was extorted with an apparent 
violation of thofe laws that guard the lives of the fub- 
jects *; Coke, the attorney-general, protefting, that if 
@ircumftances alone were not valid in the cafe of trea-. 
fon, the crown could not ftand one year on the King’s 
head. 

RALEIGH, at different times of his life, tafted both 
of the hatred and efteem of the public. He was ex- 


* Sir John Hawles, folicitor-general to king William, writes thus on 
the circumftances of Sir Walter Raleigh’s trial : 


«« I would know by what law is the depofition of a_perfon, who 
might be brought face to face to the prifoner, read as evidence; I 
would know by what law it is forbidden, that the accufer fhould be 
brought face to face to the accufed; I would know by what law 
Brook’s depofition of what the lord Cobham told him of Raleigh was 
evidence againft Raleigh ; I would know by what law the ftory Dyer 
told of what an unknown man faid to him at Lifbon of Don 
was evidence againft Raleigh ; 1 would know by what ftatute the fta- 
tutes of the Rae iP eka aly nib een of Edward the 
Sixth are repealed. 


J AIMeE 8°41. 


137 


tremely odious to the people at the time of his trial, on As. 1618. 


the fuppofition of his having been one of the principal 
promoters of the death of Effex: His after-fufferings, 
his philofophical deportment, his literary merit, and un- 
juft execution, turned the tide of envy to refpedct, love, 
and compaflion. The character of Sir Walter Raleigh 
merited neither of thefe extremes : His apprehenfion was 
quick, his parts fubtle; he had an indefatigable induttry, 
and a great command of temper ; but his judgment was 
clouded with partial views of {felf-intereft, and the fervile 
prejudices of the times; though guiltlefs of any atrocious 
crimes, yet his morals had taken a deep tint from the vices 
of a court; his fhining qualities dazzle the judgment 
and extort a complacency for his foibles; but his virtues 
were not of the ftamp to merit genuine applaufe. 


Ge scKhs- As: Boog Vin 


Negotiations with Spain.——-Commotions in Germany —umPrince 

_ Palatine eletted king of Bohemia.——Bohemia invaded. ———Ruin 
of the Palatinate. Parliament. Fall of Bacon.——Pro- 
teftation of the Commons.—m—Difolution of the Parliament. 


HE death of Raleigh heightened that diftafte which | 


| T the public had long conceived to James: to exe- 
cute a man of merit upon a fentence originally illegal ; 


a fentence whofe rigor had been already felt in the lofs 
of a large fortune, and a fifteen years imprifonment ; 
a fentence which had been underftood to have been par- 
doned by the truft and command Iately conferred ; was 
looked on as an inftance of the utmoft cruelty and in- 
srsuvou, I, juttice, 


138 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1618. juftice. To do this upon the motives of gratifying the 


Suffolk pro- 
fecuted. 


_ Spaniards, in a point on which they had {mall preten- - 


fions, as an inftance of the utmoft meannefs ; and this 


to forward an alliance which the whole nation detefted, 


excited an indignation and contempt which nothing but 
the imbecility of the times prevented from rifing to a 
height that would have fhook the firmeft foundation of 
that divine right which can commnit folly, crimes, and 
injuftice with impunity. 


In the fame proportion as was James's difregard to 
the good of the nation, rofe his attachment to worth- 
lefs individuals. Buckingham now enjoyed his favour 
to a height of extreme dotage: In his perfon centered 
every kind of honour in which a fubject could be gra- 
tified ; on his caprice depended the preferment of the 
ableft men in the three kingdoms ; and to his inexpe- 
rience, levity, and ignorance, were confided the whole: 
powers of government. fel), 


Surroux, the only remaining weed of Somerfet’s 
planting, was now removed for a new growth. His 
well-known rapacioufnefs gave a juft handle for his 
profecution ; Coke, who perfonally hated him, had the 
management of it. He had been re-taken into favour 
on a mean application to the minion, whofe counte- 
nance he had courted by the facrifice of his: daughter, 
a great beauty with a large fortune,. to bis brother, Sir 
John Villiers. .This match had been propofed to Coke 


_ before his difgrace, and rejected with marks of con- - 


tempt; he afterwards entreated fubmiflively the alliance,. 


and oseved an acquiefcence to amy terms of “de stk “ia | 


1G 


Fe SMe BH ST. 139 


that the party fhould approve. Bacon, who had now Amn. 16:8. 
attained the chancellorthip*, was another of Suffolk’s 


* Villiers, at the time he obtained the feals for Bacon, fent him a 
ater by a gentleman to the following purport: 

«That he knew him to be a man of parts, and, as the timies were, 

fit to ferve his mafter in the keeper’s place ; but he alfo knew him of 

a bafe ungrateful difpofition, and an arrant knave, apt in his profpe- 

rity t6 ruin any that had raifed him in his adverfity. Yet, for all this, 

knowing how fit an inftrument he might be for his mafter, he had ob- 

tained the feals for him; but with this affurance, fhould he ever re- 

_ quite him as he had done fome others, to whom he had been more 

’ Bound, he would caft him down as much. below fcorn, as he had ‘now 
raifed him high above any honour he could have expected.” 

This charge refers to Bacon’s ungrateful treatment of his firft patron, 
the earl of Effex. This nobleman had applied with all the warmeh 
of friendthip to Elizabeth for the place of folicitor-general for Bacon: 
On meeting with a refufal, he would needs make up the difappoint- 
ment out of his own private fortune, and beftowed upon him the gift 

of Twickenham-park, which'was afterwards fold at an under price for 


the value of eighteen hundred pounds, 

When Effex fell under the difpleafure of the court, Bacon, who 
was one of the Queen’s counfel; managed a charge again{t him before 
an affembly of counfellors; judges, and peers, concerning a book that 
had been lately dedicated to him. It was an hiftory of the firft year 
of king Henry the Fourth, and being wrote with freedom, Eliza- 
beth wanted to have fome of the paffages brought into the cafe of 
treafon. 

_ On Effex’s el Bacon was again employed againft: his gene- 
rous patron; and, after his unhappy fate, the fame Bacon, by. the 
Queen’s command, drew up and publifhed a declaration, fetting forth 
the crimes and mifdemeanors of the faid earl, A behaviour fo un- 
juftifiably fcandalous drew upon Bacon a general deteftation, which was 
not extinguifhed during his whole life, nor can his memory be exempted 
from it, whilft any generous qualities remain. in. the human fpecies. 
Weldon. Mablet’s Life of Bacon. Bacon's Apology. 
Weldon gives the following account of Bacon’s abfurd and mean 
he had obtained the feals, viz. 
T 2 « Now 


‘$40 _ - HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1618, fevere antagonifts. Coke conducted the profecution with 
an ability and acrimony peculiar to himfelf: Suffolk 


«¢« Now was Bacon invefted in his office, and, within ten days after, 
the King goes to Scotland. Bacon inftantly begins to believe him- 
felf king ; lies in the King’s lodgings, gives audience in the great 
banqueting-houfe, makes all other counfellors attend his motions, 
with the fame ftate the King ufed to come out to give audience to 
ambaffadors ; when any other counfellor fat with him about the King’s . 
affairs, would, if they fat near-him, bid them know their diftance; a Oty 
upon which fecretary Winwood arofe, went away, and would never 
fic more (under his encroached ftate), but inftantly difpatched one to 
the King, to defire him to make hafte back, for even his very feat 
was already ufurped. In this pofture he lived until he heard the 
- King was returning, and began to believe that the play was almoft 
at an end, he might perfonate a King’s part no longer; and therefore 
did again re-inveft himfelf with his old rags of bafenefs, which were 
fo tattered and poor at the King’s coming to Windfor. He attended 
. . twodays at Buckingham’s chamber, being not admitted to any better a 2 
place than the room where trencher-fcrapers and lacquies attended ; 
there fitting upon an old wooden cheft, with his purfe and feal lying , 3 
by him on that cheft. After two days he had admittance: At firft en- | 
trance he fell down flat on his face at the duke’s foot, kiffing it, vow- 
ing never to rife till he had his pardon ; then was he again reconciled, 
and fince that time fo very a flave to the duke, and all that family, that 
he durft not deny the command of the meaneft of the kindred, nor a 
oppofe any thing.” Weldon, p.120, & feq. i 


If this tale is told with exaggerations, it muft be allowed that it 


pi 
has a foundation in reality, Bacon had certainly difobliged Win- i 
wood, James, and Buckingham, during the King’s refidence in Scot- ; ; en 
land. Through motives of jealoufy he had violently oppofed the n 


match between Coke’s daughter and Sir John Villiers. He had gone a 
fo far in his oppofition as to threaten Winwood with a premunire — or 
for granting a warrant to fearch the lady, who had been fecreted by : 
her mother to prevent the match, and had ventured to write a letter 
to James, in which he reprefented the intended union as a thing that ; 
might prove detrimental to himfelf and favourite. James returned a i. 
very angry epiltle, and Bacon began to find himfelf in a precarious intl 
fituation, He was informed by Sir Henry Yelverton, ‘that Bucking~ ved 


a FAM: EB. Bu 14t 


was accufed in the Star-chamber, and convicted of mal- Ann. 1618. 
adminiftration in his office. His fentence was confine- 
ment in prifon during the King’s pleafure, and a fine of 
thirty thoufand pounds. ‘The lofs of the treafurer’s ftaff 


preceded it. 


_ THE. council was now brought to an entire approba- Negotiation 
tion of the Spanifh match: and Sir John Digby, by “ ‘?*™ 
commiflion under the great-feal, was authorized to treat 
and conclude the marriage. Sarmiento had been re- 
called to Spain to give an account of his negotiation : 
That court was fo pleafed with his conduct in procur- 
ing Raleigh’s death, that they gratified him with the title 
of count Gondemar, and fent him back with powers to 


ham had openly faid, «« He repented the having raifed him fo high; 

that the ingratitude with which he had behaved to the earls of Effex 
and Somerfet was an inveterate cuftom in him: 

That it was common in every courtier’s mouth, that his greatnefs 

fhould be abated; and, as his tongue had been a razor to fome, it 


would be retaliated on him : 

That there was laid up for him many petitions againft him to his 
majetty : 
. That Buckingham had faid, “* That he would not fecretly bite ; but 
hades: had any intereft, or tafted of the oppofition to his brother’s 
marriage, he would openly oppofe them to their faces, and they fhould 
difcern what favour he had by the power he would ufe.” 


_ Bacon wrote many fubmiffive letters to the King and favourite, with- 
aiiccy Out receiving any affurances of forgivenels. One of the letters he wrote 
be if : to the King on this occafion ends in the following ftrain : 

ii? “ And fo expetting that that fun, which, when it went from us, 
left us cold weather, and now it is returned towards us, hath brought 
with it a bleffed harveft, will, when it cometh to us, difpel and difperfe 
all mifts and miftakings.” Original Letters by Dr. Birch, p. 139, & feq. 


SUPE 57-' ome 
, ny carry 


142 


Ann, 1618, 


Ruthworth. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 
carry on the negotiation. Five leading asticles were at 
length agreed on. between the two monarchs. 
I. Tuatr the pope’s difpenfation be firft sag rvite by 
the mere act of the king of Spain. 


II], Tuat the children of this marriage be not con- 


-ftrained in matters of religion, nor their title prejudiced, 


in cafe they prove Catholics. 


Ill. Tuat the infanta’s family, being ftrangers, may: 
be Catholics, and fhall have a decent place appointed: for 
divine fervice, according. to the ufe of the church of 
Rome, and the ecclefiaftic and religious. perfons may 


wear their proper habits. 


IV. Tuat the marriage fhall be seiehetgs in Spain, 
by a procurator, according to the inftructions of the 
council of Trent; and after the infamta’s arrival in 
England, fuch a folemnization fhall be ufed as fhall 
make the marriage valid according to the laws of this 
kingdom. / 

V. TuaT fhe fhall have a competent number of chap- 
lains, and a confeffor, being ftrangers; one whereof 
fhall have power to govern the family in religious 
matters. 


Ir is eafy to difcover that the firft article was framed, 
for the double purpofe of protracting the treaty, and as’ 
an excufe for the entire breaking it, whenever the affairs 
of Spain made it their intereft to put an end to the de- 
ceit. But fuch was the ardor and fuch the infatuation 
of James, that, for fear of interrupting the treaty by. 


joa MIB. 5.54. 


any exceptions, he neglected a critical opportunity to 
oblige the Spaniard to declare himfelf in a manner that 
could not be evaded. 


A asligagacen this year broke out in Germany, that 
threatened the entire ruin of the Proteftants, and bid 
fair for a general re-eftablifhment of that ecclefiaftical 
. fervitude from which part of the inhabitants had been 
lately delivered. In the ftate of Bohemia the tenets of 
the reformed church prevailed; as the regal dignity 
was elective, they had obtained, from the favour of 
this circumftance, eflential privileges in the point of re- 
ligion *, The emperor Matthias pofleffed the crown of 
Bohemia; to pleafe the Catholics he adopted his coufin- 
- german Ferdinand, arch-duke of Gratz, for his fuccef- 
for. Ferdinand was of the younger branch of the 
houfe of Auftria ; zealoufly bigotted to the Popifh faith. 
The ambition of this prince was not {fatisfied by Mat- 
thias’s adoption; he obliged him, through the means of 
the Roman Catholic party, to refign the crown of Bohe- 
mia; and, by a partial call of the States, in an aflem- 
bly compofed of Catholics, he obtained the election, 
though with a provifo nor to act as fovereign till after 
the death of the emperor. On this ufurped fettlement 
the kingdom of Bohemia was governed by a council of 
Papifts, and the Proteftant party was treated in an inju- 
rious manner. A general aflembly of the States, called 


by the officers appointed to enforce the execution of 
edicts, demanded a reparation for the injuries they had 


8 By an agreement with the emperor Sigifmond, on his election to 
the abe of Bohemia, there was to be no citizen. or magiftrate in 
Prague but fuch as were of the reformed religion. 

fuftained,, 


VYawWy 


143 


Ann, 1618, 


Commotions 
in Germany. 


144 


Ann, 18, 


Ann. 1619. 


Prince pala- 
tine elected 
king of 
Bohemia. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


fuftained, and adjourned themfelves to another day. The: 


emperor’s lieutenants, according to orders, attempted to 
prevent their re-meeting. So tyrannical an oppofition 
enraged the States to a degree of phrenzy; they feized 


the emperor's officers, and flung three of the moft info- 
lent of them out of the caftle-window. 


“War was become cadvclautea 2 and both fides made . 


great preparations. From the time of the emperor’s at- 
tempt upon Juliers, the Proteftant States of the empire 
had formed a confederacy againft the oppreflive power 
of the Catholics ; this coalition was termed the Evange- 
lical League *. Of thefe powers the Bohemians im- 
plored affiftance, and invited the elector-palatine to ac- 


cept of their crown. In the interim Matthias died, and. 


Ferdinand obtained the Imperial dignity by the fame 
means that he had obtained the crown of Bohemia f. 
Every branch of the houfe of Auftria, vefted with large 
powers, were now united againft the reformed religion. 
In this critical fituation the Proteftants did not neglect 
the defence of Liberty: the caufe of the Bohemizns was 
adopted, and the elector-palatine marched into piesa) 
and took pofleffion of the offered crown. 


* The princes who formed this league were, the eleétor-palatine, 
the elector of Brandenburgh, the marquis of Anfpach, the duke of 
Wirtemburgh, the Jandgrave of Heffe, the princes of Anhalt, and 
the marquis of Baden. 


+ The eleétor-palatine’s ambaflador, who came to oppofe the Any 
tion, and the ambafladors from the States of Bohemia, were {topped 


at Franckfort. The States of Bohemia complained of the aét of con- - 


vocation which had been fent to F erdinand, feeing he could not exercife 
the privileges of an apie except in their name. 1 


‘the king of Bohemia. 


J AME S 1: 


145 


Very different was the effeé& that this news had Am, i6tg. 


upon James and his fubjects. The generous people, 
animated by the caufe of Liberty, ardent for the relief 


of their Proteftant brethren, were fired with impatience 


to enter as parties into the quarrel. The monarch, 


whofe ambition was centered folely in the object of the 
Spanith match, had véry contrary inclinations. Indeed 
his finances were not in a fituation to enter into a war 
without a large recruit from parliament; and the treaty 
on foot, oppofite to the inclinations of the whole people, 
made fuch an aflembly particularly undefirable at this 
juncture. Befides, the Englifh navy, which would have 
been of notable ufe to have kept Spain in awe, by the 
inftances of Gondemar, had been {fuffered to go almoft 
totally to decay, and wanted much time and money to 
put it into a condition for any hoftile attempt. Thefe 
arguments, drawn from his _prefent circumftances, were 
not the only ones that inclined James to abandon his 
fon-in-law. His exalted idea of the rights of a king, 
however unjuftly and illegally thofe rights had been ob- 
tained, would have been alone a fufficient motive for 
him to deny his afliftance to the revolted States; there- 
fore, without examining into the nature of their pre- 
tenfions, he declared againft them in the council, and 


forbad his fon-in-law to be prayed for under the title of 
The archbifhop of Canterbury, 


detained by illnefs from being at this council, wrote to 

fecretary Naunton, that it was his opinion that the elector 

fhould accept of the crown, and England openly fupport 
him. James rejected the reafons which the archbifhop 

vurged to fupport his opinion, as favouring too much the 

pretenfions to Liberty in A ah 

Vosrh.. .. THE 


146 


Ann. 1619. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Tue vifcount Doncafter had been fent fome time be- 
fore this into Germany to offer James’s mediation to 
compofe the difference between the emperor and the Bo- 
hemians *. This pitiful interfering was treated by Fer- 


* The following is the advice which the States gave to the King of 
England on this head, ‘“ The States’ deputies, writes Carleton in a 
letter to James, came to mie in the’ name of their affembly, to put a. 
queftion unto me, What I could inform them of your majefty’s inten- 
tion in fuccouring your majefty’s allies and theirs in Germany, parti-- 
cularly the Palatinate, now moft in danger, to the end they might 
govern themfelves accordingly. I had not much to anfwer, fave what 


I had underftood of your majefty’s former intention to fend ambaffa- . 


dors into Germany to join with the French in pacification of thofe 
troubles; and now newly of your majefty’s purpofe of fending firft to 
thofe princes which feem to threaten the Palatinate with extraordinary. 
levies. This they approved, fo as the embaflage might be counte- 
nanced with an army, otherwife they doubted of the effect; and there- 
upon defired me to advertife your majefty of the ftrength of the two 
Spanifh armies, one of about twenty thoufand foot and four thoufand 
horfe, which is to be at the rendezvous in Luxemburgh at the end of 
this month, and fo march towards Germany, under the conduct of the: 
marquis Spinola, before the midft of the next; the other under the 
command of Don Lewis de Velafco (the ftrength whereof is nor 
known, but by conjecture of the number wf the old troops) which is. 
to wait upon the States’ army, in cafe it fhould draw to a head upon. 
Spinola’s marching. Their intention, they faid, was good, and their 
refolution ready to affift the princes, and particularly the Palatinate, 
according as in your majefty’s name I had formerly defired them, for 
the prefervation of your majefty’s fon-in-law in his patrimonial inherits 
ance and countries, to the end your majefty might the more eafily pro- 
cure the pacification you intend. But the princes in Germany being 
roo weak of themfelves to make refiftance, and their ftrength here too. 
little to be hazarded betwixt two-armies, one of which would cut be-. 
twixt them and home, while they followed. the other, and; upon any 
difafter which might befal their men, would follow their viétory, even. 


into the heart of thefe countries, which are yet much unfettled by reas 
fon of their late diftraétions, and much of the ftrength thereby diverted; sheen 
they know not what fatisfaction to Ne ee ampere | u. 


fo & MEE. 8 it. 


147 


dinand with fo much difdain, that the ambaflador could Ann. 1619. 


not obtain one audience. 


Tuts year a very arbitrary act of fovereignty was exer- eg op- 


cifed on the earl of Ormond. He was thrown. into pri: ° 
fon for refufing to ftand to the King’s arbitration con- 
cerning a difputed eftate between him and the lord Ding- 


well. The King had adjudged it in favour of his anta- 
an Carte’s Intro- 


gonift. This lord Dingwell was Sir Richard Prefton, 
old companion and favourite of James. 
late earl of Ormond to marry his daughter to him, and 
created Prefton, on this occafion, baron of Dingwell in 
Scotland. On the death of this earl, the title defcended 
to his nephew, Sir Walter Butler, on whom the eftate was 
intailed ; the lord Dingwell difputed this right on the 
pretenfion of his wife’s fucceeding as general heir, and 
obtained pofleflion by an unjuft exertion of the power of 
the crown, notwithftanding that Ormond'’s title to the 
eftate was corroborated by the will of the deceafed earl. 


Ormonp was not the only individual that fuffered 
from illegal aéts of power in this reign. Whitlock, a 


‘Palatinate, unlefs your majefty’s more powerful hand fhould concur 


therein, and therefore they doubted .a fearful event of this fummer’s 
work ; that the Spaniards would not only make themfelves, without 
much refiftance, mafters of the Palatinate, but bring all the united 


' princes and the free towns to their fubjection, of which danger they 


likewife defired me to advertife your majefty ; and withal to befeech 
you, as the chief protector (under God) of the common caufe of reli- 
gion, and a prince particularly interefted in your fon-in-law’s fortune, to 
Contribute fome part of your great power to the fafety of both; wherein 
your majefty fhould find them ready to employ the uttermoft of their 
mea Carleton's Letters, p. 473, & Jeg: 

U 2 lawyer, 


He obliged the fi 


dudtion tothe 


Life of fee 
ke 


mond, pd 
vol, I. p. 66. 


Whitlock 
and Manfell 
imprifoneds 


148 HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 


Aon. 1619. lawyer, and Sir Robert Manfell, the vice-admiral, were 
both committed to prifon; one for giving his opinion in 
a cafe which was fuppofed to touch the King’s preroga- 
tive, andthe other for afking it. The opinion was not 
given in public, but as a private intimation to a friend. 


— EpMUND PeacuuMm, who was taken up for writing 


Original Let- fome offenfive paflages in a fermon, was racked feveral 

Dr Bich times in prifon, that a confeflion of treafonable purpofes 

P 47+ might be extorted from him by the force of pain. The 

firength of his refolution rendering this method ineffec- 

: tual, the queftion was, how to convict him on the cir- 
| Orgs, Cumftances of thofe paflages. James drew up with his 
| Dever’ own hand a ftate of the queftion. In this performance 
he employed all the powers of his logic to enlarge the 

boundaries of high-treafon to the prefent cafe. The> 

fermon had never been made public, either by preaching, 


or printing, 


In Peachum’s cafe, Bacon, who then held the place of 

i - attorney-general, by the command of the King extorted: 

. by the force of importunity the feveral opinions of the ‘ 
H- judges. Sir Edward Coke affirmed, “ That fuchanau- , 
\ ricular taking of opinions was not. according to the cuf- ; 
f fans tom of the realm; that it was new and dangerous.” Ba . a 
€on’s artifices and importunities at length prevailed: He 

IH wrote word to James that he was not wholly out of hope, 

that my lord Coke would comply when he had in fome 

dark manner put him in doubt that he fhould be left alone.. 


In the beginning of the year 1620 the affairs of Bo- | 
hemia were in a good fituation, Several princes of Ger- 


a 4 
: i. 


sete _ 


- 
4.5) 
a 7 
Sint F ’ 
ts 7 
ae A 
. 


J .& oM, # 6- cl. 149. 
many had‘ formed a league to fupport the new king ; Ann. 1620.. 
- nd Bethlem Gabor, prince of Tranfylvania, had pro- 
cured a diverfion in Hungary by exciting the Hunga- 
rians to rebel againft the emperor. At this critical time 
had England awed the Spaniards. by her fleet, and fent 
a moderate afliftance of land-forces into Germany, the 
war might have been foon determined to the advantage 
of the Proteftant caufe, and the firm eftablifhment of 
the palatine on the throne of Bohemia. But this conti- 
-nental war, the only one perhaps in which it was ever 
politic for England to engage, and in which for once 
the glory of the people and the intereft of the fovereign’ 
were united, was fo difclaimed by James that the am- James dif-- 
bafladors * whom he fent into Germany to clofe the pum p,;. 
breach between the emperor and his fon-in-law, damped ‘*"* 
the hopes of the Proteftant league, and encouraged the 
Auftrians by difavowing the elector’s proceedings, and 
denying to give him the title of king of Bohemia. At 
the fame time he ordered Cottington to affure the king of 
Spain, that his fon-in-law had acted without his know- 
ledge, that he difapproved of his conduct in accepting: 
the crown, and was determined to difown him if he per- 
fitted in his pretenfions. A kind of a complaint was 
alfo made to that court, that the emperor, by referring 
the bufinefs to four electors, had difregarded the king 
of England’s intentional kind offices, and left no place 


mas: for his authority to interpofe. 


Wuixst James’s attention was thus engrofled in giv- The Praselle- 
Pe . . F - ant caule 
ing fatisfaction to the houfe of Auftria, the affairs of Bo- declines. 
d 


ee Be: Thefe were Sir Richard Wefton and Sir Edward Conway. Sir 
__. Richard Wefton was a Roman Catholic, 
EL hemia: 


10 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 16:0, Hemia began to wear a threatening afpect. The elector 
of Saxony was won over by a jealoufy of the Palfgrave’s 
new dignity, and the promife of Lufatia*. He entered 
that country with an army of twenty thoufand men. The 
like means was ufed to engage the duke of Bavaria, who, 
at the head of a Catholic league, declared for the empe- 
ror. The king of Spain was levying a confiderable force 

_ in the Netherlands for his ufeé. The prince of Orange, 
who had urged the Palfgrave to accept the crown of Bo- 
_hemia, was impeded from giving him any confiderable 
afliftance by the commotions his conduét had excited in 
the United Provinces ¢. Other ftates were infected by the 
coldnefs of England +, and the Hungarians and Tran- 


* By the malignant jealoufy of this prince, and the weak unnatural 
~ conduct of king James, a very critical opportunity was loft of reducing 


; the power of the houfe of Auftria, and giving fuperiority to the Pro- 
teftants in Germany. 


t The States were extremely inclined to fupport thé king of Bohe- 
mia; but their domeftic quarrels, and the averfion they found in James “id 
to enter into the quarrel, prevented their exerting themfelves farther si 
i than the allowing him a monthly aid of fifty thoufand florins. They 
wrote a letter to the Proteftant princes affembled at Nuremburg, to ¢ 
i haften them in their refolution for the affiftance of the king of Bo- Ld 
| hemia. They told James’s ambaffador, that the fecurity of the Pala- 


i tinate depended on the King of England ; who, fhewing himfelf and ; y 
iY his power in time, would keep them all in obedience. “ In this opi- a 
nion, writes Sir Dudiey Carleton, I.am daily affailed with interroga- ; 3 . 
| tories what his majefty doth refolve, and what his majelty will do.” 

| ; - Carleton’s Letters, p. 431. 


+ Carleton, the Englifh -refident at the Hague, gave oo ee 
| the following intelligence to the Englifh court : 


«« That Monfieur Langerac had wrote from France, that the empe- - Se 
ror’s ambaffador had obtained a private confent of fuccours from that . 
king; the apprehenfion whereof did caufe Broderode, the States’ ambaf- 
fador, to write very fearful letters from nn eee as if the F 
P 


- 


wee 
et: 


ie MOR 4 4: 


IgE 


fylvanians, by means of the king of Poland, had been Ann, 1620. 


neceflitated to make a truce with the emperor. 


Tue king of France, who was engaged by intereft to: 
interrupt the growing greatnefs of the Auftrian family,. 


was kept in a neutrality by the influence of his favourite 
Deluynes. Deluynes had been bribed into this meafure 
by the gift of a rich heirefs, in the difpofal of the arch- 
duchefs Ifabella.. | 


Bestpes thefe difadvantages which threatened the Pro- 


teftant caufe, the conduct of the elected king of Bohemia 
was weak and indifcreet. He entrufted the command of 
his forces to prince Anhalt, in preference to two able 
eommanders that had already rendered him confiderable 
fervices, the counts de la Tour and Mansfeild: His do- 
meftic behaviour gave great offence to his new fubjects : 
He affected much ftate and grandeur, and his wife intro- 
duced a gaiety which indeed fhe had been ufed to in her 
father’s court, but which difgufted the religious Bohe- 
mians, whofe zeal ought to have been kept up by a fru- 
gal appearance, and a ftrict feverity of manners. : 


In fpite of that averfion which James had to enter’ 
into any meafures that might incur the difpleafure of 


Palatinate would be a prey the next fpring to the French, Lorrain,. 
and the archduke’s troops. To which he added, that the French agent’ 


_ there having his means augmented, prepared himfelf to follow the king 


to Prague; but in his letters from the French king and commiffion went 
no farther in title than what he was wont, which he excufed upon his 


'~ majefty’s not having acknowledged his fon-in-law king of Bohemia; in 


which refpeéct, he faid, it muft not be found ftrange in thofe princes, 
who had not fo near intereft as the King of England in blood and title.” 
Carleton’s Letters, p. 436. 

Spain;. 


“a: 
i 2 


*7 
of 
~ 


if 
~~ 
al 


Burnet;- 


152 


Ann. 1620. 


Bohemia 
invaded. 


Ruin of the 
Palatine. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND.. 


Spain, the popularity of his fon-in-law’s caufe, in a 
manner obliged him to admit of one regiment’s * going 
to the Palatinate, to make head againft Spinola, who 
had invaded it with the Spanifh forces. The fortunes 
of Frederic, king of Bohemia, began now to gather to 
a crifis: A large force, under the feveral commands of 
Maximilian duke of Bavaria, Bucquoy, and Balthazar, 
advanced to Prague, the capital of Bohemia ; the Bohe- 
mian forces were drawn out to oppofe them. On the 
eighth of November a battle was fought, which gave a 
decifive victory to the Imperialifts, and obliged the king 


‘and queen to take their flight towards Holland. One of 


the chief reafons that occafioned the precipitate fate of 
this unfortunate prince was his fuffering a difcontent to 
rife in the army for want of pay, though he had actually 
a great treafure by him, which, after his defeat, fell into 


the hands of the enemy. 


Prince Anhalt immediately deferted the vanquifhed 
party, and fought the battles of the Imperialifts. The 
generous la Tour and Mansfeild, notwithftanding the ill 


- ufage they had received, flood firm to the caufe of Liberty, 


and continued with the remainder of the beaten forces to 
harrafs the countries dependant on the emperor. 


* This was fo much againft the King’s inclination, that Wooton told 
the archduke Leopold, that true it was the Englifh fubjects had taken 
an alarm, and voluntarily meant to facrifice themfelves for the defence 
of the Palatinate, but without his mafter’s concurrence of money or 
command. Sir Horace Vere was colonel of this regiment, the earls 
of Effex and Oxford captains. Effex penfioned fifty men that went 
on this expedition, befides the complete number - his own company. 
Sanderfon, p. 484, & feg. 


PA My & 6 a4. 


$3 


Anne of Denmark, James’s queen, did not live to fee Dna 16 tg. 
eath oO; 


the entire ruin of her daughter's fortune. 
happened in the beginning of the year 1619, in the forty- 
fifth year of herage. She was a woman of avain, haughty, 
and violent temper *. The court-amufements took their 


bias from thefe qualities ; they were pompous and gaudy, 


without any degree of tafte or propriety ft. The direc- 


.* At the time of her daughter’s marriage with the Palfgrave fe had 
been flattered from the king of Spain with hopes that fhe might have 
him for a fon-in-law. This put her into fo ill a difpofition for the 
Proteftant match, that fhe defcended to fuch childifh expreffions of re- 
fentment as to call her daughter in derifion Good-wife Palfgrave. 

Spotfwood gives us the following account of the violence of this 

‘princels’s temper ; 
“© Prince Henry was affigned to the care of the earl of Mar: On 
the queen’s intended journey to London fhe went to his houfe, and 
demanded her fon, that he might accompany her. This demand be- 
ing denied by the family of the earl of Mar, fhe became fo incenfed, 
that it occafioned her a fever, and that fever a mifcarriage. The 
King being advertifed of her ficknefs, fent the duke of Lenox with a 
warrant to receive the prince, and deliver him to the queen. Not- 
withftanding this indulgence, fhe wrote a letter to the King, full of 
paflion, requiring a public reparation by the punifhment of the earl of 
_ Mar and his fervants. The King fent her word, that fhe fhould do 

wifely to forget the grudges fhe carried to the earl of Mar, and thank 
God for the peaceable poffeffion they had obtained of the kingdom of 
England, which, next under God, he afcribed to the laft negotiation 
of the earl of Mar in England. When this meflage was delivered to 
the queen fhe replied, in great wrath, that fhe rather would have wifhed 
never to fee England, than to be in any fort beholden to the earl of 


Mar.” Spotfwood, p. 477. 
+ The two following authentic letters are examples of the kind of 


vulgarity that prevailed in this princefs, and confequently infected the 
whole court, 


Queen Anne to king James. 


Her death Anne. 


ee Tam glad that our brother’s * horfe does pleafe you, and that my fie - 
enmark. 


3 for I did command him that he fhould make 
yor 


dog Stennie + does well 
i VO Ay. 


+ Villiers, 
r 


154 


_ Ann, 1620.. 


A benevo- 
lence de- 
manded, 


Rapin, 


| 

- 

t King 
/ James. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


tion of the revels were the bounds of Anne’s empire. 
It was perhaps from the little influence fhe had over her 
hufband, that fhe efcaped the odium that fell on all thofe 
who tranfacted the public affairs. 


Jags attempted to turn to his own pecuniary advan- 
tage the zeal which the people exprefled for the reinftat- 
ing of the Palfgrave’s fortune. On the almoft entire lofs 


‘of the Palatinate a benevolence was demanded, as an aid 


towards its recovery. Whether the people looked upon 
this as an excufe only to extort money from them; whe-- 
ther they were difgufted at its being demanded at a time: 
too late to expect any fruits from fuch an affiftance; or 
whether they were unwilling to encourage the examples. 
of thefe illegal methods of raifing money; the King got 
little from his fubjects by this ftratagem*. He foon 


after called a parliament, forming great hopes from the’ 


general difpofition. towards a. German war. 


Waite the people were encouraged to believe that the 


King would really attempt the recovery of the Palatinate, 


Buckingham wrote a letter to Gondemar, in which he 
affured him, * That his mafter was determined to re- 
main neuter, for the reafons of confcience, honour, —_ 


your ear hang like a.fow’s lug, and-when he comes home I will treat 
him better than any other dag: . 
Queen Anne to vifcount. Villiers. 
“ You do well in tugging the fow’s ¢ ear, and I thank you for it, and’ 
would have you do fo ftill, upon condition that you continue a watchful. 
dog to him, and be always true to him.” MSS, Brit. Muf. fol. 6986.. 


* James at this time demanded a benevolence from ee Scotch ser: ae 
jects, but every rank of people excufed themfelves from « ae ei 


Spotfwood, Pp 541. 


—" 
ee ae 


poss mi Bad. . iss 
example. On the firft reafon, the church very juflly op- Aaa. 1620... 
 pofed the principle of the Jefuits, who take upon them 
to enthrone and dethrone princes according to their fancy, 
that our religion enjoins us to obey our prince and fo- 
vereigns, though they fhould be Turks or infidels. Se+ 
condly, that if he affifted his fon-in-law in this affair his 
actions would be contrary to his proteftations, which would 
be very difhonourable, Thirdly, it was a very dangerous 
ns precedent againft all Chriftian kings, to allow of the 
tranflation of a crown by the authority of the people.” 


Ar the fame time that James was giving thefe full 
affurances to the Spanifh minifter, his ambafladors were 
dancing attendance at every prince’s court in Germany, 
to endeavour to incline them to the pacific meafures of 

_ their mafter. The arguments they made ufe of on this 
occafion, fhewed fo ftrongly James’s determined purpofe, © 
that it confirmed the coldnefs of the Proteftant allies, 
‘and freed their antagonifts from the apprehenfions of a 
powerful oppofition. Mean while the regiment of Eng- 
lith volunteers, not having been joined by any confider- 
able force, had been able to do fo little in the Palatinate, 
that that country had fallen almoft entirely into the 
hands of Spinola, the Spanifh commander. Whilft the 
king of Spain was thus compleating the deftruction of 
James’s family, Gondemar had the addrefs to perfuade 
him, in fpite of his averfion to warlike enterprizes, to 

MAE fend out a naval force againft the Algerines, who began 

ty ie) to be formidable to the Spaniards: At the fame time the 
ie tks ambaflador was fuffered to buy up all kind of warlike 
: ftores to fupply the Spanith magazines, ‘Thefe were not 

the only: inftances of a furprizing power which this 

[1 x 2 fubtle 


silvia 


156 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1620. fabtle genius had over the weak mind of the Englith 


Rufhworth, 


monarch : He actually perfuaded him that his mafter’s 
conqueft of the Palatinate would accelerate its reftora- 
tion, as it would be a gallant prefent for the infanta to 
give on her marriage. 


James was not the only dupe to the artifices of Gon- 
demar. Marco Antonio de Dominis, archbifhop of Spo- 


lato, fell a victim to his enfnaring courtefy: He came ~ 


into England in the year 1618, abjured the Roman Ca- 


tholic faith, and was preferred to the mafterfhip of the 


Savoy, and the deanry of Windfor. After fome years’ 
ftay, though he was grown old and infirm, he fuffered 
himfelf to be gained by the hopes of a cardinal’s hat, 


and returned to Rome to be reconciled to that church. 


Inftead of being prefented with a cardinal’s hat, he was 
thrown into the Inquifition, and, after his death, his 
body was publicly burnt. 


To create a confidence in the enfuing parliament of a 
real intention to recover the Palatinate by the force of 
arms, nine commiflioners were appointed to confider 
what proportion of men, fhipping, and treafure, would 
be fufficient for the enterprize. The earl of Effex, one 
of the officers in the regiment now in Germany, who 


had juft returned from that ecu was one of thefe 


commiffioners. 


Tue tongues of men were fo bufy in cenfuring the 
government, that proclamations continually iffued againft 
excefs of fpeech; all of them were in threatening 
{trains, but as the individual offenders were fcreened by 


Pom Mee Be © 


IS7 


their multitude, thefe proclamations ferved only to in- Ann. 1620, 


creafe their clamor, 


On the thirtieth of January, according to the King’s 4 Parliament 
In the beginning of ™°* 


_ appointment, the parliament met. 

James’s fpeech to this aflembly, he laments the little in- 
fluence his wife and florid. difcourfes had hitherto had 
over parliaments. “ I may truly fay, faid he, that I 
have piped unto you, but you have not danced ; I have 
often mourned, but you have not lamented.” He then 
makes the following curious definition of the nature of 
parliaments: “ I know there are divers forts of foreign 
parliaments, fome more, fome lefs in number; but I 
leave them ;-----only this I would have you to obferve, 
that it is a vain thing for a parliament-man to prefs to 
be popular, for there is no ftate or parliament without a 
monarchy; fo the Grizons, Swifles, and Low-Countries, 
which are governed without a king, have no parliaments, 
but councils and affemblies: This I put you in mind of, 
that you ferve under a monarchy, and that you muft ftand 
or fall with it *.” James affures the parliament, that he 
will do nothing in the Spanifh match that fhall not be 
for the good of religion. The trial of his fincerity he 
_ refers to his works and writings, wherein he fays, “ He 
has been a martyr tortured in the mouths of the vulgar.” 
He hopes they will truft the wifdom of their King fo far, 
that he will never do one thing in public and another in 


* By James’s manner of expreffing himfelf, it is not eafy to find out 
the diftinétion. he endeavours to demonftrate; fince, if the defign of 
the body of men he addrefféd. had been to procure to themfelves fove- 
reignty, it would be of little confequence to them whether they were 
-. called an aflembly, council, or parliament. 


private 


. 7 ™ 
- ‘ 
Ad 
ty 
‘ . 


158 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Aan, 1620, private ; the main end of his calling them together, he 
; owns, was to obtain a fupply for his neceflities; he 
draws a comparifon between his prefent fituation, and 
“ That of a woman with-child, that has gone her time | 
of travail; only inftead of months, himfelf had gone ten 
. years, and therefore it was full time that he fhould be 

delivered of his wants.” He gives a detail of his pre- 
fent ceconomy; “ That ten thoufand a-year was abated 
in his houfhold expence; that his young admiral *, out 
of the love he bore to him, had, by taking all upon 
himfelf, faved him the envy which fuch a particular fur- 
vey would otherwife have occafioned him; that the ex- 
pence of the navy was diminifhed twenty-five thoufand 
pounds +.” He then tells them, “ That the fecond caufe 
for this call of parliament is the miferable and torn eftate 
of Chriftendom.” He mentions the money it coft him 
in Doncafter’s embaflies to compofe differences, and blames 
his fon-in-law for accepting the crown from the alien- 
ated States. He proceeds to give his reafons for not 
having interfered in the caufe: “ Firft, faid he, I would 
not make religion the caufe of depofing kings; I leave 
that to the Jefuits to make religion a caufe to take away 
crowns. Next, I was not a fit judge between them, for i 
they might fay to me as he faid to Mofes, Who made ¥ 
thee a judge over us? and myfelf would not be content a 
for them to judge whether I were a king or not. Laftly, © 4 
becaufe I had been a meddler, and then to determine my 


. * The duke of Buckingham. i 
+ The navy at this time was fuffered to go to decay. Gondemat = 
had told James, that furnifhing a naval force would breed fufpicion in “1 
the king his matter, and avert his mind from the intended agent 2, 
5 a 66 Hla gee. Gs bag 


a 
4 
= | ee 
ouet | ra <5 
- ss " 1. ‘ 
. , , 
, , 
‘ Fa (ae 
: P 5 a 
‘ - “5 . > 
' -% - i 


rs 


Oo 8.3 a Ba ok 


Is9 


- fon might take the crown upon him, had been impro- Ann, 1620. 


per.”’ He next informs them, “ That he has fpent two 
hundred thoufand pounds to prevent the Palatinate from 
being invaded; and that he will leave no travail untried 
to obtain a happy peace.” After having given a hint of 
his merit in expending forty thoufand pounds upon the 
piratical war, he defires them to confider if he deferved 
not refpect. “ How happy a fame will it be, concludes 
he, that he is reverenced by his people, and reciprocally 
loves them ? Now fhall I be honoured by my neighbour 
princes, and my government, peradventure, made an. 
. example for pofterity to: follow.” 


WHATEVER might be the: effects that this wife and’ 
perfuafive fpeech had upon the parliament, their firft 
tranfaction was a petition to the King for the due exe- 
cution of laws. againft Jefuits, feminary priefts, and Po- 
pith recufants *. They then entered on the confideration: 
of thofe numberlefs grievances under which the fubjects: 
had laboured in their perfons, property, and apprehen- 
fion, during the vacancy of parliament. 


Tue Commons, not to lofe the only moments that 
rendered them capable of ferving their country, waved 
the arguments that the courtiers made ufe of for a 


* In the debate concerning this bufinefs in the lower houfe, Sir Je- 
rome Horfey moved that four or fix members fhould be appointed to 
fearch the vaults and cellars under the parliament-houfe twice a-week.. 
Parl. Hift. vol. V. p. 327. 

The Papifts at this time met. with fuch encouragement from the mi- 
 miftry, "that they made no fcruple to declare that they expected liberty. 
of confcience, and a toleration of their religion. 


in 


f{peedy, 


iGo HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


~ Ann. 1620, fpeedy fupply *, and entered into proceedings on the 
many vexatious grants that had harraffed the fubject 
during this long period of feven years. The moft glar- | 
ing abufes were, difpenfations of penal ftatutes in the : 
farming out inns t, grants of monopolies, and grants. 


_* On this fubje&t of fupply Sir William Cope moved, that a com- 
mittee of the whole houfe fhould fit every afternoon to confider the 
ftate of Chriftendom, England, the ftate of wars, and the beft means 
to carry them on. Sir John Davys argued, on the fide of the court, 
to give fpeedily, that all men run together to quench a fire, though 
they were not on fire, yet the Palatinate was on fire, religion was on 
fire, and all other countries on fire. Sir James Perrot moved, thar 
fupply and grievances might be as twins, to go together, and have no 
precedency. There had been a proclamation, he faid, to reftrain 
{peaking on matters of ftate, and the King’s fpeech had confirmed it ; 
that there was alfo reftraints put on petitioning in religious matters. 
He moved for a petition to the King to explain himfelf what he in- 
tended by matters of ftate. If recufants and the like, fo monopo- 
lies, &c. may come within the compafs of the prerogative; even for 
the Palatinate, what to be given, how to be employed, may come 
within the.compafs of matters of ftate. A committee might form fuch 
a petition, and bring it into the houfe to-morrow. He was againft ’ m 
a conference with the Lords, for in the laft parliament they rejected a 
conference. Sir Edward Coke urged, that the privileges of the houfe 
concerned the whole kingdom: * But take heed, faid he, that we 
lofe not our liberties by petitioning for leave to treat of grievances. 
No proclamation can be of force againft an act of parliament. In 
Edward the Third’s time a parliament was holden every year, that the . 
people might complain of grievances. If a proclamation comes 
again{t this the law is to be obeyed, and not the proclamation. The 
fourth of Henry the Eighth Strowde moved againft the Stannary-court, 
but was fined after the parliament, and imprifoned by the fteward of 
the Stannary: Thereupon a law enfued for freedom of fpeech in the’ 
houfe, but it ought to be done in due and orderly manner.” Parliam, 
Hit. vol. V. p. 329, & feq. “e 

+ Exceffive fines were fet upon thefe houfes of public refrefhment; == 
the licenfing them was taken out of the hands of the proper asia + 
’ hai 
; aN es 


* 


~—) 


3 AM te Br Ks 161 


“Of ‘concealments *, A patent for the fole making of Ann. 16:0. 
“gold ‘lace, given to Sir Giles Mompeflon, a creature of 
“the favourite. ~ Sir Edward Villiers had a large fhare in 
‘the ‘profits, though his name was left out of the pa- 
“tent. The privilege of the patentee went fo far as the 
“power of imprifoning all thofe that fhould prefume to 
“make this commodity, and even to enter their houfes, 
and forcibly takeaway fuch goods. By the means of fo 
extenfive a privilege, through the avarice of the patentee, 
‘all’ the’ gold ‘lace then made was adulterated to lefs than 


“half ‘its ‘value *. 


THe unravelling thefe complicated fcenes of villainy 
“began to make James tremble for his favourite. He 
“would” have ‘diffolved the ‘parliament, had it not been 
* for the artful: counfel of John ‘Williams, dean of Weft- 

minfter, who advifed him to facrifice every other crimi- 
nal to the public refentment, and footh them with an 
affurance that it was propofed by Buckingham.  Wil- 
. “Tiams’s advice was followed, and Buckingham declared 


‘ftrates, viz. the juftices of the peace. ” By this means all kind of dif- 
orderly perfons were’permitted to keep inns, ; 
* Thefe were grants of concealed titles to lands. People were turned 
out of what they had been long in poffeflion of, after having {pent 
great fums on improvements. The Commons complained that a cathe- 

~ dral and twelve hofpitals had been fwallowed up by it. 
+ In a conference on thefe fubjects between. the two houfes, the 
“Jord-chancellot’ and ‘the lord-treafurer. had “ftood up improperly to 
~tfpéak in’ their own’ defence. - The lord-chamberlain complained to the 
upper houfe of this irregularity, and termed them two Great Lords : 
~ This. diftinétion was objected to by the lord Spencer: It was agreed 
that no» lords of that houfe were to be called Great Lords, they.be- 

ing all-peers. 

Y 


Bes Wou. d. in 


a “HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 


Ana. 1620. in the houfe of Lords, that though he had two brothers $ 
called in queftion, he would not defend them, but leave ae: 
them to the cenfure of parliament. This appearance 
of candor, and the fear of being taxed with giving any 
delay toa meafure fo popular as the German war, made 
‘the Commons part with two fubfidies, and abate of thofe 
fcrutinizing enquiries that might affect the minifter, and 
prevent the bringing other criminals to juftice. 


Baconacculed AmoNG the numberlefs evidences. nah thronged to 
of malverfa- ghe 
tion inhis accufe the corrupt minifters of the crown, matters of 
— high importance were charged againft Bacon, who had 
fome time enjoyed the chancellorfhip, and was now dif- . 
tinguifhed by the title of vifcount St. Albans. He was a 
not only accufed of having fet the feal to a great num- 
ber of illegal patents, but even of bribery in the exercife 
of his office as chancellor *. 


THE encouragement which James had been prevailed 
on to give towards the difcovery of the iniquitous prac- 
tices of the times, was too great to make an honoura- , 
ble retreat. Buckingham and the chancellor could not r 
both be preferved without the diffolution of the parlia- an 
ment, and fuch a ftep muft have tacitly condemned 
both the monarch and the minifter, whofe reputations 7. 
could no otherwife be preferved but by the facrifice of ia 
their corrupt inftruments. James was fo folicitous to 
clear himfelf from any imputation of blame, that dur- _ 
ing the courfe of the enquiries, he came to the houfe 


* In the complaint which the Commons brought up againft the lord-. 
chancellor, Dr. Field, the bifhop of Landaff, was accufed of brocage in. 
a.bribe intended for the chancellor. Parl. Hift. vol. V. p. 351, & feqe 

ee 4. 4 of 


. 


JAMES L 


of Lords, and made ufe of the flrongeft terms tO pro- Ans. 1620." 
fefs his innocence *, and defire of juftice on the delin- 


quents. Thus encouraged, the Lords proceeded with 
zeal. An accufation of four-and-twenty articles of bri- 
bery, was brought into their houfe by the Commons 
againft the chancellor. This unfortunate tool of go- 
vernment was even obliged to abandon his defence. 
The King would not hazard his appearing to plead his 


caufe. An ample confeflion of the whole charge, with Bacon’s fall. 
fome trifling extenuations, was figned by him, with an Parl. Hit. 


_* The houfes had been told, that he had done nothing in thefe 
cafes without having referred the fame to feveral judges for the point 
of law, and to divers lords for the point of commodity. Thefe were 
the lord-chancellor, three of the judges, and ferjeant Finch. 


In the fpeeches he made on this occafion he faid, <‘ That if the poy pig. 


enormities: complained of had been laid before him, he would have 
punifhed the delinquents as feverely out of parliament, and peradven- 
ture more than the parliament intended to punifh them.” He told 
the houfe, “ That he believed their body had bribed his fon to do 
good offices for them.” And added, ‘* The like I may fay of one 
that fits there---Buckingham: He hath been fo ready upon all occa- 
fions to do good offices both for the houfe in general, se every mem- 
ber thereof in particular.” 


James, amongft others of shins kind of cajolements, praifed much 
the intention of a bill againft informers. ‘ Such a bill, faid he, will 
be the greateft eafe, both to me and all thofe that are near about me 
at court, that may be for I remember that fince the beginning of 
this parliament Buckingham hath told me, He never found fuch quiet 
and reft as in this time of parliament, from projectors and informers, 
who, at other times, miferably vexed him at all hours.” He told the 
Lords, “* That he acknowledged their houfe to be the fupreme court 


of juftice, in which he was ever prefent by reprefentation ; that he 


could not give them a greater affurance nor better pledge of his pur- 
pote, than by the Been he had done them of placing his only fon 
among them.” 


SF humble 


_ 


164 


- HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


- gan a62a, humble petition: for'a favourable fentence *. . Thus. ige 


nominious was. the fall of the famous, Bacon, defpica- 
ble in all the active part of life, and. only glorious. in 
the contemplative. Him the rays. of feience ferved 
but to embellith, not enlighten ; and, philofophy. herfelf 
was degraded. by a conjunction with his mean foul +. 
He did not furvive, above: five years, this. public dif 
grace. We are told that he often lamented. that ambi- 


tion and falfe glory had diverted him from {pending 


his whole time in the manner worthy of his extenfive 
genius; but there is too much reafon to believe, from 
his conduct, that thefe fentiments arofe from the weight 
of his mortifications, and not from the conviction of 
his judgment. He preferred many mean fupplications 
to James, and continued to flatter him fo far, as to 
paint his grandfather, Henry the Seventh {, in an amia+ 
ble light. This management obtained the pardon of 
his whole fentence, which was, A fine’ of forty thou- 


* One of the articles of his charge is to this purpofe: The vintners: 
in I.ondon refufed to give above a certain price for wine; the mer- 
chants complained to the council; the King made a reference to the 
chancellor; the chancellor ordered the vintners to give the price de- 
manded, and imprifoned two. or three of the moft obftinate, till they 
complied. For his pains he received a prefent.of one thoufand pounds.. 
Bacon's Submiffion, State Trials, 2d edit. vol. 1. p..364-- 

“* It may feem to us remarkable, fays an ingenious writer, that Bacon: 
was not accufed for arbitrary proceedings, ‘but for corruption.” 

+ During the time he. had the feals, he received a number of letters: 
from Buckingham in favour of different.people who had cavfes depend- 
ing in Chancery. There is great reafon to believe that every one ofi 
thefe mandates was implicitly obeyed by the fubmiffive chancellor. Thele- 
letters are in a late collection publifhed by Dr, Birch, : 

t James idolized the charatter of this monarch, and affected to re- _ 
femble him.._ It was at his defire that Bacon undertook this work. 


50. 918: re | 4 o 4) wf ‘wat Fiscde wht vy aul 
_ place, or employment in the commonwealth, and never 
Reoain. Solusicas se ye vi saisaica Ge y 


Je Se Be Yoh 


fand pounds, imprifonment in the Tower during the Ann. 1612. 


Tie : ra 5 3 Ji ; evs & _* all sA5l if BS ijf iy 
King’s pleafure, to be for ever incapable of any office, 
- iy VSOMTs FO slroved sr101t 9p: SD ¥ Most 


‘J 


Bes ~ ~ 4 ii7 SA alka 43 Wisse r ye 24d 4 
to fit again in parliament, or come within the verge of 


165. 


of. U8 .20 


» oe! . Ml Steak oe | ; os VU AS hah Ps SV¥7ogl LEE 
the court. Befides the favour. of ‘a pardon, he retained | 


‘a nominal penfion of eighteen hundred pounds a-year ; 


vy s 1¥2Z COE TS So Off til MID DIOGO RA 
but through the deficiency of its payment he languifhed 
ory JO ter Mwy Har GOA. och" 3D eTiyed OF) AP easing 
out the remainder of his life in indigent circumftances *. 
It is needlefs for an hiftorian to defcribe the ftrength or 
SEAT OF tie Aeaine | his. precious bequells to pofterity 
paint them ftronger than can any other pen. 


Wixtiams received the advantage of the counfel that 
was fo fatal to Bacon: Buckingham, having no other 
creature in whofe underftanding and compliance he 
could fo thoroughly confide, depofited the feals in his 
hands, with the title of lord-keeper inftead of lord-chan- 
cellor; this office fo nominated being held at the King’s 
pleafure -, The delinquents of an inferior order met 


* Tr a from Letters, &c. publifhed by Dr. Birch, that James 
made a kind of promife that Bacon’s fortune fhould not be affected by 
his difgrace. This promife was fo ill kept, that, in a letter of Bacon’s 
to the’King (in the fame colle€tion), he complains, that the penfion of 


éigliteen hundred a-yéar, Which’he had enjoyed during his profperity,. 
‘was ‘ftopt, and that there was cight hundred pounds in arrear due upon 
‘jt. Among the many petitions he preferred to Buckingham for a fub- 


fiftence, he defcended to afk the provoftfhip of Eaton {chool, and was 
‘defied. York-houfé and his manor of Gorhambury were fold to pay 
his debts, and himfelf reduced to take up with a lodging in Gray’s-Inn, 


“Which he inhabited while’ he was a’ practical lawyer. 


_ z+ This important alteration, with the giving of the feals to a church- 
Man, not bred in the knowledge of the laws, and the doctrine of whofe 
fgaefion. tanahs him implicit obedience to the throne, fully demon- 

€ an intention in James to fubject the civil jurifdiction to royal ca- 
price,- 


Hacket’s Life 
of Williams.- 


166° 


Ann. 1621. 


‘Parl. Hift. 
wol.V.p.385. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


with a punifhment no lefs fevere than Bacon’s. Sir Giles 


Mompeffon was degraded from the order of knighthood, 
ordained to ftand perpetually in the degree of .a perfon 
out-lawed, his teftimony to be received in no court, to 
be excepted out of all pardons hereafter to be granted, to 
be imprifoned during life, not to approach within twelve 
miles of the courts of the King and prince, nor of the 
King’s high courts ufually holden at Weftminfter, his lands 
for life to be forfeited to the King, to undergo fine and 


ranfom at ten thoufand pounds, to be difabled to hold © 


any office in the commonwealth, and, laftly, to be ever 
held an infamous perfon*. Sir Francis Mitchel, a necef- 


price. All the precedents of beftowing this place to other than a law- 
yer happened in times when the common law of England was neither 
fo full nor fo well eftablifhed as it was at this period. 


* Though Sir Edward Coke had quoted many precedents to prove 
that the lower houfe had in itfelf the power of punifhment, and that 


judicial, yet the Commons for the prefent waved this pretenfion, and 


yielded the point of fentence to the Lords. Moreover, it had been 
ordered, that whatfoever fhould be delivered by Sir Edward Coke 


fhould be concealed, upon pain of cenfure, till the conference with 
that houfe was pat. 


The Lords had requefted that thofe members who were the accufers 


of Sir Giles Mompeffon fhould be put upon oath. A long debate 
enfued upon this demand, in which many ftrong arguments were urged 
by Sir Edward Coke, Mr. Glanville, Mr. Noye, and others, that it 
would be againft the honour of the houfe to yield this point to the 
Lords. An apprehenfion left a difpute at this critical time fhould 
fruftrate the defired condemnation, determined the refult to be a com- 
pliance with the requeft of the upper houfe. Mr. Noye moved it thould 


be entered, ** It was fo ordered by the motion of the parties themfelves 


that were to be fworn, with a preteftation hereupon on the mefiage, 
and for that the caufe is of an extraordinary nature, and that they can- 


not judge of it there, as we here, becaufe we had Sir Giles Mompeffon 
prefent, they have not,” Pay DIBA 


* 


bait Mk 8 ot 


167 


fitous juftice of the peace, was found to be concerned in Ane. 1621. 


fome of the oppreflive patents: His fentence was degrada- 


tion, imprifonment during the King’s pleafure, a fine of 
one thoufand pounds, and to be difabled from holding 
any office under the King or commonwealth *. 


Six Henry Yelverton, who was at this time a prifoner 


in the Tower, from a fentence of the Star-chamber, for | 


having enlarged a charter given to the city of London 
beyond the King’s warrant, was accufed in this bufinefs 
of illegal grants. He had obtained the office of attor- 
ney-general by the means of Somerfet ; his adherence 
to his patron had rendered him the object of Bucking- 
ham’s averfion, who had actually ftirred up the profecu- 
tion againft him, and had affumed fo infolent a car- 
riage, even on his firft favour from James, as to make 
ufe of this {coffing expreflion, “ That he would make 


Yelverton the pooreft attorney in England.” From a con- ©abala 


tinuation of the fame animofity, James was incited to 
propofe to the Lords to give up his prifoner to the rigor 
of their judgment. Yelverton was brought to their 


bar, and pleaded his caufe, though not to the clearing 


* The manner of his degradation was as follows: He was brought 
by the sheriffs of London to Weftmintfter-hall,; then followed the 
commiffioners for the office of earl-marfhal; Sir Francis Mitchel was 
brought before thefe, and his fentence read by a purfuivant;. his {purs 


. were hacked in pieces by the fervants of the commiffioners, and 


thrown away ; his filver fword was taken from his fide, broke over his 


~ head, and flung away; then he was pronounced no longer to-be a. 
' knight, buta knave. Cambden’s Annals. 


_ This wretch was imprifoned in the gaol at Finfbury-fields, in the- 
‘fame chamber that he had provided for others; the place of his im-- 


of: 


prifonment was part of his fentence.. 


a 
168 


rt Toit. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 
of his own character, “yet much ‘to the difreputation of 
James and his favourite: “He thewed ‘the neceflity “he 
lay under either of lofing his bread, or of obeying all 
their illegal injunctions *. James was fo nettled at this 


* « My moft noble lords, faid he, knowing that my lord of Buck- 
ingham was ever at his majefty’s hand, ready, upon every occafion, to 
hew.me down, out of the honeft fear of a fervant, not to offend fo 
gracious a mafter as his majefty hath ever been to me, I did commit 
them, viz. the filk-men. 


_. As to the patent of inns, I cannot but herein bemoan my un- 
_happinefs, that in the Jaft caufe labouring by all means to advance. the 
profit of his majefty, and in this, with the ‘fight almoft of my ow 
ruin, to preferve his majefty’s honour and the quiet of the people; I 
am yet drawn in queftion, as if I had equally difhonoured his majefty 
in both, ~ ere 

«© When Sir Giles faw I would not be moved to offend his majefty 

by his directions, I received a meffage from Mr, Emerfon, fent, me by 

_ Sir Giles, that I would run myfelf upon the rocks, and that I thould 
not hold my place long, if I did thus withftand the patent of inns, 
or to that effect. Soon after came Sir Giles himfelf, and like a’hérald 


at arms told me, That he had this_meflage to acquaint me with from - 


_ my. lord of Buckingham, that I fhould not hold my place a month 

_ if I did not conform myfelf in a better manner to the patent of inns, 
for my lord had obtained it by favour, and would maintain it’ by his 
power. as 

_, “ How could I but ftartle at this palfage ? T Yaw here Was a great 

_ affuming of power to himfelf, td place oF Bilplace ‘ai “Sticet af his 


.-to forfake the ftanding his majefty had fet me on, ‘or elfe to ‘endatiger 
mylelf by a bye-blow, and to hazard my fortune. Pe se 


« ] humbly befeech your lordfhips to think, that nature will ftrug- 


Row it was come. to this, Whether I would obey his ma my 
clord, if Sit Giles fpoke true; zed Sone oa Dee han 


fs NS kets nds “his riaje 


~ &. 


4 > ~ | oe 


Jom M°E So. 


169 


unexpected attack, that he -chid the Lords for having An. 1621... 


queftioned Yelverton on points foreign to the direét ac- 
cufation, and demanded fatisfaétion for the flander 
thrown by Yelverton upon himfelf and favourite *. 
The Lords implicitly obeyed the intention of the King’s 
command ; and Yelverton, for the daring truths he had 
uttered, was fined to the King ten thoufand marks, con- 
fined to the Tower during pleafure, to make a fubmif 
fion and acknowledgment of his fault at the bar, in 
the King’s prefence, or in his abfence, at the King’s plea- 
fure; he was fined five thoufand marks to the mar- 
quis of Buckingham, and to make fubmiflion. This 


_judgment being given, Buckingham, either out of com- 


«« Soon after I found the meffage, in part, made good ; for all the 
profits, almoft, of my place were diverted from me, and turned into 
an unufual channel, to one of my lord’s worthies, that I retained little 
more than the name of an attorney: It was fo fatal and fo penal, that 
it became almoft the lofs of a fuit to come to me; my place was but 
as the feat of winds and tempetts, . 

__  Howbeit, I dare fay, if my lord of Buckingham had read the ar 
ticles exhibited in this place againft Hugh Defpenfer ; and had known 
the danger of placing and difplacing officers about a King, he would 
not have purfued me with fuch bitternefs. But, my oppofing his lord- 
fhip in the patent of inns, in the patent of alehoufes, in the Irifh cuf- 
toms, and in Sir Robert Naunton’s deputation of his place in the court 
of Wards, have been my overthrow. For thefe I fuffer at this day in 
my eftate and fortune (not meaning to fay as I take it, but as I know, 
for my oppofition to his lordfhip) above twenty thoufand pounds,” 
Parl. Hift. vol. V. p. 436, & Jeg. 

. ™ After Yelverton’s firft examination, James wanted to take the 
cognizance of the caufe himfelf. The Lords difputed this point, and 
James gave it up, but with many cautions of the following fort, 


. That the Lords knowing they enjoyed their honours from him, and 


under him, he doubted not but they would be tender of his honour, 


Parl. Hit. vol. V. p. 431, & fea. 
_ Vout 


a? 


punction 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


punction or oftentation, remitted the five thoufand 
marks, for which he received Yelverton’s thanks in the 
houfe, The Lords agreed to move the King to mitigate 
the large fine, and the prince of Wales, who was pre- 
fent *, offered to undertake that office. Thus far the 
King and both houfes went on with the utmoft unani- 
mity ; but the King now began to grow extremely jea- 
lous of thofe fharers in his authority, and looked upon 
the facrifices he had already made as fufficient to deferve 
an ample reward, 


Tue Commons, though they were willing to feize on 
every opportunity to render even minute fervices to their 
country, yet regarded the conceflions that had been made 
them as trifling in comparifon to the corrupt meafures 
that ftill exifted, and that looked with a threatning afpect 
on the intereft and laws of their country, and the reli- 
gion they were devoted to. To an addrefs they had made 
the King, not to fuffer a large parcel of ordnance that 
lay yet on the key to be tranfported to Spain, they re- 
ceived no farther fatisfaction, than that the King was. 
affured from his brother monarch that thefe arms were 
not to be ufed againft the Palatinate. 


Tue fpeech uttered from the throne at the beginning 
of the feffion left them no room to hope, that the King 
had dropped the unpopular and mifchievous treaty with 
the court of Spain; but rather confirmed them in the 


* The prince of Wales, by the fpecial appointment of the King, 
had been prefent during all the tranfactions of this feffion. Under the 
guife of a compliment he was placed in this houfe to over-awe the 
popular lords. é ~ 


JA M2S 1 


affurance that his blindnefs and obftinacy were proof Ana. 1621... 
_ both againft the arguments of reafon, and the ftronger 


pleadings of natural affection. Confiderations like thefe 
made them efpoufe the caufe of the Palatine-family with 
a zeal that defcended to a captious minutenefs. One Ed- 


ward Lloyd, a Papift, in talking of the king and queen ! ape aoe 


of Bohemia, had made ufe of the feoffing terms of” 
Good-man and Good-wife Palfgrave. ‘rifling as was 
this charge, and weakly fupported, Lloyd was brought 
upon his knees, and the whole houfe fell into a de- 
bate, in which there was a ftrife among the members 
who fhould propofe the fevereft punifhment. After ve- 
hement altercations, it was refolved, that Lloyd fhould 
be thrown into a dungeon, be three times pilloried, ride 
through London, with his: face to the tail of the horfe, 
holding the tail in his hand, and a paper in his hat 
denoting his offence, and that he fhould be fined one 


thoufand pounds. 


Tue Lords took fire at this encroachment, as they 
termed it, of the Commons, and the King, who was 
much difpleafed with thefe enlarged pretenfions, fent an 
interpofing meflage, in which he thanked the Com- 
mons for the concern they had exprefled for his family, 
but defired them to ftay proceedings till they had an- 
fwered thefe queries. Whether the power of their houfe 
extended to examine and punifh thofe that were not 


-members of it? Whether a party denying, as Lloyd did, 
ought to be cenfured without an accufation upon oath? 


The Commons made fome attempts to get over thefe ob- 
jeftions. It was urged, that the two houfes having 


is ees in one, and arene only for conve- 
Z2 niency, 


172 


Ann, 1628, 


Parkiam, Hift, 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 


niency, the houfe of Commons retained all the power 
of the houfe of Lords. Others were for making this 
cafe a precedent. But, after many conferences between 
the two houfes, the Commons dropped their claim, and 
the judgment was referred to the Lords, who added to 
the fevere fentence of the Commons, whipping, brand- 
ing, and perpetual imprifonment*. Thus did an indif 
creet zeal hurry on the patrons of Liberty to an infringe- 
ment of its facred laws, by a judgment no lefs arbitrary 
than fevere.. 


On the conclufion of this affair, the following proteft 
ation was drawn up in the name of both houfes: « That 
the proceedings pafled in the houfe of Commons againft 
Edward Lloyd be not at any-time hereafter drawn or 
ufed as a precedent to the enlarging or diminifhing of 
the lawful rights or privileges of either houfe ; but that 
the rights and privileges of both houfes fhall remain in 
the felf-fame plight as before.” 


Tue harmony which had till now appeared to fubfift 
between the three ftates, was entirely diflolved. James 
was fo difgufted with the high claims of the Commons, 


that he could no longer fuffer their fitting : The inten-- 


tion of an adjournment was mentioned in the houfe 
by fecretary Calvert. The Commons looked on it to be 
an expedient to evade pafling the pith then nepeniiie: 


_* This Lloyd, thus je eanimouty pt was. a man of education,. 
and poffeffed of a good eftate, a lawyer, and a juftice of peace in the. 


county of Salop. Immediately after this fevere fentence was pafied — 
- upon him, a bill went through both houfes for exempting the ‘gentry. > il 
of this realm from the > Sree cpp tee of Yeghkints url (ae 


i. 
wo Yr 
(| je che. 


ta > ewe 
= . ; 


om MOB #5 4. 


173 


before them for the redrefs of grievances, and were {0 Ann. 1629. 


inflamed by the apprehenfion, that they difputed the 
King’s privilege of adjourning the parliament, and in- 
vited the Lords to join in a petition againft it; the Lords 
acted in their ufual manner ; the King thanked them 
for having refufed to concur in the infolent carriage of 
the Commons, and added, “ That if they thought it ne- 
ceflary, he would gratify them with a farther fitting for 
eight or ten days,- but he would not now yield to the 
requeft of the lower houfe.” The Lords obtained this 
delay to be lengthened to a fortnight longer, but the 
Commons refufed the offer, as the time was too {hort 
to complete their bufinefs, and continued to draw up pe- 
titions of grievances *. They were prefented to the 
King by the archbifhop of Canterbury, who performed 
his part with the fpirit of true patriotifm. James re- 
ceived thefe petitions with fuch diftafte that the Com- 
mons found they had no time to lofe, and in all hafte 
drew up a declaration that teftified their willingnefs, 
upon proper fignification of the King’s pleafure in parlia- 
ment, to give all neceflary afliftance towards the recovery 
of the Palatinate. The King’s commiffion for an adjourn- 


* One of thefe grievances was the tranfportation of ordnance. Sir 
Thomas Roe had told the houfe, that an hundred guns lying yet on 
the keys were to be fent to Portugal, and there to be mounted on. 
twelve thips, which were to be employed againft the Englith in the 
Eaft-Indies. The Commons immediately deputed a felec&t body to. 
move the King to ftay the ordnance. To this petition he returned an- 
fwer, “* That he had affurances from the king of Spain,, that they: 
fhould only be converted againft pirates; that he had lately made a 


‘new promife, but would, for the time to come, pafs a bill to reftrain. 


any more tranfportation.” 


ment 


174 


Ann. 1621, 
Parliament 
adjourned, 
4 June. 


Wilfen. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


ment now came down to the houfe; the popular mem- 
bers oppofed reading it; but the obedient fpeaker * pro- 
nounced, according to the commiflion, the houfe to be 
adjourned till the fourteenth of November +. 


Tue lefler nobility were greatly offended at the mul- 
titude of Jately-created Scotch and Irifh earls and_ vif- 
counts, to whofe titular diftinction they were obliged to 
yield precedency, though they were not peers of Eng- 
land. Thirty-three noblemen preferred a petition to the 
King, in which they defired to be excufed from yielding 


_ this point in the common ceremonies of fociety. Dur- 


ing the recefs of parliament a cajoling proclamation 
declared, that the abufes complained of fhould be re- 
dreffed by regal authority, that the afliftance of parlia- 
ment was not neceflary to reform them, and that they 
would have been reformed before if’ they had been 
known. Laftly, the fubjects were affured, that both the 
King’s ears, and thofe of his privy-council, would be 


* Serjeant Richardfon was fpeaker. He had received a cenfure from 
the houfe for his irregular behaviour in leaving the chair when the con- 
dué of any of the ftate-officers was called in queftion, or mentioned in 
a manner that was difagreeable to the court. Guthrie, p. 754. 


+ Immediately preceding the adjournment of the two houfes, the 
offence which Dr. Feild, the bifhop of Landaff, had committed, was 
examined in the houfe of Lords. He was found guilty of a defigned 
brocage in bribery. eile, bifhop of Durham, moved, “ ‘That fince 
‘there was nothing proved againft Dr. Feild but an intent, that the con-. 
fideration of it fhould be referred to the archbifhop of Canterbury, and 
he to give the bifhop an admonition in the convocation-houfe.” The. 
Lords agreed to this motion, and fent a meflage to the lower houfe. 
concerning the nature of the mifdemeanor which had been proved 
againft Dr. Feild. Parl. Hif. vol. V. p. 450, & eg. Tod 


JAMES 1. 
open to their modeft and juft complaints. 
followed this, which forbid the converfing upon ftate- 
affairs, and threatened fevere penalties both againft the 
concealers and utterers of thefe {peeches. . 


Tue parliament, after a fecond adjournment, re- 
aflembled on the eighth of February. The lord Digby, 
who had been travelling all over Germany, to perfuade 
the emperor and his partifans to give up the advan- 
tages they had gained by their late victories, gave the 
parliament fo full an account of his fruitlefs negotia- 
tions, that there remained no covering to hide the folly 
of James’s conduct, or the grofs impofitions to which 
his fond credulity had fubjected him. Stung by thefe 
informations, the Commons drew up a petition and re- 
monftrance that exprefled their fenfe of his trifling 
management, fet forth the caufes of the increafing 
hopes of the Popith"party, the fears and apprehenfions 
of the Proteftants, and pointed out the remedies for 
thefe growing evils. The Commons, in this remon- 
france, freely reprefented all James’s unpopular manage- 
ment with Papifts, both at home and abroad, offered’ 
their advice that a war fhould be immediately declared 
and entered upon, and the King’s fon married to a Pro-. 


teftant princefs. 


Ir would be difficulr to defcribe James’s extreme in- 
dignation on hearing the fubject of this remonftrance ; 
all the tender points of prerogative, of which he was 
fo highly tenacious, were here fenfibly affected ; and a 
formal attack upon an alliance that was the ultimate 


object of his hopes and inclinations. Inflamed by 
os . fuch 


‘Another Ann, 1621. 


176 


HISTORY OF ‘ENGLAND. 


Aon. 1621, fuch flinging provocations, he affumed a courage: fo- 


reign to his nature, and ventured to bully the Com- 


mons in this fiery letter to the fpeaker. “ We have 
_ heard by divers reports, to our great grief, that our dif- 


tance from the houfes of parliament, caufed by our 
indifpofition * of health, hath emboldened fome fiery 
and popular fpirits. of fome of the houfe of Commons, 
to argue and debate publicly matters far above their 
reach and capacity, tending to our high difhonour,. and 
breach of prerogative-royal. Thefe are therefore to com- 


mand you to make known, in our name, unto the. 


houfe, that none therein fhall prefume henceforth to 
meddle with any thing concerning our government, or 
deep matters of ftate; and namely, not to deal with our 
deareft fon’s match with the daughter of Spain, nor to 
touch the honour of that king, or any other our friends 
and confederates; and alfo not to meddle with any 
man’s particulars, which have their due motion in our 
courts of juftice. And whereas we hear they have fent 
a meflage to Sir Edwin Sands, to know the reafon of 
his late reftraint, you fhall in our name refolve them, 
that it was not for any mifdemeanor of his in parlia- 
ment, but to put them out of doubt of any queftion of 
that nature that may arife among them hereafter; you 
fhall refolve them in our name, that we think ourfelves 
very free and able to punifh any man’s mifdemeanors 
in parliament, as well during their fitting as after, 
which we mean not to fpare hereafter upon any occa. 


fion of any man’s infolent behaviour there, that fhall 


= The King was now at Newmarket, on n the Presinge haaiibe 
Wiljon. 


ide 


flee aime Sk 


177 


be miniftred unto us; and if they have already touched Aun. 162r. 


any of thefe points which we have here forbidden, in 
any petition of theirs which is to be fent unto us, it is 
our pleafure that you fhall tell them, that except they 
reform it, before it comes to our hands, we will not 


deign the hearing or anfwering it.” 


Tuts letter was received and anfwered by the Com- 
mons, with that calmnefs and fteadinefs as fufficiently 
exprefled the knowledge of their own ftrength and dig- 


nity, and the contemptible light in which they viewed 


their antagonift. They fent back for their former re- 
monftrance, but returned it with another that vindicated 
their juft pretenfions, and exprefled a forrow for James’s 
mis-interpretations. To thefe James returned a copious 
anfwer *, in which the indignant monarch denounced 


* Amongft other curious paffages in this anfwer are the following 


ones, on the fubjects of religion, the king of Spain, and the prince’s 


match, 
* But becaufe we conceive that ye couple this war of the Palati- 
nate with the caufe of religion, we muft a little unfold your eyes 
herein: The beginning of this miferable war, which hath fet all 
Chriftendom on fire, was not for religion, but only caufed by our fon- 
in-law’s hafty and harfh refolution, following evil counfel, to take to 
himfelf the crown of Bohemia; and that this is true, himfelf wrote 
letters unto us at that time, defiring us to give affurance both to the 
French king and ftate of Venice, that his accepting of the crown of 
Bohemia had no reference to the caufe of religion, but only by reafon 
of his right of election, as he called it; and we would be forry that 
fuch afperfion fhould come upon our religion as to make it a good 
pretext for dethroning of kings, and ufurping their crowns; and we 
would be loth that our people here fhould be taught that ftrange 
doétrine : No, Jet us not fo far wrong the Jefuits as to rob them of 
their fweet pofitions and practices in that very point. And whereas 


Vou.T Aa you 


178 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ans.1621. Wat againft all the claims of the Commons, and expofed 


his own illegal view of government. “ The difference 
is no greater, fays he, in your pretending to advife us 


on our expofing our reafons for demanding a fupply, 


than if a merchant, that we had great need to borrow 
money from him for raifing an army, that thereupon it 


would follow that we were bound to purfue his advice’ 
in the direétion of the war, and all things depending — 


thereupon.” The whole of this anfwer breathes the 
fame fpirit of defpotifm as may be found in this ex- 
ample. It finifhes in the following extraordinary man- 


you excufe your touching upon the king of Spain upon occafion of 
the incidents by you repeazed in that place, and yet affirm, that it is. 
without any touch to his honour, we cannot wonder enough that ye 
are fo forgetful both of your words and wits: for in your former pe- 
tition ye plainly affirm, that he affeéts the temporal monarchy of the 
whole earth, than which there can be no more malice uttered againft 
any great king, to make all other princes and potentates both envy 
and hate him; but if ye lift, ic may eafily be tried whether that 


‘ “{peech touched him in honour or not, if ye fhall afk him the quef- 


tion, Whether he means to affume to himfelf that title or.no? for 
every king can beft judge of his own honour. We omit the particu-. 
lar ejaculations of fome foul-mouthed orators in your own houfe againft 
the honour of that king’s crown and eftate. 


“* And touching your excufe of not determining any thing concern- 
ing the match of our deareft fon, but only to tell your opinion, and 
lay it down at our feet; firft, we defire to know how you could have 
prefumed to determine in. that point, without committing of high- 
treafon; and next, you cannot deny but your talking of his match. 
after that manner was a direét breach of our commandment and de- 
claration out of our own- mouth, where we plainly profefied, that we 
were in treaty of his match with Spain, and wifhed you to have that 
confidenee in our religion and wifdom, that we would. fo manage it as 
our religion fhould receive no prejudice a ite” epee a 


P: 4975 & feq. 


oo 


7AM BAB ir ts 


ner: “ And though we cannot allow of your ftyle -in Ann. 1621, 


mentioning your ancient and undoubted right and inhe- 
‘ritance, but could rather have withed that ye had faid, ' 
that your privileges were derived from the grace and 
permiffion of our anceftors and us (for moft of them 
grow from precedents, which fhews rather a toleration 
than inheritance) yet we are pleafed to give you our 
royal affurance, that as long as you contain. yourfelves 
within the limits of your duty, we will be as careful to 
maintain and preferve your lawful liberties and _privi- 
leges as any of our predeceflors were, nay, as to pre- 
ferve our own royal prerogative; fo as your houfe fhall 
only have’ need to beware to trench upon the preroga- 
tives of the crown, which would enforce us, or any juft 
king, to retrench them of their privileges that would 
pare his prerogative and flowers of his crown.” Wil- 
liams advifed that the harfhnefs of this anfwer fhould 
be mitigated with a letter from the King to the two 
houfes. James, finding that the Commons were deter- 
mined not to enter on bufinefs, followed the advice in 
fome meafure, and wrote again to the fpeaker and {fecre- 
tary Calvert, offering to oblige the Commons with the 
grant of a requeft they had made for a general pardon ; 
this fecond letter ftill infifting that the liberty of the 


houfes was derived from royal favour. The Commons, 


before they were diflolved, entered this proteftation in 
vindication of their parliamentary rights: 


_ Tue Commons now affembled in parliament, juftly 
occafioned thereunto concerning fundry liberties, fran- 


_ chifes, and privileges of parliament, amongft others here 


mentioned, do make this proteftation following : . 
Aa2 Tuat 


38 | HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ano. 1621. “ Tuar the liberties, franchifes, privileges, and ju- 
Prouiaon _rifdiGtions of parliament, are the ancient and undoubted 
ACH birth-right and inheritance of the fubjects of* England, 
and that the arduous and urgent affairs concerning the 
King, ftate, and defence of the realm, and of the church. 
of England, and the maintenance and making laws, and 
redrefs of grievances which daily happen within this 
realm, are proper fubjects and matter of council or de- 
‘bate in parliament, and that in the handling and pro- 
ceeding of thefe bufinefles every member of the houfe 
of parliament hath, and.of right ought to have freedom ——© > 
of f{peech, to propound, treat, and bring: to conclufion ay 
the fame; and that the Commons in parliament have. 
like liberty to treat of thefe matters in fuch order as in. 
their judgment fhall feem fitteft; and that every mem- 
ber of the faid houfe hath like freedom from all-im- 
peachment, imprifonment, and moleftation, other than. 
‘by fentence of the houfe itfelf, for or concerning any 
peaking, reafoning, or declaring, any matter or matters 
touching the parliament or parliament-bufinefs; and that _ ., 
if any of the faid members be complained of and quef ; 
tioned for any thing done or faid in parliament, the fame 
is to be fhewed to the King, by the advice and aflent of 
all the Commons aflembled in parliament, before the King 
give credence to any private information *.” . < ; 


* The following fpirited arguments had been urged in the houfe 
for the drawing up this declaration. p 
Mr. Crew. Our inheritance not matter of grace nor toleration ;. this Z 
of that importance to us, that if we fhould yield our liberty to be but a 
matter of grace, thefe walls that have known the holding them thefé 


many years would blufh. Magna Charta, above thirty times confirmed, a. 
confirmeth all our liberties; this, but the confirmation of aie ’ aay ~: ‘is 
law. me 


‘ ti 
me’ ak : tg 
7 - 


Je & AMEE BOL 181 


Tuts proteftation was by the King himfelf ftruck out Ann. 1621. 


of the journal-book, and the parliament was afterwards 
diffolved by a proclamation, which fet forth, “« That the nas spo of 


King was conftrained to this at by the undutiful beha- 
viour of the lower houfe*.” This premature end of the 
parliament loft all the bills then. depending for the good 


of the fubject +. , 


Sir John Bennet, a judge of the prerogative-court at 
Canterbury, who had been impeached by the Commons 
for bribery and corruption, and bound to appearance for 
the large fum of nineteen thoufand pounds, by this means 
efcaped the punifhment his mifdemeanors deferved. 


Sir Ed: Coke.. The law of England is- the fubject’s beft birth-right,. 
becaufe it defendeth all he hath. Magna Charta is nominated Charta 
Libertatis, becaufe it maketh free men; our privileges in fummo gradu, 
our privileges here are the mother and nurfe of all good laws—the 
cenfure of great men—the reforming of grievances. 

Mr. Glanville. The King is to have the honour of a requeft for en+ 
joying our privileges, but hath not the power of a refufal. Journ. of 
the Commons, vol. I. p. 665, & fe, 

_ * One of the charges againft the Commons in this proclamation is 

for {peaking difrefpectfully of foreign princes. 

-  Howbeit, we are all well fatisfied of the good inclination of moft 
part of our houfe of Commons, teftified by their ready affent to the 
{peedy payment of a fubfidy newly to be granted; yet, upon this occa+ 
fion, fome particular members of that houfe took fuch inordinate liberty, 
not only to treat of our high prerogatives, and of fundry things, that, 
without our fpecial direétion, were no fit fubjects to be treated of in par- 
liament ; but alfo, to fpeak with lefs refpect of foreign princes our al- 
lies, than was fit for any fubjeét to do of any anointed | king, though in. 
enmity and hoftility with us.” Perl. Hiff. vol. V. p. 521. 

+ The only acts that paffed this feffion were three entire fubfidies 
granted by the fpirituality, and two entire fubfidies granted by the: 
temporality. Vide Statutes at Large. sf 
. AMONGST 


182 


Ann. 1621. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


AMoncst the many motions that were. made this fef- 
fion, one of Buckingham’s related to an academy for the 
bringing up of the nobility and gentry of this kingdom. 
Though this was introduced in the very midft of the 
enquiries after bribery and corruption, the houfe had the 
compliance to approve of the motion, and adjourned it- 
felf that the matter might be difcuffed. Another mate- 
rial point took up much time, and occafioned a long de- 
bate, at the fame important crifis; viz. How to give equa- 
lity of precedence to the two univerfities, in the fubfidy- 
bill granted by the laity. On a debate in the committee 
of the upper houfe on the cuftoms and privileges of the 
peers, the opinion of two judges who were appointed 
to attend the committee was afked; they refufed to give 
an opinion, becaufe the matter propofed touched the 
King’s prerogative: This refufal was very difpleafing to 
the Lords; they ordered that both the judges fhould at- 
tend the houfe to anfwer the affair. A bill paffed both 
houfes for confirming an hofpital endowed by Thomas 
Sutton, with a large eftate of eight thoufand a-year, be- 
fides thirteen thoufand pounds paid to the earl of Suffolk 
for the Charter-houfe, and ten thoufand pounds laid out 
on the building. This foundation was for eighty de- 
cayed gentlemen and forty boys. It retains the name of 
the Charter-houfe to this day. 


Mr. Shepperd, a young member of parliament, had 
given fo great an offence by oppofing, in an intemperate 
manner, a bill for the better obferving the as 
that he was prego’ the houfe. 


oe wie Bo", 
GC. .HiA).P.i.¥il. | 
Diftrefed fate of the Protefants.——Unjuft treatment of Sir Edw. 
Coke.———Imprifonment of feveral members of parliament, and 
others.—Transfer of the electoral dignity from prince Frederic 
to the duke of Bavaria. —— Negotiations with Spain.——Prince 


- of Wales's journey to Madrid.——Tranfactions during the prince’s 
| fay at Madrid.———His return to England. 


— prefent diftreffed ftate of the Proteftants through- 
out all Chriftendom, excited a great degree of fear- 
ful apprehenfion, from the abrupt diflolution of the laft 
parliament. In Germany the conquefts of the Catholics 
were marked with the moft bloody acts of cruelty and 
tyranny. The executions which were daily practifed 


’ amongft the wretched Bohemians, with the diftrefles of 


the unfortunate Palatine, deterred their ecclefiaftical bre- 
thren from attempting any oppofition to the formidable 
defigns of the houfe of Auftrias The Proteftants in 
France were in as hopelefs a fituation: Thefe had been 
promifed afliftance from James, and bafely deferted; 
they were now overwhelmed by the united parties of 
the Catholics with the queen-mother and her fon at their 
head. All their ftrong towns were at this time befieged 
or taken. The Catholic caufe began even to revive in 
England; its votaries not only afpired to a toleration, 
but to an enjoyment of equal privileges with the eftab- 
lifhed church. Thefe were not the dreams of fanguine 


“zealots, but founded on rational hopes drawn from the 


h the 


approaching union of the court of England wit 
houfe 


183 


Ann, 1628 
Diftreffed 

ftate of .the 
Proteftants. 


184. 


Ann, ies 


Unjult treat- 
ment of Sir 
Edw. Coke. 


HISTORY QF ENGLAND. 


houfe of Auftria. The well-grounded fears and refent- 


ment which this ftate of affairs excited in the minds of © 


the Britith fubjects, had been legally exprefled by their 
reprefentatives in parliament; but the infolent and vio- 
lent carriage it occafioned in their fovereign left them 
no room to hope that his fatal prejudices would admit 
of cure. To the dangerous fyftem he had adopted, and 
fteadily adhered to, might be attributed, though from a 
remote influence, that ruin which threatened all the re- 
formed, and the oppreffion to which many of them were 
at prefent fubjected. ; 


EmancipaTep from the reftraint of parliament, James 
was at full liberty to purfue his plan of negotiation, and 
fettle the affairs of Europe, by the importance of his 
character, and the fplendor of his embaffies, But that 
they had as yet produced little effect in favour of the 
forfaken king of Bohemia, a letter written at this time, 
from the emperor to Don Balthazar de Zuniga, will fhew. 
The emperor magnifies his own victories, and the diftrefled 
ftate of the Calvinifts, with their chief the elector Pala- 
tine; “ Whom if, by an impious kind of commiferation 
(writes he) I fhall reftore, and nourifh in my bofom, as 
a trodden half-living fnake, what can I expect lefs than 
a deadly fting from him, who, in regard of his guilt, 


can never be faithful, but will always gape for an occa- 


fion to free himfelf from his fears; and the genius of 
whofe fect will make him an enemy, or an unfound 
friend, to the houfe of Auftria.” 


SEVERAL members of parliament, who had thewn | 


themfelves the moft forward in the caufe of Religi 


fw Man én" & 


and Liberty, were committed to prifon. 
Coke, whofe generous temper could not long endure. the 
fervility of court-dependance, was of this number. The 
meafure he fuffered of unjuft perfecution was made up 
to him by an increafe of reputation; indeed his abilities 
never before fhone in a light fo confpicuoufly admirable. 
The drudging lawyer, animated by the brightnefs of his 
caufe, improved into the perfuafive orator: His talents 
were at this time fo remarkable, that it is alleged, the 
fucceeding patriots made his harangues their models of 
elocution. Such was the malice of offended royalty, and 
fuch the infamy of its tools, that two wretches, named 
Lepton and Goldfmith, were inftigated by Bacon, the 
late chancellor, to charge Coke with eleven articles of mif- 
behaviour as a judge and a lawyer. Thefe facts were 
judged by the houfe to be falfe and frivolous, nor could 
they be proved in the Star-chamber, where Coke was per- 
fecuted with great acrimony. His papers were feized 
after the diffolution of the parliament, himfelf denied 
the fatisfaction of converfing with his wife or children, 
and the talk of the courtiers was that his life might be 
affected *. Sir Robert Philips, Pym, Selden, and Mallory, 
were of the number of committed members. Sir Dudley 
Diggs, Sir Thomas Crew, Sir Nathaniel Rich, Sir James 
Perrot, were fent on frivolous errands into Ireland ; Sir 
Peter Hayman and others into the Palatinate. The court 
at this time affumed the power of employing any man, 


_ * The council debating about the general pardon that was to have 
pafied the laft parliament, had confidered about the ways of excluding 
Sir Edward Coke from that benefit, either by preferring a bill againft 
him before the publication of the pardon, or by exempting him by 
name. Parl. Hift, vol. V. p. 525. 


Vou. I. 


Bb even 


18s 


Sir Edward Ann. 1621. 


Members im- 
prifoned. 


186 


Ann, 1621. 


Ann. 1622. 
Rufhworth, 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


even without his confent, in any branch of public bufi- 
nefs. The earls of Oxford and Southampton, Sir Ed- 
ward Hawley, Sir George Leeds, Sir Chriftopher Nevil, 
and Sutcliff, dean of Exeter, were taken into cuftody for 
writing with freedom againft the Spanifh match. The 
public was deprived of the fervices of Sir John Saville, 
knight of the fhire for the county of York, by a dif- 
ferent method: he was made comptroller of the houthold, 
a privy-counfellor, and afterwards a baron. This was 
the firft inftance of that practice of buying off individuals, 
which, in the hands of fucceeding monarchs, has filently. 
and furely effected what James and his fon in vain at- 
tempted by clamor and violence. 


On the deceafe of Philip the Third of Spain, which 
happened in the year 1621, the lord Digby was fent to 
the court of Philip the Fourth to renew and conclude 


_ the treaty of marriage between the infanta his fifter and 


the prince of Wales. It was at this time in fo little 
forwardnefs, that letters paffed between Philip and Oli- 
vares, his prime-minifter, which utterly difclaimed fuch 
anintention. That of Philip is fo pertinent and concife 
that I fhall give the whole: “ The king my father de- 
elared at his death, that his intent never was to marry 
my filter, the infanta Donna Maria, with the prince of 
Wales, which your uncle Don Balthazar underftood, 
and fo treated this match ever with intention to delay it. — 


, Notwithftanding it is now fo far advanced, that, confider- 


ing all the averfenefs unto it of the infanta, it is time 
to divert the treaty, which I would have you find out, 
and I will make good whatfoever it be. But in all other 


things procure the fatisfaction of the king of Great Bris 


M0 


$4 IMG Be ot. 
tain, who hath deferved much, and it fhall content me, 
fo as it be not in the match.” | 


OuivaRres, in his anfwer to this letter, acknowledges 
that the minifters who treated of the match never meant 
to effect it, but, by enlarging the treaties, to make ufe 
of the friendfhip of the king of Great Britain in the af- 
fairs of Germany and Flanders. He propofes a double 
marriage with the emperor’s eldeft daughter to the prince 
of Wales, and the fecond daughter to the elector Pala- 
tine’s fon, as a means to fatisfy James, and compofe the 
differences in Germany. Things being in this ftate, it is 
no wonder that Digby did not meet with that magnificent 
reception which an ambaflador, coming on fo friendly, 
and fo feemingly approved an errand, might have ex- 
pected. He was fuffered to ftay two or three days at a 
poor village near the court, without having any civilities 
paid him, or even neceflaries provided for him. 


Asourt this time a kind of negotiation was carried 
on at Bruffels, under the authority of the archduchefs, 
whom the emperor had pretended to have vefted with 
fufficient powers to treat with James concerning the 
terms of his fon-in-law’s re-eftablifhment. The terms 
offered by James were, 


TuatT the king of Bohemia fhould, for himfelf and 
his fon, renounce all pretence of right and claim to that 
crown : 

Twat he thoutd Fc henceforth yield all conftant 


due devotion to the Imperial majefty, as did other obe-; 


dient pee eleétors of the empire : 
Bb2 THAT 


18y 


Ann, 1622. 


Negotiations 
at Bruffels. 


188 


Ann, 1622, 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Tuat he fhould crave pardon on his knees of the 


Imperial majefty : 


TuHaT he fhould not hereafter, any manner of way, 


-demean himfelf unfittingly towards the Imperial majefty, 


nor difturb his kingdoms or countries: 


- Tuat he fhould, upon reafonable terms, reconcile 
himfelf to other princes ‘and ftates of the empire; and 
that he fhould do whatever like thing fhould be judged 
reafonable and neceflary. 


Sir Richard Wefton, the Papift, was trufted with the 
management of this bufinefs, as being more agreeable 
to the party. Moreover, to gain entirely the favour of 
the archduchefs, James fuffered four thoufand men to 
be raifed in England to ferve againft the Proteftants in 
the Netherlands. 


WueEn thecommiffioners began to treat on the intended’ 
negotiation, it was objected, that James’s ambaflador could’ 
not produce fufficient powers from the king of Bohemia, 
and the archduchefs was ftill to be.directed by the court 
of Vienna; the whole bufinefs being only a fpecious pre- 
text to impofe farther on the credulity of James. 


Wuice this farce was acting at Bruflels, the king of 
Bohemia, who had entertained no hopes on the refult 
of James’s meafures, ftole from the Hague, and joined 
Mansfeild’s army in Alfatia. Chriftian, duke of Brunf. 
wick, and the marquis of Baden Dourlach, each at the 
head of a ftrong force, declared themfelves champions 
for the Protetant caufe; the duke of Brunfwick was 


f “Min ge 


poflefled of the adminiftratorfhip of Halberftadt, which Am. 1622. 
he would have been in danger of lofing, if the Auftrian 
arms had made farther progrefs in Germany. . 


Tue ray of hope which now dawned upon Frederick's 
fortune was foon obfcured: Prince Baden was defeated 
by the prince of Anhalt before he could join his allies ; 
and Tilly, general to the duke of Bavaria, forced Mans- 
feild to retreat, and the duke of Brunfwick to come 
to an engagement, in which he cut off all his infantry ; 
the duke fled with his cavalry to Mansfeild.  Thefe ac- 
cumulated misfortunes induced Frederick to obey James’s 
reiterated injunctions of returning to Holland, there to 
wait the fuccefs of his negotiations. The firft news 
that this unfortunate prince heard after his retreat was: 
that Tilly had taken Heidlebergh * by ftorm, and _be- 
fieged Manheim, two towns in the Lower Palatinate. 
James had prematurely boafted that his fon-in-law held 
that country under his protection ft. 


Wuice affairs were in this defperate fituation, the 
treaty ftill lingered at Bruffels, it having been on pur- 
pofe protracted till Tilly, who no longer met with oppofi- 
tion, had taken both Heidlebergh and Manheim. | James 


’ * The famous library at Heidlebergh was fent from thence to Rome: 


+ A truce for five weeks had been concluded between Spinola, ge- 
neral of the Spanifh army in the Lower Palatinate, and Sir Horace 
Vere, who commanded the troops of the elef&tor. The archduchefs 


made James believe that the truce was granted to his folicitation: but 

the emperor’s reafon for confenting to it was, that he might have time: 
to fend forces into that province, in the room of thofe which Spinola. 

was. obliged. to withdraw into Brabant, to over-awe the Dutch, 


Was: 


190 


An, 1622. 


Transfer of 
the electoral 
dignity. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


was entirely fatisfied with the Spanith monarch for hay- 
ing, at his defire, fent an order. for Manheim to be fpared, 
till a truce could be concluded. It is to be noted, that 
this interpofition did not preferve Manheim, the order not 
having been fent till after it had furrendered. Notwith- 
ftanding this circumftance, James continued to repofe fuch 
confidence in the candor and integrity of the Auftrian 
family, that he put Frankendale, the only remaining town 
of the Palatine’s dominions, into the hands of the arch- 
duchefs, to be re-furrendered at the expiration of a truce 
of eighteen months, One of the articles of the truce 
was, that the elector fhould renounce all conneétions with 
the prince of Brunfwic and count Mansfeild.. 


Berore the conclufion of the treaty, the emperor 
had transferred the dignity of elector Palatine to the 
duke of Bavaria *, and difmembered both the Palatinates, 
by diftributing them in portions to the Catholic powers +. 
The elector of Saxony, and feveral princes, oppofed this 
act, as contrary to the fundamental laws of the empire, 
which admit not of the difpofing of an electorate without - 
the confent of every member of the electoral college. 


* This was at the diet of Ratifbon. The Spanifh ambaffador feem- 
ingly oppofed this transfer; all Europe regarded it as a collufion be- 
tween the king of Spain and’ the emperor: Carleton, the Englifh refi- 


dent at the Hague, reprefented it in this light to Buckingham. 


+ The new elector was put in poffeffion of all the Upper Palatinate, 
and that part of the Lower which is on the fartheft fide of the Rhine. 
To the king of Spain was given the reft of the Lower Palatinate, ex- 
cept the bailiage of Germerfheim and its dependencies, which were be« 
ftowed upon the archduke Leopold. William bithop of Strafburg, the 
landgrave of Darmftadt, had the bailiwics of Unfburgh and Umitadts 
and the archbifhop of Mentz regained the poffeflion of what the:Pala- 
tine held in the Berghftraé&t by mortgage from his bifhopric. 


JAMES 1. 


WuitsT even Frederick’s enemies murmured at the 
arbitrary feverities practifed againft him, James * was fo 
little affected by them, that Gondemar wrote word to 
Spain, that he had lulled the king of England fo faft 


aileep that he hoped neither the cries of his daughter nor 


her children, nor the repeated folicitations of his fubjects. 
in their behalf, fhould be able to awaken him. 


INCONGRUOoUs as were James’s meafures to obvious 
politics, both himfelf and cabinet plumed themfelves: 
much upon them; and, in order to take proper advan- 


198 


> Ann. 16222. 


tages of the lately-concluded truce, and to obtain a con-— 


firmation of the marriage before its expiration, the 
king of Spain was gratified with an order to releafe all 
the Popifh recufants, who had been imprifoned accord- 


ing to the dictates of the law +. 


On a general offence taken at this unlimited indul- 
gence, the lord-keeper Williams wrote a letter to the 


* In one of the emperor’s declarations againft the eleCtor and his 
adherents, he urged, that the revolt of the Bohemians had not even 
met with the approbation of the King of Great Britain. Rubworth. 

+ The number of thefe is mentioned in a letter of Serica, fecretary 
of the Spanifh king, to Mr. Cottington; they were no lefs than four 
thoufand. The letter that the lord- keeper Williams wrote for the ge- 
neral enlargement of Popifh recufants is as follows: “ I am to give 
you to underftand how his majefty’s royal pleafure is, that upon receipt. 
of thefe writs you fhall make no nicenefs or difficulty to extend that his 
princely favour to all fuch Papifts as you fhall find prifoners in the gaols- 
of your circuits, for any church-recufancy whatfoever, or refufing the 
oath of fupremacy, or difperfing Popith books, or hearing faying of 
mafs, or any other point of recufancy which doth. touch or concern re- 
ligion only, and not matters of ftate.” Prynne’s neceffary Introduffion to: 


the Archbifhop of epi bis Trial, fol. ed. 1646, p.t4. 
juttices,, 


Ruthworth. 


_—  - 
SD fee. HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1622. juftices, to vindicate the King’s conduct. “ As the fun . 
(faid he) in the firmament appears to us no bigger 
than a platter, and the ftars are but as fo many nails 
in the pommel of a faddle, becaufe of the enlargement 
and difproportion between our eye and the object, fo is 
there fuch an unmeafurable diftance between the deep 
refolution of a prince, and the fhallow apprehenfions of 
common and ordinary people.” He then declares that 
the King was at that time a moft zealous interceflor for 
fome eafe and refrefhment to all the Proteftants in Eu- 
rope, which were unreafonable, if he did now execute 
the rigor of the laws againft Roman Catholics. “ But 
to conclude, faid he, from the favour done to the Eng- 
lith Papifts, that the King favours the Romifh religion 
is a compofition of folly and malice, little deferved by 
a gracious prince, who, by word, writing, exercife of 

- religion, and acts of parliament, hath fhewed himfelf 
fo refolved a Proteftant.” 


Asovur this time the following orders were given to 
reftrain popular preachers : 


cies -THat no preacher, of what title or denomination fo- 

preachers. ever, from henceforth fhould prefume, in any auditory 

within this kingdom, to declare, limit, or bound out, 

by way of pofitive doctrine, the power, prerogative, and 

jurifdiction of fovereigns, or otherwife meddle with SS 

| matters of ftate, and the differences between princes — i 
| ; and the. people, than as they are inftructed and prece- 


dented in the homilies of obedience: 


TuaT no preacher, of what title or denomination fo-— 
ever, fhall prefume, caufelefly or without i invitation: from 


JAMES I. 


193 


the text, to fall into bitter invectives and indecent railing Aun. 1622. 


‘fpeeches againft the perfons of either Papifts or Puritans. 


WHETHER James began to defpair of fuccefs from his 


pacific meafures; or whether, more probably, he de- 


pended on the credulity of his fubjects for the draining 
of their purfes, he demanded at this time a voluntary con- 
tribution for the recovery of the Palatinates by the force of 
arms. Letters were written to the high-fheriffs and juf- 
tices of the peace, to return the names of the contributors, 
that notice might be taken of thofe who refufed. 


Wuitst the people of England were thus amufed 


with high language, letters of complaint were conti- 


nually pafling from the King and his minifter to the 
court of Spain. They reprefented James’s ftrong attach- 
ment to the Auftrian family, notwithftanding the oppo- 
fition he met with from the public fpirit of the people, 
and the difeouragement he had received from the collu- 
fion between their Imperial and Catholic majefties, to 
bubble and abufe him. They complained that, upon the 


faith of affurances received from Gondemar, the prifons 


were emptied of Popifh recufants, and filled with Puri- 
tans, and the oppofers of the match. They fet forth 
James’s merit with the houfe of Auftria, in perfuading 
his fon-in-law to throw himfelf upon the mercy of the 
emperor ; and that, according to that perfuafion, count 
Mansfeild and the duke of Brunfwic had received their 
difmiffion ; that himfelf, by the incitements of Spain, had 


broke with France; yet, notwithftanding thefe graces and 


conceflions, even while he was receiving the ftrongeit 


afflurances of favour to his fon-in law from Madrid and 


Vou. I. © Ce Bruffels, 


194 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


- Ana. s6z2, Bruffels, Heidlebergh had been facked, and Manheim 
| 7 is. j taken, though garrifoned by Englifh troops. 
SSNs Negotiations. No motive lefs confiderable than the treaty in agita- 
—. _ © with Spain, 


tion could have excited James to confefs himfelf the 
dupe to the king of Spain. This was not the only 
mortification which at this time aflailed him: He began 
to apprehend that the purpofed delays to which the 
conclufion of the treaty was fubjected by its firft article 
might be drawn on to infinity; ftimulated by this fear, 
he fent an agent to Rome to folicit from the pope pro- 
per authorities for completing the marriage. 


Tus ftep ferved but to expofe his keennefs for the 
alliance, and produced thefe additions to the already- 
ftipulated articles : 


TuaT the Roman Catholics fhould be allowed a pub- 
lic church in London, befides the infanta’s private chapel ; 
and that the minifter of that church fhould be a bifhop: 


TuatT the Popifh ecclefiaftics fhould be fubject to the 
laws of their own fuperiors only: 


THarT the children of the marriage fhould be educated 
by the mother; and that fome farther propofals fhould be 
agreed to for the benefit of Popery. 


To thefe exorbitant demands James returned this anfwer: 


Tuat he was willing to allow the infanta a public 
chapel, or rather a church, in which a bifhop might 
officiate. To the fecond article he objected, —" “iid 


pty 


£ 
a 
Seer 5 7 
‘ * 


+ a 


> 


PraeMsk ws 1 


BOS 


TuatT there was no example of fuch an exemption for Ann, 1622. 


ecclefiaftics, even in Popifh ftates, To the third article, 


TuaT the children fhould be left, for a limited time to 
be fixed by the king of Spain, under the tuition of their 
mother. To the farther indulgencies for Popery he faid, 


Tuart the articles of religion agreed upon between 
him and the late king of Spain were accounted fo {fatif- 
factory, in the judgment of the moft learned clergy in 
Spain, that they declared their opinion, that, upon the 
offer of fuch conditions, the pope ought not to with- 
hold the difpenfation *. 


Tuis anfwer was fent to Madrid, that it might not 
publicly appear that the King treated with the court of 
Rome. The profeflions of Spain now grew {ftronger : 
Olivares declared, that if the emperor fhould refufe to 
reftore Heidlebergh, or to condefcend to fuch accommo- 
dation as fhould be adjudged reafonable, the king of 
Great Britain fhould be infallibly affifted with the arms 
of his Catholic majefty for reftoring the Palatinate. The 
letters that Digby, now made earl of Briftol, wrote, were 


full of affurances of fuccefs. 


Wuttsr this contract took up the whole attention of 
the court of England, the town of Bergen-op-Zoom, 
which had been befieged by Spinola, fince the expiration 
of the truce between Holland and Spain, was relieved 


' * Rufhworth obferves, that it appeared here that Spain had con- 
cealed from the pope fome articles that James had already yielded 


to. Rufbworth, vol.I. p. 66. 
by 


Gc'2 


Cabala. 


196 


Aun. 1622. ° 


Ann, 1623. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 
by the duke of Brunfwick.and count Mansfeild, who had’ 


joined prince Maurice, after their difmiffion from the 


king of Bohemia’s fervice.. 


On the reception of as s favourable anfwer, the: 


alliance of the Stewart family with the houfe of Auftria 
began, even ‘at Madrid, to wear a ferious afpect. The- 
king of Spain and his minifters, who had hitherto made: 


ufe of the treaty as a lure to induce the Britifh mo- 
narch to’ connive at their practices in Germany, found 
the bait had been fwallowed too eagerly to be eafily dif 
gorged: The articles of religion, which had been thrown. 
in as plaufible impediments, by the unexpected concef- 


fions of James, brought the affair to a crifis that could. 
not end in a rupture of the treaty, without reflecting: 
an equal fhare of infamy on. the deceiver and deceived... 
An epiftolary correfpondence had been actually begun: 
between James and the pope, who would have thought: 
himéfelf ill-treated if his authority had béen ufed as: a: 
ftale to ferve the purpofes of Spain, who was at prefent. 


entangled. in her own fnares, Compunctions of. honour: 


operated on Spanifh counfels; or, what is more proba-. . 
ble, they began to flatter themfelves, that the converfion. 


of Great Britain would be produced by this alliance, and 


the infantasnumbered with the divinities in the Popifh- 


legends.. Some or. all of thefe motives influenced at 


prefent fo ftrongly the meafures of Philip and his mini-. 


ftry, that the arrival.of the difpenfation, which was ex- 
pected from Rome in March or April, was to be. followed 
in four days by a folemnization of the nuptials. ‘The 
articles of. the portion and jointure were. already fettledy 


Briftol. 


7 
Lae 
on) 


592 


» FiOkLIM: By Bei di 
Briftol wrote word, that he fhould foon bring into England Am. 1623. 
the moft. accomplifhed princefs in the world, with a por~ ° 
tion of two millions. 


Tuis minifter’s profpects on the merit of having con- 
cluded this defired bufinefs, and the intereft he had with 
a. family which was on the eve of having an important 
influence on the court of England, excited in the breaft 
of Buckingham fenfations of jealoufy; thefe, with the: 
natural vanity of his difpofition, fired him with a de- 
fire to introduce himfelf to the court of Spain. The 
fole pofleffion of James’s favour, who was at prefent 
old, and in decline, was no longer the ultimate object 
of his views. He had for. fome time ftudioufly culti- 
vated, the prince’s friendfhip, and pofleffed at this time 
fuch a degree of his.confidence as to engage him in the 
romantic project of a journey to Madrid. The prince, 
though he was grave and fedate, had an amorous dif- 
pofition ;. his. reading, which had been chiefly romances, 
was as little calculated to inftruct. him in rational man- 
ners, as were his father’s precepts and example in ra- 
tional principles of religion and government. Thus bi- 


afled, it is no wonder that his youthful mind was in- 


flamed by the fanciful arguments of Buckingham, that 
urged the adventure as a refined piece of gallantry, wor- 


thy an accomplithed prince. 


1° 


THE expedition having been agreed on between the 
two parties, on the firft favourable opportunity, when 
James was a little elevated by his liquor, and a previous Clarendon, 
_ converfation on the expected arrival of the infanta, an {9j17°",. 
affent to their. defign was fo importunately begged 


by & feq. 
the. 


1.98 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 4 


Ann. 1623. the prince, and feconded by Buckingham, with argu- 
_ ments adapted to the King’s inclination, that the eafy 
monarch was at length prevailed on to give it: . The ar- 
gument urged on the occafion was, that this piece of | 
gallantry would -be followed by the immediate reftora- ; 
tion of the Palatinate, as a part of ‘the payment of that ere 
vaft obligation which the prince would lay on the in- . 
fanta by fuch an unufual compliment. When the King’s 
promife had been thus obtained, he was farther urged 
for an affent, that they might put their defign in imme- 
diate execution, without other attendants than two fer- 
vants, who fhould be kept in total ignorance till the 
moment of their departure. 


On the firft hour of folitude, James revolved in his 
mind the paft confultation : Innumerable difficulties pre- 
fented themfelves to his frighted imagination ; his dif- 

_ order was fo great when the prince and Buckingham 
returned to him for the difpatch, that he fell into a paf- 
fion of tears, cried out he was undone, and that they 
would break his heart if they perfifted in their refolu- 
tion. Then, with unufual earneftnefs, he fet before 
them the evils which muft attend the rath enterprize ; 
that befides the inevitable hazard to which the prince’s 
perfon would be expofed, it mutt occafion the entire_lofs 
of the people’s affection to himfelf, and the ruin of the 
almoft-compleated match ; that on the prince's arrival 
at Madrid the articles of the treaty would be laid afide, | Wa 
and new matter propofed which had not yet been men- 
tioned, and could never be confented to by him. This 
and much more he faid to the fame purpofe, conjuring 
them with fighs, and an increafe of tears, that they = 

would 


JroApoMsE &- 14 


would no more prefs him on a thing contrary to his Ann, 1623. 


underftanding and intereft. The fuppliant monarch 
received no anfwer to the weighty reafons he had in- 
fifted on: The prince put him in mind of the pro- 
mife he had made the day before; which, he added, 
was fo facred that he hoped he would. not. violate it; 
that if he:did he. would never more think of marriage. 
Buckingham. treated him with the utmoft infolence ; 
told him, that his word would never be again believed, 
after his retracting fo: foon what he had {folemnly pro- 
mifed|; that he. plainly difcerned it proceeded from an- 
other breach: of his word, in communicating with fome 
rafcal, who. had furnifhed him with thofe pitiful rea- 
fons,- but he doubted. not. that. he fhould: know hereafter 
who. his counfellor had been; that his receding from 
his promife would be fuch a difobligation to the prince, 
that undoubtedly he would never forget it, or forgive 
the man that had been the caufe of it. The importu- 
nity of the prince, and the roughnefs of Buckingham, 
intirely prevailed: over the facile difpofition of James, 
who after having difclaimed, with many oaths, the hav- 
ing communicated the matter to any perfon living, gave 
them, a fecond time, a full leave to follow their inclina- 
tion. It was agreed, that they fhould-fet out in two days, 
and that.Sir Francis Cottington, the prince’s fecretary, and 
Endymion Porter, one of his. gentlemen of the bed-cham- 
ber, fhould attend. them*. James,. thinking. it proper 


* Cottington had been one. of Cornwallis’s clerks when -he was 
James’s refident in Spain, and Endymion Porter bad been a menial 
fervant to Buckingham’s brother, from thence preferred to his fervice, . 
and afterwards to be gentleman of the. bed-chamber to the prince. . 


Wilfon, Pu 225. 


that: 


th et ee a 
_ 


200 


Ann. 1623. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 


that the intention fhould be immediately communicated 
to them, that all things neceflary to the journey might 
be prepared, fent for Sir Francis Cottington. 


On his appearance he previoufly cautioned him con- 
cerning the truft he was going to repofe in him; then 
faid, “ Cottington, here is baby Charles, and Stenie, has 
a mind to ride poft to Spain, to fetch home the infanta ; 
they will have but two more in their company, and 
have chofen you for one: What think you of the jour- 
ney?”  Cottington replied, “ He could not think well 
of it, for he believed it would render fruitlefs all that 
had been hitherto done in the match.” He then went 
on, reprefenting the fame obvious reafons that had al- 
ready occurred to the King. On Cottington’s difcourfe, 
the King, ‘throwing himfelf upon a bed, in another paf- 
fion of fighs, tears, and lamentations, exclaimed, “ I 
told you this before; I am undone! I am undone! and 
fhall lofe baby Charles!” Anger and rage appeared in 
the countenances of the prince and Buckingham: The_ 


latter reproached Cottington with the utmoft bitternefs ; 


told him, “ That on being afked by the King which 
was the beft way to make the journey, he had had the 
prefumption to give his advice in matters of ftate, and 
againtt his mafter, without being called to it, which he 
fhould repent as long as he lived.” Thefe threatenings 
put the King into a new agony; who cried out, “ Nay, 
by God, Stenie, you are very much to blame to ufe him 
fo ; he anfwered me directly to the queftion I afked 
him, and very honeftly and wifely, and yet you know 
he faid no more than I told you before he was called = 
in.” It now appeared plainly that the defign came be mt 


$QA Mi £ 8.4 


- ginally from ‘Buckingham. James was obliged to yield 
to his impetuofity, and Cottington had directions given 


him for the journey. 


To the great regret of the dejected King, the prince, 
with his advifer, and his two attendants, fet out from 
London on the twenty-feventh of February; they pafled 
through France in difguife, and reached Madrid in the 
{pace of eleven days *. They had been guilty of the 


bd James, who had now recovered: his defpondency, wrote -the fol- 
lowing curious letter to his fon and favourite, eighteen days after their 


departure from England. 


« My {weete boys, I wryte this now this fevint letre unto you upon 
the feventeenth of Mairche, fent in my fhippe calld the Adventure; 
to my two boys adventurers, qwhom God ever bleffe ; and now to be- 
gin with him, 4 jove principium, I have fent you, my babie, two of 
your chaplains fitteft for this purpofe, Mawe and Wren, together 
with all ftuffe and ornaments fitte for the fervice of God; I have 
fully inftruéted thaime, fo as all thaire behavioure and fervice fhall, 
I hoape, prove decent and agreable to the puritie of the primitive 
_ church, and yet as neare the Romane forme as can lawfully be done, 
~ for itt hath ever been my way to goe with the church of Rome, 
ufque ad aras. All the particulars hereof I remitte to the relation of 
youre before-named chaplens. I fend you alfo youre roabes of the or- 
der, qwhiche you muft not forgette to weare upon Saint George’s 
day, and dine together in thaime, if they can come in time, qwhiche 


2060Fr 


Ann. 1623. 


Prince’s 
journey te 
Madrid. 


I pray God thaye maye, for it will be a goodlie fight for the Spa- . 


niardis to fee my two boys dyne in thaime. I fend. you alfo the 
jewells I promeifed, both fome of myne and fuch of youres, I meane 
bothe of you, as are worthy the fending, for my babie’s prefenting his 
miftreffe. I fend him an old double croffé of Lorraine, not fo riche as 


awncient, and yet not contemptible for the valew ; a goodlie looking- 
glafle, with my picture in itt, to be hung att her girdle, qwhiche you 
muft tell her ye have caufed itt fo to be enchawnted by airt magike, 
as whenfoever thee fhall be pleafed to looke in itt the fhall fee the 
faireft ladie that either her brother or youre father’s dominions can af- 
: Vou. I. foorde ; 


Dd 


20% HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ano, 1623. indifcretion of venturing as fpectators at a court-ball in 
France, where Charles had a view of the princefs Hen-- 


foorde ; ye fhall prefente her with two faire long diamonts, fet lyke 
an anker, and a faire pendarite dyamont hanging att thaime; ye fhall 
give her a goodly roape of pearles ; ye fhall give her a carquant or 
coller, threttein great ballas rubeis, and threttein knotes or cinques of 
pearles;; and ye fhall give her a head-dreffing of two and twenty great 
peare pearles; and.ye fhall give her three goodlie peare pendant dya- 
monts, qwhairof the biggeft to be worne at a needle on the middeft of 
her foreheade, and one in everieeare. And for my babie’s owin wear- 
ing ye have two goode jewells of your owin, youre rounde broache of 
dyamonts, and your tryangle dyamont, with the great round pearle ; 
and I fend you for youre wearing the three brethren that ye know full 
well, but newlie fette, and the mirroure of Frawnce, the fellow of 
the Portugal dyamont, qwhich I wolde wifhe you to weare alone in 
your hatte, with a little blacke feather; ye have alfo good dyamong 
buttons of youre owin to be fett to a doublette or jerkin; as for 
youre I, it may ferve for a prefenttoadon. As for thee, my fweete 
goffeppe, I fend thee a faire table-dyamonde, qwhich I wolde once 
have gevin thee before if thou wolde have taken itt, for wearing on 
_thy hatte, or qwhaire thou plaifis; and if my babie will fpaire thee 
the two long dyamonts in forme of an. anker,. with the pendant dya- 
mont, itt were fit for an admirall to weare, and he hath enough bet- 
ter jewells for his miftreffe. Thou hes of thyne owin thy goode olde ~ 
jewell, thy three pindars dyamonts; thy picture-cafe I gave Kate, and 
the great dyamont-chaine [ gave her, qwho wolde have fent thee the 
leaft prinne fhe hadde, if I had not ftayed her. If my babie will not 
fpaire the anker from his miftrefle, he may well lend thee his rounde 
broache to weare, and yet he fhall have jewells to weare in his hatte 
for three great dayes. And now for the form of my babie’s prefent- 
ing of his jewells to his miftreffe, 1 leave that. to himfelfe, with Sten- 
nie’s advice, and my lord of. Briftolt’s, onlie I would not have thaime 
prefented all at once, but att the more fundrie times the better, and 
i would have the rareft and richeft kept hinmofte. I have alfo fent in 
four other croffes of meaner valew, with a great pointed dyamont in FE 
a ring, qwhich will fave charges in prefents. to dons, according ta 
their qualities; but I will fend with the fleete dyvers other jewels. \c3) 
for prefents for faving of chairges, qwhairof we haye foe muche ~ 


; 
7 


——————— 


a 
. 


a 
Yor 


TAJOCML IM ID HAP 
rietta, his after-wife. 
Ment, mortification, and confufion of Briftol, when he 
faw the travellers alight at his houfe: Nothing, in his 
Opinion, but a demon in the form of the prince of 
Wales; could have prevented the fuccefsful termination 
of an affair that had coft fo much time, pains, and vexa- 
tion, It was alleged againft him by Buckingham, thar, 
on finding the prince’s errand was not to turn Papift, as 
he at firft fufpected it was, he advifed him with earneft- 
nefs to that ftep. Nor is this fact improbable, fince, in 
the prefent circumftances, the minifter might rationally 
conclude, that a contrary refolution would be followed 
by the rupture of the treaty, and, with it, the difappoint- 


ment of his future profpects. 


Wuen the arrival of the royal vifitor was formally The prince 
made known to the Spanifh monarch, the attention of Madrid. 


himfelf and council was totally employed in devifing on 
the occafion a reception as romantically exalted as the 


- occafion itfelf; nor could the moft heated fancy of their 


own romance-writers defcribe more pompous ceremo- 
nies, or more bombaft expreflions of refpect, than were 


neede; for till my babie’s comming away thaire wil] be no neede of 
giving of prefents to any but to her. Thus you fee how as long as I 
want the fweete comforte of my boyes converfation, I ame forced, yea, 
and delytes, to converfe with thaime by long letres. God bleffe < 
both, my fweete boyes, and fende you, after a fuccefsfull journey, a 


_joyefull and happie returne in the armis of your deare dade. 
James R. 


«« Frow Newmarket, on Saint Patrick’s- 


daye, qwho of olde was to well pa- 
' tronized in the country ye are in.” MSS. in the Brit. Mufeum, 
n. 6orn, Pp. 21; & feq. 


Dd 2 here 


‘Equally ftrong was the aftonifh- Ann. i623. 4 : 


204 HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 


Ann. 1623. here practifed to delight the imagination of their ena~ 

_ moured gueft: The prifons in Spain were thrown open ;. 
the fumptuary laws fufpended; the privy-counfellors. 
waited on him in a body to inform him, that they had — 
exprefs orders to obey him as exactly as the king him- 
felf. Nor was he fuffered long to languifh for the fight 
of his miftrefs, who was carried abroad to vifit a mo- 
naftery, that her lover might be gratified with a diftant 

His recep- view. His introduction into the palace was performed 

tion. 
with the fame parade that attends the kings of Spain 
at their inauguration; Philip took the left-hand of him 
_on all occafions ; he was conftantly ferved by the gran- 
dees and tituladoes; prefented with golden keys of alk 
the regal apartments, that he might have accefs at all 
hours.; the queen fent him divers prefents of rich ap- — ae 
parel, perfumes, and other rarities of the country; he 
was entertained with a variety of fhews and triumphs, eI 
where, like a fuccefsful knight, he often obtained the 

bei prize in prefence of his miftrefs; at a dinner at St. Je- 

\ rome’s monaftery feveral of the chief officers of the ; 
crown waited upon him bare-headed. Wilfon afferts that : 
this. fervile cuftom was introduced into Spain by Philip 
the Second, who carried it from hag. rar where he had 
been thus attended *. 


Wurst this pompous feene was acting at Madrid, 
the difpenfation lingered at Rome. The prime-minifter 
Ovary: on his firft. ses ise to the prince, told . 


* Sully, in his Memoirs, teftifies the having ae n mah amped at 
beholding the ceremony of ferving. the ‘king of Englani at the time. 
of dinner, on the knee. ’ ee ali 


a 
. 


JAMES L 


him, “ That the match would be concluded inftantly; Ann. 1623. 
that now the kings of Spain and England fhould divide 
the world between them, for that he did not queftion’ 


but he came to change his religion.” The artful Gon- 
demar, who was-at this time at Madrid, did not fail to 
act his part of the farce, by telling the prince one day, 
in a jocular manner, “ That he had ftrange news to tell 
him, which was, that himfelf, though an Englifhman | 
in his heart, had been made that morning a privy- 
counfellor.”. This was followed by a compliment from 
Philip, that he had conferred that honour on Gonde- 
mar that his highnefs might be informed of all their 


refolves, 


CHARLEs at this time received a letter from the pope: Intercourfe of 
It exprefles an affured belief that the prince was come tweenChasles 
to Spain for the purpofe of being received into the bo- 4% P°P 


fom of the papal church. As: the prince’s anfwer to 
this letter has been reprefented by a very ingenious au- 
thor in the light of a decent compliment, to which 
there could be no fubftantial objections, I fhall give it 


at full length. 


Prince Charles to pope Gregory the Fifteenth. 


“« Mott holy father, 


We have received your letter with no lefs thank- 
fulnefs and refpect than is due to the fingular good-will 
and godly affection wherewith we know it was written. 
- It was moft acceptable to us, that the never-enough-re- 
nowned examples of our anceftors were propofed to us 
by your holinefs for our infpection and imitation 


; who, 
though: 


x66 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ane. 1623. though they often hazarded their lives and fortunes, to 


propagate the Chriftian faith, yet did they never more 
chearfully difplay the banners of Chrift crucified, againft 
his moft bitter enemies, than we will endeavour to the 
utmoft, that the peace and union which fo. long tri- 
umphed may be reduced into the Chriftian world, after 
a kind of elimination or exile. For fince the malice of 


the father of difcords hath fowed fuch unhappy divi- - 


fions amongft thofe who profefs the Chriftian religion, 
we account this moft neceflary, thereby to promote with 


better fuccefs the glory of God, and Chrift our Saviour. 


Nor fhall we efteem it lefs honour to tread in their foot- 
fteps, and to have been their rivals and imitators in 
holy undertakings, than to have been defcended of 


them; and we are very much encouraged to this, as __ 


well by the known inclination of our lord and father, 
and his ardent defire to lend a hand to fo pious a work, 
as by the anguifh that gnaws his royal breaft when he 
confiders what cruel deftructions, what deplorable cala- 
mities arife out of the diffentions of Chriftian princes. 
Your holinefs’s conjetture of our defire to contract an 
alliance and marriage with a Catholic family and princefs, 
is agreeable both to your wifdom and charity ; for we 
would never defire fo vehemently to be joined in a ftrict 
and indiffoluble bond with any mortal whatfoever, whofe 


religion we hated. Therefore your holinefs may be af- _ 


fured, that we are, and always will be, of that modera- 
tion as to abftain from fuch actions as may teftify our 
hatred againft the Roman Catholic religion ; we will ra- 


ther embrace all occafions whereby, through a gentle © re: 


and fair procedure, all finifter fufpicions may be taken 
away: That as we all confefs one individual — 


; a 

4 arte 
Vee hs 
v2 uP 


ei 


> 
| ale 


religion interpofé between him and _pofleffion. 


PA Min Sik 


and one Chrift crucified, we may unanimoufly grow up Ana. 1623. 


into one faith ; which that we may compafs, we little 
value all labour and watchings, yea, the very hazard of 
our lives. It remains that we render thanks to your 
holinefs for your letter, which we efteem as a fingular 
prefent, and wifh your holinefs all profperity and eter- 


‘nal happinefs.” 


To make the comment upon this anfwer more eafy, 
it muft be known that the pope, in his letter, exhorts 
the prince to follow his anceftors in obedience to the 
fee of Rome. “ It was moft acceptable to us, returns 
the prince, that the never-enough-renowned examples of 
our anceftors were propofed to us by your holinefs for 
our infpection and imitation.” The pope propofes no 
medium, he infifts upon a return of obedience to the 
papal hierarchy: “ Yet did they never, fays the prince, 
more chearfully difplay the banners of Chrift crucified; 
againft his moft bitter enemies, than we will endeavour 
to the utmoft to reftore peace and union in the church.” 


‘The pope fuppofes that the prince profecutes the in: 


tended marriage with a defign to re-unite himfelf to the 
church of Rome: The prince returns anfwer, “ That 


‘the pope’s conjecture is according to charity and wif- 


dom, for he would never defire to be joined in marriage 
with any one whofe religion he hated.” It is very ap- 
parent, from the whole tenor of the anfwer, that at 


this time the love-fick prince was too much rivetted in 


the defire of the match to let any obftacles in point of 
But 


whilft his paflion was tantalized by daily expectations of 
the difpenfation, it at length arrived from Rome, tacked © 


to 


208 


Ann, 1623. 


HISTORY OF ‘ENGLAND. 


to additional articles in point of religion. As thefe 
were of great importance, he was obliged:to refer them 
to his father, and Cottington was fent into. ints on 


this errand, 


| Sas was fo delighted with the scone of his fon’s 


treatment at the court of Spain, that he broke out into 


_ frantic expreflions of joy, and was heard feveral times 


to fay, “ Now all the devils in Hell cannot hinder the 


match.” On his afking his council whether it would — 


be convenient to grant a toleration for Papifts, he re- 
ceived a letter from the archbifhop of Canterbury, which 
ftrongly reprefented to him how incongruous fuch a 
meafure was to all his paft profeflions, and how dan- 
gerous the attempt to abrogate the laws of: the land by 
his own power, might prove to the welfare of himfelf 
and family. This fpirited interpofition was made by 
the worthy prelate whilft he lay under difgrace for hav- 
ing killed a park-keeper in an attempt to fhoot a deer. 
His mortification for this unlucky accident had been 
fo great as to petition the King for leave to retire to an 
alms-houfe at Guilford, which he had built for the main- 
tenance of the poor. | 


Witxiiams, the lord-keeper, had informed. Bucking- 
ham, that, by the common law yet in force, the arch- 
bifhop was made irregular, ipo facto, and fo fufpended 
from all ecclefiaftical functions, until reftored by his fu- 
perior, who was the King’s majelty ; to this he added, 
“ That though it was againft the King’s nature to add 


affliction to the afflicted, yet to leave a man of blood __ 
primate and patriarch of all his churches, founded very = 


= 


eniadieee o 


J A.-M E S$ I, 209 


harfh in the old councils and canons, and the Papifts Ann, 1623. 


would not fpare to cenfure it*. It is very much to 
James’s credit that this advice was rejected, and the 
archbifhop continued in his ecclefiaftical dignity. 


eae ki 


CoTTINGTON was foon fent back to Spain with the Tranfaaio 
additional articles figned by the King and council, perio} fay 
at Madrid. 

_Tuar the infanta fhould take with her her family, Ruthwort ; 


and that thefe fhall be nominated by the Catholic king, «fq. 
and afterwards fupplied by him: 
TuaT the election of her priefts fhall belong to the 


infanta : 

TuHaT the fervants of the family of the lady infanta 
fhall not be obliged to take the oath of allegiance to 
the king of Great Britain, provided there be any claufe 
contrary to their confciences, and the Roman Catholic 


religion : 
Tat the laws which are, or fhall be, againft reli- 
gion, fhall not take hold of the faid fervants, and only 


* Williams, who was at this time indulged with the bifhopric of 
Lincoln, refufed to be confecrated by the unfortunate prelate. It may 
be queftioned whether this objeétion arofe from a confcience delicate in 
trifles, or from the fair profpect he had of fucceeding himfelf to the fee 
of Canterbury, had Abbot been judged incapable, and a defire to pleafe 
his patron Buckingham, to whom Abbot was very difagreeable. Laud, 
who, by the means of that favourite, was at this time appointed bifhop 
of St. David’s, had the fame fcruples. It is to be remarked, that this 


. prelate afterwards affifted at the ceremony of the confecration of Richard 
“Mountague to the fee of Chichefter, which was performed by Abbot. 
Mountague had been as zealous as Laud in fupporting the pretence of 


his irregularity. 
| Ee the 


210 HISTORY.OF ENGLAND. 
Ann, 1623. the fuperior ecclefiaftic may proceed againft éccletiiticat 
"s perfons, as hath been accuftomed by Catholics. And if 
any fecular judge fhall apprehend any ecclefiaftical per- 
fon for any offence, he fhall forthwith caufe him to be 
delivered to the fuperior ecclefiaftic, who fhall proceed 
againft him according to the canon-law: 


TuaT the nurfes who fhall give fuck to the children: 
of the lady infanta fhall be chofén by the lady infarita. 


To thefe additional articles; with thofe already men- 
tioned, the King and privy-council fwore. Moreover, the- 
King agreed to thefe private ones : 


TuHaT particular laws now enacted againft Roman: 
€atholics; and even general laws, under which all the 
fubjects are comprized, if they are repugnant to the Ro+' 
man Catholic religion, fhall not at any time hereafter;. 
by any means or chance whatfoever, dire€tly or indi« 
rectly, be commanded to be put in execution againft. 
the faid Roman Catholics; and we will caufe that our 
council fhall take the fame oath, as far a8 it pertains. 
to them: 

THaT no attempt fhall be made with the moft re- 
nowned lady infanta, Donna Maria, about any thing: 
which fhall be repugnant to the Roman Catholic reli- 
‘gion, or thofe things which fhall be contained in prod 
treaty of matrimony : 


Tuat we and the prince of Wales will interpre és: 
authority, and will do as much as in us lies, that the é 
parliament pall oe the articles capitulated bet cen: = 


Fe 
* 7 


al ail tat 


Fh Me & in Gl: 


211 


the moft renowned kings in favour of the Roman Ca- Ans. 1623, 


-tholics by reafon of this marriage, and that the faid 


patliament fhall revoke and abrogate the particular laws 
made againft Roman Catholics, as likewife the general 
laws under which all are equally comprehended, if they 
are repugnant to the Roman Catholic religion; and we 
will not hereafter confent that the faid parliament fhall 
ever at any time enact or write any other new laws 


againft Roman Catholics. 


The privy-counfellor’s oath was this : 


« J, A.B. do fwear that I will truly and fully ob- 
ferve, as much as belongeth to me, all and every of the 
articles which are contained in the treaty of marriage 
between the moft gracious Charles prince of Wales, and 
the moft gracious lady Donna Maria, infanta of Spain. 
Likewife I fwear, that I will neither commit to execu- 
tion, or caufe to be executed, either by myfelf or by 
any inferior officer ferving under me, any law made 
againft any Roman Catholic whatfoever, nor will execute 
any punifhment inflicted by thofe laws, but in all things 


that belong to me will faithfully obferve his miajefty’s 


word given in that behalf.” 


Wuewn thefe returned to Spain, the prince of Wales 


engaged on the part of his father, that all the agreed- 


to particulars fhould take place in three years, or fooner 
if poffible; that he would intercede that the ten years 
of the education under the infanta fhould, according to 


the defire of the pope, be prorogued to twelve. To this 


was sata an obligation, that, as often as the infanta 
fhould 


Ee 2 


or2 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1623, fhould require, the prince would give ear to divines or 
others whom fhe would pleafe to employ, in matter of 
the Roman Catholic religion ; and for farther caution in 
point of the free exercife of the faid religion, the prince 
engaged, on the word of a king, that the things pro- 
mifed fhould take effect, and be put in execution, as 
well in the kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, as of 
England. 


TueE belief of a powerful protection to the Catholics: a 
-in England was at this time fo well eftablifhed, thata 
titular bifhop of Calcedon came privately to London to: 
exercife an epifcopal jurifdiction over them. Bonfires 
and other public rejoicings were made on the fuccefs of 
‘the treaty ; the infanta was, ftyled princefs of Wales; a 
chapel was building for her at St. James’s; a fleet was. 
prepared for her paflage; and amongft the fervile, the: E 
‘eurious, and the ignorant, three numerous clafles of 
men, which are the conftant flatterers and followers of 
the humours of the times, her picture was every where 
to be feen. At this time feveral noblemen left England. 
to pay their court at Madrid. — 


—— — 


In the good humour into which the prefent fituation. 
of affairs had put James, the favourite was not forgot ;: ” 
A patent for the title of duke was fent to him by Cot- 
tington, that he might be upon a footing with the beft 
grandee in Spain. But whilit the felf-flattered monarch 
‘was enjoying in profpect the accomplifhment of his de- 
fires, new doubts arofe in the council at Madrid. As oe 
much or more had been yielded to, it was faid, thad 75 
could have been. reafonably expected ;. but,. ‘had the pee 


POM MLB rt 


tifh ing and his fon power to effect what they had Ann. 1625. 


fo readily granted? would it not be prudent to make 
this trial by delaying the folemnization of the nuptials 
till the full performance of the conceflions? On the re- 
fult of this debate the bifhop. of Segovia frankly told 
Buckingham, “ That the articles James had affented to 
in favour of the Roman Catholics, amounted to a tolera- 
tion; that he had heard fomething of the eftate of Eng- 
land, that the King could not grant a toleration without 
a rebellion, and he eafily believed it, becaufe that the 
king of Spain was not able in his dominions to effect 
the like enterprize without incurring the like danger: 
He - therefore concluded, that if the infanta was fent 
into England before thefe alterations were eftablithed, 
fhe might be treated with a rebellion.” Gundamore, 
who had given information to the Spanifh council of 
the meafure of influence James had in England, clofed 
in with the bifhop of Segovia, and faid, “ That he did 
not think it fitting to part with the infanta before the 


articles were perfectly put in execution. 


Tus new objection, when communicated to James, 
flung him into a fit of defpair: His promifes had been 
made in fecret, and not to be performed but by degrees, 
and after the marriage, when the power of Spain was 
united to the power of the crown of England; he was 
now prefled to expofe them to the public, by an abrupt 
execution, whilft the treaty was yet unconcluded, and, 
by fuch a prelude, to fill the minds of his already-dif- 
contented fubjects with dreadful apprehenfions of its 


‘To: 


i 
214 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


sna, 16:3. TO give Spain every poflible fatisfattion, a full decla- 


ration of his intentions was drawn up, and figned. by 
fecretary Conway, and feveral privy-counfellors. - This 
confirmed the grant of all the articles, both public and 
private; and that it fhould be lawful for the Spanith 


ambafladors to aflign a difcreet perfon to employ fuch 


fufficient lawyers as fhould be thought fit to take care 


_ of the ftrength, validity, and fecurity of the faid grants ; 


and that his majefty’s attorney fhould have charge to re- 
ceive and admit the faid lawyers to the fight and judg- 
ment of the faid draughts, and, in any. doubts, to give 
them fatisfaction, or to ufe fuch legal, neceflary, and 
pertinent words and phrafes as he the attorney-general 
fhould propound for the fecurity of the Roman Catholics, 
and fure making of the faid grants; and that his ma- 
jefty’s will and pleafure was, that a legal and authentical 


pardon fhould be paffed under the great feal, wherein 


fhould be freely pardoned all the penalties to which the 
Roman Catholics were liable for matters of confcience, 


and in which they had been proceeded againft, or might. 


be; that a courfe fhould be taken that the pardon fhould 
not be coftly; and that it fhould be lawful to put as 
many as was poflible in one pardon. | 


Tue Spanifh ambafladors, not being fatisfied with 
thefe affurances, the lord-keeper and other commiflion- 
ers were directed to draw up a pardon of all offences 
patt, with a difpenfation for thofe to come, to be granted 
to all Roman Catholics obnoxious to any laws againft 


recufants, and then to iffue forthtwo general commands — iq * 
under the great feal of England; the one to all judges 
and juitices of the peace, and the other to all bithops, Ay 


Nancel " 


| ee ae Se 


chancellors, and commiflaries, not to execute any ftatute 4 Aan, 1623. 


againft them. 


THE ‘pardon was pafled full and ample; but Wil- 
Iiams, the lord-keeper, reprefented fo ftrongly the danger 
of a general difcontent and mutiny, fhould it take place 
immediately, by the means of fo peremptory a prohibi- 
tion to the judges and bithops, and the greater probability 
of fuccefs were the King’s favours enlarged by degrees, 


that the ambafladors at length confented that the matter 


thould reft till the arrival of the infanta. 


To all the important conceflions that had been already - 
made by the Englifh monarch, this additional claufe in. 


_ the pope’s difpenfation was ftill infifted on: 


“ Tat whereas there were certain articles confented 
unto by the King of England in favour of the Romam 


Catholics in his dominions, a fecurity fhould be given 
for the performance of thofe conceffions.” To this de- 
mand James anfwered, “ That hecould give no other 


fecurity than his own and the prince’s oath, exemplified. 


under the great feal of England.” 


THis was not fatisfactory, and James fuffered the 
moftification of being told, “ That his own and the 
| prince’s oath were not a fuflicient fecurity, 

fovereien Catholic prince would ftand engaged for its 
performance. Affairs remaining thus embarrafled, the 
King of Spain proffered to engage himfelf by oath for 
a performance of the articles, if, on a confulration with 
rs ‘ghoflly fathers, it was determined that he might do 


unlefs fome: 


itt 


216 


Ann, 1623. 
to a formal confideration ; they at length concluded in 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


it with a fafe confcience. A junto of -divines was called 


the affirmative, and that in cafe the king of England 
fhould fail to execute what was ftipulated, the king of 
Spain was to vindicate his oath by the fword. . Thus did 
his Catholic majefty obtain a kind of right to head a 
large party in England, which were to appeal to. him for 
redrefs in all cafes of grievance. ' 


THE vaft acquifitions which had been lately made by 
the houfe of Auftria, and the profpect of its increafe of 
power by a conjunction with Great Britain, raifed ap- 


prehenfions in the court of France that occafioned an_ 


entire alteration of their late meafures. From perfecut- 


ing their Proteftant fubjects to the brink of deftruction, 


they condefcended to a re-union, on the terms of their 
poffefling all the privileges in point of religion which 
they had before enjoyed. The ftate of the mal-contents 
in Germany was daily more hopelefs. The reftoration 
of the Palatinates had not been mentioned in the late 
tranfactions between James and the court of Spain. 


In vain had he facrificed both reputation and in- 
tereft to the chimerical project of a ftri€t union with the 
houfe of Auftria; farther obftacles ftill retarded the ac- 
complifhment of his wifhes. At this particular crifis, 


when the affair was apparently concluded to the fatis- . 


faction of all parties, the death of Gregory the Fifteenth 
afforded the Spaniards an excufe for delaying the nup- 
tials till the afflent of cardinal Barberini, the new pope, 
had been obtained. The Spanifh miniftry pretended, 


that, as the difpenfation ftill lay in the nuncio’s hands, 


Joh (MEE Bet 


and a contract had not been formed upon it, it was by An», 1623. 
the late pope’s death fufpended, and a ratification from 
the new one was become neceflary. This unfeafonable 
objection undoubtedly proceeded from the zeal of- the 
courts of Rome and Spain to complete the prince’s con- 
verfion before he left Madrid. 


THE immediate act of the new pope was to begin a 
correfpondence with the king of England and his fon: 
He informs the latter, that the firft letters which he re- 
ceived after he was preferred to the throne of the apo- 
ftles, were thofe fent out of Spain from him the prince 
to Gregory the Fifteenth, his predeceflor, of famous 
memory: “ We lifted up our hands to Heaven, conti- 
nues. he, and gave thanks to the Father of mercies, 


when, in the very entry of our reign, a Britifh prince 


began to perform this kind of obeifance to the pope of 
Rome.” 


CHARLEs’s patience was at length exhaufted by the 
vexatious delays which had fucceflively rofe between 
him and the pofleflion of his miftrefs. The Spaniards 
in effect had, by an over-nicenefs and too fine-drawn a 
policy, rather ftarved than cherifhed his paflion; inftead 
of having indulged him with thofe tender interviews 
and little favours that fwell the expectations, raife the 
_defires, and increafe the paflion of the fanguine lover, 
he had been treated with a referve that arofe to an af- 
fected indifference ; entertaining his miftrefs had been 
no otherwife allowed than in the moft formal manner, 
before a circle of ceremonious fpectators. Thus re- 


ftrained, his paflion had been: vented in diftant glances, 
Vou. I, Ff which * 


218 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ana. = which met with a return fo cold that it psy: the 


hopes of a mutual saci age 


Hs long ftay at Madrid had produced occafions tice 
gave rife to a reciprocal difguft between Buckingham 
and the Spanifh miniftry: That decent formal people re- 


garded with averfion the manners of the favourite,—a 
mixture of Gallic licentioufnefs and Britifh roughnefs.. 


The diftafteful familiarity that fubfifted between him 
and his mafter gave great offence to the high notions: 
which that nation entertained of royalty, and was as. 
incongruous to the equally-exalted pretenfions of James: 
and his fon, as to the romantic conceits of the Spa- 
niards. A contemptible buffoonry was not the moft 
material offence in Buckingham’s carriage; his beha- 
viour was lafcivious, and his whole conduct com-— 
pounded of oppofitions to Spanifh gravity and Spanith: 
delicacy. 


From thefe caufes had arifen a reciprocal animofity: 
between the parties, that produced at feveral times high: 
and warm altercations. Olivares, in a junto of mini-— 


fters, had reproached Buckingham with having flattered: 


them with the hopes, that the prince would renounce 
the Proteftant faith ; Buckingham told him he lied; the: 
indignant Spaniard refented the affront with fpirit, and: 
gave the favourite to underftand, that it was the impor- 
tance of the treaty in agitation that prevented him from: 


infifting on the proper fatisfaétion for fo grofs an injury. 
Thefe and other fubjeéts of difguft alienated Bucking- =, 


ham’s affections from the Spanifh match. The minift 


Briftol, whofe conduct had been, for the whole soe 


Sos See : 
’ — 
’ 


Joa MiB Sot 


his negotiation, fubfervient to the view of completing Ann. 1623. 
this alliance, was as much approved by the court of 


Spain as Buckingham’s was difliked.. They fhewed fo 
ftrong a difapprobation of the treaty’s having been taken 
out of the hands of the former, and transferred to the 
latter; that they teftified a doubt of the fufficiency of his 
power, as it had not been confirmed by the council of 
England. The high fpirit of the favourite, who, from 
the commencement of James’s abfurd affection to him, 
had never met with the like oppofition, was enraged to 
a degree of refentment that would alone have inftigated 
him to break off the impending treaty. His political 
reafons were not immaterial ones: There was at this 
time.a large party in the court of England, that, from 
motives of jealoufy, in oppofition to his influence, fup- 
ported Briftol; he was fo obnoxious to the whole court 
of Spain, that they declared they would rather bury the 
infanta than truft her in his hands; his patron James 
had been rather difobliged by his infolent carriage on 
‘the debate of the prince’s journey to Madrid. The fureft 
object he had to depend on was his prefent intereft with 
Charles, and that might be rendered very precarious by 
the union between him and the infanta, who, it was to 
be fuppofed, would have a powerful influence over his 
‘young and amorous mind, 


Tuis being the prefent fituation of affairs, the cata- 
ftrophe that immediately follows is not a very furpriz- 
ing one. Buckingham employed his whole powers to 
inftil into the prince an averfion for what had till now 
been the object of his paflionate defire. The prefent 


obftinacy of the Spanith miniftry, who not only refufed 
Ff 2 to 


220 


Ann, 1623, 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 
to accomplifh the marriage till the ratification of the 


- difpenfation, but-alfo to deliver up the infanta till the 


fpring, concurred fo efficacioufly with Buckingham’s en- 
deavours, that Charles was perfuaded to think that the 
Spaniards had no fincere inclination to an union with 
the crown of England, and that himfelf and his father 
had been the dupes toa treaty, the completion of which. 


would involve them in inextricable difficulties. Thefe; - 


and other the like infinuations, worked him up to fuch 
a height of refentment, that he liftened with eagernefs. 
to the project of .an abrupt departure, and began to en- 


tertain doubts of not being able to effect it. In this. 
defpondency he wrote word to his father, “ That he | 


muft now look upon. his fifter and her children, never 
thinking more of him, and forgetting that he had fuch 
a fon.” Buckingham plied him with letters at the fame 
time, to this effect: “ That he had at length difcovered: 
the king of Spain’s infincerity ; that not only he had’ 
no inclination to caufe the Palatinate to be reftored, but 
alfo was far from having the leaft thought of accom: 
plithing the marriage ; and that the prince was in dan+ 
ger of being retained in Spain all his life.” Thefe and 
other advices of the fame fort put the poor old King 


into fuch a fright that he wrote pofitive orders to Buck= — 


ingham to bring away the prince if poffible; at the: 
fame time he fent a fleet of fhips to St. Andero in Bif-. 
cay to efcort them home *. This order was obeyed: 


* One of ‘James’s letters on the occafion of thefe defponding 
meflages : 
« My fweet boys, 
“ Your letter by Cottington hath ftruck me dead; I fear it pe 
much fhorten my days. Alas! I now repent me fore that ever I 


Re i in 


po ihe eH, 


haftily. He took no ceremonious farewel of the court; 
but told: Olivares bluntly, “ That he was obliged to 
the king, queen,. and infanta, in an eternal tie of gra- 
titude; that he: would be an everlafting fervant to them, 
and endeavour to do the beft offices for concluding the 
match, and ftrengthening the amity between the two 
crowns:; but as for himfelf, he had fo far difobliged 
him, that he could not, without flattery, make the leaft 


profeflion of friendfhip to him.” The departure of the 


22-1 


"with alacrity: On pretence of preparing the Englifh Ann. 1623. 
navy for the prince’s. reception, Buckingham departed 
Cabala.. 


he princee 


prince was extremely folemn, and the parade of his Madrid. 


fatewel equal to that which had'attended his reception. 


Exalted were the reciprocal compliments: Philip de- 


clared, “ That the prince had laid him under an ever- 
lafting obligation, by placing fo high a degree of confi- 
dence in. him as to truft his: perfon in his hands, a 
thing unufual with princes, Charles magnified the fa- 


vours he-had received, and added, “ That he could not: 
fufficiently exprefs the high degree of eftimation they. 


had begot for the worth of. the giver.” 


fered you to go away: I care for match nor nothing, fo I may once 
have you in my arms again; God grant it! God grant it! God grant 
it! amen, amen, amen.. I proteft ye fhall be as heartily welcome as 
if ye had done all things ye went for, fo that I may once have you 


in my arms again. 
fpeed, as you_love my. life. And fo God fend you a happy joyful 
meeting in the arms of 

Your dear dad.. 


_ « From Greenwich, June 14, 1623.” 
MMS. in Brit, Mujeum, n. 6987, fol. 52.. 


VERY 


tou 


And fo God blefs you both, my only fweet fon, . 
only beft {weet fervant, and let me hear from you quickly, with all. 


222. ' HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1623. Very different from thefe proteftations were! the im- Ta 
preflions which Buckingham had lately made on his i 
eafy ductile mind. It was obferved that the firft words z; 
that he fpoke after he was embarked were, “ That it 
was a great weaknefs and folly in the Spaniards, after 
they tal ufed him fo ill, to grant him a free depar- 
+ ture.” Before he left the court of Madrid, a procura- — 
' tion to the king of Spain and Don Carlos his brother, 
to make the efpoufal in his name, was left in the hands 
of Briftol; it had in it a general claufe inferred, that 
it fhould not be revoked. This proxy, by the particu- 
lar direction of the prince, was to expire at Chriftmas, 
and was not to be delivered into the king of Spain’s 
hands till ten days after the arrival of the difpenfation. 
Immediately on the prince’s joining Buckingham, a po- 
fitive order was fent to Briftol not to deliver it till fecu- 
rity was given him that the infanta, after the efpoufal, 
fhould not betake herfelf to a monaftery, and to inform 
the prince what fecurity was offered, that he might him- 
felf be judge whether it was proper to accept it. At the 
fame time a defeazance of the proxy, im cafe the difpen- 
fation came clogged with any new demands, was fent 
privately to one Clark, to be produced on a critical occa. 
* fion; fo fearful was this once-ardent lover left the mar- 
riage fhould be folemnized before he could gain time to 
perfuade his father to reject it. 


His return to’ CHArxes and his prefent favourite were no fooner ar- 
rived in England than they fully demonftrated to James 
their prefent diftafte and averfion to an union with Spain; 
and this unfortunate monarch was. a fecond time ob- — 

_ liged to yield to the obftinacy of his fon and the pees 


England. 


JAMES 


perate purfuits of his domineering fervant. An exprefs Ann. 1623. 


was fent to Briftol, to inform him, that a clear reftitu- 
tion of the Palatinate was expected with the folemniza- 
tion of the nuptials, and a command that he {fhould 
procure from the king of Spain a punctual anfwer what 
courfe he would take for the reftitution of the Palatinate 
and Electorate; and in cafe the emperor or duke of Ba- 
varia fhould oppofe any part of the reftitution, what af- 
furances of content he would give in that point; to this 
- a direction was added, that the betrothing of the infanta 
fhould be on one of the days in Chriftmas. 


Tus exprefs threw Briftol into the utmoft perplexity: 
The rubs which the prinee had thrown in his’ way 
were in a manner got over; he had attained a full fe- 
curity for the infanta’s not taking the veil, and intended, 
by the fupport of his public warrant under the great 
feak of England; to wave the private order, and deliver 
the proxy om the arrival of the difpenfation. James’s 
command could not be fo well parried, and the mini- 
fters prefent profpedts begam to wear a cloudy afpect: 
He and Buckingham, had been at open variance during 
their mutual abode at Madrid, and the prince was in- 
finitely difobliged by a management that altogether op- 
pofed his pvefent inclinations. The rife of fortune he 
now pofléfied had been totally owing to the having con- 
ducted the treaty to a conclufive period. His intereft 
with James; folely founded on the merit of his negotia- 
_ tion, ineveafed in proportion to its fancied fuccefs: Fron» 
this circumftance, during its procefs, he had been cre- 


ated baron Digby, then earl of Briftol. The increafing 
nat good. 


224 


Ann. 1623.’ 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


good will of his mafter, and the advantage he had pro- 


mifed himfelf from the favour of the Catholic’ king and 
his miniftry, obtained from an obfequious adherence to 


the manners and interefts of the court of Spain, were 
now loft by this fuccefsful counter-aét of his antagonift 


Buckingham, whom he had entertained hopes of over- 
topping by means of the infanta’s power in the court of 
England. Defperate as were the prefent circumftances, 
he did not entirely abandon the hopes of concluding the 

marriage. Having obtained from Philip a written pro- — 
mife that the Palatinate fhould be reftored, he wrote an 
anf{wer to James, in which he informed him, “ That the 
difpenfation was hourly expected at the court of Madrid, 
and that letters from the duke of Paftrava certified that 
the pope had clearly paffed it.” He then expoftulated 
with him on the direction of having the marriage folem- 
nized on one of the Chriftmas holidays; affures himfelf — 
that it was given on want of due information that the 
powers would be then expired; and adds, that, with the 
concurrence of Sir Walter Afton, he fhould deliver the 
faid powers when demanded, and pafs on to the nomi- 
nating of a prefixed day for the depoffrio’s, if he received 
no orders to. the contrary. “ I have of purpofe, continues» 


he, difpatched the poft with this letter, to the end I may 


receive your majefty’s directions in this particular with all - 
poflible {peed ; which I hope fhall be to proceed directly 


‘to the marriage, according to the capitulations, and fo to 


order all things for the princefs’s journey in the fpring. 
And for the Palatinate, your majefty may be confident _ 
there fhall be diligence ufed in procuring a good and | 
f{peedy refolution.” ; 
; A Tazse. 


per eet j a. 


i xe Mee 3 oo @: re 
THeEse were not the only endeavours pradtifed by Bri- Ann. vag: 
ftol to reftore this bufinefs. Letters had been fent to the vac 

prince of Wales, fhewing, that though the point of- 
portion was a material one, yet, when the Spanifh junto 
found it, by the papers of the late king, to be no lefs 
than two millions, they refolved to make it good, not- 
withftanding they alleged that this fum was four times 
as much as ever was given in money with any daugh- 
: ter of Spain. To thefe were added arguments from the 
_ infanta’s rank and perfonal merits. Moreover, Sir Wal- 
ter Afton, a minifter who had been joined by the prince 
in commiflion with Briftol for a check upon his forwards 

nefs, laboured to reconcile Buckingham to the match, 
by infinuating, that if it proceeded, he (Buckingham) 
would have the honour of it; and the infanta being duly 
informed, muft acknowledge him to be the perfon to 
whom {fhe was obliged *. Thefe attempts were all un- 
fuccefsful ; the prince and Buckingham were determined 
again{t the match, and Briftol was commanded to follow 
Pies - the new inftructions ; namely, not to deliver the powers 
: till he obtained from the king of Spain a direct engages 
ment for the reftitution of the Palatinate and the electo- 


ral dignity. 


NoTwiTHsTANp1iNG thefe proceedings, James had not 
‘as yet been prevailed on to difclaim entirely the match, 


* Buckingham fent a threatening letter to Afton for thefe offices : 

He tells him, “« That the King had been advifed to revoke his com 

. miffion ; that this difgrace will immediately happen, if he does not 

Be 2 remove difpleafure, by a conduct entirely conformable to the fenfe of 
at, the inftruétions he received ftom the prince.” Cabala, fol. ed. 1673, 


, P: 127, & feq. : ; 
Vou.l. Gg and 


226 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1623, and ftill flattered himfelf that he could accommodate the 
prefent difference by treaties. With this view he fent a 
renewal of the powers for a larger time, and tendered 
thefe following propofitions to his fon-in-law, the titular 
king of Bohemia: To accommodate his broken fortunes 
by a full fubmiffion to the emperor, and an acceptation 
of the return of the Palatinate to his fon, and the admi- 
niftration to himfelf, with the electoral dignity, after the 
death of the duke of Bavaria, on the conditions of an 
union between that fon and a daughter of the emperor : 
The Palfgrave not to have the tuition of his faid fon, but 
to give up that charge to the infanta, when fhe fhould be 
princefs of Wales. To this difgraceful propofal Frederic _ 
returned a very fpirited anfwer: He rejects the humiliat- 
ing terms advifed him by James; fhews that they were 
only offered by his enemies, with a defign to render his 
caufe more defperate, by making him abject in the eyes 
of the Proteftant princes, who were at this time difpofed 
to fuccour him; he then fet forth the fraudulent conduc 
of the emperor and his allies, with the many grofs impo 
fitions he had been already obliged to fubmit to. In des 
fcribing the prefent politic ftate of Germany and Great 
Britain, he fhews, though in modeft terms, that if fpi+ 
rited meafures had been purfued by the court of Eng- 
land, James had been in a fituation of giving law to the: 
houfe of Auftria, inftead of receiving it in fo difgraceful 
a manner; he infifts that Germany would again exert: 
itfelf, if encouraged by a. warlike motion from the king: i 
of England.. 4 


THE enterprizes recommended to James in this an. 
fwer were ftrongly feconded: by the adverfaries of the 


Yaw iM @ Se 


Spanifh match, at this time headed by the prince and 
Buckingham. ‘This latter had an offer of an union be- 
tween his fon and a daughter of the Palfgrave, on con- 
dition of his obtaining a vigorous afliftance from England 
towards the recovery of the Palatinate. 


WueEN the ratification of the difpenfation arrived at 
Madrid *, ~bonfires were made throughout all Spain ; 
guns were fired, and other demonftrations of public re- 
joicings exhibited ; the infanta took upon her the title 
of princefs of England; her family was fettled; ‘and 
the beginning of March appointed for her journey; 
the behaviour of the Englifh ambafladors to her was 
the fame as ufed by courtiers to their fovereign; from 
the prince’s departure fhe had applied herfelf to learn- 
ing the Englith language, and had begun the letters of 
compliment which were to be fent to her hufband and 
father-in-law on the day of her efpoufal ; prefents were 
prepared for their acceptance; the ninth of December 
was appointed for the marriage-day; all the grandees 
were invited to the wedding; a gallery leading from 
the court to the church was erected a quarter of a mile 
in length, covered with tapeftry, to conduct the bride 
elect, in open view, and with moft magnificent folem- 
nity, to the ceremony. Briftol had provided coftly equi- 


_* The ambaffador that waited on Charles with congratulatory com- 
piven from the king of Spain, on his fafe return to England, had 

n ordered to make known to the princes of Flanders, Germany, 
and Italy, how near the marriage was to a conclufion. The Polifh 
ambaffador at Madrid, whofe errand was to folicit a match between 
the infanta and his mafter, returned home on the arrival of the dif- 


Gg2 pages, 


227 


Ann. 1623. . 


Preparations 
in Spain for 
celebrating 

the nuptials, 


228 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 162 pages, when the whole bufinefs was inftantly defeated — 
on the opening his farther inftructions from England, 
which were, To procure an entire furrender of the Pa- 
latinate and Electorate, before he advanced towards- 
finifhing the contract *. To this oddly-timed demand 
the king of Spain gave anfwer, “ That neither the Pa-. 
latinates nor the Electorate were in his power to difpofe: 
of ; but if a treaty was fet on foot, and the emperor 
and the duke of Bavaria would not.come to terms of 
conformity, he would join arms with England to reco- 
ver them, and was willing to give any fecurity for a dues 
performance.” 


_Tuese anfwers not fatisfying, Briftol was recalled;. 
and the infanta laid down the title of princefs of Eng-- 
land. Thus ended a treaty in which had been expended* } 
in embaffies, in the prince’s journey, and in prefents- ey 
given at the court of Madrid, as much money as was* "i 
the deftined portion of the infanta, which being in-pieces- dshfe 
of eight, amounted to the fum of fix hundred. nabs o> 
pounds. il 


On Briftol’s announcing his orders of revocation, he re-- 
ecived from Olivares, in the name of Philip, large prof-. 
fers of mediation in the court of England, and that his~ 
majefty, for the example of his own fubjects; and for 
encouragement to all fuch as fhould ferve their princes. 
with the like loyalty, had fent him a blank, on which 

he might fet down his own conditions in point of title or 


* This command was confirmed by the difpatches of four fevershi 
meffengers, who arrived at Madrid clofe at.cach other’s heels. > 


Fo ME soe 


- fortune. Briftol, not thinking it proper to accept thefe 
offers, illuftrated his refufal with an anfwer in which he 
magnified his own difintereftednefs, his fidelity to his 
matter, and his entire confidence in his juftice. 


oA: P.2). Ville 
Treaties with Spain 


Tafiuence of Buckingham.——Parliament. 
laid before the boufe.—m—Rupture with Spain. 
prorogued.——Marriage-treaty: with France. 
expedition. 
weve His character. -. 


‘0. the influence that Buckingham maintained over 
the weak mind of his prince have moft authors 
attributed the abrupt diffolution of the Spanifh treaty. 


But to the power, not the perfuafion, of the favourite, . 


may be more juftly afcribed this whimfical and unex- 
pected event. It was neither inclination nor conviction 


that prevailed-on James to difclaim the offered conclu-- 
fion of that which had been the object of his earneft: 


purfuit for a feries of fifteen years: His affections were 
over-ruled by the impetuous oppofition of Buckingham, 


229) 


Ann. 16286: 


Parliament 
Mansfeild’s 
Maffacre at Ambynd.m—Death of King ames. 


Influence of * 
Buckingham,’ 


whofe - prefent intereft with the prince, and the concur-- 


rence of the majority of the nation, detached from him: 


every other fupport than a precarious afliftance from 
Spain. In this difpofition of affairs, the timid monarch, 
with a painful compliance, fubmitted to meafures that 


overthrew his hopes in the very crifis of their accom- 


plifhment. Nor did the wanton infolence of his pam-- 


pered fervant ftop at this point: His private piques mutt 


be- 


‘ee. - . -HISTORY-OF:2NGLAND. 


Ann. 1623, be revenged on Spain, and his pacific mafter enter as a Ae) 
party in his quarrel; he who, through the courfe of a —- “ 
long reign, had with a fearful anxiety maintained an un- 
interrupted peace, muft found to arms, and declare war ; 
with a family to whofe courted friendfhip he had before tA 
facrificed every confideration. 


As not only the entire rupturé of the treaty, but a 
war with Spain had been agreed on between Charles and if 
Buckingham, Briftol had been recalled, and Henry Rich, - 3 
earl of Holland, fent into France with propofals of mar- Be 

 Yiage between the prince of Wales, and the princefs Hen- 

~ rietta, third daughter to Henry the Fourth. James, on the 

occafion of the deftined war, was obliged to have recourfe 

to the demand of a benevolence from the fubjec&t :. The 

meafures whereby it was extorted were moftinjurious. On 

the refufal of Barnes, a citizen of London, orders were fent 

. from the treafurer, that he muft immediately prepare to 
acct) carry by the poft a difpatch into Ireland. The citizen was re 
. obliged to compound the matter; and this example deterred mn 

every one afterwards from refufing the fum required *, 


BucKINGHAM’s impetuofity rofe to fuch a height, as, e 
firft, to propofe the felling the crown-lands for the ex- 3 
pence of the war, and then to confult with Dr. John 
Prefton, head of the Puritan party, on the feizing the dean 
and chapter lands for the ufe of the crown. He was dif= 
fuaded from thefe undertakings by Williams +, nor could 


* This is a glaring inftance of that grofs and pernicious abufe to 
which every degree of confidence in government is liable. 

++ The manner in which Buckingham was put off from this en 
is as follows: He acknowledged in a converfation with Wil 


fh ee ae eae 2 


he get James to countenance them. A felec council was 
appointed to examine into the prefent fituation of affairs 
with Spain, and into the conduct of that court. This 
council was very refractory to the impetuous inclinations 
of Buckingham, who, depending on his prefent popu- 
larity, and the fervor of the people towards a war with 
the houfe of Auftria, forced the King into the calling a 
parliament, that he might appeal from his oppofers to 
that powerful court.. 


Tue fituation of James at this time was pitiable: 
Since the return of the prince and duke he not only 
ceafed to rule, but was obliged to concur in meafures 
that he detefted: He was furrounded with people in 
whom he could put no confidence ; his domettics were 
all of them, either through intereft or fear, the creatures 
of Buckingham; moft of them owed their places to this 
favourite, and the prefent union that fubfifled becween 


that. for the fuccefs of his plan he depended on the difpofition of 
the popular leaders of the Commons’-houfe, and particularly on Sir 
Edward Coke. Williams managed the conteft in fuch a manner, 
that Buckingham owned lie had been entirely miftaken in the opinion 
he had formed of the principles of the leading commoners, and de- 
fifted. from. his project. Hacket,. who tells us this ftory, adds that 


Williams, the day preceding this conference, had waited two hours 
~ ja the duke’s anti-cliamber, whilft he was fhut up with Prefton, with- 


out having gained admittance. 


This ufage of Williams fhews that it was no uncommon behaviour 


in Buckingham to fubje&t the lord-keeper with the great feal of Eng- 


land to the mortification ‘of a fervile attendance, and gives fome au- 
thority to Weldon’s account of the treatment Bacon met with from 
the fame quarter. Bifbop Hacket’s Life of Williams, ott. ed. 1715, P--79s: 


& feq, 
ahs : him, 


‘hs x wre 


al 


238 


Ann, 1623, 


Hacket’s Life 
of Williams. 


Rapin.- 


232 


HISTORY. OF ENGLAND. 


-Ana.1623. ‘him and the prince, ftrengthened the refentment of for- 


mer obligations with the hopes of new ones. James’s - 
-diflrefs was heightened by a paper privately conveyed to 
him from the marquis Inniofa, the Spanifh ambaflador, 
dpecifying, “ That a confpiracy had been formed by the 
prince and duke to confine him (the King) to one of his 
country-houfes, and ufurp themfelves the government.” 
The duke’s late conduct was alleged as a leading circum- 


ftance to the treachery: According to an intimation in 


the letter, the ambaflador’s fecretary was admitted toa 
private difcourfe. Neither did the written or verbal intel- 
ligence occafion the defired alteration in James’s conduct: 
He was obferved to grow melancholy, and affected for 
fome time to fpeak to his fon and favourite in a myfte- 
rious broken language. At length, on a party with the 
prince to Windfor, he ordered Buckingham, on a trivial 


_ pretence, to remain behind. Buckingham, who looked. 


upon this as a token of uncommon difpleafure, befought 
the King to acquaint him with the caufe of this difgrace. 
The King, with tears in his eyes, returned anf{wer, “ That 
himfelf was the unhappieft man alive, to. be forfaken of 
thofe that were moft dear to him.” By the advice of 
Williams, Buckingham followed to Windfor, in which 
place he found means to work fo efficacioufly on his 
mafter’s weaknefles, as to effect a feeming, if nota real 
reconciliation *, 


* A letter which bears date after the period of this quarrel, either 
fhews that the reconciliation was real, or that James was a confum- 
mate matter in the low art of diffembling, 


In this letter James, after. having given Buckingham diretions 
concerning his wife, in expreffions fulfomely grofs and familiar, pe | . 


f°A M°E S°L 233 


-THere had fubfifted fome time before this a great Ans. 1625. 
coolnefs between Williams and Buckingham: The for- 
mer had conceived hopes of fupplanting his patron, and 
with this view had united himfelf to the Spanith faction; 
but finding, from the timidity and weaknefs of James's 
conduct, that the favourite would in the end be victo- 
rious, he heartily chimed in with his meafures, and not 
only informed him of every particular circumftance in 
the late combination carried on by the Spanifh ambaflador, 
but drew upa refutation of the whole charge alleged by 


that minifter againft him. 


Tue parliament met on the twelfth of February, Parliaments 


1623. The King’s {peech to this aflembly was an echo 
of the new-adopted fentiments of the favourite, and its 
contents a direct contradiction to his former do¢trines 
on the like and every other occafion. “ The properties King's 
and caufes of calling a parliament, fays he, are to con +i 
fer with the King and give him advice in matters of the 
; greateft weight and importance.” He then tells them, 
“ That the prefent purport of their meeting is to give Pa fi 
oy, him their counfel in the moft interefling matter that & &q- 
, ever could concern a king; that though he had been 
f upon a treaty with Spain for many years, the fituation 
of his affairs continued doubrful till he fent the prince 


| “¢ If thou be with me by four in the afternoon, it will be good time; 
and prepare thee to be a guard to me from keeping my heart un- 
broken with bufinefs, before my going to the progrefs. And thus 
God fend me a happy and a joyful meeting with my {weet Stenny this 
evening. Sweet-heart, when thou rifeft keep thee from importunities 
-of people that trouble thy mind, that at meeting I may fee thy white 
teeth fhine upon me.” MSS. in the Brit. Mufeum, n. 6987. 

Wer li -o-. ; Hh to 


234. HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1623. to Madrid, with the man he moft trufted—Buckingham ;- 
that on their return he found himfelf as far difappointed 
of his end, as if he had been waked out of a dream.” 
He is content that his fecretaries, on the information of 
his fon and Buckingham, fhall relate unto them all the 
circumftances of the Spanifh management, and what he 
is likely to obtain; and that when they have heard all, 
fuper totam materiam, he fhall intreat their good and found 
advice. “ One particular, fays he, I muft remember 
you of, becaufe it hath been much talked of in the =f 
country, that I fhould be flack in my care of religion : i) 
My lords and gentlemen all, I pray you judge me cha- ‘4 

« ritably, as you would be judged; for I never made pub- | 
lic or private treaty, but I always had a direct referva- 
.tion for the public weal and the caufe of religion, for 
the glory of God and the good of my fubjects; I only 
thought good fometimes to wink and connive at the 
execution of fome penal laws, and not to go on fo rigor- 

oufly as at other times, but not to difpenfe with any | 
or to forbid or alter any that concern religion, I never 
promifed or yielded; I never did think it with my heart, 
nor fpoke it with my mouth. My lords and gentlemen, 

adds he, it is not enough, although you are never fo wil- - a 

ling to give me your advice; for to plant will not ferve 

the turn, if I, like a good gardiner, as well as plant do 

not weed away from the roots, and remove the obftacles a 

that hinder your fo-good advice, of which the whole ‘ae 

weed and manifeft hindrance that can be is your jea- j 

loufy of me; free me from that, and for my actions:I . 

dare avow them before God and his angels; but jea- 

loufy hath a deep fting ; take away that, and nothing 

can do me harm: You are my wife, and jealoufy is 


» | fabjece 


—— — 


J+A M*E $4. 235 
fubject:to a wife, therefore remove it, and be not jealous Ana. 1623. - 
of me. For matiers of privilege, liberties, and cuftoms, 
be not over curious; I am your own kindly king, ye 
never fhall find me curious in thefe things: Therefore 

_do what you ought, and no more than your lawful li- 
berties and privileges will permit, and you {hall never 
fee me curious to the contrary ; I had rather maintain 
your liberties than alter them in any thing; fhew a truft 
in me, and go on honeftly as ye ought to do, like good 
and faithful fubjeéts; and what you have warrant for 
go on with, and I will not be curious, unlefs you give 
“me too much caufe. The next thing is, to beware that 
you take not in hand the maintaining of idle queftions 
among you, which fpoils good bufinefs: Remember, be- 
ware of genealogies and curious queftions, as St. Paul 
{peaks ; and do you keep to the ground and gravity of 
| the great bufinefs for which I called you; and next, for 
' all other things that are for the great and good govern- 
ing of this kingdom. Let not any ftir you up to law- 
queftions, debates, quirks, tricks, and jerks, but conti- 
nue yourfelves in that honeft modefty whereby you may 
have my prayers to God for you, and procure the love 
of me, and a happy end to this parliament. God judge 
me, I fpeak as a Chriftian prince; never man in a dry 
and fandy defart, where no water is, did thirft more in 
- hot weather for drink, than I do now for a happy con- 
clufion of this parliament. I now hope, after the mif- 
‘ carriage of the laft, that this may prove happy; I am 
neither curious nor captious enough to prevent it. 
Efchew all occafions of curious queftions, which may 
hinder you in this great caufe for which I have called 


your and — that fpending of time is fpoiling 
i Hh 2 of 


236 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1623. Of bufinefs. And I hope in God, and that by a faith 


Speaker 
chofen. 


in God, that by your actions this parliament I fhall 
clearly fee your hearts, and that you are the true repre- 
fentative body of my fubjects ; for you know in your 
confcience, that of all the kings that ever were, I dare 
fay, never was king better beloved by his fubjects than I 
am: Therefore, be you true glafles and mirrors of their 


faces ; and be fure you yield the true reflections and — 
reprefentations as you ought todo. And this doing, L 


hope you {hall not only find the blefling of God, but alfo 
by thefe actions procure the thanks and love of the whole 
people, for being fuch true and faithful glaffes. Laftly, 
you fhall never find me defire any thing of you but 
what fhall tend to the common good and weal of the 
kingdom.” 


Str Thomas Crew was chofen fpeaker to this parlia- 
ment: He was one of the members who diftinguifhed 
themfelves in the laft, and one of thofe, that, on its 
diffolution, was fenc over on a frivolous errand to Ire- 
land. His fpeech to the throne was decent and popular; 
he teftified a defire that all the good bills brought in laft 


parliament againft monopolies, informers, and conceal- | 


ers, might pafs in this; that the good laws for religion 
might be confirmed ; and that the Jefuits and feminary 
priefts, by the execution of thofe good laws, might, like 
a generation of locufls, with an Eaft wind, be blown 


- over the fea. He expatiated on the excellency of the com- 


mon law of England; on the advantages of the King’s 
wants being fupplied in a legal manner by parliament, 
rather than by other courfes; on the good effects of con- 


cord; and called the tranfactions of the laft affembly 
_parliament- 


se 


jim Mib§ 4.4 


237 


parliament-nullities. The lord-keeper Williams anfwered nn, 1623. 


this fpeech in a manner that fhewed it had been little 
relifhed by the King and miniftry: He vindicated the ma- 
nagement ufed to the Roman Catholics, and the late de- 
manded benevolence ; took occafion to extol Buckingham 
on the fubjec&t of the navy, but reprimanded the f{peaker 
“ for calling to remembrance the abortives of the late 


parliament.” 


Tie fubjeét on which the King had demanded parlia- Sr=xit 


treaty 
fore 


mentary advice was entered upon with great eagernefs by the hou. 


both houfes, and Buckingham was immediately called 
upon to lay before them the whole of his negotiation in 
Spain: This he did in a very artful manner. The gene- 
ralities of his account were pretty much the fame as have 
been given before in this hiftory. To thefe were added 
many circumftances favourable to his own conduct, and 
blackening to that of Briftol’s; others were exaggerated; 
others foftened, as they tended to thefe purpofes. Though 
thefe circumftances were afterwards ftrongly refuted by 
the accufed minifter, they. were at this time affirmed by 
the prince, who was called upon by Buckingham to vouch 


for their truth, 


Tue Spanifh ambafladors were fo fired at the re- 
proaches thrown upon his Catholic majefty in the courfe 
of the narration, that they publicly complained of the af- 
front, with an aflertion, that if a fubject of their mafter 
had fpoken in the like difrefpeétful terms of the King 
of England, he would not have efcaped with impunity. 
This appeal was looked upon by both houfes as an info- 


lent attack on their privileges, and an addrefs was im- 
mediately 


238 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


‘Ann. 1623. Mediately fent up to the King, declaring the duke free 
Mie) from the afperfions thrown upon him by the ambafla- 
dors ; that he had delivered nothing in his narration but 
what he was led unto by the matter itfelf, wherein he 
was fo far from tranfgrefiing, that he deferved thanks 
and honour. 


_ THE prefent- popular conduct of the favourite, and the 

colourings he had thrown upon his negotiations at the 

court of Madrid, gained him fo much real or feeming 

good will of the patriot members, that he was ftyled in 

the houfe of Commons the Saviour of the nation. An ads 

drefs was fent up to the throne from both houfes, figni- 

fying, “ That the treaties could not be longer continued, 
either with the honour of his majefty, the fafety of his . 

people, the welfare of his children, or the fecurity of his 

antient allies and confederates.” James gave the par- . 

liament to underftand, “ That if they obliged him to ea 

enter into a war, the whole burthen of it muft fall i 

upon the people, his own eftate being not fufficient to 

defray the ordinary expences of government.” This re- 

prefentation was anfwered by a declaration of the Lords 

and Commons, in which the King was affured, “ That ~ 

on the diffolution of the treaties they would be ready 

to aflift him in a parliamentary manner, both with their 

perfons and abilities.” James now thought of making 

his advantage of the prefent cordiality that fubfifted be- 

tween him and his fubjecéts, and at once demanded the 

enormous fum of five fubfidies and ten fifteenths for the 

war, and one fubfidy and two fifteenths yearly till he had 

cleared himfelf of his debts; or if they would make it = 

fix fubfidies and twelve fifteenths for the war, he would 


jim Mins «4. 


239 


drop the laft demand. | To this was affixed a condition Ann. 1623. 


that the money granted for the war fhould be put into the 


hands of ‘commiffioners appointed by parliament *. 


* The infincerity of the King’s intention towards the parliament in 
this bufinefs, in which he promifed to be guided wholly by their ad- 
vice, may be feen in a letter Buckingham wrote to him on the occa- 
fion of his fluctuating condué. , 


*¢ Dear dad and goffip, 

“ Having more bufinefs than it was fit to {peak to you within @ 
letter, I was once refolved to have waited on you myfelf; but pre- 
fently came to me the news of the Spanifh ambaffador’s going to you, 
which hath diverted my refolution at this time ; becaufe I will not 
encreafe that in you which I have always found too much, and that I 


"will not let the ambaffadors think you are diftrufted, though this 


gives enough and too much to your people. I have, to eafe your 
labour, writ fome things to Aran, by whom I likewife expect an an-- 
fwer; only I will trouble yourfelf with this, that I befeech you to 


‘fend me your plain and refolute anfwer, whether if your people refolve 


to give you a royal affiftance, to the fum of fix fubfidies and ** * * 
fifteenths, with a promife in cafe of neceffity to affift you afterwards: 
with their lives and fortunes, whether then you will not accept it, and 
their counfel to break the match, with the other treaties; and whe- 
ther or no, to bring them to this, I may not affure fome of them 
underhand (becaufe it is feared when your turns are ferved you will 
not call them together again, to reform abufes and grievances, and. 
the making of laws for the good government of the country) that 
you will be fo far from that, that you will rather win them, defiring 
nothing more than their love and happinefs, wherein your own is in- 


cluded. Sir, I befeech. you think ferioufly of this, and refolve once 


conftantly to run one way; for as long as you waver between the 
Spaniard and your own fubjeéts, to make your advantages of both, 
you are fure to do it with neither. I fhould for my own contentment, 
though I am fure I do you fome fervice here, and would be able, if 
you would do openly and heartily with me, do you more, and wait on 
you oftener; but that you go in two ways, and myfelf in one, it oc- 
cafions fo many difputes, that till you be once refolved, I think it of 


more comfort and eafe to you,. and fafer for me, that I bide away; for 
ra to: 


240 


Ann. 1623." 


HISTORY QF ENGLAND. 


Tue Commons were not fo intoxicated with their 
zeal for a rupture with Spain, or fo taken with the 
plaufible terms of the fupply, as to abate of their care- 
fulnefs in parting with the money of the fubjeét. They 
entered into a long debate on the demand: Sir Edward 
Coke, in a fpeech upon the occafion, produced a calcu- 
lation of the whole which fuch a grant would amount 
to; he eftimated it at 900,000], a larger fum, he faid, 
than all England could raife with any conveniency. The 
refolution of the debate was an offer of three fubfidies 
and three fifteenths, as the firft fruits of their good 
will *, with a promife of a farther afliftance, if, in the 


courfe of the war, it fhould become neceflary. James’s — 


affairs were at prefent too much embarrafled to make a 
retreat. He accepted of the three fubfidies and the 
three fifteenths, on the fame terms he had offered for 


Rupture with ix ; and a meflenger was difpatched to Madrid with his 


Spain. 


a 


refolution to break off farther correfpondence with that 
court +. 


Ture Commons, who had by this time intimations of 
the new treaty of marriage that was carrying on at 


to be of your opinion would be flattery, and not to fpeak humbly my 
own would be treachery: Therefore I will at this time, with all the 
induftry of my mind, ferve you here, and pray for the good fuccefs of 
that, and the lengthening your days, with all the affections of his foul 
that will live and die in love with you, 
Your majefty’s moft humble flave and dog, » 
Guthrie, p. £04. _ Stenny.” 
* Four entire fubfidies were granted by the clergy. . 
+ When this was publicly known, the city of London teftified chine 


approbation by bonfires, ringing of bells, and other Seago of 


wy: Rufhworth. IHS ide site 


- 
( 
t 
; 


pra Mab 82 & 
Paris, drew up a fevere petition againft the Papifts, and 
voted that a return fhould be made to their houfe of all 
the names of Popifh recufants throughout England, who 


were in offices of - profit, truft, or power *. Buckingham, 
who feared that if James was made defperate he might 


break through his trammels and diffolve the parliament, 


prevailed on the popular leaders in both houfes to mode- 


rate it before it was fent up to the throne {. 


S * On the report of this petition, James difpatched the following 
letter to fecretary Conway : : 


24r 


Ann. 1624. . 
Petition 
againft Popith 
recufants, 


«© I doubt not but you have heard what a ftinging petition againft the , 


Papifts the lower houfe hath fent to the higher houfe this day, that they 
may jointly prefent it to me. You know my firm refolution not to 
make this a war of religion; and feeing I would be loth to be coney- 
catched by my peopie, I pray you ftay the poft that is going into Spain, 
till I meet with my fon, who will be here tomorrow-morning, Do it 
upon pretext of fome more letters you are to fend by him. And if he 
fhould be gone, haften after him to ftay him, upon fome fuch pretext; 
and let none living know of this as ye love me; and before two in the 
afternoon tomorrow you fhall, without fail, hear from me. Farewell. . 


« April 3, 1624.” Rufoworth, vol. I. p. 140, & eg. 


+ To bring the Commons to this moderation, the prince affected 
an entire fimilarity of fentiment; and prefeffed, under the bond of an 
oath, “* That whenfoever it fhould pleafe God to beftow upon him 
any lady that was Popifh, fhe fhould have no farther liberty but for 
her own family, and no advantage to the recufants at home.” The 
following is the petition which was prefented to the King : 


«* May it pleafe your moft excellent majefty ; 

“ It having pleafed your majefty, upon our humble fuit and davice, 
to diffolve both the treaties, to our great joy and comfort, we, your 
majefty’s moft faithful and loyal fubjeéts, the Lords and Commons af- 
fembled in parliament, do in all humblenefs sia to your facred ma- 
jefty thefe two petitions following. 

*« Firft, that, for the more fafety of your realms, and better keep- 
ing of your fubjects in their due obedience, and other important rea- 


Vou. | ; Ti , fons 


“p42 si‘ HISTORY OF 79ENGLAND. 


“Ann.1624, | THESE are the King’s. proteftations in his anfwer to’ 
. this nena: “For my part, I reves before God that: 


fons of fate, your majefty will be pleafed, by fome Sach courfe as 5006, 
majefty fhall think fit, to give prefent order, that all the laws be put 
in due execution that have been made and do ftand in force againft Je- 
fuits and feminary priefts, and all others that have taken orders by au- a 
thority derived from the fee of Rome, and generally againft all Popith 
recufants; and as for difarming them, that it may be according to the. 
laws, and according to former acts and direétions of ftate in the like 
cafe; and yet that ‘it may appear to all the world the favour and cle- 
mency your majefty ufeth towards’ all your fubjeéts, of what condition 
foever; and to the intent the Jefuits and priefts now in the realm may” 
not pretend to be furprized that:a. fpeedy and certain day may be pre- 
fixed by your majelty’s proclamation, before which day they thall depart 
out of your realm, and all other your highnefs’s dominions; and neither 
they, nor any other, to return or come hither again, upon the fevereft 
penalties of the laws now in force againft them; and that all your ma- 
jefty’s fubjeéts may be thereby alfo admonifhed not to receive, entertain, 
comfort, or conceal, any of them, upon the penalties and forfeitures 
which by the laws may be impofed upon them. 

“ Secondly, feeing we are thus happily delivered from that danger 
which thefe treaties now diffolved, and that ufe which your ill-affected 3 
fubjeéts made thereof, would certainly have drawn upon us, and yet v 
cannot but forefee and fear left the like may hereafter happen, which | 
will inevitably bring fuch perils into your majefty’s kingdoms, we are ‘ia 
moft humble fuitors to your gracious majefty, to fecure the hearts’ of 
your good fubjects by the engagement of your royal word unto them, ‘ 
that, upon no occafion of marriage or treaty, or other requifite in ja 
that behalf, from any foreign prince or ftate whatfoever, you will is 
take away or flacken the execution of your Jaws againft Jefuits, ig 
and Popith recufants, 
_ * To which our humble petitions, proceeding froin. our moft loyal 
and dutiful affeétions towards your majefty, our care of our country’s 
good, and our own confident perfuafion. that thefe will much advance 
the glory of Almighty God, the everlafting honour of your majefty, the 
fafety of your kingdoms, and the encouragement of all your good fub- 
jects, we do moft humbly befeech your majefty to vouchfafe a graciqus 
anfwer.” ” Parl. Hift, vol. V1. p. 128, & eq. 


fo AIM &. Bs oh DAZ 


my heart hath bled when I have heard of the incfeafe Ann. Bagh 3 
of Popery; God is my judge that it hath been fuch a 
great grief to me, that it hath been as thorns in my 
eyes and pricks in my fides ; and, my lords and gen- 
tlemen, you fhall be my confeflors, that if I knew one 
way better than another to hinder the growth of Popery, 
- I would take it:° For knowing what I do, and being per- 
fuaded what I am, I could not be an honeft man, and 
do otherwife.” To this James added, “ That he would 
not only grant the fubftance of what was defired in the 
petition, but add fomething more of his own; that he 
would take order for the fhameful diforder of the refort- 
ing of his fubjects to all foreign ambafladors, and con- 
fider of a method to reform the education of children 


born of Popifh parents.” 


Every circumftance of the peoples’ grievances, either 
in point of foreign trade or domeftic impofitions, were 
at this time, with unreftrained liberty, canvaffed in the 
lower houfe. A private pique entertained by the princé 
and the favourite againft Lionel Cranfield, earl of Mid- 
dlefex, the prefent lord-treafurer, induced them to en- 
courage inquiries, to which he was the deftined victim. 
In a conference between the two houfes, Sir Edward Earl of Mid- 
Coke laid open a charge againft him for bribery and va- liga 
rious mifdemeanors in the execution of his offices. At 
this conference he claimed for the Commons the right of 
being the inquifitors-general of the grievances of the 
kingdom, and fhewed that they. were fo appointed by the 
wifdom of the ftate for three feveral caufes : 


I. Be- 


Tli2 


244 


Ann, 1624. 
xt 


_ (Bie fentence. 


HISTORY OF. ENGLAND. 
ih Becaufe they have beft notice from all parts thereof: 


TL Becaufe it is not the SORE bas the weakeft 


Commons, that go to the wall: 


Ill. As in a natural body not the difeafe, but the neg- 
le&t of cure, killeth, fo the long delay of grievances ; 


and this would happen if they were not found out by 


the Commons. 


By rasa tetidus tial the accufed was found guilty 


of malverfation in the feveral offices of, mafter of the — 


wardrobe, mafter of the court of Wards, and treafurer. 
The following fentence was paficd: againft him by the 
Lords: 


I 


TuaT he fhould be deprived of all the offices ee | 
he held in the kingdom : 


Tuat he fhould be incapacitated from holding any 
office, place, or AP in the ftate or common- 
wealth: 


TuaT he fhould be imprifoned in the Tower of —_ 
don during the King’s pleafure: 


TuaT he fhould never fit more in parliament; and, 


Tuat he fhould never.come within the verge of the , 


court *, 


* On the firft complaint that was made againft the earl of Middle- 


fex in the lower houfe, he offered to juttify himfelf by his counfel: 


This created a jealoufy in the Lords, that it might trench deep into 


their privileges, for a member of their houfe to anfwer an accufation 


{o> @ iM? & 8s ct: 245 
‘Tuts ftate-officer had been brought up to trade; he Ans. tbat 
had received moft of his education in the cuftom-houfe, 
and was from thence introduced to Somerfet as a man an 
of a projecting head, and who, from an acquired know- . A Red 
ledge in the cuftoms, might be ferviceable towards the 
forming and executing of plans to encreafe the King’s 
revenue. He made himfelf fo ufeful to Buckingham, 
that he was by that favourite promoted to the higheft 
: offices, at length married to one of his kinfwomen, and 
. obtained the titles of baron Cranfield and earl of Mid- 
dlefex; he had rendered himfelf very agreeable to James 
by a feeming affiduity in his fervice; and this circum- | 
ftance, with the affluence of his fortune, made him 
throw off that humble carriage to his patron which was 
exacted from ail his creatures. Hence arofe the animo- 
fity which produced his difgrace. The profecution was 
an invidious one, and the charge brought againft hira 
not very material: But the Commons were actuated with 
_ a laudable zeal of rendering exemplary, and facrificing 
to juftice, thofe harpies in office who prey upon the vitals 


of the commonwealth. 


Ir was not without grounds that Cranfield flattered 
himfelf with a powerful protection from his matter : 
James had the inclination, but not the ability, to ferve 
him; he not only lamented his fate, but endeavoured 

_ to form a party in his favour, and gave directions to 


in the houfe of Commons. On the lord-treafurer’s requeft they waved 


this formality ; but an, order was made, “ That hereafter no member 
of the Lords’-houfe Should, without licence, anfwer any complaint in 
the houfe of Commons, either in perfon or OF his counfel.” Parl. Hift- 


vol. VI. P- 133+ dence 
ms 


2460 HISTORY OF ENGLAND,. 


Ann. 1624. “Williams to make intereft among the members to this 
purpofe. Thefe efforts were fruitlefs*; as fruitlefs were 
his expoftulations to his fon and to his’ infolent minion 
on the madnefs of their prefent conduct: He ‘told the 
‘one, “ That he was making a rod to fcourge himfelf,” 
and the other, “ That he would ees his" adnan - 
parliamentary mre 

‘A CHARGE was now fent up by the Commons againft 
Samuel Harfnet, bifhop of Norwich; it contained fun- 
_ dry articles of divers extortions and: fuperftitious ‘cere- 
monies practifed by himfelf, and exacted from others, in 
the government of his diocefe. ‘The Lords excufed 
themfelves from entering ‘on this affair, and referred the 
examination of it to the High-commiffion court, with a 
promife to give judgment after they had heard their re- % 
port. Harfnet had preached a fermon at Whitehall that — &! 
gave great offence to the Commons, from the fcripture- Bitch) 
text, “ Give unto Czfar the things that be Cefar’s.”' He ? 
infifted that goods and money were Cefar’s (the King’s) ail 
and therefore could not righteoufly be denied him. Bh), 
James appeafed the anger of, the Commons by telling “Ai 
both houfes, “ That the bifhop failed in not adding, oe 
that goods were Cxfar’s according to the laws and cuf- ; 
toms sof the land +. 


* The tegard to juftice influenced fome againft him, and the awe pe 
& of the prince and duke, others; fo that Williams could obtain but one : in 
vote in his fayour. te aaa 


+ This certain path to shea the bithop’ Pisinectil age te 
conducted him at length to the poffeffion of the fee of York. — fe a 


Jos MOR 8. Mt gf: Rete BAB 


Tate Commons,.on hearing. that the King intended to Ann. sSaaeh 
Rite an end to the feflion in three-or four days, fent a 
meflage to the Lords to:the following effect: “ That the 
difficulties attending the fubfidy-bill had prevented their 
finifhing many matters of weight then depending, for 
which reafon. they entreated their lordfhips to join in a 

petition: to. his majefty for a longer term.” The prince 

_ of Wales; who was prefent when the meflage was deli- 

a vered, undertook. to move the King to grant the requeft. “ 
By the means of this interceflion, James was prevailed : 
on to prolong.the feflion: from Saturday. the twenty-fe- 
cond inftant.to Saturday the twenty-ninth, on condition 
that neither: of the houfes would entertain any new mat- ; 
ter. Ar lift of all the Popith recufants in offices of profit, 

_truft, or power, with a petition-aflixed to it, was fent up 
from. the Commons to the Lords, with an invitation to 
join with them in a-reprefentation on that fubject to the 
King *. The Lords excufed themfelves from the ungra-+ 
cious tafk by alleging, it was a kind of judgment. and 


* In this lift were fixty known or fufpected Papifts, and twenty, 
nine whofe wives, children, and fervants, were Papifts. The petition 
affixed to it ends thus: “ Now, in confideration of the great counte- 
nance hereby given’ to Popery, the great grief and offence to all your 
beit-affected; true, and loving fubjects, the apparent danger of the 
whole kingdom, by putting the power of arms into fuch hands as, 
*- by former aéts of your majefty’s council, are adjudged perfons juftly 
meet to be fufpeéted, and ‘themielves fit to be difarmed: Your faid loyat 
a and faithful fubjeéts do moft humbly befeech your majefty gracioufly 

i _ tovouchfafe that the faid lords and gentlemen above-named, for thefe 
important reafons, and for the greater fafety of your majefty, and of 
your realm and dominion, may be removed from all your majefty’s 
commiffions of great charge and truft, commifiions of lieutenancy, oyer © 
and terminer, and of the peace, and ffom all offices and other places 


of truft.” Parl. Hift, vol. VI. p. 322, & feq. 
Sint Ys condemnation : 


248 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ano. 1624. Condemnation of the party before the hearing the de- 


fence ; which, they added, would affect their reputation 
as a court of judicature, Before the end of the feflion 
the Lords came to thefe laudable refolutions concerning 
the extent of their privileges in the freedom of their fer- 
vants and followers from arreft; viz. “ That this free- 
dom fhould continue but twenty days before and after 
every feflion ; that all the Lords for the future be very 
careful in this point, and remember the ground of this 
privilege, which was only in regard that they fhould not 


be diftracted by the trouble of their fervants from at- 


tending the ferious affairs of the nation; that therefore 
they will not pervert that privilege to the public injuftice 
of the kingdom, which was given them chiefly that the 
whole realm might, in this high court, draw the clear 
light of juftice from them, in which cafe every one 
ought rather to keep far within than any way exceed 
their due limits; that hereafter before any perfon be fent 
for in this kind, the lord whom he ferves fhall, either _ 
by himfelf or by meflage, certify the houfe, upon his ho- ~ 
nour, that the perfon arrefted is within the limits of the 
privileges before expreffed: And for the particulars, they 
muft be left to the judgment of the houfe, as the cafe 
fhall come in queftion; wherein the houfe wants no 
means, as well by oath as without, to find out the true 
nature of the fervant’s quality in his lord’s fervice; there- 
upon if it be adjudged by the houfe contrary to the true 
intent, any member whatfoever muft not think it ftrange 
if, in fuch a cafe, both himfelf fuffer reproof, as the 
houfe fhall think fit, and his fervant receive no benefit 
from the privilege, but pay the fees; becaufe the juftice 
of the kingdom muft be preferred before any Pe is 


. 
— 
; 2 , 
Py wre y 
: 


r¢ 7- Ap ac to reprefs drunkennefs, and-to reftrain the haunting of 
_ inns, &c. thas : 


eae MOR} Sy ok | a5 


refpect, and none to be fpared that hall offend after fo Ann. 1624. © 
fair a warning.” 


- Tue Lords feemed now to refent the fevere precedent 

againft the members of their houfe, in the cafe of the late 

treafurer. After having heard the report of their commit- 
tee concerning judicature, they ordained, “ That in all = wee 
cafes of moment the defendant ihould have copies of all 

depofitions, both pro & contra, after the publication, a conve- 

nient time before hearing, to prepare themfelves ; and that 

on demand they fhould have learned counfel to affift them 

in their defence *. Likewife that it fhould be confidered 

on the next meeting at what time and for what caufes a 

member of that houfe fhould be brought to the bar.” 


On the twenty-ninth of May the parliament was pro- Soamaes 
rogued to the fecond of November next enfuing. The *”*" 
Commons had prepared all the depending bills for the 
royal affent +, and for this one time they parted with the 
King in feeming good humour. 


* Thefe indulgencies had been denied in the cafe of the earl of 
Middlefex. 

" + Aédts paffed this feffion. 

1. An att for making perpetual an aét made anno 39 Eliz. entitled, 
“« An att for the erecting of hofpitals and work-houfes for the poor.” 

2. An att for the quiet of the fubje&t againft concealments. 

3. An act concerning monopolies, and difpenfations with: penal laws. 
~ 4. An a& for the eafe of the fubjeé& concerning informations upon 
penal ftatutes, 
~ 5. An act that fheriffs, their heirs, &c. having a quietus eft, fhall be 
difcharged of their accounts, with the judges’ opinion therein. _ 

6. An act-concerning women convict of fall felonies. 


Vong eee 9: 8. An 
4 3 


250 


Ann. 1624. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


James’s condefcenfion in permitting the parliament to - 


be their own treafurers turned out to be a piece of grofs 


8.- An aét to punith abufes in procuring /uperfedeas of peace out of 
the courts of Weftminfter, and to.prevent the abufes in procuring. 
writs of certiorari out of the faid courts. 


g. An aét for the free trade of Welth cloths, &e. in England and. 


‘Wales. 

ro. An act to rerio a branch of the ftatute an. 34 Hen. VIII. en- 
titled, “* An act for certain ordinances in the King’s dausinions and 
principality of Wales,” 

at. An act for confirmation of a judgment given for his are in 
a fcire facias againft Henry Heron, and for “ehyerseslt of the baie a 
patent therein mentioned to be void. . 

12. An act to make perpetual the act for eafe in ping againt trou- 
blefome fuits profecuted againft juftices of the peace, mayors, &c. 

13. An att for the farther reformation of jeofails: 


14. An act to admit the fubjec&t to plead. the general information of | 


intrufion brought in the King’s behalf, and to retain his poffeffion till 
trial. 

15. An act to enable judges ‘to give reftitution of F poffefion i in cer- 
tain cafes. . 

16. An att for limitation of a€tions, and for avoiding of fuits in law. 

17. An att againft ufury. 

18. An act for the continuance of a former ftatute made 4 Jac. en- 
titled, «* An act for the true making of woollen cloth.” 

19. An act for the farther defcription of a bankrupt, and relief of 
creditors againft fuch as fhall become bankrupts, and for inflidting a 
corporal punifhment upon them in fuch a cafe. 

20. An act to prevent curfing and fwearing. 

21, An act concerning hoftlers and innholders. 

22. An aét for explnintce a ftatute en. 3, 4, 5 Ed, VI. eee the 
traders of butter and cheefe. 


23. An aét to avoid delays by removing of actions out of. wifes ; 


courts. 


lands and duchy lands. 


24. An aét for relief of ERLE 95 F Gow . 
25. An act for relief of patentees, tenants, so ferme fom 


See 


JAMES | 


asf 


king-craft: On accepting the fubfidies he made the fol- Ann. 1624. 


lowing declaration: “ I defire you to underftand, faid 
he, that I muft have a faithful fecret council of war, 
that muft not be ordered by a multitude, for fo my de- 
figns may be difcovered before-hand. One penny of 
this money fhall not be beftowed but in fight of your 
committees: But whether I fhall fend two thoufand or 
ten thoufand, whether by fea or by land, Eaft or Weft, 
by diverfion or otherwife, by invafion upon the Bava- 
rian or the emperor, you mutt leave that to your King.” 
Thus, though the parliament had appointed their re- 
ceivers, and their council of war, yet, as thefe commif- 
fioners were to anfwer all money-draughts made upon 
them by the crown, the power was nothing more than 
nominal, and a device of Buckingham’s to cajole the 
Commons into a liberal grant. 


26. An act againit fuch as fhall levy any fine, fuffer any recovery, 
knowlege, any ftatute, recognizance, bail, or judgment, in the name 
of any perfon not privy thereunto. 

27. An act to prevent the murdering of any baftard children. 

28, An act to continue divers ftatutes and repeal others. 

29. An att to enable Prince Charles to make leafes of lands parcel 
of the duchy of Cornwall, or annexed to the fame. 

30. An act to affure York-houfe and other lands to the King, and to 
affure the manors of Brighton Santon and other lands to the archbifhop 
of York. 

31. An act for the good government of the makers of knives in 
Hallamfhire, in the county of York. 

32. An att to make the Thames navigable from the Bercat to Oxon. 

33. An att for the fubfidies of the clergy. 

34. An att for three fubfidies, three fifteenths, and tenths, granted 


by the temporality, with the judges’ opinion. 


35- An act for the King’s general pardon. 
Ramee acts + 38, Vide Statutes at Large. Vide Rufbworth. 


Kk 2 ; THE. 


252 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1624, THE jealoufy which the Lords conceived left the lower 

- houfe fhould get an increafe of privileges by this joint 

power, and the want of precedent for the drawing up 

fuch a bill, made it a work of time and difficulty: Not- 

‘ withftanding the judges had given it as their opinion 

that there was nothing in this act which could impeach 

or blemifh the privileges of the higher houfe, or add to 

thofe of the lower, fave in the cafe in queftion, the 

Lords entered a proteftation, that no word, matter, or 

thing, in this aét; fhould be conftrued hereafter to make an 

any alteration in the jurifdiction, power, privilege, or au- 

thority, of. either houfe. So active was this ariftocratical 
_affembly, in all thefe points of partial privilege. 


4 
ie, 
* 


4 


" 
Se 


Marriage- THE propofal of a marriage between the: prince of 


treaty with : . - 
France, Wales and the princefs Henrietta, had been received by 


the French court with evident marks of extreme fatisfac- 

tion. Their natural jealoufy of the houfe of Auftria was 

at this time much augmented by fome late attempts of 

the Spaniard upon the boundaries of France *, and the 

additional ftrength which this formidable neighbour was 

on the point of attaining, by an union with a naval Ae 
hem the moft alarmi henfio Be- d 

power, gave them the m ming apprehenfions, Be 

fides thefe confiderations, which engaged the French mo- 

narch to wifh the diffolution of the late treaty between 

the crowns of Spain and England, an alliance with the 

latter was much to be coveted by himfelf: His Proteftant ie 

fubjeéts could never be totally extirpated, if properly fup- i 

ported by their brethren in England, and the offered 

union —_ the Stewart family would probably ree 


bl ' This was the Valen, wich country Spain had feized. 


COR Me. Bae ; 25/3. 


them of fuch an affiftance. This being the opinion and Ann. 1624. _ 
difpofition of the French miniftry, it is no wonder that. 

James’s ambaflador met with the moft cordial reception : 

Amongft many high compliments, Lewis told him, “ That 

he had rather have the prince of England for his brother- 

in-law than any man in the world; that in the terms of 

this defired union he fhould not be directed by the pope, 

but agree to fuch as did confift with reafon.” 


- Spain at this time had not given up all thoughts of 
By) renewing the interrupted treaty. A juncture thus fa- 
| i vourable might have enabled James, with any degree of 
conduct, to have concluded the alliance on fafe and ho- 
nourable terms; but his vehemence was fo apparent that 
the French court altered their tone, and told his ambaffa- 
dor, the earl of Holland, to whom the earl of Carlifle 
‘was at this time joined in commiffion, “ That the fame 
: favourable articles for the Roman Catholics were expected. 
| as had been before yielded to Spain. No interruption of 
the negotiation followed thefe new and high demands *. 


* André du Chefne, a French author, writes in the following man- 
ner on this treaty : 
. “ La recherche & propofition que les ambafladeurs Anglois firent 
de Valliance du prince fils unique du roi leur maitre avec madame fille 
de France, fut fi agreablement receve du roi tres Chreftien, & de fes 
principaux confeilleurs, qu’ils nommerent avffi toft des commifiaires 
f pour travailler avec eux au traité du mariage, mais on eut fujet de 
i oo -douter s'il fe pourrait contracter fans les conditions defirées par le roi 
Bait de la Grande Bretagne & fes fujets tant Proteftant que Puritains. Car 
de penfer obtenir les mefmes advantages pour les Catholiques d’Angle- 
terre, que le roi d’Efpagne avoit demandez, puis-que ces Proteftant & 
Puritains les jugeoint repugnants au repos de leur eftat, & que leur roi 
mefme leur avoit perfuacé qu’il n’avoit rompu avec l’Efpagne qu’en 
okra} cette 


254 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1624« They. were immediately complied with se the —— 


dors, with thefe only exceptions : 


’ TuaT a toleration fhould not be granted in the pub- 


lic articles, nor a church in London allowed to the Ro- © 


man Catholics. To balance this, the children were to be 
brought up under the care and infpection of the princefs 
Henrietta till the age of thirteen; and three private arti- 
cles were agreed to: 


cette confideration, il y avoit bien peu d’apparence. Neant-moins. le 
marquis d’Effiat ayant efté choify pour negocier une fi importante & 
difficile affaire, en qualité d’ambafladeur extraordinaire, ilen fift reuffir 
le fuccez a Yhonneur du roi, & de toute la France. Car en premier 


lieu il obtint que pour la feurté des Catholiques Anglois, le roi d’An- 


gleterre, & le prince de Galles, fon fils, bailleroient des aétes folemnels, 
& feroient ferment fur les faints evangiles. Secondement, au lieu que 
les Efpagnols s’etoient contentez d’une vingt-aine de fimple prétres pour 
Ja princeffe & toute fa cour, on lui accorda qu’elle auroit vingt-fix ec- 
clefiaftiques de tels ordres qu’il lui piairoit les choifir avec liberté de 
porter Phabit de leur ordre en public. I] obtint de plus que les enfans 
qui naitroint du mariage feroient nouris & ellevez a la Catholiques au- 
pres de la princeffe jufqua l’age de treize-ans, bien que les Efpagnols fe 
fuffent relachez a dix. Et n’eut eté que le marquis de la Vieuville, qui 
pour lors avoit la principale authorité aupres du roi tres Chretien, pafla 
des le commencement trop de cholgs dans les conditions du traité, on 

eut encore beaucoup mieux pris fes avantages pour le bien de la relis 
gion. Car il n’euft pas eté poflible d’obtenir ce que deffus, s’il fut de- 
meuré dans la meme authorité. Mais le changement qui arriva en 
donna le moyen. Le cardinel de Richelieu prenant le’ foin des affaires 
par le commandement du roi, il authorifa fi bien les chofes & negocia 
avec les ambaffadeurs Anglois avec tant de prudence & de dexterité 
quwils furent contraints de ceder a ce puiffant efprit. Ce qui donna 


plus de moyen au marquis d’Effiat de faire agreer en Angleterre ce. 
"qui: avoit eté facilité en sche Du Chefines fol. edit. Paris, 1641, 


p. 1180, & eq. 


= 


JAMES. & 


255 


Tua the Catholics, both ecclefiaftic and temporal, im- Ann. 1624. 


prifoned fince the laft proclamation which followed the 
breach with Spain, fhould be all fet at liberty : 


TuaT the Englith Catholics fhould be no more fearched 
after, nor molefted for their religion : 


THaT the goods of the Catholics, as well ecclefiaftic as 
temporal, that were feized on fince the afore-mentioned 
proclamation, fhould be reftored to them. 


As haughty and infolent were the demands of France 
in regard to the temporal articles of jointure and for- 
tune *, and equally abject were the conceflions of James. 


_* Henrietta’s jointure was to be fixty thoufand crowns a-year. If 
fhe was left a widow without children, her whole portion, which was 
eight hundred thoufand crowns, was to be returned to her, to be dif- 
pofed of as fhe pleafed, fhe ftill enjoying her dower; in cafe of chil- 
dren, two thirds were to be reftored, the other third to remain to the 
children ; the two thirds reftored to the mother to revert to them in 


- cafe fhe died unmarried, or without children by a fecond marriage ; in 


the cafe of children by a fecond marriage, thefe children of the fecond 
bed to divide the two thirds with thofe of the firft; in the cafe of her 
dying before the prince, without iflue, half of the portion was to be 
paid back to the king of France; that the King of Great Britain fhould 
prefent her on her marriage fifty thoufand crowns’ worth of jewels, 
which jewels were to be her own property ; her jointure to be affigned 


her in lands, caftles, and houfes, one whereof to be made fit for her to. 


refide in, and furnifhed. fuitably to a princefs of her quality ; that the 
fhould have the free difpofal of the offices and benefices of the faid 
Jands, part of which lands were to have the title of duchy or earldom ; 
that fhe fhould have liberty, whether fhe had children or not, to return 
to France with her houfhold goods, jewels, diamonds, and portion, a8 
fpecified in the articles above; and in this cafe the King of England to: 
conduct her to Calais at his charge. Somers’s Third Collection of Tratis, 
1751, vol. 1. p. 262, & /eq. 


THE 


256. 


Ann. 16244. 

Rapin, oét.ed. 
1729, vol. LX. 
p- 588, & feq. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


. Tue whole negotiation on the fide of Lewis was con- 
ducted by the artful minifter Richlieu, who was at this 


time introduced into the French councils through the 
intereft of the queen-mother. By his advice the arch- 
bifhop of Ambrun was fent as a fecret agent to inter- 
ceed for the Catholics, but in effect to found James’s ‘in- 
clination towards the Popifh faith. This prelate gained 


from certain Papifts, who were upon a footing of fami- 


liarity with James, fuch ufeful intelligence that he foon 
found means to attain the higheft degree of favour and 
confidence: Conferences grew frequent between them. 
One of thefe having turned upon a full toleration to 
the Catholics in England, and on the defire which James 
had of living in a ftrict union with the king of France, 
the archbifhop acquitted himfelf fo well, that the King, 
giving him a fqueeze by the hand, told him, “ That 
he perceived he was the man fent to him from God, to 


whom he might open freely his mind.” After this, he 


went upon the chimerical project he had long planned 


‘for uniting all Chriftians in one form of worfhip*; and 


on an intention he had of calling an aflembly of divines, 
both foreign and Englifh, to be held at Boulogn or 
Dover, for the purpofe of fettling proper means to carry 
his project into excution. With this he put into the 
archbifhop’s hands a memorial on the fubject, that being 
thus provided, he might begin the negotiation with the 
pope and the king of France, whilft himfelf undertook 
to deal with the king of Denmark and the arene 
princes of Germany. 


~ * Cornwallis gives us the account of a long converfation he had wi 


the duke of Lerma on this fubject of a general uniformity in the oe ES 


of Chriftian worlhip. Winwood’s Memcrials, vol. I. p. 461, & i 


JAMES IL 


2g 7 | 


. Tuts narrative of Ambrun’s.is very much of a piece Ann, 1624. 


with the impertinent fchemes and conceited opinions of 
James. He regarded religion in no other light than as 


.a proper inftrument to effec paflive obedience in fub- 


jects: For this reafon he treated the material points of 
faith that diftinguifh the Roman Catholic and reformed 
religions as mere {fchool-queftions, too infignificant to 
make a fchifm in the church the beft fuited for the arbi- 
trary purpofes of princes, except in the one tenet of fu- 
perior allegiance to the pope. This doctrine he wanted 
to inculcate to all fovereigns, and to form a kind of fra- 


ternal league, in which they fhould oblige the pope to 


give up this claim, and yield each other mutual affift- 
ance in quelling the rebellious opinions of their fubjects *, 


It was with a view of fuch fupport from the Autftrian fa-. 
mily that he had pufhed on that alliance with all its haa : 


graceful dangerous conditions. 


He was at this time actuated by the fame expectations 
in the prefent treaty with France, and affumed fo much 
upon them as to permit the archbifhop of Ambrun to 
adminifter public confirmation in the French ambaflador's 
houfe to all that fhould apply: The number was fo great 
that the magiftrates of London complained of it; the 
King owned that it was done by his permiffion. This 


be 


* He openly profeffed the following reafon for abandoning the 
Palfgrave’s caufe: That there is an implicit tie among kings which 
obligeth them, though there be no other intereft or particular engage- 
ment, to ftick to and right one another upon an infurrection of fub- 
jects; therefore he had more reafon to be againft the Bohemians than 
to adhere to them, in the depofition of their fovereign prince. Howel’s 
familiar Letters. 


Vo. I, . Ll . was 


258 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1624. WaS immediately after the ftrong declaration he had made 
to the parliament againft fuch a practice. He was at 
this time fo exalted with an expeétation of brotherly. 
friendfhip from the king of France, that he told the lords 
of the council, with a kind of tranfport, that Lewis was 
fo much his friend as to offer to affift him in perfon if 
ever he fhould defire him: “ Truly, adds he, he has 
gained fo much upon me by this kindnefs, that in any — 
thing that fhall-concern him I will employ nor only my 
peoples’ lives, but my own; and whatfoever of his fub- 
jects thall rife againft him, either Catholics or others, fhall 
find me a party for him.” 


cs 


_———— ll 


eS be Aid 


eS Oe 


Tue Englifh ambafladors who were now negotiating 
the treaty of matriage in France, had orders to propofe 
to that court a league againft the houfe of Auftria: 
Lewis’s minifters liftened to this propofal; but at the © 
fame time told the ambafladors, “ That the league and 
marriage were two diftinct things, that could not be ne- 
gotiated together ; but that after the conclufion of the : 
marriage they would treat of the league.” . SS. a 


' Tue aid granted to the King the laft parliament was i 
computed to be confiderable enough to fend five-and- 

twenty thoufand men into the Palatinate: Six thoufand, 

under the command of the earls of Oxford, Southamp- 

ton, Effex, and the lord Willoughby, were immediately 

embarked for Holland to join the army of the ftates. 

Though the united corps of Dutch and Englifh made a 
confiderable army, yet the prince of Orange could not te 
prevent the town of Breda from falling into the hands =—- 
of Spinola. During the fiege of Breda, many of the ha 


JAMES L 


259 


_Englith died by ficknefs: This was the fate of the gal- Ann. 1624. 


lant earl of Oxford, who had been one of the volunteers 
that oppofed the Spanifh forces in the Palatinate. He 


was afterwards imprifoned for {peaking freely againft - 


the Auftrian match; on the return of the prince from 


Madrid he obtained his liberty and the command of a> 


\ 


regiment. 


OTHER troops were levied to be under the command Mansfeld’s 


of Mansfeldt, who with thefe was to open a paflage into 
the Palatinate: According to this refolution Mansfeldt 
came into England, and Lewis was prefled farther on the 
— fubject of the league, or at the leaft to grant a free paf- 
fage to the Englith troops through his dominions. Eva- 
five anfwers were taken as certain promifes, and Mans- 
feldt fet out at the head of twelve thoufand men, to make 
his paflage through France into Germany. Preparatory 
to this march a demand was made of the city of Fran- 
kendale to the infanta Iabella, who, according to the 
treaty at London, was to deliver it up on the twenty-fixth 
of Oétober. At the fame time was demandéd a free 
-paflage through the German tetritory for the troops that 
were to be fent to garrifon it. The infanta anfwered, 
“ That the would freely furrender the town on the day 
appointed, to fuch as fhould produce a power from the 
king of England; that {he would grant a paflage through 
her. own and the king of Spain’s dominions, according 
to the words of the treaty; but to procure a paflage for 
the Britith troops through the empire, the declared was 
not in her power, nor was fhe obliged to do it.” To 
compleat this farce, on the twenty-fixth of October, the 
day in which Frankendale was to be re-delivered, Spinola 


Ll 2 with 


expedition. 


260 


Ann. 1624. 


Rufhworth, 


vol. I. pest. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


with his troops marched out of the town, and finding 


none of James's forces ready to take pofleffion, he in- - 


ftantly re-entered, pulled down the arms of the king of 
England, and fet up thofe of the king of Spain. The 


twelve thoufand men under the command of Mansfeldt. 


were embarked for the French coaft in the month of 
December, the very depth of winter. When they arrived 
at Calais they were not fuffered to land; after much time 
was fpent in meffages backward and forward between 
them and the court, the king of France pofitively affert- 
ing he had never promifed to grant them a paflage, they 
were forced to fail to Zealand *, where they met with 
the fame difficulty as they had juft experienced at Calais : 
The Zealanders excufed themfelves from receiving fuch a 
number of unexpected guefts, on the pretence of a de- 
ficiency of provifions. During a tedious negotiation, in 
which meflengers were fent to the Hague and afterwards 
to London, the peftilence feized the foldiers, and carried 
off above two thirds. Of the few that efcaped the fick- 
nefs fome deferted and fome lifted themfelves among their 
countrymen in the fervice of the States. Thus was ex- 
emplified the utility of James’s provifo, that the conduct 
and direction of the war muft be left to the King. This 


* The prince of Wales and the duke of Buckingham, who were at 
prefent the fole managers of the affairs of ftate, looked upon the af- 
fiftance of France as a thing to be depended upon, Lewis being in a 
manner bound by the ties of friendthip and intereft. A difpute then 
fubfifting between him and the king of Spain concerning the Valteline, 
the view of thefe fhallow politicians was not comprehenfive enough to 


take in the bigoted prepoffeffions that actuated this monarch, the arbi- 


trary defigns of his minifter, or the variety of capricious principles 
which influence the meafures of a court. 


JAMES L 


261 


refufal of receiving his troops was the fecond barbarous ana. 1624. 


infult which he had received from the Dutch republic. 


In the iflands from whence the Portuguefe and Spa- 
niards had been driven by the States, the Englifh, accord- 
ing to treaty, were to enjoy a third part of the trade; of 
the Englith factories fettled in thefe parts, a few fami- 
lies lived at Amboyna under the protection of a Dutch 
eftablifhment; according to the nature of rivalfhip, an ill 
correfpondence foon fubfifted between the two people: A 
plot was trumped up againft the Englifh, as if they had 
formed a defign to deftroy the Dutch fettlement ; all of 
them were feized, examined, and put to a variety of tor- 
tures that exceeded every diabolical invention of the kind 
that had been before known: Thofe that purchafed relief 
by confeflion, retracted it with their dying breath; the 
greater part retained their fortitude, and expired under 
their tortures; a few that furvived thefe cruelties were 
fent out of the ifland to other Englifh plantations. Thus 
the whole factory was deftroyed, and the Dutch remained 
fole mafters of the trade *. 


* It is very probable that the late behaviour of the Zealanders arofe 
from the fear of admitting fo large a body of Englifh troops, left 
they might have fallen upon fome method of revenging the maffacre 
of Amboyna. James had been upon ill terms with the Dutch for 


fome time; in the year 1609 he iffued a proclamation for preventing 


the promifcuous fifhing of ftrangers on the Britifh coaft: The Dutch 
refufed to comply with this proclamation, and defended their fithing 
veffels with a naval force. Thefe fpirited republicans had entertained 
a ftrong jealoufy on the intended conne¢tion between the Englifh and 
the Spanith courts: They refented the neglect James had fhewn to the 
Proteftant caufe, in the bafe deferting his fon-in-law, the elected king 
of Bohemia. This,’ with the contempt they had for his perfon and go- 
vernment, occafioned them to commit continual infringements in the 
a treaty 


Maffacre at 


Amboyna. 


262 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Am. 1624.  ‘T'Hts cataftrophe happened at the time when James 
: had given up all hopes of the Spanith alliance, and 
when he was pufhed on by the violent meafures of his 
favourite to a rupture with that flate. This’ being his 
fituation, the friendfhip of the Dutch was too valuable 
; : to be hazarded by an ill-timed refentment; he was ob- 
‘, liged to accept of their excufes, and to put up with this 
. flagrant breach of faith, without exaGting any kind of 
atonement.. Humiliating as were thefe accumulated 
. . difgraces, the domeftic ones fuftained by him at this 
time he much more impatiently refented: Such was the ) 
defpotifm exercifed over him by Buckingham, that, on ; in 
val ps6 Briftol’s arrival, he was conftrained to fend a command 
to him, to confine himfelf to his own houfe. Accord- 


treaty that fubfifted between them and the ftate of England: They mo- 
lefted the Englifh in their Eaft-India trade, and in Greenland, where.the 
citizens of London had eighteen fhips employed in the whale-fifhery ; 
thefe crews were furprized and murdered by the Dutch on pretence that 
they had an exclufive privilege of fifhing on that coaft. 


Sir Thomas Wentworth, in a letter to Chriftopher Wandesford, ‘Efq, 
gives the following defcription of the infults the Englifh were fubjeéted io 
to at this time: ** The States, writes he, have fo well difciplined their . 
men in the Eaft-Indies, as that direétly in breach of the articles con- Rei) 
cluded by commiflioners of us.and them, concerning the carriage fu- it aa 
turely of our trade, they have cut off the heads of captain Towerfon 

eg and ten more of our principal captains and factors in thefe places ; fo 
as our merchants here proteft to give over the trade ; and fo fave your- 
felf and other grave patriots the trouble of condemning their patent.in 

parliament. And farther their lordthips, to give us a proof how much . 
they love our company, they daily caufe their men of war to take all 
our merchant-fhips trading into Brabant, or any part of the arch- 
duchefs’s dominions. And according to their virtuous example, the 

Dunkirkers, unwilling to be behind them, do the like. by all our mer- Pa 
chants trading intoHolland, or any,part of the States’ country, ; (Guthrie. +a 
Carleton’s Letters. Sirafford’s Letters, fol. ed. 1739, Pp. 22. ihe ae 
We. B. 


SCE 
’ 


J .A M._E S. L 263 


ing to repeated folicitations of the accufed, commiffioners Ann, 1624. 
were appointed to examine into the nature of his of- 
fence: After a minute interrogation they declared, that 
they could find nothing blameable in his conduct. Not- 
withftanding this, his confinement was continued, and 
) himfelf given-to underftand by Buckingham, “ That he 
was much miftaken if he imagined that his anfwers 
. were fatisfactory to the King, the prince, or to him (the 
eae duke); that his only way of regaining favour was to 
» make the confeffion he had fent him.” James exclaimed 
againft fuch a treatment, and told Buckingham, “ It was 
an horrible tyranny to make an innocent man declare 
himfelf guilty.” Notwithftanding this, he could not ob- 
tain leave to admit him to his prefence, as the offered 
terms had been refufed, though he had folemnly promifed 
fuch a permiffion. 


James feems to have refigned himfelf to the prefent 
neceflity with an intention of breaking from his thral- 
dom on the firft favourable opportunity. He was fenfi- 
ble that the authority which his infolent minion main- 

tained over him was entirely owing to circumftances arif- 
| ing from the familiarity that had fubfifted between them, 
. 


———, 


and from a.temporary popularity, unfupported by cha- 

- racter, principle, or capacity ; an occafion would un- 
doubtedly offer to throw him off, when he was again be- 

come thé object of public odium; in this attempt he was 

certain of having afliftance from men whofe abilities 

were infinitely fuperior to thofe of his ungrateful fervant, 

4 _ men by whom Buckingham was detefted from motives of 
Ei ats. envy, and from the infolence of his carriage: Of thefe 
= -. non€ were more inveterate than Williams, who had been 
"4 long 


264 


Ann. 1624, 


Ann. 1625. 
Death of 
the King. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


long upon ill terms with his patron, on his attempt to™ 
undermine him in James’s favour, and his oppofition to 
him in council on the rupture with Spain. He had lately © 
endeavoured to eradicate from his mind unfavourable im- 
preflions, by the moft abject fubmiflion and affected zeal - 
for his fervice; thefe endeavours had been fruitlefs, and 
Buckingham had {hewn him fuch a ftrong teftimony of 
his ill-will, as to have made a pufh at him in the houfe 
of Commons the laft feffion; but the complaints were 
thought too frivolous and too ill-grounded to bear an im- 
peachment. In this fituation, Williams’s fafety was in- 
compatible with Buckingham’s power, who had like- 
wife a dangerous enemy in Briftol, on account of the 
ftrong evidence he could produce of his abfurd conduct 
at Madrid, and his grofs impofitions on the nation by a 
falfe detail to the parliament of the tranfactions at the 
court of Spain. Such a concurrence of malice and mat- 
ter could not fail to crufh him at fome unlucky pe- 
riod ; of this he was very fenfible, when the death of the 
King at once difpelled his fears, and fixed his tottering 
fituation. 


Azsour the middle of March James was feized with 
a tertian ague, which terminating in a fever, put an end 
to his life on the twenty-feventh of the fame month, and 
in the fifty-ninth year of his age. During the courfe of 
his illnefs he was fo clofely befet by Buckingham and his 
family, that the reft of the courtiers were not permitted 
to fee him till he was in the laft agonies. Without the 
knowledge of his phyficians they applied a plaifter to his 
fide, and gave him a potion whofe operation was followed 
by the fever, which terminated his days. Thefe circum- 


2 SME Bath, ” . 26g 


ftances, added to the criticalnefs of his deceafe, gave rife Ann. 1625, 
to fufpicions of the darkeft nature +; the profecution of 
inquiries was timely put an end to by the authority of 
Charles, and the affair thus favourably configned to an 
eternal accipabney 


| 
| 
James was of a middle ftature, of a fair complection, His perton. 
and a foft fkin ; his perfon plump but not corpulent, his ” 
eyes large and rolling, his beard thin, his tongue too 
big for his mouth, his countenance difagreeable, his air 
aukward, and his gait remarkably ungraceful, from a 
weaknefs in his knees that prevented his walking without 
—affiftance ; he was tolerably temperate in his diet, but 
drank of little elfe than rich and ftrong wines. 
€ 
His character, from the variety of grotefque qualities Character. 

that compofe it, is not eafily delineated: The virtues he 
poffeffed were fo loaded with a greater proportion of their 
neighbouring vices, that they exhibit no lights to fet off 
- the dark fhades; his principles of generofity were tainted 
by fuch a childifh profufion that they left him without 
means of paying his juft obligations, and fubjected him 
to the necefflity of attempting irregular, illegal, and un- 
juft methods of acquiring money. His friendfhip, not 
to give it the name of vice *, was directed by fo puerile 
a fancy, and fo abfurd a caprice, that the objects of it 
_ were ever contemptible, and its confequence attended with 


+ See an Hiftorical and Critical Account of the Life and Writings of 
; Jamest. by the ingenious and accurate W. Harris. 8vo. p. 237, & /eq. 
* All his letters to his favourite Villiers are written in a ftyle ful- 


err —— fomely familiar, many of them indecent, with very unufual expreffions 
AP of love and fondnefs. 


: ah . : VoL. I, ; ; Mm fuch 


266 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 


Ans, 1625. fuch an unmerited profufion of favours, that it was per 


haps the moft exceptionable quality of any he poflefleds 
His diftinétions were formed on principles of felfifhnefs; 
he valued no perfon for any endowments that could not 
be made fubfervient to his pleafures or his intereft, and 
thus he rarely advanced a man of real worth to prefer- 
ment *. His familiar converfation, both in writing and 
in fpeaking, was ftuffed with vulgar and indecent phrafes. 
Though proud and arrogant in-his temper, and full of 
the importance of his ftation, he defcended to buffoonery, 
and fuffered his favourites to addrefs him in the moft 
difrefpectful terms of grofs familiarity }. Himfelf af- 
fected a fententious wit, but rofe no higher in thefe at- 
tempts than to quaint, and often ftale conceits, His edu- 
cation had been a more learned one than is commonly — 
beftowed on princes; this, from the conceit it gave him, 
turned out a very difadvantageous circumftance, by con- 


* His want of gratitude to the memory of his preceptor Buchanan, 
who had taken great pains to form his tender mind to virtue, and to. 
teach him true policy and magnanimity, is one inftance of is difre- 
gard to worth. 


+ The following familiar epiftle is from Buckingham to king James : 

«* Were it not that you might think me an incroacher upon your 
goodnefs, I fhould make a propofition for you to ftay ten days at 
Theobalds, by which doing you might have the company of your fweet 
fon, without whom we fhould neither play at cards, goffe, nor fit up 
for does at Huntingdon; whereas, if you ftay at Theobalds but thefe 
ten days, you might have to wait on you not only a found fon, but a 
fervant within and without as clean as a fhilling. But if thefe reafons - 


_ were not, I pray your fowfhip how can you fpend thefe ten days better 


in any other place.” MSS. in Brit. Mu: fol. 6987, n. 106. 


The reader is referred to Letters publifhed by Sir David Dalrym- ‘ 
ple, 1762, p. 26, for another of the fame fort, but much more a 


familiar.” 


ey a oe Se ele f 


267 


traéting his opinions to his own narrow views. His pre- Ann. nap 


tences to a confummate knowledge in divinity, politics, © 


and the art of governing, expofe him to a high degree of 
ridicule; his conduct fhewing him more than commonly 
deficient in all thefe points. His romantic idea of the na- 
tural rights of princes caufed him publicly to avow pre- 
tenfions that impreffed into the minds of the people an 
incurable jealoufy; this, with an affectation of a pro- 
found fkill in the art of diffembling, or of king-craft, 


as he termed it, rendered him the object of fear and dif- 


truft; when at the fame time he was himfelf the only 
dupe to an impertinent ufelefs hypocrify. If the laws and 
conftitution of England received no prejudice from his 
government, it was owing to his want of ability to ef- 
fect a change fuitable to the purpofe of an arbitrary fway. 
Stained with thefe vices, and fullied with thefe weaknefles, 
if he is ever exempt from our hatred, the exemption muft 
arife from motives of contempt! . 


DespicaBLe as he appears through the whole period 
of his Britannic government, his behaviour when king of 


Scotland was in many points unexceptionable; but, in-. 


toxicated-with the power he received over a people whofe 
privileges were but feebly eftablifhed, and who had been 
long fubjected to civil and ecclefiaftical tyranny, he at 
once flung off that moderation which hid his deformities 
from the common eye. 


_ Tr is alleged that the corruption he met with in the 
court of England, and the time-ferving genius of the 
Englifh noblemen, were the great means that debauched 

him from: his circumfpect conduct. Among the for- 
8 Mm 2 wardett . 


268 HISTORY OPiENMEEAN BD: .. F 


Aan. 1625. wardett of this worthlefs tribe was Cecil,: afterwards earl 
Weldon. 


of Salifbury *, who told him on his coming to the crown, 


* In a fpeech that Seni made to the parliament in the year she 
he excufes himfelf for his former condué in that anbln and. fays, 
that he was led by the counfellors of the late Queen. : 


The fervile tools that James had raifed to the higheft preferments aa 
in the ftate beftowed the fame tribute of abfurd flattery to his me= = = 
mory that they had fed him with during his life. The following is a 
character drawn of him by Williams, in a fermon that he preached at . 
his funeral : Rufpworth, vol. 1. p. 160, & /eq. 


«« I dare prefume to fay, you never read in your lives of two kings 
more fully paralleled amongft themfelves, and better diftinguifhed 
from all other kings, than king James and king Solomen. King So- 
lomon is faid to be unigenitus coram matre fua, the only fon of his mo- 
ther, fo was king James; Solomon was of a complexion white and 
ruddy, fo was king James ; Solomon was an infant-king, puer parvu- 
lus, a little child, fo was king James a king at the age of thirteen 
months; Solomon began his reign in the life of his predeceffor, fo, 
by the force and compulfion of that ftate, did our late fovereign king 
James; Solomon was twice crowned and anointed a king, fo was king 

. James.; Solomon’s minority was rough, through the quarrels of the 


bo 
/ 
i 
9 iS ee a aed 


former fovereign, fo was that of king James; Solomon -was learned 2 
above all the princes of the Eaft, fo was king James above all the ’ 
princes in the univerfal world, Solomon was a writer in profe and - 


verfe, fo, in a very pure and exquifite manner, was our fweet fove- 
- reign king James; Solomon was the greateft patron we ever read of to 
church and church-men, and yet no greater (let the houfe of Aaron 
now confefs) than king James; Solomon was honoured with ambaffa- 
dors from all the kings of the earth, and fo you know was king James; 
Solomon was a main improver of bis home-commodities, as you may 
fee in his trading with Hiram, and God knows it was the daily ftudy 
of king James; Solomon was a great maintainer of fhipping and navi- 
gation, a moft proper attribute to king James; Solomon beautified _ 
very much his capital city with buildings and water-works, fo did 
king James; laftly, before any hoftile act we read of in hiftory, king 8 
Solomon died in peace, when he had lived about fixty years, and fo 
_ you know did” king Jamess and as for his words’ and i 1 


APOMIMLE BLAST | 2¢9. 


« That he fhould find his Englifh fubjects like affes, On Aan, 1625. 
whom he might lay any burden, and fhould need neither 
bit nor bridle but their aes cars. : 


omg it well enough,—it was rare and excellent in the higheft degre 
—Solomon, {peaking of his own faculty in this kind, divides it into 
two feveral heads, a teady invention, and an eafy difcharge and expref- 
fion of the fame,—‘ God hath granted me to fpeak as I would, and» 
to conceive as it is meet for the things fpoken of,”—and this was emi-_ 
nent in our late fovereign: His invention was as quick as his firft 
thoughts, and his words as ready as his invention; he would firft wind 
up the whole fubftance of his difcourfe into one folid and mafly concep- 
_ tion, and then fpread it and dilate it to what compals he pleafed, «* Pro- 

: fuenti &S que principem deceret eloquentia,” (as Tacitus faid of Auguftus) 
in a flowing and a princely kind of elocution; thofe fpeeches of his in 
the parliament, ftar- chamber, council-table, and other public audiences 
of the ftate (of which, as of Tully’s orations, “ Ea /emper optima que 
maxima,” the longett ftill was held the beft) do prove him to be the 
moft powerful fpeaker that ever fwayed the fceptre of this kingdom ; 
in his ftyle you may obferve the Ecclefiaftes, in his figures the Canti- 
cles, in his fentences the Proverbs, and in his whole difcourfe religuum ~ 
verborum Solomonis, all the reft that was admirable in the eloquence of 
Solomon ; how powerfully did he charge the prince with the care of 
religion and juftice, the two pillars (as ‘he termed them) of his future 
throne? how did he recommend unto his love the nobility, the clergy, 
and the commonalty in general? how did he thruft, as it were, into 
his inward bofom, his bifhops, his judges, his near fervants, and * dif- » Duke of 
ciple of his whom he fo loved in particular? and concluded with that Buckingham. 

heavenly advice to his fon concerning that great act of his future mar- 
riage, to marry like himfelf; and marry where he would; but if he did 
marry the daughter of that king, he fhould marry her perfon, but 
-not her religion.” 


270 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


‘C HA P., IX. 


State of the bindt: and ecclefiaftical government of. England a at the 
acceffion of the Stewart family, Caufes of the change of go- 
-vernment that took place during the adminiftration of the Stewart 

fauily.——State of trade-———State the peances during the 
reign of King Sfames. 


O enable the reader to form juft notions on the in. 
terefting tranfactions that brighten the following 
period of the Englifh ftory, it may not be improper to 
enter into a detail of the ftate of the kingdom in re- 
gard to government at the acceflion of the Scottith line. 
It muft be owned, that it was in many refpects very ar- 
bitrary, and that the liberties of the fubjeét were neither 
accurately defined, nor apparently defended. The ter- 
ror of returning again to thofe civil diftractions which 
the conteft between the two families of York and Lan- 
cafter had occafioned, together with the ecclefiaftical fac- — 
tion that broke out in this kingdom during the admini- “i 
ftration of the Tudors, had enabled that family to make se 
pernicious encroachments on the legal rights of the fub- z 
jects, ftipulated by Magna Charta; time had given , 
ftrength to thefe ufurpations, and oppofition in the peo- ; 
ple to the will of the fovereign was unauthorized by 
examples of modern date. The univerfal fimplicity of 
manners that fubfifted during the early periods of the 
Englith hiftory, and continued till the latter end of the 
fixteenth century, rendered the wiles of power lefs intri- 
cate; but at the fame time it occafioned in the ca 


pe 


a 


JOA MiB 8.41, 


an aptnefs to put a dangerous confidence in their princes : 
Thus, when the violence of Henry VIII. had wreifted the 
ecclefiaftical jurifdiction over this country from the Ro- 
man pontiff, the people readily fubmitted to the crown 
of England’s being vefted with that large addition of pre- 
rogative ; and regal authority attained without difficulty 
the fupreme power in all affairs relative to the govern- 
ment of the church, and the conf{cience of the fubject. 


Tuovucu the Englifh people had long groaned under 
the oppreflive tyranny of the fee of Rome, yet this in lat- 
ter years had become more moderate in its effects: Many 
ftatutes had been made to defend the people againft -the 
inordinate claims of this fpiritual prince; and by thefe 


. ftatutes individuals were in a great meafure protected 
_ both in their perfons and property: But when the fame 


pretenfions were united to the coercive power of civil 
magiftracy, it appeared with all its former terrors, and 
became in reality the comprehenfive engine of regal de- 
fpotifm. This difadvantageous change could not but be 
feverely felt in the moft early periods of its eftablith- 
ment, though the refentment had been fupprefled by the 
zeal which at that time prevailed for reforming the doc- 
trine of the church, and for emancipating the nation 
from foreign jurifdiction. This zeal was not fubfided 
when the reformers met with a fevere check by the fuc- 
ceflion of Mary, that bigoted Papift, who reftored to the 
pope his authority, and reinftated the Catholics in the 
adminiftration. The feverities the Proteftants fuffered 
under this government erafed from their minds every 
impreffion of evil lefs dreadful than that of a gencral 
and mercilefs perfecution. Thus, when Elizabeth, who 
profefled 


29t 


272 


Hume. 


- HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


profeffed their principles and faith, pofleffed the regab 
dignity, they unanimoufly agreed to arm her with full 
powers to fupprefs oppofition, and the High-commifliom 
court was re-erected in the very beginning of her reign, 
This was the fupreme ecclefiaftical tribunal, and was im-~ 
mediately under the direction of the crown. A confor- 
mity of religion was exacted through the whole king- 
dom, and every refufal of the ceremonies then eftablifhed 


- was liable to be chaftifed by this court with deprivation, 
- fines, confifcation, and imprifonment. Any word or 


writing that tended towards fchifm or fedition was punifh- 
able by the High-commiffioners, or any three of them; 
they were the judges what expreflions had-that tendency. 
Thefe inquifitors were not limited to proceed by legal 
information; rumor, fufpicion, were fufficient grounds. 
To the party cited before them they adminiftred an oath, 
by which they were bound to anfwer any queftion that 
fhould be propounded to them ; this oath could not be 
evaded by any pretext, and a refufal incurred the pu- 
nifhment of imprifonment, The power of the Star~ 
chamber, in civil matters, was as arbitrary as that of the 
High-commiffion court in ecclefiaftical: Its authority was 
carried to this height by Henry VII, the firft of the Tudor 
line. Nor was arbitrary jurifdiction the only enfign of 
defpotifm that was attached to the monarchy of Eng- 


land: The difpenfing power, the power of imprifonmentr, 


of exacting forced loans and benevolence, of prefling. . 
and quartering foldiers, of ereéting monopolies, had 
been all exercifed in their turns by the feveral fovereigns. 
that preceded the acceffion of the Stewart family *, No 


* So extenfive was the authority of the monarchy at the a 
of James, that Elizabeth had pene commiffioners for the ir 


aqua ti Mob Sfabrerk | 273 


wonder, therefore, that James united his darling idea of 
government.‘to.circumftances that appeared’ fo entirely. 
conformable to'it. This appearance proved a deceitful 
‘one. Parliaments, viz. A right in the people of affem- 
bling by reprefentatives, to aflift at the making of ‘new 
laws; the abolifhing old ones, or to give an aflent or 
negative..to. extraordinary levies of money, a precious 
privilege, which the people had yet preferved from the 
ruins of the Gothic conftitution, had in it many latent 
refources to preferve Liberty, which had given way, though 
not entirely yielded, to the encroachments of fuccefsful 
tyranny. 


WueEn James took pofleflion of the reins of govern- Cau‘es of the 
. . ae . anpe ©) 
ment, the opportunity’ to exert its rights with redoubled ernment un- 


° e a : he famil 
vigor was approaching; thofe circumftances that proved ¢f'gnvac 7 


favourable to the criminal ambition of the Tudors were 
either feeble, or no longer exifted ; the apprehenfion of 
fuffering religious perfecution was converted into the 
dread of finking into civil flavery: The formidable im- 
preflion of domeftic broils, which the bloody wars be- 
tween the houfes of York and Lancafter had occafioned, 


tion of princes, with full difcretionary powers to adjuft all differences 
between prifoners and their creditors, to compound debts, and give li- 
_ berty to fuch debtors as they found ‘honeft, and incapable of making 
full payment. This commiffion James renewed in the fifteenth year 
of his reign. Hume. — a 

We find alfo another extraordinary aét of power exercifed by this 
King : On the erecting a new wall at his palace at Theobalds, a com- 
miffion was given to a certain number of domeftics to prefs into his 
fervice as many workmen as fhould be fufficient to complete the 
work in a fhort time, and to feize by force bricks, carts, tools, and 
every neceflary material. Rymer’s Federa. 3 

18Nox, I. Nn was 


274 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


was now, by a long interval of peace, éerafed from the 
mind of the public. ‘The Proteftants beheld with the 
utmoft regret themfelves and pofterity fubjeé& to a power” 


' which they had raifed for the purpofe of cruthing their’ 


enemies ; the lights which men had obtained froma dif _ 
quifition into theological tenets, and the doétrine of ec- 
clefiaftical fubjection, had enabled them: to- judge more 
rationally of the nature and end of civik fubordination.. 
Paflive obedience to princes, that notion which, through. 
the darker ages of the world, had. been efficacioufly in- 
culcated into the minds of the fubject, began to be 
treated with a fcepticifm: that produced: an: entire-revoltas- 
tion in the opinions of the intelligent, Elizabeth faw 
and felt this change; had life and:empire continued, fhe 
would undoubtedly have fuftained' the mortification of 
beholding an entire alteration in the condu& of the Com- 
mons, who had hitherto fervilely complied with her ime- 
perious will. The fhort-fighted James was unable to 
account for the inconfiftence he found between’ the theo-~ 
retical and practical government of England; whilft the 
fervility of the nobles confirmed him: in the idea that 


-he was in actual poffeflion of a defpotic power, the de- 


termined oppofition of the Commons prevented him from: 
bringing that idea to reality; a fmall degree of accuracy 
would have reconciled the feeming contradiction, Evem 
in that early period it might have been difcerned: that: © 
noble principles had taken deep root in the minds of the 
Englith people, that the progréfs of more enlightened, 
reafon would bring thefe to perfection, and the harveft of 
fuch fruit muft infallibly produce an. important change: 
in the manner and. conftitution of the government) 


JAM 2S L 


_ Tas revolution in the Low Countries did not a little 
contribuse to haften fuch a difpofition: The hearts of 
the Englith were fired with fympathetic virtue, at the 
example of that brave and refolute people, happily 


emerged from a ftate of fervitude to a ftate of flourifh-- 


ing freedom. ‘The revival of letters co-operated with 
thefe caufes to effe&t an alteration in the modes of 
thinking of the Englifh mation. Thofe models of hu- 
man glory, the hiftories of Greece and Rome, excited 
all to admire, the virtuous to a defire of imitation; and, 
whilft the compofition of the antients delighted the 
tafte, their fcience and precepts enlarged the mind, cor- 
rected. the judgment, and improved the heart; whilft 
the theory of ancient politics became the ftudy of thé 
judicious learned, the recent fuccefs of the Dutch ftimu- 
lated them with defire, and even diftant hopes, of put- 
ting that theory into practice. It muft be acknowledged 
that thefe exalted hemes were not univerfally adopted ; 
they were entirely confined to the men of letters, and 
of thefe to the moft virtuous kind: But the fimplicity 
of manners that preceded this age, and that eager ap- 
petite for learning which accompanied its revival, occa- 
fioned their number to be extenfive, when compared to 
the productions of modern times. It cannot be ima- 
gined that that ftiff oppofition, which appeared in all 
the parliaments throughout this reign, was directed by 
leaders that would have been fatisfied with a temporary 
redrefs of grievances, or rather that would not have made 
ufe of all the advantages that offered to have enlarged 
to the utmoft the fyftem of Liberty. The completion of 
this was left to the more fuccefsful heroes of the fol- 
lowing period, notwithftanding it had made a greater 
Nn 2 progrefs 


275- 


276 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. | 
progrefs in this reign than was apparent; and the weak 
and abfurd adminiftration and conduct of the Stewart 


family ripened the execution of {chemes which’ might 


more fuccefsfully have taken place, when time, ‘with li- 
terature, had entirely difpelled that cloud of grofs fu- 
perftition which had long involved the European: world 
The continual complaints which the Commons in‘ par- 
liament preferred to James on the enormities that pro- 
ceeded from the arbitrary fyftem of judicature that fub- 


fifted at his acceflion, in fome meafure checked that ty> 


rannical ufe of it which had been: prattifed by Elizabeth: — 
It has been mentioned by an- ingenious hiftorian, with 
an intention to do credit to this monarch, that the pu- 
nifhments inflited by the High-commiflioners during. 
his reign were infinitely lefs,in number; and thofe more: 
mild, than they had been under the’ adminiftration: of 
Elizabeth. Deprivations, fines, confifcation, and impri+ 
fonments, were judgments that then continually iffued 
from this court: deprivation was the higheft punifhment 
inflifted in the time of ‘her fncenifions peta 3 


A tone fufpenfion from warlike exercifes, though 
baneful to a luxurious ftate, was, to the people of Eng- 
land, an advantageous circumftance.. A forcign: war 
might have diverted them from an attention to domettic 
evils ; and their manners were not at this time fo effe- 


minate as to endanger an attachment to.am inglorious —~ 


inactivity ; idlenefs, fervility, and their concomitant vices, 


- were, in thefe happy days, only to be found among the 


fervants and followers of ‘the. court. Candour, valour, 
integrity, a {pirit of independence, and every other maf 3 
culine virtue, were porlaiel ina high degree by 4 ed at 

com a 


| PA IMTe PA eh ele B99 
: commons of England, viz. of the male fex; whilft cha- 


ftity, modefty, and induftry, were the general charac- 
— of the mn: 


Ror pings CE ‘alfo was favourable to commerce; it is acknow- Stateoftrade, — 
ledged: by all hiftorians that trade increafed much in this 
reign. Thevigorous meafures of the parliament heightened 
this circumftance by freeing it from feveral monopolies, an 
impofition with which it had been much fettered by Eliza- 
beth*. It was in James’s reign that Englifh colonies began 
to flourith in America: ‘A board of trade was erected by 
this King to examine the efficacy of expedients that were 
propofed for the advantage of commerce. Agriculture, 
which was formerly imperfect in England, a moft ufeful 
_ employment, rendered illuftrious by the virtue of its 
ny followers +, received great improvement in this time, and 
the nation began to be more independant on a foreign pro- ° 
duce for’ their daily acing caeata 


Fawnd’s yearly revenue was 450,0001.; the fubfi- a the 
naaces. 


dies which were granted him by the Commons and the 
clergy, money paid him by the States and the king of 


* Trade had been fo much fettered by this arbitrary princefs, that 
“when James came to the throne of England the whole commerce of this 
country was’ centered in London: Its cuftoms amounted to 110,000 1. 
a-year; whilft thofe of all the other ports in the kingdom yielded only 
17,0001. The whole trade of London was allo confined to two hun- 
x . dred citizens. The committee appointed to exatnine this grievance in- 
a 3 fifted on it as an avowed fact, that fhipping and feamen had fenfibly 

decayed during all K:lizabeth’s reign. Hume, 4to. vol. I. p. 16, & /eq. 


i . + The practice of hufbandry, even to manual labour, was exercifed 
‘byjevery rank of the Roman people,. in the virtuous times of that il- 

ayia. - — fuftrious se Soman 
ii France, 


. 278 


Abftra&, or 
brief declara- 
tion, of the 
flate of his 
 majefty’s re- 
venue, with 
the afligna- 
tions and de- 
falcations up- 
on the fame. 
Lond. 1692. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


France *, with the fums he raifed by extraordinary and 
illegal methods, amounted in the whole to 2,193,374 Ls 
which, divided into twenty-two equal portions, and 
added to his ordinary revenue, make an annual income 
of neatly 550,000L}, a trifling fum when compared 
to the modern expences of government {: But the inha- 
bitants of this ifland were then free from the incum- 
brance, danger, and charge of a ftanding army. The 
only burthen which the fubjects bore was the fupplying 
the luxury, parade, and prodigality of the court; and 
this was. obtained from them by methods fraudulent and | 
violent, difallowed by the legal forms of the conftitution. 
They were defended from the evil of being oppreflively 


taxed, under the pretence of public utility, by the indefa~ 


tigable diligence and fturdy oppofition of their reprefenta+ 
tives in parliament, the guardians of the common weal... 


* The fum of 60,000 1. tie from Henry IV, to Elizabeth. 


+ To this’ account of the revenue may be added tonnage and 
poundage: the fum that this tax brought in has never yet been calcu- 
lated ; the increafe of trade, and the exorbitant impofitions that were 
laid on merchandize in this reign, made it very confiderable. 


{ The difference of the valuation of money may be thought an ob- 
jection to the comparifon ; but, according to Mr. Hume’s account of 
the prices that feveral of the neceffaries of life bore in thefe days, the 


difference is not fo very great as hee been -eeneeehe imagined. 


: THE 


2): 2 SS SS ellie @ Wea | Baa |e 
Ewe Gy L A+ Ne-D. 
CHARLES I 


| GHAR 4K. 
Atceffion of Charles ———His marriage. 4 parliament at Weft- 


minfler. Second feffion of parliament at Oxford. Naval 
expedition againft Spain. Third feffion of parliament. In- 
| peachment-of Buckingham. Diffelution of the parliament. 


N': fooner had death clofed the fcene of empire , 16, ‘. 

to James, than his fon Charles, invefted with rae iia 
Charles 

the reins of government, began his career with 

an impetuofity that left unregarded the forms ‘of filial 

piety, or that decent fhew of forrew commonly practifed 

on the joyful occafion of fucceffion. The three points Hucker’skife 

of, fettling the houthold, calling a parliament, fend- fio p18" 

ing difpatches to haften the marriage, were determined * ** 

the very day after the late King’s deceafe. In a confulta- 

tion on thefe fubjeéts, Williams, the lord-keeper, began 

to feel the ftorm-that had long lowered on his patron’s f 


brow: His officious advice was difregarded, and a {mall 
requeft 


280 


May 1. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1625. requeft he made of a promotion for two of his dometiics 


a - : ry = 
Cuarzes was fo forward to meet a parliament, that 
he propofed to wave the form of calling a new one, 


and to continue the laft. Williams fhewed that this . 
was contrary to order, and that the parliament was dif-. 


folved with the death of the King. On bein; 


“to difpatch writs from the Chancery, and not to 0 lofe ; . 
day, he fet forth the conveniency of giving time for the. 


King’s fervants and creatures to procure a promife for 
their elections before the precife time of a following 
parliament was publifhed. This interfering was treated 


with difapprobation; and Williams, on his return home, ~ 
had the mortification of hearing that Buckingham had- 


threatened to turn him out of his office. This would 
immediately have enfued, if the favourite’s prefent hurry 
of affairs had permitted him to attend to fuch a trifling 
circumftance. His power and influence were, if poffi- 
ble, more extenfive than they had been during the late 
reign: The charge of the war with Spain, the King’s 
marriage, and the fole direction of the adminiftration, 
were centered in himfelf; and his levity and vanity ex- 
cited him to bring the queen from France, who was 
efpoufed * there in the King’s name by the duke de 
Chevreufe +. On this occafion Charles gave a {pecimen 
of his intended government by iffuing out a pardon to 
twenty Romifh priefts, who had been convicted on acts 


* This efpoufal was made before Jamies’s obfequies were performed. 


+ The duke de Cheyseule:1 was of the houfe of Guife, and of kin 


_to Charles. - we “a Ei : 


as ae 


— 
’ 


CATOUMSRIG EBAStTErAa .- 281 


ef parliament. This was followed by an order to the Ann. 1625. 
lord-keeper, in confequence of advice from Buckingham, 
to give warrants to judges, juftices, and officers {pirirual 
and temporal, to forbear all manner of proceedings againft 
recufants. His next act of regal authority was to raife 
twelve thoufand men * for the recovery of the Palatinate, 
at the expence of coat and conduct-money to the country, 
which was to be repaid by the Exchequer in four years. 
The legality of this meafure, and a proclamation to put 
the martial law in execution during the repair of thefe 
troops to Plymouth, was not eafily acceded to by the 
judges, among whom it had occafioned long debates. 


Tue parliament, which had been fummoned for the 
feventh of May, was prorogued till the eighteenth of June, 
on account of the arrival of the queen from France, Hismariage 
whofe nuptials had been there celebrated with the higheft 
degree of royal parade. She was received by Charles 
with equal pomp, though part of the ceremony was 
by neceffity curtailed, on account of a plague which 
raged with great violence in the city of London and its 


‘neighbourhood. 


CHARLEs reprefented to the parliament the neceflity P: ah mag 


Rufhworth, 


he thought they lay under to grant a large fupply for vol. I. p.171; 
carrying on the war in Germany +. This was farther *** 


| * Two thoufand of thefe were fent into Holland, to be replaced by 
the fame number of old foldiers from thence. 
+ In the fpeech that Charles made on this occafion he tells the 
Commons, “ That he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and 
_ therefore there was no doubt but he would be a sai and maintainer 
‘fi the true religion.” ; 
Vou. I. Oo urged 


, 282, 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1625. Urged by the lord-keeper Williams, who, taking up the 


Parliament 
adjourned, 


f{peech where the King had ended, fhewed that the King’s. 
main reafon for calling the parliament was to mind 
them of the great engagements for the recovery of the 
Palatinate impofed on his majefty by the late King his 
father, and by themfelves, who broke off the treaties. 
with Spain ; to let them underftand that the fucceeding: 
treaties and alliances, the armies fent into the Low Coun-. 
tries, the repairing the forts, and the fortifying of Ire- 
land, did all meet in one centre, the Palatinate ;. and that 
the fubfidies granted in the laft parliament for thefe pur- 
pofes were already fpent, with as much more of the 
King’s own revenue. Though. the Commons: harped: 
upon grievances not redrefled, and demanded an account 


of the laft money granted for the recovery of the Palati-- 


nate, yet the danger of keeping long together, by reafon, 
of the raging plague *, and an. unwillingnefs to give a 
total denial to the requeft of their young King, deter- 
mined them to grant two fubfidies. They then petitioned. 
a recefs from parliament, on account of ‘the ficklinefs of 
the feafon. On this confideration they were —” 
to meet on the firft of Auguft at Oxford +. 


Ir is evident from the fmallnefs of once fupply at a: 
period fo peculiarly interefting, that they had already: 


entertained a ftrong jealoufy of the prefent government, 


'* This plague carried off more inhabitants than that = happened 
in the year 1603, at the acceffion of James. 


+ According to the cuftom of feveral late patliaments, the, ' 


bufinefs which had been done in the houfe was to appoint 4 a folemn 
faft.. 
1 att oti be 


cA FO RIREEL Ht St # 


or rather that they perceived the fame errors, vices, and Ana. 1625. 


follies, rooted in Charles, that had given rife to the nu- 
merous grievances of the laft reign; and with this dif- 
advantageous difference, that the vigor of youth might 
render the bad qualities of the fon more pernicioufly 
active than were the like vices in the heavy and paflive 
difpofition of the father. No change had appeared in 
the adminiftration fince the death of James: Charles 
had the fame favourite, the fame council, the fame mi- 
nifters, and all the offices of the kingdom continued in 
the hands of Buckingham’s creatures, whofe favour 
with the late monarch had been little in comparifon to 
‘what he enjoyed with the prefent. Charles, at his ac- 
ceffion to the crown, found his coffers empty, a large 
debt upon his revenue, with the additional burthen of 
an expenfive war. Notwithftanding thefe unfavoura- 
ble circumftances, he entertained the project of entirely 
fubduing that fpirit of Liberty which had already formed 
a ftrong party in the nation, and of fettling on firm 
foundations a more unlimited authority than had. been 
practifed by any of his predeceffors. Money was necef- 
fary for fuch an undertaking: This he fondly imagined 
could be eafily obtained from the Commons, by the 
pretence of fo popular a caufe as the Palatinate-war. 
But he had to deal with an aflembly compofed of indi- 
viduals, aptly culled for the important charge of de- 
fending the facred rights of humanity. It was with 
aftonifhment and indignation that they heard their King 
call upon them for the performance of engagements, - 
the conditions of which had been notorioufly violated 
by himfelf and father. It was well underftood, that the 
Commons of England had no national antipathy to Spain ; 

Oo2, tyranny, 


a 


284 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1625, tyranny, and its fupporter Popery, were the objects shige 
engaged themfelves to oppofe; for this, and this only | 

-reafon, they had joined with the favourite in breaking the 

connections with that court. They now found that the 

zeal of Charles and Buckingham fprang from: a parti- 

cular pique towards Spain; that they had contracted an 

alliance with a court equally noxious, and° from which 

more was to be apprehended by reafon of its. vicinity; 

that the public appearance of) priefts in their veftments, 

and the difpenfation of penal laws againft recufants, re- 

alized the evils only apprehended fromthe Spanith 

‘match *, Nor was it without a difdainful refentment 

that this very refpectable part of the legiflature found 

their underftandings. infulted. by a raw unexperienced 

‘King, anda contemptible minifter.. The mean collufion 

-practifed by the crown laft parliament, to obtain an ex 

traordinary fupply, and the bad management of its firft 

military attempt, convinced the Commons that the min® 

firy were not to be trufted with fo important a bufinefs 

as war; and the fpeech of the lord-keeper, which repre- 

| fented that not only the fubfidies were already fpent, but. 
| ; the revenue in debt, did not a little contribute to confirm = - ra 
them in this opinion. | 7 


At the very time when Charles was pleading necef- 
fity to the Commons in parliament, he was launching 
out into profufe and vain expences: His ambafladors, 
Carlifle and Holland, were maintained at a great charge, 

* A chapel at Somerfet-houfe had been built for the queen and her 
family, with conveniences thereunto adjoining for capuchin-friars, who ~ 
were therein placed, and had permiffion to walk abroad in their reli- 
gious habits. Rutworth, vol. 1. P 17 be Soll 10 SO CeGs 


' 


; 
I 
{ 
; 
' 


mE ~ 


Ce Boh eRe i £14 bk 


to vie with the gaudy magnificence of the French ; and, Ann. 1625. 


the parade with which the queen was conduéted home 
by Buckingham, fuited rather the circumftances of an 
Eaftern monarch, than the more decent dignity of a li- 


_ mited prince, 


Tue. re AAR the Commons thewed this -feftion 
of parliament, in circumftances thus provoking and in- 
terefting, is one of the remarkable inftances of that 


- policy, temper, and fagacity, with which the councils of 


this aflembly were directed. But before their re-meet- 
ing at Oxford an incident had happened which would 
have rendered this moderation a_ pufillanimous and 
bafe defertion of. the particular intereft of their country, 
and the more general caufe of Liberty and Religion. The 
French miniftry had cajoled James into a promife to 
furnith Lewis with one fhip of war and feven armed 
merchant-fhips, to be employed againft the Genoefe. 
Buckingham, who was at this time warmly attached to 
the court of France, prevailed on Charles to lend thefe 
fhips to be ufed at the fiege of Rochelle, where they 


were to be filled with French foldiers and mariners, to, Rufhworth, 


be commanded by the duke de Montmorency. | No 
fooner was this intention known than the whole crew 


mutinied. Vice-admiral Pennington, who had received P * 


particular orders from the favourite, would not appre- 
hend them in this fenfe ; notwithftanding repeated me- 
maces and promifes from the French, he refufed to deli- 
ver up the fhips, and failed back again to the Downs. 
The Rochellers were alarmed, and fent over agents to: 
folicit their detention; but Charles, taking. the whole: 


| affair upon himfelf, fent exprefs orders to Pennington te 


deliver: 


286 HISTORY OF ‘ENGLAND. 


ans. 1625. deliver up his own fhip, and all the merchant-thips, 
with their furniture, to the French king's minifters. Au- 
thority alone was not fufficient to engage the com- — 
mandets in an action fo repugnant to confcience 
and honour; Buckingham had recourfe to art and de- 
ceit: A rumour was fpread that peace had been con- 
cluded between the French king and his Proteftant fub- 
jects. On thé difcovery of the fraud, the captains of 
the merchant-fhips maintained that the King had no 
right to difpofe of their property, and prepared to {ail 
away ; but Pennington, who could no longer plead a 
mifunderftanding of his orders, fired to bring them 
to*. The brave Sit Ferdinando Gorges broke through, 
and returned to England. The remaining fhips were 
delivered to the French; all the officers and failors, not-~ 
withftanding great offers made them, immediately de- 
ferted ; not an individual amongft a crew of that li- 
centious clafs of men, one gunner excepted, was found 
diffolute enough to ferve againft their diftreffed bre- 
thren the French hugonots. The mifcreant was after- ; 
wards killed in charging a cannon before Rochelle: An c 
incident fo juft and opportune, though a frivolous one, a 
gave fatisfaction to the whole nation. This black tranf- 
action entirely diffipated that fond popularity which every 
monarch obtains from the vulgar in the beginning of 
his government. 


Parliament On the firft of Auguft, according to the appointed a 
at Oxford. : ay 
time of their adjournment, the parliament met at Oo: a 


* In a letter from fecretary Conway he was commanded te ufe all 
forcible means to compel them, even to finking. Say 


6. HO WIR & Bo By & 


ford. The Commons renewed their complaints againft ann, 1625. 


the illegal fcreening of recufants, Sir Edward Giles 
produced a lift of fix priefts, for whom, he faid, he 
had feen a pardon, bearing date July the twelfth, the 
wery day after his majefty had, as well by his own 
-mouth as by the lord-keeper’s, vouchfafed to return 
them fuch an anfwer to a petition for the fupprefling of 
Popery, as gave them aflurance for .his performance 
thereof. This complaint, in a conference * between the 
two houfes, was anfwered by Williams; who affirmed, 
that he had received the pardon long before its date, 
' but that he had deferred fealing it, in hopes that on 
the departure of the ambafladors, it might have been 
ftopped; but that he having received a fecond command, 
fealed it at the next general feal. Williams likewife 
added, *, That he wifhed a petition might be prefented: 
to the King to flay the like pardons hereafter.” Charles, 
feeing that the Commons were engaged on the inex- 
Ahauftible topic of grievances, without thewing any in- 
elination to enter into the only bufinefs for which they 
had been fummoned, fent for them to the great hall at 
Chrift-church, where he again infifted on their engage- 
ments to give their utmoft afliftance towards the carry- 
ing,on the war with vigour t+. Lord Conway and Sir 
John Gook, the two fecretaries, enlarged upon this fub- 


* On this conference the Commons ordered,. ‘* That, as the {peaker’ 
and the whole houfe went up, if the Lords kept bare, to do the 
fame; if they covered, then the {peaker and the reft to-do the fame.” 
“Parliam. Hift. vol. VI. p. 373. 

+ Charles began this fpeech with the following unpopular, not to: — 
fay rude, addrefs to the lower houfe: ** My ‘Lords, and You of the 
Commons.” 

: i * ject.;; 


288 


Aon. 1625. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


jet ; withal acquainting the houfes of the paft and 
prefent ftate of. continental affairs, with the money the: 
crown had already expended on the war; that the 
charges of an army had appeared in parliament to be 
700,000 |, a-year; befides Ireland was to be fortified ; 
the forts here repaired, and the navy reinftated. Then 
the lord-treafurer * added, that the late King, when he 
died, was indebted to the city of London 120,000 1. be- 
fides interelt ; for Denmark and the Palatinate 150,000]. 
for his wardrobe 40,0001.; that thefe debts lay upon 
his prefent majefty, who is indebted. unto London 
70,000], that he hath laid out for his navy, and for 
count Mansfeldt 40,0001. for mourning and funeral 
expences 42,000 1. for expences concerning the queen 
40,000 1. and the navy would require ‘to fet it forth in 


Journals of the equipage that was requifite for the great defign his 


Commons, 


& feq. 


yol. I. p.810, Majefty had in hand 300,0001. When the houfe pro- 


ceeded to take into confideration the King’s fpeech, and 
the fubfequent accounts, the officers and creatures of the 
crown alone moved for a fupply ; the reft of the affem- 
bly fell into high debates. Sir S. Wefton moved to. en- 
quire into the caufe of the fupply defired, and the ene- 
my againft whom the preparations were deftined ; that 
the eftates of the Papifts who contributed to the enemy 
‘might be {pecially refpected to fupply the King. Sir 
Francis Seymour moved for a felect committee to draw 
a petition to the King, comprehending the heads of 
thofe things which the houfe fhould think proper to in- 
form him in. Sir Edward Coke urged, that the. necefli- 


* This was ‘lord Ley, fome time before lord- chief.j a pre 


“King’s-Bench, ~ aa ) 


i 
i 
E 
. 


ee 


—~ 


oo lo 


MEAHMORAR, G ELB74 


289 


ties of the crown came by improvidence; that there Ann. 625. 


was a'leak in the government, of which leak fuch as 
thefe were the caufes: Frauds in the cuftoms, treaty 
about the Spanifh match, new-invented offices with large 
fees, old unprofitable offices which the King might juftly 
take away with the love of his people and his own ho- 
nour, the prefidentfhip of York and Wales, multiplicity 
of offices in one man, new tables kept in the King’s 
houfhold, made the leakage the greater, voluntary an- 
nuities and penfions, which ought to be ftopped till the 
King was out of debt, and able to pay; laftly, that all 
unneceflary charges, coftly diet, apparel, building, &c. 
increafed the leakage; that underftanding officers fhould 
be employed in the King’s houfe to reduce it to its an- 
cient form; that the great offices for the defence of the 
kingdom fhould be put into the hands of able men, 
who have experience, fuch as admiralty-places, and 
others. 


Sir Nathaniel Rich faid, “ That they ought not to ing ane. 
refufe to give; but before they gave to reprefent their p p. rakich te, 


wants to the King: Firft, for religion, to have his ma- 


jefty’s anfwer in full parliament, and then enrolled: 


next, to know the enemy againft whom war was to 
be made; the neceflity of an advifed council for governs 
ing the great affairs of the kingdom; the neceflity of 
looking into the King’s revenue; to have his majefty’s 
anfwer concerning impofitions on wines: And though 
the time was not now fit for the decifion of all thefe 
points, yet a feleét committee to be appointed to fet 
down the heads of them, and then to have the King’s 
anfwer to them in parliament. The doing of this, 

Vou. I. Pp added 


290 


Ann, 1625, 


Ruthworth, 
_vol. I. p.180 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 
-added he, is no capitulation with his majefty, but an or- 


-dinary parliamentary courfe, as in 22 Ed. Ill. and with- 


out it the commonwealth can neither —— the — 
nor fubfift.” ) 


In this debate Sir Robert Cotton made a long feeds 
in which he quoted the examples of paft times to thew 
that want of ceconomy in the crown had ever met with 
a fevere cenfure from the parliament, and that thofe mi- 
nifters who had helped to wafte the public treafure had 
never efcaped with impunity: “ I am glad, concluded 
he, that we have neither juft caufe, nor undutiful difpo- 
fitions, to appoint the King a council to redrefs thofe er- 
rors in parliament, as in the 42 Ed. III. &c. &c. We only 
in loyal duty offer up our humble defires, that fince his 
majefty hath, with advifed judgment, elected wife, reli- 
gious, and worthy fervants, to attend him in his high 
employment, he will be pleafed to advife with them. toge- 
ther a way of remedy for thofe difafters in ftlate brought 
on by long fecurity and happy peace, and not to be des 
by young: and fingle counfel,” 


Sir George More prefled for a committee; alleged 
that they were all bound in duty not to graft fubfidy 
upon fubfidy in one parliament. Sir George Goring 
moved that the duke of Buckingham might be of the 
committee to give fatisfaction on any afperfions that 
might be caft upon him. Others argued againft grant. 
ing any fupply before grievances were redrefled ; that 
the ordinary revenue ought to defray the ordinary exs 


pence of the crown; that the King ought to ‘contris 


‘bute to help the Palatinate’s caufe with his own eftate 5 


that aes 


ae 


pO, Bom oRke dh Es 6) a. 


29: I 


that the time of year was too far fpent for the fleet to Ann: 1625. 


go out to fervice ; that enquiry ought to be made whe- 
ther the duke broke not the match with Spain out of 
fpleen and malice to the conde Olivares, whether he 
made not the match with France upon harder terms, 
and whether the fhips employed again{t Rochelle were 
not maintained with the fubfidies given for the Palati- 
nate *? that an enquiry be made to know by what 
counfels the prefent defigns are begun, where the fleet 
is to go? and Sir Robert Manfel + to give his opinion of 
the intended expedition. Many reflections paft upon the 


mifcarriages of the duke in his feveral offices t+. The: 


refolutions of the houfe were, that religion fhould have 
the firft place in their debates, next the kingdom’s fafety, 
and then fupplies, In confequence of this refolution, a 
long petition was fent up, fetting forth the dangerous 
ftate of religion, and the remedies for the increafing 
_evil. Charles gave a gracious anfwer to every claufe of 
the petition, with large promifes that all the grievances 
complained of fhould be redrefled; and Buckingham, 
who imagined that the heat of oppofition would be al- 
layed by this condefcenfion, made a long and florid 
f{peech, in which he reprefented the prefent ftate of the 
war, and anfwered the feveral objections which had 


* Some of thefe fevere hints are only to be found in Rufhworth; 
but there is no doubt of their having been flung out in parliament, 
as they are all noticed in a long fpeech of the duke of Buckingham. 


+ Sir Robert Manfel was a fea-commander of reputation, and had 
been employed with fuccefs in the naval expeditions in James's time. 


t It was complained that pirates infefted the feas, and that the Bio» 


ae of commerce was neglected. 
* Pp2 been 


292° 
Ann. 1625. 
Parl. Hitt. 


vol. Vi. 
+ 394» & feq. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


been flung out by the Commons *, The lord-treafurer 


then produced’ a paper in which he had fet down the 
conditions of the King’s eftate; 1. his debts, 2. the 
eftate the King now ftands in, 3. how it will be for 
the future. 


“ Hrs debts to the city of London, and fome gentle- 
men, borrowed upon privy-feals and lords bonds, were 
120,000], to the wardrobe 40,o@o1. to the king of 
Denmark 75,0001. and the intereft; arrears for penfions. 
a large fum ; to his houfhold a large fam. | | 


_ Tue anticipations made by the late King before they 
were due came to 50,0001]. 


* Hrs engagements were for the pay of fix thonfand 
foot in the Low Countries ; of ten thoufand foot under 
count Mansfeldt ; and for the rigging, viétwaling, and 
providing the navy, not the like in the Phenssceet of ‘this 
time. 


«< ConcEeRNING the eftate of the ea as it now ftands, 
his father’s debts, anticipations, and engagements laid ill 
upon him ; his own debts, as prince, came to 70, cool, 
at the leat The King’s eftate, for the future, as in 


* To the objection that the eight fhips lent to the French king 
were paid with the fubfidy-money, and employed againft the Ro- 
chellers, he anfwered, “ That thofe eight fhips were maintained at 
the charge of the French king ;” and added, “ It is not dlways fit 
for kings to give account of their councils ;—judge the thing by: the 
event.” 

This anfwer, which owns that both courts were in the fecret that 
the fhips were to ferve againft Rochelle, greatly inflamed thie 
ment the Commons had conceived eet he CE 10 ae 


GF An RL OBS. kh 293 


_ charges of continuance, confifted of ten articles: 1.of debts Ann. 1625. 


unpaid, and intereft; 2. old anticipations of 50,000 1,; 
3- anticipations of new 200,0001].; taken up by bate 
felf; 4. to the king of Denmark 30,000e1.; 5. to count 
Mansfeldt 20,0001.; 6. to the Dutch 80001.; 7. to Ire- 
land 26001.; 8. the queen’s allowance and diet 37,0001.; 
9. to the king and queen of Bohemia 20,0001. per ann. ; 
1.0. preparations: for defence of the realm, and fecond- 
ing the navy.” 


AFTER reading this account the lord-treafurer alleged, 
that .certain fums were omitted becaufe they were not 
yet calculated; that no total was caft up, becaufe he 
had no auditor: he promifed that himfelf, or his fub- 
ordinate officers, fhould be ready to give fatisfaction to 
all or any of the particulars. ‘This minute detail de- 
monftrated. to the Commons the folly of a Spanifh war 
at this juncture ; and, by expofing the extreme necefli- 
ties of the crown, pointed out the favourable opportu- 
nity of limiting the exorbitant power it had aflumed, by 
methods. conftitutional and feafible. They had fhewn Journals of 
great fatisfaction at the King’s anfwer to their petition yoi'1' p.si4, 
on religious gricvanees; yet, im the eflential matter of «1 
fupply, they were fo little {wayed by empty promifes, that 
though Charles condefcended to afk two fifteenths, the 
value of 40,o¢co0l. the Commons peremptorily refufed 
to fet fo bad a precedent as to give twice in one feflion 
of parliament. Sit Robert Philips faid, that the argu- 
ments for giving were honour, neceflity, and fafety, not 
honourable actions grounded upon found counfels; that 
neceflity had been the continual argument for fupply in 


all parliaments. Sir ennai Seymour faid, it was firange 
that 


294 


Ann, 1625. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 
that the Commons fhould be called together only for a 


fupply of 40,o001.; it fhewed the King’s neceflities; | 


that 1 40,0001. had been raifed by places of honour fold, 
places of juftice were fold, and ferjeant’s places fold. Sir 
Thomas Wentworth faid, he feared the pafling of this 
precedent for fo {mall a fum was to take advantage of it 


for a greater hereafter. Mr. Rolle argued, that if the ne- - 


ceflity of money was fo great, now was the time to prefs 
for a redrefs of grievances. Sir Edward Coke quoted pre- 
cedents of punifhment inflicted on evil counfellors ; faid, 
it was malum confilium to prefs more fubfidies, when two 
had been already given; and added, that he would rather 
give roool, out of his own eftate, than to grant any 


fubfidy now. ; 


On the day after this debate, the houfe went upon a 
complaint againft Sir Francis Stewart, an admiral, for 
fuffering a pirate to take an Englifh fhip before his 
face; that to fome merchants, who had defired’ him to 
go out and chace the pirate, he anfwered, his commif- 
fion was not to go. on the French coaft, where he con- 
ceived the pirate lay; that in conclufion, though he was 
offered great fums of money, or half the goods in the 
fhip, he ftill refufed to go. On this report Sir Francis 
Seymour faid, that the lord-admiral Buckingham had the 
care of thefe things, therefore the default muft needs be 
in him and his agents, and moved for a committee to 
confider of the caufes thereof, and where the default lay. 
Mr. Lifter mentioned the wrongs done to the Englifh 
trade by Dunkirkers; and therefore moved, that the 
committee to be appointed, might in a general way con- 
fider of this, and the fafety of all the fea-ports. This 


Gas AecR sh. Eos rk 295 
being agreed to, a committee of the whole houfe was ap- Ann. 1625. 


pointed to take thefe matters into confideration, and they 
to have power to name a fub-committee. 


CHARLEs, underftanding by thefe arguments and re- 
folutions, that the houfe was determined againft a fup- 
ply without an effectual reformation in the government, 
with a rafh impetuofity diffolved the parliament *; add- Diffolution of 
ing thereby to the diftafte of the people, who were before P*!@™«" 
ftrongly difgufted with his unpopular management, The 
Commons, who had been made acquainted with the inten- 
tions of the court, formed themfelves into a grand com- 
mittee, and before they would fuffer the King’s meflenger 
to be introduced, drew up a proteftation of their honeft =" 
alacrity to do their utmoft endeavour to difcover and re- 
form the abufes of the ftate, and in like fort to afford 


* Ads paffed this parliament. 
1. An act for the punifhing divers abufes committed on the Lord’s 
’ day, commonly called Sunday. 
2. An act to enable the King to make leafes of lands, parcel of the 
duchy of Cornwall. 
3. An act for the eafe of obtaining licences of alienation, and in the 
" pleading of alienations with licence, or of pardons of alienations with- 
out licence, in the court of Exchequer, or elfewhere. 
4- An act to reftrain tippling in inns and alehoufes. 
§- An act for three entire fublidies granted by the fpirituality, 
6. An act for two entire fubfidies granted by the temporality. 
. 7- An a& that this feffion of parliament: fhall not determine by his 
majefty’s affent to this and fome other acts. 
8. An act to confirm an agreement between the King and the copy- 
holders of Macclesfield in Com. Ceftr, &c. 
9 An act for the fettlement of an agreement of the tenants of 
Chelvenham and Afhly, alias Charlton, between the King and Sir Giles 


~ Greval, knight. Vide Statutes at Large, and Rubworth, 
ety = 


296 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND... 


_ Ann.1623. all neceflary- piene the juft Sener nneneaee of 


the crown, 


A PROSECUTION againft one Montague, a court chap- 
lain, had been purfued by the Commons this parliament 
with fome eagernefs, The bufinefs appears a trifling one, 
but it carried with it fome important confequences that 
fufficiently juftify the warmth with which it was purfued. 
Montague had publifhed a book tending to Arminianifm; 
for this he had been rewarded by court-preferment, not- 
withftanding the parliament, in the latter end of the laft 
reign, had queftioned his conduct, and afterwards re- 
ferred it to the archbifhop of saree from anne 
he had received an admonition. 


MonTacvue, who now found himfelf powerfully pro- 
tected, publifhed another book, filled with the fame doc- 
trines, and entitled, “ An Appeal to Cefar.” For this 
contempt of the former cenfure of the houfe he was 
re-queftioned, and ordered to give bail of two thonfand 
pounds for his appearance at the next feffion. Charles 
interfered, and pleaded an exemption for Montague, as 
being his chaplain in ordinary, and therefore the houfe 
had no right to moleft him. This gave vigour to the 
fire already kindled, which would have terminated in an 
impeachment, if the bufinefs had not been diverted by 
the profecution of a more glaring and more b akgomtrd 
offender. 


Tuoucn the Arminian tenets had in them no natural.” 
relation to high-church or monarchical principles, yet 
being’ repugnant to neither, the fame political end, viz. 


OS, BOAR GE Eos 2 


fcreening themfelves under the protection of party, which eh 1625. . 


had forced them to an union with the republicans of 
Holland, connected them clofely to the abettors of arbi- 
trary power in this country; and they became the warmeft 
partizans for tyrannical principles in church and ftate *. 
As fuch, they were always treated with a juft animofity 
by the adverfe faction, and the pretenfions of Charles to 
exempt the individuals in his fervice from the national 
jurifdiction, turned the particular cafe of Montague to a 
difpute of importance. The bifhops had alfo interfered 
in this caufe, reprefenting it as an affair that the King 
alone, by his delegates, had a right to judge of, and that 
matters of difference in the church ought only to be de- 
termined by the King and the bifhops +. The only cir- 
cumftance that carries the appearance of an unjuttifiable 
exertion in the Commons in thefe profecutions, is the ty- 
rannical reftraint they feemed defirous to lay on literature. 
But it muft be confidered that the freedom of the prefs, 


* Thefe propofitions contain the fubftance of the Arminian doétrine: 
I. God does not in an arbitrary manner predeftinate any perfon to 
be faved or damned. 

II. Chrift died for all men, that is, all are partakers of the benefit 
of Chrift’s paffion, who fincerely perform the gofpel terms of faith and 
repentance. — 

IJ. How neceflary foever Grace may be towards our doing good 
aétions, yet it is not irrefiftible; that is, we are ftill free agents, con- 
fequently the faithful may finally fall away, or depart from a ftate of 
grace. , 

+ The bifhops ‘of London, Durham, Winchefter, Rochefter, and 
St. David’s, in a letter to the duke of Buckingham, recommended 
Montague’s book ; and faid, that his majefty would do moft gracioufly 
to prohibit all parties from {peaking or writing cen it. MSS. in 

. Br. Mufeum, PrdQ> 
_ Voit Qa neceflary 


m pe Pera i. 
ia 23 la: “ef 


298 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Aan, 1625. neceffary to the exiftence of Liberty, was a privilege ur 
known in this age; and whilft the crown’ pofleffed. the 
power of fupprefling the publication of every argument 
that clathed with its pretenfions, the Commons endeavoured. 
to attain the fame means of reftraining the venomous 
doctrine broached by its creatures and- dependants: 


Berore the diffolution of the parliament, the weanie : 
had already infected the city of Oxford, and there was. 
great murmuring that the court fhould bring them to: 
gether in fo fickly a feafon, when its avowed defign was 
only to extort money from the fubjeét, The Commons 
had exprefled great fenfe of their:danger at the feffion at 
Weftminfter, and it was remarked in the houfe, that the 
bell was tolling every minute that they were fpeaking: 
Strong as were thefe apprehenfions, the patriot‘ members 
kept their ground, and with exemplary: refolution gave 
fo conftant an-attendance that their antagonifts-could ne 
ver obtain the advantages of an undefended caufe, or a: 
feattered party. 


Tue determined refolution. of the Commons not:to. 
give any fupport.to the extravagant fchemes of the King 
and his minifter has been reprefented by the enemies of 
civil Liberty as an indefenfible obftinacy, contrary to ra- 
tional or conflitutional principles; yet.it will be found, 
on an impartial examination, confiftent with both. As 
they abfurdly fuppofe that this parliament was obliged, 
though contrary to the apparent good and fafety of 

° the fubjeét, rigidly to perform all the engagements of 
the laft, it will be neceflary to enquire what thefe’ en- 
gagements were, before they can be i 


aks Book » Red ME 8 yk 


299 


find that the laft parliament, though inflamed with the Aco. 1625. 


apprehenfion of a clofe connection with the moft power- 
ful and moft bigoted prince in Europe, and defirous, on 
any feafible terms, of breaking an union pernicious to 
the Religion and Liberty of this country, were fo wary 
of trufting a weak prodigal prince, and a vain hot- headed 
minifter, with the difficult and expenfive enterprize of re- 
gaining a then-confirmed conqueft from the united 
powers of the fame potent family; that James was ob- 
liged to fubmit to the extraordinary condefcenfion of re- 
ceiving the military fupplies from a council of war ap- 
pointed by the parliament. The mean collufion which 
fruftrated the purpofe of the condition.on which thefe 


fubfidies were granted, the imprudent manner of con- . 


ducting the firft military enterprize, and the fatal cata- 
ftrophe that enfued, muft have enforced the fame parlia- 
ment to drop a hopelefs {cheme which they had engaged 
no farther to fupport than was confiftent with the advan- 
tage and honour of the nation; of which they were to 
be the judges. If thefe reafons had been powerful enough 
to have prevented that parliament from giving farther af- 
fiftance, how ftrongly muft they have operated with this 
parliament, when united to the prefent afpect of affairs? 
The war was now no longer the war of the people ; the 
abfurd conditions on which Charles had contracted an al- 
liance with the Bourbon family had entirely broke the 
connection of an united caufe. The Palatinate quarrel, 
when diftinguifhed from that of Liberty and Religion, 
was merely private, and confined to the Stewart family. 
According to the laws of the conflitution, it could not 
be fuppofed, whatever examples the neceflity, imbecility, 
or ignorance, of particular times might have produced, 
Qqg2 that 


i> So i ae 


300 “HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


"Ann, 1625. that the people were obliged to tax themfelves with ex- 
traordinary levies of money, but for their own fupport 
and defence; if they ever did, it was only underftood 

' as.a purchafe for the redrefs of thofe grievances to which 
monarchies of all ftates are the moft fubject; and in- 
deed fuch a privilege is fo neceflary to maintain a limited. 
monarchy in due bounds, that it is the only obftacle that 
€an prevent it from becoming in practice abfolute: 

“ Give money, faid the crown, and in due time you fhall ; 
have redrefs of grievance.” ‘Was a reprefentative body a 
of the people, fpecially trufted with the facred charge of 
defending and profecuting the moft effential rights of the 
nation, of reforming the errors of government, of re- 

’ dreffing the injuries of the fubject, was it lightly to give 
up the only means whereby fuch a reformation could be’ 
effected? The bare manner in which Charles had expofed. 
his neceflities and prodigality proceeded from an abfurd' ~ 
fuppofition that the Commons would think themfelves. 
bound in duty to relieve his wants, however imprudently 
they had been incurred. But this was the fond error of 
felf-flattery, and apparently clafhed with the real duties. 
of their office. The ordinary revenue of the crown was. 
the only fund legally its own; and the neceffities to. 
which the anticipation or alienation of that revenue would 
reduce a prodigal prince, was a favourable and fair op- 
portunity to correct the errors of the ftate, and enlargeand: 
fecure the liberties of the people. The debts and ex- ~ i 
pences which had been ftated to the parliamentamounted : 
to the fum of 800,000 1. when, befides the. money that 

_had been lavifhed on the marriage and other folemnities, 
Charles had given large fums to many of his creatures, to- 
the Sue of miner gs other attendants on the queen. 

_ Cuar ee 


Cc: Bee Bh O18 Tf 4, 


301 


Cares, not having been able to obtain farther fup- Ann, 1625 


plies from the Commons, had recourfe to the old oppref- 


five expedient of forcing a loan from the fubject. Privy 


feals were iffued out to all perfons of fubftance, and the 
colleGtors were appointed to return the names of thofe 
who difcovered. a difpofition to excufe the payment of the 
fams impofed. To foften this general offence, a procla- 
mation was iffued for recalling all the children of Eng- 
lith parents that were in foreign feminaries, and an or- 


der publifhed for difarming Popifh recufants, according. 


to the petition of the late parliament. 


From the money Charles got by the loam he was enabled Naval expe- 


to equip his fleet: It confifted of eighty fhips ; ten thou- 
fand of the land-forces were embarked to ferve on the de- 


_ ftined expedition. The chief command’ was entrutfted to Sir 
Edward Cecil, lately created vifcount Wimbledon, a crea- 


ture of Buckingham, to the neglect of Sir Robert Man- 
fel, an old fea-officer, who was in great efteem with the 


“people. The next in command to Wimbledon was lord: 


Effex. So loofely eoncerted was the plan of the expcdi- 
tion, that it was not till the rendezvous at €ape St. Vin- 
eent, after a ftorm which had difperfed the whole flect, 


that a council of war was firft called to determine the 
feene of action, Effex was for attacking Cadiz, and car- 
ried his opinion by a majority of voices. The length 


of time which the fleet had been at fea was fufficient to 


. put the Spaniards on their guard. Though they found 
the bay full of fhips of great value, yet thefe, through: 
the neglect of the commanders *, were fuffered to ef- 


* A diffention between the two commanders, Wimbledon and Effex, is- 
- faid to have occafioned the prepofterous management of this bufinels. 
yrs cape. r- 


dition 
Spain. 


againtti 


302 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1625. cape. The fort of Puntal was attacked by Effex, ‘and 


taken. The poffeffion of this fort was of fo fmall con- 
fequence, that it was immediately abandoned, and the 
foldiers, having drank plentifully of new wines, became 
-difeafed. After this unfortunate beginning, the whole 
force returned to Cape St. Vincent, to wait for the Spanifh 
Plate fleet, which was then on its return from America: 
But narrowly mifling it, Wimbledon brought his — 
crew home *, 


THis unfuccefsful ill-conducted attempt increafed the 
clamor againft the miniftry ; and the difcontented party 
‘enjoyed the triumph of feeing their enemies entangled in 
{nares that became daily more intricate: A tyrannical go- 
vernment involving itfelf in difficulties that increafed the 
importance of the people, whilft at the fame time the © 
happy fituation of the kingdom exempted them from the 
fears of foreign hoftilities. 


Durine the courfe of the late expedition, Bucking- 
hham and the earl of Holland were fent to the Hague to 
negotiate a treaty with the Dutch, and to confer with 
the ambafladors of the kings of Denmark and Sweden, 
who had joined in the confederacy againft the houfe of 
Auftria. The Dutch had entered heartily into the caufe, 
and had lent. an affiftance of fhips to the late expedi- 
tion. In this congrefs Buckingham not only promifed 
great things in his mafter’s name, but threw out hints 
of hopeful expectations on the fide of France. To fup- 


* The contagion had been fpread by the imprudence of the com- 
mander, who obliged every fhip, not infected, to take a certain num- 


- ber of the fick for found men, Baker’s Chronicle. Howes Letters 


CRP ARP Bose u 303 


ply the prefent exigencies of the war, he had carried Ann. 1625. | 
with him the crown jewels, and pawned them in Hol- 
4 land for the fum of 300,000]. ‘Therefore, when the Se p-849 
fleet returned, Charles iffued out a proclamation, prohi- 
biting the foldiers from leaving their colours ;. and truft- 
ing tothe fhallow expedient of nominating * Sir Edward 
Coke }; Sir Robert Philips, Sir Thomas Wentworth, Sir. 
Francis Seymour, Sir Guy Palmes, Mr. Edward Alford, 
and Sir William. Fleetwood, the leading popular mem- 
bers, to» ferve as fheriffs in the counties, he. again ven- 
Aa _- tured to calla parliament}. Before this period Williams Hist: Lite 
had not only been turned out of his office of lord-keeper, 
but was banifhed from the council, and. commanded to 
retire to his bifhopric.of Lincoln.. 


siapetinaiane to the: meeting of the parliament at 

Oxford, Williams, to remove (if poflible) the growing dif- 

tafte of Buckingham, had officioufly informed the King 

- * . @f the enmity that fubfifted in. the houfe of Commons 


* Such a nomination by cuftom. incapacitated them from ferving in 
parliament. 

+ Sir Edward Coke objected to feveral things in the form.of the oath 
given to the fheriffs. This remarkable one again{t the Lollards was 
complied with,- and, by the advice of the. judges, left out, viz. ** You 
fhall do a}l your pains and diligence to deitroy and make to ceafe all 
manner of herefics commonly. called Lollaries, within your bailiwick, 
from time to time, to all your power, and affift and be helping to all 

~ ordinaries and‘commiffioners of the holy church, and favour and main-- 

tain them: as oftentimes as you fhall be required.” Ru/bworth, vol. 1. 

. P1971 & feq.. 
es t When the names of thofe fheriffs whom the judges had appointed. 
were fhewn to the King, he declared, that he had the names of feven, 
whom he would have fheriffs. Letters and Difpatches of Thomas Earl-of 
tees Strafford, fol. ed. 1739, p. 29. ) | 
aes 7 alo tc. againtt. 


304 


Ann. 1625. 


HISTORY OF »sENGBAN D., 


againft his favourite; but undertook, if the feflion was 


poftponed till Chriftmas, to take off the bittereft fticklers 
againfthim. This ferved only to increafe Buckingham’s 
jealoufy, who concluded that Williams could not have 
fo exact an intelligence, or fo great an influence as he 
boafted, without being a party in the cabal againft him. 
His hatred was fo inflamed by this fufpicion, that though 
precedents of fuch a nature touched him nearly, in the 
prefent difpofition of the Commons, his agents offered 
the party in the oppofition to give his afliftance to the 
ruin of Williams by a parliamentary profecution. Ha- 
tred to Buckingham faved the keeper ; who, in the point 
of pafling the pardon to the Romith priefts, had had the 
addrefs, at the expence of his patron, to clear himfelf 
tolerably well to the Commons. Immediately on the 
diffolution of the parliament his difgrace enfued: He re- 
ceived it with an abjectnefs of fpirit equal to the fervi- 
lity of his deportment during the fun-fhine of his fa- 
vour; and at the very time when he was practifing with 
Sir Thomas Wentworth to debauch him from his party 
and principles, to bring him over to the court. In this 
place it muft be remembered, that when the extravagant 
articles, both private and public, were fent by Charles 
from Madrid, James either had, or affected to fhew, 
compunctions of confcience and honour at figning arti- 
cles fo deftructive to the weal of the Proteftant religion ; 
Williams thereupon got up and made a florid fpeech, 
in which he fhewed the King and council that fo do- 
ing was repugnant to neither. On thefe flattering per- 
fuafions the articles were immediately figned, and Wil- 
liams, in a letter to Madrid, boafted of the important 
fervice he had rendered the prince. The bithop of Lin- 

coln’s 


G) HOU“ TR GE ROS 1. 


coln’s great rival and enemy was William Laud, bifhop 
of St. David's. This prelate, in his ftation of prefident 
of St. John’s college at Cambridge, had fignalized himfelf 
as a turbulent oppofer of the Puritans, and as a ftickler 
for the Arminian principles. He at length obtained the 
office of court-chaplain, and, by a fedulous attention 


_ and compliance with the humours of the favourite, his 


patronage. When the bifhopric of St. David’s became 
vacant, Buckingham afked it for Laud; but James, on 
account of his ill fame *, fhewing an averfion to his 
promotion, he employed Williams to teaze him into a 
compliance: Williams not only fucceeded in this, but 
retained him in his prebendary of Weftminfter, and 
procured him, in fome time after, a living of 1201. a- 


_ year in the diocefe of St. David’s: For all which fervices, 


Laud, now on a foot of rivalfhip, and having ina man- 
ner engroffled Buckingham’s ear, became one of the prin- 
cipal means of Williams’s difgrace. 


305 


Ann. 1625. 


Hacket’s Li€ 
of Williams. 


Four days before the meeting of parliament, the cere- Coronation, 


mony of the coronation was performed ; and Charles had 
the imprudence, at this critical time, to add to the difguft 
of the public by exacting the obfolete tribute of knights 
fees from all thofe that had forty pounds a-year+. The 


* Laud had married lady Rich to his patron the earl of Devonhire, 
her paramour, while her hufband the earl of Warwick was alive. 

_ James had another objection to this promotion: Laud had given him 
fome violent counfel in regard to the ecclefiaftical affairs of Scotland ; 
and his timorous difpofition was terrified at a circumftance that partly 

‘ the ftorm that this zealous pedant had fo great a fhare 
in raifing. Hacket’s Life of Williams. 

+ The original fam was twenty pounds, but at the time it was thus 
fixed, twenty pounds a-year was a confiderable income. 


fy. Vou. 1. Rr form 


306 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1625. form of the coronation was compiled by bifhop Laud, 
who made two additions to that which had been more 
recently ufed, from the antiquated examples of Richard II.. 
and Henry VI. One was this claufe in. the body of the: 
pape fervice: “ Let him obtain favour of the people, like: 
vo. Il, p.31. Aaron in the tabernacle, Elifha in the waters, Zacharias. 
in the temple. Give him Peter’s key of difcipline, and 
Paul’s doétrine.” The other was the following addrefs- 
pagal after the ceremony was performed: “ Stand and hold. 
faft from henceforth the place to which you have been. 
heir by the fucceflion of your fore-fathers, being now de-- 
livered to you by the authority of Almighty God, and by 
the hands of us and all: the bifhops and fervants of God.. 
And as you fee the clergy to come nearer to the altar 
than others, fo remember that in all places convenient 
you give them greater honour; that the mediator of God: 
and man may eftablifh you in the kingly throne, to be 
a mediator betwixt the clergy and the laity, and that you. 
may reign for ever with Jefus Chrift, the King of kings, 

and Lord of lords *.” aw 


Parliament.  §yx Thomas Coventry, an errant court-lawyer, obtained 


6th February. . SS 

Ruthworth, the feals on the difgrace of Williams, and, on the meet- 
vol. I. p.202, . : : d he ‘ 

& feq. ing of the parliament, made a florid minifterial fpeech, 


full of grofs adulation and devotion to the crown: “ If 
we confider aright, faid he, and think of that incompa- 
rable diftance between the fupreme height and majefty - 


* Bithop Williams, as dean-of Weftminfter, was by courfe to have | 
a chief_part in the ceremony 5 but he was commanded not to appears 


f ‘of a mighty monarch, and the fubmiflive awe and low- Anaei6a¢s 
; linefs of a loyal fubject, we cannot but receive exceed- 
| ing comfort and contentment in the frame of this higheft 
court, wherein not only the prelates, nobles, and gran- 
dees, but the Commons of all degrees, have their part; 
; and wherein that high majefty doth defcend to admit, 
or rather to invite, the humbleft of his fubjects to con- 
ference and council with him of the great, weighty, and 
difficult affairs of the kingdom: A benefit and favour 
whereof we cannot be too fenfible and thankful.—And it 
behoveth us to magnify and blefs God that hath put the 
power of affembling parliaments in the hands of him, 
. the virtue inherent of whofe perfon doth ftrive with the 
greatnefs of his princely lineage and defcent, whether he 
fhould be accounted majer or melior, a greater king or a 
better man.” This lofty defeription of majefty was an- 
fwered in the fame ftrain by the bombaft oration of the 
fpeaker, Sir Heneage Finch, viz—“ And fince we all 
ftand for hundreds and thoufands, for figures and cy- 
phers *, as your majefty, the fupreme and fovereign au- 
_ditor, fhall pleafe to place and value us; and, like coin 
to pafs, are made current by your royal ftamp and im- 
preffion only.—Here your royal perfon, ftill enthroned in 
the ftate of majefty, attended by a reverend and learned 
' prelacy, a great and full nobility, enthroned like ftars 
in the firmament, fome of a greater, fome of a lefler 
magnitude, full of light and beauty, and acknowleging 
to whom they owe their luftre, and by a choice number 
of worthy knights and gentlemen, that reprefent the 


- ~~ ee 


* Thete is a figure fomething like this in a fpeech of the royal 
orator James, viz. make the fubjects like men at chefs, a pawn to take 


a bifhop or a knight. 


Rr2 whole 


308 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1625, Whole body of your Commons. But to leave generals, 


we live not under a monarchy only, the beft of govern- 
ments, and under a government, the beft of monarchies, 
but undera king, the beft of monarchs, your royal per- 
fon. And thofe eminent graces and virtues which are in- 
herent in your perfon, in whom greatnefs and goodnefs 
contend for fuperiority, it were prefumption in me to 
touch, though with never fo good a meaning; they will 
not be bounded within the narrow circle of my difcourfe: 
What age fhall not record or eternize your princely mag- 
nanimity in that heroic action or venturous journey into 
Spain? hazarding your perfon to preferve the kingdom: 
Fathers will tell it to their children in fucceffion; after- 
ages will then think it a fable. Your piety to the memory _ 
of your dear father, in following and bedewing his hearfe . 
with your tears, is full in every man’s memory.” 


Previous to bufinefs, all the members, by an order of 
the houfe, received the facrament. This precaution was 
to difcover any falfe papiftical brethren, who might 
otherwife lurk under the cover of the oath of allegiance. 
A meflage of complaint from the King acquainted the 
houfe, that Sir Edward Coke, being fheriff of Bucking- - 
hamfhire, was returned one of the knights of the fhire 
for the county of York. This meflage the houfe referred 
to the committee of privileges and elections, to report 
their opinions of the law in thefe cafes, and the ufage of 
parliament. Sir Edward Coke gave up his feat on this 
occafion, though on the day before the diffolution of the * 
parliament it was refolved that he ftood, de facto, a mem- 
ber of that houfe. . 


. 


WiCp ‘He As Rib. Ey 8) 1 309 


Tue Commons went into-a warm examination of the Ann. 1625. 
public grievances: The mifcarriage of the fleet to Cadiz, punworth, 
the evil counfellors about the King, mif-employment and ¥:!: P.207- 
watte of the King’s revenue; and they demanded an 
account of the three fubfidies and fifteenths granted the 
21ftof James. It was refolved that a committee for fe- 
cret affairs *, and another for grievances, fhould fit every 
Wednefday and Friday during this parliament; and an 
act was tendered and read, to-adminifter an oath for the 
rendering a true account of all general and public taxes, 
rates, and collections. The prefent grievances, as enu- 
merated by the committee, are thefe: 


Grants of penfions now 120,000l. before but 80,0001. 


| TWcREAsE of houfhold from 45,0001. to 80,0001. 


FruiTLess ambafladors, with larger allowance than 
| formerly : 


“TREB Le increafe of the privy-purfe : 


| DovBLeE increafe of the tosalearyy of the chamber, and. 
great wardrobe : 


New impofitions and monopolies multiplied, and fet- 
tled to continue by grants : 


Customs enhanced by the new book of rates : 
TonNnace and poundage levied without any act of 


parliament. 


* The bufinefs of this committee for fecret affairs was to enquire 
into the conduct of Buckingham. Guthrie, vol. III. p. 840. 


THE 


31d 


Ann. 1625. 
Council of 
war exa- 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Tue council of war * was:examined conterning the 
management of the money entrufted to them by parlia- 
-ment for four.ends fpecified the 21ft of James. They all, 
on various pretences, declined giving fatisfaction, except _ 
Sir Robert Manfel, who promifed to anfwer fully to every 
:particular, provided he had leave of the King. On this 
general refufal. the oppofition dropped the affair, having 
gained an advantageous point from the fufpicions to | 
which the miniftry was expofed, by laying on the coms 
-miflioners injunctions of fecrecy, contrary to the condi-+ 
-tions of the grant 7. 


A coMMITTEE was named concerning religion, and 
‘Montague’s publications were again called in queftion: 
Thefe affairs were principally managed by Pym, a mem- 
ber of great experience and acquired judgment, having 
ferved in more than one parliament in the laft reign {. 
Warmly as Montague had been profecuted in three fuc- 
ceflive feffions, he at length efcaped fentence by a more 
interefting profecution, which at this time engrofled the 


* The men that compofed this council of war were, the lords Carey, 
Brook, Vere, Grandifon, Sir Robert Manfel, Sir John Ogle, and Sir 
T homas Button, 


+ According to the conditions of the grant, the treafurers had 
made oath that none of the money fhould iffue out of their hands with- 
out warrant from the council of war. The council of war had made 
oath that they fhould make no warrants for the payment of any of the 
money, but only for-the ends fpecified by parliament ; and, farther, 
fhould all be accountable for their doings and proceedings in that bufi- 
nefs, to the Commons in parliament, when they, or any of them, fhould 
‘be thereunto required. Parl. Hift. vol. VI. p. 427. . 


t Mr. Pym was one of the fuffering members that were imprifoned 
‘by James for fpeaking freely againft the meafures of the court. 


CC. HOA RL. B.S L 


31 


attention of the whole body. | Dr. Turner, a. phyfican, Ann, 1625. 


propounded .thefe queries to the houfe: 


i. Whether the duke, being admiral, be nor the caufe a: 


of the lofs of the King’s royalty in the narrow feas? 


Il. Whether the unreafonable, exorbitant, and immenfe 


gifts of money and lands beftowed on the duke and his: 
kindred, be not the caufe of impairing the ming reve-- 


nue and impoverifhing the crown ! 


Ill. Whether the multiplicity of offices conferred upon - 
the duke and others depending upon him (whereof they’ 
are not capable) be not the caufe.of the evil government: 


of this kingdom? 


IV. Whether recufants:in general, by a kindof’ con-- 
nivance, be not encreafed by reafon of the duke’s mo-- 


ther and his father-in-law being known Papitts? 


V. Whether'the fale of honours, offices, and places of: 
judicature, ecclefiaftical livings and promotions (a-fcandal: 


and hurt to the kingdom!) be not through the duke? 


VI. Whether the duke’s ftaying at home; being. admi-- 
ral of the fleet, and general of the land army, was not the: 
caufe of the bad fuccefs and overthrow of that action, and ! 


whether he gave good directions for that defign? 


Ow this accufation it was refolved, upon the queftion, profcutionof ! 
that common fame was.a good ground of proceeding Buckingham, - 


for the houfe of Commons, either by enquiry, or pre- 


fenting the complaint (if the houfe finds caufe) to the - 


King or Lords. Among. the arguments and obfervations _ 
. urged : 


312 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann 1625. urged to procure this refolution, Sir Thomas Wentworth’s 


were very rational: That if they could not prefent to 
the Lords upon common fame, yet they might enquire 
and accufe in that houfe upon it; that this was the 
only fafeguard of accufation for great men, whereas in 
all others no man dare accufe them, for fear of danger. 


itvol. Mr, Rolle faid, that the Commons might prefent a lord 
43% of the higher houfe to the Lords, for he was not com- 


‘th, 


pe digefting thefe matters into a fpecial charge, they Te-  - 
ceived a moft importunate meflage from the King, fet- 


pellable to anfwer in the houfe of Commons; thus, if 
they could not prefent upon common fame, he could 
never be drawn to anfwer. If the offence tended to fe- 
lony or treafon, the Commons might pray to have him 
committed, in refpect to the quality of the fact. That 
it was otherwife in fmaller offences: In the sth Hen. IV. 
a complaint was made againft the King’s confeflor, and 
fome others; hereupon the Lords.ordered that he fhould 
be removed from about the King; and the King in par- 
liament, though he knew no caufe particular, yet, be- 
caufe the Lords and Commons had thought them unfit- 
ting, he there commanded them to come no more near 
him; and affured the aflembly, that if there were any 
others againft whom the Lords and Commons had in- 
dignation, he would remove them alfo, ‘The two law- 
yers, Selden and Noy, argued for the legality of the 
proceeding on common fame; and the Commons for- 
warded the profecution with great vigour, appointing fe- 
veral committees for particular enquiries into the duke’s 
conduct. 


Wuixst they were thus employed in preparing and 


eee 


ELAOAARID EAST. 


ting forth “ the infinite prejudice the public affairs mutt Ans. item 


receive by the longer delaying the fupplies ; that his 
majefty’s fleet being returned, and the victuals fpent, 
the men muft of neceflity be difcharged, and their 
wages paid, elfe an affured mutiny would follow, which 
might be many ways dangerous at this time; that his 


majefty hath made ready about forty fhips, to be fet 


forth on a fecond voyage, which want only victuals and 
fome men, which, without prefent fepply of money; 
cannot be fet forth and kept together; that the army 
which is appointed muft be difbanded, if they be not 
prefently fupplied with victuals and cloaths; that if 
the companies of Ireland lately fent thither be not pro- 
vided for, inftead of defending that country they will 
prove the authors of rebellion; that the feafon of pro- 
viding healthful mierane will be srt if this — be 
pene z 


- 


neiany ox as thefe arguments appeared to the King, 


| the Commons did not think it prudent to truft the 


fword in the hands of Buckingham, at the very time 
they were proceeding againft him as an intolerable 


 nuifance in the ftate: Mr. Coke, fon of Sir Edward 


Coke, had avowed this fentiment in the houfe: “ It is 
better, faid he, to be eaten up _ a foreign enemy than 
to be deftroyed at home.” 


- Tae Commons, not to pileavi the fmalleft reproach 
‘upon themfelves of neglecting the real fervice of their 
country, fent the King a very civil an{fwer, in which 
they teftified an affured belief that he would accept and 
bites the faithful and neceflary advice of his parlia- 

Voi. I. Sf ment, 


314 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 162s, Ment, and that on this confideration they intended to af- : 
fit and fupply him in fuch a way, and in fo ample a >a 
meafure, as fhould make him fafe at home, and feared. 44 
abroad. 


CuARLEs was ftung to the quick at a meflage, that 
in a manner fubtle and fpecious, fhewed the determined 
refolution of the houfe to give no afliftance towards the 
occafions of the war till a miniftry fhould be elected on 
whom they could place an entire confidence. He af- 
_ fumed a more haughty manner than he had before 
“ufed to the Commons, no doubr with an intention either 
to awe this refolute afflembly into fubmiflive meafures, 
or to provoke them out of that prudent referve which 
had hitherto confined their oppofition withim the accuf- 
+ a rag tomed bounds of refpectful language: “ But for your 
& feq. claufe of prefenting grievances (writes he in his reply 
to their anfwer) I take that but for a parenthefis in your 
fpeech, and not a condition: And yet for anfwer to 
that part, I will tell you, I will be as willing to hear 
your grievances as my predeceflors have been ; fo that 
you will apply yourfelves to redrefs them, and not to 
enquire after them. I muft let you know, that I will - = 
not allaw any of my fervants to be queftioned among . 
you, much lefs fuch as are of eminent ftate, and near 
unto me. The old queftion was, What fhall be done to 
the man whom the King will honour? but now it hath 
been the labour of fome to feek what may be done 
againft him whom the King thinks ft to honour *?” 


* It muft be remarked that this quotation, taken from the Old 
Teftament, is an inftance of the power of a Perfian king, confequen 
abfurdly adapted to that of a limited monarch, and fhews that 


TS 
7%, 


Ci. HGA Ri. ESS *.1, 


Charles proceeds to reproach the Commons for incon- 
ftancy, in profecuting a man who was once an univer- 
fal favourite among them; and finifhes with this threat: 
* I would you would haften my fupply, or elfe it 
will be worfe for yourfelves; for if any ill happen I 
fhall be the laft that feel it.” This magifterial lan- 
guage produced no effect on the meafures of the Com- 
mons: They calmly voted the King three fubfidies and 
three fifteenths * ; but the act not to be brought in till 
the grievances were prefented and anfwered. Then they 
-refumed the debates concerning the impeachment of 
Buckingham, and ordered him to have notice of what 
had been charged againft him. In this debate Sir W. 
Walter made a fevere fpeech againft the favourite ; and 
Sir John Elliot fhewed, that it was not the manner of 
parliaments to give before their grievances were re- 
drefled. Charles, perplexed and exafperated at a con- 
duct which baffled all his fchemes, was determined to 
attempt the expedient of hectoring the Commons in per- 
fon, and fent for the two houfes to Whitehall. He be- 
gan his {peech with thanking the Lords for having in- 
cited the Commons to take the ftate of the kingdom 
into confideration. He avowed, that if this parliament 
did not redound to its good, it was not their faults + ; 
that he came to fhew the Commons their errors, Then 


notions of regal government were as confufed as James’s; both of 
them refolving its feveral diftinctions into that of a fimple and abfo- 
late monarchy. , 

* Some days after this the Commons added a fourth fubfidy. 


+ The Lords, in a conference with the Commons on the ftate of 
affairs abroad, had recommended to the Commons to refolve on giving 
the King a fpeedy affiftance. Parl. Hift. vol. VI. p. 470. 


Sf2 the 


31S 
Ann, 1625. 


a oe 
1. Hitt 


a. VI. 
P: 444s & feq. 


316 


Aan. 1626. the lord-keeper, by the King’s command, taking up the - 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


-fpeech, thewed that the following declaration was only 


‘intended for the Commons, but that his majefty was 


willing that the Lords fhould be witnefles of the honour 
and juftice of his refolutions ; that his majefty had ap- 
proved, by his behaviour, his affection for the right ufe 
of parliaments ;—that after he had received fatisfaction 


for his reafonable demands, he would, as a juft king, 


anfwer the grievances that fhould be prefented to him 


. in a dutiful manner; that as his majefty was well-af- 


fectioned to the right ufe of parliaments, fo never king 
was more jealous of his honour, nor tore fenfible of 
the contempt or neglect of his royal rights, which he 
will by no means fuffer to be violated by any pretence 
of parliamentary liberty, wherein: his majefty doth not 
forget that the parliament is his council, and therefore 


eught to have the liberty of a council; but he under-- 


ftands the difference between counfel and controuling, be- 
tween liberty and the abufe of liberty. The lord-keeper 
next proceeded to fchool the Commons for not having, 
according to a meflage from his majefty, correéted Mr. 
Coke for a feditious fpeech uttered in the houfé; and 
for not only encouraging, but walking in the fteps of 


' Dr. Turner, who did take upon him, faid he, to advife 


the houfe upon fundry articles againft the duke of 
Buckingham, as he pretended ; but, in truth, to wound 
the honour and government of his majefty, and of his. 
renowned father: And his majefty, firft by a meflage, 
and after by his own royal mouth, did declare that that 
courfe of enquiry was an example which by no way he 
could fuffer, though it were againft his meaneft fem 
vant, much lefs againtt « one fo near him; and “that Bis 


CHARLES 1 317 


majefty did much wonder at the foolith infolence. of Ans. 1626. 
any man that could think that his majefty fhould be 
drawn, out of any end, to offer fuch a facrifice fo un- 
* worthy of a king ora good matter. He then afferted 
the duke’s fincerity and difcretion from the King’s own 
: knowledge, with a reproach to the Commons of difre- 
j ‘ays fpectful proceedings ; that their committees had pre- 
fumed to examine the letters of the fecretary of ftate *. 
Then the Commons were reprimanded for their dilatori- 
neéfs in proceeding in the bufinefs of the fupply, the ina- 
dequarenefs of the fum to the King’s wants, and the con- 
dition:in a manner tacked to it: “ Therefore, continued 
the keeper, his majefty commandeth that you go toge- 
ther again, and by Saturday next return your final an- 
fwer what farther fupply you will add to this you have 
already agreed on; and that to be without conditions, 
either directly or indirectly, for the fupply of thefe 
great and important affairs of his majefty, which, for 
the reafons formerly made known unto you, can endure 
no longer delay; and if you fhall not by that time re- 
folve on a more ample one, his majefty cannot expect 
a fupply this way, or fuffer you to fit longer together ;. 
ih, otherwife, if you do it, his majefty is well content that 
. you fall fit fo long ds the feafon of the year will per- 
Ay mit; and doth affure you that the prefent addition to. 
your fupply to fet forward the work fhall be no hin- 


. »* Committees had been difpatched to the fignet-office, to fearch for 
originals of letters for reprieving of priefts condemned at York. The 
Commons alleged in their anfwer to the reproach of the lord-keeper, 
Sy that in the above-mentioned act they had done nothing not warranted 
Ws aes: ‘by the precedents of former eae upon the like occafions, Parl. 
| Sa able BioaR. 


teow io. 5 ' drance: 


318 


Ann. 1626. drance to your fpeedy accefs again.” When the keeper _ 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


had finifhed, the King, re-taking up the fpeech, reproached 


_ the Commons in high terms on the old topic of the par- 


liament’s having helped him to break off the treaties with 
Spain; then, continuing his fpeech, faid, * Mr. Coke 
told you it was better to be eaten up by a foreign enemy 
than to be deftroyed at home. Indeed I think it is more 
honour for a king to be invaded, and almoft eaten up, 
by a foreign enemy, than to be defpifed by his own 


fubjects.----Remember that parliaments are altogether in . 
my power, for their calling, fitting, and diffolution: - 


Therefore, as I find the fruits of them good or evil, 
they are to-continue, or not to be; and remember that 
if in this time, inftead of amending your errors, by de- 


lay you perfift in your errors, you make them greater - 


and irreconcileable; whereas, on the other fide, if you 
do go on chearfully to mend them, and look to the di- 
ftreffed ftate of Chriftendom, and the affairs of the king- 
dom, as it lieth now by this great engagement, you will 
do yourfelves honour; you fhall encourage me to go on 


with parliaments, and I hope all Chriftendom {hall feel 


the good of it.” 


TuIs injudicious bravado put a ftop to all the pre- 
ceding bufinefs in the houfe: The Commons entered 
into debates- on the unconftitutional fpeeches that fell 
from the King and the keeper, turned the houfe into a 
‘grand committee, ordered the doors to be locked, no 
member to go forth, and that the proceedings of other 
committees fhould be ftopped till they came to a refolu- 
tion in this bufinefs. When thefe determinations were 
made known to the King, the duke of Buckingham was 


' 
ordered + 
es 


6254 Rub E.S-L 319. 


ordered to explain thofe parts of the fpeeches that were Ann, 1626. 
liable to the moft exceptions. He took the opportunity 

of addrefling the houfe witha kind of vindication of his 

own conduct *, 


A REMONSTRANCE was then framed by the Com- 
mons, and fent up to the throne, on the fifth of April, 
in anfwer to the charges alleged againft them in the 
King’s and. the lord-keeper’s fpeeches. The houfe was 
then adjourned, by defire of. the King, to the thirteenth. 
This adjournment was only carried. by a majority of 
thirty, and. proves that the low-church party were at this 
time. very numerous in the lower houfe, the. oppofition 
thinking it fit to fit. through the holidays +. After. this 
fhort recefs, the Commons returned again to the bufi- 


| nefs of the profecution; but whilft they. were thus em- 

. ployed, an interefting fcene was carrying on in. the 
| houfe of Lords.. 

* One of the circumftances that Buckingham alleges to prove his 


“i fidelity to the Proteftant religion is this: ‘ If I would have con- 
* : verted. myfelf, faid he, I might have had the infanta put into’ my 

| matfter’s bed; and if any difeontent fhould have rifen here, I might 
} have had an army to have come with me; but I thought the offer 
foolifh, ridiculous, and fcornful, in that. point of religion.” We do 

not hear that the Commons made any animadverfions on this vindica- 

tion of Buckingham; but furely nothing could be more abfurdiy im- 

politic than to.avow but this objection t to the aii of the. Spaniards. 


Parl. Hift. vol. VI. p. 454. 


+ This was not the only inftance of the powerfulnefs of this party; 
it was alleged:in the houfe this feffion, that proclamations for not dreff- 
ing meat in Lent were great grievances. 
We find in Rymer, that thee proclamations had been very frequent 
in the laft reign, 


WITR 


320s (ss HI STORY OF ENGUWAND, 


Ana.1626. | Wits the low expedient which had been ufed by the - 
miniftry, of incapacitating thofe men who had the greateft 
fway in the oppofition from ferving among the Com- 
mons, by nominating them fheriffs, more exceptionable 
meafures had been ufed to rid Buckingham of his anta- 
gonifts in the upper houfe.’ I2% AS FROMMER £ 


i> 
. 5 


ae 
_ 


Ruhhworh. WHEN the parliament was fummoned, by an un- 
Pal. Hit. warrantable flretch of prerogative, Charles had given or- 
ders, that no writ fhould be fent to the bifhop of Lin+ 
coln nor the carl of Briftol On an application from 
_ the latter to the houfe of Lords, his writ was fent him, . 
but with it a letter from the lord-keeper, forbidding his 
perfonal attendance. On the receipt of this mandate, 
Briftol preferred a fecond petition to the upper houfe; re- 
prefenting his cafe as an important encroachment on the 
liberty and fafety of the peers, with a defire to be fent 
for and heard in accufation of the duke of Bucking- 
ham ; having been wronged for the {pace of two years 
in his reputation and liberty by the afperfions of the faid 
duke, to keep him from the prefence of his majefly and 
parliament, left he fhould difcover feveral of his crimes 
and mifdemeanors. 


Profeeation Bristot had had the offer, on condition of an entire 
of Briftol. 


acquiefcence, to remain without farther moleftation, and 
enjoy the benefit of the pardon granted laft parliament ; 
but Charles, provoked at thefe repeated aéts of oppofi- . 
tion, ordered the attorney-general to enter an accufation  — 

of high-treafon againft him in the houfe of Lords; and 
fignified his pleafure, in a meflage by the lord-keeper, 
that he fhould be fent for as a delinquent to anfwer his 


MOAR AURA B36 oo 321 


offences. | Briftol reminded the Lords; that their houfe Aan. 1626. 
was poffefled of his. former petition, and of his accufa-. 

tion of Buckingham: He therefore defired that they, 
would receive his charge againft the duke and the lord 
Conway, and not to invalidate his sin owt ge 

them by whe wt Ja a emi him. 


‘THE offences deci by the crown againft Briftol are 
comprized under thefe heads : 


TuaT he had, contrary to his knowledge, given infor- Articles 
mation to the court of England, that the king of Spain“? 
did really intend to conclude the marriage, and make re- 
ftitution of the Palatinate: — 


oe Ut 


Tuart he had, contrary to inftructions, continued the 
treaties on generalities : | 


Tuat he had terrified the late King from retreating by 
magnifying the power of Spain: 


TuaT he had perfuaded the enlargement of pouts and 
— priefts : 


THat he had endeavoured traiteroufly to perfuade the 
prince to change his religion: . 


_ Tat on the offer made by Spain of a marriage be- 
tween the Palatinate’s eldeft fon and the emperor's daugh- 
ter, with the condition of his being bred up in the em- 
peror’s court, he had given it as his opinion that the pro- 
pene was reafonable : 


Von. ei ) Tt THAT 


322 


Ann. 1626, 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


-Tuar he had fet a day for the delivery of the depo/f- 
rios, without treating of the things commanded to him 
as reftrictions : 


_ Tuat he had fignified in confidence, that he cared not 
what the fuccefs of the treaties might be, but was deter- 
mined to make his fortune by the negotiation: 


Tuat his intricate management had enforced the | 


prefent King, when prince, to the dangerous. journey 
into Spain : - 


Lastiy, he had offended in a high manner, by pre- 


ferring a fcandalous petition to the houfe, to the difho- . 


nour of his majefty, of blefled memory, deceafed, and 
of his facred majefty that now is; offences no way fuffer- 
able in a fubject towards. a fovereign; and in one article 


of that petition, wherein he gives his now-majefty the lie;. 


in denying that relation which his majefty affirmed. 


Or this charge Charles declared himflf the accu- 


fer: Briftol offered to make any fubmiffion that fhould 


be perfonal, to the King; but befought the Lords to 


take into confideration how dangerous would be the 
confequences if his majefty fhould be accufer, judge, 
witnefs, and have the confifcation *. He moved that 


- * Charles had offered to be himfelf the principal evidence againft. 


Briftol. The houfe, to avoid a difficulty contrived on purpefe tore. - 


ftrain the freedom of their judgment, confulted. the judges on the 
following point: Whether in. the cafe of treafon or felony wget 
teftimony was to be admitted or not? whether words fpoken to th 

prince, who is after King, makes an alteration in this cafe? .. The 
judges gave the houfe to underftand, that they had received an exprefs 


7 


-_< Va 
‘ 

ye 

: o" 


- 
va 


a 


| ‘CC HA RL ES ob 32:3 
the duke of Buckingham might be put in equal condi- Aon. 1626. 
tion with himfelf; and that as he had given in articles 
againft the lord Conway, he might not be permitted to 
meddle in that particular bufinefs, or ufe the King’s 


name in it, ex officio. 


‘In laying open his cafe he fhewed that Buckingham 
bad obtained his imprifonment to prevent the difcovery 
of his own bad practices in Spain; that by finifter means 
he had continued him in that reftraint, becaufe he had 
refufed to fign fome propofitions fent to him by the faid 


. duke. He next proceeded to the articles of impeachment 


againft the duke of Buckingham and the lord Conway. 


‘The heads of them are as follow: 


THaT the duke of Buckingham did combine with the Aviles 
againft Buck- 


Conde Gondemar to carry his majefty, late bein into inghen. 
thworth, 


Spain, to procure his converfion: vol: 1: pushy 
& feq. 


Tat when in Spain he laboured it; and by flatter- 
ing the Spanifh miniftry on this point, he caufed them to 
recede from conditions that had been before propounded: 

Tut he had procured a letter to be written from his 
late majefty to the pope: 

TuatT he had_received a bull to encourage him in the 
perverfion of the prince: -. 


Tuat he had given fcandal by his perfonal behaviour 
in Spain; and, having incenfed the king of Spain and 


‘command from the King not to give their opinion on thefe queftions. 
- Rufoworth, vol. 1. p.268, & feg. 
his 


Tt 32 


324 HISTORY. OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1626, his minifters, he put in practice divers undue courfes to 
break the match : 


TuaT he had been, in great part, the caufe of the 
ruin and misfortune of the prince Palatine and his ef- 
tates, inafmuch as thofe affairs had relation to the king- 
dom of Spain : 


TuatT he had abufed the suiting by his finifter re- 
lation ; and wronged the earl of Briftol in point of his 
honour, by many finifter afperfions he had laid upon him; 
and in point of his liberty, by many undue Comes, 
through his power and practices: . 2 


Tuat he had vexed and prefled his late majefty, for 
having fent the earl of Briftol word that he would hear 
him. againft the duke, as well as he had heard the duke 
agent, him. 


. 
Tue heads of the articles given in againt the lord i 
Conway, were, - ‘ 


Articles - Tuat the lord Conway had profeffed hinntelé fo preat 
oe collar a fervant of the duke’s, that he had not ftuck. to declare 
Mae pans that if matters could not be accommodated between 
& feq. them, he muft then adhere to the duke; from which he 

inferred that lord Conway was unfit to be a judge in any 


thing that concerneth the duke or the earl: 


Tuat the lord Conway, as a creature of the faid ap 
duke, had, by various mifreprefentations and undue 
means, not only o¢cafioned the earl of Briftol’s reftraint, 
and lengthened it, but during its continuation had pew ol 
plexed him in his bufinefs and otherwife: 9 © = 
Tier ae 


6 Sie ks Re @ Be & 2k 


325 


THAT on the earl of Briftol’s having fully anfwered Ann. 1626. 


twenty interrogatories, which had been made to him 
in his late majefty’s name, that the lord Conway, being 
the fecretary to the lords commiffioners who were ap- 
pointed to fearch into. the proceedings of the faid earl, 
perceiving that the faid earl was like to be cleared, never 
moved for a farther meeting, nor have the lords com- 
miflioners ever been permitted to meet to this day: 


_ Trat though the lord Conway Knew that the match 
of the king of Bohemia’s eldeft fon with the emperor’s 
daughter, and his being bred in the emperor's court, 
was allowed and propounded by his late majefty, yet 
had he fuffered it to be charged’ againft the earl of Brift 
tol, both in on interrogatories, and in his majefty’s Jatt 
letter : 


| THat the lord Conway. had been the caufe.of all the 


earl of Briftol’s troubles, by his dubious and entrapping 
difpatches, and inferring that the faid earl had failed in 
' Kis directions, when it fhould be made appear that his 
difpatches contained no fuch direétions as he hath al- 
leged were given. 


Tue houfe came toa refolution not to commit the 
earl of Briftol to the Tower, but to let him remain in 
cuftody of the gentleman ufher; and that the King’s 
charge againft the earl fhould have the firft hearing, 
then the earl’s againft the duke; yet fo that the earl’s 
teftimony againft the duke thould not be Poa pre- 
judiced, or impeached *.- 


* On the earls requeft, the houfe had granted him counfel: This. 
Charles objected to; but finding that.the houfe was refolved to abide 
ant by 


326 . _ HISTORY. OF’ ENGLAND. 


: 
. aie : ‘ 
Ann. 1626. CHARLES, finding by thefe determinations, that the . 
fenfe of the peers ran favourable to Briftol, fent then : 
the following meflage: j ; 


Tuat he took notice of the articles exhibited againft 
the duke of Buckingham, and he found they were 
fuch that he was able of his own knowledge to fay ~ 
more than any man of the duke’s fincerity; that one of 
them, touching the narrative made in parliament, 
trencheth as far upon himfelf as the duke; he fent . 
them thanks that they gave no way to the earl of Brif- i 
tol’s unreafonable motion of putting the duke under the | 
fame reftraint-as they did the earl, thereby efchewing 
what the earl aimeth at, namely, to alter their dutiful 
proceedings towards him; that thereby they had made 
him confident that they will continue to put a difference 
between his charge againft one that appeareth as a de- 
linquent, and the recrimination of the’ earl of Briftol 
againft his evidence *. Thus did Charles injudicioufly 
run the rifk of incurring a public affront, by thrufting 
himfelf in, not only as an evidence, but as an acceflary | 
with Buckingham. = ae 


by their own determination, he at length gave way. Parl. Hif. vol. VII. 
Pp: 29, 180, & feq. 


* On the occafion of thefe caufes now depending the King had fent 
for the whole body of bifhops, and charged them in the judgments 
they gave to be guided by their confciences. At the fame time he 
affured them, that he was always ready to promote the caufe of the a 
church ; giving them a gentle reprehenfion that they had not made ia 
known unto him in this fefion of parliament what might be profita- oF: 
ble for it. Rujbworth, vol. I, p. 247. Breviate of the Life of Lauds 
p. 8. 3 


O. BA Ri, €.8 | 327 


Tre crown at this time made an attempt to carry the Kil abiss 
profecution into the King’s-Bench ; but this was vigoroufly 
oppofed by the ane on the following objections : 


“ He can ~atel no counfel : 


“« He can ufe no witnefs againft the King: 


* He cannot know what the evidence againft him will 
be timé enough to prepare for his defence ; fo the inno- 
,,gent may be condemned, which may be the cafe of any 
~ peer; and the liberties of the houfe thereby infringed, and 
ok the honour and juftice thereof declined : 


“ Tue earl being indicted, it will not be in the power 
of the houfe to keep him from arraignment; and fo he 
may be difabled from making good his charge againft 
the duke : 


“ Ir appears that the earl, for the fpace of two years, 
till now he complained, hath not been fo much as quef- 
tioned for matter of treafon; he hath been examined on 
twenty interrogatories, and the commiffioners fatisfy that 
his anfwer will admit of no reply: 


“ Tue lord Conway by feveral letters hath intimated 

that there was nothing againft him but what was par- 

) doned by the parliament’s pardon of the 21/t of James ;. 

and fignified his majefty’s pleafure that he might reft in 
that fecurity : 


: « His miajefty hath often declared, both to the coun- 
tefs of Briftol and others, that there was neither felony 
nor treafon againft him, nor ought ele but what a {mall 
acenemiedgmeat would expiate.” 

THESE: 


328 


Ann. 1626. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


THEse reprefentations of the Lords; were fo many fa- 


vourable omens to Briftol, who denied almoft every ar- — 
ticle of the King’s charge*, and proved, by the undeni-. 


able teftimony of the written intercourfe between him and 
the court of England, that he had a¢ted in concert with 


James's inclinations, and according to the general and 


particular inftructions of that monarch. “ As touching 
the charge itfelf (faid Briftol in a igen) he made to the 


* The firt tice of ee erg charge i is, That Briftol, bat con- 
trary to his knowledge, given delufive hopes to the court of England 
concerning the conclufion of the treaty. Among the Harleian manu- 
{cripts there are feveral letters from Buckingham, whilft in Spain, to 
his patron James. The letters that he wrote previous to the difguft 
that he took at that court, are full of flattering intelligence relative 
to this point. One of them hath thefe- particular expreffions: “ If 
we can either judge by outward fhews, or general fpeeches, we have 
reafon to condemn your ambafladors for {peaking too {paringly than 
too much. If the pope will not grant a difpenfation, we would be 
glad to have your directions how far we may engage you in the. ac- 
knowledgment of the pope’s fpiritual power; for we almoft find if 
you’ will be contented to acknowledge the pope chief head under 
Chrift, that the match will be made without him.” MSS. in whe 
Mufeum, n. 6987. re 

The following letter from Charles to the dole of Buckingham, pre- 
ferved among the fame manufcripts, fhews that Charles, whilft prince 
of Wales, had entered into all Buckingham’s little piques, and that be 
was a violent partizan againft Briftol : 

« Stenie, 

** Now I muft crave your soaless: to trouble you a little 5 5 itis tiny 
Briftol ftands upon his juttification, and will by no means accept of 
my counfels; the King does hafte to have him come to his trial, and 
I am afraid, if you be not with us to help to charge him, and fet the 
King right, he may efcape with too light a cenfure. Therefore I would 
have you fend to the King to put off Briftol’s trial till you might wait 


of him, but for God’s fake do not venture to come fooner than you: 
may with the fafety of your health, &c. &." 


= O———— 


G,8CA RE EAH. B 


Lords on the fubject of his vindication) I have once an- Ann. 1526. 


fwered all, except that of my petition; [ expected not to 
have heard of thefe again. I expected a remonftrance of 
fome practice with Spain againft the ftate; or to be charged 
with the receipt of ten or twenty thoufand pounds, for 
the perfuading and procuring the delivering up of fome 
towns that the crown was in pofleffion of, as might be 
the Brill, or Flufhing, or the like; or for being the 
means of the delivery of the King’s fhips to ferve a fo- 
reign nation againft thofe of our own religion ; or for the 
revealing of his majefty’s higheft fecrets, which none but 
two or three did know of; or for treating of the greateft 
affairs; as it were by my own authority, without formal © 
inftructions in the point; or, as the lawcalls it, to have 
committed fome overt act of difloyalty ; and not to be 
charged, after feven ambaflages, with difcouragements 
and inferences.” 


Ir is very apparent, notwithftlanding the fpecioufnefs 
of Briftol’s defence, that his whole conduct had been 
fubfervient to the point of private advantage; that he 


had already obtained an opulent fortune by an exact 


conformity to the views of James; and that from mo- 
tives of felfifhnefs he had put in practice every expedient 
to prevent the rupture of the Spanifh treaty. Nor was 
his prefent oppofition excited by principles of independ- 
ence, or generous feelings, whilft recriminating againtt 
Buckingham: He meanly courted the prince who was ex- 
ercifing over him the moft unjuftifiable oppreflion ; on the 
merit of his management in the treaty with Spain, he 
had obtained, and at this very time enjoyed, the fpoils of 

Vou. I, Uu aman 


330 
Ann. 1626." 


Buckingham 
imp 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


a man whofe unjuft fate was yer frefh in the memory" 


of the public *. To thefe circumftances, ill-adapted to_ 


attract the efteem of the people, his avowed principles of 
religion were as extravagantly hierarchical as were thofe 
of the prefent miniftry. The extreme odium, therefore, 


which his antagonift Buckingham had at this time in- | 


curred, and the oppreflive treatment himfelf had met with 
from the crown, were the only caufes that gained. a po- 
pularity to his fide of the conteft. 


Tue Commons, who had been all this while prepar- 
ing matters for the impeachment, now brought up their 
charge againft the minifter +, It was managed by eight 


.* This was Sir Walter Raleigh, whofe large eftate of Sherbourn 


had been firft given by James to Somerfet, and then to Briftol. Sir 
Antony Weldon hints that Briftol was one of the principal means of 
Sir Walter’s execution, by reprefenting it to James as a neceffary fa 
crifice towards the attainment of the Spanifh match. Nor was this 
the only ftep he took to fecure the poffeffien of thefe lands :. Mr. 
Carew Raleigh relates, that. on his addreffing himfelf to. the. parlia- 
ment to be reftored in blood, king Charles fent to him, and told him. 
plainly, that, on the obligation of ten thoufand pounds, he had pro- 
mifed the earl of Briftol to fecure his: title to Sherbourn againft the 
heirs of Sir Walter Raleigh ; that now being king he. was bound to 
make good his promife; therefore, unlefs Mr. Raleigh would quit all 
his right and title to Sherbourn, he neither would nor could pafs his 
bill of reftoration. Whereupon Mr. Raleigh, being then not twenty 
years of age, left friendlefs and fortunelefs, was prevailed on by the 
promife of a fubfiftence to fubmit to the King’s will, See 4 Brief Re- 
lation of Sir Walter Raleigh’s Troubles, Sc. To the right bonourable the 
Ccmmons of England, the bumble Petition of Carew Raleigh, in Sir se 
Raleigh's Life and Works by Dr. Birch. 


++ The Commons had fent to the duke to let him know that t 
were paffing articles againft him, and that they had given the meffen- - 
: wYy¥ oe. 


SCANMGRURLh REG Tt ee 


wen * and fixteen affiftants +. Sir Dudley Diggs Ann, 1626. 
pend it with a florid metaphorical introduction +. 


As one of the crimes alleged againft Buckingham was 
the accumulation of offices and honours which he had 
obtained through his inordinate influence, the Commons 
did not omit any of thefe in the preamble to their decla- 
ration; viz. “ The Commons in this prefent parliament pypworth; 
----—-do by this their bill fhew and declare againft George, v-!: P-303- 
duke, marquis, and earl of Buckingham; earl of Co- 
ventry ; vifcount Villiers; baron of Whaddon; great ad- 
miral of the kingdoms of England and Ireland, and of 
: the principality of Wales, and of the dominions and iflands 
of the fame, and of Normandy, Gafcoigne, and Guienne ; 
general governor of the fhips of the faid kingdom ; lieu- 
tenant-general, admiral, captain-general, and governor of 


gers orders to take notice thereof out of the clerk’s book, of which he 

might take a copy if he pleafed ; and that they expeéted his anfwer on 

the fame day before ten of the clock, if he chofe to fend any. This 

meflage the duke fignified to the Lords, who did not think fit that he 

fhould anfwer ; and the duke fignified this determination:to the Com- 
‘mons. Rufbworth, vol. I. p. 247. 


* The eight managers were, Sir Dudley Diggs, Mr. Glanville, Mr. 
Herbert, Mr. Pym, Mr. Whitby, Mr. Selden, Mr. Wandsford, and 
Sir John Elliot. Guthrie, vol. III. p. 849. 


+ The fixteen affiftants were, Sir Francis Barnham, Mr. Litleton, 
} Sir William Earl, Sir William Ermyn, Mr. Noy, Mr. Rolles, Sir Ben- 
1 jamin Rudyard, Mr. Mafon, Sir Nathaniel Rich, Mr. Brown, Mr. Sher- 
land, Mr. Wyld, Mr. Charles Jones, Mr. Kirton, Mr. John sai ea 
and Mr. Therfield. Guthrie, vol. III. p. 849. 


$ The orators of thefe times had not yet difcarded this vicious elocu- 
tion, which had been greatly heightened by the example of James. 


Uu 2 


his 


332 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1626, his majefty’s royal fleet and army lately fet forth; matter 
* of the horfe of our fovereign lord the King; lord-war- 
den, chancellor, and admiral of the Cinque Ports, and 
of the members thereof; conftable of Dover-caftle ; juf- 
tice in eyre of all the forefts and chaces on this fide of 
the river Trent; conftable of the caftle of Windfor; gen- 
tleman of his majefty’s bed-chamber; one of his majefty’s. oe 
moft honourable privy-council in his realms both in = 
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and knight of the moft 
honourable order of the garter 5 the mifdemeanors, mif- 
prifions, &c.—” 


Ruthworth. THe wuts of this charge againft Buckingham may be 
Guthrie. 
comprized under eight articles ; viz. 


TaaT he had engroffed a multiplicity of honours in 
his own hands, and had rendered offices and honours ve- 
nal, by procuring and beftowing them for money : 


TuaT he had neglected the performance of his ae 
in the office of admiral: 


TuaT he had feized and detained goods from the fub- 
jects of the French king, out-of a fhip called the St. Peter ~ 
of Newhaven, on which enfued an arreft at Newhaven of 
two Englifh merchant-fhips, to the great difturbance of 
trade, and prejudice to the merchants : | | 


Tat he had extorted the fum of 10,0001, from ne 
Eaft-India company : 


‘Tuat he had procured the Vaunt-guard and fix mer- 
chant-fhips to be delivered into the hands of the French 


king, 


CAMs ARE bh Be So bey. 333 


bing knowing that they were intended to be eragloped Ann. 1626. 
againft the French Proteftants : 


Tsar he had procured divers titles to his kindred and 
allies, whofe eftates being fmall, they could not be main- 
tained in that dignity but at the expence and damage of 
the crown, who thereby difabled itfelf to reward extraor- 
dinary virtue in future times with honour: 


Tuat he had obtained a grant of divers manors be- 
longing to the crown, and had likewife received exceed- 
ing great fums of money for his own ufe, without ac- 
count, to the great diminution of the revenues of the 
crown: 


- Tuat, without a fufficient warrant, he had unduly 
procured certain plaifters, and a certain drink or potion, 
to be given to his late majelty, after which divers ill 
fymptoms did appear upon his faid majefty, who did 
attribute the caufe of his growing worfe to the faid 
plaifters and drink. 


Tue whole charge was concluded and enforced by Sir 
John Elliot, who, in the execution of this tafk, difplayed 
the powers of a lively nervous elocution. 


ArTer this impeachment the King came to the houfe, ne aad 

and made a cajoling fpeech to the Lords: He affured shies 
_ them, that the caufe of his coming was to exprefs the 
fenfe he had of all their honours; that what affected 
’ them affected him in a very fenfible manner *: « I have 


* Charles, by thefe infinuations, endeavoured to perfuade the Lords 
that their intereft was conneéted with Buckingham’s caufe. 


thought 


334 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1626. thought fit, adds he, to take order for the punifhing 
fome infolent fpeeches lately {poken. I have been too 
remifs heretofore in punifhing fuch fpeeches as concern 
myfelf; not that 1 was greedy of their monies, but that 
Buckingham, through his importunity, would not fuffer 
me to take notice of them, left he might be thought 
to have fet me on. And to come the forwarder to his 
trial, and to approve his innocence; as touching the 
matters againft him, I myfelf can be a witnefs to clear 
him in every one of them*. I fpeak not this to take 
any thing out ef your hands, but to fhew the reafon 
why 1 have not hitherto punifhed thofe infolent {fpeeches 
againft myfelf; and now I hope you will be as tender of 
my honour, when time fhall ferve, as I have been fenfi- 
ble of yours.” 


Tuose hints which Charles threw out of having taken 
order for the punifhing fome infolent fpeeches, referred 
to the imprifonment of Sir John Elliot and Sir Dudley 
Diggs, who, immediately after clofing the charge againft 
Buckingham, had been beckoned out of the conference- 
chamber, and fent to the Tower, ? e 


Tue Commons did not abate of their diligence in the ‘i 
profecution of Buckingham ; Sir Nathaniel Rich was fent 
up with a meflage to the Lords to move them to com- 


* This glaring impropriety of the King’s carriage, in owning him- 
felf thus egregioufly. managed by his favourite, with the fubfequent j 
teftimony of -his partiality, in offering himfelf as. an evidence to clear ~ a 
Buckingham, after having offered himfelf as an evidence to accufe ; 
Briftol, are two ftrong inftances of that weaknefs and paffion which in- 
fluenced the conduct of this monarch, : ai 


© Me AGR) BB E-S > 1: 


mit this great offender to: fafe cuftody: But this paffive Ann. 1626, 


affembly permitted Buckingham to. remain at liberty *, 
who now flung off all moderation, and threw out a 
kind of defiance on the malice, as he termed it, of the 


lower busied 


Tas Comianons were fo offended at the imprifonment Kuthworth, 


of their two members, that.a kind of fullen filence, & ta, 
proceeding from deep refentment, for fome time pof- 
fefled the houfe, till: Sir Dudley Carleton, a fervant of 
the miniftry, who had. been long in office, and’ was at 
this time highly patronized by. Buckingham, miftaking 
this appearance for the fymptom of an univerfal dit: 
may, began a florid metaphorical {peech,. in which he 
endeavoured. to bring the houfe to fubmit to the will of 
the court: The houfe he compared to a fhip, their mef- 
fages to the fands; the commitment to the fands which: 
the fhip did ttick on, and the compafs to the table where’ 
the book of orders did lie; he defired them to examine 
ftrictly into the orders, whether the imprifoned members 
did not exceed: their commiflion ;. if they did, to let them. 
fuffer for their prefumption ; and-this was the.courfe, he 


* It will be difficult to reconcile this conduct of the Lords to that 
hatred which the antient nobility had of this minion, who had long 
maintained aninfolent fuperiority over'them ; and whofe accumulation * 
of honours was in a manner ufurped from the whole body.- But to the 
influence which the crown had over this affembly, .Buckingham, by the - 

ats of his extenfive power, had formed a ftrong party of the new, 

fe of the-old nobility dependant upon himfelf. This the houfé - 
feem to be'fenfible of; for, finding that he was deputed procurator to » 
thirteen peers, whofe-votes on any occafion he had power to make ufe 
of, they made an order that after this feflion no lord fhould be capable 


. ti above two proxies. 
faid,'. 


336 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1626. faid, that would bring the fhip from the rocks: “ I be- 
feech you, gentlemen, added he, move not his majefty with 
trenching upon his prerogative, left you bring him out of 
love with parliaments. You have heard his majefty’s 
often meflages to you, to put you forward in a courfe that 
would be moft convenient ; in thofe meflages he told you, 
that if there were not correfpondency between him and 
you, he fhould be enforced to ufe new councils. NowI 
pray you confider what thefe new councils are and may 
be: I fear to declare thofe that I conceive. In all Chri- 
ftian kingdoms you know that parliaments were in ufe 
antiently, by which their kingdoms were governed in a 
moft flourithing manner, until the monarchs began to 
know their own ftrength; and feeing the turbulent fpirit 
of their parliaments, at length they began to ftand upon 
their prerogatives, and at laft overthrew the parliaments 
throughout Chriftendom, except here only with us. And 
indeed you would count it a great mifery if you knew 
the fubje& in foreign countries as well as myfelf, to fee 
them look not like our nation, with ftore of flefh on 
their backs, but like fo many ghofts, and not men, being 
nothing but fkin and bone, with fome thin cover to their 
nakednefs, and wearing only wooden fhoes on their feet, 
fo that they cannot eat meat, or wear good cloaths, but 
they muft pay and be taxed to the King for it. This 
is a mifery beyond expreflion, and that which we are yet 
free from; let us be careful then to preferve the King’s 
good opinion of. parliaments, which bringeth this hap- 
pinefs to the nation, and makes us envied of all others 
while there is this fweetnefs between his majefty and the 
Commons.” 


G,ROA ORS HL £46 -1 


$37 


Tuts fpeech was no fooner uttered than the members Ann. 1626. 


cried out, “ To the bar! to the bar!” and it was with 
fome difficulty that Sir Dudley’s friends. could prevent 
his being brought upon -his knees; though he after- 
wards aflumed courage to make another oration, in 
which he grofly fell upon Sir John Elliot and Sir Dudley 
Diggs, and fhewed the King’s reafons for their impri- 


fonment; Sir John Elliot for having fpoken with great — 


tartnefs againft Buckingham, and treated him with the 
bare appellation of “ this and that man,” and for fpeak- 
ing doubtfully of the return of the Englith fhips lent 
to France *; Sir Dudley Diggs for having been accufed 
with faying, upon the fubject of the plaifter applied 
to James, “ That he would therein fpare the honour of 
the prefent King.” 


THE unconftitutional language uttered by Sir Dud- 
ley Carleton would undoubtedly have met with a feverer 
cenfure from the Commons, if the recent act of violence 
committed by the court had not agitated them too 
much to take an exemplary notice of the offenfive, 
though contemptible bravado. They came to three re- 
folutions on the queftion of the imprifonment: Firft, to 
proceed in no bufinefs till they were righted in their 
privileges : Secondly, to turn them{elves into a grand 
committee, to confider of the beft means to effect it: 
And, thirdly, that none fhould leave the committee with- 
out afking leave. The following proteftation, taken by 
all the members of the houfe, was the refult of their 


_ * The return of thefe fhips was not known to Sir John Elliot at 
the time of the conference. 


_ Vou.I. Xx debate : 


338 


Ann. 1626. 
Proteftation 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


debate: “ I proteft before Almighty God, and this houfe 


of the Com- Of parliament, that I never gave confent that Sir Dudley 


mons. 


Diggs fhould {peak thefe words that he is now charged 
withal, or any words to that effect; and I have not af- 
firmed to any that he did fpeak fuch words, or any to 
that effect.” This matter had been much debated in 
the upper houfe: The duke of Buckingham had af- 
firmed there, that words fo far trenching on the King’s 
honour, that they were interpreted treafonable, had been 
fpoken in the late conference by Sir Dudley Diggs *. 
This occafioned a voluntary proteftation of thirty-fix 
lords, that Sir Dudley Diggs did not fpeak any thing at 
the conference which did or might trench on the King’s 
honour. : 


CHarLes now found that he had acted in confequence 
of a falfe reprefentation, and was not a little afhamed of 
his precipitation: He reftored both the members to their 
liberty +, and fent the Commons word that he was 
fully fatisfied that Sir Dudley Diggs had not fpoken the 
words with which he had been charged. Sir Dudley 


* The lord Holland, a profefled creature of Buckingham, was the 
only peer that fided with him in this accufation. 


+ Sir Dudley Diggs was firft enlarged, and the Commons informed 
that Sir John Elliot was detained for matters extra-judicial to that 
houfe. Of this word extra-judicial the Commons defired an expla- 
nation; which being refufed, they voted an adjournment for a day: 
This adjournment thewing Charles that they were determined to have 
full fatisfaction, he gave way to the releafe of Sir John Elliot. In the 
cafe of the imprifonment of thefe members the judges had given their 
opinion, ‘that that reftraint was an arre{t of the whole body of the 


Commons, no reafon being given to that houfe for i it. Saunderfon’s Hift, - 


of Charles I. fol, ed. 1658, p. 45° 


; 
j 
| 

3 


GH OK RLY BLE ve 


Diggs protefted the like on his return to the houfe; and Ana. 1626. » 


Sir John Elliot made an elegant fenfible f{peech in an- 
fwer to the virulent accufation of Carleton, in which 
he defended what he had faid at the conference. It was 
then refolved on the queftion, that neither Sir John Elliot, 
Sir Dudley Diggs, nor the other members, had exceeded 
the commiflion given them in the management of the 


impeachment. 


Sir Dudley Carleton was rewarded with a peerage * 
for the fpeech he had lately made againft the conduct of 
the two managers. To the Commons he had fully ex- 
plained the meaning of new councils, and by this ex-’ 
planation had proved to them the neceflity they lay un- 
der of exerting their utmoft efforts to limit a power 
which had avowed projects to deftroy the bulwark of 
the conftitution, and level the ftate of the fubject to ab- 


folute flavery. 


Wuitst Buckingham’s profecution was yet depend- Buckingham 


ing, the chancellorfhip of the univerfity of Cambridge 


became vacant by the’ death of the earl of Suffolk: The ©*™>ridse 


univerfity paid a moft acceptable compliment to majefty, 
by electing Buckingham their chancellor at the time that 
he lay under the heavy cenfure of the houfe of Com-. 
mons }. That refpectable power thought themfelves 


~* He was firft created baron Carleton, then vifcount Dorchefter, 
Hiftorical Preface to Carleton’s Letters. 

+ Though the court made great intereft to obtain this election for 
Buckingham, he carried it but by five voices, The King wrote the 
following letter to the univerfity, on the fubjeét of their compliance : 


Xx 2 © Trufty 


340 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1626, grofly affronted by fuch a proceeding, and were on the 


point of fending a letter to the univerfity, to fignify their 
difpleafure, and to require them to fend proper perfons 
to inform them of the manner in which the eleétion was 
carried. Charles interfered, and after fome meflages had 


_paffed on this occafion between him and the Commons, 


they dropped the affair, 


Tae Lords at length feemed to have caught fome- 
thing of the fpirit which had actuated the members of 
the lower houfe during this whole feffion. After hav- 


ing entered into all the defigns of the miniftry in re. 
gard to the intended military operations; after having 


fhewn their zeal for this bufinefs by reprefenting to 
the Commons the immediate neceflity for haftening the 


fupply *; after a tame acquiefcence with all the irre- 


“ Trufty and well-beloved, we greet you well ; 
‘* Whereas upon our pleafure, intimated unto you by the bifhop 


.of Durham, for the choice of your chancellor, you have with much 


duty, as we expected, highly fatisfied us in your election; we cannot 
in our princely nature (who are much poffefied with this teftimony of 
your ready and loyal affections) but for ever Jet you know how much 


you are therein made partakers of our royal approbation; and as we - 


fhall ever conceive that an honour done to a perfon we favour is out 
of a loyal refpect had unto ourfelf, and as we hall ever juftify Buck- 
ingham worthy of this your election, fo fhall you find the fruits of 
it, For that we have found hima faithful fervant to our dear father 
of bleffed memory, and ourfelf, cannot but undertake that he will 
prove fuch a one to you, and will affift him with a gracious willing- 
nefs in any thing that may concern the good of the univerfity in gene- 
ral, or the particular merits of any ftudent there.” Franklyn’s Annals, 
1681, p.185, & feq, . 


* The earl of Pembroke, lord-chamberlain, in a conference be- 
tween the two houfes, prefied the neceflity of a fupply. The Lords, — 
os on” 


q 
| 
f 


| 
iP. 
. 
i 


be 


| haw 


Ot. BE OR Bo BY OES 


341 


gular proceedings of the crown, the infringement of Ann. 1626. 


their privileges by the reftraints laid on Briftol and the 
bifhop of Lincoln; they were now animated into a kind 
of contention by the imprifonment of the earl of Arun- 
del, who was fent to the Tower on fufpicion of having 
been confenting to a ftolen marriage between the earl 
of Maletravers, his eldeft fon, and the duke of Lenox’s 
fitter *, On the fearching of precedents, they found 
but one of a peer’s being committed whilft the parlia- 


ment was fitting, without a previous trial of the Lords. 


in parliament. This occafioned a petition, in which 
they informed Charles, that they found it to be their un- 
doubted privilege that no lord of parliament, the par- 
liament fitting, or within the ufual times of privilege 
of parliament, fhould be reftrained, without fentence 
or order of the houfe, unlefs for treafon, felony, or for 
refufing to give furety for the peace. Receiving no an- 
fwer to this, they fent up a fecond petition for a gra- 
cious and a prefent anfwer, The King took up the 
term prefent in a very high manner, and fent the Lords 


word, that when he received a meflage fit to come from’ 


them to their fovereign, they fhould receive an anfwer. 
The Lords had the condefcenfion to fend another petition 
with the word prefent left out: But this not meeting 


on the King’s requeft, appointed a committee to confider of the fafety 


of the kingdom, and the report of the committee was, that one fleet 
be prefently fent to fea againft the king of Spain; that another be 


~ fent to defend our own coafts and merchants from pirates; and that 


confideration be had of maintaining the armies under the king of Den- 
mark and count Mansfeldt. 


* Some fufpicions which Buckingham had entertained againft the earl 


of Arundel was the true caufe of his confinement. Guthrie. 
pris with 


Lords’ peti- 
tion on the 
earl of Arun- 
del’s confine- 
ment. 


342. 


HISTORY OF -ENGLAND, 


Ann. 1626. with a fatisfactory anfwer, on the Commons having ob- 


Bucking- 


ham’s plea. 


tained the releafe of their members, a fourth petition - 
was fent up on the fubject of the enlargement of the . 


earl of Arundel. The Lords in this petition obferved, 
that the Commons had {peedily obtained the fame kind 
of favour, which had been as yet denied to their re- 


peated folicitations. Charles replied, that he had things . 


of great importance againft the earl of Arundel, which 
it would much prejudice his affairs to make known 3 
that as foon as poflible they thould be informed of the 
caufe, which was fuch that he was certain they would 
not conftrue his confinement to be a breach of their pri- 
vileges. _The Lords continuing to receive evafive an- 
fwers, without either obtaining the enlargement of their 
member, or the knowledge of his crime, came to a res 
folution to adjourn till they were righted in their privi- 
leges. This refolution produced the immediate deliver- 
ance of the earl of Arundel. 


BesipEs this exertion, the Lords had fent up a petition, 
reprefenting their difguft at Englifh commoners being 
dignified with Scotch and Irifh titles, and that the Eng- 
lith noblemen, poffeffing real privileges, fhould be obliged 
to give place to nominal titles of a fuperior clafs.. Thefe 
important trifles had occafioned a like application in the 


laft reign, and with the fame fuccefs, Charles promifing’ 


in general to take order for a regulation. 


_ Tue duke of Buckingham now gave in his plea to. 
the impeachment made againft him by the Commons: 
His anfwer to the feveral articles were fpecious, though 
little eee fome of them he denied, others he. 


bd . 
- 
—_— 


a te ee ee 
. = SS ee ee eee 
. 


© HOA R' £-2B- S- 2 


343 


endeavoured to vindicate, pleading example, the inclina- Ann. 1626.” 


tion and the commands of the fovereign; to the articlé 
of accumulating honours and wealth upon his family, 
the natural bonds of duty and affection. As this caufe 
never came to a trial, it is impoflible to give an explicit 
determination on thofe points which were abfolutely de- 
nied by the party accufed *. , 


At this time the Commons fent up a petition on the 
non-performance of the King’s promife to the parlia- 
ment at Oxford, to remove from all places of authority 
fuch perfons as were convicted or fufpected of Popery. 
A lift of eighty-eight, now employed in places of trutt, 
was inferted in the body of the petition. Charles, en- 
raged at this reproof, and impatient at the endlefs de- 
lays of what he termed the neceffities of the ftate, wrote 
a letter to the {peaker, in which he requires him to fig- 
nify to the houfe that he expected the bill of fubfidies 
to be brought in forthwith, without delay or condition ; 
if not, it would force him to take other refolutions. 


‘To this threatening meflage the Commons returned a 


f{pirited anfwer, accompanying it with a petition for the 
removal of the duke of Buckingham from accefs to the 
royal prefence. The arguments they made ufe of to 
perfuade the King to this condefcenfion are remarkably 
refpectful and’ affectionate: “ Your miajetty, fay they, 
hath been pleafed to give many royal teftimonies and ar- 
guments to the world how good and gracious a matter 


* At this time the lord Conway made his reply to the articles alleged 
againft him by Briftol: His anfwer was an evafive one, and too imma- 
terial to be inferted in this Hiftory. 


| you 


Parl.Hift.vol. 
VII. p. 286. 


The Com. 
mons petition 
againft Buck- 
ingham. 


344 


Aan. 1626. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


you are; but the relation by which your majefly ftands 
towards your people do far tranfcend and are more pre- 
valent and binding than any relation of a magfter to- 
wards a fervant; and to hear and fatisfy the juft and 
neceflary defires of your people is more honourable than 


any expreflions of grace to a fervant. To be a mafter of | 


a fervant is communicable to many of your fubjects ; to 
be a king of a people is — and incommunicable to 
fubjects.” 


Tx1s petition determined Charles to a fudden diffolu- 
tion of the parliament. The Commons haftened to 
draw up a remontftrance againft the duke of Bucking- 
ham, as the prime grievance of the ftate; againft the 
imprifonment of their members, contrary to the privi- 
lege of the houfe; and the illegal taking of tonnage 
and poundage, without confent of parliament. This laft 


they reprefented as the effect of new councils, fo often 


threatened by his majefty, and explained by one of their 
own members *, 


THE revenue of tonnage and poundage had been 


fometimes feted on the fovereign during life ; fome- 


times it had been limited, and renewed from period to 
period, as a kind of memorial that the reprefentatives 
of the people preferved the power of confent to this as 
to other taxes. The exorbitant impofitions on merchan- 


dize during the two preceding reigns, a grievance 


which had been frequently and fruitlefsly complained 


of by the lower houfe, with fome oppreflive ones laid 


* Sir Dudley Carleton. 


PO AOAIN GG OF 7p TL 


345 


on by Charles, obliged the Commons to retain this Aon. 1626 


check on the rapacious exactions of the crown, and a 
bill of tonnage and poundage, limited to a year, was 
brought in the firft feflion of his firft parliament : The 
Lords refufed to pafs the bill with this limitation, and 
Charles continued to exact tonnage and poundage, with- 
out being authorized by the legal confent of Lords and 
CGommions. 


Tue Commons were preparing a bill againft this 
proceeding ; but hearing that they were fuddenly to be 
diflolved, they haftily drew up their remonftrance and 
declaration, and every member, by an order of the 
houfe, was to have a copy of it delivered to him, When 
the King’s intention to diffolve the parliament was made 
known to the Lords, they fent a very prefling, though 
ineffectual petition, to diffuade him from this precipitate 
meafure. The King returned anfwer to the lords who 
came to intercede for a longer fitting, that he would 


not defer his refolution, no, not a minute. A commif= psriuicnof 
fion was immediately fent down to put an end to the parliament. 
parliament, and the fame day the earl of Arundel was $e 


‘ . Life o 
confined to his houfe, and the earl of Briftol to the Charles,p.5 8. 


Tower. 


Cuarves publifhed a declaration, fetting forth the 
caufes for aflembling and diffolving the two laft par- 
liaments. The whole of it is a narration of the fre. 
-quent and fruitlefs demands he had made for a fupply, 
with many reproaches on the Commons for their deter- 
mined inflexibility, and many impotent attempts to juf- 
tify his own intemperate proceedings, and to blacken 


o' Vou. I. ; Yy the 


346 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1626, the conduét of the lower houfe *. The well-known 

faéts, and rational principles, ftrongly urged in their 

remonftrance, were unanfwered. This fpirited perform- 

ance directed the people to make a proper comment on 

the King’s reafons for diflolving the two parliaments : 

That of Oxford to preclude from the next the leading 

popular members ; and this laft through fear of the ill 

fuccefs which might attend the favourite on the determi- A | 
‘ 
1 
7 


‘ nation of his impeachment. After having reprefented 
the tyrannical proceedings of the crown, and the duke 
of Buckingham as the prime caufe of all grievances, it 

Parl.Hit.vol. concludes with this pathetic addrefs to the King: * Give: 
VI. p. 318, : ; 
& feq. us then leave, moft dear fovereign, in the name of alb 
the Commons, proftrate at the feet of your facred: ma- 
| jefty, moft humbly to befeech you, even for the honour’ 
of Almighty God, whofe religion is direétly undermined. 
by the practice of that party which the duke fupports 5: 
for your honour, which will be much advanced: in the 
: relieving of your, people in this their great and general 
grievance ; for the honour, fafety, and welfare of your 


kingdom, which by this means. is threatened with al- “ 
moft unavoidable dangers; and for the love which your : 
majefty, as a good and loving father, bears unto your : 


good people (by whom, we profefs in the prefence of 
Almighty God, the fearcher of all hearts, you are as 
highly efteemed and beloved as ever any of your prede- 
ceflors were) that you would be gracioufly pleafed to 


* The declaration has this remarkable exordium, that the King was. - 
prompted by his inclination to juftify his conduct to his fubjeéts, but 
that he did not think himfelf bound to give an account of his royal 
aétions to any but to God, who had committed to his charge thefe 
realms and dominions. Parl. Hift. vol. VII. p. 300, yet iv a) 


Bi Rud 22S rh 


347 


remove this perfon from accefs to your facred prefence ; Aun. 1626. 


and that you would not balance this one man with all 
thefe things, and with the affairs of the Chriftian world, 
which do all fuffer fo far as they have relation to this 
kingdom, chiefly by his means. For we proteft to your 
majefty, and to the whole world, that until this great 
perfon be removed from intermeddling with the great 
affairs of flate, we are out of hope of any good fuccefs ; 
and do fear that any money we fhall or can give, will, 
through his mifemployment, be turned rather to the 


hurt and prejudice of this your kingdom, than other- 


wife, as by lamentable experience we have found in 
thofe large fupplies formerly and lately given. But no 
fooner fhall we receive redrefs and relief in this (which 
of all others is our moft infupportable grievance), bur 
we fhall forthwith proceed to accomplifh your majefty's 
own defire for fupply ; and likewife with all chearful- 
nefs apply ourfelves to the perfecting of divers other 
great things, fuch as we think no one parliament in 
one age can parallel, tending to the ftability, wealth, 
ftrength, and honour of this your kingdom, and the 
fupport of your friends and allies abroad: And we 
doubt not but, through God’s blefling, as you are the 
beft, fo you fhall be the beft-beloved and greateft mo- 


narch that ever fat on the royal throne of this famous - 


kingdom.” 


348 


Ann. 1626. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


0 A Bae 


Violent meafures of the court.——A loan exatted ms Commitment 
of many who refufed.——Trial concerning the King’s power of — 
commitment. —_—War with France——-Expedition to the Ife of 
Rhe.——Diftreffed fiate of the Rochellers. Third parliament. 
——The judges queftioned by the boufe of eeeauaaani ines md 
‘Right. ——Prorogation of the parliament. 


oh pp and the Ontos had parted with all 
the marks of diffatisfaction, diftruft, and animo- 
fity, that could be decently or fafely expreffed by either 
party. This bufy parliament was prematurely diflolved, 
before one public meafure had been determined, or one ~ 
ftatute enacted ; and this at a crifis when the King’s fo- 
reign engagements, and the more interefting concerns 
of perfonal honour, rendered the diffolution of the /par- 
liament'a meafure liable to conftructions of the moft 
infamous nature; at a period when filial piety, and a 
juft regard for honeft fame, exacted a ftrict enquiry into 
the criminal accufation of poifon, ftrongly hinted at in 
one of the articles of Buckingham's impeachment. But 
fo great was the fond infatuation of this imprudent 
prince, that, to refcue his favourite from the iffue of 
a legal trial, he plunged into inextricable difficulties, 
and incurred the odium of being an accomplice with a 
man whofe actions could not ftand the teft of examina- 
tion. Incurable was the wound which this precipitate 
ftep gave to Charles's reputation ; and, to fubject it ftill — 


more to fufpicion, a kind of mock procefs was carried on — ig 


. ia it 
2 r e 


GO IOV OR OL) i Be ok 


in the Star-chamber againft Buckingham, for high of- 
fences and mifdemeanors, and in particular for having 


adminiftered medicines to the late King. The ridicule of 
this expedient was heightened by the affair’s being dropt 
before it came to a judicial hearing, 


At the fame time that the King publithed his decla- 
ration, a proclamation was iffued for fupprefling the 
remonftrance of the Commons. This ac&t of power was 
confidered by the public in a light that did little honour 
to the royal caufe. 


ResoLuTeLy as the houfe of Commons had with- 
ftood the haughty demands of the King, it is very appa- 
rent that had he been prevailed on to drop his unpopu- 
lar attachment, and to retract his arbitrary meflages and 
fpeeches, their grants would have been liberal. After 
the impeachment was fettled, they had added a fourth 
fubfidy to the three already voted, and were drawing a 


bill of tonnage and poundage, when the King’s laft pe- 


remptory letter gave an entire change to their debates, 


_ and produced that petition againft Buckingham which oc- 


cafioned the hhafty diffolution of the parliament. 


Cu arves’s cabinet-council was compofed of men who 
owed the whole advancement of their fortune to the 
favourite: Laud, now bifhop of Bath and Wells ; Neil, 
bifhop of Winchefter ; Conway, the fecretary of ftate ; 
and Wefton, the lord-treafurer; men of weak heads: 
and bigoted principles ; who, befides their attachment to: 


. a defperate minifter, were, from their particular preju- 
dices, violently bent to oppofe the temper of the times ; 


yet, 


349 


Ann, 1626, 


350° 


Ann. 1626, 


. garded as in a manner bound to defend the facred caufe © 


Violent mea- 
fures of the 
court. 
Whitlock, 
 p.5, & feq. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


yet, deftitute of thofe minifterial arts that cajole into 
acquiefcence the eafy multitude ; force was the only ex- 


pedient which minifters of fuch limited capacities could _ 
-practife to render the people obedient, under the prefent 


unpopular fyftem of government. Buckingham, ever 


averfe to moderate counfels, was now rendered furious ~ 


by the treatment he had received from the Commons. 


Charles, with the difadvantages of inexperience, a pecu- 


liar obftinacy of temper, and a blind attachment to his 
favourite, had conceived an ineffable contempt for po- 
pular privileges, with the moft exalted notions of fub- 
lime authority in princes: Conceflions he looked upon 
as derogations to the honour of a king, and oppofition 
in fubjeéts as fuch a flagrant breach of divine and mo- 


ral laws, that it called down from Heaven a fure and 


heavy vengeance on the aggreflors. The Deity he re- 


of majefty. Thefe opinions were corroborated by the 
fulfome doctrine which was continually broached by the 
ecclefiaftical parafites that furrounded him. Such being 
the prejudices of this infatuated monarch, he was carried 
with the utmoft facility into meafures that had never been 
practifed but by the weakeft and the moft indifcreet of 
his predeceflors ; meafures which had almoft always been 
attended with perfonal deftru¢tion. 


Tae threat which Charles had made to the Commons 
of new counfels was now put in execution: The privy- 
council, compofed of fervile dependants on Buckingham, 
made no difficulty to refolve that the King might con- 


tinue to take duties upon goods and merchandize, in. 
the fame manner as they had been levied in the late 


. reign. 
te 

-. 9 248 

, Thee 


7a 


+e 


SN 


a ee ee 
. 


C2 tok Role B of «E 


reign. On this refolution a proclamation was iffued, Ann. 1626. 


commanding the fubject to fubmit to this tax, under the 
penalty of imprifonment. A commiffion was openly 
granted to the archbifhop of York and others to com- 
pound with recufants, and treat for a difpenfation of 
the penal laws enacted againft them. A loan of 
190,000]. having been refufed by the city of London, 
that city and all the maritime towns were required to 
provide a certain number of armed veflels, to conftitute 
a fleet. For the legality of this demand, Noy, a once- 
popular lawyer, but now corrupted by the promife of 
court-preferment, had rummaged up feveral obfolete 
precedents, taken from the moft tyrannical times; pre- 
cedents in fome meafure warranted by immediate necef- 
fity, but which could with no propriety be adapted to 
thie prefent circumftances. Not only the city of London, 
which was rated at twenty fhips, but the deputy-lieute- 
nants and juftices of the peace of Dorfetfhire, remon- 
{trated againft the impofition. They were fharply re- 
proved by the council, and told, that ftate-occafions and 
the defence of the kingdom, in times of extraordinary 
danger, were not to be guided by ordinary precedents ; 
that the precedents of former times were obedience, not 
direction, and that precedents were not wanting for the 
punifhment of thofe that difobeyed his majefty’s com- 
mand, fignified by that board. Thefe threats terrified 
the parties into immediate fubmiflion. Several inhabit- 
ants of the maritime towns, to exempt them{elves from 
the impofition, had withdrawn to inland places; but 
they were all commanded. to return to their former fet- 


tlements. A benevolence was demanded from all ranks. Chea, 
of people. To prevent the danger of a vigorous oppo- P- 4'6. 


fition 


352 


Ann, 1626. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


fition to thefe exactions, commiffions were given to’ the — 


lords lieutenants of the feveral counties to mufter the 


_ fubjects able to bear arms, and array them in martial or- 


der, fit to lead out againft public enemies, rebels, traitors, 
and their adherents, within the counties of their lieute- 
nancy; to reprefs, flay, and fubdue them; and to exe- 
cute martial law, {paring and putting to death according 
to difcretion. 


To deceive the public into a belief that thefe formi- 


dable proceedings were neceflary to fecure the fafety of — 


the realm, general fafts were proclaimed, and the fol- 
lowing reafon fpecified ; namely, “ To divert the judg- 
ments of God, threatening this land with a powerful 
invafion.” The engine Religion was here introduced in 
vain ; the pretence was too fhallow to impofe even on 


_ the moft ignorant: It was no fecret to the public that 


Rapin, 
val X, p.108. 


though Charles had rafhly and wantonly provoked the 
Spaniard by an ill-conducted attack on Cadiz, yet that 
monarch had given no ground to fufpect that he in- 
tended to revenge, by a fimilar enterprize, the impotent 
attempt; and England had not yet incurred the refent- 
ment of any other naval power. 


Amonc the many expedients praétifed by the mini- 
ftry to raife money, the crown-lands were granted to . 
be holden in fee-farm; a meafure ruinous to the future 


intereft of the fovereign. But this confideration had no 
weight with Charles ; he had projected fchemes to de- 
ftroy the right of meum & tuum throughout the land, and 
to fubject the whole property: of the fobiees to the ae 
pofal of the crown, — 


‘ 


LS 


Mt $8) AS Reeds 3 St 


833 


’ THe meafures the government had yet ufed did not Ana: 1626, 


produce a fupply adequate to the-demands of the mo- 
march, Benevolence-money came in very flowly, and the 
whole nation fhewed fuch a reluctance to comply with 
the arbitrary tax, that the miniftry were obliged to prac 
fife compuline: methods to enforce obedience. 


AN important Sinsite which was at this time fought 
in Germany, between the king of Denmark and the Im- 
perialifts, put an end, for a time, to the difputes on the 


continent. The emperor had raifed three armies to op- 
pofe three divifions of the allied forces, under the king of 


Denmark; count Mansfeldt, and Chriftian duke of Brunf- 
wick. Two of them were commanded by the able gene- 
rals, Tilly and Wallenftein. Mansfeldt was defeated by 
Wallenftein, and his army almoft all cut to pieces. The 
lofs to the allies was irreparable, by the death of Mans- 
feldt, and that of the duke of Brunfwick, which foon fol- 
lowed this event. The king of Denmark, the only re- 
maining commander, was afterwards attacked by Tilly, 


and obliged to retire, with the lofs of fix thoufand men *, 28th Augutt 


and. all his cannon and baggage. 


Wann the news of this difafter arrived in in England, omen 
410, 


the miniftry redoubled their efforts to get money: A «fq. 
loan was exacted to the full proportion of the four fub- oe 
fidies and three fifteenths voted laft parliament. 


The no-- 


' * Three thoufand were killed, and three thoufand taken prifoners. 
Six thoufand foot-foldiers, in the fervice of the States, were remanded, 
_and fent to join the king of Denmark, befides thirteen hundred foot, 
_ which were fent from England. Ruworth, vol.I. p. 421. 


e¢. Vou. iT, ’ Z Z 


bility 


_Ann, 1626. 


“~ 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 
bility and officers of the crown were recommended to fet 
an example of obedience, and to repair to their feveral 
counties, to promote that difpofition in others. On this 
occafion Sir Randolph Crew, a very worthy magiftrate, 


‘not fhewing a zeal for the bufinefs, was difmifled from 


his office of lord-chief-juftice, and Sir Nicholas Hyde, a 
lawyer of a tried compliant conduét, fucceeded in his 
room. He had rendered himfelf peculiarly meritorious 
by the pains he had taken in drawing Buckingham’s an- 
fwer to his impeachment, Thefe following inftructions,. 
among divers others, were given to the a 
appointed to levy the loans wh SGI OC 


« Tuar they treat apart with every one of thot that 
are to lend, and not in the prefence or hearing of any 
other, unlefs they fee caufe to the contrary; and if any 
fhall refufe to lend, and fhall make delays and excufes,. 
that they examine fuch perfons upon oath whether they 
have been dealt withal to refufe to lend, or make an 
excufe for not Iending? who hath dealt fo with them? 
and what fpeeches he or they have ufed tending to that 
purpofe? and that they thall alfo charge every fuch per- 
fon, in his majefty’s name, upon his allegiance, not to: 
difclofe to any other what his anfwer was : | 


« Tuat they endeavour to difcover whether any, pub- 
licly or underhand, be workers or perfuaders of others 
to diffent from this courfe, or hinder the good difpo- ” 
fition of others; and that, as much as they may, they 
hinder all difcourfe about it; and certify to the privy- — 
council in writing the names, qualities, and dwelling» - 
places of all fuch refractory perfons, with all fpeed, and = 


- gentlemen, Sir Thomas Darnel, Sir John Corbet, Sir Wal- 
ter Earl, Sir John Hevingham, and Sir Edward Hambden, y41.1, ,43, 


(es Mo a Roh Ex$7 1 ges 
efpecially. if. they fhall difcover any combination or con- Ann. 1626. ° 
federacy again{t thefe proceedings.” 


So vain an attempt to fecrecy, with the mixture of 
craft and tyranny found in thefe inftructions, expofed to 
the public as well the weaknefs as the villainy of their 
governors. Many knights and gentlemen that refufed 
to give their money on thefe arbitrary mandates were Commitment 
put under confinement in counties remote from their %msiy v¥° 
abodes. The prifons all over the kingdom were full of 
illuftrious fufferers. Sir John Elliot, confined in the 
Gatehoufe, fent up a well-framed petition to the King for 


his liberty: he fhewed the illegality of his commitment, 


grounding his requeft on feveral ftatutes which he cited, 
and by which he demonftrated that the King could not 
make arbitrary exactions on his fubjects, nor could the 
fubjects lawfully fubmit to them *. The five following 


Roufhworth, 


tefolutely ftood the refentment of the miniftry; and at * + 
their own expence defended, by a legal procefs, the liber- 
ties of their country, 

Tue queftion whether a fubject could be confined by Trial con- 


cerning the 
the fpecial command of the King, without afligning the King’s power 


of commits 


_caufe, was brought to a trial before the King’s-Bench, in °° 


the cafe of Sir John Corbet. The counfel for the prifoner 
were, Noy, Selden, Bramfton, and Calthrop. Thefe made 


it appear that, by the charter of king John, and fix feveral 


arm The Roman Catholics were all extremely forward to comply with . 


pinkie phimg 


313< ‘ 


ee fatutes, 


356. 


HISTORY 0 F ENGLAND. 


Ann, 1626. ftatutes, no man could be juftly imprifoned, either by the 


Ephemeris 
Parliamen- 


taria, 165 
p- 112, & 


fea. 


King or council, without a legal procefs, and that the 
caufe of the commitment ought to be expreffed in the 
return, that the judges might be enabled to determine 
whether it wasa lawful one. Notwithftanding thefe un- 
queftionable authorities, Sir Nicholas Hyde gave it as the 
refolution of the court, that the King’s fpecial order for 
the commitment was a fufficient caufe to make the mat- 
ter of the return good *, and that on thefe premifes the 
prifoners muft be remanded back +. The proftitution 
of juftice in this cafe was apparent to the whole nation, 
and the unanfwerable precedents and. arguments + which 


* The other judges at this time on the bench were Dodderidge, 
Jones, and Whitelock. 


+ Heath, the attorney-general, prefled the court to enter a. gene- 
ral judgment, that no. bail could be granted upon a commitment by 
the King or council. The judges refufing to go thus far, the fame ~ 
Heath, attorney-general, that it might ftand upon record that any fub- 
je& committed by fuch abfolute command might be detained in prifon 
for ever, gave a pofitive direction to the clerk of this court to make a 
fpecial entry of a draught of the judgment. The parliament meeting 
foon after, Heath thought proper to withdraw the draught from the 
clerk’s hand. On this occafion Sir Edward Coke made the following 
obfervation in the Commons’ houfe: ‘* I fear, fays he, were it not for 
this parliament, that followed fo foon after the form of judgment was 
drawn up, there would have been hard putting to have had it entered; 
but a parliament bringeth judges, officers, and all mem into good or- 
der.” Parl. Hift. vol. VII. p. 385, & jeg. 


ft The principal arguments urged by the lawyers were thefe that 
follow : 
_ « The writ of Habeas Corpus, faid ferjeant Brampfton, is the only 
means the fubjeét hath to obtain his liberty ; and the end of this writ 
is to return the caufe of the imprifonment, that it may be examined — 
in this court whether the’ parties ought to be difcharged or not ; but 
that cannot be done upon this return, for the caufe of the imprifon- 
8: i o4 ment 


i -- 


Cin AR LL EOS 5 
had been urged by the fore-mentioned able lawyers on Ann, 1626. 


ment of this gentleman, at firft, is fo far from appearing particularly 


by it, that there is no caufe at all expreffed in it. 
“© This writ requires that the caufe of the imprifonment fhould be 


~ returned; and if the caufe be not {pecially certified by it, yet fhould 


it at the leaft be fhewn in general, that it may appear to the judges of 


the court; and it muft be expreffed fo far, as that it may appear to be 


none of thofe caufes for which, by the law of the kingdom, the fubject 
ought not to be imprifoned ; and it ought to be expreffed that it was by 
prefentment or indictment, and not upon petition or fuggeftion made to 
the King and lords, which is againft the ftatute made in 25 Ed. III. c. iv. 


42 Ed. III. c. iii. 


“* By the ftatute 25 Ed. III. c. iv. it is ordained and eftablified, that 


no man from henceforth fhall be taken by petition or fuggeftion made 
to the King and lords, but by indiétment or courfe of law; and ac: 
cordingly it was enacted, 42 Ed. III. c. iii. the title of which ftatute 
is, None fhall be put to anfwer an accufation made to the King, with- 
out prefentment. I befeech your lordfhip to obferve the confequence 
of this caufe: If the law be, that upon this return this gentleman 
fhould be remanded, I will not difpute whether or no a man may be 
imprifoned before he be convicted according to the law; but if this 
return fhall be good, then his imprifonment fhall not continue for a 
time, but for ever, and the fubjects of this kingdom may be reftrained 
of their liberties perpetually, and by law there can be no remedy for 
the fubjeét ; and therefore this return cannot ftand with the laws of the 
realm, or that of Magna Charta, nor with the ftatute of 28 Ed. III. 
c. iii, for if a man be’not bailable upon this return, they cannot have 
the benefit of thefe two laws, which are the inheritance of the fubject. 
If your lordfhip fhall think this to be a fufficient caufe, then it goeth 
to a perpetual imprifonment of the fubject, for in all thofe caufes which 
may concern the King’s fubject, and are applicable to all times and 
cafes, we are not to reflect upon the prefent time and goverament, 
where juftice and mercy floweth, but we are to look what may betide 


us in the time to come.” 
“* I will be bold, faid Mr. Noy, to inform your lordfhip, touching; 


~ the ftatute of Magna Charta, c. xxix. Nullus liber homo capiatur, vel im- 


prifenetur, Ge, nec fuper eum switbiowus nifi per legale judicium parium fuorum;, 
vel per a terra. 
« That 


Vs 7) 


“Wi eo 


357- 


the 


358 
Ann. 1626, the fide of Freedom, opened the eyes of the public to 


HISTORY OFSENGLAND. 


«© That i fe ftatutes thefe words, im carcerem, are omitted out. 
of the print@d books, for it fhould be nec eum in carcerem mittimus, For 


thefe words, per Jegem terre, what lex terre fhould be I will not take — 


upon me to expound, otherwife than I find them to be expounded by 
ats of pafliament; and this is, that they are underftood to be the pro- 
cefs of the law, fometimes by writ, fometimes by attachment of the per- 
fon ; but whether /peciale mandatum domini regis be intended by that or 


_no, I leave it to your lordfhip’s expofition, upon two petitions of the 
‘Commons, and anfwer of the King, in 36 Ed. III. n.9, n. 20, 


“* In the firft of them the Commons complaint that the Great Char- 
ter, the Charter of the Foreft, and other ftatutes, were broken, and 
they defire that, for the good of himfelf and his people, they might 
be kept and put in execution, and that they might not be infringed 
by making arreft by fpecial command or otherwife. And the anfwer 
was, that the affent of the lords eftablifhed and ordained that the 
faid charter and other ftatutes fhould be put in execution, according 
to the petition, and that is without any difturbance by arreft, by fpe- 
cial. command, or otherwife, for it was granted as it was petitioned, 
In the fame year, for they were very careful of this matter, and it was 
neceffary it fhould be fo, for it was then an ufual thing to take men 
quibufdam de caufis, and many of thefe words caufed many acts of par- 


liament, and it may be fome of thefe writs may be fhewn; and, I — 


fay, in the fame year, they complained that men were imprifoned by 
fpecial command, and without indiétment, or legal courfe of law; 
and they defired that that thing might not be done upon men by fpe- 


_cial.command, againft the Great Charter, 


“ The King makes anfwer, that he is well pleafed therewith ; that 
was the firft anfwer: and for the future he hath added further, If any 
man be grieved let him complain, and right fhall be done unto him, 
This, my lord, is an explanation of the Great Charter, as alfo the fta- 
tute of 37 Ed. III. c. xviii. isa commentary upon it, that men fhould not 
be committed upon fuggeftion made to the King, without due proofs of 
law againft them; and fo it is enacted twice in one year. Hiufley, chief- 
juttice, faith, that Sir John Markham told king Edward [V. that’ he 


- could not arreft a man upon fufpicion of felony or treafon, as any of his 
fubjects might s becaufe if he fhould wrong a man Be _ pein ot 
parties — have no remedy againft him.” ay eth ath 


€4 He AGRI GO. £..6 ) 4. 


the knowledge of their juft rights, and the violation thofe Ann. 1626. 


_“ Now, my lord, faid Mr. Selden, I will {peak a word or two to the 
matter of the return, and that is touching the imprifonment per /peciale 
mandatum domini regis, by the lords of the council, without any caufe 
exprefied ; and admitting of any or either of both thefe to be the re- 
turn, I think, by the conftant and fettled laws of this | kingdom, with- 
out which we have nothing, no man can be juftly imprifoned by either 
of them, without a caufe of the comniitment expreffed in the return. 
My lord, in both the laft arguments the ftatutes have been mentioned 
and fully expreffed, yet I will add a little to what hath been faid. The’ 
ftatute of Magna Charta, c. xxix. that ftatute, if it were fully exe- 
cuted, as it ought to be, every man would enjoy his liberty better than: 
he doth. The law faith exprefly, No man fhall be imprifoned with- 
out due procefs of. the law, out of the-very body of this act of parlia- 
ment. Befides the explanation of other ftatutes, it appears, Nudlus liber 
homo capiatur, vel imprifouetur, nifi per legem terre. My lord, I know 
thefe words, l:gem terre, do leave the queftion where it was, if the in- 
terpretation of the ftatute were not. But I think, under your lordthip’s: 
favour, there it muft be intended by due courfe of law, to be either by 
prefentment or indiétment.. 


«« My lord, if the meaning of thefe words, per legem: terre, were: 
but as we ule to fay, according to the laws, which leaves the matter 
very uncertain, and per /peciale mandatum, 8&c. be within the meaning 
of thefe words, according to the law, then this a& had done nothing. 
The a& is, no freeman “fhall. be imprifoned but by the law of the- 
land if you will underftand thefe words, per legem terre, in the firft: 
fenfe, this ftatute will extend to villains, as well as to freemen; for 
if I imprifon another man’s villain, the villain may have an action of 
falfe imprifonment, But the lords and the King, for then they both 
-had villains, might imprifon them,. and the villain could have no re-- 
medy. But thefe words in the ftatute, per legem terre, were to the 
freemen, which ought not to be imprifoned but by due procefs of 
Jaw; and unlefs the interpretation thall be this, the freeman fhall 


-. have no privilege above the villain. So that I conceive, my lord, . 


thele words, per Jegem terre, mutt be here fo interpreted as in the’ 
42 Eliz. The bill is worth the obferving; it reciteth that divers per-- 
fons, without any writ or prefentment, were caft into prion, &c. that 


it might be enacted that it. fhould not be done. hereaticr,. the anfwer 
there: 


of Ny Lal 


360 


HISTORY’ OF ENGLAND. 


Aas. 1626; Tights had fuffered by an uninterrupted feries of illegal 


exertions of power. 


“there is, that this is an article of the Great Charter; this fhould be 


granted. So that it feems the ftatute is not taken to be an explana- 
tion of that of Magna Charta, but the wy words of the ftatute of 
Magna Charta.” 


_ As concerning the matter of the return, faid Mr. Calthrop, ic 


will reft upon thefe parts: Firft, whether the return be that he is de- 
tained in prifon by the fpecial commandment of our lord the King, be 
good or not, without fhewing the nature of the commandment, or the 
caufe whereupon the commitment is grounded in the return. The f{e- 
cond is, whether the time of the firlt commitment by the command- 
ment of the King, not appearing to the court, is fufficient to detain him 
in prifon. Thirdly, whether the imprifonment of the fubjects, without 


‘caufe fhewed, but only by the commandment of the King, be warranta- 


ble by the laws and ftatutes of this realm. As unto the firft part, I find 
by the books of our law that commandments of the King are of feveral 
natures; by fome of which the imprifonment of a man’s body is utterly 
unlawful; and by others of them, although the imprifonment may be 
lawful, yet the continuance of him without bail or mainprize will be 
utterly unlawful, There isa verbal command of the King’s, which is 
by word of mouth of the King only, and fuch commandment by the 


King, by the books of our law, will not be fufficient either to imprifon — 


aman, or to continue him in prifon. Secondly, there is a commandment 
of the King by his commiffion, which, according unto Calvin’s cafe in the 
feventh report, it is called by him breve mandatum non remed abile, and 
by virtue of fuch a commandment the King may neither feize the goods 
of his fubjeét, nor imprifon his body, as it is refolved in 42 Aff. pl. 5. 
where itis agreed by all the juftices, that a commiffion to take a man’s 
goods, or imprifon his body, without indictment or fuit of the party, or 
other due procets, is againft the law. Thirdly, there isa commandment 
of the King which is grounded upon a fuggeftion made to the King or 
to his council; and if aman be committed to prifon by fucha fuggeftion 
by commandment of the King, it is unlawful, and not warranted by the 
law of the realm. The 25Ed.III. c.iv. de provifortbus, whereas it is con- 
tained in the Great Charter of the franchifes of England, that none fhall 


. be imprifoned or arrefted of his freehold or of his ore? nor or em 


free het. ‘but by the. law of the land. 


fs 


‘ 


q 


Be 
4 


— 

ui 

ai At 
ine 
7 


Cc HOw RTS 28 Tt 


361 


ImprisoNMENT was not the only punifhment made Ane. 1626. 


 & feq. 


ufe of to awe the difcontented nation: Soldiers were <i" P4195 


- & Tt is awarded, confented, and eftablifhed, that from henceforth 
none fhall be taken by petition or fuggeftion made to our fovereign lord 
the King, or to his council, until it be by indictment or prefentment of 
his good and lawful neighbours where fuch deeds are done, in due man- 
rier, or by procefs, made by writ original at the common Jaw; nor of 
his freehold, unlefs he be duly brought in, and anfwer, and fore-judged 
- of the fame by way of law; and if any thing be done againft the fame 
it fhall be redreffed and holden for nought. 

“ 37 Ed. Ill. c.x. Although it be contained in the Great Charter, 
that no man be taken or imprifoned, or put out of his freehold, with- 
out due procefs-of the law, neverthelefs divers perfons make falfe fug~ 
geftions to the King himfelf, as well for malice as otherwife, whereof the 
King is often grieved, and divers of the realm put in great damages, 
_ contrary to the form of the fame ftatute ; 

«© Wherefore it is ordained, that all they that make fuch fuggeftions 
be fent, with their fuggeftions, to the chancellor or treafurer, and they’ 
and every of them find fureties to purfue their fuggeftions; and endure 
’ the fame pain that the other fhould have:had, if in cafe that his fuggef- 

tion be found untrue; and that then procefs of the law be made againft 
them: without being taken or imprifoned, againft the form of the fame 
charter, and other ftatutes. 

«‘ So that it appears by thefe’ feveral ftatutes, that fuch command- 
ments of the King as are grounded upon fuggeftion, either made to 
himfelf or to his council, for the imprifonment of a man, are againft 
the law. 

«« Fourthly, I find that there is a commandment of the King which 
is made under his hand with his fignet; for in the fourth and the 
fifth of Philip and Mary, Dier. 162, where ‘the ftatute of 1 Rich. II. 
c. xi. reftraineth the warden of the Fleet for letting any man at large 
that is in upon judgment at the fuit of any man, except it be by 
writ or other commandment of the King, it was doubted whether the 
queen, by letter under her hand and privy-fignet, doth give com- 
mandment to the warden of the Fleet to fuffer a man that is there in 
execution to’go about his bufinefs, or the affairs of the queen, whe- 
_ ther this be a warrantable command or not within the ftatute. And 


the law hath always been conceived upon that book that fuch a com- 
7 Vou. I, ‘, : ty mandment 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


don 1626, billeted on all thofe of fubftance who had given by their 


words or actions any offence to the government. The 
pees: fort were oe into the fleet and meine x oe 


snstidedint: is not winbaeabie by law; and if fuch a command will 
not ferve the turn to give unto a man his liberty, which the law fa- 
voureth, and had the countenance of an act of parliament for doing it, 
then I conceive it fhould be a more ftrong cafe, the King fhould not 
have power by his commandment to imprifon a man without due pro- 
cefs of the law, and reftrain him of his liberty, when there had been fo. 
many acts of parliament made for the liberty of the fubjeéts. Fifthly,, 
I do find that there is the commandment of the King, which is by his 
writ under the great feal, or the feal of the court out of which it iffueth, 
Regift. f. 69 & 70. In the writ de camtione admittenda I find the words 
mandatum regis expounded to be breve regis, for the writ goeth rex vic? 
falutem, &c. Stamf. 72, 5 Ed. Ill. c. viii. 1 Ed. II. c. ili. ix. faith, that 
every Capias in a perfonal action is a commandment of the King, for it 
is precipimus tibi quod capias, &c. and yet the defendant, as there it is 
faid, is replevifable by the common law. Sixthly, I do find by our 
books of law, and by the regifter, that this fpecial mandatum domini regis 
is expounded to be his writ, and that the law taketh no notice of any 
other /peciale mandatum than by this writ; the which being fo when the 
return is made, that he is imprifoned and detained in prifon by the 
fpecial commandment of the King, how can the court adjudge uporr 
this return, that Sir John Corbet ought to be kept in prifon, and not 
' to be bailed, when the nature of the fpecial commandment is not fer 
forth in the return, whereby it may appear unto the court that he is 
not bailable.” 

Mr. Calthrop finifhed this long difcourfe with quoting many fta- . 
tutes, and the authority of precedents, to prove that the fpecial com- — 
mand of the King, without fhewing the nature of the command, was 
an illegal form of commitment ; and that on a return of /peciale man- 
datum domini regis, without other caufe fhewed for snipes Sir 
John Corbet ought to obtain his liberty. 


* Such was the oppofition to thefe illegal exaétions, that tho’ fome of P 
the poorer fort were offered to have their money returned if they would 
fubfcribe, they abfolutely refufed, and fuffered themfelves to be. “prefled. 
into the fea-fervice rather than COE Rufoworth, vol. 1. ies 


Ee 


ee 


<p 


CoH ATRIL-E S L 


Peter Hayman was difpatched on a frivolous ‘errand into Aan. 1626. 


the Palatinate. _ Glanville, an eminent lawyer, but ob- 
noxious to the crown; had “been forced, during ‘the for- 
mer interval of parliament, to accept of an office which 
had obliged him to go onthe expedition to Cadiz, to 
the great detriment of his fortune. Martial law was 
enforced; the lives of the foldiers put in the power of © 
their officers. The cognizance of offences taken out of 
the proper courts, and judicial decifions rendered arbi- 
trary in matters of life and death. Notwithftanding a 


power fo incompatible with the civil privileges of the « 


nation, the foldiers broke out into great diforders. Rob- 
beries, rapes, cruelties, murders, frequently committed, 
filled up the meafure of mifery under which the nation 
groaned... That the people might learn to kifs the rod 
of power with devotion, and, becoming flaves by prin- 
ciple, reverence the yoke, priefts were inftructed «to 
teach fpeculative defpotifm, and graft on religious affec- 


tions fyftems of civil tyranny. The following paflages 


are in two fermons that Manwaring, a court-chaplain, 
preached before Charles: “ That the King is not bound 
to obferve the laws of the realm concerning the fub- 
jects’ rights and liberties ; but that his royal will and 
command in impofing loans and taxes, without com-: 


‘mon confent in’ parliament, doth oblige the fubjeéts’ 


confcience, upon pain of eternal damnation: That thofe 


who refufed to pay the required loan offended againft 


the law of God, and the King’s fupreme authority, and 
became guilty of impiety, difloyalty, and rebellion : 
That the authority of parliament is not neceflary for 


the raifing of aids and fubfidies ; and that the flow pro- 


goes of fuch great affemblies are not fitted for the 
fupply 


364 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1626, fupply of the ftate’s urgent neceffities, but would rather 
produce fundry impediments to the juft defigns of 
princes.” At the fame time Sibthorp, an officious time- . 
ferving ecclefiaftic, publifhed a fermon he had preached 
at Northampton, entitled, «« Apoftolic Obedience.” It 

a breathes a higher ftrain than thofe of Manwaring; viz. 

Shey * That the prince who is the head makes his court and a 

council; it is his duty to direét and make laws; he 
doth whatfoever pleafes him, and who may fay unto : 
him, What doft thou? If princes command any thing 
which fubjects may not perform, becaufe it is againft 
the laws of God, or of nature, or impoflible, yet fub- 
jects are bound to undergo the punifhment, without a. 
either refiftance or railing or reviling, and fo to yield a o 
paflive obedience where they cannot exhibit an attive 
one; and I know no other cafe, faid the fpeaker, but 
one of thofe three wherein a fubject may excufe himfelf 
with paflive obedience ; in all others he is bound to ac- 
tive sa am ¥P 


Cuar es had the imprudence not only openly to pa- 
tronize fuch infamous doctrines, but gave his fubjects to 
underftand, that his pretenfions were as alarming as the 


* Bifhop Laud was employed to draw up certain inftructions relative: 
to the loan. Thefe inftructions were fent to the two archbifhops to be a 
difperfed among the inferior clergy, and publifhed in all the parifhes of a 
the realm. Complete Hift. ed. 1706, vol. IIL. p..33, & /eq. - woe 


Laud had not only affented to the licenfing of Sibthorp’s fermon, but 
had expunged out of it feveral paflages which did not entirely agree with - 
the inclinations of the court; fuch as againft evil counfellors, the tolera- 
tion of Papifts, and the prophanation of the Lord’s-Day. Prynne’s De: 
Hift. of the Trial a4 Laud, p. 445 


CHARLES LI . 365 ae ale 
irrational affertions advanced by thefe fycophants. Arch- An1626. 0 
bifhop Abbot, that humane and popular prelate, was fe- mR i. abe 
‘queftered from his jurifdiction, and confined to one of = ; 4 i: 
his houfes in Kent, without other ground of complaint Se a 
but the-refufing to licenfe Sibthorp’s fermon. Williams, Meese 
the late keeper, did not efcape the cenfure of the party: +2 ae 


An information was fent up againft him to the lords of 
the council for encouraging Puritans. Laud’s reftlefs jea- 
loufy of this man haunted him in his fleep *. 


Wnuitst England carried the face of a conquered pro- 
vince ; whilft the liberties and properties of the fubject 
lay proftrate at the mercy of a rafh imperious monarch, 
a rapacious infolent minifter, and a defigning bigoted 
prieft + ; whilft prifons were daily filling with patriots ; 
great preparations were making for foreign hoftilities. 


Hap Charles made ufe of the money which he had 
tyrannically extorted from his fubjects to fupport the 
' king of Denmark, who had been enticed into the Ger- 
man quarrel by his importunities and promifes, he 
_ would in this point have anfwered the expectations of 
the public; but, to the aftonifhment of all men, a 
fquadron which had been fent to lie in the mouth of 


* Tt is tranfmitted from his own authority, that at this time he was 
made uneafy by a dream that reprefented the bifhop of Lincoln brought 
to him in but that he returned freed from them; that he leaped 
upon a hi ed, and he could not overtake him. Laud’s Diary 


in Prynne’s Breviate of bis Life, fol. ed. 1644, p- 9- 
» + This: was Laud, whofe furious principles had fo ingratiated him 
with the King and his minifter, that he directed all the ecclefiattical affairs, 
and no one was preferred in the church but by his recommendation. 
_ eh setae’ of ee of Laud, p. 6 


the 


586 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


os 353 1626. ° tha Elbe, to prevent the Spaniards furnifhing themfelves 


with materials for: fhipping from that country, was re- 


called, and the paflage by the Sound to the king of 
_ Denmark’s dominions. left, undefended. A refolution 


was haftily taken to break with France. Charles, at the 
time he was embroiled with his own fubjects, and thus 
deprived of the counfels of all the wife and virtuous in 
his kingdom ; worfted in all his warlike attempts ; un- 
fupplied with any treafure, but what he attained by the 


-moit exafperating meafures; before he had accommo- 


dated matters with the houfe of Auftria, wantonly-at- 


tacked. the next great power in Europe. If we trace the 


incentives to this extravagantly-imprudent ftep, we fhall 
find them all center:in the levity of the impetuous Buck- 
ingham ; a man whom fate had deftined to be the bane 
of his two patrons, and in whom we fee a ftriking ex- 
ample of that ill judgment which commonly eh the 
favour of princes. 


Tue fplendor which furrounded Buckingham at the 
time when he was difpatched to France to conduct Hen- 
rietta-Maria into England did not a little dazzle a court 
uncommonly apt to be affected with empty appearances. 
This, and the importance of his employment, had oc- 
cafioned his reception to be more than ordinarily mag- 
nificent, gracious, and friendly. In the midft of thofe 
fcenes of gaiety, pleafure, and diffipation, which this 
occafion produced, fome favourable glance: d him 
with the hopes of entering. into an am intrigue 
with no lefs confpicuous a» perfonage. than Ann of Au- 
ftria, the young: queen ‘of! France ; whom report avers — 
to have been extremely taken with the gaudy appear- 


—_ - — 


Cc H A R L E S lL ™ 367 ; ; . ia 


ance and familiar manners of the Englith favourite; the Ann, 1626. os 

; progrefs of whofe amour, during his abode at Paris, was J, 5 ae 

pS tee pe difappointed by the watchful Richlieu; but Buckingham, “ a 
: with a temerity peculiar to himfelf, on a flight pretence re 
left Henrietta-Maria at Bouloign, and returned to Amiens, ee 


where he had a fecret interview with the French queen, 
who had accompanied her fifter-in-law thus far on her 
journey. This coming to Lewis’s ear, the queen’s do- ee 
meftics were difmiffed, and that monarch entertained a . 
high refentment againft Buckingham on the unparalleled 
infolence of his conduct. .When he was making, on a 
frivolous pretence, preparations for another embafly to 
Paris, he received a meflage from Lewis, that he mutft lay 
- afide the defign of fuch a journey. On the receipt of 
this mefflage he romantically fwore, that he would fee the 
-French queen in fpite of all the power of France; and 
from that moment endeavoured to make a rupture be- 
tween the two monarchs, 


; | He was foon fupplied with pretences to forward fuch 
a difpofition ; Charles had been ufed extremely ill by 
the French court on feveral occafions. It was with great 
difficulty that he had obtained the reftoration of his 
fhips, even after they had performed the ftipulated fer- 
vice at Rochelle. Though Lewis had given him great 
_ hopes that he would enter heartily into the alliance 
againft the Auftrian family, yet this was no farther pro- 
fecuted than was neceflary to make an advantageous 
treaty with the court of Spain. Charles’s refentment of 
thefe provocations was much heightened by the treat- 
ment: he had met with from his own queen, who had 
carried herfelf with an erent infolence of be- - 
: ' haviour 


. : Fe 
€ ; ° r : e - ae 


rh HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ana, 1626, Oh avighs from the firft of their union; a period of time 
when this princefs had not arrived to more than fixteem 
years of age. She had an admired-perfon, and a viva- 
city that gave her a quicknefs in repartee, which was 
generally miftaken for the fuperior endowment of un- — 

5 derftanding. The vanity which thefe fuperficial qualifi- 

Cations excite in a young female mind was in her much 

' heightened by circumftances arifing from her particular 
| fituation. The vaft conceffions which Charles had made 
for a wife muft naturally infpire a high idea of felf-im-- 
| 


portance in the deftined bride; and fuch was the ge- 
neral opinion in the French court of the vaft influence 
which this princefs would have on the future conduct 
of her hufband and father-in-law, that on thefe grounds 
father Berulle affured the pope, “ That the propofed 
marriage would be not only for the benefit of the Eng- 
lith Catholics, but of all the Catholics in Chriftendom; 
that there was nothing to be hazarded in madame, fee- 
ing that fhe was as firm in the faith and in piety as he 
could defire. On the contrary, he had great caufe to 
hope that fhe, being dearly beloved of the King, who 
was already well enough difpofed to be a Catholic, and 
of the prince of Wales, fhe might by fo much the 
more contribute to their converfion, as women have 
| wonderful power over their hufbands and fathers-in-law, 
when love has given them the afcendant over their fpi- 
| rits ; that madame was fo zealous in religion that there 
h was no doubt but fhe would employ in this pious de- 
h | fign all that depended upon her induftry ; and that if 
' God fhould not blefs her intentions in the perfons of 
| king James, and of the prince of Wales, it was appa- 
I rent that their children would be the reftorers of the 


———- 


GO. vA; ROL YE rer sh 


369 


faith which their anceftors had deftroyed, feeing fhe Ann. 1627. 


would have the charge to educate them in the belief, 
and in the cueecaiig of the Catholic elaine till the age 


of thirteen years.” 


Ir is eafy to imagine what effect inftructions and in- 
finuations like thefe muft have on a young, vain, and 
bigoted mind ; and what muft be the conduct produced 
from a conjunction of inexperience, vanity, and enthu- 
fiafm. The infolent airs which this young queen af- 
fumed to her hufband, difputing with him on all points, 
afferting that he had no right to meddle or prefume 
to give advice on the nomination of her domeftics, or 
the ordering her houfhold; the performing a ridiculous 
penance * to Tyburn, which had been enjoined her by 
her priefts, there to pay devotion to the martyrs who had 
fuffered in the Popifh caufe: thefe, and the continual 
altercations occafioned by the petulance and abfurd pre- 
tenfions of her French attendants, obliged Charles to dif- 
mifs them from their miftrefs’s fervice, and fend them 
out of his dominions. 


Ir was fome time before this period that domeftic 
difputes had arifen to fuch a height between this pair, 
that Henrietta had earneftly defired leave to return to 
Paris, there to refide for fome time: This requeft had 
been granted-her by the inrereft of Buckingham, but 


. on the condition of his attending her. When this con- 


dition was made known to the court of France, it pro- 
duced that denial from Lewis which has been reported 


* This penance was performed barefooted. 
Vout.I. Bbb above; 


370 


Ann, 1627. 


War with 
France, 


Rapin. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


above; and the énraged and difappointed Buckingham 
found it eafy to infpire with the fame paflions the facile 
difpofition of his mafler, already chagrined with conjugal 
difcord, and with the many provocations which he had 
received from his brother-in-law the French king. 


_ A Tripe alliance was formed by the king of Eng- 
land, the duke of Savoy (who had been left expofed to: 
the Spaniard, through the perfidious conduct of the: 
French miniftry), and the duc de Rohan, the head of the 
Hugonot party in France. This alliance had been effected 
by means of the duc de Soubize, brother to-the duc de 
Rohan, and the abbot de Scaglia, ambaflador from the 
duke of Savoy. They had both refided for fome time in 
England, and had been highly careffed: by Buckingham, 
with a view to his defigns on France. According to a 
concerted plan between the Engtifh court and the duc de: 
Rohan, on the twenty-feventh of June, Buckingham, with. 
a fleet of an hundred fail, fet out for Roehelle. To his. 
great furprize, on his arrival at this place he found the 
gates fhut againft him: The defiga had been determined 
without the approbation, or even the knowledge of the 
Rochellers. This people could not readily conftrue in an 
advantageous fenfe the unexpected arrival of the forces 
of a monarch who had: fo lately lent affiftance for the 
purpofe of their deftruction. ‘To the duke de Soubife, 


who was fent by Buckingham to affure them of the - 


good intentions of Charles, and to demand admittance 
to his troops, they gave this civil denial: “ That being 
in ftri& union with all the Proteftants in the kingdom, 


they could not receive into the city the offered fuccours, .  * 
of hat Lal be) 
gonots." 
¢ 7 


without the confent of the whole body of the Hu 


wor 
SPT: 


Wyo oe - 


so 


CiA.BSA CR f sol 


371 


On this refufal from the Rochellers, Buckingham direéted Ann. 1627. 
his courfe to the Ifle of Rhe, contrary to the advice of Attempt on 


ifland being ill fupplied with troops, and the forts not 
provided for a fiege. 


Tue whole conduct of Buckingham’s attempt upon 
the Ifle of Rhe was fuch a feries of unaccountable blun- 


_ ders, that fome authors have attributed it to the influence 


of fome flattering propofals conveyed to him by the 
French queen. Whichever of -thefe might be the caufe 
of his proceedings, ignorance or treachery, the manage- 
ment of this bufinefs reflects eternal difhonour both on 
Buckingham and his mafter: On the one for executing 
a plan of this confequence in a rafh abfurd manner; 
and on the other for trufting an important command to 
a mere courtier, raw and inexperienced in the exercifes 
of war, and ignorant of all the rudiments of military 


{cience. 


Tue Englifh made good their landing at the Ifle of 
Rhe*, notwithftanding a ftout oppofition from the French 
commander, Thoyras, at the head of three thoufand 
foot and two hundred horfe. Buckingham was advifed 


‘ he Ife of 
Soubize, who recommended a defcent upon Oleron, that Ric. 


by Soubize to improve the panic of the French, and at- Rutwort. 


tack the citadel of St. Martin. This good counfel was 


_ * Lewis’s refufing admittance to Mansfeldt’s army is mentioned in 
the declaration of war publifhed on the occafion of thefe hoftilities 
againft France. To affign this refufal as one of the reafons for the 
prefent invafion was highly abfurd, fince the union between France 
and England, in the marriage of Charles and Henrietta, (ucceeded 
this affront. 


Bbb2 —_diifre. 


3972 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


“Ann. 1627, Gifregarded, and Buckingham loft five days in fortifying 


himfelf, and making preparations to attack the fort in 


the moft regular manner. At length he laid fiege to 
St. Martin’s, but neglected to take a fmall fort lying 
upon the fhore, named La Prie. When the army made 
their attack on St. Martin’s, Buckingham fent fuch fan- 
guine affurances to Charles, that a proclamation was 
prematurely iffued for encouraging the Englifh to tranf- 
port themfelves and their families to the Ifle of Rhe; 


but the progrefs of this conqueft advanced very flowly, 


or rather was at a ftand. Thoyras refufed to furrender, 
and Buckingham, after feveral fruitlefs attacks, was ob- 
liged to turn the fiege into a blockade: He received a 
recruit from Ireland of fixteen hundred men; five hun- 
dred from the Rochellers, who, by the perfuafion’ of 
Soubize, had now declared for the Englifh; and Charles, 
according to direction, prepared a large reinforcement 
from England. The French had by this time recovered 
from the furprize which the unexpected defcent of the 
Englifh had occafioned, and contrived to throw in provi- 
fions to the citadel of St.Martin. Buckingham might 
have rendered fuch fupplies ineffeCtual by making him- 
felf mafter of a well, from whence the inhabitants drew 
all their water; but this was neglected, and the enemy 
fuffered to fecure themfelves in the pofleffion of it. 


Tue length of time fpent in the fiege had given the 
French full opportunity to collect, by the affiftance of the 
Spaniards, fo large a naval force that their fleet exceeded, 


in number of fhips, that of the-Englith. By the means — 
of this fleet, and the advantage which the pofleflion of — 


fort La Prie gave them, they landed fo large a gre sh 


7 
" 
4 


ee = 


C. HAs RD ee SL 


forces that Buckingham began to think of a retreat. 
When this refolution was made known to Soubize, he 
ftrongly reprefented to him the diftrefles which fuch an 


- abandonment would bring upon the French Proteftants in 


general, and particularly upon the Rochellers; who, on 
the faith of England, had at length declared for the al- 
lies, and thus had drawn upon themfelves the fevere re- 
fentment of their monarch. The duke de Rohan and 
himfelf, prefuming on an effectual affiftance from Eng- 
land, had been fo active that they were declared public 
traitors. The duke de Rohan * was condemned to be 
torn in pieces by four horfes, and fifty thoufand crowns 
fet upon his head. Thefe prefling circumftances were all 
urged in vain: Buckingham was tired of his fituation, 
and determined to return to England, though he daily 
expected a large reinforcement from thence, under the 
command of his friend the earl of Holland. But before 
this refolve was put in execution, he made a vain at- 
tempt to take the citadel by ftorm: After having loft 
many men in the adventure, he began his march to the 
water-fide. Fort La Prie being in the poffeflion of the 
enemy, there was no paflage open but by a narrow caufe- 
way, which had on each fide of it deep ditches and falt- 
pits. Buckingham had negleéted the erecting a fort at 
the entry on the caufeway to fecure his retreat; and no 
fooner had the Englifh entered the narrow way, than, in 


_this difadvantageous fituation, they were attacked by their 


* Acton to a plan agreed on between the allies, at the time 
when Buckingham invaded France, he had made an infurrection in 
Rouvergn, and acted .there with great fuccefs. He had had great 
SasioF frosty and honours from the French king, to tempt him not 


to join the Englifh, 


enemies, 


373 


Ann, 1627. 


The Englify 
retreat from 
the Ifle of 
Rhe- 


374 


Ann, 1627, 


HISTORY-OF ENGLAND. 


enemies, who made great flaughter among them; the 
courage of the Englifh troops preferved them from a ge- 
neral rout; the French retreated in their turn, and Buck- 
ingham, with his remaining forces, gained the fleet, and 
returned home with the lofs of upwards of four thoufand 
men out of feven thoufand he had carried out with him. 
This difgraceful difafter brought a heavy additional load of 
public odium on the already univerfally detefted minifter. 
He was received by his fond mafter with as great ac- 
knowledgment for fuppofed fervices as if he had brought 
home the trophies of am important victory *. ; 


Cuarveés kindly attributed the caufe of his favourite’s 


ill fuccefs to the want of a feafonable fupply; and the 
earl of Holland, who was juft fetting out from Ply- 
mouth when Buckingham returned, was, among others, 
accufed of dilatorinefs in his proceedings. Bucking- 
ham’s arrival was followed by deputies from the Ro- 
chellers, who earneftly folicited Charles for the perform- 
ance of promifes which had been made them on his 
part; promifes on the faith of which they had been 
prevailed on to take up arms, but were now left ex- 
pofed to the refentment of their furious bigoted mo- 
narch, who, happily furnifhed with a pretext and an 
Opportunity to ruin them, had befet their town both by 


* On the inftant that Buckingham’s arrival was made known to 
Charles, he fent him confolatory letters on the occafion of his difgrace, 
conjuring him, by the facred ties of friendthip, not to the dif- 
after irrecoverable, by afflicting himfelf for the faults of Dur- 


ing the progrefs of his operations at the Ifle of Rhe, Charles had fent — 
him many compliments on the report of his military Bi MSS, 


in Br. Mufeum, n, 6988, fol. 3. 


a 


GC MA, Rit Beh 5h 


o75 


land and fea. Their circumftances were defperate, by Ann. 1627. 
reafon that they were in immediate danger of famine fate sf the 
from the ill management of Buckingham, who had ®**lles. 


difappointed them of large provifions of corn which 
they had been promifed from England. The difcontents 
of the Englith, with the juft complaints of the wretched 
Rochellers, made a general outcry againft Buckingham, 
and the prefent fyftem of government. The mariners 
came in tumultuous crowds to Whitehall, demanding 
their pay with great earneftnefs. The enemy appeared 
in triumph, entered the harbours, and infulted the Eng- 
lifh on their own coafts. Many fhips had been taken 


in a few years, and the merchants were difcouraged: 


from building, becaufe they were prefled into the King’s 
fervice, and not paid. 


THE univerfal voice of the people, which earneftly 
demanded a parliament, Charles’s neceflities, and the 
prefent critical fituation of affairs, occafioned a general 
council to be called to confult on this point. Sir Ro- 


bert Cotton, in a long and laboured fpeech, made it ap- 


pear that the only remedy for the growing evils of the 
times, was to acquiefce with the defire of the people, 
and call a parliament; that this was the only way by. 
which a fufficient fupply could be timely raifed for the 
urgent neceffities of the ftate. This ftrong reprefenta- 


tion, with fome flattering affurances at the clofe of his 
fpeech, that Buckingham might regain his popularity if 
the public could be perfuaded into a belief that he was 
the firft mover in council to call a parliament, had’ fo 
much weight with the miniftry that writs were iffued: 


out for that aflembly to meet the feventeenth of - Marcly 
following;. 


376 


Ann. 1627. 
ew 29. 


‘arliament 
called. 


Prifoners 
releafed. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


following *. Previous to this meeting, warrants were. 
fent to all parts to releafe the prifoners who had been | 


confined on account of the loan. The number of them, 
all people of fathion and fortune, amounted to feventy- 
eight t+. Thefe, gentlemen of tried refolution, were 
many of them chofen members of the enfuing parlia- 
ment; the people fixing their hopes of redrefs on pa- 
triots whofe fufferings for the public caufe had given 
flattering affurances of an uncorruptible integrity. Be- 
fides this order for a general releafe, the court thought 
proper to fend writs of fummons to the difgraced peers : 
Abbot, Arundel, Briftol, and the bifhop of Lincoln, 
were all permitted, according to their right, to attend in 
parliament. Thus far Charles afforted his condué to 
the fatisfaction of the public; but fearing that Buck- 


* Before the refolution was taken to call this parliament, Charles ° 


had borrowed 120,000]. of the city of London, for which they had 
lands to the value of 21,000]. a-year affured to them ; he likewife bor- 
rowed 30,0001. of the Eaft-India company. Baker’s Chronicle, p. 440. 


+ A lift of the prifoners that were fet at liberty by this order of the 
court: 


Sir John Strangeways, Sir Tho. Grantham, Sir Will. Armyn, Sir 
Will. Maffam, Sir Will. Wilmore, Sir Erafmus Draiton, Sir Edw. Aif- 
cough, Sir Nath. Bernardifton, Sir Ro. Poyntz, Sir Beachum St. John, 
Sir Oliver Luke, Sir Maurice Berkley, ‘Sir Tho. Wentworth, Sir John 
Wray, Sir W. Conftable, Sir John Hotham, Sir John Pickering, Sir 
Fra. Barrington, Sir Will. Chauncey, Sir Walter Earl, Sir Tho. Darnel, 
Sir Harbottle Grimfton, Sir John Corbet, Sir John Elliot, Sir John’ He- 
vingham, knights; W- Anderfon, Terringham Norwood, John Trigon- 


well, Tho. Godfrey, Rich. Knightly, Tho. Nicholas, John Hampden, 


Geo, Ratchif, John Dutton, Henry Poll, Nath. Conwell, Rob, Hatly, 


' Tho, Elmes, John Stevens, W.Coriton, Geo. Catefby, efquires; Tho. 
Wood, John Wilkinfon, W. Allan, Tho. Holyhead, gentlemen. a 


three Londoners. Rufbworth, vol. 1. Pp: 473- 


en 


CA As-R> EB ES&S - f£ 


377 


ingham, notwithftanding the hopes given by Sir Robert Aap. 1627. 


Cotton, would ftill continue the object of parliamentary 
profecution, he determined to fhew that affembly that 
he was refolutely bent to fupport his favourite, and not 
to relinquifh any of the authority he had aflumed to 
make difcretionary levies on the fubjects. At the very 
time that writs were iflued to fummon a parliament, 
the privy-council were confulting on methods to raife 
an arbitrary and heavy tax, by way of excife; and at 
the fame time 30,0001. were fent over into the Low 


Countries to Sir William Balfour and colonel Dalbier, =apricigs 
P: 4 


for the raifing of one thoufand horfe, and 70,0001. for 
arms for horfe and foot. ‘The levying of a certain fum 
on all the counties of England, for the building of 
fhips, was alfo under confideration, that an independant 
conftant unlimited revenue might, by this means, be 
raifed for the ufe of the crown *. 


* Juft before the meeting of the parliament, a fociety of Jefuits 
were taken at Clerkenwell. Among their papers was found a letter 
written to their father-rector at Bruffels. The fubftance of this letter 
is the hopes which the body entertained on the prefent fituation of af- 
fairs in England. The foundation of their hopes was in the Armi- 
nians, who affe&ted mutation; that the Catholics encouraged them in 
their fchemes of making the King independant, and freeing him of 
his ward, the parliament; that they had fhewn the means how to fet- 
tle the excife; that it was to be done by a mercenary army of Ger- 
mans: * In farming the excife, fays this letter, the country is moft 


_ likely to rife ; if the mercenary army fubjugate the country, then the 


foldiers and projeétors fhall be paid out of the confifcations ; if the 
country be too hard for the foldiers, then they muft confequently mu- 
tiny; which is equally advantageous to us. Our fuperlative defign is 
to work the Proteftants, as well as the Catholics, ta welcome a con- 
queror.” Rufbworth, Ephemeris Parliamentaria. 

Ccc AMONG 


Vou, I. 


378 


Ann, 1627,, 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Amone all the abfurd meafures that hitherto had 
been taken by Charles and his miniftry, not one of 
them is more ftriking than this of giving fo general an 
alarm on the eve of a parliament; at a time when, un- 
der the protection of their reprefentatives, the nation 
could make a more regular and legal. oppofitiom to the 


' oppreflive practices of the crowm; at fucha time to ad- 


Third 
Parliament. 


Parl. Hitt. vol. 
VIL. p. 339, 
& feq. 


vance pretences which, if brought into practice, mufb 


alter the whole fyftem, of the government,. and: eftablifh: 
a regular tyranny, is a madnefs that carries with it the 
appearance of the infatuation of enthufiaftic zeal, rather 
than the common incongruity of minifterial) councils: 
But Charles. looked on, thefe formidable preparations: as: 
fo.many precautions againft the confequences of) an: en+ 


raged parliament; and fuch, an open declaration of a 


determined purpofe to maintain, the authority he had 
affumed, as the moft certain check on. the councils: of 


that aflembly, which would rather wink at oppreffions 


that might be temporary, and comply with all the. de- 
mands of their fovereign, than, by driving Him to ex- 
tremities, rifk not only the reality, bur. the. appearance: 
of Freedom.. 


TuesE being the: politics: of the: miniftry, Charles,, 
in his fpeech at the opening of the feffion, inftead, of 
attempting, to. foften, the Commons, by foothing words: 
and fair promifes, flumg out this: threat: “ Every*man, 


fays he, now muftdo according to his confcience; where- | 


fore if you,, as God: forbid! fhould not do your, duties, 


in contributing what, the ftate. at this time; needs) Ih ; 

mutt, in difcharge of my confcience, ufe thofe otlier — 

means which God hath, put into my hands, to fave 
that o 


Tee 


= 


ee -— 


®HARLES L 


that which the follies of fome particular men may Ann. 1627. 
_ otherwife hazard to lofe.”” What muft have been the _ 


feelings of this aflembly, many individuals of which, 
united to the fenfe of public injury, had in their own 
perfons fuffered from the injuftice of the crown? what 
muft have been its feelings to hear Charles, inftead of 
offering conceflions to repair the notorious breach he 
had made in the conftitution ; inftead of endeavouring 
to bury the memory of paft offences in oblivion ; to 
hear him attempt to eftablith, as a fundamental princi- 
ple in the government, that God had put into his hands 
other means to impofe taxes than by parliament? Un- 
doubtedly at the utterance of thefe expreflions a lively 
fenfe of public danger fired the imagination of every 
patriot in the houfe; whilft the bitter fenfe of paft, and 
dread of future fufferings, warmed the indignation of 


-defs exalted characters. 


Ir-we reflect on the outrages committed by the go- 
vernment in the intermediate fpace between the conclufion 
of the laft, and the beginning of the prefent parliament ; 
with the extreme folly with which the public meafures 
were conducted, to the infamy, lofs, and even danger of 
the nation ; if we recollect the manly refentment which 
the leading members of the laft parliament fhewed at 
offences far lefs grievous than the fufferings of the pre- 


fent time,—members all nominated in this, and bearing 


the fame influence; their patriotic warmth excited by an 
accumulation of reiterated evils; with this provoking in- 
ftance of the wrong-headed inflexibility of their monarch: 
Ifwe reflect on all thefe circumftances, we fhall be wrapt 


in wonder at the capacity of the men who guided the 
Ccc2 | counfels 


380. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1627, COunfels of this aflembly, who, enraged by fuch inju- 


rious wrongs, and fuch provoking infults, could form 
and execute a plan of operations, in which forbearance 
and decorum of expreflion and ation, were as neceflary 
as vigor, ability, and refolution. 


WHEN Charles had ended his fpeech, the lord-keeper, 
after having made a tedious harangue on the fituation 
of the European powers, the ambition of the houfe of 
Auftria, the perfidy of the French court, and the danger 
to which England was expofed from the conjunction -of 
thefe formidable adverfaries, he repeated the ridiculous 
plea of the war’s having been originally undertaken. by 
advice of parliament ; and added, “ This way of par- 
liamentary fupplies, as his majefty told you, he hath 
chofen, not as the only way, but as the fitteft; mot be- 
caufe he is deftitute of others, but becaufe it is more 
agreeable to the goodnefs of his own moft gracious 
difpofition, and to the defire and weal of his people. If 
this be deferred, neceflity and the fword of the enemy 
make way to the others. Remember his zs maapeay’ s ad- 
monition ! I fay, Remember it!” 


NorwitusTanpine the repeated infults, the Com- 
mons, after having prefented Sir John Finch, the queen’s 
attorney, for their fpeaker *, calmly fettled their feveral 


* Sir John Finch, according to the manner of his predeceffor, made 
a very minifterial fpeech: After haying praifed monarchy above every 
other conftitution of government, he addreffed the throne in the fol- 
lowing ftrain: ‘* Kings, faid he, know no other tenor but God’s fer- 
vice, and their value is only tried at his beam; whence the poets faid, 
the parents of the firft kings were Calim & Terra, divine ae 


| 
: 


ey 


S: BVA hk B68 oh 


396 


committees for privileges and elections, for religion, for Ann. 1627, 


grievances, and trade. Having pafled an order that all 
the members of the houfe fhould receive the facrament, 
they drew up a petition to: the King for a general faft to 
be obferved throughout the kingdom. Then they entered 


into confideration of the late oppreflions : The billeting of Detain 08 


foldiers ; raifing of arbitrary taxes; the imprifonment of 
thofe who refufed to comply, and the refufal of bail on 
an Habeas Corpus to certain gentlemen who demanded 
it. The debate on this fubject was opened in the fol- 
lowing manner by Sir Francis Seymour: “ This is the 


alone, his majefty may fee, as in a true glafs, the eftate 
of the kingdom. We are all called hither by his ma- 


jefty’s writs, to give him faithful counfel, fuch as may © 


ftand with his honour, but that we muft do without flat- 
tery; and being chofen by the Commons to deliver up 
their juft grievances, this we muft do without fear. Let 
us not be like Cambyfes’s judges; who, being afked by 
him concerning fomething unlawful, faid, though there 
were no written laws, the Perfian kings might do what 
they lift. How can we exprefs our affections while we 


retain our fears, or {peak of giving till we know whe- 


ther we have any thing to give? for if his majefty may. 
be perfuaded to take what he will, what need we to 
give? That this hath been done appeareth by the bil- 
leting of foldiers, and imprifonment of gentlemen for 
refufal of the loan; who, if they had done the contrary 


and human approbation.” The whole tenor of the difcourfe was to 
fhew the expediency of union; viz. a parliamentary compliance with 
the King’s: ne Parl. ii ok vol. VIL: p. 347, & feg. 


for 


theC OMMODSe: 


Parl. Hift.vol.- 
great council of the kingdom; and here, if not here VII. p. 361,. 
feq. 


382 


Ann. 1627. 


Ephemeris 
Parliamen- 
taria, p. 28. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


- for fear, their faults would have been as great as thofe 


that were the projectors of it. To countenance thefe 
proceedings, hath it not been preached in the pulpit, or 
rather prated, All we have is the King’s, jure divine. 
When preachers forfake their own calling, and turn ig- 
norant ftatefmen, we fee how willing they are to change 
a good confcience for a bifhopric.” ; 


Sir John Elliot, after having ftrongly fet forth the 
late grievances, feconded a motion which Sir Francis Sey- 
mour had made at the conclufion of his fpeech for a 
committee on thefe particulars, 


“ I nave read, faid Sir Robert Philips, of a cuftom 
amongft the old Romans, that once every year they had 
a folemn feaft for their flaves, at which they had liberty 


‘without exception to fpeak what they would, thereby 


to eafe their afflited minds; which being finithed, they 


feverally returned to theit former fervitude. This may, 


with fome refemblance and diftinétion, well fet forth 
our prefent flate; where, now after the revolution of 
fome time, and grievous fufferings of many violent op- 
preflions, we have, as thofe flaves had, a day of liberty 
of fpeech ; but fhail not, I truft, be hereafter flaves, for 
we are born free: Yet what new illegal proceeding our 
flates and perfons have fuffered, my heart yearns to 
think, my tongue falters to utter; they have been. well 
reprefented by divers worthy gentlemen before me. Yet 
one grievance, and the main one as I conceive, hath 
not been touched, which is our religion,—religion, Mr, 
Speaker, made vendible by commiffion ; and men, for 


pecuniary annual rates, difpenfed withal ; whereby Pa- i “< 


~ — 
. 


C..H BR. *. £9. 


383 


pifts may, without fear of law, prattife idolatry. For am. 1627. 


the oppreffions under which we groan, I draw them un- 
der two heads: Acts of power againft law, and judg- 
ments of law againft our liberties. Of the firft fort 


are, ftrange: inftructions ; violent exactions of money — 


thereupon ; imprifonment of the perfons of fuch who 
(to deliver over to: their pofterity the liberty they received 


from: their forefathers, and lawfully were in poffeflion. 


of) refufed fo torlend; and this aggravated by the re- 
medilefs continuance and length thereof; and chiefly 
the ftrange, vaft, and unlimited power of our lieute- 
nants and their deputies, in: billeting of foldiers, in mak- 


ing rates, im granting warrants for taxes as their difcre-- 


tions; fhall guide: theny;. and all this againft the law. 
Thefe laft are the moft' imfupportable burdens that at 
this prefent affli? our poor country, and the moft cruel 
opprefliom that ever yet the kingdom of England en- 
dured:; thefe upftart deputy-lieutenants (of whom, per- 
haps, in: fome cafes: and times, there may be good: ufe; 
being, regulated: by law) are the worft of grievances, 
and: the moft: forward and: zealous executioners of thefe 
violent and unlawful: courfes which have’ been com» 
mended: unto them ;. of whofe proceedings, and’ for the 
qualifying of whofey unruly powers, it is more than 


time to: confule and determine *. Judgments of law: 


_ * Sir William.Earli reported from the committee for examination of 
complaints. againft deputy-lieutenants,, that. Sir John Stoell, a deputy- 
lieutenant, having conceived difpleafure againft the town of Taunton 
on the choice of their burgefles to ferve in this parliament, made a 
removal! of the. foldiérs: billeted ‘in’ that’ town, and fixed twelve men 
on'the mayor and’the recorder; and‘other principal citizens; who, be- 
ing encouraged. by authority, committed. great riot’ and enorinities. 

Journals of the anes vol. I. p. 886.. 


againit: 


384 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1627, 2gainft our liberty there have been three, each latter 


flepping forwarder than the former upon the right of 
the fubjeét; aiming in the end to tread and trample 
under foot all law, and that in the form of the law. 
The firft was the judgment of the poftnati *; whereby a 
nation which I heartily love for their fingular good zeal 
in our religion, and their free {pirits to preferve Liberty 
far beyond any of us, is made capable of the like fa- 
vours, privileges, and immunities, as ourfelves enjoy. 
The fecond was the judgment upon impofitions in the 
Exchequer-court by the barons, The third was that fa- 
tal late judgment againft the liberty of the fubject im- 
prifoned by the King, argued and pronounced but by 
one judge alone: I can live altho’ another, who has no 
right, be put to live with me; nay, I can live altho’ I 
pay excifes and impofitions more than I do; but to have 
my liberty, which is the foul of my life, taken from 
me by power, and to have my body pent up in a jail, 
without remedy by law, O improvident anceftors! O 
unwife forefathers! to be fo curious in providing for 
the quiet pofleflion of our laws, and the liberties of par- 
liament, and to neglect our perfons and bodies, and to 
let them lie in prifon, and that durante bene placito, reme- 
dilefs. If this be law, why do we talk of liberties » 
why do we trouble ourfelves with a difpute about law, 
franchifes, property of goods, and the like? what may 
any man call his own, if not the liberty of his per- 
fon?” This topic was farther enforced in the following 


* The judges, to flatter James, had declared, that by law the Scots 
born after his acceffion, were naturalized, and fig of all the privi~, 
leges of an Englith fubject. 


Se - 


Ci ATP AY BOE Es ONT 


manner by Sir Thomas Wentworth: “ They have taken Aan, 1628. 


from us—what fhall I fay? indeed what have they left 
us? they have taken from us all means of fupplying 
the King, and ingratiating ourfelves with him, by tear- 
ing up the roots of all property; which,:if they be not 
feafonably fet in the ground by his majefty’s hand, we 
fhall have, inftead of beauty, baldnefs. By one and the 
fame thing have the King and people been hurt, and by 
one muft they be cured. To vindicate what? new things? 
no; our ancient, lawful, and vital liberties, by reinforce- 
ment of the ancient laws made by our anceftors ; by 
fetting fuch a ftamp upon them as no licentious fpirit 
fhall dare hereafter to enter upon them.” 


“ Wit any givea fubfidy, faid Sir Edward Coke *, if 
they are to be taxed after parliament at pleafure? The 
King cannot lawfully tax any by way of loans: I differ 
from them who would have this of loans go amongt 
other grievances, for 1 would have it go alone. I will 
begin with a noble record; it chears me to think of it; 
26 Ed. Ill. it is worthy to be writ in letters of gold: 
“ Loans againft the will of the fubject are againft rea-. 
fon and the franchifes of the land; and they defire re- 
ftitution.” What a word is that franchife! the lord 
may tax his villain, high and low, but it is againft the 
franchifes of the land for freemen ‘to be taxed, but by 


their confent in parliament.” 


* Two counties, Buckinghamfhire and Suffolk, had returned Sir 
Edward Coke as one of their members. to ferve in this parliament. 
Fournals of the Gommons, vol.1. p. 876. 


Vou. 1 . _ ODdd - CHARLES, 


386 


Ann, 1628, 


Rufhworth, 
vol. I. p. $135 
& feq. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Cuarves, finding his threats had neither terrified 
the Commons into fubmiffion, nor provoked them into 
indecorum of fpeech, thought fit, on the twenty-fifth 
of March, to fend them a conciliating meflage by fe- 
cretary Cook, That he efteemed the grievances of the 
houfe his own, and ftood not on precedence in point 
of honour; he therefore defired that the fame com- 
mittee which was appointed for grievances might, at 
the fame time, take in hand the following propofitions : 
To furnifh with men and victuals thirty fhips to 
guard the narrow feas, and along the coaft; to fet out 
twenty other fhips for the relief of the town of Ro- 
chelle, and for the prefervation of the Elbe, the Sound, 
and the Baltic fea; to pay and fupply twenty-fix thou- 
fand horfe and foot for foreign fervice; to fupply the 
forts of the office of ordnance, and the ftores of the 
navy; to build twenty fhips yearly for the increafe of 
the navy; to repair the forts within the land; to pay 
the arrears of the office of ordnance, the victuallers of- 
fice, and the treafurer of the navy; to pay the arrears 
due for the freight of divers merchant-fhips employed 
in his majefty’s fervice; and to provide a magazine for 
victuals for land and fea-fervice. 


On this meflage the houfe turned themfelves into a 
committee, to take into confideration the liberty of the 
fubject in his perfon and goods, and the fupply of the 
King’s neceflities. On the fubject of liberty of perfon, 
Mr. Crefkeld, a young lawyer, made along, eloquént, 
and learned fpeech: He proved that the common law of 


England guarded both the perfons and property of the _ ay 


— fubje& Hi i 
eT” Fi , , 


a 


i ieee ee 


exprefled ; that the writ of Habeas Corpus may not be | 


if he is returned upon an Habeas Corpus, that he ought 


It was managed by, Sir Dudley Diggs, Sir Edward Coke, 


CC). ATRL ba § i. (387 


fubje& from the prerogative of the monarch. With Aon. 1628, 
the utmoft accuracy and precifion he ftated the rights 

of both King and fubject, and thewed_ how illegally the 

judges had acted-in remanding the gentlemen to prifon 

who: were confined on account of the Joan, and had 
brought their Habeas Corpus *. It was refolved on the Journals of 
queftion, that no freeman ought to be committed, de- vl por 
tained in prifon, or otherwife reftrained, by the command eit 

of the King, privy-council, or any other, without fome 

legal caufe of the commitment, detainer, or reftraint, be 


denied, but ought to be granted to every man that is 
committed, detained in prifon, or otherwife reflrained, 
though it be by the command of the King; privy-coun- 
cil, or any other; that if a freeman be committed or de- 
tained in prifon, or otherwife reftrained, no legal caufe of 
fuch commitment, detainer, or reftraint, being expreffed, 


to be delivered or bailed; that the ancient and undoubted 
rights of every freeman are, that he hath a full and ab- 
“folute property in his goods and eftate, and that no tal- 
lage, loan, benevolence, or other like charge, ought to 
be commanded or levied by the King, or any of his mi- 
nifters, without common confent of parliament. 


Tuts produced a conference between the two houfes : 


* The Saxon inftitutions, on which the common law of England is 
grounded, were fo tender of perfonal liberty, that it was not till 23 
_ Ed. TIL. the eleventh King from the Conqueft, that a ftatute was en- 
ated to attach the bodies of men for debt. Mr. Crefkeld’s Speech. Parl. 
Hift, vol. VII, p. 379: 


Ddd2 Mr. 


388 


Ann, 1626. 


—. - - #* _ = | 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 
Mr. Selden, and Mr. Littleton. The affiftants were, Sir 


Benjamin Rudyard, Mr. Pym, Mr. Rolles, Mr. Hackwell, 


Mr. Herbert, Mr. Whiteby, Sir Robert Philips, and Mr. 
Charles Jones ; all of them being men of fpirit and 
learning, the caufe was pleaded with great ability. It 
was clearly proved that the fore-mentioned refolutions 


_ ‘were authorized by Magna Charta, fix feveral ftatutes, 


Ephemeris 
Parliamen- 


taria, Pe 545 
& feq. 


Journals of 
Commons, 
vol. I. p. 880. 


and the common law of the land *. 


* The introduction was allotted to Sir Dudley Diggs: He fhewed 
that the inftitutions of the Saxons were the fundamental laws of the 
conttitution ; that it was an undoubted part of the common law of 
England, that the fubjeét had a true property in his goods and pof- 
feffions ; that this birth-right had been invaded by preffures more 


-grievous, becaufe they had been purfued by imprifonment, contrary 


to the franchife of the land; and that the late judgment in the court 
of King’s-Bench had rendered the laws and ftatutes of the realm of no 
avail towards obtaining redrefs for thefe oppreffions. 


Mr. Littleton, who was appointed to juftify the declarations of the 
houfe of Commons, began with introducing the twenty-ninth article 
of Magna Charta: Nullus liber homo capiatur, vel imprifonetur, aut di- 
Seifictur, de libero tenemento fuo, vel libertatibus, vel liberis confuetudinibus 


Suis, aut ut lagetur, aut exuletur, aut aliquo modo deftruatur, nec fuper 


cum ibimus, nec Juper eum mittimus, nifi per legale judicium parium Suo- 
rum, vel per legem terre. He fhewed that there was a corruption crept 
into this copy, and that the original words were, mec eum in carcerem 
mittimus. The words, kgem terre, he alleged, muft of neceffity be 
underfiood to be, By due procefs of law, and not, The law of the 
land, which would comprehend villains ; that thefe words were fo ex- 
plained in the fourth article of a ftatute made 25 Ed. IIL in which 
reign was the firft invafion of this perfonal liberty; that the words 
were yet more direét to the point in a {tatute made in the twenty-eighth 
year of this monarch; that in the thirty-fixth year of his reign he 
gave an anfwer to a petition, in the form that made it an act of parlia- 
ment, That no arreft by fpecial command fhould be made, contrary to 
the ftatutes; that a petition of parliament, in the fame year of his: 
rcign, explain the words, gem terre, in the fame manner; whereas — 


ae 


Ce: MwA Rak. B's 31 


389 


Waitst the Commons were taking thefe meafures Ana. 1628. 


to defend civil Liberty, they did not neglect the popular 


it is contained in the Grand Charter, and other ftatutes, That none 
be taken or imprifoned by fpecial command, without indiétment or 
other due procefs to be made by the law; yet oftentimes it hath been, 
and ftill is, that many are hindered, taken, and imprifoned, without 
indiétment or other procefs made by the law upon them. Befides 
thefe, Mr. Littleton quoted two ftatutes made againft informers in 
this King’s reign, the words of them fufficiently explaining the cap- 
tious expreflion of /egem terre in Magna Charta. He then finifhed 
with confuting a falfe comment which had been made by the court- 
lawyers on a ftatute termed the Statute of Weftminfter, enacted in 


3 Ed. I. 


Matters of record and judicial precedents were committed to Mr. Journals of » 


Selden, with the remedy of the Habeas Corpus. He began with il- 
luftrating this article, and then fhewed that precedents ought not to 
be relied.on but when they agreed with the exprefs law, he next pro- 
duced twelve precedents to the point, that perlons committed without 
a legal caufe expreffed, ought to be,delivered upon bail; and laftly, 
offered other kind of precedents, which were folemn refolutions of 
judges ; things not of record, but yet remaining in authentic copies. 


Commons, 


vol. I. p. 880. 


Sir Edward Coke demonftrated, that the aéts of parliament and Parl. Hift.vol. 
precedents produced were but fo many affirmations of the common Hira P+ 418, 


law, and that there was no good reafon of ftate againft the fhewing 
caufe of imprifonment. He began by proving, that if freemen of 
England might be imprifoned at the will and pleafure of the King, 
then were they in worfe ftate than bondmen and villains. He then 
entered upon a very deep difcuffion of the principles of the conftitu- 
tion in point of perfonal liberty, and concluded by fhewing that no 
‘virtuous operation of government could be effected by leaving to fub- 
~ jeéts that jewel which not only diftinguifhes freemen from flaves, but 


the living from the dead. 


It was agreed by the attorney-general, that the feven ftatutes urged 
by the Commons were yet in force; and that they did extend moft 
properly to the King; but he faid that fome of them were in general 

‘words, and therefore concluded nothing, but were to be expounded 


by precedents ; and others that were more particular were applied 
yf to 


39° 


Parl. Hift. 
vol. VII. 
p- 12, & leq. 


Ephemeris 

Parliamen- 
taria, p. $6, 
& feq. 


Ann, 1628, 


ing of as great force, when it moveth by a fuggeftion from a fubject, 


? 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


fubject of religious grievances: A petition againft recu- 
fants was prefented by both houfes on the thirty-firft of 5 a 


to the fuggeftions of fubjetts, and not to the Kies s command fimply 
of itfelf. 

To this Mr. Littleton replied, that the ftatutes were as direct as 
could be; and that though fome of them fpeak of fuggeftions of fub- 
jects, yet others do not; and thofe that do are as effeétual, for that 
they are in equal reafon, a commitment by command of the King be- 


as when the King takes. notice of the caufe himéelf. To one of the 
twelve precedents which had been quoted by Mr. Selden, Mr. Attor- 
ney objected, that the lords of the council fent letters to the court of 
King’s-Bench to bail the prifoners. ‘To this Mr. Selden, with great 
{pirit, replied, that that letter was of no moment, being only a di- 
rection to the chief-juftice, and no matter of record, nor any way 
concerning the judges: And befides, either the prifoner was bailable 
by law or not bailable; if bailable by the law, then he was to be 
bailed without any fuch letter; if not bailable by the law, then plainly 
the judges could not have bailed-them upon the letter without breach 
of oath, which is, that they are-to do juftice according to the law, 
without having refpect to any command whatfoever: So that fuch a ~ 
letter, in any cafe, was, for point of law, no weight againft wha the 
record of the court fhewed, 

To four precedents which the courtiers had brought seit te sor 
lutions of the Commons Mr. Selden objected, that, by the conftant 
courfe of the court of King’s-Bench, whofoever came by Habeas Cor- 
pus, or other writ, into that court, could not be bailed before they were 
Jirft committed to the marfhal of chat court; that thefe were thus com- My 
mitted appeared by the entry; and that this plainly fhewed that the ae 
court of King’s Bench in every of them refolved, that the prifoners fo , 
committed were bailable, otherwife they had been remanded, not com- j 7 
mitted to the marfhal of the King’s-Bench, a 

According to the direction of the houfe, Mr. Selden, in this con- : 
ference, produced the draught of a judgment in the cafe lately ad-_ 
judged in the court of King’s-Bench: ‘ This cafe is famous, faid tn 
and well known to your lordfhips, therefore I need no farther men- i 
tion it; and as yet, indeed, there is no ju dgment entered upon | a 
roll, but there is room for any kind of judgment to be entered. 


. * 
14 4 


> 


@ -Hervy Ri.-D, - Be 8s, +1. 


‘March. Promifes fat fo eafy upon Charles, that * not 


39! 


Ann. 1628. 
Rufhworth, 


only gave his word to perform every article of the pe vol.I.p.519- 


my lords, there is a form of judgment, a moft unufual one, fuch an. 
one as never was in any fuch cafe before ufed ; for indeed there was 


_never. before any cafe fo adjudged ; and this drawn up by a chief clerk 


of that court, by direction of Mr. Attorney-general, as the houfe was 
informed by the clerk; in which the reafon of the judgment, and 
the remanding of thefe gentlemen, is exprefied in fuch fort as if it 
fhould be declared upon record for ever, that the law was, that no man 


could be enlarged from imprifonment that ftood committed by any fuch © 


abfolute command. 

“* Now, my lords, added Mr. Selden, becaufe this draught, if it 
were entered in the roll, as it was prepared for no other purpofe, 
would be a great declaration contrary to the many acts of parliament 
already cited, contrary to all precedents of former times, and to all 
reafon of law, to the utter fubverfion of the chiefeft liberty and right 
belonging to every freeman of the kingdom ; and for that efpecially 
alfo it fuppofeth that divers ancient records had been looked into by 
the court in like cafes, by which records their judgments were di- 
rected ; whereas, in truth, there is not one record at all extant, that, 
with any colour, warrants the judgment ; therefore the houfe of Com- 
mons thought fit alfo that I fhould, with the reft that has been faid, 
fhew this draught to your lordfhips.” Mr. Selden concluded his dif- 
courfe by reading out of a book of lord-chief-juftice Anderfon’s hand- 
writing, the refolution of all the judges of England upon commit- 
ments by abfolute command. This report, though it was in favour 
of the refolutions of the Commons, yet, in the cafe of the imprifoned 
gentlemen, it had been quoted by the court-lawyers, as being ftrongly 
againft the point of perfonal liberty. 


| The report of lord-chief-juftice Anderfon. 


** Diverfe perfons fueront comittes a feveral. temps a feveral pryfons, 
fur pleafure, fans bon caufe, parte de queux eftiant amefnes en banck 
le roy, et parte en le commune banck, fueront accordant a le ley de 
Ja terre, mife a large et difchargé de le imprifonment, pur que aucuns 
grandts fueront offendus, et procure un commandement a les judges, 
que ils ne ferra ainfi apres ceo nient meén les judges, ne furceafe mes 


pr ee dee eget eux ils fefoient certain articles, le tenour de queux 


enfus 


Ruthworth, 
vol. [, ps5 BEo 
& feq. 


ma 


392 


Ann, 1628. 


B. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


tition, but added, that the mildnefs he had hitherto ufed 


had been upon hope that foreign princes might thereby 


enfus et deliver eux al fcigneurs chauncelor et treafurer, et eux fubfcribe, 
avec touts leur manies, les articles font come erifnoint. © 


“« We, her majelty’s juftices of both benches, and barons of the. 


Exchequer, defire your lordthips that by fome good means fome order 


_ May be taken that her highnefs’s fubjeéts may not be committed, or 


detained in prifon, by commandment of any nobleman or counfellor, 
againft the laws of the realm, either elfe to help-us to have accefs to her 
majefty, to the end to become fuitors to her for the fame: For divers 
have been imprifoned for fuing ordinary actions and fuits at the com- 
mon law, until they have been conftrained to leave the fame againft 
their wills, and put the fame to order, albeit judgment and execution 
have been had therein, to their great loffes and griefs ; for the aid of 
which perfons her majefty’s writs have fundry times been directed to 
fundry perfons having the cuftody of fuch perfons unlawfully impri- 
foned, upon which writs no good or lawful caufé of imprifonment 
hath been returned or certified ; whereupon, according to the laws, 
they have been difcharged of their imprifonment: Some of which 
perions, fo delivered, have been again committed to prifon in fecret 
places, and not to any common or ordinary prifon, or lawful officer 
or fheriff, or other, lawfully authorized to have or keep a gaol; fo 
that, upon complaint made for their delivery, the Queen’s courts can- 
not tell to whom to direét her majefty’s writs; and by this means 
juftice cannot be done. And moreover, divers officers and ferjeants 
of London have been many times committed to prifon, for lawful exe- 
cuting of her majefty’s writs, fued forth of her majefty’s courts at 
Weftminfter; and thereby her majefty’s fubjeéts and officers are fo 
terrified that they dare not fue or execute her majefty’s laws, her 
writs, and commandments. Divers others have been fent for by pur- 
fuivants, and brought to London from their dwellings, and, by un- 
Jawful imprifonment, have been conftrained not only to withdraw 
their lawful fuits, but have alfo been compelled to pay the purfuivants 
fo bringing fuch perfons great fums of money. All which, upon 


complaint, the judges are bound, by office and oath, to relieve and | 


help, by and according to her majefty’s laws. And where it plea 


your lordfhips to will divers of us to fet down in what cafes a prifone r 7 
fent to Euflody by her majefty, or her council, are to be detained in 


a 
a eT 


BeBe rio KAS te 


8 93 


be| induced: to ufe moderation towards their fubjects of Aan. 1628. . 


the reformed religion ; but not finding that good: effect 


‘which was expected, he refolved, unlefs he fhould very 


fpeedily fee beer fruits, to add a farther degree of fe- 
verity than that which im the petition was defired: As 
Gharles’s conduct was directly oppofite to the many pro- 
mifes»he had made on’ this head, there’ is perhaps no 
public tranfaction through his whole’ reign thar throws 
more contempt on his charaéter’ than thefe. petitions 
and ened nor’ a more fufficient juttification of the 


sail’ inl hot to! be lived by bie majefty’s court: or jolla, we 
think, thar if any perfon be committed by her majefty’s command. 
from her perfon, or by order from the council-board; and if any one 
or two of her council commit one for high-treafon, fuch perfons fo 

in thes cafes before commitced, may not be’ delivered by any of het 


courts, without due trial by the law, and judgment of acquittal had. 


Neverthelefs, the judges may award the Queen’s writ to bring the bo- 
dies of fuch prifoners. before them ; and if, upon return thereof, the 
caufes of their commitment be dértibed to the judges, as it ought to 
be; then the: judges'in the cafe’ before ought not to deliver him, but 
to remand the prifoner to the) place from whence he came, ‘which can- 
not conveniently be done unlefs notice of the.caufe in general, or elfe 


in fpecial, be known to the keeper or gaoler that fhall have the cufs 


tody of fuch prifoner.” 

This report does great honotir to thefe Judges, who, chougl at this 
period entirely dependant on the’ crown, were’ ® the only protectors of 
the civil rights of the nation. 

. It isto be obferved that the King’s council could not bring one 
clear precedent that any prifoner had been denied bail on the return 
of their Habeas Corpus, when the caufe of the imprifonment had not 
‘in the'writ; not but the civil rights of the nation had 
ry se a in the arbitrary impriforment of its fub- 
jects, but few of: thefe- unhappy fufferers had courage enough to claim: 
the protection of the laws, in oppofition to the tyrannical will of the, 
fovereign. 
r Vow. 1, — Ece Commons 


394 


Ann. 1628. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAWD. . 


Commons for their not placing any Herein in his 


ftromgat affeverations. 


Parl. Hift. 

vol. ae 

P- 403, & feq. 
ebates, 


sighs to foreign employments was not nei 
got among the grievances under debate: Sir Peter Hay- 
man fhewed his cafe; that, on refufing to lend on a 
privy-feal, he was fent by the lords of the council, at 
his own expence, to attend on an ambaflador into the 
Palatinate. On this head Sir Edward Coke gave it as 
his opinion, that a fubjeét, not being a fervant of the 
crown, was not liable to forced fervice; and even in 
the other cafe, where a fervant refufed fuch a com- 
mand, he fhewed, by two feveral ftatutes, that the 
King could only feize the offices, fees, and lands, he held 
in confequence of his fervices, but no commitment coe 
legally enfue. 


THE power which the crown had lately -ufurped of 
inflicting domeftic confinement was canvafled in the 
following manner: Mr. Selden faid, that he could find 
no traces in former times of confinement to a man’s 
own houfe, or elfewhere, by way of punifhment, ex- 
cept in the cafe of the Jews, who were fometimes con- 
fined to the Old Jewry ; that a domeftic prifon was a 
confinement only for madmen. Sir Thomas Hobby ob- 
ferved, that he was employed by Elizabeth in the year 
1588; that though at that time it was held neceflary 
to confine recufants in ftrong places, yet it was judged 
fo illegal, that, after the defeat of the Spanifh armada, 
she parliament petitioned the Queen to warrant the con- 
finement, « a: 


~ a ey a eee ie 


S.A RG £46 1£ 


_ Wirs this bufinefs of grievances the Commons, ac- 
cording to promife, went on that of fupply; they re- 
jected the propofitions, as too vaft and too complicat- 
ed.*, but voted five fubfidies for the neceflities of the 
government, ; oy ; 


_ Tue fatisfaction Charles felt from this act of the 
Commons drew this {peech from him: “ He liked par- 
liaments at firft; yet fince, he knew not how, he was 
grown to a diftafte of them; but was now where he 
was before, for he loves them, and fhall rejoice to meet 
his people again +.” 

Secretary Cook related to the houfe this fpeech, 
and a congratulatory one made on the fame occafion to 
Charles at the council-board, by the duke of Bucking- 
ham, Though thefe congratulations were couched in 
very popular terms, yet feveral members took high of- 
fence that Buckingham. fhould be mentioned in that 
houfe in fo important a manner. 


* Mr, Alford faid, that were they to anfwer punctually to every 
article of the propofitions, it might be drawn into a precedent that the 
ar were to maintain all the charges of war. 

~ Sir Nathahiel Rich objeéted, that as the bill of tonnage and pound- 
age was allotted for the defence of the coaft, it would be a bad pre’ 
cedent to give other orl for that occafion, Parl. Hift. vol. VII: 


P- 397» & eg. 
+ Charles was in fuch a sibs to get this vote of five fubfidies paffed 


into a bill, that he fent to defire the Commons not to make any re-, 
cefls the Eafter-holidays. This was unpleafing to the houfe, left it 


fhould affeét their power of adjourning themfelves when they pleafed : 


Sir Edward Coke moved to have it entered, vnc it was done ex rogatn 
regis. Parl. Hit. vol. VII.Yp. 436. 
EBeé a .- THIs 


395 


Ann. 1628. - 


Subfidies 
voted. 


396 


Ann. 1628. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Turis was not the only vain attempt that was made 


to reflore Buckingham to the good graces iof the Com: 


mons: They had been affured from fecretary Cook that 


~ he had firft moved and: — the King to atiinble’ a 


yecliomeny's #¥; IGRI WV’ 


UAFTER the: Commons had thus gratified Charles with 


avote of five fubfidies, they were wholly engroffed in 


preparing an inftrument to explain more fully thofe 
parts of Magna Charta, and the fix feveral ftatutes, which 
had_ been fo notorioufly violated by the late’ oppreflive 
acts of the miniftry. This they called a ‘Petition of 


Right, it containing thofe privileges which had mans ae 


ate angen to the fubjet. | 
THE houfe. was fretquenily} seveaiclageet's in ne weigh 
bufinefs by the importunity of Charles ; who, though 
he had given them affurances that he approved of 
uniting the grievances with the fupply, continued to 
prefs them to expedite the latter bufinefs out of hand. 
On the twelfth of April, fecretary Cook delivered the 
following meflage: “ That his majefty had long fince 
expected the fruit of that which was fo happily begun ; 
but finding a ftop beyond expectation, nay, beyond ex- 
ample, after fo good a beginning, he commanded that; 
without any farther or unneceflary delay, the houfe’ 
fhould proceed in his bufinefs; for however he had 
been willing that his own affairs and: theirs fhould con- 
cur and proceed together, yet his meaning was not that 
one fhould give interruption to the other, nor the time. 
bei 


$ This was according to Sir Robert Cotton's alifsk Ae 2 


CVA BO BI RTS Gt ay uM 397 


to, be fpun out on any pretence to hinder that refolution Ann. 1628.’ 
upon which the common caufe of this kingdom, and 
even of all Chriftendom, did fo much depend. He bids 

them therefore take heed that they force him not, by 
unneceflary and tedious delays, to make an unpleafing 

end of ‘that which was fo well begun.” 


. _ Arrer Sir John Cook had given the houfe to under- 
and that they were not to take this meflage as a threat- 
ening to diflolve the parliament, he farther added, “ I 
muft with fome grief tell you, that notice is taken as 
if this houfe prefled not only upon the abufes of power 
but upon power itfelf ; this toucheth the King, and us, 
who are fupported by that’ power.” The houfe was fo 
offended at what had fallen from Sir John Cook, that he 
was moved to explain what he meant by the word 
Power; which, he faid, was by them oppofed. This he 
refufed, faying, I cannot defcend to particulars, or go 
from that which his majefty gave me warrant or power 

i to deliver. - 


On the debate on the King’s meflage it was at length 
agreed to nominate a committee to proceed on griev- 
ances. Certain inftructions were given the fpeaker in 
anfwer to the meflage delivered by Sir John Cook ; and 
a petition * was fent up to the throne, reprefenting the 


* According to the inftructions which the Commons had given, the 
fpeaker alleged, in his preamble to the petition, that the preferving 
thofe fundamental liberties which concern the freedom of perfon, and 
property of goods and lands, were an effential means to eftablih the 
true glory of a monarch, for'rich and free fubjeéts were beft able to 
do fervice, either in peace or war; that this had been the caufe of 


the 


398 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Aan. 1628. illegality of billeting of foldiers, and the enormities o¢- 
cafioned by that oppreflive meafure: This was to be the | 
prelude to the Petition of Right. On the fourteenth of © | 

qottine by April the judges attended in the houfe of Lords, to give : 

the houfe of an account of the reafons of their judgment in the cafe 
of the gentlemen who had been imprifoned without an 
exprefs caufe fhewn. © Sir Nicholas Hyde endeavoured to 
excufe himfelf and brethren from this tafk, by reprefent- e 3 
ing it as a thing they ought not to do without warrant 7 
from the King. The popular members, fired at this refu‘ - 
fal, the lord Say anfwered, “ If the judges will not de- 
clare themfelves, we muft take into confideration the point 
of our privilege.” The duke of Buckingham, having _ 
undertaken to compofe this difference, fent a meflage to — 
the King for leave that the judges might obey the injunc: 
tions of the houfe. An anfwer having been returned in 
the affirmative, the judges proceeded to give the de- 
manded fatisfaction. The authorities which thefe corrupt 
expounders of the law quoted to juftify their proceedings 
were fo unfatisfactory that, if there had been any thing : 
wanting to the triumph of the Commons, it would have ae 
been completed by the poornefs of that which was ae y 
in vindication of the queftioned judgment at 


- 


the happy and famous vidtories cf she Englith, viral other king- 
doms of larger territories and greater numbers of people. . Parl. Hip. 
vol. VII. p. 445. 

Charles was much difpleafed with the petition, and ftill more with Y 
this preamble. Pe, 


rs 


* A few arbitrary precedents were quoted, and juitice joie farthey 
infifted, they could not have aéted otherwife ; for if they had allowed 
bail it would have reflected on the King. Every one of the hae ore 
pleaded merit for not having wee with the requeft of wn chee. - 5 


CP HPAIRTOD EPS LR): 399 


Tavs foiled, the courtiers did not altogether give up Ann. 1628. 
the point: The matter was again argued at a conference 
between the two houfes, by the attorney-general and the Sacetag 
King’s counfel on one fide, and a feleé&t committee of the '° >“ 
houfe of Commons on the other. Though prolix quo- 
tations ought to be avoided by an hiftorian, yet I. muft 
again tranfgrefs this general rule, to give my reader a 
juft idea of thofe accurate fentiments of Liberty, perfonal 
and political, which fell from the illuftrious pordoiages 
who argued on the fide of their country. 


THE attorney-general came fraught with authorities: Leayaap ang 


to combat the good fenfe, reafon, and learning, of his one fees 


antagonifts.. He began his difcourfe by objecting to the 
conftruction which the committee had made of the 
words, per legem terre: “ If, faid he, they are to be un- 
derftood per debitum legis procefum, i.e. by indictment, pre- 
fentment, or original writ, then it muft neceflarily fol- 
low, that no offender could juftly and legally be com- 
mitted and reftrained of his liberty, unlefs he was firft 
indicted or prefented by a jury, or that an original writ 
was brought againft him; which neither is, nor ever 
was, the practice of this kingdom in criminal cafes.” 
After enlarging a little more on the fubject, he quoted 
the opinions and refolutions of thofe judges that were 
efleemed the fages of the law: Stamford, in his Pleas 
of the Crown, judge Fortefcue, Fitzherbert, Newton, and 


a fpecial entry might be made of the judgment. They alleged, that 
they had only made an award, and that the prifoners might have 
brought another Habeas Corpus the next day. The judges difclaim- 


ing that they had given any judgment in the point was a tacit confef- 


fien that they could not have juftified fuch an act. 


Sis 


400. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ana. 1628, Sir Edward Coke, wha had»advanced in. the. houfé! of 


Commons, that one committed: by the body:of the. coun- 
cil was not bailable by law. After he had dwelt fome 
tume on thefe authorities, and made fome frivolous ob- 
jections to the precedents which had been quoted on. the 


other fide, he purfued his argument in the following’ - 


manner: “ But it hath been objected,’ that if the King 


or council may commit, without fhewing caufe, it would 
be, infinitely full of mifchief: fer as the King may com- 


mit one, fo he may commit many; as he may commit 
for a juft caufe, fo he may commit without a caufe; as 


he may commit for a time, fo he may commit for a 


perpetual imprifonment, To this I anfwer, that it can- 
not be imagined of the King that he will at any time, 
or in any cafe, do injuftice to his fubjects. It is: a 
maxim in our law, that the King can do no wrongs 
therefore the King can give no land by difleifin; he can: 
give no advowfon by ufurpation;. and: this: is: fo far 
from, being a defect or impotency in. the King, thar it 
is held for a point of his prerogative *. \'The reafon is; 


as the King is fupreme governor ’of his people, fo» he is: 


pater patria, therefore he cannot want: the: affection ofva 
father towards his children.” He then proceeded to, ex~ 


amplify the neceflity-of trufting the King with: the ques. 


tioned point of: power, inftancing’ two pretended necef- 
fary acts of tyranny of Elizabeth; the one im imprifon- 
ing fome fufpected perfons till one Owen, a chief: con+ 
fpirator, was pid oo and the other in sregioriy x. to 

& 


es “Thee two cheap of legal renee upon the oe 
are directly contrary to the gon of agi gk betsicr cA 


prince, 


te 


Cia Sah 2° 9° 4, 4ot 


perpetual confinement the two innocent fons of the Irith Ann. 1628, 
rebel O'Donnel. 


Serjeant Afhley feconded what the attorney-general Parl. Hit. 
had advanced, by aflerting that by /ex terre could only gh She, 


be meant the law of the land; that there were divers pom 
laws of the land, as, the common law, the law of the yea 142, 
Chancery, the ecclefiaftical law, the law of the Admi- 
ralty, or the marine law, the law of merchants, the 
martial law, and the law of the ftate; that thefe words, 
legem terra, extended to all thefe ; and that by this law 
of ftate kings could imprifon their fubjeéts at their 
pleafure, without fhewing the caufe. “ Divine truth 
informs us, faid he, that kings have their power from 
God, and are reprefentative gods; the pfalmift calling 
them the children of the Moft High, which is in a more 
efpecial manner underftood of kings than of other men ; 
for all the fons of Adam are by creation the children of 
God, and all the fons of Abraham are, by re-creation 
or regeneration, the children of the Moft High: Burt it 
is faid of kings, they are the children of the Moft High 
in refpe& of the power that is committed to them, who 
hath alfo furnifhed them with ornaments and arms fit 
for the exercifing that power, and given them {fceptres 
and crowns; fceptres to inftirute, and fwords to execute 
laws ; and crowns, as enfigns of that power and dig- 
nity with which they are invefted: Shall we, then, con- 
ceive that our King hath fo far tranfmitted the power 
of his fword to inferior magiftrates that he hath not 
referved fo much fupreme power as to commit an of- 
fender to prifon.” — 


Bes, 1, FfF SERJEANT 


402 


_ Ann. 1628. 
Parl. Hitt. vol. 
VII. p. 53. 


Ibid, & feq. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Serjeant Afhley’s zeal for flavery fubjected him to 
this ominous reproof from the lord-prefident, who told 


the gentlemen of the Commons’ houfe, that though at this ~ 


free conference liberty was given by the Lords to the King’s 
counfel to fpeak what they thought fit for his majefty’s 
fervice, yet Mr. Serjeant Afhley had no authority or direc: 
tion from them to fpeak in the manner he had done.. 


THESE were the anfwers of the committee to what 
had been advanced on the King’s fide by the attorney 
and the ferjeant: and, firft, Mr. Littleton faid, that they 
had never reftrained the procefs of the law to writs ori- 
ginal; but by the words, procefs of the law, they un- 
derftood the whole proceedings of the law, and. fo took 
in the conftables, and all thofe inferior officers, who, 


notwithftanding, are never wfed without a caufe. He 


fhewed the futility of Mr. Attorney’s conclufion, and 
then faid, that as to what Mr. Serjeant underftood per ke 


gem terra, many laws in England, martial, admiral, ec- — 


clefiaftical, and that the 9 Edw. III. called. merchant law, 


he challenged any man in England to fhew that /ex 


terre fhould be {poken of any but the common law, in 
any law-book,. ftatute, or antient record. “ And, con- 
tinued he, for what that gentlemen objects, that the 
houfe of Commons think they have gained their caufe, 
becaufe the King’s counfel have yielded the ftatutes to be 
in force; alas! we do not labour for victory, but truth ; 

convince our underftandings by better Bio and the. 

caufe fhall be yours.” | 


Six Edward Coke took up the example of O'D 


children, and faid, that it was a ftrange provifo. ee a 


7 
‘ 

. _— 
bn eee el DE Ae ee 


G(R OM! RIED EPS! TR 


403 


thing happening in an hundred year fhould ere Ann, 1628. 


- and mar fo many ftatutes in continual ufe, againft the 
old rule, “ ad eaqua frequentius accidunt jura adaptantur.” To 
the next example which Mr. Attorney had brought, that 
a king is trufted in greater things, as war, money, par- 
dons, denifons, ergo, &c. “ I deny, faid he, that thefe 
are greater things, for the liberty of the perfon is be- 
yond them all; befides, whatever the King’s power is 
in thefe points by the common law, yet is it qualified 
by acts of parliament.” To prove this aflertion, Sir Ed- 
ward Coke cited feveral ftatutes. “ The common law, 
continued he, hath fo admeafured the King’s prerogative, 


as he cannot prejudice any man in his inheritance: Law‘ 


doth privilege noblemen in arrefts; this new doétrine, 
like. the little god Terminus, yields to none; nay, the 
judges themfelves, when they fhould: fit on the bench, 


mutt be walking towards the Tower *.” 


* Sir Edward Coke, with a very laudable candour, owned that his 
former opinion was an erroneous one. He complained that he had 
not been well dealt with to have his reports, whilft a ftudent, cited 
againft him. He defired Mr. Attorney to remember that he had not 

veritatem ex cathedra, or infallibility of fpirit. He owned that he had 

- mifgrounded his opinion on the 33d of Henry VI. which being no- 
thing to the purpofe, he was affured that his opinion was nothing to 
the purpofe. “ I confefs, faid he, when I read Stamford then, and 
had it in my hand, I was of that opinion at the council-table ; but 
when I perceived that fome of the members of this» houfe were taken 
away, even in the face of this houfe, and fent to prifon, and when I 
_ Was not far off from that place mylelf, I went to my book, and would 
~ not be quiet till I had fatisfied myfelf: Stamford at firft was my guide, 
but my guide hath deceived me, and therefore 1 fwerved from it; I 
have now better guides—aéts of parliament, and other precedents + $ 
are now my guides.” Parliam. Hit. vol. ‘Vill. p62. Guthrie, 


vol. Il. p- 878. 


Fff 2 Mr, 


"| 


404 


Ann, 1628. 


_ other balance what Mr. Attorney hath faid, his ° 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Mr. Glanville obferved that the King might fafely be 
trufted with what concerned himfelf equally with the 
fubject, but not with what only concerned the fubject =: 
* We allow him a liberty to confer grace, adds he; but 
not, without caufe, to inflict punifhment; and indeed 
he cannot do injury, for if he commanded to doa mam 
wrong, the command is void im law, and. the mire bes 
comes the wrong doer.” . baie 

Mr. Selden ufed many learned arguments: to enforce 
the foregoing ones, and. defired the Lords to weigh the 
difference between the ‘King’s counfel and their’ antago- 
nifts: “ The King’s counfel, faid he, fpeak for* the 
King’s advantage, as. gloffers and parties ;. but the condi 
tion of their antagonifts is, this, that as they are mem- 
bers of the houfe of Commons they are bound:to fpeak. 


truth, and alfo, by’ a ftrict oath, to-maintain: the: King’s 
rights and pre-eminence.” 


Str Edward Coke concluded with this peta 4 My 
lords, your noble anceftors, whofe places you hold, were. 
parties. to Magna Charta, fo called for weight and fub- 
ftance ; and you, my lords the bifhops, are commanded 
to thunder out your anathemas againft all infringers 
of it; and all the worthy judges that deferved their 
places. have ever held Magna Charta in great eftimatiom. — 
Now as. juftice hath a fword, fo it hath a balance: Put 
together, my noble lords, in one balance, feven acts of © 
parliament, records, precedents, reafons,, all that we have 


fpoken, and that ftatute of 18 Edw. III. whereto: there — 


has been no anfwer; and, in God’s name, put int the 


Cc H A R 1D WW SO TE - 405 


learning, and great endowments of nature; and if he Ann, 1628: 

be weightier, let him have it; if not, then conclude a 
with us. .You are involved in the fame danger with us, 

and therefore we defire you, in the name of the Com- 

mons of England, reprefented in us, that we may have 

caufe to give God and the ee thanks for your juftice 


in OnE? maciiee us.” 


sh: storie Catseeiet up thé serpent, and Mr. Noy 
rejoined, That it was agreed on both fidés, that the King 
might commit fora caufe, not without. But Mr. Attor- 
ney had faid, he was not bound to exprefs a caufe; to 
which it was replied, thar the judges are to judge between 
him and his people, ergo, no caufe no judgment; and 
therefore the King ought not to commit for any time, 
a not an ems without exprefling the caufe. 


“aN a committee of tie houfe of Lords on this con- Pa! Hit vol. 
ference, on a motion of the earl of Warwick, a fpi- & eq. “i 
rited popular peer, ferjeant Afhley was taken into cuf- 
tody for the unconftitutional doétrine he had advanced 
in behalf of the crown *. This noble lord difplayed 2 
ftrong and lively talent of reafoning in fupport of what 
had been advanced’ by the Commons. “ I will obferve 
fomething out of the law, faid he, wherein this liberty 


-* On a petition, expreffing his forrow for the difpleafure he had: 
given, and defiring to. make fuch recognition as the Lords fhould en- 
n him, he was admitted to make his fubmiffion, and afk forgivenefs- 
sr his fault; this he did upon his knees, and was then. difcharged. 
from cuftody. The grounds of the accufation againft him were the 
pleading that the King muft be allowed to govern by a law of ftate: 


Parl, tit. v0), VIM. p68, & jeg 


erotod of 


406 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ana. 1628. Of the fubjeéts perfon is founded, and fomething out of | 
the precedents which have been alleged. As to Magna 
Charta, and the reft, concerning thefe points, they are. 
acknowledged by all to be now in force; that theywere. 
made to fecure the fubject from wrongful imprifon-. . 
ment; and that they concern the King as much or ra- 
ther more than the fubject. Well then, befides Magna. 
Charta, and thofe fix other atts of parliament, in the 
very point, we know that Magna Charta itfelf hath been 
at leaft thirty times confirmed, fo new at this time we 
have thirty-fix or thirty-feven acts of parliament to con- 
firm this liberty, altho’ it was made a matter of deri- 
fion the other day in this houfe.—Now, ‘therefore, if in 
parliament we fhall make any doubt of that which is 
fo fully confirmed by parliament; and, in a cafe fo 
clear, go about by new glofles to alter thefe old and 
. good laws; we fhall not only forfake the fteps of our 
fore-fathers, who, in cafes even of fmall importance, 
would anfwer Nolumus leges Anglia mutari, but we fhall 
yield up and betray our right in the greateft inheritance e : 
the fubjects of England have, and jthat is the laws of 
England. Truly, I wonder how any man can think 
that this houfe, though no lawyers, can admit of fuch - 
a glofs upon a plain text as fhould overthrow the very 
end and defign of. the law. . For whereas the law. of 
Magna Charta is, that no freeman fhall be imprifoned 
but by lawful judgment of his peers, or the law of the 
land, it has been infifted on by fome, that by thefe an 
words, “ the law of the land,” it is to be underftood: ae 
that the King hath, power to commit without fhewing = a 
any caufe; which ds an expofition not only exprefly ‘con-— | 
trary to other acts of parliament, and thofe bares 


+0 


C.HoAuRy bh EqgS-1 


407 


before cited, but againft common fenfe. Mr. Attorney Ann. 1628. 


confeffeth this law concerneth the King; why then, where 
the law faith the King 1 fhall not commit but by the law 
of the land, the meaning muft be, as Mr. Attorney would. 
have it, that the King muft not commit but at his own 
pleafure. And {hall we think that our anceftors were 
fo foolifh as to hazard their perfons and eftates, and 
labour fo much to get a law, and to have it thirty times 
confirmed, that the King might not commit his fubjects 
but at his own pleafure? nothing can be more ridicu- 
lous, Or more contrary to reafon and common fenfe.—. 
Mr. Serjeant Afhley the other day told your lordfhips of 
the emblem of a king; but by his leave he made a wrong 
ufe of it, for the king holds in one hand the globe, and 
in the other the {fceptre, the types of fovereignty and 
mercy ; but his fword of juftice is ever earried . before 
him by a minifler of juftice, which fhews that fubjects 
may have their remedies for injuftice done, and that ap- 
peals lie to higher powers.” 


Tue conclufion of the debates of this houfe was,. 
that a commitment by the King or his council is good 
in point of authority; and, if the caufe of the commit- 
ment was juft, then it was good in point of matter ;. 


_ but that thefe two conceflions were no-way to prejudice’ 


the King’s authority, nor yet the propofitions of the 
houfe of Commons. 


NoTwiTHsTANDING the continual importuning mef-- 
fages with which the Commons were plied from the’ 
throne, they were at this time folely engaged in pre-. 
paring the 5 etihee of Right. ‘The fubfidy-bill had not: 


pafled 


408 


Ann, 1628, 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


pafled, and Charles was in/a perplexing fituation: The 
Commons he found deaf to every propofal that thwarted 
their intended purpofe ; to lofe the fupply, and diflolve 
the parliament, on the refufal of affenting to that which 
had been clearly proved the legal privileges of the fub- 
ject, was a meafure that even the defperate Buckingham 
would not venture on. To confirm privileges which 


clathed fo entirely with the pretenfions of the crown, 


privileges which evinced the injuftice of the late mea- 
fures, was a condefcenfion infupportably humiliating to > 


~ ‘the monarchical Charles. 


Conference 
between the 
two houfes, 


Ephemeris 
Parliamen- 
taria, p. 53, 
& feq. : 


His party had prevailed fo far in the houfe of Lords, 
that they had fent the following meflage to the Com- 
mons: That they concurred with that affembly in their 
defire of all juft liberties to the fubje&, but they found 
it fit and neceflary alfo to preferve the juft prerogative 
of the King: And to the end that both houfes might 
agree therein, they defired another conference on the 
fubje&. In this conference the archbifhop of Canter- 
bury, who, though a good man, was an indifferent po- 
litician, propofed that'certain propofitions, inftead of the- 
Petition of Right, fhould be prefented by both houfes 
to the King for his affent. The fubflance of thefe pro. 
pofitions was, That the King fhould declare that Magna 
Charta, and the fix fubfequent ftatutes, were yet in force; 
that every free fubje&t had a property in his goods ; 
that it was his royal pleafure that his fubjects fhould 
enjoy all the privileges their anceftors enjoyed under the 
beft and the moft noble of his progenitors ; that in 
caufes within the cognizance of the civil law, and con- 
cerning the liberty of the fabject, he would: proceed ae 


Bc > An Rat En Bor 4: 


409 


cording to the laws eftablifhed in the realm ; that’ he Aan. 1628. 


would refolve not to ufe his prerogative to the prejudice 
of his people; and if he fhould find juft caufe of ftate 
to imprifon or reftrain any man’s perfon, that he would 
gracioufly declare that he would, within a convenient 
time, exprefs the caufe of the commitment or reftraint, 
either general or fpecial, and, upon a caufe fo exprefled, 
would leave him immediately to be tried according to 
the common juftice of the kingdom. 


MEN lefs judicious and clear-fighted than were the 
members which compofed the prefent houfe of Commons, 
might have feen that thefe propofitions were fo far from 
anfwering the purpofe of reftraining the prerogative, that 
they acknowledged a power in the King which defeated 


~ the intent of every ftatute that had been made in favour 


of the fubjec&t. The Commons avoided quarrelling with 
the Lords at this critical juncture; therefore, without 
making any comment on their propofal, they in very 
civil terms excufed themfelves from affenting to it, and 
fteadily adhered to their own refolution, 


Tuis conference was immediately followed by a f{peech 


- from the lord-keeper, which affured the two houfes, that 


the King looked upon the ftatutes infifted upon for the 
fubjects’ liberty to be all in force; that he will main- 
tain all his fubjects in the juft freedom of their per- 
fons, and fafety of their eftates; that he will govern ac- 
cording to the laws and ftatutes of the realm, and that 
they fhall find as much fecurity in his royal word and 
promife, as by any law they could make. 

Vou. I. Ggg tr 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ir would fwell this work with much infipid matter 
to relate all the abfurd fpeeches and meflages which 
paffed on this occafion: Secretary Cook enlarged upon 
them all. The following arguments were at different 
times ufed by this tool of royalty, to bring the Com- 
mons to acknowledge the court creed; viz. A fovereignty 
in the prince fuperior to laws ; that thefe might direct, 
but could not reftrain, 2 monarch; and that confequently 
the fubjects’ fureft dependance was on the word of their 
King, who would look upon himfelf as bound by the 
facred ties of honour to keep what he had folemnly 
promifed. “ Whatfoever law we can make, faid Cook, 
muft come to his majefty’s allowance; and if his ma- 
jefty find caufe in his government, he need not put life 
to it. We daily fee all laws are broken, and all laws 
muft be broken for the public good. The wrath of a 
King is like the roaring of a lion, and all laws, with 
his wrath, are of no effect; but the King’s favour is 
like the dew of thé grafs; there all will profper; and 
may God make him the inftrument to unite all our 
hearts. The King’s heart is in his promife ; is not his 
majefty engaged in his royal word? can we do more? 
we are come to the liberty of the fubjeét, and the pre- 
rogative of the King. I hope we fhall not add any 
thing to ourfelves to deprefs him. Will we in this ne- 
ceffity ftrive to bring ourfelves into a better condition, 
and greater liberty, than our fathers had, and the crown 
into a worfe? I dare not advife his majefty to admit 
that. We deal with a wife and valiant prince, that hath 
a {word in his hand for our good; and this good is fup- 
ported by power. Do not think that by cafes of lavw 


+ 30 Bog Sim . 


..2) AS EL El ST 


41i 


and debate we can make that to be no law, which, in Ann. 1628. 


experience, we every day find neceflary. Make what 
law you will, government isa folid thing, and muft be 
fupported for our good. If I will difcharge my duty, 
added he, and the oath I have taken to his majefty, I 
muft commit, and neither exprefs the caufe to the gaoler 
nor to the judges, nor to any counfellor in England, 
but to the King himfelf. Yet do not think I go without 
ground or reafon, or take this power committed to me 
to be unlimited; yea, to me it is rather a charge, bur- 
den, and danger; for if I, by this power, fhall commit 
the pooreft porter, if it appear I do it not upon a jutt 
caufe, the burden will fall heavier upon me than the law 
can infliét, for } fhall lofe my credit with his majefty, 
and alfo my place; and I befeech you confider whether 
thofe that have been in the fame place have not com- 
mitted freely, and not any doubt made of it, nor com- 


_ plaint from the fubject.” 


Hap the meaning of Charles's anxiety to get rid of 
the Petition of Right been lefs apparent to the Com- 
mons than it really was, this doctrine would have fuffi- 
ciently fhewn what ufe the monarch intended to make 
of the demanded forbearance; that what the Commons 
infifted on as their undoubted right he would have con- 
ftrued as flowing from royal favour; that the power 


of princes could not be limited by human bonds; and 


that the rectitude of their judgment was the only fafe- 
guard of fubjects; that all laws muft give way to rea- 
fons of ftate, of which reafons of flate fovereigns were 


the fole judges, 


Gggz2 « Was 


- = 
* 


4i2 


Ann. 1628. 
Debates in 
the lower 
houfe, 

Parl. Hift.vol. 


VII. p. 104) On meflages ? they put up petitions of their grievances, 
eq. 


Rufhworth, . 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


“ Was ever a verbal declaration of the King, faid Sir 
Edward Coke, verbum regis? When grievances be, the 
parliament is to redrefs them. Did ever parliament rely 


and the King ever anfwered. The King’s anfwers are 


very gracious: But what is the law of the realm? that 


is the queftion. All fucceeding Kings will fay, “ Ye 
muft truft me as ye did my predeceflors, and truft my 
meflages.” But meflages of love never came into a par- 
liament ; let us put up a Petition of Right, not that I 
diftruft the King, but that I cannot take his truft but in 
a parliamentary way.” 


“ Never houfe of Commons, faid Sir Thomas Went- 


vol. I: p-554 worth, trufted more in the goodnefs of their King, fo 


far as regarded themfelves only, as the prefent-; but we 
are. ambitious that his majefty’s goodnefs may remain 
to pofterity, and! we are accountable to a public truft: 
And therefore, feeing there hath been a public violation 
of the laws by his minifters, nothing can fatisfy them 
but a public amends.” 


Tue fubftance of this fpeech was delivered to: the 
king in an anfwer to the many importunate meflages he 
had fent the Commons to rely upon. his royal word. 
This drew from him an affent to the propofed bill; but 
the very next day fecretary Cook again importuned the 


houfe:on the old ftrain of depending on the faith of the | 
crown *. Charles, as a proof how much that faith was. 


* Secretary Cook propofed that this point fhould be debated before: 
the houte, and not before a y Spanaess faying, that it was a new — 


a a. 


CROMER ID £10 Hh 413 


to be relied on, after having given the Commons to un- Ann. 1628. 
derftand that he affented to their defire of a confirmation Viti. prite 
of the privilege of the fubject in their own way, fent a *** 

letter to the Lords to fruftrate the intent of the petition; 

viz. That he could not give up the point of committing 

in matters of ftate; that he promifed for the future to 

be very tender of the peoples’ privileges; to commit 

none for not lending money; and that the caufes of all 
commitments fhould be exprefled as foon as they could 


with fafety. 


TriFLinG and unfatisfactory as were thefe affurances;. 
they had fo much weight with the Lords * that they re- 
commended to the Commons that their petition might 
be reduced within the compafs of the king’s letter. The 
Commons refufed to proceed upon the letter, as being 
contrary to the cuftom of parliaments ; but offered to 
confer on any alterations which fhould be propounded 
by the Lords. The Lords, after having debated this The Lords 


propofe an 


matter fome days, refolved on the following addition to eda to 
the Petition. 


the Petition, which the Commons had referred to their of Right. 
approbation: “ We humbly prefent this Petition to your: 


courfe to go into a committee of the whole houfe. This propofal of 
fecretary. Cook was not affented to,, and Sir John Elliot replied, that 
the proceeding in a committee was more honourable and advantageous,. 
both to the King and the houfe ; for that way led moft to truth, as it 
was a more open way, where every man might add his reafons, and. 
make anfwer upon the hearing of other mens’ reafons and arguments.. 


Parl. Hift. vol. VIII. p. 104. 

* ‘Whilft the Commons had been wholly employed on the compre+ 
henfive fubje&t of public Liberty, the Lords had been bufied in mat- 
ters ar iialeassl own se a ariftocratical privileges. 
majefty,, 


ALA HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 


Annvi628. miajefty, not only with a care of preferving our own 
liberties, but with due regard to leave entire that fove- 
reign power wherewith your majefty is trufted for the 
protection, fafety, and happinefs, of your people *.” 


Ir is difficult to imagine that the Lords could be fo 
totally blind ‘to confequences as mot to perceive the 
weighty objections to this claufe; or that the popular 
lords would have fuffered it eafily to pafs, if they had 
not been certain of its fate in the lower houfe. It was 
rejected there with a warmth equal to the importance of 
the queftion. 


Debates on ~—- LET us look into the records, faid Mr. Alford, and - 


chis propel fee what this fovereign power is. Bodin faith that it is 

gue p-562, free from any conditions: By this we fhall acknowledge 
a regal as well as a legal power. Let us give that to 
the King the law gives him, and no more.” 


“ Avt our petition, faid Mr. Pym, is for the laws of 
England; and this power feems to be another diftin& 


power from the power of the law. I know how to add - 


fovereign to the King’s perfon, but not to his power.” 


* In a committee of the whole houfe on the contents of this petition, 
‘the lord Say moved, that thofe lords who ftood for the liberties of the 
‘nation might make their proteftation, and that to be upon record; and 
the oppofite party fhould, with the fubfeription of their names, enter 
their reafons, to remain upon record ; that fo pofterity might not be'to 


feek who they were that fo ignobly betrayed the freedom: Tas oe 


try. Sanderfon’s Life of King Charles, p. 110. 
The oppreffed bifhop of Lincoln was the fycophant sented 
moted the adding this claufe tothe petition = ud AHOTit 


=> } - ee 
: 
} oo 


€C H- A R-E E68 «4, 


« We cannot admit, faid Mr. Hackwell, of thefe words Ann, 1628. 


with fafety } they are applicable to all the parts of the 
Petition; it is in the hature of a faving; all the laws we 
cite are without a faving ; and yet now, after the viola- 
tion of them, muft we add a faving? 


« THis is magnum in parvo, faid Sir Edward Coke ; it 
is a matter of great weight; it will overthrow all our 
Petition ; it trencheth to all parts of it; it flies at loans, 
at the oath, at imprifonment, and at billeting of fol- 
diers; this turns all about again. Look into all the 
petitions of former times, they never petitioned wherein: 
there was a faving of the King’s fovereignty. I know 
that prerogative is part of the law; but fovereign power is 
no parliamentary word. In my opinion it weakens Magna 
Charta, and all the ftatutes; for they are abfolute, with- 


- out any faving of fovereign power: And fhould we now 


add it, it will weaken the foundation of law, and then 
the building muft fall. Take we-heed what we yield 
unto: Magna Charta is fuch a fellow that he will have: 
no fovereign.” 


Sir Thomas Wentworth and Mr. Noy fpoke to the fame~ 
purpofe. Mr. Selden fhewed that there never had been: 
fuch a claufe in any preceding ftature, excepting in one 
petition of the parliament in 28 of Edward I. but this 
was fo much difliked by the people, that, on a repre-- 
fentation to the King, it was taken away by the next 
parliament. Mr. Mafon made an excellent fpeech on the 
fame fubject: After having obferved that Magna Charta: 
was framed. to limit the arbitrary power which the Nor- 
man race aflumed om the conqueft of our anceftors, 

Avents « The- 


416 


Aan. .1628. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


* The ftatutes then mentioned in our petition, added h 

refraining that abfolute power of the conqueror. If we 
recite thofe ftarutes, and fay we leave entire that fove- 
reign power, we do take away that reftraint which is 
the virtue and ftrength of thofe ftatutes, and do hereby 
fet at liberty this claim of fovereign power of a con- 
gueror, which then will be limited and reftrained by no 
laws, And it was faid, that all fovereign power is not 


mentioned to be left, but only that with which the 


King is trufted for our protection, fafety, and happinefs. 
But I conceive this to be an exception of all fovereign 
power; for all fovereign power in a King is for the pro- 
tection, fafety, and happinefs of his people. If all fo- 
vereign power be excepted you may eafily judge the 
confequence, all loans and taxes being impofed by co- 
Jour of that fovereign power. The wortt truffed is very 


ambiguous, whether it be meant trufted by God only . 


as a conqueror, or by the people alfo as a King, who is 
to govern according to law, ex pact *,—If this addition 
does not refer to the petition, it is merely ufelefs and 
unneceflary, and unbefitting the judgment of this grave 
and great aflembly to add to a petition of this weight. 
If it hath reference to it, then it deftroys not only the 
virtue and ftrength of our Petition of Right, but our 


rights themfelves; for the addition being referred to | 


each part of the Petition, it will neceflarily receive this 
conftruction ; viz. That none ought to be compelled to 


* Both Charles and his father afferted on all occafions that they held 
their power from God, and were to him only accountable for their 
actions. This was not the creed of the houfe of Commons: but they 
no where exprefs their fentiments on this head more ftrongly than be 


are here expreffed in this part of Mr. Mafon’s fpeech, — int | 


a3 


, 


ween If us ae 


make any gift, loan, or fuch-like charge, without com. Aan. 1628 


mon confent or act of parliament, unlefs it be by the 
fovereign power with which the King is entrufted for 
the protection, fafety, and happinefs of his people ; that 
none ought to be compelled to fojourn or billet foldiers, 
unlefs by the fame fovereign power ; and fo of the reft 
of the rights of the Petition: And then the mott fa- 


vourable conftruction will be, that the King hath an or- _ 


dinary prerogative, and by that he cannot impofe taxes 
or imprifon; that is, he cannot impofe taxes at his will, 
or employ them as he pleafeth; but that be hath an ex- 
traordinary and tranfcendant fovereign power, for the 
protection and happinefs of his people, and for fuch pur- 
pofe he may impofe taxes or billet foldiers as he pleafeth. 
And we may aflure ourfelves that hereafter all loans, 
taxes, or billeting of foldiers, will be faid to be for the 
protection, fafety, and happinefs of the people; cer- 
tainly hereafter it will be conceived, that an houfe of 
parliament would not have made an unneceflary addi- 
tion to this Petition of Right; and therefore it will be 
refolved, that the addition hath relation to the Petition, 
which will have fuch operation as I have formerly de- 
clared. And I the rather fear it, becaufe the late loan 
and billeting have been declared to have been by fove- 
reign power, for the good of ourfelves: And if it be 
doubtful whether this propofition hath reference to the 
petition or not, I know who {hall judge whether loans 
or imprifonments hereafter be by that fovereign power 
or not *.” 


* This judicious member had influenced the houfe not to make 
their refolutions on the point of perfonal liberty the premifes of their 
Bill of Rights. « mecanhe, faid he, if by an act of explanation we 
a Re Hh h fhall 


1) 


418 


Ann. 1628. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 


‘Suc were the debates of the Commons when a mef- 
fage from the King to both houfes oecafioned another 


fhall provide only that the caufe ought to: be expreffed upon the return: 
of the Habeas Corpus, then out-of the words of the ftatute it will. 
neceflarily be inferred, that before the return of the Habeas Corpus 
the caufe need not to be exprefied, becaufe the ftatute hath appointed 
the time of the expreffion of the caufe. This then, which we ternr 
an act of explanation, will be an aé&t for the abridging of Magna’ 
Charta, and the reft of the ftatutes. In my underftanding, the words 
of this intended law, ** That no freeman ought to be committed with- 
out caufe,” can no way advantage us, or fatisfy the objection. For till 
the return of thé Habeas Corpus, he that commits is judge of the 
caufe, or at leaft hath a licence by this law till that time to conceal 
the caufe, and the gaoler is not fubje to.any action for the detaining 
the prifoner upon fuch a command: For if the prifoner demand the 
caufe of his commitment of the gaoler, it will be a fafe anfwer for 
him to fay that he detained the prifoner by warrant, and that it be- 
longs not unto him to defire thofe who. commit the prifoner to:fhew 
the caufe until he returns the Habeas Corpus. And if. the prifoner be 
a fuitor to know the caufe from thofe that committed him, it will be 
a fufficient anfwer for them to fay, they will exprefs the caufe at the 
return of the Habeas Corpus. In this cafe there will be wrong, be- 
caufe the commitment is without caufe expreffed, and one who fuffers 
that wrong, viz, the party imprifoned; and yet no fuch wrong-doer 
but may excufe, if not juftify himfelf, by this law. And if the pri- 
foner procure a Habeas Corpus, and be brought into the King’s-Bench 
by virtue of it, yet the caufe need not to be then expreffed, the pro- 
vifion of this law being, that if no caufe be then expreffed he fhall 
be bailed; and no caufe being fhewn upon the return of the Habeas 
Corpus, yet it may be pretended, that, at the time of his commit- 
ment, there were ftrong prefumptions: of fome great offence; but, 
upon farther examination, they are cleared. So we may be frequently 


imprifoned in this manner, and never underftand. the caufe; and haye 


often fuch punifhments, and no means to juftify ourfelves: And for 
all thefe proceedings this very law will be the juftification and colour. 


If by this aét there be a toleration of imprifonment, without fhewing __ 


caufe until the return of the Habeas Corpus, yet it is poffible 
company that imprifonment with fuch circumftances of clofé reft 


ae 


7 
* 


@) MoACRTEe- Bas TR 


conference on the fubject. The rational part of the ar- 
guments urged to the Lords againft this propofal were 
pretty much the fame with thofe contained in Mr. Ma- 
fon’s {fpeech *, The conviction they carried with them 
did not prevent the Lords from defiring another confer- 
ence to confider of any other way to exprefs a refpect of 
the King’s power, either by manifeftation, declaration, 
or proteft, This propofal was rejected by the Commons 
with difdain, and the Lords at length concluded this te- 
dious affair with a refolution to clear themfelves from 


and others which I forbear to exprefs, as may make an imprifonment 
for that fhort time, as great a punifhment as a perpetual imprifonment, 
in the ordinary manner.” Here Mr. Mafon fhewed that the fenfe of 
thefe refolutions’ might be fo far evaded, that a man might be tranf- 
lated from one prifon to another, and his whole life be {pent in this 
peregrination. In the conclufion of this fpeech he obferved, that no- 
thing but fuch an aét of parliament could give the King a legal power 
to commit without exprefling a lawful caufe; and added, that by pro- 
viding for reafons of {tate they might fpring a leak which might fink 
all their liberties, and open a gap through which Magna Charta, and 
all the ftatutes, might iffue out and vanith. Parliam. Hif. vol. VIII. 
p- 89, & /eg. 


* Sir Henry Martin put the Lords in mind of the moderation with 
which the Commons had conducted this affair. «* We are not igno- 
rant, faid he, in what language our predeceffors were wont to exprefs 
themfelves on much lighter provocations ; and in what ftyle they framed 
their petitions. No lefs amends could ferve their turn than fevere com- 
miffions to enquire upon the violaters of their liberties; banifhment of 
fome, execution of other offenders, more liberties, new oaths of ma- 
giftrates, judges and officers, with many other provifions, written in 
blood. Yet trom us there hath been heard no angry words in this pe- 
tition; no man’s perfon is named, we fay no more than what a worm 
trodden upon would fay, I pray tread upon me no more.” Parham, 

Hi: ae 1375 a 


“Hbh2 any 


420 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Asitt 1638. any defign to reftrain the prerogative of a crown, by eg 
the following declaration : es 


“ May it pleafe your moft excellent majefty ; we, the pet 
Lords fpiritual and temporal, in your high court of par- x3 ty 
liament aflembled, do humbly and unanimoufly declare Raph 
unto your majefty, that our intention is not to lefen or 
impeach any thing which, by the oath of fupremacy, we 
have {worn to aflift and defend.” 


Tue Lords were told by the duke of Buckingham, 

that this declaration was moft welcome to his majefty. 

arRight The Petition now pafled both houfes, and in four days 
pailts both afterwards the King came to the houfe; and, after hav- 
Janez. ing obferved to the Lords and Commons the fhortnefs of 
the time he had taken to anfwer their Petition, and the 
lord-keeper had put both houfes in mind that they had 
profeffed to have no intention to leflen or diminith his 
majefty’s prerogative, the Petition being read, Charles 


gave this anfwer : 


the Begs 2S A See King willeth that right be done, according to 

Petition of the laws and cuftoms of the realm, and that the ftatutes 

ia be put in due execution, that his fubjects may have no 
caufe to complain of any wrong or oppreffion contrary 
to their juft rights and liberties; to the prefervation 
whereof he holds himfelf as much obliged as of his — 


own prerogative.” 


Ir the Commons had imagined themfelves on the point a 
_ of receiving the fruits of their labour, ingenuity, and ci “a 
forbearance, they muft have been inflamed with dite s 
rinnea 


2 
oes 
, 
a 


La 
s 
+ 
~ 
nA 


4 xy ee 
F Py ia? Pe 


pointment, as well as indignation, at this frefh infult ann, 1628 - 
on their underftandings.. It is very certain that they re- 
turned in a very ill humour to their houfe: The King’s 
anfwer to their Petition of Right was read, and dif 
pleafed every patriot. On this occafion Sir John Elliot Debates. 
on the King’s . 

made a long fpeech, in which he pathetically fet forth aniwer. 
all the paft and prefent grievances’ of the times. Sir ee 
Edward Coke propounded that a remonftrance fhould be | 
prefented, touching the prefent dangers, and the means 
of fafety, for the King and kingdom: This was agreed 
on, and entrufted to the committee for the bill of fub- 
" fidies. Secretary Cook completed the prefent difguft, by 

giving the houfe to underftand, that his majefty having, 

upon the Petition exhibited to him by both houfes, given 

an anfwer fo full of juftice and grace, that themfelves 

and their pofterity had juft caufe to blefs him, intended 

to put an end to this feflion of parliament on Wednefday 


the eleventh. ; 


| CB AR DD EB B* OL 420 


ne ee 7 


a 


TuE Petition of Right had fo wholly engroffed the 
attention of the Commons, that all other bufinefs was 
for a time fufpended. The offender Manwaring now 
felt the whole weight of their refentment:. A heavy Chase 
charge was brought in againft this fycophant, who had Manwaring. 
fo prophanely proftituted religion to the purpofes of 
bafe policy *. The Commons were employed in this 


* Amoneft other offenfive fermons which had been preached before 

- , the King, one by Dr. Goodman bifhop of Gloucefter, afferted, in a 

“fi pofitive and literal explication the real prefence of Chrift in the facra- 
ment of the Lord’s Supper. This doétrine occafioned great fcandal ; 

‘ but the King would not fuffer the convocation to take cognizance of 
a f it, but referred it to the archbifhop of Canterbury, the bithops of 


Winchefter, . 


iff m 


422 


Ann, 1628, . 


Parl. Hitt. 
vol. VIII. 
p- 189, & feq. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 


bufinefs when they received the King’s meflage concern- 


ing the termination of the feflion. The meflage was 


entirely difregarded, a declaration againft Manwaring 
completed, and Mr. Pym, who prefided in all the com- 
mittees concerning religion, managed the charge that 
was brought againft him in the upper houfe. 


Cuar es, being highly offended at the flight that was 
put upon his laft meflage, ordered the Lords to adjourn 
for a day; and fent another meflage to the Jower houfe, 
requiring them not to enter upon new bufinefs, that 
might fpend greater time, or might lay any fcandal or 
afperfion upon the government. Warm debates enfued 
on the occafion of this ungracious interruption: Sir Ro- 


- bert Philips propofed to addrefs the King for leave to 


return home immediately, fince they were ftopped from 
giving advice, and what they had hitherto done of ad- 
vantage to their country had been grofly mifreprefented. 
Sir John Elliot began a fpeech to the fame effect, but 
was interrupted by the fpeaker; who, imagining he 
was going to tax Buckingham, ftarted up from his 
chair, and faid, “ There is a command laid upon me 


Winchefter, Durham, and St. David’s, and the affair was concluded 
by the bifhop’s preaching the fermon again, with explanatory obfer- 
vations. Before I leave this fubjeét, it may not be improper to no- 
tice, that Laud had been fent by Buckingham to Andrews bifhop 
of Winchefter, to propofe that the convocation fhould take under 
confideration the fubject of difpute between the Arminians and their 
antagonifts the Calvinifts. On Andrews’s reprefentation of the affec- 
tions of the clergy, the bufinefs was poftponed, as. the Arminian 
tenets were not fo generally entertained as to truft the determination 
of thofe points to a conyocation. 


P- 153- 


Heplit’s Life of, Laudy: ol, 62.4,668¢00n 


tA 


et 


Oo HeA SR 2 Bese 


to interrupt any that thall go about to lay an afperfion Ann. 1628: 


on the minifters of ftate.” On this interruption Sir John 
Elliot fat down: Some of the court-party faid that the 
fpeech lately made by that member had, they feared, 
given offence to his majefty. This occafioned a declara- 
tion of the houfe, that every member was free from 
any undutiful f{peech, from the beginning of the par- 
liament to that day. After this they turned themfelves 
into a grand committee; but the fpeaker defired leave 
to withdraw for half an hour *. His requeft being 
granted, the houfe proceeded on their debate. Mr. 
Wandsford faid, “ I think it is fit we go to the King, 
for this doth concern our liberties. Eet us not fear to 
make a. remonftrance of our rights; we are his coun- 
fellors. There are fome men that call evil good, and 
good evil. Juftice is now called Faction.” Sir Edward 
Coke, after having dilated on the moderation with which 
the Commons had conducted themfelves, after fuch a 
violation of their privileges, and, from the examples of 
former times, had fhewed that nothing could grow to 


* On all the important debates which had been held this feffion, 
the ferjeant was. ordered to attend on the out-fide of the door of the 
houfe, and no man was to offer to go out, upon penalty of being 
fent to the Tower. Mr. Kirton obferved, that for the fpeaker to de- 
fire to leave the houfe in fuch a manner, was never heard of before; 
he feared it would be ominous.. The following expreffion, which this 
‘member had ufed in the houfe, was called in queftion by the court- 
“party : ‘That the enemies of the commonwealth had prevailed on the 
-King to difpute their rights, but he doubted not but God would fend 
them. hearts, hands, and. fwords, to cut the throats of the enemies to 
the King and people. _The houle refolved, that in this he had faid 
nothing beyond the bounds of duty and allegiance; and that they all 
‘concurred with him therein, Par/, Hit, vol. VIII. p. 164, 192, 199... 

. abufe 


Jite 


424 


Ann, 1628, abufe but what that houfe had power to treat of, added, 


_ 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


“ Let us palliate no longer: I think the duke of Buck- 
ingham is the caufe of all our miferies.” On the nam- 
ing this detefted minifter as the general nuifance, the 
whofe houfe cried out, “ ’Tis. he! ’tis he!” Every mouth 
was open to accufe him. Mr, Selden advifed that a de- 
claration fhould be drawn up, under four heads; 1. To 
exprefs the houfe’s dutiful carriage towards his majefty ; 
2. To tender théir liberties that were violated; 3. To 
prefent what the purpofe of the houfe was to have dealt 
in; 4. That that great perfon, the duke, fearing him- 
felf to be queftioned, did interpofe, and caufe the pre- 
fent diftraction. “ All this time, faid he, we have caft 


a mantle on what was done laft parliament; but now, | 


being driven again to look upon that man, let us pro- 
ceed with that which was then well begun ; and let the 
charge be renewed, that was made laft parliament againft 
him ; to which he made an anfwer, but the particulars 
thereof were fo infufficient, that we might demand judg- 
ment on that very anfwer.” 


Mr. Selden having thus concluded his fpeech, whilft 


the motion was making to put thefe things to the 
queftion, the fpeaker, who had been privately with the 
King, brought word, his majefty commanded that the 
houfe fhould adjourn till next morning, and that all 
committees in the mean time fhould ceafe. The houfe 
thought fit to comply with this command. On the fuc- 
ceeding day, the fpeaker endeavoured to footh them b 
many profeffions of his’own zeal for the fervice of that 
houfe, with afluring them that they had mifconftrued 


a Pa 

a, : 

“% ae 
by te 


; 


ap 


. re 


ERE ee 


> 


©. HW, A-«R AL Ep 84 A. 


‘the King’s laft. meflage. At the fame time he delivered Ann. 1628._ 


them another to this purpofe: That the King had no 
meaning of barring them of their rights, but only to 
prevent a longer time of confideration than what he had 
fixed ; and that all Chriftendom might take notice of a 
{weet parting between him and his people. 


NoTwitTuHsTaNnpinc this fweetening, the houfe re- Debates on 


fumed their debates upon grievances, with an earneft- ® 
nefs that boded no relaxation to the firmnefs of their 
preceding refolutions, Amongft other abufes, they fell 
upon the defign of bringing into England a body of 
German horfe. This was intended to be a fecret, but it 
was found out by fome of the popular members, and 
communicated to the houfe. On this intelligence Burle- 
machi was ordered to attend: He acknowledged that he 
had received thirty thoufand pounds, by privy-feal, to buy 
horfes. Such a difcovery gave room for the blackeft 
comments ; the ill intentions of the miniftry blazed con- 
fpicuous to the public; and Charles, under the oppro- 
brium of the darkeft fufpicions, was obliged to comply 
with a requeft of the Commons, that he would give a 
clear and fatisfactory anfwer to the Petition of Right *. 


* The Petition of Right 


Humbly thew, That whereas it is declared and enaéted, by a fta- 
tute made in the time of the reign of king Edward I. commonly 
called Statutum de tallagio non concedendo, that no tallage or aid fhall be 
laid or levied by the King or his heirs, in this realm, without the good 
will and affent of the archbifhops, bifhops, earls, barons, knights, bur- 
geffes, and other freemen of the commonalty of this realm ; and by 
authority of Parliament, holden in the twenty-fifth year of king Ed- 
ward IJ], it is declared and enacted, that from henceforth no perfon 
thall be.compelled to make APY loans to ti King againft his will, be- 

Vor, 1, Ti. caufe 


426 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1628. This requeft was made next day by the lord-keeper, in 
the name of both houfes ; and the Petition being read, 


caufe fuch loans were againft reafon, and the franchife of the land; ~~ 
and by other laws of this realm it is provided, that none fhould be 
charged by any charge or impofition called a Benevolence, nor by fuch-- 
like charge; by which the ftatutes before-mentioned, and other the 
good laws and ftatutes of this realm, your fubjeéts have inherited this. 
freedom, that they fhould not be compelled to contribute to any tax, ] 
tallage, aid, or other like charge, not fet by common confent of parlia- 4 s 
ment: Yet, neverthelefs, of late divers commiffions, direCted to fundry 
commiffioners in feveral counties, with inftructions, have iffued; by 
means whereof your people have been in divers places aflembled, and 
required to lend certain {ums of money unto your majefty; and many 
of them, upon their refufal fo to do, have had an oath adminiftred unto ieé 
them, not warrantable by the laws and ftatutes of this realm, and have 
been conftrained to become bound to make appearance and give at-_ ere 
tendance before your privy-council, and in other places, and others of nl 
them have been therefore imprifoned, confined, and fundry other ways. e 
molefted and difquieted ; and divers other charges have been laid and : 
levied upon your people in feveral counties, by lord-lieutenants, deputy- 
lieutenants, commiffioners for mutters, juftices of peace, and others, by 
command or diretion from your majefty, or your privy-council, againft__ 
the laws and free cuftoms of this realm : , is 
And whereas alfo by the ftatute called the Great’ Charter of the li- 
berties of England, it is declared and enaéted, that no freeman may 
be taken or imprifoned, or be difleifed of his freeholds or liberties, or 
his free cuftoms, or be out-lawed or exiled, or in any manner de- 
ftroyed, but by the lawful judgment of his peers, or by the law of the 
Jand; and in the eight-and-twentieth year of king Edward III. it was 
declared and enaéted, by authority of parliament, that no man of what “d 
‘eftate or condition that he be, fhould be put out of his lands ortene- = 
ments, nor taken, nor imprifoned, nor difinherited, nor put to death, . 
without being brought to anfwer by due procefs.of law: ' 
Neverthelefs, againft the tenor of the faid ftatutes, and other the —— 
good laws and ftatutes of your realm, to that end provided, diversof = 
your fubjects have of late been imprifoned without any caufe thewed 5 ae 
and when, for their deliverance, they were brought before ju 25 


juttice, ee 
your majefty’s writs of Habeas Corpus, there to bem mee . 


\g -_ 


Se ne ee - 


TS — 
- iy = 
- 


C-H AcR & £, 8 od. 


427 


The King 


the King confirmed it in the fulleft form; viz. Svit Anv-2628- 


as the court fhould order, and their keepers commanded to certify the 
caufe of their detainer, no caufe was certified, but that they were de- 
tained by your majefty’s fpecial command, fignified by the lords of 
your privy-council; and yet were returned back to feveral prifons, 
without being charged with any thing to which they might make an- 
{wer by due procefs of law : 


And whereas of late great companies of foldiers and mariners have 
been difperfed into divers counties of the realm, and the inhabitants 
againft their wills, have been compelled to receive them into their 
thoufes, and there to fuffer them to fojourn, againft the laws and cuf- 
toms of this realm, and to the great grievance and vexation of your 
people : 

And whereas alfo by authority of parliament, in the twenty-fifth year 
of the reign of king Edward IL. it is declared and enacted, that no 
man fhould be forejudged of life or limb againft the form of the Great 
Charter, and laws of the land; and by the faid Great Charter, and 
other the laws and ftatutes of this your realm, no man ought to be ad- 
judged to death but by the laws eftablifhed in this your realm, either 
by the cuftoms of the fame realm, or by aéts of parliament; and 
whereas no offender of what kind foever is exempted from the pro- 
ceedings to be ufed, and punifhments to be inflifted, by the laws and 
ftatutes of this your realm; neverthelefs, of late divers commiffions, 
under your majefty’s great feal, have iffued forth, by which certain 
perfons have been affigned and appointed commiffioners, with power 
and authority to proceed within the land, according to the juftice of 
martial law, againft fuch foldiers and mariners, or other diffolute per- 
fons joining with them, as fhould commit any murder, robbery, felony, 
mutiny, or other outrage or mifdemeanor whatfoever; and by fuch 
fummary courfe and order as is agreeable to martial law, and as is 
ufed in armies in time of war, to proceed to the trial and condemna- 
tion of fuch offenders, and them to caufe to be executed and put to 
death, according to the law-martial ; by pretext whereof fome of your 
majefty’s fubjects have been, by fome of the faid commiffioners, put 
to death; when and where, if by the law and ftatutes of the land they 
hhad deferved death, by the fame laws and ftatutes alfo they might, and 
by no other ought to, have been adjudged and executed: 

re ner. lii 2 And 


pafies the Pe~ 


§ 
Ae 


428 


Ann. 1628. 


tition of 
Right. 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 
droit faite comme il eff defiré. On the pronouncing theft 


And alfo fundry grievous offenders, by colour thereof claiming an 
exemption, have efcaped the punifhments due to them-by the laws and 
flatutes of this your realm, by reafon that. divers of your officers and 
minifters of juftice have unjuftly refufed or forborn to proceed againtt 
fuch offenders according to the fame laws and ftatutes, upon pretence 
that the faid offenders were punifhable only by martial law, and by au- 
thority of fuch commiffions as aforefaid; which commiffions, and all 
“other of like nature, are wholly and direétly contrary to the faid laws 
and ftatutes of this your realm: 


They do therefore humbly pray your moft a majefty, that no 
man hereafter be compelled to make or yield any gift, loan, benevo- 
lence, tax, or fuch-like charge, without common confent by act of par- 
liament; and that none be called to make anfwer, or take fuch oath, or 
to give attendance, or to be confined, or otherwife molefted or dif- 
quieted concerning the fame, or for the refufal thereof ; and that no 
freeman, in any fuck manner as is before mentioned, be imprifoned*or 
detained ; and that your majefty would be pleafed to remove ‘the faid 
foldiers and mariners, and that your people may not be fo burdened in 
time to come; and that the forefaid commiffions for proceeding by mar- 


tial law may be revoked and annulled, and that hereafter no commif- 


fions of like nature may ifftle forth to any perfon or perfons whatfoever, 
to be executed as aforefaid, left, by colour of them, any of your ma- 
jefty’s fubjects be deftroyed, or put to death, contrary to the laws and 
franchifes of the land. 


All.which they moft humbly. pray of your moft excellent majefty, 


as their rights and liberties, according to the laws and ftatutes of this — 


realm ; and that your majefty would alfo vouchfafe to declare, that the 
awards, doings, and proceedings, to the prejudice of your people, in 
any of the premifes, fhall not be drawn. hereafter into confequence or 
example ; and that your majefty would be. alfo gracioufly pleafed, for 
the future comfort.and fafety of your people, to declare your royal wil] 
and pleafure, that in the things aforefaid all your officers and minifters 
fhall ferve you according to the laws and ftatutes of this realm, as they 

tender the honour of your majefty, and the profperity of this kingdom. 
Statutes at Large, vol. Il. p.1096, & fea == 


J 4 ig 
This Petition of: Right.was drawn up by Sir “oe Coke. 


CoM ARTE ES —4 


429 


words, the Commons gave a general and loud ap- Ann, 1628.. 


plaufe *. 


THE fubject of fupply, which had been fome time The com 


laid afide, was now refumed, and an order paffed that 
the committees for religion, trade, and courts of jutftice, 
fhould ceafe, and the houfe to proceed. only on griev- 
ances of the moft moment. Under this head fell a com- 
miffion to certain ftate-officers to confider of ways and 
means for raifing money to fupply the exigencies of 
government. Though there is no mention of an excife 


mons proceed 
on grievances 


in this commiffion, yet we are told fuch a fcheme had! 


been under confideration immediately before. the meet- 
ing of parliament ; and Mr. Windeham affirmed in the 
houfe, that books of precedents were. come over, in 
which the manner of the excife in Holland was re- 
lated. The commiffion t was brows into the houfe, and 


* When it was generally known chat the Petition -had been paffed 
in the proper form, the city of London refounded with the rejoicings 
of all ranks of people. Bonfires and the ringing of bells proclaimed 
the applaufe of the public. Sanderfon’s Life of Charles I. p. 113. 


+ The words of the commiffion are as. follow =. 


« And we do hereby authorize and appoint, and ftri€tly will and 
require you, that, fpeedily and ferioufly, you enter into confideration 
of all the beft and {peedieft ways and means you can, for raifing of 


' monies for the moft important occafions aforefaid ; which, without~ex- 


tremeft hazard to us, our dominions, and people, and to our friends 
and allies, can admit of no long delay; the fame to be done by ine 
pofitions, or otherwife, as in your wifdoms and beft judgments ye 
fhall find to be moft convenient in a cafe, of this inevitable neceffity.; 
wherein form and circumftance mutt be difpenfed with, rather than the 
fubftance be loft or hazarded.” 

In a conference between the Lords. and Commons concerning this 
proba the Commons .recomménded to the Lords to. make an en- 


quiry 


430 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1628. afterwards, by the defire of the Lords, cancelled by the 


‘Theieremor- King. Sir John Strangeways, though" a famous royalift, 
france, advifed the perfecting the .remonftrance on the ftate of 


the adminiftration: This advice was acceded to, and a 
remonftrance framed, fetting forth, The unconftitutional 
fyftem of government which had been lately put in 
practice; the many innovations which had been made 
on the liberties of the fubject, in confequence of that 
fyftem ; the national difhonour and danger brought on 
the Englifh from the ill conducting of public affairs ; 


"the illegal commiflion granted to the duke of Bucking- 


ham to be general of an army in the land in time of 
peace *; the dangerous purpofe of bringing into the 
country foreign troops +; the abufes introduced into the 
ceconomy of the finances; the decay of trade; the lofs 
of fhips +; the abufe of power; and the late compofi- 


quiry who was the projector of the device; and, if he could be found 
out, to inflict an exemplary punifhment on him. Rufbworth, vol. & 
p- 614, & feq. p. 616. 

* This could not properly be called a time of peace ; it was only a 
ceffation of arms. Such was the prudent jealoufy of our anceftors 
that they could not endure the fhadow of a military force, except on 
occafions of immediate neceffity. 


+ The paflage alluded to is as follows: * We are bold to declare 
to your majeity, and the whole world, that we hold it far beneath the 
heart of any free Englifhman to think that this victorious nation 
fhould now ftand in need of German foldiers to defend their own 
King and the kingdom.” 


. £ The committee for trade had brought ina report to the houfe, 
that of the fhipping of an hundred tons, or upwards, there had been, 
in the laft three years, decayed, caft away, and taken by the enemy, 
two hundred and forty eight great fhips, and with them ap -: 
able number of mariners, befides great loffes in lefs veffels; that the i 


merchants whofe thips had been taken up twenty, thirty, bade 


C.F AT Loe es: ok 


tions made with Popifh recufants *; other grievances Ann, 1628. 
relative to the encouragement of Popery and Armi- - 
nianifm +; the frequent diflolutions of parliaments were 
not forgot; and the great truft and power which the 
duke of Buckingham enjoyed was mentioned as the 


months,, all complained that they were not paid the fmall freight of 
two fhillings per ton at firft promifed. By the means of this difcou-- 
ragement, few of them built new veffels; and thofe that did build,, 
took. care to build them unfit for public fervice, to avoid their being. 
prefied. Epbemeris Parliamentaria, p. 201, & eq. 


* The Commons here put the King in mind of his anfwer to their” 


petition at Oxford on this fubjecét; the public refort to mafs at the: 
queen’s chapel, contrary to the fenfe of that an{wer. 


+ A proclamation had been iffued by Charles, forbidding his fub-. 
jects to publifh any religious doétrine, contrary to the difcipline of the 
church of England: The ufe made of this order was, that all books: 
tending to Puritanifm were fuppreffed, whil{t the Arminians enjoyed 
unmolefted the liberty of the prefs. This abufe of power is particu- 
Jarly inftanced in the remonftrance, and the bifhops Laud and Neil are- 
mentioned as enjoying too much. authority for the fafety and tranquil- 
lity of the ftate. 


The Commons complained that Popery was openly profeffed in Ire- 
land without controul; that Popifh jurifdictions were exercifed: and. 
avowed ; that. monafteries, nunneries, and other fuperftitious houfes,, 
were newly erected, re-edified, and replenifhed with men and women 
of feveral orders, and in a. plentiful manner maintained at Dublin,. 
and moft of the great towns, and divers other places, of the king-. 
‘dom of Ireland. . 


The Papifts in Ireland were at this time driving: a bargain for an, 


_ avowed toleration, and offered the terms of maintaining for the King’s. 


“fervice five hundred horfe and five thoufand foot. On this propofal, the 
‘Irith bifhops unanimoufly fubfcribed a proteftation,, in which they re-. 
_prefented that fuch a toleration would be finful, and a matter of dan-. 


gerous confequence. On this fpirited feafonable oppofition the court of 


‘England dropped the affair. . Remonftrance of the Commons. Parl. Hift. 
Complete Hit. of England, p. 34, & feq. 


Flea tape chief. 


432 |. HISTORY OF ENGLAND. = 


Ann, 1628. chief caufes of thefe mifchiefs *, To balance the feve- 

rities in this remonftrance, the fubfidy-bill at the fame 

5 ‘time pafled the houfe, and was fent up to the Lords + 
when the remonftrance was prefented {. 


Their farther. THE Commons having thus fweetened this bitter pill 


debates, 


into debate on the illegal power the King had affumed 
of exacting tonnage and poundage, without having re-. 
ceived that grant from parliament. Mr. Selden proved, 
that though fuch fupplies had been given time out of 
mind, yet it was in the fenfe of a free gift, and the an- 
fwer to fuch bills had been ever the fame as was the ly 
—_ anfwer to the bill of fubfidies ; viz. “ The King heartily 
thanketh the fubjects for their good will,” The refult 
of the debate was a remonitrance to the King on this 
fubjeét. The Commons {fhewed that the fhortnefs of 
their remaining time rendered it impoflible for them to on an 


| 
of reproof with the gift of five fubfidies, they entered | 


* The fpeaker would have excufed himfelf from prefenting this re- 
monftrance ; but the Commons inlifted on his performing this part of 
‘his duty. a 

+ The Lords objected to the form of the-bill of .fubfidies, the Com: | |e 
mons having named themfelves only in the grant. After one.confer- Ny; 
‘ence on the fubject the affair was dropped, and the bill paffed without 
any alteration, Charles not being willing to part with it after it got 
into the upper houfe. as 

$ With the bill of fubfidies the Commons fent up the following has "q 
propolitions to the Lords: That the new-granted fubfidies might be “he 
expended in the repairing of the navy royal, and the decayed fea mu- poi 
nition. Secondly, in the re-edifying of the breaches made in the forts iz et 
of the kingdom, and the haven towns. Thirdly, for a fpeedy aid and 
affiftance to the king of Denmark. And, fourthly, they pina Hq 
that the mariners might be paid the wages which had basse aie 
them. Ephemeris Pai liamentaria; p. 2045 & feq. 


—-CHARLES L 433 


perfect fuch a bill this feflion, being a bufinefs that re- Ann, i6es. 
quired conferences with the officers of the revenue, and 
merchants, not only of London, but of remote parts *, 

They then reprefent their undoubted right of aflent to 

this as to other taxes; the illegality of laying any impo- 

fitions on the fubject without act of parliament. They 

affure themfelves that his majefty will obferve his an- 

fwer to the Petition of Right, and refrain for the future 

from thefe arbitrary acts, 


CuHaRLEs, inflamed and alarmed at proceedings which 
levelled an important blow at.the independance of the 
crown, repaired in hafte to the houfe of Lords +, and 
fent for the Commons, who had already engrofled their 
remonftrance, and were reading it at the time they were 
fummoned to attend the King, who addrefled both houfes 
in the following ftrain: 


“ Ir may feem ftrange, fays he, that I come fo fud- hsp pe 
denly, before I give my aflent to the bills: I will tell remonttrance, 


Parl. Hitt.vol. 


you the caufe, though I muft avow that I owe the ac- vill. p. 241 


‘count of my ations to God alone. It is known to **™ 


every one, that awhile ago the houfe of Commons gave 


* The Commons, on granting thefe bills, fettled the rates of impo~ 
fitions ; but the crown frequently exceeded thefe bounds. They had 
been enormoufly tranfgrefled by James, and Charles had laid on new 
impofitions, which were much complained of by the merchants. 


+ Charles’s motion on this occafion was fo hafty, chat neither himfelf 
nor the peers were dreffed in their formalities, The fpeaker had been fo 
long with him in the morning that he did not attend his office till nine 

o’clock. The Commons at this time met early; they ufually had finifhed 
their bufinefs at the hour of twelve. Parl. Hi, vol, VILL, p. 241. 


Vou. KEE me 


434 


HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Ann. 1628, Me a remonftrance ; how acceptable every man may - 


judge; and, for the merit of it, I will not call that in 
queftion, for I am fure no wife man can juftify ic. 
Now fince, I am truly informed that another remon- 
ftrance is preparing for me, to take away the profit 
of my tonnage and poundage, one of the chief main- 
tenance of my crown, by alleging I have given away 
my right thereto by my anfwer to your Petition. This . 
is fo prejudicial to me, that I am forced to end this fef- 
fion fome few hours before I meant, being not willing 
to receive any more remonftrances to which I muft give 
a harfh anfwer. And fince I fee that even the houfe of 
Commons begins already to make falfe conftructions of 
what I granted in your Petition, left it be worfe inter- 
preted in the country, I will now make a declaration 
concerning the true intent thereof. The profeflion of 
both houfes in the hammering of this Petition was no 
way to trench upon my prerogative, faying, they had 
neither intention nor power to hurt it: Therefore, it 
muft needs be conceived, that I have granted no new, but 
only confirmed the ancient, liberties of my fubjects. Yet, 
to {hew the clearnefs of my intentions, that I neither re- . 
pent nor mean to recede from any thing I have pro- 
mifed you, I do here declare myfelf, that thofe things © 
_which have been done, whereby many have had fome 
‘caufe to expect the liberties of the fubject to be trenched 
upon, which indeed was the firft and true ground of 
the Petition, fhall not hereafter be drawn into example | 
for your prejudice; and from time to time, on the word ~ 
of a King, ye hall not have the like caufe to complain: 


But as for tonnage and poundage, it isa thingI cannot 


"want, and was never intended by you to afk, nor meant : 


Coe ask & B67 2 


. 


435. 


by me, I am fure, to grant—To conclude, I command Aan. 1628: 


you all that are here, to take notice of what I have 
fpoken at this time to be the true intent and meaning 
of what I. granted you in your Petition; but efpecially 


you, my lords the judges, for to you only, under me, 


belongs the interpretation of the laws: For none of the 
houfes of parliament, either joint or feparate, what new 
doctrine foever may be raifed, have any power to make 
or declare a law without my confent.” 
” 
As an antidote to the Bill of Rights, Charles ordered this 
fpeech to be entered in the Journals of the Commons. 


Thofe bills that were prepared received the royal affent, — 


Parliament 
prorogued. 


and the parliament was prorogued to the twentieth of 
Oétober *. 


CHaRLEs’s fpeech on the occafion of this prorogation 
fhews a want of judgment that renders it a difficult 


matter to determine which of the two, his head or his 


* Aéts pafied this feffion. 


1. The Petition exhibited to his majefty by the Lords fpiritual and _ 


temporal, and Commons, in this prefent parliament affembled, con- 
cerning divers rights and privileges of the fubjeét, with the King’s af- 
fent thereunto in full parliament. ; 
2, An aé& for further reformation of fundry abufes on the Lord’s 
day, called Sunday. 

3. An att for fuppreffing of all unlicenfed alehoufes. _ 
4. An aé& to reftrain the fending over of any to be popifhly bred be- 
yond feas. 

5. An att for five entire fubfidies granted by the clergy. 

6. A declaration of the Commons againft Dr. Manwaring. 

7. An act for repeal and continuance of divers ftatutes. 
- 8, An aét for the eftablifhing Sutton’s hofpital. 
"Several private atts. Vide Parl. Hif. Statutes at Large. Rufoworth. 


4 Kkk2 ; heart, 


436 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 


Aon. 1628, Heart, moft deferves cenfure. His declaration that ton- 
nage and poundage was excluded in the Bill of Rights, 
is too wretched a piece of fophiftry to fuppofe it 
meant for the purpofes of deceit. He was undoubtedly - “i 
himfelf deluded, and paffed this Petition without being _ : 
acquainted with all its importance. When he ayowed 
an intention to confirm the already-granted privileges of 
the fubject, he little underftood the largenefs of their 
extent. The ufurpations of his predeceflors he regarded 
as unqueftionable authorities ; and, in his declaration of _ 
making no additions to the liberties of the people, he: 
fancied he referved to himfelf a power of treading in 

the footfteps of former tyrants, and exerting every at 
of violation which had been practifed by the moft fortu- . ri 
nate and moft powerful of the Englifh fovereigns. The 30m 
Commons, more accurate in their judgment, had fa- — 
thomed the true ftate of the queftion: Though the fta- 
tutes framed by their anceftors to fecure public Liberty — 
had, through a concurrence of favourable circumftances, —- 
been often infringed with impunity by tyrannical princes, 
yet they had never been cancelled; and their late con- 
firmation on the fubject of the apparent abufe of power . 
gave them a luftre which time and neglect had in fome ss 
meafure darkened. The frequent declarations which | 
Charles made that he had only confirmed the ancient Li- | 
berties of the people, by his affent to the Petition of —- 
Right, added to its importance, and gave it the weight oa 
of an uncontrevertible inheritance. No expreflionscould — 
be more plain or full than the words of the Petition, or 
more directly contrary to what Charles had affirmed; 
namely, that tonnage and poundage was excluded from 
the fenfe of it, The Comenay ape. that x: could 
ot 
wy : 


es ie 


ib al) 


bad 


“CHARLES I. 


not be compelled to contribute any tax, tallage, aid, or Ann. 1628. 


other like charge, but by common confent in parliament. 
The vaft increafe of trade, and the arbitrary charges’ im- 


_ pofed on it by the late and prefent King, had brought 


in immenfe fums to the government. This growing 
fund Charles, on the opinion of his privy-council, and 
fome of the moft corrupted of his judges, thought him- 
felf inconteftably poflefled of: But this was in contra- 
diction to the avowed claims of the Commons, who had 


early protefted againft thefe pretenfions ; and, from un- 


. 


deniable precedents, proved the juftnefs of their claims *. 
Such being the ftate of the “ quettion, there muft have 
been a particular claufe in the Petition, excluding ton- - 
nage and poundage, to. have given rationality to Charles’s. 
peremptory affirmations. 


Srioux the conclufion of this feffion, the Lords had ae -vol. 
given the Commons ample fatisfaction on the juftice & feq 


they demanded on the offender Manwaring. This cri- 
minal was fentenced to fine and imprifonment;_. to 
make fubmiflion and acknowledgment of his offences at 
the bar of both houfes ; to be fufpended for the term 
of three years from the exercifing of the miniftry; to be 
difabled for ever to preach at court; to be difabled for 
ever from having any ecclefiaftical dignity ; that his 


- book being worthy to be burnt, his majefty be moved 


to grant a ‘proclamation to call in the printed copies, that 
thepmnight:. be burnt in London, and in both the uni- | 


’* The Commons fhew in their remonftrance, that a certain fpace of 
intermiffion was often obferved in this grant, that the right of the 
fabject aah be more nea . 


verfities 5 


a ‘3 ~ 
hes 438 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

& 5 a Ann, 1628. verlities ; ; and for the inhibiting the printing thereof 

be cat hereafter, upon a great penalty *. When Manwaring 


was firft brought to the bar, he attempted to vindicate 
his writings on the fame abfurd principles on which he » 
had eftablifhed his doctrine +. On this occafion the re- 


,. " * The Lords made a kind of apology for a fentence which they 
a . termed too mild for the offences of the criminal; the attributing to 
the King a participation of God’s omnipotence, and an abfolute power 
of government, his {candalous affertions againft parliaments, and his 
branding thofe gentlemen with damnation who refufed the loan, | ea 
Part of the charge the Commons brought againft him was the preach- : 
ing a fecond fermon of the fame tendency as the firft, at his parifh- 
4 - church, after the commencement of the parliament. Parliam. Hif. 
» vol. VIII. p. 204, 210. . 


+ Relying on a favourable interpretation from the bifhops, he de- 
fired the fpiritual lords might be judges of the inferences and logical 
deduétions in his fermons. The houfe reprimanded him for this re- = 1a 
queft, as an attempt to divide his judges. | yee 
On an enquiry the Lords had made touching the authorizing of this 
, publication, Montaign bifhop of London, and Laud bifhop of Bath - 
and Wells, flung the whole blame on the King, and protefted that the > hae 
fermon was publifhed by his abfolute command, and not by their ap- bi 
probation. Parl, Hit, vol. VII. p.205, 212, & feg. J oa 
During the courfe of this feffion, the lord Suffolk had been accufed 
by Sir John Strangeways of having averred that Mr. Selden had erafed 


a record, and deferved to be hanged for it. This the earl had the “i 
meannefs to deny : He was confuted by feveral witnefles. ‘ournals of 
the Commons, vol.1. p. 883, & feq. P 


1 The houfe of Lords. paffed a very arbitrary Canes onone Wake- 

land, who had printed an erroneous lift of the names of the nobility. 

; He was byought to the bar of their houfe, where he produced a war- — 
rant under the hand_of fecretary Conway: this warrant was judged in- 

- fufficient for his indemnification ; he was ordered to ftand committed to 

. “ the Fleet, and commanded to bring in his books to be burnt, and print se +f 

) no more of that nature without the approbation of the wider: it . . 

| Fournal of the Lords, vol. I. p. 420 


CHARLES | 


verend prelate Abbot reprimanded him for me ill ufe Of Ans. 1628. 


the favour that houfe had done him in giving him 
time to recollect himfelf before he was called to anfwer. 
“ I fee in you, fays he, that there are fome men who 


are miferi, fed non miferendi, 1 am forry to hear fuch an 


anfwer to the accufation of the Commons.” To this 
the archbifhop added, that he both mifliked and ab- 
horred his fermons: Touching the participation they 
gave the King with God, that it was very blafphemy; — 


' touching the other his affertion, that there is no juftice 


but between equals, not between God and man, the pa- 
rent and his children, nor between the King and his 
people, it was impious and falfe, and that he had drawn 
an infamy upon his country and religion. The arch- 
bifhop ended this admonition with putting Manwaring 
in mind of the judgment inflicted by the king of Cy- 
prus on the philofopher Anafarchis, to be brayed in a 
brazen mortar, as a proper judgment on all flatterers of 
princes. 


- END of the FIRST VOLUME. 


A hth 
AIS 


cy 


1 


4 


7 
~~ Webyt, Ea 


" 

, i 

f o . i a7 

s 
. * 
ae } 
‘ 
a 
care 
4 . re te : “4 an 
‘ ; ps - 
4 i 
= 
: 
e 
, F 
4 
"2 ? 
a "7 
P 


Bayt SDE ie MDZ PiatiserunysZentrun 
StaatsBibliothet Digitale Bibliothek 


Macaulay, Catharine, 1731-1791 


‘The History Of England From The Accession Of lames | To The Elevation Of 
‘The House Of Hanover 


Bd. 1 


London 1766 


4 Brit, 72-1 
urn:nbnide:bvb:12-bsb10225265-2