V 


3to  Ijtt  JVitamB 


IN  THE  CUSTODY  OF  TME 

BOSTON     PUBLIC   LIBRARY. 


SHELF    N° 


T    H    I 


HIST 


O      R      Y 


O    F 


G      R      E 


C      E 


THE     FIRST    VO  L  U  M  E. 


THE 


HISTORY 


O    F 


GREECE. 


By     WILLIAM     MITFORD,     Eiq. 


THE    FIRST     VOLUME. 


'*  ^ 


LONDON: 

PRINTED     BY     T.     WRIGHT, 

For  J.  Murray,   No  32,   Fleet-ftreetj    and  J.  Rob  son,    in  New  Bond-rtreet. 

M  DCC  LXXXIV. 


+  *AUA*$  T-3.  4 


IT    may  probably  be  expected,   particularly  of  an  un- 
known writer,   in  offering   to  the  Public  at  this  day 
a  Hiftory  of  Greece,    to  give   fome  prefatory  account  of 
his  deiign.      Yet  it  is  fcarcely  poflible,  and  would  at  beft 
be  tedious,    to  apologize  adequately    in  a  preface  for   a 
work   whofe  fubjecl:  is   fo  extenfive  and   Co  complicated, 
and  whofe  materials  are  at  the   fame  time  fo  various  and 
fo   defective.      The   affertion  is   little   hazardous   that   a 
Hiftory  of  Greece  remains  yet  among  the  defiderata  of 
literature.      But  the  very  length  of  time    through  which 
the  want  has  continued,   while  Grecian  hiftory  has  more 
or  lefs  ingaged  the  attention  of  every  man  of  letters,  may 
give  the  greater  appearance  of  prefumption  to  any  hope 
of  fupplying  it.      The  reality  of  the  want  indeed  alone 
can  juftify  the  endeavour ;  and  for  the  execution  no  apo- 
logy will  avail  if  the  work  itfelf  cannot  be  its  own  advo- 
cate.     With    thefe   confederations,   defirous  of   avoiding 
equally  negligence  and  tedioufnefs,  without  farther  pre- 
face,  but  not  without  anxious  expectation  of  the  public 
judgement,  the  author  fubmits  the  following  Hiftory  to 
the  world.  °' 


CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER     I. 

The    Hiilory    of    Greece,    from    the    earlieft    Accounts    to  the 

Trojan  War. 

Sect.  I.  State  of  the  World  before  the  firft  Accounts  of  Greece,  Afj'yria,  Syria, 
and  Egypt  civilized;  the  reft  barbarous  or  uninhabited.  Geographical  De- 
fcription  of  Greece.  Unfettled  Population  of  the  early  Ages.  Spirit  of  War 
and  Robbery.  'The  Phenicians  navigate  the  Grecian  Seas,  and  fettle  on  the 
Coafts.  »  -  -  -  -  i 

Sect.  II.  Of  the  f out  hern  Provinces  of  Greece  from  the  earlieft  Accounts  to  the 
Trojan  War.  Crete:  Minos.  Sicyon.  Corinth.  Argos :  Pelafgian  Dominion 
in  Greece  :  Egyptian  Colonies  in  Greece :  Danaus :  Acriftus :  Perfeus.  Pifa. 
Colonies  from  Phrygia  and  Thejpily  under  Pelops.  Hercules.  Atreus  :  Domi- 
nion of  the  Family  of  Pelops :    Agamemnon.     Lacedamon.  -         -  13 

Sect.  III.  Of  the  northern  Provinces  of  Greece  from  the  earlieft  Accounts  to  the 
Trojan  War.  Theffaly :  Tempe :  Deucalion's  Flood :  Centaurs :  Jafon.  Ar- 
gcnautic  Expedition.  Bo:otia  :  Flood  of  Ogyges :  Thebes.  Mtolia.  Attica  : 
Cecrops  :  Athens  :  Mgeus :  Thefeus :  Ariadne.  Improvement  of  the  Athe- 
nian Government  by  Thefeus:  The  Athenians  the  firft  civilized  People  of 
Greece.  -  -  -  -  _  27 

CHAPTER     II. 

Of  the  early  State  of  Asia  Minor,   and   of  the  Trojan  War. 

Early  People  of  the  sveftem  Parts  of  Afia  Minor.     Origin  and  Progrefs  of  the 
Trojan  State.     Licentious  Manners  of  the  early  Ages.     Early  Hoftilities  between 

a  2  Greece 


CONTENTS. 

Greece  and  Afia.  Expedition  of  Paris:  Rope  of  Helen:  League  of  the 
Grecian  Princes:  Sacrifice  of  Iphigeneia :  Difficulties  of  the  Greeks  In  the 
Trojan  War:  Troy  taken  :  Return  of  the  Greeks :  Confequences  of  their /lb- 
fence  :  Affaffinatlon  of  Agamemnon.  '  Credit  due  to  Homer's  hlfiorical  evidence. 
Refemilame  of  the  Trojan  War  to  circumflances  in  modem  Hlflory.  50 

CHAPTER     III. 

Of  the  Religion,  Government,  Jurifprudence,  Science,  Arts,  Com- 
merce, and  Manners  of  the  early  Greeks. 

Sect.  I.  Of  the  Progrefs  of  Things  from  the  Eaft  into  Greece,  and  of  the  Reli- 
gion of  the  early  Greeks.  -  -  .         ....         61 

Sect.  II.  Of  the  Government  and  Jurifprudence  of  the  early  Greeks.  76 

Sect.  III.  Of  Science,  Arts,  and  Commerce  among  the  early  Greeks.  Letters : 
Language  :  Poetry :  Mujic.  Hufhandry :  Traffic.  Mafonry.  Manufactures  : 
Commerce.     Art  of  War.     Navigation.     Afironomy.     Phyfic.  S3 

Sect.  IV.    Of  the  Manners  of  the  early  Greeks.         -  109 

CHAPTER     IV. 

The  Hiflory  of  Greece,  from  the  Trojan  War  to  the  Return  of 
the  Heracleids  ;  and  of  the  Grecian  Oracles,  the  Council  of 
Amphictyons,  and  the  Olympian  Games. 

Sect.  I.  Reftoratlon  of  Orejlcs  to  the  Throne  of  Argos.  Conqueft  of  Peloponnefus 
by  the  Dorians  under  the  Heracleids,  commonly  called  the  Return  of  the  Hera- 
cleids.    DiftinElion  of  the  Greek  Nation  into  Ionic,  Aivlic,  Attic,  Doric.      123 

Sect.  II.  Of  the  Origin  and  Progrefs  of  Oracles.  -  128 

Sect..  III.  Of  the  Origin  and  Conflltution  of  the  Council  of  AmphiStyons.  137 

Sect.  IV.  Early  DIJfentlons  of  the  Heracleid  Princes.  Unfettled  State  of  Pelo- 
ponnefus. Origin  of  the  Grecian  Games.  hijlitutlcn  of  the  Olympic  Feftival 
by  Iphitus  King  of  tlis.  -  -  143 

APPENDIX    to    the    FOURTH    CHAPTER. 

Of  the  Chronology  of  Grecian  Hlflory.  -  *  -  1 50 

CHAPTER 


CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER     V. 

The  Hiftory  of  the  Southern  Provinces  of  Greece,  from  the  Return 
of  the  Heracleids  to  the  Completion  of  the  Conquefl  of  Mes- 
senia  by  the  Lacedemonians. 

Sect.  I.  Recapitulation  of  Events  in  Greece.  General  Change  of  Governments  from 
Monarchal  to  Republican,  Different  kinds  of  Government  difiinguijhed  by  the 
Greeks.     Nummary  of  the  Hiftories  of  Crete,  Argos,  Corinth,  Eleia,  Arcadia.  172 

Sect.  II.   Hift'ry  of  Lacedamon.     Legiflation  of  Lycurgus.  -  1  83 

Sect.  IIF.  Hiftory  of  Meffenia  from  foe  Return  of  the  Heracleids,  and  of  Lace- 
dx-.non  frjm  the  Legiflation  of  Lycurgus  to  the  completion  of  the  Conquefl  of 
Meffenia  hy  the  Lacedaemonians.  '    '  -  -  -  206 

CHAPTER     VI. 

Summary  Vi-w  of  the  State  of  the  Northern  Provinces  of  Greece, 
and  of  the  Ellablifhnient  of  the  early  Grecian  Colonies;  with 
the  Hiftory  of  Athens  from  the  Trojan  War  to  the  firft  public 
Tran faction  with  Persia. 

Sect.  I.  View  of  the  State  of  the  Northern  Provinces  of  Greece  after  th-'  Trojan 
War.  Hifto-y  of  A: hens  from  the  Trojan  War  to  the  Abolition  of  Royalty,  and 
the  Appointment  of  Hereditary  Archons.  -  .-  229 

Sect.  II.  Of  the  Aiolic  and  Ionic  Migrations,  and  of  the  Eflabhfbment  of  Gre- 
cian Colonies  in  1ft a  Minor,  Thrace,  Cyprus,  Africa,  Sicily,  and  Italy.  234 

Sect.  III.  The  Hiftory  of  Athens  from  the  Abolition  of  Royalty  to  tie  Legiflation 
of  Solon.  -  -  242 

Sect.  IV.  Reformation  of  the  Athenian  Government  and  fieri fprudence  by  So- 
lon. -  -  -  -  -251 

Sect.  V.  The  Hiftory  rf  Athens  from  the  Legiflation  of  Solon  to  the  Expuljion  of 
the  Peiftftratids  and  the  firft  public  Tranfaciion  with  Perfia^  ~  26S 


CH  APTER 


CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER     VIL 

View  of  the  Nations  politically  conneded  with  Greece. 

Sect.  I.  Viciv  of  the  Nations  politically  connected  with  Greece:  Lydia:  Scythia  : 
Affyria  :  Perfia.  Reduction  of  the  Afiatic  Greeks  under  the  Perjian  Dominion 
by  Cyrus.  -  -  -  286 

Sect.  II.  Accejfion  of  Cambyfes  to  the  throne  of  Perfia.  Acquifition  cf  Tyre  and 
Conqueft  of  Egypt  ly  the  Perfians.  Accejfion  of  Darius.  Conflitution  of  the 
Per/tan  Empire :  Perfian  Religion.  -  -  300 

Sect.  III.  Conquff  if  Thrace,  and  Invafion  of  European  Scythia  by  Darius. 
SubmiJJion  of  Macedonia  to  the  Perfian  Empire.  State  of  the  ALgean  JJJands,  and 
Hijlory  of  Pdyoates  tyrant  of  Samos.  Situation  of  the  Grecian  People  under 
the  Ptrfian  Dominion.  -  -  -  307 

CHAPTER     VIII. 

Continuation  of  the  Hiftory  of  Greece  during  the  Reign  of  Darius 

King  of  Persia. 

Sect.  I.  Immediate  Caufes  of  the  Wars  between  Greece  and  Perfia.  Perfian  Ex- 
pedition againft  Naxos.  Re-volt  of  the  Afian  Greeks  againft  the  Perfian  Go- 
vernment. -  -  -  315 

Sect.  II.  Affairs  of  Athens.  Iwoajian  of  Attica  by  the  Peloponnefians,  Boeotians, 
and  Eubceans.  The  Athenians  cjftft  the  Ionia ns  againft  Perfia.  All  the  Afiatic 
Grecian  States  again  reduced  under  the  Perfian  Dominion.  Hiftory  of  the  Athe- 
nian Colony  in  the  Thracian  Chcrfonefe.  liberal  Adminiflration-of  the  conquered 
Provinces  under  the  Perfian  Dominion.  -  -  322 

Sect.  III.  Firft  Perfian  Armament  againft  Greece  under  Mardonius :  proceeds  no 
farther  than  Macedonia.  The  Grecian  Cities  fummoned  by  Heralds  to  ackncw- 
lege  Subjiclion  to  the  Perfian  Empire.  Internal  Feuds  in  Greece :  War  of  Athens 
and  ASgina.  -  -  _  -  336 

Sect.  IV.  Second  Perfian  Armament  againft  Greece  under  Datis  and  Art aph ernes: 
reduces  the  I/lands  of  the  Aigean  :  invades  Attica.     Battle  of  Marathon.     341 


CONTENTS. 

Sect.  V.  Growing  Ambition  of  Athens.  Effetls  of  Party-fpirit  at  Athens.  Ex- 
traordinary Honors  to  the  Memory  of  Harmodtus  and  Ariftogeiton.  Impeachment 
and  Death  of  Miltiades.  -  -  -  351 

CHAPTER     IX. 

The  Hiftory  of  Greece  from  the  Acceffion  of  Xerxes  to  the  Throne 
of  Persia,  till  the  Conclufion  of  the  nrft  Campaign  of  that  Mo- 
narch's Expedition  againft  Greece. 

Sect.  I.  Acceffwn  of  Xerxes  to  the  Thrrne  of  perfia.  Immenfe  Preparations  by 
the  Court  of  Perfia  for  Conqueft  in  Europe.  Affembly  of  the  Army  at  Sardis, 
and  of  the  Fleet  in  the  Hellefpont.  March  of  the  A>  my.  Muftcr  cf  the 
Army.     Arrival  of  the  Army  and  Fleet  at  Thcrme  in  Macedonia.  254- 

Sect.  FI.  State  of  Greece  at  the  Time  of  the  Invafwn  under  Xerxes.  Rrfponfes 
of  the  Delphian  Oracle  concerning  the  Invafion.  Meafures  for  forming  a  con- 
federacy of  Grecian  Commonwealths.  Difunicn  among  the  Greeks.  Affembly 
of  Deputies  from  the  confederated  Common-wealths  at  Corinth,  fhe  D  fence  of 
Theffaly  given  up  by  the  Confederates.  Meafures  for  defending  the  Pafs  of 
Thermopylae.         -  -  -  -  -  -  -362 

Sect.  III.  The  Grecian  Army  takes  its  Station  at  Thermopylae ;  the  Fleet  at  Ar- 
Umifium.  Refpmfes  of  the  Delphian  Oracle.  The  Per/tan  Fleet  proceeds  to 
Sepias  ;  the  Army  to  Thermopylae.  Numbers  of  the  Perjian  Forces.  Storm  and 
Shipwreck  at  Sepias.     Battle  of  Thermopylae.  -  -         -         -  -y$ 

Sect.  IV.  Numbers  of  the  Grecian  Fleet.  Sea-fights  off  Artanifmm.  Retreat 
of  the  Grecian  Fleet.  March  of  the  Perjian  Army  toward  Athens.  Attempt 
againft  Delphi.  -  -  -  -  -         -         3   S 

Sect.  V.  Unfteady  Counftls  of  the  Grecian  Confederacy.  The  Athenians,  defer  ted 
by  the  Pelop07inefians,  remove  their  Families  from  Attica.  Ariflides.  Themif- 
tocles.  Athens  taken  by  the  Perfians.  Artemi/ia.  Ancient  Manner  cf  Naval 
Aclion.     Battle  of  Salamis.     Return  of  Xerxes  into  Afia.         -         -        398 


CHAPTER 


CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER     X. 

The  Hiflory  of  Greece  from  the  Battle  of  Salamis  to  the  Conclu- 
iion  of  the  Persian  Invafion. 

Sect  I.  Return  of  the  Athenians  to  their  Country.  Meafures  of  the  Grecian 
Fleet.  Dedications  to  the  Gods  for  the  Viclory  at  Salamis.  Honors  paid 
to  Themiflocles.  Revolt  of  Chalcidice  from  the  Per/tans.  Siege  of  Potidaa 
by  Artabazus.  -_-'_'_  414 

Sect.  II.  Preparations  for  the  Campaign.  Speeches  of  Alexander  King  of  Ma- 
cedonia, of  the  Lacedamonian  Ambaffador,  and  of  the  Athenian  Minijler  in  the 
Athenian  Affemlly.  'The  Athenians  a  fecond  Time  quit  Attica.  Zeal  of  the 
Athenian  People  for  the  profecution  of  the  Perfian  War.         -  -        418 

Sect.  III.  Campaign  in  Bcvotia.     Battle  of  Plattea.     Puni/hment  of  Thebes.  425 

Sect.  IV.  Meafures  of  the  Grecian  Fleet.  Battle  of  Mycale.  Conclufion  of  that 
called  by  Grecian  Writers  the  Perfian  or  Median  War.         -  -  445 


ERRORS     of    the     PRESS. 

Page  288,   Note  *  for  y.«ToixE^£»oi  read  xaToixti/xEroi. 

350,  line  10,  for  of  Agincourt  and  Poitiers,  read,  of  Crecy,   Poitiers,    and  above  all  of 

Azincour. 

—  387,  1.   7.  for  accidently,  read  accidentally. 

—  389,  1.  3.  from  the  bottom,  for  misfortunes,  read  misfortune. 


THE 


HISTORY 


O     F 


GREECE. 


CHAP.         I. 

The  Hiflory  of  Greece,  from  the  earlieft  Accounts  to 

the  Trojan  War. 


SECT.         I. 

State  of  the  World  before  the  firjl  Accounts  of  Greece.  AJ/yria,  Syria, 
and  Egypt  civilized  •,  the  reft  barbarous  or  uninhabited.  Geographi- 
cal Defcription  of  Greece.  Unfettled  Population  of  the  early  Ages. 
Spirit  of  War  and  Robbery.  The  Phenicians  navigate  the  Grecian 
Seas,  and  fettle  on  the  Coajls. 


I 


THE  firft  accounts  of  Greece  are  derived  from  ages  long  be-     chap.  I. 
fore  the  common  ufe  of  letters  in  the  country ;  yet  among     sect  I 
its  earlieft  traditions  we  find  many  things  highly  interefting.      v^Y^ 


Known  at  an  era  far  beyond  all  hiftory  of  any  other  part  of  Europe, 
its  people  neverthelefs  preferved  report  of  the  time  when  their  coun- 

B  try 


2  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  I.  try  was  uninhabited,  and  when  their  forefathers  lived  elfewhere. 
•T-  Among  the  effects  of  this  extreme  antiquity  one  is  particularly 
linking :  the  oldeft  traditionary  memorials  of  Greece  relate,  not  to 
war  and  conqueft,  generally  the  only  materials  for  the  annals  of  bar- 
barous ages,  but  to  the  invention  or  introduction  of  inftitutions  of 
the  firft  neceflity  to  political  fociety,  and  of  arts  even  of  the  firft  ne- 
ceflity to  human  life.  Hence,  while  the  origin  of  other  ancient  na- 
tions is  neceffarily  left  to  the  conjectures  of  the  antiquarian,  that  of 
the  Grecian  people  feems  to  demand  fome  inquiry  from  the  hiftorian. 
Indeed  here,  as  on  many  other  occafions,  the  hiftorian  of  Greece 
will  have  occaiion  to  exerciie  his  caution  and  forbearance  not  lefs 
than  his  diligence,  while  he  traverfes  regions  where  curiofity  and 
fancy  may  find  endlefs  temptation  to  wander.  But  the  earlieft  tra- 
ditions of  that  country  intereft  in  fo  many  ways,  and  through  fo 
many  means,  that  he  would  fcarcely  be  forgiven  the  omiflion  of  all 
confideration  of  the  times  to  which  they  relate. 

It  has  been  not  uncommon,  for  the  purpofe  of  inveftigatino-  the 
properties  of  human  nature,  and  the  progrefs  of  fociety,  to  confider 
man  in  a  ftate  abfolutely  uncultivated ;  full  grown,  having  all  the 
powers  of  body  and  mind  in  mature  perfection,  but  wholly  without 
inftruction  or  information  of  any  kind.  Yet  whatfoever  advantages 
may  be  propofed  from  fpeculation  upon  the  fubject,  it  may  well  be 
doubted  whether  a  human  pair  in  luch  a  ftate  ever  really  exifted. ; 
and  if  we  proceed  to  inquire  whence  they  could  come,  the  fortuitous 
concurrence  of  atoms  fancied  by  Democritus  and  Epicurus  will  be 
found  perhaps  as  probable  an  origin  for  them  as  it  is  poflible  for  ima- 
gination to  devife.  But  fince  the  deep  refearches  of  modern  philo- 
fophers  in  natural  hiftory,  affifted  by  the  extenfive  difcoveries  of 
modern  navigators,  through  the  great  inlargement  of  our  acquaint- 
ance with  the  face  of  our  globe,  have  opened  fo  many  new  fources 
of  wonder,  without  affording  any  adequate  means  to  arrive  at  the 
caufes  of  the  phenomena,  new  objections  have  been  made  to  the 
Mofaic  hiftory  of  the.  firft  ages  of  the  world;   which,  it  has  been 

urged, 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  3 

urged,  could  never  be  intended  to  relate  to  the  whole  earth,  but  to  CHAP.  I. 
thofe  parts  only  with  which  the  jewifh  people  had  more  immediate  SECT.  I. 
concern.  Yet  whatfoever  difficulties  may  occur  in  that  concife  hif- 
torical  fketch,  uncertain  in  fome  places  from  extreme  antiquity  of 
idiom,  injured  perhaps  in  lbme  through  multifarious  tranfeription, 
and  in  others  fhovving  things  only  through  the  veil  of  allegory  (a 
mode  of  writing  which,  whatloever  its  advantages,  or  whatfoever 
its  inconveniencies,  the  vviteit  men  of  antiquity  never  imputed  either 
to  fraud,  or  folly  in  the  writer  *),  flill  invention  has  never  been 
able  to  form  any  theory  equally  confident  with  the  principles  of  the 
moil  heightened  philolbphy  f,  or  equally  confonant  to  the  moft  au- 
thentic tefcimonies  remaining  Irom  remoteft  ages,  whether  tranf- 
mitted  by  human  tradition,  or  borne  in  the  face  of  nature.  Not 
therefore  to  inquire  after  that  ftate  of  man  wholly  untaught  and  un- 
connected, which  philofophers  have  invented  for  purpofes  of  fpecu- 
lation  ;  nor  to  attempt,  which  were  indeed  beyond  our  object,  the 
tracing  of  things  to  their  origin  through  the  obfeure  and  broken 
path  alone  afforded  by  the  Hebrew  writers;  the  fubjedl  before  us 
icems  to  refer  for  its  fource  to  a  remarkable  facl  mentioned  by  thofe 
writers,  to  which  ftrong  collateral  teftimony  is  found  both  in  the 
oldeft  gentile  authors,  and  in  the  known  ftate  of  things.  Mankind, 
according  to  the  moft  ancient  of  hiftorians,  confiderably  informed  Genefis,  c.  x. 
and  polifhed,  but  inhabiting  yet  only  a  fmall  portion  of  the  earth, 
was  infpired  generally  with  a  fpirit  of  emigration.  What  gave  at 
the  time  peculiar  energy  to  this  fpirit,  which  feems  always  to  have 
exifted  extenlively  among  men,  though  commentators  with  bold 
abfurdity  have  undertaken  to  explain,  the  hiftorian  himfelf  is  far 
from  giving  full   information  %.     All  hiftory,  however,  proves  that 

*  The  original  and    principal    purpofe   of  1.  i.  c.  z.     This  fubjeft  is  learnedly  treated  in 
that  allegoric  ilile  which   has  always  been  fa-  the  fecond  volume  of  Biihop  Warburton's  Di- 
miliar  in. the  EMt,  is  well  explained  in  few  vine  Legation  of  Moles,  and  ingeniously  corn- 
words   by  Macrobius :   Philofophi,   fi   quid  de  mented   upon  in  Governor  Pownall's  Treatife 
his  (fummo  Deo  et  niente)  affignare  conantur  on  the  Study  of  Antiquities, 
qua;  non    fermonem  tantuminodo,   fed  cogita-  f  See  Pownall's  Treatife,  p.  130. 
tionem  quoque  humanam   fuperant,  ad   limi-  J   '  The  fchemes   that  men  of  warm  ima- 
litudines  &  exempla  confugiunt.   Somn.  Scip.  '  gination  have  raifed  from  a  Single  expref- 

B  2  '  fion 


CHAP. 
SECT. 


Herodot. 
c.  193. 
Strabo,  1. 


1.  i, 


xvi 


Herodot 
c.  109. 


1.  ii, 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

fuch  a  fpirit  has  operated  over  the  far  greater  part  of  the  globe ;  and 
we  know  that  it  has  never  yet  ceafed  to  actuate,  in  a  greater  or  lefs 
degree,  a  large  portion  of  mankind,  among  whom  the  numberlefs 
hords  that,  {till  wander  over  the  immenfe  continent  ftretchino-  from 
the  north  of  European  Turkey  to  the  north  of  China,  are  remark- 
able. The  Mofaic  writings  then,  the  general  tenor  of  tradition  pre- 
ferred by  heathen  authors  *,  and  the  mod  authentic  teflimonies  of 
whatfoever  kind  of  the  irate  of  things  in  the  early  ages  ;  veftiges  of 
art  and  monuments  of  barbarifm,  the  unknown  origin  of  the  moil: 
abftrufe  fciences,  and  their  known  tranfmiflion  from  nation  to  na- 
tion ;  all  combine  to  indicate  the  prefervation  of  civility  and  know- 
lege,  under  favor  of  particular  circumftances,  among  a  fmall  part 
of  mankind  -,  while  the  reft,  amid  innumerable  migrations,  degene- 
rated into  barbarians  and  favages. 

The  provinces  bordering  upon  the  river  Euphrates,  fuppofed  by 
many  to  have  been  the  firft  fettled  after  that  general  flood  to  which 
every  part  of  the  earth  feems  fcarcely  lefs  to  bear  teftimony  than  the 
writings  of  Mofes,  were  certainly  among  the  firft  that  became  po- 
pulous. Here,  from  the  climate,  the  wants  of  man  are  compara- 
tively few  ;  and  thofe  plentifully  fupplied  by  a  foil  of  exuberant 
fertility,  level  to  a  vaft  extent,  naturally  unincumbered  with  wood, 
and  confequently  little  expofed  to  depredation  from  beafts  of  prey  f . 
The  families  remaining  in  this  country  were  not  likely  foon  to  lofe 
the  civility,  the  arts,  and  the  fcience  of  their  forefathers.  Accord- 
ingly, whether  they  retained,  or  whether  they  invented,  aftronomy 
and   dialling  exifted  among  the  Babylonians  at  a  period  beyond  all 


'  Con  in  the  Bible,  and  fometimes  from  the 
'  fuppofition  of  a  faft  nowhere  to  be  found, 
*  are  aftoniihing.  If  you  believe  the  He- 
'  brew  doclors,  the  language  of  men,  which 
'  till  that  time  (the  building  of  Babel)  had 
'  been  one,  was  divided  into  feventy  lan- 
'  guages.  Eut  of  the  miraculous  divifion  of 
'  languages  there  is  not  one  word  in  the  Bi- 
'  ble.'  Diflertation  on  the  Origin  of  Lan- 
guages, by  Dr.   Gregory  Sharpe,  fecond  ed. 


p.  24.  where  are  fome  judicious  obfervations 
on  the  Mofaic  account  of  the  difperfion  of 
mankind. 

*  This  has  been  largely  collected  by  Mr. 
Bryant,  in  his  Analyfis  of  Ancient  Mythology. 

f  The  geography  of  this  country  has  been 
inveftigated,  and  Herodotus's  account  of  it 
confirmed,  by  the  diligence  and  accurate 
judgement  of  Mr.  Gibbon,  in  his  Hi  Story  of 
the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire. 


means 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  5 

means  of  inveftigating  their  rife  j  and  notvvithflanding  the  deep  ob-  CHAP.  I. 
fcurity  in  which  the  origin  of  letters  is  involved,  we  ftill-  can  trace  SECT.  I. 
every  known  alphabet  to  the  neighbourhood  at  leafl  of  Babylon. 

Of  the  families  who  went  in  queft 'of  new  fettlements,  or  who 
wandered,  perhaps  many  of  them,  without  any  decided  intention  of 
fettling,  thofe  who  took  poffeffion  of  Egypt  feem  to  have  been  the 
mod  fortunate.  This  country,  being  periodically  overflowed  by  the 
Nile,  receives  thus  a  kind  of  tillage,  as  well  as  a  very  rich  manuring ;    Diodor.Sic. 

fo    that,    befide   producing:    fpontaneoufly    in   wonderful   abundance   *•  '■  c;  I0,  & 

.  .  .  43.  &  80. 

many  herbs  and  roots  almoft  peculiar   to  itfelf,   which  form  a  coarfe 

but  wholefome  food,   it   is  moreover   thus  very  advantageoufly  pre- 
pared by  the  hand  of  nature  almoft  alone,  for  the  reception  of  any 
grain  that  man  may  throw  into  it.     The  benefit  of  thefe  temporary 
floods,   which  might  otherwife  appear  at  firft  view  to  bring  only  de- 
flation  upon  a  country,  would  have   been  learnt  from   the  inferior 
inundations  of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  which  are  alfo  periodical. 
Thus  invited,  therefore,  the  occupants  of  Egypt  gave  their  atten- 
tion to  the  culture  of  grain  :   and  as  the  fertility  of  the  foil  made  the 
returns    prodigioufly    great,    populoufnefs    quickly    followed    abun 
dance;  polity  became  neceffary ;  and  we  are  told  that  in  this  coun- 
try was  conflituted  the  fir  ft  regular  government :   by  which  feems  to 
be   meant  the  firft  government  in  which  various  rights  and  various 
functions  were  regularly  afligned  to  different  ranks  of  men.     Science 
appears  to   have  originated  in  Afia.      Of  the  arts,  efpecially  thofe 
more  immediately  affecting  the   well-being   of  numerous   focieties, 
Egypt  was  probably  the  mother  of  many,  as  flie  was  certainly  the  ue,.0jot  1  •• 
nurfe  of  mod.     Geometry  is  faid  to  have  been  the  offspring  of  the   jy1^9^- 
peculiar  neceffity  of  the  country;  for  the  annual  overflowings  of  the  c.  81. 
Nile  obliterating  ordinary  land-marks,  that  fcience  alone  could  af-  p.^--'^' fsV1' 
certain  the  boundaries  of  property. 

The  Angularly  daring  and  unfeeling  hardinefs  attributed  by  the  Herat,  ode  -. 
Roman  lyrift  to  the  man  who  firft  committed  himfelf  in  a  frail  bark      '• 
to  the  winds  and  waves,  appears  by  no  means  neceffary  for  the  origin 

of 


6  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  r.  of  navigation.  In  Co  warm  a  climate  as  the  middle  of  Afia,  bathing 
SECT.  r.  would  be  a  common  refreshment  and  recreation;  and  the  art  of 
fwimming,  efpecially  when  fo  many  terreflrial  animals  were  feen  to 
fwim  naturally,  could  not  be  long  in  acquiring.  The  ftrft  at- 
tempt at  the  management  of  a  boat  was  thus  deprived  of  all  ter- 
ror; and  as  it  could  not  efcape  oblervation  that  wood  floated  natu- 
rally, and  that  the  largeft  bodies  floating  were  eafily  moved,  the 
conitruclion  and  ufe  of  canoos  required  no  great  ftretch  of  invention. 
Every  circumftance  therefore  leads  to  fuppofe,  that  vends  of  that 
fimple  contrivance  were  employed  on  river.-  before  the  firft  emigra- 
tions took  place.  The  occupants  of  Phenicia,  coming  to  the  coall 
of  the  Mediterranean  with  thefe  {lender  rudiments  of  naval  know- 
lege,  would  find  many  inducements  to  attempt  the  improvement  of 
the  art.  Their  country,  little  fruitful  in  corn,  but  abounding  with 
the  fined  timber,  had  a  ready  communication  by  fea  and  the  mouths 
of  the  Nile  with  Egypt;  which,  with  all  its  fertility,  being  almoft 
confined  to  the  production  of  annual  plants,  had  occafion  for  many 
things  that  Phenicia  could  fupply.     Thus  arofe  commerce. 

Not  then  to  extend  our  inquiry  to  thofe  remote  and  inhofpitable 
though  polifhed  regions  of  the  Eaft,  whofe  hiflory  is  known  only 
from  writings  without  an  alphabet,  where  characters  are  ten  times 
more  numerous  than  words,  and  where  the  ftudy  of  a  long  life 
fcarcely  futfices  for  learning  to  read,  the  Aflyrians,  the  Egyptians, 
and  the  inhabitants  of  the  countries  between  them  feem  to  have  been 
the  only  people  who  never  funk  to  utter  barbarifm.  AiTyria  was  a 
powerful  empire,  Egypt  a  moil:  populous  country  governed  by  a  very 
refined  polity,  and  Sidon  an  opulent  city  abounding  with  manufac- 
tures, and  carrying  on  extenfive  commerce,  when  the  Greeks,  igno- 
rant of  the  moft  obvious  and  neceflary  arts,  are  faid  to  have  fed 
upon  acorns.  Yet  was  Greece  the  firft  country  of  Europe  that 
emerged  from  barbarifm  ;  and  this  advantage  it  feems  to  have  owed 
intirely  to  its  readier  means  of  communication  with  the  civilized 
nations  of  the  Eaft. 

The 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  7 

The  migrating  hords    moftly   found   countries    overgrown  with     CHAP.  I. 
wood,  and  inhabited  only  by  beads.     Hunting  was  their  ready  re-     s^^' 
fource  for  a  livelihood  :   arms   their  ifirft  neceflaries.     Their  life  was 
thus  fpent  in  action  :   they  fpred  far;  had  few  neighbours  ;   and  with 
thofe  few  little  intercourfe.     Such  people  were  inevitably  barbarous : 
but  they  would,  much  fooner  than  more  civilized  people,  give  inha- 
bitants to  every  part  of  the  globe.     Thofe  who  came  to  the  weftern 
coail  of  Alia  Minor  would  have  many  inducements  to  crofs   to  the 
adjacent  iflands.      Security   from   favage  beau's,  and   men  as   lavage, 
would  be  the  firit  folicitude  of  families  ;  and  this  thofe  iflands  would 
feem  to  promife  in  a  greater  degree  than  the  continent.     Other  iflands 
appearing  beyond  thefe,  and  beyond  thofe  again  ftill  others,   naviga- 
tion would  here  be  almofl:  a  natural  employment.     The  fame  induce- 
ments would  extend   to  the  coafts  of  the  continent  of  Greece,  in- 
dented as  it  is  with  gulphs,  and  divided  with  peninfulas.     But  Greece 
was  very  early  known    to   the  Egyptian  and  Phenician   navigators  ,• 
perhaps  foon  after  its  firfr.  population  ;   and  as  no  part  of  it  was  very 
diflant  from  the  fea,  the  whole  thus  participated  of  means  for  civili- 
zation which  the  reft  of  Europe  wanted. 

This  country,  called  by  the  ancient  inhabitants  Hellas,  by  the 
Romans  Grtecia,  and  thence  by  us  Greece,  fo  Angularly  illuftri- 
ous  in  the  annals  of  mankind,  was  of  fmall  extent,  being  fcarcely 
half  fo  large  as  England,  and  not  equal  to  a  fourth  of  Fiance  or 
Spain.  But  as  it  has  natural  peculiarities  which  influenced,  not  a  little, 
both  the  manners  and  the  political  inftitutions  of  the  inhabitants, 
a  fhort  geographical  account  of  it  may  be  a  neceflary  introduction  to 
its  hiflory. 

Greece  is  included  between  the  thirty-fixth  and  forty-firfl:  degrees 
of  northern  latitude,  and  is  furrounded  by  feas,  except  where  it 
borders  upon  Epirus  and  Macedonia.  Thefe  two  provinces  alfo 
were  inhabited  by  a  people  who  participated  of  the  fame  origin  with 
the  Greeks,  and  fpoke  a  dialect  of  the  fame  language.  .We  have 
no  direct  information  how  they  became  excluded  from  the  name : 

but 


8 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  I. 
SECT.  I. 

Strabo,  1.  vii. 
p.  321. 


but  we  Avail  find  in  the  fequel,  that  fome  circumftances  which  con- 
tributed greatly  to  hold  the  Greeks  united  as  one  people,  though 
under  feparate  governments,  did  not  extend  their  influence  to  thefe 
countries.  Of  proper  Greece  therefore,  or,  according  to  Strabo's 
phraie,  what  was  univerfally  allowed  to  be  Greece,  for  Epirus  and 
Macedonia  had  their  claims,  Thessaly  was  the  moft  northern  pro- 
vince. It  is  an  extenfive  vale,  of  uncommon  fertility,  completely 
furrounded  by  very  lofty  mountains.  On  the  north  Olympus,  be- 
ginning at  the  eaftern  coafr,  divides  it  from  Macedonia.  Conti- 
guous ridges  extend  to  the  Ceraunian  mountains,  which  form  the 
northern  boundary  of  Epirus,  and  terminate  againft  the  weftern  fea 
in  a  promontory  called  Acroceraunus,  famed  for  its  height  and  for 
ftorms.  Pindus  forms  the  weftern  boundary  of  Theffaly,  and  CEta 
the  fouthern.  Between  the  foot  of  mount  CEta  and  the  fea,  is  the 
famous  pafs  of  Thermopylae,  the  only  way,  on  the  eaftern  fide  of 
the  country,  by  which  the  fouthern  provinces  can  be  entered.  The 
lofty,  though  generally  narrow  ridge  of  Ossa,  forming  the  coafr, 
connects  CEta  with  Olympus.  The  tract  extending  from  Epirus  and 
Theffaly  to  the  Corinthian  ifthmus,  and  the  gulphs  on  each  fide  of 
it,  contains  the  provinces  of  Acarnania,  /Etolia,  Doris,  Locris, 
Phocis,  Bceotia,  and  Attica.  Many  branches  from  the  vail  ridges 
of  Pindus  and  CEta  fpread  themfelves  through  this  country.  ./Etolia 
is  everywhere  defended  by  mountains  with  difficulty  pafiable;  ex- 
cepting that  the  fea  bounds  it  on  the  fouth,  and  the  river  Achelous 
divides  a  fmall  part  of  its  weftern  frontier  from  Acarnania.  Doris 
is  almoft  wholly  mountainous.  Locris,  of  which  name  were  two 
provinces  not  contiguous,  and  Phocis  have  plains  highly  fruitful, 
but  of  fmall  extent.  Bceotia  is  a  rich  vale  with  many  ftreams 
and  lakes ;  bounded  on  the  north-eaft  by  the  Opuntian  gulph,  and 
otherwife  moftly  furrounded  by  the  mountains  Parnassus,  Heli- 
con, Cith^eron,  and  Parnes.  The  two  laft  formed  the  northern 
boundary  of  Attica  ;  a  rocky  barren  province,  producing  little 
corn  and  lefs  pafture,  but  many  fruits,  particularly  olives  and  figs, 
in  abundance  and  perfection. 

To 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  9 

To  the  fouth  of  this  tradt  lies  the  peninfula  of  Peloponnesus,  chap.  I. 
connected  with  it  by  the  Corinthian  iflhmus,  which  in  one  part  is  SECT.  I. 
only  five  miles  wide.  The  iflhmus  itfelf  is  mountainous.  The 
peninfula  contains  Achaia  *,  Argolis,  Elis  or  Eleia,  Arcadia,  Strabo. 
Meilcnia,  and  Laconia.  Arcadia,  the  central  province,  is  a  clutter 
of  mountains.  Lofty  ridges,  the  principal  of  which  are  Taygetus 
and  Zarex,  branch  through  Laconia  to  the  two  moil:  fouthern 
promontories  of  Greece,  Tjenarum,  and  Malea.  Between  thefe 
the  Eurotas  runs  :  the  vales  are  rich,  but  nowhere  extenfive. 
From  Cyllene,  the  moft  northern  and  higheft  of  the  Arcadian 
mountains,  two  other  branches  extend  in  a  fouth- eafterly  direction  ; 
one  to  the  Argolic  gulph,  the  other  by  Epidaurus  to  the  Scyl- 
l^an  promontory,  the  mod  eafterly  point  of  the  peninfula.  Thefe 
include  the  vale  of  Argos,  remarkable  for  fruitfulnefs.  Achaia 
is  a  narrow  ftrip  of  country  on  the  northern  coaft,  prefled  upon  by 
the  mountains  in  its  whole  length  from  Corinth  to  Dyme.  Elis 
and  Messenia  are  lefs  mountainous  than  the  other  Peloponnefian 
provinces.  The  latter  particularly  is  not  only  the  moft  level  province 
of  the  peninfula,  and  the  bed  adapted  to  tillage,  but,  in  general  produce, 
the  moft  fruitful  of  all  Greece. 

It  appears  thus  that  Greece  is  a  rough  country,  yet  injoying 
many,  and  even  peculiar  advantages.  The  climate  is  moft  favor- 
able :  the  fummer-heat  brings  the  fineft  fruits  to  the  greateft  per- 
fection :  the  winter-cold  fuffices  to  brace  and  harden  the  bodies  of 
the  inhabitants  :  the  fea  is  fcarcely  anywhere  too  diftant  to  keep 
both  within  the  defirable  temperature.     The  long  winding  range  of 

*  Or  Achasa.      It  is  in  fome  inftances  dif-  practice  has  prevailed  of  following  the  later 

fkult  to  decide  what  may  be  deemed  the  pro-  Latin    writers  in    their   alterations   of  Greek 

per   Englifh   orthography    of    Greek    names,  names,  infomuch  that  in  regard  to  many  cir- 

Thcre  was  a  time  when   the  French  fancy  of  cumftances  the  rule  appears  eltablifhed.  There 

altering  foreign  names  to  their  vernacular  ter-  are   however  ilill  circumftances  in  regard   to 

ruinations  prevailed  with   our  writers.     This  which  no  refpeflable  authority  is  to  be  found, 

inconvenient  practice,   utterly  ufelefs  in  a  Ian-  and,  for  fome,  precedents  vary.     In  this  un- 

guage  which  neither  declines  its  nouns,  nor  certainty  of  rule  I  have  thought  it  belt  to  ap- 

has  any  certain  form  of  termination  for  them,  proach  always  as   near  to  the  Greek  orthogra- 

has  long   been  ju'ily  exploded  with   us,   and,  phy  as  the  tyranny  of  cuftom,   and,  perhaps  it 

excepting  a  very  few,   upon  which  cuftom  has  fhould  be  added,  the  different  nature  of  the  al- 

indelibly  fixed  its  llamp,  we  write  Latin  names  phabets,  will  permit. 


only  as  they  are  written  in  Latin.     But  the 


coafl 


io  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  I. 
SECT.  I. 


coaft  abounds  with  excellent  harbours.  The  vales  afford  rich  paf- 
ture ;  the  middle  grounds  corn,  wine  and  oil ;  and  of  the  moun- 
tains, fome  to  a  great  extent  are  covered  with  variety  of  timber  ; 
fome  formed  of  the  fineft  marble ;  fome  contain  various  valuable 
metals.  And  this  variety  in  the  furface,  which  gives  occafion  to 
equal  variety  of  produce,  affords  at  the  fame  time  variety  of  climate 
in  every  feafon  of  the  year. 

The  fir  ft  emigrants  who  took  poffeffion  of  this  country,  if  they 
retained  the  leaft  relic  of  civility,  could  want  no  inducement  to  fet- 
tle themfelves  in  the  rich  and  beautiful  vales  with  which  it  abounds. 
Even  the  mod  favage,  for  the  habitation  of  a  family,  would  prefer 
a  fruitful  plain  ;  efpecially  where  mountain -forefts  were  every-wav 
at  hand  for  the  refource  of  hunting,  when  the  vale,  ill-cultivated 
or  uncultivated,  might  no  longer  afford  fubliftence.  But  perhaps 
the  beafts  of  prey,  with  which  the  old  world  has  always  been  in- 
fefted  fo  greatly  more  than  the  new,  have  contributed  not  a  little  to 
the  quicker  progrefs  of  fociety  and  civilization.  The  nrft  inhabi- 
tants of  Greece  particularly  could  hardly  fubfift  without  mutual  fup- 
port  againft  the  ravenous  beafts  of  the  woods  and  mountains,  which 
everywhere  furrounded  them.  Even  in  the  age  of  Heliod  and  Ho- 
mer the  brute  creation  was  not  fo  far  fubdued,  in  the  countries  oc- 
cupied by  the  Greeks,  but  that  fecurity  againft  wild  beafts  was  an 
important  purpofe  of  human  fociety.  Some  degree  of  political  affo- 
ciation  would  therefore  from  the  firft  be  neceffary  :  the  inhabitants 
of  every  vale  would  conftitute  a  ftate  more  or  lefs  regular. 

But  the  fpirit  of  emigration  feems  not  foon  to  have  fubfided  among, 
mankind.      Many  whole  hords,  either  diffatisfied  with  their  fettle- 
ments,  or,  like  the  Arabs  and  Tartars  to  this  day,  without  a  defire 
to  fettle,  quitted  the  fpots  they  had  firft  chofen,   and  wandered  ftill 
in  queft  of  others  *  :  and  it  appears  to  have  been  a  univerfal  prac- 

*    MaXij-a   fj.it    ovv    xa.Ta   Ta    Tfulxa,   xa)   fitrk  iiprnai  St'ort  7roM^ap(ov  T>k  'Evfui7rr,(  itiy^an  Torra.- 

Tavia,  ywtcrScci  raq    ip6$ov<;  xa.)    t«;   /niTooarao'Ei;  tauot  Tzhutujpna.      Strabo,  1.  xii.    p.  572.       The 

cW&j,  ™ts  |3ap£ap«»  ttpa.  v.a\  Tm'zxXmut  ifpr,  Amfterdam   edition  of   1707    has  wfo?  for  7rpo 

tim  xfw«/««'',»v=rfss  tv  t5«  aWioTpia?  *«T«r*<"».  rut  TfaXxuf  evidently  an  error    of   the  prefs, 

'AMii  kxljrfh  vS»  TpxS»  h  t«St«-  *i  r.  yk?  and  indeed  corrected  in  the  Latin  verfion. 

X\i}.xeyHi)  ni   <pDAo»   xai  Tut  Kmntutvt  x«i  Athiyuf 


tice, 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  M 

tice,  when  an  eligible  fituation  was  overflocked  with  inhabitants,  CHAP.  I. 

which  might  foon  happen  where  not  only  manufactures  and  com-  .        •*; 

merce,  but  even  agriculture  was  unknown  or  unpra&ifed,   to  fend 

out  colonies,  often  to  parts  very  diftant,     Thus  we  find  that  in  very 

early  times  manv  different  people,  of  whom  the  Greek  writers  in  the  Strabo,  . i.v. 

moft   inlightened  ages  could  give  no   fatisfaclory  account,    overran  p-  321-     ,   . 

6  to  b  •    i     ,  •  r  Thucvd.  1.  i. 

Greece;  lbmetimes  mixing  with  the  ancient  inhabitants,  lometimes   c.  2.  ' 

expelling  them.     The  rich  vales,  which  without  cultivation   would 

give  large  fupport  for  cattle,  were  the  coveted  territories ;  and  thefe 

were  continually  changing  their  poffeflbrs.      Of  the  expelled,  fome 

wandered  in  quell  of  unoccupied  vales  ;  or   in   their  turn  drove  out 

the  inhabitants  of  the  firft  they  came  to,   if  they  found  them  weaker 

than  themielves.     Others  took  to  the  neighbouring  mountains  ;   and 

thence,   harraffing  the  intruders,  not  unfrequently  recovered  in  time 

their  old  fettlement  in  the  vale.     When  preffed  by  a  fuperior  force, 

any  of  them  quitted  their  poffeilions  with  little  regret ;   '  thinking,' 

as  Thucydides  obferves,  '   that  a  livelihood  might  be  had  anywhere, 

'  and  anxious  for  nothing  more :  for  being  always  uncertain  when  a 

*  more  powerful  clan  might  covet  their  territory,  they  had  little  in- 

'  couragement  to  build,  or  plant,  or  provide  in  any  way  farther  than 

'  for  prefent  need.' 

Greece  thus,  in  its  early  days,  was  in  a  ftate  of  perpetual  maroding 
and   piratical   warfare.     Cattle,   as   the   great   means  of  fubliftence, 
were  firft  the  great  object  of  plunder.     Then,  as  the  inhabitants  of 
fome  parts  by  degrees  fettled  to  agriculture,  men,  women  and  chil- 
dren,  for  flaves,  became  delirable.      But  Greece   had   nothing  more 
peculiar   than    its    neighbouring   fea ;    where   fmall   iflands  were   Co 
thickly  fcattered  that  their  inhabitants,  and  in  fome  meafure  thofe  of 
the   fhores  of  the  adjacent  continents  alfo,  were  mariners  by  necef- 
iity,  and  almoft  by  nature.     Water-expeditions,  therefore,   were  foon   Thucyd.  1. i. 
found  moft  commodious   for  carrying  off  fpoil.     But  the  Greeks  in     ' s' 
their  moft  barbarous  ftate  became  acquainted  with  the  value  of  the 
precious  metals.     The  Phenicians,  whofe  induftry,  ingenuity,  and 

C  2  adventurous 


12  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  I.      adventurous  fpirit  of  commerce,  led  them  early  to  explore  the  fartheft 

SECT.  I.      fhores  of  the  Mediterranean,  and   even    to   rifle   the   dangers  of  the 

Strabo,  l. Hi.     ocean  beyond,  difcovered  mines  of  gold   and   filver  in  fome  of  the 

P- 169-  iflands  of  the  JEgean,  and  on   its  northern  coaft.     They  eftablifhed 

C-8.C}  themfelves  in  feveral  of  the   iflands  -,  and  Thafos,  which  lay  convc- 

Herodot.i.vi.   niently  for  communication  with  the  moft  productive  mines,  became 

the   feat   of  their   principal   fa&ory.       Thus   was   offered    the   moft 

powerful  incentive' to  piracy,  in  a  fea  whofe  innumerable  iflands  and 

Odyff.  l.  xx.     ports  afforded  lingular  opportunity  for  the  practice.  Perhaps,  as  Homer 

T,4H-  not   lefs    than    the   later  Grecian  authors   infinuates,  the   conduct  of 

the  Phenicians  toward  the  uncivilized  nations  among  whom  the  defire 

of  gain   led   them,  was   not  always    the   moft   upright   or   humane. 

Hollilities  would   naturally  infue  ;  and  hence    might   firft   arife   the 

Thucyd.  l.i.    eftimation   of  piracy,  which    long   prevailed   among  the  Greeks,    as 

an    honorable    practice.       But  whence-foever    this   opinion   had  its 

origin,  however  deferving  the  utmoft  reprobation,  and  however  even 

unaccountable  it  may  appear  to  civilized  people  who  have  no  inter- 

courfe  with  barbarians,  it  will  yet   be  found  that  equal   degrees  of 

civility  and  of  barbarifm  have   occafioned  manners   and  fentiments 

nearly  fimilar  in  all  ages  and  all  nations.     It  is   not  fo  long  fine® 

robbery  was  held  in  efteem  among  the  native  Irifti ;  and,  within  the 

Pennant's  Ac-  memory  of  man,  a  hofpitable  highland  Scottiih  chief,  proud  of  his 

count  of  Scot-  fabieci  defcent  from  kings  and  heroes,  would  have  boafted  of  his  at- 

land.  <-> 

Brydone's        chievements  in  that  way  :   in  Sicily  fuch  fentiments  even  yet  prevail ; 
cily.0U         "   and  among  all  the  Arabian   tribes,  from  the  middle  of  Afia  to  the 
Wood  on  Ho-  end  of  Africa,  the  idea  of  union   between   honor  and  robbery  has 
been  tranfmitted  unaltered  through  hundreds  of  generations. 


SECT. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


SECT.      II. 

Of  the  fouthern  Provinces  of  Greece  from  the  earUeft  Accounts  to  the 
Trojan  War.  Crete:  Minos.  Sicyon.  Corinth.  Argos :  Pelajgian 
Dominion  in  Greece :  Egyptian  Colonies  in  Greece :  Danaus :  Acri- 
fus :  Perfeus.  Pifa  :  Colonies  from  Phrygia  and  Thefaly  under  Pe- 
lops.  Hercules.  At  reus  :  Dominion  of the  Family  of Pelops :  Aga- 
memnon.    Lacedcemon. 

SUCH  was  the  wild  and  barbarous  ftate  of  Greece  in  general  when     CHAP.  I. 
Crete,    the    largeft  of  its  illands,   had  acquired  a  polity  fingularly     SECT.  II. 
regular,  attended  of  courfe  with  fuperior  civilization.     In  vain  how- 
ever would  we  inquire  at  what  precife  period,    in  what  ftate  of  fo- 
ciety,   by  what  exertions  of  wifdom  and  courage,  and  through  what 
affiftance  of 'fortunate   contingencies,  fo   extraordinary  a   work  was 
accomplished  :  for  many  centuries  elapfed  before  written  records  be- 
came common ;  and  traditions  are  vague,  various,  and   for  the  moft 
part  inexplicably  mixed  with  fable.     Crete  is  thus  a  great  object  for 
the  differtator  and   the   antiquarian.      Curiolity  is  excited   by  thofe 
fcanty  glimmerings   of  information  which   have  preferved  to  us  the 
names  of  the  Cabiri,   Telchines,  Curetes,  Corybantes,  Idaei  Dactyli,    Strabo,  1.x. 
with  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  other  perfonages  of  this  ifland.     Still  more 
it  is  excited  by  that  fyftem  of  laws,   which  in  an  age  of  favage  ie- 

'  }  .  ...  Plato.  Minos, 

norance,  violence   and    uncertainty  among  furrounding  nations,   in-  &deLeg-. 

forced  civil  order,  and   fecured   civil  freedom  to  the  Cretan  people ;  l.ii. 

which  was  not  only  the  particular  model  of  the  wonderful  polity  fo  p'"?go'  .%*' 

well  known  to  us  through    the  fame  of  Laceda?mon,  but  appears  to  1>lutarch-  L>'- 

o  rr  curg. 

have  been  the  general  fountain  of  Grecian  legiflation  and  jurifpru-  Strabo,   l.  x. 

dence,  and  which  continued   to  deferve  the  eulogies  of  the  greatefh  Plato  deLeg. 

fages  and  politicians  in  the  brighteft  periods  of  literature  and  philo-  cd'stiraif.  "' 

fophy.     The  glory  of  this  eliabliihment  is  generally  given  to  Minos,  Anftct.  Polit. 

a  prince  of  the  ifland  :  whofe  hiftory  was  however  fo  dubioufly  tranf-  l-xiii.  v.  4^0, 

,     &:Oclyff,l.xix. 

mitted 


V, 


178. 


1.    V 


14  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  I.     mitted   to   pofterity,    that  it   remained    undecided    among  Grecian 
S^3^'      wr'ters  whether  he-was  a  native  or  a  foreigner.     Some  indeed  attri- 
Strabo,   l.  x.   buted  the  final  improvement  only  to  Minos,  referring  the  firft  infti- 
Diodor.  sic.     tution  to  Rhadamanthus  in  a  ftill  earlier  age.     We  are  indeed  with- 
out materials   for  any  connected  hiftory  of  Crete  even  after  the  age 
of  Minos  ;   but  there  remains,  from  the  moil:  refpe&able  authority,  a 
Ariftot.Polit.    general  account  of  its   polity.     This  will  however  not  obtain,  from 

1.  u.  09&  10. 

Strabo,  l.x.      the  liberal  ipirit  of  modern  Europe,  that  full  approbation  which  it 
earned  from  antiquity.      It  refted  upon  two  principles  ;   that  freemen 
(hould  be  all  equal ;  and  that  they   mould  be  ferved  by  Haves.     The 
lawgiver  therefore  allowed   no  private  property  in  land,   nor  fcarcely 
in  anything.     The   foil  was   cultivated   by  Haves  on    the  public  ac- 
count :  the  freemen  ate  together  at  public  tables;  and  their  families 
were  fubfifted   from   the  public   flock.      The  monarch's   authority, 
except  in  war,  was  extremely  limited.     The  magiftrac  es  in  general 
were  wifely  adapted  to  the  fpirit  of  the  government.     A  fevere  mo- 
rality was   in   fome   inflances  inforced  by  law.      Superiority  was  the 
meed  of  age  and  merit  only.      Youth  were  reftrained  to   the  ftricteffc 
Plato  de Leg.    modefly  and  temperance.     Their  education,    which  was  public,   was 
Ariftot.Polit.    particularly  directed  to  make  them  foldiers.      But  while  a  compara- 
tively fmall   fociety  thus   lived   in  jufi  freedom,  and  honorable  lei- 
fure,  a  much  larger  portion  of  mankind  was  for  their  fakes  doomed 
to  rigid  and  irredeemable  flavery.     It  is  difficult  to   account  for  the 
fir  ft  eftablifhment  of  fuch  a  fyftem  but   upon  the  fuppofition  that  an 
Egyptian  or  Phenician  colony,  feizing  the  lands,  like  the  Spaniards 
in  the  Weft-Indian  iflands,   deprived  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  arms, 
Odyff.  xix.     and  compelled  them  to  labor.     But  Homer  enumerates  five  different 
hords    in   Crete,  uling   different   dialects  ;    all   apparently   free ;   for 
flaves  are  never  reckoned  among  the  people  of  a   Grecian  ftate ;  and 
all  fubject  to  the  laws  and  government  of  Minos.     He  mentions  alfo 
Ibid.  &  Iliad,    the  wealth  and  populoufnefs  of  the  ifland,  the  wifdom  of  its  legilla- 
k1i.-r.645:      torj  anj  his  lingular  favor  with  Jupiter :   but  Homer's  account  goes 
no  farther,  and  after  him  the  traditions  concerning  Minos  became 

peculiarly 


HISTORY    OF     GREECE.  15 

peculiarly   loaded  with   fable.     Some    circumftanccs,    however,   of     CHAP.  I. 

crPT     TT 

principal   importance  feem  to  remain  yet  fufficiently  warranted  for  ^_^J^J 
hiftory.     From  a  ftrong  concurrence  of  teftimony  it  appears    that 

Minos   was  an  able   prince,  who  availed  himfelf  of  advantages  open  Thucyd.  Li. 

to  him   from   the   command  of  a  people  formed  to  regular  govern-  c.  3. 

r      r  ...  Plato.  Minos, 

ment,  and  not  unacquainted  with  ufeful  arts.     Againfl  thoie  pirates   &deLeg.l.iv. 
who  infefted  every  part  of  the  Grecian  feas,   he  kept  armed  veflels  in   Thucyd.  1.1. 
conftant  employ  ;  and  his  mcafures  were  fo  vigorous  and   judicious,    Dionyi".  Hal. 

,         „  ,        ,  Antiq.  Rom. 

that  he  eflablifhed  fecurity  throughout   the /Egean.      Hence  he  has   i.v. 
the  credit  among  hiftorians  of  being   the   firft  Grecian    prince   who   Thucyd.' L  i." 
acquired  the  fovereignty  of  the  fea.     By  means  of  his   fleet  he  ex-   S; +•       . 
tended  his  authority  far  among  the  iflands :  he  was  refpecled  through-   Arjftot.  Polit. 
out  the  coaft  of  the   neighbouring  continents  j  and  he  left  behind   piutarch, ' 
him  a  wide  reputation  for  wifdom,  juftice  and  power-  Thel* 

Before  the  reign  of  this  great  prince,  as  that  early  and  able  hifto- 
fian  Thucydides  aflures  us,  fuch  had  been  the  excelfes  of  piracy  that 
all  the  fhores  both  of  the  continent  and  iflands  of  Greece  were  near- 
ly deferted  :  the  ground  was  cultivated  only  at  a  fecure  diftance 
from  the  fea ;  and  there  only  towns  and  villages  were  to  be  found.  Thucyd.  I.  i. 
But  no  fooner  was  the  evil  repreiied  than  the  aclive  temper  of  the 
Greeks  led  them  again  to  the  coaft  :  the  mod:  commodious  havens 
were  occupied  ;  the  fpirit  of  adventure  and  indirftry,  which  had  be- 
foie  been  exerted  in  robbery,  was  now  turned  to  commerce;  and,  Thucyd.  Li. 
as  wealth  accrued,  towns  were  fortified,  fo  as  to  fecure  them  againfl 
a  renewal  of  former  evils.  In  earlier  times,  however,  fome  fettlements 
had  been  made  capable  of  refifting  piratical  attempts  from  the  fea, 
or  incurfions  of  wandering  freebooters  by  land.  Sicyon  on  the 
northern  coaft  of  Peloponuefus  claimed,  in  the  civilized  ages,  to  be 
the  oldeft  town  of  Greece.  A  town  implies  not  only  an  intention 
of  fettled  occupancy,  but  alfo  fome  provilion  againfl  occurrences 
of  whatlbever  kind  that  might  renew  the  neceflity  of  migration. 
Some  municipal  government  is  indifpenlible.  The  town  then,  having 
more  to  apprehend  than  to  hope  from  any  political  connection  with 

the 


i6  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  I.  the  rucje  people  from  whom  it  fprung,  undertakes  to  fuffice  for  itfelf, 
SECT.  II.  nnj  becomes  an  independent  ftate.  Thus  the  Greek  word  which 
we  commonly  tranflate  city,  came  to  fignify,  together  with  the 
town,  its  municipal  government;  and  whenever  we  read  in  Grecian 
authors  of  a  city  founded,  it  is  generally  by  the  fame  words  implied 
that  an  independent  government  was  eflabliihed.  A  long  lift  of 
names  is  tranfmitted  to  us,  as  of  chiefs  who  ruled  Sicyon  with  that 
title  which,  in  procefs  of  ages,  came  to  have  more  precifely  the  fame 
meaning  that  King  bears  with  us.  But  this  lift  comes  to  us  wholly 
unwarranted  by  Grecian  writers  of  beft  authority.  The  hiftory  of 
the  kings  of  Sicyon  is  moreover  as  uninterefting  as  uncertain;  and 
the  ftate  they  governed  made,  till  a  very  late  period,  no  figure  in 
the  affairs  of  Greece. 

The  happier  fituation  of  Corinth,  founded  in  a  very  early  age 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sicyon,  perhaps  prevented  the  growth  of 
the  elder  town.  Near  the  fouth-weftern  point  of  the  neck  that  joins 
Peloponnefus  to  northern  Greece,  and  within  the  fame  rich  plain  in 
which  Sicyon  ftands,  a  mountain-ridge,  fcarcely  three  miles  long,  rifes 
to  a  height  remarkable  even  in  a  country  of  lofty  mountains.  The  fum- 
mitis  at  the  northern  extremity:  three  lides  are  precipices  almoft  per- 
jom-ncy  into    Dendicular,  and  even  on  the  fourth  afcent  is  difficult.    Little  beneath 

Greece,  b.  vi.     r 

p.  440.  thepointed  vertex  is  a  plentiful  fource  of  pure  water,  which,  fou'tuated, 

Pind.Olymp.    might  help  the  poets  to  the  fancy  that  the  winged  horfe  Pegafus,  drink- 

in°-,  was  there  caught  by  Bellerophon.     This  moil  advantageous  and 

nearly  inexpugnable  poft,  by  the  name  of  Acrocorinthus,  became  the 

citadel  ;  and  at  its  foot  grew  the  town  of  Corinth,  which,  as  early  as 

Homer.  Iliad.   Homer's  time,  was  noted  for  wealth  acquired  by  commerce.     For 

l.ii.  v.  570.      Dy  jancj   jt  was  t]ie   k.ey  0f  communication  between  northern   and 

fouthern  Greece;  and  byfeait  became,  through  its  ports,  one  on  the 
Saronic,  the  other  on  the  Corinthian  gulph,  the  emporium  for  all 
that  paffed  between  the  eaft  and  the  weft,  as  far  as  Alia  on  one  fide, 
and  Italy  and  Sicily  on  the  other;  the  palfage  round  the  fouthern 
Suabo,  1.  viii.  promontories  of  Peloponnefus  being  fo  dangerous  to  coafting  navi- 
p* 3y8'  o-tors,  that  it  was  generally  avoided.     Among  the  early  princes  of 

Corinth 


Strabo,  1.  viii. 

P-  379-  .„ 
Liv.    Hift. 

Rom.  1.  xlv. 

c.  28. 

Fuulan.  1.  ii. 

c.  5. 

Wheler's 

HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  17 

Corinth  were  Sifyphus,  Glaucus,  and  Bellerophon  ;  names  to  which     CHAP.  I. 

sect,  n 


poetry  has  given  fame,  but  not  delivered   down   to   us  objects  of 


hi  (lory. 

But  the  town  that  firft  acquired  political  eminence  was  Argos  ; 
which  has  indeed  been  efteemed,  by  fome  of  the  moft  judicious  anti- 
quarians, the  oldeil  of  Greece.  Itisfaid  to  havebeenfoundedbylnachus,    Paufan.  r.ii. 
fon  of  the  ocean  ;  a  title  which,  in  the  language  of  the  times,  might 
poflibly  imply  that  the  bearer  came  from   beyond  fea,  nobody  knew 
whence.     But  fome  Grecian  writers   have  doubted  whether  Inachus 
were  ever  really  the  name  of  a  man,   or  only  of  a   fmall   river  near 
Argos;  and  thefe  attribute  the  foundation  of  the  city  to  Phoroneus, 
whom  the  others  call  fon  of  Inachus.     The  age  of  Phoroneus  was 
indeed   the  term   beyond  which,  according   to   Plato,   nothing   was   Plato.  Tim*- 
known  of  Greece ;  and  the   more  probable  tradition  concerning  the   ed!s"erran".    " 
origin  of  Sicyon  fuppofed   its  founder,  iEgialeus,  cotemporary   and 
even  brother  of  Phoroneus. 

But  the  chronology  of  thefe  times  will  be  the  fubject  of  future  in- 
quiry ;  which  however,  it  may  be  here  confefled,  cannot  end  fatif- 
'factorily.  It  has  been  computed  by  chronologers,  who  have  found 
credit  with  fome  of  the  moft  learned  even  of  the  prefent  age,  that  Blair's  Chro« 
Sicyon  was  founded  2089  years  before  the  Chriftian  era,  and  only  x°abfe».a 
259  after  the  Flood  :  that  the  foundation  of  Argos  followed  after  a 
period  of  233  years,  and  that  the  reign  of  Minos  in  Crete  was  ftill 
450  years  later.  Sir  Ifaac  Newton's  conjecture,  far  more  confonant 
to  the  moft  authoritative  traditions  concerning  the  train  of  events,   Newton's 

0  Chronol. 

is,  that  Sicyon  and  Argos  may  have  been  founded  nearly  together, 
about  1080  years  before  the  Chriftian  era,  and  fcarcely  80  before 
the  reign  of  Minos.  Indeed  from  the  traditions  oreferved  by  the 
oldeil  poets,  and  all  the  inquiries  reported  to  us  by  the  moft  judi- 
cious Grecian  profe-writers  concerning  the  antiquities  of  their 
country,  it  appears  rather  probable  that  fcarcely  a  wandering  hunter 
had  ever  fet  foot  in  Peloponnefus  fo  early  as  the  period  affigned  by 
chronologers  even  to  the  founding  of  Argos. 

D  But 


18  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  I.  But  towns  are  not  ufually  at  once  built,  and  a  new  ftate_ formed,  by 

SECT.  H.  the  natives  of  a  country.  In  the  more  common  courfe  of  things 
they  grow  fo  imperceptibly,  that  not  a  rumor  of  their  origin  can 
remain.  The  accounts  therefore,  which  refer  the  foundation  of  the 
principal  cities  of  Greece  to  particular  eras  and  particular  perfcns, 
mark  them  for  colonies.  Indeed,  amid  all  the  darknefs  and  intricacy 
of  early  Grecian  hiilory,  we  find  a  ftrong  concurrence  of  teftimony 
See   Hcrodo-   to  a  few  principal  facts.      It  was  a  received  opinion  among  the  molt 

tus's  Accounts     .     r  .....  _,  .  i/~>  ■     ■       n 

of  the  Pelaf-  informed  and  judicious  Grecian  writers,  that  Oreece  was  originally 
dides's  Intro-  ^e^  ^y  barbarians  3  a  term  appropriated  in  the  flourifhing  ages  of 
du6tion,Plato,   Greece  as  a  definition   for   all  people   who  were   not   Greeks.     But 

Anitotle,  and  r       r 

mort  particu-   among  thofe  uncertain  traditions  of  various  hords  who  in  early  times 

larly    titrabo,  ° 

b.  v'ii.  p.  321.  overran  the  country,   the  Pelafgian  name  is  eminent.     This   name 

p"  01\  y  may  be  traced  back  into  Afia  :   it  is  found   in    the  iflands  ;   and  the 

Thucyd.  1. 1.  pCOpie  wj10  kore  jt  appear  t0  have  fpred  far  on  the  continent  of  Eu- 

Homer. Ilkd.  r0pe,  fince  they  are  reckoned  among  the  earliefi;  inhabitants  of  Italy. 

1.  11.    v.  947.  *  J  ° 

1.  x.  v.  429.  It  was  very  generally  acknowledged,  as  the  accurate  and  judicious 
v.  288.X  &  Strabo  allures  us,  that  the  Pelaigians  were  anciently  eftablifhed  all 
301.  Odyfl".  ovcr  Greece,  and  that  they  were  the  firft  people  who  became  power- 
Herodot.  1.  v.  ful  there.  Confonant  to  this  we  find  every  mention  of  the  Pelaf- 
gians  by  Herodotus ;  from  whom  it  appears  that  anciently  the  country 
itfelf  was  called  Pelafgia.  But  a  paffage  of  the  poet  /Efchylus  con- 
cerning this  people,  for  its  antiquity,  its  evident  honefty,  its  pro- 
bability, and  its  confifiency  with  all  other  remaining  teflimony  of 
belt  authority,  appears  to  deferve  particular  notice.  The  Pelafgian 
chiefs,  he  fays,  extended  their  dominion  over  all  the  northern  parts 
of  Greece,  together  with  Macedonia  and  Epirus,  as  far  as  the  river 
56.  Strymon  eaftward,  and  the  fea  beyond  the  Dodonasan  mountains  wefi- 

naid.'p.' 316^  ward.       Peloponnefus    was    not    peopled  fo  early:    Apis,    crofling 
ed.  H.  Steph.   the  Corinthian   gulph  from  iEtolia,  deflroyed  the   wild  hearts,  and 
thus  firft  made  that  peninfula  fecurely  habitable  for  men.     Hence  it 
had  from  him  its  mod  ancient  name  of  Apia. 

It 


c.  136.   ' 

.  vii. 

c.  42. 

Strabo, 

1.    V 

p.  221. 

Dionyf. 

Hal 

Antiq.   Rom 
1.  i. 

Strabo, 

1.  V 

p.   220, 

221 

U    1.   vii. 

p.  327. 
Herodot 

.l.ii 

HISTORYOFGREECE.  19 

It  appears  that,  in  a  very  remote  period,  fome  revolutions  in  Egypt,     CHAP.  I. 

whofe  early  tranfadions  are  otherwife  little  known  to  us,  compelled     v _^J 

a  large  proportion  of  the  inhabitants  to  feek  foreign  fettlements*. 
Crete  probably  owed  its  civilization  and  polity  to  this  event.  Some 
of  the  beft  fupported  of  ancient  Grecian  traditions  relate  the  eftablifh- 
ment  of  Egyptian  colonies  in  Greece ;  traditions  fo  little  accommo- 
dated to  national  prejudice,  yet  fo  very  generally  received,  and  fo 
perfectly  confonant  to  all  known  hiftory,  that,  for  their  more  effen- 
tial  circumftances,  they  feem  unqueftionable  f .  But  thefe  fettlers 
naturally  brought  with  them  many  oriental  traditions  ;  which,  in 
the  courie  of  ages,  through  the  unavoidable  incorreclnefs  of  oral 
delivery,  became  fo  blended  with  early  Grecian  ftory,  that,  when  at 
length  letters  came  into  ufe,  it  was  no  longer  poffible  to  afcertain 
what  was  properly  and  originally  Grecian,  and  what  had  been  derived 
from  Phenicia  or  Egypt.  Hence  the  abundant  fource,  and  hence 
the  unbounded  fcope  of  Grecian  fable.  Hence  too  the  variety  of 
ingenious  but  difcordant  fancies  of  fo  many  learned  men  concern- 
ing the  truths  which  probably  lie  everywhere  concealed  under  the 
alluring  difguife,  but  which  will  alfo  probably  forever  evade  any 
complete  detection.  But  with  all  the  intricacy  of  fable  in  which 
early  Grecian  hiftory  is  involved,  the  origin  of  the  Greek  nation, 
from  a  mixture  of  the  Pelaigian  and  perhaps  fome  other  barbarous 
hords  with  colonies  from  Phenicia  and  Egypt,  feems  not  doubtful. 
Argos,  according  to  all  accounts,  was  an  Egyptian  colony.  We  are  Thucyd  1  ; 
told  that  the  firft  chief,  whether  Inachus  or  Phoroneus,  or  whatever  c-  3- 
elfe  may  have  been  his  name,  brought  the  wild  natives  of  the  neigh- 
bourhood to   fubmit  to  his  government,  introduced  fome  form  of  paufan.  1.  ii. 

c.  15. 

*  That  fuch    revolutions,   and   more  parti-  Hiftory,    and    Bryant's    Analyfis    of  Ancient 

cularly  that    fuch    migrations    happened,   ap-  Mythology. 

pears   not   doubtful,    though   the   inveltigators  f  They  are  confirmed  by  the  concurring  te- 

of  Egyptian   antiquities   difagree    about   both  ftimonies  particularly  of  Herodotus,  Plato,  Ari- 

the  circumftances    of    thefe  events,    and    the  ftotle,  Ifocrates,  Strabo,  and  Diodorus  Siculus, 

perfons  principally    concerned.       See   Shuck-  with  the  added  evidence  of  the  popular  poets 

ford's   Connexion    of    Sacred    and   Prophane  yEfchylus  and  Euripides. 

D  2  religion 


20  HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  I.  religion  among  them,  and  made  a  progrefs  toward  their  civilization. 
S^T-^j  ^e  can  l'tl"e  expect  objects  for  hiftory  among  the  traditions  which 
would  pafs  to  pofterity  concerning  the  early  ftate  of  fuch  a  colony. 
But  the  fucceffors  of  Phoroneus  have  afforded  ample  matter  for  fable  ; 
which  yet  we  find  univerfally  tinged  with  fome  reference  to  Egypt 
and  the  eaft.  Io,  daughter  of  one  of  thefe  princes,  but  of  which  is 
^Efchyl.  Pro-   not  agreed,  had,  according  to   poetical   report,  an  amour  with  the 

meth.  et  Da-  °     .  .  . 

naid.  god  Jupiter,  was  by  him  transformed  into  a  cow,  in  that  ftiape  tra- 

velled into  Egypt,  and  there  became  a  goddefs.  Herodotus  gives 
no  improbable  account,  if  not  of  the  origin  of  this  fiction,  yet  of 
the  origin  of  its  connection  with  Grecian  ftory  ;  and,  as  it  ferves  to 
mark   the   manners   of  the  age,  it  may   be  worth  relating.     Some 

Herodot.  l.  i.  Phenician  merchants,  he  fays,  brought  a  cargo  of  the  manufactures 
of  their  country  to  Argos.  The  Grecian  women,  eager  to  procure 
toys  and  utenfils  which  their  own  towns,  yet  without  manufactures, 
did  not  furnifh,  came  in  numbers  to  the  fea-fhore.  The  Phenicians, 
to  whom  women  were  in  the  eaft  very  profitable  merchandize,  watch- 
ing their  opportunity,  feized  all  they  could,  and  among  them  Io, 
daughter  of  the  chief  of  the  diftridt,  forced  them  into  their  fhips, 
and  failed  away  *. 

Among  the  kings  of  Argos  alfo  we  find  another  perfonage  of  great 

Schol.  ad  v.   fame  in  poetry,  the  Egyptian  Danaus,  whole  fifty  daughters  mar- 
42.  .  1.  ha  .   rjej  on  ^  j-ame  ^  tjie  £fty  j-ons  Q£  j^  |3rot]-jer  jjEgyptus,  king  of 

Egypt,  and  all,  except  Hypermneftra  the  wife  of  Lynceus,  killed 
their  hufbands  on  the  wedding-night.  Of  this  family  too  we  have 
fome  hiftorical  anecdotes  which  characterize  the  times.  Danaus, 
Ifocrat.  He-  through  whatfoever  circumftances,  for  reports  are  various,  finding 
his  fituation  uneafy  in  Egypt,  imbarked  with  his  family  and  as  many 

*  That  thefe  were   probable  circumftances     r.ll  impugn  the  credibility  of  Herodotus's  anec- 
we  may  judge   from  a  fimilar  ftory,   related  of     dote,   who   leaves  it   wholly   unaccounted   for 
different    perfons.by   Homer*.      Mr.  Bryant     how   the   ftolen    princefs   fhould   acquire  in   a 
derives  the  ftory  of  Io   from  a  very  different     foreign  country  the  reputation  of  a  goddefs. 
origin.     His   fuppofition  however  does  not  at 

*  Odyff.  1.  xv. 

other 


len,  encom. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  21 

other  followers  as  he  could  collect,  in  queft  of  fome  new  fettlement.  CHAP.  I. 
Failing  in  an  attempt  to  eftablifh  his  colony  in  the  ifland  of  Rhodes,  ^f^^lIL' 
he  proceeded  to  Peloponnefus,  and  landed  near  Argos,  where  Gelanor  Diodor.  sic. 

r  r  •  ■    m  1.  v.  c.  58. 

then  reio-ned.     The  favor  with  which   he  was  here  received  by  the   jEfchyl.  Da- 
rude  inhabitants,  or  which  he  had  the  art  quickly  to  acquire  among   ™Li\m.  1.  ii. 
them,  was  {o  extraordinary,  that  it  ir.fpired  him  with  the  confidence  c>  '9- 
to  demand  the  fovereignty  of  the  ftate  as  his  legal  right.     His  claim, 
we  are  told,  was  founded  on  no  better  ground  than  a  pretended  de- 
fcent   from  the  Argian   princefs   whofe  ftory  has  been  juft  related. 
But  if  an  Egyptian  colony  had  before  been  eftablifhed  at  Argos,  an 
Egyptian  prince  might  have  other  pretentions  to  intereft,  or  even  to 
command  there.   A  different  caufe  is,  however,  reported  for  his  favor 
with  the  people.     The  Argians  were  fo  uninformed,  that,  upon  the 
failure  of  fpontaneous  fountains,  they  often  fuffered  for  want  of  water, 

though  the  ground  on  which  the  city  flood  abounded  with  excellent   9trabo'  *• V11U 

■•■■-.  P-  371, 

fprings  at  little  depth.    Danaus  taught  them  to  dig  wells.   The  boon 

was,  in  a  hot  climate  particularly,  of  high  importance.  The  tem- 
per of  the  Greeks  was  warm  :  admiration  and  gratitude  became  the 
ruling  paffions  at  Argos,  and  produced  an  inclination  toward  Danaus 
fo  violent,  that  Gelanor  was  conftrained  to  admit  him  peaceably  to 
plead  his  right  to  the  fovereignty  before  an  aflembly  of  the  people, 
held  for  that  purpofe  in  the  fields  without  the  city.  The  difpute 
however  was  fo  equally  maintained,  that  it  became  necefiary  to  defer 
the  decifion  till  the  morrow.  By  daybreak  accordingly  the  people 
were  crouding  out  of  the  gates,  when  a  wolf,  from  the  neighbouring 
mountains,  caught  their  attention  while  he  attacked  a  herd,  graziup- 
near  the  city-wall,  and  killed  the  bull.  This  was  inftantly  taken 
as  an  omen  declaring  the  divine  will :  the  wolf  was  interpreted  to 
fignify  the  ftranger,  the  bull  their  native  prince,  and  the  kingdom 
was  immediately  adjudged  to  Danaus.  Whatever  credit  we  give  to 
the  circumftances  of  thefe  and  fimilar  ftories,  they  convey  to  us  at 
leaft  the  idea  which  the  fucceeding  Greeks  had  of  the  manners,  as 
well  as  of  the  hiftory,  of  their  anceftors.   Probably  they  are  not  wholly 

unfounded : 


c.  16 


22  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

chap.  i.     unfounded  :  certainly  they  are  not  the  invention  of  adulation   and 
SECT.  II.     partiality-  and  they  are  the  only  memorials  remaining  to  characterize 
thofe  early  ages. 

The  people  of  Argos,  at  the  arrival  of  Danaus,  were,  according 
^fchyl.  Da-  tG  ^tcnylu£»  Pelafgians,  and  fubjecls  of  a  prince  whofe  dominion 
»aid   P  3,6.  extended  over  all  Greece,  together  with   Epirus  and  Macedonia*. 

ed.  H.  Steph.    1^      '  °  r 

Probably  the  Egyptian  colony  of  Inachus  or   Phoroneus,   little  nu- 
merous, had  been  unable  to  maintain  itfelf  in  independency  againft 
the  ancient  chiefs  of  the  country.     But  Danaus  made  his  eftablim- 
ment  firm  :  he  tranfmitted  it  as  an  inheritance  to  his  pofterity;  and 
fuch   was  the  prevalence  of  his  power  and  fame  in  Peloponnefus, 
that,  according  to  Euripides,  the  people  of  that  peninfula,  before 
called  Pelafgians,  received  from  him  the  name  of  Dana'i,  which  re- 
mained to  Homer's  age  -j-.  , 
Paufan.  1.  ii.       Danaus  was  fucceeded  in  the  fovereignty  of  Argos  by  Lynceus,  his 
fon-in-law,  an  Egyptian  born.     Acriiius,  grandfon  of  Lynceus,  mod 
known  through  the  poets  as  father  of  the  celebrated  Danae,   would 
much  more  on  another  account  demand  the  notice  of  hiflory,   were 
it  poffible  to  trace  and  connect  the  circumllances  of  his  reign.     We 
learn  however,  only  from  fcattered  mention  of  him,  that. he  acquired 
influence  far  beyond  the  bounds  of  Peloponnefus,  and  that  he  gave 
form  and  liability  to  a  very  important  inftitution  in  the  northern  pro- 
vinces of  Greece,  which  will  require  more  particular  notice  here- 
after, as  a  principal  efficient  in   uniting  and  holding  together,  as  one 
people,    the    various   hoiiile  tribes  who  occupied  the  country.      By 
what  means  his   power  became  thus  extended  we  are  wholly  unin- 
formed.    Some  confufed, traditions  only  of  troubles  toward  the  end 
of  his  reign  account  for  its  decay.      Perfeus,   fon  of  Danae,  daughter 
of  Acriiius,  is  the  firft  Grecian  recorded  to  pofterity,  even  in  poetry 

*  iEfchylus  calls  Danaus  and  his  Egyptians  f  Aa»«o?  b  Trmmcna  Svyursfuv  Kxrr.f, 

Barbarians,  and  feems   to  confider  the  Pelaf-  EA6w»  Ik  "Apyo;,  Sxutb>  'Uax™  xfaf 

gians  as  true  Greeks.      Strabo,  in  a  later  age,  nc>M<ry,aru(  S'  otoitao^vfjowpH 

when  the  antiquities  of  the  country  had  been  Asl"""!  ««^»^<"  '•>»  %»  <*»'  'EV^*. 
more   canvafled,  fpeaks  of  the  Pelafgians  as  Strabo,  1.  v.  p.  Z2I.  &  1.  viii.  p.  371. 

barbarians :  TliXaayot  x«i  zMoi  ficifGctfoi,  he  fays, 
b,  ix,  p.  410. 

and 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


2J 


and   fable,  as  great  in   deeds  of  arms.     He  ftands  therefore  at  the      CHAP.  I. 

head  of  the  lift  of  thofe  ancient  warriors,  whofe  names  the  poetical     SECT.  II. 

genius  of  their  country  has  made  fo  fingulaily  illuftrious,  but  whofe 

adlions  almoft  wholly  elude  the  fcrutiny  of  hiftory.      Perfeus  is  the   Strabo,  1.  rUi. 

reputed  founder  of  the  city  Mycenas,  which  he  made  the  capital   of  P" 37' 

his  dominions.   Argos  was  ftill  governed  by  its  own  chief  magiftrate, 

with  the  title  of  king,  but  dependent  upon   the  king  of  Mycena?, 

who  is  ftiled  by  Homer  King  of  many  iflands,  and  of  all  Argos:    Iliad,  1.  ii. 

a  term  which,  with   that  poet,  implied  the  whole  of  Peloponnefus. 

Afterward   Argos   recovered  its   preeminence,  and  Mycenae   became 

inconfiderable.     It  appeared  necelTary  to  take  thus  much  notice  of 

that  city,  fo  celebrated  as  the  royal  feat  of  Agamemnon,  howibever 

little  cccafion  there  may  be  hereafter  to  diftinguifh  it  by  name  *. 

Cotemporary  with  Perfeus  was  Pelops,  fon  of  Tantalus,  king  of  ifocrat.  He- 
Phrygia  in  Afia  Minor:  who,   preffed,  it   is    faid,  by   unfuccefsful   len\enc,om:.. 

Jb  '  J  Sn-abo,  1.  vm. 

war,  quitted  his  country,  with  the  eafinefs  ufual  in  thofe  early  ages,   p-_  321- 
at  the  head  of  his  partizans,  to  feek  better  fortune  elfewhere.     De-   oiymp.  i. 
fectively  as  the  circumftances  of  this  prince's  ftory  are  tranfmitted  to 
us,  and  mingled   with   romantic   fable,  yet   fome  of  the  moil:  im- 
portant remain  ftrongly  authenticated.     It  appears   that   the  weftern 
provinces  of  Afia  Minor  advanced   before   Greece   toward  arts  and 
civilization.     This,  for  which  we  have  many  grounds  of  furmize, 
receives   confirmation  from   the  candid   and  judicious  Thucydides, 
who  relates  that,  while  the  Greeks  were  yet  barbarous  and  their  coun-    Thucyd.  l.  i. 
try  poor,  Pelops,  bringing  with  him  treafures  to  an  amount  before   c'  9' 
unknown,  quickly  acquired  an  intereft  fuperior  to  that  of  any  native. 
We   are  farther  informed   by   Polybius,  whofe  teftimony,  in   itfelf  Polyb.  1.  ii. 
weighty,  is  confirmed  by  Strabo  and  Paufanias,   that  Pelops  was  at-   sirabo'  l.viii. 
tended  into   Peloponnefus   by   a  body   of   Achaians  from  Theffaly,   P-  3J?3- 
whom  he  eftablifhed  in  Laconia.     But  we  learn  from  Homer,  that  c-  l8-  &!.▼• 

C.    I  2. 

the  Achaian  name  fpred  far  in  the  peninfula  ;  for  he  calls  the  Ar-   Iliad,  l.  ii. 

v.  559. 

*  Strabo  has    remarked,    that    the    poets     ufed  one  name  for  the  other.     Strabo,  1,  viii. 
thought   it  of  fo  little  confequence  to  dillin-     p.  377. 
guilli  Argos  and   Mycenas,   that   they   often 

gians, 


24  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  I.     gjans>  wjtk  alj  the  pe0pie  0f  tne  north-eaftern  coaft,  Achaians  ;  and 
K__^__t'     he  diftinguifhes  the  whole  of  Peloponnefus  from  the  reft  of  Greece 

Strabo,  l.  viii.  by  the  name  of  Achaian  Argos.  A  large  concurrence  of  tradition 
affirms,  that  the  Phrygian  prince  married  Hippodameia,  daughter  of 
CEnomaus,  chief  of  Pifa  in  Eleia,  whom  he  fucceeded  in  the  fove- 
reignty  of  that  territory  ;  and  that  in  the  courfe  of  a  long  reign  he 
eftablifhed  his  influence,  not  fo  much  by  wars  as  by  the  marriages 
of  his  numerous  iftue  and  by  bis  wife  conducl,  affifted  however, 
probably,  by  fome  terror  of  his  power,  throughout  the  peninfula  ; 
infomuch  that  it  derived  from  him  the  name  which  it  retained  fo 
many  ages,   and  which  is  not  yet  wholly  obfolete  *. 

Aftydameia,  daughter  of  Pelops,  was  married  to  Sthenelus,  king  of 
Argos,  fon  of  Perfeus.  Their  fon  and  fuccefTor  Euryftheus  is  known 
for  his  enmity  to  Heracles,  or,  as  we  ufually  write  with  the  Latins, 

Paufan.  1.  v.    Hercules,  defcended  alfo  from  both  Perfeus  and  Pelops.  This  hero,  the 

c.  13.  . 

Grecian  or  the  Theban  Hercules,  as  he  is  often  called  to  diftinguifh 
Homer.  Iliad,  him  from  fome  great  men  of  other  countries  known  among  the 
Odyfli  1.  xi.  Greeks  by  the  fame  name,  was  born  at  Thebes  in  Bceotia,  of  Ale- 
Hefiod'scut.  mena>  wir~e  °f  Amphitryon,  king  of  that  city;  but,  according  to 
Herc.&The-   poetical  report,  his  father  was  the  god    Tupiter.      In  vain  would  hif- 

ogon.  v.  945.  o         j    1 

tory  inveftigate  the  particulars  of  the  life  of  this  celebrated  perfonage. 
While  we  mention  him  on  account  of  his  pofterity,  fo  illuftrious  in 
Grecian  ftory,  we  can  do  no  more  than  barely  aflign  him  his  rank, 
as  greateft  of  thofe  heroes  who,  prompted  by  a  fpirit  fimilar  to  that 
which  fo  many  ages  after  animated  the  northern  and  weftern  nations, 
devoted  themielves  to  toil  and  danger  in  the  fervice  of  mankind  and 
the  acquisition  of  honeft  fame  ;  oppofing  opprefTors,  and  relieving  the 
oppreffed  wherever  they  were  to  be  found,  and  bearing  thus  the 
fvvord  of  univerfal  juftice,  while  governments  were  yet  too  weak  to 
wield  it  •+•. 

•  The  Italians  have  altered  the  names  of       f  Refpice  vindicibus  pacatum  viribus  orbem, 
many  of  the  principal  places  of  Greece  and  Qua  latam  Nereus  casrulus  ambit  humum. 

the  Grecian  feas  ;  but  the  Greeks  themfelves  Se  tibi  pax  terras,  tibi  fe  tuta  cequora  debent : 
retain  the  ancient  names  almoll  univerfally.  ImpleiU  mentis  Solis  utramque  domum. 

Ovid.  Epift.  Deian.  Here. 
An 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  25 

The  hatred  of  Euryftheus,  which  purfued  Hercules  through  life,     CHAP.  1. 

ended   not  with   his   death.      His  children  and  friends,  obliged    to  SECT.  II. 

quit  Peloponnefus,  found   a    generous    reception   at    Athens.      The  Thucyd.  1.  i. 

Argian  monarch,  yet  unfatisfied,  invaded  Attica;   but  was   defeated  strabo,  1. viii. 

in  a  battle  with  the  Athenians,  and  flain.     This  event  made  way  ^]7"Sic< 

for  new  honors  and  power  to  the  family  of  Pelops.     Atreus,  fon  of  l.iv. 
that  prince  and  uncle  to  Euryftheus,  had  been  left  by  his  nephew 
regent  of  his  Peloponnefian  dominions  during  the  Attic  expedition. 
On   the  death   of  Euryftheus,   Atreus  aflumed  the  fovereignty ;   the 

treat nefs  of  his  connections  and  the  popularity  of  his  character  ap-  Thucyd.  1. 1. 

&  l       *  *  *  C.  Q. 

parently   precluding  competition.     The  claims  of  the   Perieid  and 

Pelopid  families,     thus  now,    by   right  or  violence,    united  in   the  ^rab°» L  vm- 

houfe  of  Pelops,  extended  overall   Peloponnefus.      Eleia  had  been  Iliad.  1.  ii. 

inherited  from  GZnomaiis.     Laconia,  including,  according  to  Strabo,  Strabo,  1.  viii. 

great  part  of  Meflenia,   was  occupied  by  the  colonies  from   Phrygia  ^Jtk.  1.  v. 

and   ThelTaly  which  had  followed  the  fortune  of  Pelops.     Achaia,  Q-  "■  &  L  v11- 

then  called  -/Eoialos,  or  /Egialeia,  with  Corinth,  was  of  the  parti-  Iliad.  1.  ii. 

.     .  .  V.    C/O. 

cular  domain  of  Mycenae.     Still  feveral  cities  of  Peloponnelus  had  Pauian.  1.  ii. 

each  its  chief,  prefiding  over  its  municipal  government;  and  the  de-  Homer.  Iliad, 

gree  of  dependance  cf  thefe  upon  the  paramount  fovereign  was  little  '• 1^\1^'  ^ 

exactly  defined  by  either  compact  or  cuftom  :   but  the  fuperiority  of  3*-  &fcq.  v. 

the  head  of  the  houfe  of  Pelops  in  rank,  and  his  claim   to  military  v.  160. 

command,  appear  to   have   been   undifputed.     Under   thefe   advan-  c.  9ucy  ' 

tageous    circumftances   the    Argian    fcepter    devolved  to   Agamem-  ^.^472" 

non     fon    or   grandfon  of    Atreus;    for   the  fucceflion  is    varioufly  ed.  Paris.  Au- 

j  a  '      ger. 

An  ingenious  attempt  to  elicit  hiftory  from  ever  well  known  that  the  Greeks  continually 

the  psetical  traditions  concerning  the  Grecian  altered  foreign  names,  to   accommodate  them 

Hercules  may  be  feen  in   Dr.    Samuel   Muf-  to   their    own   pronunciation   and   to   the  in- 

grave's   DifTertation    on   Grecian    Mythology,  flexions    of  their    language:    fometimes   they 

Remaining  teftimonies  concerning  the  eaftern  tranflated   them  ;    and    fometimes,  by    a    lefs 

heroes,  whom  the  Greeks  called  by  the  fame  violent  change,  by  the  tranfpoiition  or  altera- 

name/are  collected  in  Mr.  Bryant's  Syftem  of  tion  of  a  letter  or  two,  reduced  them  to  bear 

Ancient  Mythology.     It  is  truly  obierved  by  intirely  a  Grecian  appearance,  with  a  mean- 

Dr.  Mufgrave,   that  the  name  Heracles  bears  ing    however  totally  different   from    the   ori- 

all   appearance   of  being  originally   Grecian,  ginal.      Mr.  Bryant  has  collected  inltances  of 

formed  by  the  fame  analogy  as  Diodes,  Athe-  all  thefe  circumltances. 
nodes,  and  other  Greek  names.     It  is  how- 

E  related. 


26 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  I.      related  *.  Tradition  is,  however,  uniform  concerning  a  circumftance 
SECT.  II.     0f  more  hiftorical  importance  ;  an  acceflion  of  fortune,  which  brought 
'*XJ      all  the  fouthern  part  of  Peloponnefus  under  the  immediate  dominion 
of  Agamemnon. 

The  city  of  Laced^mon,  otherwife  called  Sparta,  was  founded 
at  a  period  beyond  certain  memorials.  It  appears  from  Homer  to 
have  been  among  the  moll  confiderable  of  the  remote  ages,  but  is 
little  known  for  any  remarkable  perfonages  or  events  till  the  reign  of 
Tyndareus,  whofe  wife,  the  poetical  Leda,  was  mother  of  the  cele- 
brated brothers  Caftor  and  Polydeuces,  or,  as  the  Romans  ab- 
breviated the  name,  Pollux,  and  the  (till  more  celebrated  lifters 
Clytemneftra  and  Helen.  The  brothers,  afterward  for  their 
heroic  deeds  deified  and  numbered  among  the  figns  of  the  zodiac, 
died  in  early  manhood.  The  lifters  were  married,  Clytemneftra  to 
Agamemnon,  and  Helen  to  his  brother  Menelaus.  Thus,  by  inhe- 
ritance through  thefe  princeffes,  a  large  and  valuable  domain  accrued 
to  the  houfe  of  Pelops.  The  immediate  command  of  Lacedaemon 
was  given  to  Menelaus.  But  the  time  to  which  we  now  approach 
being  diftinguiftied  by  that  very  celebrated  event  the  Trojan  war,  one 
of  the  great  epochs  of  Grecian  hiftory,  it  will  be  neceftary,  before 
we  proceed  farther  in  the  account  of  Peloponnefus,  to  take  fuch  a 
view  as  remaining  memorials  will  inable  us  to  take  of  the  reft  of 
Greece. 


*  Homer  fays,  that  the  fcepter  prefented 
from  Jupiter  by  Mercury  to  Pelops,  was  given 
by  him  to  Atreus,  who  at  his  death  left  it  to 
Thyeftes,  who  bequeathed  it,  with  the  fove- 
reignty  of  all  Argos  and  many  iilands,  to 
Agamemnon  (i).  He  mentions  nothingof  the 
murder  of  Chryfippus.  eldeft  fon  of  Pelops, 
by  Atreus,  nor  of  any  of  thofe  horrors  of  do- 
meflic  difcord  between  the  Amiving  brothers 
which  in  after-ages  filled  the  fcenes  of  the 
tragic  poets,  and  found  pla^e  even  in  the 
narration  of  grave  hiftoriansr  The  fcholiaft 
on  Homer  (2)    reports,  that  Atreus   dying  be- 

(1)  Iliad.  1.  ii.  v.  103.  (2)  Iliad.  1.  ii.  v.  10;. 

(4)  Clem.  Alex,  in  Strom. 


queathed  his  kingdom  to  his  brother  Thyeftes 
on  condition  that  he  fhould  refign  it  to  Aga- 
memnon, fon  of  Atreus,  on  his  attaining  man- 
hood, and  that  Thyeftes  faithfully  executed 
the  trull.  Both  iEfchylus  andStrabo  (3  ',  alfo 
call  Agamemnon  and  Menelaus  fons  of  Atreus. 
Others  (4)  have  fuppofed  them  his  grandions  by 
his  fonPleifthenes,  who  died  young.  Thearne- 
ral  notoriety  only,  it  ihould  feem,  of  the  paren- 
tage of  Agamemnon  in  Homer's  age  could 
occafion  his  negleft  to  particularize  it,  when 
he  has  fo  carefully  recorded  the  pedigrees  of 
many  inferior  perfonages. 

(3]   yEfchyl.  Agamcm.      Strabo,   1.  viii.  p.  372. 

SECT. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  27 


SECT.         III. 

Of  the  northern  Provinces  of  Greece  from  the  earllejl  Accounts  to  the 
Trojan  War,  Thefaly :  Tempe  :  Deucalion's  Flood :  Centaurs:  fa- 
fon :  Argonaut  ic  Expedition.  Besot ia :  Flood  of  Ogyges  :  'Thebes. 
Mtolia.  Attica:  Cccrops  .*  Athens:  JEgeus :  Thefeus :  Ariadne. 
Improvement  of  the  Athenian  Government  by  Thefeus :  The  Athe- 
nians the  firft  civilized  People  of  Greece. 

O  F  the  provinces  without  the  peninfula  the  two,  whofe  fruitful-     CHAP.  r. 
nefs  moftly  attracted   the  attention  of  emigrants,  were  Thessaly    sect.  hi. 
and  Bceotiaj   and  thefe  were  under  very  peculiar  natural  circum-         ---  — ' 
ftances.      Through  the  middle  of  the  former  runs  the  river  Peneius, 
which,  receiving  in  its  courfe  along  the  plain   many  fmaller  ftreams, 
and  the  overflowings  of  two  coniiderable  lakes,  forces  its  way  into 
the  fea  through   the   narrow  valley  of  Tempe,   between  the  moun- 
tains  Olympus   and   Oii'a.     A   country  thus  abounding  with  waters 
and  inclofed  by  mountains  could  not  but  be  fubject  to  inundations. 
Herodotus,  whom,  on  this  as  on  many  other  occafions,  Strabo  does   Herodot. 
not  difdain  to  follow,   relates  a  tradition  that  Theflaly  was  originally   '■ V1!  C-,I29- 

J  ,  ^n';'bo,  1.  vui. 

one  vaft.  lake,  without  vilible  outlet ;  till  an  earthquake,  rending  p-  430. 
Olympus  from  OiTa,  formed  the  valley  of  Tempe.  Still,  however,  the 
frequency  of  fmaller  floods  appears  to  have  cooperated  with  that 
fruitfulnefs  of  foil,  which  invited  rapine,  in  making  Theflaly  yet 
more  fubieel  to  revolutions  in  its  population  than  any  other  Grecian 
province  5  and  hence  perhaps  Homer  was  the  better  inabled  to  attri- 
bute to  his  hero  Achnlles,  the  principal  chieftain  of  thofe  parts  at  the 
time  of  the  Trojan  war,  the  honor  of  having  a  goddefs  for  his  mo- 
ther, and  for  his  father  a  mortal  indeed,  but  only  fecond  in  defcent 
from  Jupiter. 

Thessaly  was,  however,  unlefs  we  muff  except  Crete,  the  oldefl: 
obje£l  of  poetical  ftory  and  popular  tradition  of  any  part  of  Greece; 
and,  had  we  means  of  inveftigation,  were  perhaps  the  worthieft 
of  hiftorical  curiofity.     We  read  of  kings  there,  who  extended  their 

E  2  dominion 


28 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  I.     dominion   fouthward  as  far  as  the  Corinthian  ifthmus,  and  who  left 

SECT.  III.    monuments  of  their  wifdom  that  furvived  almofl  all  memory  of  their 

power.     Thefe  will  require  our  future  notice.     Theffaly  was  always 

Plato,  Menon.   fam0us  for  its  horfes,  and  the  turn  of  its  people   to  horfemanmip  ; 

t.  11.  p.  70.  8c  '       i  r 

Hippias  Ma-  which  feems  marked  by  the  ftory  of  the  Centaurs  as  earlier  known 
"284.  ed  Ser-  there  than  elfe where  in  Greece.  Whether  thofe  poetical  people  were 
native  Theffalians,  or  foreign  invaders  who  fettled  in  Theffaly, 
the  traditionary  character  of  the  centaur  Chiron  appears  to  imply  that 
they  were  a  people  fuperior  in  acquirements  to  the  fouthern  Greeks 
of  their  age*.  In  Theffaly  alfo,  at  the  port  of  Iolcus,  we  are  told, 
was  made  the  firft  fuccefsful  attempt  to  build  a  fliip  of  fize  fuperior 
to  what  had  before  been  known ;  and  from  thence  failed  the  cele- 
brated expedition  of  the  Argonauts.  Tho'  we  do  not  believe  all 
the  romantic,  and  dill  lefs  the  impomble  tales,  which  poets,  and  even 


*  The  mod  inquifitive  and  judicious  of  the 
ancient  antiquarians  appear  to  have  been  at  a 
lofs  what  to  think  of  the  Centaurs.  Strabo  calls 
them  Lye\a*  ti  <puhot  (i).a  mode  of  exprefilon  im- 
plying his  uncertainty  about  them,  while  he 
gives  them  an  epithet  for  which  no  reafon  ap- 
pears. Hefiod  (2)  and  Homer  never  fpeak  of 
them  as  a  favage  race,  and  feem  to  have  known 
nothing  of  their  equine  form  ;  which,  if  not 
an  Egyptian  invention,  has  been  found  out  by 
the  ingenuity  of  later  ages.  The  fcholiaft  on 
Homer  indeed  fays,  that  where  Neftor,  in  the 
firft  book  of  the  Iliad  (3),  fpeaks  of  mountain- 
beafts  deftroyed  byThefeus,  he  means  the  Cen- 
taurs :  but  this  interpretation  feems  violently 
far-fetched,  and  as  unwarrantable  as  unnecef- 
fary,  while  the  meaning  of  the  words  in  their 
common  acceptation  is  obvious,  and  perfectly 
confonant  to  every  account  of  the  ftate  of  things 
in  that  age.  Nor  does  the  fcholiaft  feem  bet- 
ter founded  in  fuppofing  that  the  Centaurs  are 
intended,  in  the  fecond  book  of  the  Iliad  (4), 
under  the  defcription  of  hairy  wild  bealts  of 
mount  Pelion.  In  the  Odyflee  (5)  we  find  the 
centaur  Eurytion,  whofe  very  name  imports  a 
refpedlable  character,  mentioned  with  the  ho- 


(i)  Strabo,  1.  ix.  p.  .539. 


(2)  Sc.  Hcic.  v.  184. 


norable  epithet  ayatiKvrlt ,  not  likely  to  be 
given  to  one  of  a  tribe  fit  to  be  defcribed  by 
the  grofs  appellations  of  mountain-beads  and 
hairy  favages.  He  behaved  ill  indeed  ;  but  it 
was  in  great  company;  and  it  is  expreisly 
mentioned  as  an  extraordinary  ciroumftance, 
the  confequence  of  accidental  drunken nefs. 
The  ftory  indeed  feems  to  be  intended  by  the 
poet  as  an  inftance  that  perfons  of  higheft  rank 
and  molt  refpeclable  character,  if  they  yield  to 
intemperance,  reduce  themfelves,  for  the  time, 
to  a  level  with  the  lowed:  and  moft  profligate, 
and  are  liable  to  fuffcr  accordingly.  Pindar 
in  his  3d,  4th,  and  9th  Pythian  Odes,  and  3d 
Nemean,  defcribes  the  Centaur  Chiron  as  a 
moft  paradoxical  being,  which  yet,  in  the 
fourth  Pythian,  he  has  defined  in  two  words, 
<pnp  SiTos,  a  godlike  wild-beaft.  But  even 
in  Xenophon's  time,  it  fhould  feem,  the  term 
Centaur  did  not  of  itfelf  difcriminate  the  imagi- 
nary animal  half-man  and  half-horfe  ;  for  that 
author,  wanting  to  particularize  fuch  animals, 
never  calls  them  fimply  Centaurs,  but  al- 
ways Hippocentaurs,  Horfe-centaurs.  See  Cy- 
ropred.  b.  iv. 


(3)  v,  268. 


(4)  v.  743. 


[5}  '■  xx!-  v-  295- 

fome 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  29 

fome  grave  hiftorians,  have  told  of  thofe  famous  adventurers ;  tho*     CHAP.  I. 
we  are  aware  of  the  mixture  of  eaftern  tradition  with  early  Grecian    SE£T^!' 
hiftory,  of  the  unavoidable  confufion  of  chronology  through  a  long 
courfe   of  oral   delivery,  and  of  the   blending   of  events   of  diftant 
countries  and  different  ages,  yet  it    feems   unreafonable   to  difcredit 
intirely  the  Argonautic  expedition ;  which,,  on  the  authority  of  an- 
cient writers,  and  with  perfect  confonance  to  probability  and  the  cha-   Pmdar-  Pyth. 
rafter  of  the  times,  may  be  fairly  related  thus.  Jafon,  a  young  man  of  Diod.Sic.l.iv. 
high  birth,  high  fpirit,  and  fuperior  bodily  accomplifhments,  cir- 
cumftances  which  excited  a  jealoufy  that  made  his  fituation  uneafy  at 
home,   was  ambitious  of  conducting  a  pirating   expedition,   then  an 
honorable  undertaking,   to   a   greater  diftance  than  any  had  ventured 
before  him.     With   the  afiiftance   of  the  wealth  and  power  of  his 
uncle,  who  was  prince  of  the  diftridl,  and  of  the  fkill  of  a  Phenician 
mechanic,  he  built  a  veffel  larger  than   had  hitherto  been  common 
among  the  Greeks.     His  own  rank  and  character,  together  with  the 
fame  of  his  fhip,  induced  young  men  of  diftinction  from  other  parts 
of  Greece  to   join  in  the  adventure.     They  directed  their  courfe  to 
Colchis,  on   the  eaftern  coaft  of  the  Euxine  fea;  a  country  in  fome 
degree  civilized,  according  to  Herodotus,  by  an  Egyptian  colony,  and   Herodot.  1.  ii. 
abounding  in  gold,  lilver  and  iron  mines.     They  incountered  many   Strabo,   1.  i. 
difficulties,  and  fuffered  fome  lofs ;  and  what  their  fuccefs  upon  the  C'  4v 
whole  was  appears  doubtful  :  but,  in  one  great  object  of  the  ambition 
of  their  age,   their  chief  at  leaft  was  gratified  :   the  princefs  Medeia, 
daughter  of  the  king  of  the  country,   went  off  with  him  and  palled 
to  Greece.    It  was  a  practice  of  the  Colchians,  as  we  are  told  by  Strabo   Strabo,  1.  ». 
and  Arrian,   to  collect  gold  on  mount  Caucafus  by   extending  fleeces  Arnan!  de 
acrofs  the  beds  of  the  torrents  :  as  the  water  paffed,  the  metallic  par-  Bell.  Mithrw 
tides  remained   intangled   in  the  wool.     Hence,  according  to  thofe 
informed  and  judicious  writers,   the  adventure  was  named  the  expe- 
dition of  the  golden  fleece. 

Bozotia  was  under  natural  circumftances  yet  more  extraordinary 
than  Theflaly.     It  is  a  vale  full  of  fubterranean  caverns,  and  pecu-  Strabo. 

liarly 


3«  HISTORYOFGREECE. 


CHAP.  i. 

SECT.  III. 


liarly  fubject  to  earthquakes.  The  furrounding  mountains  pour  in 
their  ftreams  on  all  fides,  forming  rivers  and  lakes,  without  any  fuch 
advantageous  and  permanent  outlet  as  the  valley  of  Tcmpe  gives  to 
the  waters  of  Theflaly.  Earthquakes  were  not  only  often  flopping 
old  channels,  and  forming  new  ones,  fome  open,  fome  underground, 
but  even  forming  new  lakes,  and  converting  the  fites  of  old  lakes  to 
dry  and  fertile  fail  ;  fo  that,  with  the  cultivated  country,  towns  alfo 
were  frequently  overwhelmed  by  the  waters.  The  flood  of  Ogyges 
was  probably  an  inundation  in  this  country,  unufually  deftruclive, 
which  drove  all  the  inhabitants  that  efcaped  with  life  to  feek  fafety 
in  the  adjoining  hilly  province  of  Attica.  The  flood  of  Deucalion 
Ariftot.  Me-  was  a  calamity  of  the  fame  kind  in  Theflaly,  or,  according  to  Ariltotle, 
c.  j4.  '    rather  in  the  weftern  provinces  about  Dodona  and  the  river  Achelous. 

Jndeed  the  fame  feafon  might  probably  produce  flmilar  confequences 
in  both ;  and  the  ignorance  of  aftertimes,  confounding  the  traditions 
of  thefe  inundations  with  the  imperfect  reports  yet  remaining  con- 
cerning the  general  deluge,  thus  gave  that  fcope  to  fable  and  poetical 
invention,  of  which  fuch  ample  ufe  has  been  made. 

Thefe  natural  calamities,  to  which  Bceotia  was  fo  liable,  were  not 
fufficient  to  induce  the  inhabitants  finally  to  defect  a  country  of  fuch 
fertility,  or  to  deter  adventurers  from  endeavouring  to  eftablifh  them- 
felves   in    it.       A   Phenician   colonv   under   Cadmus   is  faid   to   have 

j 

Strabo,  1.  ix.   founded  the   celebrated  city  of  Thebes.      It  appears  indeed  that,  iri 

P-  4°' • 

Ifocrat.  He-  procefs  of  ages,  Bceotia,  as  well  as  Theflaly,  became  lefs  fubjedt  to 
thole  defolating  inundations.  A  principal  relief  was  derived,  accord- 
ing to  Strabo,  from  the  accidental  forming  of  a  fubterranean  opening, 
by  which  the  river  Cephifus,  and  the  overflowings  of  the  lake 
Copais,  formerly  deftitute  of  any  known  vent,  were  difcharged  into 
the  fca.  No  part  of  Greece  was  more  fruitful  in  matter  for  fable 
and  poetry  than  Thebes.  The  ftories  of  Cadmus  himfelf,  of  Semele; 
Bacchus,  Antiope,  Zethus,  Amphion,  Amphitryon,  Alcmena,  Her- 
cules, Laius,  Jocafta,  CEdipus,  Eteocles,  Polynices,  may  be  red  with 
pleafure  and  advantage  in  the  works  of  the  Greek  and  Latin  poets, 

but 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  31 

but  fearcely  elfewhere.     From  them  however  we  may   collect  that     CHAP.  I. 
Thebes  was,  in  this  remote  age,  one  of  the  moft  flourifhing  and  power-     SECT.  ill. 

ful   cities  of  Greece.     The  war   which   it  fuftained  againft  the  feven  Hefiod.Op.8e 

chiefs,   authenticated    to   us    by  Kefiod   and  Homer,  and  made   il-  mad,   1.' iv. ' 

luftrious  by  the  tragedy  of  .rEfcbylus,   and   the  epic  poem^of  Statius,  ^  377-  ^V1- 

is  the  firft  inftance  of  a  league   among  Grecian  princes,   and  of  any  !•■»£  T-»4- 

thing  approaching  to  regular  war.  v.  247. 

The  j^tolians  were,   in   thefe  early  times,   not  inferior  to  their 
neighbours   in  civilization,    or  in    confequence   among   the  Grecian 
people.     Poetry  has  immortalized   their  heroes  Tydeus,   Meleager, 
and  others.     Homer  adverts  in   two   lines,  ftrongly  marked  by  that   Iliad.  1.  ii. 
power,  which  he  Angularly  poffeffed.of  exprefling  the  deepeft  pathetic 
in  the  fimpleft  terms,  to  the  cataftrophe  of  the  family  of  CEneus, 
king  of  the  country,  as  to  a  ftory  well  known  among  his  cotempora- 
ries.     Thoas,  commander  of  the  i^tolian  troops  at  the  fiege  of  Troy, 
is  reprefented  not  only  as  a  leader  of  general  merit,   but  for  his  elo-   Iliad.  1.  xv. 
quence  remarkable.     Hereafter  we  ihall   find  great  inferiority  in  the       2  4' 
comparative  progrefs  of  the  iEtolians.     The  peculiar  dangers  of  their 
feas,  efpecially  of  the  paffage  from  the  eafl  round  the  capes  of  Pelo-   Strabo,  l.viii. 
ponnefus,  very  much  excluded  them  from  the  commerce  of  the  more   mer. 
civilized  nations.     The  adjoining  people  of  Acarnania,   alone  of  all 
the  Greeks,  had  not  the  honor  of  partaking  in  the  Trojan  war ;   and, 
for  fome  centuries  after  that  event,  thefe  weftern  provinces  had  little 
communication  with  the  reft  of  Greece.      Fhocis,  Doris,  and  Locris, 
are  alio  without  objects    of  hiftory ;    but   Attica,   were   it  only  for 
its   fubfequent   fame,    will   demand  fome  notice   of  its   early  tradi- 
tions. 

Ogyges  has  had  the  reputation  of  being  the  firft  king  of  Attica  ; 
and  chronologers  have  undertaken  even  to  fix  the  time  of  his  reign. 
It  is  fet  by  fome  above  two  hundred,   and  by  the  moft  moderate  a   Biair'3  Ta- 

bles. 

hundred  and  fifty  years   before  the  next  event,  and  even  before  the  Chronol.Ta- 

next  name  of  a  man  recorded  in  Attic  hiftory.     But  we  have   no  Vol.  of  Hift 

affurance  that  even  the  name  of  Ogyges  was  known  to  the  older  Gre-  Co^t/^d  ^ 

cian  preaux. 


32  HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 

chap.  I.     c;an    authors  *.     If  anything  can  be  gathered  from  the  traditions 
SECT.  III.    concerning  fuch  a  peribnage,  reported  by  later  writers  of  beft  autho- 
rity, it  is  that,  at  fome   period   too  far  beyond  connected  hiftory  for 
any   calculation   of  its   date,    a  flood,    defolating   the   rich   fields  of 
Bceotia  over   which  he   reigned,   drove  many  of  the    inhabitants  to 
eftablilli   themfelves    in    the    adjoining    country   of    Attica ;    hilly, 
rocky,    and  little  fruitful ;   yet  preferable   to  the  mountainous  tracts 
every    other    way    furrounding     their    former    fettlements.        Both 
Strabo,  1.  ix.    Strabo    and    Pauianias    mention    a    tradition,    that    anciently    there 
Paufkn.  1.  ix.   nacl   been  towns   in    Bceotia  called    Athens  and  Eleufis  which  had 
c#  *4*  been   overwhelmed    by  a  deluge.       But   in   the  very  early   ages  we 

find  the  fame  names  given  to  various  places,  often  widely  diftant ; 
a  circumftance  probably  owing  to  the  frequency  and  extent  of 
migration,  while  the  variety  of  language  over  the  world  was  little. 
Thus,  belide  the  Boeotian  Thebes  and  the  vaft  capital  of  Upper 
Egypt,  there  were  towns  of  the  lame  name  in  Pamphylia,  in  Myiia, 
and  in  ThelTaly  :  the  name  of  Larilla  was  yet  more  common  through 

Strabo,  1.  ix.    Greece  and  Alia  Minor;  and,  befide  the  Argos  in  Peloponnefus,  there 
p.  440.  _  ° 

was  an  Argos  in  Theflaly,  another  in  Acarnania,  and  a  fourth  in  Italy. 

Strabo  fays  that  Bceotia  was  anciently  called  Ogygia  -f-.     To  the  time 

„    ,     ,  ■      of  Paufanias  one  of  the  gates    of  Thebes  in  Boeotia  was  called  the 

Paufan.  1.  ix.  t> 

c.  8.  Ogygian  gate  :   but  the  early  ./Efchylus  gives  the  epithet  Ogygian  to 

v.  39.   '  Thebes  on   the  Nile;   whence   it  feems  moft   likely  that  Egypt  was 

its  original  country. 

With  Ogyges,  however,  even  rumor  of  events  in  Attica  ceafes, 
till  Cecrops  became  prince  of  the  province  ;  leading  thither,  according 
to  the  rnofr.   received  and  probable  accounts,   a  colony  from  Egypt. 

*  Ogyges,    I  believe,    is  not   mentioned  by  that  the  oriental  mannerof  expreflion,  by  which 

Hefiod,  Homer, Herodotus,  Thucydides, Plato,  a  name   in   the  lingular  fignified  a  people,    as 

Arillotle,   or  even  Strabo  ;   to  all  of  whom  ap-  Ifrael  often  means  the  whole  people  deicended 

parently,    he  mull  have  occurred  as  an  object  from   the    patriarch    Ifrael,    may   have   led  to 

of  mention,  had  his  ftory  been  at  all  known  in  much    confufion  in  Grecian    tradition.      The 

their  times,  or,  at  leaft,  had  it  had  any  credit,  names  Cecrops,  Cranaus,  Cadmus,  and  others, 

■f  He  adds,  that  it  was  then  under  the  go-  open     wide    fields   for   conjecture,    in   which, 

vernment  of  Cecrops.      It  is   certainly  a  pro-  however,    it  will  be  little  proper  for  the  lufto- 

bable  conjecture  of  the   learned  Mr.  Pryant,  rian  to  expatiate. 

According 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  33 

According  to  every  account,  he  found  the  natives  a  moft  wild  and  igno-      CHAP.  I. 
rant  people  ;  a  circumftance,  however,  far  from  adverfe  to  his  purpofe    sect,  ill, 
of  forming  a  fettlement.     The   country  alfo,   tho  not  offering  the 
moft  alluring  profpect  to  the  vulgar  covetoufnefs  of  the  age,  was  yet, 
to  the  more  informed  and  penetrating  eye,  far  from  uninviting.     On 
the  verge  of  a  plain,  watered  by  two  fmall  ftreams,  a  haven  pre- 
fented  itfelf,    commodious  for  the  veffels  of  the  time.     Between  the 
ftreams,  near  their  junction,   and  about  three  miles  from  the  fhore, 
a  rock,  riling  nearly  perpendicular  on  all  fides,   had  every  advantage 
for  a  fortified  poft.     Mountains,   but  not  of  that  formidable  height 
common   through   Greece,  at  fome  diftance  furrounded   the  plain ; 
which,  though  not  of  the  firft  fertility,   appeared  yet  not  adverfe  to 
cultivation.      Cecrops   occupied  the  rock  j   and,  how  far   by  force 
how  far  by  perfuafion  we  are  not  at  all  informed,  he  extended  his  do- 
minion over  the  whole  tract  afterward  called  Attica.     He  divided  this   Strabo,  1.  ix. 
territory  into  twelve  diftricts,  with  a  principal  town,  or  rather  perhaps    piurarch. 
village,  in  each,  where  he  caufed  juftice  to  be  adminiftered  according   Thd' 
to  fome  falutary  laws  which  he  eftablifhed ;  and  he   taught  his  fub- 
jefts  a  more  regular  and  effectual  mode  of  defence  againft  the  incur- 
fions  of  the  Boeotians,  their  only  neighbours,  from  which  even  their 
poverty  did  not  exempt  them ;  for  in  all  times  neighbour  and  enemy 
have,   in   the  language  of  politics,    been   nearly  fynonymous.     The 
fortrefs,  which  he  made  his  refidence,  was  from  his  own  name  called 
Cecropia,  and  was  peculiarly  recommended  to  the  patronage  of  the 
Egyptian   goddefs,  whom   the   Greeks  worfhipped   by  the   name  of 
Athena,   and.the  Latins  of  Minerva.     Many,  induced  by  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  port,   and  expecting  fecurity  both  from  the  fortrefs 
and  from  its  tutelary  deity,  erected  their  habitations  around  the  foot 
of  the  rock ;  and  thus  arofe  early  a  considerable    town  which,  from 
the  name  of  the  goddefs,   was   called  Athenai,   or,  as  we  after  the 
French  have  corrupted  it,  Athens. 

This  account  of  the  rife  of  Athens,  and  of  the  origin  of  its  go- 
vernment, tho  poflibly   a    village,    and  even  a  fortrefs,    may  have 

F  exifted 


34 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  I.  exifted  there  before  Cecrops,  is  fupported  by  a  more  general  concur- 
rence of  traditionary  teftimony,  and  more  complete  confonancy  to 
the  reft  of  hiftory,  than  is  often  found  for  that  remote  age*.  The 
Strabo  l.  ix.  ftibfequent  Attic  annals  are  far  lefs  fatisfactory.  Strabo  declines  the 
P-  392-  endeavour  to  reconcile  their  inconfiftencies  ;  and  Plutarch  gives  a 

ftrong  picture  of  the  uncertainties  and  voids  which  occurred  to 
him  in  attempting  to  form  a  hiftory  from  them.  '  As  geographers,' 
he  fays,  '  in  the  outer  parts  of  their  maps,  diftinguifh  thofe  coun- 
'  tries  which  lie  beyond  their  knowlege  with  fuch  remarks  as  thefe, 
'  All  here  is  dry,  and  deiert  fand,  or  marfh  darkened  with  perpetual 
'  fog,  or  Scythian  cold  or  frozen  fea  ;  fo  of  the  earlieft  hiftory  we 
'  may  fay,  All  here  is  monftrous  and  tragical  land,  occupied  only  by 
*  poets  and  fabulifts.'  If  this  apology  was  necefThry,  even  from 
Plutarch,  for  fuch  an  account  as  could  in  his  time  be  collected  of  the 
life  of  Thefeus,  none  can  now  be  wanting  for  omitting  all  difquifi- 
tion  concerning  the  four  or  feven  kings,  for  even  their  number  is 
not  afcertained,  who  are  faid  to  have  governed  Attica  from  Cecrops 
to  JEgeus,  father  of  that  hero.     The  fame  of  Amphitryon  indeed, 

*  In  an  ingenious  diflertation  on  Grecian  Greece,  and  in    his    time   performed   in    the 

mythology,  by  Dr.  S.  Mufgrave,   it  has  been  fame    manner   in    both    countries.      We    may 

endeavoured  to  prove  that  Cecrops  was  a  na-  eafily  conceive  Attic  vanity  in  later  times  hurt 

tive   Greek,  and   that  the  religion  of  Athens  by  the  idea  that  the  founder  of  Athens  was  an 

was   not  derived  from  Egypt.      Other  works,  Egyptian,   and  that  even   their  tutelary  deity, 

however,  of  deeper  inquiry,    abundantly  fup-  whom  the  Athenians  were   fond   of  elteeming 

port  the  contrary  pofitions  ;  particularly  Black-  their  peculiar  proteftrefs,  was  borrowed.     Both 

well's   Life  of    Homer,    Monboddo  on  Lan-  fafts  militated  with  their  title  of  Autochthones, 

guage,      Bryant's    Ancient    Mythology   (1),  which,  in  the  decline  of  their   glory,   com- 

and    Pownall   on   the    Study    of    Antiquities,  paring  themfelves  with  the  numerous  Grecian 

That    the    Athenians   were    a    mixed    people,  ftates  of  later  fame,  and  colonies   of   known 

we    learn    not   only    from    many   pafTages  of  date,  they  vainly  afl'umed.     But  Thucydides, 

Herodotus,    fcarcely    to    be    queflioned,     but  if  he  had  any  refpeft  for  that  title,  had  cer- 

alfo  from  the  direft  te.Hmony  of  Thucydides,  tainly  no  faith  in  it  ;  and  when  Herodotus, 

which  muft  be  efieemed  unquestionable.      The  Plato,   Strabo,    and    Diodorus,    who    all    tr'a- 

early    communication    between    Greece    and  veiled  into  Egypt  purpolely  to  inform  them- 

Egypt  is  alfo  eftablifhed  beyond  contradiction  ;  felves  upon  fuch  fubjedls,  agree  in  reprefent- 

and  that  this  intercourfe  operated  powerfully  ing  the  Athenian  Minerva  as  the  fame  goddefs 

upon  Grecian  religion  is  not  reafonably  to  be  peculiarly  worihipped  at  Sais  in  Egypt,  it  does 

doubted.     Herodotus  exprefsly  mentions    not  not  appear  what  can  authorize  a  modern  to 

only  the  belief  of  gods,  but  the  practice  of  re-  controvert  it. 
ligious  ceremonies  imported  from  Egypt  into 

(i)  See  p«rucul»r!y  vol.  I.  p.  183. 

whofe 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  35 

whofe  name  we  find  in  the  lift,  excites  a  reafonable  curioiity  :  but      CHAP.r. 
as  it  is  not  in  his  government  of  Athens  that  he  is  particularly  an  ob-    S^X!JL 
jed  of  hiftory,  we  mail  defer  farther  mention  of  him. 

Various,  uncertain,  and  imperfect  then  as  the  accounts  were  which 
palled  to  pofterity  concerning  the  early  Attic  princes,  we  are  yet  af- 
fured  by   Thucydides,  that  Attica  was  the  province  of  Greece  in   Thucyd.  l.i. 
which  population  firft  became  fettled,  and  where  the  earlieft  pro- 
grefs  was  made  toward  civilization.     Being  nearly  peninfular,  it  lay 
out  of  the   road  of  emigrants  and  wandering  freebooters  by  land  ; 
and  its  rocky  foil,  fupporting  few  cattle,  afforded  fmall   temptation 
to  either.     The  produce  of  tillage  was  of  lefs  eafy  removal,  and  the 
gains  of  commerce  were  fecured  within  fortifications.     Attica  there- 
fore grew  populous,  not  only  from  the  fecurity  which  the  natives 
thus  in  joyed,  but  from  a  conflux  of  ftrangers  from  other  parts  of 
Greece  :  for  when  either  foreign  invaiion  or  inteftine  broil  occafioned 
anywhere  neceffity  of  emigration,   the  principal   people   commonly 
reforted  to  Athens,  as  the  only  place  of  permanent  fecurity,  and  where 
ftrangers  of  chara&er,  able    by   their  wealth  or   their  ingenuity  to 
fupport   themfelves  and  benefit  the  community,  were  eafily  admitted  Thucyd.ibid. 
to  the  privileges  of  citizens. 

But,  as   population   increafed,  the   fimple  forms    of  government 
and  jurifprudence   eftabliihed  by  Cecrops  were  no  longer  equal   to 
their  purpofe.     Civil  wars  arofe  :    the   country  was  invaded  by  fea  :    Thucyd.  1.  ii. 
Erechtheus,  called  by  later  authors  Erichthonius,  and  by  the  poets   «15'.  Ii;  d 
ftiled  Son  of  the  Earth,  acquired  the  fovereignty,   bringing,  accord-   l.ii.  v.  54.8. 

•      j        1  r  Diodor.  Sic. 

ing  to  fome  not  improbable  reports,  a  fecond  colony  from  Egypt  *.   1.  i.  0  .29. 

*  It  is  clear,   as  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  has  ob-  lift  of  Athenian  kings,  than  the  name  of  Eri- 

ferved,thatHomerdefcribes(i),  under  the  name  fichthon,  which  occurs   in    the   fame  paflage. 

of  Erechtheus,     the    fame    prince   whom    the  On  the  contrary,  as  Sir  Ifaac  has  farther  jullly 

chronologers,  and  even  Paufanias,  would  dif-  obferved(3), Plato  himfelfhas  called  that  prince 

tinguifh    from    Erechtheus    by    the    name    of  Erechtheus,  whom    later    writers   call    Erich- 

Erichthonius.     The  name  of  Erichthonius,  as  thonius.     Nor  is  there  any  appearance  of  the 

an  Athenian,   is  mentioned  by  Plato  (2)  ;   but  fecond  Cecrops  and  the   fecond  Pandion  being 

with  no  more  authority  for  inferting  it  in  the  known  to  the  earlier  Grecian  writers,  or  even 

(1)  Iliad.  1.  ii,  v.  547.  (2)  Critiai.  p  no.  t.  lii.   t&.  Scrran.  (3)  Chronol.  p.  144. 

F  2  to 


36  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  I.      Eumolpus,  with  a  body   of  Thracians,  about  the  fame  time  efta- 
sect.  in.    blifhed  himfelf  in  Eleuiis.    When,  a  generation  or  two  later,  y£geus, 
Strabo,  1. vii.    cotemporary    with    Minos,     fucceeded    his    father    Pandion    in    the 
Paufan.  1.  i.     throne,  the  country  feems  to  have  been  well-  peopled,  but  the  go- 
c-  38,  vernment  ill-conftituted  and  weak.     Concerning  this  prince,  how- 

ever, and  his  immediate  fucceffor,  tradition  is  more  ample ;  and, 
tho  abundantly  mixed  with  fable,  yet  in  many  inftances  appa- 
rently more  authentic  than  concerning  any  other  perfons  of  their 
remote  age.  Plutarch  has  thought  a  hiftory  of  Thefeus,  fon  of 
JEgeus,  not  unfit  to  hold  a  place  among  his  parallel  lives  of  the  great 
men  of  Greece  and  Rome;  and  we  find  his  account  warranted  in 
many  points  by  flrong  correiponding  teftimony  from  other  ancient 
authors  of  various  ages.  The  period  alfo  is  fo  important  in 
the  annals  of  Attica,  and  the  accounts  remaining  alltogether  go  fo 
far  to  illuftrate  the  manners  and  circumftances  of  the  times,  that  it 
may  be  proper  to  allow  them  fome  fcope  in  our  narration. 

i*Egeus,  king  of  Athens,  tho  an  able  and  fpirited  prince,  yet, 
in  the  divided  and  diforderly  ftate  of  his  country,  not  without  dif- 
Plut.  Thef.  ficulty  maintained  his  fituation.  When  paft  the  prime  of  life  he  had 
the  misfortune  to  remain  childlefs,  tho  twice  married  ;  and  a 
faction  headed  by  his  apparent  heirs,  the  numerous  fons  of  Pallas 
his  younger  brother,  gave  him  unceafing  difturbance.  Thus  urged 
he  went  to  Delphi  to  implore  information  from  the  oracle  how  the 
bleffing  of  children  might  be  obtained.  Receiving  an  anfwer  which, 
like  moft  of  the  oracular  refponfes,  was  unintelligible,  his  next 
concern  was  to  find  fome  perfon  capable  of  explaining  to  him  the 
will  of  the  deity  thus  myfterioufly  declared.  Among  the  many  efta- 
blifhments  which  Pelops  had  procured  for  his  family  throughout 
Peloponnefus,  was  the   fmall  town  and  territory  of  Trcezene,  on  the 

to  Trogus  Pompeius,  if  we  may  truft   his  epi-  of  Athenian  kings  fhows  that  what  he  reports 

tomizer(j);   and   tho'  Paufanias  thought  he  was    before    little    known,  and  remained    for 

had  difcovered  authority   for   them,    yet   the  him,  in  a  very  late  age,  to  inveftigate. 
very  manner  in  which  he  relates  the  fucceffion 

(ij  Juftm.  1,  ii.  c.  6. 

coaft 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE,  n 

coaft  oppofite  to  Athens,  which  he  put  under  the  government  of  his      CHAP.  I. 

fon  Pittheus.     To  this  prince  iEgeus  applied.     He  was  not  only  in    SECT.  III. 

his  own  age  eminent  for  wifdom,   but  his   reputation  remained  even 

in   the  moll  flourimi-ng  period  of  Grecian  philofopbyj  yet  fo  little 

was  he  fuperior  to  the  ridiculous,  and  often  deteftable  fuperftition  of 

his  time,  that,  in  confequence  of  fome  fancied  meaning  in  the  oracle 

which   even   the  fuperflitious    Plutarch  confefies  himfelf  unable  to 

comprehend,  he   introduced  his  own   daughter  iEthra  to  an  illicit 

commerce  with  jfEgeus. 

Before  Cecrops,  if  we  may  believe  traditions  very  generally  re-   Juftin.  1.  ii. 

c.  6. 
ceived  in   the  polimed  ages,   the  people  of  Attica  were  in  knowlege 

and  civilization  below  the  wildeft  favages  difcovered  in  modern 
times.  The  moit  neceffary  arts,  and  the  mod  indifpenfible  regula- 
tions of  fociety,  were  unknown  to  them.  Marriage  was  introduced 
by  Cecrops  :  the  culture  of  corn  is  faid  to  have  been  of  later  date. 
But  the  colonies  from  Egypt,  Phenicia,  and  Thrace  quickly  made 
the  Atticans  a  new  people.  At  a  period  far  beyond  connected  hif- 
tory  we  find  all  the  principal  oriental  tenets  and  maxims  of  fociety 
firmly  efbblifhed  among  them.  Marriage  was  in  high  honor;  vir- 
ginity refpeclable  ;  infidelity  in  a  wife  deeply  difgracefulj  polygamy 
unknown  ;  but  concubinage  for  a  hufband  as  lawful  as  it  was  com- 
mon ;  baftardy  no  ftain  upon  children  ;  divorces  little  heard  of. 
./Egeus  had  a  wife  living  at  the  time  of  his  vifit  to  Pittheus ;  and 
marriage  feems,  on  that  occafion,  to  have  been  intended  by  no  party. 
/Ethra,  however,  proved  fhortly  pregnant;  while  the  affairs  of  At- 
tica, in  the  utmofr.  confufion,  required  the  immediate  return  of 
/Egeus.    His  departure  from  Trcezene  is  marked  by  an  action  which, 

6  r  J  '     Plutarch. 

to  perfons  accuilomed  to  confider  modern  manners  only,  may  ap-   Thef. 
pear  unfit  to  be  related  but  in  a  fable,  yet  is  really  fo  confonant  to   c.  2-. 
the  manners  of  the  times,  and  fo  characteristic  of  them,  as  to  de- 
mand the  notice  of  the  hiftorian.     He  privately  led  IEthra  to  a  fe- 
queflered  fpot,  where  was  a  fmall  cavity  in  a   rock.     Depofiting 

there 


38  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  I.  there  a  hunting-knife  *  and  a  pair  of  fandals,  he  covered  them  with 
SEC  j  .  III.  a  rouble  fragment  of  enormous  weight.  Then  addreffing  /Ethra, 
'  If,'  faid  he,  *  the  child  you  now  bear  mould  prove  a  boy,  let  the  re- 
'  moval  of  this  ftone  be  one  day  the  proof  of  his  ftrength  :  when  he 
*  can  effect  it,  fend  him  with  the  tokens  contained  under  it  to 
'  Athens." 

Pittheus,  well  knowing  the  genius  and  the  degree  of  information 
of  his  fubjedts  and  fellowcountrymen,  thought  it  not  too  grofs  an 
impoiition  to  report  that  his  daughter  was  pregnant  by  the  god  Po- 
feidon,  or,  as  we  ufually  call  him,  with  the  Latins,  Neptune,  the 
tutelary  deity  of  the  Tra-zenians.  A  fimilar  expedient  feems  indeed 
to  have  been  often  fuccefsfully  ufed  to  cover  the  difgrace  which, 
even  in  thofe  days,  would  otherwife  attend  fuch  irregular  amours  in 
a  lady  of  high  rank,  though  women  of  lower  degree  appear  to  have 
derived  no  difhonor  from  concubinage  with  their  fuperiors.  Thefeus 
was  the  produce  of  the  fingular  connection  of  i"£thra  with  ^Egeus. 
He  was  carefully  educated  under  the  inflection  of  his  grandfather, 
and  gave  early  proofs  of  uncommon  vigor  both  of  body  and  mind. 
When  he  had  attained  manhood,  his  mother,  in  purfuance  of  the 
injunction  of  JEgeus,  unfolding  to  him  the  reality  of  his  parentage, 
conducted  him  to  the  rock  where  his  father's  tokens  were  depolited. 
He  removed  the  ftone  which  covered  them  with  a  facility  fufficiently 
indicating  that  fuperior  bodily  ftrength  fo  neceffary,  in  thofe  days, 
to  fupport  the  pretentions  of  high  birth ;  and,  thus  incouraged,  fhe 
recommended  to  him  to  carry  them  to  JEgeus  at  Athens.  This 
propofal  perfectly  fuited  the  temper  and  inclination  of  Thefeus  -, 
but  when  he  was  farther  advifed  to  go  by  fea,  on  account  of  the 
fhortnefs  and  fafety  of  the  paffage,  piracy   being  about  this   time 

*  The  Greeks  ufually  carried  two  weapons  defcribing  the  depofiting  of   the  weapon    by 

of  the  fword  kind,  one  called  |i^o;,  the  other  JEgeus,  apparently  thinking  only  of  the  great 

^a^ip,   very   different  one    from    the    other,  deeds  that  were  to  be  done  with  it,    calls  it  the 

but  commonly  both   rendered  in   Englifh    by  Xiphos.      The  ftory  which  he  afterward  relates 

the   word    sword.      The  Xiphos  was  a    large  made  it  neceflary  that  it  fhould  become  the  Ma- 

broadfword  ;    the    Machaira   was   but  a  large  chaira.      For  authority  for  the  difiinftion  Ho- 

knife,   and   ufed    for   the   purpofe   cf  a   knife  mer's  Iliad  may  be  feen,  b.  iii.   v.  271.  b.  xi. 

equally  and  a  weapon.  Plutarch,  who  often  nar-  v.  843.  Sc  b.  xix.  v.  252. 
rates,  and  fometimes  even  argues  carclefsly,  in  .  ■* 

fuppreffed 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  39 

fuppreffed  by  the  naval  power  of  Minos,  king  of  Crete,  he  poiitively     CHAP.  I. 
y     ,  J  SECT.  III. 

refufed.  v    ,  v  .,; 

The  journey  by  land  was  more  than  four  times  longer,  and  highly 
dano-erous.  That  age,  fays  Plutarch,  produced  men  of  extraordinary 
dexterity,  of  extreme  fwiftneis,  of  unwearied  ftrength ;  who  ufed 
thefe  natural  advantages  for  no  good  purpofe,  but  placed  their  injoy- 
ment  in  the  commiffion  of  infult,  outrage,  and  cruelty;  efteeming 
the  commendations  beftowed  upon  modefty,  righteoufnefs,  juftice 
and  benevolence,  as  proceeding  from  fear  to  injure,  or  dread  of  re- 
ceiving injury,  and  little  becoming  the  powerful  and  the  bold.  This 
feems  a  picture  of  all  countries,  where,  with  a  competency  of  inha- 
bitants, a  regular  and  vigorous  government  is  wanting.  Five  cen- 
turies ago,  it  would  have  fuited  England,  France,  and  all  weftern 
Europe.  It  agrees  fo  perfectly  with  all  the  accounts  remaining  of 
early  Greece,  and  particularly  thofe  of  Homer,  whofe  teftimony  is 
unqueftionable,  and  of  Thucydides,  the  mod  authoritative  of  any 
fubfequent  writer,  that  we  may  hence  conclude  the  poetical  {lories 
of  the  golden  age,  and  the  reign  of  Saturn,  were  not  originally  Gre- 
cian, but  derived  from  the  Eaft*.  This  turbulent  {hate  of  things 
produced  alfo  nearly  the  fame  confequences  in  Greece,  as  fince  in 
weftern  Europe.  It  is  amid  anarchy  and  defolation  that  great  virtues, 
as  well  as  great  vices,  have  the  ftrongeft  incentives  to  exertion,  and 
the  moft  frequent  opportunities  of  becoming  confpicuous.  While 
governments  were  unable  to  reprefs  outrages,  individuals  generoufly 
undertook  the  glorious  talk.  Afterward  focieties  were  formed  for 
the  purpofe.  Thus  arofe  the  Italian  republics,  the  free  cities  of  Robertfon's 
Germany,  and  the  corporations  throughout  Europe ;  and  by  the  fame  HMor^or16 
neceffity  the  feveral  towns  of  Greece  were  driven  to  form  themfelves   Charles  v. 

*  Hefiod's  brazen  age  ( I )  fo  exaclly  corre-  connected    fhould  appear  to  any  to  lefien  its 

fponds  with  Plutarch's  account  of  the  age  of  authority,   Homer  will  abundantly  make  good 

Thefeus,  that  it  feems  evidently  a  defcription  the  deficiency  :  a  paflagein  the  xviiith  book  of 

of  the  fame  times  in  the  fame  country.     But  the  OdyfTee,  v.  139,  is  particularly  to  the  pur- 

if  the  mythological  pafiages  with  which  it  is  pofe. 

(»■)  Op.  &  Di.  1  i,  v.  hi. 

into 


4o 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


chap.  i. 

SECT.  III. 


Plutarch. 
Thef. 


Plutarch. 
Thef. 

Thucyd.  1.  i. 
c.5. 


into  regular  independent  ftates.  Through  the  greateft  part  of  mo- 
dern Europe,  the  feudal  fubordination  had  efficacy  enough  to  keep 
the  otherwise  disjointed  members  of  the  feveral  great  kingdoms 
united  under  one  head  ;  till  the  progrefs  of  civilization  and  fcience 
inabled  legiflation  to  form  of  the  whole  one  harmonized  and  vigorous 
body.  In  Greece,  fuch  a  bond  of  union  being  wanting,  every  town 
fought  ablblute  independency  as  effential  to  freedom  and  equal  go- 
vernment. In  modern  Italy  alfo,  which  in  fome  material  circum- 
itances  of  the  feudal  connection  differed  from  the  reft  of  Europe, 
independency  was  ardently  defired  by  the  commonwealths,  and  they 
attained  it.  The  age  of  Thefeus  was  the  great  era  of  thofe  heroes, 
to  whom  the  knights  errant  of  the  Gothic  kingdoms  afterward  bore 
fo  clofe  a  refemblance.  Hercules  was  his  near  relation.  The  actions 
of  that  extraordinary  perfonage  had  been  for  fome  years  the  fubiect 
of  univerfal  converfation,  and  were  both  an  incentive  and  a 
direction  to  young  Thefeus  in  the  road  to  fame.  After  having 
deftroyed  the  moft  powerful  and  atrocious  freebooters  throughout 
Greece,  Hercules  was,  according  to  Plutarch,  now  gone  into  Alia ; 
and  thofe  difturbers  of  civil  order,  whom  his  irrefiflible  might  and 
fevere  juftice  had  driven  to  conceal  themfelves,  took  advantage  of  his 
abfence  to  renew  their  violences.  Being  not  obfcure  and  vagabond 
thieves,  but  powerful  chieftains,  who  openly  defied  law  and  govern- 
ment, the  dangers  to  be  expected  from  them  were  well  known  at 
Trcezene.  Thefeus,  however,  perfevered  in  his  refolution  to  go  by 
land  :  alledging  that  it  would  be  ffiameful,  if,  while  Hercules  was 
traverfing  land  and  feas  to  reprefs  the  common  difturbers  of  man- 
kind, he  fbould  avoid  thofe  at  his  door ;  difgracing  his  reputed 
father  by  an  ignominious  flight  over  his  own  element,  and  carrying 
to  his  real  father,  for  tokens,  a  bloodlefs  weapon,  and  fandals  un- 
trodden, inftead  of  giving  proofs  of  his  high  birth  by  actions  worthy 
of  it. 

Thus  determined  he  began  his  journey,  with  what  attendants  we 
are  not  informed.     He  had  not,  however,  proceeded  far,  before  he 

had 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  4' 

had  occafion  to  exercife  his  valor.     Periphetes  was  a  chief  of  the     CHAP.  I. 

Crp'T     TTT 

Epidaurian  mountains,  famous  for  his  robberies.    Attacking  Thefeus,      ^^.j' 
he  fell  by  his  hand.     The  Corinthian  ifthmus  was  a  fpot  particularly 
favorable  to  the  purpofe  of  freebooters.     Simmis  had  now  his  ftation 
there.  He  alfo  attacked  Thefeus,  and  was  flain.    The  neighbourhood 
of  Crommyon,  on   the  ifthmus,  was  at  this  time  infefted  by  a  wild 
fow  of  enormous  fize  and   uncommon  fiercenefs  ;  or,    as  fome  have 
reported,   by  a  female  leader  of  robbers,  whofe  grofs  manners  occa- 
fioned  to  her  the  appellation  of  fow.     The  name  Phasa,  attributed  to 
her  by  both,  feems   to   favor  the  latter  opinion.     Whatever  the  pelt 
was,  Thefeus  has  the  credit  of  having  delivered  the  country  from  it. 
Proceeding  in  his  journey  along  the   mountainous  coaft  ol   the  Sa-    strabo,  1.  ix. 
ronic  gulph,  he   ftill   found  every  faftnefs  occupied  by   men,   who,   %^}r.  Sic. 
like  many  of  the   old   barons  of  the  weftern   European  kingdoms,   l-  ^  cj£*- 
gave  protection   to   their   dependents,  and   difturbance   to  all    belide   Paufan.  Li. 
within  their  reach,    making  booty   of  whatever  they  could   mafter.   c"  t<  * 
His  valor,  however,  and  his  good  fortune  procured  him  the  advantage 
in   every  conteft,    and   carried    him  fafe   through   all   dangers,    tho 
he  found  nothing  friendly  till  he   arrived  on   the  bank  of  the  river 
Cephifus,   in  the  middle  of  Attica.     Here  he  met  fome  people  of 
the  country,  who   faluted   him   in  the  ufual  terms   of  friendfhip  to 
ftrangers.     Judging  himfelf  now   paft   the  perils  of  his  journey,  he 
requefted  to  have  the  accuftomed  ceremony  of  purification  from  blood 
performed  upon  him,    that  he  might  with  propriety  join  in  facrifices 
and  other  religious  rites.     The  courteous  Atticans  readily  complied, 
and  afterward  entertained   him  at   their  houfes.     An  ancient   altar 
commemorating  this  meeting,  and  dedicated  to  Jupiter,  with  the  epi- 
thet of  Meilichius,   the  friendly,   or  kind,  remained  to  the  time  of 
Paufan ias  *". 

When  Thefeus  arrived  at  Athens,  iEgeus,  already  approach- 
ing toward  dotage,  was  governed  by  the  Colchian  princefs  Me- 
deia,  io   famous  in   poetry,   who,  in   her  flight  from  Corinth,  had 

*  Paufanias  travelled  through  Greece  in  the     the  Roman  empire   in  the   year  after  Chrift 
reign  of  Antoninus  Pius,    who  fucceeded   to     151. 

G  prevailed 


Paufan.   1.   i. 
c.  37. 

Plutarch. 
Thef. 


42  HISTORY    OF    GREECE, 

chap.  I.  prevailed  on  him  to  afford  her  protection.  At  the  inftigation  of  this 
SECT.  III.  abandoned  woman  he  invited  Thefeus,  as  an  illuftrious  but  dano-er- 
ous  ftranger,  to  a  feaft,  intending  to  poifon  him.  But  Thefeus, 
drawing  his  hunting-knife,  as  it  feems  was  ufual,  to  carve  the  meat 
before  him,  was  prefently  recognized  by  /Egeus.  The  old  king,  em- 
bracing his  fon,  acknowleged  him  before  the  company,  and  fum- 
moning  an  afiembly  of  the  people,  prefented  Thefeus  as  their  prince. 
The  heroic  youth,  the  fame  of  whole  exploits,  fo  fulted  to  acquire 
popularity  in  that  age,  had  already  prepolIefTed  the  people  in  his 
favor,  was  received  with  warm  tokens  of  general  fatisfaction.  But 
the  party  of  the  fons  of  Pallas  was  powerful  :  their  difappointment 
was  equally  great  and  unexpected ;  and  no  hope  remaining  of  the 
accomplifhment  of  their  wifhes  by  other  means,  they  withdrew  from 
the  city,  collected  their  adherents,  and  returned  in  arms.  The  tide 
of  popular  inclination,  however,  now  ran  fo  violently  toward  Thefeus, 
that  fome  even  of  their  confidents  were  drawn  away  with  it,  A  de- 
fign  which  they  had  formed  to  furprize  the  city  was  difcovered  to 
their  adverfaries  ;  part  of  their  troops  were  in  confequence  cut  off; 
the  reft  difperfed,  and  the  faction  was  completely  quelled. 

Quiet  being  thus  reftored  to  Athens,  Thefeus  fought  every  oppor- 
tunity to  increafe   the  popularity  he  had  acquired.     Military  fame 
was  the  mean  to  which  his  active  fpirit  chiefly  inclined  him  ;   but, 
as  the  ftate  had  now  no  enemies,  he  exercifed   his   valor   in    the  de- 
ftruction  of  wild  beafts,  and  added  not  a  little  to  his  reputation   by 
delivering   the   country  from   a   favage  bull,    which  had  done  great 
ifocvat.  He-    mifchief  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Marathon.   A  report  went,  conge- 
Dioio"C°sic      n*a^  t0  tne  fuperftition  of  the  age,   that  this  furious  animal  was  the 
1.  iv.  c.  61.      rninifter   of  vengeance   of  the   god   Neptune  againft   the   people   of 

lMut3.rch 

Thcf.  Attica.     Thefeus  took  him  alive,  and,  after  leading   him   in  procef- 

jm  an.  £on  ^^g^  trie  cjty}  f^crificed  him  to  Minerva  *.     If  thefe  anec- 

*  Diodcrus   fays,    to  Apollo,    and    he   is  authority  than  either ;  more  accurate  and  more 

followed  by  Plutarch.     It  is   of  little  confe-  candid  than  Plutarch,  and  more  judicious  than 

quence  upon  this  occafion  ;  only  it  may  be  Diodorus. 
obferved   that    Paufanias    is  generally    better 

dotes 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  43 

dotes  were  no  otherwife  worthy  of  notice,  they  tend  at  leafl  to  cha-     CHAP.  I. 
radterize  the  times,  and  to  mark  the  circumftances  which  gave  that    SJ^ilL 
great  eftimation   to  bodily  ability  and  perfonal  courage.     But  there 
feems  another  view  in  which  they  are  not  wholly  undeferving  atten- 
tion.    In   this  age,  and   particularly  in  this  country,  where  happily 
wild  beafts  are  ftrangers,  we  are  apt  to  look  upon  ftories  of  deftruc- 
tive  bulls  and  boars  as  ridiculous   fables.     Yet  the  teftimony  which 
Herodotus  gives  to  the  authenticity  of  them,  in  the  firft  book  of  his 
hiftory,  mud  be   allowed  a  very  ftrong  one.     He  tells  us  that,  not 
long  before  the  age  in  which  himfelf  lived,  the  Myfians,   then  fub- 
jecls  of  Crcefus  king  of  Lydia,  fent  a  formal  deputation  to  their  mo- 
narch   to    requeft    his    affiftance  againft    a   monftrous    boar,   which 
made    great   ravages  in  their  fields,  and,   in    their  feveral   attempts 
to  deftroy  him,  had  done   them  mifchief  but  received   none.      How 
far  indeed  boars  were  terrible  animals,  we  may  judge  from  a  paffage 
in   Hefiod's   Shield  of  Hercules,    where   they  are  defcribed  fighting 
with  lions,  and  nearly  equal  in  the  combat.     But  fire-arms  give  us, 
in  thefe  times,  a  fuperiority  over  the   brute  creation,  which  men  in 
the  early  ages  were  far  from  pofteffing.     To  this  day,  when   a  tiger 
mows  himfelf  about   the   villages   of  the   unwarlike  inhabitants  of 
India,   they  apply   to  Europeans,  if  any  are   near,  for  affiftance,  as 
againft  an  enemy  which  themfelves  are  unable  to  cope  with. 

But  an   opportunity  foon  offered   for   Thefeus   to   do  his   country   piut.  Thef. 
more  eflential  fervice,   and    to  acquire   more   illuftrious  fame.     The   jP1^°  ^  *£|] 
Athenians,  in  a  war  with  Minos  king  of  Crete,   had  been   reduced   c-  »■  ed-  Ser" 
to  purchafe  peace  of  that  powerful  monarch  by   a  yearly  tribute  of  ifbcrat.  He- 
{even  youths  and  as  many  virgins.     Coined  money  was  not  common    p"^-^0™  i. 
till  fome  centuries  after  the  time  we  are  treating  of;  and   flaves  and   c-27- 
cattle  were  not  only  the  principal  riches,   but  the  moft  commodious 
and  ufual  ftandards  by  which  the  value  of  other   things   was   deter- 
mined.    A  tribute  of  flaves,  therefore,  was  perhaps  the  moft  conve- 
nient that  Minos  could  impofe  ;  Attica  maintaining   few  cattle,   and 
thofe  being  lefs  eafily  traniported.     The  burthen  was,  however,  borne 

G  2  with 


44  HISTORY    OF    GREECE, 

CHAP.  I.     wjtn  mucri  uneafinefs  by  the  Athenians ;  and  the  return  of  the  Cre- 

CfTf""!"'      TTT 

.  '  . '  tan  fhip  at  the  ufual  time  to  demand  the  tribute,  excited  frefh  and 
loud  murmurs  againft  the  government  of  iEgeus.  Thefeus  took  an 
extraordinary  ftep,  but  perfectly  fuitable  to  the  heroic  character  which 
he  affe&ed,  for  appeafing  the  popular  difcontent.  The  tributary 
youths  and  virgins  had  been  hitherto  drawn  by  lot  from  the  body 
of  the  people.  He  voluntarily  offered  himfelf  as  one  of  them.  The 
vulgar  report  was,  that  thole  unfortunate  victims  were  thrown  into 
the  famous  Labyrinth  built  by  Daedalus,  and  there  devoured  by  the 
Minotaur,  a  monfter,  half- man  and  half- bull.  This  fable  was 
probibly  no  invention  of  the  poets  who  embellifhed  it  in  more 
polifhed  ages  :  it  is  likely  enough  to  have  been  devifed  at  the  very 
time  we  are  treating  of,  and  is  not  too  prepoflerous  even  to  have 
found  credit  among  a  people  of  an  imagination  fo  lively,  and  a  judge- 
ment fo  uninformed  as  were  then  the  Athenians.  The  offer  of 
Thefeus,  therefore,  really  magnanimous,  appeared  thus  an  unparal- 
leled effort  of  patriotic  heroifm.  Ancient  historians,  who  have  en- 
deavoured to  inveftigate  truth  among  the  intricacies  of  fabulous  tra- 
dition, tell  us  that  the  Labyrinth  was  a  fortrefs  where  prifoners  were 
ufually  kept,  and  that  a  Cretan  general  named  Taurus,  which  in 
Greek  fignifies  a  bull,  gave  rife  to  the  fiction  of  the  Minotaur. 
There  appears,  however,  fufficient  teftimony  that  Thefeus  was  re- 
ceived by  Minos  more  agreeably  to  the  character  of  a  great  and  ge- 
nerous prince,  than  of  a  tyrant  who  gave  his  captives  to  be  devour- 
ed by  monfters.  But  during  this  the  flourishing  age  of  Crete,  letters 
were,  if  at  all  known,  little  ufed  in  Greece.  In  after  times,  when 
the  Athenians  bore  the  fway  in  literature,  their  tragedians  took  up 
the  popular  prejudices  againft  Minos,  whofe  character  they  vilified 
&  Plato  Mi-  on  every  opportunity ;  infomuch  that,  as  Plutarch  obferves,  the 
eulogies  of  the  elder  poets,  Homer  and  Pleiiod,  in  the  end  availed 
his  reputation  little.  The  particulars  of  Thefeus's  adventures  in 
Crete,  and  of  his  return  to  Athens,  have  thus  been  fo  dilguifed, 
that  even  to  guefs  at  the  truth  is  difficult.     The  moft  obvious   and 

natural 


nos 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  45 

natural  interpretation  of   the  fhort  and   rather  obfcure   pafl*age  in     CHAP.  I. 
which  Homer,  our  beft  guide  for    thefe   early   ages,   has    mentioned     S^5^|L 
them,    feems  to  be  this  :    Minos,   furprized  probably  at  the  arrival  of 

1  *  ,       ,     ,  .         ,  Odvli.  1.  xi. 

the  Athenian  prince  among  the  tributary  flaves,  received  him  ho-  v.  320. 
norably,  became  partial  to  his  merit,  and,  after  fome  experience  of 
it,  gave  him  his  daughter  Ariadne  in  marriage.  In  proceeding  to 
Athens  the  princefs  was  taken  with  fudden  ficknefs  ;  and  being  landed 
in  the  ifland  of  Naxos,  where  Bacchus  was  efteemed  the  tutelary 
deity,  (lie  died  there.  If  we  add  the  fuppofition  that  Thefeus,  eager 
to  communicate  the  news  of  his  extraordinary  fuccefs,  proceeded  on 
his  voyage  while  the  princefs  was  yet  living,  no  farther  foundation 
would  be  wanting  for  the  fables  which  have  made  thefe  names  fo 
familiar.  What  alone  we  learn  with  any  certainty  from  Athenian 
tradition  is,  that  Thefeus  freed  his  country  from  farther  payment  of 
the  io-nominious  and  cruel  tribute. 

This  atchievement,   by  whatfoever  means  effected,    was  fo  bold  in 
the  undertaking,    fo  complete  in  the  fuccefs,   fo  important  and  fo  in- 
terefting  in   the  confequences,   that  it   defervedly  raifed   Thefeus  to 
the  highefl:  popularity  among  the  Athenians.      Sacrifices  and  procef- 
fions  were  inftituted    in   honor  of  it,  and  were  continued  while   the 
Pagan  religion  had  exiflence  in  Athens.     The  veflel  in  which  he  made   Plato. Phado. 
his  voyage  was  fent  yearly  in  folemn   pomp    to  the   facred  ifland   of  ed.Serran. 
Delos,     where    rites   of   thankfgiving   were   performed   to    Apollo. 
Through  the  extreme   veneration   in   which   it   was  held    it   was  fo 
anxiouilypreferved,  that  in  Plato's  time  it  was  faid  to  be  ftill  the  fame 
veflel ;     tho    at    length   its   frequent    repairs    gave   occaiion    to   the 
difpute,  which  became  famous  among  the  fophifts,   whether  it  was 
or  was  not  flill  the  fame.    On  the  death  of  iEgeus,  Thefeus  fucceeded 
to  the  fovereignty  with  general  approbation  ;   and  ihowed  himfelf  not 
lefs  capable  of  improving  the  ftate  by  his  wifdom,  than  of  defending 
it  by  his  valor.     The  twelve  diftrids  into  which   Cecrops   had   di-   Jhucyd.  l.ii. 
vided  Attica,   were  become  fo  many  independent  commonwealths,    Strabo,  l.ix. 
with  fcarcely  any  bond  of  union  but   their  acknowledgment  of  one    p'iutar"ch. 
chief,  whofe  authority  was  yet  not  always   fufficient  to  keep   them 

from 


46 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  I. 
SECT.  III. 


Ifocrat.   He- 
len, encom. 
Plut.  Thci". 


Ifocrat.  He- 
len, encom. 
Plut.  Ihel". 


Thucyd.  l.ii. 

c.    t$i 

I'lut.  Thef. 


from  mutual  hoftilities.  The  inconveniencies  of  fuch  difunion  were 
great  and  obvious,  but  the  remedy  full  of  difficulty.  Thefeus,  how- 
ever, undertook  it,  and  effected  that  change  which  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  the  future  glory  of  Athens,  while  it  ranks  him  among  the 
mod  illuftrious  patriots  that  adorn  the  annals  of  mankind.  He  full 
went  through  every  diftrid,  and,  by  perfuafion  or  authority,  fettled 
every  difagreement  fubiifling  between  them.  Then  he  propofed  the 
abolition  of  all  the  independent  magiftracies,  councils,  and  courts 
of  juftice,  and  the  fubftitution  of  one  common  council  of  legislation, 
and  one  common  fyftem  of  judicature.  The  lower  people  readily 
came  into  his  meafuies.  The  rich  and  powerful,  who  fhared  among 
them  the  independent  magiftracies,  were  more  inclined  to  oppofi- 
tion.  To  fatisfy  thele  therefore,  he  promifed,  with  a  dilinterefted- 
nefs  of  which  hiftory  affords  few  examples,  to  give  up  much  of  his 
own  power ;  and  appropriating  to  himfelf  only  the  cares  and  dangers 
of  royalty,  to  fhare  with  his  people  authority,  honor,  wealth,  all 
that  is  commonly  moll  valued  in  it.  Few  were  inclined  to  refill  fo 
equitable  a  propofal  :  the  moil;  felfiih  and  mofl  obflinate  dared  not. 
Thefeus  therefore  proceeded  quietly  to  new-model  the  common- 
wealth. 

He  began  with  the  diffolution  of  all  the  independent  councils  and 
jurifdidions  in  the  feveral  towns  and  diftrids,  and  the  removal  of  all 
public  bufinefs  to  Athens  ;  where  he  built  a  council-hall  and  courts 
of  juftice,  in  the  place  (fiys  Plutarch,  who  wrote  about  the  begin- 
ning of  the  fecond  century  of  the  Chriftian  era)  where  they  now 
ftand.  This  was  the  improvement  of  mofl  obvious  advantage  :  his 
next  meafure  has  at  leafl  the  appearance  of  a  deeper  policy.  Having 
obferved  that  feni'e  of  weaknefs  natural  to  all  mankind,  which  in- 
duces them  to  look  up  to  fome  fuperior  being,  known  or  unknown, 
for  protedion  * ;  having  remarked  the  effeds,  on  the  minds  of  his 
fellowcountrymen,  of  the  various  opinions  held  among  them  upon 
this  univerfally  interefling  fubjed ;  having  probably  adverted  parti- 


*  n«tie;  It  Siwv  %«TtW'  «t8f&)7rti.      OdyiT.    1.  ill.    V.  48. 


cularly 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  47 

cularly   to   their   fuperftitious   attachment   to   the  imaginary  deities     CHAP.  I. 
efteemed  peculiarly  tutelar  of  their  refpedtive  towns  ;  he  wifely  judged    SECT.  III. 
that  the  civil   union  fo  happily  effected  would  be  incomplete,   or  at 
leaft  unftable,  if  he  did  not  cement  it  by  an  equal  union  in  religious 
concerns.     It  feems  to  have  been  with  thefe  views  that  he  inftituted   J^J  '  '"' 
one  common  feaft  and  facrifice  in  honor  of  the  goddefs  Athena,  or  Pluti  Thef" 
Minerva,   for  all   the   inhabitants   of  Attica.      This   feaft  he  called 
Panathensea,  the  feaft  of  all  the  Athenians  or    people  of  Minerva. 
From   this   time  all   the   inhabitants  of  Attica  efteemed  themfelves 
unitedly   under   the   particular   protection  of   that  goddefs ;    and  it 
feems  to  have  been  from'  this  time  that  they  unitedly  bore  her  name: 
for  they  were  before  called,  from  their  country,  Atticans,  and  fome- 
times,  from  their  race,   Ionians  *.     To  this  fcheme  of  union,  con- 
ceived with  a  depth  of  judgement,  and  executed  with  a  moderation 
of  temper  fo  little   to  be  expected  in   that  age,  the  Athenians  may 
well  be  faid  to  owe  all  their  after  greatnefs.     Without  it  Attica,  like 
the  adjoining  province   of  Bceotia,   would  probably  have  contained 
feveral  little  republics,  united  only  in  name ;  each  too  weak  to  pre- 
ferve  dignity,  or  even  to  fecure  independency  to  its  feparate  govern- 
ment ;  and  poffefiing  nothing  fo  much  in  common   as  occafions  for 
perpetual  difagreement. 

Plutarch  attributes  to  Thefeus  the  honor  of  having  been  the  firft 
prince  ever  known  to  have  religned  abfolute  power  with  the  noble 
purpofe  to  eftablifh  a  free  government.     It  appears,  however,  from 

*  Herodotus  reports,  that  the  original  in-  Cranaans,  as  they  afterward  fometimes  bore 
habitants  of  Attica  were  of  the  Pelafgian  that  of  Erechtheids  from  Erechtheus.  Hence 
hord,  and  diflinguifhed  by  the  name  of  Cra-  the  modern  learned  have  fuppofed  a  fault  in 
naans(i);  that  when  Cecrops  became  prince  the  copies  of  Herodotus,  and  have  propofed 
of  the  country,  his  fubje&s  were  called,  from  ingenious  amendments  (2).  Perhaps,  how- 
his  name,  Cecropians  ;  and  that  under  the  ever,  we  had  better  leave  the  copies  of  Hero- 
reign  of  Erechtheus  the  name  of  Athenians  dotus  as  we  find  them,  and  pay  a  little  more 
firft  obtained.  But  it  has  been  generally  held  attention  to  an  expreflion  of  Strabo,  where  he 
by  later  writers,  that  Cranaus  fucceeded  Ce-  is  treating  of  the  early  hiftory  of  Attica,  "Oite 
crops  in  the  throne  of  Attica;  and  that  from  ^1  t«k  At9iJ«  o-uyyfa-J/am;  %oKha.  iiapawSmf. 
him  the  people  mull  have  had  the  name  of  Strabo,  1.  ix.  p.  352. 

(1)  Herodot,  1  viii.  c.  44.  (2)  See  WefTeling's  Herodotus,  b.  viii,  c.  44.  note  74,  7$. 

the 


p.  383. 


48  HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 

chap.  I.     t]ie  whole  tenor  of  his  narration,  that  the  Attic  monarchs,  what- 

SECT.  in.  ever  t[iey  m}ght  claim,  were  far  from  poffeffing  abfolute  power  ;  and 
from  the  more  accurate  Strabo,  as  indeed  from  every  account  of  the 
Cretan  constitution,  the  preeminence  in  patriotic  glory  appears  much 

0*480'  L  *'  rat^ei"  due  to  Minos.  It  is  emphatically  faid  by  Strabo,  that  the 
Cretan  lawgiver  feems  to  have  propofed  the  liberty  of  the  Subject  as 
the  great  object  of  his  institutions ;  and  it  appears  every  way  proba- 
ble that  much  of  the  noble  liberality  of  Thefeus's  fyStem  was  de- 
rived from  that  fource.  It  may  have  been  on  better  foundation  af- 
ferted  by  Plutarch,  that  Thefeus  was  the  firSt  Grecian  lawgiver  who 
eStabliShed  a  distinction   of  ranks  :     tho    even    this    is    contradicted 

Strabo,  l.viii.  by  Strabo,  who  fays  that  Ion,  fon  of  Xuthus,  had  before  divided 
the  people  of  Attica  nearly  in  the  manner  afcribed  by  Plutarch  to 
Thefeus.  The  age  and  actions  of  Ion  are,  however,  of  very  uncer- 
tain historical  evidence;  and  before  Thefeus  we  are  little  afTured  of 
the  exigence  of  any  fuch  political  arrangement,  except  in  Egypt. 
Under  that  prince  fomething  of  the  kind  became  the  more  neceSfary, 
according  to  Plutarch,  from  the  number  of  Strangers  who,  in  con- 

Thucyd.  1.  i.  Sequence  of  public  incouragement,  reforted  to  Athens,  and,  con- 
formably to  ancient  cuflom,  were  admitted  to  the  rights  of  citizens. 
The  whole  commonwealth  was  therefore  divided  into  three  claffes ; 
nobility,  hufbandmen,  and  artificers.  The  executive  and  judicial 
powers,  with  the  fuperintendency  of  religion,  were  appropriated  to 
the  former.  The  others  injoyed  freedom  and  equality,  and  formed 
the  legislative  affembly.  When  his  improvements  were  completed, 
Thefeus,  according  to  the  policy  which  became  ufual  for  giving  au- 
thority to  great  innovations  and  all  uncommon  undertakings,   is  faid 

Plat.  Thef.  to  have  procured  a  declaration  of  divine  approbation  from  the  pro- 
phetic Shrine  of  Delphi. 

Thus  the  province  of  Attica,  containing  a  triangular  tract  of  land 
with  two  fides  about  fixty  miles  long,  and  the  third  forty,  was 
molded  into  a  well- united  and  well-regulated  commonwealth,  whofe 
chief  magistrate  was  yet  hereditary,  and  retained  the  title  of  king. 

In 


Plut.   Thef. 

Tin 

c.  2 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  49 

In  confequence  of  ib  improved  a  ftate  of  things,  the  Athenians  be-     CHAP.  I. 
gan,   the  firft  of  all  the  Greeks,  to  acquire  more  civilized  manners.     S^J^L 
Thucydides    particularly   remarks    that    they    were    the    firft    who   Thucyd.  1.  i. 
dropped  the  practice,  formerly  general  among  the   Greeks,  of  going 
conftantly  armed  •,  and  who  introduced  a  civil  drefs  in  contradiftinc- 
tion  to  the  military.     This  innovation,  if  it  was  not  introduced  by 
Thefeus,  appears   to  have  taken  place  very  foon  after  him,  fince  it 
feems  to  have  ftruck  Homer,  who   marks  the  Athenians  by  the  ap- 
pellation long-robed  lonians  *.     If  we  may  credit  Plutarch,  Thefeus 
coined  money,  which   was   certainly   rare  in  Greece  two  centuries 
after. 

The  reft  of  the  hiftory  of  Thefeus  affords  little  worthy  of  notice. 
It  is  compofed  of  a  number  of  the  wildeft  adventures,  many  of  them 
con(iftent  enough  with  the  character  of  the  times,  but  very  little  fo 
with  what  is  related  of  the  former  part  of  his  life.  It  feems  indeed 
as  if  hiftorians  had  inverted  the  order  of  things  ;  giving  to  his  riper 
years  the  extravagance  of  his  youth,  after  having  attributed  to  his 
earlieft  manhood  what  the  matureft  age  has  feldom  equalled.  He  is 
faid  to  have  loft,  in  the  end,  all  favor  and  all  authority  among  the 
Athenians,  and  to  have  died  in  exile.  After  him  Meneftheus,  a 
perfon  of  the  royal  family,  acquired  the  fovereignty,  or  at  leaft  the 
firft  magiftracy  with  the  title  of  king,  and  commanded  the  Athenian  Homer.  II. 
troops  in  the  Trojan  war.  *•  "•  v-  5S2- 

*  'iaom  faxwTU"<'    Iliad.  1.  xiii.  v.  685.  by  Strabo,  b.  ix.  p.  392.  and  if  there  could 

We   may  wonder  that   the  commentators   on  be  any  doubt  of  their  authority,  it  would  be 

Homer,     and    particularly    that    Mr.    Wood  removed  by  the  ufe  which  ^Efchylus  has  made 

ihould  have  been  at  any  lofs   to  apply  this  of    exaftly   the    fame   name,    calling    Attica 

name  Iaones  ;  for  the  fcholiaft  fays  that  the  'luitm  yrj>.     Perf,  p-  133.  ed.  H.  Steph. 
Athenians  are  meant  by  it :    he  is  fupported 


H  CHAP. 


5o  HISTORYOFGREECE. 


CHAP.  II. 

Of    the   early    State    of    Asia    Mi  nop,    and   of   the 

Trojan  War. 


Early  People  of  the  iveftern  Parts  of  Afia  Minor.  Origin  and  Progrefs 
of  the  'Trojan  State.  Licentious  Manners  of  the  early  Ages.  Early 
llojlilities  between  Greece  and  Afia.  Expedition  of  Paris :  Rape 
of  Helen  :  League  of  the  Grecian  Princes  :  Sacrifice  of  Iphigeneia  : 
Difficulties  of  the  Greeks  in  the  'Trojan  War :  Troy  taken :  Return 
of  the  Greeks  :  Conjequences  of  their  Abfence :  Affaffination  of  Aga- 
memnon. Credit  due  to  Homer  s  hiflorical  evidence.  Refemblance 
of  the  Trojan  War  to  circumfiances  in  'modern  Hi/lory. 

CHAP.  II.  TT  appears,  from  a  ftrong  concurrence  of  circumftances  recorded 
JL  by  ancient  writers,  that  the  early  inhabitants  of  Afia  Minor, 
Thrace,  and  Greece,  were  the  fame  people.    The  Leleges,  Caucones, 

Iliad,  I.  v.     anc[  Pelafo-ians,  enumerated  by  Homer  among;  the  Aiiatic  nations,  are 

v.   429.  °  . 

Sttabo,  l.  vii.  mentioned  by  Strabo  as  the  principal  names  among  thofe,  whom  at 
the  fame  time  he  calls  barbarians,  who  in  earliefi:  times  occupied 
Iliad,  1.  ii.  Greece.  Homer  fpeaks  of  the  Thracian  Thamyris  contending  in 
Strabo5 1.  viii.  fong  with  the  Mufes  themfelves  in  Peloponnefus.  Herodotus  afferts 
P;350/  ,•  that  the  ancient  hymns  fung  at  the  feftival  of  Apollo  at  Delos,  were 
c-  3  5-     ,  '.    compofed  by   Olen,   a   Lycian.       Paufanias   fays    farther,    that  the 

Paufan.  1.  1.  r  J  /  J 

c.  18.  1.  v.     hymns  of  Olen   the  Lycian  were  the  oldeft  known  to  the   Greeks, 
'*  &  1.x.   and  that  Olen  was  the  inventor  of  the  Grecian  hexameter  verfe.     It 


c.  27 
c 


Plato de Leg.  feems  a  neceffary  inference  that  the  language  both  of  Thrace  and 
l.yin.p.  829.  Lyda  was  Greek.  The  hymns  of  Thamyris  and  Orpheus  were  ad- 
ran,  mired  for  fingular  fweetnefs  even  in  Plato's  time  :    and  the  Thracians 

Thamyris, 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  51 

Thamyris,  or  Thamyras,  Orpheus,   Mufseus,  Eumolpus,   with  the     CHAP.  II. 
Lycian  Olen,  were  the  acknowleged  fathers  of  Grecian  poetry,  the 
acknowleged  reformers  of  Grecian  manners  ;  thofe  who,  according 
to  Grecian  accounts,  began  that  polifh  in  morals,  manners,   and  lan- 
guage,   which    in    after- ages   characterized   the    Greek,    and    diftin- 
guiflied  him  from  the  barbarian  *.      Olympus,   the  father  of  Gre- 
cian mufic,   whofe  compofitions,   which  Plato  calls  divine,   retained 
the   higheft  reputation  even  in  Plutarch's  time,   was  a  Phrygian  *f-. 
We  find  moreover  Pelops,   a  fugitive  Phrygian   prince,  marrying  a 
princefs   and  acquiring  a  kingdom  in   Peloponnefus  ;  and   Bellero- 
phon,   a  prince  of  Corinth,    is  faid  in  the  fame  manner  to  have  ac- 
quired the  kingdom  of  Lycia,  in  Alia  Minor.     Herodotus  remarks,    Heiodot.  1.  i. 
that  the  Lydian  laws  and  manners,   even  in  his  time,  very  nearly  re-   &  „£' 
fembled  the  Greek ;   and   the  Pamphylians  were  fo  evidently  a  Gre-   ^fc.^j  '" 

cian   people,   that  he  endeavours   to  account  for  their  defcent  from   Strabo>  '• Xlv- 

,  ,        ,       .  p-  668. 

European  Greeks.    The  Thracian  Greeks  were  probably  overwhelmed 

in  early  times  by  the  wild  and  fierce  nations  of  the  extenfive  conti- 
nent to  the  northward  of  them  ;  as  many  of  the  original  Afiatic 
Greeks  were  by  thofe  multitudes  from  Greece  itfelf,  whofe  change 
of  country  is  known  by  the  names  of  the  Ionic  and  ./Eolic  migra- 
tions. 

The.weftern  coaft  of  Afia  Minor  is  univerfally  allowed  to  be  one 
of  the  moll  delicious  countries  in  the  world  ;  remarkable  for  fruitful- 
nefs  of  foil,  and  particularly  excelling  Greece  in  foftnefs  of  climate. 
The  governments  formed  here,  in  the  earliefr.  times,  moftly  com- 
manded a  greater  extent  of  territory  than  thofe  of  Greece  ;  an  advan- 
tage which  they  feem  to  have  owed  not  intirely  to  a  higher  degree  of 
civilization  in  the  people,  but  much  to  the  extent  of  the  Afiatic 
plains,  lefs  cut  by  mountains  and  feas  into  fmall  portions  with  diffi- 
culty acceflible  from  each  other.     But  a  country  fo  happy  by  nature 

Op(ptv$  fj.iv  yupTtfarus  fr  J7|W*V  KO/rsoei^   Qovvv      vb7,—~ku.)   iti   v-ai   vvv  j/.ovcc-  Xhttol   Ifte   use,  BsTcc  octk. 
t  oBTf^EcrSai.  Arilioph.  Ranse.       Plato.  Minos,  p.  318.  t.  2.     "OAuforo?  0  Mag&vov 


-Mxgavcct;  k*i  '  OXt'^^ro?  0   ^vc.      Toil-      ^t«6>3T»)S "^Xvyos  T^  EM^uis  x*'  x#X??S  (/.&v?i* 

rut  o">  y.ea  t«  av'Kr.jj.ct.ra  BuoTari  in,   x«<   f/.ora  y.i-      y.rii;.     Plutarch,  de  Muiic. 

H  2  could 


52  HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

Cl>^vj'  C0U^  not»  without  a  polity  very  fuperior  to  what  was  then  common, 
efcape  thofe  miferies  which  the  paffions  or  the  neceffities  of  mankind 
were  continually  occafioning.  The  coaft  was  nearly  deferted  :  peo- 
ple civilized  enough  to  cultivate  the  arts  of  peace  withdrew  from 
the  ravages  of  piracy  to  inland  tracts,  lefs  fertile  and  lefs  favored  by 
climate,  but  where,  through  the  fecurity  enjoyed,  fome  confiderable 
fovereignties  appear  to  have  arilen  at  a  very  remote  period.  The 
firft  powerful  fettlement  upon  the  coaft,  of  which  we  are  informed, 
was  that  of  Troy ;  and  the  fketch  which  Homer  has  left  us  of  the 
rife  of  this  ftate,  flight  as  it  is  and  mingled  with  fable,  is  yet  per- 
haps the  cleared  as  well  as  the  moft  genuine  picture  exifting  of  the 
progrefs  of  population  and  political  fociety  in  their  approach  to 
Europe.  The  origin  of  Dardanus,  the  acknowleged  founder  of  the 
Trojan  ftate,  has  been  varioufly  related;    but  we  may  beft  believe  the 

Iliad.  1.  xx.  teftimony  of  Homer  to  the  utter  uncertainty  of  his  birth  and  native 
country,  delivered  in  the  terms  That  he  was  the  fon  of  Jupiter. 
Thus  however  it  appears,  that  the  Greeks  not  unwillingly  acknow- 
leged confanguinity  with  the  Trojans  ;  for  many,  indeed  raoft,  of  the 
Grecian  heroes  alfo  claimed  their  defcent  from  Jupiter.  It  is  more- 
over remarkable  that,  among  the  many  genealogies  which  Homer  has 
tranfmitted  to  us,  none  is  traced  fo  far  into  antiquity  as  that  of  the 
royal  family  of  Troy.     Dardanus  was  anceftor  in  the  fixth  degree  to 

Iliad.  1.  xx.  Hector,  and  may  thus  have  lived  from  a  hundred  and  fifty  to  two 
hundred  years  before  that  hero.  On  one  of  the  many  ridges  which 
project  from  the  foot  of  the   lofty  mountain   of  Ida,    in   the   north- 

Strabo  i  xi'ii     weftern    part    of    Afia    Minor,    he  founded   a    town    which,    from 

p.  583,  584.  his  own  name,  was  called  Dardania.  His  fituation  commanded  a 
narrow  but  fruitful  plain,  watered  by  the  ftreams  of  Simois  and  Sca- 
mander,  and  ftretching  from  the  roots  of  Ida  to  the  Hellefoont 
northward,  and  the  iEgean  fea  weftward.  His  fon  Erichthonius, 
who  fucceeded  him  in  the  fovereignty  of  this  territory,  had  the  repu- 
tation of  being  the  richeft  man  of  his  age.  Much  of  his  wealth 
feems    to   have  been    derived  from  a   large  ftock   of  brood   mares, 

to 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  53 

to  the  number,  according  to  the  poet,  of  three  thoufand,  which  the     CHAP.  II. 
fertility  of  his   foil   inabled  him   to   maintain,  and   which,   by  his 
care  and  judgement  in  the  choice  of  millions,  produced   a  breed  of 
horfes  fuperior  to   any  of  the  furrounding  countries.     Tros,  fon  of 
Erichthonius,   probably   extended,   or  in   fome   other  way  improved 
the  territory  of  Dardania ;    lince   the   appellation   by   which  it  was 
known  to  pofterity  was  derived  from  his  name.     With  the  riches  the 
population  of  the  ftate  ofcourfe  increafed.      llus,  fon  of  Tros,  there- 
fore ventured  to  move  his  refidence  from  the  mountain,  and  founded,   Strabo,  1.  xiii, 
in  the  plain  beneath,  that  celebrated  city  which  was  called  from  his 
name  Ilion,  but  which  is  more  familiarly  known  in  modern  languages 
by  the  name  of  Troy,  derived   from   his   father.     With  the  means 
however  to  defend,   the  temptation  to  attack  alfo  increafed.      Twice, 
before  that  war  which   Homer   has  made  fo  famous,  Troy  is  faid  to 
have  been  taken  and  plundered  ;   and  for  its  fecond  capture,  by  Her-   jliatj     L  v< 
cules,  in  the   reign  of  Laomedon,   fon  of  llus,    we   have    Homer's  ^•64°-&P>n- 

0  _  dar.  Olymp. 

authority.     The  government  however  revived,  and  ftill  advanced  in  vlii- 

power  and  fplendor.     Laomedon,  after  his  misfortune,  fortified  his 

city  in  a  manner  fo   fuperior   to  what  was  common  in  his  age,   that 

the  walls  of  Troy  were  faid  to  be  a  work  of  the  gods.     Under  his    Iliad,  1. xxiv. 

fon   Priam  the  Trojan  ftate  was  very  flourishing   and   of  considerable   Strabo'l.xiii. 

extent;  containing,  under  the  name  of  Phrygia,  the  country  afterward 

called  Troas,  together  with  both  fhores   of  the  Hellefpont,  and  the 

ifland  of  Lefbos  *. 

A  frequent  communication,  fometimes  friendly,  but  oftener  hoftile, 
was  maintained  between  the  eaftern  and  weftern  coafts  of  the  JE2ea.11 
fea  :  each  was  an  object  of  piracy  more  than  of  commerce  to  the 
inhabitants  of  the  oppofite  country.  Cattle  and  flaves  conftituting 
the  principal  riches  of  the  times,  men,  women,  and  children,  together 

*  Strabo  (1)  diltinguifh.es  the  Trojan  coun-  traft  afterward  called  Phrygia,  whofe  people 
try  by  the  name  of  Hellefpontian  Phrygia.  It  are  mentioned  in  Homer's  Catalogue  as  allies 
was   divided  by  Myfia  from  the   large  inland     of  the  Trojans  coming  from  afar  (2). 

(1)  b.  xiii.  p.  363.  (2)  Iliad,  1.  ii.  v.  86a.      Strabo,  I.  xii.  p.  564. 

with 


54 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CIIiP.II. 


Robertfon 
Hift.  of 
Charles  V. 


Iliad.   1,  iii. 
v.  354. 


with  fwine,  fheep,  goats,  oxen,  and  horfes,  were  principal  objects 
of  plunder.  But  fcarcely  was  any  crime  more  common  than  rapes : 
and  it  feems  to  have  been  a  kind  of  fafhion,  in  confequence  of  which 
leaders  of  piratical  expeditions  gratified  their  vanity  in  the  higheft 
degree,  when  they  could  carry  off  a  lady  of  fuperior  rank.  How 
ufual  thefe  outrages  were  among  the  Greeks,  we  may  gather  from 
the  oath  faid  to  have  been  exacted  by  Tyndareus,  king  of  Sparta, 
father  of  the  celebrated  Helen,  from  all  the  chieftains  who  came  to 
afk  his  daughter  in  marriage  :  That,  in  cafe  of  her  being  ftolen,  they 
would  alTift  in  recovering  her  with  all  their  power.  This  tradition, 
with  many  other  ftories  of  Grecian  rapes,  on  whatfoever  founded, 
indicates  with  certainty  the  opinion  of  the  later  Greeks,  among  whom 
they  were  popular,  concerning  the  manners  of  their  anceftors  *.  But 
it  does  not  follow  that  the  Greeks  were  more  vicious  than  other 
people  equally  unhabituated  to  conftant,  vigorous,  and  well-regulated 
exertions  of  law  and  government.  Equal  licentioufnefs,  but  a  few 
centuries  ago,  prevailed  throughout  weftern  Europe.  Hence  thole 
gloomy  habitations  of  the  ancient  nobility  which  now  excite  the 
wonder  of  the  traveller,  particularly  in  the  fouthern  parts ;  where, 
in  the  midft  of  the  fineft  countries,  he  often  finds  them  in  fituations 
fo  Angularly  inconvenient  and  uncomfortable,  except  for  what  was 
then  the  one  great  object,  fecurity,  that  now  the  houfelefs  peafant 
will  fcarcely  go  to  them  for  fhelter.  From  the  licentioufnefs  were 
derived  the  manners,  and  even  the  virtues  of  the  times.  Hence 
knight-errantry  and  its  whimfical  confequences. 

The  expedition  of  Paris,  fon  of  Priam  king  of  Troy,  into  Greece, 
appears  to  have  been  a  maroding  fcheme,  fuch  as  was  then  ufual. 
We  are  told,  indeed,  that  he  was  received  very  hofpitably,  and  en- 
tertained very  kindly  by  Menelaus,  king  of  Sparta.  But  this  alfo 
was  confonant  to  the  fpirit  of  the  times ;  for  hofpitality  has  always 
been  the  virtue  of  barbarous  ages  :  it  is  at  this  day  no  lefs  charac- 


*  The  ftory  of  the  oath  required  byTyn-     ner  that  indicates  it  to  have  been  both  ancient 
dareus  is  mentioned  by  Thucydides  in  a  man-     and  generally  received.     Thucyd.  1.  i.  c.  9. 

teriAic 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

teriftic  of  the  wild  Arabs  than  their  fpirit  of  robbery;  and  we  know 
that  in  the  Scottiih.  Highlands  robbery  and  hofpitality  equally  flou- 
rifhed  together  till  very  lately.  Hofpitality,  indeed,  will  be  gene- 
rally found  to  have  flourifhed,  in  different  ages  and  countries,  very 
nearly  in  proportion  to  the  neceflity  for  it ;  that  is,  in  proportion  to 
the  deficiency  of  jurifprudence,  and  the  weaknefs  of  government. 
Paris  concluded  his  viiit  at  Sparta  with  carrying  off  Helen,  wife  of 
Menelaus,  together  with  a  coniiderable  treafure  :  and  whether  this 
was  effected  by  fraud,  or,  as  fome  have  fuppofed,  by  open  violence, 
it  is  probable  enough  that,  as  Herodotus  relates,  it  was  firft  con- 
certed, and  afterward  fupported,  in  revenge  for  fome  fimilar  injury 
done  by  the  Greeks  to  the  Trojans. 

An  outrage,  however,  fo  heinoufly  injurious  to  one  of  the  greatefl: 
princes  of  Greece,  efpecially  if  attended  with  a  breach  of  the  rights 
of  hofpitality,  might  not  unreafonably  be  urged  as  a  caufe  requiring 
the  united  revenge  of  all  the   Grecian  chieftains.     But  there  were 
other  motives  to  ingage  them  in  the  quarrel.     The  hope  of  return- 
ing laden  with  the  fpoil  of  the  richer  provinces  of  Afia  was  a  ftrong 
incentive  to  leaders  poor  at  home,  and  bred  to  rapine.     The  autho- 
rity and  influence  of  Agamemnon,  king  of  Argos,  brother  of  Me-   ™"cyd*  l,u 
nelaus,  were  alfo  weighty.     The  fpirit  of  the  age,  his  own  temper, 
the  extent  of  his  power,  the  natural  deiire  of  exerting  it  on  a  fplen- 
did  occafion,  would  all   incite  this  prince  eagerly  to  adopt  his  bro- 
ther's quarrel.     He  is  belides  reprefented  by  character  qualified  to   ifoerat.  Pana- 
create  and   command   a  powerful  league;  ambitious,  active,  brave,  c-d.  Paris.  Au- 
generous,  humane ;   vain,  indeed,  and    haughty,  fometimes    to   his  fj,r'mer  Iliadi 
own   injury,  yet  commonly   repreffing  thofe  hurtful   qualities,  and  p^ffim. 
watchful  to  cultivate  popularity.     Under  this  leader  all  the  Grecian 
chieftains,  from  the  end  of  Peloponnefus  to  the  end  of  Theffaly,  to- 
gether with   Idomeneus   from   Crete,  and  other  commanders  from 
fome  of  the  fmaller  iflands,  affembled  at  Aulis,  a  fea-port  of  Bceotia.   Hefiod.  Op. 
The  Acarnanians  alone,  feparated  from  the  reft  of  Greece  by  lofty  ffi  ,6'' 
mountains  and  a  fea  at  that  time  little  navigated,  had  no  fhare  in  the 

expe- 


& 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  II.  expedition.  It  is  faid  that,  the  fleet  being  long  detained  at  Aulis  by 
contrary  winds,  Agamemnon  facrificed  his  daughter  Iphigeneia  as 
a  propitiatory  offering,  to  obtain  from  the  gods  a  fafe  and  fpeedy 
paffage  to  the  Trojan  coaft.  Whether  this  be  true  or  no,  the  cur- 
rency of  the  report,  and  of  others  of  the  fame  kind,  proves  that 
the  Greeks  of  after-ages  believed  their  anceftors,  on  momentous  oc- 
calions,  to  have  made  human  facrifices  *.  It  were  however  injuri- 
ous to  the  character  of  Agamemnon  not  to  mention,  that  he  is  faid  to 
have  fubmitted  to  this  abominable  cruelty  with  extreme  reluctance, 
and  not  until  compelled  by  the  clamors  of  the  whole  army,  who  were 
perfuaded  that  the  gods  required  the  victim.     It  is  even  afferted  that, 

Paufan.  l.  ix.  by  a  humane  fraud,  the  princefs  was  at  la  ft  faved,  under  favor  of  a 
report  that  a  fawn  was  miraculoufly  fent  by  the  goddefs  Diana,  to 
be  facrificed  in  her  ftead. 

The  fleet  at  length  had  a  profperous  voyage.  It  confuted  of  about 
twelve  hundred  open  veflels,  each  carrying  from  fifty  to  a  hundred 
and  twenty  men.  The  number  of  men  in  the  whole  armament, 
computed  from  the  mean  of  thofe  two  numbers  mentioned  by  Homer 
as  the  complement  of  different  mips,  would  be  fomething  more  than 
a  hundred  thoufand  ;  and  Thucydides,  whofe  opinion  is  of  the  highefl 
authority,  tells  us  that  this  is  within  the  bounds  of  probability ; 
tho,  as  he  adds,  a  poet  would  on  fuch  a  point  go  to  the  utmoft  of 
current  reports.  The  army,  having  made  good  their  landing  on  the 
Trojan  coaft,  were  fo  fuperior  to  the  enemy  as  to  oblige  them  imme- 
diately to  feek  fhelter  within  the  city-walls  -,  but  here  the  operations 
were  at  a  ftand.  The  hazards  to  which  unfortified  and  folitary 
dwellings  were  expofed  from  pirates  and  freebooters,  had  driven  the 
more  peaceable  of  mankind  to  affemble  in  towns  for  mutual  fecu- 
rity.     To  erect  lofty  walls  around  thofe  towns  for  defence,   was  then 


e.  19. 


Homer.  Iliad 
l.ii. 


Thucyd.  1.  i 
c.  10. 


*  The  facrifice  of  Polyxena  in  the  He- 
cuba of  Euripides  is  a  very  remarkable  in- 
llance.  But  it  mould  be  obferved  that  neither 
Homer  (1),  who  enumerates  the  daughters  of 
Agamemnon,  nor  Hefiod,  who  mentions  the 
affembling  of  the  forces  at  Aulis,    and  their 

(1)  Iliad.  1.  ix.  v.  14$ 


waiting  there  during  bad  weather,  fay  a 
word  of  the  facrifice  of  Iphigeneia,  or  Iphia- 
nafTa  ;  for  by  this  name,  according  to  the 
fcholiaft,  Homer  meant  the  fame  princefs 
called  by  the  tragic  poets  Iphigeneia. 


an 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


57 


an  obvious  invention,  and   required  little   more  than  labor  for  the    CHAP.  II. 
execution.     More  thought,  more  art,  more  experience  were  neceflary      u— v— J 
for  forcing  the  rudeft  fortification,  if  defended  with  vigilance  and  cou- 
rage.    But  the  Trojan  wails  were  Angularly  ftrong ;  Agamemnon's 
army  could  make  no  impreffion  on  them.      He  was  therefore  reduced 
to  the  method  mofc  common  for  arres  after,    of  turning;  the  fie^e  into 
a  blockade,  and  patiently  waiting  till  want  of  neceflaries  mould  force 
.  the  enemy  to  quit  their  fhelter.     But  neither  did   the  policy  of  the 
times  amount  by  many  degrees  to  the  art  of  fubiifting   fo   numerous 
an  army  for  any  length  of  time  ;    nor  would  the  revenues  of  Greece 
have  been  equal  to  it  with  more  knowlege ;    nor   indeed   would   the 
ftate  of  things  have  admitted  it  fcarcely  with  any  wealth,  or  by  any 
means.     For  in  countries  without  commerce,    the  people  providing 
for   their  own  wants  only,  fupplies  can  never  be  found  equal  to  the 
fupport  of  a  fuperadded  army.      No  fooner  therefore  did  the  Trojans 
Ihut  themfelves  within  their  walls,    than  the  Greeks  were  obliged  to 
give  their  principal  attention  to  the  means  of  fubiifting  their  nume-   ™     .d  j  j 

rous  forces.     The  common  method  of  the  times  was  to  ravage  the  c-  "• 

•  •  ■  «       Illad-  Li- 

adjacent  countries  ;    and  this  they  immediately  put  in  pradhce.     But  v.  366. 

fuch  a  refource  foon  deftroys  itfelf.      To  have  therefore  a  more  per-   &"«".'!  91 
manentand  certain  fupply,  they  fent  part  of  their  army  to  cultivate  the  5L1  *£'•■• 
vales  of  the  Thracian  Cherfonefe,  then  abandoned  by  their  inhabitants    106. 
on   account  of  the   frequent  and   deftructive  incurfions  of  the  wild  c.  u. 
people  who  occupied  the  interior  of  that  continent.     Large   bodies 
being  thus  detached  from  the  army,   the  remainder  fcarcely  fufficed 
to  deter  the  Trojans  from  taking  the  field  again,    and  could  not  pre- 
vent fuccour  and  fupplies  from  being  carried  into  the  town.     Thus 
the  fiege   was  protracted   to  the  enormous  length  of  ten  years.     It 
was  probably  their  fuccefs  in  maroding  marches  and  pirating  voyages 
that  induced  the  Greeks    to  perfevere   fo  long.     Achilles   is   faid  to  n;ad.   1.  vs.. 
have  plundered  no  lefs  than  twelve  maritime  and  eleven  inland  towns,   o'dv^'l.  ui. 
But  the  fame  circumftances  contributed  to  procure  numerous  and  T' lo6' 
powerful  allies  to  the  Trojans.    Not  only  the  Aliatic  ftates,  to  a  great 

I  extent 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

extent  eaftward  and   fouthvvard,  fent  auxiliary  troops,  but  alfo  the 
Thracians  from  Europe,  and  even  the  Macedonians.     At  length,   in 
the  tenth   year  of  the  war,  after  great  exertions  of  valor   and   the 
flaughter  of  numbers  on  both  fides,  among  whom  were  many  of  the 
higheft  rank,  Troy  yielded  to  its  fate.      Yet  was  it  not  then  overcome 
by  open  force  :  ftratagem  is  reported  by  Homer;    fraud  and  treachery 
Odyfl".  1.  viii.    have  been  fuppofed  by  later  writers.    It  was,  however,  taken  and  plun- 
dered :    the  venerable  monarch  was  (lain  :    the  queen  and  her  daugh- 
ters,   together  with  one  only  fon  remaining  of  a  very  numerous  male 
progeny,   were  led  into  captivity.      According  to  foine,  not  only  the 
city  was  totally  deftroyed,    but  the  very  name  of  the  people  from 
Wood  on  Ho-   that  time  loft.     Others  however  maintain,   and   with   great  appear- 
™er',    ,  ance  of  reafon   on  the  authority  of  Homer  himfelf,    whoie  words 

Ihad.   1.  xx.  J 

v.  302.  upon  the  occafion  feem  indeed  fcarcely  dubious,  that  ./Eneas  reigned 

afterward  at  Troy,  and  his  pofterity  after  him,  for  fome  generations  -, 
and  that  the  Trojans  were  not  intirely  expelled,  or  their  name  loft 
by  a  mixture  with  other  people,  but  in  confequence  of  the  /Eolic 

migration. 

Nothing  apparently  fo  much  as  the  elegance  of  ingenuity  every- 
where intermixed  with  early  Grecian  hiftory  has  driven  many  to  flight 
it  as  merely  fabulous,  who  have  been  difpofed  to  pay  great  refpect  to 
the  early  hiftory  of  Rome  ;  giving  a  credit  to  the  folemn  adulation 
of  the  grave  hiftorians  of  Italy  to  their  own  country,  which  they 
deny  to  the  fanciful  indeed  and  inaccurate,  but  furely  honeft  and 
unflattering  accounts  remaining  to  us  of  elder  Greece.  Agamemnon 
we  are  told  triumphed  over  Troy ;  and  we  have  fufficient  hiftorical 
grounds  to  believe  it.  But  the  Grecian  poets  themfelves  univerfally 
acknowlege  that  it  was  a  dear-bought,  a  mournful  triumph.  Few 
of  the  princes  who  furvived  to  partake  of  it  could  have  any  injoy- 
ment  of  their  hard-earned  glory  in  their  native  country.  None  ex- 
pecting that  the  war  would  detain  them  fo  long  from  home,  none 
had  made  due  provifion  for  the  regular  adminiftration  of  their  affairs 
during  fuch  an  abfence.  It  is  indeed  probable  that  the  utmoft  wif- 
dom  and  forethought  would  have  been  unequal  to  the  purpofe.     For, 

in 


Thucyd.  1,  i. 

C.  13. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  59 

in  the  half-formed  governments  of  thofe  days,  the  conftant  prefence     CHAP.  II. 
of  the  prince,  as  fupreme  regulator,  was  abfolutely  neceffary  to  keep 
the  whole  from  running  prefently  into  utter  confufion.     Agamemnon    odyfl".  1.  i. 
himfelf  had  no  fooner  reached  his  native  foil,  than  he  was  traiter-   c'3  ' 
oufly  murdered.     His  kinfman   ./Egiftheus  had  in  his  abfence  de- 
bauched his  queen   Clytaemneftra  ;     and,   with   her    affiftance,   had 
obtained  fuch  firm  poflefiion   of  the  government,   that  thofe  friends 
of  Agamemnon  who  were  fortunate  enough  to  avoid  falling  with  him, 
found  it  neceflary  to  fly  with  his  fon  Oreftes,  and  leave  the  ufurper 
in  quiet  poflefiion  of  the  throne.     The  misfortunes  on  this  occafion 
were  perhaps  in  general  not  fo  great  to  the  people  as  to  the  princes. 
Many  of  thefe  were  driven  to  imbark  again  with  their  adherents,   to 
feek  fettlements   in  diftant  countries,  and  never  to  return.     Every 
ftate,  however,  fufFered.     Athens  alone,  whofe  government  was  now 
approaching  to  a  regular  commonwealth,  felt  little  from  the  abfence 
of  the  commander  of  its  forces.     Its  magiflracies  were  all  otherwife 
fupplied. 

Such  then  were  the  Trojan  war  and  its  confequences,  according  to 
the  beft  of  the  unconnected  and  defective  accounts  remaining,  among 
which  thofe  of  Homer  have  always  held  the  firft  rank.  The  autho- 
rity, however,  of  the  great  poet  as  an  hiftorian  has  in  modern  times 
been  varioufly  eftimated.  Among  the  ancients  it  was  lefs  queftioned. 
As  it  is  of  the  higheft  importance  to  the  hiftory  of  the  early  ages 
that  it  mould  have  its  due  weight,  I  will  mention  here  fome  of 
the  principal  circumftances  of  proof  in  its  favor :  others  will  occur 
hereafter.  In  Homer's  age  then,  it  mould  be  remembered,  poets 
were  the  only  hiftorians ;  from  which  tho  it  does  not  at  all  fol- 
low that  poets  would  always  fcrupuloufly  adhere  to  truth,  yet  it  ne- 
ceflarily  follows,  that  veracity  in  hiftorical  narration  would  make  a 
large  (hare  of  a  poet's  merit  in  public  opinion :  a  circumftance  which 
the  common  ufe  of  written  records  and  profe  hiftories  inftantly  and 
totally  altered.  The  probability,  and  the  very  remarkable  confiftency 
of  Homer's  hiftorical  anecdotes,  varioufly  difperfed  as  they  are  among 

I  2  his 


60  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  II.  his  poetical  details  and  embellishments,  form  a  fecond  and  powerful  te- 
stimony. Indeed  the  connection  and  the  clearnefs  of  Grecian  hiftory 
through  the  very  early  times  of  which  Homer  has  treated,  appear  extra- 
ordinary, when  compared  with  the  darknefs  and  uncertainty  that  begin 
in  the  inftant  of  our  lofing  his  guidance,  and  continue  through  ages. 
In  confirmation  then  of  this  prefumptive  evidence,  we  have  very 
complete  pofitive  proof  to  the  only  point  that  could  admit  of  it,  his 
geography  ;  which  has  wonderfully  flood  the  mod  fcrupulous  in- 
quiries from  thole  who  were  every  way  qualified  to  make  them. 
From  all  thefe,  with  perhaps  other  confiderations,  followed  what  we 
may  add  in  the  fourth  place,  the  credit  paid  to  Homer's  hiftory  by 
the  moft  judicious  profe-writers  of  antiquity,  and  among  the  early 
ones  particularly  by  Thucydides.  But  the  very  fame  of  the  principal 
perfons  and  events  celebrated  by  Homer  feems  to  have  led  fome  to 
queftion  their  reality.  Perhaps  it  may  not  be  an  improper  digreffion 
here  to  bring  to  the  reader's  recollection  a  paflage  in  the  hiftory  of 
the  Britifh  iflands,  bearing  fo  clofe  an  analogy  to  fome  of  the  moft 
remarkable  circumftances  in  Homer's  hiftory,  that  it  affords  no  in- 
confiderable  collateral  fupport  to  that  poet's  authority  as  a  faithful 
relater  of  facts,  and  painter  of  manners.  ■  Exploits  like  that  of  Paris 
were,  in  the  twelfth  century,  not  uncommon  in  Ireland.  In  a 
lower  line  they  have  been  frequent  there  ftill  in  our  days ;  but  in 
that  age  popular  opinion  was  fo  favorable  to  them,  that  even  princes, 
like  Jafon  and  Paris,  gloried  in  fuch  proofs  of  their  gallantry  and 
fpirit.  Dermot,  king  of  Leinfter,  accordingly  formed  a  defign  on 
Dervorghal,  a  celebrated  beauty,  wife  of  O'Ruark,  king  of  Leitrim  ; 
and,  between  force  and  fraud,  he  fucceeded  in  carrying  her  oft. 
O'Ruark  refented  the  affront,  as  might  be  expected.  He  procured 
a  confederacy  of  neighbouring  chieftains,  with  the  king  of  Con- 
naught,  the  moft  powerful  prince  of  Ireland,  at  their  head.  Lein- 
fter was  invaded,  the  princefs  was  recovered,  and,  after  hoftilities 
continued  with  various  fuccefs  during  many  years,  Dermot  was  ex- 
pelled from  his  kingdom.     Thus  far  the   refemblance  hokls   with 

much 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  61 


j 


much  exa&nefs.  The  fequel  differs  :  for  the  rape  of  Dervorghal,  CHAP.  II. 
beyond  comparifon  inferior  in  celebrity,  had  yet  confequences  far 
more  important  than  the  rape  of  Helen.  The  fugitive  Dermot, 
deprived  of  other  hope,  applied  to  the  powerful  monarch  of  the 
neighbouring  ifland,  Henry  the  Second ;  and  in  return  for  affiftance 
to  reffore  him  to  his  dominions,  offered  to  hold  them  in  vaffalage 
of  the  crown  of  England.  The  Englifh  conqueft  of  Ireland  fol- 
lowed *. 

*  Mr.  Hume,   in  his  Hillory    of  England,  cumftances,  fufficiently  tallies.     Lord  Lyttel- 

has  written    the   name  of  the   heroine  of  this  ton,  in  his  Hiftory  of  Henry  the  Second,  both 

flory  Omach.     I  have  followed  Dr.  Leland's  relates   the  fadts   and  writes  the  names  nearly 

Hiftory   of  Ireland,  with  which  Mr.  Hume's  as  Dr.  Leland. 
more   abridged  account,  in    all  material   cir- 


CHAPTER     III. 

Of  the  Religion,   Government,   Jurifprudence,   Science, 
Arts,  Commerce,  and  Manners  of  the  early  Greeks. 

SECTION     I. 

Of  the  Progrefs  of  Things  from  the  Eafl  into  Greece,  and  of  the  Reli- 
gion of  the  early  Greeks. 

'OWEVER  lefs  complete  than  we  might  wifh  the  hifforical    CHAP.  in. 

.  information  remaining  to  us  from  Homer  may  be,  we  have  SECT.  I. 
yet  from  his  malterly  hand  a  finifhed  picture  of  the  manners  and 
principles  of  his  age,  domellic  as  well  as  political ;  which,  fublime 
and  magnificent  as  it  is  in  the  general  outline  and  compofition,  de- 
fcends  at  the  fame  time,  without  degrading  the  grand  whole,  to  fo 
many  minute  particulars,  as  to  leave  our  curiofity  fcarcely  in  any- 
thing ungratified.  It  belongs  not  to  hiftory  to  detail  every  circum- 
stance 


62  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  III.    fiance  of  this  entertaining  and  instructive  tablet,  which  yet  abounds 
SECT.  I.      m  matter  not  to  be  left  unnoticed. 

But,  in  confidering  the  firit  ages  of  Greece,  we  find  our  view  con- 
tinually led  toward  thofe  earlieft  feats  of  empire  and  of  fcience, 
which  we  ufually  call  collectively  the  Eaft.  And  here  fo  vaft  and  fo 
interefting  a  field  of  inquiry  prefents  itfelf,  yet,  like  forms  in  diftant 
landfcape,  fo  confufed  by  aerial  tints,  and  by  length  and  intricacy 
of  perspective,  that  it  is  not  eafy  to  determine  where  and  how  far 
investigation  ought  to  be  attempted,  and  when  precifely  the  voice  of 
caution  mould  be  obeyed,  rather  than  that  of  curiofity.  Certainly 
to  bewilder  himfelf  will  not  generally  be  allowed  to  the  hiftorian  as 
a  venial  error.  Sometimes,  however,  and  without  far  wandering 
from  well-trodden  paths,  he  may  venture  to  fearch  for  fome  illuftra- 
tion  of  his  fubject  in  that  utmoft  verge  of  hiftory's  horizon. 

In  all  countries,  and  through  all  ages,  Religion  and  Civil  Govern- 
ment have  been  fo  connected,  that  no  hiitory  can  be  given  of  either 
without  reference  to  the  other.  But  in  the  accounts  remaining  to 
us  of  the  earlieft  times,  the  attention  everywhere  paid  to  religion, 
the  deep  intereft  taken  in  it  by  individuals  and  by  communities,  by 
people  polifhed  equally  and  unpolifhed,  is  peculiarly  Striking.  A 
fenfe  of  dependance  on  fome  fuperior  being  feems  indeed  infepara- 
ble  from  man  j  it  is  in  a  manner  inftinct  in  him  *.  His  own  help- 
leflnefs,  compared  with  the  ftupendous  powers  of  nature  which  he 
fees  constantly  exerted  around  him,  makes  the  favage  ever  anxioufly 
look  for  fome  being  of  a  higher  order  on  whom  to  rely :  and  the 
man  educated  to  exercife  the  faculties  of  his  mind  has  only  to  reflect 
on  himfelf,  on  his  own  abilities,  his  own  weaknefs,  his  own  know- 
lege,  his  own  ignorance,  his  own  happinefs,  his  own  mifery,  his 
own  beginning,  and  his  end,  to  be  directed  not  only  to  belief  in 
fome  fuperior  being,  but  alfo  to  expectation  of  fome  future  State, 
through  mere  conviction  that  nature  hath  given  him  both  a  great 
deal  more  and  a  great  deal  lefs  than  were  neceffary  to  fit  him  for  this 

n«m;  o«  Qiui/  ■xu.timn'  a-t^uirot.      Homer.  Ody/T.    1.  iii.   v.  48. 

alone. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  63 

alone.     Religion  therefore  can  never  be  loft  among  mankind;  but,    CHAP. Hi. 

SECT.  I. 


through  the  imperfection  of  our  nature,  it   is  fo  prone  to  degenerate 


that  fuperftition  in  one  ftate  of  fociety,  and  fcepticifm  in  another, 
may  perhaps,  without  impropriety,  be  calied  nature's  works.  The 
variety  indeed,  and  the  grofsnefs  of  the  corruptions  of  religion,  from 
which  few  pages  in  the  annals  of  the  world  arc:  pure,  may  well  on 
firfr.  view  excite  our  wonder.  But,  if  we  proceed  to  inquire  after 
their  origin,  we  immediately  find  fuch  fources  in  the  nature  and 
condition  of  man,  that  evidently  nothing  under  a  conftant  miracle 
could  prevent  thofe  effects  to  which  the  biftory  of  all  countries  in  all 
ages  bears  teftimony.  The  fears  of  ignorance,  the  intereft  of  cun- 
ning, the  pride  of  fcience,  have  been  the  mainfprings  :  every  human 
paflion  has  contributed  its  addition. 

A  firm  belief,  however,  both  of  the  exiftence  of  a  deity,  and  of 
the  duty  of  communication  with  him,  appears  to  have  prevailed  uni- 
verfally  in  the  early  ages.     But  religion  was  then  the  common  care   Shuckford's 

Connexion  of 

of  all  men  ;  a  facerdotal  order  was  unknown  :   the  patriarch,  or  head   Sacred    and 
of  the  family,  was  chief  in  religious  as  in  civil  concerns :  a  preference   ftoiy,  v.  ii. 
to  primogeniture  feems   always  to  have   obtained*:   the  eldeft  fon     ,yuP"   9- 
fucceeded  regularly  to  the  right  of  facrificing,  to  the  right  of  being 
priefr.  of  the  family.     When  younger  fons  became  fathers  of  families, 
they  alfo  fuperintended  the  domeflic  religion  each  of  his  own  houfe- 
hold,  and  performed   the   domeftic  facrifices  ;  the  patriarch  and  his 
fuccelfors  remaining  chief  priefts  of  the  tribe.     This  order  of  things 
paffed,  remarkably  unvaried,    to  Egypt,   to  Greece,   to  Rome,  and 
very  generally  over  the  world  f.     But  concomitant  circumfiances  dif- 
fering  in   different   countries,  confequences  of  courfe   differed.     In 
Afia  extenfive  empires  feem  almoft  to  have  grown  as  population  ex- 

*  This  it  was,   according  to  Homer,  that  is  the  obfervation  of  Iris  to  Neptune. 
gave  Jupiter  himfelf  his  right  of  fupremacy  f  This  fubjecl  is  treated  diffufively,  with 

over  his   brothers;  and  the  Fates   and  Furies  many   references    to    the   Scriptures    and    to 

were  the  vindicators   of  that  right :  heathen  authors,  in  the  fixth   book  of  Shuck- 

OTad   in;  ■K^.aZvt'iepwM  Egiw&j  a\.h  ewo»t«»,  ford's    Connexion    of    Sacred    and    Profane 

Iliad.  1.  xv.  v.  204.  Hiftory. 

tended. 


64  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  III.    tended.     From  earlieft  times  the  people  were  accuftomed  to  look  up 
sect.  I.      to  one  family  as  prefiding  over  national  concerns,  religious  equally 
and  political,  by  a  hereditary  right  partaking,  in  public  opinion,  of 
divine  authority.     Ideas  and  habits  were  thus  acquired  congenial  to 
defpotic  government:  and  in   all  the  violent  revolutions  which  that 
large  and  rich  portion  of  the  earth  has  undergone,  the  idea  of  at- 
tachment to  a  particular  family,  as   prefiding  by  divine  appointment 
over  both  the  religious  and  civil  polity  of  the   nation,  has  prevailed 
and  prevails  very  extenfively   to  this  day.     We  have  no  certain  ac- 
count when  or  how  the  fac°rdotal  order  of  the  magians  arofe.    But  it 
is  a  remarkable  circumftance,  of  which  we  are  informed  by  the  moil 
Herodot.  l.  i.    unfufpicious  teftimony,   that  by  far  the  pureft  religion  known  among 
heathen  nations  remained  in  thofe  countries  from  which  all  migra- 
tion has  been  fuppofed  to  have  originated.     With  extent  of  wander- 
ing, favage  ignorance  grew. 

We  are  not  without  information  of  peculiar  caufes  which  made 
Egypt  the  great  fchool  of  fuperftition,  while  it  was  the  feat  of  arts 
and  knowiege.  A  prodigious  population  was  here  confined  within 
a  narrow  territory.  Seas  and  defarts  prevented  the  monarch  from 
extending  his  dominion.  A  more  refined  polity  than  prevailed  in 
Alia,  and  freer  communication  of  rights,  became  indifpenlible.  The 
Diodor.  sic.  powerful  families,  therefore,  fhared  with  the  monarch  in  the  fuper- 
l.i.  c.  38.  intendance  of  the  national  religion.  The  priefthood  thus,  and  the 
nobility  of  the  nation,  were  one  *.  By  a  fingular  policy,  profefiions 
and  callings  were  made  hereditary  thro  all  ranks  of  men  ;  fo  that 
the  bufinefs  of  every  man's  life  was  unalterably  determined  by  his 
birth.  Prieftcraft  thus,  among  the  reft,  became  the  inalienable  in- 
heritance of  particular  families.  Learning  was  of  courfe  their  exclu- 
live  property.  Natural  wonders,  more  frequent  here  than  elfewhere, 
aflifted    in   difpoiing  the    people   to   fuperftition  -j-.      With  fingular 

*  Diodorus   compares  the  order  of  priefts  in  f  T/^ara  te   ttXiui  etpi    ivgvrut  v>  tois-i   atooicri 

Esrypt  to  the  order  of  nobles,  the  eupatrides,     «9r«c"  utyumw.     Herodot.  1.  ii. 
at  Athens. 

intereft 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  65 


intereft  to  promote  it,  a  facerdotal  nobility  had  Angular  means.  Thus 
the  fuperftition  of  Egypt,  while  it  rofe  to  an  extravagance  unknown 
in  any  other  country,  was  alfo  fupported  by  a  union  of  powers  that 
never  met  eliewhere. 

The  circumftances  of  Greece  differed  very  materially.  Its  inha- 
bitants were  long  barbarous,  and  without  regular  government.  Among 
wandering:  favao-es  no  idea  could  hold  of  a  divine  right  inherent  in 
any  family  to  direct  either  the  religious  or  the  civil  concerns  of 
others.  But  if  the  accounts  of  Grecian  authors  are  to  be  believed, 
the  rude  natives  always  readily  affociated  with  any  adventurers  from 
the  civilized  countries  of  the  Eaft.  It  was  not  difficult  for  thefe  to 
explain  the  advantages  of  a  town,  where  the  people  might  find  fafety 
for  their  perfons  when  danger  threatened  their  fields ;  and  where, 
meeting  occafionally  to  confult  in  common,  they  might  provide  the 
means  of  a  ready  exertion  of  united  ftrength,  to  repel  thofe  evils  to 
which  the  unconnected  inhabitants  of  fcattered  villages  were  per- 
petually expofed.  A  man  of  knowlege  and  experience  muft  pre- 
iide  in  council,  and  direct  the  execution  of  what  had  been  refolved 
in  common.  A  town  was  built  and  fortified,  and  a  form  of  govern- 
ment fettled.  An  oriental  fuperintending  was  honored  with  the  title 
of  king.  Thus  appear  to  have  arifen  feveral  of  the  principal  Gre- 
cian cities.  Conftantly  the  king  exercifed  fupremacy  in  religious 
concerns  :  he  was  always  chief  prieft*;  and  he  always  endeavoured 
to  acquire  the  reputation  of  divine  authority  for  all  his  eitablifh- 
ments.  But  the  government  being  thus  notoriously  formed  by  com- 
pact, the  firft  king  a  ftranger,  equally  without  claim  of  hereditary 
royalty  among  his  original  fellowcountrymen,  and  among  thofe  in 
whole  country  he  came  to  eftabliih  himfelf,  no  idea  of  indefeafible 
right  inherent  in  a  fovereign  family  could  readily  gain  here.  The 
compact  alone  could  be  fuppofed  or  pretended  to  be  divinely  autho- 
riled.     The  perfon  of  the  king  had  no  privileges  but  by  the  gift  of 

*  See   every    facrifice    in    the    Iliad    and     Neftor's  facrifice  at  Pylos.  Odyff.  b.  iii.  v.  404 
OdylTee  ;    panicularlv  the  minute    detail  of    — 463. 

K  the 


CHAP.  III. 
SECT.  I. 


66 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  III. 
SECT.  I. 


Shuckford's 
Connexion. 
Warburton'i 
Div.  Leg. 


Herodot.  1.  ii. 
c.  53. 


the    people.      His    civil    confequence   therefore  depended    upon   his 
abilities  and   conduct.      His  religious   character  was   otherwife  efti- 
mated.     Here  not  the  perfon  or  family,  but  the  title  and  office,  were 
held  facred.      It  is   remarkable  that   Athenian    and  Roman  fuperfti- 
tion,  without  any  connection  between  the  people,  fhould  have  agreed 
fo  exactly  in  the  extraordinary  circumftancc,   that  after  the  abolition 
of  royalty  among  both,  and   while   the  very  name  of  king  was  ab- 
horred as  a  title  of  civil  magiftracy  or  military  command,  yet  equally 
the  title  and  the  office  were  fcrupulouily  retained  for  the  adminiftra- 
tion   of  religious  ceremonies.      It  has  been    obferved  that   a  prieft- 
hood  was   fir  ft  eftablifhed  among   the  Jews   when  their  government 
became  a  regular  commonwealth.      Such   appropriation  of  religious 
functions,  if  the  minifters  are  confined  to  their  proper  object,  is  per- 
haps not  lefs  advantageous  to  civil  freedom  than  necefTary  to  the  main- 
tenance of  religion. 

Proceeding  from  this  curfory  view  of  the  progrefs  of  things  from 
the  Eaft,  to  the  consideration  of  Homer's  highly  touched  picture  of 
human  life  in  his  own  age  and  country,  his  Religion  will  attract  our 
firft  attention.  It  was  the  opinion  of  Herodotus  that  Homer,  to- 
gether with  Hefiod,  principally  fettled  the  religious  tenets  of  their 
fellowcountrymen,  which  before  were  totally  vague,  floating  about 
partially  as  they  happened  to  arife,  or  to  be  imported  by  foreigners, 
particularly  Egyptians :  and  indeed  if  ever  there  was  any  ftandard  of 
Grecian  orthodoxy,  it  muft  be  looked  for  in  the  works  of  thole  two 
poets.  But  the  very  early  inhabitants  of  Greece  had  a  religion  far 
lefs  degenerated  from  original  purity.  This  curious  and  interefting 
fact  is  preferved  to  us  inadvertently  by  the  hiftorian  juft  mentioned  ; 
who  relates,  on  the  authority  of  the  priefts  of  Dodona,  that  ancient- 
lv  the  Pelafgians,  anceftors  of  the  Greeks,  and  of  whom  extenfive 
traces  remain  in  the  traditions  concerning  all  the  countries  furround- 
ing  the  JEgean  fea,  facrificed  and  prayed  to  gods  to  whom  they  gave 
no  name  or  diftinguilhing  appellation  *  ;   «  for,'  fays  he,   '  they  had 


-lvuvvjj.{m  lv$'  wyttjiu.     Herodot.   1.  ii.  c.  52. 


never 


log. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  67 

*  never  heard  of  any,  but  they  called  them  gods,  as  the  difpofers  and    CHAP.  Iir. 

*  rulers  of  all  things  *.'     Indeed  all  the  Grecian  writers  on  the  an-     SECT.  I. 
tiquities  of  their  country  appear  to  have  been  aware  of  the  late  in- 
troduction of  the  belief  in  thofe  numerous  deities  to  whom  the  poeti- 
cal genius  of  Greece  has  given  immortality.     Plato  fuppofes  that  the   Plato.  Cratyl. 
fun,   moon,   flars  and  earth,   had  previoufly  been  the  only  objects  of  ed.  Serran!  ' 
Grecian  worfhip  ;   as  they  were,  he  fays,  of  that  of  molt  of  the  bar- 
barous nations  in  his  time.     But  in  addition  to  the  ftrong  teftimony 

of  the  Dodonrean  priefts  reported  by  Herodotus,  we  find  in  the 
works  of  Hefiod  traces  of  oriental  tradition  evidently  older  than  anv 
worfhip  of  the  celeftial  luminaries.  His  golden  age,  plainly  foreign 
to  all  Grecian  hiftory,  bears  remarkable  analogy  to  the  icripture  ac- 
count of  the  terreftrial  paradife,  and  the  ftate  of  man  before  the  fall. 
c  The  fir  ft  race  of  men,'  he  fays,  '  lived  like  gods  in  perfect  happi-    Hefiod.  Op. 

*  nefs,  exempt  from   labor,  from  old  age,    and  from  all  evil.     The   v<  x 
'  earth  fpontaneoufly  fupplied  them  with  fruits  in  the  greateft  abun- 

*  dance.     Dying  at  length  without  pain,  they  became  happy   and 

*  beneficent  fpirits,  appointed  by  the  divine  wifdom  to  the  royal 
'  function  of  fuperintending  the  future  race  of  men,  watching  their 
'  gocd  and  evil  ways.'  His  lilver  age  is  not  lefs  remarkably  con- 
fonant  to  the  fcripture  account  of  the  antediluvian  world  after  the 
fall :  «  The  fecond  race  of  men,'  he  proceeds,  '  were  like  thofe  of  the 
'  golden  age  neither  in  nature  nor  in  moral  character.  They  fcarcely 
'  reached  manhood  in  a  hundred  years ;  yet  not  thus  lefs  fubject 
'  to  pain  and  folly,  they  died  early.  They  were  unceafing  in  vio- 
'  lence  and  injuftice  toward  one  another,  nor  would  they  duly  re- 
'  verence  the  immortal  gods.     Jupiter  therefore  hid  this  race  in  his 

*  anger,  becaufe  they  honored  not  the  blefied  gods  of  heaven.'  In 
fpeaking  of  the  third  race  of  men,  which  he  calls  the  brazen  race, 

*   Herodotus    feems    to  have   fuppofed    the  other  etymologies  for  it  :   but  it   feems  rather 

Greek  name   for   God   to  have   been  derived  probable,  that   it  had  a  more   ancient  origin 

from   a   Greek   verb,    fignifying    to   place  or  than   any   derivation   within    the   Greek   lan- 

difpofe  :  Other  Grecian  authors  have  imagined  guage. 

K  2  the 


68  HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  ill.    tne  p0et  at  length  comes  home  to  his  own  country,  defcribing  exacT:- 
SECT.  I.      ]y  tjiat  flate  of  things  of  which  Plutarch  has  given  a  more  particular 
account  in  his  life  of  Thefeus  *. 

We  have  large  teftimony  that  Polytheism  was  principally  derived 
from  Egypt  f.    The  colonics,  who  paded  from  that  polifhed  country 
to  lavage  Greece,   wculd  of  courfe  communicate   their  religious   te- 
nets J.     The  rude  natives  liftened  greedily  to  inftrudtion  on  a  fubject. 
in  which   they  felt   themfelves  deeply  interefted ;  and  thought  it  an 
important  improvement  to  be  able  to  name  many  gods,  whofe  ftories 
were  related  to  them,  inftead  of  facrificing  to  one   only,  without  a 
name,    and   of   whofe    nature   they   had   no  fatisfaclory  conception. 
For  the  unity  of  God  makes  a  name  ufelefs ;  where  many  gods  are 
believed,  diflinguifhing  appellations  will   be  given  of  courfe.      Nor 
is  the  tranfition  violent,  for  ignorant  people,  from  a  vague  idea  of  one 
omniprefent  deity,   to  the  belief  of  a   feparate  divine  effence  in  dif- 
ferent places,  and   in  every  different   thing.      On    the   contrary,   the 
popular  fuperflitions  of  almoit  all  nations   (how  it  congenial  to  the 
human  mind;   which  wants  exercife  of  its   powers  to   inable  it   to 
exalt  thought  to  the  conception  of  one  almighty  and  boundlefs  Being. 
Polytheifm  therefore   once  diffeminated,    the  lively   imagination  of 
the  Greeks  would  not  be  confined   within  the  limits  of  Egyptian 
inftruction.     Their  country,  with  fewer  ohje&s  of  wonder,  abounded 
with  incentives  to  fancy  which  Egypt  wanted.     Hence,  beiide  Juno, 
Herodot  1  ii.   Vefta,   Themis,  whom  they  added  to  the  principal  divinities  derived 
50,  from  the  marfhy  banks  of  the  Nile,  every  Grecian  mountain  acquired 

its   Oreads,  every  wood   its  Dryads,  every   fountain    its  Naiad,  the 
fea  its  Tritons  and  its  Nereids,  and  every  river  its  god  :   the  variety 
Hcfiod.  Op.    of  the  feafons  produced  the  Hours ;  and  the  Mufes  and  the  Graces 
were  the  genuine  offspring  of  the  genius  of  the  people.     Thus  were 

*  See  p.  -?9  of  this  Volume.  logy,  and   Pownall   on    the   Study   of   Anti- 

f  See  Warburton's  Divine  Legation,  Shuck-  quities. 
ford's  Connexion  of  Sacred  and  Profane  Hi-  \  See  on  this  fubjett  Herodotus,  Plato,  and 

itory,    Bryant's  Analyfis  of  Ancient  Mytho-  Diodorus  Siculus. 

divinities 


c 


&  Di.    1.  i. 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  69 

divinities  fo  multiplied  before  Homer's  time,  that  nobody  any  longer    CHAP.  ill. 
undertook  to  fay  how  many  there  were  not.  SECT.  I. 

And  now  the  Grecian  gods  were  changed  from  the  one  almighty 
parent  of  good,  not  lefs  in  attributes  than  in  number.     Jupiter,   the 
chief  of  them,  was  not  omnipotent :   he  was  under  the  ftricTt  controul 
of  Fate.     Omniprefence  was  not   among  his  attributes,  nor  was  he   n;ad.  1.  xiii. 
all-feeing ;  and  as  perfect  goodnefs  was  nowhere  to  be  found  in  Ho-   v'  l' 
mer's   heaven,    fo   there  was   by  no  means   perfect  happinefs   there. 
The  inferior  deities  were  commonly   more  difpofed  to  difturb  than 
affifr.  the  government  of  the  chief j    who   is  reprefented  without  the 
lead  confidence   in    their  wifdom  and  right  intentions,  placing  his    Iikd.  I.  viii. 
whole  dependance  on  his  own  ftrength  only.     Hence  alone  alfo  is  de-   j^j    1#  vii;> 
rived  their  reverence  for  him  ;   not  that  he  is  wife  and  good,  but  that   v-  2I°- 
he  is  ftrong.      Minerva,  the  goddefs  of  wifdom,  fpeaks  of  the  fove- 
reign  of  the  gods,  calling  him  at  the  fame  time  her  father,  in  the  re- 
proachful and  debating  terms  of  '  raging  with  an  evil  mind  in  perpe-    Iliad.  1.  viii. 
tual  oppofition  to  her  inclinations.'     The  fame  goddefs  is  reprefented    ''  3  l' 
adviling  Pandarus  to  endeavour  to  bribe  Apollo  with  a  promife  of  a 
hecatomb,  to  afTift  him  in  affafTinating  Menelaus  contrary  to  the  faith   iliac 
of  a  folemn  treaty  :   and  even  Jupiter  himfelf  joins  with  that  goddefs   v' 
and  Juno   in  prompting  this  deed,   in  which  the  fouleft  perjury  and 
baleft  treachery  go  united.     We  cannot  but  wonder  to  find   the  god- 
defs of  wifdom  and  the  fovereign  of  the  gods  thus  employed.     Yet 
the  belief  that  villainy,  fo  often  feen  triumphant,    was  frequently  fa- 
vored by  fome  fuperior  power,  or  however  that  the  mere  crime  againft 
the   neighbour   feldom  or  never  offended  the  deity,   appears    by   no   See  0!vfl- 
means  unnatural.     It  is  worthy  of  remark,   that  a  religion  which  ac-   '"•   v-    zi 

a  &  1.  xvi.   ' 

knowleges  only  one  God  has  not  taught  the  Turks  to  reafon  more   598. 
juftly.     '  Whatever  the  intention  may  have  been,'   fiys   the  elegant 
and  judicious  Buibequius,   in  the  account  of  his  embafly  at  the  Ot-   De  Lcm 
toman  court,  '  if  the  event   is   profperous   they   look   upon  God  as    Tl,mc 
'  authorizing  the  deed  :'  in  proof  of  which  he  relates  fome  remark- 
able 


lad.   ; 
101. 


atn  >:'.' 
3,   e- 

P1' 


70  i  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

chap.  III.    able  occurrences  in  Turkifh  hiftory,  and  a  converfation  which  he 
SECT.  i.     held  concerning  them  with  a  Turk  of  rank. 

Thus  imperfect  as  the  chief  of  the  Grecian  heaven  is  reprefented, 
{till  that  the  Greeks  derived  their  firfl  notion  of  him  from  the  power 
of  a  king  of  Crete,  is  an  opinion  as  unauthorifed  by  the  oldeft  poets 
and  hiftorians  as  it  is  in  itfelf  improbable,  not  to  fay  impollible. 
Ilkd.  1.  xvi.  Homer's  invocation  to  the  Dodonaean  Pelafgian  Jupiter  fuffices  in- 
deed  alone  to  refute  the  idea.  But  that  a  king  of  Crete,  like  Alex- 
ander and  the  Ca?fars  in  more  inlightened  ages,  may  have  affumed, 
or  may  have  been  complimented  with  a  title  ufually  appropriated  to 
the  deity,  is  fufficiently  likely.  Whence  indeed  the  Greek  name 
Zeus  (which  in  the  common  form  of  invocation  gave  the  Latin  Fu- 
Plato.  Cray-   piter)  was.  derived,  is  an  inquiry  that  cannot  end  in  certaintv.      Plato 

lus,   p.    396.       -         .     .  x        J  J  ™ 

t.  i.  ed.  Ser-  *ays  it  is  a  name  not  eafy  to  be  underftood  ;  and  his  explanation  of  it 
will  fcarcely  fatisfy  any  one.  It  feems  however  fully  confident  with 
the  analogy  of  letters,  as  well  as  from  many  circumftances  highly 
probable,  that  the  Greek  and  Latin  names  for  the  deity,  as  they  were 
varioufly  inflecled,  Theos,  or  rather  Theo,  Deo,  Dia,  Zeu,  Jove,  and 
the  Hebrew  which  we  write  Jehovah,  tho  in  the  oriental  orthography 
it  has  only  four  letters,  were  originally  one  name*. 

Ideas  concerning  that  Fate,  which  was  fuppofed  to  decide  the  lot 
of  gods  equally  as  of  men,  could  not  but  be  very  indeterminate. 
Fate  was  perfonified  fometimes  as  one,  fometimes  as  three  fifter- 
beings.  The  three  furies,  or  avenging  deities,  feem  to  have  been 
fometimes  confidered  as  the  fame  with  the  fates,  fometimes  as  attend- 
ing powers.  Either  or  both,  for  the  fuperftition  which  occafioned 
a  dread  of  naming  them  makes  it  difficult  to  diitinguiffi,  were  often 
mentioned   by   the    relpeclful   title   of  the    Venerable  Goddefles  f. 

*  See  Monde  Primitif  Analyse  et  Compare,  cedemonians  often  pronounced  and  even  wrote 

par  M.   Court  de  Gebelin,    vol.   i.   p.    166.  figma  for  theta.      See  the  account  of  inferip- 

Concermng  the  analogy  of  letters,  Sharpe  on  tions   found   in   Laconia  by    the  Abbe  Four- 

the  Origin  of  Languages,  and  Pownall  on  the  mount,  in  the   15th   vol.    of  the   Memoirs   of 

Study  of  Antiquities  may  be  confulted.      The  the  Academy  of  Infcriptions,   p.  395. 
modern  Greeks  pronounce  delta  like  the  Eng-  f  !■>,«,  &«;,  veneranda:  dex. 

liih  th  in  this,  there.     The  ancient  La- 
Th  ey 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 


7» 


They  feem  indeed  to  have  been  the  only  Grecian  deities  who  were  CHAP.  III. 
fuppofed  incapable  of  doing  wrong.  Of  evil  fpirits,  in  the  modern  SECT.  I. 
fenfe  of  the  term,  the  Greeks  appear  to  have  had  no  idea.  But  fuch 
was  the  acknowleged  imperfection  of  the  Grecian  heaven,  that 
Hefiod  exprefsly  declares  it  to  have  been  the  office  of  the  fates  and 
furies  '  to  punifh  the  tranfgreffions  of  men  and  gods*.'  It  feems 
to  have  been  fuppofed  the  principal  office  of  Jupiter  to  fuperintend 
the  performance  of  the  decrees  of  fate;  and  for  that  purpofe  to  keep 
a  watchful  eye  over  the  ways  both  of  mortals  and  immortals.  Fate 
therefore  being  but  a  blind  power,  and  Jupiter  a  very  imperfect 
divinity,  we  {hall  the  lefs  wonder  to  find  it  frequently  mentioned  by 
Homer  as  poffible;  which  yet  appears  a  ftrange  inconliitency,  that 
things  contrary  to  fate  may  be  done,  not  only  by  gods  but  even  by 
men  -j~. 

Idolatry,  as  far  as  appears  from  Homer,  was  in  his  time  unknown 
in  Greece ;  and  even  temples,  tho  thofe  of  Minerva  at  Athens  and   ji;aj,  1.  ;;. 
Apollo  at  Delphi  feem   to  have  been  of  fome   ftandiny;,   were  not   7:  549-   & 

r  i  o'  1.  ix.  v.  404. 

common.     Sacrifices  were  performed,  as    by  the  Jewilh  patriarchs,   &   Odyfl. 
on  altars  railed  in  open  air ;  and  prayers  were  addreffed,  tho  to  many, 


Theogon.  v.  220. 
-j-  Homer,  fpeaking  in  his  own  perfon,  fays 
Aio;  0'  stA/isto  /3oLAr,  :  (1 )  in  the  perfon  of  Ju- 
piter he  fays  i2?  yap  hiepd-rit  sri  (2).  His 
dodtrine  of  fate  may  be  feen  more  at  large  in 
the  20th  book  of  the  Iliad,  v.  30  and  127. 
There  is  in  the  Prometheus  of  yEfchylus  a 
very  curious  paffage  concerning  neceffity,  the 
fates,  and  the  power  of  Jupiter,  in  which  the 
poet  remarkably  avoids  explaining  what  fate 
is  :   Prometheus  and  the  Chorus  fpeak  : 

Cho.  Tis  Ivv  avuyy.xt;  Inv  oiaycrgo^oc  ; 

Prom.  Moigai  Tfip.ofipoi,  fjLvr,uQ>zi;  t    Egmm;. 

Cho.   Tvvtu)>  glq  0  Zei's  irni  a'iJiviTi^  ; 

Pl'Om.   "OuKOWy  ccv  iyQiyGl  yi  "rr.v  iri'npwiAvrj. 

Cho.    Ti  yap  ftiir^uiTcu  7.-r,vi  7r?.*e  «si  y.^aruv  ; 

Prom.    ToL't  ivy.  av  ovv  7rt'6oio,   pr.oi  *»7raf£t. 

Piometh.  \in£t.  p.  34.  ed.  H.  Steph. 

Herodotus  relates  a  refponfe  of  the  Delphian 
oracle,   declaring  the  fubjeciion  of  the  god?  to 


(1)  Iliad.  1. 


i.  v.  3. 


the  power  of  fate  :  Tm  irtir^uftitr,*  {Aipus  aci-.urti 
eYi  diropvyesm  xai  0£<j.  1.  i.  C.  pi.  This  is  the 
more  remarkable  for  being  given  as  an  apo- 
logy for  the  oracle,  whenever  it  had  the  mif- 
fortune  to  make  a  miltake  or  tell  a  falfehooj. 
The  god  of  fcience  being  thus  fallible,  we 
mall  not  wonder  if  the  wifdom  of  the  goddefs 
of  art  was  alio  imperfect.  Notwithstanding 
the  veneration  of  the  Athenians  for  the  tute- 
lary deity  of  their  ltate,  vEfchvlus,  in  his  tra- 
gedy named  from  the  Furies,  has  not  fcruplcd 
to  make  Minerva,  while  fhe  refpecls  thofe  hor- 
rible goddeffes  as  her  fuperiors  in  age,  acknow- 
lege  that  they  were  alfo  very  much  her  fuperiors 
in  wifdom  : 

Oeya^  ^wcIcm  <roi*    yepeciTepot  yup  sr 

KaiToi  yi^rtv   kxpt   iy.ov  ji^wT^a. 

yEfchyl.  Eunienid.  p  302.  ed.  H.  Steph. 
Farther,  however,  than  to  illuftrate  and  jullify 
Homer,  the  tenets  of  the  age  of  ^Efchylus  and 
Herodotus  will  be  rather  for  future  confideration. 


(i)  Iliad.  1.  via.  ■     1 


yet 


72  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  in.   yet  to  deities  beyond  the  fearch  of  human  eyes.     We  find  Neftor 
^^J-     facrificing  to  Neptune  on  the  feafhore  *  ;  to  Minerva  before  the  por- 
Odyff.  l.  iii.   tico  of  his  palace.     Nor  is  there  any  mention  of  hero-worfhip,  or 
divine  honors  paid   to  dead  men,   which  afterward  became  fo  com- 
mon -f-.      Indeed  tho  invocations  were  occaiionally  addreffed  to  num- 
berlefs  divinities,  yet  the  great  objects  of  worfhip  and   facrifke  feem 
to  have  been  only  Jupiter,  Neptune,   Apollo,   and  Miverva ;   all  per- 
haps originally,   together  with   fome   others,   but  different  names  for 
one  deity,  confidered  with  refpeet  to   different  powers,  functions,  or 
attributes}  as   the  divine  wifdom,  the  god  of  light  and  life,  the  crea- 
tor  and   ruler  of  all   things  J.       Grecian    religion   therefore,   being 
raifed  without  fyflem  on  a  foundation  of  miftake,  incongruities  were 
natural  to  it. 

The  £um  of  the  duty  of  men  to  the  gods  confided,   according  to 
.       Homer,  in  facrifke  only.     That  due  honor  was  paid  to  him  by  of- 
v.  49.  &  1.      ferings  on  his  altars,  is  the  reafon  given  bv  Jupiter  for  his  affection 
Iliad'.  1.  i.      for  the  Trojans,  and  particularly  for  Hector.     Songs  to  the  gods,  we 
' 474"  are  told,  were  alfo  grateful  to  them  ;  but  without  facrifke  nothing 

Iliad,  l.  iv.    was   effectual.      Sacrifices,  promifed   or  performed,  are  alone   urged 
' 473' '         in  prayer  to  promote  the  granting  of  the  petition.     Here  and  there 
only,  as  ftars  glittering  for  a  moment  through  fmall  bright  openings 
in    a   ftormy  fky,  we  find  fome  fpark  of  morality  connected   with 
Odyff.  1.  v.     Homer's  religion.     Minerva  recommends  Ulyffes  to  the  favor  of  the 
ir- d  l      '    g°ds  f'or  being  a  good  and  juft  king;  and   thofe  who  give  unjult 
v.  386.  judgements  are  threatened   with   divine  vengeance.     Perjury,   how- 

ever, as   the  crime  molt   particularly  affronting  to  themfelves,   was 

*   Strabo  fays  there  was  afterward  a  temple  trine,  whencefoever   derived,     of   the    charge 

of  Neptune  at  or  near  the  place  (1),  but  Homer  committed  to  the  exalted  fpirits  of  the  men  of 

mentions  no  fuch  thing.  the  golden  age   over   the  future  race  of  man- 

f   The  terms  "H//.I&60?  and  ®uov  yivo<;,  ufed  by  kind  (3). 
Hefiod   (2),  feem  but  titles  of  compliment  to  J  Agreeably  to  a  remarkable  expreffion  of 

his  heroes,   analogous  to  A105,  fo  common  with  /Efchylus  (4), 
Homer,  or   the   phrafe,  That  the   people  re-  noXXw»  hnpjvtw  po^tyr,  fii«. 

vered  their  leaders  as  gods.      All  perhaps  may  But  Mr.  Bryant,  in  his   Analyfis  of  Ancient 

fhow  a  tendency  to  a  worfhip  not  in  their  time  Mythology,     has    proved    the   fait   from    the 

praclifed,   and  might  even  help  to  lead  to  it ;  exprefs    teftimony    of    various     heahen     au- 

as  might  alfo  more  particularly  Hefiod's  doc-  thors. 
(1)  Strabo,  1.  viii.  p.  3H.     (=)  Op.  &  Di.  1.  i.  v.  158,  159.      (3)  Op.  &  Di.  1.  i.  v.  120.       (4)  Promcth.  v.  208. 

what 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  73 

what  they  were  fuppofed  mofl  particularly  difpofed  to  revenge  *.  CHAP.  III. 

*  Jupiter,'  we  are  told,  c  will  not  favor  the  falfe  ;'  and  in  another  sect.  I. 
place,  '  The  bleffed  gods  love  not  evil  deeds ;  but  they  honor  juftice,  n;ad.  1.  iy. 

*  and  the  righteous  works  of  men ,'  after  which  follows  a  remark-  QdyiL'l.  xiv. 
able  pafTage:    '  Even  when  the  hardened    and   unrighteous   invade  v- 83- 

«  the  lands  of  others,  tho  Jupiter  grant  them  the  fpoil,  and,  loading 
«  their  mips,  they  arrive  every  one  at  his  home,  ftill  vehement  fear  of 
«  vengeance  dwells  on  their  minds  +.'  The  whole  of  this  fpeech 
in  the  Odyffee  forms  a  flriking  pidure  of  that  anxious  uncertainty  con- 
cerning the  ways  of  the  deity,  his  favor  to  men,  and  their  duty  to  him, 
which  confiderate  but  uninformed  perfons  could  fcarcely  be  without. 
Hefiod,  who  had  evidently  communicated  much  lefs  extenfively 
anion©-  mankind  than  Homer,  takes  upon  him  with  honeft  zeal  to  de- 
nounce more  particularly  the  vengeance  of  the  deity  againft  thofe 
who  wrong  their  neighbours.     He  threatens  even  whole  ftates  with   Hefiod.  Op. 

00  ji^  Di.  1*  i. 

famine  and  peflilence,  the  deftrudion  of  their  armies,  the  wreck  of  v.  211— 290. 
their  fleets,  and  all  forts  of  misfortunes  for  the  unpunifhed  injuftice 
of  individuals.  At  the  fame  time  he  indifcreetly  promifes  peace  and 
plenty,  and  all  temporal  rewards  from  the  favor  of  the  gods,  to  the 
upright :  concluding,  however,  with  fome  remarks  not  lefs  worthy 
the  philofopher  than  the  poet,  which  are  the  foundation  of  that 
beautiful  and  well-known  allegory  the  Choice  of  Hercules,  and 
which  have  been  varioufly  repeated  in  all  languages. 

The  different  functions  of  the  gods,  and  the  different  and  often 
oppofite  parts  which  they  were  fuppofed  to  take  in  human  affairs, 
were  a  plentiful  fource  of  fuperftitious  rites,  as  well  as  of  advantages 
to  thofe  who,  in  confequence  either  of  office  or  their  own  preten- 

*  "Opxov  S'05  i*  ifatirot  l7rixSo»icu?  ivifuwtvi  I  have  always  endeavoured  to  render,  as  nearly 

Ilnuauw,  oVrxMTi;  Ixut  sTnopxov  hpLaoi).  as  poflible,  word  for  word.      Our  language  is 

Hefiod.  Theogon.  v.  231.  perhaps  more  favorable  for   this  purpofe  than 

f  In  tranflating  quotations  from  Greek  au-  the  French.     But   Mr.    Pope's   tranflation   of 

thors,   I  prefer  the  rifk  of  fome  harfhnefs   of  the  Iliad,  itfelf  an  admirable  poem,   will  fel-  V" 

phrafe  to  thofe  wide  deviations  from  the  ori-  dom   anfwer  the  end  of  thofe   who  defire  to 

ginal  expreffion    for  which    French    criticifm  know  with  any  precifion  what  Homer  has  faid. 
feems  to  allow  large  indulgence.    Even  poetry 

L  fions, 


74  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CH  vP.  in.  f}onSj  vvere  fuppofed  to  have  more  immediate  communication  with 
S5-v*\J"     any  deity.     '  Tell  me   which  of  the  immortals  hinders  me!'  the 

OJ  it.  l.  iv.  anxious  queftion  of  Menelaus  to  the  daughter  of  Proteus,  mufl  have 
occurred  often  as  a  moft  perplexing  doubt  in  difappointment  and  ca- 
lamity. Without  information  which  of  the  gods  was  adverfe,  the 
expence  of  propitiatory  hecatombs  was  vain  :  for  the  number  of 
Grecian  divinities  was  in  Homer's  time  far  beyond  the  bounds  of  cal- 

Odyff.  l.  v.  culation,  as  we  may  learn  from  the  addrefs  of  Ulyfies  to  the  unknown 
deity  of  a  river  ;  and  when  afterward  the  number  of  worshipped  gods 
was  prodigioufly  increafed,  thofe  unnamed  and  unknown  were  not 
the  lefs  innumerable. 

OJyff.  1.  iii.        The   opinion   was   general  that  the  gods  often  vifited  the   earth, 

v.  4-20.  &  1.  .  .         .    ,    .  . 

xvii.  v.  484.     fometimes  in  vilible  fhape,  and  that  they  interfered   in  human  con- 

v.  201.   &      cerns   upon  all  occaiions.      Numberlefs  paflages  in  various  authors 
nhd'&Od0ff    Prove  t^at  tn's  belief  was  popular.     Throughout  Homer's  poems 

Jliad.  1.  xxiii.   the   fplendid  actions   of  men  always,  and  fometimes  thofe  of  little 
V.S63&8-2.  r  /      . 

confequence,    are    attributed   to    the    immediate  influence    of   fome 

Odyfl".  I.  xix.  deity.  Thus  Ulyfies  fays,  not  '  If  I  fhall  overcome  the  proud 
'  fuitors,'  but,  '  If  god  through  me  fhall  overcome  the  proud  fuitors.' 
Thefe  opinions  could  not  but  have  powerful  effects.  They  were 
fometimes  an  incentive  to  bravery,  fometimes  an  excufe  for  cow- 
Iliad.  1.  vi.  ardice.  Often  they  decided  the  fate  of  a  battle.  In  the  lixth  book 
of  the  Iliad  the  Trojans  are  defcribed  yielding  before  the  Greeks ; 
but,  incouraged  by  Hector,  they  (land  and  renew  'the  ingagement. 
This  turn,  the  caufe  of  which  was  not  immediately  apparent,  ex- 
cited in  the  Greeks  a  fudden  fancy  that  fome  divinity  was  defcended 
from  heaven  to  afiift  their  enemies,  who  in  confequence  recovered 
the  advantage.  We  might  fuppofe,  from  the  livelinefs  of  the  poet's 
defcription,  that  he  had  been  eyewitnefs  to  fome  fuch  circumftance. 

It  is  fo  eafy,  in  times  of  general  ignorance,  for  men  of  fome  cun- 
ning to  find  means  of  cheating  the  more  thoughtlefs  into  an  extra- 
vagant opinion  of  their  abilities;  and  mankind  is,  through  the  uncertain 
forefight  of  reafon,  fo  inteiefted  in  future  events ;  that  no  country  has 

been 


v.  108. 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  75 

been  without  its  foothfayers."H  Thofe  fixed  oracles,  which  afterward    chap.  hi. 
became  fo  important  in  Grecian  politics,  had  probably  not,  fo  early      SECT.  1. 
as  the  Trojan  war,  any  very   extenfive   celebrity.     The    prophetic   Odyff.  1.  xiv. 
groves  of  the  Pelalgian  Jupiter  at  Dodona  were  indeed  not  without   xix.  v.  296. 
fame  j   but  they  were  too  inconveniently  fituated,  beyond  vail  ridges 
of  mountains  in  a  remote  corner  of  the  country,  for  the  Greeks  in 
general  to  have  means  of  confulting  them.     Delphi,  mentioned  both   Iliad.  1.  ix. 
in    the   Iliad   and  OdyfTee  by   the    name  of  Pytho,  muff,  alio  have   odyfll'l.viii. 
had  reputation  for  its   prophetical   powers,  which  alone  apparently   *•  79- 
could  procure  it  thole  riches  for  which  it  was  already  remarkable;   P.417.&420. 
and  Agamemnon  is  faid  to  have  confulted  it  before  he  undertook  the   v.  75.' 
expedition  againft  Troy.      But  it  was   lefs  ufual   to  ingage  in  great 
trouble  and  expence  to  confult  a  diffant  oracle,  while  the  belief  was 
yet  popular  that  individuals  were  everywhere  to  be  found  fo  infpired 
by  the  deity  as  to  have  the  power  of  foretelling  events,   without  de- 
pending upon  any  particular  temple  or  facred  place  as  a  peculiar  re- 
iidence  of  the  god.     Views  of  intereft,  as  we  learn   from   Homer, 
often  induced  men  of  abilities  and  experience  really  fuperior,  to  pre- 
tend  to   fuch    divine    intercourfe.      Calchas,    the  great    feer  of  the 
Grecian  army  before.  Troy,  who  is  faid  to  have  known  things  paft, 
prefent,  and  future,  was  alfo  the  chief  pilot  of  the  fleet ;  and  the   Iliad-  '•  '• 
poet  attributes  his  knowlege,  even  as  a  pilot,   not  to  his  experience, 
but  to  the  immediate  infpiration  of  Apollo.     Augury,  or  the  fcience 
of  divination  by  obfervation  of  various  circumftances  of  nature,  was 
in  fome  repute.     It  appears  doubtful  in  what  eftimation  Homer  him- 
fdt  held  it.     He  makes  Hector,  the  moft  pious  and  the  moft  amiable 
of  his  heroes,  fpeak  of  it  with  contempt  *  :  yet  in  the  end  he  makes   ir,aj.  1.  xxii. 
the  fame  Hector  acknowlege  the  fuperior  wifdom  of  Polydamas,  who    v'  "" 
confided  in  augury. 

The  human  foul  was  generally  believed  immortal.      It  is  however 
a  gloomy,  difcontented,  nugatory  immortality  that   Homer  afligns 

*  Where  he  utters  that  noble  fentiment  of         ■    'E15  imti;  apiro«,  dpinaQoci  irtp)  Trarpti?. 
patriotic  heroifra,  Iliad.  1.  xii.  v.  255. 

L  2  even 


76  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  III.  even  to  his  greateft  characters.  The  Celtic  bards  and  Teutonic 
SECT.  I.  fcalds  far  otherwife  infpired  contempt  of  danger  and  ambition  to  die 
in  battle.  The  difference  had  been  obferved  in  Lucan's  time,  and 
forcibly  flruck  the  lively  imagination  of  that  poet  *.  Some  idea  of 
rewards  and  punifhments  in  a  future  life  alfo  prevailed  in  Homer's 
age  :  but  it  was  impoffible  that  it  mould  be  regulated  by  any  juft  crite- 
rion of  moral  good  and  evil,  where  morality  had  fo  little  connection 
with  religion,  and  where  every  vice  found  favor  with  the  gods.  As 
Hefiod's  morality  is  more  pure,  fo  his  notions  of  a  future  ftate  are 
lefs  melancholy  than  thofe  of  Homer. 


SECTION     II. 

Of  the  Government  and  Jurifprudence  of  the  early  Greeks. 

I  T  appears  I  think  not  dubious  that,  in  painting  the  religion, 
government,  manners,  arts,  and  knowlege  of  the  age  of  Aga- 
memnon, Homer  gives  us  preciiely  thofe  of  his  own  time.  He  no- 
where marks  any  difference,  and  we  can  have  no  good  reafon  to  fup- 
pofe  that  any  confiderable  difference  was  known  to  him,  if  indeed 
any  exifled.  As  a  poet,  he  magnifies  the  flrength  of  men  of  old  ; 
but  he  does  not,  like  many  modern  writers,  attribute  the  decay 
of  flrength  to  any  change  of  manners.  Indeed  he  affigns  no  reafon 
for  it ;  but  he  leaves  us  to  fuppofe  that,  as  the  heroes  of  his  poem 
were  moflly  fons  or  grandfons  of  gods  or  goddeffes,  it  was  confo- 
nant  to  the  nature  of  things  that  they  mould  be  indowed  with  very 

*  Et  vos  barbaricos  ritus  moremque  finiftrum  Mors  media  eft.     Certe  populos  quos  defpicit 
Sacrorum,  Druidae,  pofitis  repetiftis  ab  armis.  Arftos 

Solis  nofle  deos  &  cosli  numina  vobis,  Felices  errore  fuo,  quos  1  lie,   timorum 

Aut  folis  nefcire  datum.     Nemora  alta  remotis  Maximus,  haud  urget  leti  metus  !   Inde  ruendi 

Incolitis  lucis.    Vobis  auftoribus  umbrae  In  ferrum  mens  prona  viris,  animsque  capaces 

Non  tacitas  Erebi  fedes,  Ditifque  profundi  Mortis,   &  ignavum  redituras  parcere  vitas. 
Pallida  regna  petunt  :  regit  idem  fpiritus  artus  Lucan.  Pharfal.  1.  i. 

Orbealio;  longa:  (canitis  fi  cognita)  vita; 


fuperior 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  77 

fuperior  abilities  to  thofe  of  his  own  days,  who  were  fbme  genera-    CHAP.  III. 
tions  farther  removed  from  fuch  lofty  origin  *.  SECT.  II. 

As  late  then  as  Homer's  own  time,  clearly,  the  Greeks  had  not  ar- 
rogated to  themfelves  any  fuperiority  of  national  character  above  the 
people  of  the  furrounding  countries  ;  and  in  fact  they  feem  not  yet  to 
have  excelled  their  neighbours  in  any  circumftance  of  fcience,  art,  or 
civilization.     So  far  from  ftigmatizing  all  the  reft  of  mankind  with    Thucyd.  I.  i. 
the  epithet  barbarian,  they  had  not  a  fixt  name  for  themfelves  col-  ('  3* 
ledtively.     They  fcarcely  feem  to  have  confidered  themfelves  as  unit- 
edly forming  a  diftinct  nation ;  a  Peloponnefian  efteeming  a  Thefla- 
iian,  as  fuch,  fcarcely  more  his  fellowcountryman,    than  a  native  of 
Phenicia  or  Egypt.     The  connection  between  the  inhabitants  of  the 
feveral  dates,  which  appears  alone  to  have  had  any  great  weight,  was 
confanguinity.     For  this  the  Greeks  retained  long  fuch  a  regard  as 
greatly  to  influence  their  politics.     It  was  indeed  natural  that,  while 
the  tenure  of  cities  and  countries  was  fo  very  precarious,  the  opinion 
of  being  defcended  from   the  fame  common  anceftors   fttould   bind 
men  more  ftrongly  together  than  the  mere  circumftance  of  poflefling 
territories  bounded  by  the  fame  mountains  or  the  fame  feas.     There 
was  hardly  a  leader  in  the  Trojan  war,  who  was  not  connected  by 
blood  with  many  others.     This  would  not  a  little  facilitate  the  form- 
ing of  fo  extenfive  a  league  ;  and  the  league  itfelf  might  contribute 
to  ftrengthen  the  connection.      But  any  tradition,  however  uncertain, 
or  after  whatfoever  interval  revived,  of  derivation  from   the  fame 
forefathers,  had,   to  a  late  period,  remarkable  influence  among  the 
Grecian  people. 

Yet  we  find  in  Homer  no  trace  of  thofe  divifions  of  the  Greek 
nation  into  Ionian,  ^Eolian,  and  Dorian,  which  afterward  became  of 
fo  great  confideration.  The  whole  country  was  under  the  dominion 
of  thefe  kindred  chieftains  ;   every  town  of  any  confequence  having 

*  Two  lines  of  Hefiod  may  ferve  as  a  com-         *Aut«i  /At  QmroTo-i  ira'p  av^pairu  ivtvbu<rxi 
ment   upon   thofe  paflages   of   Homer  which  AOararai  yiuctno  SeoiV  'rKHMi'Ka.  tUho.. 

magnify  the  abilities  of  his  heroes :  Theogon.  v.  1019. 

its 


HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 

its  own  prince  j  and  the  fubjects  were  a  mixed  people,  Grangers  be- 
ing everywhere  admitted  to  municipal  rights  with  little  referve. 
But,   as   DionySius   of  HalicarnaiTus   remarks,   the   ancient   Grecian 

Dionvf.  Ha-  .  '  ,r,  11  i        »  ,-      •  t  ,     • 

lie  Andq.  princes  were  not  ablohite,  like  the  Ahatic  monarchs,  their  power 
Rom.  l.  v.  being  limited  by  laws  and  established  cuftoms  -f.  And  this  is  per- 
fectly confonant  to  the  higher  authority  of  Homer.  The  poet  him- 
felf  appears  a  warm  friend  to  monarchal  rule,  and  takes  every  op- 
portunity zealoufly  to  inculcate  loyalty.  It  is  a  common  expref- 
fion  with  him,  that  '  the  people  revered  their  leaders  as  gods  \  and 
he  attributes  to  them  a  degree  of  divine  right  to  refpecl:  and  authority  : 

v.'T^!' "'  '  The  honor  of  the  kinS''  fays  ulyffes  in  tne  Iliad»  '  is  from  Ju- 
'.  piter,  and  the  allwife  Jupiter  loves  him  ;'  and  again,  ■  The  govern- 
'■  ment  of  many  is  bad.     Let  there  be  one  chief,  one  king,  to  whom 

Iliad,  l.li.       i  Jupiter  hath  intruded  the  fcepter  and  the  laws,   that    by   them  he 

v.  204.  J  J 

1  may  govern.'     Yet  notwithstanding  this,  in  every  Grecian  govern- 
ment which  the  poet  has  occafion  to  inlarge  upon,   he  plainly  difco- 
vers  to  us  ftrong  principles  of  republican  rule.      Not  only  the  coun- 
Odyff.  1.  vii.    cil  of  principal  men,    but  the  affembly  of  the  people  too  is  familiar 

v.  186,  &    1.  . 

viii.  v.  387.     to  him.     The  name  Agora  fignifying  the  place  of  meeting,  and  the 

26, &l."xxiv!   vero   formed   from  it,  to   exprefs    haranguing   in    aifemblies   of  the 

V-4IQ'  people,   were   already  in   common   ufe ;    and    to   be  a   good    public 

44i&1.uv&   *Peaker  was  efteemed  among  the  higheft  qualifications  a  man  could 

Odyff.l.  viii.    poffefs.      In  the  government  of  Phaeacia,  as  defcribed  in  the  Odyfiee, 

the   mixture  of  monarchy,  aristocracy,    and  democracy,  is   not  lefs 

clearly  marked  than  in  the  British  constitution.      One  chief,   twelve 

Odyfl".  1.  viii.   peers,    (all  honored  like  the  chief  with  that  title  which   we  translate 

v-  38S-  King)  and  the  affembly  of  the  people,  Shared  the  fupreme  authority  §. 

The  univerfal   and   undoubted   prerogatives  of  kings   were  religious 

fupre- 

f   Thus  alfo  Ariftotle  :    Aia  ya;  to   SovhixuTe-        'AfX°'  y[xUovat,  r^ta-xatiixuTo;  $'  iyu  u.vro;. 
goi  E.Vai  ra  r/Bn  tpicrtt  01  pit  /3ap£«foi  nruu  'Ef&itvf,  at  Odvfl".    1.  viii.  3S7 

Gt    Tift    TY,V    Ac'iCCV    7UV   ITkf]      TT,lt       LvCU7TY,yt     VVOUtVOlXTt  . 

tv,  Wrt-uw  Am*,  hi\,  ZvrXt(£m,T,c.     Polit.     Thl.s  Phrafe  would  feem  t0  defcrlbe  a"  arillo- 

1.  iii.   c.  14.  cratic  rather   than  a    monarchal   government, 

§  KixAuT£  Qciir.xwv  Jyvro^?  \l%  jwe'Jomt.  but  that  the  fuperior  authority  of  the  monarch 

•  is  marked  in  other  paifages.  The  titles  both  @a- 

Auoir.x  yup  xura  ot.jjm  kii-it^miit,  ftew-ihr,^  (riAsi;  and  «>a|  were  long  given  by  the  Greeks  to 

any 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  79 

fupremacy,  and  military  command.  They  often  alfoexercifed judicial  CHAP.  III. 
power  *.  But  in  all  civil  concerns  their  authority  appears  very  limited.  SECT.  II. 
Everything  indeed  that  remains  concerning  government,  in  the  oldeil:  ~"~ 

Grecian  poets  and  hiftorians,  tends  to  demonstrate  that  the  general 
fpirit  of  it  among  the  early  Greeks  was  very  fimilar  to  that  of  out- 
Teutonic  anceftors.  The  ordinary  bulinefs  of  the  community  was  Tacit,  de 
directed  by  the  chiefs.  Concerning  extraordinary  matters,  and  more 
ellential  interefts,  it  was  commonly  found  expedient  to  confult  the 
multitude;    and  the  multitude  claimed  a  right  to  be  confulted. 

Thus  much  we  learn  with  certainty  of  the  principles  of  govern- 
ment in  Homer's  age  ;  and  we  are  not  lefs  informed  that  the  ap- 
plication of  them  was  very  generally  irregular  and  inefficacious. 
The  whole  tenor  of  the  Odyffee  (hows  on  how  weak  a  foundation 
all  political  inftitutions  refled.  It  feems  to  have  been  univerfally 
underftood  that  monarchies  were  in  fome  degree  hereditary;  and  the 
right  of  primogeniture  was  ftrongly  favored  by  popular  opinion. 
Yet  Homer,  advocate  as  he  is  for  monarchy,  feems  plainly  to  admit  od},fl"-  ' 
a  right  in  the  people  to  interfere  and  direct  the  fuccelhon.  Telema-  3 
chus  was  to  fucceed  unqueftionably  to  his  father's  eftate ;  but  the 
fucceffion  to  the  throne  was  legally  open  to  competition  :  there  was 
always  room  for  the  pretentions  of  the  mofr.  worthy  ;  which  was 
but  another  name  for  the  mod:  powerful.  It  has  been  faid  to 
have  been  Homer's  intention,  after  having  in  the  Iliad  fet  bodily 
abilities  in  the  moft  brilliant  light,  to  (hew,  in  the  Odyffee,  the 
preeminence  of  mental  powers.  Yet  fuch  was  the  ftate  of  things 
in  his  age  that,  to  give  to  fuperior  mental  powers  any  efficacy,  he  See  panicu- 
has  been  obliged  to  add  a  high  degree,  indeed  a  general  fuperi-  l^Viii.  ver*. 
ority,   of  bodily  flrength  and  bodily  accomplishments.     Hence  even   I58-234- 


1.  T. 


any  powerful  men  without  accurate  diftin&ion.  ftriclly  appropriated  as  our  title  King  now  is. 
Plato  calls  the  leading  men    of  the   Athenian  *  Kifm  }>faa,  (•,  ^„^l?)   T?5  T£  yM^  ^to- 

democracy  in   his  own   time  pcunXiii  (l).      It  ^  J^o/i*;,  Ha)  rSi  Gwwr,  icr«,  pi,  Upu™u),  *«} 

was  fcarcely  before  the  later  times  of  the  Ro-  W?J{  twtojs  ri?  &xa«  uspwon    Ariftot.  Polit.  1.  iii. 

man    empire   that  the   title  /Witei/j  became  c.  14.     See  alfo  Thucydides,  b.  i.  c.  13. 

;(i)  Menexcnus,  p.  23?,  t.  ii.   ed.  Serran. 

the 


So 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  III. 
SECT.  II. 


Odyff.  1.  xi. 
v.  493. 


the  moft  renowned  princes  were  reduced,  in  the  decrepitude  of  years, 
to  yield  the  reins  of  royalty,  and  efteem  themfelves  fortunate  if  they 
could  retain  the  honors  only.  The  government  of  the  iflands  over 
which  Laertes,  and  after  him  his  fon  Ulyfles,  reigned,  was,  if 
we  may  judge  from  Homer,  at  leaft  as  well  regulated  as  any  of 
Greece  ;  and  thofe  princes  are  reprefented  equally  beloved  and  re- 
fpected  by  the  people.  Yet  in  the  abfence  of  the  fon  in  the  vigor 
of  manhood,  the  venerable  character  of  the  father  was  utterly  unable 
to  preferve  its  due  authority.  '  Tell  me,'  fays  alfo  the  fhade  of 
Achilles  to  Ulyfles  in  the  Elyfian  fields,  '  do  the  Myrmidons  yet  ho- 
«  nor  the  illuftrious  Peleus  ?  Or  is  he  fet  at  nought  fince  age  hath 
«  infcebled  his  limbs ;   and  I   no  longer  his  afliftant  exift  under  the 

*  light  of  the  fun,  fuch  as  in  the  fields  of  Troy  I  dealt  death  to  the 

*  braveft  while  I  fought  for  the  Greeks  ?  If  fuch  I  could  return  but 
«  for  a  moment  to  my  father's  houfe,  thofe  fhould  dread  my  ftrength 

*  and   my  invincible  arm  who  violate  his  rights,  or  obtrude  upon 

*  his  honors.' 

It  appears  neverthelefs,  that  government  and  the  adminiftration  of 
juftice  had  acquired  considerable  ftrength  and  fteadinefs,  through 
Peloponnefus  at  leaft,  fince  the  age  of  Hercules  and  Thefeus.  The 
political  ftate  of  that  country,  in  the  times  which  Homer  defcribes, 
very  much  refembled  that  of  the  kingdoms  of  weftern  Europe  in 
the  feudal  ages.  The  chiefs,  whom  we  call  kings,  were  as  the 
barons  who  exerciled  royal  rights  within  their  own  territories ;  all 
acknowleging  the  head  of  the  Pelopid  family  as  lord  paramount. 
As  the  kings  of  Argos  were  able  men,  the  confequence  of  this  fub- 
ordination,  however  checked  for  a  time  by  the  ufurpation  of  Mgif- 
theus,  could  not  but  be  favorable  to  the  regular  adminiftration  of 
law,  and  the  well-being  of  the  Peloponnefian  people. 

We  find  in  Homer  no  mention  of  a  republic,  nor  is  there  any 
tradition  of  one  fo  early  as  his  age  in  any  other  author ;  unlefs  the 
government  of  Athens  might  then  claim  that  title.  Yet,  within 
no  long  period  after  him,  monarchal  rule  was  almoft  univerfally 
abolimed,  even  the  title  of  king  nearly  loft,  and  the  term  of  tyrant 

fubfti- 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


81 


fubnituted  for  it.     This  would  appear  a  change  not  eafy  to  account 
for,  had  not  Homer  himfelf  pointed  out  to  us  that  flrong  tinge  of  re- 
publican principles  in  the  conftitution  of  the  little  ftates  of  Greece, 
even  while  princes  of  acknowleged  right  were  at  the  head  of  them. 
There  is   in   the  Odyflee  a  pointed  expreffion  to  this  purpofe,  which 
may  deferve  notice.      Ulyffes,  addrefling  himfelf  as  a  fuppliant  to  the 
queen  of  a  ftrange  country,  on  the  coaft  of  which  he  had  faved  him- 
felf from  fhipwreck,  fays,  '  May  the  gods  grant  you  and  your  guefts 
'  to  live  happily  ;  and  may  you  all   tranfmit  to   your  children  your 
'  polfeflions   in  your  houfes,  and  whatfoever  honors  the  People 

*  HATH  GIVEN  YOU*.' 

While  laws  were  yet  unwritten  they  could  be  but  few  and  fimple; 
and  judicial  proceedings  founded  upon  them  little  directed  by  any 
juft  or  fettled  principles  for  the  investigation  of  right  and  wrong. 
'  The  people  were  aflembled  in  the  market-place,  when  a  difpute 
f  arofe  between  two  men  concerning  the  payment  of  a  fine  for  man- 

*  flaughter-f.  One  of  them,  addreifing  himfelf  to  the  byftanders, 
'  afferted  that  he  had  paid  the  whole ;  the  other  infilled  that  he  had 
'  received  nothing:  both  were  earned:  to  bring  the  difpute  to  a  ju- 
'  dicial  determination.  The  people  grew  noify  in  favor  fome  of  the 
'  one,  fome  of  the  other  :  but  the  heralds  interfering  inforced  filence  ; 

*  and  the  elders  approaching,  with  fcepters  of  heralds  in  their  hands, 
'  feated   themfelves   on  the   polifhed   marble  benches   in  the   facred 

*  circle.  Before  them  the  litigants,  earneftly  ftepping  forward, 
'  pleaded  by  turns ;  while  two  talents  of  gold  lay  in  the  midft,  to  be 
'  awarded  to  him  who  fhould  fupport  his  caufe  by  the  clearer!  tefti- 

*  mony,  and  the  faireft  arguments  $.'     Such  is  the  defcription  which 


CHAP.  III. 
SECT.  II. 


Iliad.  1.  xviii. 
v.  497_S08, 


*  rsW;  S*  on  A?^o?  $mit.  differed  from   the   fcholiaft  and   from   all   the 

Odyfl*.  1.  vii.  v.  i;o.  moft   received    verfions.      But  I   learnt   from 

f  'Atfyl$  WtupSiftiKJu,  which  might  be  either  Pope's  note  upon  the  pafTage,  that   the   com- 

manflaughter,  or  the  very  different  crime,  tho  mon  interpretation,  which  he  has  followed,   is 

fimilar  aft,   of  murder:   for  Grecian  law  was  not  undifputed  ;  and  his  reafon  given  for  pre- 

yet  little  nice  in  diftinftions.  ferring   it   I   fcarcely  quite  comprehend.     A 

%  In   reviving   this    tranftation    fome    years  public  reward  propofed   either   for   the   cun- 

Jifter  it  was  firft  made,  I  found  I  had  unawares  ningeft  pleader,  or  the  cunningeft  judge,  on 

M  the 


Si 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  III. 
SECT.  II. 


Hefiod.  Op. 

tc  Di.  l.  i. 

v.  37  &  feq. 
&  236  &  feq. 


Homer  gives  of  a  court  of  juftice,  and  a  lawfuit.  The  defendant 
firft  endeavoured  to  ingage  in  his  favor  the  people  aflembled  occafion- 
ally  about  their  ordinary  bufinefs.  The  plauiibility  of  his  ftory,  and 
probably  fome  perfonal  intereft  befides,  for  the  amount  of  the  fine 
proves  the  litigants  to  have  been  men  of  fome  confequence,  procured 
him  immediately  a  party;  but  not  fuch  as  to  prevent  his  oppo- 
nent alio  from,  finding  ftrong  fupport.  The  voices  of  the  people 
therefore  not  being  likely  to  determine  the  bufinefs,  it  was  agreed 
to  refer  it  to  the  council  of  elders,  who  aflembled  inftantly,  and  de- 
cided fummarily.  It  is  obfervable  that  in  this  bufinefs  no  men- 
tion is  made  of  a  king ;  and  again  in  another  paffage  of  Homer, 
where  the  vengeance  of  Jupiter  is  denounced  againft  thofe  who  give 
unjuft  judgements,  it  is  not  the  tribunal  of  kings  that  is  fpoken  of, 
but  the  aflembly  of  the  people  *. 

What  remains  from  Hefiod  concerning  the  adminiflration  of  juftice, 
alfo  merits  notice.  A  lawfuit  with  his  brother,  in  confequence  of 
which  he  remained  deprived  of  part  of  his  patrimony,  has  given  oc- 
caiion  to  much  of  his  poem  intitled  Of  Works  and  Days.  The 
word  which  we  tranflate  King,  is  there  only  found  in  the  plural 
number,  and  appears  never  intended  to  fignify  a  monarch,  but  only 
magiftrates  or  nobles,  fuch  as  the  twelve  of  Ph^acia,  or  the  elders 
bearing  fcepters  of  heralds  in  the  facred  circle.  Againft  thofe  power- 
ful men,  whatever  they  were,  who  under  that  title,  in  his  country  of 
Bceotia,  held  the  adminiflration  of  juftice,   the  poet  inveys  feverely  : 


the  decifion  of  every  caufe,  feems  nearly  an 
equal  abfurdity ;  nor  does  it  appear  to  me 
that,  confidently  with  common  fenfe,  the  two 
talents  of  gold  can  be  confidered  otherwife 
than  as  the  amount  of  the  fine  itfelf,  the  very 
object  in  litigation.  The  words  of  the  origi- 
nal perfectly  bear  that  fenfe.  My  verfion  of 
the  preceding  line 

ToTtriv  £7r*iT    r/'iacTGy,    a-po&vots  d"  Eoixa^or, 
I  fubmit  with   more  doubt  to   the  learned  in 
the  language.   The  fpirit  of  the  paffage  makes 
me  wifh  that  it  could  be  fupported,  tho  I  can- 


not undertake  myfelf  intirely  to  defend  it.  It 
will  be  but  doing  common  juftice  to  Homer 
to  mention  that  Pope,  in  his  tranflation  of  this 
paffage,  has  taken  a  very  unwarrantable  li- 
berty ;  defcribing  the  judges  in  terms  of  ridi- 
cule, when  the  original  authorifes  no  idea  but 
of  dignity.  If  Pope's  paffion  for  fatire  had 
not  been  irrefiftible,  his  refpeft  for  his  patron 
Lord  Harcourt,  whom  it  appears  he  confulted 
upon  the  paffage,  mould  have  guarded  him 
againft  joking  i'o  much  out  of  feafon. 

•  "Afjf«s  in  iyo^Si.     Iliad.  1.  xvi.  v.  38^,  3871 

his 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  83 

his  epithet  for  them,   which  he  frequently  repeats,  is  '  bribe-devour-    CHAP.  Iir. 

*  ing  kings.'  In  his  Theogony  we  find  a  more  pleaiing  picture  :  '  The     SECT-  n- 

*  chief  of  the  Mules,'  he   there  fays,  'attends  upon   kings.     That   Hetiod.  ihe- 

ogon.  v.  96. 

*  king  whom  the  Mufes  honor,  and  on  whofe  birth  they  have  looked 

*  propitious,  on  his  tongue  they  pour  fweet  dew.  From  his  mouth 
'■  words  flow  perfuafive.    All  the  people  look  up  to  him  while,  point- 

*  ing  out  the  law,  he  decides  in  righteous  judgement.     Firm  in   his 

*  eloquence,  with  deep  penetration  he  quickly  determines  even  a 
'  violent  controverfy.     For  this  is  the  office  of  wifdom  in  kings  ;  to 

*  reprefs  outrage  and  injuftice,  administering  equal  right  to  all  in  the 
'  general  alfembly,  and  eafily  appealing  irritated  minds  with  foothing 

*  words.  When  fuch  a  king  walks  through  the  city,  eminent  among 
'  the  affembled  people,  he  is  courted  as  a  god,  with  affectionate  re- 
'  verence.     Such  is  the  facred  gift  of  the  Mules  to  men  :  for  poets 

*  and  muficians  are  from  Apollo  and  the  Mufes  -,  but  kings  are  from 
'  Jupiter  himfelf.'  It  is  remarkable  that  no  legal  power  is  here 
afcribed  to  the  people ;  and  yet,  but  for  the  mention  of  the  title  of 
king,  we  might  imagine  the  defcription  to  be  of  a  demagogue  in 
fome  of  the  fubfequent  democracies.  The  whole  palfage  forms  a 
flaking  pielure  of  thofe  middle  times,  between  the  barbarifm  when 
Orpheus  governed  brutes  by  fong,  and  Amphion  built  city-walls 
with  his  lyre,  and  the  meridian  glory  of  eloquence  and  philo- 
fophy. 

SECTION     III. 

Of  Science,  Arts,  and  Commerce  among  the  early  Greeks.  Letters  :. 
Language :  Poetry :  Mufic.  Hujbandry :  'Traffic.  Mafonry.  Ma- 
nufactures :  Commerce.  Art  of  War.  Navigation.  AJironomy* 
Pbyfic. 

IT  has  been  already  mentioned  as  a  remarkable  circumftance  in  the 
Hiftory  of  Greece,  that  its  oldeft  traditionary  memorials  relate,  not 
to  war  and  conqueft,  generally  the  only  materials  of  the  annals  of 

M  2  barbarous 


84  HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  III.  barbarous  ages,  but  to  the  invention  or  introduction  of  inftitutions 
SECT.  ill.  0f  tbe  faft  neceffity  to  political  fbciety,  and  of  arts  even  of  the  fir  ft 
neceflity  to  human  life.  In  no  country  whofe  hiftory  begins  at  a 
later  period,  do  we  find  the  fainteft  tradition,  even  a  fable,  concern- 
ruftin.  1.  ii.  inS  t^ie  nr^  inftitution  of  marriage :  in  Greece  it  was  attributed  to 
c-  6-  Cecrops.     In  Greece  tradition  mentions  the  original  production  of 

the  olive,  the  firft  culture  of  the  vine,  and  even  the  firft  fowing  of 
Paufan.  1.  Hi.   corn.     The  firft  ufe  of  mills  for  grinding  corn  is  alfo  recorded.    The 
knowlege  of  the  cultivation  and  ufe  of  the  olive,  of  the  preparation 
of  a  lafung  food  from  milk  by  converting  it  into  cheefe,   and  of  the 
domeftication  of  bees  for  their  honey  and  wax,  was  faid  to  have  been 
Diodor.  Sic.    brought  from  Africa  by  Ariftaeus  :  and  fo  important  was  the  informa- 
Pindar?Pyth.   tion  to  tlie  wild  tribes  of  hunters  who  firft  occupied  Greece,  that 
ix-  Ariftasus  had  the  fame  of  being  the  fon  of  Apollo,  the  god  of  fcience ; 

the  herdfmen  and  ruftic  nymphs,  among  whom  he  had  been  educated, 
were  railed  in  idea  to  beings  above  human  condition,  and  he  was  re- 
ported to  be  himfelf  immortal.  The  goddefs  of  art,  Minerva,  ac- 
jEfchyl.  Eu-  cording  to  the  oldeft  Athenian  author  from  whom  anything  remains 
to  us,  tho  reputed  the  peculiar  patronefs  of  Athens,  was  born  in 
Africa.  Mufic,  poetry,  feveral  mufical  inftruments,  feveral  forts  of 
verification,  have  moreover  their  inventors  named  in  Grecian  tra- 
dition. Not  to  expatiate  in  the  wide  field  thus  opened  for  inquiry 
and  remark,  one  inference  it  may  not  be  alien  from  the  office  of  hi- 
ftory to  fuggeft.  Opinions  heretofore  held  by  learned  men,  concern- 
ing the  age  of  the  world,  chiefly  derived  from  the  Hebrew  fcriptures, 
have  lately  been  treated  by  fome  faihionable  writers  with  a  degree  of 
ridicule.  Whether  anything  in  thofe  Scriptures  can  authorife  any 
calculation  of  the  years  which  have  palled  fince  the  matter  which 
compofes  our  globe  has  taken  nearly  its  prefent  form,  appears  at  leaft 
dubious  *.  But  if,  neglecting  the  arrogant  and  exploded  abfurdity 
of  Egyptian  vanity,  we  were  to  form  a  judgement  from  the  modeft 
and  undeligning  traditions  of  early  Greece, Trom  the  tenor  of  the  oldeft 

*  See  Povvnall's  Treatife  on  the  Study  of  Antiquities. 

poets, 


men. 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  85 

poets,  from  the  refearches  of  Herodotus,  Thucydides,  Plato,  Ariftotle,  CHAP.  III. 
Strabo,  even  Diodorus  Siculus,  and  in  general  of  the  moft  inquifitive  SECT-  p-h 
and  judicious  Grecian  profe- writers  concerning  the  early  ftate  of 
nations,  all  concur,  and  the  lateft  and  beft  accounts  even  of  Chinefe 
literature  go  with  them  *,  ftrongly  to  indicate  that  the  centuries 
fince  the  Flood,  or  fince  mankind  has  exifted  in  its  prefent  ftate,  are 
not  likely  to  have  been  many  more  than  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  has  fup- 
pofed ;  and  all  remarkably  accord  with  the  Hebrew  authors. 

We  might  however  perhaps  judge  with   more  rational  confidence 
on  this  fubjecT:,   if  we  knew  more  of  the  origin  of  that  art  to  which 
we  are  indebted  for  all  our  acquaintance  with  antiquity.     But  the  in- 
vestigation of  the  rife  of  Letters  was  in  vain  attempted  by  the  moil 
learned  among  the  ancients,  who  poffefTed  means  not  remaining  to 
us.     Yet  the  purfuit  has   been  revived,  and  anxioufly  urged  among 
the  moderns  ;   two  of  whom  in  our  own  country,   men  of  fingular 
learning,  unable  by  the  moft  extenfive  and  exact  refearches  to  afcer- 
tain  either  how  or  where  alphabetical  writing  was  invented,  have  yet 
deferved  highly  of  the  literary  world  by  mowing  how  and  where  it 
might  have  been   invented.      For  the  art  itfelf  being  fo  iimple  and 
familiar,  yet   the  means  of  difcovering  it  fo  extremely  difficult   to 
imagine,  while  its   utility  is  fo  beyond  all  eftimation,  fome  learned 
men,  at  a  lofs  to  conceive  its  invention  by  human  powers,  have  fup- 
pofed  it  an  immediate  communication  from  the  deity  himfelf.     But   Divine  Le°-a« 
fince  Bifhop  Warburton  and  Judge  Monboddo  have  fhown  the  poffi-   g°?\     f 
bility,  and  even   probability,   that  we  owe  alphabetical  writing  to   Language. 
the  genius  of  Egypt,  Governor  Pownall  has  gone  farther,  and  feems   Effiiy  on  the 
to  have  mown,  in  fome  degree,  the  procefs  of  the  invention  from   Study  of  An- 

0  r  tiquities. 

Egyptian  monuments  yet  remaining.  Even  to  this  apparent  proof, 
however,  a  ftrong  objection  occurs.  The  learned  among  the  Egyp- 
tians themfelves  knew  nothing  of  that  gradual  rife  of  the  art  which 
it  has  been  endeavoured  to  inveftigate  among  the  fcanty  relics  of  their 

*  See  Gibbon's  Hiflory  of  the   Roman  Empire,  c.  xxvi.  with  the  notes  22,   23,   24,  25, 
and  the  authorities  there  quoted. 

ancient 


S6  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP. III.    ancient  monuments,     They  attributed  the  intire  invention  to  one 

SECT,  ill.    perfon>    whofe   name    has    been  varioufly   written   Thoth,    Thyoth, 

Theuth,  Athothes,  Taautus,  and  who  parted  with  them  for  a  pod  ?.. 

On  the  contrary  among  the  Aflyrians,  who,   with  many  other  arts, 

pofTeffed  that  of  alphabetical  writing  at  a  period  far  beyond  connected 

SaTrcS'nd  °f  hiftoiT>  no  tradition,  as  the  learned  Shuckford  has  obferved,  appears 

Prophane         to  have  remained,   bv  whom  it  was  invented  or  whence  it  came. 

HUtury. 

Tho  therefore  doubt  yet   hangs  about   the   origin  of  letters,  and 

Plin    H'ft  ^°me  may  ^l^   ^e  ^nc^ne(^  t0  fuppofe  with  Pliny  that  they  were  of 

Nat.  i.  vii.  Afiatic  birth,  while  others  believe  with  Plato  that  they  were  invented 

Plato*.  Phile-  hi  Egypt,  yet  in  tracing  their  hiftory  we  can  go  with  fome  certainty 

t^y.&Pha-  i"to  very  high  antiquity.     Every  known  alphabet  feems  indiiputably 

drus,  P.  274.  derived  from  one  fource,  from  which  Egypt,   Syria,   and  Affyria  had 

t.  iii.  cd.  Ser-       ,,  r       .   .      r         .  .  i  , 

ran.  all  prohted  before  its  advantages  were  known  to  the  reft  of  the  world. 

The  concurrent  teftimony  of  Grecian  writers  may  warrant  our  belief 
that  a  colony  from  Phenicia,  fettling  in  Bceotia,  firft  brought  letters 
into  Greece  ■f.     The  leader  of  the  colony  was  known  to  pofterity  by 

Sharpeonthe    the  name  of  Cadmus,  which,  it  has  been  obferved,  fi^nified,   in  the 

Origin   of  .    .  ... 

Languages.      Phenician  language,  an  eaftern  man  :   and  till  the  overwhelming  ir- 
Thucyd.  1.  i.    ruption  of  Boeotians  from  Theffaly,  according  to  Thucydides  about 

fixty  years  after  the  Trojan  war,  the  country  was  called  Cadmei's,  and 

the  people  Cadmeians  J. 

*  By    fome    analogy,    familiar,    it   mould  J  K«J//i-.»   is  their  name  with   Homer  (i) 

feem,    to   the    Greeks   and  Romans,    tho  not  and  Hefiod  (2).     But  this  name  feems  not  to 

now  very  apparent,  he  was  often  called  by  the  have  been  confined  to  thofe  orientals  who  fet- 

former  Hermes,  by  the  latter  Mercurius.  tied    in    Bceotia.     Herodotus    (3)    fpeaks    of 

f   Concors  pene  omnium  fcriptorum  opinio  Cadmeians    who  expelled    the   Dorians    from 

ell  Graicos  a  Phcenicibus  literas  efTe  mutuatas,  Hiftixotis  in  Theffaly.     Hiftory  is   not  with- 

&   ante    Cadmi   setatem    nullas    apud    Graecos  out  other  examples  of  national  names   anting 

extitifle  literas. — ^Ere  perennius  documentum  in   the   fame   manner;    among   which  that  of 

fuperelt   vel  ex   nominibus  literarum!   quae  in  the   Normans    is    remarkable,    and    in    every 

utraque  lingua,  Phoenicia  videlicet  &   Gneca,  point   analogous    to   that  of  the  Cadmeians  : 

cadem  prorfus  funt. — Miflis  aliis  quae  hac  de  lofing  in   their  fettlement  in  France  both  the 

re  pluribus  expendere  &  difquirere  pofTemus,  name  and  the  language  of  their  original  coun- 

hoc   unum   nobis   fufficiat,   nempe  Graccas  li-  try,  their  new  name  of  Normans  was  an  ap- 

teras  Phoenicia:  originis   efle,   quod   neminem  pellation   defcriptive  of  the  relative  fnuation 

puto    inficias   iturum.      Montfaucon.    Palaeo-  of  their  old  country  to  their  new,  in  words  of 

graph.  Gra;c.  1.  ii.  c.  1.  the  loft  language.     Homer  has  ufed  the  Cad- 

(1}  Iliad.  1.  iv.  v.  388  &  391.  &  Odyff.  1.  xi.  v.  275.  (2)  Scut.  Here.  v.  13-  (3)  1.  t.  c.  <;6. 

meian 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  87 

But  it  has  been,  if  not  proved,  yet  fliown  to  be  highly  probable,    CHAP.  III'. 

•  QU^T*     TTT 

that  in  thefe  early  ages  the  difference  of  language  over  Afia,  Africa,      .       '    , ' 
and  Europe,  as  far  as  their  inhabitants  of  thofe  ages  are  known  to 
us,  was  but  a  difference  of  dialed!:  -,  and  that  the  people  of  Greece, 
Phenicia,  and  Egypt  mutually  underffood  each  other  *.     Nor  does 
any  circumftance  in  the  hiftory  of  the  Grecian  people   appear  more 
difficult  to  account  for,  even  in  conjecture,  than  the  extraordinary 
fuperiority  of  form  and  polim  which  their  fpeech  acquired,   in  an  age 
beyond  tradition,  and  in   circumilances  apparently  molt  unfavorable. 
For  it  was  amid  continual  migrations,  expuliions,   mixtures  of  va- 
rious hords,  and  revolutions  of  every  kind,   the   mofl  unquestionable 
circumftances  of  early  Grecian  hiftory,   that   was  formed  that  lan- 
guage fo  ffmple  in  its  analogy,  of  fuch  complex  art  in  its  compolition 
and  inflexion,  of  fuch  clearnefs,  force,  and  elegance  in  its  contexture, 
and  of  fuch  fingular  fweetnefs,  variety,  harmony,  and  majefty  in  its 
found.     Already  in  the  time  of  Homer  and  Hefiod,  who  lived  long 
before  writing  was  common,  we  find  it  in  full  poffeffion  of  thefe   piatodeLeg. 
perfections  ;  and  we  learn  on  no  lefs  authority  than  that  of  Plato,   t[\l  '*'  *9' 

meian   name   in    two   places  with   a  different  and  its   allied   oriental  tongues  (2).     In   the 

termination,   KaSjjiMu wx«  ( I )  ;    and  it  has  been  Welfh   the    deficiency   of  a    prefcnt   tenfe    to 

obferved,  that  thus  written  it  bears  a  very  near  the  verbs,  the  having  often  the  third  perfon 

rclemblancc  to  the  name  of  a  people  of  Canaan  fingular  of  the    paft  tenfe   for   the  root,    and 

mentioned  in  the  book  of  Jofhua  to  have  been  the    ufe    of    affixed   pronouns   and    particles, 

expelled  by  the   lfraelites.     Upon  a  mere  re-  are   remarkable.      Its    particular   refemblance 

I'rmbkuice   of  names,    however,   little   or    no-  to   the    Arabic   in  its  innumerable  forms  for 

thing   can   be  founded.     Similar   changes   of  plurals  of  nouns  is  alfo  remarkable.     Whence 

termination  are  common  with  Homer  for  the  arofe  the  ftrong  characteriftic  differences  which 

purpofes  of  variety  and  meter  only.  diltinguifh    the   Greek   and  Latin  from   their 

*   See  Shajpe  on  the  Origin  of  Languages,  parent  languages  of  the  eaft;   and  how,  among 

Monboddo  on  the  Origin  of  Language,   and  the  northern  nations,   the  more  wellern  Celtic 

Pownall  on   the   Study  of  Antiquities.     The  held   the  oriental  character,   and  the  Perfian, 

Greek   and   Latin   languages   are   of  acknow-  in  fituation  the  mofl  oriental,  acquired  a  mid- 

leged  oriental  origin.     The  Teutonic  diale&s,  die  character  between   the  two,   are  problems 

notwithftanding  their  coarfenefs,  have  a  ma-  which  excite  curiofity,   but  which  fcarcely  the 

nifeft  affinity  with  the  Greek  and  Latin.    The  learning  and  diligence  of  a  Gebelin  will  ever 

Celtic   dialetts    have,    in    many   charafteriftic  folve. 
circumftances,  a  clofe  analogy  to  the  Hebrew 

(1)  Iliad.  1.  iv.  v.  385.  &  1.  xxiii.  v.  fiSo.  (2)  Set  Major  Valiancy'*  EfTay  on  the  Antiquity  of  the  Irilh 

Language,  and  his  Grammar  or  the  Iberno-Ccltic. 

that 


88  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  in.    t]lat  fl-m  ;n  ]-jjs  tjme  the  di&ion  of  Thamyras  and  Orpheus,  fuppofed 
to  have  lived  long  before  Homer,  was  Angularly  pleafing. 

The  hiflory  of  Grecian  letters  lies  more  open  to  inveftigation.  It 
has  been  obferved,  that  manners  and  cufloms  have  remained  in  the  earl 
remarkably  unvaried  through  all  ages.  The  permanence  of  language 
in  the  fame  countries  is  not  lefs  remarkable.  The  Syriac  and  Arabic 
to  this  day  bear  a  clofe  affinity  to  the  Hebrew  even  of  the  Pentateuch. 
Through  the  Arabic  therefore,  the  Syriac,  Samaritan,  Chaldee,  and 
Hebrew,  we  have  means  of  tracing  one  language  almoft  to  the  begin- 
ning of  things.  In  all  thefc  dialects  we  find  that  orthography  has 
always  been  extremely  impe/fecl.  It  has  been  much  contefted  whe- 
ther the  ancient  orientals  ufed  any  characters  to  exprefs  vowels  *.  It 
is  certain  that  the  modern  Arabs,  with  twenty-eight  letters  in  their 
alphabet,  acknowlege  none  for  vowels;  and  the  Perfians,  with  a  very 
different  language,  adopting  the  Arabic  alphabet,  have  added  fome 
confonants  wanting  for  their  pronunciation,  but  no  vowels.  It 
mould  feem,  from  thefe  circumftances,  that  oriental  pronunciation 
and  oriental  orthography  have  been  fettled  by  organs  and  perceptions 
not  very  elegant  and  difcerning.  Confonants  indeed  have  been  dif- 
tinguimed  with  fome  accuracy  each  by  its  proper  letter  :  for  confo- 
nant  founds  are  moflly  fo  feparated  by  their  nature,  and  fo  incapable 
of  being  blended,  that  the  duller!  ear  ealily  difcriminates  them.  But 
it  is  not  fo  with  the  liquid  found  of  vowels.  Inaccurate  organs  of 
pronunciation  will  confound,  and  inaccurate  organs  of  hearing  will 
miftake,  efpecially  in  hafty  utterance,  thole  which,  deliberately  fpo- 
ken  by  a  good  voice,  appear  ftrongly  diftinguifhed.  The  orientals 
therefore,  in  committing  language  to  writing,  expreffed  vowels  in 
thofe  fyllables  only  where  the  vowel-found,  whether  through  length 
or  accent,  was  more  particularly  marked  by  the  voice ;  leaving  it  in 
others  to  be  fupplied  by  the  reader's  knowlege  of  the  word.     Thus 

*  Mafclef's  account  of  the  Hebrew  alpha-  Sharpe,  who  has  followed  him,  Mafclef  had  in 

bet  I  prefer  to  any  that  I  have  feen.     Appa-  view  to  inveftigate  faft,  not  to  devife  a  fyftem. 

rently  more  acquainted  with  the  modern  ori-  For  authority  for  the  Arabic  alphabet  I  follow 

ental   languages   than   our    learned    Gregory  Richardfon's  Grammar. 

in 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


S9 


in  all  the  eaflern  dialects,  ancient  and  modern,  we  find  numberlefs  ^hap.  hi. 
words,  and  fome  of  many  fyllables,  without  a  Tingle  vowel  written. 
For  it  feems  to  be  admitted  that  three  of  the  Arabic  letters  were  ori- 
ginally vowels  * ;  and  there  appears  no  reafon  to  doubt  but  the  three 
correfponding  Hebrew  letters  were  alfo  vowels  -f.  But  neither  in 
the  Arabic  nor  Perfian  (which  would  appear  to  us  more  extraordinary 
if  the  fame  abufe  was  not  familiar,  tho  fomething  lefs  grofs  and  lefs 
frequent,  in  our  own  language)  is  the  letter  written  a  guide  to  be  re- 
lied upon  for  the  vowel  to  be  pronounced.  Hence  it  feems  to  have 
been  that,  in  all  the  oriental  languages,  thofe  letters  have  ceafed  to 
fupport  their  reputation  of  vowels ;  and  hence  the  comparatively  mo- 
dern refource  of  points,  which,  without  removing  the  vowel- letters 
from  their  orthographical  ftation,  intirely  fuperfede  them  in  the  of- 
fice of  directing  the  voice  J. 


*  Among  many  proofs  of  this,  the  older 
Perfic  writings  appear  ilrong  ;  for  in  them  we 
are  told  every  fyllable  had  its  vowel  (i.)  The 
pronunciation  of  the  Perfic  is  more  delicate, 
and  its  form  more  perfect  than  thofe  of  the 
v/eftern  Afiatic  tongues,  and  in  both  it  ap- 
proaches nearer  to  the  Greek. 

f  The  Arabic  letters  alif,  vvaw,  ya,  cor- 
refponding to  the  Hebrew  which  we  call  alefh, 
vau,  iod,  if  they  are  not  vowels,  are  gene- 
rally nothing  ;  for  it  is  comparatively  feldom 
that  waw  and  ya  are  founded  like  our  v  and  j 
confonants.  Befide  thefe,  the  letters  ain  and 
h  b,  correfponding  to  the  Hebrew  letters  of  the 
fame  names,  are,  one  always,  the  other  fome- 
times,  vowels.  P.ut  thefe  five  vowel-letters 
are  very  irregularly  applied  to  the  expreflion 
of  vowel-founds  ;  or,  to  fpeak  familiarly  to 
Englifh  ears,  words  in  the  Arabic  continually, 
and  in  the  Perfian  often,  are  not  to  be  pro- 
nounced as  they  are  fpelt,  but  in  a  manner 
widely  different.  Moreover,  tho  there  are  five 
letters  in  the  Arabic  alphabet  really  vowels, 
yet  only  three  vowel-founds  can  be  difcrimi- 
nated  by  them  ;  for  the  letters  ain  and  he 
feem  to  have  no  vowel -powers  that  are  not  alfo 
poffeffed  by  other  letters. 


I  It  feems  to  be  now  decided  among  the 
learned,  that  the  vowel-points  of  the  Arabs  and 
Perfians  were  unknown  till  after  the  age  of 
Mahomet,  and  that  the  Hebrew  points  were 
imitated  from  them.  The  idea  of  uiing  points 
to  reprefent  vowels  appears  to  have  been  fug- 
gefted  by  the  Greek  marks  of  accent.  For 
when  the  Greek,  through  the  Macedonian 
conquells,  and  Hill  more  through  the  Roman, 
became  a  univerfal  language,  marks,  in- 
vented and  nrfl  ufed  in  the  Alexandrine  fchool, 
came  into  general  ufe  to  diredl  all  nations  to 
the  proper  accentuation.  In  our  own  lan- 
guage, and  in  the  Italian  and  Spanifh,  the 
ufeful  practice  has  been  followed,  and  indeed 
is  now  deemed  indifpenfible,  in  grammars  and 
dictionaries.  But  when  'the  Arabic,  by  the 
conquefts  of  the  Califs,  became  fcarcely  lefs 
extended  than  the  Greek  had  been  ;  and  its 
men  of  learning,  in  the  leifure  of  peace  and 
under  the  patronage  of  munificent  princes, 
applied  themfelves  diligently  to  the  ftudy  of 
Grecian  literature,  the  inconveniencies  of  their 
own  orthography  would,  particularly  upon 
comparifon,  appear  glaring.  To  remedy  there- 
fore the  utter  difcord  between  their  vowel-let- 
ters written,  and  vowel  founds   pronounced. 


(i)  See  Richardfon's  DifTertation  on  Eaflern  Languages,  p.  236.  of  2d  Edit. 

N 


and 


9° 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  III. 

SECT.  III. 


Newton's 
Chron.  p.  13. 


Plin.  Nat. 
Hill.  1.  v.  c. 
29.  &  1.  vii. 
c.  56. 

Jofeph.  cont. 
Apion.  1.  i. 
Strabo,  1.  vi. 
p.  259. 
Herodot.  1.  ii. 
c.  143.    1.  v. 
c.  125.    & 
1.  vi.  c.  137. 
.Strabo,   1.  i. 
p.  18.  &  al. 
Dionyf.  Ha- 
Hc. Ant. Rom. 
Li. 


I  have  been  induced  to  enter  the  more  minutely,  I  fear  tedioufly 
for  fome  readers,  into  this  detail,  becaufe  we  feem  hence  to  acquire 
confiderable  light  on  fome  circumftances,  otherwife  unaccountable, 
in  fo  curious  and  interefting  a  part  of  the  hiftory  of  mankind  as  the 
hiftory  of  Grecian  literature.  The  loweft  date  affigned  to  the  arrival 
of  Cadmus  in  Greece  is  one  thoufand  and  forty-five  years  before 
Chrifl.  Plomer  flourished  not  lefs  than  two  hundred  years  after 
him.  It  has  been  doubted  whether  Homer  could  write  or 
read ;  and  the  arguments  adduced  for  the  negative  in  Mr. 
Wood's  Eflay  on  the  Original  Genius  of  Homer  feem  fcarcely 
controvertible.  The  earlieft  Greek  profe-writers  known  to  the  an- 
cients themfelves,  were  Pherecydes  of  Syros  and  Cadmus  of  Mile- 
tus ;  mentioned  by  Pliny  to  have  lived  during  the  reign  of  Cyrus 
king  of  Perfia,  and  at  leaft  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  tafter  Horner. 
No  Grecian  ftate  had  its  laws  put  in  writing  till  about  the  fame 
period,  when  Draco  was  archon  at  Athens,  and  Zaleucus  lawgiver  of 
the  Epizephyrian  Locrians.  The  earlieft  Grecian  profe-writers  whole 
works  had  any  confiderable  reputation  with  pofterity,  were  Hecatasus 
of  Miletus  and  Pherecydes  of  Athens,  who  were  about  a  generation 
later.  The  interval  therefore  between  the  nrft  introduction  of  letters, 
and  any  familiar  ufe  of  them  in  Greece,  was,  by  the  mod  moderate 
accounts,  between  four  and  five  hundred  years.  Yet  the  information 
remaining  to  us  concerning  the  origin  and  progrefs  of  Grecian  letters, 
confidered  together  with  the  known  imperfections  of  oriental  ortho- 
graphy (which  in  its  general  principles  appears  to  have  remained  the 
fame  from  the  age  of  Mofes  to  this  day)  will  rationally  account  for 
whatever  might  otherwife  appear  in  this  circumftance  unaccountable. 


and  to  remove  the  uncertainty  of  thofe  fylla- 
bles  where  cuftom  had  eftabliihed  that  no 
vowel  fhould  be  written,  they  took  the  Gre- 
cian marks  of  accent  and  afpiration,  and, 
with  fome  alterations  and  additions,  applied 
them  to  repreient  the  found  of  vowels,  and  to 
fupply  other  defe&s  of  their  eftablifhed  ortho- 
graphy.     Thus  the  French    ufe    the  Greek 


marks  of  accent  to  difcriminate  the  different 
founds  of  their  letter  e,  and  to  point  out  the 
omiflion  of  an  orthographical  j.  Still  how- 
ever the  new  marks  for  vowels,  being  only 
three,  are  very  unequal  to  their  purpofe;  and 
they  have  moreover  never  obtained  general  ufe 
either  in  Arabic  or  Perfian  writing. 

The 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  91 

The  letters  brought  by  Cadmus  from  Phenicia  would  be  very  inade-  CHAP.  III. 
quate  to  exprefs  the  nice  difcriminations  of  found  in  the  Grecian  dia-  SECT.  III. 
lefts,  or  to  fatisfy  the  elegant  accuracy  of  Grecian  organs  of  pronun- 
ciation and  hearing.  The  invention  of  new  letters,  or  at  leaft  the 
invention  of  a  new  application  of  the  old,  would  be  indifpenfible  : 
works  which,  if  quickly  completed,  would  ftill  be  long  in  gaining 
the  neceflary  authority  of  popular  ufe  through  a  half-polifhed  nation, 
divided  into  independent  ftates  almoft  innumerable.  Nor  do  thefe 
circumftances  reft  upon  furmife.  We  have  a  plain  account  of  them 
in  Herodotus,  which  bears  in  itfelf  every  appearance  of  being  well- 
founded  ;  and,  afliuxd  by  what  we  know  of  oriental  orthography, 
and  what  we  learn  from  ancient  Greek  infcriptions  on  marbles  ftiil 
exifting,  becomes  in  every  part  intelligible,  and  almoft  circumftantial. 

The  Cadmeians,  that  author  fays,  at  rirft  ufed  letters  exactly  after  the   Herodot.  I. v. 

.  •  •   •         c-  59- 

Phenician  manner.     But  in  procefs  of  time,  their  language  receiving 

alterations,  they  changed  alfo  the  power  of  fome  of  their  letters.     Ex- 
amples of  Cadmeian  letters,  thus  accommodated  to  Grecian  fpeech,  were 
yet  remaining  in  the  hiftorian's  time  ;   who  faw  them  himfelf  on  fome 
tripods  in  the  temple  of  Apollo  Ifmenius  at  Thebes,  and  has  report- 
ed the  infcriptions.      In  this  ftate  letters  palfed,  he  continues,  to  the 
Ionian   Greeks  of   Attica,  and   other  neighbouring  provinces.      By 
thefe  fome  farther  alterations  were  made ;  but   the  letters,   he  fays, 
were   ftill  called  Phenician.       The  principal   additions,  which  the 
accurate   harmony   of    the    Greek  language  required,    were  to   the 
vowels.     No  fyllable  was  fuffered  to  be  without   its  vowel   written. 
Yet  all  the  nice  difcriminations  of  vowel-founds  in  the  voice,  even  of 
thofe  eilential  to  the  harmony  of  the  language,  were  not  at  laft  ex- 
preffed  by  written  characters ;   tho  in  the   end,   inftead  of  three   dif- 
criminating  vowel-letters,  probably  received  from  the  eaft,  the  Greeks 
ufed  ("even  vowel-letters  of  different  powers,  befide  many  combina- 
tions of  vowels,  called  diphthongs ;  which,  whatfoever  compofition 
of  found  may  be  fuppofed  in  them,  were  fo  far  fimple   founds   that 
each  could  go  to  the  forming   of  but  a  lingle   fyllable.      From  the 
Greek  was  derived  the  Latin  orthography,  and  thence  that  of  all 

N  2  weftern 


92 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  III. 
SECT.  III. 


Aftle  on  the 
Origin  and 
Progrefs  of 
Writing,  c.  v, 


weftern  Europe ;  among  which  the  Engliih,  being  the  moil  irregular 
and  imperfect,  approaches  nearefl  in  character  to  the  oriental  *.     But 
during  the  centuries  while  the  Grecian  alphabet  was   thus   receiving 
its  form,  ibme  very  remarkable  changes  took  place  alfo  in  the  method 
of  writing ;  partly  perhaps  in  confequence  of  the  delay   in  eftablifh- 
ing  the  alphabet,  and  itfelf  no  doubt  a  hindrance  to  the  progrefs  of 
letters  among  the  Grecian  people.     It  feems   not   questionable  that 
on  the  firft  introduction  of  letters  into  Greece  the  oriental  manner  of 
arranging  them  obtained,  from  the  right  toward  the  left.     Afterward 
the  practice  arofe  of  forming  the  lines  alternately  from  right  to  left, 
and  from  left  to  right;  and  the  oldeil  Greek  infcriptions  known  are 
,in  that  manner.     Then  it  became  cuftomary  to  begin  from  the  left, 
and  return  in  the  fecond  line  to  the  left  again.     At  length,  about  the 
time  of  the  Perfian  invaiion,  feveral  centuries  after  Cadmus,  this  alter- 
nate arrangement  was  finally  difufed,  and  the  Greeks  wrote  only  from 
the  left  toward  the  right.     In  this  practice  they  have  been  followed  by 
all*the  European  nations,  while  the  orientals  flill  hold  the  original  me- 
thod of  arranging  their  characters  from  the  right  toward  the  left  -f. 


■ 

*  The  vowels  of  the  Greek  alphabet,  in  the 
earlieft  ftate  in  which  it  becomes  known  to  us, 
.were  only  four,  A,  E,  I,  O.  The  gradual 
additions  have  been  traced  in  old  infcriptions, 
and  their  •hiftory  confirmed  from  paffages  of 
Greek  and  Roman  authors  (i).  The  inven- 
tion or  introduction  of  particular  letters  by 
.  Palamedes,  Simonides,  and  others,  to  whom 
it  has  been  attributed,  is  not  afcertained  on 
any  authority  (2).  The  letter  O,  we  find, 
like  the  Arabic  and  Perfian  ^  at  this  day, 
was  originally  ufed  both  for  the  fimple  found 
of  0,  and  for  that  which  was  afterward  dif- 
tinguifhed  by  the  diphthong  O  Y  ;  which  had 
probably  alfo  a  fimple  found  only,  as  it  has 
now  in  the  modern  Greek,  like  the  French  tu, 
the  Engliih  00,  and  the  Italian  u.  Y  we  know 
for  certain  to  have  had  a  very  different  found 
from  the  Latin  u,  the  long  found  of  which 
was  in  Greek  reprefented  by  the  diphthong  OY, 
and  the  lhort  by  the  vowel  0.  The  modern 
Greeks  alfo  reprefent  by  their  diphthong  ou.the 
Italian   vowel  it,    or  our  01.      The   modern 


Greek  Y,  the  Italian  u,  the  French  u,  and 
the  Engliih  u,  have  all  different  powers  ;  and 
nothing  but  the  moll  determined  national  and 
habitual  prejudice  could  lead  to  the  imagina- 
tion cherifhed  by  fome  French  critics,  to  whom 
otherwife  Grecian  literature  has  high  obliga- 
tion, that  the  ancient  Greek  Y  was  of  a  found 
fo  unpleafant,  and  formed  by  a  pofition  of  the 
lips  fo  ungraceful,  as  the  French  u. 

f  This  fheet  was  already  in  the  prefs  when 
Mr.  AfHe's  work  on  the  Origin  and  Progrefs  of 
Writing  was  announced  to  the  public.  It  h:s 
been  great  fatisfaftion  to  me  to  find  what  I 
have  ventured  on  this  fubjecl:  fo  thoroughly 
fupported  by  a  work  of  fuch  extenfive  inquiry. 
It  may  however  be  proper  to  obferve,  that  Mr. 
Altle  thinks  he  has  found  alphabets,  among  the 
nations  eaft  of  Perlia,  not  derived  from  that 
one  which  he  yet  allows  has  given  origin  to 
'  the  far  greater  part  of  thofe  now  ufed  in  dif- 
*  ferent  parts  of  theglobe.'  Origin  and  Progr. 
of  Writing,   c.  iv.  p.  48,  49,  &  c.  v.  p.  64. 


(1}  Sec  Shuckfuid't  Connection,  b.  iv. 


(1)  Montfaucon.  Palatograph.  Gisc 


1.  ii. 


After 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  93 

After  the  general  excellence  of  the  Greek  language,  the  perfection    CHAP.  III. 
which  its  Poetry  attained,  at  an  era  beyond  almoft  all  memorials  ex-     SECT.  III. 
cept  what  that  poetry  itfelf  has  preferved  to  us,  becomes  an  object,  of 
high  curioiity.     In  vain,    however,  would  we  inquire  for  the  origin 
of  that  verfe  which,  tho  means   no  longer  exiit  for  learning   to  ex- 
prefs  its  proper  harmony,   hull,  by   a  charm  almoit   mag  ical,   pleafes 
universally.     But  it  was  the  ignorance  of  letters  that  gave  poetry  its 
importance  in  the  early  ages.    To  affiit  memory  was  perhaps  the  ori- 
ginal purpofe  for  which  verfe  was  invented  :   certainly  it   was  among 
its  mod:  important  ufes.     How  neceflary  even  fuch  precarious  afilif- 
ance  was,  and  how  totally  the  furer  help  of  letters  was  wanting,   we 
may  judge  from  the  difficulty  which  Homer  afcribes  to  the  exact  re-   Iliad.  1.  ii. 
cital  of  a  catalogue  of  names.     Hence  Memory  was  deified  :   hence   ^  f  d"  „, 

the  Mufes  were  called  her  immediate  offspring.    For  this  alio,  amone   ogon-    v-  52 

r      &  to   &  915. 

other  caufes,  poetry  has  in  all  countries  preceded  regular  profe  com- 

poiition.  Laws  were,  among  the  early  Greeks,  always  promulgated 
in  verfe,  and  often  publicly  fung  j  a  practice  which  remained  in  fome 
places  long  after  letters  were  become  common  *  :  morality  was  taught, 
hiilory  was  delivered  in  verfe  :  lawgivers,  philofophers,  hiitorians, 
all  who  would  apply  their  experience  or  their  genius  to  the  inirruc- 
tion  or  amufement  of  others,  were  neceilarily  poets.  The  cha- 
racter of  poet  was  therefore  a  character  of  dignity  :  an  opinion  even 
.  of  facrednefs  became  attached  to  it :  a  poetical  genius  was  efteemed 
an  effect  of  divine  infpiration,  and  a  mark  of  divine  favor -f:  and  the 
poet,  who  moreover  carried  with  him  inftruction  and  entertainment 
no  way  to  be  obtained  without  him,  was  a  privileged  perfon,  injoying, 
by  a  kind  of  prefcription,  the  rights  of  univerfal  hofpitality.     Thefe 

*  ITgi»  ImruaQxi  y^a.^.a.Ta  rfiov  roi;  tipovs,  'iira%     tor  of  Thurium  in  Italy,  was  the  eftablilhed 

fxv]  ?7ri?.aSa'VTai*     u<jitip   h   Ayxov^aoii;    ni   nw^ouji.       law. 

Ariftot.  Probl.  feet.  19.   art.   28.      Strabo  in-  -j-  'At-ToMWro?  J'  lyu"  §tk  $  f«i  "  tppvii  oi^aj 

forms   us  ( 1 )  that,  even  in  his  time,  Nof/wso;,  nan-oia;  iffyvcrev 

Singer  of  the  Laws,  was  the  title  of  a  prin-      fays   the  bard  Phemius. 

cipal  magiltrate  atMazaca  in  Cappadocia, where  OdyiT'.  1.  xxii.  v.  34S. 

the  code  of  Charondas,  the  celebrated  legifla-  . 

(1)  b.  xii.  p.  539. 

circum- 


94  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  III.    circumftances  would  contribute  to  improve  and  to  fix  the  language. 
T.  III.    gut  fjmilar  circumftances  have  been  common  in  other  nations  about 
the  fame  period  of  progrefs   in  art   and  fcience,   without  producing 
a  language  comparable  to  the  Greek. 

The  character  of  the  language  of  a  people  mud  always  confiderably 
influence  the  character  of  their  Music.    Among  the  Greeks  mufic  had 
evidently  fome  natural  connection  with  verfe,   which  no  modern  Eu- 
ropean language  knows,  and  which  therefore  we  now  in  vain  would 
fcrutinize.     What  indeed  the  mufic  itfelf  of  the  ancients  ever  was, 
we  have  little  means  of  judging,  as  none  of  it  has  been  tranfmitted 
intelligible  to  us ;   but   that   the  very  early  Grecian  mufic  had  extra- 
ordinary merit,  we  have  Plato's  teftimony  in  very  remarkable  words  *; 
and  Ariftotle,  generally  enough   difpoied   to   differ  from  his  mailer, 
upon   this,  fubject   coincides  in  judgment  with  him-f*.   In  Homer's 
time  we  find  both  ftringed  and  wind  inftruments  familiar  J.     Poetry 
feems  to  have  been  always  fung,  and  the  accompaniment  of  ah  in- 
strument to  have  been  efteemed  effential.     Farther  of  the  mufic  of 
Homer's  age  we  can  only  judge  from  analogy.     Probably  it  was  very 
inartificial.     But  it  appears  a  folecifm  to  fuppofe  that  thofe  elegant 
perceptions  and  nice  organs,  which  gave  form  to  the  mo  ft  harmonious 
language  ever  fpoken  among  men,  and  guided  invention  to  the  ftruc- 
ture  of  that  verfe  which,  even  under  the  grofs   dilguife  of  modern 
pronunciation,  is  ftill  univerfally  charming,  could  have  produced,  or 
could  have  tolerated,  a  vicious  or  inelegant  ftile  of  mufic.      Extreme 
limplicity  in  mufic  is  perfectly  confiftent  with  elegance,  and  the  moft 
affecting  mufic  generally  is  moft  fimple. 

Conlidering  the  imperfection  of  civil  government,  and  the  confe- 
quent  infecurity  of  property,  greater  advances  had  already,  in  Ho- 
mer's age,  been  made  in  many  arts  conducing  to  convenience  and 
elegance  of  living  than  might  have  been  expected.  Agriculture  in 

*  See  note  f  p.  51  of  this  Volume.  J  The  firings  were,  like  thofe  now  ufed,  of 

t  'OXv/iirov  ftsX?  ojio^oyovfihui  f  •«'  t«{  4-»x««     l^e  Suts  °^  ^eeP  twilled,  as  we  are  informed  by 
IrOovriarixa;.     Polit.  1.  iv.  Homer  in  the  Odyffee,  1.  xxi.  v.  40S. 

various 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


95 


various  branches  appears  to  have  been  carried  on  with  great  regularity.    CHAP.  III. 
It   is   remarked  by  Cicero  that  Hefiod,    in   his  poem  on   hufbandry,     SECT.  III. 
makes  no  mention  of  manure  ;  but  Homer  exprefsly  fpeaks  of  dung-    DeSeneftute. 
ing  land,  as  well  as  of  plowing,   fowing,   reaping  corn  and  mowing  Vi  \'  "3 
grafs.     The  culture  of  the  vine  alfo  was  well  underftood,   and  the 
making  of  wine  carried  through   the   different   proceffes  with  much 
attention  and  knowlege.     This  is  evident  from  various  circumftances    odyff.  l.  ii. 
mentioned  by  Homer,  and   particularly  from  the  age  to  which  wines   v'.2oe. 
were  kept :   Neftor  produced  fome  at  a  facrifice  eleven  years  old.      Oil   °d)'fl-  '•  '"• 

1  J  J  v.  390. 

from  the  olive  was  in  ufe  ;   but  the  culture  of  the  tree  appears  not  to 
have  been  extenfive.     In   Alcinous's  garden  the   vineyard  is  a  princi-   odyff.  1.  vii. 
pal  feature  by  itfclf  \  but  the  olive  is  only  found  in  the  orchard,  with   v' II2- 
the  apple,  the  pear,  the  pomegranate,  and  the  fig.     Pafturage  has  ge- 
nerally preceded  tillage,  and  herds  and  flocks  conftituted  the  princi- 
pal riches  of  Homer's  time.      Cattle,  in  the  fcarcity,  or  perhaps  non- 
exiftence  of  coin,  were  the  moft  ufual  meafure  of  the  value  of  com- 
modities.    The  golden  armour  of  Glaucus,  we  are  told,  was  worth   niad.  1.  vi. 
a  hundred  oxen;  the  brazen  armour  of  Diomed   nine:   The  tripod,    v- 236- 
the  firft  prize  for  wreftling  at  the  funeral  of  Patroclus,  was  valued  at   iliad  j_  xxii; 
twelve  oxen  ;   the  female  flave,   the  fecond   prize,    at  four.     When   v-  702- 
Eumaeus,    in  the  Odyffee,   would  convey  an   idea  of  the  opulence  of  odvir.  1.  xiv. 
Ulyffes,   he  neither  tells  of  the  extent  of  his  lands,   nor  the  quantity 
of  his  moveables,    but  of  his   herds   and   flocks   only.       But  com- 
merce feems  to  have   been  carried  on  intirely  by  exchange.     In  the 
Iliad  we  have  a  defcription  of  a  fupply  of  wine  brought  by  fea  to  the   n;a(j.  1.  v\-u 
Grecian  camp,  where  it  is  bought  by  fome,  fays  the  poet,  with  brafs,   v'467- 
by  fome  with  iron,  by  fome  with  hides,  by  fome  with  the  cattle  them- 
felves,  by  fome  with  flaves. 

The  art  of  Masonry  appears  to  have  been  not  mean  in  Homer's 
time.     The  opulent  had  houfes    built   of  flone,  Homer  calls  it  po-    odyff.  1.  x. 
lifhed  ftone,  with  numerous  and  fpacious  apartments  for  ftate  as  well    v* 2I1' 
as  for  convenience  ;  and  it  was  with    no  fmall  ftate  that  they  were 
waited  upon  in  them  by  numerous  attendants.     A  late  ingenious  and 

learned 


V.  IOO. 


96  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  III.    learned  author  has  remarked  that  bathing,  always  a  favorite  article 

SECT.  III.    of  eaftern  luxury,   was   in  Homer's   time  carried   to  a  high    pitch  of 

Sir  Ed.  Barry  convenience,  and  even  of  elegance  j  and  that  it  declined  after  him, 

of  the   An-S   and  remained  in  a  ruder  ftate  till  it  was  reftored,  fome  centuries  after, 

cients.  Dy  Hippocrates,  for  medicinal  purpofes.     It  is  indeed  probable  that 

luxury  may  have  declined  in  more  than  one  article  after  Homer's  age, 

and  from   more  than  one  caufe.     For  the  prefent,    however,  it   may 

fuffice  to  obferve,   that   when  Greece  raifed   thofe   fumptuous   public 

buildings  which,  for  elegance  of  tafte  and  excellence  of  workmanship, 

the  moil  informed  and  refined  of  other  nations  have  ever  fince  iludied 

and  never  yet  equalled,   the  private  dwellings   appear   to  have   been 

fcarcely  in  anything  fuperior  to  thofe  of  Homer's  time.     For,  weak 

and  unfettled  as   law  and  government  then  were,  the  distinction  of 

ranks  and  difference  of  property  being  very  great,    princes   and  a  few 

opulent  perfons  had  the  means  of  indulging  themfelves  in  expences 

which,  afterward  amid  republican  equality,  if  any  could  aiford,   the 

levelling  fpirit  of  the  times  made  dangerous  to  exhibit. 

But,  as  we  have  already  remarked,  Homer  claims  nothing  of  that 

fuperiority  in  art  or   fcience  for  his  fellowcountrymen  which   they 

Iliad.  1.  xxiii.   afterward  fo  juftly  made  their  boafl.     On  the  contrary  he  afcribes   to 

Iliad.  1.  ix.     Phenicia  preeminence  in  the  arts,  and  to  Egypt  in  riches  and  popu- 

" 3  '"  lation.     Ornamental  works  in  metals,  in  ivory,  in  wool,  we  find 

were  not  uncommon  in  Greece  in  his  time  :  the  art  of  gilding  filver, 

Iliad,  l.  xxiii.   or  perhaps  rather  of  plating  filver  with  gold,  was  already  known  ; 

v'  I59'  and  the  fame  art  of  dying  crimfon,  which  became  fo  highly  efleemed 

in  the  fubfequent  times  of  luxury  and  refinement  among  both  Greeks 

and  Romans,  appears  to  have  had  its  origin  before  Homer  *.     We 

Odyfl'.l.xviii.   have  in  the  OdyiTee   the  following  lift  of  prefents  to  a  lady  :   '  A 

'  tunic,  large,  beautiful,  variegated  -,  twelve  golden  hooks  were  on 

*  it,  nicely  fitted  to  well-bent  eyes ;  a  golden  necklace  of  elegant 


*  The  expreffion  a\mfyq>v«cc  ( i )  feems  to  warrant  this  opinion, 
(i)  OdyfT.  1.  vi.  v.  53. 


work- 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  97 

'  workmanfhip,    fet   with  amber,   and    highly    fplendid ;   a   pair   of   CHAP.  III. 
'   three-drop   earrings    exquilitely  brilliant ;'    another    ornament  for    SECT.  III. 
the  neck  is  added,  for  which  we  want  a  name.     It  rather  appears, 
however,  that  thefe  admired  works  of  art  were  not  the  produce  of 
Greece.     In  another  place  Homer   defcribes  a  merchant  offering  to   Odyff.  1.  sv. 

v.  4.c8. 

fale  a  golden  necklace  fet  with  amber  ;  but  that  merchant  was  a  Phe- 

nician.     A  Giver  bowl  is  defcribed  excelling  all   that  ever  were  feen  ; 

'  for,'  adds   the    poet,   '  Sidonian    artifts   made    it,    and    Phenicians   Iliad.  1.  xxiii. 

'   brought   it  over  the  fea.'     It  feems  indeed  to  have  been  a  regular 

part  of  the  Phenician  commerce   to  fend   toys  for   ventures  to  the 

Grecian  ports  *'.     Handicraft  arts  were  not  yet  become  trades   in 

Greece;  even  princes  exercifed  them  for  themfelves.     Ulyrfes,  in  the   odyff.l.xviii. 

height  of  opulence,  made  his  own   bedftead,  adorning  it  with  gold, 

filver,  and  ivory. 

Commerce,  in  the  Homeric   age,  appears  to  have  been  princi- 
pally in   the  hands  of  the  Phenicians.     The  carrying  trade  of  the   Herodot.  1.  i. 
Mediterranean  was  early  theirs,  and  Sidon  was  the  great  feat  of  ma- 
nufacture.    The   Greeks  were  not  without  traffic  carried  on  by  fea 
among  themfelves  -,  but  the  profeffion  of  merchant  had  evidently  not 
in  Homer's  time  that  honorable  eftimation  which,  according  to  Plu-    Plutarch,  vit. 
tarch,  it  yet  acquired  at   an  early  period   in  Greece.     While  it  was   odyfli  1.  iii. 
thought  not  unbecoming  a  prince  to  be  a  carpenter  to  fupply  his  own   ^';i7Iv'  ^  ** 
wants  or  luxuries,  to  be  a  merchant  for  gain  was  held  but  as  a  mean   _h     d  t  . 
employment :   a  pirate  was  a  more  refpected  character.  c-  5- 

The  Art  of  War  is  among  the  arts  of  neceffity,  which  all  peo- 
ple, the  rudefr.  equally  and  the  mod  polifhed,  mud  cultivate,  or  ruin 
will  follow  the  neglect.  The  circumftances  of  Greece  were  in  fome 
refpedls  peculiarly  favorable  to  the  improvement  of  this  art.  Di- 
vided into  little  flates,  the  capital  of  each,  with  the  greater  part  of 
the  territory,  generally  within  a  day's  march  of  feveral  neighboring 

*  <t>c'tny.£i  tuvaW}.VToi  r,V„'Go»  »»J(!e; 

Odyfl'.  1.  xv.  v.  415. 

O  ilatc  . 


v.  427- 


98  HISTORY     OK     GREECE. 

CHAP.  III.  ftates,  which  might  be  enemies,  and  kldom  were  thoroughly  to  be 
SfS^i*!'  trufted  as  friends,  it  was  of  peculiar  neceffity  both  for  every  indivi- 
dual to  be  a  foldier,  and  for  the  community  to  pay  unremitted  atten- 
tion to  military  affairs.  Accordingly  we  find,  that  fo  early  as  Homer's 
time  the  Greeks  had  improved  confiderably  upon  that  tumultuary 
warfare  alone  known  to  many  barbarous  nations,  who  yet  have 
prided  themfelves  in  the  practice  of  war  for  fuccefiive  centuries.  Se- 
veral terms  ufed  by  the  poet,  together  with  his  defcriptions  of 
marches,  indicate  that  orders  of  battle  were  in  his  time  regularly 
formed  in  ranks  and  files.  Steadinels  in  the  foldier,  that  foundation 
of  all  thofe  powers  which  diftinguifh  an  army  from  a  mob,  and 
which  to  this  day  forms  the  highefl  praife  of  the  beft  troops,  we  find 
in  great  perfection  in  the  Iliad.  '  The  Grecian  phalanges',  fays  the 
Iliad.  1.  ir.  poet,  '  marched  in  clofe  order,  the  leaders  directing  each  his  own 
'  band.  The  reft  were  mute  :  infomuch  that  you  would  fay  in  fo 
'  great  a  multitude  there  was  no  voice.  Such  was  the  filence  with 
'  which  they  refpe&fully  watched  for  the  word  of  command  from 
'  their  officers.' 

Confidering  the  deficiency  of  iron,  the  Grecian  troops  appear  to 
have  been  extremely  well  armed,  both  for  offence  and  defence. 
Their  defenfive  armour  confifted  of  a  helmet,  a  breaftplate,  and 
greaves,  all  of  brafs,  and  a  fhield,  commonly  of  bull's  hide,  but 
often  ftrengthened  with  brafs.  The  breaftplate  appears  to  have  met 
the  belt,  which  was  a  confiderable  defence  to  the  belly  and  groin  : 
and  with  an  appendent  fkirt  guarded  alfo  the  thighs.  All  together 
covered  the  forepart  of  the  foldier  from  the  throat  to  the  ancle  j  and 
the  fhield  was  a  fuperadded  prote&ion  for  every  part.  The  bulk  of 
the  Grecian  troops  were  infantry  thus  heavily  armed,  and  formed 
in  clofe  order,  many  ranks  deep.  Any  body  formed  in  ranks 
and  files,  clofe  and  deep,  without  regard  to  a  fpecific  number  of 
either  ranks  or  files,  was  generally  termed  a  phalanx  *.     But  the 

*  Homer  applies  the  term  equally  to  the  Trojan  as  to  the  Grecian  troops.     Iliad.  I.  W. 
v.  332.  &  1.  vi.  v.  83. 

Locrians,. 


HISTORY     Q  F    G  R  E  E  C  E.  99 

Locrians,  under  O'ilean  Aja.v,  were  all  light  armed;  bows  were  their    CHAP.  III. 
principal  weapons,  and  they  never  ingaged  in  clofe  fight  *.  SECT.  III. 

Riding  on  horfeback  was  yet  little  practifed,  tho  it  appears  not  to  Ilia°"  '•  *  "• 
have  been  Unknown -\-.  Some  centuries,  however,  palled  before  it  was 
generally  applied  in  Greece  to  military  purpofes  ;  the  mountainous 
ruggednefs  of  the  country  preventing  any  extenfive  ufe  of  cavalry, 
except  among  the  Theiiaiians,  whole  territory  was  a  large  plain. 
But  in  the  Homeric  armies  no  chief  was  without  his  chariot,  drawn 
generally  by  two,  fometimes  by  three  horfes  ;  and  thefe  chariots  of 
war  make  a  principal  figure  in  Homer's  ingagements.  Neilor,  form- 
ing the  army  for  battle,  compotes  the  firft  line  of  chariots  only.  In 
the  fecond  he  places  that  part  of  the  infantry  in  which  he  has  leaft 
confidence  ;  and  then  forms  a  third  line,  or  referve,  of  the  molt,  ap- 
proved troops.  It  feems  extraordinary  that  chariots  fhould  have  been 
fo  exteniively  ufed  in  war  as  we  find  they  were  in  the  early  ages.  In 
the  wide  plains  of  Afia  indeed  we  may  account  for  their  introduction, 
as  we  may  give  them  credit  for  utility  :  but  how  they  fhould  be- 
come fo  general  among  the  inhabitants  of  rocky,  mountainous  Greece  ; 
how  the  diftant  Britons  fhould  arrive  at  that  furprizing  perfection 
in  the  ufe  of  them,  which  we  find  they  poffefied  when  the  Roman 
legions  firft  invaded  this  ifland,  efpecially  as  the  Gauls  and  Germans 
are  not  remarked  for  that  mode  of  fighting,  is  not  fo  eafily  imagined. 
Ccefar's  praife  of  the  Britifh  chariot-forces,  '  That  they  poffeffed  at  De  BeH° 
*  the  fame  time  the  celerity  of  horfe,  and  the  ftability  of  foot,'  is  no  c.  9.' 

*  Homer  has  been  evidently  far  more  con-  in  the  15th   book   of  the   Iliad  (3)   has   been 

verfant  in  military  matters  than  Hefiod.      Yet  fuppofed    to    prove     that    horfemanfliip    was 

there   would    probably   be   men  of  Locris   to  greatly  improved  in  the  poet's  age.      It  mould 

whom    the   epithet   ayxH^X" .  which    Hefiod  however  be  obferved,   that  in  the  former  in- 

gives   to   the   Locrians    of   Amphitryon's   ar-  fiance  riding  is  mentioned  familiarly,   and  not 

my  (1),  would  be  properly  applied.  at  all  as  a  new  or  extraordinary  device;  and 

f   No  perfon  of  Agamemnon's  time  is  men-  that,  on  the  contrary,   in   the   latter  an  exhi- 

tioned  by  Homer  as  riding  on  horfeback,  ex-  bition  of  (kill  is  fpoken  of  which  attracted  the 

cept  Diomed,  when,  with   UlylTes,  he   made  attention  and  excited    the  admiration  of  all 

prize  of  the  horfes  of  Rhefus  (2).      A  fimile  the  people  of  a  large  city. 

(1)  Scut.  Here.  v.  25.  (2)  IJiad.   I,  x.  v.  51 3.  .  y   v,  6;q. 

O  2  vulgar 


ioo  HISTORY. OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  III.    vulgar  praife  ;   tho  to  us  at  this  day  it  is  not  very  clear,  from  his  de- 

SECT.  III.     icription,  how  fuch  a  method  of  fighting  mould  earn  it. 

The  practice,  fo  general  in  Homer's  age,  for  the  chiefs  to  advance 

from  their  polls  and  ingage  iingly  in  front   of  the  line  of  battle,  is 

apt  at   this   day   to  ftrike  with  an   appearance  of  abfurdity  perhaps 

much  beyond  the  reality.     Before   the  ufe  of  fire-arms  that  practice 

was  not  uncommon  when  the  art  of  war  was  at  its  greateft  perfection. 

De  Bello         Csefar  himfelf  gives,  with  evident  fatisfaction,  a  very  particular  ac- 

Gall.  l.v.       count  of  a  remarkable  advanced  combat  in  which,  not  generals  in- 
e.  43.  ... 

deed,  but  two  centurions   of  his  army  ingaged.     But  the   Grecian 

chiefs  of  the  heroic  age,  like  the  knights  of  the  times  of  chivalry, 
had  armour  probably  very  fuperior  to  that  of  the  common  foldiers  ; 
and  this,  with  the  additional  advantage  of  fuperior  fkill,  acquired  by 
afiiduous  practice  amid  unbounded  leifure,  would  make  this  ikir- 
mifhing  much  lefs  dangerous  than  on  firft  conlideration  it  may  ap- 
pear. The  effects  alfo  to  be  expected  from  it  were  not  unimportant : 
for  it  was  very  pofiible  for  a  few  men  of  fuperior  ftrength,  activity, 
and  fkill,  fuperior  alfo  by  the  excellence  of  their  defenlive  armour, 
to  create  diforder  in  the  clofe  array  of  the  enemy's  phalanx.  They 
threw  their  weighty  javelins  from  a  diftance,  while  none  dared  ad- 
vance to  meet  them  but  chiefs  equally  well  armed  with  themfelves ; 
and  from  the  foldiers  in  the  ranks  they  had  little  to  fear,  becaufe  in 
that  clofe  order  the  fpears  could  not  be  thrown  with  any  advantage  *. 
Occasionally  indeed  we  find  fome  perfon  of  inferior  name  advancing 
to  throw  his  javelin  at  a  chief  occupied  againft  fome  other,  but  re- 
treating again  immediately  into  the  ranks  :  a  refource  not  difdained 
Iliad.  1.  xiv.  by  the  greateft  heroes  when  danger  prelTed.  Hector  himfelf  having 
thrown  his  javelin  ineffectually  at  Ajax,  retires  toward  his  phalanx, 

*  The  vaft  force  with  which  the  heroes  of  Arts  the  method  of  preparing  Turkey  leather), 

old  are  reported  to  have  thrown  their  javelins  will   know  that   Homer's  defcriptions  require 

is,  I  know   with  fome,  almoft  an  incredibi-  little  if  any  allowance  for  poetical  exaggera- 

Iity ;  but  thofe  who  have  feen  the  Armenian  tion.     Philippo  had   been  a  horfe-foldier  in 


Philippo  throw  a  flick  (the  man  who  commu-     the  Perfian  fervice. 
nicated  to  the  Society  for  Incourageraent  of 


but 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  101 

but  is  overtaken  by  a  ftone  of  enormous  weight,  which  brings  him     CHAP.  III. 
to  the  ground.      If  from  the  death  or  wounds  of  chiefs,  or  Daughter    SECT.  lir. 
in  the  foremoft  ranks  of  fldiers,  any  confufion  arofe  in  the  phalanx, 
the  (hock  of  the  enemy's   phalanx,  advancing  in  perfect  order,   muPc 
be  irrefiftible  *. 

Another  practice  common  in  Homer's  time  is  by  no  means  equally 
defenfible,  but  on  the  contrary  marks  great  barbarifm  ;   that  of  flop- 
ping in  the  heat  of  action  to  .drip  the  {lain.    Often  this  paultry  paffion 
for  poiTefiing   the   fpoil   of  the  enemy  fuperfeded  all  other,  even  the 
moil  important  and  mod  deeply  interefting  objects  of  battle.      The 
poet  himfelf  was  not  unaware  of  the  danger  and  inconveniency  of  ji;aj.  i.  v. 
this  praclice,   and  feems  even   to  have  aimed  at  a  reformation  of  it.    *.  4.8.  fcl.vi 
We  find  indeed   in  Homer's  warfare,  a  remarkable  mixture  of  bar- 
barifm with  regularity.     Tho  the  art  of  forming  an  army  in  phalanx 
was  known  and  commonly  practiled,   yet  the  bufinefs  of  a  general  in 
directing  its  operations  was  loft  in   the  pafiion,  or  we   may  call  it 
fafhion,  of  the  great  men  to  iignalize  themfelves  by  acts  of  perfonal 
courage  and  fkill  in  arms.     Achilles  and  Hector,  the  firft  heroes  ot 
the  Iliad,  excel  only  in  the  character  of  fighting  foldiers  :  as  generals   Iliad.  I.  xviii. 
and  directors  of  the  war,  they  are  inferior  to  many.     Indeed   while 
the  fate  of  battles  depended  fo  much  on  the  fkirmiihing  of  the  chiefs, 
we  cannot  wonder  that  the  prejudice  fliould  obtain  which  fet  the  able 
arm  in  vulgar  eftimation  above  the  able  head.   But  the  poet  obvioufly 
means  to  expofe  the  abfurdity  and  mifchievous   confequence  of  that 
prejudice  where  he  makes  Hector,  in  a  late  repentance,  at  knowlege   Iliad.  I.  xxii. 
the  fuperior  abilities  of  Polydamas.     Yet  Homer's  own  idea  of  the   v'99" 
duties   of  an   officer,   tho  he  certainly  poheffed  very  extenfive  and 
very  accurate  knowlege  both  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  war  of 

*  The  expreflions  t|aA^£jo;, —  ?x  J'  t'Oo^t  tupo-  ment  in   Homer's  time  may  perhaps  belt  be 

jiayai  (i), — d\  'nuyuv  si?  fOro?  iyaZiTa  (2),  ap-  gathered   from   the    13th   book   of  the  Iliad  : 

plied  to  the  chiefs ;   and  rijtfi  a.^m,—itv^<tt  tnat  0f  the  clofe  fight  of  infantry  in  particular 

«>f»Tts  (3),  applied    to   the   phalanx,    mark  from  the  afcon  uncjer  the  direction  of  Ajxx, 

clearly  the  difference  of  the  two  modes  of  in-  defcribed  in  the  17th  book, 
gagement.     The  manner  of  a  general  ingage- 

ti)  Iliad.  I.  xv.  v.  571.  573.        (2)  Iliad.  1.  xiii.  v.  163.  &  1.  xiv.  v.  408,        (3)  Iliad.  1.  xv.  v.  615  &  618. 

his- 


CHAP. 

III. 

SECT. 

III. 

Iliad.   1. 

v. 

v.  528. 

Vid.  &  1 

.  xiv 

v.  128. 

Iliad.    1. 

xiii 

v.  246. 
Iliad.    1. 

iv. 

r.  293. 

102  H  I  S  T  O  R  Y     O  F    G  R  E  E  C  E. 

his  own  age,  was  ftill  extremely  imperfect.  Of  all  the  leaders  in  the 
Iliad,  unlefs  we  {hould  except  Ulyifes  and  Neflor,  Agamemnon  is 
reprefented  as  mod:  poffeffing  the  qualifications  of  a  general :  and  yet, 
coming  forward  in  the  midlt  of  a  doubtful  battle,  when  we  might 
expect  the  able  commander  to  fliow  himfelf,  we  find  nothing  more 
from  him  than  exhortation  to  bold  exertion.  Merion,  an  officer 
very  high  both  in  rank  and  eftimation,  happening  to  break  his  fpear  in 
action,  immediately  quits  his  command  to  go  to  his  tent  and  provide 
himfelf  with  another  weapon.  Neftor,  giving  orders  for  an  approach- 
ing battle,  calls  the  infantry  '  the  prop  of  war  ;'  but  his  directions  are 
almofl  confined  to  the  charioteers,  and  even  to  them  difcretionary  : 
and,  upon  the  whole,  to  {how  the  troops  the  way,  more  than  to  com- 
mand them,  feems  to  have  been  the  buiinefs  of  the  chiefs.  Except- 
ing indeed  in  the  fingle  circumftance  of  forming  the  army  in  order 
of  battle,  fo  far  from  the  general,  we  fcarcely  ever  difcover  even  the 
officer  among  Homer's  heroes.  It  is  not  till  moll  of  the  principal 
Grecian  leaders  are  difabled  by  wounds  from  doing  the  duty  of  fol- 
diers,  that  at  length  they  fo  far  take  upon  themfelves  that  of  officers 
as  to  endeavour  to  reftore  order  among  their  broken  phalanges  :  and 
even  this  is  not  done  but  at  the  particular  in  {ligation  of  the  god 
Neptune.  The  introduction  of  a  deity  here  may  lead  to  fuppofe  that 
the  poet  himfelf  had  ideas  of  the  buiinefs  of  officers  fuperior  to  the 
practice  of  his  age.  But  after  only  general  expreflions  concerning 
the  attention  paid  to  reftore  order  and  give  efficacy  to  the  phalanges  *, 
we  find  a  detail  of  methods  taken  to  make  the  moft  of  the  particular 
ftrength  and  {kill  of  the  ableft  individuals,  as  if  that  were  a  matter  of 
greater  importance. 

We  may,  however,  yet  more  wonder  at  another  deficiency  in  Ho- 
mer's art  of  war  :  the  eafy  and  obvious  precaution  of  polling  and  re- 
lieving fentries,  fo  efientially  necefiary  to  the  fafety  of  armies,   was 

*   T^,-  J'arrii  iSaeri/^E;  ly.ao-fiiov,  avra.ji.tiU  inty.  Tfatc%  P  «S0  lr/,-.9.=:  k-jjiut  (pdihfMi  "£.xtu%. 

Iliad.  1.  xiv.  v.  37Q.  v.  38S. 

And  at  the  fame  time, 

utterly 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  103 

utterly  unknown.  When,  in  the  ill  turn  of  the  Grecian  affairs,  con-  CHAP.  ill. 
ftant  readinefs  for  defence  became  more  particularly  neceffary,  it  is  SECT.  III. 
mentioned  as  an  inftance  of  foldierfhip  in  the  adive  Diomed,  that  he 
fleet  on  his  arms  without  his  tent :  but  no  kind  of  watch  was  kept : 
all  his  men  were  at  the  fame  time  alleep  around  him  :  and  the  other 
leaders  were  yet  lefs  prepared  againft  furprize.  A  guard,  indeed, 
[elected  from  the  army,  was  let  in  the  manner  of  a  modern  grand- 
guard  or  out-poft :  but,  tho  commanded  by  two  officers  high  both 
in  rank  and  reputation,  yet  the  commander  in  chief  exprefTes  his 
fear  that,  being  overcome  with  fatigue,  the  whole  guard  might  fall 
alleep  and  totally  forget  their  duty  *.  The  Trojans,  who  at  the  fame 
time  after  their  fuccefs  flept  on  the  field  of  battle,  had  no  guard  ap- 
pointed by  authority,  but  depended  wholly  upon  the  intereft  which 
everyone  had  in  preventing  a  furprize  :  *  They  exhorted  one  another 
s  to  be  watchful,'  fays  the  poet.  But  the  allies  all  llept  ;  and  he 
fubjoins  the  reafon,  '  For  they  had   no   children   or  wives   at   hand.'   Hi»d,  1.  x. 

v.  422. 

However,  tho  Homer  does  not  exprefsly  blame  the  defecT:,  or  propofe 
a  remedy;  yet  he  gives,  in  the  furprize  of  Rhefus,  fuch  an  inftance 
of  the  terrible  difafters  to  which  armies  are  expofed  by  intermiflion 
of  watching,  as  might  admonifh  his  fellowcountrymen  of  the  necef- 
fity  of  improving  their  practice. 

The  Greeks,  and  equally  the  Trojans  and  their  allies,  incamped  Wad.  1.  x. 
with  great  regularity,  and  fortified  if  in  danger  of  an  attack  from 
a  fuperior  enemy.  Indeed  Homer  afcribes  no  fuperiority  in  the  art 
of  war,  or  even  in  perfonal  courage,  to  his  fellowcountrymen.  Even 
thofe  inland  Afiatics,  afterward  fo  unwarlike  -f,  are  by  Homer  put 
upon  a  level  with  the  braveft  people.  He  gives  the  Myfians  the  cha- 
racter of  perfevering  bravery  J  :  and  the  Lycians  are  included  with  the 
Trojans  and  Dardanians  under  a  very  honorable  epithet,  which  be- 
fpeaks  them  approved  good  foldiers  in  clofe  fight  §,     The  circum- 

*  — <J>L?vaCT<  Imzjxyxy  '•«8«»T«t.  as  j*Efchylus  contemptuoufly  calls  them.    Perf. 

Iliad,  1.  X.  v.  99.         p.  127.  cd.  H.  Stcph. 
-j-  "A^oJtaiTtf*  Av$wi>  j   K<*£T£gofl<!|uoi.      Iliad.  1.  xiv.   V.  £12. 

"°X?'°i'  §  *A>'^v■laWra'•     Iliad,  1.  xv,  v,  425  &  al. 

ftance 


ijD4  HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

CHAP',  in.    fiance  of  tumultuous  noife   in   the  Trojan  army,  mentioned  in  the 

SECT.  III.     lame  pafiage  of  the  Iliad  where  the  praife  of  fteady  filence  is   given 

Iliad,  t.  iv.     to  the  Greeks,  is  exprefsly  accounted  for  by  the  poet  himfelf ;    who 

'■437-  afcribes  it,    not  to  any  inferiority  in  difcipline,   but  to  the  variety  of 

languages  fpoken  among  the  Trojan  allies,  which   made  the  delivery 

of  orders  and   acting  in   concert   works    of  difficulty.     Tents,   like 

thole  now  in  ufe,  feem  to  have  been  a  late  invention.     The  ancients, 

on  defultory  expeditions,  and  in   marching   through  a  country,   flept 

with  no  flicker  but  their  cloaks,   as  our  light  troops  often  carry  none 

but  a   blanket.     When    they  remained   long  on  a   fpot   they  hutted. 

Iliad.  Lxxiv.    Achilles's    tent  or  hut  was   built   of  fir,   and   thatched   with   reeds; 

Iliac!  i  ix       an^  lt  feems  to  have  had  feveral  apartments. 

v.  659.  Navigation  had  been  much  practifed,  long  before  Homer,  in  fmall 

open  vefl'els,  nearly  iuch  as  are  ftill  common  in  the  Mediterranean  ; 
and  the  poet  gives  no  hint  of  any  late  advancement  of  the  art.  The 
feas  indeed  which  nearly  furround  Greece,  are  Angularly  adverfe  to 
improvements  upon  that  vaft  fcale  which 'oceans  require,  and  which 
modern  times  have  produced.  Broken  by  innumerable  capes  and 
iflands,  whofe  coafts  are  moftly  mountainous,  and  in  fome  parts  of 
extraordinary  height,  the  Grecian  feas  are  beyond  all  others  fubject 
to  fudden  and  violent  florins.  Thefe  united  circumftances,  which 
have  made  the  Greeks  of  all  ages  excellent  boatmen,  have  contributed 
much  to  prevent  them  from  becoming  feamen.  The  fkill  and  expe- 
rience of  the  pilot,  in  the  modern  fenfe  of  the  term,  are  constantly 
wanted  :  the  fcience  of  the  navigator  is  of  little  avail :  even  the 
compafs  is  comparatively  ufelefs  in  the  /Egean.  The  Mediterranean 
veffels  now,  not  excepting  the  French,  which  are  moftly  navigated  by 
Mediterranean  tailors,  never  keep  the  fea  there  but  with  a  fair  wind. 
The  Englifli  alone,  accuftomed  in  all  their  furrounding  waters  to  a 
bolder  navigation,  commonly  venture  in  the  Archipelago  to  work  to 
windward*.     Sails  were  uled   in  fair  winds  in  Homer's  time;   but 

*  Mr.  Wood,   in  his  ElTay  on  Homer,  has     navigation  of  the  Adriatic.      Converfing  once 
remarked   an  analogous   circumltance  in   the     with  an  Engliih  captain  of  a  Turkey-fhip,   a 

man 


C.   10. 


HISTORY    OF    tfljiilCjl 

the  art  of  failing  was  extremely  imperfect.  The  mariners  depend- 
ence was  on  his  oars,  which  no  veffel  was  without.  For  in  leas  lo 
landlocked,  yet  lb  tempeftuous,  the  greateft  danger  was  to  the  ftouteft 
fhip.  Light  vefTels,  which  with  their  oars  could  creep  along  the  coaft, 
watch  the  weather,  make  way  in  calms,  and,  on  any  threatening  ap- 
pearance, find  fhelter  in  fhoal  water  or  upon  an  open  beach,  were 
what  Grecian  navigation  peculiarly  required.  The  Phenicians,  for 
their  commerce,  ufed  deeper  fliips,  accommodated  to  their  more  open 
feas  and  longer  voyages.  But  for  ingagements  oars  gave  fo  great 
an  advantage,  where  calms  as  well  as  ftorms  were  frequent,  that  the 
fhips  of  war  among  all  the  ancients  were  of  the  galley  kind.  The 
term  long  fhips,  both  with  Greeks  and  Romans,  commonly  diftinguifh- 
ed  them  from  veffels  of  burden,  which  were  called  round  fliips.  Mr. 
Wood  has  fuppofed  that  naval  actions  were  unknown  in  Homer's 
time  :  yet  fome  terms  ufed  by  the  poet  feem  to  prove  the  contrary  *.  Thucyd.  1.  u 
The  Grecian  vefTels  were  yet  without  decks  :  anchors  alio  were  un- 
known ;  nor  does  there  feem  any  foundation  for  a  common  notion,  that 
large  flones  were  ufed  as  anchors.  It  appears  rather  to  have  been  ufual 
to  moor  vefTels  to  large  flones  found  on  the  fhore  f :  but  when  any  flay 
was  made  at  a  port,  the  veffel  itfelf  was  drawn  out  of  the  water  upon 
the  beach.  For  the  nature  of  the  navigation  requiring  that  the  con- 
ftruction  of  the  veffel  fhould  be  adapted  to  rowing  more  than  failing, 
the  depth  of  the  veffel  muft  be  fmall,  and  the  hands  to  work  it  many.. 
Accommodations  were  therefore  unavoidably  fcanty ;  and  health  as 
well  as  convenience  would  require  that  the  crew  mould  live  afhore 
when  not  wanted  aboard.  We  may  compute  the  fize  of  the  largefl 
veffels  ufed  in  Homer's  age,  from  the  greateft  number  of  men  men- 
man  of  knowlege  and  character,  he  told  me  orders  to  be  called  in  the  inftant  of  any  threat- 
that  he  did  not  fcruple,  in  tolerable  weather,  ening  appearance  in  the  Iky,  or  any  dubious 
to  work  to  windward  ;  yet  he   made  it  a  rule     fight  of  land. 

never  to  take  off  his  clothes  within  the  Arches  *  Particularly  tavpax*.   Iliad.  ]..  xv..  v.  389 

(as  our  feamen  call  the  Archipelago,  which  is     &  677. 

itfelf  a  corruption  of  the  modern  Greek  Aigio-  -f  TltTa-pci  ¥  i'Avcav  «Vo  r^rtroTo  Tufioio. 

pelago)  and  never  to  quit  his  deck  without^  Odyff.  1,  xiii.  v.  77. 

P  tioned 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  in.    tionecl  to  have  been  carried  by  any  one  velTel  of  Agamemnon's  fleet, 
SECT.  III.    which  was  one  hundred  and  twenty ;  or  perhaps  full  better  from  the 
Odyff.  l.  viii.   crew  of  the  Pheacian  veffel  ordered  to  carry  Ulyffes  to  Ithaca ;   they 
were  fifty-two,  all  rowers.      This  veffel  had  a  moveable  maft,   men- 
tioned in   the  lingular   number,  and  fails   in   the  plural.      Hempen 
cordage  feems   not   to  have  been  known  :   its  purpofes  were   fupplied 
by  leathern  thongs.      The  principal  conftellations  of  our  hemifphere, 
and  the  apparent  courfes  of  the  fun  and  fiars  had  been  obferved  ;  with 
the  help  of  which  the  Greeks  were  able  to  navigate  as  far  as  Cyprus, 
Phenicia  and  Egypt  *,  tho  their  commerce  yet  feldom  led  them  bevond 
the/Egean.  The  feas  weflward  of  Greece  were  lefs  practifed.   Sicily  re- 
mained a  fubjecT:  for  fable,  as   the  habitation  of  giants  and  monfters. 
Wood  on  Ho-  The  dangers  of  the  Adriatic  fhores  to  coafting  navigators  kept  them 
Strabo    1.  i.    unexplored :   and  Strabo,  deducing  his  proof  from  Homer,   fays  that 
P- zu  the  Euxine  was  thought  another  ocean,  and  little  more  known  than 

the  Atlantic. 

Of  the  fciences,  Astronomy  would  naturally  be  among  the  firfl 
to  ingage  the  attention  of  men.  Its  objects  can  neither  efcape  notice, 
nor  fail  of  exciting  wonder ;  and  its  utility  would  quickly  become 
obvious.  The  means  of  computing  times  and  feafons,  to  know 
when  new  fruits  and  frefh  harvefis  might  be  expected,  were  among 
firfl  neceffities.  The  fun,  by  its  apparent  daily  revolution,  gave  a  di- 
vifion  of  time  perfectly  obvious  and  highly  ufeful  ;  but  difficult, 
without  farther  help,  to  carry  to  the  computation  of  feafons.  It 
would  foon  be  obferved,  even  in  low  latitudes,  that  the  feafons  fol- 
lowed the  fun's  apparent  annual  revolution;  but  to  calculate  that  re- 
volution with  any  approach,  to  accuracy,  was  a  bufinefs  not  foon  to 
be  accomplifhed.  The  moon  therefore,  by  the  finking  and  rapid 
changes  in  its  appearance,   was,  among  the  celefiial  luminaries,  the 

*  See  the  account  of  Ulyfles'  voyage  from     the  way,   he  was  feventeen  days  out  of  light 
the  ifland  of  Calypfo(i).  With  a  fair  wind  all     of  land. 

(1)  Odyff.  1.  v.  v.  170. 

readiefi; 


HISTORY'OF     GREECE.  107 

readiefl  instrument  for  calculation  of  time  beyond  a  fmall  number    CHAP.  ill. 
of  days;  and  has  accordingly  been  the  firft  ufed  among  ail  unculti-     SEC r.  III. 
vated  people.     Hence,  and  not  through  any  predilection  for  darknefs 
and  gloomy   ideas,    which   has   been   abfurdly  enough  attributed   to 
them,   arofe  that  practice  of  our  Teutonic  anceftors,    which  we  flill 
in  part  retain,   of  reckoning  time  by  nights  rather  than  by  days.     It 
became  then  the  buiinefs,  through  the  obvious  changes  of  the  moon, 
to  afcertain   the  lefs  difcernib.le   but  far  more  important  changes  of 
the  fun,  which  govern  the  feafons.     Twelve  revolutions  of  the  infe- 
rior were  found   nearly  equal   to  one  of  the  greater  luminary  j  and 
three  hundred  fifty-four  days,  or  twelve  months  of  twenty-nine  and 
thirty  days  alternately,   were   accordingly  affigned  for   the  term  of  a 
year.     This  method  of  computing  time   leems,  to  have  palled  from 
the  Eaft  into  Greece,  where  it  was  received  into  general   ufe,  and 
became  fo  eftablifhed  for  the  purpofe  of  afcertaining   the   return   of 
days  for  civil  buiinefs  and  religious  ceremonies,  that,  notwithstanding 
its  extreme  inconveniencies,  the  more  accurate  fubfequent  calculations 
of  the  year  could  never  intirely  fuperfede  it&^u^fei     But  a  year  thus 
deficient  by  near  eleven   days   and  a  half  of  the1 'real   period  of  the 
■earth's  revolution  round  the  fun,  prefently  led  to  fo  erroneous  a  com- 
putation  of  feafons,    that  the  hufbandman   particularly   would   find 
it  utterly  unfit  for  his   purpofe.     In  climates,   therefore,  where  the 
fky  was  feldom  long  obfcured  by  vapors,   the  ftars  were  foon  found 
to  be  fir  more  accurate  directors  than  the  moon  ,•  while  their  changes 
were  far  more  readily  dnflinguifhed  than  thofe  of  the  fun.     Accord- 
ingly Hefiod,  in   hisf  Treatife  on   Hufbandry,   marks  the  feafons  for 
various  works  by  thVrifing  and  fetting  of  the  ftars  ;  and  we  learn  from    IliKi  ,  xv~ 
his  poems,  and  from  Homer,  that,    in  their  early  age,   the  more  .re*    v.  48B.. 
markable  ftars  of  our  hemifphere  were  already  claffed  in  conftellations,   v.  29. 
nearly  in  the  fame  manner  and  by  the  fame  names  as  at  this  day.    Ig-   v,  ,-2ci 
norance  of  aftronomy  we  find  mentioned  by  iEfchylus,  fpeaking,   in 
the  perfon  of  Prometheus,  of  the  ftate  of  mankind  in  the  firft  ages, 
as  a  mark  of  the  deepeft  barbarifm  ;  and  obfervation  of  the  ftars  as 

P  z  the 


let  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  III.    the  firft  thing  neceflary  to  civilized  life*.     In  our  northern  climate, 
SECT.  HI.    tne  fhortnefs  of  the  fummer-nights  and  the  coldnefs  of  the  winter, 
together  with  the  greater  frequency  of  obfcuring  vapors,   make  the 
flars  lefs  objects  for  the  hufbandman  j  while  the  greater  variety  in  the 
apparent  courfe  of  the  lun,  if  the  exaflnefs  with  which  the  year  is 
now  divided  by  more  artificial  helps  did  not  render  it  needlefs,  would 
in  a  great  degree  anfwer  the   fame  purpofe ;  and  we  accordingly  ftill 
often  find  in  our  hulbandmen  furprizing  accuracy  in  obferving  the  fun. 
But   the  people  of  lower  climates,  deprived  of   the  pleafant  modera- 
tion of  our  fummer-days,  live,  in  the  hot  feafon,  almoft  only  in  the 
night,  and  thus  become  afironomers  naturally  and  almoil  neceffarily. 
The   knowlege  of  the   cure   of  internal   difeafes    made,  it  mould 
feem,   in  Homer's  age,  no  part  of  the  fcience  of  Physic.      It  is  re- 
markable that   the  poet   nowhere  fpeaks  in  plain  terms  of  ficknefs. 
Difeafes  indeed,  and  mortal  ones,  are  mentioned,  but   as   the   effecT: 
always  of  the  immediate  ftroke  of  the  Deity,  and   not  of  anything 
in  the  common  courfe  of  nature.     They  feem   thus  to  have  been 
efleemed  utterly  beyond  the  reach  of  human  fkill  to  relieve.     The 
epidemical  ficknefs  of  the  army  before  Troy  was  occafioned  by  the 
darts  of  Apollo,  and  could  be  removed  only  by  the  prayers  of  Chryfis. 
That  fcanty  knowlege  of  nature  to  which  the  age  had  arrived,   was 
applied  only  to  relieve  the  effects  of  external  violence  upon  the  hu- 
man frame.     Skill  in  furgery  was  in  the   highefl  efteem  -j- ;  tho   it 
feems  to  have  gone  no  farther  than  to  the  extraction  of  the   inflru- 
ment  of  a  wound,  and  the  application  of  a  few  fimples  for  flopping 
haemorrhages,  and  afTuaging  inflammations.      Charms  and   incanta- 
tions, therefore,  were  fometimes  called  in  to  its  afliftance,  or  even  to 
fupply  its   place.     UlyiTes,    when  very  young,   being  wounded  by  a 
wild  boar,  the  haemorrhage  was  flopped  by  incantation  J. 

'Out'  avG^^ou;  J^o;,  Stm  x«f7ri/*oi;  Piometh.  vindt.  p.  31.  ed.  H.  Steph. 

Qtpovi  (liilaioV    ccKX   a-TtQ  "pufjLr.i  to  5T«»  •}•  Ijit^o?  y«j  anjp  "ntiKhm  a»T<rc£io?  uXKut. 

"En-gccc-cav,   'iart  $r>  c<p»  aWoAa?  \yu  Iluid.  1.  XI.   v.  514. 

%  'Zv»ttK.      Odyff.  1.  xix.  v.  457. 

SECTION 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  109 

SECTION     IV. 

Of  the  Manners  of  the  early  Greeks, 

THE  Manners  of  a  people  receive  their  tone  from  a  great  variety  CHAP- Iir* 
of  circumstances  ;  climate?  foil  ;  extent  of  territory;  population;  SECT.IV. 
religion;  government,  monarchal  or  republican,  vigorous  and  per- 
manent, or  weak  and  changeable ;  fy  Stem  of  jurifprudence;  admini- 
stration of  juStice,  ready  and  certain,  or  feeble  and  irregular;  fcience; 
arts  ;  commerce  ;  communication  with  flrangers.  We  find  accord- 
ingly the  manners  of  the  Homeric  age  distinguished  from  thofe  of 
fubfequent  times  in  Greece  by  many  characteristic  lines  ;  and  we 
may  obferve  throughout  a  Strong  oriental  tinge,  which  afterward  very 
much  faded  away.  Migrations  from  the  EaSt  into  Greece  had  ceafed 
before  Homer :  but  the  eaStern  merchants  Still  ingroSfed  the  little 
commerce  of  the  Grecian  towns.  Afterward,  whether  from  a  re- 
publican jealoufy  of  foreigners  ;  whether  from  a  republican  induftry 
with  increafed  population;  whether  from  a  republican  frugality,  with 
the  naturally  attending  difpofition  to  decry  foreign  luxuries;  or  whe- 
ther the  propensity  to  piracy  among  the  Greeks,  with  increafed  naval 
Strength,  deterred  commerce,  the  intercourse  between  the  two  coun- 
tries leffened  greatly.  The  moSt  Striking  features  in  the  Homeric 
manners  are  that  licentiouShefs,  and  that  hofpitality,  together  with 
that  union,  at  firSt  view  fo  Strange  to  us,  of  the  higheSt  dignities  with 
the  meaneSt  employments,  which  have  prevailed  in  the  EaSt  fo  re- 
markably through  all  ages.  Thefe  are,  however,  not  the  peculiar 
growth  of  any  foil  and  climate.  The  two  firSl  are  the  Seldom  failing 
produce  of  defective  government ;  and  the  other  will  everywhere  be 
found  in  an  unimproved  State  of  fociety.  The  refemblance  borne  till 
within  this  century  by  the  manners  of  the  highland  Scots  to  thofe 
of  the  Orientals  in  thefe  particulars  is  Striking.  But  in  Greece,  tho 
the  ties  of  blood  had  Such  weight  with  the  people  among  themfelves, 

yet 


no  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  ill.  yet  We  find  nothing  of  clanfhip,  nothing  of  that  devoted  attachment 
SECT.  IV.  of  vaffals  to  the  family  of  a  chief,  which  diftinguifhed  many  of  the 
Orientals,  as  well  as  our  northern  highlanders.  While  the  claims 
of  hereditary  royalty  were  eftablifhed  in  general  opinion,  fome  degree 
of  refpect  would  adhere  to  the  known  polterity  of  a  popular  leader; 
but  fuperior  perfonalqualities  were  always  neceffary  to  maintain  even 
the  poffefiion  of  rank  and  wealth. 

There  is  a  pafTage  in  the  Odyffee  which  illuftrates  remarkably  at 
the  fame  time  the  government,  the  morality,   and  the  religion  of  the 
Odyfr.  l.  xvi.  age.     It  was   propofed  among   the  fuitors  of  Penelope  to   kill  'her 
fon  Telemachus,  and  divide  his  property.     One  only  of  them  hefi- 
tated.     '  To  kill  a  perfon  of  royal  race',  he  fays,  '  is  no  light  mat- 
'  ter.     Let  us  therefore  confult  the  gods.     If  the  laws  of  the  great 
'  Jupiter  approve  it,  myfelf  will  be  among  the  firft  both  to  perfuade 
'  and  to  ilrike  the  ftroke  :   but,   if  the  gods  forbid,   I  advife  to  for- 
*  bear.'     The  perfon  thus  reprefented  ferioufly  expreffing  doubt  whe- 
ther the  fouled  murder  might  not  be  committed  with  approbation  of 
the  deity,  is  defcribed  of  high  birth,  refpectable  character,  and  fupe- 
rior underftanding.     But  murders   were   fo   common    that,    without 
peculiar  circumstances  of  enormity,  they  fcarcely  left  a  ftain  upon  the 
character  of  the  perpetrator.      Some  of  the  favorite  perfonages  of  the 
Iliad  and  Odyffee,  as  the  author  of  the  Effay  on  the  Original  Genius 
of  Homer  has  obferved,  had  been  guilty  of  this  crime,  and  had  fled 
their  country  in  confequence  :   not  however  to  efcape  public  juftice  ; 
but  to  avoid  the  revenge  of  the  relations  of  the  deceafed.      Private 
revenge  we   know  was   formerly  almoft  the  only  reftraint  upon   the 
moft  atrocious  crimes   againft  individuals   in  our  own  country,  and 

Robertfon's    ft[\[  m0re  in  the  reft  of  weftern  Europe  :  infomuch  that,  in  the  weak- 
Charles  v. 

nefs  of  public  juftice,  private  revenge  even  received  the  Sanction,  and 

was  put  under  the  guidance  of  the  law.     Hence  it  was  that  among 

the  early  Greeks,  as  in  general  through  the  Eaft,  a  numerous  progeny 

was  fo  particularly  efteemed  a  great  bleffing  to  parents.     A  numerous' 

family  was  always  a  powerful  family  :  it  could  do  juftice  to  itfelf ; 

and* 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  in 

and,  if  unanimoufly  fo  inclined,  injure  others  with  impunity.     But    chap.  hi. 
'  cruelty,   violence  and  oppreffion',   fays  the  writer  juft  mentioned, 
who  had  ftudied  oriental  manners  from  the  life,  '  are  fo  evidently  the 

*  refult  of  defective  government,  that  it  is  unneceffary  to  look  for  any 
'  other  general  caufe  of  the  fcenes  of  this  fort  with  which  Homer 

*  abounds  in   common   with  other  ancient  writers,  and  agreeably  to 

*  the  prefent  manners  of  the  Eaft.     For  when  every  man  is  in   great 

*  meafure  judge  in  his  own  caufe,  vices  of  this  clafs  are  not  only  more 
'  frequent,  but  lefs  criminal  than  in  a  civilized  ftate,  where  the  indi- 

*  vidual   transfers  his   refentments  to  the   community,    and   private 
'  injury  experts  redrefs  from   public  juftice.      Where  the  legislature 

*  does  not  ingage  for  our  perfonal  fecurity,  we  have  a  right  to  ufe 
'  fuch'  means  as  are  in  our  power  to  deftroy  the  aggreffor  who  would 
'  deftroy  us.  In  fuch  cafes  bodily  ftrength  and  courage  muft  decide 
'  moft  contefts;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  craft,  cunning,  and  fur- 
'  prize  are  the  legitimate  weapons  of  the  weak  again  ft  the  ftrong. 
'  We  accordingly  find,  that  both  the  ancient  and  the  modern  hiftory 
'  of  the  Eaft  is  a  continued  fcene  of  bloodlhed  and  treachery.'  Thefe 
very  juft  reflections  may  teach  us  to  exercife  our  pity  and  fpare  our 
cenfure  on  human  nature  in  fuch  unfortunate  circumftances. 

'  Hofpitality,'  fays  the  fame  writer,  who  had  injoyed  fuch  pecu- 
liar means  of  information  on  the  fubjecl:,  '  prevails  in  moft  coun- 
'  tries,  and  in  the  different  provinces  of  each  country,  very  much  in 
'  proportion  to  the  idlenefs,  poverty,  and  infecurity  which  attend  a 
'  defective  police.  It  is  fome  confolation,  in  fo  wretched  a  ftate  of 
'  fociety,  that  this  virtue  fhould  be  moft  cultivated  where  it  is  moft 
'  wanted.  In  Arabia  the  rights  of  hofpitality,  fo  properly  called 
'  the  point  of  honor  of  the  Eaft,  are  the  happy  fubftitute  of  pofitive 

*  law;  which  in  fome  degree  fupplies  the  place  of  juftice ;  connect- 
'  ing,  by  a   voluntary  intercourfe   of  good  offices,   thofe  vagabond 

*  tribes,  who  defpife  legiflation,  deny  the  perfect  rights  of  mankind, 
'  and  (et  the  civil  magiftrate  at  defiance.  A  ftrong  inftance  of  that 
'  fympathizing  principle  in  the  focial  conftitution  of  our  nature, 


c 


W 


hich 


Odyff. 

1.  viii. 

v.  547. 

Odyff. 
v.  208. 

1.  vi. 
&1. 

xiv.   v.  58. 

Vid.  &  1.  viii. 

v.   392 

XV.  V.   . 

&   1. 
.80. 

Odyff. 

1.  vii. 

112  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  ITT.    <  which  the  wifeft  government  will  incourage,  and  which  the  moft 
SECT.  IV.    €  deprave(l    cannot  fupprefs.'      In    confirmation  of  thefe  judicious 
remarks,  we  find  it  eftablifhed  as   a  principle  in  Homer,  that  '  to 
'  thofe  not  totally  void  of  the  feelings  of  humanity,  the  guefl  and 
'  the  fuppliant  fhould  be  as  a  near  relation  :'  and  he  gives   them  a 
divine  right  to  kind  treatment,  alledging,   that  '  the    ftranger  and 
'  the  poor  are  from  Jove.'  The  liberties  taken  by  fuppliant  ftrangers, 
and  the  confidence  repofed  in  them,   were   confonant  to  thefe  princi- 
ples.    Ulyfles,  faved  alone  from  fhipwreck  on  an    unknown  coaft, 
goes  wilhout  introduction  to  the  palace  of  the  king  of  the  country, 
which  is  reprefented  as  fingularly  rich  and  fplendid,  enters  the  apart- 
ments, and  finding  the  king  and  queen  at  fupper  with  the  principal 
nobles,  abruptly  addrefles  his  Amplication  to  the  queen.     Not  only 
kindnefs  but  honor  is  immediately  (liown  to  him ;  he   is  lodged  in 
the  palace;   and  the  next  day  the  king,  recommending  him  to  favor 
in  an  alTembly  of  the  people,  declares  at  the  fame  time  that  he  knows 
not  who  he  is.      It  feems  indeed  to  have  been  a  general  point  of  ci- 
vility not  hafuly  to  afk  any  firanger  who  he  was.     Telemachus  and 
Odyff.  ].  iii.     Mentor,  landing  in  the  port  of  Pylus,  find  the  venerable  Nenror, 
v-  4«  prince  of  the  country,  with  the  aflembled  Pylian  people  on  the  fhore, 

in  the  midft  of  the  ceremony  of  a  magnificent  public  facrifice.  The 
ftrangers  are  no  fooner  perceived  approaching  than  the  Pylians  crowd 
to  meet  them,  falute  them  in  terms  of  friendfhip,  and  invite  them 
to  partake  of  the  feaft  which  always  followed  a  facrifice,  and  which 
indeed  feems  to  have  been  an  effential  part  of  the  ceremony.  They 
were  however  not  left  to  the  civility  of  the  multitude.  Peififtratus, 
fon  of  Neflor,  advancing  before  the  reft,  took  them  by  the  hand, 
and  placed  them  at  table  by  his  royal  father  and  his  elder  brother. 
When  the  meal  was  over  Neftor  fpoke  in  thefe  remarkable  terms : 

*  Now  the  ftrangers  have  fatisfied  themfelves  with  eating,  it  will  be 
1  proper  to  afk  them  who  they  are,  and  whence  they  come.     Stran- 

*  gers,  who  are  you,  and  whence  come  you,  navigating  the  watery 
4  ways  ?     Is  it  for  any  bufinefs,  or  do  you  roam  at  large,  as  pirates 

1  over 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  113 

*  over  the  feaj   thofe  who  wander,  rifking  their  own  lives,  and  bring-    CHAP.  III. 
'  ing  evil   upon  others  ?'     Thucydides,  than  whom   none  could  be    SECT.  IV. 
better  qualified  to  judge,   believed  this  to  be  a  faithful  picture  of  the   Thucyd.  l.i. 
manners  of  his  anceitors ;  and   he  obferves   upon   it,    that  Neftor's  c' 5" 
queftion  was  in  the  common  way  of  inquiry,  and  not  at  all  implying 
doubt  whether  the  ftrangers  were  worthy  of  his   hofpitality,  or  fit 
company  for  his  table,  tho  they  might  be  pirates.     Telemachus  and   OJyff.  1.  iv. 
Peififtratus  afterward  going  as   hereditary  guefts,  but  not  peribnally 
known,   to  Menelaus  king  of  Sparta,  neither  announce  themlelves, 
nor  does  any  one  inquire  who  they  are.     The  king,  only  informed 
by  one  of  his  houfhold  that  unknown  ftrangers  juft  arrived  in  a  cha- 
riot are   waiting  without,  expreffes  difpleafure  at  the   mention  of  a 
doubt  whether  they  were   to  be  treated  in  the   palace  or  provided 
elfewhere ;   orders   that  they  fhould  be   immediately  introduced  into 
the  hall  where  he  was  fitting   at  a  public    fupper   with   his   court, 
places  them  by  himfelf  at  table,  and  then  tells  them  that,  after  they 
have  fupped,  he  will  afk  them  who  they  are,  and  whence  they  came. 
In   the   fame  manner,  in   a   former  part  of  the  poem,  Telemachus   Odyff.  1.  i. 
himfelf  is  reprefented  expreffing  indignation  at  the  leaft  delay  of  ci- 
vility to  a  ftranger  whom  he  obferves  at  the  gate  of  his  father's  pa- 
lace; goes  out  himfelf  to   receive  him,  and  tells   him  that  he  mail 
firft  fup,  and  then  declare  his  errand.     From  thefe  offices  of  hofpi-    n;ad.  1.  vi. 
tality,  once  performed,  new  and  flail  more  facred  rights  arofe,  which   v*  2I5  &  al- 
did  not  expire  with  the  perfons  who  gave  origin  to   them,   but  de- 
fcended  to  all   the  pofterity  of  either  party.     A  man  was  peculiarly 
bound  to  mow  kindnefs  to  an  hereditary  gueft ;   to  one  who  had  en- 
tertained any  of  his  anceftors,  or  who  had  been  entertained  by  them. 
How  neceffary  this  generous  point  of  honor  was,   to  alleviate  the 
miferies  to  which  mankind  in  that  unfettled  (late  of  law  and  govern- 
ment were  liable,   we  may  gather  from   many  lively  and  affecting 
pictures  fcattered  through  Homer's  poems  *.      Befide  the  general  in- 

*  There  is  a  remarkable  one,  evidently  Andromache's  fpeach,  Iliad,  xxii.  ,  487.  and 
taken  from  the  poet's  own  age,  in  a  fimile  in  Neftor's  account  of  his  majodin-g  expedition 
the  xviiith  book  of  the  Iliad,  v.  207.    See  alfo     into  Eleia.     II.  xi.  670. 

Q^_  competency 


114-  HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  HI.    competency  of  governments  to  fecure  internal  order,   the  beft  regu- 

SF.CT.  IV.    lated  were  in   perpetual  danger  of  ruin  from  foreign  enemies ;  and 

Iliad,  i.  ix.     this  ruin  was  cruel,  was  complete.      '  Thefe  are  the  evils,'  we  are 

v-  59°-  told  in  the  Iliad,   '  that  follow  the  capture  of  a  town  :   the  men  are 

'  killed  j   the  city  is  burnt  to  the  ground;   the  women  and  children 

'  of  all  ranks  are  carried  off  for  Haves.'     *  Wretch  that  I  am,'  fays 

Iliad.  1.  xxii.    the  venerable  Priam,  '  what  evil  does  the  great  Jupiter  bring  on  me 
v.  6o.  .  .  °      '   J    r         . 

*  in  my  old  age  !     My  fons  (lain,  my  daughters  dragged  into  flavery  ; 

'  violence  pervading  even  the  chambers  of  my  palace ;  and  the  very 

'  infants  dallied  again  it  the  ground  in  horrid  iport  of  war.    I  rayfelf, 

'  flain  in  the  vain  office  of  defence,  (hall  be  the  prey  of  my  own  dogs, 

'  perhaps  in  my  very  palace-gates  !' 

Where  fuch  was  war  the  manners  of  warriors,  even  of  the  nobleft 
characters,  could  not  be  without  ftains  of  barbarifm  and  illiberality. 
We  find,  in  the  Iliad,  men  of  higheil  rank,  meeting  in  battle, 
addrefs  each  other  in  language  the  moll  grofsly  infulting:  they 
threaten,  they  revile,  and  fometimes  jell  in  a  very  unfeemly  manner 
on  the  misfortunes  of  their  adverfaries.     '  You  whom  the  Greeks  lb 

Iliad.  1.  viii.  '  honor  above  others,'  fays  Hector  to  Diomed,  '  are  no  better  than 
'  a  woman.  Go,  wretch  !'  Then  follows  the  reafon  of  this  perfonal 
anger  :  '  You  think  to  ftonn  our  city,  and  carry  oft"  our  women  in 
«  your  Chips.'  After  this  the  added  threat  however  will  not  appear 
unreafonable  :  '  My  arm,'  continues  Hector,  '  fhall  firll  fend  you  to 
'  the  infernal  deities.'  With  minds  thus  heated,  and  manners  thus 
roughened,  it  is  no  wonder  if  we  find  chiefs  of  the  fame  nation  and 
army  ui'e  great  illiberality  of  language  one  to  another.  Of  this, 
..    not  to  mention  a  difpute  fo  extreme   as  that   between   Agamemnon 

v.  247.  and  Achilles,   Hector  in  a  fpeech   to  Polydamas,   and   Oilean    Ajax 

!ha,  '  ' XX1"'   to  Idomeneus,   afford  remarkable  examples. 
v.  4,3.  1 

Iliad.  1.  vi.         It  was  little  ufual   to   give  quarter.     •  Why  fo  tender-hearted  ?' 

V-SS-  fays  Agamemnon  to  Menelaus,   feeing   him  hefitate   while  a  Trojan 

of  high  rank,  who  had  had  the  misfortune  to  be  difabled   by  being 

thrown  from  his  chariot,  was  begging  for  life  ?   '  Are  you  and  your 

'  houfe 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  115 

*  houle  fo  beholden  to  the  Trojans  ?    Let  not  one  of  them  efcape    CHAP.  ill. 
'  deftruction  from  our  hands;   no,    not  the  child  within  his  mother's    SECT.  IV. 

*  womb.  Let  all  perifh  unmourned  ;  let  not  a  veftige  of  them  be 
'  feen  remaining.'  The  poet  gives  the  fandtion  of  his  own  appro- 
bation to  this  inhumanity  in  a  prince  by  no  means  generally  charac- 
terized inhuman  :  '  It  was  juftly  fpoken,'  fays  Homer;  '  and  he 
'  turned  his  brother's  mind.'  Menelaus,  accordingly,  pufhed  away 
the  noble  fuppliant,  and  the  king  of  men  himfelf  was  the  execu- 
tioner who  put  the  unrefifting  wretch  to  death.  Hector,  in  whom 
we  find  fo  many  amiable  qualities,  was  not  lefs  infected  with  this 
barbarous  fpirit  of  his  age.   When  he  had  killed  Patroclus,  and  ftripped 

him  on  the  fpot  of  his  divine  armour,  he  poftponed  the  moft  preffing  Iliad-  l«xv«« 
and  moft  important  concerns,  equally  of  himfelf  and  of  his  country, 
to  the  gratification  of  weak  revenge ;  lofing  fight  of  all  the  greater 
obje&s  of  battle  while  he  ftruggled  for  the  naked  corfe,  with  inten- 
tion to  complete  its  contumely  by  giving  it  to  be  devoured  by  Trojan 
dogs ;  and  to  make  his  vengeance  lafting  by  depriving  it  of  thofe 
funeral  rites  which  were,  in  the  opinion  of  the  times,  neceiTary  to 
the  repofe  of  fouls  after  death.  We  muft  not  therefore  wonder 
that  the  common  Greeks  fhould  delight  in  wounding  the  dead  body  Iliad,  1.  xxii. 
of  Hector  himfelf  when  he  was  foon  after  flain ;  nor  ought  we  to  v' 3/5' 
attribute  peculiar  ferocity  to  the  character  of  Achilles  for  the  indig- 
nities with  which  he  treated  it;  fince  both  the  morality  and  the  re- 
ligion of  his  age,  far  from  condemning  fuch  conduct,  evidently 
taught  him  to  confider  it  as  directed,  not  indeed  by  humanity,  but 
by  focial  affection,  and  inforced  by  that  piety,  fuch  as  it  was,  which 
the  gods  of  his  country  required.     When  the  unfortunate  monarch 

0  J   ,       -1  Iliad.  1.  xxiv. 

of  Troy  came  afterward  in  perfon  to  beg  the  body  of  his  heroic  fon,  v.  592. 
we  find  the  conduct  of  Achilles  marked  by  a  fuperior  fpirit  of  gene- 
rous humanity.  Yet  in  the  very  act  of  granting  the  pious  rcqueft, 
he  doubts  if  he  is  quite  excufable  to  the  foul  of  his  departed  friend 
for  remitting  the  extremity  of  vengeance  which  he  had  meditated, 
and  reftoring  the  corfe  to  receive  the  rites  of  burial.     Agreeably  to 

0^2  this 


1 16  HISTORY. OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  in.  this  cruel  fpirit  of  warfare,  the  token  of  victory  was  the  head  of  the 
SiiCT.  IV.  principal  perfon  of  the  vanquished  flain  fixed  on  a  poll.  The  milder 
Iliad.  i.  xviH.  temper  of  a  more  civilized  age  abolifhed  this  cuftom,  and  it  became 
ufual  for  the  conqueror  only  to  fuipend  a  fuit  of  armour  on  a  poft; 
which,  thus  adorned,  was  termed  a  trophy.  Perhaps  fire-arms. have 
contributed  to  humanize  war.  The  moil  cruel  ftrokes  to  individuals 
are  now  generally  in  a  great  meafure  the  effect  of  chance;  for  it 
feldom  can  be  afcertained  from  what  hand  precifely  they  come,  and 
revenge  thus  wants  its  object.  Other  favorable  circumftances  it  is 
true  have  affifted  ;  but  this,  it  may  fairly  be  prefumed,  has  had  its 
fhare  in  making  revenge  alien  to  modern  warfare. 

While  fuch  were  the  horrors  of  war  continually  threatening,  not 
frontier  provinces  of  extenfive  realms,  but  every  man's  door,  we  may 
wonder  at  any  progrefs  that  civility  and  the  arts  of  peace  had  made 
among  mankind ;  that  wealth,  grandeur,  elegance,  and  almoft  that 
anything  beyond  mere  neceffaries  of  life,  were  thought  worth  any 
pains  to  acquire.  But,  amid  the  alarms  of  violence  and  opprefiion, 
the  fpirit  of  hofpitality,  fo  generally  diffufed,  often  alleviated  mil- 
fortune  ;  and,  even  in  the  crafh  of  nations,  many  individuals,  if 
they  could  fave  only  their  lives  from  the  general  ruin,  were  at  no 
lofs  for  refources.  This  extenfive  communication  of  the  rights  of 
hofpitality  was  of  powerful  effect  to  humanize  a  favage  people,  to 
excite  a  relifh  for  elegance  in  ftile  of  living,  and  to  make  the  more  refin- 
ed joys  of  fociety  more  eagerly  fought,  as  well  as  more  eaiily  obtained. 
There  was  in  Homer's  time  great  difference  in  the  poffeffions  of  indi- 
viduals ;  fome  had  large  tracts  of  land  with  numerous  herds  and  flocks; 
others  had  none.  This  ftate  of  things  is  generally  favorable  to  the 
arts;  a  few,  who  have  a  fuperabundance  of  wealth,  being  better 
able,  and  generally  more  willing  to  encourage  them  than  numbers 
who  have  only  a  competency.  The  communication  of  the  rights  of 
hofpitality  would  alfo  affift  toward  the  prefervation  of  property  to  thofe 
families  which  had  once  acquired  it.  A  fort  of  affbeiation  was  thus 
formed,  which  in  fome  degree  fuppiied  the  want  of  a  regular  admi- 

niftration 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  117 

niftration  of  law.     Without  ibme  fecurity   thus   derived  we  fhould    CHAP.  in. 
fcarcely  have  found  diftin&ion  of  rank  lb  ftrongly  marked  as  it  is  in     SECT.  IV. 
Homer.     A  man  of  rank,   it   appears,   might  be  known  by  his  gait 
and  manners  under  every  difguife  of  a  mean  habit,  and  mean  employ- 
ment.  This  could  never  be  without  a  wide  diftinction  exifling  through 
fucceffive  generations.     A  youth   is  defcribed  elegant   in  his  drefs, 
and  delicate  in  his  peribn  ;   '  fuch,'  fays    the  poet,    '  as   the  fons   of 
'  princes  ufually  are.'     It  is  remarkable  that  the  youth  thus  defcribed,    v.  223..' 
was  in  the  employment  of  a  fhepherd.   Strength,  however,  and  activity 
always  go  to  the  defcription  of  Homer's  men  of  rank  :  but  luxury,  fuch 
as  it  was  in  thofe  days,  never  is  mentioned  as  unbecoming  a  hero  ;   tho 
it  was  more  particularly  the  privilege  of  the  aged  *.   The  wealthy, as  we 
have  already  obferved,  had   houfes   built   of  freeftone,  fpacious,   and 
with  many  apartments  on  different  floors  ;   and  we  find  all  the  offices 
to  be  expected  in  a  great  family  performed  with  much   regularity  -j-. 
The  directions  which  Penelope's  houfekeeper  gives  to  the  menial  fer-   odviT.  1.  xx. 
vants  for  the  bufinefs  of  the  day  might  frill  ferve  in  the  Eafr.  without  v"  I49" 
variation  :    '  Go  quickly,'   fhe  faid,   '  fome  of  you  fweep  the  houfe, 
'  and  fprinkle  it ;   and  let  the  crimfon   carpets    be   fpread    upon   the 
'feats;   let  all  the  tables  be   well  rubbed   with   fpunges,    and   wain 
'  carefully  the  bowls  and   the  cups.     Some  of  you  go   immediately 
'  to  the  fountain   for  water.'     No  lefs   than   twenty   went  on   this 
errand.       The   whole    number   of   maid-fervants   were    fifty  ;    not    v.  4.21." 

*  The  fpeech  of  UlyfTes,    himfelf  in   dif-  the  term  monarch  is  ufed  for  Pao-iXtvq,   which 

guile,   to  his  father  Laertes,   digging   in   his  is  nut  intended  here  for  fo  Uriel  a  fenfe,  being 

garden,   is  remarkable :  put  as  a  general  term  for  a  nobleman,  or  man  . 

Ovfa  rl  toi  govXelov  brtarpsTTEi  ti&ocacijQai  &n  ranK  . — 

'ET$o<  xeci  ptyefer  @wi\h  ya?  £»lj>i  mx*$.  — Nor  'peaks  thy  form  a  mean  or  fervile  mind. 

Toio^to  &  ioixa.:,  ittu  hUo-u.no  Qxyot  te,  I  read  a  monarch  in  that  princely  air  ; 

'Ev^i/JtiKa  [j.oCKilv.ui;-  ri  ya%  £iz»  Ir-l  ysfiiluu.  The  fame  thy  afpect,  if  the  fame  thy  care. 

Odyif.  1.  xxiv.   v.  254.  Soft  deep,  fair  garments,  and  the  joys  of  wine, 

The  commentators  have   obferved  a   difficulty  Thcfe  al'e  the  rights  of  age,  and  mould  be  thine. 
in   this   paffage  ;  but   it   is   only   a   gramma-  Pope's  Odyfl".  b.  xxiv.  v.  301. 

tical  difficulty  ;    the    fenfe    feems    fufficiently  f  See  the  reception  of  Telemachus  at  Py- 

obvious,   yet  the  paflage  is  fcarcely  to  be  tranf-  los  and  at  Sparta  in  the  iiid  and  ivth  books  of 

lated    with    more   accuracy    than    we  find  in  the  OdylTee,  as  well  as  the  conduct  of  UlyfTes's 

Pope's  verfion,  in  which  however  the  charac-  houfchold  in  various  parts  of  the  poem, 
tcriflical  word  fJyaOo;  remains  unnoticed;  and 


howe 


ver 


n8  HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  III.  however  all  employed  in  houfehold  buiinefs,  but  probably  moil  of 
SECT.  IV.  them  in  the  manufacture  of  cloth,  and  making  of  clothes  for  the 
family.  Men-fervants  waited  at  meals  ;  and  thofe  of  Ulyffes's  houfe- 
hold are  defcribed  as  comely  youths,  handfomely  clothed,  and  always 
neat  in  their  appearance.  Servants  of  both  fexes  feem  to  have  been 
all  ilaves. 

It  appears  indeed,  as  we  have  already  remarked,  that  fince  the  age 
of  Hercules  and  Thefeus,  confiderable  progrefs  had  been  made  in 
eftablifhing  the  powers  of  government  over  Peloponnefus  at  leaft, 
and  giving  fecurity  to  the  country.  No  apprehcnlion  of  fuch  dan- 
gers as  Thefeus  found  in  the  way  from  Trcezene  to  Athens  is  men- 
tioned in  the  account  of  Telemachus's  journey  from  Pylos  to  Sparta. 
Odyftl.av.  Without  attendants  Telemachus  and  Peiliftratus  fet  out  in  a  chariot 
drawn  by  two  horfes.  They  carry  with  them  proviiions  for  the  day. 
In  the  evening  they  arrive  at  Pherae,  where  they  are  entertained  by 
Diocles,  a  chief  of  the  country.  The  next  evening  they  arrive  at 
Sparta;   and  their  return  affords  no  more  variety  of  ftory. 

Homer  has  left  us  many  pictures  of  his  heroes  in  their  hours  of 
relaxation  with  the  goblet  circulating.  It  has  indeed  been  very  an- 
tiently  obferved,  that  he  fhows  himfelf  ftrongly  difpofed  to  focial  and 
convivial  injoyment.  Horace  has  aggravated  the  remark  into  a  re- 
proach *.  Yet  allowing  for  the  peculiarities  of  the  manners  of  the 
heroic  ages,  moft  of  which  are  ftill  found  in  the  Eaft,  there  is  great 
elegance  in  Homer's  convivial  meetings.  Once  he  makes  exprefs 
mention  of  drunkennefs  :  but  the  anecdote  forms  a  ftrong  leffon  to 
viae  X*1'  deter  from  that  vice  j  mowing,  by  a  terrible  example,  that  perfons 
See  note  *  p.   0f  tne  higheft  rank  and  moft  refpeclable  character,  if  thev   yield  to 

28  of  this  vol.    m  to  -.        *,  .  1./11/1 

intemperance,  reduce  themielves  for  the  time  to  a  level  with  the  lowelt 

and  moft  profligate,   and  are  liable  to   every  indignity.     But   at   the 

v.  L.'vid.  et   feafls   cf  the   great   the    fong   of  the  bard  feldom  failed  to   make  a 

Odyff.K  i.v.    principai    part   of  the    entertainment.      The   bard   indeed   feems  to 

153.  1.  tv.  v.    r  r        r 

17. 1.  xxii.  v.   have  been  a  perfon  of  importance  in  the  houfehold  eftablifhment  of 

330.&1.XX111.  f  . 

v.  133.  every  wealthy  chief.     His  knowlege  and  memory,  in  the  deficiency 

*  Laudibus  arguhur  vini  vinofus  Homerus,     Horat.  Epift.  19.  1.  i.  v.  6. 

of 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  U9 

of  books,  were  to  fupply  the  place  of  a  library  :  his  fkill  in  mufic  and    CHAP.  ill. 
poetry  were  to  convey  the  inftruction  in  the  mod  agreeable  manner,     \/>ys>J 
and  inform  even  when  pleafure  was  the  only  apparent  object.     In   Strabo,  i.  1. 
one  inflance   Homer  attributes   extraordinary  authority  to  the  bard. 
iEgiflbeus  could  not  accomplifh  his  purpofe  of  poflefling  himfelf  of  v  V    ' '"' 
the  perfon   of  Clytemneftra   and  the  principal   fvvay   in   the  Argian 
government,  till  he  had  removed   the   bard  whom  Agamemnon   had 
appointed  to  be  chief  counsellor  to  the  queen  in  his  abfence. 

Women  in  the  Homeric  age  injoyed  more  freedom,  and   commu- 
nicated more  in  bufinefs  and  amufement  among  men,  than  in  fubfe- 
ouent  ages  has  been  ufual    in  thofe  eaflern  countries;  far  more  than 
at  Athens  in   the  flourishing  times   of  the  commonwealth.     In  the 
Iliad  we  find  Helen  and  Andromache  appearing  frequently   in  com- 
pany with  the  Trojan  chiefs,  and  entering  freely  into    the  converfa- 
tion.    Attended  only  by  one  or  two  maid-fervants,  they  walk  through 
the  ftreets  of  Troy  as  bufinefs  or  fancy  lead  them.     Penelope,  perfe- 
cted as  fhe  is  by  her  fuitors,  does  not  fcruple  occafionally  to  mow 
herfelf  among  them  ;   and  fcarcely  more  referve  feems  to  have   been   odyff.  1.  viii. 
impofed  on  virgins  than  on  married   women.     Equally   indeed   Ho-       457' 
mer's  elegant  eulogies  and  Hefiod's   fevere  farcafm  prove  women   to   Hefiod.Op  & 
have  been  in  their  days  important  members  of  fociety.    The  charac-    Di^i:  i>v-373- 

'  *  ,  &  Theogon. 

ter  of  Penelope  in  the  OdyfTee  is  the  completeft  panegyric  upon  the  v.  570. 
fex  that  ever  was  compofed  ;  and  no  language  can  give  a   more  ele- 
gant or  a  more  highly  colored  picture  of  conjugal  affection  than  is 
difplayed  in  the   converfation  between   Hector  and   Andromache  in 
the  fixth  book  of  the  Iliad.     Even  Helen,  in  fpite   of  her   failings, 
and  independently  of  her  beauty,  fteals  upon  our  hearts  in  Homer's 
defcription  by  the  modefty  of  her  deportment  and  the   elegance  of 
her  manners.     On  all  occafions  indeed  Homer  fhows  a  difpofition  to 
favor  the  fex  :   civility  and  attention  to  them  he  attributes  moft  parti-    U'^d.  1.  ix. 
cularly  to  his  greateft  characters,  to  Achilles,  and  fiill  more  remark-    iiiad.  i.  xxiv. 
ably  to  Hector.     The  infinite  variety  of  his  fubjects,   and  the  hifto-   v>  ?62" 

rical 


J20 


HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 


CHAP.  III. 
SECT.  IV. 


rical  nature  of  his  poems,  led  him  necetfarily  to  fpeak  of  bad  women  : 
but  even  when  the  black,  deed  of  Clytemneftra  calls  for  his  utmoffc 
reprobation,  ftill  his  delicacy  toward  the  fex  leads  him  to  mention  it 
in  a  manner  that  might  tend  to  guard  againft  that  reproach  which 
would  be  liable  to  involve  all  for  the  wickednefs  of  one  *.  With 
fome  things  of  courfe  widely,  differing  from  what  prevails  in  diftant 
climates  and  diftant  ages,  we  yet  find  in  general  the  mod  perfect  de- 
cency and  even  elegance  of  manners  in  Homer's  defcriptions  of  the 
intercourfe  of  men  and  women.  Of  this  Helen's  converfations  on 
the  walls  of  Troy  in  the  Iliad,  and  in  her  court  at  Sparta  in  the 
OdyiTee,  afford  remarkable  examples.  One  office  of  civility  indeed, 
which  we  find  ufually  performed  by  women  in  the  heroic  age,  may 
excite  our  wonder  :  the  bulinefs  of  attending  men  in  bathing  feems 
to  have  been  peculiar  to  women  ;  and,  in  compliment  to  men  of  rank, 
was  performed  by  virgins  of  the  higheft  rank.  When  Telemachus 
vifited  Neftor  at  Pylos,  the  office  of  warning  and  clothing  him  was 


*  Pope,  who  was  as  little  difpofed  to  favor 
the  fex  as  he  was  formed  to  be  favored  by 
them,  has  remarkably  extended  and  aggravat- 
ed his  author's  inveftive  in  the  tranflation  of 
this  puflage. 

. — —  H  o    i^oyjx.  l.vyg  udvta. 

OdyfT.  I.  xi.  V.  433. 
is  the  expreflion  of  the  injured  Agamemnon 
toUlyfi'cs  in  the  Elyfian  Fields.  The  mean- 
ing is  limply  this  :  '  Clytemneftra's  wicked- 
*  nefs  has  been  fo  extreme,  that  it  will  commu- 
'  nicate  infamy  to  womankind  through  all 
'  futuritv  :  even  the  good  will  not  efcape  re- 
'  proach  for  it.'  But  in  the  tranflation  which 
Pope  either  made  or  adopted,  Agamemnon 
pronounces  the  whole  fex  perjured,  and  doubts 
if  a  finale  virtuous  woman  will  ever  be  found  : 

,. '  Thy  deeds,'  he  fays,  '  difgrace 

The  perjured  fex,  and  blacken  all  the  rr.ee  : 
And  Ihculd  pofterity  one  virtuous  find, 
Name  Clytemneftra,  they  will  ccrfe  the  kind.' 
Pope's  OdyfT.  1.  xi.  v.  540. 
Another  ftrong  inftance  of  this  turn  in  Pope, 
and  where  he  has  gone  more  out  of  his  way  to 


fliow  it,  occurs  in  his  note  to  the  450th  verfe 
of  his  tranflation  of  the  ninth  book  of  the 
Iliad.  A  ftrong  inllance  of  the  contrary  dif- 
pofition  in  Homer,  with  proof  that  it  remained 
to  him  in  blindnefs,  a::d  prabibly  in  old  age, 
appears  in  a  beautiful  and  afFefting  addrefs  to 
the  virgins  who  attended  the  feftival  in  Delos, 
for  which  the  Hymn  to  Apollo  has  been 
compofed  ;  and  the  paffage  is  authenticated 
to  us  by  Thucydides : 

XalfETE   a  vixbTi;  ©«7ai"  luifj  d]  y.ccl  fjLETQTrtffQt 

SI  v.ovfcti,  ri;  d  vp,piv  ouwp  r;o*ro;  auouiv 
EvOa^E  «r^>,?ircii,  xai  tiu  teWectGe  y.u.\irx  ; 
YptE^  a  iv  pcchcc  Giuo-ai  vTrovfadabi  a^^uif 
TvtyXoc,  avijPf   iiy.u  cje  Xiui  e:*  srai7ra?\&;V<nj. 

Thucyd.  1.  iii.  c.  104. 
'  Virgins  all,  joy  attend  you  !  Remember  me 
*  hereafter  :  and  when  any  ftranger  from  afar 
'  coming  here  (hall  a(k,  '  O  Virgins,  who  is  the 
'  fweeteft  poet  that  attends  your  feilival,  and 
'  with  whom  are  you  moft  delighted  r'  do  you 
'  all  kindly  anfwer  with  one  applauding  voice, 
'  Our  favorite  is  the  blind  man  who  lives  in 
'  rocky  Chios.' 


affigned 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  121 

affigned  to  the  beautiful  Polycafte,  the  virgin-daughter  of  the  vene-    CHAP.  III. 
rable  monarch.     When  Ulyffes  appeared  as  an  unknown   flranger  in    SECl-  TV- 
his   own  palace,   the  queen  Penelope,   uninformed  who  or  what  he 
was,   merely  in  purfuance  of  the  common   rights  of  hofpitality,  di- 
rected her  young  maids   to  attend  him  to  the  bath.      Ulyffes  refufed 
the  honor,  and  defired  an  old  woman  ;   but  the  poet  leems  to  have  odyfl".  1.  six. 
thought  it   neceffary  that  he  {hould  apologize   very  particularly  for   V,3I7- 
fuch  a  Angularity.    Repugnant  as  thefe  circumftances  appear  to  com- 
mon notions  of  eaflern  jealoufy,  yet  cuftoms  not  abfolutely  diffi.milar 
are  ftill  found  among  the  Arabs.     Indeed  the  general   fentiments  of  sir  James 
the   Turks    toward  the  female  fex  are   a   flrang-e  compound  of  the   r  oncr- s  °b" 

^  r  ideations    on 

groffeft  fenfuality  with  the  mofl  fcrupulous  decency.      For  the  credit  the  Religion, 
of  Homer,   however,    and   of  his   age,  it  fhould   be   oblerved  that,   the  Turks, 
among  all  his  variety  of  pictures  of  human  paflion,  not  a  hint  occurs 
of  that   unnatural  fenfuality  which  afterward   fo   difgraced  Grecian 
manners. 

It  was  cuftomary  in  the  heroic  age,  as  indeed  at  all  times  in 
Greece,  for  ladies  of  the  higheft  rank  to  employ  themfelves  in  fpin- 
ning  and  needlework,  and  in  at  leaft  directing  the  buiinefs  of  the 
loom  j  which  was  carried  on,  as  till  lately  in  the  Highlands  of  Scot- 
land, for  every  family  within  itfelf.  It  was  praife  equally  for  a  llave 
and  a  princefs  to  be  fkilful  in  works  of  this  kind.  In  Homer's  time 
warning  alfo  was  employment  for  ladies.  The  princefs  Nauficaa, 
the  young  and  beautiful  daughter  of  the  opulent  king  of  Phsacia,  a 
country  famed  more  for  luxury  than  indullry,  went  with  her  maids, 
in  a  carriage  drawn  by  mules,  to  a  fountain  in  a  fequeftered  fpot  at 
fome  diftance  from  the  city,  to  wafh  the  clothes  of  the  family. 

It  is  matter  of  no  fmall  curiolity  to  compare  the  manners  and 
principles  of  the  heroic  age  of  Greece  with  thofe  of  our  Teutonic 
anceftors.  There  are  ftrong  lines  of  refemblance,  and  there  are  at 
the  fame  time  ftrong  chara&eriftical  touches  by  which  they  fland 
diftingui flied.  Greece  was  a  country  holding  out  to  its  poffeffors 
every  delight  of  which  humanity  is  capable  -,   but  where,  through 

R  the 


122  HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  ill.    the  inefficiency  of  law,   the  inftability  of  governments,   and  the  cha- 
SECT.  iv.     racter  of  the   times,    happinefs   was  extremely  precarious,   and   the 
change  frequent  from  the  height  of  blifs   to  the  depth  of  mifery. 
Hence,   rather  than  from  his  natural  temper,    Homer  feems  to  have 
derived  a  melancholy  tinge  widely  diffufed  over  his  poems  *.     He 
frequently  adverts,    in  general  reflections,    to   the  miferies  of  man- 
Hja{j    j      -    kind.     That  earth  nourishes  no  animal  more  miferable  than  man,  is 
v- 4+7-  a  remark  which  he  puts  into  the   mouth   of  Jupiter  himfelf.      His 

common  epithet  for  war  and  battle  is  *  tearful  -{-.'  With  the 
northern  bards,  on  the  contrary,  war  and  battle  were  fubjects  of 
Mallet's  Den-  higheft  joy  and  merriment :  and  this  idea  was  fupported  in  fact,  we 
Robertfon's  are  well  affured,  to  a  moft  extraordinary  degree.  Yet  there  was 
Charles  v.  more  generolity  and  lefs  cruelty  in  the  Gothic  fpirit  of  war  than  in 
the  Grecian.  Whence  this  arofe ;  what  circumftances  gave  the 
weaker  fex  fo  much  more  confequence  among  the  Teutonic  nations 
than  among  the  Greeks  ;  how  the  fpirit  of  gallantry,  fo  little  kn  )wri 
to  this  elegant  and  polifhed  people,  fhould  arife  and  gain  fuch  uni- 
verfal  influence  among  the  fierce  unlettered  favages  of  the  North  ;  that 
gallantry  which,  with  many  fantaftical  and  fome  mifchievous  ef- 
fects, has  produced  many  fo  highly  falutary  and  honorable  to  man- 
kind, will  probably  ever  remain  equally  a  myflery  in  the  hiftory  of 
man,  as  why  perfection  in  the  fciences  and  every  elegant  art  mould 
be  confined  to  the  little  territory  of  Greece,  and  to  thofe  nations 
which  have  derived  it  thence. 

*  See   particularly  in   the    Odyflee,  1.    iv.  f  rio^sjxo;   oaxfulus,    Iliad.    1.  viii.    v.    388. 

v.  93.  1.  viii.   v.  523.    1,  xi.   v.  620.    1.  xviii.      Mi-x*  fexfvhtre-*,  Iliad.  1.  xiii.  v.  765. 
v.  129. 


CHAPTER 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  123 


CHAPTER     IV. 

The  Hiftory  of  Greece,  from  the  Trojan  War  to  the 
Return  of  the  Heracleids  ;  and  of  the  Grecian  Ora- 
cles, the  Council  of  Amphictyons,  and  the  Olympian 
Games. 

SECTION     I. 

defloration  of  Orejles  to  the  throne  of  sir  go  s.     Conquefl  of  Peloponnefus 
by  the  Dorians  under  the  Heracleids,  commonly  called  the  Return  of 
the  Heracleids.     D'finclion  of  the  Greek  Nation  into  Ionic,  JEclic, 
Attic,  Doric. 

A  KING  Homer  as  our  faithful  guide  for  the  hiftory  of  this    CHAP.  I  v. 
early  age,  we  may  conclude  that  no  great  revolution,   nothing      SECT.  I. 
of  any  extenfive  confequence  happened  in  Greece,   after  the  troubles 
derived  from   the  Trojan   war,  had   fubfided,    to  the  time  when  he 
compofed  his  poems.     The  moft  important  events  which   he  has  re- 
corded, fubfequent  to  the  return  of  the  Greeks  from  Troy,   relate  to 
the  kingdom  of  Argos.      Oreftes,   fon  of  Agamemnon,   after  living   odyir.  1.  i. 
feven  years  in  exile  at  Athens,   in  the  eighth  found  means  to  revenge   £;;£*  ]f6' 
his  father's  death  and  recover  his  inheritance.     He  killed  the  ufurper    &  3°3-  &  '• 
iE°iftheus  ;    and    his  guilty  mother   Clytemneftra    perifhed    in   the 
maifacre.     Mounting  then   the  throne  of  Argos,    he  became  a  very 
powerful  prince,    and  reigned  with  great  reputation.     Here  the  hif- 
tory of  Homer  ends  ;   and   the  manner  in  which  thefe  events  are 
mentioned  by  him  appears  ftrongly  to  indicate  that  fome  of  them 
were  within  his  memory,   and  that  the  period  of  his  life  would  not 
admit  of  his  tracing  hiftory  much  farther  *. 

*   This  point  will  be  farther  difcufled  in  the  Appendix  to  the  prefent  chapter. 

R  2  It 


124 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  IV. 
SECT.  I. 

Thucyd.  1.  i. 

C.   12. 


Strabo,   1.  ix. 
P-  427- 


Herodot.l.ix. 
c.  26. 

Plato  de  Leg. 
1.  iii.  p.  683. 
t.  ii. 

Paufan.  1.  ii. 
c.  18. 

Herodot.l.  vi. 
c.  52. 
Polyb.  1.  11. 

P-:'78-,     ... 

Strabo,  1.  vm, 

p.  383. 
Paufan.  1.  v. 
c.  1. 


It  was,   according  to  Thucydides,  whofe  iimple  affirmation  carries 
more  authority  than  that  of  any  other  writer,  and  upon  this  occafion 
has  been  univerfally  followed,    about  eighty  years  after  the  deftruc- 
tion  of  Troy  that  a  great  revolution  happened,  which  totally  changed 
the  population  of  a  large  part  of  Greece,  and,   in  its  confequences, 
that  of  all  the  weflern  coaft  of  Afia  Minor,   with  which  Homer  was 
particularly  converfant  *.      The  children  and   partizans  of  the  great 
Hercules  had  been   invited  from  Athens,   their  firft  place  of  refuge 
from  the  perfecution  of  Euryftheus,    the   lait  king  of  Argos  of  the 
Perfeid  family,   to  fettle  in  Doris.     iEpalius,  chief  of  that  province, 
in  gratitude  for  important  favors   received  from  Hercules,  is  faid  to 
have  adopted  Hyllus,  eldelf  fon  of  that  hero,    by  Deianeira  daughter 
of  CEneus  king  of  ./Etolia,   and   to   have  bequeathed  his  principality 
to   him.     Thus  fortunately  raifed  from   the  condition   of  fuppliant 
exiles  to   that  of  fovereign   princes,    the  pofterity  of  Hercules  were 
however  not   to  be  fatisfied  with  a   fcanty  command  over  herdfmen 
among  the  wilds  of  QLta  and  ParnaiTus.      Efteeming  themfelves  di- 
rect  heirs  of  the  family  of  Perfeus,    they  never  ceafed   to  claim   the 
dominion  of  Peloponnefus,  and  particularly  of  Argos,  of  which  the 
fuperior   policy  and  fortune   of  the   family  of  Pelops  had  deprived 
them.     Twice  penetrating  through   the   iithmus,    they   were   com- 
pelled to   retreat  with   lofs.      But   at  length  Temenus,    Crefphontes, 
and   Ariflodemus,     faid  to   be   great-grandfons   of    Hyllus,    aiTociat- 
ing  with    themfelves   Oxylus,  an  iEtolian  chieftain    their   kinfman, 
croffed   the   Corinthian   gulph   from   Naupactus,  at   the   head  of  an 
army  with  which,  excepting  the  mountainous  province  of  Arcadia, 
they  overran  the  whole  peninfula.    Tifamenus,  fon  of  Oreftes,  forced 
from   Argolis    and   Laconia,   made  however  a  (land  in  Achaia,  and 
maintained  himfelf  there.     Of  the  reft  the  Heracleids  became  com- 
plete mafters.     Temenus  took  porTefiion  of  Argos,  Crefphontes  of 
Meflenia,  and,  Ariitodemus  dying,    his   twin-fons  Euryfthenes  and 


*  His  refidence  after  he  was  become  blind,     cydides  to  their  authenticity,  was  in  the  iflind 
as  he  fays  himfelf  in  thofe  lines  of  the  Hymn     of  Chios,     Thucyd.  1.  iii,  c.  104. 
to  Apollo  which  have  the  teitimony  of  Thu- 

Procles 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 


"5 


Procles  were  made  joint  kings  of  Lacedaemon  :  Corinth  was  given  to    CHAP.  IV. 
Aletes,  alio  a  defcendant  of  Hercules,  and   Eleia  was    allotted    to     SECT.  I. 
Oxylus. 

Of  the  particulars  of  this  important  revolution,  the  flruggles  likely 
to  be  maintained  by  princes  lb  eftablifhed  in  their  poffemons   as  the 
Pelopidsj,  and  fo  connected  by  various  ties  of  confanguinity  and  poli- 
tical intereft,  or  the  caufes  why  little  ftruggle  was  made,  fcarcely  any 
information  remains  to  us.    It  appears  indeed  that  the  Heracleid  chiefs 
had  intereft  within  the  peninfula;   for,  as  we  are  informed  byStrabo,   Su-abo,  l.viii. 
Laconia  was  betrayed  to  them.     They  feem  alfo  to  have  fet  out  with   P" 3  5' 
judicioufly  difclaiming  all  hoftile  intentions  againftthe  people  of  Pe- 
loponnefus,  profeffin°:  that  their  aim  was  only  to  recover  their  rights 
from  princes  who  had  ulurped  them.     Farther  than  this  even  Pau-   c.  13. 
fanias  was  unable  to  gather.     Nor  are  we  more  informed  of  the  time 
employed  in   the  conqueft.     But  that  the  conqueft  was  in  the  end 
complete,   and   that   an   intire   revolution  took  place,   not  only  in  the 
government,  but  in  the  population  alfo  of  the  whole  peninfula,  except 
Arcadia,  are   fids   amply  authenticated.     As  foon  as   the  divifion  of 
the  conquered  country  was  agreed  upon,  the  Heracleid  princes,  bind-   Plato.deLeg. 
ing  themfelves  by  folemn   oaths   mutually  to  fupport  one  another  in   t*.  ii."  Jd.  Ser- 
their  refpedive  allotments,  exacted  ingagements   upon   oath  to  the   ran* 
fame  purpofe  from  all  their  fubjeds.     But  their  Dorian  and  iEtolian 
followers  had  not  conquered  rich  and  exteniive  provinces  for  others, 
to  return  themfelves  to  their  priftine  poverty  upon  their  native  moun- 
tains.    It  was  a  matter  perhaps  equally  of  policy  and  of  neceffity  to 
reward   them    with    eftablifhments    in    the  newly    acquired  territo- 
ries.    A  general   oppreffion  of  the    old    inhabitants  followed  :  great 
numbers  emigrated  :   the  reft  were  moftly  reduced  to  flavery;   and  in   ifocrat.Paaa- 
the  end  the  Heracleids  and  their  immediate  partizans  remained  fole  l  en' 
lords  of  the  foil  throughout  Peloponnefus,  excepting  Arcadia  and 
Achaia. 

This  great  change  in  the  population  of  Greece,  and  the  importance 
which  the  Dorian  name  acquired  by  it,  among  other  confequences, 

occafioned 


iz6  .HIS.  TORY    OF    GREECE. 

!\  IV.    occafioned  a  new  diftin&ion  of  the  Grecian  people,  and  brought  for- 
CT.  I.     ward  to  public  attention  fome  old  ones,   which  in  the  time  of  Homer 
and  Hefiod   appear  to  have  been  little  noticed.      Concerning  the  bar- 
barous hords  who  in  earlieft  times   occupied  Greece   under  various 
names,  Dryopes,   Caucones,   Aones,  Leleges,   Pelafgians  and  others, 
Sti  ibo,  i.  v.    the  diligent  and   judicious  Strabo  feems   to  have  been  unable  to  dif- 
p,  321,  '322!   cover  how  far  they  were  different  people.     They  appear  to  have  been 
•  p-401-    niuch  intermixed  ;  but  the  Pelafgian  name  prevailed  mofr.  on  the  con- 
tinent, and   the  Lelegian  in  the  iflands.     The  Athenians  and  Arca- 

'V  ':.!•   dians,   in  whofe  country  there  had  never,  within  the  bounds  of  tra- 
c.  50,&  l.vin.  '  J 

*•'•  44-  ditionary  memorials,  been  any  complete  revolution  of  the  population, 

continued  always  to  refer  their  origin,  in  part  at  leaft,  to  the  Pelafgians. 

Revolutions,  depriving  the  other  Greeks  of  means  to  trace  their  an- 

ceffry  fo  high,  gave  them  at  the  fame  time  new  eras  from  which  to 

begin  their  account  of  themfelves,  in   confequence  of  which  the  old 

fell  the  more  readily  into  oblivion.     The  Pelafgian  name  thus  grew 

Strabo,  l.viii.   oblblete  at  an  early  period,  and  the  Greek  nation  became  diftinguifhed 
p.  333. 

into  two  hords,  called  Ionian  and  /Eolian.     Yet  neither  have  we  any 

certain   information   how  this   diftinction  arofe ;  tho  tradition  names 

„    ,     ....    iEolus  and  Dorus,  fons  of  Hellen  the  fon  of  Deucalion,   and  Ion  and 

Strabo,  1.  vin. 

P-  383-  Achasus  fons  of  Xuthus,  another  fon  of  Hellen,  as  the  patriarchs  of 

Herodot.  1.  i.  r  .  •        . 

c  56, &  1. vii.   the  Grecian  people,  irom  whom  the  appellations  of  their   principal 

divifions  were  derived.     The  hiftory  of  thefe  princes,  however,  is 

HcroJot.l.vn.   uncertain   in   extreme  :    and  Herodotus   declares  common   tradition 

c.  95. 

among  the  Greeks  ftill  in  his  time  to  have  affirmed  that  the  iEolians, 
as  well  as  the  Ionians,  were  anciently  called  Pelafgians.  Yet  the  di- 
ftinction  of  thole  hords,  whatever  it  originally  was,  became  in  the 
courfe  of  ages  more  than  nominal ;  fince,  tho  their  fettlerhents  were 
intermixed,  and  their  language  fundamentally  one,  each  people  Mill 
preferved  its  peculiar  dialeci.  Attica  was  the  principal  fettlement  of 
the  Ionians  :  its  ancient  inhabitants  were  ufually  diftinguifhed  by  that 
Homer.  Ihad.   name  .  and  the  country  was  called  Ionia.     Colonies  migrating  hence 

1. 11.  v.  575.  J  bo 

Herodot.l.vii.  into  Peloponnefus,  occupied  the  province  afterward  named  Achaia, 

but 


•HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  127 

but  anciently  iEgialos   and  ./Egialeia ;  and  the  Ionian  colonics  were    CHAP.  IV. 
called  ./Egialian  Pela-feians.     The  reft  of  Greece,  within  and  without      SECT.  I. 
the  ifthmus,  was  pofll'fled  by  the  iEolian  hord.     Of  the  farther  divi-   Strabo,  1.  viii. 
fion  of  the  Grecian  people,  which  afterward  arofe,  Strabo  gives  a  clear 
account.     The  inhabitants  of  the  mountainous  trail  about  Parnaffus, 
under  the  name  of  Dorians,  who,  according  to  Herodotus,  had  mi-   Hcrodot.  1.  i. 
grated  thither  from  Theflaly,  were,  like  the  ancient  Atticans,  from  the 
barreiMiefs  of  their  country,  and  their  confequent  poverty,  little  fub- 
jec~t  to  invalion  ;   and  thus,  while  the  other  JEolian's,   from  their  fi    - 
quent  revolutions  and   intermixture  with  foreigners,  acquired  a  new 
dialect,  the  Dorians  alone  retained   their  manners  and  language  un- 
altered.    When  under  the  Heracleids   they  became  mailers  of  Pelo-    Ifoc«t. Pana- 

J  then. 

ponnefus,  the  ancient  inhabitants  were  moftly  either  expelled  or  re-    Strabo,  1. viii. 
duced  to  flavery ;   excepting  thofe  who  under  Tifamenus  maintained 
themfeives  in  Achaia,   and  the  Arcadians,  who  with  their  mountains 
preferved  their  freedom.     The  exiles  parted  to  Alia  Minor,  and  over- 
powering there  the  Afiatics,  as  they  had  been  themfeives  overpowered 
by  the  Dorians,  they  eftablifhed  colonies  all  along  the  weftern  coaft 
of  that  country.     Four  diftinclions  of  the  Grecian  people  now  arofe   Strabo,  1.  viii, 
out    of    the    original    two.       The    Dorian    name    prevailed    in    all     '  ^^ 
the    eftablifnments   of    the    Heracleids,    and  was    preferved    by    all 
the   colonies    founded   by  their   defendants    in   Afia,    Italy,    Sicily, 
and  wherefoever  elfe.     The  Athenians  alfo  rofe  to  fuch  preeminence 
above  all  other  people  of  Ionian  race,  that  their  name  likewife  pre- 
vailed over  that  of  their  hord ;   and  thus   the  two  original  dialers  of 
the   Greek  language  acquired   the   new  names   of  Doric   and  Attic, 
while  the  two  other  principal  dialects,   which  various  circumftanccs 
had  contributed  to  alter,  retained  the   ancient  appellations  of  /Folic 
and  Ionic.     But  all   the  Grecians   without  the  ifthmus,  except  the 
Athenians  and  Megarians,  claimed  iEolian  origin.     The  Megarians, 
tho  of  iEolian   race,  vet   being;  a  Dorian  colony  from  Peloponnefus,    Strabo,  l.vw 

Jo  J  r  ?     p.  392,  393. 

chofe  to  retain  the  diftinclion  of  the  Doric  name.     The  Ionian  name   Herodot.  1.  i 

c.  143. 

was 


i28  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  IV.    Was  rejeded  in  Greece,  and  retained  only  by  thofe  Ionians  who  mi- 
SRCT.  fc,      grated  into  Afia  and  the  iflands ;  and  to  them  the  dialect  called  Ionic 
was  peculiar. 

SECTION     II. 

Of  the  Origin  and  Progrefs  of  Oracles. 

THE  hiftory  of  a  people  divided  like  the  Greeks  into  many  little 
ftates,  each  of  which  exercifed  complete  fovereignty  within  its  own 
territory,  cannot  be  traced  in  fo  connected  a  manner  as  that  of  thofe 
nations  whofe  parts  are  united  under  one  fyftem  of  government.  Hi- 
ftorians  have  therefore  found  it  convenient,  after  giving  a  fummary 
account  of  the  remoter  ages,  to  feledt  two  commonwealths,  Athens 
and  Lacedaemon,  as  main  channels  in  which  their  narrative  fhould 
run  ;  contenting  themfelves  with  but  occalionally  relating  the  mere 
important  tranfaclions  of  the  reft.  While  the  fame  method  is  fol- 
lowed here  equally  from  neceffity  and  choice,  the  bufinefs  of  the  hi- 
ftorian,  it  fhould  feem,  were  very  incompletely  executed  mould  he 
omit  to  inveftigate,  with  fome  accuracy,  the  circumftances  which  prin- 
cipally contributed  to  keep  fo  many  independent  and  eternally  warring 
ftates,  without  any  exprefs  league,  and  often  without  any  very  obvious 
common  intereft,  frill  in  fome  meafure  united,  ftill  always  to  efteem 
themfelves  one  people,  fo  as  to  acquire  (for  they  had  them  not  in 
the  early  periods  of  their  hiflory)  Angularly  ftrong  lines  of  diftinction 
from  all  the  reft  of  mankind. 

Tho,  among  the  confequences  of  the  great  revolution  effected  by 
the  Heracleids,  a  feparation  in  national  pride,  oppofition  in  national 
prejudices,  and  even  national  antipathies  might  be  liable  to  arife 
among  the  Grecian  people,  the  Dorians  yet  fortunately  brought  with 
them  from  their  former  country  habits,  opinions,  and  attachments, 
not  only  tending  to  correct  the  mifchievous  effects  of  political  jea- 
loufies  among  the  feveral  independent  ftates  which  they  eftablifhed  in 
Peloponnefus,  but  alio  to  preferve  and  even  increafe  the  intercourfe, 

and 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  129 

and  itreno-then  the  connection  with  the  reft  of  Greece.  The  province  of    CHAP.  IV. 
Doris  was  chiefly  compofed  of  the  northern  branches  of  the  lofty  ridge     SECT.  IL 
of  Parnaffus,  at  the  fouthern  end  of  which  Delphi  was  fituated.     The 
oracle  of  this  place  had  been   for  fome  time  increafmg  in  reputation 
among  the  people  of  the  neighbouring  provinces ;  and  it  was  not 
without  the  incouragement  of  fome  refponfes,   which  admitted  a  fa- 
vorable interpretation,  that  the  Heracleids  had  ingaged  in  their  enter- 
prize.     Their  full  fuccefs  therefore  could  not  fail  to  extend  the  fame 
and  increafe  the  credit  of  the  oracle.      The  great  bond  indeed  which 
firft  united,  and  afterward  for  ages  principally  held  the  Greeks  to- 
gether,  was  their  religion.     Of  the  early  ftate   of  this,    and   fome 
principal  circumftances  in  its  rife  and   progrefs,  from  among  thofe 
which  can  be  fufficiently  afcertained  for  any  notice  in  hiftory,  it  has 
been  already  endeavoured   to   give  an  account.     It  will  be  the  place 
here  to  make  fome  inquiry  concerning  thofe  reputed  means  of  regular 
communication  with  the  deity,  lefs  known  in  earlier  times,  but  which, 
in  the  period  to  which  we  are  approaching,  became  political  engines 
of  fingular  powers,  and  had  their  effecT;  on  almoft  every  important 
occurrence.    It  were  indeed  a  very  vain  attempt  to  purfue  through  all 
its  intricacies  the  hiftory  of  inflitutions  founded  upon  ignorance,  and 
raifed  by  deceit,  at  an  age  far  beyond  the  reach  of  written  memorials, 
and  ever  afterward,  during   their  exiftence  through   many  centuries, 
covered  from  common  obfervation  with  the  utmoft  caution  of  in- 
terefted  ingenuity  favored  by  political  power.     But  as  the  fubjedt  is 
not  only  curious  in  itfelf,   but  important  to  the  hiftory  before  us,  it 
fhall  be  endeavoured  here   to   reduce  under  one   point  of  view  what 
can  be  collected  from  ancient  writers  principally  tending  to  illuftrate 
the  early  circumftances  of  oracles. 

Superftition  was  formed  into  a  fyftem  in  Egypt  at  an  age  prior  to 
our  firft  accounts  of  it.  Vaft  temples  were  built,  innumerable  cere- 
monies eftablifhed  j  the  fame  body  forming  the  hereditary  priefthood 
and  the  nobilityof  the  nation,  directed  with  a. high  hand  the  belief 
and  the  confciences  of  the  people ;  and  prophecy  was  not  only  among 

S  their 


13°  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP. IV.    their  pretentions,   but  perhaps  the  moft  indifpenfible  part  of  their 
.       '    /     ofhce.     We  have  already  had  occafion   to   remark  how  ufual  it  was 
with  the  Phenician  traders,  then  the  general  carriers  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean, to  fteal  women.     It  happened  that  the  mafter  of  a  Phenician 
Herodot.  l.ii.   veffel  carried   off  a  woman-attendant   of  the   temple   of  Jupiter   at 
C-S4-  Thebes  on  the  Nile,  and  fold  her  in  Thefprotia,  a  mountainous  tract 

in  the  northweft  part  of  Epirus  bordering  on  the  Illyric  hords.  Re- 
duced thus  unhappily  to  flavery  among  barbarians,  the  woman  how- 
ever foon  became  fenfible  of  the  fuperiority  which  her  education  in  a 
more  civilized  country  gave  her  over  them  ;  and  fhe  conceived  hopes 
of  mending  her  condition  by  practifing  upon  their  ignorance  what  (he 
had  acquired  of  thofe  arts  which,  in  able  hands,  impofed  upon  a 
more  inlightened  people.  She  gave  out  that  (lie  potiefied  all  the 
powers  of  prophecy  to  which  the  Egyptian  priefts  pretended;  that 
(he  could  difcover  prefent  fecrets  and  foretel  future  events.  Her  pre- 
tentions excited  curiotity  :  (he  chofe  her  ftation  under  the  (hade  of  a 
fpreading  oak,  where  in  the  name  of  the  god  Jupiter  (lie  delivered 
anfwers  to  numbers  who  came  to  confult  her ;  and  (hortly  her  repu- 
tation as  a  prophetefs  extended  as  far  as  the  people  of  the  country 
themfelves  communicated.  Thefe  timple  circumftances  of  her  ftory 
were  afterward,  according  to  the  genius  of  thofe  ages,  turned  into 
a  fable,  which  was  commonly  told  in  Herodotus's  time  by  the  Do- 
donsean  priefts.  A  black  pigeon,  they  faid,  flew  from  Thebes  in 
Egypt  to  Dodona,  and  perching  on  an  oak,  proclaimed  with  human 
voice,  '  That  an  oracle  of  Jupiter  ihould  be  eftablifhed  there  *.'  The 
Dodonseans,  concluding  that  a  divinity  fpoke  through  the  agency  of 
the  pigeon,  obeyed  the  mandate,  and  the  oracle  was  eftablifhed.  The 
hiftorian  accounts  for  the  fiftion  thus  :  The  woman,  on  her  arrival, 
fpeaking  in  a  foreign  dialed",   the  Dodonaeans   faid  (he  fpoke  like  a 

*  Homer,  (OdyfT.  xiv.  328,  &  xix.  297-)  Hefiod  (as  quoted  by  the  fcholiaft  upon  the 
jEfchylus,  (Prometh.  vinft.  v.  827.)  and  Strabo  Trachiniae  of  Sophocles,  v.  1174.)  and  Hero- 
(1.  v.  p.  328)  call  the  prophetic  tree  Atf<.     dotus,  1.  ii.  c.  55.  call  it  <J>r,yc*. 

pigeon : 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  131 


CHAP.  IV. 
SECT.  II. 


pio-eon  :  but  afterward,  when  fhe  had  acquired  the  Grecian  fpeech 
and  accent,  they  faid  the  pigeon,  who  from  her  darker  complexion 
was  called  the  black  pigeon,  now  fpoke  with  a  human  voice.  The 
trade  of  prophecy  being  both  eafy  and  lucrative,  the  office  of  prophet- 
efs  was  readily  fupplied  both  with  affociates  and  fucceflbrs.  A  temple 
for  the  deity  and  habitations  for  his  minifters  were  built;  and  thus, 
according  to  the  evidently  honed:,  and  apparently  well-founded  and 
judicious  account  of  Herodotus,  a'rofe  the  oracle  of  Jupiter  at  Do- 
dona,  the  very  place  where  tradition,  (till  remaining  to  the  days  of  that 
writer,  teftined  that  Sacrifices  had  formerly  been  performed  to  the 
namelcfs  God. 

In  confequence  probably  of  the  fuccefs  of  Dodona,  oracles  were 
in  remote  ages  attempted  in  various  places  *.  Olympia,  as  we  learn 
from  Strabo,  before  the  eftablifhment  of  its  games,  was  famous  for  Strabo,  1.  vrii. 
the  oracle  of  Olympian  Jupiter  j  which  however  ceafed  at  an  early 
period.  But  priefts  and  foothfayers,  finding  that  oracles  ingaged 
popular  attention  more,  and  of  courfe  were  more  lucrative  than  the 
pretenfion  to  the  gift  of  prophecy  attached  to  the  mere  perfon  of  the 
prophet,  eagerly  feized  any  opportunity  to  eftablifh  them.  Many  of 
thefe  fucceeded  for  a  time,  and  decayed.  But  the  oracle  which  held 
its  reputation,  and  extended  it,   we  may  fay,  over  the  world,   was 

*  The  learned  Mr.  Hardion  in  his  firft  Dif-  people  had  a  very  different  origin  (i);    no- 

fertation  on   the  oracle  of  Delphi,    (Mem.  de  thing  more  uncertain  than  the  time  when  the 

1'Acad.  des  Infcrip.)  undertakes  to  prove  from  Delphian    oracle    was    firit    eftablifhed  ;    and 

Herodotus  himfelf,   that  Herodotus   is  wrong  fcarcely  anything  more  evidently  fabulous  than 

in  afi'ertincr  the  Dodonean  oracle  to  have  been  thofe  reports  of   the   early  confultation  of  it, 

the   oldelt  of  Greece.     But  the  whole  of  his  on   whole    authority    Mr.    Hardion   has   not 

argument  refts   on   a   fuppofition  that  the  Pe-  fcrupled   to   fay,    '    il    ell    incontestable 

lafgians,    founders  of   the   Dodonean   oracle,  '   qu'il  etoit   etabli  meme  avant  le  deluge  de 

originated    from   a   handful  of   favages    (une  '  Deucalion.'     The  firft  account  of  the   con- 

poignee  d'hommes,  ou,   pour  mieux  dire,  des  fultation  of  the  Delphian  oracle  to  which  Strabo 

brutes)   firft  affembled  under  Pelafgus   on   the  feems   to   have    paid    any  credit  was   that  of 

mountains  of  Arcadia,  long  after  the  eftablim-  Homer,  who  mentions  a  refponfe  to  Agamem- 

ment  of  the  Delphian  oracle.     Nothing  how-  non    before    the  Trojan   war.       See   Strabo, 

ever    in     ancient    Grecian    tradition    appears  1.  ix.  p.  417. 
more  certain  than  that  the  Pelafgian  name  and 

(1)  See  p.  18  of  this  Volume. 

S  2  Delphi. 


132 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 


CHAI\  IV. 
SECT.  II. 


Strabo,  1,  viii. 
p.  418. 


Strabo,  I.  ix. 
p.419. 

Diodor.  Sic. 
1.  xvi.  c.  26. 
Paufan.   1.  x. 
c.  5. 


Delphi.  Of  this  celebrated  place  Co  many  fables  are  related,  fome  of 
them  referred  to  times  long  before  any  authentic  account  of  an  oracle 
exifling  in  Greece,  that  the  writer  whofe  fubjecl:  calls  for  fome  elucida- 
tion of  this  matter,  finds  no  fmall  difficulty  to  determine  what  not  to 
reject  of  all  that  has  been  faid  upon  it.  Indeed  on  this  mythological 
ground,  where  even  the  antiquarian  and  the  profefled  diflertator  fhould 
tread  with  caution,  the  hiftorian  cannot  but  hefitate  at  every  ftep. 
He  will  certainly  not  attempt  to  lead  his  reader  a  regular  journey 
through  it;  but  he  may  point  out  to  him  a  few  fpots  of  the  firmer 
foil,  which,  without  rilk  of  material  deception,  may  inable  him  to 
form  fome  general  idea  of  the  whole. 

On  the  fouthern  fide  of  mount  Parnaffus,  within  the  weflern  border 
of  Phocis  againil:  Locris,  and  at  no  great  diftance  from  the  feaport 
towns  of  CriiTa  and  Cirrha,  the  mountain- crags  form  a  natural  am- 
phitheater, difficult  of  accefs  ;  in  the  mid  ft  of  which  was  a  deep  ca- 
vern difcharging  from  a  narrow  orifice  a  vapor  that  powerfully  affected 
the  brain  of  thole  who  came  within  its  influence.  That  diligent  an- 
tiquarian Diodorus  Siculus  reports  that  this  was  firft  brought  to 
public  notice  by  a  goatherd,  whofe  goats,  brouzing  on  the  brink, 
were  thrown  into  fingular  convulfions  ;  upon  which  the  man,  going 
to  the  fpot  and  endeavouring  to  look  into  the  chafm,  became  him- 
felf  agitated  like  one  frantic.  Thefe  extraordinary  circumflances 
were  communicated  through  the  neighbourhood  ;  and  the  fuperftitious 
ignorance  of  the  age  immediately  attributed  them  to  a  deity  refiding 
in  the  place.  Phrenzy  of  every  kind,  among  the  Greeks  even  in  more 
inlightened  times,  was  fuppofed  the  effect  of  divine  infpiration,  and 
the  incoherent  fpeeches  of  the  frantic  were  regarded  as  prophetical. 
A  fpot  therefore  to  which  herdfmen  only  and  their  goats  had  hitherto 
thought  it  worth  while  to  climb  over  the  rugged  fides  of  the  moun- 
tain, now  became  an  object  of  extenfive  curioiity :  it  was  faid  to  be 
the  oracle  of  the  goddefs  Earth  :  the  rude  inhabitants,  from  all  the 
neighbouring  parts,  reforted  to  it  for  information  concerning  futurity; 
to  obtain  which  any  one  of  them  intoxicated  himfelf  with  the  vapor, 

and 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  133 

and  then  whatever  he  uttered  paffed  for  prophecy.  But  the  function  CHAP- IV- 
of  prophet,  under  thefe  circumftances,  was  not  a  little  dangerous;  for,  ,__  .  ',J 
according  to  Diodorus,  many,  through  the  intoxication,  unable  to 
guide  themfelves,  fell  into  the  cavern  and  were  loft.  In  confe- 
quence  of  this  an  affembly  of  the  neighboring  inhabitants  was  con- 
vened ;  in  which  it  was  determined  that  one  perfon,  appointed  by 
public  authority,  fhould  alone  be  permitted  to  receive  the  infpiration 
and  render  the  refponfes  of  the  divinity;  and  that  the  fecurity  of  the 
prophet  fhould  be  provided  for  by  a  frame  placed  over  the  chafm, 
through  which  the  maddening  vapor  might  be  inhaled  with  fafety. 
A  virgin  was  preferred  for  the  facred  office ;  and  the  frame  was 
made  refting  on  three  feet,  and  thence  called  a  tripod;  the  origin, 
fays  the  hiftorian  juft  mentioned,  of  that  favorite  form  which  was 
afterward  given  to  fuch  various  uteniils  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans. 
On  this  frame  the  prophetefs,  who,  from  fome  circumftance  not  now 
certainly  known,  acquired  the  title  of  Pythia  or  Pythonefs,  mounted 
when  there  was  occafion  to  exercife  her  function  of  revealing  the  will 
of  the  divinity.  The  importance  of  the  oracle  being  increafed  by 
this  interference  of  public  authority,  a  farther  eftablifhment  became 
neceflary.  A  rude  temple  was  built  over  the  cavern,  priefts  were  ap- 
pointed, ceremonies  were  prefcribed,  facrifices  were  performed.  A 
revenue  now  was  neceflary.  All  therefore  who  would  confult  the 
oracle  henceforward,  muft  come  with  offerings  in  their  hands.  The 
reputation  of  the  place  no  longer  then  depended  limply  on  the  fuper- 
ftition  of  the  people  :  the  intereft  of  the  priefts  became  its  guardian. 
Hence,  according  to  Hardion's  very  probable  conjecture,  the  change  Dfr 
of  divinities  fuppofed   to  prefide  at  Delphi.     The  profits  produced    ''Oracle   de 

Dclphes. 

by  the  prophetical  abilities  of  the  goddefs  Earth  beginning  to  fail,  it   Mem.  dei'A- 
was  afferted  that  the  god  Neptune   had  affociated   himfelf  with  her  fcrjp.  " 
in  the  oracle.     After  this  the  goddefs  Themis  was  faid  to  have  fuc-   Paufstn-  L  x- 

b  c.  5. 

ceeded  her  mother  Earth  in  the  inheritance.     Still  new  incentives  to    jEfctyl.  Eu- 
public  credulity  and  curiofity  became  neceflary.    If  the  attempt  to  lift 
fact  from  fable  may  in  any  cafe  be  indulged  to  the  hiftorian,  the  hymn 

to 


134  HISTORY    OF    GREECE, 

CHAP.  iv.  to  Apollo,  tranfmitted  to  us  as  the  compofition  of  Homer,  feems  to 
sect.  ii.  0ffer  f0  probable  an  account  of  the  next  and  final  change  in  the  pro- 
perty of  this  celebrated  place,  that  it  may  be  permitted  to  introduce 
it  here. 

Apollo  was  a  deity  of  great  reputation  in  the  iflands  and  in  Afia 
Minor,  but  hitherto  of  little  fame  on  the  continent  of  Greece,  when 
a  veflel  from  Gnoflus  in  Crete  came  to  the  port  of  CrifTa ;  and  the 
crew  landing  proceeded  immediately  up  the  neighboring  mountain 
Parnaflus  to  Delphi.  Prefently  a  wonderful  flory  was  circulated, 
'  That  this  veflel,  being  bound  to  Pylos  on  the  coaft  of  MefTenia, 

*  had  been  forced  by  a  preternatural  power  beyond  that  port ;  and, 

*  while  the  crew,  in  aftonifhment,  were  perfectly  paflive,  had  been 

*  conducted  with  furprizing  exactnefs  and  expedition  to  CrifTa  :   that 

*  a  dolphin  of  uncommon  magnitude  had  accompanied  the  veflel,  ap- 
'  parently  with  authority,  and,  on  their  arrival  at  CrifTa,  difcovered 

*  himfelf  to  the  crew  to  be  the  great  and  beneficent  god  Apollo ;  or- 
'  dering  them  at  the  fame  time  to  follow  him  to  Delphi,  where 
'  they  fhould  become  his  priefts.'  The  project  fucceeded  beyond  ex- 
pectation. Sacrifices  and  petitions  to  Themis  and  Neptune  had 
plainly  for  fome  time  been  wrong  :  Apollo  was  now  the  prefiding 
power  of  the  place,  and  under  this  god,  through  the  fkill  of  his 
new  minifters  (for  Crete,  as  we  have  feen,  was  earlier  civilized,  and 
had  probably  more  intercourfe  with  Egypt  than  the  reft  of  Greece) 
the  oracle  recovered  and  increafed  its  reputation.  Delphi,  which 
had  the  advantage  of  being  really  near  the  center  of  Greece,  was  re- 
ported to  be  the  center  of  the  world  ;  miracles  were  invented  to 
prove  fo  important  a  circumftance,  and  Navel  of  the  Earth  was 
among  the  titles  which  it  acquired  *.  Perhaps  at  this  time  the 
Pythian  games  had  their  origin  in  the  prize  offered  for  a  hymn  in 
honor  of  Apollo,  to  be  performed  by  the  voice  accompanied  by  the 

Paufan.  l.  x.  cithara.     The  firft  victor,  Paufanias  informs  us,  was  a  Cretan.     It 


c-7 


*  Strabo,  1.  ix.  p.  419.     Mr.  Bryant  has  accounted  for  this  title  ingenioufly,  and  perhaps 
juftly,  in  his  Analyfis  of  Ancient  Mythology,  vol.  i.  p.  240. 

was 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE,  135 

was  not  till  Ion?  after  that  athletic  exercifes  and  chariot-races  were  CHAP.  IV. 

introduced  in  imitation  of  the  Olympian.     But  Delphi  became  early  SECT.  II. 
a  coniiderable  town.    Situate  as  it  was  among  barren  mountain-crags, 

the  rich  vale  of  Criffa  was  at  hand  for  its  fupply ;   the  Bceotian  plain  Wheler's 

r        t-n  r    \       r  i        Journey  into 

was  not  far  diftant,  and  the  neighbourhood  of  the  iea  was  a  great  ad-    Greece,  b.iv. 
ditional  convenience.      Before  Homer's  time,  if  we  may  credit  the   p"  3' 
hymn  to  Apollo,  the  temple  of  that  deity  was   built  of  (tone  with 
fome  magnificence.     The  increaling  importance  of  the  oracle  brought 
it,  probably  foon  after  Homer's  age,   under  the  particular  protection 
of  the  Amphi&yonic    council ;   an   institution  of  which  an   account 
will  prefently  be  given.     But  the  Dorian  conqueft  feems  to  have  been 
the  fortunate  circumftance  that  principally  fpred  its  fame  and  inlarged 
its  influence;   which  quickly  fo  extended,   that  nothing  of  moment 
within   Greece  was  undertaken  by  dates,  or  even  by  private  perfons 
who  could  afford  the  expence,  without  firft  confulting  the  oracle  of 
Delphi;  particularly  in  circumftances  of  doubt,  anxiety,  and  difrrefs, 
Delphi  was  the  refuge.      A  prefent  upon  thefe  occafions  was  always 
neceffary  ;  and  princes  and  opulent  perfons  endeavored  to  conciliate 
the  favor  of  the  deity  by  offerings  of  great  value.     Afterward  vanity 
came  in  aid  to  fuperftition  in  bringing  riches  to  the  temple.     The 
names  of  thole  who  made  coniiderable  prefents  were  always  regiftered; 
and  when  ftatues,  tripods,  or  other  ornaments  of  valuable  materials 
or  elegant  workmanlhip  were  given,  they  were  publicly  exhibited  in 
honor  of  the  donor.     The  prophetical  bufinefs  was  generally  con- 
ducted with   great  caution  and  judgement,  and  we  are  not  without 
good  information,  fcattered  in  different  ancient  authors,  of  the  man- 
ner of  it.     The  Pythonefs  was  chofen  from  among  mountain  cot- 
tagers, the  moft  unacquainted  with  mankind  that  could  be  found. 
It  was  always  required  that  fhe  fliould  be  a  virgin,  and  originally  (he   DJbdor,  Sic. 
was  taken   very  young.     The  purity  of  virgin  innocence,  to  which 
the  Greeks   always   attached  an  idea  of  myfterious  fanctity,   made  a 
girl  moft  fit,    in  vulgar  opinion,    to   receive    the  influence  of   the 
god;  and  ignorance,  which  evinced  purity  of  mind,   was  at  the  fame 

time 


i$6  HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

chap.  IV.    tjme  very  commodious  for  the  purpofes  of  the  priefls.     Once  ap- 

SECi.  ii.     pointed  flie  was  never  to  quit  the  temple.     But  unfortunately  it  hap- 

Diod.    Sic.      pened  that  one  Pythonefs  made  her  efcape  :   her  Angular  beauty  ina- 

1.  XVI.  c.  26.  .  l  °  J 

mored  a  young  Theffalian,  who  fucceeded  in  the  hazardous  attempt 
to  carry  her  off.  After  this  it  was  decreed  that  no  Pythonefs  mould 
be  appointed  under  fifty  years  of  age  •  but  that  in  iimplicity  fhe  fhould 
ftill  be  the  neareft  poflible  to  a  child ;  and  that  even  the  drefs  peculiar 
to  girls  fhould  be  rreferved  to  her.  The  office  of  Pythonefs  appears 
not  to  have  been  defirable.  Either  the  emanation  from  the  cavern, 
or  fome  art  of  the  managers,  threw  her  into  real  convulfions.  Priefls 
intitled  prophets  led  her  to  the  facred  tripod,  force  being  often  ne- 
ceffary  for  that  purpofe,  and  held  her  on  it  till  her  phrenzy  rofe  to 
whatever   pitch   was   in   their  judgement  rnoft.  fit  for   the  occaiion. 

Plutarch,  de     There  are  accounts  of  PythonefTes  expiring  almoff.  immediately  after 
quitting  the  tripod,   and  even  on  the  tripod.     The  broken  accents 

Snabo,  1.  ix.  which  the  wretch  uttered  in  her  agony  were  collected  and  arranged 
by  the  prophets,  and  then  promulgated,  till  a  late  period  always  in 
verfe,  as  the  anfwer  of  the  god.  But  there  were  a  few  days  only  in 
the  year  on  which  the  god  might  be  interrogated  ;  and  thofe  the 
priefts  contrived  to  have  variable  at  their  difcretion.  Previous  facri- 
rices  were  moreover  neceffary,  and  if  the  victims  were  not  favorable 
the  Pythonefs  could  not  mount  the  tripod.  Thus  the  priefts  had  it 
always  in  their  power  to  deny  anfwers,  to  delay  anfwers,  or  to  give 
anfwers  direct,  dubious,  or  unintelligible,  as  they  judged  mofl  ad- 
vantageous for  the  credit  of  the  oracle.  With  frequent  opportuni- 
ties therefore  of  arrogating  the  merit  of  true  prophecy,  the  oracle 
avoided  all  rilk  of  being  convicted  of  falfe ;  tho  fuch  misfortune 
happened  to  many  oracles  lefs  ably  conducted,  to  the  no  fmall  ad- 
vantage of  Delphi  j  which  thence  acquired  the  reputation,  delivered 

Su-abo,  1.  ix.   to  us  in  words  not  advantageous  to  the  general  character  of  thofe 

p>  4I9'  fixed  feats  of  prophecy,  of  being  the  leafl  fallacious  of  all  oracles. 

But  if  princes  or  great  men  applied  in  a  proper  manner  for  the  fanc- 

tion 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  157 

tion  of  the  god  to  any  undertaking,  they  feldom  failed  to  receive  it  CHAP.  IV. 

in  direct  terms,  provided  the  reputation  of  the  oracle  for  truth  was  SECT.  II. 
not  liable  to  immediate  danger  from  the  event. 


SECTION     III. 

Of  the  Origin  and  Cotijlitntion  of  the  Council  of  Awphiclyons. 

IT  will  now  be  neceffary  again  to  revert  for  a  moment  to  the  fa- 
bulous  ages  for   the   origin   of  an  euablifhment  which  became  im- 
portant in   the  political  connection   of  the  Grecian    people;    much 
from  the  nature  of  its  conftitution,   but  ftill  more  through  its  charge 
over  that  celebrated  refidence  of  Apollo  of  which  an  account  has  juft 
been  given.     Among   the   dark  confufion  and  fanciful  falfehood  of 
ancient  tradition  we  rind  fome  affurance  that  there  were,  in  very  early 
times,  people  inhabiting  to  the  northward  of  mount  GZta,  and  along 
the  coaft  of  the  iEgean  fea  eaftward  as  far  as   the  Hellefpont,   more 
inlightened  than   the  fouthern  Greeks  ;  who  in  after  ages  acknow- 
leged  obligation  to   inftruclors  from   that  country  in   religion,   mo- 
rality,  legiflation,    and   their  vehicles  muiic   and   poetry.     We  may 
gather   alfo   that   the   numerous   barbarians  of   the   extenfive  inland 
country,  continually  harrafiing  the  more  civilized  inhabitants  of  the 
coaft,  drove  fome  to  feek  fecurer  fettlements  elfewhere  ;   and  by  pre- 
venting the  cultivation  of  the  arts  of  peace,  reduced  the  reft  to  be- 
come   barbarians    like    themfelves.      Greece    poflefled    advantageous 
barriers  again  ft  thofe  evils  in  its  feveral  ranges  of  almoft  impaffable 
mountains    ftretching    acrofs    the   country    from    fea    to    fea.     The 
fouthern  parts  therefore,   with  the  iflands,  afforded  refuge  for  thofe 
inhabitants  of  the  northern   coaft  who   had  means  of  tranfporting 
themfelves,  and  effects  to  fubfift  on  ;  and  Thrace,  as  we  have   al- 
ready obferved,   thus   fhared  with  Egypt  and   Phenicia  in   the  honor 
of  civilizing  Greece.     Thefl'aly,  however,  from  lying  more  expofed 
to  numerous  hords  of  barbarians,  as  well  as  from  the  fruitfulnefs  of 
its  foil,  fo  inviting  to  invaders,  was  in  elder  times  peculiarly  fubject 

T  /to 


138  HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  IV.  to  revolutions.  Yet,  among  the  uncertain  and  romantic  traditions 
SECT.  III.  remaining  to  us  concerning  this  country,  there  appears  foundation  to 
believe  that  it  was,  at  a  very  early  period,  governed  by  princes  more 
powerful  and  more  informed  than  their  cotemporaries  of  fouthern 
Greece.  Among  thefe  the  name  of  Deucalion  is  famous.  But  tho 
this  perfonage  on  many  accounts  excites  curiofity,  in  vain  would  hif- 
tory  inveftigate  the  events  of  his  reign.  His  fon  Amphictyon  has 
been  generally  reputed  the  author  of  the  renowned  inftitution  which 
always  bore  his  name.  Report  however  concerning  this  prince  alio 
is  too  vague  for  hiftory  to  follow  :  the  inftitution  itfelf  therefore  will 
alone  be  the  object  of  our  inquiry. 

Ages  before  letters  began  to  record  the  tranfactions  of  the  Greeks, 
a  regular  eftablifhment  had  been  made  of  an  affembly  of  deputies  from 
the  provinces  about  mount  CEta,  who  met  twice  yearly  in  a  temple 
dedicated  to  the  goddefs  Ceres  near  the  mouth  of  the  river  Afopus, 
at  that  pafs  of  Thermopylae  which  afterward  became  fo  famous.  The 
apparent  purpofe  of  the  inftitution  was  to  obviate  the  evils  daily 
arifing  from  the  fmall  extent  of  the  feveral  ftates,  continual  rapine, 
war,  and  bloodfhed  araon?  themfelves.  not  without  conftant  danger 
of  utter  ruin  from  foreign  barbarians.  The  bnlinefs  therefore  of  the 
affembly  was  to  decide  all  dilputes  between  the  flates  of  whofe  de- 
puties it  was  compofed  *,  and  to  concert  common  meafures  of  de- 
fence again  ft  foreign  enemies.  Thefe  ftates  are  faid  to  have  been  at 
firft  only  thofe  over  which  Deucalion  had  reigned  ;  comprehending 
however,  bellde  ThefTaly,  fome  provinces  fouthward  of  mount  CEta, 
Amphictyon,  fon  of  that  prince,  is  reported  to  have  added  Attica  to 
his  father's  dominions ;  and  from  him,  as  the  founder,  the  affembly 
at  Thermopylae  always  bore  the  name  of  Amphiclyonic,  and  the 
members  of  it  were  called  AmphicTyons  -j-.     But  the  people  of  the 

*  *A7roSTi|g>  Ta;  'AftpixTuonza?  oixa;  ocrai  word,  with  a  very  fmall  alteration,     Apfmiar, 

iri?.ts-i  7T<:J;  7ro*£K  fio-in.     Strabo,  1.  ix.  p.  420.  as  a  defcription  inftead  of  an  arbitrary  appelia- 

f   Such   appears   to  have  been  the  moll  re-  tion  of  the  perfons  who  compofed  the  affembly, 

ceived  opinion  of  the  mod  judicious  antiqua-  led  fome   to   fuppofe   that   this  was   the   true 

rians  among  the  ancients,    tho  it  was  not  un-  name.      See  Paufan.  1.  x.  c.  8. 
difputed.      The   obvious    application  of  the 

feveral 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  139 

feveral  ftates  which  fent  deputies,  are  faid  at  the  fame  time  to  have  QHAP.  IV. 
received  the  name  of  Hellenes  from  Hellen,  another  fon  of  Deucalion,  ^SJlI11' 
who  we  are  told  fucceeded  his  father  in  that  part  of  his  dominions 
which  lay  on  the  Theflalian  fide  of  mount  QEta.  This  name  in  pro- 
cefs  of  time  prevailed  fo  as  to  become  the  diftinguifhing  appellation 
of  the  Greeks  in  general ;  through  what  means  we  are  not  fatisfaclo- 
rily  informed  by  Grecian  writers,  but  apparently  nothing  contributed 
io  much  as  the  extenfive  reputation  and  influence  which  the  Am- 
phiclyonic  council  acquired.  For  at  an  era  far  beyond  the  reach  of 
connected  hiftory,  the  jurifdiction  of  this  aflembly  very  considerably 
exceeded  the  fuppofed  bounds  of  Deucalion's  kingdom.  Strabo  at- 
tributes the  regulations  which  became  the  bails  of  its  conftitution  to 
Acrifius  king  of  Argos,  grandfather  of  the  hero  Perfeus.  Indeed  he 
rejects  as  of  no  authority  all  accounts  of  the  aflembly  before  the  age 
of  that  prince,  declaring  pofitively  that  what  preceded  was  unknown*. 
The  conjectures  of  the  Grecian  chronologers,  with  which  however 
the  geographer  mows  himfelf  everywhere  little  fatisfied,  placed  Ani- 
phi£tyon  a  century  and  a  half  earlier  than  Acrilius.  Sir  Ifaac  Newton 
fuppofed  them  cotemporary,  and  about  a  century  older  than  the 
Trojan  war.  If  the  Englilh  philofopher  is  right  concerning  the 
chronology,  we  mull  add  the  fuppofition  of  a  league  between  the 
moll  powerful  prince  of  the  northern  and  the  moft.  powerful  prince 
of  the  fouthern  parts  of  Greece ;  and  this,  tho  we  have  no  authority 
for  it,  appears  the  moil:  probable  way  of  accounting  for  the  interfe- 
rence of  a  king  of  Argos,  not  mentioned  by  any  tradition  as  a  con- 
queror, in  the  regulation  of  an  aflembly  of  States  at  Thermopylae. 
In  Homer  we'find  no  mention  of  the  Amphictyonic  aflembly  :  but 
the  ready  acquiefcence  which  the  poet  afcribes  to  all  the  Grecian 
chiefs,  as  far  as  the  utmoft  bounds  of  Theflaly,  under  the  authority 
of  Agamemnon,  and  the  acknowlegement  even  of  the  proud  and 
powerful  Achilles  himfelf,  appear  flrongly  to  indicate  that  the  Argian 

*    Tot  notX-u    pin   ovv  a-yvourui*      Axpictos    d£  Tun   fAvriiMovsvopwu)/    9rgw70£    ctetra^ai    oqkIi   Ta    7T££j    tov; 

'Afj.q>iKTVMusj  x.  t.  A.     Strabo,  1.  ix.  p.  420. 

T  2  princes 


140 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


v^yn; 


CHAP.  IV.    princes  had,  through  fome  means,  from  of  old   maintained  an   in- 
SECT.  III.    fluence  among  the  northern  provinces.    It  was  ftill  a  very  early  period 
when  the  fupreme  direction  of  the   concerns  of  the  Delphian  oracle, 
and  of  the   treafures  which   the   fuperftirion  of  the   times  poured  in 
prefents   to   the  god   fuppofed  to  prefide  there,    was  fubmitted  to  the 
Amphictyons  ;   in  confequence  of  which   their  vernal  leflion  was  re- 
moved from  Thermopylae  to  Delphi,  and  ever  after  held  there.    With 
the  increafe  of  the   reputation  of  the  oracle,  the  importance  of  the 
Amphicfyonic   affembly   increafed ;    and   the   conqueft   of   Pelopon- 
nefus  by  the  Heracleids  very   greatly  extended  both.      For  the  Do- 
rians   being    an    Amphiclyonic    people,   as   it   was    termed,   all   the 
ftates  where    they   eftabliihed    their   power   became  alfo  Amphicly- 
onic.      But  Athens,   chief  of  the  Ionic   hord,  was  likewife  an  Am- 
phiclyonic  ftate.     All  ftates   of  Ionic  origin,   therefore,   derived  or 
claimed  thence  a  right  to  have  their  reprefentatives   in  the  council ; 
and  thus  it  feems  to  have  been  that  the  name  Hellenes  obtained  uni- 
verfal  acceptation  as  the  general  name  of  all  the  Greeks,  to  the  exclu- 
fion  of  the  Macedonians  and  Epirots  *.     The  Delphian  people  were, 
however,  ftill  acknowleged   the  legal  pofTefibrs  of  the  temple;   they 
acquired  a  degree  of  facrednefs  of  character  through  the  extreme  ve- 
neration in  which  it  was  fo  widely  held;   the  whole  extent  of  mount 
Parnaffus  obtaining  at  length  the  reputation  of  facred  ground  ;   and 
the   Delphians  were  allowed   large  privileges  as   the  priefts,   the  at- 


Strabo,  1.  ix 
p.  417. 


*  This  feems  fupported  by  Homer's  ufe  of 
the  name.  He  is  evidently  always  at  a  lofs 
for  one  collective  appellation  for  the  Greeks. 
But  in  the  37th  line  of  his  catalogue,  he  plainly 
means  to  include  the  whole  nation  under  the 
two  names  Panhellenes  and  Achaioi; 
the  former  feemingly  intended  for  the  northern 
Greeks,  the  latter  for  the  fouthern.  Thus  alfo 
in  the  Odyfl'ee  he  apparently  intends  the  northern 
divifion  of  the  country  by  the  name  Hellas, 
and  the  fouthern  by  the  name  Arcos  (1),  where 
under  the  two  he  means  evidently  to  include 

(i)  OdylT.  i.  344.  iv.  yi.6.  &816.  &  xv.  80. 


the  whole  of  Greece.  The  appellation  Da- 
naoi  appears  to  mark  the  fouthern  Greeks 
only,  or  however  chiefly.  Strabo  indeed  tells 
us  (z),  that  Argos  was  anciently  the  name  of 
all  Pelopor.ncfus  ;  that  afterward  the  epithet 
Achaic  ufed  by  Homer,  was  added  from  the 
Phthiot  Achaians,  who  came  into  the  penin- 
fula  with  Pelops,  and  fettled  in  Laconia  ;  and 
that  Danai  was  a  name  which  the  Peloponnefian 
Pelafgians  derived  from  the  Egyptian  Da- 
naus. 


(z)  1.  vii.  p.  365.  1.  viii.  p.  371. 


tendants, 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  141 

tendants,  and  as  it  were  the  family  of  Apollo.  But  it  is  not  im-  CHAP.  IV. 
probable  that  the  very  reputation  of  their  oracle  became  a  burthen  to  SECT.  III. 
them  ;  that  the  numbers  and  power  of  thofe  who  came  to  confult  it 
were  too  great  for  the  Delphians  to  preserve  the  fway  neceffary  for 
deciding  controversies,  and  regulating  proceedings  ;  that  even  the 
riches  continually  increasing  under  their  care,  ferved  but  to  make  their 
Situation  the  more  alarming ;  and  thus,  if  they  did  not  even  defire  it, 
they  at  leaSt  acquiefced  under  the  interposition  of  So  refpeclable  an 
authority  as  that  of  the  Amphiclyonic  council.  It  appears  too,  that 
the  power  thus  acquired  by  that  aSfembly  over  everything  relative  to 
the  moft  interesting  point  of  Grecian  fuperftition,  was  the  circum- 
stance which  principally  contributed  to  increafe  its  influence,  to  make 
it  an  object  for  every  State  to  have  its  reprefentative  among  the  mem- 
bers, and  to  raife  it  to  be  what  the  great  Athenian  orator  calls  it,  the 
general  council  of  the  Greeks. 

But  the  Amphiclyonic  affembly,  obfcure  in  its  origin  through  ex- 
treme antiquity,  is  not  accurately  known  to  us  even  in  thofe  ages 
from  which  we  might  expect  accurate  information.  What  the  mo  ft 
diligent  and  judicious  modern  writers  have  been  able  to  collect  on 
beft  authority  concerning  it,  is  principally  this*.  Every  independent 
Grecian  irate,  with  perhaps  fome  few  occafional  exceptions  only,  had 
a  right  either  of  itfelf,  or  in  conjunction  with  one  or  more  other 
ftates,  to  fend  two  deputies  or  reprefentatives.  One  of  thele,  with 
the  title  of  Pylagoras,  whofe  office  was  to  tranfadt  the  civil  buiinefs 
or  his  conftituents,  was  elected  by  the  fuffrages  of  his  fellow-citizens : 
the  other,  from  his  particular  privilege  of  fuperintending  religion 
and  its  rites,  called  hieromnemon,  was  appointed  by  lot.  Each  had 
an  equal  vote  on  every  occafion  in  which  the  authority  of  the  council 
was  exerted  ;  and  no  Amphidtyon  derived  any  legal  privilege  or  au- 

*  What  remains  from  ancient  authors  upon  Difcourfe  to  his  Hiflory  of  Philip  of  Macedon, 
the  fubjeft  has  been  largely  collected  by  Dean  has  digefted  and  compared  whatever  has  been 
Prideaux,  in  his  Treatife  on  the  Oxford  tranfmitted  by  ancient,  and  imagined  by  mo- 
Marbles.      Dr.    Leland,  in    the   preliminary  dern,  writers  about  it. 

thority 


i42  HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  IV.  thority  from  the  rank  or  eftimation  which  his  conflituents  held 
SECT.  III.  among  the  Grecian  ftates,  but  all  were  properly  peers.  One  hierom- 
nemon  prefided ;  and  it  feems  probable  that  the  hieromnemon  of 
every  date  exercifed  this  prefidency  in  rotation.  The  meeting  was 
opened  with  folemn  facrifices ;  at  Thermopvlae  to  Ceres  ;  at  Delphi 
to  Apollo,  Diana,  Latona,  and  Minerva.  The  nature  of  the  juris- 
diction of  the  affembly,  and  the  extent  of  its  power,  may  be  in  a  great 
meafure  gathered  from  the  oath  taken  by  every  member,  which  has, 
perhaps  the  whole,  but  at  lead  a  large  part  and  probably  the  mod. 
important,  been  preferved  in  an  oration  of  iEfchines.  It  runs  thus  : 
jEfchin.Orat.   <  \  fwear  that  I  will  never  fubvert  anv  Amphiftyonic  city  :   I  will 

dcfallaLegat.  --•...  .   .         .        •    "  J 

*  never  ltop  the  courles  of  their  water  either  in  war  or  peace.  If  any 
\  fuch  outrages  be  attempted,   I  will  oppofe  them  by  force  of  arms, 

*  and  deftroy  thofe  cities  which  are  guilty  of  fuch  attempts.      If  any 

*  devaluations  be  committed  in  the  territory  of  the  god,  if  any  fhall 

*  be  privy  to  fuch  offence,  or  entertain  any  defign  againft  the  temple, 
'  I  will  ufe  my  hands,  my  feet,  my  whole  force,  to  bring  the  offend- 
'"  ing  party  to  condign  punithment.'  An  awful  imprecation  was  fub- 
joined,   well  imagined  to  infufe  a  dread  of  the  guilt  of  perjury  :   '  If 

*  any  fhall  violate  any  part  of  this  folemn  ingagement,  whether  city, 
'  private  perlon,  or  nation,  may  fuch  violators  be  obnoxious  to  the 
'  vengeance  of  Apollo,  Diana,  Latona,  and  Minerva  the  provident. 
'  May  their  land  never  produce  its  fruits  :  May  their  women  never 
'  bring  forth  children  of  the  fame  nature  with  the  parents,   but  ofF-» 

*  fpring  unnatural  and  monftrous :  May  they  be  forever  defeated  in 
'  war,  in  judicial  controverfies,  and  in  all  civil  tranfadtions  ;  and 
'  may  their  families  and  their  whole  race  be  utterly  deftroyed  :   May 

*  they  never  offer  an  acceptable  facrifice  to  Apollo,  Diana,  Latona,  and 
'  Minerva  the  provident,   but  may  all  their  facred  rites  be  forever  re- 

*  je<fted.'  The  firft  part  of  this  oath  is  directed  to  what  was  really 
the  moft  important  bufinefs  of  the  affembly,  and  which  feems  to 
have  been  with  great  wifdom  and  humanity  propofed  as  the  principal 
end  of  the  inftitution,  the  eftablifhment  and  fupport  of  a  kind  of  law 

of 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  143 

of  nations  among  the  Greeks,  that  might  check  the  violence  of  war  CHAP.  iv. 
among  themfelves,  and  finally  prevent  thofe  horrors,  that  extremity  SECT.  III. 
of  miiery,  which  the  barbarity  of  elder  times  ufually  made  the  lot 
of  the  vanquished.  Perhaps  the  view  of  the  founders  went  yet  far- 
ther; to  bring  all  difputes  between  Amphiclyonic  ftates  before  this 
tribunal,  and  totally  to  flop  war  among  them,  or  to  puniSh  it  as  pri- 
vate war  and  rebellion.  To  this  however,  amid  the  jealous  claims 
of  every  Grecian  city  to  abfolute  independency,  the  Amphiclyonic 
council  was  never  equal.  Revolutions  in  early  times  reduced  it  to 
obfcurity :  and  when  afterward  the  increafing  fame  of  the  Delphian 
oracle,  under  its  protection,  gave  it  new  confequence,  its  members 
wifely  avoided  the  attempt  to  exert  an  authority  which  they  wanted 
power  effectually  to  fupport.  Contefls  between  States  were,  however, 
always  efleemed  proper  objects  of  its  jufifdicliorr:  but  the  fuperin- 
tendency  of  the  religion  of  the  Greek  nation  was  more  particularly 
its  office.  Its  authority  to  fine  any  Amphiclyonic  State,  and,  in  cafe 
of  non-compliance  with  injunctions,  even  to  levy  forces,  and  to  make 
war  on  the  diibbedient,  were  allowed.  Of  difputes  between  private 
perfons  it  never  condefcended  to  take  cognifance.  Its  proceedings 
were  generally  conducted  with  prudence  and  dignity  ;  and  its  de- 
crees, notwithstanding  its  deficiency  of  power,  were  always  highly 
reipecled. 

SECTION     IV. 

Early  DiJJentions  of  the  Heracleid  Princes.  Vnfettled  State  of  Pelo- 
ponnefus.  Origin  of  the  Grecian  Games.  Injlitution  of  the  Olympic 
Fe/iival  by  Ipbitus  king  of  E lis. 

THE  Return  of  the  Heracleids,  as  the  Dorian  conquefl  is    SECT..IW 
commonly  termed  by  Grecian  writers,  produced  a  revolution  in  Pe- 
loponnefus  fo  complete  that,  except  in  the  rugged  province  of  Arca- 
dia, nothing  remained  unaltered.     The  Argian  princes  of  the  family 
of  Pelops  had  acquired  fuch  fuperior  power,  and  a  legal  preeminence 

which 


14+  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  IV.  which  they  claimed  feems  to  have  been  fo  generally  admitted, 
SECT.  IV.  that  under  them  one  government  in  fbme  degree  pervaded  the 
peninfula :  the  administration  of  law  gained  confiftency,  civility 
advanced,  and  arts  began  to  {how  themfelves.  But  the  Dorian 
conqueft  quickly  reduced  all  to  that  ruder  irate  in  which  the 
new  lords  of  the  country  had  lived  among  their  native  mountains : 
arts  and  civility  fled  with  the  old  inhabitants  to  flourifh  in  another 
foil.  The  firft  care  of  the  conquering  chiefs  was  to  fecure  their  ac- 
quifitions  againft  any  attempts  of  the  former  poflefibrs  :  their  next 
feems  to  have  been  to  prevent  any  one  among  themfelves  from  ac- 
quiring a  fuperiority  above  the  reft.  Thus  probably  they  hoped  to 
provide  againft  the  evils  equally  of  foreign  invafion  and  of  domeftic 
iealoufy.      But  in  the  very  partition  of  the  country,  we  are  told,  a 

Paufan.  1.  iv.   J  ■'  ... 

c.  3.  caufe  of  future  difcord  arofe.      Ariftodemus  died.     His  followers,   to 

C>L  °  '   whom  Laconia  was  allotted,  thought  they  had  an  equal  claim  to  the 

fairer  portion  of  MefTenia,  a  lefs  mountainous  and  more  generally 
fruitful  country,  of  which  they  were  deprived  only  through  the  in- 
ability of  their  infant  fovereigns,  fons  of  their  deceafed  leader,  to 
affert  their  rights.  The  boundaries  alfo  of  the  feveral  allotments 
were,  in  the  hafte  of  divifion,  not  everywhere  accurately  afcertained, 
and  early  difputes  about  thefe  led  to  hoftilities.  Within  the  feveral 
o-overnments  moreover,  for  many  years  after  fo  violent  a  revolution, 
the  unfettled  ftate  of  things  would  often  call  for  the  ftrong  arm  of 
power  to  reprefs  outrage  and  inforce  order.  Violence  would  arife 
c.  1"?  '  fometimes   on  the   part   of  the  princes ;   and   a  conquering  people, 

Plutarch.  rude,  but  highfpirited,  was  little  difpofed  to  admit  patiently  any 
exertion  of  authority  not  perfectly  warranted  by  eftablimed  cuftom. 
Thus,  in  every  ftate,  internal  diffenfions  were  feldom  interrupted  but 
by  external  war  :  and  any  long  intermifhon  of  this  the  fituation  of 
Arcadia  fufhced  to  prevent.  Sheltered  by  their  mountains  in  then- 
property  and  their  freedom,  the  Arcadians,  bordering  upon  all,  were 
the  natural  enemies  of  all.  Peloponnefus  thus  was  relapfing  into  a 
ftate  of  anarchy  and  barbarifm  like  that  in  which  it  had  exifted  be- 
fore Pelops  and  Hercules. 

From 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  145 

From  very  early  times  it  had  been  cuftomary  among  the  Greeks    CHAP.  iv. 
to  hold  numerous  meetings  for  purpofes  of  feftivity  and  fociul  amufe-    SECT.  IV. 
ment.      A  foot-race,  a  w  refiling-match,  or  fome  other  rude  trial  of 
bodily   firength  and  activity  formed   originally  the  principal  enter- 
tainment ;  fo  far  only  perhaps  more  refpectable  in  its  kind  than  our 
country  wakes,  as  it  had  more  immediate   reference  to  that  almofi: 
ceafelefs  warfare  which  prevailed  in   elder  Greece.      It  was  probably 
the  connection  of  thefe  games  with  the  warlike  character  that  occa-   Uiad.  I.  xxiii. 
fioned  their  introduction  at  funerals  in  honor  of  the  dead;   a  cuftom   ojyiU.xxiv. 
which,  we  learn  from  Homer,   was  in  his   time  ancient.      But  all   v- 8'- 
the  violence  of  the  early  ages  was  not  able  to  reprefs  that  elegance  of 
imagination   which   feems  congenial   to    Greece.     Very   anciently  a 
contention  for  a  prize  in  poetry  and  mufic  was  a  favorite  entertain- 
ment of  the  Grecian   people ;  and  when  connected,   as  it  often  was, 
with   fome  ceremony  of  religion,  drew  together  large  aflemblies  of 
both  fexes*.     A  feftival  of  this  kind  in  the  little  ifland  of  Delos,  at   Hymn,  ad 

Apoll.   apud 

which  Homer  aflified,  appears  to  have  occafioned  a  numerous  con-  Thucyd. l.iii. 
courfe  from  different  parts  by  fea ;  and  Hefiod  informs  us  of  a  fplen-  Hefiod.  Op. 
did  meeting;  for  the  celebration  of  various  games  at  Chalcis  in  Eu-   &  Dl'  '* "' 

<->  °  v.  272. 

bcea,  where  himlelf  obtained   the  prize  for  poetry  and  fong.     The 
conteft   in   mufic    and  poetry  feems   early   to  have  been  particularly 
connected  with  the  worfhip  of  Apollo.     When  this  was  carried  from 
the  iflands  of  the  ^Egean  to  Delphi,  a  prize  for  poetry  was  inftituted  ; 
whence  arofe  the  Pythian  games.     But  it  appears  from  Homer  that   0(i>'ff>  l«  vi"' 
games,  in  which  athletic  exercifes  and  mufic  and  dancing  were  alter- 
nately introduced,    made   a  common  amufement   of   the  courts   of 
princes ;  and  before  his  time  the  manner  of  conducting  them  was  fo 
far  reduced  to  a  fyftem,  that  public  judges  of  the  games  are  men-   Odyfl".  1.  viii. 
tioned  as   a  kind  of  eftablilhed  magiftrate.     The  games,  thus  im-   V" 2^' 
proved,  greatly  refembled  the  tilts  and  tournaments  of  the  ages  of 

E^.^i^itww;   IaofK  iyEf/Oorrai  'Oi  $(  at  t!svy^u.y\ri  te  y.a.)  hyyrfcyZ  y.a.)  ioie>> 

A-.tc/T;  &vj  tsauoiatn  y.a.)  alJoitJS  aAo^t.icrii'.  My/iadfiitcn,  Ticnrwaiv  orat  rwuyrtu  ayutx'. 

Hymn,  ad  Apoll.  ap.  Thucyd.  1.  iii.  c.  104. 


U  chival 


7- 


i46  II  I  S  T  O  R  Y     O  F    G  R  E  E  C  E. 

CHAP.  IV.    chivalry.     Men  of  high  rank  only  prefumed  to  ingage  in  them  ;   but 
SECT.  IV.     a  ]arge  concourfe  of  all  orders  attended  as   fpectators :  and  to  keep 
regularity  among  thefe  was  perhaps   the  mod  neceflary  office  of  the 
judges.      But  the  mo  ft  folemn  meetings,  and  which  drew  together 
perfons  of  diftinguithed  rank  and  character,  often  from  diftant  parts, 
were  at  the  funerals  of  eminent  men.     The  paramount  fovereigns  of 
Peloponnefus   themfelves  did   not  difdain   to   attend  thefe*;    which 
were  celebrated  with  every  circumftance  of  magnificence  and  fplen- 
dor  that  the  age  could  afford.     The  funeral  of  Patroclus,  defcribed 
in  the   Iliad,   may  indeed   be  confidered   as  an  example  of  what  the 
poet  could   imagine   moft  complete.     The  games,  in  which  prizes 
were  there  contended  for,  were  the  chariot-race,  the  foot-race,   box- 
ing, wreftling,  throwing   the   quoit  and   the  javelin,   fhooting  with 
the   bow,  and  fencing  with  the   fpear.     And  in   times    when   none 
could  be  rich  or  powerful  but  the  ftrong  and  active,  expert  at  martial 
Iliad,  l.  xxiii.  exercifes,  all  thofe  trials  of  fkill  appear  to  have  been  efteemed  equally 
cxiyk'  i.  viii.   becoming   men   of  the   higheft   rank:   tho   it   may  feem,  from   the 
I'^oufa'    prizes  offered  and  the  perfons  contending  at  the  funeral  of  Patroclus, 
the  poet  himfelf  faw  in   the  game  of  the  casftus  fome  incongruity 
with  exalted  characters. 
Weft  on  the  Traditions   are  preferved   that    Eleia  in    Peloponnefus   had   been, 

oirnes.10  upon  various  great  occafions,   the  fcene  of  athletic  games  celebrated 

with  more  than  ordinary  pomp  by  affemblies  of  chiefs  from  different 
Iliad.  1,  xi.  parts  of  Greece.  Homer  mentions  fuch  at  Elis  under  king  Augeas, 
Iliad 7'l  ii  cotemporary  with  Hercules,  and  grandfather  of  one  of  the  chiefs 
v-  6z3-  who  commanded  the  Eleian  troops  in  the  Trojan  war ;  and  again  at 

Iliad.  1.  xxiii.  Buprafium  in  Eleia,  for  the  funeral  of  Amarynceus,  while  Neftor 
was  yet  in  the  vigor  of  youth.  But  it  does  not  at  all  appear  from 
Homer  that  in  his  time,  or  ever  before  him,  any  periodical  feftival 
was  eftablifhed  like  that  which  afterward  became  fo  famous  under 
the  title  of  the  Olympiad    or  the    Olympian    conteft,    or,  as    our 

*  Agamemnon  fpeaks  of   having  frequently  Hpwsw,  ote  xst  wot',  ctnolpfay.ttzv  (Saj-iXiicf, 

attended  fuch  meetings  :  Zutuvtlxi  ts  nrA,  y.x)  imrritorrat  a.zb'hu. 

"llh,  fAi  moKsai  rafw  oltfyuv  afltGfawu,  Odyfl.  1.  xxiv.  v.  8". 

writers, 


v.  62 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  147 

writers,  translating  the  Latin  phrafe,  have  commonly  termed  it,  the    CHAP.  IV. 
Olympic  games.      On  the  contrary,  every  mention  of  fuch  games  in    st     r'  IV" 
his  extant  works  {hows  them   to  have  been  only  occasional  folemni- 
ties  ;  and  Strabo  has  remarked  that  they  were  diftinguifhed  by  a  cha-   Straboj  1.  viil. 
racteriflical  difference  from  the  Olympian.    In  thefe  the  honor  de-   p' j55' 
rived  from  receiving  publicly  a  crown  or  chaplet,  formed  of  a  branch 
of  oleafler,    was  the  only   reward  of  the   victor  :    but  in    Homer's 
games  the  prizes  were  not  fo  properly  honorary  as  intrinlically  va- 
luable; and  the  value  was  often  very  coniiderable.     After  Homer's 
age,  apparently  in   confequence  of  the  long  troubles   infuing  from 
the  Dorian  conqueit,  extenfive  migrations  and  unceaiing   holtilities, 
even  the  memory  of  the  ancient  games  was  nearly  loft.     In  this  fea-     ^ 
fon  of  turbulence   and   returning  barbarifm,   Iphitus,  a   descendant,    Paufan.  1. v. 
probably  grandfon  of  Oxylus  (tho  fo  totally  the  means  of  tranfmit-    Newton's 
ting  information  to  posterity  were  wanting  that  we  have  no  an1  u  ranee   Paufen.  ibid, 
even  of  his  father's   name)   fucceeded  to  the  throne  of  Elis.     This 
prince  was  of  a   genius  that  might  have  produced  a  more  brilliant 
character   in  a  more  inlightened  age,  but  which  was  perhaps  more 
beneficial  to  mankind  in  the  rough  times  in  which  he  lived.     Active 
and  enterprizing,  but  not  by  inclination  a  warrior,  he  was   anxious 
to  find  a  remedy  for  the  diforderly  fituation  of  his  country,  and  to 
reftore  that  more  improved  fhte  of  things  which,   by  the  accounts  of 
ancient  people,  once  had  being  there,   but  now  was  only  to  be  found 
beyond   the   bounds   of  Peloponnefus.     Among  all  the  violences  of 
domeftic  feuds  and  foreign  wars,  fuperftition  ftill  maintained  its  do- 
minion undiminifhed  over  the  minds  of  the  Peloponnefian  Dorians  : 
the  oracle  of  Delphi  was  held   in  no  lefs  reverence  by  them  than  by 
their  forefathers   among   the   crags    of   Parnafius.      To   that    oracle 
therefore  Iphitus  looked  for   fupport  in  the  project  which  he  medi- 
tated.    He  lent  a  folemn  embafly  to  Delphi  to  fupplicate  informa- 
tion from  the  deity  of  the  place,  '  Plow  the  anger  of  the  gods,  which 
'  threatened  total  deftruction  to  Peloponnefus  through  endlefs  hofti- 
'  lities  among  its  people,  might  be  averted  ?'     He  received  for  an- 
il 2  fwer, 


148  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  IV.    fWer,  what  himfelf,  as  a  judicious  critic  has  obferved,  had  probably 
SECT.  iv.    fuggefted,  «  That  the  Olympic  feftival   mud    be  reflored  j  for  the 
Weft  on  the     «  neglect  of  that  folemnity  had  brought  on  the  Greeks  the  indigna- 
Games.  '  tion  of  the  god  Jupiter,  to  whom  it  was  dedicated,  and  of  the  hero 

'  Hercules,  by  whom  it  had  been  inftituted  :  and  that  a  ceffaiion  of 
'  arms  muft  therefore  immediately  be  proclaimed  for  all  cities  de- 
'  firous  of  partaking  in  it.'  This  refponfe  of  the  god  was  of  courfe 
promulgated  throughout  Greece  ;  and  Iphitus,  in  obedience  to  it, 
caufed  the  armiftice  to  be  proclaimed.  But  the  other  Peloponne- 
fians, full  of  refpect  for  the  authority  of  the  oracle,  yet  uneafy  at  the 
afcendant  thus  aflumed  by  the  Eleians,  fent  a  common  deputation  to 
Delphi  to  inquire  concerning  the  authenticity  of  the  divine  mandate 
reported  to  them.  The  Pythonefs  however,  feldom  averfe  to  autho- 
rize the  fchemes  of  kings  and  legiflators,  adhered  to  her  former  an- 
fwer ;  and  commanded    the  Peloponnefians  '  to  fubmit  to  the  direc- 

i. 

'  tions   and  authority  of  the  Eleians  in  ordering  and  eftablifhing  the 
'  ancient  laws  and  cuftoms  of  their  forefathers.' 

Supported  thus  by  the  oracle,  and  incouraged  by  the  ready  fub- 
miffion  of  all  the  Peloponnefians  to  it,  Jphitus  proceeded  to  model 
his  inftitution.  Jupiter,  the  chief  of  the  gods,  being  now  the  ac- 
knowleged  patron  of  the  plan,  and  the  prince  himfelf,  under  Apollo, 
the  promulgator  of  his  will,  it  was  ordained  that  a  feftival  mould  be 
held  at  the  temple  of  Jupiter  at  Olympia,  near  the  town  of  Pifa  in 
Eleia,  free  for  all  Greeks  to  partake  in,  and  that  it  fhould  be  re- 
peated at  the  termination  of  every  fourth  year:  that  this  feftival 
fhould  confift  in  folemn  facrifices  to  Jupiter  and  Hercules,  and  in 
games  celebrated  in  honor  of  them  :  and  as  wars  might  often  prevent 
not  only  individuals  but  whole  ftates  from  partaking  in  the  benefits 
with  which  the  gods  would  reward  thole  who  properly  fhared  in  the 
folemnity,  it  was  ordained,  under  the  fame  authority,  that  an  ar- 
miftice mould  take  place  throughout  Greece  for  fome  time  before 
the  commencement  of  the  feftival,  and  continue  for  fome  time  after 
its  conclufion.     For  his  own  people,  the  Eleians,  Iphitus  procured 

an 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  149 

an  advantage  never  perhaps  injoyed,  at  leaft  in  equal  extent,  by  any    CHAP.  IV. 
other  people   upon  earth.     A  tradition  was   current  that  the  Hera-    SECT.  IV. 
cleids,   on   appointing  Oxylus  at  the  fame  time  to  the  throne  of  Elis   Strabo,  l.viii. 
and  to  the  guardianship  of  the  temple  of  Olympian  Jupiter,  had,  un-  p'  357' 35  ' 
der  the   fanction  of  an  oath,  confecrated  all  Eleia  to  the  god,  and 
denounced  the  fevereft  curies,  not  only  on  all  who  fliould  invade  it, 
but  alfo  on  all  who  fliould  not  defend  it  againft  invaders.     Iphitus 
procured  univerfal  acquiefcence  to  the  authority  of  this  tradition ;  and 
the  deference  paid  by  the  Grecian  people,  while  independency  had  a 
being  among  them,   both  to  the  general  truce,  and   to  the  perpetual 
immunity  of  the  Eleian  territory,  is  not  among  the  leaft  remarkable 
circumftances   of  Grecian   hiftory.      A  reputation  of  facrednefs  be- 
came attached  to  the  whole  Eleian  people   as  the  hereditary  prieft- 
hood  of  Jupiter ;  and  a  pointed  difference  in  character  and  purfuits 
arofe  between  them  and  the  other  Greeks.      Little  difpofed  to  ambi- 
tion, and  regardlefs  even  of  the  pleafures  of  a  town-life,  their  gene- 
ral turn  was  wholly  to  rural  bulinefs  and  rural  amufements.     Elfe- 
where  the  country  was  left  to  peafants  :   men  of  property,  for  fecu- 
rity,  as  well  as  for  purfuits  of  ambition  and  pleafure,  refided  in  for- 
tified towns.   But  the  towns  of  Eleia,  Elis  itfelf  the  capital,  remained  P    ,     ,    ... 

.  Strabo,  1.  vm. 

always  unfortified  :  and  to  the  time  of  Polybius,  who  faw  the  liberty  p.  358- 
of  Greece  expire,   tho  the  Eleians  were  the  wealthier!  people  of  Pe-   l.  iv.  p.  336, 
loponnefus,  yet  the  richeft.  of  them  moftly  refided  upon  their  eftates,   337' 
and  many  without  ever  vifiting  Elis. 

According  to  the  accounts  collected  by  Paufanias,  fo  totally  the  Paufan.  1.  v, 
cuftoms  and  inftitutions  of  Peloponnefus  were  altered  and  over- 
thrown, through  the  violent  and  long  continued  troubles  which  fol- 
lowed the  return  of  the  Heracleids,  that  the  very  memory  of 
thofe  games,  fo  familiar  in  Homer's  age,  was  nearly  loft.  When 
Iphitus  inftituted  the  Olympian  feftival,  the  foot-race,  which 
was  diftinguifhed  by  the  name  of  Stadion,  was  the  only  game  ex- 
hibited. Afterward,  as  the  increafing  importance  of  the  meeting  oc- 
cafioned  inquiry  concerning  what  had  been  pradtifed  of  old,  or  ex- 
cited invention  concerning  what  might  be.advantageoufly  added  new, 

the 


*5*>  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

chap.  iv.  the  games  were  multiplied.  The  Diaulos,  a  more  complicated  foot- 
S^VNj"  ra°e'  WaS  added  at  tlie  f°ui'teenth  Olympiad  j  wreftling  and  the  pen- 
tathlon, or  game  of  five  exercifes,  at  the  eighteenth  ;  boxing  at  the 
twenty-third  ;  the  chariot-race  was  not  reftored  till  the  twenty-fifth  ; 
of  courfe  not  till  a  hundred  years  after  the  inftitution  of  the  feftival : 
the  pancration  and  the  horfe-race  were  added  in  the  thirty-third. 
Originally  the  facrifices,  procefllons,  and  various  religious  ceremonies 
muft  have  formed  the  principal  pageantry  of  the  meeting.  Afterward 
perhaps,  the  games  became  the  greater  inducement  to  the  prodigious 
re  fort  of  company  to  Olympia  ;  tho  the  religious  ceremonies  ftill  con- 
tinued to  increafe  in  magnificence  as  the  feftival  gained  importance. 
A  mart  or  fair  was  a  natural  confequence  of  a  periodical  alfembly 
of  multitudes  in  one  place.  Thus  in  the  end  the  Olympian  meeting 
in  fome  degree  fupplied  the  want  of  a  common  capital  for  the  Greek 
nation  ;  and,  with  a  fuccefs  far  beyond  what  the  worthy  founder's 
imagination  urged  by  his  warmed  wiflies  could  reach,  contributed 
to  the  advancement  of  arts,  particularly  of  the  fine  arts,  of  com- 
merce, of  fcience,  of  civilized  manners,  of  liberal  fentiments,  and  of 
friendly  communication  among  all  the  Grecian  people. 


APPENDIX     to     the     FOURTH     CHAPTER. 

Of  the  Chronology  of  Grecian  Hijlory. 

N  O  circumftance  of  Grecian  hiftory  has  been  more  labored  by 
learned  men,  and  yet  none  remains  more  uncertain  and  iinfatisfadtory 
than  its  Chronology.  I  would  moft  willingly  have  avoided  all  dif- 
cuffion  of  a  fubjedf.  which  has  already  filled  fo  many  volumes,  and  to 
only  touch  upon  which  muft  confiderably  interrupt  the  tenor  of  a 
narration  in  its  nature  too  much  otherwife  fubjecl:  to  interruption. 
The  very  names  indeed  of  Scaliger,  Selden,  Lydiatt,  Marfham,  Pri- 
deaux,  Petavius,  Calvifius,  Pezron,  Uflier,  Newton,  Jackfon,  and 
laftly  the  indefatigable  Freret,  might  more  than  fuffice  to  deter  from 

the 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  151 

the  attempt  to  throw  new  lifrht  on  a  matter  which  they  have  fuccef-  APPENDIX 

TO 

lively  handled,  and  on  which   they  have   fo   little   agreed.     But   as    CHAP.  IV. 

hiftory  cannot  hold  together  without  fome  fyftem  of  chronology,  and     •—-*-—» 

as  the  refult  of  my  reiearches  will  not  permit  me  to  accept  what  has 

of  late  mo  ft  obtained,  it  appeared  an  indifpenlible  duty  of  the  office 

I  have  undertaken  to  rifle  the  declaration  of  my  opinion,  not  without 

fome  explanation  of  the  ground  of  it.     This  indeed  might  have  been 

done,  without  interruption  of  the  hiftory,   by  a  preliminary  differta- 

tion  :   but  to  be  intelligible  I  muft  then  have  been  more  prolix,  and 

much  repetition  would  have  been  unavoidable.     Now  the  preceding 

hiftory  itfelf  will  go  far  to  illuftrate  its  chronology  ;  and  farther  than 

it  does  fo,  my  aim  will  be  lefs   to  decide,   than  to  afford  the  reader, 

who  has  not  particularly  turned  his  ftudies  to  this  point,  the  beft  means 

I  can,  within  a  fiiort  compafs,  to  judge  for  himfelf. 

When  a  nation  is  firft  emerging  from  barbarifm,  all  views  are 
directed  to  the  future  :  tranfaclions  pad  are  of  fo  little  confequence 
that  a  point  from  which  accounts  of  time  may  originate  is  not  an 
obvious  want,  and  the  deficiency  is  beyond  remedy  before  it  is  felt. 
It  was  probably  not  long  before  Homer  that  the  Greeks  began  to  be 
attentive  to  genealogy;  for  the  poet  is  unable  to  trace  the  pedigree 
of  any  of  his  heroes,  except  the  royal  family  of  Troy,  beyond  the 
fourth  generation  upward.  Yet  the  genealogies  of  eminent  men 
have  perhaps  been  everywhere  the  firft  affiftants  toward  afcertaining 
the  dates  of  paft  events :  feeble  at  beft,  and  in  the  early  ages  of  Greece 
the  more  fo  through  the  general  ignorance  of  writing,  together  with 
the  continual  troubles  of  the  country,  which  made  it  difficult  by  any 
means  to  preferve  certain  accounts  of  pedigrees  through  any  number 
of  generations.  When  arts  and  learning  were  firft  fpringing  in  Pelo- 
ponnefus  under  the  benign  influence  of  a  more  fettled  polity,  the 
return  of  the  Heracleids  violently  flopped  their  progrefs,  checked  and 
difiipated  ancient  tradition,  and  through  expulfions,  migrations,  and 
various  political  troubles  to  a  great  extent  and  of  long  continuance, 
prevented  the  means  of  communicating  even  recent  tranfa&ions  with 

any 


152 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


APPENDIX 

TO 

CHAP.  IV. 


Pliu.    Nat. 
Hilt.   I.  vii. 
c.  56. 

Jofeph.  com. 
Apion, 

Stiabo,   1.  vi. 
p.  a, -9. 


Dionyf.  Hal. 
Antiq.  Rom. 

it    1* 


any  accuracy  to  pofterity.  When  again  the  darknefs  fuperinduced  by 
this  revolution  began  to  clear,  we  find  hereditary  monarchy  fuper- 
feded  in  mod  of  the  Grecian  ftates  by  republican  government  and 
annual  magi  ft  racy.  This  circumftance  very  much  weakened  the  old 
means  of  afcertaining  dates,  becaufe  among  genealogies  none  could 
be  fo  obvious  to  general  knowlege  as  thofe  of  princes ;  yet  on  the 
other  hand,  had  the  republican  forms  become  at  once  regular  and 
permanent,  new  means  would  have  been  opened,  capable  of  far  greater 
accuracy  :  for  it  might  then  have  been  pofllble  to  afcertain  the  year 
by  the  name  of  the  magiftrates  of  the  time  in  different  principal  cities. 
In  the  unfettled  ftate  of  governments  however,  and  the  deficiency  of 
writing,  regifters  of  magiftracy  were  little  regularly  kept :  the  year 
was  differently  divided  in  the  different  ftates  of  Greece,  and  inaccu- 
rately calculated  in  all  of  them ;  and  no  era  had  been  fixed  from 
which  to  reckon  years.  Little  indeed  was  chronology  likely  to  ac- 
quire confifiency,  while  compofitions  in  profe  for  public  ufe  were 
unknown.  The  oldeft  Grecian  profe-writers  known  to  the  ancients 
themfelves,  were  Cadmus  of  Miletus  and  Pherecydes  of  Syros,  men- 
tioned by  Pliny  to  have  lived  during  the  reign  of  Cyrus  king  of 
Perfia ;  nearly  therefore  about  the  time  when  laws  were  firft  put  in 
writing  among  the  Greeks,  by  Draco  at  Athens,  and  by  Zaleucus  for 
the  Epizephyrian  Locrians,  and  not  till  fome  centuries  after  the 
Heracleid  revolution.  In  the  next  generation  Hecataeus  of  Miletus 
compofed  a  historical  work  in  profe,  which  had  fome  reputation  with 
pofterity  j  and  about  the  lame  time  Pherecydes  an  Athenian  wrote  of 
the  antiquities  and  ancient  genealogies  of  his  own  country.  The 
name  of  Acufilaus  of  Argos  has  been  tranfmitted  to  us  as  an  earlier 
author  :  but  the  work  of  Pherecydes  was  the  firft  compofed  in  profe 
on  the  continent  of  Greece  itfelf  which  retained  any  confiderable  credit. 
It  was  long  extant,  and  was  generally  efteemed  the  moft  valuable  upon 
its  fubjecl;  yet  how  little  fatisfadtory  it  was,  whoever  has  but  looked 
into  what  remains  to  us  from  Strabo,  Plutarch  and  Paufanias,  may  fuffi- 
ciently  j  udge.  Herodotus,  who  lived  about  half  a  century  after  the  Athe- 


nian 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  153 

nian  Pherecydes,  is  the  oldeft  Greek  profe  author  preferved  to  us.  He  APPENDIX 
fo  improved  upon  the  former  manner  of  profe  narration,  that  he  ao  ■  CHA1\  IV. 
quired  the  titles  of  father  and  prince  of  hiflory.  But  we  gain  little 
light  from  him  concerning  the  chronology  of  ancient  times  farther  than 
by  feme  genealogies,  and  even  thofe  are  not  undifputed.  The  preface 
of  the  judicious  Thucydides,  a  few  years  only  later  than  Herodotus, 
affords  the  cleared  and  mod  authentic  information  remaining,  for  the 
connection  of  Grecian  hiftory  from  the  Homeric  age  to  the  times 
immediately  preceding  the  Perfian  invafion,  and  at  the  fame  time 
mows  ftrongly  the  deficiency  of  authorities  even  for  the  hiflory  itfelf, 
and  far  more  for  its  chronology.  Still  in  Thucydides's  time  no  era 
had  been  determined  from  which  to  reckon  dates  :  the  common  me- 
thod was  to  compute  backward  either  from  the  time  prefent  or  from 
fome  well  known  period  not  diftant,  and  that  often  not  without  great 
latitude.  Thus  Herodotus  defcribes  the  time  of  events  by  faying 
they  happened  fo  many  hundred  years  before  his  time;  which  is 
fcarcely  fixing  them  within  half  a  century.  The  more  accurate 
Thucydides  commonly  reckons  backward  from  the  year  in  which  the 
Peloponnefian  war  was  concluded.  A  little  after  Thucydides,  in  the 
time  of  Socrates,  Hippias,  an  Eleian,  published  a  catalogue  of  the 
victors  in  the  Olympian  games.  This  feems  to  have  been  foon  taken 
up  as  a  commodious  fcale  for  afcertaining  dates ;  for  Xenophon,  in 
his  Grecian  annals,  quotes  one  Olympiad  for  that  purpofe.  But  we 
are  informed  by  Plutarch,  that  the  catalogue  of  Hippias  had  little 
reputation  for  accuracy*;  and  we  find  it  fti'll  long  before  the  Olym- 
piads came  into  general  uie  for  the  purpofe  of  dating.  Ephorus 
the  dilciple  of  liberates,  in  his  chronological  hiftory  of  Greece  from 
the  return  of  the  Heracleids  to  the  twentieth  year  of  the  reign  of 
Philip  of  Macedon,  digefted  his  calculation  of  dates  by  generations 
only ;  and  even  the  famous  Arundel  marbles,  compofed  fixty  years 
after  the  death  of  Alexander,  make  no  mention  of  Olympiads,  but 

*   Tgvs  /xlc  ovv  ypovovt;  l^axpihtjaai  yaXtizov  en,   xai  fj*cc?,iru.  Tovq  i/.  run    OXv^ttimWuv  etvayof^Btovi'   uv  t  ,v 
uiuytx'fht  i-^i  <pua)t   l7rwi«»  tr.Sowui  'HXitov,  a.%   ivottl^  bffAVftiiKiv  dvctyxxuv  1<7|os  7nrnr.    Plut.  v.  NlllIlK, 

X  reckon 


154  HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

APPENDIX   reckon   backward  by  years  from   the  time  prefent.     The  firft  fyfle- 
CHAP.  IV.    matic  ufe  of  the  Olympian  catalogue  for  the  purpofe  of  chronology 
'"^         was  by  Timasus  Siculus,    in  his  general  hiftory  published  foon  after 
the   date   of  the  Arundel    marbles.     That   hiftorian   endeavoured   to 
correct  chronology  by  comparing  the   fucceffion  of  kings  and  ephors 
at  Sparta,  of  archons  at  Athens,   and  of  prieftefTes  of  Juno  at  Argos, 
with  the  lift  of  Olympian  victors.     His  work  is  unfortunately  loft. 
About  forty  years  later,  Eratofthenes,   librarian  of  Alexandria  under 
Ptolemy  Soter,  digefted  a  chronological  fyftem  by  the  Olympiads,   fo 
.    much  more  complete   than  any  before  known,  that  he  has  had  the 
fecT'8  PlC"     reputation'  of  being  the  father  of  fcientific  chronology.      But  both  his 
work  and  that  of  Apollodorus  the  Athenian,   who  followed  him,   are 
alfo  loft.     What  therefore  were  his  grounds  of  calculation  for  the 
Dionyf.  Hal.   early  ages,  and  what  thofe  canons  which  Dionyiius  the  Halicarnaflian 
Aimq.  Rom.   approved,  we  cannot  know.     But  we  know  that  thofe  canons  had  not 
univerfal  approbation.      Plutarch  fpeaks  of  them  moft  diiiefpedtfully 
even  where  they  relate  to  times  bordering  upon  certain  chronology  *. 
Strabo,  perhaps  the  moft  able  of  the  ancient  antiquarians,  has  fol- 
lowed Homer,  with   evident   fatisfaction,  tracing  him  both  as   geo- 
grapher and  hiftorian   ftep  by  ftep,  and  verifying  his  accounts  by  his 
own  obfervation  and  reading;  but  he  hefitates  where  Homer  leaves 
him,  and  gives   abundant  proof  that  he  had    no  faith  in  that  chro- 
nology which  undertook  to  arrange  hiftory,  either  before  or  after  the 
times  of  which  Homer  treats,  till  the  Perfian  invalion  -f-.      Paufanias 
reports  contradictions  in  regard  both  to  the  arrangement  of  time,  and 
the  arrangement  of  pedigrees  in   ancient  Grecian  hiftory,    and  freely 

*  Tin  &  ■7r^;K^icrov  E»Teu|i»  ccvtSv  (tow  Yo\u»o<;)  ceafed  with  him  concerning  the  hiftory  of  that 
^Mova-it  'inoi  ToiVp^oioif  w;  •xntTsu.apimvikfr/i™-  E7"  feftival  itfclf,  even  where  the  regular  compil- 
es Xoyo»  eMo|o»  om»,  xat  Taaovrovs  px^-vgai;  'i^pna  tation  by  Olympiads  begins  :  'E«uai  yo\s  &»  to. 
«                ov  ^o(  froxbj  7rpov)crs<r§oii  womtoTs  ntri  7\iyo[xi-  irahaict. T«    yap     roieevrec     7roAAap/w$     fcyzTcti 

VMS      KCCl/OCt!/,    QVt;    f/.VPtOl     StOpBtiv}^    &Xil     oh^iQW ,     £K        '-Ui     OV    1TCCVU     TTtrsVeTCCt. 'EyyVTiOUl     0£   T>K  7Ti5"£WS 

ivSlt   atToi?    biAoKoyovjAtvav   (Simvrat   yaras-rjO-ai   T«{  on    p«X?1   T^5    'XTri<   '■'■"■'    'w.orns     OXi'^wriaocf,    una 

timhoytaq.     Plutarch,  v.  Solon.  t5j;  ct£<ut»j;   b  ji  Ko^oiSoj   iiixct.  ra^io»   'Hfoio?,    th» 

-)■  See  particularly  his  remarks  upon  the  va-  ^Paraa-M*    lipjov  tow  Usw  x»i   tcD   u.ymo',    W-.iiw. 

riety  of  traditions  concerning  the  origin  of  the  Strabo,  1.  viii.  c.  355. 
Olympic  games.     Doubt  feems  fcarcely  to  have 

con  fe  lies 


H  I  S  T  O  R  Y    O  F    G  R  E  E  C  E.  155 

confelTes  his  inability  to  reconcile  them  *.     But  Plutarch's  teftimony  APPENDIX 

againft  the  chronologers  is  mo  ft  explicit :  '  Thoufands,'  he  fays,  '  con-  CHAP.  IV. 

«  tinue  to  this  day  endeavouring  to  correct  the  chronological  canons,  piut.  v.  So- 

«  and  can  yet  bring  them   to  no  confiftency.'     It  feems  as  if  doubts  lon' »^ee  „ 

J  o  *  note     p.  1 53' 

had  decreafed  in  modern  times  in   proportion,  not  to  the  acquifition    andalfonote* 
of  means  for  difcovering  truth,  but  to   the  lofs  of  means  for  detect- 
ing falfehood  -{-. 

The  chronology  moft  received  in  modern  times  has  been  formed 
chiefly  from  thofe  famous  marbles  brought  from  the  Levant  for  the 
earl  of  Arundel,  and  now  in  the  poftemon  of  the  univerfity  of  Ox- 
ford, together  with  fome  fragments  of  the  chronologers  Eratofthenes, 
Apollodorus,  and  Thrafyllus,  preferved  chiefly  in  the  chronicon  of 
Eufebius,  and  the  ftromata  of  Clemens  Alexandrinus.  Thofe  mar- 
bles, whofe  fame  has  lb  much  exceeded  their  worth,  have  been 
proved  in  fome  inftances  falfe ;  and  what  can  we  think  of  the  autho- 
rity of  the  chronologers,  when  fueh  authors  as  Strabo,  Plutarch, 
and  Paufanias,  coming  after  them,  never  deign  even  to  quote  them, 
but  endeavouring  to  inveftigate  the  fame  fubjects,  declare  that  they 
were  unable  to  fatisfy  themfelves,  and  report  the  uncertainties  that 
occurred  ?  The  chronology  built  on  fueh  frail  foundations  is  alfo 
in  itfelf  improbable,  and  even  inconfiftent  with  the  moft  authentic 
hiftorical  accounts.  All  thefe  confiderations  together  urged  the 
oreat  Newton  to  attempt  the  framing  of  a  fyftem  of  chronology  for 
the  early  ages  of  Greece  from  the  beft  hiftorical  traditions  of  politi- 

*  'Oi  »«  o!j  "Etoww  Xo'yoi  Jiafojot  t«  -arXsW,  '  toritc  pour  l'hilloire  generate  &  politique  de 

y.«'  ovv  wira  6Ti  to<?  yivic-it  U<ri.    Paui'an.  1.  viii.  '  la  Grece. De  quelque   part    que   foient 

c.  rj.  "  '  venues  les  meprifes   il  eft    fur  qu'il  y  en  a 

+  This   appears   very   remarkably   in    fome  '   plufieurs  dans  la  Chronique  de  Pares,  &c.' 

obfervations  of  the  very  learned  Freret  on  the  Mem.  de  l'Acad.  des  Infcrip.  t.  xxvi.      What 

Arundel  marbles  :    '   Quand   ii  l'autoritc  que  is   this  but  faying,    '   You   may  truft  the  mar- 

'    doit  avoir  la  Chronique  de  Paros,  je  crois  '   bles  for  what  their  author  could  not  know, 

«   qu'ellc  peut  etre  affez  grande  pour  l'hilloire  '   tho   they    are    certainly    faMe    in    what    he 

<   des  temps  hcro'iques ;   cette  Chronique  etant  '   might  eafily  have  learnt,   and  ought  to  have 

•  la  feule  qui  noas  foit  reftee  un  peu  entiere  '  reported  with  accurate  fidelity.'  One  of  the 
'  de  toutes  celles  que  les  anciens  avpieet  inftances  of  miftake  mentioned  by  Freret,  re- 
i   publiies. Mais   il   s'en    faut   beaucoup  lates  to  fo  remarkable  an  event  of  lb  late  a  date 

•  que  la  Chronique  ait  le  meme  degre  d'au-  as  the  battle  of  Leuclra. 

X  2  cal 


156  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

APPENDIX  caj  events,  compared  with  the  mod  authentic  genealogies ;  and  he 

CHAP. iv.    endeavoured  to  verify  it  from  accounts  of  aftronomical  ohfervations. 

He  never  finiihed  this   work  for   publication,  or  it  would  probably 

have   come  to   us  lefs  open    to   objection.     Being   printed   after  his 

death,  it  had  for  fome  time,   however,  great  credit.      But  of  late  the 

favor  of  learned  men  has  inclined  much  to  the  former  fyflem,  which 

in  our  own  country  Dr.  Blair,  in  his  expenfive  and  valuable  Tables, 

has  implicitly  followed  ;   and   in   France  the  wonderful   diligence  of 

the  very  learned  Freret  has  been  employed  in  the  endeavour  to  prove 

that  the  real  chronology  of  early  Greece  was  ftill   more  at  variance 

with    all    remaining    hiflory  than    even    that   which   Dr.    Blair    has 

adopted.      To  explain   therefore  what  I  have  to  urge  in  apology  for 

my  preference  of  Sir  Ifaac  Newton's  fyflem,  it  may  be  neceflary  to 

lay   before  the   reader  a   fynopfis  of  the  more  received   chronology, 

which  I  lhall  give  from  Dr.  Blair's  Tables. 

The   Deluge,  according    to   Archbifhop   Ufher,  whom    Dr.  Blair 
has  followed,  was  2348  years  before  the  Chriftian  era.      The  king- 
dom of  Sicyon  is  faid  to   have  been  founded   only  259  years  later. 
The  lift  of  kings  of  Sicyon  is  carried  up  to  that  period;   but  the  next 
hiftorical  event  in  Greece  is  the  founding  of  Argos  by  Inachus,   233. 
years  after  the  founding  of  Sicyon  by  vEgialeus.      I  mail  not  inlarge 
upon   the  abfurdity  of  the  pretence  to  eftablifli  the  date  of  fuch  an 
infulated  fact,  and   of  tracing  a  fucceffion  of  kings  fo  far  beyond  all 
connected  accounts   of  tranfactions  in    the  country  ;   becaufe  it  has 
been   a   fuppofition   not  lefs  received  that  Phoroneus  and  /Egialeus, 
fons  of  Inachus,  founded  Argos  and  Sicyon  nearly  at  the  fame  time. 
Plato.  Tl-      We  have  indeed  Plato's  testimony,  that  earlier  than  the  age  of  Pho- 
t.  Hi.  'ed!  Ser-  roneus  nothing  was  known  of  Greece.     After  the  founding  of  Argos 
ran-  the  Flood  of  Ogyges  is  the  next  event  of  any  importance  :   it  is  fup- 

See  p.  51  of  pofed  to  have  happened  60  years  later.  Whether  any  perfon  of  the 
name  of  Ogyges  ever  lived  in  Greece  appears,  however,  very  uncer- 
tain. The  term  Ogygian,  ufed  in  after-ages  to  exprefs  extreme 
antiquity,  time  beyond  certain  knowlege,  feems,  from  the  ufe  which 

Homer 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  157 

Homer  makes  of  it,  to  have  been  not  originally  Grecian,  and,  if  we  APPENDIX 
may  truft  /Efchylus,  it  was  /Egyptian  *.  After  Ogyges  a  void  CHAP.  IV. 
follows  which  chronology  would  afcertain  to  be  ot  juft  208 
years.  Then  Cecrops  founded  Athens.  Dates  thus  wide  of  all  con- 
nexion with  hiftory  are  not  for  the  hiftorian  to  comment  upon. 
With  Cecrops,  however,  we  find  ourfelves  approaching  to  a  train  of 
hiftorical  events,  fo  far  connected  that  the  memory  of  man  might 
pofiibly  reach  from  one  to  the  other,  and  link  tradition  fufficiently 
for  fome  conjectural  calculation.  Deucalion  is  faid  to  have  been  co- 
temporary  with  Cecrops.  Amphictyon,  fon  of  Deucalion,  is  the 
reputed  founder  of  the  council  which  bore  his  name.  Cadmus  was 
cotemporary  with  Amphictyon.  Danaus  came  into  Greece  only 
eight  years  after  Cadmus.  The  connection  is  then  lefs  fatisfactorily 
fupported  during  near  a  century  and  half  to  Acrifius  :  it  holds  af- 
terward better  through  80  years  to  the  Argonautic  expedition.  And 
here  at  length  a  crowd  of  remarkable  perfonages  and  many  important 
events  break  upon  us  in  probable  fucceffion  :  Pelops,  /Egeus,  CEneus, 
Augeas,  Neleus,  Tyndareus,  Euryftheus,  Hercules,  Jafon,  Tbefeus., 
and  that  Minos  mentioned  by  Hefiod,  Homer,  Herodotus,  Thucy- 
dides,  Plato,  Ariftotle,  and  Strabo ;  for  the  chronologers  have  ima- 
gined a  prior  Minos  unknown  to  all  thofe  authors.  With  thefe 
perfonages  we  have  the  Argonautic  expedition,  the  wars  of  ThefTaly, 
the  wars  of  Hercules  in  Peloponnefus,  the  Theban  war,  the  war  of 
Minos  with  Athens,  the  eftablifhment  of  the  Cretan  maritime  power 
with  the  fuppreffion  of  piracy,  the  reformation  of  the  Athenian  go- 
vernment, the  expullion  of  the  pofterity  of  Perfeus  from  Pelopon- 
nefus, with  the  full  eftabliuhment  of  the  power  of  the  family  of 
Pelops,  and  finally  the  war  of  Troy.  Hiftory  regularly  connects 
thefe  events,  and  the  chronology  which  fixes  the  Argonautic  expe- 
dition to  the  year  before  Chrift  1263,  P^aces  the  expedition  againft 
Troy  lefs  than  70  years   later.     Chronology  then  continues  to  go 

*  It  feems  not  likely  that  Homer  would  prince.  ./Efchylus  calls  the  capital  of  Up- 
have  called  the  diftant  and  fabulous  ifland  of  per  Egypt  Ogygian  Thebes,  JEfchyl,  Perf. 
Cnlypfo  Ogygia  from  the  name  of  a  Grecian     v.  39. 

hand, 


i53  HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 

APPENDIX  }-,anci  in  hand  with  hiftory  as  far  as  the  return  of  the  Heracleids :  but 

TO 

CHAP.  IV.    here  many  ages  of  darknefs  infue.     The  next  events  in  Peloponnefus 
*     "      '      of  any  importance,  and  which  bring  forward   any  considerable  cha- 
racters to  the  notice  of  hiftory,  are  the  inftitution  of  the  Olympian 
games  by  Iphitus,  and  the  legiflation  of  Lacedaemon  by  Lycur^us ; 
and  chronologers  affert  that  this  interval,   in  which  neither   man  ac- 
quired  fame,  nor  event  had  any  confequence,   was  of  no  lefs   than 
220  years  :    Freret   makes   it   283.      Then   follows   another  void  of 
108  years  to  another  Iphitus,  under  whofe  prefidency  at  the  Olympic 
feftival  Coroebus  was  viclor  in  what  ever  after  bore  the  title  of  the 
firft  Olympiad.      From  this  era  chronology  begins  again  to  approach 
toward  a  connection  with  hiftory  ;  but  for  near  200  years  it  ftill  re- 
mains  very  uncertain.     The  moft  important  events  of  the  moll  po- 
lifhed  ftate  of  Greece,   the  legiflation  of  Draco,  and  even  the  legisla- 
tion of  Solon  at  Athens,  are  of  uncertain  date;  tho  the  former  is  on 
probable  grounds  placed   above   a  century  and  half  after  the  firft 
Olympiad.     Toward  the  fixty-fourth   Olympiad,    above    250  years 
after  the  victory  of  Coroebus,   books  were  ftill  fo  little  common,  and 
Plato.  Hip-      tne  means  of  multiplying  them  fo  little  known,  that  Hipparchus, 
parch.  to  promote    the   knowlege  of  letters   among   the   Athenian   people, 

caufed  moral  fentences  in  verfe  ingraved  on  marble  to  be  fet  up  in 
the  public  ways  of  Attica  for  a  kind  of  public  library.  Herodotus, 
the  earlieft  Grecian  profe-writer  whofe  works  remain  to  us,  flourifhed 
about  70  years  after.  The  Olympian  catalogue  was  firft  publiflied  by 
Hippias  the  Eleian  not  till  toward  the  hundredth  Olympiad.  The  firft 
hiftory  digefted  by  Olympiads,  that  of  Timasus,  was  above  a  hun- 
dred years  later;  and  Eratofthenes,  called  the  father  of  ancient 
chronology,  did  not  flourifh  till  about  the  hundred  and  thirty-third 
Olympiad. 

After  this  fynopfis  of  that  chronology  which  has  had  countenance 
from  fo  many  refpedable  names  of  modern  and  fo  few  of  ancient 
times,  it  may  be  advantageous  to  take  a  fhort  view  of  the  means  re- 
maining, together  with  the  means  which  the  ancient  authors  them- 

felves 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  i$9 

iclves   poflcfled,  as  far  as  we  can   know   them,  for  tracing  events  APPENDIX 
through  the  early  ages  of  Greece:   becaufe,   as  the  authority  of  the    CHAP.  IV. 
hiftpry  itfelf  depends  upon  thofe  means,  from  them  alio  its  chrono- 
logy will  derive  its  belt,  and  indeed  only  folid  fupport.      The  prin- 
cipal works  of  Hefiod  and  Homer,  two  of  the  oldeft,   and  the  moil 
valuable  anions  the  oldeft  authors  known  to  the  ancients,  have  been 
fortunately  tranfmitted  to  us.     In  what  age  thofe  authors  lived  is  un- 
decided ;   but  that  it  was  fome  centuries  before  profe-compofitions  for 
public  ufe  were  known  in  Greece  was  never  doubted.     In  their  age 
accounts  of  great  events  were  preferved  chiefly  by  memory,  afiifted 
with  verfe.     In  the  uncoatefted  work  of  Hefiod,   his  poem  in  titled 
Of  Works  and  Days,  there  remains  to  us  a  fummary  of  things  from 
the  creation  to  his  own   time.     He  begins  with  what  he  terms  the 
golden  age,  which  feems  a  tradition  derived  from  the  Eaft  concern-   f^  ^'0f/  of 
ing  the  terreftrial  paradife,  and  the  ftate  of  man  before  the  fall.     He 
proceeds  to  the  iilver  age,  which,   on  comparing  it  with  the  account 
of  Mofes,  appears  not  lefs  evidently  a  relic  of  tradition  concerning 
the  antediluvian  world.     The  brazen  age  follows,  in  which  he  de- 
fcribes  precifely  that   favage  ftate  of  the  weftern  nations   of  which 
Plutarch  gives  an  account  more  in  detail  in  his  life  of  Thefeus.     In 
fpeaking  of  the  fucceeding  generation,    whom   he  calls   the  race  of 
heroes,   the  poet  confines  his   defcription  more  pointedly  to  his  own 
country  :   he  mentions  the  wars  of  Thebes  and  Troy  by  name.     The 
next  race  of  men   to  thefe,  he  fays,  was   that  with  which  he  him- 
felf  lived,  and  this  he  calls  the  iron  race.     The  golden  race,  he  tells 
us,   were  exalted  after  death  to  a   fuperior  ftate   of  being ;   the  iilver 
race  were  hid  in  his  anger  by  the  immediate  hand  of  the  deity ;   but 
no  fuch  intervention  of  fupernatural  power  is  mentioned  in  the  ac- 
count of  the  brazen,   the  heroic,  and  the  iron  race:   it  is  merely  faid 
that  fuch  races  fucceeded  one  another;   and  the  lateft  hiftorical  event 
noticed  is  the  Trojan  war.     If  any  furmize  concerning  the  poet's 
own  age  can  be  fairly  founded  upon  this  hiftorical  deduction,  it  muft 

be  that  he  was  born  in  the  time  of  the  fons,  and  lived  probably  with 

the 


lOO 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 


APPENDIX   the  grandfbns   and  great-grandfons  of  thofe  who  fought  at  Troy*. 

CHAP.  IV.    Such  then  is  the  chronology  of  Heiiod. 

The  chronology  of  Homer  does  not  go  fo  high,   but  it  is  con- 
tinued lower.     Homer  reckons  time  upward   no  farther  than  he  can 
trace  the  genealogies  of  his  heroes ;  which  all  end  in  a  god,  a  river, 
or  fome  unaccountable  perfonage  in  the  fecond,  third,  or  at  moft  the 
fourth  generation   beyond  thofe  of  the  Trojan  war.     The  royal  race 
of  Troy  forms  the  only  exception  :  Jupiter  was  anceflor  in  the  feventh 
degree  to  Hector.      Negative  proof  furely  cannot  be  ftronger  againil 
that  antiquity  to  which  fome  of  the  Grecian   towns  in  late  ages  pre- 
tended.   Homer's  Grecian  chronology  begins  thus  fcarcely  before  the 
age  of  Pelops,  a  generation  or  two  earlier  than  the  Theban  war;   and 
it  ends  with  the  reftoration  of  Oreftes,  great-grarfdfon,  or,  according 
to  fome,  great-great-grandfon  of  Pelops -j-,  to  the  throne  of  Argos. 
Within  thefe  limits  Grecian  hiftory  is  regular  and  probable  j  and  chro- 
nology,  according  to  every  opinion  of  the  learned  who  have  endea- 
voured to  illuftrate  it,   fufficiently  tallies  with  the  courie  of  events. 
But  this  luminous  period  ftands  moft  oddly  infulated.    That  it  mould 
have  been  preceded  by  times  without   hiftory  is   not  wonderful  ;   but 
that  it  {hould  have  been  followed  by  fo  many  centuries  of  utter  dark- 
nefs  as  chronologers  have  imagined,  appears  moft  unaccountable.     It 
would  be  of  fome  importance  both  to  the  hiftory  and  to  the  chrono- 
logy of  early  Greece,  if  it  were  poflible,  to  afcertain  the  great  poet's 
own  age.     Tho  therefore  the  variety  of  opinions  upon  this  fubject 
makes  any  difcuftion  of  it  hazardous,  it  yet  appears  a  part  of  the  duty 
of  the  office  I  have  undertaken,  not  to  avoid  the  declaration  of  my 
own;  and  in   hope  of  elucidating,  in    fome  degree,  and  confirming 
the  account  which  I  have  ventured  to  give  of  that  dark  period  which 
begins  where  Homer's  hiftory  ends,  I  will  here  bring  under  one  point 

*  This  is  Sir  Ifaac  Newton's   fuppofition  :  iron  ;  an  opinion  which  I  rauli  confefs  appcjrs 

tho  he  has  underftood  the  golden  and  the  filver  to  me  wholly  unwarranted, 
ages  or  races  to  relate  particularly  to  Greece,  f   See  note  *  p.  26  of  this  Volume. 

as  well  as   the   brazen,  the  heroic,  and   the 

Of 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  :6r 

of  view  fome  circumftances  of  proof  upon  which  my  opinion  prin-    APPENDIX 
cipally  refts.  CHA™  IV- 

None  of  the  earlier  Grecian  writers  have  undertaken  to  fix  the  era 
of  the  Trojan  war;  but  Herodotus  affirms  that  Homer  lived  four  Herodot. !. iT. 
hundred  years  before  his  own  age*.  He  does  not  inform  us  now 
that  period  was  calculated;  but  many  things  remaining  from  other 
early  authors,  and  among  them  the  dates  reported  by  Thucydides, 
tend  to  make  the  afTertion  probable,  and  it  has  indeed  been  generally 
admitted.  For  the  time  then  from  the  Trojan  war  to  the  poet's  age, 
there  is  evidence  within  his  remaining  works  which  feems  to  mark 
it  flrongly.  Four  pailages  appear  to  fpeak  to  it  in  fome  degree  atfir- 
matively  :  three  of  them  indeed  but  loofely,  and  rather  by  impli- 
cation than  directly  ;  but  the  fourth  in  pointed  terms.  In  the  Odyfiee 
a  converfation  is  introduced  concerning  fubjeds  for  poetry,  where  it 
is   remarked,    that   '   thole  fubjecfs   are   preferred   for  celebration  in   Odyfi".  1.  i. 

*  which,  through  the  recency  of  the  tranfactions,  the  hearers  have  a 
'  nearer  intereft.'  Now  this  would  nrand  contradicted  by  the  poet's 
practice,  if  the  events  which  he  celebrates  happened,  as  fome  have 
imagined,  five,  four,  three,  two,  or  even  one  century  before  the 
people  for  whom  he  compofed  were  born.     In  the  Odyffee  again,  we 

find  another  remarkable  paflage  concerning  fubjeifts  for  poetry  :  *  The   0dvff 
'  gods,'  it  is  faid,   '  wrought  the  fate  of  Troy,  and  decreed  the  de-  v#  578 

*  flruclion  of  men,   that  there  might  be  fubjedrs  for  poetry  to  future 

*  generations.'  Had  the  poet  lived  after  the  return  of  the  Heracleids, 
that  revolution  would  have  furnifhed  fubjects  far  more  nearly  intereft- 
ing  to  hearers,  in  any  part  of  either  Greece  itfelf  or  the  Grecian 
fettlements  in  Afia  Minor,  than  the  war  of  Troy.  Thefe  two  paf- 
fages,  therefore,  feem  flrongly  to  indicate  that  he  lived  not  long  after 
the  times  of  which  his  poems  principally  treat.     The  third  paflage 

*  In  quoting  the  authority  of  Herodotus,  I  againft   its   authenticity   appear   to  me   much 

refer  to  that  only  of  his  general  hiftory.     1  am  ftrcnger  than  thofe  in  its  favor  ;   and  not  leaft 

not  inclined   to  give  any  credit  to  the   life  of  the  internal  evidence  of  the  work  itfelf.      See 

Homer   attributed    to   him.     The  arguments  note  ill  of  Wefleling's  edition. 

Y  may 


vm, 


i6z  HISTORY     OF^GREECE. 


t.  3 


APPENDIX  may  perhaps  prove  that  he  did  not  live  abfolutely  in  thofe  times. 
CHAP.  IV.  Speaking  in  his  own  perfon  of  the  Trojan  war,  he  fays,  '  I  have  thefe 
Iliad,  l.  H.  '  tilings  only  by  report,  and  not  of  my  own  knowlege.'  It  has  been 
v. 486.  often  obferved  that  Homer  fhows  himfelf,  upon  all  occafions,  remark- 

ably difpofed  to  extol  the  family  of  ./Eneas,  and  Angularly  careful 
to  avoid  what  might  give  them  offence;  whence  it  has  been  inferred 
that  the  pofterity  of  that  chief  exifted  and  were  powerful  in  the  poet's 
age;  nor  indeed  can  the  circumftance  be  othervvife  accounted  for. 
One  paffage,  however,  appears  to  fpeak  pointedly  to  the  purpofe :  the 
Iliad.  I.  xx.  god  Neptune  is  introduced  declaring  prophetically  that  '  ./Eneas  /hall 
'  reign  over  the  Trojans,  and  the  fons  of  his  fons,  and  thofe  who 
'  mall  be  born  after  them.'  In  its  moft  natural  interpretation  this 
paffage  feems  to  mark  precifely  the  number  of  generations  from  ./Eneas 
to  his  defcendants  cotemporary  with  the  poet ;  and  with  any  other 
interpretation  the  fenfe  is  dubious  and  incomplete,  in  a  manner  not 
ufual  with  Homer. 

Thefe  then  are,  I  believe,  the  only  pafi'ages  within  Homer's  ex- 
tant works  that  fpeak  at  all  affirmatively  to  the  age  in  which  he 
lived.  They  are  not  conclufive,  and  yet,  united,  they  are  ftrong. 
But  the  negative  evidence,  which  his  works  afford  in  confirmation  of 
them,  is  fuch  that,  but  for  the  refpecf  due  to  thofe  who  have  thought 
differently,  and  ftill  more  perhaps  to  thofe  who  have  doubted,  I 
fhould  fcarcely  hefitate  to  call  the  whole  together  decifive.  For  had 
the  return  of  the  Heracleids  preceded  the  times  in  which  Homer 
flourifhed,  is  it  conceivable  that,  among  fubjecls  which  fo  naturally 
led  to  the  mention  of  it,  he  fhould  never  once  have  alluded  to  fo 
treat  an  event,-  by  which  fo  total  a  change  was  made  of  the  princi- 
pal families,  and  indeed  of  the  whole  population  of  Peloponnefus, 
and  of  all  the  weftern  coaft  of  Afia  Minor  with  the  adjacent  iflands  ? 
His  geography  of  Peloponnefus  is  fo  minute  and  fo  exact,  that  Strabo 
has  c  ho  fen  to  follow  him  ftep  by  flep  for  the  purpofe  of  tracing  from 
remoteft  antiquity  a  complete  account  of  that  peninfula.  That  in 
fo  particular  a  defcription  of  the  country  before  the  Dorian  conqueft 

he 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  163 

he  fhould  have  been  fo  exact  that  no  fubfequent  inquiry  could  con-   APPENDIX 

TO 

vict  him  of  any  error  *,  and  yet  tbat  he  fhould   take  not  the  leaft    chap.  IV. 
notice  of  any  of  the  great  changes  in  the  property,  the  government, 
and  the  partition  of  the  country  which  that  revolution  produced,  if 
he  had  lived  to  fee  them,  is  not  eaiily  imaginable.     How  naturally, 
upon  many  occafions,  would  fome  fuch  pathetic  obfervation  have  oc- 
curred concerning  the  Pelopid,  the    Neleid,  and  other  families,  as 
that  which  in  his  catalogue  in  the  Iliad  he  makes  upon  the  cataftrophe 
of  the  royal  family  of  iEtolia  !  -f-     How  naturally  too,  especially  as 
he  mentions  the  wars  of  Hercules  both  in  Greece  and  in  Aha,  would 
fome  compliment  have  fallen  to  the  defcendants  of  that  hero,  had 
they  been  in  his  time  lords  of  Peloponnefus  inftead  of  exiles  on  the 
mountains  of  Doris  ;  and  how  almoft  unavoidable,  from  an   inha- 
bitant of  Chios,  fome  notice   of  the  acquiiitions  of  the  pofterity  of 
Agamemnon  and  Neftor  in  /Eolis  and  Ionia,   had  he  lived  after  the 
./Eolic  and  Ionic  migrations  !     Such  fubjects  being  open  to  him  for 
compliment  to  all  the  princes  both  of  the  Pelopid  and  Heracleid  fa- 
milies, would  he  have  neglected  all,  and  paid   particular  attention 
only  to  the  extinct  family  of  /Eneas,  the  enemy  of  his  nation  ?    With 
thefe   ftrong  circumftances    many   others    meet.     To  complete   the 
evidence  which   the  poet  himfelf  furnifhes  concerning  the  time  in 
which   he   lived,  we   muft  add  his    ignorance  of  idolatry,  of  hero- 
worfhip,  of  republics,  of  tyrannies,  of  a  general  name  for  the  Greek 
nation,  and   of   its   divifion   into    Ionian,  iEolian,  and    Dorian  :   we 
muft  add  the  form  of  worlhip  which  he  defcribes,  without  temples 
as  without  images  :   we  muft  add  the  little  fame  of  oracles,  and  his 
filence  concerning  the  council  of  Amphictyons  :  we  mult  add  his 


*    Ta  tt.    or,  y.ccrcc  T>i»    EMm$x  xou  roiiq   trvnyyvt,  Wfoj  iy.a;,   tote   cofti^ocTo;   Ixar°v    xaTcif9owoT9«»   tn» 

To7roW5   Jtat    Xiccu   tzspispyut;   EgsvtjvoVevaf,   ^oy^vrcripuvix,  vjapovo~av  ttfv-jeo-tv,   OTac  r\  y.ydiv  uvliTriTlov  tok   ovru 

yXy   rriii  QiaQ-/iv  h£yavl&,  'A^iapToe  ^e  Grcwwrct,  i&ya.-  o-Qbica.  iZirivZiiGi    'STEp*   tuiv   ocvluv  ?<oyov;.     Ae»  ay  Tot 

rbwacin    ^e    'A*9r,3&*a,    Ai^iaa*    $1    isr.yris    E7rl    K>i-  te    ovist,   Xiyeiv,    y.ai   Ta    tzoiriTov,    GrccfuTiZMTas    lq> 

cpi<r<7oi&*    xci]    ov^^iai/    'EJCoo'&riy.Yiv    ksvu;    ct'xolc'i'jfltiv.  ocov  tzqqw.h  vrpoG-y-oTrHiv .    Strabo,  1.  vin.  p.  337* 
Strabo,    1.  i.    p,   16.  +    Ov  ydf  sr  'Oii/v;o;  f*£y^i)Topo;  iis's?  iiaav, 

A/ya    d\  Tclvra   avpSoiXKuv  Toi  te    vvv  yxi   to    v$>  Ot;d"  atp   tr   ctyTos  ntv'   9x*  =  ol  ^avzos  Mtfaaypot;. 

Ot/.r,cov   7^yijj.iia.'   avdyy.r,  yccs   ccilii;tTa£iaf)ctt  Tavra.  Tu     (©oa»Ti)     a     itr)    •au.tl     IriraXTo    a.va.o's'iy.iv 

Ixuvii^y   tiicc   rhv    iqv    ■crji^Tou    5o£«v,    xccl    srvfyotyiar  AtTiAoicr*.  Iliad,   1.  11.    v.  643. 

Y  2  familiar 


164 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


APPENDIX   familiar  knowle°;e  of  Sidon,   and   his  filence  concerning;  Tyre  :   and 

TO  °  °  J 

CHAP.  IV.  laftly  we  may  add  the  lols  of  his  works  in  Peloponnefus,  whole 
new  inhabitants  had  comparatively  little  intereft  in  them,  and  their 
prefervation  among  the  i^Eolian  colonills  in  Afia,  who  reckoned  his: 
principal  heroes  among  their  anceftors.  All  thele  circumftances  to- 
gether appear  to  amount  almofr.  to  convi&ion  that  Homer  lived  be- 
fore the  return  of  the  Heracleids  *.      All  together  afford   alfo  ftrong 


*  In  a  late  anonymous  publication,  in- 
titled  Critical  Obfervations  on  Books  ancient 
and  modern,  in  which  much  learning  is  dif- 
played,  Mr.  Wcod's  opinion  concerning  the 
age  of  Homer  has  been  violently  controverted, 
and  the  author  has  endeavoured  to  prove  that 
the  great  poet  lived  ftill  later  than  lias  been 
generally  fuppofed.  I  have  confidered  his 
arguments  with  attention,  but  cannot  fee  any 
force    in   any   of  them.     Pie   aiTcrts  (1)    that 

*  there  are  fuch  internal  teltimonies  in  Ho- 
'  mer's  poems  of  refinement  as  (land  in  direct 
'  contradiction  to  the  rourlmefs  of  his  trian- 
'  ners,  and  prove  that  either  the  one  or  the 
'  other  could  not  be  the  real  llate  of  his  own 
'  times.'  But  Mr.  Wood,  who  had  converfed 
extensively  in  the  Eaft,  knew  that  what  thus 
appear  contradictions  to  a  learned  Engliihman 
thinking  in  his  clofet,  are  not  incompatible 
there.     '  Pope,'   the  learned  critic  continues, 

*  has  juftly  obferved  that  Homer's  invocation 
"  H^aek  os  Y.7.LQ;  oiov  axofOjaEe,  ovvs  *n  'uy.st,  (2) 
'  (hows   that   he  lived  long  after  the  fiege  of 

*  Troy.'  Thucvdides,  incomparably  a  greater 
authority  than  Pope,  has  faid  nearly  the  fame 
thing:  but  the  queilion  ftill  remains,  What  is 
long  ?  Perhaps  the  ivii  ti  "fast  might  be  not 
unreafonably  taken  to  imply  that  the  poet's 
birth  was  fo  near  the  time  of  the  Trojan  war 
that,  in  his  old  age,  if  he  had  not  declared 
the  contrary,  it  might  have  been  fuppofed  that 
he  pretended  to  know  the  events  he  defcribes 
from  having  been  a  party  concerned  ;  for  it  is 
little  uftnl  to  contradict  what  could  not  be 
fuppofed.  The  proofs  endeavoured  to  be 
drawn  from  Paterculus  and  Ariftotle,  and  from 
the  mention  of  the  G.ygaean  lake,  have  not 
more  precifion.      That   from  the  word  fiufia- 

(1}  p.  6a.         (2)  II.  1.  ii.  v.  48;.  (3)  p.  42. 

(j)  Strabo,  I  xiv.  p.  573  &  634.  (8J  1.  vii.  c.  2. 


fatpuwt  (3),  is  at  vaiiance  with  what  follows 
about  the  names  Miletus  and  Mycale  (4). 
The  learned  critic  has  very  much  overhallily 
quoted    Strabo   for   authority    that    '  Miletus 

*  was  at  fooneft  built  by  Codrus  a  hundred 
'  years  after  the  taking  of  Troy  (5).'  Strabo 
indeed  fays,  that  Neleus,  who,  according  to 
other  authors,  was  fon  of  Codrus,  founded 
Miletus,  MiA^lov  'linun  (6)  :  but  it  appears  from 
two  other  paffiges  of  the  fame  author  that  an 
older  town  of  the  fame  name,  and  near  the 
fime  fpot,  had  its  origin  from  a  colony  of 
Cretans  under  Sarpedon,  brother  of  Minos  (7 ), 
and  mull  have  been  therefore  half  a  century 
older  th.in  the  Trojan  war.  Paufinias  (8) 
bears  correfponding  teliimony  to  its  antiquity. 
'  Again,'  fays  the  author  of  the  Critical  Ob- 
fervations,  '  the  mention  made  in  the  OdyfTee 

*  of  various  articles  of  luxury  and  elegance 
'  betrays  a  later  age  than  is  ufually  afTigned  to 
'  the  poet,  and  (hows  that  he  mult  have  lived 
'  in  more  civilized  times  than  can  be  confident 
'  with   the   rough  and  fimple  manners   which 

*  he  feigns.'  1  think  not.  Arts  flourifhed  in 
Egypt  and  Phenicia  before  Homer's  age  ;  but 
no'hing  in  his  works  implies  that  Greece  was 
in  his  time  confiderably  advanced  either  in 
arts  or  in  civilization  beyond  the  times  of  his 
principal  heroes.  Two  circumftances  only 
mark  fome  little  advancement ;  and  but  little. 
The  trumpet,  as  appears  from  a  fimile,  was 
known  to  him,  tho  never  mentioned  as  in  ufe 
in  the  times  which  he  defcribes.  Prom  two 
fimilies  it  fnould  feem  alfo  that  horfemanlhip 
was  improved.  I  believe  another  inftance  can- 
not be  produced.  But  the  learned  critic  con- 
tinues, '  That  molt  curious  machine  the  for- 
'  mation  of  the  Greek  tongue  in  its  feveral 


(i)  P-  c/"-         (5)  P'  67- 


(6)  Strabo,  1.  xiv.  p.  633. 
'  tenfes. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  165 

proof  that  the  editors  of  the  Rhapfodies  found  them  genuine,  and  APPENDIX 
gave  them  fo  to  the  world.  CHAP.  IV. 

After  Homer  is  a  long  interval  to  our  next  authorities  for  Grecian 
hiftory.  Pindar  and  iEfchylus  afford  affrftance  ;  but  they  lived  too 
late  to  unite  in  any  great  degree  the  character  of  hiftorian  with  that 
of  poet  *.  The  later  poets  are  of  courfe  ftill  inferior  hiftorical  au- 
thority. Herodotus,  therefore,  the  oldeft  Grecian  profe  author 
whofe  works  remain  to  us,  and  who,  according  to  his  own  probable 
aflertion,  as  we  have  already  obferved,  was  four  hundred  years  later 
than  the  great  poet,  may  be  called  the  next  hiftorian.  Thucydides, 
Plato,  Ariftotle,  Strabo,  Plutarch,  and  Paufanias,  who  in  different 
ages  inveftigated  the  antiquities  of  their  country,  all  fufficiently  in- 
form us  what  uncertain  authorities  intervened.  Early  in  this  dark 
period,  however,  we  gain,  by  a  ftrong  concurrence  of  teftimony, 
one  remarkable  point,  the  Olympiad  in  which  Corcebus  won  in  the 
ftadion,  from  which  the  Olympiads  were  reckoned  numerically,  and 
which  was  therefore  always  called  the  firft  Olympiad.  But  unfor- 
tunately we  are  not  with  any  certainty  informed  what  principal  cha- 
racters were  cotemporary,  or  even  nearly  cotemporary,  with  Corce- 
bus.     Not  only  therefore  the  preceding  times  till   we  meet  Homer's 

"  tenfes,   cafes,   and   numbers,  was   all  perfect  of  learning   to   alter.      Thcfe  of   the    Greek 

'  and   complete   when  Homer  wrote. — It  was  were  indeed  wonderfully  happy  ;  but  had  they 

•  impoffible  for  his  language  to  have  arrived  at  not  been  fo  delivered  down  from  times  of 
'  that  fummit  of  excellence  to  which  little  ira-  darknefs,  all  the  philofophy  of  the  brightefl 
'  provement  or  addition  was  made  afterward,  ages  could  not  have  added  a  number,   a  tenfe, 

•  unlefs  the   fpeakcrs  were  alfo    arrived    near  or  a  cafe. 

•  the  fummit  of  focial  life  and  civil  govern-  *  Tho  not  more  than  three  or  four  publi- 
'  ment.'  The  learned  critic  feeni9  r.ot  fuffi-  cations  in  Grecian  profe  of  earlier  date  than 
ciently  to  have  adverted  to  the  common  and  the  works  of  Pindar  and  ^-Efchylus  acquired 
known  progrefs  of  languages.  They  are  often  any  reputation,  yet  already  in  their  time  the 
found  moil  complex  in  barbarous  times,  and  Aoyio«,  profe-writer,  appears  to  have  been  fa- 
fjmplify  with  the  progrefs  of  civilization.  The  miliarly  known  as  a  perfon  capable  of  tranf- 
Anglofaxon  had  cafes  and  a  dual  number,  mitting  facts  to  pofterity  as  well  as  the  AoJoj, 
which    it    loft    before    the    mixture    of    Nor-  poet  : 

man    French    had.    formed    our    prefent   Ian- 'brnM^foro,  avx?ii*»  Hi^ 

guage;   and  the   Greek  dual  is   fcarcely  feen  "o»ot  imixop&ar  «»&«»  ^eurat .peaiist 

but   in    the  older   authors.      But   the  general  K«»  Aoyi«n  xu)  'A'W<r. 
form    and    characler    of    every    language   be-  Pindar.  Pyth.  i. 

come  f.xt  in   barbarous  ages  beyond  the  power 

chro- 


166  HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

APPENDIX  chronology,  or,  which  is  nearly  the  fame  thing,  to  the  return  of  the 
CHAP.  IV.  Heracleids,  remain  to  be  gathered  from  genealogies,  but,  for  the 
moil  part,  the  fubfequent  alfo  till  near  the  time  of  the  Perfian  inva- 
fion.  In  the  computation  by  genealogies,  exclufively  of  its  inherent 
inaccuracy,  great  difficulties  occur.  Even  the  fucceffion  of  Lace- 
daemonian kings,  which  fhould  be  our  befr.  guide,  is  not  transmitted 
to  us  with  certain  correclnefs ;  and  when  we  recollect  the  variety  of 
opinions  of  ancient  writers,  or  thofe  reported  by  Plutarch  alone, 
concerning  the  age  of  fo  very  remarkable  a  perfonage  as  the  lawgiver 
Lycurgus,  the  pretenlions  of  chronologers  to  affign  to  each  reign  its 
exact  number  of  years  appear  utterly  abfurd.  The  terms  attributed 
to  the  perpetual  archons  of  Athens  are  not  better  founded;  and  the 
reafons  given  by  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  for  fuppoiing  that  the  {even  de- 
cennial archons  did  not  complete  feventy  years,  are  cogent.  Of  the 
annual  archons  who  followed,  accounts  are  very  deficient.  Probably 
at  their  firft  eflabliihment  written  registers  were  not  kept :  for  as  we 
are  well  affured  that  the  laws  of  Athens  were  never  committed  to 
writing  till  the  archonfhip  of  Draco,  it  is  not  likely  that  letters 
were  applied  much  fooner  to  public  purpofes  of  inferior  importance. 
Letters  became  common,  and  chronology  acquired  accuracy,  about 
the  fame  time,   and  little  before  the  Perfian  invafion. 

The  firft  Olympiad,  however,  that  in  which  Corcebus  won,  is  of 
univerfally  acknowleged  date  776  years  before  the  Chriftian  era.  To 
this  point  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  and  all  former  and  all  fubfequent 
chronologers  agree  *.  The  return  of  the  Heracleids  happened  80 
years  after  the  Trojan  war.  This  aifertion  of  the  inquifitive  and  ju- 
dicious Thucydides  has  alfo  found  univerfal  acquiefcence.  The  two 
great  deliderata  then  of  Grecian  chronology  are  to  know  what  prin- 

*   I  do  not  underftand  the  accufation  of  an  real   exiftence  (i).      On  the  contrary  Newton 

ingenious,   but  vehement  oppofer  of  Sir  Ifaac  admits  all   the   Olympiads  of  the  catalogue, 

Newton's   chronology,-  that  Newton    aflerts  a  from  Corcebus   downward  ;   and  before  Corce- 

wilful  forgery  to  have  been  made  in  the  Olym-  bus,   if  any   Olympiads   were    celebrated,   we 

pic  catalogue  of  forty  Olympiads  which  had  no  are  well  allured  that  no  catalogue  was  kept. 

(1)  DilTertation  on  the  Chronology  of  the  Olympiads,  by  Dr.  S.  Mufgrave, 

cipal 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  167 

cipal  perfons  were  cotemporary  with  Coroebus,  and  to  trace  the  ge-    APPENDIX 
nerations  from  his  age  upward   to  the  return  of  the  Heracleids.     If    CHAP.  IV. 
thefe  could  be  obtained,  we  mould  have  a  tolerably  accurate  chrono- 
logy as  far  as  Homer's  genealogies  will  carry  us ;   and  beyond  them, 
however  curiofity  may  be  incited,  the  fruit  of  inquiry  will  fcarcely 
pay  the  labor. 

Our  principal  information  concerning  the  Olympiads  is  from  Pau- 
fanias ;  who  lived  late,  but   was  a  diligent  and  a  candid  antiquarian. 
He  travelled  through  Greece  after  the  middle  of  the  fecond  century 
of  the  Chrifiian  era,  and   it  appears  that  he  examined   the  Olympic 
re°-iiter  on    the   foot.     He  fays  that  the  Olympiads  might  be  traced 
back  regularly  to  that  in  which  Corcebus  won  in  the  foot-race  ;   but 
that  even  tradition  concerning  any  regular  and  periodical  celebration 
of  the  games  went  no  farther.     It  is  ftrongly  implied  by  his  expref- 
fions,  that  the  written  regifter  of  the  Olympian  victors  was  not  fo  old 
as  Corcebus,  but   that  the  account  of  the  firft  Olympiads  was  kept 
by  memory  only  *.     Indeed  it  appears  certain,  from  all  memorials  of 
beft  authority,  that  writing  was  not  common  in  Greece  fo  early.     We 
are  not  allured  that  Corcebus  was  cotemporary  with  Iphitus,  yet  it 
appears  probable.     That  fhort  hiftory  of  the  Olympian  games  which 
Paufanias  gives  from  Corcebus  downward,  ftrongly  contradicts  the  fup- 
pofition  of  chronologers,  derived  from  a  pafTage  of  Phlegon  preferved 
by  Eufebius  but  wholly  unfupported  by  older  authors,  that  twenty- 
eight  Olympiads  intervened  between  the  eftablifhment  of  the  feftival 
by   Iphitus,    and    the    victory  of   Corcebus    under   another    Iphitus. 
Strabo's  account  ftill  more  remarkably  contradicts  fuch  a  fuppofition. 
He  affirms  that  the  /Etolians,  who  under  Oxylus  came  into  Pelopon-       abo    v... 
nefus  with  the  Heracleids,    were  the   inventors  of   the  Olympian  p*  3S4>  35S' 

*  'e£  it  yap  to  ffvvs^  TK~«  f*»«f**'S  £,r'  ™<i  of  the  catalogue,  beginning  with  the  victory 
OAv(i7riaa-i»  in  ( 1 ) ,  is  Paufanias'  expreffion  con-  of  Corcebus.  With  regard  to  later  times,  he 
cerning  the  authority  of  the  firft  Olympiads     fpeaks  in  plain  terms  of  a  written  regifter. 

(1)  I.  v.  c.  6. 

games, 


i6S  HI.STORY     OF     GREECE. 


APPENDIX  games,  and  celebrated  the  firft  Olympiads.     After  then  mentioning 
CHAP.  iv.    traditions  concerning  the  prior  eftablilhment  of  the  feftival  as  fabu- 
v-^v>^/      lous  and  unworthy  of  credit,   he  fpeaks  of  that  as  the  firft  Olympiad 
in  which  Corcebus  won.     So  far  from  giving  the  leaft  countenance 
to  the  fuppofition  that  two  or  three  centuries  intervened  between  the 
return  of  the  Heracleids  and  the  victory  of  Corccbus,  it  is  rather  im- 
plied by  his  expreffions  in  that  paffage  that  Corcebus  was  cotemporary 
with  Oxylus.     This  however   is   not  affirmed,  and  in  another  place 
Iphitus  is   mentioned  as  founder  of  the   feftival ;   but  other   authors 
ni uft  be  reforted   to   for  authority  even  for  that   lhort  interval  which 
Newton  has  fuppofed  between  Oxylus  and  Corcebus.    With  Newton, 
therefore,  I  have  no  fcruple  to  ftrike  from  my  chronology  that  period 
of  above  a  century  which   has    been   imagined   between  Iphitus  and 
Paufan.  1.  v.   Corcebus.       Iphitus,  according    to   Paufanias,    was   defcended   from 
c*4"  Oxylus,  but  in  what  degree  that  antiquarian  could   not  learn ;   there 

were  even  contradictory  teftimonies  among  the  ancient  infcriptions  and 
memorials  of  the  Eleians  themfelves  concerning  his  father's  name. 
Newton,  deducing  collateral  proof  from  another  paffage  of  Paufanias, 
fuppofes  him  grandfon  of  Oxylus,  and  places  the  Olympiad  in  which 
Corcebus  won  under  his  prefidency,  only  52  years  after  the  return  of 
the  Heracleids.  Dr.  Blair  places  Iphitus  220,  and  Freret  fuppofes 
him  283  years  later  than  that  event  ;  and  both  maintain  the  farther 
interval  of  108  years  between  his  inftitution  of  the  Olympian  games 
and  that  called  the  fir  ft  Olympiad.  If  we  fearch  hiftory  to  know 
what  occurrences  filled  this  long  interval,  we  find  none  :  nothing  in. 
the  leaft  to  contradict  Newton's  fuppofition  that  only  52  years,  inftead 
of  328  according  to  Blair,  or  395  according  to  Freret,  pafled  be- 
tween the  return  of  the  Heracleids  and  the  Olympiad  in  which 
Corcebus  won,  except  an  account  from  Paufanias  of  what  was  not 
Paufan.  1.  v.  done.  That  antiquarian  relates  that  games,  after  the  manner  of  the 
c-  8-  Homeric  age,  were  fo  long  neglected,   that  even  memory  of  them 

failed ;  and  that  they  were  recovered  but  by  flow  degrees  after  the 
time  of  Corcebus.     I  know  nothing  elfe  of  equal  or  almoft  of  any 

authority 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  169 

authority  to  direct  opinion   between  Sir  Ifaac  Newton's  conjecture,  APPENDIX 
and  computations  fo  utterly  unfupported  by  hiflory  as  thofe  adopted  by    chap.  IV. 
Blair,  or  made  by  Freret  j  computations,  as  appears  to  me,  virtually        "~ *""" "* 
contradicted  by  Herodotus,  Thucydides,  Plato,  and  Ariflotle,  and  evi- 
dently difbelieved   by  Strabo,  Plutarch,  and  Paufanias.      Not  only 
they  are  utterly  irreconcileable  to  the  hiftory,  imperfect  enough  in- 
deed itfelf,  which  remains  of  thofe  times ;   but,  to  ftrain  even  genea- 
logy to  any  kind  of  accommodation  with  them,  it  has  been  neceflary 
to  add  a  fuppoiition,  utterly  unfupported  by  the  authors  -above  men- 
tioned, that  there  were  two  extraordinary  perfonages  kings  of  Elis 
of  the  name  of  Iphitus,  two  extraordinary  perfonages  of  the  name 
of  Lyourgus  legiflators  of  Sparta,  and  fo  of  many  others   who,  at 
the  diftance  of  from  one  to  two  centuries  one  from  the  other,  bore 
the  fame  name,  did  the  fame  things,  and  acquired  the  fame  repu- 
tation. 

The  rcfult  then  of  fuch  inquiry  as  I  have  been  able  to  make  on 
this  dark  and  intricate  fulject,  leads  me  to  the  following  conclufions. 
I  have  not  the  leaft  difficulty  with  Newton  to  reject,  as  fictitious,  that 
perfonage  whom  chronologers  have  inferted  in  their  catalogue  of  kings 
of  Crete  by  the  name  of  the  firfl:  Minos  j  becaufe  his  exiftence  is 
not  only  unwarranted,  but  in  fadl  contradicted  by  what  remains  to  us 
from  Hefiod,  Homer,  Herodotus,  Thucydides,  Plato,  Ariftotle,  and 
Strabo,  concerning  the  only  Minos  whom  thofe  authors  appear  to 
have  known  *.  With  fcarcely  more  doubt  and  upon  fimilar  grounds 
I  join  in  the  rejection  of  Erichthonius,  together  with  the  fecond  Ce-  c„„  „„«.'  •  „ 

*>  ->  o  occ  note     p« 

crops  and  the  fecond  Pandion,  from  the  lift  of  the  kings  of  Athens.  3Sm  of  this 
I  cannot,   however,  hold  with  the  great  philofopher  that  Gelanor  Newton's 
king  of  Argos,  and  Danaus  the  leader  of  the  Egyptian  colony,  were 


P-J37- 


*  Diodorus  Siculus,  in  his  fourth  book  (i),  effectually   contradift   the  exiftence  of    more 

mentions  two  kings  of  Crete  of  the  name  of  than   the  one   celebrated    perfonage  of  that 

Minos.       But   the   traditions  of  the   Cretans  name,   acknowleged  by  the  writers  mentioned 

themfelves,    reported  in    his    fifth  book  (2),  in  the  text. 

(t)  c.  64.  (2)  c.  79. 

Z  co  temporary 


17©  HISTORY    OF    GREECE, 

APPENDIX  cotemporary  with  Euryftheus,  king  of  Mycenae ;  becaufe  the  fuppo- 
CHAP.  IV.  fition  is  not  only  unfupported  but  contradicted  by  teftimony  equal  to 
any  concerning  thofe  times ;  indeed  by  the  whole  tenor  of  early  hi- 
storical tradition.  We  come  next  to  that  period  which  Homer  has 
illuflrated;  and  concerning  this,  confidered  by  itfelf,  the  difference 
among  authors  has  been  comparatively  none.  In  proceeding  then  to 
the  dark  ages  which  follow,  I  have  no  doubt  in  shortening  the  period 
from  the  return  of  the  Heracleids  to  the  inftitution  of  the  Olympian 
feflival  by  Iphitus.  The  number  of  years  that  paifed  can  be  calcu- 
lated only  upon  conjectural  grounds;  but  Newton's  conjecture,  if  not 
perfectly  unexceptionable,  appears  fo  far  the  mo  ft  probable  as  it  is 
moft  confident  with  historical  tradition,  and  even  with  what  I  hold 
to  be  the  bed  chronological  authorities,  thofe  of  Strabo  and  Paulanias. 
For  the  period  then  of  108  years,  between  the  inftitution  of  the  festi- 
val by  Iphitus  and  the  firft  Olympiad,  or  that  in  which  Corcebus 
won,  I  look  upon  it  as  merely  imaginary;  its  exiftence  being  ftrongly 
contradicted  by  Strabo  and  Paufanias,  and  fupported  -by  no  com- 
parable authority.  I  am  lefs  able  to  determine  my  belief  concerning 
the  dates  of  the  Meflenian  wars  ;  nor  can  1  Satisfy  inyfelf  concerning 
thofe  of  Attic  or  Corinthian  hiitory.  In  the  former  cafes  the  bufinefs 
was  only  to  detect  falfehood  ;  here  we  have  the  nicer  talk  to  afcertain 
truth.  Upon  the  whole,  however,  Newton  appears  to  have  Strong 
reafon  on  his  fide  throughout.  He  feems  indeed  to  have  allowed  too 
little  interval  between  the  legislation  of  Draco  and  that  of  Solon; 
and  perhaps  this  is  not  the  only  inftance  in  which  his  Shortening 
fyStem  has  been  carried  rather  to  an  extreme  :  but  where  centuries 
are  in  dispute,  we  muft  not  make  difficulties  about  a  few  years.  It 
would  be  of  fome  importance,  if  it  were  poSTible,  to  determine  the 
age  of  that  remarkable  tyrant  of  Argos,  Fheidon,  the  moft  powerful 
Heiodot.l.vi.  Grecian  prince  of  his  time,  the  fir  St  who  coined  Silver  in  Pelopon- 
Strabo  l.viii.  nefus,  the  firft  who  established  a  Standard  for  the  weights  and  mea- 
P-  353-  fures  ufed  over  the  whole  peninfula,  and  who,  as  head  of  the  Hc- 

racleid  families,  and  legal  heir  of  Hercules,  claimed,  and  by  the  pre- 
valence 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 


17; 


valence  of  his  power  affumed,  the  prefidency  of  the  Olympian  fedi-  appendix 

val.     This   lad  circumdance,  if  the  Olympic  regider  was   perfect,  CHAP. IV. 

mould  have  put  his  age  beyond  quedion  :  yet  authors  who  pofTefTed      *"" ~*~—> 

the  bed  means  of  information  are  not  to  be  reconciled  concerning  it. 

Paufanias  fays  that  Pheidon   prefided  in  the  eighth  Olympiad.     But  c™2'n' 

according:  to  Strabo-the  Eleians  prefided  without  interruption  to  the   Strabo>'-v» 

.  .  P-  355- 

twenty-fixth  ;   and   if  the  copies  of  Herodotus   are  faithful,   Phei-   Herodot.l.v 

C»   I  *  7 

don  mud  have  lived  toward  the  fiftieth  Olympiad,  where  New- 
ton would  fix  him.  But  the  copies  of  Herodotus  are  not  without 
appearance  of  defect  where  Pheidon  is  mentioned.  The  chronolopers 
have  been  defirous  of  imputing  error  to  thofe  of  Strabo,  which  affert 
that  Pheidon  was  tenth  in  defcent  from  Temenus  :  they  would  have 
him  but  tenth  from  Hercules ;  and  thus  they  would  make  Strabo 
agree  with  Paufinias  and  with  the  marbles.  But  this  does  not  com- 
plete their  bufinefs.  Strabo  will  dill  contradict  the  prefidency  of 
Pheidon  in  the  eighth  Olympiad.  Moreover  that  writer,  as  his 
copies  now  fland,  is  confident  with  himfelf ;  and,  upon  Newton's 
fydem,  confident  with  Herodotus.  It  can  fcarcely  be  faid  that  Pau- 
fanias, as  his  copies  fland,  is  confident  with  himfelf:  at  lead  he  is 
very  deficient  where  it  was  clearly  his  defire  to  give  full  information. 
I  am  therefore  inclined,  with  Newton,  to  fuppofe  an  error  in  the  date 
which  dands  affigned,  as  on  his  authority,  for  the  prefidency  of  Phei- 
don. But  when  precifely  Pheidon  did  prefide,  it  diould  feem  Strabo 
could  not  learn  to  his  fatisfaclion  ;  otherwife  he  would  probably  have 
named  the  Olympiad,  and  not  have  dated  merely  by  the  pedigree. 

Having  thus  far  then  rifked  the  declaration  of  my  own  opinion,  I 
fhall  not  however  preiume  to  impofe  it  upon  the  reader  in  any  in- 
dance.  I  fhall  infert  in  the  margin  Dr.  Blair's  dates  together 
with  Sir  Ifaac  Newton's,  after  having  thus  given  the  bed  pre- 
paratory adidance  in  my  power  to  direct  the  choice  between  them  : 
forry  that  I  cannot  better  fatisfy  either  my  readers  or  myfelf.  Some 
farther  obfervations  will  occafionally  occur  in  the  fequel. 

Z2  CHAPTER 


\-nr*J 


172  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAPTER     V. 

The  Hiftory  of  the  fouthern  Provinces  of  Greece,  from 
the  Return  of  the  Heracleids  to  the  Completion  of 
the  Conqueft  of  Messenia  by  the  Lacedaemonians. 

SECTION     I. 

Recapitulation  of  events  in   Greece.     General  change  of  Governments 
from  Monarchal  to  Republican.     Different  kinds  of  Government  di- 
jlingaijhed  by  the  Greeks.     Summary  of  the  Hi/lories  of  Crete,  Argos, 
Corinth,  Eleia,  Arcadia. 

CHAP.  V.  ~W  7E  have  now  taken  fuch  a  view  of  the  hrft  population  of  Greece, 
SECT.  I.  V  v  and  the  rife  of  its  principal  cities,  as  memorials  remaining 
inable  us  :  we  have  feen  one  common  war  profecuted  by  a  league  of 
the  chiefs  of  die  different  ftates,  under  a  prince  acknowleged  fuperior 
to  the  reft:  we  have  remarked  a  great  revolution,  that  changed  the 
inhabitants  and  the  government  of  the  fouthern  part  of  the  country, 
checked  the  progrefs  of  arts  and  civilization,  and  eftabliihed  new 
divifions  of  the  Grecian  people.  We  have  then  traced  the  growth 
of  three  fingular  inftitutions  which  renewed  and  ftrengthened  the  po- 
litical and  focial  union  of  the  nation,  and  frill  more  the  union  in  re- 
ligion, which  formed  the  mod  powerful  bond.  Through  all  ages 
Grecian  hiftory  runs  in  various  ftreams,  here  meeting,  there  fe- 
parating,  and  never,  as  the  hiftory  of  mod  other  nations,  like  a  river 
that  from  various  fources  has  collected  its  waters,  uniting  into  one 
ample  unbroken  flood.  But  the  return  of  the  Heracleids  was  the  laft 
great  revolution  that  gave  a  new  people  to  any  large  proportion  of  the 
country,  and  a  general  turn  to  its  affairs  j  in  confequence  of  which 
they  affumed  thofe  channels  in  which  we  fhall  hereafter  moftly  fee 

them  flow. 

Age- 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  173 

A  general  revolution  indeed,  but  of  a  very  different  kind,  followed    chat.  v. 
fhortly;    a   revolution  of   each  ftate   within  itfelf;    which,   tho  at     SECT.  I. 
firft  it  made  no  fenfible  change  in  the  political  fituation  of  the  country 
at  large,  had  yet  confequences   of  higheft  importance.      We  have 
obferved  that   the  governments  of  the  little  ftates  of  Greece  in  the 
firft  ages,  tho  of  no  very  regular  and  certain   conftitution,  were  all 
limited   monarchies.      Homer  feems    to   have  known   no   other :  he 
makes  no  mention  either  of  a  pare  republic  or  of  the  abfolute  rule  of 
one  man.     When   therefore  the   Heracleids   poffefTed  themfelves    of 
Peloponnefus,    they   eftablifhed   everywhere   that   hereditary  limited 
monarchy  which  was   the  only  government  affimilated   to   the  ideas 
and  temper  of  their  age.     The  difpofition   toward  a   union   of  the 
whole   nation    into  one  kingdom   under  the  powerful   monarchs  of 
Argos,  which  had  appeared  before  the  Trojan  war,   was  checked  by 
the  exteniive  calamities  and  confufion  which  followed  that  expedition, 
and  ftill  more  by  the  equality  eftablifhed  among  the  Heracleid  princes 
in  Peloponnefus;  and  it  was  foon  after  finally  diffipated  through  the 
oppofite  bias  which  the  politics  of  the  country  univerfally  affumed. 
Thofe  vigorous  principles  of  democracy,  which  had  always  exifted  in 
the  Grecian  governments,  began  to  ferment ;  and  in  the  courfe  of  a 
few  ages  monarchy  was  everywhere  abolifhed  ;  the  very  name  of  kin"- 
was  profcribed ;  a  commonwealth  was  thought  the  only  government 
to  which  it  became  men  to  fubmit;  and  the  term  of  Tyrant  was  in- 
troduced to  denote  thofe  who,  in   oppofition  to  thefe  new  political 
principles,  acquired  monarchal  fway.    We  are  very  deficient  of  means 
to  trace  this  remarkable  revolution  among  fo  many  independent  little 
ftates ;  yet  it  muft  be  endeavoured,  as  far  as  may  be  from  the  fcattered 
information  remaining,  to  give  a  general  idea  of  the  political  confti- 
tution of  Greece  through  afeparate  account  of  every  commonwealth, 
proportioned  to  its  importance  among  the  concerns  of  the  nation. 

The  many  little  ftates  into  which  Greece  was  divided,  the  variety 
of  political  cuftoms  that  naturally  arofe  among  them,  the  continual 
ftruggles  of  difcordant  interefts,  and  the  frequent  revolutions  infuing, 

gave 


74 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  V. 
SECT.  I. 


Homer.    p;\f- 
fim. 
Thucyd.  1.  i, 

ci  3-'       . 
Anftot.  Polit. 
1.  iii.  c.  14. 
Dionyf.  Ha- 
lic.  Antiq. 
Rom.  1.  v. 
Ariftot.  Polit. 
1.  iii,  c.  14. 


Corn.  Nep. 
v.  Miltiud. 


Diodor.   Sic. 
1.  i.    c.  j8. 
Plutar.  Thef. 


gave  occafion  to  various  diftinctions  and  definitions  of  forms  of  go- 
vernment, which  were  afterward  with  more  or  lefs  accuracy  adopted 
by  the  Romans,  and  from  them  have  been  received  into  all  the  lan- 
guages of  modern  Europe.  The  Greeks  diftinguifhed,  at  leaft  in 
theory,  fix  fimple  forms  of  government  -,  four  legal  and  admitted; 
two  not  of  acknowleged  legality,  but  generally  fupported  by  violence. 
The  legal  were  Monarchy,  Hereditary  or  Legally  eftablifhed  Oligar- 
chy, Ariflocracy,  and  Democracy  :  the  illegal  Tyranny,  and  Amnned 
or  Tyrannical  Oligarchy.  But  abfolute  Monarchy,  as  we  have  al- 
ready obferved,  was  unknown  among  the  Greeks  as  a  legal  conftitu- 
tion.  The  title  of  King  therefore  implied  with  them  as  with  u% 
not  a  Right  of  Abfolute  Power,  but  a  Legal  Supeiiority  of  Dignity  and 
Authority  in  One  perfon  above  all  others  of  the  date,  and  for  their  bene- 
fit. The  peculiar  and  mod  indifpenlible  rights  of  Royalty  were  Reli- 
gious Supremacy,  and  Military  Command.  In  the  early  ages  Kings 
alfo  commonly  exercifed  Judicial  Authority.  But  Legiflation  feems 
never  to  have  been  regularly  within  their  lingle  prerogative.  After 
the  general  abolition  of  Monarchy  in  Greece,  if  a  Citizen  of  a  Com- 
monwealth was  railed,  through  whatfoever  means,  to  Monarchal 
Power,  his  government  was  intitled  Tyranny,  and  himfelf  Tyrant  : 
names  which  feem  fcarcely  to  have  been  originally  terms  of  reproach  ; 
tho  fuch  monarchy  was  generally  very  defervedly  reprobated.  ,  A  Di- 
flinction  of  Families  into  thofe  of  Higher  and  Lower  Rank,  appears  to 
have  obtained  very  early  throughout  Greece  ;  and  nowhere  more  than 
at  Athens,  where,  by  the  confTtution  of  Thefcus,  the  Eupatrides, 
or  Nobly  Born,  formed  a  diftinct  order  of  the  ftate,  with  great  pri- 
vileges *.  With  the  downfal  of  Monarchy,  however,  Hereditary  No- 
bility feems  to  have  declined  everywhere,  and  Wealth  became  the 
principal  criterion  of  Rank.  But  every  Citizen  in  every  Grecian  ftate 
was  bound  to  Military  Service  ;  and  equally  the  neceflity  of  the  com- 
monwealth and  the  choice  of  the  individual  would  decide  that  the 


Ariftotle  dillingui/hes  the  nobles  by  the  title  pfwyiwrjfo^     Polit.  1.  iv.  c.  4. 


ncl 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  175 

rich   mould   ferve   on   horfeback.     Thus  was  created  very  generally     CHAP.  V. 
among  the  Grecian  republics  a  Rank  of  Citizens  determined  by  their     sect.  I. 
ability  to  ferve  in  War  on  Horfeback  at  their  own  expence.   Such  was   Herod.  1.  viii. 
the  origin  of  Knighthood  in  Rome,  and  fince  in  the  feudal  king-    Ariftot. Polit. 
doms  of  Europe.     Where  the  Noble  or  the  Rich  held  all  the  powers   strIb0C'i3'x 
of  the  date,  they  themfclves  called  their  government  Aristocracy,   p-  481,482. 
which  fignifies  Government  by  the  Better  People.     But  as  this  form 
was  fometimes  oppreflive,  and  generally  unpopular,  the  lefs  honorable 
term  of  Oligarchy,  fignifying  fimply  Government  by  a  Few,  grew 
into  more  general  ufc;  and  the  term  Ariftocracy  was  more  particu- 
larly applied  to   thofe   governments  where   perfons  elected  for  their 
Merit  by  the  People  held  the  principal  power.    Democracy  fignified   Ariftot. Polk. 
Government  by  the  People  at  large  ;  all  the  Freemen  of  the  ftate  in 
aflembly  forming  the  Legal  Sovereign,  Abfolute,    and  Uncontrolable. 
But  as  Democracy  was  beyond  all  other  governments  fubject  to  irre- 
gularity and  abfurd   conduct,    where  unchecked   by  fome  balancing 
power  lodged   in   few  hands,  it   became  diftinguifhed  by  the  oppro- 
brious title  of  Ochlocracy,   Mob-rule.     But  moft  of  the  Grecian 
governments  had  fome  mixture  of  two  or  more  of  thefe  forms.     A 
iimple  monarchy,  indeed,  would  be  defpotifm  and  tyranny :   a  fimple 
oligarchy  but  the  tyranny  of  an  afTociation,  inftead  of  the  tyranny  of 
an  individual ;  and  a  fimple  democracy  fcarcely  above  anarchy.    From 
the  various  mixture,   therefore,  of  thefe  fimple  forms,   decided  whe- 
ther by  accidental  cuftom  or  by  the  various  prevalence  of  various  in- 
terefts,    arofe  new  diftinctions,    and   fometimes   new   names.       The 
mixture  of  oligarchy  and  democracy,  in  which  the  oligarchal  power 
was  iuperior,  yet  the  democratic  furhced  to  fecure  freedom  and  equal 
right   to  the  people,  might,  according  to  Ariftotle,  be  properly  di- 
ftinguifhed from  fimple  oligarchy  by  the  more  honorable  title  of  Ari- 
ftocracy.    That  mixture  where  the  democratic  power  prevailed,  yet  Ariftot.  Polk 
was  in  fome  degree  balanced  by  authority  lodged  in  fteadier  hands,   '■ ,v-  c-  6  & 
is  diftinguifhed  by  the  fame  great  author  by  the  name  of  Polity. 

It 


i76  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  V.  It  may  here  perhaps  be  a  digreffion  neither  in  itfelf  abfolutely  im- 
sect.  I.  proper,  nor  intirely  ufelefs  for  illuftration  of  the  fubjecl:  before  us, 
to  obferve  that  the  Britifn  Conftitution  is  a  compofition  of  All  the 
Legal  fimple  forms  acknowleged  by  the  Greeks,  Monarchy,  Oligarchy, 
Ariftocracy,  and  Democracy.  Monarchy  with  us  perfectly  accords 
with  the  Grecian  fenfe  of  the  term.  The  Lords  form  the  Oligarchal 
part  of  the  conftitution  j  and  the  Houfe  of  Commons  properly  the 
Ariftocratical ;  being  compofed  of  perfons  elected  by  the  People  to 
Legiflative  Authority  for  Merit  real  or  fuppofed  *.  The  Democratical 
Principle,  Equal  Law,  or,  in  the  Greek  term,  Ifonomy,  fingularly 
pervades  the  whole  ;  the  privileges  of  the  peer  extending  in  no  degree 
to  his  family,  and  the  defendants  even  of  the  Blood  Royal  being 
People,  fubjedl:  to  the  fame  laws,  the  fame  burdens,  and  the  fame 
judicature  with  the  meanell  citizen -f-.  Rights  of  Election,  Trial  by 
Jury,  and  parilh  and  tything  Offices,  together  with  the  Right  of  Ad- 
dreffing  and  Petitioning  either  the  executive  or  any  branch  of  the 
legiflature,  form  a  large  Democratical  Power,  more  wifely  given,  and 
more  wifely  bounded,  notwithstanding  fome  defedts,  than  in  any  other 
government  that  ever  exifled. 

We  have  feen  that  in  the  large  and  valuable  ifland  of  Crete  a 
regular  free  government,  under  the  prefidency  of  an  hereditary  prince, 

*  It   is   remarkable    tint   Ifocrates   applies  the  royal  legiflator,    fpeaking    with   the   au- 

the  term  Ariilocracy  as  a  title  of  compliment  thority  of  his  Witenayemote,  -]5  ;elc  man   yy 

to  the  Democracy  of  Athens,  diftinguifhing  it  Folcruhrer-  pyjvo,  &t  capme  50  eaclig.      L.L. 

as  a  well  conftituted  democracy  from  thofe  ill-  Anglofax.    a  D.  Wilkins   ed.    p.  77.  which, 

formed  governments  which   might  deferve  the  notwithstanding    the    general    energy    of    the  • 

nameofochlocracy(i).  But  in  that  writer's  time  Englifh  language,  can  fcarccly  be  rendered  in 

the    term   ariilocracy   feems    fcarcely   to   have  modern  terms  with  equal. force.      This  :t  was 

been  yet  appropriated  to  any  particular  fpecies  for  which  our  anceflcrs  contended,   when,  in 

of  government.      He   acknowleges   but   three  the  reigns  of  the  early  Norman  princes,  they 

forms,  oligarchy,  democracy,  and  monar:hy(2).  fo  often  and  fo  earncftly  demanded  the  retlora- 

f  This  Right  of  EquAL  law,   the  peculiar  tion  of  the  Saxon   laws;   and  this  it  was  that 

boafi:  of  the   Englilh   conftitution,  is   derived  gave  origin  to    the  judicium  parium  aut 
from  the   Saxon  government.      It  is    declared      legem  terr*  of  Magna  Charta,  which  that 

mere  than  once  in  the  Saxon  laws  yet  extant;  famous  deed  has  fanftified  as   the  birthright  of 

but  never  was  more  emphatically  exprefTed  than  every   Englimman,  the   Folkricht  of  the 

in  a  phrafe  of  the  laws  of  Edgar  :  Ic  pille,  fays  land. 

(1)  Panathen.  p.  512,  ed.  Paris.  Auger.  (2)  Panathen,  p.  514,  ed.  Paris.  Auger. 

was 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

was  eflablilhed  almoft  before  Grecian  hiftory  can  be  faid  to  begin. 
The  naval  power  acquired  by  Minos  appears  to  have  funk  after  him, 
and  tlie  Argian  princes  gained  the  fuperiority  in  the  Grecian  feas, 
together  with  the  fovereignty  of  the  fmaller  iflands  neareft  to  the 
continent  of  Greece.  Idomeneus,  grandfon  of  Minos,  and  com- 
mander of  the  Cretan  troops  in  the  Trojan  war,  was  however  among 
the  moft  powerful  of  the  Grecian  chiefs  of  his  time.  We  are  allured 
by  Homer  that  this  prince  was  one  of  the  few  who  returned  fafe  Odyfl".  ••  »«• 
from  that  expedition  ;  and  no  confiderable  revolution  in  Crete  feems 
to  have  been  known  either  to  Homer  or  Hefiod.  It  mull  however 
have  been  foon  after  them  that  monarchy  was  abolifhed  there. 
What  caufed  the  revolution,  or  how  it  was  effected,  we  have  no  au- 
thentic information  :  but  we  find  the  principal  cities  became  early 
feparate  independent  commonwealths.  The  purpofe  of  that  rigid 
military  education,  which  the  Cretan  laws  beyond  all  things  inforced, 
was  perhaps  originally  more  to  keep  their  own  flaves  in  fubjectiou 
than  for  any  view  of  foreign  conqueft,  or  even  any  apprehenfion  of 
invafion  at  home.  After  the  abolition  of  monarchy,  its  effecl:  was 
chiefly  Ceen  in  continual  wars  between  the  feveral  republics  within 
the  ifland.  Thus  however  the  Cretans  preferved  through  many  ages 
their  reputation  as  a  Military  people.  Their  Naval  fkill  alfo  became  strabo  l 
proverbial  j  but  it  was  chiefly  exerted  in  piracy:  and  tho  the  Cretan  P«481- 
Laws  held  their  fame,  yet  the  Cretan  Character  for  want  of  probity 
became  infamous ;  nor  ever  after  th^  Trojan  war  was  Crete  of  any 
confiderable  weight  in  the  fcale  of  Grecian  politics  *. 

Of  the  flates  on  the  continent  of  Greece,  Argos  was  among  the 
firfl:  to  abolilh  monarchy  ;  or,  however,  fo  to  reduce  its  powers  that 
we  hardly  perceive  among  hiftorians  whether  it  exifled  or  no.     The 

*   Kf^s  «rfo5  AiyirtTr.t  feems  to  have  been  an  of   the   elder    writers,    Ephorus,    Xenophon, 

ffarly  proverb  of  nearly  the  fame  import  as  our  Calliithencs,  and  Plato,   held  in  high  eiteem. 

Englifh   Set  a  thief  to  catch  a  thief.      Poly-  The   change  indeed   is   particularly  remarked 

bius,  in  the  fourth,  and  ilill  more  particularly  by   Strabo  :    Uip    &  t»?  KpSrw   o^oXoyTiTai    Sn 

in  the  fixthbook  of  his  hiltory,  fpeaks  ftroi  gly  r.ura   Tot;  •sra*«iou;  x(',ov^   inyx"-'1"    ivtoy.ovfj.ir/), 

to   the  infamy  of  the    Cretan   character,   and  Ka'   C'i?wt<*?  ixvTrn  tobj  ifirw;  rut  'ZKXr,tuv  a.-ni- 

even   denies  all  merit  to  the  Cretan  laws  and  <?*.»;>. trifot  Si  wfi?  to  %£ifo»  persGccXiy  'esi 

conftitution  ;   which  were  probably  in  his  time  **"<■«.     Strabo,  1.  x.  p.  477. 
much  altered  from  what,  as  he  fays,  the  ablelt 

A  a  Argian 


178  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  V.     Arglan  government  is  (aid  to  have  become  republican  fo  early  as  on 
SECT.  I.      the  death  of  Ceifus.   fon  of  Temenus   the  Heracleid.     But  neither 
Paufan,  1.  ii.    was  Argos  fortunate  in  the  change.     We  have  indeed  no  very  parti- 
cular account  of  either   the  conftitution  or  the  tranfaclions  of  the 
Argian  commonwealth ;   but  we  find  it  fubjecl:  to  frequent  and  vio- 
lent  diforders.     The   higher  and   lower  ranks   were   continually  at 
variance  :   the  democratical  faction  was   moftly  fuperior :   the  prieft- 
hood   had  peculiar   authority  :    fometimes    tyrants    raifed    themfelves 
Herodot.l.vi.   over  all  :   once  the   ilaves  got   pofieffion  of  the  city,  and   filled   the 
magiftracies.      The   Argian   appears   to  have  been   originally  an   i  11  — 
conftituted  government;    and  no  legiilator  of  fuperior  wifdom  and 
probity  ever  acquired  the  power,   no  fortunate  train  of  circumftances 
ever  occurred  of  themfelves  to  unite  liberty  and  administration  upon 
a  firm  and  even  baiis.     One  famous  tyrant,   Pheidon,  lineal  fucceiTor 
of  the   Heracleids,  a   prince  of  great  abilities,   but  no   moderation, 
c.  127.  raifed  himfelf  rather  than  his  country  to  a  fuperiority  which  ceafed 

p'^.g]  'X1U'  with  him.  Under  its  republican  government,  impotent  abroad  as 
Paufan.  1.  vi.  unhappy  at  home,  Argos  finally  loft  that  preeminence  which  under 
monarchal  rule  it  had  obtained  among  the  Grecian  ftates.  Far  from 
leading  the  affairs  of  Peloponnefus,  every  little  town  of  Argolis  itfelf 
refilled  the  Argian  dominion  :  even  Mycenas  long  afferted  indepen- 
dency. Epidaurus,  Trcezene,  and  Hermione  always  maintained 
themfelves  as  felf-governed  republics. 

We  have  already  remarked  the  fortunate  fituation  of  Corinth  by 
which  that  city  became  very  early  the  greatefh  emporium  of  Greece. 
It  was  probably  fortunate  alio  in  its  conftitution  :  for,  as  far  as  ap- 
pears, without  any  violent  commotion,  monarchy  nourished  there 
longer  than  in  any  other  of  the  principal  Grecian  cities.  At  length 
p  fan  1.  ii.  t^ie  Bacchiads  (a  numerous  branch  of  the  royal  family  lb  named  from 
c-  4-  their   anceftor   Bacchis,    fifth  monarch  in  fuccefhon    from    Aletes} 

Olympiad  xxx.  ... 

3rd  year.  pUt  to  death  Teleftes  the   reigning  prince,  and,  aiTiiming   the   20- 

Befoie  Chrift  *  _  °  °     r  &  t> 

658.      Naaton.  yernment  in  affociation,  formed  an  Oligarchv.   An  annual  magiftrate, 

Before    the    lit  . 

olympiad         chofen  from  among  themfelves,  prefided  with  the  title  of  Prytanis, 
Before  ch»ft^  but  witn  verv  limited  prerogatives.     Tho  oligarchies  were  generally 

odious, 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  179 


CHAP.  V. 
SECT.  I. 


odious,  yet  Corinth  flourished  under  the  Bacchiads.     Syracufe  and 
Corcyra,  Corinthian  colonies,  appear  to  have  been,  under  their  ad- 
ministration, fubject  to   the   mother-country.     Afterward   they  ac- 
quired independency  :   but  the  early  power  and  wealth  of  both,  and 
ltill    more    the    friendly    connection    of   Syracufe    with    the   parent 
State     remaining    through    many    ages,     prove    the    wifdom     with 
which   they    were    fettled.     Syracufe    requires    a   hiStory    by    itfelf. 
Corcyra  founded  early  its   own   colonies   Epidamnus  and  Apollonia 
in   Illyricum.     After  the  Bacchiads  had  held  the  administration   of  OI.  xliii.  4. 
Corinth   during  fome  generations,  they  were  expelled  by  Cypfelus,    "'•*-'■   6o5- 
who,    according    to   the    Grecian    writers,    in    his    own    perfon   re-   Ol.  xxx.  2. 
ftored   monarchy,  or,  as  it   became   popular  to   phrafe  it,  tyranny ;   B.  C.  659. 
tho,   as-  fuperior  wifdom   and  virtue  alone   never  were   fuppofed  to 
give  a  claim    to   the   titles    of  king   or   tyrant,  it   fcarcely    appears 
amon<>-  historians  by  what  right  Cypfelus  bore  either.     He  was  in 
truth  the  head  of  a  party,  by  the  Strength  and  through  the  favor  of 
^  which  he   ruled.     Determined   to  reft  his    authority,  and  even  his   Arift#  p0i;ti 
fafety,  wholly   on   his  good    deeds   and   his  power  of  attaching   to   1-v.  c.  12. 
himfelf  the  affections  of  men,  he  constantly  refuled   the  invidious, 
but  apparently  not  unufual  distinction  of  a  guard,  to  protect  his  per- 
fon ao-ainft  thofe  attempts   of  the  defeated  faction  which,  from  the 
common  violence  of  party  in  the  Grecian  commonwealths,   might  be 
enough  to   be   apprehended.     His   virtues,  indeed,  and  particularly 
his  moderation  and  clemency,  are  allowed  by  all  ;  yet  he  is  never- 
thelefs  univerfally  by  Grecian  writers  called  tyrant  of  Corinth,  and 
his  government  tyranny.     His  fon  Periander,  who  fucceeded   to  his 
power,  is  not  equally  famed  for  the  mildnefs  of  his  administration ; 
yet    for  his    abilities,  learning,    and    munificent    incouragement    of 
learned  men,  was  ranked  among  the  fages  celebrated  by  the  title  of 
the  Seven  Wifemen  of  Greece.     Periander  was  alio  fucceeded  by  his   oi.    W.   4. 
fon,  whofe  reign,  however,  was  Short.     A  commonwealth  was  now  B.  C.  557. 
established,  in  which  enough  was  retained  of  the  oligarchy  to  tern-    oi.  xlviir.  4! 
per  the  turbulence  and  capriciouihefs  of  democratical  rule;  and  Co-   B-  C.  585. 
rinth,  tho  not  the  moft  renowned,  was  perhaps  the  happieft  go- 

A  a  2  vernment 


iSo 


HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 


CHAP.V. 
SECT.  I. 


Thueyd.  I.  i. 
c.  13. 

Ol.  xxx.  4. 
B.  C.  657. 

N. 
Ol.  xxix.  1. 
B.  C.  664. 

B. 


Polyb.  1.  ii. 
p.  128. 

Strabo,  1.  viii. 
p.  383,  384. 


vernment  of  Greece.  The  local  circumftances  of  the  city  appear 
indeed  to  have  influenced  the  difpofition  of  the  people,  whofe  turn 
was  always  more  to  commerce  and  arts  than  to  politics,  arms,  or 
fcience  ;  tho  in  thefe  alfo  they  acquired  their  ihare  of  fame.  They, 
firft  among  the  Greeks,  built  veffels  of  that  improved  conftru&ion  for 
war  (whofe  form  is  now  not  certainly  known)  which  we  commonly 
diftinguifh  by  the  Latin  name  Triremes  ;  and  the  firft  fca-fight  re- 
corded in  any  hiftory  was  between  them  and  their  own  colony  of 
Corcyra.  The  Ifthmian  games,  really  a  late  eflablifhment  tho 
boafting  of  great  antiquity,  were  celebrated  within  their  territory  and 
under  their  direction,  and  brought  them  confiderable  advantages. 
Luxury  indeed  was  the  unfailing  attendant  upon  wealth  :  but  colo- 
nization and  commerce  no  lefs  certainly  produced  naval  power;  and 
Corinth,  tho  never  fingly  formidable  to  its  neighbours,  was  always 
refpecled  among  the  Grecian  ftates  *. 

Achaia  remained  during  fome  generations  united  under  monarchs 
the  pofterity  of  Tifamenus,  fon  of  Oreftes.  Refifting  then  with 
fuccefs  the  tyrannical  conduct  of  Ogygus,  the  laft  prince  of  that 
race,  the  twelve  principal  towns  became  fo  many  independent  com- 
monwealths. Thus  divided,  and  each  ftate  by  itfelf  inconfiderable, 
Achaia  could  take  no  important  fhare  in  the  political  affairs  of 
Greece. 

The  very  fingular  circumftances  of  Eleia,  which  in  a  great  degree 
fecluded  its  people  from  politics  and  war,  have  been  already  men- 


*  Tho  Pindar's  buiinefs  was  panegyric, 
yet  he  would  panegyrize  upon  the  bed  grounds 
that  his  fubjeft  afforded;  and  he  feemsjuftly 
to  have  characterized  Corinth  in  terms  of 
eulogy  that  would  have  been  but  prepofteroufly 
applied  to  moil  of  the  Grecian  cities  : 

Tay  o>.Z'iUv  Kopujoe,   Io-O^iof 

Ev  Ta  yap   Etvo/xia  vaict,    xacriy- 
»r;Tai  Tt ,   Aiy.sc  ■woTuwi' 

A&tyu'his  J&t0poK,   xui  o^o- 
TfcTTos    EipaVa,   Ta/^iai 


'Av5p«n  ■eAoutou,   ;£piVtai 
[Ict^E;  \vQov\ov  ©e'^utos. 

-Let  my  lays 


Olymp. 


Tlie  fame  of  happy  Corinth  bear  afar  : 
Which  as  a  gate  to  Neptune's  ilthmus  (lands, 
Proud  of  her  blooming  youth  and  manly  bands. 
There  fair  Eunomia,  with  her  filler-train 
Bleft  Peace  and  Jultice,  hold  their  ileady  reign; 
Who  wealth  and  fmiling  eafe  on  mortals  fhow'r, 
From  Themis'  genial  care  drawing  their  natal 
hour. 
Pye's  Translation  of  the  Olympic  Odes 
not  tranflated  by  Weft. 

tionedv 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  181 

tioned.     But  it  was  not  poSSible  by  any  institutions  to  deftroy  that    CHAP.  v. 

SECT.  I. 


elasticity  given  by  the  author  of  nature  to  the  mind  of  man,  which 


continually  excites   to  a&ion,    often   palpably   againft    intereft,    and 
which  was  ftrong  in  the  general  temper  of  the  Greeks.     Moftly  in- 
deed attached  to  rural  bulinefs  and  rural  pleafures,  the  Eleians  con- 
fined their  ambition  to  the  flattering  preeminence  allowed   them  in 
the  fplendid  afSembly  of  principal  people  from  every  Grecian  State  at 
the  Olympian  feftival,  and  the  perhaps  yet  more  flattering  relpecf  in 
which   their  facred  character  was   univerSally  held ;   which  was  fuch   Strabo,  1. viii. 
that  the  armies  of  the  moft  powerful  States  of  Greece,  having  occa-   p* 35 
fion  to  croSs  any  part  of  the  Eleian  territory,   Surrendered  their  arms 
on  entering,   in  truft  to  receive  them  again  when  they  had  paffed  the 
borders.      Yet  reftlefs  Spirits  arofe,  not  to  be  fo  Satisfied.      Often  the 
Eleians  ingaged  as  auxiliaries   in  the  wars  of  other  Slates  ;  generally 
indeed  on  pretence  oS  aSferting  the  cauSe  of  religion  ;   but  in  that  caufe 
itSelS  they  could  not  agree  among  themSelves.     During  Some  genera- 
tions, while  monarchy  SubSifted  in  the  posterity  oSIphitus,  Eleia  conti- 
nued united  under  one  government.  But  at  length  the  Spirit  of  demo- 
cracy prevailed  there  as  elfewhere  in  Greece,  and  with  the  Same  effects. 
Every  considerable  town  claimed  independency  :  PiSa  and  Elis  became   Strabo,  l.viiL 
Separate  commonwealths.      Olympia  was  Situated  within  the  territory 
oS  PiSa  on  the  northern  bank  of  the  river  Alpheius,  which  alone  Se- 
parated  its   precindt  Srom   that  city.     Elis  was   between    thirty  and 
Sorty  miles  diftant,  but  the  Eleians  retained  the  excluSive  guardian- 
Ship  of  the  temple  and  Superintendancy  of  the  feftival.    The  Pifacans, 
however,  difputed  their  ri^ht :   wars   arofe   between  the  two  cities:   Hei0lIot-1-vu 
each  endeavoured  to  gain  allies;  and  at  one  time  Pheidon,  tyrant  of  Strabo,  l.  viii. 
Argos,  claiming  to  be  by  birth  the  proper  representative  of  Hercules, 
took  to  himfelf  the  guardianShip  of  the  temple,  and  prefided   by  his 
own  authority  at  the  games.     At  other  times  the  PiSteans  prevailed,   Strabo,  1. viii. 
and  they  prefided  at  Some  Olympiads  :    but  at  length,  tho  at  what  Diodor  Sic. 
time   we  are  not  certainly  inSormed,   the  Eleians  deftroyed  PiSa  So   L  xv-  c-  78- 

~  .  -  Paufan.  1.  v. 

that  Scarcely  a  ruin  remained  ;  and  ever  after,  excepting  in  the  104th  c.  10.  &  l.vL 

„.  c.  22. 

Olytu- 


lS-2 


HISTORY"    OF     GREECE. 


CHAP.  v.     Olympiad,  when   the  Arcadians  violently  interfered,  they  held  the 
SECT.  I.      prelidency  undifhurbed  while  the  feftival  exifted  *. 

Arcadia  was  early  divided  into  many  fmall  ftates,  of  which  fome 
retained  long  the  regal  form  of  government ;  or,  to  ufe  modern  terms 
perhaps  more  analogous  to  the  circumftances,  they  were  under  the 
rule  of  chiefs  like  the  Scottifh  highland  lairds :  for  the  country  being 
wholly  mountainous  and  inland,  and  the  people  moftly  herdfmen,  the 
towns  were  fmall  and  their  inhabitants  unpoliihed.  Some  improve- 
ments, however,  would  come  to  them  from  their  neighbours :  fome 
were  fuggefted  by  necefilty.  When  bordering  dates  increafed  in 
power,  the  fcattered  inhabitants  of  mountain  villages  were  no  longer 
equal  to  the  protection  of  their  herds  and  their  freedom  :  for  men, 
together  with  their  cattle,  were  (till  principal 'objects  of  plunder.  On 
the  frontier,  therefore,  where  the  mod  formidable  neighbour  arofe, 
nine  villages  uniting  made  Tegea  a  considerable  city;  and  five  others 
joined  to  form  that  of  Mantineia. 


Strabo,  1.  viii. 
P-  337- 


*  We  have  no  connected  hiftory  of  thefe 
events  from  any  one  ancient  author,  and  the 
fcraps  of  information  remaining  from  writers 
of  belt  authority  are  not  eafdy  reconcilable. 
Paufanias  (i)  affirms  that  the  Eleians  ingaged 
Pheidon,  tyrant  of  Argos,  to  protect  them 
againlt  the  Pifarans  in  the  celebration  of  the 
eighth  Olympiad.  According  to  that  report 
to  which  Strabo  gave  mod  credit,  where  it 
appears  he  efteemed  none  certain,  the  Eleians 
held  the  prefidency  of  the  feftival  till  the 
twenty-iixth  Olympiad  (2).  He  does  not  add 
how  or  by  whom  they  were  then  deprived  of 
it ;  but  in  a  prior  paflage  (3)  he  relates  that 
Pheidon,  king  of  Argos,  tenth  in  defcent 
from  Temenus  the  Heracleid,  and  the  molt 
powerful  Grecian  prince  of  his  age,  aiiumed 
to  himfelf  the  prefidency  of  the  Olympic  fefti- 
val. A  fimilar  account  is  given  by  Herodo- 
tus (4).  Strabo  adds,  that  the  Eleians,  ut- 
terly diiTatisfied,  did  not  regifter  that  Olym- 
piad, but  reckoned  it  among  what  they  termed 
Anolympiads,  and  that  upon  occafion  of  this 


violence  of  the  Argian  prinae,  they  firft  de- 
parted from  their  original  principle  of  trufting 
wholly  to  their  facred  character  for  fecurity, 
and  applied  themfelves  to  the  practice  of  arms. 
He  adds  that,  with  afliftance  from  Lacedirj- 
mon,  they  at  length  defeated  Pheidon,  and 
acquired  the  territories  of  the  Pifatis  and  Tri- 
phylia.  He  affigns  no  dates  to  any  of  thefe 
events.  But  Paufanias  fays  that  the  Pifseans, 
under  their  prince  Pantaleon,  ejected  the 
Eleians  in  the.  thirty-fourth  Olympiad,  and 
held  the  prelidency  of  the  feftival  till  after 
the  forty-eighth.  He  has  not  marked  with 
precision  the  time  when  the  Eleians  recovered 
it  and  deftroyed  Pifa  ;  but  he  fays  the  Eleians 
called  all  thofe  Anolympiads  in  which  the  Pi- 
fajans  prefided,  and  did  not  regifter  them  in 
their  catalogue.  Thefe  difcordancies  and  de- 
ficiencies in  the  accounts  of  two  fuch  authors 
as  Strabo  and  Paufanias  deferve  the  coniider- 
ation  of  thofe  who  defire  to  know  what  credit 
is  due  to  the  Olympic  chronology  for  the 
times  before  the  Perfian  war. 


(.)b. 


(a)  Strabo,  1.  viii,  p.  355. 


(3)  P-  355- 


(4)b. 


vi.  c.  127. 


SECTION 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  1&3 

SECTION     II. 

Iliflory  of  hacedtcmon.      Lcgijlation  of  Lycurgus. 

THE  conquering  Heracleids  had  fcarcely  decided  upon  the  divi-    CHAP.  v. 
fion  of  Peloponnefus  when  Ariftodemus,  to  vvhofe  fhare  Laconia  fell,     SECT.  II. 
died,  leaving  newborn  twin  fons,   Euryfthenes  and  Procles,  or,  as  he  Herodot.  1.  v. 
is  called  by  feme  writers,  Patrocles.      The  mother,  it  is  faid,  through   c'  52' 
impartial   fondnefs,    refufing    to    declare    which    was    the   elder,    it 
was  determined  that  both  thofe  princes  mould  fucceed  to  the  throne 
of  their  father  with  equal  authority,  and  that   the  pofterity  of  each 
mould  inherit  the  rights   of  their  refpeclive  anceftors.     Laconia  was 
efteemed  a  territory   of  inferior  value    to  both  Argolis  and  Mefienia,   Strabo,  1.  viii. 
vet  fo  early  as  the  Trojan  war,   we  find  Lacedasmon  reckoned  among   p'aufan.  1.  in 
the  richefr.  and  moft  powerful  cities  of  Greece.     The  divided  royalty  Ct  3> 
indeed  now  eftablimed,   was  apparently  a  form  of  government  little 
likely  to  be  lading  in  itl'elf,   or  to   give  power   or  happinefs  to  the 
people  who  lived  under  it :   but  as,  in  the  natural  body,  a  fever  often 
leads  to  a  renewal  of  the  conftitution,   fo  ftill  more  in  the  political, 
advantageous  eftablifhrnents  commonly  owe  their  very  conception  to 
violent  diibrders.     Jealoufy,  as  might  be  expected,  arofe  between  the 
kings  :  but  hence  it  became  neceffary  for  each  to  court  the  favor  of 
the  people:   and  while. in  other  Grecian  ftates  the  tyranny  of  the  one   Plutarch. 
king  drove   the  multitude   to  affume  by  violent  means  the  fupreme   Thucyd".  1.  i. 
power  to  themfelves,  in  Lacedasmon  the  conceffions  of  the  two  gave  c"  '3* 
by  degrees  fuch   importance  to  the   people,  that  the  royal   authority 
fcarcely  remained  an  object  of  either  terror  or  envy.     Thus,  however, 
the  powers  of  government  were  at  length  fo  weakened,  that  the  worft  Herodot.  1.  i. 
perhaps  of  all  tyrannies,  anarchy,   prevailed  in  Sparta.     The  evils  of  l't^l\  j    — 
this  lawlefs  fituation  appear  to  have  been  fometimes  checked  by  abler  P-  365- 

1       i    j     1  •  /•■-'•£>   t:  i  .,,,.       Plutarch. 

princes,  who  led  the  contentious  lpint  or  the  people  to  exert  ltlelf  in  LyCUrg. 
foreign  wars,  in  which  fome  fucceffes  were  obtained.     Little,  how-  c.^gfL    "l" 

ever, 


184  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  V.  ever,  of  Importance  occurs  among  the  traditions  concerning  the  La- 
SECT.  II.  cedasmonian  ftate  till  Lycurgus,  of  the  race  of  Procles,  fucceeded  his 
brother  Polyde&es  in  the  throne.  Nor  are  we  informed  with  the 
certainty  that  might  be  expected,  in  what  age,  or  even  with  what  co- 
temporaries  this  extraordinary  man  lived.  But  the  full  affurance  we 
have  of  the  fubiiftence,  through  many  centuries,  of  that  wonderful 
phenomenon  in  politics  and  in  the  hillory  of  humanity,  the  Spartan 
fyftem,  the  eftablifhment  of  which  is  by  the  ftrongeit  concurrence  of 
authorities  referred  to  him,  may  teach  us  that  we  ought  not  to  refufe 
our  belief  to  a  relation  of  facts  merely  becaufe  they  are  ftrange  ;  and 
moreover,  that  the  uncertainty  of  the  date  of  any  event  in  thofe  early 
ages,  when  no  regular  method  of  dating  was  in  ufe,  is  no  argument 
that  the  event  itfelf  is  uncertain*. 
Plutarch.  According  to  that  account  which  Plutarch  feems  to  have  preferred, 

Lycurg.  Lycurgus  was  fifth  in  defcent  from  Procles,  and  tenth  from  Hercules. 

When  the  fcepter  devolved  to  him  by  the  death  of  his  brother,  the 
widow  of  that  prince  was  breeding.  He  was  no  fooner  afTured  of 
this,  than  he  declared  publicly  that  he  held  the  throne  thenceforward 
upon  truft  only,  to  refign  it  to  his  brother's  child,  if  it  mould  prove 
a  fon  ;  and  dropping  accordingly  the  title  of  king,  he  retained  the 
royal  power  as  prodicus,  or  protector  only.  I  proceed  with  this  anec- 
dote, which  found  credit  with  the  beft  ancient  hiftorians,  and  may 
the  rather  deferve  notice  as  tending  to  account  for  that  veneration 
borne  to  the  character  of  Lycurgus,  which  made  it  wifdom  in  him 
to  undertake  what  would  have  been  madnefs  in  an  ordinary  legislator 
to  think  of.  The  princefs  then,  we  are  told,  more  anxious  to  remain 
a  queen  than  to  become  a  mother,   caufed  private  intimation  to  be 

*   The  moft  judicious  writers   of  antiquity  gus,    fufficiently  Jets    us   know  what   credit  h 

have  contributed   to    the  perplexity  about  the  due  to  their  decifion.    Perhaps  the  beft  modern 

age  of  Lycurgus.     See  Thucydides,  b.  i.  c.  18,  attempt  to  reconcile  the  difcord  of  ancient  au- 

Plato  in  Minos,   Xenophon  of  the  Laceda;mo-  thors  on  this  fubjeft,  as  far  as  the  fuccellion  of 

nian  commonwealth,  and  Ariilotle  on  Govern-  the  Lacedaemonian  kings   only   is   concerned, 

ment.    Eratollhenes  and  Apollodorus  the  chrc-  may  be  found  in  note  32  p.  31  of  Wefleling's 

nologers   undertook  to  decide    upon   it  ;  but  Herodotus. 
Tlutarch,  in  the  beginning  of  his  life  of  Lycur- 

given 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  185 

given  to  Lycurgus  that,  if  he  would  marry  her,  no  child  of  his  late  CHAP.  v. 
brother's  fhould  ever  interfere  with  his  pofieffion  of  the  throne.  SECT.  II. 
The  protector  thought  it  prudent,  in  the  weaknefs  of  government 
and  licentioufnefs  of  the  times,  to  difTemble  his  abhorrence  of  fo  atro- 
cious a  propofal.  He  only  infifted  that  the  queen  fhould  not  in- 
danger  her  own  life  and  health  by  any  attempts  to  procure  abortion, 
and  he  would  provide,  he  faid,  that  the  child  when  born  mould  be 
no  hindrance  to  their  mutual  wifhes.  When  fhe  drew  near  her  time 
he  placed  trufly  perfons  in  waiting  about  her,  whom  he  directed,  if 
me  brought  a  girl,  to  leave  it  to  the  women,  but  if  a  boy,  to  bring 
it  immediately  to  him  wherefoever  he  might  be.  It  happened  that 
he  was  flipping  in  public  with  the  principal  magiftrates  when  the 
queen  was  delivered  of  a  fon,  which,  according  to  command,  was 
inftantly  carried  to  him.  He  received  the  child  in  his  arms,  and  ad- 
drefiing  himfelf  to  thofe  prefent,  '  Spartans,'  he  faid,  *  a  king  is  born 
'  to  you,'  and  immediately  placed  the  infant  in  the  royal  feat.  Ob- 
ferving  then  the  joy  which  prevailed  through  the  company,  rather 
from  admiration  of  his  prudence  and  uprightnefs  than  from  any  caufe 
they  had  to  rejoice  at  the  birth  of  a  fon  to  the  late  king,  he  named  the 
boy  Charilaus,  which  fignifies  the  people's  joy  *. 

But  notwithftanding  the  power  and  influence  which  Lycurgus  de- 
rived from  his  high  birth  and  high  office,  together  with  the  efleem 
in  which  he  was  held  by  all  good  men,  it  was  not  difficult  amid  the 
'general  lawleffnefs  then  prevalent  in  Sparta,  for  the  brother  of  the 
queen-mother  to  raife  a  ftrong  faction  againft  him.  Finding  it  there- 
fore no  fealbn  to  attempt  that  reformation  in  the  ftate  which  he 
wifhed,  he  determined,  being  yet  a  very  young  man,  to  indulge  his  Hci.0(lot  1  ; 
appetite  for  knowlege  by  vifiting  fuch  foreign  countries  as  were  mofi  c.  65. 
celebrated  for  art  and  fcience ;  the  only  way,  in  that  early  3ge,  by  1.  ii.  c.8. 
which  a  defire  of  knowlege  could  be  gratified.  Voluntarily,  or  in-  £h 
voluntarily,  he  left  the  ad  mini  fixation  of  Sparta  to  his  opponents, 

*    Xtcfihxcv  itoy.uo'i,    01a  to  rove  trxntti  ii»ai  WE^i^ageij.      Plut:uvll.  Lycurg. 

B  b  and 


Plutarchj 
curg. 


»86  HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  V.     ar)(j  paffed  to  Crete;  induced  by  its  fingular  laws  and  inftitutions,  hi- 
^_  _-!__.'    therto  the  moft  renowned  of  Greece.    He  is  faid  there  to  have  formed 

Strata,  l.  x.    an  intimacy  with  Thales,  a  poet  of  meat  abilities,  whom  he  ingaged 

Plut.Lj-cuig.  ...  . 

fo  far  in  his  defigns  as  to  perfuade  him  to  pafs  to  Sparta,  and,  by  po- 
pular poems  adapted  to  the  purpofe,  to  prepare  the  minds  of  the 
people  for  thofe  alterations  of  government  and  manners  which  him- 
felf  was  already  meditating.  It  is  a  common  opinion  that  he  alfo 
vifited  Afia  Minor,  where  Homer's  poems  were  then  in  every  body's 
mouth,  and  that  on  his  return  he  fir  ft  brought  them  into  general 
reputation  in  Greece. 

The  diforders  of  Sparta  were  now  grown  to  a  magnitude  no  longer 
fupportable.  The  kings  were  without  authority,  the  laws  without 
efficacy,  the  anarchy  was  extreme,  and  all  ranks  fuffered.  In  this 
fituation  of  things  the  name  of  Lycurgus  was  frequently  mentioned  : 
his  approved  integrity,  his  unfhaken  courage,  his  extenlive  genius, 
his  popular  manners,  and  that  power  which  above  all  others  he  pof- 
feffed  of  commanding  the  minds  of  men,  were  recalled  to  public  at- 
tention. At  length  it  was  agreed  by  kings  and  people  to  invite  him 
to  return  to  his  country,  and  to  take  upon  himfelf,  in  quality  of  le- 
giflator,  the  reformation  of  the  ftate.  He  joyfully  received  the  fum- 
mons  ;  but,  in  undertaking  fo  arduous  an  office,  he  proceeded  with 
the  utmoft  circumfpection  to  avail  himfelf  of  whatever  the  temper 
and  prejudices  of  the  times  offered,  that  might  contribute  to  his  fuc- 
cefs.  He  had  already  imperceptibly  begun  the  bufmefs  by  means  of 
the  poems  of  Thales ;  poetry  being  in  thofe  days,  while  letters  were 
little  known,  the  general  mean  of  popular  inftruclion,  and  often  fuc- 
cefsfully  ufed  to  excite  popular  paffion.  Before  he  would  exercife 
his  new  authority,  he  went  to  Delphi  to  procure  the  opinion  of  a 
divine  fanction  to  his  inftitutions.  The  dire&ors  of  the  oracle  were 
in  the  higheft  degree   favorable  to  his  wifhes ;  and  he  carried  back 

H^wiot'TT.  ^at  celebrated  refponfe,  as  Plutarch  calls  it,  in  which  the  Pythonefs 

C-°S-  declared  '  That  he  was  fingularly  favored  by  the  gods;  himfelf  more 

'  sod 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  187 

*  god  than  man  ;  and  that  it  fliould  be  given  him  to  eftablifh  the  mofl    CHAP.  V. 
'  excellent  of  all  fyftems  of  government.'  ^  '         / 

Armed  with  this  high  authority,  in  addition  to  that  before  derived 
from  the  voice  of  his  country,  he  returned  to  Sparta;  having  already, 
it  lhould  feem,  formed  his  plan,  not  fo  properly  for  giving  laws  to  a 
flate,  as  for  totally  new-modelling  a  people,  and  making  them  other 
beings,  different  from  all  befides  of  human  race.  But,  with  ideas  of 
a  boldnefs  that  verged  upon  extravagance,  he  never  failed  to  obierve 
the  moll  prudent  caution  in  carrying  them  into  execution.  He  be- 
gan now  with  affembling  the  principal  citizens,  to  confult  concerning 
a  plan  of  reformation  ;  but  at  this  meeting  he  difclofed  nothing  of 
his  own  delign.  He  then  took  opportunities  to  advife  with  his  more 
particular  friends  privately;  and  with  thefe  he  was  freer  in  commu- 
nication, opening  to  each  more  or  lefs  as  he  found  them  diipofed. 
When  he  had  thus  formed  a  party  ftrong  enough  to  Support  his  mea- 
fures,  the  kings  Archelaus  and  Charilaus  ftill  Strangers  to  his  purpofes, 
he  fummoned  an  affembly  of  the  people.  As  the  multitude  thronged 
the  agora,  that  place  in  Grecian  towns  which  ferved  equally  the  pur- 
pofe  of  a  market  and  of  a  general  meeting  for  public  debate,  alarm 
was  taken  at  the  appearance  of  Lycurgus's  confidential  friends  in  arms. 
Charilaus  obferving  a  tumult,  unaware  of  the  caufe,  and  unprepared 
for  defence,  immediately  fled  to  a  neighbouring  temple;  but  receiv- 
ing affurance  that  no  violence  was  intended,  and  being  natural- 
ly of  a  complying  temper,  he  returned  to  the  affembly,  and  joined  his 
uncle's  party.  Archelaus,  with  more  inclination,  was  thus  left  with 
means  too  inadequate  to  attempt  refinance,  and  Lycurgus  proceeded 
unoppofed.  He  immediately  committed  the  executive  power  of  the 
Hate  to  a  fenate  compofed  of  thirty  perfons :  twenty-eight  fele&ed 
from  among  thofe  leading  men  in  whom  he  could  moil  confide,  with 
the  two  kings  as  presidents.  To  this  body  he  gave  alio  the  moll 
important  part  of  the  legislative  authority;  for  laws  were  to  originate 
there  only.  To  the  affembly  of  the  people  he  intruded  merely  the 
power  of  confirming  or  annulling  what  the  fenate  propofed,  forbid- 

B  b  2  ding 


1*8  HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  v.     c^ng  them  all  debate:  the  members  only  gave  a  fimple  affirmative  or 
SECT.  IT.     negative,    without  being  allowed   to  fpeak  even   To  far  as  to  declare 
why  they  gave  either.     To  the  people,  however,  he  farther  commit- 
ted the  future   ele&ion   of  fenators.     The  prerogatives  of  the  kings 
LULc."i4.lt'   con-fifted   in   being  hereditary  fenators,   commanders  in  chief  of  the 
armies,  and  high  priefts  of  the  nation. 

The  conftitution  thus  far  determined,  his  next  ftep  was  the  boldeft 
innovation  ever  attempted  by  legiilator.  All  the  evils  that  can  arife 
in  an  unfettled  ill-conftituted  government  from  the  accumulation  of 
wealth  into  few  hands,  were  daily  experienced  in  Sparta  :  the  poor 
fuffered  from  the  oppreffions  of  the  rich ;  the  rich  were  in  perpetual 
danger  from  the  defpair  of  the  poor  ;  and  where  laws  neither  re- 
trained nor  protected,  daik  fraud  or  open  and  atrocious  violence  were 
the  unceafing  produce  of  avarice,  fufpicion  and  mifery.  To  combat 
inch  inveterate  and  complicated  mifchief,  faid  Lycurgus,  by  ordinary 
methods  of  criminal  courts  and  penal  laws,  were  replete  with  uncer- 
tainty, danger,  and  even  cruelty,  to  a  degree  that  cannot  be  forefeen. 
How  much  better  were  it,  inftead  of  arming  the  hand  of  the  execu- 
tioner againfl  the  effect,  at  once  to  remove  the  caufe  !  He  had  begun 
his  work  by  fecuring  thofe  of  higher  rank  to  his  party,  and  by  the 
eftablifhment  of  the  fenate  had  placed  almoft:  all  legal  authority  in 
their  hands.  But  he  did  not  mean  a  partial  benefit :  he  would  extend 
the  advantages  of  his  laws  equally  to  all,  leaving  no  diftinclions  but 
of  age  and  merit.  In  his  prefent  purpofe  he  was  fure  of  the  moft 
numerous  party,  the  poor ;  and  thefe,  headed  by  himfelf,  would  im- 
mediately become  the  moil:  powerful.  We  have  no  tradition  that  this 
meafure,  fo  oppofite  to  the  ftrongeft  paffions  and  prejudices  of  man- 
kind, produced  any  commotion.  The  principal  land-owners  were 
perfuaded  to  part  peaceably  with  their  poffeilions,  that  they  might 
preferve  their  authority;  forefeeing  probably  that  refiftance  would  but 
occafion  the  lofs  of  both.  Thus  was  effected  in  Laceda^mon  that  ex- 
traordinary divifion  of  lands,  which  allotted  to  every  family  an  equal 
fhare,  and  baniilied,  according  to  Plutarch's  expreffion,  all  diftinduon 

between 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  189 

between  man  and  man,  other  than  what  arofe  from  the  praife  of  vir-    CHAP.  V. 
tuous,  and  the  reproach  of  unworthy  deeds.     The  whole  territory  of 
Laconia  was  divided  into  thirty- nine  thoufand  fhares,   nine  thoufand 
of  which  were  afiigned  to  the  city  of  Sparta,  the  reft  to  other  town- 
fhips. 

This  regulation,  however,  would  have  been  vain  but  for  another 
which  attended  it :  Lycurgus  forbad  abfolutely  all  ufe  of  gold  and 
iilver.  Coin  he  allowed,  but  of  iron  only ;  which  was  too  weighty 
and  cumberfome,  in  proportion  to  its  value,  for  inordinate  wealth  to  be 
eafily  either  accumulated  or  ufed.  The  legiflator  thus  at  once  ob- 
tained one  great  objecf,  the  annihilation  of  foreign  commerce.  The 
Spartan  money  was  derided  through  Greece  :  no  foreign  fhip  hence- 
forward was  feen  in  the  ports  of  Laconia:  flatterers,  fortune-tellers, 
and  pandars,  fays  Plutarch,  avoided  the  hoftile  territory;  and  all  the 
trades  fubfervient  to  luxury  were  effectually  banifhed. 

The  next  ordinance  was  not  carried  fo  quietly.  Still  following  the 
Cretan  model,  Lycurgus  abfolutely  forbad  that  any  man  fhould  live 
at  home ;  ftridly  ordaining  that  all,  even  the  kings,  fhould  eat  at 
public  tables  only,  where  the  ftri&eft  moderation  and  frugality  fhould 
be  obferved.  His  former  law  ftruck  at  the  root  of  luxury:  this 
aimed  at  the  deftrucfion  of  every  fcattered  feed;  at  the  annihilation 
of  every  ufe  of  wealth,  of  the  remoteft  defire  to  poffefs  more  than 
others.  None  of  his  innovations,  we  are  told,  gave  fo  much  offence. 
In  an  aflembly  of  the  people  fo  violent  an  outcry  was  raifed  againft 
him  that,  apprehenfive  of  the  burft  of  popular  pafilon,  and  of  the  ad- 
vantage that  might  be  taken  of  it  by  his  particular  enemies,  he  retired 
toward  a  neighbouring  temple.  A  youth  named  Alcander,  of  one  of 
the  fir  ft  families  of  Sparta,  among  others,  purfued  him,  and,  as  he 
turned,  ftruck  him  in  the  face  with  a  ftick,  and  put  out  an  eye.  Ly- 
curgus notwithstanding  reached  the  temple  ;  and  finding  that  the 
multitude  were  not  fo  mad  in  their  fury  as  to  forget  the  refpecl  due 
in  the  opinion  of  the  times  to  the  fan&ity  of  the  afylum,  he  exhibited 

to 


190  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP. v.  to  them  his  lacerated  countenance  dropping  with  gore;  and  when  he 
SECT.  II.  had  at  length  procured  filence  and  attention,  fpoke  with  fuch  mo- 
deration of  temper,  and  fuch  force  of  argument,  that  he  converted 
their  rage  into  pity  and  remorfe  ;  infomuch  that,  on  the  fpot, 
they  delivered  up  Alcander  to  abide  his  judgment.  Lycurgus  drew 
advantage  from  every  circumftance.  Inftead  of  condemning  Alcan- 
der to  punimment,  he  brought  him,  by  gentle  argument  and  ingaging 
behaviour,  to  condemn  himfelf  ,•  and  in  the  end  gained  him,  from  be- 
ing his  mod:  violent  opponent,  to  become  his  mod:  ftrenuous  partizan. 
Perfifting  then  in  his  meafure,  he  not  only  procured  the  eltablifliment 
of  it,  but  he  went  farther.  The  more  completely  to  infure  equality, 
Rc"°La'cone  an<^  to  rePre^s  evei7  delire  of  fuperfluities,  he  directed  that  none  fhould 
Aiiibt.  Polit.  refufe  to  lend  whatfoever  he  was  not  immediately  ufmg,  and  that  any 
might  take,  even  without  allying,  whatfoever  he  wanted  of  his  neigh- 
bour's ;  being  only  bound  to  replace  it  undamaged.  Private  property 
thus  was  nearly  annihilated. 

Thefe  extraordinary  changes  being  effected,  he  had  little  to  fear 
from  popular  oppoiition  to  what  farther  he  might  wifh  to  eftablim  : 
the  principal  remaining  difficulty  was  to  provide  for  the  permanency 
of  what  was  already  done.  We  are  not  informed  with  any  certainty 
what  progrefs  letters  had  made  in  Greece  in  Lycurgus's  time:  but  we  are 
told  that  he  would  have  none  of  his  laws  written  :  oracles  were  de- 
livered by  voice  alone;  and  he  would  have  his  laws  confidered  as 
oracles;  as  emanations  from  that  divine  refponfe  which  fanctified  the 
voice  of  his  country,  that  had  appointed  him  to  the  office  of  legiilator : 
he  would  have  them  ingraved  in  the  hearts  of  the  people;  and,  to 
effect  this,  he  endeavoured  fo  to  direct  the  education  of  the  rifina 
generation,  that  his  inflitutions  might  be  as  a  law  of  nature  to  them. 
In  abolishing  diftinction  of  rank,  it  was  his  intention  not  to  deprefs  but 
to  elevate  his  fellowcountrymen ;  to  give  every  Lacedaemonian  thole 
advantages  which,  in  other  ftates,  a  few  only  can  enjoy  ;  to  make  the 
whole  people  one  family ;  every  brother  of  which  equally  mould  re- 
ceive the  moft  liberal  education,  and  equally  live  in  the  molt  liberal 

manner. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  191 

manner.     The  exerct-fe  of  mechanical  arts,  and  even  of  agriculture,    CHAP.  v. 
was  totally  forbidden  to  free  Lacedaemonians.     All  fuch  bufinefs  was     S^3X!/' 
to  be  left  to  Haves.  The  law  required  that  every  Lacedaemonian  mould 
be,  in  the  ftricleft  fenfe  of  the  modern  term,  a  gentleman.     No  bufi- 
nefs was  allowed  him  but  that  of  the  ftate ;  and  for  this,  in  peace  and 
in  war,   it  was  the  purpofe  of  education  equally  to  fit  every  man. 

And  here,  as  in   every  thing  elfe,   Lycurgus  carried   his  views   far 
beyond  thofe  of  ordinary  legillators.     Having  directed  the  inftitutions 
already  mentioned  a°;ainft  internal  evils,  of  which  wealth  is  elfewhere 
fo  plentiful  a  fource,   it  was  neceifary  now  to  provide  againft  external 
violence  :   and  while  for  the  firft  purpofe  he  made  his  fellowcoun try- 
men  a  nation  of  philofophers,  he  would,  for  the  other,  make  them  a 
nation   of  foldiers   fuperior  to  all    the  reft  of  mankind.     With  this 
view,  he  began  with  the  care  of  children  before  their  birth  :   he  would 
have  none  born   but   ftrong  and  able  men.     In  other  countries  great 
pains  are  taken  to  have  the  more  ufeful  brutes  perfect  in  their  kind. 
In  England  the  fcience  of  breeding  horfes  and  dogs  of  the  moft  ge- 
nerous temper,  and  higheft  bodily  ability,  has  been  carried  to  amazing 
perfection.     Lacedaemon  is  the  only  country  known  in  hiftory  where 
attention  was  ever  paid  to  the  breed  of  men.     Lycurgus,  confidering 
thofe  from  whom  the  future  race  of  Spartans  were  to  fpring  as  of  high 
confequence  to  the  ftate,   gave  very  particular  directions  for  the  ma- 
nagement of  the  young  women.     Inftead  of  that  confinement,   and 
thofe  fedentary  employments  of  the  loom  and   the  needle,   to  which 
the  other  Grecian  ladies  were  in  a  manner  condemned,   he   ordered 
that  they  fhould  be  exercifed  in  running,  wreflling,  and  throwing  the 
quoit  and  the  javelin ;   that  they  fhould  live  little  within  doors,   and 
avoid  thofe  indulgences  which  elfewhere  make  all  above  the  lowehY 
rank  of  women  fo  tender  and  helplefs.      Thus,  he  thought,   both 
themfelves  would  better  fupport  the  pains  of  child-bearing,  and  the 
children  born  of  them  would  be  more  vigorous.     It  was  cuftomary 
among  all  the  Greeks  for  the  men  to  appear  in  public  quite  naked  at 
their  athletic  exercifes.     Lycurgus  directed  that  the  young  women 

mould 


i92  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.V.  fhould  all,  at  certain  feftivals,  appear  in  public  without  any  covering, 
SECT.  II.  dance  thus  in  prefence  of  the  young  men,  and  fing,  addreffing  them- 
felves  particularly  to  them.  That  opinion  of  the  fanclity  of  wedlock, 
and  that  refpecl:  for  the  purity  of  the  marriage  bed,  which  were  com- 
mon through  Greece,  he  thought  in  many  inftances  inconvenient ; 
and  his  morality  was  always  made  fubfervient  to  his  political  pur- 
pofes.  To  be  unmarried,  and  without  children  for  the  common- 
wealth, he  caufed  to  be  accounted  fhameful  :  but  it  was  indifferent 
who  was  the  father,  provided  the  child  was  a  fine  one.  For  he  rec- 
koned all  children  to  belong  not  fo  much  to  their  parents  as  to  the 
fbte,  the  common  parent  of  all ;  and  conlidering  jealoufy  as  a  paiTion 
often  mifchievous,  and  always  ufelefs,  he  contrived  to  banifh  it  from 
Sparta  by  making  it  ridiculous.  Meafures  were,  however,  neceifary 
to  prevent  too  promifcuous  concubinage,  which  muff  be  attended  with 
the  greateft  political  evils :  and  he  found  means,  in  his  fyfiem,  which, 
with  any  other,  it  would  have  been  impoflible  to  have  put  in  practice. 
He  made  it  difgraceful  and  criminal  in  young  men  to  be  feen  in  com- 
pany with  young  women,  even  with  their  wives.  The  married  youth 
was  to  continue  his  exercifes  with  the  young  men  by  day;  he  was  to 
ileep  in  the  common  dormitory  at  night;  and  it  was  only  by  ftealth, 
and  with  the  utmoft  caution,  that  he  could  vilit  his  bride.  Tho  it 
was  held  in  itfelf  right  that  he  fhould  vifit  her,  yetfhame,  public  re- 
buke, perhaps  ffripes,  were  the  confequence  of  his  being  ken  going 
or  coming :  infomuch  that  it  was  held  creditable  for  a  man  that  his 
wife  fhould  become  a  mother  without  having  been  ever  feen  in  com- 
pany with  her  hufband.  It  is  remarkable  that,  of  all  the  people  of 
Greece,  among  the  rough  and  warlike  Spartans  only  we  find  the  wo-f 
men  free  and  refpe&ed  as  they  were  among  the  northern  nations ;  and 
it  appears  flill  more  extraordinary  when  we  confider  what  a  morality 
was  theirs.  But  defire  of  applaufe,  and  dread  of  fhame,  were  what 
Lycurgus  depended  upon  as  mainfprings  of  his  moft  lingular  political 
machine;  and  it  feems  to  have  been  a  very  judicioufly  conceived  part 
of  his  plan,   to  place  the  women  upon  that  independent  and  refpec- 

table 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  *93 


table  footing  which  inabled  them  to  be  powerful,  as  they  will  always 
be  willing,  and  generally  juft  difpenfers  of  fuch  reward  and  punifh- 
ment  as  applaufe  can  give  or  reproach  inflict*. 

The  Spartan  legiflator  had  as  little  confideration   for  the  lives  as 
for  the  feelings  of  his  fellow-creatures.     All  children  were  examined, 
as  foon   as  born,   by   perfons  appointed   for  the  purpofe  :  the  well- 
formed  and  vigorous  only  were  preferved  :   thofe  in  whom  any  defect 
either  of  fhape  or  conftitution  appeared,  were  expofed  without  mercy 
to  perifh  in  the  wilds  of  mount  Tayge'tus.     And  that  ignorance  and 
prejudice  might  not  in  Lacedaemon,  as  elfewhere,  corrupt  what  nature 
had  produced  excellent,    thofe  who  were  judged  worth  prcferving  to 
the  commonwealth  were  delivered  to  the  care  of  nurfes  publicly  pro- 
vided, and  properly  inir.ruc~r.ed  to  cooperate  judicioufly  with  nature  in 
the  rearing  of  infants.      At  the  age  of  feven  years  the  boys  were  re- 
moved to  the  public  fchools ;  no  Lacedaemonian   being  permitted  to 
educate  his  children  otherwife  than  according  to  the  mode  prefcribed 
by  law.     The  mailers  were  always  chofen  from  among  perfons  of  the 
firft  confideration,  and  the  fchools  were  common  places  of  refort  for 
thofe  of  more  advanced  age;  all  of  whom,  according  to  that  principle 
of  patriotifm  which  above  all  things  Lycurgus  took,  pains   to  incul- 
cate, conlidering  fhemielves  as  fathers  not  of  their  own  only,   but  of 
all  the  children  of  the  commonwealth,   were  attentive  to  watch   the 
behaviour  of  all,   and  to  affift  in  preferving  good  order,   and  in  pro- 
moting the  acquifition   of  valuable  accomplifhments,     The  bufinefs 
of  education  here  was  not  fo  much  to  give  the  knowlege  of  a  great 
variety  of  things,  as   to  form  the  paffions,  fentiments,  and  ideas  to 
that  tone  which  might   bed  affimilate  with   the  conftitution  of  the 
ftate;  and  fo  to  exercife  the  abilities  of  both  body  and  mind,  as  to 

*  The  leglflator's  idea  appears  to  have  been  'AM.u  put.' anus 

founded  on   the  common   manners   and  fenti-  'AtHa/uu  T?ia;  xai  TPnAAAS  &*6«s&J?w»j, 

ents  of  the  heroic  ages. '    Homer  reprefents  >At  *£  >"**«  »*  iicrtP"  <*■*<"?*<*■&  irolipoip. 
Hettor  acknowleging  fear  of  the   reproaches  una.  '•  VK  v'  443* 


CHAP.  V. 


SECT.  II. 


of  the  Trojan  ladies. 


C  c  lead 


194  HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  V.     ]eacj  them  to  the  higheft  poitible  capacity  for  the  performance  of  every- 
SECT.  IL     thing  ufeful  j  particularly  of  every  thing  ufeful  to  the  commonwealth  ; 
for  the  love  of  their  country  was  ever  held  out   to   the  young  Lace- 
daemonians as  the  polar  ftar  which  mould  influence  all  their  actions, 
all   their  affections,   all   their  thoughts.     Letters  were  taught  for  ufe 
only,  not  for  ornament.    Indeed  in  Lycurgus's  time  books  were  fcarce- 
ly  known  :   but  the  fpirit  of  his  laws  remaining  flill  in  force   when 
literature  had    arrived  at   meridian  glory  in  other  parts  of  Greece, 
the  Spartans,  tho  always  famed  for  wifdom,   never  became  eminent 
for  learning.      In   Spartan  education,  however,  great  attention   was 
paid  to  converfation  :  loquacioufnefs  was   reprobated ;   but   the   boys 
were  exercifed  at  quicknefs  in  reply ;   and   a   concife  fententious   flile 
of  fpeech,  with   repartees  and  fatirical  jokes,  was  much  incouraged. 
But  what,  above  all   tilings,  were  equally  moft  valued   as   qualities, 
and  moft  inlifted   on   as  accomplishments,  were  to  be  all-daring  and 
all-patient,  and  to  be  highly  fenfible  to  applaufe  and  fhame.      It  was 
with  a  view  to  thefe  that  Lycurgus  "eftablifhed  that  incouragement  to 
thieving  among   the  Lacedaemonian  boys  which   has    by   fome   been 
efteemed    the  difgrace    of   his    inftitutions.     But   thofe    who    felect 
this  circumftance  for  blame  will,   upon  due  confideration,   be  found 
to  mifconceive   the  legiflator.      His  fundamental  principle  was,   that 
the  commonwealth  was  all   in  all  :   that   individuals,  in  comparifbnj 
were  nothing  :   that  they  had  no  right  of  property,   nor  even  of  life, 
but  in  fubordination  to  the  wants  of  the  common   parent.     He  had 
in  confequence  nearly  abolifhed  private  property  :   he  had   in   a  man- 
ner annihilated  equally  honefty  and  difhonefty,   by  removing  from  his 
fellowcountrymen  both  want  and  riches.     But  education  was,  for  the 
fervice   of  the   commonwealth,   to   make   the  Spartan    boys,    in    the 
higheft  poffible  degree,  bold,  vigilant,  fkilful,  and  obedient  foldiers ; 
with  a  ftrong  point  of  honor,   refting  immediately  on   the  defire  of 
applaufe  and  fear  of  fhame  to  themfelves,  but  ever  ultimately  guided 
by  the  love  of  their  country.     With  this   principle  and  thefe  views, 
the  legiflator  directed  that  they  fhould  wear  but  one  garment,  which 

mould 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  195 


fhould  ferve  equally  in  winter  and  fummer :   that  they  fhould  fleep  on 
no  better  bed  than  rufhes,  which  themfelves   fhould  gather.     The 
fame  plain  food  he  allowed  to  them  as  to  the  men  j  but  in  very  fcanty 
proportion,  unlefs  they  could  ileal  it.     If  they  could  rob  a  garden,  or 
the  meffrooms,  kitchens,  or  larders  of  the  men,   undifcovered,  they 
were  allowed  to  injoy  the  fruit  of  their  boldnefs  and   fkill :   but,  if 
detected  in  the  attempt,  they  were   punifhed  feverely  ;  not  for  theft, 
but  for  aukwardnefs  and   unguardednefs.     The  commonwealth,  faid 
the  legiflator,  allows  iuftenance  to  you  as  to  the  men,  but  it  requires 
manv  duties  of  you.      Food  fhall  be  given  you  ;   fufficient  for  your 
fupport :   but  would   you   indulge    in    what   more  the  appetite   may 
crave,  you  muft  earn  it.     Whatever  you  can  acquire  by  exercifing  in 
peace  that  boldnefs,  dexterity,   and  vigilance  which  hereafter  may  be 
ufeful  to   the  commonwealth   in  war,  is   yours ;   the  commonwealth 
cives  it  you.    This  certainly  was  clearly  underftood  ;   and  it  feems  un- 
queftionably  to  follow,   that  fuch  acquilition   of  property  among  the 
Spartan  boys   had   nothing  of  the  immoral  and  difgraceful  nature  of 
theft  in  other  countries. 

Education   among    the   Spartans   could   fcarcely  be   faid   to   end. 
When  boys  approached  manhood  their  difcipline  increafed  in  ftrift- 
nefs.     To  check,  fays  Xenophon,  the  boiling  paffions  of  that  criti- 
cal period  of  life,   the   legiflator   augmented  their  ftated  labors,  and 
abridged  their  leifure.     Nor  was  there  any  remiffion  but  on  military 
fervice :   there   many  indulgences  were   allowed  ;   infomuch  that  the 
camp  was  to  the  Lacedaemonians    the  fcene  of  eafe  and  luxury;  the 
city  that  of  labor,   ftudy,  fpare   diet,   and   fevere  difcipline.      Even 
cleanlinefs  of  perfon,  or,  at  leaft,  any  particular  attention  to  it,  was 
difcouraged  in  the  city  j   but  in  the  camp  not  only  neatnefs  was  re- 
quired,  but  even  ornament  in  drefs  was  approved.      Before  the  age  of 
thirty  none  were  allowed  to  meddle  with  public  affairs  of  any  kind: 
and  even  after  that  age,  it  was  not  reputable  for  a  man  to  addicf  hhn- 
felf  to  either  political  or  judicial  bufinefs.     But  attendance  upon  the 
fchools  was  every  man's  concern.     Every  man  alfo  gave  a  portion  of 

C  c  2  his 


CHAP.  V. 
SECT.  II. 


i96  HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  v.  hjs  tjme  to  mjlitary  and  athletic  exercifes ;  and,  as  an  amufement, 
s^_/^'  hunting  was  greatly  incouraged.  Poetry  having  been  made  by  Ly- 
curgus  inftrumental  in  the  execution  of  his  fchetiie  of  reformation, 
could  not  fail  to  find  favor  in  his  efublilhed  fyftem.  Mufic  followed 
of  courfe.  Together  they  made  a  neceffiry  part  of  the  ceremony  and 
of  the  amufement  of  religious  feftivals,  which  were  frequent  at  Sparta 
as  in  every  other  Grecian  city.  But  all  kinds  of  poetry  and  mulic 
were  not  allowed:  the  ftile  of  both  was  ftriclly  under  the  reftraint  of 
the  magistrate.  Their  hours  of  leifure  from  thefe  avocations  the  La- 
cedaemonians fpent  chiefly  in  affemblies  for  the  purpofe  of  converfa- 
tion,  which  they  called  by  a  name  peculiar  to  themfelves,  Lefkhe, 
and  to  thefe  much  of  their  time  was  given.  Of  private  bulinefs  a 
Spartan  could  have  but  little.  It  was  highly  difreputable  for  his 
family  to  ingrofs  his  attention ;  and  private  ftudy  was  fcarcely  lefs 
reprobated.  For  Lycurgus,  as  Plutarch  remarks,  would  have  his 
fellowcountrymen  neither  defire  nor  even  know  how  to  live  by  them- 
felves, or  for  themfelves. 

But  what  mod  Strikingly  fets  Lycurgus  above  all  other  Iegiflators 
is  that,  in  fo  many  circumftances  apparently  out  of  the  reach  of  law, 
he  controled  and  formed  to  his  own  mind  the  wills  and  habits  of  his 
people.  Thus  he  prefcribed  fobriety  ;  and  the  Lacedaemonians  were 
fober.  Probably  all  Iegiflators  would  prefcribe  fobriety,  if  they 
could  hope  to  make  the  law  erfe&ual.  But  Lycurgus  prefcribed 
mirth  to  his  people;  and  they  were  merry:  nay,  he  prefcribed  a 
particular  kind  of  mirth  :  the  Englifh  proverb,  Be  merry  and  wife, 
was  his  rule  ;  and  the  Spartans  were  ever  fimous  for  mirth  guided 
by  wifdom.  He  prefcribed  a  peculiar  flile  of  converfation  ;  and 
while  Sparta  exifted  his  people  were  remarkable  for  that  flile  which 
even  now  b  diftinguifhed  throughout  Europe  by  the  name  of  Laconic. 
He  prefcribed  refpecr.  to  age.  This  is  a  law  of  nature ;  but  no  le- 
giflator  ever  fucceeded  like  Lycurgus  in  making  a  whole  people  uni- 
formly obedient  to  it.     In  other  governments   valuable  inftitutions 

often 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


197 


often  refult  from  fortuitous  concurrences  or  trains  of  circumftances  ;  CHAP.  V. 
but  in  Lacedasmon  not  only  all  was  directed  by  the  comprehenfive  SECT.  II. 
mind  of  the  legiflator,  but  in  many  inftanc.es  we  may  clearly  difco- 
ver  the  procefs  by  which  he  produced  his  moll:  lingular  effects. 
With  regard  to  mirth  and  the  ftile  of  converfation,  for  inftarice ; 
he  directed  that,  during  meals,  queftions  fhould  be  put  to  the  boys,  to 
which  ready  but  fhort  anfwers  were  required.  This  was  equally 
amufement  and  bufinefs  for  thofe  of  advanced  years  ;  and,  in  the 
fcarcity  of  both  allowed  to  the  Spartans,  was  not  likely  to  be  ne- 
glected. Great  attention  therefore  being  given  by  thofe  who  fuper- 
intended  education,  among  whom  were  all  the  firft  characters  of  the 
ftate,  both  to  the  matter  and  manner  of  the  anfwers,  informing, 
correcting,  applauding,  as  they  found  occafion,  quicknefs  and  pro- 
priety in  reply,  together  with  a  manner  of  fpeaking  at  once  graceful, 
reipeclful,  and  determined,  became  habitual  among  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians. It  appears  at  firft  view  very  extraordinary  that,  prefcribing 
^•modefty  to  the  Spartan  youth,  he  fliould  really  make  them  all  modeft. 
But  this  toowas  a  regular  confequence  of  his  inftitutions.  In  other 
ftates  birth  and  poflefiions  giving  rank  and  authority,  the  young  and 
the  profligate  are  thus  continually  feen  fuperior  to  the  old  and  the 
worthy  :  there  age  can  never  find  its  due  refpect.  But  in  Lacedsmon 
eminence  and  power  were  the  meed  of  age  and  merit  alone.  That 
ftfidt  obedience  therefore  which  was  required  of  the  youn^;  that 
conftantly  watchful  eye  which  was  kept  over  them  by  the  aged  ;  not 
by  a  few  appointed  for  the  purpofe,  but  by  all  the  elder  perfons  of 
the  commonwealth  j  together  with  the  placing  of  all  legal  authority 
exclufively  in  the  hands  of  the  old  ;  all  thefe  circumftances  united, 
naturally  and  neceflariiy  produced  that  modefty  in  youth,  and  that 
reverence  for  age,  for  which  Lacedaemon  became  fo  famous.  In 
other  cities,  fays  Xenophon,  thofe  of  nearly  the  fame  age  keep  com-  Xenoph.  de 
pany  moftly  together ;  and  in  prefence  of  equals  refpect  and  circum-  Rep"  Lac' 
fpection  leaft  prevail  :  but  in  Sparta  the  laws  of  Lycurgus  require 
that  the  young  and  the  old  conftantly  aflociate.     Hence  followed, 

what 


>93  M  I  S  T  O  R  Y     O  F     G  R  E  E  C  E. 


CHAP.Vi 
SECT.  II. 


what  the  fame  elegant  writer  and  experienced  obferver  of  mankind 
farther  remarks,  that  whereas  in  ether  States  the  great  eSteem  it  a 
degradation  to  be  thought  under  the  restraint  of  legal  power,  in 
Sparta  on  the  contrary  the  greateSt  make  it  their  pride  to  fet  the  ex- 
ample of  humility,  of  refpecl  for  the  magistrates,  and  of  zealous 
obedience  to  the  laws. 

Lycurgus  having  thus  eftablifhed  his  plan  of  government  upon 
principles  diametrically  oppoSite,  as  Xenophon  obferves,  in  almoft 
every  particular  to  thofe  of  the  other  Grecian  ftates,  thought  it  ne- 
ceffary  for  its  prefervation  to  prevent  as  much  as  poflible  all  inter- 
coiirfe  of  his  people  with  theirs.  He  therefore  forbad  foreign  travel, 
and  allowed  the  refort  of  Grangers  to  Sparta  but  under  great  limita- 
tions. Foreign  commerce  he  had  annihilated,  as  we  have  already 
feen,  without  an  exprefs  law  for  the  purpofe. 

We  are  not  with  any  certainty  informed  how  fir  the  treatment  of 
Slaves  among  the  Lacedaemonians,  fuch  as  we  afterward  find  it,  was 
prefcribed  by  Lycurgus;  but  it  certainly  flowed  from  his  SyStem, 
and  is  indeed  an  inexcufable  difgrace  to  it.  There  are  different  ac- 
counts of  the  origin  of  thofe  miferable  men,  who  were  distinguished 
from  all  other  Slaves  by  name  as  by  condition.  The  moSt  received 
is  that  Helos,  whether  an  Arcadian  town  or  a  rebellious  dependence 
of  Lacedaemon  is  not  agreed,  being  taken  by  Sous,  fon  of  Frocles, 
the  inhabitants  were,  according  to  the  prad ice  of  the  times,  reduced 
to  Slavery;  and  were  diSperfed  in  fuch  numbers  over  Laconia  that 
the  name  of  Helot  prevailed  in  that  country  as  Synonymous  with 
Slave.  The  institutions  of  Lycurgus  muSt  neceSfarily  have  occasioned 
a  considerable  alteration  in  the  condition  of  the  Lacedaemonian 
Slaves.  As  hulbandry  and  all  mechanical  arts  were  now  to  be  exer- 
cifed  by  them  alone,  their  confequence  in  the  State  was  considerably 
Ariftat.  Polit.  increafed  :  but  as  private  property  was  nearly  annihilated,  every  Slave 
•  "'  c"  5"  became  in  a  great  degree  the  Slave  of  every  freeman.  In  proportion 
alio  as  their  confequence  increafed,  it  became  neceSfary  to  look  upon 
them  with  a  more  jealous  eye;  and  thus  every  Helot  was  watched 

by 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

by  thoufands  of  jealous  mafters.  Yet  tho  it  were  unjuft  to  impute 
either  to  the  command  or  to  the  intention  of  Lycurgus  that  cruelty 
in  the  mafters  or  that  mifery  of  the  flaves  which  we  find  to  have 
been  afterward  really  eftablifhed  by  law,  it  is  however  impoffible  to 
exculpate  his  inftitutions  from  them.  Never  was  human  nature  de- 
graded by  fyftem  to  fuch  a  degree  as  in  the  miferable  Helots.  Every 
poflible  method  was  taken  to  fet  them  at  the  wideft  diftance  from 
their  haughty  mafters.  Even  vice  was  commanded  to  them  :  they 
were  compelled  to  drunkennefs  for  the  purpofe  of  exhibiting  to  the 
young  Lacedaemonians  the  ridiculous  and  contemptible  condition  to 
which  men  are  reduced  by  it.  They  were  forbidden  everything 
manly,  and  they  were  commanded  everything  humiliating  of  which 
man  is  capable,  while  beafts  are  not.  A  cruel  jealoufy  became  in- 
dilpenfible  in  watching  a  body  of  men,  far  fuperior  in  number  to  all 
the  other  fubjects  of  the  ftate,  treated  in  a  manner  fo  Angularly  pro- 
voking indignation  and  refentment.  Henc2  that  abominable  inftitu- 
tion  the  Cryptia.  The  mod  active  and  intelligent  young  Laceda?-  Plutarch. 
monians  were  occasionally  fent  into  the  country,  carrying  proviiions,  'S* 

and  armed  with  a  dagger.  They  difperfed,  and  generally  lay  con- 
cealed during  the  day,  that  they  might  with  more  advantage  in  the 
night  execute  their  commiffion,  which  was  to  murder  any  Helots 
they  met,  to  thin  their  numbers ;  but  particularly  the  ftouteft  men, 
and  thofe  in  whom  any  fuperiority  of  fpirit  or  genius  had  been  ob- 
ferved.  Notwithftanding,  however,  thefe  inhuman  and  difgraceful 
precautions,  Lacedaemon  was  oftener  in  danger  of  utter  fubveriion 
from  its  flaves  than  from  foreign  enemies. 

Herodotus,  as  well  as  Plutarch,  attributes  to  Lycurgus  the  honor  of  Herodot.  1. 
the  Military  code  of  Sparta  equally  as  of  the  civil ;  and  the  higher   piutsa'rci, 
authority  of  Xenophon  goes   much   to  confirm  their  teftimonv.     If  Lycur£- 

J  .,•  11  i       -n  Xenoph.de 

the  Spartan  military  was  really   put  by  the  great  legillator  upon  the    Rep.  Lac. 
footing  which  that   foldier-philofopher  defcribes,   the  improvement 
lince  Homer's   age  was   indeed   extraordinary.     Probably,  however, 
improvement  did  not  ceafe  with  Lycurgus,  but  was  continued,  as 

expe* 


2CO 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 


CIIAP.V. 
SECT    II. 


Xenoph.  de 
Rep.  Lac. 


Thucyd.  1.  v 
c.  66  &  68. 


experience  gave  occafion,  in  the  courfe  of  warfare  little  intermitted 
through  fucceffive  centuries.  But  that  fundamental  lav  which  ba'de 
the  Lacedaemonians  place  their  fee  uriry  in  their  difcipline  and  their 
courage,  and  not  in  fortifications,  breathes  the  very  ipirit  of  Ly- 
curgus.  Lacedaemon  was  accordingly  never  fortified.  The  kings 
were  commanders  in  chief  of  the  forces ;  and  their  authority,  as  the 
nature  of  military  command  requires,  was  much  greater  in  the  army 
than  in  the  ftate.  They  were,  however,  ftill  amenable  to  the  civil 
power  for  undue  exercife  of  that  neceffary,  but  dangerous  extent  of 
fupremacy. 

There  remain  to  us  two  accounts  of  the  Compofition  of  the  Lace- 
daemonian  Army,   from  authors  both  living  when  Sparta  was  in   its 
higheft  glory,   both   military  men,   both  of  great  abilities,   and  both 
poffeffing  means  of  information  fuch  as  few,   not  themfelves  Lacedae- 
monians, could  obtain.     In  general  they  agree  ;  bur.  on  fome  effential 
points  they  differ,   in  a  manner  not   to  be  accounted  for  but  by  the 
fuppofition  of  fome  error  in  the  tranfeription  of  their  works.      Ac- 
cording to  Xenophon,    the  legiflator  diftributed  the   Lacedaemonian 
forces  into  fix  divifions  of  foot  and  as  many  of  horfe  3  each  of  thefe 
divifions  in  either  fervice  having  the  title  of  Mora.      The  officers  of 
each  mora  of  infantry,  he  fays,   were  one  Polemarch,  four  Lochages, 
eight  Pentecofters,   and  fixteen   Enomotarchs ;    but   the   number   of 
foldiers  he  leaves  unmentioned.     Thucydides,  without  noticing  the 
mora,  defcribes   the  Lacedaemonian  infantry  thus  :    '  Each  Lochus 
'  confifted  of  four  Pentecoftyes,  and  each  pentecoftys  of  four  Enomo- 
«  ties  :  four  men  fought  in  the  front  of  each  enomoty  :  the  depth  of 
'  the  files  was  varied  according  to  circumftances  at  the  difcretion  of 
'  the  lochage;   but  the  ordinary  depth  was   eight  men.'     Thus   the 
enomoty  would  confift  of  thirty-two  men,   the  pentecoftys  of  a  hun- 
dred and  twenty-eight,   the  lochus  of  five  hundred  and  twelve,  and 
a  mora  compofed  of  four  lochi  would  be  two  thoufand   and  forty- 
eight.     But,  according  to  Xenophon,  if  the  enomoty  was  of  thirty  - 
two  men,  and  it  appears  nearly  certain  that  it  was  not  of  more,  the 

pen- 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 


201 


pentecoftys  would  be  but  fixty-four,    the   lochus   a   hundred   and     CHAP.  v. 
twenty-eight,  the  mora  only  live  hundred  and  twelve,  and  the  whole     SECT.  II. 
Lacedaemonian  infantry  three  thoufand  and  feventy-two.      We  are, 
however,  informed  by  Plutarch,  that  by  the  divifion  of  lands  in  La- 
conia  only,  before  the  acquifition  of  MefTenia,  thirty-nine  thoufand 
families  were  provided  for.     The  Lacedaemonians  were  not  generally 
admitted  to  the  honor  of  going  upon  fervice  beyond  the   bounds  of 
Laconia  till  after  the  age  of  thirty  :  yet,  as  the  proportion  of  cavalry 
was  very  fmall,  and  every  Lacedaemonian  was   a  foldier,  we  cannot 
reckon  the  infantry  much  fewer  than  forty  thoufand.     In  the  Perlian 
war  we  fhall  find  ten  thoufand  employed  in  one  army  beyond  Pelo- 
ponnefus,  when   a  confiderable  force   befides  was  on   diftant  fervice 
with  the  fleet,  and  while  an  enemy  within  Peloponnefus  would  make 
a  powerful   defence   neceffary   at   home.     Thus   it   appears   fcarcely 
dubious  but  there  muft  be  fome  miftake  in   the  copies  of  Xenophon. 
I  have  thought  it  neverthelefs  proper  to  be  fo  particular  in  a  detail 
which  cannot  completely  fatisfy,  not  only  becaufe  of  the  well-earned 
fame  of  the  Spartan  military,  but  alfo  becaufe  of  the»high  character  of 
the  authors  of  thefe  differing  accounts,  and  farther  becaufe  the  impoffi- 
bility  to  reconcile  them  will  at  leaft  apologize  for  deficiencies  which 
mayappear  hereafter  in  relating  operations  of  the  Lacedaemonian  forces. 
For  the  military  reader  will  have  obferved,   that  the  difference  is  not 
merely  in   names  and  numbers,   but  materially  regards  the  compo- 
fition  of  the  Lacedaemonian  armies.     This,  according  to  Thucydides 
was  formed  with  the  utmofl  fimplicity,  from  the  file  of  eight  men, 
by  an  arithmetical  progreifion  of  fours  j  and  probably  for  fome  pur- 
pofes  the   file   itfdf  was   divided  into  four    quarter-files.     But   the 
half-file  was   of  four  men,  which,  doubled,   became  a  file.      Four 
files  then  made  the  enomoty,  four  enomoties  the  pentecoftys,  four 
pentecoftyes  the  lochus,  and,  according  to  Xenophon,  four  lochi  the 
mora,  which  was  thus  analogous  to  the  modern  brigade  of  four  bat- 
talions.    Xenophon  farther  informs  us,   that  the  mora  was  the  pro- 
per command  of  the  polemarch.     From  both  writers  it  appears  that 

D  d  the 


202  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  V.     the  polemarchs  were  general  officers,  fubordinate  only  to  the  kings; 

SECT.  II.  and  this  feems  farther  proof  that  Thucydides's  account  of  the  com- 
position of  the  lochus,  and  the  calculation  founded  upon  it  of  the 
flrength  of  the  mora,  arejuft*. 

Subordination,  in  the  Lacedaemonian  difcipline,  as  Thucydides  in 
pointed  terms  remarks,  was  fimple  in  principle  but  multiplied  in  de- 
grees, fo  that  refponfibility  for  due  execution  of  orders  was  widely 
extended  ;  the  proportion  of  thofe  who  had  no  command  being  com- 
paratively very  fmall  -f.  Upon  the  whole,  indeed,  there  appears 
great  analogy  between  the  compofition  of  the  Lacedaemonian  army 
and  that  of  the  modern  European,  particularly  the  Englifh,  whether 
we  take  the  lochus  of  Thucydides,  or  the  mora  of  Xenophon,  as  a 
battalion.  The  refemblance  in  the  formation  was  clofer  till  of  very 
late  years,  when  the  deep  files  of  the  old  difcipline  have  been  totally 
rejected.  Like  the  company,  or  fubdivifion  of  our  battalions,  the 
enomoty  appears  alfo  to  have  been  the  Principle  of  Motion  in  the  La- 
cedaemonian forces.  Whatever  change  was  to  be  made  in  the  extent 
of  the  line,  in  the  depth  of  the  files,  or  in  the  pofition  of  the  front, 
the  evolution  feems  to  have  been  performed  within  each  enomoty  by 
itfelf;  the  juft  reference  of  thefe  primary  conftituent  bodies  to  one 
another,  and  to  the  whole,  being  a  fecond  buiinefs.  Farther  than 
this,  for  want  of  accurate  knowlege  of  the  technical  phrafes,  it  is 
hazardous  to  attempt  explanation   of  thofe  evolutions   of  the  La- 

*  Thucydides's  account  of  the  communi-  thirty-two.     Nothing,  we  well  know,  is  more 

cation   of  orders  through  the   Lacedemonian  common    than    for     names    to    remain    when 

armies   feems    alfo   more    conformable    to    his  things  are  altered  :   if  hereafter  the  meaning  of 

own  account  of  their  compofition  than  to  what  the  modern  words  colonel  and  conllable  lhould 

remains  as   Xenophon's.     Yet   the   inveftiga-  be   fought   in    their  derivation,    what    flrange 

tors  of  Greek  anliquities  have  very  generally  error  would  rcfult !  The  Pentecontarchia  of  Ar- 

inclined  to  the  latter;  apparently  for  no  rea-  rian's  time  was  a  command  not  of  fifty,  as  the 

fon   but   becaufe    they  would  have  the    com-  name  feems  to  import,  but  of  fixty-four  men, 

mand  of  the  pentecofter,  penteconter,  or- pen-  and    the    Hecatontarchia   of  a    hundred    and 

tecontater     (for     thus    varioufly    the     title    is  twenty-eight.   Arrian.  Tacl.  p.  39.  ed.  Amltel. 

written),    exaftly  correfpond    to   the   original  &  Lipz.  1750. 

meaning  of  his  name  ;   and  on  this  rtiadow  of         +  j^,  ^frc,  m~t)  ^  5,^  „  FfaTfa_ 

a  foundation  they  affert  that  the  enomoty,  in-  ^„   _.-„  A««'V(j*o»i«»  uWm<  "M6'™'   "c;»  **« 

eluding  its  commander,   was  of  only  twenty-  rl  1-^,^^  tSu  ifufmao  ■ErotoSi;  wpo^wi.   Thucyd. 

five  men,  tho  it  appears  fo  clearly  from  Thu-  1,  v.  c,  66. 


cydides   that    its    average    complement   was 


cedasmonian 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  203 

cedsmonian  troops  which  Xenophon  has  even  minutely  defcribed,  CHAP.  v. 
and  concerning  which  his  applaufe  highly  excites  curiofity.  Some  SECT.  II. 
other  circumftances,  however,  he  has  related  in  terms  fufHciently 
clear.  Lycurgus,  he  fays,  on  account  of  the  weaknefs  of  angles, 
directed  the  circular  form  for  incampment ;  unlefs  where  a  mountain, 
a  river,  or  fome  other  accident  of  the  ground  afforded  fecurity.  A 
camp-guard  was  mounted  daily  ;  precifely,  it  fliould  feem,  analogous 
to  the  modern  quarter-guard  and  rear-guard,  to  keep  order  within 
the  camp.  A  different  guard  for  the  fame  purpofe  was  mounted  by 
night.  For  fecurity  againft  the  enemy  out-fentries  and  vedettes 
were  ported.  An  advanced  guard  of  horfe  always  preceded  the 
march  of  the  army.  Xenophon  has  thought  it  worth  while  particu- 
larly to  mention  that  the  Lacedaemonians  wore  a  fcarlet  uniform,  and 
the  origin  of  this  he  refers  to  Lycurgus.  The  Lacedaemonian  troops 
were-  always  iingularly  well  provided  with  all  kinds  of  ufeful  bag- 
gage and  camp-neeeffaries,  and  a  large  pxoportion  of  Helot  fervants, 
laborers,  and  artifans  attended,  with  waggons  and  beads  of  burthen. 
It  appears  indeed  to  have  been  a  principle  of  the  Lacedcemonian  fer- 
vice,  that  the  foldier  fliould  be  as  much  as  pomble  at  eafe  when  off 
duty,  and  fliould  have  no  bufinefs  but  that  of  arms. 

Other  ftates  which  have  flourifhed  by  the  wifdom  of  their  laws, 
and  the  goodnefs  of  their  conftitution,  have  rifen  by  flow  degrees  to 
that  excellence  which  has  led  them  to  power  and  celebrity;  and  for- 
tunate circumftances  have  often  done  more  for  them  than  their  wifefl 
legiflatorsj  who  have  indeed  feldom  dared  to  attempt  all  that  them- 
felves  thought  beft.  But  for  Lycurgus  nothing  was  too  difficult, 
nothing  too  dangerous :  he  changed  everything  at  once :  new-mo- 
delled government,  manners,  morals  ;  in  a  manner  new-made  the 
people:  and  yet  with  all  thefe  violent  alterations,  thefe  experiments 
in  politics  hazardous  to  fuch  extreme,  no  one  confequence  feems  to 
have  efcaped  his  penetrating  genius  ;  no  one  of  his  daring  ideas  failed 
in  practice ;  he  forefuv,  and  he  provided  for  everything.  There 
was  a  difeafe  inherent  in  the  vitals  of  his  fyftem,  which  yet  mull  not 

D  d  2  be 


204  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  v.     De  impUted  to  him  as, a  fault,  iince  human  nature  feems  in  few  fitua- 
^SECl .  H.     t|ons   to   acjmit  either  remedy  or  preventative  which  may  not  prove 
work   than   the   difeafe  :   palliatives   alone  can  fafely  he  attempted. 
For  the  military  turn  which   Lycurgus   fo  much   incouraged  in  his 
iellow-countrymen,  and  the  perfection  of  difcipline  which  he  efta- 
blifhed  among  them,  were  neceffary  not  only  to  that  refpectable  in- 
dependency which  he  wifhed  them  to  injoy,   but  even  to  the  fecurity 
of  their  exiftence  as  a  people.     He  was,  however,  not  unaware  that 
thirft   of  conqueft,    and  ambition    to  command,  miift    unavoidably 
fpring  up  and  flourim  in  a  foil  fo  prepared.    Two  prohibitions,  which 
had  other  more  obvious  purpofes,  appear  at  the  fame  time  to  have 
been  intended  indirectly  to  obviate  the  mifchiefs  that  might  be  ap- 
prehended from  thefe  pamons  :   he  forbad  the  Lacedaemonians  to  in- 
gage  in  frequent  wars  with   the  fame  people  j   and  he  forbad  them, 
Irom   the   moment  when  victory  was  decisively  theirs,  to  purfue.  a 
flying  enemy.      Each  of  thefe  prohibitions  tended  ftrongly  to  prevent 
the  complete  conqueft  of  any  foreign  territory  :  at  the  fame  time  that 
the  firft  had,  for  its  more  obvious  purpofe,  the  prevention  of  foreigners 
from  acquiring  the  Spartan  difcipline ;  and  the  other,   beiide  fecuring 
his  fellowcountrymen  againft  the  misfortunes  incident  to  ram  pur- 
fuit,  as  it  leffened  to  oppofing  armies  the  danger  of  flight,   was  likely 
to  make  vidory  often  cheaper  to  the  Lacedaemonians  than  it  would 
be  in  parallel  circumftances  to  any  other  people.     Thefe,  with  the 
exclufion  of  wealth,  were  the  curbs  that  Lycurgus  put  upon  that 
ambition  which  he  could  not  but  forefee  mull  arife  among  his  fellow- 
countrymen.     Thofe  other   defects  of  the  Spartan  conftitution,   of 
Ariftot. Polit.  which  we  are  informed  by  the  comment  of  a  great  philofopher  and 
politician  who  faw  it  in  decay,  whether    originally   in   Lycurgus's 
eftablifhment,  or  whether  of  after-growth,  will  rather  be  objects  of 
future  confederation. 

Lycurgus  then  having  with  invincible  courage  and  unwearied  per- 
feverance,  and  with  penetration  and  judgement  ftill  much  more  lin- 
gular, executed  the  moft  extraordinary  plan  ever  even  devifed   by 

man  j 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  205. 

man  *  ;  waiting  a  while  to  fee  his  machine  in  motion,  and  having  the     CHAP.  V, 
fatisfacTion   to    mid   every  part  adapted,   and  the  whole   move  as  he     stEC  ^[  ■  **• 
wiflied,   his  next  and  la  ft  concern  was  to   fecure  its  duration.     Sum- 
moning  an  affembly  of   the   people,    he  obferved   upon    what   had 
been  done,    '  That  it  proved  upon  experience  good,  and  would,  he 
'  hoped,  go  far  toward  alluring  virtue,  and  of  courfe  happinefs  to  his 

*  fellowcountrymen.  He  had  yet  one  thing  to  propofe,  which  how- 
'  ever  he  would  not  venture  upon  till  he  had  confulted  the  god  j  for 
'  which  purpofe  he  would  go  himfelf  to  Delphi.  In  the  mean  time 
'  they  fhould  promife  him  that  nothing  mould  be  altered  before  his 
'  return.'  Immediately  kings,  fenate,  and  people  unanimoufly  de- 
fired  him  to  go,  and  readily  ingaged,  by  a  folemn  oath,  that  till  he  re- 
turned nothing  fhould  be  altered.  His  reception  at  Delphi  was  as 
favorable   as  before.    The  oracle  declared   '  That  the  conftitution  of 

*  Sparta,   as  it  now  ftood,   was  excellent,  and,   as  long  as  it  remained 
'  intire,   would   infure  happinefs  and  glory  to  the  ftate.'     Lycurgus 
fent  this  refponfe  to  Sparta,  determined  himfelf  never  to  return.    He 
had  now  completed  what  he  efteemed  fufficient  for  his  life.     His 
death  was  wanting  to  bind  his  fellowcountrymen  indiilblubly  to  the 
obfervance  of  his  inftitutions ;  and  a  ftatefman  ought  if  poffible,  he 
thought,  to  make  even  his  death  beneficial  to  his  country.    Conform- 
ably to  this  doctrine,  which  was  not  only  not  alien  from  the  fpirit  of 
the  age,  but  confonant  alfo  to  the  ftoic  philofophy  of  aftertimes,  he 
is  faid  to  have  died  by  voluntary  abftinence  from  nouriihment.     Dif- 
ferent accounts  are  however  given,   both  of  the  place  and  manner  of 
his  death.    One  tradition  fays  that  he  lived  to  a  good  old  age  in  Crete ;   Juftin-.  !•  «** 
and  dying  naturally,  his  body  was  burnt  according  to  the  practice  of 
the  age,  and  the  relics,  purfuant  to  his  own  requeft,  fcattered  in  the 

*  It  is   a  remark  of  J.  J.  Roufleau,   that  the  philofopher  very  jultly,  had  Lycurgus  been 

the   many  plans  of  government   propofed   by  a   legislator   in    (peculation   only,    his   fcheme 

fpeculative  men,  however  excellent  in  theory,  would  have    appeared   much    more   viiionary 

are  generally   flighted  as   mere  virions,   im-  than  Plato's, 
poffible  to  be  reduced  to  praftice  :  but,  fays 

fea  j 


c.  1, 


206  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  V.    fea  .  \e([t  jf  j^jg   DOnes  or  afhes  had  ever  been  carried  to  Sparta,  the 

CCT1"P      TTT 

1    __/       Lacedaemonians  might  have  thought  themfelves  freed  from  their  ob- 
ligation by  oath  to  obferve  his  laws. 

SECTION     III. 

Hijlory  of  MeJJ'enia  from  the  Return  of  the  Heracleids,  and  of  "Lacedamon 
from  the  Legijlation  of  Lycurgus  to  the  completion  of  the  Conqueji  of 
MeJJ'enia  by  the  Lacedamonians. 

IT  was  not  long  after  the  full  eftablifliment  of  Lycurgus's  infti- 
tutions  before  the  increafe  of  vigor  to  the  Lacedaemonian  ltate  for 
Herodot.  I.  i.  external  exertion,  became  as  apparent  as  the  internal  change  from 
boundlefs  diforder  to  unexampled  regularity.  The  Spartans  exulted 
in  their  new- felt  Strength:  the  defire  to  exercife  it  grew  irrefiftible  ; 
and  they  became  early  marked  by  their  neighbours  as  a  formidable 
people.  Wars  arofe  with  all  the  bordering  States ;  but  thofe  with 
Meffenia,  for  the  importance  of  their  confequences,  will  principally 
demand  attention. 

Messenia,  as  we  have  already  obferved,  was  the  leaft  mountainous, 
and  the  moft  generally  fruitful  province  of  Peloponnefus  ;  but  it  feems 
never  to  have  been  bleSt  with  a  government  capable  of  fecuring  to  its 
Paufan.  1.  iv.  inhabitants  the  advantages  which  the  foil  and  climate  offered.    Cref- 
c-  3*  phontes  the  Heracleid,  we  are  told,  endeavouring  to  fupport  himfelf 

by  the  favor  of  the  lower  people  againft  the  arrogance  of  the  leading 
men,  an  infurrection  infued,  in  which  he  was  cut  off  with  his  fa- 
mily; one  only  fon,  iEpytus,  efcaping  the  maffacre.  This  prince, 
however,  afcended  the  throne;  and  fo  far  acquired  fame,  that  his  de- 
fendants were  from  his  name  diftinguifhed  from  the  other  branches 
of  the  Heracleids.  But  the  Meffenian  hiftory  affords  little  interesting 
before  the  wars  with  Lacedacmon,  which,  with  their  confequences, 
form  indeed  almoft  the  whole  of  it.  Concerning  thofe  wars  hardly  any 
Ha-odot.  1.  i.  thing  remains  from  the  older  Grecian  writers.  Herodotus  feems  oddly 
c.66  ci-  to  avoid  the  mention  of  them.  In  a  very  late  age  Paufanias  endeavoured 
to  fupply  the  deficiency  ;  and  he  appears  to  have  taken  great  pains,  by 

col- 


*r 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  207 

collating  poems,  and  traditions  preferved  by  profe-writers,  with  ancient     CHAP.  V. 
genealogies, and  temple  records,  to  afcertain  the  principal  circumftances     SECT.  III. 
of  Mefldniaft  hiftory.   In  many  points  he  is  confirmed  by  fcattered  paf-    paufan.  1.  iv. 
fages  of  authors  of  high  authority  ;  and  the  confequences  of  the  Mef-   c 
fenian  wars  were  fo  remarkable  and  fo  important,  and  remain  (o  un- 
queftionably  afcertained,  that  Paufanias's   account  of  the  wars  them- 
felves  will  reafonably  require  fome  fcope  in  a  general  hiftory  of  Greece. 
The  affigned  caufes  of  the  fatal  quarrel  are  objects  of  notice,  as 
they  tend  to  mark  the  manners  of  the  age.    However  the  Greeks  were 
politically  divided,  they  always  maintained  a  community  in  the  con- 
cerns of  religion.     Some  religious  rites  indeed  were  held  peculiar  to 
particular  cities,  and  ibme  even  to  particular  families  ;  but  fome  were 
common  to  all  of  the  fame  hord,  Dorian,  Ionian,  /Eolian,  and  fome 
to  the  whole  nation.     There  was  at  LimniS,  on  the  frontier  of  Mef-   Paufan.  1.  iv. 
fenia  again ft  Laconia,  a  temple  dedicated  to  Diana;  where  Meffenians 
and  Lacedaemonians,   both  being   of  Dorian   origin,  equally  reforted 
to  facrifice,  and  to  partake  of  thofe  periodical  feftivities  which  were 
ufual  at  all  the  more  celebrated  Grecian  temples.     Ir>  a  tumult  at  one   Paufan.  ubi 
of  thofe  feftivals,  Teleclus  king  of  Sparta,  fon  of  Archelaus   the  co-    s"rabo  1  v"" 
temporary  of  Lycurgus,  was  killed.     The  Lacedaemonians  upon  this   P-  362- 
occafion  were  loud  in  complaint  that  the  Meffenians  had  attempted  to 
carry  off  fome  Spartan  virgins,  and  that  Teleclus  received  his  death 
in  defending  them.      The  Meffenians,  on  the  contrary,   averred  that 
the  treachery  was  on  the  part  of  the  Lacedaemonians  ;   that  the  pre- 
tended virgins  were  armed  youths   thus  difguifed  with  a  purpofe  to 
affafTinate  the  Meffenian  chiefs  who  attended  the  folemnity,  and  that 
Teleclus  and  his  followers  met  a  juft  fate  in  attempting  to  execute 
their  execrable  intention.      On  whichfoever  fide  the   truth   lay,   the 
Lacedaemonians   checked  their  refentment   till   in  the   reigns  of  Al- 
camenes  fon  of  Teleclus,  and  Theopompus,   grandfon  of  Charilaus 
(for  we  have  no  dates  of  any  authority  for  thefe  events  but  what  the 
genealogies  of  the  Spartan  kings   furnifli*)  other  caufes  of  quarrel 

*   Paufanias    indeed   fays    that   Polychares,      war,  was  viftor  in  the  fourth  Olympiad.     Pau- 
who   immediately  brought  on  the   Meffenian     fan.   1.   iv.  c.  4.     We  may  believe  that  the 

name 


2c8  HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 

chap.  v.  arofe.  Polychares,  a  Meflenian  of  rank,  put  out  by  agreement  Tome 
SECT.  III.  catt]Cj  |n  which  ftill  confifted  the  principal  riches  of  the  times,  under 
the  care  of  herdimen  his  own  flaves,  to  pafture  on  the  lands  of  Euajph- 
nus,  a  Lacedaemonian  ;  who  fold  both  cattle  and  herdimen,  and  pre- 
tended to  Polychares  that  they  had  been  carried  off  by  pirates.  The 
fraud  was  however  difcovered  by  one  of  the  flaves ;  who,  efcaping 
from  his  purchafer,  returned  to  bis  former  mailer.  Euaephnus,  thus 
detected,  promifed  an  equivalent  j  and  the  fon  of  Polychares  was  lent 
to  receive  it:  but,  inllead  of  keeping  his  word,  Eusephnus  caufed  the 
young  man  to  be  affaffinated.  The  father,  upon  this,  full  of  grief  and 
indignation,  went  himfelf  to  Sparta,  and  laid  his  complaint  before 
kings  and  people  :  but  finding  no  difpolition  to  grant  him  any  redrefs, 
he  returned  inraged  to  his  own  country,  and  retaliated  by  frequent  af- 
fafll nation  of  the  Lacedaemonian  borderers.  Thefe  outrages  brought  a 
deputation  from  Sparta  to  the  Meflenian  ffate,  to  demand  reparation. 
PauQm.  1.  iv.  Two  kings  then  reigned  in  Meffenia  :  of  thefe  Androcles  was  inclined 
to  give  up  Polychares  rather  than  rilk  a  war  with  Sparta.  But  An- 
tiochus  oppofed  a  meafure  which  he  affirmed  to  be  equally  mean  and 
unjufi: ;  and  fuch  was  the  imperfect  and  unfettled  flate  of  the  Meflenian 
government,  that  recourfe  was  had  to  arms  for  deciding  the  dilpute. 
Androcles  and  his  principal  partifans  were  killed,  and  Antiochus  thus 
became  fole  king  of  Meffenia. 

The  Lacedsemonians  highly  exafperated,  and  now  without  any  view 
of  peaceful  redrefs,  are  faid  to  have  taken  a  meafure  not  incredible  of 
their  age  and  circumftances,  however  impoffible  to  have  happened  in 
fuch  large  kingdoms  as  have  led  the  affairs  of  modern  Europe.  With- 
out any  of  thofe  formal  declarations  by  heralds  which  the  law  of 
nations,  even  then  among  the  Greeks,  required  as  the  forerunners  of 
honorable  war,  they  prepared  fecretly  for  hoftilities ;  and  fo  extreme 
was  the  animoiity  againfr.  the  Meffenians  which  then  pervaded  their 

name  of  the  viflor  in   the  fourth  Olympiad  chronology,   mull  have  begun  near  a  century 

was   Polychares,  and    yet   perhaps   reafonably  later,  about  the  twenty-fourth  or  twenty-fifth 

doubt   if  he  was   the   perfon  who  caufed   the  Olympiad. 
Meflenian  war,  which,  according  to  Newton's 

little 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


109 


little  ftate,  an  oath  was  univerfally  taken,  That  no  length  of  time     CHAP.  v. 
mould  weary  them,  no  magnitude  of  misfortune  fhould  deter  them,    SECT-  m- 
but  they  would  profecute  the  war,  and,  it  is  added  by  fome  writers,   Strabo,  1.  vi. 
would  on  no  account  return  to  their  families  till  they  had  fubdued  Pauian.  1.  iv. 
Meffenia.     This  violent  refolution  thus  folemnly  taken,  Ampheia,  a  juftin.  i.  ;;;f 
fmall  town  advantageoufly  fituated  for  covering  the  frontier,   became   c-  4* 
their  firfl  object.    A  body  of  troops,  led  by  their  king  Alcamenes,  en-   rup. 
tered  it  by  night,  the  gates  being  open  and  no  guard  kept,  as  no  ho-   Ol.xxxii.r. 
ftilities  were   apprehended.     The  place  was   taken  with  fcarcely  any      '     '     -^ 
refinance ;  and  all  the  inhabitants,  except  a  few  who  efcaped  by  flight,   Ol.  ix.  2. 
were  put  to  the  fword.  '     '  '  g\ 

Antiochus  died,  after  having  injoyed  but  for  a  few  months  the  mo- 
narchy of  Meffenia.  He  was  fucceeded  by  his  fon  Euphaes.  This  prince 
prepared  wifely  to  refill:  the  ftorm  which  was  burfling  on  his  country. 
While  he  avoided  battles  with  the  Lacedaemonians,  whole  art  of  war 
and  practifed  difcipline  gave  them  a  decided  fuperiority  in  the  field, 
he  provided  fo  effectually  for  the  defence  of  the  Meflenian  towns, 
that  every  attempt  of  the  enemy  proved  unfuccefsful  againft.  them. 
Thus  fecure  at  home,  he  took  opportunities  occafionally  to  imbark 
fome  chofen  troops,  and  revenged  the  pillage  committed  in  Meffenia 
by  fimilar  depredations  on  the  coaft  of  Laconia.  It  was  not  till  the 
fourth  year  of  the  war  that  he  thought  his  people  practifed  enough 
in  arms  to  meet  the  Lacedsmonians  in  the  field ;  and  even  then,  re- 
folved  to  put  nothing  to  hazard,  his  aim  was  lefs  to  pufh  for  deci- 
five  victory,  than  to  let  it  appear  that,  while  watching  opportunities, 
he  could  face  the  enemy  without  difadvantage.  In  the  following  year, 
however,  the  two  armies  came  to  a  general  ingagement ;  and  with 
a  fury  of  which  polifhed  times,  being  without  equal  incentives,  can 
furnifh  no  example.  '-  Recollect,'  laid  Euphaes,  fpeaking  to  his 
troops,  on  the  point  of  ingaging,  '  it  is  not  for  your  lands  only,  your 
'  goods,  your  wealth  that  you  are  going  to  fight.  But  you  well  know 
'  what  will  be  your  fate  if  vanquiihed  :  your  wives  and  children  will 
*  be  (laves ;  and,  for  yourfelves,  death  will  be  your  fairelt  lot,  if  it 

E  e  '  comes 


2io  HISTORYOFGREECE. 


CHAP.  V. 
SECT.  III. 


9- 


'  comes  without  ignominy  or  torture.  Ampheia  may  tell  you  this.' 
Night,hovvever,  ftopped  the  battle ;  and  next  morning  each  army  found 
itfelf  fo  weakened  by  the  numbers  flain,  that  both  fhunned  a  renewal 
of  the  ingagement. 
Paufan.  1.  iv.  But  tho  the  trial  of  arms  was  thus  equally  maintained  by  the  Meffe- 
nians,  yet  their  affairs  were, in  other  points,  declining  greatly.  The  open 
country  had  been  fo  long  the  fpoil  of  the  enemy,  that  the  means  of 
iupporting  themfelves  within  their  garrifons  began  to  fail  :  their  flaves 
deferted;  and  difeafe,  the  common  confequence,  efpecially  in  hot  cli- 
mates, of  crouding  together  in  towns  perlonsaccuftomed  to  breathe  the 
free  air  and  eat  the  frefh  food  of  the  fields,  made  havoc  among  them. 
New  meafures  became  neceffary.  They  drew  their  people  from  all  their 
inland  ports  to  Ithome,  a  ftrong  fituation  near  the  coafi ;  which  they 
preferred,  becaufe,  the  Lacedaemonians  having  no  naval  force,  it  would 
always  be  open  to  fupplies  by  fea.  Inlarging  this  place  furficiently 
to  receive  its  new  inhabitants,  they  added  at  the  fame  time  to  its  ex- 
traordinary natural  flrength  everything  of  which  their  fkill  in  forti- 
fication was  capable.  While  thefe  works  were  going  forward,  their 
doubts  and  fears  directed  them  farther,  to  the  common  refource  of 
defponding  ftates,  to  afk  advice  of  the  Delphian  oracle  how  the  blef- 
iing  of  the  gods  might  be  obtained  to  their  endeavours.  The  anfwer 
might  perhaps  jufhfy  a  fufpicion  that  the  Delphian  priefls  were  on 
this  occaiion  corrupted  by  the  Lacedaemonians ;  for  it  was  perfectly 
adapted  to  produce  difcord  and  confulion  in  Mefienia.  The  Pythonefs 
declared,  that  a  virgin  of  the  blood  of  ^pytus  muft  be  facrificed  to 
the  infernal  deities.  The  confequences  were  no  other  than  might 
be  expected  from  an  abfurd  and  cruel  fuperftition.  The  lot  was  cafl, 
and  fell  upon  the  daughter  of  Lycifcus.  But  a  prieft,  gained  by  the 
father,  declared  that  the  daughter  was  fuppoiititious,  and  therefore  not 
known  to  be  of  the  blood  required  by  the  gods.  Lycifcus  however, 
ftill  fearing  for  his  child,  took  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  doubts 
and  confulion  which  the  prielt's  declaration  had  occaiioned,  to  carry 
her  off,  and  he  deferted  with  her  to  Sparta.     Double  confufion,  doubt, 

and 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  211 

and  defpondency  now  took  poffeflion  of  the  Meflenian  council ;  when    CHAP.  v. 
Ariftodemus,   a  man   in  whom  fuperftition  or  ambition,   or  perhaps 
both  together,  had  ftifled  paternal  tendernefs,  voluntarily  offered  his 
own  daughter  for  the  victim.  But  here  other  obftacles  occurred.  The 
virgin  was  betrothed  to  a  young  Meflenian  of  higheft  rank  and  efti- 
mation  ;  who,  (hocked  with  the  fuddennefs  of  the  father's  dreadful 
purpofe,  infilled  vehemently  that  his  daughter  was  not  at  his  difpofal, 
but  belonged  to  him  to  whom  fhe  was  betrothed,  and  whofe  wife  fhe 
was  on   the  point  of  becoming.     This,   however,   not  availing,   the 
young  man,  agonizing  with  the  thought  of  thus  tragically  lofing  his 
beloved  bride,  averred  that  the  daughter  of  Ariftodemus  could  not  fa- 
tisfy  the  requiiition  of  the  gods,  for  me  was  no  virgin,   being  already 
with  child  by  him.      Infult  thus  added  to  oppofition  inraged  Arifto- 
demus to  madnefs  :   the  fiivage  flew  his  daughter  with  his  own  hand; 
and,   to  vindicate    the  honor  of  his  family  by  demonftration  of  the 
falfehood  of  the  lover's  aflertion,  caufed  the  body  to  be  diffedted.  The 
priefts  now  demanded  another  virgin,  the   deceafed   not  having  been 
regularly  facrificed.      But  the  wifer  Euphaes,  finding  himfelf  ftrongly 
fupported  by  the  iEpytidian  families,  who  were  numerous  and  power- 
ful, perfuaded  the  people  that  the  command  of  the  oracle  was  fuffi- 
ciently  performed,  and  no  more  blood  required  by  the  gods. 

The  horrid  deed  of  Ariftodemus  is  however  faid  fo  far  to  have 
ferved  his  country,  that  the  fame  of  the  oracle,  and  of  the  obedience 
paid  to  it,  threw  fome  diffidence  into  the  minds  of  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians ;  infomuch  that  for  five  years  the  war  was  almoft  intermitted. 
But  in  the  fixth  another  great  effort  was  made.  Theopompus  led  an 
army  toward  Ithome ;  and  Euphaes  now,  trufting  in  the  practifed 
valor  of  his  people,  or  perhaps  ftill  more  dreading  the  confequences 
of  confining  them  in  garrifon,  marched  to  meet  him.  A  battle  was 
again  fought,  in  which,  as  in  the  former,  great  daughter  was  made  on 
both  fides,  without  any  decifive  advantage  to  either:  only  that  the 
brave  and  worthy  Euphaes,  anxious  by  his  example  to  lead  his  people 
to  victory,  received  a  mortal  wound.     The  ambition  of  Ariftodemus 

E  e  2  now 


212  HISTORY    OF.  GREECE. 

CHAP.V.  now  was  gratified  :  Eupliaes  leaving  no  ifTue,  he  was  raifed  to  the 
throne  by  the  voice  of  the  people,  in  preference  to  all  others  of  JEpy- 
tidian  race. 

The  known  bravery  and  activity  of  this  prince  were  fuch,  that  the 
Lacedaemonians  derived  little  incouragement  from  the  death  of  Eu- 
phaes ;  and  their  lofs  in  the  late  battle  was  fo  great,  that  again,  for 
four  years,  the  operations  of  the  war  were  confined  to  mere  predatory 
incurfions.  This  time  was  judicioufly  employed  by  the  new  MefTe- 
nian  king  in  Strengthening  his  alliance  with  the  Argians,  Arcadians, 
and  Sicyonians ;  infomuch  that  when,  in  the  fifth  year  of  his  reign, 
the  Lacedaemonians  marched  all  their  forces  again  ft  Ithome,  he  re- 
ceived powerful  affiftance  from  thofe  ftates.  A  pitched  battle  was 
now  again  fought,  in  which  the  abilities  of  Ariftodemus  as  com- 
mander in  chief  were  not  lefs  confpicuous  than  his  bravery  had  been 
when  an  inferior  officer.  The  Lacedaemonian  armies  excelled  in  heavy- 
armed  foot.  The  MefTenians  were  fuperior  in  light  troops,  who  ufed 
chiefly  miffile  weapons.  By  a  judicious  difpofition  of  thefe,  fupported 
by  the  determined  bravery  of  his  heavy  phalanx,  Ariftodemus,  after  re- 
peated and  well  varied  efforts,  fucceeded  in  breaking  the  Spartan  or- 
der of  battle.  Great  numbers  fell,  both  on  the  field  and  in  the  re- 
treat. But,  tho  victory  was  fairly  on  the  fide  of  the  MefTenians ;  yet 
the  excellency  of  the  Spartan  difcipline  prevented  a  total  rout.  The 
Lacedaemonian  chiefs,  however,  found  it  neceffary  to  lead  the /batter- 
ed remains  of  their  army  immediately  into  Laconia. 

Now  the  Lacedaemonians  in  their  turn  fent  to  Delphi  to  afk  ad- 
vice of  the  god.  The  MefTenians,  flill  more  interefted  in  the  event, 
again  did  the  fame.  Unintelligible  refponfes  were  abfurdly  and 
childifhly  interpreted ;  and  for  fome  time  there  was  an  emulation 
between  the  two  people  in  fuperfHtion  rather  than  in  arms.  Remorfe 
for  his  daughter's  death  in  the  mean  time  took  pofTeffion  of  Arifto- 
demus. We  are  not  informed  of  any  confiderable  fublequent  mif- 
fortune  public  or  private  that  had  happened  to  him,  when  he  killed 
himfelf  on  her  tomb.     The  accounts  indeed  of  the  conclusion  of  this 

war 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  213 

war  are  extremely  defective  j  they  leave  us  almoft  wholly  uninformed     CHAP.  v. 
of  the  fteps   immediately  leading  to    the    cataftrophe.     The   death     SECT-  HI. 
of  Ariftodemus  was  probably  among  them  ;  for  we  hear  of  no  Meffe- 
nian  leader  of  eminent  abilities  after  him.     Spartan  difcipline  and 
Spartan  perfeverance  therefore  at  length  prevailed.     Ithome  was  be- 
lieged  and  taken.     The  inhabitants  and  garrifon,  prefled  with  extre-    Ol.xxxvii. 
mity  of  famine,  found  opportunity  to  pafs  the  Lacedaemonian  lines,   g  ^    - 
and    fled,   as     every  one    formed   hopes    of  fafety   and    fubiiftence.  N. 

Many    had     claims    of    hofpitality    at   Argos,     at   Sicyon,    and    in    O  qW'  U 
the  Arcadian  towns  j  and  to  thole  places  accordingly  directed  their  b. 

fteps  upon  this  melancholy  occalion.     Thofe  who  had  been  admitted   c™™' 
to  the  myiteries  of  Ceres,  or  could  trace  their  pedigree  to  the  facred 
families   of  that  goddefs,  found  refuge  at  Eleufis.     The  miferable 
multitude,   to  whom  no  place  of  fecure  retreat  occurred,   fcattered, 
fome    to    find   their  former   dwellings,    others    varioufly   about   the 
country.    The  Lacedaemonians,  having  deitroyed  Ithome  to  the  foun- 
dation, proceeded  to  take  pofieflion  of  the  other  towns  without  oppo- 
fition.     They  gave  to  the  Afinaeans,   who  had  been  lately  expelled 
from  their  town  and  lands  by  the  Argians,  a  trad*  on  the  Meffenian  p  ™;°;  ' V1U* 
coaft,  which  to  the  days  of  Paufanias   was   ftill  inhabited  by  their  Paulan-  !■  iv« 
pofterity.     The  other  lands  they  left  to  the  remaining  Meflenians  ; 
exacting   from  them,  together  with  an  oath  of  allegiance,  half  the 
produce  as  tribute.     Thus  was  this  important  territory  added  to  the 
dominion  of  Sparta. 

Among  the  events  of  this  war,  one  is  related  which  bears  a  flrange 
appearance  to  modern  readers,  and  yet  found  credit  with  fome  of  the 
moft  judicious  ancient  writers.     Their  accounts  indeed  differ  :  yet  all   Strabo.l.  vi. 
are  fo  far  conlbnant  to  one   another,    to   the   manners  and  circum-   juitL.' 1".  iiL 
fiances  of  the  times,  and  to  other  authenticated  events,  that  we  can-        • 
not  fuppofe  them  unfounded.     The   abfence,     we  are  told,  of  the 
Laced    monians  from  their  homes,  in  confequence  of  the  rafh  oath 
taken  at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  was  long  fupported  by  their  wives 
with  Spartan  fortitude.     But  year  elapfing  after  year,  and  MefTenia 

ftill 


2i4  HISTORY      OF      GREECE. 

CHAP.  V.  ftiu  unfubdued,  the  matrons  at  length  fent  to  the  army,  reprefentin°- 
SECT.  ill.  the  unequal  terms  on  which  the  war  was  waged.  The  enemy,  they 
obferved,  living  with  their  families,  new  citizens  were  continually 
produced  to  fupply  the  decay  of  nature,  and  the  ravage  of  war  :  but 
the  Spartan  women  had  palled  years  in  widowhood  ;  and  mould  the 
war  continue,  however  victorious  their  arms,  the  {late  would  be  as 
effectually  annihilated  as  it  could  be  by  a  conquering  enemy  ;  for  there 
would  be  no  riling  generation.  The  complaint  was  acknowleged  to 
require  ferious  confideration ;  but  remedy  appeared  difficult  without 
incurring  the  guilt  of  perjury,  and  thus  drawing  down  the  vengeance 
of  the  gods  for  that  fuppoled  of  all  crimes  the  mod  offenlive  to  them. 
The  difficulty  was,  however,  not  to  Lacedaemonians  what  it  would 
have  been  to  any  .other  people.  It  was  determined  that  thole  who 
had  arrived  at  the  age  for  bearing  arms  lince  the  commencement  of 
the  war,  none  of  whom  fortunately  had  taken  the  oath,  ffiould  be 
fent  home  to  cohabit  promifcuouily  with  the  marriageable  virgins  ; 
or,  according  to  fome  authors,  with  all  the  women.  The  inftitu- 
tions  of  Lycurgus  were  effectual  to  conquer  fome  of  the  ftrongefr. 
paffions  of  human  nature,  yet  they  were  not  equal  to  the  annihilation 
of  all  prejudice.  When  the  war  at  length  was  happily  terminated, 
and  things  at  Lacedsemon  refumed  their  wonted  courie,  the  innocent 
offspring  of  thefe  irregular  embraces  were  flighted  by  the  other  citi- 
zens. Being  however  not  the  lefs  high-fpirited  for  being  lefs  regu- 
larly born,  fome  difturbance  was  apprehended  from  their  uneafinefs 
at  the  diftindtions  made  to  their  difadvantage.  It  was  therefore 
thought  prudent  to  offer  them  means  of  eftablilhing  themfelves  with- 
out the  bounds  of  Peloponnefus.  They  readily  confented  to  emigrate; 
and  under  the  conduct  of  Phal?nthus,  one  of  their  own  body,  they 
founded  the  city  of  Tarentum  in  Italy. 

During  near  forty  years  Meffenia  remained  in  quiet  fubje&ion. 
Thole  of  its  unfortunate  people  who  fubmitted  to  the  Lacedaemonian 
terms,  chofe  the  leaft  among  evils  prelenting  themfelves,  and  refled 
under  their  hard  lot.     But  the  fucceeding  generation,  unexperienced  in 

the 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  215 

the  calamities  of  war,  unexperienced  in  the  comparative  strength  of  CHAP.  V. 
themfelves  and  their  conquerors,  yet  inftigated  by  a  fhare  of  that  irre-  SECT.  III. 
fiftible  fpirit  of  independency  which  at  this  time  fo  remarkably  per- 
vaded Greece,  and  buoyed  up  by  that  hope  of  fortunate  contingencies, 
fo  natural  in  adverfity  to  generous  minds,  could  not  brook  the  com- 
panion of  their  own  circumftances  with  thofe  of  all  other  Greeks. 
Their  fubjection  was  indeed  too  fevere  and  too  humiliating  to  be  by 
any  poffibility  borne  with  fatisfaction,  yet  not  fufficientlv  deprefling 
to  infure  the  continuance  of  quiet  fubmifiion.  A  leader  therefore 
only  was  wanting  of  reputation  to  attract  and  concentrate  the  mate- 
rials of  the  riling  ftorm,  and  it  would  burft  with  energy.  Such  a 
leader  appeared  in  Ariftomenes,  a  youth  whofe  high  natural  fpirit 
was  ftill  elevated  by  the  opinion  of  his  defcent  from  Hercules 
through  a  lone;  race  of  Meflenian  kin°;s,  When  therefore  others 
were  propcfing  a  revolt,  Ariftomenes  was  foremoft  to  act  in  it.  Per- 
fons  were  fent  privately  to  the  former  allies  of  the  ftate,  the  Argians 
and  Arcadians,  to  inquire  what  affiftance  might  be  expected  from 
them.  Very  favorable  promiles  being  received,  Ariftomenes  and 
his  party  immediately  attacked  a  body  of  Lacedaemonians  at  Derse. 
A  very  obftinate  action  infued,  which  terminated  without  victory  to  g  q  607." 
either  party:   yet  the  MelTenians  were  fo  fatisfied  with  the  behaviour  ...  Ar* 

of  Ariftomenes,  that  they  would  have  railed  him  to  the  throne.     He   g  c.  68^.' 
prudently  refuted  that  invidious  honour,  but  accepted  the  oihce  of  B- 

commander  in  chief  of  the  forces. 

The  firft  adventure  related  of  this  hero  after  his  elevation  founds 
romantic  ;  but  the  age  was  romantic,  and  his  lituation  required  no 
common  conduct.  Ariftomenes  well  knew  the  power  of  fuperftitious 
fear  among  his  cotemporaries,  and  he  formed  a  project  to  ferve  his 
country  through  its  operation.  There  was  at  Sparta  a  temple  called 
the  brazen  houfe,  dedicated  to  Minerva,  and  held  in  lingular  venera- 
tion. Ariftomenes  entered  that  city  alone  by  night  ;  which  was  not 
difficult,  as  there  were  neither  walls  nor  watch,  and  the  lefs  dange- 
rous as   no  Grecian    towns  were  lighted,    and   the  Lacedemonian 

inftitutions 


ai6  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  v.  Inftitutions  forbad  to  carry  lights.  Secure  therefore  in  obfcurity,  he 
nI*  fufpended  againft  the  brazen  houfe  a  fhield,  with  an  infcription  de- 
claring that  Ariftomenes,  from  the  fpoils  of  Sparta,  dedicated  that  fhield 
to  the  gcddefs.  Nothing  the  early  Greeks  dreaded  more  than  that 
their  enemies  mould  win  from  them  the  favor  of  a  deityV-under 
whofe  peculiar  protection  they  imagined  their  date  to  have  been 
placed  by  the  piety  of  their  forefathers.  The  Lacedaemonians  were 
N  fo  alarmed,  that  they  fent  to  inquire  of  the  Delphian  Oracle  what  was 
to  be  done.  The  anfwer  of  the  Pythonefs  was  well  confidered  for 
the  fafety  of  the  oracle's  reputation,  but  rather  embarrafilng  to  the 
Lacedaemonians :  it  directed  them  to  take  an  Athenian  for  their 
counfellor.  An  embafly  was  accordingly  fent  to  Athens.  But  here 
too  ibme  embarraffment  arofe  :  for  the  Athenians,  far  from  defirous 
that  the  fined  province  of  Peloponnefus  fhould  become  for  ever  an- 
nexed to  the  dominion-of  Sparta,  dared  not  yet  directly  oppofe  the 
oracle.  They  took  therefore  a  middle  way  ;  and  in  obeying  hoped 
to  make  their  obedience  ufelefs.  They  fent  a  man  named  Tyrtseus, 
who  among  the  loweft  of  the  people  had  exercifed  the  profeffion  of  a 
fchoolmader ;  little  known  of  courfe,  but  fuppofed  of  no  abilities 
for  any  purpofe  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  lame  of  one  leg.  There 
is  fomething  in  thefe  circum fiances  fo  little  confonant  to  modern 
hiftorv,  that  they  are  apt  at  firft  view  to  bear  an  appearance  both  of 
fable  and  of  infignificancy.  But  they  come  fo  far  authenticated  to  us, 
that  it  is  impoffible  not  to  give  them  fome  credit.  It  was  partly  from 
the  admired  works  of  Tyrtaeus  himfelf,  fragments  of  which  remain 
to  us,  that  hidorians  afterward  collected  their  account  of  the  MefTe- 
nian  affairs  ;  and  it  is  dill  common,  we  know,  for  circumdances  in 
themfelves  the  mod  trifling  to  have  confequences  the  mod  im- 
portant. 
.*.  The  MefTenian  army  was  now  reinforced  by  Argian,  Arcadian,  Si- 

cyonian,  and  Eleian  auxiliaries  ;  and  MefTenian  refugees  from  various 
foreign  parts  came  in  with  eager  seal  to  attach  themfelves  once  more 
to  the  fortune  of  their  former  country.     Thefe  combined  forces  met 

the 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  217 

the  Lacedaemonian  army,  which  had  received  fuccour  from  Corinth  CHAP.  V. 
only,  at  Caprufema.  The  exertions  of  Ariftomenes,  in  the  battle  SECT.  ill. 
which  infued,  are  fud  to  have  exceeded  all  belief  of  what  one  man 
could  do.  A  complete  victory  was  gained  by  the  MefTenians ;  with 
fo  terrible  a  (laughter  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  that  it  was  in  confe- 
quence  debated  at  Sparta  whether  a  negociation  for  peace  fhould  not 
immediately  be  opened.  On  this  occalion  great  effects  are  attributed 
to  the  poetry  of  Tyrtaeus,  and  probably  not  without  foundation.  We 
know  that  even  in  thefe  cultivated  times,  and  in  the  exteniive  ftates 
of  modern  Europe,  a  popular  long  can  fometimes  produce  confi- 
derable  confequences.  Then  it  was  a  fpecies  of  oratory  fuited  beyond 
all  other  to  the  genius  of  the  age.  Tyrtaeus  reanimated  the  droop- 
ing minds  of  the  Spartan  people.  It  was  thought  expedient  to  recruit 
the  number  of  citizens,  by  infranchiling  and  aflbciating  fome  Helots. 
The  meafure  was  far  from  popular,  but  the  poetry  of  Tyrtaeus  per- 
fuaded  the  people  to  acquiefce  ;  and  it  was  determined  ftill  to  pro- 
fecut:  the  war  with  all  jMBTlble  vigour. 

Ariftomenes  meanwhile  was  endeavouring  to  pufh  the  advantage 
he  had  gained.  He  did  not  venture  a  regular  invafion  of  Laconia,  but 
he  carried  the  war  thither  by  incurlion.  He  furprifed  the  town  of 
Pharae,  bore  away  a  considerable  booty,  and  routed  Anaxander  king 
of  Sparta,  who  had  planted  an  ambufh  to  intercept  his  return.  In 
another  irruption  he  took  the  town  of  Caryae  ;  and,  among  other 
plunder,  led  off  a  number  of  Spartan  virgins,  who  had  affem- 
bled  there  to  celebrate,  according  to  cuftom,  the  feftival  of  Diana. 
Paufanias  relates  to  his  honor  on  this  occafion  a  ftrong  inftance  of 
the  ftrictnefs  both  of  his  difcipline  and  of  his  morality.  On  his 
appointm-nt  to  the  command  in  chief  he  had  felecled  a  band  of 
young  Meffenians,  moftly  of  rank,  who  attended  him  and  fought 
by  his  fide  in  all  his  enterprizes.  The  Spartan  virgins  taken  at  Ca-' 
ryae  being  intrufted  to  a  guard  from  this  body,  the  young  men,  heated 
with  wine,  attempted  to  force  their  chaftity.  Ariftomenes  immedi- 
ately interfered  -,    but  finding  it  in  vain  that  he  reprefented  to  them 

F  f  how 


2iS  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.V.  ]10w  they  dishonored  the  name  of  Grecians  by  attempts  fo  abhorrent 
SECT.  in.  from  what  the  laws  and  cuftoms  of  their  country  approved,  he  laid 
the  moft  refractory  with  his  own  hand  dead  upon  the  fpot ;  after 
which  he  reftored  the  girls  to  their  parents.  We  have  remarked  on 
a  former  occafion  how  common  rapes  were  in  Greece.  Law  and 
order,  we  may  fuppofe,  had  now  made  fome  progrefs  fince  that  period  ; 
yet  fcarcely  fuch  as  generally  to  infure  the  ehaftity  of  women  cap- 
tives in  war.  But  where  the  crime  of  raviihing  is  moft  common, 
the  virtue  which  prompts  to  fuch  dangerous  exertion  as  that  related 
of  Ariftomenes  for  the  prevention  of  it  will  be  molt  valued,  will  con- 
fequently  become  moft  an  object  of  renown,  and  thence  will  more 
be  caught  at  by  afpiring  minds. 

Among  the  extraordinary  adventures  of  our  prefent  hero  we  find  it 
related  that,  in  an  attempt  upon  the  town  of  iEgila,  he  was  made 
prifoner  by  fome  Spartan  matrons  affembled  there  for  the  celebration 
of  a  feftival  ;  who,  trained  as  they  were  under  the  inftitutions  of  Ly- 
curgus,  repelled  the  attack  with  a  vigor  which  the  men  of  other  ftates 
could  fcarcely  exceed.  Here  the  fofter  paffions,  it  is  faid,  befriended 
him.  Archidameia,  prieftefs  of  Ceres,  becoming  inamored  of  him, 
procured  his  efcape. 

It  was  now  the  third  year  of  the  war,  when  the  Lacedsemonian 
and  Meffenian  forces  met  at  Megaletaphrus  ;  the  latter  Strengthened  by 
Stmbo,'l.'viii'.    their  Arcadian  allies  only,  whofc  leader,  Ariftocrates  prince  of  Orcho- 
Poj^b'i  '-      menus,  was  fecretly  in   the  Lacedaemonian    intereft.     On  the   firft 
onfet  this  traitor  gave  the  fignal  to  his  own  troops  for  a  retreat;  which 
he  artfully  conducted  fo  as  to  difturb  the  order  alfo  of  the  Meffenian 
forces.     The  Lacedaemonians,  prepared  for  this  event,  feized  the  op- 
portunity to  gain  the  flank  of  their  enemy.     Ariftomenes  made  fome 
vain  efforts  to  prevent  a  rout :  but  his  army  was  prefently,  for  the 
moft  part,  furrounded  and  cut  to  pieces ;   and  he  was  himfelf  fortu- 
nate in  being  able  to  make  good  his  retreat  with  a  miferable  remnant. 
The  Meffenians  had  not  now  the  refources  of  an  eftabliflied  govern- 
ment.    A  fingle  defeat  induced  inftant  neceflity  for  reforting  to  the 

meafure 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE,  219 

meafure  pra&ifed  by  Euphaes  in  the  former  war.     Again  quitting  all     CHAP.  V. 
their  inland  ports,  they  collected  their  force  at  Eira,  a  ftrong  fituation     SECT.  III. 
near  the  fea,  and  prepared  by  all  means  in  their   power  for  vigorous 
defence.     The  Lacedemonians,  as  was  forefeen,  prefently  fat  down 
before  the  place  ;   but  the  Meffenians  were  ftill  ftrong  enough  to  keep 
a  communication  open  with  their  ports  of  Pylus  and  Methone  *. 

The  enterprizing  fpirit  of  Ariftomenes  indeed  was  not  to  be  broken 
by  misfortune.       Even   in   the   prefent   calamitous   fituation  of  his 
country's  affairs,  he  would   not  confine   himfelf  to  defenfive   war. 
With  his  chofcn  band  he  made  eruptions  from  Eira,   pillaged  all  the 
neighbouring  country  on  the   fide  occupied  by  the  Lacedaemonians, 
and   even  ventured  into  Laconia,   where  he  plundered  the  town  of 
Amyclae.     His  expeditions  were  fo  well  concerted,  and  his  band  fo 
fmall  and  fo  light,  that   he  was  generally  within  the  walls  of  Eira 
again   before  it  was  known   in  the  Spartan  camp  that  any  place  was 
attacked.      1  he  bufinefs  of  a  fiege  commonly  in  thofe  times  was  ex- 
tremely flow.     The   ufual  hope  of  the  befiegers  was  to  reduce  the 
place  by  famine.     But   this  was  now  a  vain  hope  to  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians  while  Ariftomenes  could  thus  fupply  the  garrifon.     The  go- 
vernment  of  Sparta  therefore,    finding  their  army  ineffectual  to  pre- 
vent this  relief,  proceeded  to  the  extremity  of  forbidding  by  a  public 
edict  all  culture  of  the  conquered  part  of  Meffenia.     Probably  the  La- 
cedemonian  affairs   were  at   this  time  ill  adminiftered  both  in  the 
army  and   at  home.     Great  difcontents    we  are   told    broke  out   at 
Sparta  ;  and   the  government  was  again  beholden  to  the  lame  Athe- 
nian poet  for  compofing  the  minds  of  the  people. 

But  the  temper  of  Ariftomenes  was  too  daring,  and  his  enterprizes 
too  hazardous,  to  be  long  exempt  from  misfortune.  His  fcene  of 
aclion  was  not  extenfive,  fo  that  in  time  the  Lacedaemonians  necef- 

*  Paufanias  writes  this  name  Mothone,  and  Italian  name  of  Pylus  is  Navarino.     This  was, 

among  the  Greeks  it  fo  remains  to  this  day  ;  according  to  Strabo,   not  the  refidence  of  Ncf- 

but   the    Italians,     unable    to    pronounce    the  tor,   that   city  being  fitua'ted  more  northward, 

Greek  S,  fpeak   and  write  it   Modona  :    the  not  far  from  the  river  Alpheius. 
French  for  the  fame  reafon  call  it  Modon.  The 

F  f  2  farily 


220  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  V.     farily  learnt  by  their  very  lolles  the  means  of  putting  a  ftop  to  them. 
r.  ill.     pje  fejj  'm  unexpectedly  with  a  large  body  of  Lacedaemonian   troops, 
headed  hy  both  the  kings.   His  retreat  was  intercepted  ;  and  in  making 
an  obftinate  defence,  being  ftunned  by  a  blow  on  the  head,  he  was  ta- 
Paufan.  l  iv.   ken  Prif°ner  with  about  fifty  of  his  band.     The  Lacedaemonians,  con- 
StiaVr,  l.  viii.   fidering  all  as  rebels,  condemned  them  without  diftinclion  to  be  pre- 
cipitated into  a  cavern   called  Ceada,    the   common  capital   punifh- 
ment  at  Sparta  for  the  worfl  malefactors.     All  are  faid  to  have  been 
killed  by  the  fall  except  Ariftomenes  ;  whole  furvival  was  thought  lb 
wonderful   that  miracles  have  been  invented  to  account  for  it.     An. 
eagle,  it  is  reported,  fluttering  under  him,  fo  far  fupported  him  that 
he  arrived  at  the  bottom  unhurt.   How  far  fuch  miraculous  afiiftance 
was  necellary  to  his  prefervation  we  cannot  certainly  know  ;    but  the 
plain  circumstances  of  the   ftory,   tho  extraordinary,   have,    as  far  as 
appears,  nothing  contrary  to  nature.     Arilfomenes   at  firft  thought 
it  no  advantage  to  find  himfelf  alive  in  that  dark  and  horrid  charnel, 
furrounded  by  his  companions  dead  and  dying,   among  the  llceletons 
and  putrid  carcafes  of  former  criminals.     He  retreated  to  the  farthest 
corner  that  he  could  find,  and,  covering  his  head  with  his  cloak,  lay 
down  to  wait  for  death,  which  feemed  unavoidable.     It  was,  accord- 
ing to  Paufanias,  the  third  day  of  this  dreadful  imprifonment  when 
he  was  llartled  by  a  little  rufiling  noife.     Riling  and  uncovering  his 
eyes,  he  law  by  the  glimmering  of  light,  which  aflifted  him  the  more 
from  his  having  been  lb*  long  wrapt  in  perfect  darknefs,  a  fox  gnawing  ■ 
the  dead  bodies.     It  prefently  llruck  him  that  this  animal  mull  have 
found  fome  other  way  inio  the  cavern   than   that  by  which  himfelf 
had  defcended,    and   would   readily  find   the   fame   way   out   again. 
Watching  therefore  his  opportunity,    he  was  fortunate  enough  to 
feize  the   fox  with  one  hand,  while  with  his  cloak  in  the  other  he 
prevented  it  from  biting  him ;    and  he  managed  fo  as  to  let  it  have 
its  way,  without  efcaping,  fo  that  it  conducted  him  to  a  narrow  bury. 
Through  this  he  followed   till  it  became  too  fmall  for  his  body  to 
pafsj  and  here  fortunately  a  glimpfe  of  daylight  caught  his  eye.    Set- 
ting 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  22* 

ting  therefore  his  conductor  at  liberty,   he  worked  with  his  hands  till     CT 

he  made  a  paffage  large  enough  for  himfelf  to  creep  into  day,  and  he     SECT.  III. 

efcaped  to  Eira. 

The  firft  rumor  of  this  reappearance  of  Ariftomenes  found  no 
credit  at  Sparta.  Preparations  were  making  for  pufhing  the  fiege  of 
Eira  with  vigor,  and  a  body  of  Corinthian  auxiliaries  was  marching  to 
mare  in  the  honor  of  completing  the  conqueft  of  MefTenia.  Ariflo- 
menes, receiving  intelligence  that  the  Corinthians  marched  and  in- 
camped  very  negligently  as  if  they  had  no  enemy  to  fear,  iifued  with 
a  chofen  body  from  Eira,  attacked  them  by  furprize  in  the  ni^ht, 
routed  them  with  great  (laughter,  and  carried  off  the  plunder  of  their 
camp.  Now,  fays  Paufanias,  the  Lacedaemonians  readily  believed 
that  Ariftomenes  was  really  living.  Tradition  fays  that  this  extraor- 
dinary warrior  thrice  facrificed  the  Hecatomphoneia,  the  offering  pre- 
fcribed  among  the  Greeks  for  thofe  who  had  flain  in  battle  a  hundred 
enemies  with  their  own  hands.  It  was  after  this  action  that  he  per- 
formed that  ceremony  the  fecond  time. 

The  Lacedxmonians  now,  for  the  fake  of  celebrating  in  fecurity 
their  feftival  called  Hyacinthia,  which  was  approaching,  confented 
to  a  truce  for  forty  days.  Paufanias,  who  is  not  favorable  to  their 
fame,  reports  that  they  incouraged  fome  Cretan  mercenaries  in  their 
fervice  to  watch  opportunities  for  ftriking  a  blow  againft  the  Me  {Fe- 
nians, even  during  the  truce;  that  Ariftomenes  was  actually  feized 
in  confequence  ;  and  recovered  his  liberty  only  through  the  favor  of 
a  young  woman  in  the,  houfe  where  he  was  lodged,  who  cut  his  bonds, 
and  procured  him  the  means  of  flaying  his  keepers. 

Through  the  unfkilfulnefs  of  the  age  in  the  attack  of  places,  and  the 

varied  efforts  of  Ariftomenes's  genius  to  baffle  the  befiegers,  the  fieoe, 

or    rather    blockade,    of  Eira  was   protracted  to   the   eleventh   year. 

A  concurrence  of  circumftances,  feemingly  trifling,   but  which  in  the   Ol.  xlviii. 

detail   of  them  by  Paufanias  form  an  important  lefFon  for  militarv    2- 

men,  at  length  decided  its  fate.     In  a  violently  tempeftuous  night  in-      '  #, 

telligence  was  brought  to  the  Lacedaemonian  commander,  by  a  private    Ol.xxvii.2. 

rr  .  ..      B,  C,  67 u 
ioldier  b. 


222  HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  V.  foldier  whom  an  intrigue  wifh  a  MefTenian  woman  had  led  to  the 
difcovery,  that  the  MefTenian  guard  at  one  of  their  pofts,  yielding  to 
the  weather,  and  trufHng  that  the  florin  itfelf  would  prevent  their 
enemies  from  acting,  had  difperled  to  leek,  fheiter.  Immediately  the 
troops  were  lilently  called  to  arms ;  ladders  were  carried  to  the  fpot, 
and  the  Lacedaemonians  mounted  unrelifted.  The  unufually  ear- 
ned and  inceflant  barking  of  their  dogs  firft  alarmed  the  garrifon. 
Ariftomenes,  always  watchful,  haftily  formed  the  firft  of  his  people 
that  he  could  collect.  He  prefently  met  the  enemy,  and  managed  his 
defence  fo  judicioufly  as  well  as  vigoroufly,  that  the  Lacedxmonians, 
ignorant  of  the  town,  could  not  during  the  night  attempt  any  farther 
progrefs.  But  neither  could  Ariftomenes  attempt  more  than  to  keep 
the  enemy  at  bay,  while  the  reft  of  his  people,  arming  and  form- 
ing themfelves,  made  ufe  of  their  intimate  knowledge  of  the  place  to 
occupy  the  moft  advantageous  points  for  defending  themfelves,  and 
diflodging  the  enemy.  At  daybreak,  having  difpoled  his  whole 
force,  and  directed  even  the  women  to  aflift  by  throwing  ftones  and 
tiles  from  the  houfe-tops,  he  made  a  furious  charge  upon  the  Lace- 
daemonians ;  whofe  fuperiority  in  number  availed  little,  as  they  had 
not  room  to  extend  their  front.  But  the  violence  of  the  ftorm,  which 
continued  unabated,  was  fuch  as  to  prevent  the  women  from  ading 
on  the  roofs ;  many  of  whom  were  however  animated  with  fuch  a 
manly  refolution  for  the  defence  of  their  country,  that  they  took  arms 
and  joined  in  the  fight  below.  There  the  battle  continued  all  day, 
with  fcarcely  other  effect  than  mutual  flaughter.  At  night  there  was 
again  a  paufe;  but  it  was  fuch  as  allowed  little  reft  or  refrefhment  to 
the  MefTenians.  Now  the  Lacedaemonian  general  profited  from  his 
numbers.  He  fent  half  his  forces  to  their  camp,  while  with  the 
other  half  he  kept  the  MefTenians  in  conftant  alarm,  and  with  the 
return'  of  day  he  brought  back  his  refrefhed  troops  to  renew  the  at- 
tack. The  Meffcnian  chiefs  became  foon  convinced  that  all  attempts 
to  expel  the  enemy  muft  be  vain.  After  a  fhort  confutation  there- 
fore, they  formed  their  people  in  the  moft  convenient  order  for  de- 
fending 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  223 

fending  their  wives  and  children  and  mod:  portable  effects,  while  CHAP.  V. 
they  forced  their  way  out  of  the  place.  The  Lacedaemonians,  whofe  SECT.  III. 
political  inflitutions  in  fome  degree  commanded  the  permiffion  of 
efcape  for  a  flying  enemy,  gave  them  free  paffage.  The  Meffenians 
directed  their  melancholy  march  to  Arcadia.  There  they  were  molt 
hofpitably  received  by  their  faithful  allies  of  that  country,  who  divided 
them  in  quarters  among  their  towns. 

Even  in    this    extremity    of  misfortune,     the  enterprifing    genius 
of  Ariftomenes  was  immediately  imagining  new  fchemes  for  reftoring 
his  country,  and  taking  vengeance  on  her  enemies.     He  felected  five 
hundred  MefTenians,    to   whom  three   hundred   Arcadian  volunteers 
joined  themfelves,  with  a  refolution  to  attempt  the  furprize  of  Sparta 
itfelf,  while  the  Lacedaemonian  army  was  yet  in   the  fartheft  part  of 
MefTenia,  where  Pylus  and  Methone  ftill  remained  to  be  conquered. 
Everything   was  prepared  for  the  enterprize,  when  fome  of  the  Arca- 
dian chiefs  received  intelligence  that  a  meffenger  was  gone  from  their 
king  Ariflocrates  to  Sparta.     They  caufed  this  man  to  be  waylaid  on 
his   return.      He   was   feized ;    and   letters   were   found   upon   him, 
thanking  Ariftocrates    for   information    of  the   expedition    now  in- 
tended, as  well  as  for  his  former  fervices.     An  affembly  of  the  people 
was  immediately  fummoned,  in  which  the  letters   and   their  bearer 
were  produced  ;  and  the  leaders,  in  the  intereft  oppofite  to  Ariitocrates, 
worked  up  the  anger  of  the  commonalty  to  fuch  a  pitch  againft  their 
treacherous  prince,   that   they  ftoned  him  to  death.     To  perpetuate    Pavrfan-  '• IV* 
his  infamy  a  pillar  was  afterward  erected,  with  an  infeription,  ftill  pre-   Polyb.  1.  iv. 
ferved  in  the  writings  both  of  Paufanias  and  Polybius,  warning  future   piatarch.  4e 
chiefs  of  the  vengeance  of  the  deity,  which  unfailingly  fooner  or  later   y^d 
overtakes  traitors  and  perjurors. 

The  Pylians,  Methoneans,  and  other  MefTenians  of  the  coafl, 
judging  it  now  vain  to  attempt  the  defence  of  their  towns,  im- 
barked  with  their  effects  in  what  veffels  they  could  collect,  and 
failed  to  Cyllene,  a  port  of  Eleia.  Hence  they  fent  a  propofal  to 
their  fellowcountrymen  in  Arcadia,  to  go  all  together  and  fettle  a  co- 
lony 


224  H  I  S  T  O  R  Y    O  F    G  R  E  E  C  E. 

CHAP.  V.  ]onv  whercver  they  could  find  an  advantageous  efhblifhment;  and  they 
SFCT.  III.  deiired  Ariftomenes  for  their  leader.  The  propofal  was  readily  accepted 
by  the  people,  and,  as  far  as  concerned  them,  approved  by  the  genei  i ; 
but,  excufing  himfelf,  he  fent  his  fon  Gorgus  with  Manticlus,  ion 
of  the  prophet  Theocles  who  had  been  his  conftant  friend  and  com- 
panion, to  conduct  the  enterprize.  Still  it  remained  to  be  decided 
to  what  uninhabited  or  ill-inhabited  coaft  they  mould  direct  their 
courfe.  Some  were  for  Zacynthus,  fome  for  Sardinia ;  but  winter 
being  already  let  in,  it  was  foon  agreed  to  put  off  the  determination 
_    ,     ,    .     till  fpring.      In  the  interval  a  fortunate  occurrence  offered.     On  the 

Stnibo,  1.  vi.  r         ° 

P.257&268.    taking  of  Ithome  in  the  former  war,  fome  Meffenians,  joining  with 
c.  2%.  '  fome  adventurers   from   Chalcis  in   Eubcea,   had  wandered  to  Italy, 

and  there  founded  the  town  of  Rhegium.     Thefe  colonifts  had  per- 
petual variance  with  the  Zanclasans  on  the  oppofite  coaft  of  Sicily ; 
a  people  alio  of  Grecian  origin,  the  firft  of  whom  were  pirates,  who 
fettled   there  under  Cratasmenes  of  Samos,  and  Perieres  of  Chalcis. 
Anaxilas,   now   prince  of  Rhegium,  was  of  Meffenian  race.      Hear- 
ing therefore  of  this  fecond  cataftrophe  of  his   mother-country,  he 
fent  to  inform  the  Meffenians  at  Cyllene  that  there  was  in  his  neigh- 
bourhood a  valuable  territory,  and  a  town  mod  commodioufly  fituated, 
which  ihould  be  theirs   if  they  would  affift  him  in   diipoffeiiing  the 
prefent  proprietors,  his  inveterate  enemies.     The  offer  was  accepted: 
the  confederates,   victorious  by  fea  and  land,  befieged  Zancle;  and 
ni     ,...        reducing  the  inhabitants  to  extremity,  an  accommodation  was  agreed 
B.  C.  588.    upon,  by  which  it  was  determined  that  the  Meffenians  and  Zanclceans 
Ol  xxvii  '  ^10u^  hold  the  city  and  country  in  common  as  one  people,   but  that 
4.  the  name  fhould  be  changed  to  Meffene.     Thus  the  Meffenians  ob- 

B.C.  669.  tained  a  fettlement  from  which,  howfoever  in  the  courfe  of  ages  va- 
rioufly  fubjecled,  they  have  never  been  expelled;  and  the  city,  among 
many  great  misfortunes,  generally  flourifhing,  retains  the  very  name, 
.  in  the  Latin  orthography,  Mefiina,  to  this  day.  How  far  the  late 
dreadful  convulfion  of  the  elements,  involving  in  common  defolation 
Meffina  with  its  ancient  rival  Reggio,  and  violently  changing  the  face 
of  nature  to  a  great  extent  on  both  coafts,  may  beyond  ail  former  ca- 
lamities 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  225 

lamities  urge  its  final  downfal,  will  be  for  the  hiftorian  of  future  years    CHAP.  v. 

to  tell.  SECT-  jj- 

Ariftomenes  for  fome  time  ftill  indulged  the  hope,  through  fome   Paufan.  1.  W. 

°       ,  c.  23,  24. 

favoring  contingency,  to  avenge  his  country  on  the  Lacedxmonians. 

But  going  to  Delphi,  he  found  the  Pythonefs  too  wife  to  prophefy 
him  any  incouragement.  Yet  tho  he  was  no  longer  to  fliine  in  a 
public  fituation,  fortune  was  favorable  to  his  private  happinefs. 
Damagetus,  prince,  or,  as  he  is  ftiled  by  Grecian  writers,  tyrant  of 
Ialyfus  in  the  ifland  of  Rhodes,  happened  to  be  at  Delphi  inquiring 
of  the  oracle  whom  he  fhould  marry  :  for  it  feems  to  have  been 
about  this  time  that  Delphi  was  in  higheft  repute ;  individuals 
often  {training  their  circumftances  to  obtain  its  advice  on  their  more 
interefting  private  concerns.  To  a  queftion  in  its  nature  rather 
puzzling,  the  Pythonefs  gave  a  very  prudent  arifwer,  and  at  the 
fame  time  of  uncommonly  obvious  interpretation.  She  directed 
Damagetus  to  take  the  daughter  of  the  man  of  higheft  character 
among  the  Greeks.  Ariftomenes,  then  on  the  fpot,  was  unqueftion- 
ably  in  reputation  the  firft  of  the  Greeks,  and  he  had  a  daughter  un- 
married. Damagetus  therefore  made  his  propofals,  which  were  ac- 
cepted ;  and  Ariftomenes  palled  with  him  to  Rhodes,  where  he  is 
faid  to  have  fpent  the  reft  of  his  life  in  honorable  eafe. 

The  Lacedemonians  now  found  themfelves  mafters  of  a  country 
almoft   a  defert.     The  Afins?ans,  indeed,   whom   on  the  conclufion 
of  the  former  war  they  had  planted  in   Meflenia,  ftill  retained  their   paufan.  1. ir. 
fettlement.     The  Nauplians  had  now  lately  been  ejected  from  their   c'  2I*    ,    - 

r  \  •>  Snabo,  1.  viu. 

country   by   the  Argians.     To  thefe   fugitives    the    Lacedaemonians   p.  373. 
gave  the  town  and  territory  of  Methone.     The  reft  of  Meflenia  they 
divided  among  themfelves  ;   and  many  of  the  miferable  inhabitants, 
who  had  been  either  unable  or  unwilling  to  feek  their  fortune  out  of 
their  native  country,  they  reduced  to  the  condition  of  Helots. 

Here  we  might  naturally  fuppofe  the  hiftory  of  Meflenia  ended. 
But  we  (hall  in  the  fequel  find  its  unfortunate  people,  ftill  as  the 
people  of  Meflenia,  taking  part  cccafionally  in  Grecian  affairs,  and  at 

G  g  length, 


226  HISTORY    OF     GREECE, 

CHAP.V.     length,  after  more  than  a  century  and  a  half,  by  a  very  extraordi- 
SECT.  III.    nary  revolution,  recovering  poffefllon  of  their  original  country. 

During   the   long  courfe  of  years   from    the  firft  hoftilities  with 
Meflenia  to  the  completion  of  the  conqueft  of  that  country,  Lacedje- 
mon  was  not  without  wars  with  other  neighbouring  ftates,  nor  with- 
out political  convuliions   at  home  :   but  the  chronology  of  that  pe- 
riod is  fo  utterly  uncertain,  that  it  were  a  vain  attempt  to  arrange  the 
facts  reported  in  fcattered  pafiages  by  ancient  authors  of  beft  credit. 
Very  early,  we   are  told,  a  diipute  arole   concerning  the  limits  of 
Argolis  and  Laconia.     The  Lacedaemonians  ejected  the  Argians  from 
Cynuria.     Then  they  arTerted  with  limilar  violence  a  claim  to  the 
territory  of  Thyrea.      In  the  old  age  of  king  Theopompus,  according 
Paufan.  1.  x.   to  Paufanias  (therefore  between  the  firft  and  fecond  Meflenian  wars, 
Hemdot  1.  i.   t^°  Herodotus  feems  to  refer  it  to  a  later  date)  the  armies  of  the  two 
^•,8a'  ,  ftates   meeting;,  it   was  determined,  at  a  conference  of  the  leaders, 

Plutarch.  »' 

Parall.  Min.  that  the  right  to  the  lands  in  difpute  fhould  be  decided  by  an  ingage- 
ment  between  three  hundred  men  from  each  army.  The  reft  of  the 
troops  on  both  fides  retired.  The  fix  hundred  fought  with  fuch  de- 
termined valor,  and  fuch  equal  ftrength  and  fkill,  that  two  Argians 
only,  Chromius  and  Alcenor,  remained  alive  ;  with  not  a  fingle  La- 
cedaemonian, as  far  as  in  the  dufk  of  advanced  evening  they  could 
perceive,  furviving  to  oppoie  them.  Eager  therefore  to  relate  their 
victory,  they  haftened  to  the  Argian  camp.  But  during  the  night 
Othryades,  a  Lacedaemonian,  recovering  from  the  lofs  of  blood  un- 
der which  he  had  fainted,  found  himfelf,  weak  as  he  was,  undif- 
puted  mailer  of  the  field.  Plis  ftrength  fufticed  to  form  a  trophy 
from  the  arms  of  his  flain  enemies,  and  he  refted  on  the  fpot.  On 
the  morrow  the  Argians  learned  with  aftonifhment  that  the  Lacedae- 
monians claimed  the  victory.  Another  conference  was  held  in  which 
neither  fide  would  yield  its  pretentions.  The  armies  again  met; 
and,  after  a  moft  obftinate  conflict,  the  Argians  were  defeated.  The 
meafure  which  followed,  reported  by  Herodotus,  and  confirmed  by 

Pbto.  Phx.     Plato,  ftrongly  characterizes  both  the  fpirit  of  war  and  the  fpirit  of 

don.  p.  89. 


t.  i,  & 


govern- 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  227 

government  of  the  times.  The  whole  Argian  people  having  cut  oft*  CHAP.  v. 
their  hair  (a  common  mark  of  public  mourning)  it  was  decreed,  SE^3>^!' 
with  folemn  curies  againft  tranfgreftbrs,  that  '  no  man  fhould  fuffer 
'  his  hair  to  grow,  and  no  woman  wear  ornaments  of  gold,  till 
*  Thyrea  was  recovered.'  The  animoiity  which  we  fhall  find  long 
fubfiftinp-  between  Lacedaemon  and  Argos  will,  with  the  recollection 
of  thefe  circumftances,   not  appear  extraordinary. 

The  Lacedemonians  had  alfo  early  and  long  contentions  with  the 
Arcadians.  Thefe  allied  themfelves  with  the  Argians  ;  with  whofe 
affiftance  the  city  of  Tegea,  formed,  as  we  have  before  obferved,  by   Chap.  v. 

r  r  Seft.  I. 

an  affemblage  of  the  inhabitants  of  nine  villages,  was  fortified,  and 
became  capable  of  protecting  the  Arcadian  borderers  againft  the  La- 
cedaemonian inroads.  None  of  the  neighbouring  people  in  the  earlier  Herodot.  1. 1. 
times  oppoled  Spartan  incroachments  with  more  valor,  and  none 
with  fuch  fuccefs,  as  the  Tegeans.  After  often  fuffering  confider- 
able  loiles,  the  Lacedaemonians  however  at  length  gained  fome  ad- 
vantages ;  and  the  circumftances  of  the  times  induced  that  politic 
people  to  ufe  the  opportunity  for  forming  a  clofe  alliance  with  the 
brave  mountaineers  ;  who  in  the  fequel  proved  highly  ferviceable  to 
them  in  their  more  extenlive  views  of  ambition. 

As  it  is  in  the  nature  of  human   affairs  that  things  moft  advanta- 
geous mall  have  their  inherent  evils,   fo  the   nice  balance  eftablifhed 
by  the  Spartan  lawgiver  between   the  feveral  powers  of  the  govern- 
ment naturally  produced  a  conftant,   and   often  violent   ftruggle  of  Thucyd.  l.i. 
factions.     But  as  the  Lacedaemonian  inftitutions  were  unfavorable  to   iibcrat.  Pa- 
literature,  as  they  ftrongly  inforced  fecrecy  on   politics,    and   as   fo- 
reigners had  little  accefs  to  Sparta,   we  are  very  defectively  informed 
of  the  internal  tran  factions  of  that  ftate.      Authors  of  greateft  credit 
are  not  to  be  reconciled   concerning  the  firft  eftablilhment  of  thofe   Herodot.  1.  i. 
magistrates  called  Ephors,  who  in  courfe  of  time  acquired  almoft  a   Plato.   Epift. 
defpotic  authority.   Herodotus,  Plato,  and  Xenophon  refer  it  toLycur-   "j-j  p' 354' 
gus  :  Arittotle,  Plutarch  and  others,  to  king  Theopompuj,  who  com-    x< lv1Ph-  de 

"•  IvL'll         i     'AC 

pleted  the  firft  conqueft  of  Meffenia.     If  magiftrates  with  fuch  a  title   Arift.  Poiit. 

y-^  Plutarch. 

0  S  2  were  Lycurg. 


228  HISTORY     OF    GREECE, 

CHAP.  v.     were  appointed  by  Lycurgus,  the  tenor  of  that  lawgiver's  inftitutions 
SECT.  in.    wju  yet  not  permj{;  us  t0  fuppofe  that  he  meant  to  allow  them  powers 
fuch  as  they  afterward  exercifed.   He  certainly  favored  oligarchy;  and 
poffibly  the  large  authority  which  he  committed  to  the  fenate  might 
fometimts  be  abufed.     But  from  the  confent  oi  Grecian  writers  it  ap- 
pears, that  if  the  ephors  were  not  firft  appointed  under  Theopompus, 
their  powers  and  privileges  were  however  confiderably  augmented  under 
his  reign.    That  prince  either  found  it  neceflary  for  the  prevention  of 
commotion  to  grant  indulgence  to  the  people ;  or  convenient  for  his 
own  power  to  raife  an  authority  capable  of  balancing  the  overbearing 
fpirit  of  the  fenate ;   whence,   perhaps,   the  faying  reported  of  him, 
Plutarch.  ^      on  Deing  reproached  for  tranfmitting  the   regal  authority  diminiihed 
to  his  posterity,  '  that  on  the  contrary  he  mould  tranfmit  it  increafed, 
Ariftot.  Polit.   inafmuch  as  he  mould  tranfmit  it  firmer' *.     The  ephors  were  five, 
p.11*  C^9'L  .   m  number,  elecled  from  the  people  and  by  the  people;   and  the  pur- 

curg.  &  Age-   p0fe  0f  their  office  was  at  firft  merely  to  prcferve  to  the   people  their 

fil.  &   Cko-   r  .  .  J        r  r     1 

men.  conftitutional   rights   againft  any  attempts   of   the  kings   or   fenate. 

The  tribunes  of  Rome  afterward,  in  the  caufe  of  their  appointment, 
in  the  purpofe  of  their  office,  in  their  original  powers  and  privi- 
leges, and  in  what  they  by  degrees  affumed,  very  remarkably  refem- 
bled  the  Spartan  ephors ;  and  the  hiftory  of  both  goes  ftrongly  to 
prove  the  inherent  impotence  of  the  ancient  democracy,  which,  in 
two  of  the  beft  conftituted  commonwealths  of  antiquity,  unable  to 
maintain  its  own  rights,  was  reduced  to  the  abfurd  necellity  of  creat- 
ing and  fupporting  a  tyrannical  magiftracy  to  defend  them. 

*  To  fuch  a  balance  Plato  feems  to  refer     Ephors   *apf/.«xov  ws  @ao-tXt>ty<;    «'fx?5  wr^pio*. 
where  he  calls  the  fenate  and  the  college  of    Epift.  viii.  p.  354.  t.  iii. 


CHAPTER 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  22^ 

CHAPTER     VI. 

Summary  View  of  the  State  of  the  Northern  Provinces  of 
Greece,  and  of  the  Eftablifhrnent  of  the  early  Grecian 
Colonies  ;  with  the  Hiftory  of  Athens  from  the  Tro- 
jan War  to  the  fird:  public  Tranfuction  with  Persia. 

SECTION     I. 

View  of  the  State  of  the  Northern  Provinces  of  Greece  after  the  'Trojan 
War.     Hiflory  of  Athens  from  the  'Trojan  War  to  the  Abolition  of 
Royalty,  and  the  Appointment  of  Hereditary  Archons. 

WHILE  Lacedsemon,  partly  through   the  internal  vigor  of  its    CHAP.  VL 
lingular  constitution,  partly  by  conquest,  was  railing  itfelf  to      SECT.  I. 
a  preeminence  among  the  Grecian  states,  which,  since  the  expulsion  of 
the  princes  of  the  houfe  of  Pelops   from  the  throne  of  Argos,  none 
had  obtained,   a  rival  power  of  very  different  character  and  very  dif- 
ferent  institutions  was  more  filently  growing  without  Peloponnefus. 
But  the  divisions,  whence  arofe  the  weaknefs  and  insignificancy  of  the 
other  Grecian  people,  were  among  the  circumstances  principally  con- 
tributing  to  fet  Lacedasmon  and  Athens   at   the  head  of  the   nation.. 
During  fome  centuries  after  the  Trojan  war  we  have  no  hiflory  of  the 
northern  provinces,  beyond  confufed  accounts  of  migrations  and  ex- 
pulsions, which   were  frequent,   and  predatory  wars,  which  were  al- 
most unceasing.     The  principal  revolution  of  which  we  are  informed 
was  that  effected  by  the  Boeotians,  a  Theffalian  people ;  who,  accord- 
ing to  Thucydides,  about  sixty  years  after  the  Trojan  war,  migrating   Thucyd;  1.  L 
fouthward,  joined  fome  of  their  own  tribe  before  fettled  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Thebes,    and,   overpowering  the   Cadmeians,    became 
masters  of  the  whole  province,  from   themfelves   calleed  Bceotia. 

r  '  Schol.     ad 

Thebes,  which,  apparently  from  Homer,  had  been  much  reduced  by  v.  505. 1.  iu 

.        Iliad. 

the 


230 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  VI. 
Sj-.CT.  1. 


HeroJ.  l.viii, 
c.  27  &  feq. 


the  wars  preceding  the  Trojan  times,  became  the  principal  feat  of 
the  Boeotians  ;  and  under  them  recovered  fome  {hare  of  its  ancient  im- 
portance. But  the  hiftory  of  Bceotia,  to  a  late  period,  remarkably 
verifies  an  obfervation  of  the  great  poet  upon  its  circumftances  at  a 
very  early  day,  «  that  none  could  live  there  without  the  protection  of 
fortifications'  *.  While  therefore  unceafing  danger  made  the  whole 
people  neceflarily  military,  republican  jealoufy,  which  obtained  early 
among  the  Boeotians,  added  to  the  other  circumftances  of  the  times, 
would  urge  every  townlhip  the  more  anxioufly  to  provide  within  it- 
felr  for  its  own  defence.  Depending  then  upon  no  others  for  protec- 
tion, the  inhabitants  would  of  courfe  take  upon  themfelves  legifla- 
tion,  and  every  power  of  government.  Thus  Greece,  under  its  an- 
cient princes  divided  into  many  fmall  ftates,  became,  under  republi- 
can government,  ftill  much  more  fubdivided.  The  Boeotians  always 
confidered  themfelves  in  fome  meafure  as  one  people,  diftincl:  from 
the  other  Greeks  :  they  were  not  without  common  laws ;  and  thev 
had  .even  common  magiftrates,  called  Boeotarchs,  to  prefide  over  the 
concerns  of  the  Boeotian  nation.  But  the  authority  of  thofe  officers 
was  principally  military.  Every  confiderable  town  of  Bceotia  claimed 
always  to  be  an  independent  republic,  united  cnly  by  voluntary  league 
with  the  reft,  and  competent  to  decide  for  itfelf  concerning  all  its 
foreign  interefts  as  well  as  its  internal  government.  The  other  pro- 
vinces north  of  Peloponnefus  were  not  in  better  ftate  for  advancement 
in  civilization  or  in  political  confequence.  The  Thessalians,  who 
might  otherwife  have  been  the  moft  powerful  people  of  Greece,  were 
much  divided  ;  and  thofe  of  the  fouthern  border  were  continually  in- 
gaged  in  predatory  war  with  the  Phocians,  their  neighbours  on  the 
fouthern  fide  of  mount  Q2ta,  whence  the  bittereft  national  animofity 
arofe  between  the  two  people. 

We  have  already  obferved  the  favorable  circumftances  by  which 
Athens  became  early  populous  and  polifhed  beyond  the  other  Gre- 

*   Mentioning   the  building  of  the  walls  of       'Ettei  ov  ph  a.^i^yurav  y  IwtuvTo 

Thebes  by  Zethus  and  Amphion,  he  adds :  N<*w/*w  ivauj(,ogof  ®i£r,»,  v.^r^u  wt?  UVte. 

Odyir.  1.  xi.  v.  264. 

cian 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  231 

cian  cities.     From  the   time  of  the  Trojan  war  till  after  the  Dorian    CHAP.  VI. 
conquefts  in  Peloponnefus,   it  affords  nothing  important  for  hiftory.      ^_  _  l"! 
But  fuch  a  revolution  as  that  effected  by  the  Heracleids  could  not  be 
without  material  confequences  to  a  neighbouring  ftate.      The  Athe- 
nian territory  at  that  time  extended  to  the  Corinthian  ifthmus;  where, 
to  mark  the  limits,    a  pillar  had  been  erected,   on  one   fide  of  which 
was  ingraved  '  This  is  Peloponnefus,   not  Ionia,'  for  fo  Attica  was   Strabo,  I.  be, 
then  called  :   on  the  other  fide   '  This  is  not  Peloponnefus  but  Ionia.' 
But  the   people  of  the  peninfula  itfelf,  through   the  province   that 
ftretches  along  the  coaft  weftward  from  the  ifthmus,   were  of  Ionian 
race.     When  Tifamenus,  with  his  Achaian  followers  from  Argos  and 
Lacedantton,  had  procured  fecurity  to  this  country  againft  the  Hera- 
cleids, its  narrow  bounds  were  found  unequal  to  the  increafed  popu- 
lation :   the  new  comers  prevailed  againft  the  ancient  poffeffors,   and 
the  Ionian  families  were  moftly  compelled   to  migrate.  -  Athens,   al- 
ways hofpitable   to  the    unfortunate,    amid  thefe  extenfive   troubles 
through  Peloponnefus  would  abundantly  attract  refugees.     Not  only 
the  iEgialian   Ionians    but   many  Meffenians  alio,   under  Melanthus   Strabo,  1.  a. 
king  of  Pylos,  reforted  thither.    The  Athenians  were  then  ingaged  in   l.'xiv.  p.  633. 
war  with  Bceotia ;   and  on   this  account,   and  perhaps  through  fome 
dread  alfo  of  the  conquering  Dorians,  were  the  more  folicitous  to  ac- 
commodate  all  that  offered,    as  an  addition  of  ftrength  to  the  ftate. 
The  charity  was  accordingly  not  unproductive  of  reciprocal   benefit. 
For  the  armies  of  Athens   and  Bceotia   meeting,  the  Bccotian   king 
propofed  to  decide  the  matter  in   difpute  between   the, two  ftates  by 
iingle  combat  between  himfelf  and  Thymcetes,  then  king  of  Athens. 
Thymcetes,  probably  knowing  himfelf  inferior  in  bodily  ftrength  and 
agility,   declined  the  challenge.     But   the   temper  of  the   times  was   Strabo   r.  iXi 
favorable  to  that  mode  of  deciding  political  con troverfies*.     Melan-   P-  393- 

0   r  .  Herodot.  1.  v, 

thus  therefore,  the  Meffenian  prince,  who  had  his  fortune  to  feek,  of-   e.  65. 
fered  himfelf  for  champion  of  the  Athenians,  and  was  accepted :  he  c'"^]n' 

*   In  the  return  of  the  Heracleids,    accord-     determined   xani   e'6o?   ti    ira.'ha.ioi  ruv  'EWw», 
ing  to  Strabo,   the  poffeffion  of  Eleia  was  fo     Strabo,  1.  viii.  p.  357, 

was 


232  HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  VI.    was  victorious,  and  the  fcepter  of  Athens  was  his  reward.    Thymcptes 
sect.  I.      was  depofed,  and  with  him  ended  the  fucceffion  of  the  family  of 
Thefeus. 

Tradition  is  -little  accurate  concerning  a  war  which  followed  be- 
tween the  Athenians  and  Peloponnefians.  But  a  conquering  people 
is  commonly  an  overbearing  people  ;  the  protection  given  by  Athens 
to  the  refugees  from  Peloponnefus  would  afford  pretence;  and  the 
Dorians,  we  find,  foon  after  their  eftablifhment  in  the  peninfula,  made 
incroachments  on  the  Athenian  frontier,  and  founded  the  town  of 
Strabo,  1.  ix.  Megara  on  the  northern  coaft  of  the  Saronic  gulph.  When  Codrus 
p*  393'  fucceeded  his  father  Melanthus  in  the  kingdom  of  Attica,    Megara 

feems  to  have  been  already  firmly  fettled.     Hoftilities  however  con- 
tinued, or  were  recommenced  ;  and  fo  large  affiftance  came  to  the  Me- 
B.  C.  804.     garians  from   Peloponnefus,   that  Athens   itfelf  was  threatened  with 

„   „        *"   fubverfion.     While  the  hoftile  armies  were  incamped  fo  near  together 
B.  C.  1070.  _  r  t> 

B.  that  a  battle  appeared  unavoidable,  the  Delphian  oracle  was  confulted 
P;iu  an.  .vii.   a|D0Ut  tne  eventt     TJle  anfwer  of  the  Pythonefs  was  underftood  to  im- 
Vell.  Patei-c.    p0rt  ^hat   the  Peloponnefians  would  be  vi&orious,  provided  they  did 
juft'm.  1.  ii.     not  kill  the  Athenian  king.     This  refponfe  being  promulgated,    Co- 
drus, in  the  heroic  fpirit  of  the  age,  determined  to  devote  his  life  for 
the  good  of  his  country.      Difguifing  himfelf  in  the  habit  of  a  pea- 
fant,  with  a  faggot  on  his  fhoulder,   and  a  hook  in  his  hand,  he  en- 
tered the  enemy's  camp.      Obferving  in  one  part  a  croud  of  foldiers, 
he  pufhed  in  among  them  ;   words  arofe  ;  he  ftruck  a  foldier  with  his 
hook  ;  the  foldier  retorted  with  his  fword,   and  Codrus  was  killed. 
Inquiry  being  prefently  made  about  the  tumult,  the  body  was  found 
to  be   that  of  the  king   of  Athens ;   upon  which   the  Peloponnelian 
chiefs,  dreading  the  accomplishment  of  the  oracle  to  their  overthrow, 
haftily  withdrew  their  forces  into  Peloponnefus.     A  peace  with  Mp- 
sjara  feems  to  have  followed  *. 

*  The  fpot  where  Codrus  was   killed  was     ferved,  in  the  time  of  Paufanias,  and  mown 
preferved  in  memory,  or  pretended  to  be  pre-     near  the  altar  of  the  Mufes  on  the  bank  of  the 

Iliffus. 


HISTORY    OF     GREECE.  233 

The  death  of  Codrus,  while  it  thus  fortunately  delivered  Athens    chap.  VI. 
from  the  dangers  of  foreign  war,  was  the  immediate  caufe  of  inter-     SECT.  I. 
nal    fedition,   threatening  nearly  equal  evils.     Medon,   eldeft  fon  of  Paufen.  l.vii. 
Codrus,  was  lame ;  and  bodily  ability  ftill  held  that  high  rank  in  po- 
pular eftimation,  that  his  younger  brother  made  advantage  of  this  de- 
fect to  difpute  the  fucceffion  with  him.     Each  found  flrong  fupport : 
but  the  difpute  brought  forward  a  third  party  ftill   ftronger,   which 
was  for  excluding  both,   declaring  they  would  have  no  king  but  Ju- 
piter.    The  molt  fatal  confequences  were  to  be   apprehended,  when 
fortunately  a  declaration  of  the  Delphian  oracle  was  procured  in  fa- 
vor of  Medon,  and  the  bufinefs  was  amicably  accommodated.    It  was 
determined  that,  after  Codrus,  who  had  merited  fo  Angularly  of  his 
country,  none  ought  to  be  honored  with  a  title  of  which  it  was  im- 
poflible  for  any  living  man  to  be  comparatively  worthy  :   that  how- 
ever Medon  mould  be   fir  ft  magiftrate  of  the  commonwealth,   with 
the  title  of  Archon,  chief,  or  prince;  and  that  this  honor  fhould  re- 
main hereditary  in   his  family  j   but   that   the  Archon  fhould  be  ac- 
countable to  the  afiembly  of  the  people  for  due  adminiftration  of  his 
hi  oh  office.      And  as  Attica  then,  through  the  multitude  of  refugees,   Herbdot.l.ix. 

£>  *  °  °  c.  07. 

overabounded  with   inhabitants,  it  was  agreed   that  a  colony  fhould   Strabo,  1.  xiv. 
be  fent  to  Alia  Minor,  of  which  Neleus  and  Aixlroclus,  younger  fons   &640.' 
of  Codrus,   fhould  be  leaders.     Thus  was  internal  quiet  reftored  to  ca";an 
Athens   as   happily   as  external   peace.      The   reftlefs  fpirits   moflly 
joined  in  the  migration  ;  the  ftorm  of  contending  factions  difperfed ; 
and  the  affairs  of  the  commonwealth  flowed  fo  fmoothly  for  fome  ge- 
nerations after,  that  no  materials  for  hiftory  remain. 

Iliflus,  oppoiite  to  the  temple  of  Diana  Agro-     ney    into    Greece.       Stuart's    Antiquities   of 
tera,  whofe  ruins  yet  remain  on  the  other  bank.     Athens. 
Paufan.  1.  i.  c.  19.      Sir  Geo.  Whcler's  Jour- 


Hh  SECTION 


234  HISTORY    OF    GREECE, 


SECTION     II. 

Of  the  JEolic  and  Ionic  Migrations,  and  of  the  Eftabltjlmient  of  Grecian 
Colonies  in  AJia  Minor,  Thrace,   Cyprus,  Africa,  Sicily,  and  Italy . 

CHAP.  VI.         WHILE    Athens  thus   was  injoying  repofe,  and  the  ambition  of 

SECT.  II.     Lacedtemon  was  yet  confined  within  the  narrow  bounds  of  Pelopon- 

nefus,   the  theater  of  Grecian  action,  or,   we  may  fay,   Greece  itfelf, 

was  expanding  very  greatly  through   thofe   numerous  colonies  which 

were  poured  forth  in  every  direction.      Of  the  Grecian  iflands   Crete 

almoft   alone  has   occurred   hitherto   as  an   object   of  hiflory.     The 

other  iflands  of  the  /Egean  were   anciently,  and  perhaps  originally, 

held,  fome   by  Phenicians,   but  moil   by  the   people   called  Lelegcs, 

Thucyd.l.i.    who,  as  well  as  the  Phenicians,  exercifed  continual  piracy.      Minos 

Herodot  1  i    king  °^  Crete  expelled  both,  and  planted  colonies  of  his  own  people 

c-  l7l-       ..    in  their  room.      Afterward  the  power  of  the  Cretan  kin°;s   decaying 

Strabo,  1.  sn.  r  . 

p.  57-".  &  l.  fome  of  thofe  iflands  became  independent,  and  others  fell  under  dif- 
ferent dominions.  Eubcea,  one  of  the  largeft  and  moll  valuable  in 
the  Grecian  feas,  was  probably  never  under  the  dominion  of  the 
Cretan  kings,  and  indeed  was  fcarcely  in  the  circumftances  of  an 
ifland,  being  feparated  from  the  coaft  or  Bceotia  by  a  channel  fo  nar- 
row and  fhallow  that  it  is  in  effect  an  adjoining  peninfula.  While 
the  Ionic  Pelafgians  of  Attica  fpred  fouthward  into  Peloponnefus, 
they  had  alfo  extended  their  fettlements  northward  into  this  iiland, 
where  Chalcis  and  Eretria  are  faid  to  have  been  Athenian  colonies 
before  the  Trojan  war.  Thefe  two  cities,  tho  diifinct  governments, 
Stiabo,  1.  *•  yet  maintained  fuch  clofe  alliance  as  to  form  almoft  one  ftate,  and 
P-  447.  44-  Decame  very  flourifhing.  They  held  the  neighbouring  iflands  of 
Andros,  Tenos,  and  Ceos  in  fubjection  :  they  extended  the  Grecian 
name  northward  by  planting  the  peninfulas  of  Pallene  and  Athos,  to- 
gether with  the  territory  around  Olynthus  on  the  confines  of  Thrace 
and  Macedonia;  and  they  eflablifhed  colonies  in  Italy  and  Sicily. 

It 


H  I  S  T'O  R  Y     O  F     G  R  E  E  C  E.  235 

Jt   has   been   fuppofed  by  fome  authors,   but   apparently   without    CHAP. VI. 

good  grounds,  that,  before  the  Trojan  war,  migrations  had  been  made     SECT.  II. 

from  Greece  to  Afia  Minor.     We  have  feen  that  the  earlieft  known    Wood  oa  Ho- 

people  of  the  weftern  parts  of  that  country  differed  little  in  origin  or 

in  language  from  the  inhabitants  of  Greece  ;  and  fome  of  the  towns  ■ 

on  the  coaft  were  held   by  people  fo   unquestionably  Grecian,  at   (0 

early  a  period,  that  the  antiquarians  of  aftertimes,  unwilling  to  allow 

anything  to  be  Greek  that  did  not  originate  from  Greece,  were  at  a 

lofs  to  account  for  their  eftablifhment.      Miletus,   mentioned  by  Ho-   Strabo,  I. sir. 

P-   573-  °33> 
mer  in  his  catalogue,  and  Teos,  and  Smyrna,  are  laid  by  Strabo  to  &  634. 

■  »>-,.-.  ,     r  1        „  r>  1  Paulan.  1.  vii. 

have   been  Grecian    towns   before   the    1  rojan  war,      but    the   great 


C.    2. 


/Eolic  and  Ionic  migrations  made  a  complete  revolution  in  the  date 
of  that  fine  country,  and  gave  it  almoft  intirely  a  new  people.  Of 
thofe  extraordinary  and  important  events  no  ancient  author  has  left 
any  complete  account.  It  muff  therefore  be  endeavoured  to  connect 
the  fcattered  information  remaining  from  writers  of  belt  authority, 
among  whom  Strabo  will  be  our  principal  guide. 

The  /Eolic   migration  was  an   immediate  confequence  of  the 
conqueft  of  Peloponnefus  by  the  Heracleids.     Penthilus,  one  of  the   Strabo,  1.  be. 
fons  of  Oreltes,   took  refuge  upon  that  occafion   in   Eubcea,  whither  p.'  T^.l.  "xiH*. 
multitudes  of  Peloponnefians  followed.      Many  of  thefe  found  fettle-    R*  SSl-       .. 

r  J  Laufan.   1.  11. 

ments  there;   but  the  larger   number,   joined  by  a  powerful   body  of  c.  2. 
Boeotians,   paffed  with  their  prince  into  Thrace.      He  dying,   his  fon 
Echelatus   led  the  colony  acroft    the   Hellefpont,   and  made  himfelf 
mafler  of  Troy  ;   putting  then,   it  is  fuppofed,  a  final  period  to  that   Wood  on 

.  Homer. 

unfortunate   city  and   to  the  name  of    its  people.      In  the   mean  time   Strabo,  1.  xiii. 

Cleues  and  Malaus,  alfo  of  the  race  of  Agamemnon,  had   aifembled  p' 5 

a  number  of  Peloponnefian    fugitives  on   mount  Phricius  in    Locris, 

near  Thermopylae  ;   and   paihng  thence  to  Aha  Minor,   founded  the 

town  of  Cuma.     Thus  the  whole   coaft  from   Cyzicus   on  the  Pro-    Strabo,  1.  xiii. 

p.  ^86. 

pontis  to  the  river  Hermus,  together  with  the  ifland  of  Lelbos,  con- 
quered by  Gra'is,  fon  of  Echelatus,  became  fettled  by  Peloponnelians 
and  Boeotians,  and  received  the  name  of  ^Eolis  or  ^Eolia. 

H  h  2  The 


itf  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  vi.  The  great  Ionic  migration  took  place  fomewhat  later,  but  pro- 

SEC1.  II.  duced   colonies  vet   more  flourishing.      It  was  led  from   Athens   by 

Hcrodot.i.ix.  Neleus  and  Androclus  youngtf  Cons   of  Codrus,   upon  the  occasion, 

Strabo,  1. xiv,  already  mentioned,   of  the  determination   of   the   fucceffion    to    the 

Paiifan.  1.  vii.  archonShip  in   favor  of  Medon.     A  great  multitude  followed  ;   many 


C.  2 


Vu.     Athenians,  and  almoft  all  the  Ionian  and  Meffenian  families  which 

Hilt.  l.  vm.     the.  Dorian   conquell  had  driven  for  refuse  to  Athens.      Thev  feized 
c.  5.  ^  fc  J 

the  whole  coaft  of  Afia  Minor,  from  the  river  Hermus  fouthward  to 

the  headland  of  Polideion,  together  with  the  valuable  iilands  of 
Chios  and  Samos ;  expelling  the  Carian  inhabitants,  but  affociating 
the  Greeks  :  and  they  founded  twelve  cities  which  became  all  very 
considerable.  Thefe  were  Ephefus,  Miletus,  Myus,  Lebedos,  Co- 
lophon, Priene,  Teos,  Erythrx-,  Phocsca,  Clazomense,  Chios,  and 
Samos ;  to  which  was  afterward  added  Smyrna,  acquired  from  the 
./Eolians.  Thefe  cities  had  their  Separate  governments,  yet  main- 
tained fome  political  connection,  and  held  occasionally  a  general 
council  which  was  called  Panionium.  The  territory  thus  acquired 
on  the  continent  of  Aria  Minor,  fcarcely  anywhere  perhaps  extend- 
ing forty  miles  from  the  coaft  up  the  country,  was  however  in  length, 
from  the  north  of  yEolis  to  the  fouth  of  Ionia,  near  four  hundred. 

But  the  Greeks  acquired  Settlements  fouthward  of  this  tract,  with- 
in   the  bounds  of  that  corner   of  Afia  which    the  great   migrations 
„     ,      ,  .    had  left   to  the    Carians,   eenuine   defcendants   of   the   Leleges,  and 

Herwlot.  l.i.  °  b      ' 

c.  171.  which  retained  the  name  of  Caria.      Here  the  Trcezenians  founded 

c-flo.  HalicarnaSfus,   which  became  much   more  considerable  than  the  pa- 

St6c6' '" XiV'  rent  C^y*  ^^e  adjacent  ifland  of  Rhodes  had  been  very  early  occu- 
Strabo,  1. xiv.  p|ecj  by  people  of  Grecian  race,  fome  from  Crete,  it  is  Said,  fome 
Iliad.  1.  ii.  from  ThefTaly  :  and  Homer  relates,  that  Tlepolemus,  Son  of  Her- 
cules, carried  a  colony  thither  from  Argos,  and  afterward  joined  in 
the  expedition  againft  Trov.  The  great  poet  celebrates  the  power 
and  wealth  of  Rhodes.  In  his  time  it  was  divided  between  three  in- 
dependent flates,  which  were  not  till  fome  centuries  after  united, 
when  the  city  of  Rhodes  was  built  in  a  very  advantageous  fituation 

for 


HISTORY    OF    GREECF.  237 

for  a  common  capital  of  the  ifland.     A  happy  fyflem  of  government  CHAP.  VI. 

prevailed  :   people  of  higher  rank  alone  directed   public  affairs,  but  SECT.  II. 

provilion   was   made  for  the   welfare  and  fecurity  of  all*.     Hence  strabo,  1.  xiv. 

Rhodes  long  flourished  in  commerce,  arts,  and  arms,  and  extended  straboji.  xiv. 

its   dominion   over  a   confiderable   territory    upon    the   neighbouring  P- 652- 655- 

continent.     The    Halicarnaffians   on    the    contrary   held    Cos,    with  Herodot.l.vii, 

c.  99. 

fome  fmaller  iflands,  in  Subjection.  Rhodes  and  Halicarnaflus  were 
the  two  principal  Aliatic  Grecian  dates  whole  people  called  them- 
felves  Dorians. 

The  northern  coaSt  of  the  JEgtan  fea  was  not  fuccefsfully  and  per- 
manently fettled  by  people  from  Greece  fo  early  as  the  er.Aern.  It 
was,  however,  flill  an  early  period  when,  belide  the  acquisitions 
already  mentioned  of  the  Eubceans,  all  the  beft  fituations  on  the 
Thracian  coafl:  of  the  iEgean,  and  on  both  Shores  of  the  Pro-   Herodotl  1.  ii, 

C.   X  3  .   &  1.   IV. 

pontis,  were   pofl'efled   by   Greeks,  and   fome  establishments    were   c  12. 
made  far  in  the  Euxine  fea.      Macedonia,   occupied  bv  a  colony   Herodot.  1.  v. 

r  /  .  c.  22.8d.vm. 

from  Argos,  under  Caranus  defcended  from  Temenus  the  Heracleid,   c.  138. 
will  require  more  particular  notice  hereafter.  coo?' 

But  thefe  were  not  the  mod  diflant,   or  the  mofl  extraordinary  of 
the  Grecian  acquisitions  in  thofe  remote  ages.      Poetical  tradition  fays,    Pindar,  Nem, 

IV. 

and  the  moft  judicious  Grecian  writers  adopted  the  report,  that,  Shortly   Strabo,  I, xiv, 
after  the  Trojan  war,    Teucer,    fon  of  Telamon  and  brother  of  the   p"    b2' 
celebrated  Ajax,    leading  a  colony  from  the  little  ifland   of  Salamis 
on  the  coafl  of  Attica,  founded  the  city  of  Salamis  in  Cyprus.     Un- 
questionably Cyprus  was  very  early  fettled  by  Greeks.     Ir  had  flill 
earlier  been  occupied   by  the  Phenicians,  and  from  them  it  derived    Herodot.  Li. 
that  worShip  of  the  goddefs  Venus,    originally  a  Syrian  goddefs,    for   w^Od  f 
which  it  became  early  and  continued  long  remarkable.     Cyprus  was   l- viii.  y.  362. 
then  wooded  like  the  uncleared  parts  of  America.     The  Phenicians   p.  6S4'. 
therefore,  who,  through   their   Superiority  in   arts  and  manufactures, 

*   Strabo  is  warm  in  eulogy  of  the  Rhodian      larly  remarkable:    Ah/mxvSei;  it'  ua)t  it  "Po2ko>, 
government :   ©«u^.«ri  i  ivto^iu.,  he  fays.      Eut     xuiirtf  Iv  dz^oxfariivf^itoi.  1,  xiv.  p.  652, 
his  phrafe  to  exprefs  its   character  is   particu- 

found 


23  8 


HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 


CHAP.  VI. 
SECT.  II. 


Herodot.l.iv. 

c.  147  &  155. 
Strabo,  1.  x. 
p.  484.  & 
1.  xvii.  p.  837. 


Pindar.  Pyth. 
iv.  &  v.  &  ix. 


Strabo, 
p.  267. 


found  more  immediate  profit  in  trading  to  inhabited  countries  than  in 
planting  the  uninhabited,  feem  not  to  have  been  averfe  to  the  efra- 
blifbment  of  Creek  adventurers  there.  On  the  contrary  the  qver- 
abundance  ot  wood,  and  the  confequent  fcarcity  of  inhabitants, 
were  efteemed  fuch  inconvcniencies,  and  the  value  of  foil  covered 
by  wood  was  fo  trifling,  that  it  was  long  cuftomary  to  give  lands  to 
any  who  would  clear  them.  Colony  therefore  followed  colony,  from 
Laconia,  from  Argos,  from  Athens,  and  fome  other  parts.  Thus 
in  time  Cyprus  became  completely  a  Grecian  iflandj  and,  from  being 
an  object  for  nothing  but  its  {hip-timber  and  its  copper-mines,  was 
made  a  rich  and  populous  country,  producing  plenty  of  corn,  and 
famous  for  the  excellence  and  abundance  of  its  wines  and  oil.  It  was 
however  in  early  times  divided  into  too  many  little  ilates  for  any  one 
to  become  coniiderable;  and  thefe  were  moltly  under  that  reprobated 
fort  of  monarchy  which  the  Greeks  denominated  tyranny. 

Among  the  molt  fouthern  of  that  duller  of  little  iflands  in  the 
iEgean  fea  called  the  Cyclades,  is  Thera,  planted  at  an  early  period 
by  a  colony  from  Lacedxmon.  This  little  illand  alio  fent  out  its 
colony:  the  city  of  Cyrene  in  Africa  originated  thence  ;  and 
through  the  excellence  of  its  foil,  the  opportunity  of  extending  its  ter- 
ritory, the  convenience  of  its  fituation  for  commerce,  and  the  ad- 
vantage of  its  climate  for  productions  valuable  in  exchange,  Cyrene 
rofe  to  an  importance  impoflible  for  the  mother-country  ever  to  at- 
tain. Pindar  bears  teltimony  to  the  early  wealth  of  its  people,  and 
repeatedly  mentions  the  largenefs  of  the  towns  that  arofe  from  it  over 
that  part  of  Africa  which  became  diftinguiihed  by  the  name  of  the 
Cyrena'ic.  Barca,  afterward  called  Ptolemai's,  became  early  a  conii- 
derable  independent  commonwealth. 

Thus  great  and  thus  widely  fpred  were  the  early  Grecian  colonies 
eaftward,  northward,  and  fouthvvard  ;  and  yet  they  were  exceeded, 
in  hiftorical  importance  at  leaft,  by  thofe  planted  toward  the  weft. 
Italy  and  Sicily  were,  in  Homer's  time,  fcarcely  known  but  by 
name.     They  were  regions  of  imaginary  moniters  and  real  favages ; 

and 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  239 

and  the  great  poet  has  defcribed  thefe  as  accurately,   as  he  has  painted    qh\v  VI 
thole  fancifully.      '  Neither  plowing  nor  lowing,'  he  lays,  '  they  feed     SEcT  Tf 

'  on  the  fpontaneous  productions  of  the  foil.     They  have   no  afl'em-     * ■s—J 

'  blies  for  public  debate ;  no  magistrates  to  inforce  laws  ;  no  com- 
'  mon  concerns  or  any  kind:  but  they  dwell  in  caverns  on  mountain- 
'  tops ;  and  every  one  is  magiftrate  and  lawgiver  to  his  own  family. 
The  calamities  and  various  confufion  infping  Irom  the  Trojan  war 
are  faid  to  have  occaficned  the  firft  Grecian  migrations  to  thefe 
countries.  This  appears  extremely  probable,'  tho  we  (hould  not  im- 
plicitly believe  the  traditions  which  name  the  leaders  and  the  fpots  on 
which  they  feverally  fettled.  But  while  we  doubt  whether  Diomed, 
after  having  founded  Arpi,  Canufium,  and  Sipontum  in  Apulia,  really  ^I30'  gvi" 
penetrated  to  the  bottom  of  the  Adriatic  gulph,  and  became  mailer  of  .,.,.. 

r  °      1  J  bid.  &:  1.  v, 

the  country  about  the  month  of  the  Po ;   and  Hill  more  whether  Pifa   p-^5- 
i:i  Tufcany  was  really  built  by  thofe  Peloponnelian   Pifaeans  who  had 
followed  Neflor  to  the  fiege  of  Troy;    not  to  mention  the  Arcadian 
Evander,    as  founder  of  that  village  on  the  banks  of  the  Tiber  which 
afterward  became  Rome;   flill  we  learn  with  unquestionable  certainty, 
that  if  thefe  were  not  fads,  yet  Grecian  colonies  were  fettled  in  va- 
rious parts  of  Italy  at  a  very  early  period  :    fo  early,    that  tho  we  can 
trace  them  very  high,  yet  their  origin  lies  beyond  all  means  of  invef- 
tigation.    The  reputation  was  hence  acquired  by  Cuma,  on  the  Cam-    strabo   '.v. 
panian  coaft,  of  being  the  oldeft  of  all  the  Grecian  towns  both  in  Italy   P"  24^ 
and  Sicily  ;   becaufe  it  could  with  the  greatest:  certainty  refer  its  foun- 
dation to  the  remoter!  aera.      It  was  a  colony  led  by  Megalthenes  and    Strabo, Ibid, 

J  jo  \t\.  Paterc 

Ilippocles  from  Chalcis  and  Cuma  in  Eubcea,  not  a  great  while,  ac-   '•  '•  c-4> 
cording  to  Velleius  Paterculus,   after  the  founding  of  thofe  towns  by 
the  Athenians.    1  he  Campanian  Cuma  profpered  and  fent  out  its  own 
colonies.      Naples  is  among  its  offspring. 

One  flourifhing  fettlement  in  this   inviting  country    would  greatly 
incourag;e  farther  adventures.     The  Chalcidians   of  Eubcea,   we  are   c    ,     ,    . 

o  t  trabo,  1.  vi. 

told,   finding,   at  a  fubfequent  period,  their  population  too  great  for   p-  ^57. 
their  territory,  confulted  the  Delphian  oracle.    The  Pythonefs  directed 

them 


24o  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  VI.    them  to  decimate  their  whole  people,  and  fend  a  tenth  to  found  aco- 

S^J- J1,  lony.  It  happened  that  fome  of  the  principal  Meifenians,  of  thofe  who 
had  fled  their  country  after  the  firff.  war  with  Lacedasmon,  were  at  the 
fame  time  at  Delphi  to  afk  advice  of  the  god.  The  managers  of  the 
oracle  commanded  them  to  join  in  the  adventure  with  the  decimated 
Chalcidians.  Both  parties  were  pleafed  with  the  order  ;  and  chufing 
for  their  leader  a  Meffenian  of  the  Heracleid  family,  they  founded 
Rhegium  on  the  fouthein  point  of  Italy,  which  became  a  flourifhing 
and  powerful  ftate.      Not  long  after  Tarentum  was  founded  by  Lace- 

Etrabo,  1.  vi.  dasmonians ;  Locri  Epizephyrii,  and  Medama  by  Locrians  from 
Criffa  ;  Scylleticum,  afterwards  called  Scyllacium,  by  Athenians  ;  Cro- 
tona,  and  Sybaris  from  whofe  ruin  rofe  Thurium,  by  Achaians  ;  Sa- 
lentum  and  Brunduiium  by  Cretans.  Some  of  thefe  had  many  in- 
ferior towns  within  their  territory  :  and  in  the  end  full  half  the 
coaft  of  Italy  came  into  the  pcfleflion  of  Greeks  ;  whole  pofterity, 
and  even  whofe  language,  mixed  indeed  and  degenerated  amid  the 
various  and  violent  revolutions  which,  in  the  courfe  of  fo  many  cen- 
turies, the  country  has  undergone,  retain  notwithftanding  in  fome 
parts  much  of  their  original  character  to  this  day. 

While  the  coails  of  Italy  thusbecame  Grecian  ground,  fettlements 
had  been  made  with  equal  or  fuperior  fuccefs  in  Sicily.  The  Eu- 
boic  Chalcidians  were  ftill  foremoft  here,  where  Naxus  had  the  repu- 
tation of  being  the  oldeft  Grecian  town.  Shortly  after  Archias  a  He- 
racleid, with  a  colony  of  Corinthians,  founded  Syracufe  :  Lamis,  from 
Megara,  built  the  Hybl?ean  Megara  :  Gela  was  a  colony  of  Rhodians 
and  Cretans  ;  Leontium,  Catana,  Tauromenium,  Selinus,  Himera, 
Acne,  Cafminae,  Camarina;,  Acragas  called  by  the  Romans  Agri- 
gentum,  and  Zancle  afterward  named  Meffina,  were  confiderable 
towns,   colonies  from  thofe  before  founded  in  this  ifland  or  in  Italy. 

P    ,     ,    -      The  interior  of  both  countries  remained  to  the  former  race  of  inha- 

Strabo,  I.  vi. 

P--70-  bitants.     It  is  indeed  remarkable  that  the  Greeks  feem  never  to  have 

coveted  inland  territories.      Their  active  temper  led  them  always   to 
maritime  fituations.     If  driven  from  thefe,  they  fought  flill  others  of 

the 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  t4t 

the  fame  kind,  however  remote  from  their  native  country,  rather  than    CHAP.vi. 
be  excluded  from  the  fea,  and  the  means  which  it  affords  for  comma-     SEC  l  •  u- 
nication  with  all  the  world.     Accordingly  the  Italian  and  Sicilian 
Greeks   (whofe   poffelTions  were  now  fo  extenfive  as  to  acquire  the 
name  of  Great  Greece,)  and  not  lefs  the  African  colonies  maintained 
con  ft  ant  intercourfe  with  the  country  of  their  forefathers :  particu- 
larly they  frequented  the  Olympian  games,  the  great  meeting  for  all   gm< 
people  of  Grecian  race.     Perhaps  the  advantages  were  not  lefs  from 
the  intercourfe  maintained  with  the  Afiatic  colonies  :    for  there  Gre- 
cian  art  and   fcience  appear  firft   to  have  rifen   to  fplendor :    there 
Grecian  philofophy  feems  to  have  had  its  birth,   and  from  the  ifland 
of  Samos  on  the  Afiatic  coaft  the  great  Pythagoras  came  and  fettled  Str^°>  '• Vl- 
at  Crotona  in  Italy.     Thus  the  colonies  in  general  advanced  nearly 
equally  in  improvements  of  art,   fcience  and  civilization,  and  fome- 
times  went  even  before  the  mother-country.   The  firft  fyftem  of  laws  Strabo,  l.vi. 
committed  to  writing  among  the  Greeks,    according  to  Strabo,  was  p' 2*9' 
that  of  the  Epizephyrian  Locrians,  compofed  by  Zaleucus,  the  fcho- 
lar  of  Pythagoras.     The  political  inftitutions  were  principally  taken 
from  thofe  of  Crete  and   Lacedsemon  ;    the   criminal  law  from  the 
practice  of  the  court  of  Areopagus   at   Athens  :    but   the  religious 
and  moral  precepts,   always  an  effential  part  of  the  fyftem  of  every  Diodor.  Sic. 
early   lawgiver,   were   of  the  fchool  of  his  great   mafter,   and  very      xn'  c'  2°' 
iuperior  to  the  doctrine  of  elder  times.     His  criminal  law  had  more- 
over the  particular  merit  of  being  the  firft  among  the  Greeks  that  fe-   p.  260.' 
cured  the  accufed  againft  the  caprice  of  judges,  by  ftating  the  penalty 
for  every  tranfgrefiion  ;   and  his  fyftem  all  together  was  admired  for  the 
general  eafinefs  of  its  application   upon  liberal  principles  to  all  pof- 
fible  occurrences. 

Few  of  the  Grecian  colonies  were  founded  with  any  view  to  extend 
the  dominion  of  the   mother-country.     Often  the  leaders  were  no   Paufan.  i.;v, 

C.     2  3a 

more  than  pirates,   not  unlike  the  buccaneers  of  modern  times.     On   Hemd.  l.vi. 
a  favage  coaft  they  feized  a  convenient  port,  fet  flaves  to  cultivate  the  c 
adjoining  lands,    and  themfelves  continued  their  cruifes.     But  when 

I  i  a  ftate 


442  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  VI.  a  ftate  by  a  public  act  fent  out  a  colony,  the  purpofe  was  generally 
SECT.  II.  no  more  than  to  deliver  itfelf  from  numbers  too  great  for  its  territory, 
Strabo,  1.  iv.  or  from  factious  men,  whole  means  of  power  at  home  were  unequal 
to  their  ambition.  Corinth,  however,  early,  and  in  later  times  Athens, 
had  fometimes  farther  views.  Poffefiing  naval  force,  they  could  give 
protection  and  exact  obedience;  of  which  the  Grecian  commonwealths 
in  general  could  do  neither.  For  the  moitpart,  therefore,  in  the  colo- 
nies, as  in  Greece  itfelf,  every  considerable  town  claimed  to  be  an 
independent  ftate ;  and,  unlefs  opprefTed  by  a  powerful  neighbour, 
maintained  itfelf  by  its  own  ftrength  and  its  alliances. 

SECTION     III. 

'The  Hljlory  of  Athens  from  the  Abolition  of  Royalty  to   the  Legijlation 

of  Solon. 

HAVING  thus  briefly  furveyed  the  extenfive  and  important  ac- 
quisitions of  the  Greek  nation  in  various  foreign  parts,  we  return  to 
Athens.  We  have  heretofore  had  occafion  to  obferve  that  all  the 
traditions  of  the  Greeks,  concerning  the  early  hiftory  of  their  country, 
bear  ltrong  marks,  if  not  of  truth,  yet  at  leaft  of  honefty.  Even 
thofe  ages  diftinguiihed  by  the  epithets  poetical,  fabulous,  and  heroic, 
are  far  from  abounding  with  matter  of  flattery  to  the  Greek  nation. 
Homer's  perfect  impartiality  is  perhaps  among  the  greateft  wonders 
of  his  works;  and  from  the  period  where  his  hiftory  ceafes,  to  that  in 
which  the  firft  profe  historians  lived,  a  fpace  of  at  leaft  two  centuries 
and  a  half,  we  find  abfolutely  nothing  of  what  the  character  of  vanity, 
fo  liberally  attributed  to  the  Greek  nation,  might  lead  us  to  expect.  It 
is  an  obfervation  of  Sallult  that  the  actions  of  the  Athenians,  really 
great,  are  made  to  appear  ftill  greater  by  the  admirable  manner  in 
which  their  hiftorians  related  them.  But  thofe  celebrated  actions  of 
the  Athenians  did  not  begin  till  the  eyes  of  many  inlightened  and  jea- 
lous people  were  upon  them.     That  remote  period  of  their  hiftory 

where 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 


l41 


where  Invention,  fecure  from  convi&ion,  might  riot  in  flattery,  is  re-  CHAP.  VI. 
markably  barren  of  circumftances  flattering  to  the  nation.  Cecrops, 
their  firft  hero,  was  no  Athenian  ;  even  their  favorite  Thefeus  was 
not  born  in  their  country  :  Codrus  was  a  Peloponnefian  ;  and  with 
Codrus  heroifm  in  the  ancient  ftile  ended.  Here  appears  a  ftriking 
difference  between  the  hiftories  of  Greece  and  of  Rome.  The  firft 
accounts  of  Greece  prefent  us  with  a  people  inferior  to  the  inhabi- 
tants of  other  known  countries,  looking  up  with  reverence  to  any 
ftrangers  who  would  do  them  the  honor  to  come  among  them.  After 
the  times  of  the  hydras,  chimxras,  flying  horfes,  fea-monfters,  and 
other  extravagancies  merely  poetical,  the  hero  vvhofe  actions  remain 
recorded  as  moft  extraordinary,  is  Ariftomenes ;  whofe  memory  was 
cherilhed  as  the  folace  of  an  unfortunate  people,  while  their  conquer- 
ors, become  the  mod:  powerful  of  the  Greeks,  have  attributed  no  re- 
markable celebrity  to  any  of  their  great  men  of  the  fame  age,  but 
have  left  unqueflionable  victories  to  fpeak  for  themfelves  by  their 
effects  only.  But  the  hiftory  of  Rome,  from  the  eftablifhment  of 
the  confulate,  is  made  up  of  grofs  flattery  to  the  people  at  large  and 
to  the  great  families  in  particular,  till  it  became,  in  too  notorious 
reality,  a  difgrace  to  human  nature.  I  would  not  depreciate  the  real 
merit  of  the  Romans.  If  we  had  no  hiftory  of  Rome  from  the  time 
when  it  was  facked  by  the  Gauls  to  the  time  when  it  ruined  Carthage, 
ftill  we  fhould  be  certain  that,  in  that  interval,  it  muft  have  produced 
not  a  few,  but  a  whole  people  of  great  men.  It  is  the  hiftory  only, 
and  not  the  people  of  Greece  and  Rome,  that  I  mean  at  prefent  to 
compare.  In  confequence  of  the  modeft  veracity  of  the  Attic  hifto- 
rians,  Athens  is  almoft  without  hiftory  for  fome  generations  after  the 
death  of  Codrus.  The  few  obje&s  occurring  are  not  matter  of  boaft. 
Twelve  archons  are  named,  who  followed  Medon  by  heieditary  fuc- 
cefllon  ;  and  the  vanity  of  aftertimes  has  not  afcribed  to  any  one  of 
them,  or  to  any  one  man  under  their  government,  a  memorable  aclion  ; 
tho,  according  to  Blair's  chronology,  the  reigns  of  the  thirteen  were 
of  no  lefs  than  three  hundred  and  fixteen  years,  from  the  year  before 

I  i  2  Chrift 


244  HISTORY    OF    GREECE, 

CHAP.  VI.    chrift  0ne  thoufand  and  feventy  to  the  year  feven  hundred  and  fifty- 
,_■_*_, '    four.     Newton,  who  places  the  death  of  Codrus  only  eight  hundred 
and  four  years  before  Chrift,  makes  the  interval  to  the  death  of  Alc- 
mseon  the  thirteenth  archon,  in  the  year  fix  hundred  forty-feven,  no 
more  than  one  hundred  and  fifty-feven  years.     It  may  not  be  abfo- 
lutely  ufelefs  to  lay  before  the  reader  the  barren  lift  of  names,  which 
the  inveftigators  of  Attic  antiquities  have  given  us,  as  of  perfons  who, 
under  the  title  of  king  or  archon,  reigned  in  Attica  from  the  earliefi 
traditions  to  this  period.     He  will  judge  whether  inventive  pofterity 
has  attributed  to  them  an  improbable  proportion  of  brilliant  atchieve- 
ments.     Ogyges  is  mentioned  as  a  prince  who  reigned  at  a  time  beyond 
connected  tradition.    x-\fter  an  undetermined  interval,  the  next  named 
is  the  Egyptian  Cecrops.     To  him  fucceeded  Cranaus,  Amphictyon, 
Erechtheus,    Pandion,   ./Egeus,    Thefeus,   Meneftheus,   Demophoon, 
Oxyntes,  Aphidas,  Thymectes,  Melanthus,  Codrus,  Medon,  Acaftus, 
Archippus,  Therfippus,   Phorbas,  Megacles,   Diognetus,  Pherecles, 
Ariphron,  Thefpicus,  Agameftor,  iEfchylus,  Alcmason.    Some  writers 
have  fuppofed  three  kings  more  between  Amphiclyon  and  iEgeas ; 
making  a  fecond  Cecrops,   a  fecond  Pandion,   and  a  fecond  Erech- 
theus j  or  calling  the  firft  Erichthonius. 

The  next  important  occurrence  in   the   hiftory  of  Athens,  after 

changing  the  title  of  the   chief  magiftrate,  was  a  farther  change  in 

01.  xxxiii.    the  conftitution.     On  the  death  of  Alcmaeon,  Charops  was  raifed  to 

^"         ,        the  archonihip  upon  condition  of  holding  it  fcr  ten  years  only.     Six 

JV.   archons   followed  Charops   by  appointment  for  ten  years.       But  on 

Ol.  vi.  4.      t^e  expiration  of  the  archonfhip  of  Eryxias  a   farther   and  greater 

E.   change  was  made  :   it  was  refolved  that   the  office  fhould  be  annual, 

Ol.  xliii.2.   ancj  tnat  inftead  of  one,  there  fhould   be  nine  perfons  to  execute  its 

'    '    °7'N,   duties.     Neither  equal  dignity,  however,  nor  the  fame  functions  were 

Ol.xxiv.  1.   affigned  to  all.     One  principally  reprefented  the  majefty  of  the  ftate: 

^S.   hy  his  name  the  year  of  his  magiftracy  was  diftinguiihed  ;  whence 

he  was  fometimes  called  Archon  Eponymus,  but  more  ufually  he  was 

intitled  fimply  the  Archon.     The  fecond  in  rank  had   the  title  of 

King. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  245 

King.     He  was  head  of  the  religion  of  the  commonwealth,  to  which    CHAP.  VI. 

alone  the  peculiar  functions  of  his  dignity  related.     The  Polemarch    SECT-  «*« 

was  third,  and  originally  his  office  was  what  the  title  imports,  chief 

in  the  military  affairs  of  the  commonwealth.     The  other  fix  archons 

had  the  common  title  of  Thefmothetes  :  they  prelided  as  judges  in 

the  ordinary  courts  of  juftice;   and   the  fix  formed  a  tribunal  which 

had  a  peculiar  jurifdiftion.     The   nine  together  formed   the  council 

of  ftate.     Legiflation  remained   with   the   aflembly   of  the  people ; 

but  almoft  the  whole  administration,    civil,    military,   and  judiciary,    Thucyd.Ki 

was  with  the  archons.     Thofe  magiftrates  were  ordinarily  appointed   c' lz6' 

by  lot  ;  but  fometimes  the  affembly  of  the  people  interfered,  and  ex- 

ercifed  the  power  of  naming  them. 

Farther  than  this  we  are  little  exaclly  informed  what  was  yet  the 
conftitution  of  the  Athenian  government :  for  writing  was  hitherto 
fo  little  praclifed  in  Greece,  that  there  were  no  written  laws.  It  was 
therefore  impoffible  for  improvements  in  legiflation,  or  in  the  forms 
of  adminiflration,  to  advance  with  any  fteady  pace,  or,  except  with 
fuch  extraordinary  inftitutions  as  thofe  of  Crete  and  Lacedasmon,  to 
reft  on  any  firm  ground.  The  abolition  of  hereditary  fupreme  magi- 
flracy  is  a  meafure  not  generally  likely  to  bring  internal  peace  to  a 
country ;  and  the  Athenian  hiflory,   during  above   a  century  which,    NewtonV 

ChronoL 

according  to  the  loweft  computation,  palled  between  the  appointment 
of  annual  archons  and  the  Perfian  invafion,  is  fupplied  by  fcarcely 
anything  but  inteftine  troubles.  That  weight  which,  from  earlieft 
times,  a  few  principal  families  poffeiTed  among  the  Attic  people,  and 
which  was  in  a  great  degree  confirmed  to  them  by  the  conftitutions  of 
Thefeus,  remained,  amid  all  the  turbulence  of  democracy,  to  a  late 
period.  Among  thofe  families  the  Alcmaeonid  is  of  great  fame; 
claiming,  it  fhould  feem  from  the  names  of  Megacles  and  Alcmason 
which  they  affected,  fome  connection  by  blood  with  the  perpetual 
archons  and  the  kings  of  the  Neleid  line.  Megacles,  head  of  this 
family,  was  archon  when  Cylon,  a  man  alfo  of  a  very  ancient  and 

powerful 


246  HISTORY      OF      GREECE. 

CHAP.  VI.    powerful  family*,  attempted  to  acquire  the  fovereignty  of  his  coun- 
ter, ill.    try.     He  had  married  the  daughter  of  Theagenes,  tyrant  of  Megara  : 
Hcrodot.  1.  v.   he  had  been  victor  in  the  chariot-race  at  the  Olympian  games,  a  cir- 
Thu'c'yd.l.i.     cumftance  which  in  thofe  days  of  itfelf  gave   rank  and  reputation, 
Plutfsolon.     n0t  without  fome  opinion  alio  of  peculiar  favor  from  the  god  of  the 
feftival ;  and  being  apparently  a  man  of  much  ambition  and  little  un- 
der/landing, he  interpreted  a  dubious  refponfe  of  the  Delphian  oracle 
as  a  declaration   of  divine  blefli ng   upon  his   purpofe.     With   fome 
Thucyd.ibid.   troops  which  he  received  from  his  father-in-law,  he  feized  the  citadel 
of  Athens.      But  he  feems  to  have  been  little  prepared  for  the  farther 
profecution  of  his  enterprize.      The  people  ran   to  arms  under  the 
conduct  of  the   arehons,    and  "immediately  laid   liege  to  the  citadel. 
Cylon  took  an  early  opportunity  to  feek  his  own  fafety  in  flight.    His 
adherents,  prefTed  by  famine,  forfook  their  arms  and  fled  to  the  altars. 
Perfuaded  to   quit   thefe,  under   promifes  of  perfonal  lecurity,  they 
were   notwithstanding  condemned    and   executed.     This  action  gave 
occalion  for  great  outcry.      Many  authors  mention   it  as  an  enormity 
of  the  blacked:  dye,  and  Angularly  ofFenlive  to  the  gods.      In  confe- 
quence  of  it  the  remaining  partizans  of  Cylon  gathered  frefh  popula- 
rity, and  became  again  a  powerful  faction. 

The  intolerable  inconveniencies  of  an  unfettled  government,  and 
an  uncertain  jurilprudence,  at  length  induced  all  parties  to  concur 
in  the  refolution  to  appoint  a  lawgiver,  who  ihould  be  impowered  to 
make  a  thorough  reformation  in  the  itate,  and  eflabliih  a  fyflem  for 
the  future  conduct  of  its  affairs;  particularly  for  the  regular  admini- 
B.C.  572!  ftrati°n  of  juftice.  Draco  was  raifed  to  the  important  office  ;  a  man 
.AT.   whole  fevere  morals   and  inflexible  uprnrhtnefs    iuftly  recommended 

III      yVYlY  J  J 

x  him,   but  who  was   unfortunately  of  genius   very  inferior  to  the  un- 

B.C.623.     dertaking.     The  political  conffitution  he  feems  to   have  left  as  he 

B-  found  it.     Plis  alterations  were  confined  to  the  judicature ;  and  even 

there  he  mowed  himfelf  incapable  of  accommodating  his  ideas  either 

*   Ki  t»?«i  lvyt;r,s  r.cci  SituTos.      Thucyd.  1.  i.  c.  126, 

to 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


247 


to  the  neceffities  of  particular  fituations,  or  to  the  general  temper  of    CHAP.  VI. 
mankind  *.     All  crimes  equally,  from  the  moil  enormous  to  the  mo  ft    SECT- in> 
trifling  that  became  objects  of  his  laws,  he  made  capital;   urging 
that  a  breach  of  any  politive  law,  being  treafon  to  the  jurifprudence    ^uU  Solon. 
of  the  ftate,   deferved  death ;  and  he  could  go  no  farther  for  greater 
crimes.    The  feverity  of  fuch  a  fyftem  defeated  its  own  purpofe.    Few 
would  be  accufers   againft   inferior  criminals,  when  the  confequence 
was  to  be  latal  to  the  accufed  ;   and   the  humanity  of  the  judges  in- 
terfering where  that  of  witnelles  was   deficient,    it  followed  that  all 
crimes,  except  thofe  highly  atrocious,  went  wholly  unpunithed.     The 
laws  of  Draco,   therefore,   were  a  very  imperfect  remedy  for  the  evils 
under  which  Athens   labored  :   in  fome   inftances  they  but  increafed 
them. 

A  ftate  agitated  between  inveterate  conftitutional  diforders,  and  im- 
perfect: attempts  at  reformation,  was  open  to  misfortune.  The  people 
of  Salamis,  perceiving  the  weaknefs  of  the  Athenian  government, 
and  probably  fuffering  under  it,  had  revolted,  and  allied  themfelves 
with  Megara.      The  Athenians  made  feveral  attempts  to  recover   the   Plut-  s°Io"« 

•n       j       1  i  ■  1     n     1     1    /•       1  i  tii  JalHa.  1.   11. 

illand ;  but  always  with  luch  lofs,  tnat  at  length  the  lower  people,  in  c.  7. 
opposition  to  their  chiefs,  carried  a  law,  making  it  capital  for  any 
one,  magi  ft  rate  or  private  perfon,  ever  to  propofe  a  renewal  of  the 
undertaking.  This  rafti  act  of  a  legiflating  populace  brought  forward 
to  public  notice  one  of  the  greateft  characters  that  Greece  ever  pro- 
duced. Solon,  a  young  man  of  an  ancient  and  honorable  family  of 
Attica,  had  been  hitherto  diftinguifhed  only  by  his  love  of  learning 
and  his  genius  for  poetry.  The  law  concerning  Salamis  began  foon 
to  be  an  evident  caufe  of  difiatisfaction  and  fhame,  particularly 
among  the  younger  Athenians.  None  however  dared  openly  propofe 
the  repeal  of  it.  Solon  ventured  an  attempt  to  evade  its  penalty,  whi'c 
he  fhould  lead  the  people  to  the  act  which  themfelves  now  wiihed. 
He  caufed  it  to  be  reported  that  he  had  occafional  acceftes  of  phrenzy  ; 

j^oWv?  Tot;?  npnc,   'i%r,y.n.     "l^W  o    h  tci;  vopots  hvMv      T>;;  £»;fM«;  fit",  s0o(.      Aliitot.  Polit.  1,  ii,  c.  12. 

and 


248  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  VI.  ancj  for  fome  time  kept  his  houfe.  In  this  retirement  he  compofed 
SECT.  III.  a  poem,  fuch  as  he  thought  might  excite  the  multitude  as  he  defired. 
Then  watching  a  proper  opportunity  during  an  aflembly  of  the  people, 
he  ran  into  the  agora  like  one  frantic,  mounted  the  herald's  ftone 
from  which  proclamations  were  ufually  fpoken,  and  thence  recited 
his  poem  to  the  crowd.  Some  of  his  friends  were  at  hand,  prepared 
to  wonder,  admire,  and  applaud.  The  people  caught  the  phrenzy ; 
the  law  concerning  Salamis  was  abrogated ;  and  it  was  decreed  im- 
mediately to  fend  a  frefh  expedition  againft  that  ifland.  The  bufi- 
nefs  now  came  into  the  hands  of  the  party  to  which  Solon  attached 
himfelf :  it  was  conducted  with  prudence,  and  the  fuccefs  was  an- 
fwerable :  the  Athenians  recovered  the  ifland  with  little  lofs. 

But  the  fpirit  of  faction  yet  remained  unquelled.  The  partifans 
Plut.  Solon,  of  Cylon  were  ftill  violently  clamorous  about  the  unexpiated  crime  of 
the  partifans  of  Megacles,  Solon  therefore,  having  now  acquired 
great  confederation  with  all  parties,  again  Hepped  forth,  and  had  in- 
fluence fufficient  to  perfuade  the  accufed  peaceably  to  abide  a  trial,  to 
which  the  adminiftration  of  the  republic  was  unable  to  compel  them. 
They  were  condemned  to  exile  :  but  this  punifhment  upon  the  living 
was  deemed  infufficient  to  fecure  the  commonwealth  from  the  venge- 
ance of  the  affronted  deity :  the  bones  of  thofe  who  had  died  were 
removed  beyond  the  mountains. 

Meanwhile  the  Megareans,  taking  advantage  of  thefe  domeflic 
troubles,  retook  Salamis.  SuperfHtion  now  acquired  the  afcendant, 
in  the  room  of  faction,  over  the  active  minds  of  the  Athenians.  Phan- 
toms were  reported  to  have  been  feen,  and  various  ominous  circum- 
stances to  have  happened,  and  the  priefts  loudly  exclaimed  that  expia- 
tions and  purifications  were  neceflary  to  avert  the  portended  anger  of 
the  gods  All  contributed  to  produce  in  the  people  a  difpofition  favor- 
able to  the  purpofe  of  reforming  the  government;  and  Solon  was  watch- 
ful to  every  turn.  Epimeneides,  a  Cretan  philofopher,  had  extenfive 
reputation  for  fkill  in  the  divinity  of  the  age.  He  was  invited  to  take 
upon  him,  in  this  feafon  of  alarm,  the  fuperintendance  of  the  reli- 
gion 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  249 

gion  of  Athens.  Solon  lived  in  intimate  friendfhip  with  him;  and  CHAP. vr. 
together  they  laid  the  foundation  of  various  improvements  in  the  SECT.  HI. 
government  and  jurifprudence  of  the  republic.  Epimeneides  was 
the  ofteniible  director  of  everything  :  but  he  innovated  in  little  more 
than  to  order  the  performance  of  facrifices  and  proceffions,  with  great 
pomp,  and  fome  new  ceremonies  ;  in  which  his  view  feems  princi- 
pally to  have  been  to  bring  the  people,  through  the  influence  of  religion, 
recommended  by  dazzling  fplendor  and  alluring  amufement,  to  a  more 
fettled  difpofition  toward  good  order  and  fober  conduct:.  One  only 
regulation  beiides  is  attributed  to  him  :  he  reftrained  the  ufual  excefs 
of  public  mourning  for  deceafed  relations,  which  had  often  led  to 
tumult ;  being  conducted,  after  the  manner  of  many  barbarous  na- 
tions, and  of  the  provincial  Irifh  to  this  day,  with  public  and  cla- 
morous lamentation  and  weeping,  in  which  the  women  bore  a  prin- 
cipal part.  By  degrees  internal  quiet  was  reftored  to  Athens,  and 
Epimeneides  took  his  leave.  High  honors  and  valuable  prefents  were 
decreed  to  him  by  the  ftate  for  his  fervices.  He  refufed  all,  and  re- 
queued only  a  branch  of  the  facred  olive-tree  which  grew  in  the  Plut.  Solon, 
acropolis,  faid  to  be  the  parent  of  its  kind,  and  to  have  iprung  from  c.  55. ' 
the  ground  at  the  command  of  the  goddefs  Minerva.  This  being 
granted  him,  he  returned  to  Crete.  When  fuperior  abilities  have  ac- 
quired influence  to  one  man  over  the  many,  fuch  oftentatious  difin- 
tereftednefs  beyond  all  things  confirms  their  power;  and  it  is  in  times 
only  when  honorable  poverty  may  be  an  object  even  of  ambition  to 
men  of  fuperior  talents,  that  great  reformations  in  a  ftate  are  to  be 
expected. 

The  quiet  of  Athens  was  not  likely  to  be  lafling ;  for  three  poli- 
tical parties  ftill  diitracted  its  little  territory.  One  was  for  democra- 
tical  government.  It  was  principally  compofed  of  the  landholders 
of  the  mountainous  tract,  where  property  was  much  divided.  Ano- 
ther was  for  keeping  all.  political  fway  in  the  hands  of  the  wealthy; 
and  among  thefe  the  richer  poffeffors  of  the  plain  were  leaders.  A 
third  party,  of  more   difinterefted   and   moderate  men,   preferred  a 

K  k  mixture 


25°  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  VI.  m;xti]re  of  oligarchy  with  democracy.  The  principal  Arength  of 
this  party  lay  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  coaft.  Hence  thele 
factions  were  long  known  at  Athens  by  the  names  of  the  parties  of 
the  highlands,  the  lowlands,  and  the  coaft.  But  there  was  another 
divifion  of  the  Attic  people,  from  which  danger  was  yet  more 
threatening,  into  the  party  of  the  rich  and  the  party  of  the  poor. 
Almoft  all  the  ancient  commonwealths  of  which  any  accounts  re- 
main, have  been  violently  agitated  through  the  confequences  of  un- 
equal property.  This  gave  occaiion  to  the  divifion  of  lands  at  Sparta  ; 
this  caufed  many  alterations  in  the  conftitution  of  Rome  j  and  this 
was  the  immediate  motive  for  the  appointment  of  Solon  to  be  law- 
giver of  Athens.  The  operation  of  wealth  has  been  remarkably 
fimilar  in  the  different  republics.  Everywhere  the  laws  have  given 
to  the  lender  certain  rights  over  the  perfon  of  the  borrower.  Thus 
the  wealthy,  to  the  power  always  attending  property,  added  a  power 
not  originally  intended  by  the  conftitution,  yet  derived  from  the 
laws,  and  confirmed  by  them.  The  indifcretion  of  the  needy  has 
always  cooperated  at  firft  with  the  ambition  of  the  rich  to  increafe 
that  power.  The  indifcretion  of  the  rich  afterward,  indulging  a 
difpofition  to  avarice  and  tyranny,  has  at  length  urged  the  poor  to 
refill:  an  authority  to  which  themfelves  had  contributed  to  give  the 
fanction  of  law.  At  Athens  an  infolvent  debtor  became  flave  to  his 
creditor  ;  and  not  himfelf  only,  but  his  wife  and  children  alfo,  if 
lefs  would  not  anfwer  the  debt.  Sometimes  a  debtor  would  fell  his 
children  to  fave  himfelf.  Power  on  one  fide,  and  refources  on  the 
other,  both  fo  abhorrent  from  humanity,  neceifarily  produced  a  vio- 
lent irritation  in  the  minds  of  the  poor  againft  the  rich.  Moil  dan- 
gerous diffenfions  were  on  the  point  of  breaking  out,  and  many  fober 
men,  fays  Plutarch,  began  to  think  that  nothing  lefs  than  the 
Solon.  eftabliftiment  of  regal  power,  or,  as  it  was  then  called,  a  tyranny, 

could  prevent  greater  evils.  In  this  ftate  of  things  the  fuperior  cha- 
racter of  Solon  drew  the  attention  of  all  parties.  He  was  obnoxious 
to  none  :  not  to  the  lower  people,  becaufe,  tho  rich,  he  never  op- 

preffed 


Plutarch. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  *5i 

preffed  any  :  not  to  the  higher,  becaufe,  tho  adverfe  to  their  private    CHAP.  VI, 
tyranny,  he  favored  their  political  power.     His  fuperior  wifdom  had    ^^l11]' 
been  approved ;  his  integrity  was   believed  above  all  influence ;  and 
he  was  refpected  univerfally.     His  character  was  thus  great,  not  only 
in  Athens,  but  throughout  Greece.     The  part  he  had  taken  in  the 
vindication  of  the  temple  of  Delphi  againft  fome  attempts  of  the 
Cirrhaeans,    in   confequence   of  which   a  body   of  Athenian   forces 
marched  to  affift  the  AmphicTyons,  had  greatly  extended  his  reputa-   g  rj.  562. 
tion.     His  friends  therefore  fucceeded  in  procuring  him  the  appoint-  .  Nm 

C) I     X 1 V 1     1  * 

ment,  by  univerfal  confent,  to"oearchon,  with  power  to  reform  the   B.C.  594. 
laws  and  conftitution  of  the  ftate.  B' 


SECTION     IV. 

Reformation  of  the  Athenian  Government  and  Jurifprudence  by  Solon. 

BARBAROUS  ages  are  moft  favorable  for  legiflation.  Hiftory  CHAP.Vi. 
affords  few  inftances  of  great  improvement  in  the  conftitution  of  SECT.  IV- 
polifhed  ftates.  The  means  there  can  fcarcely  occur  but  through 
fome  violent  convulfion,  threatening  fubverfion,  confounding  all 
eftablifliments,  and  reducing  things  to  the  chaos  of  barbarifm.  The 
Englifh  conftitution  ftands"  lingular  in  the  circumftance  of  its  gradual 
improvements.  But  the  materials  of  its  foundation,  derived  from 
German  forefb,  were  arranged  by  the  great  Alfred  in  days  of  the 
deepeft  barbarifm  :  and  for  our  jurifprudence,  by  the  acknowlege- 
ment  of  our  greateft  lawyers,  it  received  more  improvement  in  the 
two  reigns  of  Henry  the  Second  and  Edward  the  Firft  than  in  all  the 
centuries  fince.  The  friends  of  Scion  appear  to  have  been  aware  of 
the  greater  difficulty  of  political  reformation  among  an  inlio;htened   Plutarch. 

o  J  r  00  Solon. 

people,  when,  doubting  the  fufficiency  of  the  authority  given  him 
to  reprefs  the  effects  of  party,  and  curb  the  interfering  ambition  of 
powerful  individuals,  they  offered  to  aflifl  him  in  affuming  royalty, 
and  with  a  high  hand  molding  all  things  to  his  own  pleafure.     But 

K  k  2  Solon 


252  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  vi.  Solon  was  wife  enough  for  his  own  fake  to  refufe  that  dangerous 
^_ -'_,__,'  preeminence;  and  for  the  fake  of  his  country  to  avoid  attempting 
thofe  fundamental  changes  for  which  he  faw  the  feafon  was  now  part. 
Bold  as  we'll  as  virtuous,  he  had  yet  neither  the  daring  nor  the  fe- 
vere  temper  of  the  Spartan  lawgiver  ;  but  each  feems  to  have  been 
born  for  his  own  age  and  his  own  country. 

Like  Lycurgus,  Solon's  firft  object,  and  what  indeed  the  flate  of 
things  at  Athens  mod  urgently  demanded,  was  to  remedy  the  evils 
produced  by  inequality  of  poffefiions ;  to  reconcile  the  rich  with  the 
poor,  to  relieve  thefe  without  violently  offending  thofe.  But  Solon 
would  obviate  the  abufe,  not  abolifh  the  ufe  of  riches.  The  bufmefs 
was  of  extreme  nicety.  Accounts  differ  concerning  the  manner  in 
which  it  was  effected  ;  but  the  legiflator  at  length  brought  the  two 
parties  to  join  in  a  common  facrifice,  which  was  called  the  Seifach- 
theia,  or  feafl  of  the  delivery  from  burthens,  and  all  was  fettled  : 
probably,  as  fome  authors  have  related,  not  byannulling  the  debts, 
but  by  lowering  the  interefl ;  by  giving  means  of  advantage  to  the 
debtor  through  fome  alterations  in  the  value  of  money;  and  efpe- 
cially  by  taking  from  the  creditor  all  power  over  the  perfons  of  the 
debtor  and  his  family. 

This  mofr.  difficult  and  dangerous  bufinefs  being  accommodated, 
Solon  proceeded  to  regulate  the  constitution  of  the  commonwealth. 
We  are  told  that  Lycurgus,  being  afked  why  he,  who  in  other  re- 
fpects  appeared  fo  zealous  for  the  equal  rights  of  men,  did  not  make 
his  government  democratical,  rather  than  oliearchal,  *  Go  you,'  the 

Plutarch.  &  .      °  /  , 

Apoph.  La-  legiflator  anfwered,  '  and  try  a  democracy  in  your  own  houfe.  Solon 
was  not  unaware  of  the  evils  inherent  in  that  turbulent  form  of  rule; 
but  he  found  a  predilection  for  it  fo  rooted  in  the  minds  of  his  fel- 
lowcountrymen,  that  he  feared  to  attempt  a  change,  and  fought 
only  to  obviate  its  inconveniencies.  To  every  free  Athenian,  there- 
fore, was  preferved  his  equal  vote  in  the  Assembly  of  the  People, 
which  remained  fupreme  in  all  cafes  legiflative,  executive,  and  judi- 
cial j  a  foundation  of  evil  fo  broad,  that  all  the  wifdom  of  Solon's 

other 


con. 


HISTORY    OF     GREECE.  253 

other  regulations  was  weak  againft  it.   Yet  his  other  regulations  were    CHAP.  VI. 
reolete  with  wifdom.  SECT.  IV. 

It  were  however  difficult,  if  not  impoffible,  by  the  moft  accurate  col- 
lection of  what  remains  to  us  in  various  ancient  authors,  to  afcertain 
what  was  at  any  time,  in  every  particular,  the  form  of  government 
of  Athens  ;  nor  have  we  the  means  of  always  determining  what  was, 
and  what  was  not,  of  the  inftitution  of  Solon.  The  learned  arch- 
bhhop  Potter,  after  all  his  labors,  leaves  us  in  the  dark  concerning 
fome  circumftances  which  we  might  wiih  to  have  better  elucidated  : 
for  if  it  were  only  on  account  of  the  efteem  in  which  they  were  held 
by  the  Romans,  who  mud:  have  been  impartial  as  well  as  othcrwife 
mo  ft  refpeclable  judges,  the  inftitutions  of  Solon  would  be  among  the 
'  greateft  objects  of  curiofity  in  all  antiquity.  Indeed  they  may  be  con- 
sidered, in  fome  degree,  as  the  fountain  of  all  the  legiflation  and  juris- 
prudence of  Europe;  being  the  acknowleged  model  of  the  Roman 
law,  which  has  formed  that  of  the  other  European  nations,  and  con- 
tributed confiderable  improvements  even  to  our  own.  In  thus  tracing 
modern  jurisprudence  upward,  we  arrive  indeed  at  a  very  remote 
Source.  Through  Rome  we  pafs  to  Athens,  to  Crete,  to  Egypt.  But 
it  is  in  the  constitution  and  practice  of  Athens  that  a  regular  and  Sci- 
entific jurisprudence  firft  becomes  known  to  us  in  any  detail :  and  tho 
Athens  probably  gained  much  from  Crete,  firft  by  Thefeus,  then  by 
Epimeneides,  yet  thofe  improvements,  that  poliih,  which  formed  the 
peculiar  merit  of  its  conftitution,  have  by  the  confent  of  all  been  at- 
tributed to  Solon. 

In  the  inquiry  then  what  the  Athenian  conftitution  was,  it  will  be  firft 
neceflary  to  take  a  view  of  the  component  members  of  the  Athenian 
commonwealth;  becaufe  in  thefe  it  differed  So  widely  from  every  thing 
in  modern  Europe,  that  this  alone  Suffices  to  prevent  any  clofe  reSem- 
blance  in  almoft  any  particular.  The  reSults  of  two  polls  of  Athe- 
nian citizens  remain  reported  to  us;  one  taken  in  the  time  of  Pe- 
ricles, the  other  in  that  of  Demetrius  Phalereus.  By  the  firft  they 
were  found  to  be  no  more  than  fourteen  thoufand  and  forty  perfons  j 

probably 


254  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  vi.  probaMy  men  above  the  age  of  thirty,  before  which  they  feem  not 
SECT.  JV.  to  have  been  legally  competent  to  vote  in  the  affembly  of  the  people; 
tho  of  this  we  are  not  fully  affured.  At  the  fecond  period  the  Athe- 
nian citizens  were  twenty-one  thoufand;  and  at  the  fame  time  there 
were  found  refident  in  Attica  ten  thoufand  Freemen  of  age  to  pay 
the  capitation-tax,  who  had  not  the  rights  of  Athenian  citizens,  be- 
ing either  foreigners,  or  of  foreign  extraction,  or  freed  Haves,  or 
defcended  from  fuch  ;  all  comprehended  under  the  common  name  of 
Metoikoi  ;  and  the  slaves  in  actual  bondage,  men,  women,  and 
children,  were  no  lefs  than  four  hundred  thoufand*.  This  propor- 
tion of  flaves  to  freemen,  in  a  commonwealth  fo  boaftful  of  liberty 
as  its  darling  paflion,  aftonifhes.  Not  that  it  is  difficult  to  account 
for  either  the  origin,  or  this  enormous  increafe  of  flavery  in  the  pro- 
grefs  of  fociety.  For  favages  can  exift  only  where  they  are  few  in 
proportion  to  the  territory  they  have  to  wander  over.  Where  num- 
bers increafe,  agriculture  becomes  neceffary  to  fubfiftence,  and  the 
favage  ftate  ends.  Still,  while  men  are  contented  with  neceffaries, 
moderate  labor  fuffices,  in  a  favorable  foil  and  climate,  to  maintain  a 
family.  But  when,  arts  advancing,  wants  increafe  ;  when  thofe  who 
cultivate  the  foil  are  only  a  fmall  portion  of  thofe  to  be  fed  by  it ;  the 
degree  of  labor  then  wanting  from  the  numbers  employed,  to  pro- 
cure from  the  earth  a  cheap  abundance  of  its  mcil  valuable  and 
neceffary  productions,  is  fo  extremely  irkfome,  that  nothing  lefs 
than  conitant  practice  from  early  years  can  make  it  tolerable.  Few 
people  in  eafy  circumftances  have  any  juft  idea  of  this.  Liv- 
ing moftly  in  towns,  they  talk  with  ignorant  envy  of  the  healthy 
labors  of  the  peafant.  Thofe  labors  of  the  peafant,  not  generally 
adverie  to  health  indeed,  unfailingly  bring  on  immature  old  age. 
The    limbs   early   lliffen  :    they  bear    the   accuftomed  labor,   which 

*  There  has  been  confiderable  difagreement  lies  in   the  preface  to  his  excellent  tranflation 

among  modern  writers  concerning  the  manner  of  the  Orations  of  Lyfias  and  Ifocrates.      He 

in   which   the   accounts  of  the   population  of  has  however  avoided  the  important  queflion  at 

Attica  remaining  in  ancient  authors,  and  par-  what  age  the  Athenians  became  competent  to 

ticularly  that  of  Athena;us,   which  is  of  moft  vote  in  the  afiembly  of  the  people;  probably 

confequence,  are  to  be  understood.      The  fub-  having  found  that  means  are  not  remaining  for 

jed  has  been  judicioufly  dilcufled  by  Dr.  Gil-  deciding  it. 

no 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  255 

no  others  can  bear:  but  they  lofe  that  general  power  of  brifk  exertion    CHAP.  \  I, 

which  we  call  activity.     The  internal  frame  at  the  fame  time  wears;      t       '    / 

and  even  the  luxurious  fometimes  reach  a  length  of  days   which  the 

hard-laboring  man    never    fees.      When   warlike    people   therefore, 

emerging  from  the  favage  ftate,    firft  fet  about  agriculture,   the  idea 

of  fparing   the  lives   of  prifoners,    en  condition  of  their  becoming 

ufeful  to  the  conquerors  by  labor,  was  an  obvious  improvement  upon 

the  practice  of  former  times,  when  conquered  enemies  were  conftantly 

put  to  death  ;    not  from  a  fpirit  of  cruelty,  but  from  necemtyj   for  the 

conquerors  were  unable  to  maintain  them  in  captivity,  and  dared  not 

fet  them  free.     Slavery  thus  eflablifbed,  it  is  eafy  to  conceive  how 

it  would  increafe.     In  infant  focieties  labor  cannot  be  hired  ;   becaufe 

all  can  empioy  themielves  in  their  own  concerns.     Hence  the  necef- 

fitv  for  flavery  in  our  colonies.     Tradition  ftill  in  Herodotus's  age   Herodot.l.vu 

-  p.  1 37. 

preferved  memory  of  the  time  when  flavery  was  unknown  in  Greece; 

but  before  Homer,  as  we  have  feen,  flaves  were  numerous.  Through- 
out Greece  the  fave-trade  became  as  regular  a  branch  of  commerce  as 
now  in  the  Well  Indies.  Athens  had  its  flave-market.  But  hired 
labor,  which  formerly  could  not  be  had,  then  became  little  defirable. 
The  poor  therefore,  to  fubfift,  muft  either  emigrate,  or  become  volun- 
tary flaves,  like  the  indented  fervants  of  America ;  which  we  are 
told  was  not  uncommon.  Thus  we  fee  the  great  fuperority  in  num- 
ber of  flaves  to  freemen  at  Athens  accounted  for.  The  difproportion 
was  greater  at  Lacedxmon,  and  fcarcely  inferior  over  Greece  *  :  tho 
it  was  probably  not  fo  great  in  the  age  of  Solon,  as  it  was  become  in 
that  of  Demetrius  Phalereus. 

From  this  view  of  things  then,  it  appears  that  Democracy  was 
a  mode  of  government  not  fo  abfolutely  abfurd  and  impracticable 
among  the  Greeks,  as  it  would  be  where  no  flavery  is.  For  tho  in 
democracies  the  fupreme  power  was  nominally  veiled  in  all  the  peo- 
ple, yet  thofe  called  the  people,  who  exclusively  fhared  that  power, 

*  Thucydides  fays,  the  proportion  of  flaves  was  nowhere  greater  than  in  Chios,  except  in 
Laconia,    1.  viii.  c.  4.0. 

were 


256  HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  vi.     were  fcarcely  a  tenth  part  of  the  men  of  the  ftate.     The  people, 

SECT.  IV.  moreover,  were  almoft  all  in  circumftances  to  have  received  fome 
education,  and  to  fubfift  by  eafier  means  than  thofe  which,  through 
conftant  labor  of  the  body,  difable  the  mind  for  liberal  exer- 
tion. It  was  held  by  the  Grecian  politicians  as  a  felf-evident  pro- 
portion, that  thole  who  are  to  fliare  in- government  mould  have  the 
means  of  living  independently  in  leifure ;  and  the  only  queftion  was, 
how  in  a  democracy  thofe  means  mould  be  fecured  to  a  whole  people  *. 
Slavery  however  was  abfolutcly  neceffary ;   and  hence,  tho  it  was  dif- 

Ariftot. Polit.  puted  by  fome  philofophers,  yet  Ariftotle  maintains  that  flavery  is 
natural  among  mankind.  The  fame  great  author  fuppofes  a  common- 
wealth confuting  of  thirteen  hundred  families  ;  of  which  one  thou- 
fand  fhould  be  rich,  and  three  hundred  poor.    Antiently  in  Colophon, 

c,  ,,'  he  adds,   mod  of  the  citizens  had  large  property.     The  proportion  of 

flaves  muft  of  courfe  be  great.  In  Lacedasmon,  as  we  have  feen,  the 
conftitution  required  that  every  freeman  fhould  be  ftrictly  a  gentle- 
man ;  and  in  the  reft  of  Greece,  fcarcely  any  were  fo  low  as  our  la- 
borers and  handicraftfmen.  At  Athens  all  the  people  were  paid  out 
of  the  public  treafury  for  attendance  on  the  public  bufinefs  ;  which 
thus  afforded  means  of  fupport  in  fome  degree  for  the  poor;  at  the 
fame  time  inabling  them  to  intermit  bodily  labor,  and  incouraging 
application  of  the  mind. 

But  Sovereign  Fower  being  thus  vefted  in  the  General  As- 
sembly  of  the  People,  it  was  of  great  confequence,  to  afcertain 
who  were  Athenian  People,  legally  intitled  to  that  high  privi- 
lege; and  to  provide  effectually  for  the  exclulion  of  thofe  who  were 
not  fo.  Attica  had  been  divided  in  very  early  times,  it  is  faid  by 
Cecrops,  in  a  manner  very  nearly  analogous  to  that  of  our  own  coun- 
try by  the  great  Alfred,  into  fhires,  hundreds  and  tythings.  Thefe 
divifions  of  Attica,  in  the  courfe  of  ages,  underwent  changes  both 
of  name  and  effect ;  and  two  of  the  three  feem  to  have  remained  of 

*    Oti  /asv  ouf  ou  t>>  fitT&ovoy   xx?.u<;  7rcXtT£i.'£trSai      tr»'     Tlva.  ol  T£S7roy  ijra^ttv  oi   facto*  tacj&ii'.   Anil. 
rnt    nrm    atxyxcciutt    iirx^%ii*  &%*>,*,>    oitoAoyoi^fKit     Volit.  1.  ii.  c.  9, 

principal 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  257 

principal  ufe,  the  Phylx,  and  the  Demi,  which  our  writers  on  Greek     CHAP.  vi. 
hiftoryhave  ufually  tranflated  tribes  and  boroughs.     The  tribes,  from    SJ^71*)  " 
Cecrops   till   about  fifty  years   after  Solon,  were  only  four.     A  new 
divifion  was  then  made  of  the  country  and  people  into  ten  tribes;  and 
the  boroughs  were  one  hundred  and  feventy-four.    Each  tribe  or  phyle 
had  its  prefiding  magiftrate,  called  Phylarchus  or  Epimeletes  Phyles, 
analogous  to  our  fheriff;  and  each  borough  or  demos  its  Demarchus, 
analogous  to  our  conftable  or  headborough.      It  is  remarkable  that  as 
the  title  of  King,   Baiileus,  was  fcrupuloufly  preferved  to  the  high- 
prieft,  or   perfon  prefiding  over  the  religious  concerns  of  the  Attic 
nation,  fo   the  prelident  of  the  religious  concerns  of  each  tribe  was 
intitled  Phylobafileus,  King  of  the  tribe  ;  and  he  was  always  appointed 
from  among  the  nobly  born,    the  eupatrides.     Every  child   born  to 
the  privileges  of  an  Athenian  was  carefully  regiftered  foon  after  birth. 
Youths  at  eighteen  were  entered  in  a  fecond  regifler,  when  they  were 
reckoned  among  the  Ephebi,  and   became   liable  to   military  duties 
within  Attica.     At  twenty,  being  efteemed  men,  they  were  introduced 
at  a  public  meeting  of  their  demos,  and  were  regiftered  a  third  time. 
If  democracy  was  a  form  of  government   defirable  for  any  people 
that  ever  exifted,  the  Lacedemonians  muft  have  been  above  all  others 
competent   for  it.     Yet   Lycurgus  deemed  it  unfit    even    for    thofe 
among  whom  was  no  difference  of  rank,  or  riches,  or  education,    but 
who  were  all  equally  and  with  afliduous  attention  bred  for  the  bufi- 
nefs  of  the  commonwealth  only,  and  to  all  of  whom  equally  he  meant 
to  fecure  the  moft  perfect  freedom  of  which  mankind  in  fociety  is 
capable.    Solon  therefore,  evidently  more  in  neceilary  compliance  with 
the  temper  of  the  times  than  in  purfuance  of  what  himielf  thought 
beft,  having  confirmed  to  the  Affembly  of  the  People  a  power  more 
univerfalfy  and  uncontrolably   abfolute   than  any  defpot  upon  earth 
ever  did  or  ever  can  poffefs,  his  great  concern  was  to  eftablifh  fome 
balancing  power,  capable  in  fome  degree  of  obviating  the  evils  which 
a  fovereign  multitude  is  ever  ready  to  bring  upon  itfelf.     Thefeus,  as 
we  have  feen,  had  divided  the  Attic  people  into  three  ranks,  or  per- 

L  1  haps 


z58  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  VI.  jiapS  rather  into  two  ranks,  tho  there  were  three  claries ;  and  by  his 
SECT.  IV.  jaw  triofe  Qf  t]-je  £rrj-  rank;  were  alone  competent  for  magiftracy  of 
any  kind.  '  Various  changes  feem  to  have  been  made  after  him,  as 
it  Anted  the  intereft  of  leaders  of  prevailing  factions  to  inlarge  or  to 
abridge  the  privileges  of  the  lower  orders ;  and,  when  Solon  under- 
took the  legiflation,  contradictory  precedents  had  been  fo  numerous 
as  nearly  to  have  overturned  all  rule.  That  lawgiver  made  a  new 
divifion  of  the  people  into  Four  Ranks,  determined  merely  by  the 
value  of  every  man's  poffeflions.  Magistracies  he  confined  to  the 
Firft  Three  ;  leaving  to  the  Fourth  only  the  equal  Vote  of  every  Free- 
man in  the  AfTembly  of  the  People.  But  this  alone  fufficed  to  put  all 
power  into  the  hands  of  thofe  lead  capable  of  properly  exerciiing  it : 
for  the  fourth  rank,  being  more  numerous  than  all  the  others,  would, 
if  united,  of  courfe  be  omnipotent,  and  might  even  alter  the  confti- 
tution,   as  we  fhall  hereafter  find  they  did,   to  their  own  pleafure. 

Still  therefore  purfuing  his  view  of  forming  a  balance  againft  the 
indifcretion  of  the  multitude,  Solon  inftituted  a  new  Council  or 
Senate,  confiding  of  one  hundred  perfons  out  of  each  of  the  four 
tribes  which  compofed  the  Attic  people.  Such  an  affembly  he  hoped 
would  have  a  weight  which  the  College  of  Archons  had  been  unable  to 
maintain.  To  it  therefore  he  committed  many  of  the  powers  which 
had  before  belonged  to  thofe  magiftrates.  But  this  Council  becomes 
more  known  to  us  after  the  iiicreafe  of  the  number  of  Tribes  to  ten; 
when  Fifty  Counlellors  were  appointed  out  of  each,  making  the  whole 
number  five  hundred;  whence  it's  common  title  was  the  Coun- 
cil of  Five  Hundred,  or  fometimes  limply  the  Five  Hundred. 
The  members  were  appointed  annually  by  lot  from  among  thofe 
of  the  Athenian  people  legally  qualified  for  the  dignity  who  were 
defirous  of  obtaining  it.  But  previoufly  to  their  admifllon  they 
were  to  undergo  a  ftrict  inquiry  concerning  their  paft  life,  which 
was  termed  Dokimafia  ;  when,  if  any  thing  could  be  proved  prejudi- 
cial to  their  character,  they  were  to  be  rejected.  The  counfellors  of 
each  tribe  in  turn,  for  the  fpace  of  thirty-five  days,  had  fuperior  dig- 
nity 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  259 

nity  and  additional  powers,  with  the  title  of  Prytanes  ;  and  from  CHAP.  VI. 
them  the  council-hall  was  called  Prytaneium.  The  prytanes  were  SECT.  IV. 
again  hy  turns  Presidents  of  the  council ;  and  each  held  that  high 
office  only  one  day ;  during  which  he  had  the  cuftody  of  the  public 
feal,  of  the  keys  of  the  treafury,  and  of  the  keys  of  the  citadel.  The 
whole  affembly  formed  the  Council  of  State  of  the  commonwealth, 
having  conftant  charge  of  its  political  concerns.  It  was  moreover  a 
particular  and  very  important  function  of  this  council  to  prepare  bufi- 
nefs for  the  Affembly  of  the  People ;  in  which,  according  to  Solon's 
conltitution,  nothing  was  to  be  propofed  which  had  not  fir  ft  been  ap- 
proved here.  But  the  powers  which  he  had  already  ratified  to  that 
affembly  were  too  preponderant  for  any  certain  reftraint.  Whenever, 
at  the  inftigation  of  a  factious  demagogue,  it  defired  more,  it  might 
demand  and  take. 

Aware  how  much  the  bufinefs  of  all  is  liable  to  be  confidered  as 
the  bufinefs  of  none,  Solon,  having  given  fovereign  power  to  the 
people,  would  not  leave  it  to  their  choice  to  neglect  its  duties.  Upon 
this  principle  refts  that  lingular,  but  furely  wife  ordinance,  That  thofe 
fhould  be  held  criminal  who  took  no  part  in  civil  commotions.  For 
as  it  is  notorioufly  the  honefter  men  who  are  generally  moft  difpofed 
to  be  quiet  on  fuch  occafions,  nothing  feems  fo  likely  to  fecure  the 
constitution  as  compelling  all  men  to  interfere.  For  the  fame  rea- 
fon  the  legiflator  provided  means  to  inforce  the  attendance  of  the 
people  at  the  general  affemblies.  Four  were  regularly  to  be  held 
during  the  prefidency  of  each  prytaneia,  which,  as  we  have  feen,  was 
for  a  term  of  thirty-five  days;  and  each  of  thefe  affemblies  had  its 
ftated  bufinefs.  That  of  the  hrft  was  principally  to  approve  or  reject 
magistrates  ;  to  receive  accufations  of  public  offences  prefented  by  the 
Thefmothete  Archonsj  and  to  hear  the  catalogue  of  fines  and  conhT- 
cations  for  public  Service.  The  fecond  inaded  laws  and  received  peti- 
tions, relative  either  to  the  public  or  to  private  perfons.  The  peculiar 
bufinefs  of  the  third  was  to  <nve  audience  to  the  ministers  of  foreign 
powers.    The  concerns  of  religion  were  the  fole  object  of  the  fourth. 

L  1  2  Often 


260  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  VI.  Qften  the  bufinefs  of  thefe  afiemblies  would  be  little  interesting  to 
SECT.  IV.  jj^g  pe0ple  jn  general ;  yet  great  inconvenience  might  follow  from 
want  of  due  attendance.  When  therefore  the  people  were  remifs, 
which  feems  to  have  been  common,  the  magistrates  fhut  all  the  city- 
gates  except  one,  by  which  the  people  were  permitted  to  pafs  only  to 
the  affembly  :  they  caufed  all  vendibles  to  be  removed  from  the  mar- 
kets ;  and  they  fent  about  their  attendants  holding  an  extended  cord, 
prepared  with  a  dye  for  the  purpofe,  with  which  they  marked  all  they 
overtook,  and  thofe  fo  marked  were  fined.  All  who  attended  in  due 
time  received  a  fmall  pay  from  the  treafury.  To  keep  order  in  fa 
large  a  meeting,  nine  Proedri,  Foremen,  were  appointed  by  lot  from 
the  council  j  one  from  each  of  thofe  tribes  which  were  not  at  the 
time  prytanes.  From  thefe  nine  the  EpiStates,  Chairman  or  Speaker 
of  the  affembly,  was  appointed  by  lot.  With  them  fat  the  Nomophy- 
laces,  from  their  number  called  the  Eleven,  whofe  peculiar  duty  it  was 
to  be  watchful  over  the  laws,  and  to  explain  to  the  people  the  ten- 
dency of  any  propofals  contrary  to  the  fpirit  of  the  constitution.  The 
Prytanes  had  diStinct  powers  in  the  affembly,  which  were  consider- 
able. 

The  members  of  the  Grecian  democracies,  fenfible,  from  frequent 
experience,  of  the  uncertain  power  of  reafon  over  a  multitude,  and 
of  the  evils  liable  to  arife  from  the  fluctuating  and  inflammable  nature 
of  popular  paffion,  deviled  or  admitted  various  precautions  to  pre- 
vent themfelves  from  being  led  to  acts  to  their  own  prejudice.    It  was 

Diodor.  Sic.    orQia;neci  by  Charondas,   the  celebrated  lawgiver  of  the  Thurians  of 
i.  xu.  e.  17.  .        /  ° 

Italy,  that  whofoever  would  propofe  to  abrogate  an  old  law  or  inacl 
a  new  one,  Should  come  into  the  affembly  with  a  halter  about 
his  neck  ;  and  death  was  to  follow  if  his  propofal  was  rejected.  Solon 
was  not  fo  rigid.  Aware  that  regulations  the  beft  adapted  to  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  commonwealth  at  one  time,  might  not  equally 
fuit  thofe  of  another,  he  injoined  an  annual  revifal  of  the  laws ;  when, 
if  any  alteration  was  adjudged  in  the  affembly  of  the  people  to  be 
neceflaryj  the  Nomothetes,  a  court  confiding  of  a  thoufand  perfons, 

were 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  261 

were  directed  to  confider  of  the  beft  mode  of  alteration.  When  CHAP.  VI. 
thefe  had  prepared  a  new  law,  five  officers,  called  Syndics,  were  ap-  SECT.  IV. 
pointed  to  defend  the  old  before  the  afTembly ;  which  then  decided 
between  the  two.  In  any  other  manner  than  this  it  was  hazardous 
to  propofe  a  new  law  at  Athens.  A  law  palled  by  the  afTembly  with- 
out having  been  previoufly  published  as  the  conftitution  required  ;  a 
law  conceived  in  ambiguous  or  fallacious  terms  ;  or  a  law  contrary 
to  any  former  law,  fubjected  the  propofer  to  penalties.  Jt  was  there- 
fore ufual  to  repeal  the  old  law  before  a  contrary  new  one  was  pro- 
pofed;  and  the  delay  thus  occafioned  was  an  additional  fecurity  to 
the  conftitution. 

The  regular  manner  of  Inacting  a  Law  at  Athens  was  thus  : 
The  bill  was  to  be  prepared  by  the  council.  But  any  Athenian, 
having  anything  to  propofe  for  public  conlideration,  might  addrefs 
it  to  the  Prytanes,  whofe  duty  it  was  to  receive  all  petitions  and  in- 
formations, and  tranfmit  them  to  the  council.  If  approved  there, 
it  became  a  Probouleuma,  analogous  to  our  parliamentary  bill  pre- 
pared by  a  committee  ;  and,  being  then  written  on  a  tablet,  was 
expofed  during  feveral  days  for  public  perufal  and  conlideration.  At 
the  next  afTembly  it  was  red  to  the  people.  This  being  done,  pro- 
clamation was  made  by  the  public  crier  in  thefe  terms :  *  Who  of 
'  thofe  above  fifty  years  old  chufes  to  fpeak  ?'  When  thefe,  if  any 
were  fo  difpofed,  had  made  their  orations,  the  crier  again  proclaimed, 
'  Any  Athenian,  not  difqualified  by  law,  may  fpeak.'  The  difquali- 
fying  circumftances  were,  having  fled  from  their  colors  in  battle,  be- 
ing deeply  indebted  to  the  commonwealth,  or  having  been  ever  con- 
victed of  any  heinous  crime.  But  the  Prytanes  had  a  general  power 
to  injoin  lilence  to  any  man  at  difcretion.  Without  fome  fuch. power 
lodged  fomewhere,  the  bufinefs  of  the  afTembly  might  be  endlefs  •> 
yet  it  was,  no  doubt,  necefTary  for  the  Prytanes  to  exercife  this  power 
in  fubordination  to  the  pleafure  of  the  majority  of  the  afTembly.  The 
debates  being  ended,  the  crier,  at  the  command  of  the  Proedri,  fig- 
nified  to  the  people  that  the  buiinefs  waited  their  determination  ;  when 

fufTrages 


2^2  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  VI.    fuffrages  were  given  by  holding  up  hands.     This  was  the  ordinary 

SECT.  IV.     nianner  of  voting:    but    in   fome  extraordinary  cafes,    particularly 

when  the   queftion  related    to   the   maladminiftration  of  magiftrates, 

votes  were  given  privately  by  carting  pebbles  into  veffels  prepared  by 

the  Prytanes.      The  Proedri  examined  the  fuffrages,  and  declared  the 

majority.     The  Prytanes  difmifled  the  affembly. 

We  fee,  in  the  conduct  of  this  bufinefs,  numerous  precautions 
wifely  taken  to  infure  regularity,  and  to  prevent  finifter  management, 
n  a  form  of  government  fo  naturally  difpofed  to  irregularity,  and  fo 
naturally  open  to  the  arts  of  deiigning  men.  But  Solon  hoped  to 
provide  a  farther  and  powerful  weight  in  the  balance  againfl  the  un- 
certainty and  turbulence  of  democratic  rule,  by  the  restoration  of  the 
court  of  Areopagus.  The  partiality  of  after-times  has  carried  the 
fame  of  this  celebrated  court  far  into  the  fabulous  ages ;  but  we  have 
no  authentic  account  of  its  origin  *.  The  institutions  of  Draco  had 
nearly  abolifhed  its  authority  and  fuperfeded  its  ufe.  Solon  reflored 
its  confequence,  improved  its  regulations,  and  augmented  its  powers. 
How  its  members  were  appointed  before  him  we  are  not  informed. 
By  his  inftitutions  it  was  compofed  of  thole  who  had  executed  the 
office  of  archon  with  credit;  all  of  whom,  having  palled  the  Doki- 
mafia,  or  fcrutiny  concerning  their  conduct  in  that  high  office,  were 
admitted  members  of  the  Areopagus.  This  feems  to  have  been  the 
only  dignity  of  the  Athenian  government  conferred  for  a  longer 
term  than  one  year:   the  Areopagites  were  for  life. 

The  power  of  this   court  was  very  great.     It  is  faid  to  have  been 
the  firft  that  ever  fat  upon  life  and  death  :  in  early  times  in  Greece, 

*  Archbifhop  Potter  apologizes,  feemingly  juftly  the  founder  of  that  court,  fuch  as  it  was 
unnecpffarily,  for  differing  from  fuch  refpect-  in  the  flourifhing  times  of  the  Athenian  corn- 
able  authors  as  Cicero  and  Plutarch,  who  call  monwealth.  Demofthenes  profefles  his  igno- 
Solon  the  founder  of  the  court  of  Areopagus,  ranee  of  its  origin  (i ),  of  which  he  fcarcely 
It  is  not  probable  that  Cicero  and  Plutarch  could  have  been  ignorant  had  it  been  no  older 
meant  to  deny  the  exiilence  of  the  court  of  than  Solon. 
Areopagus   before  Solon:   but  they  call  him 

fi)  Orat.  in  Ari.locratem. 

as 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  263 

as  throughout  weflern  Europe,  public  juflice  proceeding  no  farther  CHAP.  vi. 
againfl  the  mofl  atrocious  criminals  than  the  exaction  of  a  fine.  Ca-  SECT.  IV. 
pital  offences  among  the  Athenians  were,  for  the  moil  part,  connifable  ^^^^ 
by  this  court  only.  From  the  areopagus  alone  was  conilitutionally 
no  appeal  to  the  alTembly  of  the  people  :  yet,  if  that  aifembly  chofe 
to  interfere,  no  balancing  power  exiiled  in  the  Athenian  common- 
wealth capable  of  refilling  its  defpotic  will.  But  the  conilitution 
authorized  the  Areopagus  to  flop  the  effect  of  the  judicial  decrees  of 
the  aflcmbly  of  the  people  itlelf ;  to  annul  an  acquittal,  or  extend 
mercy  to  the  condemned.  The  Areopagus  directed  all  iifues  from  the 
public  treafury.  It  had  great  power  as  a  cenforial  court,  puniihing 
impiety,  immorality,  and  all  diforderly  conduct ;  not  merely  when 
accufations  were  brought ;  but  it  was  the  duty  of  the  areopagites  to 
watch  the  behaviour  of  the  citizens.  They  had  particularly  the  fu- 
perintendance  of  youth  j  and  it  was  their  duty  to  fee  that  all  were 
educated  fuitably  to  their  rank  and  fortune.  Idlenefs  was  a  crime  in 
Solon's  code,  and  came  particularly  under  their  connifance.  They 
were  to  inquire  llriclly  by  what  means  every  man,  not  of  known  pro- 
perty or  viiible  employment,  maintained  himfelf.  It  was  the  cuflom 
of  this  court,  for  judicial  buiinefs,  to  fit  only  in  the  night,  and  with- 
out light.  The  purpofe  of  this  Angularity  is  laid  to  have  been  that 
the  members  might  be  the  lefs  liable  to  prejudice  for  or  againfl  accu- 
fed  perfons.  It  was  for  the  fame  reafon  a  rule  that  pleaders  mould 
confine  themfelves  to  fimple  narration  of  facl,  and  flatement  of  the 
law,  without  any  ornament  of  fpeech,  or  any  attempt  to  warp  the 
judgement  by  appealing  to  the  paffions  of  the  judges.  The  reputa- 
tion of  this  court  for  wifdom  and  flricl  juflice,  and  very  remarkably 
for  the  refpedlable  characters  of  its  members,  was  long  extremely 
high  *. 

*  The  learned  dean  Humphrey  Prideaux  among  which  the  concluding  hyperbole  of  the 
(1)  has  fummed  up  the  principal  tellimonies  great  Tully  is  remarkable  :'  Areopagitis  a  So- 
to the  great  authority  and  high  reputation  of  '  lone  commirTa  eft  legum  cuflodia  (2).  Saepe 
the  court  of  Areopagus  in  the  following  words ;  '  igitur  injuftitiffi  et  temeritati  populi  reftitiffe, 

(1)  In  Marm.  I.  Oxon.  p.  351.  (2)'  Plutarch,  in  Solon,  et  Andocides  iriOrat.  de  Myfteriis. 

fepe 


254 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  VI. 
SECT.  IV. 


The  Athenian  conftitution,  for  (o  fmall  a  ftate,  was  very  complex. 
Befide  the  General  Affembly  and  the  Areopagus,  there  were  no  lefs 
than  ten  Courts  of  Judicature  in  Athens;  four  for  criminal 
caufes,  and  fix  for  civil.  In  the  eftablifhment  of  thefe  it  was  that 
Solon  moft  eminently  difplayed  both  his  honed;  zeal  for  the  equal  li- 
berties of  men,  and  his  ability,  as  a  legiflator,  to  devife  the  moft 
effectual  means  for  fecuring  them  :  here  we  fee  principally  exempli- 
fied the  idea  expreffed  in  his  celebrated  anfwer  reported  among  the 
fayings  of  the  kvcn  wifemen,   '  That,'   faid  Solon,  *  is  in  my  opinion 

*  the  moft  perfect  government  where  an  injury  to  any  one  is  the  con- 

*  cern  of   all.'     Before    that  lawgiver   the   Archons    were,    in    moil 

caufes,  fupreme  and  fole  judges.     Solon    directed  that,  in    the   ten 

courts  juft  mentioned,  caufes  fhould  be  decided  by  a  body  of  men, 

like  our  juries,  taken  for  the  purpofe  from  among  the  people;  the 

archons  only  prefiding  in  the  manner  of  our  judges,  and  fometimes 

carrying  the   bufinefs   through  the  neceffary  fteps   preparatory  to  the 

determination  of  a  jury,  as  in  our  courts  of  Weftminfter-hall.     But 

the    archons    being   appointed   by    lot,  and  confequently   often  very 

inefficient    for    fuch    bufinefs,     it    was   ufiul    for    each     to     chufe 

two   perfons   of  experience    to  affift    him    in  his   office.     Thefe,  in 

time,   became  regular  conftitutional  officers  by  the  name  of  Paredri, 

affeffors  ;  undergoing  the  fame  probation  as   the  archons  themfelves 

before  entering  on  their  office,  and  the  fame  fcrutiny  at  its  conclu- 

fion.     The  manner  of  appointing  the  jurors  was  thus.      A  fmall  pay 

from  the  treafury  induced  thofe  who  had  leifure  to  offer  themfelves. 

Any  Athenian,  above  thirty  years  of  age,  and  not  under  any  legal 


*  faepe  eorum  decreta  refcidifle,   memoiantur;      '  licam  (2).     Tamque   neceiTarium   ad  illam 

*  &    fine  eorum    approbatione  nihil    omnino     '   refte  inllituendam   eorum   Temper  videbatur 
«   majoris  momenti  Athenis,  ante  deminutam     '   confilium,   ut    de   illis    dicat    Cicero   Athe- 


*  eorum   per   Ephialtem   autoritatem,   de  re- 

*  publica  unquam  decernebatur  ( 1 ).     Totam 


'   nienfium  rempublicam  non  magis  po(Te  fine 
'   Areopagi  confilio,  quam  mundum  fine  pro- 


'  igitur,   ut  paucis  dicam,  regebant  rempub-     '  videntia  Dei,  adminiftrari  (3). 

(1)  Demofthen.  in  or.  con.  Androtioncm.  (2)  Suidas  in  voc.  "^pio?  cayo;,   &  Lyfus  in  or.  dc  proba- 

tion Evandri.  (3)  M.  T.  Cicero  de  Nat.  Dcor.  i.  2. 

dif- 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  265 

difqualification,  delivered  his  name  and  legal  defcription  to  the  thef-    CHAP.  VI, 
mothete  archons  ;  and  thefe  affigned  the  jurors  to  the  different  courts    SECT.  IV. 
by   lot.     This  is  that  department  in  the   machine   of  government 
which  ought  to  belong  to  the  people  at  large.      It  is  that  for  which 
they  are  mod  competent,  and  the  fecurity  of  property  and  equal  li- 
berty requires  that  they  mould  alone  poffefs  it. 

To  fave  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  from  the  inconvenient  ne- 
cefiity  of  going  to  Athens  for  juftice  in  cafes  of  inferior  confequence, 
itinerant  judges,  called  the  Forty,  were  appointed  to  go  through  the 
demi,  with  power  to  determine  actions  of  affault,  and  controverfies 
of  property  under  a  certain  value  *. 

In  all  the  Grecian  republics  every  freeman  was  bound  to  Mili- 
tary Service.  The  abundance  of  (laves  in  them  all  made  this 
both  practicable  and  neceflary,  which  in  countries  without  flaves 
would  be  neither.  The  flaves  by  their  labor  fupported  the  free- 
men in  arms  j  and  the  practice  of  arms  was  indifpenfible  for  every 
freeman,  if  it  were  only  to  preferve  that  afcendant  over  the  fuperior 
number  of  the  flaves,  without  which  property,  freedom,  and  life  it- 
felf  would  be  utterly  infecure.  Every  free  Athenian  therefore,  at 
the  age  of  eighteen,  was  inrolled  among  the  military.  His  duty,  for 
the  Firft  two  years,  was  confined  within  the  bounds  of  Attica.  The 
city-ffuard  of  Athens  was  chiefly  of  youths  under  twenty.  After 
that  age  till  forty  he  was  legally  compellable  to  any  foreign  fervice 
that  the  affairs  of  the  commonwealth  required.  Rank  and  property 
made  no  other  diftin&ion  than  giving  the  privilege  to  ferve  on  horfe- 
back;  which  was  at  the  fame  time  a  privilege  and  a  burthen ;  for  in 
Attica,  as  in  moll  of  the  Grecian  commonwealths,  every  man  of 
competent  property  was  bound  to  provide  and  maintain  a  horfe  for 
public  fervice. 

*  This  account  of  the  Athenian   conftitu-  quoted.       Petit's    collection    of   Attic    Laws, 

tion  has  been  taken  almoftintirely  from  Arch-  with     his   diffufe     comment    on     them,    may 

bifhop   Potter's   Grecian  Antiquities.      Thole  perhaps  then  attract  their  attention.      As  the 

who  are  deiirous  of  investigating  the  fubjeft  Archbifhop's  work  is  in  everybody's  hands,  I 

more  deeply  will  of  courfe  confult  that  valu-  have  thought  it  unneceflary  to  repeat  the  au- 

able  work,  and  the  numerous  authorities  there  thorities. 

M  m  The 


C.    I  I 


266  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP. v I.        The  Greeks  made  a  great  difiinction  between  the  heavy  and  the 

SECT.  IV.    light-armed   foot;    the  former  termed   Hoplites,  the    other  Piilos. 

P.  98.  of  this  The  Hoplites  wore  that  nearly  complete  armour  defcribed  in  treating 
of  the  Homeric  age :  he  carried  a  large  fhield,  and  his  principal  wea- 
pon was  a  long  fpear.  The  ufual  formation  of  this  heavy  foot  was 
in  a  large  compact  body,  termed  Phalanx,  in  which  the  files  were 
feldom  of  fewer  than  eight  men.  The  Pfilos  on  the  contrary  had 
very  imperfect  defenfive  armour;  he  carried  mifiile  weapons,  and  no 
fhield.  He  was  therefore  little  capable  of  ingaging  in  clofe  fight 
with  the  Hoplites.  Free  citizens  only  were  allowed  to  ferve  in  the 
heavy  foot.  The  light-armed  were  chiefly  flaves,  who  attended  upon 
the  Hoplitae,  and  who  alone  generally  did  all  duties  of  mere  fatigue. 
They  were  efleemed,  as  foldiers,  fo  inferior  to  the  heavy  foot,  that 
it  was  ufual,  in  reporting  the  numbers  of  Grecian  armies,  to  reckon 
the  heavy  foot  only,  tho  commonly  attended  by  at  leafl  an  equal 

Herodot.i.ix.  number  of  Pfili.  Upon  one  great  occafion  we  read  of  a  Lacedaemo- 
nian army  in  which  no  lefs  than  feven  flaves,  all  doing  duty  as  light- 
armed  foldiers,  attended  upon  every  Spartan  Hoplites.  But  tho  the 
Lacedaemonians,  and  in  general  the  Peloponnefians,  would  ferve  as 
heavy  foot  in  clofe  fight  only,  yet  the  Athenians,  and  apparently  moll 
of  the  northern  Greeks,  did  not  difdain  the  occafional  practice  of 
miflile  weapons.  They  then  took  a  fmaller  fhield,  termed  Pelta  ; 
and  hence  arofe  a  middle  order  of  foldiers  between  the  heavy  and  the 
light-armed,  called  Peltaftae,  who  carried  miliile  weapons,  yet  were 
not  incapable  of  clofe  fight. 

At  Athens  democratic  jealoufy  occafioned  a  very  inconvenient  fyf- 
tem  of  military  command.  What  were  the  military  inftitutions  of 
Solon  we  fhould  wifh  to  know,  beeaufe  he  was  himfelf  a  military 
man  of  fome  experience.  Probably  when  he  lefl'ened  the  civil  power 
of  the  college  of  archons,  the  military  authority  of  the  polernarch 
was  alio  abridged  j  for  in  the  end  we  find  that  officer  merely  a  civil 
magiflrate,  having  peculiar  jurifdiction  over  the  metoikoi,  thofe 
numerous  free  inhabitants  of  Attica  who  were  not  Athenian  citizens. 
But  we  are  not  informed  what  was  the  military   eftablifhmcnt  of 

Solon's 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  267 

Solon's  time.  When  afterward  the  Athenian  tribes  were  increafed  CHAP.  VI. 
to  ten,  every  tribe  had  its  own  military  commander.  Ten  generals,  SECT.  IV. 
therefore,  with  equal  rank,  commanded  the  forces  of  the  Athenian 
commonwealth.  All  were  not  font  together  on  foreign  expedi- 
tions :  but  at  home,  on  ordinary  occafions,  each  commanded  his 
day  in  turn  ;  the  ten  forming  a  council  of  war  to  decide  on  emer- 
gencies. The  inconveniencies  of  this  fyftem  were  often  felt;  and 
on  fome  great  occafions  the  command  in  chief  was,  by  a  par- 
ticular decree  of  the  people,  intruded  to  one  perfon  :  but  the  appoint- 
ment of  ten  generals  from  the  ten  tribes,  .with  equal  authority,  re- 
mained always  the  eftablifhed  fyftem  of  Athens. 

The  compofition  of  Grecian  armies,  and  the  fubordination  of 
command  in  them,  appear  to  have  been  generally  very  regular  :  but 
in  little  particulars  they  differed  fo  much  in  different  ages,  and  in 
different  republics  in  the  fame  age,  that  it  is  impoffible  now  to  af- 
certain  what  was  at  any  time  the  exact  formation  of  the  Athenian 
phalanx,  or  indeed  of  that  of  any  other  republic.  The  account  given 
of  the  Spartan  army  may  however  ferve  to  convey  an  idea  of  the 
Grecian  fyftem  in  general.  The  Spartan  difcipline  differed  from 
that  of  the  other  commonwealths  ;  but  its  moft  characteriftical 
difference  feems  to  have  been  that  it  was  more  perfect  *. 

*   Guifchnrdt,  the  ableft  modern  imerpre-  men   compofed    of  many    files  (according    to 

ter  of  the   ancient   military  writers,   has   the  Thucydides  (2)  generally  of  fixty- four)  among 

following  remarks  in  a  note  (1)   to  his  Tranf-  the  other  Greeks  was  fynonymous  with  r>xo,?> 

'ation  of  Arrian's  Tactics  :   '   Je  doute  fi  les  and  was  the  more  common  word  of  the  two  to 

*  interpretes  et  les  traducleurs  entendentles  exprefs  fimply  a  File  (3).  Accordingly  the 
'    manoeuvres  que  Xenophon  decrit,  et  celles  term  Ao^ayoc,   which  with  the  Lacedaemonians 

*  qu'il  detaiile,  dans  le  troifieme  livre  (of  the  was  the  title  of  an  officer  of  confiderable  rank, 
'  Anatcifis)  quand  il  parlc  des  difpoiltions  whofe  command  was  of  above  five  hunched 
«  qu'on  fit  pour  la  marche  des  troupes.  La  men,  with  the  other  Greeks  meant  no  more 
'.  taftique  de  Thucydide  et  dfi  Xenophon  clt  than  the  file-leader,  a  common  foldier.  The 
'  differente  de  celle  du  terns  d'Alexandre  le  term  E»ay.ioTi«,  originally  peculiar  to  the  La- 
'  grand.  Les  termes  qui  defigr.oient  les  cedaemoimns  and  fignifying  a  body,  gene- 
'   corps   n'etoient  plus  les   merries,   et  il  y  eut  rally  of  thirty-two  men,   formed  in  four  files, 

*  une    autre   difpoiition    de    feilions.      Faute  was  alfo  adopted  by  the  ether  Greeks  to  fig- 

*  d'  y  donner  attention  on  re  peut  que  s'em-  nify  a  divifion  of  their  yix"^  or  fi'e>   perhaps 
'   brouiller.'     It  may  be  proper  to  add   here  commonly  of  not  more  than  four  men.     See 
the   obfervation   that   the   term  As^o;,    which  Arrian,  Tadl.  p.  20. 
with   the   Lacedaemonians  iignitied    a  body  of 

(1)  P.  119.  note  j.         (:)  Thucyd.  '.v.  c.  68.         (3)  Arrian.  Taft.  p.  18  &  20.  ed.  Amflel.  &  Lipz.   1750,  <Sc 
Xenoph.  Cyropsd.  1.  iv. 

Mm  2  SECTION 


26S  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


SECTION       V. 

The  Hi/lory  of  Athens  from  the  Legijlation  of  Solon  to  the  Expulfion 
of  the  Peif/lratids  and  the  frji  public  Tranfaclion  with  Perfa. 

CHAP.  VI.         SOLON,   not  contented  with  giving  his  country  a  conftitution 

SECT.  V.     perhaps  the  moft  perfect  that  can  con  lift  with  democracy,   and  efta- 

blifhing   a  jurifprudence  not  only  far  fuperior  to  what  had    before 

been  known  in  Greece,  but  which  has  been  a  model  for  all  fubfe- 

quent  times,  was  anxious  to  have  all  his  fellowcountrymen   fatisfied 

that  what  he  had  done  was  the  beft  that  could  be  done,  and  thence 

to    infure     its    permanency.        Naturally    mild    and    open     in    his 

pun.  Solon,     manners,  he  was   free  of   accefs  to  all ;  and  confident  both  in   the 

goodnefs  of  his  caufe,  and  in  his  own  powers  of  argument  and  per- 

fuafion,  he  incouraged  converfation  upon  his  inftitutions  and  difcuf- 

fion  of  their  merit ;    profeihng  always  willingnefs  to  alter  whatfoever 

could  be  clearly  proved  capable  of  amendment.     But  he  foon  found 

that  he  had  thus  ingaged  in  an  endlefs  bufinefs.     At  the  fame  time 

therefore  to  deliver  himfelf  from  the  wearying  importunity  of  others, 

to  give  a  relaxation  to  his  mind  which  it  now  wanted,    and  to  afford 

means  to  his  great  work  of  fettling  into  firmnefs,   he  determined  to 

Herodot.  l.  i.  travel :  and  fuch  was  his  influence,  he  procured  a  promife,  folemnly 

ProclusinTi-   confirmed  by  oath  from  all  the  people,   that  they  would  change  no- 

maam,  Li.      thing  of.  ^  inft;tutioris  for  ten  yeai-Si     With  fuch  a  trial,    he  faid, 

there  would  be  competent  experience  of  their  advantages  and  difad- 
vantages ;  and  whatever  alterations  were  wanting,  might  then  be 
made  with  greater  certainty  of  altering  for  the  better.  Having  effeded 
this  he  left  Athens. 

Solon  was  fo  fuperior  in  general  intereft  and  influence  among  his 
fellowcountrymen,  that,  while  he  remained,  no  other  could  hope 
for  any  comparable  ccnfideration.  But  in  all  governments  there  muft 
be  leaders ;  in  popular  governments  there  will  be  parties;  and  if  ho- 

neft 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  269 

neft  men  want  either  abilities  or  activity  to  put  themfelves  forward,     CHAP.vr. 
the  difhoneft  will  not  be  backward.     Soon   after  the   departure  of    SECT.  v. 
Solon  the  three  parties  of  the  lowlands,  the  highlands,  and  the  coaft,    pjut<  Solon, 
began  to  reappear.     Thefe  were   in  facl   the  party  of  the  rich,  who 
wanted  to  hold  all  political  power  in  their  own  hands,  and  keep  the 
lower  people  in  ablblute  fubjection,  as  now  in  the  Venetian  and  Ge- 
noefe  republics ;   the  democratical  party,   who,   with   great  zeal  for 
equality,   were  the  readied:  inftruments  of  defpotifm  ;    and  the  party 
of  fenlible   and  moderate   men,  who,   tho  weaker  than  either  of    the 
others,  were  capable  of  holding  the  balance  between   them.      This 
party  derived  great  fupport  from  the  powerful  family  of  the  Alcmae- 
onids ;  of  whom  Megacles,   now  the  chief,  had  greatly  increafed  the   Her°dot.  l.i. 
ancient  wealth  and  fplendor  of  his  houfe  by  marrying  Agarifte,  daugli-   c.  i26  &  feq.' 
ter  and  heirefs  of  Cleifthenes  tyrant  of  Sicyon  ;    and  he  had  acquired   Pindar.  Pyth. 
fame  by  victories  in  the  Olympian,  Pythian  and  Ifthmian  games.  At  the 
head  of  the  oligarchal  party  was  Lycurgus  fon  of  Aviflola'i'des.     The 
democratical  was  principally  influenced  by  Peififtratus,   a  young  man 
of  a  very  ancient  and  honorable  family,  claiming  defcent  from  Co- 
drus,  and   through  him  tracing  their  pedigree  to  Neftor  and  the  Py- 
lian   kings  of  that  very  early  age  where  Homer  firfh  takes  up  Hiftory. 
To  extraordinary  abilities  and   a  daring  fpirit   Peififtratus  added  the 
moft  ingaging  manners;  and  he  had  diftinguidied  himfelf  in  feveral   c, 59. 
military  enterprizes,  particularly  in  taking  Nifaoa  the  feaport  of  the 
Megareans.     When  Solon,  after  an  abfence  of  ten  years,  returned  to   Plutarch,  v. 
Athens,  thefe  parties   divided  the  whole  people.     Immediately  the   Diqg.Laert. 
legiflator  informed  himfelf  of  the  ftate  of  affairs,  converfed  with  the  v*  Solon' 
chiefs,  and  endeavoured  to  moderate  the  fpirit  of  oppofition,   both  in 
them  and  in  their  followers.      But  already  prejudices  for  the  principles 
of  their  feveral  factions  were  become  rooted,  and  attachment  to  their 
leaders  another  felf-intereft.     Solon,   now  very  old,  was  lefs  able  to 
direct  the  helm  of  government  in  a  ftorm  ;   the  leaders  of  the  factions 
continued  their  oppofition  ;  and  at  length  Peififtratus,  by  an  artifice, 
became  mafter  of  the  commonwealth.     Wounding  himfelf  and  his 

mules, 


Herodot.  1.  v. 
c.  6S. 


270  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  vi.  mu!es,  he  drove  his  chariot  violently  into  the  agora,  and  pretended 

SECT.  v.  ^at,  as  he  was  going  into  the  country,  he  had  been  waylaid.      In  a 

Herodot.  1. i.  pathetic  fpeech,    for  he  was  a  moll:  able  orator,  he   told   the  people, 

Plut.'v. Solon.  '   It  was  for  being  their  declared  friend  he  thus  fuffered.      They  law 

Juftm.  l.  2.  f   -t  was  no  }011ger  fafe  for  any  man  to  be  a  friend  to  the  poor ;  they  law 

'  it  was  no  longer  fafe  for  him  to  live  in  Attica,  unlefs  they  would 
*  take  him  under  that  protection  which  he  implored.'  Immediately 
Arifton,  one  of  his  partizans,  propofed  to  decree  to  the  friend  of  the 
people,  the  martyr  of  their  caule,  a  guard  of  fifty  men  for  the  fecurity 
of  his  perlon  ;  and  fo  great  was  his  popularity,  and  fuch  the  indigna- 
tion excited  by  the  vilible  marks  of  ill-treatment  which  he  bore,  the 
decree  was  inftantly  palled  ;  in  fpite  it  is  faid  of  the  opposition  of  So- 
lon, who  ufed  his  utmoft  endeavours  to  prevent  it.  Such  is  the  ftory 
which  has  obtained.  But  it  has  come  from  the  enemies  of  the  family 
of  Peififtratus  j  and  it  feems  at  leaft  equally  probable  that  the  attempt 
upon  his  life  was  real.  We  feem  indeed  warranted  in  this  conje&ure 
by  the  very  accounts  which  fpeak  of  it  as  fictitious.  For  thole 
accounts  teftify  that  the  belief  of  a  real  attempt  to  alTafiinate  him  pre- 
vailed at  Athens  for  a  confiderable  time  :  we  are  not  informed  how 
the  fraud  was  detected ;  and  had  there  ever  been  any  detection  of  fuch 
grofs  knavery,  it  mull  have  gone  far  to  ruin  the  credit  of  Peififtratus, 
which,  during  his  life,  certainly  never  was  ruined.  But  a  real  at- 
tempt of  fuch  a  kind  could  not  fail  to  increale,  if  not  the  extent 
of  his  popularity,  at  leaft  the  zeal  of  his  party  ;  and  thus  the  decree 
for  guards  might  be  obtained,  even  in  oppolition  to  the  remon- 
ftrances  of  Solon,  in  a  manner  more  confifte  it  with  the  forms  of  the 
Athenian  conftitution,  and  with  probability,  than  the  defeftive  ac- 
counts of  the  Greek  hiflorians  feem  to  imply.  On  this  point  how- 
ever we, can  only  chufe  our  belief  in  the  dark.  What  fiands  afcer- 
tained  is,  that  Peififtratus  with  his  guards  feized  the  citadel ;  that  his 
party  ftill  fupported  him  ;  and  that  their  opponents  were  forced,  part 
into  exile,  the  reft  to  fubmillion.     Peififtratus,  as  leader  of  the  pre 


vailing 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  271 

vailing  party,  was  of  courfe  the  firft  man  of  the  commonwealth,    CHAP.  vi. 
and  from  this  time  he  is  called  by  hiftorians  Tyrant  of  Athens.  SECT.  V. 

The  term  Tyrant,  among  the  Greeks,  had  a  very  different  figni- 
fication  from  what  it  now  bears  in  all  modern  languages.  It  meant  Ti0^Ity^' 
a  citizen  of  a  republic,  who  by  any  means  acquired  fovereignty  over 
his  fellowcitizens.  Many  of  the  Grecian  tyrants  were  men  of  ex- 
traordinary virtue,  who  ufed  their  power  in  ftrict  conformity  to  eita- 
bliihed  law,  and  very  advantageoully  for  the  people  they  governed. 

Thus  they  differed  widely  from  Tyrants  in  the  modern  acceptation  of 
the  word.  But  fome  even  were  raifed  to  the  dignity  of  tyrant  by  a 
voluntary  decree  of  the  people  themfelves.     Plutarch  mentions  par-    Plutarch.  So- 

J  r      r  r  Ion.    Vid.  et 

ticulary  Tynnondas  thus  elected  by  the  Eubceans,  and  Pittacus  by  Aift.  Poiit. 
the  Mitylenaeans;  and  he  fays  the  Athenians  would  fo  have  elected 
Solon.  Ufurper  therefore  is  not  a  convertible  term  :  tho  in  general 
the  Grecian  tyrants  were  ufurpers.  Without  a  favoring  Party  among 
the  people,  no  man  could  rife  to  the  tyranny :  therefore  a  m.in  of 
univerfal  bad  character  could  not  become  a  tyrant.  But  the  violence 
of  fiction  among  the  Greeks  was  extreme :  enormous  feverities  were 
frequently  practifed  againil  a  defeated  party :  perhaps  mod  enormous 
when  the  prevailing  one  was  not  headed  by  a  tyrant;  who  might 
have  authority  to  retrain  private  malice  and  check  popular  fury. 
A  citizen,  however,  irregularly  raifed  to  fovereignty  over  his  fellow- 
citizens,  would  often  find  himfelf  very  infecure  in  his  exaltation. 
Popular  favor,  and  party  favor,  which  is  a  more  confined  popular 
favor,  are  extremely  liable  to  fluctuate.  But  firmnefs  is  necelfary  to 
command ;  and  even  great  abilities  united  with  fortunate  circum- 
ftances  would  with  difficulty,  in  fuch  a  lituation,  avoid  the  neceffity 
ofoccafional  fe  verity;  weak  minds  and  morofe  tempers  would  na- 
turally fall  into  cruelty.  The  outcry  againil:  tyrants  then  has  been 
firfl:  raifed  by  the  difappointment  of  faction;  for  among  the  ancients 
the  appellation  was  arbitrarily  applied  ;  the  perfon  to  whom  it  was 
given  being  often  really  no  more  than  the  leader  of  a  faction  ;  and 
fometimes,  as  we  have  juft  feen,  a  fovereign  by  the  beft  of  all  rights, 

the 


272  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

chap.  VI.    tne  v0{ce  0f  the  people.     But  moft  commonly  tyrants  were  more  or 
SECT.  V.     iefs   ufurpeis  of  power    which    the  laws  of   their  country   forbad  j 
and   too  frequently  feverities  were  ufed,  fometimes  atrocious  crimes 
perpetrated,   to  acquire  that  power  or  to  retain  it.     Hence  alone  the 
modern  acceptation  of  the  term  Tyrant,  from  which  it  is  neceSfary  to 
diStinguiih  the  ancient. 
Herodot.  1.  i.        It  is  exprefsly  faid  by  Herodotus,  and  confirmed  by  all  Succeeding 
Plut  Solon,    writers,    that  Peififtratus  changed   nothing  in  the  Athenian   consti- 
tution.    All   the    laws   continued   in  force  j   the  aflembly,   council, 
courts  of  juStice,  and  all  the  magistracies  remained  with  their  conSti- 
Ariftot.  Polic  tutional  powers;  he  himfelf  obeyed  a  citation  from  the  areopagus  up- 
Plut.  Solon,     on  a  charge  of  murder.      We  are  not  aSTured  that  he  even  retained  his 
guards  ;    but  it  appears  probable.      It  was  ufual  for  thofe  called  tyrants 
among  the  Greeks  to  have  guards ;   and   the  distinguishing   name  of 
doryphori,  fpearbearers,  became  attached  to  them,  as  that  of  toxote, 
bowmen,  to  the  armed  attendants  of  the  regular  magistrates.    But  even 
this  was  not  a  neceffary  characteristic;   for  in  the  preceding  age,  Cyp- 
Ariftot. Polit.  felus,  who  was  notwithstanding  always  termed  tyrant  of  Corinth,  fo 
intirely  truSted    in  the  affection   of  his   fellowcitizens  that  he  never 
would  have  guards.      It  appears  not  how  Such  a  tyrant  differs,   but  in 
title,  from  thofe  patriots  of  Succeeding  times  whofe  abilities  and  vir- 
tues placed  them  at  the  head  of  a  commonwealth  without  any  Such 
invidious  appellation.     Perhaps  however  they  have  alfo  thus  far  gene- 
rally differed  in  fortune,   that  the  hiStory  of  the  latter  has  been  trans- 
mitted to  posterity  by  thofe  of  the  fame  faction,    that  of  the  former 
by  thofe  of  the  oppofite  faction  *. 

*  Even  Ariftotle  is  fcarcely  always  confident  felus  Tyrant  of  Corinth,  tho,  he  tells  us,  Cyp- 

in  applying  the  term  Tyrant.     In  one  p..rt  of  felus  never  woJld  have  any  gunrd.      It  appears 

his  treatife  on   government    (i)     he  obferves  clearly  that  Cypfelus  in  faft  was  a  demagogue, 

that  a  guard  is  proper  both  to  legal  kings  and  and  never  properly  a  tyrant.      But  the  party 

to  tyrants  ;  and  he  mentions  it  as  a  character-  in  oppoiition  to  his  family  prevailing  at  length 

iftical  dillinftion  between   the  two,  that  kings  againft    his   grandfon,   it   became   popular  at 

had   fubjefh   for    guards,    tyrants    foreigners.  Corinth  to  give  the  title  of  tyrant  to  Cypfelus 

Yet  in  the  fame  treatife  (2)   he  calls   Cyp-  himfelf. 

(1)  B.  iii.  c.  14.  (1)  B.  v.  c.  12. 

Peififtratus 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  273 

Peififtratus  was  by  every  account  a  man  Angularly  formed  for  em-    CHAP.  VI. 
pire.     Solon   himfelf  is  reported  to  have  faid   of  him,  '  Take  away     SECT-  v- 
*  only  his  ambition  ;  cure  him  of  his  luft  of  reigning,  and  there  is  Plut.  Solon. 
'  not  a  man  more   naturally  difpofed   to  every  virtue,  nor  a   better 
'  citizen.'     We  have  however  no  fatisfactory  account  of  the  conduct 
of  the  great  lawgiver  upon  this  important  occafion  ;  party-fpirit  hav- 
ing mutilated  and  deformed  the  traditions  of  thefe  tranfactions.      It 
became  the  temper  of  fucceeding  times  to  brand  the  memory  of  Pei- 
fiftratus ;   but  the  character  of  Solon  was  not  to  be  involved   in   the 
reproach.      It  was  therefore  neceflary  to  account  for  his  want  of  au- 
thority and  influence  for  preventing  the   ufurpation,  and   to  apolo- 
gize for  his  acquiefcence  under  it;   neither  of  which  has  been  ade- 
quately done.     Plutarch  relates  fome  anecdotes  very  much  to  the  ere-   piuti  v.  So- 
dit  of  his  fpirit,   but  very  little  to  that  of  his  wifdom  and  the  influ-    L^lt&^so' 
ence   which  Ihould   have  attended  it :    for  the  Athenians,  it  feems,  Ion- 
were  fo  fatisfied  with  Peififtratus  that  they  utterly  difregarded  all  their 
venerable  legiflator's  remonftrances.      His   friends  arguing  with  him, 
we  are  told,   upon  his  imprudent  freedom  of  fpeech  upon  all  occa- 
fions,  and  afking  to  what  he  trufted  for  fecurity  againft  the  venge- 
ance of  the  tyrant,   *  To  my  old  age,'  he  replied.     But   it  was   by 
other   arts   than  thofe   of  iniquitous  vengeance  and  cruel  precaution 
that  Peiliflratus  propofed  to  fee u re,   as  he  had  acquired  his  preemi- 
nence.    Indeed  what  Plutarch  himfelf  proceeds  to  relate  explains,  in 
a  great  degree,  what  party-fpirit  had  inveloped  in  contradiction  and 
obicurity.     Far  from  refenting  any  freedom  in  Solon's  conduct,  Pei- 
liflratus treated  him  with  the  higheft  refpect.     The  venerable  fage, 
the  unblemi fhed  patriot  refufed  not  the   tyrant's  friendship;   but  on 
the  contrary  lived  with  him  in  familiarity,  and  aflifted  him  in   the 
adminiflration  of  the  commonwealth.     This  is  Plutarch's  teflimony. 
Diogenes  Laertius,   indeed,  lays  that  Solon  having  long  braved  the 
tyrant's  vengeance,  and  finding  the  Athenians  fo  loft  to  all  fenfe  of 
honor  that  all  his  efforts  could  not  excite  them  to  attempt  the  reco- 
very of  their  freedom,  left  Athens,  and  never  returned  more.     He 

N  n  even 


274  HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

chap.  vi.  even  gives  letters  faid  to  have  palled  between  the  legifiator  and  the 
sect.  v.  tyrant.  But  Plutarch  certainly  believed  thofe  letters  to  be  forgeries ; 
and  even  if  they  were  true,  they  confirm  the  concurrent  teftimony  of 
all  antiquity  to  the  excellence  of  the  character  of  Peiliitratus,  and 
his  unblafneable  conduct  in  the  adminiftration  of  the  affairs  of 
Athens. 

We  are  not  informed  at  what  time  the  Athenians  recovered 
Salamis  after  its  fecond  revolt  to  the  Mepareans.  Amon^  the 
difcordant  accounts  of  hiftorians,  all  agree  that  Solon  retook  it 
when  he  was  a  young  man,  and  long  before  he  was  appointed 
legifiator.  But  many  attribute  the  retaking  of  it  to  Peiiiftratus 
with  Solon.  This  could  hardly  be  when  Solon  was  a  young  man, 
nor  before  his  legiflation.  We  have  only  conjecture  for  fnppofing 
that  it  might  be  after  the  eftabliihment  of  Peifiilratus  in  what  is 
called  his  tyranny. 

Plutarch  reports  that  Solon  died  at  the  age  of  eighty,  about  two 
years  after  the  elevation  of  Peifiitratus.   That  ufurper,  if  he  was  fiich, 
H  rod  1  i       *e^  f°on  after  from  bis  high  fituation.     The  depreffed  rival  chiefs, 
c.  60.  Megacles  and  Lycurgus,  uniting  their  ftrength,  expelled  him.     This 

appears  frefii  proof  in  favor  of  Peififtratus.  He  flourifhed  and  in- 
joyed  Solon's  friendship  while  Solon  lived  :  when  he  had  loft  that 
excellent  man's  fupport  his  opponents  acquired  the  fuperiority.  But 
the  confederated  rivals  could  not  long  agree.  Megacles  fent  propo- 
fals  of  reconciliation  to  Peifiltratus ;  and,  at  the  fame  time  to  evince 
his  fincerity  and  to  infure  permanence  of  union,  offered  him  his 
daughter  in  marriage.  The  banifhed  chief  accepted  the  condition. 
But  a  majority  in  the  Athenian  affembly  muft  be  procured  to  favor 
their  views,  or  all  their  private  compacts  would  be  vain.  The  ac- 
count given  by  Herodotus  of  the  manner  in  which  this  was  effected 
is  among  the  ftrangeft  in  all  hiftory  ;  yet  that  hiftorian  lived  fo 
nearly  within  memory  of  the  event,  the  ftory  is  fo  little  flattering  to 
any,  and  the  circumftances  were  of  fo  public  a  nature,  that,  tho 
party  prejudice  is  likely  enough  to  have  difguifed  it,  we  fcarcely  can 

fuppofe 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  ^7$ 

fuppofe  it  wholly  unfounded.  Indeed  Herodotus  himfelf  calls  it  the  chap.  vi. 
fimpleft  trick  he  ever  heard  of:  yet  it  appears  that  many  ancient 
writers  gave  it  credit,  and,  fuch  as  it  is  related  to  us,  it  might  be 
not  unaccommodated  to  the  prejudice?,  the  imagination,  and  the  dil- 
pofition  of  thofe  on  whom  the  united  chiefs  meant  to  work.  They 
found,  we  are  told,  in  the  Peanian  demos,  a  woman  named  Phya, 
of  low  birth,  and  by  occupation  a  garland-feller,  but  of  very  extra- 
ordinary ftature,  and  at  the  fame  time  well-proportioned  and  hand- 
fome.  This  woman  they  dreffed  in  a  complete  fuit  of  armour,  with 
every  ornament  that  could  add  grace  and  fplendor  to  a  fine  natural 
figure  ;  and  feating  her  in  a  magnificent  chariot,  they  drove  into  the 
city,  heralds  preceding  who  proclaimed,  '  O  Athenians,  with  willing 
'  minds  receive  Peififtratus,  whom  Minerva,  honoring  above  all 
'  men,  herfelf  conducts  into  your  citadel.'  The  people,  adds  the 
hiftovian,  believed  the  woman  to  be  the  goddefs,  and  worshipped 
her,  and  received  Peififtratus,   who  thus  recovered  the  tyranny. 

It  has  been  fuppofed  by  fome  that  Strabo  held  the  authority  of 
Herodotus  for  nothing;  and  the  treatife  remains  which  Plutarch 
compofed  purpofely  to  decry  his  credit.  But  Strabo's  exprefiion  has 
been  alleged  to  prove  very  much  more  than  it  meant.  The  geo- 
grapher follows  and  confirms  Herodotus  in  numberlefs  inftances  ; 
and  Plutarch's  treatife  tends  ftrongly  to  prove  him  impartial  without 
proving  him  in  any  inftance  falls.  The  whole  tenor,  indeed,  of 
Plerodotus's  narration  mows  him  a  man  of  great  curiofity,  but  great 
modefty,  and  perfect  honefty.  Doubtful  of  his  own  opinion,  and 
fcrupuloufly  cautious  of  mifleading  others,  he  thinks  it  his  duty  to 
relate  all  reports,  but  with  exprefs  and  repeated  warning  to  his 
readers  to  ufe  their  own  judgement  for  determining  their  belief*. 
Hence  indeed  his  authority  is  fometimes  hazardous.     But  generally 

*    To~n  yiv  tvv  tor    Aiyviftiat  Kiyophoic-i   yjaabu           'Eyui    ds    o(pitXu    >\iyM    t«  /\iyQtj.iva,     «7e'»Se<tO|k 

Irtui  tA   T&iaufe  "571  Sana  en"    ff«oi   ^s  ra-afi  wai\a  rat  yij/.r.s    hv    'Su.vra.Ttaai   Ifu^u'  y.a)  ^oi  tbto  to    eot  >' 

hiyov    U7TOZEI-KI    oti    Tss    hiyoj/.ttoc    iw     tr.u.-m   ixn  !%5Tu    e{    sierra    to»     hiyot.  Hci'oclot.      1,    v 1 1 . 

y(£<pv.     Herodot.  1.  ii.   C.  123.  c.  152. 

N  n  2  the 


tyt> 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  VI.    tne  fimplicity  of  his  manner  detects  itfelf,  and,  with  the  affiftance  of 
SECT.  V.     circumflances  collateral  to  the  ftory,  fufficiently  indicates  where  he 
deferves  credit,  and  where  neglect*.     The  public  nature  of  the  facts 
may  be  a  degree  of  teftimony  to  the  ftrange  ftory  juft  related.      Con- 
fonance  to  the  characters  of  perfons  concerned  will  form  an  additional 
teft.     Both  of  thefe  are  totally  wanting  to  the  account  which  Hero- 
dotus proceeds  to  give  of  a  dome/tic  quarrel  laid  to  -have  occafioned 
the  fecond  expullion  of  Peiliflratus.      No  more  therefore  feems  afcer- 
tained  to  us  upon  fufficient  hiftorical  grounds,  than  that  Peififiratus 
did  retire  to  Eretria  in  Eubcea  ;  leaving  the  Alcmasonids,  fo  the  par- 
tizans  of  Megacles  were  called,  matters  of  Athens. 

But  even  in  banifhment  the  confideration  and  influence  of  Peififtra- 
tus  were  great.  He  received  prefents  and  loans  to  a  large  amount 
from  the  Hates  with  which  he  had  formed  an  intereft  during  his  ad- 
miniftration  of  Athens.  He  continued  to  flrengthen  thefe  connec- 
tions ;  and  at  length  affembled  a  military  force  with  which,  in  the 
eleventh  year  of  this  his  fecond  banifhment,  he  returned  into  Attica. 
Immediately  he  made  himfelf  mafter  of  Marathon.  Hither  his  re- 
maining partizans  in  Athens  flocked  to  his  ftandard ;  together  with 
many  other  Athenians  who,  according  to  Herodotus's  exprefTion, 
•  preferred  tyranny  to  liberty ;'  -f-  that  is,  it  fhouid  feem,  to  whom 
that  called,  by  thofe  of  the  oppofite  faction,  the  tyranny  of  Peiliflra- 
tus, would  give  freedom,  whereas  the  adminiftration  of  the  Alc- 
maeonids  was  real  tyranny  to  them  ;  for  in  no  other  acceptation  does 
the  exprefTion  appear  intelligible.  The  Alcmasonids,  after  fome 
imprudent  delay,  led  an  army  from  the  city.  But  it  was  ill  difci- 
plined  and  ill  commanded.      Peiliflratus  attacked   them  by  furprize. 

*  The  hiftorian  of  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  makes  him  often  unfit  for  children.      He  has 

the   Roman   Empire  has  characterized   Hero-  few   pages   from   which   the   philofopher  may 

dotus  with  his  ufual   livelinefs  of  expreflion  :  not  profit. 

«   Herodotus,'  he  fays,   '  fometimes  writes  for  -j.  *Oi<™  jj  rvfanU  <n?l  btviifw  h  acnrarorefon 

^  children,  and  fometimes  for  philofophers( I ).'  Herodot.   1.  i.  c.  62. 

lit  is  really  the  fimplicity  of  Herodotus  that 


(1)  Chap,  xxiv.  note  52. 


The 


HISTORY      OF      GREECE.  277 

The  rout   was  immediate.     With  his  ufual  prefence  of  mind,  and    CHAP.  VI. 

SECT.  V. 


with  a   humanity  the  more  admirable   as  it  was  then    uncommon, 


Peififtratus  inftantly  flopped  the  (laughter;  and  fending  fome  horfe 
after  the  fugitives,  proclaimed  that  '  None  need  fear  who  would  go 
'  quietly  to  their  homes :  Peififtratus  promifed  fafety  to  their  perfons 
'  and  property.'  The  known  clemency  and  honor  of  the  chief  pro- 
cured general  obedience  to  the  proclamation  :  the  principal  Alc- 
mxonids  fled  ;  and  Peififtratus  entered  Athens  unoppofed. 

It  does  not  appear   that  even   now  any  fundamental  change  was 
made  in  the  Athenian  conflitution,  or  any  unwarrantable  ftep  taken 
to    (ecu re    the    leader's    power.     As    head    of   the   prevailing  party 
he  had  of  courfe  the  principal  influence  in    the  government.     His 
abilities  might  have  given  him  that  preeminence  in  any  free  ftate.    A 
particular   intereft  with  feveral   neighbouring   dates,  efpecially   with   Herodot.  1.  i. 
Thebes  and  Argos,  and  a  wife  and  liberal  ufe  of  a  very  great  private   c"   u 
property,  are  what  he  feems  befides  moftly  to  have  confided  in.   Some 
meafures  were  neceflary  to  infure   peaceable  demeanour  from  thofe 
partizans  of  the  Alcmasonids  who  had  not  fled  their  country.     None, 
however,  were   injured   in  their   perfons  ;   their  children  only  were 
kept  as  hoftages,  and  themfelves  Cent  to  inhabit  the  ifland  of  Naxos ; 
which    Peififtratus   fubdued,  and   committed   to  the   government  of 
Lyo-damis,   a  Naxian,  who  had  aflifted  him  with  men  and  money  for 
his  invafion  of  Attica.     This  may  appear  arbitrary  ;   but  if  compared 
with  what  we  (hall  hereafter  find   ufual   in   revolutions   of  Grecian 
cities,  it  was  Angularly  mild;   infomuch  that  we  may  be  perhaps  in- 
duced to  impute  the  feverity  of  the  meafure  to  the  prevailing  party  at 
lar»e,  and  the  mildnefs   intirely  to  the  chief.     Peififtratus  alio  efta-   Herodot.  1.  v. 
blilhed  an  Athenian  colony  at  Sigeium  on  the  Hellefpont,  not  with-   c"  9+'  95' 
out  fuflaining  a  war  with  the  Mitylenseans  of  Lefbos,  who  claimed 
the  territory.     It  was  upon  occafion  of  a  vi&ory  gained  by  the  Athe- 
nians in  this  war  that  the  poet  Alcaeus,  a  principal  citizen  and  head 
of  a  faction  at  Mitylene,  incurred  the  difgrace  of  quitting  his  arms 

for 


278  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  VI.    for  quicker  flight.     The  enemy  finding  thefe  fpoils,  fufpended  them 
SECT.  v.     as  a  trophy  in  the  temple  of  Minerva  at  Sigeium. 
Plut.v. Solon.        Many  anecdotes  are  prelerved  of  Peififtratus  very  highly  to  the  ad- 

&  Apopnth.  .  . 

Diog.  Laert.    vantage  of  his  character.      His  mildnefs,  patience,  and  forbearance 
Ii.S"p°n'jo.      make  a  linking  feature  in  it.     His  kindnefs  to  the  poor  and  diftreffcd 
m&!'  m        was  not  a  diffembled  virtue,  aflumed  for  the  advancement  of  his  am- 
bitious views,   but  was  confpicuous  through  his  life.      Many  of  his 
laws  and  regulations,  highly  advantageous  to  his  country,   became  a 
part  of  its   conftitution.     Finding  an   increafing   dilpoiition   in  the 
Athenians  to  neglect  rural  employments  and  crowd  into  the  city,  he 
took  every  method  to  difcourage  this,   and  promote  agriculture,  in 
which  he  was  very  liberal  of  his  own  purfe ;  efpecially  it  by  the  fame 
act  he  could  reward  merit  or  relieve  diftrefs.      The  laws  again  ft  idle- 
ness,  attributed   by  feme  to  Solon,  are  alfo  afcribed  to  Peififtratus. 
The  law  decreeing  a  public  provilion  for  the  wounded  in  their  coun- 
try's fervice  is  referred  to  him  alone.     He  was   eminent  for  love  of 
learning  and  the  fine  arts.    He  is  faid  to  have  founded  the  fir  ft  public 
library  known   in   the  world  ;  and   the  firft  complete  collection  and 
digeftion  of  Homer's   poems  is   by  Cicero  attributed  to  him.     That 
De Orat.  1. ii'u   great  orator  Speaks  alio  of  his  eloquence  in  the  higheft  terms;  as  the 
firft  model  of  that  Sublime  and   polifhed  rhetoric,  in  which,  as  in 
moft  other  arts,  Greece  has  been  miftrefs  of  the  world.      Tho  Peifi- 
ftratus difcouraged  that  increafing  population  of  the  capital  which 
was  hurtful   to  the  country,  yet  he  improved  the  city,  and  adorned 
it  with  fplendid  public  buildings.      He  is  laid  to  have  been  the  firft 
who  ever  laid  out  a  garden  for  public  ufe.      He  continued   to  direct 
the  administration  of  Athens  with  great  wifdom,  and  with  the  efteem 
of  all  men,  during  life,   and  at  an  advanced  age  he  died  in  peace. 

Whatfoever  the  authority  of  Peififtratus  was  in  the  Athenian  rtate, 
by  whatfoever  means  fupported,  and  in  whatfoever  way  exerted,  it 
appears  certain  that  he  never  afiumed  the  tone  of  royalty.  On  his 
death  his  influence  defcended  to  fons  worthy  of  fuch  a  father:  but  fo 
intirely  was  the  administration  of  the  republic  Still  conducted  accord- 


&c  Brutus. 


ins; 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  279 

ing  to  the  forms  prefcribed  by  the  conftitution,  that,  when  afterward    CKAP.VI. 
it   became   popular  at  Athens   to   call  Peififtratus  and  his  fuccefTors      ^  ' 

kings  and  tyrants,  no  one  public  act  recorded  who  was  his  fucceflbr. 
Herodotus,  who  lived  within  memory  of  the  perfons  concerned,  men- 
tions Hippias  and  Hipparchus  as  fons  of  Peififtratus,  without  faying 
which  was  the  elder  or  the  fuperior.     The  accurate  Thucydides,  a  few   Thucyd.  I.  i 

,      ,  .     r  ,  ....  ,       c.  20.  &  1.  vi 

years  only  later,  informs  us   that  common  report  in   his   time  made   c.  54. 
Hipparchus  the  fucceflbr;   but  erroneoufly  he  fays,  for  Hippias  was 
the  elder :  yet,    fliortly  after,   Plato,   concurring  with   that  common    Plato.  Hip- 
report  which  Thucydides  had  judged  erroneous,  calls  Hipparchus  the   parc  ' 
elder.     However  this  might  be,   thofe  brothers  had  certainly  top-ether 
the  principal  influence  in  the  adminiftration  of  Athens.     Heads  of 
the  prevailing  party,  their  friends   only  could  obtain   the  principal 
magiftracies  *.     But  that  power  which  the  favor  of  their  party  wave 
them  they  ufed  in  every  inftance  beneficially  for  the  public,  and  with- 
out afperity  toward  their  opponents.     The  character  of  Hipparchus 
is  tranfmitted  to  us,  on  no  lefs  authority  than  that  of  Plato,  as  one   Plato,  Hip= 
of  the  moll  perfect  in  hiftory.     Such  were   his   virtues,   his  abilities   ^a, 
and  his  diligence,  that  the  philofopher   does   not  fcruple  to  fay  the   Hlft"  J 
period  of  his  adminiftration  was  like  another  golden  age.      He  was 
in   the  higheft  degree  a  friend   to  learning  and   learned   men.     The 
collection  and  digeition  of  Homer's  works,  by  others  afcribed  to  his 
father,  is   by  Plato  attributed   to   him.      Hipparchus  however  intro- 
duced them  more  generally  to  the  knowlege  of  the  Athenians,   by  di- 
recting that  a  public  recital  of  them  fhould  always  make  a  part  of  the 
entertainment  at  the  feftival  of  Panathenaea.      He  invited  the  poets 
Anacreon  of  Teos  and   Simonides  of  Ceos   to  Athens,   and   liberally 
maintained  them  there.     Deiirous  of  diffufing  inftruction   as  widely 
as  poflible  among  his'  fellowcountrymen,   while  books  were  yet  few, 
and  copies  not  eaiily  multiplied,  he  caufed  marble  terms  of  Mercury,    plato-  H1P- 

.  J       parch. 

with  fhort  moral  fentences  ingraved  on  the  fides,  to  be  erected  in  the 

-j-    To,  a'i  a.7&a.   avTn   ■/,  btoAi;  toi?  XEijUiyoi;  iyjj'cro,    ?s>.ii>  xsfiocrof  uu   tiw   iirty&otTo  atyuv  aviwt  it  Toil? 

«f^«i5  uia\.     Thucyd.  1.  vi.  c.  54.. 

ft.ree.ts. 


lan.  var. 
viii. 
c.  2.. 


2?o  HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  VI.  flreets  and  principal  highways  through  Attica.  Such  are  the  anec- 
SECT.  V.  d0t;es  remaining  of  Hipparchus.  Hippias  was  at  the  fame  time  laud' 
ably  active  in  public  buiinefs.  He  improved  the  public  revenue. 
Under  his  fuperintendency  the  money  of  Attica  was  called  in  and 
recoined.  He  was  author  of  a  law  allowing  compolitions  in  money 
for  various  burthenfome  offices,  which  before  none  could  avoid.  He 
profecuted  the  improvements  of  the  city  begun  by  his  father.  Attic 
tafte  in  every  branch  appears  to  have  had  its  rife  principally  under  the 
Peififtratids.  The  adminiftration  of  the  commonwealth  was  at  the 
fame  time  conducted,  in  peace  and  in  war,  happily  at  home  and  ho- 
norably abroad  ;  and,  according  to  the  remarkable  expreffion  of  the 
able  and  impartial  Thucydides,  '  Thofe  tyrants  Angularly  cultivated 
4  wifdom  and  virtue.'  * 

The  circumflances  which  caufed  the  death  of  Hipparchus,  whence 
followed  the  expulfion  of  his  family,  and  a  number  of  great  events, 
are,  as  common  in  confpiracies,  wrapt  in  inexplicable  myftery.  The 
Thucyd.l.  vi.  account  given  by  Thucydides,  utterly  abhorrent  as  it  is  from  our 
c-  54  &  k1-  manriers,  was,  we  muft  fuppofe,  not  inconfiftent  with  thofe  of  Athens: 
Plato.  Hip-  yet  did  not  fatisfy  Plato,  who  relates  a  different  ftory.  Succeeding 
Panr.h-  ,  ..      writers  have  differed  from  both.     But  there  is  one  circumftance  of 

Julhn.   I.  11. 

e.  9.  principal  hiflorical  conlequence  in  which   all  agree.      It  was  private 

revenge,  and  not  any  political  motive,  that  induced  Ariflogeiton  and 
Harmodius,  two  Athenians  of  middle  rank,  to  confpire  the  death  of 
Hippias  and  Hipparchus.  For  the  time  of  executing  their  intention 
they  chofe  the  feaft  of  Panathenaa  ;  becaufe,  part  of  the  ceremony 
confiding  in  a  proceffion  of  armed  citizens,  they  could  then  go  armed 
without  exciting  fufpicion.  They  ingaged  few  in  their  plot:- no- 
thing remains  from  which  to  fuppofe  they  had  any  object  beyond  kill- 
ing the  two  brothers  j  and  even  for  this  their  meafures  appear  to  have 
been  ill  concerted.  Their  firft  attempt  was  intended  againft  Hippias 
while  he  was  directing  the  ceremony  in  the  Ceramicus,  a  place  in  the 

*  'EiriTvhv<ruv  l-xnrXitrcv  Jij  Ti'fawoi  JiTot  dfnm  xa)  fvHff-ic     Thucyd.  1.  vi,  C,  54. 

fuburbs : 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  s8i 

fuburbs  :  but  as  they  approached  him  they  faw  one  of  their  fellow-  CHAP.  VI. 
confpirators  familiarly  converfing  with  him:  for,  fays  Thucydides,  SECT.  v. 
Hippias  was  eafy  of  accefs  to  all  *.  This  gave  them  a  fufpicion  that 
they  were  betrayed  ;  upon  which  ihey  fuddenly  refolved  to  go  againft 
Hipparchus,  who  was  fuperintending  in  the  Leocorion,  within  the 
city-walls.  Here  they  fo  far  fucceeded  as  to  kill  Hipparchus ;  but 
Harmodius  was  alio  killed  on  the  fpot.  Ariftogeiton  efcaped  the 
guards  who  attended  Hipparchus,  but,  being  taken  by  the  people,  was 
not  mildly  treated.     Such  is  Thucydides's  expreflion  -j~. 

Now  it  was  that  the  tyranny  properly  began.  So  Plato  exprefsly 
fays  X-  Anger  at  fo  atrocious  a  deed,  together  with  uncertainty  from  Thucyd.l.vi. 
what  quarter  he  might  have  next  to  ftar,  led  Hippias  immediately 
to  feverities.  Many  Athenians  were  put  to  death.  And,  this  change 
of  conduct  once  made,  to  revert  to  the  former  courfe  was  not  a  mat- 
ter of  option.  Other  fupport  than  the  love  of  his  fellowcountrymen 
became  neceilary,  not  merely  to  the  power,  but  even  to  the  perfonal 
fafety  of  Hippias.  Looking  all  around,  therefore,  for  means  of  in- 
creasing his  intereft  in  foreign  ftates,  he  married  his  only  daughter  to 
yEan  tides,  fon  of  Hippocles,  tyrant  of  Lampfacus.  Her  epitaph  re- 
corded by  Thucydides,  remarkable  for  an  elegant  limplicity  of  pane- 
gyric not  totally  loft  even  in  a  literal  profe  tranflation,  proves  how 
little  the  title  of  tyrant  was  then  a  term  of  reproach  :  '  This  dull,'  it 
fays,  '  covers  Archedice,  daughter  of  Hippias,  in  his  time  the  firft 
1  of  the  Greeks.  Daughter,  fifter,  wife,  and  mother  of  tyrants,  her. 
'  mind  was  never  elated  to  arrogance.' 


&■ 


*  *K»  oi  7rZ,Tui  IvK^coSoi;  I  lirvlcc;.     Thucyd.  to  alien  that   they   are  evidently  fables.     See 

1.  vi.  c.  57.  Paufanias,  b.  i.  c.  23. 

+  'Ov  cao'iu-t;  oi£T/e».     The  ftories  told  by  later  +„   *     /        »     ^       ,     ~  »            •> 

writers,  Seneca,  Polyanus,  Juftin,  and  others,  ^  {,    ,  ^          ^  ,y.>m  h  ,?Jj,y^.  ^  j.  £^ 

both    of    Ariftogeiton,     and    of     his    millreis  ^,a  |yyi{  T|  ^  •a6w2ici  ^  M  K?ita  0airt. 

Leffina,  are  totally  deftituw  of  that  teftimony  timfa.     pUlt().    Hippaich.        Herodotus    and 

which  we  might  expect    from   authors   nearly  Thucydides  had  before  born-  nearly  the    fame 

cotemporary.     Indeed   it   feems   not  too  much  teflimony,  tho  in  lets  emphatical  terms. 

O  o                                                  The 


282  HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  VI.        The   Alcmseonids,    ejected    by   Peififtratus,    were    numerous   and 
SF.CT.  v.     wealthy.     Under  thefe  generic  names  the  Greek  writers  include,  with 
Herodot.Lv.   the  family,  often  ail   the  partifans  of  the  family.     They  had  fettled 
themfelves  at  Lipfydrium  above  Paeonia,   fo   Herodotus  deicribes  the 
place,  and  had  fortified  it.      But  their  hopes  did  not  reft  there :   they 
were  unceaiingly  watchful  for  opportunities  to  recover  Athens.   With 
this   object  in  view,   they  omitted   no  means  of  preferving  and  in- 
creasing their  confederation  among  the  Grecian  ftates.      It  happened 
Herodot.  ut     that  the  temple  of  Delphi  was  burnt.     The  Amphiclyons  of  courfe 
Pindar.  Pyth.   were  to  provide  for  the  rebuilding  of  it.     The  Alcmseonids  offered 
for  a  certain  fum  to  undertake  the  work.     A  contract  was  in  confe- 
quence   made    with    them,    by  which    they  were   bound  to  erect  a 
temple,  according  to  a  plan  agreed   upon,  of  Porine  ftone.     It  was 
no  doubt  a  very  delirable  circumftance  for  an  exiled  family,  objedis  of 
perfecution   to   the   rulers  of  a  powerful  ftate,  thus  to  become  con- 
nected with  fo  refpectable  a  body  as  the  Amphi&yons.     But  they  took 
the  opportunity  to  make  all   Greece  in  a  manner  their  debtors,  and 
e>  en  to  involve  the  divinity  of  the  place  in  an  obligation  to  them,  by 
exceeding  their  contract  in  the  fumptuouinefs  of  the  execution,  par- 
ticularly by  building  the  whole  front  of  the  temple  of  Parian  marble. 
Herodot.  1.  v.   Another  advantage,  however,  of  ftill  greater  importance,  they  derived, 
c-  63-  as  common  report  went  in  Herodotus's  time,  from  ingaging  in  this 

bulinefs.  They  found  means  to  corrupt  the  managers  of  the  oracle; 
in  confequence  of  which,  whenever  application,  public  or  private,  was 
made  from  Lacedsemon  to  the  god  of  Delphi,  the  anfv/er  constantly 
concluded  with  an  admonition  to  the  Lacedaemonians  to  give  liberty 
to  Athens.  This  artifice  at  length  had  the  defired  effect.  Tho  La- 
cedsemon was  in  particular  alliance  with  the  Peififtratids,  bound  to 
them  moreover  by  the  facred  ties  of  hofpitality,  it  was  determined  to 
invade  Attica.  A  fmall  force  only  was  fir  ft  fent  under  Anchimolius. 
It  was  defeated,  and  the  commander  (lain.  But  the  Alcmxonid  party 
was  now  gaining  ftrength :  the  feverities  of  Hippias  drove  numbers 
to  join  them ;  and  the  Lacedaemonians,  irritated  by  their  lofs  and 

difgrace, 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  2^3 

difgrace,  prepared  earneftly  for  revenge.  They  fen t  a  larger  army  CHAP.  VI. 
into  Attica  under  their  king  Cleomenes.  It  was  joined  by  the  Ale-  °tE-T-  '/ 
maeonids  ;  and  both  together  were  fo  fuperior  to  the  forces  of  Hip- 
pias,  that  fiege  was  laid  to  Athens.  They  had  however  little  hope 
of  taking  the  city,  when  fortune  gave  it  to  them.  Hippias  and  his 
principal  partizans,  fearing  the  confequences  of  the  turn  of  popular 
favor  againft  them,  fent  their  children  out  of  the  garrifon  to  be  con- 
veyed to  a  place  of  fafety.  They  fell  into  the  enemy's  hands ;  and 
the  fathers,  unable  by  any  other  means   to  fave   them,  confented  to 

furrender  Athens  and   leave   its   territory  in  five  days.     Hippias   re-   Hcrodot.  l.v. 

C.65&94. 
tired  to  Sigeium  on  the  Hellefpont,  which  was  under  the  government  Thucyd.LvL 

of  Hegefiftratus,  his  natural  brother,  who  had  been  eftablifhed  there  c* 5 

by  Peififtratus. 

The  Lacedaemonians  were   at   this   time   by  far  the  firft   people  of 
Greece.     Bound  by  their  lingular  laws  to  a  kind  of  monkim  poverty, 
their  ambition  was   unbounded.     Matters  of  Meflenia  by  conqueft, 
allied  from  of  old  with  Corinth,  and,   as    the  more   powerful   ftate, 
always  taking  the  lead  in  the  league,  they  in  a  great  degree  command-   ifocrat.Pana- 
ed  Peloponnefus.      Still   they  watched   every  opportunity   to   extend   r|en"  P' 4-S4- 
their  power.    Whenever  the  Grecian  dates  had  war  with  one  another,   CiJ-  l'^-  Au- 
or  fedition  within  themfelves,   the  Lacedaemonians  were  ready  to  in- 
terfere as  mediators.      Generajly  they  conducted   the  bufinefs  wifely, 
and  with  great  appearance  of  moderation  ;   but  always  having  in  view 
to  extend  the  authority,   or  at  lean;  the  influence  of  their  ftate.      One 
meafure  which  they  confb.ntly  pradifed  for  this  purpofe  was  to  favor 
ariftocratical  power  3  or  rather,  wherever  they  could,  to  eftablifh  an  oli-   j,-ocrnt  p 
garchy  :   for   in  alinoft  every  Grecian  city  there  was   an   ariftocratical   the.n-  P-  46°- 
or  oligarchal,  and  a  democratical  faction ;  and  a  few  chiefs  indebted 
to  Lacedremon    for  their  fituation,   and  generally  unable   to  retain  it 
without  her  aftiftance,   would  be  the  readied:  inftruments  for  holding 
their  ftate  in  what,  termed  alliance,  was  always,  in  fome  degree,  fub- 
jedlion 

This  policy  it  was'  propofed  to  follow  at  Athens ;  and  tbe  ftrife  of 
factions,  which  quickly  arofe  there,  gave  abundant  opportunity.     By 

O  o  2  the 


2S+  H  I  S  T  O  R  Y    O  F    G  R  E  E  C  E. 

CHAP.  VI.    tne   ]ate  revolution,  Cleifthenes,    fon  of  Megacles,   now  head  of  the 

s^    ^/     Alcmjeonids,   was  of  courfe    the  firft  peribn  of  the   commonwealth. 

But  he  was  not  a  man  of  thofe  fuperior  abilities  neceflary  to  hold  the 

fway  in  a  turbulent  democracy.     A  party  was   foon   formed  againft 

Herodot.  l.v.  h\m  under  Ifagoras,  with  whom  mod  of  the  principal  Athenians  ii Jed. 
The  refource  of  Cleifthenes  was  therefore  among  the  lower  people. 
Thefe  being  all-powerful  in  the  general  affembly,  by  their  means  he 
made  fome  alterations  in  the  conftitution,  favorable  to  his  own  in- 
fluence :  particularly  he  divided  anew  the  Athenian  territory  and 
people;  inftead  of  four,  making  the  number  of  tribes  ten,  to  which 
he  gave  intirely  new  names.  It  appears  from  Herodotus  that  Cleifthe- 
nes was  at  this  time  not  lefs  tyrant  of  Athens  than  peififtratus  had 
been.  His  power  was  equal,  but  his  moderation  was  not  equal*. 
In  the  contefts  of  Grecian  factions  the  alternative  was  commonly 
victory,  or  exile,  and  fometimes  death.  We  muft  not  wonder  there- 
fore, if  the  inferior   party   fometimes   reforted    to   very  harfh    expe- 

Herodot. l.v.  dients.  Ifagoras  and_  his  adherents  applied  to  Lacedasmon.  Cleo- 
menes,  violent  in  his  temper,  but  of  conliderable  abilities,  had  more 
influence  in  the  adminiftration  of  his  country  than  its  kings  always 
poffefled.  Immediately  entering  into  the  intereft  of  Ifagoras,  he  lent 
a  herald  to  Athens,  by  whom  he  imperioufly  decreed  baniihment 
againft  Cleifthenes  and  others  of  the  Alcmasonids,  on  the  old  pre- 
tence of  inherited  criminality  from  the  lacrilegious  execution  of  the 
partizans  of  Cylon.  Cleifthenes  obeyed  the  decree.  Incouraged  by 
fuch  proof  of  the   refpect  or  dread  in  which   the  Spartan  power  was 

*  "n<  y«£  ?>j  to»  'Adwuiuia  ^xov,  oj^ot^ov  utcu?-  him,   that  whatever  he  has  faid  upon  that  deli- 

ixmt,  tots   T.-anu.  ■srjo;  -rr,>  Iz'Ctov  ftoigijt  ^co-idi  -  Cate  and  difficult  fubjeft   the   domeltic  politics 

y.aro,   t*<  <pt,?.«<  fittampoccrt,  xia  lwo'n<ri  metres  e|  0f  Athens,   and   indeed  of  all  Greece,   is  per- 

lAoo-^W,  x.  T.  a,  h  Tt  to,  ftgoir  !r?o<rS£>E»o5  ^0,7*  feft]y  confonant    t0    the   unqneftionable  autho- 

yjzrfai&TmKWTw™™.    Herodot.  I.V.C.09.  %ity  of  Thucvdides  :    the  two  writers  mutually 

This   honeit   paliage   gives    great   iniight  into  a   o    ,-   ■    '                             ,            TT        ,   -  J 

„           -  v       B     ?■  ■              a  ,                 l  reflect    light    upon   one   another.      Herodotus 

the    ftate   of  party-politics   at    Athens    at   the  _            .      r                 ,      ,                .„      '.       , 

.               .       ' r    ,y  v           ■  ,             c    ,        ,  °Pens   the   fcene;  and   whoever  will    take  the 

time,   ana   affords  a  material  part  or   the  clue     .  a  ,  •     ,  r  . 

'         ,            .         ,           u         u   r  .1      ■  pains  to  connect,  his  defuitory  yet  amufing  nar- 
necelTary  for  tracing   them    through   to  lowing  •            ...   c    ,   ,  .               '  '                  ° 
.            ',    .             °    ,  .            u          j-      r  u  ration,   will  nnd   hnn    not   an    unworthy  fore- 
times.     It  is  remarkably  to   the  credit  01   He-  f  m,         >•  ,            ,    v         ,      J       , 
1                        ,                 /.              ,        .      „      ,  ,  runner   of  Thucydides   and    Xenophon,   who 
rodotus,     and    extraordinary     that    it    Ihould  .  .    m„„Q  „„,  „    ,    •    ,             .if               , 

,          r    i-    1           -j               u       r    .  with  more  art  and  judgement  lead  us  to  the 

have  been    fo  little   noticed,    or  raiher  fo   to-  „,„/irm,v- 

,    ,         .           .     ,            ....  caiuitropne% 
tally  unnoticed,  by  writers  who  have  criticized 

held, 


c  70. 


HISTORY    OF     GREECE.  28 


0 


held,    Cleomenes    thought    the    feafon    favorable     for  making   that    CHAP. VI. 

SFCT   V 

change    in    the  Athenian    constitution  which  would    iuit    the    views      ^^^J 
of  Spartan  ambition.      He  went  to  Athens,  attended  by  a  fmall  mili-   Herodot.  1. v. 
tary  force,  and   at   once  banilhed  levin  hundred  families.      Such  was   Thucya.  l.i. 
at   this  time  Athenian   liberty.      He  was  then   proceeding   to  diffolve   c'  ' 
the  council  of  five  hundred,   and  to  commit  the  whole  power  of  the 
commonwealth   to   a   new   council  confining  cf  three  hundred,    all 
partizans  of  Ifigoras.      But  Athens  was   not  fo  far  prepared  for  fub- 
jedlion.      The  five  hundred    both   refufed  themfclves  to  fubmit,  and 
excited   the   people   to  oppofition.      The  people  ran  to  arms.      Cleo- 
menes and  Ifagoras,   taking  refuge  in  the  citadel,   were  belieged  there 
two  days.      On  the  third   they  furrendered  upon   condition    that  the 
Lacedaemonians   might   depart   in  fafety.      Ifagoras  went  with  them  ; 
but  many  Athenians   of  his   party  were  executed.      Cleifthenes  and 
the  exiled  families  immediately  returned. 

Thofe  who  now  took  the  lead  in  the  Athenian  government,  tho 
without  oppofition  at  home,  were  in  extreme  apprehenlion  of  the  confe- 
quences  of  fuch  a  breach  with  Lacedsemon.  At  a  lofs  for  allies  Herodot.  1.  v. 
within  Greece  capable  of  giving  them  effectual  fupport,  they  fent  c' 73' 
ambaffadors  to  Sardis  to  endeavour  to  form  an  alliance  with  Arta- 
j  hemes  the  Perfian  fat  rap.  Hitherto  there  had  been  fcarcely  any 
communication  between  any  branch  of  the  vaft  empire  of  Periia  and 
the  European  Greeks.  The  fatrap  received  the  deputies  of  a  little 
unheard-of  republic  with  that  haughtinefs  which  might  be  expect- 
ed. Having  admitted  them  to  audience,  he  afked  who  they  were, 
and  from  what  part  of  the  world  they  came,  that  they  delired  alliance 
with  the  Perfians  ?  Being  informed,  he  anfwered  them  very  fhortly, 
'  That  if  they  would  give  earth  and  water  to  king  Darius,'  the  ufual 
ceremony  among  the  Perfians  in  acknowleging  fubjecTtion,  '  they 
'  might  be  received  into  alliance;  otherwife  they  muft  depart.'  The 
ambaifadors,  considering  only  the  immediate  danger  of  their  country, 
confented  to  thofe  humiliating  terms.  Such  was  the  firft  public 
tranfaction  between  Greece  and  Perlia. 

CHAPTER 


2SS  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAPTER     VII. 

View  of  the  Nations  politically  connected  with  Greece. 

SECTION     I. 

View  of  the  Nations  politically  connected  with  Greece :  Lydia :  Scythia : 
Ajfyria  :  Perjia.  Reduction  of  the  Afiatic  Greeks  under  the  Perfian 
Dominion  by  Cyrus. 

CHAP.  VII.  A  S  the  affairs  of  Greece  now  become  eifentially  connected  with 
SECT.  I.  X\~  thofe  of  that  powerful  empire  which  by  rapid  conquefl  had 
united  under  one  dominion  aim  oil  the  whole  of  the  civilized  world, 
it  will  be  neceiTary  to  take  a  fhort  furvey  of  the  ftate  of  things  in  the 
furrounding  nations  ;  and  particularly  in  thofe  of  the  vail  continent 
of  Afia,  whoie  tranfacfions  with  the  little  country  cf  Greece  furniih 
fome  of  the  moil  remarkable  and  important  events  in  the  political 
hiftory  of  mankind. 

We  have  already  obferved   that  riches  and  arts  were  earlier  known 
in  Afia  Minor  than  in  Greece.     Before  the  Trojan  war  Phrygia  was 
famed  among  the  Greeks  for  wealth.     Lydia  fucceeded  to  its  repu- 
tation.     In  this  province  is  the  mountain  Tmolus,  anciently  abound- 
Hciodot.  1. 1.   jn2.  wjtn  o-old,  which  the  torrent-river  Padtolus  brought  down  from 

c.  93.  00  o^ 

Strabo,  1. xiii.  the  craggy  fummits,  fo  that  a  rude  people  might  ealily  colled  it. 
Hence  at  the  foot  of  Tmolus,  on  the  banks  of  the  Paclolus,  the 
town  of  Sardis  early  rofe  to  importance,  and  became  the  capital  of 
Lyc'ia.  Gold,  to  which  all  the  nations  of  the  old  world,  even  in 
their  ludeft  ages,  feem  almoil  inilinclively  to  have  attributed  a  my- 
fterious  value,  while  the  original  Americans,  of  any  people  known  to 
have  lung  pcffeiTed  it,  have  alone  given  it  an  eftimation  nearly  pro- 
portioned to  its  intrinfic  worth  ;  gold  has  net  always  thofe  pernicious 
effects  which  fpeculative  philofophers  have  been  fond  of  attributing 

to 


P.  625. 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  287 

to  it.      Gold  was,   to  the  Lydians,  the  fpring  of  induftry,  of  know-   CHAP.VII. 

:ECT.  I. 


lep;e,   we  may  add  of  virtue,  if  it  be  truly  laid  that  virtue  confifts  in 


action.  No  doubt  it  was  alfo  the  fpring  of  vice ;  for  fo  things  are 
conftituted  in  this  world,  that  there  almoft  only  can  be  active  virtue 
where  is  vice.  The  Lydians,  as  we  have  heretofore  had  occaiion  to  re- 
mark, appear,  to  have  derived  their  origin  from  the  fame  hords  who 
peopled  Greece.  Their  laws  and  manners,  to  the  time  of  Herodotus,  Herodot.  I. !. 
were  almoft  the  fame  with  thofe  of  the  Greeks  ;   and  that  hiftorian   ^'"»74>93 

7t' 

mentions  fome  c i re um fiances  in  the  progrefs  of  fociety  in  which  they 
preceded  neighbouring  nations.  They  were  the  fir  ft  people  known 
to  the  Greeks  to  have  exercifed  retail  trades,  and  the  firft  who  ftrucfe 
coins  of  gold  and  filver.  In  all  countries  the  arts  of  peace  and  war 
have  flourished  together.  While  the  people  of  Lydia  through  in- 
duftry were  growing  rich,  the  monarchs  extended  their  dominion 
eaftward  as  far  as  the  river  Halys.  The  fmall  republics  of  the  Gre- 
cian colonies  could  not  be  fafe  in  the  neighbourhood  of  fuch  a  po- 
tentate. They  preferved  little  political  connexion  among  fhemfelves, 
and  fcarcely  any  with  the  parent  ftates.  Gyges,  fuppoftd  to  have 
reigned  foon  after  the  age  of  Lycurgus,  firft  led  an  army  againft  Herodot.  1.  i. 
them.  He  found  among  them  probably  a  knowlege  of  war,  and  a  c' '4' 
republican  fpirit  of  bravery,  which  the  Afiatics  in  general  did  not 
poffefs ;  for  he  failed  in  his  attempts  upon  Miletus  and  Smyrna,  but 
he  took  Colophon.  The  weight  however  of  the  Lydian  kingdom, 
perfeveringly  exerted,  was  too  great  for  any  of  thofe  little  common- 
wealths to  refift.     Ardyes,  fon  of  Gyges,  took  Miletus  and  Priene. 

There  are  fome  parts  of  the  world  whofe  inhabitants,  from  earlieft 
hiftory,  have  differed  from  all  others  in  circumftances  and  in  man- 
ners, which  they  have  preferved  unaltered  through  hundreds  of  ge- 
nerations. Of  thefe  the  people  of  that  vaft  country  called  Scythia 
by  the  Greeks,  and  by  the  moderns  Tartary,  are  particularly  remark- 
able. The  defcription  that  Juftin,  after  Trogus  Pompeius,  gives  of 
the  Scythians,  is  equally  juft,  as  far  as   our  knowlege  goes,  for  all 

former 


283  HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  VII.  former  and  for  all  following  ages.     They  wander  over,  rather   than 
SECT.  I.     poflefs,  a  country  of  immenfe  extent.     Exerciiing   no   tillage,   they 
jutt'm.  l.  ii.    claim  no  property  in  land  :    they  hold  in  abhorrence  and  fcoin  the 
HeVodot.Uv.   confinement  of  a  fixed  habitation,  roaming  perpetually,  with   their 
families  and  herds,  from  pafture  to  p  allure  over  their  boundlefs  wil- 
dernefs.      In  this  vagabond  life,  not  to  fteal  from   one  another  is  al- 
moft  their  only  law.     Their  defires  commonly  go  no  farther  than 
for  food,  which  their  herds  fupply,  and  clothing,  which  the  extreme 
cold  of  their  climate  makes  peculiarly  neceiTary.      For  the  whole  ex- 
tent of  their  country  being  far  removed  from  the  balmy  influence 
of  the   ocean  ;     and,   tho   moftly   plain,   yet   of   extraordinary  height 
above  the  level  of  the  ocean  ;   being  bounded  even   on    the  fouth  by 
mountains    moflly  covered  with  fnow,   while  the    trad   northward  is 
a  continent  of  fnow,  their  winters  are  of  a  feverity  unknown  under  the 
fame  latitude  in  other  pans  of  the   globe  *.      Nature  has  therefore 
fupplied  the  brute  animals  of  thofe  regions   with  a  peculiar  warmth 
of  covering.      To  man   is   only  given   ability   to   wreft   fuch   boons 
from  the  inferior  creation.     The  ingenuity. of  the  ancient  Scythians 
went  thus  far.      Necefiity  drove    them    to    the    life   of  thofe  furs  for 
clothing  which  are   become  fo  extensively  an  article   of  ufelefs,   per- 
haps often  pernicious  luxury  in  milder  climates  -F.      Such  a  country, 
With    fuch   inhabitants,   would  little   invite  the  ambition    of  others. 
But   the  Scythians,  inilincuvely  fond  of  wandering,  were  likely  to  be 
iiifpired  with  a  defire  to  wander  among  the  poflefiions  of  their  more 

*  Herodotus's  defcription   of  the    Scythian  fiift  accounts  of  it,  fo  probably  in  Herodotus's 

winter  is  remarkable  and  prcbably  jult:    Aver  time  the  feverity  of  the  Scythian  climate  may 

ylijw£fo«  ti  av-rr,  r,  y.u.-ra.yzyjn~eu  nuo-a.  yef*  otrw  »>i  have    exceeded    anything  now   known   under 

tj  t)-'-    "S*  Tot);  f/Xt   Jztu  wv    fir.wy  affyvros   °^s  the  fame  latitude  even  in  America. 
yUi-ra:  yfiy-h,  it  ro«r»  SJwg  ixxfc«,  *?""  'm  ^'r'<^'>"  f  England  is  perhaps  of  all  countries  in  the 

■srvi,   11   meatatut    irmnias    wr?i».      *H  &  y&offg?  northern"  temperate  zone  that  in  v.  hich  furs  are 

•W""1,™  #<»*«<*  ™s  '"  k.^.^.o,-    »»■«    lecll  ufed>    lt  is  indeed  the  coumry  in  the 

T°"    ?  •             "      .    \     .p    ,                       ,  world  in  which  precaution  of  any  kind  a^ainit 

L;   ZMs.     -Oira  £   rn  rois   ferd   ,*•/*.-  changes  in  the  atmofphere  is  leak  known;   m 

«tf..   y'V-'  ;>    rJt  i'  fintatw*.   T.V«f«t  W-  iew  <ountr.es   lefs  is  neceffary  ;    and  vet  by  a 

x*a    iwiO,    cr!    *.  r\  *.     Herodot.  1.  iv.  c.  zS.  lingular  fate  it  is  that  in  which  thole  changes 

As  the   climate   of   many  parts  of  Europe  is  are  moil  complained  of. 
certainly  become  confiderably  milder  fince  the 

fettled 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE,  289 

fettled  neighbours.     And  tho  their  manner  of  life  is  little  above  that    CHAP- VIL 
of  brutes,  yet  it  has  always  been  that  of  gregarious  brutes.     They      .        _  / 
migrate  in  fuch  multitudes  that  their  progreffion  is  fcarcely  refiftible. 
War  was  moreover  peculiarly  their  delight ;    and  mercy  and  human 
kindnefs  were  totally  alien  to  their  warfare.  Scalping  was  practifed  by 
them  nearly  as  by  the  American  Indians.     None  could  claim  his  fhare 
of  plunder  who  had  not  an  enemy's  head  to  prefent  to  his  chief.    The  Herodot.l.iv. 
fcalp  then  became  the  warrior's  favorite  ornament  for  his  own  perfon,  c"  4'   J" 
and  that  of  his  horfe :   the  number  he  pofleffed  decided  his  reputation 
and  his  rank.     Without  this  teftimonial  of  military  merit  none  could 
be  admitted   to  their  principal  feafts  j   where,  as  among  our  Scandi- 
navian anceftors,   probably  their  defcendants,    the  fkulls  of  flain  ene- 
mies were  the  drinking  cups.      It  is  perhaps  well  for  the  historian's 
credit  that  we  are  aflured,    by  unqueilionable  teftimony,  of  the  exis- 
tence of  fuch  practices  among  later  people  *. 

Thrice,  in  very  early  times,  thefe  ferocious  vagabonds  are  faid  to  have 
overrun  Afia.    But  their  irruptions  had  more  the  effect  of  a  fwarm  of  lo-    Ol.  xxxvi. 
cufts,  an  inundation,  or  a  hurricane,  than  of  an  expedition  devifed  and   2« 
conducted  by  the  reafon  of  men.     While  Ardyes  reigned  in  Lydia  there      '     '     ^* 
happened  a  migration  from  thofe  rugged  climates.     A  Scythian  hord    01.  xxxix. 

drove  a  Cimmerian  hord,   apparently  of  not  very  diffimilar  manners,    **  _     ' 

«...  _  .  -  ,  B.  C.   624. 

from   their  country.     The   conquerors   puriuing  eattward,    entered  #. 

Media,  and  overwhelmed   that   rich   and  powerful   kingdom.     The   ^"°.d&'l!'iv'. 

C.    I. 

*  This  fketch   of  fo  lingular  a  portion   of  hands,   but  frefh  in  the  memory  of  all  Europe, 

mankind  was  penned  before  the  author  had  feen  The  whole  would  indeed  have  been  beyond  his 

the  finilhed  pi&ure  of  the  fame  people  by  the  purpofe  :   the  fele&ion  of  parts  hazardous;  and 

mafterlv  hand  of  the  hiitorian  of  the  Decline  any  appearance  of  a  competition  prepofterous. 

and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire.     It  has  been  He   has    therefore  rifked   his    original   (ketch, 

obferved  by  more  than  one  great  hiitorian  that  principally  translated  from  Juflin  and  Herodo- 

every  book  mould  be   as  complete  as   poffible  tus,   which  he  hopes   will   be  found  not  abfo- 

within   itfelf,    and    fhould  never  refer  for  any  lutely  incompetent  to  its  purpofe  ;  and  it  will 

thing  material   to  other  books  (i).      Sensible  certainly  be  imputed  as  a  credit  to  thofe  two 

of  the  truth  of  this   remark,   the  author   has  writers   that   this  fketch,   as  far  as  it  goes,  ac- 

found  himfelf  under   peculiar  difficulty  in  the  cords  very  completely   with  the  elaborate  ac- 

neceffity  of  giving  feme  account  of  the  Scy-  count  of  the  hiitorian  nrll-mentioned,   who  fo 

thians.     He   fcrupled   the    tranfeription   of  a  Angularly  unites  the  livelieft  manner  with  the 

long   pafl'age   from  a  hiftory    not  only  in   the  moll  accurate  diligence. 

(il  Hume's  Hift.  of  England;  Appendix  II.  and  Padre  de  Paolo  Hift.  Cone.  Trid. 

P  p  Cimmerians 


zgo 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  VII.   Cimmerians  had  avoided  them  by  taking  a  more  wefterly  courfe ;  and 
SECT.  I.      jn  their  flight  little  lefs  terrible   to   the  nations  among  whom  they 
came,   than  the   Scythians    had   been    to    themfelves,    they    overran 
Afia  Minor.      Sardis    fell   their   prey ;    the   citadel   only    withftand- 
ing  them.     Moft  of  the   Grecian   cities  fu  fie  red.     But  the   plague 
was    tranlitory.       It  came,    it   deliroyed,    it   vanifhed ;    and    things 
refumed  nearly  their  former   fituation.     The  power  of  the  Lydian 
monarchy  was  however  fhaken.     Some  of  the  Grecian  fbtes,  Mi- 
letus particularly,   appear   to  have   recovered  independency;  for  we 
find  Sadyattes,  fon  of  Ardyes,   toward  the  end  of  his  reign,  ingaged 
in  a  war  with  the  Milefians.     It  was  continued  or  renewed  by  his  fon 
Halyattes.     Miletus  was  then  a  rich  and  populous   city  ;    and  while 
no  preater  potentate  applied   to  marine  affairs,  the  naval   power  of 
Ol.  L.  •■        thofc  little  Grecian   republics  gave  them  confequence.     A  blockade 
5°°^  0f  Miletus  was  vain   while  the  fea  remained   open  to  it's  people; 
Ol.xxxix.     and  any  other  mode  of  fiege  was  at  that  time  little  known.     The  man- 
4*  „   ,  ner   therefore   in  which  the  Lydian  monarch  carried  on  the  war  was 

B.  thus.  Marching  into  the  Milefian  territory  a  little  before  harveft,  with 
Herodot.  l.i.  ajj  military  pomp,  to  the  found  of  various  mufical  inftruments,  he 
cut  down  all  the  corn,  and  deftroyed  all  the  vines,  olives,  and  other 
valuable  trees;  fparing  the  buildings,  that  the  people  might  have  the 
better  means  of  cultivating-  freih  harvefts  for  him  to  carry  off  or  de- 
ftroy.  The  Milefians,  venturing  to  take  the  field  for  the  protection 
of  their  property,  fuffered  two  conliderable  defeats.  The  war  how- 
ever continued  eleven  years  from  its  commencement  under  Sadyattes; 
and  the  Milefians  {fill  obftinately  defended  themfelves.  In  the  twelfth 
year  Halyattes,  being  feized  with  a  dangerous  illnefs,  was  agitated  with 
fuperflitious  fear  on  account  of  the  accidental  burning  of  a  temple  of 
Minerva  by  his  ravaging  troops  ;  and  the  Milefians,  taking  advantage 
of  this  circumflance,  procured  a  peace. 

*   The  fpace  of  only  three  years  allowed  by  other  circumftances  which  he  has  marked,  it 

Dr.  Blair  between  the  Scythian  irruption  and  might  have  begun  about    the   fiftieth    Olym- 

the  Milefian  war  is  inconfiftent  with  the  nar-  piad,  where  Herodotus's  account  would  nearly 

ration  of  Herodotus.     Newton  has  not  marked  bring  it, 
the  date  of  the  Milefian  war ;  but  according  to 

Crcefus 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  z9i 

Crcefus  fon  of  Halyattes  ftill  advanced  the  power  of  theLydian  mo-   CHAP.  VII. 
narchy.     He  made  all   the  A  flan  Greeks  tributary;    and,  excepting     sect.  I. 
Lyeia  and  Cilicia,  was  mailer  of  the  whole  of  Afia  Minor,  as  far  as   Herodot.  l.  i. 
the  Halys.     He  was  an  able  and  virtuous  prince,  who  made  himfelf  ca6,  &feq. 
not  lefs  beloved  than  feared  ;     fo    that  the  Afian  Greeks,    finding 
their  condition  far  from  worfe  for  their  fubjeclion  to  fuch  a  monarch, 
who  allowed  them  the  injoyment  of  their  own  laws  and  conftitution, 
with   the  whole  internal  regulation   of  their  little  commonwealths, 
became  attached  to  him  as  fubjeds  to  their  legal  hereditary  lbvereign*. 
There  had  long  been  intercourfe  between  Lydia  and  the  continent  of 
Greece.     Sardis,  as  a  mart,  was  an  object  for  all  nations  within  reach. 
Superfhtion  chiefly  led  the  Lydians  to  Greece :   the  reputation  of  the 
Delphian  oracle  was  high  among  them ;   many  prefents  from  Lydian 
monarchs  were,  in  the  time  of  Herodotus,  among  the  principal  orna- 
ments of  its  fhrine.     Gyges  king  of  Lydia,   that  writer  fays,  was  the 

*  This  appears   from  the  tenor  of  Hero-  When  in  the  mouldring  urn  the  monarch  lies, 

dotus's  narration,     and  receives    confirmation  His  fame  in  lively  characters  remains, 

from  Thucvdides,  who  fays  that  the  Ionians  Or  graved  in  monumental  hiftories, 

flourifhed  greatly  and  were  very  powerful  till  Or  deck'd  and  painted  in  Aonian  flrains. 

they  were  reduced  by  Cyrus  after  he  had  con-  Thus  frefh  and  fragrant  and  immortal  blooms 

quered  Crcefus  ( 1).      Pindar's  concife  but  em-  The  virtue,  Croesus,  of  thy  gentle  mind: 

phatical  eulogy  fpeaks  alio  ftrongly  to  the  fame  While  fate  to  infamy  and  hatred  dooms 

purpofe.      The  paflage  is  remarkable  :  Sicilia's  tyrant,  fcorn  of  human  kind  ; 

Whofe  ruthlefs  bofom  fwell'J  with  cruel  pride 

,Q7ng-6o/.'.£foT<»'  a.lyri^«-  &£<*«  When  in  his  brazen  buil  the  broiling  wretches 

'orix   a.^roi^ou.vjdJii  a't^un   Siccnat  pxv{&f  died. 

,      .   *.  ~  Him  therefore  nor  in  fweet  fociety 

The  generous  youth  convening  ever  name, 
OT  *©INEI   KPOISOY  *IAO*PnN  APETA.       XT  .\    .      ,      ',     .  ..   .    ,  .     6,    , 

Nor  with  the  harp  s  delightful  melody 

Tit  &  t*u{u   x«*X£V   "<»«t55«,   nttia  tiot,  Mingle  his  odious  inharmonious  fame. 

'Exfy"-  4>cl>M£iv  k«te^h  iravT-Si  Qanf  The  firft,  the  greater!  blifs  on  man  conferr'd, 
'OvU  j/.tv  ipjjf/.tyye;  imoplfuu  xotvvtUu  Is  in  the  afts  of  virtue  to  excel  ; 

,.  .n      v        /  «,      > '   ._.  a ._„,  The  fecond  to  obtain  their  high  reward, 

,  „  „        ~^  .        „.  The  foul-exalting  praiie  or  doing  well. 

'  Who  both  thefe  lots  attains  is  bleil  indeed, 

'ES  Fax&vn,  Jtarrtga  pJ.p .  since  fortune  here  below  can  give  no  richer  meed. 
'ApQvTisun  y  itvg    ^  Weft's  tranflation. 

'Or'  »»  iyy.i^an  xai  sty,  In  Pindar's  youth  the  fame  of  Crcefus  was 

Xts$*ho\i  v-^irov  hiiKTui.  recent.      The  fele&ion  of  him  therefore  as  an 
Pindar.  Pyth.I.      example  of  a  virtuous  and  beneficent  prince, 
fittelt  to  be  named  in  oppofition  to  a  deteiled 

(i)  Thucyd.  1.  i.  c.  16.  tyrant,  is  ftrong  teftimony. 

Pp  2  firft 


igi 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


Herodot.  1.  i 
c.  29. 


Herodot.  1. 


CHAP.  VII.  faft  foreigner,  excepting  only  Midas,  fon  of  Gordias  king  of  Phrygia, 
SECT.  I.  wh0  ever  fent  a  prefent  thither.  Crcefus  feems  to  have  equalled  in 
fuperftition  any  of  his  predeceflbrs,  tho  otherwife  highly  liberal.  He 
appears  to  have  been  partial  to  the  Greeks,  and  he  incouraged  men 
of  genius  and  learning  of  that  nation  in  his  court  *.  But  he  was  not 
without  a  confiderable  (hare  of  ambition.  Being  matter  of  the  whole 
weftern  coafl  of  Alia  Minor,  with  all  its  (hipping,  he  had  the  means 
of  becoming  a  more  formidable  naval  power  than  had  yet  been  known 
in  the  world.  Already  the  illands  trembled  for  their  independency; 
and  Greece  itfelf  was  not  without  apprehenfion,  when  events  in  ano- 
ther quarter  called  all  the  attention  of  the  Lydian  monarch. 

Tho  accounts  of  the  countries  about  the  river  Euphrates  go  far- 
ther into  antiquity  than  thole  of  any  other  upon  earth,  yet  we  fcarcely 
know  when  there  was  not  a  large  and  polillied  empire  there.  Of 
other  countries  which  have  poffelled  fcience,  arts,  and  letters,  we 
learn  whence  fcience,  arts,  and  particularly  whence  letters  have  come 
to  them  ;  but  no  trace  appears  of  their  existence  in  any  other  country 
prior  to  their  flourifhing  in  Chald^sa.  However  alio  the  wonders 
of  Babylon  may  have  been  exaggerated  by  fome  writers,  we  have 
yetluflicient  testimony  to  it's  having  been  a  city  of  extraordinary  mag- 
nitude, populoufnefs,  wealth,  and  magnificence,  when  fcarcely  elfe- 
where  in  the  world  a  city  exifted.  The  Assyrian  Empire,  of  which 
it  was  the  metropolis,  by  a  revolt  of  the  northern  provinces  became 
divided.  Babylon  remained  the  capital  of  the  fouthern  part,  Hill 
called  Aflvria  :  the  northern  formed  an  extenfive  kingdom  under  the 
name  of  M&dia.  To  the  fouth  of  Media,  and  eaft  of  Alfyria,  was 
a  mountainous  tract  called  Persia  ;  fo  inferior  to  the  furrounding 
countries  in  riches  and  populoufnefs,  that  hitherto  it  had  been  of  lit- 
tle weight  or  confideration.     But  during  the  reign  of  Crcefus  in  Ly- 


*  The  three  firft  lines  of  the  quotation  from  if  indeed  the  hiftorian  did  not  mean  to  include 

Pindar  in  the  foregoing  note,  being  introduc-  poets  under  the  term  fophifts.      It  fhould  fol- 

tory  to  the  mention  of  Crcefus,  appear  to  in-  low   that,    if  pure   Greek   was  not   the  com- 

dicate  that  the  Giecian  poets,  as  well  as   the  mon  language  of  Sardis,  it  was  however  fami- 

fophills   mentioned  by  Herodotus,    were    not  liarly  umlerllood  in  Crcefus's  court, 
without  a  due  fhare  of  that  prince's  favor; 

dia 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  29^ 

din  a  prince  of  extraordinary  abilities  named  Cyrus  arofe  among  the    CHAP.vii. 
Perlians.     Thofe  hardy  mountaineers  had  the  fame  fuperiority  over     SECT.  I. 
the  enervated  inhabitants  of  the  rich  Aiiatic  plains,   which  is  ftill 
obferved  in  the  fultry  climates  of  the  eaft;   tho  in  Europe  the  diffe-   lyofindoftan" 
rence  in  ftrength  and  courage  between  the  inhabitants  of  mountain 
and  of  plains   is   only  to  be  found  in  the  imagination  of  fpeculative 
writers.     Cyrus  became  mafter  of  Media,  according  to  fome  accounts, 
by  inheritance  from  his  mother,  according  to  others   by  arms.     He 
was  fuccefsful  in  war  againft  Aflyria,    and  threatened  the   intire  con- 
queft  of  that  empire.     Craefus  was  alarmed  at  his  growing  power 
and  fame.     It  was  obvious  policy  to  fupport  the  Aifyrian  Monarch, 
and  endeavour  to  hold  the  balance  between  him  and  the  Perfian.    Yet 
either  the  attempt  or  the  neglect  might  be  fatal  ;  and  human  wifdom 
could  only  decide  upon  the  probability.     Anxious  for  furer  grounds, 
and  full  of  the  fuperfrition  of  his  age,  he  tried  all  the  more  celebrated 
oracles  known]  to  the  Greeks  for  advice  and  information.     He  was 
fo  liberal  in  prefents  to  Delphi,   that  the  Delphians  palled  a  decree 
granting  to  the  king  and  people  of  Lydia  precedency  *  in  the  confu- 
tation of  the  oracle,  with  privilege  for  any  Lydian  to  become  at  plea- 
fure  a  Delphian  citizen.     Such  preference  to  a  foreigner  in  a  bufi- 
nefs  which  muft  have  been  under  the  controul  of  the  Amphiclyonic 
council,  proves  ftrongly  the  refpeift  of  the  Greeks  for  Crcefus,  and  per- 
haps their  fear  of  him.     Yet  the  managers  of  the  oracle,  always  pro- 
vident of  its  reputation,  could  by  no  means  be  induced  to  prophefy 
any  fuccefs  to  that  monarch  in  a  war  with  Perfia.     To  all  his  inter- 
rogatories on  that  fubject  they  gave  anfwers   fo  dubious  and  elufive, 
that,  whatfoever  part  he  might  take,  and  whatfoever  might  be  the 
event,  the  credit  of  the  oracle  would  be  fafe.      The  unhappy  prince, 
after  much  hefitation,  at  length  determined  upon  war.      He  led  his   n,     ... 
army  into  thofe  provinces  beyond  the   river  Halys  which  had  formed    b,  C.   C44, 
part  of  the  Median  monarchy.    Cyrus  immediately  quitted  his  AfTyrian  ...  -^ 

foes  to  march  againft  Crcefus.     One  great  battle   decided  the  fate  of  g  \j    rW 

*  'Hpiuwltifa  x*J  ayysx'w  *<*}  wfoiSpw.     HeroJot.  1,  i.  c.  54..     What  precifely  thcfe  piivlleges 
and  honors  were  may  be  difficult  to  determine, 

Lydia, 


294  HISTORY    OF    GREECE.' 

CHAP.  VII.  Lydja#     Cyrus  was  victorious,  and,  marching  immediately  to  Sardis, 
^£T*V     made  Crcefus  prifoner,    and  his  kingdom  a  province  of  the  Perfian 
empire. 
Heiodot.  1. 1.       While  the  iffue  of  the  war  remained  vet  uncertain  Cyrus  had  en- 

c.  141.  J  J 

deavoured  to  gain  the  Grecian  cities  in  Afia  Minor  ;  but  they  ad- 
hered to  their  ingagements  with  the  Lydian  king.  The  full  fuccefs 
therefore  of  the  Perlian  arms  could  not  but  be  highly  alarming  to 
them.  Immediately  the  lonians  fent  to  offer  fubmiflion  upon  the 
fame  terms  on  which  they  had  been  fubject  to  Crcefus.  The  Mile- 
fians  alone  were  admitted  to  fo  much  favor.  The  others  were  told 
that,  having  refufed  thofe  terms  when  offered,  they  muft  abide  the 
confluences.  Such  a  reply  from  fuch  a  potentate  was  dreadful. 
Each  city  fet  to  repair  and  improve  its  fortifications.  The  Panionian 
affembly  was  fummoned.  But  a  comparifon  of  their  own  force  with 
that  of  the  Perfian  monarchy  affording  no  reafonable  hope  that  they 
fhould  of  themfelvcs  be  able  to  withftand  the  threatened  danger,  in 
this  extremity  they  turned  their  thoughts  to  their  parent  ftates ;  with 
little  expectation,  however,  that  even  thefe  either  would  or  could 
protect  them.  An  embaffy  was  fent  to  Lacedaemon,  as  the  leading 
ftate  of  Greece.  But  it  was  never  the  character  of  the  Spartan  go- 
vernment to  be  forward  in  hazardous  enterprize.  The  lonians  could 
obtain  no  promife  of  affiftance  ;  but  fome  Spartans  were  appointed  to 
accompany  them  in  their  return,  to  inquire  into  the  truth  of 
the  alarming  accounts  given  of  the  Perfian  power,  and  endeavour 
to  learn  the  farther  deiigns  of  the  conquering  monarch.  The  Spartan 
minifters  went  to  the  Perfian  court  at  Sardis  ;  and  the  account  given 
with  his  ufual  limplicity  by  Herodotus  of  what  paffed  at  an  audience 
to  which  Cyrus  admitted  them,  marks  juft  the  contempt  which 
might  be  expected  in  an  eaflern  conqueror  for  the  little  republics  of 
Greece.  A  republic,  indeed,  was  probably  a  new  idea  to  him.  He 
-.     .     ,  .    told  the  Spartans,  '  That  he  could  not  be  afraid  of  people  who  had 

Herodot.  L  1.  . 

c.  152, 153.     «  fquares  in  the  middle  of  their  towns,  in  which  they  met  to  fwear 
*  and  deceive  one  another,'  alluding  to  the  agora,  which   was,    in 

moft 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  295 

mofl  of  the  Grecian  cities,  the  place  equally  for  the  common  market   CHAP.  VII. 
and  for  the  general  aflembly  :   and  he  concluded  with  a  threat,  '  that      ^^J' 

*  it  might  come  to  their  turn   to  lament   their  own  fubjedion,  and 

*  thev  had  better  not  interfere  in  his  concerns  with  the  Ionians.' 
The  war  with  Aflyria  was  an  object  of  other  importance.  March? 
in?  therefore  himfelf  eaftward,  he  left  the  Greeks  to  his  lieutenants. 

It  was  a  practice  of  this  great  prince  to  leave  the  administration  of 
conquered  countries,  as  far  as  fafely  might  be,  in  the  hands  of  na-   Herodot.l.ul* 

c.  i c. 

tives.      He  committed  a  high  office  at  Sardis   to    Padyas,     a  Ly-    Herodot.  l,i, 

dian,    who    took    a   very   early    opportunity  to    fhow    himfelf    un-  (    "*" 

worthy  of  the  truft  repofed  in  him.      Cyrus  was  fcarcely  gone  when 

be  managed  a  revolt,   became  mafter  of  the  town  of  Sardis,  and  be- 

fieged  the  Perlian  governor  in  the  citadel.      Cyrus  did  not  think  even 

this  a  circumstance   to  require  the  intermiffion  of  his   march  againft 

Aflyria.     He  detached  a  part  only  of  his  army  againft  the  rebel,  who 

appears  to  have  been  very  unequal  to  the  greatnefs  of  his  attempt; 

for,  according   to  Herodotus,  without  any  farther  effort,  he  fled  to   , 

1.  1.  c.    1  c6 

the  Grecian  town  of  Cuma,  where  probably  he  had  claims  of  hofpi-   &fcq. 
tality.     The  Perlian  general  fent  to  demand  him,     The  Cumasans, 
between  fear  of  the  vengeance  of  fo  mighty  a  power,  and  unwilling- 
nefs  to  incur  the  difgrace  of   betraying  a  received  fuppliant,  which 
they   expeded  would  alfo  draw  on    them    the  anger  of  the  gods, 
were    greatly  at   a  lofs.       The   neighbouring    oracle    of  Apollo   at 
Branchidae,  then  in  high  repute  among  the  Afian   Greeks,   was  their 
refaurce.     This  (lory,  alfo  related   by  Herodotus  with  a  iimplicity 
evincing  truth,  while  it  charaderizes  both  the  religion  and  the  poli-     - 
tics  of  the  times,  affords  a  remarkable  fpecimen  both  of  the  fubjeds 
upon  which  oracles  were  confulted,  and  of  the  fubterfuges  of  the 
managers  to  preferve  their  credit.    The  queftion  of  the  Cumaans  was 
not  a  little   diftreffing.     To    advife   any  oppofition   to    the    Perlian 
power  would  have  been  putting  the  credit  of  the  oracle  to  the  higheft 
rifk.     But  to   betray   an   admitted   fuppliant    was    held    among   the 
Greeks,  in  no   lefs  a  meafure,  offeniive   to  the  gods  and  infamous 
among  men.     This,  however,  the  oracle  unwarily  direded.     Arifto- 

dicus, 


296  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  VII.  d;CUS)  a  man  eminent  among  the  citizens  of  Cuma,  whether  influ- 
SECT.  I.  enced  by  party-views,  or  by  friendfhip  for  Pactyas,  or  by  honeft 
indignation  at  the  unworthy  deed  intended  by  his  fellowcitizens, 
publicly  declared  his  doubt  of  the  anfwer  reported  from  the  oracle, 
and  in  lifted  that  the  prayer  mould  be  repeated  to  the  god,  and  perfons 
of  unqueftionable  credit  appointed  to  bring  the  refponfe.  He  pre- 
vailed, and  was  himfelf  appointed  of  the  number.  The  anfwer  was 
ftill  as  before,  That  the  Cumaeans  mould  deliver  up  Pactyas.  Arifto- 
dicus,  not  thus  fatisfied,  fearching  round  the  temple,  purpofely  dif- 
turbed  fome  nefts  of  fparrows  and  other  birds,  which  Grecian  fuper- 
flition  held  to  be,  in  that  fituation,  under  the  particular  protection 
of  the  deity  of  the  place.  A  voice  was  prefently  heard  from  the  in- 
nermofl  recefs  of  the  building,  '  O  moft  unholy  of  men  !  how  dareft 

*  thou   thus  violate  my  fuppliants  !'     Ariftodicus  replied,   *  O  fove- 
'  reign  power  !  doft  thou  thus  protect  thy  fuppliants,  yet  commanded. 

*  the  Cumaeans  to  give  up  their  fuppliant  ?'  *  Yes,'  returned  the 
voice,  '  I  command  it  :  that  fo  you,  the  fooner  perilling,  may  no 
■  more  confult  oracles  about  betraying  fuppliants.'  This  reply  an- 
fwered  the  purpofe  both  of  the  oracle  and  of  Ariftodicus,  but  not  fo 
of  the  Cumaeans.  The  credit  of  the  oracle,  not  only  for  truth,  but 
in  fome  meafure  for  juftice  alfo,  was  faved  ;  but  the  Cumaeans,  fear- 
ing equal  deftruiftion  whether  they  betrayed  Paclyas  or  attempted 
his  protection,  fought  to  avoid  the  danger  by  a  middle  courfe,  and 
furnifhed  him  with  means  of  efcaping  to  Mitylene  in  Lefbos.  There 
it  was  hoped  he  might  be  fafe  :  for  as  the  Perfians  were  utterly  un- 
converfant  in  marine  affairs,  and  no  maritime  ftate  was  yet  added  to 
their  dominion,  the  Grecian  iflands  were  thought  in  no  immediate 
danger.  But  the  Mitylenaeans,  equally  regardlefs  of  their  honor, 
and  fearlefs  of  divine  vengeance,  only  conlidered  how  they  might 
moft  profit  by  the  conjuncture.  They  entered  into  a  negotiation  to 
deliver  up  Pactyas  for  a  ftipulated  price.  His  Cumrean  friends,  in- 
formed of  this,  farther  aflifted  him  with  means  of  efcaping  to  Chios. 
But  the  Chians,  no  lefs  infamoufly  mercenary  than  the  Mitylenaeans, 

for 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  297 

for  a  fmall  trail  of  land  on  the  continent  overagainft  their  ifland,  fold  CHAP.  vir. 
him  to  the  Perfian ;   and  to  execute  their  agreement  fcrupled  not  to     SECT.  I. 
violate  the  fan&uary  of  Minerva,  the  tutelary  goddefs  of  their  ftate , 
to  which  he  had  fled  as  a  fure  afylum. 

The  Perfian  general,  meanwhile,  overran  the  vales  of  the  Msean-   Herodot.l.i. 

0  c.  161. 

der  and  of  Magnefia,  and  gave  the  plunder  to  his  foldiers.  He  took 
the  town  of  Priene,  and  fold  all  the  inhabitants  for  Haves.  He  was 
proceeding  thus  violently  to  execute  his  commitlion  for  fubduing  the 
Grecian  poifefTions,  when  ficknefs  flopped  his  courfe,  and  death  foon 
followed.  Harpagus,  his  fuccefTor  in  command,  began  his  admini- 
flration  with  the  fiege  of  Phocaea.  The  Phoca:ans  had  been  remark- 
able for  their  early  and  fuccefsful  application  to  maritime  affairs. 
They,  firft  of  the  Greeks,  undertook  long  voyages,  and  made  known  Herodot.  ill. 
to  their  fellowcountrymen  the  mores  of  the  Adriatic,  and  the  coafls  c*  I&3' 
of  Tufcany  and  Spain.  Becoming  rich  by  commerce,  they  had  for- 
tified their  town,  which  was  large,  in  a  manner  fuperior  to  what  was 
then  common.  But  the  Perfian  force,  directed  by  the  fkill  of 
Harpagus,  was  too  great  for  them  to  refift.  This  general  feems  to 
have  made  his  approaches  in  a  method  analogous  to  that  now  in  ufe, 
with  jufl  the  difference  which  the  fortification  and  arms  of  his  ao-e 
required  :     to  his  trenches   he  added  a   lofty  rampart.     The    Pho-    01.   Ix    2. 

caeans,   hard  prefled,  obtained  a  truce  for  a   day   upon    pretence  of  B.  C.  539. 

13 
confidering  about  a   capitulation.     They  made   ufe  of  it  for  flight. 

Putting  their  families  and  mofl  valuable  effects  aboard  their  vef- 
fels,  they  efcaped  to  Chios.  The  Perfian  took  pofTeflion  of  the 
empty  town.  All  that  the  Phocasans  wanted  was  a  feaport  and 
fecurity  :  the  reft  their  activity  would  fupply.  They  defired  there- 
fore to  buy  the  little  iflands  called  Oenuffre,  lying  between  Chios 
and  the  main;  but  the  Chians,  jealous  of  an  interference  in  trade, 
refufed  to  fell  them.  About  twenty  years  before,  the  Phocseans 
had  founded  a  town  called  Alalia  in  Cornea.  Thither  they  deter- 
mined to  direct  their  courfe.  But  in  their  way,  actuated  by  that 
fpirit  of  revenge  which  naturally  imbittered  war  when  death,  flavefy, 

0^1  or. 


Herodot.  1.  i. 
c.  163. 
&  Strabo.  l.vi. 
p.  532. 

Faufan.  1.   x. 
c.  8. 

Thucyd.  1.  i. 
c.  13. 

Strabo.    1.  lv. 
p.  179. 


Thucyd.  ubi 

fop. 

Strabo.  1.  iv. 
p.  180.  184. 

Strabo.  1.  in 
p.  159. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

or  expatriation  were   the  only  alternatives  to  the  vanquished,  they 
fuddenly  turned   upon   Phoca?a;  and,  probably   rinding  the   Perfian 
garrifon  both  weak  and  unprepared,  they  put  the  whole  to  the  fword, 
tho  without  any  hope  or  thought  of  holding  the  place.     After  this 
ufelefs  maffacre,  imprecating  folemn  curfes  on  any  of  their  number 
who  mould  defert  their  expedition,  and  all  taking  an  oath  never  to 
return   to  Phocxa,  they  fleered  for  Corfica.      More  than   half,   not- 
withstanding,    Simulated    by    regret    for    their    native  country    and 
dread  of  their  new  undertaking,  returned.     How  they  made  their 
peace  with  the  Perfian  we  are  not  informed.     Of  the  reft,  after  va- 
rious chances,  a  part  fettled  the  town  of  Hyela,  afterward  called 
Helea  and  Velia,  in  Italy.     But  the  fairer  fortune  of  the  larger  part 
feems  not  to  have  been  known  in  Greece  in  Herodotus's  time  :    they 
founded  Maffilia,  now  Marfeille,  in  Gaul.      A  barren  territory  here 
gave  fmall  temptation  for  the  rapine  of  neighbouring  barbarians.     A 
port  Angularly  commodious  for  veiTels  adapted  to  the  navigation  of 
the  Mediterranean,  afforded  that  opportunity  which  the  Greeks  de- 
fired  for  communication  with  all   the  world,  beyond  the  ability  of 
barbarians  to  interrupt.     Thus  MaiTilia  became  a  rich  and  powerful 
maritime  commonwealth.     Its  naval  victory  over  the  Carthaginians, 
reported  by  Thucydides,  proves   its   early  ftrength.     The    Grecian 
names  Antipolis,   Nicasa,   Moncecus  (now  Antibes,  Nice,   Monaco) 
eaftward,  and  Agatha   (now   Agde%  Aphrodifion,  Emporeion,  He- 
meroicopeion   (called  by  the   Romans  Dianium)  weftward  in  Gaul, 
and  far  fouthward  on  the  coaft  of  Spain,  mark  the  extent  of  its  ma- 
ritime  dependencies.     The    neglect    of   the    admirable    harbour    of 
Toulon,  with  the  labors  afterward  of  the  Romans  to  make  Forum 
Julii,   now  Frejus,  a  naval  arfenal,  mark  the  difference  between  an- 
cient and  modern  navigation. 

The  Teians,  next  attacked  by  Harpagus,  followed  the  example  of 
Phocsea.  Sailing  to  Thrace,  they  founded  the  town  of  Abdera. 
The  other  Allan  Greeks,  finding  their  walls  would  not  inable  them 
fingly  to  refift  the  Perfian  power,  refolved  together  to  try  the  event 

of 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  299 

of  a  battle.     Being  defeated,  they  fubmitted  to  the  conqueror  on  his  CHAP.  Vir. 
own  terms,  which  feem  to  have  been  milder  than  might  have  been      ^5-\/-^l" 
expected   from   the   former    Perfian   general.     Harpagus    proceeded 
from  Ionia  through  Lycia  into  Caria,  and  brought  the  whole  of  Afia 
Minor  under  the  Perfian  dominion. 

Cyrus,  meanwhile,  was  no  lefs  fuccefsful  in  a  greater  line  in  Up-  Ol.  lx.  3. 
per  Afia.  By  that  fiege  of  Babylon,  equally  famous  in  prophane  "•  ~'  53°- 
and  facred  hiftory,  he  became  mafter  of  Aflyria.  Having  thus  ac- 
quired a  dominion  far  more  extenfive  than  had  before  been  known  in 
the  world,  the  wifdom  of  his  remaining  years  was  employed  to  model 
the  many  nations  which  owned  fubjection  to  him  into  one  regular 
empire.  We  are,  however,  far  from  having  that  certain  and  com- 
plete information  concerning  the  tranfactions  of  this  great  prince, 
either  in  war  or  peace,  that  we  might  wifh ;  but  upon  the  whole  it 
appears  that  his  laws  and  political  inftitutions  were  directed  by  a  fu- 
periority  of  genius  equal  to  that  which  guided  him  to  conqueft ;  and, 
what  principally  makes  the  want  of  an  authentic  hiftory  of  him  to 
be  regretted,  he  ftands  fingular  among  the  many  conquerors  by  whom 
it  has  been  the  fate  of  that  large  and  rich  portion  of  the  world  to  be 
overrun,  as  a  benefactor  to  mankind ;  as  a  father  to  all  his  people,  to 
the  conquered  fcarcely  lefs  than  to  his  fellowconquerors  *. 

*  j'Efchylus,  in  his  tragedy  of  the  Perfians,  rus,  if  ever  heard  of,  was  not  commonly  re- 
has  borne  teftimony  to  the  virtues  of  Cyrus  ceived  in  Greece  in  the  poet's  time,  and 
in  a  fhort  but  emphatical  panegyric.  mult  add  confiderable  weight  to  the  opinions 

KDPo<,  luSclifwt  «»ij>,  which   give    the    preference    to    Xenophon's 

"Ap!-a.s  t'Oiixi  ■acian  umnjt  (pi^wi?'  more  probable  account.      It  will,  however,  be 

AvSuv  &  Xuit  x«i  <t>{vyu>  sxTwaro,  remembered  to  the  credit  of  Herodotus's  ho- 

'Iu/mv  te  ma.7u.v  nhaaiv  Bin.  nefty   (which  ftill  adds  farther  weight  to  Xe- 

©:o?  yap  toi  ri*fyft»,  i;  tvfyuityv.  nophon's     teftimony)     that    he     prefaces    his 

p.  262.  edit.  H.  Steph.  account  with  a  confeflion  that  it  was  dubious, 

This  paflage  indicates  ftrongly  that  the  ftrange  and   that  he   had  only  felected  it  from  among 

tfory  told  by  Herodotus  of  the  death  of  Cy-  various  contradictory  reports. 


Qj}2  SECTION 


aoo  HISTORYOFGREECE. 


SECTION     II. 

AcceJJion  of  Cambyfes  to  the  Throne  of  Pet  fa.  Acquifition  of  Tyre  and 
Conquejl  of  Egypt  by  the  Perfuins.  AcceJJion  of  Darius.  Con/litu~> 
tion  of  the  Perfian  Empire  :    Per  fan  Religion. 

CHAP.  VII.        CYRUS  was  fucceeded  in  this  great  empire  by  his  fon  Cambyfes, 

^C-Tl^  whofe  temper,   which  led  him  to  emulate  his  father  rather  in  military 

Ol.  lxii.  4.  than  in  civil   virtues,  gave  occaiion  to  all  neighbouring   nations  to 

B.C. 529.  dread  the  force  of  which  he  was  become  abfolute  difpofer.      His  firfl 

N.andB.  \  .  r 

object  was  the  conqueft  of  Egypt.  This  country,  as  we  have  before 
obferved,  had  been,  from  times  of  higheft  antiquity,  a  populous, 
well-regulated,  wealthy,  and  polifhed  kingdom.  Divided  from  all  fur- 
rounding  nations  by  natural  boundaries  of  lingular  flrength,  it  had 
been  little  expofed  to  foreign  invafion.  Yet  the  Egyptian  monarchs 
had  always  been  of  great  political  confequence.  They  interfered 
frequently  in  the  affairs  of  Arabia  and  Paleftine.  This  led  to  tranf- 
actions,  in  war  and  in  peace,  with  Aflyria.  But  a  vafr.  defart  di- 
vided the  two  monarchies;  and  the  countries  difputed  by  their  arms 
were  monrly  far  diilant  from  the  feat  of  government  of  either.  Egypt 
t  itfelf  therefore,    in   a  peace  feldom   interrupted,    cultivated    fcience 

and  arts;   and  under  Amafis,  cotemporary  with  Cyru-,  lb  flouriflied 

Herodot.  1.  n.   in  riches  and  population  that,   according  to  Herodotus,   it  contained 
c.  177.  r   r  '  .  . 

twenty  thoufand  towns.     We  have  fufficient  aflurance  that  fome  of 

thofe  towns  were  of  extraordinary  lize  and  magnificence.     Egypt  was 

at  this  time  the  fchool  of  Greece  :   all  who  deiired  to  improve,  them- 

felves  in   knowlege  went  to  Egypt;    and  the  mere  circumrhnce  of 

having  been  in  that  polifhed  country  appears  in  this  age  to  have  given 

reputation   to  a   Greek.      But  about  a   century  before   the   reign    of 

Amafis  a  civil  war  in  Egypt  had  given  occafion  to  the  eftablilbment 

Herodot.  1.  u.  0f  a  Grecian  colony  there.      On  a  failure  of  the  ancient  royal  line, 
c.  1  p.  -  J 

twelve  chiefs  had  divided  the  fovereignty.     One  of  them,  Pfammi- 

tichus, 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  301 

tichus,  preffed   by  the  reft,  ingaged    in  his    fervice   fome  piratical   CHAP.  vii. 

Grecian  adventurers  from  Ionia  and  Caria ;  and  with  their  affiftance    SECT-  *fc 

« — - ^— j 

became  monarch  of  Egypt.  This  is  the  firft  inftance  upon  record  of 
that  practice,  not  lefs  common  afterward  among  the  Greeks  than 
fince  among  the  Swifs,  of  letting  their  valor  and  Ikill  in  arms  for 
hire.  Pfammitichus  thought  it  prudent  to  retain  for  his  fupport 
thofe  by  whom  he  had  acquired  his  throne.     He  fettled  his  auxiliary   Herodot.  1.  ii. 

C      I  " 

Greeks  in  a  town  near  the  mouth  of  the  Nile,  and  he  incouraged 
their  commerce  with  their  mother-country.  Probably  the  ancient 
conftitution  of  Egypt  fuftered  by  this  revolution.  The  power  of  the 
great  families  would  be  reduced  ;  fome  of  them  perhaps  extinguished  : 
and  a  monarch  who  reigned  by  an  army  of  foreign  mercenaries, 
could  fcarcely  exift  but  through  the  maintenance  of  abfolute  domi- 
nion. The  fcepter  of  Pfammitichus,  thus  fupported,  defcended  to 
his  pofterity.     But  Apries,   his  great-grandfon,    was  dethroned,   and   Herodot.  1. ii. 

C*   1 02» 

Amafis,  a  private  Egyptian,  acquired  the  fovereignty.  In  Egypt  all 
perfons  were  ftriclly  confined  by  law  to  the  profeflion  of  their  an- 
ceftors.  All  the  defcendants  therefore  of  the  Ionians  and  Carians 
were  born  foldiers.  Amafis  imitated  and  extended  the  policy  of 
Pfammitichus.   He  removed  the  Ionian  and  Carian  families  to  Mem-    TT     ,     ,   . 

Herodot.  I.  n. 

phis,  his  capital,  and  formed  from  them  his  body-guard.  He  c-i78' 
greatly  incouraged  the  refort  of  Greeks  to  Egypt,  allotted  the  town 
and  territory  of  Naucratis  on  the  Nile  for  their  refidence  and  poftef- 
fion,  and  even  allowed  them  to  build  temples  there,  and  to  have 
their  procefiions  and  other  religious  ceremonies  after  the  manner  of 
their  own  country.  Moft  of  the  Allan  Greeks  had  accordingly  tem- 
ples there  :  of  the  people  of  Old  Greece,  the  iEginetans  only  are 
mentioned.  But  farther  to  cultivate  a  general  intereft  through  the 
Greek  nation,  Amafis  made  a  large  prelent  to  the  Amphiclyons  to- 
ward rebuilding  the  temple  of  Delphi. 

This  able  prince  died  at  a  very  advanced  age,  during  the  prepara- 
tions in  Perfia  for  the  invalion  of  his  country.      He  was  fuccetded  by 
his  fon  Pfammenitus,   who  feems  to  have  fuftered  for  want  of  his  fa- 
ther's 


302 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP,  VII. 
SECT.  II. 

Herodot.  l.iii. 
c.  4. 


Herodot.  1.  ii. 
c.  1. 


Herodot.  l.iii. 
c.  19. 


Herodot. l.iii. 
c.  4  &  feq. 


01.  lxiii.  4. 
B.  C.  525. 

£. 


ther's  advantage  of  having  been  bred  in  a  private  Station.  Through 
fome  mismanagement,  apparently,  in  thofe  who  guided  his  councils, 
Phanes,  a  HalicarnaSTian,  of  conliderable  abilities  and  high  in  com- 
mand in  the  Grecian  troops,  took  difguff,  at  the  Egyptian  fervice  and 
went  over  to  the  Perfian.  The  approach  to  Egypt  from  Alia  with  a 
large  army,  from  the  nature  of  the  intervening  country,  even  with- 
out an  enemy  to  oppofe,  is  extremely  difficult.  The  Perfians  were 
utterly  unverfed  in  marine  affairs.  But  they  had  abfolute  command 
of  whatever  the  Alian  Greeks  could  fupply.  Herodotus,  himfelf 
an  Afian  Greek  almofl  cotemporary,  confeSfes  that  Cambyfes  consi- 
dered them  as  his  inherited  Haves.  Tyre,  moreover,  originally  a  co- 
lony from  Sidon,  but  rifen  to  a  Superiority  both  in  commerce  and  in 
political  confequence  above  the  parent  city  fo  as  to  become  the  firSt 
maritime  power  in  the  world,  was  under  his  dominion.  It  had  been 
fubdued  about  fifty  years  before  by  Nabuchodonolbr  king  of  Affyria. 
The  Tyrians  therefore  gladly  paffed  under  the  fovereignty  of  Perfia, 
and  feem  to  have  obtained  favorable  terms.  The  Cyprian  Greeks 
had  alSo  fought  fafety  by  voluntary  fubmiffion  ;  and  all  thefe  people 
contributed  to  form  the  fleet  and  army  which  were  to  go  againfh  Egypt. 
Yet  all  the  formidable  force  that  the  Perfian  monarch  could  raile 
might  have  failed,  but  for  the  exact  knowlege  of  the  country  and 
the  approaches  to  it,  which  Phanes  brought  to  him.  The  army 
muft  pafs  through  a  part  of  the  defert  Arabia.  Under  the  direction 
of  Phanes  the  friendship  of  an  independent  Arabian  chief,  fuch  as 
yet  hold  that  country  in  fpite  of  all  the  power  of  Turkey,  was  pur- 
chafed  j  and  through  his  affiStance  the  troops  were  fupplied  with 
provifions,  and,  what  was  Still  more  difficult,  with  water  *.  Thus 
a  moft  formidable  obftacle  was  overcome  without  lofs,  and  the  army 
met  the  fleet  before  Pelufium.  That  key  of  Egypt  was  taken  after 
a  fhort  fiege.     Pfammenitus  was  foon  after  defeated  in  a  great  battle  ; 

*  In  defcribing  this  country  and  its  people,  fiance,    among  many,    of  the    extent  of  his 

little  known  to  the  Greeks  in  general,  who  information,  as  well  as  of  his  honeily  in  re- 

from  all  their  fettlements  made  the  paflage  to  porting  it. 
Egypt  by  fea,  Herodotus  gives  one  ftrong  in- 

and 


HISTORY      OF      GREECE.  303 

and  the  whole  country  quickly  fubmitted  to  the  conqueror.     The  CHAP.  VII. 
neighbouring  Africans,  and  among  the  reft  the  Greeks  of  Cyrene  and     Sf^3^j" 
Barca,   fent  offers  of  fubmiffion  and  tribute,  which  were  accepted.        Herodot.i.m. 

c.  13. 

Cambyfes,  flufhed  with  fuccefs  beyond  expectation,  would  imme- 
diately  proceed   to  farther  conqueft.     Herodotus   fays   that  he  pro-   Herodot.i.m. 
pofed  at  the  fame  time  to  make  war  upon  the  Ethiopians,  Ammo- 
nians,  and  Carthaginians.     Carthage  was  a  colony  from  Tyre ;  and, 
emulating  the  mother-country  in  commerce,   was  become  equal,   or 
fuperior,   in   naval  power.     But   the  Tyrians   fhowed  fuch  extreme 
averfion  to  affift  in  a  war  again  ft  thofe  whom   they  termed  their  chil- 
dren, that  Cambyfes  was   perfuaded   to  defift  from  that  enterprize. 
He  chofe  to  go  in  perfon  againft  Ethiopia,    Without  feeing  an  enemy, 
he  loft  more  than  half  his  army  in  the  defert,  and  returned.     His 
conduct,  ever  fince  the  conqueft  of  Egypt,  had  been  that  of  a  merci- 
lefs  and  frantic  tyrant,  his  wildnefs  often  approaching  to  madnefs. 
He  is  faid  to  have  died  in  the  eighth  year  of  his  reign  of  an  acciden- 
tal wound  from  his  own  fword.     The  Grecian  accounts  however  of 
thefe  diftant  tranfadtions,  efpecially  of  thofe  not  by  their  nature  of 
very  public  notoriety,  are  probably  not  very  exact.     A  magian,  we 
are  told,  ufurped  the  Perfian  throne,  pretending  to  be  the  younger 
fon  of  Cyrus  efcaped  from  affafiination,  by  which,  at  the  command 
of  Cambyfes,  the  real  prince  had  perifhed.     It  will  not  be  neceffary 
to  repeat  here  the  well  known  ftory  of  the  confpiracy  of  the  feven 
chiefs,  the  death  of  the  ufurper,  and  the  elevation  of  Darius  to   the 
throne  by  the  neighing  of  his  horfe.     It  fuffices  for  our  purpofe  that 
Darius,  faid  to  be  of  the  royal  family  of  Perfia,  but  not  defcended 
from  Cyrus,  became  fovereign  of  the  empire  *. 

This  prince  was  a  fucceffor  not  unworthy  of  that  great  monarch.   -/Efchyi.Perf. 

h  .  .  ,     .  Plato.deLeg. 

His  principal  object  feems   to  have  been  to  complete  and  improve   1.  iii.  p.  694. 
the  plan  traced  by  Cyrus  for  the  adminiftration  of  his  vaft  dominion.  *»"' 


P.  332. 

t.  iii. 


*  The  fhort  account  given  by  .^Efchylus,  in     generally  followed,  but  they  are  not  irrecon- 
the  Perfians,  of  the  fucceffion  of  Perfian  kings,     cilable. 
differs  from  that  of  Herodotus,  which  has  been 

What 


304  HISTORY    OF    GREECE, 

CHAP.  VII.  What  we  ought  to  attribute  to  one,  and  what  to  the  other  of  thefe 
SECT.  II.  pHnces,  we  cannot  now  tell ;  nor  do  we  learn  with  that  accuracy 
which  we  might  wifh,  the  particulars  of  the  fyftem  finally  eftablifh- 
ed ;  but  many  circumftances  contribute  to  {how  that  upon  the  whole 
it  was  dire&ed  with  admirable  wifdom  j  infomuch  that  thofe  nations^ 
to  whom  defpotic  government  feems  congenial,  have  perhaps  never  fince 
been  lb  happy  as  under  Perfian  rule.  We  find  that  the  whole  empire 
was  divided  into  large  provinces  called  fatrapies,  each  under  the  fuper- 
intendency  of  a  great  officer  intitled  fatrap,  to  whom  all  governors 
of  towns  and  fmaller  diftricts  were  refponfible  ;  but  without  being 
dependent  on  him  for  their  appointment  or  removal,  which  were  im- 
mediate from  the  monarch.  Thus  the  fuperior  and  inferior  gover- 
nors were  each,  a  check  upon  the  other.  That  the  affairs  of  the 
empire-  might   be   adminiftered  with  regularity  and  certain  difpatch, 

and  that  information  might  conftantly  and  fpeedily  pafs  between  the 
capital  and  the  remoteft  provinces,  an  eftablifliment  was  made,  imper- 
fectly refembling  the  modern  pofl :  the  bufinefs  of  government  alone 
was  its  object,  without  any  regard  to  commercial  intercourfe,  or  the 
convenience  of  individuals.  This  appears,  however,  to  have  been 
the  firft  model  of  that  inftitution  which  now,  through  the  liberal 
fyftem  of  European  politics,  and  the  afcendant  which  Europe  has 
acquired  in  the  affairs  of  the  world,  extends  communication  fo  won- 
derfully over  the  globe.  The  Perfian  laws  were  probably  few  and 
fimple  j  more  in  the  nature  of  fundamental  maxims  than  of  a  finifhed 
fyftem  of  jurifprudence.  That  inflexible  rule  that  the  laws  were 
never  in  any  point  to  be  altered,  might  thus  be  a  falutary  reftraint 
upon  defpotifm,  without  preventing  intirely  the  adapting  of  practice 
to  changes  of  times  and  circumftances.  Darius  regulated  the  revenue 
Herodot.l.iii.  of  his  empire,  compofed  of  the  richeft  kingdoms  in  the  world.  In 
Plutaich.  apportioning  the  impofts  and  directing  their  collection,  he  is  faid  to 
Apophth.  have  fhown  great  abilities  and  great  moderation  j  yet  fo  difficult  is  it 
for  rulers  to  avoid  cenfure  whenever  private  convenience  mull  yield 
in  the  leaft  to  public  necemty,  the  Perfians,  forming  a  companion  of 

their 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


3°5 


their  three  firft  emperors,  called  Cyrus  the  father,  Cambyfes  the  ma-  CHAP.vn. 
fler,  Darius  the  broker  of  the  empire.     Mailer,  it  muft  be  obferved,      t 
among  the  ancients  implied  the  relation,   not,   as  with  us,  to  hired 
fervants,   but  to  flaves  *. 

The  Perlians  were  by  nothing  more  remarkably  or  more  honorably 
diflinguifhed  from  furrounding  nations,  and  particularly  from  the 
Greeks,  than  by  their  Religion.  It  were  beyond  the  purpofe  of  a 
Grecian  hiftory  to  inlarse  upon  the  theology  of  Zoroafter,   which,   as   Gibbon's 

J  .  .  .  .  Hift.  of  the 

a  moil  ingenious  and  indefatigable  inquirer  has  obferved,  '  was  darkly  Roman  Emp. 
'  comprehended  by  foreigners,  and  even  by  the  far  greater  number  of 
'  his  difciples.'  It  were  equally  beyond  our  object  here  to  difcufs 
the  much  difputed  queilions,  When  Zoroafter  lived,  and  whether  he 
was  really  the  founder  of  the  religion,  the  author  of  its  fublime  pre- 
cepts and  inlarged  view  of  the  divine  nature,  or  only  the  regulator 
of  the  Magian  worihip,  and  inilitutor  of  the  innumerable  ceremonies 
with  which  it  was  incumbered  and  difgraced.  It  may  however  be 
proper  to  advert  briefly  to  the  ilrong  contrail  between  the  Perfian  re- 
ligion and  the  Greek,  which,    as   the  fame  able  writer  remarks,   was 


vol.  i.  c. 


*  .ZEfchylus,  throughout  his  tragedy  of  the 
Perftans,  bears  moll  honorable  teilimony  to 
the  character  and  adminillration  of  Darius, 
particularly  in  the  chorus,   p.  166. 

Q.  TtoTtot,    h  [~tya?\a<; 

'  AfA.cs.ypi;  @ucri?tv<;  iVoS.o; 
Aa^Elof  «f%E  yupa.^, 

T,T^a.TlU.$   CiTTEpaiVOpid  ,   vol  tou.1- 

fxct  ret  'Sjvpynx  izLrz  Wiv^vvov.  x.  r.  ?.. 
Plato's  teilimony  is  not  lefs  favorable,  and 
fcarcely  lets  emphatically  exprefTed,  "E^i|s  Tt 
(g  Aa-Tio^)  zjxp^'jayfj.a  otcv  ypyt  toy  voitoOBTViV  xact 
/?acV.E:t  tcv  uyec^ov  yiyvicBcci.  Epill.  vii.  p.  3  3-« 
t.  lii.  See  alfo  his  iVlenexenus,  p.  239-  t.  li. 
and  his  third  Dialogue  on  Legillation,  p.  694.. 
Pit.rodotus.has  undertaken  to  give  an  ac- 
count, in  fome  detail,  of  the  produce  of  the 
Perlian  taxes  :  on  what  authority  we  are  not 
informed.     But  we  know  that  it  is  even  now, 


with  all  the  freedom  of  communication  through 
modern  Europe,  extremely  difficult  to  acquire 
information  at  all  approaching  to  exaftnefs  of 
the  revenue,  and  ft i  11  more  of  the  refources 
of  neighbouring  Hates.  Mr.  Richardfon,  in  his 
Differ.tat.ion  on  the  Languages,  &e.  of  the  Eall, 
has  obferved  that  the  revenue  of  Perfia,  ac- 
cording to  Herodotus's  account,  was  very  un- 
equal to  the  expences  of  fuch  an  expedition  as 
that  attributed  to  Xerxes,  and  therefore,  he 
fays,  Herodotus  mull  Hand  convicted  of  falfe- 
hood  in  one  cafe  or  the  other.  Unprejudiced 
perfons  will  have  little  difficulty  to  chufe  their 
belief.  The  principal  circumllances  of  the 
expedition  fell  neceii'arily  under  the  eyes  of 
th^ufands.  The  revenue  could  be  known  to 
very  few,  and  the  reiources  probably  to  none. 
Yet  a  very  acute  inquirer  into  ancient  politics 
has  obferved,  that  valuable  infoimation  is  de- 
rived from  Herodotus's  account  of  the  Periian 
revenue.  See  Gibbon's  Hillory  of  die  Roman 
Empire,  v.  I.  c.  S.  note  i,  &  v.  11.  c.  24. 

R  r  fuch 


3o6  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  VII.  fucn  that  jt  could  not  efcape  the  moft  carelefs  obferver.     It  appears 
SECT.  II.     to  have  ftruck  forcibly  the  inquifitive  mind  of  Herodotus,  who,  with 
all  the  prejudices  of  polytheifm  about  him,    has  in   a  few  words 
marked  it  fo  accurately  that,   after  every  fubfequent  account  of  an- 
cient authors,  and  every  difcufiion  of  modern,  very  nice  diflinction  is 
Herodot.  l. ;.  neceffary  to  convict  him  of  any  error.     '  Thefe,'  fays  Herodotus,  *  I 
«•  !ih  «3J«     «  have  found  to  be  the  tenets  of  the  Perfians.     They  hold  it  unlaw- 
'  ful  to  eredl  images,  temples,  and  altars,  and  impute  to  folly  fuch 

*  practices  in  others :  becaufe,  as  it  appears  to  me,  they  do  not,  like 

*  the  Greeks,  think  the  gods  of  the  fame  nature  or  from  the  fame  origin 
'  with  men.  The  fummits  of  mountains  they  efteem  the  places  mofl 
'  proper  for  facrifice  to  the  fupreme  Deity  j  and  the  whole  circle  of 
'  the  heavens  they  call  God.  They  facrifice  befides  to  the  fun,  the 
'  moon,  the  earth,  fire,  water,  and  the  winds.  In  addrefling  the 
'  deity  it  is  forbidden  to  petition  for  bleiTings  to  themfelves  indi- 

•  vidually;  the  prayer  muft  extend  to  the  whole  Perfian  nation.'  Such 
are  the  religious  tenets  which  have  always  been  attributed  to  the 
Perfians.  But  the  Perfians  themfelves  of  every  age,  as  the  hiftorian 
of  the  Roman  empire  proceeds  to  obferve,  have  denied  that  they  ex- 
tend divine  honors  beyond  the  One  Supreme  Being,  and  have  explained 
the  equivocal  conduct  which  has  given  occafion  to  ftrangers  con- 
Gibbon's         tinually  to  charge  them  with  polytheifm  :   '  The  elements,  and  more 

'  particularly  Fire,  Light,  and  the  Sun,  were  the  objects  of  their  reli- 
'  gious  reverence,  becaufe  they  confidered  them  as  the  pureft  fymbols, 

•  the  nobleft  productions,  and  the  moft  powerful  agents  of  the  Divine 
'  Power  and  Nature.' 


Hilt,    vol,  i 
c.  8. 


SECTION 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  307 


SECTION    III. 

Conqueji  of  Thrace,  and  Invafion  of  European  Scytbia  by  Darius.  Sub- 
mijjion  of  Macedonia  to  the  Perfian  Empire.  State  of  the  Mgean 
JJlandsy  and  Hijlory  of  Poly  crates  tyrant  of  Samos.  Situation  of  the 
Grecian  People  under  the  Perfian  Dominion. 

THE  great  dates  which  had  hitherto  fwayed  the  politics  of  the  ^HAP.VH. 
civilized  world,  and  balanced  one  another,  were  Aflyria,  Media,  Lydia,  SECT-  HI. 
Egypt.  Armenia  had  alfo  fometimes  been  of  confequence ;  and  Tyre, 
with  a  territory  of  fmall  extent,  and  little  even  proportional  value, 
yet  refpedtable  through  wealth  acquired  by  commerce,  and  naval 
power,  the  confequence  of  commerce,  like  the  Dutch  in  modern 
times,  had  been  ufually  courted  by  the  greateft  monarchs.  Carthage 
was  powerful,  but  diftant.  Greece  was  yet  of  little  political  confe- 
deration. Separated  into  fo  many  fmall  independent  dates,  often 
hodile  to  each  other,  and  never  united  by  any  political  tie  that  could 
be  lading,  each  by  itfelf,  among  the  tranfadtions  of  great  nations, 
appeared  utterly  inlignificant.  Aflyria,  Media,  Lydia,  Armenia,  Egypt, 
Tyre,  with  all  their  dependencies,  were  now  united  under  one  vad 
empire.  There  appeared  thus  in  the  world  fcarcely  an  object  for  the 
Perfian  arms  ;  and  it  might  be  expected  that  a  prince,  wife  like  Da- 
rius, yet  not  particularly  indowed  with  the  genius  of  a  conqueror, 
would  remain  fatisfied  with  fuch  dominions,  without  defiring  more, 
or  fearing  that  any  foreign  power  could  make  them  lefs.  But  fuch 
is  the  nature  of  man,  that  profperity  itfelf  creates  difquiet.  Peace, 
internal  and  external,  is  not  always  within  the  power  of  the  wifed 
prince:  the  choice  of  evils  only  is  left  to  him;  and  tho  defpotic 
chief  of  a  date  the  mod  dreaded  by  neighbouring  nations,  he  may  be 
under  a  neceffity  to  make  war.  Thus  it  feems  to  have  been  with 
Darius.  The  Perfians  had  been  accuftomed  to  refpect  in  their  fove- 
reigns,  fir  ft  their  right  of  inheritance,   then  their  character  as  con- 

R  r  2  querors. 


3o8  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  VII.  querors.  Ambitious  fpirits,  long  ufed  to  military  activity,  could  ill 
SECT.  in.  kear  re^  .  an(j  ^g  gajns  0f  conqueft  would  not  foon  be  forgotten  by 
the  greedy.  All  circumftances  therefore  considered,  it  may  have  been 
much  more  a  matter  of  neceflity  than  of  choice  for  Darius  to  feek 
for  a  war  to  wage.  Of  all  the  nations  furrounding  his  empire  the 
Thucyd.l.  H.  wild  people  of  the  frozen  regions  of  Scythia  could  alone  be  efteemed 
formidable  to  it.  He  chofe  to  lead  an  army  againfi:  them  by  the 
•  .  weftern  fide  of  the  Euxine  fea.  The  pretence  for  the  war  was  the 
invafion  of  Afia  by  that  people  above  a  hundred  years  before,  when 
they  overran  Media.  But  if  we  may  guefs  at  the  real  inducement  to 
undertake  this  expenfive  and  hazardous  expedition,  feemingly  without 
neceffity  as  without  allurement,  it  was  to  lead  as  far  from  home  as 
poffible  the  reftlefs  fpirits  of  the  nation;  and,  by  a  rough  and  unpro- 
fitable warfare,  to  make  their  wilhes  and  defires  revert,  and  become 
fixed  on  the  peaceable  injovment  of  thole  rich  homes  which  the  valor 
and  fortune  of  their  fathers  had  acquired  for  them.  An  immenfe 
Herodot.l.iv.  army  was  collected.  The  Allan  Greeks  formed  a  naval  force  to  at- 
*  1  CC1'  tend  it.  They  were  ordered  to  the  mouth  of  the  Danube.  All  the 
nations  as  far  as  that  river  fubrnitted  without  reliftance.  Darius 
croffed  it  :  but  when  ingaged  in  the  vail  wildernefs  beyond,  tho 
no  enemy  appeared  capable  of  oppofing  his  force,  want  of  fubfiftence 
foon  obliged  him  to  retire  toward  more  cultivated  regions.  Then 
the  Scythians,  collecting  their  ftrength,  preffed  upon  his  rear.  Like 
the  modern  Tartars  they  fought  moftly  on  horfeback  :  like  them  alfo, 
daring  and  fkilful  fkirmilhers,  but  incapable  of  order,  they  defeated 
an  enemy  in  detail,  continually  haraffing  and  cutting  off  detached 
parties,  without  ever  coming  to  a  general  ingagement ;  to  which,  on 
account  of  their  quick  motion  and  total  difincumbrance  from  bag- 
gage and  magazines,  it  was  impoffible  to  force  them.  Herodotus's 
account  of  this  expedition  exactly  refembles  what  has  been  expe- 
rienced in  the  fame  part  of  the  world  feveral  times  within  the  prefent 
century.  The  Perfian  cavalry,  he  tells  us,  fhrunk  from  the  impe- 
tuofity  of  the  Scythian  charge;  yet  the  Scythians  could  make  no  im- 

preffion 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


309 


preffion  upon  the  compact  body  of  the  Perfian  foot.  A  retreat  how-  CHAP.  VII. 
ever  through  fuch  a  country,  in  prefence  of  a  fuperior  cavaltry,  was  SECT.  III. 
highly  difficult  and  hazardous.  After  great  fufferings,  and  much  lofs, 
the  Perfians  reached  the  Danube.  Having  put  that  river  between 
themlelves  and  the  enemy,  the  march  was  continued  quietly  to  the 
Hellespont.  Leaving  a  large  force  here  under  Megabazus,  Darius 
proceeded  toSardis*. 

It  has  been  common  among  later  hiflorians,   to  fpeak  of  the  event 
of  this  expedition  as  highly  difgraceful  to  Darius ;  feemingly  with  as 


*  Herodotus's  account  of  this  expedition 
affords  remarkable  proof  bcth  of  his  propen- 
sity to  relate  wonderful  dories  which  he  had 
heard,  and  of  his  honelt  fcruple  to  invent  what 
he  had  not  heard  ;  and  at  the  fame  time  it 
proves  that  he  often  had  information  of diftant 
countries  and  diftant  tranfn&ions  beyond  what, 
in  his  age  and  circumftcnces,  might  be  ex- 
pected. Nothing  can  be  more  improbable 
and  inconfiftent,  not  to  fay  impoffible,  than 
his  (tory  of  the  Perfian  monarch's  cruelty  to 
CEobazus  and  his  fons.  All  the  mcft  authen- 
ticated circumftances  of  the  life  of  Darius 
mark  him  for  a  very  politic  prince,  yet  of  An- 
gular humanity.  But  that  execution,  as  it 
ftands  reported  by  Herodotus,  appears  fcarce- 
ly  lefs  abfurd  in  its  impolicy  than  abominable 
for  its  cruelty.  Yet  that  about  the  time  of 
Darius's  march  for  Scythin,  there  may  have 
been  executions  in  Perfia  in  a  family  of  rank, 
is  by  no  means  impofiible  ;  and  while  the  po- 
licy of  a  defpotic  government  would  conceal 
the  real  circumftances  of  the  crime,  perhaps 
alfo  forbidding  converfation  upon  it,  the  ab- 
furd tale  which  Herodotus  has  tranfmitted  to 
pofterity  might  pafs  in  whifpers  as  far  as  Afia 
Minor.  The  clofet-converfations  between  the 
Perfian  monarch  and  his  brother,  together  with 
other  circumftances  of  private  communication 
which  the  hiftorian  has  undertaken  to  detail, 
mull  be  otherwife  confidered.  A  propenfity 
to  the  dramatic  manner  appears  ftrong  in  all 
very  ancient  hiftory,  and  particularly  in  the 
oriental.  It  is  indeed  (till  obfervable  in  the 
narration  of  uneducated  people  in  the  moll  po- 
lifhed  countries.     This  was  not  fo  far  obfolete 


among  the  Greeks  after  the  age  of  Herodotus, 
but  that  the  judicious  and  exaft  Thucydides 
thought  it  necelfary  to  diversify  his  narrative 
by  the  frequent  introduction  of  fpeeches  ; 
which  he  has  ufed  as  a  vehicle  of  political  dif- 
cufiion  of  highell  advantage  to  his  hiftory. 
But  tho  he  bears  with  the  critics  the  principal 
credit  of  this  management,  it  appears  that  the 
defign  was  not  original  with  him  :  he  found 
the  example  already  fet  by  Herodotus  ;  of 
which  a  very  valuable  fpecimen  occurs  in  the 
debate  of  the  Perfian  chiefs  concerning  the 
form  of  government  to  be  eftabliftied  after  the 
death  of  the  Magian  ufurper :  certainly  not 
the  lefs  valuable  from  the  circumftance  that, 
evidently  not  the  fentiments  of  Perfians  con- 
fined to  a  defpotic  court,  but  the  refult  of 
extenfive  obfervation  by  a  Greek  among  va- 
rious governments,  is  there  related.  The  pre- 
tended debate  in  the  cabinet  of  Xerxes  con- 
cerning the  expedition  into  Greece,  confidered 
as  an  expofition  of  the  ftate  of  Greece  at  the 
time,  is  alfo  well  worthy  attention.  But  the 
account  which  Herodotus  has  left  us  of  fo  lin- 
gular a  people  as  the  Scythians,  fo  little  ge- 
nerally known  to  the  Greeks,  when  we  find 
it  confirmed  by  all  fubfequent  teftimony,  and 
at  length  by  the  deep  and  exa6l  refearches  of 
the  hiftorian  of  the  Roman  empire,  cannot  but 
do  him  great  credit.  It  has  indeed  been 
highly  fatisfaflory  to  me  to  find  a  writer  whofe 
authority  has  been  fo  much  fneered  at,  and 
yet  of  whom  the  want  of  cotemporary  hiilo- 
rians  has  compelled  me  to  make  fo  much  ufe, 
fo  well  Hand  the  teft  of  Mr.  Gibbon's  moff, 
extenfive  and  acute  inquiries. 

little 


310  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  VII.   Httlc  reafon  as  they  have  extolled  the  virtues,  and  even  the  wifdom  of 
SECT.  III.    the  favage  Scythians.    Certainly  his  reputation  and  confequence  among 
nations  were  not  funk  by  it*.     On  his  return  the  Ionian  and  /Eolian 
Greeks  vied  in  paying  court  to  him.     The  force  left  under  Mega- 
bazus  fufficed  to  extend  the  Perfian  dominion  weftward.     All  was 
Herodot.  1.  v.  fubdued  as  far  as  Macedonia;  and  Amyntas,  king  of  that  country,  ac- 
Piato. Menex.  knowleged    fubje&ion   to  the  Perfian   monarch    by  the  delivery  of 
p.  239. 1. 11.     earth  and  water.     The  Grecian  iflands  alfo  began  to  feel  the  over- 
bearing influence  of  the  Perfian  power.    The  hiftory  of  Samos,  which 
had  been  acquired  in  the  reign  of  Cambyfes,   as   it  tends   to  explain 
the  ftate  of  thofe  iflands  and  feas,  may  deferve  fome  detail. 
Herodot. l.Ui.        Polycrates,  a  private  citizen  of  Samos,  had,  in  conjunction  with 
Strabo,  1.  xiv.  his  two  brothers,  made  himfelf  mailer  of  the  government.    Procuring 
then  the  death  of  one,  and  the  banifhment  of  the  other  brother,  he 
remained  monarch  of  the  ifland.    Pie  feems  to  have  been  the  Machia- 
vel  of  his  time,  with  the  advantage  of  pofleffing  the  means  to  prove 
the  merit  of  his  theory  by  practice.     It  is  faid  to  have  been  his  fa- 
vorite maxim,  that  he  made  a  firmer  friend  by  repairing  an  injury  than 
he  could  poffibly  acquire  without  injuring.     With  a  hundred  trireme 
galleys  in  conflant  pay,  he  exerciled  univerfal  piracy  in  the  Grecian  feas; 
but  he  cultivated  the  friendship  of  Amaiis  king  of  Egypt ;  who  being, 
like  himfelf,  both  a  man  of  abilities  and  a  ufurper,  would  naturally 
incline  to  the  connection.     He  acquired   pofleflion  of  many  of  the 
fmaller  iflands  of  the  /Egean,  and  of  feveral  towns  on  the  continent 
of  Afia  Minor.      In  a  war  with   the  Milefians,   defeating  their  allies 
the  Lefbians  in  a  feafight,  he  deflroyed  or  took  the  whole  fleet ;  and 
fo  little  consideration  had  he  for  the  Grecian  name,  the  prilbners  were 
made  flaves,  and  the  ditch  furrounding  the  walls  of  Samos   in  He- 
rodotus's  time  was  formed  by  their  labor.     Little,  however,  as  he 
cared  for  honor  or  juftice,  he  ftudied  elegance  in   luxury.     He  in- 

•  The  teftimonies  of  JEfchy\as  and  Plato  to     of  this  Volume,  and  Plato's  third  Dialogue  on 
this  point  are  Mill  itronger  than  that  of  Hero-     Legifiation,  p.  695,  v.  ii. 
dotus.    See  the  chorus  quoted  in  note  *  p.  305 

couraged 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  311 

couraged  arts  and  learning,  which  were  already  beginning  to  flourish   CHAP.  VII. 

among  the  Afian   Greeks,   and  the  poet  Anacreon  was   his  conftant     SECr-JI1- 

gueft.     But  the  philofopher  Pythagoras  avoided  fuch  patronage  :  after   Her6dot.l.Hi. 

pafling  fome  time   in  Egypt  and  Babylon,  finding  his  country  ftill   Strabo,  1,  xiv. 

oppreffed  by  the  tyranny  of  Polycrates,  Pythagoras  finally  quitted  Samos   p'   3 

and  fettled  at  Crotona  in  Italy. 

Polycrates  began  at  length  to  be  remarked  for  a  profperity  which, 

among  many  trying  circumftances,   in  no  one  inftance  had  ever  failed 

him.     This  very  profperity  is  faid  to  have  loft  him  the  friendihip  of 

the  king  of  Egypt.     The  anecdote,   confidered  relatively  to  the  hi- 

ftory  of  the  human  mind,  is  remarkable.     Amafis  thought  it  in  the        °  °,    11U 

nature  of  things    that   the   tide  of  human  affairs   muft  unfailingly,    Strabo,  1,  w, 
.  .  .  p.  637, 638. 

fooner  or  later,   bring  a  violent  reverfe  of  fortune ;   and  in   this  belief 

he  advifed  Polycrates  to  feek  fome  lofs,  which  might  appeafe  that  dif- 
pofition,  apparent  in  the  gods,  difpofers  of  worldly  things,  to  envy 
human  happinefs  *.  Polycrates,  whether  believing  with  his  royal 
friend,  or  merely  humoring  popula/  prejudice,  determined  to  follow 
the  advice.  He  had  a  remarkable  feal,  highly  valued,  an  emerald  strabVut  fop. 
cut  by  Theodoras  a  celebrated  Samian  artift.  This  feal  he  threw 
into  the  fea.  A  few  days  after,  a  fifh  of  uncommon  fize  being  brought 
to  him  for  a  prefent,  the  feal  was  found  in  its  belly.  Polycrates,  fup- 
pofing  this  muft  be  efteemed  a  manifeft  declaration  of  divine  favor, 
wrote  a  particular  account  of  it  to  Amaiis;  whofe  fuperftition  on  the 
contrary  led  him  to  fo  different  a  theory,  that  he  fent  a  herald  for- 
mally to  renounce  friendship  and  hofpitality  with  one  whom  he 
thought  marked  for  peculiar  vengeance  by  the  gods.  Whether  the 
circumftances  of  this  ftory  be  limply  true,  or  whether  fo  deep  a  poli- 
tician as  Polycrates  might  think  it  worth  while  to  impofe  the  belief 
of  the  more  extraordinary  of  them  on  a  fuperftitious  people,  for  the 
purpofe  of  cohfirming  the  idea  that  he  was  peculiarly  favored  by  the 
deity  (an  idea  of  high  political  importance  in  that  age),  or  whether 

*   E/xot  $i  a,)  aui  fiiyu^ai  Ivrv^iat  Ivy.  ugiar.wet ,  To  Oslo»  Imrcifittu  w;  if'  QQcHpir.     Epiftle  from  Ama- 
fis to  Polycrates  in  Herodot.  b,  iii.  c.  40, 

we 


3i2  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  VII.  we  fUpp0fe  the  whole  a  fiction,  which  is  not  likely,  it  aflifts  at  leaft 
SEC^XL1L    to  characterize  the  age  in  which  it  was  written,  and  many  following 
ages,   in  which  it  was   thought  worth  repeating   and  animadverting 
upon. 
Herodot.l.'.ii.       A  deep  ftroke  of  policy,  which  occurs  next  in  the  hiMory  of  Poly- 
c.44&ieq.      crateSj  perfea:ly  accords   with   his  general  character.      He  feared   a 
fedition  among  the  Samians.     Cambyfes  was   then  collecting  a  naval 
force  from  the  Aiian  Greeks  for  his  Egyptian  expedition.     Polycrates 
fent  privately  to  defire  that  the  Periian  monarch  would  require  from 
him  alfo  a  contribution   of  force  to   the   armament.     Such  a  requeft 
was  not   likely  to  be   denied:   the  requisition  was   made ;  and  Poly- 
crates  in  confequence  manned  forty  trireme  galleys  with  thofe  whom 
he  thought  molt  inclined  and  mod  able  to  give  him  disturbance      He 
had  determined  that  they  mould  never  return   to   Samos ;   but  being 
unable  by  intrigue  to  procure    their  detention  by  the  Perfians  after 
the     conqueM    of   Egypt,    he    oppofed    them   with    open    hoftility. 
Thus   excluded   from    their  country,    they   applied   to    Lacedaemon 
for  afMance.      The  Spartan   government,   always  difpofed  to  inter- 
fere in  the  internal  quarrels  of  neighbouring  Mates,  received   them 
favorably.     Some  old  piracies  of  the  Samians  were  a  farther  pretence 
for  war,  and  induced  the  Corinthians  to  join  in  it.     The  united  force 
of  the  two  Mates  befieged  Samos  forty  days  without  making  any  pro- 
grefs,  and  then  returned   to   Feloponnefus.      The  expelled  Samians, 
thus  deferred,   had  again   their  fortune  to   feek.      Piracy  was  the  re- 
fource  on  which  they  determined.      The  ifland  of  Siphnus,   fmall  and 
otherwife  of  little  value,   had  gold  and  Mlver  mines,   by  which  its  in- 
habitants  became  remarkable  among  the   Greeks    for  riches.      The 
Samians  went  thither  and  defired   to   borrow  ten  talents.      Being  re- 
fufed,  they  debarked,  and  began  to  plunder  the  country.      The  Siph- 
nians,  giving  them  battle,  were  defeated ;  and,  in  retreating  to  their 
town,  a  large  body  was   cut  off.     A   treaty  was   then   propofed,  and 
the  Siphnians  bought  the  departure  of  the  Samians  at  the  price  of  a 
hundred  talents.     Thefe  freebooters  then  tailed  to  Crete,  and  feizing 


a  ter- 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  313, 

a  territory,  founded  the  town  of  Cydonia,  where  they  profpered  great-  CHAP.  VII. 

ly  for  five  years;    but  in  the  fixth,    quarrelling  with  the  vEginetans,  SECT.  III. 

more  powerful  pirates  than  themielves,   they  were  defeated  in  a  fea- 

fight.     The  iEginetans  then  landed  in  Crete  ;    and,   being  joined  by 

the  Cretans  in  an  attack  upon  the  Samian  town,   they   took  it,  and 

reduced  all  the  inhabitants  to  flavery. 

Such  being  the  ftate  of  the  Grecian  iflands  and  Grecian  feas,  and 

fuch  the  mutual  treatment  of  the  Greeks  among  one  another,  we  fhall 

the  lefs  wonder  at  what  they  experienced  from  the  Perlians.     The 

ambition    of  Polycrates  was  not  inferior  to  his  abilities.      He  is  fun-    Herodot.LHi. 
.  .  -   Thircyd.  1. 1. 

pofed  to  have  aimed  at  no  lefs  than  the  command  of  all  the  iilands  of  c.  13. 

the  JEgean,  together  with   all  /Eolia  and  Ionia.      His  power,   parti-    p.  637'}  638.' 

cularly  his  naval  power,  his  known  talents,    and  his  fufpe&ed  views, 

probably  all  gave  umbrage  to  Orcetes  fatrap  of  Sardis.     What  other 

caufe  of  offence  there  was,  Herodotus,   with  his  ufual  honefty,  con- 

feffes  that  he  could  not  certainly  learn.     The  Perfian  invited  him  to 

his  court.     Polvcrates   went  with   a  large  retinue.     He  was  imme-   Ol.  lxiv.  3. 

*  TJ     i~^ 

diately  arretted,  and  put  to  death  by  a  public  crucifixion  ;  efteemed  52|* 

the  moft  ignominious,   as  it  was  the  moft  cruel  of  all  ufual  modes  of 
execution. 

Samos  thus  was,  except  Cyprus,  the  firft  Grecian  ifland  brought 
under  the  Perfian  dominion.  But  after  the  return  of  Darius  from 
Scythia,  Lefbos,  Chios,  and  other  iilands  on  the  Afiatic  coaft  were, 
fome  voluntarily,  others  by  compulficn,  added  to  his  vaft  empire. 
Tyrants  in  general,  and  all  who  aimed  at  tyranny,  not  unwillingly 
fubmitted  to  a  fupremacy  which  either  placed  them  above  their  fel- 
lowcitizens,  or  fecured  the  fuperiority  obtained.  It  was  a  com-  Hcrodot  1  ; 
mon  policy  of  the  Perlians,  which  we  find  pradtifed  by  the  great  c.ij^&l.ui. 
Cyrus,  and  perhaps  not  lefs  advantageous  than  liberal,  to  appoint  the 
fon  of  the  conquered  prince,  or  fome  other  principal  perfon  of  the 
country  itfelf,  to  be  governor  of  the  conquered  country  ;  always  hc.v- 
ever  under  the  fuperintending  controul  of  a  Perfian  fatrap.  Moft 
of  the  Grecian  towns  were  therefore  left  to  their  own  magistrates  and 

S   s  laws  i 


C.  2 


3U  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  VII.  laws  j  fome  citizen  prefiding  as  governor ;  whom  in  that  elevated 
SECT.  III.  fkuation  the  Greeks  always  intitled  Tyrant.  Thus  Coes  the  Mityle- 
Herodot.  1.  v.  naean,  for  fervices  in  the  Scythian  expedition,  was  raifed  to  the  ty- 
ranny of  Mitylene.  Darius,  having  fettled  the  adminiftration  of  Afia 
Minor  and  of  his  new  acquifitions  in  Europe,  committed  the  fuper- 
intendency  of  the  whole  to  his  brother  Artaphernes,  and  returned 
himfelf  to  Sufa  his  capital. 

Probably  the  principal  ends  propofed  from  the  Scythian  expedition 
were  obtained  *.  The  ambitious  fpirits  among  the  Perfians  had  been 
diverted  from  domeftic  difturbance.  Jf  the  army  fuffered  in  the  Scy- 
thian wilds,  yet  a  large  extent  of  valuable  country,  inhabited  by  dif- 
ferent nations,  was  neverthelefs  added  to  the  empire.  New  honors 
and  new  employments  were  thus  brought  within  the  monarch's  dif- 
pofal.  And  the  acquifition  was  perhaps  not  the  lefs  valuable  from  the 
circumflance  that  both  the  people  of  the  newly  acquired  territory, 
and  the  people  ftill  unfubdued  bordering  on  it,  were  in  difpofition 
reftlefs  and  fierce ;  and  therefore  likely  to  furnifh  employment  for 
thofe  whom  the  prince,  himfelf  fafe  in  his  diftant  capital,  might  wifli 
to  employ. 


*  This  feems  a  conclufion  warranted  by  the     nies  laft  referred  to  of  ^Efchylus    and  Plato 
whole  narration  of  Herodotus,     The  teftimo-     /"peak  ftill  more  flrongly  to  the  fame  purpofe, 


CHAPTER 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE,  315 


CHAPTER     VIII. 

Continuation  of  the  Hiftory  of  Greece  during  the  Reign 
of  Darius   King  of  Persia. 

SECTION       I. 

Immediate  Caujes  of  the  Wars  between  Greece  and  Perfa.  Per/tan 
Expedition  againjl  Naxos.  Revolt  of  the  Afian  Greeks  againfl  the 
Perfian  Government. 

TH  E    Perfian   dominion    now    extended   over  a    large   portion   CHAP.VIII. 
of  the  Grecian   people,  and  bordered  on  Greece  itfelf.     The      SECT.  I. 
Afiatic  colonies    indeed,    natural    and    almofi:    necefTary   objects  for      ^S*^ 
Perfian  ambition,    could   fcarcely   by    any    poflibility   have    avoided 
falling  under  its  overwhelming  power  :    But  Greece,    feparated  from 
all  the  world  by  lofty  mountains  and  dangerous  feas,  had  little  to  at- 
tract the  notice  of  the  mighty  monarch  who  lived  at  Sufa ;   while  the 
nearer  provinces  of  India  prefented  a  far  more  tempting  field  for  his 
arms  ;  and  the  Scythians,  who  ranged  the  long  extent  of  his  northern   Thucyd.  l.ii. 
frontier,  from   the   borders  of  China  to   the   borders  of  Germany,  c' 9/" 
might  (till  be  deemed  formidable  neighbours.      Had  therefore  inac- 
tivity been  in  the  temper  of  its  people,   Greece  might  have  lain  long 
in  obfeurity,   peaceful,   free,  and  diiregarded.     But  inactivity  was  in 
the  temper  neither  of  the  people  nor  of  the  governments  of  Greece. 
Touching  upon  the  Perfian  provinces,  to  clam  was  thus  fcarcely  avoid- 
able;   and  fome  tranfactions,    at  firft  feemingly  infignificant  among 
the  concerns  of  a  van:  empire,  led  fhortly  to  thofe  wars,   which,  by 
events  contrary   to  all   human  expectation   and  forefight,  raifed  the 
Grecian  name  to  the  fummit  of  military  glory  ;  and  giving  thus  a  new 
and  powerful  fpring  to  the  temper  and  genius  of  the  people,  contri-  * 

S  s  2  buted 


ZiC  HISTORY'OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.vm.  buted  greatly  to  thofe  aftonifhing  exertions  of  the  mind  in  every  path 
f^J^'  of  fcience  and  of  art,  which  have  made  the  Greeks  of  this  and  the 
next  age  the  principal  ornaments  of  the  hiftory  of  mankind.  To 
borrow  therefore  the  words  of  a  great  man,  who  has  treated  Grecian 
hiftory  tho  briefly,  yet  with  fuperior  penetration  and  judgement, 
'   I  fhall  not  hold  it  any  impertinency  to  be  large  in  unfolding  every 

*  circumftance  of  fo  great  abufinefs  as  gave  fire  to  thofe  wars,  which 
'  never  could  be  thoroughly  quenched  until  in  the  ruin  of  this  great 

*  Perfian  monarchy  *.' 

Herodot.  l.v.        Among  the  Grecian  governors  under  the  Perfian  dominion,  Hifti- 

c.  II,  &feq.  &  o 

aus  tyrant  of  Miletus  was  eminent  for  abilities,  and  for  favor  with 
the  Perfian  king.  He  had  rendered  confiderable  fervices  in  the  Scy- 
thian expedition  ;  and,  as  a  reward,  had  obtained  a  grant  of  a  ter- 
ritory on  the  river  Strymon  in  Thrace,  where  he  propofed  to  plant  a 
colony.  Thrace  was  at  this  time  a  great  object  to  the  Greeks  for 
its  gold  and  filver  mines.  It  was  alfo  fought  for  the  (Tup-timber 
with  which  it  abounded.  In  the  extent  of  the  Perfian  empire,  to  give 
away  the  corner  of  a  newly  acquired  province  was  a  trifle  for  the 
prince's  bounty;  nor  would  the  circumftances  of  the  fpot,  in  them- 
felves,  be  thought  worth  inquiry.  But  the  bufy  temper  of  the  Greeks, 
their  forms  of  government,  fo  new  to  the  Perfians,  and  particularly 
their  fkill  in  naval  affairs,  which  gave  them  importance  with  their 
conquerors,  were  likely  to  excite  jealoufy.  It  was  fuggefted  that  Hif- 
tiasus,  by  means  of  his  colony,  fo  favorably  fituated  both  for  acqui- 
fition  of  wealth  and  increafe  of  naval  power,  might  raife  himfelf  into 
a  fituation  to  affert  independency.  Miletus,  where  he  governed, 
was  in  riches  and  population  the  firft  of  the  Afiatic  Grecian  cities : 

*  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  Hiftory  of  the  World,  fold  ancient   hiftory  to  modern   apprehcnfion, 

Part  I.  book  iii.  c.  5.   fett.  7.     It  is  to  be  re-  fhould  have  allowed  himfelf  fo  little  fcope  for 

gretted  that  this  extraordinary  man,   who,  by  the  affairs  of  Greece  and  Rome.      His  fuperior 

that  union  of  characters  common   among   the  manner  of  treating  them,  as  far  as  he  has  gone, 

ancients,  but  almoft  fingular  in  modern  ages,  did  not  efcape  the  obfervation   of  Mr.  Hume, 

foldier,  feaman,   ftatefman,  fcholar,  poet,  and  See  in  his  Hiftory  of  England,  the  Appendix  to 

philofopher,  was  fo  peculiarly  qualified  to  un-  the  Reign  of  James  the  Firft. 

his 


HISTORY    OF  -GREECE.  317 

his  influence  was  extenfive  among  the  others ;  and  mould  he  acquire  CHAP.vm. 
the  command  of  the  whole  maritime  force  of  the  Afian  Greeks,  it  SECT.  I. 
might  not  be  eafy  to  reduce  him.  Quietly,  therefore,  and  without  ap- 
parent injury,  to  prevent  any  fuch  project,  it  was  pretended  that  Darius 
greatly  defired  his  advice  and  affiftance  at  Sufa.  There  any  honors 
might  be  paid  him,  without  rifk  of  his  acquiring  means  to  aflume 
more  than  it  was  thought  proper  to  give.  Hiftioeus,  flattered  by  the 
diftincVion,  gladly  confented  to  attend  the  king.  His  Thracian 
fettlement,  already  begun,  meanwhile  remained  to  him ;  and  com- 
pletely to  prove  that  only  favor  was  intended,  the  government  of  Mi- 
letus, in  his  abfence,  was  committed  to  his  kinfman  Ariftagoras. 

Of  the  iflands  in  the  ./Egean  fea,  Naxos  was  one  of  the  moft  popu-  H  ,  j 
lous  and  flourifhing.  In  a  conteft  of  factions  there,  the  democratical  c.  28,  &  fee], 
party  prevailing,  moft  of  the  principal  citizens  were  expelled.  They 
went  to  Miletus  and  folicited  Ariftagoras  for  afllftance  toward  their 
reftoration.  That  chief  thinking  the  opportunity  commodious  for 
adding  Naxos  to  his  own  command,  received  them  favorably.  He 
told  them,  that  indeed  the  force  under  his  immediate  authority  was 
unequal  to  compel  thofe  who  now  held  their  ifland ;  for  he  was  in- 
formed they  were  eight  thoufand  ftrong  in  regular  heavy-armed 
foot,  and  had  many  galleys :  but  that  his  intereft  was  good  with 
Artaphernes  the  Perfian  fatrap,  brother  of  the  great  king*  and 
with  his  aflltlance,  who  commanded  fo  great  a  force  by  fea  and 
land,  what  they  defired  might  eafily  be  effected.  The  expelled  Nax- 
ians,  for  the  fake  of  recovering  their  own  pofleflions,  and  reven- 
ging themfelves  on  their  opponents,  readily  confented  to  guide 
a  Perfian  army  againft  a  Grecian  ifland.  Artaphernes  approved  , 
the  prcpoial  for  the  expedition.  The  winter  was  confumed  in 
preparing  two  hundred  trireme  galleys,  and  a  competent  land 
force.  Megabates,  of  the  blood  royal  of  Perfia,  was  appointed  to 
the  command.  To  deceive  the  Naxians,  it  was  reported  that  the 
armament  was  intended  for  the  Hellefpont  ;  and  accordingly,  when 
the  fleet  failed  in  the  fpring,  its  courfe  was  firft  dire&ed  that  way; 

but 


3i3  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.V'III.  but  it  flopped  at  Chios,  to  wait  for  a  northerly  wind  which  would 
SECT.  I.     carry  it  in  one  night  to  Naxos. 

For  the  ancient  gallies  of  war,  as  we  have  before  obferved,  an  open 
beach,  upon  which  they  might  be  hauled,  ferved  as  a  port;  and  as 
from  their  fmall  width  and  depth  they  afforded  little  convenient  fhel- 
ter  for  the  numerous  complement  which  the  ancient  mode  both  of 
navigation  and  of  naval  action  required,  the  crews,  for  health  as  well 
as  for  convenience,  were  at  every  opportunity  incamped  or  quartered 
afhore  *  ;  a  guard  only,  proportioned  to  the  exigency  of  the  fituation, 
being  mounted  on  every  fhip.  It  happened  that  Megabates,  vifiting 
the  fleet,  found  a  Grecian  galley  without  its  guard.  Incenfed  at  fuch 
dangerous  neglect  of  difcipline,  he  fent  for  the  captain  ;  and  with  the 
haughty  and  undiflinguifhing  imperioufnefs  of  a  modern  Turkifh 
bafhaw,  immediately  ordered  him  to  be  tied  in  his  own  cabin,  with 
his  head  out  of  the  window  -j-.  Information  was  prefently  carried  to 
Ariftagoras  ;  who  haitened  to  Megabates,  and  begged  that  a  man  in 
fuch  a  command,  and  his  friend,  might  not  be  fo  opprobrioufly 
treated.  The  Perfian  refilled  to  relax;  upon  which 'Ariftagoras  went 
himfelf  and  let  the  captain  free.  Megabates  was  of  courfe  violently 
offended.  Ariftagoras,  far  from  making  any  fubmiflion,  infilled  that 
the  whole  bufinefs  of  the  expedition  was  committed  to  his  direction. 
"With  fuch  diffention  between  the  leaders  affairs  were  not  likely  to  be 
well  conducted.  According  to  Herodotus,  Megabates  himfelf,  asfoon 
as  night  came  on,  fent  a  veffel  to  Naxos  to  give  information  of  the 
real  object  of  the  armament.  The  Naxians,  in  confequence,  who 
had  apprehended  nothing  from  a  force  profciTedly  deligned  for  the 
Hellei'pont,  and  known  to  have  begun  its  courfe  northward,  imme- 
diately drove  their  cattle,  brought  all  their  moveables  into  the  city, 

*  See  Herodot.  b.  vi.   c.  iz.     "Oi«  r^aTifl,  ranva;  Trnfa^troi,   laxrn-go<pto>ro, 

•J-  Aia3a>a//.(>i;  anhQ-na^-rns  nls.  Herodet.  1.  v.  that  I  can   i"up port    the   different  interprets- 

c.  ij.    «   Vincire  trajeftum  per  thalamiurn  na-  tion   which  I  have  given  ;    but  it  is   here  of 

•  vis,  id  ell  foramen  per  quod  infimi  remi  ex-  little  confequence. 

♦  iant.'  Verf.  edit.  Wefleling.    J  do  not  know 

and 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


3X9 


and  made  every  preparation  for  vigorous  defence.     The  fleet  at  length  CHAP.vnr. 
arrived.     The  difappointment  was  great  on  rinding  the  inhabitants      SECT.  I. 
prepared ;  yet  fiege  was  laid  to  the  city  of  the  fame  name  with  the 
ifland.     The    place  was  however  fo  well  defended  that,   after  four 
months,  little  progrefs  was  made.    The  fums  allowed  by  Artaphernes 
being  then  confumed,   and  much  beiides  from  the  private  fortune  of 
Ariftagoras,  it  became  neceflary  to  quit  the  enterprize.      Fortifying 
therefore  a    port   within  the  ifland,  in   which    the   Naxian    refugees 
might  maintain  themfelves,  the  armament,  which  had  fuffered  ccnfi- 
derably,  returned  to  the  continent. 

Ariftagoras  now  found  himfelf  very  critically  fituated:  fure  of  the  Heroc^t  1.  v, 
enmity  of  Megabates,  and  reafonably  fearing  the  difpleafure  of  Arta-  c-  35- 
phernes,  he  expected  deprivation  of  his  command  at  Miletus  as  the 
leaft  evil  that  could  enfue.  The  diftrefs  in  his  private  affairs  there- 
fore, from  his  great  expences  on  the  expedition,  added  to  the  lofs 
of  his  credit  at  the  fatrap's  court,  the  difappointment  of  all  his  for- 
mer hopes,  and  apprehenfion  of  ftill  worfe  confequences,  made  him 
defperate.  Flis  credit  was  yet  high,  not  only  in  Miletus  but  through 
aJl  the  Aliatic  Grecian  cities  :  the  idea  arofe  of  exciting  a  general  re- 
volt of  them  againft  the  Perfian  government.  In  this  crifis  a  meffen- 
ger  came  to  him  from  Hiltiaeus  at  Sufa.  That  chief  highly  uneafy 
under  all  the  honors  he  received  at  the  Perfian  court,  while  he  found 
himfelf  really  an  exile  and  a  flave,  began  to  fee  it  was  intended  that 
his  banifhment  from  his  native  country  fhould  be  perpetual.  In  re- 
volving therefore  the  circumftances  which  might  potTibly  obtain  him 
the  means  of  returning,  none  appeared  fo  likely  to  be  efficacious 
as  a  revolt  in  Ionia  ;  and  he  determined  upon  the  dangerous  meafure 
of  endeavouring  to  excite  one,  hoping  that  he  fhould  infallibly  be 
among  thofe  who  would  be  employed  to  quell  it.  The  method 
which  he  is  faid  to  have  taken  to  communicate  with  Ariftagoras  up- 
on this  hazardous  fubjecl  is  curious.'  Caufing  the  head  of  a  trufty 
flave  to  be  fhaved,  he  wrote  with  an  indelible  ffain  on  the  /kin  of  the 
fkull.      Having  then  waited  while  the  hair  grew,  he  difpatched  the 

flave 


320  HISTORY    OF    GREEC  E. 

CHAP.VIII.  flave  t0  Miletus.     Nothing  more  was  wanting  to  determine  the  wa- 
?EC  r" l]     vering  refolution   of  Ariftagoras.      He    founded   the   principal  Mi- 
lefians,  and  found  them  well  difpofed  to  his  purpofe.      He  then  called 
them  together,   and  made  his  propofal  in  form.     The  reftoration  of 
republican  government  was  the  lure.     Ariftagoras  offered    to  refign 
Hcrodot.  1.  v.   the  tyranny.       Of  the  perfons   whom  he  had  aflembled,    Hecataeus 
c.  36.  the  hiftorian,   remarkable  as  one  of  the  earlieft  Grecian  profe-writers 

whofe  works  had  any  reputation  with  poflerity   but  from   whom  no- 
thing remains   to   us,    is  faid  alone  tQ  have  diffuaded  the  revolt ;    ar- 
guing from  the  extreme  difproportion  of  any  force  they  could  poffibly 
collect  and  maintain,  to  that  of  the  Perlian  empire.      Not  prevailing, 
he  then  recommended  particular  attention  to  their  marine  ;    for   the 
command   of   the  fea,  he  faid,  alone  could  give   them   a  chance   for 
fuccefs.     But  the  revenues  of  their  ftate,  he  obferved,  were  very  un- 
equal to  fuch  an  object;    and   he  therefore  advifed  the  application  of 
the  treafures  in  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Branchidse,  otherwife  a  ready 
prey  for  the  enemy,   to  that  important  purpofe.     The  other  chiefs, 
however,  fcrupled  what  the  vulgar  would  efteem  facrilege.     But  up- 
on the  whole  their  meafures  appear  to  have  been  vigorous  and  wife. 
Ariftagoras  immediately  refigned  the  fupreme  command,  and  repub- 
lican government  was  reeftablifhed  in  Miletus.      The  Grecian  forces, 
returned   from  Naxos,  lay  ftill  incamped  at  Myus.     The  Mileiians 
fent  thither  Iatragoras,  a  man  of  influence,    who  managed  to  arreft 
feveral  of  the  leaders,  tyrants  of  their  refpeclive  flates.     They  were 
fent  each  to  his  own  city,  and  delivered  to  thofe  citizens  known  to  be 
adverfe  to  tyranny.     Mofl  of  them  were  expelled.     Coes,  who  had 
been  raifed  by  Darius  to  the  tyranny  of  Mit}  lene,    was  put  to  death. 
Thus,   through  a  general   reftoration  of  republican  government,  all 
Ionia  and  /Eolia  were  prefently  ingaged  in  the  revolt. 

Ariftagoras  left  nothing  unattempted  which  might  contribute  to 
the  fuccefs  of  the  very  hazardous  enterprize  in  wrhich  he  had  ingaged 
himfelf  and  his  country.  He  undertook  an  embafTy  to  Greece,  with 
the  hope  of  gaining  the  parent  ftates  to  the  caufe  of  the  colonies. 

He 


c.  38. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  321 

He  went  firfl  to  Lacedaemon,  He  endeavoured  to  rouze  trie  Spartans  CHAP.VIIL 
by  urging  the  fhame  which  redounded  to  all  Greece,  and  particularly 
to  Lacedaemon  the  leading  flate,  from  the  miferable  fubjedion  of  a 
Grecian  people.  He  magnified  the  wealth,  and  made  light  of  the 
military  force  of  the  Perfjan  empire.  He  animadverted  upon  the  in- 
feriority of  Afiatic  courage,  of  Afiaticarms,  and  of  the  Afiatic  man- 
ner of  fighting.  He  drew  an  alluring  picture  of  the  great  and  glo- 
rious field  which  Alia  offered  for  the  exercife  of  that  military  virtue, 
in  which  the  Spartans  fo  greatly  excelled  all  other  people,  and  he 
obferved  how  much  more  worthy  it  wis  of  their  ambition  than  the 
fcanty  frontier  for  which  they  had  been  fo  long  contending  with  their 
neighbours  the  Meffenians,  Arcadians,  and  Argives,  whofe  nearer 
approach  to  them  in  valor  and  difcipline  yet  made  fuccefs  more  doubt- 
ful. He  concluded  with  mentioning  no  lefs  than  the  conqueft  of 
Afia,  and  the  plunder  of  Sufa  itfelf  as  attainable  obj!<£ts  for  the  Spar- 
tan arms.  But  the  cautious  government  of  Lacedaemon,  wholly  di- 
rected by  a  few  aged  men,  was  not  yet  ripe  for  fuch  allurement. 
Ariftagoras  was  afked  how  far  it  was  from  Miletus  to  Sufa  ?  He  an- 
fwered  incautioufly,  '  A  three  months  journey.'  Nothing  more  was 
wanting  to  procure  him  a  firm  denial  to  his  requeft.  It  was  replied, 
that  he  could  not  ferioufly  call  himfelf  a  friend  to  the  Spartans,  who 
wanted  to  lead  them  on  a  military  expedition  to  the  diftance  of  a  three 
months  journey ;  and  he  was  commanded  to  leave  Lacedaemon. 
Finding  then  that  he  could  avail  nothing  publicly,  he  is  faid  to  have 
attempted  to  gain  king  Cleomenes  by  bribes  ;  but  failing  in  this  alfo 
he  palled  to  Athens. 


T  t  SECTION 


322  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

SECTION     II. 

Affairs  of  Athens.  Invafion  of  Attica  by  the  Peloponnefians,  Bceotians, 
and  Eubceans.  The  Athenians  ajjijl  the  Ionians  againjl  Perfa.  All 
the  Afiatic  Grecian  States  again  reduced  under  the  Perfian  domi- 
nion. Hi/lory  of  the  Athenian  Colony  in  the  Thracian  Cherfonefe. 
Liberal  Adminijlration  of  the  conquered  Provinces  under  the  Perfian 
dominion. 

CHAP.VIII.       W  E  left  the  Athenians  juSt  reStored  to  nominal  liberty,  but  in  no 
SECT.  II.     flourishing  circumstances.     By  turns  distracted  with  domestic  factions, 
^^^      prefTed  by  the  tyranny  of  Lacedaemon,  and  urged  by  the  apprehenfion 
of  a  moft  formidable  attack  with  which  Cleomenes  threatened  them, 
they  had,  by  their  ambaffadors  at  Sardis,  fubmitted  to  the  humiliation 
of  acknowleging  Subjection  to  the  Perfian  king,  in  hope  of  obtaining 
his  powerful  protection.     The  conduct  of  thofe  ambaffadors,    we  are 
Herodot.  l.  v.   told,  was  highly  reprobated  on  their  return;  and  it  does  not  appear 
that  any  Perfian  afMance  was  either  given,   or  farther  defired.     Yet 
the  danger  which  hung  over  Athens  might  have  juftified  a  treaty  for 
protection  upon  almoft  any  terms.   Cleomenes  was  bent  upon  revenge. 
&f        He  collected  forces  from  all  Peloponnefus,  not  informing  the  allies 
what  was  his  object.  At  the  head  of  a  large  army  he  landed  at  Eleufis. 
At  the  fame  time,  according   to  previous  agreement,  the  Thebans 
by  a  fudden  attack  took  CEnoe  and  Hyfiae,  Attic  boroughs  bordering 
on  Bceotia,  while  the  Chalcidians  of  Eubcea  alfo  invaded  Attica  on 
their  fide.     It  is  the  common  effect  of  public  danger  and  public  mif- 
fortune  to  bring  forward  great  characters,  and  to  excite  even  ordi- 
nary men  to  great  exertion.     No  individual  among  the  Athenians 
is  particularly  noticed  by  hiftory  upon  this  occaiion  ;   but  the  admi- 
nistration of  the  commonwealth  appears  to  have  been  wife  and  Spi- 
rited.    Neglecting  for  the  prefent  the  Thebans  and  Eubceans,  the 
Athenian  leaders  directed  their  whole  force  againSt  the  Peloponne- 
fians,  the  more  formidable  enemy.    A  battle,  upon  which  the  fate  of 

Athens 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  323 

Athens  depended,  was  on  the  point  of  being  fought,  when  the  Co-   CHAP.vni. 
rinthians,  angry  that  they  had   not  been  previoufly  confulted  con-     SECT.  II. 
cerning  the  object  of  the  armament,  afhamed  to  be  made  fo  egregioufly 
the  tools  of  the  revenge  of  Cleomenes  and  the  ambition  of  Sparta, 
and  otherwife  little  defirous  to  ruin   Athens,   withdrew  their  forces. 
Demaratus  king  of  Sparta,  diflatisfied  with  his  colleague  and  willing 
to  preferve  his  intereft  with   the  Corinthians,  retreated  with  them. 
Thefe  examples  fufficed  for  the  other  Peloponnefian  allies  :  all  with- 
drew :  and  Cleomenes  was   thus   reduced  to   the  neceffity  of  haftily, 
and  not  without  (hame,  retiring  with  the  fmall  force  remaining  un- 
der his  command.     The  Athenians  immediately  turned  againft  their 
other  enemies.     They  overtook  the   Bceotian  army  at  the  Euripus, 
retreating  to  join  the  Chalcidians  who  had  withdrawn  into  Euboea. 
They  defeated  it;  took  {even  hundred   prifoners ;   and,  crofting  the 
Euripus  the  fame  day,  gained  a  fecond  victory  over  the  Chalcidians, 
fo  complete  that  they  became  mafters  of  a  tract  in  Euboea  fufficient 
to  divide  among  four  thoufand  families  of  their  fellowcountrymen, 
whom  they  eftablifhed  as  a  colony  there.    The  Athenian  government 
inriched  their  treafury   by  the  ranlbm  of  the  prifoners,  for  whom 
they  received  two  minse,  about  fix  guineas,  a  head. 

Over  againft  Athens,  on  the  fouthern  fide  of  the  Saronic  gulph, 
lies  the  little  barren  ifland  of  JEgina,  formerly  fubject  to  the  neigh-   Hcrodot.  1.  v. 
bouring  little  ftate  of  Epidaurus  in  Peloponnefus.     This  ifland,   or  chandler's 
rather  rock,  was  a  convenient  refort  for  feafaring  people,  whether  Travels  in 

Greece   c    2 

merchants  or  pirates;  and,  between  the  two,  growing  populous  and  sc^. 
wealthy,  had  not  only  fhaken  off  its  dependency  upon  Epidaurus,  but 
was  become  one  of  the  principal  naval  powers  of  Greece  *.  Some 
old  caufes  of  enmity  fubiifted  between  JEgimi  and  Athens.  The 
Thebans  therefore,  anxious  for  revenge  againft  the  Athenians,  but 
unable,  fince  the  defection  of  their  allies,  to  profecute  it  by  their 
own  arms,  endeavoured  to  ingage  the  iEginetans  in  their  confede- 

*  Setting  afide  the  unfavorable  part  of  the  ^Eginetan  character,  ^Egina  was  the  Jerfey  and 
Guernfey  of  the  Grecian  feas. 

T  t  2  racv; 


324 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 


chap. VIII.  raCy  ;  and,  with  the  help  of  an  unintelligible  refponfe  from  the 
SECT.  II.  Delphian  oracle,  they  fucceeded.  Thofe  iflanders  furprized  and 
plundered  the  port  of  Phalerus,  and  extended  their  ravages  along  a 
coniiderable  tract  of  the  Attic  coaft.  The  Athenians,  who  had  hi- 
therto applied  themfelves  little  to  naval  war,  had  not  immediately 
the  means  of  revenge,  and  weightier  matters  foon  required  their 
attention. 

Cleomenes  was  not  of  a  temper  to   reft  under  the  difappointment 
Herodot.  l.v.   and  difgrace  of  his  Lite  mifcarriage.     He  left  nothing  untried  to  ex- 
c.  90,  &  eq.     c-te  a  £-re^  ie3gUe  againft  Athens.      In  the  Spartan  fenate  he  afierted, 
that  when  he  was  beiieged  in  the  Athenian  citadel,  the  archives  of 
the  republic  being  then  open  to  him,  he  had  difcovered  the  collufion 
of  the  Delphian  priefts  with  the  Alcmaeonids  in   regard  to   the  pre- 
tended refponfes  of  the  god  commanding  the  Lacedaemonians  to  give 
liberty  to  Athens.     He  urged  that  the  Spartan  government  had  there- 
fore acted  not  lefs  irreligiouily  and  unjuftly  than  imprudently  in  ex- 
pelling Hippias;   to   whom  they  were  bound  equally  by  the  facred 
laws  of  hofpitality  and  by  the  political  intereft  of  their  country  ;   nor 
could  they  do  their  duty  to  gods  or  men  otherwife  than   by  reftoring 
him.    The  Spartan  government,  already  jealous  of  Athens,  confented 
that  Hippias  mould  be  invited  into  Peloponnefus.      But  it  appears  to 
have  been  now  the  decided  policy  of  that  itate  to  take  no  flep  of  im- 
portance relative  to  foreign  affairs,  without  the  concurrence  of  their 
Peloponnelian  allies,  and  particularly  of  Corinth.     Thus  was  gra- 
Thucyd.  1.  i.  dually  formed  a  powerful  confederacy,  of  which  Lacedsmon  was  the 
c-10-     p       acknowleged  head.     The  deputies  of  the  allies  were  therefore  fum- 
nathen.  moned    upon   this   occafion,   and  Cleomenes  opened  his  purpofe  to 

them.  But  to  reftore  an  expelled  tyrant,  in  oppofition  to  an  efta- 
blifhed  government,  was  found  a  meafure  lo  unpopular,  and  the 
Corinthian  deputy  particularly  condemned  it  in  fuch  flron^  terms, 
that  Cleomenes  himfelf  thought  proper  to  defift  from  urging  the  bu- 
finefs  farther. 

Hippias, 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  325 

Hippias,  difappointed  of  the  hope  thus  held  out  to  him,  found  yet   CHAP. VIII. 
refources  in  his  private  chara&er,  and  the  long  eftablifhed  reputation     SECT- II- 
of  his  family.     Returning  to  Sigeinm  he  received  invitations  from   Herodot.  1.  v. 
Amyntas  king  of  Macedonia,  and  from  the  Theffalians  ;   the  former 
offering   Anthemus,   the  others   Iolcus,  for  places   of  fettlement  for 
himfelf  and  his  partizans.     But  he  had  views  which  induced  him  to 
prefer  his  refidence  in  Afia. 

We  have  now  feen  Perfia  attracting   the  attention  of  the  Greeks  of 
Afia  and  the  iflands  frequently  in  the  light  of  a  valuable  friend,   as 
well  as  of  a  tremendous  enemy.     We  have  {een  the  democracy  itfelf 
of  Athens  fetting  the  example,   among  the  ftates  of  Old   Greece,  of 
foliciting  Periian  protection.    Will  then  the  liberal  fpirit  of  patriotifm 
and  equal  government  juftify  the  prejudices  of  Athenian  faction,   and 
doom  Hippias  to  peculiar  execration,    becaufe  at  length  he  alfo,   with 
many  of  his  fellowcitizens,   defpairing  of  other  means  for  ever  re- 
turning to  their  native  country,  applied  to  Artaphernes  at  Sardis  ? 
The  refort  of  Greeks  from  various  parts  to  the  Strap's  court  and  ca- 
pital,  fome  with   political,    fome  with  mercantile  views,   was  fuch 
that  the  Athenian  government  would  not  be  likely  to  remain   unin- 
formed of  what  publicly   pafied  there   concerning  them.      Plippias 
found  the  attention  which  his  rank  and  character  might  claim.     The   „    , 

o  c.  90. 

Athenian  government,  reafonably  apprehenfive  of  the  confequences, 
fent  to  requeft  that  Artaphernes  would  not  countenance  their  banifhed 
citizen?.  The  Perfian  prince  gave  for  his  final  anfwer  to  their  am- 
baffadors,  '  That  if  the  Athenians  would  be  fafe  they  mull  receive 
*  Hippias.'  The  return  of  thefe  ambaiTadors  put  Athens  in  a  fer- 
ment. Univerfal  indignation,  not  without  a  great  mixture  of  alarm, 
was  excited.  It  was  at  this  critical  moment  that  Ariflagoras  arrived 
from  Sparta,  to  folicit  aiTiftance  to  the  Ionian  confederacy  againft  the 
oppreffion  of  Perfia.  Being  introduced  into  the  afiembly  of  the  peo- 
ple, he  repeated  thofe  arguments  which  at  Laced  jemon  had  been  un- 
availing. He  added,  that  Miletus,  as  an  Athenian  colony,  might 
reafonably  claim  afiiftance  in  its  difirefs  from  a  parent  ftate  fo  power- 
ful. 


c.  97. 


3?<5  HISTORY    OF    GREECE; 

CHAP.vm.  fa\,  f|e  omitted  nothing  that  could  flatter,  allure,  or  excite  com- 
SECT.  n.  miferation  j  and  having,  as  Herodotus  obferves,  everything  at  (lake, 
there  was  nothing  that  he  was  not  ready  to  promife ;  and  he  pre- 
vailed. Twenty  lhips  were  voted  to  affift  the  Ionians ;  and  thefe 
fhips,  adds  the  hiftorian,  were  the  beginning  of  evils  to  Greeks  and 
barbarians. 

Ol.lxx  i.*        The  adminiftration  of  Artaphernes  appears  to  have  been  negligent 
B.  C.  500.   and  weak.     The  Athenian  {hips  arrived  at  Miletus,  with  five  added 

Herodot.  1.  v. 

c  99,  &  feq.  by  the  Eretrians  of  Euboea.  The  combined  fleet  failed  to  Ephefus ; 
and  by  a  bold  flroke  to  profit  from  the  Perfian  remiflhefs,  the  land 
forces  debarking,  marched  direclly  to  Sardis.  So  totally  was  Arta- 
phernes unprepared  for  fupprefling  the  revolt,  and  fo  little  even  for 
his  own  fecurity,  tho  he  had  a  considerable  force  with  him,  he  im- 
mediately abandoned  the  town,  and  fhut  himfelf  within  the  calile. 
The  Grecian  troops  entered  the  town.  In  the  firfl  tumult  a  houfe 
was  fet  on  fire.  Many  of  the  houfes  of  Sardis  were  wailed  with  reed, 
and  thofe  built  of  brick  had  mofily  their  roofs  of  reed.  The  flame 
therefore  fpred  rapidly  through  all  the  outfkirts  of  the  town.  The 
inhabitants,  Perfians  as  well  as  Lydians,  before  without  order  or 
compacl,  folicitous  every  one  for  his  own,  were  thus  driven  to  aflem- 
ble  in  the  Agora  and  in  the  courfe  of  the  torrent  Paclolus  which 
runs  through  the  middle  of  it.  Accident  and  necefllty  having  col- 
lected them,  they  found  themfelves  ftrong  enough  to  attempt  de- 
fence. The  Greeks,  flopped  by  the  flames  in  their  career  of  plunder, 
which  had  been  their  principal  object,  and  finding  a  large  body  of 
men  to  ingage,  advantageoufly  ported,  and  whole  numbers  were 
continually    increafing,     amid    the     hefitation    of    difappointment 

*  Dr.   Blair,    and    even    the    Chronologia  and  it  does   not  appear  that  more  than  one 

Herodoti  in  Weffeling's  edition,   have  placed  parted  afterward  before  Mardonius  was  fuper- 

the  beginning  of  the  Ionian  revolt  four  years  feded  by  Artaphernes  and  Datis  (3),  who  im- 

earlier.      But    Herodotus    exprefsly    fays  (1),  mediately  proceeded  on   the  expedition  againit 

t-hat   the   war  lalled  but  fix  years.      From  the  Greece,  which  Dr.  Blair,  with  all  other  chro- 

end  of  it  he  very  clearly  marks  (2)   three  to  nologers,  places  490  years  before  the  Chriltian 

the  fecond  year  of  the  fatrapy  of  Mardonius  ;  era. 

(1)  b.  vl.  <•  18.  (2)  c.  31.  43.  &  46,  (3}c-91- 

deter- 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  327 

determined  to  retire  to  mount  Tmolus ;  whence  in  the  night  they  CHAP.VIII. 
continued  their  retreat  to  their  mips.  News  of  the  event  was  quickly  S^££J1' 
conveyed  throughout  the  provinces  within  the  river  Halys.  Troops 
haftened  from  all  parts  to  Sardis.  The  Perfians  were  not  yet  accuf- 
tomed  to  yield.  They  marched  immediately  to  meet  the  enemy, 
and  found  them  under  the  walls  of  Ephefus.  A  battle  infued,  in 
which  the  Greeks  were  intirely  defeated  ;  many  of  their  principal 
officers  were  killed,  and  thofe  of  the  furvivors  who  avoided  captivity, 
difperfed  to  their  feveral  cities.  The  Athenians,  after  this  misfor- 
tune, recalled  their  (hips ;  and,  tho  ftrongly  folicited,  would  no 
more  take  part  in  the  war. 

The  lonians  neverthelefs  continued  to  profecute  vigorous  meafures.  Herodot.  1.  v. 
Wifely  avoiding  farther  attempts  by  land,  they  confined  their  offen-  c' I03' 
five  operations  to  the  fea.  Their  fleet  failed  firfl:  to  the  Hellefpont, 
and  brought  Byzantium,  with  the  other  Grecian  towns  on  the  Pro- 
pontis,  under  their  fubjection  or  into  their  alliance.  Then  directing 
their  courfe  fouthward,  they  were  equally  fuccefsful  with  mod:  of  the 
Carian  cities.  About  the  fame  time  Onefilus  king  of  Salamis  in  Cy-  c  10+. 
prus,  in  purfuit  of  his  own  views  of  ambition,  had  perfuaded  all 
that  ifland  to  revolt  againft  the  Perfians,  except  the  city  of  Amathus. 
To  this  he  laid  fiege.  Receiving  then  information  that  a  Phenician 
fleet  was  bringing  a  Perfian  army  to  its  relief,  he  fent  to  defire  alli- 
ance with  the  lonians,  and  afliftance  from  their  navy,  as  in  a  com- 
mon caufe.  The  lonians,  without  long  deliberation,  determined  to 
accept  the  alliance  offered,  and  to  fend  the  affiftance  defired.  The 
enemy  had  however  landed  their  army  before  the  Ionian  fleet  arrived. 
On  the  fame  day,  it  is  faid,  two  battles  were  fought;  between  the 
Perfians  and  Cyprians  by  land,  and  between  the  lonians  and  Pheni- 
cians  at  fea.  In  the  feafight  the  Greeks  were  victorious,  the  Sa- 
mians  particularly  diftinguiming  themfelves ;  but  by  land  the  Cy- 
prians were  defeated  :  Onefilus  was  killed,  and  the  Perfians  quickly 
recovered  the  whole  ifland. 

But 


328  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CiiAlwm.  gut  while  victory  thus  attended  the  fleet  of  Ionia,  the  country  was 
SECT.  II.     totally  expofed  to  the  fuperior  landforce  of  the  enemy.      The  Perfian 

HcroJot.  1.  v.  general  Daurifes,  leading  an  army  to  the  HeJIefpont,  took  the  four 
e<1*  towns  Abydus,  Peicote,  Lampfacus,  and  Paefus,  in  as  many  days. 
Then,  informed  that  the  Carians  had  joined  in  the  revolt,  he  marched 
fouthward  and  defeated  that  people  in  a  great  battle.  The  routed 
troops,  joined  by  the  Ionian  army,  ventured  a  fecond  battle,  and 
were  again  defeated  ;  the  Ionians  now  principally  fufFering.  But 
Heracleides  of  Mylalfa,  general  of  the  Carians,  was  one  of  thofe  fu- 
perior men  who,  acquiring  wifdom  from  misfortune,  can  profit  even 
from  a  defeat.  The  Perlian  army  proceeded,  with  that  careLfs  con- 
fidence which  victory  is  apt  to  inlpire,  as  if  nothing  remained  but  to 
take  poflelTion  of  the  Carian  towns.  A  mountainous  tract  was  to  be 
paflcd.  Heracleides,  well  acquainted  with  the  country,  lilently  pre- 
occupied the  denies.  The  Periians,  intangled  among  the  mountains, 
were  attacked  by  furprize  :  Daurifes  fell,  with  many  officers  of  high 
rank,  and  his  army  was  completely  defeated. 

But  the  refources  of  a  vaft  empire  inabled  the  Perfians  to  act  in  too 

many  places  at  once  for  the  Ionians  to  oppofe  them  with  any  profpect 

of  final   fuccefs.     When  Daurifes   marched  toward   Caria,   Hymeas 

had  turned  from   the  Propontis   toward  the  Hellelpont,  and  quickly 

recovered  all   the  northern  part  of  iEolia.     At  the  fame  time  Arta- 

c.  12%,  &feq.   phernes  himfelf,  leading  an  army  to  the  confines  of  /Eolia  and  Ionia, 

took  Cuma  and  Clazomena?.     Then  afTembling  the  bodies  which  had 

hitherto  been  acting  feparately,  it  became  evidently  his  deiign  to  form 

the  fiege  of  Miletus,  the  head  of  the  rebellion,  by  taking  which  he 

might   finifh   the   war.      Ariftagoras  faw  the   gathering   dorm,    and 

could  fee  no  means  of  withftanding  it.      Herodotus   accufes  him  of 

pufillanimity,    apparently   without   reafon.      Aridagoras    knew    that, 

however  others  might  make  their  peace,   there  could  he  no  pardon  for 

him  ;  and  when  he  could  no  longer  affift  his  country  in  the  unequal 

conteft  into  which  he  had  led  it,  his  prefence  might  only  inflame  the 

enemy's 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  329 

enemy's  revenge.     He  determined  therefore  to  quit  Miletus.     He  CHAP.VIII. 

communicated  this  refolution  to  his  fellowcitizens,  and  waiting  to  fee     ^^"j 

Pythagoras,  a  man  high  in  rank  and  efteem  among  them,  appointed 

to  the  chief  command  in  his  room,  he  failed,  with  as  many  as  chofe 

to  follow  his  fortune,  to  that  territory  on  the  river  Strymon  in  Thrace 

which  Darius  had  given  to  Hiftiasus.     Having  put  this  colony  in  a 

way  to  profper,  he  was  afterward  killed  in  befieging  a  Thracian 

town. 

Hiftijeus,  meanwhile,  had  obtained  his  releafe  from  his  honorable  Herodot.  l.v. 

c.    106,    107. 

imprifonment  in  the  Perfian  court :  Darius  fent  him  to  Sardis  to  affift  1.  vi.  c.  1,  & 
in  quelling  the  rebellion.  But  the  Perfian  officers  there,  better  in- 
formed than  the  minifters  at  Sufa,  were  not  difpofed  to  truft  him; 
and  Hiftiaeus  finding  himfelf  fufpe&ed,  fled  by  night  into  Ionia,  and 
palled  to  Chios.  The  Ionians  however  were  not  generally  well  inclined 
to  him  :  fome  viewing  in  him  the  former  tyrant,  others  the  author 
of  their  prefent  calamities  and  danger.  His  fellowcitizens  the  Mile- 
fians  abfolutely  refufed  him  admiffion  into  their  city  :  but  he  found 
more  favor  at  Mitylene,  where  he  obtained  a  loan  of  eight  fhips,  with 
which  he  failed  to  Byzantium,  and  thence  made  prize  of  all  veffels 
pafling  from  the  Black  Sea,  except  of  thofe  Greeks  who  were  dif- 
pofed to  his  intereft. 

It  was  now  the  fixth  year  of  the  war  when  the  Perfian  army  fat   Ol.lxxi.  3. 
down   before   Miletus.      To  affift    its    operations,   which    otherwife   j^rgd'ot4,9^' 
might  have  been  ineffectual,  a  large  fleet  was  collected,  chiefly  from  0  6,  &  feq. 
Phenicia;   but  Cilicia,  Cyprus,  and  Egypt  alfo  contributed.     On  the 
other  fide  the  Panionian  affembly  was  fummoned  to   deliberate  on 
meafures  in  circumftances   {o  critical.      It  was  there  determined  not 
to  oppofe  the  Perfian  army  in  the  field ;  but  to  leave  Miletus   to  its 
own  defence  by  land,  while  every  nerve  fhould  be  ftrained  to  increafe 
their  force  at  fea ;   and  it  was  ordered  that  all  the  fhips  of  war  which 
every  ftate  of  the  confederacy  could  furniih  fhould  affemble  at  Lade, 
a  fmall  ifland  overagainft  the  port  of  Miletus,  and  try  the  event  of  a 

U  u  naval 


33< 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.VIII. 
SECT.  II, 


Herodot.l.vii. 
c.  184. 


naval  ingagement  *.  The  enumeration  given  by  Herodotus  of  the 
trireme  galleys  fent  by  each  ftate  is  probably  not  unfounded,  and  may 
mow  in  fome  degree  the  comparative  flrength  of  the  Ionian  cities. 
From  Miletus  came  eighty,  Priene  twelve,  Myus  three,  Teos  leven- 
teen,  Chios  a  hundred,  Erythra?  eight,  Phocaea,  weak,  fince  itb  capture 
by  Harpagus  and  the  emigration  of  its  people,  only  three,  Lefbo.s  feven- 
ty,  and  Samos  fixty ;  the  whole  making  three  hundred  fifty-three. 
This  indeed  appears  a  very  great  naval  force  for  thole  little  Mates  to 
afTemble  and  maintain;  the  ordinary  complement  for  a  trireme  galley 
in  that  age,  or  very  fhortly  after,  being  two  hundred  men.  The 
crews  of  the  Ionian  fleet  would  thus  be  above  feventy  thoufand. 
The  number  of  the  enemy's  {hips  was  much  greater;  Herodotus  fays 
it  amounted  to  fix  hundred.  Yet  the  Perlian  leaders  had  fo  little 
confidence  in  an  arrmment  of  which  little  or  no  part  was  Perlian, 
that  they  feared  to  rifk  a  naval  ingagement.  But  command  of  the 
fea  was  abfolutely  neceffary  to  their  final  fuccefs  by  land.  They  had 
with  them  moft  of  the  Ionian  and  iEolian  tyrants,  who  had  been 
expelled  from  their  feveral  cities  at  the  beginning  of  the  revolt. 
Through  thefe  they  endeavoured  to  practice  feparately  upon  the  fqua- 
dron  of  each  flate.  They  promifed  complete  pardon,  both  for  them- 
felves  and  their  fellowcitizens,  to  any  who  would  quit  the  confede- 
racy ;  and  their  threats  were  indeed  terrible  to  thole  who  fhould 
perfevere  in  it.  The  men,  they  laid,  Ihould  be  reduced  to  flavery, 
the  boys  fhould  be  made  eunuchs  ;  the  virgins  fhould  be  carried  into 
Bactria,  and  their  towns  and  territories  fhould  be  given  to  others. 
Neither  the  offered  favor,  however,  nor  the  threats  were  at  firfi  re- 
garded. But  difunion  in  command,  the  common  defect  of  confede- 
racies, prevailed  in  the  Grecian  fleet.  A  general  relaxation  of  dilci- 
plineinfued;  and  at  length  the  Samian   leaders,  forefeeing  nothing 


*  The  fite  of  Miletus  has  now  long  ceafed  nence  in  a  plain.    See  the  Voyage  Pittorcfque 

to  be    maritime,   and   Lade  to   be   an   ifland.  de   la   Grece  par   M.   de   Choifeuil  Gouffier. 

The   bay  on   which  that  city  Hood   has   been  Myus,   near  the  mouth  of  the  Msander,   un- 

gradually  fil'ed  with    the   mud   brought  down  derwent  earlier  the  fame  fate. 
by  the  river  Latmus,  and  Lade  is   an  emi- 

but 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  331 

but  ruin  to  the  caufe  in  which  they  were  ingaged,  began  to  liften  to  CHAP.vni. 
the  propofals  made  to  them  from  iEaces  the  expelled  tyrant  of  their 
ifland.  Weighing  the  refources  of  their  confederacy  againft  thofe  of 
the  Perfian  empire,  as  Herodotus  fays  for  them,  they  judged  that 
thecontention  on  their  part  muft  in  the  end  prove  vain  -,  fince  mould 
they,  with  all  their  difadvantage  in  numbers,  prevail  in  the  approach- 
ing action,  ftill  another  fleet  would  unfailingly  foon  be  raifed  againft 
them.  Urged  by  thefe  confiderations,  they  privately  concluded  a  treaty. 
The  perfian  leaders  then  no  longer  fcrupled  to  quit  the  port  and  rifk 
an  ingagement.  The  Grecian  fleet  advancing  to  meet  them,  the 
Samian  commander  gave  the  fignal  to  his  fquadron  to  fet  their 
fails.  This  clearly  indicated  intention  to  fly  ;  for  the  ancients  in 
action  ufed  oars  only.  The  captains  of  eleven  galleys  wilfully 
difobeyed  the  fignal,  and  ftood  the  battle ;  the  reft  failed  away. 
The  line  of  battle  of  a  fleet  among  the  ancients  was  that  alone 
which  in  our  fea-phrafe  is  called  the  line  of  battle  abreaft  : 
they  met  prow  oppofed  to  prow  *.  The  ftation  of  the  Samians  had 
been  in  the  extreme  of  one  wing.  The  Lefbians,  next  in  the  line, 
difconcerted  by  the  unexpected  expofure  of  their  flank,  as  well  as  by 
the  alarming  defertion  of  their  allies,  prefently  fled.  The  Chians 
remained  firm ;  and,  fighting  with  the  mod  determined  bravery 
againft  unequal  numbers,  fuffered  greatly.  Even  in  their  defeat, 
however,  it  appeared  that,  tho  the  Phenician  fhips  ftill  excelled  in 
fwiftnefs,  and  their  feamen  in  fkill  as  mariners,  yet  the  Greeks  were 
advancing  to  a  fuperiority  in  naval  action  above  other  nations.  The 
Phocasan  commander  Dionyfius,  having  with  his  three  galleys  taken 
three  of  the  enemy's,  when  he  found  the  battle  irrecoverably  loft,  and 
the  Ionian  affairs  confequently  defperate,  would  return  no  more  to 
Phocsa ;  but,  failing  immediately  to  the  coaft  of  Phenicia,  made 
prize  of  a  number  of  merchant-fhips.  Having  thus  inriched  himfelf 
and  his  crews,  he  failed  to  Sicily  to  injoy  himfelf  there;  and  thence 

*  "ilcririf  Tfiipvi  an'iirfufov  toi;  wowlioij  rps'powi.     Xenoph.  Lac.  Folk.  c.  xi. 

U  u  2  afterward. 


33*  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP. viii.  afterward,  as  neceflity  or  thirft  of  gain  impelled,  he  exercifed  piracy 
(^T'U'     againft  the  Carthaginians  and  Tufcans. 

The  Perfians  now,  mafters  of  the  fea,  pre  fled  the  fiege  of  Miletus, 
and  at  length  fucceeded  in  an  aflault.  Mod  of  the  men  within  the 
place  were  killed  :  the  reft,  with  the  women  and  children,  were  led 
to  Sula  ;  teftimonies  to  the  great  king  of  the  diligence  of  his  officers, 
and  examples  of  terror  to  other  conquered  provinces.  Darius  how- 
ever, according  to  the  honorable  teftimony  borne  to  him  by  Herodo- 
tus, did  them  no  other  ill  *  than  to  fettle  them  at  Ampe  on  the 
Euphrates,  near  where  that  river  difcharges  itfelf  into  the  Perfian 
gulph.  The  rich  vale  of  Miletus  was  divided  among  Perfians  ; 
Carians  were  eftablifhed  in  the  mountainous  part  of  its  territory. 
iEaces,  in  reward  for  his  fervice,  was  reftored  to  the  tyranny  of 
Samos  :  but  a  large  proportion  of  the  Samian  people,  averfe  to  his 
government,  emigrated  to  Sicily.  In  the  time  of  Herodotus  there 
flood  a  column  in  the  agora  of  the  city  of  Samos,  with  an  infcription 
in  honor  of  the  eleven  captains  who  had  bravely  fought  in  the  com- 
mon caufe  at  the  rifk  of  punifhment  for  difobedience  to  their  imme- 
diate commander.  But  the  erection  of  this  column  muft  have  been 
fubfequent  to  the  government  of  iEaces. 

Hciodot.l.vi.        Hiftiaeus,  on  the  reduction  of  Miletus,  moved  from  Byzantium  to 

c.  26. 

Lefbos,  where  he  feems  to  have  had  great  intereft.      Hence,  accord- 
ing to  Herodotus,  he  carried  on  a  piratical  war  againft  the  Greeks  no 
lefs'  than  againft  the  Perfians,  in  a  manner  which,    notwithstanding 
numberlefs  inftances  of  extreme  readinefs  in   the  Greeks   at  all  times 
to  make  petty  war  among  one  another,   appears  rather  unaccountable. 
At  length   landing  on    the  coaft  of  Alia  Minor  for  plunder,  he  was 
made  prifoner  by  the  Perfian  general  Harpagus ;   and   being  lent  to 
Sardis  was  there  crucified. 
Herodot.l.vi.       The  Perfian  fleet  wintered  at  Miletus.     Sailing  in  the  fpring,  the 
Ol.  Ixxi.  4.   iflands  Chios,   Lefbos,   Tenedos  immediately  fubmitted.     The  army 
B.  C.  493.    at  the  fame  time  proceeded  againft  the  Ionian  towns,  and  the  generals, 

*  xuxir  aalv  aXht  «tfowa«.      Herodot.  1.  vi,  C.  20. 

far 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  333 

far  otherwife  difpofed  than  their  matter,  executed  the  full  vengeance   CHAP.vni. 
which  they  had  threatened  :  the  handfomeft  Grecian  boys  were  made     S^^L 
eunuchs,  the  moft  beautiful  girls  were  carried  off;  the  towns,   and, 
as    the   Grecian    writers    particularly   obferve,    without   fparing   the 
temples,  were  burnt. 

After  the  reduction  of  the  iflands  the  fleet  failed  to  the  Hellefpont.  Herodot.Ui. 
All  on  the  Afiatic  fide  was  already  fubjedl  to  the  Perfians,  and  no-  c>  »• 
thing  on  the  European  fhore  now  flood  againtt  them.  Devaftation 
was  fpred  by  fword  and  fire.  The  Byzantians  and  Chalcedo- 
nians  beft  avoided  the  ftorm,  flying  betimes  with  their  moft  va- 
luable effeds,  and  planting  the  territory  of  Mefambria  far  in  the 
Euxine  fea.  The  Phenicians  burnt  the  empty  towns.  Then  return- 
ing to  the  Hellefpont,  all  the  Thracian  Cherfonefe  immediately  fub- 
mitted,  except  the  town  of  Cardia. 

This  peninfula,  which  by  way  of  eminence  was  commonly  called 
Amply  the  Cherfonefe,  had  been  planted  by  a  colony  of  Athenians, 
whofe  hiflory  is  not  unimportant  among  the  tranfaftions  of  Greece 
and  Perfia.  During  the  tyranny  of  Peififtratus  at  Athens  the  Do-  Herodot.I.vi. 
loncian  Thracians,  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  Cherfonefe,  preffed  in  c-34&feq- 
war  by  the  Apfinthians,  fent  their  chiefs  to  afk  advice  of  the 
god  of  Delphi.  The  oracle  directed  them  to  invite  into  their 
country,  to  found  a  colony  there,  the  firft  perfon  who,  after 
their  quitting  the  temple,  fhould  aik  them  to  the  rights  of  hof- 
pitality.  The  Doloncians,  directing  their  journey  homeward,  pafled 
through  Phocis  and  Boeotia  without  receiving  any  invitation.  Turn- 
ing then  into  Attica,  their  way  led  them  by  the  houfe  of  Miltiades 
fon  of  Cypfelus.  That  Athenian  happening  to  be  in  his  portico, 
and  feeing  men  pafs  in  a  foreign  drefs  and  carrying  fpears,  accofted 
them,  and  offered  refrefhment.  They  accepted  the  invitation;  and 
being  hofpitably  entertained,  they  related  the  oracular  refponfe  which 
they  had  received.  Miltiades  was  of  a  very  ancient,  honorable  and 
wealthy  family  of  Attica.  Herodotus  mentions,  as  a  circumftance  to 
afcertain  its  eminence,  that  it  was  a  family  accuftomed  to  keep  a 
chariot  with  four  hories ;  probably  meaning,  as  the  critics  have  ex- 
plained 


334  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.VIII. 
SECT.  II. 


plained  it,  that  the  family  of  Miltiades  had  been  accuStomed  to  con- 
tend at  the  Olympian  feftival  in  the  race  of  chariots  with  four  horfesj 
which  certainly  implied  considerable  wealth  in  a  country  like  Attica, 
little  naturally  adapted  to  breeding  and  keeping  horles.  Miltiades,  him- 
felf  popular  and  ambitious,  was  not  well  with  the  fadion  of  PeiSiStra- 
tus ;  and  thence  was  the  more  prepared  to  accept  the  invitation  of 
the  Thracians.  Collecting  therefore  a  number  of  Athenians,  either 
difpofed  to  his  intereSt,  or  averfe  to  the  prevailing  power,  all  of  whom 
Peififtratus  would  gladly  fee  depart  from  Athens,  he  eStabliShed  his 
colony,  and  was  railed  to  the  tyranny  of  the  Cherfonefe.  Dying 
childlefs,  his  authority  paSTed,  as  a  part  of  his  eState,  to  his  nephew 
Stefagoras,  fon  of  Cimon  his  brother  by  the  mother.  Stefagoras  alfo 
died  childlefs.  His  younger  brother  Miltiades  was  then  at  Athens, 
in  favor. with  Hippias  and  Hipparchus  *  ;  who,  whether  with  any  idea 
of  legal  claim  of  authority  of  the  mother-country  otfer  the  colony, 
or  merely  to  extend  their  own  power,  fent  young  Miltiades,  at  the 
fame  time  to  collect  his  inheritance,  and  to  take  upon  him  the  public 
adminiftration  of  the  affairs  of  the  Cherfonefe.  It  appears  that  the 
young  chief  carried  his  authority  with  a  high  hand  :  he  kept  a  body 
of  five  hundred  guards  in  conftant  pay  :  to  Strengthen  his  intereSt  in 
the  country  he  married  Hegefipyle,  daughter  of  Olorus  a  Thracian 
prince  ;  and  Tyrant  of  the  Cherfonefe  is  the  title  of  Miltiades  among 
all  the  earlier  Greek  historians  ■+-. 

Herodot.l.Iv.        Such  was  the  State  of  things  when  Darius  led  his  army  into  Europe. 

Com.  Nep.  Miltiades  then  yielded  to  a  power  which  he  certainly  was  unable  to 
reSiSt :  he  followed  the  Perfian  monarch's  orders  on  the  Scythian  ex- 
pedition. Pie  is  celebrated  for  having  propofed  among  the  Grecian 
chiefs  to  deftroy  the  bridge  over  the  Danube,  which  had  been  in- 
truSted  to  their  care  while  Darius  was  in  Scythia ;  hoping  that  fo  the 
prince  and  his  army,  between  famine  and  the  Scythian  Sword,  might 

*  The  Peififtratids.      Hcrodot.  1.  vi.  c.  39.  grapher  adds    sed    Justus,  and    proceeds   to 

f  Cherfonefi,    omnes  illos   quos   habitarat  explain   the   early  Grecian  fenfe  of  the  term 

annos,   perpetuam   obtinuerat  dominationem,  tyrant.     Corn.  Nep.  v.  Miltiad. 

Tyrannufque    fuerat  appellatus.       The   bio- 

periSh, 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE,  335 

perifh,  and  the  Grecian  ftates  thus  might  be  delivered  from  the  Per-   CHAP.viil 

fian  power.     How  far  this  propofal,  certainly  perfidious,  can  be  jufti-     SECT.  II. 

fied  upon  Grecian  principles  either  of  philofophy  or  of  patriotifm, 

may  he  difficult  to  determine.     We  may  however  credit  the  affertion 

of  Herodotus  and  Nepos,  that  intereft  more  than  integrity  induced 

the  other  Grecian  tyrants  to  oppofe  it:  for  they  efteemed  the  fupre- 

macy  of  Perlia  the  beft  fecurity  to  their  own  authority  againfl  the  de- 

mocratical  difpofition  of  their  people.       Herodotus  reports   that   an    HerodotAvi. 

.  .  c.  40.  &  Plu- 

aimy  of  Scythians,  bent  upon  revenging  the  Perfian  invafion,  obliged   tarch.  de  fera 

Miltiades  to  fly  the  Cherfonefe.  He  muft  have  been  however,  ac- 
cording to  the  fame  hiflorian,  popular  in  his  government,  at  lead 
among  the  Thracians,  fince,  on  the  departure  of  the  Scythians,  they 
recalled  him.  We  are  not  told  that  he  took  any  active  part  in  the 
Ionian  revolt]  but  his  flight  from  the  Cherfonefe,  after  the  defeat  of 
the  Grecian  fleet  off  Miletus,  fhows  that  he  knew  himfelf  obnoxious 
to  the  Perfians.  Putting  his  effects  aboard  five  trireme  galleys,  he 
fleered  for  Athens.  The  Phenician  fleet  purfued  him,  and  took  one 
of  his  galleys  commanded  by  his  eldeft  fon.  Here  again  Plerodotus 
bears  very  honorable  teflimony  to  Darius.  The  fon  of  Miltiades,  as 
a  prifoner  of  rank  and  confequence,  was  fent  to  receive  his  doom  at 
Sufa.  But  inflead  of  punifhment  as  a  rebel,  which  his  captors  ex- 
pected, Darius  was  liberal  of  favor  to  him,  giving  him  an  eftate  and 
a  Perfian  lady  for  his  wife,  by  whom  he  had  a  family  which  became 
numbered  among  the  Perfians.  If  Herodotus  had  authority  for  this 
anecdote,  it  may,  together  with  the  treatment  of  the  captive  Mile- 
flans,  juftify  the  opinion  which  he  advances,  that  Darius  would  have  c.  ,0. 
pardoned  even  Hifliasus,  had  he  not  been  prevented  by  the  jealous 
hafte  of  his  officers,  who  executed  that  unfortunate  but  apparently 
little  meritorious  chief,  without  waiting  for  orders  from  the  king. 

From  the  fame  impartial  hiflorian  however  we  learn,  that  the  fu- 
perintendency  of  the  Perfian  government  over  the  conquered  people 
was,  in  general,  correfpondent  to  the  difpofition  of  the  monarch, 
liberal  and  mild.     The  firft  vengeance  for  the  rebellion  being  over. 


th 


e 


33^  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.VIII.  the  Ionians  remaining  in  the  country  became  again  objects  of  care 
S.  I!'  anc*  Protedion.  No  mark  of  enmity  was  mown  during  the  remain- 
der of  that  year,  but  very  beneficial  regulations,  fays  the  hiftorian, 
were  made  *.  Sending  for  deputies  from  the  feveral  cities,  Artapher- 
nes  compelled  the  Ionians  to  pledge  themielves  to  one  another  that 
they  would  abftain  from  that  piratical,  thieving  and  murdering  kind 
of  petty  war,  to  which  the  Greeks  at  all  times  and  in  all  parts  were 
itrongly  addicted  ;  and  that  all  controverfies  between  cities,  as  be- 
tween individuals,  ihould  be  determined  by  regular  courfe  of  law-j-. 


SECTION     III. 

Firji  P  erf  an  Armament  againjl  Greece  under  Mardonius :  proceeds  no 
farther  than  Macedonia.      'The  Grecian  Cities  fummoned  by  Heralds  to 
acknowlege  fubjetlion  to  the  Perjian  Empire.    Internal  Feuds  in  Greece: 
War  of  Athens  and  Mgina. 

Ol.lxxii.i.  IN  the  fecond  fpring  after  the  reduction  of  Miletus,  a  great  change 
B.C.  492.  was  made  in  the  adminiftration  of  the  provinces  bordering  on  the 
eroo     vi.  Qrec;an  feas>     Artaphernes  was  recalled,  with  moil  of  the  principal 


c 


officers  of  his  fatrapy,  and  Mardonius,  a  young  man  of  higheft  rank, 
who  had  lately  married  a  daughter  of  Darius,  was  fent  to  take  that 
great  and  important  command.  He  led  with  him  a  very  numerous 
army.  On  the  coaft  of  Cilicia  he  met  a  large  fleet  attending  his  or- 
ders ;  and,  going  aboard,  he  failed  to  Ionia,  leaving  the  army  to  be 
conducted  by  the  generals  under  him  to  the  Hellespont.  Revenge 
Herodot.l.vi.  againft  Athens  and  Eretria  for  the  infult  at  Sardis,  was  the  avowed 
Plato.Menex.   intention  of  this  formidable  armament.     But  confidering  all  the  bed 

p.  240.  1. 11.    information   remaining  to  us  of  the  character  of  Darius  and  of  the 
ed.  Serran.  ~ 

circumftances  of  the  times,  it  appears  highly  probable  that  the  fame 

caufes  which  we  have  fuppofed  to  have  before  induced  that  monarch 

*  .  oval-  U  Hixo;  (pigov,   aKKa.  xeno-ipu  Kaera.      Hei'odot,  1.  VI.   C.  42. 

*  11         \'va.  Joaiaixoi  iTa,  y.ul  f*i  aMiJAofs  (pt'goitv  ti  x«i  ayo\tv.     Herodot.  ibid. 

himfelf 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE,  3^ 

himfelf  to  lead  an  army  into  Scythia,  ftill  exifted  in  confiderable  force,  CHAP.vin^ 
and  were  the  principal  motives  alio  to  the  permifTJon  of  this  enter-  SECT.  HI. 
prize.  Mardonius  feems  to  have  been  naturally  difpofed  to  extraor- 
dinary things.  Arriving  in  Ionia  he  depofed  all  the  tyrants,  and 
eftablifhed  democratical  government  in  every  Grecian  city;  a  mea- 
fure  fo  oppofite  to  the  general  policy  of  Perfia,  that  Herodotus  fpeaks 
of  it  as  a  wonder  next  to  incredible  among  the  people  of  old  Greece. 
Collecting  then  from  the  Ionians  and  ./Eolians  a  confiderable  addition 
to  his  forces  both  of  lea  and  land,  he  proceeded  to  the  Hellefpont, 
and  palled  into  Europe.  All  as  far  as  Macedonia  was  already  fubjedt 
to  Perfia.  That  kingdom,  which  had  before  bought  its  peace  by 
fubmitting  to  the  humiliating  ceremony  of  the  delivery  of  earth  and 
water,  was  now  brought  under  more  effective  fubjeilion,  and  com-   Herodot.l.vi. 

'  o  ■>  c.  44,  Si  1.  vu. 

pelled  to  the  payment  of  tribute.  But  the  fleet,  in  doubling  the  pro-  c.  108. 
montory  of  Athos,  loft  no  lefs  than  three  hundred  veflcls  by  a  ftorm, 
with,  it  was  reported,  twenty  thoufand  men.  The  army  alio  fuffered 
confiderably  in  a  fudden  attack  from  the  Erygians,  a  Thracian  people, 
in  which  Mardonius  himfelf  was  wounded.  If  he  would  perfevere 
in  his  purpofe  of  pufhing  conqueft  farther,  he  muft  therefore  begin 
with  fubduing  the  Brygians.  This  he  effected;  but  the  feafon  being 
then  too  much  advanced  to  attempt  more,  he  led  back  the  whole  ar- 
mament to  winter  in  Alia. 

The  firft  object  in  the  next  fpring  was  the  little  ifland  of  Thafus,  for-    Ol.  lxxii.2. 
merly  the  feat  of  the  principal  Phenician  factory  in  the  ./Egean  fiea;  bar-    ".  C.  491. 

J  .  .  Herodot.l.vi. 

ren  in  its  foil,  but  rich  by  its  gold  mines,  and  ftill  more  by  thofe  c  46&feq. 
which  its  inhabitants  poflefied  on  the  neighbouring  continent  of  Thrace. 
To  fecure  themfelves  rather  than  to  offend  others,  the  Thafians  had 
lately  employed  a  part  of  their  wealth  in  building  (hips  of  war,  and 
improving  the  fortifications  of  their  town.  An  order  came  to  them 
in  the  name  of  the  Perfian  king  to  raze  their  fortifications,  and  to 
fend  all  their  lhips  of  war  to  the  Perfian  naval  arfenal  at  Abdera. 
They  obeyed.  Then  heralds  were  fent  into  Greece,  demanding  of 
every  city  acknowlegement  of  fubjection  to  Darius  by  the  delivery 

X    x  of 


J33  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

■CHAP.VIII.  0f  earth  and  water.     Many  towns  on  the  continent  obeyed,  and  moft 

sect.  II.     of  the  iflands  *. 

It  is  an  old  obfervation,  which  the  hiftory  of  nations  gives  frequent 
occafion  to  repeat,  that  circumftances  in  themfelves  the  mod  trifling 

Herodot. !.  v.  °ften  produce  the  greateft  events.     The  old  enmity  between  Athens 

c.  82,  &i.vi.  anci  /Egina,  faid  to  have  originated  about  a  wooden  ftatue,  appears  to 
have  contributed  not  a  little  to  lead  the  Athenians  to  that  determined 
oppofition  to  Periia,  and  to  that  alliance  of  their  ftate  with  Lacedse- 
mon,  which  together,  in  faving  Greece  from  fubjection,  gave  the 
Grecian  people  to  be  what  they  afterward  became.  As  foon  as  it  was 
known  at  Athens  that  the  iEginetans  had  acknowleged  themfelves 
fubjects  to  Perfia,  minifters  were  fent  to  Sparta  to  accufe  them  as 
traitors  to  Greece.  It  was  the  character  of  the  Spartan  government 
to  be  cautious  in  enterprize,  but  unfhaken  in  principle,  firm  in  re- 
folve,  and  immoveable  by  danger.  Independency  on  any  foreign  ftate 
was  the  great  object  of  all  its  fingular  inftitutions ;  and  far  from  bow- 
ing to  a  fuperior  power,  it  had  for  fome  time  been  not  unfuccefsfully 
afpiring  to  dominion  over  others.  The  haughty  demand  of  Periia 
therefore  could  not  but  find  at  Lacedaemon  a  determined  refufal. 
Both  there  and  at  Athens,  it  is  faid,  the  public  indignation  vented 
itfelf  in  barbarian  inhumanity  :  the  Perfian  heralds  were  with  igno- 
miny and   fcoffing   put   to  death ;  at  one  place  being  thrown  into 

Herodot.l.vii.  a  pit,  at  the  other  into  a  well,  and  told  there  to  take  their  earth  and 
water.  But  the  power  of  that  vaft  empire  was  fo  really  formidable, 
and  in  general  opinion  fo  nearly  irrefiftible,  that  to  find  Athens  hearti- 
ly difpofed  to  alliance  in  oppofition  to  it,  would  be  efleemed  by  the 
Lacedaemonians  a  circumftance  the  more  fortunate,  as  the  late  en- 
mity between  the  two  commonwealths  had  been  violent.  Other  cir- 
cumftances concurred  at  this  time  to  promote  the  union.    The  ancient 

„     ,    ,    .    animofity  between  Lacedaemon  and  Ar^os  had  been  revived  and  even 

Herodot.  1.  vi.  }  b  .  .. 

c.  76  &  feq.     heightened  by  recent  tranfaclions.    Cleomenes  king  of  Sparta,  having 

*  Herodotus  fays   all  ;  but  he  afterward     have  excepted  Eubcea  and  Crete  ;   or  at  leaft 
excepts  the  little  iflands  of  Seriphos,   Siphnos,     moll  of  their  towns, 
and  Melos  (j).      Apparently  he  fhould  alfo 

(1)  B.  vii.  c.  46. 

invaded 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  333 

invaded  Argolis  and  gained  a  battle,  mafl'acred  a  large  botly  of  Ar-   CHAP.vm. 
gians  who  had  furrendered  themfelves  on  promifes  of  fafety.     Inve-    SECT.  ill. 
teracy  therefore  and  near  neighbourhood  would  make  Argos,  however 
thus  weakened,  a  dangerous  enemy.     Thebes  moreover,  formerly  the 
principal  ally  of  Sparta  beyond  Peloponnefus,  and  the  ancient  enemy 
of  Athens,  had  been  led  by  its  prevailing  faction  to  fubmit  to  the 
demands  of  Perfia.     Upon  all  thefe  accounts  the  Athenian  ambafTa- 
dors  were  very  favorably  received  at  Lacedasmon.     Cleomenes,  vehe- 
ment in  all  his  undertakings,  went  himfelf  to  ./Egina,  intending  to  HerodoU.vi. 
feize  the  perfons  of  thofe  who  had  been  forward  in  leading  the  people 
of  that  ifland  to  the  obnoxious  meafure.      He  was  oppofed  and  pre- 
vented  in  his   purpofe ;   but  not  without  a  remarkable  acknowlege- 
ment  of  the  authority  of  the  Spartan  ftate.     It  was  replied  to  him, 
•  that  he  came  merely  as  an    individual ;  the  ^Eginetan  people  would    ! 
4  have  obeyed  a  regular  order  from  the  Lacedemonian  government.' 

But  a  diffention   between    the  Spartan  kings,   the  more  dangerous   Herodot.l.vi. 
on  account  of  the  prefent  crifis  of  Grecian   affairs,  had   been  long 
growing,  and  was  now  come  to  its  height.     Demaratus  had  endea- 
voured to  excite  the  leading  men  againft  his  abfent  collegue.     Cleo- 
menes, on  his  return,  no  longer  keeping  any  meafure,  averted  that 
.Demaratus  was  illegitimately  born  ;  and  incouraging  Leotychides,  the 
next  in  fuccefTion  of  the  Procleid  family,   to  claim  the  crown  againft 
him,  fupported  the  pretenfion  with  all  his  intereft.     The  legitimacy 
of  Demaratus's  birth  was    brought  into   real  doubt;   and  where  the 
judgement  of  men  could  not  decide,  recourfe  was  had  to  the  Delphian 
oracle.     Herodotus,    who  is    not    fcrupulous  of  fpeaking    freely  of  Herodot.l.vi 
oracles,   tells  upon  this  occafion  a  very  circumftantial  ftory  of  bribery 
pradfifed  by  Cleomenes  to  procure  a  refponfe  from  the  Pythonefs  fa- 
vorable to  his  views ;   and  the   report  indeed  appears  to  have  found   Taufan.  1.  iii. 
general  credit  in  Greece.    Demaratus,  in  confequence  of  that  refponfe, 
was  immediately  depofed.      Finding  then  his   lituation  irkfome,  and 
perhaps  unfafe  in  Sparta,  he  retired  to  the  ifland  of  Zacynthus ;  and, 
being  there  ftill  perfecuted  by  Cleomenes,  he. fled  to  the  Perfian  court. 

X  x  2  Cleomenes, 


340  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

chap.viii.  Cleomenes,   now  unoppofed  in  his  meafures,   took  Leotychides  with 
r"^Jr*    him  to  TEginaj   and  fuch  was  the  authority  which  reputation  had  ac- 


Hciodor.  l.vi.  quired  to  their  ttate,  the  /Eginetan  government,  generally  haughty 
enough  through  prefumption  in  its  naval  force  and  the  fecurity  of  its 
infular  fituation,  fubmitted  implicitly  to  their  commands.  Ten  of 
the  principal  men  of  the  iiland  were  arretted  and  fent  to  Athens, 
there  to  remain  pledges  of  the  fidelity  of  the  /Eginetan  people  to  the 
Grecian  caufe. 

Hcrodot.l.vi.       But  the  hafty  paflion  of  Cleomenes  at  length  became  lading  phrenzy. 

Piufan  l  iii    Many  ttrange  actions  are  reported  of  him,  and  the  laft  was  fatal  to 

c- 4-  himfelf:  fnatching  a  fword  from  a  Helot  under  whofe  care  he  was 

Apoph.Lac,     confined,  he  deliberately  cut  himfelf  piecemeal. 

The  dilpofition  to  enmity  between  Athens  and  JEgina  fhortly 
broke  out  into  action.  The  detail  which  Herodotus  gives  of  this 
little  war  is  not  an  unworthy  object  of  hiftory,  as  it  tends  to  (how 
the  ftate  of  Greece  at  that  important  period  when  her  little  com- 
monwealths were  firft  aifailed  by  the  tremendous  might  of  Perfia. 
The  reader  fhould  caft  his  eye  upon  the  map,  and  fee  there  what 
/Egina  is.    ./Egina  was  a  formidable  foe  to  Athens.     Its  rulers,  having 

Hevodot.l.vi.  made  their  peace  with  Leotychides  fo  as  to  procure  his  mediation 
with  the  Athenian  government  for  the  rettoration  of  the  i'Eginetan 
hoftages,  could  not  yet  obtain  them.  Bent  therefore  upon  revenge, 
they  intercepted  a  large  galley,  in  which  many  Athenians  of  rank 
were  going  to  an  annual  religious  fettival  at  Delos.  But  ./Egina,  like 
all  other  Grecian  ttates,  had  its  factions.  The  oligarchal  now  pre- 
vailed ;  and  Nicodromus,  a  considerable  man  of  the  oppolite  party, 
had  found  it  prudent  to  retire  from  his  country.  The  prefent  oppor- 
tunity invited  to  connect  his  interett  with  that  of  Athens.  A  plan 
of  furprize  was  concerted  with  the  Athenian  government,  and  Ni- 
codromus, who  had  many  friends  in  the  iiland,  made  himfelf 
matter  of  that  called  the  old  town  of  ./Egina.  But  the  Athenians; 
'ndf  pofleffing  a  fufficient  naval  force  to  cope  with  the  iEginetan 
fleet,    had  applied  to  Corinth,    then   in    clofe  alliance  with  them, 

for 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  341 

for  a  loan  of  twenty  fhips.  Thefe  arrived  a  day  too  late  ;  the  whole  CHAP.vm. 
plan  in  confequence  failed;  and  Nicodromus,  with  many  of  his  ad-  SECT.  HI. 
herents,  imbarking,  fled  to  Attica.  The  Athenians  allotted  them  a 
fettlement  near  the  promontory  Sunium  ;  whence  they  made  continual 
affaults  and  depredations  upon  the  iEginetans  of  the  ifland.  The 
prevailing  party  in  JEg'ina.  meanwhile  vented  revenge  againfl  the  re- 
maining perfons  of  the  oppolite  faction,  Co  (hocking  that  in  thefe 
times  it  appears  hardly  credible.  Yet  one  circumftance  only,  of  par- 
ticular affront  to  a  goddefs,  feems  to  have  ftruck  either  the  Greeks 
of  that  age,  or  the  hiftorian  in  the  next,  as  a  peculiar  enormity. 
Seven  hundred  citizens  were  led  out  at  once  to  execution.  One  of 
them,  getting  loofe  from  his  bonds,  fled  to  a  temple  of  Ceres,  and 
laid  faft  hold  on  the  gate.  His  purfuers  endeavoured  to  pull  him 
away  ;  but  his  ftrength  baffling  them,  they  chopped  off  his  hands, 
and  thus  mangled  led  him  to  fuffer  death  with  his  fellows.  The 
iEginetans  were  foon  after  defeated  in  a  naval  engagement.  The 
Athenians  then  landed  on  the  ifland,  and  the  iEginetans  from  Sunium 
were  not  likely  to  be  advocates  for  mercy  to  their  fellowcountrymen. 
Of  a  thoufand  Argians  who  had  come  to  affift  the  i^Eginetans  of  the 
ifland,  the  greater  part  were  flain.  Still,  with  their  mattered  navy, 
the  ./Eginetans  attacked  the  Athenian  fleet  by  furprize  and  took  four 


galleys. 


SECTION     IV. 

Second  Perfian  Armament  againfl  Greece  under  Datis  and  Artaphemes  : 

reduces  the  IJlands  of  the  Mgcan  ;    invades  Attica.     Battle  of  Ma- 

rathon. 

r 

SUCH  was  the  virulence  of  enmity  among  the  Greeks  toward 
one  another  at  the  very  time  when  the  great  ftorm  was  approaching 
from  the  Eaft,  which  threatened  a  final  period  to  that  independency 
of  their  little  republics,  the  fource  of  thefe  horrid  violences.     The 

little 


34^  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP. viii.  little  fuccefs  of  Mardonius  in  his   expedition  had  probably  afforded 

SECT.  IV.    means  for  intrigue  to  take  effect  to  his  difadvantage  in  the  court  of 

Sufa.     He  was   recalled,  and  the  command  at  Sardis  was  given   to 

Herodot.l.vi.   Artaphernes,  fon  of  the  late   fatrap  of  that  name,   with  whom  was 

c.  94,  &  icq.      .....  r 

Plato.  Mencx.  joined  Datis,  a  Median  nobleman,  probably  of  greater  experience. 
&deLeg,l.iii,  Thefe  generals  alio,  leading  a  land  force  from  the  interior  provinces, 
p.698.  t.n.  met  tne  ^ect  on  tne  CQaft  0f  Cilicia.  The  conqueft  of  Greece  being 
Ol.  lxxu.3.     .        ,  .         .  ,  .  ,    ,        .        /*  ,  5 

B.  C.  4Q0.    "ie  object,  it  was  determined  to  avoid  the  circuitous  march  by  Thrace 

and  Macedonia.  A  fufficiency  of  tranfports  having  been  collected, 
the  whole  army,  cavalry  as  well  as  infantry,  were  imbarked,  and 
coafted  Afia-minor  as  far  as  Samos.  Hither  the  Ionian  and  .rEolian 
troops  and  veffels  were  fummoned.  All  being  affembled,  the  generals 
directed  their  courfe  acrofs  the  /Egean  fea,  firfl  to  Naxos.  The  in- 
habitants of  that  ifland,  notwithstanding  their  former  fucceisful  de- 
fence, durft  not  abide  this  formidable  armament  :  quitting  their  city 
they  fled  to  their  mountains.  The  Perlians  burnt  the  town,  with  its 
temples :  the  few  Naxians  who  fell  into  their  hands  were  made  flaves. 
The  fleet  proceeded  to  the  neighbouring  iflands,  receiving  their  fub- 
miflion,  and  taking  everywhere  the  children  of  the  principal  families 
as  hoftages.  No  oppofition  was  found  till  they  arrived  at  Caryftus 
in  Eubaea.  The  Caryftians,  with  more  fpirit  than  prudence,  declared 
they  would  neither  join  in  hoflilities  againft  their  neighbours  and 
fellowcountrymen,  nor  give  hoftages.  Wafte  of  their  lands,  and 
fiege  laid  to  their  town,  foon  obliged  them  to  comply  with  whatfo- 
ever  the  Periian  generals  chofe  to  command. 
Herodot.l.vi.  'pjie  ft0rm  now  approached  Eretria.  Punifliment  to  that  city  was 
one  of  the  declared  objects  of  the  armament.  Little  hope  there- 
fore could  be  entertained  of  good  terms  for  the  community.  In  this 
defperate  fltuation  of  public  affairs,  temptation  was  ftrong  for  indi- 
viduals to  endeavour,  by  whatfoever  means,  to  fecure  themfelves. 
"While  therefore  a  deputation  was  fent  by  public  authority  to  requeft 
afiiftance  from  Athens,  many  of  the  citizens  were  for  flying  to  the 
mountains  j    others  were  difpofed  to  betray  the  city  to  the  enemy; 

fome 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE,  343 

fome  of  them  thinking,  perhaps  not  unreasonably,  that  hefide  gain-  CHAP.VIII. 
ing  for  themfelves  favorable  terms,  they  might  even  leffen  the  hor-  siECI- lv' 
rors  of  capture  to  the  city  at  large,  by  preventing  the  fhock  of  arms, 
and  the  further  irritation  of  an  irrefiftible  foe.  The  Athenians  fo  far 
complied  with  the  requeft  made  to  them,  as  to  direct  that  the  four 
thouiand  colonics,  lately  fent  from  Athens  into  Eubcea,  mould  affifl 
in  the  defence  of  Eretria.  The  aid  would  have  been  important,  had 
the  Eretrians  been  united  in  council  and  prepared  for  a  liege;  or  had 
there  been  any  reafonable  profpecT:  of  farther  relief  from  the  reft  of 
Greece.  But  ./Efcbines,  fon  of  Nothon,  one  of  the  principal  citi- 
zens, feeing  defence  hopelefs,  advifed  the  colonifts,  by  a  timely 
retreat,  to  refer ve  themfelves  for  the  defence  of  their  native  country, 
which  would  next  be  attacked;  and,  if  faved,  might  frill  afford, 
poffibly  even  to  the  Eretrians,  a  refuge  from  Perfian  tyranny.  The 
colonifts  accordingly  croffed  to  Oropus,  and  arrived  fafe  in  Attica. 
The  Perfians  foon  appeared  off  the  Eretrian  coaft.  The  little  fea- 
port  towns  of  Chcereas  and  ./Egilia  were  immediately  abandoned  : 
there  the  army  debarked.  Among  the  Eretrians,  the  refolution  had 
finally  prevailed  to  defend  the  city.  During  fix  days  the  Perfian 
nflaults  were  vigcroufly  oppofed.  On  the  feventh  the  place  was  be- 
trayed by  two  of  the  principal  citizens.  The  temples  were  plundered 
and  burnt  :  the  inhabitants  were  condemned  to  flavery. 

The   Perfian  generals  allowed  but  a  few  days  reft  to  their  forces   Hcrodot.  l.vi. 
before  they  croffed  into  Attica ;  having  Hippias,   formerly  tyrant  of  Thucyd.  1. vi. 
that  country,  now  of  advanced  age,    it  being  the  twentieth  year  from     ' 
his  expulfion,  for  their  guide  and  counfellor.     In  this  alarming  fitu- 
ation  of  Greece,  no  meafures  had  been  concerted  for  general  fecurity. 
The  Afian  Greeks  had  been  firft  fubdued.     The  Perfian  dominion 
then  extended  itfelf  into  Europe  as  far  as  the  confines   of  Theffaly. 
All  the  iflands  had  now  fallen.     Eubaea,    which  might  be  reckoned 
an  appurtenance  of  the  Grecian  main,  was  conquered.     The  Perfian 
army  pafied  the  narrow  channel  which  feparates  them,  and  ftill  no 
league  for  common  defence  feems  even  to  have  been  propofed.     On 

the 


34+  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.VHI.   tne  capture  of  Eretria,  a  melTenger  was  fcnt  from  Athens  to  Lacedas- 

SECT.  IV.    mon  wjtj1  tjle  news>  anci  at  tne  fame  tjme  to  j-equeft  affiftance.     The 

Herodot.  1. vi.  Lacedaemonians  readily  promifed  their  utmofr.  help;    but  their  laws 

c.  i©6.  anci  their  religion,  they  faid,  forbad  them  to  march  before  the  full 

Strabo,  1.  ix.  °<  m         J 

p.  399.  moon,    of  which  it  wanted  five  days.     As  things  now  ftoud  indeed, 

probability  of  fuccefsful  oppofition  was  fo  fmall  that  perhaps  we  ought 
not  to  impute  to  any  bale  or  unreafonable  felfifbnefs  the  caution  of 
the  Lacedaemonian  government,  though  we  (hould  believe  that  policy 
or  irrefolution,    more  than  religion,   detained  their  army.     The  rnef- 

Henxiot.l.vi.  fenger  however,  Pheidippides,  a  runner  by  profefiion,  having  per- 
formed his  journey  with  extraordinary  celerity,  related  a  ltory  on  his 
return  which  might  be  not  unavailing  to  infpire  confidence  into  the 
Athenian  populace.  As  he  was  going,  he  faid,  over  the  Parthenian 
mountain  above  Tegea  in  Arcadia,  the  god  Pan  called  to  him  by 
name.  Me  flopped  in  obedience  to  the  voice,  when  it  proceeded, 
commanding  him  to  tell  the  Athenians,  «  That  they  were  wrong  in 
*  paying  no  worfhip  to  a  deity  fo  well  difpofed  to  them,  who  had  often 
'  ferved  them,  and  intended  them  farther  favor.'  The  worfhip  of 
the  god  Pan  was  in  confequence  introduced  at  Athens. 

TT     ,     ,   .         There  was  fortunately  at  this    time,    among  the    principal  Athe- 

Herodot.  l.vi.       _  '  o  r  r 

c  io3,&i"eq.  nialis,  a  man  qualified  both  by  genius  and  experience  to  take  the  lead 
on  a  momentous  occafion.  It  was  Miltiades  the  expelled  chief  of 
the  Cherfonefe.  But  on  his  flight  to  Athens,  Miltiades  had  not  imme- 
diately found  it  a  place  of  fecure  refuge.  A  profecution  was  com- 
menced againft  him  for  the  crime  of  tyranny  *.  In  another  feafon, 
however  indefinite  the  crime,  and  however  inapplicable  every  exiftifig 
law  to  any  act  of  the  accufed,  a  popular  aflembly  might  have  pro- 
nounced condemnation.  In  the  prefent  crifis  he  was  not  onlv  acquitted, 
but,  after  the  common  manner  of  the  flood  of  popular  favor,  raifed 
by  the  voice  of  the  people  to  be  one  of  the  ten  commanders  in  chief 
of  the  army  -f.     Immediate  afiiftance   from  Sparta   being  denied,  it 

,  Y-370    dizar^ioii  aiTon    dyxyitri;,     ioisi£a>   Ti^an'I'Joj    T?;   J»  X<gcro>*>-a       Herodot.  I.  vi.  c.   104. 

■f   STfarr.yos    'Affavuiuv    d^t^i^v,   «iffQ;ij  lira   rev   &vucv.      Herodot.  ib. 

became 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  345 

became  a  queftion  with  the  ten  generals,  whether  the  bold  ftep  mould  CHAP.vni. 
be  ventured  of  meeting  the  enemy  in  the  field  j  or  whether  their  SECT.  IV. 
whole  diligence  mould  be  applied  to  prepare  for  a  fiege.     It  happened 
that  opinions  were  equally  divided ;  in  which  cafe,    by  ancient  cuf-  Herodot.l.vi. 
torn,  the  polemarch  archon  was  to  be  called  in  to  give  the  cafling 
vote.     The  argument  attributed  by  Herodotus  to  Miltiades  upon  this 
occafion  not  only  tends  very  much  to  explain  both  the  politics  and 
the  temper  of  the  times,  but  accounts  Satisfactorily  why  that  able 
commander,    contrary  to  every  common  principle  of  defenfive  war, 
was  for  rifking  at  once  a  decifive  ingagement  with  an  enemy  in  num- 
bers fo  very  fuperior.     '  It  depends  upon   you,'  faid  Miltiades  in  a 
conference  with  the  polemarch  Callimachus,  '  either  to  reduce  Athens 

*  to  flavery,  or,  by  eflablifhing  her  freedom,  to  leave  an  eternal  me- 

*  mory  of  yourfelf  among  men,  more  glorious  than  even  Harmodius 

*  and  Ariftogciton  have  acquired.  For  never  before,  fince  the  Athe- 
'  nians  were  a  people,  did  a  danger  like  the  prefent  threaten  them. 
'  If,  yielding  to  the  Perfians,  they  are  delivered  into  the  power  of  Hip- 
1  pias,  let  it  be  thought  what  their  Sufferings  will  be.  But  if  they 
'  conquer,  Athens  will  become  the  firfl  city  of  Greece.  Should  they 
'  then,  by  your  decifion,  be  debarred  from  prefently  ingaging  the  ene- 

*  my,  I  well  know  that  faction  will  be  dividing  the  minds  of  our 
'  citizens ;  and  a  party  among  them  will  not  fcruple  to  make  terms 
'  with  the  Perfians  to  the  deftru&ion  of  the  reft.  But  if  we  ingage 
'  before  any  corrupt  difpofition  prevails,  the  gods  only  difpenfing 
'  equal  favor,  we  are  able  to  conquer.'  The  polemarch  yielded  to 
this  argument. 

The  Perfians  had  now  for  two  or  three  generations  been  accuf- 
tomed  to  almoft  uninterrupted  fuccefs  in  war.  They  had  many  times 
ingaged  the  Greeks  of  Afia  and  Cyprus ;  and  tho  the  accounts  come 
to  us  from  Grecian  historians  only,  yet  we  read  of  no  considerable 
defeat  they  had  ever  Suffered,  except  once  in  Caria;  when,  by  the 
abilities  of  Heracleides  of  Mylaffa,  their  general  Daurifes  was  fur- 
prized  among  defiles.     The  army  under  Datis  and  Artaphernes  there- 

Y  y  fore 


34-6 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.VIII. 
SECT.  IV. 

Corn.  Nep. 
v.  Miltiad. 

Plato.  Menex. 


JufKn.  1.  ii. 
c.  9. 


Com.  Nep. 
v.  Miltiad. 
Paufan.  1.  x. 
c.  20. 


fore  advanced  toward  Athens,  confident  of  fuperiority  to  all  oppofi- 
tion  in  the  field.  Herodotus  does  not  mention  their  numbers.  Ac- 
cording to  Cornelius  Nepos,  they  were  a  hundred  thoufand  effective 
foot,  and  ten  thoufand  horfe;  a  very  large  force  to  be  tranfported  by 
fea  from  Afia :  yet  Plato,  meaning  probably  to  include  the  feamen 
and  the  various  multitude  of  attendants  upon  Afiatic  troops,  calls  the 
whole  armament  five  hundred  thoufand ;  and  Trogus  Pompeius,  ac- 
cording to  his  epitomizer  Juftin,  did  not  fcruple  to  add  a  hundred 
thoufand  more.  Herodotus  has  not  either  ventured  to  report  the 
numbers  which  the  Athenians  brought  into  the  field:  he  only  fays 
that  they  were  very  inferior  to  the  Perfians  ;  and  later  writers  have 
not  lefs  contradicted  probability  in  diminishing  the  Grecian  than  in 
exaggerating  the  Perfian  force.  According  to  Nepos  and  Paufanias, 
the  Athenians  were  only  nine  thoufand,  and  the  Plataeans,  joining 
them  with  the  whole  flrength  of  their  little  commonwealth,  added 
only  one  thoufand.  But  fufficient  affurance  remains  to  us  that  Attica 
was  capable  of  railing  a  greater  force,  and  upon  fuch  an  emergency  it 
would  exert  its  utmofl  *.  The  genius  of  Miltiades  however,  rather 
than  the  flrength  of  Athens,  appears  upon  this  occafion  the  mining 
inftrument  in  the  hand  of  providence  for  the  prefervation  of  Greece. 
It  was  no  feafon  for  ceremony.     Abilities,  wherever  they  were  con- 


*  Paufanias  fays  (1)  that  the  battle  of 
Marathon  was  the  firft  occafion  upon  which 
the  Athenians  admitted  flaves  to  military  fer- 
vice  ;  meaning  probabjy  to  fervice  with  the 
freemen  in  the  heavy  infantry  ;  becaufe  it  ap- 
pears from  Herodotus  to  have  been  no  new 
practice  to  make  flaves  do  duty  as  light  troops. 
It  feems  a  neceifary  inference,  what  we  might 
otherwife  indeed  naturally  fuppofe,  that  the 
utmoft  flrength  of  Athens  was  exerted  upon 
that  occafion.  But  eleven  years  after,  at  the 
battle  of  Plataea,  when  the  immediate  danger 
to  the  Athenian  people  was  much  lefs  preffing, 
and  when  a  confiderable  part  of  their  force 
was  ferving  aboard  the  fleet,  the  Athenian 
troops  in  the  confederate  army  were  eight  thou- 


fand heavy  foot,  attended  by  an  equal  number 
of  light-armed  flaves  (2).  Indeed  at  the  time 
of  the  battle  of  Marathon,  the  acceffion  of 
flrength  to  the  Athenian  forces  from  the  colo- 
nifts  lately  returned  from  Eubcea,  would,  ac- 
cording to  Herodotus,  be  of  fcarcely  lefs  than 
four  thoufand  men.  The  fame  author  informs 
us  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  little  ifland  of 
Naxos,  after  theexpulfion  of  a  powerful  party, 
formed  no  lefs  than  eight  thoufand  regular 
heavy-armed  foot  (1).  Upon  the  whole  we  can- 
not fuppofe  the  regular  Grecian  forces  at 
Marathon  much  fewer  than  twenty  thoufand, 
and  the  armed  flaves  would  be  about  an  equal 
number. 


'(.)  l.i.  c.3*. 


(a)  Herodot.  1.  ix.  c.  t%,  19. 


(3]  Herodot.  1.  v.  c.  30. 

fpicuous, 


HISTORY    OF    G  RE  E  C  E.  347 

fpicuous,  would  of  courfe  have  the  lead.     Of  the  nine  colleagues  of  CHAP.VHL 
Miltiades  five  gave  up  their  days  of  command  to  him  ;   and  by  their      t_^JmmmJ' 
means  he  had  the  majority  of  votes  anions:  the  ten.     Thus  the  ex-   Hcrodot.l.vi. 

J  ,  C.    I  10. 

treme  inconveniencies  to  which  the  Athenian  fyftem  lay  open  were  in  pin  arch, 
a  great  degree  obviated  ;    and  the  unity  indifpenfible  to  the  advanta- 
geous conduct  of  military  bufinefs  was  eftablifhed.     Miltiades  to  his 
other  advantages  joined  that  of  having  ferved  with  the  Perfians.     He 
knew  therefore  the  compofition  of  their  armies,  the  temper  of  their 
troops,  and  the  ordinary  fyftem  of  their  generals.     The  Greeks,  whofe 
dependence  was  on  their  heavy-armed  foot  formed  in  the  deep  order 
of  the  phalanx,  ufually  began  an  ingagement  with  a  few  difcharges 
of  miflile  weapons,  and  then  prefently  came  to  clofe  fight  with  their 
long  fpears.     The  Perfians  made  more  ufe  of  the  bow,   and  lefs  of 
the  fpear ;  which  with  them  was  fhorter  than  the  Grecian  fpear,  and 
they  depended  much  upon  their  cavalry,  of  which  the  Greeks  (ex- 
cepting the  ThelTalians)  from  the  nature  of  their  country  could  have 
little.     The  defeniive  armour  alfo  of  the  Perfian  infantry  was  inferior 
to  the  Grecian.     Herodotus  has  marked  the  difference  in  a  fpeech  of  Heiodot.  l. t. 
Ariftagoras  the  Milelian  to  the  Lacedaemonian  alTembly  :    '  The  Per-  c'  49' 
'  fians  go  to  battle,'  he  fays,  *  carrying  bows  and  fhort  fpears,   and 
'  wearing  ftockings  and  turbans.'    The  Greeks  carried  long  fpears 
and  fwords,  and  wore  greaves  and  helmets  *. 

The  Perfian  generals,    guided  by  Hippias,  had  chofen  their  place  Herodot.i.vi. 
of  debarkation  on  the  eaftern  coaft  of  Attica,   near  Marathon.     Here  Thjuc'dlT" 

c.  5.8. 

*   ^fchylus,   who  is  faid  himfelf  to  have  *H  iofutt^itov 

fought  at  Marathon,   at  Salamis,  and  at  Pla-  Aoyx»i«  »V^u«  xixgaruxtf ;  P.  131. 

laja,  adverts  in  feveral  paflages  of  his  tragedy 

of  the  Perfians  to  this  difference  of  weapons.  and,  (till  farther,  Atoffa  afking  concerning  the 

The  chorus  fpeaking  of  Xerxes  fays  :  Athenians, 

"Eirayii  ^ixTu/roi;  a.,-  liar t^a.  yuf,  ro£ov\xl{  ii^ti  dia    j^J?  yavrtTf 

fyiV.  t«|»J*/*»m  "Ajwr.     P.  1  jq.  ed.  H.  Steph.  "?*" ; 

,    ,       .       „    .„.     .  the  chorus  anfwers : 

Afterward  the  cnaractenitical  weapons  are  put 

for  the  nations  who  bore  them  :  'Ok^^j-  ty^n  r«&«*,  x*t  tp^drmhs  vccydt. 

n»T£^ti»  rofee  fvpa  to   ttxit,  p.  137, 

Y  y  2  on 


348  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.VIII.  on  lancling  tney  were  at  onCe  in  a  plain  in  which  cavalry  might  act ; 
SECT.  IV.    anci  tne  way  to  Athens,  between  the  mountains  Pentelicus  and  Bri- 
PauHin.  l.  i.     leffus,  was  lefs  difficult  than  any  other  acrofs  the  heights  which  at 
Wheier's         fome  diftance  furround  that  city.     The  intire  command  which  they 
firac^tfvi    poffeffed  of  the  fea,  made  it  neceffary  for  Miltiades  to  wait  for  intel- 
Travel^in       ^geilce  where  they  would  make  their  defcent.     They  had  thus  de- 
Greece,  c. 34,   barked  their  whole  force  without  obftru&ion,   and  were  already  in 
pofTefilon  of  the  plain,  when  the  Athenian  army  appeared  upon  the 
hills  above.     But   this   plain  was  narrow :    prefied  between  the  fea 
eaftward,  and  the  hills  weftward,    and  clofed  at  each  extremity,   on 
the  north  by  a  marfh,  on  the  fouth  by  the  hills  verging  round  and 
meeting  the  fea.    Miltiades,  on  view  of  the  ground  and  of  the  enemy, 
determined  to  attack.     The  firft  object  in  ingaging  Afiatic  armies  was 
to  refifl  or  to  render  ufelefs  their  numerous  and  excellent  cavalry  : 
the  next  to  prevent  them  from  profiting  by  their  fuperior  fkill  in  the 
ufe  of  miffile  weapons.     The  former  might  have  been  obtained  by 
waiting  among  the  hills  :    but  there  the  heavy-armed  Greeks  would 
have  been  helplefs  againft  the  Perfian  archers  j   whofe  fleet,    whofe 
numbers,    and    whofe   weapons    would    inable   them    to   attack   on 
any  fide,   or  on  all  fides,  or,  avoiding  them  intirely,  to  proceed  to 
Athens.     It  was  in  a  plain  only  that  they  could  be  forced  to  that 
mode  of  ingagement    in   which   the  Greeks    had   greater  pradice, 
and  for  which  their  arms  were  fuperiorly  adapted  ;   and  the  narrow 
lot. l. vi.  piain  0f  Marathon  was  peculiarly  favorable.     Confined  however  as 
the  ground  was,  the  Athenian  numbers  were  frill  infufficient  to  form 
a  line  equal  to  that  of  the  enemy,   and  at  the  fame  time  in  all  points 
competently  flrong.     Deciding  therefore  inftantly  his  choice  of  dif- 
ficulties, Miltiades  extended  his  front  by  weakening  his  center.    Dar- 
ing valor  indeed,   guided  by  a  difcernment  capable  of  profiting  from 
every  momentary  opportunity,  could  alone  balance  the  many  difad- 
vantages  of  his  circumftances.     Finding  then  his  troops  animated  as 
he  wifhed,    he  ifTued  a  fudden  order  to  lay  afide  miffile  weapons,  to 
advance  running  down  the  hill,  and  ingage  at  once  in  clofe  fight. 
TV»e  order  was  obeyed  with  the  utmoft  alacritv.     The  Perfians,  more 

"uflomed 


C.  III. 


C.   112 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  349 

accuftomed  to  give  than  to  receive  the  attack,  beheld,  at  firft,  with  CHAP.Viii. 

SECT.  IV 


a  difpofition  to  ridicule,   this,  as  it  appeared,  mad  onfet.     The  effecT: 


C.  Mi. 


of  the  lhock  however  proved  the  wifdom  with  which  it  had  been  con- 
certed. The  Afiatic  horfe,  formidable  in  champain  countries  by 
their  rapid  evolutions,  but  in  this  confined  plain  incumbered  with  their 
own  numerous  infantry,  were  at  a  lofs  how  to  act  *.  Of  the  infantry 
that  of  proper  Perfia  almoft  alone  had  reputation  for  clofe  fight.  The 
reft,  accuftomed  chiefly  to  the  ufe  of  miflile  weapons,  was,  by  the  ra- 
pidity of  the  Athenian  charge,  not  lefs  difconcerted  than  the  horfe. 
The  conteft  was  however  long.  The  Perfian  infantry,  fucceflbrs  of 
thofe  troops  who,  under  the  great  Cyrus,  had  conquered  Afia,  being 
pofted  in  the  center  of  their  army,  ftood  the  vehemence  of  the  onfet, 
broke  the  weak  part  of  the  Athenian  line,  stad  purfued  far  into  the 
country.  The  Athenians,  after  great  efforts,  put  both  the  Perfian  c"  II3" 
wings  to  flight ;  and  had  the  prudence  not  to  follow.  Joining  then 
their  divided  forces,  they  met  the  conquering  center  of  the  Per- 
fian army  returning  weary  from  purfuit ;  defeated  it,  followed  to  the 
fhore,  and  amid  the  confufion  of  imbarkation  made  a  terrible  {laugh- 
ter. They  took  feven  galleys.  The  Perfians  loft  in  all  fix  thoufand  c.  117. 
four  hundred  men.  Of  the  Athenians  only  one  hundred  and  ninety- 
two  fell  j  but  among  them  were  the  polemarch  Callimachus,  Stefi-  c.  114. 
leos  one  of  the  ten  generals,  Cyna?geirus,  brother  of  the  poet  iEfchy- 
lus,  and  other  men  of  rank  who  had  been  earneft  to  fet  an  example 
of  valor  on  this  trying  occafion.  The  higheft  praife  of  valor  however 
was  very  equally  earned  by  the  whole  army,  whofe  juft  eulogy  will 
perhaps  beft  be  eftimated  from  an  obfervation  of  the  original  hifto- 
rian  :  *  The  Athenians  who  fought  at  Marathon,'  fays  Herodotus, 
«  were  the  firft  among  the  Greeks  known  to  have  ufed  running  for 
*  the  purpofe  of  coming  at  once  to  clofe  fight ;  and  they  were  the  firft 

*  No  account  is  given  by  Herodotus  of  any-  cavalry  previous  to  the  battle  of  Platara,  toge- 

thing  done  by  the  Perfian  horfe,  tho  he  fpeaks  ther  with  every  defcription  of  the  field  of  bat- 

of  it  as  numerous.    The  detail  however  which  tie  of  Marathon,  fufficiently  accounts  for  their 

he  afterward  gives  of  a&ions  of  the  Perfian  inaction  or  in  efficacy  there. 

*  who 


350  HISTORY    OF    GREECE.' 

CHAP.vni.  <  wh0  withftood  (in  the  field)  even  the  fight  of  the  Median  drefs, 
SECT.  IV.    <  and  of  the  men  who  wear  it;  for  hitherto  the  very  name  of  Medes 
'  and  Perfians  had  been  a  terror  to  the  Greeks  *.' 

Such  is  the  account  given  of  this  celebrated  day  by  that  hiftorian 
who  lived  near  enough  to  the  time  to  have  converfed  with  eye-wit- 
nefTes  f .     It  is  modeft  throughout,  and  bears  general  marks  both  of 
authentic  information  and  of  honeit  veracity.     The  fmall  proportion 
of  the  Athenian  flain  perhaps  appears  leaft  confident  with  the  other 
circumftances.     Yet  it  is  countenanced  by  authentic  accounts  of  va- 
rious battles  in  different  ages,  and  particularly  by  thofe  in  our  own 
hiftory  of  Agincourt  and  Poitiers.     When  indeed  the  whole  front  of 
the  foldier  was  covered  with  defenfive  armour,  daughter  feldom  could 
be  great  but  among  broken  troops,  or  in  purfuit.     We  are  however 
told  that  a  part  of  the  Athenian  army  was  broken.     If  it  might  be 
allowed  to  the  hiflorian  at  all  to  wander  from  pofitive  authority,  the 
known  abilities  of  Miltiades,  and  his  acquaintance  with  the  temper 
and  formation  of  the  Perfian  army,  added  to  the  circumftances  of  the 
aition,  would  almoft  warrant  a  conjecture  that  the  flight  of  his  weak 
center  was   intended  ;  purpofely  to  lead  the  flower  of  the  enemy's 
forces  out  of  the  battle,  and  fatigue  them  with  unprofitable  purfuit. 
The  deep  order  in  which  the  ancients  fought  would  perhaps  make 
fuch  a  ffratagem  not  too  hazardous  for  daring  prudence,  under  urgent 
necefiity  of  rifking  much.    Writers  who  have  followed  Herodotus  in 
defcribing  this  memorable  day  have  abounded  with  evident  fiction,  as 

*  Thofe   honeft    confeffions  of  Herodotus,  deprived  of  his  eyefight,  according  to  his  own 

which  have  given  fo  much  offence  to  Plutarch,  account,  in  a  very  extraordinary  manne>,  dur- 

we  find  all  more  or  lefs  confirmed  by  the  elder  ing  the  aclion  at  Marathon  :   but  the  critics 

writers    of  higheft  authority.      Thus  Plato:  feem  to  have  determined  that  thofe  expreflions 

Ai  Si  y»w/*«i  hitvXu/xhcu  aisourm  dv^umsii  neat'  mean  no  more  than  that  Herodotus  had  heard 

Zvru  icoTOjx.  xeu  y.iyaKa.  xai  ti.£x>t"<-  7"*  k«t<*&-  the  account  of  Epizelus  reported  by  others  (2). 

hvtepuy,  n»  h  Tlt?cri,  aiXi,.  Menexen.p.  240. 1.  2.  But  according  to  the  chronologers  Herodotus 

f  There  are  two  expreflions  in  his    fixth  was  born  about  fix  years  after  the  battle  of 

book  (1)  which  have  been  underftood  by  fome  Marathon.     It  is  therefore  not  at  all  impofli- 

to  import  that  he  had  himfelf  converfed  with  ble  but  he  might  have  converfed  with  perfons 


Epizelus,  fon  of  Cuphagoras,  who  had  been     prefent  at  the  attion. 

(1)  c.  117.  (2)  See  note  14.  p.  493.  °f  Wefleling's  edition. 


well 


119. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  25i 

well  as  with  fulfome  panegyric  of  the  Athenians,  and  abfurd  obloquy  CHAP.Viii. 
on  their  enemy  *.  SECT.  IV. 

Still,  however,  after  the  defeat  at  Marathon,  the  Perfian  arma- 
ment was  very  formidable  ;  nor  was  Athens,  immediately  by  its 
glorious  victory,  delivered  from  the  danger  of  that  fubverfion  with 
which  it  had  been  threatened.  The  Perfian  commander,  doubling  c.  115,  n6. 
Cape  Sunium,  coafted  the  fouthern  more  of  Attica,  not  without 
hopes  of  carrying  the  city  by  a  fudden  aflault.  But  the  Athenians 
had  a  general  equal  to  his  arduous  office.  Aware  of  what  might  be 
the  enemy's  intention,  Miltiades  made  a  rapid  march  with  a  large 
part  of  his  forces  j  and  when  the  Perfians  arrived  off  the  port  Phale- 
rus,  they  faw  an  Athenian  army  incamped  on  the  hill  of  Cynofarges 
which  overlooks  it.  They  caft  anchor ;  but,  without  attempting  any 
thing,  weighed  again  and  fleered  for  Afia.  They  carried  with  them 
their  Eretrian  prifoners,  who  were  conducted  to  the  great  king  at 
Sufa.  The  humane  Darius  fettled  them  on  an  eftate,  his  private  pro- 
perty, at  Ardericca  in  the  province  of  Ciflia,  about  twenty-four  miles 
from  his  capital. 

SECTION     V. 

Growing  Ambition  of  Athens.  Effects  of  Party-fpirit  at  Athens.  Ex- 
traordinary Honors  to  the  Memory  of  Harmodius  and  Arijlogeiton. 
Impeachment  and  Death  of  Miltiades. 

I  T  is  particularly  in  the  nature  of  democratical  government  for 
ambition  to  grow  with  fuccefs.  No  fooner  were  the  Athenians  deli- 
vered by  the  victory  of  Marathon  from  impending  deftruction,  than 
they  began  to  meditate  conqueft.     Almoft  all  the   iflands    of  the  Herodot-  1-.vi- 

.  .  .  c.  132,  &  feq. 

iEgean  were  obnoxious  for  their  ready  fubmiffion  to  the    Perfian   Com.  Nep. 
fummons  ;  and  fome  even  for  their  exertions  in  the  Perfian  caufe. 

*  The  extravagance  of  Juftin's  tale    may  might  have  deferved  fome  portion  of  the  abufe 

leflen  our  regret  for  the  lofs  of  the  great  work  with  which  calumny  has  fingularly  loaded  him. 

which  he   has   epitomized.      Had  Herodotus,  Among  later  authors  the  concife  narrative  of 

among  all  his  mufes,  given  one  romance  fo  Cornelius  Nepos  is  by  far  moll  deferving  at- 

abfurd  as  JulUn's  account  of  this  battle,  he  tention. 

Miltiades 


v.  Miltiad. 


352  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

chap.viii.  Miltiades  was  fent  with  feventy  (hips  to  exaft  fines  from  them  for 
S»^VVi'  t*ie'r  delinquency  ;  and  as  far  as  might  be,  ufing  the  newly-acquired 
naval  power  in  imitation  of  the  practice  of  Lacedasmon  on  the  con- 
tinent, to  reduce  them  under  the  authority,  or  at  lead;  the  influence 
of  the  Athenian  government.  Paros  refitted.  Siege  was  laid  to  its 
principal  town.  After  twenty-fix  days  no  imprefiion  was  made. 
Miltiades  then,  himfelf  dangeroufly  wounded,  led  back  his  armament 
to  Athens,  without  having  efFeded  anything,  according  to  Herodo- 
tus, but  the  ravage  of  that  one  ifland. 

Athens  has  been  accufed  of  black  ingratitude  and  grofs  injuftice 
for  the  treatment  of  this  great  man  which  immediately  followed.  It 
has  been  endeavoured  on  the  other  hand,  by  the  zealous  partizans  of 
democratic  rule,  to  juftify  his  doom  on  thofe  levere  principles  of  pa- 
triotifm  which  deny  all  rights  to  individuals  where  but  a  fufpicion  of 
public  intereft:  interferes.  But  whoever  will  take  the  pains  to  con- 
ned the  defultory  but  honeft  narration  of  Herodotus  may  find,  and 
everything  remaining  from  Thucydides,  Xenophon,  Ifocrates,  and 
Demofthenes  any  way  relative  to  the  fubjedt  will  confirm  it,  that 
neither  general  ingratitude  nor  general  patriotifm  fwayed  the  Athe- 
nian people  upon  this  occafion  :  party-fpirit  was  ftill  the  great  mover 
of  their  politics. 

Herodot.l.vi.  It  has  been  faid  by  Herodotus,  and  repeated  by  Thucydides,  that 
Thucyd.  1.  i.  not  Harmodius  and  Ariftogeiton,  as  the  vulgar  in  their  time  believed, 
ci  53  &  59.V1*  but  tne  Alcmaeonid  faction  delivered  Athens  from  the  tyranny  of  the 
Peiliftratids.  But  a  party,  which  had  fo  long,  lb  wifely,  fo  vir- 
tuoufly,  and  fo  beneficially  directed  the  affairs  of  the  commonwealth 
as  that  of  the  Peiliftratids,  would  be  too  firmly  and  extenfively  rooted 
to  be  at  once  annihilated  by  the  expulfion  of  its  chiefs.  It  feems 
therefore  to  have  been  the  policy  of  the  Alcmaeonid  party  to  hold  out 
the  names  of  Harmodius  and  Ariftogeiton  to  public  efteem ;  while 
nothing  was  left  untried  to  brand  the  memory  of  the  Peiliftratid  ad- 
miniftration.  Hence  the  very  extraordinary  honors  paid  to  the  me- 
mory of  the  aflafiins  of  Hipparchus.  Hence  the  mere  revenge  of  a 
private  quarrel  elevated  to  the  dignity  of  tyrannicide  and  aflertion 

of 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  353 

of  public  liberty.  The  celebration  of  the  deed  by  fongs  was  made  a  CHAP.vm. 
regular  part  of  the  ceremony  of  the  great  feftival  of  Panathenaea.  SECT.  V. 
The  cuftom  was  introduced  even  at  private  entertainments  always  to 
fing  the  fong  of  Harmodius  and  Ariflogeiton  *.  Statues  of  the  pa- 
triots, made  by  the  greateft  artills  at  the  public  expence  and  of  the 
molf  coftly  materials,  were  erected  in  different  places  of  greateil:  re- 
fort  in  the  city  -f-.  It  was  forbidden  by  a  particular  law  to  give  their 
names  to  flaves.  Obfequies  were  periodically  performed  to  their 
memory,  under  the  direction  of  the  polemarch  archon.  Particular 
honors,  privileges,  and  emoluments  were  decreed  to  their  families. 
And  to  conclude  all,  in  terror  to  future  invaders  of  public  liberty, 
but  principally  in  terror  to  the  living  enemies  of  the  Alcmaconid 
party,  promiles  were  held  out  by  public  authority,  that  future  fuf- 
ferers  in  the  caufe  of  freedom  (for  by  that  facred  name  the  Alc- 
masonids  defcribed  the  fupporters  of  their  own  power)  fliould  be 
equally  honored  with  Harmodius  and  Ariftogeiton.  Attention  to 
thefe  circumftances,  as  effetfs  of  party,  is  neceifary  for  undemanding, 
in  any  degree,  the  domeftic  politics  of  the  Athenian  commonwealth. 
The  glory  of  Miltiades,  in  diminishing  the  confequence,  excited 
the  envy  of  the  Alcmaconids.  Herodotus  mentions  a  report  that  Herodot.l.*i. 
they  had  gone  lb  far  as  to  hold  a  traiterous  correfpondence  with  the 
Perfians  under  Datis  and  Artaphernes,  and  communicated  intelligence 
to  them  by  fignals.  He  profeffes  indeed  that  he  thought  this  incre- 
dible; and  the  circulation  of  fuch  a  report  may  perhaps  bed  be  con- 
lidered  as  one  among  innumerable  proofs  how  bufy,  and  how  virulent 
in  calumny  faction  was  at  Athens  J.  On  the  other  hand  the  ill  will 
of  the  Alcmoeonids  to  Miltiades  did  not  remain  dubious.  The  fecu- 
rity  of  the  commonwealth,  which  that  great  man's  abilities  had  pro- 

*   This  fong,   the  molt  ancient  compofition  datam  Athenienfium  quoruvndam,  fufpicionem 

of  its  kind  preferved  in  prophane  hiitory,  may  tot   argumentis  repellit   Herodotus,   ut  in  his 

be  feen,   with  an  elegant  Latin  tranilation,  in  etiam  vexandis  moduir  exceffifTe  videatur  Plu- 

Biihop  Lowth's  Leftures  on  Hebrew  Poetry.  tarchus  de  Herod.  Malign.  Valcken.   not.  ap. 

f  The  laborious  Meurfius,   in  his  Peififtra-  WefTel.  Herodot.   Plutarch  has  indeed  through- 

tus,   has  collected   accounts  of  many  of  thefe  out  that  treatife  exceeded  all  meafure  of  rea- 

ltatues  from  various  ancient  authors.  fon,  and  little  regarded  argument. 

X  Narratam  fibi,  vel  ab  aliis  fcripto  man- 

Z  z    .  cured, 


354  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.VIII.  cured,  had  made  thofe  abilities  lefs  immediately  neceffary;  and  his 

SECT.  V.     failure  at  Paros  afforded  means  of  ruining  him  with  a  fickle  multi- 

Herodot.l.vi.   tude  poffeffed  of  defpotic  authority.     Xanthippus,  one  of  the  princi- 

Corn!  Nep."  Pal  men  of  Athens,  who  had  married  a  daughter  of  Megacles,  the 

v.  Miltiad.       great  opponent  of  Peififtratus  and  chief  of  the  houfe  of  Alcmaeon, 

conducted  a  capital  accufation  againft  him.     Miltiades  was  unable  to 

appear  in  the  general  affembly :  his  caufe  was  pleaded  by  his  friends. 

He  was  acquitted  of  capital  offence,   but  condemned  in  a  fine  of  fifty 

talents ;  about  nine  thoufand  four  hundred  pounds  fterling.     This  he 

was  unable  immediately  to  difcharge.  His  wound  meanwhile  brought 

on  a  mortification  -,  and  Miltiades  died  in  prifon. 


CHAPTER     IX. 

The  Hiftory  of  Greece  from  the  Acceflion  of  Xerxes  to 
the  Throne  of  Persia  till  the  Conclusion  of  the  firft 
Campaign  of  that  Monarch's  Expedition  againft  Greece. 

SECTION       I. 

Acccjjion  of  Xerxes  to  the  Throne  of  Perfia.  Immenfe  Preparations  by 
the  Court  of  P  erf  a  for  Conqueji  in  Europe.  Ajjembly  of  the  Army  at 
Sardis,  and  of  the  Fleet  in  the  Hellefpont.  March  of  the  Army. 
Mufter  of  the  Army.  Arrival  of  the  Army  and  Fleet  at  Therme  in 
Macedonia. 

CHAP. IX.    T  T ERODOTUS  relates  fome  anecdotes  attributing  to  Darius  an 

SECT.  I.      X  JL     acrimonious  refentment  againft  Athens  very  repugnant  to  his 

J^y^  ,    general  character  as  it  ftands  marked  by  authors  of  hi?heft  credit,  and 

/Efchvl.l'erf.    o  ...  . 

Piato.'ioc.cit.  even  by  what  that  hiftorian  himfelf  has  reported,  evidently  on  better 
c.  7°  &  iVq.11'  authority.     Afia,  he  adds,  was  agitated  for  three  years  by  preparations 

for 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE.  355 

a  fecond  expedition  into  Greece,  to  revenge  the  difgrace  of  Marathon.    CHAP- Ix- 

SFCT    I 

Prudence  perhaps,  not  lei's  than  honor,  would  require  the  attempt ;       t        '  J 
but  three  years  could  not  be  neceflary  to  the  refources  of  the  Perfian 
empire  for  fuch  a  purpofe  -,  and  more  important  objeds  in  the  mean 
time  called  the  attention  of  its  rulers.     Egypt  revolted  ;  and  a  dan- 
gerous difpute  about  the  right  of  fucceflion  to  the  throne  arofe  be- 
tween the  fons  of  Darius.     That  monarch  had  the  fatisfadion  to  fee 
the  fucceflion  amicably  fettled  in  favor  of  Xerxes,  his  fon   by  Atofla 
daughter  of  Cyrus,   to  the  prejudice  of  elder  fons  by  a  former  mar- 
riage :   but  he  died  foon   after,  leaving  Egypt  to  be   recovered  and   Ol.lxxiii.4. 
Greece  to  be  punilhed  by  his  fucceffor.     The  former  object  was  ac-    HerodoU.vn'. 
complifhed  in  the  fecond  year  of  the   reign  of  Xerxes  :   the  other   c-  7- 
feems  to  have  been  for  fome  time  negleded. 

But  the  Perflans  had  not  yet  forgotten  the  character,  which  their 
fathers  had  fupported,  of  a  warlike  and  conquering  people.  They 
were  not  accuftomed  to  infults  within  their  dominion  like  that  of 
the  burning  of  Sardis  ;  and  ftill  lefs  to  defeats  in  the  field  like  that 
of  Marathon.  We  cannot  fuppofe  Herodotus  often  well  informed  of 
intrigues  about  the  perfon  of  the  great  king  :  but  we  may  believe 
what  he  puts  as  a  remark  into  the  mouth  of  Xerxes,  «  that  it  had  not  p™fjja.  ™' 
«  been  the  cuftom  of  the  Perflans  to  be  quiet.'  Nor  is  it  to  be 
doubted  but  there  would  be  men  about  that  prince  ready  to  incou- 
ra°-e  an  idea  natural  enough  to  a  youth  inheriting  fuch  immenfe 
power  from  a  race  of  conquerors,  that  it  became  him  alfo  to  be  a 
conqueror,  that  it  became  him  flill  to  inlarge  the  bounds  of  his  vaft 
empire,  and  to  emulate  the  military  fame  of  Darius,  of  Cambyfes, 
and  even  of  the  great  Cyrus  *.     To  punifh  Athens  and  to  conquer 

Greece  were  therefore  fmall  objeds  :   nor  does  what  Herodotus  has   Herodot.l.vii. 

J  c.  8.  l.  3. 

*  This  is  the  motive  alfo  alledged  by  JE(-  TlMuTot  Ictot  tv>  <£ix^o>,  tov  s  anurias  Ztta 

chylus,  in  the  perfon  of  Atoffa,   for  the  expe-  "B»&>»  iy^Mfu,  •zza.-rfZoi  J  2?.£o»  iv$h  uv^inn. 

dition   of  Xerxes.      Speaking  to  the   (hade  of  Toi*  J" l|  if }(Z*  Irith  srotoax* xZvat  xxxwi, 

t\      ■    .  n,e  ravs  .  Ti>  &'  iQovhivtrit  xltevQur  xeu rfcerEVj/.  1$  'Y.Xhd.$x. 

Ta-vTU  tSi;  y.uxoTs  opiiXwi'  avofuzw  JiJao-jETei  "•  '  *  c1'  oc  Pn" 

Gotlpio;  H:fs>;S*   Kcywan  $  ws  cv  fi.ii  psycui  texhoi; 

Z  z  2  fuggefted 


35$  HISTORY    OF    GREECE, 

CHAP.  IX.  fUggefted  appear  improbable,  that  the  ardent  ambition  of  the  youth- 
^_j  f^j  ful  monarch  and  fome  among  his  counfellors  might  look  as  far  as  the 
Weftern  Ocean,  howfoever  little  its  mores  or  the  intermediate  na- 
tions were  known  to  them,  for  the  term  of  their  career  of  glory. 

Herodot.l.v'ii.    Four  years  it  is  faid  were  employed  in  preparations.     An  army  was 

C".  20. 

Diod.sic.l.xi.    collected  greater  than  the  world  ever  faw,  either  before  or  iince.   The 
commanders  on  the  weftern  frontier  of  the  empire  had  had  opportu- 
nity of  obferving  that  the  moft  formidable  land-force  could  not  fecure 
maritime  provinces  from  intuits  by  lea;  and  ftill  more   that  the  con- 
queft  of  maritime  ftates  would  be  in  vain  attempted  without  naval 
power.     Every  feaport   therefore   in   the  whole   winding   length   of 
coaft  from  Macedonia  to  the  Lybian  Syrtes  was  ordered  to  prepare 
mips  and  to  imprefs  mariners.      A  prodigious  work  was  undertaken 
for  the  purpofe  of'  making  the  navigation  fecure  from  the   Afiatic 
along  the  European  coaft,  and  to  prevent  all  riik  of  future  diiafters 
like  that  of  the  fleet  under  Mardonius.      It  was  no  lefs  than  to  form 
Herodot.l.vii.    a  canal,  navigable  for  the  largeft  galleys,  acrofs  the  ifthmus  which 
Diod.Sicl.xi.  J°^ns  Athos   to  the  continent  of  Thrace.     A  fleet  was  afTembled  at 
c- 2-  Eleus,  a  port  of  that  peninfula,  under  the  command  of  Bubares,  fon 

of  Megabazus  ;  and  the  crews  were  employed  on  the  work.  Hero- 
dotus fuppofes  mere  oftentation  to  have  been  the  motive  to  this  un- 
dertaking ;  becaufe,  he  fays,  lefs  labor  would  have  carried  the  fleet 
over  land  from  one  fea  to  the  other.  It  feems  however  no  ram  con- 
jecture that  deep  policy  may  have  prompted  it.  To  erofs  the  JEgean, 
even  now,  with  all  the  modern  improvements  in  navigation,  is  An- 
gularly dangerous.  To  double  the  cape  of  Athos  is  ftill  more  formi- 
dable. If  therefore  the  object  was  to  add  the  countries  weft  of  the 
/Egean  fea  to  the  Perfian  dominion,  it  was  of  no  final  1  confequence 
to  leften  the  danger  and  the  delays  of  the  pafiage  for  a  fleet  *.     At 

*  Scarcely  any  circumfhnce  of  the  expedi-  lived  part  of  his  time  upon  that  property,  fpeaks 
tion  of  Xerxes  is  more  ftrongly  fupported  by  of  the  canal  of  Athos  made  by  the  king  of 
hiilorical  teftimony  than  the  making  of  the  Perfia  with  perfett  confidence  (i).  Ifocrates 
canal  of  Athos.  The  informed  and  exaft  mentions  it  alfo  as  an  undoubted  circumllance  ; 
Thucydides,  who  had  property  in  Thrace,  and     ftill  in  his  time  the  fubjeft  of  wonder  and  of 

(i)  Thucyd.  1.  iv.  c.  109. 

common 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  257 

the  fame  time,  to  facilitate  the  communication  by  land,  a  bridge  was    CHAP.  IX. 
laid  over  the  river  Strymon.     Magazines  meanwhile  were  formed  all 
along  the  coaft  as  far  as  Macedonia  ;  chiefly  in  the  towns  of  the  Gre- 
cian colonies  now  fubject  to  Perfia. 

At  length,  the  levies  being  completed,  the  forces  from  all   the   01.  Ixx.iv.4. 
eaftern  and  fouthern  provinces  were  aflembled  at  Critali  in  Cappadocia.    B.C.  481. 

r  ,  Herodot.l.vn. 

Hither  the  monarch  himfelf  came  to  take  the  command.  He  marched  c.  26. 
immediately  to  Sardis;  where  the  land  force  from  the  weft  of  Afia 
Minor  joined  him.  Hence  heralds  were  fent  into  Greece,  to  all  the 
cities  except  Athens  and  Lacedsemon  ;  where,  in  the  reign  of  Darius, 
the  Perfian  heralds  had,  in  violation  of  the  law  of  nations  even  of 
that  age,  been  cruelly  put  to  death.  Earth  and  water  were  demanded 
in  token  of  fubjection ;  and,  according  to  the  oriental  cuftom,  orders 
were  given  to  prepare  entertainment  for  the  king  againft  his  ar- 
rival. Xerxes  wintered  at  Sardis.  Meanwhile  a  work  fcarcely  infe- 
rior to   the  canal  of  Athos  was  prepared   in   the  Hellefpont.     Two   Herodot.l.vii. 

Ci    %  X • 

bridges  of  boats  were  extended  from  near  Abydus  on  the  Afiatic  to   Strabo,  l.xiii. 
near  Seftos  on  the  European   fhore.     The   width   is   {'even,  furlongs.    p>  ^u 
The  bridges  were  contrived,  one  to  refift  the  current,  which  is  always 
ftrong  from  the  Propontis,  the  other  to  withftand  the  winds,  which 
are  often  violent  from  the  iEgean  fea,  fo  that  each  protected  the  other. 

Early  in  fpring  the  army  moved.  For  fo  vaft  a  multitude  one  Ol.lxxv.  1. 
principal  difficulty  was  fo  to  direct  the  march  that  water  might  not  HtTOdofu°ii 
fail.     Several  rivers  of  fome  name  were  found  unequal  to  the  fupply;   c.  37  &feq. 

common  converfation.  Diodorus  relates  the  fatt  des  as  clofe  to  the  canal,  and  many  on  the 
not  lefs  pofitively  than  Herodotus.  The  paflage  adjacent  coafts  (i).  Yet  Juvenal  has  chofen 
of  Strabo  which  defcribed  Thrace  is  unfortu-  the  ftory  of  this  canal  as  an  exemplification  of 
natelylolt;  but  the  canal  of  Xerxes  remains  the  Grecian  difpofition  to  lie:  and  I  have 
confidently  mentioned  in  the  epitome  of  his  fomewhere  red  of  a  French  traveller  in  mo- 
work.  The  place  was  moreover  fo  furrounded  dern  times  who  vifited,  or  thought  he  vifited 
by  Grecian  fettlements  that  it  feems  impoflible  the  place,  and  could  find  no  veflige  of  the 
for  fuch  a  report,  if  unfounded,  to  have  held  work.  The  reader  mull  chufe  his  belief  be- 
any credit.  At  the  very  time  of  the  expedi-  tween  the  Grecian  hiftorians  and  geographer, 
tion  of  Xerxes  there  were  no  fewer  than  five  and  the  Roman  fatirift,  fupported  as  he  may 
Grecian  towns  on  the  peninfula  itfelf  of  Athos,  be  by  modern  obfervation. 
one  even  on  the  illhmus,  defcribed  by  Thucydi- 

(1)  Herodot.  1.  vii,  c.  as.     Thucyd.  1.  to.  c.  109.  &  Excerpt,  ex  Strab.  l.vii. 

and. 


353 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 


CHAP.  IX. 
SECT.  I. 


Herodot.l.vii. 
c.  60. 


and  among  them  the  celebrated  ftream  of  Scamander,  in  its  courfe 
acrofs  the  Trojan  plain,  was  exhausted.  Seven  days  and  nights  were 
employed  unintermittingly,  in  pafling  the  bridges  of  the  Hellefpont. 
The  march  was  then  continued  through  the  Cherfonefe.  The  fleet, 
which  had  been  affembled  in  the  Helleipont,  was  at  the  fame  time 
ordered  to  proceed  along  the  coafl  weftward.  The  land  and  fea  forces 
met  again  at  Dorifcus  near  the  mouth  of  the  Hebrus,  where  Darius, 
on  his  return  from  his  Scythian  expedition,  had  eftablifhed  a  Perfian 
garrifon.  Both  the  country  and  the  coafl  here  were  favorable  for 
the  review  of  fo  immenfe  an  armament,  and  here  accordingly  the 
monarch  reviewed  his  forces  both  of  fea  and  land. 

Here  too,  Herodotus  tells  us,  the  army  was  muftered.     Subfequent 
ancient  writers  have  taken  upon  them  to  differ  from  him  concerning 
its  ftrength ;  but  we  may  beft  believe  the  fimple  honefty  of  the  ori- 
ginal hiflorian,  who,  in   defcribing  the  manner  of  the  mufter,   fuffi- 
ciently  fhows  that  even  the  Perfian  generals  themfelves  knew  not  how 
to  afcertain  the  numbers  under  their  command.     Indeed  thofe  who 
know  how  difficult  it  is,  amid  all   the  accuracy  of  divifion   and  the 
minutenefs  of  detail  in  modern  European  armies,  and  comparatively 
handfuls  of  men,_  to  acquire  exact  information  of  effective  numbers, 
will  little  expect  it  among  the  almoft  countlefs  bands  of  various  lan- 
guages and  widely  differing  cultoms  which   compofed  the   military 
multitude  under  Xerxes.    Herodotus  reckons  in  it  no  lefs  than  twenty- 
nine  nations,  from  Scythia  north  to  Ethiopia  fouth,  and  from  India 
eaft  to  Thrace  and  Lybia  weft.     To  acquire  a  foundation  for  guefling 
the  total  effective  ftrength  without  an  attempt  to  afcertain  the  detail, 
the  method  taken  by  the  Perfian  generals,  he  fays,  was   this :  Ten 
thoufand  men,  being  counted,  were  formed  in  a  circle  as  clofe  as 
poffible.     A  fence  was  then  raifed  around  them.      They  were  dif- 
miffed,  and  all  the  army  in  turn  paffed  into  this  inclofure,  till  the 
whole  was  thus   counted  by  tens  of  thoufands.     According  to  this 
mufter,  fuch  as  it  was,  the  hiflorian  fays  the  infantry  alone  amounted 
to  one  million  feven  hundred  thoufand  fighting  men ;  but  he  exprefs- 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  359 

ly  declares,  that  no  one  ever  undertook   to  give  an  account  of  the    CHAP.  IX. 
detail*.     The  cavalry  he  makes  only  eighty  thoufand,  by  no  means      SECT.  I. 
an  improbable  number,  and  likely  to  have  been  better   afcertained.    Herodot.l.vii. 
Arabian  camel-riders  and  African  charioteers  he  computes  at  twenty   c"  §7, 
thoufand.     Horfes,   mules,  affes,  oxen,  and  camels,  for  the  baggage, 
were  beiides  innumerable. 

Of  the  fleet  he  gives  a  more  particular  account.  The  trireme  Herodot.l.vii. 
galleys  of  war  amounted  to  twelve  hundred  and  feven  ;  and  his  diftri-  c"  89- 
bution,  which  may  mow  the  comparative  naval  ftrength  of  different  na- 
tions at  the  time,  makes  the  total  appear  fcarcely  beyond  probability. 
Three  hundred  were  furnifhed  by  the  Phenicians  with  the  Syrians  of 
Paleftine  ;  two  hundred  by  Egypt;  one  hundred  and  fifty  by  Cyprus; 
Cilicia  fent  one  hundred  ;  Pamphylia  thirty ;  Lycia  fifty  ;  Caria  fe- 
venty  :  thirty  were  provided  by  the  Dorian  Greeks  of  Afia,  one  hun- 
dred by  the  lonians,  fixty  by  the  ./Eolians,  feventeen  by  the  iflands, 
and  by  the  Hellefpontian  towns  one  hundred.  The  average  comple- 
ment of  men  to  each  trireme  galley  he  reckons  at  two  hundred.  The 
crews  of  the  whole  fleet  would  thus  amount  to  two  hundred  and 
forty  one  thoufand  four  hundred.  But  over  and  above  the  ordinary 
crew  there  were  thirty  Perfians  or  Medes  or  Sacians  in  each  galley. 
Thefe  would  make  an  addition  of  thirty  fix  thoufand  two  hundred 
and  ten  men.  The  Phenician  fhips,  he  fays,  were  the  belt  failers, 
and  among  thofe  the  Sidonian  excelled.  Befide  thefe  the  tranfports, 
fome  for  infantry,  fome  particularly  fitted  for  cavalry,'  ftoreihips, 
fome  of  vafr.  burden,  together  with  fmaller  veflels  of  various  forts  and 
for  various  purpofes  attending  the  fleet,  would  not  be  eafily  numbered. 
He  reckons  them  by  a  grofs  calculation  at  three  thoufand  ;  and  their 
average  crews  at  eighty  men  :  the  amount  of  their  crews  would  thus 
be  two  hundred  and  forty  thoufand;  and  the  number  of  men  in  the 
fleet  all  together  five  hundred  and  feventeen  thoufand  fix  hundred 
and  ten. 

*  "Ocroi'  pit  vw  ixaroi  Gjxgiixpt  7rtij$£o;  «^i6f*or,   i:x  'iyj!  liirai  to  ur^tKti'    ov  yxg  hty.rai  -nrga;  ovta/tux 
uv()%u7rtit.  l.vii.  c.  60. 

Of 


360  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  IX.  of  tri;s  extraordinary  expedition  naturally  many  anecdotes  would 
SECT. i.  [36  remembered  and  propagated;  many  true,  many  falfe,  miftaken, 
or  exaggerated.  '  Among  thofe  related  by  Herodotus  fome  appear 
perfectly  probable  ;  fome  refer  to  circumftances  of  which  he  could 
hardly  have  had  authentic  information,  and  fome  are  utterly  incon- 
fiftent  with  the  characters  to  whom  they  refer.  Among  the  latter  I 
mould  reckon  the  ridiculous  punifhment  of  the  Hellefpont  by  flripes 

Herodot.l.vH.  and  chains,  together  with  executions  equally  impolitic  as  inhuman, 
and  repugnant  to  what  we  learn  on  beft  authority  of  the  manners  of 
the  Perfians.  But  the  account  which  that  hiftorian  gives  of  the  march 
of  the  army,  and  of  the  attending  motions  of  the  fleet,  is  clear  and 
confident  beyond  what   might   be  expe&ed.     The  march  was  con- 

Herodot.l.vii.  tinued  from  Dorifcus  in  three  columns.  One,  under  Mardonius  and 
Mafiftes,  kept  along  the  coaft,  the  fleet  nearly  accompanying  it. 
Another,  under  Tritantxchmes  and  Gergis,  proceeded  far  within  land. 
Xerxes  himfelf  led   the  third  between   the  other  two,  Smerdomenes 

Herodpt.Lvii.  ancj  Megabyzus  commanding  under  him.  They  paffed  the  Samo- 
thracian  towns,  the  moll:  wefterly  of  which  was  Mefambria  on  the 
river  Liffus,  on  whofe  oppofite  bank  was  Stryma  a  town  belonging 
to  the  inlanders  of  Thafus.  This  river  did  not  furfice  for  the  con- 
fumption  of  the  army.     Maronasa,  DicaBa,  Abdera,  Grecian  colonies, 

Herodot.l.vn.  j       next   on   tne  roa(j.      Everywhere  the   commands   to  prepare  for 

c.  1 1 8  &  lcq.  J  J  1        ' 

the  reception  of  the  monarch  and  his  army  had  been  zealoufly  exe- 
cuted. Befide  vafl  magazines  of  corn,  meat,  and  forage  for  the 
troops,  many  of  the  cities,  emulous  to  court  favor,  or  anxious  to 
avert  wrath,  had  prepared,  with  a  fumptuoufnefs  proportioned  to  their 
hopes  and  fears  rather  than  to  their  revenues,  for  the  reception  of  the 
king  and  his  court.  Wherever  the  halt  of  the  royal  train  had  been 
announced,  a  fuperb  pavilion  was  erected,  adorned  with  the  moft 
coflly  furniture.  Many  cities  provided  even  verfels  of  gold  and  filver 
for  the  table.  The  rapacious  attendants  of  the  Perfian  court  fpared 
nothing.  In  the  morning  when  the  army  marched  all  was  carried 
off.     This  eaflern  flile  of  robbery  gave  occafion  for  a  faying  of  Mega- 

-     creon, 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  361 

creon,   a  citizen  of  Abdera,  which  Herodotus  has  recorded  as  having    CHAP.  IX. 

SECT.  I. 


become  popular,  '  That  the  Abderites  ought  to  go  with  their  wives 


*  in  procefiion   to  their  temples,  and  pray  to  the  gods  always  equally 

*  to  avert  half  the  evils  that  threatened  :  for  upon   the  prefent  occa- 

'  fion  their  mod  grateful  thanks  were  due  for  the  favor  fliown  in 

'  difpofing  Xerxes  to  eat  but  once  a  day ;  fince,  if  the  monarch  had 

'  chofen  to  dine  on  the  morrow  as  he  had  fupped  over  night,   there 

'  would  have  been  an  end  of  Abdera.' 

Not  contented  with  their  forces,  already  innumerable,  the  Perfians   Herodot.l.vil. 
,  ,  ,    .  .  -  ,_,  0 108  &  1 10. 

continued  everywhere   on   their  march  to  prels  men.     The  youth,    Diodor.  Sic 

equally  Grecian  and  Thracian,  were  compelled  to  join  either  the  '  X1' c'  3" 
army  or  the  navy.  Yet,  according  to  Herodotus,  the  Thracians 
preferved  fuch  veneration  for  the  foil  which  this  enormous  arma- 
ment had  trodden,  that  to  his  time  they  avoided  breaking  or  fowing 
it.  He  does  not  account  for  this  particularity :  but  perhaps  the 
Perfians  favored  the  Thracians  againft  the  Greeks ;  all  whole  eftablifh- 
ments  on  that  coafl:  were  incroachments  upon  Thracian  ground.  From 
Abdera  the  divilion  under  Xerxes  proceeded  to  Eion  (a  Grecian  town 
on  the  river  Strymon,  with  a  Perfian  garrifon  eftabliihed  there  by 
Darius)  and  thence  by  Argilus  and  Stageirus  to  Acanthus,  all  Grecian 
fettlements.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Acanthus  the  three  divifions 
met;  and  there  Artacharas,  a  Perlian.of  high  rank,  related  to  the 
royal  family,  and  in  great  favor  with  Xerxes,  died.  The  few  words 
in  which  Herodotus  defcribes  his  funeral,  contribute  to  £how  the  ex- 
tenfivenefs,  and  to  conned:  from  remoteft  antiquity  the  hiftory  of  the 
ceremony  which  gave  occalion  to  thole  artificial  mounts,  numerous 
in  our  own  country  as  in  many  other  parts  of  the  world.  The  whole 
army,  he  fays,  heaped  the  mount  which  forn-ad  the  fepulchral  mo- 
nument of  Artacha^as*.     After  this  folemn  ceremony  the  march  was 

*    'Etv^o^oh  Si  ixa.?u  i  rfani).     1.   vii.    C.  117.  -AfP    £»Towi  8  tirsirx  f^iyay  xul  ajJ-i^ova  rljjS'ii 

Homer  gives  a  correlponding  defcription  of  the  Xims^ev    is/st»»  i's§os  s-§«to{  aij^ijTa'w, 

fepulchral  barrow  raifed  by  the  Grecian  army  '•A*Ti>  in)  ^ov^ouayi  tmi  vfau.Tii'E.>&r,awoina' 

under  Agamemnon  in  honor  of  the  heroes  who  "fi?  »»  r»k»9»m  '"-  <nroflo^»*  <Mfe«n>  m 

fell  before  Trov  •  '  Tw  51  nit  yiya&n,  xu)  61  /A-trimaBiv  Imrrtu. 

1  '  Odyfl".  1.  xxiv.  v.84. 

A  a  a  Now 


362 

CHAP.  IX. 
SECT.  II. 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

continued  wefhvard,  with  the  country  called  Chalcidice,  full  of  Gre- 
cian fettlements,  on  the  left.  The  fleet,  which  had  met  the  army  at 
Acanthus,  proceeded  thence  through  the  canal  of  Athos,  and  round  the 
peninfulas  of  Sithonia  and  Pallene  into  the  bay  of  Therme  ;  prefling 
(hips  and  feamen  at  all  the  Grecian  towns  on  the  coaft.  The  army, 
arriving  foon  after,  occupied  with  its  incampment  the  whole  ex- 
tent of  the  Macedonian  more,  from  Therme  and  the  borders  of  Myg- 
donia  to  the  river  Haliacmon  near  the  borders  of  Theflaly. 


SECTION     II. 

State  of  Greece  at  the  time  of  the  Invafion  under  Xerxes.  Refponfes  of 
the  Delphian  Oracle  concerning  the  Invafion.  Meafures  for  forming 
a  confederacy  of  Grecian  Commonwealths.  D  if  union  among  the  Greeks. 
Affembly  of  Deputies  from  the  confederated  Commonwealths  at  Corinth. 
The  Defence  oj  Thefaly  given  up  by  the  Confederates.  Meafures  for 
defending  the  Pafs  of  Thermopylae. 

THE  Greeks  had  long  had  intelligence  of  the  immenfe  prepa- 
rations making  in  Afia;  profeftedly  for  the  punifhment  of  Athens, 
but  evidently  enough  with  more  extenfive  views  of  conqueft.  Yet 
frill,  as  on  the  former  invafion,  no  meafures  were  concerted  in  com- 
mon for  the  general  defence  of  the  country.  On  the  contrary,  many 
of  the  fmall  republics  readily  and  even  zealoufly  made  the  demanded 
acknowlegement  of  fubjeclion  to  the  great  king  by  the  delivery  of 
earth  and  water*.  Nor  will  this  appear  ftrange  to  thofe  who  read 
the  honeft  hiftorian  of  the  ao-e,  and  confider  the  real  ftate  of  thines  in 
the  country,  however  it  may  militate  with  later  declamation  on  Gre- 


Now  all  the  Tons  of  warlike  Greece  furround 
The  deftin'd  tomb,  and  cart  a  mighty  mound. 
High  on  the  fhore  the  growing  hill  we  raife, 
That  wide  th'  extended  Hellefpont  furveys  : 
Where  all,  from  age  to  age,  who  pafs  the  coaft, 
May  point  Achilles'  tomb. 

Pope's  OdyfT.  b.  xxiv.  v.  104.. 


The  concluding  words  of  the  line,  '  and  hail 
*  the  mighty  ghoft,'  are  an  addition  of  the 
tranflator  not  warranted  by  Homer  in  this  or 
any  other  pafl'.ige  of  his  works. 

*  *Otm  Qov\op.iva)v   Tun   'EoWm   aiTat/kj-S";*!    toi> 

Herodot.  1.  vii.  c.  138. 

cian 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  363 

clan  patriotism  and  love  of  liberty*.     For  it  was  furely  no  unreafon-     CHAP.  IX. 
able  opinion  held  by  many  that  the  might  of  Perfia  was  irrefiftible  -f\     SECT.  II. 
All  the  Afian   Greeks  had   formerly  in    vain    attempted  to  defend 
themfelves  againft   the  very,  inferior  potentate  of  Lydia  :  and,  when 
reduced,  they  fcarcely  found  themfelves  lofers,  but  on   the  contrary 
feem  to  have  been   in  many  points  gainers  by  their  fubjedion.      But 
now  that   immenfe  power,   which   had  not  only  fwallowed   up  the 
Lydian   monarchy  with   all  its   appendages,  but  was   already  far  ad- 
vanced into  Europe,  and  which,  to  a  land-force  that  could  not  be 
numbered,  added  by  far  the  greateft  naval  Strength,  colleded  from 
various  fubjed  ftates,  that  had  ever  been  feen  in  the  world,  how  was 
it  to   be   refilled  by  a  few  little  republics,   whofe  territories   together 
were  comparatively  but  a  fpot,  and  which  were  neverthelefs  incapable 
of  any  firm   political  union  among  one  another  ?   Quiet  men  would 
naturally  think  it  wifely  done  to  merit  favor  by  early  fubmiffion  ;  and 
the  ambitious  might  hope  that    their  field  would   even  be  extended 
through  the  eftablifhment  of  the  Perlian  dominion  in  Greece.     Some 
would  perhaps   not  unreasonably  prefer  iubjedion  under  the  Perlian 
empire  before  fubmiffion  to  the  domineering  fpirit  of  the  Spartan  oli- 
garchy +  j  while  the  more  oppreffive  tyranny  of  the  Athenian  demo- 
cracy had  yet  little  fhewn  itfelf.     Some  might  even  wifh  for  a  fuper- 
intending  authority  to  reprefs  thofe  often  horrid  violences  of  domeftic 
fadion,  by  which  every  Grecian  city  was   almoft   unceafingly   torn. 
Thofe  therefore  who  had  given  the  demanded  earth  and  water  refted 
Satisfied  in  the  confidence  that  they  fliould  fuffer  nothing  :    thofe  who 
had  refufed  it  were  in  very   great  alarm  §.      '  And  here,  fays  Hero- 


♦ 


t^u  .  j     1  _„.•      u  j  •.       •   •  /-  „-,.-  own  country,   with  eager  zeal  take  an  intereft 

That  declamation  had  its  origin  in  Greece  .  •"  .6 

,0  i-u  j        .    u  .  '1 'in  Enclifh  and  American  politics. 

when  Grecian  liberty  was  in   decay,   but   has  fa  r     ,  .  r  _  . 

,  ,,,  i       J 1       j      ,l  n-        r  .1  t   liven  liocrates  admits  this  as  a  fufficient 

been  moltly  produced  under  the  preilure  ot  the  '  %  v 

•  1   \  r    .•/-       td  t  .  apologv  tor  the  (mailer  Grecian  ftates:   HyoSrw 

imperial  delpotilm  or  Rome  ;  when  men,  not       \      ?      ,  _  ,       ,. '    * 

.     .  r       1      j'      m         r     l  Va?  T«(;  tj.iv  TU7reuu.is  tuv  TroXtuv  7tpoj->;keiv  e£  cvmat- 

daring   to    fpeak   directly  or    the   government  '   5     ,     r  ,.    „  ,  n  5 

,  .  ■   ,       ,         ,.       ...         .  1  to;  Tforaw  CiTim  T<i»  au-rvptav.      rancgyr.    p.  220. 

under  which   they   lived,  lnjoyed  a  weak   re-  •   4    1   1  *  OJ      f 

venge  in  reviling  it  obliquely,   or  in  obliquely  "   j   See  the  Panathenaic  of  Ifocrates. 
exciting   opposition  to  it,  through  immoderate  §  -0l  ^  ya?  amim^  lim<.  y~t  T£  xa}  ^      v 

eulogy  of  times  paft.     Thus  we  have  feen,  in  $«e„?  i{  -w?lv  Vilaip„<,t  Zxap  vfr™  fa&Zpv  5. 

modern  Europe,   people  denied   the  liberty  of  ft  &,  &'„•«? fr  iil^utn  jieyi&o  xuTeratmr.     Herodot. 

fpeaking  concerning  the  government  of  their  1.  vii.  c.  138. 

A  a  a  2  dotus, 


3  6+ 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  IX. 
SECT.  II. 


dotus, *  I  am  driven  of  neceflity  to  profefs  an  opinion,  invidious  I  know 
'  to  moft  men,  which  yet,  as  I  think  it  the  truth,  I  fhall  not  with- 
'  hold.  If  the  Athenians,  in  dread  of  the  approaching  danger,  had 
'  either  fled  their  country,  or  furrendered  themfelves,  not  even  an  at- 
'  tempt  could  have  been  made  to  oppofe  the  enemy  by  fea.  What' 
'  then  would  have  followed  may  be  readily  conceived.  The  fortified 
'  lines  propofed  by  the  Peloponnefians  acrofs  the  Corinthian  ifthmus 
'  would  have  been  nugatory.      For  the  Perfian  having  it  in  his  power 

•  to  make  his  attack  where  he  pleafed  by  fea,  would  have  fubdued  the 

•  feveral  ftates  one  by  one  ;  and  the  Lacedaemonians  at  laft,  reduced  to 
'  their  fingle  ftrength,  would  have  had  no  choice  left  but  of  dying 
'  glorioufly,  or  of  fubmitting  to  a  power  which  they  could  no  longer 
'  withftand ;  fo  that  all  Greece  muft  inevitably  have  fallen  under  the 
1  Perfian  yoke.  Whoever  therefore  fhall  fay  that  the  Athenians  pre- 
'  ferved  Greece,  will   not   err  from   the  truth  :    for,    to  which foever 

•  party  they  joined  themfelves,  that  muft  preponderate.  Forming 
'  their  determination  then  by  the  defire  that  Greece  fhould  furvive 
'  free,  it  was  they  who  excited  to  energy  all  that  remained  of  Gre- 
'  cian  people  undecided  for  the  Perfian  caufe  ;  and  they,  next  under 
'  the  gods,   repelled  the  invafion.' 

This  teftimony  in  favor  of  Athens  appears  upon  the  whole  not 
lefs  true  than  honorable.  But  as  the  bufinefs  of  hiftory  is  neither 
panegyric  nor  fatire,  but  to  form  ajuft  eftimate  of  the  conduct,  and 
characters  of  men,  it  will  be  proper,  as  we  have  adverted  to  the 
circumftances  which  might  apologize  for  thofe  Greeks  who  yielded 
on  the  firft  fummons,  to  advert  alio  to  the  circumftances  which  led 
the  Athenians  to  fuch  determined  and  animated  oppofition  to  the 
Perfian  power.  Nor  is  the  inveftigation  difficult.  The  burning  of 
Sardis  firft,  then  their  treatment  of  the  Perfian  heralds,  and  finally 
their  victory  at  Marathon,  had  made  the  Athenians  fo  peculiarly  ob- 
noxious that,  in  fubmitting,  they  could  little  hope  for  favorable 
terms.  Tho  moreover  Hippias  was  now  dead,  yet  the  Peififtratid 
party  ftill  exifted  ;  and  the  court  of  the  fatrap  of  Sardis  was  the  com- 
mon 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE;  365 

mon  refort  of  Grecian  refugees  ;  of  whom  fome,  richer  or  more  af-     CHAP.ix. 

piring,   or  of  rank  to  introduce  them  to  consideration,  carried  their      SECT-  I*« 

intrigues  as  far  as  the  monarch's  court  at  Sufa.     Among  thefe  Hero-    Herodot. 

dolus  names  Demaratus  the  banifhed  king  of  Sparta,  fome  Theffalian 

princes,  and  fome  of  the  Peififtratids.     All   would  expect   to  profit 

from   the   fuccefs  of  the  Perfian  arms  in  Greece  ;  to   which  indeed 

many  looked  as  the  only  circumftance  that  could  ever  reftore  them  to 

their  country;  while  on  the  contrary  thofe  who  now  led  the  affairs 

of  the  Athenian  commonwealth  muff,    on   that  very  account,  expect 

from  it  the  more  inevitable  and  deeper  ruin.     But  the  glorious  day 

of  Marathon  would  naturally  give  new  energy  to  every  Athenian  mind. 

Extraordinary  fuccefs  eafily  excites  among  a  people  the  prefumption 

that  nothing  is  too  arduous  for  them.     Now  alfo,  as  on  the  invafion 

under  Datis,   there  arofe  among  the  Athenians  a  leader  born  for  the 

occalion.     Themiftocles  was  a   man  of  oblcure  birth,   but  whom  a  J~tai?*'  v' 

Themitt. 

general  vehemence  of  temper,   with  a  fingular  enthufiafm  for  glory,   Herodot. 
added  to  extraordinary  talents,  could  not  fail  in  a  democracy  of  raif- 
ing  to  the  high  eft  political  eminence.    ;  We  have  obferved  how    the 
war  with    the   little  ifland  of  /Egina  had  contributed  to  the  former 
fpirited  oppofition  of  Athens  to  Perfia.     It  is   the  remark  of  Hero-   i.v;; 


c.  144. 

V. 


dotus  that,   upon  the   prefent  occafion  alfo,  Greece  owed  its  prefer-   S?tar.$ 
vation  to  that  war;  for  it  was  that  war  which  firft  obliged  the  Athe-    Thucyd.  1.  i 

.  ,  .  ._....  c.  14. 

mans  to  rane  a  marine.  At  Laureium,  in  Attica,  was  a  very  pro- 
ductive filver-mine,  public  property.  But  it  had  been  determined, 
in  the  true  fpirit  of  democracy,  that  as  the  treafury  was  rich,  the  re- 
venue from  the  mine,  inftead  of  being  referved  for  public  fervice, 
fhould  be  divided  among  all  the  Athenian  people  for  their  private 
ufe.  That  enthufiaflic  ardor  for  any  object  in  view  which,  when  ge- 
nius feels,  it  can  communicate,  Themiftocles  communicated  among 
the  Athenian  youth.  While  their  minds  were  generally  exafperated 
againft  the  iEginetans,  he  procured  a  decree,  which  the  graver  and 
more  experienced  leading  men  had  not  dared  even  to  propofe,  that 
no  dividend  fhould  be  made  of  the  income  from  the  mines  till  two 

hundred 


$66  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  IX.    hundred  trireme  galleys  were  built  with  it.     The  threatened  invafion 
%_^S/^J     from  the  eaft  had  flopped  the  ./Eginetan  war,  and  the  galleys  were 
now  complete. 

The  pafTage  alio  of  Herodotus  concerning  the  confutation  of  the 

Delphian  oracle  in  this  tremendous  crifis,  tends  fo  much  to  mark  the 

temper  and    character  of  the  times  that  it  may  be  worth  giving,  as 

nearly  as  our  language  will  admit,  in  his  own  words  :  *  Neither,'  fays 

Herodot.  tnat  hiflorian,  continuing  his  panegyric  of  Athens,  '  did  the  alarming 

Lvu.c  i39,    <  oracles  from  Delphi,  however  infpiring  terror,  perfuade  the  Athe- 

*  nians  to  defert  the  caufe  of  Greece.  For  perfons  deputed  by 
'  public  authority  to-confult  the  god  *,  having  performed  the  pre- 
f  fcribed  ceremonies,  entered  the  temple;  and,  as  they  fat  by  the 
'  fliiine,    the  Pythonefs,  whofe  name  was  Ariftonic3,  enounced  thefe 

*  words  :  "  Wretches,  why  fit  ye  there  ?  Leave  your  houfes  and  the 
':«  lofty  ramparts  of  your  city,  and  fly  to  the  fartheft  parts  of  the  earth. 
"  For  not  the  head  fliall  remain  firm,  nor  the  body,  nor  the  extreme 
"  feet  j  not  therefore  the  hands,  nor  mail  aught  of  the  middle  re- 
"  main,  but  all  fliall  pafs  unregarded.  For  fire  and  keen  Mars, 
'*  urging  the  Syrian  chariot,  fliall  deflroy.  Nor  yours  alone,  but 
V  many  other  flrong  towers  fliall  he  overthrow.  Many  temples  of 
"  the  immortal  gods  fliall  he  give  to  the  con  fuming  fire.  Even  now 
"  they  ftand  dropping  fweat,  and  (flaking  with  terror.  Black  blood 
"  flows  over  their  higheft  roofs,  forefeeing  the  neceflities  of  wretch- 
"  ednefs.  Depart  therefore  from  the  fanftuary,  and  diftufe  the  mind 
"  in  evils."  The  Athenian  deputies  were  thrown  into  the  deepefl 
'  conflernation.      Confulting  with  Timon  fon  of  Androbulus,  one  of 

*  the  principal  Delphian  citizens,  he  advifed  them  to  take  the  fym- 
'  bols  of  fuppliants,  and  go  again  to  the  oracle.  They  did  fo,  and 
'  addrefled  the  flirine  thus  :  "  O  fovereign  power,  prophefy  to  us 
*'  more  propitioufly  for  our  country,  regarding  thefe  fuppliant  tokens 
"  which  we  bear ;    or  we  will  not  depart  from  the  fancluary,  but  re- 

*  ©so^owoi  is  their  Grecian  title,  for  which   we  have  neither  word  nor  fcarcely  a  proper 
phrafe  in  Englilh. 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  3*7 

'main    here    even     until   we    die."      The    prophetefs  anfwered :     CHAP.  IX. 

•  Minerva  is  unable  to  appeafe  Olympian  Jupiter,  tho  m- 
'  treating  with  many  words  and  deep  wifdom.  Again  therefore  I 
'  fpeak  in  adamantine  terms.  All  elfe  within  Cecropian  bounds  and 
'  the  receffes  of  divine  Cithaeron  (hall  fall.  The  wooden  wall  alone 
'  great  Jupiter  grants  to  Minerva  to  remain  inexpugnable,  a  refuge 
'  to  you  and  your  children.  Wait  not  therefore  the  approach  of 
'  horfe  or  foot,  an  immenfe  army,  coming  from  the  continent;  but 
\  retreat,  turning  the  back,  even  tho  they  be  clofe  upon  you.    O  di- 

•  vine  Salamis !  thou  (halt  lofe  the  fons  of  women,  whether  Ceres  be 

•  fcattered  or  gathered  !"  * 
•  Writing  down  this  anfwer,  which  appeared  milder  than  the  for- 
mer, the  deputies  returned  to  Athens.  Various  opinions  were  held 
among  the  Athenian  elders  about  the  meaning  of  words  which 
interefted  them  fo  deeply.  Some  thought  they  dire&ed  the  defence 
of  the  citadel,  which  having  been  anciently  furrounded  by  a  pali- 
fade,  might  be  intended .'py  the  term  wooden  wall.  Others  infifted 
that  the  wooden  wall  could  mean  nothing  but  their  fleet,  upon 
which  alone  therefore  the  oracle  incouraged  them  to  depend  :  yet 
this  conftru&ion  feemed  overthrown  by  the  concluding  fentence, 
which  the  diviners  deemed  to  portend,  that  if  the  fleet  ventured  an 
ingagement  it  would  be  defeated  off  Salamis.  They  therefore  ad- 
vifed  by  no  means  to  rifk  any  kind  or  degree  of  ingagement,  but  to 
make  ufe  of  the  fleet  for  quitting,  with  their  families  and  effects, 
a  country  which  they  could  not  defend,  and  to  feek  a  fet dement 
elfewhere.' 

It  was  not  likely  that  the  prudent  managers  of  the  Delphian  oracle 
would   prophefy  any  thing   very  favorable  to  Athens,  fo  peculiarly 

*   Thefe  two  oracles,   tho  in   verfe  in    the  dered,    or    even   rendered    at  all    in   another 

original,   fall  remarkably  into  Englilh  almoft  language,    if  indeed   they    bear   any    certain 

word  for  word;   even  the  ambiguous   expref-  fenie  in  the  original.     Jt  has  therefore   been 

fions  almoft  exactly  correfponding  in   the  two  a  prudent  praftice  of  tranflators  to  give  their 

languages.     It  is  not  every  oracle  repoited  by  reprefcntations  of  them  in  verfe. 


Greek  authors  that  can  be  thus  literally  ren- 


devoted 


368  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP. ix.  devoted  to  Perfian  vengeance,  when  the  innumerable  forces  of  that 
SECT.  II.  mighty  empire  were  already  affembled  at  Sardis,  while  the  little  coun- 
try of  Greece  was  fo  unprepared  and  fo  difunited.  Yet  the  consulta- 
tion was  probably  neceflary  in  compliance  with  popular  prejudice ; 
and  it  depended  then  upon  genius  to  interpret  the  refponfe  advanta- 
geoufly,  after  having  perhaps  fuggefted  what  might  bear  an  advan- 
tageous interpretation.  Themiftocles  was  not  at  a  lofs  upon  this  oc- 
cafion.  '  There  was  one  emphatical  word,'  he  faid,  *  which  clearly 
'.  proved  the  interpretation  of  the  diviners  to  be  wrong.  For  if  the 
'  lad  fentence  had  been  meant  unfavorably  to  the  Athenians,  the 

*  oracle  would  fcarcely  have  ufed  the  expreffion,  "  O  divine  Salamis," 
'  but  rather,  "  O  wretched  Salamis."  Defeat  at  fea  was  there- 
?  fore  portended  not  to  them  but  to  their  enemies  :  the  wooden 
c  wall   unqueftionably   meant   their    fleet ;    and  a   naval  ingagement 

*  muft  fave  their  country.'  The  Athenian  multitude  was  predifpofed 
to  the  character  and  to  the  fentiments  of  Themiftocles.  It  was  de- 
termined, in  purfuance  of  his  opinion,  %>  put  the  whole  Strength  of 
the  commonwealth  to  the  navy,  to  increafe  the  number  of  mips  as 
fall  as  poffible,  and,  together  with  fuch  other  Greeks  as  could  be 
perfuaded  to  join  them,   to  meet  the  enemy  at  fea. 

Then  at  laft  meafures  were  taken  for  forming  a  league  among  thofe 
Grecian  ftates  who,  according  to  the  hiftorian's  expreffion,  were  in- 
clined to  the  better  caufe  *.  It  was  prefently  agreed  that  all  enmities 
among  themfelves  fho'uld  ceafe  :  for  many  yet  exifted,  and  princi- 
pally that  between  Athens  and  iEgina.  Information  came  that  Xer- 
xes was  arrived  at  Sardis.  Befide  that  his  court  was  a  common  refort 
for  refugee  Greeks,    many  of  his  Ionian  and  /Eolian   Subjects   would 

be  conftantly  about  it,  tho  probably  very  few  of  them  ever  near  his 
perfon.  Means  were  however  thus  open  for  any  Greeks  to  pafs  with 
little  fufpicion,  and  eafily  to  acquire  information  concerning  all  pub- 
lic tranfactions  of  the  Perfian  empire.     To  afcertain  report,   and  to 

*  'ZT&wvw  tup  rat  uptUu  (p^Urrut.     Hcrodot.  1.  vii.  c.  145. 

pry 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  3&9 

pry  if  poflible  more  deeply  into  things,  fome   confidential  perfons    CHAP. IX. 
were  fent  to  Sardis.     They  were  apprehended  as  fpies,  and  condemned     SECT.  II. 
to  death  :   but  the  circumftances  being  reported  to  Xerxes,  that  prince,    Herodot.Lvii. 
difapproving  the  rigid  caution  of  his  officers,   directed  that   the  fpies   p0iy«ek.Stra. 
mould  be  carried   round   the   whole   army,   and,   after  feeing  every-   ^V     "' 
thing,  difmiffed  with  paffports  to  go  where  they  pleafed.     Some  {hips    I'luta'c1?- 
about  the   fame   time,  carrying  corn  from  the  Euxine  for  /Egina  and 
Peloponnefus,  were  (topped  by  the  Periian  officers  in  the  Hellefpont. 
Xerxes  directed  that  they  fhould  be  fuffered  to  proceed  on  iheir  voy- 
age j    '  For,'  faid  he,   '   we  are  going  to  the  fame  country,    and  the 
*  corn  may  be  ufeful  to  us.'     The  appearance  of  magnanimity  in  this 
conduct  is  leffened  by  the  immenlity  of  the  Perfian  armament,  feem- 
ingly  far  overproportioned   to   its  object ;  yet  upon  the  whole   the 
anecdotes  are  not  unworthy  of  the  fon   of  Darius,   and  grandfon  of 
Cyrus.      Analagous   tranfactions    may   have  happened   among   other 
people  in  other  ages  :    a  fiery  fimilar  to  the  former  is  related  in  Ro-    Polyb.  1.  xv. 
man  hiflory.     But  in  juftice  to  Xerxes  it  ought  not  to  be  forgotten    Liv?  1!  xxx. 
that  he  ftands  firft  on  record  for  this  treatment,  generous   at  leaft,  if  p  2^;    j  iv 
we  refufe  to  call  it  magnanimous,  of  enemies  whofe  lives  were  for-   c-  7- 
feited  by  the  law  of  nations  of  all  ages. 

The  principal  Grecian  cities  whofe  refolutions  remained  yet  doubt-    Herodot. 
ful,  were  thofe  of  Crete,   with  Argos,  Corcyra,    and  Syracufe;    all 
coniiderable  for  their  naval  force.      Minifters  were  fent  to  all,   urging 
them  to  an  alliance  againft  Perfia.      Argos  had  not,  with  the  power, 
loft  all  the  pride  of  its  ancient  preeminence  among  the  Grecian  ftates. 
It  had  not  long  fince  fuffered  in  a  war  with  Sparta  ;  when  Cleomenes, 
in  one  battle,  and  a  maffacre  which  followed  it,  had  deflroyed  no  lefs   f^''  c-  '  ' 
than  fix  thoufand  Argian  citizens.     Weak  under  this  calamity,  irri- 
tated againfl;  Lacedasmon,  and  apprehending  farther  oppreffion  from 
that  ambitious  ftate,    which  might   command   Peloponnefus  fhould   '■  v»-  c-  h8. 
Argos  by  any  misfortune  be  rarther   reduced,   recouife  was  had  to   Panathen. 
the  Delphian  oracle.     The  refponfe,   evidently  compofed  by  a  friend   Herodot. 
to  the  Argians,  appears,  as  far  as  it  can  be  underftood,  to  favor  their    l'Vu  c-  I+f?> 

B  b  b  ancient 


37° 


HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 


CHAP.  IX.    ancient  pretenfion  to  fuperiority  above  all  other  Grecian  dates,    and 
SECT.  II.     at  tne  fame  time  to  direct  them  to  enter  into  no  league  for  common 
defence,  but  merely  to  provide  for  their  own  fecurity.     The  minifters 
were  neverthelefs  favorably  received.    Having,  in  the  oracular  refponfe, 
an  excufe,    which  Grecian  religion  could  not  dilpute,    for  refufing, 
if  they  chofe  it,  to  ingage  in  any  league,   the  Argiao.fi  endeavoured  to 
profit  from  the  preffing  neceffity  of  the  occafion  for  procuring  advan- 
tageous terms  as  the  price  of  their  affiftance.     They  demanded  firft 
that  the  Lacedaemonians  mould  bind  themfelves  to  peace  with   them 
for  thirty  years.      Then  they  faid  that,  tho  command  among  the  Gre- 
cian ftates  juftly  belonged  to  Argos,    yet  they  would  be  contented  to 
fhare  it  equally  with  Sparta.     The  Lacedaemonian   deputies   gave  an 
unfatisfactory   anfwer,    and   the  Argians  concluded   with    declaring, 
'  That  the  Spartan  arrogance  was  intolerable;   and  they  would  rather 
'  be  commanded  by  the  barbarians  than  fubjecT:  to  Lacedaemon.'     The 
minifters  were  then  ordered  to  leave  the  Argian  territory  before  fun- 
fet,   on  pain  of  being  treated  as  enemies.      This,  fays   Herodotus,  is 
what  the  Argians  themfelves  fay  about  thefe  matters.      Other  reports 
lefs  favorable  to  them  were  current  in  Greece.      But  after  an  account 
of  them  the  honeft  hiftorian  adds  :   '   I  do  not  undertake  to   vouch 
'  for   thefe  ftories,   nor   for  anything  relating  to  the  bufinefs  more 
'   than  as   far  as  credit  is  due   to  what  the  Argians  themfelves  fay. 
'  But  this  I  know,  that  if  all  men  were  to  bring  their  domeftic  dif- 
'  graces  together  for  the  purpofe  of  exchanging  with  their  neighbours, 
*  they  would  no  fooner  have  infpecled  thofe  of  others  than  all  would 
'  moft  willingly  take  back  their  own.     Thus  neither  upon  this  occa- 
'  fion  was  the  conduct  of  the  Argians  the  moft  fhameful.' 

The  minifters  of  the  confederates  were  not  more  fuccefsful  in 
Crete.  Herodotus,  from  whom  alone  we  have  any  detail  of  the 
political  affairs  of  thefe  times,  was  too  nearly  cotemporary  to  be 
totally  unbialled  by  the  intereft  which  perfons  yet  living  would  have 
in  the  credit  of  the  principal  actors.      He  makes  a  handfome  apology 

Hcrodot.l.vii.   for  the  refufal  of  the  Cretans  to  join  in  the  confederacy.     They  were 
c.  169.  ,   r 

delirous, 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  37i 

defirous,   he  fays,   of  taking   their  mare  in  the  common  defence  of    CHAP.  IX. 
Greece,  but  an  oracle  forbad  them.      In  regard  to  the  Corcyra?ans  he     SECT: II. 
has  not   been   fcrupulous  :    he   plainly  accufes   them    of  fcandalous   H.-.odot.i.vii. 
treachery  to  the  Grecian  caufe,  after  having  ingaged  themfelves  to   Diod.  Sic.  1. 
ftipportit.     Gelon  tyrant  of  Syracufe  was  a  very  powerful  prince,  and   h"^^*']  vii. 
his  alliance  would  have  been  a  great  acquifition.      But  difficulties  arofe   e-  'S3  &fecl" 
in  accommodating  his  pretentions  to  command  with  thofe  of  the  lead- 
ing Hates  oi  Greece.      Partly  abiurd  pride,   partly  perhaps   reafonable 
jcalouiy,  prevented   them  from    immediately  acceding  to  his  terms  ; 
and  in   the   mean  time  the  invafion  of  Sicily  by  a  Carthaginian  army 
made  his  whole  force  neceilary  at  home. 

Corinth  was  the  place  appointed  for  the  meeting  of  deputies  from  I.  vii.c.  172. 
the  confederated  fiates  to  confult  about  the  conduct  of  the  war.  None 
among  the  Grecian  people  had  been  more  forward  to  join  the  confe- 
deracy than  the  Theffalians.  Intelligence  arrived  that  the  Pcrfian  ar- 
my had  croffed  the  Hellefpont,  and  was  directing  its  march  weft- 
ward.  This  decided  that  Thelfaly  was  the  frontier  to  be  firft  attacked. 
The  Theffalians  reafonably  expected  that  a  force  would  immediately 
be  affembled,  competent  as  far  as  the  flrength  of  Greece  would  ad- 
mit, for  the  defence  of  the  paffes  into  their  country.  They  were 
alarmed  to  find  no  meafures  taken  for  that  purpofe.  They  haftened 
therefore  a  remonftrance  to  Corinth,  urging  that  the  force  of  their 
province  alone  was  utterly  unequal  to  oppofe  the  prodigious  army 
which  was  coming  againft  them  ;  that  it  was  not  to  be  expected 
they  mould  facrifice  themfelves  with  their  families  for  the  fake 
of  people  who  would  not  ftir  to  affift  them  ;  that  therefore  a  pow- 
erful army  muff,  without  delay  join  them  from  the  fouthern  dates  ; 
otherwife,  however  unwilling,  they  muff  neceffarilyendeavour  to  make 
terms  with  the  enemy.  This  reafonable  remonftrance  roufed  the 
fluggifh  and  hefitating  counfels  of  the  confederacy.     A  body  of  foot   ,    .. 

was  imbarked  under  the  command  ofEvjenetus,  a  Lacedaemonian,  and    1)'ij<-1°>'-  Sic. 

1.  xi.  c.  2. 
Themillocles   the  Athenian.     They  proceeded   through  the  Euripus 

to  Alius,  a  port  of  Thelfalian  Achaiaj   and  then  marching  acrofs 

B  b  b  2  the 


3?2  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  IX.  the  country,  occupied  the  valley  of  Tempe,  between  the  mountains 
Olympus  and  Ofla,  the  only  pafs  from  Lower  Macedonia  into  Theflaly. 
The  infantry  from  different  ftates  amounted  to  ten  thoufand  men. 
Theflaly  was  the  only  province  of  Greece  that  pofTeffed  any  conflder- 
able  ftrength  of  cavalry.  The  whole  of  the  Theflalian  horfe  joined 
the  confederate  infantry,  and  together  they  made  a  force  compe- 
tent to  defend  the  pafs  againfl:  any  numbers.  , 

But  the  Grecian  army  had  not  been  many  days  incamped  in  Tempe 
when  intelligence  came  from  Alexander  fon  of  Amyntas,  a  Macedo- 
nian man  (as  Herodotus  in  the  Ample  language  of  his  age  calls  him, 
tho  king  of  Macedonia  by  inheritance  from  a  long  race  of  anceftors 
claiming  their  defcent  from  Hercules)  informing  them  that  the  force 
by  land  and  fea  coming  againfl:  them  was  immenfe  :    that  there  was 
another  way  into   Theflaly,    practicable  for  an  army,   from  Upper 
Macedonia  through  Perrhatbia  by  the  city  of  Gonnus  j   and  if  they 
would  avoid  being  trodden  under  foot  by  their  enemies,  they  would  do 
well  to  retreat  in   time.     The  Grecian  leaders,   not  thinking  their 
ftrength  equal  to  the  defence  of  both  paffes,  imbarked  their  troops 
again,  and   returned  to  the  Corinthian  ifthmus.     The  Theflalians, 
thus  deferted,  haflened  to  make  their  fubmiflion  to  the  Perflan  mo- 
narch j   and  probably  thinking  themfelves   ill-ufed,   and  in   a  deqree 
betrayed  by  the  confederates,  entered  zealoufly  into  his  fervice  *. 

The  Grecian  confederacy  which  remained  to  refift  the  whole  force 
of  the  Perrian  empire,  now  confifled  of  a  few  little  ftates,  whofe 
united  territories  did  not  equal  Angle  provinces  of  France,  and  the 
fum  of  whofe  population  in  free  fubjecls  was  confiderably  inferior 
to  that  of  the  county  of  York  in  England.  Nor  was  there,  even 
among  thefe,  perfect  unanimity,  or  any  mode  of  general  adminiflra- 
tion  which  could  command  conftant  and  regular  exertion  of  united 
ftrength.     The  retreat  from  Tempe  appears  to  have  been  a  precipi- 

*    Lji.y)Su7av    ■xgoSvpu;,     ovSi  ti   e»obiaf-w;,     w;  Tt   h  Totin   ir^y/Men  IQmhwto    jSasWt     «»&;;    tints 
XgwpurciTei.     Herodot.  1.  vii.  c.  174. 

tate 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  375 

tate  meafure,  rendered  neceftary  by  nothing  fo  much  as  by  the  want    CHAP.ix. 
of  fome  powers  of  government  extending  over  the  feveral  ftates  which     sect.  ii. 
compofed   the   confederacy.      The  counfels   of  the   Grecian   com- 
manders may  however  have  been  reafonably  influenced  by  the  con- 
ftderation  of  the  enemy's  fuperiority  at  fea,  which  would  inable  him 
to  pour  in  forces  upon  their  rear,  whatfoever  ports  they  occupied. 

The  valuable  afllftance  of  Theffaly  being  loft,  the  confolation   re- 
mained for  the  alfembly  at  Corinth  that,  as  their  defence  was  now 
narrowed,  their  ftrength,  fuch  as  it  was,  would  be  lefs  divided;   the 
fleet  might  more  certainly  cooperate  with  the  army,    and,  if  the  at-        v 
tack  was  to  begin  nearer  the  center  of  the  confederacy,  the  preflure 
itfelf  of  danger  might  inforce  that  union   in  council  without  which 
all  defence  would  be  hopelefs.     The  nature  of  their  country,   and  of 
its   furrounding  feas,  was  a  farther  incouragement  :    the  one  every- 
where mountainous,  the  other  broken  with  innumerable  iflands  and 
headlands  and   fubject  to  fudden  ftorms,  both  were  peculiarly  favo- 
rable for  defenfive  operations.     The  fouthern  boundary  of  Theffaly, 
which  now  became  their  frontier,    was  advantageous  beyond  the  reft. 
The  ridge  of  CEta,  which  forms  it,  extends  from  fea  to  fea;  every-   Strabo.  l.ix. 
where  impracticable  for  an  army,  or  fo  nearly  fo,    that  the  fmalleft   429'. 
force  might  fuccefsfully  oppofe  the  greateft.     This  ridge  is  crofted 
nearly  at  right-angles   by  another  fcarcely  lefs   formidable,  which, 
rifing  immediately  from  the  Corinthian  ifthmus,   ftretches   through 
the  middle  of  Greece  under  various  names,  Helicon,  Parnaftus,  Pin-    strabo.  ibid, 
dus,  and,  ftill  in  a  northerly  direction,  flioots  beyond  Grecian  bounds   &  P-  434- 
far  among   the  barbarous  nations.     To   enter  Attica  and  Pelopon- 
nefus  therefore  by  the  weftern  fide  of  the  country,  firft  Pindus,  then 
CEta,  then  Parnailus,  mult  be  furmounted.     On  the  eaftern  fide  CEta 
alone  oppofed  iticlf.      But  here  only  one  pafs  was  known,  where  the 
ridge  at  its  eaftern  extremity  meets  the  fea.      In  former  ages  the  Pho-   Herodot.l.vTi. 
cians  on  the  fouth  of  the  mountains,  more  fettled  to  hufbandry  than  C,I76, 
the  Theffalians  who  lived  on  the  north,    to  prevent  predatory  in- 
curfions   upon   their  lands,    had  feized  the  commanding  faftneftes, 

and 


374  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  ix.    and  eftablifhed  a  gnrrifon  there.     Acrofs  the  middle  of  the  narrow, 
S^y^'     w'lere  was  a  width  of  about  fifty  feet  nearly  level,  they  had  erected 
a  wall ;   and   to  Itrengthen  the  defence  they  formed,   on    the  Thef- 
falian   fide,  an  inundation  from   fome   hot   fprings  which   rofe  near 
the  foot  of  the  mountain.     Thefe  circumftances  together  acquired 
to  the  place  the  name  of  Thermopylae,   Hot-gates.      A   little   north 
of  Thermopylae,   the  mountains   fo   doled,    and  again  a  little  fouth- 
ward  they  fo  preffed  upon  the  fea,  as  barely  to  admit  the  paffage  of 
a  fmgle  carriage.     Notiiing  could    be    more  commodious   than   this 
fpot   for   the  fmall  force  of  the  Greeks  to  make  a  ftand  againft  the 
immenfe  army  of  Perlia.      It  had  the  farther  extraordinary  advantage 
that,   near  at  hand,   and  within  ready  communication,   was  a  fecure 
road  for  a  fleet;   fo    landlocked  as  to   favor   that  alio  againft  fuperior 
numbers,    yet   affording    means   of   retreat.     Hither   it    was    deter- 
mined   to.    fend    the    whole    naval    force    that    could    be    collected, 
together  with  a  body  of  troops  fufficient  to  defend  the  pafs. 

But  in  the  conduct  even  of  this  bofinels  we  find  the  union  of  the 
confederated  ftates  extremely  defective.  Jealous  of  one  another,  defti- 
tute  of  any  fufficient  power  extending  over  the  whole,  and  fearing, 
not  unrealbnably,  the  naval  fuperiority  of  the  enemy,  which  might 
put  it  completely  in  his  choice  where,  when,  and  how  he  would 
make  his  attacks,  each  little  republic  feems  to  have  been  anxious  to 
referve  its  ftrength  for  future  contingencies.  Lacedasmon  again,  as  in 
HSrodot.l.vii.  the  former  war,  pretended  religion  as  a  hindrance.  The  feftival 
called  Carneia  was  to  be  celebrated,  immediately  after  which  the 
whole  force  of  the  ftate  mould  march  againft  the  enemy.  Moft  of 
the  Peloponnefian  cities  made  fimilar  excufes  ;  and  where  no  peculiar 
religious  ceremony  could  be  alledged,  the  Olympian  feftival,  whofe 
period  coincided  with  thefe  events,  was  a  common  excufe  for  all  who 
wanted  one.  Lacedaemon  therefore  fent  only  three  hundred  men  ; 
Corinth  four  hundred;  Phlius  two  hundred;  Mycena?,  which,  in- 
confiderable  as  it  was,  appears  to  have  been  at  this  time  independent 
of  Argos,  probably  through  the  interference  of  Sparta,  fent  eighty 

men. 


c.  206. 


Herodot.l.vii 
c.  202. 
Paufan.  1.x. 
c.  20. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  375 

men.     The  mountaineers  of  Arcadia  alone,  unverfed  in  the  wiles  of   CHAP.  IX. 
politics,  and  unable  to  eftimate  the  danger  to  be  expected  from  na-     s,ECy-  **• 
val  operations,  honeftly  exerted  their  ftrength  in  the  common  caufe. 
The  cities  of  Tcgea  and  Mantineia  fent  each  five  hundred  foldiers  : 
the  other  towns  made  the  whole  number  of  Arcadians  two  thoufand 
one  hundred  and   twenty.     To   thefe   the  little  city  of  Thefpiae  in 
Bceotia  added  no  lefs  than  feven  hundred  :  Thebes,  ill-affected  to  the 
caufe,  gave  only  four  hundred.     The  whole  ftrength  of  Athens  went 
to  the  naval  armament.      The  other  provinces  without  Peloponnefus 
had  at  this  time  no  large  towns,  and. their  inhabitants,  lefs  civilized, 
were  little   politically  connected  with   the  fouthern  ftates.     The  af- 
fembly  at   Corinth  was  however   not  wanting  either  in  induftry  or 
ingenuity  to  peifuade  and  incourage  thole  neareft  to  the  point  of  at- 
tack to  ufe  their  utmoft  exertion  againfl  the  invader.     Minifters  were   Herodot.l.vii. 
fent  through  their  towns  and  villages  :   '  The  force  now  lent  by  the  '   2°3' 
'  confederate  dates,'  they  were  told,   '  was  only  the  advanced  guard 
'  of  a  powerful  army  expected  every  day.     Thofe  exceffive  appre- 

*  henfions  of  the  Perfian  power  which  had  fo  pervaded  Greece,'  it 
was  added,   '  were  abfurd.      For  from  the  fea  there  was  no  reafon  for 

*  apprehenfion.  The  Athenians,  /Eginetans,  and  others  who  com-- 
'  pofed  the  allied  fleet  were  fully  equal  to  the  defence  of  the  country 

*  on  that  fide.  Nor  was  it  a  god  that  was  coming  againft  them,  but 
'  a  man  :  and  there  neither  was,  nor  ever  would  be  a  mortal  in  whofe 
'  lot,  from  his  very  birth,  evil  was  not  mingled,  and  moll:  in  the  lot 
'  of  thofe  of  higheft  llation.      In  the  common  courie  of  things  there- 

*  fore  their  invader,  a  mere  mortal,  would  be  difappointed  of  his 
'  hope.'  Hearing  theie  things,  continues  the  hillorian,  whofe  ori- 
ginal and  aim  oil  cotemporary  pencil  gives  us  the  very  lineaments  of 
the  age,  the  Opuntian  Locrians  marched  with  their  whole  force,  and 
the  Phocians  fent  a  thoufand  men.  Leonidas,  one  of  the  kings  of 
Sparta,  commanded  in  chief. 


SECTION 


376  HISTORYOFGREECE. 


SECTION      III. 

The  Grecian  Army  takes  its  Station  at  Thermopylae  ;  the  Fleet  at  Arte- 
mifium. Refpo?ifes  of  the  Delphian  Oracle.  The  Perjian  Fleet  pro- 
ceeds to  Sepias  ;  the  Army  to  Thermopylae.  Numbers  of  the  Perfian 
Forces.     Storm  and  Shipwreck  at  Sepias.     Battle  of  Thermopyhe. 


CHAP.  IX. 
SECT.  III. 


XERXES  halted  feveral  days  at  Therme,  to  refrefli  his  troops, 
to  acquire  intelligence,  and  to  tolled!:  guides  capable  of  conducting 

Herodot.i.vii.  his  multitudes  through  the  difficult  country  to  which  he  was  aD- 
proaching.     It  was  determined  to  proceed  by  Upper  Macedonia  into 

c.  128.  Theffalyi  that  road  being  more  favorable  than  the  fhorter  way  by 

the  valley  of  Tempe.  By  fea  the  Grecian  coaft  was  fo  near  that  the 
fleet  remained  in  the  bay  of  Therme  eleven  days  after  the  army  had 
recommenced  its  march. 

1.  viii.  c.  12.  I*  was  now  near  Midfummer  when  intelligence  reached  the  affem- 
1.  vii.  c.  177.  bly  at  Corinth  that  Xerxes  was  arrived  in  Pieria.  The  forces  under 
Leonidas  then  immediately  marched  to  their  ftation  at  Thermopylae; 
and  the  fleet  proceeded  to  the  neighbouring  road  of  Artemifium  on 
c.  179,  180.  tne  Eubcean  coaft.  Hence  three  galleys,  one  of  Trcezene,  one  of 
/Egina,  the  third  Athenian,  were  fent  off  the  ifland  of  Sciathus,  to 
watch  the  motions  of  the  enemy.  Ten  Perfian  galleys,  alio  fent  to 
explore,  fell  in  with  them.  The  Greeks  immediately  fled.  The 
Trcezenian  fhip  and  the  ./Eginetan  were  taken  with  their  crews.  The 
Athenian  captain  ran  his  galley  afhore  near  the  mouth  of  the  Peneius, 
and  efcaped  by  land  with  his  people.  The  Perfians  took  pofleffion 
of  the  deferted  veffel.  Immediately  fignals  by  fire  from  the  heights 
of  Sciathus  gave  notice  to  the  Greeks  at  Artemifium  of  the  enemy's 
approach.  So  little  firm  were  the  leaders  yet  in  their  counfels,  and 
fo  extremely  apprehenfive  of  the  enemy's  great  fuperiority,  that  they 
immediately  withdrew  their  fleet  to  Chalcis,  propoling  to  defend  the 

narrow 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  377 

narrow  pafs  of  the  Euripus  *.    Scouts  were  left  on  the  heights  at  the    CHAP.  ix. 
northweftern  end  of  Eubcea  ftill  to  watch  the  enemy.  SECT.  III. 

In  this  time  indeed  of  extreme  difficulty  and  danger  to  the  Greeks, 
conftant  and  equal  prudence  appears  fcarcely  anywhere  but  among 
the  managers  of  the  Delphian  oracle.  The  Delphian  citizens,  dread-  Herodot.l.vii. 
ing,  like  the  reft,  the  approaching  invafion,  confulted  their  god. 
The  refponfe  directed  them  to  pray  to  the  winds ;  for  thefe  might  be 
powerful  affiftants  to  Greece.  This  divine  admonition  was  commu- 
nicated among  the  confederate  Greeks,  and  moft  thankfully  re- 
ceived -J-.  Another  refponfe  was  reported  directing  the  Athenians  in 
particular  to  invoke  their  fon-in-law.  According  to  ancient  tradi-  1.  vii.  0  189. 
tion,  Boreas  god  of  the  northwind,  coming  from  Thrace,  perhaps 
really  a  Thracian  chief  of  that  name,  had  married  Oreithyia  daughter 
of  Erechtheus  king  of  Attica.  The  prayers  of  the  Athenians  were 
therefore  particularly  directed  to  the  northwind,  with  fome  confi- 
dence, at  leaft  among  the  vulgar,  that  they  were  not  without  pecu- 
liar intereft  with  that  deity.  Thofe  indeed  who  know  the  power  of 
whittling  or  of  an  eggiheil  upon  the  minds  of  Englifh  feamen  at 
this  day,  may  imagine  what  the  incouragement  of  the  Delphian  ora- 
cle to  expect  affiftance  from  Boreas  and  their  princefs  Oreithyia  might 
do  among:  the  Athenians.  The  event  however  which  foon  followed 
gave  more  folid  ground  of  hope,  and  might  naturally  excite  the  re- 
collection of  the  relation  of  Athens  to  the  northwind,  if  it  had  not 
before  been  thought  of. 

The  ten  Perfian  galleys,  after  the  capture  of  the  Grecian  veffels, 
proceeded  in  their  bufinefs  of  exploring  ;   but  in  paffing  between  the   1,  Y\\t  c.  183. 
ifland  of  Sciathus  and  the  main,  three  of  them  ftruck  upon  a  rock 
called  Myrmex.     The  fleet,  as  we  have  obferved,  lay  in  the  bay  of 
Therme  eleven   days    after  the  king  had  recommenced  his   march. 

*   VLaralMrtaunti;  is   the    ftrong  expreffion  of  -j-    Kai    c(pi,    hmuf   y.a.ruffu^ovo-1    Tor   fiufGapov, 

HcroJot'ja  (1).     In  another  place  he  adds  the     slayy/iAaJTE;,  x<*f"  «■&«""«  xktsSevto.    Herodot. 
corroborating  adverb  onvuq.  1.  vii.  c.  178. 

(1)  1.  vii.  c.  i8j. 

C  c  c  Upon 


378  HISTORY    OF    GREECE, 

CHAP.  IX.  Upon  intelligence  from  the  exploring  fhips  that  the  paffage  to  the 
SECT.  III.  Grecian  coaft  was  clear  of  the  enemy,  and  dangerous  only  from 
rocks,  veffels  were  fent  with  ftone  to  erect  a  mark  on  the  Myrmex, 
and  Pammon,  a  Greek  of  the  ifland  of  Scyros  (for  Herodotus  has 
taken  care  to  record  the  traitor's  name)  was  ingaged  to  pilot  the  fleet 
through  the  channel  of  Sciathus.  Proceeding  then  from  the  bay  of 
Therme,  one  day  brought  them  to  the  bay  between  the  town  of 
Cafthanaea  and  the  foreland  of  Sepias  on  the  Theflalian  coaft. 

The  army  meanwhile  had  made  its  way  through  Upper  Macedonia 
into  Perrhsbia,  and  by  the  town  of  Gonnus  acrofs  Theffaly  to  the 
neighbourhood  of  Thermopylae  without  opposition.    Here  Herodotus 

1,  \ii.  c.  1S4.   again  enumerates  the  Perlian  forces  by  land  and  lea,  with  the  addi- 
tion acquired  fince  the  departure  of  the  armament  from  Dorifcus. 

■*.  This  addition,  he  fays,  cannot  be  afcertained,  but  may  be  computed. 

The  Greeks  of  Thrace  and  the  adjacent  iflands  furnifhed  one  hundred 
and  twenty  fliips,  whofe  crews  would  amount  to  about  twenty-four 
thoufand  men.  The  land-force,  from  the  various  people  of  Thrace, 
Macedonia,  and  Theffaly,  he  effimates  at  three  hundred  thoufand. 
The  number  of  fighting  men  in  the  whole  armament  by  fea  and  land 
would  thus  be  two  million  fix  hundred  forty-one  thoufand  fix  hun- 
dred and  ten.  The  attending  multitude  he  fuppofes  could  not  be 
fewer,  but  rather  more.  Reckoning  them  equal,  the  numbers  un- 
der the  command  of  Xerxes,  which  arrived  without  misfortune  at 
Sepias  and  Thermopylae,  were  five  million  two  hundred  eighty- three 
thoufand  two  hundred  and  twenty  men,  exclufive  of  women  and 
eunuchs  without  number,  and  a  vaft  train  of  incumbrances  little 
known  to  European  armies,  but  which  in  all  ages  have  attended  the 
Afiatic.  Whatever  exaggeration  may  be  in  this  account,  we  lhall  in 
vain  feek  more  authentic  information  from  later  writers.  Herodotus's 
detail  of  the  nations  from  which  the  armament  was  collected,  and  of 
the  meafures  taken  to  provide  for  its  fubfiftence,  defective  as  the  latter 
is,  afford  the  befl  of  any  exifting  means  for  forming  fome  idea,  if 
not  of  its   numbers,  yet  of  its  immenfity.     Exaci.nefs  we   cannot 

have, 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  379 

have,  nor  anything  approaching  it  :*but  we  know  that  Afia  has  often    CI-AP-  IX. 

sect,  in 


fent  forth  armies  which  appear  next  to  prodigious ;  and  every  tefti- 


mony  makes  it  probable  that  the  forces  led  by  Xerxes  againft  Greece 
were  the  moft  numerous  ever  afTembled  in  the  world. 

The  road  of  Cafthancea  was  open  to  the  north  and  north-eaft  winds;  Herodot.l.vit. 
and  fo  little  fpacious  that  an  eighth  divifion  only  of  the  vaft  fleet  of  Diodor.  Sic' 
Perfia  could  be  moored  in  one  line  againft  the  more  :  the  other  feven 
rode  at  anchor  with  their  heads  toward  the  fea.  Such  a  fituation 
could  never  be  fafe  for  the  ancient  galleys,  peculiarly  fitted  for  a  na- 
vigation where  want  of  fea-room  makes  a  ftorm  moft  da-ngerous  to  the 
ftouteft  veffels.  The  night  after  their  arrival  was  calm :  but  in  the 
morning  the  wind  frefhened  from  the  north-eaft  *.  In  thofe  feas, 
where  ftorms  are  often  very  hidden  and  always  very  dangerous,  the 
feaman,  unacquainted  with  thofe  great  principles  of  navigation  which 
direct  a  veffel  over  the  globe,  but  which  in  his  narrow  fphere  of  action 
would  be  ufelefs,  is  yet  Angularly  attentive  in  obfervation  of  the  wea- 
ther, and  Angularly  acute  in  prognostication  of  it.  As  foon  as  it  was 
perceived  in  the  Perfian  fleet  that  a  violent  ftorm  was  approaching,  the 
diviiion  of  galleys  next  the  fhore  was  drawn  upon  the  beach.  The 
reft  were  to  provide  for  their  fafety  as  they  could.  According  to  He- 
rodotus they  feem  to  have  fcattered  to  feek  a  port,  or  a  fafe  and  un- 
occupied beach,  which  to  the  ancients  was  a  port.  But  the  ftorm 
haftily  grew  exceffive.  Some  of  the  veffels  were  ftranded  on  the 
place :  fome  were  driven  upon  the  Sepiad  foreland ;  fome  againft  the 
cliffs  of  Pelion  ;  fome  to  the  towns  of  Cafthansa  and  Melibcea.  Three 

*   Herodotus  calls  the  wind  Apeliotes,  but  not  be  thought  to  controvert    the   authority  of 

he  fays  the  people  of  the  country  called  it  the  the  tower  of  Andronicus  Cyrrheftes,  or  of  Mr. 

Hellefpontian  wind.      The  apeliotes,   accord-  Stuart's  accoun;  of  it.     But  I  will  ad4  fhat  the 

ing  to  Stuart's   account  of  the   tower  of  the  accuracy  in  ftating  winds   ufual   with  our  fea- 

winds  yet  remaining  at  Athens,   was  the  ealt.  men,  was  not   common   among   the  ancients  ; 

But  the  Hellefpont  lay  nearly  north-eaft  from  nor  is  it  at  this  day  in  many  pai  I    of  the  Me- 

Sepias :   and  the  effects  of  the  ftorm   defcribed  diterranean,   where  winds  are  ftili  named  from 

by  Herodotus  (how  that   the  wind   muft   have  the  countries  whence  they  blow,   without  any 

been   fome  decrees  northward  of  the  eaft.     I  very  exa£t  reference  to  the  poi.its  of  the  com- 

have  laid   thus  much  on  a  fubje<5l,  in  itfelf  of  pafs. 
little  confequence,  principally  becaufe  I  would 

C  c  c  2  days 


380  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  ix.  days  the  tempeft  lafted  with  unabated  violence.  The  Perfian  com- 
SECT.  in.  rnanders  were  in  the  utmoft  alarm  j  apprehenfive,  not  only  for  what 
might  be  loft,  but  alio  for  what  was  yet  fafe  on  ihore.  The  Thefla- 
lians  were  but  very  lately  become  friends  and  fubjecls  :  a  reverie  of 
fortune  might  make  their  fidelity,  and  tempt  them  to  hoftilities.  A 
rampart  was  therefore  formed  round  the  naval  camp,  chiefly  from  the 
ruins  of  the  wrecked  veflels. 

The  Simplicity  with  which  Herodotus  details  the  actions  of  men, 
often  marks  the  genuine  workings  of  human  nature  both  more  faith- 
fully and  with  more  animation  than  the  cautious  and  polilhed  manner 
of  writers  of  more  artificial  judgement.  The  dread  which  pervaded 
the  Grecian  fleet  on  the  approach  of  the  Perfian  armament  may  be 
imagined  from  the  hafty,  and  apparently  improvident  retreat  from 
Artemifium  ;  which  muft  expofe  the  land-force  at  Thermopylae  to  cer- 
tain destruction  ;  fince  the  fleet  alone  could  fecure  it  from  being  taken 
in  rear.  The  joy  at  the  view  of  the  rifing  tempeft,  and  the  confequent 
confidence  in  divine  favor  would  be  proportional.  The  Athenian 
feamen  did  not  now  forget  the  god  of  the  Thracian  wind  with  his 
Attic  princefs.  Immediately  they  fet  with  great  earneftnefs  to  facri- 
fices  and  prayers,  requefting  thole  deities  '  to  vindicate  Attica,  and 
'  bring  deftruction  on  the  barbarian  fleet  as  they  had  formerly  done  at 
*  Athos.'  Whether  this  really  induced  Boreas  to  fall  upon  the  bar- 
barians, fays  Herodotus,  I  cannot  undertake  to  fay*:  but  the  Athe- 
nians aftert  it,  and  in  confequence  they  have  built  a  temple 
to  him  on  the  bank  of  the  Iliflus.  Whether  indeed  Herodotus 
believed  the  oracular  admonition  to  have  been  promulgated  before 
the  event,  appears  dubious  :  his  expreflions  imply  fufpicion.  On  the 
fecond  day  of  the  ftorm  the  deftruction  and  diftrefs  produced  in  the 
Perfian  fleet  became  manifeft  to  the  Grecian  fcouts  on  the  Euboic 
heights,  who  haftened  to  Chalcis  with  the  intelligence.  Immediate- 
ly public  thanks  were  returned,  and  libations  poured  to  Neptune  the 


*  'Ei  f*£»  wi  iii  taXira,  twi  /3«5-/?«£ois-i  b^u.in<7t  Bo^j  etts'twe  hx  i'xu  itwcctt     Hcrodot.  1.  vii.  c.  i8q. 

deliverer  3 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  381 

deliverer ;  and  in  the  confidence  that  now  the  Perfian  force  would  be  CHAP.  IX. 
no  longer  formidable,  it  was  determined  to  reoccupy  the  former  fta-  SECT.  III. 
tion  at  Artemifium. 

The  lofs  of  the  Perfians  was  very  great.  It  is  not  likely  that  the 
Greeks  would  ever  have  any  correct  account  of  it ;  but  according  to 
the  loweft  report  four  hundred  galleys  of  war  were  funk  or  deftroyed. 
The  lofs  of  men  could  be  only  computed  from  that  of  veffels :  but 
means  were  totally  wanting  to  eftimate  the  deftruction  of  ftorefhips 
and  attending  veffels.  As  foon  as  the  weather  wis  become  moderate 
and  the  fea  fmooth,  the  Perfian  commanders,  without  waiting  to  col- 
lect the  fcattered  remains  of  their  fleet,  haftened  to  leave  fo  dangerous 
a  ftation.  Coafting  Magnefia  they  entered  the  Pagafacan  gulph, 
better  known  afterward  by  the  name  of  the  Pelafgian.  Fifteen  galleys, 
of  thofe  difperfed  by  the  fiorm,  following  fome  days  after,  fell  in  with 
the  Grecian  fleet,  which  had  refumed  its  ftation  off  Artemifium; 
and  mistaking  it  for  the  Perfian,  were  all  taken.  Among  the  prifoners 
were  Sandoces  governor  of  Cuma  in  iEolis,  Aridolis  tyrant  of  Ala- 
banda?  in  Cavia,  and  Penthylus  commander  of  the  Paphian  fquadron. 
Of  twelve  galleys  which  Paphos  had  furnifhed,  the  one  only  in  which 
the  commander  was  taken  had  furvived  the  hurricane.  This  capture 
was  very  fortunate  for  the  Greeks.  Befide  the  additional  lofs  to  the 
enemy  and  the  gain  of  fo  many  (hips  of  war  to  themfelves,  fpirits  were 
added  to  the  multitude,  and  intelligence  was  acquired  to  the  com- 
manders. As  fcon  as  the  prifoners  had  been  examined  before  the 
principal  officers  of  the  fleet,  they  were  lent  to  the  affembly  at  Co- 
rinth. 

The  profpect  of  Grecian  affairs  was  now  brightened  a  little.  If  the 
fleet  could  oppofe  the  enemy  with  but  equal  fuccels,  it  might  be 
hoped  that  the  nature  of  the  frontier  would  render  the  prodigious 
numbers  of  his  army  unavailing.  To  the  fouth  of  Thcffaly  mount 
CEta,  as  we  have  obferved,  ftretches  acrofs  the  country  from  fea  to 
fea.  North  of  ThermopyUt,  and  bordering  upon  the  Malian  bay,  is  Herodot.l.vii. 
a  plain  in  one  part  wide,  in  others  very  narrow,  inclofed  by  high  and 

impracticable 


3°2 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  IX. 
SECT.  III. 


Herodot.l.vii, 
c.  200. 


C.  201. 


c.  207. 


Plutarch. 
Apoph.  Lac. 


impracticable  mountains  called  the  Trachinian  rocks.  The  Perfian 
army,  crofiing  Theflaly  from  Upper  Macedonia,  had  moved  fouthward 
up  the  courfe  of  the  river  Apidanus ;  and  then,  turning  eaftward,  fol- 
lowed the  Spercheius  to  the  valley  and  town  of  Anticyra,  and  thence 
entered  the  Malian  plain.  At  the  town  of  Trachis,  in  the  wideft 
part  of  the  plain,  the  king  fixed  his  head-quarters.  Southward  of  this 
town  the  river  Afopus,  after  coafting  for  fome  way  the  foot  of  the 
mountain,  which  is  a  branch  of  CEta,  enters  a  cleft  of  it,  and  the 
only  road  is  by  the  courfe  of  that  river.  A  little  farther  fouthward  a 
fmall  ftream  called  the  Phoenix,  falling  from  the  hills,  meets  the 
Afopus  :  and  here  mafonry  had  been  necefTary  to  make  the  way  piti- 
able for  a  iingle  carriage*.  The  Afopus  having  made  its  courfe  by 
the  cleft  through  the  mountain-ridge,  which  is  here  narrow,  enters 
a  valley  of  fome  length,  but  little  width,  and  prefently  difcharges 
itfelf  into  the  Malian  bay.  In  this  valley,  and  on  the  bank  of  the 
Afopus,  was  the  town  of  Anthela,  with  the  temple  of  Ceres,  the 
temple  of  Amphictyon,  and  the  place  of  meeting  of  the  Amphiclyonic 
affembly.  Thermopylae  was  a  little  beyond  them,  and  lefs  than 
two  Englilli  miles  from  the  junction  of  the  Afopus  and  Phoenix.  The 
Perfian  monarch  commanded  all  to  the  noith  of  the  mountains  :  the 
Greeks  under  Leonidas  held  the  pafs. 

A  prince  like  Xerxes,  wholly  unexperienced  in  war,  might  expect, 
as  Herodotus  fays  of  him,  that  the  force  under  his  orders  was  capable 
of  anything  againfl  men,  and  almofv.  againft  nature  itfelf.  Accord- 
ing to  that  author,  he  waited  four  days  in  expectation  that  the  Greeks 
would  retreat  from  his  irrefiitible  numbers,  and  leave  him  an  unin- 
interrupted  pailage.  And  this,  according  to  the  fame  honed;  hifto- 
rian,  would  actually  have  happened  but  for  the  fuperior  genius  and 
unfhaken  courage  of  the  Lacedemonian  king.  It  has  been  added 
that  a  herald  was  fent  to  Leonidas,  commanding  him  in  the  name  of 

*  That  I  imagine  to  be  the  fenfe  of  the  phrafe  i^.afiTej  yu%  f/.U  povrn  Ji'^urai.     Herodot.  l.vii. 
c.  200.     See  Weffeling's  note. 


Xerxes 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  3S3 

Xerxes  to  come  and  deliver  his  arms ;  and  that  the  Spartan  prince    CHAP.  IX. 
anfwered   with  Laconic   brevity  only  'Come  and  take  them.'     But    SECT.  IN. 
among  the  Perfian  generals   there  were  probably  men  of  experience 
and  judgement,  not  incapable  of  informing  their  fovereign  how  ufe- 
lefs  his  numbers  would  be  in  the  pafs  of  Thermopylae.     Numerous 
alio  as  the  Greeks  were  under  his  command,  information  might  eaiily 
come  to  him  of  the  divisions  among  thofe  who  oppofed  him,  and  of 
the    difpolition    of    Ibme    to    retire.       He   might   likevvife    be    in- 
formed that  the  Spartan  king  boafted  his  defcent  from  the  hero  Her- 
cules,  who  is  faid  to  have  ended  his  mortal  life  on  mount  CF.ta,  and 
to  whom,  as  a  god,  an  altar  ftood  dedicated  in  the  valley  of  Amhela  : 
but  of  thefe   things   the  Perfians  would  not  be  likely  to  make  much 
account ;  and  they  could  not  be  informed  of  the   fuperior  talents  of 
Leonidas,   who  had   never  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  making  them 
confpicuous.     The  credit   due  to  Herodotus  we  continue  always  to 
find  very  nearly  proportioned  to  his  probable  means  of  information. 
When   thofe  were    good    he   feldom  or   never   relates    abfurd  tales. 
Where  they  have  been  deficient  he  never  fcruples  to  report  any  rumor. 
Information  of  public   orders   to  the  Periian  army   might  come  to 
him  ;  but  the  actions,  and  ftill  more  the  paflions  of  Xerxes  upon  his 
throne,  which  he  pretends  to  defcribe,  would  not  be  matters  of  com- 
mon notoriety.     Xerxes  we  are  told,  on  the  fifth  day,  commanded  the   Heroclot-1'vll« 
Medes  and  CifTians  of  his  army  alone  to  go  and  bring  all  the  Greeks 
under  Leonidas  alive  into  his  prefence.     The  attack  made  in  confe- 
quence  is  likely  to  have  been   ineffectual   enough   to  di [grace  thofe 
troops  in  fome  degree  in  the  eves  of  their  inexperienced  fovereign.  The   c.  m, 
Perfian  guards,  called  the  immortal  band,  followed   in  the   attack. 
According  to  Herodotus  the  efforts  of  this  band  were  very  fpirited ; 
and  he  accounts  very  honeftly  for  their  want  of  fuccefs.     Their  Abort 
fpears  were  inefficacious,  and  their  numbers  ufelefs  again  ft  the  longer 
weapons  of  the  Greeks,  and  on  ground  fo  "confined.      Their  attacks 
were  however  renewed  and  varied  in  all  the  ways  that  their  leaders 
could  devife.     Numbers  fell,  and  no  impreffion  was  made.     The 

report, 


C.   212. 


334  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  IX.  report,  which  the  hiftorian  adds,  is  likely  enough  to  have  become 
SECT.  [IT.  afterward  popular  in  Greece,  that  the  Perfian  monarch  kaped  thrice 
Hcrodot.l.vii.  from  his  throne  as  he  anxioufly  viewed  the  conflict.  Froir<  the  de- 
fcription  of  the  place,  however,  it  feems  impofiible  that  his  throne 
could  have  been  within  fight,  and  very  little  likely  that  he  fhould 
himfelf  have  feen  the  action.  The  immortal  band,  after  iiaving 
fuffered  feverely,  was  at  length  recalled,  and  the  Perfian  generals  were 
greatly  at  a  lofs.  The  attempt  was  however  renewed  the  next  day, 
in  the  hope  that  wounds  and  the  fatigue  of  inceffant  attacks  might 
weary  the  fmall  numbers  of  the  Greeks,  and  oblige  them  to  quit 
their  advantageous  ground.  But  the  little  army  of  Leonidas  was 
equal  to  its  purpofe;  his  reliefs  were  judicioully  managed,  and  the 
fecond  day's  attack  was  unavailing  like  the  former. 

Among  the  various  advantages  beyond  eftimation,  which  the  Perfian 
monarch  pofleffed  over  the  little  Grecian  confederacy,  may  be  reckon- 
ed the  means  almoft  unbounded  of  rewarding  thole  who  would  ferve 
him.  The  hope  of  profiting  from  thefe  brought  information  of  an- 
other pafs  over  the  mountain  ;  circuitous  indeed  and  difficult,  but 
by  which  the  Theffalians  had  fometimes  entered  Locris  and  Phocis 
for  plunder  after  the  fortifying  of  Thermopylae.  In  more  fettled 
J75«  times    it  had  been  neglected,    but  was  not    unknown    among   the 

neighbouring   inhabitants.       Leonidas   had  appointed    the   Phocians 
8c  217.   under  his  command  to  the  guard  of  it.     The  path  began  at  the  cleft 

c.216.  in  the  mountain  through  which  the  Afopus  has  its  channel.    Hence, 

by  a  winding  courfe,  it  afcended  a  hill,  diftinguiflied  by  the  name  of 
Anopaea  from  the  heights  of  CEta  on  one  fide  and  the  Trachinian 
rocks  on  the  other.  Holding  then  for  fome  fpace  along  the  top  of 
the  ridge,  it  defcended  directly  to  Alpeni,   the  firft  town   of  Locris. 

c<  2IV  The  refolution  was  immediately  taken  among  the  Perfian  generals  to 

make  an  attempt  this  way.  A  ftrong  detachment  marched  about 
duik  under  the  command  of  Hydarnes,  and  arrived  by  daybreak  with- 
out oppolition  near  the  fummit  of  Anopaea.  Here  the  Phocian  guard 
had  its  ftation.     The  oaks  with  which  the  mountain  was  covered  had 

concealed 


C.   21  ^ 


c.  21: 


HISTORY    OF     GREECE.  3»5 

concealed  the  approach  of  the  enemy.     The  Phocians,  whofe  difci-    CHAP- Ix- 
pline  in  general  was  probably  lefs  cultivated  than  that  of  Lacedaemon     SECT.III. 
or  Athens,  had  neglected  the  neceflary  precautions  of  advanced  guards 
and  out -fen  tries.     They  were  firft  alarmed  by  the  noife  of  a  multi- 
tude of  men  treading  among  the  fallen  leaves ;  which,  as  the  weather 
was  perfectly  ferene,  they  heard  at  fome  diftance.     Immediately  they 
ran  to  arms.     But,  with  the  inconfideratenefs  of  men  furprized,  ima- 
gining themfelves  the  ultimate  object  of  the  attack,   inftead  of  taking 
proper  mealures  to  fulfil  the  important  purpofe  of  their  pott  by  pre- 
venting the  paflage  of  the  enemy,  they  retreated  on  one  fide  of  the  path 
to  gain  more  advantageous  ground  for  defence.     The  judicious  Hy- 
darnes,   leaving  them  to  their  defired  fecurity,   continued  his  march, 
and,  quickly  defcending  the  mountain,  reached  the  plain  unmolefted. 

The  Perfian  army  fo  abounded  with  Greeks,  molt  of  them  involun- 
tarily prefied,  that  deferters  would  not  be  wanting  to  inform  Leoni- 
das  of  whatever  could  be  generally  known  in  the  enemy's  camp.   That 
very  night  intelligence  came  that  a  ftrong  detachment  was  marched   Herodot.l.vii. 
for  the  mountains.     Early  in  the  morning  the  fcouts  of  the  army  *    Diod.Sk.l.xi. 
arrived  with  information  that  the  enemy  had  already  pafled  the  Phocian 
guard,  and  were  defcending  toward  the  plain.    Immediately  a  council 
of  the  Grecian  commanders  was  held.     Opinions  were  divided;  fome 
thinking  it  became  them  ftill  to  maintain  their  port;   others  that  the 
confequence  of  the  attempt  could  be  but  a  ufelefs  wafte  of  lives,  which 
ought  by  all  means  to  be  preferved  for  the  future  wants  of  their  coun- 
try.    The  debate  ended  in   a  general  refolution  to  retreat  with   all 
fpeed  to  their  refpeclive  cities,  the  Lacedasmonians  and  Boeotians  only 
remaining.      Herodotus  mentions  it  as  uncertain  whether  Leonidas   Herodot.l.vS. 
difmifled  the  reft.     The  Thefpians  alone  appear  to  have  refolved  vo-   c- 22°- 
luntarily  to  abide   the  event  with  him :   the  Thebans  he  would  not 
fuffer  to  depart;  keeping  them  as  hoftages  on  account  of  the  known 
difaffe&ion  of  their  city  to  the  Grecian  caufe.     Leonidas  himfelf  de- 
termined upon  this  great  occafion  to  exhibit  to  the  world  a  merao- 

*    Ot  »IjXfgocrK«irci  x«t«^«(*ovt£?  a7To  ton  ux£vt,     Herodot.   1.  vii.   c,  219, 

D  d  d  rable 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

rable  example  of  obedience  to  that  law  of  Sparta,  which  forbad,  under 
whatfoever  difadvantage,  to  fly  from  an  enemy.     Considering  the  dif- 
pofition  which  fo  widely  prevailed  among  the  Greeks  to  fear  the  Per- 
sian power,  and  fhrink  before  it,   there  appears  not  lefs  true  patriotic 
wifdom  than  wonderful  magnanimity  in  that  prince's  conduct.     The 
oracular  refponfe  from  Delphi,  whether  real  or  feigned  after  the  event, 
which  is  faid  to  have  declared  that  either  Sparta  or  its  king  muft  fall, 
adds  nothing  to  its  luflre.     Upon  fair  hiftorical  teftimony  it  has  been 
fully  equal  to  the  warm  and  abundant  eulogies  which  writers  of  va- 
rious ages  and  nations  have  vied  in  beStowing  upon  it.     Animated  by 
his  example  every  Lacedaemonian  and  Thefpian  under  his  command 
was  refolved  to  die,  but  to  die  glorioufly  for  himfelf,  and  as  far  as 
poffible  ufefully  for  his  country.     To  be  furrounded   being  now  un- 
avoidable, the  object  was  no  longer  to  guard  the  pafs,  but  to  chufe  the 
fpot  where,  in  Sacrificing  themfelves,  they  might  make  the  greatefl 
destruction  of  the  enemy.     The  narrow  therefore,  at  the  junction  of 
Herodot.Uii.   the  Phcenix  and  Afopus,  was  given  up,  and  the  little  band  was  col- 
li. 223,  &  fcq.   lefted  at  the  wall  of  Thermopylae.   About  the  middle  of  the  forenoon  *, 
when  it  was  fuppofed  Hydarnes  might  be  nearly  arrived  in  the  rear  of 
the  Greeks,  achofen  body  from  the  Perfian  army  advanced  to  the  affault 
in  front.     Leonidas  now  gave  a  loofe  to  the  fury  of  men  prepared  for 
death.   Advancing  before  the  wall  he  attacked  the  Perfian s  in  the  wider 
part  of  the  valley,   made  great  flaughter,  and   cauled  fuch   confulion 
that,  through  want  of  room  for  the  ill-difciplined  multitude,  numbers 
were  forced  into  the  fea,  and  many  expired  under  the  preilure  of  their 
own  people.     Himfelf,  fighting  at  the  head  of  his  band,  fell  early. 
The  ingagement  was  neverthelefs  continued,   with  advantage  on  the 
fide  of  the  Greeks,   till  Hydarnes  came  in  fight  in  their  rear.      Then 
they  retreated  again  to  the  narrow  at  the  wall.     The  Thebans  took 
this  opportunity  to  beg  mercy  of  the  conquerors ;  but,  in  the  very  act 
of  Surrendering,  many  through  the  confufion  were  killed  :  the  reft  were 
made  prifoners.    The  furviving  Lacedaemonians  and  Thefpians  gained 
a  hillock,  where  they  fought  furrounded  till  they  were  Slain  to  a  man. 

■  *  xi°n'  S  aV°f?5  KW  ^«Air«  vrtoQufw,    Herodot.  1.  vii.  c.  225, 

Such 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  .        387 

Such  is  the  account  given  by  Herodotus  of  this  extraordinary  and    CHAP.  IX. 
celebrated  action.     The  circumftances   might  come  authenticated  to    SECTWII, 
him  through  the  Greeks  who  ferved   with   the  Perfians ;  and  every 
anecdote  that  could  be  collected  would   no  doubt  be  heard  with  ea- 
gernefs  and  preferved  with  care*.      The  names  of  all  the  three  hun- 
dred Spartans  were  flill  upon  record  in  the  hiflorian's  time.     Two  of 
them  furvived  the  battle,  having  been  accidently  abfent ;   Ariflode- 
mus,  who  was,  with  the  prince's  leaye,  for  the  recovery  of  his  health 
atAlpeni;  and  Pantites,  fent  on  public   bufinefs  into  Theflaly.     It 
being  however  reported  at  Lacedsemon   that  Eurytus,  who  had  alfo 
had  leave  from  Leonidas  to  remain  at  Alpeni  on  account  of  iicknefs, 
neverthelefs  joined  on  the  day  of  battle  and  fell  with  his  comrades ; 
and  that  Pantites  might  have  fo  battened  his  return  as  to  have  fnared 
in  the  glory  of  the  day,  both  were  dishonored.     Pantites  in  confe- 
quence  flrangled  himfelf :   but  Ariftodemus,   with   greater  fortitude, 
fupported  life ;  and  was  happy  enough  in  the  fequel  to  find  an  op- 
portunity for  diftinguifhing  his  courage  in  the  caufe  of  his  country, 
fo  as  completely  to  retrieve  his  reputation.     According  to  the  fame 
writer  the  body  of  the  Spartan  king,  being  difcovered  among  the 
heaps  of  flain,  was,  by  order  of  Xerxes,  beheaded,  and  the  trunk  ig- 
nominioufly  expofed  on  a  crofs.     But,  the  hiftorian  adds,  this  was 
contrary  to  the  general  principles  and  pradlice  of  the  Perfians,  who 
were  accuftomed,  beyond  all  other  people,  to  honor  military  merit 
even  in  their  enemies.     This  honefl:  obfervation,  to  the  credit  of  the 
enemies,  and  in  oppofition  to  the  prejudices  of  his  country,  proves 
not  lefs  the  extenfive  information  and  juif,  judgement  than  the  can- 
dor of  Herodotus  ;  for  every  authentic  account  marks  the  Perfians 
for  a  people  of  liberal  fentiments  and  polifhed  manners  beyond  almofi: 
any  other  in  all  antiquity. 

*  Some  feem  to  have  been  invented  after  the  tent,  is  little  confident  with  the  other  circum- 

age  of  Herodotus.      The  report  of  Diodorus,  ftances,  whether  of  place  or  time.    Indeed  mod 

followed  by  Plutarch,   Juftin  and  others,   that  of  the  tales,  the  omiffion  of  which  by  Herodo- 

Leonidas  with  his  Spartans  attacked  the  Perfian  tus  has  fo  much  excited  the  indignation  of  Plu- 

camp   by  night  and  penetrated  to  the  royal  tarch,  appear  fitter  for  poetry  than  hiflory. 

Dddz  SECTION 


1.  viii.c.  I. 


388  HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 

SECTION     IV. 

Numbers  tf  the  Grecian  Fleet.  Sea-fights  off  Artemifium.  Retreat 
of  the  Grecian  Fleet.  March  of  the  P  erf  an  Army  toward  Athens. 
Attempt  againfi  Delphi. 

CHAP. ix.  DURING  this  memorable  fcene  at  Thermopylae,  the  fleets  in 
SECT.  IV.  the  neighbouring  channel  had  not  been  inactive.  The  Perfians 
*— ~*  '  wanted  to  force  the  pafcge  between  Eubcea  and  the  main  ;  for  the 
double  purpofe  of  attending  more  clofely  the  motions  of  their  army, 
and  avoiding  the  dangers  of  the  more  open  fea.  The  buiinefs  therefore 
of  the  Grecian  fleet  was,  as  Herodotus  has  obferved,  like  that  of  the 
army,  to  defend  the  ftraits.  It  confifted  of  two  hundred  and  feventy- 
Herodot.  one  trireme  galleys,  with  a  few  of  thofe  fmaller  veffels  called  pente- 

conters.  The  penteconter,  the  veflel  of  Homer's  age,  had,  like  the 
modern  rowboat,  only  one  tier  of  oars,  and  its  complement  of  rowers 
was  from  fifty  to  fixty.  The  trireme,  it  is  generally  fuppofed,  had 
three  tier  of  oars  j  by  which  it  gained  that  fwiftnefs  fo  important 
in  the  ancient  mode  of  naval  action.  Its  ordinary  complement  of 
rowers  feems  to  have  been  about  a  hundred  and  fixty  ;  befide  whom 
it  commonly  carried  forty  foldiers,  and  fometimes  more ,-  but,  on 
emergencies,  particularly  when  boarded,  the  whole  crew  acted  with 
arms  *.     Of  the  triremes  now  in  the  Grecian  fleet,  no  lefs  than  one 

*  In  the  Athenian  fleet  at  the  battle  of  Sa-  fatisfactory  conjectures  upon  the  fubjeit  are 
lamis  there  were,  according  to  Plutarch  in  his  thofe  of  General  Melvill,  of  which  an  account 
Life  of  Themiftocles,  only  eighteen  foldiers  in  is  given  in  the  Appendix  toGovernor  Pownall'i 
each  trireme  ;  of  whom  four  were  bowmen,  the  Treatife  on  the  Study  of  Antiquities.  Along 
reft  regular  heavy  -  armed  infantry.  But  it  the  waift  of  the  galley,  according  to  the  gene- 
appears  clearly  from  Herodotus  that  a  greater  ral's  fuppofition,  from  a  little  above  the  water's 
complement  was  common.  Every  Chian  tri-  edge,  a  gallery  projected  at  an  angle  of  about 
reme  at  the  battle  oft"  Miletus  had  forty  :  and  forty-five  degrees.  In  this  the  upper  rowers 
every  trireme  of  the  Perlian  fleet  under  Xerxes  were  difpofed-,  checkered  with  the  lower, 
had  thirty  Perfians  or  Medes  over  and  above  Space  for  them  being  thus  gained,  partly  by 
the  ordinary  complement  of  foldiers  of  the  elevation,  partly  by  lateral  projection,  thofe 
country  to  which  the  trireme  belonged.  See  of  the  highelt  tier  were  not  too  much  above 
Herodot.  b.  vi.  c.  15,  b.  vii.  c.  184,  and  the  water  to  work  their  oars  with  effect.  The 
b.  viii.  c.  130.  general  has  been  confirmed  in  his  opinion  that 
The  arrangement  of  the  rowers  in  the  anci-  this  was  the  real  form  of  the  ancient  galleys  of 
ent  galleys  of  war,  the  triremes  and  quinque-  war  by  reprefentations  of  them,  tho  imperfect, 
remes,  much  difpnted  among  the  modern.'-,  in  ancient  paintings  and  reliefs  which  he  has 
remains    yet  uncertain;    but  by  far  the  meft  feen  in  Italy. 

hundred 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  389 

hundred  and  twenty-feven  were  furniihed  by  Athens,  a  very  few  years  CHAP.ix. 
before  unable  to  cope  at  fea  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  ./Eginetan  SECT.  iv. 
rock;  and  more  were  Hill  preparing  in  the  Athenian  ports.  Forty 
were  lent  by  Corinth;  twenty  by  Megara :  the  Chalcidians  of  Eu- 
bcea  manned  twenty  lent  to  them  by  the  Athenians  :  iEgina  fent 
eighteen;  Sicyon  twelve  ;  Lacedremon  only  ten  ;  Epidaurus  eight; 
Eretria  feven  ;  Trcezene  five;  and  the  iflands  of  Styros  and  Ceos  each 
two.  The  Platasans,  wholly  unacquainted  with  naval  bufinefs  but 
zealoufly  attached  to  Athens,  ferved  as  marine  foldiers  in  the  Athe- 
nian fleet.  To  thefe  triremes  the  Opuniian  Locrians  added  five  pen- 
teconters,   and  the  Ceians  two. 

In   an  armament   to  which   they  contributed  fo  much  the  largeil 
proportion,  the  Athenians  might  feem  juflly  to  claim  the  chief  com- 
mand :  yet,  fuch  was  the  reputation  and  influence  which  Lacedsemon   Herodot. 
held  among  the  Greeks,  the  allies  abfolutely  refufed  to  ferve  under  f™ 
any  but  a  Spartan  commander.     Eurybiades  was  therefore  admiral  of 
the  fleet.      Hiftorians  have  upon  this   occafion  juftly  applauded  the 
moderation  of  the  Athenian  leaders,  who  patiently  acquiefced  under 
this  decifion  ;    and,  fuperior  to  little  punctilio,  continued  with  una- 
bated zeal  to  profecute  the  great  purpofes  of  the  common  caufe.  But 
the  Athenian  counfels  were  at  this  time  directed  by  a  man  who  could 
conceal  unbounded  defire  of  glory  under  the  appearance  of  modefiy; 
who,  with  a  temper  as  pliable  as  his  genius  was  penetrating,  weigh- 
ing the  neceflities  of  the   times,  and  forefeein'g   the  opportunities  of 
ambition,  could  not  only  accommodate   himfelf  to  all  feafons  and 
circumftances,   but  had  fkill  to  lead  the  froward  populace  of  Athens 
to  fubmit  their  pailions  to  his  opinion.      Herodotus  relates  an  anec- 
dote  of  him,    too   remarkable,    whencefoever  the   information   was 
derived,  and  too  charadleriftical  to  be  omitted  *.     The  Perfian  fleet, 
being  collected  after  their  late  misfortunes,  appeared  in  the  road  of 
Aphetae,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Pelafgian  gulph,  and  oppofite  to  Arte- 
mifium  at  the  diftance  of  not  more  than  ten  miles,   in  far  greater 

*  See  Note  45,  p.  621,  of  Weffeling's  Pie-     at  this  tale,  yet  in  his  Life  of  Thcmiftocles  he 
rodotus.     Plutarch,  thoin  hisTreatife  againft     has  related  very  nearly  the  fame. 
Herodotus  he  has  expreiled  great  indignation 

numbersr 


390  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  IX.    numbers  than  the  Greeks  had  expected.     The  whole  neighbouring 
sect.  IV.    country  was  at  the  fame  time  filled  with  the  immenfe  multitude  of 
their  military  hoft.      Alarm   fpred   on  all   fides,    and   the  contagion 
reached  the  commanders  of  the  Grecian  fquadrons.      It  was  propofed 
to  retreat  to  the  interior  feas  of  Greece  f .     The  Euba^ans  who  had 
ingaged  in  the  confederacy,  being  informed  of  this,  were  in  the  high- 
eft   confternation.     They   fent   immediately   to  Eurybiades,  begging 
that    the    fleet   might   remain    for   their    protection    only    till    they 
could    remove   their  families    and   moil:   valuable  effects.     The  ad- 
miral refufed.      The  Eubceans   then  applied  to  the  Athenian   com- 
mander.    Themiftocles,  whofe  opinion  was   before  decided   ar*ainft 
the   retreat,     told   them    that,    tho   words   could   not   perfuade,  gold 
might ;  and  for   thirty  talents,  about   fix  thoufand  pounds  fterling, 
he  would  ingage  that  the  fleet  lhould  remain  and  fight  the  Perfians. 
The  money  was  prefently  paid  into  his  hands.     Five  talents   then 
brought  over  the  commander  in  chief;    and  under  his  orders  all  the 
commanders  of  fquadrons  readily  confented  to  remain,  except  Adei- 
mantus  the  Corinthian.     '  To  him  then,'  fays  Herodotus,  *  The- 
*  miftocles  fwore,  faying,  "  Neither  fhalt  thou  leave  usj  for  I  will 
*'  give  thee  more  than  the  Perfian  king  would  fend  thee  for  deferting 
**  thy  allies "   and  immediately  ordered  three  talents  to  be  conveyed 
to  his  (hip.     Fear  of  the  accufation,  or  gratification  with  the  prefent 
prevailed  ;   and  thus  were  the  principal  Grecian  commanders  bribed 
to  the  opinion  of  Themiftocles,  and  to  the  protection  of  the  Eu- 
beeans ;  and  the  fleet,  probably  to  the  great  advantage  of  the  com- 
mon caufe,  remained  in  its  ftation. 
Herod.  1.  viii.       Next  morning  at  daybreak  the   Perfian  admirals  moved.     They 
had  propofed  immediately  to  attack  the  Grecian  fleet ;  but  after  ap- 
proaching   enough   to  obferve  how  inferior  it  was    to   their  own, 
they   concluded    that,    if  they   fhould   advance,    the  Greeks  would 
certainly  retreat,  and,  through  their  knowlege   of  the  narrow  feas 
behind  them,  would  probably  efcape.     On  confultation  it  was  there- 

*  'Es-u  U  Tin   'eMb&*.     Hcrodot.  1.  viii.  c.  4. 

fore 


HISTORYOFGREECF.  39i 

fore  determined  to  fend  two  hundred  galleys  round  Eubcea  to  take  a    CHAP.  IX. 
itation  in  the  rear  of  the  Greeks ;    the  main   body  abftainine  from     sect.  iv. 
attack  till  it  fhould  be  known  by  fignals  that  the  fquadron  fo  detached 
was  arrived  at  the  ftation  propofed. 

During  thefe  tranfactions  Scyllias,  a  Greek  of  Scione,  a  remark-  r^ei-od.:.  viii 
able  diver,  who,  from  having  been  ufeful  to  the  Perfian  commanders  c>  8>  &  fc1- 
in  recovering  many  things  of  value  from  the  wreck  of  their  loft  (hips, 
had  been  introduced  to  means  of  information,  deferted  to  the  Greeks. 
He  brought  a  more  exact  account  of  the  prefent  flrength  of  the 
enemy's  fleet  than  the  Grecian  commanders  had  yet  obtained,  and  he 
informed  them  of  the  fquadron  fent  round  Eubcea.  Immediately  a 
council  of  war  was  held  ;  and,  after  much  debate,  it  was  determined 
that  the  whole  fleet  mould  weigh  at  midnight,  and  go  againft  the 
detached  fquadron  ;  in  the  juffc  hope  that,  taken  feparately,  it  might 
eafily  be  overpowered.  In  the  evening  however,  having  received  no 
farther  intelligence  of  it,  (for,  to  avoid  obfervation,  it  had  been  direct- 
ed to  keep  a  considerable  diflance  from  the  Eubcuan  coaft)  the  Gre- 
cian commanders  determined  to  try  an  attack  upon  the  main  body  of 
the  Perfian  fleet ;  or  rather  perhaps  upon  fome  part  of  it,  when  day- 
light would  not  fuflice  for  bringing  the  whole  into  action,  and  when, 
fhould  they  neverthelefs  be  overpowered,  night  would  favor  their 
retreat.  They  founded  hopes  alfo  on  a  friendly  diipofition  in 
the  Ionian  commanders  ;  of  whom  fome  were  indeed  well  inclined 
to  them,  while  others  were  no  leis  earned  to  gain  the  Perfian  mo- 
narch's favor,  and  earn  the  rewards  promifed  for  zeal  mown  in  his 
fervice.  A  fharp  ingagement  infued.  If  we  may  believe  Herodotus, 
the  Greeks  took  thirty  galleys  ;  tho  he  fays  afterward  that  neither 
fide  could  claim  a  victory.  Among  the  prifoners  however  made  by 
the  Greeks,  was  Philaon,  brother  of  Gorgus  king  of  Salamis  in  Cy- 
prus, a  man  of  great  eftimation  among  the  enemy's  officers.  Lyco- 
medes,  an  Athenian  captain,  obtained  the  reward  of  valor  for  being 
the  firft  who  took  a  Perfian  galley.  Antidorus  ofLemnos  was  the 
only  Grecian  captain  in  the  Perfian  fervice  who  deferted  with  his  fhip 

tO: 


392  H  I  S  T  O  R  Y     O  F    G  R  E  E  C  E. 

CHAP.IX.    to  the  confederate   Greeks.      The  Athenian  government  afterward 
SECTVTV .    awarded  him  with  a  grant  of  lands  in  the  iiland  of  Salamis.     In  the 

night  the  Greeks  renamed  their  llation  at  Artemifium  -,  the  Perfians 

remained  at  Aphete. 

Heiodot.  The  Grecian  fleet  had  fcarcely  caft  anchor  when  a  florm  arofe,  at- 

tended with  heavy  rain  and  violent  thunder.  The  drift  of  the  florin 
carried  the  wreck  of  the  late  ingagement  and  the  floating  bodies 
among  the  Perfian  mips.  Their  cables  were  in tangled,  their  oars 
impeded.  Repeated  flalhes  of  lightning,  amid  extreme  darknefs, 
ferved  only  to  difcover  the  horrors  of  the  fcene,  while  the  uncom- 
mon refonance  of  the  thunder  among  the  neighboring  fummits  of 
Pelion  flruck  the  feamen  with  the  imagination  that  the  gods  them- 
felves  were  thus  loudly  declaring  their  anger:  a  fancy  likely  enough 
to  arife  in  the  minds  at  lea  ft  of  the  Grecian  feamen  in  the  Perfian 
fleet ;  who,  according  to  the  belief  of  their  age,  were  making  war 
againft  the  gods  of  their  mother-country.  The  detached  fquadron, 
meanwhile,  in  the  open  fea,  as  it  was  there  called  where  none  was 
truly  open  fea,  driving  before  the  florm,  and  ignorant  of  their  courfe, 

LyiiLc.i3,&   ^  among  the  rocks  of  that  peculiarly  dangerous  bay  of  the  Eubaean 

h  xi!'^.  coaft  calIed  the  Cae,a  *•  A11  perifhed  :  <  and  thus,"  fays  Herodotus, 
«  the  deity  interfered  to  reduce  the  Perfian  force  more  nearly  to  an 
*  equality  with  the  Grecian.' 

Heiodot.  All  the  next  day  the  Perfians   remained  in  their  flation  :  while  a 

l.vni.c.  14&         .     - 

feq.  reinforcement  of  fifty-three  Athenian  galleys  joined  the  Grecian  fleet, 

bringing  with  them  the  welcome  news  of  the  deftruclion  of  the  ene- 
my's fquadron  on  the  Euboic  rocks.  Thus  incouraged  the  Grecian 
commanders  were  the  more  intent  upon  watching  opportunities  for 
farther  advantages.  Means  were  obferved  for  cutting  off  the  Cilician 
fquadron.     The  attempt  was  made  in  the  evening,  and  fucceeded ; 

*  Sinus  Euboicus,  quern  Ccela  vocant,   fufpeftus  nautis.      Liv.  Hift.  Rom.  J.  xxxi.  c.  41. 
See  Now  78,  p.  625.  of  Weffeling's  Herodotus. 

and 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  593 

and   in  the  night  the  fleet  again  refumed  its  ftation  at  Artemifium.    CHAP.  ix. 
The  Perfian  commanders,  irritated  by  repeated  infults  from  an  enemy    SC^3-J-«* 
fo  inferior,  and  apprehenfive  of  blame  for  remifTnefs,   determined  on 
the  following   day  to  attack  the  Grecian  fleet  with  their  whole  re- 
maining force.     About  noon  they  advanced,  formed  in  a  femicircle, 
with  a  view  to  furround  the  enemy.     The  Greeks  waited  in  their 
ftation,  probably  an  advantageous  one.     The  plan  of  attack  of  the 
Perfians,  if  well  conceived,  appears  to  have  been  ill  executed.     Such 
a  multitude  of  veffels  indeed,  manned  with  people  of  different  nations 
and    languages,    who  varied    both    in   method    and    in    degrees    of 
lk.il],   muft  be  extremely  liable  to  diforder,  and  little  fit   to  under- 
take nice  and  complicated  evolutions.     In  approaching  the  enemy 
they  croiled  and  fell  againft  one  another.     The  battle  was  neverthe- 
lefs  warmly  maintained.     The  Egyptians  diftinguifhed   themfelves, 
and  took  five  Grecian  galleys.     More   than   half  the  Attic  fqua- 
dron  was  difabled.  Cleinias  the  Athenian,  however,  obtained  the  re- 
ward of  valor  for  his  behaviour  in  a  galley  built  and  manned  with 
two  hundred  men  at  his  private  expence.    Herodotus  affirms  that  the 
Greeks  remained  mafters  of  the  wreck  and  of  the  dead :    but  thefe 
feem  to  have  been  their  only  tokens  of  victory.     The  hiitorian  ac- 
knowleges   that  they  fuffered  greatly ;    and  indeed  proceeds  to  give 
the  ftrongeft  proof  of  it  by  relating  that,  in  a  council  of  war  held 
immediately  after  the  ingagement,  it  was  refolved  to  retreat  to  the 
interior  feas  of  Greece.     This  refolution  was  farther  confirmed,   and   Herod,  l.v'nl. 
the  meafure  haftened,  by  the  arrival  of  Abronychus,  an  Athenian, 
who  had  been  ftationed  with  a  light  vefTel  at  Thermopylae  for  the 
purpofe  of  communicating  intelligence,  and  who  now  brought  in- 
formation of  the  circumvention  of  Leonidas  and   his  party,  and  the 
retreat  of  the  reft  of  the  army.     It  was  then  refolved  not  to  delay  for 
a  moment  the  retreat  of  the  fleet.     The  whole  moved  in  the  ac- 
cidental order  of  the  inftant  :  the  Corinthians  led,  the  Athenians 
formed  the  rear. 

E  e  e  But 


C   21. 


394  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  IX.  But  Themiftocles,  ever  fertile  in  expedients,  conceived  the  idea  of 
!,I^^r'  making  even  the  flight  of  his  fellowcountrymen  ufeful  to  his  country. 
Herod,  l.  viii.   With  feme  of  the  fwifteft  galleys   of  the  fquadron  under  his  com- 

C.   19,  &22.  O  J  1 

mand,  he  went  to  the  watering-places  of  the  road  of  Artemiiium, 
which  he  concluded  the  enemy  would  fcarcely  fail  to  vifit  next  day, 
and  there  on  the  rocks  he  wrote  thus :  '  Men  of  Ionia,  you  do  ill  in 
4  making  war  upon  your  fathers,  and  contributing  your  endeavours 
'  to  inflave  Greece.  Come  therefore  over  to  us ;  or,  if  that  cannot 
'  be,   remain  neuter,   and  perfuade  the  Carians  to  the  fame  meafure. 

*  But  if  the  neceflity  which  compels  you  to  the  part  you  are  ingaged 
c  in,  is  fuch  as  to  make  a  feceffion  impracticable,  yet,  when  we  come 
'  to  adlion,  avoid  exertion  againft  us ;  remembering  that  you  are  de- 

*  fcended  from  one  blood  with  us,  and  that  the  enmity  of  the  Per- 
'  fians  was  firft  drawn  upon  us  in  your  caufe.'  I  imagine,  continues 
the  hiftorian,  that  Themiftocles  had  two  views  in  this.  If  the  in - 
fcriptions  fhould  be  obferved  only  by  the  Greeks  of  the  Perfian  fleet, 
he  hoped  that  fome  might  be  perfuaded  by  them  :  but  if  the  mat- 
ter mould  be  reported  to  the  Perfian  chiefs,  the  Ionians  would  become 
fufpected,  and  perhaps  might  be  excluded  from  the  line  of  battle  in 
future  ingagements. 

c  23.  The  road  of  Artemifium   was   no  fooner  clear  than  a  Greek  of 

the  neighbouring  town  of  Hiftiaa  battened  in  a  light  boat  to  the 
Perfian  fleet  to  obtain  the  reward  for  fuch  intelligence.  Some  fwift 
veilels  were  immediately  difpatched  to  afcertain  the  truth  of  the  re- 
port, and  at  funrife  the  whole  fleet  weighed  and  proceeded  to  Arte- 
mifium. The  fame  day  the  Perfians  took  polleflion  of  the  town  of 
Hifliaea;  and  the  neighbouring  diftricT:  of  the  ifland  haftened  to  make 
fubmifllon. 

About  the  fame  time  the  army  recommenced  its  march  from  Ther- 
<:.  26.      rnopyije.     Some  Arcadians,  poor  and  without  profpecf  at  home,  had 
been   tempted  by  the  fame  of  the  great  king's  riches  and  liberality 
to  wander  thus  far  to  offer  their  fervices  to  him.    Herodotus  feems  to 
relate  their  flory  not  more  for  the  purpofe  of  eulogy  than  of  admo- 
nition 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  395 

nition  to  his  country.  They  were  introduced,  he  fays,  to  the  pre-  CHAP.  IX. 
fence  of  Xerxes,  and  being  afkcd  •  what  was  doing  in  Greece  ?'  they  SECT.  IV. 
anf-ercd  with  great  fimplicity,  '  That  it  was  the  feafon  of  the  Olym- 
'  pian  games,  and  that  coniequently  the  Greeks  were  amufing  them- 
.'  felves  with  feeing-  athletic  exercifes  and  horfe-races.'  Bein£  a<rain 
afked,  '  What  was  the  reward  of  the  conquerors  in  thofe  games  ?' 
they  anfwered,  '  an  olive  garland.'  Upon  which  Tritantsechmes, 
a  prince  of  the  blood-royal  of  Perfia,  exclaimed,  c  Oh  Mardonius, 
'  what  a  people  have  you  brought  us  to  fight  againft;  who  contend 
'  among  themfelves  not  for  riches  but  for  virtue !' 

But  whatever  might  be  the  general  fimplicity  or  the  general  virtue  Thucyd.Uii. 
of  the  Greeks  of  this  age,  their  patriotifm  at  leaft  was  of  very  vari-   p'iato.Menex. 
ous  complexions  in  the  different  ftates,  and  in  the  different  fa&ions   j[-0^a't'  ''p"- 
of  the  fame  ftate.     Of  the  provinces  from  mount  CEta  to  the  ifthmus,  negyr.  &Pa- 

nathen. 

Phocis  almoft  alone  was  faithful  to  the  confederate  caufe,  the  caufe  Plutarch. 
of  Grecian  independency.     From  the   moment  when   the  Perfians 
became  mafters   of  Thermopylae   Locris  could  not  avoid  fubmiffion. 
Doris,  and  all  Boeotia,  except  the  little  cities  of  Thefpia?  and  Plataea, 
had  always  been  adverfe  to  the  confederacy,  and  with  ready  zeal  feized 
the  firft  opportunity  to  acknowlege  themfelves  fubjects  of  the  Perfian 
monarch.     Flerodotus,  with  great  appearance  of  reafon,  attributes  the  Herod.  1.VHL 
firmnefs  even  of  the  Phocians  more  to  their  extreme  animolity  againft  c-  3°- 
the  Theflalians,  their  hereditary  enemies,  and  to  the  partial  coniide- 
ration  of  the  peculiar  intereft  of  their  province,  than  to  any  generous 
regard  for  common  welfare,  or  any  inlarged  view  of  Grecian  inde- 
pendency.   If  the  Theffalians,  he  fays,  had  held  with  the  Greeks,  the      c.  31. 
fame  animofity  would  have  led  the  Phocians  to  join  the  enemy. 

The  Perfians  proceeded  from  Thermopylae  with  the  Theffalians  for 
their  guides.     Turning  immediately  to  the  right  along  the  root  of 
CEta,  they  then   directed  their  march   through  the  narrow  vales  of 
Doris  toward  the  river  Cephiffus.     The  Dorian  territory  was  fpared, 
for  the  Dorians  were  zealous  in  the  Perfian  caufe ;  but  as  foon  as  the  Diod.'siV.i.xi, 
army  entered  Phocis,  at  the  inftigation  of  the  Theffalians  rather  than  °'  '4- 

E  e  e  2  from 


396  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  IX.  from  the  difpofition  of  the  Perfians,  destruction  was  begun  with  fire 
SECT\iv.  an(j  fworc]#  ^e  m>m  body  of  the  army  followed  the  courfe  of  the 
CephifTus.  Detachments  burnt  the  towns  of  Drymus,  Charadra, 
Erochus,  Tethronium,  Amphicasa,  Neon,  Pedies,  Tritecc,  Elatein, 
Hyampolis,  Parapotamii,  Aba?,  with  their  temples.  The  people 
fled  ;  many  to  the  faftnefles  of  mount  ParnafTus ;  fome  to  Amphifla. 
and  other  towns  of  the  Ozolian  Locrians;  which,  lying  beyond  the 
ridges  of  ParnafTus  and  Helicon,  were  in  lefs  immediate  danger.  A 
few  were  taken  and  reduced  to  flavery.  From  Panopea?  a  detach- 
ment was  fent  to  feize  the  treafures  of  Delphi;  about  which  fo  much 
Herod.  1.  viii.  had  been  faid  by  the  Greeks  under  Xerxes,  that  Herodotus  fuppofes 
the  Perfian  monarch  to  have  had  more  perfect  knowlege  of  them  than 
of  what  he  had  left  in  his  own  palace  at  Sufa.  The  main  body  con- 
tinued their  march  through  the  friendly  province  of  Bceotia  toward 
Athens. 

The  defence  of  Delphi,  itfelf  a  curious  object,  is  not  the  lefs  fo 
for  the  veil  with  which  interefted  ingenuity  has  induftrioufly  covered 
it,  and  which  fuperftitious  ignorance  would  rather  double  than 
withdraw.  The  account  tranfmitted  by  Herodotus,  apparently 
current  with  the  credulity  of  his  age,  may  therefore  be  neither  un- 
l.  viii.  c.  36  amufing  nor  totally  uninforming.  As  foon  as  news  arrived  that  the 
Diod.sic.l.xi.  Perfians  were  in  pofleflion  of  Thermopylae,  the  Delphian  citizens, 
anxious  for  themfelves,  anxious  for  their  temple,  anxious  for  its 
riches  of  which  they  were  guardians,  confulted  their  own  oracle. 
They  requefted  directions  particularly  concerning  the  facred  treafures ; 
whether  they  mould  bury  them  ;  or  whether  they  fhould  carry  them 
to  fome  other  country.  The  god,  fays  the  hiftorian,  would  fufFer 
nothing  to  be  moved.  He  declared  that  he  would  himfelf  take 
charge  of  what  belonged  to  him.  The  Delphians  were  thus  relieved 
at  leaff.  from  their  refponfibility  to  the  Greek  nation.  Their  cares 
were  therefore  now  confined  to  themfelves  and  their  families.  Their 
wives  and  children  were  fent  acrofs  the  Corinthian  gulph  into  Achaia. 
The  men,  except  a  few  who  withdrew  to  Amphifla  in  Locris,  occu- 
pied 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  397 

pied  the  neighbouring  faftneffes  among  the  crags  of  Parnaffus.     The    CHAP.  IX. 
Corycian  cavern,  a  large  natural  vault  in  the  fide  of  the  mountain    S^T;  1VJ 
near  the  city,  received  many.     All  quitted  Delphi  except  fixty  men 
and  the  prophet.     The  Perfian  detachment  meanwhile  approached 
by  the  way  of  Panope,  Daulis,  Lilasa,  Phocian  towns,    which  they 
burnt.     As   they  drew  near  Delphi  and  were  now   in   fight  of  the 
temple,  the  prophet,   whofe  name  was  Aceratus,  faw  the  facred  ar- 
mour, which  it   is   unlawful  for  any  mortal  to  touch,  brought  by 
fome  invifible  power  from  the  recefs  of  the  fane  and  laid  before  the 
building.   But  no  fooner  was  the  advanced  guard  arrived  at  the  chapel 
of  Minerva,   which  is  an  outbuilding  in  front  of  the  great  temple, 
than  thunder  from  heaven  fell  upon  them;  two  vaft  fragments  from 
the   mountain  rolled  down  with  prodigious  noife,  and  killed  many  : 
a  voice  of  warlike  acclamation  iffued  from  within  the  walls.    Difmay 
feized  the  Perfian  troops.     The  Delphians  then,  rufhing  from  the 
cavern,  and  defcending  from  the  fummits,  attacked  them  and  made 
great  flaughter.     The  furvivors  fled  precipitately  into  Bceotia, 

From  this  ftory  it  is  not  difficult  to  detach   the  preternatural  ma- 
chinery,   and    we   find   an  account    remaining    neither    improbable 
nor  very  defective.     The  priefts,   unwilling  to  truft  the  treafures  to 
others,  and  anxious  for  the  credit  of  their  oracle,  which  could  fcarcely 
but  fuffer  fhould  the  place  fall  into  the  hands  of  foreign  plunderers, 
determined  upon  a  bold   meafure,   which  they  executed  with  equal 
courage  and  prudence.     A  clear  and  firm  refponfe  from  the  oracle 
firft  infpired  the  citizens  with  confidence.    Then  the  beft  refuge  that 
Greece  afforded  was  provided  for  their  families.     The  ableft  and  moft 
trufty  men  were  referved  for  the  defence  of  the  place.     If  the  mode 
of  defence  was  uncommon,  it  appears  however  to  have  been  perfectly 
adapted  to  the  fituation  and  circumftances,  which  were  alio  very  un-   Strabo,  1.  is. 
common.     Surrounded  and  almoft  overhung  by  very  lofty  mountain-    Paufan.  l.  x. 
fummits,  the  lite  itfelf  of  the  city  was  compofed  of  crags  and  preci-   ju{Hn.  Lxxiv. 
pices.     No  way  led  to  it  but  through   mountain-defiles  narrow  and  c'^.     ,  . 
deep ;  fhadowed  with  wood,   and  commanded  at  every  ftep  by  faft-   Chandler, 

r  c.  6j. 

neffes 


398  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  IX.  nefles  above;  and  the  approach  from  Bceotia  was  of  considerable 
SECT.  iv.  iength  through  fuch  defiles.  Every  meafure  feems  to  have  been  taken 
to  make  the  enemy  believe  that  the  place  was  totally  abandoned,  and 
to  induce  them  to  advance  in  all  the  careleffnefs  of  perfect  fecurity. 
The  furprize  appears  in  confequence  to  have  been  complete.  A 
thunderftorm  at  midfummer  among  the  mountains  was  likely  to  be 
an  accidental  affiftant.  The  rolling  down  of  the  rocky  fragments 
might  appear  miraculous  to  thofe  who  did  not  know  that  numbers 
of  men,  concealed  among  the  crags,  were  prepared  to  give  them  mo- 
tion. Pofiibly  artificial  fires  and  explolions  might  imitate  a  thunder- 
ftorm and  increafe  the  horror  *,  The  Delphians  then  attacked  with 
every  advantage.  The  fmall  remainder  of  the  Perfian  detachment 
who  reached  the  plains  of  Boeotia,  readily  adopted  the  reports  of  fu- 
perftition  to  excufe  their  furprize  and  flight.  Two  perfons,  they 
faid,  fuperior  in  their  appearance  to  anything  human,  joined  the 
Delphians  in  the  purfuit  and  flaughter.  The  Delphians  affirmed 
that  thefe  could  be  no  other  than  Phylacus  and  Autonous,  ancient 
heroes  of  their  country,  to  whom  temples  ftood,  in  Herodotus's 
time,  near  the  chapel  of  Minerva.  The  fragments  of  rock  thrown 
down  from  the  fummits  of  ParnafTus  were  preferved  within  the  cha- 
pel, as  memorials  of  the  divine  protection  afforded  upon  that  preffing 
emergency. 

SECTION      V. 

XJnficady  Counfch  of  the  Grecian  Confederacy.  The  Athenians,  defer  ted 
by  the  Pelopoimefans,  remove  their  families  from  Attica.  Arijlides. 
Themi/locles.  Athens  taken  by  the  Perfans.  Art  em  if  a.  Ancient 
manner  of  Naval  Action.  Battle  of  Salami's.  Return  of  Xerxes 
into  AJia. 

WHILE    any  hope  remained  of  defending  the  pais  of  mount 
CEta,  the  Athenian  fleet  was  of  the  utmoft  confequence  to  the  con- 

*  See  Dutens'  Inquiry  into  the  Origin  of  the  Difcoveries  attributed  to  the  Moderns,  c.  v. 

federated 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

federated  Peloponnefians.     Without  its  affiftance  every  part  of  their 
coall   would   be  open   to  the  enemy's   navy.     The   fafety   of  Attica 
therefore  was  the  fir  ft  object  in  the  plan  of  operations.     It  was  re-   Herod.  1.  viii. 
folved  that,  in  cafe  the  enemy  fhould  penetrate  acrofs  the  mountains,  c' 4°" 
the  whole  force  of  the  confederacy  fhould  meet  them  in  Boeotia  and 
oppofe  their  farther  progrefs.     But  the  ufual  dilatorinefs  of  confede- 
racies   recurred.     The  Peloponnefian    troops   were  yet  within   their  1.  yiii.  c.  71. 
feveral  flates,  when  the  news  arrived  of  the  death  of  the  Spartan  king  1.  xi.'c.  15. 
with  his  little  bind  of  felf-devoted   comrades,  and  of  the  retreat  of  ThemiflL' 
the  reft  of  his  army.     Then  all  haftened  to  the  Corinthian  ifthmus, 
where  Cleombrotus,   brother  of  Leonidas,  took  the  command.      But 
the  vehemence  of  the  alarm,   which  fpred  on  all  fides,   now  fet  felrifh 
counfels  again  afloat.      Shortfighted  through  fear,  the  Peloponnefians 
determined  not  to  rifk  anything  for  the  prefervation  of  Attica,  but  to 
contrail  their  defence  to   their  own  peninfula.     Their  firft  bufinefs 
was  to  occupy,  as  an  advanced  poft,  the  difficult  pafiage  of  the  Sci- 
ronian   rocks ;   another   Thermopylae,  by  which  was   the  only   road 
immediately  from  Attica  into  Peloponnefus.     Then  with  earneft  di- 
ligence they  fet  to  form  ftrong  lines  acrofs  the  ifthmus.     The  people   Herod.  1.  viii, 
affembled    there   were   the    Lacedaemonians,  all    the   Arcadians,  the   c-  7"" 
Eleians,    Corinthians,   Sicyonians,  Epidaurians»   Phliafians,   Trceze- 
nians,   Hermionians.     '  Thefe,'  fays  Herodotus,  '  met  in  arms  at  the 
'  ifthmus  in  deepeft  anxiety  for  the  fate  of  Greece.     The  other  Pe- 
*  loponnefians  were  carelefs   of  the  event,   or  rather,   if  I  may  fpeak 
'  freely,   they  were  difpofed  to  the  party  of  the  enemy.' 

The  fleet,  in  its  hafty  retreat  from  Artemifium,  had  made  no  flop 
till  it  arrived  in  the  bay  of  Salamis  on  the  Attic  coaft.  There  infor-  1.  viii.  c.  40, 
mation  came  to  the  Athenians  that  no  force  was  afTerubled  in 
Boeotia  ;  that  the  Peloponnefians  had  refolved  to  confine  their  de- 
fence to  their  own  peninfula ;  that  they  had  begun  their  meafures 
for  that  purpofe;  that  Attica  thus  was  abandoned  to  deltruclion. 
The  alarm   was  extreme,     All  that  could  be  obtained  from  their 

allies 


400 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  IX. 
SECT.  V. 


Herod.  1.  viii 
c.  79. 
Plutarch. 
Ariftid.  & 
Themiftoc, 


Plutarch. 
Cimon. 


allies  was  the  affiftance  of  the  fleet  to  tranfport  their  families  and 
effects    to    Salamis,     iEgina,     and    Trcrzene :     places    lefs    expofed 
than  Athens,  but  which  expected  only  a  delay  of  ruin.     Nor  were 
the  Athenians  now,  like  the  Greeks  of  old,  practifed  in  wandering, 
and  ready  for  migration.      In  proportion  to  the  eftablifhed  fecurity  of 
property,  and  the  peace  of  domeftic  life,  the  diftrefs  of  families  was 
great.     At  the  awful  moment  of  abandoning  their  country  a  thou- 
fand  anxious  thoughts  crowded  upon  every  mind.     In  fuch  excefs  of 
public   misfortune  administration   commonly  lofes  its   powers  :   the 
people,  as  in  a  fhipwreck,  become  ungovernable  through  defpair.   All 
the  wifdom,  all  the  firmnefs,  all  the  popularity  of  the  ableff  ftatef- 
men  were  now  wanted  at  Athens  to  preferve  order,  and  to  inforce 
thofe  meafures  which  political  prudence  required.      But  one  of  the 
wifeft  and  moil  virtuous  citizens  that  any  country  ever  boafted  was 
at  this  time  in  banifhment.     Democratic  jealoufy,  or  rather  perhaps 
the  ingenuity  of  ambitious  individuals  to  make  popular  paffion  ferve 
their  private  purpofes,  had  invented  a  peculiar  mode  of  repreffing  the 
dangerous  fuperiority  which  great  abilities  might  acquire  in  a  repub- 
lic.   An  affembly  of  the  people,  by  what  was  called  Oftracifm,  voted 
an   illufrrious   citizen   into   banifhment  for  ten  years  :   alledging  no 
crime,  meaning  no  punifhment,   but  only  guarding  againft  the  over- 
bearing influence  of  individuals  :   the  exile's  property  and  his  honor 
remained    unhurt.     Ariftides    had    been    thus    banifhed ;   it   is    faid, 
through  the  management  of  Themiftocles  :  for  Ariftides  inclined  to 
the  ariftocratical  party  ;  oppoflng  that  increafe  of  power  to  the  popu- 
lar aiTembly  which  it  fuited  the  ambition  of  Themiftocles  to  promote. 
But  in  this  tremendous  criiis  of  the  commonwealth  the  name  of  the 
juft  Ariftides  began  to  be  mentioned  among  the  people;  and  it  be- 
came evident  that  his  abfence  was  very  generally  regretted.     The- 
miftocles, whofe  capacious  mind  was  never  by  views  of  faction  blinded 
to  greater  interefts,  caught  at  the  opportunity  of  popularity,   and  had 
the  magnanimity  himfelf  to  propofe  a  decree  which  would  inable  his 
rival  to  return.     Cimon,  fon  of  the  great  Miltiades,  is  faid  alfo  to 

have 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  4.01 

have  diftinguifhed  himfelf  upon  this  trying  occafion.  Being  by  in-  CHAP.  EX. 
heritance  from  a  long  line  of  anceftors  one  of  the  principal  landed  t  '  ; 
men  of  the  Athenian  commonwealth,  he  would  not  naturally  be  for- 
ward to  abandon  his  country.  But  when  proclamation  was  made 
that  all  fhould  forthwith  remove  their  families  and  effects  out  of  At- 
tica, and  that  every  man  capable  of  bearing  arms  fhould  then  imme- 
diately repair  to  his  duty  aboard  the  Meet,  Cimon,  at  the  head  of  a 
band  of  the  principal  youths  of  Athens,  marehed  in  proceffion  through 
the  moft  public  parts  of  the  city  to  the  temple  of  Minerva  in  the  ci- 
tadel. In  their  hands  they  carried  their  bridles  (the  enligns  of  that 
military  iervice  to  which  their  birth  and  poffeffions  had  deftined  them) 
and,  with  iblemn  rites,  dedicated  theie  to  the  goddefs.  Then,  arm- 
ing themfelves,  the  whole  party  fet  off  for  the  fleet  at  Salamis ;  not 
a  little  incouraging  the  admiring  citizens  by  this  demonftration  of 
confidence  in  the  gods,  and  alacrity  in  devoting  themfelves  to  that 
new  fervice  which  the  prefent  crifis  of  their  country  required.  Nor 
were  the  advantages  to  be  derived  from  popular  fuperftition  neglected. 
It  was  believed  from  ancient  times  in  Athens  that  a  large  ferpent  was 
a  divine  guard  to  the  temple  of  Minerva  in  the  citadel,  and  it  was  an 
eftablifhed  pra&ice  to  place  cakes  as  an  offering  to  this  reptile  every 
new  moon.  The  chief  prieft  of  the  temple  declared  that  the  cakes, 
which  hitherto  never  failed  to  be  eaten  by  the  divine  ferpent,  now 
remained  untouched  :  proof  that  the  goddefs  herfelf  had  forfaken  the 
citadel.  This,  fays  the  cotemporary  hiftorian,  whatever  truth  was 
in  it,  nut  a  little  contributed  to  induce  the  Athenians  readily  and 
quietly  to  quit  the  city. 

The  general  bulinefs  of  the  confederacy  was  not  conducted  either 
with  equal  wifdom  or  equal  fpirit.  The  want  of  one  fupreme  autho- 
rity was  again  felt.  The  meafures  of  the  land-forces  were  determined 
by  the  affembly  at  Corinth,  of  which  the  officers  commanding  the  troops 
of  the  feveral  ftates  were  principal  members  :   thofe  of  the  fleet  feem 

11  »  1  r  1  •  1  •        1    /-  1         Herod.  1.  viii, 

not  to  nave  been  taken  into  the  coniideration,   but  remained  for  the  c.  49  &  74. 

commanders  of  the  feveral  fquadrons  to  decide.     A  council,  of  thofe  £  '°;d*c Sl,c' 

commanders   was  held   for  the  purpofe.     The  "reat  aueftion  was,  £1,ut;ir.c/5l" 

F  f  f  Where 


Herod.  1.  viii. 

c.41. 

Plutarch. 

Themiltoe. 


40*  HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  IX.    Where  they  mould  now  wait  the  attack  of  that  fleet  from  which  they 
s^^3*     had  been  flying  ?     Fear  prevailed,  and  the  majority  were  for  retreat- 
ing to  the  Corinthian  ifthmus ;  becaufe  there  it  was  urs;ed,  if  thev 
fhould  be  defeated,  which  feems  to  have  been  expected,  tho  the  mips 
were  loft,  the  crews  might  efcape  afhore,  and  ftill  afllfl  by  land  in 
the  defence  of  their  country. 
Herod,  l.vin.       The  Perfian  army  meanwhile,  advancing  from  Thebes,  burnt  the 
Diodor.  Sid     abandoned  towns  of  Thefpiae  and  Platasa  ;  and,  entering  Attica,  found 
l.xi.  c.  i4.      nQ  refj^ance  trill  they  arrived  at  the  citadel  of  Athens.    This  was  (fill 
held  by  fome  minifters  of  the  temple  of  Minerva,  fome  of  the  poorer 
citizens  unable  to  fupport  the  expence  of  migration,  and  a  few  others 
obftinately  addicted  to  that  interpretation  of  the   Delphian   oracle 
which  fuppofed  it  to  declare  that  the  citadel  mould  remain  inex- 
pugnable.    The  city  was  delivered  to  thofe  Athenians  of  the  Pei- 
fiftratid  party  who  accompanied  the  Perfian  army.     The  citadel  was 
immediately  inverted.     Terms  were  offered   to   the   befieged  by  the 
Peifiilratids,  and  obftinately  refufed.     After  a  refiftance  beyond  ex- 
pectation, the  place  was  taken  by  affault,  and  all  within  put  to  the 
fword. 

Intelligence  of  this  event,  if  we  may  credit  the  probable  detail  of 
Herod,  l.viii.  Herodotus,  came  to  the  fleet  while  a  council  of  war  was  fitting.  It 
c.  56  &  feq.  OCCafioned  fuch  alarm  that  fome  of  the  commanders  of  fquadrons, 
without  waiting  for  a  decifioh  of  the  queftion  before  them,  haftened 
aboard  their  galleys  and  prepared  for  immediate  flight.  The  reft, 
lefs  panic-ftruck,  were  ftill  for  the  moft  part  of  opinion  that  the  pro- 
pofed  retreat  to  the  ifthmus  fliould  be  executed  without  delay.  Night 
came  on,  and  all  was  confufion.  Nothing  can  be  more  confonant 
to  the  common  character  of  thofe  little  circumftances  which  often 
decide  the  greateft  events,  than  what  the  hiftorian  proceeds  to  relate. 
Themiftocles,  returning  to  his  galley,  was  met  by  Mnefiphilus,  an 
Athenian  officer  his  particular  friend,  who  anxioully  afked  what  was 
the  determination  of  the  council  ?  '  To  retreat  inftantly,'  faid  The- 
miftocles.    '  Then,'   replied   Mnefiphilus,    *  Greece   is   loft  !    For 

4  neither 


HISTORY    OF     GREECE.  4°3 

*  neither  the  prefent  commander  in  chief,  nor  any  other  man  will     CHAP.  IX. 

*  have  influence  to  keep  the  fleet  together.     All  will  difperfe  to  their    S^£^j 
«  feveral  homes  ;   and,  through  the  folly  of  her  chiefs,   Greece  is  in- 

«  flaved  for  ever  ! — Is  there  no  poilibility  of  perfuading.  Eurybiades  to 
«  wifer  meafures  ?'  Touched  by  his  friendYearneilnefs  in  delivering 
an  opinion  perfectly  coinciding  with  his  own,  the  active  mind  of 
Themiftocles  could  not  reft.  Returning  immediately  to  Eurybiades, 
he  prevailed  to  have  another  council  haftily  fummoned.  Naturally 
vehement  in  his  temper,  Themiftocles  was  forward  and  copious  in 
difcourfe  upon  the  fubject  for  the  confideration  of  which  the  council 
met,  before  it  was  regularly  propofed  by  the  commander  in  chief. 
The  Corinthian  commander,  Adeimantus,  who  was  as  warmly  for* 
different  meafures,  interrupting  him,  faid,  '  Themiftocles,  thofe  who 
'  at  the  games  rife  before  their  time  are  corrected  with  ftripes.'  To 
fo  affronting  a  reprimand  the  Athenian  chief,  with  admirable  com- 
mand  of  himfelf,  calmly  replied,   «   True,  Adeimantus,   but    thofe 

*  who  neglect  to  ingage  in  the  conteft  never  win  the  crown  *.'  Then 
in  the  courfe  of  the  debate  he  urged  the  importance  of  preferving 
Salamis,  iEgina,  and  Megara,  which  upon  the  retreat  of  the  fleet 
muft  immediately  fall ;  the  advantage  of  the  prefent  ftation,  a  con- 
fined bay,  which  would  render  both  the  numbers  and  the  fuperior 
fwiftnefs  of  the  enemy's  galleys  ufelefs  j  and  the  total  want  of  fuch 
advantage  in  any  ftation  that  could  be  taken  near  the  Corinthian 
ifthmus.  When  all  this  proved  ineffectual  he  concluded  with  de- 
claring, '  That  if  fo  little  regard  was  fhown  to  the  Athenian  people, 
who  had  rifked  every  thing  in  the  Grecian  caufe,  their  fleet  would 
immediately  withdraw  from  the  confederacy,  and  either  make  terms 
with  the  enemy,  or  feck  fome  diitant  fettlement  for  a  people  fo  un- 
worthily treated.'  Eurybiades,  alarmed,  bent  to  this  argument:  a 
majority  of  the  other  commanders  either  felt  its  force,  or  were  de- 

*  Later  writers,  to   make   a  better  ftory,  '  hear  me.'     Plutarch,  through  an  inattentio* 

inftead  of  Adeimantus,  name  Eurybiades,  and  not  unufual  with  him,  has  in  his  Life  of  The- 

add  that  he  fhook  his  cane  over  the  head  of  miitocles   attributed  the  reprimand   to  Eury- 

Themiitocles,  who  calmly  faid,  '  Strike,  but  biades,  in  his  Apophthegm*  to  Adeimantus. 

F  f  f  2  cided 


* 


4©4  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  IX.    ^ed  by  the  Spartan  admiral ;   and  it  was  determined  to  expett  the; 
sect,  v,    enemy  in  the  bay  of  Salamis. 

Herod,  l.viii.  The  Perfian  fleet  had  remained  three  days  in  the  road  of  Artemi- 
t<1'  fium  to  refrelli  the  crews  after  their  fufferings  by  ftorms  and  ino-ao-e- 
ments.  Three  days  then  brought  them  through  the  Euripus  to  Pha- 
lerus,  at  that  time  the  principal  port  of  Athens.  Herodotus  fuppofes 
the  Perlian  numbers  by  fea  and  land  not  lefs  than  on  their  firft  ar- 
rival at  Sepias  and  Thermopylae.  For  by  land  they  were  reinforced  by 
the  Malians,  Dorians,  Locrians,  and  Boeotians.  Their  fleet  was  in- 
creafed  with  galleys  from  Andros,  Tenos,  Eubcea,  and  other  iflands. 
The  recruits  to  the  land-forces  might  eafily  fupply  the  lofs  by  battle  j. 
but  thofe  to  the  fleet  would  fcarcely  balance  the  damage  by  ftorms, 
which  feems  to  have  been  very  much  greater  than  any  hitherto  fuffered 
by  ingagements.  The  fleet  and  army  being  again  met,  a  council  of 
naval  commanders  was  fummoned  to  confider  whether  the  Grecian 
fleet  mould  be  attacked  in  its  prefent  (ration.  It  is  difficult  to  deter- 
mine how  far  credit  may  be  due  to  Herodotus's  account  of  a  Grecian 
heroine  in  the  Perfian  fleet;  who  is  yet  fo  mentioned  in  all  hifl-ories 
of  thefe  times  that  (he  muft  not   be  paffed  unnoticed.     It  was  Arte- 

L  vii.  c.  99.  mifia,  daughter  of  Lygdamis,  a  Halicarnafllan,  by  a  Cretan  lady'w 
Her  hufband  had  been  tyrant  of  Halicarnaffus,  the  native  city  of  He- 
rodotus, and  he  had  extended  his  command  over  the  neighbouring 
iflands  Cos,  Nifyrus,  Calydna.  On  his  death  Artemifia  fucceeded 
to  his  authority.  When  the  orders  of  the  Perfian  court  came  to  the 
Afian  Greeks  to  prepare  forces  for  the  European  expedition,  fhe  fitted 
out  five  galleys,  which  were  allowed  to  be  fuperior  to  any  of  that  vaft 
armament,  except  the  Sidonian  ,-  and  fhe  formed  the  extraordinary  re- 
iblution  of  undertaking  herfelf  the  command  of  this  little  fquadron. 
On  joining  the  fleet  in  the  Hellefpont  fhe  was  regularly  admitted  to 
her  feat  in  all  councils  of  war;  and  fhe  acquired  in  a  high  degree  the 
efteem  of  the  Perfian  monarch.    At  the  council  held  off  Phalerus,.  fhe, 

fcvHi.  c.6;  alone  difiuaded  the  propofed  attack  of  the  Grecian  fleet..  *  Offenfivet 
meafures/fhe  faid, *  fhould  be  profecuted  only  by  land.  There  the  fupe- 

riority. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  4°5 

rioriry  was  decided,  and  operations  more  certain.     The  fleet  mould  be    CHAP.  IX. 
reierved  as  an  indifpenfible  attendant  upon  fo  immenfe  an  army,  which 
could  not  fail  to  fuller  extremely  if  by  any  misfortune  it  mould  lofe 
the  means  of  fupplies  by  fea,    *  Befides,'  fhe  added,  '  the  Greeks  cara- 
1  not  long  hold  their  prefent  advantageous  iituation  ;  for,  if  I   am 

•  rightly  informed,  they  have  no  magazines  on  the  ifland  which  they 

•  occupy,  and  the  main  is  already  yours.    Wait  therefore  only  a  little  : 

•  you  will  fee  them  difperfe  of  themfelves,  and  all  Greece  will  be 
'  open  to  you.'  This,  wife  advice  was  overruled,  and  it  was  deter- 
mined to  attack  the  Grecian  fleet  next  morning. 

The  Grecian  commanders  meanwhile  were  far  from  being  all  hearti- 
ly difpofed  to  the  meafure  refolved  on.     Eurybiades  appears  to  have 
been   not   a   man  of  great  abilities:  his  authority  therefore  as  com- 
mander   in   chief    over  forces  from   various   independent  ftates  was- 
Tery    uncertain.       Themiftocles  was   ftill    fearful    of  the  defection 
of  fome  of  the  fquadrons;   and,   to  infure  what  in  his  judgement  was 
neceffary  for  the  common  good,  he  is  reported  to  have  taken  a  very 
extraordinary  ftep.     He  fent  a  trufty  perfon  to  the  Perlian  fleet  with   -Mchyl.'PerC 
orders  to  fay  that  he  came  from  the  Athenian  admiral,  who  was  de-  steph. 
firous  of  revolting  to  the  Perfians;  that  he  was  therefore  to  give  an  Herod,  l.vm.- 
account  of  the  diffentions  among  the  Grecian  commanders,  and  of  p;°dor.  Sic. 

.  .         .  r  .     I.  xi.  c.  17. 

the  meafures   that  were  likely  to  follow  :  adding,   that  if  the  prefent  Plutarch. 

opportunity  for  deftroying  the  whole  Grecian  fleet  together  mould  be  Arirtid,  ' 

neglected,  fuch  another  would  never  be  found.      That  very  night 

the  Perfians  moved  and  formeda  femicircle  from  the  point  of  Salamis 

to  the  port  of  Munychia :   the  Egyptian   fquadron   was  detached  to  'Dibdor.  Sic 

1.  xi.  c.  17. 

block  the  weftern   paffage;  and' a  force  was  landed  upon  the  little   iEfchyi. Perf.  • 
ifland  Pfyttaleia  between- Salamis  and  the  ports  of  Athens,  toaffiftany   Herod,  l.vtn". 
of  the  Perfian  vefTels,  and   feize  any  of  the  Grecian  that  might  be  S;.?6- ' 

3  b  Plutarch. 

driven  upon  it.     For  the  fame  purpofe  the  Attic  fhore,  to  a  confider-   Themiftoc.  St- 
able extent,  was  lined  with  troops :  the  whole  multitude  of  the  army 
being  at  the  fame  time  in  motion  ;  thofe  whom  no  duty  required  go- 
ing urged  by  curiofity  to  take  their  ftand  on  the  adjacent  heights. 

The- 


■AoG  HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 

chap.  IX.    ^iie  m0(i  commodious  eminence  was  chofen  for  the  monarch  himfelf 
SECT.  V.     t0  v;ew  at  leifure  the  action  to  infue. 

Herod  1  viii.        While  thefe  preparations  were  making  by  the  Perfians,   Ariftides, 
c.  79&fcq.      efcaping  under  favor  of  the  night  through  the  middle  of  their  fleet, 

Plutarch.  •        ,  •  7T-     •  a     -n-  i 

Themiitoc.  &  arrived  at  Salamis  from  /Egina.  Ariftides  wanted  not  magnanimity 
upon  this  great  occafion  to  lay  afide  both  private  animofity  and  the 
animofity  of  faction.  He  went  directly  to  Themiftocles,  his  rival 
and  political  enemy,  informed  him  of  what  he  had  {ecu,  and  offered 
his  affiftance  for  anything  ufetul  to  his  country.  Themiftocles  (who, 
with  a  character  of  far  lefs  difintereftednefs,  could  yet  equally  com- 
mand his  paflions,  and  well  knew  the  value  of  fuch  afiiftance)  joyfully 
accepting  the  offer,  requeued  that  Ariftides  would  accompany  him 
to  the  council  of  war  then  fitting,  and  deliver  his  information  in  per- 
fon ;  which  he  faid  would  have  much  more  weight  than  anything  that 
could  be  repeated  by  himfelf,  accuftomed  as  he  had  been  to  combat 
the  military  and  political  opinions  of  moft  of  the  Grecian  com- 
manders. Ariftides  immediately  complied.  He  had  fcarcely  deliver- 
ed his  intelligence  when  a  confirmation  of  it  came  by  a  captain  of  a 
trireme  galley  of  the  ifland  of  Tenos,  who  had  deferted  from  the 
enemy.  Then  at  laft,  prefied  by  neceflity,  the  commanders  with  one 
voice  declared  a  determination   to  exert  thetnfelves  in  action. 

Among  the  ancients,  for  a  naval  ingagement,  a  fmall  fpace  fufficed 
in  comparifon  of  what  modern  fleets  require ;  not  only  becaufe  of  the 
fmaller  fize  of  their  veflels,  but  (till  more  becaufe  of  the  different 
manner  of  working  and  fighting  them.  Our  (hips  of  war,  very  deep 
as  well  as  large,  and  deriving  motion  only  from  the  wind,  with  deep 
and  open  feas  want  large  intervals  alfo  between  fhip  and  ihip.  The 
ancient  galleys  on  the  contrary,  always  light  however  large,  and  in 
action  worked  by  their  oars  alon:,  could  form  and  move  in  very  clofe 
order,  and  were  not  afraid  of  narrow  feas.  From  their  mode  of  in- 
gagement alfo  they  required  comparatively  little  fpace.  Our  fhips, 
whofe  artillery  decides  their  battles,  muff  bring  their  broadlides  to 
bear  upon  the  enemy ;  avoiding  as  much  as  poflible  to  expofe  tbem- 

felves 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  407 

felves  in  any  other  direction.     They  ingage  therefore,  according   to    CHAP.  IX. 

the  fea-phrafes,  clofe-hauled  to  the  wind,  and  with  the  line  of  battle     SECT.  V. 

formed  ahead.    But  the  ancients,  whofe  principal  weapon  was  a  ftrong 

beak  of  brafs  or  iron  projecting  from  the  ftem  of  the  galley,  advanced 

to  the  attack   always  with  the  line  of  battle  formed  abreaft.     The 

greateft  advantage  one  galley  could  obtain  over  another  was  to  bring 

its  head  to  bear  directly  upon  the  enemy's  broadlide ;   the  next  to  gain 

the  means  of  an  oblique  impulfe  which  might  daih  away  fome  of  his 

oars.     By  the  fuccefs  of  the  former  attempt  a  galley  was  often  funk  j 

by  that  of  the  other  it  became  unmanageable  till  the  loft  or  damaged 

oars  could  be  replaced ;  and   this  gave  opportunity  for  the  more  de- 

cifive  attack  with  the  beak.    Hence  the  importance  of  oars  in  a&ion  : 

by  them  alone  attacks  could   be   made,   warded,  or  avoided  in  every 

direction.     Miilile  weapons  of  various  kinds  were  ufed  ;   but  except 

when  the  attack  of  the  beak  was  very  fuccefsful,    an  ingagement. 

feldom  concluded  without  boarding. 

Since  the  retreat  from  Artemiiium  the  Grecian  fleet  had  been  very 

considerably  reinforced.     The  Lacedaemonians  had  added  fix  triremes   Herod.  1.  .viii„ . 

to  their  former  ten  :   the  Athenian  fquadron  was  increafed  to  a  hun-   c-43&iecl- 

dred  and  eighty  :   fome  had  been  gained  from  other  ftates  :  a  few  from 

the  iflands :  and  the  total  number  of  triremes  was  now  three  hundred  Ciegr°. ' 

and  eighty.     The   triremes  of  the  Perfian  fleet  are  generally  laid  to   Ifocrat. Pstne- 

..  tt      1  1  §yr-  p- 22b. 

have  been  about  twelve  hundred :  according  to  Herodotus  they  were  t.  ;.  ed.  Au- 

above  thirteen  hundred  ♦.     Jf  exaggeration  may  be  fufpected  even  in   Herodot.l.vii. 
the  loweft  of  thefe   computations,  it   is  yet  little   reafonably  to   be,  c-89  &,  l3J' 

r  J  J  185,  &  1,  V1U.  . 

doubted  but  the  fleet  under  Xerxes,  however  inferior  in  the  fize  and   c.  66. 
quality  of  the  veflels,  exceeded,  in  the  number  of  men  which  it  bore,, 
anv  naval  armament  ever  aflembled  in   the  world. 

*  The  paflage  of  ^fchylus  which  mentions  hundred  and  feven,  which  the  poet  mentions  as 
the  number  of  the  Perfian  galleys,  both  as  it  the  fwifteft  of  the  fleet,  fliould  be  added  to 
ftands  in  all  the  editions  of  his  works  and  in  the  thoufand.  See  Stanley's  note.  According 
Plutarch's  life  of  Themiflocles,  feems  clearly  to  yEfchylus  the  Grecian  triremes  were  only 
enough  in  itfelf  to  fay  thatthey  were  in  all  but  three  hundred.  It  is  not  impoffible  but  Hero- 
a  thoufand  ;  yet  the  commentators  and  tranfla-  dotus  might  have  collected  more  accurate  in- 
tors  have  been  generally  defirous  of  ftraining  formation  of  the  numbers  furnifhed  by  the  Ce- 
lt- to  mean  that,  to  make  the  total,  the  two  veral  ftates. 

Confident 


408  HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  IX.        Confident  therefore  in   their  ftrength,    and   urged  by  the  com* 

SECT. v.     mon  neceffity  of  invaders  to   pufh  vigorous  meafures,  the  Perfians 

were   impatient   for  decifion.       Accident  feems   to  have  made  the 

•Greeks  at    laft    the    affailants  ;    and  thus  perhaps  contributed    not 

a  little  to  the  greatnefs  of  their   fuccefs.       By  daybreak    they  had 

formed  their  fleet  in  order  of  battle.     The  Athenians  on  the  right 

iHetoa.  l.  viii.  were  oppofed  to  the  Phenician  fquadron  ;  the  Lacedaemonians  on  the 

,c#  85-  left  to  the  Ionian.     As   the  fun  rofe  trumpets  founded,  paeans  were 

JEfchyl.  Pcrf.     „  ,,_.,,  ,  ,    , 

fung,  and  the  Grecian  leaders  endeavoured  by  all  means  to  reltore 
that  animation  among  their  people  which  their  own  divided  and  hefi- 
tating  counfejs  had  fo  tended  to  deaden.  Prefently  a  trireme  galley, 
Herod.  1.  viii.  which  had  been  fent  on  fome  bufinefs  to  /Egina,  endeavouring  to 
jEfehyLPerfl  pafs  the  enemy's  line,  was  attacked.  An  Athenian  galley  com- 
Diod.Sic.l.xi.  manded  by  Ameinias,  brother  of  the  poet  iEfchylus,  advanced  to  her 
refcue:  others  followed:  then  the  iEginetans  moved,  and  the  battle 
foon  became  general.  The  onfet  was  vigorous  on  both  fides.  But 
fpace  did  not  furflce  for  the  Perfians  to  bring  their  whole  fleet  regular- 
ly into  a&ion,  nor  for  the  Phenicians  in  particular  to  profit  from  the 
fuperior  fwiftnefs  of  their  galleys,  and  fkill  of  their  feamen.  The 
Athenians  and  ./Eginetans  therefore,  after  a  fharp  conteft,  broke  the 
part  of  the  Perfian  line  firft  ingaged.  Numbers  of  galleys  yet  out 
of  aclion  preffed  to  its  fupport.  Among  the  various  nations  who 
compofed  the  Perfian  fleet,  commanded  in  chief  by  Perfian  officers 
little  verfed  in  naval  bufinefs,  while  the  vaft  army  which  lined 
the  Attic  fhore  with  the  fovereign  of  the  Eaft  at  its  head,  were 
witnefies  of  the  fcene,  zeal  itfelf  contributed  to  diforder.  Damage 
and  lofs  of  oars  and  wounds  in  the  hull  from  the  beaks  of 
their  own  galleys  infued  j  while  the  Athenians  and  ^ginetans, 
forgetting  their  late  enmity,  or  remembering  it  only  as  an  incen- 
tive to  generous  emulation,  with  the  moft  animated  exertion  pre- 
ferred the  moil  fteady  difcipline.  Shortly  the  fea  itfelf  became 
fcarcely  vifihle  from  the  quantity  of  wreck  and  floating  bodies  which 

covered 


HISTORY    OF     GREECE.  409 

covered  it.     Such  is   the  ftrong  expreffion  of  the  poet  who  himfelf   CHAP.  IX. 
fought  in   the  Athenian  fquadron.      In    the  meantime   the  bufinefs     SECT.  v. 
was  ealier  to  the  Lacedaemonians  and  other  Greeks  jn  the  left  wing. 
Some  of  the  Ionian  officers  were  zealoufly  inclined  to  the  confederates  : 
tho  others  on  the  contrary  exerted  themfelves  to  earn  the  favor  of  the 
monarch  whom  thev  ferved.     The  confufion   however  arifins  from 
various  caufes  in  the  Perfian  fleet   fpred,  and  rapidly  became  general 
nnd  extreme.    All  their  galleys  which  could  dilingage  themfelves  fled. 
Some  were  taken  :   many  were  funk  ;   and  numbers  of  their  crews,  in-   Herod,  l.t-iii. 
land  men,   unpraclifed  in  fvvimming,   were  drowned.     Among  thofe 
who  perifhed  were  very  many  of  high  rank,  who  had  been  forward  to 
diflinguifh  themfelves   in   this  new  fpecies  of  war   under  their  mo- 
narch's eye.     According  to  Herodotus,  Ariabignes,  brother  of  Xerxes, 
and  admiral  of  the  fleet,  was  among  the  killed ;   but  he  is  not  men- 
tioned by  iEfchylus.     Forty  Grecian  galleys  are  faid  to  have  been  funk   ®10.ior-  iSic* 
or  otherwife  deftroyed  ;   but  the  crews  moftly  faved  themfelves  aboard 
•other  fhips,  or  on  the  neighbouring  friendly  more  of  Salamis.    When 
the  rout  was  become  total,  Ariftides  landing  on  Pfyttaleia  at  the  head   jEfchyLPerf. 
of  a  body  of  Athenians,  put  all  the  Perfians  there  to  the  fword  ;   under   Herod- L  vm- 
the  very  eye  of  Xerxes,  who,  with  his  immenfe  army  around  him,   Plut-  Ariftid. 
could  afford  them  no  affiftance. 

In  confidering  Herodotus's  account  of  this  celebrated  fea -fight,  we 
find  not  lefs  reafon  than  on  former  occafions  to  praife  his  fcrupulous 
honefty  and  modefty.  His  narrative  is  dubious  and  incomplete,  as  all 
faithful  narratives  of  great  battles  mufb  be,  unlefs  fome  eyewitnefs 
very  peculiarly  qualified  by  knowlege  and  fituation  be  the  relater. 
We  cannot  therefore  but  regret,  not  indeed  that  /Efchylus  was  a 
poet,  but  that  profe-writing  was  yet  in  his  age  fo  little  common  that 
his  poetical  fketch  of  this  great  tranfaclion  is  the  moft  authoritative, 
the  cleareft,  and  the  moft  confident  of  any  that  paffed  to  pofterity. 
Concerning  a  day,  however,  fo  glorious,  fo  Angularly  interefting  to 
Greece,  and  particularly  to  Athens,  anecdotes  would  undoubtedly 
abound;  and  a  hiftorian  a  few  years  only  later,  defirous  to  fhine  in 

G  g  g  defcription 


4io  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  IX.  defcription  rather  than  to  relate  the  truth,  could  not  have  wanted  for 
SECT.  V.  materials.  Anecdotes  indeed  of  particular  circumftances  in  great 
battles  may  often  be  authenticated  j  and  to  thefe  Herodotus  has  chiefly 
confined  bimfelf ;  avoiding  a  detail  of  the  battle  at  large,  with  an 
exprefs  declaration  that  he  could  obtain  none  upon  which  he  could 
rely.      But  among  his  anecdotes,  one  is  too  remarkable  and  too  cele- 

„     ,  ,    ...     brated  to  be  omitted.     The  queen   of  Halicarnaflus,   after  fhowinp*- 

Herod.  1.  vni.  x  & 

c'87,88&93.  extraordinary  bravery  during  the  action,  being  among  the  lad  who 
fled,  was  clofely  purfued  by  the  Athenian  galley  which  Ameinias  com- 
manded. In  this  extremity,  at  a  lofs  for  other  refuge,  me  fuddenly 
turned  againfl:  the  nearefr.  galley  of  the  Perfian  fleet,  which  happened 
to  be  that  of  Damafithymus  king  of  Calynda  in  Lycia,  with  whom. 
fhe  is  faid  to  have  been  upon  terms  not  of  perfect  friendship;  and, 
taking  him  totally  unprepared  for  fuch  an  attempt,  the  fhoke  of  the 
beak  of  her  galley  againfl:  the  fide  of  his  was  fo  violent  and  fo  well 
aimed,  that  the  Calyndian  prince  inftantly  funk  with  his  crew. 
Ameinias,  haflily  concluding  from  this  action  that  Artemiiia's  gal- 
ley was  either  one  of  the  confederate  fleet,  or  one  that  had  deferted  to 
them,  turned  his  purfuit  toward  other  veflels,  and  the  queen  of  Hali- 
carnaflus efcaped.  According  to  Herodotus,  tho  upon  this  occaflon 
we  mall  have  difficulty  to  give  him  intire  credit,  Xerxes,  from  the 
fhore  where  he  fat,  faw,  admired,  and  applauded  the  exploit. 

It  is  indeed  impoflible  here  not  to  wifh  for  thole  Perfian  hiitories  of 
thefe  great  events  which  probably  once  exifted,  and  which  a  learned 
orientalist  of  our  own  country  *  would  flatter  us  with  the  hope  of 
ftill  recovering  :  but  mod  we  wifh  for  them  when  the  Perfian  coun- 
fels  become  particularly  interefting,  of  which  the  Grecian  hifforian 
has  undertaken  to  give  a  detail  that  could  not  come  to  him  duly  au- 
thenticated. Not  that  an  author  under  a  defpotic  monarchy,  who 
often  muft  not  publifh  what  he  knows  or  believes,  and  fometimes 
may  not  dare  even  to  inquire,  could  be  put  in  any  general  competi- 
tion with  a  republican  writer,  who  not  only  may  inquire  everywhere 
and  fpeak  everything,  but  actually  manifefts  his  free  impartiality  by 

*  RicharJfon's  DiiTertation  on  the  Languages,  &c.  of  the  Ealtcrn  Nations. 

relating 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 

relating  continually,   with  the  feverity  of  a  reproving  friend,  the  dis- 
graces of  his  fellowcountrymen,  while  he  is  often  liberal  of  eulogy 
to  their  enemies.     We  might  however  poflibly  draw,  even  from  the 
flatterer  of  a  defpot,  fome  information  of  which  the  total  wreck  of 
Perfian  literature  has  deprived  us.     Yet  the  Greeks  were  not  without 
confiderable  means  of  information  often  even  of  the  intrigues  of  the 
Perfian  court.     The  eunuchs  of  the  palace,  the  perfons  perhaps  moft 
intimate  about  the   monarch    (for  according  to  Xenophon  even  the   Xcnoph.  cv- 
great  Cyrus  preferred  eunuchs  for  his  confidents),  were  of  any  nation  roPxd-  u  vu- 
rather  than  Perfian.    Some  of  them  were  Greeks  ;  at  lead  born  among 
the  Greeks,  tho  moltly  perhaps  of  foreign  origin  as  of  fervile  con- 
dition.    Herodotus   mentions  a  Greek  of  Chios  who  acquired  great 
wealth  by  the  infamous  traffic  of  caftrated  boys.     One  of  thefe,  Her-   Herod,  l.viii. 
motimus,  born  at  Pedafa  in  the  territory  of  Halicarnaflus,  was  in  high   V06.4' 
favor  with  Xerxes,  attended  him  into  Greece,  and,  both  before  and 
after  that  expedition,    was  employed  in  affairs  in   Afia  Minor  which 
would  lead  him  to  communication  with  the  principal  Greeks  of  that 
country.    Refugee  Greeks  moreover,  from  the  various  republics,  con- 
tinually fwarmed  about  the  courts  of  the  Perfian  fatraps,  and  even  of 
the  monarch  himfelf ;  fo  that,  tho  the  fpeeches  which  Herodotus 
puts  into  the  mouths  of  Perfian  cabinet-counfellors  mud  be  as  ficti- 
tious as  thofe  which  Livy  attributes   to  his  fellowcountrymen  at  the 
head  of  armies,  yet  large  means  were  certainly  open  for  Greeks  of 
rank  and  character  to  know  the  manners  of  the  Perfian  great,  and 
even  to  pry  into  the  politics  of  the  empire,   as  far  perhaps  as  the  Per- 
fians  themfelves :   for  under  a  defpotic  government  the  counfels  which 
dired  the  greatefl:  affairs  are  generally  open  to  very  few. 

After  the  battle  of  Salamis,  however,  the  tranfadions  of  public 
notoriety  befpeak  in  a  great  degree  the  counfels  that  directed  them. 
The  defeat  of  the  fleet  neceflarily  deranged  the  meafures  of  the  Perfian 
commanders.  No  port  was  near,  capable  of  protecting  its  fhattered 
and  difheartened,  but  ftill  large  remains.  Phalerus,  then  the  prin- 
cipal harbour  of  Athens,  could  not  contain  half  its  numbers.    A  hafty 

G  g  g  2  order 


4ii  HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 

CHAP.  IX.  of  the  very  night  after  the  ingagement  directed  it  to  go  immediately) 
S^s/>o'     ^or  l^e  tlellelpont.      Day  broke,  and  the  Greeks,  who  expected   a: 

Herod,  l.viii.   renewal  of  the  action,  looked  in  vain  for  an  enemy.     Quick  determi- 

l.'*ii.  c.  96,  &  nation  of  new  meafures  was  then  necellary  for  the  army;  which  hav- 
ing no  fufficient  magazines  provided  in  the  country,  was,  by  the  de- 
parture of  the  fleet,  reduced,  with  its  attending  multitudes,   to  imme- 

JEfchyl.Perf.  diate  danger  of  ftarving.  In  a  few  days  it  fell  back  into  the  rich 
and  friendly  province  of  Eceotia,  and  thence  fhortly  into  Theffaly. 

Herod,  l.viii.  Probably  the  puniihment  of  Athens,  with  the  fubmiffion  of  fa 
many  other  provinces,  were  held  fufficient,  if  not  to  fatisfy  the  mo- 
narch's hopes  of  glory,  yet  to  prevent  the  imputation  of  difgrace, 
and  perhaps  even  to  form  fome  fhadowy  claim  to  honor.  The  defeat 
of  the  fleet  would  be  of  courfe  attributed  to  the  faults  of  the  imme- 
diate commanders,  and  to  the  defects  and  inferiority  to  be  expected 
in  an  armament  not  properly  Perfian,  but  compofed  almoft  intirely 
of  the  conquered  fubjects  of  the  empire.  The  fpoil  of  Athens,  and 
among  it  the  ftatues  of  Harmodius  and  Ariitogeiton,  were  fent  as  tro- 
phies to  mark  to  the  interior  provinces  the  exploits  of  that  prodigious 
armament  which  had  fo  diminished  their  population  and  exhausted 
their  wealth.  The  affairs  of  the  empire  might  require  the  pre- 
fence  of  the  prince.  The  conquered  countries  were  not  yet  fo 
far  fettled  that  it  could  be  particularly  agreeable  to  a  young  mo- 
narch,- by  education  and  by  difpofition  probably  not  much  either  a 
warrior  or  a  man  of  buiinefs,  to  pafs  the  winter  among  them.  Xerxes 
was  therefore  to  return  into  Alia.  From  the  whole  army  three  hun- 
dred thoufand  men  were  chofen  to  remain  under  the  command  of 
Mardonius  for  the  completion  of  the  conqueft  of  Greece  in  the  fol- 

1,  viii.  c.115.  lowing  fummer.  The  rejected  multitude  were  to  return  with  all  hafte 
into  Afia ;  urged  by  the  profpect  of  famine,  and  the  apprehenfion 
that  the  approach  of  winter  might  totally  bar  the  paffage  of  the  moun- 

ffifchyi.Pcrf.  tains  and  rivers  of  Macedonia  and  Thrace.     Of  the  three  hundred 
thoufand  felected  by  Mardonius,  fixty  thoufand  were  to  march  as  a 
guard  of  the  royal  perfon  as  far  as  the  Hellefpont.     Thefe  were  per- 
haps, 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  4*3 


CHAP.  IX. 
SECT.  V. 


haps,  among  the  innumerable  crowd  of  various  nations  and  languages 
who  attended,  or  endeavoured  to  attend  the  monarch's  retreat,  thofe 
who  alone  deferved  the  name  of  foldiers.  Of  thefe,  as  of  foldiers 
forming  a  guard  neceffary  to  the  prince's  dignity  and  even  to  his  fafety, 
fome  care  was  probably  taken.  The  reft  fuffered  beyond  defcription, 
from  the  hafte  of  the  march  and  an  almoft  total  want  of  magazines : 
for  the  invafion  only  had  been  confidered  ;  the  retreat  was  unprovided 
for.  The  diforderly  multitude  therefore  lived  by  rapine,  from  friends 
equally  and  from  foes ;  but  all  was  infufficient.  Other  fuftenance  fail- 
ing, they  ate  the  very  grafs  from  the  ground,  and  the  bark  and  even 
leaves  from  the  trees ;  and,  as  the  hiftorian  with  emphatical  fimpli- 
city  fays,  ■  they  left  nothing.'  Dyfenteries  and  peftilential  fevers 
feized  whom  famine  fpared.  Numbers  were  left  fick  in  the  towns 
of  Theffaly,  Pa^onia,  Macedonia,  and  Thrace,  with  arbitrary  orders 
little  likely  to  be  diligently  obeyed,  that  fupport  and  attendance  mould 
be  provided  for  them.  On  the  forty-fifth  day  from  the  commence- 
ment of  his  march  in  Theffaly,  Xerxes  reached  the  Hellefpont;  with 
an  attendance  which,  compared  with  the  prodigious  numbers  a  few 
months  before  under  his  command  there,  might  be  called  nothing  *. 
The  bridges  were  already  deftroyed  by  florins  and  the  violence  of  the 
current :  but  the  fleet  was  arrived  -f~.  Artabazus  immediately  march- 
ed his  detachment  back  toward  Macedonia.     The  monarch  proceeded  Herod,  l.viii, 

*  C,  120.- 

to  Sardis. 

*  tt.iti.yuti  t>J;  rf«T»i)?  ivSit  f*/^  i{  Lirai.  not  perhaps  wKolly  undeferving  attention,  as  a 

Herodot.  1.  viii.  c.  115.  fpecimen  of  tales  circulated  in  Greece  concern- 

f  Herodotus  is   not  among   the  reputable  ing  thefe  extraordinary  tranfadtions ;  tho  the 

fablers  who  report  that  Xerxes   in  his  retreat,  hiftorian  himfelf  exprefsly  declares  that  he  did 

without  an  army,  without  a  fleet,   and  almoft  not  believe  it.     The  curious  may  find  it  in. 

without  an  attendant,  crofled  the  Hellefpont  in  the  1 1 8th  and  1 19th  chapters  of  his  viiith  book, 
a.  cock-boat.     He  tells  indeed  another  ftory, 


CHAPTER 


4H  HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAPTER     X. 

The  Hiftory  of  Greece  from  the  Battle  of  Salamis  to  the 
Conclufion  of  the  Persian  Invafion. 

SECTION    I. 

Return  of  the  Athenians  to  their  Country.  Meafures  of  the  Grecian 
Fleet.  Dedications  to  the  Gods  for  the  ViBory  at  Salamis.  Honors 
paid  to  Tbemijlocles.  Revolt  of  Chalcidice  from  the  Perfa?is.  Siege 
of  Potidaa  by  Artabazus. 

CHAP.  X.     n^HEv  rious  affections  of  Grecian  minds  after  fo  glorious,  fo 

SECT.  I.  JL  important,  fo  unexpected  a  victory  as  that  of  Salamis,  and  the 
confequent  hafty  retreat  of  jthat  numberlefs  army,  the  means  of  refift- 
ance  to  which  feemed  beyond  human  calculation,  may  in  fome  de- 
gree be  conceived,  but  can  fcarcely  in  any  degree  be  defcribed.  It 
does  not  appear  that  the  Peififtratid  Athenians,  or  any  Perfian  garri- 
fon  remained  in  Athens.  That  city,  and  its  whole  territory  feem  to 
have  been  recovered  by  their  late  poffeffors  without  a  ftruggle.     The 

Herodot.         meafures  next  to  be  taken  by  the  fleet  were  fubject  of  much  debate. 

l.vm.c.  10S.   jt  was  pr0p0fe(j  t0  pUrfue  the  Periians  to  the  Hellefpont,  and  at 

once  criifh  the  naval  power  of  the  empire,  which  would  render  its 
gigantic  land-force  leis  formidable  to  a  country  fcarcely  to  be  fuc- 
cefsfully  invaded  without  a  cooperating  fleet.  This  was  overruled. 
But  the  mod:  powerful  naval  armament  that  Greece  had  ever  yet  af- 
fembled,  fluflied  with  unhoped-for  fuccefs,  would  not  immediately 
reft.  Many  of  the  iflanders  were  obnoxious  for  their  forwardnefs  in 
\.  viu,  c.  £,&  tne  Perfian  caufe.  It  was  determined  to  exact  a  fine  from  them  to  be 
lc<i-  applied  to  the  expences  of  the  war.     Themiftocles,  whofe  great  qua- 

lities were  fullied  by  a  fordid  attention  to  his  private  intereft,  is  faid 
on  this  occaiion  to  have  rilled  his  own  coffers  through  the  influence 

*hich 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  415 

which  his  high  command  and  high  reputation  procured  to  him.  The      CHAP.x. 
Parians,  we  are  told,  avoided  all  public  payment  through  a  bribe  to      SECT.  1. 
the  Athenian  commander.     The  Andrians  alone,  of  the  iflanders  on 
the  European  fide  of  the  /Egean,   refolutely  refufed  to  pay  anything. 
Siege  was  in   confequence  laid  to  their  principal  town,  but  without 
effedtj   and  the  fleet  returned  to  Salamis. 

Winter  now  approached,  with  a  political  calm  which  for  a  long 
time  had  been  little  expected  by  the  confederate  Greeks.  Gratitude 
to  the  eods  for  the  great  deliverance  obtained  was  among  the  firfl 
emotions  of  the  public  mind.  It  was  ufual  after  a  victory,  to  felect 
fome  of  the  moft  valuable  articles  of  the  fpoil  to  be  offered  by  the 
name  of  Acrothinia,  firfl-fruits,   to  the  fuppofed  propitious  deities. 

...  Herodot. 

On  the  prefent  occafion  three  Phemcian  trireme  galleys  were  firfl  l.viii.  c  121. 
chofen.  One  was  dedicated  in  Salamis  to  the  hero  Ajax;  another  at 
the  promontory  Sunium,  probably  to  Minerva  * ;  and  the  third  at 
the  Corinthian  ifthmus  to  Neptune  *.  Other  offerings  required  more 
preparation.  A  ftatue  twelve  cubits  high,  holding  in  one  hand  a 
galley's  prow,  was  dedicated  to  Apollo  at  Delphi.  The  oracle  there  c.  izi. 
demanded  a  particular  acknowlegement  from  the  iEginetans ;  becaufe, 
it  faid,  in  the  glorious  conteft  of  Salamis,  they  had  excelled  all  the 
other  Greeks.  Thofe  iflanders  gladly  received  the  honorable  tefti- 
mony,  and  fent  to  Delphi  a  brazen  maft,  adorned  with  three  ftars  of 
gold.  Thefe  public  dedications  being  made  or  decreed,  the  remain- 
ing booty  was  divided.  The  fleet  then  proceeded  to  the  ifthmus, 
where  another  ceremony,  of  eftablifhed  practice  among  the  Greeks, 
remained  to  be  performed.  It  was  to  be  decided  to  whom  the  firft 
and  fecond  honors  were  due  for  behavior  in  the  war-f-.  The  chiefs 
delivered  their  opinion  in  writing  upon  the  altar  of  Neptune.     Every 

*  Minerva  and  Neptune  are  not  mentioned  ifthmus,  and  a  ftatue  we  find  was  erefted  to  him 

by  the  hiflorian  ;  but  the  conjecture  feems  lit-  there  upon  occafion  of  the  fubfequent  vidtory  of 

tie  hazardous.     The   ruins  of  the  temple  of  Plataea.     See  Herodot.  b.  ix.  c.  Si. 
the  Suniad  Minerva  remain  on  the  promon-         |    ____  &lpfc,   &„am?  tf  i|WT«ro  y«o- 

tory  to  this  day  ;   and  Neptune  was  not  only  ^  "emwvh.  dtk  to»  s&qui  tstov'. «»  «£•»■ 

the  tutelary  deity  of  the  Illhmian  games,   but  Kai Tm  jftretgoi  xjwomj  in  'tt&nun  Herodot.  1.  viii. 

efteemed  in  fome   degree  proprietary  of  the  c.  123. 

one 


4t6 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  X. 

SECT.  I. 


one  gave  the  firft  vote  for  himfelf ;  but  a  large  majority  of  the  fecond 
appeared  for  Themiftocles.  Thus  it  remained  undecided  to  whom 
the  firft  honors  fliould  be  paid  ;  and  the  fquadrons  feparated  to  their 
feveral  ftates ;  but  the  general  voice  of  the  people  founded  the  fame 
of  Themiftocles  far  beyond  all  others.  Unfatisned  however  with 
fuch  vague  applaufe,  and  difappointed  of  the  degree  of  diftinction 
which  his  ambition  affected,  Themiftocles  went  to  Lacedaemon,  pro- 
bably knowing  that  he  fhould  be  well  received.  The  Spartan  govern- 
ment there  took  upon  itfelf  to  decide  the  claims  of  merit.  It  would 
have  been  invidious  to  have  refufed  the  Arifteia,  or  firft  honors  for 
bravery  and  general  conduct,  to  their  own  admiral  who  had  com- 
manded in  chief;  but,  a  new  and  fingular  compliment  was  invented 
for  the  Athenian  commander:  they  adjudged  to  him  the  prize  of 
wifdom  and  maritime  (kill.  Eurybiades  and  Themiftocles  therefore 
together  received  from  the  Lacedaemonian  commonwealth  the  hono- 
rable reward  of  olive  crowns.  Themiftocles  was  belides  prefented 
with  a  chariot ;  and,  at  his  departure  from  Lacedaemon,  three  hun- 
dred Spartans  of  rank  *  efcorted  him  to  the  frontier;  a  kind  of  ho- 
nor never,   to  the  time  of  Herodotus,  paid  to  any  other  ftranger -j~. 

The  news  of  the  victory  of  the  Greeks  at  Salamis,  and  of  the  con- 
fequent  retreat  of  Xerxes  into  Alia,  was  quickly  conveyed  through 
all  the  Grecian  fettlements  in  uncertain  rumors,  here  exaggerated, 
there  deficient,  according  to  the  information,  the  temper,  the  ihte- 
reft,  the  memory,  or,  ibmetimes,  the  invention  of  the  individuals 
who  communicated  it,  where  public  and  certain  means  of  extenfive 
communication  were  little  known.  But  the  Greeks  of  the  Thracian 
colonies,  who  had  feen  with  trembling  the  proud  march  of  the  im- 
menfe  hoft  of  Perlia  toward  Greece,  were    alfo  eyewitneffes  of  the 


*  Y.iraer\r,rlu>»  J.vyaJe?,  JDtoi    'olm^   imrifc  xa-  with  chronology..  According  to  every  account, 

>.s'oi!?«i.    Hcrodot.  1.  viii.  c.  124.  the  aflion  at  Thermopylas   nearly  coincided 

f   Plutarch  adds  a  pompous  account  of  the  with  the  Olympian  meeting  ;    and  if  anything 

reception   of   Themittocles   at    the  Olympian  like  what  Plutarch  reports  ever  really  parted, 

*;ames,  of  which  we  find  nothing  in  Herodotus,  it  mult  have  been  four  years  after,   at  the  next 

ind  Plutarch  has  totally  forgot  to  reconcile  it  Olympian  meeting. 

miferable 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE,  417 

miferable  reverfe,  when  the  monarch  precipitated  his  retreat  into  CHAP.  X. 
Afia.  Their  information  was  however  probably  little  exacft  concern-  SECT.  I. 
ing  the  force  yet  left  hovering  over  their  mother-country,  and  their 
knowlege  of  the  refources  of  the  Perfian  empire  generally  very  imper- 
fect. According  therefore  to  the  common  nature  of  that  tide  of  the 
human  mind  which  operates  generally  much  more  forcibly  upon  the 
determinations  of  a  multitude  than  of  an  individual,  the  fruitful 
province  of  Chalcidice,  on  the  confines  of  Thrace  and  Macedonia,  Herod,  l.viii. 
boldly  revolted  from  the  Perfian  dominion,  each  little  town  affertino-  c-l26&fccl- 
its  beloved  independency.  Meanwhile  Artabazus,  having  fcen  his 
fovereign  fafe  on  the  Aliatic  fide  of  the  Hellefpont,  haftened  back, 
with  his  detachment,  itfelf  a  large  army,  to  rejoin  Mardonius.  But 
as  the  quarters  of  Thrace  and  Macedonia  were  already  crowded,  he 
halted  in  Chalcidice.  He  received  with  indignation  intelligence  of  the 
revolt,  and  thought,  not  unreafonably,  that  he  fhould  fcarcely  efcape 
cenfure  if  he  fuffered  the  winter  to  pafs  without  puniihinw  it.  Im- 
mediately he  laid  fiege  to  Olynthus  and  Potidsea.  Olynthus  was  pre- 
fently  taken  ;  and,  if  we  may  believe  Herodotus,  the  inhabitants, 
being  condu&ed  to  a  neighbouring  marfh,  were  there  all  mafTacred. 
The  town,  which  had  been  occupied  by  a  colony  from  Bottia?a  on  the 
Macedonian  coaft,  was  given  to  native  Chalcidians  -,  and  according 
to  that  common  policy  of  the  Perfians  which  we  have  heretofore  re- 
marked, the  government  was  intruded  to  Critobulus,  a  Greek  of  the 
town  of  Torone  in  the  neighbouring  peninfula  of  Sithonia. 

The  affairs  of  Thermopylae  and  Salamis  had  however  had  a  quick 
effect,  in  diminifhing  the  extreme  dread  before  entertained  of  the  Per- 
fian power,  and  in  promoting  a  general  emulation  in  arms  and  in  the 
fpirit  of  independency  among  the  Greeks.  The  Potidaeans,  whofe  fili- 
ation commanded  the  neck  of  the  fruitful  and  rebellious  peninfula  of 
Pallene,  defended  themfelves  fo  vigoroufly  that  little  progrefs  was 
made  in  the  fiege.  But  the  wealth  of  Perfia,  continually  brought 
-forward  to  fupply  the  deficiency  of  military  fcience  and  difcipline, 

H  «  «  created 


4iS 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  X.  created  a  weight  in  the  balance  of  war,  againft  which  the  Greeks 
SECT.  i.  with  difficulty  found  a  counterpoife.  Timoxeinus,  commander  of 
the  Scionsean  auxiliaries  in  Potida?a,  was  bribed  to  a  treafonable  cor- 


Herodot. 
1.  viii.  c.  128 


refpondence  with  the  Perfian  general.     They  communicated  by  means 
of  letters  wrapt  round  arrows  which  were  fhot  to  fpots  agreed  upon. 
The  accidental  wounding  of  a  Potidaean  by  one  of  thefe  arrows,  how- 
ever,  difcovered   the  treafon   before  it   had  gone  to  any  pernicious 
length.     A  crowd  immediately  gathered  about   the  wounded  man; 
and,  on  extracting  the  arrow,  a  letter  from  Artabazus  to  Timoxeinus 
was  found  upon  it.     Three  months  had  now  been  confumed  in  the 
fiege,   and  little  progrefs  made,  when  the  tide,  to  which  many  of  the 
recefles  of  the  /Egean  fea  are  fubjec"l,  flowing  to  an  unufual  height, 
flooded  the  Perlian  camp  -j-.     The  circumftance  was  not  only  alarm- 
ing, but  very  effectually  diftreffing,  in  a  winter-campaign,  to  foldiers 
bred  in  a  warmer  climate.     Immediately  therefore  upon  the  ebb  the 
general  ordered  the  army  to  march,   meaning  to  take  a  ftation  on 
higher  ground  within  the  peninfula  of  Pallene.     Not  half  the  troops 
had  paffed  the  flats  when  the  flood  made  again  with  increafed  violence. 
Many  of  the  Perfians  were  drowned.     The  Potidasans,  obferving  their 
diffrefs,  fallied  in  boats  and  killed  many.     Artabazus  found  it  necef- 
fary  immediately  to  raife  the  fiege,  and  he  led  the  remains  of  his  ar- 
my into  Theflaly. 


SECTION      II. 

Preparations  for  the  Campaign.  Speeches  of  Alexander  King  of  Mace- 
donia, of  the  Lacediefnonian  A/nbaJJador,  and  of  the  Athenian  Minijter 
in  the  Athenian  AJJ'embly.  "The  Athenians  a  fecond  time  quit  Attica.. 
Zeal  of  the  Athenian  People  for  the  profecution  of  the  Perfian  War. 

Herod.  1.  viii.       THE  Perfian  fleet,   as  foon  as  Xerxes  was  pafled  into  Afia,  quit- 
Diodor.  Sic.     ting  the  Hellefpont,  had  gone,  part  to  Samos,  part  to  Cuma,  in  whofe 

l.xi.  c.  27. 

f  See  Herodotus,  b.  vii,  c,  198,  alio  note  48,  p.  680,  of  Weffeling's  edition. 

ports 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  419 

ports  it  wintered.  In  the  fpring,  the  whole  aflembled  at  Samos.  Mif-  CHAP.  X. 
trull  of  thofe  conquered  fubjects  of  the  empire  who  alone  were  mari-  .  ^  . 
ners,  induced  thofe  who  directed  the  affairs  of  the  navy  to  increafe 
the  proportion  of  native  Medes  and  Perfians  among  the  crews.  The 
fleet  however  remained  at  Samos,  to  awe  the  coafts  of  Alia  and 
Thrace  with  the  neighbouring  iflands,  making  no  attempt  weft- 
ward. 

Spring,  lays  the  hiftorian,  and  the  recollection  that  Mardonius 
was  in  Theflaly,  awakened  the  Greeks.  The  affembling  of  the  ar- 
my was  yet  delayed,  but  a  fleet  of  a  hundred  and  twenty  trireme  gal- 
leys was  collected  at  /Egina,  under  Leotychides  king  of  Lacedasmon. 
Xanthippus  the  profecutor  of  Miltiades,  and,  through  his  marriage 
with  the  daughter  of  Megacles,  now  chief  of  the  Alcmaeonids,  com- 
manded the  Athenian  fquadron.  During  the  winter  fome  of  the 
leading  men  of  Chios  had  conlpired  againft  Strattis,  whom  the  Per- 
fians had  appointed  governor,  or,  in  the  Greek  term,  tyrant  of  their 
Hland.  They  were  detected,  but  found  means  to  fly,  and  they  went 
to  ./Egina.  Addrefling  themfelves  to  the  naval  commanders  there, 
they  urged,  That  all  Ionia  was  ripe  for  a  revolt,  and  wanted  only  the 
countenance  of  the  victorious  fleet  of  Greece  to  make  a  powerful  di- 
verfion  for  the  Perfian  arms.  They  prevailed  fo  far  that  the  fleet 
moved  eafhvard,  as  if  to  crofs .the  /Egean  i  but,  flopping  at  Delos, 
dread  of  ingaging  the  might  of  Perlia,  at  a  diftance  from  their  own 
coafts  and  in  feas  lefs  known  to  them,  again  predominated ;  fo  that, 
as  the  hiftorian  proceeds  to  obferve,  the  fpace  between  Samos  and 
Delos  remained  in  peace  through  mutual  fear. 

Mardonius,   meanwhile,  had  not  neglected,  thofe  meafures  whjch 
mieht  promote  the  fuccefs  of  his  arms  by  land.     Senfible  of  the  im-    „     , 

0        r  .  '  i.l        Herod.  1.  v!u. 

portance  of  naval  cooperation,  he   refolved   to  attempt  the  detaching   c.  136,  &feq. 
of  the  Athenians  from  the  Grecian  confederacy;  juftly  thinking  that,   1.  xi.c",  28? 
if  this  could  be  effected,   the  Perfian  fleet  would  immediately  refume 
a  decided  fuperiority.     Alexander  king  .of  Macedonia  was  judicioully 
chofen  for  his  ambafTador  to  the  Athenian 'commonwealth.     ThUt'' 

Hhh  2  prince 


42Q  HISTORY    OF    GREECE 

CHAP.X.     prince  was   intimately  connected  both  with  the  Grecian  and  Per- 
SECT^H.     fian    nations.     His  family   boafted  its   defcent   from    Hercules   and 
Perfeus    through  Temenus  the   Heracleid  king  of  Argos.     It  had 
with    the    Athenian  commonwealth    the    facred  connection  of  he- 
reditary  hofpitality.      Alexander   himfelf  had   communicated   with 
Athens  in   thofe  revered  offices  of  friendfhip.     But  his  fifter  Gygjea 
was  married  to  Bubares,  a  Periian  high  in  rank  and  in  command,  fon. 
of  that  Megabazus   who  in  the  reign  of  Darius  had  conquered  the 
weftern  Thracians,  and  compelled  Amyntas,  father  of  Alexander,   to 
the  delivery  of  earth  and  water.     Yet  tho  Alexander  had  conftantly 
acted  with  the  Perfians,  he  had  neverthelefs,  as  far  as  his  dependent 
fituation  would  permit,  always  (hown  himfelf  friendly  to  the  confe- 
derate Greeks.    Pie  was  well  received  at  Athens.    But  as  the  news  of 
Herod.  1. viii.  his  arrival   would    quickly  be   fpred  through  Greece,    and    would 
" ,41'  probably  excite  jealoufy  among  the  confederates,  efpecially  the  Lace- 

daemonians, the  leaders  of  the  Athenian  adminiftration  judicioufly 
deferred  his  public  audience  before  the  afTembly  of  the  people  till 
minifters  came  from  Sparta. 

Herodotus  does  not  inform  us  who  particularly,  during  thefe  re- 
markable transactions,  directed  the  meafures  of  the  Attic  government  j. 
which  both  in  wifdom  and  in  magnanimity  at  leaft  equal  anything  in 
the  political  hiftory  of  mankind.  Plutarch  attributes  all  to  Ariftides. 
As  early  as  poffible  after  the  arrival  of  the  Lacedaemonian  minifters,, 
an  afTembly  of  the  people  was  fummoned.  The  Lacedaemonian  mi- 
nifters and  the  king  of  Macedonia  were  together  admitted  to  this  really 
public  audience.  Silence  was  proclaimed.  Alexander  role;  and,  ac- 
cording to  the  original  hiftorian,  fpoke  in  this  fimple  and  antiquated 
.     '       ...    but  emphatical  ftile  of  oratory:  *    '  Athenians,    thus  faith  Mardo- 

Herod.l.  viu.  *  * 

c.  140.  '  nius  :  "  The  commands  of  the  king  are  come  to  me,  faying,  I  for- 

"  give  the  Athenians  all  their  offences  against  me.  Now 

"    THEREFORE,  MaRDONIUS,    THUS  DO  :    RESTORE   TO  THEM   THEIR 

*  Teftimony  is  alfo  borne  to  this  remarkable  tranfattion  by  Demofthenes,  2d  Philipp.    Dio- 
dgr us  Sic.   b.xi.  c.  z'6    and  Plutarch  in  Ariftides, 

M  TERRI- 


HISTORYOFGREECE,  42, 

•■  TERRITORY,  AND  ADD  TO  IT  WHATSOEVER  THEMSELVES  SHALL  CHAP.  X. 
•«  CHUSE,  LEAVING  THEM  TO  THEIR  OWN  LAWS;  AND,  IF  THEY  SECT.  IT. 
♦«    WILL   MAKE  ALLIANCE  WITH  ME,    REBUILD   ALL    THE    TEMPLES 

"  which  have  been  burnt.  Such  being  the  king's  commands  to 
"  me,  fo  I  muft  ncceifarily  do  unlefs  you  prevent.  From  myfelf  I 
*4  fay  to  you  thus :  Why  would  you  perfevere  in  the  folly  of  making 
"  war  againft  the  king  ?  You  cannot  overcome  him ;  you  cannot 
•«  long  refift  him.  You  know  how  numerous  his  armies  are,  and 
"  what  they  hive  effected.  You  are  informed  of  the  force  under 
"  my  command.  Should  you  overcome  me,  which  in  reafon  you 
*f  cannot  hope,  immediately  a  flill  greater  force  will  be  fent  againft 
"  you.  As  a  friend  I  recommend  to  you  not  in  the  vain  contefl 
*'  with  the  king  to  lofe  your  country,  but  to  feize  the  honorable  op- 
**  portunity  of  this  offer  from  the  kinghimfelf  for  making  peace.  Be 
"  free;  and  let  there  be  alliance  between  us  without  fraud  or  deceit." 
4  Thefe   things,  O  Athenians,  Mardonius  commanded   me  to  fay  to 

*  you.     For  my  own  part  I  fhall  omit  to  inlarge  upon  the  friendfhip' 

*  I  bear  you,  iince  this  is  not  the  firft  occafion  upon  which  you  have 
'  experienced  it.     I  beg  you  to  accept  the  terms  propofed  by  Mar- 

*  donius ;  for  I  well  fee  the  impoflibility  of  your  long  contending 
'  againft  the  Perfian  empire.     Upon   no  other  confideration  would  I 

*  have  come  to  you  thus  commiffioned.     But  the  king's  power  is  more 

*  than  human  :  his  arm  is  of  unmeafurable  length.     I  dread  the  event: 

*  for  you,  if  you  refufe  the  great  conditions  now  offered.     The  very 

*  fituation  of  your,  country  fhould  indeed  admonifh  you  :    lying  in 

*  the  road  to  the  reft  of  the  confederates,  you  alone  are  firft  expofed, 
and  a&ually  bear  all  the  brunt  of  the  war.     Comply  therefore;  for 

*  it  is  not  a  little  honorable  to  you  that  you  only  among  the  Greeks- 

*  are  felecfed  by  that  great  king  for  offers  of  peace  and  friendfhip.' 
The  king  of  Macedonia  concluded,   and   the  chief  of  the  Spartan 

minifters  rofe :  ?  The  Lacedaemonians,'  he  faid,  *  have  fent  us  to  Herod,  l.viii- 

*  requeft  that  you  will  admit  nothing  to  the  prejudice  of  Greece,  nor 
4  receive  any  propofal  from  the  barbarian.     For  fuch  a  proceeding 

'  were 


t 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

'  were  unjufr,  unbecoming  any  Grecian  people,  and  on  many  accounts 
'  moft  of  all  unbecoming  you.  To  you  indeed  we  owe  this  war, 
'  which  was  excited  contrary  to  our  inclination.     The  quarrel  was 

*  originally  with  you  alone;  now  it  is  extended  to  all  Greece.     That 

*  the  Athenians  therefore,  who  from  of  old  have  more  than  all  man- 
'  kind  aflerted  the   liberties  of  others,   mould  become  the  authors 

*  of  flavery  to  Greece,  would  be  mod  heinous.  We  grieve  for  your 
4  fufferings ;  that  now  for  two  feafons  you  have  loft  the  produce  of 
'  your  lands ;  and  that  the  public  calamity  fhould  fo  long  prefs  fo 

*  feverely  upon  individuals.  The  Lacedaemonians  and  the  other  con- 
'  federates  are  defirous  of  making  you  reparation.  They  willjngage, 
'  while  the  war  fhall  laft,   to  maintain  your  families,  and  all  thofe  of 

*  your  flaves  who  will  not  be  ufeful  to  you  on  military  fervice.     Let 

*  not  therefore  Alexander  the  Macedonian  perfuade  you,  foftening 

*  Mardonius's  mefTage.     He  is  certainly  acting  in  his  proper  fphere. 

*  A  tyrant  himfelf,  he  cooperates  with  a  tyrant.  But  for  you,  pru- 
'  dence  utterly  forbids  what  he  advifes.     You  well  know  that  among 

*  barbarians  there  is  no  faith,  no  truth.' 

In  the  name  of  the  Athenian  people,    according  to   Plutarch  by 

Ariftides,  the  following  anfwer  was  then  made  to  the  king  of  Macedo- 

Herod.  1.  vjii.  nia  :   '  We  know  that  the  power  of  the  Perfian  empire  is  many  times 

:' I43'  «  greater  than  ours.     With  this  therefore  it  was  needlefs  to  reproach 

*  us.     Neverthelefs,   independency  being  our  object,  we  are  deter- 

*  mined  to   defend  ourfelves  to  the  utmoft,  and  you  would  in  vain 

*  perfuade  us  to  make  any  terms  with  the  barbarian.  You  may  there - 

*  fore  tell  Mardonius,  that  the  Athenians  fay,  "  While  the  fun  holds 
**  his  courfe  we  will  never  make  alliance  with  Xerxes  j  but  trufHng  in 
"■  our  affifting  gods  and  heroes,  whofe  temples  and  images  he,  fetting 
««  at  nought,  has  burnt,  we  will  perfevere  in  refilling  him."  For 
'  yourfelf,   come  no  more  to  the  Athenians  with  fuch  propofals,  nor 

*  with  any  view  of  promoting  our  welfare  recommend  what  is  difho- 
'  norable  and  unjuft.   We  fliall  always  be  defirous  of  mowing  you  all 
'  the  friendship  and  refpect  to  which  the  ancient  hofpitality  and  alli- 
ance 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  423 

*  ance  between  us  intitle  you.'  The  Lacedaemonian  minifters  were  then     CHAP.  X. 
addreffed  thus :  *  The  apprehenfion  of  the  Lacedaemonians  that  we     s,ECy-  n; 

«  mio-ht  accept  the  terms  propofed  by  the  barbarian,  was,  upon  a  gene-   Herod.  l.viiL. 

'  ral  view  of  human  nature,  certainly  not  unreafonable  :   but  after  the 

«  proof  you  have  had  of  the  refolution  of  the  Athenians,  it  becomes  a 

■  dishonorable  apprehenfion.     No  riches,  nor  the  offer  of  the  fineft 

«  country  upon  earth,  mould  bribe  us   to  connect  ourfelves  with  the 

'  Perfi?ns  to  the  inflaving  of  Greece.   If  it  was  poflible  that  we  could 

'  be  fo  difpofed,  yet  the  obftacles  are  many  and  great.   Firft,  and  what 

*  principally  affecls  us,  the  images  and  temples  of  the  gods,  burnt  and 

*  reduced  to  rubbifh.  This  it  is  our  indifpenfible  duty  to  refent  and 
'  revenge  to  the  utmoft  rather  than  make  alliance  with  the  perpetrator. 

*  Then,  as  a  Grecian  people,  our  connection  in  blood  and  in  language, 

*  our  common  dedications  to  the  gods,  our  common  facrifices,  and  our 
'  fimilar  cuftoms  and  manners.  Of  thefe  the  Athenians  cannot  be- 
'  come  the  betrayers.  Know  then  this,  if  before  you  knew  it  not, 
f  that  while  one  Athenian  furvives  we  will  never  ally  ourfelves  with 
'  Xerxes.  We  gratefully  acknowlege  your  kind  attention  to  us, 
'amid  the  diltrefs  and  ruin  of  our  private  affairs,  in  propofing  to 
'  maintain  our  families.  We  will  however  fiill  make  the  beft  we  can 
'  of  our  own  means  without  burdening  you.     Thefe  then  being  our 

*  refolutions,  let  there  be  on  your  fide  no  delay  in  correfponding 
c  meafures.     Your  army  muft  march  immediately  ;  for  according  to 

*  all  appearances  it  will  not  be  long  before  the  barbarian  will  invade 

*  our  country  :  he  will  move  inflantly   upon   receiving  information 

*  that  we  have  rejedled  his  propofals.  Before  therefore  he  can  arrivs 
'  in  Attica  it  will  behove  us  to  meet  him  in  Bceotia.'  With  thefe 
anfwers  the  king  of  Macedonia  and  the  Lacedaemonian  ambafTadors 
departed. 

Mardonius  did  not  deceive  the  expectation  of  the  Athenian  leaders.   1.  ix.  c.  1- 
He  advanced  immediately,  by  nearly  the  fame  road  that  Xerxes  had 
taken,  toward  Attica.    The  wonted  hefitation  and  dilatorinefs  mean- 
while prevailed  in  the  counfels  of  the  Peloponnefians.     The  Periian 

army 


4?4 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  X. 
SECT.  II. 

Hciodot.l.ix. 
C.  3. 


1.  ix.  c.  6. 

Plutarch. 
Ariltid. 


Herodot.l.ix. 
c.  4. 

Plutarch* 
Ariltid, 


Herodot.l,ix. 


army  was  already  in  Bceotia,  and  no  meafures  were  taken  by  the  con- 
federacy for  defending  Attica.  Once  more  therefore  it  became  ne- 
ceffary  for  the  Athenians  haftily  to  abandon  their  country.  Probably 
however  the  necefiity  was  lefs  grievous  than  on  the  former  occafion  : 
befide  being  more  prepared,  they  had  lefs  to  apprehend.  Their  own 
fleet  now  commanded  the  Grecian  feas.  In  their  own  ifland  of  Sa- 
lamis  therefore  their  families  and  effects  would,  for  the  prefer) t  at 
leaft,  be  beyond  annoyance  from  the  Perfian  arms.  Thither  all  was 
removed  ;  and  in  the  tenth  month  after  Xerxes  had  quitted  Athens, 
Mardonius  unoppofed  retook  poiTeffion  of  that  city. 

The  conduct  of  the  Peloponneiians,  but  moft  particularly  of  the 
Lacedaemonians  who  were  at  the  head  of  them,  appears  upon  this 
occafion,  by  the  account  of  Plutarch  as  well  as  of  Herodotus,  unge- 
nerous, ungrateful,  and  faithlefs,  if  not  even  daftardly  *  :  that  of 
the  Athenians  magnanimous  even  to  enthuliafm.  Deprived  of  their 
country,  and  apparently  betrayed  by  their  allies,  the  Perfian  general 
thought  this  a  favorable  opportunity  for  attempting  once  more  to 
draw  the  Athenians  from  the  Grecian  confederacy.  He  therefore 
fent  Murichides,  a  Hellefpontian  Greek,  to  Salamis,  with  the  fame 
offers  which  he  had  before  made  by  the  king  of  Macedonia.  The 
minifter  was  admitted  to  audience  by  the  council  of  five  hundred. 
Lycidas  alone  of  the  counfellors  was  for  paying  fo  much  attention  to 
the  propofal  as  to  refer  it  to  an  afTembly  of  the  people.  This  cir- 
cumftance  was  communicated  ;  and,  fo  vehement  was  the  popular  zeal 
for  perfevering  in  enmity  to  Perfia,  a  tumultuous  crowd,  on  the 
rifing  of  the  council,  ftoned  Lycidas  to  death.  The  frenzy  fpred  ; 
and,  what  we  had  rather  not  believe  tho  Herodotus  the  friend  and 
panegyrift  of  Athens  affirms  it,  the  Athenian  women  attacked  the 
houfe  of  the  unfortunate  fenator,  and  his  widow  and  children  pe- 
rifhed  under  their  hands.  The  law  of  nations  was  at  the  fame  time  fo 
far  refpected  that  Murichides  was  difmiffed  without  injury  or  infult. 


*  Plutarch,  in  his  Treatife  againft  Hero-     what,  in  his  Life  of  Ariftides,  he  has  himfelf 
dotus,  has  cenfurcd  that  hiftorian  for  relating     in  flrong  terms  confirmed. 

SECTION 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  4x5 

SECTION      III. 

Campaign  in  Boeotia.     Battle  of  Plateea.     Punijlment  df  Thebes. 

MINISTERS    had  been   fent  from    Athens,   accompanied    by    CHAP.  X, 
others  from  Plataea  and  Megara,  to  remon (Irate  with  the  Lacedaemo-    SECT-  Iir> 
nian  government  on  their  fhameful  neglect  of  their  ingagements,  and   Herodot.l.ix. 
to  learn  what  were  now  to  be  the  meafures  of  the  confederacy.     The  piutarch. 
Lacedaemonians  were  celebrating  their  feaft  of  the  Hyacinthia,  one  of  Anftld- 
the  moil  folemn  of  their  calendar.      This  furnifhing  fome  pretext, 
the  ephors,  thofe  magiftrates  who  had  ufurped  a  power  in  civil  con-   Hcrodot.l.ix. 
cerns   fuperior  to  that  of  the  kings  of  Sparta,  delayed  their  anfwer 
from  day  to  day  for  ten  days  fuccemvely.     The  works  at  the  Co- 
rinthian ifthmus,  never  meanwhile  intermitted,  were  now  upon  the      c.  7  &  8. 
point  of  completion.     The  Athenian  miniflers,  thinking  themfelves 
infulted  and  their  country  betrayed,  determined  on  the  morrow  to        c.  n, 
declare  to  the  Lacedaemonian  fenate  their  fenfe  of  fuch  treatment,  and 
to  leave  Sparta.     At  length  however  the  Lacedaemonians,  after  con- 
futation with  their  allies,  and,  it  is  added,  fome  reproaches  from 
them,  had  determined  upon  jufler  meafures.     Five  thoufand  Spar- 
tans, each  attended  by  feven  helots,  making  all  together  a  body  of 
forty  thoufand  fighting  men  (for  all  the  helots  acted  as  light-armed       c.  29. 
troops)  marched   filently  out  of  the  city  in  the  evening,  under  the 
command  of  Paufanias  fon  of  Cleombrotus,  regent  for  his  coufin 
Pleiflarchus  fon  of  Leonidas,  yet  a  minor.     In  the  morning  when 
the  Athenian  miniflers  came  to  make  their  final  complaint  to  the  fe- 
nate, they  were  told  that  the  Lacedaemonian  army  was  already  on  the 
confines  of  Arcadia  in  its  way  to  meet  the  Perfians.     The  Argians 
were,  according  to  Herodotus,  fo  thoroughly  in  the  Perfian  interefl, 
that  they  had  undertaken  to  intercept  any  Spartan  troops  which  fhould 
attempt  to  quit  Laconia.     The  fuddennefs  and  fecrecy  of  Paufanias's 
march  defeated  their  intention.      Immediately  however,   on  receiving 
intelligence  that  the  Lacedaemonian  army  had  entered  Arcadia,  they 
fent  information  to  Mardonius. 

I  i  i  While 


426  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  X.        While  the  Perfian  general  had  any  hope  of  bringing  over  the  Athe- 
SECT.  ill.    njanS)  he  had  carefully  fpared  Attica  ;  but  as  foon  as  he  had  allured 
Herodot.i.ix.  himfelf  that  they  were  immoveable,  he  gave  up  the  country  for  plun- 
der to  his  troops,    and   he  completely  deftroyed   the   city.      Then, 
c.  15.  hearing  that  the  Peloponnefians  were  in  motion,  he  haftened  back 

Diod.S1cl.x1.   jntQ  gloria     a  country  more  commodious  for  the  action  of  his  nu- 
merous  cavalry,  nearer  to  his  magazines,  which  were  principally  at 

Herodot.i.ix.  Thebes,  and    from  whence,    in   any  misfortune,    retreat   would   be 
c  41.       .-. 

more  open,  while,  in  fuccefs,  the  way  was  equally  ready  into  Pelopon- 

nefus.  He  fixed  his  camp  in  the  Theban  territory,  extending  it 
along  the  courfe  of  the  Afopus  from  Erythrse  toward  Hyfiae  on  the 
border  of  the  Plataean  lands.  Within  this  tract  he  chofe  a  fituation 
where  he  fortified  a  fpace  of  fomething  more  than  a  fquare  mile. 

The  Lacedaemonians  meanwhile  were  joined  at  the  iflhmustby  the 
other  Peloponnefians  of  the  confederacy  ;  and  there,  according  to  the 
conftant  practice  of  the  Greeks  in  all  momentous  undertakings,  after 
folemn   facrifices   the    bowels   of   the  viclims   were   obferved,    from 
whence  perfons  believed  to  be  infpiied,   or,  if  fuch    were  not  to  be 
found,  perfons  learned  in  divination,  undertook  to  know  how  far  and 
upon  what  conditions  the  gods  would  be  propitious.     Tiiamenus,  an 
c"  53-         Eleian,  attended  Paufanias  in  quality  of  prophet  to  the  army.     The 
Lacedaemonians  had  fuch  confidence  in  the  fortune  and  prophetical 
abilities  of  this  man  that,   to  fecure  him  to  themlelves  when  he  had 
refufed  all  other  price,  they  admitted  him  and  his  brother  to  the  full 
privileges  of  Spartan  citizens  ;  an  honor  never,  to  the  time  of  Hero- 
dotus,  conferred  upon  any  other  perfon.      Upon  the  prefent  occafion 
c  j  the  fymptoms  were  very  favorable  ;   which  would  perhaps  commonly 

happen  when  meafures  were  already  refolved  upon  ■,  tho,  among  the 
Geeeks,  policy  and  fuperftition  were  fo  intimately  blended,  that  it  is 
often  difficult   to  difcover  what  fhould  be  attributed  to  each.     At 
c.  19  V.  28.      Eleuiis  the  combined  army  was  joined  by  the  Athenian  forces,  to  the 
l.xi.'c.  30.       chief  command  of  which  Ariftides  had   been  raifed  by  a  particular 
ArirtidCh'         decree  of  the  people.     Here  farther  facrifices  were  made,  and  the 

fymptoms 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  427 

fymptoms  of  the  victims  were  again  favorable.     The  army  therefore     CHAP.  x. 

proceeded  with  confidence  into  Bceotia,  and  took  a  polition  on  the    b( -j' 

roots  of  mount  Cithseron  oppoiite  to  the  Perlian  camp,  the  river 
Afopus  flowing  between  them. 

Mardonius  had  judicioufly  left  the  paflage  of  the  mountains  unin- 
terrupted to  the  Grecian  troops ;  his  bufinefs  being,  if  poflible,  to 
draw  them  into  the  champain  country ;  where,  through  his  ca- 
valry, on  which,  then  as  at  this  day,  was  the  principal  reliance  of 
Afxatic  armies,  victory  would  be  nearly  certain,  and  probably  eafy  to 
him.  But  Paufanias  would  not  move  from  his  advantageous  ground;  Herodot.l.ix. 
and  his  pofition  was  fo  ftrong  that  the  Perfian  general  could  not  ven-  ( 
ture  an  attempt  to  force  it.  He  ordered  therefore  Mafiftius,  his  ge- 
neral of  the  cavalry,  to  advance  with  all  the  horfe,  and,  by  harraffing 
in  various  parts,  to  make  the  Greeks  uneafy  in  their  Situation  ;  not 
neglecting  at  the  fame  time,  if  he  could  find  or  create  an  opportu- 
nity, to  attempt  an  impreflion.  The  Perfian  cavalry  all  ufed  mifiile 
weapons,  darts  or  arrows  or  both ;  a  practice  by  which,  near  four 
centuries  and  a  half  after,  they  deftroyed  the  Roman  army  under 
Craffus,  and  in  which  the  horfemen  of  the  fame  countries  are  {till 
wonderfully  fkilful  at  this  day.  Like  the  Eaftern  cavalry  at  this  day 
alfo  they  commonly  attacked  or  harrafTed  by  fmall  bodies  in  fuccef- 
fion;  vehement  in  onfet,  never  long  in  conflict,  but,  if  the  enemy 
was  firm  in  refiftance,  retreating,  as  haftily  as  they  had  advanced,  to 
prepare  for  another  charge. 

The  Megarian  camp  was  in  the  part  of  the  Grecian  line  the  mofr.  c.  21. 
acceflible  to  cavalry.  Here  therefore  Mafiftius  directed  his  principal  Plut>  Ariftid. 
efforts.  The  Megarians,  fomewhat  furprized  by  the  novel  manner 
of  the  attack,  neverthelefs  maintained  their  ftation.  Wearied  how- 
ever at  length  by  the  unceafing  fucceffion  of  frefh  troops,  all  of  whom 
approached  juft  enough  to  give  opprobrious  language,  difcharge  their 
darts  and  arrows,  and  then  inftantly  retired,  the  Megarian  leaders 
fent  to  inform  Paufanias  of  their  diftrefs  ;  adding,  that  they  muff 
abandon  their  poll  if  not  quickly  relieved.     Paufanias  himfelf  was  at 

I  i  i  2  a  lofs 


4^8 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


Plutarch 
Aditid. 


CHAP.  X.     a  i0fs  how  effectually  to  oppofe  thofe  defultory  attacks  of  the  Perfian 
SECT.  ill.    cavairy.     He  affembled  the  generals  for  their  advice,   and  expreffed 
his  wifh  that  volunteers  could  be  found  to  undertake  a  bufinefs  which 
was  fo  new  to  him  that  he  was  unwilling  to  rilk  orders  upon  it. 
The  Athenians  alone  offered  themfelves.     Ariftides  had  had  the  ad- 
vantage of  ferving  in  a  high  command  under  the  great  Miltiades  at 
the  battle  of  Marathon.     Upon  the  prefent  occafion  he  felefted  an 
Herodot.  &     active  officer  named  Olympiodorus,  under  whole  command  he  placed 
Plutarch,  ut     three  hundred  chofen  heavy-armed  foot,  with  a  large  proportion  of 
archers  and  javelin- men.     Thefe  feem  to  have  been,  in  the  Athenian 
armies,  fuperior  to  the  light  troops  of  the  Peloponnefians ;  and  pro- 
bably alfo  to  thofe  of  the  Megarians ;  who,  being  a  Dorian  people 
from   Peloponnefus,   might  pride  themfelves  upon  adhering  to  the 
Peloponnefian  difcipline.     Olympiodorus  haftened  to  the  relief  of 
the  preffed  part  of  the  line.     The  Perfian  horfe,  who,  by  the  fwift- 
nefs  of  their  retreat,  eluded  every  effort  of  the  Megarian  heavy-armed 
foot,   found  themfelves   unexpectedly  incommoded  by  the  Athenian 
bowmen.     Charging  to  difperfe  them,   they   were  received   by   the 
heavy-armed  foot,   upon  whom  they  could  make  no  impreflion,   but 
fuffered  in    the  attempt.     Mafiftius,   vexed  to   be  thus   baffled,   and 
anxious  to  recover  an  advantage  from  which  he  had  promifed  himfelf 
credit,  advanced  to  direft  and  incourage  thofe  defultory  attacks  fo  har- 
rafling  to  regular  infantry.  In  the  inftant  of  a  charge  his  horfe,  wounded 
with  an  arrow,  reared  upright,  and  Mafiftius  fell.     His  troop?,  at- 
tentive to  their  ufual  evolution,  without  adverting  to  their  general's 
misfortune  wheeled  and  retreated  full  fpeed.     The  Athenian  heavy- 
armed  foot,  rufliing  forward,   furrounded   Mafiftius.     His  horfe  was 
caught  and  led  off.     Himfelf,  lying  on  the  ground,  after  the  excel- 
lence of  his  armour,  which  was  complete  like  that  of  the  knights  of 
weftern  Europe  in  the  times  of  chivalry,  had  long  refifted  the  efforts 
of  the  Athenian  foldiers,  was  at  length  pierced  in  the  eye  by  a  javelin, 
which  penetrated  to  the  brain.  The  Perfian  cavalry,  halting  at  their  ufual 
diftance  from  the  enemy,  waited  in  vain  for  frefh  commands.     Per- 
ceiving then  their  lofs,   the  whole  body  prepared  to  charge  together, 

to 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  429 

to  revenge  their  flain  general,  or,  at  leaft,  to  recover  the  body.  CHAP.  X. 
Olympiodorus,  expecting  this,  had  fent  for  fuccour ;  but  the  Per-  SECT.  HI. 
fians  made  their  charge  before  any  fufficient  reinforcement  could  ar- 
rive, and  the  Athenians  were  obliged  to  retire  for  more  advantageous 
ground.  Affiftance  however  was  not  delayed.  The  Grecian  foot 
charged  the  Perfian  horfe,  put  them  to  flight,  and  recovered  their 
prize.  The  cavalry  flood  again  at  the  diftance  of  about  a  quarter  of 
a  mile  ;  but,  after  fome  confultation  among  the  principal  furviving 
officers,   retreated  to  their  camp. 

Mafiftius  was  a  man  very  high  both  in  rank  and  in  efteem  among 
the  Perfians,  and,  as  it  appears  from  Herodotus,  next  in  command 
to  Mardonius.  His  death  was  therefore  lamented  in  their  camp  with  Herodot.l.ix. 
all  the  pomp  of  public  mourning,  and  every  honorable  teftimony  of  c"  ~4' 
general  grief.  The  event  was,  on  the  other  hand,  not  a  little  in-  c.  2$. 
couraging  to  the  Greeks.  The  leaders  derived  juft  confidence  from 
the  experience  that  the  formidable  cavalry  of  the  Eafl  could  be  re- 
filled ;  and  the  body  of  the  flain  general,  borne  on  a  carriage  through 
the  whole  camp,  however  in  itfelf  a  melancholy  objeft,  was,  in 
this  feafon,  an  animating  fpectacle  to  the  foldiers.  It  was  now 
determined  to  quit  the  prefent  ground ;  which,  tho  otherwife  ad- 
vantageous, had  been  found  inconvenient  from  fcarcity  of  water  (for 
the  decided  fuperiority  of  the  enemy  in  cavalry  made  it  difficult  to 
water  from  the  Afopus),  and  to  venture  to  a  lower  fituation  within 
the  Platcean  territory,  near  the  Gargaphian  fountain.  In  their  march 
from  Erythra?  they  kept  the  mountain-ridge  by  Hyfia?,  but  the 
ground  of  incampment  confifted  of  gentle  eminences  only. 

In  this  fituation,  nothing  forbidding,  the  troops  of  every  Grecian  c.  25,  26, 
ftate  claimed  their  accuflomed  pofl  in  the  line.  The  Lacedaemonians, 
having  been  long  the  leading  people  of  Greece,  had  the  right  as  their 
acknowleged  privilege.  The  Athenians,  unqueflionably  next  in  con- 
fequence,  thought  themfelves  intitled  to  the  fecond  rank;  but  having 
never  acted  in  any  large  body  with  Peloponnelian  armies,  no  cuflom 
had  eftablifhed  their  degree  of  precedency.     The  Tegeans  therefore 

claimed 


Herod, 
c.  27. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 

claimed  the  left  of  the  line,  as  their  poft  by  ancient  prefcription.  A 
very  ruinous  quarrel  might  have  infued  but  for  the  wife  and  dignified 
conduct  of  the  Athenian  commanders.  The  difpute  was  brought  be- 
fore a  meeting  of  the  officers  of  the  army.  The  Tegeans  urged  their 
claim  in  a  ftudied  oration,  fupporting  it  by  a  long  detail  of  the  great 
actions  of  their  anceftors.  ArifUdes  anfwered  for  the  Athenians  *. 
'  We  underftand,'  he  faid,  '  that  we  came  here  not  to  harangue  but 
'  to  fight.  Otherwife,  were  we  difpofed  to  boaft  of  the  deeds  in 
1  arms  of  our  ancestors,  we  could  go  as  far  into  antiquity  as  the  Ar- 
'  cadians,  and  perhaps  find  more  honorable  teftimonies  in  our  favor. 
'  For  what  has  pafl'ed  in  our  own  times  we  need  only  mention  Mara- 
'  thon.  But  we  think,  it  highly  unbecoming,  in  a  moment  like  the 
'  prefent,  to  be  difputing  about  precedency.     We  are  ready  to  obey 

*  you,  Laceda?monians,  wherefoever,  and  next  to  whomfoever  you 
'  think  it  for  the  common  advantage  to  place  us.     Wherever  our  fta- 

*  tion  may  be  appointed,  we  fhall  endeavour  to  act  as  becomes  us  in 
'  the  common  caufe  of  Greece.      Command  therefore,  and   depend 

*  upon  our  obedience.'  The  Lacedaemonians  without  helitation, 
and  with  one  voice  exclaimed,  that  '  The  Athenians  ought  to  have 
'  the  poft  of  honor  in  preference  to  the  Arcadians.'  The  army  was 
then  difpofed  in  the  following  order :  Five  thoufand  Spartans  of  the 
city  held  the  firfl  place  on  the  right,  attended  by  thirty-five  thoufand 
light-armed  Helots :  then  five  thoufand  Lacedaemonians  of  the  other 
towns  of  Laconia,  attended  by  five  thoufand  Helots.  Next  to  thefe 
were  the  Tegeans,  in  number  fifteen  hundred  :  then  five  thoufand  Co- 
rinthians, three  hundred  Potidaeans  from  Pallene,  fix  hundred  Orcho- 
menians  of  Arcadia,  three  thoufand  Sicyonians,  eight  hundred  Epidau- 
rians,  one  thoufand  Trcezenians,  two  hundred  Lepreans,  four  hundred 
Mycenx-ans  and  Tirynthians,  one  thoufand  Phliafians,  three  hundred 
Hermionians,  fix  hundred  Eretrians  and  Styrians,  four  hundred  Chal- 
cidians,    five  hundred  Ambracians,   eight   hundred   Leucadians   and 


*  Herodotus,  in  relating  this  tranfaflion,  fpeaks  of  the  Athenians  in  general,  without  nam- 
ing any  one.     Plutarch  attributes  all  to  Ariftides. 

Anactorians, 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  431 

Anactorians,  two  hundred  Paleans  of  Cephallenia,  five  hundred  JEgl-  CHAP.  X. 
netans,  three  thoufand  Megareans,  fix  hundred  Plataeans,  and  laftly  SECT.  III. 
eight  thoufand  Athenians  held  the  extreme  of  the  left  wing.  Thefe, 
exclufively  of  the  Helots,  were  together  thirty-eight  thoufand  feven 
hundred;  all  heavy-armed  foot.  But  every  Spartan  of  the  city  had 
feven  Helots  attending  him  :  every  other  Lacedemonian  had  one  ;  and 
the  Haves,  who  acled  as  light-armed  foldiers,  attending  the  other  Greeks, 
were  alfo,  according  to  Herodotus,  about  in  the  proportion  of  one  to  Herodot.l.ix. 
every  heavy-armed  foldier.  The  light-armed  would  thus  be  in  all 
fixty-nine  thoufand  five  hundred,  and  the  total  number  of  fighting 
men  *  a  hundred  and  eight  thoufand  two  hundred.  There  were  be- 
tides eighteen  hundred  Thelpians  not  regularly  armed,  who  would 
make  the  whole  a  hundred  and  ten  thoufand.  Herodotus  makes  no 
mention  of  horfe  in  the  Grecian  army;  probably  becaufe  the  force 
was  inconfiderable  and  utterly  incompetent  to  face  the  numerous  and 
excellent  cavalry  of  Perfia. 

As  foon   as   it  was  known   that  the  Greeks   had  filed  off  toward   c*  JI' 

t->i  •  c"  4°" 

Platan,  Mardonius  alfo  moved  and  incamped  over  againft  them,  keep- 
ing ftill  the  Afopus  in  his  front.  Herodotus  fuppofes  his  army  to 
have  confined  now  of  three  hundred  and  fifty  thoufand  fighting 
men;  of  whom  fifty  thoufand  were  Greeks  or  Macedonians;  tho, 
he  fays,  the  number  of  thefe  was  never  exadlly  afcertained.  In  the 
number  of  the  others  alfo  he  has  omitted  to  deducl  thofe  probably  loft 
in  the  march  of  Artabazus  and  in  winter-quarters,  together  with  the 
fick,  betide  thofe  by  his  own  account  deftroyed  at  the  liege  of  Potidgea. 
Among  the  Greeks  under  the  Perfian  banners,  a  thoufand  Phocians 
followed  with  extreme  reluctance  ;  while  their  fellowcountrymen,  who 
had  taken  refuge  among  the  faftnefles  of  ParnaiTus,  were,  with  all  the 
activity  that  the  zeal  of  revenge  and  the  luft  of  plunder  united  could 
excite,  continually  harraffing  the  outfkirts  of  the  army. 

*  Av\Z*  puxipuv.  There  were  perhaps  other  flaves  who  did  not  bear  arms,  and  there  might 
be  light-armed  foidiers  who  were  not  flaves.  Such  probably  the  Thefpians  were.  See  note  49, 
p.  706,  of  Wefleling's  Herodotus, 

Mardonius, 


43* 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  X.         Mardonius,  as  well  as  Paufanias,  had  an  Eleian  prophet  in  his  pay. 

SEC  i  •  HI.     Herodotus,  who  is  very  particular  in  his  account  of  the  bufinefs,  af- 

Herodot.Lix.  firms  that  the  Perfian  general  had  even  taken  pains  to  acquire  infor- 
mation from  the  Grecian  oracles  concerning  the  event  of  the  war. 
The  prophetical  cavern  of  Trophonius  at  Lebadea  in  Bceotia  had 
been  particularly  confulted  for  him.  Poflibly  he  might  think  it  of 
confequence  to  propagate  the  belief  among  the  Greeks,  both  his 
auxiliaries  and  his  enemies,  that  their  own  gods  favored  the  Perfian 
caufe.  But  the  Greeks  under  his  command  had  alfo  their  particular 
prophet,  whofe  predictions  might  be  inconvenient  to  him,  and  againrt: 
whom  a  Grecian  prophet  under  his  own  influence  might  be  ufeful. 
For  himfelf  it  is  utterly  unlikely  that  he  would  pay  any  regard  to  the 
oracles  of  deities  the  belief  in  whom  the  religion  of  his  country  taught 
him  to  deipife  and  abhor.  The  Grecian  prophets  however  in  both 
armies,  on  infpection  of  the  facrificed  victims,  foretold  victory  to  their 
own,  provided  it  received  the  attack.  Thefe  prophecies,  if  dictated 
by  policy,  appear  on  both  fides  judicious*.  For  the  Greeks  had 
only  to  keep  their  advantageous  ground  while  the  vaft  army  of  their 
enemy  confumed  its  magazines,  and  they  would  have  the  benefit  of 
victory  without  rifk.  To  the  Perfians  alfo  the  fame  prediction  might 
be  ufeful ;  to  account  to  the  foldier  for  the  inaction  of  his  general 
before  an  army  fo  inferior,  and  to  keep  him  quiet  under  his  fufferings 
from  fcarcity  and  probably  badnefs  of  provifions,  together  with  the 
want  of  many  things  to  which  Afiatics  were  accuflomed,  while  means 
were  fought  to  intice  or  to  force  the  Greeks  from  their  pofition.    Eight 

c.  39.  days  palled  without  any  material  attempt  on  either  fide.     But  during 

this   quiet  Mardonius  obtained  exa£t  information  of  the  defiles  of 


*  If  the  fimple  Herodotus  fometimes  tires 
with  reiterated  details  of  the  fuperftition  of  his 
age,  yet  the  philofophic  Plutarch  is  far  more 
difgulting.  Herodotus,  drawing  his  pictures 
from  the  life,  is  often  informing,  and  never 
fails  to  be  in  fome  degree  amufing.  We  are 
indeed  fometimes  at  a  lofs  to  know  what  he 


believed  himfelf ;  and  often  we  wiih  in  vain  to 
difcover  how  far  the  real  belief  of  ftatefmen 
and  generals  has  operated,  and  where  their 
policy  only  has  made  ufe  of  the  credulity  of 
the  vulgar.  Here  we  might  expeft  the  philo- 
fophcr  of  an  inlightened  age  to  aflilt  us ;  but 
we  are  totally  difappointed. 


mount 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


433 


mount  Cithjcron,  through  which  the  Grecian  army  received  its  fup-  CHAP.  X. 
plies.  On  the  evening  of  the  ninth  day  a  large  body  of  horfe  marched.  t  _^ 
Juft  where  the  defile  meets  the  plain  they  fell  in  with  a  convoy.  They 
killed  men  and  cattle  till  fated  with  (laughter,  and  drove  the  re- 
mainder to  their  camp.  Two  days  then  again  paffed  without  any 
considerable  event,  neither  army  venturing  to  pafs  the  Afopus ;  but 
the  Perfian  horfe,  in  detached  bodies,  were  unceafingly  harrafling  the 
Greeks. 

Whether  the  Grecian  foothfayer  in  the  Perfian  general's  pay  was 
really  intra&able,  or  whether  only  the  hiftorian's  deiire  to  eitablifh 
the  credit  of  the  religion  of  his  country  induced  him  to  propagate 
and  perhaps  believe  the  report,  Mardonius,  we  are  told,  at  length 
determined  to  difregard  the  Grecian  prognoftics,  which  forbad 
attack,  and  to  follow  only  the  laws  and  cuftoms  of  the  Perfians  in 
ingaging  the  enemy.  The  conduct  however  which  Herodotus  attri-  Herodot.l.«x. 
butes  to  him  upon  this  occalion,  fhows  both  the  general  and  the  po-  c*  42' 
litician.  Having  fummoned  the  principal  Grecian  officers  of  his 
army,  he  afked  if  they  knew  of  any  oracle  declaring  that  a  Perfian 
army  mould  perifh  in  Greece.  None  would  own  that  they  knew  of 
any  fuch,  tho  it  feems  a  report  of  fuch  an  oracle  had  been  circulated. 
'  Then',  faid  Mardonius,  '  I  will  tell  you,  that  I  well  know  an  oracle 
'  has  foretold  the  deftru&ion  of  a  Perfian  army  that  mail  plunder  the 
'  temple  of  Delphi.  Be  however  allured  that  the  army  under  my 
'  orders  mall  never  violate  that  temple.  The  Greeks  therefore,  allies 
*  of  the  Perfians,  may  proceed,  confident  of  the  favor  of  their  gods, 
'  and  of  victory.'  He  then  declared  his  intention  to  attack  the  con- 
federates on  the  next  day,  and  directed  to  prepare  accordingly.  As 
the  hiftorian  had  converted  with  Boeotians  of  rank  who  lerved  under  c« l6- 
Mardonius,  the  account  of  this  tranfadtion,  in  itfelf  probable,  might 
come  to  him  well  authenticated. 

Among  thofe  of  Grecian  race  who  were  now  fubjedh  of  the  Per- 
fian empire,  Alexander  king  of  Macedonia,  from  an  independent 
ibvereign   become  the  follower  of  a  Perfian  general,  would  not  na- 

Kkk  turally 


43  4- 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 


Herodot.l.ix 
c.  44,   45. 
Plutarch. 
Ariitid. 


CHAP.  X.  turally  be  the  moft  fatisfied  with  his  new  fituation.  Revolving  ill 
H«  his  mind  all  the  poffible  confequences  of  the  approaching  day,  lie 
could  not  reft.  At  midnight  he  mounted  his  horfe,  rode  to  the  Athe- 
nian line,  and  demanded  to  fpeak  with  the  general.  Ariftides,  in- 
formed that  an  unknown  perfon  on  horfeback  from  the  Perfian  camp, 
and  apparently  of  rank,  demanded  to  fpeak  with  him,  aflembled  fome 
of  his  principal  officers,  and  went  with  them  to  the  place.  The 
king  of  Macedonia  told  them,  ■  that  Mardonius  had  determin-. 
'  ed  to  attack  the  Grecian  camp  next  morning,  and  had  given 
'  his  orders  for  the  purpofe.  Should  anything  neverthelefs  prevent 
'  the  attack  from  taking  place,  he  advifed  that  the  Grecian  generals 
'  mould  perfevere  in  holding  their  prefent  fituation;  for  the  deficiency 

*  of  the  magazines,  he  faid,  would  foon  compel  the  Perfians  to  retire. 
'  His  affection  for  the  Greek  nation  in  general,  and  his  particular  re- 

*  gard  for  the  Athenian  people,   had  induced  him  to  hazard  the  very 

*  dangerous  meafure  in  which  they  faw  him  ingaged.     He  need  not 

*  therefore,  he  was  fure,  requeft  from   them  that  fecrecy  which  his 

*  fafety  required  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  fliould  the  war  at  laft  have  a 
'  favorable  iflue  for  them,  he  trufted  that  his  known  inclination  to 
'  the  Grecian  caufe,  and  more  efpecially  his  fervice  of  that  night 
«  would  be  remembered,   when  Greece,   being  free,  might  aflift  Ma- 

*  cedonia  in  recovering  independency.'  Alexander  haftened  back  to 
his  own  camp ;  Ariftides  immediately  went  to  Paufanias  with  the 
intelligence  he  had  received. 

On  the  arrival  of  the  Athenian  general  at  the  commander  in  chief's 
tent,  the  important  confultation  was  inftantly  entered  upon  in  what 
manner  to  refill  the  attack  expected  in  a  few  hours,  which  was  to  de- 
cide the  fate  of  Greece.  It  had  been  obferved  that  the  native  Perfians, 
efteemed  far  fuperior  to  the  other  Aiiatic  infantry,  held  the  left  of  the 
enemy's  line  againft  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  the  Greeks  in  the 
Perfian  fervice  the  right  againft  the  Athenians.  Paufanias  propofed 
a  change  in  the  order  of  the  Grecian  army  ;  that  the  Athenians,  who 
alone  of  the  confederates  had  any  experience  of  action  with  the  Per- 
fians, 


Herodot.l.ix 
0  46. 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  435 

fians,  and  who  were  elate,   not  only  with   the  memory  of  their  great     CHAP.  X. 
victory  at  Marathon,   but  alfo   with  the  event  of  their  recent  ingage-    seCt-  Ilf- 
ment  with  the  cavalry,   mould  move  to  the  right  wing,  and  that  the 
Lacedemonians,  long  accuftomed  to  be  fuperior  to  all   the  Greeks, 
Ihould  take  the  left.    Ariitides  readily  confented,  and  orders  were  im- 
mediately given  accordingly.    Day  broke,  and  the  Perfian  generals  ob- 
ferved  that  the  Grecian    troops  were  in  motion.     This  unexpected   Herod.  1.  i*. 
circumftance  induced  them  to  defer  the  intended  attack.     Change  in    p^rch  A- 
their  own  difpofition  might  become  neceflary.     Changes  were  made.  nftu3. 
The  day  was  confumed  in  evolutions  of  both  armies,  and  the  Perfian 
infantry  never  came  into  action.     But   the  cavalry  harraffed  unceaf-   „     ,     ,  . 

■'  m  J  Heroiiot.  1.  ix. 

ingly  the  more  acceffible  parts  of  the  Grecian  line.  Generally  they  0  49. 
did  no  more  than  difcharge  their  bows  and  haftily  retire  j  but  thus  r\ftid.  C 
they  kept  a  conftant  alarm  ;  and,  while  they  inflicted  many  wounds, 
afforded  little  opportunity  for  revenge.  A  more  ferious  attack  was 
however  made  upon  that  part  of  the  Lacedaemonian  line  which 
guarded  the  Gargaphian  fountain.  Here  the  horfe  remained  mailers 
of  the  field. 

Night  put  an  end  to  this  defultory  kind  of  action;  when,   after  a   UeroA  1#-1X# 
day  of  unremitted   fatigue  *,  the  Grecian  army  was  without  water.   <=■  50. 
Provisions  alfo  began  to  fail,  the  activity  of  the  Perfian  horfe  intercept- 
ing all  fupplies.    To  move  therefore  was  indifpenfible.     At  little  more 
than     a    mile    from    the   Gargaphian   fountain   toward  Plataea,     the 

.  .  c.  51. 

waters  of  the  Afopus,  in  their  defcent  from  mount  Cithaeron,  form-  Plutarch. 
ed  an  ifland  not  half  a  mile  wide.  This  fpot,  for  the  fake  of  water,  n  '  ' 
it  was  determined  to  occupy.  At  the  fame  time  it  was  refolved  to 
lend  half  the  army  to  the  mountains  to  bring  in  a  convoy  of  provi- 
sions which  waited  there,  not  daring  to  ftir  beyond  the  defiles.  But 
they  feared  to  attempt  a  movement  in  the  plain  in  prefence  of  the  Per- 
fian horfe,  from  which  in  their  very  camp  they  had  fo  fuffered.  The 
fecond  watch  of  the  night  was  therefore  the  time  appointed  for  the 
march.  But  when,  danger  prefling,  fear  ran  high,  the  troops  of  each  inde- 

*   K.-IW   f*i»    Tn>   hf-ifim    "nu.7xv,    irgoaxiifnivni;    Tn?    iVwB,    ipjo»   fl-owx    <*Tfi>To».      Heiod,  1.  IX,  C.  J2. 

i 

K  k  k  2  pendent 


436  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.  x.  pendent  ftate  little  regarded  the  orders  of  the  commander  in  chief. 
SECT\III.  jnftead  0f  halting  at  the  ifland,  they  fled  (for  that  is  the  term  ufed 
Hemdot.l. ix.  by  Herodotus  and  confirmed  even  by  Plutarch)  as  far  as  the  temple 
Plutarch.         of  Juno  under  the  walls  of  Plataca,   at  the  diftance  of  two  miles  and 

"  a  half  from  the  Gargaphian  fountain. 

Herod,  hi*.  The  obftinacy  of  a  Spartan  officer,  from  which  only  unfortunate 
Plutarch'  confequences  could  reafonably  be  expected,  led  immediately  to  the  great 
AnftiJ.  anfj  moft  important  victory  which  followed.     Amompharetus,  whole 

military  rank  was  that  of  lochage,  but  who  was  befides  vefted  with 
the  facred  dignity  of  the  priefthood,  urging  the  laws  of  his  country 
againft  his  general's  orders,  abfolutely  refufed  to  retreat.  Paufanias, 
incenfed  at  this  difobedience,  yet,  as  the  circumftance  was  altogether 
new  in  the  Spartan  fervice,  at  a  lofs  how  to  act,  detained  the  Lace- 
demonian forces  while  the  others  were  preffing  their  march.  But 
the  Athenian  general,  ever  attentive  to  the  fervice  of  the  confede- 
racy at  large,  before  he  would  fuffer  his  own  troops  to  move,  fent  to 
inquire  the  caufe  of  the  delay  of  which  he  was  informed  among  the 
Herodot.l.ix.  Lacedaemonians.  The  officer  difpatched  upon  this  occafion  found 
Plutarch.  tne  commander  in  chief  in  high  altercation  with  Amompharetus ; 
who,  at  the  inflant  of  the  Athenian's  arrival,  taking  up  a  large  ftone 
in  both  his  hands,  in  allufion  to  the  Grecian  mode  of  voting  by 
cafting  a  fhell,  a  pebble,  or  a  die  into  an  urn,  threw  it  before  his  ge- 
neral's feet,  faying,  '  With  this  die  I  give  my  vote  not  to  fly  from  the 
*'  flrangers :'  for  by  that  gentle  term  the  Lacedaemonians  ufually  dif- 
tinguifhed  foreigners,  whom  the  other  Greeks  called  barbarians.  Pau - 
fanias  defired  the  Athenian  officer  to  report  to  his  immediate  com- 
mander what  he  had  feen,  and  to  requelt  that  the  motions  of  the  Athe- 
nian troops  might  be  directed  by  what  fhould  be  obferved  of  the 
Lacedaemonian.  At  length,  day  breaking,  he  gave  his  orders  for  the 
Herodoul.ix,  Lacedaemonians  with  the  Tegeans,  who  alone  of  the  other  confede- 
rates remained  with  him,  to  move  toward  the  propofed  ground  of 
incampment.  They  directed  their  march  along  the  hills  :  The  Athe- 
nians only  ventured  in  the  plain.  Then  at  laft  Amompharetus,  yield- 
ing 


Aiiitid. 


c.  56. 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  437 

ing  fomething  of  his  obftinacy,  ordered  his  lochus,  with  a  flow  pace,     CHAP.  X. 
to  follow  the  reft  of  the  army.  sbC  r' n1. 

The  dawn  again  difcovered  to   the  Perfians   the  Grecian  army  in 
unexpected  motion.     The  horfe,  always  alert,    and  now  elate  with    c  ,-  ° 
the  fuccefs  of  the  preceding  day,  was  quickly  upon   the  Lacedaemo- 
nian rear.     The  movement  of  the  Greeks  being  taken  for  flight,  Mar-  c.  58. 
donius  led  the  Perfian  infantry  in  purfuit.     The  whole  army  followed,          c.  59. 
with  all  the  hafte  and  confuiion  of  an  ill-difciplined  multitude  eager 
to  fliare  in  certain  victory.     The  Grecian  general  had  not    been  im- 
mediately aware  of  the  cowardly  difobedience  of  that  large  part  of 
his  forces  which  had  pufhed  on  beyond  the  ground  intended  to  be  oc- 
cupied.     It   was  now  advifable,    if  poflible,  to  join  them;    but  the 
Perfian  horfe  fo  annoyed  his   rear,  with  defuitory  attacks  continually  6o 
reiterated,   that  it  became  neceflary  to  make  a  ftand.      He  fent  there- 
fore to  inform  the  Athenian  general  of  all  circumftances,  and  to  re- 
queft   his  immediate  cooperation  in  an  effort  to  repel   the  enemy's 
cavalry.      Ariftides  readily  confented  ;    but,   before  he  could  join  the 
Lacedaemonians,  the  Grecian  troops  in  the  Periian  fexvice  were  upon          c.  61. 
him,  and  he  had  himfelf  to  cope 'with  fuperior  numbers.     The  Lace-    ^!{';jUch'  A* 
daemonians  and  Tegeans  however  alone  formed  a  considerable  army. 
They  were  above  eleven  thoufand  heavy -armed  foot,    and  more  than 
forty  thoufand  light-armed   flaves   attended   them.     But   the   light- 
armed    of  the    Peloponnefians    were    of  fo    little    eftimation,    that, 
notwithftanding    their    numbers,     Paufanias     had    particularly    de- 
fired   a    reinforcement    of   Athenian   bowmen.      The  ground    how- 
ever,  confuting  of  the   rugged  roots  of  Mount  Cithaeron  with  the 
Afopus    flowing    at    the    bottom,    was    favorable    for    defence,  and 
adverse  to    the  action  of  cavalry.      The  Perfian  infantry  w,is  there-   Herodot.l.ix. 
fof,e,  brought  up.     A  fierce  ingagement  infued.     The  Perfians,   after 
•  \fcharging  their  miffile    weapons,     clofed    upon    the  Greeks,    and 
fhowed    thetnfelves,    fays   the    impartial    hiftorian,    neither  in   cou- 
rage   nor    in    ftrength  inferior  *.     But    they  were    very   inferior  in 
arms  for  clofe  fight,  and  not  lefs  fo  in  practice  and  in  fcience.    With 


*  To  tire  fame  purpofe  alfo  even  Plutr.rch  fpeaks :    n.jaw   m>V«t<  —  owe  «5tj«xt«<  iuSi 
p»t  s£AA*,-.    V.  Ariftid. 


thei 


eir 


438 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE. 


CHAP.  x.  their  undefended  bodies  and  Short  weapons  they  nevertheless  made 
SECT.  III.  vigorous  aflaults,  many  of  them  Seizing  and  even  breaking  the  long 
fpears  of  the  Greeks.  Unacquainted  with  that  exa&neSs  of  clofe 
formation  and  that  fteddy  march,  in  which  the  Greeks  and  parti- 
cularly the  Lacedemonians  excelled,  they  ruShed  forward  Singly,  or 
in  very  fmall  bodies,  and  periShed  in  vain  attempts  to  penetrate  the 
Spartan  phalanx.  As  their  efforts  at  length,  through  repeated  failure 
began  to  relax,  the  Greeks  advanced  upon  them.  The  Tegeans, 
according  to  Herodotus,  made  the  firfl  impreflion  ;  the  Lacedemo- 
nians then  puihed  forward,  and  confulion  foon  became  general  among 
the  Perfian  infantry. 

Mardonius,  who,  a  little  before,  had  thought  himfelf  purfuino-  an 
enemy  neither  able  nor  daring  to  withstand  him,  was  Seized  with 
the  dcepeil  anguifh  to  find  vi&ory  thus  turning  againft  him.  Had 
he  inftantly  determined  upon  a  retreat,  he  might  probably  Still  have 
avoided  any  confiderable  loSs ;  for  his  infantry  would  foon  have  been 
Safe  in  the  plain  under  the  protection  of  his  numerous  cavalry.  But 
Herod. l.viii.  poffibly  Signal  and  Speedy  SucceSs  was  indiipenlible  to  him.  His 
fortune,  perhaps  his  life,  and  the  lot  of  all  his  family,  might  depend 
upon  it :  lefs  however  through  the  caprice  of  the  prince  than  that  of 
the  people  ;  which  is  always  moll:  dangerous  under  a  defpotic  govern- 
ment. His  army  was  too  numerous  to  Sub  lift:  long  in  a  narrow  and 
mountainous  country,  without  Supplies  by  Sea.  The  neceSfity  of  de- 
cilion  therefore  urging,  in  the  criiis  before  him  he  determined  to 
reft  all  upon  the  fortune  of  the  prefent  moment.  At  the  head  oS  a 
choSen  body  oS  cavalry  he  haStened  to  rally  and  Support  his  broken 
infantry.  By  a  vigorous  and  well-conducfed  charge,  notwithftand- 
ing  the  difadvantage  of  the  ground,  he  checked  the  progrefs  df'the 
Spartan  phalanx ;  but  he  could  not  break  that  firm  and  well-dilerpfi|ied 
body.  Jn  his  efforts,  aSter  many  of  his  braveft  officers  and  numbti's 
of  his  foldiers  had  been  killed  about  him,  he  received  himfelf  a  mor- 
tal wound.  His  fall  was  the  Signal  Sor  flight  to  his  whole  army.  For 
in  Afiatic  armies,  the  jealouSy  of  defpotifm  being  adverSe  to  that  cloSe 

SucceSfion 


•99» 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  439 

fuccefiion  of  various  ranks  in  command  which  in  the  European  CHAP.  X. 
contributes  fo  much  to  the  prefervation  of  order  in  all  events,  SECT.  Hi- 
the  death  of  the  commander  in  chief  can  fcarcely  fail  to  fuperinduce 
complete  confufion  and  the  certain  ruin  of  the  enterprize.  Artaba- 
zus, next  in  command  to  Mardonius,  is  faid  to  have  differed  in  opi- 
nion from  his  general  in  regard  both  to  the  war  itfelf,  and  to  the 
mode  of  conducting  it.  It  does  not  appear  that  he  was  at  all  in- 
gaged  in  the  battle  *.  As  foon  as  he  was  affured  of  the  rout  of  the 
Perfian  infantry,  leaving  the  reft  of  the  army  to  any  who  would  take 
charge  of  it,  he  haftened  his  own  retreat,  with  forty  thoufand  men 
who  had  been  under  his  immediate  orders,  toward  Phocis. 

While  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Tegeans   were  thus  unexpectedly 
victorious  upon  the  hills,  the  Athenians  were  fharply  ingaged  with   c. 67  &' 
the  Boeotians  in  the  plain  below.     The   Greeks   in   the  Perfian    fer-    1>.lut;ll'ch-  A- 

1  nitid. 

vice  are  faid  to  have  been  no  lefs  than  fifty  thoufand :  but  the 
greater  part,  little  earneft  in  the  caufe,  kept  aloof.  The  abilities  of 
Ariftides  therefore,  and  the  valor  of  the  Athenians,  not  expofed  to  a 
conteft  too  unequal,  at  length  prevailed.  The  Boeotians  fled  toward 
Thebes.     The  reft,  prepared  to  act  according  to  circumftances,  made 

,  ry^i  j        r     a  r      •  c  ■  •  Herodot.  1.  hr, 

a  timely  retreat.  1  ne  crowd  or  Anatics  or  various  nations  never  c.  68. 
flood  the  charge  of  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Tegeans,  but  fled  pro- 
fufely  on  the  firft  appearance  of  flight  among  thole  bands  of  native 
Perfians  who  had  borne  the  brunt  of  the  battle.  The  horfe  however, 
both  Perfian  and  Boeotian,  ftill  kept  the  field  and  gave  confiderable 
protection  to  the  fugitive  infantry. 

Intelligence  had  quickly  pafled  to  the  Greeks  under  the  walls  of         c.  69. 
Plataea,  that  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Tegeans  were  ingaged  and  fuc- 
cefsful.     Anxious   then   to  repair    their   fhameful  mifconduct,   with 
that  ufual  unhappinefs  of  error  which  ftill  leads  to  farther  error,   they 

f  Rollin  is  generally  exaft  ;  but  I  know  his  conduit  at  Platnea,  but  neither  Herodotus 
not  where  he  learnt  that  Artabazus  diitni-  nor  Diodorus  nor  Plutarch,  in  dcfcribing  the 
guifl.ed  himfelf  by  his  gallant  exertion  in  this  battle,  mention  that  he  was  at  all  ingaged. 
battle.  Herodotus  memions  on  a  prior  occa-  Diodorus  gives  an  account  of  his  retreat  exact- 
ion ( 1)  that  Artabazus  became  remarkable  by     ly  conformable  to  that  of  Herodotus. 

(1)  B.  vii.  c.  1 26. 

advanced 


44Q  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP. x.     advanced  with  more  hafte  than  good  order  toward  the  held  of  battle; 
.       •    /    and  the  Megarians  and  Phliafians,  venturing  by  the  plain,  were  attack- 
ed   by  the  Theban   horfe,   who    killed   fix  hundred,  and    drove   the 
reft  to  the  mountains. 
Herodot.  l.ix.        The  Lacedaemonians  and  Tegeans  meanwhile,  animated  by  unex- 
PlutaVch  pe<fted    fuccefs  yet  fteady  through  pracYifed  difcipline,  in  fpite  of  all 

AriiTid.  the  efforts  of  the  Perfian  cavalry,   preffed  on  to  the  fortified   camp: 

Diod.bic.  l.ix.  '    '  *  r 

c.  32.  the  refuge  of  the  greateft  part  of  the  routed  troops,  and  the  depo- 

sitary of  all  the  valuables  of  the  army.  They  immediately  attempted 
an  affault :  but  the  Lacedemonians  were  as  remarkable  for  their  igno- 
rance of  fieges  as  for  their  fkill  in  the  field.  They  were  baffled  with 
lofs  till  the  Athenian  forces  arrived.  Under  the  direction  of  the 
Athenian  officers,  after  vigorous  efforts  on  both  fides,  an  affault  at 
length  fucceeded.  A  horrid  (laughter  enfued.  The  victory  indeed 
of  a  free  people,  fighting  for  their  poffeffions,  their  families,  and 
their  independency,  againfl  foreign  invaders,  is  never  likely  to  be 
mild.  Of  two  hundred  and  fixty  thoufand  Afiatics,  faid  to  have 
compofed  the  Perfian  army,  exclufively  of  thofe  who  retreated  under 
Artabazus,  only  three  thoufand,  we  ate  told,  furvived.  Both  Hero- 
dotus and  Plutarch  however  avoid  all  detail  of  this  mafTacre.  How 
much  of  it  happened  within  the  fortified  camp,  and  what  execution 
was  done  on  fugitives  over  a  country  fo  furrounded  by  feas  and  moun- 
tains that  it  was  fcarcely  poffible  for  one  to  efcape,  we  neither  are 
nor  fhould  deiire  to  be  informed.  Artabazus  himfelf,  at  the  head  of 
forty  thoufand  men,  was  fo  appreheniive  of  being  cut  off  in  his  dif- 
ficult march  to  the  Hellefpont,  that,  to  deter  the  nations  through 
which  he  pr.ffed  from  any  hoftile  attempts,  he  induftrioufly  fpred  the 
report  that  his  forces  were  only  the  advanced  guard  of  the  great  army, 
which  was  following  under  Mardonius. 

When  oppotition  ceafed  within  the  Perfian  lines,  and  the  fpirit  of 
Slaughter  was  at  length  fated,  the  rich  plunder  of  the  camp  drew  the 
attention  of  the  conquerors.  Here  the  wealth  of  the  lords  of  Afia 
difplayed  a  fcene  fo  new  to  the  citizens  of  the  little  republics  of 

Greece, 


HISTORYOFGREECE.  441 

Greece,  that  they  were  at  a  lofs  on  what  objects  in  preference  to  fix  CHAP.  x. 
their  avidity.  The  Tegeans  however,  who  had  firft  furmounted  the  SECT.  III. 
rampart,  and  indeed  throughout  the  aftion  had  well  fupported  their  Herodot.l.ix. 
pretenflon  to  precedency  among  the  Greeks,  having  the  fortune  alfo 
firft  to  arrive  at  the  magnificent  pavilion  of  Mardonius,  did  not  hefi- 
tate  to  flop  there.  Inftantly  they  laid  their  rapacious  hands  upon  all 
its  rich  contents,  great  part  of  which  had  been  the  furniture  of  Xer- 
xes himfclf,  which,  on  his  hafly  departure  for  Afia,  he  had  pre- 
fented  to  his  general  and  brother-in-law.  But  they  were  not  pet-, 
mitted  intirely  to  injoy  this  precedency  in  pillage.  The  commander 
in  chief  quickly  ilfued  orders  that  none  iliould  prefume  to  appropriate 
any  part  of  the  booty,  but  that  the  whole  fhould  be  collected  to  be 
fairly  divided  among  thofe  who  had  together  earned  it.  A  brazen 
manger  only  of  very  curious  workmanfhip  the  Tegeans  were  allowed 
to  retain,  as  an  honorary  teftimony  to  their  particular  valor  and  for- 
tune. The  Helots  attending  the  Lacedaemonian  forces  were  ordered 
to  collect  the  reft.  Tents  and  their  furniture,  adorned  with  gold 
and  filver,  collars,  bracelets,  hilts  of  cimetars,  golden  cups,  and  va- 
rious other  utenfils  of  gold  and  filver,  together  with  horfes,  camels, 
and  women,  were  the  principal  fpoil.  Abundance  of  rich  clothes, 
which  at  another  time  would  have  been  thought  valuable  plunder, 
were  now  difregarded.  But  the  vigilance  of  thofe  appointed  to  fuper- 
intend  the  bufmefs  did  cot  fuffice  to  prevent  the  Helots  from  conceal- 
ing many  things  of  value,  which  they  fold  principally  to  the  iEgi- 
netans;  a  nation  (if  we  may  fo  call  the  inhabitants  of  a  rock)  of  mer- 
chant-pirates, who(  by  this  unworthy  traffic,  according  to  Herodotus, 
acquired  riches  before  unknown  among  them. 

The  booty  being  collected,  a  tenth  was  firfl.  fet  apart,   according  to   Herodot. 
the  cuftomary  piety  of  the  Greeks,  for  an  offering  to  the  gods.    From   Diojo^sic? 
the  produce  of  this,  fiiys  the  cotemporary  hiftorian,  was  dedicated  to  1-xl-c-33- 
the  god  at  Delphi   the  golden  tripod  which  {bands  upon  the  three- 
headed   brazen  ferpent  next  the  altar,   the  brazen   ftatue  of  Jupitor 
at  Olympia,   ten  cubits  high,   and  the  brazen  ftatue  of  Neptune,  fe-  j 

ven   cubits  high,    at    the   ifthmus.     The  Tegeans    dedicated    their 

L  1  1  manger 


C.  8.2 


442  HISTORYOFGREECE. 

CHAP.x.     manger  at  Tegea  in  the  temple  of  the  Alean  Minerva.     To  attribute 
Sect.  III.    to  them  a  modefty  becoming  their  valor  and  which  had  profited  from 
reproof,  we  mould  wifh  to  interpret  the  goddefs's  title,  from  analogy 
in  a  language  derived  from  the  Arcadian,  to  iignify  that  divine  wif- 
dom  which  directs  what  human  ignorance  calls  Chance.     The  reft  of 
the  fpoil  was  divided  among  thofe  who  had  fought  for  it. 
Herodot.  Lis.       Among  the  anecdotes  tranfmitted  concerning  this  great  event,  one 
related  by  the  original  hiftorian  has  been  particularly  celebrated.  The 
appendages  of  the  royal  houfhold  were  found  in  Mardonius's  tent, 
nearly  intire ;  and  moft  of  the  domeftic  Haves  had  efcaped  the  maf- 
facre.     Paufanias,  after  admiring  the  various  riches  of  the  fcene  and 
the  many  contrivances  of  luxury,  ordered  a  fupper  to  be  prepared  by 
the  Perfian  flaves,  exactly  as  it  would  have  been  for  Mardonius  had 
he  been  living  and  in   his  command.     The  orders  were  diligently 
executed  :  the  fplendid  furniture  was   arranged  ;  the  fideboard  dif- 
played  a  profufion  of  gold  and  filver  plate ;  the  table  was  covered 
with  exquifite  elegance.     Paufanias  then  ordered  his  ufual  Spartan 
fupper  to  be  placed   by  the  fide  of  this  fumptuous  entertainment. 
Little  preparation  was  necefiary.     Then   fending  for  the   principal 
Grecian  officers,  •  I  have  defired  your  company  here,'  he  faid,   *  to 
'  fhow  you  the  folly  of  the  Perfian  general.     Living  as  you  fee  at 
•  home,  he  came  thus  far  to  take  from  us  fuch  a  miferable  pittance 
'  as  ours.' 
i,  77.  The  Mantineians  had  arrived  from  Plata?a  prefently  after  the  ftorm- 

ing  of  the  camp.  Vexed  to  have  loft  their  fhare  of  glory  and  reward, 
both  fo  extraordinary,  they  marched  immediately,  contrary  to  the 
inclination  of  Paufanias,  in  purfuit  of  Artabazus.  Having  reached 
the  borders  of  Theflaly,  they  however  returned  without  effecting 
anything.  Prefently  after  them  the  Eleians  had  arrived.  The  ge- 
nerals of  both,  on  their  return  to  their  refpective  countries,  were 
punifhed  with  banifhment. 
o  The  next  care  of  the  Greeks,  after  the  collection  of  the  fpoil,   and 

what  upon  all  occafions  they  efteemed  a  necefiary  and  facred  office, 
was  the  burial  of  their  flain.     The  Lacedemonians  formed  three  fe- 

parate 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 


443 


parate  burying-places  :  one  for  thofe  who  had  borne  facred  offices  *,  CHAP,  x. 
of  whom  the  gallant  Amompharetus  had  fallen;  another  for  the  SECT.  III. 
other  Lacedaemonians ;  and  the  third  for  the  Helots.  The  Athe- 
nians, Tegeans,  Megarians  and  Phliafians  had  each  a  (ingle  burying- 
place.  Barrows,  railed  according  to  that  extenlive  pra&ice  of  anti- 
quity which  we  have  already  had  occafion  to  notice,  diftinguifhed  to 
following  ages  the  feveral  fpots  -f. 

Thefe  iblemn  ceremonies   were  fcarcely   over   when  a  dangerous   Plutarch. 
jealoufy  broke  out  between  the  Athenians   and  Lacedaemonians,  on 
the   queftion  to  whom  the   accuftomed  Arifteia,  or  firft  honors  for 
military  merit,  were  due   upon  this   great  occalion.     Immediate  ill 
confequences  were  however  prevented   through  the  influence  of  the 
Corinthian  leaders  ;  who,  interfering  as  mediators,   named  the  Pla- 
taeans  as  having   merited   beyond  all  others.      When    the    common  Herod.  T.viii. 
caufe  particularly  required  exertion  by  fea,  they,   tho  an  inland  peo-   xhucyd.  I.iii. 
pie,  had  ferved  aboard  the  fleet ;   and  in  the  campaign  by  land  which  c-  54- 
had  now  had  fo  glorious  an  event,  none  had  more  diftinguifhed  them- 


*  This  obvious  interpretation  of  the  term 
ipsa;,  which  ftands  in  all  the  editions  of  He- 
rodotus, does  not  appear  to  me  loaded  with 
any  difficulty.  I  wifh  to  avoid  difcuffion  of 
matters  which  lie  within  the  pioper  province 
of  the  critic  or  the  antiquarian  rather  than  of 
the  hiftorian  ;  yet  I  mult  own  that  I  think  the 
ingenious  conjectures  of  Valckenarius  and 
others  upon  this  paflage,  in  the  notes  of 
WefTeling's  edition,  all  more  open  to  objec- 
tion than  the  old  reading. 

f  Plutarch  in  his  Life  of  Ariftides  exprefles 
wonder,  and,  in  his  Treatife  again!  Herodo- 
tus, much  indignation  at  the  afTertion  that 
the  Lacedemonians,  Tegeans,  and  Athenians 
alone  gained  the  victory  of  Platan  :  yet  in 
the  former  work  he  has  very  fufiiciently  ac- 
counted for  it  ;  relating,  much  in  the  fame 
manner  as  Herodotus,  the  diforderly  flight 
of  the  other  Greeks  before  the  ingagement. 
It  is  little  likely  that,  while  memory  of  the 
tranfa&ions  was  yet  frefli,  a  hiftorian  writing 
for  the  Greek  nation  would  venture  a  falfe 
afTertion  fo  difhonorable  to  fo  large  a  part  of 
it,  concerning  fails  in  their  nature  of  fuch 
public  notoriety  ;   and  it  is  ftill   lefs    likely 


that  fuch  an  afTertion  would  remain  to  be  con- 
futed in  Plutarch's  age.  The  intereft  which 
the  Lacedemonians  and  Athenians  afterward 
had  in  courting  the  other  Grecian  ftates  may 
fufiiciently  account  for  the  epigrams,  barrows, 
and  other  fuch  uncertain  evidences  as  Plu- 
tarch has  quoted.  Indeed,  before  Plutarch's 
teftimony  again!!  Herodotus  can  be  of  any 
weight  he  mutt  be  firft  reconciled  to  himfelf. 
It  does  however  appear  extraordinary,  that  He- 
rodotus in  his  narrative  of  this  great  event 
fhould  never  once  have  mentioned  the  Pla- 
teans.  The  afTertion  of  Plutarch,  that  the 
Greeks  decreed  to  the  Platxans  the  f.rft  ho- 
nors for  military  merit  on  the  occafion,  tho 
Diodorus  differs  from  him,  is  confirmed  by 
Thucydides,  a  much  higher  authority.  Pof- 
fibly,  on  account  of  their  fubfequent  fate,  he 
might  have  had  fome  reafon  for  omitting  all 
mention  of  them,  fimilar  to  that,  whatever  it 
was,  which  made  him  totally  filent  concern- 
ing the  two  firft  Meftenian  wars.  When  we 
confidcr  his  extreme  freedom  by  turns  with  all 
the  moft  powerful  ftates  of  Greece,  both  omif- 
fions  appear  myfterious. 


L  1  1 


fel 


ves 


444 


HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 


c 


CHAP.  X.     felves  by  their  zeal  and  bravery.     Their  actions  on  the  day  of  Plataea 

SECT.  III.    are  not  particularly  recorded  by  hiftorians ;   but,  ever  warm  in  their 

political  attachment  to  Athens,  and  having  their  port:  next  in  the  line 

to   the  Athenians,   they  had   probably  fought   under   the  orders   of 

Plitarch  Ariftides.     Their   commonwealth  was   too  fmall  to  excite  jealoufy  : 

Ariftid.  a]l  the  other  Greeks  approved  the  determination  of  the  Corinthians: 

Thucyd.l.iii.  ,    ,       _  .  ■■,*•,■  ■    r      i 

c.  56.  and  the  Lacedxmomans  and  Athenians  acquielced. 

This  dangerous   bufinefs  being  thus  accommodated,  a  council  was 

held  to  coniider  of  farther  meaiures.     The  battle  of  Platsea,  it  is  faid, 

was  fought  on  the  twenty-fecond  of  September*.     The  feafon  was 

therefore  not   yet    too  far   advanced  for  taking  vengeance  on   thofe 

Herodot.l.is.   Greeks  wh0  naci  joined  the  Perlians.      It  was  determined  to  march 

0  86,  &  leq.  J 

Diod.Sicl.xi.  immediately  again-il   Ihebes,   and  to  require  the  delivery  of  Timege- 
nides  and  Attaginus,  heads  of  the  faction  which  had  led  the  Bceotians 
to  the  Perfian    alliance.      On   the   eleventh   day   from    the  battle  of 
Plataea  the  aimy  entered  the  Theban  lands  ;  and  the  delivery  of  the 
obnoxious  peri'ons    being  refufed,   plunder  and  wafle  of  the  country 
and   preparations  for   the  fiege  of  the  city  were  begun.     This  was 
borne  during  twenty  days.     Then  Timegenides,  fearing  the  turn  of 
popular   favor  again ft  him,   propofed  to  the  Theban  people  to  offer 
the   payment   of   a  fine   to   atone   for   the   tranfgreffion    of   the    re- 
public againft  the  common  caufe   of  Greece;  declaring   that,   if  it 
mould  be  refufed,   he  would  be  ready  to  furrender  himfelf  with  At- 
'     taginus,  rather  than  be  the  occafion  or  pretence  for  the  deftru&ion  of 
his  country.     The  propofal  was  accepted  by  the  affemhly.      But  in 
the  following  night  Attaginus  fled  ;   leaving  his  own  family,   as  well 
as  his  affociate  Timegenides,   to  the  mercy  or   the  inraged  Thebans. 
His  children  were  immediately  delivered  to  the  commander  in  chief 
of  the  confederate  Greeks.     But  the  Spartan  prince  did  not  want  li- 


*  Thus  the  chronologers  have  determined,  p(K«i»To«,  ji  x.a)  vijii  i'rt  to  'Ea^mkov  ev  Wa.ra.iS.ii; 

not  without   authority  ;   but   the   Grecian  ca-  aSpaifeTai    ovj/sSfiqr,    y.ul   Swu/o-i    tu    l^evkfia    A»V 

lerdar   was    yet    too  little   exaft  for   abfolute  Hbwwwjfii  m\(  ??«  /utsjcj     Tm  H  ran  hjjfut  amp*- 

Certainty  to  a  day.      Taimi  rh>   pax™  H*aX*-  *'"*'  °"  ^pan'ov,  Zinv  *«i   wt,  huxfSu/uiin  rut 

cam   (lavs  Plutarch,   fpeaking  of  the  battle  of  "  *s-?oAoy<?  r^°»>  «**s»  &*«£*»■{  <%>  *«> 

~.       \  •  -       _'»    -   b  i     *  i.  ■       '  •  tsAiut>s»  uyova-i,     Plutarch.  Anllid. 

I  latx^)    Ti  TtTfaOi  tou  iiuYjpQfAUijiOi;   irafjiivov,    xur  ' 

'.A&>ik*iou?,   x«r«   ui    Boiuroi'S    TsTfaJi   to?    n«>f//ov 

berality 


HISTORY    OF     GREECE. 

berality  to  diftinguifh  between  the  criminal  father  and  the  innocent 
offspring,  whom  he  immediately  difmifled  unhurt.  Timegenides 
and  fome  other  principal  Thebans  being  then  demanded,  were  fur- 
rendered.  They  expected  that  time  would  be  allowed  them  to  pre- 
pare for  a  public  defence,  and  trufted  that  means  would  be  found, 
between  the  interefl  of  their  friends  and  money,  to  infure  their 
fafety.  Paufanias  fufpe&ed  this,  and  determined  to  prevent  it.  He 
detained  them  till  the  confederate  forces  fepa'rated  for  their  feveral 
provinces;  and  then,  taking  them  to  Corinth,  caufed  them  to  be 
there  executed  ;  as  a  wtll-meant  example,  no  doubt,  for  the  com- 
mon caufe  of  Greece;  but,  as  far  as  appears,  without  tiial,  and  cer- 
tainly without  law. 

• 

S  E  C  T  I  O  N     IV. 

- 

Meafures  of  the  Grecian  Fleet.  ■    Batt'e  of  My  c  ale.      Conclufion  of  that 
called  by  Grecian  IVriters  the  Perjian  or  Median  War. 

■i  |  ' 

WHILE    the  arms  of  the  confederate   Greeks  were  thus  won- 
derfully attended   with  fuccefs  and  glory  againft  the  immediate  in- 
vaders of  their  country,  the  fleet,   which  had  lain  during  the  fummer 
inaclive  at   Delos,  was   at  length  excited   to  enterprize.      There  ap- 
pears to  have  been  in  Samos  always  i  ftrong  party  ready  to  take  any 
opportunity  for  fpirited  oppohtion  to  the  Perfians,  and  to  Th,eomeitor, 
whom  the  Perfians  had  raifed  to  the  tyranny  of  the  ifland.    .  Jngaging   Herodot.l.ix. 
in  their  views  Hegefiftratus,  fon  of  Ariftagoras  the   Milefian  chief,    Diod.'sic.l.xL 
the  Samians   deputed  Lampon   and  Athenagoras,   two  principal  men   c' 34' 
among  them,  to  attend  him  on  a  million  to  the  commanders  of  the 
confederate  fleet.    In  a  conference  with  Leotychides  and  Xanthippus, 
Hegefiftratus  reprefented  '  that  the  whole  Ionian   people  were  ready, 
on  the  leaft  incouragement,  to  revolt  againft  the  Perfians,  and  join 
the  Grecian  caufe  :   that  the  bare  appearance  of  the  Grecian  fleet  off 
their  coaft  would  fuffice  to   excite  them  to  fpirited  action  :   that  the 
Perfian  government   was   remifs   and   weak  beyond   what   could    be 
readily  believed ;  infomuch  that  never  did  the  means  offer,  to  the 

com- 


c.  91,  92. 


Diod.Sic.l 

si. 

c.  34. 

Herodot.l 

rx. 

c.  96. 

446  HISTORY     OF    GREECE. 

CHAP.  X.  commanders  of  a  powerful  armament,  of  fo  rich  a  booty  with  fo  lit— 
T-  1V-  tie  rifk.'  He  proceeded  to  urge  the  Spartan  king  and  the  Athenian 
chief  by  their  common  gods  to  ufe  the  means  fo  eafily  in  their  power 
for  refcuing  a  Grecian  people  from  fubjedion  to  barbarians  ;  and  he 
offered,  for  himfelf  and  his  colleagues,  if  their  fidelity  was  doubted, 
to  remain  hoftages  with  the  fleet.     Leotychides,  according  to  a  com- 

Herodot.l.ix.  mon  fuperftition  of  both  Greeks  and  Romans,  ftruck  with  the  name 
of  Hegefiftratus  as  a  favorable  omen  (it  fignifies  the  leader  of  an  ar- 
mament) readily  came  into  the  meafure  propofed.  Difmiifing  the 
two  other  deputies,  he  detained  Hegefiftratus  ;  and  only  one  day  be- 
ing allowed  for  preparation,  the  whole  fleet,  confifting  now,  accord- 
ing to  Diodorus  Siculus,  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  trireme  galleys, 
moved  on  the  next  for  Samos. 

The    feafon    was    fo   far  advanced    that     the  commanders    of   the 
Phenician   fquadron  in  the  Perfian  fervice,  finding  that  neither  any 
enterprize  was   intended   by  the  Perfian  admiral,    nor   any   expecled 
from  the  Greeks,  had  requefted  leave  to  depart  for  their  own  ports  for 
the  winter  before  the  equinoctial  ftorms  fhould  fet  in  ;  and  it  had 
been  granted.      Having  thus  incautioufly  parted  with  their  beft  {hips 
and  ableft  feamen,  the  Perfians  were  highly  alarmed  with  intelligence 
that   the   Grecian  fleet   was   approaching.     Haftily  quitting  Samos, 
they  paffed  to  the  neighboring  promontory  of  Mycale  on  the  Ionian 
coaft,  where  an  army,  according  to  Herodotus  of  fixty  thoufand  men, 
was  incamped  under  the  command  of  Tigranes.     Here,  lays  the  hifto- 
c.  «7.        rian,  near  the  temple  of  the  venerable  deities,  and  that  temple  of  the 
Eleufinian  Ceres  which  Philiftus  fon  of  Paficles  built  when  he  fol- 
lowed Neleus  fon  of  Codrus  to  the  founding  of  Miletus,  they  hauled 
their  galleys  upon  the  beach  ;   and,   with  ftones  found  upon  the  place 
and  palifades  formed  of  olives  and  other  cultivated  trees,  raifed  a  de- 
fence around  them. 
c  98.  The  Grecian  commanders  had  expected  to  find  the  Perfian  fleet  in 

full  force  at  Samos,  and  propofed  to  ingage  it  on  that  friendly  coaft : 
but  they  were  not  prepared  for  the  more  hazardous  meafure  of  fol- 
lowing it  to  the  Afiatic  fhore.     A  council  of  war  was  therefore  held, 

in 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE.  447 

in  which  it  was  deliberated  whether  to  retire  again  immediately  to  QHAP.  X. 
their  own  feas,  or  firft  to  make  fome  attempt  in  the  Hellefpont.  But  SECr- Vv 
intelligence  of  the  departure  of  the  Phenician  fquadron  gave  incou- 
ragement ;  the  fpirit  of  vigorous  enterprile  gained;  and  it  was  fhort- 
ly  determined  to  feek  the  enemy's  fleet.  On  approaching  the  Ionian 
coafl:  it  was  not  without  furprize  that  they  found  the  fea  completely 
yielded  to  them,  and  the  enemy  prepared  for  oppofition  by  land  alone. 
Ardor  on  one  fide  would  naturally  rife  in  proportion  to  fuch  evident 
backwardnefs  on  the  other.  The  bold  meafure  was  refolved  upon 
bv  the  Greeks  to  debark  their  whole  force  capable  of  atting  by  land, 
which  would  be  by  far  the  largeft  part  of  their  crews,  and  to  attack 
the  fortified  camp.  Probably  the  leaders  had  reafonable  hopes,  and 
perhaps  confirmed  information,  that  the  numerous  Greeks  among  the 
Perfian  forces  wanted  only  opportunity  to  revolt.  Leotychides,  how- 
ever, pradifed  an  expedient  like  that  of  Themiflocles  at  Artemifium. 
He  fent  a  herald  in  a  boat  within  hearing  of  the  Ionian  camp,  who 
made  proclamation,  according  to  the  original  hiftorian,  in  thefe  words  : 
'  Men  of  Ionia,  attend  to  what  I  fay,  of  which  the  Perfians  will  un-   Herod. utfup. 

„         ,  .  .  TI71  •  •  -ii    i  r    8t  Diod.  Sic. 

'  demand  nothing.      When  we  ingage  it  will  become  every  one  of  u  si.  c.  34. 

'  you  to  think  of  the  liberty  of  all :  the  word  is  Hebe.     Let  thofe 

■  who  hear  inform  thofe  who  are  out  of  hearing.'     The  Samians  had   Herod.  1.  ix« 

before  incurred  fome  fufpicion  from  the  Perfian  leaders  by  their  ge-   Diodor.  Sic. 

nerous  kindnefs  to  about  five  hundred  Athenian  prifoners,  who  had   1,xl-c-35* 

been  brought  from'  Attica  and  difpofed  of  as  flaves  in  Alia  Minor, 

They  had  ranfomed  all,  and  fent  them  with  fubfiflence  to  Athens. 

The  Samian  troops  in  the  Perfian  camp  were  therefore  now  deprived 

of  their  arms.     The  Milefians,  being  alio  fufpe&ed,  were  detached 

from  the  army  on  pretence  of  fervice  elfewhere. 

Leotychides  debarked  his  forces  without  oppofition  at  fome  diftance  Herodot.  l.ix. 
from  the  Perfian  camp.     To  add  to  their  animation  he  caufed  a  re-   Diodor.  sic. 
port  to  be  fpred  (for  real  intelligence  could  not  have  arrived,  it  being,   p  */'.£„  |*'- 
it  is  faid,  the  very  day  of  the  battle  of  Plataea)  that  Paufanias  had  L'-c-  33- 
gained  a  complete  victury  oyer  Mardonius  in  Boeotia.     The  Grecian  Herodot.i.«, 

r  C.  102. 

iorces 


448 


HISTORY     OF     GREECE. 


CHAP.  X. 
SECT.  IV. 


Herod.  1.  ix. 
c.  103. 
Diodor.  Sic. 
1.  xi.  c.  36. 


Herodot.l.ix, 
c.  102. 


c.  103. 


c.  104. 


forces  marched  in  two  columns  :  one  under  the  command  of  Xan- 
thippus,  compofed  of  the  Athenian,  Corinthian,  Sicyonian,  and  Tr'cc- 
zenian  troops,  held  the  plain  againft  the  fhore ;   the  other,  coniifting 
of  the  Lacedemonians  with  the  remaining  allies  under  Leotychides, 
went  by  the  more  inland  and  hilly  road.     The  former   arrived  firit, 
and,  eager  to  ingrofs  the  glory  of  the  day,   proceeded  immediately  to 
the  afTault  -,   which  was  fo  fudden,  fo  well  conducted  and  fo  vigorous, 
that  they  had  already  entered  the  Perfian  rampart  before  the  Lacedae- 
monians could  come  up.     Their  raihnefs   was   favored,  and   perhaps 
juftified  by  the  ready  zeal  of  the  Greeks  in  the  Perfian  fervice  to  give 
them  every  affiftance.     The  Samians,   exafperated   by  the  treatment 
they  had  received,  exerted  themfelves,  tho  unarmed,   by  all  means  in 
their  power  ;  and  their  exhortations  and  example  determined  the  other 
Afian  Greek-s.     From  every  account  in  Herodotus  it  appears  that  the 
proper  Perfians   had  not  yet  deierved  to  lofe  that  military  reputation 
which  they  had  acquired  under  the   great  Cyrus;   but,  of  all  the  in- 
fantry in  the   fervice  of  the  empire,  they  almoft  alone  feem  to  have 
merited  the   title  of  foldiers.      Probably  the  proportion    of  them  at 
Mycale  was   not  great.     The  other.  Afvatics  fhrunk  before  the  vehe- 
mence of  the  Athenian   attack-;  but  the  Periians   were  ftill  refilling 
with   the   utmoft   bravery  when  the  Lacedemonians  arrived.      Then 
they  were  overpowered,  and  moftly  cut  in  pieces.      Tigranes,  general 
of  the  Perfian  land-forces,  and  two  of  the'  principal  naval  command- 
ers  were  amdng  the   (lain.      Of  the  Greeks  Perilaus,  commander  of 
the  Sicyonians,  was  the  only  man  of  rank  who  fell. 

Mycale  was  a  final  1  peninfula,  and  from  the  place  of  ingagement 
was  no  retreat  by  land  but  through  narrow  paffes  over  a  mountain. 
The  Perfian  commanders,  little  expecting  fo  fudden  an  attempt  upon 
their  numerous  forces  within  fortified  lines,  thought  they  had  pro- 
vided fufficiently  for  fecurity  by  difarming  the  fufpe&ed  Samians,  and 
detaching  the  Miiefians  to  guard  the  paffes.  The  latter  circumftance 
turned  to  the  complete  deftruclion  of  their  army  :  The  Milelians, 
with  the  moil  determined  enmity,  intercepted  the  fugitives,  and  few 

efcaped. 


HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  449 

efcaped.     When  flaughter  ceafcd,  the  Greeks,  remaining  quiet  poiTef-  CHAP.  x. 

fors  of  whatever  the  Perfian  camp  and  fleet  had  contained,  carried  out  SECT.  IV. 

everything  valuable  that  could  eafily  be  removed,  and  then  fet  fire  to  Herod.  1.  ix. 

the  reft,   together  with  the  fhips,  and  the  whole  Perfian   fleet  was  c*  io6, 
burnt. 

After  this  fi°;nal  blow  upon  the  Perfian  power  the  Grecian  fleet  re-  HnoJot.lbid. 

.  i-       1      1     1  1  ri  Diodor.   Sic. 

turned  to  Samos.  A  council  was  immediately  held  to  conlider  what  1.  xi.  c.  37. 
mealures  fhould  be  taken  for  the  prefent  fecurity  and  future  welfare  of 
the  revolted  Ionians.  The  iflanders  might  be  fafe  under  the  protec- 
tion of  the  fleet ;  againft  which  it  would  now  be  difficult,  even  for 
the  refources  of  the  Perfian  empire,  foon  to  raife  a  force  capable  of 
difputing  the  command  of  the  feas.  But  it  was  generally  deemed 
impoffible,  for  any  power  of  Greece,  to  defend  the  long  line  of  con- 
tinental colonies  againft  the  land-force  lying  immediately  behind 
them.  Confirmation  arrived  of  the  news  of  the  complete  victory 
over  the  Perfian  arms  in  Bceotia.  The  Peloponnefians  then  propofed 
to  remove  the  Ionians  from  Afia  to  Greece,  and  to  put  them  in  pof- 
fefiion  of  all  the  feaports  of  thofe  ftates  which  had  fided  with  the 
Perfians.  But  the  Athenians  diflented  :  they  denied  the  neceffity  for 
lb  violent  a  meafure ;  and  they  infilled  peremptorily  that  the  Pelopon- 
nefians had  no  right  to  interfere  in  the  difpofal  of  Athenian  colonies. 
The  Peloponnefians  had  the  moderation  immediately  to  yield  to  this 
argument.  Then  the  Samians,  Chians,  Lelbians,  and  other  iflanders 
bound  themfelves  by  folemn  oaths  to  be  faithful  to  the  Grecian  con- 
federacy. The  iflands  would  be  a  prefent  refuge  for  thofe  continen- 
tals moft  obnoxious  to  Perfian  vengeance,  whom  the  walls  of  their 
towns  could  not  protect.  Sardis  was  too  near,  the  force  there  too 
great,  and  the  feafon  befides  too  much  advanced  for  anv  farther  at- 
tempt in  Ionia.  But  the  Hellefpont,  more  diftant  from  the  center 
of  the  Perfian  force,  was  open  to  enterprife  by  fea.  Thither 
therefore  the  fleet  directed  its  courfe.  It  was  determined  to  Herod.  1.  ;x. 
deftroy  the  bridges,  which  were  fuppofed  to  be  ftill  Handing  and  diodor  Sic 
protected    by  a   garrifon  ;     but  they   had  already  yielded    to    the  l- xi- c-  37- 

M  m  m  weather 


450  '  H  I  S  T  O  R  Y     O  F     G  R  E  E  C  E. 

CHAP.  X.    weather  and  current,  and  the  Perfians  had  deferted  the  place.      Win- 
SECT.  iv.    ter  now  approaching,  Leotychides,  with  all  the  Peloponnefians,  re- 
turned to  Greece.     Xanthippus  refolved  with  his  Athenians  alone  to 
Herod,  l.  ix.  attempt  the  recovery  of   the  Cherfonefe ;   an  Athenian  colony,  and 
Diod.sic.l.xi.  where  the  Greeks  were  ftill  numerous.     The  Perfians,  expofed  to  at- 
c  37-  tacks  in  various  parts   through   the  command  which    the  Athenian 

fleet  poffefled  of  the  fea,  collected  their  whole  force  in  Seftos.     After 
an  obftinate  defence,  being  prefled  by  famine,  they  made  good   their 
own  retreat ;   upon  which  the  Grecian  inhabitants  joyfully  furrendered 
the  town  to  the  Athenians. 
Herodot.l.ix.       The  Periian  monarch  remained  in  Sardis,    to   fee  the   fad  relics  of 
Diodor.'sic.     his  forces  which  found  means  to  fly  from  Mycale,  and  to  receive  the 
1.  xi.  c.  36.      calamitous  news  of  the  ftill  greater   lofs    of    his   army   in   Greece. 
Strabo.  1.  i.     Shortly  after  he  moved  to  his  diftant  capital  of  Sufa.     On  his  depar- 
m2t  Cic  de  ture  he  ordered  all  the  Grecian  temples  within  his  power  to  be  burnt; 

Nat.  Deor.     whether  fuppofing;  the  deity  offended  with  his  lon£  furferance  of  them, 
l.i.  &deLeg.  rr        t>  j  ^  a 

1.  ii.  or  that  he  thought  to  gain  popularity  among  his  fubjedls  of  the  upper 

provinces  by  this  facrifice  to  the  prejudices  of  the  magian  religion. 

Such  was  the  conclufion  of  the  expedition  of  Xerxes,  and  of  that 
called  by  Grecian  writers  the  Perfian,  or  often  the  Median  war;  after 
two  campaigns  wonderfully  glorious  to  Greece,  and,  both  in  them- 
felves  and  for  their  known  confequences,  perhaps  the  moft  remarkable 
and  important  in  the  annals  of  mankind. 


END    OF    THE    FIRST    VOLUME. 


DEC  2  8 


ms 


i