I^rcsettteb  to 
of  lite 

PntlJerstty  of  Sloroitto 

by 

The  Harris  Family 
Eldon  House 
London,  Ont. 


-^  A 


1—  ^Af  'A' 


TOUR 


I  N 


SCOTLAND. 


MDCCLXIX. 


Tros  TyRIUSque  mi  hi  nulls  difcrimine  agetur. 


THE       SECOND       EDITION. 


LONDON: 

printed  for  B.White,  at  Horace's  Head,  in  Fleet- Street* 

MDCCLXXIL 


Dfi 


[iii] 


T    O 


SirROGER  MOSTYN,Bart. 


O    F 


M0STYN5  Flintshire, 


Dear  Sir, 

A  Gentleman  well  known  to  the 
political  world  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  prefent  century  made  the 
tour  of  Eur  op  e.^  and  before  he  reached 
Abbeville  difcovered  that  in  order  to 
fee  a  country  to  beft  advantage  it  was 
infinitely  preferable  to  travel  by  day 
than  by  night. 

I  cannot   help   making  this  appli- 
cable to  myfelfj   who,  after  publiHi- 
ing  three  volumes  of  the  Zoology  of 
Great   Britain,  found  out  that  to 
A  2  be 


iv  DEDICATION. 

be  able  to  fpeak  with  more  precifion- 
of  the  fubjedls  I  treated  of,  it  was 
far  more  prudent  to  vifit  the  whole 
than  part  of  my  country :  ftrucfk 
therefore  with  the  refledion  of  hav- 
ing never  feen  Scotland,  I  inflantly 
ordered  my  baggage  to  be  got  ready, 
and  in  a  reafonable  time  found  mv- 
felf  on  the  banks  of  the  Thsoeed. 

As  foon  as  I  communicated  to  you 
my  refolution,  with  your  accuflomed 
-'  friendfhip  you  wifhed  to  hear  from 
m.e  :  I  could  give  but  a  partial  per- 
formance of  my  promife,  the  atten- 
tion of  a  traveller  beins:  fo  much 
taken  up  .as  to  leave  very  little  room 
for  the  difcharge  of  epiftolary  duties ; 
and  I  flatter  myfelf  you  will  find  this 
tardy  execution  ol:  my  engagement 
more  fatisfaiflory  than  the  hafiy  ac- 
counts I  could  fend  you  on  my  road  : 
but  this  is  far  from  being;  the  fole 
motive  of  this  addrefs. 

I  have 


DEDICATIOM. 

I  have    irrefiftible   inducements   of 
public  and   of  a   private    nature  :    to 
you  I  owe  a   rnoft   free  enjoyment  of 
the    Htde    territories   Providence    had 
beftowed    on    me  ;     for    by  a    liberal 
and     equal     ceffion     of    lields,     and 
meads  and  woods,  you  conneded   all 
the    divided    parts,    and   gave  a    full 
fcope  to  all  my  improvements.    Every 
view   I   take    from     my   window   re- 
minds me  of   my  debt,    and  forbids 
my  filence,  cauiing  the  pleaiing  glow 
of  gratitude    to    diffufe     itfelf    over 
the   whole  frame,    inftead  ot    forcing 
up    the    imbittering    ligh    oi:    Oh  I  Ji 
angulus  ilk  I    Now  every  fcene   I  en- 
joy receives  new  charms,    tor  I  mingle 
with    the    vifible  beauties,    the   more 
plealing     idea    of    owing     them     to 
yoii,    the    worthy   neighbor  and   firm 
friend,    who    aie   happy   in    the  calm 
and  domeftic  paths  of  life  with  abili- 
ties fupcrior  to  oftentatioD;^  and  good- 

nefs 


^1  DEDICATION. 

nefs  content  with  its  own  reward  : 
with  a  found  judgement  and  honeft 
heart  you  worthily  difcharge  the  fe- 
natorial  truft  repofed  in  you,  whofe 
unprejudiced  vote  aids  to  ftill  the 
mad  nefs  of  the  People,  or  aims  to 
check  the  prefumption  of  the  Minifter. 
My  happinefs  in  being  from  your  ear- 
lieft  life  your  neighbor,  makes  me  con- 
fident in  my  obfervation;  your  increaf- 
ino;  and  difcerning  band  of  friends 
difcovers  and  confirms  the  jufticc  of 
it  :  may  the  reafons  that  attrad:  and 
bind  us  to  you  ever  remain,  is  the  mod 
gratefull  vvifh  that  can  be  thought 
of,  by, 

Dear  Sir, 

Your  obljo-ed  and 

ajfeEiionate  Friendy 

a.?™:';;,.    Thomas  Pennant. 


PLATES. 


[  vii  ] 


PLATES. 

I.  Yp  IDER  Drake  and  Duck,  Page  37 

Ilf     II.  Dunkeld  C^ihcdral,  78 

III.  Csiksidc  n^Sir  Taymouih,  84 

IV.  View  from  the  King's  Seat  near  Bkir,       103 

V.  Brae-mar  Caftlc,  with  a  diftant  View  of  Inver- 

cauld  III 

VI.  Invernefs,  i47 

VII.  Frefwick  C2i?i\Q,  162 

VIII.  i  he  Gannet  darting  on  its  Prey,  165 
\X.  Czit\cUrqhuart,                                           180 

X.  Upper  Fall  of  f>vn,  181 

XI.  Sterling  Caftle,  220 

XII.  Arthur''^  Oven,  and  two  Lcchaher  Axes,    224 

XIII.  Pillars  in  Penrith  Church-Yard,  287 

XIV.  Roebuck.     White  Hare,  2S8 

XV.  Cock  of  the  Wood,  293 

XVI.  Hen  of  the  Wood.     Ptarmigan,  294 

XVII.  Saury.     Greater  Weever,  298 

XVIII.  Thorney  Crab.    Cordated  Crab.    The  laft 

from  the  Ifle  of  Wight^  300 

Page  234.  A  View  of  the  gigantic  Yew-Trce 
in  Fortingal  Church- Yard.  The  middle  part  is 
now  decayed  to  the  ground  ;  but  within  me- 
mory was  united  to  the  height  of  three  feet : 
Captain  Campbell  of  Glen-Lion  having  afTured 
me  that  when  a  boy  he  has  often  climbed  over, 
or  rode  on  the  then  conneding  part. 


ERRATA. 


ERRATA. 


Page 
29 
34 

f 
62 

67 
70 

»'5 

137 

133 

»39 
/-^. 

140 

146 

^34 


282, 


Gcodrict 
Gvjedier^ 


read 


in  the  note, 
in  the  note, 

edifice, 

Fortmonkf 

the  front,  - 

prevailed, 

Nota, 

in  the  note,   mortittf 

Findvon, 

Parifh  of  the  fame  name    — 

Findron 

favourite 

I   find   by  Montcitb  that   the  cathedral  of  Elgin  was 

founded    A.   D.  1204    by  y^w^r^zu  Bi (hop  o^  Murray y 

and  that  Inms  only  built  great  part  of  the  fteeple,  to 

which    the  words /iflf  «o.'fl^//^  o/aj  allude.     Vide  Mou^ 

)f^///;»'s  Theatre  of  Mortality,   214,    219. 

lines  14,  15,  dele  •*  is  certainly  a  moll  authentit  repre- 
fentation  of  them  ;"  and  iJifcrt  "  were  not  done  under 
my  own  eye,  nor  can  my  memory  enable  me  to  fay 
whether  thefe,  or  the  drawing  in  pofleffion  of  the  Anti- 
quarian Society,  have  the  ilrongell  refcmblance.'* 


Godrie. 

Giuedir. 

edifice. 

Lucy. 

Portincak. 

the  (outh  front, 

prevaled. 

Rota. 

mortis. 

Findorn. 

Parifh  oi  Cowobik. 

Findorn. 

favorite. 


A     TOUR 


A       T     O     U     R 

I  N 

SCOTLAND. 

MDCCLXIX. 

ON  Monday  the  26th  of  Juxe  take  my  depar-  Chiite^^ 
ture  from  Chester,  a  city  without  parallel 
for  the  fingular  ftrucftureof  the  four  princi- 
pal ftreets,  which  are  as  if  excavated  out  of  the 
earth,  and  funk  many  feet  beneath  the  furface ;  the 
carriages  drive  far  beneath  the  level  of  the  kitchens, 
on  a  line  with  ranges  of  fliops,  over  which  on  each 
fide  of  the  ftreets  paffengers  walk  from  end  to  end, 
in  covered  galleries,  fecurc  from  wet  or  heat.  The 
back  courts  of  all  thefc  houfcs  are  level  with  the 
ground,  but  to  go  into  any  of  thefe  four  ftreets  it  is 
neceftary  to  defcend  a  flight  of  feveral  fteps. 

The  Cathedral  is  an  antient  ftruflure,  very  ragged 
on  the  outfide,  from  the  nature  of  the  red  friable 
ftone  *  with  which  it  is  built :  the  tabernacle  work 
in  the  choir  is  very  neat ;  but  the  beauty,  and  elegant 
fimplicity  of  a  very  antique  gothic  chapter-houfc, 
is  what  merits  a  vifit  from  every  traveller. 

The  Hypocauft  near  the  Feathers  Inn,  is  one  of 
the  remains  of  the  Remans  -f,  it  being  well  known 
that  this  place  was   a  principal  ftation.     Among 

*  Saxum  arenarium  friabile  rubrum  Da  CcJlafpJJits.  I.  139. 
f  This  city  was  the  Deva  and    De-jana  *f  Antonine,  and 
the  ftation  of  the  Legio  •-^•icejima  I'iJJrix, 

B  many 


i  A     T    O    U    R 

many  antiquities  found  here,  none  is  more  lingular 
than  tlie  rude  fculpture  of  the  Dea  Armigera  Miner- 
'va,  with  her  bird  and  her  altar,  on  the  face  of  a 
rock  in  a  fmall  field  near  the  ff^clcb  end  of  the 
bridge. 

The  caflle  is  a  decaying  pile.  The  walls  of  the 
«,ity,.  the  only  complete  fpecimens  of  antient  for- 
tifications, are  kept  in  excellent  order,  being  the 
principal  walk  of  the  inhabitants  •,  the  views  from 
the  feveral  parts  are  very  fine  •,  the  mountains  of 
Flintf/jire^  the  hills  of  Broxton,  and  the  infulated 
rock  of  Bcefion,  form  the  ruder  part  of  the  fccnery  j 
H  rich  flat  forms  the  fofter  view,  and  the  profpe6t 
up  the  river  towards  Boiighton^  recalls  in  fome  de- 
cree the  idea  of  the  1'hames  and  Richmond  hill. 

Pafled  thro*  Tarvifi,  a  fmall  village  j  in  the 
church-yard  is  an  epitaph  in  memory  of  Mr.  John 
Tbomafen,  an  excellent  penman,  but  particularly 
famous  for  his  exad  and  elegant  imitation  of  the 
Greek  charader. 

Belamere-,  which  Leland  calls  a  faire  and  large 
foreft,  with  plenty  of  redde  deer  and  falow,  is  now 
a  black  and  dreary  walle  j  it  feeds  a  few  rabbets, 
and  a  few  black  'Terns  *  fl<;im  over  the  fplafhes  that 
water  fome  part  of  it. 
SaltPits.  A  few  miles  from  this  heath  lies  Northwich^  a 

fmall  town,  long  famous  for  its  rock  fait,  and 
brine  pits  j  fome  years  ago  I  vifited  one  of  the 
mines  -,  the  ftratum  of  fait  lies  about  forty  yards 
deep  i  that  which  I  faw  was  hollowed  into  the  form 
of  a  temple  j  1  defcended  thro'  a  dome,  and  found 

*  Br.  ZocL  II.  430. 

the 


IN    SCOTLAND. 

the  roof  fupported  by  rows  of  pillars,  about  tvva 
yards  thick,  and  fcveral  in  height  -,  the  v.'hole  was 
illuminated  with  numbers  of  candles,  and  made  a 
molt  magnificent  and  glittering  appearance.  Above 
the  fait  is  a  bed  of  whiti(h  clay  *,  ufed  in  making 
the  Z./i'(?r/'^(5/ earthen-ware  J  and  in  the  fame  place 
is  alfo  dug  a  good  deal  of  the  Gypfmn,  or  plaifter 
ftone.  The  folTil  fait  is  generally  yellov-'j  and  femi- 
pellucid,  fometimes  debafed  with  a  dull  greenifh 
earth,  and  is  often  found,  but  in  fmall  quantitiesj 
quite  clear  and  color-lefs. 

The  road  from  this  place  to  Macclesfield  is  thro* 
a  flat,  rich,  but  unpleafant  country.  That  town  is 
in  a  very  flourifliing  ftate,  is  pciTeiTed  of  a  great 
manufadure  of  mohair  and  twill  buttons;  has  be- 
tween twenty  and  thirty  filk  mills,  and  a  very  con- 
fiderable  copper  fmelting  houfe,  and  brafs  work. 

After  leaving  this  place  the  court  try  almoft  in- 
ftantly  changes  and  becomes"  very  mountanbus  and 
barren,  at  left  on  the  furface  •,  but  the  bowels  com- 
penlate  for  the  external  fterility,  by  yielding  fuffi- 
cient  quantity  of  coal  for  the  ufe  of  th6  neighboring 
parts  of  Chejhire^  and  for  the  burning  of  Hme  ; 
vaft  quantity  is  made  near  Buxfojj,  and  being  car- 
ried to  air  parts  for  the  purpofes  of  agriculture,  is 
become  a  confiderable  article  of  commerce. 

The  celebrated  warm    bath  of   Buxton  f  is   Buxtoi*^ 

^  Argilla  caerula-cinerea  Da  Cofta  fcjjlls.  1.  d8. 

\  The  Romans^  who  were  remarkably  fond  of  warm' baths, 
did  not  over-look  tnefe  agreeaole  waters  ;  they  had  a  bath, 
jnclofed  with  a  brick  wall,  adjacent  to  the  prelcnc  St.  Anni'% 
\vell,  which  Dr.  Short ^  in  his  effay  oh  tniatrai  watei.^  lays 
-iiyas  razed  in"  1 709. 

B  2  feated 


A      TOUR 

fcatcd  in  a  bottom,  amidfl:  thefe  hills,  in  a  moft' 
chearlefs  fpot,  and  would  be  little  frequented,  did 
not  Hygeia  often  refide  here,  and  difpenfe  to  her 
votaries  the  chief  blelTings  of  life,  eafe  and  health: 
with  joy  and  gratitude  I  this  moment  refled  on  the 
efficacious  qualities  of  the  waters  *,  I  recoiled  with 
rapture  the  return  of  fpirits,  the  flight  of  pain,  and 
re-animation  of  my  long,  long  crippled  rheumatic 
limbs.  But  how  unfortunate  is  it,  that  what  Pro- 
vidence defigned  for  the  general  good,  fhould  be 
rendered  only  a  partial  one,  and  denied  to  all,  ex- 
cept the  opulent ;  or  I  may  fay  to  the  (compara- 
tively) few  that  can  get  admittance  into  the  houfc 
where  thefe  waters  are  imprifoned.  There  are 
other  fprings  (Cambde7i  fays  nine)  very  near  that  in 
the  Z/.'?//,  and  in  all  probability  of  equal  virtue.  I 
was  informed  that  the  late  Duke  of  Devoiipire^  not 
long  before  his  death,  had  ordered  fomc  of  thefe  to 
be  inclofed  and  formed  into  baths.  It  is  to  be  hoped 
that  his  fucceflbr  will  not  fail  adopting  fo  ufeful 
and  humane  a  plan-,  that  he  will  form  it  on  the  moft 
enlarged  fyllem,  that  they  may  open  not  folely  to 
thofe  whom  mifufed  wealth  hath  rendered  invalids, 
but  to  the  poor  cripple,  whom  honefl  labor  hath 
made  a  burden  to  himfelf  and  his  country  ;  and  to 
the  foldier  and  failor,  who  by  hard  fervice  have  loft 
the  ufe  of  thofe  very  limbs  which  once  were  aiStive 
in  our  defence.  The  honor  rcfulting  from  fuch  a 
foundation  would  be  as  great,  as  the  fatisfaflion 
arifmg  from  a  confcioufnefs  of  fo  benevolent  a  work 
would  be  unfpeakablc  •,  the  charms  of  diHlpation 
would  then  Igfe  their  force,  and  dull  and  tallclcfs 

v.ould 


IN    SCOTLAND. 

•would  every  human  luxury  appear  to  him,  who  had 
it  in  his  power  thus  to  lay  open  thefe  fountains  of 
health,  and  to  be  able  to  exult  in  fuch  pathetic  and 
comfortable  drains  as  thefe  -.When  the  ear  heard  me^ 
then  it  blejfed  jjie,  and  ivhen  the  eye  faiv  me  it  gave 
zvitnefs  to  me ; 

Becaufe  I  delivered  the  poor  that  cried,  and  the  fa- 
therlefs,  and  him  that  had  none  to  help  him. 

The  hkjfing  of  him  that  was  ready  to  perijlo  came 
upon  me,  and  I  caufed  the  ividozv's  heart  to  fmg 
for  joy, 

I  tvas  eyes  to  the  hiind,  and  feet  iL-as  I  to  the  lame» 

After  leaving  Buxton,  paffed  thro'  Middkton  dale, 
a  deep  narrow  chafm  between  two  vaft  cliffs,  which 
extend  on  each  fide  near  a  mile  in  length  :  this 
road  is  very  fingular,  but  the  rocks  in  general  are 
too  naked  to  be  beautiful.  At  the  end  is  the  fmall 
village  of  Stoney  Middkton ;  here  the  profpecSt 
opens,  and  at  Barfly  Bridge  exhibits  a  pretty  view 
of  a  fmall  but  fertile  vale,  watered  by  the  Der- 
went,  and  terminated  by  Chatfworth,  and  its  plan- 
tations.    Arrived  and  lay  at 

Chejlerfield  •■,  an  ugly  town.  In  this  place  is  a 
great  cnanufaclure  of  worded  (lockings,  and  ano- 
ther of  a  brown  earthen-ware,  much  of  which  is 
fent  into  Holland,  the  country  which,  within  lefs 
than  half  a  century  ago,  fupplied  not  only  thefe 
kingdoms  but  half  Europe  with  that  comm.odity  ; 
the  clay  is  found  near  the  tov/n,  over  the  bafs  or 
cherty  *  ftratum,  above  the  coal.  The  fteeple  of 
Chejlerfield  church  is  a  fpire,  covered  with  lead, 

•  Or  flinty. 

B  3  jaut 


A     T    O    U    R 

but  by  a  violent  wind  ilrangely  bent,  in  which 
(late  it  remains. 
Jvyz  27.  In  the  roa.-^  fide,  about  three  miles  from  the 
town,  sre  feveral  pits  of  iron  {tone,  about  nine  or 
ten  feet  deep.  -The  ftratum  lies  above  the  coal, 
and  is  two  feet  thick.  I  was  informed  that  the 
adventurers  pay  ten  pounds  per  annum  to  the  Lord 
of  the  Soil,  for  liberty  of  raifing  it  •,  that  the  la- 
borers have  fix  fliilUn^s  per  load  for  getting  it ; 
each  load  is  about  twenty  ftrikes  or  bufhels,  which 
yields  a  tun  of  metal.  Coal,  in  thefe  parts,  is  very 
cheap,  a  tun  and  a  half  being  fold  for  five  fhillings. 

Changed  horfes  at  Work/op  and  Ttixford;  crofled 
the  Trent  at  Bunhmn- Ferry ^  where  it  is  broad  but 
fhallow  i  the  fpring  tides  flov;  here,  and  rife  about 
two  feet,  but  the  common  tides  never  reach  this 
place.  Pafs  along  the  Fojs-Byh-,  or  the  canal 
opened  by  Henry  I.  *  to  form  a  communication  be- 
tween the  Trent  and  the  Witham  j  it  was  opened  i* 
the  year  1121,  and  extends  from  Linccht  to  Tor- 
kefey  ;  its  length  is  eleven  miles  three  quarters,  the 
breadth  between  dike  and  dike  at  the  top  is  about 
fixty  feet,  at  bottom  twenty-two  \  vefTcls  from  fif- 
teen to  thirty-five  tuns  navigate  this  canal,  and  by 
its  means  a  confidernble  trade  in  coals,  timber, 
corn  and  wool,  is  carried  on.    In  former  times,  the 

*  Diigiiah  on  embanking,  167. 

f  I  make  ufe  of  this  word,  as  Do6>or  Stukrh  conjeftures 
this  canal  to  have  been  originally  a  Rcmun  work  ;  and  that 
another  of  the  fame  kind  (tailed  the  Carftiike)  coinmunic.ited 
with  ir,  by  means  of  the  IFiihom,  which  began  a  little  below 
Wojl:eniro\  three  miles  horn  Lincoln^  and  was  continued  thro' 
the  fens  as  far  as  I'rtnbcrcugh.  Stuk,:'y''i  Cnraujius.  125.  feq(J. 
hjufd.  Account  of  Richard  of  Cirencejhr.   50, 

perfons 


IN    SCOTLAND. 

perfons  who  had  landed  property  on  either  fide 
were  obliged  to  fcower  it  whenever  it  was  choaked 
up,  and  accordingly  we  find  prefentments  were 
made  by  juries  in  feveral  lucceeding  reigns  for  thac 
purpofe.     Reach 

Lincoln,  anantientbqt  ill-built  city,  much  fallen 
away  from  its  former  extent.  It  lies  partly  on  a  plain, 
partly  on  a  very  fteep  hill,   on  whofe  fummit  are 
the  cathedral  and  the  ruins  of  the  caftle.     The  firft 
is  a  vaft  pile  of  gothic  architecture ;  has  nothing 
remarkable  on  the  outfide,  but  within  is  of  match- 
lefs  beauiy  and  magnificence :  the  ornaments   are 
excefTively  rich,  and  in  the  fineft  gothic  tafte  ;  th« 
pillars  light,  the  centre  lofty,  and  of  a  furprifing 
grandeur.     The  windows  at  the  N.  and  S.  ends 
very  antient,  but  very  elegant;  one  reprefents  a 
leaf  with  its  fibres,  the  other  confifls  of  a  number 
of  fmall  circles.    There  are  two  other  antient  win- 
dows on  each  fide  the  great  ifle  :  the  others,  as  I 
recoiled,  are  modern.     This  church  was,  till  of 
late  years,  much  out  of  repair,  but  has  jufb  been 
reftored  in  a  manner  that  does  credit  to  the  Chap- 
ter.    There  is  indeed  a  fort  of  arch  near  the  W, 
end,  that  feems  placed  there  (for  the  fame  end  as 
Bayes  tells  us  he  wrote  one  of  his  fcenes)  meerly  to 
fet  off  the  refl. 

The  profpeCt  from  this  eminence  is  very  exten- 
five,  but  very  barren  of  obje6ts,  a  vafi:  fiat  as  far 
as  the  eye  can  reach,  confiding  of  plains  not  the 
moil  fertile,  or  of  fens  *  and  moors :  the  lafi;  are 

far 

*  The  fens,  naked  as  they  now  appear,  were  once  well  wood-.- 
ed  ;  oaks  have  been  found  buried  in  them,  which  were  fixtecn 

B  4-  yards 


Gecfc. 


A      TOUR 

far  Icfs  extcnfivc  than  they  were,  many  being 
drained,  and  will  foon  become  the  bed  land  in  the 
country.  But  ftili  much  remains  to  be  done-,  the 
fens  near  Revejby  Ahby  *,  eight  miles  beyond 
Horncajik^  are  of  vaft  extent ;  but  ferve  for  little 
other  purpofc  than  the  rearing  great  numbers  of 
geefe,  which  are  the  wealth  of  the  fenmen. 

During  the  breeding  feafon,  thefe  birds  are 
lodged  in  the  fame  houfes  with  the  inhabitants,  and 
even  in  their  very  bed-chambers  :  in  every  apart- 
ment are  three  rows  of  coarfe  wicker  pens  placed 
one  above  another  ;  each  bird  has  its  feparate  lodge 
divided  from  the  other,  which  it  keeps  poflefllon 
of  during  the  time  of  fitting.  A  perfon,  called  a 
Cozxard  -f,  attends  the  flock,  and  twice  a  day 
drives  the  whole  to  water  •,  then  brings  them  back 
to  their  habitations,  helping  thofe  that  live  in  the 
upper  ftories  to  their  nefts,  without  ever  mifplac- 
ing  a  fingle  bird. 

The  geefe  are  plucked  five  times  in  the  year ; 
the  firft  plucking  is  at  Lady-Day^  for  feathers  and 
quills,  and  the  fame  is  renewed,  for  feathers  only, 
four  times  more  between  that  and  Michaelmas,  The 
old  geefe  fubmit  quietly  to  the  operation,   but  the 

yards  long,  and  five  in  circumference ;  fir  trees  from  thirty  to 
thirty- five  yards  long,  and  a  foot  or  eighteen  inches  fquare. 
Thefe  trees  had  not  the  mark  of  the  ax,  but  appeared  as  if 
burnt  down  by  fire  applied  to  their  lower  parts.  Acorns  and 
fmall  nuts  have  alfo  been  found  in  great  quantities  in  the 
fame  places.      /J//^^«/<r  on  enibai^king,    141. 

*  Rc'veflty  /.bhy  was  founded  i  142,  by  H'.  Je  Romara,  Earl 
oiLiticoln,  for  Ciftercian  monks,  and  granted  by  //.Vlll.an.  30. 
to  C^Dukc  o{  Sujolk.  The  founder  turning  monk  was  buried 
here.     Tanner.  263. 

t  i.  e.  Goofe-herd. 

voung 


INSCOTLAND.  9 

young  ones  are  very  noify  and  unruly.  I  once  law 
this  performed,  and  obferved  that  godins  of  fix 
weeks  old  were  not  fpared  ;  for  their  tails  were 
plucked,  as  I  was  told,  to  habituate  them  early  to 
what  they  were  to  come  to.  If  the  feafon  proves 
cold,  numbers  of  geefe  die  by  this  barbarous  cuf- 
tom  *. 

Vaft  numbers  are  drove  annually  to  London^  to 
fupply  the  markets  ;  among  them,  all  the  fuper- 
annuated  geefe  and  ganders  (called  here  Cagmags) 
which  ferve  to  fatigue  the  jaws  o*f  the  good  Citizens, 
who  are  fo  unfortunate  as  to  meet  with  them. 

The  fen  called  the  V/eJi  Fen^  is  the  place  where   pen  bir<2s- 
the  Rufts  and  Reeves  refort  to  in  the  greatefl:  num- 
bers -f  -,   and  many  other  forts  of  water  fowl,  which 
do  not  require  the  fhelter  of  reeds  or  ruflies,   mi- 
grate here  to  breed  ;  for  this  fen  is  very  bare,  having 
been  imperfeflly  drained  by  narrow  canals,   v/hich 
interfed  it  for  great  numbers  of  miles.     Thefe  the 
inhabitants  navigate  in  moft  diminutive  {hallow 
boats  ;  they  are,  in  faft,  the  roads  of  the  country. 
The  Eajl  Fen  is  quite  in  a  ftate  of  nature,  and 
gives  a  fpecimen  of  the  country  before  the  intro- 
dudlion  of  drainage :   it  is  a  vaft  traft  of  morafs, 
intermixed  with  numbers  of  lakes,  from  half  a  mile 
to  two  or  three  miles  in  circuit,  communicating 
with  each  other  by  narrow  reedy  flraits :  they  are 
very  (hallow,  none  are  above  four  or  five  feet  in 
depth  ;  but  abound  with  fifli,  fuch  as  Pike,  Perch, 
RufF,  Bream,  Tench,    Rud,   Dace,  Roach,  Bur- 

*  It  was  alfo  praftifed  by  the  antlents.  Candidorum  alterum 
<iie£ligal:  Velluntur  quihti/dat?t  locis  bis  anno.  Plinii  lib.  v..  C.  22. 
t  Br.  Zool.  II.  365*.  S:tppl.  tab.  xv.  /.  22. 

bot, 


lo  A      T    O    U    R 

bot,  Sticklebacks  and  Eels.  It  is  obfervable,  that 
once  in  fevtn  or  eight  years,  immenfe  fhoals  o^ 
Sticklebacks  appear  in  the  Welland  below  Spaldwgy 
and  attempt  conning  up  the  river  in  form  of  a  vaft 
column.  They  are  fuppofed  to  be  the  colle6lcd 
multitudes  waQied  out  of  the  fens  by  the  floods  of 
feveral  years  ;  and  carried  into  fome  deep  hole, 
when  over-charged  with  numbers,  they  are  obliged 
to  attempt  a  change  of  place.  They  move  up  the 
river  in  Rich  quantities  as  to  enable  a  man,  who  was 
employed  in  taking  them,  to  earn,  for  a  confider- 
able  time,  four  Ihillings  a  day,  by  felling  them  at 
a  halfpenny  per  bulhel.  They  were  ufed  to  manure 
land,  and  attempts  have  been  made  to  get  oil  from 
them.  The  fen  is  covered  with  reeds,  the  harvcd 
of  the  neighboring  inhabitants,  who  mow  them 
annually;  for  they  prove  a  much  better  thatch 
than  draw,  and  not  only  cottages  but  many  very 
good  houfes  are  covered  with  them.  Stares,  which 
during  winter  refort  in  myriads  to  rood  in  the 
reeds,  are  very  de{lru6live,  by  breaking  them  down 
by  the  vaft  numbers  that  perch  on  them.  The 
people  are  therefore  very  diligent  in  their  attempts 
to  drive  them  away,  and  are  at  great  expence  in 
powder  to  free  themfelves  from  thefe  troublefome 
guefts.  I  have  fcen  a  ftock  of  reeds  harvefted  and 
flacked  worth  two  or  three  hundred  pounds,  which 
was  the  property  of  a  fingle  farmer. 

The  birds  which  inhabit  the  different  fens  are 
very  numeroiis  :  I  never  met  with  a  finer  field  for 
the  Zoolcgift  to  range  in.  Beildes  the  common 
Wild  duck,  of  which  an  account  is  given  in  another 

place, 


INSCOTLAND.  n 

place  *,  wild  Geefe,  Garganles,  Pochards,  Sho- 
velers  and  Teals,  breed  here.  I  have  feen  on  the 
Eaji  Fen  a  fmall  flock  of  the  tufted  Ducks ;  but 
they  feemed  to  make  it  only  a  baiting  place.  The 
Pewit  Gulls  and  black  Terns  abound;  the  laft  in 
vaft  flocks  almofl:  deafen  one  with  their  clamors :  a 
few  of  the  great  Terns,  or  Tickets,  are  feen  among 
them.  I  faw  feveral  of  the  great- crefted  Grebes  on 
the  Eaft  Fen^  called  there  G aunts,  and  met  with  one 
of  their  floating  nefts  with  eggs  in  it.  The  lefler 
crefted  Grebe,  the  black  and  dufky  Grebe,  and  the 
little  Grebe,  are  alfo  inhabitants  of  the  fens-,  toge- 
ther with  Coots,  Water-hens,  fpotted  Water-hens, 
Water-rails,  Ruffs,  Redflianks,  Lapwings  or  Wipes, 
Red-breafl:ed  Godwits  and  Whimbrels.  The  God- 
wits  breed  nQ2LV  J-Vajhenhrcugh -y  the  Whimbrels  onlv 
appear  for  about  a  fortnight  in  May  near  Spalding, 
and  then  quit  the  country.  Oppofite  to  Fcjfdyke 
Wajloy  during  fummtr,  are  great  numbers  oi  Avo- 
fettas,  called  there  Tel-pers,  from  their  cry  :  th^y 
hover  over  the  fportfman's  head  like  the  Lapwing, 
and  fly  with  their  necks  and  legs  extended. 

Knots  are  taken  in  nets  along  the  fhores  near 
Fojfdyke  in  great  numbers  during  winter ;  but  they 
difappear  in  the  fpring. 

The  ihort-eared  owl,  Br.  ZjOoL  L  156.  vifits  the 
neighbourhood  (^iWafljcnhrough,  along  with  the 
Woodcocks,  and  probably  performs  its  migrations 
with  thofe  birds,  for  it  is  obferved  to  quit  the  coun- 

*  Br.  Zool.  II,  462.  In  general,  to  avoid  repetition,  the  rea- 
der is  referr'd  to  the  four  OHavn  volumes  oi Britijh  Zoology, 
for  a  more  particular  account  of  animals  mentioned  in  this 
Tour. 

try 


"  A      T    O    U    R 

try  at  the  fame  time  :  I  have  alfo  received  fpecimens 
ot  tliem  from  the  BcmiJJj  dominions,  one  of  the  re- 
treats of  the  Woodcock.  This  owl  is  not  obferved 
in  this  country  to  perch  on  trees,  but  conceals  itfelf 
in  long  old  grafs  ;  if  difturbed,  takes  a  fhort  flight, 
lights  again  and  keeps  flaring  about,  during  which 
time  its  horns  are  very  vifible.  The  farmers  are 
fond  of  the  arrival  of  thefe  birds,  as  they  clear  the 
iields  of  mice,  and  will  even  fly  in  fearch  of  prey 
during  day,  provided  the  weather  is  cloudy  and 
mifty. 
Heronry.  But  the  greateft  curioflty  in  thefe  parts  is  the  vafl: 

Heronry  at  Creji-Hall^  fix  miles  from  Spalding.  The 
Herons  refort  there  m February  to  repair  their  nelts, 
fettle  there  in  the  fpring  to  breed,  and  quit  the  place 
during  winter.  They  are  numerous  as  Rooks,  and 
their  nefts  fo  crouded  together,  that  myfelf  and  the 
company  that  v/as  with  me  counted  not  fewer  than 
eighty  in  one  tree.  I  here  had  opportunity  of  de- 
tedling  my  own  millake,  and  that  of  other  Ornitho- 
logifcs,  in  making  two  fpecies  of  Herons  ;  for  I 
fjund  that  the  crefted  Heron  was  only  the  male  of 
the  other:  it  made  a  mofl:  beautiful  appearance 
with  its  fnowy  neck  and  long  crcfl  fl:reaming  with 
the  wind.  I'he  family  who  owned  this  place  was 
ot  the  fame  name  with  thefe  birds,  which  fcems  to 
be  the  principal  inducement  for  preferving  thsm. 

In  the  time  of  Michael  Drayton, 
Here  Jlalk'd  the  ftately  crane,  as  though  he  marcFd 

in  rear. 
But  at   prefent  this  bird  is  quite  unknown  in  our 
ifland  i  but  every  other  fpecies  enumerated  by  that 

obfervant 


INSCOTLAND.  13 

obfervant  Poet  flill  are  found  in  this  fenny  tra6l, 
er  its  neighbourhood. 

Vifited  Spalding^  a  place  very  much  refembling,  Jupce  28, 
in  form,  neatnefs,  and  fituation,  a  Butch  town  :  padm^. 
the  river  PFeliand  pafles  through  one  of  the  ftreets, 
a  canal  is  cut  through  another,  and  trees  are  planted 
on  each  fide.  The  church  is  a  handfome  ftru6lure, 
the  fteeple  a  fpire.  The  churches  in  general, 
throughout  this  low  tradl,  are  very  handfome ;  all 
are  built  of  ftone,  which  muft  have  been  brought 
from  places  very  r'emote,  along  temporary  canals  j 
for,  in  many  inftances,  the  quarries  lie  at  left  twenty 
miles  diftant.  But  thefe  edifices  were  built  in 
zealous  ages,  when  the  benedidtions  or  maledidions 
of  the  church  made  the  people  conquer  every  diffi- 
culty that  might  obftrucl  thef*  pious  foundations. 
The  abby  of  Crowland^  feated  in  the  midft  of  a 
fhaking  fen  *,  is  a  curious  monument  of  the  infu- 
perable  zeal  of  the  times  it  was  crefled  in  ;  as  the 
beautiful  tower  of  Bcjton  church,  vifible  from  all 
parts,  is  a  magnificent  fpecimen  of  a  fine  gothic 
tafte. 

Pafl^ed  near  the  fite  0?  Swinejljead-Abhy^,  of  v/hich       j^nh  29, 
there  are  not  the  left  remains.     In  the  walls  of  a     Snvmejhead- 
farm  houfe,    built  out  of  the  ruins,  you  are  fhewn 
the  figure  of  a  Knight  Templar,  and  told  it  v/as 
the  monk  \y\\o  poifoned  King  John-i  a  fa6l  denied 
by  our  beft  hiftorians. 

•  This  monaftery  was  founded  by  Ethtl^ald  l\\r\^  of  Mrr- 
cia,  A.  D.  716.  The  ground  being  too  marfhy  t"  admit  a 
weighty  building  of  flone,  he  made  a  foundation,  by  drivinjc 
into  the  ground  vafl:  piles  of  oak  ;  and  caufed  more  comprifk 
earth  to  be  brought  in  boats  nine  miles  off  to  lay  on  them, 
and  foriD  a  more  found  foundation. 

Returned 


Jbhj, 


«l  A.      T    O    U    R 

Returned  thro'  Lincoln^  went  out  of  town  under 
the  Nezvport-Gatey  a  curious  Roman  work  •,  paflcd 
over  part  of  the  heath,  changed  liorfes  at  Spittle, 
and  at  G la-nf or d  Bridge^  dined  at  the  ferry-houfe  on 
the  banks  of  the  Humber^  and  after  a  paflfage  of 
about  five  miles,  with  a  brifk  gale,  landed  at  Hull^ 
and  reached  that  night  Eur ton-Conft able,  the  feat  of 
Mr.  Conjlable,  in  that  part  of  Torkfmre  called  Hoi- 
dernefs  j  a  rich  flat  country,  but  excellent  for  pro- 
ducing  large  cattle,  and  a  good  breed  of  horfes, 
whole  prices  are  near  doubled  fince  the  French  have 
grown  fo  fond  of  the  Eriglijh  kind. 

Made  an  excurfion  to  Hornfea^  a  fmall  town  on 
the  coaft,  remarkable  only  for  its  mere,  a  piece  of 
water  about  two  miles  long,  and  one  broad,  fa- 
mous for  its  pike  sfid  eels ;  it  is  divided  from  the 
fea  by  a  very  narrow  bank,  fo  is  in  much  danger  of 
being  fome  time  or  other  loll. 

The  cliffs  on  the  coaft  of  Holdernefs  are  high, 
and  compofed  of  clay,  which  falls  down   in  vaft 

Amber.  fragments.  Quantity  of  amber  is  wafhed  out  of 
it  by  the  tides,  which  the  country  people  pick  up 
and  fell  -,  it  is  found  fometimes  in  large  mafles,  but 
I  never  faw  any  lb  pure  and  clear- as  that  from  the 
Baltic.  It  is  ulually  of  a  pale  yellow  color  within, 
and  prettily  clouded  ;  the  outfide  covered  with  a 
thin  coarfe  coat. 

July  2.  After  riding  about  twenty-two  miles  thro*  a  flat 

grazing  country,  reached  Burlington- S^uay,  a  fmall 
tov/n  dole  to  the  fea.  There  is  a  defign  of  build- 
ing a  pier,  for  the  protedion  of  fliippingv  at  pre- 
fcnt  there  is  only  a  large  wooden  quay,  which  pro- 
2  jc<^s 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D."  15 

iefts  into  the  water,  from  which  the  place  takes  its 
name.  From  hence  is  a  fine  view  of  the  white 
cliffs  of  Flamborough-Heady  which  extends  far  to 
the  Eaft,  and  forms  one  fide  of  the  Gabrantuicoritm 
finus  portucfus  of  Ptolpmy-,  a  name  derived  from  the 
Britijh  Gyfvy  on  account  of  tlie  number  of  goats 
found  there,  according  to  the  conjedlure  oiCambden. 

A  mile  from  hence  is  the  town  of  Burlingion. 
The  body  of  the  church  is  large,  but  the  fteeple, 
by  fome  accident*  has  been  deftroyed  •,  near  it  is  a 
large  gateway,  with  a  noble  gothic  arch,  pofTibly 
the  remains  of  a  priory  of  black  canons,  founded 
by  Walter  de  <3ant,  in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of 
Henry  I. 

This  coaft  of  the  kingdom  is  very  unfavorable 
to  trees,  for,  except  fome  woods  in  the  neighbor- 
hood of  Burton-Conjlable,  there  is  a  vaft  nakednefs 
from  the  Humber^  as  far  as  tlie  extremity  of  Cath- 
nefsf  with  a  very  few  exceptions,  which  fliall  be 
noted  in  their  proper  places. 

Went  to  Flamborough-Head.  The  town  is  on  Tuly  3, 
the  North  fide,  confifts  of  about  one  hundred  and  ^^'«^^"«^*- 
fifty  fmall  houfes,  entirely  inhabited  by  fifliermen, 
few  of  whom,  as  is  faid,  die  in  their  beds,  but 
meet  their  fate  in  the  element  they  are  fo  conver- 
fant  in.  Put  myfelf  under  the  diredion  q1  William 
Camidge^  Cicerone  of  the  place,  who  conducted  me 
to  a  little  creek  at  that  time  covered  with  {\'i^i\  2l 
fleet  of  cobles  having  jufi:  put  in.  Went  in  one 
of  thofe  little  boats  to  view  t!ie  Head^  coafting  it 
for  upwards  of  two  miles.  The  cliffs  are  of  a  tre- 
mendous height,  and  amazing  grandeur i  beneath 

arj 


i^  A     T   O   U   R 

are  feveral  vaft  caverns,  fome  clofed  at  the  end,' 
others  are  pervious,  formed  with  a  natural  arch, 
giving  a  romantic  pafiage  to  the  boat,  different  from 
that  we  entered.  In  fome  places  the  rocks  are  in- 
fulated,  are  of  a  pyramidal  figure,  and  foar  up  to 
a  vaft  height  -,  the  bafes  of  moft  are  folid,  but  in 
fome  pierced  thro',  and  arched ;  the  color  of  all 
thefe  rocks  is  white,  from  the  dung  of  the  innu- 
Its  birds,  merable  flocks  of  migratory  birds,  which  quite 
cover  the  face  of  them,  filling  every  little  projec- 
tion, every  little  hole  that  will  give  them  leave 
to  reft  ;  multitudes  were  fwimming  about,  others 
fwarmed  in  the  air,  and  almoft  ftunned  us  with  die 
variety  of  their  croaks  and  fcreams  ;  I  obferved 
among  them  corvorants,  fliags  in  fmall  flocks, 
guillemots,  a  few  black  guillemots  very  fliy  and 
wild,  auks,  puffins,  kittiwakes  *,  and  herring 
gulls.  Landed  at  the  fame  place,  but  before  our 
return  to  Flambcrough,  vifited  Robin  Leith*s  hole, 
a  vaft  cavern,  to  which  there  is  a  narrow  pafl'age 
from  the  land  fide  i  it  fuddenly  rifes  to  a  great 
height,  the  roof  is  finely  arched,  and  the  bottom  is 
'  for  a  confiderable  way  formed  in  broad  fteps,  re- 
fembling  a  great  but  eafy  ftair-cafe  -,  the  mouth 
opens  to  the  fca,  and  gives  light  to  the  whole. 

Lay  at  Hunmandby,  a  fmall  village  above  Filey 
Bay,  round  which  are  fome  plantations  that  thrive 
tolerably  well,  and  ought  to  be  an  encouragement 
to  gentlemen  to  attempt  covering  thefe  naked  hills. 

Filey  Brig  is  a  ledge  of  rocks  running  far  into 
the  fea,  and  often  fatal  to  (hipping.     The  bay  is 

•   Called  here  Petrels,  Br.  Zool.  Suf>f>I,  tab.  xxiii./.  26. 

fandy, 

/^  Jet  />-^^  ;;-V^/'>^^- 


INSCOTLAND.  ^7 

fandy,  and  affords  vaffc  quantities  of  fine  fifh,  fuch 
as  Turbot,  Soles,  &c.  which  during  fummer  ap- 
proach the  fliore,  and  are  eafily  taken  in  a  common 
feine  or  dragging-net. 

Set  out  for  Scarborough,  paffed  near  the  fite  of  Jvly  4, 
Fiixion,  a  hofpital  founded  in  the  time  oi Atbclfian, 
ro  give  fhelter  to  travellers  from  the  wohes,  that 
they  Jhould  not  he  devoured  by  them  * ;  fo  that  in  thofe 
days  this  bare  tra(5l  muft  have  been  covered  with 
wood,  for  thofe  ravenous  animals  ever  inhabit  large 
forefts.  Thefe  hofpitia  are  not  unfrequent  among 
the  /lips  i  are  either  appendages  to  religious  houfes, 
or  fupported  by  voluntary  fubfcriptiuns.  On  the 
fpot  where  Flixtcn  flood  is  a  farm-houfe,  to  this 
day  called  the  Spital  Houfe.     Reach 

Scarborough,  a  large  town,  builc  in  form  of  a; 
erefcent  on  the  fides  of  a  fteep  hilt  ;  at  one  extre- 
mity are  the  ruins  of  the  caftle,  feat:ed  on  a  cliff  or 
a  ftupendous  height,  from  whence  is  a  very  good 
viev/  of  the  town.  In  the  caflle-yard  is  a  handfome 
barrack  for  one  hundred  and  fitty  men,  but  at  pre- 
fent  untenanted  by  foldiery.  Beneath,  on  the  foutfi 
fide,  15  a  large  flone  pier,  (another  is  now  build- 
ing) which  fhelters  the  fnipping  belonging  to  the 
town.  It  is  a  place  abfolutely  without  trade,  yec 
owns  above  300  fail  of  fhips,  which  are  hired  out 
for  freight :  in  the  late  v/ar  the  Government  had 
never  lefs  than  100 "of  them  in  pay. 

The  number  of  inhabitants  belonging:  to  this 
place  are   above   10,000,  but  ^5  great  part   are 

*  Camhden  Brit.  II.  902. 

C  failors;! 


i9  A     T    O    U    R 

failors,  nothing  like  that  number  are  refident, 
which  makes  one  church  fufficient  for  thole  who 
live  on  fhore.  It  is  large,  and  fcated  almoft:  on 
the  top  of  the  hili.  The  range  of  buildings  on 
the  C//^ commands  a  fine  view  of  the  caftle,  town, 
and  fliore,  and  of  innumerable  fliipping  that  are 
perpetually  pafTing  backward  and  forward  on  their 
voyages.  The  fpaw  *  lies  at  the  foot  of  one  of  the 
hills,  S.  of  the  town  i  this  and  the  great  conveni- 
cncy  of  fea-bathing,  occafion  a  vaft  refort  of  com- 
pany during  fumnier  •,  it  is  at  that  time  a  place  of 
great  gayety,  for  with  numbers  health  is  the  pre- 
tence, but  dilTipation  the  end. 

The  fliore  is  a  fine  hard  fand,  ard  during  lo\r 
water  is  the  place  where  the  company  amufe  them- 
fclves  with  riding.  This  is  alfo  the  fifli  market;  for 
every  day  the  cobles,  or  little  fidiing-boats,  are 
drawn  on  fliore  heie,  and  lie  in  rows,  often  quite 
loaden  with  variety  of  the  bed  fifli.  There  was  a 
fiOierman,  on  the  9th  of  May ,   1767,   brought  in 

at  one  time, 
20  Cods, 

14  Lings, 
17  Skates, 

8  Holibuts,  befides  a  vaft  quantity  of  leflrr  f.fh  j 
and  fold  the  whole  for  3  1.  15  s.  It  is  fuperfluous  to 
repeat  what  has  been  before  mentioned,  of  the  me- 
thods of  fifliinfT,  being  amply  dcfcrjbed,  /'W.  III.  p. 

*  The  waters  nre  impregnated  with  a  purgative  fait,  (Cla:i' 
lir's)  a  Imall  quantity  of  common  fait,  and  cMlccl.  1  here 
are  two  wells,  the  (arthcft  from  the  town  is  more  purgative, 
and  its  talle  more  bitt.-r  ;  the  other  is  more  chalybeate,  and 
its  uitc  more  briflc  and  pungent.    D.  fi. 

*93. 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  19 

193,  of  the  Britifi  Zoology  ;  yet  it  will  be  far  from 
impertinent  to  point  out  the  pcculi^  advantages  of 
thcfe  feas,  and  the  additional  benefit  this  town  might 
experience,  by  the  augmentation  of  its  filnerras. 
For  this  account,  and  for  numberlefs  civilities,  I 
think  myfelf  much  indebted  to  Mr.  Travis^  fur- 
geon,  who  communicated  to  me  the  following  Re- 
marks : 

"  Scarborough  is  fituated  at  the  bottom  of  a  bay, ' 
formed  by  iVhilbf  rock  on  the  Norih,  and  Flanibo- 
rough-head  on  the  South  -,  the  town  is  feated  diredly 
oppofite  to  the  centre  of  the  W.  end  of  the  Dogger 
bank  ;  which  end,  (according  to  Hammond's  chart 
of  the  North  Sea)  lies  S.  and  by  VV,  and  N.  and 
by  E.  but  by  a  line  dravv'n  from  linmonth  cafJc, 
would  lead  about  N.  W.  and  S.  E.  Tho'  the  Dog- 
get  bank  is  therefore  but  i  2  leagues  from  Flambc- 
rough-head,  yet  it  is  16  and  a  half  from  Scarborough^ 
23  from  IVhitby,  and  ^6  from  Tinmouth  caftle.  The 
N.  fide  of  the  bank  flretches  ofFE.  N.  E.  between 
30  and  40  leagues,  until  it  almoft:  joins  to  the 
Long-Bank^  and  Jutt's,  Riff. 

"  It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  the  fifliermen  feldom 
find  any  Cod,  Ling,  or  other  round  fiih  upon  the 
Dogger  bank  itfelf,  but  on  the  flOping  edges  and 
hoUows  contiguous  to  it.  The  top  of  the  bank  i> 
covered  with  a  barren  fliifting  fand.  which  affords 
them  no  fubfiQence;  and  the  water  on  it,  from,  it^ 
fnailownrfs,  is  continually  lb  agitated  and  broken, 
as  to  rillow  them  no  time  ro  rcit.  The  fin  filh  do 
not  fuFcr  the  fame  inconvenience  tliere  j  for  when 
difturbed  by  the  motion  of  tlic  ka.  thc-y  Hielter 

C  2  tliem- 


A      T    O    U    R 

themfclves  in  the  fand,  and  find  variety  of  fuitablc 
food.  It  is  true,  the  Butch  fifli  upon  the  Dogger 
bank,  but  it  is  alfo  true  they  take  littleexcept  Soles, 
Skates,  Thornbacks,  Plaife,  &c.  It  is  in  the  hol- 
lows between  x.\\t  Dogger  2i{\di  i\\tPFell-Ba7iky  that 
the  Cod  are  taken,  which  fupply  L<7W^«  market. 

"  The  fhore,  except  at  the  entrance  of  Scarbo- 
rough pier,  and  fome  few  other  places,  is  compofcd 
of  covered  rocks,  which  abound  with  Lobftcrs 
and  Crabs,  and  many  other  fliell  filh,  (no  Oyfters) 
thence,  after  a  fpace  covered  with  clean  fand,  ex- 
tending in  different  places  from  one  to  five  or  fix 
miles.  The  bottom,  all  the  way  to  the  edge  of 
the  Dogger  banks,  is  a  fear ;  in  fome  places  very 
rugged,  rocky,  and  cavernous  ;  in  others  fmooth, 
and  overgrown  with  variety  of  fubmarine  plants, 
MofiTes,  Corallines,  &c.  *  fome  parts  again  arc 
fpread  with  fand  and  fhells  •,  others,  for  many 
leagues  in  length,  with  foft  miud  and  ooz,  furnilhed 
by  the  difcharge  of  the  Tees  and  Hurnber. 

*'  Upon  an  attentive  review  of  the  whole,  it  may 
be  clearly  inferred,  that  the  fhore  along  the  coaft 
on  the  one  hand,  with  the  edges  of  the  Dogger 
bank  on  the  other,  like  the  fides  of  a  decoy,  give  a 
direction  towards  ourfifliing  grounds  to  the  mighty 
fhoals  of  Cod,  and  other  fifh,  which  are  well  known 
to  come  annually  from  the  Northern  ocean  into  our 
feas  •,  and  fecondly,  that  the  great  variety  of  fifliing 
grounds  near  Scarborough^  extending  upwards  of 
16  leagues  from  the  fliore,  aflbrd  fecure  retreats 
and  plenty  of  proper  food  for  all  the  various  kinds 

•    I  met  with  on  the  (horcs  ne;r  Scarharcugh^   fmall  frag^- 

uicntJ  of  the  '.rwtf  rcJ  c0r.1l, 

of 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  21 

of  fiOi,  and  alfo  fuitable  places  for  each  kind  to  de- 
pofu  their  fpawn  in. 

"  The  fifhery  at  Scarborough  only  employs  105 
men,  and  brings  in  about  5250  1.  per  annum,  a 
trifle  to  what  it  would  produce,  was  there  a  canal 
from  thence  to  Leeds  and  Maiichefier  \  it  is  proba- 
ble it  would  then  produce  above  ten  times  that  fum, 
employ  Ibme  thouiands  of  men,  give  a  comfortable 
and  cheap  fubfiftence  to  our  manufadurers,  keep 
the  markets  moderately  reafonable,  enable  our  ma- 
nufadluring  towns  to  underfell  our  rivals,  and  pre- 
vent the  hands,  as  is  too  often  the  cafe,  raifing  in- 
furrections,  in  every  year  of  fcarcity,  natural  or 
artificial." 

On  difcourfing  with  fome  very  intelligent  fin:ier- 
men,  Iwas  informed  ofa  very  lingular  ph;Enomenon 
they  annually  obferve  about  the  fpawning  of  fiili  *. 
At  the  diflance  of  4  or  5  leagues  from  (horc,  during 
the  months  of  July  and  Augufi^  it  is  remarked, 
that  at  the  depth  of  6  or  7  fathom  from  the  furface, 
the  water  appears  to  be  faturated  with  a  thick  jelly, 
filled  with  the  0^'^of  fifh,  which  reaches  10  or  12 
fathoms  deeper  •,  this  is  known  by  its  adhering  to 
the  ropes  the  cobles  anchor  with  when  they  are 
fifning,  for  they  find  the  firft  6  or  7  fathom  of  rope 
free  from  fpawn.  the  next  10  or  12  covered  with 
llimy  matter,  the  remainder  again  free  to  the  bot- 
tom. They  fuppofc  this  gelatinous  ftuffto  fupply 
the   new-born  fry  with  food,  and  that  it  is  alio  ^ 

.  *  Mr.  0/^^ri  obferved  the  fame  in  S.  Lat.  3:^,  36,  in  his  re- 
turn  from  China.  The  feamen  call  it  ;he  flowering  of  the 
water.     A/.  II,  72. 

C  3  prote^^ion 


22  A       T    O    U    R 

protet^ion  to  the  fpawn,  as  being  difagreeable  to 
the  larger  fifh  to  fwim  in. 

There  is  great  variety  of  fifh  brought  on  fliore  ; 
hefides  thofedefcribed  as  Britijh  fifh,  were  two  fpe- 
cies  of  Rays:  the  Whip-Ray  has"  alfb  been  taken 
here,  and  another  fpecies  of  Weever ;  but  thefe 
are  flibjedls  more  proper  to  be  referred  to  2.  Fauna., 
than  an  Itinerary,  for  a  minute  defcripticn. 
July  10.  Left  Scarhcrough-,  pafTcd  over  large  moors  to 
Robin  Hood's  Bay.  On  my  road,  obferved  the 
AlumWorks.  vaft  m.ountains  of  alum  ftone,  from  which  that 
fait  is  thus  extra(fled  :  It  is  firft  calcined  in  great 
heaps,  which  continue  burning  by  its  own  phlo- 
giflon,  after  being  well  fet  on  fire  by  coals,  for  fix, 
ten,  or  fourteen  months,  according  to  the  fize  of 
the  heap,  fbme  being  equal  to  a  fmall  hill.  It  is 
then  thrown  into  pits  and  (leeped  in  water,  to  ex- 
traft  all  the  faline  particles.  The  liquor  is  then 
run  into  other  pits,  where  the  vitriolic  falts  are 
prascipitated,  by  the  addition  of  a  folution  of  the 
fal  fod<e^  prepared  from  kelp;  or  by  the  volatile 
alkali  of  flale  urine.  The  fuperfluous  wattr  b-jing 
then  evaporated  ducly  by  boiling  in  large  furnaces, 
the  liquor  is  fet  to  cool  -,  and  laftly,  is  poured  into 
large  calks,  to  cryllallize. 

The  alum  works  of  this  country  are  of  fomc  an- 
tiquity -,  they  were  liilT;  diicovercd  by  Sir  Thomas 
Cbaloiier,  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth j  who 
cbl*erving  the  trees  tinged  with  an  unufual  color, 
made  him  fufpicious  of  its  being  owing  to  fome 
mineral  in  the  neighborhood.  He  found  out  that 
the-  ftrata  abounded  with  an  aluminous  fait. 

At 


IN     SCOTLAND.  aj 

At  that  time,  the  K^gHP-i  being  ftrangers  to  the 
method  of  managing  it,  there  is  a  tradition  that  Sir 
Thomas  was  obliged  to  feduce  Ibme  workmen  from 
the  Pope's  alum-works  near  Rome,  then  the  greateft 
in  Europe.  If  one  may  judge  from  the  curfe  which 
his  Holinefs  thundered  out  againft  Sir  Thomns  and 
the  fugitives,  he  certainly  was  not  a  little  enraged; 
for  he  curfed  by  the  very  form  ih^t  Ernulpbus  *  has 
left  us,  and  not  varied  a  tittle  from  that  moft  com- 
prehenfive  of  imprecations. 

The  firft  pits  were  near  Gijborough,  the  feat  of 
the  Chcloners,  who  ftill  fiourifh  there,  notwithftand- 
ing  his  Holinefs's  anathema.  The  works  were  {o 
valuable  as  to  be  deemed  a  royal  mine  Sir  Paul 
Pindnry  who  rented  them,  payed  annually  to  the 
King  12,500  1.  to  the  Earl  of  Miilgi'ave  1,6401.  to 
Sir  WilUatn  Pennyman  600  1.  kept  800  workmen  in 
pay,  and  fold  his  alum  at  26  1.  per  tun.  But  this 
rnonopoly  was  deftroyed  on  the  death  of  Charles  I. 
and  the  right  rcftored  to  the  proprietors. 

In  thefe  alum  rocks  are  frequently  found  cornua 
ammoms^  and  ot'.ier  folTils,  lodged  in  a  ftony  nodule. 
Jet  is  fometim.es  met  with  in  thin  fiat  pieces,  ex-   Jet. 
ternally  of  the  appearance  of  wood.    According  to 
Solims,  Britain  was  famous  for  this  foflll  f . 

The  fands  near  Rcl^in  Hood's  village  v/ere  covered 
with  fifn  of  fevcral  kinds,  and  with  people  who  met 
the  cobles  in  order  to  purchafe  their  cargo  :  the 

*  Vide  7V//?r.7/«  Shant/y. 

t  Gagatis  hie  plurimus  cplimnfqtie  eji  lapis  :  fi  drtorem  rt' 
^uiras,  nigra  gemmeui  :  Ji  naturam  aqua  ardet,  oleo  rejlinguiiur  : 
Ji  poteftaicm  ailritu  cp.lej'a^us  applicita  delinet^  af^ue  Jucctnum. 
C.  xxiv. 

C  4  place 


A      TOUR 

place  feemed  as  if  a  great  fifh  fair  had  been  held 
there;  fome  were  carrying  off  their  bargains,  others 
bufied  in  curing  the  fifh  ;  and  a  little  out  at  fea  was 
a  fleet  of  cobles  and  five  men  boats,  and  others 
arriving  to  difcharge  the  capture  of  the  preceding 
tides  ■*.  There  are  36  of  the  fiift  belonging  to  this 
I'ttle  pl&ce.  The  houfes  here  make  a  grotcfque 
flippearance,  are' fcattered  over  the  face  of  a  fleep 
cliff"  in  a  very  ftrange  manner,  and  fill  every  pro- 
jeding  ledge,  one  above  anotiier,  in  the  fame  man- 
ner as  tjiofe  of  the  peafants  in  the  rocky  parts  of 
China.  Sand's  End,  Runwick,  and  Staitbes,  three 
other  fifliing-towns  on  this  coafl,  are  (as  1  am  told) 
built  in  the  fame  manner. 

The  country  through  this  day's  journey  was  hilly, 
the  coail:  higli.     Reach 

Whitby,  called  by  the  Saxons,  Streanejhalch,  or 
bay  of  the  light-houfe,  a  large  town,  oddly  ficuated 
between  two  hills,  with  a  narrow  channel  running 
through  the  middle,  extending  about  a  mile  farther 
vp  the  vale,  where  it  widens,  and  forms  a  bay. 
The  two  parts  of  the  town  are  joined  by  a  good 
draw-bridge,  for  the  conveniency  of  letting  the 
(flipping  pafs.  From  this  bridge  are  often  taken 
the  viviparous  Blenny,'  whole  back-bone  is  as 
green  as  that  of  the  Sea  Ncccie.  The  river  that 
forms  this  harbor  is  the  EJk,  but  its  waters  are 
very  inconfiderable  when  the  tide  is  out.  Here  is 
a  pretty  brifk  trade  in  fliip  building  ;  but  except 
that,  a  imail  manufaflurc  of  f.iil- cloth,  and  the 

•  From  hence  the  fifh  are  carried  in  machines  to  Dei'ht 
Litchjiela,  Birmingham,  and  Worcejltr  :  the  towns  which  lie  be- 
yond the  lad  arc  lup^ilied  ffom  the  Weft  of  England. 

hirin 


I  N    S  G  O  T  L  A  N  D.  25 

hiring  out  of  fhips  as  2itScarhorcugh^  like  that  town 
it  has  fcarce  any  commerce.  In  is  computed  there 
are  about  270  (hips  belonging  to  this  place.  Of 
late,  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  have  a  fhare  in 
the  Greenland  fiihery  -,  four  fhips  were  fent  out,  and 
had  very  good  fuccefs.  There  are  very  good  dry 
docks  towards  the  end  of  the  harbor  ^  and  at  the 
rr.outh  a  moft  beautiful  pier.  At  this  place  is  the 
crft  falmon-fifhery  on  the  coaft. 

On  the  hill  above  the  S.  fide  of  the  tovv-n  is  a  fine  St.  HiLWi 
ruin  of  St.  Hilda's  church.  The  fire  was  given  to  Church, 
that  faint  by  Ofwy^  king  of  Ncr thumb erl and ^  about 
A.  D.  657  ;  poflibly  in  confequence  of  a  vow  he 
made  to  found  half  a  dozen  monafteries,  and  make 
his  daughter  a  nun,  fhould  heaven  favor  his  arms. 
St.  Hilda  founded  a  convent  here  for  men  and  wo- 
men, dedicated  it  to  St.  Peier,  and  put  it  under 
the  direction  of  an  abbcfs.  This  eftabliOiment  was 
ruined  by  the  excurfions  of  the  Danes ;  but  after 
the  conqueft  it  was  rebuilt,  and  filled  with  Bene- 
di^ines^  by  Walter  de  Percy.  In  lefs  enlightened 
times  it  was  believed  that  not  a  wild  goofe  dared  to 
fiy  over  this  holy  ground,  and  if  it  ventured  was 
fure  to  fall  precipitate  and  perilh  in  the  attempt. 

Went  about  two  miles  along  the  fhore,  then 
turned  up  into  the  country,  a  black  and  barren 
moor;  obferved  on  the  right  a  vaft  artificial  mounr, 
or  Tumulus,  called  Freehurgh  Hill,  a  monument, 
in  all  probability,  the  work  of  the  Danes,  v/hofe 
cuilom  it  was  to  fling  up  fuch  Tumuli  over  the 
graves  of  their  kings  or  leaders-,  or,  in  memory  of 
the  flain  in  gcnrral,  upon  the  fpot  where  they  had 

obtained 


2'-^  A      T    O    U    R 

obtained  any  great  vidory.  It  is  pofTiblethat  this 
mount  owned  its  rife  to  the  viclory  gained  by  Ivar, 
a  Danijh  prince,  over  Ella,  king  of  Bcrnicia,  "who 
was  on  his  way  fronn  the  North  to  fuccour  0/beri  •, 
for  we  are  told  that  Ivar,  after  defeating  the  lafl:, 
went  from  ^''ork  to  meet  ILUa,  and  fought  and  Hew 
^  him  on  his  march. 

At  the  end  of  this  moor,  about  three  miles  from 
Gijborcu^h^  is  a  beautiful  view  over  the  remaining 
part  of  Torkjhire^  towards  Durham^  Hartlepool^  and 
the  mouth  of  the  T'ees^  which  meanders  through  a 
very  rich  tract.  The  country  inftantly  affumes  a 
new  face  ;  the  road  lies  between  moft  delightful 
hills  finely  wooded,  and  the  little  vales  between 
them  very  fertile ;  on  fome  of  the  hills  are  the  marks 
of  the  firft  alum  works,  which  were  difcovered  by 
Sir  'Thomas  Ch  a  loner. 
CisBORorcK.  GiSBOROUGH,afmalltown,'pleafantly  fituatedina 
vale,  furrounded  at  fome  diftance  by  hills,  and  open 
on theeafttothefea,  which  is  aboutfive  milesdiftant. 
It  is  certainly  a  delightful  fpot,  but  I  cannot  fee  the 
reafon  why  Cambdcn  compares  it  to  Puteoli.  Here 
w^s  once  a  priory  of  the  canons  of  the  order  of  St. 
Jujiiny  founded  by  Robert  de  Brus,  1 129,  after  the 
diflblotion  granted  by  Edward  VI.  to  the  Chaloners: 
a  very  beautiful  eafl  window  of  the  church  is  dill 
remaining.  The  town  has  at  pref.nt  a  good  manu- 
fadure  of  fail  cloth. 

The  country  continues  very  fine  quite  to  the 
banks  of  the  TeeSy  a  confiderable  river,  which  di- 
vides YorhflAre  from  the  biflioprick  of  "Durham. 
After  travelling  109  miles  in  a  ftrait  line  through 

the 


INSCOTLAND.  ;; 

the  firft,  enter  Durham^  crofnngthe  river  on  a  very 
handfome  bridge  of  arches,  the  battlements 

neatly  panneled  with  ftone;  and  reach 

Stockton,  lying  on  the  Tees  inform  of  a  cref- 
cent.  A  handfome  town  ;  the  principal  ftreet  is 
remarkably  fine,  being  i6^  feet  broad;  and  feveral 
Icficr  (Ireets  run  into  it  at  right  angles.  In  the  mid- 
dle of  the  great  ftreet  are  neat  fliambles,  a  town- 
honfe,  and  large  afiembly-room.  There  is  befides 
a  large  fquare.  About  a  century  ago,  according  to 
Anderfon^  it  had  fcarce  a  houfe  that  was  not  made 
of  clay  and  thatch  •,  but  is  now  a  flourifliing  place. 
Its  manufa(fl:ure  is  fail  cloth  ;  and  great  quantities 
of  corn,  and  lead,  (from  the  mineral  parts  of  the 
county)  are  fent  off  from  hence  by  commifTion. 
As  the  river  does  not  admit  of  large  vefTels  fo  high 
as  the  town,  thofe  commodities  are  fent  down  to  be 
ihipped. 

The  falmon  fiihery  here  is  neglefted,  for  none 
are  taken  beyond  what  is  necelTary  to  fupply  the 
country.  Smelts  come  up  the  river  in  the  winter 
time.  On  the  weft  fide  of  the  town  ftood  the  caftle  j 
what  remained  of  it  is  at  prefent  converted  into  a 
barn.  The  country  from  hence  to  Durham  is  flat, 
very  fertile,  and  much  inclofed.  Towards  the  weft 
is  a  fine  view  of  the  highlands  of  the  country :  thofe 
hills  are  part  of  that  vaft  ridge  which  commence 
in  the  north  and  deeply  divide  this  portion  of  the 
kingdom ;  and  on  that  account  are  called  by  Camb^ 
den  the  Appennines  of  England. 

The  approach  to  Durham  is  romantic,  through   Durham. 
a  deep  hollow,  cloathed  on  each  fide  with  wood. 

The 


28  A      T    O    U    R 

The  city  is  prerty  large,  but  the  buildings  old. 
Part  are  on  a  plain,  part  on  the  fide  of  a  hill.  The 
abby,  or  cathedral,  and  the  caftle,  where  the  Bifhop 
lives  when  he  reiides  here,  are  on  the  fummit  of  a 
chfT,  whofefoot  is  wafhed  on  two  fides  by  the  river 
IVere.  The  walks  on  the  oppofite  banks  are  very 
beautiful,  flagged  in  the  middle  and  paved  on  the 
fides,  and  are  well  kept.  They  are  cut  through 
the  wood,  impend  over  the  river,  and  receive  a 
venerable  improvement  from  the  caftle  and  anticnt 
cathedral  which  foar  above. 

The  lad  is  very  old  *  j  plain  without,  and  fup- 
ported  within  by  mafly  pillars,  deeply  engraved 
wiih  lozenge-like  figures,  and  zigzag  furrows  : 
others  are  plain;  and  each  forms  a  duller  of  pillars. 
The  fl<.reen  to  the  choir  is  wood  covered  with  a 
coarfe  carving.  The  choir  neat,  but  without  or- 
nament. 

The  chapter-houfe  feems  v^ry  antient,  and  is  in 
the  form  of  a  theatre.  The  cloifters  large  and 
handfome.  All  the  monuments  are  defaced,  ex- 
cept thatofBifliop  Hatfield.  The  Prebendal  houfes 
are  very  pleafantly  fituated,  and  have  a  fine  view 
backv./ards. 

There  are  two  handfome  bridges  over  the  IVere 
to  the  walks ;  and  a  third  covered  with  houfes, 
which  join  the  two  parts  of  the  town.  This  river 
produces  Salmon,  Trout,  Roach,  Dace,  Minow, 
Loche,  Bulhead,  Sticklebacks,  Lamprey,  theleflx;r 
Lamprey,  Eels,  Smelt?:  and  Samlet,  which  are 
callefl    here   Rack  riders,  becaufe  they  apjiear  in 

•  Begun  in  1093,  ^y  Bifliop  If'illiam  de  Cariltpho. 

I4  winter, 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  25 

winter,  or  bad  weather  ;  Rack,  in  the  northern  dia- 

left,  fignifying  the  driving  of  the  clouds  by  tern. 

pefts.     It  is  obferved  here,  that  before  thtry  go  off  * 

to  fpawn,  thofe  fifh  are  covered  with  a  white  llime. 

There  is  no  inconfiderable  m an u failure,  at  Bur- 
bcimy  'of  fhalloons,  tammies,  ftripes  and  callaman- 
coes.  I  had  heard  on  my  road  many  complaints  of 
the  ecclefiaflical  government  this  county  is  fubjeft 
to ;  but,  from  the  general  face  of  the  country,  it 
feems  to  thrive  wonderfully  under  them. 

Saw  Coker,  the  feat  of  Mr.  Ca}'  •,  a  moil  romantic   Jvlt  13, 
fituation,  layed  out  with  great  judgment;  the  walks 
are  very  extenfive,  principally  along  the  fides  or  at 
the  bottom  of  deep  dells,  bounded  with  vaft  preci- 
pices, finely  wooded  ;  and  many  parts  of  the  rocks 
are  planted  with  vines,  which  I  was  told  bore  well, 
but  late.  The  river  fFere  winds  along  the  hollows, 
and  forms  two  very  fine  reaches  at  the  place  where 
you  enter  thefe  walks.     Its  waters  are  very  clear, 
and  its  bottom  afolid  rock.  The  view  towards  the 
ruins  of  Fintbal- Abb^y  is  remarkably  great ;  and  the 
walk  beneath  the  cliffs  has  a  magnificent  folemnity, 
a  fit  retreat  for  its  monaftic  inhabitants.    This  was 
once  called  the  Defert,  and  was  the  rude  fcene  of 
the  auflerities  of  St.  Godric,  who  carried  them  to 
the  m-oft  fenfelefs  extravagance  *.      A  fober  mind 
may  even  at  prefent  be  affedted  with  horror  at  the 

profpefl 

•  St.  Gocdric  was  born  at  Walpch  in  Ncrfolk,  and  being  an 
itinerant  merchant,-  got  acquainted  with  St.  Cuthbert  at  Farn 
IJland.  He  made  three  pilgrimages  to  "Jernjalem  ;  at  length, 
was  warned  by  a  vifion  to  fettle  in  the  ceCcrt  of  Fhicbal.  He 
lived  an  hermitical  life  there  during  63  years,  and  prafliffd 
unheard-of  auiterities  :  he  wore   an  iion  fiiirt  next  his  ikin, 

day 


S<i  A      T    O    U    R 

profpefl  from  the  fummits  of  tlie  cliffs  into  a  dark- 
fome  and  ftupendoiis  chafm,  rendered  ftill  more 
tremendous  by  the  roaring  of  the  waters  over  its 
diflant  bottom. 

Pafll'd  through  CheJIer-Ie-Street,  a  fmall  town, 
near  which  is  Lumley-Cajtls^  the  feat  of  the  Earl  of 
Scarborough  \  a  place,  as  I  was  told,  very  well 
worth  feeing;  but  unfortunately  it  proved  a  public 
day,  and  I  loft  fight  of  it.  The  country,  from 
Durham  to  Newcajlls,  was  very  beautiful  ;  the 
rifings  gentle,  and  prettily  wooded,  and  the  views 
agreeable  \  that  on  the  borders  remarkably  fine, 
there  being,  from  an  eminence  not  far  from  the 
capital  of  Northumberland^  an  extenfive  view  of  a 
rich  country,  watered  by  the  coaly  Tyne.  Reach 
Xewcastie.  Newcastle,  a  large,  difagreeable,  and  dirty 
townj  divided  in  two  unequal  parts  by  the  river, 
and  both  fides  very  ftccp.  1  he  lower  parts  are 
inhabited  by  Keelmen  and  their  families,  a  muti- 
nous race  •,  for  which  realon  this  town  is  always 
garrifoned. 

The  great  bufincfs  of  the  place  is  the  coal  trade. 
The  collieries  lie  at  difterent  diftances,  from  five  to 

dav  and  night,  and  wore  out  three  :  he  mingled  aflies  with 
chc  flour  he  ir.adc  his  bread  of";  and,  leall  it  fliould  then  be 
too  i;ood,  kct.t  it  three  or  four  months  before  he  ventured  to 
eat  it.  In  winter,  as  well  as  i'umnicr,  he  pall'od  whole  nights, 
tip  to  his  chiti  in  water,  at  his  devotions.  Like  St.  Antony, 
he  \^.as  often  haunted  by  iicnds  in  various  fhapes  ;  fomctimes 
in  form  of  beautiful  damfcU,  fo  was  vifited  with  evil  con- 
cupilcence,  which  he  cured  by  rolling  naked  among  thorns 
and  briars:  his  body  grew  ulcerated;  but,  toencreafj  his  pain, 
he'  pouied  fait  into  the  wounds.  Wrought  many  miracles, 
and  died  \\io.  Britannia Jacra,  304.  About  ten  years  after 
his  dcceafe,  a  Bencdiiiint  priory  of  thirteen  monks  was  founded 
there  in  hi»  honor,  by  lluo^b  PuJjcj,  Biihop  of  Durham. 

eighteen 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  Ji 

eighteen  miles  from  the  river ;  and  the  coal  is 
broLiglit  down  in  waggons  along  rail  roads,  and 
difcharged  from  covered  buildings  at  the  edge  of 
the  water  into  the  keels  or  boats  that  are  to  convey 
it  on  fliipboard.  Thefe  boats  are  ftrong,  clumfy  and 
round,  will  carry  about  25  tuns  each;  fometimesare 
navigated  with  a  fquare  fail,  but  generally  are 
pufhed  along  with  large  poles.  No  fhips  of  large 
burthen  can  come  up  as  high  as  Newcajile-,  but  arc 
obliged  to  lie  at  Shields^  a  few  miles  down  the  river, 
where  ftage  coaches  go  thrice  every  day  for  the 
conveniency  of  pafTengers.  This  country  is  moft 
remarkably  populous  ;  Nezvcajtle  alone  contains 
near  40,600  inhabitants  ;  and  there  are  at  left  400 
fail  of  fhips  belonging  to  that  town  and  its  port. 
The^effcd  of  tlie  vaft  commerce  of  this  place  ia 
very  apparent  for  many  miles  round  ;  the  country 
is  finely  cultivated,  and  bears  a  molt  thriving  and 
opulent  afpefl. 

Left   NczaCiiJlk  i  the  country  in    general   flat;  July  13. 
pafled  by  a  large  ftone  column  with  three  dials  on 
the  capital,  with  feveral  fcripture  texts  on  the  fide«, 
called  here  Pigg'^  Folly,  from  the  founder. 

A  few  miles  further  is  Stanningtcn  Bridge,  a  plea- 
fant  village.  Morpeth,  a  fmall  town  with  a  neat 
town-houfe,  and  a  tower  for  the  bell  near  it.  The 
caftle  was  on  a  fmall  eminence,  but  the  remains  are 
now  very  inconfiderable.  Some  attempt  v/as  made 
a  few  years  ago  to  introduce  the  Manchefier  n\zn\x- 
fadlure,  but  without  fuccefs.  There  is  a  remarkable 
ftory  of  this  place,  thac  the  inhabitants  reduced 
their  own  town  to  alhes,  on  the  approach  of*  King 
4  John, 


32  A      T    O    U    R 

'John^  A.  D.  1215,  out  of  pure  hatred  to  their  rr^o- 
narch,  in  order  that  he  might  not  find  any  (hclter 
there. 

This  place  gave  birth  to  William  Turner^  as  Dr. 
Fuller  exprefles  it,  an  excellent  Latinifi^  Gnecian^ 
Oratour^  and  Poet  j  he  might  have  added  polemic 
divine,  champion  and  fufferer  in  the  protcflant 
caufe,  phyfician  and  naturalift.  His  botanic  wri- 
tings are  among  the  firfl  we  had,  and  certainly  the 
beft  of  them  •,  and  his  criticifms  on  the  birds  of 
Arijloth  and  Pliny ^  are  very  judicious.  He  was  the 
firft:  who  flung  any  light  on  thofe  fubjefls  in  our 
illand  ;  therefore  clames  from  a  naturalift  this 
tribute  to  his  memory  *.  ■ 

Felton^  a.  pleafant  village  on  the  Coquet,  which,- 
fome  few  miles  lower,  difcharges  itfclf  into  the 
fea,  oppofite  to  a  fmall  ifle  of  the  fame  name,  re- 
markable for  the  multitudes  of  water- fowl  which 
refort  there  to  breed. 

Jft/tTcui  At  Alhzoick,  a  fmall  town,  the  traveller  is  difap- 

Caftle.  .  . 

pointed  with  the  fituation  and  environs  of  the  caftle, 

the  refidence  of  the  Percies,  the  antient  Earls  of 

Northumberland.     You  look  in  vain  for  any  marks 

of  the  grandeur  of  the  feudal  age  •,  for  trophies 

won  by  a  family  eminent  in  our  annals  for  military 

prowefs  and  deeds  of  chivalry  ;  for  halls  hung  with 

helms  and  hauberks,  or  with  the  fpoils  of  the  chace  •, 

for  cxtenfive  forefts,   and  venerable  oaks.     You 

look  in  vain  for  the  helmet  on  the  tower,  the  antienc 

fignal  ot  hofpitaiity  to  tne  traveller,  or  for  the 

grey-headed  porter  to  conduft  him  to  the  hall  of 

•  Ilewa?  born  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  died  in  1568.- 

cnter- 


ytJL  Jxac  Sd-ajjir  if". 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  JJ 

entertainment.  The  numerous  train,  whofe  coun-« 
tenances  gave  welcome  to  him  on  his  way,  are  now 
no  more  ;  and  inftead  of  the  difinterefted  ufher  of 
the  old  times,  he  is  attended  by  a  valet  eager  to 
receive  the  fees  of  admittance. 

There  is  vaft  grandeur  in  the  appearance  of  the  ^^c^ 

putfide  of  the  caitle  -,  the  towers  magnificent,  but  ^^  ^ 
injured  by  the  numbers  of  rude  flatues  crouded  on  ^/^ 
the  battlements.  The  apartments  are  large,  and 
lately  finifhed  in  the  gothic  (lyle  with  a  mod  incom- 
patible elegance.  The  gardens  are  equally  incon- 
fiftent,  trim  to  thehigheft  degree,  and  more  adapted 
to  a  villa  near  hondon^  than  the  antient  feat  of  a 
great  Baron.  In  a  word,  nothing,  except  the  num- 
bers of  uninduftrious  poor  that  fwarm  at  the  gate, 
excites  any  one  idea  of  its  former  circumilances. 

A  flage  further  is  Belford,  the  feat  of  Abraham 
Dixon,  Efqj  a  modern  houfe ;  the  front  has  a  moft 
beautiful  fimplicity  in  it.  The  grounds  improved 
as  far  as  the  art  of  hufbandry  can  reach  j  the  plan- 
tations large  and  flouriihing:  a  new  and  neat  town, 
inftead  of  the  former  wretched  cottages ;  and  an 
induftrious  race,  inftead  of  an  idle  poor,  at  prefent 
fill  the  eft  ate. 

On  an  eminence  on  the  fea  coaft,  about  four  BamhorougU 
miles  from  Belford,  is  the  very  antient  caftle  of  ^*^^^^' 
Bamborcugh,  built  by  Ida,  firft  king  of  the  Nor- 
thumbrians, A.  D.  548.  But,  according  to  the  con- 
jecture of  an  antiquarian  I  met  with  there,  on  the 
fite  of  a  Roman  fortrefs.  It  was  alfo  his  opinion, 
that  the  fquare  tower  was  aftually  the  work  of  the 
Romans,     It  had  been  of  great  ftrength  •,  the  hill  it 

P.  is 


TOUR 


1 


13  founded  on  is  exceflivcly  deep  on  all  fides,  and 
accefTible  only  by  flif^hts  of  ilcps  on  the  fovith  eaft. 
The  ruins  are  Hill  conlidcrable  ;  the  remains  of  a 
great  hall  are  very  fingular  •,  it  had  been  warmed 
by  two  fire-places  of  a  vaft  fize,  and  from  the  top 
of  every  window  ran  a  flue,  like  that  of  a  chimney, 
which  reached  the  fummits  of  the  battlements. 
Thefe  flues  feem  defigned  as  fo  many  fupernu- 
rnerary  chimnies,  to  give  vent  to  the  fmoke  that 
tiie  immenfe  fires  of  thofe  hofpitable  times  filled 
the  rooms  with :  halls  fmoky,  but  filled  with 
good  cheer,  were  in  thofe  days  thought  no  incon- 
venience :  thus  my  brave  countryman  Hovel  ap 
Rys,  when  his  enemies  had  fired  his  houfe  about 
his  ears,  told  his  people  to  rife  and  defend  them- 
felves  like  men,  for  fliame,  for  he  hadknowne  there 
CIS  great e  a  fmoake  in  that  hall  upon  a  Chrijlmas  even  *. 
Many  of  the  ruins  are  now  filled  with  fand,  caught 
up  by  the  winds  that  rage  here  with  great  impe- 
tuofity,  and  carried  to  very  diftant  places. 

'Thi?  caftle,  and  the  manour  belonging  to  it,  was  ' 
once  the  property  of  the   Forjicrs  ;  but  purchafcd 
BiHiop  by  Lord  Crew^  Bifliop  of  Durham,  and  with  other 

C/mv'sCha-    confidcrable  cftates,  left  veiled  in  Truilees,  to  be 
tay.  '  , 

applied  to  unconfined  charitable  ufes.     Three  of 

thefe  Truilees  are  a  majority :  one  of  them  makes 

this  place  his  refidcncc,  and  blcfles  the  coafi.  by  his 

judicious  and  humane  application  of  the  Prelate'^ 

generous  bcqueft.     He  has  repaired  and  rendered 

habitable  the  great  fquare  tower:  the  part  refervcd 

^or  himfclf  and  family  is  a  large  hall  and  a  few 

fmallcr  apartments ;  but  the  reil  of  ihe  fpacioua 

•   Hijf.   Gi<jet!itr  familj,    118. 

t  edifice 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  3j 

edifice  is  allotted  for  purpofes  which  make  the  heart 
to  glow  with  joy  when  thought  of.  The  upper 
part  is  an  ample  granary  •,  from  whence  corn  is 
difpenced  to  the  poor  without  diftinilion,  even  ia 
the  deareft  time,  at  the  rate  of  four  {hillings  a 
bufhcl ;  and  the  diftrcfled,  for  many  miles  round, 
often  experience  the  con  veniency  of  this  benefadtion. 

Other  apartments  are  fitted  up  for  the  reception 
of  fliipwrecked  iailors  j  and  bedding  is  provided 
for  about  thirty,  fhould  fuch  a  number  happen  to 
be  call  on  (hore  at  the  fame  time.  A  conftantpa- 
trole  is  kept  every  ftormy  night  along  this  tera- 
peftuous  coaft,  for  above  eight  miles,  the  length  of 
the  manour,  by  which  means  numbers  of  lives  have 
been  preferved.  Many  poor  wretches  are  often 
found  on  the  ihore  in  a  flate  of  infenfibility  •,  but 
by  timely  relief,  are  foon  brought  to  themfelves. 

It  often  happens,  that  fiiips  ftrlke  in  fuch  a  man- 
ner on  the  rocks  as  to  be  capable  of  relief,  in  cafe 
numbers  of  people  could  be  fuddenly  affembled : 
for  that  purpofe  a  cannon  *  is  fixed  on  the  top  of 
the  tower,  which  is  fired  once,  if  the  accident  hap- 
pens in  fuch  a  quarter ;  twice,  if  in  another,  and 
thrice,  if  in  fuch  a  place.  By  thefe  fignals  the 
country  people  are  direded  to  the  fpot  they  are  to 
fly  to  •,  and  by  this  means,  frequently  preferve  not 
only  the  crew,  but  even  thci  vefTel  ;  for  machines 
of  different  kinds  are  always  in  readinefs  to  heave 
fnips  out  of  their  perillous  fituation. 

*  Once  belonging  so  a  Dutch  frigate  of  40  guns ;  which, 
vvith  all  the  crew,  was  loft  oppofite  to  the  caftlc,  about  fixty 
years  ago, 

D  2  In 


3^  A      T    O    U    R 

In  a  word,  all  the  fchcmes  of  this  worthy  Truflec 
have  a  humane  and  ufeful  tendency  :  he  fecmcd  as 
if  felcdted  from  his  brethren  for  the  fame  purpofes 
as  Spenftr  tells  us  the  firft  of  his*  feven  Bead/men  m 
the  houfe  of  holinejfc  was. 

'  The  firft  of  tlicm,  that  cldeft  was  and  beft, 

Of  all  the  houfe  had  charge  and  governement, 
As  guardian  and  fteward  of  the  reft  : 
His  office  was  to  give  entertainement 
And  lodging  unto  all  that  came  and  went: 
Not  unto  fuch  as  could  him  feaft  againe. 
And  doubly  quite  for  that  he  on  them  fpent ; 
^ut  fuch  as  want  of  harbour  did  conftraine  ; 
Thofe,  for  Gou's  faUe,  his  dewty  was  to  entertaine. 

Farn  Ides.  Oppofite  to  Bainhoroiigh  lie  the  Fani  iflands^ 
which  form  two  groupes  of  little  ifles  and  rocks  to 
the  number  of  kvcntten,  but  at  low  water  the 
points  of  others  appear  above  the  furface  •,  they  all 
are  diftinguifhed  by  particular  names.  The  neareft 
ifle  to  the  fhore  is  that  called  the  Houfe  I/land, 
which  lies  exaftly  one  mile  68  chains  from  the 
coaft :  the  mofl  diftant  is  about  feven  or  eight 
miles.  They  are  rented  for  1 61.  p/r  ^;;////w  •*  their 
produce  is  kelp,  fome  few  feathers,  and  a  few 
fcals»  which  the  tenant  watches  and  llioots  for  the 
fake  of  the  oil  and  fkins.  Some  of  them  yield  a 
little  grafs,  and  fcrvc  to  feed  a  co%v  or  two,  which 
the  people  arc  dcfperacc  enough  to  tranfpor:  over 
in  their  little  boats. 
July  15.  Vifited  thcfc  iflands  in  a  coble,  a  fafe  but  fccni- 
ingly  hazardous  fpccies  of  boat,  long,  narrow  and 
fiat-bortomed,  wliich  is  capable  of  going  rhro'  a 

high 


iiii;  ;,r;n,iii""iiiiii'l|ii''iiiiiiiii"iii  "" ' 


INSCOTLAND.  37 

high  Tea,  dancing  like  a  cork  on  the  fummits  of 
the  waves. 

Touched  at  the  rock  called  the  Afeg,  whitened 
with  the  dung  of  corvorants  v'hich  almoll  covered 
it  ;  their  nefts  were  large,  made  of"  tang,  and  moft 
excefTively  foetid. 

Rowed  next  to  the  Pinnacles,  an  ifland  in  the 
fartheft  groupe-,  fo  called  from  fome  vaft  columnar 
rocks  at  the  fouth  end,  even  at  their  fides,  and  flat 
at  their  tops,  and  entirely  covered  with  guillemots 
and  fhags :  the  fowlers  pafs  from  one  to  the  other 
of  thefe  columns  by  means  of  a  narrow  board, 
which  they  place  from  top  to  top,  forming  a  nar- 
row bridge,  over  fuch  a  horrid  gap,  that  the  very 
fight  of  it  ftrikes  one  with  horror. 

Landed  at  a  fmall  ifiand,  where  we  found  the 
female  Eider  ducks  *  at  that  time  fitting:  the  lower  EiderDucks. 
part  of  their  neils  was  made  of  fea  plants ;  the 
upper  part  was  formed  of  the  down  which  they 
pull  off  their  own  breads,  in  which  the  eggs  were 
furrounded  and  warmly  bedded  :  in  fome  were 
three,  in  others  five  eggs,  of  a  large  fize  and  pale 
olive  color,  as  fmooth  and  gloflfy  as  if  varniflied 
over.  The  nefts  are  built  on  the  beach,  among 
the  loofe  pebbles,  not  far  from  the  water.  The 
Ducks  fit  very  clofe,  nor  will  they  rife  till  you  al- 
moft  tread  on  them.  The  Drakes  feparate  them- 
felves  from  the  females  during  the  breeding  feafon. 
We  robbed  a  few  of  their  nefts  of  the  down,  and 
after  carefully  feparating  it  from  the  tang,  found 

•  Vide  ^r.  Zoel.  II.  454.     I  have  been  informed  that  they 
alfo  b;efd  on  Incb-Celm,  in  the  Firth  of  Ferth» 

D  3  that 


A     T    O    U    K 

that  the  down  of  one  ncfl  weighed  only  three  quar- 
ters of  an  ounce,  but  was  fo  elaftic  as  to  fill  the 
crown  of  the  largcft  hat.  The  people  of  this 
country  call  thefe  St.  Ciithbert's  ducks,  from  the 
faint  of  the  iflands*. 

Befides  thefe  birds,  I  obferved  the  following  : 

,    Puffins,  called  here  'Tom  Noddies^ 
Auks,  here  Shouts t 
Guillemots, 
Black  Guillemot, 
Little  Auks, 
Shiel-ducks, 
Shags, 
Corvorants, 
Black  and  white  Gulls, 
Brown  and  white  Gulls, 
Herring  Gulls,  whicii   1  was  told  fed  fomc- 

times  on  eggs  of  other  birds, 
Commc.n  Gull,  here  AnnetSt 
Kittiwake?,  or  Tarrocks, 
Pewit  Gulls, 
Great  Terns, 
Sea  Pics, 

Sea  Larks,  here  Brokels, 
Jackdaws,  ^vhich  breed  in  rabbet- holes. 
Rock  Pigeons, 
Rock  Larks. 

The  Terns  were  fo  numerous,  that  in  fome  places 

•  I  mull  here  acknowlege  my  obligations  to  Jofeph  Bankr, 
F.fq;  who,  previous  to  his  circumnavigation,  liberally  per- 
mitted my  artiil  to  take  copies  of  his  valuable  colledlifin  of 
Zoologic  drawings,  amongft  others  thofc  of  the  Eiihrdnoki. 

it 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  59 

it  was  difficult  to  tread  without  crufliing  fome  of 


D 

the  cgss. 


■an 


The  laft  ide  I  vifited  was  the  Houfe  ijland,  the 
fequeftered  fpot  where  St.  Cuthbert  pafTed  the  two 
laft  years  of  his  life.  Here  was  afterwards  efta- 
bliflied  a  priory  of  Benedi^fines  for  fix  or  eight 
Monks  fubordinate  to" Durham.  A  fqiiare  tower, 
the  remains  of  a  church,  and  fome  other  buildings, 
are  to  be  feen  there  ftill ;  and  a  ftone  coffin,  which, 
it  is  pretended,  was  that  of  St.  Cuthbert.  At  the 
north  end  of  the  ifle  is  a  deep  chafm,  frorti  the  top 
to  the  bottom  of  the  rock,  communicating  to  the 
fea ;  through  which,  in  tempeftuous  weather,  the 
water  is  forced  with  vafl  violence  and  noife,  and 
forms  a  fine  Jet  d'eau  of  fixty-fix  feet  high  :  it  i^ 
called  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  oppofite  coaft  the 
Churn. 

Reached  fnore  through  a  moft  turbulent  rippling, 
occafioned  by  the  fierce  current  of  the  tides  be- 
tween the  iflands  and  the  coaft. 

Purfued  my  journey  northward.     Saw  at  a  dif-    i^.^^  ^^ 
tance  the  Cheviot  hills  ;  on  which,  I  was  informed, 
the  green  Plovers  breed  ;  and  that,  during  winter, 
flocks  innumerable  of  the  great  Bramblings,  or ' 
Snow-flakes,  appear  -,  the  moil  fouthern  place  of 
their  migration,  in  large  companies. 

The  country  almoft  woodlefs,  there  being  but 
one  wood  of  any  confcquence  between  Belford  and 
Berwick.  Saw  on  the  left  an  antient  tower,  which 
fhewed  the  chark6ler  of  the  times  when  it  was  un- 
happily neceflary,  on  thefe  borders^  for  every  houfe 
to  -be  a  fortrefs. 

D  4  On 


A      TOUR 

On  the  right,  had  a  view  of  the  fea,  and,  not  re- 
mote from  the  land,  of  Lindesfarn^  or  Holy  Illand, 
once  an  epilcopal  feat,  afterwards  trandated  to 
Durham^  On  it  are  the  ruins  of  a  caftle  and  a 
church.  In  feme  parts  are  abundance  of  Entrochi^ 
which  are  called  by  the  country  people  St.  Cuth- 
herf's  beads. 

After  a  few  miles  riding,  have  a  full  view  of 
Berwick,  and  the  river  Tiveed  winding  weft  ward 
for  a  confiderable  way  up  the  country ;  but  its 
banks  were  without  any  particular  charms  *,  being 
almoft  woodlefs.  The  river  is  broad  ;  and  has  over 
it  a  bridge  of  fixtcen  very  handfome  arches,  efpe- 
cially  two  next  the  town. 

Berwick  is  fortified  in  the  modern  way  •,  but  is 
much  contracted  in  its  extent  to  what  it  was  for- 
merly, the  old  caftle  and  works  now  lying  at  fome 
diftance  beyond  the  prefent  ramparts.     The  bar- 
racks are  large,  confift  of  a  center  and  two  wings. 
The  church  was  built  by  Cromwcl,  and,  according 
to  the  fpirit  of  the  builder,  without  a  ftecple.  Even 
in  Northumberland^  (towards  the  borders)  the  ftee- 
ples  grew  lefs  and  lefs,  and  as  it  were  forewarned 
the  traveller  that  he  was  fpecdily  to  take  leave  of 
epifcopacy.    The  town-houfe  has  a  large  and  hand- 
feme  modern   tower  to   it :  the  flrects  in  general 
are  narrow  and  bad, except  that  in  which  the  town- 
houfe  ftands. 

Abundance  of  wool  is  exported  from  this  town: 
eggs  in  vaft  abundance  colleded  through  all  the 

•   I  was  informed  tbat  the    beautiful  banks  of  the  Tijuetd 
verify  the  old  long  at  the  paflage  at  ColJIreatn, 

4  country. 


INSCOTLAND.  41 

country,  almofl  as  far  as  Carlijle  :  they  are  packed 
in  boxes,  with  the  thick  end  downwards,  and  are 
fent  to  London  for  the  ufe  of  fugar  refiners.  I  was 
told  that  as  many  are  exported  as  bring  in  annually 
the  fum  of  fourteen  thoufand  pounds. 

The  falmon  fifheries  here  are  very  confiderable,    Salmon 
and  likewile  bring  in  vafl  fums  :  they  lie  on  each       ^^^^' 
fide  the  river  •,  and  are  all  private  property,  ex- 
cept what    belongs   to    the    Dean    and    Chapter 
of  Durham,  which,  in  rent    and    tythc    of   fifh, 
brings   in  450I.  per  am:,  for  all  the  other  fiHieries 
are  liable  to  tythe.     The  common  rents  of  thofc 
are  50L    a  year,  for  which  the   tenants  have   as 
much  iliore  as  ferves  to  launch  out  and  draw  their 
nets  on  fhore  :  the  limits  of  each  are  flaked  -,  and 
I  obferved   that  the  fifhers  never  failed  going  as 
near  as  pcffible  to  their  neighbour's  limits.     One 
man  goes  off  in  a  fmall  flat-bottomed  boat,  fquare 
at  one  end,  and  taking  as  large  a  circuit  as  his 
net  admits,  brings  it  on  (bore  at  the  extremity  of 
his  boundary,  where   others    afTift  in  landing  it. 
The  befl  fiihery  is  on  the  fouth  fide  *  :  very  fine 
falmon  trout  are  often  taken  here,  which  come  up 
to  fpawn  from   the  fea,  and  return   in  the  fame 
manner  as  the  falmon  do.     The  chief  import  is 
timber  from  Norway  and  the  Bailie. 

Almoft  immediately  on  leaving  Berwick,  enter 


*  For  a  fuller  account  of  this  fifhery,  vide  Brltifh  Zoology^ 
III.  241.  to  i:  may  be  alfo  added,  that  in  the  middle  of  the 
river,  not  a  mile  well  of  the  town,  is  a  large  ilone,  on 
which  a  man  is  placed,  to  obferve  what  is  called  the  reck  of 
the  falmon  coming  up. 


SCOT- 


42 


A      1*    O    U    R 

SCOTLAND, 

in  the  fliire  of  Merely  or  Afers  *.  A  litde  way  from 
Berwick^  on  the  weft,  is  Halydon  hill,  famous  for 
the  overthrow  of  the  Scots  under  the  regent  Doug- 
las^ by  Edward  III.  on  the  attempt  of  the  former 
to  raiie  the  fiege  of  the  town.  A  cruel  adion 
blafted  the  laurels  of  the  conqueror:  Setoriy  the 
governor,  flipulated  to  furrender  in  fifteen  days, 
if  not  relieved  in  that  time,  and  gave  his  fon  as 
hoftage  for  performance.  The  time  elapfed  ; 
Seton  refufed  to  execute  the  agreement,  and  with 
a  Roman  unfeclingncfs  beheld  the  unhappy  youth 
hung  before  the  walls. 

The  entrance  into  Scotland  has  a  very  unpro- 
mifing  look  -,  for  it  wanted,  for  fome  miles,  the 
cultivation  of  tlie  parts  more  diftant  from  England : 
but  the  borders  were  necelTarily  neglected  •,  for,  till 
the  acceftion  c{  James  VI.  and  even  long  after,  the 
national  enmity  was  kept  up,  and  the  borderers  of 
both -countries  difcouragcd  from  improvement,  by 
the  barbarous  inroads  of  each  nation.  This  inat- 
tention to  agriculture  continued  till  lately  -,  but  on 
reaching  tlie  fmall  village  of  Eytown^  the  fcene  was 
greatly  altered  ;  the  wretclied  cottages,  or  rather 
hovels  of  the  country,  were  vanifliing  ;  good  com- 
fortable houfes  arife  in  their  (lead  ;  the  lands  are 
inclofing,  and  yield  very  good  barley,  oats,  and 
clover ;  the  banks  are  planting  :  I  fpeak  in  the 
prcfent  tenfe ;  for4here  is  dill  a  mixture  of  the 

*  Boetbius  fays,  that  in  his  time  buflards  were  found  in  this 
county  ;  but  they  arc  now  extirpated  :  the  hiltorian  calls 
them  Guftardei.    Dcfc.  Scot,  xiii. 

old 


I 


1  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  43 

old  neglifrence  left  amidft  the  recent  improvements, 
which  look  like  the  works  of  a  new  colony  in  a 
wreiched  impoveriilied  country. 

Soon  after  the  country  relapfes ;  no  arable  land 
is  feen  ;  but  for  four  or  live  miles  fucceeds  the 
black  joylefs  he^iihy  moor  of  Col^ingb.im :  happi-  Coldingh,iv:» 
ly,  this  is  the  whole  fpecimen  that  remains  of  the 
many  miles,  which,  not  many  years  ago,  were  in 
the  fame  dreary  unprofitable  ftate.  Near  this  was 
the  convent  of  that  name  immortalized  by  the  he- 
roifm  of  its  Nuns  ;  who,  to  prcferve  themfeives 
inviolate  from  the  Danes^  cut  off  their  lips  and 
nofes ;  and  thus  rendering  themfeives  objecls  of 
horror,  were,  with  their  abbefs  Ebba  *,  burnt  in 
the  monaftery  by  the  difappointed  favages. 

At  the  end  of  the  moor  came  at  once  in  fight  of 
the  Firth  -'-  of  Forth  ;  a  moft  extcnfive  profped"!:  of 
that  great  arm  of  the  fea,  of  the  rich  country  of 
Eajt  Lothian.,  the  Bnfs  IJle  j  and  at  a  diftance,  the 
ifle  of  Mry,  the  coaft  of  the  county  of  Fife,  and 
the  country  as  far  as  Montr ofe. 

After  o-oino;  down  a  lonj?  defcent,  dine  at  Old 

DO  O  ' 

Cambus,  at  a  mean  houfe,  in  a  poor  village-,  where 
I  believe  the  Lord  of  the  foil  is  often  execrated  by 
the  weary  traveller,  for  not  enabling  the  tenant  lo 
furnifli  more  comfortable  accommodations,  in  fo 
confiderable  a  thoroughfare. 

*A.D.  870. 

f  Bodoiria  oi  Tacitus,  who  defcribes  the  two  Firths  oi  Clyde  * 

zn<i  Forih,  and  the  intervening  Ifthmas,  with  much  proprie- 
ty, fpeaking  of  the  fourth  fuirmer  Agncola  had  palTed  in 
Britain,  and  how  convenient  he  found  this  narrow  traft  for 
fhuctiiig  out  the  enemy  by  his  fortrefles,  fays,  AW;  Glota 
(Firth  o{  Clyde)  et  Bodotria,  di-verji  maris  ajlu  per  immenfum 
ti'vedif  angujio  ta rarutn  fpatio  dirimuntur,     Vit.  Agr. 

The 


44  A      1'    O    U    R 

♦  The    country  becomes    now    extremely   fine; 

bounded  at  a  diftance,  on  one  fide,  by  hills  \  on 
the  other,  by  the  fea :  the  intervening  fpace  is  as 
rich  a  trad  of  corn  land  as  I  ever  faw  i  for  Eaft 
Lothian  is  the  Northamptonjhire  of  North  Britain  : 
the  land  is  in  many  places  manured  with  fea  tang  ; 
but  I  was  informed,  that  the  barley  produced  from 
it  is  much  lighter  than  barley  from  other  manure. 

On  the  fide  of  the  hills,  on  the  left,  is  Sir  John 
Hairs,  of  Dunglas  ;  a  fine  fituation,  with  beautifull 
plantations.  Pafs  by  Brcxmouth^  a  large  houfe  of 
the  Duke  of  Roxbcrcugh^  in  a  low  fpot,  with  great 
woods  furrounding  it.  Reach 
Dunbar.  Dunbar  :  the  chief  ftreet  broad  and  handfome ; 
the  houfes  built  of  ftone ;  as  is  the  cafe  with  moft 
of  the  towns  in  ScotUmd.  There  are  fome  fliipsfent 
annually  from  this  place  to  Greenland,  and  the  ex- 
ports of  corn  are  pretty  confiderable.  The  harbour 
is  fafe,  but  fnjall  •,  its  entrance  narrow,  and  bound- 
ed by  two  rocks.  Between  the  harbour  and  the 
Columnar  callle  is  a  very  furprifing  flratum  of  ftone,  in 
fome  refpefts  rekmbling  that  of  Giant's  Caufcvjay 
in  Ireland :  it  confifts  of  great  columns  of  a  red  grit 
ftone,  either  triangular,  quadrangular,  pentangular, 
or  hcxangular ;  their  diameter  from  one  to  two  feet, 
their  length  at  low  water  thirty,  dipping  or  inclin- 
ing a  little  to  the  fouth. 

They  are  jointed,  but  not  fo  regularly,  or  fo 
plainly,  as  thofe  that  form  the  Giant's  Caufeivay, 
The  furface  of  feveral  that  had  been  torn  ofFappear 
as  a  pavement  of  numbers  of  convex  ends,  probably 
unfwering  to  the  concave  bottoms  of  other  joints 

gnce 


recks. 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  45 

once  incumbent  on  them.  The  fpace  between  the 
columns  was  filled  with  thin  fepta  of  red  and  white 
fparry  matter ;  and  veins  of  the  fame  pervaded  the 
columns  tranfverfely.  This  range  of  columns  faces 
the  north,  with  a  point  to  the  eaft,  and  extends  in 
front  about  two  hundred  yards.  The  breadth  is 
inconfiderable  :  the  reft  of  the  rock  degenerates 
into  fhapelefs  mafTes  of  the  fame  fort  of  ftone,  irre- 
gularly divided  by  thick  fepta.  This  rock  is  called 
by  the  people  of  Dunbar,  the  IJle. 

Oppofite  are  the  ruins  of  the  caftle,  feated  on  a 
rock  above  the  fea  ;  underneath  one  part  is  a  vaft 
cavern,  compofed  of  a  black  and  red  ftone,  which 
gives  it  a  moft  infernal  appearance  ;  a  fit  reprefen- 
tation  of  the  pit  of  Acheron,  and  wanted  only  to  be 
peopled  with  witches  to  make  the  fcene  complete  : 
it  appears  to  have  been  the  dungeon,  there  being  a 
formed  paftage  from  above,  where  the  poor  pri- 
foners  might  have  been  let  down,  according  to  the 
barbarous  cuftom  of  war  in  early  days.  There  are 
in  fome  parts,  where  the  rock  did  not  clofe,  the 
remains  of  walls ;  for  the  openings  are  only  natural 
fifTures  -,  but  the  founders  of  the  caftle  taking  ad- 
vantage of  this  cavity,  adding  a  little  art  to  it,  ren- 
dered it  a  moft  complete  and  fecure  prifon. 

On  the  other  fide  are  two  natural  arches,  throiic^h 
which  the  tide  flowed ;  under  one  was  a  fragment  of 
wall,  where  there  feems  to  have  been  a  portal  for 
the  admiffion  of  men  or  provifions  from  fea :  thro 
which,  it  is  probable  that  Alexander  Ramfay,  in  a 
ftormy  night,  reinforced  the  garrifon,  in  fpite  of 
the  fleet  which  lay  before  the  place,  when  clofely  * 

befieged 


4^  A      T    O    U    R 

befieged  by  the  Englijh^  in  1337,  and  galantly  de- 
fended  for  nineteen  weeks  by  that  heroine  black 
Jgnes^  Countels  of  March  *. 

^  Through  one  of  thefe  afches  was  a  mofl  pic- 
turefque  view  of  the  Bafs  IJle,  with  the  fun  fetting 
m  full  fplt-ndor ;  through  the  other  of  the  May 
ifland,  gilt  by  its  beams. 

Over  the  ruins  of  a  window  were  the  three  legs, 
or  arms  of  the  Ifle  of  Ma7Jy  a  lion  rampant,  and  a 
St.  Andrew'' s  crofs. 
juLviS.  Rode  within  fight  of  T^antallon  "caftle,  now  4 
wretched  ruin  -,  once  the  feat  of  the  powerfull  Ar- 
chibald Douglas^  Earl  of  Angus,  which  for  fome 
time  renfted  all  the  efforts  oi  James  V.  to  fubdue 
it. 

A  little  further,  about  a  mile  from  the  fiiorci 
2?r7/i  Ifle.  lies  the  Bcifs  IQand,  or  rather  rock,  of  a  mod  ftu- 
pendous  height  •,  on  the  fouth  fide  tlie  top  appears 
of  a  conic  fiiape,  but  the  other  over-hangs  the  fea 
in  a  molt  tremendous  manner.  The  caftle,  which 
was  once  the  flate  prifon  of  Scotland^  is  now  neg- 
Je6led  :  it  lies  clofe  to  the  edge  of  the  precipice, 
facing  the  little  village  of  Cajileton  ;  where  1  toke 
boat,  in  order  to  vifit  this  fingular  fpot  ;  but  the 
weather  proved  unfavorable,  the  wind  blew  io 
frcfh,  and  the  waves  ran  fo  high,  that  it  was  im- 
poiTible  to  attempt  landing  ;  for  even  in  cahncr 
weather  it  cannot  be  done  without  hazard,  there 

*  Buchanan,  lib.  ix.  c.  25.  The  EtipIiJJj  were  obliged  to 
defill  from  their  entt  rprize.  yfgnes  was  cldcll  daughter  of  Sir 
Thomas  Randal,  oi  Snadoivn,  Earl  of  Murray,  and  nephew 
tf)  Ralert  Bruce.  She  was  called  black  Annes,  fays  Robert 
Lindefay,  bccaufe  file  was  black- (kinned. 

being 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  4X 

hclncr  a  fteep  rock  to  afcend,  and  comnionly  a 
crreat  fwell,  which  often  removes  the  boat  while 
you  afe  fcaling  the  precipice  5  fo,  in  cafe  of  a  falfe 
ftep,  there  is  the  chance  of  falling  into  a  water 
almoft  unfathomable. 

Various  forts  of  water  fowl  repair  annually  to 
this  rock  to  breed  i  but  none  in  greater  numbers 
than  the  Gannets^  or  Solahd  geefe,  multitudes  of  Gannetj; 
which  were  then  fitting  on  their  nefts  near  the 
floping  part  of  the  ifle,  and  others  flying  over  our 
boat :  it  is  not  permitted  to  fhoot  at  them,  the 
place  being  farmed  principally  on  account  of  the 
profit  arifing  from  the  fale  of  the  young  of  thefe 
birds,  and  of  the  Kittiwake^  a  fpecies  of  gull,  fo 
called  from  its  cry.  The  firft  are  fold  at  Edin- 
burgh *  for  twenty- pence  apiece,  and  ferved  up 
roafted  a  little  before  dinner.  This  is  the  only 
kind  of  provifion  whofe  price  has  not  been  ad- 
vanced ;  for  we  learn  from  Mr.  R^^y,  that  it  was 
equally  dear  above  a  century  ago  -f.  It  is  un- 
necefliary  to  fay  more  of  this  fmgular  bird,  as  it 
has  been  very  fully  treated  of  in  the  fecond  volume 
of  the  Britijk  Zoology. 

With  much  difficulty  landed  at  North  Berwick^ 
three  miles  diftant  from  Cafdeton,  the  place  we 
intended  to  return  to.  The  firft  is  a  fmall  town, 
pleafantly  fcated  near  a  high   c";nic  hill,    partly 

•SOLAN    GOOSE. 
There  is  to  be  fold,  by  John  Watson,  Jun.  at  his  Stand 
at  x.htVon\X)\  Ei^inburgh,~ii\i  iawiuii  daysin  the  week,  wind  and 
^veather  ferving,  good  and  freth  Solan  Geel'e.     Any  who  hav{j 
■  occafion  for  the  lame  may  have  them  at  rcafonable  rates. 
Aug.^>  1768.  Edinburgh  Advcrtiser. 

t  Rafi  Itinerants,    igz, 

planeed 


4S  A      T    O    U    R 

planted  with  trees  :  it  is  feen  at  a  great  diftanCCf 
and  is  called  the  Law  of  Berwick  ;  a  name  given  to 
feveral  other  high  hills  in  this  part  of  the  ifland. 
Frejion  Pans,        Pafs  through  Abberladie  and  Prejlon  Pans :  the 
laft  takes  its  name  from  its  falt-pans,  there  being  a 
confiderablc  work  of  that  article  ;  alfo  another  of 
vitriol.     Saw  at  a  fmall  diftance  the  field  of  battle, 
or  rather  of  carnage,  known  by  the  name  of  the  bat- 
tle oi  Prefton  Pans,  where  the  Rebels  gave  a  Icflbn 
of  feverity,   which  was  more  than  retaliated,   the 
following  fpring,  at  CuUoden.  Obferved,  in  this  day's 
ride,  (I  forget  the  fpot)  the  once  princely  feat  of 
the  Earl  q>{  JVintoun^  now  a  ruin  -,  judicioufly  lefc 
in  that  ftate,  as  a  proper  remembrance  of  the  fad 
fate  of  thofe  who  engage  in  rebelhous  politicks. 
There  are   great  marks  of  improvement  on  ap- 
proaching the  capital ;  the  roads  good,  the  country 
very  populous,   numbers  of  manufactures  carried 
on,  and  the  profped  embclliflied  with  gentlemen's 
feats.     Reach 
Edinburgh  EDINBURGH, 

A  city  that  pofienes  a  boldnefs  and  grandeur  of 
fituation  beyond  any  that  I  had  ever  feen  :  it  is 
buik  on  the  edges  and  fides  of  a  vaft  Hoping  rock, 
of  a  great  and  precipitous  height  at  the  upper  ex- 
tremity, and  the  fides  declining  very  quick  and 
deep  into  the  plain.  The  view  of  the  houles  at  a 
diftance  ftrikes  the  traveller  with  wonder ;  their 
own  loftinefs,  improved  by  their  almoft  aerial  fitu- 
ation, gives  them  a  look  of  magnificence  not  to  be 
found  in  any  other  part  of  Cireat  Britahu  All 
thefe  confpicuous  buildings  form  the  upper  part  of 

the 


fu  ^A^  t  h^ '  4'^  7(^c:s% 


INSCOTLAND.  49 

the  great  ftreet,  are  of  ftone,  and  make  a  handfome 
appearance  :  they  are  generally  fix  or  feven  ftories 
high  in  front ;  but,  by  reafon  of  the  declivity  of 
the  hill,  much  higher  backward  ;  one  in  particular, 
called  Babel,  has  about  twelve  or  thirteen  ftories. 
Every  houfe  has  a  common  ftaircafe,  and  every 
ftory  is  the  habitation  of  a  feparate  family.     The 
inconvenience  of  this  particular  ftrudlure  need  not 
be  mentioned  ;  notwithllanding  the  utmoft  atten- 
tion, in  the    article  of  cleanlinefs,  is   in  general 
obferved.     The  common  complaint  of  the  ftreets 
oi Edinburgh  \s  now  taken  away,  by  the  great  vigi- 
lance of  the  magiftrates  *,  and  their  feverity  againfl: 
any  that  offend  in  any  grofs  degree  i".     It  mull  be 
obferved,  that  this  unfortunate  fpecies  of  archi- 
tefture  arofe  from  the  turbulence  of  the  times  in 
which  it  was  in  vogue  ;  every  body  was  defirous  of 
getting  as  near  as  poflible  to  the  protection  of  the 
caftle,  the  houfes  were  crouded  together,  and  I 
may  fay,  piled  one  upon  another,  merely  on  the 
principle  of  fecurity. 

The  caftle  is  antient,  but  ftrong,  placed  on  the  Caftlc. 
fummit  of  the  hill,  at  the  edge  of  a  very  deep  pre- 
cipice.    Strangers  are  Ihewn  a  very  fmail  room,  in 
which  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  was  delivered  oi  James 
VI. 

*  The  ftreets  are  cleaned  early  every  morning.  Once  the 
City  payed  for  the  cleaning ;  at  prefcnt,  it  is  rented  for  4  or 
500  1,   per  annum. 

f  In  the  clofes,  or  allies,  the  inhabitants  are  very  apt  to 
fling  out  their  filth,  &c.  without  regarding  who  pafTes  j  bus 
the  fuft'erer  may  call  every  inhabitant  of  the  houfe  it  came 
from  to  account,  and  make  them  prove  the  delinquent,  who 
is  always  punilhed  with  a  heavy  fine. 

E  From 


50 


Refervoir. 


Advocate's 

Library. 


A      T    O    U    R 

From  this  fortrefs  is  a  full  view  of  the  city  and 
its  environs  -,  a  ftrange  profped:  of  rich  country, 
with  vaft  rocks  and  mountains  intermixed  :  on  the 
fouth  and  eafl  are  the  meadows,  or  the  publick 
walks,  Herriot's  hofpital,  part  of  the  town  over- 
fhadowed  by  the  ftupcndous  rocks  of  Arthur's,  feat 
and  Salujhury\  Craigs,  the  Pentland  hills  at  a  few 
miles  diftance,  and  at  a  Itill  greater,  thofe  ofMuir' 
foott  whofe  fides  are  covered  with  verdant  turf. 

To  the  north  is  a  full  view  of  the  Firth  oi  Forth, 
from  ^teen's  Ferry  to  its  mouth,  with  its  fouthern 
banks  covered  with  towns  and  villages.  On  tlie 
whole,  the  profpedt  is  fingular,  various  and  fine 

The  refervoir  of  water  *  for  fupplying  the  city 
lies  in  the  Caftle-ftreet,  and  is  well  worth  feeing : 
the  great  ciftern  contains  near  two  hundred  and 
thirty  tuns  of  water,  which  is  conveyed  to  the  feve- 
ral  conduits,  that  are  difpofed  at  proper  diftances 
in  the  principal  ftreets  \  thefe  are  conveniences  that 
few  towns  in  North  Britain  are  without. 

On  the  fouth  fide  of  High-Jlreet,  is  the  Parle- 
ment  Clofe,  a  fmall  fquare,  in  which  is  the  Parlc- 
ment-Houfe,  where  the  courts  of  juftice  are  held. 
Below  flairs  is  tHe  Advocate's  library,  founded  by 
Sir  George  Mackenzie,  and  now  contains  above  thirty 
thoufand  volumes,  and  feveral  manufcripts :  among 
the  more  curious  are  the  four  Evangelifls,  very 
legible,  notwithftanding  it  is  faid  to  be  feverial 
hundred  years  old. 

St.  Jerome^  Bible,  wrote  about  the  year  i,ioo. 

*  It  is  conveyed  in  pipes  from  the  PentlandhWU  five  milcaj 
diftant. 

A  Malabar] 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  >i 

A  Malabar  book,  wrote  on  leaves  of  plants.' 

A  Turkijh  manufcript,  illuminated  in  ibme  parts 
like  a  miiTal.  Elogium  in  fultan  morad  filium  filii 
Soliman  "Turcici.  Script.  CofiJiantinopoU.  Anno  Hegir^» 
992. 

A  Cartulary,  or  records  of  the  mona(lcries,fome 
very  antient. 

A  very  large  Bible,  bound  in  four  volumes  •, 
illuftrated  with  fcripture  prints,  by  the  firft  en- 
gravers, pafted  in,  and  colle61ed  at  a  vaft  expence. 
There  are  befides  great  numbers  of  antiquities,  not 
commonly  (hewn,  except  enquired  after. 

The  Luckenbooth  row,  v/hich  contains  the  Tol- 
hooth^  or  city  prifon,  and  the  weighing-houfe,  which 
brings  in  a  revenue  of  ijOoX.per  annum^  ftands  in  the 
middle  of  the  high-itreet,  and,  with  the  guard- 
houfe,  contributes  to  fpoil  as  fine  a  ftreet  as  mod 
in  Europe^  being  in  fome  parts  eighty  feet  wide, 
and  finely  built. 

The  exchange  is  a  handfome  modern  building, 
in  which  is  the  cuftom-houfe :  the  firft  is  of  no 
ufe,  in  its  proper  character  -,  for  the  merchants  al-  ~ 
ways  chufd  Handing  in  the  open  ftreet,  expofed  tq 
all  kinds  of  weather. 

The  old  cathedral  is  now  called  the  New  Church, 
and  is  divided  into  four  places  of  worfhip  ;  in  one 
the  Lords  of  the  SefTions  attend  :  there  is  alfo  a 
throne  and  a  canopy  for  his  Majefty,  fhouid  he 
vifit  this  capital,  and  another  for  the  Lord  Coirj- 
mifTioner.  There  is  no  mufic  either  in  this  or  any 
other  of  the  Scotch  churches,  for  Peg  flill  faints  at 
the  found  of  an  organ.  This  is  the  more  fur- 
E  2  prizing. 


3^  A      TOUR 

prizing,  as  the  Dutch,  who  have  the  fame  cfta- 
bliftied  religion,  are  extremely  fond  of  thatfolemn 
inftrument  -,  and  even  in  the  great  church  of 
Geneva  the  Pfaimody  is  accompanied  with  an 
organ. 

The  fame  church  has  a  large  tower,  oddly  ter- 
minated with  a  fort  of  crown. 

On  the  front  of  a  houfe  in  the  Nether  Bowy  are 
two  fine  profile  heads  of  a  man  and  woman,  of 
Roman  fculpture,  fuppofcd  to  be  thofe  of  Severus 
Sind  Julia:  but,  as  appears  from  an  infcription  * 
made  by  the  perfon  who  put  them  into  the  wall, 
were  miftaken  tor  yldam  and  Eve. 

Near  the  Trone  church  are  the  remains  of  the 
houfe  once  inhabited  by  Alary  Stuart  ;  now  a 
tavern. 

At  the  end  of  the  Cannofigate-Street  Hands  Holy- 
Noly-Rood  jIqq^  palace,  orriginally  an  abby  founded  by  David 
I.  in  1 1 23.  The  towers  on  the  N.  W.  fide  were 
erefted  by  James  V.  together  with  other  buildings, 
/or  a  royal  refidence :  according  to  the  editor  of 
Camhden,  great  part,  except  the  towers  above- 
mentioned,  were  burnt  by  Cromwel ;  but  the  other 
towers,  with  the  reft  of  this  magnificent  palace,  as 
it  now  ftands,  were  executed  by  Six  IVilliam  Bruce^ 
by  the  diredions  of  Charles  II.  within  is  a  beauti- 
full  fquare,  with  piazzas  on  every  fide.  It  contains 
great  numbers  of  fine  apartments  *,  fome,  that  are 
called  the  King's,  are  in  great  diforder ;  the  reft 
are  granted  to  feveral  of  the  nobility. 

In  the  Earl  of  Breadalbane''sy  arc  fome  excellent 

•   In  fuu'ore  I'ultus    tui 'vejceris pane.      An nO  162 1.      Thcft 
heads  are  well  engrsvenin  iter^fn's.  Itinerary,  tab.  iii. 

portraits. 


O  T  L  A  N  D.  55 

portraits,  particularly  three  full  lengths,  remark-' 
ably  fine,  by  Vandyck^  of 

Henry  Earl  of  Holland^ 

TVilliam  Duke  of  Newcajik, 

Charles  Earl  of  IVarivick  *, 

And  by  Sir  P^ter  Lely,  the  Duke  and  Dutchefs 
of  Lauderdale^  and  Edward  Earl  of  Jerfey,  There 
is  befides  a  very  good  head  of  a  boy,  by  MorrilUo^^ 
and  fome  views  of  the  fine  fcenes  near  his  Lord- 
fhip's  feat  at  Taymouth. 

At  Lord  Dumnore\  lodgings  is  a  very  large  piece 
of  Charles  I.  and  his  Queen  going  to  ride,  with  the 
fky  fhowering  rofes  on  them  ;  a  Black  holds  a  grey 
horfe,  a  boy  a  fpaniel,  with  feveral  other  dogs 
fporting  round  :  the  Queen  is  painted  with  a  love- 
lock, and  with  browner  hair  and  compkdlion,  and 
younger,  than  I  ever  fa\f  her  drawn.  It  is  a  good 
piece,  and  faid  to  be  done  by  Vandyck.  In  the  fame 
place  are  two  other  good  portraits  of  Charles  II.  and 
James  VII. 

The  gallery  of  this  palace  takes  np  one  fide,  and 
is  filled  with  coloflfal  portraits  of  the  Kings  of  Scot- 
land, 

In  the  old  towers  are  (howen  the  apartments 
where  the  murther  of  David  Rizzo  was  committed. 

That  beautiful  piece  of  golhic  architefture  the  Chapel* 
church,  or  chapel,  of  Holy- Rood- Abby,  is  now  a 
ruin,  the  foof  having  fell  in,  by  a  moft  fcandalous 
negleft,  notwithftanding  money  had  b'ien  granted 
by  Government  to  preferve  it  entire.  Beneath  the 
ruins  lie  the  bodies  of  James  IL   and  James  V. 

•  I  am  informed  that  the  portraits  of  the  j^iitfls  of  HellanJ 
and  Warivick  are  now  removed  to  Tajmuntb^ 

E  3  Henr 


54,  .  A      T    O    U    R 

Her.ry  Darnly^  and  feveral  ptrfons  of  rank:  and  the 
infcriptions  on  feveral  of  their  tombs  are  preferved 
by  Maitland.     A   gentleman  informed    me,  that 
fome  years  ago  he  had  feenthe  remains  of  the  bodies, 
but  in  a  very  decayed  flate  •,  the  beards  remained 
on  fome  ;  and   that  the    bones  of  Henry  Damly 
proved  their  owner,  by  their  great  fize,  for  he  was" 
faiJ  to  be  fcven  feet  high. 
Parks.        Near  this  palace  are  the  Parks  firft  inclofed  by 
James  V.  within  are  the  vart"  rocks  *  known  by  the 
names  oi  Arthur\  Seat  and  Snlufhury''^  Craigs ;  their 
fronts  exhibit  a  romantic  and  wild  fcene  of  broken 
rocks  and  vail  precipices,  which  from  fome  points 
feem  to  over-hang  the   lower  parts  of  the  city. 
Great  columns  of  flone,  from  forty  to  fifty  feet  in 
length,  and  about  two  feet  in  diameter,  regularly 
-pentagonal,  or  hexagonal,  hang  down  the  face  of 
fome  of  tnefe  rocks  almoft:  perpendicularly,  or  with 
a  very  flight  dip,  and  form  a'ftrange  appearance. 
Confidcrable  quantities  of  ftone  from  the  quarries 
have  been  cut  and  fent  to  London  for  paving  the 
llreets,  its  great  hardnefs  rendering  it  excellent  for 
that  purpofe.     Beneath  thtfc  hills  are  fome  of  the 
moft  beautiful  walks  about  Edinburgh,  command- 
ing a  fine  profpeft  over  fcviral"  parts  of  the  country. 
On  one  fide  of  the  .P-^r^  are  the  ruins  of  Si.An- 
thonyh  chapel,  once  the  refort  of  numberlefs  vo- 
taries. 
HerrinrsHoC-       The  fouih  part  of  the  city  has  feveral  things 
pital.         worth  yifuing.     Herriot\  hofpital   is   a   fine   old 
buildin^>  much  too  magnificent  for  the  end  pro- 

*  AccordiW  to  Maitland,  their  perpendicular  height  is 
656  feet.  "  v-^ 

,  -  pofed,  : 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  55 

pofed,  that  of  educating  poor  children  :  it  was 
founded  by  George  Herriot,  jeweller  to  James  VL 
who  followed  that  monarch  to  London^  and  made 
a  large  fortune.  There  is  a  fine  view  of  the  caftle 
and  the  Hoping  part  of  the  city  from  the  front : 
the  gardens  were  formerly  the  refort  of  the  gay  ; 
and  there  the  Scotch  Poets  often  laid,  in  their  co- 
medies, the  fcenes  of  intrigue. 

In  the  church-yard  of  the  Grey  Friers  is  the  mo- 
nument of  Sir  George  Mackenfic^^  a  rotunda  ;  with  a 
multitude  of  other  tombs  j  this,  and  another  near 
the  Cannon-gate  being  the  only  casmeteries  to  this 
populous  city. 

The  college  is  a  mean  building  ;  but  no  one  re-  College, 
fides  in  it  except  the  Principal,  v/hofe  houfe  is  fup- 
pofed  to  be  on  the  fite  of  that  in  \^\\\z\\'H.enry  Darnly 
was  murdered,  then  belonging  to  the  Provoll  of  the 
Kirk  of  Field.  The  ftudents  of  tHe  univerfity  arc 
difper fed  over  the  town,  and  are  about  fix  hundred 
in  number:  they  wear  no  habit,  nor  are  they  fubje6t 
to  any  regulations  j  but,  as  they  are  for  the  moft 
part  volunteers  for  knowlege,  few  of  them  defert 
her  flandards.  There  are  twenty-two  profeflbrs  of 
different  fciences,  moft  of  whom  read  ledurcs:  all 
the  chairs  are  very  ably  filled ;  thofe  in  particular 
which  relate  to  the  ftudy  of  medicine,  as  is  evident 
from  the  number  of  ingenious  phyficians,  eleves  of 
this  univerfity,  who  prove  the  abilities  of  their  maf- 
ters.  The  Mtif^um  had,  for  many  years,  been 
neglefted  ;  but,  by  the  adiduity  of  the  prefentPro- 
feffor  of  natural  hiftory,  bids  fair  to  become  a  moft 
inftrudive  repofitory  of  the  naturalia  of  thefc  king- 

do.ms. 

E  4  The 


5^  A      T    O    U    R 

Infirmary.  The  royal  infirmary  is  a  fpatious  and  handfomc 
ffdifice,  capable  of  containing  two  hundred  patients. 
The  operation-room  is  particularly  convenient,  the 
counc:l-room  elegant,  with  a  good  picture  in  it  of 
Frovoft  Drtunmond.  From  the  cupolo  of  this 
building  is  a  fine  profpcd,  and  a  full  view  of  the 
city. 

Not  far  from  hence  are  twenty-feven  acres  of 
ground,  defigned  for  a  fquare,  called  Gecrge  ^qiiare: 
a  fmall  portion  is  at  prefent  built,  confifting  of 
fmall  but  commodious  houfes,  in  the  Englijh 
falhion.  Such  is  the  Ipirit  of  improvement,  that 
•within  thefe  three  years  fixty  thoufand  pounds 
have  been  expended  in  houfes  in  the  modern  tafte, 
and  twenty  thoufand  in  the  old. 

Watjon\  hofpital  fhould  not  be  forgot :  a  large 
good  building,  behind  the  Grey  Friers  church  j  an 
excellent  inftitution  for  the  educating  and  appren- 
iicing  the  children  of  decayed  merchants  ;  who, 
after  having  fcrved  their  time  with  credit,  receive 
fifty  pounds  to  fet  up  with. 

The  meadows^  or  public  walks,  are  well  planted, 
and  are  very  extenfive  :  thefe  are  the  mall  of  Edin- 
burgh, as  Comely  Gardens  are  its  l/auxhalL 

The  Cowgate  is  a  long  ftreet,  running  parallel 
with  the  High  Street^  beneath  the  lleep  fouthern 
declivity  of  the  city,  and  terminates  in  the  Grafs- 
Market^  a  wjdp  ftreet,  where  cattle  are  fold,  and 
criminals  executed.  On  fcveral  of  the  houfes  are 
fmall  iron  crofTes,  which,  I  was  informed,  denoted 
that  they  once  belonged  to  the  Knights  of  St. 
'Jckn, 

0\\ 


INSCOTLAND.  S7 

On  the  north  fide  of  the  city  lies  the  new  town, 
which  is  planned  with  great  judgement,  and  will 
prove  a  magnificent  addition  to  Edinburgh ;  the 
houfes  in  St.  Andrew's  fquare  coft  from  1800I.  to 
2000I.  each,  and  one  or  two  4000  or  5000I.  They 
are  all  built  in  the  modern  ftyle,  and  are  free  from 
the  inconveniences  attending  the* old  city. 

Th-fe  improvements  are  connected  to  the  city 
by  a  very  beautiful  bridge,  whofe  higheft  arch  is 
ninety-five  ittt  high. 

In  the  walk  of  this  evening,  I  palTed  by  a  deep 
and  wide  hollow  beneath  Calton  Hill,  the  place 
where  thofe  imaginary  criminals,  witches  and  for- 
cerers  in  lefs  enlightened  times,  were  burnt ;  and 
where,  at  feftive  feafons,  the  gay  and  gallant  held 
their  tilts  and  tournaments:  atone  of  thefe,  it  is 
faid,  that  the  Earl  of  Bothwell  made  the  firft  im- 
preflion  on  the  fufceptible  heart  of  Mary  Stuart^) 
having  galopped  into  the  ring  down  the  dangerous 
fleeps  of  the  adjacent  hill ;  for  he  feemed  to  think 
that 

Women,  born  to  be  control'd. 
Stoop  to  the  forward  and  the  bold. 

Thefe  defperate  feats  were  the  humour  of  the 
times  of  chivalry  :  Brantome  relates,  that  the  Due 
de  Nemours  galopped  down  the  fleps  of  the  Sainte 
Ckappel  at  Paris,  to  the  aflonilhment  of  the  be- 
holders. The  men  cultivated  every  exercife  that 
could  preferve  or  improve  their  bodily  ftrength  j 
the  ladies,  every  art  that  tended  to  improve  their 
charms  :  Mary  is  reported  to  have  ufed  a  bath  of 
white  wine ;  a  cuftom  ftrange,  but  not  without 
precedent.  Jaques  du  FouiUoux,  enraptured  with  a 
*  country 


5%  A      T    O    U    R 

country  girl,  enumerating  the  arts  which  flie  fcornctl 
to  life  to  improve  her  perfon,  mentions  rhis  ; 
Point  ne  portoit  de  ce  linge  femelle 
Pour  amoindrir  fon  feing  et  fa  mammelle. 
Vafquine  nulle,  ou  aucun  peli^oa 
Elle  ne  portoit,  ce  n'eftoit  fa  fa^on. 
Point  nc  prcnajt  'vin  blanc  pour  fe  'baignery 
Ne  drogue  encore  pour  fon  corps  alleger  *, 

'At  a  fmall  walk's  diftance  from  Colion  Hill  lies 
the  new  botanic  garden -f-,  cqnfiftingof  five  acres 
of  ground,  a  green- houfe  fifty  feet  long,  two  tem- 
perate rooms,  each  twelve  feet,  and  two  floves, 
each  twenty-eight :  the  ground  rifes  to  the  north, 
and  defends  the  plants  from  the  cold  winds :  the 
foil  a  light  fand,  with  a  black  earth  on  the  furface. 
It  is  finely  flocked  with  plants,  whofe  arrangement 
and  cultivation  do  much  credit  to  my  worthy  friend 
Dr.  Hope,  ProfcITor  of  Botany,  who  planned  and 
executed  the  whole.  It  was  begun  in  1764,  being 
founded  by  the  munificence  of  his  prefent  Majefty, 
who  granted  fifteen  hundred  pounds  for  that  pur- 
pofe. , 

During  this  week's  flay  at  Edinburgh,  the  prices 
of  provifions  were  as  follow  : 

Beef,  from  ^d.  to  3d.  ^, 

Mutton,  from  4d.  to  3d.  ^. 

Veal,  from  5d.  to  3d. 

J^amb,  2d.  ■^. 

Bacon,  7d. 
Butter,  in  fummer,  8d.  in  winter,  is. 

*  VAdokfcenct  dt  Jaqucs  dff  Fouilhux,   %  2. 
f  The  old  botanic  garden  lies  to  the  eaft  of  the  new  bridge  ; 
an  account  of  it  is  to  be  feen  in  the  Mu/tim  £it!/ouria»tm.  ; 

Pigeons, 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D;  59 

Pigeons, /(^r  dozen,  from  8d.  to  5s.  • 

Chickens,  per  pair,  8d.  to  is, 

A  fowl,  IS.  2d. 

Green  goofe,  3s. 

Fat  goofe,  2s.  6d. 

Large  turkey,  4s.  or  5s. 

Pig,  2  s. 

Coals,  5d.  or  6d.  per  hundred,  delivered. 
Many  fine  excurfions  may  be  made  at  a  fmall 
diftance  from  this  city.  Leith,  a  large  town,  about  Leit% 
two  miles  north,  lies  on  the  Firth,  is  a  flourifhing 
place,  and  the  port  of  Edinburgh.     The  town  is 
dirty  and  ill  built,  and  chiefly  inhabited  by  failors  -,  .    ^ 

but  the  pier  is  very  fine,  and  is  a  much- frequented 
walk.  The  races  were  at  this  time  on  the  fands, 
near  low-water  mark  :  confidering  their  vicinity  to 
a  great  city  and  populous  country,  the  meeting  was 
far  from  numerous  ;  a  proof  that  dilTipation  has 
not  generally  infefted  the  manners  of  the  North 
Britons. 

Craigmellar  caflle  is  feated  on  a  rocky  eminence, 
about  two  miles  fouth  of  Edifiburghy  is  fquare,  and 
has  towers  at  each  corner.  Some  few  apartments 
are  yet  inhabited  ;  but  the  reft  of  this  great  pile  is 
in  ruins. 

Ne-zvhitle,  the  feat  of  the  Marquifs  of  Lothian, 
is  a  pleafant  ride  of  a  few  miles  from  the  capital. 
It  was  once  siCiJiercian  abby,  founded,  by  David  I. 
in  II 40  •,  but,  in  1 59 1,  was  ere  died  into  a  lordfhip,  • 
in  favour  of  Sir  Alark  Ker,  fon  of  Sir  Walter  Ker,  of 
Cefsford.  The  houfe  lies  in  a  warm  bottom,  and, 
like  moll  other  of  the  houfes  of  the  Scotch  nobility, 

refembles 


<^o  A      T    O    U    R 

rcfembles  a  French  Chateau,  by  having  a  village  or 
little  paltry  town  adjacent.  1  he  fituation  is  very 
favorable  to  trees,  as  appears  by  the  vaft  fize  of  thofe 
near  the  houfe ;  and  I  was  informed,  that  fruit 
ripens  here  within  ten  days  as  early  as  at  Chelfea. 

The  Marquifs  poflelTes  a  moil  valuable  colkdion 
of  portraits,  many  of  them  very  fine,  and  alraoft 
all  very  inftruftive :  a  large  half-length  of  Henry 
Barnly  reprefents  him  tall,  aukvvard  and  gauky, 
with  a  ftupid,  infipid  countenance  -,  mod  likely 
drawn  after  he  had  loft,  by  intemperance  and  de- 
bauchery, thofe  charms  which  captivated  the  heart 
of  the  amorous  Mary. 

A  head  of  her  mother,  Marie  de  Guife;  not  lefs 
beautifuil  than  !re.r  daughter. 

A  head  of  Madame  Monpenfter,  and  of  feveral 
other  illuflrious  perfons,  who  graced  the  court  of 
Louis  XIII. 

Prince  Rupert  and  Prince  Mciuric£y  in  one  piece. 

Some  Imall  portraits,  ftudies  of  Fa^idyk  ;  among 
which  n  one  of  ff^^ilLam  Earl  of  Pembroke,  of  whom 
Lord  Clarendon  gives  fo  advantageous  a  charadlcr. 

A  beautifuil  l\alf-length  of  Henrietta,  Queen  of 
Charles  I.  her  charms  almoft  apologize  for  the  com- 
pliances of  the  uxorious  monarch. 

His  daughter,  the  Dutchefs  of  Orleans. 

The  wife  of  Philip  the  bold,  infcribed  Margci 
Mala,  Lodo  Mala. 

Head  of  Robert  Car,  Earl  of  ^omcrfet ;  the  coun- 
tenance effeminate,  fmall  features,  light  flaxen  or 
yellowifli  hair,  and  a  very  fmall  beard  :  is  an  ori- 
ginal of  that  worthlefs  favorite,  and  proves  that 

the 


INSCOTLAND.  ^^ 

the  figure  given  as  his  among  the  illuflrious  heads 
is  erroneous,  the  lail  being  reprefented  as  a  robuft 
black  man. 

His  father.  Sir  Robert  Car. 

An  Earl  of  Somerjet^  of  whom  I  could  get  no 
account  -,  handfomci  with  long  light  hair  inclining 
to  yellow  :  a  head. 

A  full  length  of  James  I.  by  Jamefon.  Another 
of  Charles  I.  when  young,  in  rich  armour,  black 
and  gold  :  a  capital  piece. 

Lady  Tufion  ;  a  fine  half-length. 

Earl  Morton^  regent:  half-length;  a  yellow  beard. 

Two  very  curious  half-lengths  on  wood  :  one  of 
a  man  with  a  long  forked  black  beard  ;  his  jacket 
flaflied  down  in  narrow  flripes  from  top  to  bottom, 
and  the  ftripes  loofe  :  the  other  with  a  black  full 
beard,  the  fame  fort  of  ftripes,  but  drawn  tight  by 
a  girdle. 

The  Doge  of  Venice^  by  Titian. 

Three  by  Morillio  \  boys  and  girls  in  low  life. 

A  remarkable  fine  piece  of  our  three  firft  cir- 
cum-navigatorsj  Drake,  Hawkins  and  Candifi,  half- 
length. 

The  heads  of  Mark  Earl  of  Lothian ,  and  his 
lady,  by  Sir  Antonio  More. 

Mark  Ker,  prior  of  Neivbottki  who,  at  the  refor- 
mation, complied  with  the  times,  and  got  the 
eftate  of  the  abby. 

In  the  woods  adjacent  to  this  feat  are  fomc  fub-   Subterranc 
terraneous  apartments  and  pafTages  cut  out  of  the   ^^^  rooms, 
live  rock.     A  few  miles  diftant  from  there,  near 
Hawthorn-Den,  the  refidence  of  the  celebrated  poet 

Drummond^ 


Cz  A      T    O    U    R 

T>rummond  *,  are,  as  I  was  informed,  others  of  the 
fame  nature,  but  of  greater  extent,  which  Do6lor 
Stukely  +  calls  a  Pi^i/h  caftle.  Thefe  places,  in 
fa6t,  were  excavated  by  the  antient  inhabitants  of 
the  country,  either  as  receptacles  for  their  provi- 
fions,  or  for  retreats  for  themfelves  or  families,  in 
time  of  war,  in  the  fame  manner  as  Tacitus  relates 
was  the  cuftom  of  the  Germam  J. 

Two  or  three  miles  diftant  from  Newhottk  is 
Dalkeith.  Dalkeith,  a  fmall  town,  adjoining  to  D^/^'<:///:'-hoiife, 
the  feat  of  the  Duke  of  Bucckugh  :  originally  the 
property  of  the  Douglafes,  and  was,  when  in  form 
of  a  caftle,  of  great  ftrength  •,  and,  during  the 
time  of  the  Regent  Morton'%  retreat,  ftyled  the 
Lion's  Ben, 

The  portraits  at  Dalkeith  are  numerous,  and 
fome  good  :  among  others,  the 

Firft  Duke  of  Richnond  and  his  Dutchefs. 

The  Dutchefs  of  Cleveland. 

Countefs  of  Buccleugb,  mother  to  the  Dutchefs 
of  Monmouth,  and  Lady  Eglintcn,  her  fifter. 

The  Dutchefs  and  her  two  fons :  the  Dutchefs  of 
Tork  ;  her  hand  remarkably  fine  :  the  Dutchefs  of 
Lenox. 

Mrs.  Sufanna  JVaters,  mother  of  the  Duke  of 
McJimouth,  with  his  pifture  in  her  hand. 

•  Who  is  faid  to  have  compofed  his  poems  in  one  of  thefe 
caves  :   he  flourKhcd  in  the  time  of 'Ja>/i:s  VI. 

f  Vide  Ithi.  Curio/um.  50.   tab.  3B. 

J  Solent  €t  Jul)tcrrdHeos  fptcui  aperire,  ecfque  muUo  infuptrjimo 
OMCrantf/uff'ugiiimhiemi,  et  rectptaculum  frugtbu!,  quia  rigorem 
frigorum  ejnjmodi  iocis  molliunt  :  et  ft  quando  lioftii  advenit 
aperta  pofulalur  :  Abdita  autem  et  defojfa,  ignorant ur,  aut  to  ipf» 
fallunt,  quod  luarenda  Junt .  De  Moribus  Gcrmanor.  c.  16. 

Dutchefs 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  Cj 

Dutchcfs  of  Cleveland  and  her  ion,  an  infant ; 
fhe  in  character  of  a  Madonna  :  fine. 

The  Duke  of  Monmouth,  in  charafter  of  a  young 
St.  John. 

Lord  Strafford  and  his  Secretary  ;  a  fmall  fludy 
of  Vandyk. 

Henry  VIII.  and  Queen  Catherine,  with  the  di- 
vorce in  her  hand  ;  two  fmall  pieces,  by  Holbein* 
Anna  Mullein,  by  the  fame,  dreffed  in  a  black  gown, 
large  yellow  netted  fleeves,  in  a  black  cap,  peaked 
behind. 

Lady  Jane  Gray,  with  long  hair,  black  and  very 
thick  ;  not  handfome  •,  but  the  virtues  and  the  in- 
tclledtual  perfections  of  that  fuffering  innocent, 
more  than  fupplied  the  abfence  of  perfonal  charms. 

A  large  fpirited  pidure  of  the  Duke  oi  Monmouth 
on  hoifeback.  The  fame  in  armour.  All  his  pic- 
tures have  a  handfome  likenefs  of  his  father. 

Dutchefs  of  Richmond^  with  a  bow  in  her  hand, 
by  Sir  Peter  Leiy.  A  fine  head  of  the  late  Duke  of- 
Ormond. 

A  beautiful!  head  o^  Mary  Stuart ;  the  face  fiiarp, 
thin  and  young  ;  yet  has  a  likenefs  to  fome  others 
of  her  pictures  done  before  misfortunes  had  altered 
her  ;  her  drefs  a  ftrait  gown,  open  at  the  top  and 
reaching  to  her  cars,  a  fmall  cap,  and  fmall  ruff, 
with  a  red  rofe  in  her  hand. 

In  this  palace  is  a  room  entirely  furnifned  by 
Charles  \l.  on  occafion  of  the  marriage  oi  Mon- 
mouth  with  the  heirefs  of  the  houfe  *. 

•  Since  this,  I  have  been  informed  that  not  far  from  Dal' 

keith,  at  Rcfslyn,  is  a  mod  beautiful!  and  entire  chapel  of  go- 

thic  archiiedure,  well  worth  a  vifit  from  a  curious  Traveller, 

2  At 


$4  A      T    O   U   R 

AiSmefotiy  another  feat  of  the  Duke  oi  Buccleugh^ 
a  mile  diftant  •'^rom  tlie  firft,  is  a  fine  half-length  of 
General  Mo7ik  looking  over  his  Ihoulder,  with  his 
back  towards  you  :  he  refided  long  at  Dalkeith^ 
when  he  commanded  in  Scotland, 
Nell  G'wimic,  loofely  attired. 
A  fine  marriage  of  St.  Catherine^  by  Vandyk, 
July  Z4.  Left  Edinburgh,  and  pafs'd  beneath  the  caftle, 

whofe  height  and  ftrength,  in  my  then  fituation, 
appeared  to  great  advantage.  The  country  I  paft 
through  was  well  cultivated,  the  fields  large,  but 
moftly  inclofed  with  flone  walls  -,  for  hedges  are  not 
yet  become  univerfal  in  this  part  of  the  kingdom  : 
it  is  not  a  century  fince  they  were  known  here. 
Reach  the 

South-Ferry^  a  fmall  village  on  the  banks  of  the 
Firth,  which  fuddenly  is  contracted  to  the  breadth 
of  two  miles  by  the  jutting  out  of  the  land  on  both 
fhores  -,  but  almoft  inftantly  widens,  towards  the 
weft,  into  a  fine  and  extenfive  bay.  The  profpecft 
on  each  fide  is  very  beautifull ;  a  rich  country, 
frequently  diverfified  with  towns,  villages,  caftles, 
and  gentlemen's  feats  *.  There  is  befide  a  vaft 
view  up  and  down  the  Firth,  from  its  extremity, 
not  remote  from  Sterling,  to  its  mouth  near  Mey 
ifle  ;  in  all,  about  fixty  miles. 

This  Ferry  is  alfo  culled  ^teen'^s -Ferry ^  being  the 
paflage  much  ufed  i"  by  Margaret,  queen  to  Mal- 
com  III.  and  fifter  to  Edgar  Etheling^   her  refidencc 

•  Such  as  Scith  caftl«,  Dumfcrlinc  town,  Lord  Mcrn's^s, 
Lord  Hopetoun'i,  Captain  DundaJ's''%. 

■\  Or,  as  others  fay,  bccaulc  fhe,  her  brother  and  filler,  firfl 
landed  there,  after  their  efcapc  from  Williavi  the  Conqueror. 

being 


d 


IN    SCOTLAND.  ^5 

being  at  Bumfcrline.  Crofs  over  in  an  excellent 
pafTage-boa,: ;  obferve  midway  the  little  ifle  called 
Inch-Garvey^  with  the  ruin  of  a  Imall  caftle.  An 
ar5lic  gull  flew  near  the  boat,  purfued  by  other 
gulls,  as  birds  of  prey  are :  this  is  the  fpecies  that 
perfecutes  and  purfues  the  leiler  kinds,  till  they 
mute  through  fear,  when  it  catches  up  their  excre- 
ments e'er  they  reach  the  water  :  the  boatmen,  on 
that  account,  flyled  it  the  dirty  AuliH. 

Landed  in  the  (hire  of  Fife  *,  at  North  Ferry^  Granite 
near  which  arc  the  great  granite  quarries,  which  quarry. 
help  to  fupply  the  ftreets  of  London  with  paving 
ftones  j  many  Ihips  then  waiting  near,  in  order  to 
take  in  their  lading.  The  granite  lies  in  great  per- 
pendicular flacks  ;  above  which,  a  reddifli  earth 
filled  with  friable  micaceous  nodules.  The  granite 
itfelf  is  very  hard,  and  is  all  blailed  with  gun- 
powder :  the  cutting  into  Ihape  for  paving  cods 
two  (hillings  and  eight  pence  per  tun,  and  the 
freight  to  London  feven  (hillings. 

The  country,  as  far  as  Kinrofs,  is  very  fine,  con- 
fifting  of  gentle  rifings  -,  much  corn,  efpecially 
Bear 'i  but  few  trees,  except  about  a  gentleman's 
feat,  called  Blair ^  where  there  are  great  and  flou- 
rifhing  plantations.  Near  the  road  are  the  lafl 
collieries  in  Scotland,  except  the  mconfiderable 
works  in  the  county  of  Sutherland. 

Kinrofs  is  a  fmall  town,  feated  in  a  large  plain, 
bounded  by  mountains  j  the  houfes  and  trees  are 
fd  intermixed  as  to  give  it  an  agreeable  appearance. 
It  has  fome  manufa6lures  of  linnen  and  cutlery 

•  Part  of  the  antient  Caledonia., 

F  ware. 


t^  .  A      T    O    U    R 

v/are.  At  this  time  was  a  meeting  of  juftices,  on 
a  fingular  occafion  :  a  vagrant  had  been,  not  long 
before,  ordered  to  be  whipped  -,  but  fuch  was  the 
point  of  honor  among  the  common  people,  that  no 
one  coLild  be  perkiadcd  to  go  to  Perth  for  the  execu- 
tioner, who  lived  there :  to  prefs,  I  may  fay,  two  men 
for  that  fervice  was  the  caufe  of  the  meeting  •,  fo  Mr. 
Bofwell  may  rejoice  to  find  the  notion  of  honor  pre- 
vale  in  as  exalted  a  degree  among  his  own  country- 
men as  among  the  virtuous  Corficans  *. 

Not  far  from  the  town  is  the  houfe  of  Kinrofs^ 
built  by  the  famous  architefl  Sir  IVilliam  Bruce^  for 
his  own  refidence,  and  was  the  firft  good  houfe  in 
North  Britain :  it  is  a  large,  elegant,  but  plain 
building",  the  hall  is  fifty-two  feet  long,  the  grounds 
about  it  well  planted,  the  fine  lake  adjacent  -,  fo 
that  it  is  capable  of  being  made  as  dclightfull  a 
place  as  any  in  North  Britain. 

Lough-Leven-,  a  magnificent  piece  of  water,  very 
broad,  but  irregularly  indented,  is  about  twelve 
miles  in  circumference,  and  its  greateft  depth  about 
twenty-four  fathoms:  is  finely  bounded  by  moun- 
tains on  one  fide  ;  on  the  other,  by  the  plain  of 
Kinrofs^&nd  prettily  embellillied  with  feveral  groves, 
moft  fortunately  difpofed.  Some  iflands  are  dif- 
perfed  in  this  great  expanfe  of  v;ater-,  one  of  which 
is  large  enough  to  feed  feveral  head  of  cattle ;  but 
the  moft  remarkable  is  that  dillinguiflied  by  the 
captivity  of  A'/^ry  5'///^7r/, 'which  (lands  almoft  in 
the  middle  of  the  lake.  The  caille  ilill  icnTains  ; 
confills  of  a  fquare  to\\er,  a  fmall  yard  with  two 
•  Jl/j?.  Cvrfua.  p.  285,  of  the  third  edition. 

round! 


I 


INSCOTLAND.  e^ 

round  towers,  a  chapel,  and  the  ruins  of  a  building, 
where,  it  is  faid,  the  unfortunate  Princefs  was  lodged. 
In  the  fqiiare  tower  is  a  dungeon  with  a  vaulted 
room  above,  over  which  had  been  three  other  {lo- 
ries. Some  trees  are  yet  remaining  on  this  little 
fpot ;  probably  coeval  with  Mary^  under  whofe 
fiiade  (he  may  have  fat,  expeding  her  ei'cape  at 
length  efredlcd  by  the  enamoured  Douglas  *.  This 
caftle  had*  before  been  a  royal  refidence,  but  not 
for  captive  monarchs  -,  having  been  granted  from 
the  crown  hy  Robert  III.  to  Douglas^  Laird  oiLoch»_ 
Leven, 

St.  Serfs  ifle  is  noted  for  having  been  granted 
by  Brnde^  laft  King  of  the  Pi'^s^  to  St.  Servan  and 
the  Culdeesi  a  kind  of  priefts  among  the  firft  Chrif- 
tians  of  North  Britain,  who  led  a  fort  of  monaftic 
life  in  cells,  and  for  a  confiderable  time  preferved  • 
a  pure  and  uncorrupt  religion  ;  at  length,  in  the 
reign  of  David  I.  were  fupprelTed  in  favor  of  the 
church  of  Rome.     The  priory  of  Port-jnonk  vfas  on  - 

this  iQe,  of  which  fome  fmallremains  yet  exift. 

The  fifli  of  this  lake  are  Pike,  fmall  Perch,  fine  Filh  Ss  birds. 
Eels,  and  moft  excellent  Trouts ;  the  beft  and  the 
reddefl  I  ever  faw  •,  the  largeft  about  fix  pounds  in 
weight.  The  fifiiermen  gave  me  an  account  of  a 
fpecies  they  called  the  Gaily  Trout,  which  are  only- 
caught  from  0<^<7Z'^r  to  January;  are  fplit,  faked  and 

*  Kiftorlans  differ  in  refpeft  to  the  caufe  that  influenced  him 
to  aflifl  in  his  fovereign's  efcape  ;  fome  attribute  it  to  his  ava- 
rice, and  think  he  was  bribed  with  jewels,  referved  by  Mary  ; 
others,  that  he  was  touched  by  a  more  generous  paflTion  :  the 
laft  opinion  is  the  moft  natural,  confidering  the  charms  of  the 
Queen  and  the  youth  of  her  deliverer. 

F  2  dried. 


6S  A     T   O    U    R 

cried,  for  winter  provifion :  by  the  delcriptlon,  they 
certainly  were  our  Char,  only  of  a  larger  fize  than 
any  we  have  in  England^  or  IFales^  fome  being  two 
feet  and  a  half  long.  The  birds  that  breed  on  the 
illes,  are  Herring  Gulls,  Pewit  Gulls,  and  great 
Terns,  called  here  Piclarnes. 

Lay  at  a  good  inn,  a  fingle  houfe,  about  half  a 
mile  North  of  Kinrofs, 
TuLV  25.  Made  an  cxcurfion  about  feven  miles  well,  to  fee 

Rumbling  ^^^  rumbling  brig  at  Glen-devon,  a  bridge  of  one 
arch,  flung  over  a  chafm  worn  by  the  river  Devon, 
about  eighty  feet  deep,  very  narrow,  and  horrible 
to  look  down ;  the  bottom,  in  many  parts,  is  covered 
with  fragments  of  rocks;  in  others,  the  waters  arc 
vifible,  gulhing  between  the  ftones  with  great  vio- 
lence :  the  fides,  in  many  places,  projed,  and  al- 
moll  lock  in  each  other;  trees fhoot  out  in  various 
fpots,  and  contribute  to  encreafe  the  gloom  of  the 
glen,  while  the  ear  is  filled  with  the  cawing  of  daws, 
the  cooing  of  wood-pigeons,  and  the  impetuous 
noife  of  the  waters. 
Canvdrox  ^  ""^il^  lowcr  down  is  the  Caivdron  Glen:  here 

Ckn.  fhe  river,  after  a  fliort  fall,  drops  on  rocks  hollowed 

in  aftrange  manner  into  large  and  deep  cylindric 
cavities,  open  on  one  fide,  or  formed  into  great 
circular  cavities,  like  cauldrons  *  :  from  whence 
the  name  of  the  place  :  one  in  particular  has  the 
appearance  of  a  vaft  brewing  veflcl  ;  and  the  water, 
by  its  great  agitation,  has  acquired  a  yellow  fcum> 

•  Jn  Snutden,  and  the  North  of  Germany,  fuch  holes  at  thefe 
are  called  Grant't  Pots.  Kalm's  Voy..  I.  121.  and  Ph,  Trauf, 
utrlJg.  V.  165, 

2  exadly 


INSCOTLAND.  ^9 

exadlly  refembling  the  yefty  working  of  male  liquor, 
Juil  beneath  this  the  water  darts  down  about  thirty 
feet  in  form  of  a  great  white  flieet :  the  rocks  below 
widen  confiderably,  and  their  clifty  fides  are  fringed 
with  wood.  Beyond  is  a  view  of  a  fine  meadowy 
vale,  and  the  diftant  mountains  near  Sisrling. 

Two  miles  north  is  Caftk  Campbell^  feated  on  a  Cadle  CW;/- 
lleep  peninfulated  rock  between  vafl:  mountains, 
having  to  the  fouth  a  boundlefs  view  through  a 
deep  glen  fhagged  with  brufh  wood  •,  for  the  forefts 
that  once  covered  the  country  are  now  entirely  de- 
ftroyed.  Formerly,  from  its  darkfome  fituation, 
this  pile  was  called  the  caftle  oi  Gloom  ;  and  all  th« 
names  of  the  adjacent  places  were  fuitable  :  it  was 
feated  in  the  pariih  of  Dolor-,  was  bounded  by  the 
glens  of  care^  and  wafhed  by  the  birns  of  forrozv. 
This  cafiile,  with  the  whole  territory  belonging  to 
the  family  of  Argyle^  underwent  all  the  calamities 
of  civil  war  in  1645  •,  for  its  rival,  the  Marquis  of 
Montrofe-,  carried  fire  and  fword  through  the  whole 
eflate.  The  caftle  v/as  ruined  ;  and  its  magnificent 
reliques  exift,  as  a  monument  of  the  horror  of  the 
times.  No  wonder  then  that  the  Marquis  expe* 
rienced  fo  woeful  and  ignominious  a  fate,  v/hen  he 
fell  into  the  power  of  fo  exafperated  a  chieftain. 

Returned  to  my  inn  along  the  foot  of  the  Ochil 
hills,  whofe  fides  v/ere  covered  with  a  fine  verdure, 
and  fed  great  numbers  of  cattle  and  fheep.  The 
country  below  full  of  oats,  and  in  a  very  improving 
(late  :  the  houfes  of  the  common  people  decent,  but 
moftly  covered  with  fods  •,  fome  were  covered  both 
with  ftraw  and  fod.     The  inhabitants  extremely 

F  3  civil. 


I 


yo  A      T    O    U    R 

civil,  and  never  failed  offering  brandy,  or  whey, 
when  I  flopt  to  make  enquiries  at  any  of  their 
ho'jfes. 

In  the  afternoon  crofTcd  a  branch  of  the  fimie 
hills,  which  yielded  plenty  of  oats  •,  defcended  into 
Btraith-earn.  Straith-eam^  a  beautifuU  vale,  about  thirty  miles  in 
length,  full  of  rich  meadows  and  corn  fields,  divided 
by  the  river  Earn^  which  ferpentines  finely  through 
the  middle,  falling  into  the  T>>-,  of  which  there  is 
a  fight  at  the  eaft  end  of  the  vale.  It  is  prettily 
diverfified  with  groves  of  trees  and  gentlemen's 
houfes  ;  among  which,  towards  the  weft  end,  is 
Cajlle  Vru/umond,  the  forfeited  feat  of  the  Earl  of 
Perth. 

Cofile  Duplin  *  -,  the  refidence  of  the  Earl  of 
Kinnoul,  feated  on  the  north  fide  of  the  vale,  on 
the  edge  of  a  fiecp  glen.  Only  a  fingle  tower  re- 
mains of  the  old  caftle,  the  reft  being  modernized. 
The  front  commands  a  pleafing  view  of  the  vale  ; 
behind  are  plantations,  extending  feveral  miles  in 
length  ;  all  flourifli  greatly,  except  thofe  of  afli.  I 
remarked  in  the  woods,  fome  very  large  chefnuts, 
horfe-chelhuts,  fpruce  and  filver  firs,  cedar  and 
arbor  viice.  Broad-leaved  laburnum  thrives  in  this 
country  greatly,  grows  to  a  great  fize,  and  the 
wood  is  ufed  in  fineerlng.  ** 
fiuit.  Fruits  fucceed  here  very  indifi^crently -,  even  non- 

pareils require  a  wall  to  ripen:  grapes,  figs,  and  late 

•  Nenr  this  place  was  the  battle  of  Duplin,  M3  2,  between 
the Englijh,  under  the  command  oi  Bnliol,  and  x\ie  Scots.  The 
laft  were  defeated,  and  fuch  a  number  of  the  name  of  liny 
flain,  that  the  family  would  have  been  extinft,  had  not  feve- 
ral of  tlieir  wives  been  left  at  home  pregnant. 

peadies. 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  71 

peaches,  will  not  ripen:  the  winters  begin  early  and 
end  late,  and  are  attended  with  very  high  winds.  I 
was  informed  that  labor  is  dear  here,  notwithftand-  Labor, 
ing  it  is  only  eight-pence  a  day  j  t-hecommon  people 
not  being  yet  got  into  a  method  of  working,  fo  do 
very  little  for  their  wages.  Notv^ithftandiiig  this, 
improvements  arecarried  on  in  thefe  parts  with  great 
fpirit,  both  in  planting  and  in  agriculture.  Lord 
Ki nnou /  phnted  lad  year  not  fewer  than  eighty  thou- 
fand  trees,  befides  Scolcb  firs  -,  fo  provides  future 
forefts  for  the  benefit  of  his  fuccelTors,  and  the  em- 
bellifhment  of  his  country.  In  refped:  to  agricul- 
ture, there  are  difficulties  to  ftruggle  with,  for  the 
country  is  without  either  cpal  or  lime  ftone  ;  fo  that 
the  lime  is  brought  from  the  eftate  of  the  Earl  of 
Elgin,  near  Dumferline,  who,  I  was  told,  drew  a 
confiderable  revenue  from  the  kilns. 

In  Caftle  Duplin  are  fome  very  good  pidures  ;  a 
J'emarkable  one  of  Luther,  Bucer,  and  Catherine 
the  nun,  in  the  charafters  of  muficians,  by  Georgi- 
ani  di  Cajlel  franco. 

A  fine  head  of  a  fecular  prieft,  by  Titian.  St. 
Nicholas  blefling  three  children.  Two  of  cattle, 
by  Rofa  di  Tivoli.  A  head  of  Spencer.  Rtibens* 
head,  by  himfelf.  A  fine  head  of  Butler,  by  Sir 
Peter  Lely.  Of  the  old  Countefs  of  Defmond,  by 
Rembrandt.  Mrs.  Tofts,  in  the  charadler  of  St. 
Catherine,  by  Sir  Godfrey  Knelkr.  Sir  George  Haye, 
of  Maginnis,  in  armour,  1640-,  done  at  Rome  by  L. 
Ferdinand.  Haye,  Earl  of  Carlijle,  in  Charles  the 
Firft's  time,  young  and  veryhandfome,  by  Cornelius 
Janfen.     The  fecond  Earl  of  Kinnoul,  by  Vandyk. 

F  4  Chancellor 


Hill  of  Men- 
cnef 


A      T    O    U    R  I 

Chancellor  Hayc,  by  Mytens.     A  good  portriit  of 
Lord  Trcafurer   Oxford,    by  Rickardfcn.     And    a 
beautiful!  miniature  of  Sir  John  Earnly, 
July  27.'  Afcended  the  hill  of  Moncrief-y  the  profpeft  from 

thence  is  the  glory  of  Scotland,  and  well  merits  the 
eulogia  given  it  for  the  variety  and  richnefs  of  its 
views.     On  the  fouth  and  well  appear  Slraithern, 
embelliflied  with  the  feats  of  Lord  Kinnoul,  Lord 
Rollo-,  and  of  feveral  other  gentlemen*  the  Carfe^  or 
rich  plain  of  Cowrie,  Stormont  hills,  and  the  hill  of 
Kinnoul,  whofe  vaft  cliff  is  remarkable  for  its  beau- 
tiful! pebbles.     The  meanders  of  the  Em,   which 
winds  more  than  any  river  I  at  this  time  had  feen, 
are  moft  enlivening  additions  to  the  fcene.     The 
lall  turn  it  takes  forms  a  fine  peninfula  prettily 
planted,  and  juft  beyond  it  joins  the  ^ay,  whofe 
^eftuary  lies  full  in  view,  the  fea  clofing  the  profpedt 
on  this  fide. 

To  the  north  lies  the  town  of  Perth,  with  a  view 
of  part  of  its  magnificent  bridge  •,  which,  with  the 
fine  woods  called  Perth  Parks,  the  vaft  plain  of 
Strailh-Tay,  the  winding  of  that  noble  river,  its 
iflands,  and  the  grand  boundary,  formed  by  the 
diftant  highlands,  finilh  this  matchlcfs  fcene.  The 
inhabitants  of  Perth  are  far  from  being  blind  to  the 
beauties  of  their  river ;  for  with  fingular  plcafure 
they  relate  the  tradition  of  the  Roman  army,  when 
it  came  in  fight  of  the  Tay  *,  burfling  into  the  ex- 
clamation of,  Ecce  Tiherims 

On  approaching  the  town  are  fome  pretty  walks 
handfomely  planted,  and  at  a  fmall  diftance,  the 

*  Tau5,  Tacit i  'vit.Agr. 

remains 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  73 

remains  of  fome  works  of  Cromwell,  called  Oliver's 
Mount. 

Perth  is  large,  and  in  general  well-built  •,  two  Pbrth, 
of  the  ftrects  are  remarkably  fine ;  in  fome  of  the 
lefTer  are  yet  a  few  wooden  houfes  in  the  old  ftyle ; 
but  as  they  decay,  the  magiftrates  prohibit  the  re- 
building them  in  the  old  way.  There  is  but  one 
parifli,  which  has  two  churches,  bcfides  meetings! 
for  feparatifts,  who  are  very  numerous.  One 
church,  which  belonged  to  a  monaftery,  is  very 
antient :  not  a  veflige  of  the  lafl  is  now  to  be  feeti ; 
for  thedifciples  of  that  rough  apoftle  Knox  made  a 
general  dcfolation  of  every  edifice  that  had  given 
flielter  to  the  worfhippers  of  the  church  of  Rome  :• 
it  being  one  of  his  maxims,  to  pull  down  the  neftsj 
and  the  rooks  would  fly  away. 

The  fiourilhing  ftate  of  Pert b  is  owing  to  two 
accidents :  the  firft,  that  of  numbers  oi  CromweWs 
wounded  officers  and  foldiers  chufing  to  refide  here, 
after  he  left  the  kingdom,  who  introduced  a  fpirit 
of  induftry  among  the  people  :  the  other  caufe  was 
the  long  continuance  of  the  Earl  of  Af^r's  army 
here  in  1 7 1 5,  which  occafioned  vail  fums  of  money 
being  fpent  in  the  place  :  but  this  town,  as  well  as 
all  Scotland.,  dates  its  profperity  from  the  yean  745, 
the  government  of  this  part  oi Great  Britain  having 
never  been  fettled  till  a  little  after  that  time.  The 
rebellion  was  a  diforder  violent  in  its  operation,  but 
falutary  in  its  effefts. 

The  trade  of  Perth  is  confiderable  :  it  exports   Trad«, 
annually  one  hundred  and  fifty  thoufand  pounds 
v/orth  of  linnen,  ten  thoufand  of  wheat  and  barley, 

and 


74  A      T    0    U    R 

and  about  the  fame  in  cured  raln:ion.  ThatfiHi  is 
taken  there  in  vaft  abundance;  three  thouTand  have 
been  caught  in  one  morning,  weighing,  one  with 
another,  fjxteen  pounds  •,  the  whole  capture,  forty- 
eight  thoufand  pounds.  The  filhery  begins  at  St. 
Andrew^  Day,  and  ends  Augujt  26th,  old  ftylc. 
The  rents  of  the  nflieries  amount  to  three  thoufand 
pounds  'per  annum. 

•     I  was  informed  that  fmelts  come  up  this  river  in 
May  and  Jun^, 
pearl.  There  has  been  in  thefe  parts  a  very  great  fifhery 

of  pearl,  got  out  of  the  frefli- water  mufcles.  From 
the  year  1761  to  1764,  1 0,000 1.  worth  were  fcnt 
to  London^  and  fold  frora  los.  to  il.  16  s.  per 
ounce.  I  was  told  that  a  pearl  has  been  taken 
there  that  weighed  33  grains;  but  this  fifliery  is 
at  prefent  exhaufted,  from  the  avarice  of  the  under- 
takers :   it  once  extended  as  far  as  Lough-Tay. 

Gozvrie  Floufe  is  fliewn  to  all  ftrangers;  formerly 
the  property  and  refidencc  of  the  Earl  of  Gowrie-, 
whofe  tragical  end  and  myfterious  confpiracy  (\i 
confpiracy  there  was)  are  (till  frcfli  in  the  minds  of 
the  people  of  Perth.  At  prefent  the  houfe  is  oc- 
G^xtir.->  con-  cupied  by  fome  companies  .of  artillery.  I  was 
piiacy.  fiiewn  the  ftaircafe  where  the  unhappy  nobleman 

was  killed,  the  window  the  frighted  monarch  James 
roared  out  of,  and  that  he  efcapcd  through,  when 
he  was  favcd  from  the  fury  of  the  populace,  by 
Baily  Rcy^  a  friend  oi  Cowrie's^  who  was  extremely 
beloved  in  the  town. 

From  the  little  traditions  preferved  in  the  palace, 
it  fcems  as  \i  Cowrie  had  not  the  left  intent  of  mur- 

thcring 


IN    SCOTLAND. 

thcring  the  King :  on  the  day  his  Majefty  cirne  to 
Perth,  the  Earl  was  engaged  to  a  wedding-dinner 
with  the  Dean  of  Guild  :  when  the  account  of  the 
King's  defign  reached  him  he  changed  color,  on 
being  taken  fo  unprovided  ;  but  the  Dean  forced 
him  to  accept  the  nuptial  feaft,  which  was  lent  over 
to  the  Earl's  houfe. 

When  the  King  fled  he  pafTed  by  the  feat  of  Sir 
William  Moncrief,  nczx  Em  bridge,  who  happening 
to  "be  walking  out  at  that  time,  heard  from  the 
mouth  of  his  terrified  Majefly  the  whole  relation  ; 
but  the  Knight  found  it  lb  marvellous  and  fo  dif- 
jointed,  as  plainly  to  tell  the  King,  that  if  it  was  a 
iruejlory,  it  was  a  veryjlrange  one. 

Gowrie  was  a  mod  accompliflied  gentleman:  af- 
ter he  had  finilhed  his  ftudies  he  held  the  Profeflbr 
of  Philofophy's  chair  for  two  years,  in  one  of  the 
Italian  univerfities. 

Crofs  the  Tay  on  a  temporary  bridge  ;  the  ftone 
bridge,  which  is  to  confifl  of  nine  arches,  beino-  at 
this  time  unfinifhed  j  the  largeft  arch  is  feventy-fix 
feet  wide  ;  when  complete  it  promifes  to  be  a  moll 
magnificent  ftruflure.  The  river  here  is  very  vio- 
lent, and  admits  of  fcarce  any  navigation  above ; 
but  {hips  of  eighty  or  ninety  tuns  come  as  far  as 
the  town. 

Scone  lies  about  a  mile  and  half  higher  up,  on  the       Scom, 
eaft  bank  of  the  river.     There  was  once  here  an 
abby  of  great  antiquity  *,  which  was  burnt  by  the 
reforming  zealots  of  Dundee.     The  prefent  palace 

*  Founded  hy  Alexander  I.  1 114,  for  canons  regular  of  St. 
Augujiine, 

was 


*1    >0 


^6  A      T    O    U    R 

was  begun  by  Earl  Cowrie  •,  but,  on  his  death, 
being  granted  by  James  VI.  to  his  favorite,  Sir 
David  Murray,  of  Gofpatrie,  was  completed  by 
him  i  who,  in  gratitude  to  the  king,  has,  in  feveral 
parts  of  the  houfe,  put  up  the  royal  arms.  The 
houfe  is  built  round  two  courts  ;  the  dining-room  is 
large  and  handfome,  has  an  antient  but  magnificent 
chimney-piece,  the  king's  arms,  with  this  motto. 

Nobis  hac  invi£!a  miferunt  centum  fex  Proavi. 
Beneath  are  the  Murray  arms.  In  the  drawing- 
room  is  fome  good  old  tapellry,  with  an  excellent 
figure  of  Mercury,  In  a  fmall  bed-chamber  is  a 
medly  fcripture  piece  in  needle-work,  with  a  border 
of  animals,  pretty  well  done  ;  the  work  of  Maty 
iS/«^^r/,  during  her  confinement  in  Locb-leven  czWXe. : 
but  the  houfe  in  general  is  in  a  manner  unfurnifhed. 

The  gallery  is  about  a  hundred  and  fifty-five  feet 
long;  the  top  arched,  divided  into  compartments, 
filled  with  paintings,  in  water  colors,  of  different 
forts  of  huntings;  and  that  Nimrod,  James  VI.  and 
his  train,  appear  in  every  piece. 

Till  the  dcftruflion  of  the  abby,  the  kings  of 
Scotland  were  crowned  here,  fitting  in  the  famous 
wooden  chair,  which  Edward  I.  tranfportcd  to 
JVeJiminJler-Abhyy  much  to  the  mortification  of  the 
Scots,  who  efteemed  it  as  their  palladium.  Charles 
II.  before  the  battle  of  IVorceJier,  was  crowned  in 
the  prefent  chapel.  The  old  Pretender  refided  at 
Sco?n  for  a  confiderable  time  in  17 15,  and  his  foa 
made  it  a  vifit  in  1745. 

Re- palled  the  Tay  at  Bii'im's  Boat ;  vifited  the 

field 


INSCOTLAND.  7f 

Held  of  Loncart)\  celebrated  for  the  great  viflory  *  l^^^^rtj, 
obtained  by  the  Scots  over  the  Danes,  by  means  of 
the  gallant  peafant  Hay  and  his  two  fons,  who,  with 
noother  weapons  than  the  yokes  which  they  fnatched 
from  their  oxen  then  at  plough,  firft  put  a  flop  to 
the  flight  of  their  countrymen,  and  afterwards  led 
them  on  to  conqueft.  The  noble  family  of  Hay 
are  defcended  from  this  ruftic  hero,  and  in  memory 
of  the  aftion,  bear  for  their  arms  the  inftrument 
of  their  victory,  with  the  allufive  motto  of  Subjugo, 
There  are  on  the  fpot  feveral  tumuli,  in  which  are 
frequently  found  bones  depofited  in  loofe  ftones, 
difpofed  in  form  of  a  coffin.  Not  remote  is  a  fpot 
which  fupplied  me  with  far  more  agreeable  ideas  j  a 
traft  of  ground,  which  in  1732  was  a  meer  bog, 
but  now  converted  into  good  mieadows,  and  about 
fifty  acres  covered  with  linnen ;  feveral  other  parts 
with  buildings,  and  all  the  apparatus  of  the  linnen 
manufacture,  extremelv  curious  and  worth  feeinof, 
carried  on  by  the  induftrious  family  of  the  Sandi- 
tnans,  who  annually  make  four  hundred  thoufand 
yards  of  linnen. 

The  country  is  good,  full  of  barley,  oats,  and 
flax  in  abundance  i  but  afcer  a  few  miles  travcllincr 
is  fucceeded  by  a  black  heath :  ride  through  a  beau- 
tiful plantation  of  pines,  and  after  defcending  an 
eafy  flope  the  plain  beneath  fuddenly  contrafts  it- 
felf  into  a  narrow  glen  :  the  profpedt  before  me 
ftrongly  marked  the  entrance  into  the  Highlands^ 
the  hills  that  bounded  it  on  each  fide  being  lofty 
and  rude.     On  the  left  was  Birna-m  Wood,  which   Biman 

*  Jn  the  time  of  Kennttli,  who  began  his  reign  In  976.  Wood, 

feems 


yt  -t:i^^  .       A      TOUR 

feems  never  to  have  recovered  the  march  its  an*] 
Vunfmam,    ceftors  made-  to  Bunfmane  :   1  was  fliewn  at  a  great^ 
diftance  a  high  ridge  of  hills,  where  Ibmc  remains 
of  that  famous  fortreis  {Macbeth^  caftle)  are  faid| 
yet  to  cxifl. 

The  pafs  into  the  Highlands  is  awefully  magnifi-'' 
cent ;  high,  craggy,  and  often  naked  mountains 
prefenr  thcmfelvcs  to  view,  approach  very  near 
rach  other,  and  in  many  parts  are  fringed  with 
v/ood,  overhanging  and  darkening  the  Tay,  that 
rolls  with  great  rapidity  beneath.  After  fome  ad- 
vance in  this  hollov/,  a  moft  beautiful  knowl,  co- 
vered v/ith  pines,  appears  full  in  view ;  and  foon 
DunkeU.  after,  the  town  of  Diinkeld,  feated  under  and  en- 
vironed by  crags,  partly  naked,  partly  wooded, 
with  fummits  of  a  vaft  height.  Lay  at  hver,  a 
good  inn,  on  the  weft  fide  of  the  river. 
July  28.  Crofted  it  in  a  boat,  attended  by  a  tame  fwan, 
which  was  perpetually  folliciting  our  favors  by  put- 
ting its  neck  over  the  fides  of  the  ferry-boat.  Land 
in  the  Duke  of  Jthol's  gardens,  which  are  extremely 
pleafing,  waflied  by  the  river,  and  commanding 
from  different  parts  of  the  walks  the  moft  beautiful 
and  pifturefque  views  of  wild  and  gloomy  nature 
that  can  be  conceived.  Trees  of  all  kinds  grow 
here  extremely  well  i  and  even  fo  fouthern  a  (hrub 
as  Portugal  laurel  flourilhes  greatly.  In  the  gardens 
are  the  ruins  of  the  cathedral,  once  a  magnificent 
aedifice,  as  appears  by  the  beautiful  "round  pillars 
ftill  ftanding;  but  the  choir  is  preferved,  and  at 
prefent  ufed  as  a  church.  In  the  burial-place  of 
the  family  is  a  large  monument  of  the  Marquis  o{ 


fd  A      T    O    U    R 

furnifhcd  •,  but  the  owners  civil,  fcnfible,  and  of 
che  quickeft  apprehenfions. 

The  ftrait  now  widens  into  a  vale  plentiful  in 
oats,  barley  and  flax,  and  well  peopled  :  on  the 
right  is  the  junftion  of  the  I'ay  and  the  Tumcl : 
the  channels  of  thefe  rivers  are  wide,  full  of 
gravel,  the  mark  of  their  devaftation  during  floods. 
Due  north  is  the  road  to  Blair  and  Fcrt  Jugufius, 
through  the  noted  pafs  of  Kiliicrajtkie  ;  turn  to  the 
left  J  ride  oppofite  to  Cajlle  Menzies :  reach  Tay- 
mouth,  the  feat  of  the  Earl  of  Breadalbane. 
JuLY29,&c.  'Taymouth  *  lies  in  a  vale  fcarce  a  mile  broad, 
Tajmouth^  Very  fertile,  bounded  on  each  fide  by  high  moun- 
tains finely  planted.  Thofe  on  the  fouth  are  co- 
vered with  trees,  or  with  corn  fields,  far  up  their 
fides.  The  hills  on  the  north  are  planted  with 
pines  and  other  trees,  and  vaftly  fticp,  and  have  a 
very  alpine  look  -,  but  particularly  refemble  the 
great  flope  oppofite  tiie  grande  Chartreufe  in  Dau- 
phi7ii.  His  Lordlhip's  policy  -j-  furrounds  the 
houfe,  which  ftands  in  the  park,  and  is  one  of  the 
few  in  which  fallow  deer  are  feen. 

The  ground  is  in  remarkable  fine  order,  owing 
to  his  Lordlliip's  affiduity  in  clearing  it  from  ftones, 
with  which  it  was  once  covered.  A  Blajler  was  in 
conftant  employ  to  blall  the  great  ftones  with  gun- 
powder ;  for,  by  reafon  of  their  fize,  there  was  no 
other  method  of  removing  them, 
walkfi.        "Yhc  Bet'ceaH  walk  is  very  magnificent,  compofed 

*  Its  name,  ia  old  maps,  h  Balloch  ;  i.  c.  the  mouth  of  the 
loch. 

f  This  word  here  fignifies  improvementJ,  or  demefne  : 
when  ufed  by  a  merchant,  or  tradefman,  fignifies  their  ware- 
hom'cs,  ftjop:;,  and  the  like, 

•f 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  Bi 

of  great  trees,  forming  a  fine  gothic  arch  -,  and  pro- 
bably that  fpecies  of  architecture  owed  its  origin  to 
fuch  vaulted  fhades.  The  walk  on  the  bank  of  the 
Tay  is  fifty  feet  wide,  and  two  and  twenty  hundred 
yards  long ;  but  is  to  be  continued  as  far  as  the 
junction  of  the  'Tay  and  the  IJon^  which  is  about 
as  far  more.  The  firft  runs  on  the  fides  of  the 
walk  with  great  rapidity,  is  clear,  but  not  color* 
lefs,  for  its  peliucidnefs  is  like  that  of  brown 
cryftal;  as  is  the  cafe  with  moft  of  the  rivers  of 
Scotland^  which  receive  their  tinge  from  the  bogs. 
The  Tay  has  here  a  wooden  bridge  two  hundred 
feet  long,  leading  to  a  white  feat  on  the  fide  of  the 
oppofite  hill,  commanding  a  fine  view  up  and  dov/n 
Straith  Tay.  The  rich  meadows  beneath,  the  wind- 
ing of  the  river,  the  beginning  of  Lough-Tay,  the 
difcharge  of  the  river  out  of  it,  the  neat  village  and 
church  01  Kenmor,  form  a  moll:  pleafmg  and  mag- 
nificent profpedft. 

The  view  from  the  temple  of  Fenus  is  that  of  the  Lough-Taj. 
lake,  with  a  nearer  fight  of  the  church  and  village, 
and  the  difcharge  of  the  river.  The  lake  is  about 
a  mile  broad,  and  about  fifteen  long,  bounded  on 
each  fide  by  lofty  mountains  ;  makes  three  great 
bends,  which  adds  to  its  beauty.  Thole  on  the  fouth 
are  well  planted,  and  finely  cultivated  high  up  ; 
interfperfed  with  the  habitations  of  the  Highlanders^ 
not  fingly,  but  in  fmall  groupes,  as  if  they  loved 
fociety  or  clanihip  :  they  are  very  Imall,  mean,  and 
without  windows  or  chimnics,  and  are  the  difgracc 
of  North  Britahu  as  its  lakes  and  rivers  are  its' 
glory.     Lough-Tay  is,  in  many  places,  a  hundred 

G  fathoms 


ti  A      T    O    U    R 

fathoms  deep,  and  within  as  many  yards  of  the 
(hore,  fifty-four. 

Till  the  prefent  year,  this  lake  was  fuppofed  to 
be  as  incapable  of  freezing  as  Lough- Nefs,  Lough- 
Earn,  and  Lough-Each  ;  tho'  Lough- Ray nac^  and 
even  Lough-Fine,  an  arm  of  the  fca,  often  does. 
But  in  March  1771,  fo  rigorous  and  uncommon 
was  the  cold,  that  about  the  20th  of  that  month 
this  vaft  body  of  water  was  frozen  over,  in  one 
part,  from  fide  to  fide,  in  the  fpace  of  a  fingle 
night ;  and  fo  ftrong  was  the  ice,  as  greatly  to 
damage  a  boat  which  was  caught  in  it. 

Lough-Tay  abounds  with  Pike,  Perch,  Eels,  Sal- 
mon and  Trout  -,  of  the  lafl:,  fome  have  been  taken 
that  weighed  above  thirty  pounds.  Of  thefe  fpe- 
cics,  the  Highlanders  abhor  Eels,  and  alio  Lam- 
pries,  fancying,  from  the  form,  that  they  are  too 
nearly  related  to  Serpents  *. 

The  north  fide  is  lefs  wooded,  but  more  culti- 
vated. The  vail  hill  of  Laursy  with  beds  of  fnow 
on  it,  through  great  part  of  the  year,  rifes  above 
the  reft,  and  the  flill  loftier  mountain  of  Benmor 
clofes  the  view  far  beyond  the  end  of  the  lake. 
All  this  country  abounds  with  game,  fuch  as  Grous, 
Ptarmigans  -f-,  Stags,  and  a  peculiar  fpecies  of 
White  Hare.  Hare,  which  is  found  only  on  the  fummits  of  the 
higheft  hills,  and  never  mixes  with  the  common 
kind,  which   is  frequent  enough  in  the  vales  J. 

•  I  was  informed,  that  at  the  head  of  the  lake  are  the  re- 
mains of  an  old  caftlc,  called  Finlarif^,  belonging  to  Lord 
Breadalhane,  and  of  a  park  finely  wooded  with  old  oaks, 
chefnuts,  and  other  timber. 

f   Br.  7ct^.  illujir.  21.  tab.  xiii, 

\  The  fame,  />.  4c.  tab.  xlvii. 
2  This 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  %^ 

This  fpecies  is  grey  in  fummer,  white  in  winter  ;  is 
fmaller  than  the  brown  Hare,  and  more  delicate 
meat. 

The  Ptarmigans  inhabit  the  very  fummits  of  the  Ptamigans, 
higheft   mountains,    amidfl   the   rocks,  perching 
among  the  grey  ftones,  and  during  fummer  are 
fcarce  to  be  diftinguilhed  from  them,  by  reafon  of 
their  color.     They  feldom  take   long  flights,  but 
fly  about  like  pigeons ;  are  filly  birds,  and  fo  tame 
as  to  fufFer  a  Hone  to  be  flung  at  them  without 
rifing.     It  is  not  necefl!ary  to  have  a  dog  to  find 
them.     They  tafte  fo  like  a  Grous,  as  to  be  fcarce 
diftinguilhable.  During  winter,  their  plumage,  ex- 
cept a  few  feathers  in  the  tail,  are  of  a  pure  white, 
the  color  of  the  fnow,  in  which  they  bury  them- 
felves  in  heaps,  as  a  protedion  from  the  rigorous 
air. 
^      Royfton  Crows,  called  here  Hooded  Crows,  and  Birds* 
in  the  Erfe^  Feanagh,  are  very  common,  and  refide 
here  the  whole  year.     They  breed  in  the  hills,  in 
all  forts  of  trees  j  lay  fix  eggs ;  have  a  fhriller  note 
than  the  common  fort  j  are  much  m.ore  mifchievous; 
pick  out  the  eyes  of  lambs,  and  even  of  horfes, 
when  engaged  in  bogs ;  but,  for  want  of  other 
food,  will   eat  cranberries,   and  other   mountain 
berries. 

Ring  Ouzels  breed  among  the  hills,  and  in  au- 
tumn defcend  in  flocks  to  feed  on  the  berries  of  the 
wicken  trees. 

Sea  Eagles  breed  in  ruined  towers,  but  quit  the 
country  in  winter  j  the  black  Eagles  continue  there 
the  whole  year. 

G  2  U 


84  A      T    O    U    R 

It  is  very  difiiculc  to  leave  the  environs  of  this 
delightful  place  :  before  I  go  within  doors,  I 
niuft  recall  to  mind  the  fine  winding  walks  on  the 
fouth  fide  of  the  hills,  the  great  beech  fixteen  feet 
in  girth,  the  pidiirefque  birch  with  its  long  ftreani- 
ing  branches,  the  hermitage,  the  great  cataradls 
adjacent,  and  the  darkfome  chafm  beneath.  I 
muft  enjoy  over  again  the  view  of  the  fine  reach  of 
the  T>v,  and  its  union  with  the  broad  water  of  the 
Lion:  1  muft  ftep down  to  view  the  druidical  circles 
of  ftunes,  cjUed  in  the  Erfe,  'Tibherd;  and  hilly,  I 
Tly  hidge.  muft  vifit  '^'cy- bridge^  and,  as  far  as  my  pen  can 
contribute,  extend  the  fame  of  our  military  coun- 
trymen, who,  among  other  works  worthy  of  the 
Romans^  founded  this  bridge,  and  left  its  hiftory 
infcribed  in  thefe  terms : 

Mirare 

viam  hanc  miljtarem 

Ultra  Romanos  terininos 

M.  Pafilium.  ccL  hac  iliac 

extenfam  -, 

Tefquis    ct  paludibus    infultantem 

per  Montes  rupefque  patefadam 

et  indignanri  Tavo 

ut  cernis  inicratam. 

Opus  hoc  arduLuii  fua  folertii, 

Et  decennali  militum  opera, 

A.  Mr.  X"*  1733.  Pofuit  G.  Wade 

Copiarum  in  Scotia  Prxfot^us. 

Euce  quantum  valeant 

Regis  Georgii  II.  Aufpicia. 

'J'aymouth 


"WMl 


IN    SCOTLAND. 

^aymoitth  is  a  large  houfe,  a  caftle  modernized. 
The  moll  remarkable  part  of  its  furniture  is  the 
works  of  the  famous  Jamefon  *,  the  Scotch  Vandyh^  Jamefcn. 
an  eleve  of  this  family.  That  fingular  performance 
of  his,  the  genealogical  pidure,  is  in  good  pre- 
fervation.  Sir  Dunfau  Campbell,  Laird  of  Lochlou^ 
is  placed  recumbent  at  the  foot  of  a  trtc,  wirh  a 
branch  ;  on  the  right  is  a  fmgle  head  of  his  eldefl: 
fon,  the  chief  of  the  Argyk  family  j  but  on  the 
various  ramifications,  are  the  names  of  his  defcen- 
dents,  and  along  the  body  of  the  tree  are  nine 
fmall  heads,  in  oval  frames,  with  the  names  on  the 
margins,  all  done  with  great  neatnefs  :  the  fecnnd 
fon  was  fit  ft  of  the  houfe  of  Breadalbane,  vv'^ich 
branched  from  the  other  about  four  hundred  years 
ago.  In  a  corner  is  infcribed,  The  Geneologie  of  the 
houfe  of  Glenorquhie  ^hairof  is  defcendit  fundris 
nohil  i3  worthie  houfes.  ]zme(on  fa ciebat.  1635. 
Its  fize  is  eight  feet  by  five.  In  the  fame  room  are 
about  twenty  heads  of  perfons  of  the  family  ;  among 
others,  that  of  a  lady,  fo  very  ugly,  that  a  wag,  on 
feeing  it,  with  lifted  hands  pronounced,  that  fhe 
v/zs  fearfully  and  'U}onde}fully  made.  There  are  in 
the  fame  houfe  feveral  heads  by  Jamrfon ;  but  many 
of  them  unfortunately  fpoiled  in  the  mending. 

In  the  library  is  a  fmail  book,  called,  from  the 
binding,  the  black  bock,  with  fome  beautiful  draw- 
ings in  it,  on  vellum,  oi  iht  Breadalbane  family,  in 

*  Sen  of  an  architeft  at  Aberdeen  ;  ftudied  under  RuheiHy 
at  Ant'iverp.  Charles  I.  fat  to  him,  and  prefented  him  with  a 
diamond  ring.  He  always  drew  himfelf  with  his  h;;t  on. 
His  prices  were  20I.  Scots,  or  il.  13s.  4d.  Englijh,  per  head  ; 
was  born  in  1586  ;  died  at  Edinburgh,  1644.  Por  a  further 
account,  confult  Mr.  Wulpole^%  Anecdotes  of  Painting. 

G  3  water- 


tS  A      T    O    U    R 

water-colors.  In  the  firft  page  is  old  Sir  Duncan^ 
between  two  other  figures  •,  then  follow  Teveral 
chiefs  of  the  family,  among  whom  is  Sir  Coli», 
Knight  of  Rhodes,  who  died  1480,  aged  80.  At 
the  end  is  a  manufcript  hiftory  of  the  family,  end- 
ing, I  think,  in  1633. 
JuLV  50,  Went  to  divine  fervice  at  Kinmore  *  church, 
which,  with  the  viljage,  was  re-built,  in  the  neateft 
manner,  by  the  prefent  Lord  Breadalbane :  they 
fland  beautifully  on  a  fmall  headland,  projefling 
into  the  lake.  His  Lordfhip  permits  the  inhabi- 
tants to  live  rent-free,  on  condition  they  exercifc 
fome  trade,  and  keep  their  houfes  clean  :  fo  that, 
by  thef^  terms,  he  not  only  faves  the  expence  of 
fending^  on  every  trifling  occafion,  to  Perth  or 
Crief,  but  has  got  fome  as  good  workmen,  in  com- 
mon trades,  as  any  in  his  Majefty's  dominions. 

The  church  is  a  remarkably  neat  plain  building, 

with  a  very  handfome  tower  fteeple  :  the  congre- 

N  gation   wa^  numerous,    decent,    attentive,   flill  ; 

well  and  neatly  clad,  and  not  a  ragged  or  flovenly 

perfon  among  them.     There  were   two  fervices, 

one  in  EfJgUfi-,  the  other  in  Erfe.     After  the  firft, 

numbers  of  people,  of  both  fcxes,  went   out  of 

church,  and  feating  themfclves  in  the  church-yard, 

made,  in  their  motly  habits,  a  gay  and  piflurefque 

Highlandcon.  appearance.  The  devotion  of  the  common  people 

grc^ation.        q^-  ^cctlandy  on  the  ufual  days  of  worfhip,  is   fis 

much  to  be  admired,  as  their  condud  at  the  fa- 

cralicnt  in  certain  places  is  to  be  cenfured.     It 

•  Or  the  Great  Head. 

is 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  87 

is  celebrated  but  once  In  a  year  *  5  when  there  are 
fometimt-s  three  thoufand  communicants,  and 
as  many  idle  fpeflators.  Of  the  firib,  as  many  as 
poflible  crowd  each  fide  of  a  long  table,  and  the 
elements  are  rudely  ihoven  from  one  to  another  ; 
and  in  fome  places,  before  the  day  is  at  an  end, 
fighting  and  other  indecencies  enfue.  It  is  often 
made  a  feafon  for  debauchery  j  fo,  to  this  day. 
Jack  cannot  be  perfuaded  to  eat  his  meat  like  a 
chriftian  -f . 

Every  Sunday  a  colle<5lion  is  made  for  the  fick  or 
necelTitous  j  for  poor's  rates  are  unknown  in  every 
country  parifh  in  Scotlafid.  Notwithftanding  the 
common  people  are  but  juft  rouzed  from  their  na- 
tive indolence,  very  few  beggars  are  feen  in  North 
Britain :  either  they  are  full  mafters  of  the  leflbn 
of  being  content  with  a  very  little  •,  or,  what  is  more 
probable,  they  are  poflefTcd  of  a  fpirit  that  will 
ftruggle  hard  with  neceflity  before  it  will  bend  to 
the  afking  of  alms. 

Vifited  a  pretty  little  ifland  in  Loch-^ay  tufted 
with  trees,  and  not  far  from  the  fhore  :  on  it  are  the 
ruins  of  a  priory  dependent  on  that  at  Scone  \  found- 
ed in  1 122,  by  Alexander  the  Firft,  in  which  were 
depofited  the  remains  of  his  Queen  Syhilla-,  natural 
daughter  to  Henry  I.  it  was  founded  by  Alexander 
in  order  for  the  prayers  of  the  Monks  for  the  re- 
pofe  of  his  foul,  and  that  of  his  royal  confort  J. 

•  Formerly  the  facrament  was  adminiflered  but  once  in 
two  years. 

+  Tale  of  a  Tub. 

X  As  appears  from  a  grant  made  by  that  Monarch  of  the 
ifle  in  Loch-Tay,  Ut  Ecclejta  Dei  ibi  pro  me  et  [ro  /fnima 
^YBILL^  Regin^  ibi  defunct  a  fabricetur^  &C. 

G  4  '  To 


^S  A      T    O    U    R 

To  this  ifland  the  Campbells  retreated,  during  the 
fucceiffs  of  the  Marquifs  of  Montrofe^  where  they 
defended  themftlves  againft  that  hero,  which  was 
'one  caule  oi  his  violent  refentment  againft  the 
vi-hoie  name. 

July  3J.  Roue  to  Glen-lion  ;  went  by  the  fide  of  the  river* 
that  ^ivcs  name  to  it.  It  has  now  loft  its  antient 
title  of  DuiCy  or  Blacky  given  it  on  account  of  a 
great  battle  between  the  Mackays  and  the  Mac- 
grcgGYs  \  atter  which,  the  conquerors  are  faid  to 
have  ftaincd  the  water  with  red,  by  wafliing  in  it 
their  bloody  fwords  and  fpears.  On  the  right  is  a 
rocky  hill,  called  Shi-hallen,  or  the  Paps.  Enter 
Ckn-lion  through  a  ftrnit  pafs :  the  vale  is  narrow, 
but  fertile  ;  the  banks  of  the  river  fteep,  rocky,  and 
wooded  ;  through  which  appear  the  rapid  water  of 
the  JJon.  On  the  north  is  a  round  fortrefs,  on  the 
top  of  the  hill ;  to  which,  in  eld  times,  the  natives 
retreated,  on  any  invafion.  A  little  farther,  on  a 
plain,  is  a  fmall  Roman  campf,  called  by  the  High- 
landers Fortingal^  or  the  Fort  of  the  Strangers : 
themfelves  they  ftyle  Na-fian,  or  defcendents  of 
FingaL     In  Fortingal  church  are  tlie  remains  of  a 

Great  yew.  prodigious  yew-tree,  whofe  ruins  meafyred  fifty-fix 
feet  and  a  half  in  circumference. 

Saw  at  the  houfe  of  Col.  Camphell  of  Glen-lion, 
a  curious  walking-ftaff,  belonging  to  one  of  his 
anceftois  :  it  was  iron  cafed  in  leather,  five  feet 

•  Tills  river  freezes ;  but  the  Tay,  which  receives  it, 
never  does. 

t  It  poflibly  might  have  been  made  during  the  expedition 
of  Scverus,  who  peneirattd  to  the  extremity  of  this  ifland  : 
it  was  the  moil  northern  work  of  the  Rcmnns  I  had  any  intel- 
ii^tncc  of. 

Ions;  5 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  ^Si 

long ;  at  the  top  a  neat  pair  of  extended  wings, 
like  a  caduceus-,  but,  on  being  fhook,  a  poniard, 
two  feet  nine  inches  long,  darted  out. 

He  alfo  favored  me  with  the  fight  of  a  very 
antient  brotche,  which  the  Highlanders  ufe,  like 
x\\Q  fibula  of  the  Remans-,  to  faften  their  vefl :  it  is 
madeof  filver,  is  round,  v^ith  a  bar  crofs  the  mid- 
dle, from  whence  are  two  tongues  to  faften  the 
folds  of  the  garments  :  one  fide  is  ftudded  with 
pearl,  or  coarfe  gems,  in  a  very  rude  manner;  on 
the  other,  the  names  of  the  three  kings  of  Cologne^ 
Caspar,  Melchior,  Baltazar  •,  with  the  word 
conftmfnatim.  It  was  probably  a  confecrated 
brotche,  and  worn  not  only  for  ufe,  but  as  an 
amulet. 

Return  fouth,  and  come  at  once  in  fight  of 
Loch-Tay.  The  day  being  very  fine  and  calm, 
the  whole  fcenev/as  moft  beautifully  repeated  in  the 
water.  I  muft  not  omit  that  on  the  north  fide  of  - 
this  lake  is  a  moft  excellent  road,  which  runs  the 
whole  length  of  it,  leading  to  I'eindrum  and  Inve- 
raray, in  Argyleflnre,  and  is  the  route  which  tra- 
vellers muft  take,  who  make  what  I  call  the  pel:: 
tour  *  of  Scotland.  This  whole  road  was  made  at  the 
fole  expence  of  the  prefent  Lord  Breadalbam;  who, 
to  facilitate  the  travelling,  alfo  ereded  thirty-two 
ftone-bridges  over  the  torrents  that  rulh  from  the 

*  Which  comprehends  the  route  I  have  defcribed  ;  adding 
to  it,  from  Ta^mouth,  along  the  road,  on  the  fide  of  the  lake, 
to  Killin,  I  6  miles;  from  thence  to  Teindrum,  20  j  Gienorchie, 
12  ;  Innjeraray,  16  ;  Luis,  on  the  banks  of  Loch-lomond,  30; 
Dunharton,  1 2  ;  Gla/goiv,  1  5  ;  Sterling,  3 1  ;  Edlnkurgh,  by 
Hopetoun-Hoafe,  35;  a  traft  unparalleled,  for  the  variety, 
and  frequency  of  fine  and  magnificent  fcenery. 

mountains 


A      T    O    U    R 

mountains  into  the  lake.    They  will  find  the  whole 
Roads,    country  excell  in  roads,  partly  military,  partly  done 
by  ftatute  labor,  and  much  by  the  munificence  of 
the  great  men. 

I  was  informed,  that  Lord  Breadalbane^^  eftate 
was  fo  extenfive  that  he  could  ride  a  hundred  miles 
an  end  on  it,  even  as  far  as  the  Well  Sea,  where  he 
has  alfo  fome  iflands.     Thefe  great  properties  are 
divided  into  diftri6ls,  C2\\td  Officiaries :  a  ground 
officer  preiides  over  each,  and  has  three,  four,  or 
five  hundred  men  under  his  care  :  he  fuperintends 
the  duties  due  from  each  to  their  Lord,  fuch  as 
fetching  peat,  bringing  coal  from  Perlh,  &c.  which 
they  do,  at  their  own  expence,  on  horfes  backs, 
travelling  in  firings,  the  tail   of  one  horfe  being 
fafiened  by  a  cord,  which  reaches  to  the  head  of 
the  next :  the  horfes  are  little,  and  generally  white 
or  grey  ;  and  as  the  farms  are  very  fmall,  it  is  com- 
mon for  four  people  to  keep  a  plough   between 
them,  each  furnifhing  a  horfe,  and  this  is  called  a 
horfc  gang. 

The  north  fide  of  Loch-Tny  is  very  populous; 
for  in  fixteen  fquare  miles  are  feyenteen-  hundred 
and  eighty-fix  fouls:  on  the  other  fide,  about  twelve 
hundred.  The  country,  within  thefe  thirty  years, 
is  grown  very  induftrious,  and  manufactures  a  great 
deal  of  thread.  They  fpin  with  rocks  *,  which 
they  do  while  they  attend  their  cattle  on  the  hills ; 
and,  at  the  three  or  four  fairs  in  the  year,  held  at 
^aymciith^  about  fixteen  hundred  pounds  worth  of 
yarn  is  fold  out  of  Breadalbane  only. 

•  Their  Lord  gives  among  them  annually  a  great  noniber 
of  fpinning- wheels. 

Much 


I 


INSCOTLAND.  ^ 

Much  of  this  may  be  owing  to  the  good  fertCc 
and  humanity  of  the  chieftain  ;  but  much  again  is 
owing  to  the  abolition  of  the  feudal  tenures,  or 
vaiTalage  ;  for  before  that  was  effircled  (which  was 
done  by  the  influence  of  a  Chancellor  *,  whofe 
memory  Scotland  gratefully  adores  for  that  fervice) 
the  Strong  opprefTed  the  Weak,  the  Rich  the  Poor. 
Courts  indeed  were  held,  and  juries  called  ;  but 
juries  of  vafTals,  too  dependent  and  too  timid  to 
be  relied  on  for  the  execution  of  true  jullice. 

Leave  Taymouth-^  ford  the  Lien,  and  ride  above   Aug.  i, 
it  thro'  fome  woods :  on  the  left  burfts  out  a  fine 
cafcade,  in  a  deep  hollow,  covered  with  trees :  at 
a  fmall  diftance  to  the  weft  is  Cajile-Gartby  a  fmaii 
caftle  feated  like  caftle  Campbell^  between  two  deep 
glens  :  keep  afcending  a  fteep  hill,  but  the  corn 
country   continues  for   a  while  :    the   fcene   then 
changes  for  a  wild,  black,  and  mountainous  heath : 
defcend  into  Rayndcb,  a  meadowy  plain,  tolerably   Rayiach^ 
fertile  :   the  lake  of  the  fame  name  extends  from 
Eaft  to  Wefti  is  about  eleven  miles  long,  and  one 
broad:  the  Northern  banks  appeared  very  barren; 
part  of  the  Southern  finely  covered  with  a  foreft  of 
pine  and  birch,  the  firft  natural  woods  I  had  leen  of  Pine  Forcit. 
pines  :  rode  a  good  way  into  it,  but  obferved  no 
trees  of  any  fize,  except  a  birch  fixteen  feet  in  cir- 
cumference :   the  ground  beneath  the  trees  is  co- 
vered with   heath,  biiberies,   and  dwarf  arbutus, 
•whofe  glofiy  leaves  make  a  pretty  appearance  :  this 
place  gives  fhelter  to  black  game,  and  is  at  prefent 

*  Earl  of  HardTvick,  who  may  br  truly  faid  to  have  given 
to  the  North  Britons  their  great  charier  of  liberty. 

the 


92  A      TOUR 

tlie  farthefl  Southern  rclort  of  roes,  for  very  f^w 
ever  ftraggle  lower  down :  near  thefe  woods  is  a  faw- 
mill,  which  brings  in  about  i  Sol.  per  amj.  the  deal, 
which  is  the  red  fort,  is  fold  in  plank  to  difTerent 
parts  of  the  country,  carried  on  horfes  backs,  for 
the  trees  are  now  grown  fo  Icarce  as  not  to  admit  of 
exportation  *. 

The  lake  affords  no  other  fidi  than  trouts,  and 
bull  trouts ;  the  laft,  as  I  was  informed,  are  fome- 
times  taken  of  the  length  of  four  feet  and  a  half: 
many  water  fowl  breed  in  the  birns  or  little  dreams 
that  trickle  into  the  lake  •,  among  others  different 
fort  of  grebes,  and  divers  :  I  was  told  of  one  which 
the  inhabitants  call  T'uruvacbal,  that  makes  a  great 
noife  before  ftorms,  and  by  their  defcription  feems 
to  be  the  Finder  of  Gcfnsr. 
The  Poet  This  country  was  once  the  property  o^  Robert  [on  ^ 
Strusn.  q£  siyif^^^  y/YiQ  J5ad  been  in  the  rebellion  of  17 15  ; 
had  his  eftate  relfored,  but  in  1745  rebelling  a  fe- 
cond  time,  the  country  was  burnt,  and  the  eflate 
annexed  to  the  crown  :  he  returned  a  few  years  af- 
ter, and  died  as  he  lived,  a  moft  abandoned  fot  ; 
notwithflanding  which  he  had  a  genius  for  poetry, 
and  left  behind  him  a  volume  of  elegies,  and 
other  pieces,  in  fome  of^which  he  elegantly  laments 
the  ravages  of  war  among  his  vafials,  and  the  lofs 
of  his  favorite  fcenes,  and  in  particular  his  foun- 
tain Argentine. 

The  country  is  perfetStly  highland;  and  in  fpitc  of 
the  intercourfe  this  and  the  neighboring  parts  hav^ 
of  late  years  had  with  the  rcil  of  the  world,   it  Hill 
•  Some  Pot-A(h  is  alio  made  of  the  Birch  Wood. 

retains 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  93 

retains  fome  of  its  antient  cuftoms  and  fiiperfl:!-  SupcrlliuoBS. 
tions  ;  they  decline  dail)',  but  lead  their  memory 
flioiild  be  loil,  I  fliall  mention  feveral  that  are  (till 
praftifed,  or  but  very  lately  difufed  in  the  trad  I 
had  pafled  over.  Such  a  record  will  have  this 
advantage  when  the  follies  are  quite  extinft,  in 
teaching  the  unfhackled  and  enlightened  mind  the 
difference  between  the  pure  ceremonies  of  religion, 
and  the  wild  and  anile  flights  of  fuperflition. 

The  belief  in  fpeftres  Hill  exills  ;  of  which  I  Spe£lrcs, 
had  a  remarkable  proof  while  I  was  in  the  county 
of  Breadalbane :  a  poor  yifionary,  who  had  been 
working  in  his  cabbage-garden,  imagined  that  he  t 
was  railed  fuddenly-into  the  air,  and  conveyed  over 
a  wall  into  an  adjacent  corn-field  * ;  that  he  found 
himfelf  furrounded  by  a  crowd  of  men  and  women, 
many  of  whom  he  knew  to  have  been  dead  fome 
years,  and  who  appeared  to  him  fkimmlng  over  the 
tops  of  the  unbended  corn,  and  mingling  together 
like  bees  going  to  hive :  that  they  fpoke  an  unknown 
language  and  vv'ith  r.  hollow  found :  that  they  very 
roughly  puflied  him  to  and  fro ;  but  on  his  utter- 
ing the  name  of  God,  all  vanifhed  but  a  female 
fprite,  who  feizing  him  by  the  fhoulder,  obliged 
himtopromifean  affignation,atthat  very  hour,  than 
day  fevenight:  that  he  then  found  that  his  hair  was 
all  tied  in  double  knots,  and  that  he  had  almoft  loft 
the  ufe  of  his  fpeech  :  that  he  kept  his  word  with 


•  Thefe  tales  of  fpe(flral  tranfportation  are  far  from  being 
new  ;  Mr.  Aubrey  in  his  mifcellanies,  p.  13.  gives  two  ridi- 
culous relations  of  almoft  fimiiar  fafts,  one  in  Dciionjhire,  the 
Other  in  the  fhire  of  Mnrrnv, 

4  t^e 


94  A     T    O    U    R 

the  fpetflrc,  whom  he  foon  faw  come  floating  thro' 
the  air  towards  him :  that  he  fpoke  to  her,  but  fiie 
told  him  at  that  time  fhe  was  in  too  much  haftc 
to  attend  to  him,  but  bid  him  go  away,  and  no 
harm  fliould  befall  him  i  and  fo  the  affair  refted 
when  I  left  the  country.  But  it  is  incredible  the 
m'lkh'ief  thck^'Egri  Somnir.  did  in  the  neighborhood: 
the  friends  and  relation  of  the  deceafed,  whom  the 
eld  Dreamer  had  named,  were  in  the  utmoft  anxiety 
at  finding  them  in  fuch  bad  company  in  the  other 
world  :  the  almoll  extind  belief  of  the  old  idle 
tales  began  again  to  gain  ground,  and  the  good 
minifter  will  have  many  a  weary  difcourfe  and  ex- 
liortation  before  he  can  eradicate  the  abfurd  ideas 
this  idle  ilory  has  revived. 

In  this  part  of  the  country  the  notion  of  witch- 
craft is  quite  loft  :  it  was  obfervcd  to  ceafe  almoft 
immediately  on  the  repeal  of  the  witch  adt  *  ;  a 
proof  what  a  dangerous  inftrument  it  was  in  the 
hands  of  the  vindidive,  or  of  the  credulous. 

Unluckyday.  Among  the  fuperftitious  cuftoms  thefe  are  the 
moll  fingular.  A  Highlander  never  begins  any 
thing  of  confequence  on  the  day  of  the  week  on 
which  the  3d  of  Mtiy  falls,  which  he  ftylcs  Lagb 
Sheachanna  Jia  hUanagh,  or  the  dilmal  day. 

Bel-teln.  On  the  I  ft  of  May,  the  herdfmen  of  every  vil- 

lage hold  their  Bel-tein  t,  a  rural  facrifice :  they  cut 
a  fquarc  trench  on  the  ground,  leaving  the  turf  in 
the  middle  -,  on  that  they  make  a  fire  of  wood,  on 

•  which  was  not  till  the  year  1736. 

f  My  account  of  this,  and  every  other  ceremony  mentioned 
in  this  Journal,  was  communicated  to  me  by  gentlemen  refx- 
deut  on  the  fpot  where  they  were  performed. 

which 


INSCOTLAND.  ^ 

which  they  drefs  a  large  caudle  of  eggs,  butter, 
oatmeal  and  milk  •,  and  bring,  befides  the  ingre- 
dients of  the  caudle,  plenty  of  beer  and  whifky  ; 
for  each  of  the  company  muft  contribute  fomething. 
The  rites  begin  with  fpilling  fome  of  the  caudle  on 
the  ground,  by  way  of  libation  :  on  that,  every  one 
takes  a  cake  of  oatmeal,  upon  which  are  raifed 
ninefquare  knobs,  each  dedicated  to  fpme  partiqular 
being,  the  fuppofed  preferver  of  their  flocks  and 
herds,  or  to  fome  particular  animal,  the  real  de- 
ftroyer  of  them  :  each  perfon  then  turns  his  face  to 
the  fire,  breaks  off  a  knob,  and  flinging  it  over  his 
fhoulders,  fays.  This  I  give  to  ibee,  pre/erve  thou 
my  horfes  •,  this  to  thee,  preferve  thou  my  Jheep  ;  and 
fo  on.  After  that,  they  ufe  the  fame  ceremony  to 
the  noxious  animals  :  This  I  give  to  thee,  O  Fox  ! 
fpare  thou  my  lambs  j  this  to  thee,  0  hooded  Cro'W  ! 
this  to  thee,  0  Eagle ! 

When  the  ceremony  is  over  they  dine  on  the 
caudle  •,  and  after  the  feaft  is  finilhcd,  what  is  left 
is  hid  by  two  perfons  deputed  for  that  purpofc  ', 
but  on  the  next  Sunday  they  re-aflTemble,  and  flnifh 

the  reliques  of  the  firft  entertainment  *. 

On 

*  A  cuftom,  favoring  of  the  Scouh  Bel-fein,  prevales  in 
Ghuctjierjhire,  particularly  about  JV^fw^w/  and  the  neighboring 
parifhes,  on  the  twelfth  day,  or  on  tVt Epiphany,  in  the  even- 
ing :  all  the  fervants  of  every  particular  farmer  afTemble  to- 
gether in  one  of  tne  relds  that  has  been  fown  with  wheat  ;  on 
the  border  of  which,  in  the  moll  confpicuous  or  moft  elevated 
place,  they  make  twelve  fires  of  ftraw,  in  a  row  ;  around  one 
of  which,  made  larger  tnan  the  reft,  they  drink  a  chearful 
glafs  of  cyder  to  their  mafter's  health,  fuccefs  to  the  future 
harvelt,  and  tlen  returniTig  home  they  feaft  on  cakes,  made 
of  carraways,  &c.  fcaked  in  cyder,  which  they  clame  as  a  re-- 
ward  for  their  pad  labars  ir.  fowing  the  grain.    Thii  feems  to 

rcfeaible 


96  A     T    O    U   R 

Funeral  Oil  the  death  of  a  Highlander,  the  corps  being 

flretched  on  a  board,  and  covered  with  a  coarlc 
linncn  wrapper,  the  friends  lay  on  the  bread  of  the 
deceafed  a  wooden  platter,  containing  a  fmall  quan- 
tity of  fait  and  earth,  feparate  and  unmixed ;  the 
earth,  an  emblem  of  the  corruptible  body  ;  the  fait, 
an  emblem  of  the  immortal  fpirit.  All  Hre  is  ex- 
tinguiflied  where  a  corps  is  kept;  and  it  is  reckoned 
fo  ominous,  for  a  dog  or  cat  to  pafs  over  it,  that 
the  poor  animal  is  killed  without  mercy. 

late-wake.  The  Late-'wake  is  a  ceremony  ufed  at  funerals: 

the  evening  after  the  death  of  any  perfon,  the  rela- 
tions and  friends  of  the  deceafed  meet  at  the  houfe, 
attended  by  bagpipe  or  fiddle ;  the  nearefl;  of  kin, 
be  it  wife,  fon,  or  daughter,  opens  a  melancholy 
ball,  dancing  and  greeting  ;  /.  e.  crying  violently  at 
the  fame  time  •,  and  this  continues  till  day-light ; 
but  with  fuch  gambols  and  frolicks,  among  the 
younger  part  of  the  company,  that  the  lofs  which 
occafioned  them  is  often  more  than  fupplied  by  the 
confequences  of  that  night  *.  If  the  corps  remains 
unburied  for  two  nights  the  fame  rites  are  renewed. 
Thus'y  Scytbian-Yikey  they  rejoice  at  the  deliverance 
of  their  friends  out  of  this  life  of  mifery. 

Coranich.  The  Coranichy  or  fmging  at  funerals,  is  flill  in 

rofcmble  a  cuflom  of  the  ssii'icnt  Danes,  wlio,  in  their  addrcfTes 
to  tlieir  rural  dc-itics,  emptied,  oti  every  invocation,  a  cup  ia 
honor  of  them.  Niordi  et  Frej/E  memoria poculis  rexolehatury 
annua  ut  ipjis  contingent  f elicit  as,  frugumque  et  reliqucc  annonec 
uberrimus  prouentus.     Worm.  Monum,  Dan,  lib.  i.  p.  28. 

*  This  cuftom  was  derived  from  their  jiorthern  ancellors, 
Longe  fecurius  tncritndum  cjje  arbitrantuVy  quam  I'iijcnduin  : 
puerperia  luiiu^  fanernque  yj/i'vo  canfu,  ut  in  plurimutn  come- 
hbrantcs.     Olaus  Magnus.   116. 

ufc 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  ^; 

ufc  in  fome  places :  the  fongs  are  generally  in  praife 
of  the  deceafed  -,  or  a  recital  of  the  valiant  deeds 
of  him,  or  anceftors.  I  had  not  the  fortune  to  be 
prefent  at  any  in  'North  Britairiy  but  formerly  af- 
fifted  at  one  in  the:  fouth  oi  Tr elands  where  it  was 
performed  in  the  fullnefs  of  horror.  The  cries  are 
called  by  the  Iriflj  the  ''Ulogohne  and  Hullulu,  two 
words  extremely  expreffive  of  the  found  uttered  on 
thefe  occafions,  and  being  oi  Celt  it  tlock,  Etymo- 
logifts  would  fwear  to  be  the  origin  of  the  Q?<Q/jjyccv 
of  the  Greeks,  and  Vlulatus  of  the  Latins.  Virgil 
is  very  fond  of  ufing  the  lafl:,  whenever  any  of  his 
females  are  diftrelTed ;  as  are  others  of  the  Roman 
Poets,  and  generally  on  occafions  fimilar  to  this. 

It  was  my  fortiine  to  arrive  at  a  certain  town  ia 
Kerry i  at  the  time  that  a  perfoh  of  ibme  drftindion 
departed  this  life  :  my  curiofiry  led  me  to  the  houfe,' 
^'here  the  funeral  feemed  conduced  in  the  purelt 
clafTical  form. 

^odcunque  afpicerem  lu5ius  gemitufq^ue  fonahant^ 
Formcque  non  taciti  funeris  intiis  erat. 
In  fliort,  the  ccnclamatio  was  fet  up  by  the  friends 
in  the  fame  manner  as  Virgil  dcfcribes  that  confe- 
quential  of  Dido's  death. 

Laraentis  gemituque  et  f^emineo  ululatu 

Te^la  fremunt. 
Immediately  after  this  followed  another  ceremony, 
fully  defcribed  by  Cambdcn^  in  his  account  of  the 
manners  of  the  ancient  Irijlo  ;  the  earneft  expoftu- 
lations  and  reproaches  given  to  the  deceafed,  for 
quitting  this  world,  where  fhe  enjoyed  fo  many 
blelTings,  fo  good  a  hufband,  fuch  fine  children. 

H  This 


9$  A     T    O    U    R 

This  cuftom  is  alfo  of  great  antiquity,  for  Eurya- 
ius's  mother  makes  the  fame  pathetic  addrcfs  t© 
her  dead  fon. 

Tune  ilia  feneS^ 
Sera  mca:  rcquies  ?  potuijii  relinquere  folam 
Crudelis  ? 
But  when  the  time  approached  for  carrying  out  the 
corps  the  cry  was  redoubled. 

Tremuiis  ululatibus  athera  complent. 
A  numerous  band  of  females  waiting  in  the  outer 
court,  to  attend  the  herfe,  and  to  pay  (in  chorus) 
the  laft  tribute  of  their  voices.  The  habit  of  this 
forrowing  train,  and  the  negle6t  of  their  perfons, 
were  admirably  fuited  to  the  occafion  :  their  robes 
were  black,  and  flowing,  refembling  the  antient 
Valla  j  their  feet  naked,  their  hair  long,  and  diihe- 
veled  :  I  might  truely  fay, 

Vidi  egomet  nigra  fuccinEiam  vadere  palla  "" 

Canidiam  ;  pcdibus  nudis,  pajjcque  capillo 
Cum  Sagana  majore  ululantem. 
Among  thefe  mourners  were  difperfed  the  females, 
who  fung  the  praifes  of  the  deceafed,  and  were  in 
the  place  of  the  Mulieres  Pr^fica  of  the  Romans, 
and,  like  them,  were  a  mercenary  tribe.    I  could 
not  but  obferve  that  they  over-did  their  parts,  as 
Horace  acquaints  us  the  mourners  of  his  days  did. 
Vt  qui  conduct  pi  or  an  i  in  funera,  diaint 
El  faciunt  prope  plura  dolentibus  ex  animo. 
The  corps  was  carried  (lowly  along  the  verge  of  a 
mod  beautifull  lake,  the  iilulatus  was  continued, 
and  the  whole  proccfTion  ended  among  the  vene- 
rable 


INSCOTLAND.  99 

r^ble  ruins  of  an  old  abby.    But  to  return  to  Norib 
Britain. 

Midwives  give  new-born  babes  a  fmall  fpoonfull 
of  earth  and  whifky,  as  the  firfl:  food  they  tafte. 

Before  women  bake  their  bannocks,  or  oatmeal 
cakes,  they  make  a  crofs  on  the  laft. 

The  notion  of  fecond-fight  ftill  prevales  in  a  few  Fairies^ 
places  :  as  does  the  belief  of  Fairies ;  and  children 
are  watched  till  the  chriftening  is  over,  lead  they 
fliould  be  ftole,  or  changed. 

Elf-Jhots^  i.  e.  the  ftone  arrow  heads  of  the  old 
inhabitants  of  this  ifland,  are  fuppofed  to  be  wea- 
pons (hot  by  Fairies  at  cattle,  to  which  are  attri- 
buted any  diforders  they  have  :  in  order  to  effe6t  a 
cure,  the  cow  is  to  be  touched  by  an  elf-fliot,  or 
made  to  drink  the  water  in  which  one  has  been' 
dipped.  The  fame  virtufc  is  faid  to  be  found  in 
the  cryflal  gems  *,  and  in  the  adder-ftone,  our  Glein 
Naidr  \  and  it  is  alfo  believed  that  good  fortune 
muft  attend  the  owner ;  fo,  for  that  reafon,  the  firfi: 
is  called  Clach  Bhotiaigh^  or  the  happy  ftone.  Cap- 
tain Jrchibald  Campbell  fhewed  me  one,  a  fpheroid 
fet  in  filver,  which  people  came  for  the  ufe  cf 
above  a  hundred  miles,  and  brought  the  water  it 
was  to  be  dipt  in  with  them  ;  for  without  that,  in 
human  cafes,  it  was  believed  to  have  no  effeft. 

Thefe  have  been  fuppofed  to  be  magical  ftones 
or  gems  ufed  by  the  Druidsy  to  be  infpedled  by  a 
chafte  boy,  who  was  to  fee  in  them  an  apparition  in- 
forming him  of  future  events.     This  impofture,  as 

•  Woodvjard's  Method  of  Follils,  p.  30.  See  alfo  Air.  ^u^ 
^/■^'s  Mifcellanies,  p.  128. 

H  2  wc 


loo  A      T    O    U    R 

we  are  told  by  Dodor  JVood-wardy  was  revived  in 
the  lad  century  by  the  famous  Do<5tor  Dee,  who 
called  it  h'\speiv  ftone  and  holy  Ji one,  and  pretend- 
ed, by  its  means,  to  foretell  events.  I  find  in  Mak- 
fvucon  *,  that  it  was  cuftomary  in  early  times  to 
depofite  Balls  of  this  kind  in  urns  or  fepulchers  : 
thus  twenty  were  found  at  Rome  in  an  alabaflrine 
urn  :  and  one  was  difcovered  in  1653,  ^"^  ^^*^  tomb 
of  Childcric  at  Tournai  j  he  was  King  of  France,  and 
died  A.  D.  480. 
Aug.  2.  i^cfc  Carrie,  the  houfe  of  Mr.  Campbell,  fador 

for  the  Struan  eftate,  where  I  had  a  very  hofpitable 
reception  the  preceding  night.  Went  due  eaft  •, 
pafled  over  a  bridge  crofs  the  'TumeU  which  dil- 
chnrges  itfelf  out  of  Lough  Raynach.  Not  far  off 
were  fome  neat  fniall  houfes,  inhabited  by  veteran 
foldiers,  who  were  fettled  here  after  the  peace  of 
1 748  •,  had  land,  and  three  pounds  in  money  given, 
and  nine  pounds  lent,  to  begin  the  world  with.  In 
ibme  few  places  this  plan  fucceeded  ;  but  in  gene- 
j  al,  was  frullrated  by  the  diflipation  of  thefe  new 
colonitls,  vvlio  could  by  no  means  relifh  an  in- 
duftrious  life  •,  but  as  foon  as  the  money  was  fpent, 
which  fcldcm  lafted  long,  left  their  tenements  to 
be  poflcfTcd  by  the  next  comer. 

Saw  a  flarnping-mill,  calculated  to  reduce  lime- 
ftone  to  a  fine  powder,  in  order  to  favc  the  expence 
of  burning,  for  manure.  The  ftampers  beat  it  into 
fmall  pieces  in  a  trough,  which  a  (beam  of  water 
paflTcd  through,  carrying  off  the  fine  parts  into  a 
proper  receptacle,  the  grofs  ones  being  ftopped  by 

*  La  Motiimens  de  la  Monarchic  Fran.oi'e, 

a  grate. 


I 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  loi 

a  grate.  I  did  not  find  that  this  projefl  anfwered  -, 
but  was  told,  that  the  benefit  tlie  land  was  to  re- 
ceive from  it  would  not  appear  till  the  third  year. 

On  going  up  a  fteep  hill  have  a  fine  view  of  the 
lake.  Where  the  mountains  almoil  clofe,  is  Mount 
Alexander,  where  Stru:in  once  refided,  and  which 
he  called  his  hermitage  :  it  is  a  mofb  romantic  fitua-  ~" 

tion,  prettily  wooded,  impending  over  a  fine  bafon, 
formed  by  the  Tw/nel,  in  a  deep  hollow  beneath.  At 
the  bottom  of  this  hill  is  Argentine,  a  little  foun-  Argentine, 
tain  ;  to  which  he  gave  that  name  from  the  filvery 
micie  it  flings  up  :  near  this  are  feveral  rude  but 
beautifull  walks  amidft  the  rocks  and  trees,  among 
which,  in  clefts  and  chafms,  I  was  fliewn  the  hard 
bed  of  the  poor  poet,  when  his  difioyaky  had  made 
it  penal  for  him  to  fhew  his  head.  Near  this  the 
rocks  almofl  meet,  and  the  river  rufhes  with  vaft 
violence  between.  Some  outlawed  A/'Grc-'^crj  were 
once  furprized  on  the  precipice,  and  all  killed  ; 
one,  who  made  a  defperate  leap  upon  a  ftone  in  the 
middle  of  the  water,  and  another  to  the  oppofite 
fide,  had  the  hard  fate  to  be  fhot  in  climbing  the 
rocky  fleeps. 

A  mile  lower  are  the  falls  of  the  "Tumel :  1  have 
feen  higher  ;  but,  except  that  of  the  Rhine,  never 
faw  one  with  more  water. 

Afcend  a  very  fteep  and  high  hill  through  a  great 
birch  wood  -,  a  moft  pifturefque  fcene,  from  the 
pendent  form  of  the  boughs  waving  with  the  wind 
from  the  bottom  to  the  utmoft  fummits  of  the 
mountain.  On  attaining  the  top,  had  a  view  of  a 
jjeautifull  little  5/rj/V/?',. fertile  and  prettily  wooded, 

H  3  with 


102  A      T    O    U    R 

with  the  river  in  the  middle,  forming  numbers  of 
quick  meanders;  then  iuddenly  fwelling  into  a  lake, 
that  fills  the  vale  from  fide  to  fide ;  is  about  three 
miles  long,  and  retains  the  name  of  the  river.  After 
riding  along  a  black  moor,  in  fight  of  vaft  moun- 
tains, arrive  at 

Blair  *,  or  /f/>6o/-Houfe,  feated  on  an  eminence 
above  a  plain,  watered  by  the  Carrie,  an  outrageous 
ftream,  whofe  ravages  have  greatly  deformed  the 
vally,  by  the  vaft  beds  of  gravel  which  it  has  left 
behind.  The  houfe  was  once  fortified,  and  held  a 
fiege  againft  the  Rebels  in  1 746  j  but  at  prefent  it 
is  much  reduced  in  height,  and  the  infide  highly, 
finifhed  by  the  noble  owner.  The  mod  fingular 
piece  of  furniture  is  a  cheft  of  drawers  made  of 
broom,  moft  elegantly  flriped  in  veins  of  white  and 
t  broom  brown.  This  plant  grows  to  a  great  fize  in  Scot- 
'  land,  and  furnifhes  pieces  of  the  breadth  of  fix 

inches. 

Near  the  houfe  is  a  fine  walk  furrounding  a  very 
deep  glen  finely  wooded,  but  deficient  in  water  at 
the  bottom  •,  but  on  the  fide  of  the  walk  pn  the 
rock  is  a  fmall  cryftalline  fountain,  inhabited  at 
that  time  by  a  pair  of  Naiads,  in  form  of  golden 

Hang'-n^ft.  fifh.  In  a  fpruce  fir  was  a  hang-neft  of  fome  un- 
known bird,  fufpended  at  the  four  corners  to  the 
boughs  •,  it  was  open  at  top,  an  inch  and  a  half  in 
diameter,  and  two  deep  •,  the  fides  and  bottom 
thick,  the  materials  mofs,  worfi:ed,  and  birch  bark, 
lined  with  hair  and  feathers.     The  dreams  afford 

Parr^  the  Parr,  a  fmall  fpccie^  of  Trout,  feldom  excecd- 

♦  Or  the  plain  where  a  baitle  had  been  fought. 

ing 


trCwi 


IN    SCOTLAND. 


lO: 


ing  eight  inches  in  Ictigth,  marked  on  the  fides 
with  nine  large  bluifli  fpots,  and  on  the  lateral  line 
with  fmall  red  ones  *. 

This  country  is  very  mountainous,  has  no  natural 
woods  except  of  birch ;  but  the  vaft  plantations  that 
begin  to  cloath  the  hills  will  amply  fupply  thefe 
defefts.  There  is  a  great  quantity  of  oats  raifed 
in  this  neighborhood,  and  numbers  of  black  cattle 
reared,  the  refources  of  the  exhaufted  parts  of 
South  Britain. 

Vifit  the  pafs  of  Killicrankie,  about  five  miles  KHHcran^ie, 
fouth  of  Blair :  near  the  northern  entrance  was 
fought  the  battle  between  the  Vifcount  Dundee  and 
General  Mackay,  in  which  the  firft  was  killed  in  the 
moment  of  victory.  The  pafs  is  extremely  narrow, 
between  high  mountains,  with  the  Carrie  running 
beneath  in.  a  deep,  darkfome,  and  rocky  channel, 
over-hung  with  trees,  forming  a  fcene  of  horrible 
grandeur.  The  road  through  this  ftrait  is  very  fincj 
formed  by  the  foldiery  lent  by  the  Government, 
who  have  rixpence/»<?r  day  from  the  country  befides 
their  pay.  About  a  mile  beyond  the  pafs,  Mr. 
Jlol?ertfon*Sy  ofFa/^ally,  appears  like  fairy  ground 
amidll  thefe  wild  rocks,  feated  in  a  moft  beautiful! 
meadow,  watered  by  the  river  Tumel,  furrounded 
with  pretty  hills  finely  wooded. 

The  Duke  of  Athors,  eftate  is  very  extenfive,  and 
the  country  populous :  while  valTalage  exifted,  the 
chieftain  could  raife  two  or  three  thoufand  fighting 
men,  and  leave  fuificient  at  home  to  take  care  of 
the  ground.     The  forefts,  or  rather  chafes,  (for 

•  Br.  Zoo!,  illujlr. 

H  4  they 


104  A      T    O    U    R 

they  are  quite  naked)  are  very  extenfiye,  an4  feed 

yaft  numbers  of  Stags,  which  range>  at  certain 

times  of  the  year,  in  herds  of  five  hundred.    Some 

grow  to  a  great  fize :  I  have   heard  of  one  that 

weighed  iS  ftone,  Scots^  or  3141b.  exclufive  of 

head,  entrails  and   fkin.     The  hunting  of  thcfe 

animals  v/as  formerly  after  the  manner  of  ^nEaJIern 

•Great  hunt-     monarch.  Thoufands  of  vaflals  furrounded  a  great 

?"^';  trafl  of  country,  and  drove  the  Deer  to  the  fpot 

where  the  Chieftains  wereftationed,  who  Ihotthem 

at  their  leifure.     The  magnificent  hunt,  made  by 

an  Earl  of  yf//?c/,  near  this  place,  for  the  amufe- 

ment  of  James  Y.  and  the  Qiieen- mother,  is  too 

remarkable  to  be  omitted  ;  the  relation  is  therefore 

given   as  defcribed   by  Sir  David  Lindfay  of  the 

Mount  *,  who,  in  all  probability,  afTifted  at  it. 

"  The  Earl  oi  Athole,  hearing  of  the  King's 
"  coming,  made  great  prpvilion  for  him  in  all 
"  things  pertaining  to  a  prince,  diat  iie  was  as  well 
"  ferved  and  eafed,  with  all  things  neceflary  to  his 
**  eftate,  as  he  had  been  in  his  own  palace  o{  Edin-; 
'*  hur^^h.  For  \  heard  fay,  this  noble  Earl  gart 
**  make  a  curious  palace  to  the  King,  to  his  Mo- 
«>  *'  ther,  and  to  the  EmbafTador,  where  they  were 
"  fo  honourably  eafed  and  lodged  as  they  had  been 
*'  in  England^  France^  Italy^  or  Spain^  concerning 
**  the  lime  and  equivalent,  for  their  hunting  and 
'"  paffime  •,  which  was  builded  in  the  midft  of  a 
"  fair  meadow,  a  fair  palace  of  green  timber, 
*J  wind  with  green'  birks,  that  were  green  both 

*  Hiji.  ScoilanJf   146. 


r 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  165 

*'  under  and  above,  which  was  fafl^ioned  in  four 
"  quarters,  and  in  every  quarter  and  nuik  thereof 
*'  a  great  round,  as  it  had  been  a  block-houfc, 
"  which  was  lofted  and  gefted  the  fpace  of  three 
"  houfe  height ;  the  floors  laid  with  green  fcarets 
"  fpreats,    medwarts  and  flowers,  that    no    man 
*'  knew  whereon  he  zeid,  but  as  he  had  been  in  a    * 
•*  garden.     Further,  there  were  two  great  rounds ^- 
*'  in  ilk  fide  of  the  gate,  and  a  great  portculleis 
*'  of  trte,  falling  down  with  the  manner  of  a  bar- 
*'  race,  with  a  draw-bridge,  and  a  great  flank  of 
"  water  of  fixteen  foot  deep,  and  thirty  foot  of 
*'  breadth.     And  alfo  this  palace  within  was  hung 
*?  with  fine  tapeftry  and  arrafles  of  filk,  and  lighted 
**  with  fine  glafs  windows  in  all  airths ;  that  this 
*'  palace  was  as  pleafantly  decored,  with  all  necef- 
*'  faries  pertaining  to  a  prince,  as  it  hr.d  been  his 
*'  own  palace-royal  at  home.     Further,  this  Earl 
*'  gart  make  fuch  provifion  for  the  King,  and  his 
"  Mother,  and  the  Embaflador,  that  they  had  all 
"  manner  of  meats,  drinks,  and  delicates  tliat  were 
'*  to  be  gotten,  at  that  time,  in  all  Scotland^  either 
"  in   burgh  or  land  •,  that  is  to  fay,   all  kind  of 
"  drink,  as  ale,  beer,  wine,  botli  white  and  claret, 
*'  maheryy  mu/kadel,  Hippocras-,  aqiiavita.  Further, 
*'  there  was   of  meats,  wheat-bread,  main-bread 
"  and  ginge  bread  ;    with  fiefnes,  beef,   mutton, 
**  lamb,  veal,  venifon,  goofe,  grice,  capon,  coney, 
**  cran,   fwan,    partridge,    plover,    duck,    drake, 
*'  briflTel-cock  and  pawnes,    black-cock  and  muir- 
*'  fowl,  cappercaillies :  and  alio  the  ftanks,   that 
f'  were  round  about  the  palace,  were  full  of  all 

*^  delicate 


c^  A      T    O    U    R 

delicate  fiflies,  as  falmonds,  fronts,  pearches, 
"  pikes,  eels,  and  all  other  kind  of  delicate  fifhes 
*'  that  could  be  gotten  in  frelh  waters ;  and  all 
"  ready  for  the  banket.  Syne  were  there  proper 
"  ftewards,  cunning  baxters,  excellent  cooks  and 
*'  potingars,  with  confeflions  and  drugs  for  their 

deferts ;  and  the  halls  and  chambers  were  pre- 
**"  pared  with  coftly  bedding,  vefTcl  and  napery, 
**  according  for  a  king,  fo  that  he  wanted  none  of 
*'  his  orders  more  than  he  had  been  at  home  in  his 
"  own  palace.  The  King  remained  in  this  wilder- 
'*  nefs,  at  the  hunting,  the  fpace  of  three  days  and 
"  three  nights,  and  his  company,  as  I  have  fhewn. 
**  I  heard  men  fay,  it  coft  the  Earl  oi  Athole^  every 
"  day,  in  expences,  a  thoufand  pounds." 

But 'hunting  meetings,  among  the  great  men, 
were  often  the  preludes  to  lebellion  ;  for  under  that 
pretence  they  coUeded  great  bodies  of  men  without 
fufpicion,  which  at  length  occafioned  an  a<5t  of  par- 
lement  prohibiting  fuch  dangerous  aiTemblies.  ^ 

Set  out  for  the  county  oi  Aberdeen-,  ride  eaftward 
over  a  hill  into  Glen-Tilt^  famous  in  old  times  for 
producing  the  moft  hardy  warriors  •,  is  a  narrow 
glen,  feveral  miles  in  length,  bounded  on  each  fide 
ty  mountains  of  an  amazing  height^on  the  fouth 
is  the  great  hill  of  Ben  y  glo,  whofe  bafe  is  thirty- 
five  miles  in  circumference,  and  whofe  fummit 
towers  far  above  the  others.  The  fides  of  many  of 
thefe  mountains  are  covered  with  fine  verdure,  and 
aic  excellent  fiieep-walks  :  but  entirely  woodlefs. 
The  road  is  the  moft  dangerous  and  the  moft  hor- 
rible 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  lo; 

rible  I  ever  iravelled  :  a  narrow  path,  fo  rugged 
that  our  horfes  often  were  obliged  to  crofs  their 
legs,  in  order  to  pick  a  fecure  place  for  their  feet ; 
while,  at  a  confiderable  and  precipitous  depth  be- 
neath, roared  a  black  torrent,  rolling  through  a  bed 
of  rock,  Iblid  in  every,  part  but  where  the  Tilt  had 
worn  its  antient  way.  Salmon  force  their  paffage 
even  as  high  as  this  dreary  ftream,  in  fpite  of  the 
diftance  from  the  fea,  and  the  difficulties  they  have  "  '^ 
to  encounter, 

Afcend  a  fleep  hill,  on  the  top  of  which  we  re- 
frelhed  ourfelves  with  fome  goats  whey,  at  a  Sheelin^  Sheellns. 
or,  as  it  is  fometimes  called,  An-ie*^  and  Bolbay^a. 
dairy-houfe,  where  the  Highland  fhepherds,  or  gra- 
ziers, live  during  fummer  with  their  herds  and 
flocks,  and  during  that  feafon  make  butter  and 
cheefe.  Their  whole  furniture  confifts  of  a  few 
horn  fpoons,  their  milking  utenfils,  a  couch  formedi 
of  fods  to  lie  on,  and  a  rug  to  cover  them.  Their 
food  oat- cakes,  butter  or  cheefe,  and  often  the 
coagulated  blood  of  their  cattle  fpread  on  their 
bannocks.  Their  drink  milk,  whey,  and  fome- 
times, by  way  of  indulgence,  whifky.  Such  dairy- 
houfes  are  rommon  to  moft  mountainous  countries : 
thofe  in  IVales  are  called  Foilys,  or  Summer-houfes  ; 
thofe  on  the  Swifs  Alps,  Se fines. 

Dined  on  the  fide  of  Locb-'Till,  a  fmall  piece  of 
water,  fwarming  with  Trouts.  Continued  our  jour- 
ney over  a  wild,  black,  moory,  melancholy  trad. 
Reached  Brae-mar  f  •,  the  country  aimoft  inltantly 

•  /.  e.   a  boufe  made  of  turf. 

•f-  Jirae,  fignifks  a  llcep  face  of-any  hiJl. 

Ghaa-Tcd, 


108  A      T    O    U    R 

changed,  and  in  lieu  of  dreary  waftcs,  a  rich  vale, 
plenteous  in  corn  and  grafs,  fucceeded.  Crofs  the 
Dee  near  its  head,  which,  from  an  infignificanc 
flream,  in  the  courfe  of  a  very  few  miles,  increafcs 
to  the  fizeof  a  great  river,  from  the  influx  of  num- 
Brae-mar.  bers  of  Other  waters.  The  rocks  of  Brae-mar^  on 
the  caft,  are  exceedingly  romantic,  finely  wooded 
with  pine.  The  clifTs  are  very  lofty,  and  their  front 
mofl  rugged  and  broken,  with  vaft  pines  growing 
out  of  their  fifilires. 

"This  tra£b  abounding  with  game,  was,  in  old 
times,  the  annual  refort  of  numbers  of  nobility, 
who  affembled  here  to  pafs,  a  month  or  two  in  the 
amufements  of  the  chafe.  Their  huntings  refem- 
bled  campaigns  ;  they  lived  in  temporary  cottages, 
called  Lonquhards^  were  all  dreffed  in  an  uniform 
habit  conformable  to  that  of  the  country,  and 
pafled  their  time  with  jollity  and  good  chear,  mod 
admirably defcribed  hy  John  Taylor^  the  water  poet, 
who,  in  1618,  made  there  his  Pennilejfe  Pilgrimage, 
and  defcribes,  in  page  135,  the  rural  luxury  with 
all  the  glee  of  a  Sancbo  Panfa. 

*'  I  thank  my  good  Lord  Erjlin^  (fays  the  Poet) 
'*  hee  commanded  that  I  (boukl  alwayes.^ee  lodged 
"  in  his  lodging,  the  kitchen  being  alwayes  on  the 
*'  fide  of  a  banke,  many  kettles  and  pots  boyling, 
"  and  many  fpits  turning  and  winding,  with  great 
"  variety  of  cheere  :  as  venifon  bak'd,  fodden,  roft 
"  and  (lu'de  bccfe,  mutton,  goates,  kid,  hares, 
"  frefli  falmon,  pidgeons,  hens,  capons,  chickens, 
"  partridge,  moore-coots,  heath-cocks,caperkcllies, 
**-  anci  termagants;  good  ale,  facke,  white  and  cla- 
ret. 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  105 

*'  ret,  tent  (or  Allegant)  and  moft  potent  aqua^ 


(C 


•  The  French,  during  the  reign  o^  Charles  IX.  feemed  not 
only  to  have  made  full  as  large  facrifices  lo  Diana  and  Bacchus^ 
but  even  thought  their  entertainment  incomplete  without  the 
prefence  of  Venus,  yacques  du  rouilloux,  a  celebrated  writer 
on  hunting  of  that  age,  with  n-.uch  ftrioufnefj  defcribes  all 
the  requifites  for  the  chafe,  and  thus  places  and  equips  the 
jovial  crew  :  —  *  L'Aflemblee  fe  doit  faire  en  quelque  beau 
«   lieu  foubs  des  arbres  aupres  d'une  fontaine  ou  Ruilfeau,   la 

*  ou  les  veneurs  fe  doiuent  tous  rendre  pour  faire  leur  rapport. 

*  Ce  pendant  le  Sommelier  doit  venir  avec  trois  bons  chevaux 

*  chargez  d'inilrumens  pour  anoufer  le  gofier,   conime  cou- 

*  trets,  barraux,  baril?,  flacons  et  bouteilles  :  lefquelles  doiuent 

*  eftre  pleines  de  bon  vin  d'' Arbors,  de  Beaume,  de  Chaloce  et  de 

*  Graue :  luy  eftant  defcendu  du  cheval,  les  metra  refraifchir 

*  en  I'eau.  ou  bien  les  pou:ra  faire  refroidir  avec  du  Can  ire  : 

*  apres  il  eftandra  la  nappe  fur  la  verdure.  Ce  fait,  le  cuifi- 
<   uier  s'en  viendra  charge  de  plufieurs  hons  hamois  de  gueuUy 

*  comme  jambons,  langues  de  bcEuf  fumees,  groins,  et  wreilles 

*  de  pourceau,  cervelats,  efchinees,  pieces  de  bccuf  de  Saifon, 

*  carbonnades,   jambons  de  Maxeuce,  paftez,   longes  de  veau 

*  froides  couuertes  de  poudre  blanche,  et  autres  menus  fuf- 

*  frages  pour  remplir  le  boudin  iequel  il  metra  fur  la  nappe. 

'  Lors  le  Roy  ou  le  Seigneur  avec  ceux  de  fa  table  eftren- 

*  dront  leurs  manteaux  fur  I'herbe,  et  fe  coucheront  de  coRe 

*  deffus,   beuuans,  mangeans,    rians  et  faifans  grand  chere  ;* 

*  and  that  nothing  might  be  wanting  to  render  the  encertain- 
ment  of  fuch  a  fet  of  merry  men  quite  complete,  honeil  Jacques 
adds,   '  et  s'il    y  a  quelque  fcmme  de  reputation  ea  ce  pays 

*  qui  fafle  plaifir  aux  compagnons,  elle  doit  etre  aileguee,  et 

*  fes  paffages  ct  remuemens  de  feffes,  attendant  le  rapport  a 

*  venir.'  ( 

But  when  the  great  man  falHes  out  to  the  chace  of  foxes  and 
badgers,  he  feems  not  to  leave  fo  important  an  affair  to  chance, 
fo  fets  off  thus  amply  provided  in  his  triumphal  car,  «  Le 

*  Seigneur,  {dys  FouillouxJ  doit  avoir  fa  petite  charrette,  la 

*  oii  il  fera  dedans,  avec  la  Fillctte  aagee  de  feize  a  dix  fept 
'  ans,  laquelle  luy  frottera  la  telle  par  les  chcmins.     Toutes 

*  les  chevilles  et  paux  de  la  charrett"  do!ucnt  eflre  garnis  de 

*  flaccons  et  bouteilles,  et  doit  avoir  au  bout  de  la  charrette 

*  un  cofTre  de  bois,  plein  decoqs  d'inde  froids,  jambons,  lan- 
«  gues  de  Bceufs  et  autre  bons  harno.s  de  gueule,     Et  fi  c'eft 

*  en  temps  d'hiver,  il  pourra  faire  porter  fon  petit  pavilion, 

*  et  faire  du  feu  dedans  pour  fe  chauffer,  ou  bien  donner  un 
«  coup  en  robbe  a  la  nymphe.'  ^.  3-.  ~^, 

"  All 


no  A      T    O    U    R 

"  All  thefc,  and  more  than  thcfe,  we  had  conti- 
*'  nually,  in  fuperfluous  abundance,  caught  by 
"  faulconers,  fowlers,  fifhers,  and  brought  by  my 
*'  Lord's  (Mrr)  tenants  and  purveyors,  to  vidual 
*'  our  campe,  which  confided  of  fourteen  or  fifteen 
"  hundred  men,  and  horfes.  The  manner  of  the 
"  hunting  is  this  :  five  or  fix  hundred  men  doe  rife 
*'  early  in  the  morning,  and  they  doedifpcrfe  them- 
*'  felves  divers  wayes,  andfeven,  eight,  or  ten  miles 
"  compaffe,  they  doe  bring  or  chafe  in  the  deer  in 
*'  many  heards  (two,  three,  or  four  hundred  in  a 
"  heard)  to  fuch  or  fuch  a  place,  as  the  noblemen 
"  fhall  appoint  them  ;  then  when  day  is  come,  the 
*'  lords  and  gentlemen  of  their  companies  doe  ride 
**  or  go  to  the  laid  places,  fometimes  wading  up  to 
"  the  middles  through  bournes  and  rivers  •,  and  . 
"  then  they  being  come  to  the  place,  doe  lye  dov/n 
*'  on  the  ground  till  thofe  forefaid  fcouts,  which 
*'  are  called  xh^Tinckhell^  do  bring  down  the  deer; 
*'  but,  as  the  proverb  fays  of  a  bad  cooke,  fo  thefe 
*'  Tinckheli  men  doe  lick  their  own  fingers  ;  for, 
*'  befides  their  bowes  and  arrows  which  they  carry 
"  with  them,  wee  can  heare  now  and  then  a  hargue- 
"  bufe,  or  a  mufquet,  goe  off,  which  doe  feldom 
"  difdiarge  in  vaine  :  then  after  we  had  flayed 
'  "  three  hourcs,  or  thereabouts,  we  might  perceive 

"  the  deer  appeare  on  the  hills  round  about  us, 
"  (their  heads  making  a  fhew  like  a  wood)  which 
"  being  followed  clofe  by  the  Thickbeli,  are  chafed 
"  down  into  the  valley  where  wee  lay  j  then  all  the 
**  valley  on  each  fide  bfing  way-laid  with  a  hun- 
**  dred  couple  of  ftrong  Iridi  grey-hounds,  they  arc 

*'  let 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  m 

"  let  loofe,  as  occafion  lerves,  upon  the  heard  of 
"  deere,  that  with  dogs,  gunnes,  arrowes,  durks 
*'  and  daggers,  in  the  fpace  of  two  houres  fourfcore 
*'  fat  deere  were  flaine,  which  after  are  difpofed  of 
*'  forae  one  way  and  fome  another,  twenty  or  thirty 
"  miles,  and  more  than  enough  left  for  us  to  make 
*'  merry  withall  at  our  rendevouze.  Being  come 
*'  to  our  lodgings,  there  was  llich  baking,  boyling, 
*'  rolling  and  ftewing,  as  if  Cook  Ruffian  had  been 
"  there  to  have  fcalded  the  Devill  in  his  feathers." 
But  to  proceed. 

Pafs  by  the  caftle  of  Brae-fftar,  a  fquare  tower, 
built  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago,  to  curb 
the  difcontented  chieftains ;  but  at  prefent  unnecef- 
farily  garrifoned  by  a  company  of  foot,  being 
rented  by  the  Government  from  Mr.  Farquharfou^ 
of  Invercauld,  whofe  houfe  I  reached  in  lefs  than 
half  an  hour. 

Invercauld  is  feated  in  the  centre  of  the  Grampw.n 
hills,  in  a  fertile  vale,  walhed  by  the  Bee->  a  large; 
and  rapid  river :  nothing  can  be  more  beautifuil 
than  the  different  views  from  the  feveral  parts  of  it. 
On  the  northern  entrance,  immenle  ragged  and 
broken  crags  bound  one  fide  of  the  profpedl;  over 
whofe  grey  fides  and  fummitsisfcattered  the  melan- 
choly green  of  the  pidurefquC' pine^  which  grows 
out  of  the  naked  rock,  where  one  would  think  na^ 
ture  would  have  denied  vegetation. 

A  little  lower  down  is  the  caftle  above-men- 
tioned ;  formerly  a  necelTary  curb  on  the  little 
kings  of  the  country  j  but  at  prefent  ferves  fcarce 
any  purpofe,  but  to  adorn  the  landfcape. 

The 


ii«  A     TOUR 

I'hc  views  from  the  flcirts  of  the  plain,  near  Liver-' 
cauldy  are  very  great  ;  the  hills  that  immediately 
bound  it  arc  cloathed  with  trees,  particularly  with 
birch,  whofe  long  and  pendant  boughs,  waving  a 
vaft  height  above  the  head,  furpafa  the  beauties  of 
the  weeping  willow. 

Thefouthcrn  extremity  is  pre-eminently  magni- 
ficent •,  the  mountains  form  there  a  va(t  theatre, 
the  bolom  of  which  is  covered  with  cxtenfive  forefts 
of  pines :  above,  the  trees  grow  fcarcer  and  fcarcer, 
and  then  feem  only  to  fprinkle  t!ie  furface  •,  afie:^ 
which  vegetation  ceafes,  and  naked  fummits  *  of  a 
furprifing  height  fucceed,  many  of  them  topped 
with  perpetual  fnow  •,  and,  as  a  fine  contraft  to  the 
fcene,  the  great  cataradl  of  Garval-bcurriy  which 
feems  at  a  diftance  to  divide  the  whole,  foams 
amdift  the  dark  forcft,  rufhing  from  rock  to  rock 
to  a  vaft  diftance. 

Some  of  thefe  hills  are  fuppofed  to  be  the  highcft 
part  of  Great  Lriiain  :  their  height  has  not  yet  been 
taken,  but  the  conjedure  is  made  from  the  great 
defcent  of  the  Dee,  which  runs  from  Brae-mar  -f-  ta 
the  fea,  above  feventy  miles,  with  a  moft  rapid 
courfe. 

Rode  to   take  a  nearer  view  of  the  environs  ; 

crofied  the  Dee  on  a  good  (lone-bridge,  built  by 

the   Government,  and   entered  on  excellent  roads 

rin«  Foreft.     ii^t^<->  ^  magnificent  forefl:  of  pines  of  many  miles 

extent.  Some  of  the  trees  are  of  a  vaft  fjzej  I  mea- 

•  The  higheft  is  called  Ben  v  hcurJ,  under  which  is  a  fmall 
lough,  which  1  was  told  had  ice  the  latter  end  of  July. 

\  The  moft  diftaut  from  the  fca  of  any  place  in  }sorth 
Britain, 

2  fured 


IN    SCOTLAND.  tij 

fured  feveral  that  were  ten,  eleven,  and  even  twelve 
feet  in  circumference,  and  near  fixty  feet  high, 
forming  a  mod  beautiful!  column,  with  a  fine  ver- 
dant capital.  Thefe  trees  are  of  a  great  age,  having, 
as  is  fuppofed,  feen  two  centuries.  The  value  of 
thefe  trees  is  confiderable  ;  Mr.  Farqtiharfon  in- 
formed me,  that  by  fawing  and  retailing  them,  he 
has  got  for  eight  hundred  trees  five-and-twenty 
(hillings  each  :  they  are  fawed  in  an  adjacent  faw- 
hiill,  into  plank  ten  feet  long,  eleven  inches  broad  j 
and  three  thick,  and  fold  for  two  fnillings  apiece. 

Ntar  tnis  antient  foreil  is  another,  confiding  of 
fmaller  trees,  almoft  as  high,  but  very  (lender;  one 
grows  in  a  fmgular  manner  out  of  the  top  of  a 
great  done,  and  notwithdanding  it  feems  to  have 
no  other  nouridiment  than  what  it  gets  from  the 
dews,  is  above  thirty  feet  high. 

The  profpeft  above  thefe  foreds  is  very  extraor- 
dinary, a  didant  view  of  hills  over  a  furface  of  ver- 
dant pyramids  of  pines. 

This  whole  tra6t  abounds  with  game :  the  Stags    Stags, 
at  this  time  were  ranging  in  the  mountains  -,  but 
the  little  Roebucks  *  were  perpetually  bounding   Roej, 
before  us  -,  tnd.  the  black  game  often  fprung  under 
our  feet.  The  tops  of  the  hills  fwarmed  with  Grcus  Bird?; 
and  Ptarmigans.     Green  Plovers,  Whimbrels,  and 
Snow-flecks  -f-,  breed  here  :  the  lad  aflemble  in 
great  flocks  during  winter,  and  collect  fo  clofely  in 
their  eddying  flight  as  to  give  the  fportfman  oppor- 

•  Thefe  animals   are   reared  with  great   difficulty;  even 
when  taken  young,  eight  out  of  ten  generally  die. 
f  £r.  Zob/.  illujir.  17.  tab.  xi. 

i  tutjty 


114  A      T    O    U    R 

turity  of  killing  numbers  at  a  Ihot.  Eagles  *, 
Fcregrinc  Falcons,  and  Go{hawI;s  breed  here  : 
the  Falcons  in  rocks,  the  Gofhawks  in  trees  :  the 
laft  piirlucs  its  prey  an  end,  and  dafhcs  through 
every  thing  in  purfuit  •,  but  if  it  miflTes  its  quarry 
dcfuls  from  following  it  after  two  or  three  hun- 
dred yards  flight.  Thefe  birds  are  profcribed  ; 
half  a  crown  is  given  for  an  eagle,  a  (hilling  for  a 
hawk,  or  hooded  crow. 

Foxes  are  in  thele  parts  very  ravenous,  feeding 
on  roes,  (beep,  and  even  (he  g02L«i. 

Rooks  vilit  thefe  vales  in  autumn,  to  feed  on 
the  different  fort  of  berries;  but  neither  winter  nor 
breed  here. 

I  faw  fiying  in  the  forefls  the  greater  Bulfinch  of 
Mr.  Ed-xards^  t::h.  125,  1 24.  the  Loxia  enuckatcr  of 
Lirir.jcuSt  whofc  food  is  the  feed  of  pine  cones  j  a 
bird  conr.mon  to  the  north  of  Europe  and  America. 

On  our  return  pafled  under  feme  hi;;h  cliftsj  with 

B>ch Woods,   large  woods  of  birch  intermixed.     This  tree  is  ufcd 

for  all  forts  of  implements  of  hufbandry,  rtx)nng 

of  fmall  houfeii,  wheels,  fuel  •,  the  Highlanders  alfo 

tan  their  own  leather  with  the  bark  ;  and  a  great 

deal  of  excellent  wine  is  extra^cd  from  the  live 

tree.     Observed  among  thefe  rocks  a  fort  of  pn>- 

jecting  (htlr,  on  which  had  been  a  hut,  accefliblc 

only  by  the  help  of  fbmc  thongs  fattened  by  fome 

very  expert  climbers,  to  which  the  family  got,  in 

time  of  danger,  in  former  days,  with  their  mofl 

valuable  moveables. 

•  The  P.icg  adJ  Eajl?,  called  here  the  Black  £«§>.  I 
fufpect,  from  the  deicripdcn,  th-i  the  Botrel  breeds  here. 
1  heard  alfo  cf  a  bird,  Ciilcd  ice  ^vcK.j.i  jui  cmim,  b.: 
coald  not  pfx>care  it. 

Tb« 


INSCOTLAND.  i^S 

The  honfcs  of  the  common  pccple  in  thefe  parts   Cottages. 
are  fhocking  to  humanity,  formed  of  Joofe  ftones, 
and  covered  with  clods,  which  they  call  devijlo^  or 
with  heath,  broom,  or  branches  of  fir :  they  look, 
at  a  diftance,  like  fo  many  black  mole-hills.    The 
inhabitants  live  very  poorly,  on  oatmeal,  barley- 
cakes,  and  potatoes ;  their  drink  whifky  fweetened 
with  honey.    'The  men  are  thin,  but  ftrong-,  idle 
and  lazy,  except  employed  in  the  chace,  or  any 
thing  that  looks  like  amufement ;  are  content  with 
their  hard  fare,  and  will  not  exert  themfelves  far- 
ther than  to  get  what  they  deem  necefTaries.  The 
women  are  more  induftrious,  fpin  their  own  huf- 
bands  cloaths,  and  get  money  by  knitting  flocking?, 
the  great  trade  of  the  county.      The  common  wo- 
men are  in  general  moll  remarkably  plain,  and  foon 
acquire  an  old  look,  and  by  being  much  expofed 
to   the  weather  without  hats,    fuch  a   grin,  and 
contraflion  of  the  mufcles,  as  heightens  greatly 
their  natural  hardnefs  of  features :  I  never  faw  fo 
much  plainnefs  among  the  lower  rank  of  females^ 
but  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  hard  features  is  not  found 
till  you  arrive  among  the  fifh- women  of  Aberdeen. 
Tenants  pay  their  rent  generally  in  this  country 
in  money,  except  what  they  pay  in  poultry,  which 
is  done  to  promote  the  breed,  as  the  gentry  are  fo 
remote  from  any  market.     Thofe  that  rent  a  mill 
pay  a  hog  or  two;  an  animal  fo  detelled  by  the 
Highlanders,  that  very  few  can  be  prevailed  on  to 
tafte  it,  in  any  fiiape.     Labor  is  here  very  cheap, 
the  ufual  pay  being  fifty  fliiUings  a  year,  and  two 
pecks  of  oatmeal  a  week. 

I  2  Purfucd 


ttr. 


ii6  A      T    O    U    R 

Aug.  6-  Purfiied  my  journey  caft,  along  a  beautiful!  road 
by  the  river  fide,  in  figlu  of  the  pine  forefts.  The 
Vale  now  grows  narrow,  and  is  filled  with  woods 
of  birch  and  alder.  Saw  on  the  road- fide  the  feats 
of  gentlemen  high  built»  and  once  dcfenfibk.  The 
peafants  cultivate  their  little  land  with  great  care  to 
the  very  edge  df  the  ftony  hills.  All  tlie  way  are 
vafl:  maifcs  of  granite,  the  fame  vvliich  is  called  in 
Cornwall,  Moor-ftone. 

The  Glen  contrads,  and  the  mountains  approach 
each  other.  Quit  the  Highlands,  pafling  between 
Paft  of  BoUi»  two  great  rocks,  called  the  Pafs  of  Bollitir,  a  very 
narrow  (trait,  whofe  bottom  is  covered  with  the 
tremendous  ruins  of  the  precipices  that  bound  the 
road.  I  was  informed,  that  here  the  wind  rages 
with  great  fury  during  winter,  and  catching  up  the 
fnow  in  eddies,  whirls  it  about  with  fuch  impe- 
tuofity,  as  makes  it  dangerou-i  for  man  or  bead  to 
be  out  at  that  time.  Rain  alio  pours  down  fome- 
times  in  deluges,  and  carries  with  it  (lone  and 
gravel  from  the  hills  in  fuch  quantity,  that  I  have 
feen  thefe  fpatcs,  as  they  are  called,  lie  crofs  the 
roads,  as  the  avelenches,  or  fnow-falls,  do  thofe  of 
the  Alps.  In  many  pans  of  the  Highlands  were 
hofpitia  for  the  reception  of  travellers,  called  by 
the  Scotch,  Spittles,  or  hofpitals :  the  fame  were 
ufual  in  fVales,  where  they  are  ftyled  Tfpitty,  and, 
in  both  places,  were  maintained  by  the  religious 
houfes  :  as  fimilar  yjfylums  are  to  this  day  fup- 
portcd,  in  many  parts  of  the  Alps. 

This  pafs  is  the  caftern  entrance  into  the  High- 
lands.    The  country  now  allumes  a  new  face  :  the 

hills 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  117 

hills  grow  lefs ;  but  the  land  more  barren,  and  is 
chiefly  covered  with  heath  and  rock.  The  edges 
of  the  Bee  are  cultivated,  but  the  reft  only  in 
patches,  among  which  is  generally  a  groupe  of 
fmall  houfes.  There  is  alfo  a  change  of  trees,  oak 
being  the  principal  wood,  but  not  much  of  that. 
Refrelhed  my  horfes  at  a  hamlet  called  Tiilloch^  and 
looking  weft,  faw  the  great  mountain  Laghin y  gair^ 
which  is  always  covered  with  fnow. 

Obferved  feveral  vaft  plantations  of  pines, 
planted  by  gentlemen  near  their  feats :  fuch  a  laud- 
able fpirit  prevales  in  this  refpedl,  that  in  another 
half-century  it  never  fiiall  be  faid,  that  to  fpy  the 
nakednefs  of  the  land  are  you  come. 

Dine  at  the  little  village  of  Kincaird.  Here- 
abouts the  common  people  cultivate  a  great  deal  of 
cabbage.  The  oat-fields  are  inclofed  with  rude 
low  mounds  of  ftone. 

Lay  at  a  mean  houfe  at  Banck&rie.  The  country, 
from  Bollitir  to  this  place,  dull,  unlefs  where  va- 
ried with  the  windings  of  the  river,  or  with  the 
plantations. 

The  nearer  to  Aberdeen,  the  lower  the  country  Aug.  7. 
grows,  and  the  greater  quantity  of  corn  :  in  ge- 
neral, oats  and   barley ;  for   there   is   very  little 
wheat  fown  in  thefe  parts.     Reach 

Aberdeen,  a  fine  city,  lying  on  a  fmall  bay    abeideek, 
formed  by  the  Bee*,  deep  enough  for  fliips  of  two 
hundred  tuns.     The  town  is  about  two  miles  in 
circumference,  and  contains  thirteen  thoufand  fouls, 

;>nd  about  three  thoufand  in  the  fuburbs.     It  once 
*  The  bridge  lies  about  two  miles  fouth  of  the  town,  and 
confiils  of  feven  neat  arches. 

I   -^  enjoyed 


iiJ  A      T    O    U    R 

enjoyed  a  good  fhare  of  the  tobacco  trade,  but  was 
at  length  forced  to  refign  it  to  Glafgciv^  which  was 
fo  much  more  convenif ntly  fituated  for  it.  At  pre- 
fent,  its  in^.ports  are  from  the  Baltic^  and  a  few 
merchants  tiade  to  the  M'^eji-hdies  and  North 
Stockin"  America.  Its  exports  are  (lockings,  thread,  fal- 
trade.  nion,  and  ont-meal :  the  firil  is  a  moft  important 
article,  as  appears  by  the  following  ftate  of  it.  For 
this  manufadure,  20,800  pounds  worth  of  wool 
is  annually  imported,  and  i6co  pounds  worth 
of  oil.  Of  this  wool  is  annually  made  69,333 
dozen  pairs  of  {lockings,  worth,  at  an  average, 
il.  IDS.  /)^r  dozen.  Thefe  are  made  by  the  country 
people,  in  almoft  all  parts  of  this  great  county, 
who  get  4s.  pr  dozen  for  fpinning,  and  14s.  "per 
dozen  for  knitting  •,  fo  that  there  is  annually  paid 
them  62,3291.  14s.  And  befides,  there  is  about 
2000I.  value  of  {lockings  manufaflured  from  the 
wool  of  the  county,  which  encourages  the  breed  of 
fheep  much  •,  for  even  as  high  as  Invercauld,  the 
farmer  fells  his  {heep  at  twelve  {liillings  apiece,  and 
keeps  them  till  they  are  four  or  five  yecirs  old,  for 
the  fake  of  the  wool.  About  200  combers  are 
alfo  employed  con{lantly.  The  thread  manufac- 
ture is  another  confiderable  article,  tho'  trifling 
in  comparifon  of  the  woollen. 
Salmon.  The  faimon  fifheries  on  the  Bee  and  the  Don,  are 
a  good  branch  of  trade  :  about  46  boats,  and  130 
men,  are  employed  on  the  firll;  and  in  fome  years, 
167,0001b.  of  fi(h  have  been  fcnt  pickled  to  Lon- 
don,  and  about  930  barrels  of  faked  fi{h  exported 
to  France,  Ilaly,  &c.  The  {ilhery  on  the  Don  is 
far  lefs  confiderable. 

The  town  of  Aberdeen  is  in  general  well  built, 

with 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  II9 

with  granite  from  the  neighboring  quarries.  The 
beft  ftreet,  or  rather  p/^f^,  is  the  Caftle-ftreet :  in 
the  middle  is  an  odlagon  building,  with  neat  bas 
relievos  of  the  Kings  of  Scotland,  from  James  I.  to 
James  VII.  The  Town-houfe  makes  a  good  figure, 
and  has  a  handfome  fpire  in  the  centre. 

The  eaft  and  weft  churches  are  under  the  fame 
roof;  for  the  North  Britons  obferve  oeconomy  even 
in  their  religion  :  in  one  I  obferved  a  fmall  (hip 
hung  up-,  a  votive  offering  frequent  enough  in 
Popijh  churches,  but  appeared  very  unexpe6kdly 
here. 

In  the  church-yard  lies  Andre'-jj  Canty  minifler  of  AndreiuCunti 
Aherdeen^irom  whom  the  Spcftator  derives  the  word 
to  cant ;  but,  in  all  probability,  Andrew  canted  no 
more  than  the  reft  of  his  brethren,  for  he  lived  in 
a  whining  age  *  ;  the  word  therefore  feems  to  be 
derived  from  canto,  from  their  fmging  out  their 
difcourfes. 

In  the  fame  place  are  multitudes  of  long-winded 
epitaphs ;  but  the  following,  though  fhort,  has 
a  moft  elegant  turn  : 

Si  fides,  fi  humanitas,  multoque  gratus  lepore  candor  5 
Si  fuorum  amor,  amicomm  charitas,  omniumque  Be- 

nevokntia  fpiritum  reducere  pojfent, 
Hattdheic/jtus  {^^z  Johannes  Burnet  a  Elrick.1747. 
The  college  is  a  large  old  building,  founded  by    College^ 
George  Earl  of  Marechal,  1593-     On  one  fide  is 
this  ftrange  infcription ;  probably  alluding  to  feme 
fcoffers  at  that  time  : 

•  In  CiarUf  the  Fir  It's  dm*. 

I  4  They 


A     T    Q    U    R 

They  have  feid, 
Quhat  lay  thay  ? 
Let  Yame  fay. 

In  the  great  room  are  feveral  good  pidlurcs.  A 
head  of  the  Founder.  The  prefent  Lord  Marechal 
when  young,  and  General  Keith,  his  brother.  Bi- 
fhop  Burrtet  in  his  robes,  as  Chancellor  of  the  Gar- 
ter. A  head  of  Mnry  Stuart,  m  black,  with  a 
crown  in  one  hand,  a  crucifix  in  the  other.  Arthur 
Jonjlon,  a  fine  head,  by  Jamefcn.  Andrew  Canty 
\>y  the  fame.  Gordon,  of  Strahkcb,  publifher  of  the 
maps,  and  feveral  others,  by  Jamefon. 

In  the  library  is  the  alcoran  on  vellum,  finely 
illuminated. 

A  He}?rew  Bibl^,  Manufcript,  with  Rabinical 
jiotes,  on  vellum. 

Jfidori  excerpta  ex  lihro  :  a  great  curiofity,  being  a 
complete  natural  hiftory,  with  figures,  richly  illu- 
rninated  on  fquares  of  plated  gold,  on  vellum. 

A  Paraphfafe  on  the  Revelation,  by  JarAes  VL 
with  notes,  in  the  King's  own  hand. 

A  fine  miflal  *. 

There  are  aboiU  a  hundred  and  forty  ftudents 
jjelonging  to  this  college. 

The  grammar-fchool  is  a  low  but  neat  building. 
Gordon^  hofpital  is  handfome  -,  in  front  is  a  good 
ftatue  of  the  founder  :  it  maintains  forty  boys, 
children  of  the  inhabitants  of  Aberdeen^  who  are 
apprenticed  at  proper  ages. 

•  There  is  alfo  a  very  curious  filver  chain  fix  feet  long', 
found  in  the  ruins  of  the  White  Fryers;  at  one  end  is  a 
round  flat  plate,  on  the  other  apear-fhapcd  appendage. 

The 


IN    SCOTLAND.  '$2t. 

The  infirmary  is  a  large  plain  building,  and  fends 
,  out  between  eight  and  nine  hundred  cured  patients 
annually. 

On  the  fide  of  the  Great  Bleachery,  which  is 
common  to  the  town,  are  the  publick  walks.  Over 
a  road,  between  the  Caftle-ftreet  and  the  river,  is  a 
very  handfome  arch,  which  muft  attradl  the  atten- 
tion of  the  traveller. 

On  the  eafl  of  the  town  is  a  work  begun  by 
Cromzsi^el,  from  whence  is  a  fine  view  of  the  fea :  ' 

,  beneath  is  a  fmall  patch  of  ground,  noted  for  pro- 
ducing very  early  barley,  which  was  then  reaping- 

Prices  of  provifions  in  this  town  were  thcfe  :   Provlfions,. 
Beef,  (i6  ounces  to  the  pound)  2d.  ■*-.  to  56.  mut- 
ton the  fame;  butter,  (28  ounces  to  the  pound)  6d. 
to  8d.  cheefe,  ditto,  46.   to  4d.  -!-■  ^  large  pullet; 
.6d.  or  lod.  duck,  the  fame  ;  goofe,  2S.  3d. 

Crofs  the  harbour  to  the  granite  quarries  that  Granite 
contribute  to  fupply  London  with  paving-ftones  : 
the  Hone  lies  either  in  large  nodules  or  ip  (hattery 
beds,  are  cut  into  fhape  ;  and  the  fmal.1  pieces  for 
the  middle  of  the  ftreets  are  put  on  board  for 
feven  Ibillings  per  tun,  the  lopg  ftones  at  ten- 
pence  per  foot. 

Vifited  old  Aberdeen^  about  a  mile  north  of  the  Aug.  s. 
new  i  a  poor  town,  feated  not  far  from  the  Bon.  ^^'^  ^^herdeeiu 
The  college  is  built  round  a  fquare  with  cloifters. 
The  chapel  is  very  ruinous  within  \  but  there  ftill 
remains  fome  wood- work  of  exquifite  v^orkmanfhip- 
This  was  preferved  by  the  fpirit  of  the  Provoft, 
at  the  time  of  the  reformation,  who  armed  his  peo- 
ple and  checked  the  blind  z^al  of  the  populace. 

The 


T22  /V      T    O    U  R 

The  library  is  large.  The  moft  remarkable 
things  are,  'John  Trevifa's  tranflation  of  HigderCs 
Folydronicon^  in  1387  ;  the  manufcript  excellently 
wrote,  and  the  language  very  good,  for  that  time. 
A  very  neat  Tiutch  miflal,  with  elegant  paintings  on 
the  margin.  Another,  of  the  angels  appearing  to 
the  fhepherds,  with  one  of  the  men  playing  on  the 
bagpipes.  A  manufcript  catalogue  of  the  old  trea- 
fury  of  the  college. 

He5lor  Boethius  was  the  firfl  principal  of  the  col- 
lege, and  fent  for  from  Paris  for  that  purpofe,  on 
an  annual  falary  of  forty  marks,  Scots^  at  thirteen- 
pence  each.  The  fquare  tower  on  the  fide  of  the 
college  was  built  by  CrcmiveU  for  the  reception  of 
ftudents  ;  of  which  there  are  about  a  hundred  be- 
longing to  the  college,  who  lie  in  it. 

In  Bifhop  Elphinfton\  hall,  who  was  the  founder, 
is  a  piflure  of  Bifliop  Dunbar^  who  finifhed  what 
the  other  left  incomplete.  Forbes^  Bifhop  of  Aber- 
deen^ and  ProfeiTors  Sandiland  and  Gordon^  by 
Jamefon.  The  Sybils  :  faid  to  be  done  by  the  fame 
hand,  but  fcemed  to  me  in  too  different  a  ftyle  to 
be  his  j  but  the  Sybilia  AEgyptiaca  and  Erytbraa 
are  in  good  attitudes. 

The  cathedral  is  very  antient  •,  no  more  than  the 
two  very  antique  fpires  and  one  ifle,  which  is  ufed 
as  a  church,  are  now  remaining. 

From  a  tumulus^  called  Tillie  dron^  now  covered 
with  trees,  is  a  fine  view  of  an  cxtenfive  and  rich 
corn  country  •,  once  a  moft  barren  fpot,  but,  by  the 
induftry  of  the  inhabitants  brought  to  its  p'refent 
ftate.  A  pretty  vale  bordered  with  wood,  the  ca- 
thedral 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  123 

thedral  foaring  above  the  trees,  and  the  river  Bon^ 
form  all  together  a  mod  agreeable  profpedl. 

Beneath  are  fome  cruives,  or  wears,  to  take  fal- 
mon  in.  The  owners  are  obliged  by  law  to  make 
the  rails  of  the  cruives  *  of  a  certain  width,  to  per- 
mit fi(h  of  a  certain  fize  to  pafs  up  the  river  ;  but 
as  that  is  negledled,  they  pay  an  annual  fum  to  the 
owners  of  the  fifherics  which  lie  above,  to  compen- 
fate  the  lofs. 

In  the  Regiam  Majefiatem  are  preferved  feveral 
antient  laws  relating  to  the  falmon  fifheries,  couched 
in  terms  expreflive  of  the  fimplicity  of  the  times. 

From  Saturday  night  till  Monday  morning,  they 
were  obliged  to  leave  a  free  pafTage  for  the  filh, 
which  is  ityled  the  Saterdnyes  Sloppe  -f. 

Alexander  I.  enaded,  '  That  the  (Ireame  of  the 

*  water  fal  be  in  all  parts  fwa  free,  that  ane  fwine 

*  of  the  age  of  three  zeares,  well  i^td,  may  turne 

*  himfelf  within  the  ftreame  round  about,  fwa  that 

*  his  fnowt  nor  taill  fall  not  touch  the  bank  of  the 

*  water. 

*  Slayers  of  reide  fiflie  or  fmoltes  of  falmond, 

*  the  thirde  time  are  punifhed  with  death.     And 

*  fic  like  he  quha  commands  the  famine  to  be 

*  done.*  Jac.  IV.  pari.  S.Jlat.Roh.  III. 

Continue  my  journey  :  pafs  over  the  bridge  of  Awe.  9, 
Don  ;  a  fine  gothic  arch  fiung  over  that  fine  river, 
from  one  rock  to  the  other :  ride  for  fome  miles  on 
the  fea  fands  j  pafs   through  Newhurghy  a   fmaU 
village,  and  at  low  water  ford  the  Tihen,  a  river 

•  Cruives,  &c.  Hiall  have  their  heeke  two  inches  wide, 
that  the  fry  may  pafs.     R06.  I. 

^  produ6live 


X24  A      T    O    U    R 

produflive  of  the  pearl  mufcle  :  go  through  the 
parifli  of  Furvie-t  now  entirely  overwhelmed  with 
fand,  (except  two  farms)  and  about  500I.  ^i^r  ann. 
loft  to  the  Errol  family,  as  appears  by  the  oath  of 
the  faftor,  made  before  the  court  of  feffions  in 
1600,  to  afeertain  the  minifter's  falary.  It  was  at 
Inundarion  that  time  all  arable  land,  now  covered  with  fhifting 
fands,  like  the  deferts  of  Arabia^  and  no  veftiges 
remain  of  any  buildings,  except  a  fmall  fragment 
of  the  church. 

The  country  now  grows  very  flat ;  produces 
oats  J  but  the  crops  are  confiderably  worfe  than 
in  the  preceding  country.     Reach 

Bownefs^  or  Buchanefs^  the  feat  of  the  Earl  of 
ErroU  perched  like  a  falcon's  neft,  on  the  edge  of 
a  vaft  cliff  above  the  fea.  The  drawing-room,  a 
large  and  very  elegant  apartment,  hangs  over  it , 
the  waves  run  in  wild  eddies  round  the  rocks  be- 
neath, and  the  fea  fowl  clamor  above  and  below, 
forming  a  ftrange  profpedt  and  fingular  chorus. 
The  place  was  once  defenfible,  there  having  been 
a  ditch  and  draw-bridge  on  the  accclTible  fide  i 
but  now  both  are  deftroyed. 

Above  five  miles  fouth  is  Shins,  the  remains  of 
the  old  family  caflle,  featcd  ftrongly  on  a  penin- 
fulated  rock  ;  but  demolifhed  in  1594,  by  James 
VI.  on  the  rebellion  of  the  Earl  of  Huntly.  Near 
this  place  are  fome  vaft  caverns,  once  filled  with 
curious  ftaladlical  incruftations,  but  now  deftroyed, 
in  order  to  be  burnt  into  lime ;  for  there  is  none  in 
this  country,  that  ufcful  commodity  being  im- 
ported 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  '^2^ 

ported  from  the  Earl  of  EIgtn*s  works  on  the  Firth 
of  Forth. 

Here  the  (hore  begins  to  grow  bold  and  rocky, 
and  indented  in  a  ftrange  manner  with  fmall  and 
deep  creeks, or  rather  immenfe  and  horrible  chafms. 
The  hmous Bullers  of  Buchan  lie  about  a  mile  north    SuUert  of 
of  Bownefs ,  are  a  vaft  hollow  in  a  rock,  projecting   Buchan„ 
into  the  fea,  open  at  top,  with  a  communication  to 
the  fea  through  4  noble  natural  arch,  thro'  which 
boats  can  pafs,  and  lie  fecure  in  this  natural  har- 
bour.    There   is  a  path  round   the  top,  but  in 
fome  parts  too  narrow  to  walk  on  with  fatisfac- 
tion,  as  the  depth  is   about  thirty  fathom,  with 
water  on  both  fides,  being  bounded  on  the  north 
and  fouth  by  fmall  creeks. 

Near  this  is  a  great  infulatcd  rock,  divided  by  a 
narrow  and  very  deep  chafm  from  the  land.  This 
rock  is  pierced  through  midway  between  the  water 
and  the  top,  and  in  great  florms  the  v/ates  rufii 
through  it  with  vaft  noife  and  impetuofity.  On  the 
fides,  as  well  as  thofe  of  the  adjacent  cliffs,  breed 
multitudes  of  Kittiwakes  *.  The  young  are  a  fa-  ir^f^aw, 
vorite  dilh  in  North  Britain^  being  ferved  up  a 
little  before  dinner,  as  a  whet  for  the  appetite  ; 
but,  from  the  rank  fmell  and  tafte,  feem  as  if  they 
were  more  likely  to  have  a  contrary  efreft.  I  was 
told  of  an  honeft  gentleman  who  was  fet  down  for 
the  firft  time  to  this  kind  of  whet,  as  he  fuppofed  ; 
and  after  demolifhing  half  a  dozen,  with  much  im- 
patience declared,  that  he  had  eaten /^a-,  and  did 

•  Br.  ZqqI,  illufir,  26.  tah,  xxiii, 

not 


12^      —  A      T   O    U    R 

not  find  himfelf  a  bit  more  hungry  than  befo;e  he 
began. 
Fifberyoffea        On  this  coaft  is  a  great  fiflicry  of  Sea  Dogs  *, 
°^^'  which  begins  the  laft  week  of  July^  and  ends  the 

firft  in  September.  The  livers  are  boiled  for  oil  i 
the  bodies  fplic,  dried,  and  fold  to  the  common 
^  people,  who  come  from  great  diftances  for  them. 
There  are  very  fine  Turbot  taken  on  this  coaft; 
and  towards  Peterhead^  good  filherles  of  Cod  and 
Ling.  The  Lord  of  the  Manour  has  3I.  6s.  8d. 
per  annum  from  every  boat,  (a  fix-man  boat)  but 
if  a  new  crew  lets  up,  the  Lord,  by  way  of  encou- 
ragement, finds  them  a  boat.  Befides  thefe,  they 
have  little  yawls  for  catching  bait  at  the  foot  of 
the  rocks.  Mufcles  are  alfo  much  ufcd  for  bait, 
and  many  boats  loads  are  brought  for  that  purpofe 
from  the  mouth  of  the  Tthen.  Of  late  years,  a 
very  fuccefsfull  falmon  fifliery  has  been  fct  up  in 
the  fandy  bays  below  Slains.  This  is  performed  by 
long  nets,  carried  out  to  fea  by  boats,  a  great  com- 
pafs  taken,  and  then  hawled  on  (hore.  It  is  re- 
marked, thefe  fifh  fwim  againft  the  wind,  and  arc 
much  better  tafted  than  thofe  taken  in  frelh  waters. 
Mofl  of  the  labor  on  fhore  is  performed  here  by 
the  women :  they  will  carry  as  much  fifh  as  two 
men  can  lift  on  their  fhoiilders,  and  when  they  have 
fold  their  cargo  and  emptied  their  bafl<.et,  will  re- 
place part  of  it  with  ftones :  they  go  fixteen  miles 
to  fell  or  barter  their  fifh  i  are  very  fond  of  finery, 
and  will  load  their  fingers  with  trumpery  rings, 
when  they  want  both  fhoes  and  ftockings.     The 

•  The  picked  Dog,  Br.  Zcol.  III.  -j-j, 

fleet 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.       '  *27 

fleet  was  the  laft  war  fupplied  with  great  numbers 
of  men  froni  this  and  other  parts  oi  Scotland,  as 
well  as  the  army  :  I  think  near  70,000  engaged  in 
the  general  caufe,  and  affifted  in  carrying  our  glory 
through  all  parts  of  the  globe  :  of  the  former, 
numbers  returned  •,  of  the  latter,  very  few. 

The  houfes  in  this  country  are  built  with  clay,  Houfes; 
tempered  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  IJraelites  made 
their  bricks  in  the  land  of  yEgypt :  after  dreffing 
the  clay,  and  working  it  up  with  water,  the  la- 
borers place  on  it  a  large  ftratum  of  flraw,  which 
is  trampled  into  it  and  made  fmall  by  horfes :  then 
more  is  added,  till  it  arrives  at  a  proper  confiftency, 
when  it  is  ufed  as  a  plaifter,  and  makes  the  houfes 
very  warm.  The  roofs  are  farked,  i.  e.  covered 
with  inch-and-half  deal,  fawed  into  three  planks, 
and  then  nailed  to  the  joifts,  on  which  the  flates  are 
pinned.  * 

The  land  profpefl  is  extremely  unpleafant ;  for 
no  trees  will  grow  here,  in  fpitc  of  all  the  pains 
that  have  been  taken  :  not  but  in  former  times  it 
mud  have  been  well  v/ooded,  as  is  evident  from  the 
numbers  of  trees  dug  up  in  all  the  bogs.  The 
fame  nakednefs  prevales  over  great  part  of  this 
coaft,  even  far  beyond  Bamff,  except  iti  a  fcW  warm 
bottoms. 

The  corn  of  this  tratt  is  oats  and  barley ;  of  the 
laft  I  have  feen  very  good  clofe  to  the  edges  of  the 
cliffs.  Rents  are  paid  here  partly  in  calh,  partly 
in  kind  •,  the  laft  is  commonly  fold  to  a  contra(5lor. 
The  land  here  being  poor,  is  fet  cheap.  The  peo- 
ple  live  hardly  :   a  common  food  with  them  is 


128  A      T    O    U    R 

fozvettS)  the  huflvs  of  oats,  fifft  put  into  a  barrdl 
with  water,  in  order  to  grow  four,  and  then  boiled. 
Aug.  II.  Croflcd   the  country  wwa.rds  Bawff^  over  oat- 

lands,  a  coarfe  fort  of  downs,  and  feveral  black 
heathy  moors,  without  a  fingle  tree  fornumbers  of 

Craig/lon        miles.     See  Crnivflon  caftlc,  a  good  houfe,  once 
Callle.  .  'CD  -> 

defenfiblc,  featcd  in  a  fnug  bottom,  where  the  plan- 
tations thrive  greatly.  Saw  here  a  head  of  David 
Lejlyy  by  Jamefon^  and  another  of  Sir  Alexander 
Frazier^  by  the  fame.  Pafled  by  a  fmall  ruined 
caflle,  at  a  place  called  Cajlletony  feated  on  a  round 
hill  in  a  deep  glen,  and  fcarce  accefllble.  Ford  the 
Devrofty  a  fine  river,  over  which  had  been  a  beau- 
tiful! bridge,  now  wafhed  away  by  the  fioods. 
Reach 
Sawf.  Bamff,  pleafantly  feated  oh  the  fide  of  a  hill ; 

has  feveral  ftreets  i  but  that  with  the  town-houfe  in 
itj  adorned  with  a  new  fpire,  is  very  handfome : 
the  harbor  is  very  bad,  as  the  entrance  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Bevron  is  very  uncertain,  being  ofteh 
flopped  by  the  fiiifting  of  the  fands,  which  ar6 
continually  changing,  in  great  ftorms  -,  the  pier  is 
therefore  placed  on  the  outfide.  '  Much  falmon  is 
exported  from  hence.  About  ^roop  head,  fom^ 
kelp  is  made  ;  and  the  adventurers  pay  the  Lord  of 
the  Manour  50 1.  -per  ajin.  for  the  liberty  of  colled- 
ing  the  materials. 

The  Earl  of  Finlater  has  a  houfe,  prettily  feated 
on  an  eminence,  near  the  town,  with  fome  planta- 
tions of  flirubs  and  fmall  trees,  which  have  a  good 
effeft  in  fo  bare  a  country.  The  profpc6l  is  very 
fine,  commanding  the  rich  meadows  near  the  town, 
2  Dcwn 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  129 

D^ww  afmall  but  well-built  nfhing-town,  the  great 
promontory  of  Trcop-head,  and  to  the  north  the 
hills  of  Rofsjhire,  Sutherlfjid^  and  Cathnefs. 

The  houfe  once  belonged  to  the  Sharps  •,  and  the 
violent  archbilhop  of  that  name  was  born  here.  In 
one  of  the  apartments  is  a  pidure  of  Jamefon  by 
himfelf,  fitting  in  his  painting-room,  drefled  like 
Rubens^  and  with  his  hat  on,  and  his  pallet  in  his 
hand.  On  the  walls  are  reprefented  hung  up,  the 
pictures  o{  Charles  I.  and  his  Queen  ;  a  head  of  his 
own  wife  ;  another  head  ;  tv/o  fea  views,  and  Per- 
feus  and  Andromeda,  the  produdions  of  his  various 
pencil. 

D/(^  Houfe,  a  vaft  pile  of  building,  a  little  way  DuffUc^k, 
from  the  town,  is  a  fquare,  with  a  fquare  tower  at 
each  end  -,  the  front  richly  ornamented  with  carv- 
ing, but,  for  want  of  wings,  has  a  naked  look  : 
the  rooms  within  are  very  fmall,  and  by  no  mean^ 
anfwer  the  magnificence  of  the  cafe. 

In  the  apartments  are  thefe  pidures :  Frances, 
Dutchefs  of  Richmond,  full  length,  in  black,  with 
a  little  pifture  at  her  breaft.  ^t.  ^y,  1633,  by 
Vandyk.  Fine  heads  o^  Charles  I.  and  his  Queen. 
A  head  of  a  Duff,  with  fhort  grey  hair,  hy  Alexander 
of  Corfenday.  Near  the  houfe  is  a  fhrubbery,  with 
a  walk  two  miles  long  leading  to  the  river. 

About  two  miles  weft  of  Bamff,  not  far  from  the  Aug.  12. 
fea,  is  a  great  ftratum  of  fand  and  fliells,  ufed  with 
fuccefs  as  a  manure.  Sea  tang  is  alfo  much  ufed 
for  corrl-lands,  fometimes  by  itfelf,  fometimes 
mixed  with  earth,  and  left  to  rot:  it  is  befides  often 
laid  frelh  on  grafs,  and  anfv/ers  very  well.     Pafied 

K  by 


130  A     T   O    U   R 

by  thehonfc  oi  Boyne^  a  ruined  caftle,  on  the  edge 
of  a  deep  glen,  tilled  with  Ibnie  good  afh  and 
maples. 

Near  Portfoy^  a  fmall  town,  is  a  large  llratum  of 
marble,  a   coarfe  fort  of  Verd  di  Ccrjica^  ufed  in 
fome  houfes  for  chimney-pieces.     Reach 
CuUfnllovi^e.       Ciillen  Iloufe,  feated  at  the  edge  of  a  deep  glen 
full   of  very  large  trees,   which  being  out  of  the 
reach  of  the  fca  winds,  profper  greatly.    This  fpot 
is  very  prettily  laid  out  in  walks,  and  over  the  en- 
trance  is  a  magnificent  arch  fixty  feet   high,  and 
eighty-two  in  width.     The  houfe  is  large,  but  ir- 
regular.    The  mod  remarkable  pictures  are,  a  full 
length  of  "James  VI.  by  Myiens  :  at  the  time  of  the 
revolution,   the  mob  had  taken  it  out  oi  Holyrood 
Houfe,  and  were  kicking  it  about  the  ftreets,  when 
the  Chancellor,  the  Earl  of  FiuLiler,  happening  to 
pafs  by,  redeemed  it  out  of  their  hands.     A  por- 
trait ot  James  Duke  of  ihmiltony  beheaded  1649, 
in  a  large  black  cloak,  with  a  fVir,  by  Vdndyk.     A 
half-length  of  his  brother,  by  the  fame,  killed  at 
the  battle  o^  PVorceJlcr.  IViUinm  Duke  of  llamilton^ 
prefident  of  the  revolution  parlcment,  by  KnelUr, 
Old  Lord  Bamff,  aged  90,  wkh  a  long  white  fquare 
beard,  who  is  laid  to  have  incurred  the  cenfure  of 
the  church,  at  that  age,  for  his  galantrics  *. 

The 

*  Amonf;  otherph5\uies  of  pcrfons  of  merit,  that  of  the  ad. 
mirablc  C'ichton  mull  not  lie  civcrlooked.  I  w;is  iuformed, 
that  there  is  one  of  that  extraordinary  perfon  in  the  poflcflion 
of  Alrxandtr  Motri/on,  Efij;  of  Va^iiic,  in  the  county  of  B^Tm/f; 
it  is  in  the  fame  apartment  with  lome  oi  JamrjoH^^,  but  fecinj 
done  by  a  fupcrior  hand  :  came  into  Mr.  Mtjrri/on'%  poflcflion 
from  the  faouly  of  O/V/^/t «,  Wi*i.Q\XTi\.Frendraught,  chief  of 

tJic 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  131 

The  country  round  Cullen  has  all  the  marks  of 
improvement,  owing  to  the  *  indefatigable  pains 
of  the  late  noble  owner,  in  advancing  the  art  of 
agriculture  and  planting,  and  every  orhbr  ulefull 
bufincfs,  as  far  as  the  nature  of  the  foil  would  ad- 
mit. His  fuccefs  in  the  firft  was  very  great  j  the 
crops  of  beans,  peas,  oats,  and  barley,  v/ere  ex- 
cellent-,  the  wheat  very  good,  but,  through  the 
fault  of  the  climate,  will  not  ripen  till  it  is  late, 
the  harveft  in  thefe  parts  being  in  Ocfober.  The 
plantations  are  very  extenfive,  and  reach  to  the  top 
of  the  hill  of  Knock  •,  but  the  farther  they  extend 
from  the  bottoms  the  worle  they  luccecd. 

The  town  of  Cullen  is  mean  •,  yet  has  about  a 
hundred  looms  in  it,  there  being  a  ilouriOiing  ma- 
nufadure  of  linnen  and  thread,  of  which  near  fifty 
thoufand  pounds  worth  is  annually  made. 

Near  this  town  ih^  D \.\kt  oi  Cumberland^  after  his 
march  from  Bamff-,  joined  the  reit  of  his  forces 
from  Straithbogie^  and  encamped  at  Cullen. 

In  a  fmali  fandy  bay  are  three  lofty  fpiring  rocks, 
formed  of  flinty  maflcs,  cemented  together  very 
diiferently  from  any  fbratum  in  the  country.  Thcfc 
are  called  the  three  Kings  of  Cullen.  A  little  far- 
ther is  another  vafi  rock,  pierced  quite  through, 
formed  of  pebbly  concretions  lodged  in  clay,  which 
had  fubfiided  in  thick  but  regular  layers. 

the  name,  to  whom  Cnchion  probably  fent  it  from  Tialy,  where 
he  fpent  the  lafl  years  of  his  (hort,  bvit  glorio.Js  life. 

*  His  Lordlliip  colled^d   together   near  2000  fjuls,   to  hi? 
new  town  at  Keith,  hyfeui/ig;  i.e.  giving  in  perpetiuty,  on.     • 
payment  of  a  flight  ackuowlegemeiit,   Ian  i  fjfficvent  to  build 
a  houfe  on,  with  gardens  and  back-yard. 

K  2  Palled 


132  A      T    O    U    R 

Ave.  aj.  PafTed  through  a  fine  open  country,  full  of  gen- 

tle rifings,  and  rich  in  corn,  with  a  few  clumps  of 
trees  Iparingly  fcattered  over  it.    Great  ufe  is  made 

Stone  marie,  hereof  (tone  mark,  a  gritty  indurated  marie,  found 
in  vaft  ftrata,  dipping  pretty  much  :  it  is  of  dif- 
ferent colors,  blue,  pale  brown,  and  reddifh ;  is 
cut  out  of  the  quarry,  and  laid  very  thick  on  the 
ground  In  lumps,  but  will  not  wholly  diflblve  un- 
der three  or  four  years.  In  the  quarry  is  a  great 
deal  of  fparry  matter,  which  is  laid  apart,  and 
burnt  for  lime.     Arrive  at 

Co/luQordon,  CajtU-Gordcn^  a  large  old  houfe,  the  feat  of  the 
Duke  of  Gordon^  lyitig  in  a  low  wet  country,  near 
lome  large  well-grown  woods,  and  a  confiderable 
one  of  great  hollies.  It  was  founded  by  George 
fecond  Earl  of  Huntly ;  and  was  originally  called 
the  caftle  of  the  bog  of  Gight.  The  principal  pic- 
tures in  Cajlle-Gordon  are,  the  firft  Marquifs  of 
Iluntly.  Fourth  Marquifs  of  Huntly^  beheaded  by 
the  Covenanters.  His  fon,  the  gallant  Lord  Gordon, 
Montrofc's  friend,  killed  at  the  battle  oi  Auldfort. 
T^ord  Lewis  Gordon^  a  lefs  generous  warrior  j  the 
plague  *  of  the  people  of  Murrayy  (then  the  feat  of 
the  Covenanters)  whofe  character,  with  that  of  the 
brave  Mcntrcfey  is  well  contrafted  in  thefe  old 
lines  : 

Jf  yc  with  Mcntro/c  gae,  ye'l  get  fie  and  wae  enough  ; 

If  ye  with  Lord  Lenvls  gae,  ye'l  get  rob  and  rave  enough. 

•  Whence  this  proverb, 

*  The  Guil,  the  Cor.Ion,  and  the  Hooded  Craw, 
<   Were  the  three  worft  things  Murray  ever  faw. 
Cutl  is  a  weed  that  infdls  corn.    It  was  from  the  caftle  of 
Rcti-es,  on  the  Sp:j-,  that  Lord  Levjis  made  his  plundering  cx- 
curfions  into  Murntv. 

The 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  13 

•  The  head  of  the  fccond  Countefs  of  Huntl)\ 
daughter  of  James  I.  A  fine  fmall  portrait  of  the 
Able  d'Jubignef  fitting  in  his  ftudy.  A  very  fine 
head  of  St.  John  receiving  the  revelation  ;  a  beau- 
tifull  expreflion  of  atte'ntion  and  devotion. 

The  Duke  oi  Gordon  ftill  keeps  up  the  diverfion  Falconry, 
of  falconry,  and  had  feveral  fine  Hawks,  of  the 
Peregrine  and  gentle  Falcon  fpecies,  which  breed 
in  the  rocks  of  Glenmore.  I  faw  alfo  here  a  true 
Highland  gre-hound,  which  is  now  become  very 
fcarce :  it  was  of  a  very  large  fize,  ftrong,  deep 
chefted,  and  covered  with  very  long  and  rougii  hair. 
This  kind  was  in  great  vogue  in  former  days,  and 
wkdt  in  vaft  numbers,  at  the  magnificent  ftag-chafes, 
by  the  powerful!  Chieftains. 

The  Spey  is  a  dangerous  neighbor  to  Cajlle-  The  ^pry. 
Gordon^  a  large  and  furious  river,  overflowing  very 
frequently  in  a  dreadful!  manner,  as  appears  by  its 
ravages  far  beyond  its  banks.  The  bed  of  the 
river  is  wide  and  full  of  gravel,  and  the  channel 
very  fhifting. 

The  Duke  of  Cumberland  pafled  this  water  at 
Beily  church,  near  this  place,  when  the  channel 
was  fo  deep  as  to  take  an  officer,  from  whom  I  had 
the  relation,  and  who  v/as  fix  feet  four  inches  high, 
up  to  the  bread.  The  banks  are  very  high,  and 
fleep  j  fo  that,  had  not  the  Rebels  been  provi- 
dentially fo  infatuated  as  to  neglect  oppofition,  the 
paflTage  muft  have  been  attended  with  confiderable 
lofs. 

The  faimon  filhery  on  this  river  is  very  great : 
about  feventeen  hundred  barrels  full  are  caught  in 

K  3       .  the 


1S4  A      T    O    U    R 

the  feafon,  and  the  (hore  is  rented  for  about  i2Col. 
per  annum. 

AvQ  f  i.  Pafi'ed  through  Forchahus,  a  wretched  town,  clofc 

to   the  cafHe.     CrofTed   the   Spey  in  a  boat,  and 
landed  in  the  county  oi Murray. 

The  pealants  houles,  which,  throughout  the  fliirc 
of  Bamffy  were  very  decent,  were  now  become  very 
mlferable,  being  entirely  tnade  of  turf :  the  country 
partly  moor,  partly  cultivated,  but  in  a  very  flo- 
venly  manner. 

El^ln,  Dine  at  Elgin  *,   a  good  town,   with  many  of 

the  houfes  built  over  piazzas  •,  excepting  its  great 
cattle  fairs,  has  little  trade  ;  but  is  remarkable  for 
its  ecclefiaftical  antiquities.  The  cathedral -f-  had 
bfcn  a  magnificent  pile,  but  is  now  in  ruins.  Jon- 
fion^  in  his  encomia  urbium^  Celebrates  the  beauty  of 
Elgin^  and  laments  the  fate  of  this  noble  building: 
u^rcihus  heroum  nitidis  urbs  cingitur^  intus 

Plebeii  radiant.,  nchiliumque  Lares  : 
Omnia  dcUHanty  ceteris  fed  rudera  lempli 
Dum  fpe^as^  lachrymis^  Scotia  tinge  genas. 
The  weft  door  is  very   elegant,  and  richly  orna- 
mented.  The  choir  very  beautifull,  and  has  a  fine 
and  light  gallery  running  round  it  -,  and  at  theeaft 
end  are  tv.'o  rows  of  narrow  windows  in  an  excel- 
lent gotliic  tafte.  Ihe chapter- houfc  is  an  oflagon, 

•  Cehice  Belle  ville. 

^  Founded  by  'John,  fecond  fon  of  the  hoofe  Ctf  Junes,  and 
Bifhop  oi  Murray,  1406  ;  of  vvhofc  epitaph  I  mtt  with  in  a 
curious  M.  S    hiHory  of  the  li:nes  family  this  fra;:ment. 

H:c  jacet  in  Xio  pater  et  Dominus,  Dcminus  Johannes  de 
Innes  bvjui  Eccleji,r  epijccfus — j^i  hoc  notabiU  opus  incepit 
4t  ptr  Jepttnnium  ediJica'Vit, 

the 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  J35 

the  roof  fupported  by  a  fine  fingle  column,  with 
neat  carvings  of  coats  of  arms  round  the  capital. 
There  is  ftill  a  great  tower  on  each  fide  of  this  cathe- 
dral ;  but  that  in  the  centre,  with  the  fpire  and  whole 
roof,  are  fallen  in,  and  form  moft  awefull  frag- 
ments, mixed  with  the  battered  monuments  of 
Knights  and  Prelates.  Boethius  fays  that  Duncan^ 
who  was  killed  by  Macbeth  at  Invernefs^  lies  buried 
here.  Numbers  of  modern  tomb-ftones  alfo  crowd 
the  place  ^  a  proof  how  difficult  it  is  to  eradicate 
the  opinion  of  local  fanflity,  even  in  a  religion  that 
afftifts  to  defpife  it. 

About  a  mile  from  hence  is  the  caftle  Qi Spinle;  SpinU. 
a  large  fquare  tower,  and  a  vaft  quantity  of  other 
ruined  buildings,  flill  remain,  which  fnews  its  an- 
tient  magnificence  whilfi  the  refidenceof  the  Bifhops 
ot  Murray  :  the  lake  of  Spinie  almoft  wafiies  the 
walls  j  is  about  five  miles  long,  and  half  a  mile 
broad,  featcd  in  a  flat  country.  During  winter, 
great  numbers  of  v/ild  fwans  migrate  hither  j  and 
I  have  been  told,  that  fome  have  bred  here.  Boe- 
thius *  fays  they  refort  here  for  the  fake  of  a  cer- 
tain herb  called  after  their  name. 

Between  this  and  Elgin  is  a  ruined  chapel, called 
Mciifon  dieu.  Near  it  is  a  large  gravelly  cliff^,  from 
whence  is  a  beautifull  view  of  the  town,  cathedral, 
a  round  hill  with  the  remains  of  a  caftle,  and  be- 
neath is  the  gentle  ftream  of  the  Lojfiey  the  Loxia 
of  Ptolemy. 

Three  miles  fouth  is  the  Abby  o£ Plufc^irdin,  in  piufcairdin 
a   moil  fequeftred  place  j  a  beautifull  ruin,  the     ^'^'^X- 
*  Scotorum  Regni  defer,  ix, 

K  4  arches 


1^6  A      T    O    U    R 

arches  elegant,  the  pillars  well  turned,  and  the 
capitals  rich  *. 

Crofs  the  Lojfte^  ride  along  the  edge  of  a  vale, 
which  has  a  ftrange  mixture  of  good  corn  and  black 
turberies  :  on  the  road-fide  is  a  mill-ftone  quarry. 

Arrive  in  the  rich  plain  oi  Murray,  fertile  in 
corn  ;  and  the  upper  parts  of  the  country  produce 
great  numbers  of  cattle.  The  view  of  the  Firth  of 
Murroy^  v/ith  a  full  profpedof  the  high  mountains 
oi RcfsJIjire  and  Sutherland,  and  the  magnificent  en- 
trance into  the  bay  oi  Cromartie  between  two  lofty 
hills,  form  a  fine  piece  of  fcenery. 
^iMlo/shhhy,  Turn  about  half  a  mile  out  of  the  road  to  the 
north,  to  fee  Kinlofs  Abby+,  the  burying-place  of 
many  a  Scottijh  monarch.  The  Prior's  chamber, 
two  femicircular  arches,  the  pillars,  the  couples  of 
feveral  of  the  roofs,  afford  fpecimens  of  the  moft 
beautifull  gothic  architefture  in  all  the  elegance 
of  fimplicity,  without  any  of  its  fantaftic  ornaments. 
Near  the  abby  is  an  orchard  of  apple  and  pear 
I  trees,  at  left  coeval  with  the  laft  Monks  j  numbers 

lie  proftrate  ;  their  venerable  branches  fecm  to  have 
taken  frelh  roots,  and  were  loaden  with  fruit,  be- 
yond what  could  be  expeded  from  their  antique 
look. 
Great  Near  Forres,  on  the  road-fide,  is  a  vaft  column, 

column.  three  feet  ten  inches  broad,  and  one  foot  three  inches 

thick  :  the  height  above  ground  is  twenty-three 
feet ;  below,  as  is  faid,  twelve  or  fifteen.  On  one 
fide  are  numbers  of  rude  figures  of  animals  and 

•  As  1  was  informed,  for  I  did  not  fee  this  celebrated  abby. 
•j-  Founded  about  1124,  by  Davitil. 

armed 


IN    SCOTLAND.  137 

armed  men,  with  colors  flying  :  fomc  of  the  men 
feemed  bound  like  captives.  On  the  oppofite  fide 
was  a  crofs,  included  in  a  circle,  and  raifed  a  little 
above  the  furface  of  the  (tone.  At  the  foot  of  the 
crofs  are  two  gigantic  figures,  and  on  one  of  the 
fides  is  feme  elegant  fret-work. 

This  is  called  King  Suend's  ftone  ;  and  feems  to 
be,  as  Mr.  Gordon  *  conjedlures,  erefted  by  the 
Scots,  in  memory  of  the  final  retreat  of  the  Daries : 
it  is  evidently  not  Dafiijh,  as  fome  have  afTerted  ; 
the  crofs  difproves  the  opinion,  for  that  nation  had 
not  then  received  the  light  of  chriftianity. 

On  a  moor  not  far  from  Forres,  Boetbius,  and 
Shake/pear  from  him,  places  the  rencountre  of  MaC' 
heth  and  the  three  wayward  fillers,  or  witches.  It 
was  my  fortune  to  meet  with  but  one,  which  was 
fomewhere  in  the  lall  county  :  fhe  was  of  a  fpecies 
far  more  dangerous  than  thefe,  but  neither  withered^ 
fior  wild  in  her  attire,  but  fo  fair. 

She  look'd  not  like  an  Inhabitant  o'th'  Earth  ! 

Boethius  tells  his  ftory  adm.irably  well :  but  en- 
tirely confines  it  to  the  predictions  of  the  three  fa- 
tal fifters,  which  Shakefpear  has  fo  finely  copied  in 
the  IVth  fceneof  the  ift  a6l.  The  Poet,  in  confor- 
mity to  the  belief  of  the  times,  calls  them  witches-, 
jn  fa6t  they  were  the  Fates,  the  Valkyrie  -}-  of  the  nor- 
thern nations,  Gunnay  Nota^  and  Skulda,  the  hand- 
maids 

•  It  in,  Ssptenir.  158. 

f  From  Walur,  fignifying  the  flaughter  in  battle,  and  Kyria 
to  obtain  by  choice  :  for  their  oiRce,  befides  feleiting  out  thofe 
that  were  to  die  in  battle,  was  to  conduct  them  to  Valhallay 
the  Paradife  of  the  brave,  the  Hall  of  Odin.  Their  numbers 
are  different,  ibme  make  them  three,  others  twelve,  others 

fourteen  j 


i^B  A      T    O    II    R 

maids  of  Odin^  the  ardic  Mnrs^  and  ftyled  the 
Chufers  of  the  Jlain^  it  being  their  office  in  battle  to 
mark  thofe  devoted  to  dea;]i.    • 

We  the  reins  to  flaughter  give. 
Oars  to  kill,  and  ours  to  fpare  : 
Sflite  of  danger  he  (hall  live, 
(Weave  the  crimfon  web  of  war)  *. 

Bocthius^  fenfihle  of  this,  calls  them  Pnrc^ :  and 
Shake/pear  introduces  them  juft  going  upon  their 
employ. 

When  flial]  we  three  meet  again 
In  thunder,  lightning,  or  in  rain  ? 
When  the  hurly-burly* s  donCf 
When  the  battle's  loft  or  <woh. 

But  all  the  fine  incantations  that  fucceed,  are  bor- 
rowed from  the  fancifull  Diableries  of  old  times, 
but  fublimed  ;  and  purged  from  all  that  is  ridicu- 
lous by  the  creative  genius  of  the  inimitable  Poet, 
of  whom  Dry  den  fo  juftly  fpeaks  : 

But  Shakespear's  magic  cou'd  not  copied be^ 
Within  that  circle  none  durfi  imalk  but  he. 

We  laugh  at  the  magic  of  others ;  but  Shake* 
/pearls  makes  us  tremble.  The  windy  caps  f  of  King 


fourteen;  are  defcribed  as  being  very  heautifull,  covered  with 
tl<e  fcathcrt  of  fwans,  and  armed  with  fpear  and  helmet. 
f  ide  Bartholinus  de  lauf.  contempt,  fwtrtui.  553,  554,  &  not<f 
•tel,  Srephanii  in  Sax.  Cramm.  88.  &   I'orfajus.   p.  36- 

•    Gray. 

■\  King  Eric  was  a  great  ma!gician,  who  by  turning  his  cap, 
caulcu  the  wind  10  blow  according  ly  his  mind. 

4  Eric^ 


IN     SCOTLAND.  139 

Eric,  and  the  vendible  knots  of  wind  otWiftFinlnnJ* 
magicians  appear  infinitely  ridiculous;  but  when 
our  Poet  drefTes  up  the  fame  idea,  how  horrible 
is  the  dorm  he  creates  ! 

Though  you  untie  the  wines,  and  let  them  fight 

/\gainft  the  churches ;  though  the  yefly  waves 

Confound  and  fwallow  navigation  up  ; 

Though  blaced  corn  be  lodged  and  trees  blown  down  j 

Though  caftles  topple  on  their  warders'  heads ; 

Though  palaces  and  pyramids  do  flope 

Their  heads  to  their  foundations ;  though  the  tieafure 

Of  nature's  germins  tumble  nil  together. 

Even  till  deftruftion  ficken,  anfwer  rae 

To  what  I  aflc. 

Lay  at  Forres^  a  very  neat  town,  feated  under  Forres. 
fome  little  hills,  which  are  prettily  divided.  In  the 
great  flreet  is  the  town  houfe  with  a  handfome  <^u- 
polo,  and  at  the  end  is  an  arched  gateway,  which 
has  a  good  efFe6t.  On  a  hill  weft  of  the  town  are 
the  poor  remains  of  the  caftle,  from  whence  is  a 
fine  view  of  a  rich  country,  interfperfed  with  groves^ 
the  bay  of  Fin dr en,  a  fine  bafon,  almolt  round, 
with  a  narrow  ftrait  into  it  from  the  fea,  and  a  me- 
lancholy profped  of  the  parifli  of  the  fame  name, 
now  nearly  overwhelmed  with  fand.  This  ftrange  Inundation 
inundation  is  ftiU  in  motion,  but  moftly  in  the  time 
of  a  weft  wind  :  it  moves  along  the  furface  with  an 
even  progreffion,  but  is  ftopped  by  water,  after 

*  Solebant  aliquando  Finni,  negotiatoribus  in  eorum  litto- 
ribus  contraria  ventorum  tcmpeftace  impeditis,  ventum  ve- 
nalem  exhibere,  mercedeque  oblata,  tres  nodos  magicos  msn 
caflioticos  Icro  conftridos  eifdem  reddere,  eo  fervato  modera- 
mine  ut  ubi  primum  dijjoluer'mt,  ventos  haberent  placidos  ; 
ubi  alterum,  vehementiores  ;  at  ubi  tertium  laxa'verint  ita  fas- 
vas  tempeltates  fe  palTuros,  &c.  O/aajil/a^aajde  gent.  Sept.  97. 

which 


of  fand. 


^ 


«0     .  A      T    O    U    R 

which  it  forms  little  hills :  its  motion  is  (o  quick, 
that  a  gentleman  afllired  me  he  had  feen  an  apple- 
tree  fc  covered  with  it,  in  one  feafon,  as  to  leave 
only  a  few  of  the  green  leaves  of  the  upper 
branches  appear  above  the  furface.  An  eftate  of 
about  300  1.  per  ann.  has  been  thus  overwhelmed  j 
and  it  is  not  long  fince  the  chimnies  of  the  prin- 
cipal houfes  were  to  be  feen :  it  began  about  eighty- 
years  ago,occafioned  by  the  cutting  down  the  trees 
and  pulling  up  the  bent,  or  ftarwort,  which  gave 
occalion  at  lall  to  the  a6t  15th  G.  II.  to  prevent  its 
farther  ravages,  by  prohibiting  the  dcftruiflion  of 
that  plant. 
Aug,  15.  Crofs  the /vWrow ;   land  near  a  friable  rock   of 

whitifh  ftonc,  much  tinged  with  green,  an  indica- 
tion of  copper.  I'he  ftone  is  burnt  for  lime.  From 
an  adjacent  eminence  is  a  pi(5l:urerque  view  of 
Forres.  About  three  miles  farther  is  'Tarnaway 
"csiiii.  Caflle,  the  antient  feat  of  the  Earls  oi  Murray. 
The  hall,  called  Randolph's  Hall,  from  its  founder 
Earl  Randolph^  one  of  the  great  fupporters  of 
Robert  Bruce^  is  timbered  at  top  like  Wejlmhijier 
Hall:  its  dimenfions  are  79  feet  by  '^^■,  10  inches, 
and  fcems  a  fit  refort  for  Barons  and  their  vaflals. 
In  the  rooms  are  fome  good  heads :  one  of  a 
youth,  with  a  ribband  of  fome  order  hanging 
from  his  neck.  One  unknown,  with  a  black  body 
to  his  vefl,  and  brown  fleeves.  The  Fair,  or 
Benny  Earl  of  Murray^  as  he  is  commonly  called, 
who  was  murdered,  as  fuppofed,  on  account  of 
a  jealoufy  James  VI.  entertained  of  a  pafTion  the 
Qiieen  had  for  him  ;  at  left  fuch  was  the  popular 

opinion, 
2 


Tarnnivay 


IN     SCOTLAND.  (^t 

•opinion,  as  appears  from  the  old  ballad  on  the 
occafion : 

He  was  a  braw  Gallant, 

And  he  played  at  the  Gluve  * ; 
And  the  bonny  Earl  of  Murray^ 

Oh  !  he  was  the  Queene's  Love. 

There  are  befides,  the  heads  of  his  lady  and  daugh- 
ter ;  all  on  wood,  except  that  of  the  Earl.  To 
the  fouth-fide  of  the  caftle  are  large  birch  woods, 
abounding  with  Stags  and  Roes. 

Continued  my  journey  weft  to  Atddearne.  Am  JuUeame; 
now  arrived  again  in  the  country  where  the  Erfe 
fervice  is  performed.  Juft  beneath  the  church  is 
the  place  where  Montrofe  obtained  a  fignal  vidlory 
over  the  Covenanters,  many  of  whofe  bodies  lie  in 
the  church,  with  an  infcription,  importing,  accord- 
ing to  the  cant  of  the  time,  that  they  died  fighting 
for  their  religion  and  their  king.  I  was  told  this 
anecdote  of  that  hero  :  That  he  always  carried  with 
him  a  Ccefar^s  Commentaries,  on  whofe  margins 
were  written,  in  Montrofe'%  own  hand,  the  generous 
fentiments  of  his  heart,  verfes  out  of  the  Italian 
Poets,  exprefling  contempt  of  every  thing  but 
glory.  ^ 

Have  a  diftant  view  of  Nairn^  a  fmall  town  near 
the  fea.     Ride  through  a  rich  corn  country,  mixed 

*  For  Glaive y  an  old  word  for  a  fword. 

*  Then  furth  he  drew  his  trufty  Glaivey 

Quhyle  thoufands  all  arround, 

Drawn  frae  their  fheaths  glanft  in  the  fun. 

And  Iciud  the  Bougills  found.' 

Hardjknute. 

with 


r4-2  A      T    O    U    R 

vith  deep  and  bl.Kk  turberies,  which  ilicw  the  ori- 
ginal Hate  of  the  land,  before  the  recent  introduc- 
tion of  the  improved  method  of  agriculture.   Reach 

€aiuJor.  CoJder  Caftle,  or   Ca'-jodor,  as   Sbakefpear  calls   it, 

once  the  property  cf  its  tbatics.  The  antient  part 
is  a  great  fquare  tower  ;  but  there  is  a  large  and 
m'')re  .Tiodern  building  annexed,  with  a  draw- 
bridge. 

All  the  honfes  in  thcfc  parts  are  caftles,  or  at 
left  defenfible  •,  for,  till  the  year  1745,  the  High- 
landers mavk'  their  inroads,  and  drove  away  thecattle 
of  their  dcfencelrfs  neighbors.  There  arc  faid  to 
exift  fome  very  old  marriage  articles  of  the  daughter 
of  a  chicftiin,  in  v/hich  the  father  promifcs  for  her 
portion,  200  Scots  marks,  and  the  half  of  a  Af/- 
chaclmas  moon,  i,  e.  half  the  plunder,  when  the 
nights  srewdark  enough  to  make  their  excurfions. 

Rode  into  the  woods  of  Calder^  in  which  were 
very  fine  birch  trees  and  alders,  fome  oak,  great 
broom,  and  juniper,  which  gave  fhelter  to  the  Roes. 
Deep  rocky  glens,  darkened  with  trees,  bound 
each  fide  of  the  wood:  one  has  a  great  torrent  roar- 
ing at  its  diftant  bottom,  called  the  Brook  oi  Ach- 
vem  :  it  well  merits  the  name  of  that  of  Acheron^ 
being  a  mofl:  fit  fcene  for  witches  to  celebrate  their 
noflurnal  rites  in. 

Obferved  on  a  pillar  of  the  door  of  C^/J<?r  church, 

A  joug.  zjougt  i.  e.  an  iron   yoke,  or  ring,  fattened   to  a 

chain  j  which  was,  in  former  times,  put  round  the 
necks  of  delinquents  againft  the  rules  of  the  church, 
who  were  Ic-.t  there  expofed  to  Ihame  during  the 
lime  of  divine  fervice  :  but  thefe  penalties  are  now 

happily 


I  N    ^  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  ,43 

r 

happily  abolifhed.  The  clergy  of  Scotland^  the  ScctchzXzriy. 
moil  decent  and  confiftent  in  their  condu(fi:  of  any 
fee  of  men  I  ever  met  with  of  their  order,  are  at 
prefent  much  chnr.ged  from  the  furious,  illiterate, 
and  enthufiaftic  teachers  of  the  old  times,  and 
have  taken  up  the  mild  method  of  perfuafion,  in- 
ftead  of  the  cruel  difcipline  of  corporal  punifh- 
ments.  Science  almoft  univerfally  flourilhes  among 
them  i  and  their  difcourfe  is  not  lefs  Improving 
than  the  table  they  entertain  the  (Iranger  at  is 
decent  and  hofpitable./  Few,  very  few  of  them, 
permit  the  bewitchery  of  difilpation  to  lay  hold  of 
them,  notwithftanding  they  allow  all  the  innocer.t 
pleafures  of  others,  which,  though  not  criminal  in 
the  layman,  they  know,  muil  bring  the  taint  of 
levity  on  the  churchman.  They  never  fink  their 
characters  by  midnight  brawls,  by  mixing  with  the 
gaming  world,  either  in  cards,  cocking,  or  horfe- 
races,  but  preferve,  with  a  narrow  incorfie,  a  dig- 
nity too  often  loft  among  their  brethren  fouth  of 
the  T^weed  *. 

The  Scotch  livings  are  from  40].  per  ann.  to  1531.    ^a.'.Aliving^ 
per  ann.  a  decent  houfe  is  built  for  the  miniiler  on 
the  glebe,  and  about  fix  acres  of  land  annexed.  The 
church  allows  no  curate,  except  in  cafe  of  fickncfs 

•    To  the   WORTHY  !  f 

But  if  in  thefe  days  fuch  apoftafes  appear, 
(And  fuch  I  am  told  are  found  there  and  here) 
O  pardon,  dear  friends,  a  well-meaning  zeal 
Too  unguardedly  telling  the  fcandal  I  feel  ; 
It  touches  not  ye,  let  the  galled  jades  winch  : 
Sou^d  in  morals  and  doftrine,  ye  never  fhould  flinch, 
fcc.  &c.  &c.        ■  ^ 


144  A      T    O    U    R 

or  age,  when  one,  under  the  title  of  helper,  is  ap- 
pointed ;  or,  where  the  livings  are  very  extenfive,  a 
miflionary  or  afiiftant  is  allotted  -,  but  fine-cures,  or 
fine-cured  preferments,  never  difgrace  the  church 
of  our  fiRer  kingdom.  The  widows  and  children 
of  thofe  who  die  in  poor  circumfhances  are  of  late 
provided  for  out  of  a  fund  eftablifhed  by  two  afts, 
17th  and  2  2d  G.  II.  *. 

Crofs  the  Nairn ;  the  bridge  large,  but  the 
-flream  inconfiderable,  except  in  floods.  On  the 
weft  is  Kilraz'och  Caftle,  and  that  of  Dalcrofs.  Keep 
due  north,  along  the  military  road  from  Perth',  pafs 
'along  a  narrow  low  piece  of  land,  projefling  far 
into  the  Firt^^  called  Arderfter^  forming  a  ftrait 
fcarce  a  mile  over,   between  this  county  and  that 

Fort  George,  of  Cromartie  -f.  At  the  end  of  this  point  is  Fort 
George,  a  fmali  but  ftrong  and  regular  fortrefs, 
built  fince  1745,  as  a  place  d'armes :  it  is  kept  in 
excellent  order ;  but,  by  reafon  of  the  happy 
change  of  the  times,  feemed  almoft  deferred  :  the 
barracks  are  very  handfome,  and  form  feveral  re- 
gular and  good  ftreets. 

Lay  at  CambeltowKy  a  place  confifting  of  num- 
bers of  very  mean  houfes,  owing  its  rife  and  fup- 
port  to  the  neighboring  fort. 

Aug.  16.  Pafied  over  CuUoden  Moor,  the  place  that  North 

Britain  owes  itsprefcnt  profperityto,  by  the  vi(5loTy 
of  April  16, 1746.  On  the  fide  of  the  Moor  are  the 
great  plantations  of  CuUoden  Houfe,  the  feat  of  the 

•  An  account  of  the  government  of  tht  church  of  Scotland 
was  communicated  to  mc  by  the  Reverend  Mr.  Brodie,  the  late 
worthy  miniftcr  of  Calder.     Vide  Appendix,  N"-  I. 

f  Between  which  plies  a  ferry-boat. 

lat; 


CuUoden. 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  145 

late  Duncan  Forbes,  a  warm  and  aflive  friend  to  the 
houfe  of  Hanover,  who  fpent  great  fums  in  its  fer- 
vice,  and  by  his  influence,  and  by  his  perfuafions, 
diverted  numbers  from  joining  in  rebellion  ;  at 
length  he  met  with  a  cool  return,  for  his  humane 
but  unpolitical  attempt  to  O^eath,  after  viflory,  the 
unfatiated  fword.  But  let  a  veil  be  flung  over  a  few 
exccfTcs  confequential  of  a  day  produdive  of  fo 
much  benefit  to  the  united  kingdoms. 

The  young  adventurer  lodged  here  the  evening 
preceding  the  battle ;  diflraded  with  the  avcrfion 
of  the  common  men  to  difcipline,  and  the  diflfen- 
fions  among  his  officers,  even  when  they  were  at  the 
brink  of  deftruftion,  he  feemed  incapable  of  acting, 
could  be  fcarcely  perfuadcd  to  mount  his  horfe, 
never  came  into  the  aftion,  as  might  have  been  ex- 
pe(fted  from  a  prince  who  had  his  laft  fl:ake  to  play> 
but  fled  inglorioufly  to  the  old  traitor  Lovat  *,  who, 
I  was  told,  did  execrate  him  to  the  perfon  who  in- 
formed him  that  he  was  approaching  as  a  fugitive  ; 
forefeeing  his  own  ruin  as  the  confequence  -f.  y 

The 

*  His  Lordfhip  was  at  that  time  expefting  the  event  of  the 
battle,  when  a  perfon  came  in  and  informed  him,  that  he  faw 
the  Prince  riding  full  fpeed,   and  alone. 

■f-  Regard  to  impartiality  obliges  me  to  give  the  following 
account,  very  recently  communicated  to  me,  relating  to  the 
Hation  of  the  chief  on  this  important  day  j  and  that  by  an  eye- 
witnefs. 

The  Scotch  army  was  drawn  up  in  a  fingle  line  ;  behind,  at 
about  500  paces  diftance,  was  a  corps  de  re/cr-ue,  with  which 
was  the  Adventurer,  a  place  of  feeming  lecuricy,  fromi 
whence  he  ifl'ued  his  orders.  His  ufual  drefs  was  that  of  the 
Highlands,  but  this  day  he  appeared  in  a  brown  coat,  with  ;i 
loofe  great  coat  over  it,  and  an  ordinary  hat,  fuch  as  country- 
men wear,  on  hi^  head.     Kemote  as  tliis  place  was  from  che 


14^  A      T    O    U    R 

The  Duke  of  Cumberland^  v^hcn  he  found  that 
the  barges  of  the  licet  atcended  near  the  fhore  for 
the  fatety  of  his  perfon/in  cafe  of  a  defeat,  imme- 
diately ordered  them  away,  to  convince  his  men  of 
the  refolution  he  had  taken  of  cither  conquering  or 
pcrilhing  with  them. 

1  he  battle  was  fought  contrary  to  the  advice  of 
fome  of  the  moft  fenfible  men  in  the  rebel  army^ 
who  advifed  the  retiring  into  the  faHnelfes  beyond 
the  Nffsj  the  breaking  down  the  bridge  of  Inver- 
nefs^  and  defending  themfelves  amidft  the  moun- 
tains. They  pohtically  Urged  xh^x. England  was  then 
engaged  in  bloody  v/ars  foreign  and  domeftic,  that 
it  could  at  that  time  ill  fpare  its  troops  \  and  that 
the  government  might,  from  that  confideration,  be 
induced  to  grant  to  the  infurgents  their  lives  and 
fortunes,  on  condition  they  laid  down  their  arms. 
They  were  fenfible  that  their  caufe  was  defperate, 
and  that  their  ally  was  faithlefs-,  yet  knew  it  might 
be  long  before  they  could  be  entirely  fubdued  -, 
therefore  drew  hopes  from  the  fad  neccfiity  of  our 
affairs  at  that  feafon  :  but  this  rational  plan  was  fu- 
perfeded  by  the  favourite  fartion  in  the  army,  to 
whofe  guidance  the  unfortunate  adventurer  had  re- 
figned  himfelf. 

After  defcending  from  the  Moor,  got  into  a  well 
cultivated  country  -,  and  after  riding  fome  tinie 
under  low  but  pleafant  hills,,  not  far  from  the  fca, 
reach 

fpot  the  trifling  a£>ion  was,  a  fervant  of  Vn  was  killed  by  an 
accidental  fliot.  It  is  well  known  how  (hort  the  conflid  was  : 
and  the  moment  he  faw  his  right  wing  give  way,  he  fled  with 
the  utmoA  precipitation,  and  without  a  flngl^  attendant. 

Inverness, 


IN    SCOTLAND.  147 

Inverness,  finely  feated  on  a  plain,  between  the  Invbrkss?, 
Firth  of  the  lame  name  and  the  river  Nefs :  the 
firft,  from  the  narrow  ftrait  of  Ankrfier,  inftantly 
widens  into  a  fine  bay,  and  again  as  fuddenly  con- 
tra6bs  oppofite  Invernefsy,  at  the  ferry  of  Kejfcck.,  the 
pafs  into  Rofsjlire.  The  town  is  large  and  well 
built,  and  very  populous,  being  the  laft  of  any  note 
in  North  Briiain.  On  the  north  is  Oliver's  Fort,  a 
pentagon  ;  but  only  the  form  remains  to  be  traced 
by  the  ditches  and  banks.  Near  it  is  a  ve^y  con- 
fiderable  rope  manufifture.  On  an  eminence  fjuth 
of  the  town  is  old  Fort  Geor^e^  which  was  taken 
and  blown  up  by  the  Rebels  :  it  had  bren  no  more 
than  a  very  antienc  caille,  the  place  where  Boethius 
fays  that  Duncan  was  murdered  :  from  thence  is  a 
mod;  charming  view  cf  the  Firth,  the  paflage  of 
Kejfock^  the  river  Nefs,  the  llrange  Ihaped  hill  of 
Tcrmnin  heurich,  and  various  groupes  of  diflanC 
mountains. 

That  fingular  Tommin  is  of  an  oblong  form, 
broad  at  the  bafe,  and  Hoping  on  all  fides  towards 
the  top  i  fo  that  it  looks  like  a  great  fhip  with  its 
keel  upwards,  hs  fides  and  part  of  the  neicrh- 
boring  plains  are  planted,  fo  it  is  both  an  agreeable 
walk  and  a  fine  object.  It  is  pctfedly  detached 
from  any  other  hill ;  and  if  it  was  not  for  its  great 
fize,  might  pafs  *  for  a  work  of  arc.  The  view 
from  it  is  fuch,  that  no  traveller  will  think  his  labor 
loft,  after  gaining  the  fummit. 

At  Invernefsy  and  I  believe  at  other  towns  in  6"^^?/- 

*  Its  length  at  top  about  300  yards  j  I  neglefled  meafur- 
ing  the  bale  or  the  height,  which  are  both  confiderabk;  tiie 
breadth  of  the  top  only  20  yards. 

L  2  land^ 


14?  A      T    O    U    R 

land^  is  nn  officer,  called  Dean  of  the  Cuild,  who, 
afTided  by  a  council,  luperintends  the  markets,  re- 
gulates the  price  -f-  of  provifions  j  and  if  any  houfe 
falls  down,  and  the  owner  lets  it  lie  in  ruins  for 
three  years,  the  Dean  can  abfolutely  difpofe  of  the 
ground  to  the  befl  bidder. 

Crofs  the  Nefs  on  a  bridge  of  feven  arches,  above 
which  tiie  tide  flows  for  about  a  mile. 

Proceed  north  •,  have  a  fine  view  of  the  Firth, 
which  now  widens  again  from  Kejfock  into  a  large 
bay  fome  miles  in  length.  The  hills  flope  down  to 
the  water-fide,  and  are  finely  cultivated ;  but  the 
diftant  profpeft  is  of  rugged  mountains  of  a  flu- 
pendous  height,  as  if  created  as  guards  to  the  reft 
of  the  ifland  from  the  fury  of  the  boifterous  north. 

Ride  clofe  to  the  water-edge  thro*  woods  of  alder, 
pafs  near  fcveral  houfcs  of  the  Fraziers^  and' reach 
Ca/iU  Dunie.       Caftle  Dunie^  the  fite  of  the  houfe  of  their  chief- 
tain Lord  Lovat. 

The  old  houfe,  which  was  very  mean,  was  burnt 
down  in  1746;  but  a  neat  box,  the  refidencc  of 
the  hofpitable  faflor,  is  built  in  its  ftcad  on  a  high 
bank  well  wooded,  over  the  pretty  river  Bewleyy 
or  BeauUeii.  The  country,  for  a  certain  circuit,  is 
fertile,  well  cultivated,  and  fmiling.  The  bulk  of 
Lord  Lovat's  ellate  was  in  thefe  parts  •,  the  reft,  to 
the  amount  of  500I.  per  ann.  in  Straiiherick.  He 
was  a  potent  chieftain,  and  could  raife  about  1000 

f  Ikef,  (22  ounccb  to  the  pound)  2d.  to  4d.  Mutton, 
ati.  to  id  Wal,  3d.  to  <;d.  Pork,  2d.  to  3d.  CiiickenJ, 
3d.  to  4d.  a  couple.  Fowl,  ^d.  to  6d.  apiece.  Goofe,  izd. 
to  i4d.  Ducks,  IS.  a  couple  Eggs,  icven  a  penny.  Sal- 
mon, of  which  there  arc  fcveral  great  fifiierici,  id.  and  id. 
halfpenny  per  pound, 

men : 


IN    SCOTLAND. 


149 


men  :  but   I  found  his  neighbors  fpoke   as  unfa-, 
vorably  of  him,   as  his  enemies  did  in  the  moll 
diftant  parts  of  the  kingdom.    His  property  is  one 
of  the  annexed  eftates,  /.  e.  fettled  unalienably  on 
the  crown,  as  all  the  forfeited  fortunes  in  the  High-    Forfeited 
lands  are:  the  whole  value  of  which  brought  in  at    ^^^^^^s* 
that  time  about  6000I.  per  ann.  and  thole  in  the 
Lowlands  about  the  fame  fum  •,  lb  that  the  power 
and   intereft  of  a  poor  twelve  thoufand  per  ann. 
terrified  and  nearly  fubverted  the  conllitution  of 
thefe  powerful  kingdoms. 

The  profits  of  thefe  eftates  are  lodged  in  the 
hands  of  Truftees,  who  apply  their  revenue  for 
the  founding  of  fchools  for  the  inllruftion  of  chil- 
dren ia-  fpinning ;  wheels  are  given  away  to  poor 
families,  and  flax-feed  to  farmers.  Some  money  is 
given  in  aid  of  the  roads,  and  towards  building 
bridges  over  the  torrents;  by  which  means  a  ready 
intercourfe  is  made  to  parts  before  inacceflible  to 
flrangers  *.  And  in  i753>  a  large  fum  was  fpent 
on  2iX\Utopian  proje6t  of  eftablilhing  colonies  (on  the 
forfeited  eftates)  of  difbanded  foldiers  and  failors : 
comfortable  houfes  were  built  for  them,  land  and 
money  given,  and  Tome  lent;  but  thefuccefs  by  no 
means  anfwered  the  intentions  of  the  proje£lors.^ 

Ford  the  Bewley,  where  a  falmon  fifhery,  belong-    Aug.  17. 
ing  to  the  Lovat  eftate,  rents  at  120I.  per  annum. 
The  country  on  this  fide  the  river  is  called  Leornamo-    Leomamo-- 
nach,  or  the  Monk's  Land,  having  formerly  been 
the  property  of  the  Abby  of  Bewly ;  and  the  oppo- 
fite  fide  bears  the  name  of  Airds^  or  the  Heights,    ylirds. 
'    •  The  faftors,  or  agents  of  thefe  eftates,  are  alfo  allowed 
all  the  money  they  expend  in  planting. 


ISO  A      TOUR 

Pafs  by  fome  excellent  farms,  well  enclofcd,  im- 
proved, and  planted;  the  land  produces  wheat  and 
other  corn.  Much  cattle  are  bred  in  thefe  parts, 
and  there  are  feveral  linnen  manut'acflures. 
Caftle^rtf4«.  Ford  the  Ccfis.n  to  Caftle  Brann,  the  feat  of  Lord 
Fortrcfe\  a  good  houfe,  pleafantly  fituated  on  tiie 
fide  of  a  hill,  commands  a  view  of  a  large  plain, 
and  to  the  well  a  wild  profpefl  of  broken  and  lofty 
jnountains. 

There  is  here  a  fine  full  length  of  Mary  Stuart, 
with  this  infcription,  Maria  D.  G.  Scctia  piijfima 
reprta.  Francise  Dctaria.  Aimo  Mtatis  Rcgrd  38. 
1580.  Her  drefs  is  black,  with  a  ruff,  cap,  hand- 
kerchief, and  a  white  veil  down  to  the  ground, 
beads  and  prayer-book,  and  a  crofs  hanging;  horii 
her  neck  •,  her  hair  dark  brown,  her  face  handlbme, 
and  confidering  the  difference  of  years,  lb  much 
refembling  her  portrait  by  Zucchero^  in  Chf/icick 
Houfe,  as  to  leave  little  doubt  as  to  the  originality 
of  the  laft. 

A  fmall  half-length  on  wood  of  He>jry  Darn(y, 
infcribed  Henncus  Stuardtts  Dominus  D^rnly,  JEu 
IX.  M.D.LV.  drcfild  in  black,  with  a  fword;  it 
js  the  figure  of  a  pretty  boy. 

A  fine  portrait  of  Cardinal  Richlieu.  General 
Monk^  in  a  buff  coat.  Head  of  Sir  George  Mac- 
ketifie.  The  Farl  of  Seaforth,  called,  from  his  fize, 
]Cenneth  More.  Dutchefs  oi'  Bejufcrt,  daughter  of 
the  Marquifs  of  Pozvis,  Earl  of  Cajilcmaine,  admi- 
ral in  the  time  of  Cpcirles  II. 

Near  the  houfe  are  fome  very   fine  oaks  nnd 

horfc-chefnuts  :    in    the  garden,   Turky   apricots, 

orange  nc<5larincs,  and  a  fmall  foft  peach,  ripe  •, 

4  other 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  151 

other  peaches,    nedlarines,  and  green  gages,  far 
from  ripe. 

Pals  through  Dirigivall^  a  fmall  town,  thecapital   Dingiuall. 
of  RofsJIjire,  fituaced  near  the  head  of  the  Firth  of 
Cromartie :  an   antient  crofs,  and  an  obeHfic  over 
the  burying-place  of  the  Eails  of  Cromartie*s  fa- 
mily, were  all  I  faw  remarkable  in  it.  \ 

Ride  along  a  very  good  road  cut  on  the  fide  of  a 
hill  with  the  country  very  well  cultivated  above 
and  below,  with  feveral  fmall  woods  interfperfed 
near  the  water's  edge.  There  is  a  fine  view  of  al- 
moft  the  whole  bay,  the  moft  capacious  and  fecure  Firth  of  Cr#. 
of  any  in  Great  Britain ;  its  whole  navy  might  lie  *"^^'^^'- 
there  wii;h  eafe,  and  (hips  of  two  hundred  tuns  may 
fail  up  above  two-thirds  of  its  length,  which  ex- 
tends thirty  miles,  from  the  Suiters  *  of  Cromartie 
to  a  fmall  diftancc  beyond  Dingwall :  the  entrance 
is  narrow  •,  the  proje6ling  hills  defend  this  fine  bay 
from  all  winds  ^  fo  it  juftly  me/its  the  name  given 
it  of  Partus  falutis. 

FouLES,  the  feat  of  Sir  Henry  Monro^  lies  about   Foulis, 
a  mile  from  the  Firth^  near  vaft  plantations  on  the 
flats,  as  well  as  on  the  hills.     Thofe  on  the  hills 
are  fix  miles  in  length,  and  in   a  very  flourifhing 
Hate.  On  the  back  of  thefe  are  extenfive  vallies  full 
of  oats,  bounded  by  mountains,  which    here,  as 
well  as  in  the  Highlands  in  general,  run  from  eaft   . 
to  weft.    Sir  Henry  holds  a  foreft  from  the  crown  by 
a  very  whimfical  tenure,  that  of  delivering  a  fnow-   Singular 
ball  on  any  day  of  the  year  that  it  is  demanded  j 

•  Suiters,  c\r  Shooters,  two  hills  that  form  its  entrance,  pro- 
jeding  conliderably'into  die  waiei. 

I.  4  and 


tenure. 


^p2  A      T    O    U    R 

?nd  he  feems  to  be  in  no  danger  of  forfeiting  his 
right  by  failure  of  the  qiiit-renr,  for  fnow  lies  in 
form  of  a  glaciere  in  the  chafms  of  Benwezvijht  a 
neighboring  mountain,  throughout  the  year. 
Ap-G.  1 8.  Continue  my  journey  along  the  low  country, 
which  is  rich  and  well  cultivated. 

Pa's  near  Invergorden  *,  a  handfomehoufe,  amidft 
fine  p^nrp.dons.  Near  it  is  the  narroweft  part  of 
the  Firth,  and  a  ferry  into  the  (hire  of  Cromarty, 
row  a  country  almoft  deilitute  of  trees;  yet,  in  the 
time  of  James  V.  was  covered  with  timber,  and 
over-run  with  wolves  -f-. 
Ballin^gouan.  Near  the  lummit  of  the  hill,  between  the  Firths 
of  Cromartie  and  Dcrnccb,  is  BallinagouaUy  the  feat 
of  a  gentleman,  who  has  mod  fuccefsfully  converted 
his  fword  into  a  plough-lhare  ;  who,  after  a  feries 
of  difmterefted  fervices  to  his  country,  by  clearing 
thefeas  of  privateers,  the  moll  unprofitable  of  cap- 
tures, has  applied  himfelf  to  arts  not  lefsdeferving 
of  its  thanks.  He  is  the  bed  farmer  and  the 
greatefl:  planter  in  the  country  :  his  wheat  and  his 
turneps  (hew  the  one,  his  plantations  of  a  million 
of  pines  each  year  the  other  t.     It  was  with  great 

fatis- 

•  At  Culracn,  three  miles  from  this  place,  is  found,  two 
feet  beneath  the  furface,  a  ftratum  of  white  foapy  marie 
filled  with  ihclls,  and  is  much  ufed  as  a  manure. 

f  Thefe  animals  have  b.  en  lonj;  extinft  in  North  Brifain, 
rotwithflanding  M.  //e  Bujcn  a/l.-rts  the  contrary.  There 
are  many  antitnt  laws  for  iheir  extirpation  :  that  of  Jamts  I. 
farlem.  7.  is  the  moil  remarkable:  "  I'he  Schireffs&  Barons 
fold  hunt  the  wrlf  four  or  ^hrie  tjme»  in  the  Zcar,  betwixt 
5t.  Maris  day  &  Latnbei,  qiihich  is  the  time  of  their  quhelpes, 
&  all  tcncntj  fall  rife  with  them  under  paine  of  ane  wad- 
der." 

X  Pine,  or  Scotch  fir- feed,  as  il  is  called,  (^lls  from  four  to 

fix 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  '»i3 

fatisfafbion  that  I  obferved  charafters  of  this  kind 
very  frequent  in  North  Britain  ;  for  during  the  in- 
terval of  peace,  every  officer  pofTefTed  of  any  pa- 
trimony was  fond  of  retiring  to  it,  aflumed  the  far- 
mer without  flinging  ofi^  the  gentleman,  enjoyed 
rural  quiet ;  yet  ready  to  undergo  the  fatigues  of 
war  the  moment  his  country  clamed  his  fervices. 

About  two  miles  below  Ballinagouan  is  a  melan- 
choly inftance  of  a  reverfe  of  conduft :  the  ruins 
of  New  'Tarhaty  once  the  magnificent  feat  of  an  AWu  ^rurlat, 
unhappy  nobleman,  who  plunged  into  a  moft  un- 
gratefull  rebellion,  deftruftive  to  himfelf  and  fa- 
mily. The  tenants,  who  feem  to  inhabit  it  gratis^ 
are  forced  to  fheker  themfelves  from  the  weather 
in  the  very  loweft  apartments,  while  fwallows  make 
their  nells  in  the  bold  ftucco  of  fome  of  the  upper. 

While  I  was  in  this  county,  I  heard  a  Angular 
but  well-attefted  relation  of  a  woman  difordered  in 
her  health,  who  failed  for  a  fupernatural  fpace  of 
time ;  but  the  length  of  the  narrative  obliges  me 
^o  fling  it  into  the  Appendix  *. 

Ride  along  a  tedious  black  moor  to7W/»,  a  fmall 

town  on  the  Firth  of  Dornoch ;  diftinguilhed  for 

nothing  but  its  large  fquare  tower,  decorated  with 

five  fmall  fpires.     The  place  appeared  very  gay 

at   this  time  -,  for  all  the  gaudy  finery  of  a  little 

fair   was   difplayed   in   the    Ihew  of  hard   ware, 

painted   linnens,  and  ribbanids.     Kept  along  the 

fix  (hillings  per  pound.  Rents  are  payed  here  in  kind  :  the 
landlord  either  contrafts  to  fupply  the  forts  with  the  produce 
of  the  land,  or  fells  it  to  the  merchant,  who  comes  for  it. 
The  price  of  labor  is  6d.  per  day  to  the  men,  3a.  to  the 


women, 

•  No,  II. 


fliorf, 


154     ■  A      T    O    U    R 

fliore,  for   about    two    miles,  through    an     open 
corn    country,  and    crofTing   the   great   ferry,    in 
breadth  near  two  miles,  thro*  a  rapid  tide,  and  in 
a  bad    boat,  land    in   the   county   of   Sutherland, 
and  in  lefs  than  an  hour  reach  its  capital. 
Dornoch,         Dornoch,  a  fmall  town,  half  in  ruins ;  once  the 
refidence  of  the  Bifhops  of  Cnthnefs^  and,  like  Dur- 
ham, the  feat  of  Ecclefuidics :   many  of  the  houfcs 
ftill  are  called  ;'!fter  the  titles  of  thole  that  inhabited 
them  :  the  Bifhop  lodged  in  the  callle:  the  Dean's 
houfe  is  at  prefent  the  inn  :  the  cathedral  was  in  form 
of  a  crofs,  and  is  now  a  ruin,  except  parr,  which 
is  the  prefent  church.     On  the  doors  and  window- 
lhu:ters  were  painted  (as  is  common  in  many  parts 
of  Nor/ h  Britain)  white  tadpole-like  figures  on  a 
black  ground,  dcHgned  toexprefs  the  tears  of  the 
.  country  for  the  lofs  of  any  perfon  of  diftinclion. 
'J'hefe  were  ocraOon'ed  by  the  afl*e(5ting  end  of  that 
amiable  pair  the  young  Earl  and  Countefs  ofSulbsr- 
hnd,  who  were  lovely  in  their  lives,  and  in  their 
deaths  they  v/ere   not  divided,  for  their  happinefs 
was  interrupted  by  a  very  fhort  feparation  \fnne  uhi 
idem  et  maxtmus  et  honejfi'ffimus  amor  eft,  alic^uando 
p\rflat  morte  jungi,  qunrn  vita  dtjtrahi  *. 

Ride  on  a  plain  not  far  from  the  fea;  pafs  by  a 
fmill  crofs,  called  the  Tbtine^s  Crofs  \  and  not  far 
from  thence  the  fpot  where  an  unhappy  creature 
had  been"' burnt,  if  I  miftake  not,  in  yi4j!e  i  727,  for 

tr.e  imaginary  crime  of  witcbc)-i:ftf. 

Crofs 

•  Whef<*  a'mutual  and  inoft  arr^rnt  and  mod  virtuous 
alvet^Vion  rrigiis,  it  is  fomctimcs  prelei^ble  to  be  united  by 
death,  than  torn  artindcr  by  liTc. 

f"  This  i,  the  lall  InHaacc  of  ihcfc  frantic  executions  in 

the 


IN    SCOTLAND.  155 

Crofs  a  very  narrow  inlet  to  a  frnaU  bay  at  Porth' 
heg^  or  the  little  ferry,  in  a  boat  as  dangerous  as 
the  laft  ;  for  horfes  can  neither  get  in  or  cut  with- 
out great  rifque,  from  the  vaft  height  of  the  fides 
and  their  want  of  flips.  Keep  along  the  ihore, 
pafs  by  the  fmall  village  of  Golfpie,  and  reach 

Dunrobin  caftle,  the  anticnt  feat  of  the  Earls  of  Dunrohlut 
Sutherlatid^  founded  about  the  year  iioo,  fituatcd 
on  a  round  hill  at  a  fmall  diftance  from  the  fea. 
The  fev/  paintings  here  are,  an  Earl  oi  Murray ^  an 
old  man,  on  wood.  His  fon  and  two  daughters, 
by  Co.  G.  1628.  A  fine  full  length  of  Charles  I. 
Aligns  WilUamfoiu  a.  hero  of  the  clan  Chattan,  who 
refcued  the  Sutherlands  in  the  time  of  diftrefs.  A 
very  fingular  picture- of  the  Duke  of  Aha  in  coun- 

the  north  of  Scotland,  as  that  in  the  fcath  was  at  Paijly  in 
i6q6,  where,  among  others,  a  woman,  young  and  handfome, 
fuffered,  with  a  reply  to  her  enquiring  friends,  worthy  a 
Roman  matron,  being  aJked  why  llie  did  not  make  a  better 
defence  on  her  tryzX,  zni':ievc6,  My  per/ecutors  ha've  iitjiroyed 
my  honor,  and  my  life  is  not  noiu  luorih  the  pains  of  defending. 
The  lall  inllance  of  national  credulity  on  this  head  was  the 
ftory  of  the  witches  of  Thurfo,  who  tormenting  for  a  long 
time  an  honeft  fellow  under  the  ufual  form  of  cats,  at  lall 
provoked  him  {q,  that  one  right  he  put  them  to  flight  wi'.h 
his  broad  fword,  and  cut  off  the  leg  of  one  lefs  nimble  than 
the  reft  ;  on  his  taking  it  up,  to  his  amazement  he  found  it 
belonged  to  a  female  of  his  own  fpecics,  and  next  morning 
dilcovered  the  owner,  an  old  hag,  with  only  the  com  pa- 
nion  leg  to  thif.  The  horrors  of  the  tale  were  confiderabiy 
abated  in  the  place  I  heard  it,  by  an  unlucky  enquiry  made 
by  one  in  company,  'vi-x..  In  what  part  would  the  old  woman 
have  fufFered,  had  the  man  cut  off  the  cat's  tail  ?  But  Hhefc 
relations  of  almoft  obfolete  fuperftitions  muft  never  be 
though  t  a  refleftion  on  this  country,  as  long  as  any  memory  re- 
mains of  the  tragical  end  of  the  poor  people  at  Trmg,  who, 
within  a  few  miles  of  our  capital,  in  1751,  f^^H  a  facrificeto 
the  belief  of  the  common  people  in  witches,  or  of  that 
ridiculous  impofture  in  the  capital  itfelf,  in  1762,  of  the  Cock' 
l,ant  ghoft,  which  found  credit  with  all  lanks  of  people^ 

cil. 


15^  A     T    O    U    R 

cil,  with  a  cardinal  by  his  fide,  who  puts  a  pair  of 
bellows  blown  by  the  Devil  into  his  ear;  the  Duke 
lias  a  chain  in  one  hand,  fixed  to  the  necks  of  the 
kneeling  Flemings ;  in  the  other  he  fhews  them  a 
paper  of  recantation  for  them  to  fign,  behind  whom 
are  the  reformed  Clergy. 

The  demefn  is  keep  in  excellent  order,  and  I 
faw  here  (lat.  58.)  a  very  fine  field  of  wheat,  which 
would  be  ripe  about  the  middle  of  next  month. 

This  was  the  laft  wheat  which  had  been  fown 
this  year  in  North  Britain, 

Sutherland  is  a  country  abounding  in  cattle,  and 
fends  out  annually  2500  head,  which  fold  about 
this  time  from  2I.  los.  1031.  *  per  head.  Thefe 
are  very  frequently  without  horns,  and  both  they 
and  the  horfes  are  very  fmall.  Stags  abound  in 
the  hills,  there  being  reckoned  not  lefs  than  i6qo 
on  the  Sutherland  eftate,  which,  in  fad,  is  the 
greateft  part  of  the  county...  Befides  thefe  are  Roes, 
Grous,  black  game  and  Ptarmigans  in  plenty,  and 
during  winter  multitudes  of  water-fowl  on  the 
coaft. 

Not  far  from  Dunrohin  is  a  very  entire  antiquity 

of  the  kind  known  in  Scotland  by  the  name  of  the 

FiHijhQdX-   P/<J?(/^  Caftles,  and   called  here  Cairn  Lean,  or  a 

tki.  gj-ey  tower:  that  I  faw  was  about  130  yards  in 

circumference,  round,  and  raifed  fo  high  above  the 

ground  as  to  form  a  confiderable  mount :  on  the 

top  was  an  extenfive  but  (hallow  hollow  ;  within 

were  three  low  concentric  galleries,  at  fmall  dif- 

tances  from  each  other,  covered  above  with  large 

(tones  j  and  the  fide-walls  were  about  four  or  five 

f  Lean. 

feet 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  >57 

feet  thick,  rudely  made.  There  arc  generally  three 
of  thefe  places  near  each  other,  fo  that  each  may 
be  feen  from  any  one.  Whether  thefe  were  the 
fuffugia  hiemi  aut  receptacula  frugihus  of  the  Pi^ts^ 
as  they  were  of  the  Germans^  or  whether  they 
might  not  have  been  ufed  for  religious  purpofes,  as 
fuch  hollows  have  been  in  Norway  *,  I  will  not 
pretend  to  decide :  if  the  laft,  I  would  fuppofe 
fome  of  the  galleries  to  be  for  the  priefts,  the 
others  for  the  viftims,  who  were  chofen  by  lot, 
and  who  might  be  brought  to  be  facrificed  in  the 
concave  area  above,  which  was  well  adapted  to 
retain  their  blood,  that  was  to  be  fprinkled  on 
the  fpecftators,  on  the  polls  of  their  houfes,  and  on 
the  fails  of  their  fhips  f. 

Kept  along  the  Ihore  northward.  About  a  mile  Auo.  19. 
from  the  caftle  are  fome  fmall  cliffs  of  free-ftone  ; 
in  one  is  Straith-leve7i  Cove,  an  artificial  cave,  with 
feats  and  feveral  Ihallow  circular  hollows  cut  within- 
fide.  At  fome  diftance,  and  near  the  fea,  are 
fmall  ftrata  of  coal  three  feet  thick  dipping  to  the  Coal. 
eaft,  and  found  at  the  depth  of  about  14  to  24 
yards.  Sometimes  it  takes  fire  on  the  bank,  which 
has  given  it  fo  ill  a  name,  that  people  are  very 
fearfull  of  taking  it  aboard  their  fhios.  I  am  fur- 
prized  that  they  will  not  run  the  rifque,  confider- 
ing  the  miraculous  quality  it  poflefles  of  driving 
away  rats  wherever  it  is  ufed.  This  is  believed  by 
the  good  people  of  Sutherland^  who  affured  me 
fsrioufly  of  its  virtues  •,  and  they  farther  attributed 
the  fame  to   the  earth  and  very  heath   of  their 

•  Wormii  Monumenta  Danica  lib,  I.  p.  6. 
•f   Wbrm,  Monum,  lib,  V .p,  2<j. 

2  county. 


15^1  A      T    O    U    R 

connty.  They  add  too,  that  not  a  rat  will  live 
with  therq,  notwithitanding  they  fwarm  in  the  ad- 
jacent fliires  of  Ro/s  and  Cathnefs  *. 

In  /IJfynt^  a.  part  of  this  county,  far  weft  of  Dun^ 

rQhiriy  are  large  ftrata  of  a  beautiful  white  marble, 

*cqua],  as  I  was  told,  to  the  Parian.     I  afterwards 

faw  Tome  of  the  fame  kind  found  at  Clenavon  in 

Bndtnocb. 

Crofs  the  water  of  Brora,  which  runs  along  a 
deep  chafm,  over  which  is  a  handfome  bridge  of  a 
fingle  arch.  Near  is  a  cave,  where  the  Salmon- 
fidiers  lit  during  the  feafon  :  the  roof  is  pierced 
through  to  the  furface,  which  fcrves  for  a  natural 
chimney.  They  take  annually  about  lo  or  12  lafts 
of  fifh.  In  a  bank  not  far  from  the  bridge  are 
found  abundance  of  Belemmt<e. 

The  country  is  very  fandy,  and  the  arable,  or 
cultivated  parr,  very  narrow,  confined  on  the  caft 
by  the  fea,  on  the  wed  by  lofcy  black  mountains, 
which  approach  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  water,  till 

•  Some  years  ago  I  bought  of  the  Monks,  at  the  great 
BeneJiSiinc  convene  at  /lug/burg,  Tome  papers  of  St.  Ulric'% 
earth,  which  I  was  afl'urcd,  by  Lutheran  and  Papiji,  had  the 
Tame  rat-cxpclling  quality  with  that  above-mentioned  ;  but 
whether  for  want  of  due  faith,  or  negledl  of  attending  to  the 
forms  of  the  printed  prefcripiion  given  with  them  (here copied 
at  full  length)  I  know  not,  but  the  auuacious  aniinals  haunt 
iTiy  hoiHe  in  fpite  of  ii  : — VcnerabiUs  Rdiqu-if  Jt  Terra  St- 
puk'-rali,  Jive  de  rejhluta  a'cintus  cnrne  S.  Udalrici  Coiif.  if 
Epijcopi  Auquftani  ;  qu.v  ft  honorifiie  ad  injfor  aUarum  Rcli- 
quiarum  hahnntur,  l£  ad  Dei  laudetn,  Diinque  PrtrfuUs  honcrerrtt 
plum  quoddttm  opus^  v.  g.  Oratio,  "Jrjunium,  Eleemofyna^  &c. 
pra:jhtury  mirum  ejl,  qua  polJcant  e^cacia,  ad  projcribcndts 
prajtrtim  c  domibus,  tif  ijicinia  Glim,  qui  fubjljlere  minimc  va- 
lent,  ubieuHqne  fnniles  Rrliquite  aim  Jidmcid  fucriut  afpenfa,  'utl 
ajjirvata.  Idque  ex  Jpteiali  prrsrogau-vd,  qua  omnipotens  Deas 
infignia  tantiPatroni  meriia  ptrpttut  miraculoJiatHit  condecorart. 

ac 


IN    SCOTLAND.  .j^^ 

at  length  they  projcfl  into  it  at  the  great  promon- 
tory the  Ord  of  Cathnefs^  the  boundary  between 
that  county  and  'Sutherland^  after  which  the  coaft  is 
bold  and  rocky,  except  a  fmall  bay  or  two. 

Ford  tiie  very  dangerous  wz^ter  of  fJemfdale,  rapid  Hmfaale, 
•nd  full  of  great  (lones.  Very  large  Lampries  are 
found  here,  fifh  detcfted  by  the  Highlanders.  Be- 
neath the  ftones  on  the  fea-ftiore  are  abundance  of 
fpotted  and  viviparous  Biennies,  Father  Lafiiers, 
and  Whiftie  FiQi.  IVIackrel  appear  here  this  month, 
but  without  their  roes.  I  thought  them  far  inferior 
in  goodnefs  to  thofe  of  our  counLry.  Much  fal- 
mon  is  taken  here. 

The  grey  Water-wagtail  quits  this  country  in 
the  winter  ;  with  us  it  refides. 

Dined  at  the  little   village  of  Hemfdale ,',  near 
which  are  the  ruins  of  a  fquare  tower. 

Pafisd  through  a  rich  vale  full  of  good  barley 
and  oats  between  the  hill  of  Hemfdale  and  the  Ord.   Ord  of  Caih- 
Afcend  that  vaft  promontory  on  a  good  road  wind-   ^^•^^' 
ing  up  its  deep  lidesj  and  impending  in  many  parts 
over  the  fea,  infinitely  more  high  and  horrible  tlian 
our  Fenviacn  Mawr.     Beneath  v/ere  numbers  of 
Seals  floating  on  the  waves,  v^ith  fea-fowl  fw/imming 
among  them  with  great  fccurity.     Obferved"  pro- 
jecting from  one  part  of  the  0;v/,  far  below,  a  fmall 
and  verdant  hill,  on  which,  tradition    fays,    was 
fought  a  fingle  combat  between  an  Earl  of  Cathnejs 
and  a  fon  of  the  Earl  of  Sutherland,  while  their  two 
armies  looked  on  from  above:  the  £rft  was  killed 
on  the  fpot,  the  lad  died  of  his  wounds. 

Beneath  this  cape  are  immenfe  caves,  the-refof: 

of 


i6o  A      T    O    U    R 

of  Seals  *  and  Sea-fowls :  the  fides   and  top  are 
chiefly  covered  with  heath  and  morafly  earth,  which 
gives  it  a  black  and  melancholy  look.     Ride  over 
fome  boggy  and  dreary  moors.    Pafs  thro'  AufdaJc, 
a  little  highland  village.     Defcend  into  a  deep  bot- 
tom covered  with  alders,  willows,  birch  and  wicken 
trees,  to  Langwall,  the  feat  of  Mr.  Sutherland,  who 
gave  me  a  very  hofpitable  reception.     The  coun- 
try abounds  with  Stags  and  Roes,  and  all  forts  of 
feathered  game,  while  the   adjacent  river  brings 
Salmon  almoft  up  to  his  door. 
Lavcllan.        \  enquired  here  after  the  Lavellanf,  which,  from 
defcription,  I   fufped  to  be   the   Water   Shrew- 
moufe.     The  country  people  have  a  notion  that  it 
is  noxious  to  cattle :  they  preferve  the  Ikin,  and, 
as  a  cure  for  their  fick    beads,  give   them   the 
water  in  which  it  has  been  dipt.     I  believe  it  to 
be  the  fame  animal  which  in  Sutherland  is  called 
the  Water  Mole. 
Aug.  20.       Proceed  on  my  journey.     Pafs  near  Berridale. 
On  a  peninfula jutting  into  the  fea  is  the  ruin  of  the 
caftle  ;  between  it  and  the  land  is  a  deep  chafm, 
where  there  had  been  a  draw-bridge.   On  this  caftlc 
are  ftationed,  in  the  falmon  feafon,  perfons  who  arc 
to  obferve  the  approach  of  the  fifh  to  the  freih 
waters. 

Near  Clathron  is  a  druidical  ftone  fet  an  end, 
and  of  a  moft  ftupendous  fizc. 

•  During  fpring  great  quantities  of  I.ump-fifh  refort  here, 
ar^d  are  the  prey  of  the  Seals,  as  appears  from  the  numbers  of 
their  flcins,  which  at  that  feafon  float  afhorc.  The  Seals,  at 
certain  times,  fecm  vifited  with  a  great  mortality ;  for  at 
th"fe  times  multitudes  of  them  are  feen  dead  in  the  water. 

t  SitbaUhiJi.Scbtland.     Br .  ZaoU  illuji .  cii. 

Saw 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  i5i 

Saw  Bunheth  *,  the  feat  of  Mr.  Sinclair,  fituated  Dmbetb. 
on  a  narrow  neck  of  land ;  on  one  fide  impending 
over  the  Tea,  on  the  other  over  a  deep  chafm,  into 
which  the  tide  fiov/s :  a  fmall  narrow  garden,  with 
billows  beating  on  three  fides,  fills  the  reft  of  the 
land  between  the  houfe  and  the  fea.  Numbers  of 
old  caftles  in  this  county  have  the  fame  tremendous 
fituation.  On  the  weft  fide  of  this  houfe  are  a  few 
rows  of  tolerable  trees  ;  the  only  trees  that  I  faw. 
from  Berridale  to  the  extremity  oi  Cathnefs  -f.  On 
the  right  inland  are  the  fmall  remains  of  Knnckennan 
caftle,  built  by  an  Earl  of  Cnthnefs.  From  thefe 
parts  is  a  full  view  of  the  lofty  naked  mountain  cf 
Scaraben  and  Morven.  The  laft  Ptamiigans  in  Scaral^Gi 
Scotland  are  on  the  fi^ft^•,  the  laft  Roes  about  Lang- 
wally  there  being  neither  high  hills  nor  woods  be- 
yond. All  the  county  on  this  fide,  from  Dunbeib 
to  the  extrem.ity,  is  flat,  or  at  left  very  feldom  in- 
terrupted with  hills,  and  thofe  lov/  ;  but  the  coafts 
rocky,  and  compofed  of  ftupendous  cliffs. 

Refreftied  our  horfes  at  a  little  inn  at  the  hamlet 
of  Clyihe,  not  far  from  the  headiandi  called  Clythe- 
nefs.  Reach  Thrtimjler,  a  feat  of  Mr.  Sinclair^. 
It  is  obfervable,  that  the  names  of  places  in  thifi 
county  often  terminate  in  ter  and  dak^  v/hich  favors 
of  Danijh  origin. 

The  Sinclairs  are  very  numerous,  and  poHefs 
confiderable   fortunes  in  thefe  parts ;  but  BoeihiuS 

*  This  caftle  was  taken  and  garrifoned  by  the  Marquifs  of 
Montrofe '\n  I'Sjo,  immediately  preceding  his  final  defeat. 

f  But  valt  quantity  of  fubterransojs  timber  in  all  the 
moors.  Near  Dunbeth  is  an  entire  FiS}s  caflle,  with  the  hol- 
low iu  the  top,  and  is  called  the  Bourg  of  Dunbeth. 

M  faysj 


H'kk. 


162  A      T    O    U    R 

Tays,  that  tliey,  the  Frciziers,  Camphdls,  BofiveU^ 
and  many  others,  came  originally  from  Trance. 
•Aun^.^zK  Pafs  through  Wick^  a  fmall  burrough  town  with 
fome  good  Iioufcs,  feated  on  a  river  within  reacli 
of  the  tide,  and  at  a  diftance  lies  the  old  caftle. 
Somewhat  farther,  clofe  to  the  fea,  is  Archringal 
tower,  the  feat  of  Sir  IVilHam  Dunhnr,  Ride  over 
the  Links  of  Keith^  on  the  fide  of  Sinclair  bay. 
Thefe  were  once  a  morafs,  now  covered  with  iand, 
finely  turfed  over  -,  fo  in  this  inftance  the  land  has 
been  obliged  by  the  inftability  of  the  fand.  The 
old  caftle  of  Keifs  is  feated  on  a  rock,  with  a  good 
hoLife  of  the  fame  name  near  it. 

Near  Frefioick  caftle  the  cliffs  are  very  lofty  j 
the  ftrata  that  compofe  them  lie  quite  horizontally 
in  fuch  thin  and  regular  layers,  and  fo  often  inter- 
fe6ted  by  fifllires,  ns  to  appear  like  mafonry.  Be- 
neath are  great  infulated  columns,  called  here 
Stacks^  compofed  of  the  fame  1  .»rt  of  natural  ma- 
fonry as  the  cliffs ;  many  of  them  are  hollowed 
quite  thro',  fo  as  to  form  moft"  magnificent  arches, 
which  the  fea  ruflics' thro'  v/ith  vaft  noife  and  im- 
petuofity,  affording  a  moft  auguft  piece  of  fcencry 
to  fuch  who  arc  fleady  enough  to  furvey  it  from  the 
narrow  and  almoft  impending  paths. 
Frt/ivick  Frffivick  caftle  is  feated  on  a  narrow  rock  pro- 
jeding  into  the  fea,  with  juft  room  enough  for'it 
to  ftand  on :  the  accefs  to  it  while  the  draw- bridge 
was  in  being,  was  over  a  deep  chafm  cut  thro'  the 
little  ifthmus  that  conne(^.ed  it  to  the  main  land. 
1  hcfe  dreadful  fiiuations  arc  ftrongly  exprcfiive  of 

the 

4 


caiile. 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  163 

the  jealous  and  v/retched  condition  of  the  tyrant 
owners. 

After  riding  near  Frefivhk  bay,  the  fecond  fandy 
bay  in  the  county,  pafs  over  a  very  bad  morals, 
and  after  a  few  miles  travel  arrive  at  Bungjh  bay  *,  Dungjhy  bay, 
a  low  tracl,  confining  of  oat-lands  and  grazing 
land :  the  ullima  "Thule  of  Mr.  Wallace,  whofe  dc- 
fcription  it  fully  anfwer.s  in  this  particular. 

'^am  juxta  infamcs  fcopi'.H,  ei  petrofa  vora^o 
Afperat  undifonis  faxa  pudenda  vadis  -}-. 

The  beach  is  a  colle6tion  of  fragments  of  Ihells  ♦, 
beneath  which  are  vaft  broken  rocks,  fome  funk, 
others  apparent,  running  into  a  fea  never  pacific. 
The  contrary  tides  and  currents  form  here  a  moft 
tremendous  ccnteft  ;  yet,  oy  the  ikilfulnefs  of  the 
people,  are  pafied  with  great  fafety  in  the  narrow 
little  boats  I  faw  lying  on  the  fhore. 

The  points  of  this  bay  are  Dungjhy  h^zd  and  St. 

John's  head,  flretching  out  into  the  fea  to  the  eaft 

and  weft,  forming  a  pair  of  horns ;  from  the  re- 

femblance  to  which  it  iLould  feem  that  this  country 

•  was  antiently  ftyled  Cornana. 

From  hence  is  a  full  view  of  feveral  of  the  Orkney  q  ■>  ,  ^  > 
iflands,  fuch  as  FlofUy  fFaes^  Ronaldfa,  S'lvanna,  to 
the  weft  the  Skerries^  and  within  two  miles  of  land 
Stroma,  famous  for  its  natural  mummies,  or  the  j^iyj^mlcs. 
entire  and  uncorrupted  bodies  of  perfons  who  had 
been  dead  fixty  years.  I  was  informed  that  they 
were  very  light,  had  a  flexibility  in  their  limbs,  and 

•  John  a  Grout" s  houfe  is  now  known  oniy  by  name.  The 
proper  name  of  the  bay  is  Duncan's, 

f  Quoted  by  Mr.  Wallace  &om  the  Itn  Balthkum  of 
Conrad  us  Cehes, 

M  2  were 


164  A      T    O    U    R 

were  oi'  a  dufky  color  *.  This  ifle  is  fertile  in  corn, 
is  inhabited  by  about  thirty  families,  who  know 
not  the  life  of  a  plough,  but  dig  every  part  of  their 
corn  land. 

Dine  at  the  good  miniftcr's  of  Canmjhy.  On  my 
return  faw  at  a  diilance  the  Stacks  of  Dungjhy,  a 
vail  infulated  rock,  over-topping  the  land,  and  ap- 
pearing like  a  great  tower. 

''Pafied  near  the  feat  of  a  gentleman  not  long 
dcceafed  ;  the  lad  who  was  believed  to  be  poffcfled 
Second  .I^I.r,   of  x\\z  fccond fight.     Originally  he  made  ufe  of  the 
pretence, in  order  to  render  liimfelf  more  refpedtabic 
with  his  clan-,  but  at  length,  in  fpite  of  fine  abili- 
ties, was  made  a  dupe  to  his  own  artifices,  became 
poflcfTed  with  a  ferious  belief  of  the  faculty/and  for 
a  confiderable  number  of  years  before  his  death 
was  made  trucly  unhappy  by  this  flrange  opinion, 
which  originally  arofe  from  the  following  accident. 
Ik  boat  of  his  was  on  a  very  tempelluous  night  at 
fea  ;  his  mind,  filled  with  anxiety  at  the  danger  his 
people  were  in,  furnillied  him  with  ej'ery  idea  of 
the  misfortune  that  really  befell  them  :  he  fuddenly 
itarting'up    pronounced  that  his  men  would  be 
drowned,  for  that  he  had  fcen  them  pafs  before 
him  with  wet  garments  and  dropping  locks.    The 
event  was  correfpondent,  and  he  from  that  time 
grew  confirmed  in  the  reality  of  fpedral  prcdid:ions. 

*  In  the  Philofcphical  TranfaSiont  abridged,  viii.  705.  is  an 
alnioR  parallel  in!fance  of  two  corpfes,  found  in  a  moor  in 
Derhyjhtre,  that  had  101-49  years  refilled  putrcr.i<!^ion,  and  were 
in  muvh  the  (Jmc  Hate  as  tliofe  in  t^irctna.  In  vol.  xlvii.  of 
the  P}}.  Tr.  at  large,  is  an  account  of  a  body  found  entire  and 
imputrid  at  Stairrien  in  Devonjhirt,  80  years  after  its  inter- 
meiit. 

There 


7A' 


GA-NWET 


^«///J/m4     J'lrt^e^^ 


Ji.  J/Ut-nf}'  J' 


IN    SCOTLAND.  165 

There  is  another  fort  of  divination,  called  Sleina- 
nachdt  or  reading  ihc  fpeal-hom^  or  the  blade- bone 
of  a  fhoulder  of  mutton  well  fcrnped.  When  Lord 
hcudon  was  obliged  to  retreat  before  the  Rebels  to 
the  ifle  of  ^kie^  a  common  foldier,  on  the  very  mo- 
ment the  battle  of  Culloden  was  decided,  proclamed 
the  vi(5lory  at  that  diftance,  pretending  to  have  dif- 
covered  the  event  by  looking  through  the  bone. 

I  heard  of  one  inftance  cf  fecond  fight,  or  rather 
of  forefight,  which  was  well  attefted,  and  made 
much  noife  about  the  time  the  prediflion  was  ful- 
filled. A  little  after  the  battle  of  PrejJon  Pans,  the 
prefident,  Duncan  Forbes,  being  at  his  houfe  of  Cul- 
loden with  a  nobleman,  from  whom  I  had  the  rela^ 
tion,fell  into  difcourfe  on  the  probable  confequcnces 
of  the  action  :  after  a  long  converfaticn,  and  after 
revolving  all  that  might  happen,  Mr.  Forbes  fud- 
denly  turning  to  a  window,  faid.  All  tbefe  things  may 
f:dl  out  \  hut  depend  on  ity  all  ihefe  dijlurbantes  "j^ill 
he  terminated  on  this  [pot. 

Returned  the  fame  road.  Saw  multitudes  of  Gaanets. 
Gamiets,  or  Soland  Geefe,  on  their  pafiage  noith- 
ward  :  they  went  in  fmall  flocks  from  five  to  fifteen 
in  each,  and  continued  p.'fTing  for  hours:  it  was  a 
fiormy  day  -,  they  kept  low  and  near  the  fhore ;  but 
never  pafiTed  over  the  land,  even  when  a  bay  with 
promontories  intervened,  but  followed  (preferving 
an  equal  diftance  from  fhore)  the  form  of  the  bay, 
and  then  regularly  doubled  the  Capes.  I  faw  many 
parties  make  a  fort  of  halt  for  the  fake  of  fifliing; 
they  foared  to  a  great  height,  then  darting  down 
headlong  into  the  fca  made  the  water  foam  and 
M  3  fprir.g 


'i<^(^  A     T   o   u    ri 

fprinw  up  with  the  violence  of  iheir  defcent ;  after 

which  they  purfued  their  route. 

Swans  refort  in  O^lober  to  the  Loughs  of  Hem- 

frigs  and   IVaJi^r^  and   continue  there  till  March. 

Abundance  of  I  and-rails  are  found  throughout  the 

county.    Multitudes  of  Sea-fowl  breed  in  the  cliffs: 

among  others,  the  Lyre  \  but  tlie  fcaf  n  being  pad, 

I  neither  faw  it,  nor  could  unoeifcand  what  fpecies 

it  was. 

Z-n-n-r  Vr.y        Wcnt  alonpj  a  fine  hard  fand  on  the  edge  of  5'/«- 
and  calUe.      ^^^^^y  j^^^^     q^^  ^j^^  j-^^^^^j^  ^^^^^^^^  ^^^^  l^cfshead,  on 

the  fame  rock,  are  Sinclair  and  Carnego  caftles  ; 
but,  as  if  the  joint  tenants,  like  beads  of  prey,  bad 
been  in  fear  of  each  other,  there  was  between  them 
a  draw-bridge  ;  the  firll  too  had  an  iron  door, 
which  dropped  from  above  through  grooves  Hill 
vifible. 
Produce  of  r  Qathtiefs  may  be  called  an  immenfe  morafs,  mixed 
with  fome  fruitfull  fpotsof  oats  and  barley,  mrch 
ccarfe  grafs,  and  here  and  there  fome  fine,  almoll 
all  natural,  there  being  as  yet  very  little  artificial. 
At  this  time  was  the  hay  harveft  both  here  and 
about  Dunrcbin :  the  hay  on  this  rough  land  is  cut 
with  very  fliort  fcythes,  and  with  a  brilk  and  ftrong 
flroke.  The  country  produces  and  exports  great 
quantities  of  catrriealy  and  much  whifky  is  diftilled 
from  the  barley  :  the  great  thinncfs  of  inhabitants 
throughout  Ccdhiejs  enables  them  to  fend  abroad 
much  of  its  produdions,^  No  wiieat  had  been  raifed 
this  year  in  the  county  -,  and  I  was  inform.ed  that 
this  grain  is  fown  here  in  the  fpring,  by  reafon  of 
the  wet  and  fury  of  the  winters. 

The 


IN    SCOTLAND.  167 

The  county  is  fuppoled  to  fend  out,  in  fome  Cattle. 
years,  2200  head  of  cattle  -,  but  in  bad  feafons,  the 
farmer  kills  and  faks  numbers  for  fale.  Great 
numbers  of  fwine  are  reared  here:  they  are  fhort, 
high-backed,  long-briftled,  (harp,  flender  and  long- 
nofed  ;  have  long  eredl  ears,  and  moft  favage 
io  >ks,  and  are  feen  tethered  in  almofl-  every  field. 
The  reft  of  the  commodities  of  Cathnefs  are  butter, 
cheefe,  tallow,  hides,  the  oil  and  fkins  of  feals,  and 
the  feathers  of  geefe. 

Here  are  neither  barns  or  granaries  •,  the  corn  is 
thraflied  out  and  preferved'  in  the  chafT"  in  hykes, 
which  are  ftacks  in  fhape  of  bee-hives,  thatched 
quite  round,  where  it  will  keep  good  for  two  years. 

Much  Salmon  is  taken  at  Cajile-hill,  Dunet,  JVick^  Salmon. 
and  Thurfo.  The  miraculous  draught  at  the  lafl 
place  is  flill  talked  of;  not  lefs  than  2500  being 
taken  at  one  tide,  within  the  memory  of  man.  At 
a  fmall  diftance  from  Sinclair  caftle,  near  Staxigo 
creek,  is  a  fmall  herring- fifhery,  the  only  one  on 
the  coaft :  Cod  and  other  white  fifh  abound  here  ; 
but  the  want  of  ports  on  this  flormy  coafl  is  an  ob- 
ftacle  to  the  eflablifhment  of  fifheries  on  this  fide 
the  country. 

In  the  month  of  November  numbers  of  Seals  *  are   Seals, 
taken  in  the  vafl  caverns  that  open  into  the  fea  and 
run  fome  hundreds  of  yards  under  ground.    Their 
entrance  is  narrow,  their  infide  lofty  and  fpacious. 
The  Seal-hunters  enter  thefe  in  fmall  boais  with 

*  Sometimes  a  large  fpecies  near  twelve  feet  long  has  beea 
killed  en  the  coaft  ;  and  I  have  been  informed  that  the  fame 
kind  a;e  found  on  the  rock  ////5/r,  one  of  the  weftern  ifles. 

M  4  torches 


A      T    O    U    R 

torches,  which  they  light  as  foon  as  they  land,  and 
then  v/ith  loud  fliouts  alarm  the  animals,  which 
tliey  kill  with  clubs  as  they  attempt  to  pafs.  This 
is  a  hazardous  employ  ;  for  (liould  the  wind  blow 
hard  from  fea,  thefe  adventuiers  are  inevitably 
loft  *. 

Much  lime-ftone  is  found  in  this  country,  which 
when  burnt  is  made  into  a  compoft  with  turf  and 
tang.  The  tender  fex  (I  blu{h  for  the  Cathnejians) 
are  the  only  animals  of  burden  :  they  turn  their 
patient  backs  to  the  dunghills,  and  receive  in  their 
kcizcs^  or  baflcets,  as  much  as  their  lords  and  maf- 
ters  think  fit  to  fling  in  with  their  pitchforks,  and 
then  trudge  tothefields  in  droves  of  fixtyor  feventy. 
The  common  people  are  kept  here  in  great  fervi- 
tude,  and  moft  of  their  time  is  given  to  their  Lairds, 
an  invincible  impediment  to  the  profperity  of  thi^ 
county. 

Of  the  ten  pariflies  in  Cathnefs,  only  the  four 
that  lie  S.  E.  fpeak  Erje  ;  all  the  others  fpeak  Erig- 
lijfj^  and  that  in  greater  purity  than  moll  part  of 
JNorth  Britain. 

Inoculation  is  much  pradifcd  by  an  ingenious 
pliyfician  (Dr.  Mackenzie,  of  fFick)  in  this  county, 
nnd  alfo  the  Orkneys  +,  with  great  fuccefs,  with- 
out any  previous  preparation.  The  fuccefs  was 
equally  great  at  Sanda-,  a  poor  ifle,  where  there 
was  no  fort  of  fuel  but  what  was  t>ot  from  dried 
cow-dung  :  but  hi  all  thefe  places,  tlie  fniall-pox  is 
very  fatal  in  the  natural  way.     Other  difeafes  in 

*  For  a  fuller  account.  'viJe  Br.  Zool.  illujfr.  3S. 
t  At  this  time  a  perfon  was  employed  in  the  fame  bufincfs 
>n  the  .S/Y//«/;d'jflandi. 

2  Calhncfs 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.         '  169 

Cathnefs  are  colds,  coughs,  and  very  frequently 
palfies. 

I  came  here  too  late  *  to  have  any  benefit  from  the  Long  days, 
great  length  of  days  •,  but  from  June  to  the  middle 
of  July,  there  is  fcarce  any  night ;  for  even  at  what 
is  called  midnight  the  fmalkft  print  may  be  read, 
fo  truely  did  Juvenal  ftyle  thefe  people, 

Minima  content os  noEle  Britanxos. 

On  my  way  between  Thrumjler  and  Btinheth,   Aug.  23. 
again  faw  numbers  of  flocks  of  Ganncts  keeping  Gannets. 
due  north,  and  the  weather  being  very  calm  they 
flew  high.    It  has  not  been  obferved  that  they  ever 
return  this  way  in  the  fpring  ;  but  feem  to  make  a  - 
circuit  of  the  ifland,-  till  they  again  arrive  at  the 
Bafs,    their  only  breeding- place   on    the  eaftern 
coaft. 

On  defcending  a  fleep  hill  is  a  romantic  view  of  Berridak. 
the  two  bridges  over  the  waters  of  Berridak  and 
Langwall^  and  their  wooded  glens,  and  of  the  caftle 
of  Berridak  -f,  over  the  fea,  where  the  Salmon- 
fiihers  flation  themfelves  to  obferve  the  approach 
of  thofe  fifh  out  of  the  ocean.  After  a  tedious 
afcent  up  the  King's  road  of  four  miles,  gain  the 
top  of  the  Ordy  defcend,  and  lie  at  Hemfdale. 

Re-vifit  the  fame  places,  till  I   pafs  Dingwall.   Auc.  24, 
Crofs  \.\itConan  in  a  boat,  a  very  beautiful!  river,  ^°  ^9- 
not  remote  fromCaJlle  Braan.    Was  in  this  neigh- 

*  Befides  the  miffing  fo  lingular  a  phaenomenon,  I  found 
that  the  bad  weather,  which  begins  earlier  in  the  north,  was 
fetting  in  :  I  would  therefore  recommend  to  any  traveller, 
who  means  to  take  this  diftant  tour,  to  fet  out  from  Edinburgh 
a  month  fooner  than  myfelf. 

t  A  Utile  up  the  land  is  the  ruin  of  Ach-cajlk. 

l3orhood 


I/O  A      T    O    U    R 

Slr.2o]zr         boi  iiood  informed  of  other  fingular  cudoms  of  the 
J  lignlanders. 

On  New-year's  day  they  burn  juniper  before 
their  cattle,  and  on  the  firft  Monday  in  every  quar- 
ter fprinkle  them  with  urine. 

In  fomc  parts  of  the  country  is  a  rural  facrifice, 
different  from  that  before- mentioned.  A  crofs  is 
cut  on  fome  flicks,  which  is  dipped  in  pottage,  and 
the  Thurfday  before  Eajler  one  of  each  placed  over 
the  fhecpcor,  the  ftable,  or  the  cow-houie.  On 
the  I  ft  ot  May  they  are  carried  to  the  hill  where  the 
rites  are  celebrated,  all  decked  with  wild  flowers, 
and  after  the  feaft:  is  over,  re- placed  over  the  fpots 
they  were  taken  from  •,  and  this  was  originally  ftyleJ 
C!cii-d;i-Be!tein  *,  or  the  fplit  branch  of  the  fire  of 
the  rock.  Thefe  follies  are  now  fcldom  pradifed, 
and  that  with  the  utmofl  fccrecy ;  for  the  Clergy 
are  indefatigable  in  difcouraging  every  fpecies  of 
fuperftition. 

In  certain  places,  the  death  of  people  is  fuppofed 
to  be  foretold  by  the  cries  and  fhrieks  of  Ben/hi^  or 
the  Fairies  wife,  uttered  along  the  very  path  where 
the  funeral  is  to  pafs ;  and  what  in  Wales  are  called 
corps  candles,  are  often  imagined  to  appear,  and 
foretell  mortality. 
M3r!i.-;r.e  The  courtlhip  of  the  Highlander  has  thefe  t9* 

cui^.ouib.  markable    circumftances  attending  it  :  after  pri* 

vately  obtaining  the  confcnt  of  the  Fair,  he  formally 
demands  her  of  the  father.  The  Lover  and  his 
Friends  afTemblc  on  a  hill  allotted  for  that  purpofe 
in  every  parilh,  and  one  of  them  is  difpatched  to 

*  M  PltrjWs  intrzduaioK,  &c.  i66. 

obtain 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  171 

obtain  permiffion  to  wait  on  the  daughter  ;  if  hi; 
is  ruccefsfuU,  he  is  again  lent  to  invite  the  father 
and  his  friends  to  afcend  the  hill  and  partake  of  a 
whifl<y  cafk,  which  is  never  forgot  :  the  Lover  ad- 
vances, takes  his  future  Father-in- bw  by  the  hand, 
and  then  plights  his  troth,  and  the  Fair-one  is  fur- 
rendered  up  to  him.     During  the  marriage  cere- 
mony, great  care  is  taken  that  dogs  do  not  pafs 
between  them,  and  particular  attention  is  payed  to 
the  leaving  the   Bridegroom's    left-llioc   without 
buckle  or  latchet,  to  prevent  witches  *  from  de- 
priving him,  on  the  nuptial  night,  of  the  power  of 
loofening  ,the  virgin  zone.     As  a  teft,  not  many 
years  ago  a  fingular  cuftom  prevaled  in  the  ■ivcjiern 
Highlands  the  morning  after  a  wedding  :  a  bafket 
•was  faftencd  Vv'ith  a  cord  round   the  neck  of  the 
bridegroom  by  the  female   part  of  the  company, 
who  immediately  filled  it  with  ftones,  till  the  poor 
man  was  in  great  danger  of  being  (Irangled,  if  his 
bride  did  not  take  compafiion  on  him,  and  cut  the 
cord  with  a  knife  given  her  to  ufe  at  difcretion.  But 
fuch  was  the  tendernefs  of  the  Caledonian  fpoufcs, 
that  never  was  an   inftance  of  their  negleding  an 
immediate  relief  of  their  good  man. 

Pafs  near  the  abby  f  of  Ber.ttUeu^  a  large  ruin ; 
.  crofs  the  ferry,  and  again  reach  Jnz-ernefs, 

iVlake  an  excurfion  ten  miles  fouth  of  Invernefs  Aug.  30. 
to  Moy-ball,  pleafanily  feated  at  the  head  cf  a  fmall  Moy-haU. 

•  An  old  opinion.  G^/ztt  fays  that  the  wirches  made  ufe 
offoatls  as  a  charm,  Ut  njiin.  (oeundi,  nifallor^  in  i;ir:s  telle- 
rent.    Gefner  de  quad.  ovj.  p.  72. 

t  Founded  about  1219,  by  Lord  Patrick  B^ptt,  for  the 
monks  0*  Vall^ombrefa, 

but 


172  A      T    O    U    R 

but  beautifull  lak,e  of  the  fame  name,  full  of  Trour, 
and  Cbar^  called  in  the  Erfe^  'Tnriar-kimch,  and  in 
the  Scotch,  Red  Weems.  This  water  is  about  two 
miles  and  a  half  long,  and  half  a  mile  broad, 
adorned  with  two  or  three  ifles  prettily  wooded. 
Each  fide  is  bounded  by  hills  cloathed  at  the  bot- 
tom with  trees;  and  in  front,  at  the  diftance  of 
thirty  miles,  is  the  great  mountain  of  Karn  Goran, 
patched  with  fnow. 

This  place  is  called  Stafach  na  gaily  or  the  thrc- 
Hiold  of  the  Highlands,  being  a  very  natural  and 
ftrongly  marked  entrance  from  the  north.  This 
tianChattan.  js  the  feat  of  the  Clan  Chat t an,  o^  the  W-IntcJIjcs, 
once,  a  powerfuU  people  :  in  the  year  1715,  fifteen 
hundred  took  the  field  •,  but  in  1745*  fcarce  half 
that  number  :  like  another  Ahfalom,  their  fair  mif- 
trefs  was  in  that  year  fuppofed  to  have  ilolen  their 
hearts  from  her  Z-^/r^  their  chieftain  :  but  the  feve- 
reft  loyalift  muft  admit  fome  extenuation  of  their 
error,  in  yielding  to  the  infinuations  of  fo  charming 
a  feducer. 

Boethius  relates,  that  in  his  time  hrccriufs  was 
greatly  frequented  by  merchants  from  Germany, 
who  purchafed  here  the  furs  of  feveral  forts  of  wild 
beafls*  ;  and  that  wild  horfes  were  found  in  great 
abundance  in  its  neighborhood :  that  the  country 
yielded  a  great  deal  of  wheat  and  other  corn,  and 

•  ^d  NcfHe  lacui  longi  quatuor  et  nj'tginti  pnffi/um  m'tUia,  Inti 
dncdecim  later  a,  propter  ingentia  tiemora  fcrarutn  ingens  (opia  rji 
rertorum,   equorum  itidojnilcrum,  caprcohrum  et  eju/tr.odi  aninian- 
*  iium  magna  lii  :  ad  hccc  tnarttriUtS,  Foiihi/r,  ut  'vulgo  'vocaiitur, 

I'ulpcsy  viuJicUte,  Fihri,  Lulrii que  tncomparabili  nnmero''quornm 
lergcrn  extern  gentes  ad  luxum  immenjo  pretio  coemunt.  tjcot. 
Regni  Defer,  ix.     Hift.  Scot.  x,\x. 

quantities 


I  N    5  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  173 

quantities  of  nuts  and  apples.  At  prefent. there  is 
a  trade  in  the  flvins  of  Deer,  Roes,  and  other  beads, 
v.'hich  the  Highlanders  bring  down  to  the  fairs. 
There  happened  to  be  one  at  this  time  ;  the  com- 
modities were  flcins,  various  neceflaries  brought  in 
by  the  Pedlars,  coarfe  country  cloths,  cheefe,  but- 
ter and  meal ;  the  laft  in  goat-flcin  bags ;  the  but- 
ter lapped  in  cavvls,  or  leaves  of  the  broad  aha  or 
tang;  and  great  quantities  of  birch  wood  and  hazel 
cut  into  lengths  for  carts*,  ccc.  which  had  been 
floated  down  the  river  from  Loiigb-Nefs. 

The  fair  was  a  very  agreeable  circumftance,  and  Highland 
afforded  a  moft  fmguLir  groupe  of  Highlanders  in 
all  their  motly  dreffes.  Their  brechan^  or  plaid, 
confifts  of  twelve  or  thirteen  yards  of  a  narrow 
ftuff,  wrapt  round  the  middle,  and  reaches  to  the 
knees  :  is  often  fallened  round  the  middle  with  a 
belt,  and  is  then  called  hrechan-feal\  but  in  cold 
weather,  is  large  enough  to  wrap  round  the  whole 
body  from  head  to  feet  -,  and  this  often  is  their 
only  cover,  not  only  within  doors,  but  on  the  open 
hills  during  the  whole  night.  It  is  frequently 
faftened  on  the  fhoulders  with  a  pin  often  of  filver 
and  before  with  a  brotche  (like  the  fihula  of  the 
Romans),  which  is  fometimes  of  filver,  and  both 
large  and  expenfive ;  the  old  ones  have  very  fre- 
quently mottos. 

The  (lockings  are  fliort,  and  are  tied  below  the 
knee.  The  cuoranen  is  a  fort  of  laced  Ihoe  made 
of  a  fkin  with  the  hairy  fide  out.  but  now  feldom 
worn.  The  truiJJj  were  worn  by  the  gentry,  and 
were  breeches  and  (lockings  made  of  one  piece, 

I'he 


A      T    O    U    R 

The  fllehi^i  i.  e.  little  plaid,  alfo  called  kelt,  is 
a  fort  of  fhorc  petticoat  reaching  only  to  the 
knees,  and  is  a  modern  fubftiturc  for  the  lower 
part  of  the  plaid,  being  found  to  be  lefs  cumbcr- 
fomc,  cfpccially  in  time  of  aiflion,  when  the  High- 
lenders  uled  to  tuck  their  hcc/jan  into  their  girdle. 
ALmoIl  all  have  a  great  pouch  of  badger  and  other 
fkins,  with  tafiels  dangling  before.  In  this  they 
keep  their  tobacco  and  money. 

Their  antient  arms  were  the  Lcchaber  ax,  now 
ufed  by  none  but  the  town-guard  o^ Edinburgh  -y  a 
tremendous  weapon,  better  to  be  exprefled  by  a 
figure  than  words  *. 

'  The  broad-fword  and  target ;  with  the  laft  they 
covered  themfclvcs,  with  the  firft  reached  their 
enemy  at  a  great  diftance.  Thefe  were  their  antienc 
Vv'eapons,  as  appears  by  -f  Tacitus  \  but  fince  the 
difarming  adl,  are  fcarcely  to  be  met  with  ;  partly 
owing  to  that,  partly  to  the  fpirit  of  induftry  now 
rifing  among  them,  the  Highlanders  in  a  few  years 
T\'ill  fcarce  know  the  ufe  of  any  weapon. 

Bows  and  arrows  v;ere  ufed  in  war  as  late  as  the 
middle  of  the  laft  Century,  as  I  find  in  a  manufcripc 
life  of  Sir  Eijoin  Cameron. 

The  dirk  was  a  fort  of  dagger  ftuck  in  the  belt. 
I  frequently  faw  this  weapon  in  the  fhambles  of 
Invernefsy  converted  into  a  butcher's  knife,  being, 
like  Hudibras's  dagger, 

A  fervlceable  dudgeon. 
Either  for  fighting  or  for  drudging. 

•  Vide  tab.  xii. 

f  Sii/iul  conjlnntia,  fvnul  arte  Britanni  ingentilui  gladiis  ft 
brenjibus  cetris,  mijjilia  iwjlrorum  vitare  njel  (xcutcre.  Vita  Agri* 
colx.  c.  36. 

The 


IN    SCOTLAND.  175 

The  dirk  was  a  weapon  ufed  by  the  antient  Cak- 
donians,  for  Dio  Cajfius,  in  his  account  of  the  expe- 
dition of  Sevsrus,  mentions  it  under  the  name  of 
Hy^&pihov  *,  Pu^io  or  Utile  Dagger. 

The  Matiucajhlafa,  or  arm-pit  dagger,  was  worn 
there  ready  to  be  ufed  on  coming  to  clofe  quarters. 
Thefe,  with  a  piftol  ftuck.  in  the  girdle,  completely 
armed  the  Highlander  -f. 

It  will  be  fit  to  mention  here  the  method  the  Fiery-crofi. 
Chieftains  took  formerly  to  aflemble  the  clans  for 
any  military  expedition.  In  every  clan  there  is  a 
known  place  of  rendezvous,  ftyled  Cam  a  whiiiy 
to  which  they  muft  refort  on  this  fignal.  A  perfon 
is  fcnt  out  full  fpeed  with  a  pole  burnt  at  one  end 
and  bloody  at  the  other,  and  with  a  crofs  at  the 
top,  which  is  called  CrcJJj-tairiet  the  crofs  of  (hame  j, 
or  the  Hery  crofs  •,  the  firit  from  the  difgrace  they 
would  undergo  if  they  declined  appearing  ;  the  fe- 
cond  from  the  penalty  of  having  fire  and  fword 
carried  thro*  their  country,  in  cafe  of  refufal.  The 

•   Xiphil.  epit.  Dionis. 

f  Major y  who  wrote  about  the  year  151 3,  thiw  defcrlbes 
their  arms  :  Arcum  et  faghtas,  latijjimuni  enfctn  cum  par^vo  hal^ 
herto,  pugionem  gro/fum  ex  /oh  uno  latere  fcindentem,  fed  acutif- 
ftmutn  Jub  zona  femper  ferunt,  '■tempore  belli  loricam  ex  loris 
fcrreb  per  totum  corpus  itiduunt.   Lib.  1.   c.  viii. 

X  This  ci:(lom  was  common  to  the  northern  Parts  c^ Europe 
with  fome  flight  variation,  as  appears  from  Olaus  Magnus,  p. 
146,  who  dcfcribes  it  thus,  Bacculus  tripalmnris,  agilioris  ju- 
I'enis  curfu  precipiti,  ad  ilium  ^jel  ilium  pagum  /lU  milium  kujuf- 
viodi  ediSio  defer endtis  committitur,  ut  3,  4.  vel  8  die  unus,  duo 
'vel  tresf  aut  njiritim  cmnes  'vel  finguli  ab  anm  trilufti,  xum 
armis  et  exfetijis  lo  'vcl  20  dierum  fub  pcena  ccmhujiionis  dome* 
rum  (quo  ufio  baculo)  •vel  fufpenjionis  Patroni,  aut  omnium 
(quce  fune  allegata  f.gnatur)  in  tali  ripe,  i-d  campo,  aut  'valle 
comparere  teyiear.tur  Ji'.hito,  caufam  vocaticms,  atque  ordinem  exe^ 
eulionii  Pra;fecti/?  ovincialis,  quid  fieri  iitieat  audituri. 

filft 


lyS  /V      T    O    U  R 

firO:  bearer  delivers  it  to  the  next  perfon  he  meets, 
he  runnino;  full  fpeed  to  the  third,  and  lb  on.  In 
the  late  rebellion,  it  was  fent  by  fome  unknown 
difaffeded  hand  thro' the  coumy  of  Breadalhnet 
and  pafTed  through  a  tra6l  of  thirty-two  miles  in 
three  hours,  but  without  effe6t. 
Women's  The  women's  drels  is  the  kircb,  or  a  white  piece 

^^^*  of  linnen,   pinned  over  the  foreheads  of  thofe  that 

are  married,  and  round  the  hind  part  of  the  head, 
falling  behind  over  their  necks.  The  fingle  women 
wear  only  a  ribband  round  their  head,  which  they 
call  a  fnood.  The  td/iac^  or  plaid,  hangs  over  their 
Ihoulders,  and  is  faftened  before  with  a  brotche  ; 
but  in  bad  weather  is  drawn  over  their  heads :  I 
have  alfo  obferved  during  divine  fervice,  that  they 
keep  drawing  it  forward  in  proportion  as  thqir  at- 
tention increafes  -,  infomuch  as  to  conceal  at  laft: 
their  whole  face,  as  if  it  v/as  to  exclude  every  ex- 
ternal object  that  might  interrupt  their  devotion. 
In  the  county  of  Breadalbane,  many  wear,  when  in 
high  drefs,  a  great  pleated  {locking  of  an  enormous 
length,  called  ojfan.  In  other  refpefts,  their  drefs 
refembles  that  of  women  of  the  fame  rank  in  Eng- 
land:  but  their  condition  is  very  different,  being 
little  better  than  (laves  to  our  fex. 
Character  of  xhe  mai^Iiers  of  the  native  Highlanders  may 
landers!  j^ftl/  t>c  cxprefTed  in  thefe  words  :  ijidgleiit  to  a 

high  degree,  iinlefs  roufed  to  war,  or  to  any  ani- 
mating amufement  •,  or  I  may  fay,  from  experience, 
to  lend  any  difinterefled  afTillance  to  the  diftreffed 
traveller,  either  in  diredling  him  on  his  way,  or  af- 
fording their  aid  in  paffing  the  dangerous  torrents 

of 


N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D;  177 

of  the  Highlands:  hofpitable  to  the  highefi:  degree, 
and  full  of  generofity  :  are  much  affedled  with  the 
civility  of  ftrangers,  and  have  in  themfelves  a  natu- 
ral politenefs  and  addrefs,  which  often  flows  from 
the  meanefl  when  left  expefted.  Thro'  my  whole 
tour  I  never  met  with  a  angle  inftance  of  national 
reflection  !  their  forbearance  proves  them:  to  be  fu- 
perior  to  the  meannefs  of  retaliation :  I  fear  they  pity 
us  -,  but  I  hope  not  indifcrimihately.  Are  excef- 
lively  inc^uifitive  afcer  your  buflnefs,  your  name, 
and  other  particulars  of  little  conkquence  to  them: 
moft  curious  after  the  politicks  of  the  v/orld,  and 
v/hen  they  can  procure  an  old  nesvs-paper,  will 
liften  to  it  with  all  the  ^y idiiy  oi  Shckefpear's  black- 
fmith.  Have  much  pride,  and  confequently  are 
impatient  of  affronts,  and  revcngefull  of  injuries. 
Are  decent  in  their  general  behaviour;  inclined  to 
fuperfiition,  yet  attentive  to  the  duties  of  religion, 
and  are  capable  of  giving  a  moft  diftinft  account  of 
the  principles  of  their  faith.  But  in  many  parts  of 
the  Highlands,  their  charafler  begi^is  to  be  more 
faintly  marked  •,  they  mix  more  with  the  world, 
and  become  daily  lefs  attached  to  their  chiefs :  the 
clans  begin  to  difperfe  themfelves  through  different 
parts  of  the  country,  finding  that  their  induftry  and 
good  condudt  aflbrd  them  better  prote«ftion  (fince 
the  due  execution  of  the  lav;s)  than  any  their  chief- 
tain can  afford  %  and  the  chieftain  tafting  the  fweets 
of  advanced  rents,  and  the  benefits  of  induftry, 
difmifl^es  from  his  table  the  crowds  of  retainers,  the 
former  inftruments  of  his  opprefnon  and  freak ilh 
tyranny. 

K.  Moft 


179  A     T   O    U    R 

inj.laPiJ  Moil  of  the  antient  fports  of  the  Highlanders, 

'^^^^'"  fuch  as  archery,    hunting,    fowling    and   fifhing, 

are  now  difufed  :  thofe  retained  are,  throwing  the 
putting-^onc,  or  ftone  of  Jlrength*,  as  they  call  it, 
which  occafions  an  emulation  who  can  throw  a 
weighty  one  the  fartheft.  Throwing  the  penny- 
ftone,  which  anfwers  to  our  coits.  Th^Jhinty,  or 
the  ftriking  a  ball  of  wood  or  of  hair :  this  game  is 
played  between  two  parties  in  a  large  plain,  and 
furnilhed  with  clubs-,  which-ever  fide  Itrikes  it  firft 
to  their  own  goal  wins  the  match. 

The  amufements  by  their  fire-fides  were,  the 
telling  of  tales,  the  wildeft  and  moft  extravagant 
imaginable  :  mufick  was  another :  in  former  times, 
the  harp  was  the  favorite  inftrument,  covered  with 
leather  and  ftrung  with  wire  -f,  but  at  prefent  is 
Bagpipes.  quite  loft.  Bagpipes  are  fuppofed  to  have  been 
introduced  by  the  Dnnes  -,  the  oldeft  are  played 
with  the  mouth,  the  loudeft  and  moft  ear-piercing 
of  any  wind  mufick  ;  the  other,  played  with  the 
fingers  only,  are  of  Irijh  origin :  the  firft  fuited 
the  genius  of  this  warlike  people,  rouzed  their 
courage  to  battle,  alarmed  them  when  fecure,  and 
colleded  them  when  fcattered.  This  inftrument  is 
become  fcarce  fince  the  abolition  of  the  power  of 
the  chieftains,  and  the  more  ixiduftrious  turn  of  the 
common  people^ 

Vocal  mufick  was  much  in  vogue  amongft  them, 
and  their  fongs  were  chiefly  in  praife  of  their  antient 

•  Cloch  Heart. 

f  Major  fays,  Pro  mujicis  in/Irumtntis  et  mujleo  concentUf  Lyra. 
Jj,Jue/lres  utuntur,  cujus  chordas  ex  are,  tt  7ion  tx  animaltum  sk- 
tejiinii  /aciunt,   in  qua  dukijp.mi  modulantur, 

heroes. 


IN    SCOTLAND.  179I 

heroes.  I  was  told  that  they  dill  have  fragments  of 
the  ftory  of  Fingal  and  others,  which  they  carrol 
as  they  go  along  •,  theie  vocal  traditions  are  the 
foundation  of  the  works  of  OJJian. 

Leave  Invernefs,  and  continue  my  journey  weft    Aug,  31, 
for  fome  time  by  the  river-fide  :  have  a  fine  view 
of  the  plain,  the  Tommin,  the  town  and  the  dillanc 
hills.     After  a  ride  of  about  fix  miles  reached 
Lough-Nefs  *,  and  enjoyed  along  its  banks  a  molt 
romantic  and  beautiful!  Icenery,  generally  in  woods 
of  birch,  or  hazel,  mixed  with  a  few  holly,  vv'hite- 
thorn,  afpin,  adi  and  oak,  but  open  enough  in  all 
parts  to  admit  a  fight  of  the  water.  Sometimes  the 
road  was  ftrait  for  a  confiderable  diftance,  and  re- 
fembled  a  fine  and  regular  avenue  ;  in  others  it 
wound  about  the  fides  of  the  hills  which  over- 
hung the  lake  :  the  road  was  frequently  cut  thro' 
the  rock,   which  on  one  fide  formed  a  folid  wall  i 
on  the  other,  a  fteep  precipice.    In  many  parts  we 
were  immerfed  in  woods ;  in  others,  they  opened 
and  gave  a  view  of  the  fiJes  and  tops  of  the  vaft 
mountains  foaring  above:  fome  of  thefe  were  naked, 
but  in  general  covered  with  wood,  except  on  the 
meer  precipices,  or  where  the  grey  rocks  denied 
vegetation,  or  where  the  heath,  now  glowing  with 
purple  bloflbms,  covered  the  furface.     The  form 
of  thefe  hills  was  very  various  and  irregular,  either 
broken  into  frequent  precipices,  or  towering  into 
rounded  fummits  cloathed  with  trees ;  but  not  fo 
clofe  but  to  admit  a  fight  of  the  fky  between  them, 

*This  beautiful!  lake  has  a  great  refcmblance  to  fome  parts 
of  the  lake  <^  Lncertif,  efpecially  towards  theealt  end. 

N  2  Thus, 


i3o  A      r    O    U    R 

Thus,  for  many  miles,  there  was  no  polTibility  o^ 
cultivation  -,  yet  this  tradt  was  occupied  by  dimi- 
nutive cattle,  by  Sheep,  or  by  Goats :  the  laft  were 
pied,  and  lived  mod  luxurioufly  on  the  tender 
branches  of  the  trees.  The  wild  animals  that  pof- 
fefled  this  pidlurefque  fcene  were  Stags  and  Roes, 
black  game,  and  Grous  -,  and  on  the  fummits, 
white  Hares  and  Ptarmigans.  Foxes  are  fo  nume- 
rous and  voracious  that  the  farmers  are  fometimes 
forced  to  houfe  their  Sheep,  as  is  done  in  France^ 
for  fear  of  the  Wolves  *. 

The  north  fide  oi  Lough -Nefs  is  far  lefs  beau- 
tifull  than  the  fouth.  In  general,  the  hills  are  lefs 
high,  but  very  deep  ;  in  a  very  few  places  covered 
with  brulh-wood,  but  in  general  very  naked,  from 
the  Aiding  of  the  ftrata  down  their  Hoping  fides, 
Caftle  About  the  middle  is  Caftle  Urqhtiart,  a  fortrefs 

Ur^huan,  founded  on  a  rock  projecting  into  the  lake,  and 
was  faid  to  have  beei*  the  Teat  of  the  once  powerful! 
Cummins.  Near  it  is  the  broadeft  part  of  the 
Lough,  occafioned  by  a  bay  near  the  caftle. 

Above  is  Glen-Morijlon^  and  eaft  of  that  Straith- 
Clas,  or  the  Chifokis  country  ;  in  both  of  which 

'  *  It  IS  to  me  matter  of  furprlze  tliat  no  mention  is  made,  in 

the  Poems  oi  Ojjian,  of  our  greater  hearts  of  prey,  which  muft 
have  abounded  in  his  days ;  for  the  Wolf  wai  a  pert  to  the  coun> 
try  fo  late  as  the  reign  of  Queen  EUzabcthy  and  the  Bear  ex- 
iltcd  there  at  Icll  Lill  the  year  1057,  wlien  ^Gordon,  for  killing 
a  fierce  Bear,  was  dircdcd  by  King  Malcolm  III.  to  carry 
three  Dears  heads  in  his  banner.  Other  native  animals  arc 
cften  mcniioncd  in  fevcral  parts  of  the  work  ;  and  in  the  five 
little  poems  on  night,  compofitions  of  as  many  Bards,  every 
modern  Bniijh  beart  of  chace  ib  enumerated,  the  howling  Dog 
and  howling  Fox  defcribtd  ;  yet  the  howling  Wolf  omitted, 
%H-hich  would  have  made  the  Bards  night  much  more  hideous. 

are 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  i8i 

are  forefts  of  pines,  where  that  rare  bird  the  Cock 
of  the  Wood  is  ftill  to  be  met  with.  At  Clerj" 
Morijton  is  a  manufaftnre  of  linnen,  where  forty 
girls  at  a  time  are  taught  for  three  months  to  fping 
and  then  another  forty  taken  in  :  there  are  befides 
fix  looms,  and  all  fupported  out  of  the  forfeited 
lands. 

Above  is  the  great  mountain  Meal  Fourvounkh^ 
the  firfl  land  failors  make  from  the  eall  fea  -,  on  the 
top  is  a  lake  faid  to  be  lOO  fathoms  deep. 

I  was  informed  that  in  that  neighborhood-  are 
glens  and  cafcades  of  furprifing  beauty,  but  my 
time  did  not  permit  me  to  vifit  them. 

Dined  at  a  poor  inn  near  the  Generars  Huty  or 
the  place  where  General  IVnde  refided  when  he  in- 
fpecled  the  great  work  of  the  roads,  and  gave  one 
rare  example  of  making  the  foldiery  ufefull  in  time 
of  peace.  Near  is  a  fine  glen  covered  at  the  bot- 
tom with  wood,  through  v/hich  runs  a  torrent  rifing 
fouthward.  The  country  alfo  is  prettily  varied  v/ith 
woods  and  corn-fields. 

About  a  mile  farther  is  the  fall  of  Fyers,  a  vaft  pall  of  A 
catara6t,  in  a  darkfome  glen  of  a  ftupendous  depth; 
the  water  darts  far  beneath  the  top  thro'  a  narrow 
gap  between  two  rocks,  then  precipitates  above 
forty  feet  lower  into  the  bottom  of  the  chafm,  and 
the  foam,  like  a  great  cloud  of  fmoke,  ri(es  and 
fills  the  air.  The  fides  of  this  glen  are  vaft  pre- 
cipices mixed  with  trees  over-hanging  the  water, 
through  which,  after  a  fhort  fpace,  the  waters  dif- 
charge  themfelves  into  the  lake. 

About  half  a  mile  fouth  of  the  firfl  fall  is  ano- 
N  3  ther 


ers. 


:iSz  A     TOUR 

ther  pafTing  through  a  narrow  chafm,  whofe  fides 
it  ha^  undermined  for  a  confiderable  way  :  over  the 
gap  is  a  true  Alp'me  bridge  of  the  bodies  of  trees 
covered  with  fods,  froni  whofe  middle  is  an  awe- 
full  view  of  the  water  roaring  beneath. 

At  the  fall  of  Fyers  the  road  quits  the  fide  of  the 
lake,  and  is  carried  for  fome  fpace  through  a  fmall 
vale  on  the  fide  of  the  river  Fyers,  where  is  a  mix- 
ture of  fmall  plains  of  corn  and  rocky  hills.  Then 
fucceeds  a  long  and  dreary  moor,  a  tedious  afcent 
up  the  mountain  See-ivhinniny  or  Cummitis  Seat, 
whofe  fummit  is  of  a  great  height  and  very  craggy.- 
Defcend  a  fteep  road,  leave  on  the  right  Lough- 
^p.arf^  a  fmall  irregular  piece  of  water,  decked 
with  little  wooded  ifles,  and  abounding  with  Char. 
After  a  fecond  fteep  defcent,  reach 

VoriAugufius.  fort  Jugujlus  *,  a  fmall  fortrefs,  feated  on  a 
plain  at  the  head  o( Lough -Nefs^  between  the  rivers 
'Taarf  and  Oich  \  the  lafl  is  confiderable,  and  has 
over  it  a  bridge  of  three  arches.  The  fort  confifts 
of  four  bafi;ions ;  within  is  the  Governor's  houfe, 
and  barracks  for  400  men  :  it  was  taken  by  the 
Rebels  in  1746,  who  immediately  dcferted  it,  after 
dcmolifhing  as  much  as  they  could. 

l»Hgh-h'f/s.         Lough-Nefs  is  twenty-two  miles  in  length  ;  the 

breadth  from  one  to  two  miles,  except  near  Caftlc 

Urqhuarfy  where  it  fwells  out  to  three.     The  depth 

is  very  great  •,  oppofite  the  rock  called  the  Horfe- 

JhoCy  near  the  weft  end,  it  lias  been  found  to  be 

•  Its  Erfe  name  Is  Kil-ivhinnin,  or  the  burial-place  of  the 
Cummins.  Jt  lies  on  the  road  to  the  Iflc  of  Sire,  which  is  about 
5  2  niilcs  ofF ;  but  on  the  whole  way  there  is  not  a  place  fit  for 
the  reception  of  man  or  horfe. 

J  40 


I  N    S  G  O  T  L  A  N  D.  1S3 

140  fathoms.  From  an  eminence  near  the  fort  is 
a  full  view  of  its  whole  extent,  for  it  is  perfedlly 
ftrair,  running  from  eafl  to  weft,  with  a  point  to 
the  fouth.  The  boundary  from  the  fall  of  Fyers  is 
very  fteep  and  rocky,  which  obliged  General  fF^de 
to  make  that  detour  from  its  banks,  partly  on  ac- 
count of  the  expence  in  cutting  through  fo  much 
folid  rock,  partly  through  an  apprehenfion  that  in 
cafe  of  a  rebellion  the  troops  might  be  deftroyed  in 
their  march,  by  the  tumbling  down  of  flones  by 
the  enemy  from  above :  befides  this,  a  prodigious 
arch  muft  have  been  flung  over  the  Glen  of  Fyers. 

This  lake,  by  reafon  of  its  great  depth,  never  Never  freezes 
freezes,  and  during  cold  weather  a  violent  fteam 
fifes  from  it  as  from  a  furnace.  Ice  brought  from 
other  parts,  and  put  into  Lough-Nefs,  inftantly 
thaws ;  but  no  water  freezes  fooner  than  that  of  the 
lake  when  brought  into  a  houfe.  Its  water  isefteemed 
very  falubrious  •,  fo  that  people  come  or  fend  thirty 
miles  for  it :  old  Lord  Lo'uat  in  particular  made 
conftant  ufe  of  it.  But  it  is  certain,  whether  it  be 
owing  to  the  water,  or  to  the  air  of  that  neighbor- 
hood, that  for  feven  years  the  garrifon  of  Fort  ^«- 
gujlus  had  not  loft  a  fingle  man. 

The  fifti  of  this  lake  are  Salmon,  which  are  in 
ieafon  from  Chrijimas  to  AUdfummer,  Trouts  of 
about  2  lb.  weight.  Pikes  and  Eels.  During  win- 
ter it  is  frequented  by  Swans  and  other  wild  fowls. 

The  greateft  rife  of  water  in  Lougb-Nefs  is  four- 
teen feet.  The  lakes  from  whence  it  receives  its 
fupplies  are  Lough-Oich^  Lough-Garrie->  and  Lough- 
^icb.     There  is  but  very  little  navigation  on  it ; 

N  4  the 


i84  A      T    O    U    R 

the  only  vcflel  is  a  gaily  belonging  to  the  fort,  to 
hrfiig  the  flores  from  tlie  eafl  end,   the  river  Nefi 
being  too  fhallovv  for  navigation. 
Its  agitations       jc  js  violently  agitated  by  the  winds,  and  at  times 
the  waves  are  quite  mountainous.     November  ill, 
1 755,  at  the  fame  time  as  the  earthquake  at  Lifborti 
thefe  waters  were  afrccfled  in  a  very  extraordinary 
manner  :  they  rofe  and  flowed  up  the  lake  from 
eaft  to  weft  with  vaft  impetuofity,  and  were  carried 
above  200  yards  up  the  river  Oich,  breaking  on 
its   banks  in  a  wave  near  three  feet  high  -,  then 
continued  ebbing  and  flowing  for  the  fpace  of  an 
hour :  but  at  eleven  o'clock  a  wave   greater  than 
any  of  the  reft  came  up  the  river,  broke  on  the 
north  fide,  and  overflowed  the  bank  for  the  extent 
of  30  feet.     A  boat  near  the  GerieraPs  Hut,  loaden 
with  brufli-wood,  was  thrice  driven  alhore,  and 
twice  carried  back  again  ;  but  the  laft  time,   the 
rudder  was  broken,  the  wood  forced  out,  and  the 
boat  filled  with  water  and  left  on  Ihore.     At  the 
fame  time,  a  little  ifle,  in  a  fmall  lough  in  Badeuochy 
was  totally  reverfed  and  flung  on  the  beach.     But. 
at  both  thefe  places  no  agitation  was  felt  on  land. 
cjp^  ^  Rode  to  the  caftle  oiTor-down,  a  rock  two  miles 

CaftleofT<;r-   ^^^ft  of  Fort  Au^ujlus :  on  the  fummit  is  an  antient 
**■"''*•  fortrefs.     The  face  of  this  rock  is  a  precipice  i  on 

the  accefllble  fide  is  a  ftrong  dyke  of  loofe  ftones ; 
above  that  a  ditch,  and  a  little  higher  a  terrafs  fup- 
ported  by  ftones :  on  the  top  a  fmall  oval  area, 
hollow  in  the  middle:  round  this  area,  for  the 
depth  of  near  twelve  feet,  are  a  quantity  of  ftones 
iliangcly  cemented  with  almoft  vitrified  matter,  arid 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  1E5 

in  fome  places  quite  turned  into  black  fcoria  :  the 
ftones  were  generally  granite  mixed  with  a  few  grit- 
ftones  of  a  kind  not  found  nearer  the  place  than  40 
mile?.  Whether  this  was  the  antient  fitc  of  fome 
forge,  or  whether  the  ftones  which  form  this  for- 
trefs  *  had  been  colledled  from  the  ftrata  of  fome 
Vulcano,  (for  the  veftiges  of  fuch  are  faid  to  have 
been  found  in  the  Highlands)  I  Tubmit  to  farther 
enquiry. 

From  this  rock  is  a  view  of  Ben-ki^  a  vafl  craggy 
mountain  above  GIen-Gar?'ie's  country.  Towards 
the  fouth  is  the  high  mountain  Coryarich :  the  afcent 
from  this  fide  is  nine  miles,  but  on  the  other  the  de- 
fcent  into  Badenoch  is  very  rapid,  and  not  above 
one,  the  road  being,  for  the  eafe  of  the  traveller, 
cut  in  a  zigzag  faihion.  People  often  perifh  on  the 
fummit  of  this  hill,  which  is  frequently  vifited  dur- 
ing winter  with  dreadfull  ftorms  of  fnow. 

After  a  {hort  ride  weftward  along  the  plain,  reach  Sipt.  2. 
Lough-Oich,  a  narrow  lake ;  the  fides  prettily  in- 
dented, and  the  water  adorned  with  fmall  wooded 
ifles.  On  the  (hore  is  Gkn-Garrie^  the  feat  of  Mr.  Okn-Garm, 
McDonald,  almoft  furrounded  with  wood,  and  not 
far  diftant  is  the  ruin  of  the  old  caftle.  This  lake 
is  about  four  miles  long  *,  the  road  on  the  fouth 
fide  is  excellent,  and  often  carried  through  very 
pleafant  woods. 

After  a  fmall  interval  arrive  on  the  banks  of 
l^ough'Lochy^  a  fine  piece  of  water,  fourteen  miles   Lcugh-Uchy, 
long,  and  from  one  to  two  broad.     The  diftant 

•   r  was  informed  that  at^ri/aig  is  an  old  caftle  formed  of 
the  fame  materials, 

mountains 


iS^  A      T    O    U    R 

mountains  on  the  north  were  of  an  immenfe  height ; 
thole  on  the  fouth  had  the  appearance  of  tine  Hicep- 
•walks.  The  road  is  continued  on  the  fide  of  the 
lake  about  eight  miles.  On  the  oppofite  Ihore  was 
Cameron  of  Achnacarric^  once  the  feat  of  Cameron  of  Lochiel, 
Lochid.  but  burnt  in  1746.     He  was  efleemed  by  all  par- 

ties the  honefteft  and  mod  fenfible  man  of  any  that 
embarked  in  the  pernicious  and  abfurd  attempt  of 
that  and  the  preceding  year,  and  was  a  melancholy 
inftance  of  a  fine  underftanding  and  a  well-intend- 
/  ing  heart,  over-powered  by  the  unhappy  preju- 
dices of  education.  By  his  influence  he  prevented 
the  Rebels  from  committing  feveral  excefiies,  and 
even  faved  the  city  of  Glafgow  from  being  plun- 
dered, when  their  army  returned  out  of  England^ 
irritated  with  their  difappointment,  and  enraged 
^    .  at  the  loyalty  that  city  had  fliewn.^Thc  Preten- 

der came  to  him  as  foon  as  ever  he  landed.  Lochiel 
feeing  him  arrive  in  fo  wild  a  manner  and  fo  un- 
fupported,  entreated  him  to  defift  from  an  enter- 
prize  from  which  nothing  but  certain  ruin  could 
refult  to  him  and  his  partizans.  The  Adven- 
turer grew  warm,  and  reproached  Lochiel  with  a 
breach  of  promife.  This  affefled  him  fo  deeply, 
that  he  inftanriy  went  and  took  a  tender  and  moving 
leave  of  his  la^ly  and  family,  imagining  he  was  on 
the  point  of  parting  with  them  for  ever.  The  in- 
come of  his  eftate  was  at  that  time,  as  I  was  told, 
not  above  700I.  fer  ann.  yet  he  brought  fourteen 
hundred  men  into  the  fitld. 

The  waters  of  this  lake  form  the  river  Lochy^ 

and  difcharge  themfelves  into  the  weftern  fea,  as 

4  thof« 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  187 

thofe  o^Lougb-Oich  do  through  Lough-Nefs  into  the 
eailern.     About  the  beginning  of  this  lake  enter 
Lochaber  *  ;  ftop  at  Low-bridge,  a  poor  houfe-,  tra-   Lochaher, 
vcl  over  a  black  moor  for  fome  miles  ;  fee  abun- 
dance of  cattle,  but  fcarce  any  corn.     Crofs 

High-bridge,  a  fine  bridge  of  three  arches  flung 
over  the  torrent  Specn,  founded  on  rocks  ;  two  of  t 

the  arches  are  95  feet  high.  This  bridge  was  built 
by  General  Wade,  in  order  to  form  a  communica- 
tion with  the  country.  Thefe  publick  works  were 
at  firft  very  difagreeable  to  the  old  Chieftains,  and 
leflened  their  influence  greatly ;  for  by  admitting 
flrangers  among  them  their  clans  were  taught  that 
the  Lairds  were  not  the  firfl:  of  men.  But  they  had  ' 
another  reafon  much  more  folid;  Lochaber  had  been 
a  den  of  thieves ;  and  as  long  as  they  had  their 
waters,  their  torrents  and  their  bogs,  in  a  ftate  of 
nature,  they  made  their  excurfions,  could  plunder 
and  retreat  with  their  booty  in  full  fecurity.  So 
weak  were  the  laws  in  many  parts  oi North  Britain, 
till  after  the  late  rebellion,  that  no  ftop  could  be 
put  to  this  infamous  pradice.  A  contribution, 
called  the  Black-maiU  was  raifed  by  feveral  of  thefe  Blad-maiL 
plundering  chieftains  over  avafl:  extent  of  country : 
whoever  payed  it  had  their  cattle  enfured,  but  thofe 
who  dared  to  refufe  were  furc  to  fufi^er.  Many  of 
thefe  free-booters  were  wont  to  infert  an  article,  by 
which  they  were  to  be  releafed  from  their  agree- 
ment, in  cafe  of  any  civil  commotion  :  thus,  at  the 
breaking  out  of  the  laft  rebellion,  a  IVVGregor  f , 

*  So  called   from  a  lake  not  far  from  Fort  William,  near 
whofe  banks  Banqiio  was  faid  to  have  been  murthered. 
■(■  Who  affumed  the  name  of  Graham, 

who 


iSS  A      TOUR 

who  had  with  the  (Iridefl:  honor  (till  that  event) 
prefcrved  his  friends  cattle,  immediately  fent  them 
word,  that  from  that  time  they  were  out  of  his 
proteftion,  and  muft  now  take  care  of  themfelves. 
Barrifdale  was  another  of  this  clafs,  chief  of  a  band 
of  robbers,  who  fpread  terror  over  the  whole  coun- 
try: but  the  Highlanders  at  that  time  efteemed  the 
open  theft  of  cattle,  or  the  making  a  fpreith  (as 
they  called  it)  by  no  means  di(honorable  ;  and  the 
young  men  confidered  it  as  a  piece  of  gallantry, 
by  which  they  recommended  themfelves  to  their 
miftrefles.  On  the  other  fide  there  was  often  as 
much  bravery  in  the  purfuers;  for  frequent  battles 
enfued,  and  much  blood  has  been  fpilt  on  thofe 
occafions.  They  alfo  (hevved  great  dexterity  in 
tracing  the  robbers,  not  only  through  the  boggy 
land,  but  over  the  firmeft  ground,  and  even  over 
places  where  other  cattle  had  pafled,  knowing  well 
how  to  diflinguilh  the  fteps  of  thofe  that  were  wan- 
dering about  from  thofe  that  were  driven  haftily 
away  by  the  Free-booters. 

From  the  road  had  a  diflaiit  view  of  the  moun- 
tains of  Arifaigi  beyond  which  were  Moydart^  Kin- 
loch,  &c.  At  the  end  of  Lough  Shiel  the  Pretender 
firfl  fet  up  his  ftandard  in  the  wildefl:  place  that 
imagination  can  frame  :  and  in  this  fequeftered 
fpot  amidft  antient  prejudices,  and  prevaling  ig- 
norance of  the  blefTings  of  our  happy  conftitution, 
the  flrength  of  the  rebellion  lay. 

Pafs  by  the  fide  of  the  river  Lochy^  now  confi- 
Inverlochy.       dtrablc.  Scc  hvcrkchy  Cajlle  with  four  large  round 

towers. 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  i8^ 

towers  *,  which,  by  the  mode  of  building,  fcems  to 
have  been  the  work  of  the  Englijh.,  in  the  time  of 
Edward  1.  who  laid  large  fines  on  the  Scotch  Barons 
for  the  purpofe  of  erefting  new  caftles.     Reach 

Fort  IFiiliar/i,  built  in  King  IVilUam's  reign  ; 
as  was  a  fmall  town  near  it,  called  Mary- 
ioroughi  in  honor  of  his  Queen ;  but  prior  to  that, 
had  been  a  fmall  fortrefs,  creeled  by  General  Monky 
with  whofe  people  the  famous  Sir  Ewen  Ca- 
tmron  f  had  numerous  contefls.  The  prefent  fort 
is  a  triangle,  has  two  baftions,  and  is  capable  of 
admitting  a  garrifon  of  eight  hundred  men.  It  was 
well  defended  againft  the  Rebels  in  1746,  who 
raifed  the  fiege  with  much  difgrace.  The  fort  lies 
on  a  narrow  arm  of  the  fea,  called  Lcch-yelly  which 
extends  fome  miles  higher  up  the  country,  making 
a  bend  to  the  north,  and  extends  likewife  weftward 
towards  the  ifle  of  Mull,  near  twenty-four  ScotcJs 
miles. 

This  fort«on  the  weft,  and  Fort  Augujius  in  the 
centre,  and  Fort  George  on  the  cafl,  form  what  is 
called  the  chain,  from  fea  to  fea.     This  fpace  is   The  Chain, 
called  Glen-more,  or  the  great  Glen,  which,  includ- 
ing water  and  land,  is  almofl:  a  level  of  feventy 

*  The  largeft  is  called  Cummin's  tower.  Thefe  towers  (6 
greatly  refemble  thofe  built  by  the  fame  monarch  in  Nor(/j 
Wales,  that  I  fcarce  hefitate  to  attribute  this  caftle  to  him. 
By  feveral  accounts  it  appears  that  there  had  been  a  caftle  on 
the  fame  fpot,  built  nnany  centuries  prior  to  this  ruin  ;  and 
it  is  alfo  alTerted,  that  the  league,  between  Charkmagne  and 
Achaius^  King  of  Scotland,  was  figned  by  the  latter  in  it. 

t  Who  is  faid  to  have  killed  the  laft  Wolf  in  Scotland^ 
about  the  year  16S0. 

miles. 


15<J  A     T    O   U    R 

miles.  There  is,  in  fafl,  but  little  land,  but  what 
is  divided  by  firth,  lough,  or  river  -,  except  the 
two  miles  which  lie  between  Lough  Oicb  and  Lough 
Lochy.  By  means  of  Fort  George^  all  entrance  up 
the  Firth  towards  Invernefs  is  prevented.  Fort  Au- 
gujlus  curbed  the  inhabitants  midway,  and  Fort 
fFilliam  is  a  check  to  any  attempts  on  the  weft. 
Detachments  are  made  from  all  thefe  garrifons  to 
Invernefs y  Bernera  barracks  oppofite  to  the  IHc  of 
Skie,  and  Caflle  Ducirt  in  the  Ifle  oi  Mull  f.  Other 
fmall  parties  are  alfo  fcattered  in  huts  throughout 
the  country,  to  prevent  the  ftealing  of  cattle. 

Fort  William  is  furrounded  by  vaft  mountains, 
which  occafion  almoft  perpetual  rain  :  the  loftieft 
Bencvtjb,  are  on  the  fouth  fide  •,  Benevijh  foars  above  the  reft, 
and  ends,  as  I  was  told,  in  a  point,  (at  this  time 
concealed  in  mift)  whofe  height  from  the  fea  is  faid 
to  be  1450  yards.  As  an  antient  Briton,  I  lament 
the  difgrace  of  Snoicdon ;  once  efteemed  the  higheft 
hill  in  the  ifland,  but  now  muft  yield  the  palm  to  a 
Caledonian  mountain.  But  I  have  my  doubts  whe- 
ther this  might  not  be  rivaled,  or  perhaps  furpaflcd 
by  others  in  the  fame  country  ;  for  example,  Ben  y 
hourd^,  a  central  hill,  from  whence  to  the  fea  there 
is  a  continued  and  rapid  dcfcent  of  feventy  miles, 
as  may  be  feen  by  the  violent  courfe  of  the  Dee  to 
Aberdeen.  But  their  height  has  not  yet  been  taken, 
which  to    be   done  fairly  muft  be  from  the  fea. 

■\  I  was  informed  that  coal  has  been  lately  difcovered  in 
this  ifland.  What  advantage  may  not  this  prove,  in  eftablifh- 
ments  of  manufadures,  in  a  country  juft  rouzed  from  the 
kp  of  indolence ! 

Benevijhy 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  t^i 

BeneviJIji  as  well  as  many  others,  harbour  fnow 
throughout  the  year. 

The  bad  weather  which  reigned  during  my  ftay 
in  thefe  parts  prevented  me  from  vifiting  the  cele- 
brated parallel  roads  in  Glen-Roy,  As  I  am  unable 
to  fatisfy  the  curiofity  of  the  Reader  from  my  own 
obfervation,  I  (hall  deliver  in  the  Appendix  *  the 
informations  I  could  colled:  relating  to  thefe  amaz- 
ing works. 

'The  great  produce  of  Lochaher  is  cattle :  that  Trade  of 
diftrifl  alone  fends  out  annually  30CO  head  j  but  if  Lochaher, 
a  portion  of  Invernefsjhire  is  included,  of  which  this  j 
properly  is  part,  the  number  is  10,000.  There  are  : 
alfo  a  few  horfes  bred  here,  and  a  very  few  fheep;  i 
but  of  late  feveral  have  been  imported.     Scarce  / 
any  arable  land,  for  the  excefllve  wet  which  reigns'"^ 
here  almofl  totally   prevents  the  growth  of  corn, 
and  what  little  there  is  fit  for  tillage  fets  at  ten 
Ihillings  an  acre.     The  inhabitants  of  this  diftrift 
are  therefore  obliged,  for  their  fupport,  to  import 
fix  thoufand  bolls  of  oatmeal  annually/ which  coft 
about  4000I.  the  rencs  are  about  3000!.  per  ami, 
the  return  for  their  cattle  is  about  7500I.  the  horfes 
may  produce  fome  trifle: ;  fo  that  the  tenants  mufl 
content  themfelves  with  a  very  fcanty  fubfiftence, 
without  the  profpeft  of  faving  the  left  againft  un- 
forefeen  accidents.     The  rage  of  raifino  rents  has 
reached  this  diftant  country :  in  England  there  may 
be  reafon  for  it,  (in  a  certain  degree)  where  the 
value  of  lands  is  encreafed  by  acceflion  of  com- 
merce, and  by  the  rife  of  the  price  of  provifions ; 

•  //■*.  III. 

but 


192  A     T    O    U    R 

but  here  (contrary  to  all  policy)  the  g;reat  men  b;- 
gin  at  the  wrong  end,  with  fqiieezing  the  bag, 
before  they  have  helped  the  poor  tenant  to  fill  it, 
by  the  introdudlion  of  manufadtures.  In  many 
of  the  ifles  this  already  (hews  its  unhappy  efFeft, 
and  begins  to  depopulate  the  country,  for  numbers 
of  families  have  been  obliged  to  give  up  the  ilrong 
attachment  the  Scots  in  general  have  for  their  coun- 
try, and  to  exchange  it  for  the  wilds  of  jdmerica. 

The  houfes  of  the  peafants  in  Lochaber  are  the 
mod  wretched  that  can  be  imagined  -,  framed  of 
upright  poles,  which  are  wattled;  the  roof  is 
formed  of  boughs  like  a  wig'iuam,  and  the  whole  is 
covered  with  fods  •,  fo  that  in  this  moid  climate 
their  cottages  have  a  perpetual  and  much  finer 
verdure  than  the  reft  of  the  country. 

Salmons  are  taken  in  thefe  parts  as  late  as  May  ; 
about  s<^  tuns  are  caught  in  the  feafon.  Thefe  fiOi 
never  appear  fo  early  on  this  coaft  as  on  the  eaftern. 

Phinocs  are  taken  here  in  great  numbers,  1500 
having  been  taken  at  a  draught.  They  come  in 
Aii^ujl  and  difappear  in  November.  They  are  about 
a  foot  long,  their  color  grey  fpottcd  with  black, 
their  fleQi  red ;  rife  eagerly  to  a  fly.  The  fifliermen 
fuppofe  them  to  be  the  young  of  what  they  call  a 
great  Trout,  weighing  30  lb.  which  I  fuppofe  is  the 
Grey  *.  • . 

Sept.  4.  _    Left  Fori  TVilliamy  and  proceeded  fouth  along  \ 
the  military  road  on  the  fide  of  a  hill,  an  awcfuU 
height  above  Loch-Leven  f,  a  branch  of  the  fea,  fo 

*  Br.  Zool.  III.  248. 

f  The  country  people  have  a  moll  fuperftitious  defire  of 
being  buried  in  the  little  iflc  of  Mfl«,  in  this  Lough. 

narrow 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  193 

narrow  as  to  have  only  the  appearance  of  a  river, 
bounded  on  both  fides  with  vaft  mountains,  among 
whofe  winding  bottoms  the  tide  rolled  in  with  fo- 
lemn  majefty.  The  fcenery  begins  to  grov/  very 
romantic  ;  on  the  weft  fide  are  fome  woods  of  birch 
and  pines  :  the  hills  are  very  lofty,  many  of  them 
taper  to  a  point,  and  my  old  friend,  the  lare  worthy 
Bifliop  Poccck,  compared  the  fhape  of  one  to  mount 
Tabor.  'Beneath  them  is  Glen-Co,  infamous  for  the  Gkn-Qd 
maffacre  of  its  inhabitants  in  1691,  and  celebrated 
for  having  (as  fome  afiert)  given  birth  to  OJlan  ; 
towards  the  north  is  Morvan.,  the  country  of  his 
hero  Fingal.^, 

Leave  on  the  left  a  vaft  cataraft,  precipitating 
itfelf  in  a  great  foaming  fheet  between  two  lofty 
perpendicular  rocks,  with  trees  growing  out  of  the 
fifiures,  forming  a  large  ftream,  called  the  water  of 
Boan. 

Breakfaft  at  the  little  village  of  Kinloch-Leven  on   Kinkd-Le^ 
moft  excellent  minced  flag,  theonly  form  I  thought  '^^'^' 
that  animal  good  in. 

Near  this  village  is  a  fingle  farm  fourteen  miles 
long,  which  lets  for  only  35I.  per  ann.  and  from 
the  nature  of  the  foil,  perhaps  not  very  cheap. 

Saw  here  a  ^ern^  a  fort  of  portable  mill,  made  a  Quern* 
of  two  {tones  about  two  feet  broad,  thin  at  the 
edges,  and  a  little  thicker  in  the  middle.  Li  the 
centre  of  the  upper  (tone  is  a  hole  to  pour  in  the 
corn,  and  a  peg  by  way  of  handle.  The  whole  is 
placed  on  a  cloth  •,  the  grinder  pours  the  corn  into 
the  hole  with  one  hand,  and  with  the  other  turns 
round  the  upper  (tone  with  a  very  rapid  motion, 

O  while 


194  A     T    O    U    R 

wliilc  the  meal  runs  out  at  the  fides  on  the  cloth. 
This  is  rather  prelerved  as  a  curiofity,  being  much 
out  of  ufe  at  prefent.  Such  are  fuppofcd  to  be  the 
fame  with  what  are  common  among  the  McorSt 
being  the  fimple  fubflitute  of  a  mill. 

Immediately  after  leaving  Kitiloch-Levcn  the 
mountains  fear  to  a  far  greater  height  than  before ; , 
the  fides  are  covered  with  wood,  and  the  bottoms 
of  the  glens  filled  with  torrents  that  roar  amidll 
the  loofe  ftones.  After  a  ride  of  two  miles  begin 
The  Hack  to  afcend  the  black  mountain,  in  Argykfiire,  on  a 
mountatn.  ^^^^  road,  which  continues  about  three  miles  al- 
mofl:  to  the  fummit,  and  is  certainly  the  highefl: 
publick  road  in  Great  Britain,  On  the  other  fide 
the  defcent  is  fcarce  a  mile,  but  is  very  rapid  down 
a  zigzag  way.  Reach  the  King's  houfe,  feated  in  a 
plain:  it  was  built  for  the  accommodation  of  His 
Majefty's  troops,  in  their  march  through  this  defo- 
late  country,  but  is  in  a  manner  unfurniflied. 

Pafs  near  Lot'gh-T'ulla,  a  long  narrow  piece  of 
water,  with  a  fmall  pine-wood  on  its  fide.  A  few 
weather-beaten  pines  and  birch  appear  fcattered  up 
and  dov/n,  and  in  all  the  bogs  great  numbers  of 
roots»  that  evince  the  foreft  that  covered  the  coun- 
try within  this  half  century,  Thefe  were  the  lafl: 
pines  which  I  faw  growing  fpontaneouny  in  North 
Pine  forcfls.  Britain.  Hiht  pine-forefls  are  become  very  rare: 
I  can  enumerate  only  thofe  on  the  banks  of 
Lough- Raynach,  at  Invercauld,  and  Brae  mar ;  at 
Coygach  and  Dirry-Mojiach :  the  firfl:  in  Straith- 
navern,  the  lafl  in  Sutherland.  Thofe  about  Lough- 
Loyn^  Gkn'MorijloUi  and  Straith-Clas ;  a  fmall  one 

near 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  19^ 

near  Lcugh-GarriCy  another  near  Loiigh-Arkig,  and 
a  few  fcattered  trees  above  Kinloch- Leven^  all  in 
Invernefsjhire  •,  and  1  was  alfo  informed  that  there 
are  very  confiderable  woods  about  Cajlle  Grant^  I 
faw  only  one  fpecies  of  Pine  in  thofe  I  vifited  i  nor 
could  I  learn  whether  there  was  any  other  than  what 
is  vulgarly  called  the  Scotch  Fivy  whofe  fynonyms 
are  thefe : 

Pinus  fyhejiris  foliis  hreuihus  gl/iucis,  corns  parvh 
albentibiis.     Raii   hift.    PI.   1401.  fyn.   ftirp. 
Br.  442. 
Pinus Jylveftris.     Gerard's  herb.   1356.  Lin.  fp. 
PI.  141 8.  Flora  Angl.  361. 

Fin  d'Eccfe,  ou  de  Ge7ieve.     Du  Hamel  Traits 

des  Arbres.  II.  125.  No.  5. 
Fyrre,  Strom.  Sondmor.  12. 
Mofl  of  this  long  day's  journey  from  the  black 
mountain  was  truly  melancholy,  almoft  one  conti- 
nued fcene  of  dufky  moors,  without  arable  land, 
trees,  houfes,  or  living  creature,  for  numbers  of 
miles. 

The  roads  are  excellent ;  but  from  Fort  JFilliam 
to  Kinloch-Leven^  very  injudicioully  planned,  often 
carried  far  about,  and  often  fo  fteep  as  to  be  fcarce 
fiirmountable  ;  whereas  had  the  engineer  followed 
the  track  ufed  by  the  inhabitants,  thofe  inconve-* 
niences  would  have  been  avoided. 

Thefe  roads,  by  rendering  the  highlands  ac-CefTi-   Military 
ble,  contributed  much  to  their  pfefent  improvement,   '^°^^^' 
and  were  owing  to  the  induftry  of  our  foldiery  i 

O  2  the/ 


196  A      TOUR 

they  were  begun  in  1723  *,  under  the  direflions  of 
Gen.  Wade^  who,  like  another  HannibaU  forced  his 
way  through  rocks  fuppofed  to  have  been  uncon- 
querable: many  of  them  hang  over  the  mighty  lakes 
of  the  country,  and  formerly  afforded  no  other  road 
to  the  natives  than  the  paths  of  (heep  or  goats,where 
even   the  Highlander  crawled  with  difficulty,  and 
kept  himfelf  from  tumbling  into  the  far  fubjacent 
water  by  clinging  to  the  plants  and  bufhes  of  the 
rock.    Many  of  thefe  rocks  were  too  hard  to  yield 
to  the  pick-ax,  and  the  miner  was  obliged  to  fub- 
due  their  obftinacy  with  gunpowder,  and  often  in 
places  where  nature  had  denied  him  footing,  and 
where  he  was  forced  to  begin  his  labors,  fufpended 
from  above  by  ropes  on  the  face  of  the  horrible 
precipice.     The  bogs  and  moors  had  likewife  their 
difficulties  to  overcome ;  but  all  were  at  length  con- 
ftrained  to  yield  to  the  perfeverence  of  our  troops. 
r\r\  fome  places  I  obferved,  that,  after  the  manner 
of  the  Romans,  they  left  engraven  on  the  rocks  tlie 
names  or  the  regiment  each  party  belonged  to,  who 
^,^      were  employed  in  thele  v/orks ;  nor  were  they  lefs 
^*^  ,       worthy  of  being  immortalized  than  ihc  Fexillafio's 
V^        of  the  Roman  legions  j  for  civilization  was  the  con- 
fequence  of  the  labors  of  both. 

Thele  roads  begin  ^iDunkeld-t  are  carried  on  thro* 
the  noted  pafs  of  Ktlltcrankie^  by  Blair,  to  Dalna^ 
cardoch,  Balwhinie,  and  over  the  Coryarich,  to  Fort 
Jugttjtus.  A  branch  extends  from  thence  eaftward 
to  Inverr,efsy  and  another  weft  ward,  over  High- 
bridge,  to  Fort  JVilliam.    I'rom  the  lad,  by  Kinloch- 

•  Vide  /.  84. 


I 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  197 

Leven,  over  the  Block  Mountain-,  by  the  King's 
houfe,  to  Teindrum^  and  from  thence,  by  Glen-urqhie., 
to  Inveraray^  and  fo  along  the  beautiful!  boundaries 
of  Lough-Lomond^  to  its  extremity. 

Another  road  begins  near  Crieff  pafTes  by  Aber- 
feldy,  crofTes  the  Tay  at  Tay-bridge,  and  unites  with 
the  other  road  at  Dalnacardoch  ;  and  from  Dal- 
whinie  a  branch  pafles  through  Badenoch  to  Inver- 
nefs, 

Thefe  are  the  principal  military  roads;  but  there 
may  be  many  others  I  may  have  over  looked. 

Rode  through  fome  little  vales  by  the  fide  of  a 
fmall  river ;  and  from  the  appearance  of  fertility, 
have  fome  relief  from  the  dreary  fcene  of  the  reft 
of  the  day.     Reach 

I'yendrum^  a  fmall  village.  The  inn  is  feated  the  Tycndrum. 
higheft  of  any  houfe  in  Scotland.  The  l^ay  runs 
eaft,  and  a  few  hundred  yards  further  is  a  little 
lake,  whofe  waters  run  weft.  A  lead-mine  is 
worked  here  by  a  level  to  fome  advantage  ;  was 
difcovered  about  thirty  years  ago :  the  veins  run 
S.  W:  and  N.  E. 

Continue  my  tour  on  a  very  fine  road  on  a  fide  Sept.  5. 
of  a  narrow  vale,  abounding  with  cattle,  yet  defti- 
^tute  both  of  arable  land  and  meadow  •,  but  the 
beafts  pick  up  a  fuftenance  from  the  grafs  that 
fprings  up  among  the  heath.  The  country  opens 
on  approaching  Glen-Urqhie^  a  pretty  vally,  well  GUnmUrqhie. 
cultivated,  fertile  in  corn,  the  fides  adorned  with 
numbers  of  pretty  groves,  and  the  middle  watered 
by  the  river  Urqhie :  the  church  is  feated  on  a 
Hnowl,  in  a  large  ifle,  formed  by  the  river :  the 
O  3  Manfe^ 


i9«  A      TOUR 

AJanfey  or  miniftcr's  houfe,  is  neat,  and  his  little 
demein  is  decorated  in  the  moft  advantageous 
places  with  feats  of  turf,  indicating  the  content  and 
fatisfaftion  of  the  poflcrlTor  in  the  lot  Providence 
has  p-iven  him. 

In  the  church  yard  are  feveral  gravc-ftones  of 
great  antiquity,  with  figures  of  a  warrior,  each  fur- 
nifhed  with  a  fpear,  or  two-handed  fword  :  on  fome 
are  rcprefentations  of  the  chafe  •,  on  others,  elegant 
fret- work  -,  and  on  one,  faid  to  be  part  of  the  coffin 
of  a  McGregor,  is  a  fine  running  pattern  of  foliage 
and  flowers,  and  excepting  the  figures,  all  in  good 
fade. 

On  an  eminence  on  the  fouth  fide  of  this  vale 
dwells  M''Nabb,  a  fmith,  whofe  family  have  lived 
in  that  humble  fl:ation  fince  the  year  1440,  being 
always  of  the  fame  profefllon.  The  firft  of  the  line 
was  employed  by  the  Lady  of  Sir  Duncan  Campbell^ 
v;ho  built  the  caftle  of  Kilchurn  when  her  hufband 
was  on  a  croifade  :  fome  of  their  tombs  are  in  the 
church-yard  of  GY(?;;-t/;'^^;>  ;  the  oldeft  has  a  ham- 
mer and  other  implements  of  his  trade  cut  on  it. 
I  here  was  favored  with  feveral  tranflations  of 
fome  Englijh  poetry  into  the.£"r/^  language,  an  epi- 
taph, and  an  elegy,  to  be  found  in  the  Appendix  *, 
by  thofe  whofe  turn  leads  them  to  perufe  per- 
formances of  that  kind.  After  breakfaft,  at  a  good 
inn  near  the  village,  was  there  prefentat  achriften- 
ing,  and  became  fponfor  to  a  little  Highlander^  by 
no  other  ceremony  than  receiving  him  for  a  mo- 
ment into  my  arms. 

*  A'o.  IV.     . 

Purfuc 


1  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  199 

Purfue  my  journey,  and  have  a  fine  view  of  the 
meanders  of  the  river  before  its  union  with  Lough- 
Aw  :  in  an  ifle  in  the  beginning  of  the  lake  is  the 
caftle  of  Kilchurn,  which  had  been  inhabited  by  the  Cadle  of 
prefent  Lord  Breadalbane's  grandfather.  The  great 
tower  was  repaired  by  his  Lordfhip,  and  garrifoned 
by  him  in  1 745,  for  the  fervice  of  the  government, 
in  order  to  prevent  the  Rebels  from  making  ufe  of 
that  great  pafs  crofs  the  kingdom  :  but  is  now  a 
ruin,  having  lately  been  ftruck  by  lightening. 

At  a  place  called  Hamiltojt's  Pafs,  in  an  indant 
burll  on  a  view  of  the  lake,  which  makes  a  beau-  'Louzb-Ait 
tifuU  appearance  •,  is  about  a  mile  broad,  and  fhews 
ar  left  ten  miles  of  its  length.  This  water  is  pret- 
tily varied  with  ifles,  fome  fo  fmall  as  merely  to 
peep  above  the  lurface  i  yet  even  thefe  are  tufted 
with  trees  ;  fome  are  large  enough  to  afford  hay  and 
paflurage ;  and  in  one.  called  Inch-hail^  are  the 
remains  of  a  convent*.  On  Fraoch-Elan  -^-^ih^Hef' 
perides  of  the  Highlands,  are  the  ruins  of  a  caflle. 
The  fair  Mego  longed  for  the  delicious  fruit  of  the 
ifle,  guarded  by  a  dreadfull  ferpent  :  the  hero 
Fraoch  goes  to  gather  it,  and  is  deflroyed  by  the 
monfter.  This  tale  is  fung  in  the  Erfe  ballads,  and 
is  tranflated  and  publifhed  in  the  manner  of  F/;?^^/^/ 

The  whole  extent  of  Lough- Aw  is  thirty  miles, 
bounded  on  the  north  by  Lorn^  a  portion  of  Argyle- 

*  The  country  people  are  flill  fond  of  burying  here.  In- 
fular  interments  are  faid  to  owe  their  origin  to  the  fear  peo- 
ple had  of  having  their  friends  corpfes  devoured  by  wolves 
on  the  main  land. 

f  This  ifland  was  granted  by  Alexander  III.  in  1267,  to 
CillcrijT  M'Nachdan  and  his  heirs  for  ever,  on  condition  they 
fiipyld  entertain  the  King  whenever  he  pafled  that  way. 

O  4  Ihire^ 


200  A      T    O    U    R 

JJj'irt^  a  fertile  country,  prettily  wooded  near  the 
water-fide.     On  the  N.  E.  arc  vaft  mountains  : 

Mount  among  them  Crouachan  *  towers  to  a  great  height  •» 

Oeuachan.  \^  yiWs  from  the  lake,  and  its  fides  are  fliagged  with 
woods  impending  over  it.  At  its  foot  isthedilcharge 
of  the  waters  of  this  Lough  into  Lougb-Etivc,  an 
arm  of  the  fea,  after  a  turbulent  courfe  of  a  feries 
of  catarafls  for  the  fpace  of  three  miles.  At  Bu- 
«..":t',  near  the  north  end,  is  a  large  falmon-fifhery  ; 
alfj  a  confiderable  iron-foundery,  which  I  fear  will 
foon  devour  the  beautifuli  woods  of  the  country. 

Sc8//!oru.-a,  ^^^^  ^y  ^^o^J^'^^i  a  fingle  houfe.     Dine  at  the 

little  village  of  Cladi/b  About  two  miles  hence, 
on  an  eminence  in  fight  of  the  convent  on  Itjch-haily 
is  a  fpot,  called  Croifch  an  TJleachd.,  or  the  crofs  of 
bowing,  becaufe,  in  PopiJJj  times,  it  was  always 
cuftomary  to  kneel  or  make  obeilance  on  firll  fight 
of  any  confecrated  place  "f. 

Pafs  between  hills  finely  planted  with  feveral  forts 
of  trees,  fuch  as  IFeymouth  pines,  &c.  and  after  a 
piduref'que  ride,  reach 

Inveraray,  '  Inveraray  -,  the  cadle  the  principal  feat  of  the 

Dukes  of -r^r^jiV,  chief  of  the  C^w/)/'t//j;  was  built  by 
Duke  Archibald-y  is  quadrangular  with  around  tower 
at  each  corner,  and  in  the  middle  rifes  a  fquarc  one 
glazed  on  every  fide  to  give  light  lo  the  Itaircafe 
and  galleries,  and  has  from  without  a  m.oll  dif- 
agrccable  efi^rd.     In  the  attic  ftory  arc  eighteen 

•  Or  the  Great  Heap. 

t  Druidical  llonci  and  temples  arc  called  Clachan,  churches 
liaving  oftrii  been  built  on  fuch  places  :  to  go  to  Clachan  is  a 
coinmon  Erfe  phrafc  forgoing  to  church. 

good 


IN     SCOTLAND.  201 

good  bed-chambers :  the  ground-floor  was  at  this 
time  in  a  manner  unfurnilhed,  but  will  have  feveral 
good  apartments.  The  caftle  is  built  of  a  coarle 
lapis  ollaris,  brought  from  the  other  fide  of  Lough- 
Fine,  and  is  the  fame  kind  with  that  found  in  Nor- 
way, of  which  the  Kmg  of  Denmark's  palace  at 
Copenhagen  is  built.  Near  the  new  cattle  are  fome 
remains  of  the  old. 

/This  place  will  in  time  be  very  magnificent; 
but  at  prefent  the  fpace  between  the  front  and  the 
water  is  difgraced  with  the  old  town,  compofed  of 
the  moft  wretched  hovels  that  can  be  imagined. 
The  founder  of  the  caftle  defigned  to  have  built  a 
new  town  on  the  weft  fide  of  the  little  bay  the  houfe 
ftands  on :  he  finifhed  a  few  houfes,  a  cuftom- 
houfe,  and  an  excellent  inn :  his  death  interrupted 
the  completion  of  the  plan,  which,  when  brought 
to  perfeftion,  will  give  the  place  a  very  different 
appearance  to  what  it  now  bearsy 

From  the  top  of  the  great  rock  Duniquaich  is  a 
fine  view  of  the  caftle,  the  lawn  fprinkled  with  fine 
trees,  the  hills  covered  with  extenfive  plantations, 
a  country  fertile  in  corn,  bordering  the  Lough, 
and  the  Lough  itfelf  covered  with  boats.  The 
trees  on  the  lawn  about  the  caftle  are  faid  to  have 
been  pknted  by  the  Earl  of  Argyle  :  they  thrive 
greatly  •,  for  I  obferved  beech  from  nine  to  twelve 
feet  and  a  half  in  girth,  pines  nine,  and  a  lefler 
maple  between  feven  and  eight. 

But  the  bufy  fcene  of  the  herring-fifliery  gave 

no  fmall  improvement  to  the  magnificent  environs 

of 
2 


202  A      T    O    U    R 

o^  Inveraray.  Every  evening  *  fonie  hundreds  of 
boats  in  a  manner  covered  the  furface  ot  Lough' 
Fine^  an  arm  of  tlie  Tea,  which,  from  its  narrow- 
nels  and  from  the  winding  of  its  ihores,  has  all 
the  beauties  of  a  frefli- water  lake  :  on  the  week- 
days, the  chearfuli  noifc  of  the  bagpipe  and  dance 
echoes  from  on  board  r^'  on  the  fabbaih,  each  boat 
approaches  the  land,  and  pfalmody  and  devotion 
divic!e  the  day  •,  for  the  common  people  of  the 
^''''  '  north  are  difpofed  to  be  religious,  having  the 
example  before  them  of  a  gentry  untainted  by 
luxury  and  difiipation,  and  the  advantage  of  be- 
ing inftrudlcd  by  a  clergy,  who  are  active  in  their 
duty,  and  who  prefcrve  reipcft,  amidil  all  the  dif- 
advantagcs  of  a  narrow  income,. 
Lcugb  Fine.  yj^g  length  of  Lcttgh-Finey  from  tlic  eaftern  end 

to  the  point  of  Lamond,  is  above  thirty  Scotch 
miles;  but  its  breadth  fcarce  two  mcafured  :  the 
depth  from  fixty  to  icventy  fathoms.  It  is  noted 
Herrings.  for  the  vall  flioals  of  herrings  that  appear  here  in 
July  and  continue  till  January.  The  higheft  fcafon 
is  from  September  to  Chrijlmas^  when  near  fix  hun- 
dred boats,  with  four  men  in  each,  are  employed. 
A  chain  of  nets  is  ufed  (for  feveral  are  united)  of 
a  hundred  fathoms  in  length.  As  the  herrings 
fwim  at  very  uncertain  depths,  fo  the  nets  are  funk 
to  t!ie  depth  the  flioal  is  found  to  take  :  the  fuccefs 
therciore  depends  much  on  the  judgement  or  good 
fortune  of  the  fifliers,  in  taking  their  due  depths  j 
for  it  often  happens  that  one  boat  will  take 
multitudes,  while  the  next  docs  not  catch  a  Tingle 

•  The  fifhery  ii  cariiej  uu  in  lii«  nig  lit,  the  herrings  being 
tlicn  in  moiioii. 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  301 

fi(!i,  which  makes  the  boatmen  pfrpetually  en- 
quire of  each  other  about  the  depth  ot  their  nets. 
Thefe  are  kept  up  by  buoys  to  a  proper  pitch  ;  the 
ropes  that  run  through  them  are  faftened  with  peg>, 
and  by  drawing  up,  or  letting  out  the  rope  (cifter 
taking  out  the  pegs)  they  adjuft  their  fituation, 
and  then  replace  them.  Sometimes  the  fifn  fwim 
in  twenty  fathom  water,  fometimes  in  fifty,  and 
oftentimes  even  at  the  bottom. 

It  is  computed  that  each  boat  gets  about  40I.  in 
the  feafon.  The  fi(h  are  either  faked,  and  packed 
in  barrels  for  exportation,  orfold  frefh  to  the  country 
people,  two  or  three  hundred  horfes  being  brought 
every  day  to  the  water  fide  from  very  dillant  parts. 
A  barrel  holds  500  herrings,  if  they  are  of  the  bed 
kind  ;  at  a  medium,  700 :  but  if  more,  for  fome- 
times a  barrel  will  hold  1000,  they  are  reckoned 
very  poor.  The  prefent  price  1 1.  4s.  per  barrel ; 
but  there  is  a  drawback  of  the  duty  on  fait  for  thofe 
that  are  exported. 

The  great  rendezvous  of  veflcls  for  the  fifliery  off 
the  weftern  ifles  is  at  Camheltown^  in  Caniyre^  where 
they  clear  out  on  the  12th  q(  September,  and  fome- 
times three  hundred  buffes  are  fcen  there  at  a  time : 
they  mud  return  to  their  different  ports  by  January 
13th,  where  they  ought  to  receive  the  prasmium  of 
2I.  I  OS.  per  tun  of  herrings  ;  but  it  is  faid  to  be 
very  ill  paid,  which  is  a  great  difcouragemcnt  to 
the  fifhery. 

The  herrings  of  Lough-Fine  are  as  uncertain  in 
their  migration  as  they  are  on  the  coaft  of  fVales. 
They  had  for  numbers  of  years  quitted  that  water  j 
but  appeared  again  there  within  thefe  dozen  years. 

Such 


ao4i  A      T    O    U    R 

Such  is  the  cafe  with  the  lotjghs  on  all  this  weflern 
coaft,  not  but  people  defpair  too  loon  of  finding 
thcmjtromone  or  twounfuccefsfuUtryals  in  the  be- 
ginning of  the  feafon  j  perhaps  from  not  adjufting 
their  nets  to  the  depth  the  fifli  happen  then  to  fwim 
in  :  but  if  each  year  a  fmall  vefTcl  or  two  was  fent 
to  make  a  thorough  tryal  in  every  branch  of  the  fea 
on  this  coaft,  they  would  undoubtedly  find  fhoals 
of  fifh  in  one  or  other. 

Tunnies.  Tunnies  *,  called   here  Mackrel-Sture^  are  very 

frequently  caught  in  the  herring  feafon,  v/hich  they 
follow  to  prey  on.  They  are  taken  with  a  ftrong 
iron  hook  faftened  to  a  rope  and  baited  with  a  her- 
ring :  as  foon  as  hooked  lofe  all  fpirit,  and  are 
drawn  up  without  any  refillance  :  are  very  adivc  ' 
when  at  liberty,  and  jump  and  frolick  on  the  fur- 
face  of  the  water. 

Sept.  7/  Crofil'd  over  an  elegant  bridge  of  three  arches 

upon  the  Aray^  in  front  of  the  caftle,  and  kept 
riding  along  the  fide  of  the  Lough  for  about  ittvtn 
miles  :  faw  in  one  place  a  fhoal  of  herrings,  clofe 
to  the  furface,  perfcclly  piled  on  one  another,  with 
a  flock  'of  Gulls,  bufied  with  this  offered  booty. 
After  quitting  the  water-fide  the  road  is  carried  for 
a  confiderable  way  through  the  bottoms  of  naked, 
deep  and  gloomy  glens.  Afcend  a  very  high  pafs 
with  a  little  lough  on  the  top.  Reach  the  end  of 
Z/<?//^Z'-Lo«^,  another  narrow  arm  of  the  fea,  bounded 
by  high  hills,  and  after  a  long  courfe  terminates  in 
the  Firth  of  Clyde. 

Near  this  place  fee  a  houfe,  very  pleafantly  fitu- 

•  Br,  Zoel.  illuftr.  53. 

ated. 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  405 

ated,  belonging  to  Colonel  Campbell,  amidft  plan- 
tations, with  Tome  very  fertile  bottoms  adjacent. 
On  afcending  a  hill  not  half  a  mile  farther,  appears 

LouGH-LoMOND.  Nort h-BH tain  tmy  yftWhozix  Review  of 
of  its  waters  •,  for  fo  fhort  a  ride  as  thirty  miles  Lakes, 
prefents  the  traveller  with  the  view  of  four  moft 
magnificent  pieces.  Lough- Aw^  Lough-Fine^  Lough^ 
Longy  and  Lougb-Lomond,  Two  indeed  are  of  falt- 
water  •,  but,  by  their  narrownefs,  give  the  idea  of 
frefh-water  lakes.  It  is  an  idle  obfervation  of  tra- 
vellers, that  feeing  one  is  the  fame  with  feeing  all 
of  thefe  fuperb  waters-,  for  almoft  everyone  I  vifited 
has  its  proper  charaflers. 

Lough-  Leven  is  a  broad  expanfe,  with  ifles  and 
cultivated  fhores. 

Lnigh-Tay  makes  three  bold  windings,  has  fteep 
but  Hoping  fhores,  cultivated  in  many  parts,  and 
bounded  by  vafl  hills. 

Lough-Ray nach,  is  broad  and  flrait,  has  more 
wildnefs  about  it,  with  a  large  natural  pine  wood 
on  its  fouthern  banks. 

Lough  ^umel  is  narrow,  confined  by  the  floping 
fides  of  fleep  hills,  and  has  on  its  weftern  limits  a 
flat,  rich,  woody  country,  watered  by  a  moft  fer- 
pentine  ftream. 

The  Leugh  of  Spinie  is  almoft  on  a  flat,  and  its 
fides  much  indented. 

Lough-Moy  is  fmall,  and  has  foft  features  on  its 
banks,  amidft  rude  environs. 

Lough-Nefs    is    ftrait    and  narrow  *,    its   Ihores 
abound  with  a  wild  magnificence,  lofty,  precipi- 
tous 


fo6  A      T    O    U    R  , 

tous  and  wooded,  and  has  all  the  greatnefs  of  an 
Jlpine  lake. 

Lough-Okh  has  lofty  mountains  at  a  fmall  dif-* 
'       tance  from  its  borders  ;  the  fhores  indented,   and 
the  water  decorated  with  ifles. 

Lough-Lochy  wants  the  ifles  •,  its  (hores  flope,  and 
feveral  ftraiths  terminate  on  its  banks. 

Lough- Aw  is  long  and  waving  :  its  little  ifles 
tufted  with  trees,  and  jufh  appearing  above  the 
water,  its  two  great  feeds  of  water  at  each  ex- 
tremity,  and  its  fingular  lateral  difcharge  near  one 
of  them,  fufficiently  mark  this  great  lake. 
Laugh-  Lough-Lomond^  the  laft,  the  moft  beautlfull  of  the 

Lamcnd.  Caledonian  lakes.    The  firft  view  of  it  from  Tarbat 

prefcnts  an  extenfive  ferpentine  windingamidfl:lofty 
hills :  on  the  north,  barren,  black  and  rocky,  which 
darken  with  their  fhade  that  contradted  part  of  the 
water.  Near  this  gloomy  tradl,  beneath  Craig  Rof- 
M'Cre£ors.  ton,  was  the  principal  feat  of  the  ArCregors,  a 
murderous  clan,  infamous  for  excefles  of  all  kinds; 
at  length,  for  a  horrible  maflacre  of  the  Colquhuns, 
or  Cahoujis,  in  1602,  were  profcribed,  and  hunted 
down  like  wild  beads  ;  their  very  name  fupprefled 
.  by  aft  of  council ;  fo  that  the  remnant,  now  dif- 
perfed  like  JewSi  dare  not  even  fign  it  to  any  deed. 
Their  poflerity  are  Pcill  faid  to  be  diftinguiflied 
an:^ong  the  clans  in  wiiich  they  have  incorporated 
themfelves,  not  only  by  the  rednefs  of  their  hair, 
but  by  their  flill  retaining  the  mifchievous  ci;fpofi' 
tion  of  their  ancefl;ors. 

On  the  weft  fide,  the  mountains  arc  cloathed  near 

the 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  207 

the  bottoms  with  woods  of  oak  quite  to  the  water 
edge  ;  their  fiimmits  lofty,  naked  and  craggy. 

On  the  eaft  fid«,  the  mountains  are  equally  high, 
but  the  tops  form  a  more  even  ridge  parallel  to 
the  lake,  except  where  Ben-Lomond  *,  like  Saul 
amidft  his  companions,  overtops  the  reft.  The 
upper  parts  were  black  and  barren  -,  the  lower  had 
great  niarks  of  fertility,  or  at  left  of  induftry,  for 
the  yellow  corn  was  finely  contrafted  with  the  ver- 
dure of  the  groves  intermixed  with  it. 

This  eaftern  boundary  is  part  of  the  Grampia?!  Crampian 
hills,  which  extend  from  hence  through  the  coun-  liiUs* 
ties  oi  Pert  hi  Angus  ^  Mearns,  and  Aberdeen.  They 
take  their  name  from  only  a  fingle  hill,  the  Mens 
Grampus  of  T^acitus^  where  Calgacus  waited  the 
approach  of  Agricola^  and  v/here  the  battle  was 
fought  fo  fatal  to  the  brave  Caledonians,  Anti- 
quarians have  not  agreed  upon  the  particular  fpot ; 
but  the  able  Mr.  Gordon  -f  places  it  near  Comerie^ 
at  the  upper  end  of  Straithern^  at  a  place  to  this 
day  called  Galgachan  Moor.     But  to  return. 

The  road  runs  fometimes  through  woods,  at 
others  is  expofed  and  naked  \  in  fome,  {o  fteep  as  to 
require  the  fupport  of  a  wall :  the  whole  the  work 
of  the  foldiery  :  blefled  exchange  of  inftruments  of 
deftrudlion  for  thofe  tl^at  give  fafety  to  the  traveller, 
and  a  polifli  to  the  once  inacceflibie  native. 

A  great  headland  covered  with  trees  feparates 
the  firft  fcene  from  one  totally  different.  On  paf- 
'fing  this  cape  an  expanfe  of  water  burfts  at  once  on 

•  Its  height  is  3240  feet, 
f  It  in.  Sept  ait.  39. 

youf 


2o8  A      T    O    U    R 

your  eye,  varied  with  all  the  fofter  beauties  of  na- 
ture. Immediately  beneath  is  a  fiat  covered  with 
wood  and  corn  :  beyond,  the  headlands  ftretch  far 
into  the  water,  and  confift  of  gentle  rifings ;  many 
have  their  furfaces  covered  with  wood,  others 
adorned  with  trees  loofely  fcattered  either  over  a 
fine  verdure,  or  the  purple  bloom  of  the  heath. 
Numbers  of  iflands  are  difperfed  over  the  lake  of 
the  fame  elevated  form  as  the  little  capes,  and 
wooded  in  the  fame  manner ;  others  juft  peep  above 
the  furface,  and  are  tufted  with  trees  ;  and  num- 
bers are  fo  difpofed  as  to  form  magnificent  viftos 
between. 

Oppofite  Lufsy  at  a  fmall  diftance  from  Ihorc,  is 
a  mountainous  ifle  almofl:  covered  with  wood  ;  is 
near  half  a  mile  lOng,  and  has  a  moft  fine  cffed.  I 
could  not  count  the  number  of  iflands,  but  was 
told  there  are  twenty-eight :  the  largeft  two  miles 
long,  and  (locked  with  Deer. 

The  length  of  this  charming  lake  is  24  Scotch 
miles  i  its  greateft  breadth  eight  :  its  greateft  depth 
a  hundred  and  twenty  fathoms.  Befides  the  fifh 
common  to  the  Loughs  are  Gui7iiadsy  called  here 
Poans. 

The  country  from  Ltifs  *  to  the  fouthern  ex- 
tremity of  the  lake  continually  improves  •,  the 
mountains  fink  gradually  into  fmall  hills  •,  the  land 
is  highly  cultivated,  well  planted,  and  well  inha- 
bited. I  was  ftruck  with  rapture  at  a  fight  fo  long 
new  to  me  :  it  would  have  been  without  alloy,  had 

•  A  tolerable  inn  on  the  borders  of  the  lake. 

it 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  iocjl 

it  not  been  daflied  with  the  uncertainty  whether 
the  mountain  virtue,  hofpitality,  would  flourifh 
with  equal  vigor  in  the  fofter  fcenes  I  was  on  the 
point  of  entering  on  ;  for  in  the  Highlands  every 
houfe  gave  welcome  to  the  traveller. 

The  vale  between  the  end  of  the  lake  and  Dun- 
barton  is  unfpeakably  beautiful),  very  fertile,  arid 
finely  watered  by  the  great  and  rapid  river  Levin^ 
the  difcharge  of  the  lake,  which,  after  a  fhort  courfe, 
drops  into  the  Firth  of  Clyde  hdovf  Dunbariofj : 
there  is  fcarcely  a  fpot  on  its  banks  but  what  is 
decorated  with  bleacheries,  plantations  and  villas. 
Nothing  can  equal  the  contraft  in  this  day's  journey, 
between  the  black  barren  dreary  glens  of  the  morn- 
ing ride,  and  the  fcfc  fcenes  of  the  evening,  ifl:inds 
worthy  of  the  retreat  oi  Armida,  and  which  Rinaldo 
himfelf  would  have  quitted  with  a  figh. 

Before  I  take  my  lad  leave  of  the  Highlands^  it   Entrances 

1  ,  ,  .  r  ?  •  into  the 

would  be  proper  to  obierve  that  every  entrance  into   Highlands, 
them  is  ftrongly  marked  by  nature. 

On  the  fouth,  the  narrow  and  wooded  glen  near 
'Dunkdd  inftantly  fhews  the  change  of  country. 

On  the  eaft,  the  craggy  pafs  of  Bollitir  gives  a 
contracted  admiflion  into  the  Grampian  hills. 

On  the  north,  the  mountains  near  Lcugh-Moy 
appear  very  near,  and  form  what  is  properly  ftyled 
the  threfhold  of  the  country  ;  and  on  the 

Weft,  the  narrow  road  impending  over  Lough" 
Lomond  forms  a  mcft  charaderiltic  entrance  to  this 
mountainous  tra6t. 

But  the  £r/^  language  is  not  confined  within 
thefe  limits ;  for  it  is  fpoken  on  all  fides  beyond 

P  thefe 


^lO  A      T    O    U    R 

thefe  mountains.  On  the  eaftern  coafl  it  begins  aF 
Nairn  •,  on  the  weftcrn,  extends  over  all  the  ifles. 
It  ceafcs  in  the  north  of  Cathmfs^  the  Orkneys-,  and 
the  Shetland  iflands  *  ;  but  near  Lcugh-Loinond,  is 
heard  at  Litfs^  at  Buchanan,  eail  of  the  lal<c,  and 
at  Rofenetb,  weft  of  it. 

Crofs  the  ferry  over  the  Levin  at  Bonnal,  and  af- 
ter a  ride  of  three  miles  reach 

Dunbar  ton.  Dumbarton,  a  fmall  but  good  old  town,  feated 

on  a  plain  near  the  conflux  of  the  Levir  with  the 
Firth  oi  Clyde  ;  it  confifts  principally  of  one  large 
(Ireet  in  form  of  a  crefcent.  On  one  fide  is  the 
Tolbooth,  and  at  thcp  fouth  end  the  church  with  a 
fmall  fpire  fleeple.  The  waites  of  the  town  are 
bagpipes,  which  go  about  at  nine  o'clock  at  night 
and  five  in  the  morning. 

Its  caHle.  'J  he  caflle  is  feated  a  little  fouth  of  the  town  on 

a  two-headed  rock  of  a  ftupendous  height,  rifing 
in  a  ftrange  manner  out  of  the  lands,  and  totally 
detached  from  every  thing  clfe.  On  one  of  the 
fummits  are  the  remains  of  an  old  light-houfe  j  on 
the  other,  the  powder  magazine  :  in  the  hollovf 
between  is  a  large  well  of  excellent  water  fourteen 
feet  deep.  The  fides  of  the  rocks  are  immenfe 
precipices,  and  often  over-hang,  except  on  the  fide 
■where  the  governor's  houfe  ftands,  which  is  defend- 
ed by  walls  and  a  few  cannon,  and  garrifoned  by 
a  tew  invalids.  From  its  natural  ftrength,  it  was 
in  former  tmies  deemed  impregnable;  fo  that  the 

*  In  the  ShfthiiJ  ijlcs  arc  flill  fome  remains  of  the  l^orft,  or 
old  Nirivc^ian  language, 

dcfpcrate 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  211 

defperate  but  fuccefsfuU  fcalado  of  it  157 1  *  may 
vie  with  the  greateft  attempts  of  that  icind,  with 
the  capture  of  the  Numidim  fortrefs,  in  ihtjugur. 
thine  war,  by  Marius  j  or  the  more  horrible  furprize 
of  Fefcaivp-^-^  by  the  gallant  Bois-rose. 

From  the  fummits  of  this  rock  is  a  fine  view  of 
the  country,  of  the  town  of  Dunharton^  the  river 
Levin-,  the  Firth  oi  Clyde-,  ^^'the  Glota  oi  Tacitus)  here  ^ 

about  a  mile  broad,  and  of  the  towns  of  Greenoch 
and  Port  Glafgozv,  on  the  oppofiie  fnore.  The  bu- 
finefs  of  this  country  is  the  fpinning  of  thread, 
which  is  very  confiderable.  There  is  alfo  a  great  Fifii? 
falmon-filhery  :  but  in  this  populous  country,  fo 
great  is  the  demand  for  them  that  none  can  be 
fpared  for  curing.  Gil/es  come  .up  the  river  in 
June,  and  continue  in  plenty  about  twenty  days  ; 
and  many  Salmon  Trout  are  taken  from  March  to 
July.  PhinocSy  called  here  Yellow  Fins,  come  \n. 
July,  and  continue  about  the  fame  fpace  of  time  as 
the  Giifes :  the  fifhermen  call  them  the  youncr  of 
fome  great  Sea  Trout.  During  May,  Parrs  appeaj 
in  fuch  numbers  in  the  Levin,  that  the  water  feems 
quite  animated  with  them.  There  are  befides  in 
that  river  Perch  and  a  few  Poans  J. 

Pafs   by  the  ruins  of  Dunglas  cadle,  near   the    Sept.  S.; 
banks  of  the  Clyde,  which  meanders  finely  alono-  a 
rich  plain  full  of  barley  and  oats,   and  much  in- 

*  Robert/ojt' s  hiji.  ScotlarJ,  II.  i-.  cclaijo,     Guforic'syYll, 

t  Sully s  Memoirs,   Vol  I.  Book  VI. 

X  At  Dunbarton  I  was  informed  by  perfcns  of  credit,  that 
Swallows  have  often  been  taken  in  midwinter,  in  a  tornid 
flate,  out  of  the  fteeple  of  the  church,  and  alfo  out  of  a  fand- 
t)ank  over  the  river  Endrichj  near  Long!;  Lunoud. 

V_  2  clofed 


«i2  A      T    O    U    R 

clofed  with  good  hedges,  a  rarity  in  North  Britain* 
At  a  diftancc  are  lome  gentle  rifings,  interfperfcd 
with  woods  and  villas  belonging  to  the  citizens  of 
Clajgow. 

Glasgow.  The  beft  biiilt  of  any  modern  fecond-rate  city  I 

ever  law  :  the  houfes  of  (lone,  and  in  a  good 
tafte.  The  principal  itrect  runs  eaft  and  weft,  and 
is  near  a  mile  and  a  half  long  •,  but  unfortunately, 
is  not  ftrait.  The  T'cJbocth  is  large  and  handfome. 
Next  to  that  is  the  Exchange:  within  is  afpacious 
room  with  full-length  portraits  of  all  our  monarchs 
fince  Jaines  I.  and  an  excellent  one,  by  Ramfay^  of 
•Archibald  Duke  o^  ArgyJe,  in  a  Judge's  robe.  Before 
the  Exchangers  a  large  equeftrian  ftatue  o'f  King 
William.  This  is  the  broadeft  and  fined  part  of  the 
ftreet :  many  of  the  houfes  are  built  over  piazzas, 
but  too  narrow  to  be  of  much  fervice  to  walkers. 
Numbers  of  other  ftreets  crofs  this  at  right  angles, 
and  are  in  general  well  built, 
.ar  et-  y|^^  maikct-pUces  are  great  ornaments  to  this 

city,  the  fronts  being  done  in  a  very  fine  tafte,  and 
the  gates  adorned  with  columns  of  one  or  other  of 
the  orders.  Some  of  theie  markets  are  for  meal, 
greens,  fitfh,  or  flefli.  There  are  two  for  the  latl 
which  have  conduits  out  of  fcveral  of  the  pillars  ; 
fo  that  they  are  conftantly  kept  fweet  and  clean. 

'  Near  the  meal-market  is  a  publick  granary,  to 

be  filled  on  any  apprehenfion  of  fcarcenefs. 

The  guard- houfe  is  in  the  great  llreer,  which  ii 
kept  by  the  inhabitants,  who  regularly  do  duty. 
An  excellent  police  is  obfcrved  here,  and  proper 
officers  attend  the  markets  to  prevent  any  abufcs. 

The 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  213 

The  old  bridge  over  the  Clyde  confifls  of  eight 
arches,  and  was  built  400  years  ago  by  Bi(hop 
Rcci'y  two  others  are  now  building.  The  tide  flows 
three  miles  higher  up  the  country  j  but  at  low 
water  is  fordable.  There  is  a  plan  for  deepening 
the  channel  ;  for  at  prefent  the  tide  brings  up  only 
very  fmall  velTels ;  and  the  ports  belonging  to.this 
city  lie  fourteen  miles  lower,  at  Port  Glejgow  and 
Crcencck^  on  the  fide  of  the  Firth. 

Near  the  bridge  is  a  large  alms-houfe,  a  vafl 
nailery,  a  flone-ware  manufaclure,  'and  a  great 
porter  brewery,  which  fupplies  fome  part  of  unin- 
dudrious  Ireland.  Within  f  ght,  on  the  Ibuth  fide, 
are  collieries ;  and  much  coal  is  exported  into  the 
lail- mentioned  iuand,  and  into  America. 

The  great  imports  of  this  city  are  tobacco  and  Trade. 
fugar:  of  the  former,  above  40,000  hogfneads  have 
been  annually  imported,  and  near  20,000  again 
exported  into  France.  The  manufaflures  here  are 
linnens,  cambricks  *,  lawns,  tapes,  fuflians,  and 
flriped  linnens ;  fo  that  it  already  begins  to  rival 
Manchejter^  and  has  in  point  of  the  conveniency  of 
its  ports,  in  refpecl  to  America^  a  great  advantage 
over  it. 

The  college  is  a  large  building,  with  a  handfome  College, 
front  to  the  fireet,  rcfembling  fome  of  the  old  col- 
leges in  Oxford.  Charks  I.  fubfcribed  200I.  to- 
wards this  work,  but  was  prevented  by  the  troubles 
from  paying  it  ;  but  Cromwel  afterwards  fulfilled 
the  defign  of  the  royal  donor.  It  was  founded  in 
1450,  by  James  II.  Pope  Nicholas  V.  gave  the 
*  The  greateft  cambrick  manufaiflure  is  now  at  PaiJIyy  a 
few  miles  from  this  city. 

P  3  i>itU, 


'H4.  A      T    O    U    R 

hfd/\  bLit  Bifnop  'TurnbuU  fupplied  the  money.' 
There  arc  about  400  ftudents  belonging  to  the  col- 
lege, who  lodiie  in  the  town  :  but  the  Profefibrs 
have  good  houfes  in  the  college.  Young  gentlemen 
of  fortune  have  private  tutors,  who  have  an  eye  to 
their  condufb  ;  the  reft  live  entirely  at  their  own 
difcretion. 

The  library  is  a  very  handfome  room,  with  a  gal- 
lery round  it,  fupported  by  pillars.  That  benefi- 
cent nobleman  the  iirft  Duke  of  Chdndos^  when  he 
vifited  the  college,  gave  500I.  towards  building 
this  apartm.ent. 

Meflrs.  Rchcvt  and  Andrevj  FghUs,  printers  and 
booklVlkrs  ,to  the  univerfity,  have  inftituted  an 
academy  for  -painting  and  engraving  ;  and  like 
good  citizens,  zealous  to  promote  the  weltare  and 
honor  of  their  native  place,  have  at  vaft  expcncc 
formed  a  moft  numerous  colIeiSlion  of  paintings 
from  abroad,  in  order  to  form  the  tafte  of  tlieir 
cleves. 

The  printing  is  a  very  confidcrable  branch  of 
bufinefs,  and  has  long  been  celebrated  for  the 
beauty  of  the  types  and  the  correftnefs  of  the  edi- 
tions. Here  are  pi-efervcd  in  cafes  numbers  of 
monumental  and  other  ftoncs  *,  taken  out  of  the 
walls  on  the  Roman  ftations  in  this  part  of  the 
kingdom  :  fome  are  well  cut  and  ornamented  : 
moft  of  them  were  done  to  perpetuate  the  memory 
of  the  vexjlhitio,  or  party,  who  perforn^ed  fuch  or 

•  Several  have  bcrn  engraven  by  the  artift<:  of  (he  academy. 
The  Pfovoft  of  the  Univcifity  did  me  the  honor  of  prtlent- 
ing  mc  with  :i  fet. 

fuch 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  215 

fuch    works ;   others  in  memory  of  ofTicers  who 
died  in  the  country. 

The  cathedral  is  a  large  pile,  now  divided  into  Churches, 
two  churches  :  beneath,  and  deep  under  ground, 
is  another,  in  which  is  alfo  divine  fervice,  where 
the  congregation  may  truely  fay,  clamavi  e  pro- 
fiindis :  the  roof  is  fine,  made  of  flone,  and  lup- 
ported  by  pillars  ;  but  the  beauty  much  hurt  by 
the  crowding  of  the  pews.  Near  this  is  the  ruin 
of  the  caftle,  or  Bilhop's  palace. 

The  new  church  is  a  very  handfome  building* 
with  a  large  elegant  porch  ;  but  the  outfide  is 
much  disfigured  by  a  flender  fquare  tower  with  a 
pepper-box  top  :  and  in  general,  the  fteeples  of 
Glafgow  are  in  a  remarkable  bad  tatle,  being,  in 
faft,  no  favorite  part  of  architedure  with  the  church 
of  Scotland.  The  infide  of  thatjufl:  fpoken  of  is 
mofb  neatly  finifhed,  fupported  by  pillars,  and  very 
prettily  ftuccoed :  it  is  one  of  the  very  few  excep- 
tions to  the  flovenly  and  indecent  manner  in  which 
Prefbytery  keeps  the  houfes  of  God  :  reformation 
in  matters  of  religion- feldom  obferves  mediocrity  : 
here  it  was  outrageous  j  for  a  place  of  worfliip 
commonly  neat  was  deemed  to  favor  of  popery  : 
but,  to  avoid  the  imputation  of  that  extreme,  they 
run  into  another ;  for  in  many  parts  of  Scotland 
our  Lord  feems  ftill  to  be  worfnipped  in  a  ftable, 
and  often  in  a  very  wretched  one.  Many  of  the 
churches  are  thatched  with  heath,  and  in  fomc 
places  are  in  fuch  bad  repair  as  to  be  half  open  at 
top;  fo  that  the  people  appear  to  worlliip,  as  the 
Druids  did  of  old,  in  open  temples, 

P  4  Went 


2i6  A      T    O    U    R 

Sept.  io.        Went  to  fee  llamiltcn  Houfe,  twelve  miles  from 
Glafgo'-d) :  rode  through  a  rich  and  beautiful!  corn 
country,  adorned  with  fmail  woods,  gentlemen's 
feats,  and  well  watered.     Hereabout  I  faw  the  firft 
muddy  in-eani  fmre  I  had  left  Edinburgh  ;  for  the 
Highland  rivers  running  generally  through  a  bed 
of  rock,  or  pure  gravel,  receive  no  other  teint,  in 
the  greateft  floods,  than  the  brown  cryftalline  tinge 
of  the  moors,  out  of  which  they  rife. 
Sojhivell       g.-e  on  the  wePi,  at  a  little  difbance  from   the 
road,  the  ruins  of  Bothwell  caftle,  and  the  bridge, 
remarkable  for  the  Duke  of  Monmouth\  vidlory 
over  the  Rebels  in  1679.     The  church  was  collet 
giate,  founded  by  ArchihaUY.v[\  o^ Douglas^  I39S» 
and  is,   as  I  heard,  *  oddly  incrulted  with  a  thin 
coat  of  Hone. 
Hamilton,       Hamiltcn  Houfe,  or  Palace,  as  it  is  called  here, 
is  feated  at  the  end  of  a  fmall  town  -,  is  a.  large 
difagrecable  pile  of  building,  with  two  deep  wing? 
at  right  angles  with  the  centre.     The  gallery  is  of 
great  extent,  and  furniihed  (as  well  as  fome  other 
rooms)  with  moft  excellent  paintings :  that  of  Da- 
jucl  in  the  Lion*s  den,  by  Rubens,  is  a  great  per- 
formance :  the  fear  and  devotion  of  the  prophet  is 
finely  exprefled  by  his  uplifted  face  and  eyes,  his 
clafped  hands,  his  fwelling  mufcles,  and  the  violent 
cxtenfion  of  one  foot:  a  Lion  looks  fiercely  at  him 
with  open  mouth,  and  fecms  only  reftrained  by  the 
almighty  power  from  making  him  f;ill  a  victim  to 
his  hunper-,  and  the  fignal  deliverance  of  Daniel  is 
more  fully  maiked  by  the  number  of  human  bones 

•  Bi/hop  Pocock''s  matiujiript  Journal. 

fcattered 


1  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  217 

fcattered  over  the  floor,  as  if  to  fhew  the  inftant 
fate  of  others,  in  whofe  favor  the  Deity  did  not 
interfere. 

The  marriage-feaft,  by  Paul  Veronefe^  is  a  fine 
piece,  and  the  obftinacy  and  refifl:ance  of  the  in- 
truder, who  came  without  the  wedding  garment, 
is  ftrongly  exirrefTed. 

The  treaty  of  peace  between  England  and  Spain^ 
in  the  reign  of  James  I.  by  Juan  de  Fanto%a-i  is  a 
good  hiftorical  pidure.  There  are  fix  Envoys  on 
the  part  of  the  Spaniards^  and  five  on  that  of  the 
Englifo,  with  their  names  infcribed  over  each  :  the  ' 
Englijh  are  the  Earls  of  Borfet^  Nottingham^  Be-vonr 
JhirCy  Northcmptcn,  and  Robert  Cecil. 

Earls  of  Lauderdale  and  Lanerk  fettling  the  co- 
venant, both  in  black,  with  faces  full  of  puritani- 
cal lolemnity. 

Several  of  the  Dukes  oi Hamilton.  James  Duke 
of  HcmiltGnt  with  a  blue  ribband  and  white  rod. 
His  fon,  beheaded  in  1649.  -^^^  brother,  killed 
at  the  battle  of  Worcejier.  The  Duke  who  fell  in 
the  duel  with  Lord  Mohun. 

Fielding,  Earl  of  Denbigh  *  ;  his  hair  grey,  a  gun 
in  his  hand,  and  attended  by  an  Indian  boy.  The 
fineft  I  ever  faw  of  Vandykes  portraits :  it  feems  per- 
fectly to  fl:art  from  the  canvafs,  and  the  acftion  of 
his  countenance  looking  up  has  matchlefs  fpirit. 

*  The  perfon  who  Ihewed  the  houfe  called  him  governor 
of  Jamaica  ;  but  that  mull  be  a  miftalce.  Jf  any  errors  ap- 
pear in  my  account  of  any  of  the  pidures,  I  flatter  myfelf  it 
may  be  excufed  ;  for  fometimes  they  were  fliewn  by  fervants; 
fometimes  the  owners  of  the  houfe  were  fo  obliging  as  to  at- 
tend me,  whomi  could  not  trouble  with  a  number  of  c[uellions. 

His 


*iS  A      T    0    U    R 

His  daughter,  and  htrr  hiifband  the  Marquifs  of 
Hamilton. 

Old  Duke  of  Chatclbcrault,  in  black,  with  an 
order  about  his  neck. 

Two  half-lengths  in  black  ;  one  with  a  fiddle  in 
Iiis  hand,  the  other  in  a  grotefque  attitude  •,  both 
with  the  fame  countenances  ;  good,  but  fwarthy, 
miilakenly  called  David  Rizzo's  •,  but  I  could  not 
learn  that  there  was  any  portrait  of  that  unfor- 
tunate man. 

Maria  Dei  Gratia  Scotorum  Regittay  1586.  j^t.  43. 
a  half-length  j  a  ftiff  figure,  in  a  great  ruff,  au- 
burne  hair,  oval  but  pretty  full  face,  of  much 
larger  and  plainer  features  than  that  atCadle  Braan, 
2i  natural  alteration  from  the  increafe  of  her  cruel 
ufage,  and  of  her  ill  health;  yet  ftill  with  a  refem- 
blance  to  that  portrait.  It  was  told  me  here,  that 
fhe  fent  this  pi6lure,  together  with  a  ring,  to  the 
Duke  of  Hamilton^  a  little  before  her  execution. 

A  head,  faid  to  be  Jnna  Bullen^  very  handfome, 
dreffed  in  a  ruff  and  kerchief  edged  with  ermine, 
and  in  a  purple  gown;  over  her  face  a  veil,  fo 
jranfparent  as  not  to  conceal 

The  bloom  of  young  defire  and  purple  light  of  love. 

Earl  Morion^  Regent  o^  Scotland. 

The  rough  reformer  John  Knox. 

Lord  Belhaven,  author  of  the  famous  fpeech 
againft  the  union. 

Philip  II.  at  full  length,  with  a  flrange  figure  of 
Fame  bowing  at  his  feet  with  a  label  and  this 
moitOj  Pro  mcrente  adjlo. 

About 


I  N     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  ai^ 

About  a  mile  from  the  houfe,  on  an  eminence   Chatdbtraull 
above  a  deep  wooded  glen,  with  the  Avon  at  its 
bottom,  is  Chatdherault  ;  fo  called  from  the  eftate 
the  family  once  pofTefTed  in  France :   is  an  elegant 
banqueting  houfe,  with  a  dog-kenncl,  gardens,  &c. 
and  commands  a  fine  view  of  the  country.     The    • 
park  is  now  much  inclofed :  but  I  am  told  that 
there  are  ftill  in  it  a  few  of  the  breed  of  the  wild   Wild  cattle, 
cattle,  v;hich  Boethius  *  fays  were  peculiar  to  the 
Caledonian  foreO:,  were  of  a  fnowy  whitenefs,  and 
had  manes  like  lions :  they  were  at  this  time  in  a 
diftant  part  of  the  park,  and  I  loft  the  fight  of 
them. 

I  regret  alfo  the  not  being  able  to  vifit  the  falls 
of  the  Clyde  near  Lanerk^  which  I  was  informed 
were  very  romantic,  confiding  of  a  feries  of  cata- 
rads  of  different  heights  from  ten  to  fifteen  feet, 
fome  falling  in  flieets  of  water,  others  broken,  and 
their  fides  bounded  by  magnificent  rocks  covered 
with  trees. 

Returned  to  Glafgow* 

Crolfed  the  country  towards   Sterling.     PafTed  Sept,  m- 
through  the  village  oi  KyJfitbe,  noted  for  a  viflory  Kylfnhf. 
gained  by  Montrofe  over  the  Covenanters.     Thro* 
a  bog,  where  numbers  of  the  fugitives  perifhed,  is 
now  cutting  part  of  the  canal  that  is  to  join  the 

*  Gignere  folet  ea  Jyl'ua  lo'vis  candidijjimos  in  formam  heonit 
jubam  habentes,  cat  era  manfiietis  Jtmillimos  'verb  adeo  f^ros,  &c, 
£>elcr.  Regni  Scotia^,  fol.  xi.  1  was  a!fo  informed  that  the 
fame  kind  is  found  in  the  Duke  of  ^eenjbury^%  Park  at 
Drumlanrig  :  but  at  prefent,  in  tio  part  of  North  BrliniH  in 
an  unconfined  ftate.  I  imagine  thefe  to  have  been  the  fame 
with  the  jiibatos  Bifontes  of  Pliny,  which  were  found  in  his 
time  in  Germany,  and  might  be  common  both  to  our  ifland 
and  the  continent. 

Firth's 


220  A      T    O    U    R 

Firths  of  Forth  and  Ciyds.  Saw  the  fpot  where  the 
battle  of  Banjwckhcurne  vi2iS  fought,  in  which  the 
Engli/Jj  under  EJzvard  II.  had  a  fhamefull  defeat. 
Edward  was  fo  afllired  of  conqueft  that  he  brought 
with  him  WiUiam  Bafion,  a  Carmelite^  and  famous 
poet,  to  celebrate  his  vidlory,  but  the  monarch  was 
defeated,  and  the  poor  bard  taken  and  forced  by 
the  conqueror,  invitd  minerva^  to  fing  his  fuccefs, 
which  he  did  in  fuch  lines  as  thefe  : 

Hie  capita  hie  rapiiy  hie  tcrit^  kic  ferity  ecce  dolores ; 
Vox  tonat  j  as  fonat  j  hie  ml:  •,  hie  luit  \  arUo  modo 

res. 
Hie  fecat  ;  hie  7ieeat  \  hie  doeet  \  hie  nffcet  \  ijle  fu- 

gatur  : 
Hie  lateti  hie  patet ;  hie  premit,  hie  gemit ;  hie  fu- 

peratur, 

St.  IsirAan.  Went  through  the  fmall  town  of  St.  Ninian  *,  a 
mile  fouth  of  Sterli)ig.  The  church  had  been  the 
powder-magazine  of  the  Rebels,  who,  on  their  re- 
treat, blew  it  up  in  fuch  hade,  as  to  dcftroy  fome 
of  their  own  people  and  about  fifteen  innocent 
fpeftatOrs. 
Sterling.  Sterling  and  its  caftlc,  in  refpeft  of  fituation,  is 
a  miniature  of  Edinburgh ;  is  placed  on  a  ridged 
hill,  or  rock,  rifing  out  of  a  plain,  having  the 
caftle  at  the  upper  end  on  a  high  precipitous  rock. 
"Within  its  walls  was  the  palace  of  feveral  of  the 
Scotch  Kings,  a   fquare  building,  ornamented  on 

•  Apoflle  of  the  Pi^s,  fon  of  a  prince  of  the  Cutabrian  Bri- 
lainsy  converting  the  Puis  as  far  as  the  Grampian  hills. 
Died  432. 

4.  thi-ce 


iillii^llllliilijliiliilliliiliiiii!!!!!!;^^^ 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.     -  221 

three  fides  with  pillars  relling  on  grotcfque  figures 
projeding  from  the  wall,  and  on  the  top  of  each 
pillar  is  a  fiatiie,  feemingly  the  work  of  fancy. 
Near  it  is  the  old  parlement-houfe,  avail  room  120 
feet  long,  very  high,  with  a  timbered  roof,  and  for- 
merly had  a  gallery  running  round  the  infide.  Below 
the  caftle  are  the  ruins  of  the  palace  belonging  to 
the  Earls  of  Mar^  whofe  family  had  once  the  keep- 
ing of  this  fortrefs.  There  are  ftill  the  Erjkine 
arms  and  much  ornamental  carving  on  parts  of  it. 
The  town  of  Sterlhig  is  inclofed  with  a  wall  -,  the 
ftreets  are  irregular  and  narrow,  except  that  which 
leads  to  the  caftle.  Here,  and  at  the  village  of 
Bannockhoiirne-,  is  a  confiderable  manufafture  of 
coarfe  carpets. 

From  the  top  of  the  caftle  is  by  far  the  fineft  view 
in  Scotland.  To  the  eaft  is  a  vaft  plain  rich  in  corn, 
adorned  with  woods,  and  watered  with  the  river 
Forth,  whofe  meanders  are,  before  it  reaches  the 
fea,  fo  frequent  and  fo  large,  as  to  form  a  multi- 
tude of  moft  beautiful!  peninfulas  -,  for  in  many 
parts  the  windings  approximate  fo  clofe  as  to 
leave  only  a  little  ifthmus  of  a  few  yards.  In  this 
plain  is  an  old  abby,  a  view  of  Alloa,  Clack- 
mamiarit  Falkirk^  the  Firth  of  Forth,  and  the  coun- 
try as  far  as  Edinburgh.  On  the  north,  the  Ochil 
hills,  and  the  moor  where  the  ha.ti[e  of  DumMam 
was  fought.  To  the  weft,  the  ftraith  of  Menteith, 
as  fertile  as  the  eaftern  plain,  and  terminated  by 
the  Highland  mountains,  among  which  the  fummit 
of  Ben-Lof}2ond  is  very  confpicuous. 

The  Sylva  Caledonia,  or  Caledonian  Foreft,  begun 

a  little 


222  A      T    O    U    R 

a  little  north  of  Si criifigi  and  pafiing  through  Men- 
teith  and  Straithcrn^  extended,  according  to  Boe- 
ihiusj  as  far  as  y^thol  on  one  fide,  and  Lccbaber  on 
the  other.  It  is  very  (lightly  mentioned  by  the  an- 
tients  * ;  but  the  fuppofed  extent  is  given  by  the 
.  Scottijh  hi  dorian. 
^alkirk.  Lie  at  Falkirk^  a  large  ill-built  towni  fupported 

by  the  great  fairs  for  black  cattle  from  the  High- 
lands, it  being  computed  that  24,000  head  are 
annually  fold  here.  There  is  alfo  a  great  deal  of 
money  got  here  by  the  carriage  of  goods,  landed  at 
Carron  wharf,  to  Glafgow.  Such  is  the  increafe  of 
trade  in  this  country,  that  about  twenty  years  ago 
not  three  carts  could  be  found  in  the  town,  and  at 
prefent  there  are  above  a  hundred  that  are  fup- 
ported by  their  intercourfe  with  Glafgotv. 

In  the  church-yard,  on  a  plain  ftone,  is  the  fol- 
lowing epitaph  on  John  de  Graham,  ftyled  the  right 
hand  of  the  gallant  Wallace^  killed  at  the  battle  of 
Falkirk  \n  1298  ■\\ 

Here  lies  Sir  John  the  Grame  both  wight  and  wife, 
AtiC  of  the  chief  reflce wit  Scotland  thrife. 
Ane  better  knight  not  to  the  world  was  lent. 
Nor  was  gude  Grame  of  trueth,  and  of  hardiment. 
Mente  manuqut  fottns,  tt  VALLit  fidus  Achates 
Conditur  hie  Gram  US  hello  inter/eilus  ab  Angli?, 
22  JmIH.  1298, 

Near  this  is  another  epitaph,  occafioncd  by  a 
fecond  battle  of  Falkirk^  as  difgracefull  to  the  Eng' 

*  Dy  Pliny y  lib.  iv.  f.  x6.  and  Eumenius,  in  his  Panegyric 
on  CoiijJarttiuSy  <"•  7- 

f  Fought  hetwecn  Falkirk  and  Carron  works,  at  a  place 
Cilied  to  tli;^  Jay  Graham's  Moor. 

2  lijb 


1  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  j|?^ 

hjh  as  the  other  was  fatal  to  the  Scots:  the  firfl  was 
a  well  difputed  combat ;  the  laft,  a  pannicon  both 
fides,  for  part  of  each  army  flew,  the  one  weft,  the  - 
other  eaft,  each  carrying  the  news  of  their  feveral 
defeats,  while  the  total  deftrudlion  of  our  forces 
was  prevented  by  the  gallant  behaviour  of  a  briga- 
dier, v;ho  with  two  regiments  faced  fuch  of  the 
rebels  as  kept  the  field,  and  prevented  any  further 
advantages.  The  epitaph  I  allude  to  is  in  memory 
of  Sir  Robert  Monro  *,  the  worthy  chieftain  of  that 
loyal  clan,  a  family  which  loft  three  brothers  the 
fame  year  in  fupport  of  the  royal  caufe.  Sir  Robert 
being  greatly  wounded  in  the  battle  was  murthered 
in  cool  blood,  by  the  Rebels,  with  his  brother  Dr. 
MonrOj  who  with  fraternal  piety  was  at  that  time 
drelfing  his  v/ounds  :  the  third  was  afiaflinated  by 
miftake  for  ens  who  well  deferved  his  death  for 

•  Condltur  heic  quod  poterit  mori 
RoBERTi  Monro  de  Foulis,  Eq.  Bar.* 

Gentis  fui  Principis  , 

Militutn  Tribuni  : 

Vita  in  caftris  curiaque  Britannica 

Honefte  produfla 

Pro  Libertaie  religione  Patriae 

In  acie  honeftiflime  defundla 

Prope  Falkirk  y^;?.  xviii.  1746.   jEt.62., 

Virtutis  confiliique  fama 

In  Montanorum  cohortis  Prsefeftura 

Qnamdiu  prailium  FontonjEum  memorabitnx 

Perduratura ; 

Ob  amiciciam  et  fidem  amlcis 

Humanitatem  clementiamque  adverfariis 

Benevolentiam  bonitatenique  omnibus, 

Trucidantibus  etiam. 

In  perpetuum  defideranda. 

DuNCANUS  Monro  de  Qifdale,  M.  D.  J?/.  59^ 

Frater  Fratrem  linquere  fugiens, 

Saucium  curans,  idus  inermis 

Coinmoriens  cohoneftat  Urnam. 

fpontaneous 


i^24r  A     T   O    U   R 

fpontaneous  barbarities  on  Highlanders  approaching 
according  to  proclamation  to  furrender  their  arms. 

I  have  very  often  mentioned  fields  of  battles  in 
this  part  of  the  kingdom  ;  fcarce  a  fpot  has  efcaped 
unftained  with  gore ;  for  had  they  no  publick  enemy 
to  contend  with,  the  Scots,  like  the  fVeiJh  of  old, 
turned  their  arms  againft  each  other. 
Iron  founde-  CarroH  iron-works  lie  about  a  mile  from  Falkirk^ 
""•  and  are  the  grcateft  of  the  kind  in  Europe :  they 

were  founded  about  eight  years  ago,  before  which 
there  was  not  a  fingle  houfe,  and  the  country  a  meer 
moor.  At  prefent,  the  buildings  of  all  forts  are 
of  vaft  extent,  and  above  twelve  hundred  men  are 
employed.  The  iron  is  fmelted  from  the  ilone, 
then  call  into  cannon,  pots,  and  all  forts  of  utenfils 
made  in  founderies.  This  work  has  been  of  great 
fervice  to  the  country,  by  teaching  the  people  in- 
duftry  and  a  method  of  fetting  about  any  fort  of 
labor,  which  before  the  common  people  had  fcarce 
any  notion  of. 

Carron  wharf  lies  on  the  Forib,  and  is  not  only 
iifefull  to  the  works,  but  of  great  fervice  even  to 
Glafgow,  as  confiderable  quantities  of  goods  deftined 
for  that  city  are  landed  there.  The  canal  likewife 
begins  in  this  neighborhood,  which,  when  cffcded, 
will  prove  another  benefit  to  thefe  works. 

At  a  fmall  diftance  from  the  founderies,  on  a 
little  rifing  above  the  river  Carron,  flood  that  cele- 
Ar/hur^s  O-     brated  antiquity  called  Arthur^  Oven,  which  the 
ingenious  Mr.  Gordon  *  luppofes  to  have  been  a 

*  Itin.  Stptcntr.  p.  24.  tab.  iv.  as  the  book  is  very  fcarce,  I 
have  taken  the  liberty  of  having  that  plate  copied  into  this 
work. 

faceUum^ 


ven. 


xn. 


2JU^ 


AR  T  HITR  S    O  VB I^ 


TW^O     liOCHABER  AXB  S 


.^^fittwtf  Jc-f^ 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  225 

faceJlum^  or  little  chapel,  a  repofitory  for  the  Roman 
Infignia^  or  llandards :  but,  to  the  mortification  of 
every  curious  traveller,  this  matchlcfs  edifice  is  now 
no  more;  its  barbarous  owner,  a  gothic  knight, 
caufed  it  to  be  demolillied,  in  order  to  make  a 
mill  dam  with  the  materials,  which,  within  lefs 
than  a  year,  the  Naiades^  in  refentment  of  the  fa- 
crilege,  came  down  in  a  flood  and  entirely  fwept 
away. 

Saw  near  Calkndar-lioufQ  fome  part  of  Jnto-    c  „^     « 
ninus's  Wall,  or,  as    it  is  called  here,    Graham''^   Craoam't 
Dyke  *.     The  vallum  and  die  ditch  are  here  very    ^y^^' 
evident,  and  both  are  of  a  great  fize,  the  laft  being 
forty  feet  broad  and  thirteen  deep ;  it  extended 
from   the  Firth  ot  Forth  to  that  of  Clyde,  and  was 
defended  at  proper  diftances  by  forts  and  watch- 
towers,  the  work  of  the  Roman  legions  under  the 
command  of  Lollius  Urbicus,  in  the  reign  oi  Anto- 
ninus Pius.     According  to  Mr.  Gordon,  it  began  at 
old  Kirk  Patrick  on  the  Firth  of  Clyde,   and  ended 
two  miles  weft  of  Ahercorn,  on  the  Firth  of  Forth., 
being  in  length  36  miles,   8 87  paces. 

PafTed  thro'  Burrowjloncfs.,  a  town  on  the  Firth, 
inveloped  in  fmoke  from  the  great  fait- pans  and 
vaft  collieries  near  it.  The  town-houfc  is  built  in 
form  of  a  caftle.  There  is  a  good  quay,  much 
frequented  by- (hipping  i  for  confiderable  quantities 
of  coal  are  fent  from  hence  to  Lc/fdon^  and  there 

•  So  called  from  Gracant,  who  is  fald  to  have  firft  made  3 
breach  in  this  wall  foon  after  the  recreac  of  the  Romans  out  of 
Britain.      Vide  Boethius^  Cxxvi. 

Q.  are 


lioufe. 


226  A      TOUR 

arc  bciides  fome  Greenlajid  fliips  f  btlonging  to  the 
town. 

Th-e  whole  country  from  Falkirk  for  fome 
dilbnce  from  the  Firth  is  very  low,  and  in  many 
places  proteded  from  the  lea  by  banks.  I  ob- 
ferved  in  certain  places  far  from  the  water,  vaft 
beds  of  oifter- (hells ;  a  mark  of  it  having  once  been 
pofieft  by  that  element. 
uT.!c"'  Reach //c/j^/c^-Houfe,  the  feat  of  the  Earl  of 

Hopeton ;  a  houfe  began  by  Sir  IVilliam  Bruce,  and 
finifhed  by  Mr.  Adams  :  is  the  handfomeft  I  faw  in 
North  Britain  :  the  front  is  enriched  with  pilafters  ; 
the  wings  at  fome  diftance  joined  to  it  by  a  beau- 
tifull  colonade  :  one  wing;  is  the  ftables,  the  other; 
the  library. 

The  great  improvements  round  the  houfe  are] 
very  extenfive  ;  but  the  gardens  are  ftill  in  the  old 
tafte:  trees  and  fhrubs  fucceed  here  greatly  ;  among 
others  were  two  Portugal  laurels  thirty  feet  high. 
Nothing  can  equal  the  grandeur  of  the  approach  to 
the  houfe,  or  the  profped  from  it.  The  fituation 
is  bold,  on  an  eminence,  commanding  a  view  of 
the  Firth  of  Forth,  bounded  on  the  north  by  the 
county  of  Fife;  the  middle  is  chequered  with  iOands, 
iiich  as  (Jai'vey,  Inch  Keith  *,  and  others ;  and  to 

the 

f  This  year  the  whale- fifhcry  becan  to  revive  ;  which  for  a 
few  years  pad  had  beer.  To  unfuccefsfull,  that  fcvcral  of  the  ad- 
venturers had  thoughts  of  difpofing  of  their  fliips.  Perhaps 
the  whales  had  till  this  year  dcfcrted  thofe  feas  ;  for  Marten^ 
p.  185  of  his  voyage  to  S/>if!zlergen,  remarks,  "That  thcfc 
«'  animal?,  either  weary  of  their  place,  or  fcnfible  of  tlieii 
"  own  danger,  do  often  change  their  harbours." 

•  Tliis  iiie  is  oppofite /.fi'//».  By  order  of  cooncll.in  i4gj, 
all  venereal  paticnis  in   the  nffi^hborhocd  were   tranfponcd 

there. 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  227 

the  fouth-eaft  is  a  vaft  command  oi  Eafi  Lothian-t 
and  the  terminating  objedl  the  great  conic  hill  of 
North  Berwick. 

The  whole  ride  from  Sterling  to  ^een*s-Ferry 
(near  Hopeton-HoufQ-  is  not  to  be  paralleled  for  the 
elegance  and  variety  of  its  profpcds  :  the  whole  is 
a  compofition  of  all  that  is  great  and  beaiuifiiU : 
towns,  villages,  feats,  and  antient  towers,  deco- 
t-ace  each  bank,  of  that  fine  expanfe  of  water  the 
Firth  ;  while  the  bufy  fcenes  of  commerce  and 
rural  oeconomy  are  no  fmall  addition  to  the  (till 
life.  The  lofty  mountains  of  the  Highlands  form 
a  diftant  but  auguft  boundtjry  towards  the  north- 
weft  •,  and  the  eaftern  vic.v  is  enlivened  with  fiiips 
perpetually  appearing  or  vaniihing  amidft  the  nu- 
merous ifles. 

Pafs  by  ^een's-Ferry ;  fall  into  the  Edinburgh 
road,  and  finifh,  this  evening,  in  that  capital,  a 
moft  agreeable  and  profperous  Tour.  It  was  im- 
poflible  not  to  recall  the  idea  of  w  hat  I  had  feen  ; 
to  imagine  the  former  condition  of  this  part  of  the 
kingdom,  nnd  to  compare  it  with  the  preli  nt  ftate, 
and  by  a  fort  of  fecond-fight  make  a  probable  con- 
jecture of  the  happy  appearance  it  will  aiTume  in  a 
very  few  years.     Nor  could  I  forbear  repeating  the 

there,  Ne  quid detrimentl  res publica  caperet.  It  is  remarkable, 
that  this  diforder,  which  was  thought  to  have  appeared  ia 
Eurtpt  only  four  years  before,  (hould  make  fo  quick  a  pro- 
grefs.  The  horror  of  a  difeafe,  for  which  there  was  then  fup- 
pofed  to  be  no  cure,  muft  have  occafioned  this  attention  to 
llop  the  contagion  ;  for  even  half  a  century  after,  one  of  the 
firit  monarchs  oi  Europe,  Francii  I.  fell  a  vidSim  to  it.  The 
order  is  fo  curious  that  we  have  given  it  a  place  in  the  zip- 
I'tndixt  Nb.  Y. 

Q^a  '        prophetic 


228  A      T    O    U  R 

prophetvc  lines  *  oi  /iaron  Hill,  who  feemed  fcizt-J 
with  a  like  rtverie  : 

Once  more  !   O  North,  I  view  thy  winding  fhores. 
Climb  thy  bleak  hills  and  crols  thy  duflcy  moors. 
Impartial  view  thee  with  an  heedfull  eye. 
Yet  ftill  by  nature,  not  by  ctiiiure  try. 
England  thy  filler  is  a  gay  coquet, 
Whom  art  enlivens,  and  ;eniptations  whet  ; 
Rich,   proud,  and  wanton,   fhe  her  beauty  know§, 
And  in  a  confcious  warmth  of  beauty  glows  : 
Scotlund  comes  after  like  an  unripe  fair. 
Who  fighs  with  anguifli  at  her  niler's  air  ; 
Unconfcious,  that  (he'll  quickly  have  her  day. 
And  be  the  toaft  when  Albion's  charms  decay. 

Sept.  i8.  After  a  few  d.iys  experience  of  the  fame  hofpi- 
tality  in  Edivburgh  that  I  had  met  with  in  the  High- 
lands, I  continued  my  journey  fouth,  through  a 
rich  corn  country,  leaving  the  Pentlavd  hills  to 
the  weft,  v/hofe  fides  were  covered  with  a  fine 
turf.  Before  I  reached  Crooks  a  fmall  village, 
the  country  grew  worfe  :  after  this  it  ailumed 
a  Highland  appearance,  the  hills  were  high,  the 
vales  narrowi  and  there  was  befides  a  great  fcarcity 
of  trees,  and  hardly  any  corn  ;  inftead,  was  abun- 
dance of  good  pafturage  for  flieep,  there  being 
great  numbers  in  thefe  parts,  which  fupply  the 
north  of  England.  The  roads  are  bad,  narrow,  and 
often  on  the  edges  of  precipices,  impending  over 
the  river  Tzvcedy  here  an  inconfiderable  llrcam. 
Keach 
MorrAT.  Moffat,    a  fmall  neat  town,  famous   for  its 

•  Written  on  a  window  in  Nort/j  Britain. 

fpaws. 


I  K     S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  229 

fpaws  i  one  faid  to  be  ulefull  in  fcrophulous  cafes, 
the  other  a  chalybeate,  which  makes  this  place 
much  relbrted  to  in  iummer.  Doctor  IValker^  mi- 
nifter  ct  the  place,  fhewed  me  in  manufcript  his 
natural  hillory  of  the  wcjlern  ijles^  which  will  do 
him  much  credit  whenever  he  favors  the  world 
with  it. 

The  country  between  Moffat  and  Lockerby  is  very  Sipt.  19. 
good,  a  mixture  of  downs  and  corn- land,  with  a 
few  fmall  woods  :  the  country  grows  quite  flat  and 
very  unpleafant :  but  incedant  rains  throughout 
my  journey  from  Edinburgh  rendered  this  part  of 
my  tour  both  difagreeable  and  unedifying.  Crofs  a 
fmall  river  called  the  Sark^  which  divides  the  two 
kingdoms,    and  enter  Cumberland. 

About  three  miles  farther  crofs  the  EJk  over  a 
handfome  ftone-bridge,  and  lie  at  the  fmall  village 
of  Longtozvn,  The  country  is  very  rich  in  corn* 
but  quite  bare  of  trees,  and  very  flat.  Near  this 
village,  at  Netherby,  are  the  ruins  of  a  Reman  fta- 
tion,  where  llatucs,  weapons  and  coins  are  often 
dug  up. 

Crofs  the  Eden  to  Carltjle^  a  pleafant  city,  fur-  Sept.  29. 
rounded  with  v/alls,  like  Chejler^  but  they  are  very  ^"""'i^- 
dirtv,  and  kept  in  very  bad  repair.  Thecaftleis  an- 
ticnt,  but  makes  a  good  appearance  at  a  diflance:  the 
view  from  it  is  fine,  of  rich  meadows,  at  this  time 
covered  with  thoufands  of  cattle,  it  being  fair-day. 
The  Eden  here  forms  two  branches,  and  infulate* 
the  ground  -,  over  one  is  a  bridge  of  four,  over  the 
other  one  of  nine  arches.     There  is  befides  a  prof- 

a  3  peft 


230  A      T    O    U    R 

pe(5t  of  a  rich  country,  and  a  diftant  view  of  Cold- 
fells,  Crcfs-fells,  Skidda'ujy  and  orher  mountains. 

The  cathedral  *  is  verv  irnpcrfed,  Croinvuel  hav- 
ing pulled  down  part  to  build  barracks  with  the 
materials.  There  remains  fome  portion  that  was 
buik  in  the  Saxon  timej,  with  very  mafTy  pillars 
and  round  arches.  The  reft  is  more  modem,  faid 
to  have  been  built  in  the  reign  of  Edward  III.  who 
had  in  one  part  an  apartment  to  lodge  in.  The 
arches  in  this  latter  building  are  fliarp  pointed:  the 
eaft  window  remarkably  fine. 

The  manufadturcs  of  Carlijle  are  chiefly  of 
printed  linnens,  for  which  near  3000I.  per  ann.  is 
paid  in  duties.  It  is  alfo  noted  for  a  great  manu- 
la(5bure  of  whips,  which  employs  numbers  of  chil- 
dren. 

Salmons  appear  in  the  Eden  in  numbers  fo  early 
as  the  months  t)f  December  and  January  •,  and  the 
London^  and  even  Newcajlle  markets,  arc  fupplied 
with  early  fifli  from  this  river:  but  it  is  remarkable 
that  they  do  not  vifit  the  FJk  in  any  quantity  till 
ylpriU  notwithftanding  the  mouths  of  both  thefe 
waters  are  at  a  fmall  diftance  from  each  other.  I 
omitted  in  its  j.roper  place  an  account  of  the  New- 
cojile  fifhery,  therefore  infert  here  the  little  I  could 
collcfl  relating  to  it:  the  fidi  feldom  appear  in  the 
S'yneuW  Eehrucry:  there  are  about  24  filheries  on 
the  rive'-,  befides  a  very  conliderable  were,  and  the 
whole  annual  capture  amounts  to  about  36,000  fill). 

*  Begun  hv  Waiter,  deputy  of  thefe  partr,  under  Willi  am 
Jyu/us ;  but  the  new  choir  was  not  ibunacd  till  about  1  354. 

2  I  was 


I  N    S  C  O  T  L  A  N  D.  ^31 

I  was  informed  that  once  the  fifh  were  brought 
from  Berivick  and  cured  at  Neivcifile  -,  but  at  pre- 
fent,  notwithftanding  all  goes  unuer  the  name  of 
Newcajlle  Sahnon,  very  little  is  taken  there,  in 
coinparifon  of  what  is  caught  in  the  Tweed. 

The  country  near  Carlijle  confifts  of  fmall  en- 
clofures  -,  but  a  little  farther  on,  towards  Penrith^ 
changes  into  coarfe  downs.  On  the  eafl,  at  a  dif^ 
tance,  are  ridges  of  high  hills  running  parallel  to 
the  road,  with  a  good  inclofed  country  in  the  inter- 
vening fpace.  Above  Penrith  is  a  rich  inclofed 
trad,  mixed  with  hedge-row  trees  and  woods.  On 
the  fouth  weft,  a  profpeft  of  high  and  craggy 
mountains.  After  I  left  Lockerby^  Nature,  as  if 
exhaufted  with  her  labors  in  the  lofty  hills  of  Scot- 
land,  feemed  to  have  lain  down  and  repofed  herfelf 
for  a  confiderable  fpace  ;  but  here  began  to  rife 
again  with  all  the  fublimity  of  alpine  majefty.  ^ 

Penrith  is  an  antient  town,  feated  at  the  foot  Pbnritw, 
of  a  hill :  is  a  great  thoroughfare  for  travellers  ; 
but  has  little  other  trade,  except  a  fmall  one  of 
checks.  The  church  is  very  neat,  the  gallery  fup- 
ported  by  large  columns,  each  formed  of  a  fingle 
ftone.  In  the  church-yard  is  a  monument  of  great 
antiquity,  confifting  of  twoftone  pillars  eleven  feet 
fix  inches  high,  and  five  in  circumference  in  the 
lower  part,  which  is  rounded-,  the  upper  is  fquare, 
and  tapers  to  a  point :  in  the  fquare  part  is  fome 
fret-work,  and  the  relievo  of  a  crofs.  Both  thefe 
ilones  are  mortifed  at  their  lower  part  into  a  round 
one:  they  are  about  fifteen  feetafunderj  the  fpace 

Qj.  between 


232  A      T    O    U    R 

Sept.  21.  between  them  is  inclofed  on  each  fide  with  two  very 
large  but  thin  femicircular  ftones  •,  fo  that  there  is 
left  a  walk  between  pillar  and  pillar  of  two  feet  in 
breadth.  Two  of  thefe  lefTer  dunes  are  plain,  the 
other  two  have  ctitain  figures  at  prefent  fcarce 
intelligible  *. 

Crofs  the  Emct^  a  fmall  river,  and  foon  after  the 
J^ozither^  o\tr  Teem  a  f}\  Bridge,  near  which  I  enter 
Westmorland.  About  four  miles  farther  crofs 
Clifton  Moor,  where  the  Rebels  made  a  (hort  (land 
in  1745,  ^^''^  facrificed  a  few  men  to  fave  the  reft 
of  their  army.     Pafs  over  Shap  Fells,  more  black, 
dreary,  and  melancholy,  than  any  of  the  High- 
land hills,  being  not  only  very  barren  but  dcftitute 
of  every  pidlurefque   beauty.     This  barren   fctne 
continued  till  within  a  fmall  diftapce  of 
Kendal.        Kekdai^,  a  large  town  on  the  river  Kent^  in  a 
rich  and  beautifuU  vale,  well  cultivated,  and  pret- 
tily wooded.     Here  is  a  very  great  trade   in   knit 
"woriled- (lockings,  fome  linfies,  and  a  coarfe  fort  of 
cloth,  called  cottons,  for  the  Guinea  trade. 

Near  Burton  enter  Lancashire.  Reach  its  ca- 
l^ancajitr.  pital,  Ldncaftcr,  a  large  and  well-built  town,  feated 
on  the  Lune,  a  river  navigable  for  fhips  of  250 
tuns  as  high  as  the  bridge.  The  cuftom-houfe  is 
a  fmall  but  moil  elegant  building,  with  a  p-ortico 
fupported  by  four  ionic  pillars,  on  a  beautifuU 
plain  pediment.  There  is  a  double  flight  of  Ilrps, 
^  ruftic  furbafe  and  coins  j  a  work  that  does  much 
credit  to  Mr.  GilloWi  the  architc6l,  an  inhabitant 
of  this  town. 

•  For  a  further  account  vide  /.ppendix  N**  VI. 

The 


IN     SCOTLAND,  %si 

The  church  Is  feated  on  an  eminence,  and  com- 
mands an  extenfive  but  not  a  pleafing  view.  The 
caftic  is  entire,  the  courts  of  juftice  are  held  in  it; 
and  it  is  alfo  the  county  jail.  The  front  is  very 
handfome,  confifts  of  two  large  angular  towers, 
with  a  handfome  gateway  between. 

Eleven  miles  farther  is  the  village  of  Garjlang^ 
feated  on  a  fertile  plain,  bounded  on  the  eaft  by 
the  fells-,  on  the  weft  by  Felling  mofs,  which  for- 
merly made  an  eruption  like  that  of  Solway.  The 
adjacent  country  is  famous  for  producing  the  fineft 
cattle  in  all  the  county.  A  gentleman  in  that 
neighborhood  has  refuled  30  guineas  for  a  three 
year  old  cow  :  calves  of  a  month  old  have  been 
fold  for  10  •,  and  bulls  from  70  to  loa  guineas, 
which  have  afterwards  hired  out  for  the  feafon  for 
30  •,  fo  Rotv/ithftanding  his  misfortune,  well 
might  honeft  Barnaby  celebrate  the  cattle  of  this 
place. 

Veni  Garfiang  ubi  rata 
Sunt  Armenta  fronte  lata, 
Vcni  Gar/lang,   ubi  male 
Intrans  forum  befiiale. 
Forte  vacillando  vico 
Hue  et  illuc  cum  amico. 
In  Jiivencs  dorfum  rui 
Cujijs  cornel  laefus  fui, 

A  little  to  the  Eaft  is  a  ruined  tower  the 
remains  of  Grenehau>gh  caftle,  built  as  Camhdtn 
fays,  by  Thomas  Stanley  firft  Earl  of  Derby^  to  pro- 
teft  himfelf  from  the  outlawed  nobility,  whole 
cftates  had  been  granted  him  by  Henry  Wl. 

4  Haftened 


«34 

Sept.  22. 


A      TOUR,     &c. 

Haftencd  through  Prefioriy  Wiggan^  Warrington, 
and  Chejler^  and  finifhed  my  journey  with  a  rap- 
ture of  which  no  fond  parent  can  be  ignorant, 
that  of  being  again  rcllored  to  two  innocent  prat- 
tlers after  an  abfence  equally  regretted  by  all 
parties. 


APPENDIX. 


C     235     ] 

APPENDIX. 

NUMBER     I. 

Concerning  the  Conftitution  of 
the  Church  of  Scotland. 

iRefbytcrian  government  in  Ecot^ 
land  took  place  after  the  refor- 
mation of  popery,  as  being  the  form 
of   eccleliaftical  government   moft  a- 
greeable   to  the  genius   and    inclina- 
tions of  the  people  of  Scotland,  When 
yames  VI.  fucceeded  to  the  crown  of 
Englaiid^  it  is  well  known,  that  dur- 
ing his  reii2,n  and  that  of  his  fuccef- 
fors  of  the  family  of  Stewart^  deligns 
were  formed  of  altering  tfie  conftitu- 
tion of  our  civil  government  and  ren- 
dering our  kings  more  abfolute  *,   The 

*  The  writer  mud  mean  ip  Scotland-,  for  in 
England  the  two  firlt  monarchs  oj  ihe  name  feem 
only  to  have  attempted  to  iupporc  ihc  plenitude  of 
power  exerted  by,  and  delivered  down  to  them  by 
their  immediate  Predecefibrs,  which  the  fcrvile 
fpirit  of  the  prt ceding  times  enduied. 

eftablifli- 


23^  APPENDIX. 

efiablifhment    of   cpifconacy  in  Scot- 
land  was   thought    to    be  one    point 
proper  in  order  to  facilitate  the  exe- 
cution  of  thefe  dcfigns.      Epilcopacy 
was  accordingly  efiabliflicd  at  length, 
and  continued   to  be  the  government 
of     the     church    till    the    revolution, 
when  fuch  dcfiprns  fubiiftinor  no  lono;- 
er,   prefbyterian   government   v/as  re- 
ftored  to  Scotland,      It  was  eftabliflicd 
by  adl   of    parliament   in    1690,    and 
was  afterwards  fecured   by  an  exprefs 
article  in  the  treaty  of  union  between 
the   two  kingdoms    of  Rvgland   and 
Scotland.      Among    the    minifters    of 
Scotland^     there     fublifts     a     pcrfedt 
equality ;   that  is,    no    minifter,  con* 
iidered  as  an  individual,   has   an  au- 
thoritative  jurifdidion   over   another. 
Jurifdi6lion    is    com jic tent    for   them 
only    when    they    adt   in  a   collective 
body>  or    as  a  court  of   judicature  : 
and  then  there  is   a  lubordination  of 

one 


1 


APPENDIX.  237 

one  court  to  another,  or  inferiour  and 
fuperiour  courts. 

The  courts  eftabliflicd  by  law  are 
the  four  following,  viz.  Church  Sef- 
lions,  Prefbvterles,  Provincial  Svnods, 
and  above  all  a  National  or  General 
Affembly. 

A  Church  Scfiion  is  compofed  of 
the  Minifter  of  the  parifli  and  certain 
difcreet  Laymen,  who  are  chofen  and 
ordained  for  the  exercife  of  difcipline, 
and  are  called  Elders.  The  number 
of  thefe  Elders  varies  according  to 
the  extent  of  the  parifh.  Two  of 
them,  together  with  the  Minifter,  are 
neceffary,  in  order  to  their  holding  a 
legal  meeting.  The  Minifter  always 
prefidcs  in  thefe  meetings,  and  is 
called  Moderator  •  but  has  no  other 
authority  but  what  belongs  to  the 
Prcefes  of  any  other  court.  The 
Church  Seffion  is  appointed   for   in- 

fp&ding 


238  APPENDIX. 

fpedling  the  morals  of  the  parifhioners, 
and  managing  the  funds  that  are  ap- 
propriated for  the  maintainnnce  of  the 
poor  within  their  bounds.  When  a 
perfcn  is  convided  of  any  inftance  of 
immoral  condud,  or  of  what  is  in- 
conliflent  with  his  chriftian  profeflion, 
the  Church  Seffion  infilife  fome  eecle- 
fiaftical  cenfure,  fuch  as  giving  him 
an  admonition  or  rebuke  :  or  if  the 
crime  be  of  a  grofs  and  publick  na- 
ture, they  appoint  him  to  proftfs  his 
repentance  in  face  of  the  whole  con- 
gregation, in  order  to  make  fatisfac- 
tion  for  the  publick  offence.  The 
hisheft  church  cenfure  is  excommu- 
nication,  which  is  feldom  inflided 
but  for  contumacy,  or  for  fome  very 
atrocious  crime  obflinately  perfifted 
in.  In  former  times  there  were  cer- 
tain civil  pains  and  penalties  which 
followed  upon  a  fentence  of  excom- 
munication, but  by  a  BritiJIj  ftatute 
thefe    are    happily     abolifhed.     Ihe 

church 


APPENDIX.  239 

church  of  Scotland  addreffes  its  cen- 
fures  only  to  the  confciences  of  men  ; 
and  if  they  cannot  by  the  methods  of 
perfuafion  reclaim  offenders,  they 
think  it  inconfiftent  with  the  fpirit  of 
true  religion,  to  have  recourfe  to 
compuhive  methods,  fuch  as  tempo- 
ral pains  and  penalties. 

If  the  perfon  thinks  himfclf  ag- 
grieved by  the  Church  Seilion,  it  is 
competent  for  him  to  feek  redrefs,  by 
entering  an  appeal  to  the  Prefbytery^ 
which  is  the  next  fuperiour  court.  In 
like  manner  he  may  appeal  from  the 
Pre{bytery  to  the  Provincial  Synod, 
and  from  the  Synod  to  the  Afiembly, 
whofe  fentence  is  final  in  all  eccle- 
iiaftical  matters. 

A  Prefbytery  confifls  of  the  Mini- 
fters  within  a  certain  diftridi,  and  alfo 
of  one  ruling  Elder  from  each  Church 
Seffion  within  the  diftrict.     In  fettling 

the 


240  A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X. 

the  boundaries  of  a  Prcfbytery,  a  re- 
gard was  paid  to  the  fituation  of  the 
country.  Where  the  country  is  po- 
pulous and  champaign,  there  are  in- 
ftances  of  thirty  Minifters  and  as 
many  Elders  being  joined  in  one  Pref- 
bytery.  In  mountainous  countries 
where  travelling  is  more  difficult, 
there  are  only  feven  or  eight  Minifters, 
in  fome  places  fewer,  in  a  Prelbytery. 
The  number  ol:  Prefbyteries  is  com- 
puted to  be  about  feventy.  Prefby- 
teries review  the  procedure  of  Church 
Seffions,  and  judge  in  references  and 
appeals  that  are  brought  before  them. 
They  take  trials  of  candidates  for  the 
miniftry  :  and  if  upon  fuch  trial  they 
find  them  duly  qualified,  they  licenfc 
them  to  preach,  but  not  to  difpenfe 
the  facraments.  Such  licentiates  are 
called  Probationers.  It  is  not  com- 
mon for  the  church  of  Scotland  to  or- 
dain or  confer  holy  orders  on  fuch  li- 
centiates till  they  be  prefented  to  fome 

vacant 


APPENDIX.  *      24X 

vacant    kirk,  and    thereby  acquire  a 
right  to  a  benefice. 

It  is  the  privilege  of  PrefbyterieS  to 
judge  their  own  members,  at  leaft  in 
the  firft  inftance.  They  may  be 
judged  for  herefy,  that  is,  for  preach- 
ing or  publilliing  docSlrines  that  are 
contrary  to  the  publick  ftandard  im- 
pofed  by  Ad  of  ParHament  and  Af- 
fembly  ;  or  for  any  inftance  of  im- 
moral condudl,  profecutions  for  herefy 
were  formerly  more  frequent  than 
they  are  at  prefent ;  but  happily  a 
more  liberal  fpirit  has  gained  ground 
among  the  Clergy  of  Scotland,  They 
think  more  freely  than  they  did  of 
old,  and  confequently  a  fpirit  of  in- 
quiry and  moderation  feems  to  be  on 
the  growing  hand  ;  fo  that  profecu- 
tions for  herefy  are  become  more  rare, 
and  are  generally  looked  upon  as  in- 
vidious. Some  fenfible  men  among: 
the  clergy  of  Scotland  look  upon  fub- 

R  fcriptions 


242  APPENDIX. 

fcrlptions  to  certain  articles  and  creeds 
of  human  compolition  as  a  grievance, 
from  which  they  would  wiihngly  be 
deUvered. 

Prc{byterie3  arc  more  fevcre  in  their 
cenlures  upon  their  own  members  for 
any  inftance  o[  immoral  condud:.  If 
the  perfon  be  convicfled,  they  fufpend 
him  from  the  exercife  of  his  minifte- 
rial  office  for  a  limited  time  :  but  if 
the  crime  be  of  a  heinous  nature, 
they  depofe  or  deprive  him  of  his  cle- 
rical character;  fo  that  he  is  no  long- 
er a  minifter  of  the  church  of  Scot- 
land  J  but  forfeits  his  title  to  his  bene- 
fice, and  other  privileges  of  the  efta- 
bliihed  church.  However,  if  the  per- 
fon thinks  himfelf  injured  by  the  fcn- 
tence  of  the  Prefbytery,  it  is  law- 
ful for  him  to  appeal  to  the  Provin- 
cial Synod,  within  whofe  bounds  his 
Prefbytery  lies  :  and  from  the  Synod 
he  may  appeal  to  the  National  AiTem- 

4  ^^Y' 


APPENDIX.  24 

bly.  Prelbyteries  hold  their  meetings 
generally  every  month,  except  in  re- 
mote countries,  and  have  a  power  of 
adjourning  themfelves  to  whatever 
time  or  place  within  their  diftricft 
they  fliall  think' proper.  They  chufe 
their  own  Prcefes  or  Moderator,  who 
muft  be  a  Minifter  of  their  own  Pref- 
bytery.  The  ruling  Elders  who  fit 
in  Prefbyteries  muft  be  changed  every 
half-year,  or  elfe  chofen  again  by  their 
refpedive  Church  Sellions. 

Provincial  Synods  are  the  next  lljpe- 
riour  courts  to  Prefbyteries,  and  are 
compofed  of  the  feveral  Prefbyteries 
within  the  province  and  of  a  ruling 
Elder  from  each  Church  SefTion.  The 
ancient  diocefes  of  the  Bifhops  are  for 
the  rnoft  part  the  boundaries  of  a 
Synod.  Moft  of  the  Synods  in  Scot- 
land meet  twice  every  year,  in  the 
months  of  April  and  OEiobeVy  and  at 
every  meeting  they  chufc  their  Pra:fes 

R  2  or 


•^ 


244  APPENDIX. 

or  Moderator,  who  muft  be  a  clergy- 
man of  their  own  number.  They 
review  the  procedure  of  Prefbyteries, 
and  judge  in  appeals,  references  and 
complaints,  that  are  brought  before 
them  from  the  inferior  courts.  And 
if  a  Prefbytery  fhall  be  found  negli- 
gent in  executing  the  ecclefiaftical 
laws  againft  any  of  their  members,  or 
any  other  perfon  within  their  jurifdic^ 
tion,  the  Synod  can  call  them  to  ac- 
count, and  cenfure  them  as  they  fhall 
fee  caufe. 

The  General  Aflembly  is  the  fu- 
'  preme  court  in  ecclefiaftical  matters, 
and  from  which  there  lies  no  appeal. 
As  they  have  a  power  of  making  laws 
and  canons,  concerning  the  difcipline 
and  government  of  the  church,  and 
the  publick  fervice  of  religion,  the 
King  fends  always  a  commiffioner  to 
reprefent  his  royal  perfon,  that  no- 
thing   may    be    enadled    inconfiftent 

with 


APPENDIX. 

with  the  laws  of  the  ftate.  The  per- 
fbn  who  reprefents  the  King  is  gene- 
rally fome  Scots  nobleman,  whom  his 
Majefty  nominates  annually  fome  time 
before  the  meeting  of  the  afiembly, 
and  is  allowed  a  fuitable  falary  for  de- 
fraying the  expence  of  this  honourable 
office.  He  is  prefent  at  all  the  meet- 
ings of  the  affembly,  and  at  all  their 
debates  and  deliberations.  After  the 
affembly  is  conftitutcd,  he  prcfents  his 
commiflion  and  delivers  a  fpeech ; 
and  when  they  have  finiflied  their  bu- 
iinefs,  which  they  commonly  do  in 
twelve  days,  he  adjourns  the  affembly, 
and  appoints  the  time  and  place  of 
their  next  annual  meeting,  which  is 
generally  at  Edinburgh  in  the  month 
of  May.  ^  ^ 

The  Affembly  is  compofed  of  Mi- 
nifters  and  ruhng  Elders  chofen  an- 
nually from  each  Prefbytery  in  Scot- 
hnd.     As  the   number    of  Minifters 

R  3  and 


245 


246  APPENDIX. 

and  Elders  in  a  Prcfbytery  varies,  fo 
the  number  of  their  reprefentatives 
niufi:  hold  a  proportion  to  the  number 
of  Miniflers  and  Elders  that  are  in  the 
Preibytery.  The  proportion  is  fixed 
by  laws  and  regulations  for  that  pur- 
pofe.  Each  Royal  Burgh  and  Uni- 
verfity  in  Scotland  has  likewife  the 
privilege  of  chufing  a  ruling  Elder  to 
the  Afiembly.  All  eledions  mufi:  at 
leaft  be  made  forty  days  before  the 
meeting  of  the  Afiembly.  Their  ju- 
rifdidion  is  either  confl:itutiv'e  or  ju- 
dicial. By  the  firfl:  they  have  autho- 
rity to  make  laws  in  ecclefiaftical 
matters  :  by  the  other  they  judge  in 
rcfcrepces  and  appeals  brought  be- 
fore them  from  the  fubordinate  courts, 
and  their  fcntences  are  decifive  and 
final.  Oiie  point  which  greatly  em-  ; 
ploys  their  attention  is  the  fettle- 
nient  of  vacant  pariflies.  The  com- 
mon people  of  Scotla?id  are  greatly 
prejudiced  againft  the  law  oi:  pa- 
tronage. 


APPENDIX.  247 

tronnge.  Hence  when  a  patron  pre- 
fents  a  candidate  to  a  vacant  parifh, 
the  parifliioners  frequently  make  great 
dppoiition  to  the  fettlcment  of  the 
prefentee,  and  appeal  from  the  infe- 
riour  courts  to  the  Aflcmblv.  The 
AfTembly  now-a-days  are  not  difpofed 
to  indulge  the  parilliioners  in  unrca- 
fonable  oppofition  to  prefentees.  Cn 
the  other  hand,  they  are  unwilling  to 
fettle  the  prefentte  in  oppofition  to 
the  whole  people,  who  refufe  to  fub- 
mit  to  his  miniflry,  becaufe  in  this 
cafe  his  niiniftrations  among  them 
muft  be  uffclefs  and  without  tfFedl. 
The  Afiem.bly  therefore  for  the  mofl 
part  delay  giving  fentence  in  fuch  cafes, 
till  once  they  have  ufed  their  endea- 
vours to  reconcile  the  parifhioners  to 
the  prefentte.  But  if  their  attempts 
this  way  prove  unfucceisful,  they  pro- 
ceed to  fettle  the  prefentee  in  obe- 
dience to  the  ad:  of  parliament  con- 
cerning patronages.     Upon  the  whole 

R  4  it 


24.8  APPENDIX. 

it  appears  that  in  the  judicatories  of 
the  church  of  Scotland^  there  is  an 
equal  reprcfentation  of  the  Laity  as  of 
the  Clergy,  which  is  a  great  fecurity 
to  the  Laity  againft  the  ufurp^tions  of 
the  Clergy. 

The  bufinefs  of  every  Minifter  in  a 
parilL  is  to  perform  religious  worfhip, 
and  to  preach  in  the  language  of  the 
country    to    his     congregation    every 
Sunday^    and  likewife  on  other  extra- 
ordinary occafions   appointed   by  the 
laws   and  regulations  of  the  church. 
The  tendency  of  their  preaching  is  to 
'    infl-Tud  their  hearers  in   the  effcntial 
doctrines  of  natural  and  revealed  re- 
ligion,   and  ioiprove  thefe  inftrudions 
\\\   order  tp  promote  the  pradlice  of 
piety  and   focial  virtue.     Of  old,   it 
was  cuftomary  to  preach  upon  con- 
troverted   and    myfterious    points    of 
diviniry,    but   it   is    now  hoped   that 
the  generality  of  the  Clergy  confinp 
2  the 


APPENDIX.  249 

the  fubjed  of  their  preaching  to  what 
has  a  tendency  to  promote  virtue  and 
good  morals,  and  to  make  the  people 
peaceable  and  ufeful  members  of  fo- 
ciety, 

Minifters  likevvife  examine  their 
parifhioners  annually.  They  go  to 
the  different  towns  and  *  villages  of 
the  parifh,  and  in  an  eafy  and  fami- 
liar manner  converfe  with  them  upon 

*  I  muft  obferve,  that  Bifhop  Burnet  (by  birth  a 
Scotchman)  adopted  in  his  diocefe  the  zeal  of  the 
church  of  his  native  country,  and  its  attention  to 
the  morals  and  good  conduft  of  the  clergy  and  their 
fiocks.  Not  content  with  the  ufual  triennial  vili- 
tations,  he  every  fumnner,  during  fix  weeks,  made 
a  progrefs  through  fome  diilridl  of  his  diocefe, 
preaching  and  confirming  from  church  to  church, 
fo  that  before  the  return  of  the  triennial  vifitation 
he  became  well  acquainted  with  the  behaviour  of 
every  incumbent.  He  preached  every  Sunday  in 
fome  church  of  the  city  of  Salijhury,  catechifed, 
and  inftru6led  its  youth  for  confirmation  -,  was  moll 
vigilant,  and  ftrift  in  his  examination  of  candidates 
for  holy  orders  ;  was  an  invincible  enemy  to  plu- 
ralities, and  of  courfe  to  non-refidents  ;  filled  his 
office  with  worth  and  dignity,  and  by  his  epifcopal 
merits,  it  is  10  be  hoped,  may  have  atoned  for  the 
acknowledged  bletVi^cs  in  his  biographical  cha- 
racter. 

the 


250  A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X. 

the  eflcntial  doclrines  of  religion. 
They  make  trial  of  their  knowledge 
by  putting  qiieftions  to  them  on  thefe 
heads.  The  adult  as  well  as  children 
are  catechiftd.  They  likewife  vifit 
their  parifhes  and  inquire  into  the  be- 
haviour of  their  feveral  parilliioners, 
and  admonifh  them  for  whatever  they 
find  blameable  in  their  condud:.  At 
thefe  vif-tations  the  Minifter  incul- 
cates the  practice  of  the  relative  and 
focial  duties,  and  infifts  upon  the  ne- 
cefilty  of  the  pradlice  of  them.  And 
if  there  happen  to  be  any  quarrels 
among  neighbours,  the  Minifter  en- 
deavours by  the  power  of  perfuafion 
to  brinp;  about  a  reconciliation.  But 
in  this  part  of  their  conduct,  much 
depends  upon  the  temper,  prudence, 
and  difcretion  of  Minifters,  who  arc 
cloathed  with  the  fame  pafTions,  pre- 
judices and  infirmities,  that  other 
men  are." 


To 


APPENDIX.  ^51 

To  this  fenfible  account  of  the 
Church  of  North  Britain.  I  bee  leave 
to  add  another,  whicli  may  be  confi- 
dered  as  a  fort  of  fupplcment,  and  may 
fcrve  to  fling  light  on  fome  points  un- 
touched in  the  preceding  :  it  is  the  ex- 
trad;  from  an  anfvver  to  fome  queries 
I  fent  a  worthy  correfpondent  *  in 
the  Highlands,  to  whom  I  am  in- 
debted for  many  fenfible  communi- 
cations : 

*'  To  apprehend  well  the  prefent 
"  flate  of  our  church  patronage  and 
*'  mode  of  fettlement,  we  muft 
"  briefly  view  this  matter  from  the 
"  Reformation.  At  that  remarkable 
"  period  the  whole  temporalities  of  the 
"  church  were  refumed  by  the  Crown 
''  and  Parliament  ;  and  foon  after  a 
''  new  maintenance  was  fettled  for 
*'  minifters   in    about    960     pariflies. 

*  The  Reverend  Mr.  M^Iniyre  Minifter  of  Gleft" 
urcbie. 

"  The 


i?52  APPENDIX. 

'^  The  patrons  of  the  old,  fplendid 
"  Popifli  livings,  ftill  claimed  a  pa- 
"  tronage  in  the  new-modelled  poor 
"  ftipends  for  parilh  minifters.  The 
"  Lords,  or  Gentlemen,  who  got  from 
"  the  Crown,  grants  of  the  foperiorities 
^'  and  lands  of  old  abbieSy  claimed  alfo 
*'  the  patronage  of  all  the  churches 
"  which  were  in  the  gift  of  thofe 
^^  abbies  during  popery.  The  Ki7ig 
*'  too  claimed  the  old  patronage  of 
'*  the  Crown^  and  thofe  of  any  ec* 
**  clejiaflic  corporations  not  granted 
*^  away, 

"  Lay-patronages  were  reckoned 
"  always  a  great  grievance  by  the 
"  Church  of  Scotland ^  and  accord - 
''  ingly  from  the  beginning  of  the 
"  reformation  the  Church  declared 
"  againft  lay-patronage  and  prefenta- 
"  tions.  The  ecclefiaftical  laws,  or 
^'  ads  of  aflembly,  confirmed  at  laft 
**  by  parliament,   required,    in   order 

'«  to 


APPENDIX.  253 

"  to  the  fettlement  of  a  minifter, 
"  fome  concurrence  of  the  congre- 
**  gation,  of  the  gentlemen  u^ho  had 
"  property  within  the  cure,  and  of  the 
"  elders  of  the  parifli. 

"  The  Elders,  or  -ST/riJ-Seffion,  arc 
**  a  number  of  perfons,  who,  for  their 
**  wifdom,  piety  and  knowledge,  are 
"  eleded  from  the  body  of  the  people 
"  in  every  parifh,  and  continue  for 
^'  life,  feje  he7te  gere7ttibusy  to  affift 
"  the  parifh  minifter  in  fuppreffing 
*'  immoralities  and  regulating  the  af- 
"  fairs  of  the  parifh.  Three  of  thefe 
*'  men  and  a  minifter  make  a  quo- 
*^  rum,  and  form  the  loweft  of  our 
*'  church  courts. 

"  Thus  matters  continued  to  the 
*'  Year  1649,  when  by  ad-  of  parlia- 
*^  ment  patronages  were  abolijhed  en- 
"  tirely,  and  the  eledion  or  nomina- 
"  tioQ  of  minifters  was  committed  Xq 

"  the 


254  APPENDIX. 

"  the  Kirk-S^cihon  or  Elders ;  who, 
"  in  thofe  dars  of  univerfal  fobriety 
*'  and  outward  appearance  at  kafl:  of 
*'  religion  among  the  Prefbyterians, 
''  were  generally  the  gentlemen  oi 
"  beft  condition  in  the  pariili  who 
*'  were  in  communion  with  the 
*'  church.  After  the  reflorotmt  of 
*'  King  Charles  II.  along  with  epif- 
*'  copacy  patronages  returned,  yet 
**  under  the  old  laws ;  and  all  de- 
*'  bates  were  finally  determinable  by 
*'  the  General  Affe7?ibly^  which  even 
''  under  epifcopacy  in  Scotland  was  the 
''  fupreme  ecclefiaftic  court.  Thus 
*'  they  continued  till  the  Revolution, 
"  when  the  Prcfoyterian  model  was 
*'  reftored  by  adt  of  parliament. 

"  The  people  chofe  their  own  mi- 
"  nifters,  and  matters  continued  in 
''  this  form  till  the  year  1711,  when 
"  Queen  A?i7ie'i  miniftry  intending  to 
*'  defeat  the  Ha?ioi;er  fucceffion,  took 

''all 


APPENDIX, 

a]!  methods  to  harafs  fuch  as  were 
iirmly  attached  to  it,  which  the 
Prefbyterian  Gentry  and  Clergy  ever 
were,  both  from  principle  and  inte- 
reft.  An  ad;  therefore  was  obtained, 
and  which  is  ftill  in  force,  reftoring 
patrons  to  their  power  of  eledling 
minifters. 

"  By  this  a<^  the  King  is  now  in 
polleflion  of  the  patronage  of  above 
coo  churches  out  of  950,  having 
not  only  the  old  rights  of  the 
crown,  but  many  patronages  ac- 
quired at  the  reformation  not  yet 
alienated  ;  all  the  patronages  of 
the  1^  Scots  BifhopSv  and  all  the  pa- 
tronages of  the  Lords  and  Gentle- 
men forfeited  in  the  years  1 7 1 5 
and  1745.  Lords,  gentlemen  and 
magillrates  of  burroughs,  arc  the 
patrons  of  the  remaining  churches. 
A  patron  muft  prefent  a  qualified 
perfon  to  a  charge  within  fix  months 

^*of 


255 


256  APPENDIX. 

^'  of  the  laft  incumbent's  removal  or 
^*  death,  otherwife  his  right  falls  to 
*^  the  Prefbytery. 

"  A   Prefbytery  confifls   of  feverdl 
^^  Minifters  and  Elders.      All  parifhes 
*'  are   annexed    to    fome   Prefbytery. 
*'  The  Prefbytery  is  the  fecond  church 
*'  court,     and    they    revife     the    a6ls 
"  of  the  Kirk-SeHiony   which   is  the 
*'  loweft.      Above    the   Prefbytery   is 
"  the  Synod,  which  is  a  court  con- 
*'  fifting  of  feveral  Prefbyteries.  And 
**  from   all    thefe    there    lies    an   ap- 
"  peal  to  the  General  Aflembly,  which 
"  is    the    fupreme    church  court    in 
**  Scot/and.    This  fupreme  court  con- 
**  fifts    of  the   King   reprefented    by 
**  his   Commiflioner,    Minifters    from 
"  the     different     Prefbyteries,     and 
"  ruling    Elders.       They    meet    an- 
*'  nually    at    Ediiihurgh^    cnadl    laws 
**  for  the  good  of  the  church,  finally 
"  determine  all  controverted  cledtions 

'^  of 


APPENDIX.  257 

'*  of  minifters.  They  can  prevent  a 
^'  clergyman's  tranfportation  from  one 
, ''  charge  to  another.  They  can  find 
*'  a  prefentee  quahfkd  or  unqualified, 
**  and  confequently  oblige  the  patron 
'^  to  prefent  another.  They  can  de- 
''  pofe  from  the  miniftry,  and  every 
*'  intrant  into  holy  orders  becomes 
^*  bound  to  fubmit  to  the  decifions  of 
*'  this  court ;  which,  from  the  days 
*'  of  our  reformer  yohn  Knox^  has  ap* 
*'  propriated  to  itfelf  the  titles  of  The 

*'  VERY  VENERABLE  and  VERY  REVE- 

*'  RExND  Assembly  of  the  Church   of 
*'  Scotland, 

*^  All  the  clergymen  of  our  com- 
*^  munion  are  upon  a  par  as  to  autho- 
*'  rity.  We  can  enjoy  no  pluralities. 
*'  Non-refidence  is  not  known.  We 
"  are  bound  to  a  regular  difcharge  of 
**  the  feveral  duties  of  our  ofiice.  The 
"  different  cures  are  frequently  vifited 
"  by   the  Prefbytery  of  the  bounds  ; 

S  ''  and 


258 


APPENDIX. 

and  at  thcfe-  vihtations  flrid  en- 
quiry is  made  into  the  life,  doc- 
trine and  diligence  of  the  incum- 
bent. And  fciT  default  in  any  of 
thefe,  he  may  be  fufpended  from 
preaching  :  or  if  any  grofs  immo- 
rality is  proved  againft  him,  h:^  can 
be  immediately  depofed  and  ren- 
dered incapable  of  officiating  as  a 
minifter  of  the  gofpe!.  Appeal 
indeed  lies,  as  I  fiiid  before,  from 
the  decision  of  the  inferior  to  the 
fupreme  court. 


"  Great  care  is  taken  in  preparing 
young  men  for  the  miniftry.  After 
going  through  a  courfe  of  philo- 
fophy  in  one  of  our  four  Universi- 
ties, they  muft  attend  at  leaft  for 
four  years  the  Divinity-Hall,  where 
they  hear  the  preledlions  of  the 
profcffors,  and  perform  the  dif- 
ferent cxercifes  prefcribed  them  :i 
they    muft  attend  '  the  Greek,  the 

''  Plebrcvv, 


APPENDIX. 

''  Hebrew,  and  Rhetoric  clailes ;  and 
^'  before  ever  they  are  admitted  to 
*'  tryals  for  the  miniftry  before  a  Pref- 
"  bytery,  they  muft  lay  teftimonials 
''  from  the  different  profeflbrs  of  their 
*^  morals,  their  attendance,  their  pro- 
'^  grefs,  before  them:  and  if  upon 
"  tryal  they  are  found  unqualined, 
"  they  are  either  fct  afide  as  unfit  for 
"  the  ofBce,  or  cnjoiacd  to  apply  to 
^'  their  ftudies  a  year  or  two  more. 

'^  Cur  livings  are  in  general  from 
^'  60  to  120I.  flerling.  Some  few 
*'  livings  are  richer,  and  a  few  poorer. 
"  Every  minifter  beiides  is  entitled  to 
''  a  manfion-houfe,  barn  and  ftable  ; 
"  to  four  acres  of  arable  and  three  of 
*'  pafturage  land.  Our  livings  are 
''  exempted  from  all  public  duties ; 
''  as  are  alfo  our  perfons  from  all 
"  public  ftatute-works.  As  fchools 
"  are  eredled  in  all  our  pariihes^  and 
"  that  education  is  cheap,  our  young 
S  2  gcne- 


259 


26o  APPENDIX. 

*^  generation  is  beginning  to  imbibe 
"  feme  degree  of  tafte  and  liberal 
*'  fentiment  unknown  to  their  illite- 
*'  rate  rude  forefathers.  The  Englifli 
*'  language  is  cultivated  even  here 
**  amongft  thefe  bleak  and  dreary 
"  mountains.  Tour  Divines,  your 
*'  Philofophers,  j<?«r  Hiftorians,  j'<?«r 
**  Poets,  have  found  their  way  to  our 
*'  fequeftred  vales,  and  are  perufed 
"  with  pleafure  even  by  our  lowly 
fwains ;  and  the  names  of  T'illotfon^ 
of  Atterbury^  of  Clerk^  of  Seeker^ 
"  oi  NewtoUy  of  Locke^  of  Bacon,  of 
"  Ly  Helton,  of  Dry  den,  of  Pd?/?^,  of 
"  G/^;^,  and  of  Gray,  are  not  unknown 
*'  in  our  diftant  land." 


M 


N  UM- 


APPENDIX.  36i 

NUMBER     If. 

Account  of  the  faftina  Woman 
of  Rofsjhire, 

Dunrobin^  Aug.  24,  1769. 

The  Information  of  Mr.  Rainy^  Mif- 
fionary  -  Minifter  in  Kincardine^ 
anent  Katharine  M^ Leod. 

J^Athari?ieM''Leod^  daughter  to  Do- 
nald M  ^  Leod^  farmer  in  Croig^  in 
the  parifli  of  Kincardi?ie^  Rofsjhirey  an 
unmarried  woman,  aged  about  thirty- 
five  years,  fixteen  years  ago  contraded 
a  fever,  after  which  Ihe  became  bHnd. 
Her  father  carried  her  to  feveral  phy^ 
ficians  and  furgeons  to  cure  her  blind- 
nefs.  Their  prefcriptions  proved  of 
no  efFedl.  He  carried  her  alfo  to  a 
lady  ikilled  in  phyfic,  in  the  neighs 
borhood,  who,  doubtfull  whether  her 
blindnefs  was  occailoned  by  the  weak-' 
S  3  nefs 


262,  APPENDIX. 

nefs  of  her  eyc-licls,  or  a  defect  in  her 
eyes,  found  by  the  ufe  of  feme  medi- 
cines that  the  bHndnefs  was  occafioned 
by  a  v^eaknefs  in  her  eye-Hds,  which 
beinor  flrcngrthened  fhe  recovered  her 
fight  in  fome  meafure,  and  difchargcd 
as  ufual  every  kind  of  work  about  her 
father's  farm ;  but  tyed  a  garter  tight 
round  her  forehead  to  keep  up  her 
eye-Hds.  In  this  condition  fhe  con- 
tinued for  four  or  five  years,  enjoying 
a  good  ftate  of  health,  and  working 
as  ufual.  She  contrad:ed  another  lin- 
gering fever,  of  which  fhe  never  re- 
covered perfeclly. 

Some  time  after  her  fever  her  jaws 
fell,  her  eye-lids  cloied,  and  flie  loft 
her  appetite.  Her  parents  declare 
that  for  the  fpace  of  a  year  and 
three-quarters  they  could  not  fay  that 
any  meat  or  liquid  went  down  her 
throat.  Being  interrogated  on  this 
point,  they  own'd  they  very  fre- 
quently 


APPENDIX.  263 

qucntly  put  fomething  into  her  mouth. 
But  they  concluded  that  nothing  went 
down  her  throat,  becaufe  fiie  had  no 
evacuation ;  and  when  they  forced 
open  her  jaws  at  one  time,  and  kept ' 
them  open  for  fome  time  by  putting 
in  a  flick  between  her  teeth,  and 
pulled  forward  her  tongue,  and  forced 
fomething  down  her  throat,  fhe 
cou2[hed  and  firained,  as  if  in  danger 
to  be  choaked.  One  thing  during 
the  time  fhe  eat  and  drank  nothing 
is  remarkable,  that  her  jaws  were 
unlocked,  and  fhe  recovered  her 
fpeech,  and  retained  it  for  feveral 
days,  without  any  apparent  caufe  for 
the  fame  ;  (he  was  quite  fenfible,  re- 
peated feveral  queftions  of  the  fhorter 
catechifms  ;  told  them  that  it  was  to 
no  purpofe  to  put  any  thing  into  her 
mouth,  for  that  nothing  went  down 
her  throat ;  as  alfo  that  fometimes  fhe 
underftood  them  w^ien  they  fpoke  to 
S  4  her. 


264  APPENDIX. 

her.     By  degrees  her  jaws  thereafter 
fell,  and  (he  loft  her  fpeech. 

Some  time  before  I  faw  her  fhe  re- 
ceived fome  fuftenance,  whey,  water- 
gruel,  6cc.  but  threw  it  up,  at  leaft 
for  the  moft  part,  immediately.  When 
they  put  the  ftick  between  her  teeth, 
mentioned  above,  two  or  three  of  her 
teeth  were  broken.  It  was  at  this 
breach  they  put  in  any  thing  into  her 
niouth,  I  caufed  them  to  bring  her 
out  of  bed,  and  give  her  fomething 
to  drink.  They  gave  her  whey.  Her 
neck  was  contraded,  her  chin  fixed 
on  her  breaft,  nor  could  by  any  force 
be  pulled  back  :  flie  put  her  chin  and 
mouth  into  the  difh  with  the  whey, 
and  I  perceived  fhe  fucked  it  at  the 
abi^ve-mentioncd  breach  as  a  child 
would  luck  the  breaft,  and  imme- 
diately threw  it  up  again,  as  her  pa- 
rents toid  me  fhe  ufed  to  do,  and  ihe 
endeavoured  with  her  hand  to  dry  her 

mouth 


APPENDIX.  265 

mouth  and  chin.  Her  forehead  was 
contraded  and  wrinkled  ;  her  cheeks 
full,  red,  and  blooming.  Her  parents 
told  mc  that  fhe  flept  a  great  deal  and 
foundly,  perfpired  fometimes,  and 
now  and  then  emitted  pretty  large 
quantities  of  blood  at  her  mouth. 

For  about  two  years  paft  they  have 
been  wont  to  carry  her  to  the  door 
once  every  day,  and  fhe  would  fhevv 
figns  of  uneafinefs  when  they  neg- 
Ie6ted  it  at  the  ufual  time.  Laft  fum- 
mer,  after  giving  her  to  drink  of  the 
water  of  the  well  of  Strathconnen^ 
fhe  crawled  to  the  door  on  her  hands 
and  feet  without  any  help.  She  is  at 
prefent  in  a  very  languid  way,  and 
flill  throws  up  what  fhe  drinks. 


N  UM- 


^66  APPENDIX. 

NUMBER     III. 
Parallel  Roads  in  Glen-Roy. 

LL  the  dcfcription  that  can  be 
given  of  the  Parallel  Roads,  or 
Terrafles,  is,  that  the  Glen  of  itfelf 
is  extremely  narrow,  and  the  hills  on 
each  fide  very  high,  and  generally  not 
rocky.  In  the  face  ol:  thefe  hills, 
both  fides  of  the  glen,  there  are  three 
roads  at  fmall  difiances  from  each 
other,  and  dirccSily  oppofite  on  each 
fide.  Thefe  roads  have  been  mea- 
fiired  in  the  conipleateft  parts  of 
them,  and  found  to  be  26  paces  of  a 
man  five  feet  ten  inches  high.  The 
two  higheft  are  pretty  near  each  other, 
about  50  yards,  and  the  lowefl:  double 
that  diflance  from  the  neareft  to  it. 
They  are  carried  along  the  fides  of 
the  glen  with  the   utmoft  regularity, 

nearly 


APPENDIX.  267 

nearly  as  exact  as  drawn  with  a  line  of 
rule  and  compafs. 

Where  deep  burns  or  gullies  of  wa- 
ter crofs  thcfe  roads,   they  avoid  both 
the  deiccnC   and   afcent  in  a  very  cu- 
rious manner ;   fo   that   on    the    fide 
where   tlie  road  enters  thofe  hollows, 
they   rather  afcend  along    the  flope, 
and   dcfcend   the   oppofite   fide  until 
they  come  to  the  level,   without  the 
traveller    being    fenfible   of  afcent   or 
defcent.       There     are    other    fmaller 
glens  falling  into  this  Gle72-Roy,     The 
parallel     roads    furround     all     thefe 
fmaller    ones  ;    but    where    Glen- Roy 
ends  in  the  open  country  there  are  not 
the  fmalleft  vefliges    of  them    to  be 
feen.      The  length  of  thefe   roads  in 
Glen- Roy  are  about  feven  miles.  There 
are  other  two  glens  in  that  neighbor- 
hood   where   thefe    roads  are  equally 
vifible,  called    Gle7t~Gluy   and   Glen-- 
Spean^    the    former    running     north- 
weft 


268  APPENDIX. 

weft  and  the  latter  fouth  from  Glen- 
Roy,  Both  thefe  roads  are  much 
about  the  fame  length  as  Glen-Roy^ 

It  is  to  be  obferved  that  thefe  roads 
are  not  caufeway,  but  levelled  out  of 
the  earth.  There  are  fome  fmall 
rocks,  though  few,  in  the  courfe  of 
thefe  roads.  People  have  examined 
in  what  manner  they  made  this  pafTage 
through  the  rocks,  and  find  no  veftige 
of  roads  in  the  rock  ;  but  they  begin 
on  each  fide,  and  keep  the  regular  hne 
as  formerly.  So  far  I  am  indebted  to 
Mr.  Irapaud^  Governor  of  Fort  An- 
gujlus^ 

I  cannot  learn  to  what  nation  the 
inhabitants  of  the  country  attribute 
thefe  roads :  I  was  informed  that  they 
were  inacccfliblc  at  the  eaft  end,  open 
at  the  weft,  or  that  neareft  to  the  fea, 
and  that  there  were  no  traces  of  build- 
ings,   or    druidical  remains,    in    any 

parr, 


APPENDIX.  269 

part,  that  could  lead  us  to  fufpeft 
that  they  were  deligned  for  ceconomi- 
cal  or  religious  purpofes.  The  coun- 
try people  think  they  were  defigned 
for  the  chace,  and  that  thefe  terrafies 
were  made  after  the  fpots  were  cleared 
in  lines  from  wood,  in  order  to  tempt 
the  animals  into  the  open  paths  after 
they  were  rouzcd,  in  order  that  they 
might  come  within  reach  of  the  bow- 
men, who  might  conceal  themfelves 
in  the  woods  above  and  below.  Ridings 
for  the  fportfmen  are  ftill  common  in 
all  great  forefts  in  France^  and  other 
countries  on  the  continent,  either  that 
they  might  purfue  the  game  without 
interruption  of  trees,  or  fhoot  at  it  in 
its  pafiage. 

Mr.  Gordon^  p.  114  of  his  Itine- 
rary, mentions  fuch  terrafies,  to  the 
number  of  feventeen  or  eighteen,  raifed 
one  above  the  other  in  the  moft  regu- 
lar  manner,  for  the  fpace  of  a  mile, 

on 


270 


APPENDIX. 

on  the  lide  of  a  hill,  in  the  county  of 
l^weedale^  near  a  village  called  Ro7na7iay 
and  alfo  near  two  fmall  Rofnan  camps. 
They  arc  from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet 
broad,  and  appear  at  four  or  five 
miles  difiance  not  unlike  a  m-eat  am- 

o 

phitheatre.  The  fame  gentleman  alfo 
has  obfervxd  fimilar  terrafles  near 
other  camps  of  the  fame  nation,  from 
whence  he  fufpeds  them  to  be  works  of 
the  RompMS^  and  to  have  been  thrown 
up  by  their  armies  for  itinerary  en- 
campments. Such  may  have  been 
their  ufe  in  thofe  places :  but  what 
could  have  been  the  objedl  of  the 
contrivers  of  the  tcrraffes  of  Glen-Roy^ 
where  it  is  more  than  probable  thofe 
conquerors  never  came,  remains  a 
myftery,  except  the  conjecture  above 
given  fhould  prove  fatisfadory. 


N  U  M 


APPENDIX,  tiji 

NUMBER     IV. 
GALIC    PROVERBS, 

I.  T  EAGAP  a  Choir  am  beul  an  Anmhuin. 


Juftice  itfelf  melts  a^ay  in  the  mouth  of  the 
feeble. 


2.  '5  laidir  a  ihiid,  'j  anmhu'm  a  tBg. 

The  ftrong  fhall  fall,  and  oft  the  weak  efcaps 
unhurt. 


3.  ^S  fiida  Lamb  an  Fheumanaicb. 

Long  is  the  hand  of  the  needy. 

4.  '5  laidir  an  f  Anmhuin  an  Uchda  Trebir, 

Strong  is  the  feeble  in  the  bofom  of  mights 

5,  '5  maith  an  Sgathan  Sidl  Carra. 

The  eye  of  a  friend  is  an  unerring  mirror,' 

6,  Cha  bhi  *m  Bochd  a  fo-air  Saihhir. 

The  luxurious  poor  fliall  ne'er  be  rich. 
%  7.  Far 


273  APPENDIX. 


7.  Far  tin   tain"  an   Amhuin^   *i   an  as  mug  ha  a 
fuaim. 

Mofl  (hallow mofl  noify. 


8.  Cha  neilCleith  air  an  OlCf  ach  gun  a  dheand. 

There  is  no  concealment  of  evil,  but  not  to 
commit  it. 


9.  Gthht  na,  Cloinne-higa,  hhi  *ga  toiri  V  ga  grad- 
iarrai. 

The  gift  of  a  child,  oft  granted — oft  recaUed. 


10.  Cha  neil  Saoi  gun  a  choi-meas. 

None  fo  brave  without  his  equal. 

11.  *S  mhic  a  thainic  Comhairl ghtic  a  Beul  Ama- 

dain. 

Oft  has  the  wifeft  advice  proceeded  from  the 
mouth  of  Folly. 

I  a.  TuiflilichP  an  /'  Each  ceithir-chafach. 

The  four-footed  horfe  doth  often  (lumble  1 
fo  may  the  ftrong  and  mighty  fall. 

13.  Mar 


APPENDIX.  273 

13.  Mar  a    chd-is  Duin*    a    B  heat  ha,     hheir     i 
Bnith  air  a  Cho-erjhacb. 

As  is  a  man's  own  life,  ib  is  his  judgment  of 
the  liv6s  of  others. 


14.  Fanai'  Buina  flna^    re  Shh,  *s   hheir  Buiniz 
dcno  dui-kum. 

The  fortunate  rhan  awaits,  and  he  fhall  arrive 
in  peace  :  the  unlucky  hafiens,  and  evil 
(hall  be  his  fate. 


ji.5.  Cha  do  chuir  a  Ghuala  ris,  nach  do  chttir  Tuar 
haris. 

Succefs  muft  attend  the  man  who   bravely 
ftruggles. 


16.  Cha  Ghloir  a  dhearahhas  ach  Gntomh. 

Triumph  never  gain'd  the  founding  words  of 
boaft. 


17,  '5  trie  a  dh"  fhas  dm    Fuigheal-fochaid,  ^s  d 
ntheith  am  Fuigheal-faramaid. 

Oft  ha's  the  objedt  of  caufelefs  fcorn  arriv'd  at 
honour,  and  the  once  mighty  fcornei'  fallerv 
down  to  contempt. 

T  J 8.  Chfi, 


274  APPENDIX. 

1 8.  Cha  do  deiobair  Feann  Rtgb  nan  Laoeb  riamk 
Fear  a  laimh-deife. 

The  friend  of  his  right-hand  was  never  de- 
ferted  by  Fingal  the  king  of  heroes. 

1^.  tlSig  Dia  re  b*  Airc^  's  cba  '»  Aire  nar  tbig. 

God  Cometh  in  the  time  of  diftrcfs,  and  it  i^ 
no  longer  dilVrefs  when  he  comes. 

EPITAPH. 

By      BEN      JOHNSON. 

UNderneath  this  marble  hearfe 
Lies  the  fubjedt  of  all  verfe  ; 
Sidney'^  filler,  Pembroke's  mother : 
Deathy  ere  thou  haft  kill'd  another. 
Fair  and  learn'd,  and  good  as  (he, 
^ime  (hall  throw  a  dart  at  thee. 

Tranflated  into  Galk. 

AN  fho  na  luighe  fo  Lic-lighe 
Ha  adh-bheann  nan  uille-bhuadh. 
Mat  hair  Phembroke,  Piuthar  Philip  : 
Ans  gach  Daan  bith*  orra  luadh. 
A  Bhais  man  gearr  thu  fios  a  coi-meas, 
Beann  a  dreach,  fa  h'  Juil,  fa  Fiach, 
Briftidh  do  Bhogh,  gun  Fhave  do  fhaighid  : 
Bithi* — mar  nach  bith'  tu  riamh. 

A  Sailor's 


APPENDIX.  275 

A  Sailor's  Epitaph  in  the  Church-yard 
of  Great  Tarmouthy  Norfolk 

THO'  Boreas'  blow  and  Nepluns's  waves 
Have  toft  me  to  and  fro. 
By  God's  decree,  you  plainly  fee, 

I'm  harbour'd  here  below  : 
Where  I  muft  at  anchor  lye 
With  many  of  our  fleet ; 
But  once  again  we  muft  fet  fail^ 
Our  Admiral  Christ  to  meet. 

Tranflated   into    Galic, 

LE  Uddal-cuain,  's  le  (heide  Gaoidh 
'S  lionmhor  Amhra  thuair  mi  riamh  ; 
Gam  luafga  a  nul  agus  a  nal, 

Gu  trie  gun  Fhois,  gun  Deoch,  gun  Bhiadh. 
Ach  thanig  mi  gu  Calla  taimh, 

'S  leg  mi  m'  Achdair  ans  an  Uir, 
Far  an  caidil  mi  mo  Phramh, 

Gus  arifd  an  tog  na  Suill. 
Le  Guth  na  Troimp'  as  airde  fuaim 

Dus  gidh  mi,  's  na  bheil  am  choir 
Coinnich'  fhin  Ard-Admhiral  a  Chuain 

Bhon  faith  fhin  Fois,  is  Duais,  is  Lonn. 

Ta  SAPPHO'^ 


276  APPENDIX. 

S  A  P  P  H  0\     ODE. 


B 


LEST  as  the  immortal  Gods  is  he. 
The  youth  who  fondly  fits  by  thee,  i£c. 

Tranllated  into  Galic, 


I.'    A   Dhmhur  mar  Dhia  neo  bhafmhor  'ta 
JlV.  'N  t'  Oglach  gu  caidreach  a  fliuis  re  d'  Tqa; 
Sa  chluin,  fa  chith  re  faad  na  huin 
Do  Bhriara  droigheal,  *s  do  f  hrea  gradh  cilln. 

2.  Och  :  's  turr  a  d'  fhogair  thu  mo  Chlofs 

'Sa  dhnifg  thu  'm  Chroidh'  gach  Buaireas  bochd ; 
'N  tra  dhearc  mi  ort,  's  mi  goint  Ic  'r  Aadh 
Bhuail  reachd  am  uchd,  ghrad  mheath  moChail; 

3.  Theogh  'm  Aigne  aris,  is  fliriith  gu  dian 
Teafgradh  air  feadh  gach  Baal  am  Bhiann  : 
Ghrad  chaoch  mo  (huil  le  Ceodhan  Uain 
'S  tac  aoidh  mo  Chluas  le  bothar-f  huaim. 

4.  Chuer  Fallas  'tliith  mo  Bhuil  gun  Luth. 
Bith  Eal-ghris  chuin  tre  m'  fhuil  gu  dlu. 
Ghrad  thug  am  Plofg  a  bheannachd  leom 

Is  fliniomh  mi  flieach  gun'Diog  am  Chomm. 


EPITAPH 


APPENDIX.  277 

EPITAPH  on  a  Lady,  in  the  Parifli- 
Church  of  Gle?iorchay^  in  North-- 
Britain. 

1.  AN  (ho  na  luigh  ta  fan  Innis 
Jljl     Bean  bu  duilich  leom  bhi  ana 
Beul  a  cheuil,  is  Lamh  a  Ghrinnis, 

Ha  iad  'niolhe  fho  nan  tamh. 

2.  Tuiir  c.ha  toir  am  Bochd  dhuit  beannachd  : 

An  lom-nochd  cha  chluthaich  thu  nis  mo' 
Cha  tiormaich  Dcur  bho  fh^il  na  h'Ainnis  : 
Co  tuiir  O  Lagg  !   a  bheir  dhuit  treoir  ? 

5.  Chan  fhaic  fhin  tnille  thu  fa  choinni : 
Cha  fuidh  fhin  tuille  air  do  Bhord  : 
D'fhalabh  uain  fuairceas,  feirc  is  modhan 

fia  Bron  's  bi-mhulad  air  teachd  oiru.  ^ 


In    Englip, 

I.  T    G  W  Ihe  lies  here  in  the  duft,  and  her  me- 

X— /  mory  fills  me  with  grief:  filent  is  the  tongue 

of  melody,  and  the  hand  of  elegance  is  now  at  refi-. 

2.  No  more  fliall  the  poor  give  thee  his  blefTing: 
nor  (hall  the  naked  be  warmed  with  the  fleece  of 
^thy  flock.  The  tear  (halt  thou  not  wipe  away  from 
the  eye  of  the  wretched.  Where,  now  O  Feeble, 
^s  thy  wonted  help  ! 

T  3  3.  Nq 


278  APPENDIX. 

3.  No  more,  my  fair,  (hall  we  meet  thee  in  the 
focial  hall :  no  more  (hall  we  fit  at  thy  hofpitable 
board.  Gone  for  ever  is  the  found  of  mirth  :  the 
kind,  the  candid,  the  meek  is  now  no  more.  Who 
Can  exprefs  our  grief !  Flow  ye  tears  of /^ipr/    - 


A  young  Lady's  Lamentation  on  the 
Death  of  her  Lover, 

Tr^nflated    from  the  Galic. 

GLqomy  indeed  is  the  night  and  dark,  and 
heavy  alfo  is  my  troubled  foul :  around  mc 
all  is  filcnt  and  flill ;  but  deep  has  forfaken  my 
eyes,  and  my  bofom  knoweth  not  the  balm  of 
peace.  1  mourn  for  the  Iqfs  of  the  dead  —  the 
youngs  the  beauteous,  the  brave^  alas  !  lies  low — 
Lovely  was  thy  form,  O  youth  !  lovely  and  fair 
was  thy  open  foul — Why  did  I  know  thy  worth— r 
ph  !  why  muft  I  now  that  worth  deplore  ? 

Length  of  years  feemed  to  be  the  lot  of  my  Love, 
yet  few  and  fleeting  were  his  days  of  joy  —  Strong 
he  ftood  as  the  tree  of  the  vale,  but  untimely  he 
fell  into  the  filent  houfe.  The  morning  Sun  faw 
thee  fiourifh  as  the  lovely  rofc — before  the  noon- 
pdc  heat  low  thou  droop'ft  as  the  withered  plant. 

V\'\\2i\.then  availed  thy  bloom  of  youth,  and  what 
thy  arm  of  flrength  ?  Ghaftly  is  the  face  of  Love 

2  —dim 


APPENDIX.  279 

—  dim   and  dark    the  foul-exprefllng  eye  —  the 
mighty  fell  to  arife  no  more ! 

Whom  now  fhall  I  call  my  friend  ?  or  from  whom 
can  I  hear  the  found  of  joy  ?  In  thee  the  friend  has 
fallen"— in  thy  grave  my  joy  is  laid. — We  lived— 
we  grew  together.  O  why  together  did  we  not  alfo 
fall ! 

Death — thou  cruel  fpoilcr  !  how  oft  haft  thou 
caufed  the  tear  to  flow  !  many  are  the  mifcrable 
thou  haft  made,  and  who  can  cfcape  thy  dart  of 
woe  ? 

Kinfl  Fate,  come  lay  me  low,  and  bring  me  to 
my  houfe  of  reft.  In  yonder  grave,  beneath  the 
leafy  plane,  my  Love  and  I  fhall  dwell  in  peace. 
Sacred  be  the  place  of  our  repofe.  • 

O  feek  not  to  difturb  the  alhes  of  the  dead ! 

NUMBER     V.  ' 

Order  of  Council  relating  to 
the  Removal  of  venereal 
Perfons  from  Edinburgh  in- 
to Inch  Keith. 

"22  Sej^r.  1497. 
«'  XT   is   our   Soverane  Lords  Will 
"  X    ^^^    ^he     Command    of    the 
*'  Lordis  of  his  Counfale  fend  to  the 

T  4  "  Proveft 


28o  APPENDIX, 

"  Provefl:  and  Baillies  within  this  bur 
**  that  this  Proclamation  followand  be 
*'  put  till  execution  for  the  efchewing 
''  of  the  greit  appearand  danger  of  the 
V  Infection  of  his  Leiores  fra  this  conta- 
^  ?'  gious  ficknefs  callit  the  Grandgor 
"  and  the  greit  uther  Skayth  that  may 
**  qcciir  tp  his  Leiges  and  Inhabitant 
"  within  this  bur' ;  that  is  to  fay^  we 
?'  charge  ftraitly  and  commands  be  the 
**  Authority  above  writtin,  that  all 
?'  manner  of  perfonis  being  within  thq 
*'  freedom  of  this  bur'  quilks  are  in- 
?'  fedit  or  hes  been  infedit  uncurit 
*'  with  this  faid  contagious  plage  callit 
**  the  Grai^dgor^  devoyd,  red  and  pafs 
^'  fur'  of  this  Town  andcompeir  apor^ 
f '  the  fandis  of  Leith  at  ten  hours  be- 
"  fore  none  and  thair  fall  thai  have  and 
f  fynd  Botis  rcddic  in  the  havin  or- 
*'  danit  to  them  be  the  Officeris  of  this 
f  bur  rcddely  furneifl  with  viduals  to 
"  have  thame  to  the  hiche^  and  thair 
f*  to  remane  quhill  God  proviyd  for 

f«  thair 


APPENDIX.  281 

'^  thair  Health :  And  that  all  uther 
"  perfonis  the  quilks  taks  upon  thame 
*^  to  hale  the  faid  contagious  infirmitie 
*^  and  taks  the  cure  thairof  that  they 
"  devoyd  and  pafs  with  thame  fua  that 
"  nane  of  thair  perfonis  qnhilks  taks 
^'  fic  cure  upon  thame  ufe  the  famyn 
*'  cure  within  this  bur'  in  pns  nor  peirt 
"  any  manner  of  way.  And  wha  fa 
*^  beis  foundin  infedlit  and  not  paiTand  ' 
*^  to  the  Inche  as  faid  is  be  Mono7tday 
^^  at  the  Sone  ganging  to,  and  in  lyk- 
"  ways  the  faid  perfonis  that  takis  the 
'^  fd  Cure  of  fanitie  upon  thame  gif 
"  they  will  ufe  the  famyn  thai  and  ilk 
'.*  ane  of  thame  falle  be  brynt  on  the 
**  cheikwith  the  marking  Irne  that  thai 
*'  may  be  kennit  in  tym  to  cum  and 
^*  thairafter  gif  any  of  tham  remainis 
"  that  thai  fall  be  banift  but  favors/' 


NUM- 


282  APPENDIX. 

NUMBER     VI. 

Of  the  Columns   in  Penrith 
Church- Yard. 

SINCE  the  printing  of  p.  231,  I 
have  been  favored  with  two  beau- 
tifull  drawings  of  the  pillars  *  in 
Penrith  Church- Yard.  One  was  com- 
municated to  me  by  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Farijh  of  Carlijle^  and  reprefents  them 
in  their  prefent  ftate  ;  the  other  by 
the  Rev.  Mr.  Monkhoufe^  Fellow  of 
Queens  College ^^  Oxford^  which  is  a 
view  of  them  before  they  were  muti- 
lated. The  firft  is  certainly  a  moft 
authentic  reprefentation  of  them  ;  the 
laft  varies  in  many  particulars  from 
the  form  they  now  appear  in :  in  that 
the  columns  are  drawn  entirely  fquare 

*  The  lefTer  pillar  engraven  with  thefc  is  by  tra-r 
dition  of  the  country  thought  to  belong  to  thefe  \ 
but  Mr.  F^r//?; thinks  it  is  at  too  great  adiltance  from 
them  to  admit  of  that  fuppofition  :  its  height  is  fix 
fecL 

from 


APPENDIX.  aSj 

from  top  to  bottom,  whereas  the  lower 
part  of  the  pillars  now  extant  are 
rounded.  There  is  no  fret- work  on 
the  old  drawing  of  thefe  columns,  but 
inflead  are  two  fmall  rude  figures  of 
human  heads.  The  thin  femicircular 
ftones  are  deeply  and  regularly  in- 
dented on  their  edges,  which  appear 
of  an  equal  thicknefs  throughout  ; 
whereas  the  others  are  very  (harp,  or 
ridged  at  one  extremity,  and  dilate 
gradually  till  they  arrive  at  a  confi- 
derable  thicknefs  at  the  other.  The 
figures  in  the  old  fkctch  are  of  a  boar, 
and  perhaps  a  bear.  The  upper  ends 
of  thefe  pillars  feem  faithfully  to  fup- 
ply  what  has  been  deftroyed,  a  crofs 
and  a  capital. 

How  this  great  variation  in  the 
drawings  of  the  fame  columns  hap- 
pened, is  not  eafy  to  fay  ;  for  it  does 
not  appear  that  there  ever  were  any 
others  in  the  place.  Time  has  obli- 
terated  the    figures    of  the  animals : 

but 


^84  APPENDIX. 

but  whether  any  workman  had  chiz- 
zled  the  whole  {hafts  of  the  pillars  to 
their  prefent  form,  is,  1  think,  fcarcely 
to  be  conjedured  ;  they  bear  all  the 
appearance  of  antiquity.  The  old 
drawings  are  done  with  much  ele- 
gance, and  are  copied  from  fome  col- 
ledions  in  the  cuftody  of  Mr.  Monk^ 
houfcy  formed  by  Hugh  Toddy  D.  I>. 
Prebendary  of  Carlijle  and  Vicar  of 
Penrithy  as  materials  for  the  antiqui- 
ties of  the  diocefe  he  belonged  to. 
Notwithftanding  my  doubts  about  the 
entire  fidelity  of  the  old  drawing, 
(which  was  done  about  the  y^ar  1690) 
I  caufe  it  to  be  engraven  as  a  com- 
panion to  the  other,  in  hopes  that 
fome  antiquarian  of  the  country  will 
oblige  the  Public  by  clearing  up  the 
point. 

By  Mr.  Monkhoufe\  permiflion  I 
annex  Doctor  Todd\  account  of  thefe 
antiquities  : 

^'  At 


APPENDIX.  285 

*'  At  the  north  door  of  the  church 
are  ereded  two  large  ftone  pillars 
of  a  pyramidical  form,  cruciated 
towards  the  top,  each  of  them  fif- 
teen feet  high,  and  placed  at  the 
diftance  of  feventeen  feet  from 
each  other.  The  fpace  between 
them  is  furrounded  with  the  rude 
iiorures  of  four  boars,  or  wild  hoo;s, 
what  this  monument  denotes,  and 
for  what  reafon  it  was  firft  ereded, 
may  be  fomewhat  uncertain.  The 
common  vulgar  report  is,  That  one 
Ewen  or  Owe7i  Ccefarius^  a  very  ex- 
traordinary perfon  famous  in  thefe 
parts  for  hunting  and  fighting, 
about  14.00  years  ago,  whom  no 
hand  but  the  hand  of  Death  could 
overcome,  lyes  buried  in  this  place. 
His  ftature,  as  the  ftory  fays,  was 
prodigious,  beyond  that  of  the 
Patagons  in  South  Amei'ka^  viz. 
*^  fifteen  feet.     That  the  two  pillars 

'^  denote 


^86  APPENDIX. 

denote  his  height,  and  the  four 
rough  unpoHfih'd  ftones  betwixt  re- 
prefent  fo  many  wild  boars  which 
had  the  honour  to  be  killed  by  this 
wonderful  giant.  That  there  might 
be,  in  remote  times,  in  thefe  re- 
gions, men  of  large  gigantick  fi- 
gures, as  there  are  now  near  the 
Magellanic  Streights,  and  that  they 
might  affect  Roman  firnames  and 
diftindiions  as  the  Americans  about 
Darien  do  Spanijhy  needs  not  either 
be  difcuffed  or  denied.  But  thofe 
perfons  give  the  beft  account  of  the 
original,  nature,  and  defign  of  thefe 
ftones,  who  look  upon  them  as  of 
a  much  later  date,  and  for  a  very 
different  intention.  That  they  were 
erected  long  after  the  introdudion 
of  chriftianity  at  the  north  or 
Death's  door  of  the  church  in  the 
form  of  a  crofs,  in  order  to  reft  the 
bodies  of  the  dead  upon  them,  and 
to  pray  for  their  fouls  (as  the  man- 


(( 


ner 


jxirr. 


2d7 


.^^ 


PILLARS    rNT    PEISTRITH   CHURCHYARD 


APPENDIX.  287 

*'  ner  was) :  And  that  the  four  figures 
**  of  Boars  are  the  cognizance  *  of 
**  the  Earls  of  JVarwick^  fome  of 
*'  whom  held  the  feigniory  of  Penrith 
* '  and  lived  in  the  caftle,  and  might 
*'  be  at  the  expence  of  the  work." 

*  The  Bear  and  ragged- flafF  was  ;  but  I  do  not 
recolleft  that  the  Boars  had  any  thing  to  do  with 
the  Earls  of  fVarwick  :  But  as  Boars  and  Bears  arc 
reprefented  on  the  ftones,  it  feems  as  if  this  Mr. 
Cafarius  was  a  knight-errant,  who  cleared  the 
country  of  monfters  -,  fo  in  memorial  of  his  ex- 
ploits thefe  figures  were  engraven.  The  heads  too 
might  have  been  cut  on  the  columns  in  memory 
of  fome  petty  tyrants  of  the  neighborhood  whom 
he  had  demolifhed  ;  for  fuch  bloody  trophies  were 
in  former  days  very  common  :  witnefs,  among  the 
Weljh-,  the  T'n  pen  Sais,  or  three  Englijhmen's  heads, 
borne  in  the  arms  of  many  of  our  families,  as  a 
token  of  the  prowefs  of  their  anceftors. 


A  Re- 


288  APPENDIX. 


1 


A  Recanitulation  of  the  A  n  i  m  a  l  d 
mentioned  in  the  Tour,  with  fome. 
additional  Remarks  in  Natural 
Hiftory. 

Ulld  Cattle.  'T^  H  E    ofTspring  of   them    nowr 

JL      domefticated  are    faid    to   be 

found  \n  Hamilton  Park.  Vide  p.  219; 

Roebuck.  Inhabits  the  forefts  on  the  fouth  of 
Lough- Raynachi  thofe  in  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Invercauld,  the  woods 
near  ^arnaway  and  Calder  caftles, 
and  about  hough-Moy  and  Lough- 
Nefs',  and  its  mod  northerly  haunts 
are  the  woods  of  Langwally  at  the 
entrance  into  Cathnefs. 

A  full-grown  Roe  weighs  60  lb. 
the  hair  in  fummer  is  fliort,  fmooth, 
and  glolfy,  red  at  the  tips,  cinereous 
beneath.  At  approach  of  winter  the 
hair  grows  very  long  and  hoary,  and 
proves  an  excellent  defence  againft 
the  rigor  of  the  highland  air.  The 
rump  and  underfide  of  the  tail  white. 
The  tail  very  fhort.  Below  the  firft 
joint  of  the  outfide  of  the  hind  leg 
is  a  long  tuft  of  hair,  fuch  as  is  found 
on  the  legs  of  certain  Antelopes.  The 
horns  of  a  Roebuck  of  the  fccond 

year' 


nr. 


'^S^. 


'f 


Z. 


:  (Ao^/n^cL.     it.  4iL^  5%^^. 


^. 


/" 


&f.y^/ 


APPENDIX.  289 

year  are  ftrait,  flender,  and  without 
any  branch :  in  the  third  become  bi- 
furcated :  in  the  fourth,  trifurcated, 
and  grow  more  fcabrous  and  frrongerj 
in  proportion  to  their  longevity.  It 
feeds  during  lunaitier  on  grafs,  and  is 
remarkably  fond  oi tht  Rubus Saxatilis^ 
called  in  the  Highlands  on  that  ac- 
count the  Roebuck  Berry.  When 
the  ground  is  covered  with  fnow  it 
feeds  on  the  extreme  branches  of  the 
pine  and  juniper.  It  brings  two 
young  at  a  time.  The  Fawns  are 
elegantly  fpotted  with  white.  It  is 
extremely  difficult  to  rear  them  ;  com- 
monly eight  out  of  ten  dying  in  the 
attempt.  The  flefii  of  the  Roe  is  by 
fome  accounted  a  delicacy  :  to  me  ir 
feemed  very  dry.  They  keep  in  fmall 
families  of  five  or  fix. 

Notwithftanding  it  is  not  quite  pe« 
culiar  to  Scotland  in  a  wild  ftate,  yet 
is  mentioned  here  on  account  of  fome 
Angularities  relating  to  its  natural 
hiitory,  v/hich  I  collefled  in  my  jour- 
ney. Stags  abound  all  over  the  High- 

.  lands  and  in  the  Ifle  of  Skie.  In  the 
lafi:  are  fo  numerous  as  to  oblige  the 
farmer  to  watch  his  corn  :  are  very 

.  fond  of  crowsfoot,  and,  like  the  Re'ui^ 

will  eat  lichens.     I  have  been  affurcd 

U  that 


290 


APPENDIX. 

that  they  are  greatly  delighted  with 
the  found  of  mu^ck,  and  that  they 
will  be  tempted  to  remain  in  the 
deepeft  attention  :  that  they  are  fre- 
quently (liot,  allured  to  their  deftrnc- 
tion  by  the  melody  of  the  pipe.  Fal- 
low Deer  are  very  fcarce  in  North- 
Britain^  and  wholly  confined  in  parks. 

Highland  Is  the  kind  which  Boethius  takes  no- 
Creheund,  tice  of,  and  fays  is  one  of  the  three 
that  are  not  to  be  found  any  where 
clfe.  He  calls  it,  Genus  venaticum 
cum  cekrrimum  turn  audacijjimuni :  nee 
modo  in  [eras  fed  in  hojles  ctiam  La- 
tronefque ;  -praftrtim  ft  dominum  due- 
ioremve  injuriam  affici  cernat  aut  in  eos 
concitetiir. 

This   fort  of  dog  is  become  very 
rare.    Vide  p.  133. 


IFolffh  breed,  I  faw  at  Gordon  caftle  a  dog  the  ofF- 
fpring  of  a  Wolf  and  Pomeranian 
bitch.  It  had  much  the  appearance 
of  the  firlu,  was  very  good  natured 
and  fportive ;  but  being  flipped  at  a 
weak  Deer  it  inflantly  brought  the 
animal  down  and  tore  out  its  throat. 
This  dog  was  bred  by  Mr.  Brooke 
animal- merchant,  in  London^  who  told 
me    that   the   congrefs   between  the 

-  '*  wolf 


APPENDIX.  291 

wolf  and  the   bitch  was  immediate, 
and  the  produce  at  the  litter  was  ten. 

fVhiie  Hare.  Peculiar  to  the  fummits  of  the  higheft 
mountains  of  the  Highlands :  is  lefs 
than  the  common  Hare  •,  its  limbs 
rriore  (lender  ;  its  flelh  more  delicate  : 
it  never  defcends  into  the  vallies,  or 
mixes  with  the  common  kind  :  is  very 
agile  and  full  of  frcrlick  when  kept 
tame  :  is  fond  of  honey  and  carraway 
comfits,  and  prognoflicates  a  ftorm 
by  eating  its  own  dung  :  in  a  wild 
ftate,  does  not  run  an  end,  but  feeks 
fhelter  under  flones  as  foon  as  pof* 
fible. 

Inuring  fummer  its  predominant 
color  is  grey  :  about  September  it  be- 
gins to  aflume  a  fnowy  whitenefs  ;  the 
alteration  of  color  appearing  about 
the  neck  and  rurrip,  and  becomes  en- 
tirely white,  except  the  edges  and  tips 
of  the  ears :  in  Jpril  it  again  refumes 
its  grey  coat. 

Ldvetlari.  A  fmall  animal,  nientioned  by  Sir 
Robert  Sibbald,  as  being  common  in 
Cathnefsy  living  in  the  water,  and 
whofc  breath  is  noxious  to  cattle.  T 
fufped  from  the  defcription  that  I  had 
p^ivcn  me,  that  it  is  the  fame  with  the 
U  2  Water 


292  APPENDIX. 

Water  Shrewmoufc,  Br.  Zool.  illujlr. 
p.  83. 

I  could  get  no  account  of  Sir  Ro- 
hert''s  moufe  with  a  black  back,  which 
he  fays  kills  moles. 

Seals.  The  Seals  on    the   coafts   o^  North- 

Britain  are  the  common  and  the  great. 
Syn.  S>uad.  N"' .  265.  266.  But  I  could 
not  learn  that  the  fValrus  was  ever 
ieen  in  any  of  the  Scottish  Seas :  not- 
withftanding  it  was  found  about  the 
Orkney  Ifles  in  the  days  of  Boefbius, 
Vide  Defc.  Regn.  Scotia,  xvi. 

BIRDS. 

Eagle.  The  Sea  Eagle  breeds  in  ruined  tow- 

ers, and  leaves  its  fummer  haunts  be- 
fore winter.  The  Rinj^-tail  Eagle, 
Br.  Zool.  breeds  in  rocks,  and  con- 
tinues in  North  Britain  the  whole 
year. 

Falcons.  The  Peregrine  and  the  Gentil  Falcons 
breed  in  Glenmore^  and  other  lofty  rocks 
of  the  Highlands.  The  Gyr-Falcon 
has  been  fhot  in  Jhcrdeenjhire.  A 
large  white  FJawk,  I  fuppofe  an  un- 
fpotted  bird  of  the  laft  fpecies,  has 
bred  for  thefe  laft  twelve  years  ziHil- 
leigh-Grccn,  near  Hacknefs,  four  miles 
from  Scarborough. 

4  Co/lawks. 


%r^  ,ff/,^  ff^r^. 


^4.nD.' 


9>*.it^y/ . 


APPENDIX. 

Cojhawh.      Breed  in  trees  in  the  highland  part  of 
Aherdeenjhire. 

Owl.  The  great-horned  or  Eagle  Owl  has 

been  fhot  in  the  fhire  of  Fife. 

Crow.  The  common  fpecies  is  very  rare  in 

the  Highlands,  there  being  fcarce  any 
other  fort  found  there  than  the  Roy- 
jlon  or  Hooded  Crow,  which  refides 
there  the  whole  year.  Whence  thofe 
that  vifit  us  annually  during  winter 
migrate  from  is  uncertain. 

Chatterer.  Vifits  i\\t  neighborhood  of  Edinburgh 
annually,  appearing  in  flocks  during 
winter,  and  feeds  on  the  berries  of 
the  mountain  afli. 

Chough.  Is  found  in  the  fartheft  parts  of  Glen- 
lioHy  and  near  Acbrnore. 

Cock  of  the    This  bird   is  found  in  a  few  woods 

PVood.        north   of  hoigh-Nefs^  ;    perhaps    in 

thofe    near   Caflle-Grant  ?   Formerly;, 

was  common  throurhout  the  Kicrh- 

t  _  o 

lands,  and  was  called  Caper calze,  and 
Auercalze ;  and  in  the  old  law-books, 
Capercally.  The  variety  of  the  black 
game,  mentioned  by  iVI.  Briffon  under 
the  name  of  Coq^.  de  Bruyere  pi^uete^ 
U  3  Wiis 


293 


294-  APPENDIX. 

was  a  mixed  breed  between  thcfe  two 
birds  i  but  I  could  not  hear  tha.  any 
at  prefent  wen^  to  be  found  in  North 
Britain.  Liniteus  has  met  with  them 
in  Sweden^  and  defcribes  them  unrer 
the  title  of  leirao  cauda  bifurca  fuhtus^ 
alho  pin5lata, 

'Ptarmigan,  Another  of  the  grous  kind,  common 
on  the  fummits  of  the  higheft  high- 
land hills.  Vide  p.  S3,  and  Br.  Zool. 
illujir.  p.  21.  If  I  miftake  not,  I 
have  heard  that  a  few  are  ftill  found 
on  the  Cumberland  mountains. 

Bufiard.  Now  extind  in  Scotland.  Boethius 
fays  that  in  his  days  it  was  found  in 
Merch. 

Ring-dove.  I  found  in  the  Journal  of  Mr.  James 
Stare.  Rohertjon  an  ingenious  eleveof  Dodlor 
Hope^  that  thefe  two  birds  are  found 
in  great  abundance  during  fummer 
in  the  Ifle  of  Arran.  Ririg-Ouzels 
are  very  common  in  the  Highlands. 

Nightingale.  Not  found  in  North-Britain :  proba- 
bly from  the  fcarcity,  and  novelty  of 
hedges  in  that  part  of  the  kingdom, 
yet  it  vifits  Sueden  a  much  more  rigo- 
rous climate. 

Sione- 


^ 


VI. 


2' 


i  y. 


I.  f^a/rTAua^j'L.    H.^^Y^/^f  or^tAe  y/iootl. 


APPENDIX.  295 

Stone-Cbatter. T\i\s  bird  is  feen  near  Edinburgh  dur- 
ing winter  ;  fo  does  not  migrate. 

Pwe'Bu^fi7tch.Br.  ZocL  ilhijlr.  p,  59.  Found  during 
fummer  in  the  pine-foreils  of  Aher- 
deenjhire,  and  probably  breeds  there. 

Snciv-flake.  I  have  had  lately  an  opportunity  of 
comparing  this  bird  with  the  greater 
Brambling  and  find  them  to  be  dif- 
ferent, and  not,  as  I  once  thought,  • 
varieties  of  the  fame  kind.  The  fize 
of  this  is  lefs,  and  the  claw  of  the 
hind  toe  much  fhorter,  A  few  of 
thefe  birds  breed  with  the  Ptarmigans 
on  the  fummits  of  the  higheft  moun- 
tains •,  but  the  greateft  numbers  mji- 
grate  from  the  moft  diilant  north, 
•  even  from  Greenland  and  Spitzbergem 
Vide  Br,  ZocL  illujir.  p.  1 7. 

^V  A  T  E  R    FOWL. 

Wbimbrel.      Breeds  in  the  hills  about  Invercaidd, 

RedGcdwit.  Breeds   in  Lincolnjhire.     For  the  lift 
of  other  fen  birds,  vide  p.  9,  10, 

Auks,  The  black-billed  Auk  and  lefler  Guil- 

lemot appear  during  winter  in   flocks 
innumerable  in  the  Firth  of  Forth  ; 
and  are  called  there  Marrots,     Their 
U  4  fum- 


296  APPENDIX. 

fummer  retreat  is  not  yet  traced.  The 
Jittle  Auk  is  Ibmetimes  (hot  near  Ahr- 
deen. 

JrSfic  Gull.  Is  called  i^  North  Britain  tlie  Dirty 
jiulin.  i  faw  one  flying  over  the  Firth 
of  Forth  near  the  Queen's  Ferry. 

(^oofander.  Dc6lor  Walker  of  Moffat  fhewed  me 
one  killed  ,during  fummcr  in  the 
weftern  ifles  •,  alfo  fome  other  birds 
which  were  fuppoled  to  have  migrated 
out  of  Great  Britiwi.  He  alfo  difco- 
vered  in  the  Ille  of  Tirey  the  Tringa 
interpres. 


REPTILES. 

Snake.  A  nev/  Britijh  Snake  was  difcovered 

in  Aberdeen/hire  by  the  late  Do(fl:or 
I  David  Skene,  a  gentleman  whofe  lofs 
will  be  deplored  by  every  lover  of 
natural  .hiftory ;  for  to  great  know- 
lege  was  added  the  mod  liberal  and 
.communicative  difpofition.  The  ac- 
count he  favored  me  with  of  this  rep- 
tile was  this  :  Its  length  was  fifteen 
inches  :  it  had  no  fcuia  abdom.  or 
catidalia,  but  was  entirely  covered 
with  fmall  fcales,  which  on  the  upper 
part  of  the  head  were  larger  than  the 
reft :  the  tongue  was  broad  and  fork- 
ed :  the  noftrils  fmall  and  round,  and 

placed 


APPENDIX.  297 

placed  near  the  tip  of  the  nofe :  the 
eyes  lodged  in  oblong  fifilires  above 
the  angle  of  the  mouth  :  the  belly 
was  of  a  bluifh  lead-color  with  fmall 
white  fpots  irreoiilarly  difperfed  :  the 
reit  of  the  body  of  a  greyifli  brown 
with  three  longitudinal  blackifli 
brown  lines,  one  extending  from  the 
back  of  the  head  to  the  point  of  the 
tail,  the  two  others  were  broader  and 
extended  the  whole  length  of  the 
fides.  DocTcor  Skene  informed  me  that 
it  was  the  fame  with  the  Anguis  Eryx 
of  Linnaeus,  p.  392. 

F     I    S     K. 

B*:ifiing  This  fpecies  frequents  the  Firth  of 
Shark.  Clyde  and  the  feas  of  the  weftern  ifles  : 
the  Trudees  for  the  forfeited  eftates 
encourage  the  nfliery,  and  furnifh  the 
adventurers  with  money  to  purchafe 
th^e  proper  materials. 

Picked  Dcg'  Swarms  on  the  eaftern  coaft  of  Scot- 
land, and  is  taken  and  cured  for  the 
ufc  of  the  common  people.  Mr. 
James  Robcrtfon  obferved  near  the 
Ifle  of  Skie  a  fpecies  called  there  the 
Blind'kive,  which  is  reckoned  a  great 
reftoratlve. 

Greater 


298  APPENDIX. 

Greater  Draco  major  feu  araneus  Salvian.  70. 

Weever.  This  fpecies  was  taken  near  Scar- 

borough^ and  communicated  to  me  by 
Mr.  '•Travis. 

Its  length  eleven  inches ;  greateft 
depth  one  inch  and  three-quarters  : 
head  flat  :  eyes  large  :  edges  of  the 
jaws  rough  with  minute  teeth  •,  the 
lower  jaw  the  longeft,  and  dopes  lefs 
than  that  of  the  common  fpecies:  the 
head  covered  with  minute  tubercles  i 
cheeks  an'd  gills  covered  v/ith  fmall 
,  fcales  ;  on  the  lafl:  is  a  fharp  fpine.    • 

Firft  dorfal  fin  is  black,  and  con- 
fifts  of  five  jpines  j  the  fecond  reaches 
within  a  fmall  diilance  of  the  tail  : 
the  perioral  has  thirteen  branched 
rays  •,  the  ventral  fix  •,  the  anal  ex- 
tends as  far  as  the  fecond  dorlal :  tail 
*  large,    triangular,   and   even    at  the 

end. 

The  fcales  run  in  oblique  lines  from 
the  back  to  the  belly,  with  a  divifion 
between  each  row; 

Codfijh,  One  was  taken  at  Scarborough  in  1 755, 

which  meafured  five  feet  eight  inches, 
and  its  girth  round  the  (lioulders  five 
feet:  its  weight  781b.  and  was  fold 
for  a  Ihilling. 


Saury. 


Saurus  Rondel.  232. 


Aftei 


"=Y 


APPENDIX.  299 

After  a  violent  ftorm  from  the 
N.E.  in  November  laft,  a  great  num- 
ber of  thefe  fiih  were  flung  on  fhore 
in  rtie  Firth  oi  Perth  on  the  fands  of  ' 

Leith.  An  account  and  an  accurate 
figure  of  one  of  them  was  commu- 
nicated to  me  bv  Mr.  George  Paton 
of  Editfiurgb,  a  gentleman  who  is  a 
zealous  promoter  of  natural  know- 
lege. 

Its  length  is   eleven   inches  :   the 
nofe  flender  :  the  jaws  produced  like 
thofe  of  the  Sea  Needle,  but  of  equal 
lengths,     and    the   upper    mandible 
nightly  recurvated  •,  their  length  one 
inch  :   eyes  large  :   body  flender  and 
anguilliform,    but    towards   the   tail 
grows  fuddenly  fmaller,   and   tapers 
to  a  very  inconfiderable  girth :  on  the 
lower  part  of  the  back  is  a  fmall  fin, 
with  fix  fpurious  between  that  and 
the  tail,  like  thofe  of  the  Mackrel  : 
correfpondent  to  thefe  are  the  anal 
and  fix  fpurious :   the  peroral   and 
ventral  fins  very  fmall :  the  tail  much 
forked  :  the  back  when  frefh  was  of 
a  dark  color,   the  belly   bright  and 
filvery. 

Rondektius  defcribesthis  fifli  among 
thofe  of  the  Mediterranean ;  but 
fpeaks  of  it  as  very  rare  even  there. 

C  R  U  S- 


300  APPENDIX. 

CRUSTACEA. 

'thorny  Crab'  Cancer  fpinofus^  maximus,  cricntalis 
Scb.  Muf.  56.  tab.  xxii.  fig.  i.  Can- 
ur  fpinofus  ambo'mcnfis — 44.  tab.  xviii. 
fig.  10. 

C  Horridus  Lin.  fyft.  1047. 
C.  fpinofus^    thcrace     cordato,    mucro- 
nato  :  pedibus  tantuni  tribus  curforiis  : 
chelis  inaq.  pcd.   minoribus,   Gronov. 
Zooph.  No.  976. 

Body  of  a  heart- fhape:  length  from 
the  fnout  to  the  end  of  the  back  five 
inches  one-tenth :  fnout  projcfting 
and  bifurcated  :  the  upper  cruft  co- 
vered with  thick  fpincs  ;  thofe  on  the 
margins  very  long,  fharp  and  Itrong : 
the  claws  covered  on  all  fides  with 
great  fpines  ;  the  right  claw  twice  as 
,  large  as  the  left:  the  fangs  befet  with 

frnall  tufts  of  hair :  on  each  fide  only 
three  legs  echinated  like  the  claws, 
and  nine  inches  long.  No  BritrJJj 
cruftaceous  animal  is  {0  well  guarded 
as  this. 

I  have  k^T\  this  fpecies  almoft 
wholly  incrufted  with  the  Lepas  ha- 
lanusy  and  Anomia  fquamula.  Do<5lor 
Skene  favored  me  with  a  fine  fpeci- 
rnen,  it  being  taken  on  the  coafl  of 
^iberdcen* 

INSECTS. 


xvnr. 


I 


appendix; 


301 

INSECTS. 


Onifciis. 


Oeftrum, 

Sea  on  the  Torkjhin 

coaft. 

Pfora, 

ihid. 

Marin  us. 

ibid. 

OceanicLis, 

ibid» 

Trifurcatus  novus,  ihid, 

Qiiadratus  novus,   ihid. 

Phalangium    GrolTipes,  Sea  near  Aherdeenl 

Dr.  Skene. 

Balicnarum,  ihid* 


Q.U  E  R  I  E  S, 


302 


APPENDIX. 

Q^U    E   R    I   E   S, 

Originally  compofed  and  printed  by- 
Order  of  the  Society  of  Anti- 
quaries, and  now  addrefled  to 
the  Gentlemen  and  Clergy  of  North-- 
Britai7i^  refpedling  the  Antiquities 
and  natural  Hiftory  of  their  refpec- 
tive  Parifhes  *,  with  a  View  of  ex- 
citing them  to  favor  the  World  with, 
a  fuller  and  more  fatisfacftory  Ac- 
count of  their  Country,  than  it  is 
in  the  Power  of  a  Stranger  and 
traniient  Vifitant  to  give. 


w 


1»  T'^J  7  H  AT  is  the  antient  and  modern  name 
of  the  parifli,  and  its  etymology  t 


II.  What  number  of  hamlets  or  villages  are  in 
it>  their  names  and  fituation  ? 

III.  What  are  the  number  of  its  houfes  and  in- 
habitants ? 

•  Many  of  the  paiilTies  in  Kcrth  Britain  are  of  Aich  ex- 
tent as  to  fupply  ample  maicrials  for  a  hillory  of  each  alone; 
fo  it  is  to  be  hoped  fome  parochial  Gtniu/es  will  arile  and 
favor   the    Publick   with    what    is    much    wanted,   local 

H -STORIES. 

IV, 


APPENDIX. 

IV.  What  number  of  people  have  been  married, 
chriftened,  and  buried,  for  the  fpace  of  20  years 
laft  pad,  compared  with  the  firft  20  years  of  the 
regiftcr?  When  did  the  rcgifter  begin  <■  If  there 
are  any  curious  remarks  made  therein,  pleafe  to 
give  an  account  thereof. 

V.  Are  there  any  vaults  or  burial  places  pecu- 
liar to  any  ancient  or  other  families  ?  What  are 
they,  and  to  whom  do  they  belong  ? 

VI.  Are  there  any  ancient  or  modern  remarkable 
monuments  or  grave-ftones  in  the  church  or  chan- 
cel, Sec.  Pleafe  to  give  the  infcriptions  and  arms, 
if  any,  on  the  fame,  if  worthy  notice,  efpecially  if 
before  the  i6th  century. 

VII.  Are  there  any  remarkable  ones  in  the 
church-yard  ?  Pleafe  to  give  an  account  what  they 
are.  Are  there  any  paintings  in  the  windows  either 
of  figures  or  arms  ?  Add  a  copy  or  defcription, 

VIII.  Are  there  any  tables  of  benefaiflions  or 
other  infcriptions  v/hich  are  worthy  notice,  on  any 
of  the  walls  of  the  church,  either  within  or  with* 
out  ?  Pleafe  to  infert  them  at  full  lengih. 

■*  IX.  Are  there  any  particular  cuftoms  or  privi- 
leges or  remarkable  tenures  in  any  of  the  manoi'S 
j  in  the  parifh  ? 

X.  What  ancient  manor  or  manfion-lioufe,  feats 
or  villas,  are  in  the  parifh  .' 

'         XJ.  Are 


303 


3°4 


APPENDIX. 

XI.  Are  there  any  annual  or  other  procefllons, 
perambulations,  or  any  hofpital,  alms  or  fchool- 
houfe  -,  by  whom  and  when  founded,  and  wlio  has 
the  right  of  putting  people  into  them  ? 

XII.  Have  you  any  wake,  whitfon  ale,  or  other 
cuftoms  of  that  fort  ufed  in  the  parifh  ? 

XIII.  Is  there  any  great  road  leading  thro*  the 
pari(h,  and  from  what  noted  places  ? 

XIV.  Are  there  any  crofles  or  obelifl^s  or  any 
things  of  that  nature  ere(5ted  in  the  parifh  ? 

XV.  Arc  there  any  remains  or  ruins  of  mo- 
nafteries  or  religious  houfes  ?  Give  the  beft  account 
thereof  you  can. 

XVI.  Are  there  any  Roman,  Pi5!ijby  or  Danijb 
caftles,  camps,  altars,  roads,  forts,  or  other  pieces 
of  antiquity  remaining  in  your  parifh  :  what  are 
they,  and  what  traditions  arc  there,  or  hiftorical 
accounts  of  them  ? 

XVII.  Have  there  been  any  medals,  coins,  or 
other  pieces  of  antiquity  dug  up  in  your  pasifh  i 
when  and  by  whom,  and  in  whofe  cuftcdy  arc 
they  ? 

XVIII.  Have  there  been  any  remarkable  battles 
fought,  on  what  fpot,  by  wliom,  when,  and  what 
traditions  are  tiiere  rclatins  thereto .'' 


D 


XIX.  Has 


APPENDIX. 

XIX.  Has  the  parifii  given  either  birth  or  bu- 
rial to  any  man  eminent  for  learning  or  other  re- 
markable or  valuable  qualifications  ? 

XX.  Are  there  any  parks  or  warrens,  the  num- 
ber of  deer,  and  extent  of  the  park,  &:c.  any  he- 
ronries, decoys,  or  fifheries  ? 

XXI.  Do  any  rivers  rife  in  or  run  thro*  the  pa- 
rifli,  which  are  they  -,  if  navigable,  what  fort  of 
boats  are  ufed  on  them,  and  what  is  the  price  of 
carriage pc-r  hundred  or  ton,  to  your  parifh  ? 

XXIL  Are  there  any,  and  what  bridges,  how 
are  they  fuppor:ed,  by  private  or  public  coft,  of 
what  materials,  what  number  of  pie/s  or  arches, 
the  length  and  breadth  of  the  bridge  and  width  of 
the  arches  ? 

XXIII.  Are  there  any  barrows  or  tumuli,  and 
have  any  been  opened,  and  what  has  been  found 
therein  ? 

XXIV.  Are  there  any  manufactures  carried  on 
in  the  parifh,  and  what  number  of  hands  are  em- 
ployed? 

XXV.  What  markets  or  fairs  are  kept  in  tlic 
parifh,  what  commodities  are  chiefly  brought  for 
fale  i  if  any  of  the  manufactures  or  produce  of  the 
country,  live  cattle,  or  other  things,  that  toil  is 
paid  and  to  whom,  and  where  are  they  kept  ? 

X  XXVI.  Is 


OS3 


3o6  APPENDIX. 

XXVI,  Is  there  any  (latutc  fair  for  hiring  of 
fervants,  and  how  long  has  it  been  eftabhfhed  j 
what  are  the  ufual  wages  for  men  and  maids, 
&c.  for  each  branch  of  hufbandry  ? 

XXVII.  Are  there  in  any  of  the  gentlemen's 
houfes,  or  on  their  eftates,  any  pictures  which  give 
infight  into  any  hiftorical  fadVs,  ot  any  portraits  of 
men  eminent  for  any  art,  fcience,  or  literature ; 
any  ftatues,  bufto's,  or  other  memorial  which  wiW 
give  any  light  to  paft  tranfadions  ? 


QJl  E  R  I  E  S 


I 


APPENDIX;  307 

(QUERIES 

Relating   to    the   Natural  Iliftory  of 
the  Parish. 


I.  TTjTHAT  is  the  appearance  of  the  country  in 
VV     theparilhj  is  it  fiat  or  hilly,  rocky  or 
mountainous  ? 

II.  Do  the  lands  confift  of  woods,  arable,  paf- 
ture,  meadow,  heatli,  or  what  ? 

III.  Are  they  fenny  or  mooriHi,  boggy  of  firm } 

IV.  Is  there  fand,  clay,  chalk,  fi;one,  gravel, 
loam,  or  What  is  the  nature  of  the  foil  ? 

V.  Are  there  any  lakes,  meers  or  waters,  what 
are  they,  their  depth,  where  do  they  rife,  and 
whither  do  they  run  ? 

VI.  Are  there  any  fubterraneous  rivers,  which 
appear  in  one  place,  then  fink  into  the  earth,  and 
rife  again  ? 


•d* 


VII.  Are  there  any  mineral  fpfings,  frequented 
for  the  drinking  the  waters  ;  what  are  they  ;  at 
what  fealbns  of  the  year  reckoned  befi,  and  what 
difrempcrs  are  they  frequented  for  ? 

^  2  yni.  Arc 


3o8  APPENDIX. 

VIII.  Are  there  any  periodical  fprings,  which 
rife  and  fail,  ebb  and  flow,  at  what  fcafons,  give 
the  bed  account  you  can  ? 

IX.  Are  there  any  mills  on  the  rivers,  to  what 
ufes  are  they  employed  ? 

X.  Are  there  any  and  what  mines  ;  what  arc 
they  •,  to  whom  do  they  belong  j  what  do  they 
produce  ? 

XL  Have  you  any  marble,  moorflone,  or  other 
flone  of  any  fort,  how  is  it  got  out,  and  how 
worked  ? 

XII.  What  forts  of  manure  or  amendment  do 
they  chiefly  ufe  for  their  land,  and  what  is  the 
price  of  it  on  the  fpot  ? 

XIII.  What  are  the  chief  produce  of  the  lands, 
wheat,  rye,  oats,  barley,  peas,  beans,  or  wiiat  ? 

XIV.  What  forts  of  fifh  do  the  rivers  produce, 
what  quantities,  and  what  prices  on  the  fpot,  and 
in  what  feafons  are   they  belt  ? 

*X1V.  What  quadrupeds  and  birds  are  there 
in  your  pariQi  ?  What  migratory  birds,  and  at  what 
times  do  they  appear  and  difappear  r 


XV.  Arc 


APPENDIX.  309 

XV.  Are  there  any  remarkable  caves,  or  grot- 
toes, natural  or  artificial  ?  give  the  bell  defcription 
and  account  thereof  you  can. 

XVI.  Are  there  any  and  what  quantities  of  faf- 
fron,  woad,  teazels,  or  other  vegetables  of  that 
fort,  growing  in  the  parifli,  and  the  prices  they  fell 
for  on  the  fpot  ? 

XVII.  Is  the  parifli  remarkable  for  breeding  any 
cattle  of  remarkable  qualities,  fize,  or  value,  and 
what  ^ 

XVIII.  Are  there  any  chalk-pits,  fand  or  gravel- 
pits,  or  other  openings  in  the  parifh,  and  what  ? 

XIX.  On  digging  wells  or  other  openings,  what 
ftrata*s  of  foil  do  they  meet  with,  aTid  how  thick 
is  each  ^ 

XX.  How  low  do  the  fprings  lye,  and  what 
fort  of  water  do  you  meet  with  in  the  feveral  parts 
of  the  parifli .'' 

XXI.  Is  there  any  marl,  fuller's  earth,  potter's 
earth,  or  loam,  or  any  other  remarkable  foils,  as 
ochre,  &c. 

XXII.  Are  there  any  bitumen,  naptha,  or  other 
fubftanccs  of  that  nature  found  in  the  earth  ? 

X  3  XXIII.  Does 


3IO  APPENDIX. 

XXIII.  Does  the  pari(h  produce  any  quantities 
of  timber,  of  what  fort,  and  what  are  the  prices  on 
the  fpot,  per  load  or  ton  ?  Are  there  any  very  large 
trees,  and  their  fize  ? 

XXIV.  Are  any  quantities  of  fheep  raifed  or  fed 
in  the  parifh,  and  on  what  do  they  chiefly  feed  ? 

XXV.  Are  the  people  of  the  country  remarkable 
for  ftrength,  fize,  complexion,  or  any  bodily  or 
natural  qualities  ? 

!XXVI.  What  are  the  diverfions  chiefly  ufed  by 
the  gentry,  as  well  as  the  country  people,  on  par- 
ticular occafions  ? 

XXVII.  What  is  the  nature  of  the  air  ;  is  it 
moiil:  or  dry,  hsalthy  or  fubjedl  to  agues  and  fevers, 
and  at  what  time  oi  the  year  is  it  reckoned  moft 
fo  ?  and,  if  you  can,  account  for  the  caufes. 

XXVIII.  Are  there  any  petrifying  fprings  or 
waters  that  incrud  bodies,  what  are  they  ? 

XXIX.  Any  hot  waters  or  wells  for  bathing, 
and  for  what  diftempcrs  frequented  ? 

XXX.  Are  there  any  figured  ftones,   fuch  as 
cchinit^e,  belemnitas,  &c.  Any  having  the  impref- 
fion  of  plants  or  fifties  on  them,  or  any  foffll  ma- 
rine 


APPENDIX.  31X 

fine  bodies,  fuch  as  fhells,  corals,  &c.  or  any 
petrified  parts  of  animals  :  where  are  they  found, 
and  what  arc  they  ? 

XXXI.  Is  any  part  of  the  parifh  fubjeft  to  in- 
undations or  land  floods,  give  the  beft  account,  if 
any  things  of  that  nature  have  happened,  and  when  ? 

XXXII.  Hath  there  been  any  remarkable  mif- 
chief  done  by  thunder  and  lightning,  ftorma  ot 
whirlwinds,  when  and  what  ? 

XXXIII.  Are  there  any  remarkable  echoes, 
where  and  what  are  they  p 

XXXIV.  Have  any  remarkable  phsenomena 
been  obfcrved  in  the  air,  and  what  ? 


If  the  Parijh  is  on  the  Sea  Coast. 

XXXV.  What  fort  of  a  (bore,  fiat,  fandy,  high, 
orj-ocky  ? 

XXXVI.  What  forts  of  fifh  are  caught  there,  in 
what  (quantity,  at  what  prices  fold,  when  moft  in 
ftafon,  how  taken,  and  to  what  market  fent  ? 

XXXVII.  What  other  Sea  animals,  plants, 
fponges,  corals,  fiiells,  ^c.  are  found  on  or  near 
ihc  coalls  ? 

X  4  XXXVIII.  Are 


312  APPENDIX. 

XXXV'ITI.  Are  there  any  remarkable  Sea  weeds 
ufed  tor  manure  of  land,  or  curious  on  any  other 
account  ? 

XXXIX.  What  are  the  courks  of  the  tides  on 
the  fl^..re,  or  r>ff  ar  Sea,  the  current'^  at  a  mile's 
diftance,  and  other  things  worthy  remark  ? 

X^^.  Vv  hat  number  of  fifhing  vefTels,  of  what 
fort,  how  navigated,  and  what  number  of  hands 
are  there  in  the  parilh  ? 

XLl.  Kow  many  fhips,  and  of  what  burthen, 
belong  to  the  parifii  ^ 

XLII.  Are  there  any>  and  what  light-houfes, 
beacons,  or  land-marks  ? 

XLin.  What  are  the  names  of  the  creeks,  bays, 
harbours,  headlands,  fands,  or  iflands  near  the 
coafts  f 

XLIV.  Have  there  been  any  remarkable  battles 
,  or  rea-fi<^hts  near  the  coafts,  and  when  did  any  re- 

markable wrecks  or  accidents  happen,  which  can 
give  li^ht  to  any  hiftorical  fa£ls  ? 

XLV.  If  you  arc  in  a  city,  give  the  beft  account 
you  can  procure  of  the  hiftory  and  antiquity  of  the 
place  i  if  remarkable  for  its  buildings,  age,  walls, 

fieges. 


APPENDIX.  313 

fieges,  charters,privileges, immunities,  gates,  ftreets, 
markets,  fairs,  the  number  of  churches,  wards  and 
guilds,  or  companies,  or  fraternities,  or  clubs  that 
are  remarkable  ;  how  is  it  governed  ?  if  it  fends 
members  to  parliament,  in  whom  does  the  choice 
lye,  and  what  number  of  voters  may  there  have 
been  at  the  laft  poll  ? 


ITINERARY- 


C  314  ] 

ITINERARY. 


Miles. 


DOWNING, 

21  Chefter,  Deonna-iBez'ana  Ptol.  Deva  Anton. 

Rav.  Chorog.  Deva,  colonia  legio  cretica 
vkcfima  Valeria  vi^lrix  R.  C. 
1 8     Northwich,  Condate.  R.  C. 
8     Knutsford, 

1 2  Macclesfield, 

10  Buxton, 

13  Middekon, 

1 1  Chefterfield, 
J  6     Workfop, 

12  Tuxford, 

8     pLinham  Ferr}',  on  the  TrentjTrivo»aJ!.  R.C. 
10     Lincoln, L/W«wFtol.  Anton. Rav.  Chorog. 
R.C. 

6     Wafhenbrough  and  back  to  Lincoln, 
1 2     Spittle, 
12     Glanford  Bridge, 
12     Barton, 

Humber  River,  /^I?u^,  Ptol.  R.  C. 

8     Hull, 

8     Burton  Conflable, 

22  Burlington  Quay. 

Its  bay,  Cabrantuicorum  portuofus  ftnusVTOh. 
Portiis  f.clix  R.  C. 
5     Flamborough  Head,  Btigantum  extremaK.Q. 
10     Hunmanby, 

10  Scar- 


ITINERARY, 

MIL 

:s. 

lO 

Scarborough, 

134 

Robin  Hood's  Bay, 

64 

•  Whitby, 

13 

SkeUin  Dam, 

9 

Giiifboiough, 

12 

Stockton, 

Tees  River,  Tijlsjl.  R.  C.  its  mouth,  Dunum 

Jin  MS  Ptol. 

20 

Durham, 

V7ere  River,  Fedra'jl.  R.  C. 

6 

Chcfter  le  Street,  Epiacum  R.  C. 

9 

Newcaftle,  Pons  Aelii  Notit.  Imp. 

Tyne  River,  Vedra  fi.  Ptol.  "Tina  jl,  R.  C. 

14 

Morpeth, 

9 

Felton, 

10 

Alnwick,  Alauna  Rav.  Chorog. 

;6 

Belford, 

16 

Berwick,  ^tiejfis  Rav.  Chorog. 

Tweed  River,  Alaunus  Ptol.  ^ueda  R.  C. 

3'S 


SCOTLAND. 

!6  Old  CambLis, 

3  0  Dunbar,  Ledone  Rav.  Chorog. 

6  North  Berwick, 

14  Prefton  Pans, 

8  Edinburgh, 

9  South  Ferry, 

Firth  of  Forth,  BcderiaPTOL.  BodoirlaT  aciti. 
R.  C- 

2  North 


^i6  ITINERARY. 

Miles. 

2     North  Ferry,  . 

Fife  County,  Horojli:  R.  C.  Caledonia  Taciti. 
15     Kinrofs, 
20     Rumbling  Brig,  Caflle  Campbell,  and  back 

to  Kinrofs 
13     Caftle  Duplin,  Duablifts  Rav.  Chorog. 

8  Perth,  Orrea  R.  C. 

Tay  River  and  its  mouth,  TausTAcm.  Tava 
JEfl,  Ptol.  R.C. 

1  Scone, 

I  Lunkerty, 

13  Dunkeld, 

20  Taymouth, 

15  Carrie  on  Lough  Raynach, 

20  Blair, 

35  Through  Glen-Tik  to  Invercauld, 

18  TuUoch, 

15  Kincairn, 

9  Banchorie, 
18  Aberdeen, 

Dee  River,  Bha  fl.  Ptoj..  R,  C,-. 
Ythen  River,  Ittma  fl.  R.  C. 
25     Bownefs, 

27     Craigfton  Caflle,  • 

9     BamfF, 

Devron  River,  Celniiis  fl.  R.C. 
8     Cullen, 
12     Cadle  Gordon, 

Spey  River,  Celmus  fl.  Prol.  Ti^^j  R.  C. 
8     Va\gmi  Alitacenon  Rav.  Chorog. 

10  Forres, 
4 


ITINERARY.  317 

Miles. 

I  o     Forres, 

I I  Tarnaway  Caftle,  Calder,  Fort  George. 
Firth  of  Murray,  Tu<e.  JBfi.  FTOL.Farar  jEj}^ 

R.C. 
12     Invernefs,  Ptcroton-i  caftra  data  R.C. 
10     Caille  Dunie, 
18     Dingwall,  Foules. 

Firth  of  Cromartie,  Loxafl.  R.  C. 
Rofslhire,  Creones  R.  C.  the  fame  writer  places 
at  Cbannery  in  this  county,  Ar^Jinium  Imp, 
Rom. 
15     Ballinagouan, 
6     Tain,  Cafira  data  Ptol. 
9     Dornoch.  Its  Firth,  Vara  o'Ji,  Ptol.  Ahonajl, 
R.  C. 
Sutherland  County,  Logi  R.  C. 
9     Dunrobin  Catlle, 
18     Hemfdale, 

Ord  of  Cathnefs,  Ri-pa  alta  Ptol. 
Cachnefs   County,   Carnabii,    Cattini    R.    C. 
Virubtum  promontorium  R.  C. 
8     Langwall, 

15  Clythe  ;  Q\yx.\\^n^(s^Vervedrum  prom.'K.C. 
8     Thrumlter, 

3     Wick, 

Wick  River,  Ilea  ft.  Ptol. 

1 6  Duncan's  or  Dungby  Bay,  and  John  a  Grout's 

houl". 
DunL:fby  Head,  Berulium  promontorium  Vtol, 

Caledonia  extrema  R.  C. 
Stroma  ille,  Ocetis  Infula  R.  C. 

2   Canelby, 


3i8  ITINERARY. 

Miles. 

2     Canefby,  and  back  the  fame  road  to 
137     Invernefs, 

Invernefs  County,  Caledctiii  R.  C. 

17  General's  Hut, 

15  Fort  Auguftus, 

Dough  Lochy,  Longus  fl.  R.  C. 
28     Fort  William.   R.  C.  places  Banatian^zv  it. 

14  Kinioch-Leven, 
9     King's  Houfe, 

19  Tyendrum, 

12  Dalmalie, 

1 6  Inveraray,    v 
22  Tarbut, 

Loch-Lomond,  Liucaiidor  Lacus  R.  C. 
8     Lufs, 
12     Dunbarton,  Theodofia  R.  C. 

Firth  of  Clyde,  G/(?/<2  Taciti.  Clotta^eJi.Vi.Qi 

15  Glafgow,  Ciidum  Rav.  Chorog. 
24     Hamilton,  and  back  to  Glafgow, 
jg     Kylfithe, 

1 8  Sterling, 
8     Falkirk, 

Calendar, 

15  Hopeton  Houfe, 

II  Edinburgh, 

18  Lenton, 

18  Bild, 

1 8  Moffat, 

18  Lockerby, 


K  N  G- 


ITINERARY.  319 

ENGLAND. 

Miles. 
21     Longtown  in  Cumberland, 

Netherby,  Cajira  expbrjtorum  An-ton.  Jejics 
Rav.  Chorog. 
9     Carlifle,  LugavalliuTn  Anton. 
18     Penrith,  Bereda  Rav.  Chorog. 
II     Shap  in  Weftmorland, 
15     Kendal,  Conca7ightm  Notit.  Imp. 
1 1     Burton,  Coccium  R.  C. 
II     Lancafier,  Lcngovicus^OTiT .  Imp.' 

Lune  River,  Alanna  fi.  R.  C. 
1 1     Garflang, 
1 1     Prefton, 
1 8     Wiggan, 
13     Warrington, 
21     Chefter, 
21     Downing  in  Flintfiiire. 

The  antient  names  of  places  marked  R.   C.  are  borrowed 

from  the  late  Dr  Stukeley^  account  of  Richard  oT  Cirencejier^ 
with  his  ancient  map  of  Roman  Brittain  and  the  Itinerary 
thereof,  publill-ed  in  1757.  "^^^^  reil  from  Mr.  Horjly'i 
remarks  on  Ptolemy,  Antonine's  Itinerary^  Notitia  imperii, 
and  Ravennatis  Britannia  Chorographia, 


INDEX. 


[    320   ] 


m 

I      N       D 

R 

x1 

A 

Page  1 

/J  BERBEEN,  New 

117 

■^                             Old, 

121 

Alnwick  Caftle, 

3^ 

Alum  works  in  Yorkfhire 

22 

Amber, 

14 

Appenines  o{  Etigland^ 

27 

Argentine,  Siruan'%  favorite 

fountain. 

101 

Arthur's  Oven, 

224 

Augufiust  Fort, 

182 

Aiddearney 

141 

Avofetta, 

II 

Aw^  Lough, 

199 

B 

Bamlcrough  Caftle,  well  regulated  charity  there, 

33>  34 

Bamff^  128 

Bafs  IQe,  46 

Beggars,  few  in  Scotlandy  87 

Bel-teiuy  a  finguhr  fuperftition,  94 

Benevijhy  higher  than  Snowdon,  190 

Berridale,  1  Co 

Berwick  on  Tweedy  its  falmon  filhery,  40,  4 1 

North,  47 

Birch  tree,  its  great  ufe,  114 

Birds, 


INDEX.  321 

Page 

Birds,  of  LincohPjire,  9,  lo^  11,  12 

FLimborough  Headf  15 

Fa?-,!  Jjlands,  36 

Birnam  Wood,  77 

Black-mail,  a  forced  levy  fo  called,  1S7 

5/^/r  Houfcr,  102 

Bodotria  of  Tacitus^  43 

BoUiiir-i  Pafs  of,  1 1 6 

Botanic  garden  at  £i/;?Z':(:rp'^,  58 

Boivnejs  Caftle,  its  iirange  ficuation,  124 

Braan  Cafile,  150 

Brae- mar  t  Jo8 

^r^?/?,  finecafcade  on  the,  79 

Brotche,  89 

Bultinch,  greater,  114 

Bullers  of  Biwhany  125 

Btirlingtcn,  '                  1 4 

Burnet,  Bp»  amiable  in  his  cpifcopal  characler,  249 

Buxton,  its  faiubrious  waters,  3 


Caldor,  or  Cavjdcr  Cafde, 

142 

Cambiis,  Old, 

43 

CartipheU,  Caftle, 

69 

Canal, 

219 

Carron  Iron-work';, 

t24 

Cathnefs, 

116 

Cattle,  wild,            ■.     . 

2/9 

Cd'Ji'dron  Glen,  a  cafar.i^l  there. 

68 

Chain  the,  what, 

ji^,^ 

Chatterer* 

29? 

Y 

Chejier^ 

322  INDEX. 

Page 

Chejler,  its  fingular  (Ireets,  i 

Cathedral,  jhid. 

Hypocauft,  ibid. 

Chpjlerfield,  ^ 

Chejler  Le  Street,  30 

Church  Scotch^  its  conftirntion,  235 

Clau  Chattan^  o\' M'-'IntoJJjcs,  172 

Clergy  Scotch^  commendable  conduftof,  I43 

Coal  of  Sutherland^  its  miraculous  quality,  157 

Cobles,  a  fmall  boat-y  36 

Cock  of  the  Wood,  293 

Coker,  its  romantic  iituation,  29 

Ccldinghanj  Moor  and  Abbey,  .         43 

Coranich,  or  howling  at  fun-.rals,  96 

Cottages,  wretched  in  the  Highlands,  1 1 5 

Crab,  the  Thorney,  300 

Craigfron  Caftle,  1 2  8 

Crane,  now  unknown  in  Efig<at}d^  1  z 

Crickton,  the  admirable,  his  picture,  130 

Cromartte^  Firth  of,  151 

Crows,  Royfton  or  Hooded,  ^^,  293 
Ctdlen  Houfe  and  Town,                            130,  131 

fingular  rocks  near,  131 

Cullcden  Houfe  and  Moor,  144 

Cuftoms,  fingular  ones  in  the  Highlands,  94,  170 

Cuthbcrt\  Ducks,  Saint,  38 

D 

Days,  long  in  Cf?//;;;//;,  169 

Drt//^^;//^,  pidu res  there,  62 

Dean  of  Guild,  what,  148 

Dclamere 


INDEX.  323 


Page 

Delamere  Forefl, 

2 

Dingwall  Town, 

151 

Dogger  Bank,  great  fifliery  near, 

19 

Dornoch, 

154 

Dunbar^ 

44 

Dunheth  Caftle, 

161 

Dungjby  Bay, 

,63 

Dunkeldi 

78 

Dunrobin  Caftle, 

^55 

Duvjinane, 

78 

Duplin  Caftle,  piflures  there. 

70 

Durham^ 

27 

E 

Eagles, 

292 

Eider  Ducks, 

37 

Edinburgh^  its  lofty  fituation. 

48 

inconveniences. 

49 

rcfervoir. 

50 

Univerfity, 

55 

Elgin^  a  good  town. 

134 

its  cathedral. 

?^/^, 

Erfe  language,  where  fpoken. 

168,  209 

F 

Fairies,  belief  in. 

99 

Falcons, 

292 

Falkirk,  great  cattle  fairs  there, 

222 

Battle, 

25^ 

Earn  Iftands, 

36 

y  2 

Fafting 

32+  INDEX, 

Page 

Fafting  woman,  extraordinary  cafe  of,  261 
Fen,  Eaft,  its  fidi  and  birds,                             9?  10 

Fiery  crofs,  what,  175 

Finchal  monaftery,  29 

'rint\  Lough,  its  herring-fifhery,  202 

Flam/^croiigh-l-iesid,  its  birds,  1 6 

Flixto}!^  1 7 

Forcbabusy  134 

Forfeited  eftates,  how  applied,  149 

Forres^  great  column  near,  136 

Fofs-dyke,  6 
Fraoch-ElaHy  the  HefperUes  o(  the  Highlands,   199 

Freehi&gh  Hill,  a  large  Tumulus,  25 

Frejwick  Caftle,  horrid  Iituation  of,  162 

Funeral  cuftoms,  96 

ryers->  fall  of,  18 1 


G 

Gannet, 

47,  165,   169 

Geefc,  how  often  plucked. 

8 

George,  Fort,  Old, 

147  • 

^New, 

144 

Gijl-'orough, 

26 

Clejj-Coy 

193 

Glen-Rcy^  ftrange  roads  there. 

191,  266 

Glen-Ttlt,  a  dangerous  pafs. 

106 

Glen-lJrqhie, 

^97 

Godricy  Saint,  his  a u (lenities, 

29 

Gordon  CaRle, 

132 

Gowrie  con  fjnracy, 

74 

Graham^ 

INDEX.  325 


Page 

Grnham^  John  De,  his  epitaph. 

222 

Graham's  Dyke, 

225 

Granite  Quarries  at  A^.  Ferry^ 

^5 

Ahej-deerii 

121 

Gre-hound,  the  Highland, 

133,  290 

Grcut's^  John  a,  ho  Life, 

i6j 

Gull,  Ardic, 

65 

a 

Halydon  Hill,  battle  of. 

42 

Hares,  white. 

S2,  291 

Heronry,  a  great, 

12 

Herring  fifhery. 

202,  203 

High-bridge, 

187 

Highlands,  awefull  entrances  into. 

74 

Drefs  of  the  Highland  Men, 

173 

Women, 

176 

Arms, 

174 

Charadter  of  the  Highlanders 

,        176 

Sports  and  amufements  of. 

178 

Hope  ion  Houfe, 

226 

Huntings,  magnificent  in  old  times,         104,  108 

I 

Jamefon,   the  painter,  ^^ 

Fine  pidture  of  his  titTiiymoufb,        ibid. 
Other  pidlures  of  his,  128,  129 

Jet,  where  found,  23 

Inoculation  pradlifed  as  far  as  Shetland  Ifles,     168 
Infcdts,  301 

Jnverarjf 


25 


INDEX. 


Page 

Inverary  Town  and  Cadle, 

200 

Invercauld,  its  magnificent  fituation. 

III 

Jnverhchy  Caftlc, 

188 

Invernejs, 

«47 

Fair, 

172 

Joug,  whatj 

142 

Itinerary, 

3'4 

K 

Kikhurn  Caftle, 

199 

Killicrankie,  Pafs  of, 

103 

Kinloch-LevefJt 

193 

Kinkfs  Jibbey, 

136 

Ki?2?'ofs, 

65 

Kittivvake,  a  fort  of  Gull, 

125 

L 

Labor,  its  price  in  Scotland, 

7^  115 

Late  wake,  a  ftrange  funeral  cuftom, 

96 

Lavellan,  the  Water  Shrew-moufe, 

160,  291 

Leitb, 

59 

Lincoln,  its  beautiful!  cathedral. 

7 

Locbai?er, 

187,  191 

Locbiel,  his  feat. 

186 

Loch-Leven, 

66 

its  fifli  and  birds. 

67 

Loncarty,  battle  of. 

77 

LoJBc  River, 

135 

Lothian,  Eafl,  its  fertility. 

44 

Macclesfield^ 

INDEX.  327 


M 

Page 

Macclesfield^ 

'  3 

Mackrel  fture. 

204 

Mac  Nabhs^  an  antient  family  of  fmlths, 

19^ 

Marble,  white, 

158 

Marriage  cuftoms,  fingular. 

170 

Moffat., 

228 

Moncrief^  Hill  of;  its  fine  vicwj 

72 

Monro^  Sir  Robert^  his  epitaph. 

223 

Morpeth^                                 '. 

3^ 

Mountain,  the  black. 

194 

Mummies,  natural. 

163 

N 

Natural  hiftory,  recapitulation  of,  &c. 

288 

Nefs,  Lough, 

179,  182 

agitations  of,  in  17559 

184 

Newbottk,  piflures  there. 

,    59 

Newcajlle  on  Tyne, 

30 

its  falmon-fifhery, 

230 

Nightingale,  none  in  Scotland, 

294 

0 

Ord  of  Catbnefsy  a  high  promontory, 

159 

Orkney  Ifles, 

163 

Ouzels,  Ring, 

83 

P 

Pearls, 

74 

Penrithi  the  pillars  at. 

231,  282 

Perth, 

328  INDEX. 

Page 

Perth,  a  fine  town,  7^ 

its  trade,  ibid. 

P-clJjIj  c^iWcs,  J  56 

Pine  forclb,  1 12,  194. 

Pines,  vafi  Plantations  of,  151,  152 

Poetry,   Erft\  274,  &c. 

Prejion  PanSy  48 

Proverbs,  Erfe,  258,  &l. 

Provifions,  prices  of,  at  Edinburgh,  5S 

at  Aberdeen^  1 2 1 

at  Invernefs,  148 

Ptarrr.igans,  83,  294 

CL 

Queries  relating  to  the  antiquities  and  natural 

hiftory  of  Norlb  Britain,  302 

Quern,  a  hand-mill,  193 


R 

P.nynach,  Lough,  pine  lore  (I  near. 

91 

Kenti,  how  paid  in  the  Highlands, 

115 

raifing  of,  ill  effects  of, 

igi 

Roads,  parallel  in  Glen-Roy, 

266 

Roads,  the  military. 

U5 

Re  bin- Heed's  Bay, 

22 

Roe- bucks. 

2S3 

Koyiton  Crows, 

^h 

293 

Rumbling  Brig  near  Glen-dcvcn, 

68 

near  Bunkdd, 

19 

Sacrament, 


J 


INDEX.  ^         329 

S  Page 

Sacrament,  indecently  received  \nN,  Britain^  87 
Sailors  and  Soldiers,  an  attempt  to  colonize,  100 
Salmon  fifheries,   antient  laws -to  preferve,        123 

m  England-,  25,  27,41 
in  Scotland^  74,  123,  126,  17,^.,  i6y 

Salt-Pits  at  Nortbixjich.,  2 

Sand,  inundations  ot,  124,  139 

Saury,  a  new  Britijh  fifh,  298,  299 

Scarborough.,  1 7 

its  fisheries,  19 

Scone.,  75 

Scotland.,  unpromifing  entrance  into,  42 

Seals,  159,  292 

Second  fight,  164 

Sherlins,  or  fummer  dairies,  107 

Slain'^  Caftle,  1 24 

Snake,  a  new  fpecies,  296 

Snowflake,  295 

Sdland  Geefe,  47,  165,  169 

Spalding.,  1 3 

Spedre  ftory,  9i 

Spey,   a  violent  river,  i33 

Spinie  Caftle  and  Lake,  i35 

Stags,  289 

Stuart.,  Mary,  pidlures  of,  ^5^ 

Stocking  trade  in  Aberdeen,  ^  ^  ^ 

Stockton.^  27 

Siraitbearn,  a  fertile  trad,  7° 

Stroma  me,  ~  1^3 

Z  Sfrua?7, 


33^ 


INDEX. 


Page 


o 


Struany  Robert fon  of,  a  poet,  92 

SwineJJjrad  Abbey,  1 3 

Syhlla,  Queen,  where  buried,  87 

T 

*itantallon  Caftle,  4^ 

^arnaway  Caftle,  140 

STtfj,  Lough,  Si 

never  frozen  till  1769,  82 

Ifle,  and  convent  on  it,  87 

T'^^- .Bridge,  infcription  on  it,  84. 

*Tay-moiith^  its  beauties,  80 
Theft  of  cattle,  once  held  not  difhonorable,    187 

Tordow/i  Caftle,  its  fingular  cement,  184 

'Tumel,  the  fails  of,  10 1 

Lake,  102 

Tunny,  204 

burner.  Dr.  tVilliam,  the  naturalift,  32 

'^'ivecdy  40 
'Tyendrum,  higheft  feated  houfe  in  Scotland,       197 

U 

Vlric\  St.  his  earth,  158 

Urqbuari  Caftle,  180 

V 

Venereal  patients,where  formerly  confined, 2  2  6, 2  79 

W 

Weever,  Greater,  298 

WtrCi  its  fifti,  2S 

Whitby, 


INDEX.  331 


Page 

Whitly, 

24 

Wick, 

162 

William^ 

Fort, 

189 

Witches, 

where  burnt. 

57^  154 

Macbeth's, 

i37>^^- 

of  Thurfo, 

^55 

Wolves, 

how  lonor  exiftinor 

D                              C5 

in  Scothndy 

189 

Women,  the  common,  hardly  treated  in  North 
BriiaWy  126,  168 

Y 

Yew  tree,  a  great,  88 

Tiben  River,  12^ 


N      I      S. 


Lately  Publifhed, 
And   Sold  by    BENJAMIN  WHITE, 
At  Ho R  A  c  e's  Head,  in  Fleet-Street^ 

All  by  THOMAS  PENNANT,  Efqj 

I.  "DRiTiSH  Zoology,  illuftrated  with  132  cop- 

per plates,  finely  illuminated,  on  Imperial 
paper.  Folio.  Pricie  Eleven  Guineas,  half 
bound. 

II.  British  Zoology,  or  a  compleat  Syftematlc 

Hiftory  of  the  Qiiadrupeds,  Birds,  Reptiles, 
and  Piflies  of  this  country,  illullrated  with 
139  copper  plates,  in  4  volumes,  Oclavo, 
Royal  paper<i  Price  2/.  8j.  in  boards,  or 
2/.  1 55.  bound. 

The  3d  and  4th  volumes  may  be  had  fcpa- 

rately,  to   compleat   fetts,   both    Royal 

and   fmall  papers. 

III.  Indian  Zoology,    Part  I,  with    12    plates, 

finely  coloured,  Quarto,  Imperial  paper. 
Price  i6j.  fewed. 

IV.  A  Synopsis  of  Quadrupeds,  Odavo,  with 

"^iX  copperplates,  Price 9^.  in  boards. 


1495    4        L' 


BINDING  SLUT.  AUblkl  MffV 


DA  Pennant,  Thomas 

855        A  tour  in  Scotland. 

?^  2d  ed. 

1772 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
