Ill 

^;$r' 


THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 
OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 


GIFT 


ft.   H 


THE    LIFE 


OF 


FRANCIS   PLACE 


'          •         yX        ,       ,        /    •  /?£     '  •     /->      //.  /> 

*»  sS/s  Jw&trJ&um  <i  •  freww.!  r>-  Wffr.t  (>.>,; 


THE    LIFE 


OF 


FRANCIS    PLACE 

1771-1854 


BY 


GEAHAM    WALLAS,    M.A. 

LECTURER  AT   THE   LONDON   SCHOOL   OF   ECONOMICS   AND 
POLITICAL  SCIENCE 


LONGMANS,    GREEN,    AND    CO. 

39    PATERNOSTER    ROW,    LONDON 

NEW   YORK   AND   BOMBAY 

1898 

A"    right*    rexrrved 


Printed  by  BALLANTYNK,  HANSON  6*  Co. 
At  the  Ballantyne  Press 


Colleq-e 
.Library 

15  A 


THE  main  sources  of  this  biography  are  the  well-known 
Place  manuscripts  in  the  British  Museum,  referred  to  by 
their  number  in  the  catalogue,  and  the  autobiography 
and  letter-books  lately  in  the  possession  of  Francis  Place's 
descendants,  to  whom,  and  especially  to  Mr.  Francis  C. 
Miers,  I  have  to  express  my  sincere  thanks.  I  am  glad 
to  say  that  by  Mr.  Miers'  generosity  the  autobiography 
and  letter-books  have  now  been  deposited  in  the  Museum 
with  the  other  manuscripts. 

My  own  work  has,  of  course,  by  no  means  exhausted 
the  interest  of  these  documents.  I  have  confined  myself 
to  writing  Place's  life,  and  have  made  no  attempt  to  deal 
with  the  materials  which  he  collected  for  the  general 
history  of  his  time.  Within  these  limits  I  have  tried  to 
make  my  book  useful  to  any  future  historian  who  may 
deal  with  the  period,  by  giving  references  to  the  original 
sources  for  all  statements  of  fact.  For  the  punctuation 
of  quotations  from  Place's  manuscript  I  am  responsible. 
Place  punctuated  extremely  badly,  and  his  printed  works 
were  apparently  repunctuated  by  the  printer's  reader. 
He  spelt  pretty  accurately,  but  made  occasional  mistakes, 
which  I  have  not  reproduced.  I  have  further,  in  one  or 
two  instances,  corrected  little  grammatical  slips  where  the 
insertion  of  a  footnote  seemed  to  be  pedantic. 

It  is  an  important  question  for  the  historical  student 


i\.  4.J 


vi  PREFACE 

how  far  Place's  evidence  should  be  accepted  on  points  as 
to  which  (as  in  the  case  of  some  incidents  in  the  Reform 
struggle)  he  is  the  only  witness.  My  own  opinion,  formed 
after  consulting  independent  evidence  in  newspapers  and 
elsewhere  for  a  very  large  number  of  Place's  statements, 
is,  that  his  accuracy  on  all  questions  of  fact  was  most 
remarkable.  His  memory  seems  to  have  been  excellent, 
and  his  description  of  events  after  1 820  was  written  within 
a  few  years  or  months  of  their  occurrence,  and  was  checked 
by  the  use  of  a  mass  of  printed  documents  and  original 
letters. 

Finally,  I  have  to  record  my  gratitude  to  Mr.  F.  W. 
Galton  and  Mrs.  McKillop  for  their  skilled  assistance, 
and  to  many  other  friends  for  exhortation  and  reproof. 


GRAHAM  WALLAS. 


17  JOHN  STBEKT,  BEDFORD  Row, 

LONDON,  W.C.,  December  1897. 


C  0  N  T  E  X  T  S 


CHAPTER  I 

PAGK 

EARLY  LIFE  i 


CHAPTER  II 
WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,   1807-15       .....       39 

CHAPTER  III 
THE  BENTHAMITES     ........       65 

CHAPTER  IV 
SCHOOLS  FOR  ALL     ........       93 

CHAPTER  V 
WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,   1815-30       .         .         .         .         .114 

CHAPTER  VI 
THE  DISMAL  SCIENCE 157 

CHAPTER  VII 
THE  CHARING  CROSS  LIBRARY  .         .         .         .         .         .176 

CHAPTER  VIII 

THE  COMBINATION  LAWS  ...  .         .      197 


viii  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  IX 


PAOK 


THE  FIRST  REFORM  CAMPAIGN 241 

CHAPTER  X 
WAR  ON  Two  FRONTS 265 

CHAPTER  XI 
THE  SECOND  REFORM  CAMPAIGN 289 

CHAPTER  XII 
THE  REFORMED  PARLIAMENT      .         .         .         .         .         .324 

CHAPTER  XIII 
CHARTISM          .........     353 

CHAPTER  XIV 
LAST  YEARS      .........     385 


SUMMARY   OF   CHIEF   EVENTS   IN 
PLACE'S   LIFE. 


1771.  Born  November  3. 

1784-1789.  Apprenticed  to  leather-breeches  maker. 

1791.   Marriage. 

1793.  Strike  of  leather-breeches  makers.     Out  of  work  for  some 

months. 

1794-1796.   Member  of  London  Corresponding  Society. 
Went  to  Birmingham  (1796)  to  defend  delegates. 
1796.  Assisted  in  publication  of  Paine's  "Age  of  Reason." 
1799.   Opened  a  shop  at  Charing  Cross,  with  a  partner. 
1 80 1.  Recommenced  the  business  alone. 
1804.  Began  to  take  interest  in  Lancastrian  schools. 

1807.  First  interest  in  Westminster  elections. 

1808.  Introduction  to  Bentham  and  James  Mill. 

1810.   (April)  Burdett's  arrest.     (June)  Inquest  on  Joseph  Sellis. 

Place's  estrangement  from  Burdett. 
1810-1814.  Acquaintance  with  Godwin. 

1813.  Acquaintance  with  Robert  Owen  began. 
1813-1814.  Member  of  "British  and  Foreign  School  Society." 

Introduction  to  Hume. 

1814.  Was  instrumental  in  Repeal  of  Statute  of  Apprentices. 
Gave  up  politics  in  Westminster  for  a  time. 

1815.  Gave  evidence  before  Committee  on  Mendicity. 

1816.  Gave  evidence  before  Committee  on  Education. 
Apparent  maximum  of  business. 

1817.  Handed  control  of  business  to  eldest  son. 
Visit  to  Bentham  at  Ford  Abbey. 


x  SUMMARY   OF   CHIEF   EVENTS 

1818.  General  Election  :  Romilly  and  Burdett  elected  at  West- 

minster. 

1819.  Westminster  election   for  Eomilly's  vacancy.     Lamb   de- 

feated Hobhouse.     (August)  "Peterloo."     (November — 
December)  "The  Savage  Parliament." 

1820.  General  Election.     Hobhouse  and  Burdett  elected  at  West- 

minster :  unopposed  for  thirteen  years. 
1824-1825.  Repeal  of  Combination  Laws. 
1827.  Death  of  first  wife. 

1830.  Married  Mr?.  Chatterley.     General  Election. 
1831-1832.  Eeform  agitation. 

1833.  Loss  of  capital.     Removal  to  Brompton  Square. 

1834.  The  Dorchester  labourers'  imprisonment. 

1834-1836.  Work  on:   Repeal  of  Stamp  Duty;  Municipal  Cor- 
porations ;  Corporation  of  London. 
1836-1839.  Wrote  "History  of  Reform  Agitation." 

1837.  Organised  "Working- Men's  Association." 

1838.  Drafted  "The  People's  Charter." 

1839.  Joined  in  agitation  for  Penny  Postage. 
Imprisonment  of  Chartist  leaders. 

1840-1846.  Joined  in  Anti-Corn-Law  agitation. 
1841.  Visit  to  Manchester  for  Anti-Corn-Law  League. 

Health  began  to  give  way. 
1844.  Serious  illness. 
1851.  Separated  from  his  wife.     Went  to  live  at  Hammersmith. 

1853.  Removed  to  Earl's  Court. 

1854.  Death  on  January  i. 


CHAPTER    I 
EARLY  LIFE 

ON  January  7,  1854,  an  article  in  the  Spectator  announced 
that  Francis  Place  had  died  at  the  age  of  eighty -two. 
"  Few  men,"  said  the  writer,  "  have  done  more  of  the 
world's  work  with  so  little  external  sign.  .  .  .  He  was 
essentially  a  public  man,  but  his  work  usually  lay  behind 
the  curtain.  .  .  .  He  loved  quiet  power  for  the  purpose  of 
promoting  good  ends." l 

The  lovers  of  quiet  power  are  soon  forgotten.  The  Spec- 
tator article  implies  that  Place's  name,  even  in  1854,  was 
unknown  except  to  his  old  political  associates.  During 
the  forty  years  which  have  since  elapsed,  the  "Radical 
tailor  of  Charing  Cross  "  has  only  been  known  from  his 
friendship  with  Bentham  and  James  Mill,  and,  it  may  be, 
from  Robert  Owen's  apparently  absurd  statement  that  he 
was  the  "real  leader  of  the  Whig  Party." 2  That  Place  took 
no  steps  to  secure  notoriety  during  his  lifetime,  was  partly 
because  his  power  over  other  men  depended  largely  on  his 
readiness  to  give  them  the  public  credit  of  the  work  he 
planned  for  them,  and  partly  because  indifference  to  popu- 
larity was  part  of  his  philosophy.  But,  fortunately,  that 
indifference  did  not  prevent  him  from  taking  a  good  deal 
of  trouble  to  make  himself  known  to  posterity.  He 
knew  by  what  he  had  learnt  from  the  scanty  records  of 

1  The  Spectator,  No.  1332,  ytli  January  1854,  p.  13. 

2  The  "Life  of  Robert  Owen,"  written  by  himself  (London,  1857),. 
vol.  i.  pt.  i.  p.  122. 

A 


2  EARLY   LIFE 

eighteenth-century  Radicalism,  that  history  is  of  great  and 
immediate  usefulness  to  a  politician ;  and  being  himself  a 
maker  of  history,  he  was  sensible  of  a  moral  obligation  to 
leave  authentic  records  of  the  public  work  in  which  he 
had  borne  a  hand.  From  1813  to  1850  he  carefully  kept 
and  indexed  his  political  letters;  and  in  1823,  under  the 
persuasion  of  Bentham,  he  commenced  an  autobiography 
for  publication.  The  result  was  what  might  have  been 
expected  from  a  man  whose  sense  of  the  importance  of 
facts  made  him  over -anxious  to  record  every  possible 
detail.  The  autobiography,  which  never  was,  and  never 
will  be,  published,  branched  off  into  a  series  of  long  and 
unwieldy  monographs  on  the  Westminster  Elections,  the 
repeal  of  the  Combination  Laws,  the  Reform  Agitation  of 
1830-32,  and  the  numerous  other  public  and  private  enter- 
prises in  which  he  took  part,  and  was  accompanied  by  huge 
collections  of  illustrative  documents.  No  less  than  seventy 
volumes  make  up  in  this  way  the  "  Place  Manuscripts  "  in 
the  British  Museum.1  Other  volumes  are  in  the  posses- 
sion of  his  family.  But  besides  the  facts  which  he  was  so 
diligent  to  collect,  these  volumes  contain  the  history  of  an 
extraordinarily  interesting  man,  who,  from  1793,  when  he 
became  Secretary  to  the  Leather-breeches  Makers'  Trade 
Club,  to  1838,  when  he  drafted  the  "People's  Charter,"  was 
a  master  in  the  inception  and  execution  of  those  difficult 
and  uncertain  reforms  which  we  have  now  come  to  think 
of  as  having  been  from  the  first  easy  and  irresistible. 

Francis  Place  was  a  Londoner ;  he  was  born  on  Novem- 
ber 3,  1771,  in  a  "sponging  house,"  or  private  debtor's 
prison,  in  Vinegar  Yard,  near  Drury  Lane,  kept  by  his 
father,  Simon  Place,  who  was  at  that  time  a  bailiff  to  the 
Marshalsea  Court.  Francis  was  lucky  enough  to  be  sent 
regularly  to  some  sort  of  school  from  the  age  of  four  till 
he  was  nearly  fourteen.  The  private  adventure  schools 
1  Additional  MSS.,  vols.  27,789-27,859. 


EARLY   LIFE  3 

round  Drury  Lane  and  Fleet  Street  in  the  eighteenth 
century  were  not,  however,  exactly  places  of  education,  and 
he  did  not  learn  much  until,  in  his  twelfth  year,  he  came 
under  a  kindly  ineffectual  teacher,  who  lent  him  books, 
gave  him  good  advice,  and  lectured  him  with  the  other 
pupils  every  Thursday  afternoon  on  the  elements  of 
morality.  With  this  exception,  the  surroundings  of  his 
early  life  were  so  unfavourable,  that  in  later  years  he  and 
other  believers  in  the  sufficiency  of  Bentham's  "  Table 
of  the  Springs  of  Action"  were  often  puzzled  to  account 
for  the  resolution  and  self-control  which  he  developed. 

When  Francis  Place  was  nearly  nine  years  old  the 
sponging  house  was  given  up,  and  Simon  Place  took  a 
tavern  with  the  savings  which  he  had  made  by  legalised 
blackmail.  Place  describes  his  father  as  a  bony,  muscular 
man,  about  five  feet  six  or  seven  inches  in  height,  of  dark 
complexion,  and  very  strong.  "  He  was  a  resolute,  daring, 
straightforward  sort  of  a  man,  governed  almost  wholly  by 
his  passions  and  animal  sensations,  both  of  which  were 
very  strong,  and  careless  of  reputation,  except  in  some 
particulars  in  which  he  seems  to  have  thought  he  excelled. 
These  were  few,  mostly  relating  to  sturdiness  and  dissolute- 
ness. .  .  .  He  never  spoke  to  any  of  his  children  in  the 
way  of  conversation ;  the  boys  never  ventured  to  ask  him 
a  question,  since  the  only  answer  which  could  be  anticipated 
was  a  blow.  If  he  were  coming  along  a  passage  or  any 
narrow  place  such  as  a  doorway,  and  was  met  by  either  me 
or  my  brother,  he  always  made  a  blow  at  us  with  his  fist 
for  coining  in  his  way.  If  we  attempted  to  retreat  he 
would  make  us  come  forward,  and  as  certainly  as  we  came 
forward  he  would  knock  us  down."  He  was  an  inveterate 
gambler,  the  home  being  more  than  once  broken  up  owing 
to  his  losses  in  the  State  lotteries  of  the  time.  On  such 
occasions  he  would  wander  away  for  months,  supporting 
himself  by  his  old  trade  as  a  journeyman  baker,  while 


4  EARLY   LIFE 

his  wife  kept  the  family  by  needlework.  Out  of  school 
Francis  Place,  who  was  short  and  sturdy,  took  his  full 
share  in  that  now  incredible  street  life  which  flourished 
in  London  before  the  new  police.  He  was  skilled  in  street 
games,  a  hunter  of  bullocks  in  the  Strand,  an  obstinate 
faction  fighter,  and  a  daily  witness  of  every  form  of  open 
crime  and  debauchery.  In  school,  however,  he  became 
easily  head  boy,  and  was  regularly  employed  to  teach  his 
fellow-scholars. 

Some  months  before  Francis  was  fourteen  years  old  his 
father  announced  that  he  should  be  apprenticed  to  a  con- 
veyancer. The  boy  flatly  refused  to  be  "made  a  lawyer," 
and  declared  that  he  would  prefer  anything  else  if  it  were 
a  trade.  "  This,"  he  says,  "  was  in  the  evening,  and  my 
father  went  immediately  into  his  parlour  and  offered  me 
to  any  one  who  would  take  me.  A  little  man  named 
France  said  he  would,  and  I  was  sent  the  very  next  morn- 
ing on  liking  for  a  month  to  learn  the  art  and  mystery  of 
leather-breeches  making."  France  was  a  drunken  little 
wretch,  and  Place,  left  to  take  care  of  himself,  though  he 
worked  hard  during  the  day,  spent  his  evenings,  as  he 
afterwards  unflinchingly  confessed,  in  a  sorry  enough 
fashion  among  his  associates  in  Fleet  Street  and  the  sur- 
rounding courts.  He  belonged  to  a  "  cutter  club  " — an 
eight-oared  boat's  crew  —  who  used  to  drink  and  sing 
together  after  the  evening's  row.  The  cockswain  of  the 
crew  was  some  years  later  transported  for  a  robbery,  and 
the  stroke  oar  was  hanged  on  a  charge  of  murder.  Place, 
however,  did  not  even  at  this  time  go  really  to  the  bad. 
He  was  less  dissolute  than  his  companions,  and  could  not 
afterwards  recollect  a  single  act  of  dishonesty  during  his 
apprenticeship.  That  this  was  so  was  probably  due  at 
least  as  much  to  a  certain  dogged  personal  pride  as  to  the 
wide  views  of  life  which  he  had  learnt  at  school  from  the 
Thursday  afternoon  lectures  on  morality. 


EARLY   LIFE  5 

In  July  1789,  before  he  was  yet  eighteen  years  old,  his 
indentures  were  given  up,  and  he  became  an  independent 
journeyman  breeches-maker.  He  had  been  working  for 
nine  months  somewhat  irregularly  at  his  trade,  when  he 
met,  in  April  1 790,  his  future  wife,  Elizabeth  Chadd.  This 
was  the  turning  point  in  his  career.  His  innate  toughness 
of  fibre  definitely  asserted  itself,  and  he  became  steady, 
frugal,  and  industrious.  He  could,  however,  save  little  or 
nothing.  He  was  a  highly  skilled  workman,  but  leather- 
breeches  making  was  a  decaying  trade,  and  he  could  earn 
no  more  than  fourteen  shillings  a  week.  His  father,  whose 
health  had  broken  down,  had  sold  his  public-house  and 
lost  in  a  lottery  all  that  he  had  received  from  the  sale,  and 
his  mother  was  working  as  a  washerwoman.  But  Place 
was  hopeful,  and  Elizabeth  Chadd  was  unhappy  at  home. 
So  in  March  1791,  when  he  was  nineteen  and  a  half,  and 
she  not  quite  seventeen,  they  were  married,  and  went  to 
live  in  one  room  in  a  court  off  the  Strand.  Their  joint 
earnings  were  under  seventeen  shillings  a  week.  "  From 
this  we  had  to  pay  for  lodging  three  shillings  and  sixpence 
a  week,  and  on  an  average  one  shilling  and  sixpence  a 
week  for  coals  and  candles.  Thus  we  had  only  twelve 
shillings  a  week  for  food  and  clothes  and  other  necessaries. 
Nothing  could  be  saved  from  this  small  sum.  We  how- 
ever continued  to  dress  ourselves  respectably,  and  were 
comfortable  with  each  other.  As  our  poverty  would  not 
permit  us  to  give  anything  away,  we  kept  ourselves  very 
much  to  ourselves,  had  scarcely  any  acquaintance,  and 
visited  nobody  except  our  parents  and  my  eldest  sister. 
.  .  .  We  soon  acquired  the  character  of  being  proud  and 
above  our  equals.  This  was  the  certain  consequence  of 
our  having  no  acquaintance  with  any  one,  and  being 
better  dressed  than  most  who  were  similarly  circum- 
stanced, and  we  were  contemptuously  called  '  the  Lady 
and  Gentleman.' " 


6  EARLY   LIFE 

As  his  own  trade  of  leather-breeches  making  was  in  so 
bad  a  way,  he  commenced  to  make  stuff  breeches,  and 
formed  "clubs"  of  working-men  to  raffle  for  his  produc- 
tions. Though  he  lost  money  by  this  speculation  he 
gained  experience,  and  was  soon  able  to  get  fairly  well- 
paid  employment  as  a  stuff-breeches  maker,  taking  work 
from  various  master  tailors  to  be  done  at  home.  But  mis- 
fortune was  near  at  hand.  In  March  1793,  two  years  after 
his  marriage,  and  a  year  after  the  birth  of  his  first  child, 
a  strike  took  place  in  the  leather-breeches  making  trade. 
His  description  of  this  event  is  worth  giving  at  some 
length,  as  the  earliest  existing  account  of  a  strike  written 
from  the  inside. 

"  Some  time  before  I  was  married  I  became  a  member  of 
the  Breeches-Makers'  Benefit  Society,  for  the  support  of 
the  members  when  sick,  and  to  bury  them  when  dead.  I 
paid  my  subscription  regularly,  but  I  never  attended  at 
the  public-house  at  which  the  club  was  held,  excepting  on 
the  evenings  when  the  stewards  were  chosen.  The  club, 
though  actually  a  benefit  club,  was  intended  for  the  pur- 
pose of  supporting  the  members  in  a  strike  for  wages.  It 
had  now,  in  the  spring  of  1793,  about  £250  in  its  chest, 
which  was  deemed  sufficient;  a  strike  was  agreed  upon, 
and  the  men  left  their  work.  It  was  a  badly  paid,  badly 
conducted  trade;  a  good  workman,  who  was  constantly 
employed,  might  earn  a  guinea  a  week ;  but  scarcely  any 
one  was  fully  employed.  It  required  from  an  hour  to  an 
hour  and  a  half,  when  two  were  employed,  to  cut  out  and 
get  ready  a  pair  of  leather  breeches ;  and  as  no  one  master 
had  an  arrangement  so  complete  as  to  have  work  always 
ready,  and  as  the  whole  was  piecework,  the  masters  were 
regardless  of  the  loss  and  inconvenience  the  men  suffered. 
The  men  in  the  best  shops  could  not  therefore  earn  more 
than  eighteen  shillings  a  week,  and  in  all  the  others  much 
less.  They  had  therefore  resolved  to  strike  for  wages,  which 


EARLY   LIFE  7 

would  put  them  as  to  earnings  on  a  level  with  other  trades. 
So  many  of  them  had  become  makers  of  stuff  breeches 
that,  notwithstanding  the  trade  of  leather-breeches  making 
had  declined,  the  proportion  of  hands  to  employment  was 
less  than  formerly,  and  trade  was  brisk.  The  leaders  there- 
fore calculated — as  they  thought  securely — on  obtaining 
the  advance  they  demanded.  They  did  not  foresee  that  the 
masters  would  represent  the  strike  as  unreasonable,  and 
persuade  their  customers  to  wear  stuff  breeches,  at  least 
for  a  time,  and  that  they  could  get  this  sort  of  work  done 
by  tailors.  As  I  had  not  been  at  the  club-house  for  more 
than  three  months,  and  had  now  no  acquaintance  with 
any  one  in  the  trade,  I  was  neither  aware  of  the  intention 
to  strike,  nor  of  the  strike  when  it  took  place.  The  first  I 
heard  of  it  was  from  Mr.  Bristow.  On  taking  some  work 
home  one  evening  he,  instead  of  giving  me  more  as  I 
expected,  gave  me  my  discharge.  I  asked  the  reason ;  he 
would  assign  none,  and  I  reproached  him  with  acting 
unjustly,  and  in  a  way  I  should  not  have  done  towards 
him.  He  then  alluded  to  the  strike,  to  which  he  supposed 
I  was  a  party.  I  assured  him  that  I  had  never  heard  of 
any  intention  amongst  the  men  to  strike,  and  had  no 
knowledge  whatever  on  the  subject,  but  that  which  he  had 
imparted.  He  was  a  kind  and  reasonable  man ;  he  told 
me  he  was  satisfied  I  had  not,  and  would  not  deceive  him. 
'  He  was,'  he  said,  '  very  sorry  to  discharge  me,  but  that  at 
a  meeting  of  the  masters  it  had  been  agreed  that  every 
leather-breeches  maker  who  was  employed  to  make  stuff 
breeches  should  be  at  once  discharged,  to  prevent  them 
assisting  those  who  had  struck.'  Allison  discharged  me 
next  day.  Thus  at  once  were  our  hopes  destroyed  and 
our  views  obscured.  No  chance  of  employment  remained  ; 
so  I  went  to  the  club-house,  and  here  I  was  informed  that 
every  man  out  of  employment  was  to  be  paid  seven  shillings 
a  week  from  the  fund.  I  found  that  the  number  of  men 


«  EARLY   LIFE 

was  at  least  equal  to  the  number  of  pounds  the  club  had 
in  its  possession,  and  consequently  there  was  provision 
only  for  three  weeks.  In  the  evening,  when  the  men  were 
assembled,  I  stood  up  upon  one  of  the  tables  and  addressed 
them.  I  pointed  out  the  inadequacy  of  the  sum  they 
had  collected,  the  privations  they  would  probably  have  to 
endure.  I  proposed  that  as  many  as  were  willing  should 
receive  one  week's  pay  in  advance  and  a  certificate,  pro- 
vided each  of  them  would  go  on  the  tramp  and  engage  not 
to  return  to  London  for  a  month.  It  was  well  known  that 
a  man  who  brought  a  certificate  to  any  leather- breeches 
maker's  shop  in  the  country  would  be  sure  of  a  day's  keep, 
a  night's  lodging,  and  a  shilling  to  start  again  with  the  next 
morning,  and  in  some  of  the  larger  towns  a  breakfast  and 
half-a-crown  in  money  to  help  him  along.  Many  therefore 
were  willing  to  leave  London  on  the  terms  proposed.  The 
proposition  was  adopted,  and  arrangements  made  to  carry 
it  into  effect  the  next  morning.  I  then  proposed  that, 
instead  of  giving  each  man  seven  shillings  for  his  week's 
subsistence,  they  should  make  up  Rag  Fair  breeches,1  and 
let  as  many  as  would  take  them  have  two  pairs  a  week, 
at  four  shillings  a  pair,  journeyman's  wages.  This  was 
a  shilling  a  week  more  than  was  proposed  to  be  given, 
and  as  the  loss  on  each  pair  would  not  be  more  than  two 
shillings  and  sixpence,  the  fund  would  last  more  than 
twice  as  long  as  it  would  if  seven  shillings  were  given  to 
each  for  doing  nothing.  Besides  this,  there  was  another 
advantage,  namely,  that  every  man  who  could  procure 
any  sort  of  employment  could  not  make,  and  would  not 
perhaps  be  desirous  to  make,  two  pairs  of  Rag  Fair 
breeches  a  week;  and  if  there  were  men  who,  having 
other  employment,  were  mean  enough  to  take  money 
from  the  fund,  this  would  put  an  end  to  any  such  prac- 
tice. This  proposition  was  highly  applauded,  and  instantly 
1  i.e.  leather  breeches  made  of  inferior  materials. 


EARLY   LIFE  9 

adopted.  A  committee  of  three,  of  which  I  was  one,  was 
appointed  to  make  the  necessary  arrangements,  and  to 
report  on  the  next  evening.  I  then  proposed  that  a  very 
convenient  shop,  under  the  Piazza  in  Covent  Garden, 
which  I  had  been  to  look  at,  should  be  taken,  in  which 
the  trade  should  be  carried  on.  This  proposition  was 
referred  to  the  committee,  who  were  empowered  to  take 
the  shop  if  they  approved  of  it.  I  then  proposed  to 
them  to  prepare  an  address  setting  forth  the  reasons  for 
the  strike,  that  it  should  be  printed  and  circulated.  This 
was  also  agreed  to,  and  referred  to  the  committee.  A 
report  on  all  these  matters  was  made  by  me  on  the  next 
evening,  and  as  my  knowledge  of  Rag  Fair  breeches- 
making  was  well  known  and  duly  appreciated,  I  was 
unanimously  elected  sole  manager  of  the  whole  concern, 
and  the  stewards  of  the  club  were  directed  to  furnish  the 
money  necessary  for  the  purpose.  My  pay  was  to  be 
twelve  shillings  a  week,  on  condition  that  I  would  arrange 
the  whole  business  in  a  plain  manner  and  conduct  it ;  and 
those  whom  I  might  find  it  necessary  to  employ  under 
me  in  the  business  should  have  nine  shillings  a  week  each. 
The  business  was  immediately  commenced,  and  was  so 
managed  that  legal  proceedings  could  not  be  taken  against 
us  for  a  combination.  Things  went  on  thus  until  the  close 
of  the  month  of  May,  when  the  money  was  all  expended, 
and  the  men  were  compelled  to  return  to  their  employ- 
ment without  any  advance  of  wages.  The  masters  in  their 
turn  punished  the  men  as  much  as  they  could ;  and  as  the 
whole  number  of  masters  was  small,  and  the  whole  number 
of  men  few,  it  was  by  no  means  difficult  for  the  combined 
masters  to  effect  their  purpose.  All  who  had  been  in  any 
way  active  in  the  strike  were  not  to  be  employed  so  long 
as  any  other  man  was  unemployed ;  I  and  another  young 
man  named  James  Ellis  were  never  again  to  be  employed 
in  any  way  whatever,  by  any  master  breeches-maker." 


10  EARLY   LIFE 

The  terrible  description  which  follows  might  be  written 
of  thousands  of  families  to-day.  "During  the  strike, 
which  continued  three  months,  we  expended  what  little 
we  had  saved.  Soon  after  the  commencement  of  the 
strike  our  child  was  taken  with  smallpox,  and  died. 
During  the  child's  illness  we,  of  course,  lived  and  slept 
in  the  same  room ;  it  was  a  small  one,  and  it  may  easily 
be  supposed  that  our  condition  was  one  of  extreme  chagrin. 
To  my  wife  it  was  one  of  great  suffering.  Persons  who 
have  never  been  in  such  circumstances  can  form  but 
faint  ideas  of  the  misery  even  the  best  and  most  frugal 
of  workmen  sometimes  endure. 

"  During  the  next  eight  months  I  could  obtain  no  sort 
of  employment,  either  in  my  own  trade  or  in  any  other 
way.  At  the  commencement  of  this  state  of  things  I 
contrived  so  to  conduct  myself,  as  to  keep  away  every  one 
who  was  likely  to  visit  us,  and  no  one  excepting  my 
brother  ever  called  upon  us ;  and  thus  none  knew  how 
poor  we  really  were.  We  visited  nowhere  except  now  and 
then  our  parents,  ...  so  we  were  left  alone,  which,  in 
our  circumstances,  was  what  we  desired.  •  We  made  many 
efforts  to  procure  some  sort  of  employment,  but  were 
wholly  unsuccessful.  We  suffered  every  kind  of  privation 
consequent  on  want  of  employment  and  food  and  tire. 
This  is  the  only  period  of  my  life  on  which  I  look  back 
with  shame.  The  tricks  and  pranks  of  my  boyhood  were 
common,  and  were  not  thought  disgraceful ;  no  one  would 
have  abandoned  me  for  what  every  one  did  and  was  ex- 
pected to  do,  though  the  knowledge  of  it  might  have 
distressed  my  mother.  My  temper  was  bad,  and  instead 
of  doing  everything  in  my  power  to  soothe  and  comfort 
and  support  my  wife  in  her  miserable  condition;  instead 
of  doing  her  homage  for  the  exemplary  manner  in  which 
she  bore  her  sufferings ;  instead  of  meeting,  as  I  ought  on 
all  occasions  to  have  done,  her  good  temper  and  affection : 


EARLY   LIFE  11 

I  used  at  times  to  give  way  to  passion,  and  increase  her 
and  my  own  misery.  The  folly  and  absurdity  of  giving 
way  to  bad  temper  was  always  apparent  to  me,  and  I 
never  attempted  either  to  palliate  or  excuse  it  to  myself. 
I  was  indeed  ashamed  of  it,  and  set  about  to  rectify  it, 
and  this  I  soon  did  to  a  considerable  extent.  It  is  but  too 
common  for  a  man  and  his  wife,  whose  circumstances 
compel  them  to  be  almost  constantly  together  in  the  same 
room,  to  live  in  great  discomfort.  Our  disagreements  were 
not,  however,  frequent,  and  when  they  did  occur,  the  fault 
was  always  on  my  side.  Nothing  conduces  so  much  to 
the  degradation  of  a  man  and  woman  in  the  opinion  of 
each  other,  and  of  themselves  in  all  respects — but  most 
especially  of  the  woman — than  her  having  to  eat  and 
drink,  and  cook  and  wash  and  iron,  and  transact  all  her 
domestic  concerns,  in  the  room  in  which  her  husband  works, 
and  in  which  they  sleep.  In  some  cases  men  and  women 
are  so  ignorant  and  brutal  that  this  mode  of  life  is  of  no 
moment  to  them ;  but  to  those  who  have  ever  so  small  a 
share  of  information,  and  consequently  of  refinement,  it  is  a 
terrible  grievance,  and  produces  sad  consequences.  .  .  . 

"  Our  sufferings  were  great  indeed.  As  long  as  we  had 
anything  which  could  be  pawned,  we  did  not  suffer  much 
from  actual  hunger ;  but  after  everything  had  been  pawned 
'but  what  we  stood  upright  in,'  we  suffered  much  from 
actual  hunger.  My  wife  was  a  fine,  handsome  young 
woman,  and  I  was  most  affectionately  and  sincerely  at- 
tached to  her,  notwithstanding  the  ebullitions  of  temper  I 
have  noticed ;  and  when  I  sometimes  looked  at  her  in  her 
comfortless,  forlorn,  and  all  but  ragged  condition,  I  could 
hardly  endure  our  wretched  state,  and  know  not  what 
mischief  or  crimes  it  might  have  driven  me  to  commit, 
had  not  the  instructions  of  my  good  schoolmaster,  and 
my  previous  reading,  enabled  me  to  form  something  like 
correct  notions,  and  to  hold  to  them. 


12  EARLY   LIFE 

"  After  about  two  months'  privation  I  became  somewhat 
reconciled  to  my  condition,  hopeless  as  it  at  times  seemed, 
and  at  length  I  obtained  such  a  perfect  command  of  my- 
self that,  excepting  commiseration  for  my  wife,  and  actual 
hunger,  I  suffered  but  little,  and  bore  my  lot  without  much 
repining.  I  made  up  my  mind  to  endure  whatever  I  should 
be  compelled  to  suffer,  and  resolved  to  take  advantage  of 
everything  which  might  occur,  to  work  myself  into  a  con- 
dition to  become  a  master  myself.  I  never  afterwards 
swerved  in  the  least  from  this  resolution.  .  .  . 

"  My  wife  had  never  been  at  a  pawnbroker's,  and  could 
not  go.  I  would  not  go  myself.  Hunger  at  last  induced 
her  to  request  the  wife  of  an  old  man,  a  carpenter  who 
lived  in  one  of  the  garrets,  to  pawn  something  for  her.  This 
she  did,  and  continued  to  go  as  long  as  there  was  anything 
which  could  be  pawned.  This  woman  was  about  fifty 
years  of  age ;  she  was  very  poor,  of  quiet  manners,  and  to 
us,  and  as  far  as  we  could  learn,  very  honest.  It  is  pro- 
bable that  when  she  was  no  longer  employed  to  pawn 
things  for  us,  she  concluded  we  had  nothing  more  to  pawn, 
and  communicated  her  suspicions  to  our  landlord's  wife, 
who,  as  well  as  her  husband,  offered  my  wife  credit  for 
everything  they  sold ;  and  the  wife  almost  forced  bread, 
coals,  soup,  and  candles  on  her.  And  at  the  end  of  our 
privation,  notwithstanding  we  were  only  half  fed  on  bread 
and  water,  with  an  occasional  red  herring,  we  were  six 
pounds  in  debt  to  our  landlord." 

Those  eight  months  of  actual  starvation  had  on  Place 
the  same  lasting  influence  that  the  sufferings  of  his  boy- 
hood had  on  Charles  Dickens.  Thirty  years  later,  when  he 
was  a  rich  man  and  had  already  for  four  years  retired  from 
business,  he  writes  with  a  pity  still  keen  and  fresh  of  those 
whom  he  left  behind  amid  the  horrors  from  which  he 
himself  escaped.  "  The  hopes  of  a  man  who  has  no  other 
means  than  those  of  his  own  hands  to  help  himself  are  but 


EARLY   LIFE  13 

too  often  illusory,  and  in  a  vast  number  of  cases  the  dis- 
appointments are  more  than  can  be  steadily  met ;  and  men 
give  up  in  despair,  become  reckless,  and  after  a  life  of 
poverty,  end  their  days  prematurely  in  misery.  The  mis- 
fortune is  the  greater  too,  as  it  is  only  the  better  sort  of 
persons  to  whom  this  happens — to  the  careful,  saving' 
moral  men  and  women,  who  have  set  their  hearts  on 
bettering  their  condition,  and  have  toiled  day  and  night  in 
the  hope  of  accomplishing  their  purpose.  None  but  such 
as  they  tell  how  disappointment  preys  on  them;  how  as 
the  number  of  their  children  increases,  hope  leaves  them ; 
how  their  hearts  sink  as  toil  becomes  useless ;  how  adverse 
circumstances  force  on  them  those  indescribable  feelings 
of  their  own  degradation,  which  sink  them  gradually  to 
the  extreme  of  •wretchedness.  Others  there  are  in  much 
larger  numbers,  whose  views  are  narrower — they  who 
hoped  and  expected  to  keep  on  in  a  decent  way,  who  never 
expected  to  rise  in  the  world,  and  never  calculated  on  ex- 
treme poverty.  I  have  seen  a  vast  many  such,  who,  when 
the  evil  day  has  come  upon  them,  have  kept  on  working 
steadily  but  hopelessly,  more  like  horses  in  a  mill,  or  mere 
machines  than  human  beings  ;  their  feelings  blunted,  poor 
stultified  moving  animals,  working  on,  yet  unable  to 
support  their  families  in  anything  like  comfort ;  frequently 
wanting  the  common  necessaries  of  life,  yet  never  giving 
up  until  '  misery  has  eaten  them  to  the  bone,'  none  know- 
ing, none  caring  for  them ;  no  one  to  administer  a  word  of 
comfort,  or,  if  an  occasion  occurred  which  might  be  of 
service  to  them,  none  to  rouse  them  to  take  advantage  of 
it;  all  above  them  in  circumstances  calumniating  them, 
classing  them  with  the  dissolute,  the  profligate,  and  the 
dishonest,  from  whom  the  character  of  the  whole  of  the 
working  people  is  taken.  Yet  I  have  witnessed  in  this 
class  of  persons  so  despised,  so  unjustly  judged  of  by  their 
betters,  virtues  which  I  have  not  seen  to  the  same  extent 


14,  EARLY   LIFE 

as  to  means  among  any  other  description  of  the  people. 
Justice  perhaps  will  never  be  done  to  them,  because  they 
may  never  be  understood,  because  it  is  not  the  habit  of 
men  to  care  for  others  beneath  them  in  rank,  and  because 
they  who  employ  them  will  probably  never  fail  to  look 
grudgingly  on  the  pay  they  are  compelled  to  give  them 
for  their  services,  the  very  notion  of  which  produces  an 
inward  hatred  of  them,  a  feeling  so  common,  that  it 
is  visible  in  the  countenance  and  manners  in  nearly 
every  one  who  has  to  pay  either  journeymen,  labourers,  or 
servants." 

Again  and  again  he  urges  the  lesson  that  the  only  chance 
for  a  working-man  in  bad  times  is  to  preserve,  at  the  cost 
of  however  much  privation,  his  own  sell' -respect.  "No 
working-man,  or  journeyman  tradesman,"  he  says,  "  is  ever 
wholly  ruined  until  hope  has  abandoned  him."  He  dwells 
on  the  necessity  of  two  rooms  as  a  means  of  avoiding 
degradation  with  the  insistence  which  those  who  have  had 
practical  experience  of  family  life  in  one  room  always  use, 
and  which  sometimes  seems  exaggerated  to  those  who  have 
not.  Writing  of  a  somewhat  more  fortunate  time,  he  says : 
"The  room  in  which  we  lived  (in  1795)  was  a  front  room 
at  a  baker's  shop.  The  house  had  three  windows  in  the 
front,  two  in  the  room  and  one  in  a  large  closet  at  the  end 
of  the  room.  In  this  closet  I  worked.  It  was  a  great  ac- 
commodation to  us ;  it  enabled  my  wife  to  keep  the  room 
in  better  order.  It  was  advantageous,  too,  in  its  moral 
effects.  Attendance  on  the  child  was  not,  as  it  had  been, 
always  in  my  presence.  I  was  shut  out  from  seeing  the 
fire  lighted,  the  room  washed  and  cleaned,  and  the  clothes 
washed  and  ironed,  as  well  as  the  cooking.  We  frequently 
went  to  bed,  as  we  had  but  too  often  been  accustomed  to 
do,  with  a  wet  or  damp  floor,  and  with  the  wet  clothes 
hanging  up  in  the  room.  Still,  a  great  deal  of  the  annoy- 
ance and  the  too  close  interference  with  each  other  in 


EARLY   LIFE  15 

many  particulars  which  having  but  one  room  made  in- 
evitable, were  removed  happily  for  ever. 

"  I  have  before  remarked  that  the  consequences  of  a 
man  and  his  wife  living  in  the  same  room  in  which  the 
man  works  are  mischievous  to  them  in  all  respects,  and  I 
here  add  as  a  recommendation  to  all  journeymen  trades- 
men and  other  workmen  who  are  much  at  home,  and 
even  to  those  who  are  only  at  home  at  meal  -  times 
and  after  working  hours,  and  at  other  times  such  as 
Sundays,  and  when  they  have  no  employment,  to  make 
almost  any  sacrifice  to  keep  possession  of  two  rooms,  how- 
ever small  and  however  inconveniently  situated  as  regards 
the  place  of  their  employment.  Much  better  is  it  to  be 
compelled  to  walk  a  mile  or  even  two  miles  to  and  from 
their  work  to  a  lodging  with  two  rooms,  than  to  live  close 
to  their  work  in  a  lodging  of  one  room.  I  advise  them 
also  to  arrange  these  contrary  to  the  usual  custom  of  those 
who  have  two  rooms,  and  to  put  the  bed  in  the  room  in 
which  as  much  as  possible  of  the  domestic  work  is  done. 
A  neat  clean  room,  though  it  be  as  small  as  a  closet,  and 
however  few  the  articles  of  furniture,  is  of  more  importance 
in  its  moral  consequences  than  anybody  seems  hitherto  to 
have  supposed." 

At  the  end  of  1793,  when  there  seemed  no  chance  of 
the  boycott  upon  him  being  removed,  Place  determined  to 
leave  his  trade,  and  arranged  to  accept  a  post  as  overseer 
of  parish  scavengers  at  eighteen  shillings  a  week.  He  was 
to  have  gone  to  this  work  on  a  Monday,  but  on  the  preced- 
ing Friday  he  was  sent  for  by  one  of  his  former  employers. 
He  refused  to  go,  as  another  employer  had  already  endea- 
voured to  entrap  him  into  an  admission  of  the  existence  of 
the  Trade  Club,  in  order  to  get  him  prosecuted  under  the 
infamous  Combination  Laws.  His  wife,  however,  persuaded 
him  to  allow  her  to  go,  and  "  in  a  short  time  she  returned 
and  let  fall  from  her  apron  as  much  work  for  me  as  she 


16  EARLY   LIFE 

could  bring  away.  She  was  unable  to  speak  until  she  was 
relieved  by  a  flood  of  tears."  ..."  All  difficulty  and  appre- 
hension vanished  on  our  being  again  employed  by  Mr. 
Allison.  We  both  went  to  work  with  a  hearty  good-will. 
The  carpenter's  wife,  who  was  as  well  pleased  as  she  could 
have  been  had  she  been  our  mother,  was  now  employed  to 
cook  and  wash  for  us,  to  keep  our  room  clean,  and  to  get 
our  things  from  the  pawnbroker's  as  fast  as  we  could  pro- 
cure money  for  the  purpose.  We  now  worked  full  sixteen, 
and  sometimes  eighteen,  hours  a  day,  Sundays  and  all.  I 
never  went  out  of  the  house  for  many  weeks,  and  could 
not  find  time  for  a  month  to  shave  myself.  We  turned 
out  of  bed  to  work,  and  turned  from  our  work  to  bed  again. 
My  hair  was  black  and  somewhat  curled,  my  beard  was 
very  thick,  my  whiskers  large,  and  my  face  somewhat 
sallow,  and  upon  the  whole  I  must  have  been  a  ferocious- 
looking  fellow.1  .  .  . 

"  We  soon  recovered  from  our  deplorable  condition, 
bought  clothes  and  bedding  and  other  necessaries,  a  good 
bedstead,  and  many  other  things  which  made  us  com- 
fortable. We  removed  to  a  much  more  convenient  room 
in  a  small  recently  built  house  near  the  Angel  Inn,  in  the 
then  open  space  at  the  end  of  Wych  Street.  We  put  an 
iron  rod  close  up  to  the  ceiling,  on  which  ran  a  couple  of 
curtains.  We  employed  the  wife  of  a  hackney  coachman 
who  lodged  in  the  garret  to  cook  and  wash  and  clean  for 
us ;  we  had  plenty  of  work,  and  we  worked  hard.  I  bought 
a  stove  and  had  it  set  on  a  plan  of  Count  Runiford's.  Our 
little  furniture  was  good  enough  for  our  circumstances, 
and  the  room  was  especially  neat  and  clean.  There  was 
a  small  yard  to  the  house  and  a  wash-house,  and  these 

1  He  has  given  earlier  another  description  of  his  personal  appear- 
ance. "My  complexion,"  hejsays,  "was  dark,  my  hair  very  black,  and 
my  beard  thick.  I  was^rather  thin  but  muscular,  was  rive  feet  six 
inches  high,  and  had^altogether  the  appearance  of  being  several  years 
older  than  I  was." 


EARLY  LIFE  17 

were  great  conveniences.  We  had  never  before  been  so 
well  off,  or  had  reason  to  be  so  well  satisfied ;  I  was  able 
also  to  assist  my  mother.  We  used  to  work  later  than 
usual  on  Friday  nights,  and  earlier  than  usual  on  Saturday 
mornings,  so  as  to  finish  our  week's  labour  by  three  o'clock 
on  the  Saturday  afternoon,  and  we  ceased  working  on 
Sundays.  I  used  to  clean  myself  and  go  to  Mr.  Allison's 
to  settle  with  him,  and  my  wife  and  the  coachman's  wife 
used  to  put  the  room  into  the  best  possible  order.  We 
then  put  on  our  best  clothes  if  the  weather  was  fine  and 
took  a  walk.  As  we  scarcely  left  our  work  for  meals  all 
the  week,  we  had  a  hot  supper  on  the  Saturday,  a  beef- 
steak or  mutton-chops.  Our  neat  place,  the  absence  of 
want,  the  expectation  of  continuing  to  do  well,  the  per- 
suasion that  our  days  of  suffering  were  at  an  end,  and  our 
mutual  affection,  made  us  perhaps  as  happy  as  any  two 
persons  ever  really  were." l 

It  is  one  of  the  most  astonishing  signs  of  Place's  resolu- 
tion and  courage,  that  throughout  his  "out-of-work" 
months,  while  constantly  faced  with  hunger  and  appre- 
hension, he  devoted  a  great  part  of  his  undesired  leisure 
to  severe  intellectual  work.  Even  as  a  schoolboy,  and 
during  the  early  years  of  his  apprenticeship,  he  had  done 
some  serious  reading.  Writing  of  that  time  he  says : 
"  My  desire  for  information  was,  however,  too  strong  to  be 
turned  aside,  and  often  have  I  been  sent  away  from  a 
bookstall  when  the  owner  became  offended  at  my  stand- 
ing reading,  which  I  used  to  do  until  I  was  turned  away. 
...  I  used  to  borrow  books  from  a  man  who  kept  a  small 
shop  in  Maiden  Lane,  Covent  Garden,  leaving  a  small  sum 
as  a  deposit,  and  paying  a  trifle  for  reading  them,  having 

1  Against  this  may  be  set  an  incidental  remark  in  another  part  of 
the  autobiography  :  "  During  several  years  when  I  earned  my  living 
by  sewing  I  was  scarcely  ever  free  from  headache,  and  had  often  to 
endure  terrible  attacks." 

B 


18  EARLY   LIFE 

one  only  at  a  time."  During  the  first  year  of  his  married 
life  he  had  lodged  with  an  old  woman  who  took  charge  of 
chambers  in  the  Temple,  and  lent  him  books  borrowed 
from  the  rooms  which  she  cleaned.  At  that  time  he  says 
he  had  already  worked  through  "  the  histories  of  Greece 
and  Rome,  and  some  translated  works  of  Greek  and 
Roman  writers ;  Hume,  Smollett,  Fielding's  novels,  and 
Robertson's  works;  some  of  Hume's  essays,  some  trans- 
lations from  French  writers,  and  much  on  geography ; 
some  books  on  anatomy  and  surgery;  some  relating  to 
science  and  the  arts,  and  many  magazines.  I  had  worked 
all  the  problems  in  the  Introduction  to  Guthrie's  '  Geo- 
graphy,' and  had  made  some  small  progress  in  geometry." 

His  landlady  enabled  him  to  read  "Blackstone,  Hale's 
4  Common  Law,'  several  other  law  books,  and  much  bio- 
graphy." When  out  of  work  he  read  "many  volumes  in 
history,  voyages  and  travels,  politics,  law  and  philosophy, 
Adam  Smith  and  Locke,  and  especially  Hume's  '  Essays ' 
and  'Treatises.'  These  latter  I  read  two  or  three  times 
over.  .  .  .  Reading  of  Hume  put  me  on  improving  myself 
in  other  ways.  I  taught  myself  decimals,  equations,  the 
square,  cube,  and  biquadrate  roots.  I  got  some  knowledge 
of  logarithms,  and  some  of  algebra.  I  readily  got  through 
a  small  schoolbook  of  geometry;  and  having  an  odd 
volume,  the  first,  of  Williamson's  '  Euclid,'  I  attacked  it 
vigorously  and  perseveringly.  Williamson's  is  by  no  means 
the  best  book  on  the  subject,  yet  I  am  still  of  opinion  that 
it  is  the  best  book  I  could  have  had  for  the  purpose  of 
teaching  myself.  My  progress  was  for  some  time  very 
slow ;  I  was  perplexed  between  quantity  and  number,  and 
could  not  readily  abstract  myself  from  the  consideration  of 
numbers.  I  suspect  that  this  has  its  baneful  influence  on 
all  who  learn  arithmetic  before  they  acquire  any  knowledge 
of  geometrical  figures  and  definitions  of  them,  which,  by 
experience,  I  now  know  may  be  taught  to  children  without 


EARLY   LIFE  19 

much  difficulty;  and  which,  being  taught,  assists  the 
learner  to  a  great  extent  when  he  comes  to  be  taught 
mathematics  as  a  science.  Often  and  often  did  I  find 
myself  at  fault,  and  was  as  often  obliged  to  turn  back 
again.  I  was  sometimes  brought  to  a  standstill,  and  at 
times  almost  despaired  of  making  further  progress.  Wil- 
liamson's '  Euclid '  is  preceded  by  five  dissertations ;  these 
I  read  carefully,  working  the  problems  as  I  went  on.  I 
have  no  doubt  that  I  should  have  had  less  difficulty  had  I 
not  been  impressed  with  a  persuasion  of  the  great  difficulty 
of  acquiring  the  information  I  sought.  The  volume  con- 
tained the  first  six  books  of  Euclid.  With  labour  such  as 
few  would  take,  and  difficulties  such  as  few  would  encoun- 
ter, I  got  through  the  six  books;  but  not  at  all  to  my 
satisfaction.  I  knew  no  one  of  whom  I  could  ask  a  ques- 
tion or  receive  any  kind  of  instruction,  and  the  subject 
was  therefore  at  times  very  painful." 

All  this  was,  of  course,  put  an  end  to  as  soon  as  an 
opportunity  came  to  work  "  full  sixteen  or  eighteen  "  hours 
a  day.  But  this  busy  time  did  not  last  long.  After  a  few 
months  his  employer  sent  less  and  less  work,  and  soon  he 
was  again  discharged.  He  then  reorganised  the  Breeches- 
Makers'  Union,  early  in  1 794,  under  the  guise  of  a  Tontine 
Sick  Club,  became  its  secretary  with  a  salary  of  £10  per 
annum,  and  obtained  in  the  spring  of  1795,  without  a 
strike,  the  advance  which  had  been  vainly  asked  for  in 
1793.  This,  however,  led  to  the  dissolution  of  the  club, 
the  funds  of  which  were  shared  out  among  the  members, 
and  Place  lost  his  office.  He  was  then  paid  to  draw 
up  articles  or  rules  for  various  trade  clubs,  and  became 
secretary  and  organiser  to  those  of  the  carpenters,  plumbers, 
and  others.  He  spent  much  of  his  time  in  delivering  by 
hand  the  printed  notices  of  meetings,  and  was  allowed  to 
charge  postage  price  for  so  doing. 

The  autobiography,  till  it  reaches  the  year  1794,  is  curi- 


20  EARLY   LIFE 

ously  individualistic  in  tone.  Place,  when  he  looked  back 
on  the  first  twenty-three  years  of  his  life,  and  wished  to 
estimate  the  conditions  under  which  his  character  was 
built  up,  remembered  almost  exclusively  the  personal 
temptations  and  errors  of  his  boyhood,  his  intense  love 
for  his  wife,  his  early  marriage,  and  the  stern  struggle  for 
regular  work  and  opportunity  of  knowledge  which  followed. 
The  most  impersonal  intellectual  interest  to  which  he 
refers  is  the  religious  question,  and  the  series  of  doubts  and 
fears  which  were  ended  when  David  Hume's  "Essays," 
supplemented  by  a  chance  copy  of  Paine's  "  Age  of  Reason," 
finally  made  him  an  agnostic. 

But  no  young  man  could  have  lived  as  he  did  in  London 
throughout  the  five  years  which  followed  the  French  Revo- 
lution, organising  trade  unions  and  suffering  himself  per- 
sonally from  the  effects  of  unjust  laws,  without  being 
profoundly  influenced  by  the  great  message  which  the 
French  Republic  was  proclaiming  to  the  world.  And 
indeed  when,  "  at  the  request  of  my  landlord,"  he  joined 
the  London  Corresponding  Society  in  June  1794,  it  is  evi- 
dent that  this  step  was  the  result  not  of  a  casual  impulse, 
but  of  a  steady  intellectual  development.  Place  was  never 
a  man  who  incurred  risk  without  due  consideration,  and 
the  risk  involved  in  what  he  was  doing  was  sufficiently 
obvious.  The  English  Government  had  now  been  for  more 
than  a  year  at  war  with  France.  Burke,  "in  one  of  his 
mad  rants  in  the  House  of  Commons,"1  had  denounced 
the  Corresponding  Society  by  name  as  "  the  mother  of  all 
the  mischief."  Two  delegates  of  the  Society  had  been 
arrested  at  the  Edinburgh  Convention  six  months  before 
and  sent  to  Botany  Bay,  and  finally,  on  May  12.  1794,  a 
few  weeks  before  Place  joined,  Thomas  Hardy,  the  origi- 
nator and  secretary  of  the  Society,  with  ten  others  of  the 
most  prominent  members,  had  been  arrested  on  a  charge 

1  27,808  (4). 


EARLY   LIFE  21 

of  high-treason,  and  were  then  awaiting  trial.  These  arrests 
were  the  immediate  cause  of  Place's  action.  "  The  violent 
proceedings  of  the  Government,"  he  says,  "  frightened  away 
many  of  the  members  of  the  Society,  and  its  number  was 
very  considerably  diminished.  Many  persons,  however,  of 
whom  I  was  one,  considered  it  meritorious  and  the  perform- 
ance of  a  duty  to  become  members  now  that  it  was  threat- 
ened with  violence  and  its  founder  and  secretary  was  perse- 
cuted. This  improved  the  character  of  the  Society,  as  most 
of  those  who  joined  it  were  men  of  decided  character,  sober 
thinking  men,  not  likely  to  be  easily  put  from  their  purpose." 

The  London  Corresponding  Society  had  been  founded 
at  the  end  of  1791,  its  object  being  "to  correspond  with 
other  societies  that  might  be  formed  having  the  same 
object  in  view,  as  well  as  with  public-spirited  individuals." 1 

The  Corresponding  Society  formed  the  working-class  wing 
of  the  Democratic  movement  of  the  time.  The  societies  of 
the  "  Friends  of  the  People  "  and  "  Constitutional  Informa- 
tion "  were  already  in  existence,  and  engaged  in  spreading 
the  ideas  of  the  French  Revolution.  But  their  annual  sub- 
scriptions of  five  guineas  and  two  guineas  and  a  half 
respectively  excluded  working-men  from  membership 
Hardy  therefore  fixed  his  subscription  at  a  penny  per  week, 
with  a  shilling  entrance  fee.  The  political  programme  of 
the  Society  consisted  of  the  "  Plan  of  Radical  Reform  " — 
universal  suffrage,  annual  parliaments,  payment  of  mem- 
bers— which  Major  Cartwright  had  advocated  in  1776,  and 
which  was  to  reappear  more  than  forty  years  later  as  "  The 
People's  Charter."  The  name  of  the  Society  proved  un- 
fortunate. The  British  public  always  believed  that  it 
implied  an  intention  of  corresponding  with  the  French 
Government,2  a  serious  matter  in  war  time.  As  a  matter 

1  27,808  (3). 

2  Of.  a  survival  of  this  tradition  in  Mrs.  E.  C.  Gaskell's  "  Sylvia's 
Lovers"  (London,  1863),  vol.  i.  p.  298. 


22  EARLY   LIFE 

of  fact,  the  name  had  originally  no  reference  to  France, 
but  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  law  forbade  any  federation 
of  political  bodies.  A  regular  exchange  of  letters  between 
kindred  societies  up  and  down  the  country  was  the  easiest 
way  of  evading  the  law,  and  the  term  had  been  used  at 
least  once  before  by  a  society  formed  for  a  similar  object.1 
Such  a  correspondence  with  the  provinces  did  go  on  as  far 
as  the  expense  of  postage  and  the  interference  of  Govern- 
ment with  the  post-office  would  allow.  But  the  main 
strength  of  the  Society  was  in  London.  "  The  Society 
assembled,"  says  Place,  "  in  divisions  in  various  parts  of 
the  Metropolis.  That  to  which  I  belonged  was  held,  as 
all  others  were,  weekly,  at  a  private  house  in  New  Street, 
Covent  Garden.  Each  division  elected  a  delegate  and  sub- 
delegate;  these  formed  a  general  committee,  which  also 
met  once  a  week ;  in  this  committee  the  sub-delegate  had 
a  seat,  but  could  neither  speak  nor  vote  while  the  delegate 
was  present.  I  was  soon  elected  delegate,  and  became  a 
member  of  the  general  committee.  In  this  Society  I  met 
with  many  inquisitive,  clever,  upright  men,  and  among 
them  I  greatly  enlarged  my  acquaintance.  They  were  in 
most,  if  not  in  all,  respects  superior  to  any  with  whom  I 
had  hitherto  been  acquainted.  We  had  book  subscriptions, 
similar  to  the  breeches  clubs  before  mentioned ;  only  the 
books  for  which  any  one  subscribed  were  read  by  all  the 
members  in  rotation  who  chose  to  read  them,  before  they 
were  finally  consigned  to  the  subscriber.  We  had  Sunday 
evening  parties  at  the  residences  of  those  who  could  accom- 
modate a  number  of  persons.  At  these  meetings  we  had 
readings,  conversations,  and  discussions.  There  was  at 
this  time  a  great  many  such  parties ;  they  were  highly 
useful  and  agreeable.2 

1  "Mr.  Burke  belonged  to  the  Corresponding  Society  in  Bucking- 
hamshire" [arc.  1780]  (newspaper  cutting,  27,837-48). 

2  Place  mentions  an  incidental  result  of  these  readings  upon  the 
members  of  the  inner  circle  of  the  Corresponding  Society.     "This 


EARLY   LIFE  23 

"Early  in  the  month  of  October  1794,  a  special  Commis- 
sion was  issued  to  try  the  persons  accused  of  high-treason. 
To  prepare  matters  for  the  approaching  trials,  several  com- 
mittees were  appointed.  Of  one  of  these  I  was  a  member ; 
and  when  the  nine  days'  trial  of  Thomas  Hardy  com- 
menced, I  used  to  attend  daily  at  the  Old  Bailey  from  noon 
till  night,  go  to  work  when  I  came  home,  and  again  in  the 
morning  early  till  noon ;  and  thus  I  contrived  to  do  as 
much  as  an  ordinary  day's  work.  I  was  very  active  and 
useful  in  directing  others,  and  was  well  pleased  to  see  the 
esteem  in  which  I  was  held  by  those  with  whom  I  acted,  who 
were  clever  men  in  circumstances  very  superior  to  mine." 

Few  State  trials  are  more  famous  than  those  which 
followed.  Thomas  Hardy,  Home  Tooke,  the  old  philologist, 
who,  like  many  moderate  men,  was  supposed  to  be  an 
extremist  merely  because  he  was  courageous,  and  Thelwall, 
the  Radical  lecturer,  were  successively  tried  and  acquitted. 
Then  the  prosecutions  of  the  remaining  defendants  were 
abandoned.  A  quarter  of  a  century  later  Place  referred  to 
"  the  State  trials  in  1 794,  the  bare  mention  of  which  brings 
to  my  mind  an  association  of  ideas  the  most  exhilarating, 
and  sends  me  back  to  the  Old  Bailey  with  the  most  vivid 
recollections  of  the  men  and  things  of  that  time.  Never 
can  I  forget  the  emotions  I  felt  during  the  nine  days'  trial, 
or  the  joy  in  which  I  partook  on  hearing  the  verdict  'Not 
guilty'  pronounced  on  my  worthy  and  excellent  friend 
Thomas  Hardy,  on  whose  inoffensive,  upright  character  the 
breath  of  calumny  has  never  breathed  from  the  mouth  of 
any  one  who  ever  knew  him."  : 

course  of  discipline  compelled  them  to  think  more  correctly  than  they 
had  been  accustomed  to  do  ;  it  induced  them  to  become  readers  of 
books,  and  the  consequence,  the  very  remarkable  consequence,  was  that 
every  one  of  them  became  a  master,  and  permanently  bettered  his  con- 
dition in  life"  (Place  to  Noble,  March  10,  1836). 

1  See  the  unpublished  MS.  of  the  second  Reply  to  Lord  Erskine 
1819,  referred  to  at  p.  143. 


24  EARLY   LIFE 

The  triumphant  acquittal  of  Hardy,  Tooke,  and  Thelwall 
increased  the  membership  of  the  Corresponding  Society, 
and  by  the  end  of  May  1795  it  consisted  of  seventy 
different  divisions,  with  an  average  weekly  attendance  of 
over  two  thousand  members.  Place  had  from  the  first 
been  recognised  as  a  capable  organiser,  and  in  the  summer 
of  1795  he  usually  took  the  chair  at  the  weekly  general 
committee.  Some  of  his  decisions  are  still  to  be  seen  in 
the  British  Museum,1  entered  in  the  dirty  little  minute- 
book  of  the  Society.  The  entry  for  August  27,  1795,  is  as 
follows : — "  Citn.2  Place  in  chair.  A  citizen  said  .  .  .  there 
was  a  person  named  Dykes  amongst  them,  as  he  believed 
was  not  a  good  citizen,  as  he  belonged  to  the  Loyal  Britons.3 
Citn.  Place  said  he  had  once  been  a  Loyal  Briton,  but  he 
did  not  think  himself  any  the  worse  for  it,  and  he  said  he 
knew  that  Dykes,  and  believed  him  to  be  a  very  good 
citizen." 

On  the  committee  of  the  Corresponding  Society  Place 
advocated  the  political  tactics  in  which  he  continued  to 
believe  throughout  the  rest  of  his  life.  The  majority  of 
the  members  were  always  proposing  large  public  meetings 
with  the  view  of  intimidating  the  Government,  so  that  they 
might  be  "  compelled  to  grant  a  reform  in  the  House  of 
Commons."  Place  and  a  very  few  of  his  friends  had  no 
such  expectation.  "  I  believed  that  Ministers  would  go  on 
until  they  brought  the  Government  to  a  standstill — that 
was  until  they  could  carry  it  on  no  longer.  It  appeared  to 
me  that  the  only  chance  the  people  either  had  or  could 
have  for  good  and  cheap  government  was  in  their  being 
taught  the  advantages  of  representation,  so  as  to  lead  them 
to  desire  a  wholly  representative  government;  so  that 
whenever  the  conduct  of  Ministers  should  produce  a  crisis 
they  should  be  qualified  to  support  those  who  were  the 

1  27,813  (114).  2  i.e.  Citizen. 

3  This  was  no  doubt  a  friendly  society  or  sick  club  of  some  kind. 


EARLY   LIFE  25 

most  likely  to  establish  a  cheap  and  simple  form'of  govern- 
ment. I  therefore  advised  that  the  Society  should  proceed 
as  quietly  and  privately  as  possible."  Public  meetings  were, 
however,  held,  and  the  effect  upon  the  Government  was, 
not  the  granting  of  parliamentary  reform  but  the  passing 
of  the  Treason  and  Sedition  Bills,  otherwise  known  as  the 
Pitt  and  Grenville  Acts,  in  November  1795.  By  these 
Acts  almost  every  possible  form  of  agitation,  or  indeed  of 
political  action,  was  rendered  illegal.  At  the  same  time 
Habeas  Corpus  was  suspended  and  many  reformers  were 
arrested  and  sent  to  prison  without  trial.1 

From  this  blow  the  Corresponding  Society  never  re- 
covered. "  Some  thought  it  dangerous,  others  thought  it 
useless,  to  meet  again,  and  the  whole  matter  fell  rapidly  to 
decay."  Great  efforts  were  made  by  some  of  the  members 
to  revive  the  Society,  but  without  much  effect.  "The 
business  of  the  Society,"  says  Place,  "increased  after  its 
members  fell  off.  It  was  necessary  in  order  to  keep  it 
from  absolute  ruin  to  appoint  deputations  from  the  general 
committee  to  the  divisions  whose  delegates  ceased  to 
attend  the  district  committee,  as  well  as  to  those  which 
were  sluggish  or  met  in  small  [numbers.  This  was  an 
arduous  undertaking.  ...  I  remember  having  to  attend 

1  Place,  although  he  was  actively  engaged  in  one  of  the  societies 
aimed  at  by  these  Acts,  and  although  he  and  all  his  friends  were 
violently  opposed  to  them,  was  never  deluded  into  the  belief  that  his 
own  set  represented  popular  opinion.  He  declared  several  times  that 
these  Acts  were  in  reality  extremely  popular.  Writing  to  Harrison  on 
February  15,  1842,  he  recounts  the  events  which  led  to  the  passing  of 
the  Acts,  and  says,  "  Infamous  as  these  laws  were,  they  were  popular 
measures.  The  people,  ay,  the  mass  of  the  shopkeepers  and  working 
people,  may  be  said  to  have  approved  them  without  understanding 
them.  Such  was  their  terror  of  the  French  regicides  and  democrats, 
such  the  fear  that '  the  throne  and  the  altar '  would  be  destroyed,  and 
that  we  should  be  '  deprived  of  our  holy  religion,'  that  had  the  know- 
ledge of  the  grand  conspiracy  been  equal  to  their  desires,  they  might 
have  converted  the  Government  into  anything  they  wished  for  the 
advantage  of  themselves."  [27,810  (91).] 


26  EARLY   LIFE 

in  this  way  as  many  as  three  divisions  on  one  evening, 
and  having  to  harangue  each  of  them  on  their  neglect, 
and  to  urge  them  to  a  state  of  greater  activity.  The 
correspondence  with  the  country  was  also  very  con- 
siderable." l 

In  1796,  the  Society  committed  one  of  the  most  fatal 
mistakes  into  which  a  body  in  want  of  funds  can  fall. 
Against  the  urgent  advice  of  Place  and  his  party,  a  maga- 
zine was  started.  This  venture  not  only  increased  the 
Society's  debt,  but  absorbed  the  special  fund  which  had 
been  collected  for  the  defence  of  the  delegates  of  the 
Society,  who  had  been  arrested  at  Birmingham.2 

Place  had  been  partly  responsible  for  sending  them. 
"We  cajoled  ourselves  and  each  other,"  he  says,  "with 
delusive  expectations,"  that  a  visit  from  deputies  would 
greatly  increase  the  membership  of  the  Society,  which, 
he  adds,  "proves  us  to  have  been  very  silly  people."3 

He  got  more  and  more  dissatisfied  with  the  proceedings 
of  the  Society,  and  at  last  took  an  opportunity  of  leaving 
the  committee.  "I  was  out  of  office  at  midsummer 
(1796),"  he  says,  "and  not  liking  the  proceedings  of  the 
executive  committee,  I  refused  to  be  elected  to  it  again, 
as  I  did  also  to  be  president  of  the  general  committee, 
and  became  simply  the  delegate  of  the  division  to  which 
I  belonged." 

In  March  1797  he  resigned  his  delegation,  and  in  June 
of  the  same  year  his  membership  of  the  Society.  A  month 
later  the  Society  held  a  large  public  meeting  in  a  field  near 
St.  Pancras  Church.  All  who  were  on  the  platform  were 
arrested  by  the  Middlesex  magistrates,  and  after  this  the 
Society  "  declined  rapidly,  and  by  the  end  of  the  year  was 

1  27,808  (69). 

2  John  Gale  Jones  and  John  Binns.     Cf.  the  very  interesting  "  Re- 
collections of  the  Life  of  John  Binns,"  written  by  himself  (Philadelphia, 
1854,  8vo).     Place  was  sent  to  Birmingham  to  conduct  the  defence. 

3  27,808  (72). 


EARLY   LIFE  27 

in  a  very  low  state."  But  the  Society  did  not  actually 
come  to  an  end  till  1798.  In  that  year  O'Quigley,  the 
Irish  delegate  to  the  French  Government,  was  in  London,1 
and  an  attempt  was  being  made  by  a  few  revolutionists 
to  form  a  society  of  United  Englishmen  to  act  with  the 
United  Irishmen  in  organising  an  armed  rebellion.  The 
Government  had  nursed  the  plot  by  means  of  spies,  and 
on  April  i8th  some  dozen  men  were  seized,  including 
Colonel  Despard  and  three  others,  who  against  Place's 
advice  had  gone  down  to  dissuade  from  their  purpose  the 
men  who  were  really  in  earnest.2  On  the  next  night  all 
the  members  of  the  committee  of  the  Corresponding  Society 
were  seized.  It  requires  some  experience  of  the  amount 
of  moderation  which  may  be  found  among  advanced  bodies 
to  credit  Place's  statement  that  the  subject  for  discussion 
that  night  was  the  advisability  of  volunteering  in  all  good 
faith  for  resistance  to  the  expected  French  invasion,  and 
that,  just  before  the  arrest,  it  had  been  "  agreed  to  recom- 
mend the  members  of  the  Society  individually  to  join  some 
corps  (each)  in  his  own  neighbourhood."  Place  explicitly 
denies  that  the  Society  had  as  its  object  "the  formation  of 
a  Republic  by  the  assistance  of  France."  "  This  is  a  base 

1  O'Quigley,  or  O'Coigley,  as  his  name  was  sometimes  spelt,  was  soon 
afterwards  caught  on  his  way  to  France,  and  hanged  for  treason. 

2  The  members  of  the  London  Corresponding  Society  did  all  in  their 
power  to  dissuade  those  whom  they  knew  from  embarking  in  the 
United  Englishmen  conspiracy,  but  without  success.     At  last  it  was 
agreed  by  Place  and  others  that  steps  ought  to  be  taken  to  put  an  end 
to  the  plot.     On  this  occasion,  Place  proposed  one  of  those  bold  steps 
which  he  sometimes  took,  and  which,  perhaps,  helped  afterwards  to 
produce  the  notion  that  he  was  a  spy.     "  I  was  for  doing  this,"  he  says, 
"by  sending  for  Evans,  B.  Binns,  and  a  foolish  fellow,  their  coadjutor, 
named  James  Powell,  and  frankly  telling  them  we  would  take  means 
to  stop  their  proceedings  by  communicating  to  Mr.  Ford,  the  magistrate 
at  the  Treasury,  who  and  what  they  were  and  what  they  intended,  so 
that  unless  they  at  once  desisted  they  should  be  prevented  from  in- 
volving others  in  mischief  and  disgrace,  and  bringing  punishment  upon 
them.     This  was  objected  to,  especially  by  Colonel  Despard,  as  it  would 
appear  dishonourable."     [27,808  (92).] 


28  EARLY   LIFE 

lie,"  he  says.  "  No  such  avowal  was  ever  made.  No  pro- 
position of  the  kind  was  ever  discussed.  On  the  contrary, 
it  ever  was  the  prevalent  opinion  of  the  Society  that  the 
people  ought  to  work  out  their  own  regeneration,  and  that 
it  was  their  duty  to  resist  the  French  if  they  attempted  an 
invasion,  on  whatever  pretext  it  was  made.  That  if  this 
nation  was  not  wise  enough  to  reform  its  own  government, 
the  people  could  not  be  made  free  by  a  foreign  power, 
but  might,  as  they  would  deserve,  be  made  slaves.  This 
was  the  opinion  generally,  and  indeed  almost  universally, 
entertained  by  the  members."1  The  seizure  of  its  com- 
mittee finally  extinguished  the  London  Corresponding 
Society,  "  which  never  made  any  attempt  to  meet  again,  not 
even,  I  believe,  in  any  division.  The  members  dispersed, 
and  wholly  abandoned  the  delegates."  Habeas  Corpus 
was  again  suspended,  and  the  twenty-eight  men  who  had 
been  arrested  were  kept  in  prison  without  trial  for  three 
years.  For  the  first  eighteen  months  of  this  period  Place 
was  left  almost  alone  in  the  work  of  collecting  and  dis- 
tributing subscriptions,  and  pressing  for  payment  of  an 
allowance  to  the  wives  and  families  of  the  prisoners,  which 
was  at  last  granted  by  the  Government. 

Towards  the  close  of  the  year  1796,  when  he  had  left 
the  committee  of  the  Corresponding  Society,  and  for  the 
time  had  little  public  work  on  hand,  Place  formed  the  idea 
of  publishing  a  cheap  edition  of  Tom  Paine's  "Age  of 
Reason,"  a  book  which  had  much  influence  on  his  own 
mind.  He  induced  a  small  jobbing  bookbinder  and  seller 
of  his  acquaintance,  named  Thomas  Williams,  to  share 
with  him  the  expense  and  risk  of  publication,  and  an 
edition  of  two  thousand  copies  was  prepared.  Within  a 
fortnight  of  its  publication  the  whole  edition  was  sold 
out,  and  Williams  broke  away  from  the  agreement  with 
Place,  and  refused  to  share  the  profits.  Williams  then 
1  27,808  (108-109). 


EARLY  LIFE  29 

produced  on  his  own  account  another  and  still  larger 
edition,  which  was  also  selling  rapidly,  when  he  was  indicted 
for  the  publication  of  a  seditious  and  blasphemous  libel. 
After  a  long  delay  he  was  convicted,  and  sentenced  to  a 
year's  imprisonment,  with  hard  labour.  Place  devoted 
himself  to  raising  means  for  the  support  of  the  convict's 
wife  and  family  during  his  confinement. 

It  was  hi  1795,  while  chairman  of  the  Corresponding 
Society,  that  Place  began  to  take  the  first  definite  steps  to 
raise  himself  from  the  position  of  journeyman  to  that  of 
employer.  He  was  still  poor,  but  he  had  gained  experience 
in  dealing  with  men.  Above  all,  his  studies  had  trained 
his  imagination.  He  could  see  his  future  career  as  clearly 
as  his  present  difficulties.  He  could  think  of  society  as  a 
whole,  and  of  the  processes  of  trade  as  being  something 
more  than  a  mysterious  iniquity.  "  It  is  remarkable 
enough,"  he  says,  "  that  almost  every  honest  journeyman 
is  deterred  for  a  long  time,  and  some  for  ever,  from  making 
an  attempt  to  get  into  business,  lest  he  should  be  '  ruined,' 
notwithstanding  being  ruined  could  only  bring  him  back 
again  to  journey-work.  This  must  seem  strange  to  all 
who  have  not  had  practical  experience  on  the  subject. 
The  fear  of  doing  injury  to  others  by  contracting  debts  he 
may  be  unable  to  pay  is  a  proper  feeling,  and  when  it  is 
not  indulged  to  an  extent  which  prevents  a  man  from 
bettering  his  own  condition  without  doing  injury  to  any- 
body, operates  beneficially.  But  besides  this  reasonable 
apprehension,  the  fear  of  personal  ruin  operates  to  a  very 
considerable  extent ;  it  did  with  me.  The  reason  is,  that 
there  is  a  sort  of  mystery  in  the  matter,  an  uncertainty 
which  they  who  fear  to  do  evil  are  not  willing  to  encounter. 
Mr.  Godwin's  book1  extinguished  this  fear  in  me.  It  led 

1  This  reference  is  to  the  "  Inquiry  Concerning  Political  Justice,  &c,n 
by  William  Godwin  (London,  1793,  2  vols.).  Place  says  he  learnt  to 
disbelieve  in  "abstract  rights"  from  Godwin  in  1793  (Place  to  War- 
burton,  May  5,  1839). 


30  EARLY   LIFE 

me  to  reason  on  the  matter,  and  convinced  me  that  a  man 
might  turn  others  to  account  in  every  kind  of  undertaking 
without  dishonesty,  that  the  ordinary  tricks  of  tradesmen 
were  not  necessary,  and  need  not  be  practised.  This  was 
to  me  the  most  grateful  kind  of  knowledge  I  could  acquire, 
and  I  resolved  to  lose  no  time  in  putting  it  in  practice." 
He  began  by  getting  a  few  private  customers,  for  whom  he 
could  work  directly.  In  this  he  could  have  made  great 
use  of  his  position  in  the  Corresponding  Society,  but  "  my 
notions  of  independence,"  he  says,  "  were  somewhat  absurd, 
and  they  prevented  me  from  deriving  all  the  benefit  I 
might  have  received,  and  circumstances  warranted.  I  was, 
however,  afraid  of  doing  anything  which  might  prospec- 
tively  debase  me  in  my  own  opinion,  and  I  acted  on  the 
safe  side." 

His  next  step  was  to  acquire  credit  with  the  drapers  and 
clothiers.  With  this  purpose  he  made  his  purchases  on  an 
elaborate  and  ingenious  system.  "I  knew  that  by  pur- 
chasing materials  at  two  or  three  shops,  however  small  the 
quantities,  and  letting  each  of  them  know  that  I  made 
purchases  of  others,  each  would  sell  to  me  at  as  low  a  price 
as  he  could,  and  each  would  after  a  time  give  me  credit. 
I  afterwards  put  this  mode  of  proceeding  into  practice,  and 
whenever  I  had  two  things  to  purchase,  I  bought  one  at 
one  shop,  and  carried  it  under  my  arm  to  another  shop, 
where  I  bought  the  remainder  of  what  I  wanted.  In  a 
little  time  credit  was  offered  to  me,  each  wishing  to  have 
the  whole  of  my  custom,  and  each  probably  supposing  it 
was  greater  than  it  was.  From  this  time  I  always  bought 
on  short  credit ;  instead  of  paying  for  the  goods,  I  put  by 
the  money,  taking  care  always  to  pay  for  what  I  had  before 
the  term  of  credit  expired.  I  thus  established  a  character 
for  punctuality  and  integrity  with  three  mercers  and  two 
woollen-drapers,  and,  as  I  foresaw,  I  should,  if  I  could  once 
take  a  shop,  have  credit  for  any  amount  whatever.  This 


EARLY   LIFE  31 

was  a  work  of  time,  but  of  less  time  than  I  had  calculated 
upon;  I  had  supposed  that  it  would  scarcely  be  accom- 
plished in  less  than  six  years ;  it  was  accomplished  in  less 
than  four  years.  .  .  . 

"  The  number  of  my  customers  was  small,  the  prices  I 
charged  were  very  low,  and,  what  was  worse,  some  few  got 
into  debt  with  me  and  never  paid  their  debts.  My  wife 
frequently  importuned  me  to  go  again  to  journey-work, 
and  offered  to  try  to  procure  it  herself  if  I  would  let  her. 
I,  however,  resolutely  refused.  I  insisted  upon  it  that  I 
should  work  myself  into  a  condition  to  become  a  master 
tradesman,  and  should  then  be  able  to  maintain  my  family 
respectably ;  that  no  hope  of  my  ever  being  able  to  do  this 
in  any  other  way  existed,  and  that  nothing  should  therefore 
divert  me  from  my  purpose ;  that  our  present  privations 
were  by  no  means  so  bad  as  those  we  had  suffered,  and 
that  there  was  something  like  a  certainty  that  they  would 
at  no  very  distant  time  be  ended  for  ever ;  that  as  every 
day  was  a  new  day,  the  contemplation  of  the  evils  of  one 
day  was  as  much  as  we  ought  reasonably  to  entertain,  and 
that  it  was  disgraceful  not  to  bear  the  evils  of  one  day  with 
temper.  This  reasoning  often  repeated  had  its  weight  with 
my  wife,  but  it  neither  satisfied  her  nor  reconciled  her  to 
her  condition.  Still  we  were  not  unhappy ;  upon  the  whole 
we  were  comfortable,  and  at  times  very  far  indeed  from 
unhappiness.  There  was,  however,  one  bad  result  of  our 
long  state  of  probation  and  privation;  it  to  some  extent 
destroyed  my  wife's  cheerful  disposition,  and  made  her 
apprehensive  of  misfortune ;  and  she  never  recovered  from 
this  entirely.  Her  situation  was  necessarily  worse  than 
mine  on  account  of  the  two  children.  .  .  .  Sometimes  she 
almost  despaired  of  ever  being  better  off  in  the  world,  and 
at  these  times  she  used  to  complain  of  my  folly  in  thinking 
I  should  be  able  to  take  a  shop  and  commence  business ; 
and  as  to  my  succeeding  and  being  able  to  procure  money 


32  EARLY   LIFE 

enough  to  live  without  business,  she  declared  it  was  sheer 
insanity.  These  fits  were,  however,  of  short  duration,  and 
were  always  caused  by  some  great  privation  she  and  the 
children  suffered.  .  .  .  The  few  good  clothes  we  had  left  were 
taken  great  care  of,  and  when  out  of  the  house  we  always 
made  a  respectable  appearance,  and  were  generally  con- 
sidered, by  those  who  knew  us,  as  flourishing  people,  who 
wanted  for  nothing.  In  fine  weather  on  Sundays  we 
usually  walked  into  the  fields,  taking  the  children  with  us. 
Our  walk  was  frequently  to  White  Conduit  House,  and  the 
fields  beyond  it  towards  Copenhagen  House.  Both  these 
places  were  celebrated  tea-gardens,  and  the  number  of 
persons  who  frequented  them  on  Sundays  was  very  great. 
We  carried  the  children  nearly  the  whole  of  the  way,  and 
returned  as  we  went,  never  spending  a  single  halfpenny." 

From  this  time  forward  Place  seems  always  to  have 
thought  of  himself,  not  as  the  half-starved  journeyman 
that  he  was,  but  as  the  prosperous  tradesman  that  he 
meant  to  be.  He  "  resolved  to  give  my  children  the  best 
possible  education  which  my  circumstances  would  afford." 
With  this  view  he  determined  to  learn  French.  He  and 
four  other  members  of  the  Corresponding  Society  arranged 
to  receive  lessons  from  a  "  profound  and  pompous  "  fellow- 
member,  "  who  used  to  talk  with  great  self-complacency  of 
his  skill  in  teaching."  Their  first  teacher  did  not  prove 
a  success,  and  an  emigrant  priest  was  soon  secured,  under 
whom  the  little  class  rapidly  advanced.  Place,  though  he 
had  now  left  the  Corresponding  Society,  never  found  any 
difficulty  in  borrowing  books,  and  used  to  stay  at  home 
to  read  Helvetius,  Rousseau,  and  Voltaire  for  three  or  four 
hours  every  evening.  When  at  work,  he  fixed  his  French 
grammar  before  him  and  steadily  learnt  it  by  rote.  This 
first-hand  acquaintance  with  the  French  revolutionary 
philosophers  had  an  important  influence  on  his  political 
ideas,  and  in  after  years  his  knowledge  of  French,  though 


EARLY   LIFE  33 

never  very  scholarly,  was  of  immense  value  to  him  in  his 
business.  A  Mr.  William  Frend  of  the  Temple  used  also 
to  come  and  sit  with  Place  at  his  work,  answering  his  ques- 
tions and  guiding  his  studies  in  astronomy  and  algebra. 
In  the  same  way  the  rich  and  good-natured  Colonel 
Bosville,  Colonel  Despard  till  the  time  of  his  arrest,  and 
others  used  to  come  to  talk  with  a  man  whose  conversation 
must  already  have  been  worth  hearing. 

Meanwhile  his  ambition  was  expanding,  and  instead  of 
taking  a  small  shop  in  some  Holborn  back  street  as  he 
had  originally  intended,  he  entered  into  partnership  with 
a  fellow-workman  nearly  as  poor  as  himself,  and  opened  a 
tailor's  shop  at  No.  29  Charing  Cross,  in  the  centre  of 
what  was  then  a  rapidly  improving  neighbourhood.  The 
partners  took  possession  on  April  8,  1799.  The  shop  was 
stocked  on  credit,  and  their  joint  cash  funds  on  the  day  of 
opening  were  one  shilling  and  tenpence.  But  they  were 
both  of  them  enterprising,  skilful,  and  furiously  industri- 
ous, so  that  in  less  than  two  years'  time  they  had  thirty-six 
men  at  work,  and  every  prospect  of  a  splendid  business. 
But  a  sickening  disappointment  was  still  to  come ;  Place's 
partner  married  a  wife  with  whom  agreement  was  impos- 
sible, and  having  the  offer  of  a  large  loan,  forced  the  busi- 
ness into  liquidation,  and  bought  the  goodwill  for  himself. 
The  effect  on  Mrs.  Place  was  terrible.  "Neither  tongue 
nor  pen,"  says  Place,  "  can  describe  her  anguish.  She  saw 
nothing  before  her  but  destruction.  .  .  .  She  was  sure  we 
should  all  be  turned  into  the  streets.  Industry  was  of  no 
use  to  us ;  integrity  would  not  serve  us ;  honesty  would  be 
of  no  avail.  We  had  worked  harder  and  done  more  than 
anybody  else,  and  now  we  were  to  suffer  more  than  any- 
body else."  From  that  time  till  the  day  of  her  death  she 
never  lost  the  apprehension  of  sudden  and  undeserved 
misfortune.  "  This,"  Place  says,  "  was  undoubtedly  the 
bitterest  day  of  my  life."  But  the  crisis  was  well  fitted 


34  EARLY   LIFE 

to  bring  out  his  obstinate  courage,  and  the  skill  in  dealing 
with  men  which  he  had  developed  in  his  political  work. 
At  the  meeting  of  creditors  he  completely  turned  the  tables 
on  his  late  partner,  and  found  every  one  so  ready  to  advance 
him  money  or  goods  that  on  April  8,  1801,  three  months 
after  his  first  discovery  of  the  plot  against  him,  and  exactly 
two  years  from  the  day  of  the  opening  of  the  first  shop,  he 
opened  a  much  larger  and  more  conspicuous  shop  on  his 
own  account  at  No.  16  Charing  Cross.  "  I  put  in,"  he  says, 
"  a  new  front  as  elegant  as  the  place  would  permit.  Each 
of  the  panes  of  glass  in  the  shop  front  cost  me  three 
pounds,  and  two  in  the  door  four  pounds  each.  .  .  .  Such 
shop  fronts  were  then  uncommon ;  I  think  mine  were  the 
largest  plate-glass  windows  in  London,  if  indeed  they  were 
not  the  first.  .  .  .  Fitting  up  the  shop  cost  me  nearly  three 
hundred  pounds.  .  .  .  There  were  five  large  Argand  lamps 
in  the  shop,  besides  candles,  to  make  the  windows  and 
every  part  of  it  as  nearly  equally  light  as  possible." 

Here  for  the  next  five  or  six  years  he  lived  the  life 
of  any  one  of  those  successful  money-makers  whose  bio- 
graphies have  been  written  by  Dr.  Smiles.  He  knew  well 
the  method  by  which  money  was  to  be  made.  Though 
a  skilled  breeches-maker,  "  I  was,"  he  says,  "  myself  no 
tailor.  I  could  not  cut  out  a  coat  as  it  should  be  cut,  nor 
make  it  up  as  it  should  be  made  up.  I  never  thought  it 
was  worth  while  to  learn  to  do  either.  I  knew  I  could 
procure  competent  persons  for  these  purposes,  and  that 
the  most  profitable  part  for  me  to  follow  was  to  dance 
attendance  on  silly  people,  to  make  myself  acceptable  to 
coxcombs,  to  please  their  whims,  to  have  no  opinion  of  my 
own,  but  to  take  special  care  that  my  customers  should 
be  pleased  with  theirs."  The  student  of  Rousseau  and 
Godwin,  and  the  future  disciple  of  Bentham,  shows  him- 
self in  the  reflection,  "  it  was  all  matter  of  taste,  that  is,  of 
folly  and  caprice." 


EARLY   LIFE  35 

During  these  years  he  definitely  gave  up  every  form  of 
public  life.  "  I  never  lost  a  minute  of  time,  was  never  on 
any  occasion  diverted  from  the  steady  pursuit  of  my  busi- 
ness, never  spent  a  shilling,  never  once  entertained  any 
company.  The  only  things  I  bought  were  books,  and  not 
many  of  them.  I  adhered  steadily  to  'the  practice  I  had 
adopted,  and  read  for  two  or  three  hours  every  night  after 
the  business  of  the  day  was  closed,  which  never  (happened 
till  half-past  nine  o'clock.  I  never  went  to  bed  till  twelve 
o'clock,  and  frequently  not  till  one,  but  I  indulged  a  little 
in  the  morning  by  lying  in  bed  till  seven."  He  had  the 
power  of  dismissing  any  train  of  thought  at  a  moment's 
notice.  "  I  had  long  since  obtained,"  he  says,  "  the  power 
of  abstraction  to  a  considerable  extent.  I  could  dismiss 
a  train  of  thought  at  pleasure  and  take  up  another,  and 
could  leave  any  business  of  any  kind  and  go  to  something 
else  without  any  reference  to  the  subject  I  had  left,  and 
when  I  concluded  the  new  thoughts  or  finished  the  new 
business  I  could  revert  to  the  old  thoughts  or  business 
and  take  them  [up  again  where  I  had  left  them.  I  used 
wholly  to  dismiss  all  thought  of  business  when  it  was 
closed  for  the  day,  and  could  therefore  go  to  my  book 
quite  unoccupied  with  anything  else."  In  time  he  paid 
off  his  own  debts  to  the  wholesale  houses,  and  came  nearer 
to  the  point  when  he  could  himself  pay  cash,  and  when 
his  ten  thousand  pounds'  worth  of  book  debts  represented 
accumulated  profit. 

A  man  of  his  organising  capacity  could  probably  have 
made  money  in  any  business  in  which  he  had  found  him- 
self, and  it  was  an  ill  chance  that  made  him  a  tailor.  Men 
are  still  apt  to  look  upon  their  tailor  as  in  some  sense  a 
menial  servant.  But  eighty  or  ninety  years  ago  the  humi- 
liations of  the  position  were  such  as  a  proud  man  could 
hardly  endure.  "  How  often  have  I  taken  away  a  garment 
for  a  fault  which  did  not  exist,  and  which  I,  of  course, 


36  EARLY   LIFE 

never  intended  to  rectify.  How  often  have  I  taken  back 
the  same  garment  without  it  ever  having  been  unfolded, 
and  been  commended  for  the  alteration  which  had  not 
been  made,  and  then  been  reprehended  for  not  having 
done  what  was  right  at  first.  How  often  have  I  been 
obliged  to  take  back  a  garment  and  sell  it  to  a  Jew  for 
not  much  more  or  any  more  than  one-third  of  its  price, 
because  a  man  or  his  wife,  or  his  mistress,  disliked  it  when 
it  was  made  up.  How  often  on  the  most  trivial  or  frivolous 
pretence  have  I  been  obliged  to  do  the  same  thing,  as,  for 
instance,  because  there  was  one  button  on  the  front  of 
a  coat  or  waistcoat  more  or  less  than  he  or  she  at  the 
moment  thought  would  make  the  garment  more  becom- 
ing; how  often  have  I  done  this,  and  on  a  subsequent 
order  from  the  same  person  for  a  similar  garment  taken 
home  the  rejected  one,  which  has  been  highly  approved. 
How  often  have  I  attended,  at  the  command  of  a  customer, 
at  a  distance  of  two  or  three  miles  on  a  wet  day,  been  kept 
waiting  in  the  hall  for  half-an-hour  or  an  hour,  and  then 
either  been  told  that  the  customer  had  forgotten  me,  or 
could  not  see  me,  and  I  must  come  again  at  a  time  named; 
and  when  kept  by  one  person  so  long  that  I  was  five 
minutes  beyond  the  time  named,  been  rebuked  for  negli- 
gence by  another.  In  short,  a  man  to  be  a  good  tailor 
should  be  either  a  philosopher  or  a  mean  cringing  slave, 
whose  feelings  had  never  been  excited  to  the  pitch  of  man- 
hood. One  or  the  other  he  must  be  if  he  start  poor  and 
hope  to  succeed  in  making  a  considerable  business.  He 
who  is  neither  the  one  nor  the  other,  will  never  be  any- 
thing but  a  little  master,  and  will  probably  die  in  debt. 
"  I  had  three  things  continually  in  my  recollection : — 
"  The  first,  and  by  far  the  most  important,  was  to  get 
money,  and  yet  to  avoid  entertaining  a  mercenary,  money- 
getting  spirit ;  to  get  money  as  a  means  to  an  end,  and  not 
for  its  own  sake. 


EARLY   LIFE  37 

"The  second  was  to  take  care  that  the  contumelious 
treatment  I  had  to  endure  should  not  make  me  a  sneaking 
wretch  from  principle  to  those  above  me,  a  tyrant  to  those 
below  me. 

"The  third  was  to  beware  of  presumption,  that  I  did 
not  become  arrogant.  I  had  no  doubt  of  success,  and 
therefore  felt  most  strongly  the  necessity  of  watching  and 
guarding  myself,  in  the  hope  that  when  I  had  realised  as 
much  money  as  I  deemed  requisite  to  a  state  of  independ- 
ence, my  habits  and  manners  should  not  be  such  as  would 
exclude  me  from  what  is  called  good  society,  if  at  that 
time  I  should  desire  such  society  and  should  be  occasion- 
ally cast  into  it,  or  should  not  exclude  me  from  the  ac- 
quaintance and  even  friendship  of  the  better  sort  of  men 
of  genius  and  talent.  ...  I,  however,  still  continued  to 
act  with  the  utmost  reserve  towards  my  customers,  many 
of  whom  were  men  in  the  public  offices.  I  never  made 
free  in  conversation  with  my  customers,  and  when  any  of 
them  made  free  with  me  I  always  let  it  pass  with  as  little 
notice  as  possible." 

Later  on  as  his  books  accumulated  he  had  to  be  more 
and  more  careful  that  none  of  his  ordinary  customers 
should  be  allowed  to  go  into  the  library  at  the  back  of  the 
shop,  or  to  "  know  anything  of  me  except  as  a  tailor."  He 
complains  that  on  several  occasions  he  lost  good  customers 
owing  to  their  learning  something  of  his  habits  of  study, 
and  being  perhaps  quick  enough  to  guess  at  the  biting 
scorn  which  underlay  his  guarded  politeness.  "  Had  these 
persons  been  told  that  I  had  never  read  a  book,  that  I  was 
ignorant  of  everything  but  my  business,  that  I  sotted  in  a 
public-house,  they  would  not  have  made  the  least  objection 
to  me.  I  should  have  been  a  "  fellow  "  beneath  them,  and 
they  would  have  patronised  me ;  but  ...  to  accumulate 
books  and  to  be  supposed  to  know  something  of  their  con- 
tents, to  seek  for  friends,  too,  among  literary  and  scientific 


38  EARLY  LIFE 

men,  was  putting  myself  on  an  equality  with  themselves, 
if  not,  indeed,  assuming  a  superiority ;  it  was  an  abomin- 
able offence  in  a  tailor,  if  not  a  crime,  which  deserved 
punishment.  Had  it  been  known  to  all  my  customers 
that  in  the  few  years  from  1810  to  1817  I  had  accumulated 
a  considerable  library,  in  which  I  spent  all  the  leisure  time 
I  could  spare;  had  the  many  things  I  was  engaged  in 
during  this  period,  and  the  men  with  whom  I  associated 
been  known,  half  of  them  at  the  least  would  have  left  me, 
and  these,  too,  by  far  the  most  valuable  customers  indi- 
vidually." And  ten  years  later  he  recurred  to  the  same 
subject,  and  noted  the  very  little  change  which  had  taken 
place  in  this  respect.  "  The  nearer  a  common  tradesman 
approximates  in  information  and  manners  to  a  footman," 
he  says,  "  the  more  certainly  will  he  please  his  well-bred 
customers ;  the  less  he  knows  beyond  his  business,  jthe 
more  certain,  in  general,  will  be  his  success." 1 

In  spite  of  this  the  business  rapidly  and  regularly  in- 
creased. In  1816,  when  it  reached  its  maximum,  the  net 
profits  for  the  year  were  considerably  over  three  thousand 
pounds.  At  the  same  time,  Place's  family  grew  rapidly, 
and  in  1817,  when  he  retired  from  business,  and  handed 
the  shop  over  to  his  eldest  son,  he  had  ten  children  living 
out  of  fifteen  who  had  been  born  to  him. 

1  27,823  (412). 


CHAPTER  II 

WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,   1807-15 

UP  to  the  Reform  Bill  of  1832,  borough  members  of 
Parliament  might,  according  to  the  accidents  of  local 
history,  be  elected  by  a  few  officials,  a  close  corporation, 
a  body  of  "  freemen "  or  "  potwallopers,"  or,  in  a  few 
cases,  by  all  payers  of  "scot  and  lot."1  By  far  the 
most  important  of  the  "scot  and  lot"  boroughs  was 
the  City  and  Liberty  of  Westminster,  of  which  Place 
became  an  elector  when  he  moved  to  Charing  Cross. 
Westminster  then  included  the  whole  of  the  ancient 
property  of  the  Abbey,  a  district  stretching  from  Temple 
Bar  on  the  east  to  Kensington  Palace  on  the  west, 
and  from  Oxford  Street  on  the  north  to  the  Thames 
on  the  south.  At  the  beginning  of  the  century  about 
half  this  district  had  been  built  over,  and  the  census  of 
1 80 1  returns  the  population  as  153,272,  of  whom  rather 
more  than  10,000  were  rated  to  the  poor-rates  for  separate 
houses,  and  therefore  entitled  to  vote.  Many  of  the  streets 
round  the  Abbey  were  extremely  poor,  and  from  the 
description  of  the  voters  given  in  the  poll-books,  a  clear 
majority  seem  to  have  been  artisans  or  very  small  trades- 
men. Outside  Westminster  the  freemen  of  London  City 
returned  four  members,  but  no  other  Londoner  had  a 
vote  at  all  unless  he  happened  to  be  a  freeholder  to  the 
annual  value  of  forty  shillings,  and  as  such  entitled  to 
vote  for  the  counties  of  Middlesex  or  Surrey.  Until 
1  i.e.  of  the  local  rates. 

39 


40  WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,  1807-15 

1780  the  members  for  Westminster  were  returned  by 
the  "influence"  of  the  Dean  and  Chapter  in  accordance 
with  the  wishes  of  the  Crown.  In  that  year,  however, 
C.  J.  Fox,  standing  as  an  extreme  democrat,  succeeded  in 
winning  one  of  the  Westminster  seats.  Four  years  later, 
after  the  famous  contest  in  which  the  Duchess  kissed  the 
butcher,  a  local  arrangement  was  made,  by  which  the 
Tories  and  Whigs  divided  the  two  seats.  At  the  elections 
of  1790,  1796,  and  1802,  Radical  candidates  came  forward, 
but  with  little  success. 

In  the  old  Corresponding  Society  days  Place  had  not 
concerned  himself  much  with  electioneering,  and  for  the 
first  five  years  after  taking  the  Charing  Cross  shop  hi 
1800  he  had  withdrawn  himself  entirely  from  public  life.1 
When  at  last  he  again  began  to  pick  up  the  threads  of 
political  life  it  was  not  with  the  Radical  independents,  but 
with  the  well-to-do  Whig  tradesmen  that  he  first  made 
acquaintance.  "In  1805,  having  mastered  all  the  diffi- 
culties attending  the  establishment  of  a  new  business,  .  .  . 
I  permitted  several  respectable  and  well-judging  men  to 
come  and  gossip  with  me  occasionally.  They  were  most 
of  them  electors  of  Westminster.  Mr.  Thomas  and  one 
or  two  others  of  them  were  members  of  the  Whig  Club, 
and  great  admirers  of  Mr.  Fox,  Mr.  Erskine,  Mr.  Sheridan, 
&c.  I  never  had  any  respect  for  either  Fox  or  Sheridan, 
and  not  much  for  Erskine.  I  was  satisfied  that  they  were 
trading  politicians,  Tories  out  of  place,  who  cared  little 
for  the  people  further  than  they  could  be  made  to  promote 
their  own  interests,  whether  those  interests  were  popular 
or  pecuniary.  Of  the  dispositions  of  the  leading  Whigs  I 
had  proof  enough,  and  with  these  I  used  to  banter  my 
new  friends.  They  on  their  part  maintained  that  Fox  and 
his  partisans  were  all  good  men  and  true,  and  if  an  oppor- 
tunity occurred  would  redeem  in  the  most  perfect  and 

1  See  p.  35. 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,  1807-15  41 

complete  way  all  the  pledges  they  had  ever  given  to  the 
people.1 .  .  .  My  opinions  of  these  Whigs  and  Tories,  and 
more  especially  of  the  Whigs,  was  of  course  shown  only 
to  the  few  with  whom  I  conversed.  I  was  wholly  un- 
known in  Westminster,  and  knew  next  to  nothing  of  the 
electors." 2 

On  January  23,  1806,  Pitt  died,  and  Fox,  in  alliance  with 
the  Grenvillite  Tories,  came  into  office.  Fox  was  at  the 
time  the  Whig  member  for  Westminster,  and  a  meeting 
was  at  once  called  in  Westminster  Hall  to  congratulate 
the  King  on  the  new  administration,  and  to  arrange  for 
Fox's  unopposed  re-election.  "  I  suggested,"  says  Place,  "  to 
some  of  my  Whig  friends  that,  among  the  eulogiums  which 
would  be  lavished  on  the  Whigs,  Parliamentary  reform 
should  be  included,  and  that  one  of  the  resolutions  should 
declare  that  the  electors  relied  on  the  many  promises  made 
to  them  on  the  subject,  and  that  they  trusted  the  great 
and  important  object  would  continue  to  receive  the  support 
of  Mr.  Fox  and  his  friends."  Fox  let  it  be  known  that 
"  he  should  be  much  obliged  if  no  allusion  to  Parliamentary 
reform  were  made  at  the  meeting,  as  a  separate  meeting 
could  be  held  on  the  subject."  3  The  resolution  was  omitted, 
but  no  reform  meeting  was  held,  and  after  a  few  months 
of  office  Fox  died.  The  Ministers  then  brought  forward 
Lord  Percy,  eldest  son  of  the  Duke  of  Northumberland,  "  a 
very  young  man,  without  pretensions  to  talents  of  any 
kind,"  4  and  by  putting  up  Sheridan  as  a  sham  candidate, 
to  be  withdrawn  at  the  last  moment,  secured  the  unopposed 
return  of  their  nominee. 

At  this  time  William  Cobbett  was  attempting  in  his 
Political  Register  to  revive  the  democratic  movement, 
which  since  the  coercive  laws  of  1795  and  1800  had  almost 
ceased  to  exist.  He  saw  the  chance  which  the  Westminster 

1  27,850  (6).  2  27,850  (9). 

27,850(10).  4  27,850(12). 


42  WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1807-15 

"  scot  and  lot "  franchise  offered  for  a  representation  of  the 
popular  feeling  of  the  Metropolis,  and  on  August  9,  1806, 
a  month  before  Fox's  death,  published  the  first  of  four 
eloquent  "  Letters  to  the  Electors  of  Westminster."  In  his 
last  letter,  written  just  after  the  return  of  Lord  Percy,  he  up- 
braided them  for  allowing  themselves  to  be  tricked  by  the 
Government.  "  The  letter,"  says  Place,  "  was  much  read, 
and  was  very  useful.  It  produced  shame  in  many  and 
a  desire  to  do  something  on  another  occasion ;  but  it  did 
not  remove  from  them  the  notion,  which  long  practice  had 
confirmed,  that  a  contested  election  could  only  be  carried 
by  money,  money  in  immense  sums ;  and  this  prevented 
me  from  expecting  any  extraordinary  exertions  would  be 
made  by  the  electors  for  themselves  at  the  expected  general 
election." l 

On  the  day  of  the  election  the  Duke  of  Northumber- 
land, the  facade  of  whose  house  was  only  a  few  doors  from 
Place's  shop,  distributed  bread  and  cheese  and  beer  from 
his  steps.  Place  describes  the  scene  and  his  own  feelings. 
"  My  indignation  was  greatly  increased  when  I  saw  the 
servants  of  the  Duke  of  Northumberland,  in  their  showy 
dress  liveries,  throwing  lumps  of  bread  and  cheese  among 
the  dense  crowd  of  vagabonds  they  had  collected  together. 
To  see  these  vagabonds  catching  the  lumps,  shouting, 
swearing,  fighting,  and  blackguarding  in  every  possible 
way,  women  as  well  as  men,  all  the  vile  wretches  from  the 
courts  and  alleys  in  St.  Giles  and  Westminster,  the  Por- 
ridge Islands,  and  other  miserable  places;  to  see  these 
people  representing,  as  it  was  said,  the  electors  of  West- 
minster, was  certainly  the  lowest  possible  step  of  degrada- 
tion, except,  indeed,  if  it  be  possible,  to  hear  it  said,  as  it 
was  said,  that '  the  electors  of  Westminster  had  been  treated 
by  the  bounty  of  the  Duke.'  Some  who  mingled  in  the 
mob  were  ashamed  of  the  proceedings,  and  as  the  mob 
i  27,850(22). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1807-15  43 

pressed  round  the  butts  which  contained  the  beer,  suggested 
that  the  best  way  would  be  to  knock  in  the  heads  as  they 
stood  up  on  end.  This  was  done  immediately.  The  heads 
were  beaten  in,  and  the  coal-heavers  ladled  the  beer  out 
with  their  long-tailed,  broad-brimmed  hats;  but  the  mob 
pressing  on,  the  butts  were  upset,  and  the  beer  flowed  along 
the  gutters,  from  whence  some  made  efforts  to  obtain  it. 
It  may  be  possible  to  imagine  something  like  the  disgraceful 
scene,  but  it  is  not  possible  either  to  describe  it  or  to  excite 
in  the  reader  the  almost  uncontrollable  feelings  of  a  spec- 
tator. I  was  not  the  only  one  who  felt  indignation.  Almost 
every  man  I  knew  was  much  offended  with  the  whole  of  the 
proceedings  and  with  all  who  were  concerned  in  them." 1 

But  the  movement  in  favour  of  independent  action  in 
Westminster  soon  received  a  more  effectual  supporter  than 
either  William  Cobbett  or  the  little  knot  of  disgusted 
tradesmen  round  Charing  Cross.  Sir  Francis  Burdett  was 
the  most  popular  political  figure  in  London ;  he  had  entered 
Parliament  ten  years  before,  and  had  fought  hard  to  im- 
prove the  treatment  of  the  untried  political  prisoners  in 
Coldbath  Fields  Prison.  In  1802  the  metropolitan  free- 
holders had  elected  him  as  member  for  Middlesex.  Since 
then  he  had  once  gained  and  twice  lost  the  Middlesex  seat 
on  petition.  His  marriage  with  Miss  Sophia  Coutts  had 
made  him  one  of  the  wealthiest  men  in  England ;  but 
having  spent  nearly  £100,000  in  contesting  three  election 
petitions  before  the  shameless  Parliamentary  Committees 
of  the  time,  he  had  now  lost  patience  with  the  whole 
system  of  party  government.  In  October  1806  he  pub- 
lished an  address  to  the  freeholders  of  Middlesex,  in  which 
he  said,  "  a  double  imposture  is  attempted  to  be  passed  on 
you.  The  watchword  of  one  party  is  '  the  best  of  kings,' 
the  watchword  of  the  other  is  '  the  best  of  patriots ' ;  but 
neither  of  these  parties  will  descend  to  particulars  and 
1  27,850(19,  20). 


44  WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,  1807-15 

inform  you  what  the  '  best  of  kings '  and  the  '  best  of 
patriots '  have  already  done  or  will  do  for  you.  What  they 
have  done  for  themselves  we  know  and  feel ;  what  further 
they  will  do  for  us  we  can  only  conjecture." l 

A  week  after  the  publication  of  this  address  Parliament 
was  dissolved.  Burdett  refused  to  stand  again  for  Middle- 
sex, and  nominated  James  Paull  as  an  independent  candi- 
date for  Westminster.  Paull  was  a  poor  enough  creature' 
who  had  come  home  from  India  to  carry  on  in  Parliament 
an  old  feud  against  the  Governor-General,  but  because  of 
Burdett's  influence  he  was  less  than  three  hundred  votes 
behind  the  official  Whig.  It  was  clear,  therefore,  that  if 
strong  independent  candidates  could  be  brought  forward 
one  or  both  seats  might  be  carried. 

Place  had  "  plumped  "  for  Paull,  and  towards  the  end  of 
the  seventeen  days'  poll  had  sent  him  some  suggestions  as 
to  organisation.  "  I  now  enlarged  my  acquaintance  among 
the  electors,  and  constantly  maintained  not  only  that  the 
people  had  the  power  to  do  themselves  justice  as  electors, 
but  that  no  more  was  necessary  in  the  first  instance  than 
that  a  few  men  of  business  and  spirit,  no  one  of  whom  had 
any  sinister  interest,  should  act  together,  and  hold  them- 
selves ready  for  action  when  an  opportunity  offered." 2  A 
chance  of  action  soon  came.  The  Ministry  refused  to 
pledge  themselves  against  Catholic  Emancipation,  and 
towards  the  end  of  April  1 807  George  III.  dissolved  Parlia- 
ment and  appealed  to  the  country.  On  the  evening  after 
the  dissolution  a  few  independent  electors  met  at  Place's 
house  and  decided  to  run  Burdett  and  Paull.  Burdett 
refused  to  come  forward  as  a  candidate  or  spend  a  shilling 
on  the  election,  but  promised  to  sit  if  elected.  Three  days 
later,  and  four  days  before  the  poll  was  to  begin,  Burdett 
and  Paull  quarrelled,  and  in  the  duel  which  followed  both 
were  seriously  wounded. 

i  27,850(23).  2  27,850(21). 


WESTMINSTER    POLITICS,   1807-15  45 

The  little  independent  committee,  in  spite  of  this 
tremendous  blow,  and  of  the  fact  that  they  had  no  funds 
to  speak  of,  determined  to  go  on.  They  dropped  Paull,  but 
persisted  with  Burdett's  candidature.  At  the  public  meet- 
ing which  had  been  advertised  for  the  Crown  and  Anchor 
Tavern  they  could  not  even  obtain  a  hearing.  Paull's 
friends  attached  a  stout  broker's  man  to  each  of  the  com- 
mittee, with  orders  to  shout  "  Paull !  Paull ! "  as  soon  as  he 
began  to  speak.  "  I  know  no  word,"  writes  Place,  with  a 
lively  recollection  of  the  scene,  "  so  well  calculated  to  con- 
found an  audience  as  the  open  sound  Paull." l 

The  committee,  however,  retired  to  a  small  room, 
collected  £34  among  themselves  in  addition  to  the  £$o 
which  they  had  in  hand,  and  decided  to  continue  their 
work.  "  We  had,"  says  Place,  "  a  long  discussion,  in  which 
I  put  the  matter  in  every  form  in  my  power.  I  offered 
to  give  up  every  other  thing  and  attend  wholly  to  the 
election  till  its  close.  After  some  time  Mr.  Brooks  and 
Mr.  James  Powell  agreed  to  give  the  whole  of  their  time, 
and  several  others  agreed  to  give  a  considerable  portion  of 
theirs.  Summonses  were  immediately  issued  to  some  thirty 
persons  who  had  been  active  at  the  last  Middlesex  and 
Westminster  elections  to  meet  at  six  o'clock  in  the  even- 
ing at  the  Ship  Tavern,  Charing  Cross. 2  .  .  .  We  were 
all  of  us  obscure  persons,  not  one  man  of  note  among  us, 
not  one  in  any  way  known  to  the  electors  generally,  as 
insignificant  a  set  of  persons  as  could  well  have  been 
collected  together  to  undertake  so  important  a  public 
matter  as  a  Westminster  election  against  wealth  and 
rank  and  name  and  influence.  I  again  went  over  the 
topics  I  had  urged  in  the  morning,  said  I  would  not  only 
undertake  the  management,  but  also  whatever  might  other- 
wise be  necessary  which  others  might  dislike  because  it 
was  disagreeable.  That  as  Mr.  Brooks  had  allowed  his 
1  27,850  (68,  69).  2  27,850  (66). 


46  WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,  1807-15 

name  to  appear  in  public  as  chairman  and  treasurer,  no 
other  name  need  be  mentioned  in  any  of  our  proceedings 
which  any  one  desired  should  not  appear.  That  we  could 
not  be  of  any  importance  as  individuals,  and  it  was  there- 
fore incumbent  on  us  to  make  the  matter  clear  to  the 
understandings  of  the  electors,  to  call  upon  them  to  do 
then*  duty  to  themselves,  and  to  leave  display  and  exhibi- 
tions of  consequence  to  others.  That  if  we  proceeded 
openly,  and  acted  honestly,  failure  either  from  want  of 
money,  or  from  the  electors  not  coming  forward  to  the 
poll,  would  be  no  disgrace  to  any  of  us." l  ..."  It  was 
arranged  that  no  money  should  be  expended  on  account 
of  the  election  but  by  vote  of  the  committee,  on  a  printed 
form  filled  up  and  signed  by  its  order.  That  there  should 
be  no  paid  counsellors,  attorneys,  inspectors  nor  can- 
vassers, no  bribing,  no  paying  of  rates,  no  treating,  no 
cockades,  no  paid  constables,  excepting  two  to  keep  the 
committee-room  doors.  That  notice  of  our  intended  pro- 
ceedings should  be  sent  to  the  magistrates,  who  should 
be  warned  to  see  that  the  peace  was  kept. 2 

"At  the  moment  the  election  commenced  some  of  my 
coadjutors  were  exceedingly  depressed.  We  had  scarcely 
any  money,  nobody  had  joined  us,  and  we  appeared  as 
forlorn  as  the  Whigs  and  Tories  had  predicted  we  should 
be.  Some  among  us  who  had  borne  abuse  very  well  could 
not  bear  being  laughed  at,  and  the  ridicule  which  was  cast 
upon  us  almost  disabled  them  from  acting."  3 

All  those  of  the  committee  and  then"  friends  who 
were  voters  polled  early  on  the  first  morning,  but  at  the 
end  of  the  day  Burdett  had  received  only  78  votes. 
On  the  third  day,  a  Saturday,  his  poll  reached  309. 
The  committee  had,  however,  money  enough  hi  hand  for 
another  day  or  two.  On  Saturday  evening  they  "hired 
three  or  four  ponies,  put  decently  dressed  bugle  boys  on 
1  27,850  (67).  2  27,850  (43).  3  27,850  (75). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1807-15  47 

them,  gave  each  of  them  a  dark  blue  silk  cap,  and  sent 
them  about  the  streets  to  animate  the  people  and  distribute 
handbills."  1  All  Sunday  was  spent  in  canvassing.  Even 
Place  left  the  central  committee-rooms,  and  for  the  first 
and  only  time  in  his  life  canvassed  "  some  of  the  courts 
and  lanes  in  Westminster  for  about  two  hours  and  a  half." 2 

On  the  Monday  Burdett  received  more  votes  than  any 
other  candidate,  and  on  the  fifteenth  and  last  day  of  the 
poll  he  was  at  the  head,  with  over  five  thousand  votes. 
Lord  Cochrane,  who  had  come  forward  as  a  Whig  candidate 
with  a  grievance  against  the  Government,  was  second,  while 
neither  Sheridan,  the  official  Whig,  nor  Elliott,  the  official 
Tory  candidate,  reached  much  more  than  half  Burdett's 
poll.  "  Sheridan  was  so  far  behind  that  he  had  no  chance 
of  out-polling  Cochrane,  and  as  he  begged  hard  to  be 
permitted  to  make  as  respectable  a  show  of  numbers  as 
he  could,  Lord  Cochrane  took  his  inspectors  away,  and 
Sheridan  polled  whom  he  pleased,  and  the  same  man  over 
and  over  again  as  many  times  as  he  pleased." 3 

"  The  moment  the  election  was  ended,"  says  Place,  "  and 
I  had  closed  my  accounts  with  Mr.  Brooks  the  treasurer, 
which  was  at  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  I  went  home  to 
my  business,  which  I  had  neglected  for  nearly  three  weeks ; 
being  from  the  commencement  of  the  election  to  its  close 
at  the  committee-rooms  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
and  remaining  till  all  accounts  for  the  day  were  made  up, 
all  the  books  were  posted  up,  and  the  business  arranged 
for  the  next  day.  This,  excepting  on  the  last  day,  never 
occurred  till  after  twelve  o'clock  at  night."  4 

The  committee  continued  their  existence  after  the 
election,  and  thenceforward  were  the  recognised  political 
authority  in  Westminster.  Every  year  a  public  dinner 
was  held  to  commemorate  the  victory  of  1 807,  and  West- 

27,850  (79).  2  27)850  (8o). 

'  27,850  (80).  *  27,850  (81). 


48  WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,  1807-15 

minster  meetings  in  Palace  Yard  or  Westminster  Hall 
were  summoned  whenever  a  chance  offered  of  damaging 
the  Government  or  spreading  democratic  principles.  Thus 
in  March  1 809  a  meeting  was  held  to  denounce  the  Duke 
of  York  for  having  allowed  Mrs.  Clarke  to  sell  commissions 
in  the  army,  and  in  May  a  dinner  was  given  in  honour  of 
Major  Cartwright  and  Parliamentary  Reform. 

In  the  autumn  of  1809  the  Westminster  Committee 
found  itself  mixed  up  with  the  celebrated  "  0.  P."  riots 
in  Covent  Garden  Theatre.  This  theatre  which,  with 
Drury  Lane,  enjoyed  a  licensed  monopoly  of  legitimate 
drama,  had  lately  been  rebuilt  after  a  fire,  and  on  the 
night  of  reopening  prices  were  raised.  The  audience 
hooted  the  performance,  and  called  for  the  "  Old  Prices." 
John  Kemble,  the  lessee,  lost  his  temper,  and  sent  a  Bow 
Street  Magistrate  on  to  the  stage  to  threaten  to  read  the 
Riot  Act.  Next  day  some  of  the  Westminster  politicians 
who  had  been  in  the  pit  came  to  Charing  Cross,  and 
Place  made  them  a  mould  from  "two  hearthstones"  for 
casting  the  initial  letters  of  their  motto.  "Powell  and 
Wall  cast  about  a  hundred  '  0.  P's.,'  and  as  the  metal  was 
fresh  from  the  mould  it  was  very  bright,  and  when  stuck 
against  the  crown  of  a  black  hat  was  very  conspicuous." 
After  three  months'  wrangling  in  the  theatre  and  police 
courts  Place  was  "the  means  of  bringing  about  a  recon- 
ciliation, which  at  the  desire  of  Mr.  Kemble  was  made 
at  my  house  on  the  23rd  of  December.  Present  for  the 
theatre,  Mr.  Kemble,  Mr.  Harris,  Jun.,  and  Mr.  Este;  for 
the  0.  P.,  Mr.  Scott,  Mr.  Savage,  Mr.  Powell,  and  Mr.  Willett 
as  a  friend.  When  the  whole  affair  was  settled  Mr.  Harris 
urged  me  to  accept  a  free  admission,  which  I  refused." 1 

In  the  spring  of  1810  a  contest  began  between  West- 
minster and  the  House  of  Commons,  which  attracted  the 

1  Henry  Hunt  in  his  "Memoirs"  (2  vols.,  London,  1820-22),  vol.  ii. 
p.  385,  says  that  the  0.  P.  riots  were  a  political  affair. 


WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,  1807-15  49 

attention  of  the  whole  country.  On  February  21  the 
Commons  ordered  John  Gale  Jones  to  attend  at  the  bar  of 
their  House.  Jones  was  the  organiser  of  a  debating  society 
near  Covent  Garden,  and  had  advertised  a  harmless  enough 
discussion  about  the  exclusion  of  strangers  by  the  First  Lord 
of  the  Admiralty  during  the  debate  on  the  Walcheren  expe- 
dition. Jones  came  to  Place  for  advice,  "  a  poor,  emaciated 
crazy-looking  creature,  possessed  of  considerable  talents, 
but  as  devoid  of  judgment  as  any  man  well  could  be." * 
Place  strove  to  make  him  understand  that  submission  to 
the  House  would  do  him  no  good,  while  he  had  everything 
to  gam  as  an  unflinching  martyr  in  the  cause  of  free 
speech.  Jones  promised  courage,  but  repented  of  his 
promise.  He  went  to  the  House,  made  an  abject  sub- 
mission, and  was  committed  to  Newgate.2  On  March  12 
Burdett  moved  for  his  release,  and  delivered  a  speech, 
which  he  afterwards  revised  and  published  in  Cobbett's 
Register.  This  publication  was  brought  before  the  House 
as  a  breach  of  privilege.  The  question  was  debated  for 
three  nights,  and  finally,  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning 
of  Friday  April  6,  a  motion  to  commit  Burdett  to  the 
Tower  was  carried  by  a  majority  of  38.  Burdett  instantly 
came  up  from  Wimbledon,  barricaded  himself  inside  his 
big  house  in  Piccadilly,  and  announced  that  he  considered 
the  Speaker's  warrant  to  be  illegal,  and  would  repel  force 
by  force.  Huge  crowds  collected,  greater,  it  was  said,  than 
those  at  the  Gordon  riots  in  1780.  The  main  body  were 
decent  orderly  people,  but  small  groups  of  rioters  moved 
about  smashing  windows  and  pelting  those  who  refused  to 
cheer  for  Burdett.  The  only  police  force  in  London  was 
the  shifting  body  of  amateur  "constables"  under  the 
command  of  the  sheriffs,  one  of  whom  at  least3  was 

1  27,850(158). 

2  "House  of  Commons  Journals,"  vol.  Ixv.  p.  113,  2ist  February 
1810.  s  Alderman  Wood. 

D 


50  WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,  1807-15 

actively  hostile  to  Lord  Liverpool's  government.  The 
Ministry,  therefore,  could  only  keep  order  by  using  troops, 
and  on  each  of  the  three  next  nights  the  Horse  Guards 
were  sent  to  clear  the  streets.  "It  was  their  common 
practice  to  ride  upon  the  foot  pavement  and  drive  the 
people  before  them,  pressing  on  them  in  such  a  way  as  to 
cause  great  terror,  frequently  doing  some  of  them  injury 
and  compelling  them  to  injure  one  another,  striking  those 
who  could  not  get  out  of  the  way  fast  enough  with  the 
flat  of  their  swords.1  On  the  other  hand,  the  people  "  taking 
a  long  ladder  from  a  building,  placed  it  across  the  street 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  prevent  the  horses  in  the  dark 
pursuing  them.  They  then  did  all  they  could  to  provoke 
the  Guards  to  charge  upon  them,  and  upon  their  doing  so 
they  retreated  round  the  ends  of  the  ladder  and  under  it, 
and  from  the  other  side  showered  the  rubbish  they  found 
upon  the  soldiers." 2  "A  rumour  was  extensively  propa- 
gated that  the  utmost  hatred  existed  between  the  Foot 
and  the  Life  Guards,  and  it  was  said,  and  believed  by  vast 
numbers  of  people,  that  the  Foot  Guards  and  the  I5th 
Light  Dragoons  were  much  more  disposed  to  fight  the 
Life  Guards  than  they  were  disposed  to  obey  an  order  to 
attack  the  people." 3  "  There  was  a  solemn  stillness  and  a 
gloom  half  visible  which  produced  on  me,  as  upon  inquiry 
I  afterwards  found  it  had  done  on  others,  that  peculiar 
sort  of  feeling  which  has  been  represented  as  being  felt 
by  soldiers  waiting  for  the  dawn  of  day  to  commence  a 
battle."4 

Burdett  wrote  to  the  sheriffs  demanding  their  pro- 
tection, and  the  sheriffs  with  a  body  of  constables  "re- 
moved the  soldiers  to  some  distance  each  way  from  Sir 
Francis  Burdett's  house.  Here  they  formed  across  the 
street  and  permitted  no  one  to  pass."  5 

1  27,850  (184).          2  27,850  (192).  3  27,850  (188,  189). 

427,850(186).  5  27,850(190). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,  1807-15  51 

But  the  Ministers  showed  themselves  more  determined 
than  the  City  authorities.  The  volunteers  were  called  out, 
and  "all  the  troops  within  a  hundred  miles  of  London, 
both  cavalry  and  infantry,  were  ordered  to  march  to  the 
Metropolis." l  At  the  Tower,  guns  were  mounted  on  the 
gates  and  water  let  into  the  ditch. 

On  the  Sunday  evening  Burdett's  brother  came  to  call 
Place  to  a  council  of  war.  They  were  admitted  into  a 
house  in  Stratton  Street  belonging  to  the  Coutts  family ; 
and  thence  made  their  way  by  cellar  passages  through 
guarded  iron  doors  (the  watchword  for  the  evening  being 
"  Place ")  to  the  great  house  in  Piccadilly.  They  found 
Burdett  in  consultation  with  the  semi-lunatic  Roger 
O'Connor.  It  appeared  that  Cochrane,  being  a  hare- 
brained sailor  Avith  a  passion  for  fighting,  had  "  contrived 
an  effectual  mode  of  defence  against  any  force  that  could 
be  used." 2  Henry  Hunt  says  that  Cochrane  drove  up  in  a 
hackney-coach  and  rolled  into  the  passage  a  barrel  of  gun- 
powder for  mining  the  front  of  the  house. 3 

Place  of  course  saw  clearly  that  this  was  the  kind  of 
step  which  should  only  be  undertaken  by  men  who 
seriously  contemplate  the  levying  of  civil  war.  "  It  will 
be  easy  enough/'  he  told  the  conspirators,  "  to  clear  the 
hall  of  constables  and  soldiers,  to  drive  them  into  the 
street  or  to  destroy  them,  but  are  you  prepared  to  take 
the  next  step  and  to  go  on  ? " 

"  This  produced  instant  conviction  of  the  folly  of  at- 
tempting any  (such)  thing.  It  was  all  at  once,  and  by  all, 
agreed  that  nothing  should  be  done  in  this  way,  but  that 
as  the  sheriff  had  consented  to  avail  himself  of  the  civil 
power,  and  as  a  large  number  of  the  inhabitants  would 
probably  be  collected  to  attend  his  orders  at  nine  o'clock 

1  27,850  (193).  2  27,850  (199). 

3  See  the  "  Memoirs  of  Henry  Hunt,"  written  by  himself  (2  vols., 
London,  1820-22),  vol.  ii.  p.  391. 


52  WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,  1807-15 

in  the  morning,  the  matter  should  be  left  to  him." *  .  .  . 
"I  did  not  then,  I  do  not  now  (1826),  disapprove  of  Sir 
Francis  Burdett's  notions.  Had  circumstances  been  such 
as  to  promise  an  effectual  resistance,  not  only  at  the  house 
of  Sir  Francis  but  anywhere  else,  had  there  been  anything 
like  a  sufficient  body  organised  to  have  assured  the  soldiers 
that  power  enough  existed  to  protect  them,  .  .  .  there 
would  have  been  a  fair  chance  in  the  then  disposition  of 
men,  and  of  no  small  portion  of  the  army,  that  a  successful 
effort  at  the  outset  would  have  given  them  confidence,  and 
that  many  and  perhaps  nearly  all  the  troops  in  London 
would  have  revolted.  But  there  was  no  organisation  and 
no  arms,  and  to  have  resisted  under  such  circumstances 
would  have  been  madness."2  Place  therefore  returned 
to  Charing  Cross  to  complete  the  arrangements  for  using, 
as  Wilkes  had  done  forty  years  earlier,  the  police  powers 
of  the  City  against  the  Government. 

"  It  was  late  in  the  evening  before  all  our  arrangements 
were  fully  made  and  persons  appointed  to  carry  them  into 
effect.  Several  were  appointed  to  see  as  many  house- 
keepers 3  as  they  could,  and  induce  as  many  as  they  could 
to  assent  to  go  to  the  Gloucester  coffee-house,  where  the 
largest  room  in  the  house  was  taken,  to  be  sworn  in  as 
constables  at  a  quarter  before  nine  o'clock  on  the  Monday 
morning.  It  was  intended  that  a  number  of  these  house- 
keepers, some  on  horseback,  but  the  principal  part  on  foot, 
should  attend  the  sheriff  to  the  officer  commanding  on  the 
spot,  who  was  to  be  desired  to  withdraw  his  troops,  and 
upon  his  absolute  refusal,  or  on  his  making  a  show  of 
resistance,  he  was  to  be  taken  into  custody.  If  he  resisted 
this,  he  was  to  have  notice  of  an  action  to  be  brought 
against  him,  and  the  same  process  was  to  be  gone  through 

1  27,850  (200).  2  27,850  (201,  202). 

3  i.e.  ratepaying  householders,  who  could  be  legally  called  upon  to 
act  as  constables. 


WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,  1807-15  53 

with  any  officer  on  duty." l  "I  was  to  have  the  direction 
of  them  until  they  were  placed  under  the  command  of  the 
sheriff.  Bills  were  printed  ready  to  be  pasted  on  boards 
to  be  carried  by  men  on  poles,  informing  the  people  that 
the  civil  power  under  the  orders  of  the  sheriff  would  keep 
the  peace,  and  they  were  desired  if  necessary  to  lend  their 
aid,  and  they  were  informed  that  the  military  were  directed 
to  withdraw.2  .  .  .  Our  object  was  to  gain  time,  to  prevent 
the  capture  of  Sir  Francis  until  after  the  House  of 
Commons  had  again  met,  which  it  was  to  do  on  the 
Monday  afternoon." 3 

On  Monday  morning  Place  kept  his  appointment  at  the 
Gloucester  coffee-house.  Fewer  "  housekeepers  "  presented 
themselves  for  their  extremely  risky  duties  than  had  been 
expected,  but  by  half-past  nine  Place  had  a'  hundred  men 
under  him.  Wood,  the  reforming  sheriff,  was  late,  and  on 
his  way  to  Piccadilly  was  met  with  the  news  that  all  was 
over.  The  [authorities  had  probably  been  kept  well  in- 
formed of  the  proceedings  at  the  Gloucester  coffee-house, 
and  the  troops  had  broken  into  Burdett's  house  at  ten 
o'clock.  They  broke  up  a  hastily  arranged  scene,  in  which 
Sir  Francis  was  teaching  his  son  to  translate  Magna 
Charta,  and  carried  him  off  in  a  coach  surrounded  by  a 
strong  force  of  cavalry  through  a  yelling  mob  to  the 
Tower.4 

Here,  from  April  9  till  the  prorogation  of  Parliament  on 
June  21,  Burdett  remained  in  custody.  The  House  did 
not  dare  to  provoke  another  Wilkes  campaign  |by  depriv- 
ing him  of  his  seat,  and  debated  with  more  anger  than 
dignity  the  deliberately  insolent  petitions  which  came  in 
from  Middlesex  and  Westminster. 

While  Burdett  was  still  in  the  Tower,  Place  was  called 

1  27,850  (197).  227,850(198).  327,850(197). 

4  See  the  Report  of  the  Serjeant-at-Arms  to  the  House  of  Commons, 
"House  of  Commons  Journals,"  April  9,  1810,  vol.  Ixv.  p.  261. 


54  WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,  1807-15 

upon  to  perform  a  purely  incidental  duty  under  circum- 
stances which  affected  all  the  rest  of  his  political  career. 
During  the  night  of  May  30,  1810,  the  household  in  St. 
James's  Palace  were  aroused  by  cries  for  help,  and  it  was 
found  that  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  had  been  seriously 
wounded.  Half-an-hour  later  his  valet,  Joseph  Sellis,  was 
discovered  dead,  with  his  throat  cut,  hi  a  closet  not  far 
from  the  Duke's  room.  The  Duke  of  Cumberland  was 
already  the  most  unpopular  of  the  King's  sons,  and  a 
rumour  spread  that  he  had  murdered  Sellis,  and  had  been 
wounded  in  the  struggle.  As  the  death  had  occurred  in 
the  Palace  the  coroner  of  the  King's  Household  held  the 
inquest,  and  the  jury  consisted  of  tradesmen  and  others 
living  "  within  the  verge  of  the  Court."  Place  was  sum- 
moned, and  with  his  usual  attention  to  detail  went  down 
on  the  morning  of  the  inquest  to  the  rooms  of  a  barrister 
in  Lincoln's  Inn  to  read  up  the  law  of  Coroner's  Quest. 
He  was  chosen  foreman,  and  used  his  morning's  studies  to 
insist  successfully  that  reporters  should  be  allowed  to  be 
present,  and  that  the  seventeen  jurymen  who  had  answered 
the  summons  should  all  be  sworn.  The  King's  coroner  was 
not  a  very  competent  person,  and  Place  as  foreman  seems 
to  have  very  largely  carried  on  the  inquiry.  "  It  is  my 
belief,"  he  says,  "  that  every  one  of  the  men  who  served  on 
the  inquest  was  prejudiced  against  the  Duke."  But  the 
jury  brought  in  a  unanimous  verdict  of  felo  de  se.  Sellis 
was  shown  to  have  attacked  the  Duke  with  a  sword,  and 
afterwards  to  have  committed  suicide.  No  one  who  will 
now  take  the  trouble  to  read  the  evidence  can  doubt 
for  an  instant  that  the  verdict  was  just,  but  it  keenly 
disappointed  those  who  had  expected  the  chance  of  a 
scandal  greater  even  than  that  of  Mrs.  Clarke.  Place 
was  promptly  accused  of  having  been  bribed  by  the 
Court,  and  the  accusation  was  for  the  next  ten  years 
continually  revived  by  any  one  who  wished  to  injure 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,  1807-15  55 

him.1  For  the  moment  the  chief  importance  of  the  inci- 
dent was  its  effect  on  Burdett's  mind.  One  cannot  read 
Magna  Charta  for  ever,  and  Burdett  was  not  a  man  who 
read  much  else.  He  had  therefore  nothing  to  occupy  him 
in  the  Tower  except  the  daily  gossip  of  Roger  O'Connor  and 
Colonel  Wardle.  These  two  men  magnified  the  report 
against  Place,  and  Burdett  came  to  believe  that  the 
sheriff's  delay  at  the  storming  of  his  house  was  due  to 
Place's  treachery.  Nothing  of  this,  however,  was  known 
outside  the  Tower.  The  Westminster  Committee  deter- 
mined to  arrange  a  triumphal  procession  for  Burdett  on  his 
release,  and  Place,  though  he  hated  shows  of  any  kind, 
consented  to  become  chief  organiser. 

Parliament  was  to  be  prorogued  on  June  2 1 ,  and  Burdett 
must  necessarily  be  set  free  as  soon  as  the  House  rose. 
For  three  days  Place  never  left  his  post  at  the  Crown  and 
Anchor  Tavern,  where  he  prepared  the  most  elaborate 
printed  directions  for  the  marshals,  the  processionists,  and 
the  spectators,  at  every  point  on  the  route.  People  came 
over  from  Ireland  and  Scotland  to  see  the  sight.  "  Almost 
every  decently  dressed  person  had  a  blue  cockade  in  his 
hat.  The  ladies  wore  blue  bonnets,  blue  feathers,  and  blue 
necklaces  made  of  very  large  beads  manufactured  for  the 
purpose ;  many  wore  blue  dresses,  and  all  had  blue  ribbons. 
Every  open  space  was  filled  with  people,  and  an  immense 
multitude  assembled  on  Tower  Hill.  All  London  seemed 
to  be  in  the  streets."  ~ 

But  Burdett  in  his  rooms  in  the  Tower  was  every  day 
becoming  more  fidgety  and  suspicious,  and  half  persuaded 
himself  that  Place  might  arrange  with  the  Government  to 
have  him  shot  as  he  rode  in  the  triumphal  car.  When  the 

1  Henry  Hunt,  for  instance,  says  of  this  incident  :  "  It  is  paid  that 
since  that  period  Mr.  Place  has  been,  a  very  rich  man,  but  that  before 
that  he  was  a  poor,  very  poor,  democrat. — "Memoirs  of  Henry  Hunt" 
(2  vols.,  London,  1820-22),  vol.  ii.  p.  424. 

2  27,850(235). 


56  WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,  1807-15 

news  came  by  semaphore  that  the  House  had  risen  he 
crossed  the  Thames  quietly  in  a  boat.  Place  made  the  best 
of  the  situation,  and  ordered  the  procession  to  go  on  with  an 
empty  car  in  front,  and  poor  Gale  Jones  speechifying  from 
the  top  of  a  hackney-coach  behind.  But  though  the  rest 
of  the  committee  soon  got  over  their  disappointment,  Place 
nursed  his  wrath.  Henry  Hunt  said  he  called  Burdett  "  a 
damned  coward  and  a  poltroon," l  which  is  likely  enough. 
Anyhow,  for  the  next  nine  years  Place  and  Burdett  did  not 
speak  to  each  other. 

In  1812  there  was  a  general  election,  and  Burdett  and 
Cochrane  were  returned  unopposed.  In  1814  occurred 
the  well-known  hoax  on  the  Stock  Exchange,  for  which 
Cochrane  and  several  others  were  sentenced  to  heavy 
fines  and  imprisonment.2  Cochrane's  conviction  was  con- 
sidered in  Westminster  to  be  due  to  a  party  intrigue,  and 
he  was  returned  unopposed  at  the  bye-election  which 
followed  his  expulsion  from  the  House  of  Commons. 
Place's  name  does  not  appear  on  the  committee  which 
managed  either  of  these  elections.  He  prepared  schemes, 
drew  up  resolutions,  and  gave  the  use  of  his  library  for 
preliminary  meetings,  but  refused  to  do  anything  which 
would  require  him  to  go  out  of  his  own  house. 

Meanwhile  Burdett's  suspicions,  under  the  influence  of 
Henry  Hunt  and  others,  were  steadily  growing,  and  in  July 
1814  he  sent  a  letter  to  the  committee  of  the  West  London 
Lancastrian  Association,  of  which  both  Place  and  he  were 
members,  demanding  that  "  Place  and  John  Richter  might 
be  expelled  the  committee,  Place  being  a  spy  employed  by 
the  Government,  and  Richter  being  his  tool."  3  Place  wrote 

1  See  the  "  Memoirs  of  Henry  Hunt,"  vol.  ii.  p.  423. 

2  It  was  alleged  that  they  had  concocted,  for  Stock  Exchange  purposes, 
a  plan,  in  accordance  with  which  several  persons  dressed  as  British 
officers  rode  up  to  London  from  Dover  and  Sheerness  reporting  a  victory 
of  the  allied  armies. 

3  James  Mill  told  Place  that  "in  the  preceding  year,  being  at  Oxford 
with  Mr.  Bentham,  where  they  saw  Sir  Francis  Burdett,  he  told  them 


WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,   1807-15  57 

indignantly  to  the  committee  to  offer  his  resignation.  It 
was  accepted,  and  he  resolved  to  have  nothing  further  to 
do  either  with  the  Westminster  Reform  Committee  or  the 
members  for  Westminster.  In  less  troubled  times  this 
resolution  would  probably  have  been  final ;  as  it  was,  it 
lasted  about  two  years.1  Burdett  and  Place,  however,  did  not 
speak  to  each  other  till  1819.  As  to  the  accusation  itself, 
most  people  seem  to  have  come  to  think  of  it  as  merely 
Burdett's  way  of  expressing  a  passing  feeling  of  irritation. - 
At  this  period  of  his  life  Place  had  the  ill-fortune  to  be 
admitted  to  the  personal  friendship  of  William  Godwin, 
and  the  singularly  good  fortune  to  escape  from  it  without 
ruin.  "  In  the  year  1810,"  that  is  to  say,  as  soon  as  Place's 
acquaintance  had  any  pecuniary  value,  "  Mr.  William 
Godwin  sought  my  acquaintance,  and  I  readily  formed  a 
friendship  with  him.  I  had  never  heard  anything  alleged 
against  his  moral  character.  I  had  heard  much  in  his 
praise,  and  I  had  benefited  in  no  small  degree  by  his 
writings.3  I  was  therefore  pleased  to  have  him  for  a  friend. 
Godwin  had,  however,  a  design  of  no  small  moment  to  him 
in  seeking  my  acquaintance,  and  he  accomplished  his 

I  was  a  spy,  and  he  cautioned  them  against  me,  and  upon  Mr.  Bentham 
desiring  some  reason  for  his  assertion  and  advice,  he  said  that,  when  he 
was  resisting  the  Speaker's  warrant,  I  had  undertaken  on  the  Sunday 
before  he  was  seized  to  fill  his  house  with  people  to  beat  out  the 
soldiers  if  they  should  break  in,  but  that  instead  of  doing  so  I  had 
betrayed  him."  [27,823  (102-103).] 

1  Even  in  1815  Place  seems  to  have  taken  part,  probably  with  some 
other  organisation  than  the  Westminster  Committee,  in  opposing  the 
Corn  Law  of  that  year.     Long  afterwards  he  wrote  to  Cobden :  "  I  was 
one  cause  of  preventing  the  enactment  of  the  Corn  Laws  in  1814,  and 
all  but  fought  against  it  in  1815"  (Place  to  Cobden,  November  15, 
1841);  and  still  later  he  recorded  that  "this  atrocious  Bill  .  .  .  was 
passed  behind  immensely  strong  double  barricades  of  timber  which 
blocked  up  the  streets  and  other  avenues  to  the  Houses  under  the 
cannon  of  the  artillery,  the  swords  of  the  cavalry,  and  the  bayonets  of 
the  infantry." — "  Autobiography." 

2  See  e.g.  Hunt's  remark  on  p.  55. 

3  See  p.  29. 


58  WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,  1807-15 

purpose  beyond  what  could  have  been  his  most  sanguine 
expectations.  It  was,  however,  of  no  permanent  use  to 
him,  highly  pernicious  as  it  was  to  several  others." l 

"  I  soon  found  that  he  was  uncomfortably  circumstanced 
in  his  pecuniary  concerns,  and  needed  my  advice  and 
assistance.  Both  of  these  I  was  willing  he  should  have  to 
the  full  extent  of  my  capability.  I  made  some  inquiries 
respecting  the  state  of  his  affairs,  and  as  I  went  on  inquir- 
ing saw,  as  I  supposed,  a  probability  of  extricating  him 
from  his  difficulties,  and  placing  him  in  comparatively 
easy  circumstances.  .  .  .  An  account  was  shown  to  us,  and 
books  were  brought  forward  to  verify  the  account.  Such 
a  case  was  shown  as  induced  us  to  conclude  that  if  £5000 
could  be  raised,  Mr.  Godwin  would  not  only  be  placed  in  a 
state  of  comparative  ease,  but  that  the  business  carried  on 
by  his  wife  would,  when  disembarrassed,  repay  the  loan, 

1  Place  gives  a  pathetic  little  picture  of  another  man  whom  Godwin 
helped  to  disillusionise.  "  Mr.  Godwin's  affairs  brought  me  acquainted 
with  a  Mr.  Elton  Hammond,  whose  father  had  been  a  wholesale  tea- 
dealer  in  the  City  of  London,  and  had  at  his  decease  left  a  considerable 
property  to  his  two  sons  and  two  daughters.  Mr.  Hammond  was  tall 
and  well  formed.  The  contour  of  his  face  was  very  like  the  imaginary 
portraits  of  Jesus  Christ  as  painted  by  eminent  artists,  but  somewhat 
thinner  and  rather  longer,  or  it  had  the  appearance  of  greater  length 
perhaps  from  its  being  thinner.  His  features  were  regular  and  hand- 
some ;  his  countenance  was  mild,  placid,  benevolent,  yet  somewhat 
sorrowful.  .  .  .  Mr.  Hammond  started  in  life  with  enthusiastic  notions 
of  the  capacity  and  desires  of  mankind  to  become  virtuous  and  happy. 
To  their  rapid  improvement  he  hoped  to  devote  himself.  He  persuaded 
himself  that  he  should  be  able  to  correct  their  vices  and  prevent  them 
committing  crimes.  He  set  about  their  reformation  with  uncommon 
ardour.  How  little  he  was  able  to  accomplish  need  not  be  told.  He 
consumed  his  time  and  expended  his  money  in  the  vain  pxirsuit  of  a 
phantom,  which  was  perpetually  misleading  him,  and  wearied  and 
weakened  his  intellectual  powers  before  his  experience  had  shown  him 
how  hopeless  his  pursuit  was.  He  was  at  length  compelled  to  conclude 
that  the  progress  of  mankind  towards  a  state  of  virtuous  benevolence 
was  an  almost  imperceptible  increment ;  he  despaired,  and  in  his 
despair  shot  himself.  He  was  emphatically  my  friend,  and  I  loved 
him  with  great  sincerity  to  the  moment  of  his  death." 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,  1807-15  59 

and  to  this  hour  ( 1 827)  I  am  satisfied  it  might,  and  ought 
to,  have  been  so,  notwithstanding  the  accounts  laid  before 
us  were  not  correct  accounts,  and  did  not  contain  a  true 
statement,  but  had  been  fabricated  in  order  to  induce  us 
to  procure  the  money." 

Place's  letters  give  the  history  of  the  last  months  of  the 
acquaintance.  On  January  2,  1814,  he  writes  to  his  friend 
Wakefield :  "  Godwin  has  just  left  me  after  his  Sunday's 
usual  visit,  and  I  am  happj7  to  find  he  has  visited  Sir  J. 
Mackintosh  lately,  and  that  these  two  men  who  ought  to 
have  been  enemies  are  perfectly  good  friends  again."  On 
January  25,  after  some  correspondence  as  to  raising  money 
from  Shelley's  post-obit  bonds,  Place  writes  again  to  Wake- 
field:  "Godwin  sends  you  a  thousand  thanks  for  your 
information.  He  is  hi  some  respects  a  poor  creature.  He 
fears  poverty,  not,  I  think,  much  on  his  own  account,  but 
for  his  family."  In  September  of  the  same  year  the 
acquaintance  ends  with  an  exchange  of  stern  reproaches 
from  Place,  and  miserable  shuffling  excuses  and  upbraidings 
from  Godwin.  On  September  2,  for  instance,  he  writes  to 
Place:  "My  integrity  I  thoroughly  know;  it  has  always 
adhered  to  me,  and  it  supports  me  even  against  such  an 
attack  as  this,  and  from  such  a  man  as  you.  .  .  .  Your 
passions  carry  you  so  far  as  absolutely  to  assert  the  thing 
that  is  not.  You  say  'I  induced  you  to  go  to  Lambeth 
upon  an  undertaking  that  you  should  be  paid.'  This  is  not 
so.  There  my  integrity  triumphed.  You  urged  me  again 
and  again  to  undertake  for  that,  but  in  vain.  I  said,  '  I 
will  see  what  can  be  done,  I  will  do  the  very  best  I  can.' " 
September  3. — "There  is  nothing  more  to  be  lamented 
between  persons  of  high  worth  and  rare  qualities,  than  that 
they  should  quarrel.  Poor  Holcroft  used  to  say  that  I 
should  never  make  him  quarrel  with  or  alienate  himself 
from  me ;  and  as  long  as  he  remained  perfectly  the  man  he 
had  been,  he  kept  his  word.  I  think  I  can  answer  for  it,  you 


60  WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1807-15 

shall  never  make  me  quarrel  with  you."  September  n. — 
"  You  once  told  me  you  owed  everything  that  you  most 
valued  in  yourself  and  your  rules  of  conduct  to  the  sole 
perusal  of  my  writings,  and  is  this  the  man  whose  acquaint- 
ance you  disown  ? "  One  quotation  from  Place's  letters 
will  be  enough.  "  I  regret  my  own  weakness  in  having 
persuaded  myself  that  trickery  would  in  you,  any  more 
than  in  other  persons  who  resort  to  it,  produce  any  but  its 
usual  consequences.  I  regret  still  more  that  I  ever  lent 
myself  in  any  way,  for  ever  so  short  a  time,  to  assist  you 
either  directly  or  indirectly  in  any  such  practice.  Most  of 
all,  I  regret  that  you  should  have  made  it  necessary  for  me 
to  write  this  to  you." 

He  makes  a  calculation  showing  that  Godwin  muddled 
away  £1500  a  year  during  the  ten  years  1804-1814,  "not- 
withstanding he  had  for  the  last  four  or  five  years  paid  no 
rent  for  the  house  he  lived  in,  which  was  worth  £200  a 
year."  Place's  own  loss  from  his  connection  with  this 
prince  of  spongers  was  something  under  .£400. 

Even  in  the  days  of  the  Corresponding  Society,  Place 
had  been  as  keen  a  student  of  politics  as  he  was  a  politician, 
and  when  he  became  organiser  at  Westminster,  his  interest 
in  the  more  permanent  questions  underlying  party  struggles 
became  still  deeper.  By  that  time  political  theory  in  Eng- 
land was  in  a  state  of  rapid  transition.  The  influence  of 
the  French  Revolutionary  thinkers  was  disappearing,  and 
neither  the  "  classical "  political  economy  nor  Bentham's 
Utilitarianism  had  yet  established  themselves.  Such 
discussion  as  went  on  was  largely  in  the  hands  of  the 
"  cranks,"  the  persistent  men  of  one  idea  apiece,  who  make 
popular  movements,  and  thereby  often  force  undesired 
criticisms  of  established  opinion  upon  better-equipped 
thinkers.  With  them  Place  was  always  ready  to  spend 
hours  of  patient  discussion,  and  from  them  he  learnt  as 
much  as  from  his  books. 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1807-15  (jl 

Thomas  Spence,  the  Land  Nationalise!',  was  a  typical 
specimen  of  these  political  Poor  Preachers.  He  had 
been  a  schoolmaster  in  Newcastle,  and  had  conceived  of 
"Spence's  glorious  plan"  of  "parochial  partnership  in 
land  without  private  landlordism,"  while  engaged  in  a 
quarrel  between  the  corporation  and  freemen  of  New- 
castle about  the  rents  of  the  Town  Moor.  In  1792  he 
was  in  London,  and  was  imprisoned  for  selling  Paine's 
"  Rights  of  Man."  After  his  release  he  published  a  long 
series  of  tracts,  of  which  the  best  known  was  the  periodical 
"  Pigs'  Meat ;  or,  Lessons  for  the  Swinish  Multitude  "  (1793- 
1795).  In  1 80 1  he  was  again  imprisoned  for  publishing  a 
tract  called  "  The  Restorer  of  Society  to  its  Natural  State." 
Place  came  to  know  him  in  1792,  "when  he  kept  a  book- 
stall at  the  top  of  Chancery  Lane  in  Holborn.  .  .  .  He 
was  at  that  time  as  poor  as  any  man  could  well  be,  and 
with  some  trifling  fluctuations  in  his  affairs  he  continued 
in  this  state  to  the  day  of  his  death.  He  was  a  very 
simple,  very  honest,  single-minded  man,  querulous  in  his 
disposition  and  odd  in  his  manners.  .  .  .  His  disposition 
was  strongly  marked  on  his  countenance,  which  marked 
him  as  a  man  soured  by  adverse  circumstances,  and  at 
enmity  with  the  world.  Still  he  loved  mankind,  and  firmly 
believed  that  the  time  would  come  when  they  would  be 
wise,  virtuous,  and  happy.  He  was  perfectly  sincere,  and 
unpractised  in  the  ways  of  the  world  to  an  extent  few 
could  imagine  in  a  man  who  had  been  pushed  about  in 
it  as  he  had  been.  ...  A  man  so  poor,  so  high  in  his 
notions  of  independence,  so  fanatically  certain  of  the  un- 
paralleled goodness  of  his  system,  and  so  easily  excited, 
could  have  no  friends  amongst  the  persons  with  whom  he 
associated.  .  .  .  He  was  unknown  to  such  philosophical 
men  as  would  have  formed  a  true  estimate  of  his  worth, 
made  allowance  for  his  infirmities  .  .  .  and  led  him  to  a 
better  knowledge  of  the  world.  .  .  .  Ordinary  men  could  not 


62  WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,  1807-15 

be  the  friends  of  one  whom  they  could  not  appreciate ;  and 
he  on  his  part  despised  such  men.  .  .  .  He  looked  upon  them 
as  despicable,  willing  slaves,  who  deserved  no  better  treat- 
ment than  they  met  with,  and  he  frequently  told  them  so." l 
Hone  afterwards  described  "  Spence's  vehicle,  like  a  baker's 
close  barrow.  The  pamphlets  were  exhibited  outside,  and 
when  he  sold  one  he  took  it  from  within,  and  handed  and 
recommended  others,  with  strong  expressions  of  hate  to  the 
powers  that  were  and  prophecies  of  what  would  happen  to 
the  whole  race  of  landlords." 2  He  used  to  distribute  copper 
tokens  stamped  with  the  words  "  Spence's  Plan,"  a  phrase 
which  his  disciples  "  chalked  on  every  wall  in  London."  3 
He  died  in  1814,  and  handed  on  his  message  to  Thomas 
Evans,  who  in  the  year  of  his  master's  death  founded 
that  "Society  of  Spencean  Philanthropists"  which  so 
frightened  Lord  Sidmouth  in  1817. 

Of  Spence  Place  says,  "Almost  all  the  great  changes 
in  the  religion  and  government  of  mankind  have  either 
been  accomplished,  or  put  in  the  way  to  be  accomplished, 
by  men  whose  cast  of  thought  was,  like  his,  concentrated 
on  one  object,  pursued  under  all  kinds  of  difficulties,  and 
accomplished  at  last  almost  against  the  consent  of  the 
very  people  on  whom  they  were  to  operate."  4 

Major  Cartwright,  the  originator  of  the  six  points  of 
the  Charter,5  and  the  founder  of  Lord  Sidmouth's  other 
bugbear,  the  "  Hampden  Club,"  only  differed  from  Spence 
in  the  fact  that  he  was  a  man  of  some  fortune.  Place 
liked  the  "Old  Gentleman,"  as  he  was  generally  called, 

1  27,808(152-153). 

2  W.  Hone  to  Place  (1830),  27,808  (315).     The  barrow  was  also  used 
for  selling  a  mysterious  compound  called  Saloup,  27,808  (310). 

*  27,808  (230).  4  27,808  (151). 

5  See  "  The  Legislative  Rights  of  the  Commonalty  Vindicated,"  by 
John  Cartwright  (London,  1777,  8vo).  This  is  a  second  and  enlarged 
edition  of  a  pamphlet  published  in  1776,  and  called  "Take  your 
Choice."  See  Address  of  the  Metropolitan  Parliamentary  Reform 
Association,  27,810  (5). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,  1807-15  63 

and  helped  him  to  get  up  his  meetings  and  petitions, 
but  found  him,  apparently,  a  dreadful  bore.  "When  he 
was  in  town  he  used  frequently  to  sup  with  me,  eating 
some  raisins  he  brought  in  his  pocket,  and  drinking  weak 
gin  and  water.  He  was  cheerful,  agreeable,  and  full  of 
curious  anecdote.  He  was,  however,  in  political  matters 
exceedingly  troublesome,  and  sometimes  as  exceedingly 
absurd.  He  had  read  but  little  or  to  little  purpose,  and 
kneAV  nothing  of  general  principles.  He  entertained  a 
vague  and  absurd  notion  of  the  political  arrangements 
of  the  Anglo-Saxons,  and  sincerely  believed  that  these 
semi-barbarians  were  not  only  a  polished  people,  but  that 
their  'twofold  polity,'  arms-bearing  and  representation, 
were  universal  and  perfect." l 

In  1813  Kobert  Owen  brought  to  London  the  manuscript 
of  that  "  New  View  of  Society,"  which  may  be  regarded  as 
the  starting  point  of  modern  Socialism.  Place  writing  in 
1836  says :  "  He  introduced  himself  to  me,  and  I  found  him 
a  man  of  kind  manners  and  good  intentions,  of  an  imper- 
turbable temper,  and  an  enthusiastic  desire  to  promote  the 
happiness  of  mankind.  A  few  interviews  made  us  friends." 
..."  He  told  me  he  possessed  the  means,  and  was  resolved 
to  produce  a  great  change  in  the  manners  and  habits  of  the 
whole  of  the  people,  from  the  most  exalted  to  the  most 
depressed.  He  found  all  our  institutions  at  variance  with 
the  welfare  and  happiness  of  the  people,  and  had  dis- 
covered the  true  means  of  correcting  all  those  errors 
which  prevented  them  having  the  fullest  enjoyment 
possible,  and,  consequently,  of  being  wise  and  happy. 
His  project  was  simple,  easy  of  adoption,  and  so  plainly 
efficacious,  that  it  must  be  embraced  by  every  thinking 
man  the  moment  he  was  made  to  understand  it.  He 
produced  a  manuscript,  which  he  requested  me  to  read  and 
correct  for  him.  I  went  through  it  carefully,  and  it  was 
1  27,850  (108). 


64  WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,  1807-15 

afterwards  printed.  .  .  .  Mr.  Owen  then  was,  and  is  still, 
persuaded  that  he  was  the  first  who  had  ever  observed  that 
man  was  the  creature  of  circumstances.  On  this  supposed 
discovery  he  founded  his  system.  Never  having  read  a 
metaphysical  book,  nor  held  a  metaphysical  conversation, 
nor  having  even  heard  of  the  disputes  respecting  free-will 
and  necessity,  he  had  no  clear  conception  of  his  subject, 
and  his  views  were  obscure.  Yet  he  has  all  along  been 
preaching  and  publishing  and  projecting  and  predicting  in 
the  fullest  conviction  that  he  could  command  circum- 
stances or  create  them,  and  place  men  above  their  control 
when  necessary.  He  never  was  able  to  explain  these 
absurd  notions,  and  therefore  always  required  assent  to 
them,  telling  those  who  were  not  willing  to  take  his  words 
on  trust  that  it  was  their  ignorance  which  prevented  them 
from  at  once  assenting  to  these  self-evident  propositions. 

"January  7,  1836,  Mr.  Owen  this  day  has  assured  me, 
in  the  presence  of  more  than  thirty  other  persons,  that 
within  six  months  the  whole  state  and  condition  of  society 
in; Great  Britain  will  be  changed,  and  all  his  views  will 
be  carried  fully  into  effect."  l 

1  27,791  (264-268). 


CHAPTER   III 

THE    BENTHAMITES     . 

THE  history  of  any  definite  "  school "  of  philosophic  or  poli- 
tical opinion  will  generally  show  that  its  foundation  was 
made  possible  by  personal  friendship.  So  few  men  devote 
themselves  to  continuous  thought,  that  if  several  think  on 
the  same  lines  for  many  years  it  is  almost  always  because 
they  have  encouraged  each  other  to  proceed.  And  varieties 
of  opinion  and  temperament  are  so  infinite,  that  those  who 
accept  a  new  party  name,  and  thereby  make  themselves  re- 
sponsible for  each  other's  utterances,  are  generally  bound 
by  personal  loyalty  as  well  as  by  intellectual  agreement. 

The  "Benthamite,"  or,  as  it  became  later,  the  "Utili- 
tarian "  school,  which  adopted  Bentham's  formula  of  "  the 
greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number"  as  its  motto, 
was  no  exception  to  this  rule.  Bentham's  writings  from 
the  year  1776,  when  he  published  the  "Fragment  on 
Government,"  would  in  any  case  have  had  their  effect. 
But  the  enormous  influence  which,  towards  the  end  of 
his  life,  he  exerted  upon  liberal  thought  in  England,  was 
very  largely  due  to  the  care  which  he  then  took  to  secure 
that  a  few  able  men  should  always  enjoy  the  most  com- 
plete intellectual  intimacy  with  himself  and  each  other. 
Of  these  men  the  ablest  was  James  Mill. 

Mill  was  introduced  to  Bentham  in  1808,  and  from 
thenceforward  dined  from  time  to  time  at  his  house  in 
Queen  Square.1  Place  about  that  time  came  to  know 

1  Cf.  "  James  Mill :  A  Biography,"  by  Alexander  Bain  (London, 
1882),  page  72. 


66  THE  BENTHAMITES 

Edward  Wakefield,1  the  writer  of  several  good  but  now 
forgotten  books  on  social  economics.  "Soon  after  we 
became  intimately  acquainted  Mr.  Wakefield  introduced 
Mr.  James  Mill  to  me.  Mr.  Mill  at  this  time  resided  at 
Stoke  Newington,  whence  he  came  occasionally,  generally 
once  a  week,  I  believe,  to  dine  with  Mr.  Bentham,  who 
lived  in  Queen  Square  Place,  Westminster.  Our  ac- 
quaintance speedily  ripened  into  friendship,  and  he 
usually  called  on  me  on  his  way  to  Mr.  Bentham's, 
when  we  spent  an  hour  together."2 

Mill  and  Place  worked  hard  during  1813  and  1814  on 
the  British  and  Foreign  School  Society  at  the  West  London 
Lancastrian  Association,3  and  wrote  to  each  other  in  a  tone 
of  warm  affection.  Thus  Place  in  a  letter  of  October  1814 
wrote :  "  I  do  not  know  when  I  experienced  more  delight 
than  your  letter  has  this  day  given  me.  Somehow  or  other 
I  have  all  my  life  long,  and  in  all  circumstances,  met  with 
.so  much  of  what  was  excellent,  and  even  exquisite,  that  I 
have  had  a  happy  life,  one  enjoyment  scarcely  passing 
away  before  another  presented  itself.  At  present  they 
crowd  upon  me;  to  be  esteemed  and  confided  in  by  the 
wise  and  good  was  the  great  end  I  always  pursued,  and 
your  letter  tells  me  that  I  have  both  deserved  and  obtained 
it  from  one  whom  everybody  considers  pre-eminently  good 
and  wise.  .  .  .  Could  I  advise  or  perform  anything  which 
tended  to  promote  your  comfort,  how  inexpressibly  happy 
should  I  be."4  And  again:  "You  tell  me  to  write  soon, 
and  I  obey.  It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  me  to  write  to  you, 
and  were  it  not  that  you  are  too  learned  in  men  and  things 
for  me  to  venture  any  speculation  I  should  indulge  in  some. 
I  am  perfectly  contented  to  be  a  learner,  and  am  eagerly 
desirous  of  instruction.  Every  one  of  your  letters  is  to  me 

1  e.y.  "An  Account  of  Ireland,  Statistical  and  Political"  (London, 
1812.     2  vols.).  2  27,823  (84). 

3  See  Chap.  IV.  pp.  96,  106-110.      *  Place  to  Mill,  October  17,  1814. 


THE  BENTHAMITES  67 

a  lesson.  Anxious  as  I  have  always  been  to  obtain  infor- 
mation, careful  as  I  have  likewise  been  to  examine  myself 
and  to  divest  myself  of  prejudices,  yet  intensely  occupied, 
as  poverty  compelled  me  to  be,  in  a  disagreeable  and  for 
some  years  unhealthy  business,  my  opportunities  for  mental 
improvement  have  been  comparatively  few.  It  is  true  I 
have  at  all  times  had  the  acquaintance  of  some  men  of 
superior  intellect,  and  have,  I  know,  profited  by  it.  But  till 
I  became  happily  acquainted  with  you  I  had  no  person 
with  whom  I  could  compare  myself  in  the  beneficial  manner 
I  can  now  do.  I  am  upwards  of  forty  years  of  age,  but 
mind  has  little  to  do  with  age  except  in  infancy  and  dotage, 
and  I  would  fain  persuade  myself  that  I  am  about  twenty- 
two  or  twenty-three  years  old,  with  a  good  prospect  of 
health  and  leisure  for  improvement  before  me." l 

Mill  himself  drops  his  habit  of  reserve,  and  writes  with 
stiff  goodwill:  "Your  place  of  a  friend  to  me  shall  not 
be  a  sinecure.  You  had  no  occasion  for  this  declaration 
to  satisfy  you  respecting  my  opinion  of  you,  to  which  I 
should  have  been  far  from  alluding,  had  it  not  been  for 
the  malignity  with  which  I  see  your  character  pursued,2 
and  which  makes  it  my  duty  to  declare  on  all  occasions 
that  I  have  met  with  few  men  in  my  whole  life  of  whom  I 
think  so  highly."  3 

Mill  even  writes  of  his  own  money  affairs,  and  confesses 
that  "  The  History  of  India,"  on  which  he  had  been  at  work 
since  1806,  had  "kept  him  as  poor  as  a  church  mouse," 
that  he  "  practises  much  economy,  a  good  school  for  him- 
self and  his  children,"  but  that  he  "  hopes  to  be  at  his  ease 
when  the  work  is  finished."  He  passes  from  the  subject 
with  the  words,  "  so  much  for  these  affairs  into  which  few 
are  so  far  admitted,  and  as  few  care  whether  I  have  little  or 

1  Place  to  Mill,  November  27,  1814. 

2  With  reference  to  the  accusation  that  Place  was  a  Government  spy. 
.See  pp.  54-56. 

3  James  Mill  to  Place,  July  30,  1814  (in  the  family  autograph  book). 


68  THE  BENTHAMITES 

much." l  Place  answers :  "  What  you  have  said  of  your  cir- 
cumstances does  not  in  the  least  surprise  me.  My  wife  and  I 
saw  as  much  long  since,  and  we  loved  you  the  more  for  it." 2 

Place  and  Wakefield  wrote  to  each  other,  full  of  care  for 
Mill  and  schemes  for  his  future.  Mill  and  his  family  were 
now  living  for  a  great  part  of  the  year  at  Ford  Abbey,3  the 
huge  Devonshire  mansion  which  Bentham  had  rented,  and 
Wakefield  was  afraid  that  he  might  slip  into  a  permanently 
dependent  position.  "  I  am  deeply  interested  about  Mill, 
for,  with  all  my  admiration  of  Mr.  Bentham,  he  is  too  good 
a  man  to  become  a  dependant  upon  any  individual ;  and  I 
fear  that  the  increasing  expenses  of  his  young  family  must 
render  him  so,  unless  we  can  place  him  at  the  head  of  this 
new  school."  4  "  Mill  is  hard  at  work  upon  his  Indian  work, 
and  has  wrote  it  up  to  the  year  1790.  I  wish  it  may  ever 
repay  him  for  his  labour.  He  says  he  is  very  well,  but 
looks  otherwise — thin  in  the  face;  and  I  misread  him  if 
he  be  not  in  a  state  of  anxiety."5  "Do  you  think  he  is 
calculating  upon  the  sale  of  his  work  upon  India  ?  If  that 
is  the  case,  then  I  fear  he  will  be  disappointed ;  and  as  for 
maintaining  a  large  family  entirely  by  his  pen,  the  thing  is, 
I  think,  impossible,  unless  he  had  managed  to  tumble  on 
to  some  popular  work,  such  as  Hayley's  '  Life  of  Cowper,' 
or  something  as  great."  6 

Place,  in  answer,  asked,  "  Shall  such  a  man  be  left  to  the 
chance  of  sickness  to  reduce  him  to  absolute  want  ?  Shall 
he  be  destroyed  by  anxiety  and  corroding  cares,  which  the 

1  James  Mill  to  Place,  October  14,  1814.     [Letter  dated  afterwards 
by  F.  Place,  Jun.,  and  accidentally  ascribed  to  1817.] 

2  Place  to  Mill,  October  17,  1814. 

3  For  a  good  description  of  the  life  at  Ford  Abbey  in   1814,  cf. 
"Memoirs  and  Correspondence  of  Francis  Homer"  (London,  1843), 
vol.  ii.  p.  178. 

4  Wakefield  to  Place,  August  17,  1814.     The  school  is  the  Christo- 
mathic  School,  cf.  p.  130  (note). 

6  Wakefield  to  Place  (from  Ford  Abbey),  October  i,  1814. 
8  Wakefield  to  Place,  October  17,  1814. 


THE  BENTHAMITES  69 

firmest  rnind  cannot  always  repel  when  no  prospect  of 
better  days  presents  itself  ? " l  He  then  proposed  a  scheme 
for  raising  ^300  among  Mill's  friends,  to  be  put  anony- 
mously to  his  credit  at  the  bank,  a  scheme  which  Wake- 
field  thought  might  do  more  harm  than  good.  During 
Mill's  long  absences  from  London,  Place  managed  his 
business  affairs;  and  Professor  Bain  says  that  he  has  "heard 
from  very  good  authority  that  Francis  Place  .  .  .  made 
him  advances  while  he  was  writing  the  history.  These,  of 
course,  were  all  repaid." 2 

Mill,  on  his  part,  tried  to  cure  Place  of  his  habit  of 
"raving."3  In  a  letter  of  December  1814  he  says:  "But 
I  am  satisfied  you  are  going  on  in  the  right  path,  and  I 
know  now  that  you  can  do  better  than  you  are  doing. 
Only  observe  as  much  as  possible  of  suavity  in  the  manner, 
while  there  is  anything  of  asperity  in  the  matter,  and  you 
will  be  sure  to  succeed."4  And  some  months  later  Place 
wrote,  after  describing  an  outburst,  "  I  suppose  you  to  be 
looking  at  me.  I  see  the  whole  of  what  you  intend,  and 
feel  how  deficient  I  often  am,  but  I  cannot  talk  of  some 
things  with  some  people  as  calmly  as  I  do  of  two  and 
two  being  four,  but  I  will  endeavour  to  improve."5  At 
the  same  time,  he  fears  that  if  he  ceases  to  feel  intensely 
and  immoderately,  he  may  ultimately  sink  into  the  vege- 
table Philistinism  of  the  ordinary  retired  tradesman.  "  I 
have  always  contemplated  the  probability  of  being  released 
from  business,  and  I  have  been  afraid  of  too  much  caution 
as  tending  to  produce  cold-heartedness.  It  would  be  dam- 
nable to  have  little  employment  and  no  feeling."  ° 

1  Place  to  "Wakefield,  October  7,  1814. 

2  See  "  Janu-s  Mill  :   a  Biography,"  by  Alex.  Bain  (London,  1882), 
page  163. 

3  Place,  in  a  letter  to  Ensor,  October  13,  1816,  quotes  Mill's  expres- 
sion, "  to  rave  like  Place." 

4  James  Mill  to  Place,  December  31,  1814. 

5  Place  to  .Mill,  July  20,  1815. 

6  Place  to  Mill,  August  50,  1816. 


70  THE  BENTHAMITES 

The  two  friends  exchanged  descriptions  of  their  children. 
Mill  recounted  the  amazing  precocity  of  John  Stuart,  now 
eight  years  old,  and  his  sister  Wilhelmina.  "  My  two  chil- 
dren, John  and  Willie,  are  with  me  at  six  A.M.,  and  then  we 
have  half  a  day's  work  done  before  any  other  body  is  up 
hi  the  house.  John  is  now  an  adept  in  the  first  six  books 
of  Euclid  and  in  Algebra,  performing  simple  questions  with 
great  ease,  while  in  Greek  he  has  read  since  he  came  here 
the  last  half  of  Thucydides,  one  play  of  Euripides  and  one  of 
Sophocles,  two  of  Aristophanes  and  the  treatise  of  Plutarch 
on  education.  Willie  has  read  along  with  him  several  lives 
in  Cornelius  Nepos,  and  has  got  over  the  most  difficult  part 
of  the  task  of  learning  Latin,  while  John  wants  but  little 
of  being  able  to  read  Latin  with  ease.  His  historical  and 
other  reading  never  stands  still,  he  is  at  it  whenever  he  has 
any  time  to  spare.  This  looks  like  bragging,  but  as  I  tell 
you  the  untoward  part  of  my  circumstances,  it  is  but  right 
you  should  hear  that  which  gives  me  pleasure  also.  There 
are  few  to  whom  I  talk  of  either."  l 

1  James  Mill  to  Place  (from  Ford  Abbey),  Dec.  7,  1814.  A  passage 
in  one  of  Mill's  letters  throws  some  light  on  a  disputed  point  in  his 
early  life.  "  As  for  Sir  John  Stuart,  he  is  one  of  the  Barons  of  the 
Exchequer  in  Scotland,  and  his  estate  and  residence  was  near  my 
father's.  I  was  at  an  early  age  taken  notice  [of]  by  him  and  Lady  Jane. 
When  the  time  came  for  my  going  to  college,  it  was  my  father's  in- 
tention to  send  me  to  Aberdeen,  as  both  nearer  and  less  expensive  than 
Edinburgh.  Sir  John,  however,  and  Lady  Jane  insisted  that  he  should 
let  them  take  me  to  Edinburgh,  which  was  the  more  celebrated  uni- 
versity ;  that  they  would  look  after  me,  and  take  care  that  the  expense 
to  my  father  should  not  be  greater  than  at  Aberdeen.  I  went  to 
Edinburgh,  and  from  that  time  lived  as  much  in  their  house  as  in  my 
father's,  and  there  had  many  advantages,  saw  the  best  company,  and 
had  an  educated  man  to  direct  my  education,  and  who  paid  for  several 
expensive  branches  of  education,  but  which  for  him  I  must  have  gone 
without,  and  above  all,  had  unlimited  access  in  both  town  and  country 
to  well-chosen  libraries.  So  you  see  I  owe  much  to  Sir  John  Stuart, 
who  had  a  daughter,  one  only  child,  about  the  same  age  as  myself,  who, 
besides  being  a  beautiful  woman,  was  in  point  of  intellect  and  disposi- 
tion one  of  the  most  perfect  human  beings  I  have  ever  known.  We 
grew  up  together  and  studied  together  from  children,  and  were  about 


THE  BENTHAMITES  71 

Mill  and  his  friends  seein  often  to  have  discussed  the  old 
question  as  to  how  far  a  child's  mind  is  a  tabula  rasa  on 
which  education  can  produce  any  effect  desired.  "  Wake- 
field,"  wrote  Place,  "is  a  believer  in  innate  propensities, 
.  .  .  and  so  fully  is  he  satisfied  of  the  truth  of  his  theory, 
that  he  expects  to  see  your  John's  innate  propensities 
break  out  presently  and  form  his  character.  .  .  .  The  posi- 
tion I  take  against  him  is,  that  the  generality  of  children  are 
organised  so  nearly  alike  that  they  may  by  proper  manage- 
ment be  made  pretty  nearly  equally  wise  and  virtuous." l 

Place's  own  children,  though  clever  enough,  were  not  so 
remarkable  as  the  little  Mills,  while  his  paternal  affection 
expressed  itself  in  a  somewhat  more  human  form,  and  Mrs. 
Place  was  apparently  not  so  willing  as  Mrs.  Mill  to  allow 
unlimited  educational  experiments.  "  Tom,"  he  wrote  of 
one  of  them,  "  is  a  little  Bonaparte  of  a  fellow,  three  years 
old,  with  reasoning  powers  very  far  beyond  his  age  and 
beyond  his  ability  to  express  in  words ;  but  his  courage, 
activity  in  mischief,  and  his  determined  manner  are  the 
constant  causes  of  as  delightful  a  discord  as  ever  prevailed 
among  as  many  small  brats.  I  have  given  all  the  time  1 
could  in  any  way  spare  to  them,  and  have  no  doubt  they 
would  be  infinitely  more  to  my  mind  could  I  bestow  a 
certain  portion  of  time  every  day  on  them,  notwithstanding 
the  difficulty  there  is  of  convincing — I  might  have  said  the 
impossibility  of  convincing — the  grown  females  that  I  know 
at  all  what  I  am  about." 2  Some  of  Place's  elder  children 

the  best  friends  that  either  of  us  ever  had.  She  married  Sir  William 
Forbes,  and  after  producing  him  six  children  died  a  few  years  ago  of  a 
decline.  Her  poor  mother  told  me  with  her  heart  ready  to  break  that 
she  spoke  about  me  with  almost  her  last  breath,  and  enjoined  them 
never  to  allow  the  connection  which  subsisted  between  us  to  be  broken. 
So  much  for  the  old  friendship  with  Sir  J.  Stuart,  which  it  is  very 
proper  you  should  know,  but  which  I  do  not  wish  to  be  talked  about." 
(James  Mill  to  Place  from  Ford  Abbey,  Oct.  26,  1817.) 

1  Place  to  Mill,  October  30,  1816. 

2  Place  to  Mill,  July  20,  1815. 


72  THE  BENTHAMITES 

were  now  grown  up,  and  to  one  of  them,  from  her  letters 
evidently  a  bright  and  attractive  girl,  Mill  wrote  much 
advice  on  beginning  work  at  six  in  the  morning,  and  other 
points.  Mrs.  Mill  and  Mrs.  Place  enjoyed  a  separate  friend- 
ship of  their  own.  In  December  1816,  Place  sent  a  post- 
script of  kind  messages  from  his  wife  and  daughters  to 
Mrs.  Mill :  "  She  is  their  favourite  acquaintance,  the  more 
so  as  she,  poor  woman,  as  well  as  my  wife,  has  '  a  grumpy 
husband  who  bites  her  nose  off.' " 1 

Mill  about  this  time  proposed  to  settle  in  France,2  and 
there  was  now  a  plan  that  Place,  who  expected  soon  to  be 
able  to  retire  from  business,  should  settle  there  beside  him. 
"  You  give  me  abundant  pleasure,"  wrote  Mill,  "  by  hinting 
the  probability  of  your  settling  yourself  down  beside  me  in 
France.  I  foresee  nothing  there  which  would  make  it  un- 
comfortable for  us  to  reside  as  soon  as  we  please.  Assure 
yourself  that  the  French  people  will  soon  be  very  quiet 
and  contented  slaves ;  and  the  despotism  of  the  Bourbons, 
a  quiet,  gentle  despotism.  There  I  may  live  cheap,  my 
children  will  acquire  a  familiarity  with  the  language  and 
with  the  manners  and  character  of  a  new  people.  When 
they  have  enough  of  this  we  shall  remove  into  Germany 
till  the  same  effects  are  accomplished,  and  after  that  if  we 
please  we  may  go  to  Italy.  We  shall  then  return  accom- 
plished people,  and  men  and  women  of  us,  I  hope,  able  to 
do  something  for  the  cause  of  mankind.  We  shall,  at  any 
rate,  have  plenty  of  knowledge,  the  habit  of  living  upon 
little,  and  a  passion  for  the  improvement  of  the  condition 
of  mankind." 3 

In  the  course  of  1812  Mill  introduced  Place  to  Bentham.4 
For  three  years  after  this  there  is  no  evidence  that  Place 

1  Place  to  Mill,  December  [N.D.]  1816. 

2  For  a  similar  proposal  a  year  earlier,  cf.  "  James  Mill :  a  Biography," 

P-  139. 

3  James  Mill  to  Place,  September  6  [1815]. 

4  "  Autobiography." 


THE  BENTHAMITES  73 

was  in  any  way  intimate  with  the  Master.  When,  in  1814, 
Bentham  and  Mill  began  their  yearly  residence  at  Ford 
Abbey,  Place,  at  Mill's  request,  sent  long  letters  on  "all 
that  goes  on  in  the  world,  political  and  domestic." 1  The 
Bentham  MSS.  hi  the  British  Museum  record  that  on  May 
21,  1816,  Bentham  lent  Place  the  Federalist  to  read.2 
Place's  position  as  a  disciple  began  in  August  1817,  when 
he  went  to  stay  at  Ford  Abbey.  His  letters  to  Mrs.  Place 
during  this  visit  give  a  detailed  description  of  the  Mill 
family  life. 

"I  cannot  but  admire  the  children  here,  who  give  no 
one  any  trouble;  they  have  a  hard  time  of  it,  learning 
their  lessons  from  six  every  morning  to  nine,  and  saying 
them,  and  learning  others  from  eleven  to  one ;  and  learn- 
ing again  in  the  afternoon — learning,  too,  with  a  precision 
utterly  unknown  by  others ;  even  little  Jim  spells  words  of 
four  syllables  well;  and  Clara  reads,  as  she  herself  says, 
'  Natural  History.'  At  present  she  '  is  reading  of  quadru- 
peds,' and  really  knows  what  she  reads  in  a  surprising 
manner,  and  explains  the  meaning  of  the  terms  used  with 
ease  and  correctness.  As  for  crying  and  bawling,  it  may 
be  said  to  have  no  existence  here ;  some  of  them  cry  when 
scolded  or  cuffed  over  their  lessons,  but  it  is  all  but  un- 
known on  other  occasions.  Mrs.  Mill  is  a  patient,  quiet 
soul,  hating  wrangling,  and  although  by  no  means  meanly 
submissive,  manages  to  avoid  quarrelling  in  a  very  admir- 
able manner."3 

A  little  earlier  he  had  described  his  own  daily  life :  "  I 
have  been  pacing  the  walks  from  ten  to  two — four  hours' 
hard  work  at  Latin.  I  use  all  the  care  and  diligence  I 
possess  or  can  command  at  this  very,  very  difficult  study : 
but  my  master  gives  me  a  good  character,  and  says  I 

1  James  Mill  to  Place,  July  6,  1815. 

2  Brit.  Mus.  Addl.  MSS.  33,564. 

3  Place  to  Mrs.  Place,  August  28,  1817. 


74  THE  BENTHAMITES 

shall  certainly  accomplish  my  purpose.  Nouns  substan- 
tive and  adjectives  have  been  gone  through,  not  slightly, 
but  fiilly ;  pronouns  as  much  as  they  are  said  to  be  useful ; 
the  verb  esse-sum  has  been  subdued ;  and  I  am  loving 
away  in  all  possible  moods  and  tenses  with  am -are.  I 
shall  cease  loving  in  two  days,  and  shall  be  teaching  away 
with  doc-eo,  doc-ui,  doc -turn,  doc -ere.  Every  day  I  am 
obliged  to  decline  a  number  of  nouns  and  adjectives 
chosen  at  random  by  others,  and  to  say  all  I  have  gone 
through.  If  I  am  not  at  school,  no  one  ever  was.1  Mill 
is  beyond  comparison  the  most  diligent  fellow  I  ever  knew 
or  heard  of;  almost  any  other  man  would  tire  and  give  up 
teaching,  but  not  so  he ;  three  hours  every  day,  frequently 
four,  are  devoted  to  the  children,  and  there  is  not  a 
moment's  relaxation.  His  method  is  by  far  the  best  I 
ever  witnessed,  and  is  infinitely  precise  ;  but  he  is  exces- 
sively severe.  No  fault,  however  trivial,  escapes  his  notice ; 
none  goes  without  reprehension  or  punishment  of  some 
sort.  Lessons  have  not  been  well  said  this  morning  by 
Willie  and  Clara ; — there  they  are  now,  three  o'clock, 
plodding  over  their  books,  their  dinner,  which  they  knew 
went  up  at  one,  brought  down  again ;  and  John,  who  dines 
with  them,  has  his  book  also,  for  having  permitted  them 
to  pass  when  they  could  not  say,  and  no  dinner  will  any  of 
them  get  till  six  o'clock.  This  has  happened  once  before 
since  I  came.  The  fault  to-day  is  a  mistake  in  one  word. 
Now  I  could  not  be  so  severe;  but  the  learning  and 
reasoning  these  children  have  acquired  is  not  equalled  by 
any  children  in  the  whole  world.  John  is  truly  a  prodigy, 
a  most  wonderful  fellow ;  and  when  his  Logic,  his  Languages, 
his  Mathematics,  his  Philosophy  shall  be  combined  with  a 

1  Any  one  who  went  to  Ford  Abbey  seems  to  have  been  expected  to 
work.  Place  writes  to  Wakefield  (Sept.  3,  1814):  "Hume  is  gone 
to  Ford  Abbey,  where  he  intends  staying  some  time,  as  he  sent  his 
carriage  on,  and  was,  when  I  saw  him,  packing  up  Smith's  "Wealth 
of  Nations"  to  study  there. 


THE  BENTHAMITES  75 

general  knowledge  of  mankind  and  the  affairs  of  the  world, 
he  will  be  a  truly  astonishing  man ;  but  he  will  probably 
be  morose  and  selfish.  Mill  sees  this ;  and  I  am  operating 
upon  him,  when  the  little  time  I  can  spare  can  be  so  ap- 
plied, to  counteract  these  propensities,  so  far  as  to  give  him 
a  bias  towards  the  management  of  his  temper,  and  to  pro- 
duce an  extensive  consideration  of  the  reasonings  and 
habits  of  others,  when  the  time  shall  come  for  him  to 
observe  and  practise  these  things."  l 

"  Wednesday,  August  20. 2 — I  have  now  been  here  long 
enough  to  know  all  about  the  family ;  Mrs.  Mill  is  both 
good-natured  and  good-tempered,  two  capital  qualities  in  a 
woman;  she  is,  however,  not  a  little  vain  of  her  person, 
and  would  be  thought  to  be  still  a  girl.  Since  I  have  been 
here  there  has  not  been  one  single  instance  of  crying 
among  the  children,  who  certainly  give  less  trouble,  and 
have  fewer  ridiculous  propensities  and  desires  than  any  I 
ever  knew;  notwithstanding  they  have  a  plentiful  lack  of 
manners,  and  as  much  impertinence,  sometimes  called 
impudence,  as  any  children  need  have.  You  would  be 
surprised  to  see  little  Jim  trundling  a  hoop  nearly  as  tall 
as  himself  round  the  Great  Hall,  going  as  fast  as  the  others, 
and  turning  the  corners  with  admirable  dexterity." 

"August  7,  1817. — All  our  days  are  alike,  so  an  account 
of  one  may  do  for  all.  Mill  is  up  between  five  and  six ;  he 
and  John  compare  his  proofs,  John  reading  the  copy  and 
his  father  the  proof.  Willie  and  Clara  are  in  the  saloon 
before  seven,  and  as  soon  as  the  proofs  are  done  with,  John 
goes  to  the  farther  end  of  the  room  to  teach  his  sisters. 
When  this  has  been  done,  and  part  of  the  time  while  it  is 
doing,  he  learns  geometry ;  this  continues  to  nine  o'clock, 
when  breakfast  is  ready. 

"  Mr.  Bentham  rises  soon  after  seven,  and  about  eight 

1  Place  to  Mrs.  Place,  August  17,  1817. 

2  Postscript  to  the  foregoing  letter. 


76  THE  BENTHAMITES 

gets  to  his  employment.  I  rise  at  six  and  go  to  work ;  at 
nine  breakfast  in  the  parlour — present,  Mrs.  Mill,  Mill,  I, 
John,  and  Colls.1 

"  Breakfast  ended,  Mill  hears  Willie  and  Clara,  and  then 
John.  Lessons  are  heard  under  a  broad  balcony,  walking 
from  end  to  end,  the  breakfast  parlour  on  one  hand  and 
pots  of  flowers  rising  one  above  another  as  high  as  your 
head  on  the  other  hand ;  this  place  is  in  the  front  of  the 
Abbey.  All  the  lessons  and  readings  are  performed  aloud, 
and  occupy  full  three  hours,  say  till  one  o'clock. 

"  From  nine  to  twelve  Mr.  Bentham  continues  work- 
ing ;  from  twelve  to  one  he  performs  upon  an  organ  in  the 
saloon. 

"  From,  breakfast  time  to  one  o'clock  I  am  occupied  in 
learning  Latin ;  this  is  also  done  aloud  in  the  walks,  and 
already  I  have  conquered  the  substantives  and  adjectives. 
During  this  period  Colls,  who  is  a  good  boy,  gets  a  lesson 
of  Latin  from  Mill,  and  of  French  from  me :  his  is  a  capital 
situation  for  a  boy  of  genius. 

"At  one  we  all  three  walk  in  the  lanes  and  fields  for 
an  hour.  At  two  all  go  to  work  again  till  dinner  at  six, 
when  Mrs.  Mill,  Mill,  Bentham,  I,  and  Colls,  dine  together. 
We  have  soup  or  lish,  or  both,  meat,  pudding,  generally 
fruit,  viz.,  melons,  strawberries,  gooseberries,  currants, 
grapes;  no  wine.  The  first  day  I  came,  wine  was  put 
upon  the  table ;  but  as  I  took  none,  none  has  since  made 
its  appearance.  After  dinner,  Mill  and  I  take  a  sharp 
walk  for  two  hours,  say,  till  a  quarter  past  eight,  then  one 
of  us  alternately  walks  with  Mr.  Bentham  for  an  hour  ;  then 
comes  tea,  at  which  we  read  the  periodical  publications; 
and  eleven  o'clock  comes  but  too  soon,  and  we  all  go  to 
bed. 

"  Mrs.  Mill  marches  in  great  style  round  the  green  in 
front  of  the  house  for  about  half  an  hour  before  breakfast 
1  Bentham's  amanuensis. 


THE  BENTHAMITES  77 

and  again  after  dinner  with  all  the  children,  till  their  bed- 
time." l 

When  Place  returned  after  two  months  at  Ford  Abbey 
he  was  profoundly  influenced  by  James  Mill's  philosophy 
of  life,  and  had  caught  that  "  habit  of  analysis "  which 
John  Stuart  Mill  notices  as  the  result  of  his  father's  train- 
ing.2 A  few  days  after  his  return  he  writes :  "  I  have  not 
been  out  of  the  house  since  Thursday,  so  off  I  set  to  Hyde 
Park  alone,  and  as  I  tramped  I  thought  of  you  and  yours, 
and  of  the  Abbey  and  Mr.  Bentham,  and  of  mine,  and  of 
all  the  world  and  all  its  virtues  and  vices,  its  pleasures 
and  its  pains,  upon  the  misery  of  some  wretch  at  every 
hundred  yards'  distance  in  this  thick,  hazy,  gloomy  day's 
atmosphere,  and  I  gave  away  all  my  money.  I  prosed  on 

1  Place  to  Mrs.  Place,  August  7,  1817.     The  following  letter,  written 
on  the  inner  fold  of  one  from  Place  dated  August  4,  1817,  reporting  his 
arrival  at  Ford  Abbey,  is  interesting  as  a  glimpse  of  John  Stuart  Mill's 
mother : — 

Mrs.  James  Mill  to  Mrs.  Place. 

"  MY  DEAR  MRS.  PLACE, — I  will  take  all  possible  care  of  your  lord 
and  master,  and  see  that  his  [clothes]  return  from  the  wash  regularly. 
I  am  much  pleased  to  hear  that  he  admires  the  Abbey.  He  will  pass 
his  time  very  pleasantly  here,  I  have  no  doubt.  I  have  recovered  my 
youth  now.  I  was  more  fatigued  than  usual,  owing  to  the  child  not 
going  to  the  new  servant.  I  think  she  will  answer  very  well,  as  there 
is  less  to  do  on  account  of  the  washing  all  being  put  out.  I  am  very 
glad,  as  I  brought  a  great  deal  of  work  to  do.  Give  my  kind  love  to 
Miss  Place,  and  best  remembrances  to  all  the  rest  of  the  family. — Yours 
truly  and  sincerely,  H.  MILL." 

Sir  Samuel  Romilly  stayed  at  Ford  Abbey  during  part  of  the  time 
that  Place  was  there.  In  a  letter  to  Uumont  he  describes  Place.  "  He 
is  self-educated,  has  learnt  a  great  deal,  has  a  very  strong  natural 
understanding,  and  possesses  great  influence  in  Westminster,  such 
influence  as  almost  to  determine  the  elections  for  members  of  Parlia- 
ment. I  need  hardly  say  that  he  is  a  great  admirer  and  disciple  of 
Bentham."  ["James  Mill :  a  Biography,"  by  A.  Bain  (London,  1881), 
page  78.]  Place  writes  to  his  wife  that  Miss  Romilly  supposed  him  for 
some  days  to  be  a  Member  of  Parliament.  [Place  to  Mrs.  Place,  Sep- 
tember 29,  1817.] 

2  See  J.  S.  Mill's  "Autobiography"  (London,  1873),  page  137.' 


78  THE  BENTHAMITES 

happiness  and  misery,  and  reviewed  ray  own  propensities 
and  conduct,  the  motives  by  which  I  had  been  governed 
and  the  results,  and  conjectured  what  the  result  might 
have  been  had  different  reasons  operated." l 

Mill  was  now  nearly  at  the  end  of  his  twelve  years'  task, 
the  "History  of  India."  Place  took  an  almost  painfully 
intense  interest  in  the  book.  Towards  the  end  of  1816  he 
wrote :  "  I  have  been  thinking  that  possibly  I  might  be 
useful  to  you  in  your  Indian  history,  by  reading  or  writing 
or  taking  down  from  dictation,  and  three  or  four  hours  a 
day  are  at  your  service."2  In  the  winter  of  1817-18,  as 
the  work  was  in  the  press,  Place  arranged  details  with  the 
publisher,  helped  to  revise  proofs,  and  worked  at  the  pre- 
paration of  the  index.  When  he  had  read  part  of  the 
proofs,  he  writes  in  terms  of  enthusiastic  praise,  but  warns 
Mill  that  "  My  opinion  must  be  cautiously  taken,  because  I 
am  not,  and  cannot  be,  altogether  an  impartial  evidence.  I 
am  too  much  interested  in  your  prosperity  and  fame  too, 
that  my  desire  for  uncommon  success  accompanies  me  in 
all  my  reading ;  and  although  I  endeavour  to  divest  myself 
of  all  partiality,  and  try  to  read  the  book  as  I  should  read 
the  work  of  an  indifferent  person,  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  this  is  never  really  done."  3 

The  history  was  published  at  the  beginning  of  January 
1818,  and  was  immediately  successful.  In  February  there 
was  already  a  proposal  on  foot  that  Mill  should  be  ap- 
pointed to  an  assistant  examinership  in  the  East  India 
House,  with  a  salary  beginning  at  £800  a  year.  The 
appointment  was  made  in  May  1819,  after  a  vigorous 
canvas  by  Ricardo,  Hume,  Place,  and  the  rest  of  his 
friends.  "As  soon  as  I  had  heard,"  says  Place,  "that  he 
had  been  named  as  a  person  fit  for  the  office,  ...  I  stood 

1  Place  to  Mill,  October  20,  1817. 
"  Place  to  Mill,  September  15,  1816. 
3  Place  to  Mill,  October  21,  1817. 


THE  BENTHAMITES  79 

on  no  ceremony  with  anybody.  Mill  was  to  be  served ;  he 
deserved  the  best  exertions  in  his  favour  of  every  one  who 
knew  him,  and  I,  as  one  who  knew  his  transcendent  merits, 
went  to  work  at  once  without  consulting  any  one,  in  a  way 
which  I  knew  no  one  would  advise,  no  one  could  think 
likely  to  produce  any  good  consequences.  It  was  a  chance 
well  worth  taking ;  it  was  the  only  one  I  had,  or  could  have, 
of  serving  him  effectually." l 

After  his  appointment  to  the  India  House,  Mill  had 
naturally  to  live  in  or  near  London,  and  Place's  long 
weekly  budget  of  news  was  no  longer  needed.  But  the 
two  remained  intimate  friends.  Place  on  several  occasions 
stayed  with  Mill  at  Marlow  and  elsewhere,  and  Mill's  letters 
show  that  he  consulted  Place  on  all  important  questions. 
Only  once  is  there  any  sign  of  a  misunderstanding.  In  a 
diary  which  he  kept  for  1826,  Place  writes  on  May  18: 
"  Walked  with  James  Mill  to  Cheapside.  Home  again  at 
eleven  A.M.  As  I  am  here  a  recorder  of  time  more  than  of 
opinions,  I  shall  not  say  why  it  has  happened  that,  such 
friends  as  Mill  and  I  are,  his  name  has  not  before  appeared 
in  this  diary."  Three  days  later  Place  went  down  to  stay 
with  the  Mills  at  Dorking,  and  the  diary  for  the  next  few 
months  shows  them  to  have  been  very  often  together. 
Yet  in  spite  of  Place's  constant  loyalty,  one  has  the  feeling 
that  Mill  rather  starved  the  affection  of  his  friends  as  well 
as  that  of  his  children.  "  He  could  help  the  mass,"  wrote 
Place,  "but  he  could  not  help  the  individual,  not  even 
himself,  or  his  own."  ~ 

After  Mill's  appointment  Bentham  lost  his  constant 
companionship,  and  from  1819  relied  more  and  more 
on  Place.  In  one  of  Place's  fragments  of  diary,  there  is 
an  entry — 

"Tuesday,  June  19,  1827. — From  Saturday  evening  till 
this  morning  at  nine  no  one,  for  a  wonder,  called  upon  me 
"  Autobiography."  -  Ibid. 


80  THE  BENTHAMITES 

excepting  my  old,  very  dear  friend,  Jeremy  Bentham,  who 
came  with  a  volume  of  his  book  now  in  the  press — a 
volume  on  Evidence * — to  request  me  to  read  the  first  462 
pages  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  whether  (i)  the 
matter  was  such  as  would  interest  the  generality  of  readers 
who  read  on  matters  not  quite  frivolous ;  (2)  if,  as  to  style, 
it  was  such  as  would  not  deter  them ;  (3)  if  yea  on  both 
these  questions,  how  far  it  could  be  aided  by  notes  and 
references  to  facts  and  practice ;  if  no,  on  the  second  ques- 
tion, how  it  could  be  amended,  the  object  being  to  print  so 
much  of  the  work  in  a  separate  volume."  This  is  followed 
by  a  note:  "Visits  from  and  to  Mr.  Bentham  have  not 
been  hitherto  mentioned,  as  each  of  our  houses  were  as 
frequently  entered  by  either  as  his  own." 

In  the  diary  kept  for  Bentham  by  his  secretary  from 
1821  to  18252  there  are  constant  entries  of  copies  of 
Bentham's  works,  sent  to  Place  for  distribution  among  his 
political  friends,  and  of  books  lent  to  him  for  his  own 
reading.  From  the  same  diary,  it  would  seem  that  Place 
managed  most  of  Bentham's  minor  business  matters.  But 
Bentham  by  no  means  thought  of  Place  merely  as  a 
useful  performer  of  small  commissions.  Richard  Carlile, 
who  knew  both  men  well,  wrote  in  1836  that  "Jeremy 
Bentham,  twenty  years  ago,  pronounced  Mr.  Place  to  be 
the  most  fit  man  living,  from  extensive  knowledge  of  the 
state  of  the  country  and  its  parties,  the  condition  and 
wants  of  the  people,  and  from  his  own  probity  and  mental 
energy,  to  become  a  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home 
Department."  3 

1  The  reference  is  to  Bentham's  "  Rationale  of  Judicial  Evidence " 
(London,  1827.  5  vols.),  which  was  finally  put  into  form  and  finished 
by  John  Stuart  Mill.  Cf.  p.  83,  and  J.  S.  Mill's  "Autobiography" 
(London,  1873),  Page  ri4- 

8  Brit.  Mus.  AddL  MSS.  33,563. 

3  See  the  Old  Monthly  Magazine,  May  1836,  p.  445,  article  entitled 
"  The  Real  Nobility  of  the  Human  Character,"  by  A.  P.  [i.e.  Richard 
Carlile1. 


THE   BENTHAMITES  81 

Place  in  a  letter  to  Hodgskin,  in  1817,  quotes  Bentham  as 
saying,  " '  Tell  Mr.  Hodgskin  that  I  am  a  comical  old  fellow 
only  for  a  day  or  two,  until  those  who  do  not  know  me 
become  acquainted  with  my  manner.'  And,"  he  adds, 
"  this  is  strictly  the  truth,  for  he  is  the  most  affable  man 
in  existence,  perfectly  good-humoured,  bearing^  and  for- 
bearing, deeply  read,  deeply  learned,  eminently  a  reasoner, 
yet  simple  as  a  child ;  annoyed  sometimes  by  trifles,  but 
never  by  anything  but  trifles  never  worth  a  contentious 
observation." l 

The  letters  between  Place  and  Bentham 2  are,  as  would 
be  expected  from  the  fact  that  they  lived  within  two 
minutes'  walk  of  each  other,  and  met  constantly,  mostly 
short  notes  sent  by  hand  to  ask  questions  or  make  appoint- 
ments. A  longer  letter  than  usual,  written  a  year  before 
Bentham's  death,  is  worth  quoting : — 

J.  B.  to  F.  P. 

"Q.  S.  P.8  April  24,  1831,  Sunday. 

"DEAR  GOOD  BOY, — I  have  made  an  appointment  for 
you;  and  you  must  absolutely  keep  it,  or  make  another. 
It  is  to  see  Prentice,4  and  hear  him  express  his  regrets  for 
calling  you  a  '  bold  bad  man.'  (Oh,  but  the  appointment 
it  is  for  Tuesday,  one  o'clock,  commencement  of  my  cir- 
cumgiration  time.)5  I  said  you  were  a  bold  man,  but 
denied  your  being  a  bad  one,  judging  from  near  twenty 
years'  intimacy.  I  asked  him  why  he  called  you  a  bad 

1  Place  to  Hodgskin,  May  30,  1817. 

2  These  are  now  among  the  Bentham  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum  ; 
others  are  in  Place's  Letter  Books,  and  among  the  Bentham  MSS.  in 
University  College  Library. 

3  i.e.  Queen's  Square  Place. 

4  Archibald  Prentice,  author  of  a  "  History  of  the  Anti-Corn  Law 
League"  (London,  1853.     2  vols.),  and  several  other  works.     He  gives 
a  delightful  account  of  this  visit  in  his  "  Historical  Sketches  of  Man- 
chester," pp.  379-386. 

6  i.e.  a  trot  round  his  garden  for  an  hour. 

F 


82  THE   BENTHAMITES 

man ;  his  answer  was  because  of  the  pains  you  had  taken 
to  disseminate  your  anti-over-population  (I  should  have 
said  your  over-population-stopping)  expedient.  The  case 
is,  he  is  iuergical;1  Calvinistic;  is  descended  from  two 

\)      OO 

parsonical  grandfathers  of  considerable  notoriety.  I  ob- 
served to  him  that  every  man  is  master  of  his  own  actions, 
but  no  man  of  his  own  opinions ;  that  on  the  point  in 
question  he  was  no  less  far  from  you  than  you  from  him ; 
and  that  if  every  man  were  to  quarrel  with  every  man 
whose  opinions  did  not  on  every  point  whatsoever  coincide 
with  his,  the  earth  would  not  be  long  burdened  with  the 
human  race.  As  to  the  point  in  question,  I  took  care  not 
to  let  him  know  how  my  opinion  stood;  the  fat  would 
have  been  all  in  the  fire,  unless  I  succeeded  in  converting 
him,  for  which  there  was  no  time ;  all  I  gave  him  to 
understand  on  the  score  of  religion  as  to  my  own  senti- 
ments was,  that  I  was  for  universal  toleration ;  and  on 
one  or  two  occasions  I  quoted  scripture."  .  .  .  The  rest 
of  the  letter  is  taken  up  with  a  minute  description  of 
Prentice's  character.2 

1"Jug"  (short  for  Juggernaut)  with  its  derivations,  "juggist," 
"anti-jug,"  &c.,  were  constantly  used  in  the  Bentham  circle  as  a 
conveniently  unintelligible  synonym  for  orthodox  Christianity. 

2  A  letter  of  Place's  will  show  his  way  of  addressing  Bentham  : — 

F.  P.  to  J.  B. 

"  December  24,  1827. 

"Mr  DEAR  OLD  FATHER, — Doone  says  you  desire  to  have  a  gossip 
with  me  ;  say  when  and  where,  and  I  will  write  to  you. 

"  The  Mechanics'  Institution  [the  present  Birkbeck]  is  about  to  cele- 
brate the  anniversary  by  a  dinner,  and,  instead  of  having  the  masses 
of  ostentatious  men  who  have  done  nothing  to  deserve  it  to  be  made 
stewards,  the  committee  of  the  Institution  are  desirous  to  have  for 
stewards  those  benefactors  by  whose  aid  it  was  they  became  an 
organised  body,  that  it  may  appear  clearly  that  they  who  were  once 
its  friends  are  still  its  friends.  Give  me  leave,  then,  to  put  down 
your  name.  You  will  not  be  required  to  attend  any  meeting,  you 
will  not  be  liable  to  expense,  nor  to  be  annoyed  by  any  application 
whatever. — Yours  most  sincerely,  FRANCIS  PLACE."  (Brit.  Mus.  Addl. 
MSS.  33,546,  p.  179-) 


THE    BENTHAMITES  83 

One  service  which  all  Bentham's  disciples  were  allowed 
to  perform  was  the  writing  of  Bentham's  later  books.  The 
Master  used  to  spend  each  day  his  allotted  number  of 
hours  in  producing  those  piles  of  almost  illegible  manu- 
script, which  are  now  warehoused  at  University  College. 
Their  general  character  may  be  fairly  described  by  John 
Stuart  Mill's  account  of  the  papers  on  "  Evidence."  "  Mr. 
Bentham  had  begun  this  treatise  three  times,  at  con- 
siderable intervals,  each  time  in  a  different  manner,  and 
each  time  without  reference  to  the  preceding;  two  of 
the  other  three  times  he  had  gone  over  nearly  the  whole 
subject." 1  Out  of  such  materials  the  books  through  which 
Bentham  exercised  his  influence  on  the  thoughts  of 
Europe  were  patiently  pieced  together  by  his  friends. 
Dumont  spent  his  whole  life  in  preparing  a  series  of  French 
editions.  John  Mill's  earliest  important  literary  work  con- 
sisted in  "  editing  "  the  "  Rationale  of  Judicial  Evidence ; " 2 
Bingham,  with  a  great  deal  of  assistance  from  Place  and 
Mill,  put  together  the  "  Book  of  Fallacies ; " 3  Grote,  under 
the  name  of  Philip  Beauchamp,  the  "  Natural  Religion ; " 4 
and  James  Mill  the  "Table  of  the  Springs  of  Action."5 
Even  Hobhouse  was  pressed  into  the  service,  and  writes 
early  in  1819:  "I  never  was  to  translate  Mr.  Bentham. 
I  was  to  arrange  his  MSS.  and  put  his  words  into  the 
vernacular,  which,  by  the  way,  you  may  perhaps  call 
translating,  although  I  suspect  it  would  be  difficult  to 
find  language  more  to  the  purpose  than  Bentham's  own." 6 
Place's  share  in  this  work  consisted,  besides  his  help  on  the 

1  See  J.  S.  Mill's  "  Autobiography,"  pages  114,  115. 

2  Cf.  J.  S.  Mill's  "Autobiography,"  page  114. 

3  "The  Book  of  Fallacies,"  by  Jeremy  Bentham  (London,    1824). 
See  Place  to  Hobhouse,  August  7,  1819.     27,837  (166,  167). 

4  London,  1822. 

5  "  A  Table  of  the  Springs  of  Action,"  &c.,  by  Jeremy  Bentham 
(London,  1815). 

6  Hobhouse  to  Place,  April  13,  1819.      27,837  (141,  142). 


84  THE   BENTHAMITES 

"  Fallacies,"  in  preparing  Bentham's  "  Plan  of  Parliamentary 
Reform,"1  so  as  to  "make  the  reading  more  easy  to  the 
commonalty,"  and  adding  notes  to  it  with  the  help  of 
Wooller,  the  Radical  editor  of  the  Black  Dwarf*  He 
also  saw  "  Chrestomathia " 3  through  the  press,  and  put 
together  the  whole  work  called  "  Not  Paul,  but  Jesus,"  by 
"Gamaliel  Smith."4 

Place  seems  at  first  to  have  been  rash  enough  to  hope 
that  temperate  criticism  might  lead  Bentham  to  improve 
his  way  of  writing.  Bentham's  "  Codification  Papers,"  he 
complains  in  a  letter  to  Mill,  "  instead  of  being  written  in 
a  plain,  familiar  style,  which  would  allure  a  common  man 
(and  how  very  few  are  there  who  are  not  common  men) 
to  read  it,  is  so  written  that  to  comprehend  all  that  is  said, 
each  paragraph,  nay,  each  sentence,  must  be  studied,  and 
most  men  think  it  trouble  enough  to  study  the  subject 
itself,  be  it  what  it  may,  even  in  the  plainest  language, 
without  being  obliged  at  the  same  time  to  make  a  study  of 
the  phraseology  of  the  author.  ...  I  can  take  the  neces- 
sary pains,  for  at  least  two  reasons :  first,  the  knowledge  I 
have  acquired  of  Mr.  Bentham  personally,  added  to  my 

1  Plan  of  Parliamentary  Reform  in  the  form  of  a  Catechism  (Lon- 
don, 1818). 

2  Place  to  Hume,  March  i,  1839. 

8  "Chrestomathia,"  by  Jeremy  Bentham  (London,  1815,  1816, 
1817,  &c.). 

4  Place  does  not  say  this  in  any  of  his  letters  or  diaries.  The  Utili- 
tarian circle  for  obvious  reasons  kept  that  side  of  their  work  rather  quiet. 
But  Dr.  Richard  Garnett  has  a  copy  of  "  Not  Paul,  but  Jesus,"  on  the 
inside  leaf  of  which  Place  has  written,  "  The  matter  of  this  book  was 
put  together  by  me,  at  Mr.  Bentham's  request,  in  the  months  of  August 
and  September  1817,  during  my  residence  with  him  at  Ford  Abbey, 
Devonshire."  Bentham's  rough  manuscript  of  "  Not  Paul,  but  Jesus," 
in  University  College,  is  endorsed  in  Place's  hand  with  the  various 
dates  on  which  he  read  the  sheets,  that  is  to  say,  mostly  during  his 
stay  at  Ford  Abbey.  When  Bowring  published  Deontology  from  Ben- 
tham's notes  (1834),  Place  wrote,  "  It  is  no  work  of  my  very  dear  and 
good  old  master,  but  of  that  wild  poetical  surface  man  Bowring."  (Place 
to  Wheatley,  February  21,  1840.) 


THE   BENTHAMITES  85 

knowledge  of  his  reputation ;  second,  because  I  never  read 
anything  of  his  without  being  both  wiser  and,  as  I  believe, 
better  in  consequence  of  that  reading,  or  rather  studying. 
...  I  do  my  duty  in  thus  endeavouring  to  cause  the  evil 
to  be  removed ;  for  an  evil  it  is,  whether  the  fault  be  in  the 
writer  or  in  the  reader." 1 

Mill  replies  in  a  great  fright :  "  Your  letter  had  nearly 
done  mischief.  Reading  it  to  him,  as  he  expects  your 
letters,  as  he  sees  them  come  in,  should  be  read,  I  stumbled 
on  your  saying,  .  .  .  when  observing  what  followed,  I  pre- 
tended to  find  a  difficulty  in  reading,  and  slipped  the  whole 
of  what  you  said  about  the  style.  He  never  would  have 
forgiven  you,  and  to  excite  dislike  where  no  good  is  to  be 
done  by  it  is  evil  for  both  parties.  There  is  no  one  thing 
upon  which  he  plumes  himself  so  much  as  his  style,  and 
he  would  not  alter  it  if  all  the  world  were  to  preach  to  him 
till  Domesday." 2 

At  one  time  Bentham  intended  that  Place  should  be  his 
literary  executor.  On  August  9,  1 826,  Place  writes  in  his 
diary — "  Mr.  Bowring — a  long  conversation  respecting  Mr. 
Bentham's  will.  Mr.  B.  made  his  will  in  1817,  when  I  was 
with  him  at  Ford  Abbey,  making  me  his  executor,  and 
leaving  me  £1000  for  the  purpose  of  arranging  and  printing 
from  his  MSS.  Subsequently  Mill  and  I  supposed  he  had 
made  Bowring  his  executor.  This  does  not  appear  to  be 
the  case ;  but  Bowring  has  reason  to  fear  that  he  has  altered 
and  complicated  his  will,  and  that  his  MSS.  may  not  be 
properly  attended  to.".3 

In  the  Utilitarian  movement  there  are  two  distinct 
periods  divided  roughly  by  the  year  1824.  Up  to  that 
time  Bentham  had  been  the  active  leader  of  the  group; 

1  Place  to  James  Mill,  October  20,  1 8 1 7. 

2  James  Mill  to  Place,  November  6,  1817. 

3  Bentham's  final  will  made   Bowring  literary  executor,  and  left 
Place  a  mourning  ring,  which  was  one  of  his  most  valued  possessions. 


86  THE   BENTHAMITES 

and  although  Mill  and  Place  were  the  only  two  members 
of  the  school  who  were  in  constant  personal  intimacy  with 
Bentham  himself,  Dumont,  Brougham,  Grote  (after  1818), 
and  others  would  have  accepted  the  name  Benthamite.1 
Apart  from  their  writing  and  thinking,  James  Mill  and 
Bentham  were  constantly  occupied  with  practical  projects. 
They  used  the  ordinary  methods  of  committees,  subscrip- 
tions, and  newspaper  articles  for  the  direct  improvement  of 
schools,  and  law  courts,  and  political  machinery. 

In  1823  James  Mill's  greater  son,  John  Stuart  Mill,  then 
seventeen  years  old,  entered. the  India  Office,  and  began 
his  independent  intellectual  life.  In  the  spring  of  1824 
the  Westminster  Review  was  founded.  From  1824  John 
Stuart  Mill,  with  the  younger  generation  of  Utilitarians — 
Charles  Austin,  Eyton  Tooke,  G.  J.  Graham,  and  others — 
formed  the  real  centre  of  the  movement.  They  wrote  books 
and  reviews  rather  than  newspaper  articles,  and  were  more 
really  interested  in  speculative  questions  than  in  practical 
politics  or  social  work. 

In  the  first  period  Place  had  taken  his  full  part  of  the 
work.  He  had  not  only  kept  Bentham  and  Mill  in  contact 
with  the  outside  world,  but  himself  originated  much  of 
their  activity.  In  the  second  movement  he  had  little  or 
no  share.  Though  he  could  do  effective  work  in  his  own 
way  on  a  newspaper,  he  could  not  make  himself  felt  in  a  con- 
test carried  on  by  the  methods  of  deliberate  high  literature. 
If  he  had  been  a  more  skilled  writer,  or  had  understood 
better  the  conditions  of  good  literary  work,  his  chance  would 
have  come  in  1824,  when  the  Utilitarians,  old  and  young, 
found  themselves,  rather  against  their  will,  responsible  for 
the  new  Westminster  Review.  He  was  asked  to  send  an 
article  to  the  first  number,  but  refused,  except  on  condition 
that  no  alteration  should  be  made  in  his  work  without  his 
consent.  "Mine,"  he  said,  "must  be  legitimate  children, 
1  Cf.  J.  S.  Mill's  "Autobiography"  (London,  1873),  page  101. 


THE   BENTHAMITES  87 

however  ugly  and  ungraceful  they  may  be."  l  Bentham, 
who  was  superintending  the  arrangements  and  providing 
the  money  for  the  new  Review,  wrote  him  a  long  letter 
describing  and  justifying  editorial  custom,  and  pointing  out 
that  Mill's  articles  in  the  Edinburgh  Review  had  been 
"  cut  and  slashed  without  mercy."  He  enclosed  his  letter 
with  a  characteristic  little  note  to  Bowring,  the  editor. 
"  Ugly  or  ungraceful  children  we  cannot  adopt,  nor  can  we 
traffic  in  pigs  in  a  poke.  If  you  approve  of  my  reply, 
perhaps  you  will  send  it  to  the  proud  man."  Three  years 
later  Bowring  seems  to  have  accepted  Place's  terms,  and  in 
July  1826  his  first  article  appeared.  Bowring  was  a  most  in- 
competent editor,2  and  the  book  sent  to  Place  was  actually  a 
"  History  of  Egypt." 3  Place  spent  a  fortnight  on  his  article, 
working  nine  hours  a  day,  and  conscientiously  examining 
such  ancient  Egyptian  history  as  then  existed.  Bowring 
did  not  send  him  a  proof,  and  the  article  was  miserably 
misprinted.  But  however  well  it  had  been  printed,  it  would 
have  remained  inexpressibly  dull  and  wooden.  Later  a 
better  chance  was  given  him  in  an  article  on  the  "  History 
of  Parliaments,"  in  the  form  of  a  review  of  Major  Cart- 
wright's  life,  which  was  arranged  for  and  largely  written 
in  1826,  but  appeared  in  October  I82/.4 

The  fifty  pages  occupied  by  that  article  simply  cannot 
be  read.  Place  had  been  working  at  Parliamentary  history 
ever  since  his  visit  to  Ford  Abbey  in  1817,  and  three  great 
folios  in  the  British  Museum5  contain  his  notes  on  the 
subject.  He  had  known  the  old  Major  well,  and  an  inter- 

1  Place  to  Bowring,  September  1823. 

2  Cf.  J.  S.  Mill's  "Autobiography"  (London,  1873),  page  97. 

3  See  the  Westminster  Review,  July  1826,  Article  VIII.,  pp.  158-201. 
A  review  of  Histoire  de  i'Egypt  sous  le  gouvernement  de  Moliammed-Alij, 
&c.,  par  M.  Felix  Mengin. 

4  See  the  Westminster  Revieiv,  October  1827,  Article  I.,  pp.  253-303. 
A  review  of  "  The  Life  and  Correspondence  of   Major   Cartwright," 
edited  by  his  niece,  F.  D.  Cartwright. 

5  27,853-5- 


88  THE   BENTHAMITES 

esting  magazine  article  might  be  put  together  from  the 
notices  of  Cartwright  and  other  reformers  actually  con- 
tained in  his  papers.  But  the  article  gets  no  further  than 
1688,  and  consists  of  a  pointless  series  of  facts  from  original 
sources,  put  together  in  a  style,  compared  with  which  that 
of  Stubbs'  "  Constitutional  History  "  is  airy  and  journalistic. 
The  promised  second  instalment  of  the  "  History  of 
Parliaments"  did  not  appear,  and  Place  never  again 
succeeded  in  getting  into  print  anything  longer  than  a 
pamphlet  or  a  newspaper  article.  Jeffrey,  editor  of  the 
Edinburgh,  wrote  to  Place  in  February  1827,  that  he  was 
willing  to  take  an  article  from  him.  "  I  think  your  article 
will  be  improved  by  avoiding  those  asperities  of  style  in 
which  you  sometimes  indulge,  and  which  are  the  great 
blemish  of  the  Westminster." l  But  the  proposal  does  not 
seem  to  have  led  to  anything.  Again  when  the  two  Mills 
seceded  from  the  Westminster  Review  in  1829,  Bentham 
wrote  to  Bo  wring,  "get  Place  to  set  matters  right;  he  is  the 
best  man  in  the  world." 2  Perhaps  if  Place  had  submitted 
patiently  to  the  cutting  and  slashing  of  a  magazine  editor, 
he  might  have  avoided  some  of  those  literary  faults  which 
henceforward,  writing  as  he  was  without  criticism  or  direc- 
tion, steadily  increased  upon  him.  He  probably  could 
never  have  acquired  certain  habits  of  mind  necessary  for 
great  literary  success.  He  was  absolutely  wanting  in 
humour.  Writing  in  1836  to  Mrs.  Grote,  he  mentions 
Walter  Scott,  and  says,  "  I  never  could  read  even  half  of 
any  one  of  his  novels.  I  tasked  myself  to  it;  I  tried 
several  times  at  different  stories;  I  never  could  succeed; 
I  became  wearied,  and  grew  angry  as  often  as  I  made  the 
attempt." 3  And  when  describing  his  boyhood,  he  says,  "  I 
read  Bunyan's  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  and  parts  of  •  equally 

1  Jeffrey  to  Place,  February  1827  (in  the  family  autograph  book). 

2  Bowring  to  Place,  December  7,   1829  (in  the   family  autograph 
book). 

3  Place  to  Mrs.  Grote,  January  8,  1836  ("  Autobiography  "). 


THE   BENTHAMITES  89 

absurd  books."1  In  the  masses  of  notes  on  old  plays 
which  he  made  in  1828  and  1829,  he  is  simply  concerned 
to  prove  the  increased  decency  of  manners  in  his  own 
time,  and  shows  no  sign  of  feeling  the  poetic  value  of 
what  he  reads.2 

But  the  main  source  of  his  defects  as  a  writer  was  the 
fact  that  he  transferred  to  his  literary  work  the  enormously 
long  hours  of  an  artizan,  and  the  lifeless,  mechanical 
"stroke"  by  which  such  hours  are  alone  made  possible. 
Most  of  his  deliberate  literary  work  was  tired  work,  and 
the  result  is  that  his  familiar  notes  are  better  than  his 
formal  letters,  and  his  letters  better  than  his  treatises. 

But  apart  from  his  literary  limitations,  there  were  other 
sufficient  reasons  for  Place's  falling  out  of  the  second  stage 
of  the  Utilitarian  movement.  Bentham  and  James  Mill, 
though  they  broke  with  the  French  revolutionary  thinkers 
and  the  whole  doctrine  of  Natural  Rights,  nevertheless 
retained  many  of  the  characteristic  habits  of  eighteenth- 
century  thought.  They  believed  themselves  to  have  found 
a  common-sense  philosophy,  by  which  ordinary  selfish  men 
could  be  convinced  that  the  interests  of  each  invariably 
coincided  with  the  interests,  if  not  of  all,  at  any  rate,  of  the 
majority.  Pleasures,  according  to  this  philosophy,  are  all 
of  the  same  kind  in  so  far  as  they  are  pleasures,  and  it 
happens  that  the  acts  which  secure  the  interests  of  the 
majority  are  also  the  most  pleasurable.  Every  man, 
therefore,  if  he  were  reasonably  well  educated  in  his 

1  "Autobiography." 

2  Even  in  ordinary  social  intercourse  his  matter-of-fact  seriousness 
must  have  been  sometimes  rather  trying.     On   April   20,    1826,   for 
instance,  he   walked   to   Kotherhithe   "to   see    Mr.    Brunei's   tunnel. 
Found  Lord  Darnley,  Lady  Darnley,  and  three   other  women  there, 
with  Sir  George  Cunningham.     They  were  joined  by  Lord  Paget  and 
another  well-dressed  animal  whose  name  I  did  not  hear,  who  made  a 
singular  discovery.     On  the  steam-engine  being  named  simply  as  the 
engine,  he  observed  that '  it  must  be  very  hard  work  for  the  engine.' 
Got  away,  not  much  liking  my  company."     (Diary,  April  20,  1826.) 


90  THE   BENTHAMITES 

youth,  would  throughout  the  rest  of  his  life  aim  at  "  the 
greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number,"  simply  because 
he  would  recognise  that  that  was  the  way  to  gain  for 
himself  the  greatest  amount  of  "the  pleasure  of  self- 
approbation,"  and  because  self-approbation,  being  pure, 
contained  more  units  of  enjoyment  per  unit  of  time  than 
any  other  pleasure.  This  was  Place's  position.  "The 
motive  to  benevolence,"  he  wrote  hi  1833,  "is  always 
self-approbation.  The  motive  in  itself  is  neither  good 
nor  bad ;  it  is,  however,  imperative,  and  I  obey  it." l 
"  Self-approbation "  is  a  term  which  can  be  used  as  a 
meaningless  synonym  for  any  kind  of  human  motive,  but 
if  adopted  in  its  ordinary  sense  as  the  conscious  end  of 
human  action,  it  is  apt  to  produce  the  kind  of  result 
which  one  can  trace  from  time  to  time  all  through  Place's 
letters.  When  a  man  is  in  the  mood  for  that  kind  of 
enjoyment,  he  is  encouraged  by  such  a  philosophy  to  in- 
dulge in  a  good  deal  of  naive  self-glorification;  and  when 
he  is  out  of  the  mood,  he  finds  it  difficult  to  fix  on  a 
reason  for  living  at  all.  The  life  which  Place  or  James 
Mill  actually  lived  was  too  laborious  to  seem  worth  much 
if  tested  by  the  quantity  of  personal  pleasure  which  they 
got  from  it.  Accordingly  their  prevailing  habit  of  mind 
was  apt  to  be  that  which  John  Stuart  Mill  ascribes  to  his 
father.  "  His  standard  of  morals  was  Epicurean,  inasmuch 
as  it  was  Utilitarian,  taking  as  the  exclusive  test  of  right 
and  wrong  the  tendency  of  actions  to  produce  pleasure 
or  pain.  But  he  had  .  .  .  scarcely  any  belief  in  pleasure. 
.  .  .  He  thought  human  life  a  poor  thing  at  best,  after 
the  freshness  of  youth  and  of  unsatisfied  curiosity  had 
gone  by."  2 

The  eighteenth-century  quality  in  the  elder  Utilitarians 
comes   out   also   in    their    extraordinary   positiveness    on 

1  Place  to  Harrison,  December  14,  1833. 

2  See  J.  S.  Mill's  "Autobiography  "  (London,  1873),  page  48. 


THE   BENTHAMITES  91 

psychological  and  metaphysical  points.  In  1817  James 
Mill  was  beginning  to  plan  the  "  Analysis  of  the  Human 
Mind,"  which  he  published  in  1829.  "If  I  had  time  to 
write  a  book,"  he  says,  "I  would  make  the  human  mind 
as  plain  as  the  road  from  Charing  Cross  to  St.  Paul's."1 
A  year  earlier  he  wrote,  "  I  am  reading,  at  least  I  have 
begun  to  read,  the  '  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.'  I  see  clearly 
enough  what  poor  Kant  is  about."  - 

Against  this  position  John  Stuart  Mill  revolted  with 
all  his  soul.  His  "  Autobiography  "  describes  his  growing 
sense  of  the  difficulty  of  ultimate  problems,  and  his  grow- 
ing dissatisfaction  with  the  mere  arithmetical  calculation 
of  pleasure  as  the  end  of  human  existence.  "  I  never  in- 
deed wavered,"  he  says,  "  in  the  conviction  that  happiness 
is  the  test  of  all  rules  of  conduct  and  the  end  of  life.  But 
I  now  thought  (in  1830)  that  this  end  was  only  to  be 
attained  by  not  making  it  the  direct  end.  Those  only  are 
happy  (I  thought)  who  have  their  minds  fixed  on  some 
object  other  than  their  own  happiness — on  the  happiness 
of  others,  on  the  improvement  of  mankind,  even  on  some 
art  or  pursuit,  followed  not  as  a  means,  but  as  itself  an 
ideal  end.  Aiming  thus  at  something  else,  they  find  happi- 
ness by  the  way.  .  .  .  Ask  yourself  whether  you  are  happy, 
and  you  cease  to  be  so." 3 

Place,  like  Mrs.  Grote  and  the  other  sectarian  Ben- 
thamites, was  grievously  disappointed  at  this  tendency  in 
John  Mill's  writings.  "  I  think  John  Mill,"  he  wrote  in  1 838, 
"  has  made  great  progress  in  becoming  a  German  meta- 
physical mystic.  Eccentricity  and  absurdity  must  occa- 
sionally be  the  result."4 

1  James  Mill  to  Place,  December  6,  1817. 

2  James  Mill  to  Place,  October  8,  1816  (autograph). 

3  See  J.  S.  Mill's  "Autobiography"  (London,  1873),  p.  142. 

4  Place  to  Falconer,  September  2,  1838.     In  1837  Mrs  Gi-ote  called 
him  in  a  letter  to  Place,  "  that  wayward  intellectual  deity  "  (August 
1 6,  1837). 


92  THE   BENTHAMITES 

From  Place's  diary  for  1826  one  learns  that  John  Mill, 
then  twenty  years  old,  was  a  frequent  caller  at  Charing 
Cross.  But  the  few  letters  between  them  which  have 
been  preserved  are  short,  and,  though  friendly  enough  in 
manner,  confined  to  business  matters. 

Bentham  died  in  1832,  and  Place,  two  years  later,  wrote 
of  him  as  "  my  twenty  years'  friend,  my  good  master  from 
whom  I  learned  I  know  not  how  much,  as  it  spread  in  so 
many  directions.  He  was  my  constant,  excellent,  venerable 
preceptor,  of  whom  I  think  every  day  of  my  life,  whose 
death  I  continually  lament,  whose  memory  I  revere,  and 
whose  absence  I  deplore." l 

James  Mill  died  on  June  23,  1836.  Ten  days  previously 
Place  saw  him  for  the  last  time.  On  his  return  he  de- 
scribed his  visit  in  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Grote.  "  Stayed  too 
long  with  poor  Mill,  who  showed  me  much  more  sympathy 
and  affection  than  ever  before  in  all  our  long  friendship. 
But  he  was  all  the  time  as  much  of  a  bright  reasoning 
man  as  ever  he  was,  reconciled  to  his  fate,  brave  and  calm 
to  an  extent  which  I  never  before  witnessed,  except  in 
another  old  friend,  Thomas  Holcroft,  the  day  before  and 
the  day  of  his  death."  - 

1  Place  to  Harrison,  May  2,  1834. 

2  See  "Jarnes  Mill :  a  Biography,"  p.  409. 


CHAPTER  IV 
SCHOOLS  FOR  ALL 

"  So  complete  was  my  father's  reliance  on  the  influence  of 
reason  over  the  mind  of  mankind,  whenever  it  is  allotved  to 
reach  them,  that  he  felt  as  if  all  would  be  gained  if  the  whole 
population  were  taught  to  read,  if  all  sorts  of  opinions  were 
allowed  to  be  addressed  to  them  by  word  and  in  ivriting, 
and  if,  by  the  means  of  the  suffrage,  they  could  nominate 
a  legislation  to  give  effect  to  the  opinions  they  adopted." l 

The  existing  system  of  popular  education  in  England 
can  be  traced  directly  back  to  the  formation  of  the  Royal 
Lancastrian  Association  in  1810.  In  1798  a  young  Quaker 
named  Joseph  Lancaster  had  begun  to  teach  a  few  poor 
boys  in  a  shed  adjoining  his  father's  house  in  the  Borough 
Road.  He  was  an  enthusiastic  teacher,  with  a  good  deal 
of  personal  magnetism,  and  he  soon  had  more  pupils  than 
he  could  manage  himself  on  the  usual  method.  Dr. 
Andrew  Bell  had  published  in  1797  a  pamphlet  describing 
the  "  Madras  System  "  of  setting  the  children  to  teach  each 
other.2  This  system  Lancaster  copied  or  reinvented,  and 
soon  formed  vague  plans  of  covering  all  England  with 
schools,  in  each  of  which  a  thousand  children  should 
be  taught  in  squads  of  ten  by  a  hundred  monitors. 
He  believed,  and  induced  others  to  believe,  that  this 
could  be  done  at  an  annual  cost  of  not  more  than 
five  shillings  per  head.  But  he  had  more  than  the 

1  See  J.  S.  Mill,  "Autobiography,"  p.  106. 

2  See  "  An  Experiment  in  Education,  made  at  the  Male  Asylum  of 
Madras,''  &c.,  by  Andrew  Bell,  D.D.,  &c.  (London,  1797). 


94  SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL 

usual  allowance  of  the  faults  of  the  enthusiastic  tempera- 
ment, and  within  a  few  years  found  himself  heavily 
in  debt  and  obliged  to  issue  a  public  appeal  for  funds. 
Place  read  this  appeal  in  1804,  found  time  to  visit  the 
school,  and  "  having  examined  the  teacher  and  seen 
the  mode  of  teaching  practised,"  became  a  subscriber 
of  half  a  guinea  monthly.1  Unfortunately  Lancaster,  after 
his  success  in  collecting  funds,  became  still  more  extrava- 
gant, and  by  1807  owed  £4000,  and  was  in  momentary 
danger  of  arrest.  From  this  he  was  saved  by  Joseph  Fox, 
a  rich  Quaker  dentist.  Fox  paid  Lancaster's  debts,  and 
persuaded  William  Allen,  Joseph  Forster,  and  others  of  the 
"Saints"  to  become  trustees.  By  1810  they  had  formed 
the  Royal  Lancastrian  Association,  on  the  committee  of 
which  the  names  of  James  Mill,  Henry  Brougham,  and 
Samuel  Rogers  appear  among  a  number  of  Quaker  philan- 
thropists and  Nonconformist  ministers.  Lancaster  travelled 
up  and  down  the  country  lecturing  on  his  principles ;  many 
Lancastrian  schools  were  founded ;  and  the  Church  party  in 
1811  formed  the  "National  Society  for  the  Education  of 
the  Poor  in  the  Principles  of  the  Established  Church,"  with 
the  avowed  object  of  bringing  the  growing  movement  under 
safe  control.2  Lancaster,  however,  soon  quarrelled  with 
the  trustees,  and,  in  1812,  set  up  against  their  wish  a 
middle-class  boarding  school  in  Tooting.  Here  he  was 
more  reckless  than  ever,  and  when  he  became  bankrupt  in 
1813,  it  was  found  that  he  had  spent  ^8000  in  the  previous 
four  years.  Place  had  a  son  at  the  Tooting  school,  and  relates 
that  Lancaster  "sometimes  kept  one  and  sometimes  two 
carriages.  He  seldom  went  from  home  but  in  a  carriage, 
and  generally  had  some  of  his  lads  in  one  or  two  post- 
chaises  following  him ;  and,  as  if  to  waste  his  time,  in- 
dulge his  love  of  ostentation  and  squander  the  money  of 
other  people,  he  used  to  take  excursions  in  the  manner 
1  27,823  (8).  2  Cf.  27,823  (6). 


SCHOOLS   FOR  ALL  95 

described  to  some  distance,  dine  sumptuously,  and  of 
course  expensively,  and  return  home  in  the  evening. 
Sometimes  these  excursions  occupied  two  or  three  days." l 

Place  gave  him  much  good  advice,  and  for  a  time  vainly 
attempted  to  make  peace  between  him  and  the  trustees. 
After  the  failure  of  this  attempt,  Place  took  part  in 
the  disagreeable  arrangements  by  which  Lancaster  was 
pensioned  off  with  the  title  of  Superintendent,  and  the 
Royal  Lancastrian  Association  became  in  1813  the  British 
and  Foreign  School  Society.  Place  had  already  for  two 
years  been  an  intimate  friend  of  James  Mill,  was  "re- 
puted rich,"  and  well  known  to  be  an  excellent  man  of 
business ;  so  that  when  the  Society  was  reconstructed 
he  was  put  upon  the  new  committee,  and  managed  to 
find  time  for  a  great  deal  of  work.  In  January  1814 
he  writes  to  his  friend  Wakefield:  "Indeed,  I  never  was 
so  intensely  occupied  in  my  life  as  I  have  been  lately 
with  the  two  (school)  committees,  the  statute  of  Elizabeth,2 
closing,  balancing,  and  making  out  my  yearly  bills  and 
accounts,  and  in  addition  to  my  usual  business  fitting  out 
the  Dutch  officers  at  Yarmouth  to  take  the  field,  or  rather 
the  mud-banks,  of  Holland  to  defend  William  the  First 
at  the  expense  of  their  own  liberties." 3  His  constant  fear 
was  that  the  Lancastrian  schools  might  become  instru- 
ments of  social  oppression  by  being  connected  with  the 
idea  of  "charity."4  For  this  reason,  in  drawing  up  the 
by-laws  for  the  British  and  Foreign  Society  on  its  forma- 
tion, he  "  wholly  omitted  the  words  '  poor '  and  '  labouring 
poor,'"  which  had  hitherto  been  employed,  "and  took 
special  care  that "  there  should  be  no  phrase  in  "  them  which 
could  give  offence  or  hurt  the  feelings  of  any  one." 5  And 
with  the  same  object  he  tried  to  persuade  the  committee 

1  27,823  (18,  19). 

2  i.e.  the  Statute  of  Apprentices,  repealed  in  1814. 

3  Place  to  Wakefield,  January  2,  1814. 

4  Wakefield  to  Place,  December  7,  1813.  6  27,823  (22). 


96  SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL 

that  those  parents  who  were  able  to  do  so  should  be  made 
to  pay  a  penny  a  week  for  the  education  of  each  child. 

From  the  first,  Wakefield,  Place,  Mill,  and  Brougham, 
"  who,"  Place  says,  "  is  one  of  the  few  who  see  the  whole 
scope  and  extent  of  what  it  may  lead  to," 1  were  bent  on 
nothing  less  than  the  organisation  of  a  complete  system 
of  primary  and  secondary  education,  at  any  rate  for  London. 
With  regard  to  primary  education,  the  plan  was  that  the 
central  institution  in  the  Borough  Road  should  be  used 
exclusively  for  the  work  of  training  schoolmasters  and 
mistresses,  and  that  London  should  be  divided  into  dis- 
tricts, to  be  controlled  by  independent  school  committees. 
Place  says  that  with  this  view  "the  whole  of  London 
south  of  the  Thames  was  to  be  organised  somewhat  on  the 
plan  of  the  Bible  Society,  and  a  penny  a  week  subscription 
was  to  be  pressed  in  every  direction.  When  the  plan  was 
digested  and  quite  complete,  a  public  general  meeting  of 
the  inhabitants  was  to  be  called,  at  which  the  Royal  Dukes, 
several  noblemen,  and  a  large  number  of  influential  inhabi- 
,  tants  were  to  be  induced,  as  could  then  have  been  done,  to 
attend.  This  meeting  was  to  have  been  followed  by  meet- 
ings in  as  many  districts  as  it  might  be  found  advisable  to 
divide  this  portion  of  the  Metropolis  into.  I  wrote  out  the 
plan  carefully,  omitting  nothing  which  I  thought  was  at 
all  likely  to  be  useful.  I  procured  the  sheets  of  Howard's 
large  plan  of  London,  and  having  divided  the  portions 
intended  to  be  operated  upon  according  to  population  into 
a  number  of  nearly  equal  parts,  I  coloured  and  hung  it  up 
in  the  committee  room." 2 

In  1813  the  West  London  Lancastrian  Association  was 
formed  on  Wakefield's  suggestion,  to  arrange  for  the  western 
half  of  London  north  of  the  Thames.  Districts  were  allotted 
for  the  inspection  of  various  members,  and  Wakefield  drew 

1  Place  to  Wakefield,  February  20,  1814. 
8  27,823  (23). 


SCHOOLS   FOR  ALL  97 

up  a  valuable  report  on  the  educational  and  social  condi- 
tion of  the  Drury  Lane  district,  which  was  afterwards, 
printed  by  Brougham's  Education  Committee  in  1816.  He 
had  the  idea,  of  which  Mr.  Charles  Booth  has  since  made 
such  brilliant  use,  that  if  permanent  educational  visitors 
were  appointed  for  all  London  a  thorough  collection  of 
social  statistics  might  be  made.1 

The  motto  of  the  West  London  Lancastrian  Association 
was  the  exhilarating  phrase,  "  Schools  for  All,"  and  every 
now  and  then  a  note  of  joyful  expectation  breaks  through 
the  practical  strain  of  Place's  letters.  In  writing  to  Allen, 
for  instance,  he  speaks  of  the  "health  and  beauty,"  the 
"mass  of  intellect"  that  he  had  observed  in  the  Lan- 
castrian schools,  "which,  if  properly  managed,  would 
reflect  the  greatest  credit  on  the  country,  and  all  but 
infinitely  promote  the  happiness  of  the  rising  generation."  2 

1  Wakefield's  proposal  was  as  follows  :   "The  account  you  give  me," 
he  says,  "is  excellent.     But  let  me  impress  upon  you  to  place  each 
section  under  permanent  inspection.     Many  useful  queries  might  be 
added  to  those  of  the  W.  L.  L.  A.,  particularly  to  examine  whether  the 
heads  of  a  wretched  family  can  read  and  write.     Do  not  by  any  means 
allow  the  books  of  those  sections  which  I  have  visited  to  be  considered 
as  an  example — they  are  not  half  filled  up.     A  school  once  established, 
and  a  detailed  account  of  every  labouring  family  shall  be  furnished  to 
the  Association.     The  statement  of  the  celebrated  Lipsmitch  in  his 
'  Divine  Ordinances,'  that  the  rate  of  life  in  London  is  of  shorter  dura- 
tion than  in  any  great  town  in  Europe,  has  long  been  with  me  an  object 
of  inquiry.     Now,  if  permanent  visitors  can  be  paid  for  the  whole  of 
London  we  shall  ascertain  the  truth  of  this  assertion,  and,  if  possible, 
develop  the  cause,  without  a  knowledge  of  which  a  remedy  cannot  be 
proposed,  much  less  applied."     (Wakefield  to  Place,  January  6,  1814.) 

2  27,823  (67).     With  this  letter  Place   forwarded   to   Allen  three 
specimens  of  illustrated  reading  lessons,  dealing  with  the  commoner 
tools,  &c.,  very  much  on  the  lines  of  the  illustrated  " Headers"  now 
used  in  the  lower  standards  of  elementary  schools.      Allen  replied 
strongly  approving,  and  saying  that  the  lessons  were  like  the  Dutch 
school-books,  and  were  in  "the  manner  in  which   Pestalozzi  goes  to 
work."     But  they  were  never  used,  and  one  of  the  committee  told 
Place  that  "it  had  been  decided  privately  that  no  lesson,  unless  it 
was  taken  from  the  Scripture,  could  be  laid  before  the  committee." 
27,808  (72). 

G 


98  SCHOOLS   FOR  ALL 

At  the  same  time,  Place  and  his  friends  were  equally 
keen  in  promoting  a  system  of  Lancastrian  higher  schools. 
This  was  Place's  own  proposal.  He  had  at  this  time  nine 
children  alive,  and  it  was  a  matter  of  serious  difficulty  for 
him  to  secure  for  them  such  education  as  he  desired,  at  an 
expense  no  greater  than  he  could  afford.  Writing,  in  1833, 
of  this  period,  he  says :  "  It  was  my  intention  to  change, 
and  had  I  succeeded  in  establishing  a  superior  school  it 
would,  I  am  persuaded,  have  changed  the  whole  system  of 
teaching.  All  the  large  towns  throughout  the  country 
would  have  set  up  similar  schools,  and  have  produced 
incalculable  advantages.  Some  years  hence,  when  the 
exertions  which  have  been  made,  and  are  still  being  made, 
to  increase  the  desire  of  men  in  the  middle  ranks  of  life  to 
have  their  children  properly  educated,  shall  have  suc- 
ceeded, it  will  scarcely  be  believed  how  difficult,  not  to 
say  impossible,  it  was  for  any  man  who  could  not  afford 
to  pay  a  very  large  sum  of  money  to  procure  an  adequate 
education  for  his  children.  I  do  not  mean  a  merely 
classical  education,  i.e.  the  rudiments,  or  very  little  more 
than  the  rudiments,  of  Greek  and  Latin,  and  some  of  the 
elements  of  mathematics,  which  is  all  that  nine  in  every 
ten  of  those  who  are  classically  educated  obtain;  but  I 
mean  besides  these  rudiments  something  more  than  the 
mere  elements  of  mathematics,  modern  languages,  political 
economy,  politics,  and  morals,  including  the  broad  and 
comprehensive  doctrine  of  motives. 

"  I  have  never  yet  been  able  to  find  any  school,  either  in 
or  out  of  the  Metropolis,  in  which,  at  an  expense  within  the 
amount  which  an  ordinary  tradesman  is  able  to  pay,  he 
can  have  his  sons  taught  as  he  wishes  they  should  be 
taught,  or  even  as  persons  in  inferior  stations  in  Scotland 
are  taught,  defective  even  as  that  education  is.  It  was 
this  knowledge  which  first  induced  me  to  think  of  the 
application  of  Joseph  Lancaster's  system  to  the  purpose  of 


SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL  99 

educating  the  children  of  those  who  having  comparatively 
small  means  are  yet  desirous  of  giving  a  really  useful  edu- 
cation to  their  children."1  Wakerield  took  up  the  idea 
eagerly  :  Mill,  "  from  the  first  moment  the  plan  was  men- 
tioned, heartily  concurred  in  it."  2  He  "  goes  into  it  most 
heartily,"  says  Place  elsewhere,  "  and  consents  to  assist  in 
procuring  money,  &c.  ;  "  3  and  Wakerield  adds  that  "  Mill  is 
always  at  work,  but  never  shows  himself."  4  Bentham  also 
"  came  heartily  into  the  project,"  .  .  .  and  offered  his  garden 
a,t  Queen's  Square  Place  for  the  site  of  the  school.5  The 
group  of  friends  were  immensely  cheered  by  hearing  that 
the  monitorial  system  had  already  been  applied  with  success 
to  secondary  education  in  Scotland.  Place's  second  daughter 
Annie  had  just  gone  to  be  governess  in  a  family  in  Edin- 
burgh. She  mentioned  her  father's  plan  to  Mr.  Gray,  one 
of  the  masters  of  the  Edinburgh  High  School,  who  there- 
upon wrote  to  Wakefield  to  say  that  he  had  practised  the 
Lancastrian  method  in  teaching  Latin  and  Greek  for  the 
last  two  years,  and  that  it  had  met  with  "  the  most  distin- 
guished success.  I  ...  had  no  conception  of  the  advan- 
tages to  be  derived  from  it  till  I  fairly  made  the  experi- 
ment. I  believe  it  to  be  equally  applicable  whether  the 
numbers  be  great  or  small,  and  in  teaching  every  branch 
of  human  knowledge.  In  my  own  case  it  has  converted  a 
laborious  and  often  an  irksome  profession  into  the  most 
easy  and  delightful  employment  possible.  .  .  .  Instead  of 
that  inattention,  drowsiness,  and  even  insubordination  that 
too  frequently  prevail  at  the  bottom  of  large  classes  in  the 
old  way,  all  is  activity,  cheerfulness,  and  prompt  obedience  ; 


1  27,823  (135).  2  27,823 

3  Place  to  Wakefield,  February  20,  1814. 

4  Wakefield  to  Place,  December  /,  1813.      In  a  letter  to  Colonel 
Jones,  written  some  years  later,  Place  says,  "  Mr.  James   Mill  .  .  . 
wrote   the   memorable   and    admirable   essay,   'Schools   for   All,   not 
Schools  for  Churchmen  only."'     See  27,824  (349). 

5  27,823  (144). 


100  SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL 

...  no  boy  becomes  incorrigibly  idle,  because  he  is  kept 
in  employment,  conquers  every  difficulty,  and  soon  begins 
to  love  his  labour."1  Gray  was  at  once  urged  to  give  fuller 
details,  and  in  reply  wrote  a  long  and  enthusiastic  descrip- 
tion of  his  experiences,  which  was  copied,  circulated,  and 
finally  published.  Soon  afterwards  Place  heard  that 
the  plan  had  also  been  successfully  tried  in  the  academy 
at  Perth,  and  Fox  received  an  enthusiastic  letter  from 
Pillans,  the  Rector  of  the  Edinburgh  High  School,  de- 
scribing its  good  effect  in  his  own  class.  The  monitorial 
system  is  now  amply  discredited. .  but  one  can  imagine 
that  it  was,  at  any  rate,  better  than  the  dreadful  old 
method,  whereby,  for  hours  together,  one  boy  at  a  time 
translated,  while  two  hundred  played.  It  was,  indeed,  the 
first  serious  attempt  in  England  to  think  out  any  system 
of  class-teaching  whatsoever.  The  master  who  in  those 
early  years  adopted  the  Lancastrian  system,  did  really  try 
to  provide,  in  Lancaster's  words,  "every  boy  with  some- 
thing to  do,  and  a  motive  for  doing  it,"  and  when  Gray  or 
Pillans  wrote  about  the  'delightfulness  of  the  new  system, 
they  were  thinking,  not  only  of  the  practice  by  which  the 
elder  boys  heard  the  repetition  lessons  of  the  younger,  but 
of  the  rapid  fire  of  question  and  answer  between  the  boys 
and  the  master  in  the  succeeding  lesson,  the  use  of  the 
blackboard  in  teaching  geography,  and  that  general  in- 
ventiveness in  devising  expedients  and  arousing  interest, 
which  the  new  system  seemed  to  encourage,  and  the  old 
had  made  impossible.2 

Place  and  Wakefield  recognised  the  danger  as  well  as 
the  expense  of  great  boarding-schools,  and  advocated 
higher  day-schools,  where  boys  should  receive  "  the  advan- 
tages which  are  to  be  derived  from  the  learning  of  a 
master,  and  the  emulation  which  results  from  the  society 

1  James  Gray  to  Wakefield,  December  17,  1813. 
«  27,823  (67). 


SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL  101 

of  other  boys,  together  with  the  affectionate  vigilance  ex- 
perienced in  the  house  of  their  parents."  l  In  a  letter  to 
William  Allen,2  Place  suggests  that  these  higher  schools 
should  be  used  to  give  the  young  teachers  from  the  Borough 
Road  some  years  of  secondary  education  before  they  began 
their  professional  life,  and  that  evening-classes  for  adults  and 
apprentices  should  be  held  on  the  school  premises.  "  I  do 
not  believe,"  he  says  elsewhere,  "  there  is  at  the  present 
time  a  single  carpenter  in  this  great  metropolis  who  pos- 
sesses any  practical  geometry."  3  The  actual  curriculum 
proposed  for  the  higher  Lancastrian  schools  was  largely 
borrowed  from  the  systematic  treatise  on  Chrestomathia 
(i.e.  Useful  Education),  at  which  Bentham  was  then  work- 
ing; but  Place's  notes  to  Bentham's  first  draft,  in  June 
1814,  show  that  here  too  he  was  thinking  for  himself. 
He  proposes  that  mineralogy  should  be  taught  by  dia- 
grams and  specimens,  and  hints  that  Bentham  might 
help  William  Smith,  who  is  "  unable  to  go  to  press  unless 
he  can  obtain  assistance,"  in  bringing  out  that  geological 
map  which  was  afterwards  to  prove  the  real  beginning 
of  systematic  geology  in  England.  He  asks  very  per- 
tinently whether  more  than  two  cases  of  English  nouns, 
except  the  personal  pronouns,  should  be  taught,  and  urges 
the  necessity  of  making  boys  constantly  observe  and  even 
handle  geometrical  forms  in  order  to  enable  them  to  over- 
come the  difficulty  in  turning  their  thoughts  from  number 
to  dimension,  to  which  he  refers  in  his  account  of  his  own 
youth.4  Nor  did  he  overlook  the  educational  value  of 
games,  though  he  did  not  realise  that  a  game  which  is 
partly  a  lesson  is  neither  a  good  game  nor  a  good  lesson. 
"  It  is  as  necessary,"  he  wrote,  "  for  boys  to  play  together, 
as  it  is  that  they  should  be  taught  together.  It  is 
therefore  intended  if  possible  to  provide  a  space  large 

1  27,823  (147, 148).  2  27,823  (149-154). 

3  27,823  (168).  *  Cf.  ante,  p.  18. 


102  SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL 

enough  for  this  purpose,  in  which  their  games  may 
be  made  more  attractive  and  more  useful  than  they 
have  hitherto  been ;  where  new  ones  may  be  introduced ; 
and  thus  their  very  amusements  out  of  school  may  be 
made  to  conduce  to  their  improvement,  and  their  morals 
made  much  more  conducive  to  their  happiness,  by 
teaching  them,  as  it  were,  in  a  little  world  of  their  own, 
patience,  forbearance,  and  kindness  to  one  another.  I  see 
no  reason  why  their  games  should  not  be  made  the  means 
of  instruction,  of  calling  to  remembrance  the  instruction 
they  have  received.  Nothing  can  be  more  easy,  nothing 
more  pleasant.  The  boy  who  plays  at  marbles  may  as  well 
draw  a  map  as  a  ring,  and  by  shooting  at  a  marble  placed 
on  Dublin,  recollect  that  by  striking  it  under  a  certain 
angle  he  will  place  his  '  taw '  in  a  situation  to  attack 
another  marble  placed  on  Cork,  or  Limerick,  or  Belfast. 
In  playing  at  fives,  what  should  prevent  him  driving  his 
ball  against  the  belt  of  Orion,  or  the  tail  of  the  Bear ;  and 
why  may  not  other  games  be  invented  equally  entertaining 
and  instructing  ? " l 

Above  all,  he  dwelt  on  the  social  value  of  a  real  educa- 
tion. If  the  leisured  classes  could  be  taught  to  think, 
Place  was  convinced  that  enough  social  feeling  could  be 
created  among  them  to  result  in  effective  action.  "  I  appeal 
to  your  own  experience,"  he  wrote  in  the  letter  to  William 
Allen  already  quoted.  "  How  few  are  there  on  whom  you 
can  rely  for  active  co-operation  in  promoting  the  happiness 
of  the  people !  Your  connection  is  principally  among  those 
whose  rank  is  at  the  top  of  the  middle  class,  who,  enjoying 
wealth  and  leisure,  might  be  expected  to  possess  the  dis- 
position to  do  the  greatest  service  to  humanity,  with  the 
knowledge  necessary  to  give  full  effect  to  their  disposition. 
But  is  this  so  ?  Alas,  it  is  not  so,  and  it  cannot  be  ex- 
pected to  exist  in  any  great  quantity  as  we  descend  !  Why 
1  27,823(153). 


SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL  103 

is  this  ?  Plainly  because  of  ignorance ;  people  do  not  see 
how  much  is  in  their  power ;  they  doubt  their  own  ability 
to  effect  any  real  and  permanent  good  on  a  large  scale,  and 
they  therefore  attribute  the  evils  they  have  no  hope  of 
removing  to  the  very  constitution  of  society.  They  would 
remove  the  evils  they  are  constantly  obliged  to  witness, 
but  unable  to  contemplate  the  possibility  of  accomplishing 
their  wishes,  they  endeavour  to  get  rid  of  uneasy  sensations 
by  trying  to  forget  them,  and  by  continued  efforts  to  free 
themselves  from  them  they  stifle  the  best  feelings  of  their 
nature,  become  morose,  and  disqualify  themselves  from 
the  performance  of  any  good  whatever;  or  they  relieve 
themselves  by  the  performance  of  what  is  vulgarly  called 
charity;  they  give  money,  victuals,  clothes,  &c.,  and  thus 
by  encouraging  idleness  and  extinguishing  enterprise,  in- 
crease the  evils  they  would  remove." l 

With  regard  to  the  monitorial  system,  Place  was  no 
wiser  than  his  generation.  He  conceived  of  it  not  as  a 
necessary  makeshift  in  the  absence  of  trained  masters 
and  of  money  to  pay  them,  but  as  the  best  method  pos- 
sible. He  quotes  with  approval  Gray's  statement  that 
"  boys  are  better  qualified  to  teach  boys  than  men." 2  In 
the  "proposals"3  for  a  higher  Lancastrian  school  which 

1    27,823  (149,    150).  2    Cf.  27,823  (140,   141). 

3  "  Proposals  for  Establishing  in  the  Metropolis  a  Day  School  in 
which  an  example  may  be  set  of  the  application  of  the  Methods  of  Dr. 
Bell,  Mr.  Lancaster,  and  others,  to  the  higher  branches  of  Education'' 
(London,  1815),  16  pp.  Svo.  Eepublished  1816  and  1817,  with  lists  of 
subscribers,  &c.,  added.  Copies  of  all  three  editions  are  preserved  in 
27,823  (21 1-235).  Place  has  left  the  following  account  of  the  authorship 
of  these  Proposals  :  "  Mr.  Mill  returned  to  town  with  Mr.  Bentliam 
early  in  the  month  of  February  1815,  Mr.  Bentham  bringing  with  him 
his  '  Chrestomathia'  ;  and  as  Mr.  Mill  and  I  had  reason  to  believe  that 
he  would  attempt  to  draw  up  proposals  as  a  prospectus  for  the  intended 
school,  we  set  about  preparing  such  proposals  as  we  thought  would 
sufficiently  explain  the  purpose,  and  be  likely  to  induce  persons  to  join 
us.  We  were  quite  certain  from  what  we  knew  of  Mr.  Uentham's  habit 
of  endeavouring  to  exhaust  almost  everything  he  took  in  hand,  that  the 


104  SCHOOLS  FOR  ALL 

Place  and  James  Mill  drew  up  in  1815,  it  is  distinctly 
declared  that  "  when  the  boys  who  are  trained  in  the 
school  have  made  sufficient  progress  to  perform  the  duties 
of  upper  monitors  in  all  the  stages  of  instruction,  no  ushers, 
it  is  presumed,  will  be  required." l 

In  1814  the  idea  that  a  school  building  should  be  specially 
constructed  for  its  purpose  was  valuable,  and  if  not  new,  at 
least  newly  discovered.  But  the  design  of  the  proposed 
•Chrestomathic  school,2  as  drawn  by  an  architect  under 
Place's  supervision,  is  such  that  no  good  teaching  could  pos- 
sibly have  been  given  there.  In  February  1814  Place  had 
written  to  Wakefield,  "  Mr.  Bentham  has  sent  me  his  books 
on  the  construction  of  Panopticons  and  the  plates — I  shall 
read  them  most  carefully."  3  The  "  books  on  the  construc- 
tion of  Panopticons  " 4  were  the  mass  of  controversy  that 
resulted  in  the  creation  of  Millbank  Prison  as  the  one 
material  memorial  of  Bentham's  genius,  and  the  ground 
plan  of  the  new  school  has  a  certain  resemblance  to  that 
dreary  syllogism  in  brick.  It  was  intended  that  the  build- 
ing should  consist  of  a  single  huge  polygonal  room,  with 

drawing  up  of  proposals  if  left  to  him  would  terminate  in  a  goodly- 
sized  pamphlet,  if  not  in  a  volume.  I  therefore  made  notes  of  what  I 
considered  the  principal  points  necessary  to  convey  a  knowledge  of  our 
purpose,  and  the  reasons  for  each  note.  From  these  Mr.  Mill  and  I 
composed  a  paper,  which  we  caused  to  be  printed  as  '  Proposals,'  &c., 
leaving  a  space  in  page  13  for  the  names  of  the  managers  when  they 
should  be  obtained.  This  paper  was  by  Mr.  Bentham  considered  as 
adequate  to  the  purpose  intended,  and  these  Proposals  are  the  papers 
commented  on  by  Mr.  Bentham  in  appendix  to  his  '  Chrestomathia,' 
printed  anonymously  in  the  summer  of  1815.  .  .  . 

"In  1817  Mr.  Bentham  republished  his  'Chrestomathia'  with  a  new 
title-page,  on  which  his  name  appeared.  It  was  now  twice  the  size  in 
which  it  first  appeared,  having  Part  II.  attached  to  it,  containing  what 
Mr.  Bentham  called  Appendix  V."  27,823  (182,  183). 

1  See  the  "Proposals"  preserved  in  27,823  (211-218). 

2  See  Bentham's  papers  on  "Chrestomathia"  (London,  1815,  1816, 
1817,  &c.). 

3  Place  to  Wakefield,  February  20,  1814. 

4  See  Bentham's  "  Panopticon,  or  the  Inspection  House "  (London, 
1791),  2  vols.,  and  other  papers. 


SCHOOLS   FOR  ALL  105 

nine  concentric  rows  of  desks,  divided  into  blocks  by  pas- 
sages leading  to  the  centre ;  at  the  centre  point  the  master 
was  to  sit  on  a  revolving  chair,  "  so  that  he  may  turn  him- 
self round  and  see  every  part  of  the  school  without  rising." 
Place  even  contemplated  complacently  the  fearful  din 
which  would  result  from  monitorial  education  carried  on 
under  one  vast  sounding-board.  "  A  boy,"  he  wrote,  "  who 
has  been  taught  to  think  accurately  on  one  subject  only, 
amidst  discordant  noises,  without  having  his  attention 
drawn  off  from  the  subject,  has  acquired  a  power  of  no 
ordinary  kind." l 

Even  in  1816,  when  giving  evidence  before  Brougham's 
commission,  Place  seems  to  have  had  no  more  conception 
than  any  one  else  that  Lancaster's  method  may  have  helped 
to  produce  that  persuasion  among  parents  which  he  there 
laments,  that  their  children  in  elementary  schools  "play, 
and  learn  nothing." 2 

But  in  1814  a  recognition  of  the  limitations  of  the  moni- 
torial system  would  have  been  simply  one  more  obstacle 
to  Place's  harmonious  working  with  the  other  members  of 
the  British  and  Foreign  School  Society,  and  there  were 
obstacles  enough  as  it  was.  Most  of  the  rich  Quakers 
who  provided  the  current  funds,  and  to  whom  the  Society 
was  heavily  in  debt,  were  earnest  adherents  of  evangelical 
orthodoxy.  Place  used  to  horrify  them  by  using  the  word 
" infidel"  as  the  commonly  accepted  name  for  his  own 
opinions  and  those  of  his  friends.  The  British  and  Foreign 
Society  had  a  rule  that  no  reading  lesson  whatever  should 
be  given  except  from  the  Bible.  This,  by  the  influence 
of  Place  and  Mill,  was  dropped  from  the  declarations  of 
principles  of  the  West  London  Lancastrian  Association, 
and  a  statement  substituted  that  "of  religious  books, 

1  27,823  (133). 

2  See  Place's  evidence  before  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of 
Commons  on  Education  in  the  Metropolis,  1816  [June  13]. 


106  SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL 

the  Bible  alone,  without  gloss  or  comment,  written  or 
spoken,  will  be  read." l  At  the  same  time,  the  rule  of  the 
parent  society,  that  all  children  were  to  be  taken  to  some 
place  of  worship  on  Sundays,  was  also  omitted.  Joseph 
Fox  was  the  secretary  of  both  societies.  Place  at  first  did 
his  best  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  him ;  but  by  January 
1814  he  had  lost  patience,  and  wrote  to  Wakefield  about 
Fox :  "  I  would  willingly  he  should  take  the  credit  of 
everything — I  care  not  who  has  it ;  but  I  do  not  like  this 
accommodation  to  the  dispositions  of  other  men;  it  is 
damned  hypocrisy.  He  shall  keep  all  he  has  obtained  of 
me  in  this  way,  but  I  will  practise  on  him  no  longer.  I 
have  missed  many  points  because  I  would  not  gain  them 
by  these  means,  and  I  will  never  gain  another  by  them." 2 

In  March  Fox  Avrote  a  long  and  querulous  letter  to 
Place,  urging  that  his  drafts  should  be  printed  just  as  he 
wrote  them,  and  adding  that  "  to  write  merely  to  have  the 
very  pith  and  marrow  of  one's  ideas  picked  out,  is  what 
I  cannot  submit  to.  Confidence  has  been  placed  in  Mr. 
Allen  and  me  in  our  other  quarter,  and  we  have  acted  as 
the  occasion  demanded ; " 3  to  which  Place  replied,  declin- 
ing to  cease  exercising  his  rights  as  a  member  of  the 
committee. 4 

From  that  time  forward  Fox  steadily  ignored  the  re- 
commendations of  committees  wrhen  he  did  not  agree  with 
them,  and  pledged  the  funds  of  the  societies  in  the  most 
intolerably  irresponsible  fashion.  Everything  was  justified 
by  a  reference  to  that  Inner  Light  which  is  the  strength 
and  weakness  of  Quakerism.  Place  complained  indig- 
nantly. "  The  notions  he  himself  formed  he  succeeded  in 
persuading  himself  were  ordinances  of  God ;  and  as  he 
thus  made  his  own  personal  purposes  holy,  every  means 

1  27,823  (97).  2  Place  to  Wakefield,  January  2,  1814. 

3  Fox  to  Place,  March  26,  1814. 

4  See  Place  to  Fox,  March  27,  1814. 


SCHOOLS    FOR   ALL  107 

was  fair  for  their  accomplishment.  .  .  .  His  sanctity  did 
not  prevent  him  being  liberal  or  mean  or  ostentatious,  or 
valiant  or  cowardly,  or  civil  or  insolent,  for  he  was  one 
or  the  other  as  suited  his  purpose,  or  as  he  was  impelled 
by  his  feelings,  or  his  fears  or  his  hopes."  1 

In  March  1814  a  small  committee  was  appointed  to 
investigate  an  unsavoury  scandal  about  Lancaster.  The 
evidence  against  him  was  conclusive,  and  he  only  avoided 
certain  dismissal  by  resigning  his  post  of  superintendent. 
In  his  letter  of  resignation  he  deliberately,  and  with  some 
success,  set  himself  to  turn  the  religious  members  of  the 
society  against  Place,  whom  he  calls  "a  professed  adversary 
of  the  sacred  writings,"  "  a  firebrand  of  discord,"  and  refers 
to  as  among  "  those  who  profess  infidel  opinions,  and  boast 
of  having  been  leaders  and  founders  of  the  London  Corre- 
sponding Society."2  The  intolerant  section  of  the  com- 
mittee, led  by  Fox,  saw  an  opportunity  of  attacking  Place, 
and  a  special  meeting  was  called  at  Kensington  Palace. 
Place  attended  the  meeting,  and  has  left  a  description  of 
the  concourse  of  Quakers  and  dissenting  ministers  who 
always  flocked  to  those  meetings  which  were  called  at  the 
Palace,  and  of  Hume,  who,  every  time  either  of  the  dukes 
spoke  to  hin],  kept  "  bowing  his  unwieldy,  because  un- 
manageable, body  as  awkwardly  as  an  elephant  might  be 
supposed  to  do." 3  The  Duke  of  Kent  opened  the  meeting, 
and  having  referred  to  Lancaster's  charges,  paused,  evi- 
dently waiting  for  a  reply.  Place,  however,  being  deter- 
mined not  to  speak,  an  embarrassing  silence  followed.  "  I 
had  no  desire,"  says  Place,  "  to  embarrass  the  Duke,  who 
always  behaved  in  the  kindest  and  best  possible  manner ; 
but  my  course  had  been  taken,  and  I  was  resolved  not  to 
depart  from  it."  After  a  delay,  the  Duke  was  about  to 
proceed  further  on  the  subject,  when  "  Mr.  Whitbread,  in  a 
hurried  manner,  and  in  an  undertone,  interrupted  him  by 
1  27,823  (45).  2  27,823  (29-31).  3  27,823  (36). 


108  SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL 

saying,  '  Let  him  alone ;  let  him  alone.' "  The  Duke  took 
the  cue,  and  said  that,  as  Lancaster  had  behaved  badly 
and  deserted  the  Institution,  the  best  way  was  to  dismiss 
his  letter  entirely.  "  Mr.  Whitbread  said  '  Certainly ; '  upon 
which  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  who  was  always  good-humoured, 
but  seldom  discreet,  called  out  across  the  table  to  me, 
'  Prosecute  him,  Place  !  Prosecute  him,  Place ! '  I  said 
very  calmly,  '  I  never  prosecute  anybody  for  what  they 
say  respecting  me.  I  have  no  personal  enmity  to  Joseph 
Lancaster,  and  he,  like  every  one  else,  may  say  what  he 
pleases  of  me.  What  he  has  said  which  is  true,  he  is  quite 
at  liberty  to  say ;  and  for  what  he  has  said  which  is  not 
true,  I  care  nothing.'  Thus  terminated  this  mighty  affair." l 
A  more  serious  incident  occurred  a  few  months  later, 
when,  as  already  described,  Sir  Francis  Burdett  denounced 
Place  as  a  Government  spy,2  and  called  for  his  dismissal  from 
the  West  London  Lancastrian  Association.  Against  the 
advice  of  Mill  and  Wakefield,  Place  now  resigned  his  position 
in  a  society  where  he  believed  that  he  could  no  longer 
be  of  any  use.  His  formal  resignation  was  conveyed  in  a 
letter  in  July,  but  he  did  not  at  once  cease  his  work  on  the 
central  British  and  Foreign  Committee.  Here  he  had 
two  main  objects — to  introduce  such  a  system  of  accounts 
as  should  give  the  committee  some  real  control  over  its 
officers,  and  to  put  the  school  in  the  Borough  Road 
on  a  business-like  and  economical  footing.  It  had  now 
become  a  resident  training  college  for  the  Lancaster 
schools  throughout  the  country.  But  Lancaster's  original 
idea  that  it  was  to  be  a  free  school,  where  the  poorest  of 
poor  children  should  be  taught  reading  and  writing  and 
the  printing  trade,  still  affected  the  management.  A  ridicu- 
lously expensive  printing  business  was  carried  on  in  con- 
nection with  the  school.  No  sufficient  attempt  was  made 
to  select  the  children  who  were  taken  into  the  schools,  and 
1  27,823  (36-40).  2  Cf.  p.  56. 


SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL  109 

the  monitors  were  boarded,  lodged,  and  clothed,  though 
many  of  them  were  obviously  unfit  to  become  teachers. 
Place  forced  Fox  to  confess  that  two  boys  who  had  just 
been  sent  to  Edinburgh  had  cost  the  institution  upwards 
of  .£500  each.  He  then  proceeded  to  argue  "  that  so  far 
from  its  being  necessary  for  us  to  take  ignorant,  ill-bred 
boys  and  girls  to  be  trained  at  an  enormous  expense,  there 
were  plenty  of  decent,  respectable  people  who  would  be 
glad  to  send  their  sons  and  daughters  to  have  them  taught 
the  system,  on  the  chance  of  their  being  appointed  to 
schools,  without  any  expense  to  us,  and  that  the  boys  and 
girls  so  sent  would  come  better  educated  in  other  respects 
than  any  one  ever  had  been  educated  in  the  institution, 
and  would,  as  to  manners,  be  greatly  to  be  preferred." l  He 
was  anxious  as  far  as  possible  to  avoid  a  quarrel.  Furious 
as  he  often  was  with  Fox,  yet  he  pitied  his  mental  suffer- 
ings, and  had  been  in  spite  of  the  differences  of  their  creeds 
originally  on  terms  of  intimate  friendship  with  him.  For 
William  Allen,  "  good  William  Allen  "  as  he  called  him,  he 
always  retained  a  sincere  and  deep  affection,  and  he  ad- 
mitted that  the  two  men  had  saved  the  Lancastrian  system. 
"  They  had  kept  it  from  being  extinguished ;  they  had 
carried  it  on  for  six  years,  certainly  expensively  and  ab- 
surdly, yet  to  some  extent  with  their  own  money."  But  the 
hard  fact  remained  that  in  the  year  ending  November  ior 
1814,  ^2950  contributed  by  outside  subscribers  had  been 
expended,  "  and  yet  all  that  the  committee  which  expended 
the  money  did,  was  furnishing  not  more  than  six  teachers 
to  other  schools  (at  a  cost  of  ^1200)  and  maintaining  two 
free  day-schools,  which  did  not  together  contain  more  than 
350  boys  and  girls."  z 

Place  failed  in  this  as  he  failed,  for  the  time,  in  all  his 
educational  schemes.     From  the  beginning  he  had  recog- 

1  27,823  (44-45)- 
27,823  (47,  48) ;  cf.  also  Place  to  Wakefield,  October  7,  1814. 


110  SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL 

nised  how  rare  was  that  social  enthusiasm  which  formed 
the  guiding  principle  of  his  own  life  and  those  of  his 
friends,  and  how  weak  a  force  it  constituted  as  compared 
with  religion  or  self-interest,  or  even  vanity.  In  March 
1814  he  had  written  to  Wakefield:  "With  what  ease  you 
talk  of  3000  shares  at  £10  each  and  of  two  large  com- 
mittees !  You  will  procure  neither.  There  is  no  political 
tclat,  no  crawling  to  the  great,  no  ostentation  with  which 
the  great  may  please  themselves,  no  fashion,  no  reversion 
in  heaven  to  be  purchased,  and  wanting  all  these  things, 
there  remains  nothing  but  an  enlarged  view  of  things  and 
virtue  enough  to  cause  activity.  Whether  there  be  more 
of  these  than  just  enough  to  allow  us  to  crawl  on,  I  very 
much  doubt.  You  know  how  few  there  are  who  pursue 
the  thing  from  right  principles,  and  how  inefficient  all 
others  are." x  Nevertheless  to  the  end  of  the  year  he  kept 
steadily  on  with  his  scheme  of  reconstruction.  Joseph 
Hume  was  on  his  side ;  and  Mill  writes  hi  October  to  say 
that  Brougham  has  told  William  Allen  that  he  would 
"  blow  up  the  whole  Lancastrian  concern  if  he  should  find 
a  tendency  for  converting  it  into  an  instrument  of  bigotry 
and  superstition." 2  But  Hume  despaired  of  success,  and 
Brougham  never  kept  his  promise  of  support.  There  were, 
however,  other  parties  on  the  committee,  and  Place,  in 
December  1814,  describes  in  a  letter  to  Mill  how  he  had 
walked  home  arm-in-arm  between  two  dissenting  ministers 
who  hated  Fox,  and  "  would  be  well  pleased  to  get  rid  of 
him  in  any  way,  and  for  what  do  you  think  ?  why,  to 
make  a  missionary  society  of  it,  to  send  out  preachers  all 
over  the  three  kingdoms  to  preach  for  it.  ...  Precious 
hypocrites  these.  Only  think  of  those  two  lugging  hold  of 
my  arms  and  cramming  their  nonsense  into  me  that  I  may 
fight  Fox  for  their  purpose." 3 

1  Place  to  Wakefield,  March  25,  1814. 

2  James  Mill  to  Place,  October  14,  1814. 

3  Place  to  James  Mill,  December  10,  1814. 


SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL  111 

In  the  end  Place  did  succeed  in  converting  a  majority  of 
the  committee  to  his  plan,  Avhen  Allen  and  Fox  announced 
that  they  would  resign  if  the  vote  of  the  committee  was 
acted  upon.  They  could  of  course  sell  up  the  whole  in- 
stitution at  any  moment;  Place,  therefore,  rather  than 
destroy  what  good  was  being  done,  ceased  to  attend 
the  meetings,  and  in  the  summer  of  1815  his  name  was 
removed  by  Fox  from  the  committee. 

Meanwhile  the  West  London  Lancastrian  Association 
was  practically  dead.  The  school  which  the  Association 
had  hired  from  the  parent  society  was  given  back,  and 
rules  insisting  on  the  Bible  only  being  read  and  on  com- 
pulsory church-attendance  were  adopted.  Fox,  who  had 
killed  the  scheme,  rejoiced  over  his  own  zeal  in  the  cause 
of  religion,  and  called  the  Association  an  "abortion."'  Place, 
in  a  letter  to  Brougham,  retorts  that  "  any  fool  can  do  mis- 
chief, because  any  fool  can  by  sympathy  excite  the  bad 
passions  in  his  fellow-fools,  and  thus  Fox  has  been  enabled 
to  triumph."  l 

The  further  history  of  the  Chrestomathic  Higher  School 
project  is  easily  told.  Money,  in  spite  of  Place's  efforts, 
came  in  very  slowly.  The  estimated  cost  of  the  school 
building  was  about  .£4000,  and  by  1817  only  ^2500  had 
been  provided.  But  the  estimate  was  calculated  on  the 
assumption  that  Bentham  would  carry  out  his  promise  to 
allow  the  school  to  be  built  in  his  garden,  and  already,  in 
October  1817,  Mill  wrote  that  although  Bentham's  "eager- 
ness "  to  have  the  school  in  his  garden  "  was  originally 
very  great,"  and  he  was  still  "  quite  keen,"  yet  it  was  be- 
coming evident  that  he  would  not  continue  to  like  the 
idea,  and  that  "  there  are  a  multitude  of  disagreeables  con- 
nected with  it  of  which  he  will  not  at  present  allow  himself 
to  think,  but  which  will  swell  into  great  objections  here- 
after." 2  This  prophecy  was  exactly  fulfilled.  Bentham 
1  Place  to  Brougham,  November  23,  1814.  2  27,823  (181). 


112  SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL 

imposed  harder  and  harder  conditions,  and  in  1820,  after 
an  enormous  correspondence,  his  ofter  of  a  site  was  finally 
declined,  and  the  project  was  given  up. 

Three  years  later  Place  saw  another  chance  of  educa- 
tional work  in  the  proposal  to  found  a  London  Mechanics' 
Institute,  made  by  his  friend  Hodgskin  in  1823.  He  had 
now  handed  over  the  shop  at  Charing  Cross  to  his  son 
and  was  able  for  some  weeks  in  the  autumn  of  1823  to 
give  "  the  whole  of  his  time,  from  morning  to  night,"  to 
the  work  of  hunting  up  Trade  Union  secretaries  and 
"  houses  of  call,"  drafting  rules  and  circulars,  or  collecting 
subscriptions  from  his  political  acquaintances.1  By  Feb- 
ruary 1825  he  had  collected  over  £1500  out  of  the  £2000 
which  had  then  been  contributed.  There  were,  of  course, 
the  usual  difficulties.  The  working-men  suspected  that 
the  Institute  would  be  controlled  by  their  employers  for 
their  own  purposes,  and  passed  a  resolution  on  one  occasion 
against  any  request  being  made  for  donations  to  the  build- 
ing fund.  On  the  other  hand,  possible  donors  were  often 
equally  suspicious.  Place  gives,  for  instance,  an  account  of 
an  interview  with  Lord  Grosvenor  (afterwards  Marquis  of 
Westminster).  "  He  said  he  had  a  strong  desire  to  assist 
the  institution,  but  he  had  also  some  apprehension  that 
the  education  the  people  were  getting  would  make  them 
discontented  with  the  Government.  I  said  the  whole  mass 
of  the  people  were  discontented  with  the  Government,  and 
that  although  teaching  them  would  not  remove  their  dis- 
content, it  would  make  them  less  disposed  to  turbulence." 
.  .  .  He  said,  "  True,  but  we  must  take  care  of  ourselves." 2 
In  the  result  he  gave  nothing.  The  London  Mechanics'  Insti- 
tute was,  however,  more  successful  than  the  Chrestomathic 
school.  At  the  first  set  of  lectures,  in  March  1 824,  Place 
writes  to  Burdett,  describing  his  joy  at  seeing  "  from  800 
to  900  clean,  respectable-looking  mechanics  paying  most 
1  27,823  (244,  245).  *  27,823  (278). 


SCHOOLS   FOR   ALL  113 

marked  attention  "  to  a  lecture  on  chemistry.1  As  years 
went  on  the  Institute,  under  Dr.  Birkbeck's  superintend- 
ence, steadily  developed ;  and  at  this  moment,  under  the 
name  of  the  "Birkbeck,"  it  is  one  of  the  most  useful 
educational  agencies  in  London.2 

1  Place  to  Sir  F.  Burdett,  May  i,  1824.     27,823  (337). 

2  Place  states  that  his  own  name  never  appeared  in  print  in  connec- 
tion with  the  Institute,  but  in  the  report  of  the  first  anniversary  dinner 
it  is  mentioned  that  his  health  was  drunk  as  one  of  the  founders  of  the 
institution,  the  chairman  describing  him  "  as  a  most  useful  auxiliary 
in   the   formation   of   the   Society."       See   the   Report  preserved    in 
27,824  (55). 


CHAPTER  V 

WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,    1815-30 

ON  July  15,  1815,  Napoleon  surrendered  at  Rochefort,  and 
the  long  war  which  had  covered  the  whole  of  Place's  political 
life  was  at  an  end.  Peace,  however,  brought  with  it  social 
conditions  even  worse  than  those  which  had  resulted  from 
war  prices  and  war  taxation.  From  the  beginning  of  1816 
England  wras  visited  by  an  unexampled  stagnation  of  trade. 
"  The  poor,"  said  Brand  in  the  House  of  Commons  on  March 
28,  1816,  "in  many  cases  have  abandoned  their  own  resi- 
dences. Whole  parishes  have  been  deserted,  and  the  crowd 
of  paupers  increasing  in  numbers  as  they  go  from  parish  to 
parish,  spread  wider  and  wider  this  awful  desolation." l  In 
May  came  the  agricultural  hunger  riots  at  Ely.  In  July 
there  were  "  distress  meetings  "  attended  by  the  royal  dukes 
and  the  magnates  of  the  Church.  The  trade  depression  was 
followed  by  one  of  the  worst  of  recorded  harvests.  "  The 
state  of  the  weather  and  crops,"  wrote  Jarnes  Mill  to  Place 
on  August  26,  1816,  "alarms  me.  There  will  be  no  flour 
in  the  ear,  no  work  for  the  people,  and  scarcity  will  pro- 
duce an  amount  of  misery  which  the  heart  aches  to  think 
of.  How  many  a  lovely  child  and  meritorious  man  and 
woman  will  perish  in  all  the  miseries  of  want !  A  curse — a 
tenfold  curse  upon  the  villains  by  whom  such  scenes  are 
prepared."  On  October  2  Place  wrote  to  Mill :  "  London  is 
in  a  sad  state ;  there  are  more  people  unemployed  than  was 
ever  known  at  the  same  time  of  the  year,  and  many  more 

1  Hansard,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  671. 

114 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30          115 

will  soon  be  dismissed.  The  ensuing  winter  will  be  dread- 
ful. Four-fifths  of  all  the  tailors  are  out  of  work,  and  the 
remaining  fifth,  though  they  pay  a  shilling  a  day  out  of 
their  wages,  cannot  save  the  mass  from  starving.  They  are 
actually  starving,  and  many  of  them  must  perish  from  want 
of  food." 

Next  year,  on  June  4,  1817,  Place  wrote  to  Thomas 
Hodgskin  in  Italy :  "  What  you  say  of  the  miseries  on  the 
north-eastern  side  of  Italy  may  be  nearly  paralleled  by 
some  places  in  England.  Take,  as  an  example,  that  Mr. 
Wakefield  travelling  with  another  person  from  Worcester 
towards  Wales  overtook  many  groups  of  distressed  people ; 
and  upon  inquiry  where  they  were  going,  was  told  that 
they  had  heard  of  workers  being  wanted  in  Wales,  and 
were  going  thither.  They  were  composed  of  young  and 
middle-aged  men,  who  were  so  worn  with  hunger  that 
many  of  them  could  hardly  walk.  He  and  his  friend  gave 
a  shilling  to  each  group,  which  amounted  to  eighteen 
shillings.  Hundreds  have  died,  thousands  will  die  of 
starvation.  Comparing  the  quantity  of  business  done 
now  with  the  quantity  done  four  years  ago,  I  do  not  believe 
that  more  than  one-third  of  the  people  can  find  constant 
employment." 

As  long  as  the  war  lasted  any  resistance  to  the  Govern- 
ment had  been  of  necessity  local  and  spasmodic.  A 
Radical  member  might  be  elected  for  Westminster,  or  a 
few  country  labourers  might  burn  ricks  or  break  machines, 
but  any  attempt  at  a  national  agitation  for  a  political 
object  could  always  be  put  down  by  the  cry  of  treason. 
With  the  peace,  however,  came  the  first  signs  of  a  general 
democratic  movement.  In  the  winter  of  1814-15,  during 
the  few  months  between  the  first  Peace  of  Paris  and  the 
Hundred  Days,  old  Major  Cartwright  formed  an  associa- 
tion called  the  Hampden  Club,  and  in  April  1815  sent 
printed  petitions  all  over  England  for  signature,  asking 


116          WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,   1815-30 

for  annual  parliaments,  equal  electoral  districts,  and  the 
suffrage  for  all  direct  taxpayers.1 

In  the  following  year  the  movement  came  into  the  much 
more  capable  hands  of  William  Cobbett.  In  November 
1815  Cobbett  lowered  the  price  of  his  Political  Register 
from  a  shilling  and  a  halfpenny  to  twopence.  The  "  Two- 
penny Trash,"  as  it  came  to  be  called,  at  once  acquired 
an  enormous  influence,  and  through  it  Cobbett,  with  his 
friend  "  Orator  Hunt,"  began  to  crystallise  the  widespread 
discontent  into  a  definite  demand  for  parliamentary 
reform. 

In  the  national  agitation  of  1816-17  Place  took  little 
part.  He  was,  till  the  summer  of  1817,  still  engaged  with 
his  business,  and  his  leisure  was  largely  given  to  that 
enormous  mass  of  reading  which  the  note-books  for  those 
years  record.  When  in  1814  his  associates  in  West- 
minster countenanced  the  charge  that  he  was  a  Govern- 
ment spy,2  he  had  determined  to  withdraw  from  open 
political  work,  and  to  this  determination  he  kept  as  long 
as  he  could.  Writing  of  December  1814  he  says  :  "I  was 
now  freed  from  all  connection  with  public  politics.  In 
this  state  I  intended  to  remain,  not  inactive,  not  useless. 
.  .  .  With  Mr.  Brooks  and  his  coadjutors  all  co-operation 
was  at  an  end.  ...  I  visited  nobody.  I  was,  as  I  have 
always  been,  desirous  to  promote  and  willing  to  assist  in 
measures  likely  to  increase  the  knowledge  of  the  com- 
monalty, and  ready  therefore  to  co-operate  with  any  man 
or  any  body  of  men  for  this  desirable  and  important 
object.  But  I  did  not  intend  to  mix  again  in  politics 
beyond  writing  occasionally  in  a  newspaper,  or  consulting 
and  advising  privately  with  particular  persons." 3  His 
whole  temperament  was  opposed  to  the  loose  -  tongued 
vituperation,  the  reckless  use  of  second-hand  facts,  the 

1  27,809  (8) ;  c/.  also  ante,  p.  62.  2  See  p.  56. 

3  27,809  (5). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30          117 

appeals  to  every  form  of  unthinking  prejudice,  which 
were  the  tools  of  Cobbett's  trade.1  Indeed,  wherever  Place 
mentions  Cobbett  it  is  generally  with  some  phrase  like  "  im- 
pudent mountebank  " 2  or  "  unprincipled  cowardly  bully."  3 

The  agitation  carried  on  by  Cobbett  and  Hunt  from 
1816  to  1819  was  addressed  to  the  working-classes  only, 
and  aimed  at  separating  them  entirely  from  the  whole 
body  of  well-to-do  politicians.  Place  believed  that  such 
a  separation  must  of  necessity  lead  to  failure.  Cobbett, 
he  says,  was  "  too  ignorant  to  see  that  the  common  people 
must  ever  be  imbecile  .  .  .  when  not  encouraged  and 
supported  by  others  who  have  money  and  influence." 4 

In  the  spring  of  1 8 1 6  Place  seems  to  have  thought  that 
the  "  money  and  influence  "  of  those  Whig  Radicals  who 
had  drawn  their  political  ideas  to  some  extent  from 
Bentham  might  be  used  to  help  the  Reformers  in  West- 
minster. Of  these,  Henry  Brougham  was  by  far  the 
ablest,  and  Place  hoped  that  Brougham  might  be  induced 
to  separate  himself  from  the  regular  Whig  opposition.5 

1  Place  first  met  Cobbett  after  the  Westminster  election  of  1 807,  and 
the  two  remained  pretty  good  friends  for  some  years.     In  January  1810 
Cobbett  was  prosecuted  for  an  article  in  the  Register  against  flogging  in 
the  army,  and  Place  helped  with  the  preparation  of  his  defence.     He 
describes  how,  when  they  met  at  the  Crown  Office  to  arrange  for  the 
picking  of  the  jury.  Cobbett  "sprung  from  his  chair,  threw  his  hands 
above  his  head,  and  paced  the  room  damning  and  blasting  the  Attorney- 
General."     At  the  trial  ''lie  made  a  long  defence,  a  bad  defence,  and  his 
delivery  of  it  and  his  demeanour  were  even  worse  than  his  matter.     He 
was  not  at  all  master  of  himself,  and  in  some  parts  where  he  meant  to 
produce  great  effect  he  produced  laughter.     So  ludicrous  was  he  in  one 
part  that  the  jury,  the  judge,  and  the  audience  all  laughed  at  him.     I  was 
thoroughly  ashamed  of  him,  and  ashamed  of  myself  for  being  seen  with 
him.  ...  I  never  saw  Cobbett  but  once  after  his  trial.     He  called  on 
me  in  a  few  days,  but  I  was  unable  to  congratulate  him  on  any  part  of 
his  conduct.     I  never  spoke  to  him  afterwards."    ("Autobiography.'") 

2  Article  in  Artisan's  Newspaper. 

3  27,809  (17).  4  27,809  (17). 

5  "  I  wished  that  Mr.  Brougham  might  be  detached  from  the  faction 
and  make  common  cause  with  the  Reformers,"  27,809  (26). 


118          WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

Cochrane's  father,  Lord  Dundonald,  was  ill,  and  in  the 
event  of  his  death  Cochrane  would  vacate  his  seat  by 
becoming  a  Scotch  Peer.  No  one  had  been  suggested  for 
the  seat  except  Major  Cartwright,  "who  was  utterly  in- 
competent, and  for  whom  the  electors  would  not  vote."1 
On  March  20,  1816,  Brougham  made  a  speech  in  the 
House  on  the  Salaries  of  the  two  Secretaries  of  the 
Admiralty,  which  greatly  offended  Ministers  and  as  greatly 
pleased  the  Reformers.  "  I  was  pleased  with  it,2  and  on 
the  23rd  wrote  a  letter  to  him  encouraging  him  to  proceed 
in  the  course  he  had  at  length  taken.  ...  I  was  desirous 
Brougham  should  if  possible  be  kept  up  to  the  mark 
with  a  view  to  his  becoming  member  for  Westminster."3 
"  Some  pains  were  taken  to  ascertain  if  he  could  be  re- 
lied upon  to  maintain  the  right  of  the  people  to  annual 
parliaments,  and  suffrage  as  extensive  as  direct  taxation. 
This  having  been  ascertained,  yet  not  in  quite  so  openly 
and  satisfactory  a  manner  as  it  was  desirable,  ...  it  be- 
came necessary  that  he  should  be  made  known  to  the 
electors." 4 

But  Brougham  was  by  no  means  prepared  to  sacrifice 
his  political  future  for  the  sake  of  the  democratic  idea. 

"Several  good  opportunities  were  offered  him  to  mix 
in  a  proper  way  with  the  electors.  He  availed  himself  of 
none  of  them.  .  .  .  He,  a  lawyer,  mistook  the  law,  and 
travelled  out  of  his  way  to  justify  Ministers  for  having 
illegally  transported  Bonaparte  to  St  Helena.  .  .  .  He 
said  that  no  man  dissented  from  the  grant  of  £60,000 
to  the  Princess  Charlotte  for  an  outfit,  and  £60,000  per 
annum  to  her  for  marrying  a  German  soldier  to  breed 

1  27,809  (13). 

2  Twelve  years  later  Place  wrote  :  "  I  have  just  now  read  the  speech 
(December  14,  1829).    It  does  by  no  means  appear  to  deserve  the  praise 
I  bestowed  on  it,  nor  scarcely  any  praise  at  all,"  27,809  (14). 

3  27,809  (13). 

4  Place  to  Bennet,  October  12,  1816.     See  27,809  (29). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,    1815-30          119 

public  beggars,  while  the  truth  really  was,  and  is,  that 
scarcely  a  man  who  was  likely  to  have  voted  for  him 
thought  that  a  single  shilling  should  either  have  been 
given  to  her  or  added  to  her  then  immense  income." l 

By  October  1816  Place  had  made  up  his  mind.  Early 
in  that  month  he  was  shown  a  letter  from  Brougham 
asking  "  what  chance  there  was  of  his  being  returned  for 
Westminster  in  the  event  of  a  dissolution."  -  He  answered 
by  describing  Brougham's  omissions  and  commissions,  and 
declaring  that  "  the  electors  .  .  .  say  if  Brougham  is  look- 
ing to  the  Court  for  preferment  he  has  been  consistent, 
but  then  he  ought  not  to  expect  to  be  taken  up  by  the 
people." 3 

It  was  just  at  the  time  when  he  determined  to  abandon 
the  idea  of  Brougham's  candidature  that  Place  had  what 
seems  to  have  been  his  first  interview  with  Orator  Hunt. 
He  wrote  to  James  Mill  on  September  2,  1816:  "Hunt 
has  been  with  me.  He  is  a  pretty  sample  of  an  ignorant, 
turbulent,  mischief-making  fellow,  a  highly  dangerous  one 
in  turbulent  times.  It  Avas  not  until  he  had  been  two 
hours  with  me  that  I  discovered  the  whole  of  his  reasons 
for  calling  upon  me.  I  should  not  have  known  them  at 
all,  had  he  not  talked  himself  into  full  confidence,  and 
then  supposed  it  was  I  who  reposed  it  in  him.  .  .  .  He 
got  warmed  and  '  as  foolish  as  a  waggon-horse,'  and  told 
me  all  he  knew  in  relation  to  me  and  Burdett ;  said  it 
was  Wardle  who  had  persuaded  Burdett  while  in  the 
Tower  that  I  was  a  spy :  that  he  was  also  persuaded  by 
Wardle ;  that  Burdett  had  made  a  mistake  ;  and  if  he  had 
called  me  a  spy,  I  had  called  him  a  coward  and  a  rascal, 
and  it  was  time  this  was  put  an  end  to ;  ...  that  an 
attempt  had  been  made  to  put  the  Whigs  upon  West- 

1  Place  to  Bennet,  October  12,  1816.     See  27,809  (29,  30). 

2  Place  to  Hodgskin,  May  30,  1817. 

3  Place  to  Bennet,  October  12,  1816.     27,809  (30). 


120  WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

minster,  and  that  Brougham  had  been  brought  to  the 
Crown  and  Anchor  Tavern  by  one  Mill,  a  Scotchman, 
who  afterwards  turned  Westminster  up  because  Brougham 
had  been  rejected.  Place.  '  What  do  you  know  of  Mill  ? ' 
Hunt  'I  never  saw  the  man  in  my  life,  but  I  am  told 
he  is  one  of  the  Edinburgh  Reviewers.'  Place.  '  And  what 
of  that?'  Hunt.  'Why,  it  is  a  damned  rascally  review, 
and  has  done  a  deal  of  mischief.'  Place.  'And  some 
good,  I  hope.'  Hunt.  'I  never  see  it.'  ...  I  told  Hunt 
it  was  miserable  to  see  the  avidity  with  which  they  (he 
and  his  political  friends)  sought  to  cut  each  other's  throats, 
and  that  it  would  require  nothing  more  in  days  of  turbu- 
lence, whenever  they  should  arise,  than  for  those  who  hate 
the  people  to  stimulate  them  to  destroy  one  another,  which 
would  be  as  easy  as  putting  yeast  to  the  dough  to  make 
it  rise.  .  .  .  Hunt  says  his  mode  of  acting  is  to  dash  at 
good  points,  and  to  care  for  no  one ;  that  he  will  mix  with 
no  committee,  or  any  party ;  he  will  act  by  himself ;  that 
he  does  not  intend  to  affront  any  one,  but  cares  not  who  is 
offended." 

On  January  28,  1817,  Parliament  met.  By  this  time 
Hunt  was  the  most  conspicuous  figure  in  the  Reform 
movement.  He  had  presided  over  a  great  meeting  in 
the  Spa  Fields  on  November  15,  1816,  which  had  been 
adjourned  to  December  2,  and  the  second  meeting  had 
been  followed  by  an  absurd  attack  on  the  Tower,  organised 
by  a  few  physical-force  revolutionists  under  the  direction 
of  a  Government  spy.  In  January  1817  Hunt  and  Major 
Cartwright  induced  Burdett  to  lend  his  name  to  what 
Place  calls  the  silly  plan  of  collecting  some  seventy 
deputies  from  various  towns  in  England  to  present  peti- 
tions on  the  first  day  of  the  Session.  Burdett  seems  to 
have  become  alarmed  and  drove  straight  to  Parliament 
without  taking  any  notice  of  Hunt  and  the  deputies.1 
i  See  27,809  (37). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,    1815-30          121 

But  enough  occurred  to  give  the  Government  an  excuse 
for  repression,  and  in  particular  "as  the  Regent  went  to 
open  Parliament  some  groans  and  hisses  were  heard,  and 
on  his  return  a  pane  of  glass  in  the  State  coach  was 
broken." l 

On  February  3  a  message  from  the  Regent  on  the 
disturbed  state  of  the  country  was  sent  with  a  sealed 
bag  of  papers  to  the  two  Houses.  The  Government  and 
their  organs  in  the  press  at  once  set  themselves  deliber- 
ately to  excite  public  terror.2  "  The  ministerial  newspapers 
were  indefatigable  in  magnifying  every  movement  into 
treason  and  sedition.  All  the  talent,  all  the  acrimony, 
all  the  malignity  and  falsehood  which  the  most  venal 
and  corrupt  and  base  amongst  the  basest  of  mankind — 
as  some  of  the  fellows  connected  with  the  newspapers 
are — had  their  full  swing  against  the  reformers.  Every 
loyal  slave,  every  one  whose  situation  in  corporations  was 
gainful,  or  who  expected  to  gain,  was  active  in  his  way."  3 

"The  Castlereagh  administration  ...  in  time  of  peace 
adopted  the  means  "  which  Pitt  "  had  used  in  time  of  war. 
They  took  advantage  of  the  general  distress  and  partial 
discontent  of  the  people,  and  employed  spies  to  excite 
tumults,  to  form  plots,  to  foment  sedition,  and  to  produce 
treason.  .  .  .  Every  plot,  real  or  imaginary,  every  movement 
of  the  populace  which  could  be  instigated,  every  paltry 
penny  publication  (some  of  which  were  their  own)  which 
could  be  made  to  talk  seditiously,  as  the  nonsense  they 
contained  was  called,  were  magnified  into  serious,  seditious, 
outrageous  tumults,  horrid  and  widely  extended  treasons, 
shaking  the  very  foundations  of  the  Government  and 
threatening  its  overthrow.  And  even  the  poor  harmless 
Spenceans,  with  their  library  consisting  of  an  old  Bible 

1  27,809  (49). 

2  See  "  Sir  R.  Peel  from  his  Private  Correspondence,"  by  C.  S.  Parker 
<London,  1891),  8vo,  pp.  234-237.  3  27,809  (34). 


122          WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

and  three  or  four  small  publications,  a  high-priest  under 
the  name  of  librarian,  and  some  forty  or  fifty  followers, 
were  held  out  as  a  bugbear  to  all  men  of  landed  property, 
who  were  to  succumb  to  these  formidable  and  numerous 
speculators,  and  (be)  compelled  to  resign  their  lands  to 
the  parishes  for  the  use  of  the  whole  community." l 

"  Any  administration  which  is  base  enough  may  in  times 
of  severe  distress  have  as  many  plots  and  conspiracies  as 
it  pleases.  There  are  always  reckless,  desperate  men  eager 
to  listen  to  tales  from  spies  set  on  to  impose  upon  them. 
There  are  others  again  so  ignorant,  that  they  may  be  made 
to  believe  almost  anything  which  a  cunning  fellow  may 
project  under  the  pretence  of  bettering  their  condition. 
Such  men  may  be  led  on  imperceptibly  to  themselves  to 
lengths  they  never  contemplated  going,  and  to  conse- 
quences which  they  could  hardly  at  any  time  appreciate."  2 

The  Whigs  in  Parliament  were  more  concerned  to 
prove  that  they  had  no  dealings  with  the  Radicals  than 
to  oppose  coercion.  Some  of  them  voted  for  the  suspen- 
sion of  Habeas  Corpus,  and  for  the  "  Gagging  Act "  which 
followed,  and  all  of  them  by  their  abuse  of  the  Reform 
leaders  helped  to  encourage  the  Government.  Place  wrote 
to  his  friend  Hodgskin  on  May  30,  1817  :  "At  the  opening 
of  the  Session,  as  no  doubt  you  know,  the  Regent  was 
hooted  at  and  pelted,  and  his  Ministers,  taking  advantage 
of  this,  if  they  did  not  themselves  cause  it,  proposed  a 
suspension  of  the  Habeas  Corpus  Act." 

"  At  the  same  moment  petitions  from  all  parts  for  reform 
of  Parliament  were  presented,  and  they  ultimately  amounted 
to  as  many  as  would  have  filled  a  waggon,  and  were  signed 
by  at  least  a  million  of  men.  .  .  .  Brougham  came  to  England 
just  before  the  Parliament  met,  and  finding  himself  dis- 
appointed for  Westminster,  knowing,  too,  that  unless  he 
made  a  strong  party  among  the  Whigs  he  would  not  be  in 

2  27,809  (44-46),  see  pp.  61,  62.  -  27,809  (70). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,    1815-30          123 

the  next  Parliament,  he  at  once  took  a  most  decided  part 
against  the  petitioners  for  reform.  Their  petition  was 
for  annual  parliaments,  and  pretty  generally  for  universal 
suffrage.  Brougham  called  them  all  manner  of  vile 
names,  and  imputed  to  them  all  manner  of  vile  motives 
— they  were  ignorant,  deluded,  vile,  mischievous  incen- 
diaries, &c.  &c.  .  .  . 

"  The  Ministers  found  by  far  the  best  support  for  the  vile 
measures  they  contemplated  in  the  Whigs,  who  by  their 
abuse  of  the  people  gave  encouragement  to  the  Ministers 
to  go  much  further  than  they  themselves  contemplated. 
And  these  dirty  Whigs  who  had  been  vigour  itself  against 
the  claims  of  the  people  were  perfectly  imbecile  against  the 
abominable  measures  of  the  Ministers,  who  have  all  the 
power  and  all  the  law  in  their  own  hands  to  imprison 
whom  they  please,  for  any  time  they  please,  at  their  own 
will  and  pleasure,  and  without  any  accusation  even." l 

Of  the  coercive  laws  of  1817,  Place  was  never  able  to 
speak  with  patience.  Ten  years  later  he  wrote :  "  Knowing 
as  I  do  how  much  it  is  in  the  power  of  Government  to 
promote  the  instruction  and  well-being  of  the  common 
people,  how  much  the  wealth  and  happiness  of  the  whole 
community  might  be  increased  by  proper  conduct  on  the 
part  of  the  Government,  and  seeing  that  instead  of  per- 
forming these  important  duties  it  busies  itself  in  matters 
as  mean  as  they  are  mischievous  and  as  unjust  as  they 
are  cruel,  I  feel  quite  unable  to  satisfy  myself,  and  I 
despair  of  being  able  adequately  (to  express)  correct  ideas 
of  the  singular  baseness,  the  detestable  infamy,  of  their 
equally  mean  and  murderous  conduct."-  And  again, 
'•  They  who  passed  the  Gagging  Acts  in  1817  and  the  Six 
Acts  in  1819  were  such  miscreants,  that  could  they  have 
acted  thus  in  a  well-ordered  community  they  would  all 
have  been  hanged,  and  when  I  say  this,  I  may  add  that  it 
1  Place  to  Hodgskin,  May  30,  1817.  -  27,809  (69). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

would  have  been  no  more  than  they  deserved.  I  do  not 
think  that  I  say  anything  harshly."1 

His  anger  was  the  greater  because  he  believed  at  that 
time  that  the  suffering  of  the  people  was  solely  due  to  the 
misgovernment  of  the  ruling  classes.  "  By  an  unvaried 
and  unqualified  support  of  all  the  violent  measures  of 
Ministers,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  they  have  reduced 
the  mass  of  the  nation  to  a  state  of  poverty,  of  dependence, 
of  starvation ;  until,  alarmed  for  themselves,  they  have 
established  soup-kettles  to  dole  out  broth  in  scanty  por- 
tions to  the  industrious  people  who,  but  for  their  conduct, 
would  have  been  living  as  became  men — independent  men 
— on  their  own  earnings." 2 

Place's  share  in  the  fight  against  the  Gagging  Act  was 
carried  on  by  means  of  a  little  paper  called  Hone's  Register. 
In  January  1817  Colbett's  Register  was  selling  50,000  a 
week  of  its  twopenny  edition,  and  Place  offered  to  help 
William  Hone,  a  needy  bookseller,  who  was  afterwards  to 
become  famous,3  by  writing  weekly  a  similar  paper  for  him. 
The  second  number  of  the  Register,  published  on  February 
8,  1817,  contained  Place's  reply  to  Brougham,  entitled 
"Universal  Suffrage  and  Annual  Parliaments  against  Mr. 
Brougham,  and  the  Whigs."  And  in  a  special  fourth 
number,  entitled  the  Register  Extraordinary,  on  February 
17,  1 8 1 7,  he  printed,  from  a  copy  corrected  by  Brougham 
himself,  a  report  of  the  speech  delivered  by  Brougham  at 

1  Place  to  Colonel  Jones,  November  5,  1829. 

2  27,809  (52).    Twelve  years  later  he  made  a  note  against  this  passage, 
which  shows  the  effect  which  his  complete  acceptance  of  the  Malthusian 
economics  had  then  had  upon  his  social  views.    "  Many  who  are  now  as 
well  as  myself  convinced  that  the  condition  of  the  working  people  .  .  . 
was  almost  wholly  attributable  to  the  too  rapid  increase  of  population, 
concurred  in  the  statement"  (27,809,  51(6),  dated  Dec.  26,  1829). 

3  When  Hone  was  three  times  tried  and  acquitted  for  blasphemy  in 
December  1817  Place  gave  ^5  to  a  subscription  raised  on  his  behalf. 
See  The  proceedings  at  the  Public  Meeting  .  .  .  for  the  purpose  of  enabling 
Wm.  Hone  to  surmount  the  difficulties  in  which  lie  has  been  placed,  ii-c. 
(London,  1818),  8vo.     List  of  Subscribers,  p.  21. 


WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,   1815-30          125 

the  City  of  London  Tavern  in  June  1814,  when  he  expected 
to  become  the  Reform  candidate  for  Westminster.  "  Having 
determined  to  print  the  Register  Extraordinary,"  he  wrote, 
"  I  took  care  to  let  Mr.  Brougham  know  not  only  of  my 
determination,  but  also  the  matter  it  would  contain.  This 
perplexed  him,  so  he  sent  for  Mr.  Mill  and  advised  him  to 
come  to  me  and  if  possible  prevent  the  publication.  Mr. 
Mill  came,  and  with  his  usual  honesty  told  me  what  had 
passed.  I  replied  that  if  Mr.  Brougham  would  assure  me 
that  he  would  desist  from  attacking  the  Reformers,  and  say 
as  many  words  in  the  House  as  should  plainly  indicate  his 
hostility  was  at  an  end,  the  Register  should  not  be  printed. 
I  heard  no  more  on  the  subject.  On  Monday  the  Register 
was  published,  and  several  thousands  were  sold  in  the  space 
of  a  few  hours."  l 

After  the  appearance  of  the  Register,  Brougham  attacked 
the  Reformers  more  fiercely  than  before.  Burdett  "  being 
out  of  favour  with  the  Reformers,"  because  of  his  conduct 
at  the  opening  of  Parliament,  Cochrane  stood  alone  in  the 
Commons,  and  "  the  speech-making,  gabbling  Whigs,  with 
Mr.  Brougham  for  leader,  anticipated  no  difficulty  in  putting 
him  down."2  To  Cochrane,  therefore,  Place  handed  a 
letter,  in  which  Brougham  had  avowed  himself  a  supporter 
of  many  of  the  doctrines  which  he  was  now  denouncing, 
and  Cochrane  read  it  in  the  House.3 

1  27,809(56).  See  Hone's  Register,  No.  2,  '•  Universal  Suffrage  and 
Annual  Parliaments  against  Mr.  Brougham  and  the  Whigs,"  and  the 
Register  Extraordinary,  No.  4.  '-'  27,809  (50). 

3  Hansard,  vol.  xxxv.  p.  370,  February  17,  1817.  Place  only  wrote 
five  numbers  of  Hone's  Register.  "My  other  avocations  would  not 
permit  me  to  write  Weekly  Registers,  and  I  was  obliged  to  desist.  I 
was  conducting  a  considerable  business  at  the  time,  and  had  with  diffi- 
culty obtained  as  much  leisure  as  enabled  me  to  attend  to  passing  events, 
to  listen  to  people  who  called  on  me,  and  superintend  the  printing  of 
the  Register.  The  crisis  was  now  past,  the  mischief  to  the  people  was 
certain,  the  Whigs  were  scoffed  at  by  Ministers  and  despised  by  the 
people  ;  I  had  put  Hone's  Register  fairly  on  its  legs  ;  the  profit  was  con- 
siderable, and  I  was  in  hopes  he  would  have  been  able  to  continue  it, 


126          WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

The  harvest  of  1817  was  comparatively  successful,  and 
for  a  few  months  the  distress  was  relieved.  Place  consoled 
himself  with  the  reflection  that  the  campaign  against 
political  liberty  had  failed  of  its  mam  object.  It  had  not, 
as  the  Pitt  and  Grenville  Acts  of  1795  had  done,  crushed 
out  the  will  to  resist.  "The  people  had  become  too  well 
informed  to  be  deceived." x 

"  Notwithstanding  the  impediments  thrown  in  the  way  of 
the  people  in  their  search  for  knowledge — notwithstanding 
the  Acts  passed  for  the  very  purpose  of  strengthening  the 
hands  of  Ministers — notwithstanding  the  immense  increase 
of  the  standing  army  in  time  of  peace — notwithstanding 
the  excessive  number  of  persons  who  are  more  or  less 
dependent  on  the  Government  —  notwithstanding  the 
monstrous  amount  of  money  of  which  it  had  the  distribu- 
tion— notwithstanding  the  increased  and  increasing  influ- 
ence and  patronage  it  possessed,  its  actual  power  was 
much  less  than  that  which  Mr.  Pitt  had. " 2 

But  the  events  of  1817  intensified  the  disgust  with 
which  Place  regarded  the  whole  body  of  politicians  in 
Parliament.  He  wrote  of  this  time:  "Nothing  but  an 
acquaintance  with  such  men,  nothing  but  hearing  from 
their  own  mouths  the  loose  notions  they  entertain  on 
almost  all  subjects,  could  convince  those  who  only  hear 
of  them  in  connection  with  public  matters  how  very  little 
they  know,  and  how  very  little  these  idle  persons  can  be 
prevailed  upon  to  take  the  trouble  necessary  to  become 
acquainted  with  any  important  matter  of  politics  and 
legislation.  They  are  proud,  conceited,  and  overbearing. 
They  represent  their  own  money  or  their  patrons.  They 
look  towards  the  Government  as  the  means  of  providing 
for  themselves  or  their  relations.  They  are  not  account- 

and  by  its  means  have  found  a  maintenance  for  his  family  ;  to  this  he 
was  unequal — the  sale  soon  declined.  The  work  lingered  on  till  October 
25,  and  then  expired."  27,809  (57). 

i  27,809  (46).  2  27,809  (47,  48). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,    1815-30  127 

able  to  any  but  their  patrons,  and  are  as  different  from 
what  a  set  of  men  elected  by  the  people,  and  accountable 
to  the  people,  would  be  as  it  is  possible  to  conceive." l 

At  the  same  time  he  noticed  that  the  excitement  of  the 
time  was  leading  men  outside  Parliament  to  do  serious  in- 
tellectual work.     In  a  letter  written  at  the  time  he  said : 
<(  The  bad  conduct  of  the  Whigs  produced  one  effect,  it 
called  forth  the  talents  of  many  men  who  at  once  showed 
the  law  and  customs  of  Parliament  in  former  times,  and 
the  reasonableness  of  the  people's  petitions,  and,  of  course, 
exposed  the  folly  and  ignorance  of  those  who  in  the  two 
Houses  had  gone  out  of  their  way  to  abuse  them.     It  is 
surprising  that  not  one  man  in  either  House  knew  enough 
of  the  history  of  his  country  to  do  it  justice,  and  thus  all 
the  knowledge  and  all  the  learning  has  been  exhibited 
out  of  the  Houses.     Several  very  able  treatises  have  been 
published,  and  a  great  sensation  has  been  produced  by  a 
book  in  favour  of  universal  suffrage  and  annual  Parlia- 
ments written  by  Mr.  Bentham.2     Men  have  appeared  as 
writers  who  were  never  before  heard  of,  and  have  pro- 
duced works  full  of  good  matter,  good  style,  and   good 
thinking,  exhibiting  altogether  a  diffusion  of  knowledge 
far  surpassing  any  former  period.     On  this  rest  our  hopes, 
on   this   rest  the  fears  of  the  legitimates,  who  seem  to 
imagine  that  in  proportion  as  the  people  grow  wiser  and 
more  capable  of  enjoying  freedom  they  should  be  deprived 
of  it.     I  have  no  fears  for  the  result ;  the  corruption  will 
destroy  its  own  means  of  corrupting,  and  then  we  shall 
start  fair  again,  with  full  scope  for  our  knowledge  and 
courage." 3 

In  the  summer  of  1817  Place  determined  to  help  in 
this  work  of  political  education  by  gathering  the  materials 
for  a  History  of  Parliament.  "  In  consequence  of  the 

1  27,809  (27).  -  See  p.  84. 

3  Place  to  Hodgskin,  May  30,  1817. 


128          WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

agitation  of  the  question  of  Parliaments  and  the  interest 
a  very  large  proportion  of  the  people  took  in  the  dis- 
cussion, I  set  to  work  to  prove  from  authentic  documents 
the  practice  and  the  law  of  Parliament,  and  shall,  I  hope, 
set  the  dispute  at  rest.  It  is  a  laborious  job,  but  from 
being  a  lazy  fellow  lying  in  bed  till  eight  or  nine  o'clock 
hi  the  morning,  I  have  risen  at  six,  and  work  as  hard  as 
I  can  till  breakfast-time  and  from  tea-time  in  the  after- 
noon to  ten  or  eleven  at  night. 

"You  will  justly  remark,  what  have  the  usages  of 
antiquity  to  do  with  the  reasonableness  of  our  present 
claims  ?  why  the  customs  of  a  rude  age  govern  us  now  ? 
What  we  ought  to  desire  is  that  we  should  adopt  such 
an  arrangement  as  may  be  in  accordance  with  our  im- 
proved state  of  knowledge.  And  this  would  be  conclusive 
if  numbers  were  not  led  more  by  authority  than  by  reason. 
When  Lords  Grey  and  Holland  and  others  in  high  stations 
assert  roundly  that  the  custom  was  so-and-so,  and,  mis- 
applying the  word  Right,  tell  us  that  the  people  have  no 
rigid  to  certain  things  they  claim  to  exercise,  and  no 
right  to  certain  laws,  because  they  did  not  formerly 
exist,  ...  it  becomes  necessary  for  some  one  to  stop  the 
mouths  of  such  preachers  by  showing  them  they  are 
teaching  false  doctrine." l 

But  the  mass  of  materials  which  resulted  from  this 
study2  was  never  turned  into  a  book,  and  Place  was 
forced  to  devote  himself  for  the  next  two  years  to  the 
daily  business  of  political  organisation. 

Between  1807  and  1818  there  was  no  contested  election 
for  Westminster.  In  the  three  years  1818-1820  there 
was  one  every  year.  The  first  of  these  came  at  the 
general  election  of  1818.  Cochrane  had  accepted  the 
command  of  the  Chilian  fleet,  and  Burdett  and  the  West- 

1  Place  to  Hodgskin,  May  30,  1817. 

2  See  them  in  27,853-27,855. 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,  1815-30  129 

minster  Committee  chose  Douglas  Kinnaird  as  the  second 
Reform  candidate.  Place  helped  in  the  preliminary  discus- 
sions, but  refused  to  take  any  part  in  the  actual  business 
of  the  election.  "I  went  into  it  until  a  public  meeting 
was  called  at  the  Crown  and  Anchor,  and  then,  as  I  had 
told  those  who  were  acting,  I  withdrew  from  all  public 
interference."1  He  had  not  yet  forgiven  the  committee 
for  the  calumnies  of  1814,  and  already  felt  the  incon- 
venience in  politics  of  a  reputation  for  industry.  "  I 
objected,"  he  wrote  in  1816,  "to  become  active  among 
men  who  invariably  left  me  to  do  all  the  business,  and 
when  I  had  done  it  found  fault  not  with  the  business,  but 
with  me,  that  when  they  could  do  without  me  I  was  a  spy, 
and  when  they  could  not  do  without  me  I  was  a  fine 
fellow." 2 

While  Place  remained  in  his  tent  the  committee  got 
into  all  sorts  of  difficulties.  Cobbett  had  been  carrying 
on  for  the  last  six  months  a  disreputable  quarrel  with 
Burdett  on  money  matters.  Burdett  was  lazy  and  in- 
different in  the  details  of  his  parliamentary  work,  and 
Cobbett  and  Hunt  abused  the  Westminster  Committee 
as  a  Rump  of  Burdett's  personal  followers.3  Douglas 
Kinnaird  was  a  young  and  unknown  man. 

Under  these  circumstances  an  official  Whig  candidate 

1  Place  to  Enson  (undated),  1819. 

2  Place  to  Mill,  September  2,  1816. 

"  I  cannot  consent  that  anything  in  which  I  engage  on  the  part  of 
others  should  be  neglected  in  any  way,  or  rather  that  any  possible 
thing  should  be  omitted  which  could  in  any  way  promote  the  object. 
Some  of  my  colleagues  know  this,  and  whenever,  therefore,  I  am  fairly 
committed  they  slink  away  and  leave  the  burden  upon  me." — Place 
to  Hobhouse,  October  29,  1819.  27,839  (188). 

3  "Why  were  we  obliged  to  fight  up  Burdett  to  the  popularity  he 
had  lost,  when,  even  at  the  very  time  he  was  losing  it,  he  desired  to 
have  it  increased  1     How  did  this  happen  1     Simply  by  the  incessant 
din  Cobbett  rang  in  the  ears  of  the  people,  and  the  assistance  it  received 
from  the  old  crazy  Cartwright  and  others." — Place  to  Hobhouse,  July 
II,  1819.     See  27,837  (164). 

I 


130          WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,   1815-30 

seemed  to  have  a  good  chance,  and  Sir  Samuel  Romilly 
was  approached.  On  June  8  he  accepted,  and  wrote  in 
his  diary  that  he  expected  an  easy  victory  over  Douglas 
Kinnaird,  "  with  whose  name,  till  the  present  moment,  the 
public  was  wholly  unacquainted,  and  who  is  set  up  by  a 
little  committee  of  tradesmen,  who  persuade  themselves 
that  they  are  all-powerful  in  Westminster."1  The  Tories 
ran  Sir  Murray  Maxwell. 

On  June  9  Brooks,  the  chairman  of  the  committee, 
wrote  to  Place,  "  We  are  much  in  want  of  your  assistance 
...  to  be  put  in  the  way  to  proceed;"2  and  Percy,  the 
paid  secretary,  also  wrote,  asking  him  to  come  down  "  and 
set  us  a-going,  whatever  you  may  do  afterwards."3  On 
June  12  Percy  wrote  again,  "I  attribute  all  to  your 
absence;  one  word  or  proposition  from  you  to  form  the 
arrangements  would  have  done  it." 4 

On  June  15  Place  so  far  gave  way  as  to  attend  a 
meeting  on  arrangements  held  in  his  own  house.5  Mean- 
while the  poll  had  begun,  and  the  result  of  the  first  few 
days  gave  ground  for  fear  that  both  the  Reform  candidates 
would  be  beaten,  and  that  the  Whig  and  Tory  would  be 
elected.  The  Reform  Committee  therefore  hastily  decided 
to  withdraw  Kinnaird,  and  to  concentrate  all  their  resources 
on  securing  Burdett's  seat. 

This  decision  was  taken  on  June  1 7,  and  on  the  same 
day  came  an  urgent  letter  from  the  committee  imploring 
Place  to  pay  "  one  more  visit "  to  the  committee  room.6 
Place  replied  raging  against  the  desertion  of  Kinnaird,  and 
against  a  suggested  coalition  with  the  Whigs,  "which  in 
my  eyes  is  as  base  as  anything  of  the  sort  can  possibly  be." 

Next  day,  however,  he  buckled  on  his  armour.  Writing 
in  1819  he  says,  "  I  was  obliged  to  go,  so  I  went,  and  became 

1  Sir  S.  Romilly's  Memoirs,  vol.  iii.  p.  360.     See  also  ante,  p.  77,  note  i. 

2  27,841  (153)-  3  27,841  (154).  4  27,841  (178). 
6  27,841  (212).                    6  27,841  (253). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30  131 

at  once  King,  Lords  and  Commons,  Judge.  Jury,  and  Jack 
Ketch.  I  found  a  number  of  people  employed  as  clerks,  a 
room  engaged  for  me.  everything  in  the  utmost  confusion, 
and  no  person  there  of  any  authority  or  consequence,  and, 
in  fact,  no  one  whom  I  could  consult.  So  I  went  to  work 
with  the  tools  I  found,  did  just  what  I  pleased,  got  the 
matter  into  form  in  about  three  hours,  issued  books,  sum- 
moned everybody,  set  them  to  work,  and  in  two  days  had 
above  200  regular  canvassers.  I  went  every  morning  at 
six  o'clock,  and  never  quitted  the  room  until  ten  or  eleven 
at  night,  not  even  for  meals.  Generally  I  had  only  one 
each  day,  and  that  on  a  piece  of  paper  at  my  table.  On 
the  last  day  of  the  election,  at  one  o'clock,  I  despatched  a 
canvasser  to  bring  up  the  last  voter  who  had  made  a 
promise,  and  then  I  went  home ;  but  from  the  time  I 
went  to  the  time  I  finally  left,  I  never  saw  even  a  single 
meeting  of  the  committee.  The  dirty  Whigs  did  all  they 
could  to  revive  the  abominable  practices  of  former  times, 
to  introduce  the  old  debauchery,  but  they  did  not  succeed. 
They  gave  a  public  breakfast,  set  out  with  profusion;  about 
forty  attended.  We  met  this  by  bills  and  placards.1  They 
offered  another  at  the  Hummums ;  we  met  this  also ;  and, 
what  must  seem  incredible,  not  a  dozen  people  attended  it, 
and  only  one  of  these  was  an  elector.  This  put  an  end  to 
treating." 2 

Burdett's  seat  was  saved,  though  he  was  only  second  to 

1  "  A  public  breakfast  was  announced  at  the  Hummums,  in  Covent 
Garden.     Here  all  who  chose  to  go  might  stuff  themselves  out  with  the 
best  and  most  expensive  viands,  and  then  like  slaves  be  marched  to  the 
poll.      This  was  defeated  so  completely  that  no  other  attempt  of  the 
kind  has  since  been  made.     Men  were  placed  at  and  near  the  tavern 
door  with  placard  poles,  on  both  sides  of  which  was  a  large  posting 
bill  containing  these  words  :  '  Esau  sold  his  birthright  for  a  mess  of 
pottage.     Electors,  sell  not  yours  for  a  paltry  breakfast.'"     (Place  to 
Unett  and  Parkes,  January  8,  1828.)     But  see  p.  42.     The  breakfast, 
however,  of  1819  was  not  technically  "public." 

2  Place  to  Ensor,    1819  (undated,   but  apparently  written    about 
February  5,  1819). 


132          WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

Romilly.  In  the  country  the  Whigs  gained  thirty  seats, 
and  increased  their  numbers  from  1 50  to  about  1 80.  There- 
upon Brougham  wrote  a  florid  article  on  The  State  of  Parties 
for  the  Edinburgh  Revieiv,  in  which  he  declared  that  "  even 
the  more  respectable  zealots  of  Reform  have  failed  to 
estrange  them  (the  people)  from  their  natural  leaders.  To 
these  leaders  they  have  evinced  their  willingness  to  return."1 

Place  set  himself  steadily  to  win  back  both  seats  for 
the  Reformers,  and  proposed  an  elaborate  plan  for  a  federal 
organisation  of  the  various  parishes  of  Westminster  on 
the  lines  of  the  ward  committees  of  a  modern  political 
association.2  The  fight  came  sooner  than  he  expected. 
On  November  2,  1818,  occurred  Romilly's  lamentable 
suicide.  "As  soon  as  I  heard  of  Romilly's  death — and 
that  was  within  two  hours  from  the  time  it  happened — I 
wrote  a  bill  calling  upon  the  electors  to  support  Kinnaird. 
I  printed  the  bill,  and  in  the  course  of  the  next  day 
caused  several  thousands  to  be  distributed  in  parcels  to 
the  electors  who  had  been  the  most  active  during  the 
last  election,  an  alphabetical  list  having  been  previously 
made  under  my  direction  as  a  part  of  the  plan  before 
mentioned.3 

Kinnaird,  however,  refused  to  stand,  and  Place  persuaded 
the  committee  to  support  John  Cam  Hobhouse.  The  com- 
mittee, in  their  fear  of  doing  anything  undemocratic, 
decided  to  call  a  public  meeting  and  to  ask  for  nomina- 
tions, it  being  arranged  that  Hobhouse's  name  should  be 
proposed.  "This,"  said  Place,  "was  in  fact  an  advertise- 
ment for  a  riot.  It  should  have  been  to  nominate  some 

1  Edinburgh  Review,  vol.  xxx.,  June  1818,  p.  204.  For  Brougham's 
authorship  of  the  article,  see  Hobhouse,  "A  Defence  of  the  People 
against  Lord  Erskine,"  p.  123. 

8  The  original  MS.  of  the  plan  is  preserved,  27,842  (12-21).  See 
the  letter  to  Ensor,  1819,  and  the  account  of  the  working  of  the  plan  in 
the  "Authentic  Narrative  of  the  Westminster  Election  of  1819"  (in 
British  Museum).  3  Place  to  Ensor,  1819. 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30          133 

one  person,  not  to  ask  the  question  who  ? " l  He  expressed 
this  view  in  a  curt  note  to  a  leading  member  of  the  com- 
mittee :  "  Miller,  when  a  man  has  a  set  of  words  ringing  in 
his  ears  to  which  he  has  attached  no  specific  idea,  it  is 
almost  impossible  to  make  that  man  attend  to  reason.  He 
is  not  in  a  state  to  discriminate.  .  .  .  The  words  that  are 
doing  the  mischief  are  '  Public  meeting.' " 2 

The  meeting  was  held  on  November  1 7,  Place  taking  no 
part  in  it.3  It  went  off  peacefully  and  successfully.  A 
Whig  nominated  Lord  John  Russell,  and  Hunt  nominated 
Cobbett,  who  had  fled  to  the  United  States.  Both  were, 
however,  beaten,  and  Hobhouse's  name  carried  by  an  over- 
whelming majority. 

The  election  would  not  come  on  till  the  meeting  of 
Parliament  in  the  spring,  and  there  was  plenty  of  time  for 
careful  preparation.  A  managing  committee  met  daily, 
with  Place  in  the  chair.  Hobhouse  worked  hard  at  address- 
ing parish  meetings,  and  the  organisation  grew  rapidly.  In 
February  1819  Place  wrote:  "The  results  are,  a  large  com- 
mittee in  each  of  the  parishes,  a  general  public  meeting  in 
each  of  the  parishes,  a  complete  canvass  of  the  whole  city 
and  liberty  by  the  parish  committee,  and  books  in  as  fine 
a  state  as  perhaps  it  is  possible  to  make  them ;  a  public 
dinner  also  in  each  of  the  parishes :  and  on  Monday  week 
next  another  public  general  meeting  of  the  whole  body  of 
the  electors,  to  whom  a  Report  will  be  made,  it  then  to  be 
printed  and  extensively  circulated.  You  must  know  that 
we  never  before  dared  to  call  a  public  meeting  in  the 
parishes,  never  had  a  proper  parish  committee,  and  no 

1  Place  to  Ensor,  1819. 

2  Place  to  Miller,  November  7,  1818.     27,842  (57). 

3  Place  wrote  at  the  time  :  "  I  shall  have  no  more  to  do  with  the 
business  except  at  home,  and  as  little  as  possible  there,  for  I  am  not  dis- 
posed when  the  business  has  been  once  made  plain  and  easy  to  have  it 
made  difficult  by  others, and  then  to  go  to  fight  through  those  difficulties." 
— Place  to  Mill,  November  5,  1818.     27,842  (51). 


134          WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,   1815-30 

system  of  regular  canvassing.  The  general  committee  now 
consists  of  upward  of  330  persons,  and  the  subscriptions 
amount  to  £1800.  This  is  a  New  View  of  Society.  All 
this  has  been  done  very  quietly,  and  at  a  comparatively 
very  small  expense,  and  the  long  period  from  November  3 
to  the  present  moment  has  been  so  well  occupied  that  the 
enthusiasm  of  the  people,  which  was  roused  at  the  begin- 
ning, has  never  subsided.  The  Minister  has  been  fairly 
driven  off  the  ground,  and  all  the  contrivances  of  the  dirty, 
sneaking  Whigs  have  ended  in  nothing.  They  have  done 
all  they  could,  but  to  both  the  factions  the  matter  has 
appeared  wholly  hopeless.  Attempts  are  now  being  made 
by  the  high-flying  aristocrats  to  catch  a  fool  who  will  meet 
us  at  his  own  expense,  but  I  do  not  believe  they  will  find 
one." 1 

Place's  Keport  to  the  Westminster  electors  was  presented 
to  a  public  meeting  on  February  9,  1819.  It  contained  a 
history  of  the  Westminster  Reform  movement  since  the 
election  of  1 809,  at  which  "  the  electors  of  Westminster 
emancipated  themselves  from  the  control  of  both  the 
aristocratical  factions."  It  plainly  referred  to  the  Whigs 
as  a  "corrupt  and  profligate  faction,"  and  to  Lord  Grey 
as  one  of  those  who  had  been  "  solemnly  pledged "  to 
the  cause  of  Reform.2  It  added  that  Westminster 
had  "become  a  school  of  political  morality,  instead  of 

1  Place  to  Ensor,  1819. 

2  Lord  Grey  and  his  son-in-law  Lambton  (afterwards  Lord  Durham) 
had  just  before  the  election  denounced  the  Reformers  at  a  meeting  of 
the  Newcastle  Fox  Club.     Lambton  called  the  "  Radical  Reformers  " 
"  brawling,  ignorant,  but  mischievous  quacks,"  with  whom  "  the  true 
people  of  England  hold  no  communication."   Lord  Grey,  with  an  obvious 
reference  to  the  Westminster  Committee,  reprobated  the  introduction  of 
the  American  "  caucus"  into  English  politics.    (See  unpublished  MS.  of 
the  Second  Reply  to  Lord  Erskine,  and  "Narrative,"  p.  34 ;  also  Morning 
Chronicle,  January  6  and  8,  1819.) 

This  early  reference  to  the  Caucus  may  have  been  derived  from  an 
article  in  the  Edinburgh  Review  for  December  1818  (p.  201). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,    1815-30          135 

being,  as  it  formerly  was,  one  common  scene  of 
depravity ! " l 

The  Report,  like  most  of  Place's  literary  work,  was  much 
too  long.  It  would  have  taken  some  fifty  minutes  to  read, 
and  the  crowded  meeting  endured  about  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  of  it,  but  after  that  cries  of  "  Print  it "  were  heard,  and 
the  remainder  was  taken  as  read.  The  Report  had  not 
been  shown  to  Hobhouse  or  Burdett,  who  perhaps  were 
annoyed  at  its  tone.2  But  Hobhouse  in  his  speech  took 
the  same  line  as  the  Report.  He  said  that  "  the  country 
is  sick  of  party," 3  and  that  if  he  were  sent  to  Parliament  it 
would  be  "  as  one  of  those  extravagant  Reformers  "  4  whom 
the  Edinburgh  Review  had  been  abusing.  Finally,  he 
pledged  himself  to  vote  for  "Parliaments  of  short  dura- 
tion "  and  a  "  full,  free,  and  equal  share "  for  all  in  the 
choice  of  their  representatives.5 

Hitherto  the  Whigs  had  sulkily  acquiesced  in  Hob- 
house's  candidature,  but  Place's  Report  and  Hobhouse's 
speech  compelled  them  either  to  fight  or  to  accept  a  con- 
spicuous defeat.  They  first  tried  to  induce  Hobhouse  to 
disavow  the  Report.6  On  his  refusal  they  determined  to 
fight,  and  at  the  last  moment  nominated  Lord  Melbourne's 

1  "  Authentic  Xarrative,"  p.  49.    The  whole  Report  is  there  printed, 
pp.  44-70- 

2  A  writer  in  the  Edinburgh  Review  (vol.  cxxxiii.),  April,  p.  300,  who 
had   access   to   the   privately   printed   memoirs   of    Hobhouse,   says : 
"  Citizen    Place,  who  was   proud   of   his   pen,  wrote  a   bitter  appeal 
which  irritated  and  divided  the  party." 

3  "  Authentic  Xarrative,"  p.  60.         4  Ibid.  p.  63.         5  Ibid.  p.  63. 

6  See  Greville,  "  Memoirs  of  the  Reign  of  George  IV.  and  William 
IV.,"  vol.  i.  p.  17,  February  14,  1819.  "George  Lamb  has  been  pro- 
posed in  opposition  to  Hobhoiise.  The  latter  drew  this  opposition 
upon  himself  by  his  speech,  and  still  more  by  the  reports  of  his 
committee,  in  which  they  abused  the  Whigs  in  unmeasured  terms. 
Lambton  went  to  Hobhouse  and  asked  him  if  he  would  disavow  the 
abuse  of  Lord  Grey,  which  his  committee  had  inserted  in  the  document 
they  printed  ;  he  refused,  on  which  the  opposition  was  determined 
upon  and  began.  ...  It  is  generally  supposed  that  Lamb  will  win." 


136          WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

brother,  George  Lamb.  The  Morning  Chronicle  afterwards 
(February  22,  1819)  said:  "It  was  not  till  the  evening  of 
Friday  the  I2th  instant  that  it  was  decided  on  proposing  a 
Whig  candidate  the  following  day,  at  the  nomination  of 
candidates  for  Westminster,  in  opposition  to  Mr.  Hobhouse, 
in  consequence  of  his  speech  on  the  Tuesday  proceeding 
out  of  Mr.  Place's  report,  and  it  was  actually  past  twelve 
on  the  same  night  before  Mr.  Lamb  finally  decided  to 
stand." 

The  election  which  followed  lasted  from  February  1 3  to 
March  3,  1819,  and  was  fought  hard  up  to  the  last  moment. 
The  electoral  arrangements  of  those  days  are  open  to  many 
serious  objections,  but  taken  in  a  sporting  spirit,  they  must 
have  provided  glorious  fun ;  and  in  that  spirit  high  society 
in  West  London  went  into  the  battle.  Mr.  Lamb's  can- 
vassers were  "  composed  of  the  great  body  of  the  aristo- 
cracy, with  the  young  gentlemen  of  almost  all  the  Club 
Houses;"2  and  Hobhouse  described  how  one  of  Lamb's 
committee  was  heard  to  tell  his  candidate  as  the  best 
possible  joke,  "I  have  just  been  shaking  hands  with  these 
blackguards  for  you."  3  Lamb's  sister-in-law,  Lady  Caroline 
Lamb  (Byron's  Lady  Caroline  Lamb),  rushed  with  her 
usual  energy  into  a  new  form  of  excitement.  She  and  "  a 
number  of  ladies  of  rank "  went  round  canvassing  in  the 
rain  and  snow  of  February  1819.  "  She  was  seen  galloping 
over  all  parts  of  Westminster,  and  where  her  horse  could 
not  go  she  walked,  leaving  few  lanes  and  alleys  un- 
explored." 4 

Meanwhile  all  the  wit  of  the  West  End  was  directed  to 

1  "Authentic   Narrative,"  February  22,  1819,  p.   168,  quoted   from 
Morning  Chronicle  of  that  day.     It  was  reported  that  the  Whigs  had 
said  amongst  them,  "If  we  carry  the  election,  we  shall  be  Ministers 
in  a  fortnight  afterwards."    ("Narrative,"  p.  384.     See  also  the  un- 
published MS.  of  Place's  Second  Reply  to  Lord  Erskine.) 

2  "Authentic  Narrative,"  p.  116. 

3  Ibid.  p.  159.  *  Ibid.  p.  131. 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,    1815-30          137 

the   task   of  ridiculing   Place.      The   Morning   Chronicle 
published  an  epigram— 

"  '  England/  quoth  tailor  Place,  '  shall  quickly  see, 
That  I  have  power  to  make  young  Hob.  M.P. ; 
'Tis  strange  indeed  if  I,  so  devilish  clever, 
Can't  make  the  mob  roar  out,  "  Hobhouse  for  ever  !  "  ' 
'Tis  stranger  still  that  Snip  should  not  reflect 
The  mob  may  bawl,  but  others  may  elect. 
Yet  let  not  Hobhouse  feel  too  much  displeasure, 
Poor  Snip  has  only  taken  a  wrong  measure."  l 

A  pun  on  Place's  name  and  the  "  place "  which  Hob- 
house's  father,  Sir  Benjamin  Hobhouse,  received  on  the 
occasion  of  his  change  of  political  opinions,  appears  in 
several  forms,  of  which  perhaps  the  best  is — 

"  Old  Hobhouse  once  had  got  a  name, 
But  lost  for  Place  his  better  fame, 
So  now  his  son,  a  louder  railer, 
Loses  his  seat  by  Place  the  Tailor. 
How  fatal  to  the  Hobhouse  race 
Is  an  excessive  love  of  Place  ! " : 

The  main  object  of  the  Whig  tactics  was  to  represent 
the  "  Rump  "  as  a  little  knot  of  "  slanderers  and  levellers," 3 
•discarded  both  by  gentlemanly  politicians  and  by  real 
Radicals.  Orator  Hunt  was  therefore  encouraged  to  come 
down  daily  to  the  hustings  in  Covent  Garden  and  abuse 
Hobhouse  in  support  of  the  bogus  candidature  of  old 
Major  Cartwright.  Unfortunately  Hunt's  work  was  made 
•extremely  easy.  Hobhouse  after  his  Radical  speech  of 
February  9  had  a  severe  and  untimely  attack  of  con- 
scientiousness, as  a  result  of  which  he  read  on  the 
nomination  day  a  laboured  and  ambiguous  statement  of 
his  opinions  on  the  franchise  question.  The  statement 
showed  that  what  he  really  wanted  was  not  universal 
suffrage,  but  the  substitution  of  a  uniform  and  perhaps 

1  "Authentic  Narrative,"  p.  300.  -  27,842  (523). 

3  Morning  Chronicle,  February  20,  1819. 


138          WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,    1815-30 

considerable  qualification  for  the  existing  anomalies  of 
borough  representation;  that  is  to  say,  the  Reform  Bill 
of  1832.  Lamb's  party  offered  a  thousand  pounds  for  an 
explanation  of  the  statement,  and  proved  that  if  it  meant 
anything  it  implied  the  disfranchisement  of  a  large  section 
of  the  Westminster  voters.  Lamb  himself  seems  to  have 
held  just  the  same  views  on  the  franchise  as  Hobhouse, 
and  represented  that  he  was  prepared  to  go  further. 
Hobhouse  having  recovered  from  his  conscientiousness 
outbid  Lamb,  but  the  mischief  was  already  done.  Lady 
Caroline  persuaded  forty  incautious  voters,  living  in  or 
near  the  courts  and  alleys  of  Shepherd's  Market,  May  Fair, 
that  "Mr.  Hobhouse  had  abandoned  his  principles,  and 
that  Mr.  Lamb  was  the  Liberty  candidate"1  Sir  Charles 
Wolseley,  Thelwall,  Wooler,  and  other  honest  Radicals, 
who  were  more  concerned  with  principles  than  organisa- 
tions, appeared  on  the  hustings,  repudiated  Hobhouse  as 
a  "political  humbug,"  and  accused  Burdett  of  trying  to 
make  Westminster  a  rotten  borough.  - 

It  was  hardly  to  be  expected  that  the  Whigs  would  be 
very  scrupulous  as  to  electioneering  methods  in  a  contest 
of  this  kind.  Breakfasts,  for  instance,  were  given  to 
",Mr.  Lamb's  committee,"  at  one  of  which  twenty-six 
dozen  of  wine  were  drunk.  What  was  more  important 
was  that  the  Whigs  hired  all  the  rate  collectors  of  the 
Westminster  parishes  as  inspectors.  The  High  Bailiff 
decided  that  no  ratepayer  was  qualified  to  vote  unless  he 
had  actually  paid  his  rates,  and  left  it  to  the  rate-collectors 
to  settle  the  point  in  each  case.  Accordingly  if  such  a 
voter  came  up  for  Lamb  no  notice  was  taken;  if  for 
Hobhouse,  his  vote  was  refused. 

1  "Authentic  Narrative,"  p.  131. 

2  "  Well  indeed  might  Mr.  Oldfield  say  in  his  next  edition  of  his 
'History  of  Boroughs'  :  'The  Borough  of  Westminster,  14,000  voters  ; 
Sir  F.   Burdett,   Patron.'"     (Speech   by   Northmore,   in   "Authentic 
Narrative,"  p.  126.) 


WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,   1815-30          139 

Under  these  conditions  it  is  surprising  that  the  West- 
minster organisation  held  together  as  well  as  it  did. 
Lamb  was  elected  with  4465  votes,  including  those  of  the 
Tories  and  of  the  faggot  voters  attached  to  the  Govern- 
ment Offices.  Hobhouse  received  3861  votes.  He  re- 
tained throughout  the  favour  of  that  section  of  the 
population  which  goes  to  meetings.  Hunt  spoke  every 
day  in  actual  peril  of  his  life.  Not  a  word  of  Lamb's 
speeches  reached  any  one  but  the  reporters.  On  the  last 
day  a  squadron  of  mounted  Whig  gentlemen  were  pelted 
out  of  Covent  Garden. 

As  soon  as  the  election  was  over,  Lord  Erskine  issued 
a  pamphlet  entitled  a  "  Short  Defence  of  the  Whigs  against 
the  Imputations  attempted  to  be  cast  upon  them  during 
the  late  Election  for  Westminster."1  To  this  both  Place 
and  Hobhouse  replied.  Place's  "  Reply  to  Lord  Erskine  " 
was  finished  first,  and  Hobhouse  wrote  of  it,  "  The  reply  is 
decisive,  a  home-thrust."2  In  it  Place,  with  the  help  of 
his  new  historical  reading,  drew  up  a  most  damaging 
account  of  the  Government  of  England  by  the  Whigs 
during  the  eighteenth  century.  He  defended  the  Report, 
and  declared  that  the  contest  which  was  forced  upon  the 
Whigs  by  its  publication  has  convinced  "  a  large  portion 
of "  the  people  "  that  there  is  no  real  difference  between 
the  Whig  and  Tory  factions,  except  the  difference  which 
always  existed ;  namely,  that  the  Tories  would  exalt  the 
kingly  power  that  it  might  trample  upon  the  aristocracy 
and  the  people,  while  the  Whigs  would  establish  an 
aristocratical  oligarchy  to  trample  on  the  King  and  the 
people." 3 

In  Parliament  the  Whigs  were  stronger  during  the 
summer  of  1819  than  they  had  been  since  they  left  office 

1  See  it  in  the  British  Museum. 

2  Hobhouse  to  Place,  March  29,  1819.     27,837  (140). 

3  "  A  Reply  to  Lord  Erskine  by  an  Elector  of  Westminster,"  p.  4. 


140          WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,   1815-30 

in  1 807.  The  currency  question  was  one  of  great  difficulty, 
and  the  ministry  suffered  from  "  a  want  of  concert  and  co- 
operation.1 "  On  May  1 8,  Tierney,  as  leader  of  the  Opposi- 
tion, moved  for  an  inquiry  into  the  state  of  the  nation,  and 
received  178  votes  to  the  357  of  the  Tories.2  But  when 
on  July  i  Burdett  brought  forward  a  studiously  moderate 
resolution  in  favour  of  parliamentary  reform  he  found 
only  fifty-eight  supporters.  The  nearer  the  Whigs  thought 
themselves  to  office,  the  more  anxious  were  they  to  remain 
unpledged  on  that  point. 

Meanwhile,  in  the  manufacturing  districts  the  three 
years'  agitation  for  radical  reform  was  resulting  in  a 
really  formidable  popular  movement,  and  in  Lancashire 
the  long  summer  evenings  were  being  used  for  open-air 
meetings  and  secret  drilling.  On  July  7,  1819,  Lord 
Sidmouth  sent  out  a  circular  to  the  Lord-Lieutenants. 
On  July  30  the  Regent  issued  a  proclamation  against 
seditious  meetings.  On  August  16  a  huge  Reform  meet- 
ing, with  Hunt  as  chief  speaker,  took  place  in  St.  Peter's 
Fields,  at  Manchester.  The  magistrates  determined  to 
arrest  Hunt,  and  with  that  object  instructed  a  body  of 
yeomanry  to  force  their  way  through  the  crowd.  The 

1  Wilbraham,  Feb.  24,  1 8 1 9  (in  Diary  of  Lord  Colchester,  vol.  iii.  p.  7 1 ). 

2  In  this  debate,  Canning,  to  Place's  delight,  used  the  incidents  of 
the  Westminster  election  as  a  disproof  of  the  claim  of  the  Whigs  to  be 
the  popular  party.     "  He  should  have  thought  they  would  not  so  soon 
have   forgot   the  Westminster   election.     He  had   in  his  time  faced 
popular  election,  and  it  was  not  impossible  he  might  do  so  again.     But 
he   had   never  been  obliged   to  go  home  accompanied  by  a  file  of 
grenadiers.     His  retreat  had  been  effected  with  somewhat  more  safety 
than  this  essence  of  popularity ;  this  routed  cavalcade,  this  assemblage 
of  ribbons  and  rubbish,  with  laurel  at  their  heads  and  brickbats  at 
their  tails,  who  were  rescued  from  their  overpowering  popularity  by  his 
Majesty's  Horse-guards."   ("  Narrative,"  p.  385.     See  also  Hansard,  vol. 
xl.  p.  545,  May  18,  1819.)     "Party  names  now  go  for  little.     We,  at 
Westminster,  killed  the  Whigs  as  a  party — as  Whigs — and  Canning 
shouted  their  requiem  ;  '  Ribbons  and  rubbish.    Favours  at  their  heads, 
and  brickbats  at  their  tails.'     There  ended  all  respect  for  that  party 
name."    (Place  to  Burdett,  January  7,  1829.) 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,    1815-30  141 

yeomen  were  surrounded  and  used  their  swords,  where- 
upon the  whole  meeting  was  dispersed  by  a  charge  of 
Hussars.  Eleven  of  the  spectators  were  killed,  and  be- 
tween four  and  five  hundred  wounded.1 

Place  when  he  heard  the  news  of  "  Peterloo  "  wrote  to 
Hobhouse :  "  These  Manchester  yeomen  and  magistrates 
are  a  greater  set  of  brutes  than  you  form  a  conception  of. 
They  have  always  treated  the  working  people  in  a  most 
abominable  manner.  I  know  one  of  these  fellows  who 
swears  'Damn  his  eyes,  seven  shillings  a  week  is  plenty 
for  them ' ;  that  when  he  goes  round  to  see  how  much 
work  his  weavers  have  in  their  looms,  he  takes  a  well-fed 
dog  with  him,  almost,  if  not  entirely  for  the  purpose  of, 
insulting  them  by  the  contrast.  He  said  some  time  ago 
that  'The  sons  of  bitches  had  eaten  up  all  the  stinging 
nettles  for  ten  miles  round  Manchester,  and  now  they  had 
no  greens  to  their  broth.'  Upon  my  expressing  indigna- 
tion, he  said,  '  Damn  their  eyes,  what  need  you  care  about 
them  ?  How  could  I  sell  you  goods  so  cheap  if  I  cared 
anything  about  them.'  I  showed  him  the  door,  and  never 
purchased  any  of  his  goods  afterwards.  Another  of  these 
fellows,  a  manufacturer  and  yeoman,  said  yesterday,  we  in 
London  did  not  know  what  a  set  of  damned  villains  the 
fellows  at  Manchester  were.  They  must  be  kept  quiet 
by  the  sword.  He  was  told  to  take  care  of  himself;  he 
laughed  and  said,  '  Ah,  you  know  nothing  of  the  weight 
of  a  sabre ;  that's  the  argument ! '  What  but  what  has 
happened  could  be  expected  from  these  fellows  when  let 
loose.  They  never  for  a  moment  thought  of  consequences. 
They  cut  down  and  trampled  down  the  people  ;  and  then 
it  was  to  end  just  as  cutting  and  trampling  the  furze 
bushes  on  a  common  would  end.  You  may  see  what  was 
thought  of  the  transaction  by  the  conduct  of  the  fellow 

1  See  A.  Prentice,  "Historical  Sketches  of  Manchester"  (1851), 
p.  167. 


142          WESMTINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

who  hung  the  flag  he  had  seized  out  of  his  window.  The 
law  will,  from  the  want  of  proper  interference,  afford  no 
redress.  Should  the  people  seek  it  by  shooting  their 
enemies  one  by  one  and  burning  their  factories,  I  should 
not  be  at  all  surprised,  nor  much  outraged." l 

Far  more  menacing  even  than  the  Manchester  massacre 
itself  were  the  signs  which  showed  that  the  Government 
intended  henceforth  to  put  down  popular  agitation  by 
military  force.  On  August  21  the  Regent  sent  a  letter 
to  the  Lord-Lieutenants  of  Lancashire  and  Cheshire,  re- 
questing them  to  convey  to  the  magistrates  and  yeomanry 
of  those  counties  "  the  great  satisfaction  derived  by  his 
Royal  Highness  the  Prince  Regent  from  their  prompt, 
decisive,  and  efficient  measures  for  the  preservation  of  the 
public  tranquillity." 2 

The  Westminster  Reformers  felt  that  if  the  right  of 
public  meeting  in  England  was  not  to  be  lost  for  ever, 
it  was  necessary  to  assert  it  now.  On  August  25,  at 
9  p.m.,  Place  wrote  to  Hobhouse:  "I  have  not  had  a 
moment  to  myself.  The  people  are  all  in  motion,  and 
I  am  obliged  to  put  up  with  being  consulted  by  those 
who  have  brains,  and  pestered  by  those  who  have 
none."  3 

As  usual  his  plans  Avere  interfered  with  by  the  irre- 
concilables.  "  The  first  movement  in  London  consequent 
on  the  news  of  the  massacre  at  Manchester  was  a  meeting 
precipitately  called  by  Major  Cartwright  and  Wooler.  It 
was  attended  in  the  course  of  three  hours  by  at  least  3000 
generally  well-dressed  persons,  but  they  were  disgusted  and 
driven  away  by  Dr.  Watson,  Jones,  Preston,  Thistlewood, 
and  the  meeting  came  to  nothing." 4  After  this  failure  it 
was  all  the  more  important  to  secure  a  really  impressive 

1  Place  to  Hobhouse,  August  20,  1819.     27,837  (179). 

2  Annual  Register,  vol.  Ix.  1819,  App.  p.  125. 

3  27,837(181). 

*  Place  to  Hodgskin,  September  8-12,  1819. 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30          143 

Westminster  meeting.  In  such  a  meeting  Place  honestly 
attempted  to  induce  the  Whig  leaders  to  take  part.1 

"  As  soon  as  it  was  known  that  a  Westminster  meeting 
would  be  certainly  held,  I  had  several  persons  with  me  who 
are  connected  with  the  Whigs  to  inquire  what  was  intended 
to  be  proposed.  The  reply  was,  '  If  the  Whigs  will  call  the 
meeting  we  will  join  them,  if  they  will  not  call  the  meeting 
we  will,  and  if  any  of  the  leading  men  among  them  will  call 
upon  me  I  will  show  them  the  matters  intended  to  be 
brought  forward ;  or,  if  any  of  them  will  even  request  to 
see  them,  they  shall  be  called  upon.'  This  was  several 
times  repeated,  as  well  to  those  who  called  upon  me  as  to 
some  of  the  people  of  the  Morning  Chronicle,  who  were,  it 
was  understood,  in  communication  with  Mr.  Brand,  Lord 
John  Russell,  and  Mr.  William  Smith,  all  of  whom  were  in 

London.     But  no  desire  for  co-operation  was  shown 

Not  one  of  them  attended  the  meeting,  and  the  lying 
Chronicle  states  on  the  Saturday,  only  two  days  after  the 
meeting,  that  the  reason  none  of  the  Whigs  attended  was 
that  the  proceedings  included  propositions  for  a  reform 
of  Parliament.  A  more  deliberate  lie  was  never  before 
told,  even  by  the  pre-eminent  liar,  Perry.  But  were  it 
true  even,  what  an  excuse !  The  Whigs  would  not  come 
because  parliamentary  reform  was  to  be  mentioned.  Be 
it  so,  but  then  it  ought  to  be  clearly  understood  that  the 
Whigs  make  no  part  of  the  people.  Up  to  this  time, 
Sunday,  September  12,  there  has  been  no  meeting  but 
of  Reformers;  not  a  finger  has  been  stirred  but  by  the 
Reformers ;  not  a  shilling  has  been  subscribed  but  by  the 
Reformers ;  even  the  necessary  legal  assistance  would  have 

1  Place  even  decided  to  suppress  a  Second  Reply  to  Lord  Erskine, 
which  was  nearly  ready  for  the  press.  In  a  preface  to  the  MS.  he  says, 
"  The  Manchester  massacres  induced  the  author  to  lay  it  aside.  He 
was  resolved  that  if  the  Whigs  did  not  do  their  duty  to  their  country 
in  so  trying  an  occasion,  they  should  have  no  excuse  for  not  doing  it,  so 
far  at  least  as  he  was  concerned." 


144          WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

been  wanting  but  for  the  aid  given  by  the  Reformers ;  and 
the  open  violators  of  the  laws,  the  murderers  of  the  people, 
would  have  had  their  triumph  complete.  Add  to  this  that 
the  famous  Whig  Lord  Derby  and  his  son,  Lord  Stanley, 
and  the  other  Whig  Lord  Belgrave,  have  all  applauded  the 
murderers." l 

The  great  meeting  was  held  on  September  2,  and  was 
attended  by  100,000  persons,  "  at  the  risk  of  military  execu- 
tion, and  under  the  musquetry  and  sabres  of  the  household 
army."2 

Between  September  8  and  September  12  Place  wrote  a 
long  letter  to  Thomas  Hodgskin  in  Edinburgh,  which  was 
to  be  shown  to  M'Culloch,  the  economist  and  editor  of  the 
Scotsman.  M'Culloch  had  written  a  manifesto  on  Peterloo, 
in  which  he  lamented  the  division  of  classes,  vaguely  advo- 
cated parliamentary  reform,  and  prophesied  that  "  we  shall 
soon  see  public  men  and  the  public,  the  Whigs  and  the 
people,  united." 

This  letter  contains,  perhaps,  the  best  statement  of  that 
strong  though  moderated  optimism  with  which  Place  at 
this  period  of  his  career  regarded  the  political  outlook. 
"  You  say,"  he  wrote,  " '  the  men  in  ragged  coats  have 
proved  by  their  conduct  and  their  resolutions  that  they 
understand  the  business  they  are  about.'  This  is  very 
true.  I  know  of  no  paper  deserving  unqualified  praise 
more  than  the  Smithfield  declaration,  of  which  I  send 
you  a  copy.  Mr.  M'Culloch  says:  'The  people  possess 
more  singleness  of  purpose,  more  honesty,  more  kind- 
heartedness  and  generosity,  more  principle,  moral  and 
religious,  than  their  superiors.'  Nothing  could  be  more 
true  or  better  expressed;  and  did  Mr.  M'Culloch  mix 
with  the  working  people  as  I  have  done,  and  obtain  their 
confidence  as  I  have  done,  even  he  would  be  astonished 

1  Place  to  Hodgskin,  September  8-12,  1819. 
8  See  Hobhouse,  "  A  Trifling  Mistake,"  p.  43. 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

at  finding  the  qualities  he  praises  existing  in  an  excess, 
of  which  by  theory  he  can  form  but  a  faint  notion.  He 
may  well  say  '  public  men  have  no  solid  right  to  those 
airs  of  superiority  which  are  commonly  expressed  by 
them.'  Well  may  he  add  that  '  it  is  a  mockery  to  call 
that  law  which  does  not  protect  the  poor  as  well  as  uphold 
the  rich.'  Mr.  M'Culloch  says,  '  It  is  quite  a  mistake  to 
impute  the  existing  discontents  to  the  existing  distress ; 
they  originate  in  other  causes,'  and  that  'wise  measures 
will  never  be  adopted  without  a  reform  in  Parliament.' 
This  is  a  plain  statement  of  two  very  important  truths, 
and  the  conviction  of  their  truth  has  been  steadily  and 
regularly  inarching  and  spreading  over  the  face  of  the 
country  ever  since  the  Constitutional  and  Corresponding 
Societies  became  active  in  1792.  The  effects  of  this  inarch 
are  no  less  singular  than  wonderful.  I  have  watched  its 
progress  with  some  attention,  being  fully  persuaded  that  it 
was  and  is  of  momentous  importance.  One  of  its  effects 
has  been  almost,  if  not  entirely,  overlooked,  and  when 
stated  will  not  be  believed  by  those  persons  who  have 
been  so  admirably  depicted  by  Mr.  M'Culloch.  It  is 
that  in  spite  of  the  demoralising  influence  of  many  of 
our  laws,  and  the  operation  of  the  poor-laws,  it  has 
impressed  the  morals  and  manners,  and  elevated  the 
character  of  the  working-man.  I  speak  from  observation 
made  on  thousands  of  them,  and  I  hold  up  this  fact  as 
enough  of  itself  to  satisfy  any  man  not  wholly  ignorant 
of  human  nature  as  a  very  portentous  circumstance.  Look 
even  to  Lancashire.  Within  a  few  years  a  stranger  walking 
through  their  towns  was  'touted,'  i.e.  hooted,  and  an 
'  outcomling '  was  sometimes  pelted  with  stones.  '  Lanca- 
shire brute '  was  the  common  and  appropriate  appellation. 
Until  very  lately  it  would  have  been  dangerous  to  have 
assembled  500  of  them  on  any  occasion.  Bakers  and 
butchers  would  at  the  least  have  been  plundered.  Now 

K 


146         WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

100,000  people  may  be  collected  together  and  no  riot 
ensue,  and  why  ?  Why,  but  for  the  fact  before  stated, 
that  the  people  have  an  object,  the  pursuit  of  which 
gives  them  importance  in  their  own  eyes,  elevates  them 
in  their  own  opinion,  and  thus  it  is  that  the  very 
individuals  who  would  have  been  the  leaders  of  the  riot 
are  the  keepers  of  the  peace.  In  every  place  as  reform 
has  advanced,  drunkenness  has  retreated,  and  you  may 
assume  that  a  cause  which  can  operate  so  powerfully  as 
to  produce  such  a  change,  is  capable  of  producing  almost 
anything.  It  must  continue  to  operate  still  more  and 
more  extensively.  It  will  not  be  materially  retarded,  and 
cannot  by  any  means  be  extinguished — as  it  is  the  result 
of  conviction  in  the  minds  of  the  people  of  their  own 
importance,  and  not  the  ebullitions  of  enthusiasm— 
although  that  at  times  has  its  effects;  it  will  not  sub- 
side into  indifference,  notwithstanding  its  energies  will 
only  be  displayed  at  intervals,  and  under  peculiar  circum- 
stances." 

On  August  27  Hunt  was  committed  for  trial,  and 
released  on  bail.  On  September  13  he  entered  London 
in  triumph.  Place  in  his  description  of  the  day  showed 
that  he  was  better  able  than  the  Whigs  to  sympathise 
with  an  enemy  in  times  of  common  danger. 

"There  was  not  much  waving  of  handkerchiefs,  but 
there  was  a  good  deal  of  respect  at  times  paid  to  the 
man.  How  in  a  mass  of  300,000  people  could  it  be 
otherwise  ?  Aye,  and  he  deserved  it  too,  and  more  than 
he  got.  If  the  people — I  mean  the  working  people — are 
to  have  but  one  man,  they  will,  as  they  ought,  support 
that  man  at  least  with  their  shouts.  And  there  are  very 
many  cases  too  in  which  they  would  fight  with  him,  or 
for  him.  Whose  fault  is  it  that  no  better  man  goes  among 
the  people  ?  Not  theirs  ;  they  will  cling  to  the  best  man 
that  makes  common  cause  with  them.  I  remember  how 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30          147 

I  felt  when  I  was  a  working-man,  and  know  how  they 
feel,  and  how  far  they  reason.  If  none  shows  himself 
but  Hunt,  Hunt  must  be  their  man."  l 

For  a  moment,  however,  it  looked  as  if  the  Whigs  might 
after  all  lead  the  agitation.  Hobhouse  wrote  enthusiasti- 
cally to  Place  to  say  that  Lord  Fitzwilliam  had  been 
dismissed  from  his  Lieutenancy  for  attending  an  indig- 
nation meeting  in  the  West  Riding,  and  that  Lord 
Tavistock  had  given  ^50  to  the  Defence  Fund.  Place 
answered  denying  that  this  meant  much.  "  Tavistock  and 
his  £50 !  Well,  I  dare  say  if  I  knew  him,  I  should  find 
him  a  soft-headed  fellow.  All  his  public  conduct  seems 
to  say  as  much  for  him  and  no  more.  Kindness,  or  at 
the  least  the  absence  of  harshness,  and  good-nature  are 
very  common  characteristics  in  this  sort  of  animal;  and 
it  is  very  probable  that  he  is  really  a  good  sort  of  a  man. 
But  we  want  in  public  men  dogged  thinking,  clear  ideas, 
comprehensive  views,  and  pertinacity,  i.e.  a  good  share  of 
obstinacy  or  hard-headedness." 2 

On  November  23,  Parliament  was  specially  assembled  to 
consider  the  state  of  the  country.  For  the  first  fortnight 
of  the  ensuing  session  Place  made  a  regular  analysis  of  the 
proceedings  "of  the  Savage  Parliament."  His  marginal 
annotations,  "  infamous  lie,"  "  blundering  fool,"  and  "  well 
done,  Wilson,"  or  "  good  stuff,"  show  the  state  of  mind  in 
which  he  read  the  debates.  In  the  analysis  itself,  Wilber- 
force,  who  declared  that  "  the  great  body  of  the  thinking 
part  of  the  people  were  satisfied "  with  the  action  of  the 
Manchester  magistrates,  is  "  an  ugly  epitome  of  the  devil," 
and  emphasis  is  laid  on  Tierney's  approval  of  the  shocking 
sentence  just  passed  upon  Carlile,  and  on  his  declaration 
that  the  Whigs  "  had  ever  stood  in  the  front  rank  against 
the  deluded  Radicals." 

1  Place  to  Hobhouse,  September  19,  1819.     27,837  (192). 

2  27,837(192). 


148          WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

The  Savage  Parliament  lasted  from  November  23  to 
December  30,  and  spent  that  period  in  passing  the  cele- 
brated Six  Acts,1  by  which  writing  and  speaking  on 
political  questions  was  made  nearly  as  dangerous  as  under 
the  Pitt  and  Grenville  Acts  of  1795.  In  the  debates  on  the 
Six  Acts  the  Whigs  occasionally  made  good  speeches,  but 
offered  no  really  serious  resistance. 

The  temper  of  the  House  of  Commons  was  well  shown 
on  December  1 3  in  the  discussion  on  an  alleged  breach  of 
privilege.  Hobhouse  in  continuation  of  the  controversy 
with  Erskine  had  published  about  the  beginning  of 
November  a  pamphlet  called  "  A  Trifling  Mistake  of  Lord 
Erskine  corrected."  The  greater  part  of  this  pamphlet 
consisted  of  the  poorest  sort  of  verbal  controversy,  but  the 
last  few  pages  are  in  a  different  style,  and  handle  with 
unflinching  frankness  the  situation  created  by  Peterloo. 
"What  prevents  the  people  from  walking  down  to  the 
House  and  pulling  out  the  members  by  the  ears,  locking 
up  their  doors,  and  flinging  the  key  into  the  Thames  ?  .  .  . 
Do  we  love  them  ?  Not  at  all.  .  .  .  Their  true  practical 
protectors  then,  the  real  efficient  anti-Reformers,  are  to 
be  found  at  the  Horse -guards  and  the  Knightsbridge 
Barracks.  .  .  .  Nothing  but  brute  force,  or  the  pressing 
fear  of  it,  will  reform  the  Parliament."  ~ 

Even  Burdett  declared  that  he  did  not  defend  the 
language  of  the  pamphlet,3  and  the  moral  feelings  of  the 
House  were  so  outraged  that  Hobhouse's  instant  com- 
mittal to  Newgate  was  carried  by  198  to  65,  against  the 
moderate  proposal  that  he  should  first  be  heard  in  his 
defence.  Perhaps  Burdett's  willingness  to  throw  over  the 
language  of  the  pamphlet  may  have  been  due  to  the  fact, 

1  (i)  Against  delay  of   justice  ;    (2)  against   drilling ;    (3)  against 
blasphemy  and  sedition ;    (4)  for  disarming ;    (5)  newspaper  stamp ; 
(6)  against  open-air  meetings. 

2  "A  Trifling  Mistake,"  pp.  49-51. 

3  Hansard,  vol.  xli.,  p.  1019,  December  13,  1819. 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,    1815-30          149 

for  Avhich  there  is  a  good  deal  of  evidence,  that  the 
incriminated  passages  were  not  written  by  Hobhouse  at  all, 
but  by  Place.1 

On  January  29,  1820,  George  III.  died,  and  a  general 
election  followed.  At  Westminster,  Burdett  and  Hob- 
house  stood  against  Lamb.  The  polling  lasted  from 
March  9  to  March  25.  Place  inserted  in  the  book  in 
which  at  that  time  he  recorded  his  reading :  "  March 
1820 — Occupied  from  seven  in  the  morning  every  day  to 
midnight  in  the  Westminster  election,  where  my  presence 
seemed  so  absolutely  necessary,  that  I  was  unable  to  take  a 
single  meal  at  home  or  even  so  much  time  as  was  required 
to  read  half  a  column  in  a  newspaper." 

The  Westminster  Reformers  fought  under  better  con- 
ditions than  in  1819.  Hobhouse  had  been  in  prison  from 
December  14,  1819,  to  February  29,  1820,  and  Burdett  was 
sentenced  on  March  23  at  Leicester  to  a  fine  of  £2000  and 
three  months'  imprisonment  for  a  letter  to  the  West- 
minster electors,  written  in  the  preceding  August  on  the 
news  of  Peterloo.  Even  the  most  ignorant  ratepayer  in 
the  Seven  Dials  could  now  have  no  doubt  as  to  who  were 
the  "  Liberty  Candidates."  Nor  was  there  any  opposition 
from  the  extremists.  Hunt  was  in  prison,  and  the  con- 
viction of  Thistlewood  and  his  companions  for  the  Cato 

1  The  evidence  is  shortly  as  follows  : — Carlile  in  a  passage  preserved 
by  Place,  and  not  contradicted  by  him,  says  :  "  Even  in  going  to  New- 
gate, by  order  of  the  House  of  Commons,  the  then  Mr.  Hobhouse 
fathered  a  pamphlet  which  was  not  his  own,  but  which  was  written  by 
Mr.  Place  "  {Monthly  Magazine,  May  1836,  p.  455,  in  an  article  by 
A.  P.— Richard  Carlile). 

Place,  writing  to  Hobhouse  on  October  29,  1819,  apologises  for  his 
"  presumption,"  apparently  in  stopping  the  press  while  "  A  Trifling 
Mistake  "  was  being  printed,  and  says  "  the  alteration  in  the  last  page 
is  worth  all  the  expense,  and  would  be  worth  it  were  it  ten  times  as 
much."  27,837  (188).  Hobhouse  (in  "Proceedings  as  to  a  TriHing 
Mistake,1'  pp.  31  and  66)  hints  that  he  did  not  write  the  last  two 
sheets.  The  style  of  the  pages  is  also  much  more  like  Place's  than 
Hobhouse:s. 


150          WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,   1815-30 

Street  plot1  had  cowed  the  small  body  of  real  revolu- 
tionists in  London.  The  Judges'  ruling  in  an  action 
against  the  High  Bailiff  of  Westminster  had  also  made 
it  impossible  for  the  rate  collectors  to  repeat  their  whole- 
sale disfranchisement.2 

Hobhouse  and  Burdett  were  elected,  with  Lamb  some 
400  votes  behind  Hobhouse,  and  Westminster  was  again 
handed  over  to  "  the  aristocratic  borough-mongering  con- 
trol of  Messrs.  Brooks,  Plaice  &  Co." 3 

During  the  half-year  which  followed  the  general  election 
of  1820  the  interest  of  the  whole  nation  was  concentrated 
on  the  attempt  of  George  IV.  to  divorce  his  wife.  The 
new  Queen  as  Princess  of  Wales  had  lived  abroad  since 
1813,  and  the  best  that  could  be  said  of  her  manner  of 
life  was  that  it  was  better  than  that  of  her  husband. 
On  the  death  of  George  III.  the  Cabinet  opened  negotia- 
tions with  her  in  the  hope  that  she  might  be  induced  to 
remain  out  of  England,  but  on  June  5,  1820,  she  suddenly 
landed  at  Dover,  and  on  June  6  drove  into  London. 
Round  her  all  the  discontent  of  the  time  instantly 
crystallised. 

Place's  Guard  Book  of  documents  relating  to  the  Queen 
has  been  lost,  but  casual  references  elsewhere  imply  that 
he  helped  to  direct  the  agitation.  He  complains,  for 
instance,  at  the  Westminster  meeting,  held  on  July  4, 
to  address  the  Queen,  "not  a  single  Whig  attended,"4 
and  writes  on  August  5,  1820:  "The  Queen  has  been 
here  some  weeks,  and  nearly  the  whole  of  the  people 
have  repeatedly  and  vehemently  expressed  their  opinion 
on  the  infamous  conduct  of  the  King  and  his  Ministers 
towards  her.  And  now  when  the  spirit  of  the  people, 

1  The  plot  to  murder  all  the  Ministers  at  a  Cabinet  dinner  on 
February  23,  1820.  The  plot  was  betrayed,  and  in  part  arranged,  by  a 
Government  spy. 

3  See  27,837  (142).  3  Morning  Post,  March  27,  1820. 

4  Loose  sheet  in  Commonplace  Book. 


WESTMINSTER  POLITICS,   1815-30  151 

instead  of  subsiding  rises  day  by  day  as  the  Queen  be- 
comes more  and  more  determined  not  to  submit  to  her 
powerful  and  manifold  enemies,  .  .  .  the  dirty  sneaking 
Whigs,  who  had  held  aloof  in  expectation  of  the  Queen's 
submission,  and  the  triumph  they  in  consequence  expected 
over  the  people,  find  themselves  in  a  worse  dilemma  than 
then*  opponents,  and  would  do  almost  anything,  if  any- 
thing could  be  done  without  the  people." l 

But  the  evidence  of  the  Queen's  guilt  was  unanswerable, 
and  Place  had  to  content  himself  with  the  hope  that  the 
whole  business  would  go  far  to  destroy  any  illusions  with 
respect  to  royalty  which  the  people  might  still  retain. 
"  Multitudes  of  all  ranks  below  the  Peerage,  even  to  the 
barelegged  sailors  along  shore  below  London  Bridge, 
costermongers,  and  common  porters,  went  in  processions 
to  Brandenburgh  House,  saw  the  Queen,  and  heard  her 
converse.  She  was  the  very  woman  herself,  beyond  all 
other  women,  to  satisfy  the  inquisitive  people  that  the 
distinction  claimed  by  high  rank  was  merely  fictitious. 
She  was  vulgarly  familiar  and  commonplace  in  her  lan- 
guage and  deportment,  much  less  genteel  in  all  respects 
than  many  of  the  well-dressed  women  who  went  to  her  in 
the  processions.  .  .  .  Those  of  the  aristocracy  who  attended 
the  Queen  had  little  either  in  their  manners  or  appearance 
to  produce  any  favourable  impression  on  the  multitudes 
whom,  day  after  day  and  hour  after  hour,  they  had  to 
introduce  to  the  presence  of  the  Queen.  Eoyalty  was, 
judged  of  by  the  Queen,  and  aristocracy  by  the  noblemen 
and  the  ladies  in  her  suite,  and  both  fell  amazingly  in  the 
estimation  of  the  people." 2 

The  Whigs,  although  they  came  late  into  the  agitation 

on  behalf  of  the  Queen,  were  yet  the  real  gainers  by  it. 

The  newspapers  which  brought  thousands  of  columns  of 

cheap  obscenity  into  every  corner   of  England,  brought 

1  Commonplace  Book  C,  p.  156.  -  27,789  (125,  126). 


152  WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,    1815-30 

also  the  speeches  in  which  Brougham  and  Denman  lashed 
the  King,  and  the  Whigs  found  that  without  pledging 
themselves  to  any  constitutional  change  they  had  become 
the  leaders  of  an  almost  universal  popular  movement. 
On  September  12,  1820,  Wilbraham  wrote  from  Lathom 
House  to  Lord  Colchester:  "Radicalism  has  taken  the 
shape  of  affection  for  the  Queen  and  has  deserted  its 
old  form,  for  we  are  all  as  quiet  as  lambs  in  this  part  of 
England,  and  you  would  not  imagine  that  this  could  have 
been  a  disturbed  country  twelve  months  ago."  l  And  on 
November  24,  Lord  John  Russell  said  to  Tom  Moore  that 
"  the  Queen's  business  had  done  a  great  deal  of  good  in 
renewing  the  old  and  natural  alliance  of  the  Whigs  and 
the  people,  and  weakening  the  influence  of  the  Radicals 
with  the  latter." 2 

When  the  excitement  about  the  Queen  died  down,  Place's 
work  as  a  director  of  Westminster  elections,  and  an  organiser 
of  Westminster  meetings,  came  for  a  long  period  to  an  end. 
A  rapid  improvement  of  trade  put  a  stop  to  social  exas- 
peration and  political  activity.  At  the  beginning  of  1820 
others  besides  Place  thought  that  the  country  was  on  the 
verge  of  civil  war.3  At  its  close  England  had  entered  into 
a  period  of  social  peace ;  the  "  truce  "  had  begun  "  between 
Parliament  and  the  people," 4  which  continued  until  1831. 

In  Westminster,  Burdett  and  Hobhouse  held  their  seats 
for  the  next  thirteen  years  without  a  contest,  and  the  work 
.  of  local  political  organisation  took  up  but  a  small  part  of 
Place's  attention.  The  two  Reform  members  for  West- 
minster were  after  all  somewhat  of  a  disappointment. 
Burdett  was  "too  rich,  too  high,  and  too  lazy,"5  and 
Place's  letters  to  him  are  written  in  the  dryest  and  most 

1  "Diary  and  Correspondence  of  Lord  Colchester,"  vol.  iii.  p.  164. 

2  "Life  of  Lord  John  Russell,"  by  Spencer  Wulpole,  vol.  i.  p.  122. 

3  Grenville,  "  Memoirs,"  vol.  i.  p.  37. 

*  Article  signed  "  Editor  of  the  Scotsman,"  preserved  in  27,809  (268). 

*  27,791  (116). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,    1815-30  153 

formal  style.  Nor  was  Hobhouse  of  the  stuff  of  which 
really  efficient  political  workers  are  made.  As  early  as 
August  27,  1819,  he  writes  to  Place:  "It  is,  I  say,  natural 
that  a  politician  trudging  steadfastly  along  the  thorny, 
narrow,  and  uninviting  road  should  now  and  then  look 
about  him  to  see  whether  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen 
are  upon  him.  It  is  natural  that  he  should  expect  his 
perseverance  ought  to  be  rewarded  by  a  smile  at  least."  l 
For  two  years,  and  two  years  only,  Hobhouse  did  "  trudge 
steadfastly  along."  In  1826,  speaking  of  the  sessions  of 
1821  and  1822,  he  said:  "We  divided  on  every  item  of 
every  estimate — we  were  glued  to  these  seats.  The  evening 
sun  went  down  upon  us  in  this  hostile  array,  and  wThen 
he  rose  in  the  morning  he  shone  upon  our  undiminished 
ranks.  If  an  Opposition  despised  hunger  and  thirst  and 
watchfulness  for  conscience'  sake,  it  was  the  Opposition 
that  was  led  by  my  friend  (Joseph  Hume)  during  those 
never-ending  sessions."2  But  on  April  18,  1822,  he  was 
already  excusing  himself.  "You  are  wrong  in  thinking 
me  lazy.  I  can  work  hard  enough  when  there  is  anything 
to  do.  But  the  Den  is  a  damper  to  industry."  3 

"As  it  is,"  Place  wrote  in  1826,  "  Burdett  and  Hobhouse 
are  little  if  any  better  than  mere  drawling  Whigs  ;  but  the 
influence  of  the  people  in  their  own  affairs  was  assisted  and 
maintained  in  1820,  and  the  fear  of  the  Reformers  still 
remains."4  In  1827  Place  says  in  his  diary  (December  7), 
that  Hobhouse  had  been  writing  from  his  dictation,  and 
adds,  "  If  this  man  would  learn  how  to  work,  he  would 
make  a  figure."  In  1829  Place  wrote  to  Colonel  Jones 
of  Hobhouse  :  "  When  spoken  to  he  says  lacrimoniously 
enough,  '  Howr  hard  it  is  that  when  a  man  has  done  his 
best  he  should  give  no  satisfaction  ! ' '  He  then  describes 

1  27,837  (i 86). 

2  Hobhouse,  Speech  on  Reform,  April  27,  1826. 

3  27,837  (205).  4  27,843  (391). 


154          WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,    1815-30 

how  Hobhouse  shirked  all  work  at  that  Vestry  Bill,  by 
which  Place  hoped  to  reform  the  obscure  iniquities  of 
London  local  government,  and  proceeds:  "He  does  not 
suit  the  electors  of  Westminster,  nor  they  him,  and 
the  probability  is  that  they  will  not  go  on  much  longer 
together." l 

But  however  small  might  be  the  direct  result  of  the 
Westminster  contests,  they  had  given  Place  himself  an 
invaluable  political  education.  He  had  learned  the  tactics 
which  suited  his  own  powers.  "I  know,"  he  wrote  to 
Hobhouse  on  October  29,  1819,  "  I  have  obtained  a  char- 
acter for  precipitancy,  and  I  know  I  shall  always  retain 
that  character.  It  may  be  partly  deserved,  but  I  know 
also  that  it  has  partly  been  acquired  by  acting  promptly 
when  action  became  necessary,  it  being  in  my  opinion 
much  better  and  less  mischievous  to  act  on  those  occasions 
even  at  the  risk  of  doing  wrong,  than  be,  as  Bentham  calls 
it,  LordEldonish."2 

But  above  all,  he,  almost  alone  among  the  English 
politicians  of  his  time,  had  now  an  intimate  and  practical 
acquaintance  with  the  working  of  democracy.  LTniversal 
suffrage  in  local  or  national  elections  meant  for  him  neither 
a  hideous  nightmare  nor  a  glorious  Utopia,  but  simply  the 
extension  of  the  system  existing  in  the  city  of  Westminster 
and  the  few  "  open  "  parishes  of  the  metropolis  to  the  rest 
of  the  kingdom.  "  The  people  who  are  the  most  dreaded 
are  the  most  confiding.  So  long  as  there  is  no  glaring 
misconduct  in  their  trustees,  and  no  marked  oppression 
upon  themselves,  they  will  not  interfere ;  and,  spite  of  all 
that  has  been  said  of  demagogues  misleading  them,  if  a 
man  cannot  show  them  that  they  are  really  oppressed, 
treated  with  contumely  and  plundered,  he  can  produce 
no  effect  upon  them.  Vague  generalities  will  not  avail 
him  in  parish  matters  where  the  people  have  the  power 

1  Place  to  Colonel  Jones,  November  5,  1829.  2  27,837  (188). 


WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,    1815-30  155 

to  choose  their  own  representatives.  To  excite  them  to 
any  extent  sufficient  to  induce  them  to  act  in  any  way  he 
must  go  far  beyond  supposed  grievances,  he  must  have 
real  grievances  to  work  upon,  and  even  this  would  not 
answer  his  purpose  unless  the  people  had  been  previously 
dissatisfied,  were  ill  used,  and  saw  some  chance  of  a 
remedy  through  the  exertions  of  the  demagogue.  And 
whenever  these  circumstances  existed,  a  demagogue  would 
be  a  very  desirable  person." 

"  The  truth  is,  that  the  vulgarity  will  not  choose  men  from 
among  themselves;  they  never  do  so  when  left  perfectly 
free  to  choose.  In  all  such  cases  they  invariably  choose 
men  of  property,  in  whom  they  expect  to  find  the  requisite 
appropriate  talent,  honesty,  and  business-like  habits,  and 
they  make  fewer  mistakes  than  other  men  are  apt  to  do. 
The  reason  for  this  is,  they  have  fewer  sinister  interests  to 
induce  them  to  do  wrong;  their  choice  is  influenced  by 
the  desire  to  do  good  to  themselves,  and  it  so  happens  that 
their  good  must  always  be  the  public  good." l 

"  If  they  who  have  the  power  had  the  requisite  know- 
ledge, they  would  at  once  pass  an  Act  giving  to  every  parish 
both  the  right  and  the  power  to  elect  their  own  Vestries 
annually,  giving  to  each  Vestry  the  power  to  originate  and 
control  all  parish  matters  in  every  department,  compelling 
them,  however,  to  proceed  in  one  uniform  way  all  over  the 
country,  doing  everything  openly,  and  publishing  their 
audited  accounts  every  three  months.  It  is  objected  that 
if  men  are  elected  for  short  periods  they  will  have  no  time 
to  acquire  the  necessary  experience,  but  will  be  continually 
displaced  by  others  who  will  proceed  in  the  same  course. 
The  very  reverse  is  the  fact,  and  always  will  be  so  where 
the  elections  are  really  free,  and  the  periods  short,  and 
accountability  as  perfect  as  it  can  be  made.  It  might  be 
decided  a  priori  that  this  must  be  so.  Annual  election  is 
1  Place  to  Hobhouse,  March  22,  1830. 


156          WESTMINSTER   POLITICS,   1815-30 

election  for  life  if  the  representative  do  his  duty  in  a 
becoming  manner.  If  he  do  otherwise,  his  removal  is  a 
positive  good.  ...  I,  who  have  had  much  to  do  in 
managing  and  conducting  of  many  associations  as  well  as 
of  large,  very  large,  bodies  of  people,  and  especially  of 
working  people,  know  that  they  are  the  most  docile  and 
most  orderly  of  all  classes.  .  .  .  The  fact  really  is,  not 
that  they  are  too  clamorous,  but  that  they  are  too  tame 
and  quiescent.  Fear,  the  child  of  ignorance,  as  Hudibras 
states,  creates  bugbears.  .  .  .  Our  business  should  be  to 
dispel  fear  and  put  reason  in  its  place."  l 

1  Place  to  Hobhouse,  March  22,  i83o(?). 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE  DISMAL  SCIENCE 

"  THE  '  Inquiry  into  the  Wealth  of  Nations  '  is  not  a  book 
much  to  my  taste.  It  is  very  proper  that  such  subjects 
should  be  discussed,  but  I  own  that  there  is  something  in 
the  discussion  that  makes  me  feel,  while  engaged  in  it, 
a  painful  contraction  of  the  heart."1  Place,  in  criticising 
this  passage,  says:  "Every  man  who  greatly  desires  the 
well-being  of  his  species  .  .  .  has  no  doubt  felt  the  repug- 
nance which  Mr.  Godwin  has  mentioned,  at  finding  him- 
self compelled  to  abandon,  as  it  were,  the  notions  he  would 
fain  indulge  without  alloy,  and  to  descend  to  calculations 
and  comparisons  of  losses  and  gains,  of  trade,  commerce, 
and  manufactures,  of  the  nature  of  rent,  profit,  and  wages, 
the  accumulation  of  capital,  and  the  operation  of  taxes. 
But  he  who  would  essentially  serve  mankind  has  no  choice ; 
he  must  submit  himself  patiently  to  the  pain  he  cannot 
avoid  without  abandoning  his  duty." 2 

Godwin  wrote  his  complaint  in  1820,  more  than  forty 
years  after  the  publication  of  the  "  Wealth  of  Nations," 
and  both  he  and  Place  were  probably  thinking  not  so 
much  of  Adam  Smith,  as  of  the  "  classical "  political 
economists  Malthus,  James  Mill,  Ricardo,  and  M'Culloch, 
who  first  appeared  as  a  force  in  political  thought  at  the 

1  William  Godwin's  "  Of  Population  :  an  Enquiry  concerning  the 
Power  of  Increase  in  the  Numbers  of  Mankind,"  &c.  (London,  1820), 
p.  611. 

2  "Illustrations   and   Proofs   of   the   Principle   of   Population,"  by 
Francis  Place  (London,  1822),  pp.  269,  270. 

157 


15S  THE    DISMAL   SCIENCE 

end  of  the  great  war  with  France.  Between  1815  and 
1820,  everybody  in  England  who  thought  at  all  was 
forced  to  form  definite  opinions  on  a  series  of  very  diffi- 
cult economic  problems.  The  war  had  left  an  enormous 
national  debt,  a  depreciated  paper  currency,  a  heavy 
income  tax,  a  poor  law  causing  more  misery  than  it 
relieved,  and  a  system  of  agriculture  depending  on  a 
price  of  food  which  only  the  most  rigid  protection  could 
keep  up  in  times  of  peace.  The  revolutionary  proposals 
of  Cobbett  on  the  National  Debt,  and  of  Thomas  Spence 
on  private  ownership  of  land,  were  daily  becoming  better 
known  and  more  popular.  Journalists,  professors,  men  of 
business,  and  a  few  statesmen  were  obliged  to  take  down 
Adam  Smith  from  their  shelves,  and  "  descend  to  calcula- 
tions and  comparisons"  on  Currency,  the  Law  of  Rent, 
and  the  causes  which  regulate  International  Trade.  At 
first  a  rather  scattered  discussion  on  particular  points  was 
carried  on  by  letters  to  newspapers,  pamphlets,  and  maga- 
zine articles ;  but  when  a  general,  though  incomplete,  agree- 
ment on  principles  and  methods  had  shown  itself  among 
the  dominant  school  of  writers,  systematic  treatises  were 
published,  by  Ricardo  in  1817,  by  Mai  thus  in  1820,  by 
James  Mill  in  1821,  and  by  M'Culloch  in  1825. 

Place  was  from  the  first  in  the  thick  of  the  controversy. 
Since  1795  he  had  read  every  book  or  pamphlet  of  any  im- 
portance which  had  appeared  on  social  or  economic  ques- 
tions. His  correspondence  with  James  Mill,  Wakefield, 
Ensor,  and  Hodgskin,  from  1813  onwards,  is  full  of  economic 
disputation.  J.  B.  Say,  the  most  eminent  French  economist 
of  the  time,  when  staying  for  some  months  in  England  in 
1814,  formed  a  strong  personal  friendship  with  Place,  and 
wrote  to  him  at  intervals  during  the  next  twelve  years.1 

1  Place  may  have  been  known  to  other  Frencli  economists.  Blanqui 
calls  him,  "un  des  hommes  les  plus  judicieux  de  1'Angleterre."  Dic- 
tionnaire  de  I'Economie  Politique,  de  MM.  Coquelin  et  Guillaumin 
(Paris,  1853),  article  "Place,"  vol.  ii.  p.  369,  written  by  Blanqui. 


THE   DISMAL   SCIENCE  159 

On  economic  questions  Place's  instincts  were  practical 
rather  than  speculative.  As  soon  as  he  had  formed  an 
opinion,  he  looked  round  to  find  the  definite  persons  whom 
it  was  important  to  convince  on  the  particular  point.  On 
one  matter  he  long  felt  himself  helpless.  When,  in  1814, 
the  proposed  Corn  Law  was  being  discussed,  he  wrote  to 
James  Mill:  "It  is  only  for  the  purpose  of  diffusing  in- 
formation that  it  can  be  at  all  desirable  to  interfere  with 
the  Corn  Laws ;  for  the  legislature  will  certainly  do  all  in 
its  power  to  keep  up  the  rent  of  land,  and  will  pass  an 
Act  for  that  purpose  next  session  in  spite  of  everything 
which  can  be  done  to  prevent  it.  The  rich  landholders 
will  see  nothing  but  the  decrease  of  rents,  and  having  the 
power  they  will  certainly  prevent  it,  be  the  consequences 
whatever  they  may." l 

On  other  points  he  was  more  successful.  Sergeant 
Onslow,  in  1814,  carried  through  an  Act  by  which  the 
Statute  of  Apprentices  was  finally  repealed,  and  Eng- 
lish employers  were  left  for  a  few  years  absolutely  free 
from  legislative  interference.  Place  wrote  to  Wakefield, 
"The  affair  of  Sergeant  Onslow  partly  originated  with 
me,  but  I  had  no  suspicion  it  would  be  taken  up 
and  pushed  as  vigorously  as  it  has  been,  and  is  likely 
to  be."2 

A  large  folio  volume  in  the  British  Museum3  contains 
the  record  of  Place's  fight  against  the  Sinking  Fund,  which 
Pitt  had  started  in  1786  for  the  gradual  extinction  of  the 
National  Debt.  During  the  French  war  the  scheme  had 
developed  into  an  incredibly  stupid  arrangement  by  which 

1  Place  to  James  Mil],  September  9,  1814.     His  efforts  to  diffuse 
information   on  this  subject  included  the  organisation  of  a   riot  in 
Westminster.     See  p.  57,  footnote. 

2  Place  to  Wakefield,  January  2,  1814.     See  p.  59. 

3  27,836.      This  volume  contains  letters  on  the  question  written  by 
Bicardo  to  Place  in  1819,  and  reprinted  in  the  Economic  Journal, 
vol.  iii.  No.  X.,  June  1893,  pp.  289-93. 


160  THE   DISMAL  SCIENCE 

new  stock  was  created  at  a  loss  to  the  Government  in 
order  to  buy  up  old  stock.  For  seventeen  years,  from 
1812  to  1829,  Place  hammered  away  at  the  subject, 
writing  articles  for  the  Morning  Chronicle,  the  Traveller, 
and  any  other  paper  that  would  take  them,  giving  away 
thousands  of  copies  of  the  same  articles  in  pamphlet  form, 
and  towards  the  end  coaching  Hume  for  speeches  in  the 
House.  In  1829  the  whole  system  was  quietly  abolished 
by  Act  of  Parliament,  and  Place  wrote  a  few  days  later  in 
his  autobiography :  "  If  to  exult  at  the  accomplishment 
of  one's  wishes  be  vanity,  I  plead  guilty  to  that  offence. 
I  am  as  well  pleased  as  I  am  capable  of  being  at  the 
termination  of  an  affair  in  which  I  have  no  personal 
interest  beyond  that  which  I  ought  to  have  for  the  wel- 
fare of  the  country  generally,  an  affair,  however  in  which 
I  have  laboured — as  often  as  circumstances  presented  the 
least  hope  of  success — assiduously." 

While  agitating  against  the  Sinking  Fund,  Place  suffered 
much  inconvenience  from  the  apparently  deliberate  con- 
fusion in  which  the  national  accounts  were  kept.  "  Mr. 
Ricardo  and  Mr.  Hume  were  both  very  desirous  to  form 
accurate  conceptions  of  the  Finance  Accounts.  We  had 
frequent  consultations  on  the  subject,  to  which  I  gave  a 
very  considerable  portion  of  my  time,  dissecting  collating 
and  compiling  the  Public  Finance  Accounts  and  State- 
ments. No  balances  had  ever  been  stated  in  any  of  these 
accounts.  ...  I  had  for  several  years  past  turned  my 
attention  to  the  subject,  and  understood  more  of  these 
accounts  than  perhaps  any  other  person  out  of  office.  I 
was  not  however  able  to  construct  an  accurate  balance 
sheet  from  the  accounts  and  papers  printed  by  order  of 
Parliament.  No  two  papers  agreed,  and  when  others 
were  moved  for,  the  disagreement  was  increased.  .  .  .  This 
at  length  led  to  proceedings,  which  early  in  the  year  1822 
terminated  in  a  select  committee  of  the  House  of  Com- 


THE   DISMAL   SCIENCE  161 

mons  "to  consider  of  the  best  mode  of  simplifying  the 
accounts  annually  laid  before  Parliament." * 

In  1826  he  wrote  in  a  working-men's  paper  a  defence 
of  political  economy,  and  pointed  to  what  the  economists 
had  already  done.  "It  was  the  political  economists  who 
developed  the  baneful  effects  of  the  Corn  Laws,  and  it 
is  they,  and  they  alone,  who,  by  their  writings,  their 
lectures,  their  speeches,  and  their  conversations,  have 
so  far  enlightened  the  people  as  at  length  to  produce 
an  almost  general  demand  for  the  repeal  of  those  mis- 
chievous and  unjust  laws.  To  the  political  economists 
we  owe  the  relaxation  of  our  absurd  Navigation  Laws. 
To  them  we  owe  the  repeal  of  the  manifold  laws  which 
constituted  the  obnoxious  laws  known  by  the  name  of 
the  Combination  Laws.  To  them  we  owe  the  knowledge, 
which  is  fast  pervading  the  community,  respecting  a  secure 
currency.  Their  knowledge  has  at  length  made  its  way 
into  the  Houses  of  Parliament  and  into  the  Cabinet,  and 
has  produced  very  important  effects.  And  the  good  which 
has  resulted  from  this  knowledge  has  happily  been  such 
that  ignorance  will  never  more  obtain  the  ascendency. 
How  much  more  good  the  principles  advocated  by  the 
political  economists  will  do  this  country,  it  is  quite  im- 
possible for  any  one  to  predict,  but  that  they  will  be 
very  great,  no  reasonable  man  can  doubt.  The  poli- 
tical economists  are  the  great  enlighteners  of  the  people. 
Look  at  their  works  from  the  time  of  the  great  man 
Adam  Smith  to  the  '  Essay  on  Wages,'  just  published 
by  Mr.  M'Culloch,  and  see  if  they  have  not,  all  along, 
deprecated  everything  which  was  in  any  way  calcu- 
lated to  do  injury  to  the  people ;  see  if  they  have 
not  been  pre-eminently  the  advocates  for  increasing  the 
knowledge  of  the  working  classes  in  every  possible  way, 
and  then  let  any  man  say,  if  he  can,  that  they  have 
1  "  Autobiography." 


162  THE   DISMAL  SCIENCE 

not    been   as    pre-eminently  the    best   friends    of   those 
classes." l 

Place  was,  however,  far  from  being  one  of  the  mere 
"practical"  politicians,  of  whom  he  often  spoke  with 
unmeasured  scorn.  He  strove  by  severe  and  minute 
study  to  acquire  a  consistent  intellectual  basis  for  his 
work.  The  beautifully  written  notes  which  he  made 
when  reading  Ricardo's  "Principles  of  Political  Eco- 
nomy" are  nearly  as  long  as  the  book  itself.  He 
was  an  industrious  collector  of  tables  of  wages,  statistics 
of  population,  and  any  other  information  by  which  an 
old  generalisation  could  be  tried  or  a  new  one  suggested.2 
And  he  brought  to  this  work  an  experience  of  industrial 
life  which  saved  him  from  some  of  the  characteristic 
faults  of  the  Rlcardian  school.  He  never  consciously  or 
unconsciously  looked  upon  the  mass  of  the  people  merely 
as  instruments  for  enriching  a  "  nation  "  of  capitalists  and 
landlords.  His  anger  was  always  most  vehemently  excited 
by  the  cheap  accusations  of  idleness  and  vice,  which  news- 
papers and  members  of  Parliament  were  never  tired  of 
bringing  against  the  whole  working  class.  In  a  pamphlet 
written  in  1829,  he  says:  "A  labouring  man  should  have 
no  fits  of  idleness ;  so  says  pride,  wilfulness,  and  ignorance. 
He  who  of  all  men,  the  negro  slave  excepted,  has  the  fewest 
inducements  to  constant,  unremitted  toil,  should  be  free 
from  idle  feelings.  This  is  impossible.  Every  man  has 
his  fits  of  idleness.  No  man  in  any  class  has  always  the 

1  The  Trades'  Newspaper  and  Mechanics'   Weekly  Journal,  No.  52, 
June  1 8,  1826. 

2  Cf.  e.g.,  the  tables  of  wages  from  1777,  collected  by  Place  and 
published   in  the  Gorgon,  1818,   and  a  letter  from   Place  to  James 
Mill  (September  9,  1814).     "Have  you  seen  the  Corn  Reports  of  the 
Lords'  Committee?    I  have  been  comparing  parts  of  them  with  the 
returns  to  the  Population  Acts,  1811,  [and]  the  tables  of  progressive 
increase  of  the  population  in  the  last  century.     The  table  of  births, 
burials,  and  baptisms  when  compared  with  the  price  of  bread  and  the 
wages  of  labour,  exhibits  some  curious  and  important  phenomena." 


THE   DISMAL   SCIENCE  163 

same  desire  for  exertion  or  investigation ;  no,  nor  even  for 
the  pursuit  of  pleasure,  when  even  pleasure  alone  is  the 
object  of  his  useless  life.     No  man  at  all  times  follows  even 
the  most  gratifying  pursuit  or  inquiry  with  the  same  zeal ; 
relaxation  becomes  absolutely  necessary,  and  this  is  sought 
in  change  in  his  pursuits  and  in  change  of  place,  by  every 
one  whose  means  enable  him  to  indulge  in  what  is,  in 
relation   to   the  working-man,   called   idleness — the   word 
being  used  in  respect  to  him  in  its  worst  and  most  oppro- 
brious sense.     The  working-man  must  have  no  relaxation  ; 
he  who  drudges  constantly  against  his  will,  must  have  no 
such  propensities  as  are  allowed  and  cherished  in  his  supe- 
rior ;  the  unintellectual  man  must  exert  greater  powers  of 
mind  than  the  intellectual  man ;  must  show  by  his  conduct 
that  his  is  the  superior  understanding,  or  he  is  condemned 
.as  unworthy ;  and  this  is  called  judging  him  fairly.     The 
most  painstaking,  saving,  industrious  man  is  not  free  from 
the  desire  of  leisure ;  there  are  times  when  he  is  unable  to 
bring  himself  to  the  conclusion  that  he   must   continue 
working.     I  know  not  how  to  describe  the  sickening  aver- 
sion  which   at   times   steals   over   the  working-man,  and 
utterly  disables  him,  for  a  longer  or  shorter  period,  from 
following  his  usual  occupation,  and  compels  him  to  indulge 
in  idleness.     I  have  felt  it,  resisted  it  to  the  utmost  of  my 
power,  but  have  been  so  completely  subdued  by  it  that,  spite 
of  very  pressing  circumstances,  I  have  been  obliged  to  submit 
and  run  away  from  my  work.     This  is  the  case  with  every 
workman  I  have  ever  known ;  and  in  proportion  as  a  man's 
case  is  hopeless  will  such  fits  more  frequently  occur  and  be 
of  longer  duration.  The  best  informed  amongst  the  workmen 
will,  occasionally, solace  themselves  at  such  times  with  liquor; 
the  uninformed  will  almost  always  recur  to  the  same  means 
to  procure  the  excitement  which  must  be  procured." l 

1  "  Improvement  of  the  Working  People,"  by  Francis  Place,  Sen. 
.(London,  1834),  pp.  13-15.  A  misprint  in  the  second  line  is  corrected 
•by  Place  in  the  copy  preserved  in  27,825  (217-225). 


164  THE   DISMAL  SCIENCE 

He  had  been  himself  secretary  of  several  trade  unions, 
and  refused  to  denounce  as  fools  or  criminals  those  who 
would  face  any  suffering  rather  than  accept  less  than  the 
trade  union  rate  of  wages.  In  1815  he  told  the  Committee 
on  Mendicity  that  "When  journeymen  tradesmen  in  the 
Metropolis  were  unemployed,  and  however  long  the  period 
they  remained  unemployed,  they  never  would  work  for  less 
than  the  full  wages."  Lord  Lascelles,  the  chairman  of  the 
committee,  called  out,  "Here  is  the  evil.  Do  you  not 
think,  Mr.  Place,  that  this  is  very  wrong?"  "No,"  he 
answered,  "  it  is  the  perfection  of  wisdom  in  them.  Let  us 
suppose  there  were  40,000  men  unemployed,  and  40,000 
employed.  All  the  work  required  is,  at  the  time,  done  by 
40,000  men,  and  there  is  no  demand  for  any  more.  If  the 
40,000  unemployed  men  were  so  unwise  as  to  undersell  the 
others,  they  might  displace  them.  But  these  in  their  turn 
would  be  displaced,  and  they  would  soon  be  reduced  to 
the  situation  to  which  you  have  reduced  the  agricultural 
labourer.  They  would  all  be  paupers,  and  being  so  in  this 
large  city,  they  would  lose  all  the  independence  and  self- 
respect  they  now  possess;  they  would  no  longer  dress 
decently  and  becomingly:  they  would  lose  all  the  admir- 
able intelligence  they  possess ;  they  would  become  vicious 
and  beastly,  and  full  of  crimes  of  all  sorts;  cruel,  vindic- 
tive, and  miserable  beyond  all  example ;  and  the  whole 
nation  would  feel  the  sad  consequences.  Gentlemen  need 
not  be  alarmed ;  there  can  be  no  reason  for  concealment ; 
you,  not  they,  are  ignorant  of  these  things.  They  know 
them  well,  understand  them  thoroughly,  and  act  most 
wisely.  No  danger  can  therefore  arise  from  their  seeing  in 
print  what  they  already  know." l 

In  the  same  way,  though  he  defends  Malthus'  general 
position,  he  turns  to  denounce  the  crude  statement  in  the 

1  Place  to  James  Mill,  July  20,  1815.     This  evidence  was  omitted 
from  the  official  report  as  irrelevant. 


THE   DISMAL   SCIENCE  165 

"  Principles  of  Population,"  that  no  man  has  a  "  right "  to 
public  support,  and  that  therefore  the  system  of  Poor  Relief 
should  be  entirely  abolished.  "  Mr.  Malthus  denies  to  the 
unemployed  poor  man  the  right  to  eat,  but  he  allows  the 
right  to  the  unemployed  rich  man.  He  says,  '  Every  man 
may  do  as  he  will  with  his  own ' ;  and  he  expects  to  be 
able  to  satisfy  the  starving  man  with  bare  assertions  of 
abstract  rights.  Mr.  Malthus  is  not  speaking  of  legal  right, 
for,  he  says,  the  poor  have  a  legal  rigid,  which  is  the  very 
thing  he  proposes  to  destroy.  It  is  an  abstract  right  which 
is  denied  to  the  poor  man,  but  allowed  to  the  rich ;  and 
this  abstract,  which  has  no  meaning,  although  dignified 
with  the  title  of  the  'law  of  nature,  which  is  the  law  of 
God,'  is  to  be  explained  and  taught  to  the  poor,  who  are 
to  be  fully  convinced.'  " 1 

Again,  when,  in  1815,  all  his  friends  were  clamouring  for 
the  repeal  of  the  income  tax,  he  opposed  them,  on  the 
ground  that  the  burden  would  be  "  shifted  from  the  rich 
to  the  other  classes.  .  .  .  The  rich  will  be  relieved,  the 
middle  classes  injured,  and  the  labourer  distressed." 2  In 
the  same  year  a  Mr.  Benett  of  Warminster,  in  advocating 
the  Corn  Law,  "  threatened  the  meeting  that,  unless  the 
Parliament  passed  an  Act  to  protect  his  property,  he  would 
remove  to  a  country  where  his  diminished  income  would 
support  him  as  it  ought  to  do."  Place  added,  "  One  thing 
he  omitted  to  say,  which  was,  to  threaten  to  take  the  land 
away."3  Again  and  again  he  denounces  the  great  land- 
lords of  his  time.  "  All  they  cry  out  against  is  the  high 
wages  of  labour,  and  they  exult  at  every  opportunity  to 
reduce  them.  They  (as  Paine  said  some  years  ago)  depend 
more  on  breaking  the  spirit  of  the  people  by  poverty,  than 

1  "  Illustrations  and  Proofs  of  the  Principle  of  Population  "  (London, 
1822),  p.  137. 

2  Place  to  Mill,  February  15,  1815. 

3  Place  to  Mill,  January  16,  1815. 


166  THE   DISMAL  SCIENCE 

they  fear  goading  them  into  insurrection  by  oppression. 
Thus  the  whole  value  of  all  the  improvements  in  agricul- 
ture goes  to  the  landowners,  and  the  price,  so  far  as  it  is 
advanced  by  the  increased  rent,  is  levied  by  them  upon 
the  people,  who  are  unable  to  purchase  necessaries  with 
the  miserable  pittance  they  receive  for  their  labour." l 

With  all  his  courage  and  industry  and  sympathy, 
Place  never  attained,  perhaps  never  could  have  attained, 
the  intellectual  force  required  for  original  and  creative 
economic  thought.  He  was  to  the  end  a  disciple  rather 
than  a  maker,  and  a  disciple  who  accepted  without 
reserve  the  one  doctrine  from  which  the  classical  politi- 
cal economy  followed  as  a  series  of  corollaries,  Malthus' 
celebrated  "Principle  of  Population."  Replying,  in  1818, 
to  Ensor,  who  was  just  about  to  publish  his  essay  on 
population,2  and  who  boasted  that  it  contained,  among 
other  things,  "  a  refutation  of  Malthus," 3  Place  says : 
"As  for  your  answer  to  Malthus,  I  shall  judge  of  it 
when  I  see  it.  I  do  not  know  exactly  what  you  mean 
wheti  you  say,  '  I  have  refuted  Malthus.'  His  propositions, 
assumed  at  random,  may  be  easily  refuted ;  they  were 
assumed  for  the  purpose  of  illustration,  and  are  necessarily 
incorrect.  Much,  too,  of  his  reasoning  may  be  refuted. 
But  I  do  not  expect  to  see  what  I  call  the  principle  dis- 
proved ;  namely,  that  in  all  old  settled  countries  the  popu- 
lation presses  against  starvation,  and  is  kept  from  increasing 
with  the  rapidity  which,  but  for  the  want  of  produce,  it 
would  increase." 4 

It  is  difficult  at  the  present  time  to  appreciate  with 
anything  like  justice  the  fears  of  those  who  studied  the 
population  question  at  the  beginning  of  this  century. 

1  Place  to  James  Mill,  October  17,  1814. 

2  "An   Inquiry   Concerning  the   Population   of  Nations,"  &c.,  by 
George  Ensor  (London,  1818). 

3  Ensor  to  Place,  January  [N.D.]  1818. 

4  Place  to  Ensor,  January  18,  1818. 


THE   DISMAL   SCIENCE  167 

Food-stuffs  can  now  be  brought  in  time  of  peace  from 
thinly  populated  to  thickly  populated  countries  with  an 
ease  then  undreamt  of,  and  whole  populations  can,  as  far 
as  transport  is  concerned,  move  in  search  of  food  with 
equal  ease.  The  population  question  has  become  inter- 
national rather  than  national,  and  its  merely  numerical 
urgency  has  been  at  least  postponed  for  some  centuries. 
The  increase  of  wealth  per  head  has,  during  the  last 
half -century,  been  greatest  just  in  those  countries  in 
which  population  has  increased  most  rapidly.  In  addi- 
tion to  this,  both  in  Europe  and  America,  the  birth- 
rate during  recent  years  has  been  steadily  falling,  while 
in  France  population  has  remained  almost  stationary. 
Social  distress  is  still  everywhere  to  be  found,  but  it  has  no 
apparent  relation  either  to  population  per  acre,  or  to  excess 
of  births  over  deaths.  Compare  with  this  the  facts  acces- 
sible to  those  who  had  to  study  the  results  of  the  first 
three  English  censuses  of  1801,  1811,  and  1821.  All 
statistics  went  to  show  that  population  throughout  Europe 
had  been  growing  at  a  geometrical  ratio,  which  actually 
increased  during  the  period  of  the  Napoleonic  wars. 
Emigration  hardly  existed.  There  were  no  railways  and 
no  steamships.  Each  nation  had  to  look  to  its  own  fields 
for  its  own  subsistence,  and  the  law  of  diminishing  returns 
to  agriculture  was  believed  to  be  already  operative  in  every 
part  of  Europe.  The  English  economists  saw  continually 
before  them  the  state  of  Ireland,  which  had  then  nearly 
two  million  one  hundred  thousand  more  inhabitants  than 
at  the  present  time,1  and  where  the  congestion  of  population 
most  undoubtedly  did  keep  down  the  standard  of  comfort. 
In  England  the  increase  of  population  had  been  accom- 

1  The  census  of  1821  was  the  first  which  was  taken  in  Ireland  by 
the  Census  Commissioners.  Their  report  returned  a  population  of 
6,801,827.  The  census  of  1891  gave  a  population  of  only  4,704,750,  a 
decrease  of  30.87  per  cent. 


168  THE   DISMAL   SCIENCE 

panied  by  a  rapid  improvement  of  industrial  processes ;  and 
yet  Place,  in  1826,  referring  to  the  trade  depression  of  the 
preceding  winter,  could  say  that  "  a  race  has  been  run  be- 
tween the  improvement  of  machinery  and  the  increase 
of  population,  and  population  has  beaten  machinery."1 
Ricardo,  sitting  in  his  study,  could  quietly  prophesy  that 
this  would  go  on  until  the  "  natural "  point  was  reached, 
at  which,  either  from  the  distress  consequent  on  the  fall 
of  wages,  or  from  a  decrease  of  marriages,  the  death-rate 
of  the  working  classes  overtook  their  birth-rate.2 

But  to  Place,  a  merely  "  scientific "  attitude  was  impos- 
sible. When  he  thought  of  the  "working  classes,"  he 
pictured  to  himself  an  endless  procession  of  men  such  as 
he  had  been,  with  wives  and  children  like  his  own.  The 
lowering  of  wages  to  their  "  natural "  level  meant  to  him 
the  repetition,  millions  of  times  over,  of  the  starvation 
and  weariness  and  despair  which  he  had  gone  through, 
before  he  had  been  willing  to  give  up  his  skilled  trade 
and  apply  for  work  as  a  parish  scavenger.  He,  like  other 
political  economists,  believed  that  population  was  in  Eng- 
land already  redundant,  and  that  no  permanent  social 
improvement  could  be  looked  for  until  its  increase  had 
been  checked.  But,  unlike  the  others,  he  was  filled  with 
a  burning  sense  that  something  had  to  be  done,  and  done 
immediately,  and  done  by  him,  to  check  it.  Malthus  had 
expressed  a  hope  that  late  marriages  would  become  the 

1  Diary,  July  19,  1826. 

2  Ricardo,  in  his  "Principles  of  Political  Economy"  (London,  1817), 
p.  90,  says  :  "  The  natural  price  of  labour  is  that  price  which  is  neces- 
sary to  enable  the  labourers,  one  with  another,  to  subsist,  and  to  per- 
petuate their  race,  without  either  increase  or  diminution."     In  the 
same  sense  Place  writes  :  "  The  real  wages  of  the  labourer  in  a  redun- 
dant population  are  no  more  than,  according  to  the  habits  of  the  country, 
will  enable  him  to  subsist  and  propagate  his  race,  and  he  must  have 
the  same  real  wages,  and  will  have  no  more,  while  the  population  is 
redundant,  whether  the  taxes  remain  or  are  all  repealed."     (Diary, 
October  12,  1826.) 


THE   DISMAL   SCIENCE  169 

rule.  But  Place  was  convinced  that  for  the  working 
classes,  and,  indeed,  for  all  classes,  delay  of  marriage  was 
harmful,  even  if  it  were  possible. 

To  go  even  as  far  as  Malthus  and  Mill  had  gone  was 
dangerous.  Careful  as  Malthus  had  been,  his  name  was 
already  spitten  upon  by  almost  every  decent  and  religious- 
minded  man  or  woman  in  the  country.  To  doubt  that 
"  God  sent  food  for  every  mouth  which  He  sent  into  the 
world  "  was  blasphemous ;  to  inquire  further  was  obscene. 
With  all  Place's  dogged  courage,'  it  must  have  cost  him 
a  struggle  before  he  entered,  as  he  did  about  1820,  upon 
a  deliberate  propaganda  of  neo-Malthusianism.  In  a  book 
which  he  published  in  1822,  he  plainly,  though  carefully, 
stated  his  position,  and  in  the  introduction  said:  "The 
author  is  perfectly  aware  that  he  has  exhibited  views  and 
proposed  remedies  which  will  with  some  persons  expose 
him  to  censure ;  but  he  is  also  aware  of  the  utility  of  thus 
exposing  himself." J 

From  this  time  forward  Place  continually  advanced 
the  neo-Malthusian  position  in  argument  with  every 
working-man  whose  confidence  or  gratitude  he  could  earn 
in  every  working-class  newspaper  that  would  admit  his 
letters,  and  in  his  correspondence  with  private  friends 
and  public  acquaintances.  As  a  consequence  his  name,  for 
twenty  years,  was  hardly  ever  mentioned  in  print  without 
some  reference,  deprecatory  or  abusive,  to  his  notorious 
opinions.  Good  men  refused  to  be  introduced  to  him, 
and,  in  1834,  his  help  was  declined  on  this  ground  alone 
by  the  strongly  liberal  "Society  for  the  Promotion  of 
Useful  Knowledge."  * 

1  "  Illustrations   and    Proofs  of   the    Principle  of   Population,"  by 
Francis  Place  (London,  1822),  p.  12. 

2  Of.  the  MS.  account  of  matters  relating  to  "Essays  for  the  People," 
1834.     The  rest  of  the  inner  circle  of  the  Benthamites  seem  to  have 
shared  Place's  opinion,  though  he  alone  faced  the  public  scandal.     See 
the  letter  from  Bentham   to  Place  on  p.  81,  James  Mill's  article  on 


170  THE   DISMAL  SCIENCE 

Among  the  leaders  of  the  workmen  he  met.  with  but 
little  success.  "All  were  opposed,"  he  says,  "to  the 
'  Malthusian  doctrine,'  as  they  called  the  '  Principle  of 
Population,'  plain  and  simple  as  it  is,  namely,  '  The  people 
have  the  power  to  increase  their  number.'  All  disregarded 
the  fact  that  the  people  had  increased  and  were  increasing, 
and  over-running  the  means  of  subsistence ;  and  that  under 
the  hindrances  opposed  by  the  landlords  to  the  improve- 
ment of  husbandry  by  the  application  of  chemistry  and 
machinery  to  land,  the  actual  increase  of  produce  was  very 
small,  whilst  the  increase  of  people  was  very  great,  that 
the  disproportion  would  continually  increase,  until  the  time 
should  come  when  a  stop  would  be  put  to  all  increase  of 
capital,  and  consequently  of  employment,  and  the  working 
people  be  reduced  to  the  mud  cabins  and  potato  diet  of  the 
Irish  cottars,  and  ruin  follow  in  its  train,  or  that  the  people 
should  generally  revolt,  produce  a  frightful  revolution,  in 
which  would  be  sacrificed  an  incalculable  amount  of  property, 
and  the  extirpation  of  the  aristocracy  in  all  its  branches." l 

Place  was  often  accused  of  invincible  prejudice  on  this 
point.  "On  all  other  subjects  but  Malthusianism,  Mr. 
Place  is  a  close,  a  candid,  and  a  most  even  -  tempered 
reasoner;  but  doubt  the  infallibility  of  his  anti-population 
creed,  and  he  is  ready  to  treat  you  as  the  Homoousian 
Christians  did  their  diphthongal  controvertists,  the  Homoi- 
ousians,  in  the  fifth  century.  The  only  answers  he  will 
condescend  to  give  are,  'You  don't  understand  political 
economy ;  your  words  have  no  sense  in  them ;  they  con- 
tain no  distinct  ideas.'  " 2 

Colonies  in  the  supplement  to  the  "Encyclopaedia  Britannica,"  1824, 
vol.  iii.  p.  257,  and  the  incident  recorded  of  John  Mill  by  Christie. 
("John  Stuart  Mill  and  Mr.  Abraham  Hay  ward,  Q.C.,"  by  W.  D. 
Christie,  London,  1873,  p.  9).  For  Place's  neo  -  Malthusianism,  see 
letter  to  Burdett,  May  i,  1824,  and  also  27,823  (337). 

1  27,819(74). 

2  The   Northern  Liberator,   December   30,  1837,  in   an   article  by 
A.  H.  Beaumont. 


THE   DISMAL   SCIENCE  171 

This  is  not  the  occasion  to  enter  upon  that  unwritten 
chapter  of  English  working-class  history  which  begins 
with  Robert  Dale  Owen  and  Francis  Place,  and  ends  with 
Charles  Bradlaugh.  But  without  reference  to  it,  it  is  im- 
possible to  understand  Place's  general  position  with  regard 
to  social  reform.  His  desire  was,  not  that  population 
should  be  stationary,  but  that  its  increase  should  be  slower 
than  the  probable  improvement  in  methods  of  production 
— in  his  phrase,  that  "  machinery  should  be  allowed  to 
beat  population  in  the  race."  He  could  Avork  for  educa- 
tion, democracy,  freedom  of  combination,  everything  that 
tended  to  the  general  diffusion  of  knowledge  and  self-respect, 
because  he  believed  that  knowledge  and  self-respect  were 
not  only  good  in  themselves,  but  likely  to  lead  to  a  restraint 
of  population.  Once  men  had  become  wise  on  that  one 
point,  he  was  prepared  to  welcome  economic  equality, 
though  on  an  individualistic  basis,  as  readily  as  political 
equality.  But  so  long  as  population  continued  without 
restraint,  a  more  equal  distribution  of  wealth  would,  he 
thought,  simply  drag  every  one  down  to  a  common  level.1 
"  No  doubt,"  he  wrote  in  1 8 1 8,  "  a  somewhat  better  mode 
of  producing,  accumulating,  and  enjoying  might  be  desired, 
but  the  time  when  this  will  be  understood  and  acted  upon 
is,  I  fear,  very  distant.  ...  It  is  not  of  much  consequence 
whether  England  contains  twelve  or  fifteen  millions  of 
bipeds,  or  Ireland  six  or  eight  millions  of  similar  animals, 
but  of  much  importance  it  is  that  they  should  be  well 
instructed  and  well  governed,  and  made  comfortable ;  but 
these  desirable  purposes  can  only  be  accomplished  by 
restraining  their  increase."  -  Or  again,  when  arguing 
against  Ensor  in  the  Trades  Newspaper,  he  says :  "  In 
Ireland  there  are  365  persons  to  every  square  mile,  while 
in  England  there  are  not  more  than  200.  In  England, 

1  Cf.  the  same  argument  in  J.  S.   Mill's  "  Principles  of   Political 
Economy"  (London,  1865,  2  vols.),  vol.  i.  pp.  238,  239. 

2  Place  to  Ensor,  January  1 8,  1 8 1 8. 


172  THE   DISMAL  SCIENCE 

with  200  persons  to  a  square  mile,  there  are  always  a  con- 
siderable number  of  poor  persons;  but  in  Ireland,  with 
365  persons  to  a  square  mile,  a  large  proportion  of  the 
whole  population  is  constantly  in  a  state  of  such  extreme 
wretchedness  that  there  is  no  parallel  to  it  in  England, 
except  in  some  few  instances,  and  on  some  extraordinary 
occasions.  The  misery  which  has  some  time  past  prevailed 
in  portions  of  our  manufacturing  districts  always  exists 
in  Ireland.  .  .  .  '  But,'  says  Mr.  Ensor,  '  there  is  sufficient 
food  for  all  the  people,  if  that  food  was  distributed  as  God 
intended  it  should  be,  for  the  use,  and  not  the  abuse,  of 
the  idle  and  the  aristocratic.'  This  is  another  fallacy — a 
misleading,  mischievous  fallacy.  Mr.  Ensor's  proof  that 
there  is  food  enough  is  that  the  people  have  subsisted. 
True  enough  it  is  that  the  people  who  have  subsisted  have 
subsisted ;  and  true  enough  it  is  that  by  a  better  arrange- 
ment of  society,  capital  might  have  increased  somewhat 
faster  than  it  has  increased;  but  if  the  population  had 
increased  as  rapidly  as  capital  increased,  the  people  would 
have  been  precisely  in  the  same  relative  situation  as  they 
now  are;  all  the  difference  would  have  been  that  the 
number  of  sufferers  would  have  been  greater  than  it  is. 
Strange  it  is  that  Mr.  Ensor  should  not  have  seen  through 
his  fallacy.  That  there  has  been,  and  that  there  is,  the 
means  of  subsistence  for  the  people,  is  proved  by  their 
being  alive.  But  the  political  economists  are  not  satisfied 
with  this;  they  want  something  better  for  the  people; 
they  are  not  satisfied  that  those  who  exist  should  barely 
exist — that  they  should  have  low  wages,  and  no  leisure, 
and  no  pleasure,  no  recreation,  and  no  instruction.  They 
are  not  satisfied  that  their  number  should  be  constantly 
kept  up  to  the  starvation  point,  and  that  hunger,  disease, 
and  misery  should  be  the  only  means  of  keeping  down 
their  number." l  He  opposed,  on  Malthusian  grounds,  the 
1  The  Traded  Newspaper  and  Mechanics'  Weekly  Journal,  Jan.  18,  1826. 


THE   DISMAL   SCIENCE  173 

encouragement  of  allotments  or  small  holdings;1  but  though 
he  argued  against  any  immediate  alteration  in  the  distribu- 
tion of  land,  he  was  for  the  greater  part  of  his  life  a  land 
nationaliser.  He  had  been  converted  in  the  old  days  by 
Thomas  Spence,  and  hoped  that  when  the  population 
difficulty  had  once  been  settled,  private  property  in  land 
would  come  to  an  end.2 

On  such  immediate  legislative  proposals  as  could  not  be 
judged  merely  by  their  effect  on  the  growth  of  population, 
Place  followed  the  economists  of  his  time  in  leaning  strongly 
towards  individual  freedom.  He  gave  evidence,  for  instance, 
before  the  Committee  on  Drunkenness  in  1834,  in  favour 
of  absolute  free  trade  in  the  liquor  traffic.  But  to  the  end 
of  his  life  he  was  too  much  influenced  by  the  habits  of 
thought  which  he  had  learned  as  a  trade  union  secretary, 
to  be  either  comfortable  or  consistent  in  preaching  absolute 
freedom  of  industrial  contract.  He  strongly  urged,  for 
instance,  the  trade  unions  in  the  factory  districts  to  ex- 
clude Avomen  and  children  from  the  mills,3  and  to  lower 
the  hours  of  labour  by  general  action.  He  even  advocated 
the  exclusion  of  children  and  girls  under  twenty-one  by 
law.4  On  the  other  hand,  the  Ten  Hours  Bill,  which 
proposed  to  shut  the  factories  outright  at  the  end  of  the 
legal  day,  aroused  his  strongest  opposition,  and  he  wrote 

1  Cf.  e.g.,  Place  to  Beauclerk,  April  7,  1831. 

2  Cf.  Place  to  Whytoch,  October  28,  1839.      "It  is  my  hope  and 
belief  that  the  time  Avill  come  when  men  will  be  sufficiently  wise  to 
agree  that  all  the  land  shall  belong  to  the  people,  and  that  too  upon 
the  plan,  or  some  such  plan,  as  Mr.  Spence  has  promulgated,  by  which 
the  people  shall  be  the  sole  landlord,  and  receive  all  the  rent."     Cf.  also 
the  Northern  Liberator,  December  30,    1837,  and   an   article  in  the 
Traveller  for  January  1821,  which  shows  that  at  that  time  he  was 
against  land  nationalisation,  on  account  of  the  great  and  uncontrolled 
revenue  which  it  would  give  to  the  central  Government. 

3  Cf.  Place's  article,  "  Handloom  Weavers  and  Factory  Workers,  a 
Letter  to  James  Turner,  cotton  spinner,"  in  J.  A.  Eoebuck's  "  Pam- 
phlets for  the  People,"  September  29,  1835,  P-  5- 

4  Ibid,  p.  9. 


174  THE   DISMAL   SCIENCE 

in  reference  to  it,  "  Every  suggestion  which  does  not  tend 
to  the  reduction  in  number  of  the  working  people  is  use- 
less, to  say  the  least  of  it.  All  legislative  interference  must 
be  pernicious.  Men  must  be  left  to  themselves  to  make 
their  own  bargains ;  the  law  must  compel  the  observance  of 
compacts,  the  fulfilment  of  contracts.  There  it  should 
end.  So  long  as  the  supply  of  labour  exceeds  the  demand 
for  labour,  the  labourer  will  undersell  his  fellows,  and  pro- 
duce poverty,  misery,  vice,  and  crime." 

"  The  remedy  again  is  good  teaching,  which  will  in  time 
make  men  see  the  evils  of  redundant  population,  cause 
them  to  respect  themselves,  induce  them  to  marry  at  an 
early  age,  give  them  a  companion  in  a  wife,  the  only  true 
companion  which  a  man  may  ever  have  for  a  real  and  long 
continuance,  give  him  a  home  in  which  he  may  improve 
himself  and  enable  him  to  teach  the  few,  very  few,  children 
he  may  choose  to  propagate,  and  enjoy  himself  as  a  rational 
being  ought  to  do." 1 

It  is  probable  that  his  intellectual  conviction  upon 
the  point  of  freedom  was  strengthened  by  the  fact 
that  his  personal  acquaintance  with  industrial  life  was 
confined  to  a  home-working  trade.  "  I  have  never," 
he  wrote  in  1835,  "seen  the  inside  of  a  cotton  factory. 
It  is  almost  certain  that  I  never  shall  see  the  inside 
of  one.  I  have  read  all  the  evidence  taken  by  Com- 
mittees of  Parliament ;  I  have  read  books  and  pamphlets ; 
I  have  conversed  with  numbers  of  cottoners,  masters  as 
well  as  men ;  I  understand  much  of  the  machinery  used  in 
all  sorts  of  mills,  and  should  like  to  see  it  in  use.  But 
I  cannot  voluntarily  submit  to  see  the  misery  of  working 
it  before  my  eyes.  I  abhor  such  scenes  of  degradation,  as 
even  the  best  of  the  cotton-mills  cannot  be  free  from. 

1  27,827  (194).  See  also  the  "Letter  to  James  Turner,"  p.  8,  and 
27,820(153).  Place  several  times  declared  that  in  those  trades  where 
children  work  the  whole  family  earned  no  more  than  a  man  in  trades 
open  to  men  only.  See,  for  instance,  27,828  (117). 


THE   DISMAL   SCIEN7CE  175 

This  will  be  treated  as  a  ridiculous  feeling,  as  an  absurd 
prejudice ;  but  to  ine,  to  whom  human  beings  are  valuable 
as  they  are  intellectual  and  free,  a  cotton-mill  is  more  ab- 
horrent than  I  can  find  words  with  which  to  describe  it." l 
But  he  seems  to  hesitate  in  his  individualism  when  writing 
of  so  clear  an  invasion  of  individual  freedom  as  a  proposed 
Truck  Act.  He  declares  indeed  that,  "  No  restrictive  laws 
should  exist.  Every  one  should  be  at  liberty  to  make  his 
own  bargain  in  the  best  way  he  can."  But  he  adds,  "  I 
cannot,  however,  but  lament  that  the  tendency  of  this  free- 
dom is  against  the  interest  of  the  workman,  and  in  favour 
of  his  employer.  Whatever  any  man  who  employs  a  large 
number  of  work-people  proposes  as  a  regulation  is  sure  to 
be  something  for  his  own  advantage,  and  for  the  disadvan- 
tage of  the  work-people ;  it  can  scarcely  ever  be  otherwise." 
Then  he  bursts  out  into  a  fury  against  those  great  em- 
ployers whom  the  Truck  Acts  were  intended  to  check.  "  I 
go  sick  at  heart  when  I  think  of  such  men  as  Yates ;  I 
always  become  a  savage  when  I  see  them  ;  I  would  not 
have  such  men  even  for  common  acquaintances,  no,  not 
for  '  all  the  gold  which  sinews  bought  and  sold  have 
ever  earned.' " 2 

1  See  the  "  Letter  to  James  Turner,"  p.  9. 

2  Place  to  Hume,  January  7,  1830. 


CHAPTER  VII 

THE  CHARING  CROSS  LIBRARY 

"  The  writer  of  this,  though  by  circumstances  separated 
from  the  immediate  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Place  for  several 
years  past,  can,  by  the  experience  of  eighteen  and  the  well- 
founded  report  of  forty  years,  pronounce  him  a  prodigy  of 
useful,  resolute,  consistent,  political  exertion,  and  indefati- 
gable labour,  which  evidently  continues  unabated  to  this 
day.  .  .  .  Francis  Place,  by  his  assistant  labours  and 
advice  given  to  members  of  the  House  of  Commons,  has 
produced  more  effect  in  that  House  than  any  man  who 
was  ever  a  member." l 

There  is  an  old  gentleman  still  alive  and  active,  who  can 
remember  being  taken  as  a  boy,  about  the  year  1 820,  up 
into  a  big  room  lined  with  books  at  the  back  of  Place's 
shop,  and  being  told  in  a  reverential  voice  that  this  was. 
the  headquarters  of  English  Radicalism.2  Place  had 
been  a  collector  of  books  ever  since  his  school-days, 
and  continued  to  collect  nearly  to  the  end  of  his  life. 
From  the  first  the  library  was  especially  rich  in  Parlia- 
mentary papers,  catalogued  by  subjects,  and  in  pamphlets 
and  newspaper  cuttings,  bound  and  lettered  with  his  own 
hand.  Everything  was  arranged  with  that  scrupulous 
"  method  and  tidiness  and  comfort "  to  which  Place's 
correspondents  often  refer.3 

1  See  article  on  "The  Real  Nobility  of  the  Human  Character,"  by 
A.  P.  [i.e.  Richard  Carlile],  in  the  Monthly  Magazine,  May  1835,  p.  454. 

2  Cf.  also  "Sixty  Years  of  an  Agitator's  Life,"  by  G.  J.  Holyoake: 
(London,  1893,  2  vols.),  vol.  i.  p.  215. 

3  Cf.  e.g.,  T.  Hodgskin  to  Place,  May  19,  1819. 

no 


From  the  original  drawing  in  South  Kensington  A/H;CUHI,  by  MACI.ISK, 
reproduced  in  "  Fraud's  Magazine,"  April  1836. 


To  face  page  177. 


THE    CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY  177 

This  was  the  "  Civic  Palace,  Charing  Cross,"  where  the 
"  Arch  Radical " l  sat  all  day  long  on  a  high  stool  at  his 
desk,  as  before  his  retirement  from  business  he  had  sat 
all  day  long  in  the  adjoining  shop.  Every  member  of 
Parliament  who  lived,  as  most  members  then  did,  in 
Bloomsbury  or  the  City,  would  pass  Charing  Cross  twice 
a  day.  In  any  case,  the  House  of  Commons  and  Downing 
Street  were  both  within  a  few  minutes'  walk. 

"  My  library,"  says  Place,2  "  was  a  sort  of  gossiping  shop 
for  such  persons  as  were  in  any  way  engaged  in  public 
matters  having  the  benefit  of  the  people  for  their  object. 
.  .  .  No  one  who  knew  me  would  hesitate  to  consult  with 
me  on  any  subject  on  which  I  could  either  give  or  procure 
information."  And  again,  "  When  I  lived  at  Charing  Cross 
my  library  was  frequented  very  much  in  the  manner  of  a 
common  coffee-house  room.  It  was  open  to  a  considerable 
number  of  persons,  many  of  them  members  of  Parlia- 
ment." 3  In  times  of  excitement  the  room  became  crowded. 

A  very  good  description  of  Place  and  his  daily  life 
about  this  time,  was  given  in  the  Northern  Liberator. 
"  Francis  Place  ...  is  in  the  sixty-fifth  year  of  his 
age.  He  is  about  five  feet  seven  inches  high,  with  a 
head  which  would  delight  the  phrenological  taste  of  our 
worthy  friend  Alderman  Fife,  and  is  of  a  stout,  stalwart 
frame.  A  walk  of  twenty  or  thirty  miles  a  day  is  one  of 

1  George  Ensor  to  Place,  1820  [N.D.]. 

2  In  a  loose  sheet,  dated  April  1834.    There  is  a  good  description  of 
Place  and  the  company  at  his  library  in  "  Lord  Melbourne,"  by  Henry 
Dunckley  (1890),  pp.  150,  151. 

:i  Place  to  B.  Hawes,  M.P.  [for  Lambeth],  April  24,  1839.  Hawes' 
reply  is  interesting,  as  showing  the  view  taken  of  Place  by  his  political 
pupils. 

"  LAMBETH,  May  i,  1839. 

"  MY  DEAR  SIR, — In  reply  to  your  note,  I  only  wish  you  and  your 
library  were  where  it  was.  The  good  sentry,  well  posted  as  you  were, 
would  do  us  all  a  world  of  good.  .  .  .  Never  mind.  I'll  tight  on  and 
be  satisfied  with  your  honest  approval — and  fight  on  till  you  cry  hold. 
—Yours  sincerely,  B.  HAWKS." 

M 


178          THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY 

his  favourite  amusements;  but  his  time,  from  six  in  the 
morning  to  eleven  at  night,  is  generally  spent  in  his 
library,  where  he  is  surrounded  with  books,  pamphlets, 
journals,  and  memoranda  of  every  kind — political,  philo- 
logical, physiological,  and  every  other  'cal'  which  can  be 
imagined,  all  arranged  in  such  perfect  order  that  he  can 
put  his  hand  on  any  book  or  paper  he  may  want  in  a 
moment.  The  bump  of  order  is  in  him  very  prominent 
indeed."1 

Among  the  politicians  who  attended  the  "  Civic  Palace  " 
there  were  always  some  who  came  not  merely  to  gather 
facts,  but  to  obtain  general  political  guidance  from  their 
host.  To  such  Place  was  rather  a  hard  taskmaster.  He 
never  expected  them  to  take  his  advice,  but  if  they  did 
not  he  dealt  very  faithfully  with  them.  "  I  told  Bennet," 2 
he  wrote  in  1819,  "from  the  first  that  I  should  wear  him 
out,  and  that  he  would  be  'obliged  either  to  shun  me  or 
lead  a  dog's  life  with  his  party.  He  said,  No ;  I  said,  Yes. 
He  has  done  so.  But  next  session  he  will  come  again, 
and  as  he  certainly  means  well,  I  shall  be  pleased  to  see 
him.  I  never  suffer  the  motives  which  operate  in  another 
man's  mind  to  have  much  influence  on  my  conduct." 3 

A  few  entries  in  the  private  diary  for  1826  record  Place's 
experience  of  a  better-known  politician,  Colonel  Torrens. 

"  Thursday,  October  12.  —  A  long  conversation  with 
Colonel  Torrens  on  the  most  prominent  matters  likely 
to  be  brought  before  Parliament  in  the  ensuing  session, 
.  .  .  and  the  means  of  keeping  himself  independent  of 
cabals,  which  never  fail  to  compromise  a  man's  usefulness." 

"Saturday,  October  28. — Colonel  Torrens — is  willing  to 
do  all  he  can  to  get  a  meeting  of  such  titled  and  other 

1  The  Northern  Liberator,  December  30,  1837.  Article  by  the  editor, 
A.  H.  Beaumont. 

'•"  The  Hon.  Grey  Bennet,  M.P.,  whom  Place  coached  for  some  time. 
3  Place  to  Hobhouse,  August  16,  1819.     27,837  (172). 


THE   CHARING   CROSS  LIBRARY          179 

landowners  as  may  be  willing  to  publish  a  declaration 
against  the  Corn  Laws." 

"Friday,  November  3. —  Colonel  Torrens  .  .  .  mueh 
talk.  .  .  .  There  is  some  chance  that  a  nucleus  will  be 
formed  in  the  new  House  of  Commons  of  a  few  men  who 
are  too  discreet  to  join  the  worn-out,  palsied  Whigs,  and 
are  better  informed  on  the  true  mode  of  legislating  than 
men  have  hitherto  been.  Cautioned  Torrens  against  join- 
ing the  club  at  the  Clarendon,  in  which  the  miserable 
Whigs  stultify  every  fresh-catched  member." 

"Thursday,  November  16. — Colonel  Torrens — who  is 
somewhat  puzzled  with  the  annoyance  of  his  pretended 
Whig  friends,  who,  he  says,  are  advising  him  not  to  do 
anything  this  session  of  Parliament,  telling  him  that  if 
he  does  so  he  will  be  called  a  talking,  busy  fellow,  and 
will  lose  himself.  ...  I  advised  him,  as  I  have  often  done 
before,  not  to  make  speeches,  but  to  say  whatever  he 
thought  was  necessary  on  subjects  which  he  thoroughly 
understood." 

"Tuesday,  November  21. — Torrens,  it  is  evident,  is  play- 
ing a  game  in  which  he  may  not,  and  I  hope  will  not,  be 
a  gainer.  He  admitted  that  he  did  not  mean  to  take  a 
manly,  decided  part  .  .  .  but  to  act  cautiously,  that  is,  to 
feel  his  way  to  some  place  or  office." 

"  Monday,  November  27. — Colonel  Torrens — with  whom 
a  long  conversation  respecting  the  House  of  Commons. 
He,  as  usual,  paltering  and  shuffling." 

"  Tuesday,  December  5. — To  Colonel  Torrens  on  the  sub- 
ject of  Mr.  Hume's  motion  or  notice  for  to-morrow  night 
relating  to  the  exportation  of  machinery.  Was  not  a  little 
disappointed  at  finding  Torrens  utterly  ignorant  of  the 
subject,  and  that,  notwithstanding  his  knowledge  of  poli- 
tical economy,  he  talked  like  a  silly  old  woman  of  the 
advantages  of  impeding  the  French  manufacture  of  cotton 
goods.  .  .  .  But  he  is  a  poor  creature,  and  will  make  no 


180          THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY 

figure  as  an  opponent  of  Ministers  in  what  is  bad,  and 
will  not  be  worth  their  purchasing." 

"  Wednesday,  December  13. — Colonel  Torrens — he  is  a 
shuffler,  and  we  do  not  agree.  We  shall  soon  cut." 

The  entry  for  a  day  in  1826,  which  happens  to  be  in 
rather  shorter  form  than  usual,  will  give  a  specimen  of 
Place's  average  day's  work  at  that  time. 

"Monday,  April  10,  1826. — Wrote  a  long  letter  to  Sir 
Francis  Burdett  on  the  expenses  and  arrears  of  the  last 
West.  Elections  in  1820.  The  election  cost  £1600  and 
£,96  still  remained  unpaid.  I  have  paid  .£130;  and  Mr. 
Henry  Brooks,  who  is  liable  for  the  £96,  cannot  afford  to 
pay  it — so  I  asked  Sir  F.  B.  to  pay  that  sum  on  Henry 
Brooks's  account. 

"Heard  at  the  Royal  Institution  M'Culloch's  third 
Lecture  on  Political  Economy. 

"Called  on  Mr.  Hobhouse — had  a  long  conversation, 
on  the  case  of  Dr.  Thorpe,  and  got  a  promise  of  an 
appointment  for  Dr.  Thorpe  to  see  him  and  Burdett 
together. 

"  Walked  with  my  wife,  out  from  half-past  ten  to  half- 
past  two. 

"  Read  at  Mr.  Hume's  request  and  for  the  satisfaction  of 
the  seamen  of  the  Tyne  and  Wear  who  had  written  to  me 
on  the  subject,  "  a  Bill  to  enable  commissioners  for  trying 
offences  upon  the  sea,"  &c.  &c.  Noted  it,  and  wrote  to 
the  seamen.  The  Bill,  if  passed  into  a  law  as  it  is  at  pre- 
sent worded,  would  be  an  act  of  injustice  towards  the 
seamen. 

"  Read — six  letters  sent  to  me  by  Mr.  Hume — correspond- 
ence respecting  the  absurd  Potteries  Bill  which  I  noted 
on  the  6th,  and  about  which  I  conferred  with  Mr.  Mayre 
the  potter. 

"  N.B. — The  Bill  is  bad  in  every  respect,  and  will  not  be 
passed. 


THE    CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY  181 

"  Read  proof  of  Sheet  B,  vol.  ii.,  '  Travels  in  Chili  and 
La  Plata.' 

"Interrupted  in  the  evening  by  Mr.  Tijou  and  Charles 
Blake — and  afterwards  by  George  White,  a  clerk  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  who  came  to  tell  me  '  the  good  news ' 
that  ministers  had  been  beaten  from  their  project. 

"Read  two  articles  in  the  Bolton  Chronicle  respecting 
the  miserable  state  tof  the  weavers  and  others,  and  con- 
taining absurd  proposals  to  fix  a  minimum  of  wages  and 
to  stop  the  use  of  machinery. 

"Wrote  a  short  paper  composed  of  questions  for  the 
Bolton  Chronicle. 

"  Mr.  Benn  respecting  D.  Richards,  the  Vicar,  who  wants 
a  clause  in  the  Charing  X  Improvement  Bill  to  compel 
the  parishioners  to  pay  his  curate.  Refused  to  see  the 
Dr.,  but  took  care  to  defeat  his  purpose  through  Mr. 
Hobhouse." 

It  is  very  curious  to  note  how  much  Place's  businesslike 
and  methodical  habits  dominated  his  political  as  well  as 
his  private  life.  In  spite  of  his  constant  meetings  with 
politicians  and  important  persons,  he  seldom  made  friends 
with  any  of  them.  They  were  almost  invariably  treated 
as  persons  engaged  in  business  might  have  been,  and  just 
as  his  customers  were  invited  to  come  to  his  shop,  so  his 
political  associates  were  expected  to  come  to  his  library. 
He  consistently  declined  to  call  upon  them  at  their  own 
homes  under  any  circumstances.  He  valued  his  inde- 
pendence too  highly  to  meet  them  on  any  but  absolutely 
equal  terms,  which  he  knew  by  experience  it  was  not 
always  easy  for  "  the  tailor "  to  secure.  A  year  before 
Colonel  Torrens'  visits,  Place  wrote  a  general  account 
of  his  relations  with  all  such  political  catechumens, 
which  explains  his  attitude  admirably.  "  The  various 
public,  political,  and  parliamentary  matters  in  which  I 
have  interfered,"  said  he,  "  have  brought  me  acquainted 


182          THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY 

with  many  great  men,  and  caused  me  to  be  most 
graciously  invited  to  call  upon  some  of  them.  This 
I  have  never  done,  unless  something  which  related  to 
others  made  it  necessary,  and  this  happened  very 
seldom.  It  was  a  rule  with  me  from  the  first  never  to 
call  on  any  great  man  in  any  other  case,  and  I  do  not 
believe  I  have  seen  so  many  as  half-a-dozen  lords  and 
commoners  at  their  own  houses,  excepting  Burdett,  Hob- 
house,  and  Hume,  and  not  even  either  of  them  unless  on 
business.  To  all  invitations  I  have  replied,  that  I  was  at 
home  till  eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  after  four 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon;  was  always  ready  to  attend  to 
any  suggestion,  and  to  co-operate  in  any  project  which 
was  likely  to  be  useful,  and  especially  if  it  related  to  the 
working  people.  With  those  public  men  who  called  I 
always  communicated  freely.  Several  have  expressed  a 
desire  to  become  better  acquainted  with  me;  but  this  I 
always  declined,  as  our  circumstances  and  habits  of  life 
differed  greatly,  and  I  could  not  consent  to  be  patronised, 
or  to  be  a  '  humble  friend ' ;  to  come  when  I  was  sent  for, 
and  to  go  when  my  presence  was  not  quite  agreeable,  and 
to  take  care  not  to  be  in  the  way  when  other  great  men 
or  women  were  there.  To  those  who  wished  to  be  better 
acquainted  I  said,  you  can  be  as  much  better  acquainted 
with  me  as  you  please  by  calling  here  when  you  have 
anything  to  do  for  the  public  good  in  which  I  can  in 
any  way  assist.  But  as  their  notions  of  what  was  for  the 
public  good  very  often  differed  from  my  notion  of  what 
was  for  the  public  good ;  as  almost  the  whole  of  them  made 
party  politics  their  rule  of  action ;  as  I  disliked  both  the 
great  political  parties,  and  as  my  notions  were  well  known 
to  be  republican,  a  few  interviews  were  generally  sufficient 
for  their  purposes,  and  our  intercourse  as  generally  ceased." l 

1  Place  to  Thomas  Campbell,  February  10,  1825.     [In  the  "Auto- 
biography," chap.  14.] 


THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY          183 

Place's  greatest  and  most  permanent  success  as  a  Parlia- 
mentary schoolmaster  was  with  Joseph  Hume.  Hume's 
dogged  industry,  and  the  enduring  strength  of  his  short 
and  awkward  body,  saved  him  from  any  accusation  of 
idleness  and  frivolity.  A  certain  dulness  of  feeling  was 
useful  to  him,  not  only  in  protecting  him  for  thirty 
years  against  the  slings  and  arrows  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  but  also  in  enabling  him  placidly  to  receive 
and  act  upon  those  angry  letters  and  remonstrances  which 
Place's  other  pupils  must  often  have  found  intolerably 
overbearing. 

Hume  was  advised  by  his  friend  the  Duke  of  Kent 
to  make  Place's  acquaintance,  and  in  July  1813  they 
were  introduced  to  each  other  by  Fox  the  Quaker, 
with  whom  Place  was  then  busily  engaged  in  the  pro- 
motion of  the  Lancastrian  school  system.1  Place,  at  first, 
had  no  great  liking  for  his  new  acquaintance,  but  he  was 
persuaded  by  Mill  to  take  Hume  up.  In  a  letter  to  Mrs. 
Grote,  in  1836,  Place  described  their  connection  with  each 
other.  "Mill  fixed  him  upon  me  some  twenty-five  years 
since.2  I  found  him  devoid  of  information,  dull  and 
selfish.  From  the  country  he  came  from,  India,  and  the 
way  in  which  he  commenced  his  public  life  here,  I  had  no 
reliance  on  him  for  good  service,  and  no  grounds  for  placing 
confidence  in  his  integrity.  Mill  said,  '  Work  on  with  him 
and  he  will  come  out ;  there  is  much  in  him  that  will  grow 
by  good  nursing ;  and  even  if  after  a  while  he  turn  out  ill, 
we  shall  have  the  advantage  of  all  the  good  he  may  have 
done.'  Our  intimacy  brought  obloquy  upon  both  of  us,  to 
which  he  was  nearly  as  callous  as  I  was.  He  was  taunted 
with  '  the  tailor  his  master,'  without  whom  he  could  do 
nothing.  I  was  scoffed  at  as  a  fool  for  spending  time 

1  Cf.  Chap.  IV. 

2  James  Mill  had  been  at  school  with  Hume  at  Montrose  Academy. 
See    "James    Mill:    a    Biography,"    by    Alexander    Bain     (London 
1882),  p.  7. 


184          THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY 

uselessly  upon  'Old  Joe,'  upon  'The  Apothecary.'  He 
was  treated  as  no  man  before  him  ever  was  treated,  and 
worse,  too,  by  the  Whigs  than  by  the  Tories.  Some  of  the 
leading  men  at  Brooks's  treated  him  with  feigned  respect 
to  his  face,  and  scoffed  at  him  behind  his  back,  and  talked 
of  him  as  '  the  fellow  who  dined  at  three  o'clock  and  knew 
nothing  of  the  habits  and  manners  of  a  gentleman.'  The 
slightest  error  in  a  calculation  was  imputed  to  him  as 
imbecility  and  ignorance.  The  mistake  of  saying '  tear  and 
wear,'  putting  the  last  word  first,  was  matter  of  exultation 
against  him,  and  was  held  forth  by  the  Whigs  as  a  proof 
that  he  was  stupid  and  good  for  nothing.  Often  have  I 
repeated  such  things  as  these  to  him,  and  cautioned  him 
not  in  anything  to  rely  upon  the  hollow-hearted,  shallow- 
headed  men  who  would  make  friends  with  him  if  they  saw 
therein  the  prospect  of  destroying  his  utility.  Mill's  pre- 
dictions were  realised.  Hume  showed  his  capabilities  and 
his  imperturbable  perseverance,  which  have  beaten  down 
all  opposition ;  and  there  he  stands,  the  man  of  men." 1 

It  was  easy  enough  for  Place  at  any  time  between  1822 
and  1827  to  justify  his  furious  contempt  for  ordinary  party 
politics.  George  Canning  had  become  Foreign  Secretary 
and  leader  of  the  House  of  Commons  in  1822.  For  the 
next  five  years  he,  with  Peel  as  Home  Secretary,  and 
Huskisson  as  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade,  developed 
a  policy  which  was  Tory  in  little  but  name.  Canning  did 
all  that  he  could  do  to  encourage  the  reaction  against 
despotism  abroad ;  while  Huskisson  and  Peel,  accepting  in 
large  part  the  doctrines  of  the  political  economists,  freed 
the  internal  trade  of  the  country  from  some  of  its  most 
harassing  restrictions,  and  seriously  alarmed  those  whose 
rents  depended  upon  protection  against  foreign  imports. 
The  Whig  leaders  could  only  hope  to  represent  themselves 
as  more  advanced  than  the  Tories,  by  advocating  either 
1  Place  to  Mrs.  Grote,  May  13,  1836  ("Autobiography"). 


THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY  185 

absolute  freedom  of  trade  or  a  democratic  extension  of  the 
franchise.  But  they  did  not  believe  in  Free  Trade,  and 
were  nervous  about  anything  except  the  mildest  measures 
of  Parliamentary  reform.  As  long  therefore  as  the  Tories 
allowed  the  Canningites  to  lead  them  the  Whigs  were  a 
negligible  quantity  in  politics.  Writing  in  1821,  Place 
declared :  "  Much  has  been  done  by  the  electors  in  West- 
minster since  1806  towards  unmasking  this  faction,  and 
never  was  it  in  a  more  contemptible  state  than  at  the  pre- 
sent moment.  Without  power  or  the  hope  of  power,  less 
popular,  and  deservedly  so,  than  the  party  in  power,  it 
is  of  no  political  importance  whatever.  Distrusted,  if  not 
despised,  by  a  considerable  portion  of  the  people,  even  its 
name  will  probably  in  a  few  years  be  lost.  Or,  if  it  remain, 
it  will  be  received  as  the  name  of  Tories  out  of  place,  and 
will  be  simply  applied  to  any  opposition  not  composed 
of  Radical  reformers,  however  and  of  whomsoever  con- 
stituted." * 

Under  such  circumstances  the  Parliamentary  debates 
became  the  merest  faction  fights,  and  the  obvious  duty  of 
a  reformer  in  the  House  of  Commons  was,  not  to  combine 
and  compromise,  but  to  educate.  "  Hitherto,"  complained 
Place,  "  the  government  of  the  country  had  been  adminis- 
tered on  no  general  principles,  but  by  temporary  expedients 
for  the  purpose  of  accomplishing  particular  objects  or  to 
ward  off  particular  inconveniences."2  He  firmly  believed 
that  the  necessary  "general  principles"  had  now  been 
worked  out  by  Benthani  and  the  economists,  and  that  if 
only  they  were  continually  advertised,  the  steady  increase 
of  popular  knowledge  must  ultimately  lead  to  their  adop- 
tion. It  did  not  matter,  therefore,  whether  the  reformers 
in  Parliament  numbered  six  or  sixty,  provided  that  they 
were  resolute,  consistent,  and  intelligible.  Meanwhile  an 

1  Article  by  Place  in  the  Traveller,  January  4,  1821. 

2  27,849  (5,  6). 


186          THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY 

energetic  man  could  carry  detailed  reforms  which  should 
be  not  mere  "  temporary  expedients,"  but  logical  appli- 
cations of  valid  principles.  It  was  "an  opinion  of"  Place's 
"that  a  man  must  have  a  good  many  projects  in  hand 
to  accomplish  any."1  The  diaries  which  he  kept  from 
September  1825  till  December  1827  show  him  to  have 
been  toiling  and  contriving  in  literally  scores  of  differ- 
ent schemes.  Many  of  them,  such  as  the  formation  of 
mechanics'  institutes,  the  organisation  of  linen-drapers' 
assistants,  or  the  conciliation  of  a  quarrel  between  the 
seamen  of  London  and  those  of  South  Shields,  were  not 
directly  political.  But  he  was  also  working  at  the  repeal 
of  the  Wool  Laws,  the  Cutting  and  Flaying  Acts,  the  laws 
prohibiting  curriers  from  becoming  tanners,  and  those 
regulating  hackney  coaches  and  the  system  of  pressing 
seamen.  Other  schemes  of  his  aimed  at  improved  adminis- 
tration, as,  for  instance,  the  appointment  of  six  Finance 
Committees  of  the  House  of  Commons  for  controlling 
supply,  the  improvement  of  the  law  of  creditor  and  debtor, 
and  the  appointment  of  special  commissioners  to  try 
offences  committed  at  sea.  And  in  addition  to  all  this 
purely  public  work,  his  time  was  always  very  much  taken 
up  in  helping  individual  cases  of  hardship,  in  negotiating 
and  settling  disputes  between  employers  and  workmen, 
and  in  acting  as  arbitrator  in  numerous  commercial 
disputes. 

The  library  at  Charing  Cross,  besides  its  use  as  a  political 
workshop,  was  also  the  centre  of  a  very  practical  system  of 
publication.  "When  it  was  thought  advisable  to  print  a 
tract  for  distribution  on  any  subject  a  notice  was  put  up 
over  the  fireplace,  e.g.,  '  It  is  proposed  to  print  for  distribu- 
tion an  extract  from  the  report  of  the  Select  Committee  on 
Metropolis  Police  Offices.'  This  was  read  by  those  who 

1  Hodgskin  to  Place,  September  2,  1819  (continuation  of  letter  dated 
July  9,  1819). 


THE   CHARING    CROSS   LIBRARY          187 

came  in,  and  they  who  approved  of  it  put  down  a  sovereign. 
Some  hundreds  of  pounds  were  collected  in  this  way,  and 
many  tracts  were  carefully  and  usefully  distributed." l 
The  most  important  of  the  reprints  were  Mill's  articles 
from  the  "Supplement  to  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica" 
(1820-23),  including  the  famous  essay  on  "Government." 
Among  the  others,  one  traces  Mill's  article  on  the  "  Ballot " 
from  the  Westminster  Review  of  July  1830,  a  tract  by 
Place  himself  on  the  "Law  of  Libel"  (1823),  and  J.  R. 
M'Culloch's  "Essay  on  Wages"  (1826). 

By  1826  the  proceedings  at  the  Charing  Cross  Library 
had  evidently  at  last  begun  to  attract  a  certain  amount  of 
public  attention.  In  that  year  a  writer  in  the  European 
Magazine  takes  "  Francis  Place  of  Westminster,  Esq.," 2  as 
the  fourth  of  a  series  of  "  Characters  for  Charity's  Sake," 
the  preceding  three  having  been  Henry  Brougham,  M.P., 
John  Cam  Hobhouse,  M.P.,  and  Joseph  Hume,  M.P. 

The  article  begins  with  a  saying  of  Archimedes,  "  Give 
me  place  for  my  fulcrum  and  I'll  move  the  world,"  and 
contains  six  pages  of  good-humoured  and  amusing  chaff 
of  "this  most  indefatigable  and  efficient  individual," 
and  the  whole  company  of  Benthamite  Radicals.  "  Upon 
Joseph  Hume  the  country  has  rained  teapots  and  pepper- 
castors,  and  the  tide  of  cyder  has  emulated  the  November 
swell  of  the  Severn;  Hobhouse  has  been  plastered  with 
speeches,  and  pots  of  beer  innumerable  have  flowed  to  his 
glory ;  and  in  the  matter  of  Brougham,  the  very  thin-ribbed 
men  of  the  Modern  Athens,3  forgetting  at  once  their  politics 
and  their  parsimony,  have  delved  their  one  arm  up  to  the 
shoulder  in  haggis  and  bathed  the  other  in  sheep's-head 
broth  renown.  .  .  .  But  notwithstanding  all  this,  not  even 

1  Place  to  Benjamin  Hawes,  M.P.,  April  24,  1839. 

2  The  European  Magazine,  New  Series,  vol.  ii.  No.  7,  March  1826, 
pp.  227-33. 

3  The  reference  is  to  Brougham's  celebrated  Edinburgh  tour,  from 
which  he  had  just  then  returned. 


188          THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY 

a  ballad  singer  in  petit  France l  has  trolled  the  name  of 
Place,  not  a  bone  has  been  gnawed  or  a  pint  of  small-beer 
emptied  to  his  glory ;  and  that  ungrateful  country,  which 
was  pouring  pots  of  all  denominations,  shapes,  and  sizes 
upon  the  heads  of  mere  puppets  of  his  science,  has  voted 
him  nothing,  no,  not  so  much  as  a  pointless  and  eyeless 
needle."  .  .  .  "Now,  speaking  candidly  and  without  any 
amplification,  we  scarcely  know  of  a  thing  that  he  has  not 
done — meaning,  of  course,  in  the  way  of  promoting  civil, 
religious,  and  other  kinds  of  liberty.  He  is,  adopting  the 
Oriental  similitude,  the  cow's  horn  upon  which  stands  the 
tortoise  upon  which  stand  the  worlds  in  all  their  number 
and  variety.  .  .  .  No  one  needs  to  be  told  that  the 
whole  popular  liberties  of  this  country,  and,  by  connection 
and  consequence,  of  the  world,  depend  upon  the  electors  of 
Westminster;  and  just  as  necessarily  as  the  sinking  of  lead 
depends  upon  its  weight,  do  these  electors  depend  upon 
Mr.  Place,  not  only  in  the  choice  of  the  men  whom  they 
entrust  as  their  representatives,  but  in  the  very  subjects  in 
which  those  men  deal.  When  it  is  said  that  Sir  Francis 
Burdett  or  John  Cam  Hobhouse  made  a  proposition  or  a 
speech,  thus  or  thus,  there  is  a  misnomer  in  the  assertion ; 
for  the  proposition  or  the  speech  belongs  in  justice  to  Mr. 
Place,  and  in  all  that  demonstration  of  frantic  freedom, 
that  tumultuous  tide  of  popularity  which  they  propel,  he 
is  the  influential  luminary,  the  moon  which  stirs  up  the 
waters.  .  .  .  Look  over  the  notices  of  motions,  and  see 
when  Joseph  [Hume]  is  to  storm  sixpence  laid  out  in  the 
decoration  of  a  public  work,  or  sack  the  salary  of  a  clerk 
in  a  public  office,  and  when  you  find  that  in  a  day  or  two 
it  is  to  astonish  St.  Stephen's  and  delight  the  land,  then 
go,  if  you  can  find  admission,  to  the  library  of  this  inde- 
fatigable statesman,  and  you  will  discover  him  schooling 
the  Nabob  like  a  baby.  There  upon  that  three-footed 
1  "  Petty  France,"  a  street  in  Westminster,  since  pulled  down. 


THE    CHARING    CROSS   LIBRARY  189 

stool,  gowned  in  wholesome  grey,  with  an  absolute  ava- 
lanche of  schemes,  scraps,  and  calculations  around  him, 
sits  the  philosophic  sage,  delivering  his  golden  rules  with 
the  slowness  and  the  certainty  of  the  choicest  alembic ; 
and  yonder,  squatted  upon  a  pile  of  unread  pamphlets,  sits 
the  substantial  pupil,  with  his  Avhole  countenance  perked 
into  one  gigantic  ear  of  astonishment  and  delight.  '  The 
wild  ass  quaffing  the  spring  in  the  desert,'  says  the  Arabian 
proverb,  '  is  not  so  lovely  as  the  countenance  of  him  who 
drinketh  understanding.' 

"Nor  is  it  in  the  senate-house  alone  that  the  political 
tact  and  talents  of  this  illustrious  man  are  exerted  in 
benefiting  the  world.  All  those  schemes  which  are  now 
in  progress  for  rendering  Westminster  the  fountain  of 
philosophy  and  civilisation,  as  well  as  of  liberty,  can  have 
originated  with  none  other  than  Mr.  Place.  It  is  true  that 
Jeremy  Bentham  is  his  senior  by  a  year  or  two ;  but  still 
we  see  no  reason  why  Jeremy  should  not  be  the  pupil,  and 
Mr.  Place  the  instructor;  and  we  are  quite  sure  that  of 
the  other  philosophers  of  Queen's  Square l  he  is  the  manu- 
facturer. Now,  the  singular  part  of  the  business  is,  that 
the  others  should  get  all  the  merit.  Those  codes,  cate- 
chisms, and  constitutions  which,  if  the  world  had  but 
read  them,  would  have  done  it  so  much  good,  all  have  his 
imprint  upon  them — or  rather,  perhaps  we  should  say, 
his  spirit  in  them.  The  government  of  Mill,  the  political 
economy  of  M'Culloch,  the  speeches  of  Dr.  Borthwick 
Gilchrist,  the  lectures  of  Dr.  Birkbeck,  the  poetry  of 
Bowring,  and,  as  we  have  sometimes  been  inclined  to 
think,  the  holdings  forth  of  Gast 2  and  Gregory — all  have  a 
smack  of  Place  in  them.  .  .  . 

1  i.e.  Bentham's  house  in  Queen's  Square  Place,  Westminster. 

2  Secretary  to  the  Shipwrights'  Union  and  the  leading  Trade  Unionist 
at  this  time  in  London.      He  was  a  friend  of  Place's.      See  Webb, 
"  History  of  Trade  Unionism,'1  p.  76  (note). 


190          THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY 

"  We  are  not  sure  that  he  was  the  absolute  inventor  of 
mechanics'  institutions,  but  we  do  think  that  either  he  or, 
which  is  the  same  thing,  some  of  his  pupils  gave  to  the 
London  combination  bearing  that  name  that  unity  and 
bias  which  cannot  fail  to  make  it  a  very  efficient  organ  of 
civil  liberty  in  Westminster,  in  the  event  of  a  contested 
election.  .  .  .  Left  to  mere  science  and  literature,  an  insti- 
tution of  this  kind  might  have  lasted  for  a  while,  though 
it  would  soon  have  gone  the  way  of  all  institutions ;  but  by 
making  it  political,  it  is  connected  with  that  which  is  both 
inexhaustible  and  indestructible,  and  therefore  it  is  made 
permanent.  Even  here,  however,  Mr.  Place  is  as  modest 
and  as  self-denying  as  he  is  in  his  literature,  his  philosophy, 
and  his  greater  politics.  He  does  not  always  attend,  and 
when  he  does,  he  sits  in  his  corner,  '  modest  as  the  maid 
that  sips  alone,'  although  a  knowing  person  may  discover 
from  the  expression  of  his  countenance  when  the  actor 
does,  and  when  he  does  not,  give  the  sense  of  his  author." 

In  spite,  however,  of  the  great  influence  which  Place 
had  acquired,  and  of  the  very  real  and  important  reforms 
which  he  had  secured,  he  sometimes  lost  patience  com- 
pletely. The  trickery  and  dishonesty  of  the  Whig  party, 
the  weakness  of  the  Radicals,  and  the  frequency  with 
which  those  whom  he  had  helped  allowed  themselves  to 
be  cajoled  or  bought  over  by  Governments  opposed  to  all 
progress,  disgusted  him.  Thus,  writing  to  Hume  in  1830, 
he  says :  "  I  am  a  tolerably  patient  fellow,  but  on  this  one 
subject — this  rascally  House  of  Commons — I  cannot  always 
command  my  feelings.  This  atrocious  assembly,  when- 
ever I  think  of  it,  excites  in  me  indignation,  hatred,  utter 
abhorrence.  Whenever  I  think  of  them,  I  involuntarily 
run  over  a  long  list  of  their  diabolical  acts,  their  abomin- 
able conduct,  which  perhaps  has  no  parallel,  and  I  get  ease 
only  by  cursing  them  most  heartily  and  sincerely.  I  need 
not  more  particularly  point  out  to  you  the  cause  of  my 


THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY  191 

abhorrence.  You  know  these  people  in  their  corporate 
capacity  thoroughly,  and  can  scarcely  think  better  of  them 
than  I  do." l 

The  year  1830  seeins  indeed  to  have  been  a  particularly 
trying  one  to  him.  The  revival  by  Scarlett,  the  Attorney- 
General  of  the  Whig  Government,  of  the  barbarous  press 
prosecutions,  and  the  attempt  to  alter  the  stamp  duty  on 
newspapers,  and  to  increase  the  stringency  of  the  laAV 
against  their  proprietors,  had  thoroughly  aroused  him. 
He  took  active  steps  to  combat  these  proceedings.  But 
members  were  dilatory,  and  all  sorts  of  provoking  delays 
were  put  in  his  way.  In  the  "  loose  gossiping  account "  - 
of  his  doings  during  the  year  1830,  which  he  wrote  late  in 
that  year  and  in  1831,  he  reveals  the  very  great  chagrin 
and  disappointment  he  felt.  "  These  things  sometimes  vex 
me,  and  almost  make  me  resolve  to  cut  my  parliamentary 
acquaintance ;  and  this  I  certainly  should  do  were  it  not 
that  the  matters  I  have  accomplished  encourage  me  to 
hope  I  shall  still  be  successful.  It  was  only  after  six  years 
of  continued  exertion  in  a  great  many  ways  that  I  at 
length  induced  Mr.  Hume  to  procure  a  committee,  which 
led  to  the  repeal  of  the  laws  against  combinations  of  work- 
men, and  the  Act  which  forbade  artisans  leaving  the 
country.3  It  was  only  after  long-continued  efforts  that 
the  exportation  of  machinery  was  brought  to  the  state  it 
now  is.  It  was  in  defiance  of  the  opinions  of  the  Speaker 
and  the  Attorney-General  that  I  procured  the  repeal  of 
the  Cutting  and  Flaying  Act ;  and  it  was  only  after  efforts 
continued  during  seven  years  that  I  at  length  was  the 
means  of  a  committee  sitting  on  the  conduct  of  the  Com- 
missioners of  Hackney  Coaches,  which  will  probably  put 
an  end  to  the  abuses  and  to  the  absurd  laws  which  incom- 
mode this  business  arid  inconvenience  the  public.  If  I  did 

1  Place  to  Hume,  May  25,  1830.  2  "Autobiography." 

3  See  Chap.  VIII. 


THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY 

not  console  myself  with  these  and  similar  results,  I  should 
abandon  all  such  efforts,  shut  out  my  political  friends,  and 
betake  myself  to  more  agreeable  pursuits.  It  is  now  the 
ipth  November.  The  Parliament  has  been  sitting  for 
business  only  three  weeks,  and  I  have  been  requested  to 
do  as  much  in  the  way  of  research  and  statement  as  would 
occupy  me  for  three  months.  I  will  do  no  one  of  these 
tilings,  unless  I  have  very  good  reason  to  believe  that  my 
time  will  not  be  wasted,  nor  the  matters  on  which  I  may 
employ  myself  be  laid  aside.  With  some  I  will  insist  that 
old  matters  be  brought  forward  before  I  attend  to  any  new 
ones,  unless  these  shall  be  decidedly  of  as  much  urgency 
as  importance." :  But  his  despair  was  always  short-lived. 
"  I  am  always  doing  all  that  can  be  done,"  he  had  once 
written,  "  but  I  have  learned  to  let  that  which  we  cannot 
accomplish  go  without  regret." 2 

There  is  one  danger  to  which  those  who  are  in  close 
contact  with  the  actual  facts  of  political  work  are  peculiarly 
liable,  but  which  Place  entirely  escaped.  He  did  not 
become  cynical.  It  often  happens  that  a  politician, 
having  started  with  the  idea  that  he  is  following  the 
rushing  current  of  popular  enthusiasm,  and  having  found 
that  his  real  work  consists  in  creating,  by  all  sorts  of 
ingenious  shifts,  a  poor  semblance  of  interest  among  a 
deeply  indifferent  public,  comes  to  think  of  himself  as  a 
charlatan,  and  of  his  work  as  a  rather  disreputable  amuse- 
ment. Place,  however,  understood  the  machinery  of  poli- 
tics without  despising  it.  "  By  the  word  '  people,' "  he 
once  wrote,  "  when,  as  in  this  letter  I  use  the  word  in  a 
political  sense,  I  mean  those  among  them  who  take  part 
in  public  affairs,  by  whom  the  rest  must  be  governed." 3 

From  another  danger,  incident  to  his  position  as  an  ex- 

1  "Autobiography,"  vol.  v.  chap.  7,  under  date  May  1830. 

2  Place  to  Wakefield,  December  5,  1813. 

3  Place  to  Sir  J.  Hobhouse,  June  2,  1832. 


THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY  193 

working-man  who  had  become  a  powerful  politician,  he  did 
not  perhaps  escape  so  entirely.  The  facts  of  his  own  career 
were  the  best  demonstration  of  the  validity  of  his  principles, 
and  for  a  time  he  was  apt  to  expect  his  acquaintances  to  be 
as  interested  as  he  was  himself  in  his  wonderful  success  in 
gaining  education,  wealth,  and  political  influence.  In  Feb- 
ruary 1825,  for  instance,  Thomas  Campbell,  the  poet,  had 
written  a  letter  in  the  Times,  in  which  he  had  given  an 
eulogistic  description  of  Place  as  an  argument  in  favour 
of  establishing  a  University  for  London,  and  putting  the 
highest  education  within  the  reach  of  the  commercial 
classes.  Place,  therefore,  sent  Campbell  a  long  private 
letter  describing  the  exact  limits  of  his  knowledge  of  lan- 
guages, science,  law,  political  economy,  metaphysics,  the  fine 
arts,  &c.,  and  of  the  studies  by  which  that  knowledge  had 
been  acquired.  He  then  proceeds :  "  The  subject  on  which 
without  pretension  I  have  prided  myself  most,  is  the  power 
I  have  possessed  of  influencing  or  governing  other  men 
individually  and  in  bodies — I  am  sure  I  may  say  truly  by 
honest  means — and  for  what  at  the  time  always  appeared  to 
me  to  be  useful  purposes.  This  has  always  been  to  me  a  test 
of  the  information  I  had  acquired,  and  had  I  not  succeeded 
as  I  have  done,  I  should  have  been  disappointed,  and 
turned  back  to  inquire  why  I  had  failed.  I  have  never 
interfered  in  any  way,  in  any  one  single  instance  out  of 
my  business,  for  the  purpose  of  any  personal  advantage 
whatever,  except  intellectual  advancement.  In  all  public 
matters  in  which  I  have  been  engaged  I  have  either  been 
the  leader  or  one  of  the  leaders,  and  I  am  not  aware  of  any 
one  instance  in  which  I  did  not  obtain  as  much,  and,  in 
some  instances,  considerably  more  credit  than  was  due  to 
me."  l  After  his  failure,  however,  as  a  contributor  to  the 
Westminster  Review,  and  in  other  literary  work  on  which 
he  had  set  his  heart,  there  is  little  trace  in  his  correspond- 
1  Place  to  Campbell,  February  10,  1825. 


194-          THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY 

once   of  that  self-complacency  which  is  apt  to  disguise 
itself  as  scientific  frankness. 

But  a  much  heavier  blow,  and  one  which  left  its  marks 
on  all  he  said  and  did  during  the  remainder  of  his  long  and 
busy  life,  now  befell  him.  On  October  1 9,  1 827,  his  first  wife 
died  of  cancer.  They  had  been  married  for  thirty-six  years, 
and  she  had  borne  him  fourteen  children,  of  whom  ten 
were  then  alive.  She  had  always  been  busy  in  household 
affairs,  and  had  never  attempted  to  share  his  intellectual 
interests,  so  that  he  had  found  it  difficult,  when  his  grown- 
up sons  and  daughters  were  at  home,  to  prevent  her  from 
feeling  herself  excluded  from  their  talk.  But  her  death 
revealed  that  passionate  intensity  of  feeling  which  was  the 
real  driving  force  of  Place's  life.  Ten  years  before,  when 
William  Allen  became  a  widower,  Place  had  written  that 
"  Allen  has  no  philosophy  to  enable  him  to  reason  rightly, 
to  induce  him  to  see  things  as  they  are,  none  to  hold  him 
up  against  those  common  calamities  which  ought  to  be 
borne  with  firmness;  and  the  consequence  is  that  he 
has  been  both  miserable  in  mind  and  ill  in  body." l  Now 
he  himself  was  to  learn  that  no  amount  of  right  reasoning 
can  make  calamities  anything  but  calamities.  His  wife 
was  buried  in  the  churchyard  of  Angmering,  the  little 
Sussex  village  where  she  died.  "  On  the  day  of  her 
funeral,"  Place  wrote,  "  I  suffered  more  than  I  had  ever 
before  done,  and  more  than  I  believed  I  could  suffer  on 
any  occasion,  more,  I  am  sure,  than  I  can  again  suffer.  I 
held  up  against  it  all  I  could,  I  resisted  as  much  as  man 
could  do,  but  it  was  useless,  and  I  was  utterly  subdued,  so 
much  so,  indeed,  that  I  could  willingly  have  died  also.  .  .  . 
All  that  was  in  my  power  was  hiding  myself  in  a  barn  to 
indulge  my  sorrow.  Go  to  the  funeral  I  could  not ;  I  had 
no  power  left  equal  to  such  a  purpose,  and  here,  therefore, 
in  the  barn  I  remained  ...  a  mere  child  without  a  par- 
1  Place  to  J.  Mill,  October  30,  1816. 


THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY  195 

ticle  of  resolution  or  self-control  left  in  him.  .  .  .  Such 
was  the  impression  on  me  that  for  some  time  after  her 
'death  I  frequently  thought  I  heard  her  moving  along 
the  passages  of  the  house  or  in  the  rooms.  These  noises 
were  made  by  others,  yet  I  very  often  looked  up  expecting 
to  see  her."  1 

Of  the  succeeding  months  he  wrote  to  his  son-in-law  at  Rio 
de  Janeiro,  "No  one  can  imagine  how  wretched  I  was.  .  .  . 
So  completely  was  I  thrust  out  from  all  which  to  me  was 
most  dear,  that  I  knew  not  what  to  do.  ...  Much  as  I  love 
my  children,  desirous  as  I  am  to  do  them  every  possible 
service,  it  was,  and  is,  quite  out  of  my  power  to  find  among 
them  the  society  which  is  necessary  to  my  comfort.  I 
cannot,  like  many  other  men,  go  to  a  tavern;  I  hate  taverns 
and  tavern-company.  I  cannot  drink,  I  cannot  for  any 
considerable  time  consent  to  converse  with  fools.  I  dislike 
set,  formal  dinners,  at  which  a  man  must  either  show  off 
or  be  voted  a  bore,  and  show  off  to  very  little  purpose  after 
all,  to  come  home  in  the  middle  of  the  night  discontented. 
I  was  utterly  uncomfortable.  I  read  and  wrote  all  day,  and 
almost  all  night.  I  had  some  matters  of  laborious  research 
in  hand,  and  I  went  on  doggedly  with  them.  I  thought  I 
might  become  reconciled  to  my  circumstances.  ...  In  this, 
however,  I  totally  failed.  ...  I  had  no  one  to  converse 
with,  no  one  to  talk  over,  as  I  had  been  accustomed  to  do, 
the  occurrences  of  the  day,  no  one  to  sympathise  with 
me  in  anything  I  was  doing,  and  my  thoughts  were  there- 
fore turned  in  upon  myself  and  upon  my  poor  deceased 
wife.  I  then  went  solitarily  to  my  sofa — I  could  not  sleep 
in  the  bed,  and  had  discarded  it  from  the  day  of  my  poor 
wife's  death — there  to  endure  the  thoughts  I  could  not 
dismiss,  there  to  suffer  as  I  had  never  before  suffered.  I 
assure  you,  John,  that  during  many  nights  I  never  slept  at 

1  "  Autobiography,"  chap.  14. 


196          THE   CHARING   CROSS   LIBRARY 

all.  I  wasted  away,  and  at  the  end  of  three  months  had 
lost  nearly  twenty  pounds  in  weight." l 

Before  his  wife's  death  Place  had  been  several  times  con- 
sulted on  business  matters  by  Mrs.  Chatterley,  a  clever 
middle-aged  actress  at  Covent  Garden  Theatre.  She  now 
called  to  condole  with  him,  and  during  the  year  1828,  when 
absorption  in  the  details  of  politics  had  become  impossible 
to  him,  he  formed  the  habit  of  spending  a  few  hours  each 
day  at  her  house  in  Brompton  Square.  This  continued 
for  two  years,  but  though,  in  1828  and  1829,  he  left  the 
library  every  day  at  three  o'clock,  his  mornings  were  occu- 
pied as  much  as  ever.  On  May  4,  1829,  for  instance,  he 
notes  that  he  has  on  hand  schemes  dealing  with  Corn 
Laws,  Silk  Laws,  Police,  Vestries,  Parliamentary  Reform, 
and  the  employment  of  children  in  cotton  factories. 

In  February  1830  he  and  Mrs.  Chatterley  were  married, 
and,  with  some  regret,  he  determined  to  remain  at  Charing 
Cross  instead  of  removing  to  Brompton  Square;  to  con- 
tinue to  live,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  daily  work  of  politics, 
and  not  in  literature  and  research.  "It  was  utterly  im- 
possible for  me  to  detach  myself  from  the  business  of  others 
if  I  resided  at  Charing  Cross.  So  I  at  once  abandoned  the 
schemes  I  would  willingly  have  indulged,  and  especially 
the  attempt  I  had  long  since  contemplated  of  writing  a 
history  of  North  America  (and  for  which  I  have  collected 
upwards  of  600  volumes),  and  at  once  reconciled  myself  to 
my  old  way  of  consuming  time." 2 

1  Place  to  J.  Miers,  March  7,  1828  ("Autobiography,1'  chap.  14). 

2  "Autobiography,"  vol.  v. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

THE    COMBINATION   LAWS 

"  The  Labour  Question  may  be  said  to  have  come  into 
public  view  simultaneously  with  the  repeal,  betiveen  sixty 
and  seventy  years  ago,  of  the  Combination  Laics,  which 
had  made  It  an  offence  for  labouring  men  to  unite  for  the 
purpose  of  procuring  by  joint  option,  tlirounl  peaceful 
means,  an  c.agmentation  of  their  wages.  From  this  point 
progress  began."  l 

The  repeal  of  the  Combination  Laws  in  1824-25  was  the 
most  striking  piece  of  work  that  Place  ever  carried  through 
single-handed.  During  the  eighteenth  century  there  had 
been  passed  a  series  of  statutes  directed  against  combina- 
tions of  journeymen  in  particular  trades.  The  first  of  the 
series  was  an  act  of  1721  ''for  regulating  the  journeymen 
tailors  within  the  bills  of  mortality,"  and  the  last  the 
general  act  of  1 799  "  to  prevent  unlawful  combinations  of 
workmen." 2  This  legislation  was  not  successful  in  putting 
a  stop  to  combination :  but,  together  with  the  common  law 
as  interpreted  and  developed  by  the  judges,  it  enabled  a 
master  who  had  a  quarrel  with  his  workmen  to  punish 
them  with  the  most  abominable  tyranny. 

1  Extract  from  au  article  on  "The  English  Labourer.''  by  the  Right 
Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone,  in  the  Weekly  Star,  Xo.  i,  vol.  i.,  February  6, 
1892. 

-  For  the  history  of  the  Combination  Laws  see  "The  History  of 
Trade  Unionism,"  by  Sidney  and  Beatrice  Webb  (London,  1894), 
chap.  ii.  As  to  their  operation  in  the  case  of  the  London  tailors, 
see  "Select  Dociunents  Illustrating  the  History  of  Trade  Unionism 
in  the  Tailoring  Trade,"  by  F.  W.  Galton  (London,  i! 


198  TIIK   COMBINATION    LAWS 

A  unanimous  refusal  to  work  at  reduced  prices  was 
regarded  as  sufficient  evidence  of  unlawful  combination, 
and  the  non-acceptance  by  an  unemployed  journeyman  of 
work  offered  to  him  by  any  employer  in  his  trade,  meant 
liability  to  undergo  a  long  period  of  imprisonment  or  to 
be  impressed  into  his  Majesty's  sea  or  land  forces.  The 
material  which  Place  collected  in  eight  thick  volumes,1  to 
illustrate  the  history  of  the  Combination  Laws,  includes 
several  cases  where  the  magistrates  threatened  the  men 
with  imprisonment  as  an  alternative  to  work  on  the 
masters'  terms,  and  one  case  where  a  summons  for  com- 
bination was  used  to  put  a  stop  to  a  suit  for  wages  owing.2 
It  also  shows  that,  as  Place  said,  the  laws  "were  not  so 
much  the  consequence  of  the  desire  to  keep  the  people  in 
an  abject  state  of  subjection  to  their  employers,  as  of  a 
persuasion  that  they  enabled  those  employers  to  get  their 
work  done  at  less  expense." 3  "  Justice,"  Place  wrote,  "  was 
entirely  out  of  the  question  ;  the  working-men  could  seldom 
obtain  a  hearing  before  a  magistrate — never  without  impa- 
tience and  insult ;  and  never  could  they  calculate  on  even  an 
approximation  to  a  rational  conclusion.  .  .  .  Could  an  ac- 
curate account  be  given  of  proceedings,  of  hearings  before 
magistrates,  trials  at  sessions  and  in  the  Court  of  King's 
Bench,  the  gross  injustice,  the  foul  invective  and  terrible 
punishments  inflicted,  would  not,  after  a  few  years  have 
passed  away,  be  credited  on  any  but  the  best  of  evidence." 4 

Many  of  the  statutes  against  combination  nominally 
applied  to  the  masters  equally  with  the  men,  but  though 
the  masters  openly  formed  agreements  to  lower  wages, 
with  penalties  attached  to  their  violation,  and  circulated 
black-lists  of  insubordinate  journeymen,  not  a  single  case 

1  Brit.  Mus.  Addl.  MSS.  27,799-806. 

2  See  First  Report  and  Minutes  of  Evidence  of  the  Select  Committee 
on  Artisans  and  Machinery — Evidence  of  W.  Ablett,  March  8,  1824, 
p.  147.     Place's  copy,  preserved  in  27,800  (161). 

3  27,798  (6).  *  27,798  (7,  8). 


THE  COMBINATION   LAWS  199 

lias  been  discovered  where  they  were  successfully  prose- 
cuted for  these  offences. 

Though  Place  in  the  year  1799  became  an  employer,  he 
never  forgot  what  he  had  suffered  as  a  black-listed  and 
starving  journeyman  breeches-maker,  or  while  in  constant 
danger  of  arrest  as  the  underpaid  secretary  of  the  carpen- 
ters' and  plumbers'  trade  clubs.  In  a  MS.  report  to  the 
Council  of  the  National  Political  Union  in  1831  he  wrote: 
"  When  I  became  a  master  I  did  not  forget  that  I  had 
been  a  journeyman,  and  I  acted  accordingly.  Never  in 
my  life  did  I  call  any  man  who  worked  for  me  out  of 
his  name.  I  always  paid  the  highest  rate  of  wages,  and 
whenever  the  men  struck  for  an  increase  of  wages  I  never 
suffered  them  to  leave  me,  but  at  all  the  three  strikes 
which  occurred  whilst  I  remained  in  business  I  gave  the 
advance  as  soon  as  it  was  asked,  though  these  advances 
raised  the  men's  wages  from  a  guinea  and  ninepence  a 
week  to  six  and  thirty  shillings.  Since  I  left  business 
in  1818  I  have  constantly  employed  some  portions  of  my 
time  to  promote  the  welfare  of  the  working  people,  and 
at  times  a  very  considerable  portion  of  my  time,  as  for 
instance  in  procuring,  after  efforts  continued  for  years,  the 
repeal  of  the  laws  against  combinations  of  workmen,  and 
in  establishing  the  mechanics'  institutions.  This  explana- 
tion will,  I  hope,  be  received  as  evidence  that  I  really  am, 
what  I  pretend  to  be,  the  ardent  and  active  friend  of  the 
working  classes." l 

Place  gives  the  grounds  of  his  hostility  to  the  Combi- 
nation Laws  in  a  pamphlet  written  at  the  time  of  the 
debates  on  the  Act  of  1825  :  "If  keeping  down  wages  in 
some  cases,  by  law,  was  a  national  good  ;  if  the  degrada- 
tion of  the  whole  body  of  the  working  people  by  law  was 
desirable ;  if  perpetuating  discord  between  masters  and 
workmen  was  useful ;  if  litigation  was  a  benefit ;  if  living 
1  MS.  Report,  preserved  in  27,822  (51,  52). 


200  THE  COMBINATION  LAWS 

in  perpetual  violation  of  law  was  a  proper  state  for  work- 
men and  their  employers  to  be  placed  in,  then  the  laws 
against  combinations  of  workmen  were  good  laws,  for  to 
all  these  did  they  tend." l 

In  1810  the  journeymen  compositors  employed  by  the 
Times  were  prosecuted  for  the  crime  of  belonging  to  a 
combination  and  taking  part  in  a  strike.  As  in  1 806  the 
scandals  of  the  Westminster  election  brought  Place  back 
into  democratic  politics,2  so  now  this  practical  example  of 
the  operation  of  the  Combination  Laws  started  him  on  the 
work  of  obtaining  freedom  of  association.  "  The  cruel 
persecutions  of  the  journeymen  printers  employed  on  the 
Times  newspaper  in  1810  were  carried  to  an  almost  in- 
credible extent.  The  judge  who  tried  and  sentenced  some 
of  them  was  the  then  Common  Serjeant  of  London,  Sir 
John  Silvester,  commonly  known  by  the  cognomen  of 
"  Bloody  Black  Jack."  He  was  a  remarkably  large  bluff 
man.  with  large,  uncouth  features,  and  a  somewhat  ferocious 
aspect.  He  obtained  the  cognomen  in  consequence  of  his 
hasty  disposition,  the  satisfaction  he  expressed  when  sen- 
tencing criminals,  and  the  heavy  sentences  he  inflicted."3 
The  men  were  sentenced  on  December  11,  1810,  and  the 
Times  of  two  days  afterwards  contains  the  text  of  "  Bloody 
Black  Jack's  "  pronouncement.  "  Prisoners,  you  have  been 
convicted  of  a  most  wicked  conspiracy  to  injure  the  most 
vital  interests  of  those  very  employers  who  gave  you  bread, 
with  intent  to  impede  and  injure  them  in  their  business ; 
and,  indeed,  as  far  as  in  you  lay,  to  effect  their  ruin.  The 
frequency  of  such  crimes  among  men  of  your  class  of  life, 
and  their  mischievous  and  dangerous  tendency  to  ruin  the 
fortunes  of  those  emplo}rers  which  a  principle  of  gratitude 
and  self-interest  should  induce  you  to  support,  demand  of 

1  "Observations  on  Huskisson's  Speech,"  by  F.  P.  (Francis  Place). 
London,  1825,  p.  21. 
8  Cf.  Chap.  II.  3  27,798  (8). 


THE  COMBINATION  LAWS  201 

the  law  that  a  severe  example  should  be  made  of  those 
persons  who  shall  be  convicted  of  such  daring  and  flagitious 
combinations,  in  defiance  of  public  justice,  and  in  violation 
of  public  order.  N"o  symptom  of  contrition  on  your  part 
has  appeared — no  abatement  of  the  combination  in  which 
you  are  accomplices  has  yet  resulted  from  the  example 
of  your  convictions."  *  The  men  were  then  sentenced  to 
terms  of  imprisonment  varying  from  nine  months  to  two 
years. 

In  the  same  year  the  master  tailors  of  London  made  an 
effort  to  obtain  such  a  drastic  Act  of  Parliament  as  would 
enable  them  to  put  down  the  long-established  union  in  the 
trade.2  "  I  was  applied  to,"  says  Place,  "  to  subscribe,  but  I 
refused;  yet  notwithstanding  this,  I  was  appointed  a  mem- 
ber of  their  committee.  I  attended  once,  and  explained 
to  them,  very  calmly  and  deliberately,  the  reasons  why  I 
did  not  and  could  not  concur  with  them, — and  why  1 
thought  it  advisable  for  them  to  desist,  and  make  an 
attempt  to  procure  the  repeal  of  all  the  laws  against  com- 
binations of  workmen.  I  showed  them  that  their  present 
proceedings  could  cause  nothing  but  mischief:  that  they 
would  not  succeed  in  procuring  an  Act  of  Parliament ;  and 
that  if  they  could,  it  would  be  evaded,  no  matter  how  it 
was  worded.  I  showed  them  how  it  happened  that  in 
their  particular  trade,  they  had  never  been  able  to  make 
use  of  the  law  as  it  stood,  and  explained  to  them  that,  so 
long  as  the  men  continued  to  repose  confidence  in  those 
they  appointed  to  manage  their  concerns,  no  law  could 
reach  them,  and  that  a  more  severe  law  would,  as  they 
very  well  knew,  increase  that  confidence.  I  gave  no  offence, 

1  The  Times,  December  13,  1810. 

2  Special  Acts  had  been  passed  in  1721.  and  again  in  1768,  fixing  the 
wages  and    forbidding    combinations    in    the    tailoring    trade.      The 
employers   had  been   attempting   f>  r   some   years   to   get   these   laws 
strengthened  and  more   stringently  administered.     See   Galton,  "  The 
Tailoring  Trade"  (supra). 


202  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

but  the}7  proceeded ;  and  a  Committee  (a  select  committee 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  but  an  open  committee,  that  is, 
a  committee  which  any  member  who  chose  might  attend) 
was  appointed  to  take  evidence.  When  the  Committee 
had  sat  two  cr  three  days  I  went  down  to  the  House,  and 
after  hearing  some  witnesses  examined,  requested  that  I 
might  be  examined.  I  had  given  a  sketch  of  what  I  wished 
to  depose,  to  the  parliamentary  agent  for  the  journeymen, 
who  mismanaged  the  business  sadly ;  but  still  my  evidence 
was  sufficient  to  destroy  the  bill.  I  was  well  known  by 
name  in  the  trade,  and  pretty  wrell  known  personally, 
though  I  knew  scarcely  half-a-dozen  of  the  masters.  There 
were  many  in  the  room,  yet  in  no  instance  was  the  person 
of  any  one  of  them  known  to  me.  My  evidence  produced 
a  strong  ebullition  among  those  who  took  a  different  view 
of  the  matter.  Mr.  Barton  was  chairman  of  the  Commit- 
tee ;  he  was  a  Welsh  Judge,  and  at  this  time  was  totally 
blind.  When  my  evidence  was  concluded,  some  of  the 
spectators  hissed ;  upon  which  Mr.  Barton,  in  the  name  of 
the  Committee,  thanked  me  for  coming  forward  as  I  had 
done  and  giving  the  evidence  I  had  given.  Two  of  the 
principal  master  tailors  then  told  the  chairman  that  they 
concurred  completely  in  all  I  had  said,  and  wished  my 
evidence  should  stand  as  theirs  also.  It  was  explained  to 
the  Committee  that  I  was  entirely  unknown  to  these 
gentlemen,  and  had  had  no  communication  with  either  of 
them.  This  put  an  end  to  the  proceedings  in  Parliament. 
Several  master  tailors  called  on  me  afterwards  and  thanked 
me ;  but  not  a  single  journeyman,  nor  an}'  one  for  them, 
came  near  me,  nor  at  any  subsequent  time  did  they  do 
anything  to  promote  the  repeal  of  the  Combination  Laws ; 
— except  a  small  number  at  one  house  of  call  signing  a 
petition  for  that  purpose  at  my  request,  when  I  had  pre- 
pared it  for  them."  l 

1  27,798  (9-11). 


THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

The  workmen  "could  not  be  persuaded  to  believe  that 
the  repeal  of  the  laws  was  possible.  Every  one  else  either 
thought  the  laws  were  useful,  or  that  any  attempt  to  pro- 
cure their  repeal  would  be  loss  of  time ;  and  some  few,  as 
they  came  gradually  into  the  persuasion  that  the  laws 
ought  to  be  repealed,  refused  to  have  anything  to  do  with 
so  hopeless  a  case.  I  was  not  to  be  put  from  my  purpose, 
as  I  had  seen  strange  things  accomplished  by  perseverance, 
and  I  was  resolved  to  persevere. 

"In  1814,  therefore,  I  began  to  work  seriously  to  procure 
a  repeal  of  the  laws  against  combinations  of  workmen,  but 
for  a  long  time  made  no  visible  progress.  As  often  as  any 
dispute  arose  between  masters  and  men,  or  when  any  law 
proceedings  were  had,  and  reported  in  the  newspapers,  I 
interfered,  sometimes  with  the  masters,  sometimes  with  the 
men,  very  generally,  as  far  as  I  could,  by  means  of  some 
one  or  more  of  the  newspapers,  and  sometimes  by  acting  as 
a  pacificator,  always  pushing  for  the  one  purpose,  the  repeal 
of  the  laws. 

"  I  Avrote  a  great  many  letters  to  trade  societies  in 
London,  and  as  often  as  I  heard  of  any  dispute  respect- 
ing the  Combination  Laws  in  the  country  I  wrote  to  some 
of  the  parties,  stated  my  purpose,  and  requested  informa- 
tion. Few  condescended  to  notice  my  applications,  and 
scarcely  any  furnished  me  with  the  information  I  wished 
to  have ;  but  many  of  the  country  papers  inserted  the 
articles  I  sent  to  them,  and  these  must  have  produced  some 
effect,  though  no  signs  of  any  appeared.  Working-men 
had  been  too  often  deceived  to  be  willing  to  trust  to  any 
one  who  was  not  well  known  to  them.  Habitually  cunning, 
and  suspicious  of  all  above  their  own  rank  in  life,  and 
having  no  expectation  of  any  mitigation,  much  less  of  a 
chance  of  the  laws  being  repealed,  they  could  not  persuade 
themselves  that  my  communications  were  of  any  value  to 
them,  and  they  would  not  therefore  give  themselves  any 


204  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

trouble  about  them,  much  less  to  give  such  information  as 
might,  they  thought,  be  some  day  used  against  them.  I 
understood  them  thoroughly,  and  was  neither  put  from  my 
purpose  nor  offended  with  them.  I  was  resolved  to  serve 
them  as  much  as  I  could.  I  knew  well  enough  that  if  they 
could  be  served  in  this  as  in  many  other  particulars,  it  must 
be  done  without  their  concurrence,  in  spite  of  them. 

"  The  papers  I  continued  to  write  for  the  daily  and 
weekly  press  were  not  wholly  thrown  away;  there  was, 
after  some  time,  an  evident  reluctance  in  many  places  to 
enforce  the  laws  against  the  workmen ;  and  some  who  did 
enforce  them  no  longer  met  with  the  general  support  which 
had  formerly  been  given  to  such  proceedings.1 

"In  1 8 1 8  a  Mr.  Wade,  a  wool-comber  by  trade,  as  I 
afterwards  learned,  commenced  a  Aveekly  publication  called 
the  Gorgon?  which  he  sold  for  three-halfpence.  I  learned 
his  character  and  advanced  him  some  money,  as  did  also 
Mr.  Benthain  and  Mr.  Bickersteth.  He  was  an  honest 
man,  and  although  I  never  saw  him,  his  letters  pleased  me, 
and  assured  me  I  had  done  well  in  procuring  him  assistance. 
He  repaid  all  the  money  which  had  been  lent  to  him. 

"A  number  of  this  small  publication  was  distributed 
among  trade  societies ;  copies  were  sent  to  some  master 
manufacturers  and  to  some  newspapers.  The  publication 
was  political,  but  it  contained  much  that  related  to  trade, 
manufactures,  and  domestic  policy.  This  paper  induced 

1  In  1819  Place,  in  a  letter  to  Hobhouse,  wrote  :  "Only  think  of  it, 
that  I,  sitting  in  my  skylight  as  the  sycophant  Perry  called  it,  have, 
by  taking  advantage  of  circumstances,  induced  the  Chronicle,  and  even 
the  Times,  to  set  the  matter  on  its  right  footing.    The  Star  is  a  powerful 
auxiliary,  and  I  expect  the  Scotsman,  to  whom  I  have  written  at  much 
length,  will  be  a  useful  coadjutor.     It  has  always  appeared  to  me  to  be 
good  policy  to  work  with  the  press  in  any  way  it  may  at  any  time  be 
willing  to  work  for  the  public  good.'' — Place  to  Hobhouse,  August  16, 
1819,  27,837  (173). 

2  Place's  own  bound  volume  of  the  Gorgon  for  1818-1819  is  in  the 
British  Museum. 


THE   COMBINATION   LAAVS  205 

Mr.  Hume  to  come  into  my  project  much  more  than  he 
had  hitherto  done ;  and  to  observe  much  more  particularly 
the  operations  and  consequences  of  the  obnoxious  laws. 
I  caused  several  members  of  Parliament  to  read  the  papers 
on  trade  as  they  appeared  in  the  Gorgon,  and  I  supplied 
the  editor  with  much  of  the  matter,  which  he  worked  up 
in  his  own  way  into  essays.1  The  Gorgon  was  not  alto- 
gether such  a  publication  as  I  should  have  preferred,  but 
is  was  the  only  one  which  could  be  used  with  any  con- 
siderable effect,  and  this  was  a  sufficient  reason  why  I 
should  assist  the  proprietor  and  make  the  most  I  could 
of  it.  Progress  was  now  made.  Many  persons  began  to 
wish  for  the  repeal  of  the  laws ;  almost  every  member  of 
Parliament  whom  I  knew  became  convinced  that  the 
laws  could  do  no  good ;  most  of  them  were  satisfied  they 
did  mischief,  and  ought  to  be  repealed." 2 

On  August  1 6,  1819,  Place  wrote  in  high  spirits  to 
Hobhouse :  "  Next  session  we  shall  have  a  Committee 
on  the  wages  of  labour,  and,  whether  the  Act  against 
Combinations  of  Workmen  be  or  be  not  repealed,  the 
examination  and  discussion  of  the  subject  will  elevate  the 
wTorking-man  in  his  own  opinion.  If  it  be  repealed,  the 
effect  will  be  much  greater  than  you  can  have  any  correct 
conception  of.  If  it  be  not  repealed,  10,000  petitions  will 
be  presented  to  the  two  Houses  in  the  following  session, 
signed  by  from  two  to  three  millions  of  men  and  women 
who  actually  receive  wages.  I  am  persuading  the  work- 
men in  London,  Manchester,  and  some  other  places  openly 
to  commence  penny-a-week  societies  to  defray  the  ex- 
penses of  sending  some  of  the  ablest  among  them  to 
attend  the  Committee.  The  repeal  of  the  Combination 

1  See,  in  particular,  an  account  of   the  London  tailors  and  their 
combinations,  which  appeared  in  the  issues  of  the  Gordon  of  September 
26,  October  3  and  10,  1818,  and  is  reprinted  by  F.  AV.  Galton,  "The 
Tailoring  Trade,"  pp.  146-160. 

2  27,798  (12-14). 


206  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

Laws  would  make  thousands  of  reformers  among  the 
master  tradesmen  and  manufacturers." l  And  a  few  weeks 
later  he  wrote,  even  more  hopefully,  to  Hodgskin:  "When 
it  was  agreed  to  bring  in  the  bill  to  repeal  so  much  of  the 
laws  against  combinations  of  workmen  as  relate  to  the 
rate  of  wages  and  hours  of  working,  which  is  all  that  is 
intended  to  be  done,  it  was  supposed  that  it  would  require 
several  years  to  get  it  through  the  House  of  Commons. 
But,  from  the  decided  part  the  newspapers  have  taken, 
the  correspondence  which  has  been  going  on,  and  the 
number  of  master  tradesmen  and  manufacturers  who  not 
only  desire  the  repeal,  but  are  willing  to  petition  for  it, 
and  to  give  evidence  also  before  a  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons,  hopes  are  entertained  that  it  may  be 
got  through  next  session.  Mr.  M['Culloch]  can  do  much 
service  by  helping  this  on,  as  he  is  looked  to  as  an 
authority  on  these  matters.  It  is  of  vast  importance,  and 
would  do  more  towards  destroying  the  existing  animosities 
between  the  working-men  and  their  employers,  than  any 
other  circumstance  whatsoever."  - 

These  high  hopes  and  spirits  were  not,  however,  justified 
by  events,  and  Place  continued  to  devote  his  time  to  the 
collection  of  evidence,  and  to  the  personal  conversion  of 
individual  members  of  Parliament,  editors  nnd  econo- 
mists. At  last,  in  1822,  Joseph  Hume,  encouraged  by 
several  members  to  bring  the  matter  before  the  House  of 
Commons,  announced  that  he  intended  to  bring  in  a  bill 
to  repeal  all  the  laws  against  combinations  of  workmen. 

"  Parliament,"  says  Place,  "  was  not  as  yet  in  a  condition 
to  deal  properly  with  the  subject;  and  I  was  therefore  in 
no  hurry  to  urge  Mr.  Hume  to  proceed  beyond  indicating 
his  purpose.  I  supplied  him  with  a  considerable  quantity 
of  papers,  printed  and  MS.,  relating  to  the  subject,  advised 

1  Place  to  Hobhouse,  August  16,  1819. 

2  Place,  to  Hodgskin,  September  8,  1819. 


THE    COMBINATION   LAWS  207 

him  to  examine  them  carefully,  and  promised  my  assist- 
ance to  the  greatest  possible  extent  for  the  next  session. 
These  papers  were  afterwards  sent  to  Mr.  M'Culloch  at 
Edinburgh,  who  was  at  this  time  editor  of  the  Scotsman 
newspaper,  and  he  made  admirable  use  of  them  in  that 
paper.  This  gave  a  decided  tone  to  several  other  country 
papers,  and  caused  the  subject  to  be  discussed  in  a  way, 
and  to  an  extent,  which  it  had  never  before  been.  Towards 
the  end  of  the  session,  Mr.  Hume  informed  me  that  many 
of  the  Opposition  members  had  consented  to  a  repeal  of 
the  laws ;  and  that  Mr.  Huskisson,  Mr.  Wallace,  Mr. 
Copley  the  Attorney-General,  and  some  others  who  were 
high  in  office,  had  promised  not  to  oppose  the  appoint- 
ment of  a  Select  Committee  to  inquire  respecting  the 
efficiency  of  the  laws  against  combinations  of  workmen, 
and  their  effects  in  other  particulars.  Thus  a  consider- 
able advance  was  made." l 

Of  what  happened  in  Parliament  during  the  next  two 
years,  Place  has  left  a  detailed  chronological  account. 

"Parliament  met  on  February  4,  1823,  and  a  few  days 
afterwards  Mr.  Hume  exerted  himself  to  obtain  the 
concurrence  of  as  many  members  as  he  could  to  his 
proposal ;  he  did  not,  however,  make  much  progress. 
But  a  circumstance  soon  occurred  which  induced  many 
of  them  to  consent  to  support  his  proposition  for  a  Com- 
mittee. 

"A  Mr.  George  White,  a  clerk  of  committees  at  the 
House  of  Commons,  had  formed  a  partnership  with  a 
Mr.  Gravener  Henson,2  a  bobbin  netmaker  at  Nottingham ; 

1  27,798  (15). 

2  Gravener   Henson  had  long  been  a   leader  of    the    framework 
knitters'  unions,  and  is  sometimes  alleged  to  have  been  "  King  Lud," 
the  organiser  of  the  mobs  who  visited  obnoxious  manufacturers  and 
smashed  their  machinery.     He  suffered  several  terms  of  imprisonment, 
and  published  in  1831  a  "History  of  the  Framework  Knitters,"  now  ;i 
scarce  work. 


208  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

they,  and  some  half-dozen  others,  some  of  them  Coventry 
men,  had  concerted  a  plan  with  Mr.  Peter  Moore l  to  bring 
in  a  bill  to  repeal  the  laws  against  combinations  of  work- 
men. White  understood  the  progress  Mr.  Hume  was 
making;  but  he  and  Mr.  Henson  had  a  beautiful  scheme 
of  legislation,  as  complicated  and  absurd  as  two  such  ill- 
instructed  men  could  well  contrive.  They  meant  well, 
but  did  not  understand  the  means  necessary  to  do  well. 
They  were  both  active,  indefatigable  men.  White  went 
to  work  heartily,  and  collected  from  the  statutes  every- 
thing he  could  find  which  in  any  way  related  to  masters 
and  workmen;  this  he  showed  to  Peter  Moore  together 
with  the  draft  of  a  bill ;  and  Mr.  Moore  at  once  agreed  to 
introduce  the  bill.  This  course  was  taken  to  prevent  Mr. 
Hume  either  from  moving  for  a  Committee  or  bringing  in 
a  bill ;  and  they  were  very  near  effecting  their  purpose. 

"  On  March  3,  1823,  Mr.  Moore  obtained  leave  to  bring  in 
his  bill.  .  .  .  Mr.  Moore's  bill  produced  considerable  alarm 
to  many  members,  and  especially  to  ministers,  at  whose 
request  Mr.  Moore  at  length  consented  that  the  discussion 
on  its  merits  should  be  postponed  to  the  next  session. 

"  Parliament  met  again  on  February  3,  1824.  Just  before 
this  time  appeared  the  Edinburgh  Review,  No.  78,  con- 
taining from  the  pen  of  Mr.  M'Culloch  a  very  excellent 
essay  on  the  propriety  of  repealing  the  laws  against  com- 
binations of  workmen,  and  those  which  forbade  the  emi- 
gration of  artisans.  Its  effect  on  many  members  was 
remarkable;  several  of  them  told  me  there  was  no  re- 
sisting the  conclusive  arguments  it  contained,  and  one  of 
them  said  he  was  prepared  to  speak  the  substance  of  the 
essay  in  the  House. 

"  Mr.  Hume,  however,  met  with  more  opposition  than  he 
anticipated.  Mr.  Moore's  bill  was  a  bug-a-boo.  I  advised 
him  to  take  no  notice  of  the  bill,  but  to  move  at  once  for 
1  Then  the  member  of  Parliament  for  Coventry. 


THE   COMBINATION   LAWS  209 

a  Select  Committee.  When  the  time  came  for  doing  so,  Mr. 
Huskisson  shrunk  back.  He  advised  Mr.  Hume  to  forego 
his  intention  of  moving  for  a  Committee  on  the  Combina- 
tion Laws,  and  to  take  in  only  the  Emigration  of  Artisans 
and  the  Exportation  of  Machinery.  Mr.  Hume  was  cajoled 
and  gave  notice  accordingly.  This  was  February  6,  and 
thus  was  all  the  labour  I  had  bestowed  on  the  subject,  as 
it  had  been  on  other  subjects,  at  once  pushed  aside ;  all 
the  letters  and  all  the  communications  I  had  made  and 
received  were  to  go  for  nothing,  and  the  papers  for  Mr. 
Hume's  guidance  were  at  once  rendered  useless. 

"  On  his  return  from  the  House  he  came  to  me  with 
Alderman  Wood.  Mr.  Hume  said  Mr.  Huskisson  had 
consented  to  the  appointment  of  a  Committee  on  Artisans 
and  Machinery,  but  he  objected  to  take  in  the  Combina- 
tion Laws,  as  Peter  Moore  would  come  with  his  bill,  make 
a  schism  in  the  Committee,  and  cause  a  deal  of  trouble.  I 
argued  the  propriety  of  taking  in  the  Combination  Laws, 
and  Mr.  Hume  seemed  half  convinced  of  the  propriety  of 
doing  so,  but  he  did  not  promise  to  do  so.  He  left  with 
me  the  motion  in  the  form  he  proposed  to  make  it,  and 
the  names  of  the  members  for  the  Committee,  for  me  to 
revise.  After  some  very  serious  consideration,  I  wrote  as 
follows : — 

"'February  7,  1824. 

" '  I  am  decidedly  of  opinion  that  you  should  take  in  the 
Combination  Laws,  and  also  that  you  should  at  once  take 
Peter  Moore  into  the  Committee.  Moore  is  not  a  man  to 
be  put  aside,  and  the  only  way  to  put  him  down  is  to  let 
him  talk  his  nonsense  in  the  Committee,  where  being  out- 
voted, he  will  be  less  an  annoyance  in  the  House.  I  know 
Mr.  Moore  well — know  how  pig-headed  he  is,  that  he  will 
be  sure  to  go  in  the  opposite  way  to  which  he  is  pulled, 
and  I  also  know  that  he  must  be  borne  with.  If  you  do 


210  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

not  take  him  into  the  Committee,  he  will  come  with  his 
book  of  petty  legislation  before  the  House,  and  compel  the 
House  to  negative  his  mass  of  absurdities.  The  public 
will,  however,  see  nothing  in  this  but,  as  they  will  conclude, 
an  evident  resolution  in  the  Government  not  to  do  justice. 
Peter  Moore  will  be  looked  to  by  millions,  and  all  sorts  of 
obloquy  will  be  cast  upon  every  other  man  in  the  House. 
Moore's  Bill  might  be  cut  down  in  the  Committee,  and  if  I 
were  a  member  of  that  Committee,  I  would  set  my  foot  to 
his  on  this  part  of  the  business,  and  although  I  should  not 
convince  him,  I  would  beat  him  from  all  his  positions. 

" '  The  business  is  really  very  simple,  and  it  lies  in  a  small 
space.  Repeal  every  troublesome  and  vexatious  enactment, 
and  enact  very  little  in  their  place.  Leave  workmen  and 
their  employers  as  much  as  possible  at  liberty  to  make 
their  own  bargains  in  their  own  way.  This  is  the  way  to 
prevent  disputes ;  but  when  they  do  occur,  leave  them  to 
settle  them  amongst  themselves,  with  an  appeal  to  a 
Justice  of  the  Peace  in  cases  (and  they  will  be  very  few) 
in  which  the  parties  cannot  of  themselves  come  to  a  de- 
cision. Let  the  magistrate  decide  on  the  evidence  before 
him,  and  make  his  decision  final.  I  have  no  doubt  at  all 
that  you  will  find  this  not  only  by  far  the  pleasantest  but 
the  shortest  way  of  proceeding. — Yours  truly, 

" '  FRANCIS  PLACE.' 

"  The  above  was  written  to  be  shown  to  Mr.  Huskisson 
and  others;  it  was  accompanied  by  another  letter  which 
was  intended  to  be  private. 

"'i.  It  was  generally  understood  last  session  that  you 
would  move  for  a  repeal  of  the  Combination  Laws  in  this 
session.  Nobody  seemed  to  care  much  about  Mr.  Moore ; 
everybody  seemed  to  rely  on  Mr.  Hume. 

"  '  2.  You  and  I  had  a  similar  understanding,  and  I  acted 


THE  COMBINATION  LAWS  211 

upon  it  very  extensively.  I  took  every  opportunity  to 
prepare  people  to  expect  your  motion ;  and  many  thousands 
do  expect  it.  I  have  sent  circular  letters  to  a  great  many 
houses  of  call  for  journeymen,  telling  them,  as  I  was  fully 
warranted  in  telling  them,  that  the  Committee  you  would 
move  for  was,  amongst  other  matters,  to  consider  of  the 
repeal  of  the  Combination  Laws.  I  have  this  day  been  at 
houses  of  call  for  hatters,  smiths,  carpenters,  weavers,  boot 
and  shoe  makers,  and  metal  workers.  To-morrow  I  am  to 
be  at  those  of  the  bakers,  tailors,  plumbers,  painters  and 
glaziers,  bricklayers,  and  bookbinders.  Now  if,  after  all, 
you  do  not  go  on  with  the  Combination  Laws,  what  will 
be  the  consequence  ?  I  shall  have  to  say  to  hundreds  of 
persons  that  you  did  agree  to  go  into  it;  that  this  was 
the  reason  I  talked  with  them  on  the  subject  and  wrote  to 
them ;  but  that,  when  the  time  came,  you,  without  reason, 
declined  doing  it.  You  will  at  once  see  that  I  have  no 
choice.  I  must  say  this. 

'"3.  If  you  do  not  go  into  the  Combination  Laws  by 
making  it  one  reason  for  a  Committee,  Peter  Moore  will 
take  advantage  of  the  multitude  of  petitions  that  will 
be  presented  to  the  House;  he  will  introduce  his  bill 
again.  .  .  .' 

"  Mr.  Hume  consulted  Mr.  Huskisson,  and  it  was  agreed 
that  the  motion  should  be  made,  as  I  had  suggested  it. 
Thus  the  matter  about  which  so  much  pains  had  been 
taken,  so  much  time,  and  some  money  also,  had  been 
spent,  and  which  was  all  but  set  aside,  was  again  put  upon 
its  legs. 

On  the  1 2th  February,  Mr.  Hume  made  his  motion,  and 
obtained  his  Committee.  It  was  with  difficulty  Mr.  Hume 
could  obtain  the  names  of  twenty-one  members  to  compose 
the  Committee ;  but  when  it  had  sat  three  days,  and  had 
become  both  popular  and  amusing,  members  contrived  to 


212  THE    COMBINATION  LAWS 

be  put  upon  it,  and  at  length  it  consisted  of  forty-eight 
members. 

"When  the  Committee  met  for  business,  Mr.  Hume 
found  himself  in  a  very  difficult  situation ;  he  had  been  so 
assiduously  employed  in  various  other  matters,  that  it  had 
been  impossible  for  him  to  give  attention  to  the  details  of 
this.  He  was  much  annoyed  and  embarrassed ;  no  one 
assisted  him,  and  some  put  obstacles  in  his  way.  I  offered 
to  attend  the  Committee  as  his  assistant,  but  the  jealousy 
of  the  members  prevented  this ;  they '  would  not  be  dictated 
to' — that  is,  they  would  not  have  the  business  put  in  a 
plain  way  by  the  only  man  who  had  made  himself  master 
of  it  in  all  its  bearings,  because  he  was  neither  a  member  of 
the  honourable  House,  nor  even  a  gentleman.  Thus  does 
pride  and  ignorance,  in  all  situations,  from  a  Committee 
of  the  honourable  House  to  a  chandler's  shop  in  an  alley, 
show  itself  much  in  the  same  way,  always  absurd,  always 
pitiful,  very  generally  mischievous.  Happily  nothing  can 
subdue  Mr.  Hume's  perseverance,  and,  like  almost  every 
man  who  perseveres  in  a  right  course,  he  almost  always 
finds  himself  firm  upon  his  legs  at  the  end  of  his  labour. 
Mr.  Hume  wrote  a  circular  letter  announcing  the  appoint- 
ment of  the  Committee,  and  inviting  persons  to  come  and 
give  evidence ;  copies  of  this  were  sent  to  the  mayors  and 
other  officers  of  corporate  towns,  and  to  many  of  the 
principal  manufacturers.  Some  one  country  paper  having 
obtained  a  copy,  printed  it,  and  it  was  presently  reprinted 
in  all  the  newspapers,  and  thus  due  notice  was  given  to 
everybody.  Meetings  were  held  in  many  places ;  and  both 
masters  and  men  sent  up  deputations  to  give  evidence.  The 
delegates  from  the  working  people  had  reference  to  me,  and 
I  opened  my  house  to  them.  Thus  I  had  all  the  town  and 
country  delegates  under  my  care.  I  heard  the  story  which 
every  one  of  these  men  had  to  tell.  I  examined  and  cross- 
examined  them ;  took  down  the  leading  particulars  of 


THE    COMBINATION   LAWS  213 

each  case,  and  then  arranged  the  matter  as  briefs  for  Mr. 
Hume ;  and,  as  a  rule,  for  the  guidance  of  the  witnesses, 
a  copy  was  given  to  each.  This  occupied  days  and  nights, 
and  occasioned  great  labour  ;  much  of  it  might  have  been 
saved  if  the  Committee  would  have  permitted  me  to  re- 
main in  the  room  and  assist  the  chairman  as  I  had  done 
on  former  occasions.  As  it  was,  I  had  no  choice.  Each 
brief  contained  the  principal  questions  and  answers.  That 
for  Mr.  Hume  was  generally  accompanied  by  an  appendix 
of  documents,  arranged  in  order  with  a  short  account  of 
such  proceedings  as  was  necessary  to  put  Mr.  Hume  in 
possession  of  the  whole  case.  Thus  he  was  enabled  to 
go  on  with  considerable  ease,  and  to  anticipate  or  rebut 
objections. 

"  Mr.  George  White  was  clerk  of  the  Committee.  He  was 
at  first  annoyed  by  the  interference  of  Mr.  Hume,  whose 
conduct  had  set  Peter  Moore  entirely  aside.  Mr.  Moore 
never  once  attended  the  Committee.  Mr.  White  soon, 
however,  became  satisfied  that  I  was  pushing  the  matter 
in  the  right  way,  sought  my  acquaintance,  and  gave  all 
the  assistance  in  his  power.  He  told  me  that  some 
members  of  the  Committee,  seeing  Mr.  Hume's  briefs  in 
my  handwriting,  were  much  offended,  and  had  hinted  at 
having  me  called  before  the  Committee,  for  tampering, 
as  they  called  it,  with  the  witnesses.  It  would  have  well 
pleased  me  to  have  been  so  called,  as  I  should  have  been 
able  to  have  shown  up  some  honourable  members  in  a 
new  light  before  the  public. 

"  The  workmen  were  not  easily  managed.  It  required 
great  care  and  pains  and  patience  not  to  shock  their  pre- 
judices, so  as  to  prevent  them  doing  their  duty  before 
the  Committee.  They  were  filled  with  false  notions,  all 
attributing  their  distresses  to  wrong  causes,  which  I,  in 
this  state  of  the  business,  dared  not  attempt  to  remove. 
Taxes,  machinery,  laws  against  combinations,  the  will  of  the 


214  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

masters,  the  conduct  of  magistrates,  these  were  the  funda- 
mental causes  of  all  their  sorrows  and  privations.  All 
expected  a  great  and  sudden  rise  of  wages,  when  the  Com- 
bination Laws  should  be  repealed ;  not  one  of  them  had 
any  idea  whatever  of  the  connection  between  wages  and 
population.  I  had  to  discuss  everything  with  them  most 
carefully,  to  arrange  and  prepare  everything,  and  so  com- 
pletely did  these  things  occupy  my  time,  that  for  more 
than  three  months  I  had  hardly  time  for  rest. 

"  As  the  proceedings  of  the  Committee  were  printed  from 
day  to  day  for  the  use  of  the  members,  I  had  a  copy  sent 
to  me  by  Mr.  Hume,  which  I  indexed,  on  paper  ruled  in 
many  columns,  each  column  having  an  appropriate  head 
or  number.  I  also  wrote  remarks  on  the  margins  of  the 
printed  evidence;1  this  was  copied  daily  by  Mr.  Hume's 
secretary,  and  then  returned  to  me.  This  consumed  much 
time,  but  enabled  Mr.  Hume  to  have  the  whole  mass  con- 
stantly under  his  view.  And  I  am  very  certain  that  less 
pains  and  care  would  not  have  been  sufficient  to  have 
carried  the  business  through. 

"  I  had  still  one  fear,  namely,  of  speech-making.  I  was 
quite  certain  that  if  the  bills  came  under  discussion  in  the 
House  they  would  be  lost.  Mr.  Hume  had  the  good  sense 
to  see  this,  and  wholly  to  refrain  from  speaking  on  them. 

"  There  was  another  difficulty,  not  easily  to  be  sur- 
mounted, and  this  was  the  Report  of  the  Committee. 
When  evidence  before  a  Select  Committee  has  been  taken, 
it  is  usual  to  discuss  the  matter  of  the  report,  and  here  it 
but  too  often  happens  that  some  sinister  interest  prevails. 
In  the  present  case  the  report  must  have  been  drawn  by 
me  for  Mr.  Hume,  and  the  consequence  would  have  been 
such  alterations,  omissions,  and  additions,  as  would  have 
made  it  useless  and  defeated  the  purpose  intended.  It  was 

1  The  volumes  of  evidence  thus  prepared  and  annotated  by  Place 
are  now  preserved  in  vols.  27,800-27,801. 


THE    COMBINATION   LAWS  215 

therefore  agreed  to  deviate  from  the  usual  mode,  and  draw 
up  resolutions  which,  if  possible,  should  be  substituted  for 
a  report.  It  was  quite  clear  to  both  me  and  Mr.  Hume 
that  it  would  not  only  be  more  difficult  for  members  to 
cavil  at  and  alter  short  resolutions,  each  containing  a  fact, 
than  it  would  be  to  bedevil  a  report  drawn  in  the  usual 
way,  but  as  the  means  of  detecting  and  exposing  sophistry 
in  this  form  would  be  easy  and  certain,  few  if  any  of  the 
members  would  make  the  attempt.  Resolutions  were 
accordingly  drawn,  printed,  and  circulated  amongst  the 
members  of  the  Committee.1  They  were  cavilled  at,  but 
nothing  in  the  way  of  alteration  was  proposed.  Time  was 
thus  gained,  and  at  length,  when  all  were  pretty  well 
wearied  with  attending  at  the  Committee,  it  was  agreed 
that  Mr.  Hume  should  report  the  resolutions.  This  was 
gaining  a  point  of  the  utmost  importance,  and  ensuring  the 
progress  of  the  bills  through  the  House. 

"  There  were,  however,  other  difficulties  to  be  encoun- 
tered. Mr.  White  and  I  had  put  the  bills  into  form  with 
the  fewest  words  possible.  Mr.  Hume,  however,  suffered 
the  Attorney- General  to  employ  Mr.  Anthony  Hamond,  a 
barrister,  to  draw  the  bills;  he  took  our  MSS.,  and  pretty 
specimens  of  nonsense  he  made  of  them  !  He  had  all  the 
necessary  documents,  some  suggestions  in  writing,  and  the 
bills  themselves  as  perfectly  drawn  as  we  could  draw  them ; 
but  he  knew  not  how  to  use  them.  This  caused  consider- 
able perplexity.  We  attacked  his  draft,  and  afterwards 
the  printed  bills.  He  paid  but  little  attention  to  us,  but  it 
so  happened  that  when  the  bills  were  once  printed  he  con- 
sidered himself  as  having  performed  all  that  he  was  likely 
to  be  remunerated  for,  and  he  gave  himself  no  further 
concern  about  them.  We  now  got  them  into  our  hands, 

1  The  resolutions  as  agreed  to  by  the  Committee  were  presented  to 
Parliament  in  the  Sixth  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Artisans 
and  Machinery,  1824. 


216  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

altered  them  as  we  liked,  had  MS.  copies  made  and  pre- 
sented to  the  House.  No  inquiry  was  made  as  to  who 
drew  the  bills;  they  were  found  to  contain  all  that  was 
needful,  and  with  some  assiduity  in  seeing  members  to 
induce  them  not  to  speak  on  the  several  readings,  they 
passed  the  House  of  Commons  almost  without  the  notice 
of  members  within  or  newspapers  without. 

"When  the  bill  went  to  the  Lords,1  a  new  difficulty 
occurred.  The  half-crazy  Lord  Lauderdale  intimated  that 
he  should  oppose  the  bills.  He  approved,  he  said,  of  the 
principle  of  the  bills,  but  it  was  beneath  the  dignity  of  the 
House  of  Lords  to  pass  them,  until  noble  members  had 
had  an  opportunity  of  perusing  the  evidence  taken  before 
the  Commons'  Committee,  which  had  not  as  yet  been  re- 
printed by  their  Lordships'  printer.  If  Lord  Lauderdale 
had  used  these  words  in  the  Noble  House,  the  bills  would 
have  been  put  off  till  the  next  session,  when  it  is  very  pro- 
bable they  would  have  been  rejected.  With  almost  incre- 
dible pains  taken,  Lauderdale  was  induced  to  hold  his 
tongue,  and  three  Acts  were  passed : — 

"  (i.)  An  Act  to  repeal  the  laws  relating  to  the  combina- 
tions of  workmen,  and  for  other  purposes  therein  men- 
tioned (5  Geo.  IV.  c.  95). 

"  (ii.)  An  Act  to  consolidate  and  amend  the  laws  relative 
to  the  arbitration  of  disputes  between  masters  and  work- 
men (5  Geo.  IV.  c.  96). 

1  A  very  vigorous  canvass  of  the  Lords  was  made  by  Hume  and 
Place.  On  June  9  Hume  wrote  to  Place :  "  I  send  you  a  letter  re- 
ceived from  Lord  Lansdoune  and  a  copy  of  my  answer  to  him.  1 
have  also  written  to  Lord  Rosslyn  to  the  same  purport,  and  wish  you 
to  press  through  M'Intosh  and  Brougham  the  support  of  Lords  Lauder- 
dale, Ackland,  &c.  You  should  send  the  several  deputies  now  in  town 
to  the  several  Lords  who  take  a  part,  and  to  the  Lord  Chancellor,  Lord 
Liverpool,  to  request  their  support  of  the  bills.  I  have  written  to 
Mr.  Huskisson  to  get  the  support  of  Lord  Liverpool.  ...  A  canvass 
for  the  bills  must  be  made  to  ensure  success." — Hume  to  Place, 
June  9,  1824,  27,801  (148). 


THE    COMBINATION   LAWS  217 

"  (iii.)  An  Act  to  repeal  the  laws  relative  to  artisans  going 
abroad  (5  Geo.  IV.  c.  97)."  l 

Place  was  of  opinion  that  the  repeal  of  the  Combination 
Laws  would  lead  to  the  disappearance  of  trade  unions. 
He  thought  that  these  were  formed  chiefly  to  resist  the 
continuous  combination  of  employers,  and  to  defend  the 
workmen  against  the  tyranny  of  the  law. 

In  1811  he  had  argued,  as  against  the  attempt  of  the 
London  master  tailors  to  impose  fresh  restrictions  upon  their 
workmen,  that  "  the  combinations  of  the  men  are  but  de- 
fensive measures  resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  counteract- 
ing the  offensive  ones  of  their  masters.  .  .  .  When  every 
man  knew  that  he  could  carry  his  labour  to  the  highest 
bidder,  there  would  be  less  motive  for  those  combinations 
which  now  exist,  and  which  exist  because  such  combina- 
tions are  the  only  means  of  redress  that  they  have.2  Again, 
in  1825,  he  wrote  to  Sir  Francis  Burdett :  "Combinations 
will  soon  cease  to  exist.  Men  have  been  kept  together 
for  long  periods  only  by  the  oppression  of  the  laws ;  these 
being  repealed,  combinations  will  lose  the  matter  which 
cements  them  into  masses,  and  they  will  fall  to  pieces. 
All  will  be  as  orderly  as  even  a  Quaker  could  desire.  He 
knows  nothing  of  the  working  people  who  can  suppose 
that,  when  left  at  liberty  to  act  for  themselves,  without 
being  driven  into  permanent  associations  by  the  oppression 
of  the  laws,  they  will  continue  to  contribute  money  for 
distant  and  doubtful  experiments,  for  uncertain  and  pre- 
carious benefits.  Even  now  in  a  very  populous  part  of  the 
country,  and  where  the  people  are  particularly  ill  treated, 
the  men  have  refused  to  contribute  a  penny  each  per  week 
to  pay  the  expense  of  a  delegate  to  be  sent  to  London.  If 

1  27,798  (15-24). 

2  "  An  Address  to  the  Legislature  of  Great  Britain,  from  .  .  .  the 
Master  Tailors  of  London,"  &c.  (London,  1811,  8vo),  pp.  3,  4.     Brit. 
Mus.  Addl.  MSS.  27,799  (16).      Reprinted  in  "  The  Tailoring  Trade," 
by  F.  W.  Gal  ton  (London,  1896),  pp.  108-114. 


218  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

let  alone,  combinations,  excepting  now  and  then,  and  for 
particular  purposes,  under  peculiar  circumstances,  will 
cease  to  exist." l 

These  opinions  were  shown  by  the  event  to  have  been 
entirely  erroneous.  The  repeal  of  the  Combination  Laws, 
happening  to  coincide  with  a  time  of  great  commercial 
prosperity,  everywhere  produced  an  outbreak  of  trade 
unionism  and  strikes.  From  one  end  of  the  country  to 
the  other  masters  and  men  were  engaged  in  industrial 
conflict. 

Nassau  Senior  a  few  years  later  described  the  removal 
of  the  oppressive  legislation  as  having  produced  "  a  great 
moral  effect.  ...  It  confirmed  in  the  minds  of  the  opera- 
tives the  conviction  of  the  justice  of  their  cause,  tardily  and 
reluctantly,  but  at  last  fully  conceded  by  the  Legislature. 
That  which  was  morally  right  in  1 824  must  have  been  so, 
they  would  reason,  for  fifty  years  before." 2  In  the  Avinter 
of  1824-25  the  employers  petitioned  the  Government  on 
all  sides  to  re-enact  the  old  laws  or  to  devise  some  new 
and  even  more  drastic  legislation.  Place  and  Hume  did 
what  they  could  to  restrain  the  men.  At  Place's  instigation 
Hume  wrote  letters  to  the  leaders  of  many  of  the  trades 
on  strike  and  to  many  of  the  provincial  newspapers,  urging 
them  to  desist  from  their  action,  and  warning  them  that 
any  violent  conduct  could  only  result  in  the  re-enactment 
of  the  laws."  8 

Place  wrote  several  similar  letters,  one  of  the  most  in- 
teresting of  which  is  that  to  the  Glasgow  cotton- weavers. 

1  Place    to   Sir    Francis    Burclett,    June    20   and    25,   1825,  27,798 

(57,  58). 

2  See  the  MS.  Report  of  Nassau  Senior  to  Lord  Melbourne,  on  Trade 
Combinations  [1831,  unpublished,  in  the  Home  Office  Library],  quoted 
on  pp.  92,  93  of  the  "History  of  Trade  Unionism,"  by  Sidney  and 
Beatrice  Webb  (London,  1894). 

3  See   Hume's  letter  to  the  Manchester  cotton-spinners,   Dec.  27, 
1824,  to  the  Glasgow  weavers,  Sept.   18,  1824,  preserved  with  others 
and  several  newspaper  cuttings  of  such  letters  in  27,801  (241-272). 


THE   COMBINATION    LAWS  219 

To  Mr.  PETER  M'DOUGAL  and  Mr.  WILLIAM  SMITH 
at  Glasgow. 

"LONDON,  Sept.  i,  1824. 

"  When  you  were  in  London  as  delegates  for  the  purpose 
of  being  examined  by  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House 
of  Commons  on  Artisans  and  Machinery,  you  had  oppor- 
tunities enough  of  witnessing  the  interest  I  took  in  the 
welfare  of  the  working  classes.  You  then  learned  that  I 
had  been  for  several  years  past  employed,  as  well  personally 
as  by  means  of  the  press,  in  endeavouring  to  procure  the 
repeal  of  the  laws  against  combinations  of  workmen.  I 
remind  you  of  this  as  one  proof  that,  in  differing  from  the 
weavers  of  Glasgow  as  to  the  propriety  of  their  present 
conduct,  I  am  not  very  likely  to  be  less  disposed  towards 
their  interest  than  I  ever  was  at  any  former  period.  It 
seems  to  me  necessary  to  say  this  in  order  to  procure  the 
serious  attention  of  a  large  body  of  men,  one  of  whom  has 
said,  and  no  doubt  very  justly,  'We  have  been  so  often 
imposed  upon  by  designing  artifice,  or  led  into  the  ditch 
by  ignorance,  that  we  can  hardly  trust  anybody.'  .  .  .  The 
newspapers  inform  me  that  the  weavers  in  and  near  Glasgow 
are  forming  themselves  into  societies  for  the  purpose  of 
raising  their  wages.  For  attempting  by  all  legal  means  to 
increase  the  amount  of  their  low  wages  they  deserve  com- 
mendation. A  weaver  for  his  time  and  talents  deserves  to 
be  paid  as  well  as  a  spinner  is  paid  for  his  time  and  talents. 
Why  a  weaver  has  not  been  as  well  paid  admits  of  easy 
explanation.  The  spinners  being  together  in  considerable 
bodies,  were  able  to  a  great  extent  to  resist  the  attempts 
made  to  lower  their  wages,  and  by  the  resistance  they  made 
they  saved  themselves  from  the  degradation  which  the 
weavers,  from  being  isolated  and  spread  over  a  large  sur- 
face, unfortunately  experienced.  The  laws  against  com- 
binations of  workmen,  enforced  as  they  were,  and  the 


220  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

perversion  of  the  law  against  conspirators,  inflicted  many 
evils  upon  workmen.  But  spite  of  these  laws  and  their 
perversion,  those  who,  from  the  particular  nature  of  their 
employments,  were  able  to  evade  those  laws  or  oppose  them- 
selves in  a  body  to  their  employers,  maintained  their  ground 
and  preserved  themselves  from  degradation,  whilst  those 
who  were  not  in  such  circumstances  could  not  do  so,  and 
this  unfortunately  was  the  case  of  the  weavers  and  some 
other  journeymen.  Those  laws  which  thus  degraded  and 
demoralised  the  working  people  having  been  repealed,  and 
the  weavers  for  the  first  time  finding  themselves  at  liberty 
to  act  for  themselves,  might  reasonably  have  been  expected 
to  commit  some  errors,  and  this  has  accordingly  happened. 
The  error  I  now  allude  to  is  the  resolution  to  exclude  a 
particular  factory  altogether,  to  work  no  more  on  any  terms 
for  a  particular  person.  This  is  equally  reprehensible  and 
absurd.  Reprehensible  because  the  Act  repealing  the  laws 
against  combinations  of  workmen  should  have  been  ac- 
cepted by  both  workmen  and  employers  as  an  Act  of  obli- 
vion ;  and  because  such  a  conspiracy  as  that  against  Mr. 
Hutcheson  is  equally  unreasonable  and  unjust.  Absurd 
because  it  is  impracticable.  .  .  .  Enough  has,  I  hope,  been 
said  to  induce  you  to  abandon  the  attempt  to  exclude  any 
factory,  and  in  future  promptly  to  condemn  every  such 
proposition,  let  it  come  from  whom  it  may. — I  am,  your 
well-wisher,  FRANCIS  PLACE."1 

By  this  time  ministers  had  become  thoroughly  alarmed, 
and  early  in  the  session  of  1825  made  an  effort  to  undo  the 
effects  of  their  previous  legislation. 

"  It  unfortunately  happened  that  from  the  close  of  the 
session  in  1824  the  price  of  provisions  had  been  rapidly 
rising,  and  was  still  rising  when  the  Parliament  again 
assembled  on  February  3,  1825.  Trade  in  all  its  branches 

1  The  letter  is  preserved  in  27,801  (237). 


THE   COMBINATION   LAWS  221 

was  flourishing,  and  the  workmen  were  very  generally  em- 
ployed. Released  from  the  law  which  had  oppressed  them, 
persuaded  that  their  wages  had  been  kept  down  lower  than 
they  ought  to  have  been,  and  believing  that  it  was  now  in 
their  power  to  obtain  an  advance,  many  trades  contem- 
plated a  strike.  Great  pains  were  taken  to  prevent  the 
men  striking,  and  much  effect  was  produced.  Many  trades 
turned  their  attention  solely  to  the  grievances  which  the 
operation  of  the  laws  had  imposed  on  them,  and,  having 
removed  these,  remained  content.  Others  attempted  more : 
they  struck  for  wages,  or  to  restore  their  wages  to  the  sum 
they  had  some  time  before  been.  Some  obtained  an  advance, 
some  were  standing  out  when  the  Parliament  assembled. 

"  The  cotton-spinners  of  Glasgow  were  the  most  repre- 
hensible. They  struck  at  a  mill  belonging  to  a  Mr.  Dunlop, 
a  bad  man,  at  whose  factory,  it  has  been  observed,  '  peace 
never  came.'  This  led  to  a  strike  on  the  part  of  the  master 
cottoners  against  all  their  workpeople,  thousands  of  whom 
were  deprived  of  the  means  of  subsistence  by  their  own 
labour,  and  reduced  to  indescribable  distress  and  misery. 

"  The  body  of  cotton-masters  had  been  merciless  oppres- 
sors at  all  times,  and  on  this  occasion  their  conduct  towards 
their  workpeople  was  remarkably  cruel.  They  had,  for 
the  fault  of  some,  condemned  many  thousands  to  starva- 
tion. Still  the  working  people,  miserably  ill  used,  and 
goaded  as  they  were  to  the  act,  had  done  unwisely  in 
attempting  to  prevent  Mr.  Hutcheson  (whom  they  con- 
sidered their  particular  oppressor)  from  ever  employing  his 
mill  again. 

"Next  to  these  master  cottoners  were  the  shipbuilders, 
and  some  of  the  shipowners,  headed  by  some  rich  and 
influential  men  on  the  river  Thames.  The  workmen  com- 
plained of  certain  obnoxious  proceedings  of  their  employers, 
of  breach  of  contract,  and  want  of  regularity  in  the  prices 
paid  for  their  labour.  They  did  not  desire  any  advance 


222  THE   COMBINATION    LAWS 

of  wages,  but  requested  a  conference  for  the  purposes  of 
regulation.  This  was  peremptorily  refused,  and  the  men 
struck.  The  [shipbuilders  then  came  to  a  resolution  not 
again  to  employ  any  man  who  belonged  to  the  Ship- 
wrights' Union.  Disputes  had  been  going  on  for  some 
time  amongst  the  sailors  and  the  shipowners,  but  the  con- 
duct of  both  the  sailors  and  shipwrights  was  exemplary ; 
no  disorderly  acts  could  be  alleged  against  them.  But  as 
the  shipping  interest,  as  it  is  called,  had  the  ready  ear  of 
ministers,  they  most  shamefully  misrepresented  the  con- 
duct of  the  men,  and  represented  the  consequences  as  likely 
to  lead  to  the  destruction  of  the  commerce  and  shipping  of 
the  empire.  Ministers  were  so  ignorant  as  to  be  misled  by 
these  misrepresentations,  and  were  mean  and  despicable 
enough  to  plot  with  these  people  against  their  workmen. 

"  The  interest  of  the  unprincipled  proprietors  of  the 
Times  newspaper  was  intimately  connected  with  the  '  ship- 
ping interest,'  and  it  lent  its  best  services  to  their  cause. 
It  stuck  at  nothing  in  the  way  of  false  assertion  and 
invective ;  it  represented  the  conduct  of  Mr.  Hume  as 
mischievous  in  the  extreme,  and  that  of  the  working 
people  all  over  the  country  as  perfectly  nefarious ;  and 
it  urged  ministers  to  re-enact  the  old  laws,  or  to  enact 
new  ones,  to. bring  the  people  into  a  state  of  miserable 
subjection. 

"  In  this  state  were  matters  when  the  Parliament  assem- 
bled. Care  had  been  taken  to  circulate  a  report  that  the 
laws  against  combinations  would  be  re-enacted.  This  spread 
alarm  all  over  the  manufacturing  districts,  and  had  some 
effect  in  keeping  the  people  quiet.  I  was  appealed  to  from 
various  places,  and  by  various  bodies,  many  of  whom  had 
been  supine  while  the  laws  were  in  existence,  but  who  were 
now  apprehensive  of  the  recurrence  of  the  evils  which  had 
been  removed. 

"  Nothing  indicating  any  such  intention  on  the  part  of 


THE    COMBINATION   LAWS  223 

ministers  had  transpired,  and  on  Mr.  Hume  mentioning 
the  matter  to  Mr.  Huskisson,  he  led  him  to  believe  that 
nothing  of  the  kind  was  at  all  contemplated.  I  therefore 
wrote  to,  and  otherwise  informed  those  who  had  applied  to 
me,  that  Mr.  Hume's  bill  would  not  be  repealed,  and  this, 
on  my  authority,  was  stated  in  several  of  the  country 
newspapers. 

"Just  at  this  time,  a  fresh  deputation  of  shipbuilders, 
men  of  wealth  and  influence,  waited  upon  Mr.  Huskisson 
to  complain  of  the  conduct  of  their  men.  They  endea- 
voured to  persuade  him  either  to  repeal  Mr.  Hume's  Act, 
or  to  pass  another,  the  substance  of  which  they  laid  before 
him,  and  which  they  said  would  be  much  more  effectual. 
It  was  a  scheme  to  prevent  workmen  from  subscribing 
money  for  any  purpose  whatever,  unless  they  first  obtained 
the  consent  and  approbation  of  some  local  magistrate,  and 
unless  that  magistrate,  or  some  other  such  magistrate,  also 
consented  to  become  their  treasurer,  and  see  to  the  due 
application  of  the  money.  Either  Mr.  Huskisson  did  not 
think  any  interference  of  the  Government  was  at  that  time 
necessary,  or  he  played  the  hypocrite  to  the  acme  of  per- 
fection; for  he  told  Mr.  Hume  of  the  visit  of  the  ship- 
builders, and  said  '  he  had  told  them  that  he  did  not 
understand  the  matter,  and  recommended  them  to  see  Mr. 
Hume,  who  had  paid  great  attention  to  it.' 

"  The  shipbuilders  called  at  Mr.  Hume's  house.  Mr. 
Hume  was,  however,  unfortunately  indisposed,  and  could 
not  see  them ;  he,  however,  wrote  a  note  and  requested  an 
interview,  but  they  took  no  notice  of  his  request. 

"  Complaints  continued  to  be  made  to  ministers,  and  Mr. 
Huskisson  suggested  to  Mr.  Hume  that  it  would  answer  all 
good  purposes  if  he  (Mr.  Huskisson)  were  to  notice  these 
complaints  in  the  House,  and  threaten  the  workmen  that, 
unless  their  conduct  was  lawful  and  their  demands  reason- 
able, the  old  laws  should  again  be  restored ;  and  if  he  (Mr 


224  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

Hume)  were  to  say  something  in  the  same  strain.  This 
was  done,  and  it  was  concluded  the  matter  would  rest  here. 
Mr.  Hume  was  therefore  much  surprised  when,  in  a  few 
days,  Mr.  Huskisson  gave  notice  that  he  should  on  the 
morrow  move  for  a  Committee  on  the  Act  of  the  last 
session  (Mr.  Hume's  Act).  Mr.  Hume  asked  him  what  it 
was  he  intended  to  propose,  when  he  said  he  did  not  in- 
tend to  restore  the  old  laws,  but  to  introduce  some  com- 
mercial regulations  principally  relating  to  the  refractory 
seamen ;  and  that  what  he  intended  to  say  in  moving  for 
the  Committee  would  be  in  favour  of  the  workmen  gene- 
rally. Mr.  Hume  was  thus  thrown  off  his  guard.  On 
March  29,  Mr.  Huskisson  made  his  speech,  which  he 
concluded  by  moving  '  for  the  appointment  of  a  Select 
Committee  to  inquire  into  the  effect  of  the  Act  5  Geo.  IV. 
c.  95,  in  respect  to  the  conduct  of  workmen  and  others  in 
different  parts  of  the  United  Kingdom,  and  to  report  their 
opinion  how  far  it  may  be  necessary  to  amend  or  repeal 
the  said  Act.' 

"  Mr.  Huskisson  commenced  his  speech  by  declaring 
that  repealing  the  Combination  Laws  seemed  likely  to  be 
attended  with  the  most  inconvenient  and  dangerous  con- 
sequences. He  admitted  that  the  Act  5  Geo.  IV.  c.  95 
was  fair  in  principle,  but  not  so  in  practice.  He  com- 
plained that  the  Committee  had  made  no  report,  and  he 
made  several  objections  to  the  resolutions.  He  excused 
himself  for  neither  having  attended  in  his  place  in  the 
Committee,  nor  to  the  progress  of  the  bill  in  Parliament, 
and  having  thus  cleared  his  way,  he  fell  furiously  to  work 
upon  his  subject.  He  pulled  the  Act  to  pieces ;  complained 
of  it  as  an  anomaly.  It  not  only  repealed  the  statute  law, 
but  forbade  the  operation  of  the  common  law,  which  had 
thus  introduced  a  great  public  evil.  (It  had  done  nothing 
of  the  kind,  and  he  did  not  know  the  meaning  of  the  words 
he  was  using.)  The  bill  had  been  hurried  through  the 


THE    COMBINATION7   LAWS  225 

House  without  discussion.  He  then  drew  a  false  and 
exaggerated  picture  of  the  state  of  the  country,  and  pre- 
dicted the  most  fatal  consequences.  Liberty,  property,  life 
itself  was  in  danger,  and  Parliament  must  speedily  inter- 
fere. He  held  the  regulations  of  men  in  combinations  in 
his  hand ;  some  he  read,  and  described  their  proceedings  as 
very  terrible  indeed,  when  in  fact  there  was  nothing  the 
least  terrible  in  them.  He  endeavoured  to  make  his  way 
to  the  feelings  and  foolings  of  the  members  by  the  old 
cant  he  and  his  former  accomplices  had  so  successfully 
used  against  the  reformers.  Congresses  were  formed ; 
federal  republics  were  established  by  these  wonderfully  wise 
and  hard-working  people.  He  supposed  the  monstrous 
absurdity  of  '  all  the  different  branches  of  mining,  manu- 
facturing, navigating  and  shipping  in  the  country,'  being 
thus  combined  into  a  perpetual  confederacy,  and  drew  just 
such  inferences  as  a  three-parts  crazy  creature  might  have 
drawn  from  his  bewildered  imagination,  with  shame  be  it 
spoken.  It  is  with  shame  I  write  this  of  a  man  who  should 
have  had  more  sense  and  more  honesty,  but  who,  at  any 
rate,  if  he  had  neither,  should  have  been  too  proud  to  have 
exposed  himself  thus  in  the  character  of  a  statesman.  He 
described  several  clauses  in  the  Act  as  particularly  mis- 
chievous and  utterly  repugnant  to  all  good  legislation ;  as, 
in  fact,  exciting  and  encouraging  the  commission  of  crimes  ; 
and  yet,  in  the  end,  he  was  himself  compelled  to  re-enact 
nearly  every  one  of  the  clauses  he  objected  to.  Xo  funda- 
mental alteration  was  ultimately  made  in  any  one  of  them, 
and  very  few  were  altered  at  all.  The  law  is,  however,  less 
precise. 

"  Mr.  Hume  showed  that  in  those  cases  where  there  was 
anything  worth  complaining  of,  the  masters  were  more 
culpable  than  the  men. 

"  Mr.  Peel l  related  circumstances  respecting  the  ship- 

1  Afterwards  Sir  Robert  Peel,  at  that  time  Home  Secretary. 

P  * 


226  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

wrights  and  sailors  which  were  afterwards  shown  to  be 
false.  But  he  relied  principally  on  some  outrages  which 
had  been  committed  in  Dublin,  reprehensible  enough  to 
be  sure,  but  transient  and  worthy  of  little  notice. 

"  The  Committee  was  appointed.  When  Mr.  Huskisson 
made  his  furious  speech,  Mr.  Hume  was  astonished,  and 
was  very  ill  prepared  to  reply  to  him.  He  had  always 
maintained  to  me  that  Mr.  Huskisson  was  a  man  ot 
honour,  incapable  of  such  gross  and  shameless  deception. 
I  always  thought  Mr.  Hume  mistaken ;  I  had  observed 
Mr.  Huskisson  much  longer  than  Mr.  Hume  had,  and 
entertained  no  doubt  at  all  that  he  was  courtier  enough 
to  attempt  anything  likely  to  answer  his  purpose.  Mr. 
Hume  was  deceived  by  his  too  good  opinion  of  Mr. 
Huskisson:  had  he  been  less  credulous  he  would  have 
been  provided  with  the  means  of  showing  how  false  and 
scandalous  and  ill-judged  the  assertions  of  Mr.  Huskisson 
were.  Many  laughed  at  him  for  his  folly,  but  any  man 
may  at  any  time  be  deceived  by  any  other  man  to 
whom  he  gives  his  confidence,  if  that  other  man,  like  Mr. 
Huskisson,  be  mean  enough  and  base  enough  to  lie  to 
himself,  and  shameless  enough  openly  to  declare  that 
in  public  which  is  in  direct  contradiction  to  what  he  has 
pledged  himself  in  private.  Mr.  Huskisson  and  Mr.  Peel 
had  concerted  the  whole  matter.  They  had  adopted  the 
suggestions  of  the  shipbuilders  and  shipowners,  and  had 
consented  to  prepare  a  bill  on  the  basis  of  their  sugges- 
tions. They  had  looked  too  lightly  at  the  matter,  or  they 
would  not  have  undertaken  it;  they  undervalued  the 
enemy  they  had  to  encounter,  and  thought  to  walk  over 
the  field  without  a  battle.  It  was  to  be  a  Committee 
more  of  form  than  of  business,  and  was  to  sit  but  a  very 
few  days.  Mr.  Huskisson  named  his  Committee  from 
amongst  those  whom  he  knew  to  be  inimical  to  the 
men,  and  such  as  were  sure  to  follow  his  and  Mr.  Peel's 


THE    COMBINATION   LAWS  227 

views.  Mr.  Hume  could  not,  however,  be  excluded ;  there 
would  have  been  a  demand  in  the  House  that  he  should 
be  placed  on  the  Committee ;  and  it  was  therefore  advis- 
able to  put  him  on  at  once.  In  any  other  case  the  old 
Committee  would  have  been  revived,  but  that  Committee 
had  acted  fairly,  had  made  its  purpose  generally  known, 
had  examine;!  every  one  who  offered  to  be  examined,  with 
care  and  the  utmost  impartiality.  It  was  not  therefore 
calculated  for  a  special  purpose,  and  the  usual  mode  was 
impudently  departed  from.  Neither  Mr.  Hume  nor  1 
expected  we  should  be  able  to  beat  such  a  Committee  as 
we  did. 

"Mr.  Huskisson  was  unfortunate  in  wording  his  motion 
'  to  inquire  respecting  the  conduct  of  workmen'  He  might, 
had  he  foreseen  the  consequence,  have  so  worded  his 
motion  as  to  have  shut  us  out ;  as  it  was  he  let  us  in, 
spite  of  every  effort  which  was  made  to  the  contrary. 
When  it  was  demanded  that  workmen  against  whom  no 
complaint  had  been  made,  should  be  examined  for  the 
purpose  of  proving  the  benericial  effects  of  Mr.  Hume's 
Act,  and  the  demand  was  grounded  on  the  words  of  the 
motion,  Mr.  Huskisson  was  astounded.  He  meant  no 
such  thing;  it  was  not  intended  to  have  any  such  in- 
quiries made ;  and,  notwithstanding  the  words  of  the 
motion,  the  Committee  determined  that  none  of  the  work- 
ing people  should  be  examined,  excepting  only  such  as 
might  be  personally  accused.  Even  this  partial  and  un- 
just decision  was  extended  to  the  exclusion  of  men 
who  were  accused  of  heinous  crimes  which  they  had  not 
committed.  Another  circumstance  of  moment  seems  to 
have  escaped  the  observation  of  Mr.  Huskisson ;  this  was 
the  Easter  holidays.  So  near  to  these  holidays  was  the 
appointment  of  the  Committee,  that  it  could  not  sit  for 
nearly  a  fortnight.  Mr.  Hume  and  I  availed  ourselves 
of  this  circumstance,  and  were  indefatigable.  I  wrote  to 


228  THE   COMBINATION    LAWS 

many  places  in  the  country,  and  induced  them  to  send 
up  delegates.  I  went  amongst  the  London  trades,  per- 
suaded them  to  meet  and  appoint  delegates  to  co-operate 
with  those  from  the  country,  formed  a  permanent  and 
large  committee  of  them,  induced  them  to  collect  moneys, 
and  collected  some  myself  for  them.  They  were  thus 
enabled  to  pay  Parliamentary  agents,  and  other  expenses. 
These  men  (the  deputies)  were  vigilant  and  intelligent, 
especially  the  shipwrights,  some  of  whom  were  very  clever 
men,  as  were  some  also  from  Lancashire,  Glasgow,  York- 
shire, and  the  sailors  from  the  Tyne.  The  delay  in  the 
meeting  of  the  Committee  gave  me  the  opportunity  to  write 
the  small  pamphlet,  "  Observations  on  Mr.  Huskisson's 
Speech,"  &c.  Two  thousand  copies  were  printed  by  the 
Trades  Committee,  and  very  carefully  distributed,  especially 
amongst  members  of  the  two  Houses,  and  considerable 
effect  was  produced  by  it  in  favour  of  the  men  and 
Mr.  Hume's  Act.  My  mind  was  fully  made  up.  I  laid 
every  other  matter  and  thing  aside ;  opened  my  house  to 
the  workmen ;  did  everything  I  could ;  and  saw  every- 
body who  was  at  all  likely  either  to  be  made  useful,  or 
prevented  being  mischievous.  Nothing  that  could  be 
done  by  me,  by  Mr.  Hume,  by  the  Trades  Committee,  or 
by  others,  was  omitted  to  be  done;  and  the  effect  pro- 
duced was  such  as  could  not  have  been  easily  anticipated, 
nor  very  easily  credited. 

"  Many  of  the  members  who  had  been  on  the  Committee 
in  the  preceding  session,  requested  to  be  put  upon  the 
present  Committee,  but  Avere  refused,  Mr.  Huskisson 
telling  these  gentlemen  the  Committee  would  sit  no  more 
than  three  or  four  days;  and  yet  he  contrived  to  place 
some  half-dozen  more  of  his  own  partisans  upon  it. 

"When  the  Committee  assembled,  the  Right  Honour- 
able Thomas  Wallace l  was  appointed  chairman.  He  was 
1  At  that  time  Master  of  the  Mint. 


THE    COMBINATION   LAWS 

a  man  singularly  well  qualified  for  his  office,  conversant 
with  Parliamentary  business,  not  too  wise  for  the  purposes 
of  his  masters,  but  more  than  sufficiently  conceited  with 
his  own  wisdom  and  his  own  importance.  In  many 
respects  he  was  perhaps  the  most  unmanageable  man 
that  could  have  been  pitched  upon.  He  had  a  purpose 
to  accomplish,  and  would  attend  to  no  suggestions  from 
those  who  were  opposed  to  him.  The  Committee  were 
informed  that  about  half-a-dozen  gentlemen  would  be 
examined,  and  then  a  bill  would  be  submitted  to  the 
Committee  to  remedy  the  evils  complained  of.  Mr.  Peel, 
who  was  in  a  great  hurry  to  come  to  a  conclusion, 
proposed  a  bill  on  the  plan  before  mentioned,  and  the 
Attorney -General,  Copley,  was  requested  to  prepare  it 
forthwith.  Both  Mr.  Hume  and  I  were  acquainted  with 
the  intended  enactments.  We  conversed  on  the  subject, 
and  Mr.  Hume  undertook  to  speak  to  the  Attorney- 
General.  He  did  so,  and  put  it  to  Mr.  Attorney,  how  he 
could  draw  a  bill  on  the  plan  proposed,  so  as  not  to  make 
it  the  most  obnoxious  nonsense  that  ever  had  been  pro- 
posed to  Parliament  ?  How,  if  money  Avas  not  to  be  sub- 
scribed but  by  permission  of  a  magistrate;  and  how,  if 
none  but  a  Justice  of  the  Peace  was  ever  to  be  a  treasurer, 
school  societies,  Bible  societies,  charitable  societies,  and 
other  useful  associations,  could  exist  ?  In  fact,  how  any 
association  for  desirable  purposes  could  be  formed  in 
which  contributions  were  necessary,  unless  every  such 
society  first  obtained  an  Act  of  Parliament  ?  Whether, 
indeed,  in  the  present  state  of  society,  such  an  Act  could 
be  passed ;  and  whether,  if  it  could  be  passed,  it  would 
not  be  calculated  to  change  the  character  of  the  whole 
body  of  the  people  for  the  worse  ?  Mr.  Attorney  Copley 
saw  the  force  of  the  objections,  shrunk  from  the  task,  and 
declined  drawing  the  bill.  Thus  a  most  material  point 
was  gained.  Copley  was  disliked,  and,  had  he  drawn  the 


230  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

bill,  would  have  had  to  encounter  great  obloquy.  So 
disgraceful  a  bill  would  have  caused  a  great  sensation, 
and  would  probably  have  been  defeated  in  consequence  of 
the  clamour  it  would  have  excited.  But  that  was  not  the 
game  we  had  to  play.  It  was  our  purpose  to  break  down 
the  matter,  little  by  little,  in  every  possible  way,  and  then 
to  encounter  what  remained  as  vigorously  as  we  could. 

"Notwithstanding  the  Attorney -General  shrunk  from 
the  bad  work,  the  shipbuilders  of  the  Thames  stuck  close 
to  it,  and  in  a  bill  which  they  printed  as  a  comment  on 
the  report  of  the  Committee,  they  urged  the  adoption  of 
the  plan  they  had  proposed  to  ministers ;  and  this  bill 
they  caused  to  be  put  into  the  hand  of  every  one  of  the 
members  as  he  entered  the  House  on  the  second  reading 
of  the  bill. 

"  The  Committee  soon  found  that  it  was  not  quite  so 
easy  to  proceed  in  the  way  proposed  as  they  had  antici- 
pated. They  Avere  not  a  little  surprised  at  finding  the 
passage  to  the  committee  -  room  blocked  up  by  men 
demanding  to  be  examined,  and  still  more  so  at  finding 
that  some  of  them  sent  in  offers  to  rebut  the  evidence 
which  had  been  given  on  the  preceding  day.  Every 
accusation  was  denied  almost  as  regularly  as  it  was  made, 
and  evidence  to  the  contrary  was  offered,  not  only  by 
notes  to  the  chairman,  but  by  letters  to  individual  mem- 
bers, and  this  was  constantly  repeated. 

"In  the  Committee  of  1824  every  case  was  made  as 
public  as  possible.  In  this  Committee  great  pains  were 
taken  that  nothing  which  passed  in  the  Committee  should 
be  known,  but  they  were  all  pains  to  no  purpose.  I  knew 
everything  that  passed,  and  always  had  the  men  ready  to 
reply.  Mr.  Hume,  with  unexampled  courage  and  perse- 
verance, supported  the  claims  of  the  men  to  be  heard. 
Petitions  to  be  heard  were  sent  to  the  House  and  referred 
to  the  Committee;  they  who  petitioned  attended  at  the 


THE  COMBINATION    LAWS 

committee-room  and  demanded  a  hearing:.     The  members 

O 

could  hardly  get  to  their  room  or  from  it,  so  completely 
was  the  passage  blocked  by  the  men,  and  so  well  had  they 
been  instructed  not  readily  to  make  way  for  the  members. 
This  produced  considerable  effect  on  the  members  of  the 
Committee,  and  attracted  the  attention  of  a  great  many 
members  of  the  House,  who  in  consequence  were  apprised 
of  the  course  the  Committee  had  chosen  to  adopt. 

"  Mr.  Hume  insisted  upon  it,  that  his  bill  had  produced 
great  and  extensive  good,  and  he  offered  the  proofs  by  the 
mouths  of  many  witnesses  who  were  anxiously  waiting 
outside  the  committee-room  to  be  examined,  they  having 
come  from  various  parts  of  the  United  Kingdom  for  the 
very  purpose  of  being  examined.  The  Committee  found 
themselves  in  a  dilemma,  and  at  length  consented  to 
examine  some  men.  This  was  a  consequence  of  their 
fears.  The  injustice  they  contemplated  was  so  very  gross 
they  could  not  encounter  the  exposure  with  which  they 
were  threatened  as  well  in  the  public  papers  as  in  the 
House.  It  was  this,  and  no  love  of  justice,  which  at  length 
operated  on  them.  Still  they  did  not  give  up  their  inten- 
tion, but  endeavoured  to  limit  the  examination  to  those 
only  who  were  accused  by  name,  and  to  this  they  adhered 
so  pertinaciously  as  to  exclude  a  large  number  of  those 
they  ought  to  have  examined.  They  wholly  excluded  the 
deputies  from  Birmingham,  Sheffield,  and  several  other 
places,  who  were  in  London,  and  so  fully  satisfied  was  I  of 
the  impossibility  of  inducing  them  to  examine  others  that 
I  prevented  many  places  sending  deputies. 

"  The  working  people  of  Dublin  and  Glasgow  were 
accused  of  serious  crimes.  These  accusations  were  re- 
corded by  the  Committee,  and  intended  to  be  laid  before 
the  House.  Still  the  Committee  would  hear  none  of  the 
persons  whom  it  was  desirable  should  have  been  sent  from 
these  places  to  rebut  the  accusations.  Men's  names  were 


232  THE    COMBINATION   LAWS 

used  as  having  in  Glasgow  abetted  murder ;  and  yet,  not- 
withstanding the  very  men  who  had  been  so  named  wrote 
to  Mr.  Hume  and  to  the  chairman  of  the  Committee 
requesting  to  be  examined,  the  Committee  persisted  in 
refusing  to  hear  them.  The  men  said,  'We  are  men  of 
good  character,  have  done  no  wrong  to  any  one,  are  at 
work  in  the  same  shops  and  factories  in  which  we  have 
worked  for  years,  and  have  nothing  objected  to  us  by  our 
employers ;  AVC  demand  the  opportunity  to  clear  ourselves 
from  the  imputation.'  But  no,  the  Committee  would  not 
hear  them ;  it  would  record  the  accusation,  add  the  weight 
of  its  authority  to  it,  and  leave  the  accused  without  a 
defence.  Mr.  Huskisson  was  base  enough  to  call  the  men 
thus  accused,  and  thus  refused  a  hearing,  'acquitted 
felons';  and  yet  they  were  unacquitted,  for  they  had 
been  accused  only  before  the  Committee,  who  had  not 
condescended  to  do  either  them  or  themselves  the  justice 
of  trying  them  at  the  bar  of  the  Committee. 

"Notwithstanding  this,  no  one  was  refused  a  hearing 
who  came  with  a  complaint  against  the  workmen ;  no  one 
was  refused  payment  for  his  time  and  travelling  expenses 
who  gave  evidence  against  the  men,  while  many  of  the 
men  who  had  been  weeks  in  attendance,  and  were  at 
length  forced  on  the  notice  of  the  Committee  and  were 
examined  by  them,  were  refused  any  remuneration  what- 
soever. It  was  attempted  to  avoid  payment  by  a  mean 
shuffle.  It  was  said  the  men  were  not  summoned  by  the 
Committee,  but  it  was  shown  that  some  of  those  who  had 
received  the  highest  rate  of  pay,  and  were  men  of  property 
who  did  not  need  to  be  reimbursed,  were  not  summoned ; 
and  a  direct  refusal  to  give  anything  to  the  men  was  the 
consequence.  Some,  however,  were  paid. 

"  My  time  was  wholly  occupied  from  the  day  Mr.  Hus- 
kisson made  his  speech  till  some  time  after  the  passing  of 
the  Act.  I  examined  a  vast  number  of  persons;  made 


THE    COMBINATION   LAWS 

digests  and  briefs  for  Mr.  Hume;  wrote  petitions  to  the 
House  and  to  the  Committee ;  many  letters  to  Mr.  Wallace, 
the  chairman ;  and  many  to  other  persons,  all  as  the  agent 
of  the  men,  and  for  their  adoption.  No  one  thing  that 
could  be  done  was  omitted,  every  possible  advantage  was 
taken  of  even  the  most  minute  circumstance,  and  it  was 
by  these  and  Mr.  Hume's  extraordinary  exertions  that  the 
intentions  of  Mr.  Huskisson  and  Mr.  Peel  were  at  length 
so  completely  defeated,  and  the  bill  called  Mr.  Wallace's 
bill  was  passed.1 

"The  Committee  as  it  proceeded  became  exceedingly 
indignant.  Its  anger  when  it  discovered  that  I  obtained 
correct  accounts  of  its  proceedings  was  violent  and  absurd. 
It  could  not  bear  that  I  should  be  thus  informed;  that 
their  measures  should  be  anticipated  in  letters  and  peti- 
tions ;  and  that,  spite  of  all  their  exertions  and  the  advan- 
tages they  possessed,  they  should  every  day  be  losing 
ground.  They  threatened  to  punish  me  for  my  temerity. 
I  was  to  be  sent  for,  to  be  questioned,  to  be  reported  to  the 
House,  to  be  committed  to  Newgate,  for  daring  to  interfere 
and  tampering  with  their  witnesses. 

"  These  were  the  notions  these  wise  men  entertained 
of  justice.  The  masters  might  consult  when  and  where 
they  pleased;  give  what  instructions  they  pleased;  have 
the  ears  of  members  of  the  Committee,  and  go  in  and  out 
of  the  committee-room  while  the  Committee  was  sitting  as 
often  as  they  pleased.  But  the  workmen  were  to  have  no 
one  to  assist  them ;  no  one  was  to  instruct  them,  notwith- 
standing they  were  the  party  who  most  needed  instruction. 
They,  such  as  the  Committee  chose,  were  to  go  before  a 
body  of  their  superiors — great  squires  and  members  of  Par- 
liament— be  cross-questioned,  bullied,  and  intimidated,  and 

1  In  a  letter  to  S.  Harrison,  October  3,  1840,  Place  says,  "The  repeal 
of  the  laws  against  combinations  of  workmen  in  1824  and  1825  cost 
me  upwards  of  ,£250  in  money." 


234  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

no  one  was  either  to  advise  or  assist  them.  So  they  con- 
cluded ;  so  I  resolved  that  it  should  not  be.  It  happened, 
however,  that  every  one  of  the  men  who  entered  the  com- 
mittee-room in  awe  of  the  great  men,  came  out  of  it  with 
feelings  of  contempt  for  those  who  had  treated  them,  as 
they  invariably  did,  with  contumely  and  insult,  and  while 
they  did  so,  as  invariably  exposed  their  ignorance  and  their 
malice  to  the  observation  of  the  men;  and  this,  too,  to 
such  an  extent  as  to  take  away  all  respect  and  put  the 
men  at  perfect  ease  while  under  an  examination  which 
many  had  previously  looked  to  with  considerable  dread. 

"  Mr.  Hume  was  at  first  alarmed  at  the  threats  of  the 
Committee  to  send  for  me.  He  sent  a  messenger  from  the 
Committee  to  me  with  a  note  expressing  his  apprehension. 
I  replied  by  the  messenger ;  and  urged  him  to  provoke  the 
Committee  thus  to  commit  themselves.  He  did  so;  but 
they  could  not  be  prevailed  to  put  their  threat  into  execu- 
tion. I  was  very  desirous  of  being  examined.  I  could 
have  contrived  to  have  had  questions  put  to  me  which 
would  have  enabled  me  to  say  everything  I  wished  to  say, 
and  the  newspapers  would  have  given  it  insertion  at  length ; 
some  because  it  would  have  answered  their  purposes,  and 
others  because,  as  some  inserted  it,  they  could  not  keep  it 
out;  most  would,  however,  have  done  it  willingly  on  my 
furnishing  them  with  copies.  The  worst  the  Committee 
could  have  done  would  have  been  to  report  me  to  the 
House,  and  move  that  I  should  be  called  to  the  bar.  In 
the  meantime  the  examination  would  have  appeared  in  the 
newspapers,  and  a  very  pretty  piece  of  business  they  would 
have  made  of  it.  A  debate  in  the  House  on  such  a  motion 
would  have  been  a  fine  exposure  of  the  conduct  of  the  Com- 
mittee. After  all,  the  House  could  only  have  sent  me  to 
Newgate  for  contumacy  at  their  bar ;  the  session  Avas  draw- 
ing to  a  close,  and  I  should  have  been  nearly  as  comfortable 
in  one  of  the  rooms  of  the  gaoler's  house  as  at  home. 


THE    COMBINATION    LAWS  £35 

'•  I  kept  on  steadily  telling  the  men  to  inform  the  Com- 
mittee that  they  had  been  examined  and  instructed  by  me. 
I  sent  written  demands  on  the  chairman  for  them  to  be 
paid  as  others  were  paid ;  and  at  length  some  of  the  men 
were  paid,  though  only  half  or  one-third  the  usual  sum. 
There  were  two  shipwrights  from  Shields  named  Shippon 
and  Welsh,  remarkably  sturdy  men.  They  had  been 
examined  and  were  refused  any  remuneration.  They  both 
knew  Sir  Matthew  White  Ridley,  the  member  for  New- 
castle, and  on  these  men  I  fixed  for  an  experiment.  I 
accordingly  wrote  a  petition  to  the  House  against  the 
Committee  in  their  favour.  This  was  an  unprecedented 
step,  and  it  required  some  nerve  on  the  part  of  the  men  to 
go  through  with  it.  It  was  agreed  that  a  copy  of  the 
petition  should  be  sent  to  the  Committee  under  cover  to 
Sir  Matthew  White  Ridley  before  it  was  presented  to  the 
House.  The  Committee  was  very  indignant,  and  sent  for 
the  men.  Sir  M.  W.  Ridley  was  appointed  to  bully  them  ; 
and  this  he  did  in  his  own  particular  style,  to  the  amuse- 
ment of  the  men  and  some  two  or  three  members  of  the 
Committee.  The  men  were  not  at  all  intimidated,  but 
remained  unmoved  at  his  threats  to  send  them  to  prison, 
as  well  as  their  advisers,  and  the  consequence  was  that 
Ridley,  having  uselessly  exhausted  his  stock  of  abuse,  and 
the  Committee  finding  they  could  not  put  the  men  from 
their  purpose,  Ridley  tore  the  petition  in  pieces,  and  the 
men  had  an  order  for  payment. 

"  After  the  report  had  been  printed  and  the  bill  came  to 
be  discussed,  great  efforts  were  made  by  the  shipbuilders 
and  others  to  introduce  coercive  clauses,  while  Mr.  Hume 
was  effectually  active  to  modify  the  bill.  There  was  much 
vehemence  and  ill-temper  in  some  of  the  debates  which 
attended  the  presentation  of  petitions,  and  still  more  when 
the  bill  was  in  committee  of  the  whole  House.  Mr. 
Denman  and  Mr.  John  Williams,  whose  great  legal  know- 


i>36  THE    COMBINATION   LAWS 

ledge  was  respected,  did  good  service  in  showing  that  the 
repeal  of  the  common  law  was  proper.  These  debates  were 
considered  by  the  newspaper  reporters  as  matters  of  small 
consequence;  and,  like  many  others,  might  be  passed  by 
so  as  to  save  them  trouble ;  and  they  are  very  inadequately 
reported.  Once  when  the  bill  was  in  committee  the  debate 
was  singularly  acrimonious.  I  was  in  the  House  under 
the  gallery ;  was  accosted  by  many  members,  and  assured 
by  some  that  there  had  been  no  such  a  stormy  debate 
during  the  whole  session.  The  House  was  thin,  and  on 
the  Opposition  side  not  so  many  as  twenty  members.  Sir 
Francis  Burdett  and  Mr.  Hobhouse  supported  Mr.  Hume, 
but  he  had  to  bear  the  vehement  attacks  of  the  whole 
Ministerial  bench — Huskisson,  Peel,  Wallace,  Canning,  the 
Attorney-General,  &c.  &c.  No  terms  either  as  to  truth  or 
decency  of  language,  to  the  utmost  extent  which  ingenuity 
could  use,  so  as  not  to  be  reprehended  by  the  Speaker, 
were  spared.  Wallace  gave  loose  to  invective,  and  Avas 
disgracefully  abusive.  Huskisson  became  enraged,  and 
most  grossly  insulted  Sir  Francis  Burdett  and  Mr.  Hob- 
house.  Mr.  Peel  stuck  at  nothing ;  he  lied  so  openly,  so 
grossly,  so  repeatedly,  and  so  shamelessly,  as  even  to 
astonish  me,  who  always  thought,  and  still  do  think  him, 
a  pitiful,  shuffling  fellow.  He  was  repeatedly  detected  by 
Mr.  Hume,  and  as  frequently  exposed.  Still  he  lied  again 
without  the  least  embarrassment,  and  was  never  in  the 
smallest  degree  abashed.1  This  was,  upon  the  whole,  a 
very  disgraceful  exhibition. 

1  Sir  Robert  Peel's  view  of  the  proceedings  may  be  gathered  from 
his  letter  to  Mr.  Leonard  Homer,  dated  November  29,  1825.  "Suffi- 
cient precautions,"  he  says,  "were  not  taken  in  the  Act  of  1823  (sic), 
the  first  substitute  for  the  old  Combination  Laws,  to  prevent  that 
species  of  annoyance  which  numbers  can  exercise  towards  individuals, 
short  of  personal  violence  and  actual  threat,  but  nearly  as  effectual  for 
its  object." — "Sir  Robert  Peel,  from  his  Private  Correspondence," 
edited  by  C.  S.  Parker  (London,  1891),  p.  379. 


THE   COMBINATION   LAWS  237 

"  Mr.  Huskisson  accused  Mr.  Hume  of  having  betrayed 
the  Committee  and  suffered  himself  to  be  led  by  the 
opinions  of  others.  He  told  Mr.  Hobhouse  he  was  obliged 
to  talk  as  he  did,  in  opposition  to  his  better  judgment. 
Mr.  Canning  and  Mr.  Peel  went  over  the  same  ground. 
Mr.  Canning  told  Sir  Francis  Burdett  he  did  not  under- 
stand the  matter,  but  being  under  surveillance,  he  was 
obliged  to  talk  as  he  did. 

"  Sir  Matthew  W.  Ridley  followed  in  the  same  course. 
I  was  repeatedly  alluded  to,  and  stared  at  by  all  the  House ; 
but  as  I  caught  Mr.  Hume's  eye  several  times,  and  saw  that 
it  in  no  way  annoyed  him,  I  remained.  When  they  had 
all  done  speaking,  Mr.  Hume  addressed  the  House,  and  in 
about  twenty  minutes  gave  an  account  of  his  conduct, 
described  the  Committee,  named  me  repeatedly  as  the  man 
to  whom  he  owed  much  assistance,  justified  us  both,  and 
made,  as  I  thought,  a  triumphant  speech.  He  challenged 
any  one  to  show  that  I  had  in  any  wray  interfered  impro- 
perly, or  had  been  otherwise  than  serviceable  in  all  respects. 
No  man  on  any  occasion  ever  more  completely  beat  his 
opponents  before  him.  I  confess  I  thought  myself  a  toler- 
ably sturdy  fellow  ;  but  Mr.  Hume's  sturdiness  had,  on  this 
occasion,  my  most  unqualified  admiration.  I  am  certain 
no  man  but  himself  could  have  been  found  who  would  have 
behaved  with  such  unshaken  firmness,  and  so  successfully 
have  replied  to  a  host  of  opponents  as  he  did.  It  was  a 
very  extraordinary  instance  of  intrepidity  and  tact,  and  so 
it  has  since  been  acknowledged  to  have  been  by  men  on 
both  sides  of  the  Housa 

"  When  the  bill  was  reported  I  was  again  in  the  House, 
and  Mons.  J.  B.  Say1  was  with  me.  On  this  occasion 
the  most  rancorous  hostility  was  again  shown ;  allusions 
to  me  were  so  particularly  personal  and  graceless,  that  at 

1  See  the  reference  to  J.  B.  Say,  the  distinguished  French  economist, 
at  p.  158. 


238  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

length  M.  Say  proposed  that  we  should  leave  the  House,  as 
he  observed  my  friends  were  made  uncomfortable,  and  we 
withdrew.  Nothing  of  this  was  reported  in  the  newspapers. 
In  matters  of  this  kind  little  is  ever  reported ;  and  at  all 
times  as  little  as  can  be  conveniently  of  Mr.  Hume.  He  is 
generally  disliked  by  the  reporters,  who,  like  other  men 
who  follow  laborious  employments,  are  disposed  to  make 
the  labour  as  light  as  they  can.  They  object  to  Mr.  Hume 
that  his  pertinacity  prolongs  the  session,  as  it  very  fre- 
quently also  docs  the  hours  the  House  sits.  And  on  the 
two  occasions  when  the  House  was  in  committee  on  the 
Combination  Laws  Bill  the  reporters  not  only  neglected  to 
report  Mr.  Hume  as  they  ought  to  have  done,  but  they  so 
reported  the  debate  as  to  give  the  appearance  of  defeat  to 
him,  when,  in  fact,  he  was  remarkably  triumphant. 

"  Ultimately  the  Act  differed  very  little  from  Mr.  Hume's 
Act.  It  is  substantially  the  same.  The  words  'common 
law'  are  omitted,  but  by  the  4th  and  5th  enacting  clauses 
it  is  wholly  excluded,  both  in  the  commencement  and  close 
of  the  clauses ;  and  this  being  the  principal  purpose  of  the 
Act,  the  other  alterations  were  of  comparatively  small 
moment.  There  is  a  long  clause,  differently  Avorded  in 
some  particulars  from  Mr.  Hume's  Act,  respecting  intimida- 
tion, and  the  punishments  for  offences  are  increased ;  but 
the  partial,  unjust,  and  mischievous  laws  which  forbade 
combinations  of  workmen  to  alter  their  wages  and  hours  of 
working  are  all  swept  away,  and  the  new  Act  6  Geo.  III. 
c.  129  has,  by  the  4th  and  5th  clauses,  declared  combina- 
tions for  these  purposes  to  be  legal. 

"  The  principal  objection  to  leaving  out  the  words  •'  com- 
mon law'  is  that  the  perversity  or  ingenuity  of  lawyers 
may,  in  some  circumstances,  ground  vexatious  proceedings 
on  the  vagueness  of  the  law ;  and  in  other  times,  men  may 
be  again  indicted  for  conspiracies  and  horridly  punished 
when  they  have  committed  no  crime.  This  is  a  state  in 


THE    COMBINATION    LAWS  239 

which  no  law  should  ever  be  left.  Men  may  combine  to 
regulate  wages  and  hours  of  working,  but  if  at  any  meet- 
ing held  for  either  or  both  of  these  purposes,  the  men 
should  be  led  to  deviate  into  any  other  matter,  they  may 
then  be,  all  or  any  of  them,  indicted  under  the  common 
law  for  conspiracy ;  and  the  mercy  they  would  meet  with, 
under  the  operation  of  this  process,  may  be  guessed  at  by 
the  terrible  punishments  many  have  heretofore  endured. 
This  ground  of  objection  was  taken  by  Lord  Rosslyn  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  when  the  Chancellor  Eldon  explained  that 
such  proceedings  were  not  contemplated  by  the  Act,  and 
would  not  be  permitted.1 

"  The  laws  against  combinations  were  inimical  to  the 
working  people  in  many  respects.  They  induced  them  to 
break  and  disregard  the  laws.  They  made  them  suspect 
the  intentions  of  every  man  who  tendered  his  services. 
They  made  them  hate  their  employers  with  a  rancour 
which  nothing  else  could  have  produced.  And  they  made 
them  hate  those  of  their  own  class  who  refused  to  join  them, 
to  such  an  extent  as  cordially  to  seek  to  do  them  mischief. 
The  amendment  on  the  repeal  of  the  laws  was  immediate, 
and  has  been  increasing  ever  since.  The  people  have  come 
better  together,  have  now  [1829]  incomparably  more  con- 
fidence in  the  good  intentions  of  others  to  serve  them 
than  they  ever  had  before,  and  are  much  better  disposed 
to  serve  themselves.  None  but  good  results  can  follow.  It 
is  true  the  old  leaven  has  not  yet  worn  out.  Power-looms 
have  been  broken  since  the  repeal  of  the  Combination  Laws, 
and  now  the  Spitaltields  weavers,  in  their  state  of  misery, 
have  destroyed  a  good  deal  of  silk  in  the  looms.  Still  the 
extent  of  the  mischief  has  been  comparatively  small  as 

1  Place  had  considerable  success  in  the  House  of  Lords.  In  addition 
to  this  declaration  from  the  Chancellor,  Lord  Rosslyn,  at  I'lace's  sugges- 
tion, proposed  several  amendments.  One  of  these,  which  conceded  the 
right  of  appeal  to  Quarter  Sessions,  was  accepted  l>y  the  Government, 
and  was  afterwards  of  some  value. 


240  THE   COMBINATION   LAWS 

compared  with,  former  times,  and  a  few  years  will  probably 
put  an  end  to  everything  of  the  kind. 

"The  tumults  caused  by  combinations  of  workmen  on 
account  of  wages  have  generally  ceased.  There  are  now 
none  of  those  outrageous  proceedings  which  were  formerly 
perpetual ;  and  although  it  is  very  probable  that  there  will 
be  occasional  ebullitions,  it  is  not  at  all  likely  that  the 
conduct  so  very  generally  pursued  up  to  the  repeal  of  the 
Combination  Laws  will  ever  again  be  resumed.1 

"Soon  after  the  proceedings  in  1825  were  closed  the 
seamen  of  the  Tyne  and  Wear  sent  me  a  handsome  silver 
vase,  paid  for  by  a  penny- a- week  subscription,  and  the 
cutlers  of  Sheffield  sent  me  an  incomparable  set  of  knives 
and  forks  in  a  case.  They  are  not  only  the  finest  specimen 
of  workmanship  I  ever  saw,  but  men  well  acquainted  with 
cutlery  have  declared  that  they  excel  anything  they  have 
ever  seen." 2 

1  27,798  (25-41)-  2  27,798  (66). 


CHAPTER  IX 
THE  FIRST  REFORM  CAMPAIGN 

ON  April  15,  1830,  Place  after  his  second  marriage  returned 
to  Charing  Cross,  and  to  his  "  old  way  of  consuming  time." 
On  June  26,  George  IV.  died.  His  death  had  been  for 
some  time  expected,  and  politicians  had  been  preparing 
themselves  for  the  consequent  general  election,  and  for  the 
accession  of  a  king  who  was  understood  to  be  a  reformer. 
The  Whigs  were  on  the  look-out  for  a  popular  cry,  and  found 
it  in  what  was  known  ten  years  later  as  the  Condition  of  the 
People  Question.  They  therefore  moved  an  amendment  to 
the  address  declaring  that  the  partial  distress  mentioned  in 
the  king's  speech  on  February  4  was  really  general.  This 
was  a  question  of  fact  as  to  which  most  members  of 
the  House  of  Commons  knew  nothing  at  all ;  but  because 
it  was  a  question  of  fact  gentlemen  could  make  sonorous 
declarations  of  popular  sympathy  without  committing 
themselves  to  any  definite  policy. 

Accordingly  the  "  speech  -making  gabbling  Whigs"1 
filled  pages  of  Hansard  with  vague  chatter  about  their 
own  observations  and  the  testimony  of  their  friends,  and 
in  the  great  Whig  club-house  at  Brooks'  men  declared 
that  "  it  would  be  impossible  to  go  on "  beyond  June.2 
In  the  Commons,  the  Whigs  were  supported  by  some  dis- 
affected Tories  who  had  not  yet  forgiven  Wellington  for 
passing  Catholic  Emancipation  in  1829. 

1  27,509  (5°)-  '  27,789  (142). 

241  Q 


242          THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

But  even  outside  the  little  circle  of  the  Commons  the 
Condition  of  the  People  Question  was  being  discussed 
more  widely  than  it  had  been  since  1817.  Prices  were 
going  up,  and  the  newspapers  were  full  of  those  confused 
complaints  which  any  change  in  the  standard  of  value 
always  produces.  Place  looked  on  with  grim  disgust. 
"  Between  the  landowners  on  the  one  side,  who  wanted 
laws  to  make  food  dear  and  commodities  cheap,  and  the 
generality  of  the  manufacturing  people  who  wanted  high 
profits  and  high  wages  with  cheap  produce,  there  was  as 
absurd  and  as  unintelligible  a  state  of  things  as  had 
perhaps  ever  existed." l 

The  general  impression  that  times  were  changing  was 
heightened  by  the  behaviour  of  the  new  king.  "George 
the  Fourth,"  wrote  Place  to  Hume,  "  shut  himself  up  from 
mere  hatred  of  the  people.  The  present  silly  man  is  court- 
ing them  most  absurdly.  N"o  sooner  was  he  made  king, 
than  he  who  had  been  private  became  public ;  he  walked 
in  the  streets;  he  rode  among  the  people  ;  he  went  about 
with  his  queen  in  an  open  carriage  ;  he  bowed  and  waved 
his  hat,  and  laughed,  and  was  as  merry  as  the  silliest  of 
the  mob.  The  people,  too,  took  off  their  hats  and  hurrahed 
and  shouted,  and  were  as  pleased  as  so  many  children  with 
a  new  toy.  .  .  .  The  king  goes  on  making  a  nonsensical 
exhibition  of  himself  and  his  queen,  making  speeches  as 
often  as  he  can  find  an  occasion,  speeches  which  a  board- 
ing-school girl  would  be  ashamed  of.  And  what  is  the 
consequence  of  all  this  ?  The  consequence  is  that  the 
seamen  of  the  North  have  sent  a  petition  to  him  by  a 
deputation  who  are  charged  to  see  him,  and  beg  him  to 
attend  to  their  prayer,  which  is,  that  he  will  redress  their 
grievances  and  raise  their  wages.  Others  are  asking  for 
and  expecting  to  receive  from  him  similar  advantages. 
The  housekeepers  [i.e.  ratepayers]  are  much  in  the  same 
1  27,789(144). 


THE   FIRST   REFORM    CAMPAIGN 

way ;  they  too  expect  him  to  do  for  them  they  know  not 
what." l 

At  the  general  election  in  August,  as  Westminster  was 
not  contested,  Place  undertook  the  unpaid  "  management " 
of  Middlesex  for  his  friend  Hume.2  The  elections  produced 
more  interest  than  usual,  and  at  the  moment  when  the 
excitement  was  at  its  highest,  came  the  Three  Days'  Revo- 
lution in  Paris,  and  the  forcible  substitution  of  a  consti- 
tutional monarchy  under  Louis  Philippe  for  the  reactionary 
despotism  of  Charles  X.  Place  has  described  the  recep- 
tion of  the  news  at  Hume's  committee-room. 

"  There  had  been  no  arrivals  from  Paris  at  London  for 
three  or  four  days,  and  great  indeed  was  the  anxiety  it 
caused.  It  was  said  there  had  been  a  coup  d'etat  which 
had  succeeded,  and  this  increased  the  anxiety.  .  .  .  AVhcn 
the  news  arrived  I  was  in  the  large  room  used  as  a  public 
room  by  Mr.  Hume's  committee.  The  anxious  state  in 
which  men  were  had  caused  a  large  attendance  of  highly 
respectable  people,  among  whom  were  many  members  of 
the  late  Parliament.  The  company  was  in  large  groups 
talking  of  the  probable  events  at  Paris,  when  a  gentleman 
came  in  with  a  French  publication,  printed  at  Paris  in  the 
evening  of  the  2Qth  [July],  announcing  the  people's  victory 
after  the  three  days'  fighting.  Mr.  Hobhouse  was  near 
the  door,  and  was  the  first  to  possess  himself  of  the  news, 
which,  having  announced,  he  raised  his  hat  above  his  head 

1   Place  to  Hume,  November  i,  1830. 

-  On  this  occasion  lie  was  made  very  angry  by  the  eagerness  of  the 
Whig  magnates  to  get  as  much  out  of  him  as  possible,  and  their  fear 
of  demeaning  themselves  by  being  grateful.  In  his  diary  he  accuses 
Hobhouse  of  contriving  "  to  induce  his  Whig  friends  to  object,  as  they 
did,  to  my  being  placed  on  the  Committee  of  Middlesex  freeholders. 
.  .  .  lint  the  most  curious  circumstance  was,  that  the  very  same  men 
who  had  done  so  passed  a  resolution  a  fortnight  before  the  election 
came  on,  putting  the  management  of  the  Committee  into  my  hands, 
and  the  uncontrolled  disposal  of  the  funds  at  my  discretion  ! " 
("  Diary,"  July  1830.) 


244  THE   FIRST   REFORM    CAMPAIGN 

and  cheered  loudly.  All  present  were  electrified,  and  many 
cheers  were  given  in  as  loud  voices  and  as  heartily  as  ever 
they  were  given  on  board  a  man-of-war  at  the  moment 
of  victory.  No  assembly  of  men  were  ever  more  elated, 
or  congratulated  one  another  more  heartily  or  more 
sincerely." l 

The  easy  success  of  the  Revolution  of  July  not  only 
gave  a  strong  impetus  to  the  movement  in  favour  of  Parlia- 
mentary Reform  in  England,2  but  also  helped  to  decide  the 
particular  form  which  that  movement  was  to  take  during 
the  next  two  years.  The  first  French  Revolution  had 
completely  discredited  in  England  any  policy  of  forcible 
resistance  to  Government.  Now,  however,  an  organised 
rising  began  to  seem  not  only  a  reasonable,  but  a  virtuous 
and  tolerably  safe  method  of  solving  constitutional  diffi- 
culties. "  This  new  Revolution  produced  a  very  extraordi- 
nary effect  on  the  middle  classes,  and. sent  a  vast  number 
of  persons  to  me  with  all  sorts  of  projects  and  propositions. 
Every  one  was  glorified  with  the  courage,  the  humanity, 
and  the  honesty  of  the  Parisians,  and  the  common  people 
became  eagerly  desirous  to  prove  that  they  too  were  brave 
and  humane  and  honest.  All  soon  seemed  desirous  to 
fight  against  the  Government  if  it  should  attempt  to 
control  the  French  Government."  3 

Place  himself  came  under  the  influence  of  this  change 
of  feeling.  During  the  next  two  years  the  thought  was 
always  at  the  back  of  his  mind  that,  horrible  as  an  armed 
revolution  must  almost  necessarily  be,  and  he  had  no  illu- 
sions on  this  point,  such  a  revolution  might  yet  be  worth 
while.  In  April  1831  Major  Beauclerk  wrote:  "Most 
sincerely  do  I  hope  it  may  not  be  necessary  for  us  to  pass 

1  27,789(162,  163). 

2  "  The  '  three  days '  produced  much  of  our  political  excitement."- 
"  The  Greville  Memoirs,  a  Journal  of  the  Reigns  of  King  George  IV. 
and  King  William  IV."  (3  vols.,  London,  1874-1887),  vol.  ii.  p.  219. 

3  "Diary,"  July  1830. 


THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN          245 

through  the  ordeal  of  a  revolution  to  restore  us  to  a  state 
of  sanity,  but  much  as  I  dread  such  a  crisis.  I  must  confess 
I  should  prefer  it  a  thousand  times  to  the  alternative  of 
again  returning  to  the  same  vicious  and  rotten  system." l 
Place  replied :  "  I  hope  with  you  almost  against  mv  con- 
viction that  we  shall  be  able  to  avoid  a  violent  revolution 
in  working  out  our  reformation.  A  violent  revolution  in 
this  country  would  be  dreadful  in  the  extreme.  .  .  .  The 
horrors  perpetrated  by  the  Parisian  mobs  in  the  early 
stages  of  their  revolution,  were  the  immediate  consequences 
of  supplies  not  being  brought  to  the  city  as  usual.  Con- 
template seriously  what  would  be  the  consequences  of  the 
failure  of  supplies  to  this  great  metropolis.  Think  of  the 
mischief  which  would  be  produced  if  neither  corn  nor 
cattle  were  brought  to  market  for  only  three  days,  includ- 
ing one  market-day  at  Smithfield  and  Mark  Lane,  and  you 
will  be  convinced  that  the  horrors  of  Paris  would  be  far 
exceeded  by  those  of  London.  .  .  .  Do  you  think  you  can 
estimate  with  anything  like  precision  the  terrible  conse- 
quences of  a  starving  and  an  enraged  populace  in  London 
and  its  example  on  all  parts  of  the  country  ?  If  you  do  so 
you  will  dread  a  convulsion  as  much  as  I  do.  Yet  I  agree 
with  you  that  even  a  convulsion  should  be  risked  rather 
than  have  the  borougliniongering  system  continued." 2 

O  O  O         *J 

For  ten  years  Place's  whole  habits  of  work  had  been 
opposed  to  "  pitched  battle  "  tactics.  He  had  steadily  ex- 
ploited the  fact  that  the  most  bigoted  of  Tory  Governments 
cannot  continuously  resist  the  passage  of  small  reforms,  or 
prevent  accumulated  small  reforms  from  having  their 
effect.  Now,  however,  in  view  of  the  possibility  of  an 
armed  revolution  he  welcomed  the  idea  that  the  end  of 
such  concessions  was  come,  and  that  the  Duke  of  Welling- 
ton, like  Polignac,  would  make  a  final  stand  against  pro- 

1  A.  H.  Beauclerk  to  Place,  April  7,  1831. 
•  Place  to  Major  Beauclerk,  April  7,  1831. 


246  THE   FIRST   UK  FORM   CAMPAIGN 

gress.  "  The  Duke  thinks  this  is  not  the  time  to  meet  the 
wishes  of  the  people.  He  does  not  understand  them,  and 
has  therefore  resolved  to  make  no  concessions.  I  hope  he 
will  stick  to  his  resolve.  If  I  thought  as  the  Duke  thinks, 
and  were  in  his  place,  I  would  permit  no  change  to  be 
made  and  would  be  obstinate  to  the  death.  It  is  a 
question  of  longer  or  shorter  —  change  will  come.  It  is 
a  very  simple  question, — there  must  be  a  radical  change, 
not  a  sharn  reform,  but  a  radical  change  from  the  top 
to  the  bottom,  and  this  you  may  if  you  please  call  a 
revolution. 

"  The  whole  scheme  of  our  Government  is  essentially 
corrupt,  and  no  corrupt  system  ever  yet  reformed  itself. 
Our  system  could  not  reform  itself  if  it  would.  Take  away 
the  corruption  and  nothing  remains.  His  Dukeship  and 
his  coadjutors  know  this  as  well  as  I  do,  but  they  think 
they  can  continue  to  cajole  the  people.  Catholic  emanci- 
pation was  to  appease  them.  Repeal  of  taxes  on  beer  and 
on  leather  was  to  satisfy  them.  .  .  .  He  has  seen  that 
concession  goes  for  nothing,  while  anything  remains  to  be 
conceded,  and  he  will  concede  no  more.  Well  done,  brave 
Duke  !  It  is  a  happy  circumstance  that  when  the  people 
have  obtained  the  thing  they  clamoured  for,  they  set  very 
little  store  by  it.  This  is  the  security  for  good  government 
in  the  end.  The  Duke  is  like  the  school-boy  who  objected 
to  say  A. 

'  If  I  say  A,  I  must  say  B, 

And  so  go  on  to  C  and  1) ; 

And  so  no  end  I  see  there'll  be 

If  I  but  once  say  ABC.' 

"  But  we  are  told,  if  all  concession  be  refused  the  people 
will  become  outrageous,  and  no  one  can  tell  what  may 
follow.  Yes,  I  think  any  one  can  tell.  There  will  be  much 
grumbling  and  growling,  and  meeting  and  petitioning  will 
follow.  They  will  become  more  and  more  dissatisfied ', 


THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN  247 

and  in  time  they  will  use  force,  and  after  a  while  they 
will  triumph.  This  is  inevitable." l 

On  November  2,  King  William  the  Fourth  opened  his  first 
Parliament.  One  result  of  the  excitement  of  the  preceding- 
summer  was  that  129  new  members — an  unusual  propor- 
tion in  the  unreformed  House  of  Commons — had  been 
elected,  and  though  politicians  were  not  so  clearly  labelled 
as  they  are  noAV,  the  Whigs  were  known  to  be  hopeful. 
One  sentence  in  the  king's  speech  produced  something 
like  a  panic.  The  Revolution  in  Paris  had  been  followed 
by  another  in  Brussels,  by  which  the  Belgians  had  declared 
themselves  independent  of  the  Dutch  Crown.  "  I  am  en- 
deavouring," the  king  was  made  to  say,  "  in  concert  with 
my  allies,  to  devise  such  means  of  restoring  tranquillity  as 
may  be  compatible  with  the  welfare  and  good  government 
of  the  Netherlands,  and  with  the  future  security  of  other 
states."  This  seemed  to  point  to  an  attack  by  Prussia 
upon  Belgium,  a  new  alliance  against  France,  and  a  repeti- 
tion of  the  whole  dreary  course  of  the  Napoleonic  wars. 2 

On  that  evening  Place  "  dined  alone  with  Mr.  Bentham^ 
.  .  .  The  printed  speech  of  the  king  was  brought  to  us  soon 
after  dinner,  and  it  greatly  disconcerted  us.  We  had  no 
doubt  that  the  Lords  had  been  sounded  on  the  subject, 
and  had  warranted  the  insertion  of  the  hostile  paragraphs 

1  Place  to  Hume,  Nov.  i,  1830. 

2  "  We  expected   that  arrangements  would   be   made  privately  for 
Prussia  to  assist  Holland  to  recover  the  Netherlands,  that  France  would 
then  interfere,  and  there  would  be  a  general  war.     The  king's  speech 
was  therefore  expected  with  anxiety,  and  when  the  time  for  the  Parlia- 
ment to  meet  came,  the  people  in  the  metropolis  were  unusually  agitated. 
Parliament  assembled  on  the  26th  October,  and  the  hopes  of  the  people 
were  dashed  to  the  ground  by  the  passage  it  contained  respecting  Bel- 
gium.    War  seemed  inevitable,  and  many  were  the  suggestions  to  place 
impediments  in  its  way.    Amongst  others,  a  refusal  of  the  housekeepers 
to  pay  taxes,  and  to  form  themselves  into  a  National  Guard.  ...  I  did 
not  expect  any  hostile  expressions  would  be  put  into  the  king's  speech, 
and  I  had  therefore  no  expectation  of  any  extraordinary  proceedings, 
nor  of  any  change  of  ministers."     ("  Diary,"  1830.) 


248          THE   FIRST   REFORM    CAMPAIGN 

in  the  speech.  Every  sort  of  evil  seemed  to  follow  in  the 
train  of  a  general  war,  and  our  forebodings  were  dismal 
enough." l 

Wellington  had  already  on  that  same  evening  made 
his  celebrated  declaration  of  hostility  to  any  change  of 
the  system  of  representation,  and  Grey  in  the  Lords,  and 
Brougham  in  the  Commons,  had,  on  behalf  of  the  Whig 
party,  given  notice  of  motions  in  favour  of  some  undefined 
measure  of  Parliamentary  reform.  In  the  existing  temper 
of  the  House  of  Commons  it  was  generally  felt  that  the 
Whigs  could  now  come  into  office  as  soon  as  they  liked. 
Next  evening  Place  again  saw  Mr.  Bentharn,  "  when  we  con- 
gratulated ourselves  and  one  another  on  the  occurrence  of 
the  preceding  evening,  being  quite  convinced  that  great 
changes  were  at  hand,"  but  he  adds  the  modest  avowal  that 
"  we  were  also  a  little  perplexed  at  not  being  able  to  see 
exactly  how  they  would  be  brought  about." 2  On  Novem- 
ber 7,  four  days  later,  Wellington  made  his  defeat  in- 
evitable by  countermanding,  on  the  ground  of  his  own 
unpopularity  and  the  danger  of  a  riot,  a  visit  in  state  by 
the  king  to  the  City,  which  had  been  arranged  for  Lord 
Mayor's  Day.3 

1  27,789(17^).  2  27,789(177). 

3  Though  Place  was  perfectly  willing  to  make  political  use  of  the 
possibility  of  disorder  in  London,  he  was  at  that  time  doing  his  best  to 
make  the  new  police  (established  in  1829)  as  efficient  as  possible.  His 
administrative  instinct  rejoiced  over  their  substitution  for  the  "con- 
ceited and  interested  people  who  managed  the  old  watch  in  parishes  " 
[27,789,  (182)],  and  Mr.  Thomas,  the  police-inspector,  used  to  visit  him. 
On  one  such  occasion  about  this  time,  "  I  advised  Mr.  Thomas  not  again 
to  wait  until  his  men  were  attacked,  and  then,  when  they  had  been 
maltreated  and  bruised,  to  take  a  few  vagabonds  into  custody  ;  but 
when  he  saw  a  mob  prepared  to  make  an  attack,  to  lead  his  men  on  and 
thrash  those  who  composed  the  mob  with  their  staves  as  long  as  any 
of  them  remained  together,  but  to  take  none  into  custody  ;  and  that 
if  this  were  done  once  or  twice,  there  would  be  no  more  such  mobs. 
On  the  gth  November  a  large  mob  gathered  in  the  City  and  sallied 
through  Temple  Bar,  armed  with  pieces  of  wood  from  a  fence  in  Chan- 
cery Lane,  for  the  purpose  of  beating  the  police.  My  advice  was 


THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN  249 

The  fall  of  the  Tory  ministry  and  the  immediate  coming 
into  office  of  the  Whigs,  unchastened  and  unpledged,  was 
exactly  what  Place  did  not  want.  "The  old  Whigs,"  he 
wrote,  "thought  silence  the  most  prudent  course.  They 
knew  that  Lord  Wellington's  administration  was  drawing  to 
a  close,  and  they  did  not  like  to  object  to  many  things  which 
under  other  circumstances  they  would  have  unsparingly 
condemned,  and  they  did  not  like  to  propose  any  of  those 
reforms  which  under  other  circumstances  they  would  have 
declared  were  necessary  to  save  the  country  from  ruin, 
lest  they  should  commit  themselves  and  be  called  upon, 
should  they  be  in  power,  to  perform  their  promises."  1  On 
November  8  Place  wrote  a  long  letter  to  Hobhouse,  putting 
as  many  of  his  real  reasons  for  desiring  delay  as  he  dared, 
and  probably  a  good  many  more  than  was  wise.  " '  Miracles 
never  will  cease.'  Here  am  I,  '  the  furious  republican,' 
whose  opinions  have  induced  many  to  fear,  and  more  to 
hate  him,  become  a  mod6r6,  writing  to  you  not  to  accelerate 
an  instant,  but  to  retard,  not  a  mere  reform,  but  an  actual 
change. 

"  The  folly  of  the  king  and  his  ministers  has  precipitated 
matters.  .  .  .  The  king  refuses  to  make  a  procession  along 
the  streets,  and  the  playhouses  are  from  very  fear  to  be 
shut  up  to-morrow.  This  is  the  first  time,  observe,  that 
apprehension  of  violence  by  the  people  against  an  adminis- 
tration has  induced  them  openly  to  change  their  plan  of 
proceeding. 

"  Put  these  matters  in  any  way  you  please.  Let  men  do 
all  they  can  to  reconcile  themselves  to  the  conduct  of 

followed.  The  police  retreated  up  Wych  Street,  and  collected  to  about 
sixty  men  in  Catherine  Street,  from  whence  they  sallied  and  beat  the 
mob  before  them  to  Temple  Bar.  This  at  once  put  an  end  to  all  rioting  ; 
no  one  was  killed,  no  limb  was  broken,  but  many  were  bruised  and 
many  heads  were  broken  ;  but  there  were  no  more  mobs."  ("  Diary," 
November  1830.) 
1  27,789  (181). 


250          THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

ministers.  ...  Its  nature  cannot  be  changed,  neither  can 
they  make  it  other  than  the  first  step  in  the  British 
Revolution.  You  know  my  opinion  of  the  weakness  of  the 
present  Government.  You  know  my  opinion  that  there 
never  can  be  a  strong  Government  again  in  England  until 
there  has  been  a  change  in  its  very  form,  and  neither  you 
nor  any  one  else  will  argue  the  contrary  against  me. 

"  I,  then,  want  no  instant  change  of  ministers.  I  am  as 
certain  as  a  man  can  be  who  is  not  desirous  to  cheat  him- 
self or  be  deceived  by  others,  that  a  present  change  of 
ministers  would  do  more  towards  producing  or  rather 
accelerating  a  revolution  than  all  the  other  circumstances 
of  the  time  taken  together ;  and  the  time  is  not  yet  come 
when  a  radical  change  can  be  made,  either  so  effectually  as 
to  prevent  other  similar  changes,  or  so  beneficially  as  to 
answer  the  purposes  of  any  class  of  reformers.  ...  If  they 
were  to  be  ousted  at  once,  who  are  to  come  in  ?  Not 
another  Tory  set.  There  are  not  Tory  materials  of  suf- 
ficient importance  to  build  up  an  administration  Avhich 
could  continue  in  office  to  the  end  of  the  session.  Not  a 
Whig  administration,  for,  in  spite  of  the  wishes  of  their 
friends,  here  is  hardly  anything  but  imbecility.  Who 
would  be  minister  ?  Earl  Grey  ?  Look  at  him.  Is  he 
competent  to  do  the  duty  ?  .  .  .  The  Marquis  of  Lans- 
downe  ?  Why  should  the  fact  be  concealed  that  he  is  in 
no  way  competent  to  the  duties  of  the  office  ?  .  .  .  Lord 
Holland  ?  He  has  gone  by,  or  rather  circumstances  have 
gone  by  and  left  him  behind.  .  .  . 

"  Do  pray  do  all  you  can  to  prevent  the  unwise  conduct 
of  your  friends  in  resisting  ministers  in  such  a  way  as  to 
compel  them  to  resign  at  once.  Abuse  their  proceedings 
as  much  as  you  please,  but  beyond  this  do  nothing  to 
prevent  them  sinking  gradually  as  low  as  possible,  and 
then  leave  them  to  work  themselves  out  of  office,  which 
will  happen  quite  soon  enough.  .  .  . 


THE    FIRST   REFORM    CAMPAIGN  251 

"  I  have  seen  a  letter  from  the  man  whom  I  consider  the 
most  influential  man  in  England,  Thomas  Attwood  of 
Birmingham,1  proposing  an  association  to  collect  the  names 
of  persons  in  London  who  will  pledge  themselves  to  pay 
no  more  taxes  if  ministerial  interference  should  produce 
the  probability  of  a  war  with  Belgium,  and  I  believe  some- 
thing of  the  kind  will  be  done.  There  has  long  been 
growing  a  disposition  to  refuse  paying  taxes,  but  it  is  only 
now  that  rich  men  who  have  any  influence  have  coun- 
tenanced it.  Now  there  are  many  such  willing  to  take 
part  in  it. 

"  Now  mark  the  consequences.  If  any  considerable 
portion  of  the  housekeepers  were  to  refuse  paying  taxes, 
and  especially  if  this  were  to  happen  in  London,  a  revolu- 
tion -would  be  effected  in  a  week,  in  spite  of  the  Govern- 
ment and  the  army.  If  taxes  were  refused  it  would 
instantly  produce  a  panic,  Bank  of  England  notes  would 
no  longer  circulate,  and  Government  would  be  powerless. 
No  one  would  bring  a  sack  of  flour,  a  bullock  or  a  sheep, 
to  the  London  markets.  The  moment  taxes  were  really 
refused  the  shops  would  be  all  closed,  decent  people  would 
remain  at  home  until  the  populace  and  the  soldiers  had 

1  In  January  1830,  Mr.  Thomas  Attwood  and  his  friends  had  founded 
the  formidable  "Birmingham  Political  Union  of  the  Middle  and  Lower 
Classes,"  with  a  Populist  programme,  to  use  the  American  term,  of 
manhood  suffrage  and  paper  monej'.  In  regard  to  the  proposal  to 
refuse  to  pay  taxes,  Place  wrote,  "I  was  induced  to  put  Att wood's 
proposition  into  a  form  which,  if  not  strictly  legal,  was  yet  not 
punishable,  as  his  certainly  was,  by  all  who  should  sign  it.  1  there- 
fore wrote  out  a  declaration  in  a  very  few  words,  thus  : — 'That  in  the 
event  of  the  present  ministers  so  misconducting  the  affairs  of  the 
country  as  to  make  it  probable  we  shall  be  involved  in  a  Continental 
war,  we  will  consider  the  propriety  of  checking  so  mischievous  an 
event  by  withholding  the  means  as  far  as  may  lay  in  our  power,  and 
will  then  consider  whether  or  not  refusing  to  pay  direct  taxes  may  not 
be  advisable.'  This  was  readily  agreed  to  by  a  great  many  of  the  most, 
prosperous  shopkeepers,  and  by  many  other  persons  of  property  and 
influence." — 27,789  (197). 


252          THE    FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

fought  and  were  reconciled.  A  provisional  government 
would  thus  be  formed— no  man  can  tell  what  fortuitous 
circumstances  may  produce  a  revolution.  .  .  .  That  it  will 
happen  before  many  years  have  passed  away  seems  to  me 
a  reasonable  expectation.  You  know  my  opinion,  that 
when  men  ought  to  act  they  should  act  promptly,  and  go 
through  with  the  business,  be  it  whatever  it  may.  You 
know  that  I  have  a  great  dislike  to  undertake  any  matter 
unless  circumstances  seem  to  warrant  the  conclusion  that 
it  can  be  wholly  and  not  partially  accomplished.  I  have 
always  held  that  when  action  becomes  necessary  it  is  much 
better  to  risk  doing  wrong  than  doing  nothing,  and  if  the 
Opposition  had  no  choice,  I  should  say,  go  on,  don't 
hesitate  a  moment,  oust  the  ministers  as  soon  as  possible. 
But  they  have  a  choice,  and  may  do  mischief  if  they 
refuse  or  neglect  to  take  that  choice."1 

Events,  however,  moved  much  too  rapidly  for  such 
tactics.  On  November  15  the  Tories  were  defeated  in  a 
division  on  the  Civil  List,  and  Lord  Grey  took  office  with  a 
Ministry  of  Whigs  and  Canningites,  or,  as  Place  describes 
them,  a  "  motley  assembly "  of  "  Whigs,  Whig  reformers, 
half-and-half  Tories,  and  others  who  cared  little  about 
anything  beyond  their  emoluments,  and  knew  little  beyond 
what  they  learned  in  the  drawing-rooms  of  their  associates, 
the  clubs  to  which  they  belonged,  or  the  clique  Avith  which 
they  congregated.  .  .  .  Lord  Grey  had  in  1810  openly 
abandoned  the  notions  of  reform  which  he  had  previously 
promulgated,  and  quarrelled  with  those  whom  he  had 
helped  to  convince,  because  they  did  not  apostatise  as  he 
did.  And  they  who  remembered  his  conduct  placed  little 
reliance  on  the  vague  declaration  he  made  on  accepting 
office." 2 

But  the  Whigs  were  in,  and  Place  at  once  took  up  the 

1  Place  to  Hobhouse,  November  8,  1830. 
3  27,789  (203). 


THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN          253 

task  of  worrying  them  into  granting  as  much  reform  as 
possible.  "  The  Reformers,"  he  wrote  to  Hume  on  Novem- 
ber 22,  "  will  not,  however,  be  again  cajoled,"  and  he  pro- 
ceeds to  suggest  the  public  cross-examination  of  ministers 
on  those  points  on  which  they  were  likely  to  be  weak. 
"  A  question  was  put  to  Lord  Althorp  on  Saturday,  thus, 
'  Will  any  man  in  office  be  permitted  to  advocate  voting  by 
ballot  ? '  The  reply  was,  '  Certainly  not.'  The  question 
was  put  by  a  member  of  Honourable  House,  who  was  pre- 
pared to  make  certain  propositions,  but  on  receiving  this 
answer  he  proceeded  no  further.  The  reason  for  my  writ- 
ing to  you  now  is  to  tell  you  these  things,  and  to  suggest 
to  you  the  propriety  of  asking  the  same  question  and 
another  of  a  like  nature  in  the  House." l 

Lord  Melbourne,  who  was  Home  Secretary  in  the  new 
Government,  found  himself  fully  occupied  by  the  growth  of 
the  more  or  less  revolutionary  "  Political  Unions  "  in  the 
towns,  and  the  rick-burning  by  the  agricultural  labourers 
in  the  country.2  Under  these  circumstances  he  sent  his 
brother,  Mr.  George  Lamb,  to  see  Place,  and  endeavour  to 
induce  him  "  to  write  two  or  three  papers  to  the  working 
people,  and  especially  the  agricultural  labourers,  to  per- 
suade them  to  desist  from  the  enormities  they  were  com- 
mitting. .  .  .  Mr.  Lamb  said,  '  We  are  of  opinion  that  you 
can  write  to  them  with  more  effect  than  any  one  else.' "  3 
But  Place  declined  the  task,  on  the  ostensible  ground  that 
such  pamphlets  would  be  interpreted  as  a  sign  of  fear 
and  so  encourage  the  labourers  to  proceed  still  further. 
Though  he  was  afterwards  persuaded  to  write  a  pamphlet  to 
show  that  rick-burning  was  of  no  use  as  a  means  of  increas- 
ing wages,  he  could  not  help  recognising  that  "  Captain 

1  Place  to  Hume,  November  22,  1830. 

2  See   "Lord   Melbourne's  Papers,"   edited   by   Lloyd   C.   Sanders 
(London,  1889),  pp.  120-165. 

s  27,789  (207-208'. 


THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

Swing " l  was  helping  to  bring  reform  within  the  range  of 
practical  politics. 

"  Incendiary  fires  continued  to  increase,  and  by  the  middle 
of  December  they  had  extended  over  thirteen  counties. 
These  fires,  and  the  general  discontent  of  the  working 
people,  had  caused  great  alarm,  and  many  were  the  schemes 
and  projects  for  putting  an  end  to  them,  and  the  Govern- 
ment was  compelled  to  appoint  a  Special  Commission  to 
try  such  of  the  incendiaries  and  rioters  as  could  be  caught. 
This  increased  the  discontent  of  the  working  classes,  who, 
though  they  generally  condemned  the  burning  of  ricks, 
found  an  excuse  for  the  farmers'  labourers  in  their  igno- 
rance, their  low  wages,  their  pauper  allowance,  the  oppres- 
sions they  were  made  to  endure,  and  the  want  of  means 
and  intelligence  to  meet  in  societies  as  mechanics  and 
artisans  met,  and  settle  their  differences  with  their  em- 
ployers. 

"  It  seemed  certain  that  no  Special  Commission  nor  any 
other  mode  of  coercion  would  prevent  rick-burning  Avhile 
wages  were  very  low,  and  were  made  up  by  pauper  allow- 
ances from  the  parishes;  that  it  was  useless  either  to 
punish  or  advise,  unless  a  more  just  and  wiser  system 
were  adopted ;  and  a  great  many  persons  of  property  and 
understanding  were  of  opinion  that  the  fires  were  calcu- 
lated to  compel  attention  to  the  actual  state  and  condition 
of  the  labourers,  and  ultimately  to  produce  such  changes 
as  would  place  them  and  their  immediate  employers  in  a 
better  state  than  they  had  for  years  been,  in  as  good  a 
state,  indeed,  as  it  was  possible  they  could  be  placed  by 
any  interference  of  Government.  The  measures  which  it 
seemed  likely  would  be  forced  on  the  Government  were 
thought  to  be  a  better  administration  of  the  Poor  Laws, 
a  repeal  of  the  Corn  Laws,  of  all  laws  restricting  trade  and 

1  The  title  given  to  the  leader  of  the  gangs  of  labourers  who  went 
about  rick-burning. 


THE   FIRST   REFORM    CAMPAIGN  255 

commerce,  economy  in  the  administration  of  the  public 
revenue,  decrease  of  taxation,  reform  of  the  laws,  especially 
those  which  related  to  the  administration  of  justice,  and 
above  all,  reform  of  Parliament,  which  would  ensure  all 
the  other  reforms." l 

Poor  old  Richard  Carlile2  put  the  same  idea  rather 
more  bluntly  in  the  Prompter,3  and  to  Place's  furious 
indignation,  the  Government  of  Whig  rick-owners  decided 
to  prosecute  him,  though  the  article  was  one  "  which  would 
not  probably  have  been  noticed  by  the  Wellington  Adminis- 
tration." 4  Place  stormed  at  his  friends  in  Parliament,  and 
particularly  at  Colonel  Leslie  Grove  Jones,5  who,  as  Place 
was  careful  to  point  out,  had  himself  used  more  violent 
language  in  letters  to  the  Times.6  The  ministry,  however, 
held  to  their  prosecution,  and  Carlile  received  the  savage 
sentence  of  two  years'  imprisonment  and  a  heavy  fine.7 
After  this  it  was  not  surprising  that  when  Hume  proposed 
to  Lord  Grey  that  the  Newspaper  Stamp  Duties  should  be 
immediately  repealed,  he  was  told  that  "  these  matters  did 
not  press." s 

When  Parliament  met,  the  Whigs  introduced  an  ill- 
contrived  Budget,  including  proposals  for  a  heavy  tax  on 
steamboat  passengers,  and  an  increase  of  the  army  by  10,000 

1  27,789  (206,^207). 

2  Ricliard  Carlile,  the  well-known  martyr  of  free  speech,  had  lately 
spent  six  years  (1820-26)  in  Dorchester  gaol. 

3  The  Prompter,  November  27,  1830. 

4  27,789  (236). 

•'  Lieutenant-Colonel  Leslie  Grove  Jones,  born  1/79,  died  1839.  Hi- 
served  through  the -Peninsular  War.  After  leaving  the  army  lie  took 
up  politics  as  an  advanced  Radical  and  reformer,  and  gained  consider- 
able notoriety  by  his  violent  letters  in  the  Times  signed  "  Radical." 
"  Justitia,"  &c. 

6  Place  to  Jones,  January  7,  1831. 

"  At  the  same  time  prosecutions  were  commenced  against  several 
other  papers  [27,789  (238)],  which  were  all  abandoned  except  that 
against  Cobbett,  in  whose  case  the  jury  disagreed. 

8  Place  to  Hume,  January  12,  1831. 


256  THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

men.  There  seemed  now  to  be  no  prospect  of  a  Reform 
Bill  which  would  make  any  serious  change  in  the  system 
of  representation.  A  friend  of  Place's  was,  he  says,  told  by 
Lord  Grey,  early  in  December  1830,  "that  whatever  pro- 
position for  reform  might  be  made  by  ministers,  it  must  be 
such  an  one  as  the  House  of  Commons  would  entertain." l 

Place  however  hammered  on :  "  The  old  reformers  fore- 
saw that  the  only  chance  for  the  production  of  a  good  bill 
was,  as  Lord  Grey  had  said  (1797),  the  resolutions  of  the 
people  acting  on  the  prudence  of  the  House."2  And  the 
note  in  his  diary  for  February  1831  is,  "Writing  petitions 
and  resolutions  for  reform  of  Parliament,  and  consulting 
with  persons  on  this  subject." 

But  the  people  were  now  getting  thoroughly  impatient 
lor  a  change  to  be  made.  Men  outside  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, Place  says,  adopted  one  of  Lord  John  Russell's 
phrases,  and  were  everywhere  saying,  "We  must  have 
reform  to  save  the  constitution,"  by  which  word,  he  adds, 
"  they  meant  everything  and  nothing,  but  it  helped  them 
in  the  struggle  which  soon  succeeded."3  "Meetings  of 
almost  every  description  of  persons,"  wrote  Place,  "  were 
held.  In  cities,  towns,  and  parishes,  by  journeymen  trades- 
men in  their  clubs,  and  by  common  workmen  who  had 
no  trade  clubs  or  associations  of  any  kind.  .  .  .  The  sys- 
tematic way  in  which  the  people  proceeded,  their  steady 
perseverance,  their  activity  and  skill,  astounded  the  enemies 
of  reform,  and  produced  an  effect  sometimes  observed  in 
considerable  bodies  of  men,  yet  scarcely  ever  in  a  nation. 
The  enemies  of  reform  had  so  strong  a  feeling  of  the  im- 
possibility of  anything  like  a  successful  opposition,  that 
they  remained  in  a  state  of  comparative  quiescence  quite 
at  variance  with  their  proceedings  on  former  occasions." 4 

The  bill  was   to  be   introduced   on   March    I,   and   on 

1  27,789  (209).  *  27,789  (263). 

8  27,789  (273)-  4  27,789  (252). 


THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN  257 

February  16,  when  ministers  would  be  finally  making  up 
their  minds  on  its  details,  Place  sent  Hume  a  message 
which  he  obviously  hoped  would  be  passed  on :  "I  think 
that  as  soon  as  ministers  have  fairly  exposed  themselves, 
as  they  will  scarcely  fail  to  do  on  the  ist  March,  and  the 
weekly  press  has  got  the  cue,  for  the  daily  press  is  too 
venal  and  corrupt  to  be  useful  in  this  way ;  I  think  I  shall 
be  induced  to  put  aside  every  man  and  every  thing  who  or 
which  now  occupies  my  time,  and  labour  day  and  night  to 
expose  them  in  every  possible  way.  And  I  doubt  not  I 
shall  soon  find  plenty  of  able  coadjutors." l 

On  the  evening  of  March  i,  Lord  John  Russell  made 
his  statement.  "  I  was  alone  in  the  evening,"  says  Place, 
"anxiously  expecting  some  one  to  come  from  the  House 
to  tell  me  what  had  occurred.  At  length,  a  friend  who 
had  taken  a  report  of  about  half  of  Lord  John  Russell's 
speech  for  the  Morning  Chronicle  came  in  and  told  me 
the  particulars  of  the  ministerial  plan.  It  was  so  very 
much  beyond  anything  which  I  had  expected,  that,  had 
it  been  told  to  me  by  a  person  unused  to  proceedings  in 
the  House,  I  should  have  supposed  that  he  had  made  a 
mistake.  Both  I  and  my  informant  were  delighted,  and 
we  at  once  took  measures  to  cause  it  to  be  known  in  the 
coffee-houses  in  the  neighbourhood,  whence  it  spread  like 
wildfire." 2 

Next  day  Hobhouse,  with  whom  Place  had  lately  had 
"almost  daily  conversations,"3  called  at  Charing  Cross, 
and  in  his  privately  printed  memoirs  has  left  an  account 
of  the  visit.  On  March  i,  after  Lord  John  Russell's 
statement,  he  says :  "  Burdett  and  I  walked  home  to- 
gether, and  both  agreed  that  there  was  very  little  chance 
of  the  measure  being  carried.  We  thought  our  West- 
minster friends  would  oppose  the  £10  qualification  clause; 

1  Place  to  Hume,  February  16,  1831. 
227,789(265).  3    27,789(264). 

R 


258          THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

but  we  were  wrong,  for  calling  the  next  day  on  Mr.  Place, 
we  found  him  delighted  with  the  bill,  and  were  told  that 
all  our  supporters  were  equally  pleased  with  it." 1 

Place's  daily  breathings  of  fire  and  slaughter  had  ob- 
viously answered  their  purpose  in  convincing  Hobhouse, 
and  through  him  the  Government,  that  the  reformers 
would  not  be  easily  satisfied.  And  it  is  a  remarkable 
proof  of  the  pivotal  position  of  Westminster,  that  Hob- 
house  believed  that  the  opposition  of  that  constituency 
would  be  fatal  to  the  .bill.  Place  was  in  fact  now  offered, 
with  apologies,  infinitely  more  than  he  had  ever  dreamt 
of  getting.  "The  statement,"  he  writes  in  his  diary, 
"surprised  all  parties.  The  reformers,  the  enemies  of 
reform,  and  the  boroughmongers,  Avere  all  equally  sur- 
prised,— and  all  for  the  same  reason,  namely,  that  the  plan 
of  reform  had  been  made  so  extensive.  None  believed, 
none  expected  any  such  propositions.  But  they  were 
plain  and  easily  understood ;  there  was  no  leaning  to  party. 
The  fear  of  a  revolution  if  they  were  not  passed,  and  the 
sneaking  servility  of  the  ridiculously  loyal,  who  will  go 
with  the  king,  made  the  propositions  acceptable  to  a 
much  more  decided  majority  of  the  whole  people  than 
any  other  measure  proposed  to  Parliament  had  ever  before 
been  within  the  memory  of  any  man  living. 

"  Any  general  description  of  the  state  of  feeling  would 
but  feebly  depict  the  excitement  caused  by  the  proposed 
reform.  But  much  may  be  learned  from  the  leading  articles 
of  the  newspapers,  and  the  accounts  they  contain  of  the 
many  meetings  held  all  over  the  country.  It  was  im- 

1  See  the  Edinburgh  Review,  April  1871,  pp.  283-337.  The  article 
contains  extracts  from  the  memoirs  of  Sir  John  Cam  Hobhouse,  Lord 
Broughton.  The  memoirs  themselves  have  not  yet  been  published 
(1897).  Greville  says  that  "  Hobhouse  told  me  he  had  at  first  been 
afraid  that  his  constituents  would  disapprove  this  measure,  as  so  many 
of  them  would  be  disfranchised,  but  that  they  had  behaved  nobly, 
and  were  quite  content,  and  ready  to  make  any  sacrifice  for  such  an 
object."  ("The  Greville  Memoirs,  &c.,"  vol.  ii.  p.  124.) 


THE    FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN  259 

possible  for  me  to  be  an  idle  spectator." l  "I  saw  that  the 
time  was  coming  when  it  would  be  the  duty  of  every  man 
to  go  forward  and  do  his  best  for  the  public  good.  It 
seemed  to  me  that  he  who  neglected  this  duty  was  a  bad 
citizen,  and  deserved  severe  reprehension.  True  enough 
it  was  that  the  actual  amount  of  service  which  each 
ordinary  man  could  perform  was  small,  but  it  was  equally 
true  that  unless  there  was  an  immense  aggregate  of  such 
services,  ministers  would  be  unable  to  carry  the  bill,  which 
if  carried  could  not  fail  greatly  to  benefit  the  country, 
and  tend  to  the  advantage  of  the  whole  civilised  world. 
Undecided  in  what  way  I  should  devote  myself  to  the 
public  service,  I  thought  my  exertions  would  as  yet  be 
most  useful  at  home,  but  this  notion  was  soon  changed 
by  the  persons  who  .  .  .  called  upon  me  and  induced 
me  to  take  the  management  of  a  public  meeting  at  the 
Crown  and  Anchor  Tavern,  on  March  4,  i83i."2 

At  this  meeting  Place  intended  to  stiffen  the  ministers 
in  giving  as  much  as  they  had  promised  by  asking  for  a 
great  deal  more.  He  accordingly  passed  through  the 
organising  committee  a  series  of  resolutions  in  favour 
of  Triennial  Parliaments  and  the  Ballot,  "  to  make  the 
plan  of  reform  proposed  by  his  Majesty's  ministers  effec- 
tual."3 Hobhouse,  however,  when  the  meeting  began, 
jumped  on  the  table,  and  carried  in  the  name  of  unanimity 
a  proposal  that  no  resolution  except  one  of  confidence  in 
ministers  should  be  put,  an  exhibition  of  "  true  Whig 
tactics"  for  which,  says  Place,  the  reformers  never  for- 
gave him,4  and  which  helped  to  lose  him  his  seat  at 
Westminster  two  years  later. 

On  March  21,  the  second  reading  of  the  bill  was  carried 
by  a  majority  of  one.  There  wras  a  general  illumination 
in  London,  and  Place  was  approached  by  "  a  gentleman 

1  "Diary,"  March  i,  1831.  2  27,789  (318,  319). 

a  27,789  (278).  «  27,789  (278,  279)- 


260          THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

from  the  Controller  of  the  King's  Household,"  who  asked 
him  to  try  to  arrange  that  the  unilluminated  windows  of 
the  Tories  should  not  be  broken,  as  those  of  protesting 
Radicals  had  been  on  former  occasions.  Place  refused 
to  make  any  such  attempt.  He  recalled  the  saying  of 
various  London  magistrates  to  "disloyal  persons"  in  the 
past,  that  "  a  few  farthing  candles  would  have  saved  their 
windows."  Not  much  window -breaking  was  likely  to 
take  place,  since  no  one  would  now  pay  money  for  it,  but 
if  no  window  were  broken,  the  Tories  would  argue  a  re- 
action of  public  opinion,  and  declare  that  "  even  the  mob 
had  respected  the  houses  of  those  who  had  been  falsely 
represented  as  their  worst  enemies,  but  whom  they  knew 
were  truly  their  best  friends."  In  the  event,  as  he  con- 
tentedly remarks,  "the  windows  in  a  very  few  houses  of 
the  inveterate  Tories  were  partially  broken." l 

But  a  majority  of  one  on  the  second  reading  meant  a 
certain  defeat  in  committee.  Such  a  defeat  came  on 
April  19,  and  was  followed  by  another  defeat  on  the 
Estimates  on  April  21.  On  April  22  the  king  was  per- 
suaded to  drive  suddenly  down  to  the  House  and  prorogue 
Parliament,  with  a  view  to  its  immediate  dissolution. 

Place  was  at  this  time  mainly  occupied  with  the  wTork 
of  the  "  Parliamentary  Candidates'  Society,"  a  sub-com- 
mittee of  which  met  daily.2  This  society  was  in  intention 
a  predecessor  of  the  "National  Liberal  Federation,"  and 
was  imitated  from  "  the  American  Correspondence  Societies 
and  Caucuses,"3  which  are  supposed  to  give  the  rank 
and  file  of  a  party  some  control  over  its  electoral  policy. 
Its  career  was,  however,  a  very  troubled  one.  Most  of 
the  well-known  men  who  joined  the  Committee  found 
Place's  methods  too  high-handed,  and  soon  left,  while 
Place  himself  had  as  usual  the  greatest  difficulty  in 

1  27,789  (287,  288).  2  27,789  (350). 

3  Erskine  Perry  to  Place,  April  i,  1831. 


THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN  261 

keeping  his  temper  among  the  gentlemen  amateurs  who 
tried  to  combine  democratic  opinions  with  fashionable 
life. 

"  It  is  not  so  with  the  Tories  in  public  political  matters : 
they  persuade  themselves  that  everything  they  do  is 
genteel.  .  .  .  They  had  no  fear  of  being  looked  upon  as 
ungcnteel,  none  of  being  discountenanced  by  Holland 
House  people  and  Brooks'  Club  people,  like  the  poor 
half-and-half  people  with  whom  it  was  necessary  I  should 
associate.  .  .  .  Every  one  of  them  had  the  fear  of  the  club 
before  his  eyes.  Colonel  Jones  could  not  as  yet  bring 
himself  to  offend  the  men  with  whom  he  associated  at 
Brooks'.  Beauclerk  was  kept  in  check  by  the  Travellers'. 
Perry  must  not  be  cut  at  the  Universities'.  Hume  could 
not  bear  the  taunts  of  the  House,  and  nearly  all  the  rest 
were  either  similarly  circumstanced,  or  afraid  to  com- 
promise their  gentility  by  doing  what  would  be  condemned 
as  going  much  too  far  by  their  friends — the  half  dandy, 
half  idiot  fashionable  people,  who  sometimes  condescended 
to  notice  them,  or  with  whom  they  usually  associated, 
as  well  as  bv  the  fools  who  would  call  them  vulgar-r-r 

\J  O 

fellows.  .  .  . 

"  The  working  classes,  who  are  of  little  importance  in 
any  useful  political  proceeding  unless  countenanced  by 
those  called  their  betters,  might  have  been  made  useful 
to  the  public  cause.  .  .  .  The  shopkeeping  race  and  such 
as  they,  who  are  among  the  most  despicable  people  in 
the  nation  in  a  public  point  of  view,  might  have  been  of 
much  importance,  .  .  .  ought  on  this  occasion  to  have 
been,  and  might  have  been  turned  to  good  account,  had 
the  men  who  have  leisure  and  considerable  acquirements 
been  in  other  respects  qualified  to  have  proceeded  in  the 
right  direction.  But  they  were  not. 

"  The  curse  of  gentility  is  upon  them  all,  and  this  in- 
duces them  to  attend  to  minor  objects,  to  neglect  major 


262          THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

objects,  to  trifle  with  matters  the  most  serious,  and  when 
any  considerable  difficulty  occurs,  to  shuffie  away  from  it, 
and  then  when  reproached  with  such  pitiful  conduct,  to 
make  an  off-hand  lying  excuse  which  an  honest  boy  or 
girl  would  be  ashamed  to  make.  These  people  whenever 
they  interfere  in  Liberal  political  affairs  endeavour  to 
accomplish  two  incompatible  things — first,  to  go  on  with 
the  public  matter ;  secondly,  not  to  lose  caste  with  their 
fashionable  friends  and  acquaintances.  This  being  im- 
possible, the  first  is  sacrificed  invariably.  They  shrink 
back  as  it  were  into  their  shells.  .  .  .  Not  one  of  them 
has  the  courage  to  cut  his  drawing  -  room  friends  and 
become,  as  he  ought  to  be,  a  highly  useful  and  important 
man." l 

The  particular  question  on  which  Place's  tactics  came 
most  definitely  into  contact  with  the  gentlemanly  feelings 
of  his  fellow  committee-men  of  the  Parliamentary  Candi- 
dates' Society,  was  the  expediency  of  collecting  and  pub- 
lishing a  record  for  electioneering  purposes  of  the  votes 
and  other  public  action  of  Tory  members  of  Parliament. 
After  the  well-known  politicians  had  resigned,  the  greater 
part  of  the  work  of  the  society  seems  to  have  consisted 
in  preparing  such  records,2  and  shortly  after  the  election 
the  society,  which  had  been  furiously  abused  by  almost 
every  paper,  Whig  or  Tory,  came  to  a  quiet  end.  Place 
wrote  its  obituary.  . 

"  The  Parliamentary  Candidates'  Society  was  of  short 
duration,  as  such  a  society  ought  to  be,  and  as  I,  at  least, 
intended  it  should  be.  ...  It  would,  if  it  had  been  con- 
tinued, have  degenerated  into  a  cabal  for  the  advantage  of 
some  very  few  persons,  and  those  by  no  means  the  most 

1  27,789  (336-339). 

2  Place  wrote  that  by  April  20  the  public  characters,  in  full  detail, 
of  twenty-two  members  of  Parliament  had  been  prepared.    They  were, 
however,  never  published. — 27,789  (369). 


THE   FIRST   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

respectable."  l  But  when  all  is  said,  Place  probably  remem- 
bered the  society  as  one  of  the  least  fortunate  of  his 
efforts. 

The  new  Parliament  met  on  June  14.  It  contained  a 
majority  of  more  than  a  hundred  for  "  the  bill,  the  whole 
bill,  and  nothing  but  the  bill."  "The  election  of  the 
members  to  the  new  Parliament  in  1831  was  a  very  extra- 
ordinary circumstance,  one  which  no  man  could  have 
anticipated  as  possible  a  year  before  it  took  place.  It 
could  not  have  been  anticipated  that  a  boroughmonger- 
ing  Parliament  would  have  been  called  together  with  an 
express  recommendation  from  the  king  to  put  an  end  to 
the  boroughmongering  by  which  alone  it  could  exist." 2 

He  quotes  the  figures  given  by  the  Society  of  the 
Friends  of  the  People  in  1793,  as  to  the  extent  to  which 
members  of  the  Commons  were  nominated  by  individual 
owners  of  property,  and  proceeds :  "  This  scandalously 
corrupt  state  of  the  House  in  1793  was  somewhat  in- 
creased in  1831,  and  against  this  infamous  power,  and 
the  infamous  manner  in  which  it  was  used,  the  people 
had  to  contend.  The  necessary  misgovernment  of  an 
irresponsible  king,  an  irresponsible  House  of  Peers,  and 
a  luxurious,  rich,  overbearing,  benumbing  clergy,  with  a 

1  27,789  (317).  The  society  was  for  a  time  heartily  supported  by 
the  Whig  newspapers,  especially  the  Spectator,  which  described  it  as  a 
society  for  securing  the  return  of  Reform  candidates,  and  for  selecting 
new  candidates  to  serve  the  Reform  party  in  Parliament.  In  a  leading 
article  (Saturday,  March  12,  1831,  pp.  254,  255),  short  biographies  of  a 
number  of  such  possible  candidates  are  given,  including  Grote,  Henry 
Drummond,  Hume,  and  others,  and  Place  himself,  who  in  a  very  eulo- 
gistic notice  is  described  as  "  the  leader  of  that  organised  body  which 
liberated  Westminster  and  preserved  its  independence  of  the  Dukes 
of  Newcastle  [mistake  for  Northumberland]  and  the  Court."  Else- 
where Place  alludes  incidentally  to  the  fact  that  he  was  "  waited  upon 
with  an  offer  "  to  stand  for  Westminster  against  Burdett  and  Hobhouse, 
and  received  "offers  from  one  or  two  other  places  of  seats,  free  of 
expense,"  but  declined. — 27,844  (34). 

2    27,789(384). 


264          THE   FIRST  REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

House  of  Commons  thus  chosen  or  rather  appointed — the 
long  war  and  its  multiplied  horrors,  the  waste  of  human 
life,  the  amount  of  human  suffering,  the  unparalleled 
waste  of  the  public  money  .  .  .  were  not  the  greatest  evils 
to  the  nation  which  its  vicious  and  vitiating  government 
produced.  The  bribery,  the  perjury,  the  corruption,  the 
immorality  and  the  consequent  enormous  and  widespread 
criminality  and  debasing  notions  it  produced,  encouraged 
and  maintained  all  over  the  country  .  .  .  were  much  more 
lamentable  than  all  the  other  evils,  enormous  as  they 
were." : 

The  bill  was,  of  course,  at  once  reintroduced.  Owing  to 
Tory  obstruction  it  proceeded  very  slowly.  "Complaints 
were  made,"  wrote  Place,  "  but  they  were  useless.  The 
people  were  angry  and  were  growing  sulky  when,  as  the 
Committee  at  length  approached  its  termination,  they 
dropped  petitioning  the  House  and  once  more  became 
lively  as  their  attention  was  turned  to  the  House  of 
Lords."2  On  September  21  it  finally  passed  the  House 
of  Commons  and  was  sent  to  the  Lords.  There  it  met 
with  short  shrift,  and  on  October  8  the  Reform  news- 
papers announced  in  black-edged  editions  that,  at  six 
o'clock  that  morning,  the  Lords  had  refused  the  second 
reading  by  a  majority  of  forty-one. 

1  27,789  (387,  388).  2  27)7g9  (4o6j  407). 


CHAPTER  X 
WAR   ON    TWO   FRONTS 

IN  the  general  anger  and  excitement  which  followed  the 
action  of  the  Lords  on  October  8,  Place  kept  before  him 
as  the  one  supreme  necessity  of  the  situation  the  continu- 
ance of  the  alliance  between  the  Whig  Cabinet  and  the 
"  People." 

The  most  immediate  danger  was  that  the  Whigs  might 
abandon  part  of  the  Bill,  and  allow  the  Lords  to  save 
their  credit  by  a  compromise.  But  there  was  another 
danger — which  Place,  better  than  any  one  else,  was  able 
to  estimate — that  an  agitation  for  social  revolution  might 
develop  among  the  working  classes,  against  which  Whigs 
and  Tories  would  unite  as  they  had  united  against 
Cobbett  and  Hunt  in  1817  and  1819.  The  two  possible 
centres  for  such  a  movement  were  Lancashire  and  London. 
In  Lancashire  the  rapid  development  of  the  textile  in- 
dustry had  divided  the  whole  population  into  two  irre- 
concilable camps  of  organised  masters  and  organised  men. 
Preston,  like  Westminster,  was  a  scot  and  lot  borough,  and 
at  a  bye-election  in  1 830  Hunt,  standing  on  a  strictly  revo- 
lutionary platform,  had  beaten  the  Whig  Irish  Secretary, 
Lord  Stanley.  At  Manchester  John  Doherty  had  begun 
in  1829  that  federation  of  the  cotton  spinners  which  was 
the  origin  of  the  socialistic  Grand  National  Trades  Union 
in  1833-34.  Doherty  called  on  Place  in  October  1831. 
"He  maintained  that  the  people  ought  no  longer  to  be 
shuffled  off  with  a  Bill  which  could  do  them  no  good, 


266  WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS 

but  ought  to  take  the  affair  into  their  own  hands,  and 
by  force  to  compel  the  Government  to  do  what  was  right." 
"  I  told  him,"  says  Place,  "  it  was  absurd  to  expect  such  a 
combination  among  the  working  people  as  would  enable 
them  to  defeat  the  army  and  others  who  would  not 
quietly  submit  to  be  plundered.  That  the  working  people 
unaided  by  the  middle  class  never  had  accomplished  any 
national  movement,  and  that  it  was  insane  in  him  to 
suppose  that  they  could  effect  any  change  by  force.  He 
acknowledged  they  never  had  made  a  national  movement, 
but  said  that  they  were  now  resolved  to  have  their  rights, 
and  I  should  soon  be  convinced  I  was  in  error.  They  were 
now  organised,  were  determined  to  bring  the  matter  to 
issue,  and  if  it  were  possible  they  could  fail,  it  were  better 
to  be  slain  in  the  attempt  than  to  go  on  as  their  enemies, 
the  wealth  accumulators,  now  made  them  go,  in  misery 
unmitigated,  and  as  they  intended,  perpetually." l  But 
the  working  -  class  leaders  in  Lancashire  received  their 
ideas  from  London,2  and  in  London  Place  had  for  some 
years  watched  the  formation  of  a  small  group  of  revo- 
lutionary thinkers  holding  an  economic  creed  much 
more  definite  and  coherent  than  the  vague  denuncia- 
tion of  social  injustice  to  which  Cobbett  and  Hunt 
had  trusted.  He  describes  this  movement  as  having 
originated  in  the  teachings  of  Robert  Owen  and  Thomas 
Hodgskin. 

1  27,791  (242). 

2  The  "Union"  (i.e.  the  London  "National  Union  of  the  Work- 
ing   Classes")    had    "great    influence    over   a    considerable    portion 
of  the  working  classes,  more  especially  in  the  great  manufacturing 
counties.     Daring  the  time  the  Reform  Bills  were  before  the  Parlia- 
ment this   was  particularly  the   case.     The  attention  of  the   whole 
people  was  then  drawn  to  the  subject,  and  the  working  people  were 
quite  as  much  excited  as  any  class  wliatever.     The  consequence  of 
this  excitement  was  a  general  persuasion  that  the  whole  produce  of 
the    labourers  and  workmen's  hands  should   remain   with    them."- 
27,791  (242). 


WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS  267 

Owen  since  1817,  when  his  public  propaganda  began, 
had  kept  round  him  a  body  of  devoted  disciples,  who 
believed  with  him  that  man  was  what  circumstances  made 
him,  and  that  the  existing  industrial  system  made  the 
creation  of  favourable  circumstances  impossible.  Hodgskin 
was  a  man  of  wider  education  than  Owen,  and  greater 
intellectual  subtlety.  In  1813,  being  a  young  naval 
lieutenant,  he  had  been  put  upon  half-pay  for  writing 
a  pamphlet  against  pressing,  had  then  lived  in  Edin- 
burgh, trying  to  eke  out  his  pay  by  writing,  and  had 
travelled  on  the  Continent,  first  as  a  companion  to  Place's 
eldest  son,  and  afterwards  by  himself  on  foot.1 

In  Edinburgh  he  read  Ricardo's  "  Principles  of  Political 
Economy,"  and  carried  on  during  1820  a  long  argumen- 
tative correspondence  with  Place  about  the  book.  In  this 
correspondence  Hodgskin  developed  the  "  surplus  value ' 
theory,2  that  inevitable  corollary  of  Ricardo's  "labour 
value,"  which,  since  the  publication  of  Marx's  "  Capital," 
has  raised  in  Germany  and  elsewhere  "a  Ricardian  socialism, 

1  For  a  description  of  Hodgskin,  see  27,791  (263). 

2  For  instance,  Hodgskin  complains,  in  a  letter  dated  May  28,  1820, 
of  "  the  want  of  an  accurate  distinction  between  natural  price  and 
exchangeable  value.    Natural  price  is  measured  by  the  quantity  of  labour 
necessary  to  produce  any  commodity  ;  its  exchangeable  value,  or  what 
another  will  give,  or  is  obliged  to  give,  for  this  commodity  when  pro- 
duced, may  or  may  not  be  equal  to  the  quantity  of  labour  employed  in 
its  production.    Mr.  R.  has,  I  think,  made  a  mistake  by  supposing  these 
two  things  to  be  equal.     They  are  not,  or  the  wages  of  labour  would 
always  be  equal  to  the  produce  of  labour.     It  requires,  for  instance,  a 
certain  portion  of  labour  to  produce  a  quarter  of  corn.     This  quarter 
of  corn,  however,  when  produced,  and  in  the  possession  of  a  man  who 
is  at  the  same  time  both  landlord  and  farmer,  will  at  present  exchange 
for  a  prodigious  deal  greater  quantity  of  labour  than  it  cost  to  produce 
it.    There  is,  therefore,  a  great  difference  between  real  natural  price  and 
exchangeable  value,  and  by  not  attending  to  this  Mr.  R.  has  been  led 
into,  I  think,  gross  mistakes  relative  to  the  decrease  of  profits  in  an 
improving  state  of  society."     For  Marx's  debt  to  Hodgskin,  see  "Capi- 
tal" (English  edition,  1887),  vol.  i.  pp.  331,  345,  348  ;  vol.  ii.  pp.  547, 
587»  774,  775- 


268  WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS 

appearing  like  the  ghost  of  the  deceased  Ricardian  ortho- 
doxy sitting  crowned  on  the  grave  thereof."  l 

In  1825,  just  after  the  struggle  against  the  re-enactment 
of  the  Combination  Laws,  Hodgskin,  then  living  in  London, 
published  an  extremely  able  pamphlet,  entitled  "  Labour 
Defended  against  the  Claims  of  Capital,"  by  "A  Labourer," 2 
in  which  he  attacked  the  existing  system  of  wealth  pro- 
duction and  the  arguments  by  which  it  was  defended,  and 
claimed  that  all  the  products  of  labour  should  be  distributed 
among  the  labourers,  manual  or  mental.  Place,  though  he 
had  a  great  personal  liking  for  Hodgskin,  steadily  fought 
against  his  ideas,  and  in  1827  unsuccessfully  opposed  his 
appointment  to  a  lectureship  on  Political  Economy  at  the 
Mechanics'  Institute.3 

Hodgskin's  own  style  was  too  technical  to  have  had 
much  influence  on  popular  political  thought ;  but  William 
Thompson  brought  out  "Labour  Rewarded"  (1827),  in 
which  Hodgskin's  doctrine  was  expanded  and  put  into 
rhetorical  form.  Henceforward  the  writings  and  speeches 

1  James  Bonar,  "Mai thus,"  p.  214. 

2  The  greater  part  of  this  pamphlet  consisted  of  a  temperate  and 
searching  criticism  of  what  are  now  acknowledged  to  be  two  of  the 
main  defects  of  the  "  classical "  economics,  the  clumsy  assumption  that 
all  commodities  were  sold  exactly  a  year  after  the  commencement  of 
their  production — and  that  in  consequence  all  labourers  were  supported 
for  each  succeeding  twelve  months  by  the  accumulated  capital  of  their 
employers  —  and   the   unpardonable   ignoratio    elenchi,  by   which  an 
analysis  of  the  differential  advantages  of  land  and  capital  in  production 
was  treated  as  an  ethical  and  political  justification  of  the  landlord  and 
the  capitalist.    The  constructive  proposals  amount  to  little  more  than  a 
suggestion  that  the  problem  of  distribution  would  be  solved  if  "all 
kinds  of  labour"  were  "free."     A  copy  is  in  the  British  Museum. 

3  27,823  (369).     The  lectureship  resulted  in  Hodgskin's  longer,  but 
less  outspoken,  book,  " Popular  Political  Economy"  (1827).     In  1820, 
Place  apparently   succeeded    in   persuading   Hodgskin   not  to  write 
a    large    book    explaining   his   position.     Hodgskin   writes,   "  I   had 
the  intention,  till  I  received  your  last  letter,  to  devote  all  my  spare 
time  first  to  these  subjects,  and  to  put  together  a  book  on  them,"  and 
then   proceeds   to   sketch  a  book  curiously  like    Marx's   "  Capital." 
— Hodgskin  to  Place,  June  4th  (no  year,  but  apparently  1820). 


WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS 

of  the  agitators  of  the  time,  though  mainly  consisting  of 
such  denunciations  of  in  equality  as  are  to  be  found  in  all 
periods  of  human  history,  yet  contained  ideas  and  phrases 
which  had  obviously  come  from  the  more  scientific  revolu- 
tionists. The  first  number,  for  instance,  of  the  Poor  Mans 
Guardian  ( 1 83 1 )  contains  a  poem  by  "  One  of  the  Know 
Nothings." 

"  Wages  should  form  the  price  of  goods  ; 

Yes,  wages  should  be  all, 
Then  we  who  work  to  make  the  goods, 

Should  justly  have  them  all ; 

But  if  the  price  be  made  of  rent, 

Tithes,  taxes,  profits,  all ; 
Then  we  who  work  to  make  the  goods, 

Shall  have — just  none  at  all" 

Owen  was  a  communist  who  at  this  time  seems  to  have 
believed  in  aristocratic  government,  and  Hodgskin  was 
politically  an  anarchist.1  But  in  1831  the  Owenite  working- 
men  had  come  to  think  of  the  new  criticism  of  society  as 
the  basis  of  a  claim  for  democracy.  Their  transition  from 
voluntary  communism  to  social  democracy  is  well  illus- 
trated by  the  successive  titles  assumed  by  their  organisa- 
tions in  London.  In  the  two  years  between  1829  and  1831 
they  successively  called  themselves  "  The  London  Co-opera- 
tive Trading  Association,"  "  The  British  Association  for 
the  Spread  of  Co-operative  Knowledge,"  "  The  Metropolitan 
Trades  Union,"  and  finally  "  The  National  Union  of  the 
Working  Classes."  William  Lovett,  the  most  thoughtful 
of  them,  sent  Place  the  following  account  of  the  process : 2 
"  They  had  read  and  admired  the  writings  of  Robert 

1  27,823  (369)  ;  cf.  also  27,791  (263). 

*  Place  afterwards  knew  Lovett  well,  and  liked  him.  He  describes 
him  as  follows  :  "  Lovett  was  a  journeyman  cabinetmaker,  a  man  of 
melancholy  temperament,  soured  with  the  perplexities  of  the  world. 
He  was,  however,  an  honest-hearted  man,  possessed  of  great  courage,  and 
persevering  in  his  conduct.  In  his  usual  demeanour  he  was  mild  and 
kind,  and  entertained  kindly  feelings  towards  every  one  whom  he  did 


270  WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS 

Owen,  Peter  (sic)  Thompson,  Morgan,  Gray,  and  others,  and 
resolved  to  be  instrumental  to  the  extent  of  their  means 
and  their  abilities  in  spreading  a  knowledge  of  these 
works  throughout  the  country.  They  intended,  however, 
to  avoid  the  course  taken  by  Robert  Owen.  He  had  all 
along,  though  in  his  mild  manner,  condemned  the  Radical 
Reformers,  believing,  as  he  did,  that  reform  was  to  be 
effected  solely  on  this  plan,  the  Radical  Reformers  of 
the  working  classes  believing  that  his  plan  could  only  be 
carried  out  when  the  reforms  they  sought  had  been 
accomplished.  Many  among  them  also  considered  his 
proceedings  inimical  to  their  interests.  These  notions 
were  at  length  entertained  to  so  great  an  extent  among 
his  disciples  that  they  opposed  him,  and  carried  their 
own  resolutions  at  the  meeting,  in  direct  opposition  to 
those  proposed  by  him.  The  persons  before  named,  there- 
fore, during  Mr.  Owen's  visit  to  North  America,1  resolved 
to  take  up  such  parts  of  his  system  as  they  believed  would 
be  appreciated  by  the  working  classes,  and  be  the  means 
of  uniting  them  for  specific  purposes,  taking  care  that 
these  purposes  should  not  interfere  more  than  was  pos- 
sible with  opinions  in  the  proceedings  to  be  adopted  in 
matters  on  which  great  differences  of  opinion  existed.  .  .  . 
"  The  British  Association,  the  central  organ  of  all  these 
societies,  some  months  before  its  dissolution,  was  applied 

not  sincerely  believe  was  the  intentional  enemy  of  tlie  working  people  ; 
but  when  either  by  circumstances  or  his  own  morbid  associations  he 
felt  the  sense  he  was  apt  to  indulge  of  the  evils  and  wrongs  of  mankind, 
he  was  vehement  in  the  extreme.  He  was  half  an  Owenite,  half  an 
Hodgskinite,  a  thorough  believer  that  accumulation  of  property  in  the 
hands  of  individuals  was  the  cause  of  all  the  evils  that  existed."  27,791 
(67).  And  again,  "  He  is  a  tall,  thin,  rather  melancholy  man,  about 
thirty-two  years  of  age,  in  ill-health,  to  which  he  has  long  been  subject ; 
at  times  he  is  somewhat  hypochondriacal ;  his  is  a  spirit  misplaced." — 
27,791  (241).  See  also  Lovett's  "  Lif  e  and  Struggles  "(an  autobiography), 
London,  1867. 

1  i.e.  the  visit  from  Nov.  1828  to  April  1829. 


WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS  271 

to  by  a  few  carpenters,  who  held  their  meetings  at  a 
public-house  in  Argyle  Street,  and  who,  being  imbued 
with  co-operative  views,  wanted  assistance  in  carrying 
into  effect  some  modified  plan ;  this  was  done  by  the 
advice  of  Mr.  Hetherington,  Mr.  Warden,  and  Mr.  Foskett. 
These  persons  attended  at  a  meeting  in  Argyle  Street  on 
Wednesday,  April  2,  1831.  They  first  called  themselves 
'  The  Metropolitan  Trades  Union,' l  and  subsequently  took 
the  more  extensive  name  of '  The  National  Union  of  the 
Working  Classes  and  others.' 2 

"  The  National  Union  of  the  A^^orking  Classes  sprang 
out  of  another  society  called  '  The  British  Association  for 
promoting  Co-operative  Knowledge.'  The  Co-operative 
Society  was  a  branch  of  Mr.  Robert  Owen's  plan  for 
establishing  'a  new  order  of  society.'  This  Association 
(i.e.  the  'British  Association,  &c.')  was  formed  on  May  n, 
1829,  principally  by  a  number  of  persons  who  belonged 
to  a  society  in  Red  Lion  Square  called  '  The  London 
Co-operative  Trading  Association.'  It  was  intended  to 
accumulate  a  capital  for  co-operative  purposes  by  dealing 
among  themselves  and  acquaintances,  and  thus  saving 
the  profit  of  the  retail  trader.  .  .  . 

"  The  persons  who  took  the  lead  in  this  affair  were  James 

1  The  published  objects  of  the  Metropolitan  were  in  part  political. 
The  first  was,  "  to  obtain  for  all  its  members  the  right  of  electing  those 
who  make  the  laws  which  govern  them  ; "  .  .  .  and  the  second,  "  to 
afford  support  and  protection,  individually  and  collectively,  to  every 
member  of  the  Metropolitan  Trades  Union,  to  enhance  the  value  of 
labour  by  diminishing  the  hours  of  employment,  and  to  adopt  such 
measures  as  may  be  deemed  necessary  to  increase  the  domestic  comfort 
of  working-men." — Handbill  of  the  Metropolitan  Trades  Union,  March 
23,  1831.     27,791  (247). 

2  27,791    (244-246).     The  word  "others"   caused   dissensions,   and 
"motions  were  twice  made  to  permit  'None  but  Wealth  Producers'  to 
be  members  of  the  committee,  or  to  hold  any  office  in  the  Union.     In 
discussing  the  proposition  it  was  shown  that  several  of  their  leaders 
were  not  wealth  producers  in  the  meaning  of  the  words,  in  the  re- 
stricted sense  the  words  were  used,  and  the  motions  were  not  adopted." 
—27,891  (281). 


272  WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS 

Watson,1  William  Lovett,  John  Cleave,2  George  Foskett, 
Robert  Wigg,  Philip  and  George  Skene,  William  Millard, 
Thomas  Powell,  Henry  Hetherington,3  and  Benjamin 
Warden,  all  working-men.  As  the  affairs  of  the  British 
Association  were  now  brought  to  a  close,  the  remainder 
of  its  committee,  namely,  John  Cleave,  James  Watson, 
William  Lovett,  Julian  ^Hibbert,  and  several  others  joined 
this  new  union.  These  persons  conceived  it  a  fit  oppor- 
tunity for  blending  their  own  peculiar  views  of  society, 
especially  those  of  the  production  and  the  distribution  of 
wealth,  with  those  of  the  Radical  Reformers."  * 

The  National  Union  of  the  Working  Classes  contained 
in  1831  about  500  regular  paying  members,  as  well  as 
about  i  ooo  "  who  paid  only  occasionally  at  times  of  great 
excitement,  and  yet  reckoned  themselves  members."  5  The 
Union  had  about  a  dozen  branches  in  different  parts  of 
London,  but  by  far  the  most  important  of  its  activities 
was  the  weekly  public  meeting  at  the  Rotunda  in  Black- 
friars  Bridge  Road,  which,  says  Place,  "would  probably 
contain  a  thousand  persons,  and  I  have  seen  hundreds 
outside  the  doors  for  whom  there  was  no  room  within." 6 
Their  title  was  too  long  for  general  use,  and  they  were 
usually  known  as  "  The  Rotundanists." 

They  had  taken  no  part  or  interest  in  the  general 
election  of  1*83 I,7  and  were  just  now  exasperated  against 

See  a  Memoir  of  James  Watson,  by  William  Linton,  and  27,796 
(302).  When  Place  died,  Watson  sent  a  letter  to  the  Reasoner,  in 
which  he  called  him  "The  English  Franklin"  (Reasoner,  1854,  p.  210). 

2  See  27,791  (67). 

3  1792-1849.      Publisher  and  proprietor  of  Poor  Man's  Guardian, 
See  Life  of,  by  G.  J.  Holyoake,  1849. 

4  27,791  (247,  248).  5  27,791  (242).  o  27,791  (243). 

7  The  new  Parliament  was  now  assembled  ;  there  had  been  a 
general  election,  and  unusual  efforts  had  been  made  to  procure  the 
return  of  members  likely  to  promote  the  passing  of  the  Reform  Bills. 
It  will  be  seen  how  little  this  interested  the  leaders  of  the  "  National 
Union  of  the  Working  Classes,"  since  in  none  of  their  resolutions  is 
there  any  expression  denoting  any  particular  interest  taken  by  them  in 
the  elections.  27,791  (285). 


WAR    ON    TWO    FRONTS  273 

the  Whig  Government  by  the  fact  that  several  of  their 
members  were  in  prison  for  selling  unstamped  publi- 
cations. Lovett  had  the  additional  grievance  that  his 
goods  had  been  sold  (in  September  1831),  because  he  had 
refused  to  serve  in  the  Militia,  and  had  given  "no  vote, 
no  musket"  as  his  reason.1  The  original  Co-operative 
Radicals  had  been  lately  joined  by  Mr.  Dios  Santos,  Mr. 
William  Benbow,  the  author  of  a  plan  for  a  general  strike, 
and  certain  other  more  or  less  disreputable  revolutionists. 

Place,  who  suffered  much  at  their  hands,  writes  of  them 
and  of  their  conduct  at  the  time  with  undisguised  dislike : 
"  There  was  a  strong  muster  of  the  men  who  led  the  meet- 
ings at  the  Rotunda.  Some  of  these  men  were  remarkably 
ignorant,  but  fluent  speakers,  filled  with  bitter  notions  of 
animosity  against  everybody  who  did  not  concur  in  the 
absurd  notions  they  entertained,  that  everything  which 
was  produced  belonged  to  those  who,  by  their  labour, 
produced  it,  and  ought  to  be  shared  among  them ;  that 
there  ought  to  be  no  accumulation  of  capital  in  the  hands 
of  any  one  to  enable  him  to  employ  others  as  labourers, 
and  thus  by  becoming  a  master  make  slaves  of  others 
under  the  name  of  workmen;  to  take  from  them  the 
produce  of  their  labour,  to  maintain  themselves  in  idleness 
and  luxury,  while  their  slaves  were  ground  down  to  the 
earth  or  left  to  starve.  They  denounced  every  one  who 
dissented  from  these  notions  as  a  political  economist, 
under  which  appellation  was  included  the  notion  of  a 
bitter  foe  to  the  working  classes,  enemies  who  deserved'no 
mercy  at  their  hands.  Most  of  these  men  were  loud  and 
long  talkers,  vehement,  resolute,  reckless  rascals.  Among 
these  men  were  some  who  were  perfectly  atrocious,  whoso 
purpose  was  riot,  as  providing  an  opportunity  for  plun- 
dering."2 

The  Rotund  anists  were  often  believed  to  represent  the 

1     27,791    (300).  2    27,791    (48). 


274  WAR   ON   TWO  FRONTS 

whole  working  class  in  the  Metropolis,  a  belief  which  they 
themselves  fully  shared.  They  entertained  the  "strange 
notion,"  says  Place,  which  has  long  existed  "  among  small 
as  well  as  large  bodies  of  working-men  who  frequently 
meet  together,  that  they  are  the  working  people."  l  And 
"it  was  very  generally  supposed  a  vast  majority  of  the 
working  people  in  London  were  members,  and  that  they 
were  under  the  control  of  its  managers." 2 

1  27,791  (343)- 

2  27,790   (23).     On   October  25,   1831,  James  Mill  wrote  in  great 
anxiety  to  Place  about  a  deputation  "  from  the  working  classes "  who 
had  been  preaching  communism  to  Mr.  Black,  the  editor  of  the  Morn- 
ing Chronicle.    "  Their  notions  about  property  look  ugly  ;  they  not  only 
desire  that  it  should  have  nothing  to  do  with  representation,  which  is 
true,  though  not  a  truth  for  the  present  time,  as  they  ought  to  see,  but 
they  seem  to  think  that  it  should  not  exist,  and  that  the  existence  of  it 
is  an  evil  to  them.     Rascals,  I  have  no  doubt,  are  at  work  among  them. 
Black,  it  is  true,  is  easily  imposed  upon.     But  the  thing  needs  looking 
into.     Nobody  has  such  means  of  probing  the  ulcer  as  you,  and  nobody 
has  so  much  the  means  of  cure.     The  fools,  not  to  see  that  what  they 
madly  desire  would  be  such  a  calamity  to  them  as  no  hands  but  their 
own  could  bring  vipon  them." 

Place  answered  : — 

"  MY  DEAR  MILL, — As  you  sometimes  take  pains  to  serve  the  common 
people,  and  as  you  are  an  influential  man,  I  send  you  an  essay  in  reply 
to  your  note.  The  men  who  called  on  Black  were  not  a  deputation 
from  the  working  people,  but  two  out  of  half-a-dozen  who  manage,  or 
mismanage,  the  meetings  of  the  Rotunda  in  Blackfriars  Road,  and  at 
the  Philadelphian  Chapel  in  Finsbury.  The  doctrine  they  are  now 
preaching  is  that  promulgated  by  Hodgskin  in  a  tract  in  1825,  entitled 
'  Labour  Defended  against  the  Claims  of  Capital,' "...  and  so  on 
through  a  long  letter.  (Place  to  Mill,  October  26,  1831.)  A  year 
later  Mill  passed  on  Place's  information  to  Brougham,  "  The  nonsense 
to  which  your  Lordship  alludes  about  the  rights  of  the  labourer  to  the 
whole  produce  of  the  country,  wages,  profits,  and  rent,  all  included, 
is  the  mad  nonsense  of  our  friend  Hodgskin  (sic)  which  he  has  pub- 
lished as  a  system,  and  propagates  with  the  zeal  of  perfect  fanaticism. 
Whatever  of  it  appears  in  the  Chronicle,  steals  in  through  his  means,  he 
being  a  sort  of  sub-editor,  and  Black  (the  editor)  not  very  sharp  in 
detecting  ;  but  all  Black's  opinions  on  the  subject  of  property  are 
sound.  These  opinions,  if  they  were  to  spread,  would  be  the  sub- 
version of  civilised  society  ;  worse  than  the  overwhelming  deluge  of 
Huns  and  Tartars."  (Mill  to  Brougham,  September  3,  1832,  in  Bain's 
"James  Mill,"  p.  364.) 


WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS  275 

Such  was  the  position  in  London — the  Ministry  anxious 
to  avoid  a  contest  with  the  Lords,  and  the  only  working- 
class  political  organisation  in  the  hands  of  a  group  of 
doctrinaire  revolutionists,  who  were  convinced  that  the 
Bill  would  do  more  harm  than  good. 

For  once,  however,  it  was  possible  to  appeal  to  that  rare 
but  overwhelming  force,  the  political  activity  of  the  non- 
political  man.  "  There  are  times  and  circumstances,  and 
both  were  now  combined,  when  quiescent  men,  who  take 
the  most  moderate  views  of  public  matters,  and  are  willing 
to  let  political  movements  take  their  own  course,  shake  off 
their  usual  apathy,  assume  a  new  character,  and  become 
the  resolute  promoters  of  the  greatest  changes.  This  was 
now  about  to  become  the  case  here." l 

The  Bill  had  been  rejected  by  the  Lords  on  Saturday 
morning,  October  8,  1831.  Next  day  two  young  men2 
came  to  Place  with  a  proposal  for  a  procession  through 
London,  to  present  an  address  to  the  King  on  the  follow- 
ing Wednesday.  This  was  exactly  what  Place  wanted.  A 
great  procession  would  be  more  likely  than  anything  else 
to  intimidate  Ministers,  and  would  raise  no  difficult  ques- 
tions as  to  the  amount  of  reform  which  was  to  be 


1  27,791  (24). 

2  Bowyer, "  a  journeyman  bookseller,  and  a  very  respectable  working- 
man,"  and  Powell,  "  an  attorney's  clerk,"  afterwards  sub-editor  of  the 
Morning  Chronicle.    27,790  (24).     Autograph  accounts  of  the  procession 
by  both  of  them  are  in  the   Letter-Book.     In   his  account,  Bowyer 
describes  the  situation :   "  Meetings  had  been  held  in  the  manufac- 
turing districts,  at  which  petitions   for  universal  suffrage  had  been 
agreed  to,  and  delegates  had  arrived  in  London  from  various  parts  of 
the  country  to  enforce  the  separate  claims  of  the  working  people.     The 
language  used  by  these  delegates  and  their  associates,  and  that  used  by 
the  unstamped  publications,  was  directed  to  the  object  of  inducing  the 
working  people  to  believe  that  the  constituency  which  the  Reform  Bill 
would  create  would  belong  exclusively  to  the  class  of  tradesmen  and 
shopkeepers,  or,  as  they  were   termed,  the  middlemen — a  class  which 
at  all  times,  it  was  said,  had  been  the  worst  enemies  of  the  working 
people." 


276  WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS 

demanded,  or  the  economic  principles  on  which  the 
demand  was  to  be  based.1  He  accordingly  gave  all  the 
help  he  could  to  the  proposal,  drew  up  and  signed  a  letter 
asking  for  funds,  and  gave  them  a  list  of  probable  sub- 
scribers, including  the  name  of  Tom  Young,  Lord  Mel- 
bourne's mysterious  factotum,2  through  whose  hands  a 
good  deal  of  the  Government's  Secret  Service  Fund  seems 
to  have  passed. 

On  Monday,  Place  attended  four  public  meetings,  ending 
up  with  one  at  the  Rotunda.  On  Tuesday  came  bad  news. 
Parkes  wrote  from  Birmingham  to  Grote,  "  I  have  been 
written  to  by  the  Government  to-day.  They  are  still  the 
same  men,  not  suited  to  the  occasion.  I  do  fear  their 
going  out.  We  have  all  written  up  to  them,  '  PEERS  OR 
REVOLUTION.'  .  .  .  All  the  cards  are  ours,  and  the  whole 
nation  deserves  to  stand  before  the  world  in  a  pillory  if  we 
are  swindled.  I  only  fear  a  compromise."  3  Brougham  on 
Monday  night  had  said  in  the  Lords :  "  Careless  whether  I 
give  offence  in  any  quarter,  I  must  say  that  I  am  so  far 
moved  by  some  points  urged,  as  to  be  ready  to  reconsider 
some  matters  on  which  I  had  deemed  that  my  mind  waai 
made  up,  although  in  the  greater  proportion  of  the  objec- 
tions to  the  Bill  I  cannot  concur.  Nevertheless,  I  am 
uninfluenced  as  regards  the  bulk  of  its  principles."  And 
Lord  Althorp  had  hinted  at  "modifications"  in  the 
Commons. 

Place  at  once  sat  down  and  wrote  (9  A.M.,  Tuesday)  a 
letter  to  Hobhouse,  which  he  obviously  intended  to  be 
shoAvn  to  Ministers :  "  You  recommend  '  Patience,  patience, 

1  Place  also  says  that  many  working-men  called  on  him,  whom  he 
advised  to  get  up  "trade  meetings  and  meetings  of  working-men 
indiscriminately,"  and  at  these  meetings  to  speak  in  favour  of  universal 
suffrage,  but  propose  resolutions  in  support  of  the  Government.  27,790 

(23). 

a  27,790  (25).     For  Tom  Young,  see  p.  303  and  note. 

3  Parkes  to  Grote,  undated,  indexed  by  Place  as  October  10,  1831. 


WAR    ON   TWO   FRONTS  277 

patience.'  The  word  '  Patience '  must  mean,  if  it  mean 
anything,  a  reasonable  expectation  that  all  which  is 
necessary  will  be  done  forthwith.  Do  circumstances 
warrant  such  a  conclusion  ?  I  say  no,  they  do  not.  If 
they  did,  I  too  should  say  '  Patience,  patience,  patience.' 
I  say  the  people  have  no  sufficient  reason  to  conclude 
that  what  ought  to  be  done  to  ensure  the  passing  of  the 
Reform  Bill  will  be  done,  and  unless  they  be  as  '  stupid  as 
waggon  horses,'  they  cannot,  ought  not  to  be  patient.  .  .  . 
I  have  stood  up  firmly  against  proceedings  which  had  a 
tendency  to  produce  a  panic.  Others  of  my  friends  have 
done  the  same,  and  our  success  was  perfect  until  yesterday 
afternoon,  when  at  the  close  of  the  meeting  at  the  Crown 
and  Anchor  Tavern  many  persons  avowed  their  determina- 
tion to  withdraw  their  balances  from  their  bankers  in 
gold." ! 

From  everywhere  came  accounts  of  huge  meetings, 
of  occasional  riots,  and  of  effusive  expressions  of  con- 
fidence in  Ministers,  founded  upon  a  growing  distrust 
of  them. 

"  So  thoroughly  were  the  people  at  a  loss  respecting 
the  course  which  ought  to  be  pursued,  that  besides 
attending  meetings  called  by  they  did  not  care  whom, 
the  people  did  nothing.2  "All,  however,  talked  vaguely 
of  '  being  firm,'  that  is,  as  a  man  said  at  one  of  the 
public  meetings,  '  staring  at  the  Government,  staring  at 
them  firmly.' "  3 

The  great  London  procession  (on  October  13)  was  a 
complete  success,  though  no  Rotundanist  leader  took  part 
in  it.4  But  on  the  same  day  came  leading  articles  in  the 
Courier  (the  official  ministerial  paper)  and  the  Morning 

1  Place  to  Hobliouse,  October  11,  1831. 
*  27,791  (6). 

3  Place  to  Parkes,  October  13,  1831. 

4  27,790  (39)- 


278  AVAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS 

Herald,  hinting  at  a  compromise  with  the  Lords  and  a 
modified  Bill ; l  and  Warburton,  the  Radical  member  for 
Bridport, "  one  of  Lord  Althorp's  most  confidential  friends,"2 
called  on  Place  with  the  news  that  Parliament  was  to  be 
prorogued  for  three  months.3 

On  that  evening  Place  broke  through  his  habit  of 
working  behind  the  scenes,  and  took  a  step  which  brought 
his  name  for  a  day  or  two  into  almost  all  the  newspapers. 
He  went  down  to  a  meeting  of  parochial  delegates  at  the 
Crown  and  Anchor  Tavern,  told  them  what  he  had  heard 
of  the  intentions  of  Ministers,  drew  up  a  strong  memorial 
to  the  effect  that  if  the  Bill  were  not  reintroduced  after 
the  shortest  possible  prorogation,  "this  country  will  in- 
evitably be  plunged  into  all  the  horrors  of  a  violent 
revolution,"  and  organised  a  deputation  there  and  then 
to  see  Lord  Grey  at  his  house  in  Downing  Street.  The 
deputation  arrived  at  a  quarter  to  eleven  at  night,  and 
were  told  by  Lord  Grey  that  "it  would  be  absurd"  for 
Ministers  "to  propose  a  measure  which  they  could  not 
hope  to  carry  through";  that  a  new  Bill  would  be 
prepared  "  not  less  efficient  than  the  old " ;  that  the 
preparation  of  such  a  Bill  would  take  "much  time  and 
consideration "  ;  and  finally,  and  emphatically,  that  any 
disturbances  would  be  put  down  by  military  force.4 

The  Courier  and  the  Chronicle  during  the  next  few 
days  carried  on  an  angry  controversy  as  to  what  had  been 
said  and  intended.  Lord  Grey  gave  his  account  of  the 
interview  in  the  House  of  Lords  on  October  i/,6  and 
Greville  writes  a  month  later  of  "  the  domiciliary  visit  of 

1  e.g.  "  We  have  never  joined  in  any  cry  for  '  the   whole   Bill.' " 
(Morning  Herald,  October  12,  1831.) 

2  Place  to  Parkes,  October  13,  1831. 

3  27,790  (54). 

4  27,790  (61-70). 

6  Hansard,  Third  Series,  vol.  viii.  850,  851. 


WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS  279 

Place  and  his  rabble  "  as  having  helped  to  open  the  eyes 
of  the  moderate  members  of  the  Cabinet.1 

On  Saturday,  October  15,  Grote  spoke  in  favour  of  con- 
fidence in  Ministers  at  a  Mansion  House  meeting,  and  next 
day  Place  wrote  to  him :  "  Last  Sunday  we  feared,  and 
had  cause  to  fear,  that  the  working  people  would  not  take 
part  with  the  middle  classes.  You  lamented  this;  .  .  . 
they,  however,  soon  demonstrated  their  feelings,  and 
proved  that  they  were  ready,  at  any  risk,  and  at  any 
sacrifice,  to  stand  by  us.  And  then  what  did  we  do  ?  We 
abandoned  them,  deserted,  betrayed  them,  and  shall  have 
betrayed  them  again  before  three  more  days  have  passed 
over  our  heads — betrayed  them  again,  for  'we  shall  all  of 
us  before  that  time  be  well  acquainted  with  the  new 
facts,  that  no  Peer  will  be  created,  that  Parliament  will 
be  prorogued  for  a  very  long  period,  that  such  a  Bill  as 
the  Lords  will  please  accept  will  be  promised  to  be 
brought  in  a  conciliatory  Bill.  And  we,  yes  we,  the 
dastardly,  talking,  swaggering  dogs,  will  sneak  away  with 
our  tails  between  our  legs." 2 

Meanwhile  the  excitement  was  sinking,  the  Tories  were 
announcing  a  reaction  of  public  opinion,  and  the  only 
hope  of  a  continued  and  successful  agitation  lay  in  the 
"political  unions  of  the  middle  and  working  classes," 
which  had  been  formed  up  and  down  the  country  on  the 
Birmingham  model.  Such  a  union  for  London  was  pro- 
posed by  Perry  on  October  15,  and  initiated  by  a  meeting 
of  fifty  persons  at  the  Crown  and  Anchor  on  October  ig.3 

Place  worked  hard  at  the  preliminary  organisation,  but 
warned  by  the  fate  of  the  Parliamentary  Candidates' 

1  Greville,  "  Journal  of  the  Reigns  of  George  IV.  and  William  IV.," 
vol.  ii.  p.  213  (November  19,  1831). 

2  Pla.ce  to  Grote,  October  16,  1831.     Mrs.  Grote  wrote  an  amusing 
reply,  beginning,  "  Don't  you  go  for  to  row  my  good  man."     (Mrs.  Grote 
to  Place,  October  19,  1831.) 

3  27,791  (8,  9,  31). 


280  WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS 

Society,  took  care  to  leave  himself  an  opening  for  retreat. 
"  Mr.  Perry  had  acted  a  capital  part,  and  Major  Beauclerk 
seconded  him  excellently.  But  I  was  unable  to  place  con- 
fidence in  their  steady  perseverance.  They  had  faltered  in 
the  Parliamentary  Candidates'  Society.  I  doubted  if  they 
were  the  men  to  go  through  steadily  the  difficulties  and 
dangers  I  saw  before  us.  I  did  not  therefore  formally 
become  a  member  of  the  Union,  was  not  appointed  on  the 
committee,  nor  did  I  in  any  way  commit  myself  so  as  to 
draw  upon  me  the  duty  of  assisting,  as  I  must  otherwise 
have  done,  the  business  of  the  Union,  and  be  compelled  to 
go  on  if  others  abandoned  it  and  it  did  not  progress  in  the 
right  way.  Mr.  Perry  and  Major  Beauclerk  were  willing 
to  take  the  lead,  and  they  were  permitted  to  do  so." l 

If  the  Union  was  to  attract  any  attention,  some  well- 
known  man  must  be  secured  as  chairman.  Hume  refused, 
and  suggested  that  the  very  name  "Union"  should  be 
dropped,  "because  we  have  already  twenty  National 
Unions  in  London  of  the  admirers  of  Mr.  Owen  and  Mr. 
Hunt,  and  you  will  be  confounded  with  them."^ 

At  last  Burdett  accepted  the  post,  on  condition  that 
"the  Union  were  made  specifically  to  support  Ministers 
in  carrying  the  Bill." 3  Place  at  about  the  same  tune 
joined  the  committee,  and  his  hope  that  100,000  mem- 
bers would  join  seemed  likely  to  be  fulfilled. 

But  the  most  serious  trouble  was  still  to  come.  If  the 
National  Political  Union  was  to  claim  any  authority,  it 
must,  according  to  the  political  ideas  of  the  time,  be 
formed  at  a  public  meeting,  and  all  who  presented  them- 
selves must  be  allowed  to  join.  At  the  preliminary  "  com- 
mittee" meetings  resolutions  moved  by  the  Rotundanists 
and  their  sympathisers  in  favour  of  universal  suffrage  and 

1  27,791  06,  i/O- 

2  Hume  to  Major  Beauclerk,  October  20,  1831.     27,791  (12,  13). 

3  27,791  (17). 


AVAR   ON   TWO    FRONTS  281 

annual  parliaments  had  been  with  difficulty  defeated,1  and 
it  seemed  likely  that  amendments  in  that  sense  would 
be  carried  at  the  public  meeting  advertised  for  Monday, 
October  3 1 ,  at  the  Crown  and  Anchor  in  the  Strand. 

Place  as  usual  was  waging  a  war  on  two  fronts.  While 
he  was  determined  that  the  Union  should  assist  the  Bill 
to  pass,  he  was  equally  determined  that  it  should  not  be 
used  to  uphold  the  Bill  as  a  final  measure.  He  therefore 
induced  the  committee  to  suggest  that  the  object  of  the 
Union,  as  put  to  the  meeting,  should  be  "  to  obtain  a  real 
and  effectual  representation  of  the  middle  and  working 
classes  of  the  people  in  the  Commons'  House  of  Parlia- 
ment," 2  and  furiously  insisted  in  a  letter  to  Perry  that  the 
resolution  should  not  be  confined  to  a  mere  support  of  the 
Bill,  even  though  Burdett  should  threaten  to  resign. 

"  The  working  people  would  see  in  the  proceeding  the 
old  desire  to  use  them  for  a  purpose  and  then  to  abandon 
them.  The  gap  between  the  working  and  middle  classes 
would  be  widened,  the  rancour  that  exists  would  be 
increased,  and  all  chance  of  conciliation  put  off  for  years. 
...  I  am  a  member  of  the  Council  only  because  the  Union 
includes  working  people.  I  have  some  reputation  among 
them,  and  can  at  times  exercise  a  wholesome  influence 
over  more  or  less  of  them ;  this  I  should  lose  were  my 
name  to  appear  to  anything  which  was  either  ambiguous 
or  delusive."  3 

October  31  must  have  been,  as  Place  describes  it,  a 
sufficiently  exciting  day.  The  meeting  was  called  for 
eleven  o'clock,  and  there  was  a  preliminary  meeting  to 
finally  settle  the  resolutions  at  half-past  ten  in  a  room 
"about  25  feet  long  and  12  broad.  "Before  eleven  o'clock 
it  was  crowded  almost  to  suffocation,  and  the  door  was 
blocked  up  with  a  crowd  of  persons  vainly  endeavouring  to 

1  27,791  (39).  2  27,791  (39). 

3  Place  to  Perry,  October  28,  1831. 


282  WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS 

gain  admittance.1  ...  A  tumult  was  expected,  and  it  had 
therefore  been  determined  to  put  me  in  the  chair.  I  am  a 
pretty  resolute  chairman,  and  know,  I  think,  how  to  manage 
a  tumultuous  assembly,  but  it  is  with  extreme  difficulty  that 
I  was  able  to  manage  this."  2 

A  resolution  in  favour  of  universal  suffrage  was  defeated, 
but  the  uproar  communicated  itself  to  the  crowds  in  the 
great  Crown  and  Anchor  hall,  and  it  became  necessary  to 
adjourn  the  meeting  to  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields.  There  were 
twenty  thousand  persons  in  the  Fields,  and  "  as  not  more, 
perhaps,  than  half  of  the  people  assembled  could  understand 
what  was  addressed  to  them,  it  was  probable  that  any 
amendment  or  new  resolutions  they  (the  Rotundanists) 
proposed  would  be  carried." 3 

Burdett  took  the  chair,  lost  his  temper,  and  put  the 
crowd  against  him.  After  the  usual  speeches  from  W.  J. 
Fox 4  and  others  in  denunciation  of  the  Lords,  Lovett  moved 
a  universal  suffrage  amendment,  and  asked  the  working- 
men  present  "what  the  middle  classes  wanted  except  to 
make  them  the  tools  of  their  purposes/5  Finally,  an 
amendment  of  Wakley's,6  that  half  the  Council  of  the  new 
Union  should  consist  of  working-men,  was  carried,  and  the 
meeting  dispersed. 

Place  concluded  that  the  middle-class  politicians  would 
now  leave  the  Union,  and  that  the  working  classes  would 
not  join  it.  Intending  members  had  been  told  to  enrol 
themselves  at  the  Crown  and  Anchor,  and  "  while  the  vote 
of  thanks,  which  was  not  at  all  merited  by  the  chairman, 
was  being  proposed,"  Place  left  the  meeting  and  went  to  the 
Crown  and  Anchor.  "Here  I  remained  alone  till  I  con- 
cluded no  one  would  come,  and  then  I  went  home." 7 

1  27,791  (48).  2  27,791  (52).  3  27,791  (57). 

4  William  Johnson  Fox  (1786-1864),  Unitarian  minister,  editor  of 
Monthly  Repository;  member  of  Parliament  for  Oldham,  1847-1863. 

5  27,791  (64). 

6  One  of  the  members  of  Parliament  for  Finsbury,  editor  of  the  Lancet, 
and  at  this  time  an  ally  of  the  Rotundanists.  7  27,791  (70). 


WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS  283 

This  time,  however,  some  of  Place's  colleagues  were  more 
persevering  than  himself.  Erskine  Perry  came  later  to  the 
tavern  with  Roebuck,  enrolled  names,  drew  up  a  cheerful 
handbill,  signed  it  with  Burdett's  name,  and  then  "  looked 
in  upon  Place,  who  thought  the  whole  thing  was  crushed  in 
the  bud,  and  that  there  was  very  faint  possibility  of  estab- 
lishing the  Union."  The  two  ended  the  evening  by  going 
"  down  to  the  Rotunda,  where  we  heard  ourselves  denounced, 
and  the  Union  also,  as  aristocratical,  &c.,  by  Cleave  and 
others." l 

Next  morning  Place  took  heart  and  determined  to 
make  the  best  of  the  situation.  If  half  the  Council 
was  to  consist  of  political  working-men,  steps  must  be 
taken  that  they  should  not  be  Rotundanists ;  and  if,  as 
was  very  nearly  true,  there  were  no  effective  politicians 
among  the  working-men  who  were  not  in  sympathy 
with  the  Rotundanists,  such  men  must  be  created. 
Next  day,  therefore  (November  i),  Place  says:  "I  and 
my  friends  were  early  at  the  tavern,  and  remained  there 
all  day  and  until  late  at  night.  Between  three  and  four 
hundred  men  entered  their  names  as  members.  When- 
ever any  respectable  working-man  took  a  ticket  he  was 
asked  questions  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  if  he  were 
a  Rotundanist,  and  upon  finding  that  he  was  not,  he  was 
invited  into  the  committee  room,  questioned  as  to  his 
political  notions,  and  requested  to  give  the  name  or  names 
and  references  to  the  character  of  any  man  or  men  whom 
he  knew  in  his  trade  who  was  a  sober,  discreet,  clever  man, 
and  many  such  men  were  designated.  Almost  every  man 
who  was  invited  into  the  committee  room  appeared  to 
understand  the  men  who  managed  at  the  Rotunda,  dis- 
liked them  much,  and  were  willing  to  aid  us  as  well  as  they 
could  to  promote  the  election  of  such  working-men  for  the 
Council  as  were  honest,  sensible,  well-intentioned  men, 
1  27,791  (46,  47).  (Perry's  notes.) 


284  WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS 

having  the  confidence  of  their  fellow-workmen.  Many  of 
our  coadjutors  came  in,  and  as  no  time  was  to  be  lost, 
and  no  one  in  our  circumstances  was  to  be  either  idle  or  to 
regard  the  consumption  of  his  own  time,  each  of  them  was 
despatched  to  see  the  workmen  who  had  been  named  to 
us,  inquire  their  characters  of  their  employers  and  their 
neighbours,  and  then  to  invite  them  to  join  the  Union 
with  a  view  to  their  being  elected  on  the  Council.  The 
Bill  'this  is  not  an  Union,  &c.,'  and  copies  of  all  our 
publications,  were  given  to  these  men,  as  they  were  to 
every  one  who  became  a  member ;  and  in  a  few  days  we 
had  a  sufficient  number  of  such  men  for  the  Council,  and 
the  certainty  that  their  fellow-workmen  would  vote  for 
them.  They  who  were  constant  attendants  at  the  Rotunda 
and  other  such  meetings  were  much  more  desirous  of 
having  nonsense  talked  to  them  for  a  penny  a  week  or  for 
nothing  than  to  work  for  the  good  of  others  and  to  pay  a 
shilling  to  put  them  in  a  position  to  <k^  so,  kept  away  from 
the  Union,  and  we  saw  very  clearly  that  the  mischief- 
makers  had  no  chance  to  become  members  of  the  Council 
in  any  considerable  number.  We  saw  plainly  enough  that 
Wakley's  resolution  had  produced  the  anticipated  conse- 
quences, as  a  comparative  few  who  were  not  working-inen 
joined  us,  and  some  of  those  who  were  not  working-men 
left  us.  Still  we  hoped  that  if  we  could  succeed  in  pro- 
curing a  really  respectable  Council  we  should  be  able  to 
induce  a  large  number  of  such  persons  to  join  us,  and  we 
were  not  mistaken." l 

The   Rotundanists   had  now   come   to   look   upon   the 

1  27>79l  (?!>  72).  The  Government,  acting  through  Mr.  Merle,  the 
editor  of  the  Courier,  tried  exactly  the  same  tactics  against  the  National 
Political  Union  as  Place  used  against  the  Rotundanists.  A  "  respect- 
able Association"  was  started,  which  excluded  "persons"  (like  Place) 
"  of  known  Republican  opinions."  But  that  sort  of  tactics  requires 
skill  and  perseverance,  and  the  "  respectable  Association  "  died  in  three 
weeks.  27,791  (81,  82). 


WAR   ON   TWO    FRONTS  285 

National  Political  Union  as  their  chief  enemy.  It  was  at 
that  time  apparently  taken  for  granted  by  every  one  that 
the  members  of  the  "  Political  Unions "  were  to  possess 
themselves  of  arms,1  and  this  was  represented  as  the  creation 
of  an  armed  force  for  the  prevention  of  real  reform.2 

Accordingly,  the  Rotundanists  not  only  advised  their 
members  to  join  the  rival  Union  in  such  numbers  as  to 
capture  it,  but  themselves  announced  a  great  meeting  on 
November  7,  in  the  open  space  by  the  White  Conduit 
House.  Benbow,  with  a  view  to  this  meeting,  laid  in  a 
stock  of  heavy  constables'  staves,  which  he  retailed  at  a 
few  pence  each  to  such  of  the  members  as  desired  to 
protect  themselves  against  the  police.  But  he  and  his 
friends  so  overdid  their  truculence  that  the  Government, 
alarmed  by  the  riots  at  Bristol  (October  29,  1831),  brought 
up  troops  to  London,  and  swore  in  hundreds  of  special 
constables.3  The  White  Conduit  House  meeting  had  to 
be  abandoned,  and  the  National  Political  Union  held  the 
field. 

On  November  the  22nd  it  was  announced  that  Parlia- 
ment was  to  reassemble  for  the  consideration  of  the  Reform 
Bill  on  December  6.  Lord  Grey's  plan  of  a  long  proroga- 
tion and  a  remodelling  of  the  Bill  had  therefore  been 
abandoned.  How  serious  the  danger  had  been  is  shown 
by  Greville's  account  of  the  negotiations  which  went  on 

1  The  Times  (November  i,  1831)  speaks  approvingly  of  it  as  a  system 
"  of  voluntary  national  armament." 

2  "  The  working  people  in  their  meetings  deprecated  the  organising 
and  arming  the  housekeepers  alone  as  a  scheme   to   depress  them." 
27,791  (101).     The  development  of  the  July  monarchy  in  France  had 
shown  how  effectual  a  middle-class  "  National  Guard,"  even  of  revolu- 
tionary origin,  might  be  in  keeping  the  unarmed  working  classes  quiet. 
The  term  "National  Guard"  was  already  so  invidious  that,  on  October 
8,  1831,  27(6'  Poor  Alan's  Guardian  (the  organ  of  the  Rotundanists)  pro- 
posed a  "  Popular  Guard  "  against  the  "  National  Guard  "  for  England. 
See  it  in  27,791  (303). 

3  27,791  (254). 


286  WAR   ON  TWO   FRONTS 

during  November  between  a  section  of  the  Cabinet  and 
the  Tory  leaders.1  On  November  19,  he  writes  of  Ministers 
as  being  convinced,  "  that  if  existing  institutions  are  to  be 
preserved  at  all,  there  is  no  time  to  be  lost  in  making  such 
an  arrangement  as  may  enable  all  who  have  anything  to 
lose  to  coalesce  for  their  mutual  safety  and  protection."  - 
If  this  had  happened  the  Chartist  movement  would 
have  begun  in  1832  instead  of  1837,  and  the  history  of  the 
British  Empire  during  the  nineteenth  century  might  have 
been  a  good  deal  more  like  the  history  of  the  German 
Empire  after  1871  than  most  people  would  now  think 
possible.  The  negotiations,  however,  came  to  nothing,  and 
Parliament  was  summoned  for  the  reintroduction  of  the  Bill 
on  December  6.  Place  knew  what  had  been  going  on  both 
from  the  gossip  of  the  House  of  Commons  and  from 
Parkes'  letters,3  and  he,  like  the  rest,  was  relieved  when 
the  danger,  for  the  moment,  was  over.  After  the  calling 
of  Parliament  for  December  6  "  the  people  became  calm, 
and  agitation  in  most  places  ceased."  4 

Things  were  still  quieter  after  the  new  Bill  was  found  to 
be  as  good,  if  not  better,  than  the  old  one,  and  it  was  natu- 
raHy  more  difficult  to  keep  the  National  Political  Union 

1  On   November    10,    1831,   Greville  (vol.  ii.  p.  211)  describes  the 
arrangement  for  a  compromise  as  being  carried  on  by  Lord  Wharncliffe, 
Lord  Palmerston,  and  Lord  Grey.     On  November  23,  he  writes  that 
the  Duke  of  Richmond,  Lord  Grey,  and  Lord  Palmerston  voted  in  the 
Cabinet  against  the  calling  together  of  Parliament  before  Christmas. 
(Vol.  ii.  p.  217.) 

2  Greville  Memoirs,  vol.  ii.  p.  213. 

3  e.g.  "Half  the  Cabinet  stand  slyly  on  tiptoe  looking  over  Lord 
Grey's  shoulders  to  see  if  they  can  discern  their  successors,  and  trim  to 
coalesce  with  them." — Parkes  to  Grote,  October  26,  1831,  and  November 
28,  1831,  Parkes  to  Grote :  "  I  am  glad  to  hear  to-day  that  the  silly 
attempt  to  compromise  is  over." 

4  27,791  (112).     The  announcement  of  the  short  prorogation  was 
accompanied  by  a  proclamation  so  worded  that  it  might  satisfy  the 
King  without  checking  the  Unions.     Place  explained  its  limitations 
in  a  tract  for  the  National  Political  Union  on  "The  Laws  relating 
to  Political  Associations."     27,791  (99,  104). 


WAR   ON  TWO   FRONTS  287 

going  in  quiet  than  in  exciting  times.  Of  the  Christmas 
weeks  in  1831  Perry  writes:  "This  fortnight  was  the 
most  critical  period  in  the  existence  of  the  Union.  We 
were  without  funds.  From  one  to  three  members  per 
day  and  no  more  joined  us." 1 

On  December  12  Place  writes  anxiously  to  Hume: 
"  The  cholera  will  spread  all  over  the  country,  and  by  the 
time  the  Bill  shall  have  reached  the  Third  Reading,  and 
the  country  shall  have  become  tired,  if  not  wearied  out 
and  disgusted,  we  shall  have  quarantine  regulations  against 
our  shipping  in  all  parts  of  the  world.  The  consequence 
may  be  a  great  impediment  to  navigation,  diminution  of 
trade  and  commerce,  embarrassment,  stagnation,  panic, 
multitudes  of  people  discharged  in  all  our  great  manu- 
factures. Ministers  should  look  well  to  this  without  loss 
of- time;  but  they  are  after  all  but  a  poor  set  of  creatures, 
and  will  probably  let  the  thing  take  its  course.  It  is  plain 
they  have  sadly  embarrassed  themselves  by  taking  in  hand 
a  matter  too  large  for  them  to  manage;  they  hesitated 
and  vacillated  about  reform  like  weak  men  as  they  are, 
and  then  plunged  into  it  rashly.  Hardly  had  they  un- 
folded their  scheme  than  they  wished  they  had  not  done 
so,  and  would  have  withdrawn  it  if  they  could.  In- 
sufficient as  it  is  (notwithstanding  it  is  more  than  any  one 
expected  them  to  propose),  it  is  too  much  for  them,  and 
has  made  them  imbecile  for  any  other  good  purpose. 
The  people  have  kept  them  to  it,  and  they  must  continue 
to  keep  them  to  it.  It  seems  to  be  the  lot  of  almost  every 
country  that  in  eventful  periods  the  men  who  govern  shall 
be  especially  weak  and  absurd.  Strong-minded,  discreet, 
bold  men  would  have  carried  the  Bill  before  this  time, 
have  had  the  people  with  them,  and  fixed  themselves  so 
firmly  in  power  for  all  good  purposes,  that  Taxes  on  Know- 
ledge, and  Gagging  Bills,  and  Printing  Press  Registering 

1   27,791  (121). 


288  WAR   ON   TWO   FRONTS 

Bills  would  all  be  repealed,  to  their  honour  and  glory  and 
the  permanent  advantage  of  the  country." l 

After  Christmas  the  apathy  in  London  continued  with 
that  startling  completeness  which  only  London  politicians 
know.  The  Council  of  the  National  Political  Union  held 
weekly  meetings,  to  which  the  public  were  admitted.  On 
January  4,  1832,  "it  was  necessary  on  account  of  the  audi- 
ence that  a  show  of  business  should  be  made.  .  .  .  Mr. 
Wakefield  therefore  proposed  the  appointment  of  a  com- 
mittee to  draw  up  a  petition  relating  to  partnerships,  more 
especially  banking  partnerships.  ...  It  caused  an  ani- 
mated discussion,  and  interested  every  one  of  the  auditors."2 

On  February  2  there  was  friction,  and  Burdett  left  the 
Union.  On  February  6  there  was  an  election  of  the 
Council,  with  an  elaborate  object-lesson  in  voting  by 
ballot.  The  Rotundanists  ran  candidates,  but  they  were 
all  beaten  by  the  "  ticket "  organised  by  the  old  committee. 
And  so  with  debates  on  the  Anatomy  Bill 3  and  Newspaper 
Stamps,  the  winter  wore  on. 

Perhaps  after  all  the  trouble  that  had  been  taken  the 
National  Political  Union  might  not  seem  a  very  great 
thing.  But  its  promoters  had  secured  a  vitally  important 
strategic  position.  They  now  controlled  an  organisation 
which  at  the  critical  moment  every  London  reformer  must 
necessarily  join. 

1  Place  to  Hume,  December  12,  1831. 

2  27,791  (126). 

3  The  Anatomy  Bill  (for  facilitating  the  provision  of  dead  bodies  for 
dissection)  was  a  question  after  Place's  own  heart,  in  which  unanswer- 
able arguments  had  to  meet  almost  unconquerable  prejudices.    He  had 
been  working  on  the  point  since  1828,  when,  after  arranging  for  the 
purchase  of  an  urgently  needed  "  subject "  from  a  resurrection  man,  he 
had  drawn  up  a  petition  to  Parliament  for  a  law  enabling  unclaimed 
bodies  to  be  dissected.     The  murders  by  Burke  in  1828,  and  Bishop  in 
1831,  kept  the  question  alive,  and  finally  in  July  1832  the  Bill  was 
passed.    Place  has  left  a  long  account  of  this  struggle  (27,828,  261-337). 
He  was  especially  annoyed  at  the  opposition  of  Wakley,  the  editor  of 
the  Lancet,  and  himself  a  surgeon. 


CHAPTER  XI 

THE  SECOND  REFORM  CAMPAIGN 

Ox  March  26,  1832,  after  another  term  of  obstruction  in 
the  Commons,  the  Reform  Bill  was  for  the  second  time 
introduced  into  the  House  of  Lords.  The  most  important 
change  in  the  situation  since  the  preceding  October  was 
that  the  King,  under  the  influence  of  his  wife,  his  sisters, 
and  his  illegitimate  children,  was  now  nervous  about  the 
Bill,  and  disinclined  to  secure  Ministers  a  majority  by 
creating  Peers.  But  this  change,  though  known  among 
the  Tory  leaders,  was  unknown  elsewhere ;  and  in  other 
respects,  the  position  of  the  Lords  had  been  weakened  by 
the  five  months'  delay.  Every  man  in  the  country  had 
been  by  this  time  compelled  to  form  an  opinion  on  the 
Bill,  and  most  men  had  come  to  think  with  Sydney  Smith, 
that  the  Atlantic  would  beat  Mrs.  Partington.  The  Lords 
must  either  enormously  increase  their  power  by  a  victory, 
or  enormously  decrease  it  by  a  defeat.  The  settled  doctrines 
of  the  English  Constitution — "  that  nose  of  wax  which 
every  one  twists  to  his  purpose  "  l — against  which  Bentham 
had  so  often  railed,  could  now  be  turned  against  them. 
'•  The  theory  of  '  the  Constitution '  was  against  them : 
the  elucidation  by  '  constitutional  writers '  was  against 
them  ;  the  whole  doctrine  of  checks  was  against  them ; 
that  beautiful  system  so  lauded  by  Whigs  and  Tories, 
and  believed  by  almost  everybody,  as  constituting  the 
very  essence  of  the  best  of  all  possible  governments,  was 

1  27,793  (65). 


290         THK   SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN 

against  them.  .  .  .  The  doctrine  of  checks  had  long  been 
a  maxim,  and  so  it  remained.  The  answer  to  all  assertions 
to  the  contrary  was,  '  If  the  king  cannot  be  a  check  upon 
the  Lords,  he  is  nothing.'  "  l 

The  danger,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  working  classes 
would  break  away  from  the  Reform  alliance  had  not  grown 
less.  Manchester  and  London  were  still  the  two  centres 
of  working-class  revolutionary  feeling2  and  middle-class 
intolerance.  "  The  great  peculiarity  causing  a  difference 
between  the  Political  Unions  and  the  Unions  of  the 
working  classes  was,  that  the  first  desired  the  Reform 
Bill  to  prevent  a  revolution,  the  last  desired  its  destruction 
as  the  means  of  producing  a  revolution." :i 

One  writer  sent  an  article  to  the  Poor  Man's  Guardian, 
dated  Manchester,  March  19,  in  the  course  of  which  he 
said :  "  The  Bill  is  the  most  illiberal,  the  most  tyrannical, 
the  most  abominable,  the  most  infamous,  the  most  hellish 
measure  that  ever  could  or  can  be  proposed.  ...  I  there- 
fore conjure  you  to  prepare  your  coffins,  if  you  have  the 
means.  You  will  be  starved  to  death  by  thousands  if  this 
Bill  passes,  and  thrown  on  the  dunghill  or  on  to  the  ground 
naked  like  dogs." 4 

In  Manchester  four  working-men  had  been  prosecuted 
by  the  Whig  Attorney-General,  and  sentenced  on  March 
15  to  a  year's  imprisonment,  for  a  peaceable  open-air 
meeting.5  In  London,  Lovett,  Watson,  and  Benbow,  the 

1  27,792  (41). 

2  "...  a  revolution  in  which  they  might  gain,  but  could  not  lose. 
It  was  this  expectation  and  desire  which,  to  a   considerable   extent, 
prevented   them    (considerable  bodies   of  the   working   classes)   from 
joining  the  Political  Unions  in  London,  Manchester,  Bristol,  and  other 
places,  and  led  them  to  use  no  efforts  to  promote  the  passing  of  the 
Bill."    27,792(15)- 

3  27,793  (76). 

4  See  the  Poor  Man's  Guardian,  April  i  r,  1832,  article  entitled,  "Last 
Warning  on  the  Accursed  Reform  Bill,"   by  One  of   the  Oppressed. 

5  27,791  (365)- 


THE   SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN         JJ91 

three  leaders  of  the  National  Union  of  the  Working  Classes, 
were  now  out  on  bail  for  organising  a  procession  on  March 
2  i ,  on  which  day  the  Government  had  ordered  a  solemn 
fast  as  a  means  of  averting  the  cholera.  The  Rotundanists 
had  then  walked  through  the  streets,  carrying  a  loaf  of 
bread  and  a  round  of  beef  with  the  inscription,  "  The  True 
Cure  for  the  Cholera."  l 

Before  the  debate  on  the  first  reading  came  on,  Place 
drew  up  for  the  National  Political  Union  a  petition  to  the- 
House  of  Lords.  This  petition  was  mainly  historical,  and 
put  Place's  views  as  to  the  political  evolution  of  English 
society  with  a  quiet  offensiveness  that  secured  its  insertion 
into  most  of  the  Reform  newspapers  :  "  That  your  petitioners 
humbly  submit  to  your  noble  House  that  the  time  has 
arrived  when  a  great  change  must  be  made  in  the  system 
under  which  this  nation  has  been  long  governed. 

"  That  this  inevitable  change  may  be  gradual  and  peaceful, 
or  sudden  and  violent.  That  it  remains  with  your  noble 
House  to  determine  in  which  of  these  two  ways  the  change 
shall  be  made.  .  .  . 

"  That  in  former  times  there  was  little  wealth  in  this 
country  beyond  that  which  was  held  by  the  aristocracy  in 
Church  and  State. 

"  That  there  was  little  learning  and  knowledge  beyond 
that  which  the  aristocracy  possessed,  the  people  being  left 
in  a  state  of  profound  ignorance.  .  .  . 

"  That  so  different,  indeed,  are  the  present  from  former 
times,  that,  instead  of  nearly  all  the  wealth  in  the  nation 
being  possessed  by  the  aristocracy,  the  whole  amount  pos- 
sessed by  them  is  a  small  fraction.  That  so  different,  in- 
deed, are  the  present  from  former  times,  in  respect  to 
intellectual  acquirements  in  every  branch  of  knowledge, 
that  it  can  be  no  disparagement  to  the  privileged  classes 
to  say  that  the  country  abounds  with  men  in  every  depart- 

1  27,791  (255,  392). 


292        THE   SECOND   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

inent  of  knowledge  to  whom  no  superior  can  be  found  in 
the  aristocracy.  .  .  . 

"  Your  petitioners  therefore  submit  to  your  noble  House, 
that  any  endeavour  to  prevent  the  proposed  reform  in  the 
House  of  Commons  will  be  an  attempt  to  govern  knowledge 
by  ignorance,  than  which  nothing  can  be  more  absurd  and 
more  impossible." l 

As  soon  as  the  Bill  was  introduced  in  the  Lords  it 
was  seen  that  it  would  probably  pass  a  second  reading. 
Lord  Harrowby,  on  behalf  of  Lord  Wharncliffe  and  the 
"  Waverers,"  who  had  negotiated  with  Lord  Grey  in  the 
preceding  November,  announced  that  he  would  vote  for 
the  second  reading,  and  " endeavour  to  alter"  the  Bill  in 
Committee.  Lord  Grey,  in  reply,  said,  "  He  would  attend 
to  suggestions  in  Committee,  and  agree  to  such  alterations 
as  might  appear  to  him  reasonable,  which  did  not  tend  to 
destroy  the  principle  of  the  Bill." 

At  once  suspicions  began  to  be  formed,  though  little  was 
actually  known.  One  fact,  however,  reached  Place  in  spite 
of  "  the  strictest  silence,  caution,  and  secrecy  of  Minis- 
ters." -  On  April  7  he  received  a  letter  from  Colonel  Jones, 
stating  that  there  was  a  "  conspiracy "  to  substitute  a 
franchise  of  £20  for  the  £10  franchise  in  London.  "No 
stir,"  Colonel  Jones  wrote,  "  is  made  by  the  metropolitan 
districts,  and  this  serves  as  a  sufficient  excuse  to  the  luke- 
warm reformers  in  the  Cabinet.  I  have  worked  like  a  mule 
to  set  them  in  motion,  but  in  vain.  You  must  try  your 
hand." 3  He  ends  by  asking  for  a  letter  which  Lord 
Durham  could  use  in  speaking  against  the  proposal  to 
mutilate  a  Bill  "  which  had  been  drawn  principally  by 
himself."  Place  replied :  "  I  am  told  that  Sir  Francis  Bur- 
dett  says  that  withholding  the  franchise  from  the  metro- 

1  A  copy  of  the  petition  as  adopted  March  21,  1832,  is  preserved  in 
27,792  (18). 

-  27.792  (37).  3  27,792  (44)- 


THE   SECOND   HEFO1UI    CAMPAIGN         293 

politan  boroughs  is  a  matter  of  small  importance,  that, 
notwithstanding  they  are  populous,  the  people  who  have 
property  in  them  very  generally  live  in  other  places,  where 
they  will  be  represented.  This,  if  it  be  correctly  reported 
to  me,  is  very  absurd  language  for  him  to  hold.  Sir  Francis, 
on  consideration,  would  not  say  this  any  more  of  Maryle- 
bone  or  Finsbury  than  he  would  of  Westminster.  Let  it, 
however,  be  supposed  that  his  words  relate  only  to  '  the 
dreaded  Tower  Hamlets.'  Of  this  large  and  wealthy  place 
Sir  Francis  knows  nothing.  To  him,  and  such  as  him,  it  is 
an  unknown  land,  and  so  it  is  to  every  one  of  the  Peers. 
Very  different  indeed  would  be  his  opinion,  or  that  of  any 
one  else  capable  of  correct  observation  and  reasoning  who 
should  occupy  himself  for  two  or  three  days  in  walking 
about  this  part  of  the  metropolis  and  seeing  what  it  con- 
tains. He  would  be  surprised  at  the  vast  masses  of  property 
there  collected,  as  well  as  at  the  people  to  whom  much  of 
the  property  belongs,  who  live  there  and  nowhere  else." 

'•  1 1  P.M. — Just  now,  as  I  was  closing  this  paper.  Sir 
Francis  came  in.  We  have  gone  over  the  matter  again, 
and  he  concurs  in  all  I  have  written."  l 

On  April  9,  after  an  adjournment  over  the  Easter  holi- 
days, the  Lords'  debate  on  the  second  reading  began.  Things 
were  still  so  far  quiet  that  Lord  Grey  and  Lord  Melbourne 
both  referred  to  the  "  general  silence,"  and  the  '•  silence  of 
the  people,"  but  politicians  were  already  preparing  for  a 
struggle.  Cobbett  on  March  3 1  had  begun  to  preach  in  his 
Register  a  "no-rent"  campaign  among  the  tenant-farmers, 
and  the  London  reformers  were  gathering  facts  as  to  the 
military  force  which  would  be  brought  against  them  in 
case  of  a  right.  "The  army  at  this  time  in  Great  Britain 
consisted  of  about  11,000  men.  This  number  was  never 
thought  of  as  having  any  relation  to  the  number  of  the 
people.  It  was  doubtless  thought  sufficient  for  the  pur- 
1  Place  to  Colonel  Jones,  April  9,  1832.  27,792  (50,  51). 


J294         THE   SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN 

poses  of  intimidation  and  coercion.  Of  this  11,000  nearly 
7000  were  congregated  round  London,  and  4000  alone 
remained  to  coerce  all  the  towns  in  England,  Wales,  and 
Scotland.  It  has  been  seen  at  the  time  of  the  Bristol  riots, 
how  very  small  a  number  of  troops  could  be  spared  when 
that  large  city  was  being  burned  by  a  mere  mob,  among 
whom  there  was  no  organisation,  and  when  every  other 
place,  Nottingham  alone  excepted,  was  not  only  quiescent, 
but  showed  no  disposition  to  rioting.  And  yet  a  much 
larger  force  than  was  sent  to  Bristol  would  be  of  no  avail 
against  a  more  general  and  well-organised  insurrection, 
aided  and  countenanced  by  other  places  in  the  same 
state."  *  On  the  other  hand,  the  aristocratic  "  club  men 
were  more  than  ever  desirous  to  provoke  the  people  to 
show  fight,  that  they  might  lick  them." 2 

The  second  reading  debate  took  up  four  nights,  and 
was  for  the  most  part  carried  on  by  both  sides  in  a  tone 
that  caused  Place  to  state  in  language  of  studied  precision, 
"  I  have  had  communication  with  a  considerable  number  " 
of  Peers  "  on  various  occasions,  and  those  communications 
have  been  of  kinds  and  of  sufficiently  long  continuance 
to  enable  me  to  decide  accurately:  and  true  it  is  that  I 
never  knew  one  that  as  a  politician  was  not  a  mean 
shuffler." 3 

On  April  14,  at  seven  in  the  morning,  the  second  reading 
was  carried  by  a  majority  of  nine.  But  the  "  Waverers," 
who  had  voted  so  far  with  the  Government,  made  no  secret 
of  their  intention  to  transform  the  Bill  in  Committee,  and 
there  were  many  complaints  amongst  the  reformers  that 
Lord  Grey  did  not  make  things  sure  by  creating  Peers. 
Place  held  it  wiser  to  fight  the  Lords  as  they  were. 
"  Several  of  the  best-informed  men  in  the  council  of  the 
National  Political  Union  were  not  desirous  that  Peers 

1  27,792  (38,  39).  2  27)792  (3e). 

3  27,792  (244). 


THE    SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN 

should  be  made  in  the  gross."  l  On  May  7  the  Govern- 
ment met  their  inevitable  defeat.  Lord  Lyndhurst  brought 
forward  a  procedure  resolution,  Avhich  Lord  Grey  declared 
would  be  fatal  to  the  Bill,  and  carried  it  by  a  majority  of 
thirty-live  in  a  house  of  267  Peers. 

On  the  next  day  (Tuesday,  May  8)  Lord  Grey  went 
down  to  Windsor  and  presented  to  the  King  a  minute 
signed  by  the  whole  Cabinet,  Avith  the  exception  of  the 
Duke  of  Richmond,  asking  for  the  creation  of  fifty  Peers. 
The  King  refused,  and  Lord  Grey  resigned.  Then  followed 
the  situation  which  had  been  so  anxiously  hoped  and  feared. 
On  Wednesday  the  King,  at  Lord  Lyndhurst's  suggestion, 
sent  for  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  who  promised  to  attempt 
the  formation  of  a  Tory  ministry.  For  six  days  the 
attempt  went  on,  but  no  Tory  ministry  could  maintain 
any  show  of  defence  in  the  House  of  Commons  to  which 
Peel  did  not  belong,  and  Peel  would  not  take  office.  He 
gave  as  his  reason  the  fact  that  the  King  had  required  the 
new  ministry  to  pledge  themselves  to  a  Reform  Bill  as 
efficient  as  that  introduced  by  the  Whigs.  Wellington 
accepted  the  condition  in  order  to  save  the  prestige  of  the 
Lords :  Peel,  from  whatever  motive,  refused  it. 

But  of  these  negotiations  nothing  was  knoAvn  outside, 
except  the  broad  facts  that  the  King  had  refused  to  create 
Peers,  and  that  Wellington  was  forming  a  government.  It 
was  unfortunate  for  the  Tories  that  Wellington  was  their 
only  possible  Prime  Minister.  Two  years  before,  his  abso- 
lute refusal  to  consent  to  any  degree  of  reform  had  brought 
the  Whigs  into  power.  On  Mav  7  he  had  signed  an 
obstinately  worded  protest  against  the  second  reading. 
Above  all,  he  was  a  soldier.  In  1830  he  had  told  Charles 
Greville  that  his  own  regiment  alone  could  beat  all  the 
populace  of  London:  in  October  1831  he  had  told  a  Man- 
chester deputation  that  "  the  people  of  England  are  very 
1  27.792  (295). 


296        THE   SECOND   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

quiet  if  they  are  let  alone,  but  if  they  won't  be  quiet, 
there  is  a  way  to  make  them." l  His  appointment  meant 
just  that  open  appeal  to  brute  force  which  infuriates 
a  nation  accustomed  to  any  measure  of  political  liberty. 
Men  had  been  in  a  state  of  nervous  tension  even  before 
the  division  in  the  Lords.  Place  describes  the  feeling  in 
London.  "  On  Monday  the  7th  of  May,  the  excitement 
was  wound  up  to  the  highest  pitch  it  had  hitherto  at- 
tained. It  was  to  a  very  considerable  extent  a  holiday. 
Solicitude  was  not  only  visible  in  the  countenances  of 
men,  but  in  their  words  and  actions  also.  Anxiety  made 
them  neglectful  of  business  concerns  to  an  extent  never 
before  observed.  They  seemed  to  say,  '  Let  us  wait  until 
to-morrow ;  let  the  day  pass  as  it  may,  we  can  attend  to 
nothing  correctly  until  we  know  the  fate  of  the  Reform 
Bill,  a  fate  which  may  determine  for  us  whether  we  may 
pursue  our  occupations  in  peace  and  orderly  quietness,  or 
whether  we  are  to  enter  into  a  new  and  much  less  pleasant 
occupation.' "  But  as  soon  as  the  King's  action  was 
known,  London  put  on  the  aspect  of  a  city  in  revolution. 
"London  Avas  placarded  in  a  manner  never  before  wit- 
nessed. The  placards  called  upon  the  people  to  support 
Ministers,  to  meet  in  Unions,  parishes,  trades,  &c.,  and 
demand  that  the  Reform  Bill  be  passed  by  the  Lords." 3 

The  Bishop  of  Lichfield,  who  was  announced  to  preach 
on  Sunday  at  St.  Bride's,  was  mobbed  in  church,  and 
with  difficulty  rescued.4  The  King  could  hardly  venture 
abroad.  On  the  day  after  his  sending  for  the  Duke,  "  a 
desperate  rush  was  made  at  his  horses  on  Constitution 
Hill.  Execrations,  instead  of  blessings,  heretofore  be- 

1  Quoted    by  Alderman  Potter  (afterwards  M.P.  for  Wigan)  in  a 
speech  at  the  meeting  of  the  Union  in  May  1832.    27,794  (168).     Place 
says,  "  I  was  assured  by  a  general  officer  who  dined  with  him  (the 
Duke)  at  the  house  of  a  common  friend,  that  he  made  no  secret  of  his 
wish  to  carry  the  threat  into  execution."     27,794  (22). 

2  27,792  (203-204).  3  22,793  (22).  4  27,793  (193,  194)- 


THE    SECOND   REFORM   CAMPAIGN         297 

stowed,  were  heard,  both  deep  and  loud,  as  his  carriage 
drove  off  with  a  military  escort.  Many  such  escorts  will 
be  necessary  should  King  William  take  a  military  ruler 
to  his  councils."1 

But  if  the  King  was  now  unpopular,  the  Queen,  to 
Avhom  the  change  in  his  attitude  was  ascribed,  was  simply 
detested.  It  has  been  a  not  unimportant  fact  in  preserv- 
ing the  balance  of  the  English  Constitution,  that  German 
court  manners  are  disagreeable  to  us.  Queen  Adelaide, 
the  widow,  before  she  married  King  William,  of  the  Duke 
of  Saxe-Meiningen,  had  the  worst  manners  of  a  small 
German  court.2  The  Queen's  Theatre  announced  a  change 
of  name,  the  Adelaide  omnibuses  plied  with  paper  pasted 
over  the  hated  letters,  and  the  Reform  newspapers  printed 
a  paragraph  about  "  German  frows  "  from  Cobbett's  Register, 
of  quite  indescribable  brutality. 

Cards  with  "  No  Taxes  paid  here  "  were  beginning  to 
appear  in  the  windows,  and  many  householders  were  pre- 
paring for  a  state  of  siege.  "  It  was  somewhat  curious  to 
hear,  as  I  heard  from  several  heads  of  families,  the  inten- 
tion which  numbers  besides  themselves  entertained  of  pur- 
chasing a  quantity  of  flour,  bacon,  and  potatoes,  on  which 
to  live  during  the  time  the  markets  might  be  either  wholly 
deserted  or  badly  supplied." 3  Above  all,  there  were  meet- 
ings everywhere,  and  of  all  sorts  and  conditions,  meetings 
of  trades,  of  parishes,  of  the  Licensed  Appraisers'  Western 
Society  (to  express  their  unanimous  determination  not  to 
distrain  for  assessed  taxes),  of  the  city  corporation,  all 
urging  the  Commons  to  stop  supplies,  to  appoint  Parlia- 

1  27,793  (20).     Extract  from  the  True  Sun. 

2  Place  describes  how  "  the  jolly,  good-natured,  laughing  King  drove 
about  the  streets :>  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  wliile  "  the  Queen, 
with    her   spare   form,  her  sour  countenance,  and  her  straight,  stiff, 
German  back,  sat  bolt  upright,  squeezing  out  her  gracious  smiles." 
27,789(152). 

3  27,793  (143)- 


298        THE   SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN 

mentary  Commissioners,  to  do  anything  which  should  make 
government  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington  impossible. 

Place  had  now  his  reward  for  the  Avork  of  establishing 
the  National  Political  Union  during  the  preceding  autumn. 
The  Union  held  "  general  meetings  "  every  evening,  at  each 
of  which  hundreds  of  new  members  joined — "decent, 
well-dressed  tradesmen,"  as  the  Jlloriiiny  He  mid  described 
them.  Before  the  general  meeting,  the  Council,  now  con- 
sisting mainly  of  Place's  personal  following,  regularly  held 
a  preliminary  meeting,  at  which  all  important  resolutions 
were  taken,  and  at  which  Place  was  always  in  the  chair. 

His  position  in  the  National  Political  Union,  his  reputa- 
tion for  fearlessness,1  and  his  personal  friendship  with 
Joseph  Parkes,  the  Birmingham  organiser,  made  him 
the  chief  centre  for  that  preparation  for  armed  resist- 
ance to  the  Duke  which  had  been  long  considered, 
and  was  now  definitely  taken  in  hand.  On  May  3, 
Place,  who  was  already  "  working  like  a  devil  in  a  mud 
wall,"  Avrote  to  Parkes :  "  Tell  Hadley  I  am  particularly 
well  pleased  at  the  working  of  the  thing  among  you  and 
among  the  people  generally.  It  is  altogether  much  more 
systematic,  and  in  all  respects  much  better  than  he,  and 
you,  and  I,  and  the  Glasgow  and  Nottingham  men,  antici- 
pated." -  In  the  narration  of  this  time  he  says :  "  Com- 
munications had  been  had,  as  well  personally  as  by 
other  means,  between  the  leaders  of  the  National  Political 
Union  and  many  influential  men  in  nearly  all  the  large 
towns  in  England  and  Scotland  and  in  many  other  places, 
all  of  which  would  have  followed  the  example  of,  or  rather 
simultaneously  with  Birmingham,  have  barricaded  their 
respective  towns,  and  awaited  the  result  of  the  proceedings 
in  London."  3 

1  "  I  am  not  conscious  to  myself  of  that  perfect  fearlessness  which  I 
envy  so  much  in  you."     (Grote  to  Place,  October  20,  1831.) 

2  27,792  (307).  3  27.793(i40- 


THE    SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN         299 

Before  the  resignation  of  Lord  Grey  the  Birmingham 
Political  Union  had  been  heavily  in  debt,1  but  now  the 
respectable  inhabitants  were  all  joining,  and  the  Scots  Greys 
were  confined  to  barracks,  sharpening  their  swords.  Even 
in  Manchester  the  "  timid  men,"  the  "  whole  Bill  and 
nothing  but  the  Bill  men,"  and  the  "  Himtites,"  were  now 
united.-  Orator  Hunt  himself  declared  for  the  Bill  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  and  there  was  in  fact  no  longer  any 
reason  for  the  extremists  to  stand  aside  from  a  contest  in 
which  they  might  hope  to  come  to  the  front. 

On  Friday,  May  11,  a  Birmingham  deputation  came  to 
London,  authorised  to  pledge  the  Birmingham  Union  to  a 
rising.  "  Between  eight  and  nine  o'clock  on  the  morning 
of  the  1 1  th  I  received  a  note  from  Mr.  Parkes,  saying  that 
a  spontaneous  meeting  of  100,000  persons  had  been  held 
at  Birmingham  on  the  preceding  afternoon  at  Newhall 
Hill;  that  expresses  had  been  sent  to  all  the  Lon:lon 
morning  newspapers  with  an  account  of  the  proceedings, 
each  of  which  would  have  a  notice  inserted.  The  people 
at  Birmingham  had  determined  not  to  pay  taxes — to  arm 
themselves.  A  deputation  consisting  of  himself  and  others 
had  arrived  in  London  with  a  petition  to  the  Commons,  to 
be  presented  in  the  evening.  They  would  be  with  me  at 
ten  o'clock.  They  intended  being  present  at  the  West- 
minster meeting  and  at  the  Common  Hall  in  the  City  of 
London,  and  to  call  upon  the  people  of  London  to  stand 
fast  by  them.  All  Birmingham  had  joined  the  Union.  .  .  . 
At  ten  o'clock  the  Birmingham  deputation  and  several 
other  gentlemen,  members  of  deputations  from  several 
important  places,  assembled  in  my  library.  AVe  soon 
came  to  a  clear  understanding  on  the  most  material  points. 

1  Parkes  wrote  to  Place,  May  2,  1832,  that  the  Union  was  ,£200  in 
debt,  and  still  had  to  face  the  expenses  of  the  great  meeting  of  May  7. 
He  asks  Place  to  collect  money  in  London.  27,792  (305). 

-  See  extract  from  a  local  paper  for  May  15,  1832.     27,794  (55)- 


JJOO        THE   SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN 

The  state  of  the  Government  and  the  country  was  as  freely 
as  fully  discussed.  It  was  clear  to  us  all  that  it  would  be 
impossible  for  the  King  to  form  any  administration  of 
which  the  Duke  of  Wellington  was  not  placed  at  the  head. 
It  was  as  clear  to  us  that  the  public  was  prepared  to  resist 
such  an  administration,  and  that  if  the  means  they  em- 
ployed should  be  unsuccessful  in  preventing  its  formation, 
they  would  at  once  openly  revolt  against  it.  The  means 
of  organising  the  people  for  effectual  resistance  were  also 
discussed,  and  there  was  a  general  agreement  that  Bir- 
mingham was  the  place  in  which  to  hoist  the  standard  of 
revolt,  and  it  was  understood  that  the  first  hostile  defence 
against  the  Duke  of  Wellington's  administration  should  be 
made  there." l 

Next  day  (Saturday,  I2th)  a  secret  council  of  deputies 
was  held.  "It  was  agreed  to  consult  during  the  day  in 
every  way  with  as  many  influential  men  as  possible,  .  .  . 
and  to  meet  in  a  body  with  as  many  of  the  deputies  from 
various  parts  of  the  country  as  could  be  collected  together. 
Towards  noon  a  meeting  was  held  at  a  tavern  in  Covent 
Garden.  Many  deputies  attended.  The  business  was 
entered  upon  at  once,  and  at  once  every  one  present  was 
determined  to  go  through  with  it.  There  was  no  reserve 
on  any  part  of  the  whole  of  the  case  between  the  people 
and  the  Tories.  The  persons  present  were  all  men  of  sub- 
stance ;  some  were  very  rich  men.  All  were  persons  of 
influence,  and  whom  circumstances  had  made  of  consider- 
able importance.  Some  were  only  known  to  others  by 
name,  some  not  in  any  way ;  but  it  seemed  to  be  concluded 
that  all  who  were  present  were  good  men  and  true,  and 
there  was  as  much  confidence  in  each  other's  integrity  as 
there  could  have  been  had  each  been  the  well-known  friend 
of  every  one  else.  ...  It  was  clearly  understood  that  in  the 
event  of  Lord  Wellington  being  appointed  Premier  and 
1  27,793  (98- 1 co). 


THE   SECOND   REFORM   CAMPAIGN         301 

forming  an  administration,  as  every  one  expected  would  be 
at  once  attempted,  that  if  necessary,  as  no  doubt  was  enter- 
tained that  it  would  be,  open  resistance  should  at  once  be 
made,  and  in  the  meantime  all  that  could  be  done  should 
be  done  to  prevent  such  an  administration  being  formed."1 

Place  seems  to  have  recognised  that  all  this  would  pro- 
bably be  reported  to  the  authorities,  and  to  have  deliberately 
exploited  that  fact.  There  is  a  good  deal  to  be  said  for  this 
combination  of  conspiracy  and  advertisement,  on  the  one 
condition,  that  those  who  engage  in  it  are  wholly  indifferent 
to  their  personal  safety.  "  No  one  who  attended  the  meet- 
ing could  do  harm  to  any  other  by  reporting  what  passed. 
Were  there  men  among  them  who  came  as  spies  to  report 
proceedings  to  the  Tories — to  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and 
to  Earl  Grey,  as  it  is  probable  there  were — still  nothing  was 
to  be  apprehended.  If  the  proceedings  were  reported  to 
Earl  Grey  and  his  colleagues,  they  could  take  no  step,  legal 
or  illegal,  against  the  parties,  even  were  they  disposed  to 
take  any,  which  it  is  probable  they  were  not.  Were  the 
proceedings  reported  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and  the 
King,  they  could  use  no  means  of  personal  annoyance. 
They  could  only  proceed  by  using  personal  violence,  and 
to  this  as  yet  they  dared  not  resort.  .  .  .  Had  they  seized 
and  imprisoned  the  persons  of  respectable  men  on  a  charge 
of  a  suspicion  of  high-treason,  it  would  at  once  have  caused 
an  insurrection,  a  stoppage  of  trade  and  of  the  circulation 
of  paper-money,  and  thus  put  an  end  to  their  power.  .  .  . 
The  reports  which  were  probably  made  to  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  and  Earl  Grey  must  have  increased  their  desire 
to  have  the  matter  settled." 2 

On  the  military  side  of  the  proposed  rising  Place  is  some- 
what reticent.  Just  as  in  his  old  tradesman  days  he  had 
refused  as  a  breeches-maker  to  take  any  share  of  responsi- 
bility for  the  details  of  tailoring,  so  he  probably  now  left  all 

1  2/,793  043,  M4).  '2  27,793  (M4,  MS)- 


THE   SECOND   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

strictl}'  military  details  to  the  professional  officers  in  the 
movement.  Of  these  he  says :  "  Numbers  of  military  men 
of  all  ranks  and  many  naval  men,  all  men  of  experience, 
were  ready  to  undertake  to  organise  and  conduct  the  opera- 
tions of  the  people,"  l  and  added  in  a  note  written  in  his  old 
age :  "  When  in  the  month  of  May  an  insurrection  was  ex- 
pected, I  had  personal  communication  with  no  less  than 
thirteen  officers,  the  lowest  in  rank  of  whom  was  a  major, 
all  ready  to  serve  the  people  against  the  Tories,  should  the 
King  appoint  them  to  the  office  of  Ministers."  -  His  fellow- 
conspirator,  Joseph  Parkes,  was  less  cautious,  and  in  a  letter 
to  Mrs.  Grote  (June  1832)  says:  "I  and  two  friends  should 
have  made  the  revolution,  whatever  the  cost.  I  had  written 
to  General  Johnstone,3  and  had  got  a  cover  to  Colonel 
Xapier,  and  would  have  had  both  in  Birmingham,  and  a 
Count  Chopski,  a  Pole,  by  Monday;  and  I  think  we  could 
have  prevented  anarchy  and  set  all  right  in  two  days."4 
Of  these,  Count  "  Chopski "  was  Count  Czapski,  a  Polish 
officer,  who  had  been  prominently  put  forward  at  the 
great  Birmingham  meeting  on  May  7.  The  "  cover  to 
Colonel  Napier"  introduces  a  rather  complicated  story. 
The  officer  referred  to  was  Colonel  William  (afterwards 
Sir  William)  Napier,  the  historian  of  the  Peninsular  War. 
His  letters  at  the  time  show  that  he  was  quite  con- 
vinced that  there  would  be  a  fight,  and  equally  con- 
vinced that,  being  a  poor  man  with  a  large  family,  it  was 
not  his  duty  to  risk  anything  in  it.  ;'  I  am  not  disposed 
to  be  the  leader  of  the  enfants  perdu*"  he  wrote,  six 
months  before,  to  his  wife.  "  I  mean  to  go  with  the 
great  stream,  and  if  I  can  float,  it  will  do  for  me.  No 
dancing  on  breakers  until  I  have  a  good  safe  lifeboat  for 

1  27,793(142).  2  27,790(244). 

3  This  is  probably  General  William  Augustus  Johnson  of  the  Ceylon 
regiment,  M.P.  for  Boston,  1820-26,  and  for  Oldhain,  1837-47. 

4  27,794(164). 


THE   SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN         303 

you  and  the  babes."  :  The  "  cover "  to  him  was  a  letter 
from  Torn  Young,  ex-purser  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire's 
yacht,  whom  Lord  Melbourne,  then  Home  Secretary,  kept 
half  as  private  secretary,  half  as  a  sort  of  spy  on  the 
advanced  men.2  It  is  not  unlikely  that  Place  was  thinking 
of  him  when  he  made  his  calculation  that  the  proceedings 
of  the  deputies  would  be  reported  to  the  Government.  Per- 
haps, however,  on  this  occasion  Mr.  Young  did  not  intend, 
until  the  cat  had  jumped,  to  decide  whether  he  was  acting 
as  an  agent  provocateur  or  as  an  independent  patriot. 

His  letter  was  never  delivered;  but  Young  afterwards 
(June  25,  1832)  wrote  to  Napier,  saying  that  "The  display 
of  energy  and  a  readiness  to  act  on  the  part  of  the  people, 
when  the  Duke  of  Wellington  was  on  the  eve  of  coming 
in,  was  greater  far  than  I  expected.  .  .  .  Are  you  aware 
that,  in  the  event  of  a  fight,  you  were  to  be  invited  to 
take  the  command  of  Birmingham  ? "  He  then  mentions 
Parkes  and  Place,  and  asks  Napier  whether  he  would  have 
accepted  the  offer.  Napier  answered  cautiously,  ridiculing 
the  idea  that  he  would  have  "  co-operated  in  arms  with  a 
Birmingham  attorney  and  a  London  tailor  against  the 
Duke  of  Wellington." 3 

1  See  "Life  of  General  Sir  W.  Napier"  (London,  1864,  2  vols.),  vol  i. 

P-  373- 

-  "  Young  seldom  comes  to  me  but  for  some  purpose  connected  with 
the  Home  Office,  and  almost  always  when  they  are  in  a  dilemma.  He 
is  a  cleverish  sort  of  fellow,  with  a  vulgar  air  of  frankness  which  may 
at  times  put  people  off  their  guard,  but  he  is  not  at  all  the  right  sort 
of  man  to  be  private  secretary  and  spy  for  the  Home  Secretary.  .  .  . 
Any  man  who  would  natter  Tom's  vanity  by  leaving  him  to  suppose  he 
was  sucking  his  brains  would  assuredly  suck  Tom's."  (Note  by  Place 
in  Letter  Book,  dated  August  26,  1832.)  For  a  description  of  Tom 
Young  see  "Memoirs  of  Viscount  Melbourne,"  by  W.  M.  Torrens,  1878, 
vol.  i.  p.  368.  Place  seems  to  have  known  Melbourne  at  first  as  a 
customer.  Torrens  (I.e.  p.  188)  says  that  Place  was  forced  on  one 
occasion  to  serve  him  with  a  writ  ''  instructing  his  solicitor  at  the 
same  time  to  see  what  that  would  do,  but,  d — n  it,  nothing  further." 

3  The  correspondence  was  published  in  the  Freeman's  Journal, 
October  7  and  10,  1848.  See  also  "Life  of  Sir  W.  Napier"  (London, 
1864,  2  vols.),  vol.  ii.  pp.  274,  275. 


W-t        THE   SECOND   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

As  to  the  rest  of  the  thirteen  officers,  any  one  who  reads 
the  speech  of  Colonel  Leslie  Grove  Jones  at  the  Marylebone 
meeting  of  May  14  will  believe  that  he  was  one  of  them, 
and  Place  implies  that  Colonel  de  Lacy  Evans,  soon  to  be 
Radical  member  for  Westminster,  was  another.  The  rank 
and  file  would,  of  course,  have  been  mainly  drawn  from  the 
Political  Unions,  of  whom  in  the  preceding  autumn  Lord 
Grey  had  written,  "  Unarmed  as  a  body,  they  possess  arms 
as  individuals."  After  the  meeting  on  May  10,  a  deputa- 
tion waited  on  Attwood  to  offer  him  a  guard  of  "  1500  men 
armed  with  muskets,  &c."  The  yeomanry  in  many  places 
had  refused  to  serve  under  Tory  officers,  and  some  of  them 
had  resigned  without  returning  their  weapons.  The  Times 
of  May  22  says  that  swords  and  pike-heads  had  been 
manufactured  in  Sheffield.  Where  the  ammunition  was 
collected,  Colonel  Jones  may  have  known. 

What  was  even  more  important  was  that  Hobhouse,  by 
this  time  become  Sir  John  Cam  Hobhouse  and  Secretary 
of  War,  and  Lord  Durham,  who  was  Lord  Privy  Seal  and 
a  member  of  the  Cabinet,  seem  to  have  been  concerned  in 
the  military  preparations.  Parkes  wrote  to  Grote  on  May 
14,  and,  after  saying  that  "soldiers  are  enrolling  them- 
selves in  our  Union,"  goes  on,  "  I  stopped  with  Lord 
Durham  till  two  this  morning  alone,"1  and  Colonel  Jones 
told  the  huge  Marylebone  meeting  on  the  same  day  that, 
"  at  two  o'clock  this  morning  I  asked  the  Secretary  of  War 
whether  any  orders  had  been  given  for  troops  to  march 
upon  London,  and  he  said  No."  -  Place  gives  an  interest- 
ing, though  guarded,  account  of  his  conversations  with 
Hobhouse  at  this  point,  from  which  it  incidentally  appears 
that  Place  himself  believed  that  the  instalment  of  Reform 
offered  by  the  Bill  was  not  only  an  easier  thing  to  secure 
than  immediate  Universal  Suffrage,  but  under  all  the 
circumstances,  a  wiser  thing  to  desire.  "Hobhouse,"  he 

1    27,794  (10).  2   27,793  (202). 


THE    SECOND    REFORM    CAMPAIGN         305 

says,  "up  to  this  moment"  (Nov.  15)  "feared  that  the 
Duke  would  form  an  administration,  and  that  he  might 
succeed  in  establishing  himself  in  power  by  means  of  the 
army.  .  .  .  We  had  talked  this  matter  over  several  times, 
and  as  I  never  doubted  the  Duke  would  be  at  once  beaten, 
I  stated  my  view  of  the  whole  case  as  often  as  we  con- 
versed, and  showed  what  I  believed  would  be  the  process, 
step  by  step,  always  explaining  what  to  me  seemed  certain, 
namely,  that  the  defeat  of  the  Duke,  when  in  power,  might 
be  an  instant  destruction  of  the  Government  in  Church  and 
State,  and  the  formation  of  a  purely  representative  govern- 
ment— for  which  the  people  were  by  no  means  so  well 
fitted  as  they  ought  to  be,  and  it  was  most  desirable  they 
should  be,  before  any  such  change  were  made.  This 
revolution  was  therefore  undesirable,  not  only  on  account 
of  the  present  mischief  in  every  way  in  which  there 
could  be  mischief,  but  of  the  future  trouble  and  peril 
a  premature  revolution  could  not  fail  to  produce.  This 
made  it  the  more  necessary  that  anything  and  everything 
should  be  done  that  could  be  done  to  prevent  the  Duke's 
accession  to  power." l 

Not  much  in  the  way  of  an  organised  rising  was  in- 
tended or  desired  in  London.  The  part  assigned  to  Place 
and  his  friends  was  to  prevent  the  seven  thousand  troops 
near  London  being  used  to  crush  the  movement  in  the 
Midlands.  "  All  that  seemed  necessary  to  be  done  was  the 
making  such  various  demonstrations  as  would  cause  appre- 
hension to  the  rulers,  and,  for  the  safety  of  the  metropolis 
and  themselves,  compel  them  to  keep  the  soldiers  where 
they  were." 2 

Place,  with  his  grimly  practical  sense  of  what  a  revolu- 
tion meant,  did  not  think  that  any  elaborate  preparations, 
would  be  required  for  this  purpose.  "  The  vast  multitude 
of  people  who  would  be  deprived  of  employment,  and 
1  27,794  (87).  -  27,793  (MO- 


306        THE   SECOND   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

consequently  of  the  means  of  living,  would  not,  they 
could  not,  even  if  they  were  so  disposed,  remain  quiescent. 
Neither  would  those  concerned  in  trade,  and  especially  the 
small  traders,  when  forced,  as  they  would  instantaneously 
be,  to  discontinue  their  trading.  The  consequence  of  this 
stoppage  of  trading  in  the  face  of  a  starving  multitude  of 
unemployed  people  would  lead  to  various,  and  probably 
extensive,  outrages,  which  all  the  troops  collected  in  or 
near  London  could  not  prevent.  This  was  now  pretty 
generally  understood,  and  the  problem  which  remained 
to  be  solved  was  how  far  the  army  under  such  circum- 
stances could  be  depended  upon  by  the  Government." l 

But  Place  knew  how  difficult  it  was  to  keep  a  London 
crowd  in  hand,  and  opposed  with  all  the  arts  of  delay  a 
mass  meeting  on  Hampstead  Heath,  on  which  the  mem- 
bers of  the  National  Political  Union  had  set  their  hearts. 
"  Had  this  meeting  been  called,"  he  says,  "  more  than 
half  a  million  of  persons  would  have  attended.  People 
would  have  come  from  considerable  distances,  trade  in 
London  and  its  environs  would  have  been  suspended,  and 
as  no  arrangement  could  be  made  to  engage  the  attention 
of  all  present  to  the  same  subject  at  the  same  time,  ample 
scope  would  be  given  to  the  mischievously-disposed  to  hold 
separate  meetings  on  the  ground,  and  propose  and  carry 
their  own  resolutions.  This  was  known  to  many  of  us  as 
a  matter  determined  upon  by  several  leaders  of  working- 
men  who  did  not  concur  in  the  plan  and  proceedings  of  the 
National  Political  Union,  and  to  these  all  the  miscreants 
and  vagabonds  in  the  metropolis  would  have  clung." 2 

Instead  of  the  Hampstead  gathering,  a  meeting  of  the 
comparatively  respectable  parishes  of  Marylebone,  St.  Pan- 
eras,  and  Paddington  was  arranged  to  be  held  in  Regent's 
Park  on  May  1 1 .  At  this  meeting  Colonel  Jones  was 
apparently  ordered  to  be  as  seditious  as  possible.  If  so, 

1  27,793  (142).  2  27,793  (123,  124). 


THE   SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN         307 

the  Colonel  carried  out  his  orders  thoroughly.  "  He  had 
been,"  he  said,  "  at  the  head  of  some  of  the  most  desperate 
attacks  during  the  late  war,  and  he  now  declared  that  if  a 
necessity  arose  he  would  again  lead  on  his  countrymen  to 
glory  in  a  cause  which  he  should  be  more  pleased  with 
than  any  in  which  he  had  ever  before  been  engaged." l 

Meanwhile  an  attempt  was  made  to  organise  London  by 
the  only  existing  local  areas,  the  parishes.  The  first  de- 
liberate breach  of  the  law  by  the  National  Political  Union 
was  the  sending  of  Major  Revell,  apparently  one  of  the 
"  thirteen  officers,"  as  a  formally  appointed  deputy  to  take 
the  chair  at  a  meeting  of  the  branch  Union  of  Bethnal 
Green.2  Other  parish  meetings  are  described,  for  instance, 
at  St.  Andrew's,  Holborn,  in  the  "  inquest  room,"  with  the 
senior  churchwarden  in  the  chair.3  The  Lord  Mayor  and 
Sheriffs,  when  at  the  head  of  a  crowd  of  5000  men  they 
drove  down  to  St.  Stephen's  with  their  petition  on  May  8, 
probably  thought  that  they  were  leading  the  whole  metro- 
politan movement.  But  the  reports  of  the  meetings  of 
Common  Hall  seem  to  show  that  Place's  old  friend 
Alexander  Galloway,  who  had  not  forgotten  his  two  years' 
imprisonment  in  the  Corresponding  Society  days,  was 
directing  the  serious  work  in  the  City.  Mr.  Savage  at  the 
Marylebone  meeting  allowed  himself  a  significant  reference 
to  the  use  which  might  be  made  of  the  new  City  police. 

But  London,  though  not  for  the  moment  the  best  centre 
for  an  armed  rising,  was  the  centre  of  English  credit,  and 
therefore  the  necessary  point  for  that  financial  campaign 
from  which  Place  had  always  expected  most  success.  On 
Saturday,  May  1 2,  he  wrote :  "  In  the  afternoon  the  de- 
puties from  Birmingham,  other  deputies,  and  several  persons 
who  were  not  deputies,  came  to  my  house.  They  had  been 
in  various  parts  of  the  metropolis,  had  conversed  with 
many  people — merchants,  bankers,  traders,  and  members  of 
1  27,793  (203).  -  27,792  (256).  3  27,792  (255). 


308        THE   SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN 

Parliament.  All  whom  they  had  seen,  as  well  as  them- 
selves, were  greatly  excited  at  the  no  longer  doubted  intel- 
ligence that  the  King  had  ordered  the  Duke  of  Wellington 
to  form  an  administration.  They  observed  that  such  was 
the  dread  of  his  probable  conduct,  and  so  strong  the  desire 
to  prevent  him  doing  mischief,  that  already  his  protest  on 
the  second  reading  of  the  Bill  on  the  /th  May  was  reprinted, 
placarded,  and  distributed,  with  a  caution  to  the  people 
against  permitting  him  to  govern  them.  It  was  generally 
understood  that  the  Duke  would  endeavour,  and  would 
probably  succeed,  in  forming  an  administration  of  desperate 
men,  and  proceed  at  once  to  put  down  the  people  by  force, 
cost  whatever  it  might.  No  one  present,  however,  doubted 
that  the  people  would  put  down  the  Duke,  and  each  was 
ready  to  do  his  best  for  that  purpose.  It  was  quite  certain 
that  the  bulk  of  the  people  would  rise  en  tiuisse  at  the  call 
of  the  Unions,  and  the  deputies  now  in  London  and  other 
cities." 

"It  was  now  considered  necessary  that,  as  soon  as  it  was 
ascertained  that  the  Duke  had  formed  an  administration, 
all  the  deputies,  excepting  three  sent  by  the  three  principal 
places,  should  return  home  and  put  the  people  in  open 
opposition  to  the  government  of  the  Duke,  while  the  lead- 
ing reformers  in  London  should  themselves  remain  as  quiet 
as  circumstances  would  permit,  and  promote  two  material 
purposes :  ( i )  keeping  the  people  from  openly  meeting  the 
troops  in  battle,  supposing  the  soldiers  were  willing  to  fight 
them ;  (2)  to  take  care  to  have  such  demonstrations  made 
as  would  prevent  the  soldiers  being  sent  from  London,  if 
it  should  turn  out,  as  seemed  next  to  impossible,  that  the 
mass  of  the  people  did  not  make  these  demonstrations 
themselves." 

"  It  was  very  clearly  seen  that  if  a  much  more  open 
and  general  run  for  gold  upon  the  banks,  the  bankers,  and 
the  Bank  of  England  could  be  produced,  the  embarrass- 


THE   SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN         309 

merit  of  the  Court  and  the  Duke  would  be  increased,  and 
that  if  a  general  panic  could  be  produced,  the  Duke  would 
be  at  once  defeated.  To  this  purpose  the  attention  of  us 
all  was  turned,  and  many  propositions  were  made  to 
increase  the  demand  for  gold.  Several  suggestions  were 
made,  several  hints  were  adopted  and  agreed  to  be  put  in 
train ;  but  some  measure  which  would  operate  extensively, 
and  at  once,  was  still  desired,  and  this  put  us  into  a  per- 
plexity respecting  the  means  of  accomplishing  this  purpose. 
Among  the  persons  present  were  two  bankers,  and  although 
they  were  likely  to  be  inconvenienced  greatly,  and  perhaps 
to  be  considerable  losers,  they  entered  very  heartily  into 
the  business.  There  was  a  general  conviction  that  if  the 
Duke  succeeded  in  forming  an  administration,  that  cir- 
cumstance alone  would  produce  a  general  panic,  and  almost 
instantaneously  close  all  the  banks,  put  a  stop  to  the  circu- 
lation of  Bank  of  England  notes,  and  compel  the  Bank  to 
close  its  doors ;  and  thus  at  once  produce  a  revolution.  The 
question,  therefore,  among  us  was,  Can  we  adopt  means 
to  cause  such  a  run  upon  the  banks  as  may  either  intimi- 
date the  Duke,  and  induce  him  to  give  up  the  attempt  to 
form  an  administration  and  coerce  the  people,  or  prevent 
him  having  the  means  of  aggression  if  he  persists  in 
his  attempt  ?  It  was  thought  we  might  succeed  in  one, 
and  if  in  the  first,  prevent  the  second,  and  consequently 
the  revolution,  though  much  deplored,  was  no  longer 
feared.  While  the  discussion  was  going  on,  some  one 
said,  we  ought  to  have  a  placard  announcing  the  conse- 
quences of  permitting  the  Duke  to  form  an  administra- 
tion and  attempting  to  govern  the  country,  to  call  upon 
the  people  to  take  care  of  themselves  by  collecting  all  the 
hard  money  they  could,  and  keeping  it,  by  drawing  it  from 
Savings-Banks,  from  bankers,  and  from  the  Bank  of  Eng- 
land. This  was  caught  at,  and  Mr.  Parkes  set  himself  to 
work  to  draw  up  a  placard.  Among  the  words  he  wrote 


310        THE   SECOND   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

were  these, '  WE  MUST  STOP  THE  DUKE.'  These  words  struck 
me  as  containing  nearly  the  whole  that  was  necessary  to  be 
said.  I  therefore  took  a  large  sheet  of  paper  and  wrote 

thus — 

TO    STOP   THE 

DUKE, 

GO    FOR 

GOLD. 

"  I  held  up  the  paper,  and  all  at  once  said, '  That  will  do ; 
no  more  words  are  necessary.'  Money  was  put  upon  the 
table,  and  in  less  than  four  hours  bill-stickers  were  at  work 
posting  the  bills.  The  printer  undertook  to  work  all  night, 
and  to  despatch  at  four  o'clock  on  the  next  (Sunday)  morn- 
ing six  bill-stickers,  each  attended  by  a  trustworthy  person 
to  help  him,  and  see  that  all  the  bills  were  stuck  in  every 
part  of  London.  Other  persons  were  engaged  to  distribute 
them  in  public-houses  and  in  shops,  wherever  the  people 
would  engage  to  put  them  up,  to  send  them  to  the  environs 
of  London  by  the  carriers'  carts,  and  thus  cause  as  general 
as  possible  a  display  at  once.1  Parcels  were  sent  oft'  by  the 
evening  coaches,  and  by  the  morning  coaches  of  the  next 
day,  to  a  great  many  places  in  England  and  Scotland,  and 
with  some  of  these  parcels  a  note  was  also  sent,  requesting 
the  people  to  reprint  them  as  posting-bills  and  as  hand- 
bills."2 

On  Monday  (May  14)  the  Evening  Standard  accused 
Grote  of  having  originated  these  placards.  He  wrote  to 
the  papers  indignantly  denying  any  approval  of  the  move, 
and  privately  to  Place,  prophesying  that  it  would  set  all  the 
commercial  interest  against  reform.  A  few  hours  after- 
wards Place  replied :  "  Saturday  I  was  kept  in  town  by 

1  See  Morning  Post,  May  15,  1832,  "A  large  placard  posted  about  the 
town  yesterday  gave  the  following  pithy  advice, '  To  stop  the  Duke,  call 
for  gold.'" 

2  27,793(146-148). 


THE   SECOND   REFORM   CAMPAIGN         311 

people  calling  upon  me,  yesterday  the  same.  This  morn- 
ing my  library  was  thronged  like  a  fair,  so  many,  so  much 
loud  talking,  so  much  confused  noise,  that  even  my  head 
began  to  ache.  So  I  took  an  opportunity  and  started  off 
to  the  Marylebone  meeting  to  see  how  it  was  going  on.  I 
took  your  note  with  me,  thought  on  what  you  had  written, 
read  it  twice  over  as  I  went  along,  reasoned  with  myself  as 
for  you  and  against  you,  and  satisfied  myself,  because  I 
could  not  help  it,  that  I  could  if  I  had  time  show  good 
and  sufficient  cause  against  every  one  of  your  statements. 
I  only  fear  lest  the  demonstration  should  not  go  far 
enough." 

So  far  the  preparations  had  been  carried  on  in  daily  ex- 
pectation of  the  appointment  of  a  Wellington  administra- 
tion. But  expressions  of  anxiety  appeared  on  Monday 
(May  14)  in  the  Tory  papers,  and  on  Tuesday  the  King 
again  sent  for  Lord  Grey.  Place  first  heard  of  the  event 
from  Hobhouse,  and  at  once  wrote  again  to  Grote :  "  Here 
is  the  answer  to  your  note  of  yesterday.  Just  at  the  time 
when  the  Standard  published  your  letter  containing  your 
— what  ? — oh !  arguments  to  prove  that  '  Go  for  Gold '  was 
no  go  at  all,  in  came  a  great  man,  who  seeing  the  placard 
on  my  table  pointed  to  it  and  exclaimed,  '  That  is  the 
settler ;  that  has  finished  it.'  x  This  he  said  without  hesi- 
tation before  a  gentleman  whom  he  had  never  before  seen. 
When  the  gentleman  was  gone,  he  told  me  that  the  placard 
and  some  other  such  matters  had  worked  out  the  reforma- 
tion. Earl  Grey  was  gone  to  the  King.2  That  fears  of  a 

1  Note  by  Place  in  the  Letter  Book,  "  Sir  John  Hobhouse." 

2  See  John  Francis,  "History  of  the  Bank  of  England,"  vol.  ii.  p.  67. 
"  For  a  week  the  Corporation  sustained  a  run  upon  its  specie,  which 
was  reduced  to  ,£4,919,000.     In  one  day  ,£307,000  were  paid.     It  soon 
became  very  questionable  whether  the  run  for  gold  would  not  drain 
every  banker  in  the  kingdom,  and  the  writing  on  the  wall  spoke  to 
those  having  authority  with  a  power  far  exceeding  the  most  brilliant 
oratory.     Lord  Lyndhurst  found  it  impossible  to  form  a  ministry  ;  and 


J312        THE   SECOND   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

hitch  of  a  very  extraordinary  character  were  entertained.1 
That  if  it  or  any  other  extraordinary  matter  occurred  he 
would  call  again  in  the  evening.  It  is  now  1 1  P.M.,  and  as 
he  has  not  called  I  conclude  that  all  is  going  on  well." 

In  the  Lords  that  evening  Grey  made  a  guarded  state- 
ment that  he  had  "  had  a  communication  with  his  Majesty, 
which  has  as  yet  led  to  no  decided  consequences,"  and 
moved  the  adjournment  of  the  House  till  Thursday  (May 
17).  Baring,  in  the  Commons,  announced  on  behalf  of 
the  Tories  that  "the  communications  with  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  for  the  formation  of  a  new  ministry  are  entirely 
at  an  end." 

Wednesday  (May  16)  was  given  up  to  rejoicing,  but  in 
the  evening  came  rumours  of  another  difficulty.  On  Thurs- 
day morning  the  Times  announced  that  the  Queen  had 
within  the  last  few  hours  told  her  friends  ''  not  to  despair. 
The  King  will  do  without  the  Whigs,"  and  in  its  leading 
article  declared  that  "Arthur,  Duke  of  Wellington,  had  better 
look  to  consequences.  Oppressive  and  revolting  laws  must 
be  enforced  by  violence — there  is  no  other  method.  .  .  . 
That  is  to  be  our  prospect,  is  it  ?  If  so,  may  the  hand  of 
every  free  Englishman  perish  from  his  body,  if  he  do  not 

Karl  Grey  was  recalled."  Francis  also  says  (p.  68)  that  ,£1,500,000 
was  paid  in  a  few  days.  See  also  the  evidence  of  Horsley  Palmer, 
Jones  Lloyd,  Richards,  and  Ward  before  the  Select  Committee  on  the 
Charter  of  the  Bank  of  England,  1831-32. 

1  Note  by  Place  in  the  Letter  Book  :  "  A  project  of  the  Queen's  which 
the  King  countenanced — to  depart,  he  and  she  clandestinely  for  Han- 
over"— Place  expands  this  (27,794  /.  88)  :  "He  [Hobhouse,  the  name 
being  here  erased]  very  seriously  assured  me  that  some  steps  had  been 
taken  with  a  view  to  the  departure  of  the  King  and  Queen,  when  their 
intention  became  known  and  was  consequently  frustrated.  It  was  not 
likely  such  a  plot  could  succeed,  but  if  it  had  the  whole  Government 
would  have  been  dissolved  in  an  instant,  and  a  war  with  the  powers  on 
the  Continent  would  probably  have  been  the  consequence.  England 
and  France  must  have  made  common  cause,  and  they  would  have  had 
to  fight  against  Austria,  Prussia,  and  Russia,  and  great  indeed  would 
have  been  the  calamities  of  such  a  war." 


THE    SECOND    REFORM    CAMPAIGN         313 

himself  and  his  children  and  his  country  right  upon  the 
head  of  the  murderer."  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  King  was 
still  unwilling  to  give  a  specific  pledge  to  make  Peers.  But 
he  had  written,  through  Sir  Herbert  Taylor,  to  each  one  of 
the  Tory  Peers  individually,  suggesting  that  "  All  difficulties 
in  the  arrangement  in  progress  will  be  obviated  by  a  de- 
claration in  the  House  to-night,  from  a  sufficient  number 
of  Peers,  that  in  consequence  of  the  present  state  of  affairs 
they  have  come  to  the  resolution  of  dropping  their  further 
opposition  to  the  Reform  Bill." l 

Grey  accepted  office  on  the  understanding  that  such  a 
declaration  would  be  made.  When  the  Houses  reassembled 
on  Thursday,  however,  Wellington  delivered  a  long  and 
angry  speech  without  making  any  declaration  of  the  kind. 
Grey,  therefore,  would  only  say  that  nothing  wTas  settled, 
and  add,  "  Unless  I  can  be  assured  of  the  ability  of  carrying 
the  Bill  fully  and  efficiently  through  this  House,  I  shall  not 
again  return  to  office."  2  Writing  that  night,  through  Sir 
H.  Taylor  to  the  King,  Grey  says  :  "  As  the  Peers  were 
leaving  the  House,  Lord  Strangford  said  to  somebody  near 
him, '  You  see  Sir  H.  Taylor's  famous  letter  did  no  good.'  " 3 


1  "Annual  Register,"  1832,  p.  187. 

2  Hansard,  May  17,  1832. 

3  "  Correspondence  of  Earl  Grey  with  King  William  IV,"  vol.  ii.  p.  424. 
In  the  "Correspondence  of  the  Princess  Lieven  and  Earl  Grey"  (London, 
1890,  3  vols.),  vol.  ii.  pp.  352,  353,  Grey  writes  on  May  18  :    "When 
I  went  to  the  House,  I  had,  in  consequence  of  communications  which  I 
had  had  from  St.  James's  in  the  morning,  every  reason  to  believe  that 
the  Duke  of  Wellington  and  others  would  have  declared  that  they 
abandoned  all  further  opposition  to  the  Bill,  .  .  .  and  in  that  case  I 
had  the  King's  authority  to  declare  that  I  continued  in  his  service. 
Instead  of  such  a  declaration,  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  in  giving  what 
he  called  an  explanation  of  his  conduct,  made  a  most  violent  attack  on 
me,  but  said  nothing  on  which  I  could  rely  with  respect  to  his  future 
conduct.  ...  It  was  impossible  for  me,  in  the  circumstances  in  which 
I  then  stood,  to  make  the  declaration  which  I  had  contemplated,  and  I 
could  only  say  that  nothing  was  yet  definitely  settled.     And  such  is  the 
fact.    The  Cabinet  meets  at  twelve  to  consider  what  step  we  should  now 


3U        THE   SECOND   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

The  Council  of  the  National  Political  Union  met  as  usual 
in  the  evening.  Place  and  others  knew  what  had  happened 
in  the  Lords,  but  in  accordance  with  the  policy  of  keeping 
London  in  hand  as  long  as  possible,  it  was  decided  to  go 
on  quietly  with  the  routine  business  of  the  Union,  lest  any 
mention  of  what  had  passed  in  the  Lords  should  produce 
a  riot.1 

Next  day,  Friday  (May  18),  eleven  days  since  the 
division  in  the  Lords,  and  nine  days  since  the  acceptance 
of  Grey's  resignation,  came  the  final  crisis.  The  Morning 
Chronicle  announced,  "We  can  only  construe  the  debate 
of  last  night  into  an  open  declaration  of  war  by  the 
Tory  Lords  against  the  people  of  England.  .  .  .  The 
situation  of  the  country  is  truly  alarming.  Lord  Grey 
is  only  minister  ad  interim.  The  nation  has,  in  fact, 
been  ten  days  without  any  Government.  The  people  are 
wrought  up  to  the  highest  point  of  political  excitement; 
they  are  only  restrained  by  the  personal  and  moral  in- 
fluence of  the  men  of  intelligence  and  property  who  lead 
them,  and  who,  knowing  that  they  may  be  able  to  pull 
down  and  not  to  reconstruct,  have  hitherto  restrained 
any  outbreak  of  popular  power.  But  our  accounts  from 
the  country  confirm  us  in  the  opinion  that  some  explosion 
will  speedily  take  place  unless  instant  means  are  adopted 
— we  say  instant  means,  because  we  think  that  the  post  of 
this  evening  ought  to  take  out  tJuit  decision  which  can  alone 
restore  loyalty,  peace,  and  order.  We  are  otherwise  on  the 
eve  of  the  '  barricades.' " 

Place  received  the  Times  and  the  Chronicle  at  7  A.M.2 
"  Several  persons,"  he  says,  "  came  to  me  before  eight 
o'clock  in  the  morning,  each  filled  with  apprehension, 

take  ;  hut  the  matter  must  be  settled  to-day  one  way  or  the  other. 
These  men  are  mad,  and  I  wish  they  may  not  be  found  to  have  pushed 
things  to  an  extreme  which  may  produce  irreparable  mischief." 
1  27,794(260).  2  27,794(271). 


THE    SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN         315 

each  having  his  own  version  of  what  had  happened. 
All,  however,  had  come  to  the  same  conclusion — resist- 
ance to  the  Duke  at  any  cost,  and  in  every  possible  way. 
Others  came  in,  and  at  about  half-past  eight  a  gentleman 
came  with  a  message  from  Sir  John  Hobhouse.  He  said 
there  was  to  be  a  meeting1  in  Downing  Street  at  noon, 
and  Sir  John  wished  me  to  write  a  letter  to  him,  telling 
him  all  the  facts  I  could,  and  giving  him  my  opinion  of 
the  state  of  feeling  among  the  people,  as  far  as  I  could, 
and  my  view  of  prospective  results.  I  therefore,  as  soon 
as  I  could  dismiss  the  persons  who  were  with  me,  and 
shut  others  out  for  a  time,  wrote  as  rapidly  as  I  could 
the  following  letter: — 'May  1 8,  1832.  9  A.M.  Dear  Sir 
John, — The  moment  it  was  known  that  Earl  Grey  had 
been  sent  for,  the  demand  for  gold  ceased.  No  more 
placards  were  posted,  and  all  seemed  to  be  going  on 
well  at  once.  Proof  positive  this  of  the  cool  courage 
and  admirable  discipline  of  the  people.  We  cannot,  how- 
ever, go  on  thus  beyond  to-day.  If  doubt  remain  until 
to-morrow,  alarm  will  commence  again,  and  panic  will 
follow.  No  effort  to  stop  the  Duke  by  going  for  gold 
was  made  beyond  a  mere  demonstration,  and  you  saw 
the  consequences.  What  can  be  done  in  this  way  has 
now  been  clearly  ascertained,  and  if  new  efforts  must  be 
made,  they  will  not  be  made  in  vain. 

"'Lists  containing  the  names,  addresses,  &c.,  of  all  persons 
in  every  part  of  the  country  likely  to  be  useful  have  been 
made,  the  name  of  every  man  who  has  at  any  public 
meeting  shown  himself  friendly  to  reform  has  been 
registered.  Addresses  and  proclamations  to  the  people 
have  been  sketched,  and  printed  copies  will,  if  need  be, 
be  sent  to  every  such  person  all  over  the  kingdom. 
Means  have  been  devised  to  placard  towns  and  villages, 
to  circulate  hand-bills,  and  to  assemble  the  people.  So  many 
1  Of  the  Cabinet.  See  Lord  Grey's  letter,  p.  313  (foot-note). 


316        THE   SECOND    REFORM    CAMPAIGN 

men  of  known  character,  civil  and  m,ilit<iry,  have  entered 
heartily  into  the  scheme,  that  their  names  when  published 
will  produce  great  effect  in  every  desirable  way.  If  the 
Duke  come  into  power  now,  we  shall  be  unable  longer  to 
"  hold  to  the  laws " ;  break  them  we  must,  be  the  conse- 
quences whatever  they  may ;  and  we  know  that  all  must 
join  with  us  to  save  their  property,  no  matter  what  may 
be  their  private  opinions.  Towns  will  be  barricaded,  new 
municipal  arrangements  will  be  made  by  the  inhabitants, 
and  the  first  town  which  is  barricaded  shuts  up  all  the 
banks.  <:  Go  for  Gold,"  it  is  said,  will  produce  dreadful 
evils.  We  know  it  will,  but  it  will  prevent  other  evils 
being  added  to  them.  It  will  stop  the  Duke.  Let  the  Duke 
take  office  as  Premier,  and  we  shall  have  a  commotion  in 
the  nature  of  a  civil  war,  with  money  at  our  command.  If 
we  obtain  the  money,  he  cannot  get  it.  If  it  be  but  once 
dispersed,  he  cannot  collect  it.  If  we  have  money  we  shall 
have  the  power  to  feed  and  lead  the  people,  and  in  less 
than  five  days  we  shall  have  the  soldiers  with  us.  .  .  .'" l 

It  is  safe  to  assert  that  no  such  letter  was  ever  before 
written  by  the  organiser  of  a  rising  to  a  War  Minister,  for 
the  purpose  of  its  being  laid  before  the  Executive  Govern- 
ment. But  Place  may  have  felt,  with  the  instinct  born  of 
long  experience  in  the  management  of  men,  that  since 
everything  now  turned  on  the  decision  of  Ministers,  the 
greatest  value  of  the  plot  was  that  it  could  be  used  to 
influence  their  minds,  and  may  have  calculated  that  if 
Ministers  did  again  resign  on  that  day,  it  was  not  likely 
that  their  last  act  would  be  to  order  his  arrest. 

"  At  twelve  o'clock  Mr.  Hume  came.  He  said  it  was  ap- 
prehended the  Duke  would  be  put  into  office  to  do  as  he 
pleased,  or  as  he  could.  That  when  the  House  of  Commons 
adjourned  on  the  preceding  evening  an  arrangement  was 
made  for  a  meeting  at  the  Treasury  on  the  next  morning 
1  27,794  (278,  279). 


THE    SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN         317 

(this  day)  at  one  o'clock,  if  nothing  was  done  before  ten 
o'clock  in  the  morning,  when  Mr.  Edward  Ellice  (Secretary 
to  the  Treasury)  was  to  send  notices.  He  had  received  a 
notice,  and  was  now  going  to  the  meeting.  I  read  the 
draft  of  the  letter  to  Sir  John  Hobhouse,  and  we  talked  over 
arrangements  of  several  kinds.  He  was,  he  said,  disposed 
to  whatever  might  be  found  necessary,  either  within  the 
House  or  without  it,  and  so  were  other  members.  Several 
gentlemen,  some  of  them  deputies  from  the  country,  and 
some  military  men,  were  with  me."  l 

At  the  Cabinet  it  was  decided  still  to  insist  on  power  to 
create  Peers.  Grey  and  Brougham  went  over  to  St.  James's 
Palace  to  communicate  that  decision.  In  their  absence  the 
Cabinet  continued  sitting,  and  sat,  indeed,  according  to 
Greville,  "  almost  all  day." 

"  At  three  o'clock  Mr.  Hume  came  again.  There  were 
then  about  a  dozen  gentlemen  present,  including  two  mili- 
tary men  high  in  rank.  Mr.  Hume  was  greatly  agitated. 
He  said  all  was  going  wrong,  and  that  the  people  must 
look  to  themselves,  as  he  had  no  doubt  that  the  House  of 
Commons  would  look  to  themselves  and  to  the  people,  and 
would  do  their  duty  to  both.  He  told  me  apart  that  Sir 
John  Hobhouse  had  requested  him  to  call  upon  me  and 
tell  me  what  he  had  told  us  all.  Sir  John  said  he  would 
call  himself,  if  it  were  possible,  in  the  evening. 

"  I  was  confined  to  the  house  by  the  great  number  of 
persons  who  called  upon  me.  They  came  from  various 
parts  of  the  metropolis,  and  were  persons  in  various  condi- 
tions of  life.  What  each  related  respecting  the  anxious 
state  of  the  public  and  their  determination,  was  in  unison, 
and  might  therefore  be  fairly  considered  the  opinion  of  the 
people  of  London.  .  .  .  There  were  numerous  meetings  in 
many  parts  of  London,  and  it  was  determined  that  in  the 
event  of  the  Duke's  appointment  being  avowed  in  the 
1  27,794  (280,  281). 


318        THE   SECOND   REFORM   CAMPAIGN 

Houses  of  Parliament,  as  it  was  expected  it  would  be,  that 
all  the  deputies  and  others  who  were  up  in  London  on  the 
business  of  reform  should  go  home  by  the  speediest  con- 
veyances, call  public  meetings,  appoint  deputies  to  form  a 
congress  to  meet  at  some  proper  place,  to  push  the  demand 
in  every  possible  way,  and  to  use  every  other  means  to 
embarrass  and  defeat  the  Duke. 

"  Birmingham  was  to  take  the  lead,  which  it  was  pre- 
pared to  do.  The  town  was  to  be  barricaded  at  once, 
and  other  towns  were  to  follow  the  example.  There  was 
a  very  complete  arrangement  for  procuring  information  of 
what  was  going  on  at  Weedon  Barracks,  and  there  was  a 
probability  that  the  soldiers  in  these  barracks  would  refuse 
to  act  against  the  people ;  and  it  was  concluded  that  in 
such  an  event,  few  or  none  of  the  soldiers  in  other  places 
would  obey  orders  when  it  was  seen  that  the  people  were 
able  and  willing  to  protect  them.  It  was  intended  to  seize 
as  many  of  the  families  of  the  Tory  Lords  as  possible,  to 
carry  them  into  the  towns,  and  there  to  hold  them  as 
hostages  for  the  conduct  of  the  Duke  towards  the  re- 
formers. .  .  .  No  proceedings  beyond  those  of  causing  a 
general  demand  for  gold  were  to  be  taken  in  the  first 
instance.  It  was  to  be  kept  as  quiet  as  possible.  It  was 
quite  certain  that  if  the  Bank  closed  its  doors,  and  the 
supply  of  the  markets  ceased,  a  general  tumult  would 
immediately  take  place  which  no  power  the  Government 
possessed  could  put  down,  nor  could  it  continue  in  exist- 
ence many  days.  Meetings  would  be  called,  and  the 
necessary  arrangements  made  to  supply  the  metropolis 
with  food.  The  army  as  well  as  every  other  department 
of  military  force  would  fall  from  the  hands  of  the  Govern- 
ment. 

"  An  old  Guardsman,  a  general  officer,  told  me  that  he 
had  seen  his  friend  Lord  Melbourne  at  the  Home  Office, 
and  had  told  him  the  Duke  could  do  nothing  with  the 


THE    SECOND   REFORM   CAMPAIGN         319 

army,  since  he  dared  not  move  any  part  of  it  away  from 
the  metropolis,  and  that  he  could  not  use  it  with  any 
effect  in  London;  and  that  if  he  really  understood  the 
situation  he  would  be  placed  in,  he  would  never  for  a 
moment  think  of  carrying  on  the  Government  by  force." : 

"  In  this  fearful  state,  this  unparalleled  situation,  were 
the  King  and  people  placed ;  and  the  moment  had  arrived 
when  the  decision  of  one  man,  and  he  one  of  the  silliest, 
was  compelled  to  choose  between  a  course  which  would, 
at  least  for  some  years,  give  peace  to  the  nation,  though  it 
might,  and  probably  would,  tend  to  a  gradual  change  of 
the  whole  political  institutions  of  the  nation,  and  that 
which  even  to  him  it  must  have  become  all  but  certain, 
would  at  once  put  in  jeopardy,  if  not  indeed  destroy,  not 
only  those  institutions,  but  the  aristocracy  with  them.  Yet 
he  could  not  think,  as  a  wiser  man  would  have  thought 
calmly.  He  was  not  one  of  those  men  to  whom  deep 
thinking  was  familiar.  Thinking  at  all  on  so  large  a  sub- 
ject must  to  him  have  been  most  painful,  and  he  had  those 
about  him  eager  enough  to  save  him  from  any  effort  of 
the  kind  by  their  ill-considered  suggestions.  Decide,  how- 
ever, he  must.  He  dared  not  let  the  two  Houses  of  Parlia- 
ment assemble  before  his  determination  was  taken,  and  a 
circumstance  to  be  related  presently  caused  him  to  decide 
in  the  right  way.  Truly  were  we  in  a  lamentable  situation 
when  so  much  for  good  or  evil  depended  on  such  a  man  as 
William  the  Fourth,  King  of  England. 

"  The  crisis  was  come ;  both  Houses  of  Parliament  were 
filled  with  members,  and  with  as  many  strangers  as  could 
obtain  admission.  An  immense  concourse  of  people  was 
assembled  outside  the  Houses,  and  everybody  waited  the 
expected  announcements  with  the  utmost  anxiety.  It  was 
fearfully  apprehended  that  the  Duke  would  be  appointed ; 
nil  confidence  in  the  patriotism  of  the  King  had  subsided, 
1  27,794  (281-283). 


320        THE   SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN 

and  the  worst  consequences  were  anticipated.  The  deputies 
from  the  towns  in  various  parts  of  the  kingdom  had  made 
preparations  for  their  departure,  and  the  evening  papers 
had  their  forms  standing  ready  to  insert  the  announce- 
ments in  the  Houses  of  Parliament  in  second  editions,  to 
be  forwarded  by  the  mails  and  coaches  to  every  part  of  the 
United  Kingdom.  In  a  state  of  indescribable  apprehension 
and  terror,  Earl  Grey  in  the  Lords,  and  Lord  Althorp  in 
the  Commons,  announced  the  exhilarating  fact  that  Minis- 
ters, having  secured  the  means  to  pass  the  Reform  Bills 
without  mutilation,  would  continue  in  office. 

"  At  half-past  five  o'clock,  while  sitting  with  some  gentle- 
men waiting  to  receive  the  news  that  they  might  determine 
on  the  course  it  would  be  advisable  to  take,  Mr.  Howard,  a 
gentleman  who  had  gone  to  the  House  of  Commons  for 
the  purpose  of  hearing  the  communication  expected  to  be 
made,  came  in  in  breathless  haste,  and  said  he  had  just 
heard  Lord  Althorp  make  the  declaration  of  his  con- 
tinuance in  office,  with  full  powers  to  carry  the  Bills. 
Mr.  Howard  was  scarcely  gone  when,  in  a  state  of  high 
enthusiasm,  Sir  John  Hobhouse  came  and  confirmed  the 
information  Mr.  Howard  had  given  us.  'An  immense 
load  had,'  he  said,  been  removed  from  the  minds  of  all, 
and  pleasant  sensations  would  now  take  the  place  of  the 
all  but  too  well  grounded  apprehensions  of  most  extensive 
evils,  whatever  good  might  ultimately  be  obtained,  and 
that  the  people  might  honestly  gratify  themselves  with 
their  own  manly,  steady,  courageous  conduct,  which  had 
compelled  the  unwilling  decision  in  their  favour.  Sir  John 
stayed  but  a  few  minutes.  Like  every  one  else,  he  was 
eager  to  spread  the  good  news  as  far  and  as  wide  as  he 
was  able. 

"On  the  next  morning  I  was  informed  that  the  King 
determined  to  appoint  Earl  Grey  in  consequence  of  the 
following  circumstance :  At  about  two  o'clock  a  gentleman 


THE    SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN         ,'321 

came  to  Earl  Grey  privately.  He  was  commissioned  by 
the  Bank  directors  to  inform  him  that  if  nothing  was 
settled  in  time  to  be  forwarded  to  the  country  by  the 
mails,  they  apprehended  that  the  depositors  in  Savings- 
Banks  would  generally  give  notice  to  withdraw  their  de- 
posits, and  convert  the  amount  into  cash.  That  this  being 
known,  other  persons  would  also  demand  gold  for  paper, 
and  that  the  run  upon  all  the  banks  would,  in  a  few  days, 
compel  them  to  close  their  doors.  That  Earl  Grey  re- 
quested this  gentleman  to  proceed  to  the  Duke  of  Welling- 
ton and  make  the  communication  to  him.  He  did  so,  and 
the  Duke  having  immediately  made  a  similar  communica- 
tion to  the  King,  Earl  Grey  was  restored  to  office  with  the 
power  he  desired.  This  information  was  given  me  by  a 
confidential  person  of  a  Cabinet  Minister,  with  an  injunc- 
tion by  him  that  I  was  not  to  use  his  name." l 

On  Sunday  morning,  May  20,  Place  sat  down  and 
wrote  his  reflections  on  the  "memorable  eleven  days." 
"  Here  let  us  hope  the  turmoil  will  end.  We  were  within 
a  moment  of  general  rebellion,  and  had  it  been  possible  for 
the  Duke  of  Wellington  to  have  formed  an  administration, 
the  King  and  the  people  would  have  been  at  issue.  It 
would  have  been  soon  decided,  but  the  mischief  to  pro- 
perty, especially  to  the  great  landowners  and  fund-holders, 
and  personally  to  immense  numbers,  would  have  been 
terrible  indeed.  Yet  upon  the  coolest  calculation  it  would 
have  been  by  far  less  terrible  than  that  which  must  have 
resulted  from  a  submission  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and 
the  army. 

"  I  always  doubted  the  courage  of  the  people,  as  well  as 
the  judgment  to  do,  at  the  right  time,  the  thing  which 
might  be  most  requisite  to  produce  the  greatest  amount  of 
good  on  any  great  emergency.  There  had,  however,  been 
no  means  at  any  time  of  judging  correctly  on  this  subject, 
1  27,794(286-288). 


THE   SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN 

the  people  never  in  any  case  having  acted  for  themselves, 
but  always  as  the  tools  of  some  party  for  party  purposes, 
even  when  national  good  was  the  result  of  this  use  which 
was  made  of  them.  This  was  indeed  the  first  time  they 
ever  combined  of  their  own  free-will  for  a  really  national 
purpose,  and  this  it  is  which  marks  the  era  as  of  more 
importance  than  any  former  proceeding — which  makes  its 
prospective  of  still  greater  importance  as  the  first  of  an 
inevitable  series,  which  from  time  to  time  will  increase  the 
power  of  the  people  and  lessen  that  of  the  Government, 
until  it  has  either  totally  destroyed  it  by  a  violent  ebullition 
or  quietly  absorbed  it. 

"  Thanks  to  the  King  and  his  stultified  advisers.  Thanks 
to  the  Duke  of  Wellington  for  his  blind  courage.  Thanks 
to  the  Tory  Lords  for  their  ignorance  of  the  people,  since  it 
is  to  these  things  we  owe  the  demonstration  and  communi- 
cation all  over  the  country  of  the  knowledge  and  power  of 
the  people,  and  the  assurance  it  has  given  to  all  that  these 
important  particulars  were  about  equally  shared  by  them 
in  every  part  of  Great  Britain,  the  thorough  conviction 
they  have  now  obtained  of  the  moral  power  to  control 
the  Government,  and  the  confidence  that  conviction  will 
give  to  them  when  the  reformed  House  of  Commons  at 
no  great  distance  of  time  shall,  as  it  must,  prove  how 
inadequate  will  be  the  Reform  Bill  to  satisfy  the  expecta- 
tions of  the  people.  Even  a  year  ago  the  people  as  a 
body  may  be  said  to  have  been  essentially  loyal,  desirous 
to  support  the  Government  of  the  King,  the  Bishops,  the 
other  Lords,  and  the  Commons.  .  .  .  Much  of  this  absurd 
loyalty  has  now  been  destroyed,  and  can  never  again  exist. 
The  demonstrations  made  by  the  King  and  Lords  have 
shaken  those  absurd  notions,  and  compelled  the  people 
to  progress  towards  entertaining  republican  opinions  to 
an  extent  which  no  one  had  anticipated. 

"  So  great  a  change  in  so  short  a  period,  which,  from  its 


THE   SECOND   REFORM    CAMPAIGN         323 

very  nature,  must  be  permanent,  never  was  so  generally 
and  so  effectually  manifested  by  any  people.  Kings  and 
Lords  will  of  themselves,  if  permitted,  in  time  go  quietly 
out  of  existence,  and  as  it  may  be  hoped,  at  least  in  this 
country,  representative  government  will  be  established 
without  tumults  or  any  extensive  convulsion. 

"  The  only  apprehension  which  can  reasonably  be  enter- 
tained of  any  considerable  disturbance,  is  want  of  patience 
of  the  people.  If  they  be  not  too  much  in  a  hurry,  repre- 
sentative government  will  be  produced  exactly  at  the  time 
wrhen  it  can  best  be  maintained,  and  that  will  be  when  the 
people  have  been  prepared  to  carry  it  on  with  the  least 
possible  difficulty,  and  the  consequent  certainty  of  reaping 
all  its  advantages. 

"  Had  I  taken  notes  of  such  matters  as  have  come  to 
my  knowledge  during  the  last  eighteen  months,  had  I 
noticed  the  many  persons  whom  the  agitation  brought  me 
acquainted  with,  the  multitude  of  things  within  and  with- 
out doors  in  which  I  have  been  engaged  with  other  men, 
the  relation  would  have  been  at  least  somewhat  curious 
and  extraordinary,  but  to  have  made  notes  would  have 
been  unfair  towards  others.  Much  of  what  was  said  and 
done  was  necessarily  confidential,  and  notes  might  have 
fallen  into  [other]  hands  in  the  event  of  ulterior  proceed- 
ings, and  done  great  mischief.  The  anticipation  of  such  a 
probability  determined  me  to  make  no  memorandum,  to 
record  no  names,  to  write  nothing  which  could  be  avoided 
which  might  in  any  way,  under  any  circumstances,  be  at 
all  likely  to  commit  anybody,  and  to  burn  all  notes  and 
letters  which  came  to  me  which  were  likely  to  be  in  the 
most  trifling  matter  obnoxious,  if  seized,  to  the  writers — 
that  to  Sir  John  Hobhouse  on  the  i8th  of  May  alone 
excepted,  and  this  would  have  been  destroyed  in  the  even- 
ing but  for  Lord  Grey's  restoration  to  office."  l 
1  27,795  (27-30). 


CHAPTER  XII 


WOULD  Lord  Grey  and  his  Cabinet.follow  up  their  victory  ? 
Place  at  first  thought  that  some  of  them  might  be  induced 
to  try.  On  June  2,  1832,  a  fortnight  after  the  collapse  of 
the  opposition  to  the  Reform  Bill,  Hobhouse  called  and 
asked  Place  what  he  thought  of  "our  prospects."  Place 
replied  at  length,  and  Hobhouse  urged  him  to  put  his 
reply  in  writing.  Place  begins  his  long  letter  by  dwelling 
on  the  present  opportunity  of  carrying  in  peace  changes 
which,  if  delayed,  might  come  through  civil  war,  and  then 
advises  that  the  Radical  section  of  the  Cabinet  should  put 
forward  an  advanced  policy,  and  if  it  were  not  accepted, 
strengthen  their  position  in  the  country  by  resigning.1  If, 
however,  he  had  any  real  hope  that  Hobhouse  and  Durham  '2 

1  "  What,  then,  should  Ministers  do  ?  The  answer  is  short,  and,  as  it 
appears  to  me,  clear.  Such  of  them  as  may  be  well  disposed  to  do  their 
duty  to  the  people  must,  when  the  Bills  are  passed,  resign.  They  who 
are  willing  to  take  upon  themselves  the  responsibility  of  proposing  such 
reforms  in  Church  and  State  as  must  be  proposed  by  somebody,  such  as 
if  not  granted  will  be  extorted,  must  resolve  to  have  their  own  way,  or 
not  to  serve  as  Ministers.  They  among  them  who  are  able  to  appreciate 
the  age,  and  are  disposed  to  march  with  its  improvements,  will  refuse  to 
hold  office  unless  the  King  submits  himself  in  all  matters  of  State  policy 
to  their  guidance."  (Place  to  Hobhouse,  June  2,  1832.) 

*  Place  seems  to  have  kept  up  communication  with  Lord  Durham,  at 
any  rate,  for  some  days  after  the  memorable  1 8th  of  May.  There  was  a 
rumour,  for  instance,  even  after  Lord  Grey's  return  to  office,  that  the 
Government  would  accept  amendments  in  Committee  of  the  Lords 
abolishing  some  of  the  new  Metropolitan  seats.  Place  hastily  got 
together  the  materials  for  a  long  statistical  speech,  which  was  delivered 
by  Lord  Durham  on  May  22.  The  speech  was  successful,  and  Lord 

324 


THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT  325 

would  take  his  advice,  it  must  soon  have  disappeared.  They 
had  been  willing  to  carry  a  moderate  Bill  by  force,  but  they 
were  in  no  hurry  to  bring  on  a  complete  democracy. 

Having  failed-  to  induce  Ministers  to  resign,  Place 
attempted  the  almost  equally  impossible  task  of  forcing 
an  amendment  of  the  Reform  Bill  through  the  weary  and 
demoralised  House  of  Commons.  The  Bill,  when  reintro- 
duced  in  December  1831,  contained  a  new  clause,  excluding 
from  the  register  any  one  who  had  not  paid  his  rates  and 
annual  taxes  by  July  20  in  each  year.  Place  persuaded 
Warburton  in  February  to  oppose  this  clause  in  Com- 
mittee, but  neither  he  nor  Warburton  could  induce  any 
other  member  to  take  the  point  seriously.  In  an  atmos- 
phere so  unreal  as  that  of  the  House  of  Commons  it 
was  easy  for  men  to  convince  themselves  that  all  their 
constituents  would  hasten  to  avoid  disfranchisement  by 
paying  their  rates  as  soon  as  possible.  Place,  however, 
after  July  20  went  round  the  various  parishes  in  West- 
minster, and  discovered  that  very  few  of  the  ratepayers 
had  actually  qualified  themselves.  The  state  of  things 
which  he  discovered  was  startling.  Burdett  and  Hob- 
house  refused  to  attempt  to  understand  the  question,  but 
Colonel  Evans  armed  himself  with  Place's  figures,  and 
brought  about  four  debates  on  the  subject  in  the  last  week 
of  the  session.  Meanwhile  Place  collected  facts,  inter- 
viewed members,  wrote  letters  and  newspaper  articles,  and 
organised  petitions.  He  was  so  far  successful  that  Lord 
Althorp  suggested  that  the  strict  terms  of  the  Act  could 
be  evaded  by  the  registration  authorities,  and  the  officials 
were  glad  to  take  the  hint.  For  years  afterwards  Place 

Durham  declared,  somewliat  prematurely,  that  "the  days  of  flowery 
oratory  were  gone  for  ever,"  and  that  the  future  belonged  to  him  "  who 
would  take  the  trouble  to  collect  facts,  and  had  the  capacity  to  draw 
correct  inferences."  27,795  0 1Q-  The  speech  itself  was  printed,  and  is 
inserted  27,795  (124-134). 


326  THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

complained  that  the  effect  had  been  to  enable  the  over- 
seers to  put  on  or  keep  off  almost  any  one  they  wished. 

His  tone  was  more  hopeful  when  he  was  urging  the 
Radicals  outside  Parliament  not  to  rest  after  their 
victory.  In  July  1832  he  wrote  to  Lawrence  Pitkeithly, 
the  leader  of  the  Huddersfield  working-men :  "  We  wanted 
the  Reform  Bills l  and  a  new  Parliament  under  the  Bills. 
These  we  shall  soon  have,  and  then  let  whoever  may  be 
Ministers,  we  must  do  our  duty  to  ourselves  manfully 
and  continually.  We  must  have  petitions  in  hundreds 
for  short  Parliaments  and  voting  by  ballot  as  means  of 
procuring  reforms  in  every  possible  way  and  to  the 
greatest  possible  extent.  It  is  very  difficult,  and  requires 
much  time  to  move  a  nation  like  this,  even  when  it  has 
been  demonstrated  that  very  small  exertions  will  produce 
the  greatest  good.  Even  they  who  are  disposed  to  move 
are  seldom  agreed  to  work  together.  If  some  fundamental 
pouits  were  selected,  and  all  agreed  to  push  for  them, 
success  would  be  certain.  The  Reform  Bills  are  in 
themselves  of  little  value,  but  as  a  commencement  of  the 
breaking  up  of  the  old  rotten  system  they  are  in- 
valuable." 2 

At  the  general  election  which  followed  the  passage  of 
the  Bills,  Place  advised  that  pledges  should  be  required 
from  all  Reform  candidates.  He  wrote  a  tract  on  this 
point,  which  was  published  by  the  National  Political 
Union,3  in  which  he  said :  "  Pledges  may  then  be  taken 

1  i.e.  the  English,  Scotch,  and  Irish  Bills. 

2  Place  to  Lawrence  Pitkeithly,  July  25,  1832. 

3  "No.  15.     National  Political  Union.     On  Pledges  to  be  given  by 
Candidates."     (By  Francis  Place.)      "To  the  electors  of  the  United 
Kingdom  "  (London,  July  1832).     This  action  of  the  National  Political 
Union  gave  rise  to  much  discussion  among  the  Reformers.     John  Mill, 
e.g.  wrote  two  very  interesting  articles  against  Pledges  in  the  Examiner 
on  ist  July  and  i5th  July  1832,  27,796  (48),  and  W.  J.  Fox  defended 
them  in  the  Monthly  Repository.     The  seven  points  on  which  Place 
suggested   the  asking  for   pledges  were  :    (i)  Parliamentary  Reform 


THE    REFORMED    PARLIAMENT  327 

from  all.  Every  elector  should  recollect  that  his  repre- 
sentative is  elected  for  the  unreasonably  long  period  of 
seven  years,  and  that  he  may  therefore  set  his  con- 
stituents at  defiance  for  that  period."  In  Westminster 
Burdett  and  Hobhouse  were  requested  to  pledge  them- 
selves to  the  Ballot,  the  abolition  of  the  House  and  Window 
Taxes,  the  Newspaper  Stamp  Duty,  and  the  repeal  of  the 
Septennial  Act.  Both  declared  that  "none  but  fools 
demanded  pledges,  and  none  but  knaves  gave  them." l 

Place  himself  was  asked  to  stand  for  Westminster,  but 
refused.  When,  however,  Colonel  Evans  came  forward 
against  Hobhouse,  Place  supported  him.2  Evans  was 
beaten,  but  defeated  Hobhouse  at  a  bye-election  a  few 
months  afterwards. 

As  soon  as  the  general  election  was  over  Place  wrote  to 
Joseph  Parkes,  suggesting  that  the  Birmingham  Political 
Union  should  begin  a  popular  agitation  for  the  Ballot 
and  triennial  Parliaments.  Parkes  replied :  "  Our  glass 
here  is  almost  run  out.  till  some  circumstances  turn  it 
again.  The  fact  is,  that  we  have  all  made  such  heavy 
personal  and  pecuniary  sacrifices  that  we  fear  that  so 
recently  after  the  elections,  we  should  not  get  up  a 
sufficient  public  meeting  for  Birmingham  on  the  Ballot 
and  Septennial  Act.  We  have  the  will,  but  the  elections 
have  taken  our  last  wind ;  and  indeed,  a  meeting  costs 
us  a  great  deal  of  money.  .  .  .  Who  the  devil  is  to  go 
on  with  this  public  work  and  his  private  duty  ?  I  can't ; 
I  am  determined  to  lie  fallow  as  much  as  I  consistently 
can ;  it  is  impossible  to  keep  up  the  devotion  we  have  had 
here  for  two  years.  I  had  rather  go  to  the  Swann  River,  or 

(shorter  Parliaments  and  ballot)  ;  (2)  Law  Reform  ;  (3)  Financial 
Reform  ;  (4)  Trade  Reform  (Free  Trade)  ;  (5)  Church  Reform  ;  (6) 
Abolition  of  Slavery  ;  (7)  Abolition  of  Taxes  on  Knowledge. 

1  27,844  (24). 

2  See  "A  Letter  to  the  Electors  of  Westminster/'  in  which  Place 
defends  himself,  and  refers  to  Hobhouse's  Radical  declarations  in  1819. 


328  THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

even  Botany  Bay,  than  go  through  the  sacrifices  and 
labour  of  the  last  eighteen  months.  I  have  read  no  books, 
I  have  not  slept  half  enough,  I  have  collected  no  money, 
I  have  neglected  my  business.  Numerous  others  have 
done  the  same.  Actually  eight  leading  middlemen  of 
the  Union  have  'broke.'  And  as  I  do  not  choose  so  to 
injure  my  utility  or  comfort,  I  don't  mean,  Mr.  Place,  to 
give  so  much  time  to  the  political  plough ;  I  will  do  my 
duty  nevertheless.  We  have  buried  the  Tories,  and  if 
the  Whigs  will  not  do  right,  the  sexton  must  be  called  out 
again.  Good-night,  old  firebrand." 1 

The  first  reformed  Parliament  met  on  January  29, 
1833,  and  was  at  once  occupied  with  an  Irish  Coercion 
Bill.  Under  any  circumstances  Place  would  not  have  con- 
cerned himself  very  seriously  with  an  Irish  question.  He 
had  been  long  convinced  that  the  task  of  governing 
Ireland  from  England  was  an  impossible  one,  and  had 
perhaps  too  little  sympathy  with  those  who  were  com- 
pelled to  attempt  it.  In  his  letter  to  Hobhouse  of  June  2, 
1832,  he  wrote:  "A  word  or  two  as  to  Ireland.  There 
nothing  worth  doing  on  a  large  scale  can  be  done  while 
that  country  is  kept  in  subjection  to  this.  Stanley's 
nostrums  will  only  tend  to  make  the  bond  of  union  among 
the  Irish  the  more  firm.  The  Irish  must  be  left  to  fight 
it  out  among  themselves  before  they  can  arrive  at  that 
condition  when  regeneration  can  commence,  or  rather, 
before  any  progress  can  be  made  towards  actual  civilisation. 
I  do  not  consider  that  to  be  a  state  of  civilisation  in  which 
property  is  not  secure." 2 

1  Joseph  Parkes  to  Place,  January  17,  1833. 

2  Place  to  Hobhouse,  June  2,  1832.     27,795  (228-235).     See  PJace  to 
Ensor,  May  27,  1835. 

"  It  is  now  some  fifteen  years  since  you,  Mill,  and  I  dined  with 
Richard  Taylor,  and  at  his  table  discussed  the  matter  more  fully 
than  we  had  previously  done,  of  a  separation  between  England 
and  Ireland.  Since  that  time  some  reading,  much  conversation,  as 


THE   REFORMED    PARLIAMENT  329 

But  in  the  spring  of  1833  the  state  of  his  personal  affairs 
might  have  prevented  him  from  noticing  much  more 
interesting  political  matter  than  the  dispute  between  Lord 
Stanley  and  Daniel  O'Connell. 

He  had  put  a  large  part  of  his  capital  into  house  pro- 
perty, and  had  left  the  investment  of  it  to  an  incompetent 
or  dishonest  solicitor.  On  February  25,  1833,  after  an 
examination  of  his  affairs,  he  found  that  out  of  an  income 
of  a  little  more  than  ^iioo,  some  £650  was  irrevocably 

well  with  Irishmen  of  some  importance  as  with  Englishmen,  and  more 
serious  thinking,  have  confirmed  me  in  my  opinion  that  Ireland  never 
can  be  what  it  ought  to  be,  what  it  would  have  been,  if  it  had  been,  or 
if  it  is  to  be,  an  independent  country.  I  never  hesitate  in  any  place,  or 
before  any  company  when  Ireland  is  talked  of,  to  assert  that  there  is 
but  one  way  permanently  to  better  its  people,  and  that  is  by  a  separa- 
tion, by  making  Ireland  an  independent  nation,  and  leaving  it  to  choose 
a  government  for  itself.  The  terms  to  be  these  :  Ireland  to  take  a 
reasonable,  and  consequently  a  small  portion  of  the  public  debt,  and  pay 
the  interest  of  it ;  no  customs  to  be  paid  on  the  importation  of  any- 
thing, the  produce  or  manufactures  of  either  country  ;  and  no  more  tax 
to  be  laid  on  such  produce  and  manufactures  than  is  usually  laid 
thereon  when  manufactured  or  produced  on  the  spot. 

"  I  know  all  the  objections  which  can  be  made  to  this  project,  and 
some  of  them  are  very  serious  ;  but  as  I  am  thoroughly  persuaded  that 
they  will  not  be  removed  by  the  continual  dependence  of  Ireland  on 
England,  either  with  or  without  an  Irish  Parliament,  I  am  for  putting 
an  end  as  soon  as  possible  to  the  present  state  of  things,  that  a  better 
state  of  things  may  commence.  The  most  important  of  all  the 
objections  is  this,  that  if  Ireland  were  separated  from  England  there 
would  be  a  terrible  civil  war  among  the  people.  This  is,  I  think,  an 
inevitable  consequence,  but  it  is  one  that  will  happen  some  day  ;  it  is  a 
state  the  Irish  people  must  pass  through,  and  I  am  therefore  for  giving 
them  the  earliest  possible  opportunity  to  fight  it  out,  arid  to  settle  down 
under  a  regular  government." 

Place,  like  other  Radicals  of  his  time,  believed  in  the  ultimate 
solution  of  most  imperial  problems  by  separation.  In  his  diary 
for  1830  he  says  that  India  should  be  "independent  at  as  early 
a  period  as  possible,  and  that  this  would  be  advantageous  to  both 
Great  Britain  and  India."  On  January  18,  1838,  during  the  Canadian 
troubles,  he  sent  Lovett  Bentham's  "Emancipate  your  Colonies" 
(1793).  On  the  other  hand,  on  December  5,  1838,  he  wrote  to  Parkes, 
"  The  plan  of  Lord  Durham,  Federal  Colonies,  was  the  only  one 
which  could  retain  the  Canadas  in  peace  even  for  a  short  time." 


330  THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

lost.  Two  days  afterwards  he  sat  down  and  wrote  out  a 
calculation  of  his  future  expenses,  ending  with :  "  I  am 
strong,  active,  healthy,  and  a  better  man  than  most  at 
sixty-one  years  of  age,  capable  of  many  things,  and  willing 
to  undertake  some  one  or  more  things;  and  if  oppor- 
tunities should  occur,  I  will  embrace  them.  At  present  I 
see  nothing  likely  to  be  useful  in  this  way,  so  I  must  wait. 
If  I  would  turn  sycophant,  be  a  tool  and  a  rascal,  I  could 
soon  obtain  employment  under  Government;  this  I  will 
not  do." 1 

The  house  at  Charing  Cross  was  now  let  to  his  eldest 
son,  who  had  taken  on  the  business  sixteen  years  before, 
while  Place  with  his  wife  and  those  of  the  family  who 
were  still  at  home  removed  to  a  smaller  house  (No.  21) 
in  Brompton  Square.  This,  together  with  the  fact  that 
his  wife  was  attacked  by  cholera  and  nearly  died,  kept 
Place  occupied  for  some  months. 

Even  when  he  was  again  at  leisure,  there  were  several 
causes  tending  to  detach  him  from  the  daily  business  of 
Parliamentary  politics.  He  and  his  books  were  no  longer 
easy  of  access  from  the  House  of  Commons;  he  soon 
ceased  to  be  an  elector  of  Westminster ;  and  he  intended 
to  take  any  useful  paid  post  that  might  be  offered  to 
him. 

For  a  short  time  in  1834-35  ne  was  Secretary  to  the 
Pure  Spring  Water  Company,  formed  to  supply  London 
with  water  from  artesian  wells.  But  it  got  into  the  hands 
of  City  company  promoters  and  Place  resigned,  having 
received  £100  for  his  services.  The  Company  soon  after- 
wards broke  up,  as  the  necessary  Bill  was  rejected  in  the 
House  of  Commons. 

Nevertheless,  Place  worked  steadily  from  1834  to  1836, 
both  in  the  reconstruction  of  English  local  government  by 
the  New  Poor  Law  (1834)  and  the  Municipal  Reform  Bill 
1  "  Autobiography." 


THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT  331 

(1835),  and  in  the  long  struggle  for  the  abolition  of  the 
Newspaper  Stamp. 

The  two  Local  Government  Bills  were  the  result  not  of 
the  official  Whig  tradition  as  represented  in  the  Cabinet, 
but  of  "philosophic  radicalism"  acting  through  Royal 
Commissions.  Edwin  Chadwick,  Secretary  to  the  Poor- 
Law  Commission  (1832-34),  and  Place's  friend,  Joseph 
Parkes,  Secretary  to  the  Muncipal  Corporations  Com- 
mission (1833-1835),  were  both  personal  disciples  of 
Jeremy  Bentham,  and  the  Bills  themselves  were  the 
embodiment  of  principles  which  the  Benthamites  had 
discussed  for  twenty  years. 

With  the  Poor-Law  Commissioners  Place  must  have 
been  in  touch  at  least  as  early  as  the  spring  of  1833, 
for  even  in  the  midst  of  his  own  misfortunes  he  found 
time  to  help  them. 

"Early  in  March  1833,"  he  says,  "Lord  Althorp  wrote 
to  the  Commissioners  of  the  Poor-Laws  inquiry,  and 
requested  them  to  inform  him  whether  the  adoption  of 
the  Labour  Rate  Bill1  (the  renewal)  as  a  temporary  and 
palliative  measure  would  have  the  tendency  to  increase 
the  evil  of  the  Poor-Laws.  The  answer  of  the  Commis- 
sioners seemed  to  me  so  very  likely  to  do  much  service 
if  it  were  put  into  the  proper  hands,  that  I  applied  for 
money  to  enable  me  to  print  10,000  copies,  and  also  for 
the  names  of  all  persons  who  had  either  been  examined 
or  corresponded  with,  or  were  likely  to  interfere  in  the 
matter.  The  money  and  the  names  were  furnished.  I 
wrote  an  appropriate  head,  printed  and  sent  copies  in 
franks  and  by  coach  parcels  free  of  expense  to  every 
person  indicated.  The  consequence  was  that  all  pro- 
ceedings were  at  once  dropped,  and  no  more  was  heard 

1  The  labour  rate  was  an  arrangement  by  which  pauper  labourers 
were  forced  upon  unwilling  employers  in  order  to  lower  the  money 
rate.  Cf.  Report  of  1834,  p.  108. 


332  THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

of  the  mischievous  Bill,  either  within  or  without  the 
House."1 

He  knew  Chadwick  personally,  and  a  letter  which  he 
wrote  in  July  1833  contains  an  accurate  forecast  of  the 
coming  Report.2 

The  Commissioners  proposed  that  the  administration  of 
the  new  Act  should  be  superintended  by  a  small  body  of 
paid  officials,  and  it  occurred  to  Place  that  possibly  he 
himself  might  be  appointed. 

"I  wish,"  he  writes  to  Harriet  Martineau,  "the  Lord 
Chancellor  would  make  me  one  of  the  Central  Commis- 
sioners under  an  Act  of  Parliament,  the  leading  enactments 
of  which  should  be  the  recommendations  of  the  present 
Poor-Law  Commissioners.  I  would  go  into  the  business 
and  help  to  carry  it  on  with  all  my  heart  and  soul,  would 
work  carefully  and  promptly  and  efficiently  in  the  great 
and  good  work,  would  think  nothing  of  obstacles,  and  be 
utterly  careless  of  the  abuse  which  will  be  showered  down 
in  all  possible  forms  on  the  obnoxious  Commissioners."  3 

He  preserved  a  letter  from  Anthony  Fonblanque,  the 
editor  of  the  Examiner,  urging  him  to  put  himself 
forward  as  a  candidate,  and  his  answer,  in  which  he  said 
that  "  Lord  Brougham  knows  that  under  such  a  Bill  as 
I  have  alluded  to  ...  I  should  look  much  more  to  the 
elevation  of  the  common  people  than  to  the  salary;  that 

1  Place  to  Parkes,  May  11,  1835. 

2  "The  remedy,  as  far  as  a  remedy  can  be  applied,  seems  short  and 
clear.     No  assistance  either  in  money,  clothes,  or  food  should  be  given 
by  the  parish  to  any  one,  in  any  case  whatever,  out  of  the  workhouse, 
some  cases  of  sickness  alone  excepted,  and  even  then  sparingly.     The 
workhouse  should  be  for  a  district  composed  of  one,  two,  or  more 
parishes  where  the  inmates  might  be  classed,  and  good  instead  of  evil 
produced.     The  adoption  of  this  plan  would  for  some  time  cause  evil 
to  many,  good  to  multitudes.     There  could  then  be  no  parish  payment 
to  make  up  wages,  nor  many  of  the  present  contrivances  to  make  the 
people  dissolute  and  reckless."     (Place  to  Wade,  July  9,  1833.) 

3  Place  to  Harriet  Martineau,  March  4,  1834. 


THE    REFORMED    PARLIAMENT  333 

I  would  diligently,  honestly,  and,  I  hope,  judiciously  execute 
the  trust  for  one-half  of  the  salary  named."  But  no  man 
in  power  "  would  willingly  have  it  supposed  that  he  would 
have  countenanced  any  proposal  to  make  the  Radical 
Tailor  a  King's  Commissioner."  l 

Place  was,  as  he  expected,  passed  over,  and  Brougham 
could  perhaps  have  found  better  reasons  for  his  decision 
than  that  which  Place  suggested.  Chadwick's  combination 
of  dogmatism  and  industry  nearly  wrecked  the  new  system 
as  it  was,  and  Chadwick  and  Place  together  would  have 
gone  near  to  bring  about  a  revolution.  Above  all,  Place 
was  a  known  and  unflinching  partisan  on  just  the  point 
where  the  Commissioners  were  sure  to  encounter  the  most 
furious  vituperation.  The  word  Malthusian  punctuates 
Times'  leaders  and  Chartist  speeches  on  the  new  Poor- 
Law  from  1835  to  1849,  and  his  opinions  about  the  popu- 
lation question  were  notorious. 

The  Act  as  finally  passed,  though  it  did  not  exactly 
correspond  to  Place's  sketch  of  1833,  or  to  the  proposals 
of  the  Commissioners,  was  yet  logical  and  drastic  enough. 
Place  for  the  moment  abused  the  Government  for  having 
weakened  it,  but  in  August  1834  wrote  to  Chadwick  full  of 
hopes  as  to  its  result,  and  advising  him  to  print  a  short 
popular  analysis  for  general  distribution.  From  that  time 
forward  he  steadily  defended  the  law  with  tongue  and 
pen,  and  kept  up  even  among  the  extreme  democrats  a 
tiny  minority  of  audible  opinion  in  its  favour.  The  Chartist 
Northern  Liberator  writes  in  1837  (December  30)  of  him 
as  being  "  the  very  head  and  chief,  the  life  and  soul,  of  the 
Poor-Law  Amendment  Bill." 

Place  speaks  of  the  removal  to  Brompton  as  having 
"  increased  my  comfort  and  diminished  my  usefulness."  2 
Certainly  his  correspondence  in  the  summer  of  1834  shows 

1  Place  to  Anthony  Fonblanque,  March  4,  1834. 

2  Loose  sheet,  dated  April  1834. 


334  THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

that  absence  from  Westminster  had  brought  him  an  un- 
usual amount  of  leisure.  On  May  2  and  3,  for  instance,  he 
wrote  to  his  friend  Samuel  Harrison  an  enormous  letter 
of  something  like  seven  thousand  words,  criticising  from 
the  agnostic  point  of  view  William  Hewitt's  "  Popular  His- 
tory of  Priestcraft." 

He  did  not  believe  that  the  next  step  towards  a  demo- 
cratic franchise  would  willingly  be  taken  by  any  govern- 
ment then  possible.  But  he  was  convinced  that  forces 
stronger  than  the  will  of  any  government  were  in  opera- 
tion, and  meanwhile  he  could  watch  the  rise  and  fall  of 
ministries  with  philosophic  calm.  In  July  1834  Lord  Grey 
resigned,  and  Lord  Melbourne  became  Premier.  Place 
supposed  that  Brougham  would  now  be  the  real  leader  of 
the  Whigs,  and  knew  that  in  that  case  the  Lords  must 
either  fight  or  submit  to  continued  humiliation. 

"  There  must  be  a  decisive  quarrel  with  the  Lords  some 
day,  and  the  Lords  will  in  the  end  be  beaten.  I  think  the 
Chancellor  is  the  man  to  carry  on  a  series  of  useful  sub- 
ordinate quarrels,  which  may  prepare  the  way  for  the 
ultimate  quarrel,  and  make  it  when  it  comes  as  little 
mischievous  and  as  short  as  possible.  If,  for  instance, 
the  Chancellor  begins  with  some  measures  likely  to  be 
popular,  e.g.  newspaper  stamps,  which  can  and  will  be 
usefully  worked  out  of  doors,  and  the  Lords  choose  to 
quarrel  with  it,  and  if  they  should  make  the  quarrel 
last  for  some  time,  the  beating  they  will  get  will  be  of 
importance  in  more  ways  than  one.  If  the  Lords  should 
swallow  the  pill  without  much  carping  at  it,  they  will 
have  prepared  their  noble  throats  for  a  bolus,  and  that 
may  be  the  repeal  of  so  much  of  the  2yth  clause  of  the 
Reform  Act  as  relates  to  payments  of  rates  and  taxes 
as  a  disqualifying  clause.  If  stamps  be  removed  and 
good  teaching  follows,  the  machine  will  work  more  freely 
with  little  friction,  and  therefore  with  very  little  chance 


THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT  335 

of  breaking  any  material  part  of  it.  Otherwise,  it  may 
go,  as  the  engineers  say,  '  smash  at  once.'  These  are  the 
general  reasons  why  I  wish  Brougham  to  lead."  l 

Melbourne's  sudden  dismissal  by  the  King  on  the 
appointment  of  Wellington  left  him  quite  unmoved.  In 
December  1834  he  wrote:  "With  respect  to  politics  as 
they  now  stand,  I  am  quite  at  ease.  Before  Wellington 
first  took  office,  yet  when  a  change  was  seen  to  be  at 
hand,  Hobhouse,  being  then  at  the  Duke  of  Bedford's 
at  Woburn,  wrote  to  me  for  my  opinion  respecting 
probable  public  proceedings.  I,  in  reply,  said  there  never 
could  be  what  was  called  a  strong  or,  as  to  time,  a  long 
administration  until  very  great  changes  in  the  whole  plan 
and  system  of  government  had  happened.  Wellington's 
administration  cannot  continue  for  two  years,  and  whose 
is  to  follow  his  ?  And  whose  that  ?  &c.  &c.  In  five  years 
boys  now  fifteen  years  of  age  will  be  men.  In  ten  years 
boys  who  are  ten  years  old  will  be  men,  men  of  twenty, 
thirty,  and  so  on,  and  time  will  have  quietly  sent  a  large 
number  of  old  prejudiced  aristocrats  to  the  grave,  and 
substituted  for  them  young,  energetic  fellows,  brought  up 
very  generally  without  reverence  for  authority,  and  imbued 
with  notions  of  representative  government.  I  need  not 
point  out  to  you  the  consequences."  2 

Peel  on  his  return  from  Italy,  in  December,  took  over 
the  premiership  from  Wellington,  and  at  once  dissolved 
Parliament.  The  Whigs  came  back  from  the  election 
seriously  weakened  in  numbers,  and  dependent  for  any 
possible  majority  upon  Irish  and  Radical  support.  A 
rough  note  made  by  Place  at  the  time  states  that 
Warburton  called,  on  February  9,  1835,  ".  .  .  and  we 
had  a  very  long  conversation  respecting  a  plan  he  had 
suggested  some  time  before,  and  was  diligently  employed 

1  Place  to  Parkes,  July  17,  1834. 

2  Place  to  J.  Prout,  December  21,  1834. 


336  THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

in  carrying  into  effect.  It  was  to  induce  the  reformers, 
under  himself,  the  Whigs  under  Lord  John  Russell,  and 
the  Irish  under  Daniel  O'Connell  to  concur  in  such 
matters  as  were  common  to  all  these  parties,  and  agree 
to  sink  minor  differences  and  work  together  for  such 
objects  as  the  three  should  point  out.  There  were  two 
circumstances  on  which  it  seemed  essential  they  should 
concur,  the  Speaker  and  the  Address." l 

A  further  note  says :  "  2otk  February. — The  House  met 
last  night,  and  contrary  to  my  expectations  elected  Mr. 
Abercrombie,  Speaker.  This  is  a  good  beginning."  And 
on  February  25,  he  writes:  "I  was  much  pleased  that 
the  amendment  to  the  Address  had  been  carried  by  a 
majority  of  seven." 

On  April  8,  1835,  Peel  resigned,  and  Lord  Melbourne 
took  office.  But  Place's  satisfaction  at  the  alliance  between 
the  Whigs  and  the  Radicals  lasted  very  few  weeks.  The 
Radicals  in  Parliament  felt  that  they  ought  to  avoid 
anything  which  would  embarrass  the  Government,  and 
Place  found  to  his  horror  that  no  one,  not  even  Joseph 
Hume,  was  willing  to  continue  that  resolute  assertion  of 
democratic  principles  in  the  House,  without  which  the 
development  of  democratic  opinion  in  the  country  could 
not  proceed. 

One  result  of  the  alliance  was  that  the  abolition  of  the 
newspaper  stamp  seemed  further  off  than  ever.  Since  1819, 
when  the  4d.  stamp  duty  was  extended  to  every  periodical 
costing  less  than  6d.,2  Place  had  fought  against  "Taxes 
on  Knowledge."  As  long  as  the  Tories  were  hi  power  Lord 
Liverpool,  or  even  Canning,  could  consistently  advocate 
the  restriction  of  political  discussion.  But  the  fact  that 
the  Whigs  had  now  held  office  since  1830,  and  that  the 
tax  remained  undiminished,  was  only  to  be  explained  by 

1  Loose  sheet  in  Letter  Book,  1835. 
*  See  p.  148,  note. 


THE   REFORMED    PARLIAMENT  337 

their  rooted  disbelief  in  every  principle  which  they  pro- 
fessed to  hold. 

Year  after  year  Place  had  brought  the  question  forward.1 
Every  year  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  declared 
himself  in  favour  of  repeal  in  principle,  and  every  year 
the  Government,  for  reasons  which  they  dared  not  avow, 
continued  the  tax.  Meanwhile  the  Commissioners  of 
Stamps  so  used  their  power  of  prosecution  as  to  set  up 
a  peculiarly  odious  form  of  censorship.  The  Penny 
Magazine,  for  instance,  was  allowed  to  circulate  unstamped, 
while  the  Poor  Man's  Guardian  was  prosecuted.  Place 
had  suffered  personally  from  the  tax.  Directly  after  the 
general  election  of  1832,  Roebuck  and  he  revived  an  old 
plan  of  starting  a  penny  weekly  paper,  with  the  awe- 
inspiring  title  of  the  Political  and  Moral  Magazine. 
Place  was  to  be  editor,  and  offered  to  give  to  the  work 
six  or  seven  hours  a  day. 

"  If  I  became  editor,"  he  writes  to  Roebuck,  "  I  should 

1  In  January  1831  lie  had  published  one  of  the  best  and  most  forcible 
of  his  pamphlets,  "A  letter  to  a  Minister  of  State  respecting  Taxes  on 
Knowledge,"  of  which  many  thousands  had  been  since  distributed. 
On  June  15,  1832,  Bulwer  in  the  Commons  moved  for  a  Committee  on 
the  subject.  He  made  a  long  speech  from  notes  provided  by  Place,  and 
Lord  Althorp  congratulated  him  on  the  industry  which  he  had  shown 
in  his  investigation  of  the  subject,  and  opposed  his  motion  "entirely  on 
a  financial  ground."  This  debate  was  printed  by  the  National  Political 
Union,  with  notes  by  Place.  In  1833  Althorp  mentioned  the  matter 
in  the  Commons,  but  did  nothing.  In  1834  Lord  Brougham  gave 
evidence  before  the  Committee  on  Libel  Law  in  favour  of  complete 
repeal,  which  Place  reprinted,  and  circulated  10,000  copies.  (Place  to 
Ebenezer  Elliott,  July  9,  1834.  See  Repeal  of  the  Stamp  Duty, 
Roebuck's  pamphlet  for  December  1835,  p.  8.)  He  wrote  articles  on 
the  subject  for  any  paper  which  would  take  them,  and  his  letter-books 
contain  a  long  series  of  indignant  appeals  to  friends  and  strangers. 
The  great  London  dailies  were  against  the  abolition  of  the  stamp  as 
likely  to  injure  their  monopoly,  and  on  January  19,  1833,  tne  Times 
printed  on  its  leader  page  an  abusive  little  paragraph  against  Place 
(and  by  implication  Lord  Althorp)  for  a  supposed  plot  to  destroy  its 
circulation.  Grote  used  to  call  the  repeal  of  the  stamp  Place's 
hobby.  (Place  to  Hume,  January  3,  1837.) 

Y 


338  THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

make  a  business  of  it,  and  I  foresee  that  it  would  occupy 
me  six  hours  a  day  at  the  least.  To  enable  me  to  bestow 
so  much  time  upon  it  I  must  use  the  mornings  for  my  own 
affairs,  and  for  such  other  persons  and  their  affairs  as  I  can- 
not with  justice  abandon,  to  seeing  such  persons  as  I  may 
wish  to  see,  or  cannot  refuse  to  see,  and  to  taking  exercise. 
I  must  dine  at  three,  and  employ  all  the  rest  of  the  day  on 
the  work,  rigidly  excluding  everybody  with  the  exception 
of  some  half-a-dozen  members  of  Parliament,  whom,  for 
reasons  obvious  to  you,  I  must  admit  at  all  times.  ...  If 
I  were  willing  to  let  the  publication  be  of  the  ordinary 
cast  of  vulgar  politics,  I  might  save  half  of  the  time,  or 
even  more  than  half  of  the  time,  I  have  mentioned,  but  I 
will  not  do  these  things.  I  think  the  publication  may 
be  made  a  vehicle  to  promulgate  the  true  principles  of 
politics,  political  economy  and  morals,  with  such  practical 
applications  of  these  principles  in  so  popular  a  way  as  to 
command  the  attention  and  obtain  the  respect  of  men  who 
have  cultivated  understandings,  and  at  the  same  time 
please  and  instruct  the  working  people  to  an  extent  which 
for  their  own  sakes  may  induce  them  to  purchase  it." 1 

James  Mill  agreed  with  the  project,  and  he,  John  Mill, 
the  Grotes,  Charles  Buller,  W.  J.  Fox,  Edwin  Chadwick, 
and  others,  were  to  write  for  it.  The  necessary  funds  were 
provided,  and  there  only  remained  the  question  of  the 
newspaper  stamp.  Warburton,  the  Vice-President  of  the 
proposed  company,  tried  to  get  Lord  Althorp  to  promise 
privately  that  if  an  assurance  were  given  that  no  '•  annoy- 
ance of  Ministers"  were  intended  by  the  paper  it  should 
not  be  prosecuted ;  but  Lord  Althorp  would  give  no 
such  promise,  and  on  February  5,  1833,  refused  in  answer 
to  a  question  in  the  House  to  pledge  himself  to  a  repeal 
of  the  tax.  The  proposal,  therefore,  was  abandoned. 
"  Ministers,"  wrote  Place,  "  and  men  in  power,  with  nearly 
1  Place  to  Roebuck,  December  27,  1832. 


THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT  339 

the  whole  body  of  those  who  are  rich,  dread  the  conse- 
quences of  teaching  the  people  more  than  they  dread  the 
effect  of  then1  ignorance." l 

It  may  be  feared  that  the  life  of  the  paper  would  in  any 
case  have  been  short.  The  Political  and  Moral  Magazine 
might  have  been  a  treasure-house  for  the  future  historian, 
it  might  have  influenced  those  few  working-men  and 
others  who  can  be  "  induced  to  purchase  papers  for  their 
own  sakes,"  that  is  to  say,  for  the  sake  of  their  more  serious 
selves;  but  the  general  public  would  certainly  have  con- 
tinued to  read  publications  "  of  the  ordinary  cast  of  vulgar 
politics."  Yet  because  the  Government  had  prevented 
the  experiment  from  being  tried,  the  good  that  the  paper 
might  have  done  grew  yearly  more  important  in  Place's 
mind. 

A  milder  man,  indeed,  than  Place  might  have  lost 
patience  when,  on  May  i,  1835,  he  received  a  letter  from 
Hume  stating  that  it  was  his  "  wish  not  to  do  anything  as 
regards  the  tax  upon  newspapers  until  we  know  what  is  to 
be  done  by  the  Ministers,"  and  that  meanwhile  "  any  peti- 
tions got  up  or  stir  made  might  not  do  good  but  harm  if 
Ministers  really  mean  to  repeal,  of  which  we  can  have  no 
knowledge  until  they  all  return  (from  re-election)." 2 

Place  replied :  "  My  dear  Sir, — Here  comes  probably  the 
last  long  political  letter  you  will  ever  be  called  upon  to  read 
of  my  writing.  ...  I  do  not  in  the  least  comprehend  .  .  . 
how  you  would  come  to  the  conclusion  .  .  .  that  no  one 
should  '  stir '  because  '  we  can  have  no  knowledge,  &c.'  If 
you  had  said  we  must  stir  because  '  we  can  have  no  know- 
ledge, &c.,'  it  would  have  been  rational.  I  have  lately 
been  congratulating  myself  that  I  no  longer  reside  at 
Charing  Cross,  and  had  nearly  broken  up  my  connection 

1  MS.  account  of  the  "  Society  for  the  Diffusion  of  Political  and  Moral 
Knowledge." 

2  Hume  to  Place,  April  24,  1835. 


340  THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

with  the  dawdlers,  and  that  with  the  exception  of  two  or 
three  of  my  parliamentary  friends  I  could  now  and  then, 
as  I  occasionally  do,  see  others,  and  talk  with  them  on  any 
subject,  barring  politics.  If  it  were  not  that  the  people  do 
at  times  respond  to  a  call  made  in  the  right  way,  I  should 
have  given  up  all  interference  in  public  political  matters, 
hopeless  of  any  good  results.  I  shall  now  probably  pursue 
a  course  independently  of  parliamentary  men  as  associated, 
and  I  believe  I  can  do  more  good  without  them  than  with 
them. 

"  When  did  any  Minister,  either  Whig  or  Tory,  keep  his 
promise  to  you  ?  How  often  during  more  than  twenty 
years  have  you  maintained  and  acted  on  the  only  sound 
doctrine,  that  to  accomplish  any  public  purpose  steady 
perseverance  was  necessary  at  all  times,  and  in  all  seasons, 
in  good  report  and  in  evil  report ;  and  how  much  good  you 
have  produced,  how  much  evil  you  have  prevented,  no  one 
knows  accurately,  no,  not  even  yourself." 

He  then  reminds  Hume  of  Lord  Althorp's  action  in 
1833:  "We  were  cajoled,  as  men  usually  are  who  rely  on 
others  and  refrain  from  doing  their  duty  to  themselves. 
Lord  Althorp  mentioned  the  subject  in  the  House,  but  in 
such  a  way  as  just  to  enable  him  to  say,  as  he  did  say,  as 
any  thorough-going  Whig  would  have  said,  that  he  had 
proposed  the  measure,  but  the  House  showed  no  particular 
feeling  on  the  subject,  so  he  did  not  press  it.  There  was 
no  particular  feeling ;  no,  we  had  been  stultified,  and  had 
neglected  the  means  necessary  to  produce  a  feeling.  It 
shall  be  no  fault  of  name  if  any  Minister  ever  has  the 
opportunity  to  repeat  Lord  Althorp's  words.  If  Ministers 
mean  us  honestly,  they  will  encourage  the  people  to  show 
themselves,  and  their  desire  for  the  repeal.  If  they 
understood  their  own  position,  they  would  promote  the 
repeal  promptly  and  vigorously.  They  would  make  it 
matter  of  conscience,  and  not  give  the  Tories  a  chance  to- 


THE    REFORMED  PARLIAMENT  34.1 

take  the  credit  of  doing  it.  I  am  persuaded  that  there  is 
as  much  chance  of  its  being  done  by  a  Tory  as  by  a 
Whig  administration,  and  I  should  greatly  prefer  a  Tory 
administration  which  would  take  off  the  duty,  to  a  Whig 
administration  which  would  not  take  it  oft'.  Scarcely  any 
man  in  Parliament  besides  Lord  Brougham  appears  to  know 
the  actual  value  of  the  repeal.  In  a  moral  point  of  view  it 
is  what  Archimedes  wanted  to  have  in  a  physical  point  of 
view,  a  place  to  stand  upon,  a  fulcrum  to  move  the  world. 
Do  you  recollect  the  fable  of  the  wolves  who  wished  the  sheep 
to  send  away  the  dogs  ?  If  you  do  not,  go  and  read  it." l 

Hume,  though,  like  Bismarck's  emperor,  he  required 
winding  up  at  intervals,  still  went  steadily  enough  when 
he  was  wound  up,  and  took  part  in  the  deputation  to 
Spring  Rice,  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  on  May  8. 
On  this  occasion  "  the  Exchequer  Chancellor  told  us,"  writes 
Place,  "  as  plainly  as  any  courtier  could  do  who  did  not  use 
the  words,  that  we  should  never  have  the  Stamp  Duty 
repealed  as  long  as  he  had  the  power  to  prevent  it."  - 

On  March  30,  1835,  the  Report  of  the  Municipal  Corpora- 
tions Commission  was  presented  to  Parliament.  Place's 
collection  of  manuscripts  and  materials  on  Municipal  Cor- 
porations has,  unfortunately,  been  lost,  but  there  is  some 
evidence  that  he  helped  his  friend  Joseph  Parkes  with  the 
preparation  of  the  Report.  Parkes,  for  instance,  speaks  of 
having  "  inhabited "  Place's  library  in  Brompton  Square 
during  May  i834.3  When  the  Report  was  presented  the 

1  Place  to  Hume,  May  2,  1835. 

2  Place  to  Hume,  May  12,  1835. 

3  Besides   collecting  books  and  papers  on  municipal  corporations, 
Place  had  occasionally  concerned  himself  with  the  (juestion  for  some 
years  past.     In  1830,  for  instance,  he  had  drawn  up  for  Hume  a  motion 
for  a  return  respecting  city  and  borough  corporations.     In  the  letter  in 
which  he  forwarded  a  draft  of  the  motion,  he  wrote  of  it  as  a  "  first 
step"  in  the  consideration  of  the  subject,  rendered  necessary  by  the  fact 
that  "  no  man  has  any  knowledge  of  the  municipal  laws  and  customs  of 
nine  out  of  ten  corporations." 


342  THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

Tories  were  still  in  office,  but  even  the  Whigs,  when  they 
came  in,  showed  no  eagerness  to  act  upon  it. 

In  his  angry  letter  to  Hume  of  May  2.,  1835,  Place,  after 
dealing  with  the  newspaper  stamp  question,  proceeds : 
"  Then  comes  the  Corporation  Bill.  Not  a  line  of  this  Bill 
has  been  penned,  nor  any  plan  been  brought  tinder  con- 
sideration. About  a  week  hence  it  will  begin  to  be  taken 
into  consideration,  and  then  come  discussions,  disputings, 
writings,  printings,  revising,  and  then  the  matter  must  be 
considered  by  another  body.  Then  will  commence  the 
drawing  of  a  Bill  to  go  through  the  same  processes,  and  by 
the  end  of  July  it  may  perchance  be  in  Committee  in  the 
House  of  Commons.  That  any  Bill  on  this  subject  can 
pass  the  House  of  Commons  this  session  is  out  of  all  reason- 
able expectation." 

Against  this  passage  Place  writes  a  marginal  note,  dated 
June  4,  1835  :  "It  was  found  that  not  to  present  a  Bill  as 
early  as  could  well  be  done  was  a  risk  Ministers  could  not 
take,  so  one  was  drawn  by  some  of  the  Commissioners  and 
the  Secretary  (Parkes),  and  it  is  to  be  presented  to-morrow. 
It  is  as  good  as  they  who  drew  it  dared  to  make  it.  It  will 
be  altered  before  presented." 

On  May  1 1  Place  had  written  to  Parkes  saying :  "  There 
is  now  a  just  complaint  that  no  one  interests  himself  as  he 
ought  to  do  respecting  municipal  corporations,"  and  enclos- 
ing a  statement  of  the  "  Principles  upon  which  Municipal 
Government  ought  to  be  founded."  Parkes  replied  by  pro- 
posing that  Place  should  edit  a  temporary  shilling  weekly 
to  appear  during  the  remainder  of  the  session,  and  to  be 
paid  for,  apparently,  out  of  the  party  funds. 

Place's  statement  of  principles  accordingly  appeared  on 
June  5  (the  day  on  which  Lord  John  Russell  introduced  the 
Bill)  as  part  of  the  prospectus  of  the  Municipal  Corpora- 
tion Reformer,  a  paper  which  was  to  be  "a  history  of  a 
political  measure  second  only  in  importance  to  the  reforma- 


THE    REFORMED   PARLIAMENT  343 

tion  of  Parliament."  In  the  prospectus  Place  proposes 
that  each  town  should  be  governed  by  a  single  council  of 
thirteen  to  thirty-one  members,  elected  annually  by  house- 
hold suffrage  and  the  ballot,  for  single  member  wards, 
without  property  qualification  or  privileged  aldermen.  The 
deliberations  of  these  bodies  were  to  be  public,  and  detailed 
administration  was  to  be  carried  out  by  very  small 
responsible  committees,  who  should  be  paid  for  their  work, 
membership  of  the  council,  as  such,  being  unpaid.  The 
powers  of  the  councils  were  to  include  the  control  of  the 
magistrates,  police,  and  gaols,  of  paving,  lighting,  water, 
markets,  bridges,  docks,  harbours,  sewers,  &c.,  the  making 
of  bye-laws,  and  the  administration  of  all  town  property  and 
trusts  for  hospitals,  schools,  and  charities.  In  his  private 
notes  for  June  1835  he  writes  that  upwards  of  60,000 
copies  of  the  prospectus  of  the  Municipal  Reformer  have 
been  printed  and  distributed ;  l  and  adds  "  a  goodly  mass  of 
republican  notions  these."  On  June  13  the  Municipal 
Corporation  Reformer  began  to  appear.  Five  numbers 
only  were  published,  the  reason  of  this  comparative  failure 
being,  according  to  Place,  that  the  "  expected  fierce  opposi- 
tion to  the  Bill "  did  not  show  itself,  and  that  "  people 
relied  on  the  House  of  Commons  and  gave  themselves 
little  trouble  about  the  proceedings."  Perhaps  the  party 
contributions  to  the  expense  of  publishing  may  have  been 
checked  by  such  incidents  as  Place's  beginning  the  first 
number  with  a  detailed  and  damaging  comparison  in 
parallel  columns  between  his  own  proposals  and  the 
Government  Bill,  and  slipping  into  it  a  dig  at  his  old 
enemy,  the  ratepaying  clauses  of  the  Reform  Bill. 

On  July  20  the  Bill  passed  the  House  of  Commons 
almost  unchanged.  It  soon,  however,  became  clear  that 

1  See  also  an  article  by  Place,  entitled  "The  Peers  and  the  People," 
in  Roebuck's  Pamphlets  for  the  People,  August  29,  1835,  where  the 
"  principles"  are  reprinted,  and  the  same  statement  is  made. 


34-4  THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

Lord  Lyndhurst  was  organising  a  campaign  against  it 
in  the  Lords.  On  August  2  Place  writes:  "Requested 
to  attend  a  meeting  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Parkes.  The 
Lords  are  expected  to  throw  out  the  Corporation  Bill.  .  .  . 
Wrote  letter  to  Mr.  Parkes,  dated  August  3.  Copied  by 
Mr.  Parkes,  original  sent  to  Lord  Melbourne." l 

In  this  letter  he  said:  "You  know  that  from  the  first 
I  did  not  expect  that  the  Lords  would  pass  the  Municipal 
Reform  Bill.  Now  I  conclude  that  every  reasonable  man 
is  of  the  same  opinion.  The  Lords  reason  thus :  '  We  have 
already  lost  more  than  one  of  the  means  we  long  possessed 
of  influencing  the  House  of  Commons.  ...  If  we  lose  the 
advantages  which  accrue  to  us  from  close  corporations, 
if  we  destroy  the  affinity  between  ourselves  and  these 
boroughs,  the  people  will  be  emboldened  to  proceed  to 
much  greater  lengths,  and  will  gain  power  continually  at 
we  lose  it.'  These  are  arguments  which  the  silliest  soul 
that  ever  was  a  lord  could  understand,  and  they  are  acted 
upon  by  a  majority  of  the  House  of  Lords.-  ...  It  was 
fear,  not  altogether  ill-founded,  which  induced  them  to 
agree  to  the  Parliamentary  Reform  Bill.  They  see  no 
such  pressing  necessity  now.  They  are  not  acted  upon 
by  fear  to  the  same  extent,  and  they  calculate  upon  the 
imbecility  of  Ministers.  It  is  this  imbecility  which  I 
too  fear.  If  Ministers  had  obtained  a  character  for 
decision  and  sturdiness,  the  people  would  have  shown 
their  determination  to  support  them,  and  this  would 
have  operated  beneficially  on  the  Lords.  They  are  now 
rapidly  approaching  what  to  them  will  appear  a  very 
great  difficulty,  but  which  to  more  determined  men 
would  appear  to  be  no  difficulty  at  all.  Their  course,  if 

1  Diary,  August  1835. 

2  Lord  Lyndhurst,  August  3,  1835,  said  in  the  House  of  Lords,  "  If 
they  (the  Corporations)  fell,  the  Church  would  come  next,  and   the 
hereditary  peerage  of  the  realm  afterwards." 


THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT  345 

they  choose  to  take  it,  is  very  simple,  and  may  be  de- 
scribed in  very  few  words.  They  must  demand  of  the 
King  that  he  should  prorogue  the  Parliament  for,  say,  five 
days,  and  then  hold  a  short  session  to  pass  the  Bills.  If 
the  King  should  refuse,  the  Ministers  should  at  once 
resign,  and  state  in  the  two  Houses  the  reason  why.  This 
would  convince  the  people  that  there  was  a  body  of 
men  deserving  of  public  confidence,  and  to  them  they 
would  give  it  most  heartily.  .  .  .  No  Tory  administration 
could  remain  in  office." l 

The  second  reading  in  the  Lords  was  carried,  but  Lord 
Lyndhurst  and  the  Tory  majority  transformed  the  Bill 
beyond  all  recognition  in  Committee.  Place,  who  was 
confined  to  his  room  with  sciatica,  raged  gloriously. 
"  The  Lords,"  he  wrote  to  Hume,  August  30,  "  have 
made  a  Bill  which  cannot  be  amended,  a  Bill  which,  how- 
ever much  it  may  be  tinkered  at,  can  never  be  made 
acceptable  to  the  nation,  a  Bill  that  will  bring  disgrace  on 
all  who  in  the  House  of  Commons  may  endeavour  to  make 
it  passable.  .  .  .  The  preamble  is  quite  enough.  The 
alterations  made  in  the  preamble  are  intentional  insults, 
and  should  be  treated  as  such.  .  .  .  Collision  with  the 
Lords  cannot  be  avoided.  They  have  placed  you  in 
circumstances  in  which  collision  or  disgrace,  little  short 
of  infamy,  must  be  chosen." 

"  People,"  he  wrote  to  Parkes  on  September  5,  "  silly, 
puling  people,  aye,  and  those  too  who  ought  to  know 
better,  are  talking  of  '  revolutionary  measures.'  To  oppose 
Ministers  is  to  promote  violent,  bloody  revolution,  plunder, 
rape,  and  the  devil  knows  what  besides.  .  .  .  The  drivellers, 
and  yet  there  is  not  a  damned  soul  among  them  who  does 
not  say  the  Lords  must  be  reorganised.  .  .  .  Reorganise, 
indeed ;  pretty  fellows  these  to  be  reorganises,  they  who 
take  a  kick  like  dogs,  wag  their  tails,  and  take  another 
1  Place  to  Parkes,  August  3,  1835. 


346  THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

kick.  .  .  .  Aye,  aye,  say  you,  but  what  if  Billy  [his  Majesty 

King  William  IV.]  damned  and ed  his  eyes  as  he 

is  apt  to  do,  and  refused  to  prorogue?  What!  why,  a 
little  wholesome  agitation  like  one  of  those  thunder- 
storms which  purify  the  air,  and  do  no  harm  to  any  one. 
.  .  .  Bloody  revolution,  indeed;  no,  no,  there  never  can 
be  such  a  revolution  as  long  as  the  people  have  confidence 
hi  the  House  of  Commons.  If  we  are  ever  to  have  a 
bloody  revolution,  it  must  be  from  want  of  confidence  in 
the  House  of  Commons." 

Peel,  in  the  Commons,  refused  to  support  the  Lords' 
amendments ;  a  compromise  was  arranged,  and  the  Bill  was 
passed. 

On  September  30  Parkes  wrote :  "  We  have  got  on  a  stage, 
and  you,  old  postillion,  well  know  it."  "Yes,"  answered 
Place  on  the  same  day,  "and  a  good  one;  but  recollect 
that  this  was  not  the  question,  never  was  made  the 
question  by  me.  The  question  was,  Ought  Ministers  to 
have  put  up  with  the  kicking  the  Lords  bestowed  upon 
them  ?  I  say  no ;  the  time  was  as  critical  as  propitious  for 
them,  and  they  ought  to  have  turned  upon  their  assailants. 
The  Lords  will  not  be  reformed,  not  they,  but  it  is  good 
to  make  every  one  see  that  they  must  either  be  reformed 
or  abolished,  that,  whenever  the  time  comes,  the  abolition, 
cost  what  it  may,  may  be  perfect." 

During  the  winter  of  1835-36  Place  worked  for  two 
main  objects:  the  reform  of  the  Corporation  of  London, 
which  had  been  omitted  in  the  Bill  of  1835,  and  'the 
abolition  of  the  Newspaper  Stamp.  His  diary  for 
December  1835  says,  "Occupied  in  reading  and  com- 
menting on  Municipal  Corporation  Commissioners'  inquiry 
respecting  London,  with  a  view  to  obtaining  further  par- 
ticulars, and  framing  a  Bill  for  the  City  of  London ; "  and 
for  January  1836,  "Continue  reading,  inquiring,  and 
writing  in  conjunction  with  Joseph  Fletcher  on  London 


THE    REFORMED    PARLIAMENT  347 

Corporation  and  the  report  of  the  Commissioners  (the 
proofs  only)." 

There  is  no  sign  that  Place  ever  contemplated  the 
present  unified  government  of  the  Metropolis,  but  side  by 
side  with  his  work  for  the  reform  of  the  Vestries  he  had  for 
years  past  been  preparing  for  an  attack  on  the  City.  After 
the  passing  of  the  Reform  Bill  in  1832  he  refused  to  attend 
the  City  banquet  on  the  ground  that  "  the  whole  of  the 
City  government "  was  "  a  burlesque  on  the  human  under- 
standing more  contemptible  than  the  most  paltry  farce 
played  in  a  booth  at  Bartholomew's  Fair,  and  more  mis- 
chievous than  any  man  living  is  prepared  to  believe." l 

When  his  friend  Alexander  Galloway,  engineer  and 
Common  Councillor,  protested  against  his  refusal,  and 
ascribed  it  to  his  having  listened  to  hearsay  reports,  Place 
replied :  "  You  know  nothing  about  the  information  I 
have,  though  you  do  know  I  endeavoured  to  procure 
a  good  deal  from  you,  and  that  you  gave  me  very  little. 
You  treat  the  Corporation  property  as  if  it  were  private 
property.  It  is  no  such  thing ;  it  is  public  property,  only 
applicable  to  public  uses.  I  will  say  no  more  now.  If 
I  can  get  aAvay  from  Charing  Cross  I  will  say  what  I 
think  should  be  said  in  print." 2 

In  November  1833,  shortly  after  Parkes'  appointment  as 
Secretary  of  the  Municipal  Corporation  Commission,  Place 
wrote  to  him  about  "  our  corrupt,  rotting,  robbing,  in- 
famous Corporation  of  London "  and  the  "  Court  of 
Aldermen,  old  men — no,  old  women,  gossiping,  guzzling, 
drinking,  cheating,  old  chandlers'-shop  women,  elected  for 
life."  He  then  proceeded  to  propose  his  own  plan  of  City 
Government.  He  wanted  a  Common  Council,  consisting 
of  twenty-one  members,  elected  by  ballot  for  twenty-one 
City  wards.  "But,  says  a  member  of  the  Common 
Council — more  than  one  has  said  so  to  me — what  would 
1  27,796  (55).  2  Place  to  A.  Galloway,  July  1 1,  1832. 


348  THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

you  do  for  Committees  ?  Why  this,  make  committees 
of  threes — make  commissioners  —  pay  them  reasonably, 
but  let  it  be  known  that  they  are  paid,  and  how  much  they 
are  paid,  and  report  the  work  they  have  done  for  the 
money.  .  .  .  Give  the  Mayor  £1000  a  year  at  the  utmost, 
and  call  him  lord  if  you  like  it — no  shows,  no  parade,  no 
feasts,  no  fooleries.  Let  there  be,  say,  seven  aldermen 
at  £400  a  year  each,  or  a  smaller  sum  to  pay  them  for 
their  magisterial  duties."  Never  was  work  more  com- 
pletely wasted  than  Place's  efforts  to  reform  the  City. 
The  mysterious  engines  of  City  influences  were  brought 
to  bear  upon  the  Government ;  the  Bill  which  had  been 
promised  for  1836  never  appeared,  and  the  proof  report 
was  never  even  printed. 

Meanwhile  the  question  of  the  Newspaper  Stamp  was 
becoming  so  urgent  that  not  even  Lord  Melbourne's 
Government  could  let  it  alone.  Every  month  the  un- 
stamped newspapers  increased  their  sale,  and  the  Govern- 
ment increased  its  severity.  Between  1830  and  1836 
there  were  728  prosecutions  for  selling  unstamped  papers, 
219  of  which  were  in  1835,  and  a  still  larger  proportion 
in  the  first  two  months  of  I836.1  Hetherington,  the  pro- 
prietor of  the  Poor  Man's  Guardian,  was  hiding  to  avoid 
arrest;  and  Cleave,  the  editor  of  the  unstamped  Cleaves 
Gazette,  was  in  prison  until  he  could  pay  .£600  penalties, 
as  well  as  heavy  costs.2 

In  January  1836  Place  revived  a  scheme  of  the  year 
before  for  agitation  by  correspondence  against  the  stamp. 
A  ground-floor  room  in  Leicester  Square  was  taken,  and 
there  Place's  friend,  Dr.  Black,3  and  a  few  working-men 
volunteers  used  to  spend  their  evenings  addressing 

1  Hume's  speech  at  the  deputation  to  Lord  Melbourne,  February  n, 
1836.  2  Ibid. 

3  Dr  James  Roberts  Black  of  Kentucky,  a  cadaverous  American, 
who  had  come  to  London  in  1834.  He  cherished  a  vague  project  of 


THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT  349 

circulars,  answering  letters,  and  organising  petitions. 
"  There  were  no  paid  clerks,  no  messengers,  no  adver- 
tising in  newspapers,  no  public  meetings,  yet  a  corre- 
spondence was  opened  with  very  nearly  3000  respectable 
persons  who  were  distributed  all  over  the  country."  l 

Roebuck  was  meanwhile  evading  the  law  by  publish- 
ing a  weekly  undated  pamphlet,  written  by  himself,  Place, 
and  others,  which  at  one  time  had  a  sale  of  io,ooo.2  On 
February  1 1  a  deputation  saw  Lord  Melbourne  at  the 
Treasury,  and  Dr.  Birkbeck,  Hume,  Place,  and  others 
made  long  speeches  against  the  tax.  Place's  great  fear 
was  that  the  Government,  with  the  Whig  instinct  for 
slipshod  compromise,  would  lower  the  stamp  instead  of 
abolishing  it. 

On  March  1 5  Spring  Rice,  on  behalf  of  the  Government, 
brought  forward  exactly  the  scheme  which  Place  had 
feared.  He  proposed  to  deal  with  stamp  duties  of  all 
kinds  by  a  long  consolidating  Act,  a  clause  of  which  was 
to  lower  the  newspaper  stamp  from  fourpence  to  a  penny. 
At  the  same  time  the  law  against  unstamped  publications 
was  to  be  made  much  more  stringent,  and  was  to  apply 
to  pamphlets  as  well  as  newspapers. 

Against  these  proposals  Place  for  the  next  five  months 
kept  up  a  dogged  contest,  writing  and  publishing  three 
pamphlets  in  March  and  April,  supplying  Wakley  and 
Duncombe  with  notes  for  their  speeches,  and  trying  in 
vain  to  stir  Hume  into  vigorous  opposition.  He  was 
convinced  that  the  Bill  would  diminish  rather  than  in- 


establishing  working-men's  educational  associations.  He  became 
Place's  constant  disciple  and  follower.  Place's  grandchildren  still 
remember  his  visits,  and  the  stern  tones  in  which  he  used  to  be  re- 
proved for  spitting  into  the  fender. 

1  27,819(26). 

2  See  the  pamphlets  in  British  Museum.     They  contain  some  of 
Place's  best  journalistic  work.     For  the  figures  as  to  the  circulation, 
see  "James  Mill :  a  Biography,"  by  Alexander  Bain,  p.  398. 


35.)  THK    REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

crease  the  opportunities  of  obtaining  information  open  to 
the  working  classes.  The  penny  unstamped  papers  had 
succeeded  in  spite  of  the  law  in  acquiring  a  large  circulation, 
Spring  Rice  himself  stated  that  one  paper  which  had  been 
seized  before  publication  was  found  to  be  printing  forty 
thousand  copies  a  week.1  The  new  law  would  put  a  stop 
to  all  this,  and  while  the  rich  men's  sevenpenny  paper 
would  be  reduced  to  fourpence-halfpenny  or  tivepence, 
the  poor  man's  penny  paper  would  be  raised  from  one 
penny  to  twopence-halfpenny.2  But  the  Government, 
though  they  dropped  the  stamp  on  pamphlets,  kept  to 
the  rest  of  their  proposals,  and  their  Bill  was  accepted  as 
a  settlement  of  the  question.  It  was  not  till  1855  that 
the  penny  stamp  was  abolished,  and  only  with  the  repeal 
of  the  advertisement  duty  in  1853,  and  the  paper  duty  in 
1 86 1,  that  Taxes  on  Knowledge  ceased,  and  a  penny  daily 
press  became  possible  in  England. 

In  1 836  nearly  the  whole  Parliamentary  session  was  spent 
on  an  Irish  Municipal  Bill,  which  was  thrown  out  by  the 
Lords  and  abandoned  by  the  Ministry.  Lord  Melbourne 
remained  in  office  for  five  more  years,  and  did  not  retire 
until  he  had  finally  exhausted  any  political  good- will  Avhich 
still  attached  to  the  name  of  Whig.  His  lordship's  personal 
comfort  during  those  years  was  possibly  increased  by  the 
fact  that  Place,  after  1836,  definitely  gave  up  his  work 
as  parliamentary  "  postillion."  "  When  Fox  coalesced  with 
North,"  he  wrote  to  Roebuck  in  October  1836,  "  it  produced 
much  the  same  result  as  the  coalition  of  Whigs  and 
Radicals  is  now  producing.  It  made  the  people  distrust 
all  public  men,  it  put  an  end  to  their  meetings  and  their 
efforts  to  procure  a  reform  of  the  House  of  Commons, 
and  this  state  continued  for  eight  years,  when  the  French 
Revolution  again  roused  them  and  brought  them  into 

1  Hansard,  June  20,  1836. 

•  Letter  to  Hobhouse,  August  10,  1836. 


THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT  351 

action.  .  .  .  Had  the  House  acted  properly,  had  the 
Reformers  acted  sensibly  and  boldly,  no  one  can  tell  what 
beneficial  changes  might  have  been  effected,  .  .  .  and  why 
have  not  these  things  been  done  ?  Why,  but  because 
Ministers  must  be  kept  in  their  places ;  the  live  lumber, 
Lord  John  and  Lord  Melbourne,  and  Spring  Rice  and 
John  Hobhouse,  and  Glenelg,  &c.,  must  not  be  removed." l 

He  always  believed  that  the  Radicals  in  the  House,  if 
they  had  shown  anything  like  courage,  would  have  crys- 
tallised round  themselves  the  growing  popular  discontent. 
"Had  he  at  that  time  (1835)  taken  the  position  he  ought 
to  have  taken,"  Place  wrote  of  Hume  in  1 840,  "  he  would 
soon  have  been  joined  by  others ;  but  even  if  he  had  stood 
alone  for  a  time,  scolded  at  by  Lord  John  and  Lord  the 
Devil  and  all  his  imps,  ...  he  would  long  ere  this  have 
become  emphatically  the  people's  man,  instead  of  being  as 
he  is  now,  next  to  nothing  in  their  estimation."  2 

Or  again,  "A.  man  in  our  House  of  Commons  should 
never  compromise.  He  should  always  be  ready  to  take 
whatever  he  could  get.  but  always  under  protest,  always 
as  a  move  forwards  towards  the  attainment  of  the  large 
reform  he  contemplated,  and  he  should  be  careful  to  make 
the  public  understand  what  he  intended." 

For  a  moment  in  1836  Place  even  wished  that  he  was 
in  the  House.  "  Vanity  apart,"  he  wrote  to  Roebuck,  "  or 
vanity  indulged,  I  care  not  which,  but  I  do  believe  that 
were  I  in  the  House,  you  and  I  could,  aye,  and  would,  do 
much  of  what  ought  to  be  done,  though  we  should  be  both 
bitterly  hated — despised  we  could  not  be — but  the  hatred 
even  would  not  last  beyond  a  session  or  two."  3 

John  Stuart  Mill  wrote  to  Place  in  February  1837,  urging 
him  not  to  "  hibernate."  Place  retorted  by  declaring,  "  I 

1  Place  to  Roebuck,  October  3,  1836. 

2  Place  to  Roebuck,  December  23,  1840. 

3  Place  to  Roebuck,  October  3,  1836. 


352  THE   REFORMED   PARLIAMENT 

have  no  present  inclination  to  waste  my  time  with  men 
who  are  infirm  of  purpose,.  ;and  worry  myself  to  no  useful 
purpose."  Mill  himself  was  still  of  an  age  and  inclination 
to  hope  for  something  even  of  Lord  Melbourne;  and  in 
writing  to  Fonblanque,  said  of  this  letter,  "  I  shall  keep 
it  as  a  rnemorial_of  the  spiritless,  heartless,  imbecility  of 
the  English:Radicals."  1 

1  See  John  Stuart  Mill :  "  Notices  of  his  Life  and  Works,"  reprinted 
from  the  Examiner  (London,  1873),  P-  *>• 


CHAPTER  XIII 
CHARTISM 

DURING  the  Reform  agitation  Place  had  noticed  that 
many  working-men  in  London  and  Lancashire  opposed 
the  Bill  on  the  ground  that  it  would  strengthen  the 
position  of  their  employers,  and  that  the  interest  of  their 
employers  was  necessarily  opposed  to  their  own.1  They 
believed  that,  under  the  conditions  of  modern  industry, 
the  capitalist  was  enabled  in  the  process  of  buying  labour 
and  selling  commodities  to  retain  a  huge  proportion  of  the 
value  which  labour  produced.  The  clearness  of  this  con- 
ception varied,  of  course,  from  the  definite  economic  creed 
of  those  who  had  been  the  personal  disciples  of  Owen  or 
Hodgskin,  to  the  conviction  which  Bronterre  O'Brien 
inspired  in  the  readers  of  the  Poor  Mans  Guardian, 
that  somehow  science  was  on  their  side,  or  the  vague 
feeling  of  the  factory  hands  that  others  were  growing 
unjustly  rich  at  their  expense. 

In  the  disappointment  which  followed  the  passing  of 
the  Reform  Bill  this  doctrine  spread  rapidly,  and  soon 
came  to  form  part  of  the  content  of  the  new  word 
"  socialism."  2  To  its  influence  were  mainly  due  the  two 

1  See  p.       . 

2  Perhaps  the  earliest  recorded  use  of  this  term  is  in  the  Poor  Man's 
Guardian  for  August   24,    1833,   where   a  letter  appears   signed  "A 
Socialist."    At  first  it  seems  to  have  meant  little  more  than  "  Owenite," 
and  the  transition  to  a  more  general  meaning  may  be  seen  in  a  remark 
of  Bronterre  O'Brien  in  the  Northern  Star,  June  23,  1838.     "If  I  mis- 

2 


863 


354  CHARTISM 

most  dramatic  events  of  English  working-class  history— 
the  Grand  National  Trades  Union  of  1833-34,  and  the 
Chartist  movement  of  1837-39. 

John  Doherty1  had  been  preaching  since  1829,  that  all 
the  trade  unions  should  be  combined  in  one  national 
federation,  which  could  be  used  to  secure  to  the  workmen 
the  whole  product  of  their  labour.  In  1833  his  scheme 
was  adopted  by  almost  all  the  existing  working-class 
organisations.  Robert  Owen  and  John  Fielden 2  threw 
themselves  into  the  movement,  which  within  a  feAv  months 
enrolled  half  a  million  members,  and  Fielden  suggested 
that  the  campaign  should  be  opened  by  a  general  strike 
for  an  eight  hours'  day  on  March  i,  i834.3 

Lord  Melbourne  had  been  anxiously  watching  the  trade 
unions  ever  since  he  became  Home  Secretary,  and  in  August 
1833  h°  issued  a  solemn  warning  as  to  the  "criminal 
character  and  evil  effects"  of  the  new  federation.  On 
November  4  Joseph  Parkes  wrote  to  Place,  and  offered 
on  behalf  of  the  Government  to  print  and  circulate  a 
pamphlet  if  Place  would  write  it,  giving  "  a  brief,  plain 
exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  wages,  an  epitome  of  the 
repealed  and  present  law  of  combination,  and  advice  to 
the  working  classes."  4  Place  answered,  "  If  I  were  sure 
that  I  should  not  be  losing  my  time  I  would  write  such  a 
paper,  but  then  I  should  be  for  doing  the  workmen  the 
justice  which  no  one  seems  to  like  to  have  done,  and  would 

take  not,  all  the  more  intelligent  Socialists  are  becoming  Radicals,  and 
all  the  more  intelligent  Radicals  are  becoming  Socialists.  .  .  ."  Place, 
writing  in  1841,  says  that  the  people  are  misled  "  by  notions  of  equality 
in  respect  to  property,  and  by  the  doctrines  promulgated  by  Robert 
Owen,  now  known  under  the  name  of  Socialism."  27,519  (5). 

1  See  p.  265. 

2  John   Fielden  (1784-1849),  the  Radical   M.P.  for   Oldham,  and 
supporter  of  the  Ten  Hours  Bill. 

3  For  the  whole  movement,  see  Webb,  "  History  of  Trade  Unionism/' 
chapter  iii. 

4  Parkes  to  Place,  November  4,  1833. 


CHARTISM  fJ55 

not  assist  to  promulgate."  l  A  month  later  Place  wrote 
to  Parkes  complaining  that  the  factory  commissioner 
Tumell  had  treated  the  subject  in  "The  Companion  to 
the  Newspaper "  purely  from  the  master's  point  of  view.'2 
and  Parkes  in  replying  again  urged  him  to  write.3 

Meanwhile  the  "  Grand  National  Trades  Union "  was 
growing  daily,  and  the  Government,  Place  was  told,  were 
considering  a  Bill  to  double  the  penalties  in  the  Combina- 
tion Law  of  1825.  Place  wrote  instantly  to  Tom  Young,4 
urging  Lord  Melbourne  to  give  up  this  "  worse  than  absurd 
proposal,"  stating  that  he  was  '•'  even  now  carrying  on  a 
correspondence  with  some  members  of  the  committee  at 
Manchester,  to  whom  I  speak  as  plainly  as  possible,"  and 
promising  to  write  "  one  or  more  addresses  to  the  workmen 
when  their  present  foolish  project  has  failed,  as  it  soon  will 
fail,  and  when  they,  in  consequence  of  its  failure,  will  bo 
disposed  to  attend  to  what  may  he  written  to  them." 5 
His  prophecy  seemed  likely  to  be  fulfilled  almost  at  once. 
The  funds  of  the  "  Grand  National "  were  wasted  in  a  series 
of  sectional  strikes  which  the  executive  were  powerless  to 
prevent,  and  the  great  eight  hours'  strike  ordered  for  March  i 
Avas  hardly  attempted.  The  movement  was  already  mori- 
bund when,  on  March  1 7,  six  agricultural  labourers  from  a 
little  village  near  Dorchester  were  sentenced  to  the  out- 
rageous punishment  of  seven  years'  transportation  for 
"  administering  illegal  oaths "  while  forming  a  branch  of 
the  Grand  National.  Immediately  the  whole  agitation 
revived,  and  a  middle-class  member  of  the  Manchester 
Executive  wrote  to  Place  "  (7«  ira,  Ministers  have  furnished 

1  Place  to  Parkes,  November  8,  1833. 

2  Place  to  Parkes,  December  7,  1833. 

3  Parkes  said  that  he  had  sent  Place's  letter  to  Miss  Harriet  Martineau, 
•\vlio,  as  well  as  Place  and  Tufnell,  seems  to  have  been  approached  by 
the  Home  Office. 

4  See  p.  303. 

6  Place  to  T.  Young,  January  8,  1834. 


JJ56  CHARTISM 

the  stimulus.  Wo  were  very  near  the  condition  you 
predicted  we  should  be  in.  We  are  now  upon  our  legs 
again." l  Things  looked  so  formidable  that  Place  deter- 
mined to  write  at  once.  He  accordingly  produced  early  in 
April  two  essays,  one  the  examination  of  a  chairman's 
speech  at  the  Birmingham  meeting  held  to  protest  against 
the  Dorchester  sentences,  and  the  other  entitled  "Trades 
Unions  (i.e.  Federations  of  Trades)  condemned,  Trades 
Clubs  justified."  These  essays,  with  two  others,  "  Trade 
Clubs,  Strikes,  Wages,"  and  "Trades  Unions  and  Trade 
Clubs  of  various  kinds  compared,"  were  too  impartial, 
and  perhaps  too  long,  for  the  purposes  of  the  Government. 
Parkes  did  not  publish  them,  and  they  still  remain  in 
manuscript.2 

On  April  21  the  London  working-men  made  a  huge 
procession  to  the  Home  Office  on  behalf  of  the  Dorchester 
labourers,  which  is  the  only  incident  of  trade  unionism 
before  1867  that  has  penetrated  into  the  history  books. 
Place  was  in  constant  communication  with  members  of 
the  London  committee,  explaining  the  law  relating  to 
petitions,  and  trying  to  prevent  them  from  breaking  it. 
On  the  morning  of  the  demonstration  he  wrote  to  Parkes, 
urging  the  Government  to  let  the  processionists  alone. 
"  There  will  be  an  immense  assemblage  of  people,  but 
of  they  be  let  alone  and  no  displays  of  a  provocating 
nature  be  made  against  them,  all  will  go  off  quietly."3 
"  The  people,"  he  said  a  few  days  before  the  procession, 
"  would  go  through  the  job  they  had  set  themselves,  and 
when  completely  fatigued,  as  they  would  be  by  four  or 
five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  they  would  go  home."  *  At 
the  same  time,  he  gave  his  own  opinion  of  the  conduct 

1  See  Place  to  Parkes,  April  21,  1834. 

2  They  make  up  the  volume  27,834. 

3  Place  to  Parkes,  April  21,  1834. 
*  Loose  MS.,  dated  April  1834. 


CHARTISM  357 

of  the  Ministers.  "  Had  the  sentence,"  he  wrote,  "  been 
passed  on  the  Dorchester  labourers  and  then  remitted, 
had  a  proclamation  been  issued  [as  he  had  urged  immedi- 
ately after  the  sentence]  declaring  the  law,  and  the  deter- 
mination to  enforce  it,  been  made,  an  end  would  have 
been  put  to  all  the  Unions.  But  the  fact  is,  and  it  is 
useless  to  conceal  it,  our  Ministers  have  no  energy  in 
any  case  except  against  the  common  people."  l  The 
Government  did  let  the  procession  alone,  and  on  the 
next  day  Lord  Melbourne  consented  to  receive  a  small 
deputation  on  behalf  of  the  trades.  Tom  Young  after- 
wards reported  that  the  Cabinet  decided  to  carry  out 
the  sentence,  "lest  it  should  be  inferred  that  they  had 
remitted  it  through  fear ; "  and  when  Brougham,  four  years 
later,  was  accused  by  Place  of  this  "  narrow-minded  coward- 
ice," he  admitted  that  the  charge  was  true.2 

The  law  was  not  changed,  but  Place  had  the  greatest 
difficulty  in  keeping  the  Government  from  active  adminis- 
trative interference  on  the  side  of  the  masters  in  the  strikes 
which  occurred  in  and  near  London.  "  The  men."  he  says 
"working  at  the  gasworks  in  Westminster  struck  for  an 
increase  of  wages,  and  the  chairmen  or  secretaries  of  the 
several  companies  went  to  Lord  Melbourne,  the  Home 
Secretary,  and  made  complaints  which  the  Secretary  with 
singular  folly  was  disposed  to  entertain ;  but  a  gentleman 
from  his  office  came  to  me,  and  I  advised  him  seriously  to 
send  away  all  complainants  in  such  cases  with  a  recom- 
mendation to  exert  themselves  in  their  own  concerns.  I 
convinced  him  that  if  the  Home  Secretary  was  silly  enough 
to  interpose  in  such  matters,  his  time  would  be  wholly 
occupied  with  the  complaints  of,  and  deputations  from. 

1  Place  to  Parkcs,  April  21,  1834. 

2  Note  in  loose  MS.,  dated  April  1834.     The  sentence  was  remitted 
in  1836,  and  the  men  brought  back  in  1838.     .^ee  Webb,  "History  of 
Trade  Unionism,"  p.  133. 


.'358  CHARTISM 

masters  and  men." l  This  last  argument  was  likely  to 
tippeal  strongly  to  a  man  of  Lord  Melbourne's  tempera- 
ment, and  at  the  same  time,  as  far  as  his  lordship  had 
any  principle,  he  probably  did  believe  in  Ifiiwer  faire. 
The  gas  directors  Avcro  therefore  sent  away  empty.  The 
master  coopers  were  at  first  more  fortunate;  their  men 
had  struck  against  a  new  scale  of  piece-work  by  which 
wages  were  seriously  reduced,  and  Sir  James  Graham, 
the  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  "ordered  the  journeymen 
who  were  employed  by  Government  at  the  Victualling 
Office,  Deptforcl,  to  make  casks  for  the  masters,  and  per- 
mitted the  masters  to  circulate  a  notice  that  the  trade 
might  be  supplied  with  casks  from  his  Majesty's  Victualling 
Office."  2 

Place  set  up  Hume  to  question  the  Government.  A 
long  debate  ensued  on  March  13,  1834,  in  which  Sir 
James  Graham  expressed  his  opinion  that  the  repeal  of 
the  Combination  Laws  in  1824  had  been  "questionable 
in  theory,  and  in  point  of  practical  prudence  extremely 
doubtful,"  but  promised  to  discontinue  his  interference. 
On  November  14  the  London  Block  Coopers,  with  an 
unusual  impulse  of  gratitude,  wrote  to  Place,  stating  their 
intention  of  calling  the  next  Sunday  morning  to  present 
him  with  a  "  Model  of  a  Brewhouse  Butt "  as  a  "  mark  of 
respect  for  .  .  .  the  assistance  you  gave  them  during  their 
late  strike."  3 

By  that  time  the  "  Grand  National "  was  broken  up,  the 
"  rights  of  industry  men "  were  defeated,  and  trade 
unionism  had  received  a  set  back,  the  effects  of  which 
were  felt  for  the  next  ten  years.  Place  enforced  his  view 
of  the  moral  upon  the  sore  and  beaten  Manchester  Com- 
mittee with  a  plainness  of  speech  which  in  spite  of  his 

1  Loose  MS.,  dated  April  24. 

2  Ibid. 

3  Family  autograph  book. 


CHARTISM  359 

evident  sincerity  and  good-will  must  have  been  very  hard 
to  bear.  "  You  will  recollect,"  he  writes  to  James  Turner 
of  Manchester  on  October  19,  1834,  "that  when  the 
scheme  was  first  set  on  foot  to  reduce  the  hours  of 
working  from  twelve  to  eight,  retaining  the  twelve  hours' 
pay,  I  told  you  that  the  scheme  would  fail,  and  I  told  you 
why  it  would  fail,  and  nothing  be  done.  You  know  how 
it  did  fail,  and  nothing  was  done.  Here  again  I  shall  be 
told  that  if  the  working  people  had  held  together  the 
scheme  would  have  been  carried  into  effect.  Aye,  to  be 
sure  it  would ;  but  this  was  not  at  all  likely,  not  at  all 
possible.  The  working  people  never  did  agree  on  any  one 
subject,  and  no  man  in  his  senses  can  expect  that  even 
a  twentieth  part  of  them  are  at  all  likely  to  concur  in 
anything  which  requires  time  for  its  accomplishment. 
The  working  people  could,  if  they  chose,  establish  a  purely 
representative  government  on  the  ist  of  March  next,  and 
it  is  just  as  likely  they  will  do  so  as  it  was  that  they  would 
demand  eight  hours'  work  and  twelve  hours'  pay  on  the 
i  st  of  March  last." 

Trade  unionism  as  a  means  of  securing  social  equality 
was  now  discredited,  but  the  causes  which  had  produced 
the  "  Grand  National "  were  still  active,  and  any  pro- 
posal which  offered  a  chance  of  successful  revolution  was 
certain  of  working-class  support.  Such  a  proposal  was 
drafted  in  the  year  1838  by  Place  himself,  under  the 
name  of  the  "  People's  Charter,"  and  issued  by  the 
Working  -  Men's  Association,  the  leading  members  of 
which  were  Place's  own  disciples.  In  1835  and  1836 
Place  and  his  friend,  Dr.  J.  K.  Black,  had  induced 
William  Lovett  and  a  few  other  members  of  the  defunct 
National  Union  of  the  Working  Classes  to  help  in  the 
agitation  against  the  newspaper  stamp.1  In  1836  the 
stamp  had  been  reduced  to  a  penny  by  a  settlement 
1  See  p.  348. 


360  CHARTISM 

which  it  seemed  to  be  impossible  to  upset  for  some  time 
to  come,  and  Black,  whose  main  idea  had  always  been  the 
formation  of  mutual  instruction  classes,  induced  Lovett 
to  start  the  "Working-Men's  Association  for  benefiting 
politically,  morally,  and  socially  the  useful  classes."  Place 
suggested  that  the  new  association  should  hold  conversa- 
tion meetings  on  the  lines  of  those  which  the  more 
thoughtful  members  of  the  London  Corresponding  Society 
had  held  forty  years  earlier.  His  idea  was  accepted,  and 
the  meetings  were  held  from  half-past  ten  till  one  o'clock 
at  Lovett's  coffee-house  in  Gray's  Inn  Road  every  Sunday 
morning  for  the  first  six  months  of  1837.  Of  the  dis- 
cussions at  these  meetings  Place  always  spoke  with  warm 
admiration.  After  the  first  he  wrote  to  Colonel  Perronet 
Thompson,  "  You  should  have  been  with  us  this  morning. 
It  was  remarked  by  Chapman,  and  I  assent  to  it,  that  he 
never  in  his  life  heard  so  much  sense  and  so  little  non- 
sense among  so  many  people  in  the  same  time." l 

The  subject  discussed  on  that  day  was  "Will  Free 
Trade  reduce  wages  ? "  The  slips  of  paper  on  which  Place 
made  the  notes  for  his  own  speech,  and  took  down  the 
points  of  his  opponents,  are  still  preserved.2  They  contain 
a  singularly  compact  summary  of  the  three  main  forms  of 

1  Place  to  Thompson,  January  8,  1837. 

2  The  notes  are  as  follows  : — 

"  (Place.)  No  wages  if  no  capital ;  certain  number  of  capitalists  ; 
ditto  labourers.  Increase  of  labourers  ;  none  of  capital ;  wages  fall. 
Increase  of  cap(ital) ;  none  of  lab(ourers)  ;  wages  rise.  Increase  of 
both  ;  wages  remain.  Inevitable  in  periods  of,  say,  ten  years.  Master 
cannot  reduce  wages  unless  pop(ulation),  &c.  Cannot  prevent  increase 
of  pop(ulation).  Masters  strike  ;  men  strike  ;  undersell  one  another. 
Unions,  is.  general  unions  of  all  trades,  cannot  do  any  good.  Trade 
societies  may  ;  can  only  impede,  not  prevent,  fall  of  wages  ;  always 
weak  when  trade  bad,  and  vice  versa.  Produce  dividend  :  (i)  Kent, 
(2)  Wages,  (3)  Profit;  cannot  be  otherwise  ;  no  capital,  no  wages.  No 
w;iges,  no  produce. 

"  (Owen.)  We  can  support  all  Europe.  Lose  our  time  in  discussing 
these  subjects.  Question,  is  there  knowledge  enough  among  the 


CHARTISM  361 

economic  analysis  which  during  the  nineteenth  century 
have  been  presented  as  political  creeds.  Place  gives  the 
"  classical "  political  economy  of  mid-century  Liberalism, 
Robert  Owen  the  voluntary  communism  of  Proudhon  and 
Bakounin,  and  Lovett  the  "  iron  law  "  on  which  Marx  and 
Lassalle  based  their  social  democracy. 

The  six  or  seven  leading  members  of  the  Working-Men's 
Association  formed  an  able  and  fairly  homogeneous  group. 
Most  of  them  had  left  the  bench,  and  were  living  as  news- 
dealers, journalists,  small  shopkeepers,  or  paid  officials. 
Eight  or  nine  years  of  agitation  had  made  them  good 
speakers  and  organisers.  In  those  years  the  freshness  had 
worn  off  their  socialist  faith,  and  some  of  them  were  near 
the  time  when  they  would  be  even  unduly  dominated  by 
the  "  political  economists "  whom  they  had  begun  by 
hating.1  They  genuinely  liked  and  respected  Place,  and 
years  afterwards  Lovett  wrote  of  the  "  clear-headed  and 
warm-hearted  old  gentleman,"2  who  helped  and  taught 
them. 

Among  these  men  Place  found  not  only  a  new  oppor- 
tunity of  influence,  but  consolation  for  the  weariness  and 
disgust  which  had  made  him  abandon  Parliamentary 
politics.  The  good  of  the  working-men  had  always  been 
the  first  object  of  his  life,  but  since  his  return  to  politics  in 
1 807,  his  method  of  action  had  brought  him  into  perpetual 
conflict  with  the  impatience  and  resentment  of  working- 
class  feeling.  He  had  toiled  as  the  schoolmaster  toils  for 
his  pupils,  without  much  hope  of  gratitude,  or  even  of 

working  people  to  put  an  end  to  all  our  institutions?  Until  equality 
none  done.  Equality  more  easy  than  any  other  change. 

"  (Lovett.)  People  would  contend  for  a  better  state  if  they  had  more 
political  power  ;  .  .  .  Corn  Laws  ;  agricultural  labourers  would  come 
in  competition  with  manufactures  and  reduce  wages.  Reduction 
would  be  spem,  abroad.  Living  on  potatoes,  would  still  be  fed  upon 
potatoes."— [27,319  (259-263)]. 

1  See  p.  273. 

2  "  The  Life  and  Struggles  of  William  Lovett"  (London,  1876),  p.  164. 


«  CHARTISM 

understanding.  Now,  however,  a  changed  note  shows 
itself  in  his  correspondence  with  Lovett,  Vincent,  Cleave, 
and  the  rest.  He  is  as  far  as  ever  from  sharing  their 
socialist  ideas.  But  it  is  as  men  fighting  against  his  own 
enemies,  and  discouraged  by  his  own  disappointments,  that 
he  thinks  of  them,  and  not  as  the  impersonal  objects  of 
his  work.  Just  at  the  time  when  John  Stuart  Mill  wrote  of 
him  as  an  example  of  "spiritless  and  heartless  imbecility," l 
Place  was  sending  a  letter  of  comfort  to  William  Lovett. 
It  is  a  strange  sort  of  comfort,  and  illustrates  well  that 
close-lipped  stoicism  which  the  "  greatest  happiness  prin- 
ciple "  Avas  apt  to  develop  among  its  sterner  adherents. 

"January  12,  1837. — There  is  a  tone  of  melancholy  in  your  note 
which  I  have  sometimes  observed  in  your  manner.  I  have  the  greatest 
possible  regard  for  you,  and  you  can  hardly  sufficiently  appreciate  the 
pleasure  I  should  receive  at  observing  that  you  were  happy.  I  conclude 
that  your  disposition  towards  despondency  arises  from  two  causes — (i) 
your  health  not  being  robust  ;  (2)  that  you  dwell  too  much  on  the  mis- 
fortunes and  miseries  of  your  fellow-men. 

"  Now,  I  have  seen  as  many  changes  as  most  men,  and  have  [known] 
the  extremes  of  poverty,  but  I  never  have  been  melancholy,  never 
despaired,  never  was  really  unhappy  during  twelve  consecutive  hours, 
and  I  will  tell  you  why.  When  I  was  very  young  I  was  persuaded  to 
believe  that  'this  was  the  best  of  all  possible  worlds.'  I  found  it  a  very 
bad  one.  I  did  my  best  to  mend  it,  as  we  are  both  now  doing.  What, 
then,  is  the  real  difference  between  us  ?  This — you  look  on  the  dark 
side  of  the  picture,  I  on  the  bright  one.  Your  anticipations  of  the 
future  are  gloomy,  mine  are  the  reverse.  You  lament  the  past,  and 
suH'er  the  recollections  it  produces  to  distress  you.  I  take  the  past  and 
comparing  it  with  the  present  see  an  immense  change  for  the  better.  I 
see  that  this  and  many  other  countries  cannot  be  used  as  they  were  wont 
to  be  used  in  former  times,  that  they  are  much  further  removed  from 
the  state  of  mere  animals  than  they  were,  and  that  the  sum  of  happiness 
is  much  greater  than  it  was ;  and  hence  I  infer  that  it  will  continue  to 
increase.  The  process  will  be  slow,  very  slow,  and  probably  one  of 
iluctuation,  but  ever  advancing.  This  it  is  which  consoles  me.  This 
it  was  and  is  that  determined  me  and  determines  me  to  be  cheerful, 
and  not  to  permit  myself  to  be  depressed,  and  to  annoy  myself  with 
matters  which  1  can  neither  prevent  nor  mitigate. 

"  I  never  go  out,  however,  without  seeing  poverty  and  ignorance,  and 

:  See  p.  352. 


CHARTISM  363 

am  constantly  obliged  to  shake  off  tlie  uneasy  feelings  these  produce, 
Jest  I  should  become  a  misanthrope.  You  and  I  and  all  such  men  are 
apt  to  value  mankind  too  highly,  but  riot  equally  so.  1  n  proportion  as 
this  notion  prevails  will  be  our  uneasiness.  Look  at  mankind,  calmly, 
rationally,  as  they  are  ;  see  the  naked  savages ;  see  the  ferocious  Malays, 
the  murderous  Ladrones,  and  ask  yourself  what  is  man  as  Nature  made 
him  I  Is  he  so  far  above  a  wild  beast  as  that  we  should  be  unhappy 
on  his  account?  Look  from  these  through  all  gradations  and  see  what 
he  really  is,  see  what  a  creature  of  prejudice,  bad  passions,  and  ignor- 
ance he  is.  See  what  a  mass  of  meanness  and  roguery  prevails  among 
all,  even  among  those  who  are  the  most  cultivated.  Look  at  those 
who  are  not  compelled  to  work  with  their  own  hands  for  their 
maintenance,  and  see  the  vile,  degrading  notions  and  practices  of 
this  class.  Look  to  those  who  are  able  to  maintain  themselves  with- 
out any  kind  of  employment ;  look  to  the  rich,  the  titled,  the  proud, 
conceited  aristocracy  ;  look  at  any  and  all  of  them  as  classes,  and 
nowhere  will  you  find  mankind  such  as  you  and  I  would  wish  to  see 
them.  Oh  no  :  it  is  a  picture  which  in  its  details  is  so  detestable,  so 
utterly  repugnant  to  my  notions,  that  had  I  not  been  convinced  that 
'this  is  the  best  of  all  possible  worlds,'  bad  as  it  is,  I  would  have  left  it 
many  years  ago.  I  settled  the  question  with  myself  thus,  and  I  advise 
you  to  follow  my  example,  since  it  will  make  you  happier,  and  enable 
you  to  increase  the  happiness  of  others.  I  resolved  that  nothing  I  saw, 
nothing  I  read,  nothing  I  heard,  should  make  me  unhappy.  1  should 
have  added  nothing  I  suffered — that  I  would  be  cheerful.  I  saw  that 
to  better  the  condition  of  others  to  any  considerable  extent  was  a  long 
uphill  piece  of  work,  that  my  best  efforts  would  produce  very  little 
effect.  But  I  saw  very  distinctly  that  I  could  do  nothing  better,  noth- 
ing indeed  half  so  good.  This  made  me  go  on  steadily,  and  kept  me  as 
steadily  to  my  resolve  not  to  be  unhappy,  let  whatever  might  come. 

"Now,  Lovett,  if  every  one  could  be  persuaded  to  think  thus,  and  to 
act  thus,  the  really  unhappy  would  be  but  few  ;  and  this  after  all  is  the 
great  lesson  to  inculcate.  Every  one  who  learned  it  would  have  his 
energy  and  his  means  to  do  good  greatly  increased. — Yours  truly, 

"FRANCIS  PLACE.'' 

As  Place's  gospel  of  cheerfulness  ends  on  a  note  of 
patient  despair,  so  Lovett's  answering  apology  for  his 
melancholy  is  really  an  assertion  of  optimism.  Lovett  had 
at  that  time  in  his  socialism  what  Place  could  not  rind  in 
his  Malthnsian  economics,  a  universal  remedy  for  all  suffer- 
ing and  all  wrong. 

'•January  16,  1837. — DEAR  SIR, — lam  fully  sensible  of  your  kind- 
ness towards  me,  and  if  more  powerful  circumstances  did  not  control  my 
desire  to  avoid  looking  on  the  dark  side  of  the  picture,  I  might  profit 


364  CHARTISM 

by  your  kind  advice  and  resolve  to  be  free  from  cares  and  apprehensions. 
But  you  know,  sir,  that  our  feelings  depend  on  our  internal  structure, 
influenced  by  the  external  world  ;  and  that  our  philosophy  is  not  always 
master  of  the  one,  nor  possesses  an  absolute  command  over  the  other. 
A  highly  favourable  organisation  may  have  done  much  for  you  in  this 
respect ;  especially  as  you  had  your  difficulties  to  encounter  in  the 
midst  of  youth  and  vigour,  and  now,  contemplating  the  difficulties  you 
have  braved,  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  rewards  of  your  labour,  having  no 
apprehension  for  the  future,  possessing  your  own  comfortable  home,  and 
surrounded  with  your  friends,  you  think  the  course  you  have  pursued 
may  be  followed  with  advantage  by  others.  Youth  and  vigour  of  body 
give  us  great  power  to  cope  with  difficulties,  and  when  success  attends 
our  exertions  a  corresponding  state  of  mind  gives  us  still  greater  energy 
to  master  them.  But  when  youth,  and  strength,  and  flow  of  spirits 
have  been  wasted  in  unrequited  toil  and  poverty,  and  when  after  years 
ot  great  physical  and  mental  exertions,  after  a  life  of  sobriety  and 
industry,  you  find  yourself  losing  your  physical  energies  (so  necessary 
for  those  who  have  to  depend  on  their  labour),  and  getting  more  and 
more  involved  in  difficulties  inextricable,  and  having  the  cares  of  a 
family  in  whose  welfare  is  your  highest  hope,  you  need  not  be  surprised 
if  my  tone  and  manner  correspond  with  my  situation.  Perhaps  the 
scenes  I  have  had  to  encounter  in  my  journey  may  have  increased  my 
sympathies  for  my  fellow-men  ;  and  while  I  believe  with  you  that  this 
is  the  best  world  of  which  I  have  any  hope,  yet  when  I  feel  conscious 
of  how  much  could  be  done  to  make  it  a  comparative  paradise  of  happi- 
ness, instead  of  the  hell  of  toil,  of  poverty,  and  crime  we  find  it,  I  can- 
not help  lamenting  that  the  wise  and  intelligent  few  do  not  carry  their 
views  of  reformation  beyond  making  comfortable  slaves  of  the  many  to 
pamper  and  support  the  few. 

"True  it  is  that  Nature,  by  casting  the  savage  in  the  midst  of  the 
forest  to  contend  with  wolves  and  tigers  for  a  subsistence  has  rendered 
him  scarcely  superior  to  the  animals  of  his  prey  ;  yet  when  we  take 
into  account  that  she  has  also  bestowed  faculties  on  him  which  have 
gradually  raised  him  up  to  subdue  all  existence  to  his  purposes,  and 
built  up  that  empire  of  mind  which  has  turned  the  waste  of  oaks 
and  acorns  into  a  blooming  garden  (and  still  but  in  the  infancy  of  its 
culture)  ;  and  when  we  see  that  in  proportion  to  the  development  of 
intellect,  so  are  the  feelings  of  sympathy,  affection,  and  friendship,  and 
are  the  passions  of  love  heightened  by  a  thousand  enjoyments,  who  does 
not  sigh  for  the  extension  of  knowledge  unalloyed  by  the  withering 
blasts  of  toiling  poverty  ?  You  have  drawn  a  faithful  picture  of  the 
evils  attendant  on  the  different  classes  we  find  in  this  country.  These 
evils,  I  think,  may  be  fairly  traced  to  the  circumstances  and  constitu- 
tion of  society,  and  not  to  the  organisation  of  man.  What  other  feel- 
ings can  you  expect  than  those  of  slavish  and  cringing  servility,  blended 
with  a  lust  for  mere  animal  enjoyments,  from  those  who  are  taught  to 
believe  themselves  born  to  toil,  and  to  obtain  which  they  must  bend  cap 


CHARTISM  365 

in  hand  to  a  being  who,  not  a  whit  better  than  themselves,  must  bend 
again  to  the  class  above  him.  What  can  l>e  expected  from  those  whose 
sole  occupation  and  attention  are  engrossed  from  youth  to  age  in  buying 
and  selling,  cheating  and  swindling,  their  fellow-men,  in  order  to  amass 
wealth  which  their  habits  and  feelings  preclude  them  from  enjoying? 
Strong  indeed  must  be  the  mental  energy  and  moral  feeling  of  the  few 
who  brave  the  contagious  influences  of  such  pursuits  and  escape  with 
the  philosophy  of  enjoyment. — From  your  fellow-citizen, 

"WILLIAM  LOVETT." 

But  a  few  months  after  the  formation  of  the  Working- 
Men's  Association  the  leaders  found  themselves  too  busy 
to  write  long  letters  on  the  causes  of  human  happiness, 
or  to  spend  their  Sunday  mornings  in  academic  dis- 
cussions. The  Association  had  from  the  beginning  pro- 
fessed political  as  well  as  educational  objects,  and  in 
February  1837  its  political  programme  was  defined  at  a 
meeting  in  the  Crown  and  Anchor  Tavern.  This  consisted 
of  the  famous  "  six  points  " — universal l  suffrage,  the  ballot, 
payment  of  members,  annual  parliaments,  equal  electoral 
districts,  and  abolition  of  the  property  qualification  for 
Parliament — which  together  had  formed  Major  Cartwright's 
plan  of  Radical  reform  as  early  as  1776,  and  had  been  ever 
since  closely  connected  with  the  word  Radicalism. 

The  Radicals  in  Parliament  approached  the  new  body, 
and  on  May  31,  1837,  a  private  meeting  was  held  between 
thirteen  members  of  Parliament  and  about  sixty  members 
of  the  Association.  Eleven  members  signed  the  six  points, 
and  a  committee  was  appointed  to  draft  a  comprehensive 
Bill,  to  be  called  "  The  People's  Charter." 2  "  None  of  the 
members  of  Parliament,"  says  Place,  "gave  himself  any 
further  concern  respecting  the  Bill  they  agreed  to  draw."  3 

1  i.e.  manhood. 

-  27,819(57-220). 

3  The  working-men  on  the  committee  were  Henry  Hetherington, 
John  Cleave,  James  Watson,  Richard  Moore,  William  Lovett,  Henry 
Vincent.  See  the  list  of  the  founders  of  the  National  Union  of  the 
Working  Classes,  p.  272. 


366  CHARTISM 

This  action  of  the  Association  coincided  with  a  sudden 
revival  of  working-class  interest  in  politics  throughout  the 
country.  The  comparative  prosperity  which  had  pre- 
vailed since  1832  was  succeeded  by  a  depression  of  trade 
in  1836-37,  and  "  Working  -  Men's  Associations"  with 
vaguely  revolutionary  objects  appeared  spontaneously  in 
many  provincial  towns.1  In  August,  Henry  Vincent  and 
John  Cleave,  their  two  best  speakers,  went  on  a  lecturing 
tour  in  the  north  of  England,  and  founded  branches. 
Early  in  October,  Lovett,  their  best  Avriter,  published  a 
singularly  eloquent  and  pathetic  Address  to  the  Working 
Classes.-  Place  made  Hume  give  him  three  hundred 
"franks,"  and  by  these  and  other  means,  sent  copies  of 
the  Address  from  one  end  of  the  country  to  the  other. 

In  the  early  autumn  there  was  a  general  election 
on  the  occasion  of  the  Queen's  accession,  at  which  the 
Radical  party  in  Parliament  was  almost  annihilated ;  and 
in  November,  Lord  John  Russell  made  that  declaration  of 
contentment  with  the  Reform  Bill  of  1832,  Avhich  earned 
him  the  nickname  of  "  Finality  Jack,"  and  completed  the 
alienation  of  the  Reformers  from  the  Whigs.  In  the 
same  month  Feargus  O'Connor,  already  well  known  as  the 
most  effective  mob  orator  of  his  time,  began  to  publish 
the  Northern  Star  at  Leeds,  and  to  join  advocacy  of  the 
"  live  points  of  Radicalism  "  to  furious  abuse  of  the  Xew 
Poor-Law.  In  December,  Attwood  and  the  "  currency 
men "  of  Birmingham  revived  the  Birmingham  Political 
Union 3  on  the  basis  of  universal  suffrage.  By  the  spring 
of  1838  a  formidable  popular  movement  had  already 

1  Place  says  that  the  Working-Men's  Association  had  at  one  time 
150  branches.  See  Place  to  Hume,  December  19,  1839  (in  "Auto- 
biography"1. 

'2  27,819  (22 1-224).  See  the  Address,  preserved  also  in  the  volume  of 
Addresses  of  the  London  Working- Men's  Association,  Brit.  MHS.  8138, 
a  (i)  ;  cf.  also  Lovett's  "  Life  and  Struggles"  (London,  1876),  pp.  94-97. 

3  See  p.  251,  note. 


CHARTISM  367 

developed  itself  in  the  manufacturing  districts,  and  great 
open-air  meetings^were  held,  at  which  the  New  Poor- Law 
and  the  Factory  system  were  denounced,  and  universal 
suffrage  was  demanded  as  a  means  of  immediate  social 
revolution. 

On  May  8,  1838,  the  People's  Charter,  from  which  the 
movement  was  to  take  its  name,  at  last  appeared  in 
pamphlet  form.  Place  writing  at  the  time  gives  the  history 
of  its  production.  The  committee  appointed  to  draft  a 
Bill  the  year  before  had,  as  has  been  mentioned,  neglected 
to  do  so.  Early  in  March  1838,  however,  Lovett  asked 
help  from  Place,  who  "  undertook  the  task  upon  condition 
that  the  points  and  as  much  of  the  detail  as  the  Association 
could  easily  put  together  should  be  prepared,  so  that  in 
drawing  the  Bill  I  might  be  well  aware  of  their  notions. 
This  was  done,  and  I  drew  the  skeleton  of  a  Bill  under 
appropriate  heads,  and  sent  it  to  Mr.  Lovett  for  Mr. 
Roebuck  to  complete,  as  he  had  again  said  he  would. 
But  his  sad  state  of  health  did  not  permit  him  to  keep 
his  promise,  and  I  therefore  made  the  Charter,  Lovett 
assisting  me  as  he  could.  The  Working-Men's  Association 
approved  of  it,  and  it  was  printed.  Copies  were  sent  to 
every  Working-Men's  Association  in  Great  Britain,  to 
many  other  Associations  and  to  many  persons,  with  re- 
quests that  they  would  suggest  such  amendments  as  they 
might  think  advisable.  .  .  .  Certain  propositions  in  some 
few  details  were  examined,  adopted,  and  incorporated  by 
desire  of  the  Association  by  Lovett  and  me.  This  amend- 
ment has  made  the  Charter  more  simple.  Alterations 
were  also  made  in  the  Address,  Avhich  serves  -as  an  intro- 
duction ;  and  although  that  Address  is  not  such  an  one  as  I 
should  have  drawn,  the  publication  is  a  very  respectable 
one."  1 

1  Place  to  Erskine  Perry,  October  4,  1838  ;  cf.  also  27,820  (96-98). 
For  a  copy  of  the  Charter,  see  27,820  (370-373).  There  were  two 


368  CHARTISM 

On  September  13,  1838,  Place  wrote  to  Hume  rejoicing 
in  the  movement,  and  (with  an  obvious  desire  to  improve 
the  occasion)  ascribing  its  success  to  the  inaction  of  the 
Radicals  in  Parliament.  "  The  Tories,  under  the  name  of 
Conservatives  in  the  House  of  Commons  and  the  Tories 
in  the  same  House  under  the  name  of  Whigs,  assisted  by 
the  misnamed  Liberals,  had,  so  they  all  believed,  succeeded 
in  quieting  the  people,  i.e.  in  stultifying  them,  and  had 
put  them  into  a  state  of  apathy,  which  at  length  the 
Liberals  began  to  lament  when  they  found  that  the 
apathy  was  such  as  had  not  and  could  not  be  paralleled 
except  at  the  time  of  the  infamous  coalition  of  Fox  and 
North.  .  .  .  Then,  however,  there  was  no  public ;  now  there 
is  a  growing  public  even  among  the  working  people  and 
those  nearest  to  them  in  condition,  and  the  consequence  is 
just  that  which  all  well-judging  men  might,  as  some  did, 
anticipate.  The  most  active  and  well-informed  among 
the  people,  seeing  themselves  utterly  abandoned  by  those 
who  had  promised  at  the  hustings  to  be  their  friends, 
began  to  stir  for  themselves,  at  first  with  very  small 
numbers,  for  a  reform  of  Parliament  on  the  broadest 
possible  plan.  And  their  numbers  increased  with  wonder- 
ful celerity,  and  at  length  they  have  produced  an  agitation 
not  at  all  contemplated  or  even  believed  to  be  possible  by 
those  whose  condition  in  life  was  above  them,  and  have  in 
a  very  short  time  been  the  cause  of  immense  numbers 
of  people  in  various  places  coming  into  active  service. 
This  is  a  new  feature  in  society  produced  by  the  in- 
creased intelligence  of  the  working  people.  This  is  the 
first  time  that  the  desire  for  reform  has  been  moved  by 
them  (the  working  people)  and  carried  upwards.  Until 
now  it  has  always  proceeded  downwards,  and  expired  when 
abandoned,  as  it  always  has  been,  by  their  gentlemen 

editions  of  the  Charter,  that  sent  round  to  the  Associations  hi  May 
1838,  and  the  amended  version  published  in  September  1838. 


CHARTISM  369 

leaders.     It  will  not  again  expire,  but  will  go  on  continu 
ally,  sometimes  with  more,  sometimes  with  less,  rapidity, 
but  on  it  will  go." l 

On  September  17  the  Working-Men's  Association  held 
an  open-air  meeting  in  Palace  Yard  to  inaugurate  the 
movement  in  London.  They  asked  Place  and  Roebuck  to 
be  two  of  their  delegates.  Place  declined  on  the  ground 
that  such  posts  should  be  taken  by  younger  men,  who 
"  have  no  objection  to  be  out  at  night,"  but  suggested  that 
Roebuck  ought  to  accept,  and  promised  for  himself  that 
"if  any  circumstance  of  pressing  moment  to  the  people 
generally  should  arise  and  make  it  every  man's  duty  to 
come  out,  I  would  not  stay  at  home,  but  would  put  aside 
every  consideration,  come  among  them,  and  do  my  duty  to 
the  best  of  my  ability." 2 

Place's  correspondence  at  the  time  shows  that  he 
thought  Chartism  had  little  chance  of  immediate  success 
unless  some  accident,  as  had  happened  in  1832,  should^ 
bring  politics  into  a  revolutionary  position.  But  he  was 
sure  that  a  well-managed  agitation  for  the  Charter  would 
create  a  strong  democratic  party,  led  by  the  new  class  of 
educated  working-men,  and  able  to  put  pressure  upon 
Parliament. 

For  instance,  in  the  letter  quoted  above  he  wrote :  "  We 
have  now,  then,  obtained  to  a  considerable  extent  what  we 
never  before  had,  namely,  a  very  large  proportion  of  the 
working  people  going  on  with  others  for  the  common  and 
intelligibly  declared  purpose  set  forth  in  the  Charter.  .  .  . 
They,  however,  persuade  themselves  that  they  shall  obtain 
the  Act  in  a  short  time.  Disappointment  will  vex  and 
perplex  them,  and  numbers  will  fly  off  and  determine  to 
adopt  violent  proceedings.  This  feeling  will  not  last  long, 
It  will  give  way  to  rational  feelings  again,  and  then  the 


1  Place  to  Hume,  September  13,  1838. 

2  Place  to  Falconer,  September  2,  1838. 


2  A 


370  CHARTISM 

matter  will  fluctuate,  no  one  can  say  how  long,  nor  what 
incidents  of  a  decisive  nature  will  occur,  nor  how  any 
portion  of  the  whole  matter  will  finally  terminate.  Good 
will  result,  and  that  too  in  many  ways,  but  in  none  more 
certainly  than  in  preventing  the  Government  from  doing 
many  mischievous  things." 

The  kind  of  agitation  for  which  Place  hoped  was  that 
which  was  soon  to  be  illustrated  by  the  Anti-Corn-Law 
League,  an  agitation  rigidly  confined  to  one  proposal,  and 
including  every  one  who  could  be  persuaded  by  patient 
and  good-natured  propaganda  to  approve  of  it.  Before 
consenting  to  draft  the  Charter,  he  had  made  the  leaders 
of  the  Working-Men's  Association  promise  that  they  would 
prevent  speeches  against  the  New  Poor -Law  or  for 
Socialism  from  being  delivered  on  their  platforms.1  He 
declared  at  the  time  that  they  were  determined  "  to  cease 
using  opprobrious  terms  and  epithets,  and  to  receive  every 
one  as  a  friend  who  will  take  the  Charter  as  his  guide,  and 
to  work  on  steadily  with  every  such  person  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  their  purpose."2  "Such  Associations,"  he 
afterwards  wrote,  "  can  only  succeed  by  long-continued, 
steady,  patient,  liberal  conduct,  accepting  and  using  every 
kind  of  assistance  which  may  at  any  time,  and  in  every 
way,  be  available,  making  no  absurd  pretensions  to  any- 
thing, and  especially  not  to  superior  wisdom  and  honesty, 
but  acting  with  becoming  modesty,  but  with  indomitable 
perseverance." 3 

An  agitation  on  these  lines  would,  he  knew,  have  to 
overcome  the  tendency  of  men  engaged  in  manual  labour 
to  confine  their  desires  to  their  immediate  material 
interests.  "Propose,"  he  wrote  in  1835,  "to  a  working- 
man  any  great  measure  affecting  the  whole  body,  and  he 

1  27,835  (i 60,  &). 

2  Place  to  Falconer,  September  2,  1838. 

3  27,819  (47). 


CHARTISM  371 

immediately  asks  himself  the  question,  What  am  I  to  get  by 
it,  meaning,  what  at  the  instant  am  I  to  have  in  my  hand, 
or  in  my  pocket,  which  I  should  like  to  have  ?  To  this  he 
replies — nothing.  There  he  sticks ;  he  does  nothing;  he  has 
not  the  heart  to  do  anything  even  for  his  own  advantage  if 
that  advantage  be  remote,  and  he  has  no  desire  to  stir  him- 
self for  the  advantage  of  other  persons." l  But  he  hoped 
that  this  tendency  would  be  cured  at  least  in  part  by  the 
spread  of  education,  and  that  if  so,  "some  three  or  four 
material  things  made  as  simple  as  possible,  and  worked  at 
separately,  may  all  be  going  on  at  the  same  time." 2 

Lovett  and  his  friends  accepted  Place's  ideal  of  agitation, 
and  with  occasional  lapses  tried  thenceforth  to  act  on  it. 
But  the  Chartist  movement  in  its  main  development 
belonged  to  a  type  of  agitation  diametrically  opposed  to 
that  which  Place  desired.  The  conception  which  fired  the 
northern  factory  hands  and  pitmen,  or  the  Welsh  iron- 
miners  in  1838  and  1839,  and  again  in  1848,  was  that  of  a 
class  solidarity  depending  primarily  upon  an  identity  of 
material  interest,  and  overcoming  individual  selfishness  and 
inertia  by  discipline  and  enthusiasm — a  "  class- war,"  to  use 
a  modern  phrase,  which  should  deliberately  antagonise  all 
outside  the  ranks  of  the  "  comrades." 

The  Working-Men's  Association  gave  Chartism  its  name 
and  programme,  but  never  had  any  considerable  voice  in 
its  direction.  It  seemed  at  first  as  if  the  movement  would 
be  in  the  hands  of  Attwood  and  his  "  currency  "  friends  in 
Birmingham.  They  drew  up  the  form  of  petition  to  the 
Government,  which  was  to  be  presented  by  a  Convention 
of  delegates  from  all  England  in  the  spring  of  1839,  and 
which  contained  such  phrases  as :  "  The  good  of  a  party 
has  been  advanced  to  the  sacrifice  of  the  good  of  the  nation ; 
the  few  have  governed  for  the  interests  of  the  few ;  while 

1  Place  to  William  Longson,  weaver,  Stockport,  May  25,  1835. 

2  Ibid. 


372  CHARTISM 

the  interest  of  the  many  has  been  neglected  or  insolently 
and  tyrannously  trampled  upon."  .  .  .  "We  tell  your 
honourable  House  that  the  capital  of  the  master  must  no 
longer  be  deprived  of  its  due  profit ;  that  the  labour  of  the 
workmen  must  no  longer  be  deprived  of  its  due  reward; 
that  the  laws  which  make  food  dear  and  those  which, 
by  making  money  scarce,  make  labour  cheap,  must  be 
abolished.  ..." 

At  a  succession  of  meetings  in  the  autumn  of  1838  the 
currency  men  convinced  their  Socialist  audiences  of  their 
sincerity  by  describing  the  misery  of  the  working  classes 
and  denouncing  the  Government,  to  whose  wickedness  that 
misery  was  due.  They  contributed  the  funds  and  business 
ability,  without  which  a  big  campaign  could  not  be 
organised,  and  might  well  have  brought  about  that  alliance 
between  Socialism  and  proposals  of  currency  change  which 
has  become  a  standing  fact  in  the  United  States.1  That 
they  failed  was  mainly  due  to  the  influence  of  Feargus 
O'Connor.  He  never  attempted  to  understand  Attwood's 
"  rag-botheration," 2  and  took  what  economics  he  had  in 
the  earlier  years  of  the  movement  ready  made  from  the 
Marxism  of  Bronterre  O'Brien.  His  idea  from  the  begin- 
ning was  the  formation  of  what  he  used  to  call  an  "  Old 
Guard"  of  stalwart  Chartists,  who  should  all  read  the 
Northern  Star,  and  all  take  him  as  their  unquestioned 
leader.  Both  O'Connor  and  the  Birmingham  men  natu- 

1  Place  pointed  out  a  danger  in  this  form  of  agitation  which  showed 
itself  in  Mr.  Bryan's  campaign  of  1896.  "The  whole  of  the  agitation 
was  made,  what  the  people  of  Birmingham  themselves  afterwards  called 
it,  'A  Bread  and  Cheese  Question,'  probably  the  worst  foundation 
possible,  since  a  change  for  the  better,  however  small,  would  be  sure  to 
detach  a  large  proportion  of  their  members  from  them  and  cause  the 
whole  of  them  to  distrust  their  leaders,  who  had  taken  great  pains  to 
make  them  believe  that  the  distress  must  not  only  continue,  but  must 
go  on  increasing  until  Mr.  Attwood's  scheme  of  currency  was  put  into 
practice."  27,819  (87). 

2  See  Northern  Star,  July  20,  1 830. 


CHARTISM  373 

rally  opposed  the  purely  political  tactics  of  the  London 
Working-Men's  Association.  O'Connor  denied  that  they 
were  working-men  at  all.  He  appealed  against  them  to 
the  "  unshorn  chins,  blistered  hands,  and  fustian  jackets," x 
and  in  London  set  up  a  Democratic  Association  in  opposi- 
tion to  them.  Attwood  afterwards  said  that  the  "  pamphlet 
called  the  '  Charter '  .  .  .  proceeded  from  a  little  clique  or 
junta  of  men  who  had  little  more  influence  over  the  work- 
men of  London  than  over  those  of  Constantinople." 2 

When  the  Convention  met,  on  February  4,  1839, 
O'Connor  and  his  party  dominated  it  from  the  first. 
Attwood's  currency  scheme  was  contemptuously  rejected, 
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  missionaries  of  the  Convention 
were  collecting  signatures  to  a  petition,  in  the  wording  of 
which  the  whole  of  that  scheme  was  implied.  Lovett  was 
made  Secretary  of  the  Convention,  but  the  majority  of  the 
sixty  delegates  seem  to  have  been  suspicious  of  him  and 
his  Association.  "  Dr."  Taylor,  the  ablest  man  among  the 
extreme  revolutionists,  wrote  in  the  Northern  Star:  "I 
came  to  London  very  much  prejudiced  against  Lovett  and 
all  who  belonged  to  the  Working-Men's  Association,  look- 
ing upon  them  as  no  better  than  the  tools  of  Place,  Grote, 
Hume,  Brougham,  and  the  other  leaders  of  the  Malthusian 
party."  3 

The  Convention  sat  from  February  till  May  1839,  in 
Bolt  Court,  Fleet  Street,  imitating  the  House  of  Commons 
for  five  weary  days  every  week,  quarrelling  among  them- 
selves, and  passing  resolutions  about  the  state  of  the 
People,  Ireland,  the  Poor-Law,  the  Factory  System,  and 
the  Rural  Police.4  The  movement  was  now  past  the  point 

1  Northern  Star,  February  24,  1838. 

2  27,819(241).  3  27,821  (144). 

4  "  There  was  little  for  the  Convention  to  do,  besides  some  matters 
of  detail  of  small  moment,  so  they  made  business  for  themselves  .  .  . 
made  speeches  to  one  another  .  .  ." — Place  to  Hoare,  December  19, 
1839  (in  "Autobiography"). 


374  CHARTISM 

at  which  Place  could  hope  to  do  much  by  giving  advice. 
"It  is  impossible,"  he  wrote  on  March  6,  1839,  "to  produce 
any  effect  by  reasoning  with  masses  of  men  when  they 
are  once  intent  upon  any  project,  be  it  whatever  it  may. 
Circumstances  alone  can  operate  upon  them." l 

On  March  1 1  Lovett  wrote  to  Place  (who  had  been  ill 
with  influenza):  "We  are  beginning  to  understand  each 
other  better  than  we  did ;  the  unfounded  calumnies  made 
against  us  in  the  North  are  being  dissipated,  and  the  blood 
and  thunder  heroes  are  being  done  up." 2 

Place  replied :  "  Upon  the  whole,  the  proceedings  have 
been  better  than  I  expected.  I  know  well  enough  how 
inexperienced  men  must  act,  and  I  have  observed  nothing, 
except  now  and  then  in  language,  which  I  have  not  seen 
over  and  over  again  in  each  of  our  Houses  of  Parliament. 
At  first  the  deputies,  as  you  know  I  expected  they  would, 
talked  as  if  the  whole  power  of  the  people  was  lodged  in 
their  hands,  and  could  be  used  by  them  at  will.  .  .  .  They 
are  learning  a  practical  lesson  of  wisdom,  and  will  return 
home  wiser  and  better  men  than  they  came ;  but  they  will 
not  generally  have  pleased  those  who  sent  them.  They 
will  have  seen  some  part  of  the  great  difficulty  of  moving 
a  whole  people,  and  will  each  of  them  have  learnt  patience 
and  forbearance.  I  hope  they  will  learn  perseverance. 
They  who  sent  them  will  not  have  had  the  same  advan- 
tages, and  will  have  learnt  nothing ;  will  be  disappointed, 
and  will  show  their  displeasure.  It  will  then  become  each 
of  the  deputies  in  his  particular  district  to  bear  with  the 
people,  and  not  to  give  up  the  cause  either  for  chagrin  or 
despair.  Before  the  time  comes  for  the  deputies  to  dis- 
perse, they  will  be  thoroughly  convinced  that  with  a  few 
exceptions  the  people  instead  of  being  excited  will  become 
torpid.  They,  the  deputies,  will  also  be  convinced  how 

1  Place  to  Robert  Wallace,  M.P.,  March  6,  1839. 

2  Lovett  to  Place,  March  1 1 ,  1 839. 


CHARTISM  375 

greatly  they  miscalculated  their  own  power  and  influence, 
and  it  will  behove  them,  each  one  as  far  as  his  circum- 
stances will  permit  him,  to  cheer  up  the  people,  and 
encourage  them  steadily  to  pursue  their  object.  Upon  the 
whole  much  good  will  be  done,  good  far  overbalancing  all 
the  trouble  and  expense  which  will  be  occasioned." l 

Place  had  never  been  in  the  North  of  England,  and  could 
not  understand  that  the  Chartist  movement  had  there 
developed  into  something  very  different  from  the  spas- 
modic revolutionary  demonstrations  of  the  London  work- 
ing-men. The  manufacturing  villages  of  Lancashire  and 
Yorkshire  and  South  Wales  were  really  in  that  state  of 
determined  unanimity  which  their  delegates  described. 
Pikes  were  being  forged,  regular  drilling  was  going  on, 
and  nothing  but  military  force  could  prevent  a  rising. 
This  fact  was  gradually  brought  home  to  the  southern 
delegates  in  London,  and  when  on  May  13  the  Convention 
moved  to  Birmingham,  Lovett  and  other  "moral  force" 
members  had  been  converted  to  an  intention  to  use 
"  physical  force  "  if  possible. 

The  rising  in  the  North  was  prevented  by  the  extra- 
ordinary skill  with  which  Sir  Charles  Napier  used  his  little 
army  of  occupation.2  Ineffectual  rioting  occurred  at 
Birmingham  and  elsewhere,  and  a  small  body  of  troops 
were  attacked  at  Newport.  Then  the  Government  hit 
back,  and  during  the  winter  of  1839-40  hardly  a  single 
Chartist  leader  escaped  imprisonment.  As  soon  as  the 
mischief  was  done  Place  set  to  work  to  prevent  the  sen- 
tences of  death  being  carried  out,  to  provide  for  the 
families  of  those  who  were  imprisoned,  and  to  organise  a 
protest  against  the  dangerous  extension  of  the  law  of  libel 
under  which  Lovett  and  others  had  been  convicted.3 

1  Place  to  Lovett,  March  13,  1839. 

2  See  "  Life  and  Opinions  of  Sir  C.  J.  Napier,"  by  Sir  W.  F.  D. 
Napier,  vol.  ii. 

3  "  I  also  am  engaged,  have  for  these  three  months  been  intensely 


376  CHARTISM 

Chartism  as  a  means  of  revolution  had  failed  as  com- 
pletely as  Trade  Unionism,  and  the  Chartists  did  not  take 
their  beating  well.  The  conception  of  "solidarity,"  of  a 
new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  to  be  achieved  by  a  band  of 
brothers  leagued  against  a  world  of  tyrants  and  slaves,  is 
the  greatest  of  all  revolutionary  forces.  Perhaps  without 
some  measure  of  it  very  few  men  can  be  induced  to  fight 
for  their  ideas.  But  it  is  apt  to  make  those  who  come 
under  its  influence  cruel  and  intolerant  in  success,  and  to 
leave  a  peculiar  kind  of  nagging  bitterness  after  failure. 
Chartism  in  1840  was  little  but  an  organisation  for 
breaking  up  public  meetings.  "In  London,"  says  Place, 
"the  interruption  is  made  and  sustained  by  from  about 
1 20  to  200  men,  many  of  them  youths.  They  go  from 
place  to  place  where  Anti-Corn-Law  lectures  are  given; 
they  there  make  a  disgraceful  broil,  which  is  reported  in 
the  Northern  Star  as  'a  glorious  victory.'  These  150 
men  call  themselves  the  people,  and  their  impudence 
and  tyranny  is  without  example.  .  .  ."  "  I  have  a 
letter  before  me  from  the  editor  of  the  Glasgow 
Argus,  in  which  he  says:  'Nothing  is  doing  here  in 
public.  The  Chartists  have  put  down  public  speaking. 
Nothing  could  now  be  done  but  by  tickets  of  admission.' " l 
"They  think,"  Place  says  again,  "they  can  effect  their 
purpose  by  taking  pains  to  make  enemies,  when  they 
should  be  seeking  to  make  friends."2  For  one  moment. 

engaged  in  every  way  a  man  can  be  engaged  in  the  affairs  of  others,  in 
doing  all  I  possibly  can,  first,  for  William  Lovett  .  .  .  secondly,  in 
other  cases  of  quite  as  much  importance  though  not  of  so  much  public 
consequence,  and  in  these  cases  I  have  written  quires  of  paper,  and 
been  at  many  places  distant  from  home  .  .  .  and  I  assure  you  that 
though  I  never  go  out  except  to  take  exercise,  without  which  I  cannot 
keep  up  my  health,  and  though  I  see  no  company,  waste  no  time  at  or 
after  meals,  and  keep  writing  on  at  this  time  of  the  year,  till  eleven 
o'clock  at  night,  I  have  wholly  neglected  matters  relating  to  myself." 
• — Place  to  Samuel  Hoare,  December  19,  1839  (in  "Autobiography"). 

1  Place  to  Roebuck,  December  23,  1840. 

2  Place  to  Colonel  Thompson,  January  2,  1841. 


CHARTISM  377 

indeed,  he  seemed  even  to  fear  that,  in  any  rapid  advance 
towards  democracy,  it  might  be  such  a  turbulent  minority 
rather  than  the  steady  mass  of  the  people  who  would 
come  to  the  front.  On  March  i,  1841,  the  Metropolitan 
Anti-Corn-Law  Association  held  a  meeting  at  the  Crown 
and  Anchor  Tavern.  Next  day  Place  writes  to  John 
Collins,  the  Birmingham  "  moral  force  "  Chartist,  who  had 
been  imprisoned  with  Lovett :  "  I  have  seen  many  up- 
roarious meetings,  .  .  .  but  I  never  saw  anything  which 
would  bear  even  a  distant  comparison  with  what  I  saw 
last  night.  I  was  very  much  vexed  at,  and  very  much 
ashamed  of,  the  people  before  me.  There  I  sat  thinking 
of  the  terrible  evils  of  the  French  Revolution  in  its  earlier 
periods,  and  sure  I  am  that  if  the  men  who  composed  by 
far  the  greater  portion  of  the  audience  were  not  restrained 
by  '  their  fellow-subjects,'  the  policemen  and  the  soldiers, 
all  the  horrors  of  the  worst  scenes  in  the  French  Revo- 
lution, all  its  monstrous  cruelties  and  enormous  evils  of 
every  kind,  would  be  outdone  by  the  men  whose  heads 
would  readily  conceive  and  whose  hands  would  speedily 
commit  them." l 

But  though  he  had  ceased  to  hope  anything  from  the 
existing  Chartist  organisations,  Place  still  kept  up  a  corre- 
spondence with  individual  Chartists,  striving  to  make  them 
recognise  facts  and  learn  patience.  "  Men  are  like  children," 
he  wrote,  "  and  if  you  want  them  to  learn  a  lesson,  you  must 
repeat  it  very  many  times,"  2  and  very  many  times  did  he 
explain  his  conception  of  democratic  tactics  to  any  man 
who  would  listen.  The  Chartists,  he  declared,  "  never  can 
have,  and  consequently  never  will  have,  any  effective  power 
until  the  desire  for  the  Charter  shall  become  the  strong 
and  fully,  and  repeatedly,  expressed  wish  over  and  over 
again,  of  a  decided  majority  of  the  whole  of  the  people. 

1  Place  to  John  Collins,  March  2,  1841. 

-  Place  to  J.  G.  Symons,  September  19,  1840. 


378  CHARTISM 

Until  they  shall  become  convinced  of  this,  and  act  upon 
the  conviction  with  good  faith  and  good  manners,  they 
will  never  even  approximate  towards  a  conclusion."  l  All 
through,  he  was  conscious  that  he  was  hi  reality  more 
Chartist  than  the  Chartists  themselves.  They  had  taken 
up  the  "  six  points  "  as  a  new  idea  four  or  five  years  before, 
and  were  not  unlikely  to  take  up  some  other  new  idea  with 
equal  eagerness.  Place,  "  rascally  Whig,"  as  they  were  apt 
to  call  him,  had  worked  for  the  "  six  points  "  during  half  a 
century.  "  They  would  not  believe  that  he  who  could  write 
this  paper  was  a  Chartist  and  something  beyond  it,  before 
any  beyond  a  very  few  of  them  probably  were  in  existence; 
that  it  is  within  a  few  months  of  fifty  years  since  he 
became  persuaded  that  no  government  could  be  really 
good,  nor  no  people  in  a  sound  and  wholesome  condition, 
while  there  was  any  privileged  class  or  person  in  the 
nation."  2 

There  is  a  trace  of  patient  irony  in  his  letters  to  the 
Chartist  "  stalwarts,"  who,  one  by  one,  deserted  the  mono- 
tonous agitation  for  a  distant  democracy,  and  took  up 
some  scheme  in  which  they  could  feel  an  inventor's 
delight.  Just  as  Feargus  O'Connor  himself  was  to  cap- 
ture the  whole  Chartist  organisation  some  years  later 
for  his  joint-stock  land  scheme,  so  Lovett  came  out  of 
prison,  hi  1840,  "almost  crazy"  with  the  belief  that  the 
Chartists  ought  to  apply  all  their  funds  to  building  great 
schools,  where  the  children  would  receive  a  thorough 
literary,  technical,  and  sociological  education.  "  I  am 
certain,"  wrote  Place,  "you  will  never  have  even  one 
school.  You  will  never  raise  .£3000  for  such  a  purpose, 
and  .£3000  would  not  pay  for  such  a  school  as  you  have 
described.  I  hope  to  see  the  time  when  ^20,000,000  will 

1  Place  to  Colonel  Thompson,  January  2,  1841  (intended  for  publica- 
tion ;  cf.  postscript). 

2  Place  to  Colonel  Thompson,  January  2,  1841. 


CHARTISM  379 

be  voted  to  pay  for  the  building  of  schools  —  schools 
for  all,  and  not  schools  for  Churchmen,  or  Chartists, 
only — and  when  a  compulsory  rate  will  be  levied  on  all, 
in  each  school  district,  by  a  committee  of  the  district,  to 
pay  the  expenses  of  carrying  on  the  schools,  in  which 
the  teaching  shall  be  really  good  and  apart  from  all 
religion,  and  especially  from  all  sectarianism,  whether 
religious  or  political." l  John  Collins,  of  Birmingham, 
set  up  after  his  release  a  "  Chartist  Church,"  where,  accord- 
ing to  Colonel  Thompson's  enthusiastic  description,  "  On 
Sunday  they  say  they  preach  Bible  politics,  and  on  week 
days  any  other  kind  of  politics  they  like.  The  simple 
fact  is,  they  preach  what  they  like  throughout."  2  Henry 
Vincent,  when  released  from  his  eighteen  months'  im- 
prisonment, found  that  emotional  exhortations  to  good 
living  suited  his  eloquence  and  his  audiences  better  than 
well-worn  demonstrations  of  the  Six  Points.  "  In  North- 
ampton," he  wTote,  "  I  publicly  administered  the  teetotal 
pledge.  I  have  proposed  the  formation  of  public  libraries 
and  lecture-rooms.  Every  appeal  to  the  intellect  and 
virtue  of  the  masses  is  most  cordially  responded  to."  3 

All  these  things  Place  answers  kindly  enough,  never 
forgetting  that  his  correspondents  are  men  who  have 
suffered  imprisonment  in  his  own  cause.  He  only  permits 
himself  to  say  in  writing  to  Collins,  "  Pray,  in  whatever 
you  and  your  colleagues  may  do,  or  say,  or  write,  think 
less  of  your  own  feelings  and  more  of  your  under- 
standings." 4  But  he  lost  patience  when  Vincent,  whose 
printing  business  was  going  badly,  and  who  was  heavily 
in  debt,  became  dazzled  with  the  idea  of  an  easy  candida- 
ture for  Parliament  at  Banbury.  "You  will,"  wrote 


1  Place  to  Lovett,  March  30,  1841. 

'L  Colonel  T.  P.  Thompson  to  Place,  April  13,  1841. 

3  Vincent  to  Place,  March  23,  1841. 

4  Place  to  Collins,  January  30,  1842. 


380  CHARTISM 

Vincent,  "  perhaps  be  surprised  to  hear  that  I  have  been 
called  upon  to  contest  Banbury  at  the  ensuing  election, 
with  every  prospect  of  success.  My  lectures  to  the  middle 
and  working  classes  there  have  produced  this  state  of 
feeling.  Several  of  the  most  influential  tradespeople 
are  at  the  head  of  the  move.  The  constituency  is  small, 
and  should  there  be  three  candidates,  my  return  is  certain. 
The  legal  and  other  incidental  expenses  will  not  much 
exceed  £100.  Subscriptions  are  being  raised  in  Banbury. 
Will  you  be  kind  enough  to  see  Mr.  Leader  and  other 
friends,  and  solicit  a  little  pecuniary  aid  for  me — a  little 
from  those  who  are  favourable  to  Chartism  would  treat 
the  House  of  Commons  to  a  working-man.  I  shall 
proceed  to  Banbury  in  about  a  week.  This  is  no  childish 
affair.  My  friends  there  are  in  earnest.  ...  I  have  already 
more  promises  than  the  Tories  polled  at  the  last  election. 
Pray  help  me  all  you  can  hi  the  undercurrent.  You  can 
do  much."  1 

Placed  answered  the  next  day :  "  I  must  know  a  good  deal 
more  of  the  circumstances  which  have  captivated  you  before 
I  can  do  as  you  desire.  Banbury  has  not  300  registered 
voters,  and  unless  you  had  a  requisition  signed  by  a 
majority  of  them  in  their  own  handwriting,  you  could  not 
be  elected;  and  even  if  you  had  their  signatures,  your 
return  would  be  precarious.  .  .  .  You  talk  like  but  too 
many  others,  as  if  honesty  and  patriotism  were  the  rule 
among  the  electors,  while  the  fact  is  that  they  who  are 
honest  go  for  nothing.  They  balance  one  another,  and  the 
election  is  really  made  by  the  rascals  who  ought  to  be 
transported  for  seven  years,  the  lawyers  and  election- 
jobbers-  for  fourteen  years,  and  the  candidates  who  pay 
them  for  twenty-one  years.  .  .  .  Your  letter  is  matter  of 
feeling  showing  great  excitation,  whereas  it  ought  to  have 
been  one  of  business,  statement  of  facts,  calculations,  &c. 
1  Vincent  to  Place,  June  3,  1841. 


CHARTISM  381 

As  it  is,  it  will  do  more  harm  than  good  for  me  to  show  it. 
[Then]  comes  a  most  material  question.  How  are  you  to 
live  supposing  you  were  to  be  elected?  How  are  you  to 
pay  the  unavoidable  expenses  of  being  a  member,  no  light 
matter  you  may  be  assured  ?  And  when  you  had  sat  for  a 
session,  and  Parliament  was  again  dissolved  and  you  were 
ousted  from  Banbury,  what  would  you  do  ?  ...  To  save 
time  I  will  give  you  my  advice  now  instead  of  doing  it,  as 
I  must  otherwise  do,  in  a  week  or  a  month  hence.  It  is 
this,  leave  off  running  about  the  country,  your  wife  with 
you,  learning  nothing  which  can  ever  be  of  any  use  to 
either  of  you,  but  much  which  is  likely  to  tell  in  the  con- 
trary direction.1  Go  to  your  own  business  and  become  a 
man  of  business  for  the  next  ten  years.  You  may  perhaps 
at  the  end  of  that  time  be  in  a  condition  to  do  some  public 
service.  You  will  be  quite  in  time  for  enacting  the  Charter, 
or  for  doing  any  other  great  national  good.  ...  If  you 
don't  like  what  I  have  written,  put  the  letter  away,  and 
presently  when  things  have  changed  with  you  read  it  again. 
I  speak  plainly  with  you  because  you  must  believe  that  I 
really  mean  you  well,  and  because  you  cannot  disguise 
the  fact  to  yourself  that  I  know  something  about  the 
matter  on  which  I  have  written." 2 

The  Banbury  election  took  place  on  June  30,  1841,  and 
Henry  Vincent  received  5 1  votes. 

The  last  literary  work  which  Place  did  was  a  history  of 

1  "  Long  ago  William  Lovett  came  to  me  with  Vincent,  in  conse- 
quence of  a  letter  I  wrote  to  him  (Vincent),  at  his  own  request,  on  a 
speech  he  made,  and  on  which  he  prided  himself,  in  which  I  showed 
him  that  every  one  of  his  historical  statements,  twelve  in  number,  was 
erroneous  and  directly  contrary  to  the  facts.  Both  he  and  Lovett  re- 
quested I  would  put  him  upon  a  course  of  reading,  and  as  he  then 
said  he  was  going  to  stick  close  to  business,  I  gave  him  advice,  under- 
took to  supply  him  with  books  and  to  hold  conversations  with  him 
as  he  went  on  reading.  But  he  could  neither  work  nor  read."  (Place 
to  Gaskell,  March  i,  1840.) 

-  Place  to  Vincent,  June  4,  1841. 


382  CHARTISM 

Chartism,  written  in  the  years  1840-43,  and  left  unfinished. 
In  this  and  in  the  letters  written  at  the  time  he  tried  to 
reconcile  himself  to  what  he  believed  to  be  the  conditions 
of  working-class  progress.  He  was  convinced  that  rapid 
and  easy  advance  could  only  be  brought  about  by  patient, 
tolerant,  disillusioned  men,  and  yet  he  could  see  no  reason 
to  suppose  that  any  but  a  very  few  working-men,  and 
those  at  long  intervals,  would  be  patient,  or  tolerant,  or 
disillusioned. 

"  A  great  mass  of  our  unskilled  and  but  little  skilled 
labourers  (among  whom  are  the  handloom  weavers),  and 
a  very  considerable  number  of  our  skilled  labourers,  are  in 
poverty,  if  not  in  actual  misery ;  a  large  portion  of  them 
have  been  in  a  state  of  poverty  and  great  privation  all 
their  lives.  They  are  neither  ignorant  of  their  condition 
nor  reconciled  to  it.  They  live  amongst  others  who  are 
better  off  than  themselves,  with  whom  they  compare 
themselves ;  and  they  cannot  understand  why  there  should 
be  so  great  a  difference,  why  others  who  work  no  more  or 
fewer  hours  than  themselves  at  employments  not  requiring 
more  actual  exertion,  and  in  many  cases  occupying  fewer 
hours  in  the  day,  should  be  better  paid  than  they  are,  and 
they  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  difference  is  solely 
caused  by  oppression — oppression  of  bad  laws  and  avari- 
cious employers.  To  escape  from  this  state  is  with  them 
of  paramount  importance.  Among  a  vast  multitude  of 
these  people  not  a  day,  scarcely  an  hour,  can  be  said  to 
pass  without  some  circumstance,  some  matter  exciting 
reflection,  occurring  to  remind  them  of  their  condition, 
which  (notwithstanding  they  have  been  poor  and  distressed 
from  their  infancy,  and  however  much  they  may  at  times 
be  cheerful)  they  scarcely  ever  cease,  and  never  for  a  long 
period  cease,  to  feel  and  to  acknowledge  to  themselves 
with  deep  sensations  of  anguish  their  deplorable  condition. 
To  men  thus  circumstanced,  any,  the  most  absurd,  scheme 


CHARTISM  383 

which  promises  relief  is  eagerly  seized  and  earnestly  ad- 
hered to  until  long  after  it  has  failed,  and  is  even  then 
reluctantly  given  up,  and  its  failure  is  always  accounted 
for  by  something  being  supposed  to  have  happened  which 
prevented  the  good  the  scheme  held  out  from  being  accom- 
plished ;  and  thus  they  remain  as  they  were,  having  learnt 
nothing,  ready  to  be  again  deluded  by  some  other  scheme, 
until  they  hopelessly  abandon  every  effort  either  to  serve 
themselves  or  others." l 

"  It  should  be  remembered  that  every  attempt  to  reform 
any  old  institution  has  necessarily  been  made  by  enthusi- 
astic but  not  well-informed  men,  who  saw  but  a  small 
portion  of  the  impediments  which  made  their  present 
success  impossible.  Such  men  are  always,  and  necessarily, 
ignorant  of  the  best  means  of  progressing  towards  the 
accomplishment  of  their  purpose  at  a  distant  time,  and 
can  seldom  be  persuaded  that  the  time  for  their  accom- 
plishment is  distant.  Few,  indeed,  such  men  would  inter- 
fere at  all  unless  they  imagined  the  change  they  desired 
was  at  hand.  They  may  be  considered  as  pioneers  who, 
by  their  labours  and  then*  sacrifices,  smooth  the  way  for 
those  who  are  to  follow  them.  Never  without  such 
persons  to  move  forward,  and  never  but  through  their 
errors  and  misfortunes,  would  mankind  have  emerged 
from  barbarism,  and  gone  on  as  they  have  done,  slow  and 
painful  as  their  progress  has  been." 2 

But  in  other  moods  he  could  hope  that  the  few  who  had 
learnt  the  sad  wisdom  of  political  experience  might  still 
prove  the  stronger,  and  that  the  working  classes  might  in 
the  end  progress,  not  by  successive  shortsighted  enthu- 
siasms, but  by  cool  and  steady  perseverance.  "  As  the  best 
men,"  he  wrote  elsewhere,  "  in  the  working  class  proceed  in 
their  attainment  of  knowledge  they  will  cease  to  enforce 
1  27,819(8,9).  2  27,820(5). 


384  CHARTISM 

their  mistaken  notions,  and  this  will  be  called  abandoning 
their  caste  by  those  who  remain  unenlightened ;  and  these 
men,  and  such  other  men  as  have  power  over  multitudes 
of  other  men,  and  have  sinister  objects  to  accomplish,  will 
misinterpret  to  the  many  the  actions  and  opinions  of  those 
who  may  have  become  more  enlightened,  and  will  repre- 
sent them  as  enemies  of  the  people  whom  they  would  be 
the  best  qualified  and  best  disposed  to  serve.  The  people 
will  continue  to  be  misled,  and  will  look  upon  their  best 
friends  as  their  worst  enemies,  and  the  more  the^e,  their 
friends,  may  attempt  to  justify  themselves  and  to  defend 
themselves  against  absurd  and  false  imputations,  the 
firmer  will  be  the  conviction  of  the  misled,  ill-judging 
multitude  that  they  are  enemies  to  be  shunned.  Progress 
in  the  capability  of  thinking  more  justly  will,  however, 
increase.  Various  circumstances  will  occur  tending  to 
this  result.  Some  of  the  leaders  who  have  impugned  their 
fellows  will  be  convinced  that  they  have  decided  absurdly, 
and  these  will,  from  time  to  time,  fall  into  the  ranks  of 
those  who  have  been  rejected  by  the  people — will  have 
become  a  very  considerable  number,  and  will  slowly  but 
surely  recover  their  influence.  In  the  meantime  many  of 
the  incorrigible  leaders  and  large  numbers  of  those  of 
their  followers  who  are  unteachable  will  be  wearied  out 
with  continued  and  rapidly  recurring  disappointments,  and 
will  draw  off,  to  be  replaced  by  better  men ;  and  notwith- 
standing the  times  of  inactivity  and  despair  which  will 
occasionally  occur,  the  progress  of  actual  improvement  in 
right  thinking  will  go  on  with  increased  velocity." l 
1  27,819  (7,  8). 


CHAPTER    XIV 

LAST   YEARS 

IN  March  1839  Place  wrote  from  Brompton  Square, 
"  Having  removed  from  my  well-known  residence  and, 
being  quietly  settled  here,  I  arn  gradually  dropping  out 
of  notice,  and  men  and  things  are  dropping  out  of  my 
notice." 1  He  hoped  that  he  would  now  be  able  to  devote 
the  rest  of  his  life  to  the  serious  historical  work  for  which 
he  had  so  long  been  preparing.  Writing  of  this  year  he 
says,  "  I  had,  so  I  thought,  too  much  neglected  other 
matters,  purposes  for  which  I  had  long  been  collecting 
materials,  and  had  at  length  seriously  determined  to  set  to 
work,  arrange  my  books  and  papers,  and  put  my  matter 
together  for  a  Narrative  History  of  the  Working  People 
and  their  employers,  their  education,  manners,  morals, 
pastimes,  and  their  improvement  since  the  Revolution  of 
i688."2 

Between  1836  and  1839,  while  working  under  constant 
interruption,  he  had  written  his  long  "  History  of  the 
Reform  Agitation."3  Near  the  beginning  of  it  he  says 
that  he  is  almost  deterred  from  continuing,  "  lest  I  should 
waste  my  time  by  failing  to  be,  as  I  earnestly  desire  to 
be,  useful  to  mankind."4  Most  of  the  many  thousand 
hours  which  the  work  must  have  taken  him  were  indeed 
wasted.  By  far  the  greater  part  of  the  History  consists  of 

1  Place  to  Wallace,  March  6,  1839. 

2  Corn-Law  Doings,  in  "  Autobiography." 

3  27,789-27,797.  4  27,789  (233). 

3S5  0    B 


386  LAST   YEARS 

laborious  precis  of  speeches  delivered  each  day  during  the 
agitation.  These  are  much  too  long  for  the  ordinary 
student,  and  the  specialist  will  prefer  the  full  reports  hi 
Hansard  or  the  Times.  Only  at  wide  intervals  there  come 
a  few  pages  of  vigorous  narrative  or  an  interesting  personal 
observation.  As  a  writer  of  memoirs,  Place  was  indeed 
dull  on  principle.  In  1819  he  had  said,  "I  hate  the 
collector  and  retailer  of  anecdotes  of  his  friends  or  of  those 
he  acts  with,  and  I  hold  him  to  be  a  rascal  who  keeps  any 
account  of  his  immediate  and  private  intercourse  with 
other  men," l  and  the  History  of  Reform  is  most  valuable 
where  he  breaks  through  his  own  rule.  The  "  History  of 
the  Movements  of  the  Working  Classes  and  Others " 
(which  forms  a  continuation  of  the  Reform  narrative)  is 
better,  and  perhaps  the  proposed  History  of  the  Working 
People  would  have  been  better  still. 

But  Place,  as  long  as  his  strength  lasted,  never  enjoyed 
complete  leisure  for  literary  work.  Again  and  again  he 
had  to  give  way  to  that  force  which  requires  men  to 
do  that  which  they  have  been  proved  able  to  do,  rather 
than  that  which  they  desire.  The  letter,  for  instance,  in 
which  he  declared  that  he  was  "  dropping  out  of  notice  " 
was  written  in  answer  to  one  from  Robert  Wallace,  asking 
him  to  influence  the  working-men  on  the  side  of  Penny 
Postage.  Place's  letter  contains  a  very  long  and  detailed 
scheme  for  capturing  the  London  Press,  followed  by  an 
implied  threat  that  if,  as  seemed  probable,  the  Government 
brought  in  Twopenny  Postage,  he  would  get  up  an  agitation 
against  it  as  a  "  Whig  trick."  "  A  man,"  he  says,  "  must 
have  been,  or  must  be  as  I  was,  a  poor  journeyman  to  know 
the  value  of  twopence  to  a  respectable  working-man.  .  .  . 
Without  this  sort  of  intercourse  no  man  can  .  .  .  compre- 
hend the  wide  difference  between  a  penny  and  twopence, 

1  Place  to  Hobhouse,  April  29,  1819. 
8  27,819-27,822. 


LAST   YEARS  387 

how  unwilling  careful  people  are  of  spending  twopence, 
how  careless  they  are  of  spending  a  penny."  He  ends  by 
promising  "  to  do  my  best  in  every  way." l 

Place  always  wondered  why  the  Whig  Government, 
which  had  so  long  refused  cheap  newspapers,  granted 
cheap  postage  so  easily.  He  could  only  ascribe  it  to  the 
skill  with  which  the  vague  fear  of  Chartism  was  brought 
to  bear  on  the  members  of  Parliament.  "  If  we  had  not 
obtained  the  Act  last  session,"  he  wrote  in  1 840,  "  we  should 
never  have  obtained  it  at  all.  The  many  months  which 
would  have  passed  before  we  could  again  have  brought  it 
before  the  two  Houses  would  have  enabled  the  members 
to  shake  off  their  absurd  fear,  to  become  ashamed  of  them- 
selves for  having  been  at  all  alarmed,  and  then  they  would 
have  rejected  the  Bill  with  contempt." 

"  The  way  in  which  the  effect  was  produced  and  the  Act 
obtained  is  known  to  very  few,  most  of  whom  are  members 
of  the  House  of  Commons.  The  agitation  was  carried  on 
in  a  quiet,  unostentatious  way,  which  appeared  to  the  gene- 
rality as  no  movement  at  all ;  but  it  was  a  very  great  and 
extensive  movement,  and  it  was  continually  being  made 
manifest  to  our  lords  and  masters  every  hour  and  in  every 
possible  form." 2  In  the  tactics,  as  opposed  to  the  strategy 

1  If  Place  is  right,  "Warburtoii  (see  p.  278)  deserves  more  credit  than 
he  has  received  for  the  introduction  of  the  Penny  Post.     He  was  Chair- 
man of  the  Select  Committee,  and  drew  up   their   Report  in    1839. 
Place   says,   "  To   him   we  are  all  indebted   for  the  penny  postage, 
since  without  his  excellent  report,  a  work  of  intense  study  and  great 
judgment,  the  penny  postage  would  never  have  been  obtained."     (Place 
to  Thompson,  March  10,  1840.)     Place  in  1838  committed  himself  to 
a  curiously  sanguine  prophecy  as  to  the  effect  of  postal  reform.     "If 
general  post  letters  were  charged  only  one  penny,  the  postage  in  all 
cases  being  paid  at  the  receiving  houses,  and  when  the  delivery  was 
accelerated  by  the  railways,  we  should  become  a  wiser  and  a  better 
people,  and  by  far  a  more  intelligent  people,  than  any  which  have  ever 
existed,  or  even  (been)  contemplated  as   likely  to  exist."     (Place   to 
Parkes,  January  18,  1838.) 

2  (Place  to  Wheatley,   February   21,    1840.)     Place   says,    "I   may 
claim  the  merit  of  ...  suggesting  the  plan  for  working  it  out,  and  by 


388  LAST  YEARS 

of  politics,  Place  always  held  that  every  effort  should  be 
concentrated  on  influencing  the  minds  of  those  who  have 
to  give  the  operative  vote. 

As  soon  as  the  prosecutions  of  1 839-40  had  removed  the 
original  Chartist  leaders,  Hume  wrote  to  Place,  "  I  want 
to  know  your  opinion  of  the  chance  of  the  Chartists  now 
acting  more  moderately  if  we  were  to  put  ourselves  at  their 
head  to  demand  the  leading  points  of  the  Charter  quietly, 
but  by  the  strongest  demonstration  of  numbers ;  whether, 
in  fact,  the  working-men  would  now  join  us  in  our  demand 
for  all,  but  in  the  understanding  that  we  will  be  ready  to 
take  any  part  of  our  demand." l  Place  replied,  "  There  is 
at  present  no  possibility  of  doing  good  to  the  working 
people  or  to  anybody  else  by  any  proposal  for  reform  in 
Parliament.  The  working  people  are  not  in  a  condition  to 
join  in  any  scheme  of  the  sort,  neither  will  they  be  so  for 
some  time  to  come." 2  And  again  to  Warburton,  who 
made  the  same  proposal,  "  My  advice  is  wait,  have  patience, 
watch  events."  3  Meanwhile  he  tried  to  coach  the  middle- 
class  Radicals  in  the  rather  difficult  art  of  acting  with  the 
working-men  of  that  day.  He  describes,  for  instance,  in  a 
letter  to  Peter  Taylor  an  incident  at  the  Radical  Club.4 

assisting  the  very  clever  men  who  were  labouring  with  the  full  know- 
ledge of  all  its  advantages  to  effect  their  invaluable  purpose.  My 
efforts  in  the  details  were,  however,  of  small  value  when  compared 
with  those  of  several  others."  (Ibid.)  He  alludes  to  a  dinner  given  by 
Warburton  to  Rowland  Hill,  Joseph  Parkes,  W.  A.  Ashurst,  and  him- 
self, who  formed  themselves  into  a  committee,  and  determined  to 
prevent  the  compromise  of  a  twopenny  post.  At  the  same  time  he  was 
helping  the  cheap  circulation  of  knowledge  by  working  with  Warburton 
to  oppose  Serjeant  Talfourd's  Bill  extending  copyright  to  sixty  years 
after  an  author's  death.  (See  Place  to  Warburton,  May  5,  1839,  and 
January  18,  1840.) 

1  Hume  to  Place,  February  9,  1 840. 

2  Place  to  Hume,  February  10,  1840. 

3  Place  to  Warburton,  April  7,  1840. 

*  The  Radical  Club  was  a  monthly  dinner  club,  to  which  Robert 
Owen,  Mazzini,  and  others  belonged. 


LAST   YEARS  389 

"  The  two  great,  conspicuous,  and  constantly  pervading 
faults  of  the  working  people  are  impatience  and  intoler- 
ance. You  saw  both  in  Mitchell.  At  our  April  dinner, 
when  I  was  in  the  chair,  I  humoured  Mitchell  and  Huggett. 
They  wished  the  Club  to  present  a  petition  to  the  House 
of  Commons  in  favour  of  Vincent,  and  they  wished  the 
petition  to  be  such  a  one  as  they  would  have  caused  to  be 
drawn,  which  none  of  the  members  would  have  signed. 
Now  these  men,  like  other  working-men,  have  been  too 
ill  educated,  and  have  seen  too  little  of  the  Avays  of  men 
in  associations  for  business  to  become  either  patient  or 
tolerant.  The  proposal  for  a  petition  was  to  them  the 
whole  universe,  and  excluded  anything  else.  They  could 
not  imagine  that  any  other  man's  notion  could  deserve 
attention.  Their  notion  was  to  them  all-important,  and 
hence  the  petulance,  impatience,  and  intolerance  manifested 
by  both.  Mitchell  spoke  thirteen  times,  Huggett  nine 
times.  .  .  .  There  was  an  appearance  of  difficulty,  which  I 
could  only  get  over  by  allowing  them  to  exhaust  them- 
selves, and  then  to  permit  me  to  draw  the  petition.  They 
were  impatient,  intolerant,  and  vehemently  suspicious  of 
our  sincerity;  and  the  time  was  consumed  in  allowing 
them  to  talk  down  their  own  misconceptions  and  absurd 
apprehensions.  It  was  not  time  lost ;  the  petition  effected 
more  than  was  expected,  and  they,  poor  fellows,  were  entitled 
to  the  indulgence." l 

In  1841  a  union  between  Chartists  and  Reformers 
seemed  more  possible.  On  January  21  a  great  meeting 
was  held  at  Leeds  to  inaugurate  the  "  New  Move," 2  and 

1  Place  to  Peter  A.  Taylor,  July  14,  1840. 

-  Hamer  Stansfield  of  Leeds  wrote  to  Place  on  January  13,  1841  : 
"  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  you  have  now  in  your  hands  the  power 
of  doing  more  good  to  your  country  by  a  single  act  than  any  other  man 
in  it,  of  grasping  the  fruits  of  your  long  labours  by  merely  reaching 
out  your  hands  to  take  possession.  I  allude  to  the  opportunity  you 
have  at  present  of  bringing  about  a  union  between  the  Charti.-ts  and 


390  LAST  YEARS 

the  Northern  Star  advised  the  Chartists  to  swamp  it. 
Place  wrote  to  those  Chartists  whom  he  knew  imploring 
them  to  behave  reasonably,  and  was  roundly  abused  for 
doing  so.1 

In  London  the  difficulty  between  the  London  Chartists 
and  the  Radicals  had  become  in  large  part  one  of  words. 
The  Chartists  had  made  the  term  Universal  Suffrage 
hateful  to  the  middle-class  politicians,  while  the  working- 
men  believed  that  Household  Suffrage  covered  a  hypo- 
critical design  for  their  betrayal.2  Place  inclined  to  some 
new  term  like  "  General "  Suffrage.  "  Universal  Suffrage," 
he  wrote,  "  General  Suffrage,  Registration,  or  Capacity  for 
Reading  Suffrage,  any  Suffrage  with  Ballot  and  Short 
Parliaments  which  would  give  the  mass  of  the  people 
the  power  to  elect  the  members  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  is  Democracy,  and  would  put  an  end  to  every 
privileged  class  and  person.  The  Established  Church, 
the  House  of  Peers,  and  the  office  of  King  would  all  be 
abolished."3  But  he  was  convinced  that  no  great  change 
in  the  suffrage  was  immediately  possible.  In  discussing 
a  proposed  Reform  society,  he  said,  "  The  accomplishment 
of  the  ends  which  the  society  must  propose  are  far  oft'.  .  .  . 
Every  one  who  may  expect  general  results  in  a  short  time 

our  agitation.  Last  year  you  thought  the  attempt  premature,  and  you 
were  right,  but  circumstances  have  somewhat  changed  since  then.'' 
Place  began  his  reply,  "  If  I  had  any  such  power  as  you  suppose,  it 
would  have  been  exerted  ere  this,  for  it  has  long  been  my  custom  not  to 
wait  until  called  upon,  but  quietly  and  as  effectually  as  possible  to 
interfere  whenever  I  see  an  opening  to  be  useful." 

1  See  Northern  Star,  May  22,  1841,  where  he  is  accused  of  a  "deep 
conspiracy"  against Feargus  O'Connor  ;  and  November  19,  1742,  where 
"Franky  Place"  is  accused  of  giving  money  to  the  Working-Men's 
Association  (which  he  was  then  trying  to  revive). 

-  "  It  was  no  more  possible  for  them  [the  London  Chartists]  to  agree 
to  the  words  "Household  Suffrage,"  than  it  is  for  your  friends  to  agree 
to  the  words  "Universal  Suffrage."  (Place  to  Hume,  February  10, 

1841.) 

3  Place  to  Hume,  February  u,  1841. 


LAST   YEARS  391 

will  be  disappointed."  l  In  1 842  a  new  society  was  actually 
formed,  under  the  name  of  "  The  Metropolitan  Parlia- 
mentary Reform  Association,"  having  as  its  avowed  object 
the  attainment  of  the  Charter,  without  the  use  of  the  name. 
It  lived  exactly  twelve  months.  The  Chartist  movement 
ran  its  own  course  till  1 848,  and  that  agreement  between 
the  enfranchised  and  the  disfranchised,  on  which  further 
extension  of  the  suffrage  depended,  did  not  come  till  1 867. 
Place  himself  from  1840  onwards  thought  that  Parlia- 
mentary Reform  was  less  immediately  practicable  than 
the  repeal  of  the  Corn  Laws.  In  that  year,  at  the  age 
of  sixty-nine,  he  came  for  the  first  time  under  the  in- 
fluence of  a  greater  and  more  persistent  organiser  than 
himself.  Richard  Cobden  had  founded  the  Anti-Corn- 
Law  League  in  the  winter  of  1838-39,  and  in  January 
1 840  sent  a  deputation  to  London  to  revive  the  moribund 
Anti-Corn-Law  Association,  which  had  been  founded  in 
1836.  Warburton  sent  the  deputation  to  Place  with  a 
complimentary  letter,  saying  that  he  "had  been  mainly 
instrumental  in  obtaining  the  Act  for  the  Penny  Postage, 
and,  could  set  the  same  machinery  at  work  for  the  repeal 
of  the  Corn  Laws."  -  Place  at  first  refused  to  interfere  "  in 
any  public  matter  which  would  require  my  attendance 
away  from  my  own  house,"  but  at  last  C.  P.  Villiers 
(who  had  been  with  him  on  the  Postage  committee), 
Warburton,  and  others,  persuaded  him  to  consent.  He 
became  chairman  of  the  business  committee  of  the 
Association,  and,  as  usual,  had  to  do  a  great  part  of  the 
drudgery  of  organisation.3  The  letters  which  he  received 

1  Place  to  Hume,  February,  11,  1841. 

-  Letter  quoted  by  Place  to  Thompson,  March  10,  1840. 

3  A  report  signed  by  Place  in  1841  produced  the  last  of  those 
witticisms  about  Place's  name  and  trade  which  began  in  1818.  The 
Morning  Herald  of  April  i,  1841,  writes:  "This  report  is  signed  by 
that  ancient  artificer  of  'unmentionables,'  who  used  to  give  gratuitous 
instruction  to  nursling  demagogues  and  aspiring  whiglings  among  the 


392  LAST   YEARS 

from  Cobden  bear  an  amusing  likeness  to  those  which  he 
had  been  sending  all  his  life  to  other  people.  On  February 
27,  1 840,  for  instance,  Cobden  wrote :  "  My  dear  Sir, — I 
think  every  possible  effort  should  be  made  to  get  your 
proceedings  into  the  London  papers.  The  country  is  now 
just  ripe  to  take  the  cue  from  the  metropolis.  Every 
movement  upon  the  Corn  Law  will  vibrate  through  the 
length  and  breadth  of  the  land.  A  good  stirring  appeal, 
short  and  pithy,  from  the  Metropolitan  Association,  call- 
ing upon  the  nation  to  unite  and  co-operate  against  the 
bread  tax,  would  be  responded  to,  and  such  an  address 
is  necessary  to  put  the  Association  on  its  proper  footing 
with  the  country,  and  to  give  it  claims  upon  the  com- 
munity for  support.  The  address  ought  to  appear 
immediately  in  the  London  papers,  and  it  should  re- 
commend petitions  to  be  forwarded  immediately  for  the 
abolition  of  all  taxes  upon  the  first  necessaries  of  life. 
The  Sun  and  Chronicle  are  the  two  most  important 
papers  for  the  country.  The  Advertiser  is  not  so  much 
seen  out  of  London.  The  object  to  be  kept  in  view  by 
your  Association,  in  my  humble  opinion,  ought  to  be  to 
influence  the  country  at  large  more  than  the  metropolis. 
London  is  generally  well  represented  as  far  as  the  Corn 
question  is  concerned.  But  we  must  change  the  Parlia- 
mentary representation  of  a  great  many  other  boroughs 
before  we  can  carry  our  point  with  the  House  of  Commons. 
I  hope  you  will  bear  in  mind  always  the  great  power  you 
have  at  command  over  the  country  through  the  London 
Press.  We  in  Manchester  are  looked  upon  with  some 
jealousy  by  the  agriculturists  (I  mean  the  population 
of  rural  towns,  as  well  as  farmers  and  labourers),  but 
they  will  follow  the  metropolis  as  their  natural  leader." 

rising  hopes  of  the  legislature  in  their  diurnal  progresses  to  and  from 
the  House  of  Commons.  The  genius  of  the  old  Charing  Cross  Cabinet 
[truly  the  genius  loci]  still  presides,  it  seems,  in  all  its  '  pristine  pride  of 
place.' " 


LAST  YEARS  393 

To  this  Place  returned  a  long  answer,  in  which,  after 
stating  that  he  was  working  on  Corn-Law  business  from 
7  A.M.  till  midnight,  he  goes  on : — 

"  The  people  here  differ  very  widely  from  you  at  Man- 
chester. You,  some  of  you,  at  Manchester  resolve  that 
something  shall  be  done,  and  then  you,  some  of  you,  set 
to  work  and  see  it  done,  give  your  money  and  your  time, 
and  need  none  but  mere  servants  to  carry  out  the  details. 
Our  men  of  property  and  influence  never  act  in  this  way. 
They  themselves  must  be  operated  upon,  and  that,  too,  with 
care  and  circumspection,  to  induce  them  even  to  give  us 
their  mites,  and  to  permit  us  to  put  their  names  on  the 
list  of  our  general  committee.  Of  the  committee  of 
eleven  appointed  at  the  meeting  which  you  attended,  and 
half-a-dozen  whom  we  put  on  the  next  day,  we  have  met 
no  more  in  committee  than  three,  four,  or  five,  until 
yesterday,  when  we  met  to  discuss  our  constitution,  when 
seven  attended.  Our  subscription  does  not  amount  to 
quite  ;£ioo. 

"  London  differs  very  widely  from  Manchester,  and,  in- 
deed, from  every  other  place  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  It 
has  no  local  or  particular  interest  as  a  town,  not  even  as 
to  politics.  Its  several  boroughs  in  this  respect  are  like 
so  many  very  populous  places  at  a  distance  from  one 
another,  and  the  inhabitants  of  any  one  of  them  know 
nothing,  or  next  to  nothing,  of  the  proceedings  in  any 
other,  and  not  much  indeed  of  those  of  their  own. 
London  in  my  time,  and  that  is  half  a  century,  has  never 
moved.  A  few  of  the  people  in  different  parts  have 
moved,  and  these,  whenever  they  come  together,  make  a 
considerable  number — still,  a  very  small  number  indeed 
when  compared  with  the  whole  number — and  when  these 
are  judiciously  managed,  i.e.  when  they  are  brought  to 
act  together,  not  only  make  a  great  noise,  which  is  heard 


394  LAST  YEARS 

far  and  wide,  but  which  has  also  considerable  influence  in 
many  places.  But,  isolated  as  men  are  here,  living  as  they 
do  at  considerable  distances,  many  seven  miles  apart,  and 
but  seldom  meeting  together,  except  in  small  groups,  to 
talk  either  absolute  nonsense  on  miserable  party  politics, 
or  to  transact  business  exclusive  of  everything  else,  they 
will  tell  you  they  have  no  time  to  give  to  the  Association 
to  help  to  repeal  the  Corn  Laws,  while  the  simple  fact  is 
that,  with  the  exception  of  the  men  of  business  (and  even 
they  lose  much  time),  four-fifths  of  the  whole  do  nothing 
but  lose  their  time.  With  a  very  remarkable  working 
population  also,  each  trade  divided  from  every  other,  and 
some  of  the  most  numerous  even  from  themselves,  and 
who,  notwithstanding  an  occasional  display  of  very  small 
comparative  numbers,  are  a  quiescent,  inactive  race  as  far 
as  public  matters  are  concerned.  The  leaders — those 
among  them  who  do  pay  attention  to  public  matters — are 
one  and  all  at  enmity  with  every  other  class  of  society. 
True  it  is,  as  they  allege,  they  have  been  cajoled  and  then 
abandoned  by  the  middle  class  as-  often  as  they  have  acted 
with  them,  but  their  opinions  are  pushed  to  extremes,  and 
are  mischievous  prejudices.  They  call  the  middle  class 
'  shopocrats,'  '  usurers '  (all  profit  being  usury),  '  money- 
mongers,'  '  tyrants  and  oppressors  of  the  working  people,' 
and  they  link  the  middle  class  with  the  aristocracy 
under  the  dignified  appellation  of  '  murderers  of  society,' 
'  murderers  of  the  people/  With  such  a  population  so 
circumstanced,  the  well-informed,  honest,  zealous  men  few 
in  number,  there  is  no  way  of  making  those  who  give  a 
tone  to  any  such  project  as  ours  but  by  such  preparatory 
measures  as  I  have  described,  and  by  unweariedly  working 
them  out." * 

In  September  1840  Cobden  wrote  to  Place  a  long  and 
cheery  letter,  describing  all  the  plans  of  the  League,  and 
1  Place  to  Cobden,  March  4,  1 840. 


LAST   YEARS 

asking  news  of  London.  Place's  reply  is  gloomy  enough. 
The  London  public  was  able  to  absorb  unlimited  lectures 
and  circulars  without  the  least  trace  of  an  effect.  The 
Association  "had  not  £10  in  hand,  and  did  not  know 
how  to  raise  £10  more;"  a  special  summons  had  been 
issued  for  a  meeting  of  the  general  committee,  and  one 
only  had  attended.  Yet  if  the  League  would  send 
£250  to  London  something  might  be  done.  Cobden 
replies : — 

"  I  am  sorry  to  receive  your  last  long  letter,  which  is 
certainly  very  much  like  a  dying  speech  and  confession. 
Is  there  no  hope  of  sufficient  help  to  keep  the  thing 
nominally  alive?  As  to  Manchester  attempting  to  sus- 
tain an  unreal  show  of  opinion  against  the  bread  tax  in 
London,  I  think  you  will  agree  with  me  that  it  would  be 
impossible,  and  even  useless,  if  it  were  not  so." l 

In  1841  Place's  health  began  to  give  way.  He  went  in 
November  to  a  meeting  of  the  council  of  the  Anti-Corn- 
Law  League  in  Manchester,  caught  cold  on  the  journey 
back,  and  suffered  very  severely  from  bronchitis  during 
the  winter.  From  that  time,  although  he  attended  com- 
mittees when  he  could,  his  old  powers  of  endurance  were 
gone.  He  still,  however,  continued  his  narrative  of  the 
Chartist  movement,  and  began  to  write  regularly  as 
English  correspondent  of  the  Delhi  Gazette,  which  was 
owned  and  edited  b}-  one  of  his  sons  in  India,  In  1844 
even  that  came  to  an  end.  He  was  attacked  with  a  sort 
of  paralytic  stroke  followed  by  serious  brain  symptoms. 
For  a  year  he  could  neither  read  nor  write,  and  his 
recovery  was  very  gradual  and  incomplete.  When  he  was 
able  to  get  about  again  he  continued  to  attend  the  weekly 
meetings  of  the  Anti-Corn-Law  Committee  until  the  repeal 
of  the  law  in  1846.  In  that  year  he  could  again  for  a 
moment  speak  of  himself  as  "  choke  full  of  public  matters  " 
1  CoMen  to  Place,  Octolier  5,  1840. 


396  LAST   YEARS 

when  writing  to  Cobden  and  urging  him  not  to  take  office 
under  Lord  John  Russell.  Cobden  replied : — 

"July  i,  1846. — MY  DEAR  PLACE, — Probably  the  best 
answer  I  can  give  to  your  wise  and  friendly  counsels  is  to 
tell  you  briefly  what  I  am  going  to  do.  I  have  obtained 
leave  of  absence  from  Parliament  for  the  rest  of  the  session. 
I  am  about  to  address  a  letter  to  my  constituents,  inform- 
ing them  that  I  must  claim  a  year's  exemption  from  public 
life,  and  shall  go  abroad  to  secure  it.  Thus  you  see  I  shall 
be  out  of  all  the  danger  you  have  so  kindly  foreseen.  Let 
me  now  congratulate  you,  who  have  worked  so  long  for  the 
triumph  of  principles  which  themselves  paved  the  way  for 
the  success  of  us,  the  reformers  of  comparatively  yesterday, 
upon  the  passing  of  the  repeal  measure.  I  do  not  forget 
the  merits  of  those  who  have  gone  before  me,  who  broke 
down  the  great  impediments  in  our  path,  and  left  us  only 
to  macadamize  the  road  to  victory.  It  has  often  been  a 
matter  of  regret  that  I  have  not  been  able  to  see  you  lately, 
but  I  have  often  spoken  of  you,  and  inquired  after  your 
health.  Long  may  it  be  preserved.  You  have  lived 
through  by  far  the  most  eventful  seventy  years  in  the 
world's  history.  Nay,  the  fifty  years  during  which  you 
have  been  an  observer  of  public  events  have  been  more 
fertile  in  great  and  enduring  incidents  than  any  five  cen- 
turies I  could  select.  Bless  yourself  that  you  live  in  times 
when  reform  bills,  steamboats,  railroads,  penny  postage, 
and  free  trade,  to  say  nothing  of  the  ratification  of  civil  and 
religious  liberties,  have  been  possible  facts." 

Place  did  not  die  till  1854,  and  before  he  died  had  much 
to  bear.  His  second  marriage  in  1830  turned  out  fairly  well 
for  twelve  years.  But  young  Chatterley,  the  stepson,  was 
a  source  of  constant  anxiety  and  trouble,  and  Place's  home 
life  was  embittered  by  quarrels  with  his  wife  about  him  and 
about  money  matters.  The  remainder  of  his  property  was 
still  further  diminished,  and  he  was  obliged  to  sell  his  prints 


LAST  YEARS  397 

and  many  of  his  books.  Yet  he  was  still  capable  of  a 
resolute  assertion  of  his  old  philosophy.  There  is  an  entry 
in  his  diary  for  1826,  "  I  have  limited  my  desires  so  as  to 
bring  all  that  is  necessary,  and  more  than  is  necessary, 
within  my  reach ;  and  have,  I  think,  brought  myself  to 
this  state,  that  no  possible  event  can  make  me  uncomfort- 
able for  twenty-four  hours,  bodily  pain  alone  excepted." 
To  this  in  1850  he  added,  in  the  changed  writing  and 
confused  phrases  of  his  extreme  old  age,  "  I  have  since 
had  more  to  prove  the  supposition  correct  since  the  above 
was  written,  and  most  especially  during  the  last  five  years, 
than  all  that  occurred  in  all  my  former  long  life  had  been 
compressed  in  the  same  time,  even  after  its  amount  had 
been  doubled.  Yet  thanks  to  former  reasonings,  I  have 
neither  lost  my  cheerfulness,  nor  even  been  unhappy 
during  twenty-four  consecutive  hours."  * 

Twelve  months  after  this  was  written  a  separation  was 
arranged  with  his  wife,  and  Place  went  to  live  with  his 
married  daughter  in  Hammersmith.  His  grand-daughter 
still  remembers  his  arrival,  and  the  waggon  which  brought 
the  remainder  of  his  library  to  be  stacked  in  a  dry  stable. 
He  was  now  very  feeble,  but  comfortable  and  happy. 
Shortly  after  his  attack  in  1844  he  had  chosen  a  method 
of  occupying  himself  mechanically  and  yet  usefully.  "  Com- 
pelled," he  says,  "to  give  up  reading,  and  to  be  very 
cautious  as  to  the  time  I  employ  in  writing,  my  life  would 
have  become  very  monotonous  and  irksome  had  I  not 
discovered  a  resource  in  what  had  at  times  filled  up  spaces 
and  given  me  occupation  when  I  was  compelled  to  sit  and 
hear  the  tales  and  complaints  of  various  persons.  This 
occupation  consisted  of  cutting  from  newspapers  notices  on 
various  subjects,  and  especially  of  such  as  related  to  the  work- 
ing people.  I  had  put  away  a  great  quantity  of  newspapers 
and  cuttings  from  newspapers.  These  I  now  overhauled, 
1  Diary,  November  24,  1826.  Note  added  February  22,  1850. 


398  LAST   YEARS 

us  I  did  other  largo  quantities  which  were  sent  to  me. 
From  these  I  cut  out  whatever  I  thought  might  be  useful 
at  some  future  time,  in  relation  lo  the  working-classes  most 
especially.  I  now  arranged  these  papers,  pasted  them  into 
books,  and  put  them  in  form  for  binding." l  Some  of  these 
"  guard-books  "  are  in  the  British  Museum,  others  have  been 
scattered  or  destroyed.  On  this  task  he  spent  two  cheerful 
and  industrious  years  at  his  daughter's  house.  Joseph 
Parkes  used  to  come  and  talk  to  him,  with  Samuel  Harri- 
son, the  most  faithful  of  his  political  disciples,  who  ten 
years  before  had  offered  to  copy  letters  for  him,  "  well  paid 
for  my  trouble  in  this  way  by  the  privilege  of  reading  what 
you  write."  2  In  1853  his  two  clever  and  hardworking  un- 
married daughters  took  a  little  house  with  him  in  Foxley 
Terrace,  Earl's  Court.  Here  on  January  i,  1854,  he  was 
found  to  have  died  suddenly  and  painlessly  in  the  night. 

His  death,  as  has  been  already  said,  attracted  little  atten- 
tion. The  newspapers  during  the  few  weeks  preceding  the 
Crimean  War  were  filled  with  other  matter.  Joseph 
Hume,  however,  himself  very  old  and  soon  to  die,  spoke 
in  his  praise  at  a  meeting  of  the  Parliamentary  Reform 
Association,  declaring  him  to  have  been  "the  most  dis- 
interested reformer  he  ever  knew,  valuable  in  council, 
fertile  in  resource,  performing  great  labours  ;  but  he  never 
thought  of  himself.  Honours  and  advantages  he  might 
often  have  commanded,  but  he  preferred  assiduous  and 
private  services,  which  he  rendered  of  his  own  zeal,  and 
defrayed  out  of  his  own  wealth."  3 

J  "Autobiography."  *  27,810(225). 

*  The  Beasoner,  March  26,  1854. 


INDEX 


ABERCROMBIK,  Mr.,  made  Speaker, 

336 

Ackland,  Lord,  216 
Acts  to  repeal  Combination  Laws 

(1824),  216 

—  Second  ditto  (1825),  238 
Acts,  the  Six,  123,  148 

"  Address  to  the  Working  Classes," 
by  Lovett,  366 

Agitation,  Place's  ideal  of  an, 
369  seq. 

Allen,  William,  trustee  of  Lancas- 
trian school,  94,  109 

—  Place's  condolence  with,  194 
Althorp,  Lord  : 

—  (1830)     represents     Ministers 
opposed  to  ballot,  253 

(1831)  hints  at   modifications 


of  Reform  Bill,  276 

—  a  friend  of  Warburton,  278 

—  (1832)  declares   bill   about  to 
pass,  320 

—  (1832)   suggests   the  avoiding 
of  registration  part  of  new  Act, 

325 

—  (J833)  makes  an  inquiry  from 
Poor-Law  Commissioners,  331 

—  (1833)      commends      Bulwer's 
speech  on  Stamp  Duty,  337 

refuses   to  pledge  himself  to 


its  repeal,  338 
—  Place's  criticism  of  this,  340 

Allison,   Mr.,    one   of   Place's   em- 
ployers, 7,  16 

"  American  Correspondence  Society 
and  Caucuses,"  360 

"  Analysis   of  the  Human  Mind," 
by  James  Mill,  91 

Anatomy  Bill,  288  71. 


Anti- Corn -Law  Association,  the 
Metropolitan,  meeting  of,  377 

becoming  moribund,  391,  392 

-  League,  370,  391-395 

Apprentices,  Statute  of,  95,  159 

Apprenticeship,  Place's,  4 

Argyle  Street  meetings  of  "Metro- 
politan Trades  Union,"  271 

Army,  proposed  increase  of,  255 

position  of  in   1832,  294,  305, 

308 

—  prophesied  desertion  of,  316 

Attwood,  Thomas  : 

his  proposal  to  pay  no  taxes, 

251 

foundation  of  his  Birmingham 

Political  Union,  251 

influence  in  Chartist  move- 
ment, 366,  371  scq. 

Austin,  Charles,  86 

"  Authentic  Narrative  of  the 
Westminster  Election  in  1819," 
MS.  by  Place,  132  n.,  ct  seq. 


BALLOT,  agitation  for  vote  by,  253, 
259.  327 

Place's  view  of  vote  by,  390 

see  also  Six  Points 

Banbury  election  in  1841,  379  teq. 

Bank  of  England,  run  on,  311  n. 

directors    communicate    with 

Earl  Grey,  321 

Barton,  Mr.  A.,  a  Welsh  judge,  202 

Beauclerk,  A.  H.,  Major,  244,  261, 
280 

Beaumont,  A.  H.,  editor  of  Nor- 
thern Liberator :  article  on  Place, 
170,  178 


399 


400 


INDEX 


Belgrave,   Lord  :    his   approval   of 

massacre  at  Peterloo,  144 
Bell,  Dr.  Andrew,  author  of  pam- 
phlet on  Madras  System,  93 
Benbow,  William  : 

prosecuted,  291 

Rotundanist,  273,  285 

Benefit   Society,  Breeches-Makers', 

strike  of,  6  seq. 

Benett,  Mr.,  of  Warminster,  165 
Bennet,  the  Hon.  Grey,  M.P.,  178 
Bentham,  Jeremy  : 

See  generally,  Chaps,  iii.  v.  vi. 

assisted  the  Gorgon,  204 

described  by  Place,  81,  92 

his  opinion  of  Place,  80 

his  reception  of  King's  speech 

(1830),  247 

his  death,  92 

his  will,  85 

various  of  his  works,  83,  84, 104 

Bethnal    Green    Branch    Political 

Union,  307 
Bible,  use  of,  in  Lancastrian  school?, 

105 

Bickersteth,  Mr.,  assisted  the  Gor- 
gon, 204 

Bingham,  editor  of  works  by  Ben- 
tham, 83 

Binns,  John,  arrested  at  Birming- 
ham, 26 

Benjamin,  his  brother,  27 

Birkbeck,  Dr.,  113 

speech  against  newspaper  tax, 

349 

Institute,  82 

rise  of,  113 

Birmingham  : — 

(1796)  Place's  visit  to  de- 
fend delegates  of  Corresponding 
Society,  26 

(1824)  deputies  excluded  from 

Committee  on  Combination  Laws, 

231 

—  (1830)  Political  Union  formed, 


251 

—  its  action  in  Reform  agitation, 

299.  307,  3i8 

(1837-8),  its  action  in  Chartist 

agitation,  366  seq. 


Black,  editor  of  Morning  Chronicle, 

274 
Black,  Dr.  J.  R.,  American,  348  and 

«••  359 

Black  Dirarf,  the,  84 

Blanqui's  reference  to  Place,  158 

"Bloody  Black  Jack"  (Sir  John 
Silvester),  200 

Bolton  Chronicle  on  condition  of 
weavers,  181 

"  Book  of  Fallacies,"  Bentham's,  83 

Books  read  by  Place  in  youth,  17, 
28,32 

Borough  Road,  school  at,  93,  101 

Bosville,  Col. :  his  intercourse  with 
Place,  33 

Bowring,  editor  of  Edinburgh  Re- 
view, 84,  85,  87 

Bowyer,  a  journeyman  bookseller, 

275 
Brand,  Mr.,  a  Whig,  and  Reform, 

143 

"  Bread  and  Cheese  Question,"  a 
dangerous  method,  372 

Breeches-Makers'  Benefit  Society's 
strike,  6 

Union  reorganised,  19 

Bribery  (supposed)  of  Place  by 
Government,  54 

Bristol  Riots  in  1831,  285,  294 

Bristow,  Mr.,  one  of  Place's  em- 
ployers, 7 

"British  and  Foreign  School  So- 
ciety," 95 

Brompton  Square,  house  in,  196, 
330 

Brooks,  Henry,  elector  of  West- 
minster, 45,  47,  116,  130,  180 

Brougham,  Lord  : 
a  disciple  of  Bentham,  86 

his  influence  in  education,  94, 

96,  no,  in 

(1816)    proposed    candidature 

of,  at  Westminster,  117-119 

(1817)  action  against  Reform, 


122-125 

—  (1818)  article  on  State  of  Par- 
ties, 132 

—  (1820)    influence    for    Queen 
Caroline,  152 


INDEX 


401 


Brougham,  Lord : 

(1824)  action  on  Combination 

Laws,  216  n. 
(1830)  influence  in  Keform  Bill, 

248,  276 
(1832)    inquiry  about  Rotun- 

danists,  274  n. 
(1834)  evidence  on  Libel  Law, 

337 
(1834)    admission    concerning 

Dorchester  case,  357 
(1835)  the  real  leader  of  the 

Whigs,  334 
—  (1835)  on  Newspaper  Stamps, 


341 

Sketch  of,  in  European  Maga- 
zine, 187 

his  Educational  Committee,  97, 

i°5 

Brunei's  tunnel,  Place's  visit  to,  89  n. 
Brussels,  revolution  in,  1830,  247 
Bulwer,  speech  on  Newspaper  Tax, 

337 

Burdett,  Sir  Francis  : 

history  previous  to  1807,  43 

(1807)   election    at  Westmin- 
ster, 47 

(1810)  committed  by  House  of 

Commons,  49  seq. 

(1810)      estrangement      from 

Place,  54  seq. ,  119 

—  (1810)  procession   for,   on  re- 


lease from  Tower,  55  seq. 
—  (1817)    presents    petition    to 
House,  1 20 
—  (1817)  out  of  favour  with  Re- 


formers, 125 

—  elections  at  Westminster  in 
1818,  1820,  129  seq.,  149,  152, 
1 80 

(1819)  resolution  in  favour  of 


Reform,  140 

(1819)  did  not   defend   Hob- 
house's  pamphlet,  148 
—  (1820)  fined  and  imprisoned  for 
letter  to  electors,  149 

(1825)  connection  with  Repeal 

of  Combination  Laws,  217,  236 

(1831)  connection  with  Reform 

Bill,  257 


Burdett,  Sir  Francis : 

(1831)  made  president  of  the 

National  Political  Union,  280,  282, 

288 
(1831)  views  on  Metropolitan 

Boroughs,  292 

(1832)  refusal  to  take  up  ques- 


tion of  voters  having  paid  taxes, 

325 
—  (1832)  refusal  to  make  pledges, 


327 

his  brother,  51 

Business,  Place's  establishment  of 

his  own,  33 

profits  from,  in  1816,  38 

handed  over  to  his  son,  38 


CAMPBELL,  Thomas,  the  poet :  cor- 
respondence with  Place,  193 
Canadian  troubles,  329 
Canning,  George : 

(1819)   on   Westminster  elec- 
tion, 140 

—  (1822)  leader  in  the  Commons, 
184 

(1825)    speeches    concerning 

Combination  Laws,  236  seq. 

Capital,  Place's  loss  of,  329 

"  Captain  Swing,"  254 

Carlile,  Richard  : 

imprisoned  for  article  on  Re- 
form, 255  and  n.,  147 

Article  referring  to  Place,  80, 

176 

Article  referring  to  "A Trifling 

Mistake,"  149 

Cartwright,  Major  : 

his  "Plan  of  Reform"  (1776) 

and  other  pamphlets,  21,  62,  365 

—  his  intercourse  with  Place,  62 
founding  the  Hampden  Club, 

62,  115 

—  (1816  and  1819),  proposed  can- 
didature for  Westminster,  1 1 8,  137 

—  (1817)  collecting  petitions,  120 

—  (1819)  action  after  "Peterloo," 


142 

Place's  review  of  his  life,  87 

Castlereagh  administration,  121  seq. 

2  e 


402 


INDEX 


Catholic  Emancipation,  the  Duke's 

action  on,  241 
Cato  Street  Plot,  149 
"Caucus,"   references  to,    134  n., 

260 
Census  in  England,  167 

in  Ireland,  167  n. 

Chadd,  Elizabeth,  Place's  marriage 

to,  5 

—  See  Wife,  his  first 

Chad  wick,     Edwin,     secretary    to 
Poor-Law  Commission,  331 

"Characters   for   Charity's   Sake," 
187 

Charing  Cross : 

(No.  29),  33 

-  (No.  16),  34 

—  house  left  by  Place,  330 
—  Improvement  Bill,  181 

Charter,  the  People's,  359,  365,  367 
Chartism,  Place's  history  of,  382 

his  final  views  on  the  move- 
ment, 377 

Chartist  Church,  379 
leaders  imprisoned  in  1839,  375 

—  schools  planned,  378 
Chatterley,  Mrs.,  Place's  marriage  to, 

196 

Place's  step-son,  397 

Cholera,  the,  287,  291,  330 
"  Chrestomathia,"  84,  103 
Chrestomathic  school,  the,  104,  in 
Clarke,  Mrs.,  selling  commissions,  48 
Cleave,  John : 

Botundanist,  272,  283 

afterwards  Chartist,  362,  365, 

366 

Cleaves  Gazette,  348 
Cobbett,  William  : 
(1806)  his  letter  to  electors  of 

Westminster,  41 

(1816)  his  movement  for  re- 
form, 116  seq. 

(1818)  quarrel  with   Burdett, 

129 

(1818)  nominated  for  West- 
minster while  in  America,  133 

—  proposal  on  National  Debt,  1 58 

—  (1830)  prosecuted  for  sedition, 


255 


Cobbett,  William  : 
—  (1832)    preaching    "no-rent," 

293 

Cobden,  Richard,  391-396 
Cochrane,  Lord  : 

(1807)  elected  for  Westmin- 
ster, 47 

(1810)  barricading   Burdett's 

house,  51 

(1812-1814)    twice    returned 

unopposed,  56 

—  (1814)  imprisoned,  56 

(1816)  illness  of  father,  118 

(1817)  read  Brougham's  letter 

in  House,  125 

( 1 8 1 8 )  took  command  of  Chilian 

fleet,  128 

Colchester,  Lord:   his  correspond- 
ence quoted,  140,  152 
Collins,   John,   Chartist,    377;    his 

church,  379 

Combination  Laws,  the  Acts  to  re- 
peal them,  216 

Committee    to    inquire    into 

Action  of  Repeal,  224  seq. 

proposed  bill  to   reintroduce 


the,  355 

Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons 
on  Action  of  Repeal  of  Combina- 
tion Laws  (1825),  224  seq. 

Artisans'  Emigration  and 

Machinery  Exportation  (1824), 
209  seq. 

—  Drunkenness  (1834),  173 

—  Education  in  London  (1816), 
97,  105 

Libel  Law  (1834),  337 


-  Mendicity  in  London  (1815), 
164 

Companion  to  the  Newspaper,  an 
article  on  Trades  Unionism  in, 

355 

Compositors  on  the  Times  prose- 
cuted, 200,  201 

"  Condition  of  the  People  Question," 
241  seq. 

Constables  under  the  sheriffs,  49, 
52 

"Constitutional  Information"  So 
ciety,  21 


INDEX 


403 


Convention   of   Chartist   delegates, 

373  «•<?• 

"  Co-operative  Knowledge,  British 
Association  for  the  spread  of," 

358 
"Co-operative  Trading  Association, 

the  London,"  358 
Coopers,  strike  of,  358 

—  their  present  to  Place,  358 
Copley,  the  Attorney-General,  and 

the  Combination  Laws,  207,  229 
Corn  Law,  new,  proposed  in  1814, 

159 

—  defence  of  by  landowner,  165 
Corresponding  Society,  the  London, 

20-28 

Corruption  at  Westminster  elec- 
tions, 42,  131,  138 

Cotton  factory,  Place's  views  on,  174 

Cotton-spinners  at  Glasgow,  their 
strike,  221 

Cotton-weavers  at  Glasgow,  Place 
writes  to,  219 

—  at  Bolton,  181 

Courier,  the,  ministerial  paper,  277, 

278 

Coutts,  Miss  Sophia,  43 
Covent  Garden  Theatre,  riots  at,  48 
Creditor  and  debtor,  the  law  of,  186 
Cumberland,  inquest  involving  the 

Duke  of,  54 

"Currency"  men,  366,  371  seq. 
Currency,    division  in   Cabinet  on 

question  of  (1819),  140 
Curriers,  laws  concerning,  186 
"Cutter  club,"  a,  4 
"Cutting  and  Flaying  Acts,"  186, 

191 
Czapski,  Count,  302 


DEAN  and  Chapter  of  Westminster, 

their  influence,  40 
Delhi  Gazette,  Place  writes  for  the, 

395 

Denman,  Lord  : 
support    of   Queen   Caroline, 

152 

—  on  repeal  of  Combination  Laws, 


235 


"Deontology,"  Benthaiu's,  84  n. 

Deputation  by  night  to  Lord  Grey, 
278 

Derby,  Lord,  144 

Despard,  Colonel : 

in  Corresponding  Society,  27 

— -  friendship  with  Place,  33 

Doherty,  John,  265  seq.,  354 

Dorchester     labourers,    their     sen- 
tence for  combination,  355 

Drummond,  Henry,  as  Reform  can- 
didate, 263 

Drunkenness,  Committee  on,  1834, 

173 

Drury  Lane,  report  on  the  educa- 
tional condition  of,  97 
Dublin    working  -  men    accused   of 

crimes,  231 

Dumont,  economist,  83,  86 
Dunlop,  master  cottoner,  221 
Durham,  Lord,  as  George  Larnbton, 

134 

on  Reform  Bill,  292 

concerned  in  military  prepara- 
tions, 304 

in  communication  with  Place, 


324 


—  plan  of  federal  colonies,  329  n. 
Dutch  officers  at  Yarmouth,  95 
"  Dykes  "  and  the  "  Loyal  Britons," 
24 


EARL'S  Court,  Place's  house  in,  398 
Edinburgh    Convention  of  London 

Corresponding  Society,  the  arrests 

at,  20 

•  High  School,  99,  100 

Revieiv,    Place's    attempts    to 

write  for,  87,  88 

Review,   article   by   Brougham 


on  State  of  Parties,  132 

Review's    article    referring    to 


"Caucus,"  134 

Review's  article  by  M'Culloch 


on  Combination  Laws,  208 
"  Egypt,  History  of,"  Place's  review, 

87 

Eight   hours'   day,   proposed  strike 
for  an,  354 


404 


INDEX 


Eldon,    Lord,    on    Act    to    Repeal 

Combination  Laws,  239 
Elections,  General : 

—  1806,  44 

-  1807,  44 

-  1818,  128 

—  1820,  149 

-  1830,  241,  243 

— •   1832   (Reformed  Parliament), 
326 

-  1835,  335 
—  1837,  366 

1841,  379  seq. 

Elliot,  Mr.,  Tory  candidate  for  West- 
minster (1807),  47 
Ellis,  James,  leather-breeches  maker, 

9 

"  Emancipate  your  Colonies,"  329  n. 
Emigration  of  Artisans,  Committee 

on,  209 

Employer,  Place  as  an,  199 
En  son,  George,  on  Population,   166 

teq. 

Epigrams  on  Place,  137,  391 
Erskine,  Lord : 
his  pamphlet   defending  the 

Whigs,  139 

—  Place's  reply  to,  139 

-   Hobhouse's  "A  Trifling  Mis- 
take of,"  148 

Place's  early  view  of,  40 


"Essay  on  Wages,"  M'Culloch's, 
187 

quoted  by  Place,  161 

Este,  Mr.,  of  Covent  Garden  Theatre, 
48 

European  Magazine,  sketches  in,  187 

"Evans"  in  United  Englishmen 
conspiracy,  27 

Evans,  Colonel  de  Lacy : 

concerned  in  military  prepara- 
tions, 304 

—  elected  for  Westminster,  327 

—  took  up  question  of  voters  hav- 
ing paid  rates  and  taxes,  335 

Evening  Standard,  the,  accuses  Grote 
of  originating  the  gold  placards, 
310 

Examiner,  has  article  by  James  Mill 
on  Pledges,  326 


Exportation    of    Machinery,    Com- 
mittee on,  209 


FATHER,  Place's,  3 
Federal  Colonies,  plan  of,  329 
Federation  of  Trades  Unions,  354  teq, 
Fielden,  John,  and  Trades  Unions, 

354 
Finality  Jack,"  366 

Finance  Accounts,  Public,  160 

Committees  for  Supply,  186 

Fitzwilliam,   Lord,  dismissed  from 
Lieutenancy,  147 

Fletcher,  Joseph,  and  London  Cor- 
porations, 346 

Fonblanque,    Anthony,     editor    of 
Examiner,  332 

Forbes,  Sir  William,  and  his  wife,  71 

Ford,  Mr.,  a  magistrate,  27 

Ford  Abbey,  68 

—  Place's  visit  to,  73  seq. 

Forster,  Joseph,  in  Lancastrian  Asso- 
ciation, 94  scq. 

Foskett,  George,  Rotundanist,  271, 
272 

Fox,    Charles    James,    and    West- 
minster, 40,  41 

Fox,  Joseph,  and  Lancastrian  Asso- 
ciation, 94,  106-111,  183 

Fox,  William  J. : 

(1831)  denounces  Lords  in  Re- 


form meeting,  282 

(1832)  defends  pledges,  326 


"Fragment  on  Government,"  Ben- 

tham's,  65 

Framework  knitters,  History  of,  207 
France,  Place's  master,  3 
Free  Trade  : 

—  debate  on,  by  Place,  Owen,  and 

others,  360 

Whig  disbelief  in,  185 

Frend,  Mr.  William,  of  the  Temple,  29 
"Friends   of    the   People,    Society 

of,"  21 


"  GAGGING  "  Acts.'the,  122,  123 
Galloway,  Alexander  A.  : 
in  Reform  campaign,  307 


INDEX 


405 


Galloway,  Alexander  A. : 

correspondence  with  Place  on 

London  Corporation,  347 
"  Gamaliel  Smith,"  84 
Gast,     J.,     Trade     Unionist,     189 

and  n. 
Gasworks,   strike  at   Westminster, 

357 

George  IV. : 
divorce  proceedings,  150  seq. 

—  death  of,  241 

Place's  view  of,  242 

Glasgow    men     and     Combination 

Laws,  218-221,  231 
•    and    Chartism  :    letter  from 

editor  of  Argus,  376 
Gloucester  coffee-house,  constables 

sworn  in  at,  52 
"Go  for  Gold,"  277,  308  seq.,  315 

seq.,  318 

Godwin,  William  : 
his  "  Political  Justice,"  29 

—  his  "Population,"  157 

-  his  view  of  "Wealth  of  Na- 
tions," 157 

Place's  intercourse  with,  57-60 

Gorgon,  the,  edited  by  Wade,  204 
seq. 

Government  ask  Place  to  write 
pamphlets  : 

on  rick-burning,  253 

advice  to  working-classes,  354 

Graham,  G.  J.,  Utilitarian,  86 

Sir  James.  358 

Gray,  Mr.,  schoolmaster,  of  Edin- 
burgh, 99 

Grey,  Lord : 

—  See  Chaps,  ix.  x.  xi.  generally 
(1819)  denunciation  of  West- 
minster Reformers,  134 

(1830)  gives  notice  of  motion 

for  Reform,  248 

takes  office,  252 

(1831)  deputation  by  night  to, 

278 

—  (1832)  first  resignation,  295 

—  sent  for  by  the  King,  310 

second  resignation,  334 

Grosvenor,  Lord,  Place's  interview 

with,  112 


Grote,  George: 

connection  with  Bentham,  83, 

86 

(1831)  suggested  as  candidate 

for  Westminster,  263 

connection  with  Reform  Bill, 

276,  279,  310  seq. 

Grote,   Mrs.,    correspondence   with 
Place,  91,  92,  279 


HABEAS  Corpus  Act,  suspension  of  : 

(1795).  25 

(1796),  28 

(l8l7),   122 

Hackney  coaches,  Place's  work  on 
the  laws  regulating  them,  186, 
191 

Hammersmith,  Place  retires  to,  397 
Hammond,    Mr.   Elton,    and    God- 
win, 58 

Hampden  Club,  the,  62,  115 
Hampstead   Heath,  Mass  Meeting 

proposed  on,  306 

"  Handloom  Weavers  and  Factory 
Workers,"  pamphlet  by  Place, 

173 
Hardy,  Thomas,  arrest  and  trial  of, 

20-23 
Harris,     Mr.,     of    Covent    Garden 

Theatre,  48 
Harrison,  Samuel,  disciple  of  Place 

398 
Harrowby,    Lord,  and  the  Reform 

Bill,  292 
Hawes,    B.,  M.P. :  his    intercourse 

with  Place,  177  n. 
Henson,  Gravener,  207  seq. 
Hetherington,  Henry,  271,  272  n., 

348,  365 

Hibbert,  Julian,  Rotundanist,  272 
Higher    Schools,    Lancastrian,    78, 

103 
Hobhouse,  Sir  John  Cam  : 

—  and  Bentham's  works,  83 
(1819)  election  at  Westminster, 

132-140 

(1819)   pamphlet,  "A  Trifling 

Mistake,"  and  committal  to  New- 
gate, 148 


406 


INDEX 


Hobhouse,  Sir  John  Cam  : 

(1820)  re-election,  149 

—  Parliamentary    work     (1820- 
1830)  153 

—  with  Charing  Cross  Improve- 
ment Bill,  181 

sketch  of,  in  European  Maga- 
zine, 187 

(1^25)  action  on  Combination 

Laws,  236 
(1830)  receives  news  of  Great 

Revolution,  243 

action   on   Reform  Bill,   257, 

3",  315 

—  concerned  in  military  prepara- 
tions, 304 

-  (1832)    work     in     Reformed 
Parliament,  324,  335 

declares  against  Pledges,  327 

Hodgskin,  Thomas,  account  of,  and 

his  Political  Economy,  267  seq. 
proposed  Mechanics'  Institute, 

112 

made  Lecturer  in  it,  268 

Holcroft,  Thomas,  friend  of  Place, 

59,92 

Holgate,  G.  J.,  176 
Holland,  Lord,  Place's  criticism  of, 

250 

Hone  and  his  Register,  124,  125 
Horse   Guards  to   clear  Piccadilly, 

5° 
House  and  Window  Taxes,  pledge 

to  abolition  of,  327 
Howard,  Mr.,  announces  passing  of 

Reform  Bill,  320 
Howitt,    William,   on   Priestcraft  : 

Place  criticises,  334 
Huddersfield  working-men :    Place 

writes  to,  326 
Hume,  Joseph  : 

(1813)  introduction  to  Place, 

183  seq. 

—  on    Lancastrian   Association, 
107,  no 

-  (1822)   questions   on    finance 
accounts 

(1824-1826)    work    on    Com- 
bination Laws,  206  and  whole  of 
chap.  viii. 


Hume,  Joseph : 

(1830)  election  at  Middlesex, 

243 

-  (1834)   question   on    coopers' 
strike,  358 

(1835)    work    on    Newspaper 

Stamp  Duty,  339,  349 

(1840)  connected  with  Char- 
tism, 388 

—  (1854)  last  words  on  Place, 
398 

Hummums     in     Covent     Garden, 

public  breakfast  at,  131 
Hunt,  Henry,  "Orator": 

Reference  to  Memoirs,  5 1 

(1810)  foments  quarrel  between 

Place  and  Bnrdett,  55,  56 

—  (1815-1816)  work  with  Cobbett, 


118  seq. 

-  (1818-1820)    work    in    West- 
minster elections,   129,  133,   137, 

139 

—  (1819)  at  "  Peterloo,"  140 

—  committal  and  triumphal  re- 
turn to  London,  146 

—  (1830)  elected  at  Preston,  265 

—  (1831)  work  for  Reform  Bill  in 
Manchester,  299 

Place's  impressions  of,  119  seq. 


Huskisson  (1822)  in  Government,  184 

connection  with  Combination 

Laws,   207   and   whole   of  chap, 
viii. 

Hutcheson,  master-cottoner  of  Glas- 
gow, 221 


ILLNESSES  of  Place,  345,  374,  395 

"  Improvement     of    the    Working 
Classes,"  pamphlet  by  Place,  163 

"  India,    History    of,"     by    James 
Mill,  67,  78 

India,  Place's  views  on,  329 :  writes 
for  Delhi  Gazette,  395 

41  Inquiry  Concerning  Political  Jus- 
tice," Godwin's,  29 

Ireland,     resolution     of     Chartists 
about,  373 

Irish  Coercion  Bill,  328 
i   Municipal  Bill,  350 


INDEX 


407 


JEFFREY,  editor   of  Edinburgh  Re- 
view, 88 

Johnson,  General,  M.P.,  302 
Jones,  John  Gale : 
(1796) arrested  at  Birmingham, 


26 


(1810)  called  to  Bar  of  House, 

49 

in  procession  for  Burdett,  56 

Jones,  Col.  Leslie  Grove  : 

action  on  Reform  Bill,  292,  304 

biographical  note,  255 

speech  in  Regent's  Park,  306 


KEMBLE.  John,  and  "O.P."  riots,  48 
Kent,   Duke    of,   and    Lancastrian 

Association,  107  seq. 
introduces   Place  and   Hume, 

"  King  Lud,"  note  on,  207 
Kinnaird,    Douglas,    candidate   for 
Westminster,  129  seq. 


"  LABOUR  Defended  against  the 
Claims  of  Capital,"  by  Hodgskin, 
268 

"  Labour  Rate  Bill,"  331  and  n. 

"Labour  Rewarded,''  by  William 
Thompson,  268 

"  Labour  Value,"  Ricardo's  theory 
of,  267 

Lamb,  George,  elected  for  West- 
minster, 135  seq. 

sent  to  Place  by  Lord  Mel- 
bourne, 253 

Lamb,  Lady  Caroline,  136,  138 

Lambton,  George,  134  n.  See  Lord 
Durham 

Lancashire,  remarks  of  Place  con- 
cerning, 145 

and  the  Reform  Bill,  265 

drilling  of  Chartists  in,  375 

Lancaster,  Joseph,  93  seq. 
scandals  about,  107 

charges  against  Place,  107 

Lancastrian  Association,  the  Royal, 
generally  Chap.  iv. 


Lancastrian  Association,  the  Royal : 
Place  resigns  from  it,  56,  109 

Higher  Schools,  98,  103 

Land  Nationalisation,  Place's  article 

against,  173 
|   Land  Nationaliser,  Spence.the,  6 1  seq. 

Lansdowne,  Lord,  canvassed  for 
Reform  Bill,  216 

Place's  opinion  of,  250 

Lascelles,  Lord,  chairman  of  Com- 
mittee on  Mendicity,  164 

Lauderdale,  Lord,  opposes  Reform 
Bill,  216 

"Letter  to  the  Electors  of  West- 
minster, A,"  by  Place,  327.  See 
also  "Report  to  Electors  of  West- 
minster " 

"  Letter  to  a  minister  .  .  .  respecting 
Taxes  on  Knowledge,"  by  Place, 

337 

Letters  from  Place  to  be  shown  to 
Ministers  : 

(1831)  to  Hobhouse  on  Reform 

Bill,  276 

(1832)  to  Col.  Jone«,  for  Lord 
Durham,  292 

(1835),    to    Parkes,  for    Lord 


Melbourne,  on  Municipal  Reform 
Bill,  344 

"  Letters  to  the  Electors  of  West- 
minster," 1806,  by  Cobbett,  42 

"Libel,  the  Law  of,"  pamphlet  by 
Place,  187 

Libel  Law,  Committee  on,  337 

Liberal,  use  of  this  term,  368 

—  the   National  Liberal  Federa- 
tion, 260 

"  Liberty  Candidates,"  138,  149 

Licensed  Appraisers'  Western  So- 
ciety, their  action  in  Reform  agi- 
tation, 297 

Lichfield,  Bishop  of,  mobbed,  296 

Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  Rotundanist 
meeting  in,  282 

Linen-drapers'  assistants,  organisa- 
tion of,  by  Place,  186 

Liquor  traffic :  free  trade  is  advo- 
cated by  Place,  175 

Liverpool,  Lord  :  was  canvassed  for 
Combination  Laws.  216  n. 


408 


INDEX 


Liverpool,  Lord:  his  government,  50, 
140 

London  Corresponding  Society,  20-28 

Reform  of  the  Corporation  of, 

346  teq. 

Place's  proposal  for  its  cor- 
poration, 347 

Place's  summary  on  political 

work  in,  393 

Longson,  William,  weaver  of  Stock- 
port,  letter  to,  371 

Lord  Mayor's  petition  on  Reform 
Bill,  307 

Lords,  Reform  Bill  thrown  out  in 
the  (i  83 1),  264 

oppose  Municipal  Reform  Bill, 

344  seq. 

Lovett,  William : 

—  a  letter  from  Place  to  him,  and 
answer,  quoted  in  full,  362-365 

as  Chartist,  359,  and  whole  of 

chap.  xiii. 

as  Rotundanist,  269  seq. ,  282, 

290 

imprisoned,  375 

"Loyal  Britons,"  24 

Lyndhurst,  Lord,  against  Reform 
Bill,  295 

could   not   form   a  Ministry, 

311  n. 

against  Municipal  Corporations 

Bill,  344 


M'CULLOCH,  J.  R.,  his  rise  as  eco- 
nomist, 157 

—  lectured  at  Royal  Institution, 
1 80 

action  on  Combination  Laws, 

207,  208 

on  "Peterloo,"  144  seq. 

M'Dougal,  Peter,  of  Glasgow,  219 

M'Intosh,  Sir  James,  59,  216  n. 

"  Madras  System,"  93 

Malthus,  his  doctrine,  164  seq. 

Manchester  and  Reform  agitation, 
265,  290,  299 

and  Chartist  agitation,  355 

and    Anti-Corn-Law    League, 

393-395 


Manchester,  four  working-men  pro- 
secuted for  open-air  meeting,  290 
Martineau,  Harriet,  Place's  letters 

to,  332 

approached  by  Government  to 

write  pamphlet,  355 

Marylebone  parish  meeting  in  Re- 
form agitation,  304,  306,  311 

Maxwell,  Sir  Murray,  candidate  for 
Westminster,  130 

"Mayre  the  potter,"  180 

"  Mechanics'  Institute  "  (Birkbeck), 
112,  268 

Meeting  of  Radical  members  and 
working-men  to  draft  the  Charter, 

365 
Meetings  in  London  after  "Peterloo," 

142,  144  .-•"/• 
interrupted   by  Chartists,  76 

seq. 

Melbourne,  Lord  : 
against  Reform  Bill,  293 

—  in  office  (i 833-34),  334,  336,  350, 

355.  357 
biography  of,  177/1. 

—  his  factotum  Young,  303 
Mendicity,  Committee  on,  164 
Merle,  Mr.,  editor  of  the  Courier, 

284 
Middlesex,  Burdett  member  for,  43 

Hume  elected  for,  243 

Mill,  James  : 

—  Clara,  James,  jun.,  and  Wil- 

helmina,  70  seq. 

death  of,  92 

life  at  Ford  Abbey,  73  seq. 

Mrs.  James,  72  seq. 

reprints  of  his  "  Government  " 


and  "Ballot,"  187 

See  generally  Chaps,  iii.  v.  vi. 


Mill,  John  Stuart : 
—  articles  against  pledges,  326 

—  early  life,  70  seq. 

—  enters  Indian  Office,  86 

—  his  letter  to  Place  (1837),  351 

—  mental  development  criticised 
by  Place,  91 

work  on  Bentham's  books,  83 


Millard,  William,  Rotundanist,  272 
Millbank  prison,  105 


INDEX 


409 


Mob  dispersed  on  Lord  Mayor's  Day, 

(1830),  248 
Monthly  Repository,  article  by  W.  J. 

Fox  in,  326 
Moore,  Peter,  208  seq. 
Richard,  and  People's  Charter, 

365 

Morning  Chronicle,  the : 

articles  from  Place  on  Sinking 

Fund,  1 60 

connection  with  Whigs,  143 

—  had    articles     by    Hodgskin, 
1831,  274 

on  Combination  Laws,  204 

on  Westminster  election,  1819, 

136  seq. 

said  to  be  influential  in  the 

country,  392 

Morning  Herald  hints  at   compro- 
mise with  Lords,  278 

Morning  Post,  1832  :  account  of  "Go 
for  Gold,"  310 

"  Municipal  Corporation   Reform," 
the,  342  seq. 

Corporation  Commission,  Re- 
port of,  341 

Government,  Place's  proposals 

for,  343 

Reform  Bill,  330  seq.,  342  seq. ; 

passed,  346 


NAPIER,  Sir  William,  302,  303 

Sir  Charles,  375 

"  Narrative  History  of  the  Working 

Classes,"  planned  by  Place,  385 
National  Debt,  Cobbett's   proposal 

for,  158 

Sinking  Fund  for,  159 

"National  Society  for  Education  of 

Poor  in  Church  Principles,"  94 
"  National   Union  of  the  Working 

Classes,"  266  n.,  269,  291 
"  Natural  Religion,"  by  Bentham,  83 
"New  Move,"  the,  339 
"New    View    of    Society,"    a,   by 

Owen,  63 

"Newcastle  Fox  Club,"  134 
Newspaper  cuttings  made  in  Place's 

old  age,  398 


Newspaper  Stamp  Duties,  148,  191, 

255,  288,  327,  336-342,  348-350 

close  of  agitation,  360 

"No-rent"  campaign,  293 
Northern    Liberator    references     to 

Place,  170,  177,  333 
Northern  Star  of  Leeds,  and  Chartist 

agitation,  353,  366,  372,  373,  390 
Northumberland,     Duke     of,    and 

Westminster  elections,  41  seq. 
"  Not  Paul,  but  Jesus,"  by  Bentham, 

84 
Nottingham,  disturbances  at,  294, 

208 


O'BRIEN,  Bronterre,  353,  372 

"  Observations  on  Mr.  Hoskisson's 
Speech,"  pamphlet  by  Place,  228 

O'Connell,  Daniel,  329,  336 

O'Connor,   Feargus,   Chartist,    336, 
371  seq. 
-  Roger,  51,  55 

"Offences  on  the  Sea,"  Bill  con- 
cerning, 180 

Onslow,  Sergeant,  159 

"  O.P."  riots,  48 

O'Quigley  and  French  Government, 
27 

Owen,  Robert,  63  seq. 
—  in  debate  on  Free  Trade,  361 

influence  on  Rotundanists,  266 

influence  on  Chartism,  354 


PADDINGTON    parish    meeting   on 
Reform  Bill,  306 

Paine,  Thomas : 

his    "  Age    of   Reason  "   pub- 
lished by  Place  and  another,  28 
his   "Rights    of    Man"  pub- 


lished, 6 1 
Palmerston,  Lord,  and  Reform  Bill, 

286 

"  Panopticons,"  Bentham's,  104 
Parkes,  Joseph,  of  Birmingham  : 
his  work  in  Reform  Bill  agita- 
tion, 276,  298,  299,  302,  303,  309 

(1832)  desired  by  Place  to  begin 

fresh  agitation,  327 


410 


INDEX 


Parkes,  Joseph,  of  Birmingham  : 
(1833-1835)    work    on    Poor- 

Law   Commission,    331   seq.,   341 

teg. 

—  (1834)    wrote    to    Place    for 
Government,  354 

visited  Place  in  his  old  age, 

398 

Parliament,  first,  of  William  IV. 
(1830),  247 

of  1831,  263 

first  Reformed,  328 

of  1835,  335 

Queen  Victoria's  first  (1837), 

366 

"  Parliamentary  Candidates'  So- 
ciety," 260  seq. 

Parliamentary  Reform  Association, 
the  Metropolitan  (to  gain  Char- 
ter), 391 

speech  of  Hume  to,  on  Place's 

death,  398 

"Parliaments,  History  of,"  Place's 
review  of,  87 

Place's  materials  for  his  own 

work  on,  127 

— —  Triennial,  259,  327 

Partnerships,  petition  concerning, 
proposed,  288 

Paull,  James,  candidate  for  West- 
minster, 44  teq. 

Peel,  Mr.  Robert : 

(1822)  took  office,  184 

(1825)  action  on  Combination 

Laws,  229,  236 

(1832)  refused  office,  295 

—  (1834)  Premier,  335 
-  (1835)  resigned,  336 

(1835)    action    on    Municipal 

Corporation  Bill,  346 
Peers,  fifty  to  be  created,  295 
"  Peers,    the,     and    the     People," 

pamphlet  by  Place,  343 
"  Peers    or    Revolution,"    popular 

cry,  276 

Penny  Postage,  386  seq. 
"  People's  Charter,  the,  359,  365 

in  pamphlet  form,  367 

Percy,  Lord,  elected  at  West- 
minster (1806),  41 


Percy,   Mr.,   secretary  of  Western 
Committee,  130 

Perry,   Erskine,    in    Parliamentary 
Candidates'  Society,  261 

work  in  Reform  agitation,  279, 

280,  283,  287 

Perry,   Thomas  (father  of  above), 
editor  of  Morning  Chronicle,  143 

Personal  appearance  of  Place,  16 

Perth,  the  Academy  at,  100 

Pestalozzi,  97  n. 

"Peterloo,"  141  teq. 

Petition    from  Birmingham   Char- 
tists, 371  teq. 

"  Philip  Beauchamp,"  83 

"  Pigs'  Meat,"  a  tract  by  Spence,  61 

Pitkeithly,  Lawrence,  326 

Pillans,  Mr.,  of  Edinburgh,  100 

Pitt  and  Grenville  Acts,  25 

Place,  Annie  (daughter),  99 

Simon  (father),  3 

"Tom"  (son),  71 

"  Plan  of  Parliamentary   Reform," 
by  Bentham,  84 

"Pledges  to  be  given   by  Candi- 
dates," pamphlet  by  Place,  326 

Philadelphian  Chapel  in  Finsbury, 
Rotundanist  meetings  at,  274 

Police,  the  new,  248  n. 

Political  and  Moral  Magazine,  337, 

338 
Political   economy,  defence  of,  by 

Place  to  working-men,  161 
denounced    by    Rotundanists, 

276 
Political  Register,  Cobbett's,  41,  116, 

124,  293,  297 

Political  Union  of  Birmingham,  251 
"Political    Union,   the   National," 

formation  of,  279,  288 

petition  to  Lords,  291 

part  in  Reform  Bill  agitation, 

294,  298,  314 
mass   meeting  organised 

306  teq. 

issued  tract  on  pledges,  326 


by, 


Poor  Law,  Commission  on,  331  teq. 

Act  passed,  333 

the  New,  abused  by  Chartists, 

366,  370,  373 


INDEX 


411 


Poor  Man's  Guardian,  the,  political 

economy  of  first  number,  269 
prosecuted   for    Stamp   Duty, 

337,  348 
as  Rotundanist  organ,  285 

—  article     denouncing     Reform 
in,  290 

under  O'Brien,  353 

"Population,  Of,"  by  Godwin,  157 
" Illustrations    and    Proofs   of 

the  Principle  of,"  by  Place,  157, 

165,  169 
" Inquiry  Concerning,'5  by  En- 

sor,  1 66 

Potteries  Bill,  180 
Powell,  James,  of  Westminster,  45,48 
Powell,  Thomas,  Rotundanist,  272 
"  Powell,"  of  Morning  Chronicle,  275 
Prentice,  Archibald,  81 
Press  prosecutions,  191 
Preston,  election  at,  in  1830,  265 
"Priestcraft,  Popular  History  of," 

334 
Prisoners,     political,    in    Coldbath 

Fields,  43 
Procession,  Burdett's  triumphal,  55 

seq. 

—  for  Dorchester  labourers,  356 
of  petitioners  for  Reform  Bill, 

275.  277 

"Pure    Spring   Water  Co.,"   Place 
secretary  of  the,  330 


QUEEN  ADELAIDE,  297 

her  project  of  flight,  312 

Queen  Caroline:  her  divorce,  150 seq. 

—  Victoria's  accession,  366 
Queen's  Square,  Bentham's  house  in, 

65 

—  to  be  used  as  school,  99,  m 


RADICAL  Club,  the,  388  seq. 
"Radical    Reform,    Plan    of,"    by 

Cartwright,  21 
"Radicalism,  the  Five  Points  of," 

366 

"  Rag-botheration,"  372 
"Rag-fair  breeches,"  8 


Rate-collectors  as  election  inspec- 
tors, 138,  150 

Rates  and  taxes  to  have  been  paid 
by  voters,  325 

"Rationale  of  Judicious  Evidence," 
by  Bentham,  80,  83 

Red  Lion  Square,  Rotundanists  in, 
271 

"Reform  Agitation,  History  of," 
by  Place,  385 

Regent  unpopular,  121 

Regent's  proclamation  against  sedi- 
tious meetings,  140,  142 

Regent  Park  meeting  of  parishes  on 
Reform  Bill,  306 

Register,  Cobbett's.  See  Political 
Register 

Register,  Extraordinary  (Hone's),  124 

"Reply  to  Lord  Erskine,"  Place's, 

139 
"  Restorer  of  Society  to  its  Natural 

State,"  by  Spencer,  61 
Revell,  Major,  and  National  Political 

Union,  307 
Ricardo,  D.  : 
his  influence  used  for  James 


Mill,  78 

-    pressing    for    rendering     of 
Finance  Accounts,  160 

-   influence    of    his    economics, 


168,  267 

Richards,  Dr.,  Vicar  in  Westmin- 
ster, 181 

Richmond,  the  Duke  of,  and  Reform 
Bill,  286,  295 

Richter,  John,  "tool  of  Place,"  56 

Ridley,  Sir  M.  W.,  and  Combination 
Laws,  235 

Rioters,  Special  Commission  to  try, 

254 
Roebuck  : 

his  work  for  Reform  Bill,  283 

publishing    pamphlets,     <xc., 

337.  349 

work  for  Charter,  367-369 

Rogers,    Samuel,    and    Lancastrian 

Society,  94 
Rom  illy.  Sir  Samuel : 
elected  for  Westminster  (1818), 


412 


INDEX 


Romilly,  Sir  Samuel : 

—  his  suicide,  132 

—  his  account  of  Place,  77 
Rosslyn,    Lord,    and    Combination 

Laws,  216,  239 
Rotunda,  in  Blackfriars  Bridge  Road, 

meetings  at,  272 
"  Rotundanists,  the,"  272  seq. 
Rural  police,  resolutions  of  Chartists 

concerning,  373 
Russell,  Lord  John : 

(1818)   nominated   for   West- 
minster, 133 

as  Whig  leader,  143,  152,  336 

-  action   on  Reform   Bill,    256, 
257,  366 

—  brought  in  Municipal  Corpora- 
tion Bill,  342 

Cobden  to  take  office  under, 

396 


ST.  ANDREW'S,  Holborn,  parish 
meeting  on  Reform  Bill,  307 

St.  Bride's  Church,  mob  at,  296 

St.  James's  Palace,  the  crime  in,  54 

St.  Pancras'  parish  meeting  on  Re- 
form Bill,  306 

St.  Peter's  Fields,  Manchester 
("Peterloo"),  140 

Santos,  Mr.  Dios,  among  Rotun- 
danists, 373 

Savage,  Mr.  : 

—  in  "  O.P."  riots,  48 

—  at  Marylebone  Reform  meeting, 
307 

"Savage  Parliament,  the,"  147,  148 
Say,  J.  B.,  French  economist,  158, 

237 

Scarlett,  the  Attorney-General,  191 
Scavengership  offered  to  Place.  15 
"Schools    for    All,"    James    Mill's 

essay,  99  n. 
Schools,  National,  Place's  ideal  of, 

378  seq. 

"  Scot  and  Lot  "  Boroughs,  39,  265 
Scotsman,  the,  on  "Peterloo,"  144 
on    Combination    Laws,   204, 

207 
Scot,  Mr.,  in  "O.P."  riots,  48 


"  Scots  Greys  "  at  Birmingham,  299 
Seamen  of  the  North,  petition  from, 

242 
"Second  Reply  to  Lord  Erskine  " 

by  Place,  143  n. 
Sellis,  Joseph,  and   the   Duke   of, 

Cumberland,  54 
Septennial  Act,   pledge  demanded 

for  the  repeal  of,  327 
Sheffield  cutlers'  present  to  Place, 

240 

delegates  excluded  from  Com- 
bination Laws  Committee,  231 
Shepherd's  Market,  May  fair,  138 
Sheridan,  R.  B.,  40,  41,  47 
Shields,  shipwrights  of,  235 

South,  seamen  of,  186 

Shipbuilders  and  Combination  Laws, 

the,  221,  230 

Shippon,  a  shipwright,  235 
Shipwrights'  Union,  222 

—  from  Shields,  235 

"  Short  Defence  of  the  Whigs,  A," 
by  Lord  Erskine,  139 

Sidmouth,  Lord,  62 

his  circular  to  Lord  -  Lieu- 
tenants, 140 

Silvester,  Sir  John,  204 

Sinking  Fund,  the,  159  seq. 

Six  Acts,  the,  123,  148 

"  Six  Points  "  of  the  Charter,  365 

Skene,  Philip,  and  George,  Rotun- 
danists, 272 

Skilled  labourers,  the  poverty  of 
(quotation  from  Place),  382 

Smith,  William : 

—  and  his  geological  map,  101 

—  Radical  M.P.,  143 

of  Glasgow,  219 

Socialism,  Place   bars  speeches  on, 

370 

and  currency,  372 

"Socialist,"  word  first  used,  353 
"Society  for  Promotion   of   Useful 

Knowledge"  refuse  Place's  help, 

169 
Spence,  Thomas,  Land  Nationalise^ 

6 1  seq. 
"  Spencean  Philanthropists,  Society 

of,"  62 


INDEX 


413 


Spring  Rice,  Mr.,  Chancellor  of  the 

Exchequer,  341,  349 
Stamp  Duties.  See  Newspaper  Stamp 

Duties 
Stamps,  Commissioners   of,  use  of 

their  power,  337 
Stanley,  Lord,  144 
Stansfield,  Hamer,  letter  to  Place, 

389 
Star,    the,    and    the    Combination 

Laws,  204 
State  Trials  of  Thomas  Hardy  and 

others  (1794),  23 

"  Statute  of  Apprentices,"  95,  159 
Steamboat  passengers,  tax  proposed 

on,  253 

Stock  Exchange,  hoax  on,  56 
Strangford,  Lord,  and  Reform  Bill, 

3i3 

Stuart,  Sir  John,  and  Lady  Jane, 
James  Mill  writes  account  of, 
70  n. 

Suffrage,  Universal,  Place's  view 
on,  304 

on  Household,  390 

Sun,  the,  read  in  the  country,  392 
"  Surplus  Value  "  theory,  267 
Sussex,  the  Duke  of,  and  Lancas- 
trian Association,  108 


"TABLE  of  the  Springs  of  Action," 

by  Bentham,  83 
Tailors,  master  :  their  desire  to  put 

down  the  Union,  201,  202 
Tavern,  City  of  London,  meeting  at, 

125 

Tavern,  the  Crown  and  Anchor  : 

meeting  of  Westminster  elec- 
tors at,  43,  55,  129 

meeting  of  National  Political 

Union  at,  259,  277,  282 

Tavistock,  Lord,    and  "  Peterloo," 

147 
Taxes,  proposed  refusal  to  pay,  251, 

297 

Taylor,  Sir  Herbert,  213 
"  Dr,"  revolutionist,  wrote  in 

Northern  Star,  1839,  373 
Teetotal  lectures  by  Vincent,  379 


Ten  Hours  Bill,  354 

Place  opposed  to,  173 

Thelwall,  John,  trial  of,  23 

—  in  Westminster  elections,   138 
Thistlewood,  George,  142 

•  conviction   after   Cato   Street 

Plot,  149 

Thomas,  Mr.,  an  elector  of  West- 
minster, 40 

—  Mr.,  police-inspector,  248  n. 
Thompson,  Col.  Perronet,  360,  379 
Thompson,  William,  author  of  Labour 

pamphlet,  268 

"Three  Days'   Revolution,"  recep- 
tion of  news  of,  243,  244 
Tierney,  Mr.,  M.P.,  140,  147 
Times,  the  compositors  prosecuted, 
200 

attitude  on  Combination  Laws, 

204 

connected     with     shipping 

interest,  222 

Tontine  Sick  Club,  a,  19 
Tooke,  Eyton,  86 

,  Home,  trial  of,  23 

Tooting,  Lancaster's  school  in,  94 
Torrens,    Colonel,   and    Place,    178 

seq. 
Tower  prepared  for  defence  during 

Burdett's  imprisonment,  51 
Trades  club,  Breeches-Makers',  6 
Trades'  Newspaper    and   Mechanics' 

Weekly  Journal,  162,  172 
Trades  Union,  the  Grand  National, 

265,  354,  355-358 

the    Metropolitan,  269 

"  Trades  Unions  condemned,  Trades 
Clubs     justified,"    and    kindred 
pamphlets  by  Place,  356 
Traveller,  the : 

article    by    Place    on    Land 

Nationalisation,  173 

articles  on  Sinking  Fund,  160 

articles  on  Whigs,  185 


Treason  and  Sedition  Bills,  25 
"Trifling  Mistake  of  Lord  Erskine  ' 

148 
Troops  ordered  to  the  Metropolis, 

5i 
Truck  Act,  Place's  views  on,  175 


414 


INDEX 


Tufnell,  E.  C.,  factory  commissioner, 

355 
Turner,  James,  of  Manchester,  and 

Grand  National  Trades  Union,  359 
' '  Twopenny       Trash,"       Cobbett's 

paper,  1 1 6 
Tyne  and  Wear,  seamen  of,  240 


UTILITARIAN     school,    the.       See 

Chaps,  iii.  and  vi. 
"  United  Englishmen"  and  "  United 

Irishmen,"  27 

Universal  Suffrage,  Place  on,  304 
-  agitation   for,    367.     See  cdao 

"Six  Points" 
" and     Annual     Parliaments 


against  Mr.  Brougham  and  the 
Whigs"  :  Place's  article,  124 
University  for  London  proposed,  193 


VESTRY  Bill,  154,  155 

Victualling  Office  men  ordered  to 

make  casks,  358 
Villiers,  C.  P.,  391 
Vincent,  Henry  : 
candidature     for     Banbury 

(1841),  379 

—  Chartist,  362,  365 

—  lecturing  tours,  396,  379 
Vinegar  Yard,  Place's  birth  in,  2 
Volunteers  called  out  in   Burdett 

dispute,  51 

Voters  in  Westminster,  the  kind  of 
(1807),  and  in  London  generally 
39 


WADE,  editor  of  the  Gorgon,  204 
Wakefield,  Edward,  66 

—  member  of  National  Political 

Union,  288 

See  generally  Chap.  iv. 


Wakley,  T.,  M.P.,  editor  of  Lancet, 

282,  284,  349 
—  opposition   to  Anatomy   Bill, 

288 
Walcheren  expedition,  49 


Wales,  Chartist  drilling  in   South, 

375 

Wall,  Mr.,  in  "  O.P"  riots,  48 

Wallace,  Robert,  correspondent  of 
Place's,  386 

Right  Hon.  Thomas,  and  com- 
mittee on  Combination  Laws,  207, 
228,  236 

Warburton,  Henry,  M.P.,  278,  325, 

335.  338 

—  work  on  Penny  Postage,  387 

seq. 

connection  with  Chartism,  388 

connection  with  Anti-Corn-Law 

League,  391 
Warden,    Mr.,     Rotundanist,     271, 

272 
Wardle,  Col. :  his  connection  with 

Burdett,  55,  119 
Watson,  James : 

—  Chartist,  365 

—  prosecuted,  291 
Rotundanist,  272 

"  Waverers,  the,"  292,  294 
"Wealth    of    Nations,   the,"   God- 
win's criticism  of,  157 
Weavers  of  Spitalfield,  the,  239 
Weedon  Barracks,  soldiers  at,  318 
Wellington,  Duke  of : 

—  See  Chaps,  ix.  x.  xi. 

—  took  office  in  1834,  335 
Welsh,  a  shipwright,  235 

iron-miners,  371 

Westminster    as     a    constituency, 

Place's  view  of,  29 

as  an  electoral  district,  39 

contest  with  House  of  Com- 


mons (1810),  48  seq. 

—  elections  previous  to  1807,  40- 

43 
election  in  1807,  44  seq. 

—  election  in  1818,  129-132 

—  election  in  1819,  133-139 
—  election  in  1820,  149  seq. 

—  "Electors,  Report  to, "Place's, 

134 

—  gas  strike,  357 

Review,  86  seq.,  187 

Westminster,    the    Duke    of,    and 

education,  112 


INDEX 


415 


West  London  Lancastrian  Associa- 
tion, 96  scq. 

Wharncliffe,  Lord,  and  Reform  Bill, 
286-292 

"Whig  Club,  the,"  40 

Whitbread,  Mr.,  and  Lancastrian 
Association,  107 

White,  George,  clerk  in  House  of 
Commons,  181,  207  scq. 

White  Conduit  House,  mass  meet- 
ing proposed  at,  285 

Wife,  Place's  first,  5,  1 6,  31,  35 

her  friendship  with  Mrs.  Mill, 

72  seq. 

her  death,  194  seq. 

Place's  second,  196 

his  separation  from,  397 

Wigg,  Robert,  Rotundanist,  272 
Wilberforce's    pronouncement     on 

"  Peterloo,"  147 
Willett,  Mr.,  in  "O.P."  riots,  48 
William  IV. : 
Place's  view  of,  242,  297 

visit  in   state   to   City  post- 
poned, 248 

attacked  on  Constitution  Hill, 

296 

position  of,   in   Reform    Bill 

crisis,  289  seq.,  319,  320 

Williams,  Mr.  John,  legal  authority, 
on  Combination  Laws,  235 


Williams,  Thomas,  publisher  of 
"Age  of  Reason,"  with  Place,  28 

Windows  not  to  be  broken  in  illu- 
minations, 260 

Wolseley,  Sir  Charles,  and  West- 
minster election  (1819),  138 

Wood,  Alderman  : 

and  Burdett  dispute,  49,  50 

—  and  Combination  Laws,  209 

Wool  Laws,  Place  works  for  Repeal 
of,  1825-27,  186 

Wooller,  editor  of  Black  Dwarf t  84, 
138,  142 

"Working  Classes,  History  of  the 
Movements  of,"  MS.  by  Place, 
132 

"Working-Men's  Association,"  359 
seq. 

branches,  366 

meetings  of,  360 

-  open-air    meeting    in   Palace 
Yard,  369 

printed  charter,  367 


Wych  Street,  Place's  life  in,  16 


YOEK,  Duke  of,  denounced,  48 
Yorkshire,     Chartist     drilling     in, 

375 

Young,  "Tom,"  Melbourne's  facto- 
tum, 276,  303,  355,  357 


THE    END 


Printed  by  BALLANTYNE,  HANSON  6*  Co. 
Edinburgh  &  London 


THE  WOKKING   OF  DEMOCRACY 


Bvr  SIDNEY  AND  BEATRICE  WEBB 

THE  HISTORY  OF  TRADE  UNIONISM.  8vo,  pp.  574,  cloth, 
with  Coloured  Map.  First  Edition  published  May  1894; 
Second  Edition,  1896.  Price  i8s. 

This  work,  founded  almost  entirely  upon  material  previously  unpublished, 
describes  the  growth  and  development  of  the  Trade  Union  Movement  in  the 
United  Kingdom  from  1700  down  to  1890,  including  the  political  history  of 
the  English  working-class.  The  final  chapter  describes  the  Trade  Union 
world  of  to-day  in  all  its  varied  features,  including  a  realistic  sketch  of  Trade 
Union  life  by  a  Trade  Union  Secretary,  and  a  classified  census  founded  on 
the  authors'  investigations  into  a  thousand  separate  unions  in  all  parts  of 
the  country.  A  coloured  map  represents  the  percentage  which  the  Trade 
Unionists  bear  to  the  population  of  each  county.  A  bibliography  of  Trade 
Union  literature  is  appended. 

"To  the  politician  ...  an  invaluable  guide." — Observer,  27th  May  1894. 

"A  masterly  piece  of  work."— Times,  5th  May  1894. 

"  This  is  one  of  those  books,  rari  nantes  in  yurgite  vasto  of  trash,  which  every 
man  and  woman  feeling  a  human  interest  in  the  problem  of  the  age  will  do 
well  to  possess  for  present  study  and  future  reference.  .  .  .  The  authors  have 
offered  the  world  a  book  which  amounts  practically  to  a  history  of  something 
far  more  important  than  Trade  Unionism  —that  is  to  say,  of  the  attitude  of 
the  State  towards  Labour  in  Great  Britain  at  various  stages,  and  of  the  effect 
which  each  attitude  produced.  .  .  .  The  book  is  really,  perhaps  unconsciously, 
a  history  of  the  progress  of  Economical  Thought  in  Britain.  ...  To  all  County 
Councillors  and  Members  of  Parliament  who  care  to  look  before  they  leap  we 
woul'l  fain  say,  'Read  this  book  aud  inwardly  digest  it.'" — National  Observer, 
2nd  June  1894. 


Uniform  with  the  above,  by  the  same  Authors. 

INDUSTRIAL  DEMOCRACY.  8vo,  Two  Vols.,  pp.  900,  cloth, 
with  Two  Diagrams.  Published  January  1898.  Price  255. 
net. 

The  first  part  of  this  work  contains  an  analysis  of  the  working  of  Democracy 
in  the  Trade  Union  world,  including  its  remarkable  experience  of  the 
Referendum,  the  Initiative,  and  Representative  Institutions.  The  second 
part  describes  the  Trade  Union  methods  and  regulations,  including  Factory 
Legislation  and  every  form  of  regulation  of  labour,  in  all  the  various  trades 
of  the  United  Kingdom.  The  third  part  supplies  a  new  analysis  of  the 
working  of  industrial  competition,  and  a  full  exposition  of  economic  theory, 
leading  up  to  some  novel  proposals  for  dealing  with  the  sweated  trades.  The 
book  contains  facts  and  copious  explanations  upon  every  phase  of  the  Labour 
Question,  with  an  elaborate  Index. 


LONGMANS,    GREEN,    AND    CO. 

LONDON,  NEW  YORK,  AND  BOMBAY 


a  Classifteb   Catalogue 


OF  WORKS  IN 


GENERAL    LITERATURE 

PUBLISHED    BY 

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO. 

39    PATERNOSTER   ROW,    LONDON,    E.G. 

91  AND  93  FIFTH  AVENUE,  NEW  YORK,  AND  32  HORNBY  ROAD,  BOMBAY. 

CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

PAGE 

BADMINTON  LIBRARY  (THE).     -     10 

MANUALS    OF    CATHOLIC    PHIL- 

BIOGRAPHY,        PERSONAL        ME- 

OSOPHY   - 

-    16 

MOIRS,    &c.        7 

MENTAL,  MORAL,  AND  POLITICAL 

CHILDREN'S  BOOKS                             -'    26 

PHILOSOPHY  - 

.    14 

CLASSICAL  LITERATURE  TRANS- 

MISCELLANEOUS 

AND  CRITICAL 

LATIONS,  ETC.                                     -     18 

WORKS      - 

-     29 

COOKERY,     DOMESTIC     MANAGE- 

MISCELLANEOUS 

THEOLOGICAL 

MENT,  &c.          28 

WORKS      - 

-     31 

EVOLUTION,         ANTHROPOLOGY, 

POETRY  AND  THE 

DRAMA     -         -     18 

&c.                                                      -         -     17 

POLITICAL    ECONOMY   AND   ECO- 

FICTION, HUMOUR,  &c.   -                  -     21 

NOMICS     - 

-     16 

FUR,  FEATHER  AND  FIN  SERIES     12 

POPULAR  SCIENCE  -                            -     24 

HISTORY,       POLITICS,        POLITY, 

SILVER  LIBRARY 

(THE)         -         -     27 

POLITICAL  MEMOIRS,  &c.    -         -       3 

SPORT  AND  PASTIME                          -     10 

LANGUAGE,    HISTORY   AND 

TRAVEL    AND    ADVENTURE,  THE 

SCIENCE  OF     -         -         -         -         -     16 

COLONIES,  &c. 

-       8 

LONGMANS'    SERIES    OF   BOOKS 

VETERINARY  MEDICINE,  &c.          -     10 

FOR  GIRLS       -                 ...     26 

WORKS  OF  REFERENCE-         -         -     25 

INDEX    OF    AUTHORS    AND     EDITORS. 

Page 

Page 

Page 

,                                  Page 

Abbott  (Evelyn)       -    3,  18 

Baden-Powell  (B.  H.)        3 

Bosanquet  (B.)         -        14 

Cochrane  (A.)  -        -        19 

(T.  K.)      -        -        :4 

Bagehot  (W.)  -      7,  16,  29 

Boyd  (Rev.A.  K.  H.)7,2g,  31 

Coleridge  (S.  T.)      -        20 

(E.  A.)      -        -        14 

Bagwell  (R.)     -        -          3 

Brassey  (Lady)          -      8,  9 

Comyn  (L.  N.)          -        26 

Acland  (A.  H.  D.)     -          3 

Bain  (Alexander)      -         14 

(Lord)'           3,8,11,16 

Conington  (  [ohn) 

Acton  (Eliza)    -        -        28 

Baker  (Sir  S.  W.)     -    8,  10 

Bray  (C.  and  Mrs.)  -         14 

Conybeare(Rev.W.J.) 

Adeane  (J.  H.)  -        -          7 

Baldwin  (C.  S.)         -         14 

Bright  (Rev.  J.  F.)  -          3 

&  Howson  (Dean)         27 

jEschylus          -        -         1  8 

Balfour  (A.  J.)           -  11,31 

Broadfoot  (Major  W.)      10 

Corbett  (Julian)        -          3 

Ainger  (A.  C.)  -        -        n 

Ball(J.  T.)        -        -          3 

Brogger  (W.  C.)        -          8 

Corder  (Annie)          -         19 

Albemarle  (Earl  of)  -        n 

Baring-Gould    (Rev. 

Brookings  (W.)         -        29 

Coventry  (A.)   -        -         n 

Allen  (Grant)    -        -        24 

S.)          -        -        -27,29 

Browning  (H.  Ellen)          9 

Cox  (Harding)           -        10 

Allingham  (W.)        -  18,29 

Barnett  (Rev.  S.  A.  & 

Buck  (H.  A.)     -        -         ii 

Crake  (Rev.  A.  D.)   -        26 

(F.)                                         21 

Mrs.)      -        -        -         16 

Buckle  (H.  T.)-        -          3 

Creiehton  (Bishop)-      3,4 

Andre  (R.)         -        -        12 

Baynes  (T.  S.)  -        -        29 

Bull  (T.)    -        -        -        28 

Crozier  (J.  B.)  -        -         14 

Anstey  (F.)       -        -        21 

Beaconsfield  (Earl  of)      21 

Burke  (U.  R.)   -        -          3 

Crump  (A.)                 -        21 

Archer  (W.)      -        -          8 

Beaufort  (Duke  of)  -  10,  n 

Burrows  (Montagu)            4 

Cuningham  (G.  C.)  -          3 

Aristophanes    -        -         18 

Becker  (Prof.)  -                  18 

Butler  (E.  A.)   -        -        24 

Cuizon  (Hon.  G.  N.)          3 

Aristotle   -                 -  14,  18 

Beesly  (A.  H.)  -        -         19 

(Samuel)  -        -        29 

Cutts  (Rev.  E.  L.)    -          4 

Armstrong     (G.     F. 

Bell  (Mrs.  Hugh)      -         19 

Savage)          -                 19 

—  (Mrs.  Arthur)    -          7 

Cameron  of  Lochiel         12 

Dallinger  (F.  W.)     -          4 

—  (E-  J-  Savage)  7,  19,  29 

Bent  (J.  Theodore)  -          8 

Cannan  (E.)      -        -         17 

Davidson  (W.  L.)     -  14,  16 

Arnold  (Sir  Edwin)  -    8,  19 

Besant  (Sir  Walter)-          3 

—  (F.  Laura)          .         13 

Davies  (J.  F.j   -        -         18 

(Dr.  T.)     -        -          3  ;  Bickerdyke(J.)          -        ii 

Chesney  (Sir  G.)      -          3 

Deland  (Mrs  )   -        -  21,  26 

Ashley  (W.  J.)  -                 16  1  Bicknell  (A.  C.)         -          8 

Chisholm  (G.  G.)     -        25 

Dent  (C.  T.)     -                n 

Astor  (J-  J-)               -        21    Bird  (R-)   -        -        -        31 

Cholmondelev-Pennell 

Deploige  -        -        -        17 

Atelier  duLys(  Author           Black  (Clementina)  .        21 

(H.)                          -         ii 

De  Salis  (Mrs.)         -  28,  29 

of)-       -       -       -       26 

Blackwell  (Elizabeth)        7 

Cicero        -        -        -         18 

De  Tocqueville(A.)-          3 

Ayre  (Rev.  J.)  -        -        25 

Bland  (Mrs.  Hubert)          20 

Clarke  (Rev.  R.  F.)  -         16 

Devas  (C.  S.)    -        -        16 

Boase  (Rev.  C.  W.)-          4 

Clodd  (Edward)        -        17 

Dickinson  (G.  L.)     -          4 

Bacon                -        -    7,  14    Boedder  (Rev.  B.)     -        16 

Clutterbuck  (W.  J.)-          9 

Diderot      -        -        -        21 

INDEX     OF     AUTHORS     AND      EDITORS— continued. 


Page 

Pate 

Page 

Page 

Dougall  (L.)      -       -       21 

Hudson  (W.  H.)       -        24 

Miss  Molly  (A  uthor  of)      26 

Sophocles          -        -        18 

Dowell  (S.)        -        -        16 

Hueffer  (F.  M.)        -         7 

Molesworth  (Mrs.)   -        26 

Soulsby  (Lucy  H.)       26,  31 

Doyle  (A.  Conan)     -        ai 

Hume  (David)                   14 

Montague  (F.  C.)     -          6 

Spedding  (J.)     -        -    7.  »4 

Dreyfus  (Irma)          -        30 

Hunt  (Rev.  W.)        -          4 

Montagu  (Hon.  John 

Sprigge  (S.  Squire)  -          8 

Du  Bois(W.  E.  B.)-          4 

Hutchinson  (Horace  G.)  ii 

Scott)         -        -        12 

Stanley  (Bishop)       -        24 

Dufferin  (Marquis  of)        n 
Dunbar  (Mary  F.)    -        20 

Ingelow  (Jean           •  '9i  *& 

Moore  (T.)        -        -        25 
(Rev.  Edward)  -        14 

Steel  (A.  G.)     -        -        10 
(J.  H.)       -       -        10 

James  (W.)       -        -        14 

Morgan  (C.  Lloyd)  -        17 

Stephen  (Leslie)       -          9 

Eardley-Wilmot  (Capt. 

;efferies  (Richard)    -        30 

Morris  (W.)       -    ao,  22,  31 

Stephens  (H.  Morse)          6 

S.)      -                          8 

]lenery-Shee  (R.)      -        17 

(Mowbray)        -        n 

Stevens  (R.  W.)       -        31 

Ebrington  (Viscount)       12 

]  erome  (Jerome  K.)  -        22 

Mulhall  (M.  G.)        -        17 

Stevenson  (R.  L.)     -  23,  26 

Egbert  (J-  C.)    -        -        18 

'  ohnson  (J.  &  J.  H.)         30 

Munk(W.)        -        -          7 

Stock  (St.  George)   -        15 

Eggleston  (E.)  -        -          4 

Jones  (H.  Bence)      -        25 

VT                    IV  » 

'Stonehenge'   -        -        10 

Ellis  (J.  H.)      -        -        12 
—  (R.  L.)       -        -        14 
Evans  (Sir  John)      -        30 

(Owen  G.)         -         9 
ordan  (W.  L.)         -        16 
'[owett  (Dr.  B.)         -        17 
;!oyce(P.  W.)   -       -         4 

ISansen  (r.)                •          9 
Nesbit  (E.)                        20 
Nettleship  (R.  L.)    -        14 
Newman  (Cardinal)  -        22 

Storr  (F.)                            14 
Stuart-  Wortley  (A.  J  .)  1  1  ,  12 
Stubbs  (I.  W.)-        -          6 
Sturdy  (E.  T.)  -        -        30 

Farrar  (Dean)  -        -  16,  21 

Justinian                            14 

Ogle(W.)-        -        -        18 

Suffolk  &  Berkshire 

Fitzwygram  (Sir  F.)        10 

Oliphant  (Mrs.)        -        22 

(Earl  of)     -        -        ii 

Folkard  (H.  C.)         -        12 

Kalisch  (M.  M.)        -        32 

Oliver  (\V.  D.)         -         9 

Sullivan  (Sir  E.)       -        n 

Ford  (H.)  -                -        12 

Kant  (I.)                             14 

Onslow  (Earl  of)      -        ii 

—  (J.F.)        -        -        26 

Fowler  (Edith  H.)    -        21 

Kaye  (Sir  J.  W.)       -          5 

Orchard  (T.  N.)        -        31 

Sully  (James)                     15 

Foxcroft  (H.  C.)       -          7 

Kerr  (Rev.  J.)    -        -        n 

Osbourne  (L)                     23 

Sutherland  (A.  and  G.)        6 

Francis  (Francis)      -         12 

Killick  (Rev.  A.  H.)  -        15 

P-rL-  /\»/  \                                             T- 

(Alex.)       -        -        15 

Freeman  (Edward  A.)         4 

Kitchin  (Dr.  G.  W.)           4 

arK  i  w  .) 

Suttner  (B.  von)       -        23 

Froude  (James  A.)  4,  7,  9,  21 
Furneaux  (W.)          -        24 

Knight  (E.  F.)  -        5,9,  u 
Kostlin  (J.)                          7 

Parr  (Louisa)    -        -        26 
Payne-Gallwey    (Sir 
R.)      -        -        -  ii,  13 

Swinburne  (A.  J.)     -        15 
Symes  (J.  E.)    -        -        17 

Gallon  (W.  F.)         -        17 
Gardiner  (Samuel  R.)         4 
Gathorne-Hardy  (Hon. 
A.  E.)         -        -        12 

Ladd  (G.  T.)     -        -        15 
Lang  (Andrew)  5,  10,  n,  13, 
17,  18,  19,  20,  22,  26,  30 
Lascelles  (Hon.  G.) 

Peek  (Hedley)  -        -        ii 
Pembroke  (Earl  of)  -        n 
Phillipps-Wolley(C.)  10,22 
Pleydell-Bouverie  (E.  O.)  1  1 

P-l           /\\7    \                                                                             T-l 

Tacitus     -        -        -        18 
Tavlor  (Col.  Meadows)    17 
—  -  (Una)         -        -        23 
Tebbutt  (C.  G.)         -        ii 

Gerard  (Dorothea)   -        26 
Gibbons  (J.  S.)          -  ii,  12 
Gibson  (Hon.  H.)     -        13 

IO,  II,  12 

Laughton  (J.  K.)      -          8 
Laurie  (S.  S.)   -        -          5 

ole  (vv.)  -        -        -        13 
Pollock  (W.  H.)        -        ii 
Poole  (  W  .  H  .  and  Mrs.)    29 

Thompson  (N.  G.)   -         13 
Thornhill  (W.  J.)     -        18 
Todd  (A.)  ...          6 

(C.  H.)       -        -        14 
(Hon.  W.)         -        32 
Gilkes  (A.  H.)  -        -        21 
Gill  (H.  J.)        -        -        22 
Gleig  (Rev.  G.  R.)    -          8 
Goethe      -        -        -        19 

Layard  (Nina  F.)      -        19 
Leaf  (Walter)   -        -        31 
Lear  (H.L.Sidney)-        29 
Lecky  (W.  E.  H.)     -    5,  19 
Lees  (J.  A.)       -        -          9 
Lejeune  (Baron)       -          7 

Poore  (G.  V.)                    31 
Potter  (J.)         -        -        16 
Praeger  (S.  Rosamond)    26 
Prevost  (C.)      -        -        n 
Pritchett  (R.  T.)       -        ii 
Proctor  (R.  A.)  13,  24,  28,  31 

Toynbee  (A.)    -        -        17 
Trevelyan  (Sir  G.  O.)          7 
—  (C.  P.)       -        -        17 
Trollope  (Anthony)  -        23 
Tupper  (J.  L.)  -        -        20 
Tyndall  (J.)                           9 

Graham  (P.  A.)         -  13,  21 

Lester  (L.  V.)   -        -          7 

Quill  (A.  W.)    -        -        18 

Tyrrell  (R.  Y.)  -        -        18 

(G.  F.)       -        -        16 

Levett-Yeats  (S.)      -        22 

Quillinan  iMrs.)        -          9 

Granby  (Marquis  of)        12 

Lewes  (G.  H.)  -        -        15 

Quintana  (A.)   -        -        22 

Upton    (F.    K.    and 

Grant  (Sir  A.)  -        -        14 
Graves  (R.  P.)  -        -          7 
Green  (T.  Hill)         -        14 
Greville  (C.  C.  F.)    -          4 

Lillie  (A.)-                         13 
Lindley(J.)       -        -        25 
Lodge  (H.  C.)  -                  4 
Loftie  (Rev.  W.  J.)  -          4 

Raine  (Rev.  James)  -          4 
Ransome  (Cyril)       -          3 
Rawlinson         (Rev. 

Bertha)      -       -       26 

Vaughan  (Cardinal)  -        17 
Verney  (Frances   P. 

Grey  (Maria)             -        26 
Grose  (T.  H.)                    14 
Grove  (F.  C.)    -        -        n 
(Mrs.  Lilly)       -        n 

Longman  (C.  J.)    10,  13,  30 
(F.  W.)      -        -        13 
(G.  H.)      -        -  ii,  12 
Lowell  (A.  L.)  -        -          5 

Canon)        -        -          8 
Rhoades  (J.)     -        -        18 
Rhoscomyl  (O.)        -        23 
Ribblesdale  (Lord)  -        13 

R*      U    /  A     \                                                           TQ 

and  Margaret  M.)         8 
Vincent  (].  E.)-        -        17 
Virgil                                  18 
Vivekananda  (Swami)      38 

Gurdon  (Lady  Camilla)    21 
Gurney  (Rev".  A.)      -        19 
Gwilt  (J.)  -        -        -        30 

Haggard  (H.   Rider)  21,  22 
Hake(O.)-        -        -        ii 

Lubbock  (Sir  John)  -        17 
Lucan       -        -        -        18 
Lutoslawski  (W.)     -        15 
Lyall  (Edna)     -        -        22 
Lyttelton  (Hon.  R.  H.)    10 
(Hon.  A.)  -        -        ii 

icn  (A.)                            10 
Richardson  (C.)        -        12 
Richman  (I.  B.)        -          6 
Rickaby  (Rev.  John)         16 
(Rev.  Joseph)    -        16 
Ridley  (Annie  E.)     -          7 

Vivian  (Herbert)      -         9 

Wakeman  (H.  O.)     -          6 
Walford  (L.  B.)        -        23 
Walker  (jane  H.)     -        29 
Wallas  (Graham)     -          8 

Halliwell-Phillipps(J.)       8 
Hamlin  (A.  D.  F.)    -        30 
Hammond  (Mrs.  J.  H.)       4 

Lytton  (Earl  of)       -        19 
MacArthur  (Miss  E.  A.)  17 

Riley  (J.  VV.)     -        -        20 
Roget  (Peter  M.)      -  16,  25 
Rolfsen  (N  )              -          8 

Walpole  (Spencer)   -          6 
Walrond  (Col.  H.)    -        10 
Walsingham(Lord)-        ii 

Hampton  (Lady  Laura)   30 
Harding  (S.  B.)         -          4 

Macaulay  (Lord)       5,  6,  20 
MacColl  (Canon)                6 

Romanes  (G.  J.) 

Walter  (J.)        -        -          8 
Watson  (A.  E.  T.) 

Harte  (Bret)      -        -        22 

Macdonald  (George)  20,  32 

8»  i5>  *7»  ao,  32 

10,11,12,  23 

HartingtJ.  E.)-        -        12 
Hartwig  (G.)     -        -        24 

Macfarren  (Sir  G.  A.)        30 
Mackail  (J.  W.)        -        18 

Ronalds  (A.)     -        -        13 
Roosevelt  (T  )  -       -         ± 

Waylen  (H.  S.  H.)   -        30 
Webb  (Mr.  and  Mrs. 

Hassall  (A.)       -        -          6 
Haweis  (Rev.  H.  R.)    7,  30 

Mackinnon  (J.)          -          6 
Macleod  (H.  D.)       -        16 

Rossetti  (Maria  Fran- 

Sidney)       -        -        17 
—  (T.  E.)       -        -        19 

Heath  (D.  D.)  -                14 

Macpherson  (Rev.  H.  A.)i2 

cesca)     -                         31 
(W   M  )             -        20 

Weber  (A.)       -        -        15 

Heathcote  (J.  M.  and 
C.  G.)          -        -        ii 

Madden  (D.  H.)        -        13 
Maher  (Rev.  M.)      -        16 

Russell  (Bertrand)    -        17 

Weir  (Capt.  R.)         -        II 
Wevman  (Stanley)  -        23 

Helmholtz  (Hermann 

Malleson  (Col.  G.  B.)          5 

(Alys)         -        -        17 

Whately(Archbishop)  14,  15 

von)    -        -        -        24 

Mandello(J-)     -        -        17 

Saintsbury  (G.)         -        12 

(E.  Jane)  -       -        16 

Henderson      (Lieut- 

Marbot  (Baron  de)   -          8 

Sandars  (T.  C.)         -        14 

Whishaw  (F.  J.)       -        23 

Col.  G.  F.)        -          7 

Marshman  (I.  C.)     -          7 

Schreiner  (S.  C.  Cron- 

White  (W.  Hale)     -        20 

Henry  (W.)       -        -        n 

Martineau  (Dr.  James)    32 

wright)       -        -        10 

Whitelaw  (R.)  -        -        18 

Herbert  (Col.  Kenney)     12 

Maskelyne  (J.  N.)     -        13 

Seebohm  (F.)    -        -     6,  8 

Wilcocks  (J.  C.)       -        13 

Hewins  (W.  A.  S.)    -        17 

Maunder  (S.)                     25 

Selous  (F.  C.)  -        -        10 

Willich  (C.  M.)         -        as 

Hill  (Sylvia  M.)        -        21 

Max  Miiller  (F.) 

Selss  (A.  M.)     -        -        19 

Witham  (T.  M.)       -        n 

Hillier  (G.  Lacy)      -        10 

15,  16,  30,  32 

Sewell  (Elizabeth  M.)       23 

Wood  (Rev.  J.  G.)   -        25 

Hime(Lieut.-Col.  H. 

(Mrs.)        -        -          9 

Shakespeare     -        -        20 

Woodgate  (W.  B.)  -        10 

W.  L.)        -        -        30 

May  (Sir  T.  Erskine)          6 

Shand  (A   I.)    -        -        12 

Wood-Martin  (W.  G.)        6 

Hodgson  (ShadworthH.)  14 

Meade  (L.  T.)  -        -        26 

Sharpe  (R.  R.)  -        -          6    Woods  (Marga/et  L.)       23 

Holroyd  (Maria  J.)  -          7 

Melville  (G.J.Whyte)      22 

Shearman  (M.)          -        10 

Wordsworth  (Elizabeth)  ao 

Hope  (Anthony)       -        22 

Merivale  (Dean)       -          6 

Sinclair  (A.)      -        -        ii 

-.  —  (William)                  20 

Hornung  (E.  W.)     -        22 

Merriman  (H.  S.)      -        22 

Smith  (R.  Bosworth)          6 

Wylie  (J.  H.)    -       -  '      6 

Houston  (D.  F.)       -          4 
Howell  (G.)       -        -        16 

Mill  (James)                       15 
(John  Stuart)    -  15,  16 

(W.  P.  Haskett)          9 
Soderini  (Count  E.)  -        17 

Youatt  (W.)      -        -        10 

Howitt  (W.)     -        -          9 

Milner  (G.)                        30 

Solovyoff  (V.  S.)      -        31 

Zeller(E.)         -        -        15 

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


History,  Polities,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &e. 


Abbott. — A-   HISTORY     OF    GREECE 
By  EVELYN  ABBOTT,  M.A.,  LL.D. 
Part  I. — From   the   Earliest  Times  to  the 
Ionian  Revolt.     Crown  8vo.,  ios.  6d. 
Part  II. — 500-445  B.C.     Crown  8vo.,  ios.  6d. 

Acland  and  Ransome. — A  HAND- 
BOOK IN  OUTLINE  OF  THE  POLITICAL  HIS- 
TORY OF  ENGLAND  TO  1896.  Chronologically 
Arranged.  By  A.  H.  DYKE  ACLAND,  M.P., 
and  CYRIL  RANSOME,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  65. 

ANNUAL  REGISTER  (THE}.     A 

Review    of  Public    Events    at  Home    and 

Abroad,  for  the  year  1896.     8vo.,  185. 

Volumes  of  the  ANNUAL  REGISTER  for  the 

years  1863-1895  can  still  be  had.    iSs.each 

Arnold  (THOMAS,  D.D.),  formerly 
Head  Master  of  Rugby  School. 

INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES  ON  MOD- 
ERN HISTORY.    8vo.,  75.  6d. 

MISCELLANEOUS  WORKS.  8vo.,  75. 6d. 

Baden-Powell.  —  THE  INDIAN 
VILLAGE  COMMUNITY.  Examined  with 
Reference  to  the  Physical,  Ethnographic, 
and  Historical  Conditions  of  the  Provinces; 
chiefly  on  the  Basis  of  the  Revenue- 
Settlement  Records  and  District  Manuals. 
By  B.  H.  BADEN-POWELL,  M.A.,  C.I.E. 
With  Map.  8vo.,  i6s. 

Bagwell. — IRELAND  UNDER  THE 
TUDORS.  By  RICHARD  BAGWELL,  LL.D. 
(3  vols.)  Vols.  I.  and  II.  From  the  first 
invasion  of  the  Northmen  to  the  year  1578. 
8vo.,  325.  Vol.  III.  1578-1603.  8vo.  i8s. 

Ball. — HISTORICAL  REVIEW  OF  THE 
LEGISLATIVE  SYSTEMS  OPERATIVE  IN  IRE- 
LAND,from  the  Invasion  of  Henry  the  Second 
to  the  Union  (1172-1800).  By  the  Rt.  Hon. 
J.  T.  BALL.  8vo.,  6s. 

Besant. — THE  HISTORY  OF  LONDON. 
By  Sir  WALTER  BESANT.  With  74  Illus- 
trations. Crown  Svo.,  is.  gd.  Or  bound 
as  a  School  Prize  Book,  as.  6d. 


Brassey  (LORD). — PAPERS    AND 

DRESSES. 


AD- 


NAVAL  AND  MARITIME.    1872-1893. 
2  vols.     Crown  8vo.,  ios. 

MERCANTILE  MARINE  AND  NAVIGA- 
TION^ from  1871-1894.     Crown  8vo.,  55. 

IMPERIAL  FEDERATION  AND  COLON- 
ISATION FROM  1880  to  1894.     Cr.  8vo.,  5s. 


Brassey   (LORD)    PAPERS    AND  AD- 
DRESSES— continued. 

POLITICAL     AND     MISCELLANEOUS. 
1861-1894.     Crown  Svo  55. 

Bright. — A  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 
By  the  Rev.  J.  FRANCK  BRIGHT,  D.  D. 

Period    I.     MEDIEVAL  MONARCHY:    A.D. 
449  to  1485.     Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d. 

Period  II.     PERSONAL  MONARCHY.    1485  to 
to  1688.     Crown  8vo.,  5s. 

Period  III.     CONSTITUTIONAL  MONARCHY. 
1689  to  1837.     Crown  Svo.,  js.  6d. 

Period  IV.     77/£  GROWTH  OF  DEMOCRACY. 
1837  to  X88o     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Buckle. — HISTORY  OF  CIVILISATION 
nv  ENGLAND  AND  FRANCE,  SPAIN  AND 
SCOTLAND.  By  HENRY  THOMAS  BUCKLE. 
3  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  245. 

Burke. — A  HISTORY  OF  SPAIN  from 

the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Death  of  Ferdinand 
the  Catholic.  By  ULICK  RALPH  BURKE, 
M.A.  2  vols.  8vo.,  325. 

Chesney. — INDIAN  POLITY:  a  View  of 

the  System  of  Administration  in  India.  By 
General  Sir  GEORGE  CHESNEY,  K.C.B., 
With  Map  showing  all  the  Administrative 
Divisions  of  British  India.  Svo.,  2is. 

Corbett. — DRAKE  AND  THE  TUDOR 
NAVY,  with  a  History  of  the  Rise  of  Eng- 
land as  a  Maritime  Power.  By  JULIAN 
CORBETT.  With  Portraits,  Illustrations  and 
Maps.  2  vols.  Svo. 

Creighton. — A  HISTORY  OF  THE 
PAPACY  FROM  THE  GREAT  SCHISM  TO  THE 
SACK  OF  ROME,  1378-1527.  By  M. 
CREIGHTON,  D.D.,  Lord  Bishop  of  London. 
6  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.  each. 

Cuningham.  —  A  SCHEME  FOR  IM- 
PERIAL FEDERATION:  a  Senate  for  the 
Empire.  By  GRANVILLE  C.  CUNINGHAM, 
of  Montreal,  Canada.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Curzon. — PERSIA  AND  THE  PERSIAN 
QUESTION.  By  the  Right  Hon.  GEORGE 
N.  CURZON,  M.P.  With  9  Maps,  96  Illus- 
trations, Appendices,  and  an  Index.  2 
vols.  8vo.,  42s. 

De  Tocqueville. — DEMOCRACY  IN 
AMERICA.  By  ALEXIS  DE  TOCQUEVILLE. 
2  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  i6s. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


History,  Polities,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &e. — continued. 


Dickinson. — THE  DEVELOPMENT  ot- 
PARLIAMENT  DURING  THE  NINETEENTH 
CE\TURY.  By  G.  LOWES  DICKINSON,  M.A. 
8vo,  75.  6d. 

Eggleston. — THE  BEGINNERS  OF  A 

NATION:  a  History  of  the  Source  and  Rise 
of  the  Earliest  English  Settlements  in 
America,  with  Special  Reference  to  the  Life 
and  Character  of  the  People.  By  EDWARD 
EGGLESTON.  With  8  Maps.  Cr.  8vo.,7s.  6d. 

Froude  QAMES  A.). 

THE  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  from  the 
Fall  of  Wolsey  to  the  Defeat  of  the  Spanish 
Armada. 

Popular  Edition.     12  vols.     Crown  8vo. 

35.  6d.  each. 

4  Silver    Library  '     Edition.       12     vols. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each. 

THE  DIVORCE  OF  CATHERINE  OF 
A R AGON.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  SPANISH  STORY  OF  THE  AR- 
MADA, and  other  Essays.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND  IN  THE 
EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  3  vols.   Cr.  8vo., 
IDS.  6d. 

ENGLISH  SEA  MEN  IN  THE  SIXTEENTH 
CENTURY.  Cr.  8vo.,  6s. 

THE  COUNCIL  OF  TRENT.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s. 

SHORT  STUDIES  ONGREA T SUBJECTS. 
4  vols.     Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each. 

CAESAR  :  a  Sketch.     Cr.  8vo,  35.  6d. 
Gardiner  (SAMUEL  RAWSON,  D.C.L., 

LL.D.). 

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  from  the  Ac- 
cession of  James  I.  to  the  Outbreak  of  the 
Civil  War,  1603-1642.  10  vols.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s.  each. 

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  GREAT  CIVIL 
WAR,  1642-1649.  4  vols.  Cr.  8vo.,6s.  each. 

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  COMMONWEALTH 
AND  THE  PROTECTORATE.  1649-1660. 
Vol.1.  1649-1651.  With  14 Maps.  8vo.,2is. 
Vol.  II.  1651-1654.  With  7  Maps. 
8vo.,  215. 

WHAT  GUNPOWDER  PLOT  WAS. 
With  8  Illustrations  and  Plates.  Crown 
8vo.,  7S. 


Gardiner  (SAMUEL  RAWSON,  D.C.L., 

LL.D.) — continued. 

CROMWELL'S   PLACE    IN  HISTORY. 

Founded  on  Six  Lectures  delivered  in  the 
University  of  Oxford.     Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  STUDENT'S  HISTORY  OF  ENG- 
LAND. With  378  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.,  I2S. 

Also  in  Three  Volumes,  price  45.  each. 
Vol.  I.  B.C.  55 — A.D.   1509.     173  Illustra- 
tions. 

Vol.  II.  1509-1689.     96  Illustrations. 
Vol.  III.  1689-1885.     109  Illustrations. 

Greville. — A  JOURNAL  OF  THE  REIGNS 
OF  KING  GEORGE  IV.,  KING  WILLIAM  IV., 
AND  QUEEN  VICTORIA.  By  CHARLES  C.  F. 
GREVILLE,  formerly  Clerk  of  the  Council. 
8  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  35  6d.  each. 

HARYARD  HISTORICAL  STUDIES. 

THE  SUPPRESSION  OF  'THE  AFRICAN 
SLAVE  TRADE  TO  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF 
AMERICA,  1638-1870.  By  W.  E.  B.  Du 
Bois,  Ph.D.  8vo.,  7s.  6d. 

THE  CONTEST  OVER  THE  RA  TIFICA  TON 
OF  THE  FEDERAL  CONSTITUTION  IN  MASSA- 
CHUSETTS. By  S.  B.  HARDING,  A.M. 
8vo.,  6s. 

A  CRITICAL  STUDY  OF  NULLIFICATION 
IN  SOUTH  CAROLINA.  By  D.  F.  HOUSTON, 
A.M.  8vo.,  65. 

NOMIMATIONS   FOR    ELECTIVE    OFFICE 

IN  THE  UNITED  STATES.  By  FREDERICK 
W.  DALLINGER,  A.M.  Member  of  the  Massa- 
chusetts Senate.  8vo.,  75.  6d. 

%*  Other  Volumes  are  in  preparation. 

Hammond. — A  WOMAN'S  PART  IN 
A  REVOLUTION.  By  Mrs.  JOHN  HAYS 
HAMMOND.  Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 

Historic  Towns. — Edited  by  E.  A. 
FREEMAN,  D.C.L.,  and  Rev.  WILLIAM  HUNT, 
M.A.  With  Maps  and  Plans.  Crown  8vo., 
35.  6d.  each. 

Bristol.   By  Rev.  W.  Hunt.  !  Oxford.      By  Rev.  C.  W. 
Carlisle.         By      Mandell  i      Boase. 


Creighton,  D.D. 

Cinque  Ports.  By  Mon- 
tague Burrows. 

Colchester.  By  Rev.  E.  L. 
Cults. 

Exeter.    By  E.  A.  Freeman. 

London.  By  Rev.  W.  J. 
Loftie. 


Winchester.      By  G.  W. 

Kitchin,  D.D. 
York.       By    Rev.    James 

Raine. 
New  York.    By  Theodore 

Roosevelt. 
Boston  (U.S.)     By  Henry 

Cabot  Lodge. 


Joyce. — A  SHORT  HISTORY  OF  IRE- 
LAND, from  the  Earliest  Times  to  1608.  By 
P.  W.  JOYCE,  LL.D.  Crown  8vo.,  105.  6d. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORXS. 


History,  Politics,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &c.— continued. 


Kaye  and  Malleson.— HISTORY  OF 

THE  INDIAN  MUTINY,  1857-1858.  By  Sir 
JOHN  W.  KAYE  and  Colonel  G.  B.  MALLE- 
SON. With  Analytical  Index  and  Maps  and 
Plans.  6  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each. 

Knight. — MADAGASCAR  IN  WAR 
TIME  :  THE  EXPERIENCES  OF  '  THE  TIMES  ' 
SPECIAL  CORRESPONDENT  WITH  THE 
HOVAS  DURING  THE  FRENCH  INVASION 
OF  1895.  By  E.  F.  KNIGHT.  With 
16  Illustrations  and  a  Map.  8vo.,  125.  6d. 

Lang  (ANDREW). 

PICKLE  THE  SPY:  or,  The  Incognito 
of  Prince  Charles.  With  6  Portraits. 
8vo.,  i8s. 

ST.  ANDREWS.  With  8  Plates  and 
24  Illustrations  in  the  Text  by  T.  HODGE. 
8vo. ,  155.  net. 


Laurie. — HISTORICAL  SURVEY  OF 
PRE-CHRISTIAN  EDUCATION.  By  S.  S. 
LAUR!E,  A.M.,  LL.D.  Crown  Svo.,  125. 


Lecky  (WILLIAM  EDWARD  HARTPOLE). 
HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGH- 
TEENTH CENTURY. 

Library  Edition.     8  vols.      8vo.,  £-j  45. 

Cabinet  Edition.  ENGLAND.  7  vols. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s.  each.  IRELAND.  5 
vols.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.  each. 

HISTORY  OF  EUROPEAN  MORALS 
FROM  AUGUSTUS  TO  CHARLEMAGNE.  2 
vols.  Crown  8vo.,  i6s. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  RISE  AND  INFLU- 
ENCE OF  THE  SPIRIT  OF  NATIONALISM  IN 
EUROPE.  2  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  i6s. 

DEMOCRACY  AND  LIBERTY.  2  vols. 
8vo.,  365. 

THE  EMPIRE  :  its  value  and  its 
Growth.  An  Inaugural  Address  delivered 
at  the  Imperial  Institute,  November  20, 
1893.  Cr.  8vo.,  is.  6d. 


Lowell. —  GOVERNMENTS  AND 
PARTIES  IN  CONTINENTAL  EUROPE.  By 
A.  LAWRENCE  LOWELL.  2  vols.  8vo.,  2is. 


Macaulay  (LORD). 

THE  LIFE   AND    WORKS  OF  LORD 
MACAULAY.     'Edinburgh'   Edition.     10 
vols.     8vo.,  6s.  each. 
Vols.  I. -IV.  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 
Vols.  V.-VII.    ESSAYS;    BIOGRAPHIES; 
INDIAN  PENAL  CODE  ;  CONTRIBUTIONS 
TO  KNIGHT'S  '  QUARTERLY  MAGAZINE.  '. 
Vol.  VIII.  SPEECHES  ;  LAYS  OF  ANCIENT 

ROME;  MISCELLANEOUS  POEMS. 

Vols.  IX.  and  X.  THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS 

OF  LORD  MACAULAY.     By  the  Right 

Hon.  Sir  G.  O.  TREVELYAN,  Bart.,  M.P. 

This  Edition  is  a  cheaper  reprint  of  the  Library 

Edition  of  LORD  MACAULAY'S  Life  and  Works. 

COMPLETE  WORKS. 
Cabinet  Edition.       16  vols.      Post  8vo., 

£4  *6s. 

Library  Edition.      8  vols.     8vo.,  £5   53. 
' Edinburgh''  Edition.     8  vols.     8vo.,  6s. 

each. 

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND  FROM  THE 
ACCESSION  OF  JAMES  THE  SECOND. 
Popular  Edition.     2  vols.    Cr.  8vo.,  55. 
Student's  Edition.   2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.,  125. 
People's  Edition.   4  vols.   Cr.  8vo.,  i6s. 
Cabinet  Edition.    8  vols.  Post  8vo.,  485. 
'  Edinburgh  '  Edition.     4  vols.     8vo.,  6s. 

each. 
Library  Edition.     5  vols.     8vo.,  £4. 

CRITICAL  AMD  HISTORICAL  ESSAYS, 
WITH  LAYS  OF  ANCIENT  ROME,  in  i 
volume. 

Popular  Edition.    Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 
Authorised  Edition.     Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d., 

or  35.  6d.,  gilt  edges. 
Silver  Library  Edition.    Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

CRITICAL  AND  HISTORICAL  ESSAYS. 
Student's  Edition,    i  vol.    Cr.  8vo.,  6s. 
People's  Edition.     2  vols.    Cr.  8vo.,  8s. 
'  Trevelyan  '  Edition.   2  vols.    Cr.  8vo.,  gs. 
Cabinet  Edition.   4  vols.  Post  8vo.,  24$. 
'  Edinburgh'  Edition.     3  vols.     8vo.,  6s. 

each. 
Library  Edition.     3  vols.     Svo.,  365. 

ESSAYS  which  may  be  had  separately 

price  6d.  each  sewed,  is.  each  cloth. 
Addison  and  Walpole. 


Croker's  Boswell's  Johnson. 
Hallam's        Constitutional 

History. 

Warren  Hastings. 
The  Earl  of  Chatham  (Two 

Essays). 
Frederick  the  Great. 

MISCELLANEOUS  WRITINGS 

People's  Edition,   i  vol.  Cr.  8vo.,  45. 64. 
Library  Edition.     2  vols.     8vo.,  2is. 


Ranke  and  Gladstone. 

Milton  and  Machiavelli. 

Lord  Byron. 

Lord  Clive. 

Lord     Byron,    and     The 

Comic     Dramatists    of 

the  Restoration. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


History,  Politics,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &e. — continued. 


Macaulay  (LORD) — continued. 

MISCELLANEOUS     WRITINGS     AND 

SPEECHES. 

Popular  Edition.     Crown  8vo.,  zs.  6d. 

Cabinet  Edition.  Including  Indian  Penal 
Code,  Lays  of  Ancient  Rome.and  Miscel- 
laneous Poems.  4  vols.  Post  8vo.,  245. 

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF 
LORD  MACAULAY.  Edited,  with  Occa- 
sional Notes,  by  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  G.  O. 
Trevelyan,  Bart.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

MacColl. — THE  SULTAN  AND  THE 
POWERS.  By  the  Rev.  MALCOLM  MACCOLL, 
M.A.,  Canon  of  Ripon.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

Mackinnon. — THE  UNION  OF  ENG- 
LAND AND  SCOTLAND:  A  STUDY  OF 
INTERNATIONAL  HISTORY.  By  JAMES 
MACKINNON.  Ph.D.  Examiner  in  History 
to  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  8vo.,  i6s. 

May. — THE  CONSTITUTIONAL  HIS- 
TORY OF  ENGLAND  since  the  Accession 
of  George  III.  1760-1870.  By  Sir  THOMAS 
ERSKINE  MAY,  K.C.B.  (Lord  Farnborough). 
3  vols.  Cr.  8vo.,  i8s. 

Merivale  (THE  LATE  DEAN). 
HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  UNDER  THE 
EMPIRE.    8  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each 
THE  FALL  OF  THE  ROMAN  REPUBLIC: 
a  Short  History  of  the  Last  Century  of  the 
Commonwealth.     lamo.,  75.  6d. 

Montague.  —  THE  ELEMENTS  OF 
ENGLISH  CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY.  By 
F.  C.  MONTAGUE,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Richman. — APPENZELL  :  PURE  DE- 
MOCRACY AND  PASTORAL  LIFE  IN  INNER- 
RHODEN.  A  Swiss  Study.  By  IRVING  B. 
RICHMAN,  Consul- General  of  the  United 
States  to  Switzerland.  With  Maps.  Crown 
8vo.,  5$. 

Seebohm  (FREDERIC). 

THE  ENGLISH  VILLAGE  COMMUNITY 
Examined  in  its  Relations  to  the  Manorial 
and  Tribal  Systems,  &c.  With  13  Maps 
and  Plates.  8vo.,  165. 

THE  TRIBAL  SYSTEM  IN  WALES: 
Being  Part  of  an  Inquiry  into  the  Struc- 
ture and  Methods  of  Tribal  Society. 
With  3  Maps.  8vo.,  125. 

Sharpe. — LONDON  AND  THE  KINGDOM: 

a  History  derived  mainly  from  the  Archives 
at  Guildhall  in  the  custody  of  the  Corpora- 
tion of  the  City  of  London.  By  REGINALD 
R.  SHARPE,  D.C.L.,  Records  Clerk  in  the 
Office  of  the  Town  Clerk  of  the  City  ol 
London.  3  vols.  8vo.  IDS.  6d.  each. 


Smith. — CARTHAGE  AND  THE  CARTH- 
AGINIANS. By  R.  BOSWORTH  SMITH,  M.A., 
With  Maps,  Plans,  &c.  Cr.  8vo.,  3*.  6d. 


Stephens.  —  A  HISTORY  OF  THE 
FRENCH  REVOLUTION.  By  H.  MORSE 
STEPHENS.  3  vols.  8vo.  Vols.  I.  and  II. 
185.  each. 


Stubbs. — HISTORY  OF  THE  UNIVER- 
SITY OF  DUBLIN,  from  its  Foundation  to 
the  End  of  the  Eighteenth  Century.  By  J. 
W.  STUBBS.  8vo.,  12$.  6d. 


Sutherland. — THE  HISTORY  OF  AUS- 
TRALIA AND  NEW  ZEALAND,  from  1606  to 
1890.  By  ALEXANDER  SUTHERLAND,  M.  A., 
and  GEORGE  SUTHERLAND,  M.A.  Crown 
8vo.,  2i.  6d. 


Taylor.  —  A  STUDENT'S  MANUAL  OF 
THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIA.  By  Colonel  MEA- 
DOWS TAYLOR,  C.S.I.,  &c.  Cr.  8vo.,  75.  €>d. 

Todd.  -  PA  RLIAMENTARY      GOVERN- 

MENT  IN   THE  BRITISH    COLONIES.      By 
ALPHEUS  TODD,  LL.D.     8vo.,  305.  net. 

Wakeman  and  Hassall.—  ESSAYS 
INTRODUCTORY  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  ENGLISH 
CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY.  By  Resident 
Members  of  the  University  of  Oxford. 
Edited  by  HENRY  OFFLEY  WAKEMAN, 
M.A.,  and  ARTHUR  HASSALL,  M.A  Crown 
8vo.,  65. 


Walpole.  —  HISTORY    OF    ENGLAND 

FROM    THE    CONCLUSION    OF    THE    GREAT 

WAR  IN    1815    TO    1858.       By    SPENCER 
WALPOLE.     6  vols.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.  each. 


Wood-Martin. — PAGAN  IRELAND  : 
ANARCH&OLOGICALSKETCH.  A  Handbook 
of  Irish  Pre-Christian  Antiquities.  By  W. 
G.  WOOD-MARTIN,  M.R.I.A.  With  512 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  155. 

Wylie.  —  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND 
UNDER  HENRY  IV.  By  JAMES  HAMILTON 
WYLIE,  M.A.,  one  of  H.  M.  Inspectors  ot 
Schools.  3  vols.  Crown  8vo.  Vol.  I.,  1399- 
1404,  IDS.  6d.  Vol.  II.,  155.  Vol.  III.,  155. 
[Vol.  IV.  In  the  press. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Biography,   Personal   Memoirs,  &c. 


Armstrong. — THE  LIFE  ANDLETTERS 
OF  EDMUND  J.  ARMSTRONG.  Edited  by 
G.  F.  SAVAGE  ARMSTRONG.  Fcp.  8vo.,  js.6d. 

Bacon. — THE  LETTERS  AND  LIFE  OF 
FRANCIS  BACON,  INCLUDING  ALL  HIS  OC- 
CASIONAL WORKS.  Edited  by  JAMES  SPED- 
DING.  7  vols.  8vo.,  ^4  45. 

Bagehot. — BIOGRAPHICAL    STUDIES. 

By  WALTER  BAGEHOT.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Biackwell.  —  PIONEER  WORK  IN 
OPENING  THE  MEDICAL  PROFESSION  TO 
WOMEN:  Autobiographical  Sketches.  By 
Dr.  ELIZABETH  BLACKWELL.  Cr.  8vo.,  6s. 

Boyd(A.  K.  H.)  (' A.K.H.B.'). 

TWENTY- FIVE  YEARS  OF  ST. 
ANDREWS.  1865-1890.  2  vols.  8vo. 
Vol.  I.  i2s.  Vol.  II.  155. 

ST.  ANDREWS  AND  ELSEWHERE  : 
Glimpses  of  Some  Gone  and  of  Things 
Left.  8vo.,  155. 

THE  LAST  YEARS  OF  ST.  ANDREWS  : 
SEPTEMBER  1890  TO  SEPTEMBER  1895. 
8vo.,  155. 

Brown. — FORD  MADOX  BROWN:   A 

Record  of  his  Life  and  Works.  By  FORD  M. 
HUEFFER.  With  45  Full-page  Plates  (22 
Autotypes)  and  7  Illustrations  in  the  Text. 
8vo.,  425. 

Buss. — FRANCES  MARY  Buss  AND 
HER  WORK  FOR  EDUCATION.  By  ANNIE 
E.  RIDLEY.  With  5  Portraits  and  4  Illus- 
trations. Crown  8vo,  75.  6d. 

Carlyle. —  THOMAS  CARLYLE:  A  His- 
tory of  his  Life.  By  JAMES  ANTHONY 
FROUDE. 

I795~I%35-     2  vols.     Crown  8vo.,  75. 
1834-1881.     2  vols.     Crown  8vo.,  75. 

Digby. —  THE  LIFE  OF  SIR  KENELM 

DIGBY,  by  one  of  his  Descendants,  the 
Author  of  '  The  Life  of  a  Conspirator,' 
'  A  Life  of  Archbishop  Laud,'  etc.  With 
7  Illustrations.  8vo.,  i6s. 

Erasmus. — LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF 
ERASMUS.  By  JAMES  ANTHONY  FROUDE. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

FALKLANDS.  By  the  Author  of 
« The  Life  of  Sir  Kenelm  Digby,'  '  The  Life 
of  a  Prig,'  etc.  With  Portraits  and  other 
Illustrations.  8vo. 

Fox. —  THE     EARLY    HISTORY    OF 
CHARLES  JAMES  Fox.     By  the  Right  Hon. 
Sir  G.  O.  TREVELYAN,  Bart. 
Library  Edition.     8vo.,  i8s. 
Cabinet  Edition.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 


Halifax. — THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF 
SIR  GEORGE  SAVILE,  BARONET,  FIRST 
MARQUIS  OF  HALIFAX.  With  a  New 
Edition  of  his  Works,  now  for  the  first  time 
collected  and  revised.  By  H.  C.  FOXCROFT. 
2  vols.  Svo. 

Halford. — THE  LIFE  OF  SIR  HENRY 
HALFORD,  BART.,  G.C.H.,  M.D.,  F.R.S., 
By  WILLIAM  MUNK,  M.D.,  F.S.A.  8vo., 
i2s.  6d. 

Hamilton. — LIFE  OF  SIR  WILLIAM 
HAMILTON.  By  R.  P.  GRAVES.  Svo.  3  vols. 
155.  each.  ADDENDUM.  8vo.,  6d.  sewed. 

Harper.  —  A  MEMOIR  OF  HUGO 
DANIEL  HARPER,  D.D.,  late  Principal  of 
Jesus  College,  Oxford,  and  for  many  years 
Head  Master  of  Sherborne  School.  By|L. 
V.  LESTER,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  55. 

Havelock. — MEMOIRS  OF  SIR  HENRY 
HAVELOCK,  K.  C.  B.  By  JOHN  CLARK 
MARSHMAN.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Haweis. — MY  MUSICAL   LIFE.     By 

the  Rev.  H.  R.  HAWEIS.  With  Portrait  of 
Richard  Wagner  and  3  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.,  75.  6d. 

Holroyd. — THE  GIRLHOOD  OF  MARIA 
JOSEPHA  HOLROYD  (Lady  Stanley  of 
Alderley}.  Recorded  in  Letters  of  a  Hun- 
dred Years  Ago,  from  1776  to  1796.  Edited 
by  J.  H.  ADEANE.  With  6  Portraits. 
Svo.,  i8s. 

Jackson. — THE  LIFE  OF  STONEWALL 
JACKSON.  By  Lieut. -Col.  G.  F.  HENDERSON, 
York  and  Lancaster  Regiment.  With  Por- 
trait, Maps  and  Plans.  2  vols.  Svo. 

Lejeune. — MEMOIRS  OF  BARON  LE- 
JEUXE,  Aide-de-Camp  to  Marshals  Berthier, 
Davout,  and  Oudinot.  Translated  and 
Edited  from  the  Original  French  by  Mrs. 
ARTHUR  BELL  (N.  D'ANVERs).  With  a 
Preface  by  Major-General  MAURICE,  C.B. 
2  vols.  Svo.,  245. 

Luther.  —  LIFE  OF  LUTHER.  By 
JULIUS  KO*STLIN.  With  Illustrations  from 
Authentic  Sources.  Translated  from  the 
German.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d. 

Macaulay. — THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS 
OF  LORD  MACAULAY.  By  the  Right  Hon. 
Sir  G.  O.  TREVELYAN,  Bart.,  M.P. 

Pupular  Edition,     i  vol.    Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 
Student's  Edition      i  vol.     Cr.  Svo.,  6s. 
Cabinet  Edition.     2  vols.     Post  Svo.,  125. 
Library  Edition.     2  vols.     8vo.,  365. 
'  Edinburgh  '  Edition.     2  vols.     8vo.,  6s. 
each. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Biography,   Personal  Memoirs,   &e.— continued. 


Marbot.  —  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  THE 
BARON  DB  MARBOT.  Translated  from  the 
French.  2  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  75. 

Nansen. — FRIDTIOF  NANS  EN,  1861- 
1893.  By  W.  C.  BROGGER  and  NORDAHL 
ROLFSEN.  Translated  by  WILLIAM  ARCHER. 
With  8  Plates,  48  Illustrations  in  the  Text, 
and  3  Maps.  8vo.,  125.  6d. 

Place. — THE  LIFE  OF  FRANCIS  PLACE. 
By  GRAHAM  WALLAS. 

Rawlinson. — A  MEMOIR  OF  THE 
LATE  SIR  HENRY  RAWLINSON,  BART., 
K.C.B.,  F.K.S.,  D.C.L.,  ETC.  Written 
chiefly  by  his  brother,  the  Rev.  GEORGE 
RAWLINSON,  Canon  of  Canterbury.  With 
Contributions  by  the  late  Sir  Henry's  eldest 
son,  and  by  Field- Marshal  LORD  ROBERTS. 

Reeve. — THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF 
HENRY  REEVE,  C.B.,  late  Editor  of  the 
'  Edinburgh  Review,'  and  Registrar  of  the 
Privy  Council.  By  J.  K.  LAUGHTON,  M.A. 

Romanes. — THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS 
OF  GEORGE  JOHN  ROMANES,  M.A.,  LL.D., 
F.R.S.  Written  and  Edited  by  his  WIFE. 
With  Portrait  and  2  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.,  65. 


Seebohm. — THEOXFORD  REFORMERS 
— JOHN  COLET,  ERASMUS  AND  THOMAS 
MORE  :  a  History  of  their  Fellow- Work. 
By  FREDERIC  SEEBOHM.  8vo.,  145. 

Shakespeare.  —  OUTLINES  OF  THE 
LIFE  OF  SHAKESPEARE.  By  J.  O.  HALLI- 
WELL-PHILLIPPS.  With  Illustrations  and 
Fac-similes.  2  vols.  Royal  8vo.,  £1  is. 

Shakespeare's    TRUE   LIFE.       By 

JAMES  WALTER.     With  500  Illustrations  by 
GERALD  E.  MOIRA.     Imp.  8vo.,  2is. 

Verney.  —MEMOIRS  OF  THE  VERNEY 

FAMILY. 
Vols.  I.  &  II..  DURING  THE  CIVIL  WAR. 

By  FRANCES  PARTHENOPE  VERNEY.  With 

38   Portraits,  Woodcuts  and  Fac-simile. 

Royal  8vo.,  425. 
Vol.  III.,  DURING  THE  COMMONWEALTH. 

1650-1660.   By   MARGARET   M.  VERNEY. 

With  10  Portraits,  &c.     Royal  8vo.,  2is. 

Wakley. — THE  LIFE  AND  TIMES  OF 
THOMAS  WAKLEY,  Founder  and  First  Editor 
of  the  '  Lancet,'  Member  of  Parliament  for 
Finsbury,  and  Coroner  for  West  Middlesex. 
By  S.  SQUIRE  SPRIGGE,  M.B.  Cantab. 
With  2  Portraits.  8vo.,  i8s. 

Wellington. — LIFE  OF  THE  DUKE 
OF  WELLINGTON.  By  the  Rev.  G.  R. 
GLEIG,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 


Travel  and  Adventure,  the  Colonies,  &c. 


Arnold. — SEAS  AND  LANDS.  By  Sir 
EDWIN  ARNOLD.  With  71  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Baker  (SIR  S.  W.). 

EIGHT  YEARS  IN  CEYLON.  With  6 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  RIFLE  AND  THE  HOUND  IN 
CEYLON.  With  6  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.,  3*.  6d. 

Bent. — THE  RUINED  CITIES  OF  MA- 
SHONALAND  :  being  a  Record  of  Excavation 
and  Exploration  in  1891.  By  J.  THEODORE 
BENT.  With  117  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Bicknell. — TRAVEL  AND  ADVENTURE 
IN  NORTHERN  QUEENSLAND.  BY  ARTHUR 
C.  BICKNELL.  With  24  Plates  and  22  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  8vo.,  155. 


Brassey  .  —  Vo  YA  GES  AND  TRA  VELS 
OF  LORD  BRASSEY,  K.C.B.,  D.C.L.,  1862- 
1894.  Arranged  and  Edited  by  Captain  S. 
EARDLEY-WILMOT.  2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.,  105. 

Brassey  (THE  LATE  LADY). 

A  VOYAGE  IN  THE  '  SUNBEAM;  '  OUR 
HOME   ON   THE    OCEAN  FOR   ELEVEN 


Cabinet    Edition.      With    Map    and    66 
Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d. 

Silver  Library  Edition.    With  66  Illustra- 
tions.    Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Popular  Edition.     With  60  Illustrations. 
4to.,  6d.  sewed,  is.  cloth. 

School  Edition.      With   37   Illustrations. 
Fcp.,  2S.  cloth,  or  35.  white  parchment. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Travel  and  Adventure,  the  Colonies,  &e. — continued. 

Brassey  (THE  LATE  LADY) — continued.    Lees  and  Clutterbuck. — B.C.  1 887  : 

A  RAMBLE  IN  BRITISH  COLUMBIA.  By  J.  A. 
LEES  and  W.  J.  CLUTTERBUCK.  With  Map 
and  75  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 


SUNSHINE  AND  STORM  IN  THE  EAST. 
Cabinet  Edition.  With  2  Maps  and  114 

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d. 
Popular  Edition.     With  103  Illustrations. 
4to.,  6d.  sewed,   is.  cloth. 

IN  THE  TRADES,  THE  TROPICS,  AND 
THE  '  ROARING  FORTIES.  ' 
Cabinet  Edition.      With    Map    and    220 

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d. 
Popular  Edition.     With  183  Illustrations. 

4to.,  6d.  sewed,  is.  cloth. 

THREE  VOYAGES  IN  THE  '  SUNBEAM'. 
Popular  Ed.  With  346  Illust.  410.,  25. 6d. 

Browning. — A  GIRL'S  WANDERINGS 
IN  HUNGARY.  By  H.  ELLEN  BROWNING. 
With  Map  and  20  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo., 
35.  6d. 

Froude  GAMES  A.). 

OCEANA  :  or  England  and  her  Col- 
onies. With  9  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo., 
2s.  boards,  2s.  6d.  cloth. 

THE  ENGLISH  IN  THE  WEST  INDIES  : 
or,  the  Bow  of  Ulysses.  With  9  Illustra- 
tions. Crown  8vo.,  2s.  boards,  25.  6d.  cloth. 

Howitt. —  VISITS  TO  REMARKABLE 
PLACES.  Old  Halls,  Battle-Fields,  Scenes, 
illustrative  of  Striking  Passages  in  English 
History  and  Poetry.  By  WILLIAM  HOWITT. 
With  80  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Jones.  —  ROCK  CLIMBING  IN  THE 
ENGLISH  LAKE  DISTRICT.  By  OWEN  G. 
JONES.  With  numerous  Plates. 

Knight  (E.  F.). 

THE  CRUISE  OF  THE  '  ALERTE  ' :  the 
Narrative  of  a  Search  for  Treasure  on  the 
Desert  Island  of  Trinidad.  With  2  Maps 
and  23  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

WHERE  THREE  EMPIRES  MEET:  a 
Narrative  of  Recent  Travel  in  Kashmir, 
Western  Tibet,  Baltistan,  Ladak,  Gilgit, 
and  the  adjoining  Countries.  With  a 
Map  and  54  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  35. 6d. 

THE  ' FALCON'  ON  THE  BALTIC:  a 
Voyage  from  London  to  Copenhagen  in 
a  Three-Tonner.  With  10  Full-page 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 


Max  Miiller. — LETTERS  FROM  CON- 
STANTINOPLE. By  Mrs.  MAX  MULLBR. 
With  12  Views  of  Constantinople  and  the 
neighbourhood.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Nansen  (FRIDTJOF). 

THE  FIRST  CROSSING  OF  GREEN- 
LAND. With  numerous  Illustrations  and 
a  Map.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

ESKIMO  LIFE.  With  31  Illustrations. 
8vo.,  i6s. 

Olive  r. — CRAGS    AND     CRA  TERS  : 

Rambles  in  the  Island  of  Reunion.  By 
WILLIAM  DUDLEY  OLIVER,  M.A.  With 
27  Illustrations  and  a  Map.  Cr.  8vo.,  6s. 

Quillinan. — JOURNAL  OF  A  FEW 
MONTHS'  RESIDENCE  IN  PORTUGAL,  and 
Glimpses  of  the  South  of  Spain.  By  Mrs. 
QUILLINAN  (Dora  Wordsworth).  New 
Edition.  Edited,  with  Memoir,  by  EDMUND 
LEE,  Author  of  '  Dorothy  Wordsworth,'  &c. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Smith. — CLIMBING  IN  THE  BRITISH 
ISLES.  By  W.  P.  HASKETT  SMITH.  With 
Illustrations  by  ELLIS  CARR,  and  Numerous 
Plans. 

Part  I.  ENGLAND.     i6mo.,  35.  6d. 
Part  II.  WALES  AND  IRELAND.     i6m<x, 

35.  bd. 
Part  III.  SCOTLAND.         [In  preparation. 

Stephen.  —  THE  PLAY- GROUND  OF 
EUROPE.  By  LESLIE  STEPHEN.  New 
Edition,  with  Additions  and  4  Illustrations, 
Crown  8vo.,  6s.  net. 

THREE  IN  NOR  WA  Y.     By  Two 

of  Them.  With  a  Map  and  59  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  2s.  boards,  2s.  6d.  cloth. 

Tyndall. — THE    GLACIERS    OF    THE 

ALPS  :  being  a  Narrative  of  Excursions 
and  Ascents.  An  Account  of  the  Origin 
and  Phenomena  of  Glaciers,  and  an  Ex- 
position of  the  Physical  Principles  to  which 
they  are  related.  By  JOHN  TYNDALL, 
F.R.S.  With  numerous  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s.  6d.  net. 

Vivian. — SERVIA  :  the  Poor  Man's 
Paradise.  By  HERBERT  VIVIAN,  M.A.  8vo. 


io        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Veterinary  Medicine,  &e. 


Steel  GOHN  HENRY). 

A  TREATISE  ON  THE  DISEASES  OF 
THE  DOG.  With  88  Illustrations.  8vo., 

i os.  6<f . 

A  TREATISE  ON  THE  DISEASES  OF 
THE  Ox.  With  119  Illustrations.  8vo.,  155. 

A  TREATISE  ON  THE  DISEASES  OF 
THE  SHEEP.  With  100  Illustrations. 
8vo.,  1 25. 

OUTLINES  OF  EQUINE  ANATOMY :  a 
Manual  for  the  use  of  Veterinary  Students 
in  the  Dissecting  Room.  Cr.  8vo.,  75.  6d. 

Fitzwygram. — HORSES    AND 

STABLES.  By  Major-General  Sir  F.  FITZ- 
WYGRAM, Bart.  With  56  pages  of  Illustra- 
tions. 8vo.,  2s.  6d.  net. 


Schreiner.  —  THE     ANGORA     Go  A  r 

(published  under  the  auspices  of  the  South 
African  Angora  Goat  Breeders'  Association), 
and  a  Paper  on  the  Ostrich  (reprinted  from 
the  Zoologist  for  March,  1897).  By  S.  C. 
CRONWRIGHT  SCHREINER.  8vo. 

'  Stonehenge.'  —  THE  DOG  IN 
HEALTH  AND  DISEASE.  By  '  STONE- 
HENCE  '.  With  78  Wood  Engravings. 
8vo.,  75.  6d. 

Youatt  (WILLIAM). 

THE  HORSE.  Revised  and  Enlarged 
by  W.  WATSON,  M.R.C.V.S.  With  52 
Wood  Engravings.  8vo.,  75.  6d. 

THE  DOG.  Revised  and  Enlarged. 
With  33  Wood  Engravings.  8vo.,  65. 


Sport  and  Pastime. 
THE  BADMINTON  LIBRARY. 

Edited  by  HIS  GRACE  THE  DUKE  OF  BEAUFORT,  K.G.,  and  A.  E.  T.  WATSON. 
Complete  in  28  Volumes.      Crown  8vo.,  Price  105.  6d.  each  Volume,  Cloth. 


The  Volumes  are  also  issued  half-bound  in  Leather,  with  gilt  top. 

from  all  Booksellers. 


The  price  can  be  had 


ARCHER  Y.  By  C.  J.  LONGMAN  and 
Col.  H.  WALROND.  With  Contributions  by 
Miss  LEGH,  Viscount  DILLON,  &c.  With 
2  Maps,  23  Plates  and  172  Illustrations  in 
the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  xos.  6d. 

ATHLETICS  AND  FOOTBALL. 
By  MONTAGUE  SHEARMAN.  With  6  Plates 
and  52  Illust.  in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

BIG     GAME    SHOOTING.       By 

CLIVE  PHILLIPPS-WOLLEY. 

Vol.  I.  AFRICA  AND  AMERICA. 
With  Contributions  by  Sir  SAMUEL  W. 
BAKER,  W.  C.  OSWELL,  F.  C.  SELOUS, 
&c.  With  20  Plates  and  57  Illustrations 
in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  THE 
ARCTIC  REGIONS.  With  Contribu- 
tions by  Lieut.-Colonel  R.  HEBER 
PERCY,  Major  ALGERNON  C.  HEBER 
PERCY,  &c.  With  17  Plates  and  56  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

BILLIARDS.  By  Major  W.  BROAD- 
FOOT,  R.E.  With  Contributions  by  A.  H. 
BOYD,  SYDENHAM  DIXON,  W.  J.  FORD,  &c. 
With  ii  Plates,  19  Illustrations  in  the  Text, 
and  numerous  Diagrams.  Cr.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 


BOATING.  By  W.  B.  WOODGATE. 
With  io  Plates,  39  Illustrations  in  the  Text, 
and  4  Maps  of  Rowing  Courses.  Cr.  8vo., 
i  os.  6d, 

COURSING  AND  FALCONRY. 
By  HARDING  Cox  and  the  Hon.  GERALD 
LASCELLES.  With  20  Plates  and  56  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6rf. 

CRICKET.  By  A.  G.  STEEL  and 
the  Hon.  R.  H.  LYTTELTON.  With  Con- 
tributions by  ANDREW  LANG,  W.  G.  GRACE, 
F.  GALE,  &c.  With  12  Plates  and  52  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  105.  6d. 

CYCLING.  By  the  EARL  OF  ALBE- 
MARLE  and  G.  LACY  HILLIER.  With  19 
Plates  and  44  Illustrations  in  the  Text. 
Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d. 

DANCING.  By  Mrs.  LILLY  GROVE, 
F.R.G.S.  With  Contributions  by  Miss. 
MIDDLETON,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  ARMYTAGE, 
&c.  With  Musical  Examples,  and  38  Full- 
page  Plates  and  93  Illustrations  in  the  Text. 
Crown  8vo.,  xos.  6d. 

DRIVING.  By  His  Grace  the  DUKE 
of  BEAUFORT,  K.G.  With  Contributions  by 
other  Authorities.  With  12  Plates  and  54 
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  los.  6rf. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.         n 


Sport  and  Pastime — continued. 

THE  BADMINTON  LIBRARY— continued. 

SEA  FISHING.  By  JOHN  BICKER- 
DYKE,  Sir  H.  W.  GORE-BOOTH,  ALFRED 
C.  HARMSWORTH,  and  W.  SENIOR.  With 
22  Full-page  Plates  and  175  Illustrations  in 
the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  zos.  6rf. 


FENCING,  BOXING,  AND 
WRESTLING.  By  WALTER  H.  POLLOCK, 

F.  C.  GROVE,  C.  PREVOST,  E.  B.  MITCHELL, 
and  WALTER  ARMSTRONG.    With  18  Plates 
and  24  Illust.  in  the  Text.    Cr.  8vo.,  ros.  6d. 

FISHING.  By  H.  CHOLMONDELEY- 
PENNELL. 

Vol.  I.  SALMON  AND  TROUT.  With 
Contributions  by  H.  R.  FRANCIS,  Major 
JOHN  P.  TRAHERNE,  &c.  With  9  Plates 
and  numerous  Illustrations  of  Tackle, 
&c.  Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  PIKE  AND  OTHER  COARSE 
FISH.  With  Contributions  by  the 
MARQUIS  OF  EXETER,  WILLIAM  SENIOR, 
G.  CHRISTOPHER  DAVIS,  &c.  With 
7  Plates  and  numerous  Illustrations  of 
Tackle,  &c.  Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

GOLF.  By  HORACE  G.  HUTCHINSON. 
With  Contributions  by  the  Rt.  Hon.  A.  J. 
BALFOUR,M. P.,  Sir  WALTER  SIMPSON,  Bart., 
ANDREW  LANG,  &c.  With  25  Plates  and  65 
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

HUNTING.  By  His  Grace  the  DUKE 
OF  BEAUFORT,  K.G.,  and  MOWBRAY  MORRIS. 
With  Contributions  by  the  EARL  OF  SUFFOLK 
AND  BERKSHIRE,  Rev.  E.  W.  L.  DAVIES, 

G.  H.  LONGMAN,  &c.    With  5  Plates  and  54 
Illustrations  in  the  Text.     Cr.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

MOUNTAINEERING.  By  C.  T. 
DENT.  With  Contributions  by  Sir  W.  M. 
CONWAY,  D.  W.  FRESHFIELD,  C.  E. 
MATTHEWS,  &c.  With  13  Plates  and  95 
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

POETRY  OF  SPORT  (THE).— 
Selected  by  HEDLEY  PEEK.  With  a 
Chapter  on  Classical  Allusions  to  Sport  by 
ANDREW  LANG,  and  a  Special  Preface  to 
the  BADMINTON  LIBRARY  by  A.  E.  T. 
WATSON.  With  32  Plates  and  74  Illustra- 
tions in  the  Text.  Crown  Svo.,  105.  6<f. 

RACING  AND  STEEPLE-CHAS- 
ING. By  the  EARL  OF  SUFFOLK  AND 
BERKSHIRE,  W.  G.  CRAVEN,  the  Hon.  F. 
LAWLEY,  ARTHUR  COVENTRY,  and  ALFRED 
E.  T.  WATSON.  With  Frontispiece  and  56 
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Cr.  Svo.,  IDS.  6d. 

RIDING  AND  POLO. 

RIDING.  By  Captain  ROBERT  WEIR, 
the  DUKE  OF  BEAUFORT,  the  EARL  OF 
SUFFOLK  AND  BERKSHIRE,  the  EARL  OF 
ONSLOW,  &c.  With  18  Plates  and  41  II-' 
lustrations  in  the  Text  Cr.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 


SHOOTING. 

Vol.  I.  FIELD  AND  COVERT.  By  LORD 
WALSINGHAM  and  Sir  RALPH  PAYNE- 
GALLWEY,  Bart.  With  Contributions  by 
the  Hon.  GERALD  LASCELLES  and  A.  J. 
STUART-WORTLEY.  With  n  Plates  and 
94  Illusts.  in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  MOOR  AND  MARSH.  By 
LORD  WALSINGHAM  and  Sir  RALPH  PAYNE- 
GALLWEY,  Bart.  With  Contributions  by 
LORD  LOVAT  and  Lord  CHARLES  LENNOX 
KERR.  With  8  Plates  and  57  Illustrations 
in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

SKATING,  CURLING,  TOBOG- 
GANING. By  J.  M.  HEATHCOTE,  C.  G. 
TEBBUTT,  T.  MAXWELL  WITHAM,  Rev. 
JOHN  KERR,  ORMOND  HAKE,  HENRY  A. 
BUCK,  &c.  With  12  Plates  and  272  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  zos.  6d. 

SWIMMING.  By  ARCHIBALD  SIN- 
CLAIR and  WILLIAM  HENRY,  Hon.  Sees, 
of  the  Life-Saving  Society.  With  13  Plates 
and  106  Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Crown 
8vo.,  i  os.  6d. 

TENNIS,  LA  WN  TENNIS, 
RACKETS  AND  FIVES.  By  J.  M.  and 
C.  G.  HEATHCOTE,  E.  O.  PLEYDELL- 
BOUVERIE,  and  A.C.  AINGER.  With  Contri- 
butions by  the  Hon.  A.  LYTTELTON,  W.  C. 
MARSHALL,  Miss  L.  DOD,  &c.  With  12 
Plates  and  67  Illustrations  in  the  Text. 
Crown  Svo.,  IDS.  6d. 

YACHTING. 

Vol.  I.  CRUISING,  CONSTRUCTION 
OF  YACHTS,  YACHT  RACING 
RULES,  FITTING-OUT,&c.  By  Sir 
EDWARD  SULLIVAN,  Bart.,  THE  EARL  OF 
PEMBROKE,  LORD  BRASSEY,  K.C.B.,  C. 
E.  SETH-SMITH,  C.B.,  G.  L.  WATSON,  R. 
T.  PRITCHETT,  E.  F.  KNIGHT,  &c.  With 
21  Plates  and  93  Illustrations  in  the  Text, 
and  from  Photographs.  Crown  8vo., 
IDS.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  YACHT  CLUBS,  YACHT- 
ING IN  AMERICA  AND  THE 
COLONIES,  YACHT  RACING,  &c. 
By  R.  T.  PRITCHETT,  THE  MARQUIS  OF 

DUFFERIN  AND  AvA,  K.P.,  THE    EARL  OF 

ONSLOW,  JAMES  MCFERRAN,  &c.  With 
35  Plates  and  160  Illustrations  in  the 
Text.  Crown  Svo.,  105.  6d. 


12         MESSRS.  LONGMAiNS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Sport  and  Pastime — continued. 

FUR,   FEATHER,   AND   FIN   SERIES. 


Edited  by  A.  E.  T.  WATSON. 
Crown  8vo.,  price  55.  each  Volume,  cloth. 

%*  The  Volumes  are  also  issued  half-bound  in  Leather,  with  gilt  top. 

from  all  Booksellers. 


The  price  can  be  had 


THE  PARTRIDGE.  Natural  His- 
tory by  the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON  ; 
Shooting,  by  A.  J.  STUART-\VORTLEY  ; 
Cookery,  by  GEORGE  SAINTSBURY.  With 
ii  Illustrations  and  various  Diagrams  in 
the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  55. 


THE  GROUSE.  Natural  History  by 
the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON;  Shooting, 
by  A.  J.  STUART-WORTLEY  ;  Cookery,  by 
GEORGE  SAINTSBURY.  With  13  Illustrations 
and  various  Diagrams  in  the  Text.  Crown 
8vo.,  55. 


THE  PHEASANT.  Natural  History 
by  the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON  ;  Shooting, 
by  A.  J.  STUART-WORTLEY  ;  Cookery,  by 
ALEXANDER  INNES  SHAND.  With  10  Illus- 
trations and  various  Diagrams.  Crown 
8vo.,  55. 


THE  HARE.  Natural  History  by 
the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON  ;  Shooting, 
by  the  Hon.  GERALD  LASCELLES  ;  Coursing, 
by  CHARLES  RICHARDSON  ;  Hunting,  by  J. 
S.  GIBBONS  and  G.  H.  LONGMAN;  Cookery, 
by  Col.  KENNEY  HERBERT.  With  9 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo,  55. 

RED  DEER.— Natural  History.  By 
the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON.  Deer  Stalk- 
ing. By  CAMERON  OF  LOCHIEL. — Stag 
Hunting.  By  Viscount  EBRINGTON. — 
Cookery.  By  ALEXANDER  INNES  SHAND. 
With  10  Illustrations  by  J.  CHARLTON  and 
A.  THORBURN.  Crown  8vo.,  55. 

THE  RABBIT.     By  J.  E.  HARTING, 

etc.     With  Illustrations.       [In  preparation. 

WILDFOWL.  By  the  Hon.  JOHN 
SCOTT  MONTAGU.  With  Illustrations. 

[In  preparation. 

THE  SALMON.    By  the  Hon.  A.  E. 

GATHORNE-HARDY.       With     Illustrations. 

[In  preparation. 

THE  TROUT.  By  the  MARQUIS  OF 
GRANBY,  etc.  With  Illustrations.  [Inprep. 


Andre. —  COLONEL  BOGEY'S  SKETCH- 
BOOK. Comprising  an  Eccentric  Collection 
of  Scribbles  and  Scratches  found  in  disused 
Lockers  and  swept  up  in  the  Pavilion,  to- 
gether with  sundry  After-Dinner  Sayings 
of  the  Colonel.  By  R.  ANDRE,  West  Herts 
Golf  Club.  Oblong  410.,  2s.  6d. 

BADMINTON     MA  G  A  ZINE 

(THE)  of  SPORTS  AND  PASTIMES.  Edited 
by  ALFRED  E.  T.  WATSON  ("  Rapier "). 
With  numerous  Illustrations.  Price  is. 
monthly. 

Vols.  I.-IV.     6s.  each. 

DEAD  SHOT(THE):  or,  Sportsman's 
Complete  Guide.  Being  a  Treatise  on  the  Use 
of  the  Gun,  with  Rudimentary  and  Finishing 
Lessons  in  the  Art  of  Shooting  Game  of  all 
kinds.  Also  Game-driving,  Wildfowl  and 
Pigeon-shooting,  Dog-breaking,  etc.  By 
MARKSMAN.  With  numerous  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d. 


Ellis. — CHESS  SPARKS  ;  or,  Short  and 
Bright  Games  of  Chess.  Collected  and 
Arranged  by  J.  H.  ELLIS,  M.A.  8vo.,  45.  6d. 

Folkard. — THE    WILD-FOWLER  :    A 

Treatise  on  Fowling,  Ancient  and  Modern, 
descriptive  also  of  Decoys  and  Flight-ponds, 
Wild-fowl  Shooting,  Gunning-punts,  Shoot- 
ing-yachts, &c.  Also  Fowling  in  the  Fens 
and  in  Foreign  Countries,  Rock-fowling, 
&c.,  &c.,  by  H.  C.  FOLKARD.  With  13  En- 
gravings on  Steel,  and  several  Woodcuts. 
8vo.,  i2s.  6d. 

Ford. — THE  THEORY  AND  PRACTICE 
OF  ARCHERY.  By  HORACE  FORD.  New 
Edition,  thoroughly  Revised  and  Re-written 
by  W.  BUTT,  M.A.  With  a  Preface  by  C. 
J.  LONGMAN,  M.A.  8vo.,  145. 

Francis. — A  BOOK  ON  ANGLING  :  or, 
Treatise  on  the  Art  ol  Fishing  in  every 
Branch  ;  including  full  Illustrated  List  of  Sal- 

•  mon  Flies.  By  FRANCIS  FRANCIS.  With  Por- 
trait and  Coloured  Plates.  Crown  8vo.,  155. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.          13 


Sport  and  Pastime — continued. 


Gibson. —  TOBOGGANING  ON  CROOKED 
RUNS.  By  the  Hon.  HARRY  GIBSON.  With 
Contributions  by  F.  DE  B.  STRICKLAND  and 

'  LADY-TOBOGANNER  '.         With     40     IlluStra- 

tions.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Graham. — COUNTRY  PASTIMES  FOR 

BOYS.  By  P.  ANDERSON  GRAHAM.  With 
252  Illustrations  from  Drawings  and 
Photographs.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Lang. — ANGLING  SKETCHES.  By 
ANDREW  LANG.  With  20  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  3*5.  6d. 

Lillie. — CROQUET:  its  History,  Rules 
and  Secrets.  By  ARTHUR  LILLIE,  Champion, 
Grand  National  Croquet  Club,  1872 ;  Winner 
of  the  '  All-Comers'  Championship,'  Maid- 
stone,  1896.  With  4  Full-page  Illustrations 
by  LUCIEN  DAVIS,  15  Illustrations  in  the 
Text,  and  27  Diagrams.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Longman. — CHESS  OPENINGS.  By 
FREDERICK  W.  LONGMAN.  Fcp.  8vo.,  2s.  f>d. 

Madden. — THE  DIARY  OF  MASTER 
WILLIAM  SILENCE  :  a  Study  of  Shakespeare 
and  of  Elizabethan  Sport.  By  the  Right 
Hon.  D.  H.  MADDEN,  Vice-Chanceller  of  the 
University  of  Dublin.  8vo.,  i6s. 

Maskelyne. — SHARPS  AND  FLATS  :  a 

Complete  Revelation  of  the  Secrets  01 
Cheating  at  Games  of  Chance  and  Skill.  By 
JOHN  NEVIL  MASKELYNE,  of  the  Egyptian 
Hall.  With  62  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Park. — THE  GAME  OF  GOLF.  By 
WILLIAM  PARK,  Jun.,  Champion  Golfer, 
1887-89.  With  17  Plates  and  26  Illustra- 
tions in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d. 

Payne-Gallwey  (SiR  RALPH,  Bart.). 

LETTERS  TO  YOUNG  SHOOTERS  (First 
Series).  On  the  Choice  and  use  of  a  Gun. 
With  41  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  js.  6d. 

LETTERSTO  YOUNG  SnooTERs(Second 
Series).  On  the  Production,  Preservation, 
and  Killing  of  Game.  With  Directions 
in  Shooting  Wood- Pigeons  and  Breaking- 
in  Retrievers.  With  Portrait  and  103 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  i2s.  6d. 


Payne-Gallwey  (SIR  RALPH,  Bart.) 

— continued. 

LETTERS  TO  YOUNG  SHOOTERS. 
(Third  Series.)  Comprising  a  Short 
Natural  History  of  the  Wildfowl  that 
are  Rare  or  Common  to  the  British 
Islands,  with  complete  directions  in 
Shooting  Wildfowl  on  the  Coast  and 
Inland.  With  200  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.,  1 8s. 


Pole  (WILLIAM). 

THE  THEORY  OF  THE  MODERN  SCIEN- 
TIFIC GAME  OF  WHIST.  Fcp.  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 

THEEVOL  UTIONOF  WHIST:  a  Study  of 
the  Progressive  Changes  which  the  Game 
has  undergone.  Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 


Proctor. — How    TO  PLAY    WHIST: 

WITH     THE     LAWS    AND     ETIQUETTE    OF 

WHIST.     By  RICHARD  A.  PROCTOR.    Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d. 


Ribblesdale. — THE  QUEEN'S  HOUNDS 
AND  STAG- HUNTING  RECOLLECTIONS.  By 
LORD  RIBBLESDALE,  Master  of  the  Buck- 
hounds,  1892-95.  With  Introductory 
Chapter  on  the  Hereditary  Mastership  by 
E.  BURROWS.  With  24  Plates  and  35  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text,  including  reproductions 
from  Oil  Paintings  in  the  possession  of  Her 
Majesty  the  Queen  at  Windsor  Castle  and 
Cumberland  Lodge,  Original  Drawings  by 
G.  D.  GILES,  and  from  Prints  and  Photo- 
graphs. 8vo.,  25$. 


Ronalds. — THE  FLY-FISHER'S  ENTO- 
MOLOGY. By  ALFRED  RONALDS.  With  20 
coloured  Plates.  8vo.,  145. 

Thompson  and  Cannan.  HAND- 
IN-  HAND  FIGURE  SKA  TING.  By  N  ORCLIFFE 
G.  THOMPSON  and  F.  LAURA  CANNAN, 
Members  of  the  Skating  Club.  With  an 
Introduction  by  Captain  J.  H.  THOMSON, 
R.A.  With  Illustrations.  i6mo.,  6s. 


Wilcocks. — THE  SEA  FISHERMAN: 
Comprising  the  Chief  Methods  of  Hook  and 
Line  Fishing  in  the  British  and  other  Seas, 
and  Remarks  on  Nets,  Boats,  and  Boating. 
By  J.  C.  WILCOCKS.  Illustrated.  Cr.  8vo.,  6s. 


I4        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Mental,  Moral,  and  Political  Philosophy. 

LOGIC,  RHETORIC,  PSYCHOLOGY,  &C. 

Abbott. — THE  ELEMENTS  OF  LOGIC. 
By  T.  K.  ABBOTT,  B.D.     12010.,  35. 

Aristotle. 

THE  ETHICS:  Greek  Text,  Illustrated 
with  Essay  and  Notes.  By  Sir  ALEXAN- 
DER GRANT,  Bart.  2  vols.  8vo.,  325. 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  ARISTOTLE'S 
ETHICS.  Books  I. -IV.  (Book  X.  c.vi.-ix. 
in  an  Appendix).  With  a  continuous 
Analysis  and  Notes.  By  the  Rev.  EDWARD 
MOORE,  D.D.,  Cr.  8vo.  IQS.  6d. 


Bacon  (FRANCIS). 

COMPLETE  WORKS.    Edited  by  R.  L. 

ELLIS,    JAMES     SPEDDING     and    D.    D. 

HEATH.     7  vols.     8vo.,  ,£3  135.  6d. 
LETTERS  AND  LIFE,  including  all  his 

occasional    Works.      Edited    by   JAMES 

SPEDDING.     7  vols.     8vo.,^44s. 
THE  Ess  A  YS :  with  Annotations.    By 

RICHARD  WHATELY,  D.D.     8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 
THE  ESSAYS.     Edited,  with  Notes, 

by  F.  STORR  and  C.  H.  GIBSON.     Crown 

8vo,  35.  6d. 
THE    ESSAYS:    with    Introduction, 

Notes,  and  Index.    By  E.  A.  ABBOTT,  D.D. 

2  Vols.  Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.   The  Text  and  Index 

only,  without  Introduction  and  Notes,  in 

One  Volume.     Fcp.  8vo.,  25.  6d. 

Bain  (ALEXANDER). 

MENTAL  SCIENCE.     Cr.  8vo.,  65.  6d. 

MORAL  SCIENCE.     Cr.  8vo.,  45.  6d. 

The  two  works  as  above  can  be  had  in  one 

volume,  price  IDS.  6d. 

SENSES  AND  THElNTELLECT.  8vO.,I55. 

EMOTIONS  AND  THE  WILL.  8vo.,  155. 
LOGIC,  DEDUCTIVE  AND  INDUCTIVE. 

Part  I.  45.     Part  II.  6s.  6d. 
PRACTICAL  ESSAYS.    Cr.  8vo.,  2s. 

Baldwin. — THE  ELEMENTS  OF  EX- 
POSITORY CONSTRUCTION.  By  Dr.  CHARLES 
SEARS  BALDWIN,  Instructor  in  Rhetoric  in 
Yale  University. 

Bray  (CHARLES). 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  NECESSITY  :  or, 
Law  in  Mind  as  in  Matter.  Cr.  8vo.,  55. 

THE  ED  UCA  TION  OF  THE  FEELINGS  :  a 
Moral  System  for  Schools.  Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 

Bray. — ELEMENTS  OF  MORALITY,  in 
Easy  Lessons  for  Home  and  School 
Teaching.  By  Mrs.  CHARLES  BRAY. 
Crown  8vo.,  is.  6d. 


Crozier. — HISTORY  or  INTELLECTUAL 
DEVELOPMENT:  on  the  Lines  of  Modern 
Evolution.     By  JOHN  BEATTIE  CROZIER. 
Vol.  I.  Greek  and  Hindoo  Thought ;  Graeco- 
Roman  Paganism  ;  Judaism  ;  and  Christi- 
anity down  to  the  Closing  of  the  Schools 
of  Athens  by  Justinian,  529  A.D.    8vo.,  14$. 

Davidson. — THE  LOGIC  OF  DEFINI- 
TION, Explained  and  Applied.  By  WILLIAM 
L.  DAVIDSON,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Green  (THOMAS  HILL). — THE  WORKS 

OF.     Edited  by  R.  L.  NETTLESHIP. 
Vols.  I.  and  II.  Philosophical  Works.     8vo., 

i6s.  each. 
Vol.  III.  Miscellanies.     With  Index  to  the 

three  Volumes,  and  Memoir.     8vo.,  21*. 
LECTURES  ON  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF 

POLITICAL  OBLIGATION.     With  Preface 

by  BERNARD  BOSANQUET.     8vo.,  55. 

Hodgson  (SHADWORTH  H.). 
TIME  AND  SPACE:  A  Metaphysical 

Essay.     8vo.,  i6s. 
THE    THEORY    OF   PRACTICE:     an 

Ethical  Inquiry.     2  vols.     8vo.,  245. 
THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  REFLECTION. 

2  Vols.       8VO.,  21S. 

Hume.  —  THE  PHILOSOPHICAL  WORKS 
OF  DAVID  HUME.  Edited  by  T.  H.  GREEN 
and  T.  H.  GROSE.  4  vols.  8vo.,  565.  Or 
separately,  Essays.  2  vols.  285.  Treatise 
of  Human  Nature.  2  vols.  285. 

James.  —  THE  WILL  TO  BELIEVE,  and 
Other  Essays  in  Popular  Philosophy.  By 
WILLIAM  JAMES,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  etc.  Crown 
8vo.,  75.  6d. 

Justinian. — THE      INSTITUTES      OF 

yuSTlNiAN:  Latin  Text,  chiefly  that  of 
Huschke,  with  English  Introduction,  Trans- 
lation, Notes,  and  Summary.  By  THOMAS 
C.  SANDARS,  M.A.  8vo.,  i8s. 

Kant  (IMMANUEL). 
CRITIQUE  OF  PRACTICAL  REASON, 
AND  OTHER  WORKS  ON  THE  THEORY  OP 
ETHICS.  Translated  by  T.  K.  ABBOTT, 
B.D.  With  Memoir.  8vo.,  12s.  6d. 
FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 
METAPHYSIC  OF  ETHICS.  Translated  by 
T.  K.  ABBOTT,  B.D.  (Extracted  from 
'  Kant's  Critique  of  Practical  Reason  and 
other  Works  on  the  Theory  of  Ethics.') 
Crown  bvo,  3$. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC,  AND  HIS 
ESSAY  ON  THE  MISTAKEN  SUBTILTY  OP 
THE  FOUR  FIGURES..  Translated  by  T. 
K.  ABBOTT.  8vo.,  65. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Mental,  Moral  and   Political   Philosophy — continued. 


K  i  1 1  i  C  k. — HANDBOOK  TO  MILL'S 
SYSTEM  OF  LOGIC.  By  Rev.  A.  H. 
KILLICK,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Ladd  (GEORGE  TRUMBULL). 

PHILOSOPHY  OF  KNOWLEDGE:  an 
Inquiry  into  the  Nature,  Limits  and 
'Validity  of  Human  Cognitive  Faculty. 
8vo.,  185. 

PHILOSOPHY  OF  MIND  :  An  Essay  on 
the  Metaphysics  of  Psychology.  8vo.,  i6s. 

ELEMENTS  OF  PHYSIOLOGICAL  PSY- 
CHOLOGY. 8vo.,  215. 

OUTLINES  OF  PHYSIOLOGICAL  PSY- 
CHOLOGY. A  Text-book  of  Mental  Science 
for  Academies  and  Colleges.  8vo.,  i2s. 

PSYCHOLOGY,  DESCRIPTIVE  AND  EX- 
PLAN  A  TORY  ;  a  Treatise  of  the  Phenomena, 
Laws,  and  Development  of  Human  Mental 
Life.  8vo.,  ais. 

PRIMER  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.  Cr.  8vo., 
55.  6d. 

Lewes. — THE  HISTORY  OF  PHILOSO- 
PHY, from  Thales  to  Comte.  By  GEORGE 
HENRY  LEWES.  2  vols.  8vo.,  325. 

Lutoslawski. — THE  ORIGIN  AND 
GROWTH  OF  PLATO'S  LOGIC.  By  W. 
LUTOSLAWSKI.  8vo. 

Max  Miiller  (F.). 
THE  SCIENCE  OF  THOUGHT.  8vo.,  2 15. 
THREE  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES  ON 

THE  SCIENCE  OF  THOUGHT.     8vo.,  2s.  6d. 

net. 

Mill. — ANALYSIS  OF  THE  PHENOMENA 
OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  By  JAMES  MILL. 
2  vols.  8vo.,  285. 

Mill  (JoHN  STUART). 

A  SYSTEM  OF  LOGIC.   Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

ON  LIBERTY.     Crown  8vo.,  is.  d.d. 

CONSIDERATIONS  ON  REPRESENTA- 
TIVE GOVERNMENT.  Crown  8vo.,  2s. 

UTILITARIANISM.     8vo.,  2s.  6d. 

EXAMINATION  OF  SIR  WILLIAM 
HAMILTON'S  PHILOSOPHY.  8vo.,  i6s. 

NATURE,  THE  UTILITY  OF  RELIGION, 
AND  THEISM.  Three  Essays.  8vo.,  55. 

Romanes. — MIND  AND  MOTION  AND 
MONISM.  By  GEORGE  JOHN  ROMANES, 
LL.D.,  F.R.S.  Cr.  8vo.,  4s.  6d. 

Stock  (ST.  GEORGE). 
DEDUCTIVE  LOGIC.   Fcp.  8vo.,  y.  6d. 
LECTURES    IN    THE   LYCEUM  ;     or, 

Aristotle's  Ethics  for  English  Readers. 
Edited  by  ST.  GEORGE  STOCK.  Crown 
8vo.,  75.  6d. 


Sully  (JAMES). 

THE  HUMAN  MIND  :  a  Text-book  of 
Psychology.  2  vols.  8vo.,  215. 

OUTLINES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.    8vo.,  gs. 

THE  TEACHER'S  HANDBOOK  OF  PSY- 
CHOLOGY. Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d. 

STUDIES  OF  CHILDHOOD.     8vo, 

ios.  6d. 

CHILDREN'S  WAYS:  being  Selections 

from  the  Author's  '  Studies  of  Childhood,' 
with  some  Additional  Matter.  With  25 
Figures  in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d. 

Sutherland.  —  THE  ORIGIN  AND 
GROWTH  OF  THE  MORAL  INSTINCT.  By 
ALEXANDER  SUTHERLAND, M.A. 

Swinburne.  —  PICTURE  LOGIC  :  an 
Attempt  to  Popularise  the  Science  of 
Reasoning.  By  ALFRED  JAMES  SWINBURNE, 
M.A.  With  23  Woodcuts.  Crown  8vo.,  53. 

Weber. — HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY. 
By  ALFRED  WEBER,  Professor  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Strasburg.  Translated  by  FRANK 
THILLY,  Ph.D.  8vo.,  i6s. 

Whately  (ARCHBISHOP). 

BACON'S  ESSAYS.  With  Annotations. 

8vo.,  ios.  6d. 

ELEMENTS  OF  LOGIC.  Cr.  8vo.,  45.  6d. 
ELEMENTS  OF  RHETORIC.     Cr.  8vo., 

45.  6d. 

LESSONS  ON  REASONING.     Fcp.  8vo., 

is.  6d. 

Zeller  (Dr.  EDWARD,  Professor  in  the 

University  of  Berlin). 

THE  STOICS,  EPICUREANS,  AND 
SCEPTICS.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  O.  J. 
REICHEL,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  155. 

OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF 
GREEK  PHILOSOPHY.  Translated  by 
SARAH  F.  ALLEYNE  and  EVELYN 
ABBOTT.  Crown  8vo.,  ios.  6d. 

PLATO  AND  THE  OLDER  ACADEMY. 
Translated  by  SARAH  F.  ALLEYNE  and 
ALFRED  GOODWIN,  B.A.  Crown  8vo., 
1 8s. 

SOCRATES  AND  THE  SOCRATIC 
SCHOOLS.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  O. 
J.  REICHEL,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  ios. 

ARISTOTLE  AND  THE  EARLIER  PERI- 
PATETICS. Translated  by  B.  F.  C.  Cos- 
TELLOE,  M.A. ,  and  J.  H.  MUIRHEAD, 
M.A.  2  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  245. 


16        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Mental,  Moral,  and  Political  Philosophy — continued. 

MANUALS  OF  CATHOLIC  PHILOSOPHY. 

(Stonyhurst  Series). 


A  MANUAL  o*  POLITICAL  ECONOMY. 
By  C.  S.  DEVAS,  M.A.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d. 

FIRST  PRINCIPLES    OF   KNOWLEDGE. 
By  JOHN  RICKABY,  S.J.     Crown  8vo.,  55. 

GENERAL   METAPHYSICS.       By  JOHN 

RICKABY,    S.J.     Crown   8vo.,   55. 
LOGIC.     By  RICHARD  F.  CLARKE,  S.J. 
Crown  8vo.,  55. 


MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  (ETHICS  AND 
NATURAL  LAW).  By  JOSEPH  RICKABY,  S.J. 
Crown  8vo.,  55. 

NATURAL  THEOLOGY.  By  BERNARD 
BOEDDER,  S.J.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d. 

PSYCHOLOGY.     BY  MICHAEL  MAKER, 

S.J.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d. 


History  and  Science  of  Language,  &e. 


Davidson. — LEADING  AND  IMPORT- 
ANT ENGLISH  WORDS  :  Explained  and  Ex- 
exmplified.  By  WILLIAM  L.  DAVIDSON, 
M.A.  Fcp.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Farrar.  — LA  NG  u AGE  AND  LA  NG  UA  GES  : 

By  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.     Crown 
8vo.,  fa. 

Graham.  —  ENGLISH  SYNONYMS, 
Classified  and  Explained :  with  Practical 
Exercises.  By  G.  F.  GRAHAM.  Fcp.  8vo.,  6s. 

Max  Miiller  (F.). 

THE  SCIENCE  OF  LANGUAGE. — Found- 
ed on  Lectures  delivered  at  the  Royal  In- 
stitution in  1 86 1  and  1863.  2  vols.  Crown 
8vo.,  2is. 


Max  Miiller  (F.) — continued. 

BIOGRAPHIES  OF  WORDS,  AND  THE 
HOME  OF  THE  ARYAS.  Crown  8vo.,  js.  6d. 

THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE 
OF  LANGUAGE,  AND  ITS  PLACE  IN 
GENERAL  EDUCATION,  delivered  at  Ox- 
ford, 1889.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  net. 

Roget. —  THESAURUS  OF  ENGLISH 
WORDS  AND  PHRASES.  Classified  and 
Arranged  so  as  to  Facilitate  the  Expression 
of  Ideas  and  assist  in  Literary  Composition. 
By  PETER  MARK  ROGET,  M.D.,  F.R.S. 
Recomposed  throughout,  enlarged  and  im- 
proved, partly  from  the  Author's  Notes,  and 
with  a  full  Index,  by  the  Author's  Son, 
JOHN  LEWIS  ROGET.  Crown  8vo.  IDS.  6d. 

Whately. — ENGLISH  SYNONYMS.  By 
E.  JANE  WHATELY.  Fcp.  8vo.,  35. 


Political  Economy  and  Economics. 


Ashley. — ENGLISH  ECONOMIC  HIS- 
TORY AND  THEORY.  By  W.  J.  ASHLEY, 
M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  Part  I.,  55.  Part  II. 
los.  6<i. 

Bagehot. — ECONOMIC  STUDIES.  By 
WALTER  BAGEHOT.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Barnett. — PRACTICABLE    SOCIALISM. 

Essays  on  Social  Reform.     By  the  Rev.  S. 
A.  and  Mrs.  BARNETT.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Brassey. — PAPERS  AND  ADDRESSES 
ON  WORK  AND  WAGES.  By  Lord  BRASSEY. 
Edited  by  J.  POTTER,  and  with  Introduction 
by  GEORGE  HOWELL,  M.P.  Crown  8vo.,  55. 

Devas. — A  MANUAL  OF  POLITICAL 
ECONOMY.  By  C.  S.  DEVAS,  M.A.  Cr.  8vo., 
6s.  6d.  (Manuals  of  Catholic  Philosophy.) 

Dowell. — A  HISTORY  OF  TAXATION 
AND  TAXES  IN  ENGLAND,  from  the  Earliest 
Times  to  the  Year  1885.  By  STEPHEN 
DOWELL,  (4  vols.  8vo).  Vols.  I.  and  II. 
The  History  of  Taxation,  2is.  Vols.  III. 
and  IV.  The  History  of  Taxes,  2is. 


Jordan. — THE  STANDARD  OF  VALUE. 
By  WILLIAM  LEIGHTON  JORDAN,  Fellow 
of  the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  &c.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s. 

Macleod  (HENRY  DUNNING). 
BIMETALISM.     8vo.,  55.  net. 

THE  ELEMENTS  OF  BANKING.  Cr. 
8vo.,  3s.  6d. 

THE  THEORY  AND  PRACTICE  OF 
BANKING.  Vol.  I.  Svo.,  i2s.  Vol.11.  14$. 

THE  THEORY  OF  CREDIT.  Svo. 
Vol.  I.,  ios.  net.  Vol.  II.,  Part  I.,  IDS.  net. 
Vol.  II.,  Part  II.,  ios.  net. 

A  DIGEST  OF  THE  LAW  OF  BILLS 
OF  EXCHANGE,  BANK-NOTES,  &c. 

(in  the  press. 

Mil  1. — POLITICAL  ECONOMY.  By 
JOHN  STUART  MILL. 

Popular  Edition.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 
Library  Edition.     2  vols.     Svo. ,  305. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.         17 


Political  Economy  and  Economics — continued. 


Mulhall. — INDUSTRIES  AND  WEALTH 
OF  NATIONS.  By  MICHAEL  G.  MULHALL, 
F.S.S.  With  32  full-page  Diagrams. 
Crown  8vo.,  8s.  6d. 


Soderini. — SOCIALISM  AND  CA  THOLI- 

CISM.  From  the  Italian  of  Count  EDWARD 
SODERINI.  By  RICHARD  JENERY-SHEE. 
With  a  Preface  by  Cardinal  VAUGHAN. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s. 


Symes. — POLITICAL  ECONOMY  :  a 
Short  Text-book  of  Political  Economy. 
With  Problems  for  Solution,  and  Hints  for 
Supplementary  Reading ;  also  a  Supple- 
mentary Chapter  on  Socialism.  By  Pro- 
fessor J.  E.  SYMES,  M.A.,  of  University 
College,  Nottingham.  Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 


Toynbee. — LECTURES  ON  THE  IN- 
DUSTRIAL REVOLUTION  OF  THE  18rn  CEN- 
TURY IN  ENGLAND:  Popular  Addresses, 
Notes  and  other  Fragments.  By  ARNOLD 
TOYNBEE.  With  a  Memoir  of  the  Author 
by  BENJAMIN  JOWETT,  D.D.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

Vincent. — THE  LAND  QUESTION  IN 
NORTH  WALES:  being  a  Brief  Survey  of 
the  History,  Origin,  and  Character  of  the 
Agrarian  Agitation,  and  of  the  Nature  and 
Effect  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Welsh 
Land  Commission.  By  J.  E.  VINCENT. 
8vo.,  5s. 

Webb  (SIDNEY  and  BEATRICE). 
THE  HISTORY  OF  TRADE  UNIONISM. 
With  Map  and  full   Bibliography  of  the 
Subject.     8vo.,  i8s. 

INDUSTRIAL  DEMOCRACY:  a  Study 
in  Trade  Unionism.     2  vols.  8vo. 


STUDIES  IN   ECONOMICS  AND  POLITICAL  SCIENCE. 

Issued  under  the  auspices  of  the  London  School  of  Economics  and  Political  Science. 


THE  HISTORY  OF  LOCAL  RATES  IN 
ENGLAND:  Five  Lectures.  By  EDWIN 
CANNAN,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 

GERMAN  SOCIAL  DEMOCRACY.  By 
BERTRAND  RUSSELL,  B.A.  With  an  Ap- 
pendix on  Social  Democracy  and  the 
Woman  Question  in  Germany  by  ALYS 
RUSSELL,  B.A.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

SELECT  DOCUMENTS  ILLUSTRATING 
THE  HISTORY  OF  TRADE  UNIONISM. 

i.  The  Tailoring  Trade.  Edited  by 
W.  F.  GALTON.  With  a  Preface  by 
SIDNEY  WEBB,  LL.B.  Crown  8vo.,  53. 


DEPLOIGE'S  REFERENDUM  EN  SUISSE. 
Translated,  with  Introduction  and  Notes, 
by  C.  P.  TREVELYAN,  M.A.  [In preparation. 

SELECT  DOCUMENTS  ILLUSTRATING 
THE  STATE  REGULATION  OF  WAGES. 
Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by 
W.  A.  S.  HEWINS,  M.A.  [In  preparation. 

HUNGARIAN  GILD  RECORDS.  Edited 
by  Dr.  JULIUS  MANDELLO,  of  Budapest. 

[In  preparation. 

THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  ENGLAND 
AND  THE  HANSEATIC  LEAGUE.  By  Miss 
E.  A.  MACARTHUR.  [In  preparation. 


Evolution,  Anthropology,  &c. 


Clodd  (EDWARD). 

THE  STORY  OF  CREATION:  a  Plain 
Account  of  Evolution.  With  77  Illustra- 
tions. Crown  8vo.,  35.  f>d. 

A  PRIMER  OF  EVOLUTION:  being  a 
Popular  Abridged  Edition  of  '  The  Story 
of  Creation'.  With  Illustrations.  Fcp. 
8vo.,  is.  6d. 

Lang. — CUSTOM  AND  MYTH  :  Studies 
of  Early  Usage  and  Belief.  By  ANDREW 
LANG.  With  15  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo., 
3S.  6d. 

Lubbock. — THE  ORIGIN  OF  CIVILISA- 
TION, and  the  Primitive  Condition  of  Man. 
By  Sir  J.  LUBBOCK,  Bart.,  M.P.  With  5 
Plates  and  20  Illustrations  in  the  Text. 
8vo.,  i8s. 


Romanes  (GEORGE    JOHN). 

DARWIN,  AND  AFTER  DARWIN:  an 
Exposition  of  the  Darwinian  Theory,  and  a 
Discussion  on  Post- Darwinian  Questions. 
Part  I.  THE  DARWINIAN  THEORY.  With 

Portrait  of  Darwin  and  125  Illustrations. 

Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 
Part   II.    POST- DARWINIAN   QUESTIONS: 

Heredity  and  Utility.     With  Portrait  of 

the  Author  and  5  Illustrations.    Cr.  8vo., 

IDS.  6d. 
Part    III.      Post- Darwinian     Questions : 

Isolation  and  Physiological  Selection. 

Crown  8vo.,  55. 

AN  EXAMINATION  OF  WEISM ANN- 
ISM.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Ess  A  YS.  Edited  by  C.  LLOYD 
MORGAN,  Principal  of  University  College, 
Bristol.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 


i8        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Classical  Literature,  Translations,  &e. 


Abbott.  —  HELLENICA.  A  Collection 
of  Essays  on  Greek  Poetry,  Philosophy, 
History,  and  Religion.  Edited  by  EVELYN 
ABBOTT,  M.A.,  LL.D.  8vo.,  i6s. 


^Eschylus.  —  EUMENIDES  OF 

LUS.     With   Metrical   English  Translation. 
By  J.  F.  DAVIES.     8vo.,  75. 

Aristophanes.  —  THE    ACHARNIANS 

OF  ARISTOPHANES,  translated  into  English 
Verse.    By  R.  Y.  TYRRELL.    Crown  8vo.,  is. 

Aristotle.  —  YOUTH  AND  OLD  AGE, 
LIFE  AND  DEATH,  AND  RESPIRATION. 
Translated,  with  Introduction  and  Notes, 
by  W.  OGLE,  M.A.,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.,  some- 
time Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi  College, 
Oxford.  8vo.,  75.  6d. 

Becker  (PROFESSOR). 

GALLUS  :  or,  Roman  Scenes  in  the 
Time  of  Augustus.  Illustrated.  Post 
8vo.,  35.  6d. 

CHARICLES  :  or,  Illustrations  of  the 
Private  Life  of  the  Ancient  Greeks. 
Illustrated.  Post  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Butler.  —  THE  AUTHORESS  OF  THE 
ODYSSEY,  WHERE  AND  WHEN  SHE  WROTE, 
WHO  SHE  WAS,  THE  USE  SHE  MADE  OF 
'iHE  ILIAD,  AND  HOW  THE  POEM  GREW 
UNDER  HER  HANDS.  By  SAMUEL  BUTLER, 
Author  of  '  Erewhon,'  etc.  With  Illustra- 
tions. 8vo. 

Cicero.  —  CICERO'S  CORRESPONDENCE. 
By  R.  Y.  TYRRELL.  Vols.  I.,  II.,  III.,  8vo., 
each  125.  Vol.  IV.,  155.  Vol.  V.,  145. 

E  g  b  e  r  t.  —  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 
STUDY  OF  LATIN  INSCRIPTIONS.  By 
JAMES  C.  EGBERT,  Junr.,  Ph.D.  With 
numerous  Illustrations  and  Facsimiles. 
Square  crown  8vo.,  165. 


Lang;. — HOMER  AND  THE  EPIC.  By 
ANDREW  LANG.  Crown  8vo.,  gs.  net. 

Lucan. —  THE  PHARSALIA  OF  Luc  AN. 
Translated  into  Blank  Verse.  By  Sir 
EDWARD  RIDLEY.  8vo.,  145. 

Mackail. — SELECT  EPIGRAMS  FROM 
THE  GREEK  ANTHOLOGY.  By  J.  W.  MAC- 
KAIL.  Edited  with  a  Revised  Text,  Intro- 
duction, Translation,  and  Notes.  8vo.,  165. 

Rich. — A  DICTIONARY  OF  ROMAN  AND 
GREEK  ANTIQUITIES.  By  A.  RICH,  B.A. 
With  2000  Woodcuts.  Crown  8vo.,  js.  6d. 

Sophocles. — Translated  into  English 
Verse.  By  ROBERT  WHITELAW,  M.A., 
Assistant  Master  in  Rugby  School.  Cr.  8vo., 
8s.  6d. 

Tacitus.  —  THE  HISTORY  OF  P. 
CORNELIUS  TACITUS.  Translated  into 
English,  with  an  Introduction  and  Notes, 
Critical  and  Explanatory,  by  ALBERT 
WILLIAM  QUILL,  M.A.,  T.C.D.  2  vols. 
Vol.  I.  8vo.,  75.  6d.  Vol.  II.  8vo.,  12*.  6d. 

Tyrrell. — TRANSLATIONS  INTO  GREEK 
AND  LATIN  VERSE.  Edited  by  R.  Y. 
TYRRELL.  8vo.,  6s. 

Virgil. 

THE  ^ENEID  OF  VIRGIL.  Translated 
into  English  Verse  by  JOHN  CONINGTON. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

THE  POEMS  OF  VIRGIL.  Translated 
into  English  Prose  by  JOHN  CONINGTON. 
Crown  8vo.,  65. 

THE  S&NEID  OF  VIRGIL,  freely  trans- 
lated into  English  Blank  Verse.  By 
W.  J.  THORNHILL.  Crown  8vo.,  7*.  6d. 

THE  &NEID  OF  VIRGIL.    Translated 
into  English  Verse  by  JAMES  RHOADES. 
Books  I. -VI.     Crown  8vo.,  51. 
Books  VII. -XII.     Crown  8vo.,  55. 


Poetry  and  the  Drama. 

Allingham  (WILLIAM). 


IRISH  SONGS  AND  POEMS.  With 
Frontispiece  of  the  Waterfall  of  Asaroe. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  65. 

LA  URENCE  BLOOMFIELD.  With  Por- 
trait of  the  Author.  Fcp.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

FLOWER  PIECES ;  DAY  AND  NIGHT 
SONGS;  BALLADS.  With  2  Designs  by 
D.  G.  ROSSETTI.  Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.  large 
paper  edition,  125. 


Allingham  (WILLIAM) — continued. 

LIFE  AND  PHANTASY  :  with  Frontis- 
piece by  Sir  J.  E.  MILLAIS,  Bart.,  and 
Design  by  ARTHUR  HUGHES.  Fcp.  8vo., 
65. ;  large  paper  edition,  125. 

THOUGHT  AND  WORD,  AND  ASHBY 
MANOR:  a  Play.  Fcp.  8vo.,  6s. ;  large 
paper  edition,  12$. 

BLACKBERRIES.    Imperial  i6mo.,  65. 

Sets  of  the  above  6  vols.  may  be  had  in  uni- 
\form  Half -parchment  binding,  price  305. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Poetry  and  the  Dr&ma,— continued. 


Armstrong  (G.  F.  SAVAGE). 

POEMS  :  Lyrical  and  Dramatic.  Fcp. 
8vo.,  6s. 

KING  SA  UL.   (The  Tragedy  of  Israel, 
Part  I.)     Fcp.  8vo.,  55. 

KING  DAVID.  (The  Tragedy  of  Israel, 
Part  II.)     Fcp.  Svo.,  6s. 

KING  SOLOMON.     (The  Tragedy  of 
Israel,  Part  III.)     Fcp.  8vo.,  6s. 

UGONE  :  a  Tragedy.     Fcp.  8vo.,  65. 

A  GARLAND  FROM  GREECE  :  Poems. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  ys.  6d. 

STORIES  OF  WICKLOW:  Poems.  Fcp.  i 
8vo.,  ys.  6d. 

MEPHISTOPHELES  IN  BROADCLOTH  : 
a  Satire.     Fcp.  8vo.,  45. 

ONE  IN  THE  INFINITE:    a    Poem. 
Crown  8vo.,  ys.  6d. 

Armstrong. — THE  POETICAL  WORKS 
OF  EDMUND  J.  ARMSTRONG.  Fcp.  8vo.,  ss. 

Arnold. —  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  WORLD: 
or,  The  Great  Consummation.  By  Sir 
EDWIN  ARNOLD.  With  14  Illustrations 
after  HOLM  AN  HUNT.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 


Goethe. 

FAUST,  Part  I.,  the  German  Text, 
with  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  ALBERT 
M.  SELSS,  Ph.D.,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  55. 

FAUST.  Translated,  with  Notes. 
By  T.  E.  WEBB.  8vo.,  ias.  6d. 

Gurney. — DAY-DREAMS:    Poems. 
By  Rev.  ALFRED  GURNEY,  M.A.      Crown 

8vo.,  35.  6d. 


Beesly  (A.  H.). 

BALLADS      AND 
Fcp.  8vo.,  55. 

DANTON,  AND  OTHER  VERSE. 
8vo.,  45.  bd. 


OTHER       VERSE. 


Fcp. 


Bell  (MRS.  HUGH). 

CHAMBER  COMEDIES  :  a  Collection 
of  Plays  and  Monologues  for  the  Drawing 
Room.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

FAIRY  TALE  PLAYS,  AND  How  TO 
ACT  THEM.  With  91  Diagrams  and  52 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Cochrane  (ALFRED). 

THE  KESTREL  s  NEST,  and  other 
Verses.  Fcp.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

LEVIORE  PLECTRO  :  Occasional 
Verses.  Fcap.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 


Ingelow  (JEAN). 

POETICAL    WORKS. 

8vO.,   I2S. 


2  vols.      Fcp. 


LYRICAL  AND  OTHER  POEMS.  Selec- 
ted from  the  Writings  of  JEAN  INGELOW. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  as.  6d.  cloth  plain,  35.  cloth  gilt. 

Lang  (ANDREW). 

GRASS  OF  PARNASSUS.  Fcp.  8vo., 
2s.  6d.  net. 

THE  BLUE  POETRY  BOOK.  Edited 
by  ANDREW  LANG.  With  100  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s. 


Layard.  —  SONGS  IN  MANY  MOODS. 
By  NINA  F.  LAYARD.  And  THE  WANDER- 
ING ALBATROSS,  &c.  By  Annie  Corder.  In 
one  volume.  Crown  8vo.,  55. 


Lecky.—  POEMS. 
Fcp.  8vo., 


By    W.    E.    H. 


Lytton    (THE     EARL     OF),     (OWEN 
MEREDITH). 

MAR  AH.     Fcp.  Svo.,  6s.  6<7. 

KING  POPPY  :  a  Fantasia.  With  i 
Plate  and  Design  on  Title-Page  by  ED. 
BURNE-JONES,  A.R.A.  Cr.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

THE  WANDERER.     Cr.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 
LUCILE.     Crown  Svo.,  IDS.  6d. 
SELECTED  POEMS.    Cr.  Svo.,  105.  6d. 


20        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Poetry  and   the  Drama — continued. 


Macaulay. — LA  YS  OF  ANCIENT  ROME, 

6°c.     By  Lord  MACAULAY. 

Illustrated  by  G.  SCHARF.  Fcp.  410.,  105.  6d. 

Bijou       Edition. 

i8mo.,  25.  6d.  gilt  top. 

Popular  Edition. 

Fcp.  410.,  6d.  sewed,  is.  cloth. 
Illustrated  by  J.    R.   WEGUELIN.     Crown 

8vo.,  35.  6d. 
Annotated  Edition.     Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  sewed, 

is.  6d.  cloth. 

Macdonald  (GEORGE,  LL.D.). 

A  BOOK  OF  STRIFE,  IN  THE  FORM  OF 
THE  DIARY  OF  AN  OLD  SOUL  :  Poems. 
i8mo.,  6s. 

RAMPOLLI  :  GROWTHS  FROM  A  LONG- 
PLANTED  ROOT:  being  Translations,  New 
and  Old  (mainly  in  verse),  chiefly  from  the 
German ;  along  with  '  A  Year's  Diary  of 
an  Old  Soul '.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Morris  (WILLIAM). 

POETICAL  WORKS — LIBRARY  EDITION. 
Complete  in  Ten  Volumes.     Crown  8vo., 
price  6s.  each. 

THE  EARTHLY  PARADISE.  4  vols. 
6s.  each. 

THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  JASON. 
6s. 

THE  DEFENCE  OF  GUENEVERE,  and 
other  Poems.  6s. 

THE  STORY  OF  SIGURD  THE  VOLSUNG, 
AND  THE  FALL  OF  THE  NIBLUNGS.  6s. 

LOVE  is  ENOUGH ;  or,  the  Freeing  of 
Pharamond :  A  Morality ;  and  POEMS 
BY  THE  WAY.  6s. 


THE  ODYSSEY  OF  HOMER. 
into  English  Verse.     6s. 

THE  S£NEIDS  OF    VIRGIL. 
into  English  Verse.     6s. 


Done 


Done 


Certain  of  the  POETICAL  WORKS  may  also 
be  had  in  the  following  Editions  : — 

THE  EARTHLY  PARADISE. 
Popular  Edition.     5  vols.     i2mo.,  255. ; 

or  5s.  each,  sold  separately. 
The  same  in  Ten  Parts,  255.;  or  2s.  6d. 

each,  sold  separately. 
Cheap   Edition,   in  i  vol.     Crown  8vo., 

7s.  6d. 


Morris  (WILLIAM) — continued. 

LOVE  is  ENOUGH  ;  or,  the  Freeing  of 
Pharamond :  A  Morality.  Square  crown 
8vo.,  75.  6d. 

POEMS  BY  THE  WAY.    Square  crown 

8vo.,  6s. 

%*  For    Mr.    William    Morris's    Prose 
Works,  see  pp.  22  and  31. 

Nesbit. — LA  YS  AND  LEGENDS.  By  E. 
NESBIT  (Mrs.  HUBERT  BLAND).  First 
Series.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  Second  Series. 
With  Portrait.  Crown  8vo.,  55. 

Riley  QAMES  WHITCOMB). 

OLD  FASHIONED  ROSES:  Poems. 
i2mo.,  55. 

A  CHILD-WORLD:  POEMS.  Fcp. 
8vo.,  5s. 

Romanes. — A  SELECTION  FROM  THE 
POEMS  OF  GEORGE  JOHN  ROMANES,  M.A., 
LL.D.,  F.R.S.  With  an  Introduction  by 
T.  HERBERT  WARREN,  President  of  Mag- 
dalen College,  Oxford.  Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d. 

Shakespeare. — BOWDLER'S  FAMILY 
SHAKESPEARE.  With  36  Woodcuts,  i  vol. 
8vo.,  145.  Or  in  6  vols.  Fcp.  8vo.,  2is. 

THE  SHA  KESPEA  RE  BIR  THDA  Y  BOOK. 
By  MARY  F.  DUNBAR.  32010.,  is.  6d. 

Tupper. — POEMS.  By  JOHN  LUCAS 
TUPPER.  Selected  and  Edited  by  WILLIAM 
MICHAEL  ROSSETTI.  Crown  8vo.,  55. 

***  The  author  of  these  Poems  was  a  Sculptor,  and 
afterwards  A  rt  Instructor  in  Rugby  School.  He  died  in 
1879,  having  been  a  very  close  associate  of  the  Pre- 
Raphaelite  Brotherhood,  and  contributing  in  verse  and 
prose  to  their  magazine,  the  '  Germ,'  in  1850. 

Wordsworth.  —  SELECTED  POEMS. 
By  ANDREW  LANG.  With  Photogravure 
Frontispiece  of  Rydal  Mount.  With  16 
Illustrations  and  numerous  Initial  Letters. 
By  ALFRED  PARSONS,  A.R.A.  Crown  8vo., 
gilt  edges,  6s. 

Wordsworth  and  Coleridge. — A 

DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  WORDSWORTH  AND 
COLERIDGE  MANUSCRIPTS  IN  THE  POS- 
SESSION OF  Mr.  7".  NORTON  LONGMAN. 
Edited,  with  Notes,  by  W.  HALE  WHITE. 
With  3  Facsimile  Reproductions.  410., 
IDS.  6d. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.        21 


Fiction,   Humour,  &c. 


Allingham. — CROOKED  PATHS.     By 

FRANCIS  ALLINGHAM.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 
Anstey  (F.,  Author  of  'Vice  Versa'). 

VOCES  POPULI.  Reprinted  from 
'  Punch  '.  First  Series.  With  20  Illus- 
trations by  J.  BERNARD  PARTRIDGE. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  MAN  FROM  BLANKLEY'S  :  a 
Story  in  Scenes,  and  other  Sketches. 
With  24  Illustrations  by  J.  BERNARD 
PARTRIDGE.  Post  410.,  6s. 

Astor. — A  JOURNEY  IN  OTHER 
WORLDS  :  a  Romance  of  the  Future.  By 
JOHN  JACOB  ASTOR.  With  10  Illustrations. 
Cr.  8vo.,  6s. 

Beaconsfield  (THE  EARL  OF). 
NOVELS    AND    TALES.       Complete 
in  ii  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  is.  6d.  each. 


Vivian  Grey. 
The  Young  Duke,  &c. 
Alroy,  Ixion,  &c. 
Contarini        Fleming, 

&c. 
Tancred. 


Sybil. 

Henrietta  Temple. 

Venetia. 

Coningsby. 

Lothair. 

Endymion. 

NOVELS  AND  TALES.  The  Hughen- 
den  Edition.  With  2  Portraits  and  n 
Vignettes,  n  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  425. 

Black. — THE  PRINCESS  D  ESI  REE. 
By  CLEMENTINA  BLACK.  With  8  Illustra- 
tions by  JOHN  WILLIAMSON.  Cr.  8vo.,  6s. 

Crump. —  WIDE  ASUNDER  AS  THE 
POLES.  By  ARTHUR  CRUMP.  Cr.  8vo.,  6s. 

Deland. — PHILIP    AND    His    WIFE. 

Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 

Diderot. — RAMEAU'S  NEPHEW:    a 

Translation  from  Diderot's  Autographic 
Text.  By  SYLVIA  MARGARET  HILL.  Crown 
8vo.,  3s.  6d. 

Dougall. — BEGGARS  ALL.  By  L. 
DOUGALL.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Doyle  (A.  CONAN). 

MICAH  CLARKE:  A  Tale  of  Mon- 
mouth's  Rebellion.  With  10  Illustra- 
tions. Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  CAPTAIN  OF  THE  POLESTAR^ 
and  other  Tales.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  REFUGEES:  A  Tale  of  the 
Huguenots.  With  25  Illustrations.  Cr. 
8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  STARK  MUNRO  LETTERS.  Cr. 
8vo,  6s. 


Farrar  (F.  W.,   DEAN   OF   CANTER- 
'  BURY). 

DARKNESS  AND  DAWN:  or,  Scenes 
in  the  Days  of  Nero.  An  Historic  Tale. 
Cr.  8vo.,  75.  6d. 

GATHERING  CLOUDS  :  a  Tale  of  the 
Days  of  St.  Chrysostom.  Cr.  8vo.,  75.  6d- 

Fowler  (EDITH  H.). 

THE  YOUNG  PRETENDERS.  A  Story 
of  Child  Life.  With  12  Illustrations  by 
PHILIP  BURNE-JONES.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

THE  PROFESSOR'S  CHILDREN.  With 
24  Illustrations  by  ETHEL  KATE  BURGESS, 
Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Froude. —  THE  Two  CHIEFS  OF  DUN- 
BOY:  an  Irish  Romance  of  the  Last  Century. 
By  JAMES  A.  FROUDE.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Gilkes. — KALLISTRATUS  :  an  Auto- 
biography. A  Story  of  Hannibal  and  the 
Second  Punic  War.  By  A.  H.  GILKES,  M.A., 
Master  of  Dulwich  College.  With  3  Illus- 
trations by  MAURICE  GREIFFENHAGEN, 
Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Graham. — THE     RED     SCAUR  :     A 

Novel    of    Manners.       By    P.    ANDERSON 
GRAHAM.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Gurdon. — MEMORIES  AND  FANCIES  : 
Suffolk  Tales  and  other  Stories;  Fairy 
Legends  ;  Poems  ;  Miscellaneous  Articles. 
By  the  late  LADY  CAMILLA  GURDON,  Author 
of  '  Suffolk  Folk- Lore '.  Crown  8vo.,  5s. 

Haggard  (H.  RIDER). 

HEART  OF  THE   WORLD.     With  15 

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 
JOAN  HASTE.  With  20  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  3s.  6d. 

THE  PEOPLE  OF  THE  MIST.  With 
16  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

MONTEZUMA'S  DA  UGHTER.  With  24 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo. ,  35.  6d. 

SHE.  With  32  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.,  3s.  6d. 

ALLAN  QUATERMAIN.  With  31 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

MAIWA'S  REVENGE  :  Cr.  8vo.,  is.  6VL 

COLONEL  QUARITCH,  V.C.     Cr.  8vo. 

3S.  6d. 
CLEOPATRA.    With  29  Illustrations. 

Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 


22        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Fiction,   Humour,   &c. — continued. 


Haggard  (H.  RIDER) — continued. 

BEATRICE.     Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

ERIC  BRIGHTEYES.  With  51  Illus- 
trations. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

NADA  THE  LILY.  With  23  Illustra- 
tions. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

ALLANS  WIFE.  With  34  Illustra- 
tions. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  WITCH'S  HEAD.  With  16 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

MR.  MEESON'S  WILL.  With  16 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

DAWN.  With  16  Illustrations.  Cr. 
8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Haggard  and  Lang.— THE  WORLD'S 

DESIRE.  By  H.  RIDER  HAGGARD  and 
ANDREW  LANG.  With  27  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Harte. — IN  THE  CARQUINEZ  WOODS 
and  other  stories.  By  BRET  HARTE.  Cr. 
Svo.,  35.  6d. 

Hope. — THE  HEART  OF  PRINCESS 
OSRA.  By  ANTHONY  HOPE.  With  9  Illus- 
trations by  JOHN  WILLIAMSON.  Crown 
8vo.,  65. 

Hornung. — THE  UNBIDDEN  GUEST. 
By  E.  W.  HORNUNG.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Jerome. — SKETCHES  IN  LAVENDER: 
BLUE  AND  GREEK.  By  JEROME  K.  JEROME, 
Author  of  '  Three  Men  in  a  Boat,'  etc. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Lang. — A  MONK  OF  FIFE  ;  being 
the  Chronicle  written  by  NORMAN  LESLIE 
of  Pitcullo,  concerning  Marvellous  Deeds 
that  befel  in  the  Realm  of  France,  1429-31. 
By  ANDREW  LANG.  With  13  Illustrations 
by  SELWYN  IMAGE.  Cr.  8vo.,  6s. 

Lyall  (EDNA). 

THE  A  UTOBIOGRAPHYOF  A  SLANDER. 

Fcp.  8vo.,  is.,  sewed. 

Presentation  Edition.     With  20  Illustra- 
tions  by   LANCELOT   SPEED.      Crown 
8vo.,  2s.  6d.  net. 
THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  OF  A  TRUTH. 

Fcp.  8vo.,  is.,  sewed  ;  is.  6d.,  cloth. 
DOREEN.     The  Story  of  a  Singer. 

Crown  8vo.,  6s. 
WAYFARING  MEN.     Crown  8vo.,  65. 

Levett-Yeats  (S.). 
THE  CHEVALIER  D'AURIAC.    Crown 

8vo.,  6s. 
A  GALAHAD  OF  THE  CREEKS,  and 

other  Stories.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 


Melville  (G.  J.  WHYTE). 

The  Gladiators. 
The  Interpreter. 
Good  for  Nothing. 
The  Queen's  Maries. 


Holmby  House. 
Kate  Coventry. 
Digby  Grand. 
General  Bounce. 
8vo.,  is.  6d.  each. 

Merriman. — FLOTSAM:  The    Study 

of  a  Life.  By  HENRY  SETON  MERRIMAN, 
With  Frontispiece  and  Vignette  by  H.  G. 
MASSEY,  A.R.E.  Crown  Svo.,  6s. 

Morris  (WILLIAM). 

THE  WATER  OF  THE  WONDROUS 
ISLES.  Crown  Svo.,  js.  6d. 

THE  WELL  A  T  THE  WORLD'S  END. 
2  vols.  Svo.,  28s. 

THE  STORY  OF  THE  GLITTERING 
PLAIN,  which  has  been  also  called  The 
Land  of  the  Living  Men,  or  The  Acre  of 
the  Undying.  Square  post  Svo.,  55.  net. 

THE  ROOTS  OF  THE  MOUNTAINS, 
wherein  is  told  somewhat  of  the  Lives  of 
the  Men  of  Burgdale,  their  Friends,  their 
Neighbours,  their  Foemen,  and  their 
Fellows-in-Arms.  Written  in  Prose  and 
Verse.  Square  crown  Svo.,  Ss. 

A  TALE  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  THE 
WOLFINGS,  and  all  the  Kindreds  of  the 
Mark.  Written  in  Prose  and  Verse. 
Second  Edition.  Square  crown  Svo.,  6s. 

A  DREAM  OF  JOHN  BALL,  AND  A 
KING'S  LESSON.  i2mo.,  is.  6d. 

NEWS  FROM  NOWHERE;  or,  An 
Epoch  of  Rest.  Being  some  Chapters 
from  an  Utopian  Romance.  Post  Svo., 
is.  6d. 

%*  For  Mr.  William  Morris's  Poetical 
Works,  see  p.  20. 

Newman  (CARDINAL). 

Loss  AND  GAIN  :    The    Story  of  a 

Convert.     Crown  Svo.     Cabinet  Edition, 

6s. ;  Popular  Edition,  35.  6d. 
CALLISTA  :    A   Tale   of  the   Third 

Century.     Crown  Svo.     Cabinet  Edition, 

6s. ;  Popular  Edition,  35.  6d. 

Oliphant. — OLD  MR.  TREDGOLD. 
By  Mrs.  OLIPHANT.  Crown  Svo.,  6s. 

Phillipps-Wolley. — SNAP:  a  Legend 
of  the  Lone  Mountain.  By  C.  PHILLIPPS- 
WOLLEY.  With  13  Illustrations.  Crown 
Svo. ,  3s.  6rf. 

Quintana. — THE  CID  CAMPEADOR  : 
an  Historical  Romance.  By  D.  ANTONIO 
DE  TRUEBA  Y  LA  QUINTANA.  Translated 
from  the  Spanish  by  HENRY  J.  GILL,  M.A., 
T.C.D.  Crown  Svo.,  6s. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.        25 


Fiction,   Humour,   &e. — continued. 


Rhoscomyl  (OWEN). 

THE  JEWEL  OF  YNYS  GALON  :  being 
a  hitherto  unprinted  Chapter  in  the  History 
of  the  Sea  Rovers.  With  12  Illustrations 
by  LANCELOT  SPEED.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6cf. 

BATTLEMENT  AND  TOWER  :  a 
Romance.  With  Frontispiece  by  R. 
CATON  WOODVILLE.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

FOR  THE  WHITE  ROSE  OF  ARNO: 
a  Story  of  the  Jacobite  Rising  of  1745. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Sewell  (ELIZABETH  M.). 

A  Glimpse  of  the  World,  Amy  Herbert, 

Laneton  Parsonage.  Cleve  Hall. 

Margaret  Percival.  Gertrude. 

Katharine  Ashton.  Home  Life. 

The  Earl's  Daughter.  After  Life. 

The  Experience  of  Life.  Ursula.     Ivors. 

Cr.  8vo.,  is.  6d.  each  cloth  plain.  2s.  6d 
each  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges. 

Stevenson  (ROBERT  Louis). 

THE  STRANGE  CASE  OF  DR.  JEKYLL 
AND  MR.  HYDE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  sewed. 
is.  6d.  cloth. 

THE  STRANGE  CASE  OF  DR. 
JEKYLL  AND  MR.  HYDE;  WITH  OTHER 
FABLES.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

MORE  NEW  ARABIAN  NIGHTS — THE 
DYNAMITER.  By  ROBERT  Louis  STEVEN- 
SON and  FANNY  VAN  DE  GRIFT  STEVEN- 
SON. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  WRONG  Box.  By  ROBERT 
Louis  STEVENSON  and  LLOYD  OSBOURNE. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Suttner. — LAY  DOWN  YOUR  ARMS 
(Die  Waffen  Niedcr) :  The  Autobiography 
of  Martha  Tilling.  By  BERTHA  VON 
SUTTNER.  Translated  by  T.  HOLMES. 
Cr.  8vo.,  is.  6d. 

Taylor.  —  EARLY  ITALIAN  Loi'E- 
STORIES.  Edited  and  Retold  by  UNA 
TAYLOR.  With  12  Illustrations  by  H.  J. 
FORD. 

Trollope  (ANTHONY). 
THE  WARDEN.     Cr.  8vo.,  15.  6d. 


BARCHESTER 
is.  6d. 


TOWERS.      Cr.    8vo., 


Walford  (L.  B.). 

IVA  KILDARE  :  a  Matrimonial  Pro- 
blem. Crown  Svo.,  6s. 

MR.  SMITH  :  a  Part  of  his  Life. 
Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 

THE  BABY'S  GRANDMOTHER.  Cr. 
8vo.,  2s.  6d. 

COUSINS.     Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 
TROUBLESOME    DAUGHTERS.        Cr. 

8vo.,  2s.  6d. 

PAULINE.     Crown.  8vo.,  25.  6d. 
DICK  NETHERBY.     Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 
THE  HISTORY  OF  A     WEEK.      Cr. 

8vo.  2s.  6d. 

A  STIFF-NECKED  GENERATION.     Cr. 

Svo.  2s.  6d. 

NAN,  and  other  Stories.     Cr.  8vo.> 

2s.  6d. 

THE  MISCHIEF  OF  MONICA.  Cr. 
Svo.,  2s.  6d. 

THE  ONE  GOOD   GUEST.     Cr.  Svo. 

2s.  6d. 

'  PLOUGHED]  and  other  Stories. 
Crown  8vo.,  as.  6d. 

THE  MA  TCHMA  KER  .    C  r .  Svo . ,  25.  6 d. 

Weyman  (STANLEY). 

THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  WOLF.  Cr. 
Svo.,  35.  6d. 

A  GENTLEMAN  OF  FRANCE.  Cr.  Svo., 

6s. 

THE  RED  COCKADE.     Cr.  8vo.,  65. 

Watson. — RACING  AND  CHASING:  a 
Volume  of  Sporting  Stories  and  Sketches. 
By  ALFRED  E.  T.  WATSON,  Editor  of  the 
'  Badminton  Magazine  '.  With  numerous 
Illustrations. 

Whishaw  (FRED.). 

A  BOYAR  OF  THE  TERRIBLE  :  a 
Romance  of  the  Court  of  Ivan  the  Cruel, 
First  Tzar  of  Russia.  With  12  Illustra- 
tions by  H.  G.  MASSEY,  A. R.E.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s. 

A  TSAR 's  GRATITUDE.    Cr.  8vo.,  65. 

Woods. —  WEEPING  FERRY,  and  other 
Stories.  By  MARGARET  L.  WOODS,  Author 
of  '  A  Village  Tragedy  '.  Crown  Svo.,  6s. 


a4        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Popular  Science  (Natural  History,  &e.). 


Butler. — OUR  HOUSEHOLD  INSECTS. 
An  Account  of  the  Insect-Pests  found  in 
Dwelling-Houses.  By  EDWARD  A.  BUTLER, 
B.A.,  B.Sc.  (Lond.).  With  113  Illustra- 
tions. Crown  8vo.,  3$.  6d. 


Furneaux  (W.). 

THE  OUTDOOR  WORLD;  or  The 
Young  Collector's  Handbook.  With  18 
Plates  1 6  of  which  are  coloured,  and  549 
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo., 
75.  6d. 

BUTTERFLIES  AND  MOTHS  (British). 
With  12  coloured  Plates  and  241  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d. 

LIFE  IN  PONDS  AND  STREAMS. 
With  8  coloured  Plates  and  331  Illustra- 
tions in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d. 


Hartwig  (DR.  GEORGE). 

THE  SEA  AND  ITS  LIVING  WONDERS. 
With  12  Plates  and  303  Woodcuts.  8vo., 
75.  net. 

THE  TROPICAL  WORLD.  With  8 
Plates  and  172  Woodcuts.  8vo.,  75.  net. 

THE  POLAR  WoRLD.With  3  Maps, 
8  Plates  and  85  Woodcuts.  8vo.,  75.  net. 

THE  SUBTERRANEAN  WORLD.  With 
3  Maps  and  80  Woodcuts.  8vo.,  js.  net. 

THE  AERIAL  WORLD.  With  Map,  8 
Plates  and  60  Woodcuts.  8vo.,  71.  net. 

JHEROES  OF  THE  POLAR  WORLD.  1 9 
Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  25. 

WONDERS  OF  THE  TROPICAL  FORESTS. 
40  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  zs. 

WORKERS  UNDER  THE  GROUND.  29 
Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  zs. 

MARVELS  OVER  OUR  HEADS.  29 
Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  2s. 

SEA  MONSTERS  AND  SEA  BIRDS.  75 
Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  23.  6d. 

DENIZENS  OF  THE  DEEP.  117  Illus- 
trations. Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 


Hartwig  (DR.  GEORGE) — continued. 

VOLGA  NOES  A  ND  EA  R  THQ  UA  KES.    3  o 
Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 

WILD  ANIMALS  OF  THE   TROPICS. 
66  Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.,  31.  6d. 


Helmholtz. — POPULAR  LECTURES  ON 
SCIENTIFIC  SUBJECTS.  By  HERMANN  VON 
HELMHOLTZ.  With  68  Woodcuts.  2  vols. 
Cr.  8vo.,  3$.  6d.  each. 


Hudson  (W.  H.). 

BRITISH  BIRDS.  With  a  Chapter 
on  Structure  and  Classification  by  FRANK 
E.  BEDDARD,  F.R.S.  With  16  Plates  (8 
of  which  are  Coloured),  and  over  100  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  75.  6d. 

BIRDS  IN  LONDON.  With  numerous 
Illustrations  from  Drawings  and  Photo- 
graphs. 


Proctor  (RICHARD  A.). 

LIGHT  SCIENCE  FOR  LEISURE  HOURS. 
Familiar  Essays  on  Scientific  Subjects.  3 
vols.  Cr.  8vo.,  55.  each. 

Ro  UGH  WA  YS  MA  DE  SMOO  TH.  Fam  i  - 
liar  Essays  on  Scientific  Subjects.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d. 

PLEASANT  WA  YS  IN  SCIENCE.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d. 

NATURE  STUDIES.  By  R.  A.  PROC- 
TOR, GRANT  ALLEN,  A.  WILSON,  T. 
FOSTER  and  E.  CLODD.  Crown  8vo., 
35.  6d. 

LEISURE  READINGS.  By  R.  A.  PROC- 
TOR, E.  CLODD,  A.  WILSON,  T.  FOSTER 
and  A.  C.  RANYARD.  Cr.  8vo. ,  35.  6d. 

*,*  For  Mr.  Proctor's  other  books  sec  Messrs. 
Longmans  <&•  Co. '5  Catalogue  of  Scientific 
Works. 


Stanley. — A  FAMILIAR  HISTORY  OF 
BIRDS.  By  E.  STANLEY,  D.D.,  formerly 
Bishop  of  Norwich.  With  Illustrations. 
Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS         25. 


Popular   Science    (Natural  History,  &e.) — continued. 


Wood  (REV.  J.  G.). 

HOMES  WITHOUT  HANDS:  A  Descrip- 
tion of  the  Habitation  of  Animals,  classed 
according  to  the  Principle  of  Construc- 
tion. With  140  Illustrations.  8vo., 
js.,  net. 

INSECTS  AT  HOME  :  A  Popular  Ac- 
count of  British  Insects,  their  Structure, 
Habits  and  Transformations.  With  700 
Illustrations.  8vo. ,  75.  net. 

INSECTS  ABROAD  :  a  Popular  Account 
of  Foreign  Insects,  their  Structure,  Habits 
and  Transformations.  With  600  Illustra- 
tions. 8vo.,  75.  net. 

BIBLE  ANIMALS  :  a  Description  of 
every  Living  Creature  mentioned  in  the 
Scriptures.  With  112  Illustrations.  8vo., 
75.  net. 

PETLAND  REVISITED.  With  33 
Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Our    of  DOORS;    a    Selection    of 

Original  Articles    on    Practical    Natural 

History.  With  n  Illustrations.    Cr.  8vo., 
35.-  £>d. 


Wood  (REV.  J.  G.) — continued. 

STRANGE  DWELLINGS:  a  Description 
of  the  Habitations  of  Animals,  abridged 
from  '  Homes  without  Hands '.  With  60 
Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

BIRD  LIFE  OF  THE  BIBLE.  32  Illus- 
trations. Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

WONDERFULNESTS.  30 Illustrations. 
Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

HOMES  UNDER  THE  GROUND.  28 
Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

WILD  ANIMALS  OF  THE  BIBLE.  29 
Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  6d. 

DOMESTIC  ANIMALS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 
23  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  BRANCH  BUILDERS.  28  Illus- 
trations. Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 

SOCIAL  HABITATIONS  AND  PARASITIC 
NESTS.  18  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  2s. 


Works  of  Reference. 


Longmans'  GAZETTEER  OF  THE 
WORLD.  Edited  by  GEORGE  G.  CHIS- 
HOLM,  M.A.,  B.Sc.  Imp.  8vo.,  £2  2s.  cloth, 
£2  i2s.  6d.  half-morocco. 


Maunder  (Samuel). 

BIOGRAPHICAL  TREASURY.  With 
Supplement  brought  down  to  1889.  By 
Rev.  JAMES  WOOD.  Fcp.  8vo.,  65. 

TREASURY  OF  GEOGRAPHY,  Physical, 
Historical,  Descriptive,  and  Political. 
With  7  Maps  and  16  Plates.  Fcp.  8vo.,  65. 

THE  TREASURY  OF  BIBLE  KNOW- 
LEDGE. By  the  Rev.  J.  AYRE,  M.A.  With 
5  Maps,  15  Plates,  and  300  Woodcuts. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  6s. 

TREASURY  OF  KNOWLEDGE  AND  LIB- 
RARY OF  REFERENCE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  6s. 

HISTORICAL  TREASURY.  Fcp.8vo.,6s. 


Maunder  (Samuel) — continued. 

SCIENTIFIC  AND  LITERARY  TREA- 
SURY. Fcp.  8vo.,  6s. 

THE  TREASURY  OF  BOTANY.  Edited 
by  J.  LINDLEY,  F.R.S.,  and  T.  MOORE, 
F.L.S.  With  274  Woodcuts  and  20  Steel 
Plates.  2  vols.  Fcp.  Svo.,  125. 


Roget. —  THESAURUS  OF  ENGLISH 
WORDS  AND  PHRASES.  Classified  and  Ar- 
ranged so  as  to  Facilitate  the  Expression  of 
Ideas  and  assist  in  Literary  Composition. 
By  PETER  MARK  ROGET,  M.D.,  F.R.S. 
Recomposed  throughout,  enlarged  and  im- 
proved, partly  from  the  Author's  Notes,  and 
with  a  full  Index,  by  the  Author's  Son, 
JOHN  LEWIS  ROGET.  Crown  8vo.,  ioi.  6d. 


Willich.- POPULAR  TABLES  forgiving 
information  for  ascertaining  the  value  of 
Lifehold,  Leasehold,  and  Church  Property, 
the  Public  Funds,  &c.  By  CHARLES  M. 
WILLICH.  Edited  by  H.  BENCE  JONES. 
Crown  8vo.,  ioi.  6d. 


26        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Children' 
Crake  (REV.  A.  D.). 
EDWY  THE  FAIR;    or,    The    First 

Chronicle  of  ^Escendune.  Cr.  8vo. ,  25.  6d. 
ALFGAR  THE  DANE  ;  or,  The  Second 

Chronicle  of  /Escendune.     Cr.  8vo.  is.  6d. 
THE  RIVAL  HEIRS  :  being  the  Third 

and  Last  Chronicle  of  jEscendune.     Cr. 

8vo.,  2s.  6d. 
THE  HOUSE  OF  WALDERNE.    A  Tale 

of  the  Cloister  and  the  Forest  in  the  Days 

of  the  Barons'  Wars.     Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 
BRIAN  FITZ-  COUNT.      A    Story   of 

Wallingford     Castle      and      Dorchester 

Abbey.     Cr.  8vo.,  25.  6d. 

Lang  (ANDREW). — EDITED  BY. 
THE  BL  UE  FA  IR  y  BOOK.     With  1 3  8 

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 
THE  RED  FAIRY  BOOK.     With  100 

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 
THE  GREEN  FA  IR  Y  BOOK.     With  99 

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  65. 
THE  YELLOW  FAIRY  BOOK.     With 

104  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 
THE  PINK  FAIRY  BOOK.     With  67 

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 
THE  BL  UE  POE  TR  Y  BOOK.  With  i  oo 

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 
THE  BLUE  POETRY  BOOK.     School 

Edition,  without  Illustrations.     Fcp.  8vo., 

as.   6d. 
THE  TRUE  STORY  BOOK.     With  66 

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 
THE  RED  TR  UE  STOR  Y  BOOK.    With 

100  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 
THE  ANIMAL  STORY  BOOK.     With 

67  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Meade  (L.  T.). 

DADDY'S  BOY.     With  Illustrations. 
Crown   8vo.,   35.   6d. 


s  Books. 

Meade  (L.  T.) — continued. 

DEB  AND  THE  DUCHESS.  "With  Illus- 
trations. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  BERESFORD  PRIZE.  With 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  HOUSE  OF  SURPRISES.  With 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.  35.  6d. 

Molesworth — SILVERTHORNS.  By 
Mrs.  MOLESWORTH.  With  Illustrations, 
Cr.  8vo.,  ss. 

Praeger. — THE  ADVENTURES  OF  THE 
THREE  BOLD  BABES:  HECTOR,  HONORIA 
AND  ALISANDER.  A  Story  in  Pictures.  By 
S.  ROSAMOND  PRAEGER.  With  24  Cploured 
Plates  and  24  Outline  Pictures.  Oblong 
4to.,  3s.  6d. 

Stevenson. — A  CHILD'S  GARDEN  or 
VERSES.  By  ROBERT  Louis  STEVENSON. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  55. 

Sullivan. — HERE  THEY  ARE  !    More 
Stories.     Written  and  Illustrated  by  JAS.  F. 
SULLIVAN.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 
Upton  (FLORENCE  K.  AND  BERTHA). 
THE  ADVENTURES  OF  Two  DUTCH 
DOLLS  AND  A  '  GOLLIWOGG  \    With  31 
Coloured   Plates  and  numerous  Illustra- 
tions in  the  Text.     Oblong  410.,  6s. 

THE  GOLLIWOGG' s  BICYCLE  CLUB. 
With  31  Coloured  Plates  and  numerous 
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Oblong  410., 
6s. 

THE  VEGE-MENS  REVENGE.  With 
Coloured  Plates  and  numerous  Illustra- 
tions in  the  Text.  Oblong  410.,  6s. 

Wordsworth. —  THE  SNOW  GARDEN, 

AND  OTHER  FAIRY   TALES  FOR   CHILDREN. 

By  ELIZABETH  WORDSWORTH.  With  10 
Illustrations  by  TREVOR  HADDON.  Crown 
8vo.,  3s.  6d. 


Longmans'  Series 

Price  as. 

ATELIER  (THE)  Du  LYS:  or,  an  Art 
Student  in  the  Reign  ot  Terror. 

BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 
MADEMOISELLE  MORI  :  a    THA  T  CHILD. 


of  Books  for  Girls. 

6d.  each. 

THE  THIRD  Miss  ST.  QUENTIN. 
Mrs.  MOLESWORTH. 


Tale  of  Modern  Rome. 
IN  THE  OLDEN  TIME  :  a 


Tale  of  the   Peasant 
War  in  Germany. 
THE  YOUNGER  SISTER. 


UNDER  A  CLOUD. 
HESTER'S  VENTURE 
OF 


THE    FIDDLER 

LUGAU. 
A    CHILD   OF   THE 

REVOLUTION. 
ATHERSTONE    PRIORY.        By    L.    N. 

COMYN. 

THE  STORY  OF  A  SPRING  MORNING, 

etc.     By  Mrs.  MOLESWORTH.     Illustrated. 

THE  PALACE  IN  THE  GARDEN.      By 

Mrs.    MOLESWORTH.     Illustrated. 
NEIGHBOURS.    By  Mrs.  MOLESWORTH. 


By 


VERY  YOUNG;  AND  QUITE  ANOTHER 

STORY.  Two  Stories.  By  JEAN  INGELOW. 
CAN  THIS  BE  LOVE?  By  LOUISA  PARR. 
KEITH  DERAMORE.  By  the  Author  of 

'  Miss  Molly '. 

SIDNEY.     By  MARGARET  DELANO. 
AN     ARRANGED     MARRIAGE.        By 

DOROTHEA  GERARD. 
LAST  WORDS  TO  GIRLS  ON  LIFE  AT 

SCHOOL  AND  AFTER  SCHOOL.     By  MARIA 

GREY. 
STRAY  THOUGHTS  FOR    GIRLS.      By 

LUCY  H.  M.  SOULSBY,  Head  Mistress  of 

Oxford  High  School.     i6mo.,  is.  6d.  net. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.        27 


The  Silver  Library. 

CROWN  8vo.     35.  6d.  EACH  VOLUME. 


Arnold's  (Sir  Edwin)  Seas  and  Lands.    With 

71  Illustrations.     y.  6d. 

Bagehot's  (W.)  Biographical  Studies.     35.  6</. 
Bagehofs  (W.)  Economic  Studies.     35.  <>,/. 

Bagehot's  (W.)  I  iterary  Studies.  With  Portrait. 

3  vols,  35.  6d.  each. 
Baker's  (Sir   S.  W.)  Eight  Years  in  Ceylon. 

With  6  Illustrations.     35.  6d. 
Baker's  (Sir  S.  W.)  Rifle  and  Hound  in  Ceylon. 

With  6  Illustrations,     y.  6d. 
Baring-Gould's  (Rev.  S.)  Curious  Myths  of  the 

Middle  Ages.     35.  6d. 

Baring-Gould's  (Rev.  S.)  Origin  and  Develop- 
ment of  Religious  Belief.    2  vols.    y.  6d.  each. 
Becker's  (Prof.)  Callus :  or,  Roman  Scenes  in  the 

Time  of  Augustus.     Illustrated.     y.  6d. 
Becker's  (Prof.)  Charicles:  or,  Illustrations  of 

the   Private    Life   of   the    Ancient    Greeks. 

Illustrated,     y.  6d. 
Bent's  (J.  T.)  The  Ruined  Cities  of  Mashona- 

land.     With  117  Illustrations,     y.  6d. 
Brassey's  (Lady)  A  Voyage  in  the  '  Sunbeam '. 

With  66  Illustrations.     3^.  6d. 
Butler's  (Edward  A.)   Our  Household  Insects. 

With  7  Plates  and    113  Illustrations  in  the 

Text.     y.  6d. 
Clodd's  (E.)  Story  of  Creation :  a  Plain  Account 

of  Evolution.     With  77  Illustrations.     3^.  6d. 
Conybeare  (Rev.  W.  J.)  and   Howson's  (Very 

Rev.  J.  S.)  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul. 

46  Illustrations,     y.  6d. 
Dougall's  (L.)  Beggars  All :  a  Novel.     y.  6d. 
Doyle's  (A.  Conan)  Micah  Clarke.      A  Tale  of 

Monmoutn's  Rebellion.     10  Illusts.     y.  6d. 
Doyle's  (A.  Conan)  The  Captain  of  the  Polestar, 

and  other  Tales.     35.  6d. 
Doyle's  (A.  Conan)  The  Refugees:  A  Tale  of  j 

Two  Continents.  With  25  Illustrations.  y6d.  \ 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  History  of  England,  from  | 

the   Fall  of  Wolsey   to   the   Defeat   of   the 

Spanish  Armada.     12  vols.     3.5.  6d.  each. 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  English  in  Ireland.     3  vols. 

ioj.  6d. 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  Divorce  of  Catherine  of 

Aragon.     y.  6d. 
Froude's   (J.   A.)    The   Spanish   Story    of   the 

Armada,  and  other  Essays,     y.  6d. 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  Short  Studies  on  Great  Sub- 
jects.    4  vols.     y.  6d.  each. 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  Thomas  Carlyle :  a  History  of 

his  Life. 

1795-1835.     2  vols.     js. 

1834-1881.     2  vols.     7-r. 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  Caesar:  a  Sketch.     35.  6J. 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  Two  Chiefs  of  Dunboy :  an 

Irish  Romance  of  the  Last  Century.     3^.  6d. 
Gleig's    (Rev.    G.    R.)    Life    of    the'  Duke    of 

Wellington.     With  Portrait.     3*.  6d. 
Greville's  (C.  C.  F.)  Journal  of  the  Reigns  of 

King  George   IV.,   King  William   IV.,  and 

Queen  Victoria.     8  vols.,  y.  6d.  each. 


Haggard's  (H.  R.)  She :  A  History  of  Adventure. 

32  Illustrations,     y.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)    Allan   Quatermain.      With 

20  Illustrations,     y.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Colonel  Quaritch,  V.C.  :    a 

Tale  of  Country  Life.     y.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Cleopatra.     With  29  Illustra- 
tions,    y.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Eric  Brighteyes.    With  51 

Illustrations.      3^.   6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Beatrice.     y.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Allan's  Wife.    With  34  Illus- 
trations,    y.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Montezuma's  Daughter.  With 

25  Illustrations.     y.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  The  Witch's  Head.     With 

1 6  Illustrations,     y.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)   Mr.  Meeson's  Will.     With 

16  Illustrations.     y.  6d. 
Haggard's   (H.  R.)  Nada  the  Lily.     With  23 

Illustrations.     35. 6d. 

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Dawn.  With  16  Illusts.  y.  6d. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  The  People  of  the  Mist.    With 

16  Illustrations.     y.  6d. 

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Joan  Haste.    With  20  Illus- 
trations.    35.  6d. 
Haggard  (H.  R.)  and  Lang's  (A.)  The  World's 

Desire.     With  27  Illustrations.     35.  6d. 
Harte's  (Bret)  In  the  Carquinez  Woods  and 

other  Stories.     35.  6d. 
Helmholtz's  (Hermann  von)  Popular  Lectures 

on  Scientific  Subjects.    With  68  Illustrations, 

2  vols.     y.  6d.  each. 

Hornung's  (E.  W.)  The  Unbidden  Guest.    35.  6d 
Hewitt's   (W.)   Visits   to   Remarkable   Places. 

80  Illustrations,     y.  6d. 
Jefferies'   (R.)  The   Story  of  My  Heart :    My 

Autobiography.     With  Portrait.     3^.  6d. 
Jefferies'    (R.)    Field    and    Hedgerow.      With 

Portrait,     y,  6d. 

Jefferies'  (R.)  Red  Deer.  17  Illustrations.  3^.  6d. 
Jefferies'   (R.)   Wood   Magic:   a   Fable.     With 

Frontispiece  and  Vignette  by  E.  V.  B.    y.  6d. 
Jefferies  (R.)  The  Toilers  of  the  Field.    With 

Portrait  from  the  Bust  in  Salisbury  Cathedral. 

y.  6d. 
Kaye  (Sir  J.)  and  Malleson's  (Colonel)  History 

of   the    Indian    Mutiny   of   18S7-8.      6   vols. 

y.  6d.  each. 
Knight's  (E.  F.)  The  Cruise  of  the    'Alerte': 

the  Narrative  of  a  Search  for  Treasure  on 

the    Desert   Island   of    Trinidad.      With    2 

Maps  and  23  Illustrations,     y.  6d. 
Knight's  (E.  F.)  Where  Three  Empires  Meet:  a 

Narrative    of    Recent   Travel    in    Kashmir, 

Western  Tibet,  Baltistan,  Gilgit.  With  a  Map 

and  54  Illustrations.     35.  6d. 
Knight's  (E.  F.)  The  '  Falcon  '  on  the  Baltic :  a 

Coasting    Voyage    from    Hammersmith    to 

Copenhagen  in  a  Three-Ton  Yacht.     With 

Map  and  n  Illustrations.     y.  6d. 
Lang's  (A.)  Angling  Sketches.     20  Illustrations. 

y.  6d, 
Lang's  (A.)  Custom  and  Myth:  Studies  of  Early 

Usage  and  Belief,     y.  6d. 
Lang's  (Andrew)  Cock  Lane  and  Common-Sense. 

With  a  Xew  Preface,     y.  6d. 


*8        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


The  Silver  Library— continued. 


Lees  (J.  A.)  and  Clutterbuck's  (W.  J.)  B.  C. 
1887,  A  Ramble  In  British  Columbia.  With 
Maps  and  75  Illustrations,  y.  6d. 

Macaulay's  (Lord)  Essays  and  Lays  of  Ancient 
Rome.  With  Portrait  and  Illustration,  y.  6d. 

Macleod's  (H.  D.)  Elements  of  Banking,    y.  6d. 

Marbot's   (Baron   de)    Memoirs.     Translated. 

2  VOlS.       JS. 

Marshman's  (J.  C.)  Memoirs  of  Sir  Henry 
Havelock.  y.  6d. 

Max  Mailer's  (F.)  India,  what  can  It  teach  as  ? 
y.6d. 

Max  Mailer's  (F.)  Introduction  to  the  Science 
of  Religion,  y.  6,7. 

Merivale's  (Dean)  History  of  the  Romans 
under  the  Empire.  8  vols.  y.  6d.  each. 

Mill's  (J.  S.)  Political  Economy,     y.  6d. 

Mill's  (J.  S.)  System  of  Logic,    y.  6d. 

Mllner's  (Oeo.)  Country  Pleasures :  the  Chroni- 
cle of  a  Year  chiefly  in  a  Garden,  y.  6d. 

Nansen's  (F.)  The  First  Crossing  of  Greenland. 
With  Illustrations  and  a  Map.  y.  6d, 

Phillipps- Wolley 's  (C.)  Snap :  a  Legend  of  the 
Lone  Mountain.  13  Illustrations,  y.  6d. 

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  The  Orbs  Around  Us.      y.  6d. 

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  The  Expanse  of  Heaven. 
y.  6d. 

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Other  Worlds  than  Ours.  y.6d. 

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Our  Place  among  Infinities : 

a   Series   of   Essays    contrasting   our    Little 
Abode  in  Space  and  Time  with  the  Infinities 
around  us.     Crown  8vo.,  y.  6d. 
Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Other  Suns  than  Ours.  y.  6d. 


Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Rough  Ways  made  Smooth. 

y.  6d. 
Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Pleasant  Ways  in  Science. 

y.  6d. 

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Myths  and  Marvels  of  As- 
tronomy, y.  6d. 

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Nature  Studies,     y.  6d. 

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Leisure  Readings.  By  R.  A. 
PROCTOR,  EDWARD  CLODD,  ANDREW 
WILSON,  THOMAS  FOSTER,  and  A.  C. 
RANYARD.  With  Illustrations,  y.  6d. 

Rhoscomyl's  (Owen)  The  Jewel  of  Ynys  Galon. 
With  12  Illustrations,  y.  6d. 

Rossetti's  (Maria  F.)  A  Shadow  of  Dante,  y.  6d. 

Smith's  (R.  Bosworth)  Carthage  and  the  Cartha- 
ginians. With  Maps,  Plans,  &c.  y.  6d. 

Stanley's  (Bishop)  Familiar  History  of  Birds. 
160  Illustrations,  y.  6d. 

Stevenson's  (R.  L.)  The  Strange  Case  of  Dr. 
Jekyll  and  Mr.  Hyde;  with  other  Fables. 
y.  bd. 

Stevenson  (R.  L.)  and  Osbourne's  (LI.)  The 
Wrong  Box.  3^.  6d. 

Stevenson  (Robert  Louis)  and  Stevenson's 
(Fanny  van  de  Grift)  More  New  Arabian 
Nights. — The  Dynamiter.  y.  6tf. 

Weyman's  (Stanley  J.)  The  House  of  the 
Wolf :  a  Romance,  y.  6d. 

Wood's  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Petland  Revisited.  With 
33  Illustrations.  y.  6d. 

Wood's  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Strange  Dwellings.  With 
60  Illustrations.  3^.  6d. 

Wood's  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Out  of  Doors.  With  n 
Illustrations,  y.  6d. 


Acton.  —  MODERN  COOKERY.  By 
ELIZA  ACTON.  With  150  Woodcuts.  Fcp. 
8vo.,  45.  6d. 


Cookery,   Domestic  Management,   &c. 

De  Salis  (MRS.). — continued. 
DRINKS  A  LA  MODE.  Fcp.Svo.,  is.6d. 

ENTREES  A  LA  MODE.  Fcp.  8vo., 
is.  6d. 

FLORAL  DECORATIONS.  Fcp.  8vo., 
is.  6d. 

GARDENING  A  LA  MODE.  Fcp.  8vo. 
Part  L,  Vegetables,  is.  6d.  Part  II., 
Fruits,  is.  6d. 

NATIONAL  VIANDS  A  LA  MODE.  Fcp. 
8vo.,  is.  6d. 

NEW-LAID  EGGS.     Fcp.  8vo.,  15.  6d. 

OYSTERS  A  LA  MODE.  Fcp.  8vo., 
is.  6d. 

PUDDINGS  AND  PASTRY  A  LA  MODE. 

Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d. 
SAVOURIES  A  LA  MODE.     Fcp.  8vo., 

SOUPS  AND  DRESSED  FISH  A  LA 
MODE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d. 


Bull  (THOMAS,  M.D.). 

HINTS  TO  MOTHERS  ON  THE  MAN- 
AGEMENT OP  THEIR  HEALTH  DURING  THE 
PERIOD  OF  PREGNANCY.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d. 

THE  MATERNAL  MANAGEMENT  OF 
CHILDREN  IN  HEALTH  AND  DISEASE. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d. 

De  Salis  (MRS.). 

CAKES    AND     CONFECTIONS    A    LA 

MODE.     Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d. 
DOGS:    A    Manual    for    Amateurs. 

Fcp.  8vo.,  15.  6d. 

DRESSED  GAME  AND  POULTRY  A  LA 
MODE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d. 

DRESSED  VEGETABLES  A  LA  MODE. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.        29 


Cookery,  Domestic  Management,  &e. — continued. 


De  Salis   (MRS.). — continued. 

SWEETS  AND  SUPPER  DISHES  ^  LA 
MODE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d. 

TEMPTING  DISHES  FOR  SMALL  IN- 
COMES. Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d. 

WRINKLES  AND  NOTIONS  FOR 
EVERY  HOUSEHOLD.  Crown  8vo.,  is.  6d. 

Lear. — MAIGRE  COOKERY.  By  H.  L. 
SIDNEY  LEAR.  i6mo.,  2s. 

Poole. — COOKERY  FOR  THE  DIABETIC. 
By  W.  H.  and  Mrs.  POOLE.  With  Preface 
by  Dr.  PAVY.  Fcp.  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 


Walker  QANE  H.). 

A  BOOK  FOR  E.VERY  WOMAN. 
Part  I.,  The  Management  of  Children 

in  Health  and  out  of  Health.      Crown 

8vo.,  2s.  6d. 
Part    II.    Woman   in  Health  and  out  of 

Health.     Crown  8vo.,  as.  6d. 

A  HANDBOOK  FOR  MOTHERS  : 
being  Simple  Hints  to  Women  on  the 
Management  of  their  Health  during 
Pregnancy  and  Confinement,  together 
with  Plain  Directions  as  to  the  Care  of 
Infants.  Crown  8vo.,  2S.  6d. 


Miscellaneous  and  Critical  Works. 


Allingham. —  VARIETIES  IN  PROSE. 
By  WILLIAM  ALLINGHAM.  3  vols.  Cr.  8vo., 
i8s.  (Vols.  i  and  2,  Rambles,  by  PATRICIUS 
WALKER.  Vol.  3,  Irish  Sketches,  etc.) 

Armstrong. — Ess  A  YSAND  SKETCHES. 
By  EDMUND  J.  ARMSTRONG.  Fcp.  8vo.,  55. 

Bagehot. — LITERARY  STUDIES.  By 
WALTER  BAGEHOT.  With  Portrait.  3  vols. 
Crown  8vo.,  3s.  6d.  each. 

Baring-Gould. —  CURIOUS  MYTHS  OF 
THE  MIDDLE  AGES.  By  Rev.  S.  BARING- 
GOULD.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Baynes.  —  SHAKESPEARE  STUDIES, 
and  other  Essays.  By  the  late  THOMAS 
SPENCER  BAYNES,  LL.B.,  LL.D.  With  a 
Biographical  Preface  by  Professor  LEWIS 
CAMPBELL.  Crown  8vo.,  ys.  6d. 

Boyd  (A.  K.  H.)  (<  A.K.H.B.'). 

And  see  MISCELLANEOUS  THEOLOGICAL 
WORKS,  p.  32. 

AUTUMN  HOLIDAYS  OF  A  COUNTRY 
PARSON.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

COMMONPLACE  PHILOSOPHER.  Cr. 
8vo.,  35.  6d. 

CRITICAL  ESSAYS  OF  A  COUNTRY 
PARSON.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

EAST  COAST  DAYS  AND  MEMORIES. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

LANDSCAPES,  CHURCHES,  AND  MORA- 
LITIES. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

LEISURE  HOURS  IN  TOWN.     Crown 

8vo.,  35.  6d. 
LESSONS  OF  MIDDLE  AGE.     Crown 

8vo.,  35.  6d. 

OUR  LITTLE  LIFE.  Two  Series. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each. 

OUR  HOMELY  COMEDY:  AND  TRA- 
GEDY. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 


Boyd     (A.  K.  H.)     ('A.K.H.B.').— 

continued. 

RECREATIONS  OF  A  COUNTRY  PARSON. 
Three  Series.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each. 
Also  First  Series.  Popular  Edition.  8vo., 
6d.  Sewed. 

Brookings. — BRIEFS  FOR  DEBATE  ON 

CURRENT  POLITICAL,  ECONOMIC  AND 
SOCIAL  TOPICS.  Edited  by  W.  Du  Bois 
BROOKINGS,  A.B.  of  the  Harvard  Law 
School,  and  RALPH  CURTIS  RINGWALT,  A.B. 
Assistant  in  Rhetoric  in  Columbia  Univer- 
sity, New  York.  With  an  Introduction  on 
'  The  Art  of  Debate '  by  ALBERT  BUSHNELL 
HART,  Ph.D.  of  Harvard  University.  With 
full  Index.  Crown  8vo.,  6s. 

Butler  (SAMUEL). 

EREWHON.     Crown  8vo.,  55. 

THE  FAIR  HAVEN.  A  Work  in  De- 
fence of  the  Miraculous  Element  in  our 
Lord's  Ministry.  Cr.  8vo.,  js.  6d. 

LIFE  AND  HABIT.  An  Essay  after  a 
Completer  View  of  Evolution.  Cr.  8vo., 
7s.  6d. 

EVOLUTION,  OLD  AND  NEW.  Cr. 
8vo.,  IQS.  6d. 

ALPS  AND  SANCTUARIES  OF  PIED- 
MONT AND  CANTON  TICINO.  Illustrated. 
Pott  410.,  IDS.  6d. 

LUCK,  OR  CUNNING,  AS  THE  MAIN 
MEANS  OF  ORGANIC  MODIFICATION? 
Cr.  8vo.,  "js.  6d. 

Ex  VOTO.  An  Account  of  the  Sacro 
Monte  or  New  Jerusalem  at  Varallo-Sesia. 
Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6<f. 

THE  AUTHORESS  OF  THE  ODYSSEY, 

WHERE   AND    WHEN   SffE    WROTE,    WHO 

SHE  WAS,  THE  USE  SHE  MADE  OF  THE 
ILIAD,  AND  HOW  7 HE  POEM  GREW  UNDER 
HER  HANDS.  With  Illustrations.  8vo. 


30        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Miscellaneous  and  Critical  Works— continued. 


CHARITIES  REGISTER,  THE  ANNUAL, 
AND  DIGEST:  being  a  Classified  Register 
of  Charities  in  or  available  in  the  Metro- 
polis, together  with  a  Digest  of  Information 
respecting  the  Legal,  Voluntary,  and  other 
Means  for  the  Prevention  and  Relief  of 
Distress,  and  the  Improvement  of  the  Con- 
dition of  the  Poor,  and  an  Elaborate  Index. 
With  an  Introduction  by  C.  S.  LOCH,  Sec- 
retary to  the  Council  of  the  Charity  Organi- 
sation Society,  London.  8vo.,  45. 

Dreyfus. — LECTURES  ON  FRENCH 
LITERATURE.  Delivered  in  Melbourne  by 
IRMA  DREYFUS.  With  Portrait  of  the 
Author.  Large  crown  8vo.,  I2s.  6d. 

Evans. — THE  ANCIENT  STONE  IM- 
PLEMENTS, WEAPONS  AND  ORNAMENTS  OF 
GREAT  BRITAIN.  By  Sir  JOHN  EVANS, 
K.C.B.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  etc. 
With  537  Illustrations.  Medium  8vo.,  28s. 

Gwilt. — AN  ENCYCLOPEDIA  OF  AR- 
CHITECTURE. By  JOSEPH  GWILT,  F.S.A. 
Illustrated  with  more  than  noo  Engravings 
on  Wood.  Revised  (1888),  with  Alterations 
and  Considerable  Additions  by  WYATT 
PAPWORTH.  8vo.,  £2  12$.  6d. 

Hamlin. — A  TEXT-BOOK  OF  THE 
HISTORY  OF  ARCHITECTURE.  By  A.  D.  F. 
HAMLIN,  A.M.  With  229  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d. 

Hampton.  —  FOR  REMEMBRANCE  : 
Wishes,  Prayers,  Thoughts.  Compiled  by 
the  Lady  LAURA  HAMPTON.  Small  8vo. 

Haweis. — Music  AND  MORALS.    By 

the  Rev.  H.  R.  HAWEIS.  With  Portrait  of 
the  Author,  and  numerous  Illustrations, 
Facsimiles,  and  Diagrams.  Cr.  8vo.,  75.  6d. 

Hime. — STRAY   MILITARY   PAPERS. 

By  Lieut-Colonel  H.  W.  L.  HIME  (late 
Royal  Artillery).  8vo. 

CONTENTS. —  Infantry  Fire  Formations  —  On 
Marking  at  Rifle  Matches— The  Progress  of  Field 
Artillery — The  Reconnoitering  Duties  of  Cavalry. 

Indian  Ideals  (No.  i). 

NARADA  SUTRA  :  an  Inquiry  into 
Love  (Bhakti-Jijnisa).  Translated  from 
the  Sanskrit,  with  an  Independendent 
Commentary,  by  E.  T.  STURDY.  Crown 
8vo.,  25.  6d.  net. 


Jefferies. — (RICHARD). 

FIELD  AND  HEDGEROW:  With  Por- 
trait. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  STORY  OF  MY  HEART:  my 
Autobiography.  With  Portrait  and  New 
Preface  by  C.  J.  LONGMAN.  Cr.  8vo.,  35. 6d. 

RED  DEER.  With  17  Illustrations 
by  J.  CHARLTON  and  H.  TUNALY.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  TOILERS  OF  THE  FIELD.  With 
Portrait  from  the  Bust  in  Salisbury 
Cathedral.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

WOOD  MAGIC  :  a  Fable.  With  Fron- 
tispiece and  Vignette  by  E.  V.  B.  Crown 
8vo. ,  35.  6d. 

THOUGHTS  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OP 
RICHARD  JEFFERIES.  Selected  by  H.  S. 
HOOLE  WAYLEN.  i6mo.,  35.  6d. 


Johnson. — THE  PATENTEE'S  MAN- 
UAL: a  Treatise  on  the  Law  and  Practice 
of  Letters  Patent.  ByJ.  &  J.  H.JOHNSON, 
Patent  Agents,  &c.  8vo.,  los.  6d. 


Lang  (ANDREW). 
MODERN  MYTHOLOGY.     8vo.,  95. 

LETTERS  TO  DEAD  AUTHORS.  Fcp. 
8vo.,  2s.  6d.  net. 

BOOKS  AND  BOOKMEN.  With  2 
Coloured  Plates  and  17  Illustrations. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  25.  6d.  net. 

OLD  FRIENDS.  Fcp.  8vo.,  25.  6d  :     . 

LETTERS  ON  LITERATURE.  Fcp. 
8vo.,  2s.  6d.  net. 

COCK  LANE  AND   COMMON  SENSE. 

Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

THE  BOOK  OF  DREAMS  AND  GHOSTS. 
Crown  8vo.,  65. 


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.        31 


Miscellaneous  and  Critical  Works — continued. 


Macfarren.  —  LECTURES    ON   HAR- 
MONY.     By  Sir  GEORGE  A.   MACFARREN. 

8VO.,  I2S. 


Max  Milller  (F). 


INDIA:  WHAT  CAN  IT  TEACH  Us? 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

CHIPS  FROM  A  GERMAN  WORKSHOP. 

Vol.  I.  Recent  Essays  and  Addresses. 
Crown  8vo. ,  6s.  6d.  net. 

Vol.  II.  Biographical  Essays.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s.  6d.  net. 

Vol.  III.  Essays  on  Language  and  Litera- 
ture. Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d.  net. 

Vol.  IV.  Essays  on  Mythology  and  Folk 
Lore.  Crown  8vo,  8s.  6d.  net. 

CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  SCIENCE  OF 
MYTHOLOGY.  2  vols.  8vo.,  325. 

Milner. — COUNTRY  PLEASURES:  the 
Chronicle  of  a  Year  chiefly  in  a  Garden. 
By  GEORGE  MILNER.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  bd. 

Morris  (WILLIAM). 

SIGNS  OF  CHANGE.  Seven  Lectures 
delivered  on  various  Occasions.  Post 
8vo.,  45.  6d. 

HOPES  AND  FEARS  FOR  ART.     Five 

Lectures  delivered  in  Birmingham,  Lon- 
don, &c.,  in  1878-1881.  Crown  8vo., 
45.  6d. 

Orchard. — THE  ASTRONOMY  OF 
'  MILTON'S  PARADISE  LOST  '.  By  THOMAS 
N.  ORCHARD,  M.D.,  Member  of  the  British 
Astronomical  Association.  With  13  Illus- 
trations. 8vo.,  155. 


Poore  (GEORGE  VIVIAN),  M.D., 
F.R.C.P. 

Ess  A  YS  ON  RURAL  HYGIENE.    With 
13  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d. 

THE  DWELLING  HOUSE.     With  36 
Illustrations.     Crown  Svo.,  35.  6d. 

Proctor. — STRENGTH  :    How  to  get 

Strong  and  keep  Strong,  with  Chapters  on 
Rowing  and  Swimming,  Fat,  Age,  and  the 
Waist.  By  R.  A.  PROCTOR.  With  9  Illus- 
trations. Crown  8vo.,  2s. 

Rossetti. — A  SHADOW  OF  DANTE: 
being  an  Essay  towards  studying  Himself, 
his  World  and  his  Pilgrimage.  By  MARIA 
FRANCESCA  ROSSETTI.  With  Frontispiece 
by  DANTE  GABRIEL  ROSSETTI.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Solovyoff. — A  MODERN  PRIESTESS 
OF  Is  is  (MADAME  BLAVATSKY).  Abridged 
and  Translated  on  Behalf  of  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research  from  the  Russian  of 
VSEVOLOD  SERGYEEVICH  SOLOVYOFF.  By 
WALTER  LEAF,  Litt.  D.  With  Appendices. 
Cro\vn  8vo.,  6s. 

Soulsby  (Lucv  H.  M.). 
STRAY     THOUGHTS     ON    READING. 

Small  8vo.,  2s.  6d.  net. 

STKA  v THOUGHTS  FOR  GIRLS.  1 6mo., 

is.  6d.  net. 

STKA  Y  THOUGHTS  FOR  MOTHERS  AND 

TEACHERS.     Fcp.  8vo.,  2s.  6d.  net. 
STRAY    THOUGHTS    FOR    INVALIDS. 

i6mo.,  2s.  net. 

Stevens. — ON  THE  STOWAGE  OF  SHIPS 

AND  THEIR  CARGOES.  With  Information  re- 
garding Freights,  Charter-Parties,  &c.  By 
ROBERT  WHITE  STEVENS,  Associate-Mem- 
ber of  the  Institute  of  Naval  Architects. 
8vo.,  2is. 


Miscellaneous  Theological  Works. 

%*  For  Church  of  England  and  Roman  Catholic  Works  see  MESSRS.   LONGMANS  &  Co.'s 

Special  Cataloques. 

Balfour.  -  -  THE    FOUNDATIONS    OF    Bird  (ROBERT) — continued. 

BELIEF :  being  Notes  Introductory  to  the 
Study  of  Theology.  By  the  Right  Hon. 
ARTHUR  J.  BALFOUR,  M.P.  8vo.,  i2s.  6d. 

Bird  (ROBERT). 

A  CHILD 's  RELIGION.  Cr.  8vo.,  as. 
JOSEPH,  THE  DREAMER.  Crown 


8vo.,  55. 


OF 


/ESUS,        THE        CARPENTER 
NAZARETH.      Crown  8vo.,   5$. 

To  be  had  also  in  Two  Parts,  price  2s.  6d. 
each. 

Part    I.    GALILEE    AND    THE    LAKE    OF 
GENNESAKET. 


Part    II.   JERUSALEM    AND   THE   PERJEA. 


32        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 


Miscellaneous  Theological  Works — continued. 


Boyd(A.  K.  H.)    ('  A.K.H.B.'). 

OCCASIONAL  AND!MMEMORIALDA  YS  : 
Discourses.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d. 

COUNSEL  AND  COMFORT  FROM  A 
CITY  PULPIT.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

SUNDAY  AFTERNOONS  IN  THE  PARISH 
CHURCH  OF  A  SCOTTISH  UNIVERSITY 
CITY.  Crown  Svo.,  35.  6d. 

CHANGED  ASPECTS  OF  UNCHANGED 
TRUTHS.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

GRAVER  THOUGHTS  OF  A  COUNTRY 
PARSON.  Three  Series.  Crown  8vo., 
35.  6d.  each. 

PRESENT  DAY  THOUGHTS.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d. 

SEASIDE  MUSINGS.     Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

1  To  MEET  THE  DAY'  through  the 
Christian  Year  :  being  a  Text  of  Scripture, 
with  an  Original  Meditation  and  a  Short 
Selection  in  Verse  for  Every  Day.  Crown 
8vo.,  ^s.  6d. 

Gibson. — THE  ABBE  DE  LAMENNAIS. 
AND  THE  LIBERAL  CATHOLIC  MOVEMENT 
IN  FRANCE.  By  the  Hon.  W.  GIBSON. 
With  Portrait.  8vo.,  125.  6d. 

Kalisch  (M.  M.,  Ph.D.). 

BIBLE  STUDIES.  Part  I.  Pro- 
phecies of  Balaam.  8vo.,  los.  6d.  Part 
II.  The  Book  of  Jonah.  8vo.,  105.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  OLD  TESTA- 
MENT: with  a  New  Translation.  Vol.  I. 
Genesis.  8vo.,  i8s.  Or  adapted  for  the 
General  Reader.  125.  Vol.  II.  Exodus. 
155.  Or  adapted  for  the  General  Reader. 
I2j.  Vol.  III.  Leviticus,  Part  I.  155. 
Or  adapted  for  the  General  Reader.  85. 
Vol.  IV.  Leviticus,  Part  II.  155.  Or 
adapted  for  the  General  Reader.  85. 

Macdonald  (GEORGE). 

UNSPOKEN  SERMONS.  Three  Series. 
Crown  8vo.,  y.  6d.  each. 

THE  MIRACLES  OF  OUR  LORD. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

Martineau  (JAMES). 

HOURS    OF   THOUGHT    ON    SACRED 
THINGS  :  Sermons,  2  vols.     Crown  8vo., 
35.  6d.  each. 
10,000/10/97. 


Martineau  (]AMES)— continued. 

ENDEAVOURS  AFTER  THE  CHRISTIAN 
LIFE.  Discourses.  Crown  8vo.,  -js.  6d. 

THE  SEAT  OF  AUTHORITY  IN  RE- 
LIGION. 8vo.,  14*. 

ESSAYS,  REVIEWS,  AND  ADDRESSES. 
4  Vols.  Crown  8vo.,  -js.  6d.  each. 

I.  Personal;  Political.  II.  Ecclesiastical;  Historical. 
III.  Theological;  Philosophical.  IV.  Academical; 
Religious. 

HOME  PRAYERS,  with  Two  SERVICES 
for  Public  Worship  Crown  8vo.,  y.  6d. 

Max  Miiller  (F.). 

HIBBERT  LECTURES  ON  THE  ORIGJN 
AND  GROWTH  OF  RELIGION,  as  illustrated 
by  the  Religions  of  India.  Cr.  8vo.,  js.  f>d. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SCIENCE  OF 
RELIGION  :  Four  Lectures  delivered  at  the 
Royal  Institution.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 

NATURAL  RELIGION.  The  Gifford 
Lectures,  delivered  before  the  University 
of  Glasgow  in  1888.  Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

PHYSICAL  RELIGION.  The  Gifford 
Lectures,  delivered  before  the  University 
of  Glasgow  in  1890.  Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

ANTHROPOLOGICAL  RELIGION.  The 
Gifford  Lectures,  delivered  before  the  Uni- 
versity of  Glasgow  in  1891.  Cr.Svo.,  ios.6d. 

THEOSOPHY,  OR  PSYCHOLOGICAL  RE- 
LIGION. The  Gifford  Lectures,  delivered 
before  the  University  of  Glasgow  in  1892. 
Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 

THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  VEDANTA 
PHILOSOPHY,  delivered  at  the  Royal 
Institution  in  March,  1894.  8vo.,  55. 

Romanes. — THOUGHTS  ON  RELIGION. 
By  GEORGE  J.  ROMANES,  LL.D.,  F.R.S. 
Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d. 

Vivekananda. —  YOGA  PHILOSOPHY: 

Lectures  delivered  in  New  York,  Winter  of 
1895-96,  by  the  SWAMI  VIKEKANANDA, 
on  Raja  Yoga  ;  or,  Conquering  the  Internal 
Nature ;  also  Patanjali's  Yoga  Aphorisms, 
with  Commentaries.  Crown  Svo,  35.  6d. 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY,  LOS  ANGELES 

COLLEGE  LIBRARY 

This  book  is  due  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


Book  Slip-25m-9,'60CB2S86s4)4280 


College 
Library 


UCLA-College  Library 

DA  536  P6W1  1898 

iii  iii  inn  i 


L  005  769  214  7 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 
III 


A     001  010  768     8 


