This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



'UNIVERSITY 



LIBRARIES 




STMFORD 



UBRAIW 



STANFORD UNIVERSITY L| BR/\R[ £3 



DIVERSITY UBRARIES STANFORD UNIVE 



3RARIES • STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRA 



LIBRARIES STANFORD UNIVERSITY 



STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES 



RD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES ■ STANFORD 



ANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES STAN! 



DIVERSITY LIBRARIES - STANFORD UNIVE 



IRARIES • STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRA 



■ TY LIBRARIES STANFORD UNIVERSITY 



STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES 



CRD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES 



r ■ . 



v.. i ^"^ 



A 



DISCOURSE 



ON THE 



LOVE OF OUR COUNTRY, 



DELIVERED ON NOV. 4, I789. 



f Price is. 6d. 1 



"T T*t%*ot: 



DISCOURSE 

ON THE 

LOVE OF OUR COUNTRY, 

DELIVERED ON NOV. 4, IjSg* 

AT THE 

MEETING-HOUSE IN THE OLD JEWRY, 

TO THE 

SOCIETY 

FOR 

COMMEMORATING THE REVOLUTION 

I N 

GREAT BRITAIN.' 

W I TH A N 

APPENDIX, 

CONTAINING THK 

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE SOfclETY; 

A N 

ACCOUNT OF THE POPULATION OF FRANCE ; 

AND TH £ 

DECLARATION OF RIGHTS BY THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

OF FRANCE. 

THIRD EDITION, with Additions to the APPENDIX, 

Containing Communications from France occafioned by the Congratulatory 
Addr<Js t>i die ReveUitioa«Socke^y*t€(»tk& National AfiemHy of France, 
■with thfe'Arifwers-to"tbcnJ.» tt*»*»» '•• ^ • • 

• t,«»<' •^•••«« a****^".. 

By RICHARD PRICE, D.D. LL-.D. F.R.S. 

AND FELLOW OF fHE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL 
SOCIETIES AT PHILADELPHIA AND BOSTON. 



L O N DO N: 



PRINTED BY GEORGl STAFFORD, 

FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND. 

If.DCC.XC* 



<\ 



U2,004^ 










'-•ti -J 






-< 



• • 






• • • • 



• • • 



• • • 



• • « »• 



<* • 






.•••• 



• ■ !• * f • 



• • • • 

• • • • 



■ I* %. 



' • • • 

• • • 



• -; - - 



T a T n B 



RIGHT HONOURABLE 



EDMUND BURKE. 



>ammm 



S I R, 



I Sincerely thank you ifbr the iarcairns yon infinuated 
in your Speech on Tuelclay laft, againft the 
Chairman of the Provincial Meeting of Proteftant 
Diffenters at Warrington. That Chairman I had 
the honour to be 5 and you have given me> by fo 
doing, an opportunity of conveying information of 
what aSiually pafled at that meeting, without em- 
ploying the dirty channel of Samuel Fleicber. You 
have fbme remains of a great and a good charafter 
yet to lofe.— This friend of yours, though anxious 
to acquire one, is humbly content with fuch as he 
can purchafe by the publication of his own in- 
famy. 

A Wtii 



J!'w • - *" 

With this man, indeed; "-!'' could have had no in- 
ercourfe— -knowing •notftin'g of him but what he has 
tiblvcd the pubHc/at large fhould know, I have 
Lo ^{-ofF to ip'ukc in his behalf, againft hb own 
.ccourit or Kis own conduct. Content as he is, for 
he fak^* *6f .being noticed, to ftand forward to the 
voi*ld,*;ubrfer the ftrong fulpicion of being the hired 
py, -pf'a party, the fervile inftrument of intole- 
rance and perfecution — employing the power in- 
fufted to him by his friends, to betray them to 
heir enemies — perverting the meaning of expreflions 
jfed, and fabricating fuchas he wifhed to have been 
jfed — adopting the religious charafter of one feft, that 
le might be the inftrument of making them odious 
CO another — and, with a ftrange perverfion of intjel- 
left, actually prpfefHng to do t%is in juftice to his 
:bara£ler as a chriftian. This man may be your 
correlpondent — he could not have been mine. 

The paflage in his publilhed Letter, relating to 
me, i^ the following : " After repeated attempts to 
" knoW the fteps they (i. e. the Deputies then met) 
'^ meant to take, or if their views went any farther 
" than the bare repeal of the penal parts of thofe 
*^ Afts, the anfwer from the Chairman was, that // 
" was neither reajonahle nor fcriptural to make them 
" known y ufing our Sa^vioyr's ^ords, 1 have yet many 
" things to fay unto yoUy hut ye cannot hear them now; 
and added (after haying heard the further fenti- 
ments of the refpedtive Delegates from the Inde- 
pendents and Anabaptists) that if that were all 
** they were then met for^ he would not give the nip of 
^^ a fir aw for the Repeal. After which a Mr. 
" T-r-n, a neighbouring Minifter, rofe up and faid, 
" Their intentiojts were to remove the Liturgy from the 
" Churchy and abolijh Tythes.'* 

Thefe are the " RecoUeftions" of Sapiuel Fletcher, 
which if they were as accurate as any man would 
have made them who had any credit to lofe by their 

refiitation. 






C 3 ] 

refutation, need not to have been publilhed at all. 
Tottering indeed muft the Church be, if this fpe- 
cimen of the wifdom of the Diflenters can afford any 
reafonable alarm to the members of the eftablifliment ! 
It was not prudent in her fons thus to expofe her 
crazy conftitution : nor did 1 fulpeft you. Sir, to have 
been fo friendly to our caufe as to have aflifted in 
this egregious blunder. 

To the befl. of my recolleftion, the converfation 
which took place at the meeting at Warrington, and 
which has given rife to the paflage thus quoted, was 
in fubjlance as follows : — The words I do not exatlly 
remember: I had not then experienced a Samuel 
Fletcher. 

A claufe in the declaration offered to the meeting 
-was deemed by fome of the Deputies (by myfelf, among 
the reft) to imply a pledge, that, in our opinion, the 
Corporation and Teft A6ts were the only grievances 
which any of the Diffenters had to complain of, and 
that if thefe were repealed, we ftiould at no time 
hereafter apply for any farther parliamentary relief. 

This claufe was oppofed on the following grounds, 

viz. That it was imprudent to bind ourfelves now to an 

opinion, which we might fee reafon to alter hereafter — 

That we could not anfwer at prefent, what might our 

future fentiments, or the fentiments of our pofterity ; 

or that a forbearance which the temper of the times 

might make prudent now, would always continueib 

under every alteration of public opinion — That if our 

friends in London, or the delegates-iro the general 

meeting fhould happen to be decidedly of opinion^ 

that the other Penal Laws refpefting religion might 

properly be afked for, we ought not by any prefent 

refolution to throw an obftacle in the way of fo defira- 

ble an application— And that at any rate, as we wen 

then met refpefting the repeal of the Corporation anc 

Teft Afts, we need not fay any thing at prefent relpec- 

ting the other Penal Laws againft Diffenters, eithe; 

one way or the other — ^That whether we did or die 

A 2 \NJ 



E 4 ] 

not intend to go further, wc ought noj be refofcd 
that which was right, even though fome of us might 
intend to afk for that which was wrong — That what- 
ever our future intentions might be, they had nothing 
to do with the repeal of the Corporation apd Tefl: 
Afts, for whenever we required what was improper 
to^ be granted, it was in the power of Parliarnent to 
rejeft our application. 

To thefe reafo.ns I added, that, in my opinion, the 
principles which would juftify the repeal of one Pe- 
nal Law concerning religion, would extend to all Penal, 
Laws of the fame kind — That if the public were Qot 
aware of this now, they migiit be at fome fut^re 
time; and that we ought not by any prefent pledge 
to debar ourfelves from applying to the good fenfe 
of the people, when that time fliould come — That 
for my own part, I deemed the repeal of the Cor-, 
poration and Teft A<fls of very little confequence 
in comparifon to the repeal of the other Penal Laws. 
refpe<5ting religious faith — That the benefit of the 
Toleration A61 ///^^ did not extend to thofe DifTenters. 
who denied the doftrine of the Trinity — That, though, 
educated in the doftrines and difcipline of the efta- 
blifhment, I had denied, and fhould continue tq deny 
it, conceiving it my duty, to propagate my opinions, 
refpedting it— That never meaning to fer^-e.any of the 
offices to which the Corporation and Te^ Afts applie^d, 
the mere repeal of thejey was to me^ and to perfon^ 
fimilarly circumftancedy not worth a JiraWy (or an ex- 
preflion of the lame import. ) 

/ did not Jay generally ^ that the repeal was not worth 
a ftraw, hut comparatively i and. with refpeft tp perfons. 
who, like myfelf, were never likely to become obnoxious 
to them, and who had far more reafon to compUin of 
the unchriftian-like exception in the Toleration AS:— 
Nor did I, to my^recolledion, naake ufe of the. elegant 
phrafeology which your, inventive correfpondent has 
afcribcd to me. 

To 



C s 5 

To all this it was objeded, that if we had any 
fartiier intentions^ it would be deemed hypocritical 
to conceal them— and that the Diffenters had already 
beta too much charged with diflimulation. 

I repHed, that we ftioujd do harm to a cauie we 
meant to ferve, by afkii5g haftily and improperly for 
that which thA public had not yet an opportunity of 
being fatisfi^d whether it ought or ought not to be 
granted — ^Xnat though W€ being interefttxl, had ftu^*- 
died the fiibjeft, and were convinced, yet the public 
who were not {o^ Ihould be allowed time to inform 
themfelves leifurely on the qucftion: — And that if tbcj 
were not informed now, and if this was not the time to* 
ailc for the repeai of all PensJi Laws in matters of re-., 
ligion, it was therefore not the time to declare to the 
world that we meant to alk it in future — That to d(^ 
fo, would only tend to raife an unnecelTary oppofitioa 
to the claims of truth and juftice — ^That a. man's, opi^ 
nions might outftep the courfe of pubhc information, 
and that there was no bypocrify in referving the right 
to propagate them at that, period, when they were moft 
likely to meet with calm inveftigation. — ^That our 
Saviour himfelf had done fo when he told his difci- 
ples, I have many things to fay to you^ but ye cannot 
hear them now. 

I did not fay it was not JcriptuT'al to declare the 
fteps meant to be taken by the Proteftant Diflenters> 
or whether their views went any farther. This would 
have been a blunder which; Samuel Fletcher indeed 
might have made, who deems it of the eflence of 
chriftianity to fet chriftians together by the ears ! 

Whether this converfation amounts to a proof of 
your correlpondent's letter, the public will judge. 
It will be no mean exercife even of your ingenuity, 
exerted as it [is for the moft part in defence of un- 
tenable propofitions, to make out the coincidence. 

With 






f 6 J 

• f 

With refpeft to Mr. T— n (Mr. Toulmin, I Ibp- 
pofe) with whom I think it an honour to agree in 
opinion, / am Jure he did not declare in my hearing 
^bat the intentions (of that meeting, or of any 
other Diflenters,) were to remove the Liturgy from 
*' the Church, and abolifh the Tithes.*' — I heard no- 
thing fimilar to it to my recolleftion, nor can I have 
the flighteft fufpicion that he did declare this even in 
private converfation to any body. 7 muji fufpeft the 
contrary, when the witnefs of the declaration is Samuel 
Fletcher^ 

So much for bis accufations. One word more with 
him, and I leave him for ever ; fo wild, fo infane 
does this man's chriftianity appear to me, that I (hall 
not wonder at any future inconfiftency of his con- 
du6t or profeffions; at prefent I have the honour 
of being the objeft of his reproof— ^\i\% laft, this only 
requeft I have to make of him, f which you> perhaps, 
may have the goodnefs to convey) that he may never 
injure my veracity, by bearing teftimony in behalf of 
it, or taint my charafter by his praije. 



I am, 

S I R, 

Your obliged Servant, 
THOMAS COOPfi'R. 

Manchejicr^ March /^ I790« 












I. 



biSCOURSE, &c. 






iPsALM cxxii. 2d^ and following verfes. 

fiur feet Jhall Jland within thy gates, O Jerufaleniy 
whither Ae tribes go up ; the tribes of the Lord 
unto the tejljr^ony of Sfraeli To give thanks t0 
the name of the Lordj for there fit the thrones of 
judgrkeUt ; - the throne of the Houfe of David. 
Pray for the pface of Jerusalem. They Jhall 
pYofpeir thai love ihee^ Peace be within thywatls^ 
and profperity within tiy palaces. For my brethren 
Tand companions fake I will noiU fay peace be within 
thee. Becaufe of the Houfe of the Lord our Gody I 
Willfeek thy good. 

IN thefe words the Pfalmift exprefles, 
in ilrong and beautiful language, his 
love of his country, and the reafons oh 
which he founded it; and my prefent 
defign is, to take occafion from them to 
explain the duty we owe to our country, 
and the nature, foundation, and proper 

B expreffions 



1 

cxpreflions of that l6ve to it which wc 
ought to cultivate. 

I reckon this a fubjedt particularly 
fuitable to the fervices of this day, and to 
the Anniverfary of our deliverance at the 
Revolution from the dangers of popery 
and arbitrary power; and Ihould I, on 
fuch an occafion, be led to touch more 
on political fubjedts than would at any 
other time be proper in the pulpit, you 
will, I doubt not, excufe me. 

The love of our country has in all 
times been a fubjedt of warm com- 
mendations; and it is certainly a noble 
paffion ; but, like all other paffions, it 
requires regulation and direction. There 
are miftakes and prejudices by which, 
in this inftance, we are in particular 

danger of being mifled. 1 will briefly. 

mention fome of thefe to you, and ob- 
ferve, 

Firft, That by our country is meant, 
in this cafe, not the foil or the fpot of 
earth on which we happen to have beea 

born; 



[ 3 ] 

bom ; not the fprefts and fields, but 
that eommunity of which we are mem-' 
bjsrs ; or that body of companions and 
friends and kindred who are aflbciated 
with us under the fame conftitution of 
govemment, prote<fted by the fame laws, 
gnd bound together by the famq civil 
polity. 

Secondly, It is proper to obferve, that 
even in this fenfe of our country, that 
love of it which is our duty, does not 
imply any conviftion of the fuperior 
value of it to other countries, or any 
particular preference of its Iaw;s an4 
conftitution of government. Were thi^ 
implied, the love of their country woul4 
be the duty of only a very fmall part of 
mankind ; for there are few countries 
that enjoy the advantage of laws and 
governments which deferve to be pre^ 
ferred. To found, therefore, this duty 
QXi fuch a preference, would be to found 
it on error and delufion. It is, however, 
a common delufion. There is the fame 
partialis in countries, to themfelves, that 

3 % there 



I: 4 T 

there is in individuals. All our attach? 
mcnts fhould be accompanied, as far ai 
poffible, with right opinions.— —We aw 
too apt to confine wiwom and virti^ 
within the circle of our own acquaihl^ancf 
arid party. Qur friends, our country, 
and ill fhort every thing related to xiii 
we are difppfed to overvalue. A wifi 
man will guard himfelf againft thic 
delufion. He will ftudy td think of ^l 
things as they are, and not fufjcr arty 
l^artial aflfeftions to blind his undifi'^ 
ftanding. In other families there tti^y 
i>e as much worth as in our own. In 
other circles of friends there may be as 
jJnuch wifdom j and in other countries a# 
much of all that deferves cftecm; but^ 
tlotwithftanding this, our ' obligation to 
love bur own families, friends, and coun- 
try, and to feek, in the firft place, their 
^ood, will remain the fame. 

Thirdly, It is proper I uipuld defire 
you particularly to diltinguifli bctwcer^ 
the love of our country and that fpirit of 
rivalihip and ambition which has beeii 






I s I 

fpmmon itt^qn^ nations.— —What hz4 
the love pf their country hijtherto beea 
amoh^ m?(nkind ? What has it been but 
a love of domination; a defire of con* 
qucft, and a tljirfl for grandeur and gloiy^ 
Pf extitfding territory, ?ind enflgiving fur- 
jfouinding cbuhtries? What has it beei| 
hiii a blind and narrow^ principle, pro- 
ducing in every country a contempt 
pf oifhe^ countries, and forming men 
into combination^ and fadions againft 
their coftirti'dh rights and liberties ? This 
is the princif)!^* that has been too often 
jcried up is a virtue of the firft rank : 4' 
principle of th6 fame kind with that 
Whieh goverris dans of Indians or tribeff 
pf jirdbs^ and Jeads them Out to plunder* 
and malTa'dre. As fnoft of the evils 
>vhich have taken place in private life, 
^nd amon^ individuals, have been oc- 
jcafioned by the defire of private in- 
t'ereft overcoming the public affedioris ; fo 
pioft of the evils which have taken place' 
among bodies of men have been occafiohed^ 
py the defire of their own intereft over- 

coniing 



t 6 1 

coming the principle of univerfal bencvo^ 
lence : and leading them to attack one ano- 
ther's territories, to encroach on one ano- 
ther's rights, and to endeavour to build 
their own advancement on the degradation 
pf all. within the risach of their powe r » 
What was the love of their country 
ampng the Jews^ but a wretched partiality 
to themfplvps, and a proud contempt of 
^11 Qther nations ? What was the love of 
their country among the old Romans? 
We have heard much of it ; but I cannot 
Jiefitate in faying th^t, however great it 
appeared in fome of its exertions, it was 
in gengral no better than a principle hold- 
ii>g together a band of robbers in their 
^ttenipts to crufh all liberty but their 
own.. What is pow the love pf his coun* 
try in ^ Spaniard^ ^ Turk^ or a Ruffian ? 
Can it be confidejred as any thing better 
than a paflion for flavery, or a blind 
attachment to a fpot where he enjoys no 
rights, and is difpofed of as if he wa^ 
9 beaft ? 

]Let us learn by fuch reflexions to cor-. 

recft 



t 1 3 

re6l and purify this paffion, and to maktf 
it a juft and ratiohal principle of adion. 

It is very remarkable that the founder of 
our religion has not once mentioned this 
duty, or given us any recommendation of 
it j and this has, by unbelievers, been made 
an objcdlion to Chriftianity. What I have 
faid will entirely remove this obje&ion. 
Certain it is, that, by inculcating on men 
an attachment to their country, Chriftia- 
nity would, at the time it was pr6pa- 
gated, have done unfpeakably more harm 
than good. Among the Jews^ it would 
have been an excitement to war and in- 
furredtions ; for they were then in eager 
expectation of becoming foon (as the fa- 
vourite people of Heaven) the lords and 
conquerors of the earth, under the tri- 
umphant reign of the Meffiah. Among 
the Romans J likewife, this principle had, 
as I have juft obferved, ' exceeded its jiift 
bounds, and rendered them enemies to 
the peace and happinefs of mankind. By 
inculcating it, therefore, Chriftianity 
would have confirmed both Jews and 

Gentiles 



r s 1 

ijrentiles in one of the mofl: pemiciou$ 
faults; Our Lprd and bis Apoftles have 
done better; They have recommended 

4hat UNIVERSAL BENEVOLENCE wbich 

is an unfpeakably nobler principle than 
any partial affe(5fcions. they have laid 
fuch llrefs on loving ill men^ even oui^ 
cneniies^ stnd niade an ardent and exten-t 
five ciharity fo effential a part of virtucf^ 
that the religion they have preached may,; 
by way of diftindion from all ofther re- 
ligions, be called the Religion o{ Bene- 
volence; Nothing can be morei friendly 
to the general rights of mankind ; and 
were it duly regarded andpracSif^d, civery 
man wouid corifider every other man as 
his brother^ and all the animofity that 
how takes place among contending na-i 
lions would be abolifhed; If yoii want 
any proof of this> think of our Saviour's 
parable of the good Samaritan. Thd 
Jews and Samaritans were two rival 
nations that entertained a hatred of one 
• pother the moft inveterate ^ The defign 

. 9Jf this parable was to fhew to a Jew, 

that 



C 9 J 

that (tvtn a Samaritan^ and confequently 
all men of all nations and religions, 
were included in the precept. Thou 

SHALT LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR AS 
THYSELF. 

But I am digreffing from What I had 
chiefly in view ; which was , after no- 
ticing that love of our country which is 
falfe and fpurious, to explain the nature 
and effedls of that which is juft and 
reafonable. With this view I muft de- 
fire you to recoiled: that we are fo con- 
ftituted that our afFedtions are more 
drawn to fome among mankind than to 
others, in proportion to their degrees of 
nearnefs to us, and our power of being 
ufeful to them. It is obvious that this 
is a circumflance in the conftitution of 
our natures which proves the wifdom and 
goodnefs of our Maker; for had our af- 
fed:ions been determined alike to all our 
fellowrcreatures, huftian life would have 
been a fcene of embarraflmentand dif- 
tradlion. Our regards, according to the 
order of nature, begin with ourfelves; 
and every man is charged primarily with 

C the 



tile care of himfelf. Next come our 
families, and benefactors, and friends ; 
and after them our country. We can do 
little for the intereft of mankind at large. 
To this intereft, however, all other in- 
terefts are fubordinate* The nobleft prin- 
ciple in our nature is the regard to ge- 
neral juftice, and that good-^will which 

embraces all the world. 1 have already 

obferved this ; but it cannot be too often 
repeated. Though our imlmediate atten- 
tion muft be employed in promoting our 
own intereft and that of our neareft con- 
nexion^; yet we muft remember, that a 
narrower intereft ought always to give 
way to a more extenfive intereft. In 
purfuing particularly the intereft of our 
country, we ought to carry our vie\ys 
beyond it. We Ihould love it ardently, 
but not exclufively. We ought to feek 
its good, by all the means that our dif- 
ferent circumftances and abilities will 
allow ; but at the fame time we ought to 
confider ourfelves as citizens of the vvorld, 
and take care to maintain a juft regard 
to the rights of other countries. 

The 



The enquiry by what means (fubjed to 
this limitation) we may beft promote the 
intereft of our country is very import- 
ant; and all that remains of this dif- 
courfe fhall be employed in anfwering it, 
and in exhorting you to manifeft your 
love to your country, by the means I fhall 
mention, 

The chief bleffings of human nature 

are the three following : Truth — 

Virtue — ^and Liberty. Thefe are, 

therefore, the bleffings in the poffeffion of 
which the intereft of our country lies, 
ind to the attainment of which our love 
of it ought to dire(3: our endeavours. By 
the diffufion of knowledge it muft be 
diftinguifhed from a country of Barba^ 
rians : by the pradtice of religious vir- 
tue, it muft be diftinguiftied from a 
country of gamblers^ Atheijis^ and liber -^ 
tines: and by the poffeffion of liberty, 
it muft be diftinguiftied from a country 

of Jlaves. 1 will dwell fbr a few 

moments on each of thefe heads : 

Qur firft concern, as lovers of our 

G 2 country, 



country, muft be to enlighten it.— Why 
are the nations of the world fo patient 
under defpotifm ? — ^Why do they crouch 
to tyrants, and fubmit to be treated as 
if they were a herd of cattle ? Is it not 
becaufc they are kept in darknefs, and 
want knowledge ? Enlighten them and 
you will elevate them. Shew them they 
are menj and they will ad: like men. 
Qive them juft ideas of civil government, 
and let them know that it is an expe^ 
dient for gaining protection againft in* 
jury and defending their rights*, and it 
will be impolliblfi for them to fubmit to 
governments which, like moft of thofc 
now in the world, are ufurpations on the 
rights of men, and little better than con* 
trivances fpr enabling the fei^ to opprefs 
the many. Convince them that the Deity 
is a righteous and benevolent as well as 
omnipotent being, who regards with 
equal eye all his creatures, and conneds 
his favour with nothing but an honeft 
defire to know and do his will ; and that 

♦ See the Declaration of Rights by Ac National Affem- 
bly of Frartce. in the Appendix. 

zeal 



[ 13 1 

2eal for myftkal dodrines which has ledl 
men to hate and harafs one another will 
be exterminated. Set religion before 
them as a rational fervice, confifting not 
in any rites and ceremonies, but in wor* 
Shipping God with a pure heart and prac*» 
tifing righteoufnefs from the fear, of his 
difpleafure and the apprehenfion of a fu- 
ture righteous judgment, and that gloomy 
and crud fuperftition will be aboliflicd 
which has hitherto gooe under the nam6 
of religion, and to the fupport of which 
civil government has been perverted. 



-iiri.4. 



Ignorance is the parent of bigotry, into^ 
lerincc, perfecutiont and flavery. Inform 
and inftrudt mankind i and thefc evils will 
be excluded .**^-*^ Happy is the perfon who, 
hiftifelf raifed above vulgar errors, is coit-* 
fcious of having aimed at giving mankind 
this inftriifHon. Happy is the Scholar or 
Philofopher who at the clofe of life can re- 
fled: that he has made this ufe of his learn- 
ing and abilities : but happier far niufl he 
be, if at the fam6 time he has reafdn to be- 
lieve he has been fuccefsful, and a<5t:ually 

con- 



[ H ] 

contributed, by his inftrudtions, to difle^ 
minate among his fellow-creatures juft 
notions of thejnfelves, of their rights, of 
religion, and the nature and end of civil 
govemmenf. Such were Milton^ Locke^ 
Sidney y Hoadly^ &c. in this country ; fuch 
%vcre MontefquieUy Fenelon^ Turgot^ &c, 
in France. They fowed a feed which 
has fince taken root, and is now growing 
up to a glorious harvejft. To the in- 
formation they conveyed by their writings 
we owe thofe revolutions in which every 
friend to mankind is now exulting. 
What an encouragement is this to us all 
in our endeavours to enlighten the world } 
Every degree of illumination which we can 
communicate muft do the greateft good. 
It helps to prepare the minds of men for 
the recovery of their rights, and haftens 
the overthrow of prieftcraft and tyranny. 

. In fliort, we may, in this ipftance, 

learn our duty from the condud: of the 
pppreflbrs of the world. They know 
that light is hoftile to them, and there- 
fore they labour to keep men in the dark, 

With 



[ IS ] 

With this intention they have appoiiitcd 
licenfcrs of the prefs; and, in Popifh 
countries, prohibited the reading of the 
Bible. Remove the darknefs in which 
they envelope the world, and their ufurp- 
ations will beexpofed, their power will be 
fubverted, and the world emancipated* 

The next great bleffing of human na-^ 
lure which I have mentioned is virtue. 
This ought to follow knowledge, and to. 
be direfted by it. Virtue without know- 
ledge makes enthufiafts; and knowledge 
without virtue makes devils ; but both 
united elevates to the top of human dig- 
nity and perfecSlion. We muft, there- 
fore, if we would f^rve our country, 
miake both thefe the objects of our zeal. 
We muft difcourage vice in all its forms ; 
and our endeavours to enlighten muft 
have ultimately in view a reformation of 
manners and virtuous pradlice. 

I muft add here, that in the pradicc of 
virtue I include the difcharge of the pub- 
lic duties of religion. By negle^ing 

thefe 



C i6 1 

thtk we iriay injure our country effentially^ 
But it is melancholy to obferve that it is 
a common negledt among us ; and in a 
great mcafurc owing tio a caufe which i» 
not likely to be foon removed : I mean, 
the defeds (majr I not fay, the abfurdt- 
ties?) in our eftabliihed codes of faith 
and wotfhip. In foreign countries, the 
higher ranks of men, not (Jiftinguifhing 
between the religion they fee eftablifhed 
and the Chriftian religion^ are generally 
driven to irrcligion and infidelity. The 
like evil is produced by the like caufe ii> 
this country ; and if no reformation of 
oqr eftablifhed formularies can be brought 
about, it muft be expeded that feligiont 
will go on to lofe its credit, and that 
little of it will be left except among the 
lower orders of people, many of whom, 
while their fuperiors give up til religion, 
are finking into an enthufiafm in religion 
lately revived. 

I hope you will not miftake what I am 
now faying, or confider it as the effedl 
of my prejudices as a Piffenter from the 

eftablifhed 



[ 17 3 

cftabliflied church. The complaint I am 
making, is the complaint df many of the 
wifeft and beft men in the eftabliflied 
church itfeJf, who have been long urging 
the neceffity of a revifal of its Liturgy 
and Articles *. Thefe were framed above 
two centuries ago, when Chriftendom was 
juft emerging from the ignorance and 
barbarity of the dark ages. They remain 
now much the fame they were then ; 
and, therefore, cannot be properly adapted 
to the good fenfe and liberality of the 
prefent times J — This imperfecftign, how- 
ever, in our public forms of worfhip, af- 
fords no excufe to any perfon for neg- 
kifting public worfhip. All commu- 
nities will have fome religion ; and it is 
of infinite confequence that they fliould 

be led to that which, by enforcing the 
obligations of virtue and putting men 

* See a pamphlet afcribed to a great name, and which 
would dignify any name, entitled. Hints, &c. fubmltted 
to the/erious Attention of the Clergy, Nohility, and Gentry, 
newly aJfembUdx By a Layman, a Friend to the true 
Principles of the Confitution in Church and State, and 
to Civil and Religious Liberty. The Third Edition, cor-» 
jredcd ; and printed for White and Debrett, 1789. 

D upon 



[ i8 3 

upon loving inftead of dar^ning one ano- 
ther, is moft favourable tp the inteijeft qf 
fpci^ty. - 

If there is a Governor of the YTwld* 
who dire(Sls all events, l>e ought to b* 
invoked and worfhipped ; ^d thofc who 
diflike that mode of worlhip which is^ 
prefcribed by public authority, ought (if 
they can find no worfhip w/ of the church 
which they approve) to fet up a feparatc 
worfhip for thennifelves i and hy doing 
this, and giving an e^^^mple of a ra- 
tional and manly wcffliip, nxen of weight, 
from their rank or literature, may do 
the greateft fervice to fociety ^n^d the 
world. They may bear a teftimpny 
againft that application, of civil power 
to the fupport of particular modes of 
faith, which obftruifts human improve- 
ment, and perpetuates error ; arid they 
may hold out an inftrud:ion which will 
difcountenance fuperftition, and at the 
fame time recommend religion, by making 
it appear to be (what it certainly is when 
rightly underftood) the^ftrongeft incentive 
to all that is generous and worthy, and 

con* 



tbnrec^utntly the beft friend to public or- 
dfcr and happinefs. 

Liberty is the next great blefling 
which I have mentioned as the objed: of 
patriotic zeaL -It is infeparable from 
knowledge and virtue, and together with 
them completes the glory of a commu- 
ntt/k An enlightened and virtuous court-- 
try muft be a fnee country. It cannot 
fuflfer invafions of its rights, or bend to 
tyrants^— —I n«jd not, on this tMciafion, 
take any pains to (hew you how great t 
bbffing liberty iL The fmalkft attention 
to the hiftory of paft ages, and the pre-* 
fent ftate of nrankiad, will make you 
fchfible of its importance. Look round 
the world, and you will find almoft €vety 
country , refpedtable or contemptible, happy 
or miferable, a fruitful field or a frightful 
wafte, according as it poffeffes or waamts 
this blefling. Think of Greece, formerly 
jthe feat of arts and fcience, and the mofl*. 
4iftinguilhed Ipot «nder heaven; but 
pow-» having loft liberty, a vile and 
wretdted %ot, a rcgi<wi of darknefs, po- 

D a verty^ 



t " J 

ptoud and licentious contempt on the 
dlher. The former is the extreme to 
which mankind in general have been 
iftfoft pi^one ; for it has oftener happened 
that men have been too paflive than t(^ 
unruly ; and the rebellion of Kings againft 
their people has been more comn>ott> and 
done ttiotc mifchief, than the rebellkm 
of pec^le againft their Kings. 

Adulation is always odious, and whtA 
offered to men in power it corrupts them^ 
by giving them improper ideas of tfittf 
fituation ; and it deA)afes thofe who oflfef 
it, by manifefting an abjeiSlnefs founded 
on improper ideas of th€mjkh)ei. I 
have lately obferved in this kingdom too 
hear approaches to this abje€lnefs. In 
our late addreffes to the King, ofn his 
recovery from the fevere illnefs with 
which God has been pleafed to afflidl 
him, we have appeared more like a herd 

crawling at the feet of a mafter, than 
like enlightened and manly citizens ro* 
joicing with a beloved fovereign^ but at 
the fame time confcious that he derives 
all his confe^uence from thettifelves. 

But, 



i n 1 

]^ut, perhaps, thefe fervilities in the lan^ 
guage of our late addre0c$ fhould be 
pardoned, as only Jhrms of civility ^ 
and ^xpr^ffions of an overflow of good- 
nature. Th^y have, however, a dan- 
gerous tendency. The potentates of this ] 
world arc ' fufficiently apt to eonfider | 
therofelvesi as poflTefled of an inherent | 
fuperiority 1 which giv^s them a right ta | 
govern* and make$ mankind tdeir ^wn \ \ 
and this infatuation is; ajmoft every where, 
fofteted in them by the creeping fycon 
phants about them, and the language, 
of flattery which they are continually 

hearing. 

Civil governors aire properiy the fer*, 1 
vants of the public; and a King x^ no I 
more th^t ^he firft fervant of tlw public^ j 
created by it, maintained by it, and rch 
fponfible to it : and all the homage pai4 
him, is due to him on no Qther account 
than his relation to the public* His fai^ 
crednefs is the j(af:redaefs of the comf 
munity. His authority is the authprity 
of the community ; and the term Ma, 
JESTY, which it is. ufual to aj^ply t<? 

hira^ 



[ »4 3 
him, is by no means his own majeftjr, 

but the MAJESTY OF THE PEOPLE. 

For this reafpn, whatever he may be in 
his private capacity; and though, in refpedt 
of perfonal qualities, not equal to, or even 
fer below many among ourfelves — For 
this reafon, I fay (that is, as reprefenting 
the community and its firft magiftrate), 
he is entitled to our reverence and obe- 
dience. The words mqst excellent 
MAJESTY are rightly applied to him; 
and there is a refpedt which it woifld be 
criminal to withhold from him. 
' You cannot be too attentive to this 
cbfervation. The improvement of the 
world depends on the attention to it : 
fior will mankind be ever as virtuous and 
happy as they are capable of being, till 
the attention to it becon^s univerfal and 
efficacious. If we forget it, we (hall be 
in danger of an idolatry as grofs and ftupid 
as that of the ancient heathens, who, 
after fabricating blocks of wood or ftone, 

fell down and wx)rfhipped them. The 

difpofition in mankind to this kind of 
idolatry is indeed a very mortifying 

fubje^t 



[ ^5 ] 

fubjedt of reflexion, In Turkey* 

millions of human beings adore a filly 
mortal, and are ready to throw themfelves 
at his feet, and to fubmit their lives to 
his difcretion. In Russia, the com- 
mon people are only a stock on the 
lands of grandees, or appendages to their 
eflates, which, like the fixtures in a 
houfe, are bought and fold with the 
eftates. In Spain, in Germany, and 
under moft of the governments of the 
world, mankind are in a fimilar ftate of 
humiliation. Who, that has ajufl fenfe 
of the dignity of his nature, can avoid 
execrating fuch a debafement of it ? 

Had I been to addrefs the King on a 
lateoccafion, I fhould have been inclined 
to do it in a ftyle very different from that 
of mofl of the addreffers, and to ufe fome 
fuch language as the following; ■ 
** I rejoice, Sir, in your recovery, I 
** thank God for his goodnefs to you. I 
•* honour you not only as my King, but 
as almofl: the only lawful King in the [ 
world, becaufe the only one who owes | 
** his crown to the choice of his people. } 

E *• May 






v^ 



[ 26 ] 

May you enjoy all poffible happinefs. 
May God Ihew you the folly of thofe 
efFufions of adulation which you are 
now receiving, and guard you againd 
their efFedls. May you be led to fuch 
a juft fenfe of the nature of your fitua- 
tion, and endowed with fuch wifdom^ 
as fhall render your reftoration to the 
government of thefe kingdoms a bleflt 
ing to it, and engage you to con- 
fider yourfelf as more properly the 
Servant thsui the Sovereign of your 
people." 

But I muft not forget the oppofite ex- 
treme to that now taken notice of ; that is^ 
a difdainful pride, derived from a confci- 
oufnefs of equality, or, perhaps, fuperiori- 
ty, in refpe(fl of all that gives true dignity^ 
to men in power, and producing a con-^ 
tempt of them, and a difpofition to treat 
them with rudenefs and infult. It is a 
trite obfervation, that extremes generally 
beget one another* This is particularly 
true in the preferit cafe. Perfons juftly 
informed on the fubjei^ af government, 

when 



,f ^1 3 

when they fee men dazzled by looking 
up to high nations, and obferve loyalty 
carried to a length that implies igno- 
rance and fervility : fuch perfons, in 
fuch circumftances, are in danger of 
fpurning at all public authority, and 
throwing oflf that refpe(5lful demeaqor to 
perfons inveftcd with it which the order 
of fociety requires. There is undoubtedly 
a particular deference and homage due to 
civil magiftrates, on account of their fta- 
tions and offices; nor can that man be 
either truly wile or truly virtuous, who | 
defpifes governments, and wantonly j^^^i/ | 
ivil of bis rulers ; or who does not, by \ . 
all the means in his power, endeavour to 
ftrengthen their hands, and to give weight 
to their exertions in the difcharge of their 

duty. Fear Gody fays St. Peter. Love 

the brotherhood. Honour all men. Ho^ 
nour the King. ■ Tou muji needs ^ f^y$ 

St. Paul, be fubjeSi to rulers^ not only 
for wrath (that is, from the fear of fuf- 
fering jthe penalties annexed to the breach 
of the laws), but for confcience fake^ 
l^or rulers are minijiers of God^ and rem 

E ^ ven^eri 



[ a8 ] 

vengers for executing wrath on all that 
do evil. 

Another expreffion of our love to our 
country is defending it againft enemies. 
Thefe enemies are of two forts, internal 
and external ; or domeftic and foreign. 
The former are the moft dangerous, and 
they have generally been the moft fucceff- 
ful. I have juft obferved, that there is a fub- 
miffion due to the executive officers of 
government, which is our duty ; but you 
muft not forget what I have alfo ob- 
fer^d, that it muft not be a blind and 
flavifti fubmiflion. Men in power (un- 
lefs better difpofed than is common) arc 
always endeavouring to extend their 
power. They hate the dodlrine, that it 
is a TRUST derived from the people, 
and not a right vefted in themfelves. 
\ For this reafon, the tendencv of every 
1 government is to defpotifm ; and in this 
I the beft conftituted governments muft 
end, if the people are not vigilant, ready 
to take alarms, and determined to refift 
abufes as foon as they begin. This vi- 
gilance,- 



[ 29 ] 

gilance, therefore, it is our duty to main- 
tain. Whenever it is withdrawn, and a 
people ceafe to reafon about their rights 
and to be awake to encroachments, they 
are in danger of being enflaved, and 
their fervants will foon become their 
majiers. 

I need not fay how much it is our 
duty to defend our country againft fo- 
reign enemies. When a country is at- 
tacked in any of its rights by another 
country, or when any attempts are made 
by ambitious foreign powers to injure 
it, a war in its defence becomes neceflary : 
and, in fuch circumftances, to die -for 
our country is meritorious and noble. 
Thefe defenjive wars are, in my opinion, 
the only juft wars. Offenfive wars are 
always unlawful ; and to feek the aggran- 
dizement of our country by them, that is, 
by attacking other countries, in order to 
extend dominion, or to gratify avarice, is 
wicked and deteftable. Such, however, 
have been moft of the wars which have 
taken place in the world ; but the time is, 
I hope, coming, when a conviftion will 

prevail, 



C 30 1 

prevail, of the folly * as well as the ini* 
quity of wars ; and when the nations of 
the earth, happy under juft governments, 
and no longer in danger from the paflions 
of Kings, will find out better ways of 
fettling their difputes ; and beat (as Ifaiah 
prophefies) their fwords into plowjhares^ 
4md their Jpears into prunin^-^books ^ 

Among the particulars included in that 
duty to our country, by difcharging 
which we fhould Ihew our love to it, I 
will only further mention praying for it. 
gnd offering up thankfgivings to God for 
t?very event favourable to it. At the pre-. 

* See a ilriking tepcefentadon of the fblljr of wars» ia 
dve laft fedions of Mr, Neckar's Treaufe on the Adminiflra' 
lion of the Finances of Y%k^AC%, There is leafon to bc^ 
Uev« tiiat the feoiimentt oa this AibJQ^ in that tieatifc^ 
are sow the pxevaiUng ientixQents io the court and le« 
giflatqre of FaANCE ; and, confequently, that one of th^ 
happy effe^h of the involution in that country may be, if 
]K)t our own faiilt, fuch a hannony betwe^ the two firft 
kingdoms i» the wodd, ilrengtbened by a ponnnon par, 
ticipation in die bleflings of liberty, as (hall not only 
prevent their engaging in any future wars with one ano«r 
tber, biitdiipofe liiein to unke in preventing wars every 
ifhere^ and in makinj; the wor}d free and happy. 

fent 



t 31 ] 

fcnt feafon we are called upon to cxpreijt, 
in this way, our love to our country. 
It is the bufinefs of this day, and of the 
prefent fervice ; and, therefore, it is ne- 
ceflary that I fliould now diredl your at- 
tention to it particularly. 

We are met to thank God for that 
event in this country to which the name 
of The Revolution has been giveni 
and which, for more than a century, it 
has been ufual for the friends of freedom, 
and more efpecially Proteftant Diffenters^ 
under the title of the Ri;volution So- 
ciETY, to celebrate with expreffions of 
joy and exultation.— —My highly va- 
lued and excellent friend*, who addrefled 
you on this occa£on laft year, has given 
you an intcrefting account of the princi- 
pal circumftanccs that attended this event, 
and of the reafons we have for rejoicing 
in it. By a bloodlefs vidlory, the fetters 
which defpotifm had been long pre- 
paring for us were broken ; the rights of 

• See Dr. Kippit's Sermon, preached on November 4th, 
1788, to the Kevoltition Society, and printed for Mr. 
CadeU. 

the 



[ 32 ] 

the people were afferted, a tyrant ex* 
pelled, and a Sovereign of our own choice 
appointed in his room. Security was given 
to our property, and our confci6nces were 
emancipated. The bounds of free en- 
quiry were enlarged ; the volume in which 
are the words of eternal life, was laid 
more open to our examination ; and that 
ara of light and liberty was introduced 
among us, by which we have been made 
an example to other kingdoms, and be- 
came the inftrudlors of the world. Had 
it not been for this deliverance, the pro- 
bability is, that, inftead of being thus 
diftinguifhed, we fhould now have been 
a bafe people, groaning under the infamy 
and mifery of popery and flavery. Let 
us therefore, offer thankfgivings to 
God, the author of all our bleflings. Had 

he not been on our Jide^ we Jhould have 
been fw allowed up quicks and the proud 

waters would have gone over our fouls. 

But our fouls are efcaped^ and the fnare 

has be^n broken. Blejfed then be the name 

of the Lord^ who made heaven and earth. 

cxxivth Pfalm, 

It 



[ 33 ] 

It IS well known that King James was 
not far from gaining his purpofej and 
that probably he would have fucceeded, 
had he been lefs in a hurry". But he 
was a fool as well as a bigot. He want* 
ed courage as well as prudence; and, 
therefore, fled, and lift us to fettle quiet* 
ly for ourfelves that conftitution of go- 
vernment which is now our boaft. Wfe 
have particular reafon, as Proteftant Dif- 
fenters, to rejoice on this occafion. It was 
at this time we were refcued from perfe* 
cution, and obtained the liberty of wor- 
fhipping God in the manner we think 
inoft acceptable to him. It was then our 
meeting-houfes were opened, oiir worlhip 
was taken under the protection of the law, 
and the principles of toleration gained a 
triumph. We have, therefore, on^ this 
occafion, peculiar reafons for thankfgiv- 
ing— But let us remember that we ought 
not to latisfy ourfelves with thankfgivings. 
Our gratitude, if genuine, will be ac- 
companied with endeavours to give (labi- 
lity to the deliverance our country has ob- 
tained,, and to extend and improve the 

F happinefs 



t 34 3 

happincfs with which the Revolution 
has bleft us—Let us, in particular, take 
care not to forget the principles of 
the Revolution. This Society has, very 
properly, in its Reports, held out thefc 
principles, as an inftruftion to the pub* 
lie. I will only take notice of the three 
following: 

Firft; The right to liberty of confciencc 
in religious matters. < 

Secondly; The right to refift power 
when abufed. And, 

Thirdly ; The right to chufe our own 
governors ; to cafhier them for mifcon- 
I du6l ; and , to frame a government for 
ourfelves. 

I On thefe three principles, and more 
efpecially the laft, was the Revolution 
founded. Were it not true that liberty 
of confcience is a facred right ; that power 
abufed juftifies refiftance; and that civil 
authority is a delegation from the peo- 
ple — Were not, I fay, all this true; the 
Revolution would have been not an as- 
sertion. 



\ 



I S5 7 

SEiLTiON, but an invasion of rights ; 
not a Revolution, but a Rbbellion. 
Chcrifli in your breafts this convidion^ 
and ad under its influence ; detefting the 
odious dodlrines of paflive obedience, non- 
refiftance, and the divine right of kings 
— dodrines which, had they been adted 
upon in this country, would have left us 
at this time wretched flaves-^dodtrincs 
which imply, that God made mankind to 
be oppreffed and plundered ; and which 
arc no lefs a blafphemy againft him, than 
an infult on common fenfe. 

,i would farther diredt you to remember^ 
that though the Revolution was a greaf 
work, it was by no mcaqs a perfed 
work jf and that all was not then gained 
which was neceffary to put the kingdom 
in the fecpre and complete poffeflion of 
the bleffings of liberty. — In particular,: 
you fhould recoiled, that the toleration 
then obtained was imperfed. It included 
only thofe who could declare th^ir faith 
in the dodrinal articles of the church of 
England. It has, indeed, be?n fince extend- 
€4> but not fuiBciently ; fot there ftill 

F 2 e^ift 



[ 36 3 

exift penal laws on account of religious 
opinions, which (were they carried into 
execution) would fhut up many of our 
places of worfhip, and filcnce and impri-? 
ion /ome of our ableft and beft men.-*— « 
The TEST i-Aws are alfo ftill in force ; 
and deprive of eligibility to civil and mi- 
litary offices, all who cannot conform to 
the eftablifhed worfhip. It is with great 
pleafure I find that the body of Protef- 
tant Diflenters, though defeated in two 
late attempts to deliver their country 
from this difgrace to it, have determined 
to perfevere. Should they at laft fucceed, 
ihey will have the fatisfaftion, not only 
of removing from themfelves a profcrip- 
tion they do not deferve, but of contri- 
j buting to lefTen the number of our public 
i iniquities. For I cannot call by a gentlef 
name, laws 'which convert an ordinance 
appointed by our Saviour to commemo- 
rate his death, into an inftrument of op- 
preffive policy, and a qualification of 
rakes and atheiils for civil polls. — I have 
faid, Jhould they ;fucceed — but perhaps I 
ought not to fuggeft a doubt about th?ir 

fuccefs^ 



I 37 1 

fticcefs*. And, indeed, when I confiderthat 
in Scotland the eftablifhed church is 

defended 

* It has been unfortunate for the DiiTenters that, in theirlate 
applications for a repeal of the Tcft Laws, they have been 
oppofed by Mr. Pitt. He has contended that^ on account 
of their not believing and worfhipping as the Church of Eng- 
land does, they ought to be excluded from that eligibility to 
public offices which is the right of other citizens, and con- 
fequently denied a comfUte toleration ; acknowledging, how- 
ever, their integrity and rcfpeftablenefs, but reckoning it only 
tlie more neceiflfary on that account to defend the national 
church againft them. Such fentiments in thefe times can do 
no honour to any man, much lefs to a fon of the late Lord 
Chatham, whofe opinion of toleration and Proteflant Difr 
fenters may be learnt from the following account. 

In 1769 and 1772, the miniilers among the Diflenters ap^ 
plied to Parliament for relief from the obligation they were 
then under to {ubfcribe the dodrinal articles of the Church of 
England In order to be entitled to a toleration, 'and both 
times fuccecded in thp Houfe of Commons, in confequence 
of Lord North's neutrality, but were defeated in the Houfe 
of Lords, in confequence of an Oppofition from the Epifcopal 
Bench* They perfevered, however; the Biihops repented; 
and a third application proved fuccefsful in both Houfes.— « 
In the debate occafioned in the Houfe of Lords by tht fecond 
-application. Dr. Drammond, the Archbiihop of York, hav- 
ing called the Diflenting Miniflers *• men of clofe ambition,** 
Lord Chatham faid, that this was judging uncharitably; 
and that whoever brought fuch a charge againft them, with- 
out proof, 'defamed. Here he paufed ; and then went on— 
f The Diflenting Minifters are reprefented as men of clofe 
^' ajnbition* They are fo« my Lords; and their ambi^ 



I 38 ]- 

defended by no fuch teft— i^that in Ire^. 
.LAND it has been abolifhed— that in a great 
neighbouring country it has been declared 
to be an indefeafible right of all citizens 
to be equally eligible to public offices— 
that in the fame kingdom a profcfTed Dif- 
fenter from the eftablifhed church holds 



•* tion is to keep clo/e to the college of fiihermen> not of 
**^ cardinals, and to the dodrine of infpir^ apo(Ues« not 
•^ to the decrees of intcreftpd and afpiring biihops. They 
«* contend for a fpiritual creed, and fcriptural worftiip. Wo 
•• have a Calviniftic creed, a Popiih liturgy, and an Armi^ 
** nxan clergy. • The Reformation has laijd open the fcrip-. 
tures to an* iiet not the Biihops ihut them again. Lawn 
in fupport of ecckfiaftical power arc pleaded for^ whicK 
♦' it would fhock humanity to execute. It is faid, that re- 
•* ligious fe^ have done great mifchicf* when they were not 
•• kept under reftraint : but hiilory afljards no proof that 
'•' fefts have ever been mifchievous, when they were not op^ 
•* preffed and pcrfecuted by the ruling church." Sec the Pai- 
Hameiaitary Debates for 1 772* 

In one of his letters to me, not ^ong after this debate* 
isttcd Burton- Pynfent, January 16, 1773, he expreifes hiisw 
lelf in the following words : " In writing to you, it is ina-. 
•• poffible the mind fhould not go of itfelf to that rooft inte-. 
•• refting of all objed^s to fallible man— Toli ha tion. Be 
*' aifured, that on this facred and unalienable right of n^* 
*' ture, and bulwark of truth, my warm wifties will ahvayik 
•' keep pace with your own. Haj^, if the times had aK 
•• lowed us ^o add hopes to our wifl^s*'* 

the 



<r 



C 39 ] 

tKe firft offic!c in the ftatc — that in the 
Emperor's dominions ^ews have been 
lately admitted to the enjoyment of equal 
privileges with other citizens — and that 
in this very country, a Diffenter, though 
excluded from the power of executing the 
kws, yet is allowed to be employed in 
making them. — When, I fay, I confidcr 
fuch fafts as thefe, I am difpofed to think 
it impoffible that the enemies of there^ 
peal of the Teft Laws ftiould not foca 
become alhamed, and give up their op- 
pofition* 

But the moll important inftance of tlic \ 
imperfed: ftate in which the Revolution \ 
left our conftitution, is the inequality 

OF OUR REPRESENTATION. I thinks . 

indeed, this defed: in our conftitution fa 
grofs and fo palpable, as to make it excel- 
lent chiefly in form and theory. You 
Ihould remember that a reprefentation in 
the legiflature of a kingdom is the hafis 
of conftitutional liberty in it, and of all 
legitimate government ; and that without 
it a government is nothing but an ufurpa- 

tion. 



[ 40 ] 

(ion*. When the reprefentafion is faix* 
and equal, and at the fame time vefted 
with fuch powers as our Houfe of Com- 
mons poffefTes^ a kingdom may be faid 
to govern itfelf, and confequently to pof- 
fefs true liberty* When the reprefenta- 
tion is partial, a kingdom poffeffes liber- 
ty only partially ; and if extremely par- 
tial, it only gives a femblance of liberty i 
I but if not only extremely partial, but cor- 
ruptly choferi^ and under corrupt influence 
after being chofen, ith^corats znuifance^^ 
and produces the worft of all forms of 
government — a government by corruption 
—a government carried on and fupported 
by fpreading venality and profligacy through 
a kingdom. May heaven preferve this 
kingdom from a calamity fo dreadful! 
It is the point of depravity to which 
abufes under fuch a government as ours 
naturally tend, and the laft ftage af na- 
tional unhappinefs. Wc are, at prefent, 
I hope, at a great diftance from it. 
But it cannot be pretended that there 

*. Except in dates fo Tmall as to admit of 1 Legiflative Af* 
fembly* confining of all the members of the f^ate. 

are 



/ 



r 41 I 

are no advances towards it, or that 
there is no reafon for apprehenfion and 
alarm. 

The inadequatenefs of our reprefenta- 
tion has been long a fubjed: of complaint. 
This is, in truth, our fundamental griev-. 
ance ; and I do not think that any thing 
is much more our duty, as men who love 
their country, and are grateful for the Re- 
volution, than to unite our zeal in endea- 
vouring to get it redreffed. At the time 
of the American war, affociations were 
formed for this purpofe in London, and 
other parts of the kingdom ; and our pre- 
fent Minifter himfelf has, fince that war, 
diredled to it an effort which made him a 
favourite with many of us . But all atten- 
tion to it feems now loft, and the proba- 
bility is, that this inattention will conti- 
nue, and that nothing will be done to- 
wards gaining for us this effential bleffing, 
till fome great calamity again alarms our 
fears, or till fome great abufe of power 
again provokes our refentment ; or, perhaps , 
till the acquifition of a pure and equal re- 

prefentation by other countries (while 

G we 






V 

.1; 



f 4^ J 

We arc mocked with the fhaddw ♦) kincff es 
OHf fhame. 

Such is the condudl by which we ought 
to exprefs our gratitude for the Revolu- 
tion. — We (hould a.lways bear in mind 
the principles that juftify it. We fliould 
contribute all we can towards fupplying 
what it left deficient ; and fhew ourfelves 
anxious about tranfmitting the bleffings 
obtained by it to our pofterity, unim- 
paired and improyed. — But, brethren, 
while we thus fhew our patriotic zeal, let 
us take care not to difgrace the caufe of 
patriotifm, by any licentious, or immoral 

condudl.' Oh ! how eameftly do I wifb 

that all who profefs zeal in this caufe, 
were as diftinguifhed by the purity of their 
morals, as fome of them are by their 
abilities; and that I could make them 
fenfible of the advantages they would de-' 
rive from a virtuous character, and of the 
fufpicions they incur and the lofs of con^ 

fequence they fufFer by wanting it. 

Oh ! that I could fee in men who oppofc 

* A reprcfentation chofen principally by the Ticafury, 
and a few thoufands of the dregs of the people, who are gene- 
rally paid for their vot^ 

tyranny 



C 43 I 

tyranny in the ftate, a difdain of the ty- 
ranny of low paffions in themfelves ; or, 
at Icaft, fuch a fenfe of Ihame, and re- 
gard to public order and decency as would 
induce them to hide their irregularities, 
and to avoid infulting the virtuous part 
of the community by an open exhibition 
of vice I — I cannot reconcile myfelf to 
the idea of an immoral patriot, or to that 
reparation of private from public virtue, 
which fome think to be poilible. Is it to be 
expedted that ■ But I muft forbean 
i am afraid of applications, which many 
are too ready to make, and for which \ 
fhould be forry to give any juft ocpa« 
fion. 



I have been explaining to you the 
nature and expreflions of a juft regard 

to our Country. Give me leave to ex- 
hort you to examine your condudt . by 
what I have been faying. You love your 
country, and defire its happinefs; and, 
without doubt, you have the greateft rea- 
iqti for loving it. It has been long a 

G :; very 



C 44 1 

very diftinguilhed and favoured country. 
Often has God appeared for it and de- 
livered it. Let us ftudy to fhew our- 
felves worthy of the favour Ihewn us. — 
Do you pradlife virtue yourfelves, and 
ftudy to promote it in others? Do you 
obey the laws of your country, and aiin 
at doing your part towards maintaining 
ar\d perpetuating its privileges? Do you 
always give your vote on the jQde of 
public liberty; and are you ready to pour 
out your blood in its defence ? Do you 
look up to God for the continuance of 
his favour to your country, and pray for 
its profperity ; preferving, at the fame 
time, a ftridt regard to the rights of other 
countries, and always confidering your- 
felves more as citizens of the world 
than as members of any particular com- 
munity ? If this is your temper and 

condudt you are bleflings to your country, 
and were all like you, this world would 
foon be a heaven. ' .r 

' I am addreffing' myfelf to Chriftians. 
Let me, therefore, mention to you the 
example of our bleffed Saviour. I have 

obferved, 



t 45 ] 

cfeferved, at the beginning of this dif^ 
Gourfe, that he did not inculcate upon 
his hearers the love of their country, or 
take any notice of it as a part of our duty, 
Ipftead of doing this, I obferved that he . 
taught the obligation to love all man- 
kind, and recommended univerfal bene- 
volence, as (next. to the love of God)/ 
our firft duty ; and, I think, I alfo proved 
to you, that this, in the circumftances 
of the world at that time, was an in^ 
ftance of incomparable wifdom and good- 
nefs in his inftrucftions. But we muft 
not infer from hence, that he did not 
include the love of our country in the 
number of our duties. He has fhewn 
the contrary by his example. It appears 
that he poffefled a particular afFedtion for 
his country, though a very wicked country. 
We read in Luke x. 42, that when, upon 
approaching Jerufa/em^ in one of his laft 
joumies to it, he beheld it, he wept over- 
it, and faid; O&f that thou hadfi known 
(even thou^ at leaji in this thy day) the 
things that belong to thy peace. — What a 
tender fplicitude about his country does 

the 



r 46 3 

the lamentation over yerufakm imply^ 
which is recorded in the fame gofpel^ 
chap, xiji, and [34, Ob! Jerufalem^ Je- 
rufalemf thou that kittejl the prophets^ and 
Jiofffft them who are fent to tbee^ bow often 
woul4 Ikave gathered thy children together^ 
as a ben gat beret b her brood undfr her 
wings ^ b%tye would not^ 

It may not be improper farther to men^r 
tion the love St. Paul expreffed fqr his 
country, when he declared, that, for 
the fake of his brethren and Jcinfnicnr 
he could even wifh himfelf accurfed from 
Cbrijl. (Rom. ix, 3.) The original words 
are an XyiAT^^Mx from Cbriji ; and his 
meaning is, that he could have been 
contented to fuffer himfelf the calamities 
which were coming on the Jewifh peo-i 
pic, were it poffible for him, by fuch 4 
facrifice of himfelf, to fave them. 

It is too evident that the <late of thig 
country is fuch as renders it an pbjed^ 
of concern and anxiety. It wants (I 
have fhewn you) the grand fecurity of 
public liberty. Increafing luxury has 
multiplied jjbufes in it. A monftrous 

weight 



t 47 1 

t^eiglit of debt is crippling it. Viceania 
Venality are bringing down upon it God's 

difpleafure. That fpirit to which it owes 
its diftindfeions is declining*; and fomc 
late events feefti to prove that it is be- 
coming every day more reconcileable to 
encroachments on the fecurities of its 
liberties -f* — It wants, therefore, your pa- 
triotic fervices; and, for the fake of 
the diftindtions it has fo long enjoyed; 
for the fake of our brethren and com-^ 
panions, and all that Ihould be dear to 
a free people, we ought to do our ut-^ 
moft to fave it from the dangers that 
threaten it; remembering, that by adling 

• One of thefe diftinaions is, that being in poffeflion of the 
forms of an excellent coi^itution of government, any changes 
or improvements neceilkry to corre^ abufes and to give 
perfeft liberty, may be grafted upon them, without tu- 
mult or danger; whereas other countries, wanting thefe 
forms, and being under the neceflity of erefting a new con- 
ftitution on the ruins of an old one, cannot acquire li- 
berty without fetting every t&ing afloat, and making their 
efcape from flavery through the dangers of anarchy* 

+ Among thefe encroachments I mnft reckon the extenfion 
of the Excife laws, the introdudion of the cuftom of farming 
taxes, and the additional burdens lately thrown on the freedom 
f>f the prefs, and the circulation of intelligence. 

thus. 



[ 48, ] 

thusi ^*^e fhdll promote^ in the beft 
manner, our own private intereft, as well 
as the intereft of our country ; for when 
the community profpers, the individuals 
that compofe it muft profper with it^— 
But, fhould that not happen, or fliould 
we even fufFer in our fecular intereft 
by our endeavours to promote the in-* 
tereft of our country, we ftiall feel a fa- 
tisfa(5lion in our own breafts which is 
preferable to all this world can give; 
and we ftiall enjoy the tranfporting hope 
of foon becoming members of a perfedt 
community in the heavens, and having 
an entrance minijiered to us^ abundantly into 
the everlajiing kingdom of our Lord and Sa-- 
viour Jefus Chrift. 



You may reafonably expedt that I 
ftiould now clofe this addrefs to you. 
But I cannot yet difmifs you, I muft' 
not conclude without recalling, particu- 
larly, to your -recolledlion, a confidera^ 
tion to which I have more than once al- 
lucied, and. which, probably, your thoughts. 

have 



I 49 J 

have been all along ^ticipating : A con^ 
iideration with which my mind is im- 
prefled more than I can exprefs. I mean, 
the confideration of the favourablenefs of 
the prcfent times to all exertions in the 
caufe of public liberty . 

What an eventful period is this ! I 
am thankful that I have lived to it; and 
1 could almoft fay. Lord, now letteft 
thou thy fervant depart in peace ^ for mine 
eyes havefeen thy fahation. I have liveql 
to fee a difRifion of knowledgie, which 
has undermined fupcrftition and error— 
I have lived to fee the rights of naen 
better underflood than ever; and nations 
panting for liberty, which feemed to have 

loft the idea of it. 1 have lived to fee 

Thirty Millions of people, indignant 
and refolute, fpurning at flavery, and 
demanding liberty with an irrefiftible 
voice; their king led in triumph, and 
an arbitrary monarch furrendering^him- 
felf to his fubjefts^-— -After fharing in the 
benefits of one Revolution, I have been 
fpared to be a witnefs to two other 
Revolutions, both glorious.^--— And now, 

H methinks. 



[ so 3 

mcthinks , I fee the ardour for liberty catch- 
ing and fpreading; a general amendment 
beginning in human affairs ; the domi- 
nion of kings changed for the dominion 
of laws, and the dominion of priefts 
giving way to the dominion of reafon 

and confcience. 

Be encouraged, all ye friends of free- 
dom, and writers in its defence ! The 
times are aufpicious. Your labours have 
not been in vain. Behold kingdoms, ad- 
monifhed by you, ftarting from fleep, 
breaking their fetters, and claiming juf- 
tice from their oppreflbrs! Behold, the 
light you have ftruck out, after fetting 
America free, refledled to France, 
and there kindled into a blaze that lays 
defpotifm in alhes, and warms and illumi- 
nates Europe! 

Tremble all ye oppreflbrs of the world ! 
Take waming all ye fupporters of flavifh 
governments, and llavilh hierarchies ! Call 
no more (abfurdly and wickedly) re- 
formation, innovation. You cannot 
now hold the world in darknefs. Struggle 
no longer againft incfeafing light and li- 
berality 



[ 51 ] 

bcrality. Reftore to mankind their rights; 
and confent to the corredtion of abufes, 
before they and you are deftroycd to- 
gether. 



FINIS, 



H 



« T 



APPENDIX. 



T^birty Millions of People in France. 

( PAGE 49. ) 

MY reafoits for ftating the People of France at this 
number, will appear from the following fafks 
and oMervations* 

From accurate enumerations made at the end of 

every three years in Sweden, during 21 years, from 

1755^0 177s, it appeared that the average number 

of inhabitants of all ages, was in that period 2,^3 1 o, 1 6o« 

• The average of annual births, was 90,145. 

l!%e average of atinual deaths, including three years 
of extraordinary mOrtz^litVy was 66,7^9. A 34th 
part and three-fifths, therefore, of the inhabitants died 
annually. See my Treatife on Annuities, VoK I. 
p. 274, and Vol. IL p. I2^ &c. and the firft additional 
FiTay at the end of the fetond Vol* p. 16, &c« 

In the kingdom of Naples, confifting in 1777 ^^ 
4,311,503 inhabitants, the average of annual deaths 
fcr five years was 115^4121 A 37th J part, there*' 

fore. 



2 APPENDIX. 

fore, of the inhabitants died annually. lb. Vol. 1. 

In the province of VauJy Switzeri^and, con- 
taining 112,951 inhabitants, a 45th part dies an- 
nually, lb. 

In the kingdom of France, the medium of aa- 
nual de;iths, births^ and )narriages, was 

Of Births for 4 For 6 years, to 

years, to 1774 - 9Hj7io 1780, - 958,419 
Of Deaths - - 793,951 - - - . 834,865 

OfMARRIAGES - 192,180 - - - - 228,170 

I 

I feetio reafon for fufpeiling, that the proportion 
lof inhabitants dying aniiually to the whole number 
of inhabitants, is greater in France than in Swe-^ 
den, or even in the kingdom of Naples. Let it, 
howerer, be reckoned the fame with that in Swedea;^ 
tiiat is^ as i to 34I, and. the number of inhabitants in 
France, in 1780, muft have been 34I multiplied by 
834,865, or nearly twbnty<-nin£ millions* 

It fhould be obferved, that in tbe ten years front 
1771 to 1780, there was in France Cucb an iacreafc 
fjf tbe annual births, death$» and marriages (pror 
duced by the excefs of the births, above the deaths)^ 
as evidently proved that the number of inhabitants 
had increafed in thofe t;en years near a million m\, 
a half. 

It fhould be farther confidered, that the returns of 
birth8,deaths, andmarriagesin France, being returns 
of numbers adually counted and regiftered, they muft 
be (as fuch accounts always are) in fome degree de- 
ficient. Mr. Neckar, in his Treatife on the Admini- 

firationiof the Finances of France (Vol. !• p« 251) 

has 



A P ? S H D I K» } 

has mentioned other deficiencies in thefe returns ; and, 
particular! y^ that (except the Jews of Lor rain f Mface^ 
and the county of Metz) the regifters of population 
do not contain the names of any non-catholicks (in 
number near two millions), except they have beea 
baptized in the eftablifhed church. 

It feems, therefore, that my ftatement of the pre- 
fent inhabitants of France at thirty millions, is very 
moderate : an addition of two millions on account of 
an increafe fince 1780, and the deficiencies juft men- 
tioned, would make them 31 millions. Mr. Neckar 
(ibid. p. 219), without making any allowance for this 
increafe, and for deficiencies, ftates them in 1784 at 
only 24,802,580, in confequence of multiplying the 
births by 25|« But I reckon that in whole kingdoms 
the proportion of births to the number of inhabitants 
much more variable than the proportion of deaths ; 
pofEbly, he was not acquainted with the fafts here 
ilated, and many others of the fame kind which may 
be found in the Treatife on Annuities to which I 
have referred, and which prove that the lowe/l mul- 
tiplier of the annual medium of deaths which fhould 
be ufed to find the number of inhabitants in a whole 
kingdom, is 32 or 33. In Sweden and the kingdom of 
Naples it appears to be greater ; but, if we fuppofe 
33 the right multiplier, the inhabitants of France muft 
have been in 1780, 27 1: millions ; and the increafe 
fmce, with the deficiencies in the returns, will make 
it highly probable that, even on this fuppofition, they 
muft be now near 30 millions. 

If the births in Sweden are taken for guides in this 
cafe, it will be reafonable, in order to find the right 
multiplier, to increafe it for France in the fame 

proportion 



4 APPEND! X. 

proportion that the rath of the excefs of the l>irth$ 
above the deaths there is lels than the fame ratio ia 
Sweden. And this will make the proper multiplier 
of the ^ir/^j in France 30 nearly, and will give the 
number of inhabitants in 1780 near 29 millions, a^ 
before. I wifh there were equal data for determining 
the number of people in Britain* 



« 
APPENDIX. 



The Declaration of Rights, which 
has been agreed to by the National Af^ 
fembly of Ykk^q^s.^ and fanSlioned by 
the King^ and which forms the Bafis of 
the new Conjlitution g/' France, conx 
tains fuch an authority for fome of the 
fentiments in the foregoing Difcourfe^ 
and holds out to the world an injlruc^ 
tion on the fubjeSt of Civil Govern- 
ment of fuch confequencej that I cannot 
help inferting here the following Traqf« 
lation of it. 

DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS OF MEN 

AND OF CITIZENS, 

By the National Assembly of FRANCE, 

4 

THE Reprefentatives of the people of 
France formed into a National Aflembly, confider'- 
ing that ignorance, negledl:^ or contempt of human 
rights, are the fole caufes of public misfortunes and 
corruptions of government, haverefolved to {et forth, 
in a foiemn declaration, thefe natural, imprefcriptible, 
and unalienable rights : that this declaration being 
conftantly prefent to the minds of the members of the 
body focial, ^hey may be ever kept attentive to their, 
rights and thdir duties : Thit the afts of the legiila-t 

I tiv^ 



6 ▲ F F £ K D I X. 

tive and executive powers of government being ca- 
pable of being-every moment compared with the end 
of political inftitutions, may be more refpefted : and 
alfo, that the future claims of the citizens, being 
direfted by fimple and inconteftible principles, may 
always tend to the maintenance of the Gonftitution, 
and the general happinefs. 

For thefe reafons, the National Assembly 
doth recognize and declare, in the prefence of the 
Supreme Being and with the hope of his bleffing aftd 
favour, the following Jacred rights of men and of 
citizens. 

L Men were born and always continue free, and 
equal in refpedi of their rights. Civil diftinflions, 
therefore, can'be founded only on public utility. 

II. The end of all political aiTociations is th^ pre- 
fervation of the natural and imprefcriptible rights of 
man ; and thefe rights are liberty, property, fecurity, 
and refillance of oppreflion. 

III. The nation is effentially the fource of all fo- 
vereignty ; nor can any individual, or any body of men, 
be entitled to any authority which is not expreffly 
derived from it. 

IV. Political liberty confifts in the power of doing 
whatever does not injure another. The exercife of 
the natural rights of every man, has no other limits 
than thofe which are neceflary to fecure to every other 
man the free exercife of the fame rights; and thefe 
limits are determinable only by the law. 

V. The law ought to prohibit only aftions hurtful 

to fociety. What is not prohibited by the law fhould 

not be hindered; nor fhould any one be compelled tq 

that which the law does not require. 

' VI. The 



A P t» :t H t) I X. % 

■ " VL The law is an expr^on of the will of the 
community. All citizens have a right to concur, 
either perfonally or by their reprefentatives, in its 
formation. It iliould be the fame to all, whether Mt 
proteins or puniflies ; and all being equal iti its (ight, 
are equally eligible to all honours, places, and em- 
ployments, according to their different abilities, with- 
out any other diftin<Sipn than that created by their 
virtues and talents. 

VIL No man fhould be accufed, arrefted, or held 
in confinement, except in cafes determined by the 
law, and according to the forms which it has pre- 
fcribed. All who promote, folicit, execute, or caufe 
to be executed arbitrary orders, ought to be punifhed ; 
and every citizen called upon or apprehended by vir- 
tue of the law, ought immediately to obey, and ren- 
ders himfelf culpable by refinance^ 

VIII. The law ought to impofe no other penalties 
than fuch as are abfolutely and evidently necefTary : 
and no one ought to be punifhed but in virtue of 
a law promulgated before the offence, ^nd legally 
applied. 

IX. Every man being prefumed innocent till he 
has been conyi<9:ed, whenever his detention becomes 
indifpenfible, all rigour to him, more than is necefTary 
to fecure his perfon, ought to be provided againfl by 
the law. 

X. No man ought to be molefled on account of bis 
opinions, not even on account of his religious opi- 
nions, provided his avowal of them does not difturb 
the public order eflablifhed by the law. 

XI. The unreflrained communication of thoughts 
and opirlions beiiig one of the mofl precious, rights of 

la ' man. 



8 APPENDIX. 

man, every citizen may fpeak, write, and publl/h 
freely, provided he is refponfible for the abufe of this 
liberty in cafes determined by the law. 

XII. A public force being neceflary to. give fecu- 
rity to the rights of men and of citizens, that force 
is inftituted for the benefit of the community, and 
not for the particular benefit of the perfons with 
whom it is entrufted. 

XIIL A common contribution being neceflary for 
the fupport of the public force, and for defraying the 
other expences of government, it ought to be divided 
equally among the members of the community, ac- 
cording to their abilities. 

XIV. Every citizen has a right, either by himf^lf or 
his reprefentative, to a free voice in determining the 
neceflity of public contributions, the appropriation 
of them, and their amount, mode of afleffment, and 
duration. 

XV. Every community has a right to demand of 
all its agents an account of their conduct. 

XVI. Every community in which a feparation of 
powers and a fecurity of rights is not provided for, 
wants a conftitution* 

XVII. The right to property being inviolable and 
facred, no one ought to be deprived of it, except in 
cafes of evident public neceflity legally afcertained, 
and on condition of a previous juft indemnity. 



I hope 



APFEKDIX* 9 

I hope I fliall be excufed for taking the liberty to 
offer the following remarks on the tenth of thefe ar- 
ticles : 

Intolerance in Religion, and restraints 
on the DISCUSSION of fpeculative points, have been 
fome of the chief caufes of the flow progrefs of hu- 
man improvement, and of the miferies of the world. 
I could therefore have wiflied to fee, in fuch an in- 
ftruftion to the world as this declaration contains, an 
article ftrongly marking and reprobating thefe evils. 
This tenth article does not, I think, fufficicntly an- 
fwer this purpofe. For it is obvious, that in Tur- 
key, writing againft Mahomet ; in Spain, againft 
the Inquifition; and in every country, againft its 
cftablifhed doftrines, is a difturbance o£ public order 
eftabliflied by law ; and, therefore, according to this 
articlej punifhable. 

The eleventh article is worthy of the very refpe<£l- 
able propofer of it, but in fome degree liable to the 
fame objeftion. Laws may be unjuft, and determine 
the faireft difcuffions of fpeculative points, and the 
beft publications, to be abufets of liberty. At Rome, 
a few years ago, the publication of one of the greateft 
produ£iions .of human genius was deemed an abufe of 
liberty, and prohibited, becaufe it afferted the motioa 
of the earth. Even in England, at this day, its 
laws determine every thing written or fpoken againft 
the doftrine of the Trinity, to be an offence punifli* 
able by fines and imprifonment. 

The declaration that would beft meet my wifties in 
this inftance would be :, 

<* That every man has a right to profefs and prac- 
** tife, without moleftation or the lofs of any civil 
}^ privilege, that mode of religious faith and worfhip 

^ whicji 



to APrSNQlJt. 

<< which he thinks moil acceptable to his Maker; and 
<^ alfo to difcufs freely by fpeaking, writing, and 
^ publiQiing all fpeculative points, provided he does 
*^ not by any itvert aft or dirtff invafion of the rights 
•* of others, break the peace^ or attempt to injure 
<* any one in his perfon, property, or good name.* 
In a Trail on the American Rbvolutiok, 
I have given an account of the reafons, which in my. 
i^inion require fuch aa extent of religious and inteJl- 
Ie£lual liberty as thefe words imply ; and which prove 
that civil power, without concerning itfelf about qpi- 
nions or the tendencies of opinions, ought to confine 
» itfelf to the prefervation of peace and the proteftion 
of univerfal liberty, as far as it is not employed to in- 
jure itfelf. 

The tenth article, on which I have here remarked, 
was probably a compromife between oppofite fenti- 
ments in the National Aflembly^of France, and, 
may, I hope, in fome future time, be re-confidered. 
Jkf. Rabaud de Su Etienne^ a proteftant clergyman, 
and a member of the A&mbly, delivered a fpeech 
againft it full of eloquence and the jufteft fentiments. 
This fpeech was afterwards printed, and circulated at 
Paris ; and I carinot lielp wi/hing that a tranflatioii 
of it, as there ^printed, may be foon publiihed and 
circulated in this kingdom. 



▲ PPENDX3U )t 



SOCIETY for commemorating the Glo- 
rious Revolution of 1668. 

jit the Anniverfary Meeting of this Society, held at the 
London Taventy Nov. 4, 1789, 

The Rt. Hon. Earl Stanhope in the Chair, 

A Report from the Commitee was brought up, from 
which the following is an extradi : 

** Your Committee are perfuaded, that by the 
tinion of the friends of freedom, their rights are af- 
certained and eftabliflied; and trufting that it will 
be highly honourable to avow ourfelves, in the moft 
explicit manner, advocates for. the pure and genuine 
principles of civil and religious liberty, they have with 
, this view prepared a book, in which thofe gentlemen 
who are inclined to let their names be tranfmitted to 
pofterity, as the friends of the great and glorious 
Revolution of 1688, may infert them after the follow- 
ing preamble, and a declaration of aflent to the 
three following propofitions. 

PREAMBLE. 

This Society, fenfible of the important advantages 
arifing to this country by its deliverance from popery 
and arbitrary power, andconfcious that, under God, 
we owe that {Ignal bleffing to the Revolution, which 
feated our deliverer King William the Third on the 
^rone; do .hereby declare our firm attachment to the 



■i 

i 



12 APPENDIX* 

civil and religious principles which were recognized 
and eftablifhed by that glorious event, and v^rhich has 
.preferved the fucceffion in the proteftant line ; and 
our determined refolution to maintain, and, to the ut- 
moft of our power, to perpetuate, thofe bleilings to 
tjie lateft pofterity. 

Three Propositions, containing the fundamental 

principles of the Society : 

1. That all civil and political authority is derive^ 
from the people. 

2. That the abufe of power juftifies refiftance. 

, 3. That the right of private judgment, liberty of 
coiifcience, trial by jury, the fi;e^dom of the prefs, 
and the freedom of eledtion, ought ever to be held 
facred and inviolable* 

The Committee farther refolved. 

That in order to caufe the principles of the Revo- 
lution to be well underftood, extenlively propagated, 
and firmly maintained ; and to preferve the glorious 
fabric of the BritiftiGonftitution; and to tranfmitthe 
invaluable bleffings of public freedom to pofterity^ 
unimpaired and improved, it becomes the people to 
cftabliih focieties throughout the kingdom upon Re- 
volution principles, to maintain a corrffpondence 
with each other, and to form that grand concentrated 
union of the true friends of public liberty, which may 
be neceflary to maintain its exiftence. 

The Committee concluded their Report with cor»- 
gratulating the members of the Society, as Britops^ 
and citizens of the world, upon that noble fpirit of civil 
and religious liberty which had, fince the lafl meet- 

ing* 



APPENDIX. f3 

ing, fo confpicuoufly flione forth on the tolhtirtent, 
more efpecially on the glorious fuccefs of the French 
Revolution ; and with exprefling their ardent wiflids 
that the influence of fo glorious an e^mple may he 
felt by all mankind, until tyranny anfl defpotifiti 
ihall be fwept from the face of thie globe, and 
'^^univerfal liberty and happinefs prevail. 

Dr. Price then moved, and it was umanimoufly r6- 
folved^ that the following. Congr^ulatory Addrefi t6 
the National/ Aflembly of France, be tranfmitted to 
ithem, figned by the Chairman: 

* The Society for commemorating the Revolution 
^ in Gfeat Britain, difdaining national partialities, and 

* rejoicing in every triumph of liberty and juftice 

* over arbitrary, power, offer to the National Affem- 

* bly of France theit congratulations on the Revola- 

* tion in that country, and on the prolpedl it gives to 
^ the two firft kingdoms in the world, of a comilion 

< participation in the blefSngs of civil and religipus 

* liberty* 

« They cannot help adding their ardent wifh^s of 
^ an happy fettlfedifent of fo important a Revolution, 

< and at the &rhe time expreffipg the particular fatif- 
« faSion, with Whifch they refle<a on the tendency of 

* the glorious example given in France to encourage 

* other nations to affert the unalienable rights of man- 

* kind, artd thereby to introduce a general reforma- 
^ tion in the governments of Europe, and to make 

* the world free and happy. 

< STANHOPE, Chairman.' 

In purfuance of the fcfolution of the Society, this 

\ Congratulatory Addrefs was conveyed to the Duke 

of Rochefoucauld at Paris, with a letter requefting 

-» K . him 



?4 .APPENDIX. 

him to prcfent it to the National Assemble, 

and at the fame time imtimating, that the Society 

confidcrcd the National Assembly as adting 

for the world as well as for the great kingdom ft 

reprefentedt and therefore hoped that their Addrefe 

,was not an improper intrufion ; or, if it was, that 

it would be excufed a^ an effufion of zeal in the caufe 

of general liberty and human happinefs which no 

xonflderations of impropriety had been able to 

fupprefs. 

The following communications 'and letters will 
fliew how highly the Society has been gratified 
by the favourable reception of its Addrefs. 

ExtraSl from a Letter of the Duke de Roche- 
foucauld to Dr. Price. — Dated Paris. 
. December id, 1789. 

<* Cetoit bien au Dr. Price qui'I appartenoit 

de propofer une motion tendante. a faire a ce^e 
Liberte le plus bel hommage, celui des prejuges 
nationaux. Uaddrefle de felicitation que le Comte 
de Stanhope a fait I'honneur au Due de la Roche- 
foucauld de lui envoier a ete re^ue de V Aflemble« 
Nationale avec de vifs applaudiflemens, Elle y a 
vu Taurore du beau jour ou deux nations qui fe 
font toujours eftimees malgre leurs divifions poli- 
tiques, et malgre la deverfite de leurs gouvernemens, 
cgntraikeront une liaifon intime par la fimilitude 

1 

de leurs opinions, et par leur enthoufiafme commun 
pour la Liberte. Elle a charge fon Prefidcnt d'ecrire 
au C* de Stanhope, mais les occupations multipliees 
4e la Preiidence n'aiant pas encore permit Texpe* 

dition 



A !» P E N D I X.^ 15 

aition dc la lettre, le Due de la Rochefoucauld s'em<- 
prefle toujours d'avoir Fhoneur de repondre au 

DoiSleur Price. Heureux d'avoir ete choifi pour 

cette honorable commiffion, il en a rendu compte 
a TAflembl^e Nationale, et en lui prefentant- 
r addrefle ij lui a fait connoitre les droits qu' avoit 
a fon eftime, & a I'eftime de la nation Frjincoife yne 
Spciete dont Tobjet pft ^uflEi nobje et aufli p^trigtic^pe, 
&c. &c. 

TRANSLATION. 

^< It belonged to— ^-r-Dr. Price to propofe a motion 
tending to pay to liberty the faireft homage, that of 
national prejudices.— The addreft of congratulation 
which Earl Stanhope has don^ the Duke de la Roc he- » 
FOUCAULD thp honour to tr^nfmit to him, has 
been receive^ by the National Aflembly with lively 
applaufe. They have feen in that addrefs the dawn 
of a glorious day, in which two nations who have 
always efteemed pn? another notwithftanding their 
political divifiotis and the diverfity of their govern-, 
ments, (hall contradt an intimate union, founded oiv 
the fimilarity of their opinions and their common en-? 
tbufiafm for liberty. — ^They have direSed their Pre^ 
fident to write to Earl Stanhope; but the multi- 
plicity pf the bufinefs of thePrefidency not having yet 
. permitted the expediting of that letter, the Duke dela 
RocHEFoycAutp has not delayed to do himfelf the 
hq^our of writing to Dr. Price, Happy in having 
been chofen for fuch an l^onpurable commiffion, he has 
re/idered an account of it to the National Aflembly ; 
^nd, in prefei^ting to tl^em the addrefs pf a Society 
ffhpfe objedl is fo noble and patriotic, he has 

)C 2 ^cquaintec| 



%6, APPENDIX, 

acquainted tbem with the claim which it has to their 
efteem, and to thp eft^epi of thp whole French 
national ^c. &c. 

ExtraSl from the Votes of the National Affembly 
(f France, of Wedrtefday the 2^tb of Nov. 
1789, tranfmitted by the Archbishop of 
Arx, Prefident of the National AJfembly^ ta 
Earl Stanhope, Chairman of the Revolution 
Society in London. 

Extrait dti PrHh verbal de. Pjlffimhlec Nationale du 
Afercridi 7,yn£ Novem. 1789. 

Un membre a In une adrefle de felicitation d^ la part 
de la Societe Aiighife, appellee Societe de/a Revbtution. 
L'aflemblee vivement touchee de ce temoignage extra- 
ordinaire d*efl:ime a exprime fa fatisfadl ion par degrands 
applaudiiTennens, et a d6crcte que M. Je Prefident fera 
charge d'ecrire a Milord Stanhope Prefi.dent de la So- 
ciete, une lettre dans la quelle- il lui temoignera la 
vlve et profonde fenfibilite qu'a eprouve rAflemblee 
Nationale de France a la leAure de la declaration 
faite au nom de la Societc de la Revolution d*Angle- 
terre, la quelle refpire les fentimens d'humanlte et 
de bienveitlance univerfelfe qui doivent lier dans 
tofus les pays dii monde, les vrais amis de la Libertc 
pt^ du bohheur des nations. 

(Sigiie) L'ARCH. D* AIX, 

Prefident de rAflemblee Nationale* 

(L. S.) Le Vtc. deMir^bEtAUjV 

Secretaire. 

f^ntre Sigiie)^ Salomon db la Sauge^ie., 

'".v.;-: . '^^''. ■ ' 'Secret. 

TRANSt 



TRANSLATION. 

^xtrc^il from the Votes of the National Jjpmlly of 
JVedneJday the 25/A tiov. 1789. 

A member having read a Congratulatory Addrefs 
of the Englljh Society called the Revolution Society ; 
the Aflenjbly, deeply affefted with this extraordinary 
proof of efteem, exprefled its f;;itisfa6l:ion by loud 
applaufe, and refolved that the Prefident be direftecj 
to write a letter to Lord Stanhope, Chairman of the 
Society, expreffing the lively and deep fenfibility 
with which the National Aflembly of France re- 
ceived the addrefs of the Revolution Society in Eng- 
land, which breathes thofe fentiments of humanity 
and univerfal benevolence, that ought to unite to- 
gether, in all countries of the world, the true friends 
of liberty and the happinefs of mankind. 

(Signed) THE ARCHBISHOP OF AIX, 

Freddent of the National AiTembly. 

Sealed with the Anna 
pf the Natloaal AjQTembly of Fn»ce. 

(Counter-Signed) The V^^. de Mir^beau, 

Secretary. 

Salomon ds tA Saugerie. 

Secretary. 



Lttter 



li . APPENDIX. 

Letter from the Archbishop cf AiXj Preftdenf 
cf the National AJfemhlyy to Earl Stanhope^ 
Chairman of the Revolution Society. 

.(C P P Y.) 

A Parisy ce ^me DecemhrCy lySg* 

IL eft digne, Milord, d'une Spciete celebrc 
jCt d'un.peuple heureux et libre de s'ipterefler a tous 
les.progres. du bonheuj: et de la lil^erte publique. 

Pepuis lon^-tems Ja nation Franyaife exeroit I'em- 
pire de fes connaiiTances et de fps artSi elk 4ingeoit 
fon gDuye^j:\|5ment par fes ppii>iojn$, quand elk ne fe 
gpuvernoif pas encode elk meme par fes loix. 

Elk pourfuivoit ;>vec ardeur des vcrites utiks, et 
repandant chaque jour lalumiere fur tputes les parties 
de fon adminiftration, elk fembloit ei>train^e, comma 
par un mouyement univerfel, aux changemens qui 
lui donnent fa confiftance et fa force, 
' Un Roi que nou^ pouvons appellor le meilleur des 
homipes, et k preinier des citoyens, ^i^cpurageoit^^ 
par fes vertus, jTes efpcrance€r'de'>fa nation, et main- 
tenant, un concburs unaninje ctab^Jt une conftitution 
durable, fur les droits inip|:efpriptfcles des hpmme? et 
des citoyens. 

<* II appartjent fans doute a notre Cpck, quand I^ 
raifon s'etend avec \v^ liberte, de faire difparoitre a 
jamais ks haines et ks rivalites nationales : il ne faut 
pas que ks guerres, ces erreurs de gouvernem^nSit 
foient J'efFet des prejuges que font ks vices des na- 
tions, et les deux peupks, les plus inftruits de I'Eu- 
xofQy (Jpivent montrer par leur cxcmple, que I'amour 

de 



APPE17DIX*. f9 

de la patrie s'accorde avec tous les lentihietis ie I'hu^ 
manite* 

. *« L'Aflemblee Nationale a reconnu dans TAdrefle 
de la Socicte de la Revolution d'Angleterre, ces prin-^ 
ctpes de bienveillance unlverfelle qui doivent liery dans 
tous les pays du monde^ les vrais amis du honhcur^ et de 
la liherte dis nations : Elle a configne les temoignageSy 
de fa vive et profonde fenfibilite, dans une delibera- 
tion folemnelle, qu'elle me charge de vous communi- 
quer. 

' Re^evez les aflurances de tous les fentimens, avec 
les quels, I'ai Fhonneur d'etre, 

Mylord, 
Votre tres l^umble, 

Et tres obeifant ferviteur, 
(Signe) UARCH. d'AIX, 

Prefident de I'Aflemblee Nationale; 



TRANSLATION. 

Farisy the ^th December y ^7^9- 
IT is worthy, my Lord, of a celebrated 
Society, and of an happy and free people, , to interell 
themfelves in the progrefs of public liberty and hap- 

pinefs. 

The French nation has long been improving in 
knowledge and arts ; and its government was directed 
by opinions derived from them even before the coun- 
try governed itfelf by the laws which they didlated. 

The nation purfued with ardour ufeful truths, and 
daily diffufing light over every branch of the admini- 
ilration, it appeared to be carried, as by an univerfal 

impHlfe, 



ftO APPENDIJt; 

impulfe, to thofe changes which now give it ftrength 
and ftability. 

A King whom we may call die beft of men, and 
the firft of citizens, encouraged by his virtues the 
hopes of the nation, and now, by univerfal concur- 
rence, a durable conilitution is eftabliihed, founded 
on the unalienable rights of men and citizens. 

It undoubtedly belongs to our age, in which rea- 
fon and liberty are extending themfelves together, td 
extinguilh for ever national hatred and rivalfhip. 

We muft not allow the prejudices which difgrac© 
nations to produce wars, thofe errors of governments* 
But the two moll enlightened people of Europe ought 
to ihew, by their example, that the love of their 
country is perfefUy compatible with every fentiment 
of humanity. 

The National Aflembly difcovers in the Addrefs 
of the Revolution Society of England, thofe princi- 
ples of univerfal benevolence which ought to bind 
together, in all countries of the world, the true friends 
to the happinefs and liberty of mankind. 

The National Aflembly has given the moft unde- 
niable teftimony of its ftrong and deep fenfe of this 
truth, by the folemn vote which it has directed mo 
to communicate to yoq. 

Accept the aflurance of thofe fentiments with which 
I have the honour to be. 

My Lord, 
Your moft humble. 

And moft obedient fervant, 

The ARCHBISHOP of AIX, 

Prefident of the National Aflembly. 

m 

7fl Lord Stanhdpe, Cbaifman 
of the Revolution Society* 



kffolutioH of thanks from the Patriotic Society 
at Dijon^ tranfmitted by M. VAhbe Volfius^ 
the Chairman, to Earl Stanhope^ Chairman 
of the Revolution Sbdeiy. 

Ext rait du Regijire dei Deliberations du Club Pairio^ 

tiqUe de Dijon. 

SeaHce du Lundi^ y:>me Novembriy 1789. 
Mi M, TAbbe Volfius, Prefident. 

Kavier ; de Morveau ; Mazuye, Medecin ; Mazuye, 

jivocat; Googet, Prime; Deze; Larche, Vau^ 
drey; Gillette; Villiers; Chamy; Durande//j; 
Bazire, cadet; Renaud; Leroux: Vaillant, aini; 
Purveri^i Muzard; Maret; Gbuget-Deflahdres'j 
Jacotot ; et Vaillant, cadet ; prefens, 

M. Nayizr a dit: 

Messieurs, 

L*ADRJESSE de felicitation, erivoiee a tjtffim-^ 
hlie Ndiionale de France, par la Societe de la Revolu- 
tion de Londres, a excit6 votre admiration ct celle de 
toils ies vrais amis bu bonheur public, Des Anglois 
qui dedaign^nt Ies preventions nationales, et qui ap- ^ 
plaudiffent Jiux efforts de leurs rivavix, pour fecouer le 
joug du pouvoir abitraire, prefentent un fpecSiacle fur 
ie quel Ies philofophes attentifs aux progres de i'efprit 
humain, ne peuvent pas manquer de £xer leurs re- 
gards. 

Telle eft done la vi6lorrc remportee par la raifon c,t 
la philantrophie fur Ies prejuges et Ies jaloufies po* 

L pulaires^ 



pulaires> que nous avons lieu d*efperer deformais que 
tdus ies peuples oubliantdfts interits partieU s'incou- 
rageront mutuellement a la coitquete de la liberte» et 
qu'ainfif dans toutes les parties de TEuropey rhomnie 
fera bientot reintegre dans des droits que le defpo- 
tifme a bien pu enchainer pour un temps, mais ^*il 
n'eft point en fon pouvoir d'aneantir, 

Pourquoi craindrions-nous le Tavouer, Meffieurs > 
La revolution qui s^opere aujourd'hui dans notre pa* 
trie, eft due furtout a Texemple que I'Angleterre nous 
a donne depuis un iiecle* Ceft du jour ou nous avons 
appris a connaitre la conftitution politique de cette 
Ifle, et les profperites que Taccompagnent, que notre 
haine pour le defpotifme a pris une veritable energie. 
£^ aflurant leur bonheur, les Angloifes ont prepare 
celui de I'Univers. Tandis que de toutes parts, les 
tyrans s^effbr^aient d'eteindre le feu facre de la liberte^ 
nos voifins veillaient avec uri foin couragisux, a Fen* 
tretenir toujours dans leur fein. Nous en avons re- 
cueilli des etincelles bienfaifantes ; et ce feu embra- 
fant toutes les ames, va, dans I'Europe entiere, re-> 
duire pour jamais en cendres les liens dont le defpo- 
tifme accablait les nations. 

Rendons a nos voifms le jufte tribut de reconnaif^ 

fance que les amis dliumanite ne doivent point refufer 

aux plus zeles deffenfeurs de fes droits. Que la Soctiti 
de la Revolution apprenne que les Fran^ais ont ^te fen* 

iiblement touches des felicitations qu'elle a adrefleS a 

I'Affemb'l^e Nationale ; Que ces vertueux philantro^ 

phes ne doutent plus du fucces de leurs vteux, en 

voiant les habitans des provinces, le difputer a ceux 

ie la capitale, dans I'amour ardent de la libertis; 

La matiere mife en deliberation ; le Club Patriae 

> tiqut 



APPENDIX* 23 

itque confiderant qu'il entre parfaitement dans Fobjet 
de fon inftitntien de naaniiefler en totite occafion, le 
zele de fes membres^ pour I'accompliflement d'une 
revolution db la quelle depend le bonheur de la na^ 
tion; que TAdrefle de la Smite de la Revolution a 
rAflemhl^ Nationaky eft un a<9:e memorable qui 
inerite la reconnaifTance de tous les Fran^ais ; que le 
plus fur moien d'aflurer la f elicite des peuples eft "de 
multiplier ^ntre*eux les temoignages des fentimens 
d'union fratemcile qui doivent animer reciprdquement 
des hommes egaux en droits^ et vivans fous une con-< 
ftitutipn libre : 

Le Club z delib^^ unanimement que la Sociite de la 
Rivolution ferait priere d'agreer I'exprelEon de la fen- 
libilite vive et reconnaiftante dont il a ^te touche a la 
lefhire de I'aiSte dans le quel la Sociite a fl dignement 
xnamfefte FinterSt qu^elle prend aux efforts de la 
nationlFran(aife> pour obtentr une eonftitution qui lu| 
fafle partager avec le peuple Anglais les grands biens 
attaches si la liberte : Le Club ne defirant rien avec 
tant d'ardeur^ que de voir regner entre les deux na^- 
tions la concorde fraternelle fans la quelle elles per- 
4raient les fruits de cette Uberte precieufe doat elles 
fe font montrees dignes. : 

Arrete en outre que copie de la prefente dclibcra* 
tion fera envoiee par M. le Prefident a la Societe de 
la Revolution de Londres* 
(Signe au Rcgiftre.) VOLFIUS. 

(Copie.) Vail LA NT, Cadet. 

Secretaire d^ Club Patriotique 
de Dijon* 

L* TRANS- 



24 APPENDIX. 

TRANSLATION, 

Extraii from the Regijier of the Deliberations of the 

Patriotic Society of Dijon. 

At the Meeting held on Monday, Nov. 30, 1789. 

Mr, L'Abbe Volfius, Prefident, 

Navier, &c. prefent. 

Mr. Navier made the following Speech : 

Gentlemen, 

«f THE Congratulatory Addrefs fent to the 
National Affembly of France, by the Revolution 
Society of London, has excited your admiration, and 
that of every true friend of the public welfare. 

** Englilhmen difdaining national prejudices, an4 
applauding the efforts of their rivals to (hake off the 
yoke of arbitrary power, prefent a fpeftacle which 
philofophers, attentive tp the prpgrefs of the humi^n 
min4, cannot ffiil to contemplate with pleafure. 

<< Such then is the yiftory obtained by reafon and 
philanthropy over popular prejudices and jealoufies, 
that we have now caufe to hope that all nations for- 
getting partial interells, will mutually encourage 
each other in the attainment of liberty; and that 
thus, throughout Europe, mankind will be fhortly 
reftored tp thpfe rights of which defpotifm has de- 
prived them for a time, but which it never could 
annihilate. 

<« Why fhould we be afhamed. Gentlemen, to ac- 
knowledge that the Revolution which is now eftabliih- 
ing itfelf in our country, is owing to the ex^ple 
given \>j England a century ago ? 



*• It was from that day we became acquainted witk 
the political conflitution of that ifland, and the 
profperity with which it was accompanied ; it was 
from that 4ay our hatred of defpotifm derived its 
energy. In fecuring their own happinefs, Englifli- 
men have prepared the way for that of the univerfe. 
Whilft on all fides tyrants were attempting to cxtin- 
guifh the facred flame of liberty, our neighbours 
with intrepid watchfulnefs and care cheriihed it ia ' 
their bofoms. We have caught fome of thefis falutary 
fparks; and this fireenfiaming every mind, is extend- 
ing itfelf over all Europe, for ever to reduce to afhes 
thofe {hackles with which defpotifm has opprefle4 
mankind. 

^* Let us render to our neighbours that juft tribute 
of gratitude which the friends of mankind ought 
nevier to refufe to the moft zealous defenders of its 
rights. 

** Let the Revolution Society know that Frenchmen 
have been fenCbly aflFefted by the congratulations 
which it has addreflTed to the National Aflembly, that 
tliefe virtuous philanthropifts, feeing the inhabitants 
of the provinces vying with thofe of the metropolis ^•' 
in the ardent love of liberty, may be in no doubt 
about the attainment of their wiflies.'* 

fhe fubjeft having been debated, the Patridtic 
Society confidering — that it is perfeftly confiftent 
with the obje<£l of its inftitution to manifeft on every 
occafion, the zeal of its niembers for apcomplifhing 
a revolution on which depends the welfare of the 
nation ; — that the a^drefs from the Revolution 
Society to the National AfTembly is a memorable 
aft, which dcfervcs the gratitude of evdry French - 



1090 ; nni tKat th^ Auefi oi^ans to fccure the Inijf>t« 
Bfife of diffefont nations is to multiply between them 
tliofe proofs of a fraternal union of fentiment which 
•sighft reeiprocally to animate men equal in rights 
wai happy in the enjoyivieat of the advantages of a 
free confttcution ; 

It was therefore unaoimoufiy i^reei^ that the 
Revolution Society (hould be entreated to accept the 
cffiafio^s of lively feniibiUty and gratitude with wbicli 
thi^ Society w^ animated at the reading of the Addrefs 
IB which t^t Society has fo worthily manifefted the 
intereft it takes in the eJSbrts of the French nation^ 
to eftahlifh a conflitution which will enable it to be 
;i partaker with the Englifh people in the very greet 
tleffings attached li^ freedom: and that i^ defires 
nothing more ardendy than to fee fraternal concord 
cftahliflved between the two nations, without which 
they would both lofe the fruits of that precious 
^freedom of ip^hich they have proved themfelves fo 
worthy. 

Kefotved alfoir that a Copy of the prefent reibhitioa 
fliatl be fent by the Prefideot to th^ B^evolutioii 
Soeiety^ of London* 

(The Regifter Signed) VOLFIUS* 

^Extradt Signed) Valiant Juh# 

Secretary of the Patriotic Society' 
of Dijon, 



Ifffe^ 



APPEKDI^ d^ 



Letter frm the Members ef the Patriotic Uniim 
of the Town and Caftleward of Lislb, to the 
Chairman and Members of the RevoIutiM 
Stfdety in London. 

COPY- 

Messieurs^ 

Si rien n'eft plus capable de flatter TAffemblee 
Nationale de la France, que vos applaudiflemeas i 
ibn ouvr^e^ rien, en mfrne tems^ n'efl plus 
fTopre ^ue votre jugement) a Aaas en garantir le 
fucces. II faut Tavouer, Meffieurs,.en Politiqus* 
comme en Philofophie, v6tis etes les maitfes et 
les mod^es de toute la terre. C'efl chez vous, oui^. 
c^efl dans votre ile fortunee, que la Uberte, cant'^ 
battue, repoufiSe de toutes parts par le defpotiCine^ 
a trouve un azile facre> et 11 k France va^ enfia* 
jouir de ce bien precieux, elle en fera peutctre plus 
redevable a yotre nation qu'a elle nieme; car, fi 
nous n'avoins €te encourages par votre exemple, et 
eclaires par votre experience, nous feriohs peut-ctntf 
encore bien eloignes de rompre les chaines fous les 
quelles nous etions courbes, et nous gimerions 
tticore fous ce joug odieux qui tifannife et referrtf 
les lacultes de Thomme, qui commande a la pen^e^ 
qui degrade fon eflencc, je veux dire, Tempire des 
ptiyug^s ^t de la fuporftition. 

La noblefle de votre precede a I'egard des Franfais^ 
im les for^ant au refpe£t et a la rei^onnaiflancey 

prouvd 



28 4 P ^ £ N I> I 3Ca 

prouve a la fois a I'Europe entiere^ que la Jaloufley tti 
iiijufles rivalitesy et toutes les petites paffions bafles 
ne trouVent pdint d'acces dans Tame elevee des 
Pbilofophes amis de la liberte. 

Agreez Ie$ remercimens particuliers d'une afibcla- 
tion d'hommes, admirateurs de votre gcDerofite, 
€t foyez perfuades des fentimens de refpe£l;^ aveo 
les quels, nous avons Thonneur d'etre. 

Messieurs, 

Vos tres humbles, et tres^ 

Obeiflans Seviteurs, 

Lt:s Membres de l'Union Patriote de* 

ViLLE ET Ch ATELLENIE D£ LlU.E# 

Lille lezime. Nov. ijSg. 

G. Jacquerje 

Secretaire* 

ilf. M. Lei Trefidenti it Memhns A 
Clttb> d$ la RevpliUhn. hmdnsi 



TRANSLAtlON* 

Gentlemen, 

AS nothing is more flattering to the Na^ 
tional Aflembly of France than your approbation o4 
its proceedings, fo nothing at the fame time is 
more proper than your judgment to fecure tbe 
fuccefs of them. It muft be owned. Gentlemen, 
that in politics as in philofophy, you are the 

inftru&ors 



inlttu6lcrs and examples of the whole world. It 
is among you, yes, it is in your favoured ifle, that 
liberty every where attacked and trampled upon by 
defpotifm has found a facred afylum, and if France 
ihould obtain that invaluable blefling, fhe will 
perhaps be more indebted for it to your nation than 
to herfelf ; for if we had not been encouraged by 
your example, and enlightened by your experience, 
we might yet perhaps have been unable to break 
thofe chains under which we were bowed down, and 
we fliould ftill have groaned under that odious yoke 
(the empire of prejudices and fuperftition) which 
tynlnnixcs over and cramps the faculties of man, 
enflaves his mind, and degrades his nature. 

Your noble conduA towards the French nation 
demands both our refpefk and gratitude, and at the 
fame time demonftrates to all Europe, that jealoufy, 
nnjuft rivalfhip, and bafe paffions are incapable of 
finding accefs to the exalted minds of philofophers, 
friends of liberty. 

Accept the particular thanks of an affociation of 
men, admirers of your generofity ; and be perfuaded 
of the fentiments of refpedt with which we have 
the honour to be. 

Gentlemen, 
Your very humble and very obedient fervants, 

TheMemBersof the Patriotic Union of the 

Town and Castle Ward of Lille. 

C yacquerye. 

Secretary. 
Li Iky 26 Nov. 1789; 

M It 



3© APPENDIX. 

It will be aftonifhing if any perfon, whp ha^within 
him a fpark of zeal for liberty and human happinefs, 
fliould be able to read thefe papers without delight* 
They prove the truth of the obfervation in the note, 
?• 30. We fee in them (to ufe the language of the 
excellent Duke de Rochefoucauld) the dawn of a 
glorious day— of a day when ({hould fentiments con- 
genial to thofe in France prevail in Britain) two na* 
tions at the head of the world, convinced of the folly 
of wars and laying adde all jealoufies, ihall embrace 
one another, and form a fraternal and intimate union, 
not for the vile purpofes of avarice and conqueft, but 
to fpread the knowledge of human rights, to extend 
the bleflings of juftice and liberty, and to promote 
feace on eatth andgond will amsng men^ 



The following anfwers to thefe communicatioBS 
have been ordered by the Revolution Society : 

Note in anjwer to the Archbijhop of Aix's Letter. 

The members of the Revolution Society in London 
requeft the Archbifliop of Aix's acceptance of their 
heft thanks for the letter which he has direfied to 
Earl Stanhope their Chairman, and for conveying to 
them the Vote of the National Aflembly of Frahce. 
They could fcarcely have received a higher fatif- 
fa(3ion than has been given them by the ArchbiJhop's 
letter, and the condefcending notice with which the 
National Aflembly has been pleafed to honour their 
Congratulatory Addrefs. They feel particularly the 
juftice which this auguft aflembly has done them, by 

imputing 



A P P E N D I X»: %t 

imputing their addrefs to the influence of thofe prin- 
ciples of univerfal benevolence which ought in all 
countries to bind together the friends of humari 
liberty and happinefs. Their hearts are warmed with 
thefe principles j and they defire nothing fo earneftly 
as that the time may foon come when they Jhall f9 
poffefs every human heart as to put an end to all jea- 
loufies between nations, exterminate oppreffion and 
flavery, and caufe wars, thofe dreadful errors of go vem- 
ments, to ceafe in all the earth. They exult in th# 
profpefk of fuch a time, which feems to be opening, 
and with which the proceedings of the National 
Aflembly of France promife to blefs mankind. 

The Revolution Society cannot avoid taking this 
occafion to add, that among thei*rfportant benefits of 
the Revolution in France, they reckon its tendency 
to aflFord a falutary inftru<Slion to Kings. They 
learn with pleafure that the People of France an^ 
happy in a King wha has encouraged them by hi a 
virtues in recovering their rights, and been on thia 
account juftly crowned with the title of the Re* 
sTORER OF French Liberty, This elevates him 
to the Wgheft pinnacle of glory. The defpots of the 
world muft now fee their folly. This example 
muft fliew them that they can never be fo great or 
happy> or truly powerful, as by renouncing defpotic 
power, and being placed (like the Kings of France 
and England) at the head of an enlightened people 
wd free conftitutions of government? 

Signed by Earl Stanhope, in the name of 
the Society. 

■ • 

M ^ - Itttfr 



^% i^; P P E K D I Xf 

Letter in anfwer to the Letter from the Patriotic 

Society at Dijon. 

To Mr. TAhhe VoLFlus, Prejid$nt of the Patriotic 

Society at DijON, 

SIR, 

THE Revolution Society in London have 
teccived with the higheft pleafure the Refolqtion of 
Thanks which you have tranfmitted to them fron^ the 
Fatriotic Club at Dijon, They are delighted with 
the Speech of Mr. Kavier ; and they concur heartily 
in the wiihes cxprefled by him, and the other mem- 
ters of the Patriotte^Club, of a Fraternal Union 
between this country and theirs. Among the bene- 
fits of the revolution in France they reckon its tea* 
dcncy to piodiice fuch an union, founded on a com- 
mon participation in the bleffirigs of liberty, and an 
extenfion of thofe principles of juftice and reverence 
for human rights which are now guiding the proceed- 
ings of the National Aflembly of France, and mak- 
ing them a glorious example to the world. 
• buch without doubt will be the iffue of this revo- 
lution, fliould that ardor of univerfal benevolence 
which the members of the Revolution Society in 
London feel in 'heir own hearts, poffefs the hearts of 
all their countrymen. 

May Heaven blefs the world with an union fo de-^ 
firable, and fufFer no partial interefts or popular vio- 
lences to prevent the citizens of France from en- 
joying all thebleffings that can be derived from a wife, 
aj}d equitable, and free gonftitution of government ! 

Under 



A P F £ N D I X. S3 

Ujftder a grateful fenfe of the attention with which 
the Society of which you are Prefident has honoured 
tfae Revolution Society^ and with the greateft refpeS^ 
I ^m^ Sir^ &c. 

Signed by Earl Stanhope, Chairman, 
in the name of the Society. 

X^etter in anfzver to the Letter from the Members 
efihe Patriotic Union of the ^own of Lis lb. 

To the Members of the Patriotic Union qfthe Town ofLiJle^ 

Gentlemen, 

ACCEPT our gratitude for the very obliging 
letter with which you have honoured us. Our Con- 
gratulatory Addrefs to the National Aflembly of 
France was derived from the warmed: zeal in the 
general caufe of liberty and human happinefs ; and 
we have been highly gratified by the favourable man* 
per in which it has been received. Confidering our- 
felves more as citizens of the world than as members 
of any particular community, we cannot but rejoice 
in every event by which this facred caufe gains a tri- 
umph over arbitrary power and oppreffion. The late re- 
volution in your country is an event of this kind won- 
derful and unparalleled. It was not pollible we (hould 
bear of it without the livelieft feelings of delight and 
exultation ; nor could we, without doing violence to 
ourfelves, avoid exprefling thefe feelings, and afpiring 
tp the honour of being known to the people of France, 
f^od acquainting them with our admiration of them as 
t?"^ enljghtened people, who with a fpirit and una- 
nimity 



fiimity never before known in fo vafl a kingdoih^ and. 
that feemed like an infpiration from heaven^ had 
^aken off the odious yoke of defpotifm, ailerted and 
recovered the rights of men, and made themfelvej^ 
joint partakers with us in the invaluable bleffings of 
civil and religious liberty. 

We cannot help adding on this occadon, that we 
admire the liberality of the members of the Patriotic 
l(Jnion of Li^le in afcribing the deliverance of 
France to the exaipple of England ; and th^t i( is 
with pleafure we refleft that an acknowledgment fo 
c;^n4id.and generous is not altogether without foundar 
tiofi. Britain has undoubtedly ever (Ince the aera 
of its own Revolution been a moft diftinguifhed and 
favoured kingdom*, ?. an4 held oyt to the world an 
example of nqitional dignity and happinefs derived 
frpm the poffeflion of liberty, which has inftru(Se4 
other kingdoms. BujL our regard to truth requires us^ 
^t tlie fame time that we thus boaft, to acknowledge 
that Kow the tiipe fepms to be arrived when we ftiall 
Jofe this honourable 4iftin£lion. France is taking the 
Jead; and Britain will be left behind, if not provoked 
by the example of France to correft abufes that are 
every day growing more palpable ; and, in particular^! 
to fubfiitute for it§ prefent partial an4 imperfe<5l repre-? 
fentation fuch an equal and pure reprefentation gs pup 
jjrethren in France are likely to enjoy. 

With fentiments of the warmeft efteem, we are^ 
Gentlemen, 
Your moft obedient and humble Servants^. 

The Members of the 
BjvoLUTioN Society in London^ 



Publijhed by the fame Author ^ 
And printed for T. Cadell, in the Straiid. 

L /^BSERVATIONS on Reversionary Pay- 
\>^J MB NTS; on Schemes for providing Annuities 
for Widows, and for Perfons in Old Ace ; on the Method 
of calculating the Values of Assurances on Lives; and ort 
the National Debt. To which are added. Four Essays 
on difierent Subjedls in the Dodrine of Life Annuities and 
Political Arithmetick. The Fourth Edition, enlarged 
into Two Volumes by Additional Notes and Effays, a Col- 
lection of New Tables, a Hiftoiy of the Sinking Fund, 2t State 
of the Public Debts in January 1783, and a PostscIIipt on 
the Population of the Kingdom* rrice 1 5s. bound. 

IL Two Trafts on Civil Liberty, the War with Ame* 
RICA, and the Debts and Finances of the Kingdom; with a 
General' Introdu^on and Supplement. The 8th Edition. 
Price 6s. bound. 

IIL A Review of the principal Queftions and Difficulties iii 
Morals. Particularly, thofe relating to the Original of our 
ideas of Virtue, its Nature, Founcfition, Reference to the 
Deity, Obligation, Subjeft-Matter, and Sanftions. The ^di 
Edition. With an Appewdix; containing Additional Notes, 
3nd a Diflertation on the Being and Attributes of the Deity. 
Price 6s. 

IV. Four Dissertations.— L On Providence. —If. Oa 
Prayer.— IIL On the Reafons for expeding that virtuous Men 
fliall meet after Death in a State of Happinefs. — IV. On the 
Importance of Chrillianity, the Nature of Hillorical Evidence, 
and Miracles. The 4th Edition. Price 6s. 

. V. An Appeal to the Public, on the Subjeifl of the 
Kational Debt. The 2d Edition; with an Appendix, 
Containing Explanatory Obfervations and Tables; and an Acr 
count of the prefent State of Population in Norfolk. Price 2s. 

VL A Sermon delivered to a Congregation of Proteftant 
Diffenters, at Hackney, pn the loth of Feb. 1779, being the 
Day appointed for a General Faft. The 2d Edition. To 
which are added. Remarks on a PafTage in the Bilhop of Lon- 
don's Sermon on Afh-Wednefdav, 1779. Price is. 

VIL A 



BOOKS printed for T. CADEtL. 

ViL A Discourse addreffed to a Cof^regation at Ha c j!« 
KEY, on Ffebruaty 21, 1781, being thd Day appointed for a 
Fablic Faft, Price is, 

VIlL An Essay on the Population of ENGLAND^from 
the Revolution to the prefent Time. With an Appendix, con- 
taining Remarks oh mt Account of the Population, Trade, and 
Refources of the Kingdom, in Mr. Eden's Letters to Lord Car* 
liile. The 2d Edition. Price 2s. 

IX. The Evidence for a future Period of Improvement m 
the State of Mankind, with the Means and Duty of promoting 
It reprefented, in a Difcourfe delivered the 25th of April) 
1787, at the Meeting- Houfe in the Old Jewry, London, to 
the Su^>orters of a New Academical Infiitution among Pro- 
tcftant DifTencers. 

X. Sermons on tlie Christian Doctrine, as received 
by the different Denominations of Chriftians. To which are: 
added. Sermons on the Security and Happinefs of a Virtuous 
Courfe; on the Goodnefs of God^ and the Refunedlion of 
Lazarus. The 2d Edition, corredted. With an Appendix, 
occafiobed by Dr. Prieflley's Letters to the Author, 

XL Observations on the Importance of the Ame- 
rican Re VOL u T ION ; and the Means of making it a Benefit 
to the World. To which is added, A Letter to the Author, from 
M. Turcot, late Comptroller General of the Finances of 
France. With an Appendix, containing a Tranflation of the 
Will ofM. FortuneRicard; lately publilhcd in France. 

Printed for Mr. Johnfon^ in St. PauPs Church- Tard. 

XIL A Free Discussion of the Doctrines of Mate- 
rialism and Philosophical Necessity, in a Cone* 
fpondence between Dr. Price and Dr. Prieftley, 



w- 



\
