This is a digital copy of a book thaï was prcscrvod for générations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's bocks discoverablc online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose légal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia présent in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journcy from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we hâve taken steps to 
prcvcnt abuse by commercial parties, including placing lechnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use thèse files for 
Personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do nol send automated queries of any sort to Google's System: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character récognition or other areas where access to a laige amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for thèse purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogX'S "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informingpcoplcabout this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it légal Whatever your use, remember that you are lesponsible for ensuring that what you are doing is légal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countiies. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any spécifie use of 
any spécifie book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps rcaders 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full icxi of ihis book on the web 

at |http: //books. google .com/l 



Hagerman Collection 



HliTORÏ AND POLITICAL SCIENCE 



JAMB J. HAGERftAN OF ClASSOF -61 



Profcs*ar Charlei Kcndall Mtmt 



4. 



E s s A Y 



FIRST PRINCIPLES 

O F 

GOVERNME NT, 

AND ON THE ÎJATVRE OF 

Political, Civil, and Religions 
LIBERTY, 

INCI.UD1NG 

Remarks on Dr, Brown's Code of Education, 

AN D o N 
Dr, Baicuy's Sermon on Church Authority. 

The Second Edition, coTrcfled and enUrgeJ, 

Bv JOSEPH P^ILSTLEV, LL-D. F.R.S. 

L N D N: 

iprioied fût J. Johnson, No -jz, in 5:. Paai's Church-YarJ. 




oTC 
\7fc 

ni 



i O/Cyî^' '*■-<''*'> CVi-t-ftlcff»! 



T HE 



PREFACE. 



TH I S publication owes its rifë to 
xht Remarks I wrote on Dr. Browtis 
propofalfor a code of éducation. Several 
pcrfons who were pleafed to think fa- 
voûrably of that performance, (in which 
I was led to mention the fubjeâ of civil 
and religions liberty) were defirous that 
I fliould treat of it more at large, aUd 
without any immédiate view to the Doc-* 
tor*s work. It appeared to them, that 
/ fome of the views I had given of this 
important^ but difficult fiibjeél, . were 
new, and fhowed it, in a clearer . ligjit 
than any in which they had feen it re- 
^ prefented before ; and they thought I had 
(; placed the foundation of fome of the 
moft valuable interefts of mankind on a 
^* broaderand firmer bafîs, than Mr. Locke, 
1 and others who had formerly writteu 
^v upon this fubjedl^ I hâve endeavourcd 
( to anfwer the wilhes of my friends, in 

A the 



vi PREFACE. 

the beft manner I am able ; and, at the 
fametime, I hâve retained the fubftance 
of the former treatifc, having diftribut- 
ed the fèveral parts of it into the body 
of this. 

In this fecmtd édition^ I hâve alfo in- 
troduced wbat I had written on Church-- 
authoritj, in anfwer to Dr. Balguys fèr- 
mon on that fubjeél, preached at Lam* 
beth chapel, and publiflied by order of 
the Archbifliop. As I do not mean to 
republiflieitherthe Remarks mi Dr. Bronvn^ 
or thefe on Dr. Balguy^ feparately, and 
the fubjeéls of both thofe pièces hâve a 
near relation to the gênerai one on Civil 
and Religions Liberty , I thought there 
would be a propriety in throwing them 
into one treatife. 

I had no thonghts of animadverting 
npon Dn Warburton in this work, till I 
was informed by fome intelligent and 
worthy clergymen of my acquaintance, 
that his Alliance is generally confidered 
gis the beft dcfence of the prefent fyftem 



of 



PREFACE. vii. 

of church-authority, and that moft o- 
ther writers took their arguments from it. 

In a poftfcript to this work he informs 
us, p. 271, that, in it, the r coder njoïll 
Jcc confuted at large j what he calls a puri^ 
tanical principky and alfo an ahfurd affer^ 
tion of HookerSy by, ivbich he entangled 
himfelf and bis catife in inextripable difficul'' ' 
tiesy viz. that cvuil and ecclefiaftical ponver 
are things feparated by nature^ and more 
efpeciaUy by divine infiitutioni andfo inde^ 
pendent of one another^ that they mtift al-- 
nvay s continue independent. Whateveriuc- 
cefs this wiiter may hâve had in pulling 
up other foundations, I think he had bet<^ 
ter hâve left thofe of the church as he 
found them : for the difficulties in which 
the fcheme of the Alliance is entangled, 
appear to me to be far more inextricable, 
than thofeofany other fcheme of church- 
authority that I hâve yet £een. Ail that 
can be faid in its favour is, that, having 
lefs of the fimplicity of truth, and, con- 
fequently, being fupported with more 
art and fophiftry, the abfurdity of it is 
not fo obvions at ârft fîght, though it be 

ten 



vlii I» R E F À C E. 

■ • 

teft rimes more glaring after it has been 
fuflSiciently attended to. 

Sony I am to be under the ncccffity 
of troubling my reader with the répéti- 
tion of any thing that h?is been faid be- 
fore on= this fubjedt, in my remarks on 
' thofe writers ; but wheii the famé argu- 
ments are urged again and again, it is 
împoffible always to find new, or better 
anfwers. I flatter myfelf, however, that 
feveral of the obfervations in this treatifè 
will appear to be new, at leaft, that fome 
things will appear to be fet in a new or 
clearer point of light. But whenever 
the interefts of truth and liberty are at- 
tacked, it is to be wifhed that fome 
would ftand up in their defence, whether 
they acquit themfelves better than their 
predeceflbrs in the famé good oîd caufe^ or 
not. Ne'W books in defence of any prin- 
ciples whatever, will be read by many 
perfons, who will not look into old books, 
for the proper anfwers to them. 

Confiderable advantage cannot but ac- 
crue to the caufe of religions, as well as 

civil 



PREFACE. IX 

civil libcity, from keeping the important 
fubjeA continually in view. We are un- 
der great obligation, therefore, to ail thc 
advocates for church-authority, when- 
ever they are plea>(èd to write in its de- 
fence. 

Every attempt that has hitherto been 
made to ûiake, or undermine the foun- 
dations of the chriftian faith, hath end- 
ed in the finner eftabliihment of it. Al- 
fo, every attempt to fupport the unjuft 
claims of churchmen. over their fellow 
chriftians, hath been equally impotent, 
and hath recoiled upon themfèlves ; and, 
I make no doubt, that this will be the 
îflue of ail the future efforts of interefted 
or mifguided men, in fo weak and un- 
worthy a caufe. 

It will be feen, that I hâve taken no 
notice of any thing that has been writ- 
ten in the controverfy about the Omfef- 
JionaL I would only obferve, and I can- 
not help obferving, that the violent op- 
pofîtion that has been made to the mo- 
deft attempts, both of the candid difqui- 

fttors 



X PREFACE 

jitors^ aiid thofe of the author of the 
QmfeJJional^ and Lis rclpeélable friends, 
to procure a redrefs of only a few of the 
more intolérable grievances the clergy 
labour under, and aremoval of fome of 
the moft çbvious and capital defeds in 
the eftabliihed church, has more weight 
than a hundred arguments drawn from 
tbeory only, in demonftrating the foUy 
of ereéling fuch complicated and un- 
wieldly fyftems of policy, and in fhow- 
^ng the mifchiefs tbat attend them. 

Little did the founders of church e- 
ftablifhments confider, of what unfpeak- 
able importance it is to the interefts of 
religion, that the ambition of chriftian 
minifters be circumfcribed within nar- 
row limits, when they left them fuch 
unbounded fcope for courting prefer- 
ment. But the interefts of religion hâve 
been very little confidered by the foun- 
ders of church eftablifliments, Indeed 
if they had confidered them, how little 
were they qualîfied to make provifion 
for them ? I need not fay what I feel, 
when I find i<d much in tlie writings 

of 



I. 



PREFACE. to 

of ingenious men concemiug the wifdont 
of tkefe conilitutions. It always biings 
to my mind what St. Paul fays of tbc 
nvifdom of this, world in other refpedb, 

Sucfa,. howevcr, is the virtue of ibme 
men, that it is proof againft ail the bad 
influence of the conftitution of which 
they aremembers. Without flattering, or 
tormenting themfelves with a ^uain am^ 
ibitian^ many excellent clergymen, wor- 
thy of a better fîtuation, contentcdly 
fit down to the proper duty of their fta- 
tion. Their only objcél is to do good to 
tbe fouis of men, and their only hope of 
rcward is in that world, where they nvho 
bave been ivife fhall fhine as the brigbtnefs 
qf the firmament, and they nvho bave tum^ 
ed many to righteonfnefs asthe fars for ever 
and ever. Such charaélers as thefe I tru- 
ly révère ; and it is chiefly for the fake 
of forming more fuch, that I wilh the 
eftablifhment of the church of England 
might be reformed in fome efTential 
. points. The powers of reafon and con- 
fcicnce plead for fuch a reformation, but, 
alas ! the powers of this world are a- 

gainft 






Kii P R E F A C E. 



aînft it, This unnatural alfy of religi- 
Oût (or rather her im perious mafter) with- 
Dtit whofe permiffion nothing.can bc 
done, yrïW not admit of it. . 

But at the famé time that, from a 
love of truth, and a juft regard for the 
purity of a divine religion, we bear a 
public teftimony againft thofe abufes 
which menhave introduced into it ; let 
us, as becomes chriftians, hâve the can* 
dour to make proper allowances for the 
•préjudices and prepofTeiîîons, even of the 
fomiders, promoters, and abettoi:s of 
theie anti-chriftian lyftems ; and flîll 
farther let us be £rom indul jging a thought 
to the préjudice of thofe, who hâve been 
«ducated in a révérence for thefe modes 
of religion, and hâve nôt ftrength of 
^nind to feparate their ideas . of thefe 
farmsy from thofe of the poiver of it. In 
this cafe, let us be particularly careful 
:how we give oflFence to.any ferious an4 
well*difpofed minds, and patieatly bear 
with the wheat and the tares growinjg 
together till the harvefti 

Such 



F R E F A C E. xSi 



Sùch is my belicf in dbie dodrîneof 
an œrar-rafing providence, that I hâve 
no doubt, but thàt evcry thing in thc 
whole fyftem o£ nature, how noxiotis 
ioèver it may be in fpme refpeéls, bas 
real, though unknown vSçs ; and alfb 
that cvery thing, even the groffefl abu-' 
£es in the civil or ecclefiaftical çonftituti* 
ons of particular ftates, is fubfervient 
to the wife and gracioùs ddîghs of him^ 
who, notwithftandihg thefë appearances, 
ftill r»fc^ in thâ kmgdoms of mm. 

■ f 

I make no apology for the fftedcnn 
with which I hâve written; The fub- 
je6l is, in the higheft degree, intereft- 
îng to humanity, it is open to philofo-* 
phical difculfion, and I hâve taken no^ 
greater. liberties than becomes a phi- 
lofopher, a man, and an ËngHfhman* 
Having no other views than to promote.a 
thorongh knowledge of this important 
fubjeâ:, not being fenfible of aiiy bialà 
to miflead me in my inquiries, and con- 

fcious of the u prightnefs ofmy intentions, 

I freely fubmit my thoughts to the exami- 

natioi of ail impartial judgcs, and the 

« £irieQidi§ 



xiv P R E FA C E; 

friendsôf their coûntry aiad of mankînd. 
They who know the fervour of gênerons 
feeKngs wUl be fenfiblc, that I Haye ex- 
prefled myfelf withno more warmth than^ 
the importance of thefubjeét necejQTarily 
promptcd, ;in a breaft not naturally the 
coldeft ; and that to hâve appeared more 
indiâerent) I cotdd not havé beenfîncere. 

Beiîdes thé frecdom withrwhicLI hâve 
made dûs defence of civil and religions 
liberty, îs fufBciently juftified by the 
freedom with which they hâve been at- 
tacked ; and thôugh the advocates for 
. chnrch pôwer are vcryready to accufe 
the Diffenters of indecency^ when, in de- 
fending themfelves, they refleél upon 
the eftabliflied chm*ch ; yet I do not fee 
why, in a judgment of eqnity, the famé 
civility and decency fliould not be ob- 
ferved on both fides ; of why infolence 
on one fidé fhould not be anfwered by 
contempt on thé other. 

Notwithftànding the ardôur of mind 
with which, it wiU be évident, fome 
parts of the following treatife were 

■written 



PRE F A t E. 



vr 



Twittên, the wannth with whîcb 1 hâve 
efpotilcd the caufe of lîberty , arid thc 
feverity with which I hâve animadvertcd ■ 
upon: whatever lappréhend to bè unfâ- 
vourable to it ; I think I cannot bé juftly 
aecufed of party zeai, becaùfè it will be 
found^ that I hâve treated ail parties with 
equal fiteedom. ïndeed, fiich is the 
ufiiar violence of humah paffions, when 
ahy thîng interefting to them is con- 
tended for, that the beft caufè in the 
world is not fufficietit to prevent intem- 
pérance and excefs ; fb that it is eafy to 
lee too much to blâme in ail parties : and 
it.by no means follows, that, becaufe a 
man difapproves of the condudl of one, 
that he muft, therefore, approve of that 
of its oppofite. The greateft enemy of 
popery may fee fomething he diflikes in 
the conduifl of the firft reformers, the 
warmefl zeal againft epifcopacy is con- 
fiftent with the juft fenfe of the fanlts of 
the puritans, and much more may an 
enemy of Charles the firft^ be an enemy 
of Cromwell alfo. 



N.B. 



XVI 



PREFACE. 



N: B. Let it be obferved, that, in 
this treatife, I propofe no more than to 
confîder the Jirji principks of civil and 
religions liberty, and to explain fome 
leading ideas upon the fabjeâ. For a 
more extenfive view of it, as afîèdting a 
gréa ter variety of particnlars in the fyftem 
bf government, I refer to the courfe of 
leéiures on hijlory and civil pQlicy ; ^Jylla-- 
bus of which is printed in the Effay on a 
courfe of libéral éducation for civil and 
aâlive life, and the whole of which, with 
enlargements, I propofe to publifh in 
due time. 









SECTION 



■•r 



SECTION L 



Ofthe Firft Principles of Government^ 
and the différent kinds of Liberty. 



M AN dérives two capital advan- 
tages from the iuperiority of his 
intelleâxial powers. The firft 
iS) that, as an individual, he pofTefles 
a certain comprehenfion of mind, 
whereby he contemplâtes and enjoys the 
paft and the future, as well as the pre- 
fent, This compçehenfion is enlarged 
with the expérience of every day ; and by 
this means the happinefs of man, as he 
advances in intelleâ, is continually lefs 
dépendent on temporary circumftanccs 
and fenfations» 

The next advantage refultîng from the 
famé principle, and which is, in many 
refpe^i both the caufe and eâeâ ofthe 

B former^ 



2 THE FIRST PRINCIPLES 

former, is, that the human fpecies itfelf 
-îs capable of a fîmilar and unbounded 
improvement ; whereby mankind in a 
later âge are greatly fuperior to mankind ^ 
in a former âge, the individuals being 
taken at the famé time of life. Of this 
progrefs of the fpecies, brute animais 
are more incapable than they are of that 
relating to individuals. No horfe of 
this âge feems to hâve any advantage o- 
ver other horfes of former âges ; and if 
there be any improvement in the ipecies, 
it is ow^ing to our manner of breeding 
and training them. But a man at this 
time, who has been tolerably well edu- 
cated, in an improved chriftian country, 
is a being poiTefled of much greater 
povvrer, to be, and to make happy, than 
a perfon of the famé âge, in the famé, or 
any ôther country, fome centiyiès ago. 
And, for this reafon, I jnake no doubt, 
that a perfon fome centuries hence will, 
at the famé âge, be as much fuperior 
to us. 

The great infiniment in the hand of 
divine providence, ofthis progrefs of the 

fpecies 



OF GOVERNMENT. j 

Ipecies towards perfedlion, is fociety, and 
confcquentlj govemment. In a date of 
natxire the powers of any indi vidual are 
diflîpated hy an attention to a multipli- 
clty of objedls. The employments of ail 
are fîmilar. From génération to généra- 
tion every man does the famé that every 
other does, or has done, and no perfoa 
begins where another ends ; at leaft, 
gênerai improvem'ents are exceedingly 
flow, and uncertain. This we fee ex- 
emplified in ail barbarous nations, and 
efpecially in countries thinly inhabited, 
where the conneâions of the people are 
flight, and confequently fbciety and go- 
verninent very imperfedl; and it may 
be feen more particularly in North Ame- 
rica, and Greenland. Whereas a date 
of more perfedl fociety admits of a pro- 
per diftribution and divifion of the ob- 
jets of human attention. In fuch a 
ftate, men are connedled with and fub- 
fervient to one another ; fo that, while 
one man confines himfelf to one fingle 
objedl, another may give the famé undi- 
vided attention to another objeél. 

B 2 Thus 



4 THE FIRST PRINCIPLES 

Thus the powers of ail hâve their fall 
effedl î and hence arife improvements in 
ail the conveniencesoflife, and in every 
branch of knowledge. In this ftate of 
things, it requires but a few years^to 
comprehend the whole preceding pro- 
grefs of any one art or fcience ; and the 
reft of a man's life, in which his facul- 
ties are the moft perfecîl, may be given 
to the extenfion of it. If, by this means, 
one art or fcience fhould grow too large 
for an cafy comprehenfion, in a moderate 
fpace of time, a commodious fubdivifîon 
will be made. Thus ail knowledge wilf 
bc fubdivided and extended ; and knonv- 
ledge^ as Lord Êacon obferveSj being 
power, the human powers will, in fadl, 
be enlarged ; nature, including both its 
materials, and its laws, will be more at 
our command ; men will naake their fitua- 
tion in thi§ world abundantly more eafy 
and comfortable ; they will probaWy 
prolong their exiftence in it, and will 
grow daily more happy, each in himfelf, 
and more able (and, I believe, more dif- 
pofed) to communicate bappinefs to 
others. Thus, whatever was the be- 

ginning 



OF GOVERNMENT. 5 

guming of dhiis world, tîie end will be 
glorious and paradifaical, beyond what 
our imaginations can now conceive. 
Extravagant as ibme may {(uppoCe thefe 
views to be, I think I could fhow 
tbem to be fairly fuggefted by the true 
theory of human nature, and to arife 
f rom tiie natural courie of human afiaîrs. 
But, for the prefent, I wave this fubjeA, 
the contemplation of which always 
m^kes me happy. 

Govemtnent being the great infini- 
ment of this progrefs of the human fpecies 
towards this glorious flate, that form of 
goverriment will hâve a jiift clàim to our 
approbation which favours this progrefs, 
and that muft be condemned in which 
it is retarded. Let us then, my fellow 
citizens, confider the bufînefs of govern- 
m^nt with thefe enlarged views, and trace 
fome of the fundamental principles of it, 
by an attention to what is moft conduci ve 
to the happinefs of mankind at prefent, 
and moft favourable to the increafeof this 
happijîiefs in futurity ; and, perhaps, we 
may underftand this intricatefubje<îl,with 

B 3 fome 



6 THE FIRST PRINCIPLES 

fome ofitsmoft important circumftances, 

better than we hâve donc ; at leaft we 

» 

may fee fome of them in a clearer and 
ftronger point of light. 

Tobegin with firft principles, we muft, 
for the fake of gaining clear ideas on the 
fubjeél, do what almoft ail political writ- 
ers hâve done beforeus ; that is, we muft 
fuppofe a number of people exifting, who 
expérience the inconvenience of living in- 
dependent and unconneéled ; who are ex- 
pofed, without redrefs, to infults and 
wrongs of every kind, and are too weak to 
procure themfelves many of the advan- 
tages, which they are ftnfible might 
eafily be compafTed by united ftrength. 
Thefe people, if they would engage the 
protedlion of the whole body, and join 
their force in enterprizes and undertak- 
ings calculated for their common good, 
muft voluntarily refign fome part of their 
natural Uberty, and fubmit their con- 
du6l to the diredlion of the commu- 
nity : for without thefe conceflions, fuch 
^n alliance, attended with fuch advan- 
çages, cpuld not be formed. 

Were 



OF GOVERNMENT. ^ 

Were thefe people few in number, and 
living. within a ûnall diftance of one 
another, it might be eafy for them to 
ailèmblc upon every occafion, in which 
the wjhole body was concerned ; and every 
thing might be determined by the votes 
of the majority, provided they had previ- 
oufly agreed that the votes of a majority 
fliould be decifive. But were the fo- 
ciety numerous, their habitations remote, 
and the occafîons on which the whole body 
muft interpofe fréquent, it would be abfb- 
lutely impoffible that ail the members of 
the ftate fhould affemble, or give their 
attention to public bufînefs. In this café, 
though, with Roujfeauy it be a giving up 
of their liberty, there muft be deputies, 
or public officers, appointed to aâ in 
the name of the whole body ; and, in 
a ftate of very great extent, where ail 
the people côuld never be aflembled,^ the 
vrhole power of the community muft 
necefîarily, and almoft irreverfibly, be 
lodged in the hands of thefe deputies. 
In England, the king, the hereditary 
lords, and the eledors of the houfe of 
commons, are ihefejianding deputies ; and 

the 



fi THE FIRST PRINCIPLES 

the members of the houfe of commons 
are, again, the temporary deputies of this 
kft order of the fkate. 

In ail ftates, great or fmall, the fenti- 
ments of that body of men in whofe 
hands the fupreme power of the fockty is 
lodged, mufl be underftood to be the 
fentiments of the whole body, if there 
be no other method in which the fenti- 
ments of thé whole body càn be ex- 
preffed. Thefe deputies, or reprefenta- 
tives of the people, will make a wrong 
judgment, and purfue wrong meafures, if 
they confult not the good of the whole 
fociety, whofe reprefentatives they are ; 
juft as the people themfelves wonld 
make a wrong judgment, and purfue 
wrong meafures, if they did not confult 
theîr own good, provided they could be 
afïèmbled for that purpofe. No maxims 
or rules of policy can be binding upon 
them, but fuch as they themfelves fhall 
judge to be conducive to the public good. 
Theirownreafon and confciMice are their 
only -^ide, and the people, in whofe 
name they aél, their only judge. 

In 



OF GOVERNMENT. 9 

In thefc circumftances, if ï be aiked 
what ï mean by tiberty^ I âiould chufe, 
for the fafce of gr^atercleamefs, to divîdc 
it into two kinds, political and cwil ; and 
the importance of having clear ideas on 
this fubjeél will be my apology for thé 
innovation. Political liberty, I 
Would fay, confijis in the ptnver^ 'which 
the mèmbers ofihejîate referve to thentjel'ues^ 
of arriving àt the public offices ^ or, at leaft, 
qf having votes in the nomination of thofe 
njuhofll them : and I would chufè to càll 
civil LIBERTY thut poiver over theif 
O'wn aâlions, ivhich the members of thejiate 
refervt to themfelvesy and ivhich their of^ 
ficers mujl not infringe. 

Political liber tjj therefore, is équiva- 
lent to the right of magiftracy, being the 
claim that any member of the ftate hath, 
to hâve his private opinion or judgment 
become that of the public, and thereby 
control the aiSlions of others ; whereas 
civil liberty^ extends no farther than to 
a man's own condudï:, and fignifies the 
right he has to be exempt from the con- 

trol of the fociety, or its agents j that 

• 
is. 



lo THE FIRST PRINCIPLES, &c. 

is, the power he has of providing for his 
own advantage and happinefs. It is a 
man's civil liberty, which is originally in 
its full force, and part of which he facri- 
fices when he enters into a ftate of fociety ; 
and polidcal liberty is that which he may, 
or may not acquire in the compenfation 
he receives for it. For he may either fti- 
pulate to hâve a voice in the public dé- 
terminations, or, as far as the public dé- 
termination doth take place, he may fiib- 
mit to be governed whoUy by others. Of 
thefe two kinds of liberty, which it is of 
the greateft importance to diftinguifh, I 
fliall treat in the order in which I hâve 
mentioned them. 



SECTION 



s E C T I-O N IL 



O F 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. 



IN countries where every member of 
the fociety enjoys an equal power of 
arriving at the fupreme ofEces, and 
confequently of direéling the flrength and 
the fentiments of the whole community, 
there is a date of the moft perfeâ politi- 
cal liberty. On the other hand, in coun- 
tries where a mail is, by his birth or for- 
tune, excluded from thefe offices, or from 
a power of votingfor properperfons to fill 
them ; that man, whateverl)e the form of 
the government, or whatever civil liberty, 
or power over his own adlions he may 
hâve, has no power over thofe of another; 
he has no fhare in the government, and 
therefore has no political liberty at ail. 

Nay 



12 POLITICAL LIBERTY. 

Nay his own conduél, as far as the 
focîety does interfère, is, in ail x:afes, di- 
re(5led by others. 

It may be faid, that no fociety on earth 
was ever formed in the manner repre- 
fented above. I anfwer, it is true ; be- 
caufe ail governments whatever hâve 
teen, in fome meafure, conipulfory, ty- 
rannical, and oppreflive in their origin ; 
but the method 1 hâve defcribed muft be 
allowed to be the only équitable and fair 
method of forjpaing a fociety. And fînce 
every man retains, and can never be de- 
prived of his natural right (founded on a 
regard to the gênerai good) of relieving 
himièlf from ail oppreflîon, that is, from 
every thiog that has been impofèd upon 
him vvritkout his own confent ; this muft be 
iheonly true andproperfoundaition of ail 
the governments iubjGifting in the worîd, 
land that tp whièh the people who corn- 
pofe them hav^ an unalienable right t© 
bring them back, 

It muil neceffarUy be underftood, 
therefore, whether it be expreffed or 

not, 
p 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. ig 

not, that ail peopte live in fbciety for 
their mntual advantage ; fo that the 
good and happiacfs ofthemembers, that 
is the majority of the members of any 
ftate, is the great (landard by which 
€vcry thing relating to that fl:«c muft 
finally be determined. And though it 
may be fuppofed, that a body of people 
miay be bound by a voluntary rdQgna- 
tion of ail their intcrcfts to a ûngjie pcr- 
fon> or to a few, it can never be fuppofed 
that the refignation is obligatory on their 
pofterity ; becaufe it is manifcftly con^ 
trary to the good of the ivhoh that itjhould 
befo. 

I own it is rather matter of furprife 
to me, that this great obje<5t of ail go* 
vcrnment Ihotild hâve been fo little in- 
fifted on by our great writers who hâve 
treated of this fiibjedl, and that more 
ufe hath not been made of it. In treat- 
ing of particular régulations in fiâtes, 
this principle neceffarily çbtruded itfelf ; 
ail arguments in favour of any law being 
always drawn from a confîderation of its 
tendency to promote the public good; 

and 



\4 POLITICAL LIBERTY. 

and yet it has often efcaped the notice of 
writers in difcourfing on the-firft prin- 
ciples* of fociety, and the fubjeét of ci- 
vil and religions liberty. 

This one gênerai idea, properly pur- 
iued, throws the greateft light upon the 
whole fyftem of policy, morals, and, I 
may add, theology too. To a mind not 
warped by theological and metaphyfîcal 
fubtilties, the divine being appears to 
be adluated by no other views than the 
pobleft we can conceive, the happinefs 
of his créatures. Virtue and right con- 
duél confift in thofe affecflions and ac- 
tions whiçh terminate in the public 
good ; juftice and veracity, for inftance, 
having nothing intrinfîcally excellent 
in them, feparate from their relation to 
the happinefs of mankind; and the whole 
fyftem of right to power, property, and, 
every thing elfe in fociety, muft be re- 
gulated by the famé confîderation : the 
decifive queftion, when any of thefe 
fubjefts are examined, being, What 
is it that the good of the community 
requires ? 

Let 



".•V- fi^ 



PÔLITICAL LIBERTY. 15 

Let it be obfèrved, in this place, that 
I by no means aflert, that the good of 
mankind requires a ftate of themofl per- 
fe<îl political liberty. This, indecd, is 
not poflible, except in exceeding fmall 
fiâtes ; in none, perhaps, that are fb 
large as even the republics of ancient 
Greece ; or as Genoa, or Geneva in 
modem times. Such fmall republics as 
thefe,^ if they were defirable, would be 
impraticable î becaufe a ftate of per- 
feâ equality, in communîties or îndi- 
viduals, can never be prefèrved, while 
fome are more powerful, more enter- 
prifing, and morè fiiccefsful in their at- 
tempts than others. And an ambitions 
nation could not wifh for a fairer oppor- 
tunity of arriving at extenfîve empire, 
than to find the neighbouring countriés 
cantoned out into a number of imall go- 
vernments ; which coul d hâve no power 
to withftand it fingly, and which could 
never form fufficiently extenfîve confe- 
deracies, or aét with fufficient unani- 
mity, and expédition^ to oppofè it with 
fuccefs. 

Suppofîng 



ï6 PÔLITICAL LIBERTY. 

Suppofing, thçrefore, that, in order to 
prevent the greateft of ail inconvenienccs, 
very cxtanfive, and confequently abfolute 
monarchies, it may be expédient to hâve 
iuch ftates as Eiïgland, France, and 
Spain ; political liberty mufl, in fome 
meafure, bç reftrained ; but in ivhat 
manner a reftraint fhould be put upon it, 
or hùnv far it fhould extend, is not ea- 
fy tô be afcertained. In gênerai, it fhould 
feem, that none but perfons of confi- 
derabk fortune fhould be capable of ar- 
riving at the higbeft offices in the go- 
vern«ient ; not only becaufè, ail other 
circumflances bcing equal, fuch perfons 
will gcnerally haye had the bcft éduca- 
tion, and confequently be the befl qua- 
llÊed to a<a for the public good ; but be- 
eaufe alfo, they will neceflarily hâve the 
moflpropertyutftake, and will, therefore, 
be EEkoû: iaterefted in the fate of their 
country . 

Let itbe obferved, however, that what 
snay be called a modérât e fortune (though 
a thing of fo variable a nature caaanot 
be defined) fhould be confîdered as équi- 
valent 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. 17 

in this refpeél, to the moft afBuent one. 
Perfons who are bom to a moderate for- 
tune, are, indeed, generally better edu- 
cated, hâve, confequeutly, more enlarg- 
ed minds, and are, in ail refpe<Els, more 
truly independentj than thofe who are 
bom to great opulence. 

For the famé reafon, it may, perhaps, 
be more eligible, that thofe who are ex- 
tremely dépendent fhould not be al- 
lowed to hâve votes in the nomination of 
the chief magiftrates } becaufèthis might^ 
in fome inftances, be only throwing 
more votes into the hands of thofe per- 
fons on whom they dépend. But if, ia 
every date of conûderable extent, we 
fuppofc a gradation of eleélive offi- 
ces, and if we Ukewife fuppofe the low- 
eft clafles of the people to hâve votes 
in the nomination of the loweft officers, 
and, as they increafe in wealth and im- 
portance, to hâve a flxare in the choice of 
perfons to fill the higher pofts, till they 
themfelves be admitted candidates for 
places of public truft ; we Ihall, perhaps^ 
form an idea of as much political liberty 

C as 



î8 POLI TIC AL LIBERTY. 

as is confiftent with tjie ftate of man- 
kind. And I think expérience fhews, 
that the higheft offices of ail, équiva- 
lent to that of king^ ought to be, in fome 
meafure, hereditary, as iuEngland ; élec- 
tive monarchies having generally been 
the théâtres of cabal, confufion, and 
mifery. 

It muft be acknowledged, however, to be 
exceedingly hazardous to the liberties of 
a people, to hâve any office of importance 
frequently filled by the famé perfons, or 
their defcendants. The boundaries of 
very great power can never be fo exaft- 
ly defined, but that, when it becomes 
the intereft of men to extend them, and 
when fo flattering an objecS is kept a 
iong time in view, opportunities will be 
found for the purpofe. What nation 
would not hâve been enflaved by the un- 
controverted fucceffion of onïy three fuch 
princes as Henry IV. of France, Henry 
VIL of England, or the prefent king of 
Pruffia ? The more accomplifhed and 
glorious they were as warriors, or ftatef- 
men, the more dangerous would they 

bc 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. 19 

be 2is princes, in free ftates. It is nothing 
but the continuai fear of a revolt, in fa- 
vour of fome rival, that could keep fuch 
princes within any bounds ; i- e. that 
could make it their intereft to court the 
favour of the people. 

Hereditary nobles ftand in the famé 
predicament with hereditary princes. 
The long continuance of the famé par- 
liaments hâve alfb the famé tendency. 
And had not thefe thing6, together with 
an independent ecclefiaftical power, been 
w^onderfully balanced in our conftitu- 
tion, it could never hâve ftood fb long. 
The more complex any machine is, and 
the more nicely it is fitted to anfwer its 
purpofe, the more liable it is to diforder* 
The more avenues there are to arbitrary 
pQwer, the more attention it requires to 
guard them ; and with ail the vigilance 
of the people of thefe nations, they hâve 
more than once been obliged to hâve re- 
courfe to the fword. The liberties we 
now enjoy, precarious as they are, hâve 
not been purchafe^i without blood. 

Though it be very évident that no of- 

C 2 fice 



20 POLITICAL LIBERTY. 

fice of great truft and power fhould be 
fuffered to continue a long time in the 
famé hands, the fucceffion might be fo 
rapid, that the remedy would be worfe 
than the difeafe. With refpeél to this 
nation, it feems to be agreed, thaty2/>- 
tennial parliaments hâve brought onr li- 

berties into very eminent hazard, and 
that triennialy if not annual parliaments 
would be better. Indeed feptennial par- 
liaments were at firft a dired: ufurpation 
of the rights of the people : for, by the 
famé authority that one parliament pro- 
longed their own power to feven years, 
they might hâve continued it to twicc 
feven, or, like the parliament in 1641, 
hâve made it perpétuai. The bulk of 
the people never fee the moft obvions 
tendencies of things, or fo flagrant a vio- 
lation ôf the conflitution would never 
hâve been fuffered. But whereas a gêne- 
rai clamour might hâve prevented the 
evil, it may require fomething more to 
redrefs it. 

But though the ex^6l médium of jpo- 

litical liberty, with rëfpeiSl either to the 

propcrty 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. 21 

property of men in offices of truft, or to 
their continuance in poivery be not eafily 
Ifixed, ît is not of much confequence to 
do ît ; fince a confîderable degree of per- 
fedliôn in government will admit of great 
varieties in this refpedl ; andthe extrême 
*of political flavery, which excludes ail 
perfons, except one, or a very few, from 
having accefs to the chief magiftracy, or 
from having votes in the choice of magi- 
ilrates, and which keeps ail the pôwer 
of the ftate in the famé hands, or the 
famé familles, is eafily marked out, and 
tiie fatal eflPedls of it are very ftriking. 
For fuch is the ftate of mahkind, that 
perfons poflefled of unbounded power 
will generally aél as if they forgot the 
proper nature and defîgn of their ftation, 
and purlue their own interéft, though 
it be oppofite to that of the commiuiity 
at large. 

Provided thoic who make laws fub- 
mit to them themfelves, and, with refpe<5l 
to taxes in particular, fo long as thofe 
who impofe them|ibear an equal fliare 
with the reft of tne commnnity, there 

C 3 will 



22 POLITICAL LIBERTY. 

will be no complaint. But in ail tafes, 
when thofe who lay the tax upon others 
exempt themfelves, there is tyrarmy ; and 
the man who fubmits to a tax of a penny, 
levied in this manner, is liable to hâve 
the laft penny he has extorted from him. 

Men of equal r^nk and fortune with 
thofe who ufually compofe the Englifh 
houfè of Gommons hâve nothing to fear 
from the impofition of taxes, fo long as 
there is any thing like rotation in that of- 
fice j becaufe thofe who impofe them are 
liable to pay them themfelves, and are 
no better able to bear the burden ; but 
perfons of lower rank, and efpecially 
thofe who hâve no votes in the ele<îlion 
of members, may hâve reafon to fear, 
becaufe an unequal part of the burden 
may be laid upon them. They are ne- 
çeflarily a di/linêi order in the communi- 
ty, and hâve no direét method of con- 
troling the meafures of the legiflature. 
Our increafing game^laivs hâve ail the 
appearance of the haughty decrees of a 
tyrant, who facrifices every thing to his 
pwn pleafure and caprice. 

Upon 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. 23 

Upon thefe principles it is évident, that 
there muft hâve been a grofs inattention 
to the very firll principles of liberty, to 
fay nothing worfe, in the firft fcheme of 
taxing the ijp|iabitants of America in the 
Britifh parliàment. 

But if there be any truth in the prin- 
ciples above laid down, it muft be a 
fundamental maxim in ail governments, 
that if any man hold what is called a 
high rank, or enjoy privilèges, and pré- 
rogatives in a ftate, it is becaufe the 
good of the ftate requires that he ftiould 
hold that rank, or enjoy thofè privi- 
lèges ; and fuch perfons, whether they 
be called kings, Jenators, or nobles ; or 
by whatever names, or titles, they be 
diftinguiflied, are, to ail intents and pur- 
pofes, Ûitferuants of the public j and ac- 
countable to the people for the difcharge 
of their refpedive offices. 

If fuch magiftrates abufe their truft, 
in the people, therefore, lies the right 
oidepofing^ and confequently of puni/hing 
them. And the only reafon why abufes 

which 



24 POLITICAL LIBERTY. 

which hâve crept into offices hâve been 
connived at, is, that the corre<Sling of 
them, by having recourfe to firft 
principles, and the people taking into 
their own hands their rightÉto appoint 
or change their officers, and to afcer- 
tain the bounds of their authority, is 
far from being eafy, except in fmall 
liâtes ; fo that the remedy would often 
be worfe than the difeafe. 

But, in the largeft liâtes, if the a- 
bufes of government Ihould, atany time 
be great and manifell ; if the fervants 
of the people, forgetting their majlers^ 
and their mallers' interell, Ihould purlue 
a feparate one of their own ; if, inllead 
pf confidering that they are made for the 
people, they Ihould confider the peo- 
ple as made for them ; if the oppreffi- 
ons and violations of Aght fliould be 
great, flagrant, and univerfally refented ; 
if the tyrannical governors Ihould hâve 
no friends but a few lycophants, who 
had long preyed i]çon the vitals of 
their fellow citizens, and who might 
be çxpeéled to defçrt a government, 

whenever 



EOLITICAL LIBERTY. 25 

whenever their interefts fliould be de- 
taehed from it : if, in confequence of 
thefe circumflances, it fliould become 
manifeft, that the rifque, which would 
be run in attempting a révolution would 
be trifling, and the evils which might 
be apprehended from it, were far lefs 
than thofe which were aélually fuflFered, 
and which were daily increafing ; in 
the name of God, ï afk, what princi- 
ples are thofe, which ought to reftrain 
an injured and infulted people from af- 
ferting their natural rights, and from 
changing, or even puniftiing their go- 
vernors, that is their fermants ^ who had 
abufed their truft", or from altering the 
whole form of their government, if it 
appeared to be of a ftrudlure fo liable 
to abufe ? 

To fay that thefe forms of govern- 
ment hâve been long eftabliflied, and 
that thefe oppreflions hâve been long 
fufFered, without any complaint, is to 
fupply the flrongeft argument for their 
abolition. Lawyers, who are governed 

by rules and précédents, are very apt to 

fall 



26 POLITICAL LIBERTY. 

fall înto millakes, in determining what is 
right and lawful, in cafés which are, 
in their own nature, prior to any 
fixed laws or précédents. The only rea- 
fon for the authority of précédents and 
gênerai rules in matters of law and go- 
vernment, is, that ail perfons may know 
what is laiv ; which they could not do 
if the adminiftration of it was not uni- 
form, and the famé in fimilar cafés. 
But if the précédents and gênerai rules 
themfelves be a greater grievance than 
the violation of them, and the eftablifli- 
ment of better précédents, and better 
gênerai rules, what becomes of their 
obligation ? Thç neceflity of the thing, 
in the changing courfe of human afFairs, 
obliges ail governments to alter their 
gênerai rules, and to fet up new précé- 
dents in afFairs of lefs importance ; and 
why may not a proportionably greater 
neceflity plead as flrongly for the alté- 
ration of the mofl gênerai rules, and 
for fetting up new précédents in matters 
of the greatefl confequence, afFeâing the 
mofl fundamental principles of any go- 
vernment, and the diflribution of power 
^mong îts feveral members ? No- 



.*■' 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. 27 

Nothing can more juftly excite the in- 
dignation of an honeft and opprefled ci- 
tizen, than to hear a prelate, who en- 
joys a confiderable bénéfice, under a cor- 
rupt government, pleading for its fup- 
port by thofe abominable perverfions of 
fcripture, which hâve been too common 
on this occafion ; as by nrging in its fa- 
vour that pafTage of St. Paul, The poivers 
ivhich be are ordained of God^ and other s 
of a fimilar import. It is a fufficient an- 
fwer to fuch an abfurd quotation as this, 
that for the famé reafon, the powers 
which ivill be will be ordained of God 
alfo. 

Something, indeed, might hâve been 
faid in favonr of the dodlrines oîpajfwc 
obédience and non-reft/lance^ at the time 
v^^hen they were firft ftarted ; but a iSian 
muft be infatuated who willnot renounce 
them now. The Jefuits, about two cen- 
turies ago, in order to vindicate their 
kiiig-killingprinciples, happened, among 
other arguments, to make ufè of this great 
and juft principle, that ail civil power is 

ultimately 



28 POLITICAL LIBERTY. 

ultmately derived from the people : and 
their adverfaries, in England, and elfe- 
where, inftead of fhewing how they 
abufed and perverted that fiindàmental 

principle of ail government in the café 
in queftion, did, what difputants warmed 
with controverfy are very apt to do ; 
they denied the principle itfelf, andmaîn- 
tained that ail civil poiver is derived from 
Gody as if the Jewifh theocracy had 
been eftablifhed throughout the whole 
world. From this maxim it was a clear 
confeqnence, that the governments, which 
at any time fubfift, being the ordinance 
of Godj and the kings which are at any 
time upon the throne, being the vicege-^ 
reitts of God^ muft not be oppofed. 

So long as there were récent examples 
of good kings depofed, and fome of them 
maflacred by wild enthnfiafts, fome in- 
dulgence might be allowed to thofe 
warm, but weak fiiends of fociety, who 
wôuld lày hold of any principle, which, 
howeverillfounded, would fupplyan ar- 
gument for more cffeéhially preferving 
the public pcace j but to maintain the 

famé 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. 29 

famé abfurd priuciples at this day, whea 
the danger from which they ferved to 
flielterus is over, and the heat of contro* 
verfy is abated, fhews the ftrongeft and 
mofl blameable prepoiTeffion, Writers 
in defence of them do not deferve a feri- 
rlous anfwer : and to alledge thofe princi- 
ples in favovir of a comipt govemment, 
which nothing canexcufe but their being 
brought in favour of a good one, is un* 
pardonable. 

The hiftory of this controvcrfy about 
the doâxine of pafllve obédience and 
non-refiftance, afibrds a ftriking example 
of the danger of having recourfe to 
falfe prihciples in controvcrfy. They 
may ferve a paiticular tmn, but, in other 
cafés, may be capable of the moft dan- 
gerous application ; whereas univerfal 
truth will, in ail poffible cafés, hâve the 
beO: confequences, and be ever favourable 
to the true interefts of mankind» 

It will be faid, that it is opening a door 
to rebellionj to aflert that magiftrates, 
abxiiipg their power^ may bè fet afideby 

the 



30 



POLITIGAL LIBERTY. 



the people, who are of courfe their own 
judges when that power is abufed. May 
not the people, it is faid, abufe their 
power, as well as their governors ? I an- 
Iwer, it is very poflible they may abufe 
their power : it is poflible they may ima- 
gine therafelves opprefled when they are 
not : it is poflible that their animofitjr 
may be àrtfully and unreafonably in- 
flamed, by ambitions and enterprifing 
men, whofe views are often beft anfwered 
by popular tumults and infurredlions ; 
and the people may fuffèr in confequence 
of their foUy and prccipitancy. But what 
man is there, or what body of men 
(whofe right to direél their own condudl 
was never called in queflion) but are 
liable to be impofed upon, and to fuflPer 
in confequence of their miftaken appre- 
henfions and precipitate condudl ? 

With refpeâ to large focieties, it is 
very improbable, that the people fliould 
be too foon alarmed, fo as to be driven 
to thefe extremities. In fuch cafés, the 
power of the government, that is, of 
the goyernors, muft be very extenfive 

and 

m 



I 

I 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. 31 

and arbitrary ; and the power of thc peu- 
ple fcattered, and difficult to be united ; 
fo that, if a man hâve common fenfe, he 
will fee it to be madnefs to propofe, 
or to lay any meafures for a gênerai inlur- 
reâion againft the government, except in 
café of very gênerai and great opprefll- 
on. Even patriôts, in fuch circumftanccs, 
will confidef, that prefent evils always ap- 
pear greater in confequenceof their being 
prefent ; but that the future evils of a re-t 
volt, and a temporary anarchy, may be 
much greater than are apprehended at a! 
diftance. They will, alfo, confîder, that! 
unlefs their meafures be perfedlly welÉ 
laid, and their fiiccefs decifive, ending in | 
a change, not of men^ but of things ; not \ 
of governors, but of the rules and ad- I 
miniflxation of government, they will 
only rivet their chains the fafter, and 
bring upon th%mfelves and their country 
tenfold min, 

So obvions are thefe difficulties, that 
lie in the way of procuring redrefs of 
grievances by force of arms, that I think 
we may fay, without exception, that in 

ail 



/ 



32 POLITICAL LIBERTY. 

ail cafés of hoftile oppofition to govern- 
ment, the people muft hâve been in the 
(right ; and that nothing but very great 
ippreffion could drive them to fuch def- 
(erate meafures. The bulk of a people 
îldom fo mnch as complain vyithout rea- 
►n, becaufe they ne ver think of corn- 
iaining till they feel ; fo that, in ail 
c^fes of diflatisfadlion with government, 
is moft probable, that the people are 
ijured. 

/ The café, I ,own, may be otherwife in 
jRiates of fmall extent, vsrhere the power 
bf the governors is comparatively fmall, 
/and the power of the people great, and 
foon united.. Thefefears, therefore, may 
. be prudent in Venice, in Genoa, or in the 
fmall cantons of Switzerland ; but it were 

r 

to the laft degree, abfurd to extend them 
to Great-Britain. ♦ 

The Englifh hiftory will inform us, 
that the people of this country hâve 
always borne extrême oppreffion, for a 
long time before there has appeared any 
danger of a gênerai infurre(^ion againft 

the 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. 



33 



the government. What a fcries of en- 
croachments upon their rights did even 
the feudal barons, whofe number was 
not very coiifîderable, and whofe power 
was great, bear from WilJj^^m the Con- 
queror, and his fucceffors, * before they 
broke put into aétual rébellion on'that ac-*" 
count, as ïn the reigns of king John, and 
Henry the third ! And how much were 
the loweft orders of the poor commons 
trampled upon with impunity by both, 
till a much later period ; when, ail the 
while, they were fo far from attempting 
any refiftance, or even complaining of 
the grofs infringements of their rights, 
that they had not fô much as the idea of 
their having any rights to be trampled 
upon ! After the people had begun to 
acquire property, independence, and an 
idea of their natural rights, how long did 
they bear a load of old and ijew oppref- 
fibns under tlîe Tudors, but more efpe- 
cially under the Stuarts, before they 
broke but into what the friends of arbi- 
trary poyrer afieâ: to call the grand re^ 
bellim ! And how grcat did that obfti- 
nate civil war fliow the power of the 

D kin^ 



54 POLITICAL LIBERTY. 

king to be, notwithftanding the moft 
intolérable and wanton abufe of it ! At 
the clofe of the year 1642, it was more 
probable that the king would hâve pre- 
vailed than tlye parliameht ; and his fuc- 
cefs would Jiave been certain, if his con- 
du6t had not been as weak, as it was 
wickéd. 

So great was the power of the crown, 
that after the refloration, Charles the 
fécond was tempted to adl the famé part 
with his father, and aélually did it, in a 
great meafure, with impunity ; till, at 
laft, he was even able to reign without 
parliaments ; and if he had lived much 
longer, he would, in ail probability, hâve 
been as arbitrary as the king of France. 
His brother James the fécond, had al- 
moft fubverted both the civil and reli- 
gions liberties of his country, in the 
ihort fpacc of four years, and mîght 
hâve done it completely, if he could 
hâve been content to hâve proceeded 
with more caution ; nay, he might hâve 
fucceeded notwithftanding his precipi- 
tancy, if the divine being had not, at 

that 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. 55 

that critical time, raifed up William the 
third, of glorious memory, for our deli- 
Terance. But, God be thanked, the go- 
vernment of this country, is now fixed 
tipon fo good and firm a baiis, and is fo 
generally acquiefced in, that they are 
only the mère tools of a court party, or 
the narrow minded bigots, among the 
inferior clergy, who, to ferve their own 
low purpofes, do now and then pro- 
mote the cry, that the church or the 
ftate is in danger. 

As to what is called the crime of re^ 
bel lion, we hâve nothing to do either 
with the namei or the thing, in the café 
before us. That term, if it admit of 
any définition, is an attempt to fubvcrt 
a lawful government ; but the queftion 
is, whether an oppreffive government, 
though it hâve been ever fo long efta- 
bliftied, can be a lawful one ; or, to 
eut oflF ail difpute aboutwords, if lawful, 
légal, and conftitutional, be maintained 
to be the famé thing, whether the law- 
ful, légal, and conftitutional govern- 
ment be a good government, or one in 

D 2 which" 



\ 

\ 



r 
I 

t 



56 POLITICAL LIBERTY. 

which fuflîcient provifion is madefor thc 
happinefs of the fubjedls of it. If it fail 
in this efïèntiai charac5ter, refpefting the 
tnie end and objeél of ail civil govern- 
meut, no other property or title, with 
which itmay bedignified, oughttofhelter 
it from thegénerous attack of the noble 
anddaring patriot. If the bôld attempt 
be -précipitate, and unfuccefsful, the 
tyrannical. government, will be fùre to 
term it rébellion, but that cenfure can- 
pLOt make the thing itfelf lefs glorious. 
The memory of fuch brave, though un- 
fuccefsful and unfortunate friends of li- 
berty, aud of the rights of mankind, as 
that of Harmodius and Ariftogiton 
among the Athenians, and Ruflel and 
Sidney in our ov^rn country, will be 
had in everlafting honour by their gratte- 
fulfellow citizcnsj and hiflory will fpeak 
anotherlanguagethan laws. 

If it be afked how far a people may 
kv^Uy go in punifhing their chief 
magiftrates, I anfwer that, if the enor- 
mity of the offence (which is of the famé 
extent as the inJBry done to the public) 

be 



/ 



i 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. 37 

bc confidercd, any punifhment is jufti- 
fiable that a man can incur in human fo- 
cicty. It mày bc faid, there arc no 
laws to punifli thofè governors, and we 
muft not condemn perfons by laws made 
éxpàft faâlo ; for this conduâ: will yindi- 
catc thc moft obnoxioiis meafurcs of the 
m.oft tyrannicai adminiftration. But I 
anfWcr, that this is a cafe, in its own na- 
turci priof to thc eftablifliment of any 
laws whatevcr j ^as it afîcdls thc very 
being of focicty, and defeats the prin- 
cipal ends for which recourfe was origi- 
nally had to it/ Theçe may bc no fixed 
law againft an open in vader, who fhould 
attempt to fèize upon a country, with a 
view to enflave ail its inhabitants ; but 
mufl not theinvaderbc apprehended, and 
eyen put todeath, though he hâve broken 
no expreis law then in being, or lîone 
of which he was properly apprized ? 
And why fliould a man, who takes the 
advantage of his being king, or gover- 
iior, to fubvert the laws and liberties of 
his country, bc confidercd in any other 
light than that of a forcign invader? 
Nay his crime is much more atrocious^ 

as 



38 POLITICAL LIBERTY. 

as he was appointée! the guardian of the 
laws and libertîes, which he fubverts, 
and which he was, therefore, under the 
flxongeft obligation to maintain. 

In a café, therefore, of this highly 
criminal nature, falus populi fuprema ejt 
lex. That muft be donc which the good 
of the whole requires ; and, generally, 
kings depofed, baniflied, or împrifoned, 
^re highly dangerous to a nation ; be- 
(caufe, let them hâve governed ever fo ill, 
it will be the intereft of fome to be 
their partifans, and to attach themfelves 
to their caufe. 

It will be fuppofed, that thefe obfer- 
vations hâve a référence to what pafFed 
in England in the year 1 648. Let it be 
fuppofed. Surely a man, and an En- 
glilhman, may be at liberty to give his 
opinion, freely and without difguife, con- 
ceming a tranfaélion of fo old a date. 
Charles the firft, whatever he was in his 
private charadler, which is out of the 
queftion hère, was certainly a very bad 
king of England. During a courfe of 

many 



POLI TIC AL LIBERTY. 39 

many years, and notwithflanding re- 
peated remonftrances, he governed by 
maxims utterly fubverfive of the funda- 
mental and free conftitution of this 
country ; and, thérefore, he deferved 
the fevereft punifliment. If he was 
mifled by his éducation, or his friends, 
he was, like auy other criminal, in the 
famé circumftances, to be pitied, but 
by no means to be fparcd on that ac- 
count. 

ïrom the nature of things it was ne- 
ceffary that the oppofitïon Ihould begin 
from a few, who ,niay, thérefore, be 
ftiled a fa6lion ; but after the civil war 
(which neceffarily enfued from the king's 
obftinacy, and in which he had given 
repeated inftances of difîimulation and 
treachery) there was evidently no fafety, 
either for the faélion or the nation, fliort 
of his death. It is to be regretted, that 
the fîtuation of things was fuch, that the 
fentence could not be pafTed by the whole 
nation, or their reprefentatives, folemnly 
affembled for that purpofe, I am fenfi- 
ble indeed, that the generality of the na- 
tion, 



40 P.OLITICAL LIBERTY. 

tion, at that time, woùld not hâve vot- 
cd the 'dcatb of thdr fovereign; but 
this was not owing to any want of a juft 
fenfe of the wrongs he had done them, 
but to an opinion oï xht facrednefs ofking^ 
ly ponveTy from which very few of the 
friends of liberty in thôfe times, efpeci- 
ally among the Prefbyterians, who were 
the majority, could intirely diveft them- 
felves. Such a tranfaélion would hâve 
been an immortal honour to this coùn- 
try, whenever that fuperftitious notion 
{hall be obliterated : A notion which 
has been extremely ufeful in the infant 
ftate of focieties ; but which, like other 
fuperftitions, fubfîfts long after it hath 
jceafed to be of ufe. 

The fum of what hath been advanced 
ppon this head, is a maxim, than which 
nothing is more true, xSxdX every govern-- 
fnent^ in its original principles, and anteccT 
dent to its prefent form, is an equal repub- 
lie y and, confequently, that every man, 
when he cornes to be fenfible of his na- 
tural rights, and to feel his own impor- 
tance, will cpqifîder himfelf as fully e- 

qual 



'.?^ 



POLÏTICAL LIBERTY. 41 

quai to any other perfon whatever, The 
confideration of riches and power, how«^ 
ever acquirôd, muft be entirely fet aûde, 
when we come to thefe firft principles. 
The very idea of property, or right of 
any kind, is founded upon a regard to 
the gênerai good of the fociety, under 
whofe proteâion it is enjoyed ; and no- 
thing is properly a maris oivn, but what 
gênerai rules, which hâve for their ob- 
jeél the good of the whole, give to him. 
To whomfoever the fociety delegates its 
power, it is delegated to them for the 
xnore eafy management of public aflFairs, 
and in order to make the more efFedlual 
provifion for the happinefs of the whole. 
Whoever enjoys^ property, or riches in 
the ftate, enjoysthem for the good of the 
date, as well as for himfelf ; and when- 
ever thofe pokers, riches, ot rights of any 
kind, are abufed, to the injury of the 
whole, that awful and ultimate tribu- 
nal, in which every citizen hath an e- 
qual voice, may demand thè refignation 
of them ; and in circumftances, wherc 
regular commiflions from this abufed 
public cannot be haë, every man, who 

has 



42 POLITICAL LIBERTY. 

has power, and who is adluated with the 
fentimcnts of the public, may aflume a 
public charafter, and bravely redrefs 
public wrongs. In fuch difnial and cri- 
tical circumftances, the ftifled voice of 
an opMelïèd country is a loud call upon 
every man, pofTefTed with a fpirit of pa- 
tjriotifm, to exert himfelf ; and whenever 
that voice Ihall be at liberty, it will ra- 
tify and applaud the aélion, which it 
could not forînally authorize. 

In large liâtes, this ultimate feat of 
power, this tribunal to which lies an 
appeal from every other, and from which 
no appeal can even be imagined, is too 
much hid, and kept out of fight by thé 
prefent complex forms of government, 
which dérive their authorîty from it, 
Hence hath arifen a want of clear- 
nefs and confiftency in the language of 
the friends of liberty. Hence the pre- 
pofterous and flavifh maxim, that 
whatever is enaéled by that body of 
men, in whom the fupreme power of 
the ftate is vefled, muft, in ail cafés, be 
implicitly obeyed j * and that no attempt 

to 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. 43 

to repeal an unjuft law can be vindi- 
fcated, beyond a fimple remonftrance 
addrefled to the legiûators. A café, 
which is very intelligible, but which 
can neverhappen, will demonftrate the 
abfurdity of fuch a maxim. ^ 

Suppofe the king of England, and the 
two honfes of parliament, fliould make 
a law, in ail the ufual forms, to exempt 
the members of either houfe from pay- 
ing taxes to the government, or to take 
to themfelves the property of their fel- 
low citizens. A law like this would o- 
pen the ejcs of the wholê nation, and 
fliow them the true principles of go- 
vernment, and the power of govemors. 
The nation would fee that the moft 
regular governments may become ty- 
rannical, and their governors oppreffive, 
by feparating their intereft from that 
of the people whom they govern. 
Such â law would fhow them to be but 
fervants, and fervants who had Ihame- 
fully abufed their truft. In fuch a café, 
every man for himfelf would lay his 
hand upon his fword^ and the autho- 

*^ rity. 



44 POLITICAL LIBERTY. 

rity of the fupreme powcr of the date 
would be anmliilated. 

So plain are thcfe firÛ: principles a£ 
ail govcrnoaent, and political Ubeity, 
that ï will tabe upoa me to fay, it is im- 
poflible a man fliould not be convinced 
of them, who brings to the fubjed a 
mind free from th^ grollbft aad meaneft 
préjudices. Whatever be the form of 
aiiy government, wboever be the fupreme 
magiftrates, or whatever be their num*- 
ber ; that is, to whomfocver the power 
^f the fbciety is delegatçd, their autho-^ 
rity is, in its own ijature, reverfible. No 
man dan be fuppqièd to f efign his na* 
tural liberty, but on conditions. Theiè 
conditions, whethcr they be exprefïèd or 
jiot, muft be violated, whenever the 
plain and obvions tvkâs oî govemment 
are Aot anfwered j and a delegated power, 
perverted from the intention for which 
it was beftowed, expires of courfe. Ma-^ 
giftrates therefore, who confult not the 
good of the public, ^nd who employ 
their power to opprçfs the peoplc, are a 
public nuifance, aijd their ppwcr is abro- 
gated ipfo fam. • V^is 






PÔLITICAL HBERTY. 45 

I 

Tliis, however, can only be the café 
in extrême oppreffion ; when the blef- 
fiûgs of fociety and civil govemment, 
great aiid important as they are, are 
bought too dear ; when it is better not 
to be governed at ail, than.to be go- 

» vertied in foch a manner ; or, at leaft, 
when the hazard of a change of go- 
vernment wonld be apparently the lefs 
evil of thè two; and, therefore, thefe 
occafions rarely occur in the courfe of 
human aflFairs. It may be afked, what 
Ihonld a people do in café of lefe generaf 

' oppreffion, and only particular grîe- 
vances j \7hen the deputies of the people 
make laws which evidently favour 
themfelves, and bear hard upon the 
body of the people they reprefent, and 
fnch as they would certainly difapprove, 
could they be afTembled for that pur- 
pofe ? I anfwer, that when thîs appeats 
to be very cleariy the café, as ît ought 
by ail means to do (fince, in many cafes, 
if the govenjment hâve not power to 
enforce a bad law, it will not hâve 
power to efifoice a gôod t)ne) the firft 

ftcp 



46 POLITICAL LIBERTY.. 

ftep which a wife and moderate people 
•will take, is to make a remonftrance to 
the legiflature ; and if that be not pradli- 
cable, or be not heard ; ftill, if the com- 
plaints be gênerai, and loud, a wife 
prince and miniftiy will pay regard to 
them ; or they will, at length, be weary 
of enforcing a pénal law which is ge- 
nerally abhorred and difregarded ; when 
they fee the people will run the rifque 
of the punifliment, if it cannot be evad- 
ed, rather than quietly fubmit to the 
injundlion. And a regard to the good 
of fociety will certainly juftify this 
condudl of the people. 

If an over fcrupulous confcience 
fhould prevent the people from ex- 
preiîing their fentiments in this man- 
ner, there is no method left, until an 
opportunity offers of chufing honefter 
deputies, in which the voice of the loweft 
ciaffes can be heard, in order to obtain 
the repeal of an opprefïive law. 

Governors will never be*awed by the 
voice of the people, fo long as it is a 

mère 



POLITICAL LIBERTY. 47 

mère voice, without overt-adls. The 
confequence of thefe feemingly mode- 
rate maxims is, that a door will be left 
open to ail kinds of oppreflion, without 
any refource or redrefs, till thc public 
wrongs be accumulated to the degree 
above mentioned, when ail the world 
would juftify the utter fubverfion of the 
government. Thefe maxims, . there- 
fore, admit of no remedy but the laft, 
and moft hazardous of ail. But is not 
even a mob a lefe evil than a rébellion, 
and ought the former to be fo fèverely 
blamed by writers on this fubjeél, when 
it may prevent the latter ? Of two evila 
of any kind, political as well as others, 
it is* the didlate of common fenfè to 
chufe the lefs. Befides, according to 
common notions, avowed by writers 
upon morals on lefs gênerai principles, 
and by lawyers too, ail pénal laws give 
a man an alternative, either to abflain 
from the aélion prohibited^ or to take 
the penalty. 



SECTION 



SECTION III. 



O F 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 



S E C T. L 

Of the nature of Civil Liberty in 

gênerai. 

IT îs a matter of the greateft impor- 
tance, that we carefiiUy diftinguifh 
betwcen ûitform and the extent ofponver 
in a go vemment ; . for many maxims in 
politics dépend upon the one, which 
are too generally afcribed to the other. 

It is comparatively of fmall confè- 
quence, wbo^ or how many be our gover- 

nors* 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 



49 



nors, or ho^w long thcir. office conti- 
nties, provided their power be the famé 
while thc7 are in office, and the admini-- 
ftration be uniform and certain. AU the 
différence whîch can arifè to fiâtes from 
diverfîties, in the number or continu- 
ance pf govemors, can only flow from 
the motives and opportunities, which 
thofe différent circumftances may give 
their deputies, of extending, or making 
a bad ufè of their power. But whçther 
a people enjoy more or fewer of their 
natural rights, under any form of go- 
vei^iment, is a matter of the laft impor- 
tance ; and upon this dépends, what, I 
ihould chufè to call, the civil liberty of the 
ftate, as diftindl from its political liberty. 



If the power of govemment be very 
extenfive, and the fubjeâs of it hâve, 
confequently, little power over their 
own aélions, that government is tyranni- 
cal, and oppreffive ; whether, with re- 
fpedl to its form, it be a monarçhy, an 
ariftocracy, or even a republic. For the 
government of the temporary magi- 
ftrates of a democracy, or even the laws 

E them- 



50 CIVIL LIBERTY. 

themfelves iriay be as tyrannical as tbîe 
maxims of tlie moft defpotic monarchy, 
and the adminiftration of the gOYcrn- 
ment may be as deftrudiive of private 
happinefs. The only confolation that a 
democracy fuggefts in thofe circum- 
. ftances is, that every member of the ftate 
has a chance of arriving at a fliare in the 
chief magiftracy, and confequently of 
playing the tyrant in his turn ; and as 
there is no government in the world fo 
perfecSlly democratical, as that every 
member of the ftate, without exception, 
has a right of being admitted into the 
adminiftration, great numbers will be 
in the famé condition as if they had lived 
nnder the moft abfolute monarchy ; and 
this is, in fa6l, almoft univerfally the 
café with the poor, in ail governments* 

For the famé reafon, if there were 
no fixed laws, but every thing was de- 
cided according to the will of the per- 
fons in power ; who is there that would 
think it of much confequence, whether 
his life, his liberty, or his property were 
^t the mercy of one, of a few, or of a 

great 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 51 

great nùmber of people, that is, of a 
mob, liable to the worft of influences. 
So far, therefore, wejmay fafely fajr, 
with Mr. Pope, that thofe governments 
tvhich are heji adminifiered are heji : — that 
is, provided the power of government 
be moderate, and leave a man the moft 
valuable of his private rights ; provided 
the laws be certainly known to every 
one, and the adminiftration of them be 
uniform, it is of no confequence how 
many, or how few perfons are employed 
in the adminiftration. But it muft be al- 
lowed, that there is not the famé chance 
for the continuance of fiich laws, and of 
fuch an adminiftration, whether the pow- 
er be lodged in few, or in more hands. 

The governments now fubfifting in 
Europe differ widely in their forms ; but 
it is certain, that the prefent happinefs 
of the fubjedls of them can by no means 
be eftimated by a regard to that circum- 
ftance only. It dépends chiefly upon 
the power, the extent, and the maxims 
of government, refpedling perfonal fe- 
curity, private property, &c. and on the 

E 2 ier* 



52 CIVIL LIBERTY, 

certainty and uniformity of the admi^ 
niftration. - 

Civil liberty has been gready impaired 
by an ajbufe of the maxim, that thc 
joint underftan^ding of ail the mèmbers 
of a ftate, properly colledted, m^ft be 
préférable to that of iadiyiduals ; aad 
confequently that the inore the cafés are, 
in which mankind are governcd by thi^ 
miited reafon of the whple «community, 
fp much the better ; whereas, in truth, 
the greater part of human àélions are of 
fuch a nature, that more inconvenien.ce 
would foUow from their being fixed by 
laws, than from their being left to every 
man's arbitrary will. 

We may be afîifted in conceiving the 
nature of this fpecies of liberty, by con- 
fidering what it is that men propofe ta 
gain by entering into fociety. Now it 
is évident, that we are npt led to virifli 
for a ftate of fociety by the want of any 
thing that we can conveniehtly procure 
for ourfelves. As a man, and a member 
of civil fociety, I am defîrous to receive 

fuch 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 53 

I 

fuch affiftance as ftumbers can give to m- 
Jwiduaisj butby nomeâns that affiftance 
which numbers, as fuch, cannot give to 
iiidividuals ; and, leaft of ail, fiich as in- 
dîvidiials are bétter quàlified to impart 
to^umberë. TKere are many things 
ïefpeéïing hniùan happincfs that pro- 
perly fall undér the two laft mentioned 
claffes, and the grçat difficulty côncern- 
ing the due extènt of civil government 
lies in diftinguifhîng the objeds that be- 
long to thefe claffes. Little difficulty, 
however, has, in facfï, arifen from the 
nature of the things, in comparifon of 
the difficulties that hâve been occafioûed 
by its being the întereft of men to com- , 
bine, confound, and perplex them* 

As far as xntVQ Jlrength can go, it is e- 
vident, that numbers may affift an indi- 
vidual, and this feems to hâve been the 
firft, if not the only reafon for having 
recourfe to fociety. If I be injured, and 
not ablc to redrefs my own wrongs, I 
afk help of my neighbours ànd acquain- 
tance ; and occafîons may arife, in which 
the more ^fiance I can procure, the 

better 



54 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 



better. But I can feldom want thè af- 
fiftance of numbers in managing my 
domeftic aflFairs, wbich require nothing 
but my own confiant infjpedlion, and the 
immédiate application of my own facul- 
ties. In this café, therefore, any attempt 
of numbers to aflîft me, would only oc- 
cafion embarraffment and diftrefs. 

For the purpofe of finding out trutb, 
individuals are always employed to af^ 
fift multitudes ; for, notwithftanding it 
be probable, that more difcoveries will 
be made by a number of perfons than 
by one perfon ; and though one perfon 
may aflift another in fuggefting and per- 
feéling any improvements in fcience ; 
yet ftill they ail a6l as independent indi'vi-' 
(iuals, giving vpluntary information and 
advice. For whenever numbers hâve 
truth or knowledge for tbeir objeâ, and 
aâ as a collective body, i, e, authorita- 
fivefy, fo that no fîngle perfon can hâve 
power to détermine any thing till the 
majority hâve been brought to 'agrée to 
it, the interefts of knowledge will cer- 
tainly fuffer, there is fo little profpedl 
" . ' of 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 5s 

t)f the préjudices of the many giving 
way to the better judgment of an indi- 
vidual. Hère, there is a café, in which 
fociety muft always be benefited by in- 
dividuàls, as fuch, ^nd not by numKers, 
in_a coUeftive capacity. It is leaft of 
ail, therefore, for the advancement of 
knowledge, that I fhould be induced to 
wifh for the authoritative interpofition 
pf fpciety. 

In this manner it might not be a very 
difficult thing, for candid and impartial 
perfons, to fix reafonable bounds for the 
interpofition of laws and government. 
They ^re defeâive when they leave an 
individual deftitute of that afSflance 
which they could procure for him, and 
they are burdenfome and opprefïive ; i. e. 
injurions to the natural rights and civil 
liberties of mankind, when they lay a 
man under unnecefTary reftriélions, by. 
controUng his conduél, and preventing ' 
him fwm ferving himfèlf, with refpedt 
to thofe things, in which they can'yield 
him no real afiiftance, and in providing 
for which he is in no danger of injuring 
others* This 



^6 CIVIL LIBERTY. 

This queftion may be farther illuibated 
by two pretty juft comparifons. Magi- 
ilrates are xhc/ervants of the public, and 
therefore the ufe of them may be illu- 
firated by that of fervants. Now let a 
man^s fortune or his incapacity be fuch 
that his dependence on fervants is ever fo 
great ; there muft be many things that 
he will be obliged to do for himfelf, and 
in which any attempt to aflift him would 
qnly embarrafs and diftrefs him ; and in 
many cafés in which perfons do make 
ufe of fervants, they vrould be much 
more at their eafe, if their fituation would 
allow them to do without their affiftance. 
If magiftrates be confidered in the more 
refpeâable light of reprefentatwes and 
deputies of the people, it ihould likewife 
be confidered, that there are many cafés, 
in which it is more convenient for a man 
to a(Sl in perfon than by aay deputation 
whatever. 

» 
In fome refpedb, however, it muft be 
p.cknowledged, that the propcr extent qf 
çiyil goveriUment is npt eafily circiun-^ 

fçribed 



. CIVIL LIBERTY 57 

fcribed within exacSl limits. That the 
happinéfs of the whôle community 
is the ultimate end of govemment 
can never be doubted, and ail claims 
of individuals inconfiftent with the 
public good are abfolutely null and 
void ; but there is a real difficulty in 
determining what gênerai rules, refpea- 
ing the extent of the power of govem- 
ment, or of governors, arc moft condu- 
cive to the public good. 

Some may think it beft, that the le- 
giflature fliould make exprefs provifion 
for every thing which can even indireél- 
ly, remotely, and confequentially, afFedl 
the public good ; while others may think 
it beft, that every thing, which is not 
properly of a civil nature, fliould be 
entirely overlooked by the civil magi- 
ftrate; that it is for the advantage of 
the fociety, upon thewhole, that ail 
thofe things be left to tlake their own 
natural courfe, and that the legiflature 
cannot interfère in them, without de- 
feating its own great objeél, the public 
good. 

We 



f 

S8 CIVIL LIBERTY. ' 

We are fo little capable of arguing 
a priori in matters of government, that 
it fhould feem, experiments only eau 
détermine how far this power of the le- 
giflature ought to extend ; and it fhould 
likewife feem, that, till a fufficient 
number of experiments hâve been made, 
it becomes the wifdom of the civil ma- 
giftracy to take â:s little upon its hands 
as poflible, and never to interfère, with* 
out the greateft caution, in things that 
do not immediately affedl the lives, li- 
berty, or property of the members of 
the community ; that civil magiftrates 
Ihould hardly ever be moved to exert 
themfelves by the mère tendencies of 
thingSy thofe tendencies are generally 
fo vague, and often fo imaginary ; and 
that nothing but a manifeft and urgent 
necefîity (of which, however, themfelves 
are, to be fure, the only judges) can 
juftify them in extending their authority 
to whatever has no more than a tenden- 
cy, though the ftrongeft poflible, to dif- 
turb the tranquility and. happinefs of the 
ftate. 

There 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 59 

There can be no doubt but that 
any people, forming themfelves into 
a fociety, may fubjedl themfelves to 
whatever rellridions they pleafe; and 
confequently, that the fupreme civil 
magiflrates, on whom the whole power 
of the fociety is devolved, may make 
what laws they pleafe ; but the queftion 
is, what reflxiétions smd laws are wife, 
and calculated to promote the public 
good ; for fuch only are juft, right, and, 
properly fpeaking, lawful. . 

Political and civil liberty, as before 
explained, though very diflèrent, hâve, 
however, a very near and manifeft con- 
neélion; and the former is the chief 
guard of the latter, and on that account, 
principally, it is valuable, and worth 
contending for. If ail the political power 
of this country were lodged in the hânds 
of one perfon, and the government 
thereby changed into an abfolute mo- 
narchy, the people would find no dif- 
férence, proyided the famé laws, and 
the famé adminiftration, which now fub- 



6o CIVIL LIBERTY. 

fift, were contînued. But then, t}\e 
pcople, having no political liberty, would 
hâve no fecurtiy for thc continuance of 
the famé laws, aiid thc famé adminiftra- 
tion. They would hâve no guard for 
their civil liberty. The monarch, having 
it in his option, might not chufe to con- 
tinue the famé laws, and the famé ad- 
miniftration. He might fancy it to be 
for his own ihtereft to alter them, and 
to abridge his fubjecfls in their privatc. 
rights 5 and, in gênerai, it may be de- 
pended upon, that govemors will not 
confult the intereft of the people, except 
it be their own intereft too, becaufe go- 
vemors are but men. But while a num- 
ber of the people hâve a fliare in the 
legiflature, fo as to be able to control 
the fupreme magiftrate, there is a great 
prôbability that things will continue in 
a gôod ftate. For the more political li- 
berty the people hâve, the fafer is their 
civil liberty. 

There may, however, be fbme kind of 
guard for civil liberty, independent of 
that which is properly called politicaL 

For 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 



61 



For the fupremc magiflxate, though, no^ 
minai ly 9 he hâve ail the power of the 
ftate in his hands, and, without violât*- 
ing anj of the forms of the conftitutioa, 
imy enaâ and eSxecute what laws hc 
pleafèsj yet his circumftances may be 
fuch, as fliall lay him under v^hat is c* 
quivalent to a natural impojjibility of do- 
ing v\rhat he v\rould chufe. And I do not 
hère mean that kind of reftraiat, which 
ail arbitrary princes are under, from the 
fear of a revolt of their fubjedls ; v^rhich 
is often the confcquençe of great oppref- 
IJon ; but from what may be called the 
fpirit of the tintes. 

Magifirates, being men, cannot but 
havc, in fbme meafure, the feelings of 
other men. They could not, therefore, 
be happy themfelves, if they were con- 
fcious that their conduél expofeJd them 
to univerfal hatred and contempt* Nèi- 
ther can they be âltogether indifièrent to 
the light in which their charaders and 
conduél will appear to pofterity. For 
their ownfakes, therefore, they will ge- 
nerally pay fome regard to the fentiments 
of their people. The 



62 CIVIL LIBERTY. 



The more civilized any country îs, the 
more effectuai will thîs kind of guard to 
political liberty prove ; becaufe, in thofe 
circumftances, a fenfe of juftice and ho- 
nour hâve got firmer hold of the minds 
of men ; fo that a violation of thém 
would be more fenfîbly felt, and more 
generally and ftrongly refented. For 
this reafon, a gentleman of falhion and 
fortune has much lefs to dread in France, 
or in Denmark, than in Turkey. The 
confifcation of an overgrown rich man's 
efFedls, without any caufe afiigned, 
would make no great noife in the latter ; 
whereas in thofe countries, in which the 
forms of law and liberty hâve been long 
eftablifhed, they necefTarily carry with 
them more or lefs of Ûiq fubjiance alfo. 

There is not, I believe, any country 
in Europe, in which a man could be 
condemned, and his effedls confifcated, 
but a crime muft be alledged, and a pro- 
cefs of law be gone through. The con- 
firmed' habit of thinking in thefe coun- 
tries is fuch, that no prince could dif- 

penfe 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 63 

penfe with thefe formalities. He would 
be deemed infane^ if he Ihould attempt to 
do oth^rwife ; the fucceffion would be 
fet afîde in favour of the next heir, by 
the gênerai confent of the people, and 
the révolution would take place without 
blood flied. No perfon ftanding near 
any European prince would hefitate what 
to do, if his fovereign ftiould attempt to 
eut ofF a man's head, out of mère wan- 
tonnefs and fport, a thing that woùld 
only ftrike the beholders with awe in 
fome foreign courts. 

Should the EnglijQi govemment be- 
come arbitrary, and the people, difguft- 
ed with the condudl of their parliaments^ 
do what the people of Denmark hâve 
done, chufe their fovereign for their 
perpétuai reprefentative, and furrender 
into his hands ail the power of ftate ; 
the forms of a free govemment havebeen 
fo long eliablifhed, that the moft artfui 
tyrant would be a long time before he 
could render life and property as preca- 
tîous as it is even in France. The trial 
by juries, in ordinary cafés, would ftand 



^ / 



64 CIVIL LIBERTY. 

a long time; the habeas corpus would^ 
generally at leaft, continue in force, and 
ail exécutions would be in public» 

It may be queftioned whether thc 
progrefs to abfolute flavery and infecu- 
rity would be more rapid, if the king 
were nominally arbitrary, or only virtu-^ 
ally fo, by uniformly influencing the 
houfe of Gommons. 

In fome refpeAs, fo large a body of 
men would venture upon things which 
no fingle perfon would chufe to do of 
his own authority ; and fo long as they 
had little intercourfe but with one ano- 
ther, they would not be much affedled 
with the fenfe of fear or fhame. One 
may fafely fay, that no fingle member 
of the houfe would hâve had the af^ 
furance to décide as the majority hâve 
often done, in cafés of controverted e- 
leélions. 

But, on the other hand, as the mem- 
bers of the houfe of Gommons necefla- 
rily fpend a grcat part of the fummer 

months 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 6$ 

months with their friends in the country, 
they could not fliew their faces after 
pafling an ad, by which gentlemen like 
themfelves, or even their eledors, fliould 
be much aggrieved ; though they may 
now and then opprcfs the poor by un- 
reafbnable game ads, &c. becaufe they 
ne ver converfe with any of the poor except 
their imniediate> dépendants, who would 
not chufe to remonftrate on the fubjed. 

Befides, fo long as the members of 
parliament are eleâied, though only once 
in feven years, thofe of them that are 
really chofen by the people can hâve no 
chance of being re-eleded but by pleal^ 
ing the people ; and many of ihem 
would not chufe to reduce themfelves 
and their pofterity, out of the houfe, to 
a worfe condition than they originally 
were. Let them be ever fo obfequious 
to a court, they will hardly chufe to de- 
prive themfelves of ail power of giving 
any thing for the future. 

• Independent, therefore, of ail convic- 
tion of mind, there muft be a minority 

F in 



ee CIVIL LIBERTY, 

in the houfe, whofe clamour and oppo^ 
fition will impede the progrefs of tyran- 
ny ; whereas a king, furrounded by his 
guards, and a cringing nobility, has no 
check. If, however, he be a man of 
fenfe, and- read hiftory, he may compre- 
hend the varions caufes of the extrême 
infecnrity of defpotic princes i many of 
whom hâve appeared in ail the pomp of 
power in the moming, and hâve been 
in prifon, without eyes, or maflacred, 
and dragged about the flxeets before 
night.. 

At ail advetitures, I Ihould thiiik it 
more wife to bear with a tyrannical par- 
liament, though a more expenfive mode 
of fervitude for the prefent, than an ar- 
bitrary prince. So long as there is a 
power that can nominally put a négative 
upon the proceedings of the court, there 
is fome chance, that circumftances may 
arife, in which the prince may not be 
able to influence them. They may fee 
the necejfîty^ if not the ivifdom of corn- 
plying with the juft defires of the peo- 
ple j and by palTxng a few fundamentally 

good 



CIVIL LIBERTY. «y 

good laws, true freedom may be efta- 
blifhed for âges ; whereas, were the old 
forms of conftitutional liberty once abo- 
liflied, as in France, there would be little 
hope of their revival. 

Whenever the houfe of Gommons 
ihall be fo abandonedly corrupt, as to join 
with the court in abolifhing any of the 
ejfential forms of the con/iitution, or eflPec- 
tually defeating the great pur pofes of it, 
let every Englifliman, before it be too la te, 
re-perufe the hiftory of his country, and 
do what Englifhmen are renowned for 
having formerly donc in the famé cir-^ 
cumftancest 

Where civil liberty is intirely dîvefted 
of its natural guard, political liberty, 
ïfliould not hefitate to prefer the govern- 
ment of one, to that of a number ; be- 
caufe a fenfe of fliame would haye lefs 
influence upon them, and they would 
keep one another in countenance, in 
cafés in which any fingle perfon would 
yield to the fenfe of the majority. 

F a Political 



6S CIVIL LIBERTY. 

Political and civil libeity hâve mafiy 
things in common, which indeed, i& the 
reafon why they hâve becn fo often con- 
founded. A fenfe both of political and 
civil flavery, makes a man think meah- 
I7 of himfelf, The feelîng of his infig- 
nificance debafes his mînd, checks every 
great and énterprifîng fentiment ; and, in 
fa<S, renders him that poor abjeét créa- 
ture, which he fancies himfelf to be. 
Having always fome unknown evil ta 
fear, though it Ihould never coitie, he 
has no perfedl enjoyment of himfelf, or 
of any of the bleffings of life ; and thus, 
his fentiments and his enjoyments being 
of a lower kind, the man finks nearer 
to the ftate of the brute création. 

On the other hand, a fenfè of political 
and civil liberty, though there fliould 
be no great occafion to cxert it in the 
courfe of a man's life, gives him a con- 
ftant feeling of his own power and im- 
portance ; and îs the foundation of his 
indulging a frec, bold, and manly turn 
of thinking, unreftrained by the moft 
diftant idea of control. Being free from 

ail 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 69 

ail fcar, he has themoft perfe<5t cnjoy- 
bient of himfelf, an(J of ail the bleffings 
of life } and his fèntiments and enjoy- 
inents, being raifed, his very being is ex- 
aked, and the man makes nearer ap-- 
çrQadies to fuperior natxires. 

Without a fpirit of liberty^and a feel- 
ing of fecurity and independence, no 
great improvements in agriculture, or 
any thing eliè, will ever be made by naen. 
A man has but poor encouragement to 
beftpw labour and expence upon a pièce 
of ground, in which he has no.fecure 
prqperty ; and when neither iimfèlf, nor 
his pofterity, will, probably, ever dérive 
any permanent advantage from it. In 
confirmation of this, I cannot help quot - 
ing a fcw inftruélive paflages from Mr. 
Du Poivre* j Traveh of a Pbilofopber. 

It is his gênerai obfervation, that " a 
*^ country poorly cultirated is always 
" inhabited by men barbarous, or op-^ 
^ preiTed." p. 5. 

*^ In a t^nreftrial paradiie^ the Siamefe 

are, 



yo CIVIL LIBERTY. 

" are, perhaps, the moft wretched peo- \ 
" pie in the world, The govemment i& 
" defpotic. The fovereign alone enjoys 
" the true liberty which is natural to ail 
" mankind. His fubjedls are ail flaves. 
" Every one of them is annually taxed 
" at fix months perfonal fervice, without 
*^ wages, and even without food. p. 56. 

On the other hand, " The Chinefe en- 
" joy, undifturbed; their private poflef- 
^' fions, as well as thofe which, being by 
^* their nature indivifible, belong to ail ; 
" and he who buys a field, or receives it 
" by inheritance from his anceftors, is 
" of courfe the foie lord or mafter. The 
" lands are free as the people, without 
" feudal fervices, or fines of aliénation. 
" A tenth part of the produce of the 
" earth is the only tax, or tribute, in the 
" Chinefe empire, fince the origin of the 
^' monarchy. And fuch is the happy re- 
" fpeâ which the Chinefe hâve for their 
^^ antient cuftoms, that no emperor of 
^* China ever entertains the moft diftant 
^^ thought of augmenting ît, nor his 
^* fubjeéls the leaft apprehenfion of fuch 
f* augmentation/' p. 78. In 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 71 

In arbitrary govemments the poor are 
certainly the moft fafe, as their condi- 
tion exhibits nothing that can attradl ' 
the notice, or tempt the violence of a 
tyrant. If, therefore, a man afpire to 
notliing more than to* get his bread by 
the labour of his hands, in fome cufto- 
mary employment, he has little to fear, 
let him live where he will. Like the afs 
in the fable, he can but beaf his burden. 
No governments can do without ïabour- 
ers and artifans. It is their intereft to 
proteâ: them, and elpecially thofe who 
are dexterous in the more élégant arts, 
that are fubfervient to luxury. 

But the poorefl: can hardly be with- 
out fome degree of ambition, except 
when that gênerons principle has been 
long repreffed, and in a manner eradi- 
cated by a continuai habit of flavery ; 
and the moment that a man thinks of 
rendôring himfelf in any refpedl confpicu- 
ous, for his wealth, knowledge, or influ- 
ence of any kind, he begins to be in 
danger. If he hâve but a very hand- 
ibme wife, he muft not live near a de- 

fpotie 



72 CIVIL LIBERTY. 

fpotic court, or in the neighbourhood 
of any great mau who is countenanced 
by it. If he hâve wealth, he muft hide 
it, and enjoy it in fecret, with fear and 
trembling ; and if he hâve fenfe, and 
think differently from his neighbours, 
he muft do the famé, or rifque the fate 
pf Galileo. » 

I fhall clofe this fe(5lion with a few 
extradls from travellers, and other writers, 

which fhew the importance of political 
and civil liberty. 

" In travelling through Germany,'* 
fays Lady M. W. Montagne, " it is im- 
" poffible not to obferve the différence 
" between the free towns, and thofe 
" under the government of abfolute 
" princes, as ail the little fovereigns of 
" Germany are. In the fidl there ap- 
" pears an air of commerce and plenty, 
^^ the ftreets are well built, and full of 
" people, the fhops are loaded with 
f' merchandize, and the commonalty 
" are clean and chearfuL In the other, 

" you 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 75 

" you fee a fort of £habby finery, a 
" number of people of quality tawdried 
" out, narrow nafty flreets, out of repair, 
" wretchedly thin of inliabitants, and 
" above half of the Common people 
" afking alms/' Lady M. W. Montai 
gue's Lettersy vol. I. page 16. 



" Every houfe in Turkey," the famé 
excellent writer obferves, " at tïie death 
' of its mafter, is at the grand fèignior s 
' difpofal ; and therefore no man cares 
' to make a great expence, which he is 
' not fure his family will be the better 
' fon Ail their defign is to build a 
^ houfe commodious, and that will laft 
^ their lives, and they are very indif- 
' ferent if it falls down the next yean'' 
Ib. p. 70. 



" The feàr of the laws," fays the ad- 
mirable author of the EJfay on crimes 
and fumjhments^ *^ is falutary, but the 
" fear of man is a fruitful and fatal 
" fource of crimes. Meiï cnflaved are 
" more voluptuous, more dcbauched, 

" and 



74 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 



^^ and more cruel than thofe who are in 
" a ftate of freedom. Thefe ftudy the 
" fciences, and the interefts of nations. 
*' They hâve great objedls before their 
^^ eyes, and imîtate them. But thofe 
" whofe views are confined to the pre- 
" fent moment, endeavour, amidft the 
^^ diftradlion of riot and debauchery, to 
" forget their fituation. Accuftomed to 
" the uncertainty of ail events, the con- 
" fequencea of their crimes becomè pro- 
*' blematical ; which gives an additional 
" force to the ftrength of their paAions."* 
P. i66. 

" The Turkifli Bafhaw once deftroyed 
" ail the fugar canes inCyprus, to prevent 
" the people having too much wealth. 
" This ifland is to this day the cleareft 
" proof that can be given, how much 
" a bad goVernment may defeat ail the 
" kind intentions of nature : for, in fpitc 
" of ail the advantages a country can 
" pofîibly hâve, there nevcr was a more 
" defolate place than this ifland is at this 
" day." Thevenot in Knox's colleâion, 
yoL 6, p. 71. There 



CIVIL LIBERTY. 75 

There is hardly any greater inftance 
of the wanton abufe of power, in the 
invafîon of the natural rights of man- 
kind, than in the game laivs^ thàt are in 
force in différent fiâtes of Europe. . Eng- 
land has juft and great complaint to 
make on this fubjeiSt ; but we are not 
yet reduced to the déplorable condition 
of the Saxons, as it is defcribed by Han- 
way, vol. I. p. 433* 

^ " Huntingis the ruling pafïion of the 
" Saxon court, and fatal to the inhabi- 
" tants» - In the harâ winter of 1740, it 
" is cqmputed, that above 30,000 deer 
" died in the eleélorate of Saxony ; and 
" yet^. iia the open lands and forefts, 
"There are now reckoned to remain a- 
" bove that number, of which no per- 
*' fon dares kill one, xinder the penalty 
" of being condemned to the gallies. In 
" every town of any note, there are fif- 
" ty of the inhabitants, who watch, five 
" every night, by rotation, and ufe bells 
" to frighten the deer, and défend their 
^' corn. Fréquent remonftrances hâve 

^- t>een made to the court on this fubjedl ; 

" but 



76 EFFECTS OF A 

" but to no other purpofe, than to con- 
" viace the pcople of their flavery." 

Félix quem faciunt^ aliéna pericuîa cautum. 



SECTION IV. 

In nvhat manner an authoritative code 
of éducation ivould affeél politiçal and 
civil liberty. 

HAVING cdnfîdered the nature 
of civil liberty in général, I 
flxall treat of two capital branches of 
which it confîfts. Thefe are the rights 
of éducation, and religion. On thefe 
two articles much of the happinefs of 
human life is acknowledged to dépend ; 
but they appear to me to be of fuch a 
nature, that the advantage we dérive 
from them will be more effcdlually fe- 
cured, when they are condudled by in- 
dividuals, than by the ftate ; and if this 
can be demonftrated, nothing more is 
neceflary, to prove that the civil magi- 

ftrate 



CODE OF EDUCATION 77 

ftrate ha s no bufinefs to interfère with 
them* 

This I cannot help thinking to bc the 
fhorteft, and the beft ilïue npon which 
we can put every thing in which the ci- 
vil magiflxate prétends to a right of in- 
terférence. If it be probable that the 
bufinefs, whatever it be, will be con- 
dudled better, that is, more to the ad- 
vantage of fociety, in his hands, than in 
thofe of individuals, the right will be al- 
lowed. In thofe circumftances, it is 
évident, that no friend to fociety can 
deny his claim. But if the nature of 
the thing be fuch, that the attention of 
individuals, with refpedl to it, can be 
applied to more advantage than that of 
the magiftrate ; the claim of the former 
muft be admitted, in préférence to that 
of the latter. 

No doubt, there are examples of both 
kinds. The avenging of injuries, or re- 
drefling of private wrongs, is certainly 
better trufted in the hands of the magi- 
Urate than in thofe of private perfons ; 

but 



78 EFFECTS OF A 

but with what advantage could a magi- 
ftrate interfère in a thoufand particulars 
relating to private families, and private 
friendlliips ? Now I think it is clear, 
that éducation muft be ranked in the 
latter clafa, or among thofe things in 
which the civil magiftrate has no right 
to interfère ; becaufe he cannot do it to 
any good purpofe. But fince Dr. Brown 
has lately maintained the contrary, in a 
treatife, intitled, Thoiights on civil liber- 
ty^ licentioufnefs^ and faâlion^ and in an 
Appendix relative to a propofed code of edu-' 
cation^ fubjoined to a Sermon on the fe-- 
maie charaEler and éducation. I fhall in 
this feélion, reply to what he has ad- 
vanced on this fubjedl, and offer what 
has occurred to me with relation to it. 

Left it fliould be apprehended, that I 
miftake the views of this writer, I Ihall 
fubjoin a few extraéls from the work, 
which contain the fubftance of what he 
has advanced on thefubjecSl of éducation. 
He afferts, " That, the firft and beft fe- 
" curity of civil liberty confifts, in im- 
** prefling the infant mind with fuch ha- 

" bits 



CODE OF EDUCATION, ^g. 

** bits of thonght andaélion, as may cor- 
" refpond with, and promote the ap- 
" pointments of public law." In his 
appendix, he fays, that, "byacoDEoP 
" EDUCATION, he means a fyftem of 
" principles, religious, moral, and poli- 
" tical, whofe tendency may be the pre- 
" fervation of the bleffings of fociety, as 
" they are enjoyed in a free ftate, to be 
" inftilled efFeélually into the infant and 
" growing minds of the commnnity, for 
" this great end of public happinefs." 

In what manner the fecurity of civil 
liberty is to be efFeéled by means of this 
code of éducation, may be ikcn in the 
folio wing defcription hegives of theinfti- 
tutions of Sparta. " No father had a 
" right to educate his children accord- 
" ing to the caprice of his own fancy. 
" They were dçlivered to public officers, 
" who initiated them early in the man- 
" ners, the maxims, the exercifes, the 
" toils ; in a word, in ail the mental and 
" bodily acquirements and habits which 
" correfponded with the genius of the 
" ftate, Family connexions had no 

" place. 



So EFFECTSOFA 

" place. The firft and leading objeél 
" of their affedlion was the gênerai wel- 
" fare. This tuition was carefully con- 
" tinued till they were enrolled in the 
" lift of men." 

With refpedl to the Athenian govern- 
ment, he fays, page 62, " The firft and 
" ruling.defeél in the inftitution of this 
" republic feems to hâve been the total 
" want of an eftablifhed éducation, fui- 
" table to the genius of the ftate. There 
" appears not to hâve been any public, 
" regular, or prefcribed appointment of 
" this kind, beyond what cuftom had 
" accidentally introduced/' 

He fays, page 70, " There were three 
" fatal circumftances admittçd into the 
" very eflence of the Roman republic, 
" which contained the feeds of certain 
" ruin ; the firft of which was, the neg- 
" ledl of inftituting public laws, by 
" which the éducation of their children 
" might hâve been afcertained." 

He complains, page 83, " that the 

Britifl» 



CODJL OF EDUCATION. Ôi 

'^ Britiih fyftem of policy and religion 
*^ is not upheld in its native power like 
" that of Sp^rta, by correfpondent and 
" eflFe^éiual rules of éducation ; that it is 
" in the power of every private man to 
" educate his child, not only without a 
" révérence for thefe, but in abfolute 
*^ contempt of them j that, at the re- 
"solution, p. 90, the éducation of 
" youth was ftill left in an imperfeél 
" ftate î this great révolution having 
" confined itfelf to the reform of public 
*^ inftitutions, without afcending to the 
" great fountain of political fecurity, 
" the private and eflPeélual formation of 
"the infant mind; and, p. 107, that 
" éducation was afterwards left ftill 
" more and more imperfedl." 

Laftly, he afferts, p. 156, " that 
" the chief and efièntial remedy of licen- 
" tioufnefs and fadion, the fundamental 
" means of the lafting and fecure efta- 
" blifhmentof civil liberty, canonlybein 
" a gênerai and prefcribed improvement 
" of the laws of éducation, to which ail 
" the members of the community ihould 

G «legally 






82 EFFECTSOFA 

" legally fubmit ; and that for want of 
" a prefcribed code of éducation, the 
" manners and principles, on wlûch 

•* alone the ftate can reft, are inefiFec- 
" tually inftilled, are vague, fluduat- 
" ing and felf contradidtory. No- 
" thing," he fays, " is more évident, than 
" that fome reform in this great point is 
" neceflary for the fecurity of public free- 
" dom ; and that though it is anincurable 
" defeél of our political ftate, that it has 
" not a correfpondent and adéquate code 
" of éducation inwrought into its firft 
" effence ; we may yet hope, that, in a 
" fecondary and inferior degree, fome- 
" thing of this kind may ftill be inlaid ï 
" that, though it cannot hâve that perfedl 
" eâicacy, as if it had been originally of 
^^ the pièce, yet, if well conduéled, it 
" may ftrengthen the weak parts, and al- 
" leviate defedls, if not completely re- 
" move them."^ 

In condudlîng my examination of thefe 
fentiments, I fliall make no remarks upon 
any particular paflages in the book, but 
confider only the author s gênerai fcheme, 

and 



CODE OF EDUCATION. 83 

and the proper and profeflfed objedl of it. , 
And as the doélor has propofed no par- 
ticular plan of public éducation, I fhall 
be as gênerai as he has been, and only 
fliew the inconvenience of eftablifhing, 
by law, any plan of éducation what- 
ever. 

This writer pleads for a plan of éduca- 
tion eftabliflied by the legiûature, as the 
only efFeâual method of preventing faéli- 
on in theftate, and fecuring the perpetui- 
ty of our excellent conftitution, ecclefia- 
ftical and civil. I agrée with him, in ac- 
knowledging the importance .of éducati- 
on, as influencing the manners and the 
conducSl of men. I alfo acknowledge, 
that an uniform plan of éducation, agree- 
able to the principles of any particular 
form of governme^t, civil or ecclefiafti- 
cal, vsrould tend to eftablilh and perpetu- 
ate that form of government, and pre vent 
civil diffentions and facSlions in the ftate. 
But I flibuld objeél to the interférence of 
the legiflature in this bufinefs of éducation, 
as prejudicial to the proper defign of édu- 
cation, and alfo to the great ends of civil 

G 2 focieties 



^ 



84 EFFECTS.OF A 

focîeties with refped to their prefent 
utility. r £hall moreover fhow, that it 
would be abf olutely inconfîftent with the 
true principles of the Englifh govern- 
ment, and could not be carried into exé- 
cution, to any purpofe, without the ruin 
of our prefent conftitution. I beg the 
candour of the public, while I endea- 
vour to explain, in as few words as pof- 
fible, in what manner, I apprehend, this 
interférence of the civil magiftrate would 
operate to obftruél thefe great ends ; and 
I Ihall confider thefe articles feparately» 

I obferved in the firft place, that a 
légal code of éducation might interfère 
with the proper defign of it. I do not 
mean what this writer feems to confider 
as the only obje(5l of éducation, the tran- 
quility of the ftate, but the forming of 
wife and virtuous men ; which is cer- 
tainly an objedl of the greateft impor- 
tance in every ftate. If the conftitution 
of a ftate be a good one, fuch men will 
be the greateft bulwarks of it ; if it be 
a bad one, they will be the moft able and 
ready to contribute to its reformation ; 

in 






CODE OF EDUCATION. 85 

in either of which çafes they will render 
it the greateft fervice. 

Education is as much an art (founded, 
as ail arts are, upôn fcience) as hufban- 
drjr, as architeélure, or as fhip-bnilding. 
In ail thefe cafés we hâve a pradlical pro- 
blem propofed to us, which muft be per- 
formed by the help of data with which 
expérience and obfervation furnilh us. 
The end of flaip-building is to make the 
beft fliips, of architecSlure the beft houfes, 
and of éducation, the beft men. Now, 
of ail arts, thofe ftand the faireft chance 
of being brought to perfedlion, in which 
there is opportunity of making the moft 
experiments and trials, and in which 
there are the greateft number and variety 
of perfons employed in making them. 
Hiftory and expérience fliow, that, aete^ 
ris paribusj thofe arts hâve always, in 
fad, been brought the fooneft, or the 
neareft to perfedtion, which hâve been 
placed in thofe favourable circumftances* 
The reafon is, that the opérations of 
the human mind are flow ; a number of 
falfc hypothefès and conclufions always 

G 3 précédé 



86 EFFECTSOFA 

précède the right one; and in every 
art, manual or libéral, a number of awk- 
ward attempts are made, before we are 
able to exécute any thing which will bear 
to be fliown as a mafter-piece in its tind ; 
fo that to eftablifh the methods and pro- 
cefles of any art, before it hâve arrived 
to a ftate of perfection (of which no man 
can be a jtidge) is to fix it in its infancy, 
to perpétua te every thing that is inconvé- 
nient and awkvsrard init, and to eut ofPits 
future growth and improvement. And 
to eftablifh the methods and procefTes of 
any art when it has arrived to perfeélion 
is fuperfluous. It will then recom- 
mend and eft,ablifh itfelf, 

Now I appeal to any perfon whether 
any plan of éducation, which has yet been 
put in exécution in this kingdom, be fo 
perfedl as that the eftablifhing of it by 
authority would not obftrucSl the great 
ends of éducation ; or even whether the 
united genius of man could, at prefent, 
form fo pçrfeél a plan. Every man who 
is experiencedinthebufinefs of éducation 
well knows, that the art is in its infan-» 

cy î 



CODE OF EDUCATION. 87 

cy ; but advancing, it is hopcd, apace to 

a ftate of manhood. In this condition, 

it requires the aid of every circumftance 
favourable to its natural growth, and 

dreadsnothingfb muchas being confined 
and crampedby thennfeafonable hand of 
power. To put it (in its prefent imper- 
feél ftate) into the hands of the civil ma* 
giftrate, in order to fix the mode of it, 
would be like fixing the drefs of a child, 
and forbidding its cloaths evertobemade 
wider or largen 

Mannfadlurers and artifts of feveral 
kinds aiready complain of the obftruc- 
tion which is thrown in the way of their 
arts, by the injudicious aâs of former 
parliaments ; and it is the objedl of our 
wifeft ftatefmen to get thefe obftruétions 
removed, by the repeal of thofe aéls. I 
wim it could not be faid, that the bnfi- 
nefs of éducation is aiready under too 
many légal reftraints. Let thefe be re- 
moved, and a few more fair experi- 
ments made of the différent methods of 
conduâing it, beforethelegiflaturethinfc 
proper to interfère any more with it ; 

and 



88 EFFECTSOFA 

and by that time, it is hoped^ they will 
fee no reafon to interfère at ail. The 
bufineià would be cofaduâ:ed to much 
better purpofe, even in favour of their 
bwn views, if thofe vicws were juft and 
honourable, than it would be under any 
arbitrary régulations whatever, 

To fliew this fcheme of an eftablifhcd 
^ethod of éducation in a clearer point of 
light, let us imagine that what is now pro- 
pofedhad been carried into exécution fome 
centuries bcfore this time. For no rea- 
fon can be afligncd for, fixing any mode 
of éducation at prefent, which might 
not hâve been made ufe of, with the 
famé appearanceof reafon, for fixing ano-^ 
ther approved method a thoufand years 
ago. Suppofe Alfred, when he found- 
ed the univerfîty of Oxford, had made 
it impoflible, that the method of inftruc- 
tion ufed in his time fhould ever hâve been 
altered. Excellent as that method might 
hâve been, for the time in which it was 
inftituted, it would now hâve been the 
wçrft method that is praélifed in the world. 
guppofe the number of the arts and fci- 

ences, 



CODE OF EDUCATION. 89 

ences, with the manner of teaching 
them, had becn fixed in this kingdom, 
beforç the revival of letters and of the 
arts, it is plain they could never hâve ar- 
riyed at their prcfent advanced ftate 
among us. We fhould not hâve had 
the honour to lead the way iii the moft 
noble difcoveries, in the mathematics, 
philofophy, aftronomy, and, I may add, 
divinity too. And for the famé reafon, 
were fuch an eftablifhment to take place 
in the prefent âge, it would prevènt ail 
great improvements in futurity. 

V may add, in this place, that, if we 
argue, from the analogy of éducation to 
other arts which ar» moft iîmilar to it, 
we can never expeél to fèe human nature, 
about which it is employed, brought to 
perfe<Slion, but in confequence of indulg- 
ing unbounded libcrty, and even caprice 
in cond^éling it. l'The power of nature 
in pro4iicing plants cannot be fhown to 
advant^e, but rail ail poffible cîrcum- 
ftanceiof culture*. Thericheftcolours, the 
moft fragrant icents, and the hxD^ ex- 
quifité flavours,: which our prefent gar- 

dens 



9D EFFECTSOFA 

dens and orchards exhibit, would ne- 
ver hâve been known, if florifts and gar- 
deners had been confined in the prpceffes 
of cultivation ; nay if they had not been 
allowed the utmoftlicentioufhefs of fancy 
in the exercife of their arts. Many of 
the fineft productions of modem garden- 
ing hâve been the refult of cafual experi- 
ment, perhaps of undefigned déviation 
from eftabliflbed niles. Obfervations of 
a fimilar nature may be made on the me- 
thods of breeding cattle, and training 
animais of ail kinds. And why fhould 
the rational part of the création be depri- 
vcd of that opportunity of diverfifying 
and improving itfelf, which the vegetable 
and animal world enjoy ? 

From new, and feemingly irregular me- 
thods of éducation, perhaps fomething 
extraordinary and uncommonly great 
may fpring. At leaft there would be a 
fair chance for fuch productions ; and if 
fomething odd and excentric fliould, now 
and then, arife from this unbounded li- 
berty of éducation, the varions bufinefs 
of human life may a£Ford proper fpheres 
for fuch excentric geniufes. Edu- 



CODE OF EDUCATION. 91 

Education, taken ia its moft extenfive 

lenfe, is properly that which makes the 

man. One method of éducation, there- 

fore, would only produce one kind of 

men ; but the great excellence of human 

nature confifts in the variety of which 

it is capable. Inftead, then, of endea- 

vouring, by uniform and fixed fyftems 

of éducation, to keep mankind always 

the famé, let us give free fcope to every 

thing which may bid fairfor introducing 

more variety among us. The various 

charaéler of the Athenians was certain! y 

préférable to the uniform charadler of the 

Spartans, or to any uniform national 

charadler whatever. Is it not univerfal- 

ly confidered as an advantage to Eng- 

land, that it contains fo great a variety 

of original chara(5lers : And is it not, 

on this accQunt, preferred to France, 

Spain, or Italy ? 

Uniformity is the charaéleriflîc of 
the brute création. Among them every 
fpecies of birds build their nefts with the 
famé materials, and in the famé form ; the 
genius and difpofition pf one individual 

is 



•V 



52 EFFECTSOFA 

îs that of ail ; and it is only the éducation 
whîch men give them diat raifes any of 
them much abovc others. But it is the 
glory of human nature, that the opérati- 
ons of reafon, though variable, and by no 
means infallible, are capable of infinité 
improvement. We corne into the world 
worfe provided than any of the brutes, and 
for a year or two of otir lives, many of 
them go farbeyond us in intelled:ual ac- 
complifhments. But when their facul- 
ties are at a fuU ftand, and their enjoy- 
ments incapable of variety, or increafè, 
our intelleélual powers are growing 
apace; we'are perpetually deriving hap-^ 
pinefs from new fources, and even before 
we leave this world are capable of tafl- 
ing the felicity of angels. 

Hâve we, th^n, fo little fenfe of the 
proper excellence of our natures, and of 
thè views of divine providence in our for- 
mation, as to catch at a poor advantage a- 
dapted to the lower nature of brutes. Ra- 
ther, let us hold on in the courfe in 
which the divine being himfelf hasput 
us, by giving reafon its full play, and 

throwing 



CODE OF EDUCATION. 93 

throwing ofiF the fetters which fhôrt- 
fighted and ill-judging men hâve hung 
upon it. Though, in this courfe, we be 
liàbleto more extra vagancies than brutes, 
governed by blind but unerring inftin<5t, 
or than men whom miftaken fyftems of 
policy hâve made as uniform in their fen- 
timents and conduit as the brutes, we 
Ihall be in the way to attain a degree of 
perfection and happinefs of which they 
can hâve no idea. 

However, as men are firfl animais be- 
fof e they can be properly termed rational 
créatures, and the analogies of individu- 
als extend to focieties, a principle fbme- 
thing refembling the inftindl of animais 
may, perhaps, fuit mankind in their in- 
fant (late ; but then, as we advance in 
the arts of life, let us, as far as we are 
able, aflert the native freedom of our 
fouis ; and, after having been fervilely go- 
verned like brutes, afpire to the noble 
privilège of governing ourfelves like 
men. 

If it may hâve been ncceflary to efta- 

bliih 



94 EFFECTSOFA 

blifti fomething by law concerning édu- 
cation, that neceffity grows lefs every- 
day, and encourages us to relax the bonds 
of authorîty, rather than bind them 
fafter. 

Secondly, this fcheme of an eftablifh- 
ed mode of éducation would be preju- 
dicial to the great ends of civil fociety. 
The great objeél of civil fociety is the 
happinefs of the members of it, in the 
perfeéî: and undifturbed enjoyment of 
the more important of our natural rights, 
for the fake of which, we yoluntarily 
give up others of lefs confequence to us. 
But whatever be the blelîings of civil 
fociety, they may be bought too dear. It 
is certainly pofîible to facrifice too much, 
at leaft more than is neceflary to be fa- 
crified for them, in order to produçe the 
greatefl fum of happinefs in the com- 
munity. Elfe why do we complain of 
tyrannical and oppreffive governments ? 
Is it not the meaning of ail complaints 
of this kind, that, in fuch governments, 
the fubjeéls are deprived of their moft 
important uatural rights, without an 

équivalent 



CODE OF EDUCATION. 95 

équivalent recompenfe ; that ail the va- 
luable ends of civil government might 
be efFeélually fecured, and the members 
of particular liâtes be much happier 
npon the whole, if they did not lie un- 
dér thofe reftiidions. 

Now, of ail the fources of happinefs 
and enjoyment in human life, the do- 
meftîc relations are the moft confiant 
and copions. With our wives and chil- 
dren we necefTarily pafs the greateft part 
of our lives. The connedlions of friend- 
fhip are flight in cômparifon of this inti- 
matc domellic union. Views of interefl 
or ambition may divide the iieareft 
friends, but our wives and children are, 
in gênerai, infèparably conneéled with 
us and attached to us. With them ail 
oun joys are doubled, and in their affec- 
tion and afhduity we find confolation un- 
der ail the troubles and difquietudes of 
life. For the enjoymènts which refult 
from this mofl delightful intercourfe, ail 
mankind, in ail âges, hâve been ready to 
facrifice every thing ; and for the inter- 
ruption of this intçrcourfc no compenfa- 

tion 



96 EFFECTSOFA 

tion whatever can be made by man* 
Whaf then can be more juftly alarming, 
to a man who has a txue tafte for happt- 
nefs, than, either that the choice of his 
wife, or the éducation of his children ^ 
fliould be under the diredlion of perfons 
who haye noparticularknowledgeofhim, 
or particular afFcélion for him, and whofc . 
views and maxims he might utterly diA 
like ? What profpedl of happinefs coidd 
a man hâve with fuch a wife, or fuch 
children ? 

It is poflible indeed, that the prefèr-^ 
vation of fome civil focieties, fuch as that 
of Sparta, may require this facrifice j but 
thofe civil focieties muft be wretchedly 
conftituted to ftand inneed of it, and had 
better be utterly diffolved. Were I a 
memberof fuch a ftate, thankfîil ihould I 
be to its governors, if they would permit • 
me peaceably to retire to any other 
country, where fo great a facrifice was 
not required. Indeed, it is hardly pof- 
fible that a ftate fliould require any fa- 
crifice, which I fhould think of fo much 
importance, Ând, I doubtnot, fo many 

others 



CODE OF EDUCATION. 97 

others would be of the famé mind, that 
there would foon be very little reafon to 
complain of the too great increafe of 
commerce in fuch a country. This, how- 
ever, would render very neceffary ano- 
therpart of our author's fchemej viz. 
putting a reftraint upon travelling a- 
broad, left too many perfons fliould be 
willing to leave fuch a country, and hâve 
no inclination to return. 

If there be any natural rights whîch 
ought hot to be facrificed to the ends of 
civil fociety , and no politicians or moral- 
ifts deny but that there are fome (the 
obligations of religion, for inftance, being 
certainly of a fuperior nature) it is even 
more natural to look for thefe rîghts 
among thofe which refpeél a man's chil- 
dren, than among thofe which refpeét 
himfelf ; becaufe nature has generally 
made them dearer to him than him- 
felf. 

If any truft càn be faid to be of God, 
and fuch as ought not to Be reKnquiflied 
at the command of man^ it is that which 

H w« 



98 EFFECTSOFA 

we hâve of the éducation of oiir chîl^ 
dren, whom the divine being feems W 
hâve put under our immédiate care ; that 
we may inflru(Sl them in fuch principles> 
form them to fuch manners, and give 
them fuch habits of thinking and a.ùr 
ing, as we fhall judge to be of the greateft 
importance to their prefent and future 
well being. 

I believe there is no father in the 
world (who, to a fenfe of religion, joins 
a ftrong fenfe of parental affeélion) who 
would think his own liberty above half 
indulged to him, when abridged in fb 
tender a point, as that of provîdïng, ta 
his own fatisfaâion, for the good cpn- 
duel and happinefs of his ofFspring. 
Nature feems to hâve eftablifhed fuch a 
ftrong- connexion between a purent and 
his children, at leaft during the firft pe- 
riod of their lives, that to drag them 
from the afylum of their natural guardi- 
ans, to force them to public places of 
éducation, and to inftil into them religions 
fentiments contrary to the judgment and 
choice of their parents, would be as cruel^ 

as 



CODE OF EDUCATION. 99 

as obliging a man to make the greatefl: 
perfonal. facrifice, even that of his con- 
fcience, to the civil magiftrate. 

What part of the perfecution which 
the proteftants in France underwent did 
they complain of more feelingly, and 
with more juftice, than that of their chil- 
dren being forced from them, and carri- 
ed to be educated in public monafleries ? 
God forbid that the parental afFeélions 
of free born Britons Ihould ever be put to 
fo fevere a trial ! or to that which the 
poor Jews in Portugal fuffered ; many of 
whom eut the throats of their children, 
or threw them into wells, and down pré- 
cipices, rather than fuffer them to be 
dragged away to be educated under the 
direction of a popilh inquifition ; think- 
ing the lives of their children a lefs facri- 
fice than that of their principles. 

. It was a meafure fimilar to that which 
Dr. Brown recommends, at which the 
whole chriftian world took the greatefl 
alarm that was ever given to it, in the 
reign of that great man, but inveterate 

Ha enemy 



loo EFFECTS OF A 

é 

enemy of chriftianity, the emperor Ju- 
lian ; who would hâve fliut up the fchools 
of chriftians, and hâve forbidden them to 
tcach rhetoric and philofophy. Similar 
to this fcheme, in its nature and tenden- 
cy, was the moft odious meafure of the 
moft odious miniftry that ever fat at the 
helm of the Britifh government, and 
which was providentially defeated the 
very day that it was to hâve been carried 
into exécution ; I mean thescHisM bi ll> 
patronized by the Tory minifters in the 
latter end of the reign of queen Ann. 
Should thefe meafures be refumed, and 
purfued, Farewel, a long farewel tô Eng- 
land's greatnefs ! Nor would this be faid 
in a hafly fit of unreafonable defpair. 
For, befides that fuch a naeafure as this 
could not but hâve many extenfîve con- 
fequences ; it is not to bé doubted, but 
that whoever they be who do thus much, 
they both can and ^will do more. Such 
a fcheme as this will never be pulhed 
for its own fake only. 

In examining the prefent opération 
and utility of any fcheme of policy, wé 

ought 



V V 



CODE OF EDUCATION loi 

ought to take into confideration the eafè 
or the difficulty of carrying it into exe- 
cution>, For if the difturbance, which 
would be occafîoned by bringing it into 
exécution, would be £o great an incon- 
venience, as to overbalance the good to 
be efFe(Sled by it, it were better never to 
attempt it. Now, though the dodor 
hath laid down no particular fcheme of 
public and eftabliflied éducation, and 
therefore we cannot judge of the parti- 
cular difficulties which would attend the 
eftablifliing of it ; y et, if it be fuch as 
would anfwer the end propofed by him, 
this diiEculcy would appear to me abfo- 
lutely infuperable, in fuch a country as 
England. 

Whatever be the religions, moral, and 
political principles, which are thought 
conducive to the good of the fociety, if 
they muft be effeôlually injlilled into the 
infant andgroiving minds ofthe community, 
it can never be done without taking the 
children very early from their parents, 
and cutting off ail communication witî^ 
them, till they be arrived to maturity, 

H 3 and 



102 EFFECTS OF A 

and their judgments be abfolutely fixed. 
And if this author judged, that the reafon 
why a fcheme of this nature did not take 
place in Athens, was the difficulty of 
eftablilliing it, after the people were tole- 
rably civilized ; he muft certainly judgc 
it to be infinitely more difBcult, among 
a people fo much farther advanced in 
the arts of life than the Athçnians. 

He well obferves, p. 53, that, " to 

" give children a public éducation where 

" no éducation had taken place, was natu- 

" rai and pradlicable ;" but he feems to be 
aware, that an attempt to carry any iuch 

plan into exécution, in the moft flourifh- 

ing period of a free and civilized fia te, 

would be highly unnatural, without the 

leaft probable hope of fuccefs, and dan- 

gerous to fuch as took it in hand. For 

he fays, p. 52, that, " to eflPeél a 

" change of government only is a work 

" fuflScient for the abilities of the greateft 

" legiflator ; but to overturn ail the pre- 

^' eftablifhed habits of the head and 

** heart, to deftroy or reverfe ail the 

^' fixed aflbciations, maxims, manners, 

"and 



CODE OF EDUCATION 103 



/ 



" and principles, were a labour which 
" might well be ranked among the. 
" moft extravagant legends of fabulons 
«Greece." 

What mîght be expeéled from the bu- 

finefs of éducation being lodged by the 
ilate in the hands of any one fet of men, 
may be imagined from the alarm which 
the Newtonian fyftem gave to ail phi- 
lofophers at the time of its firft publica- 
tion ; and from what pafled at Oxford 
with refpeél to Locke^s EJfay on the hu-^ 
man underftanding^ which hath done fo 
much honour to the Englifh nation in 
the eyes of ail the learned world. We 
are told by the authors of Biographia 
Britannica^ in the life of Mr. Locke, 
that " there was a meeting of the heads 
" of houfes at Oxford, where it was pro- 
" pofed to cenfure, and difcourage the 
^' reading of this EfTay ; and that, àfter 
^^ varions debàtes, it was concluded, that, 
^' without any public cenfure, each head 
^* of a houfe fliall endeavour to pi'event 
^^ its being read in his own collège/' 
This pafled but à little before Mr. Locke's 

death, 



104 EFFECTS OF> A 

death, and about fourteen years aftcr 
thé firfl publication of the Eflay. 

Hitherto I hâve argued agaînft efta- 
blilhed modes of éducation upon gênerai 
principles, fliewing how unfavouraJ)lc 
they are to the great ends of civil ^fo- 
ciety, with only occafional références to* 
the Englifh conftitution ; and in thefe 
arguments I hâve, likewife, fuppofed 
thefe methods of éducation, whatever 
they be, adhially eftablilhed, and to hâve 
operated to their fuU exteiit. I fhall 
now add, that, before thefe methods can 
be eftablifhed, and produce their full 
eflFecSl, they muft occafion a very confi- 
derable altération in the Englifh confti- 
tution, and almoft inevitably deftroy the 
freedom of it ; fo that the thing which 
would, in fadl, be pefpetuated, wpuld 
not be the prefent conftitution of Eng- 
land, but fômething very différent from 
it, and more defpotic. An altération of 
fo great importance, which tends to de- 
feat one of the principal objedls of this 
government, cannot but give juft caufe 
qf alarm to every friend of the prefent 

happy 



GODE OF EDUCATION. 105. 

happy conftitution and liberties of thîs 
country. In fupport of this affeition, 
I defire no other argument than that 
with which Dr. Brown hinifelf furniflies 
me, from the influence he allows to 
edjicarion, operating, likewife, in the 
very manner which he defcribes, and to 
the very end for which he advifes the 
cftablifliing of its mode. 

* * * 

Education îs confidered by the doélor 
only in a political view, as ufeful to inftil 
into the minds of youth particular max- 
ims of policy, and to give them an at- 
tachment to particular forms of it ; or» 
as tending to fuperinduce fuch habits ôf 
mind, and to give fuch a gênerai turn of 
thinking, as would correfpond with the 
genius of a particular date. This édu- 
cation he would hâve to be univerfal and 
uniform ; and indeed, if it were not fo, 
it could not poflibly anfwer the end pro- 
pQfêd. It muft, therefore, be conduéled 
by one fet of men. But it is impoffible 
to find any fet of men, who fliall hâve 
an equal regard to ail the parts of our 
conftitution j and whatever part is neg- 

leaed 



io6 EFFECTSOFA 

leded in fuch a fyftem of éducation, it 
cannot fail to be a fiîfferer. 

The Englifli government is a mixture 
of régal, ariftocratical, and democratical 
power ; and if the public éducation 
lliould be more favourable to any one of 
thefe than to another, or more than its 
prefent importance in the conftitution 
requires, the balance of the whole would 
neceflarily be loft. Too much weight 
would be thrown into fome of the fcales, 
and the conftitution be overturned. If 
the Gommons, reprefenting the body of 
the people, had the choice of thefe pub- 
lic inftnidlors, which is almoft impoffi- 
ble, we fhould fee a republic rife put of 
the ruins of our prefent government ; if 
the Lords, which is highly improbable, 
we Ihould, in the end, hâve an arifto- 
cracy ; and if the court had this nomi- 
nation, which it may be taken for grant- 
ed would be the cale (as ail the execu- 
tive power of the ftate is already lodged 
in the hands of the fovereign) it could 
not but occafion a very dangerous accef- 
fion of power to tl^e crown î and we 

might 



CODE OF EDUCATION. 107 

might juftly expeél afyftem of éducation, 
principles, and manners favourablc to 
defpotifih. Every man would be edu- 
cated with principles, which would lead 
him to concur with the vicws of the 
court, AU that oppofition from the 
country; which is fo falutary in this na- 
tion, and fo effential to the libcrties of 
England, would be at an end. And 
when once the fpirit of dcfpotifm was 
thus eftablilhed, and had triumphed over 
ail oppofition, we might foon expeél to 
fee the forms of it cftablifhed too, and 
thereby the very doors fhut againft old 
Englifh liberty, and effedlually guarded 
againft the poflibility of its return, ex- 
cept by violence ; which would then be 
the only method of its re-entrance. 

It is évident to common underftand- 
ing, that the true fpirit and maxims 
of a mixed government can no otherwife 
be continued, than by every man's edu- 
çating his children in his bwn way; 
and that îf any one part provided for 
the éducation of the wholc, that part 
would foon gain the afcendancy j and, 

if 



2o8 EFFECTS OF A 

if it were capable of it, would become 
the whole. Were a ftate, for inftance, 
to confift of papifts and proteftants, and 
the papifts to havg the foie power of édu- 
cation, proteftantifm would expire with 
that génération : whereas, if the papifts 
and proteftants educated each their own 
children, the famé proportion would 
continue to fubfift between them, and 
the balance of power would remain the 
famé. For the famé reafon the only 
method of preferving the balance, which 
at prefent fubfifts among the feveral po- 
litical and religions parties in Great-Bri- 
tain, is for each to provide for the édu- 
cation of their own children: 

In this way, there will be a fair pro- 
fpe6l of things continuing nearly upon 
their prefent footing, for a confiderable 
time; but fubjedl to thofe graduai altérati- 
ons which, it may be hoped, will prove 
favourable to the beft interefts of the fo- 
ciety upon the whole. Whereas, were 
thedireélion of the whole bufinefs of édu- 
cation thrown into the hands of the 
court, it would be fuch an acceflion of ' 

power 



CODE OF EDUCATION. Ï09 

power to the régal part of our conftitu- 
tion, as could not fail to alarm ail the 
friends of civil liberty ; as ail the friends 
of religious liberty would be juftly 
alarmed, if it fliould devolve upon the 
eflablifhed clergy. And it were the 
greatefl injùftice to the good fenfe of free 
bom Britons, to fuppofe the noble fpirit 
of religions liberty, and a zeal for the 
rights of free inqniry confined within 
the narrow circle of Proteftant Diflenters. 

Confidering the whole of what hath 
been advanced in this fedlion, I think it 
fufficieïitly appears, that éducation is a 
branch of civil liberty, which ought by 
no meansto befurrenderedintothehands 
of the magiflxate j and that the beft in- 
terefts of fociety require, that the right 
of conduâing it fhould be inviolably 
preferved to individuals. 



SECTION 



SECTION V. 



Of Religions Liberty^ and Toléra^' 

tion in gênerai. 

TH E moft important queftion con- 
cerning the extent of civil go- 
vemment is, whether the civil magiftrate 
ought to extend his authority to matters 
of religion \ and the only method of 
deciding this important queftion, as it 
appears to me, is to hâve recourfe at 
once to firft principles, and the ultimate 
rule concerning every thing that refpedls 
a fociety ; viz. whether fuch interférence 
of the civil magiflrate appear to be for 
the public good. And as ail arguments 
a priori^ in matters of policy, are apt to 
be fallacious, fa6i and expérience feem to 
be our only fafe guides. Now thefe, as 
far as our knowledge of hiftory extends, 
déclare clearly for no interférence in this 
café at ail, or, at leaft, for as little as is 
poifible. Thofe focieties hâve ever en- 

joyed 



AND TOLERATlON. m 

joyed thç moft happinefs, and hâve been, 
ceteris paribusy in the moft flourifhing 
ftate, where the civil magiftrates hâve 
meddled the leaft with religion, and 
where they hâve the moft clofely con- 
fined their attention to what îmmediate- 
ly aflFedls the civil interefts of their fel- 
low citizens. 

Civil and religions matters (taking 
the words in their ufual acceptation) 
ièem to be fo diftindl, that it can only 
be in very uncommon emergencies, 
where, for inftance, religions quarrels 
among the members of the ftate rife very 
high, that the civil magiftrate can hâve 
any c^ll, or pretence, for interfering 
with religion. 

It is, indeed, impoflible to name any 
two things, about which men are con- 
cemed, fo remote in their nature, but 
that theyhave fome connexions and mu-^ 
tuai influences ; but were I aiked what 
two things I fliould think to be in the 
leq/l danger of being confounded, and 
which even the ingcnuity of man could 

£ind 



112^ RELIGIOUS LIBERTY. 

find the leaji pretence for involving toge- 
ther, I fliould fay the things that relate 
to this lifcj and thofe that relate to the 
life to corne. Defining the obje<5l of civil 
government, in the moft extenfîve fenfe, 
to be the making provifion for the fecure 
and comfortable enjoyment of this life, 
by preventing one man from injuring 
another in his perfon or property; I 
ihould think the office of the civil ma- 
giflxate to be in no great danger of being. 
incroached upon, by the methods that 
men might think proper to take, to pro- 
vide for their happinefs after death. 

AU the civil focieties we enter înto in 
this life will be diflblved by death. 
When this life is over, I fhall not be 
able to claim any of the privilèges of 
an Englilhman ; I fhall not be bound by 
any of the laws of England, nor fhall 
I owe any allegiance to its fovereign. 
When, therefore, my fîtuation in a fu- 
ture life fhall hâve no conneélion v^ith 
my privilèges or obligations as an Eng- ' 
lifhman, why fhould thofe perfons who 

make laws for Éngliflunen interfère with 

my 



AND TOLERATION. ug 

my condudl, with refpedl to a ftate, to 
which their power does not extend. Be- 
fides, we know that infinité mifchiefs 
hâve arifen from this interférence of 
government in the bufinefs of religion ; 
and we hâve yet feen no inconvenience 
to hâve arifen from the want, or the jre* 
laxation of it, 

The fine country of Flanders, the moft 
flourifliing and opulent then in Europe, 
was abfolutely ruined, paft recovery, by 
the mad attempt of Philip the fécond, 
to introduce the popifh inquifition into 
that côuntry. France was greatly hurt 
by the revocation of the ediél of Nantz ; 
whereas England was a great gainer on 
both occafîons, by granting an afylum 
for thofe perfecuted induftrious people ; 
who repaid us fDr our kindneis, by the 
introduélion of many ufeful arts and ma- 
nufadhires, which were the foundation 
of our prefent commerce, riches, and 
power. 

Penfylvania flouriflied much more 
than New England, or than any other of 

I the 



114 RELIGIOUS LiBERTr, 

tlie Englifli fettlements in North Ame-^ 
rica, evidently in confequencc of giving 
more liberty in matters of religion, at its 
firft eftablilhment. Holland has found 
its advantage in the indulgence flie gives 
to a greatvarietyof religions perfuafions. 
England has alfo been much more flou- 
rifliing and happy, fince the eftabli/h-- 
mentj as it may properly enough be ftiled, 
of the diffenting mrCthod of worfhip, by 
what is commonly called the aâl oftole-- 
ration. And ail the fenfible part of Eu- 
rope concur in thinking, both that the 
Polifh diflldents hâve a right ta ail the 
privilèges of other Polifh citizens ; and 
that it would be much happier for that 
country if their claims were quietly ad- 
mittcd ; and none but interefted bigots 
oppofed their demands. 

If we look a little farther ojBT from 
home, let it be faid, what inconvenience 
did Jenghis khan, Tamerlane, arid other 
eaftern conquerors ever find fromleaving 
religion to its natural courfe in the 
countries they fubdued, and from having 
chriflians, mahometans, and a variety of 

pagans 



AND TOLERATION. 115 

pagaris under the famé form of civil go- 
vernment ? Are not both chriftianity and 
mohammedanifin, in fadl, eftablillied 
(the former at leaft fully tolerated) in 
Turkey ; and what inconvenience, worth 
mentioning, bas ever arifen from it ? 

Pity it is then, that more aiid fairet 
experiments are not made ; when, judg- 
ing from what is paft, the confequences 
of unbounded liber ty^ in mat ter s of reli-' 
giofij promife to be fo very favourable to 
the beft interefts of mankind. 

I am aware, that the connexion be- 
tween civil and reUgious afFairs, will be 
urged for the neceffity of fome inter- 
férence of the legiflature with religion ; 
and, as I obferved befbre, I do not deny 
the conneélion. But as this connecSlion 
bas always been found to be the greateft 
in barbarous nations, and imperfe(5l go- 
vernments, to which it lends an ufeful 
aid ; it may be prefumed, that it is gra- 
dually growing lefs neceflary ; and that, 
in the prefent advanced ftate of human 
fociety, there is very little occafion for 

I 2 it# 



ii6 RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, 

it. For my own part, I hâve no appre- 
henfion, but that, at this day, the laws 
might be obeyed very well without any 
ecclefiaftical fandUons, enforced by the 
civil magiftrate. 

Not that I think religion will ever be 
a matter of indifférence in civil fociety : 
that is impoffible, if the word be un- 
derftood in its greateft latitude, and by 
religion we mean that principle where- 
by men are influenced by the dread of 
çvil, or the hope of reward from any 
unknown and invifible caufes, whether 
the good or evil be expeéled to take 
place in this world or another ; compre- 
hending enthufîafm, fuperftition, and 
every fpecies of falfe religion, as well as 
the true. Nor is fuch an event at ail de- 
firable ; nay, the more juft motives men 
hâve to the famé good adlions, the bet- 
ter ; but religions motives may ftill ope- 
rate in favour of the civil laws, without 
fuch a conneélion^ as has been formed 
between them in ecclefiaftical eftablifli- 
ments ; and, I think, this end would be 
anfwered even better without that con- 
nexion. In 



AND TOLERATION. 117 

In ail the modes of religion, which 
fubfift among mankind, however fub- 
verfive of virtue they may be in theory, 
there is fbme fahvo for good morals ; îb 
that, in fadl, they enforce the more ef- 
fential parts, at leaft, of that condudl, 
which the good order of fociety requires. 
Befides, it might be expedled, that if ail 
the modes of religion were equally pro- 
tedled by the civil magiftrate, they would 
ail vie with one another, which fhould 
beft deferve that protedlion. This, 
however, is, in fadl, ail the alliance 
that can take place between religion and 
civil policy, each enforcing the famé 
conduél by diflferent motives. Any other 
alliance betiveen church and Jiate is only 
the alliance of différent forts of worldly 
minded men, for their temporal emo- 
lument. 

If I be urged with the horrid exceffes 
af the anabaptifts in Germany, about 
the time of the reformation j of the Le- 
vellers in England, during the civil wars j 
and the fhocking pradlices of that peo- 
ple in Afia, from whom we borrow the 

I 3 term 



ii8 RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, 

term offajftn ; I anfwer, that, befides its 
beingabfolutely chimerical to apprehend 
any fuch extravagances at prefent, and 
that they can ne ver fubfift long ; fuch 
outrages as thefe, againft the peace of fo- 
ciety, may be reftrained by the civil ma- 
giftrate, without his troubling himfelf 
about religions opinions. If a man com- 
mit murder, let him be puniftied as a 
murderer, and let no regard be paid to 
his plea of confcience for committing 
the adlion ; but let not the opinions, 
which led to the aélion be meddled 
with : for then, it is probable, that more 
harm will be donc than good, and, that 
for a fmall évident advantage, rifque will 
be run of endlefs and unknown evils ; or 

• 

if the civil magiftrate never interfère in 
religion but in fuch cafés as thofe before 
mentioned, the friends of liberty will 
hâve no great reafon to complain. Con- 
fidering what great encroachments hâve 
been made upon their rights in feveral 
countries of Europe, they will be fatis- 
fied if part of the load be removéd. 
They will fupport themfelves with the 
Jiope, that, as the ftate will certainly 

fînd 



AND TOLERATION, 119 

find a folld advantage in every relaxation 
of its claim upon men's confciences, it 
will relax more and more of its pre- 
tended rights ; till; at laft, religions opi- 
nions, and religions allions, be as free as 
the air we breathe, or the light of the 
common fun. 

I acknowledge, with the ftatefinan, that 
the proper objeél of the civil magiftrate is 
the peace and well being of fociety, and 
that whatever tends to difturb that peace 
and well being, properly cornes under his 
cognifance. I acknowledge feveral religi- 
ons and moral, as well as political princi- 
ples hâve a near conneélion with the well 
being of fociety. But, as was more fully 
explained before, there are many cafés, 
in which the happinefs of fociety is near- 
ly concerned, in which it would, never- 
thelefs, be the greateft" impropricty for 
the civil magiftrate to interfère ; as in' 
many of the duties of private life, the 
obligations of gratitude, &c. In ail fuch 
cales, where the well being of fociety is 
moft nearly concerned, the civil magi- 
ftrate ha s no right to interfère, unlefs he 



can 



I20 RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, 

can do it to good purpofe. There is no 
différence, I apprehend, to be made in 
this café, between the right^ and the nmf" 
dom of interférence. If the interférence 
would be for the good of the fociety up- 
on the whole, it is wife, and right ; if it 
would do more harm than good, it is 
foolifh and wrong. Let the fagacious 
ftatefman, therefore, confider, whether 
the interférence of the civil magiftrate 
be, in its own nature, calculated to pre- 
vent the violation of the religions and 
moral principles he may wifli to enforce. 
I think it is clear, that when they are in 
danger of being violated, his prefence is 
fo far from tending to remedy the evil, 
that it muft neceffarily inflame it, and 
make it worfe. 

Itis univerfally undçrftood, that rea- 
SON and AUTHORiTYaretwothings,and 
that they hâve generally been oppofed to 
one another. The hand of power, there- 
fore, on the fide of any fet of principles 
cannot but be a fufpicious circumftance. 
And though the injunâion of the ma- 
giftrate may filence voices^ it multiplies 

ivhifpers j 



AND TOLERATION. 121 

^ivhi^ers; and thofe whifpers are the 
things at which he has the moft reafon 
to be alanned. 

Befides, it îs univerfally true, that 
where the civil magiftrate has the greateft 
pretence for interfering in religions and 
moral principles, his interférence (fnppof- 
ing there were no impropriety in it) is 
the leaft neceiOTary. If the opinions and 
principles in queflion, be evidently fub- 
verfive of ail religion and ail civil fociety, 
they muft be evidently falfe, and eafy to 
réfute ; fo that there can be no danger 
of their fpreading ; and the patrons of 
them may fafely be fufFered to maintain 
them in the moft open manner they 
chufe. 

To mention thofe religions and moral 
principles which Dr. Brown produces, as 
the moft deftruélive to the well being of 
fociety ; namely, that theré is no God, 
and that there is no faith to be kept uuith 
hère tic s. So far am I from being of ^his 
opinion, that it is necefTary to guard 
againft thefe principles by fevere penal- 

ties, 



1112 RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, 

ties, and not to tolerate thofe who main-* 
tain them, that I think, of 'ail opinions, 
furely fuch as thefe hâve nothing formi- 
dable or alarming in them. They can 
hâve no terrors but w^hat the magiftrate 
himfelf, by his ill-judged oppofition, 
may give them. Perfecution may pro- 
cure friends to any caufe, and poffibly to 
this, but hardly any thing elfe can do it. 
It is unqueftionable, that there are more 
atheifts and infidels of ail kinds in Spain 
and Italy, where religion is fo well 
guarded, than in England ; and it is, per- 
haps, principally owing to the laws in 
favour of chriftianity, that there are fb 
many deifts in this country. 

f 

For my own part, I cannot help think- 
îng the principles of Dr. Brow^n very 
dangerous in a free ftate, and therefore 
cannot but wifli they vsrere exterminated. 
But I fhould not think that filencing him 
would be the beft method of doing it- 
No, let him, by ail means, be encourage 
ed in making his fentiments public ; both 
that their dangerous tendency, and 
their futility may more clearly appear. 

Had 



AND TOLERATION. 123 

Had I the direâion of the prefs, he 
Ihould be welcome to my imprimatur for 
any thing he Ihould pleafe to favour the 
world with ; and ready, if I know my- 
felf, fliould I be, to furnifh him with 
every convenience in my power for that 
purpofe. It is for the intereft of tnith 
that every thing be viewed in fair and 
open day light, and it can only be fome 
finifter purpofe that is favoured by dark- 
nefs or concealment of any kind. My 
fentiments may be fallacious, but if no 
body were allowed to write againft me, 
how could that fallacy be made to ap- 
pear ? Be the prayer of the magnanimous 
Ajax ever mine, 

Ev h çasi xai oM(r<rov Homer. Lib. 17. v. 646. 

This writer artfûUy mentions only 
three opinions or principles, one under 
each clafs of religion^ moralsy and politics^ 
as neceflary to be guarded by civil penal- 
ties, and not to be tolerated ; and, no 
doubt, he has chofen thofc principles 
which a friend to his country would 
moft wilh to havc fuppreffed, and with 

regard 



124 RELIGÏOUS LIBERTY, 

regard to wKich, he would leaft fcnipu- 
loufly examine the means that might be 
ufed to fupprefs them. This, Britons, 
is the method in which arbitrary power 
has ever-been introduced ; and is well 
known to hâve been the method ufed 
by the thirty tyrants of Athens. They 
firft eut oiF perfons the moft generally 
obnoxious, ai^d fuch as the ftanding laws 
could not reach ; aiid even that intel- 
ligent people were fo far duped by their 
refentment, that they were not awaré, 
that the very famé methods might be 
employed to take ofF the worthieft men 
in the city. And if ever arbitrary 
power Ihould gain ground in England, 
it will be by means of the feeming 
neceflity of having recourfè to illégal 
methods, in order to come at opinions 
or perfons generally obnoxious* But 
when thefe illégal praélices hâve once 
been authorized, and hâve pafFed into pré- 
cédents, ail perfons, and ail opinions will 
lie at the mercy of the prime minifter, 
who will animadvert upon whatever 
gives him umbrage. 

Happy 



AND TOLERATION. 125 

Happy would it bé for the unfufpedl- 
ing fons of lîberty, if their enemies 
would fay, at firft, how far they meant 
to proceed againft them. To fay, as 
Dr. Brown docs, that there are many 
opinions and principles whTch ought not 
to be tolerated, and to inftance only in 
three^ is very fufpicious and alarming. 
Let him fay, in the name of ail the 
friends of liberty, I challenge him, or 
any of his friends to fay, how many 
more he has thought proper not to men- 
tion, and what they are ; that we may 
not admit the foot of arbitrary pawer, 
before we fee what fîze of a body the 
monfter has to follow it. 

Such is the connexion and gradation 
of opinions, that if once we admit there 
are fome which ought to be guarded by 
civil penalties, itwilleverbe impoflible 
to diftinguifh, to gênerai fatisfaélion, be- 
tween thofe which may be tolerated, and 
thofe which may not. No two men liv- 
ing, were they queftioned ftridly, 
would give the famé lift of fuch funda- 
mentais* Far eafîer were it to diftin- 
guifh 



126 RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, 

guifli the exaét boundaries of the ani- 
mal, vegetable, and minerai kingdoms 
in nature, which yet naturalifts find to 
be impofîible. But a happy circum- 
ftance it is for human fociety, that, in 
reJigion and morals, there is no neceflity 
to diftinguifh them at ail. The more 
important will guard themfelves by thcir 
own évidence, and the lefs important 
do not deferve to be guarded. 

Political principles, indeed, may re- 
quire pénal fandlions ; but then it is for 
the very famé reafon that religions and 
moral principles require none. It is be- 
cau!fe they do not carry their own évi- 
dence along with them. Governments 
adlually eftablifhed muft guard them- 
felves by penalties and intolérance, be- 
caufe forms of govèrnment, and perfons 
prefiding in them, being nearly arbitrary, 
it may not be very évident that a diflPe- 

rent govèrnment, or différent gover- 
nors, would not be better for a ftate. 
Laws relating to treafon are to be con- 
fidered as arifing from the principle of 
felf-prefervation. But even with re- 

fpe(5t 



AND TOLERATION. 127 

fpe<5l to civil govemment, it is better not 
to guard every thing fo ftrongly as that 
no altération cân ever be made in it. 
Nay, altérations are daily propofed, and 
daily take place in our civil government, 
in things both of great and fmall confd- 
quence. They are improvements in 
religion only that réceive no connte- 
nance from the ftate : a fate fingular and 
hard ! 

Befîdes, fo many are the fubtle dif- 
tinélions relatin^ to religion and morals, 
that no magiltrate or body of m agi-, 
flrates, could be fuppofed to enter into 
them ; and yet, without entering into 
them, no laws they could makè would 
be effedlual. To inftance in the firft of 
Dr. Brown's principles, and the moft 
eirential of them, viz. the being of a 
God. The magiftrate muft define ftriét- 
ly v^rhat he means by the term God, for 
otherwife Epicureans and Spinozifts" 
might be no atheifts ; Or Arians or Atha- 
nafians might be • obnoxious to the law. 
The magiftrate muft likewife punilh, not 
only thofe who diredlly maintain the 

principles 



128 RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, 

principles of Athéifm (for evafions are 
£o eafy to find, tliat fuch laws would 
hurt no body) but he muft punifli thofe 
who do it iadireélly ; and what opinions 
are there not, in religion, morals, aiid 
even natural philofophy, which might 
not be faid to lead to Atheifm ? The 
do(5lrine of equivocal génération, for 
inftance, might certainly be thought of 
this kind, as well as many others, 
which hâve been very harmlefsly main- 
tained by many good chriftians* 

I am fenfible, that in the few par- 
ticnlars which Dr. Brown has thought 
proper to mention, his intolérant prin- 
ciples are countenanced by Mr. Locke ; J 
but^ as far as I can recolleiîl, Jthefè are 
ail the opinions which he would 
not tolerate ; whereas this writer ajP- 
ferts there are many j fo that he mufl: 
proyide himfelf with fome other au- 
thority for the reft. Befides I make 
i>o doubt, thegreat Mr. Locke would, 
without the leaft reluiîlance, hâve given 
up any of his affertions,- upon find- 
ing.fo bad an ufe made of tixem, and 

that 



^ 



AND TOLERATION. 129 

that the confequenees of them were fo 
very unfavourable to his own great ob- 
jeiSl, and contradidlory to his leading 
principles ; and that he would, with 
indignation, hâve given up any adhé- 
rents to ârbitrary power, who, from fuch 
a pretence as this, fliould hâve claimed 
his proteélion from the gênerons pur- 
fuit of the friends of liberty, of rea- 
fon, and of mankind, After ail, the 
€ontroverfy is not about men, but prin- 
ciples. And fo great an enemy as Mr. 
Locke, to ail authority in matters of 
opinion, would not hâve been fo incon- 
fiftent as to hâve excepted his own. 

It will be faid, that a regard to liberty 
itfelf muft plead for one exception to the 
principles of toleration. The papifts, it 
is alledged, are fuch determined enemies 
to liberty, civil and ecclefîaftical, and fo 
effeâually alienated from the. interefts 
of a proteftant country and government, 
that proteftants, who hâve a regard for 
their own fkfety,. and the great caufe in 
which they are engaged, cannot tolerate 
them,. If they do it, it is at their own 

K péril > 



130 RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, 

péril ; fo that the perfecution of papifts 
is, in fad, nothing more than a diÂate 
of felf-prefervation. 

This plea, I own, is plaufible ; and 
two centuries ago it is no wonder it had 
confiderable weight ; but perfecution by 
protejiants^ in this enlightened âge, ap- 
pears fo utterly répugnant td the great 
principle of their caufe, that I wifh they 
would view it in every point of light, 
before they ferioufly adopt any fuch 
meafure. And I cannot help thinking, 
that the refult of a more matvu:e confi- 
deration of this fubjeét will not be to 
render enjil for en)il to our old mother 
church, but rather a more indulgent 
treatment than we hâve as yet vouch- 
fafed to afFord her. 

In the firft place, I cannot imagine 
that the increafe of popery, in thefe 
kingdoms, will ever be fo confiderable, 
as to give any juft alarm to the frierids 
ôf liberty. Ail the addrefs and afïiduity 
6f man cannot, certainly, recommend fo 
ftbfurd a fyftem of faith and praéUce to 

any 



AND TOLERATION. 131 

any but the loweft and moft illiterate of 
our common people, who can ne ver 
hâve any degree of influence in the ftate. 
The number of popifh gentry muft grow 
lefs ; partly through the influence of 
fafliion, and partly through the con- 
viélion of thofe who hâve a libéral 
éducation, which will neceflarily throw 
proteftant books into their hands. 

The French tranflator of Warburton's 
Alliance^ in an addrefs to Cardinal Fleury, 
(in which he recommends fuch a fyflem 
of church eftablifliment and toleration 
as this of the Bifliop of Gloucefter) ob- 
ferves, that the number of Roman ca- 
tholicks in England diminiflies every 
day, and that the only reafbn why they 
are not fb good fubjedls in this country, 
as they are in Holland, is, that they are 
under morereftraints hère. 

If the popifli priefts and miflionaries 
hâve the fuccefs which it is pretended 
they hâve, I am almofl perfuaded,.that 
the mofl eflTedlual arguments they hâve 
employed for this purpofe^ hâve been 

K z draw]> 



132 RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, 

drawn from. the rigour of our prefent 
laws refpedling the papifts. They tell 
the people, that, confcious of the weak- 
nefs of our caufe, we dare not give them 
full liberty to teach and exercife their 
religion ; kaowing that the excellency of 
it is fuch, that, if it werc publicly exhi- 
bited, it would attraél univerfal admira- 
. tion ; and that what we are not able to 
filence by argument, we fupprefs by 
force. 

Befides, the traces and remains of 
popery are fo ftriking in the book of 
common prayer, and in the whole of 
our ecclefiaftical eftablifhment, that the 
dérivation of it from the popifli fyftem 
cannot be concealed ; and hence it may 
not be diiEcult for an artful papift, to 
perfuade many of the common people 
to quit the fliadow, and hâve recourfe to 
the fubflance ; to abandon the interefts 
of an apoftate child, arid adopt that of 
ils ancient and vénérable parent. 

Let the church of England then, be- 
fore it be too late, make a farther re- 
formation 



r : 



AND TOLERATION. 133 

formation from popery, and leave fewer 
of the fymbols of the Romifli church 
about her ; and; tkç ideas of her mem- 
bers being more remote from every thing 
that has any connexion with popery, 
the popifh tniffionaries will hâve much 
more difficulty in making them compre- 
hçnd aijL<J relilh it. A çonvert to popery 
from any of the fecSls of proteflant diiïen- 
ters (who are farther removed from the 
popifli fyftem than the church of Eng- 
land) is, very rarely heard of. And 
this efifedl is not owing to any particular 
care of their minifters to guard their 
hearers againft popery ; but becaufe the 
whole fyftem of their faith and pradlice 
is fo contrary to it, that even the com- 
mon people among them, would as^ foon 
turn mahometans, or pagans, as become 
papifts. 

Inftead, then, of ufing more rigour 
with the papifts, let us allow them a full 
toleration. We fhould, at leafî^ by this 
means, be better judges of their num- 
ber, and increafe. And I alfo think 
they would be much lefs formidable in 

K 3 thefc 



Î34 RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, 

thefe circumftances, than they are at 
prefent If they be enemies, an open 
enemy is lefs dangerous than a fecret one. 
And if our ecclefiaftical eftablifhment 
nxufl: not be reformed, and removed far- 
ther from popery ; let the clergy, as the 
beft fuccedcmeum for fuch an eflPeélual 
antidote againft their poifon, Ihow 
more zeal in the difcharge of their pa- 
rochial duties, and give more attention 
to their flocks. Half the zeal which 
the papifts employ, to make converts, 
would be more than fufEcient to prevent 
any from being made. Whofe bufinefs 
is it to counteraél the endeavours of the 
popifli emiffaries, but thofe whom the 
ftate has appointed the guardians of the 
people in fpiritual matters ; and what is 
their calling in the aid of the civil pow- 
er, but an acknowledgement of a neg- 
ledl of thfeir proper duty ? 

It may be faid, that the particular 
fituation of this country fhould be a 
motive with ail the friends of our happy 
conftitution, to kcep a watchful eye over 
the papifts î fince a popilh religion may, 

at 



AND TOLERATION. 135 

at length, fix a popifh pretender upon 
the throne of thefe kingdoms. Serioufly 
as this argument for perfecution might 
hâve been urged formerly, I cannot help 
thinking that, everfince the laft rébellion, 
the apprehenfion on which it is ground- 
ed, is become abfolutely chimerical, and 
therefore that it does not deferve a ferions 
anfwer. After the pope himfelf has re- 
f ufed to acknowledge the heir of the Stu- 
art family to be king of England, what 
can a papift, as fuch, hâve to plead for 
him ? And, for my own part, I make no 
doubt, there are men of good fcnfe a- 
mong the popifh gentry, at leaft, and 
perfons of property of that perfuafîon, 
as well as among perfons of other reli- 
gions profeffions ; and therefore, that if 
they lay under fewer civil difadvantages, 
they would not only chearfully acquiefce 
in, but would become zealoufly attached 
to our excellent form oï free gon)ernment ; 
and that, upon any emergency, they 
would bravely ftand up for it, proteftant 
as it is, in oppofîtion to any popifh fyflem 
of arbitrary power whatever. 

Befîdes, 



136 RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, 

Beiîdes, when a popifli country is at 
this very time,* fliowing us an example 
of a toleration, more perfedl, in feveral 
refpedls, than any which the chnrch of 
England allows to thofe whodiflent from 
her, is it not time to advance a little 
farther ? Political confiderations may 
juftly bc allowed to hâve fome weight 
in this café. France may reafonably be 
expedled to follow, and improve upon 
the example of Poland ; and if we do 
not make fome fpeedy improvement of 
liberty, that great and indefatigable 
rival power, by one mafter ftroke of 
policy, may almoft depopulate this great 
and flourfliing kingdom» 

We often hear it faid, that if France 
grows wife, and admits of toleration 
England is undone. Novelty, and a 
milder climate, will, no doubt, attradl 
multitudes ; and whenever the French 
make a reformation, as their minds arc 
much more enlightened, than thofe of 
the Englifli reformers were, when our 

prefent 

* Written in 1768. 



AND TOLERATION. 137 

prefent eftablifliment was fixed, their 
reformation will, in ail probability, bê 
much more perfedl than ooirs. And if 
the French through our folly, and the 
ambition, avarice, or bafenefs of fome 
fpiritual dignitaries, fliould be permitted 
to take the lead in this noble work, and 
our emtilation be not roufed by their ex^ 
ample, the future motto of England 
may, with too much propriety, be taken 
from Bacon's fpeaking ftatue, Time is 

PAST. 



SECTION VI. 

Some diJiinEîmn that hâve been 
made on the fubjeEî of religious 
liber ty^ ^ and toleration conjidered. 

IN order to illuftrate fome of the fun- 
damental principlesof religious liber- 
ty, I beg the reader's indulgence while I 
animadvert on a few diftindlions that 
hâve been fuggefted by fome perfons who 

hâve 



13» DISTINCTIONS CONCERNING 

hâve written, at difFcrent times, on this 
fubjcdl, and which I think hâve tended 
to introduce confufion into our ideas 
concerning it. Many of my readers may 
think fome of the cafés I fliall mention, 
unworthy of the notice I hâve taken of 
them, but I hope they will excufe my 
giving them a place in this feélion, when 
they confider that it is, at leaft, pofïible 
they may hâve occafioned fome difficulty 
to other perfons, unufed to thefefpecula- 
tions. 

I. Religion is fometimes confidered as 
of a perfonaly and fometimes as of a po^ 
lîtical nature. loi fome meafure, indeed, 
cvery thing that concerns individuals 
muft afFeél the focieties which they com- 
pofe j but it by no means follows, that 
it is, therefore, right^ or ivife for foci- 
eties (i. e. mankind colledlively taken) 
to intcrméddle with every thing, fo as 
to make laws, and appoint fandlions 
concerning every thing ; becaufe, in 
numberlefs cafés, more confufion and 
inconvenience would necefTarily arife 
from the interférence, than from the 

want 



RELIGIOUS LIBERTY. 139 

want of it ; fince individuâls are, in many 
refpedls, better fituated for the purpofè 
of judging andproviding for thémfelves 
than magiflxates, as fuch, can bc. 

Thefe, and many other realbns, lead 
me to confider the bufinefs of religion, 
and every thing fairly connedled with 
it, as intirely a perfonal concem, and al- 
together foreign to the nature, objeél, 
and ufe of civil magiftracy. 

Befides, there is fomething in the na- 
ture of religion that makes it more than 
out of the proper fphere^ or province of 
the civil magiftrate tô intermeddle with 
it. The duties of religion, properly un- 
derftood, feem to be, in fbme meafure, 
incompatible with the interférence of 
the civil powen For the purpofe and 
obje6l of religion neceflarily fuppofe the 
poivers of indvuiduals^ and a refponfthility^ 
which is the confequence of thofe pow- 
ers ; fo that the civil magiftrate, by 
taking any of thofe powers from indi- 
viduâls, and affuming them to hiiiifelf, 
4oth fo far incapacitate them for the 

duties 



^40 DISTINCTIONS CONCERNING 

duties of religion. : If, for inftance, I 
be commanded by diviixe authority to 
fearch the fcripturesy and the magiftrate 
forbid me the ufe of them, how can I 
difcharge my duty ? And for the famé 
reafon, I muft think the authority of 
the magiflxates oppofed to that of God, 
in every café in which human laws im- 
pede the ufe of my faculties in matters 
of religion. 

As a being capable of immortal life 
(which is a thing of infinitely more con- 
fequence to me than ail the political 
conlîderations of this world) I muft en- 
deavour to render myfelf acceptable to 
God, by fuch difpofitions and fuch con- 
duit, as he has required, in brder to fit 
me for future happinefs. For this pur- 
pofé, it is evidently requifite, that I dili*- 
gently ufe my reafon, in order to make 
myfelf acquainted with the will of God } 
and alfo that I hâve liberty to do what- 
ever I believe he requires, provided I do 
not moleft my fellow creattires by fuch 
affumed libei:ty. But ail human efta- 
blifliments, as fuch, obftrud freedom of 

inquiry 



RELIGIOUS LIBERTY. Hï 

inquiry in matters of religion, by lay- 
ing an undue bias upon the mind, i£ 
they be not fuch, as by their exprefs 
conftitutions prevent ail inquiry, and 
preclûde every poiEble effedl of it. 

m 

t 

Chriftianity, by being a more fpirîtual 
and moral conftitution than any other 
form of religion that ever appeared in 
the world, requires men to think and a<5l 
for themfelves more accuràtely than any 
other. But human eftablifhments, by 
calling off men's attention from the 
commandments of God to thofe of men, 
tend to defeat the great ends of religion* 
They are, thérefore, incompatible with 
the genius of chriftianity» 

ÏI. In examining the right of the civil 
magiftrate to eftablifh any mode of reli- 
gion, or that of the fubjedl to oppofe it, 
the goodnefs of the religion, or of the 
mode of it, is not to bé taken into the 
queftion j but only the propriety (which is 
the famé with the utility) of the civil ma- 
giftrate as fuch, interfering in the bufinef s. 
For what the magiftrate may think to be 

ver y 



142 DISTINCTIONS CONCERNING 

very juft, and even conducive to the good 
of fociety, the fubjedl may think to be 
wrong, and hurtful to it. If a chriftian 
magiftrate hath a right to eftablifli any 
mode of the chriftian religion, or the 
chriftian religion in gênerai, a Mahome- 
tan governor muft hâve the famé right 
to eftablifli the Mahometan religion ; 
and no liberty can be claimed by a chri- 
ftian under a Mahometan government, 
to exercife the chriftian religion, that 
may not, in the famé degree, be claimed 
by a Mahometan fubjedl of a chriftian 
government, to exercife the Mahometan 
religion. Alfo, if it be unreafonable and 
oppreflive to oblige chriftian fubjeéls to 
fupport the Mahometan religion, it is 
equally unreafonable and oppreflive to 
oblige a Mahometan to fupport the chri- 
ftian religion, in the place where he re- 
fides ; or to oblige chrîftians of one dé- 
nomination to fupport another mode of 
it, which they do not approvel 

The authority of God and confcience 
may always, with equal juftice, be op- 
pofed to human authority j and the ap- 

peal 



X 



RELIGIOUS LIBERTY. 143 

peal of Peter and John to the Jewifh 
magiftrates, conceming their obligation 
to obey God rather than man^ will equally 
ferve a Proteftant in a Popilh eftablifli- 
ment, or a Dilïenter of any kind in a 
Proteftant one. It is of no avail to the 
Papift, or the Proteftant, in any eftablifh- 
ment, to prétend that the religion they 
enforce is true^ or that it is the famé, in 
gênerai, with that which thofe who dit- 
f ënt from them profefs ; becaufe the Pro- 
teftant and the Diffenter do not objedl 
to the eftablifliment in thofe refpedls in 
which they believe it to be true^ but in 
thofe in which they believe it to ht falfe^ 
and to require them to believe and do 
what their confcience difapproves. And 
for a Proteftant of any dénomination 
whatever, to maintain his own right to 
refift the impositions of a Popifli govern- 
ment, and at the famé time to infift up- 
on a right to impofe upon his fellow 

chriftians of other Proteftant denomina- 

f. 

tions, is top abfurd to admit of a formai 
réfutation. 



IIL 



144 DISTINCTIONS CONCERNING 

III. Some perfons, of narrow minds, 
may be ready to admit of a plea for the 
toleration of ail feds of Protejiants. 
They may bear them fome degree of 
good will, as brethren^ or at leaft, as 
diftant relations j though tlie blood in their 
veins benot equ^lly pure with their own ; 
but, in order to demonftrate that there 
may Jbe a licentioufnefs in toleration, 
and that we mufl flop fomewhere, they 
fay, " What muft we do with heathens 
" and athcijlsr I anfwer, the very famé 
that you, chriflians, would wifh that 
heathens and atheifts, in your fituation, 
Ihould do to you, being in theirs. If 
your party has been fb long in power, 
that you cannot, even in fuppofition, fe- 
parate the idea of it from that of the 
authority which has been fo long con- 
nected with it ; read the hiftory of the 
primitive church, and fee what it was 
that the firft chriftians wifhed and plead- 
ed for, under the Pagan emperors. Read 
the antient chriftian apologies ; and do 
the infidels of the prefent âge the juftice 
to put them, or at lealt part of them, in- 
to their mouths. 

IV. 



RELIGIOUS LIBERTY. 145 

IV. Others hâve the modération and 
good fenfe to admit theTcafonablenefs of 
perfons being allowed to judge for them- 
ihlYeSy SLiidto think as they pleafe in mat- 
ters of religion, and even to exercife 
whatever mode of religion their confci- 
ences approve of } but they will not ad- 
mi^ of any thing that nas a tendency to 
increafe the obnoxious fedl ; no publi- 
cation of bookfi, or other attempts to 
make profelytes; not even a refleélion 
upon the eftablilhed religion, though it 
be neceflary to a vindication of their 
own. But what fignifies a privilège of 
judging for ourfelves, if we hâve not the 
neceflary means of forming a right judg- 
Hient, by the perufal of books contain- 
ing the évidence of both fides of the 
queftion ? What fome diftinguifh by the 
names of aâiive and pajftve oppofition to 
an eftabliflied religion, difièr only in 
name and degree. To défend myfelf, 
and to attack my adverfary, is, in many 
cafés, the very famé thing, and the one 
. cannot be done without the other. 



Beiides, 



146 DISTINCTIONS CONCERNING 

Be&des, the perfons who make ufe of 
this diftincSlion, ftiould confider that, for 
the reafons they alledge, the Jewifh ni- 
1ers did right to forbid Peter and John 
to preach, or to teach, in the name of 
Jefus of Nazareth, and that Peter and 
John did wrong in not fubmitting to that 
prohibition. They ftiould confider that 
the primitive chriftians, nnder heathen 
governments, had no right, according 
to their maxims, to any thing more than 
the private exercife of their worfhip, and 
that they oflFended againft the poivers 
that then nvere^ and that were ordained of 
God, when they wrote their excellent 
books, and took the pains they did to 
propagate their religion among ail ranks 
of men, and among ail nations of the 
world ; though they adled in obédience 
to the folemn injundlion of our Lord, 
who bade them go and preach the gqfpel 
to every créature. 

By the gofpel every chriftian will, and 
muft underftand, the gofpel in its puri- 
ty; i. e. what he apprehends to be the 
pure gofpel} in oppofîtion, not only to 

heathénifm 



RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, ^ 147 

heathenifm, and religions fundamentally 
falje^ but to erroneous chriftianity, or 

to religions that are in part true. What- 
6ver bé the religions opinions, therefore, 
that I ferioufly think are agreeable to 
the Word of God, and of importance to 
the happinefs of mankind, I look npon 
myfelf as obliged to take every prudent 
method of propagating them, both by 
the ufe of fpeech and writing \ and the 
man who refrains from doing this, when 
he is convinced that he fhould . do good 
upon the whole by attempting it, what- 
ever rifque he might run in confequence 
of oppofing anti-chriftian eftablifhments, 
is a traitor )to his proper lord and mafter^ 
and fliows that he fears more them uoho 
can only kill the hody (whether by the 
heathen methods of beheading, crucify- 
ing, throwing to the wild beafts, &c. 
or the chriftian methods of buming a- 
live, and roafting before a flow fire) 
than him, nvho can cajl both foui and hody 
into hell. 

V. It is faid by fome, who think them- 
felves obliged to vindicate the cojiducSl of 

L 2 Chrift 



148 DISTINCTIONS CONCERNING 

Chrift and his apoftles, that, though no 
gênerai plea to oppofe an eftablifhed re- 
ligion can be admitted, in excufe o£ a 
pretended reformer, yet that a fpecial 
plea, fucii as a belief of a divine com- 
miflion, will excufe him. But I can fee 
no material diflPerence in thefe cafés. 
The voice of confcience is, in ail cafés, as 
the ^oice of God to every man. It is, 
therefore, my duty to endeavour to en- 
lîghten the minds of my friends, my 
countrymen, and mankind in gênerai, 
as far as I hâve ability and opportunity ; 
and to exert myfelf with more or lefs 
zeal, in proportion, as I myfelf fliall 
judge the importance of the occafion 
requires ; let my honeft endeavours be 
confidered as ever fb fadlious and fediti- 
oiis, by thofe who are aggrieved by 
them. It is no new cry among the ene- 
mies of reformation, The men nvho hâve 
turned the ivôrld upjide dovun are corne 
hither alfo. 

VL There are fome who confine the 
obligation to propagate chriftianity to 
the clergy^ and even to thofe of them 

who 



RELIGIOUS LIBERTY. 149 

who hâve a regular commij/ion for that 
purpofe, according to the form of efta- 
bliflied churches ; and fay that laymèn 
cannotbe under any obligation to trouble 
themfelves about it, in whatevér part of 
the world they be caft ; and what they 
fay concerning the propagation of chri- 
ftianity they would extend to the refor- 
mation of it. But I can fee no founda- 
tion for this diftindlion, either iri reafon, 
or in the fcriptures. The propagation, 
or reformation of chriftianity, is com- 
prehended in the gênerai idea of pro-^ 
moting ufeful knoivledge gf any kind, and 
this is certainly the ^uty of every man, 
in proportion to his ability and oppor- 
tunity. 

Our Saviour gives no hint of any dif- 
férence between clergy and laity among 
his difciples. The twelve apoftles were 
only diftinguifhed by him as appointed 
witnefles of his life, death, and refur- 
redion. After the defceht of the Holy 
Ghoft, fupernatural gifts were equally 

communicated toall chriftian couverts. 
The diftindion of elders was only fuch 

L 3 as 



«M 



I50 DISTINCTIONS CONCERNING 

as years and expérience intitled men to, 
and only refpeéled the internai govern- 
ment of particular churches. As to the 
propagation of chriftianity abroad, or 
the reformation of corruptions in it at 
home, there is nothing in the fcriptures, 
that can lead us to imagine it to hg the 
duty of one man more than another. 
Eyery man who underftands the chri- 
ftian religion, I confider . /.iaving thè 
famé commiflion to teach it, as that of 
any biihop, in England, or in Rome. 

VIL Some of^the advocates for efta- 
blifliments lay great ftrefs on the diftinc- 
tîon between pofttwe and négative re- 
ftraînts put upon diffenteis. The for- 
mer they affedl to difclaim, but thé lat- 
ter they avow, and prétend that it is no 
perfecution. But hère I can find no real 
différence, except in degree. Aii exclu- 
fion from an advantage, and a fubjedlion 
to a pofitive difadvantage agrée in this, 
that a man who is fubjeâ to either of 
them is in a njoorfe condition on that ac- 
count, than he would otherwife Kave 
been. If a man, for confcience fake, be 

excluded 



RELIGIOUS LIBERTY. 151 

^xcluded from a lucrative office, to 
which another perfon, of a différent per- 
fuafion, has accefs ; he fuffers as much, 
as if the office had been open to him, 
and a fine, equal to the advantage he 
would hâve gained' by it, impofèd upon 
himt Nay, it is cafy to fuppofe cafés, 
in which négative reftraints niay be a 
greater hardftiip than pofitive ones. 
The interJfl^n of jire and ivater is not a 
fentence of pofitive punifliment, and yet 
banifliment, or death mufl: be the con- 
feqvience. Notwithftanding ail this, né- 
gative reftraints/ however fevere, muft 
not be called perfecution, while pofitive 
reftraints, how light foever, cannot be 
denied to fal. under that obnoxious ap- 
pellation. 

In reality thofe who défend the neçeffi- 
ty and propriety of laying dififenters under 
négative reftraints, without chufing to be 
advocates for pofitive ones, are only a - 
fraid of the term perfecution, which, hap- 
pily for the friends of liberty, lies under 
an odium at prefent ; but their arguments 
would be much clearer, and lofe nothing 

of 



152 THE EXTENT OF 

of their ftrength ; and their ideas would 
be more free from confufion, i£ thcy 
would openly maintain, that a certain 
degree of perfecution was juft, though 
certain degrees of it were unjuft ; and 
thcy might eafily fay, that they could 
not prétend to fix any precife boundary 
in this café, but muft leave it to be deter- 
mined by circumftances. 



SECTION VIL 



Farther obfervations concerning the 
extent of ecclejiajîical authority^ 
and the power of civil governors 
in matters of religion. 

IT is faid that a chrifiïan church^ or a 
chriftian fociety, and the poiver of 
chriftian focieties, are certainly fpoken 
of in the New Teftament ; that focieties 
cannot fubfift without officers and laivs^ 

nor 



ECCLESIASTIGAL AUTHORITY 153 

nor canlaws be enforced without/)^;^//^^/. 
Ail this, and every confequence of the 
like nature, is readily graînted ; but the 
fandlions of the church of Ghrift in this 
world are, like itfelf, and like the ivea-' 
pons of the chrifiian nvarfare^ not carnalj 
and temporal, but of a fpiritual nature ; 
and do not aflFeél a man's perfon, life, 
liberty, or eftate. Ail that our Saviour 
direéls, in café of the greateft refradlo- 
rinefs, is to confider fuch obftinate of- 
fenders as heathen men and publicans ; that 
is, we are juftified in ceafing to look up- 
on them as brethren and fellow chrifti- 
ans ; and they are not intitled to our pe- 
culiar afFedlion, and attention, as fuch. 

The delivering over to Satan, which St. 
Paul mentions, as a punifhment for the 
greateft offénce that could be committed 
in the chriftian church, is not a deliver- 
ing over to the civil magi/irate, or to the 
executioner. In fhort, ail that the New 
Teftament authorizes a chriftian church, 
or its ofEcers, to do, is to exclude from 
their fôciety thofè perfons whom they 
deem unworthy of it. There is no hint 

of 



154 THE EXTENT OF 

ôf fuch excluded members lying under 
any civil difqualification. If they were 
not to be confidered as chrijiians, and pro- 
per members of chriftian focieties ; they 
were ftill men, proper members of civil 
fociety, and not liable to civil penalties, 
unlefsthey had, likewife, oflPended againft , 
the laws of the ftate. 

The hômd fentence of excommunication^ 
as it is in ufe in the church of Rome, or 
the church of England, is well known 
not to hâve been introduced into the 
chriftian church, till the Roman Em- 
perors became chriftians ; and was not 
eftabliflied in its full extent till about the 
fifth century, wlien it was adopted by 
the barbarous Celtes, and other Germa- 
nie nations, and made fimilar to what 
they had praétifed in their own Druidi- 
cal religion ; which was, in this refpedt, 
analogous to that of the Hindoos. In 
both of thenj excommunication was the 
heavieft punifliment that could be in- 
curred in human fociety, as it eut a man 
off from ail the benefits of it. 



It 



ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 155 

It will be faid that, in the times of St. 
Paul, temporal pénal ties were inflidled 
upon members of the chriftian church, 
for their irregularities committed in it. 
For this caufe, fays the apoftle, fome are 
nveak and Jickly among you, and fome Jleep ; 
which is generally underftood to refer to 
ficknefs and death, as a punilhment for 
their fliameful abufe of the inflitution 
of the Lord's fupper. But it fliould be 
confidered, that thefe punifhments were 
the immédiate aH of God^ and in the 
flridleft fenfe miraculous, like the death 
of Ananias and Sapphira, or the blinda- 
nefs of Elymas the forcerer. Thefè 
cafés, therefore, will not authorize pu- 
nifhments infliéled by men. Ail that 
can be donè to thofe who are guilty of 
contempt againft church power, is to 
leave them to thejudgment ofGod, who will 
fufEciently proteél his church, and who 
is a better judge of its real danger than 
man can be ; and if he chufe to bear with 
fuch ofiènders, what hâve we to do to 
obftrud the effeds of his long fuffering 
and mercy ? 

I hâve 



155 THE EXTENT OF 

I hâve no objecîlion, however, on my 
own account, to allowing ecclefiaftical 
' officers to do more than Ghrift, than St. 
Paul, jor the other apoftles ever pretend- 
cd to. Let thera not only prediâl, but, 
îf theîr zeal prompt them to it, let them 
imprecate divine judgments. Let them 
pray that God nvould fpeedily plead his 
onvn caufe^ taking it for granted to be 
their own. Were I the obnoxious per- 
fon, I Ihould be very eafy upon the oc- 
cafion, provided their own cruel and 
mercilefs hands were not upon me. 

It is allowed by many, that chriftian 
churches, as fuch, and its officers, as 
fuch, hâve no right to inflidl civil punifh- 
ments ; but they fay the civil magiftrate 
may embrace the chriftian religion, and 
enforce its precepts by civil pénal ties. 
But hâve civil magiftrates, when they 
become chriftians, a power of altering, 
or new modelling the chriftian religion, 
any more than other members of the 
chriftian church? If not, its laws and 
fandlions remain juft as they did before, 
fuch as Jefus Ghrift and his apoftles left 

them > 



ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY. fsy 

them ; and the thiogs that may hâve 
been fubflituted in their place, cannot 
be called chriftianity, but are foniething 
elfe. 

If the civil magiftrate chufe to become 
a chriûian, by ail means let the doors of 
the chtiltian church be open to him, as 
they ought to be to ail, without diftinx:- 
tion or refpeâ of perfons ; but whenhe 
is in, let him be confidered as no more 
than any other private çhriftian. Give 
him a vote in ail cafés in which the 
whole aiTembly is concerned, but let him, 
likeothers, befubjedlto church cenfures, 
and even to be excommunicated, or ex- 
cluded for notorious ill behaviouf . 

It is, certainly, contrary to ail ideas 
of common fenfe, to fuppofè that civil 
magiftrates embracing chriftianity hâve, 
therefore, a powei: of making laws for 
the chriftian church, and enforcing the 
obfervance of them by iandltons alto- 
gether unfuitable to its nature. The 
idea cannot be adxnitted without fup- 
•pofing a total change in the very firft 

principles 



158 THE EXTENT OF 

principles and effentials of chriftianity* 
If civil penalties be introduced into the 
chriftian church, it is, in every fenfe, 
and to every purpofe, making it a king^ 
dont of this ivorld. Its governors then 
afTume a power over men's perfons and 
property, a power unknown in the infti- 
tutes of our religion. If, moreover, the 
civil magiftrate take upon him to pre- 
fcribe creeds and confeffions of faith, as 
is the café in EngUnd, w^hat is it but to 
ufurp a dominion over the faith of chri-- 
Jîians^ 2l power, which the apoftles them- 
felvçs exprefsly difclaimed. 

It may be faid, that *the civil magi* 
ftrate, upon embracing chriftianity, and 
being convinced of the excellency of its 
precepts^ may chufe to incorporate them 
into his fcheme of civil policy, and en- 
force them by civil penalties, not as 
matters of religion, but as belonging tô 
civil government. Thus Chrift has for- 
bidden polygamy, and the civil magi- 
ftrate (a Turk for inftance) being con- 
verted to chriftianity, in order to put 
an end to the former cuftom, may make 

it 



ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY. 159 

it death to marry two wives. He may 
alfo think the minifters of the chriftian 
church a very refpcélable order of men, 
and inveft thcm with civil power ; where- 
by they may be enabled to infliél civil 
puniiliments, in cafés where, before, 
they could only make ufe of admoniti- 
ons ; and he may tax the people for their 
fupport, Thinking pne mode of chri- 
ftianity préférable to another, may he 
not alfo, arm its minifters, with a civil 
power for fupprefïing the reft ; when, be- 
fore, they could only hâve ufed argu- 
ments for this purpofe ? Are civil and 
ecclej(iaftical powers fb very incompatible 
that the famé peiÀbns may not be inveft- 
ed with both ? Were not ail heads of fa- 
milies, both kings and priefts, in the pa- 
triarchal times ? 

I anfwer, that, whatever régulations 
the civil magiftrate may adopt, y et, a& 
his adopting of them, and enforcing 
them by civil penalties makes them, con- 
fefledly, to be of a civil nature, he is 
not intitled to obédience with refpeél to 
them, fo far as they are of a religions 

nature. 



i6o THE EXTENT OF 

nature. If, therefore, any private chrî- 
ftian fhould difFer in opinion from his 
civil magiftrate, or thofe invefted by him 
with civil power, with refpedl to thofe 
things which are of a religions nature, 
he cannot confider himfelf as under any 
more obligation to fubmit to him, than 
he would be to fubmit to a heathen ma- 
giftrate in the famé café. A confcienti- 
ous chriftian will never hefitate about 
obeying God rather than man, though 
that man fhould be a magiftrate, or 
though he Ihould be a chriftian, and af- 
fume the title of fupreme head of the 
whole, or any part of the chriftian church. 
Any other maxims than thefe, it is évi- 
dent, might be attended with the utter 
fubverfion of the chriftian religion. For 
the civil magiftrate would hâve nothing 
to do but to adopt chriftianity into his 
fyftem of civil policy ; and then, hav- 
ing the whole within his own cogni- 
zance, he might add and alter at plea-* 
fure, till he had made it quite a diffé- 
rent thing from what he found it 



It 



ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY. i6i 

It is npon this principle of the civil 
magiftrate converting chriftianity; into 
civil policy, or fomething iîmilar to it, 
that Dr. Balguy, and, I believe, moft of 
the advocates for church powerin Eng- 

land at prefent, found their daim to ec- 
clefîailical authority. The clergy of 
former âges went upon quite another 
ground. They claimed authority jure 
divino, and fcomed to dérive their pow- 
er from the civil magiftrate. Thefe tgvo 
fpecieç of authority were perpetually op« 
pofed to one another j and the church 
encrôached upon the ftate, or the ftate 
upon the church, as opportunity favour- 
ed their refpcélive attempts ; infomuch 
that the hiftory of Europe, in the darfc 
âges, îs Httle more than an account of 
the violent ftruggles between thefe twa 
contrary powers. 

The Romïfh clergy ftill kecp up the 
famé pretences, and fo did the clergy of 
the church of England, till they were 
fairly argucd, or laughed out of them* 
Upon this, they hâve, lately, fèt up ano- 
ther claim to power, not contrary to, but 

M unckr 



î6l THE EXTENT OF 

under that of the civil magiftrate. In 
their prefent ideas, the ecclefiaftical efta- 
bliftiinent is a créature of thejiate. They 
confider themfelves as civil officers^ em- 
ployed by the king to teach the religion 
the ftate has adopted, and they receivc 
their wages, as other fervants of the 
crown. 

Now, admitting ail this, what havc 
thf people to do with them as minifters 
of the gofpel, and fervants of Jefus 
Chrift; fince they teach for doélrines the 
commandments of vien ? Hitherto the chri- 
ftian people o£this country hâve ima- 
gined, that their minifters came to them 
with a commiffion from Chrift, to teach 
them the things that relate to their ever-» 
lafting happinefs, and thereby fecure 
the falvation of their immortal fouis • 
Hitherto they hâve held them in révé- 
rence as fucceflbrs of the apoftles, and 
fubmitted themfelves to them, as to per- 
fons, vuho ivatchedfor their fouis ^ as thofe 
nvho inujl give an account to their chief 
fhepherd^ ivhen he Jhall appear^ and who, 
for their good, w^ere invefted with fpiri- 

tual 



ECCLESIASTICAL AUTAORITY. 163 

tuai power, independent of ail human 
authority. 

Should they not now, therefbre, be 
apprized^ that their ghoftly fuperiors 
hâve, of late, renounced the principle on 
which they hâve hitherto yielded them 
obédience, and that their clergy chufe 
to rânk with juftices of the peace, and 
other civil and crown officers, that they 
may, accordingly, change the mode of 
relpedl they hâve hitherto paid them ? 

Not that I wonder that the advocates 
for the church of England hâve changed 
the ground of their défence, and that 
they are not a little embarafled . with 
their temporal fupreme head. It was a 
thing that was qui te neiv in the chriftian 
church, a thing that was by no means 
their own choice, originally, but was 
forced upon them, and what they are 
now obliged to make the beft of ; fo that 
if one hypothefis will not fupport the in- 
novation, they muft hâve recourfe to a- 
nother. 

M 2 At 



i64 THE EXTENT OF 

At this day, articles of faith, and 
rules of church difcipline are enafted, 
and liable to be abrogated by a6ls of 
parliament ; , whereas ail this bufînefs 
was formerly donc in fynods, ahd gêne- 
rai councils, which acknowledged lèfs 
dependence on the civil power ; and, low 
as is my opinion of the perfons who com- 
pofed the fynods, and gênerai councils 
of former times, I cannot help thinking 
them more compétent judges of articles 
of chriftian faith than any king of Eng^ 
landj afGfted, or not affifted by an Eng- 
Itjh parliament. When thefe temporal 
powers fliall think proper to enaêi any 
more ecclefiaftical canons, or confefîions 
of faith, I hope that, for the fake of de- 
cency, they will purge the two houfes 
of thofe members who cannot give fatis- 
faâiory évidence that they are chriftians 
at ail. But, upon recolleélion, Dr. Bal- 
guy will not think this circumftance ne- 
ceflary, fince, according to his déter- 
mination, the civil magiftrate is not to 
provide for himfelf, but for the largefi 
fedl amonghis fubjeéls ; and therefore a 
Mahometan magiftrate might be as fafe- 

17 



ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY. 165 

ly trufted to make chriftian conftitutions 
as any chriftian magiftrate whatever, 
Perhaps he might be thought more pro- 
per, fince, haviûg no bias . in favour of 
anjr parti<:ular fe(5l of chriftians, he 
might be expedted to be a more impar- 
tial judge in thc café. 

The reafon which the Bifliop of Glou- 
cefter gives for the propriety of making 
the civil magiftrate the iupreme head of 
the church, " whereby he becomes pojp- 
" feffed of the foie right of ordering and 
" decreeing every thing that the minifters 
"and officers of the church had before 
" a power of doing, (fo that even ail 
" matters of opinion are ont of the jurif- 
" didlion of the church)"* is really cu- 
" rious. " The church/' it feems, *^ wants 
" proteâion from external violence. This 
" proteélion the ftate only can give to it ; 
^* but," fays this author, " protecElion 
" not being to be afForded to any perfbn 
^\ or body, without power over that per- 
^^ fon or body, in the perfon or body 



* Alliance p. 64, 81, 87. 

4 



" pro- 



i66 THE EXTENT OF 

" protedling, it neceflarily follows, that 
" the civil magiftrate muft be fupreme." 

I cannot help thinking that the church, 
according to this author, made a very 
hard bargain, and paid very dear for 
protection. Might not the ftate hâve 
been content to proteâl the church, with- 
out diélating to her in ecclefiaftical mat- 
ters ? Certainly at the time this famous 
alliance was made, the agents for the 
church were under a panick, and muft 
hâve forgotten that Chrift himfelf had 
promifed to proteél his church, to be 
with it to the end of the world, and 
that the gâtes of hell flaould not prevail 
againft it. 

Were it not for the power to favour 
the profeflbrs of religion with which 
magiftrates are invefted, one might won- 
der how, of ail mankind, they fliould 
ever hâve been thought of, as proper to 
take the lead in an afFair of this nature. 
I fliould much fooner hâve thought of 
applying to them to fuperintend the bu- 
iinefs of medicine, in which the healths 

and 



ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY. 167 

and lives of their fubjeds are fo much 
concernée!. But, happily for mankind, 
they hâve not taken it into their heads to 
intermeddle fo much with it. The rea- 
fon is, that there is nothing in the bufi- 
nefs of medicine, of which they could 
avail themfelves ; whereas a league with 
priejisj who hâve always a great influ- 
ence over mankind, has often been ex- 
tremely convenient for them. 

Of ail mankind, furely magiftrates 
hâve the leaft leifure, and the leaft capa- 
city for judging in matters of religion. 
Confequently, they aremoft likely to dé- 
termine rafhly, and in fuch a manner 
as beft fuits vsrith their worldly views. 
Of this we hâve a notable example in 
the Hampton- Court conférence. There 
the advocates for prefbyterianifm and 
epifcopacy had a folemn meeting, to de- 
fa ate on the merits of their refpedlive 
modes of church government, in the 
prefence of King James I. (of blefled 
memory in the church of England) at a 
time, when, perhaps, a majority of the 
nation were difpofed in favour of prefby- 
terianifm. 



i68 THE EXTENT OF 

terianifm. But was a kiiag, wkh Lis 
head full of the notions of arbitrary 
power, in a proper difpoâtîon to décide 
a controverfy of this nature : and migkt 
it not hâve been èxpe<Sled, that the max- 
im No hijhop no king would bc fufBcient 
to détermine his choice, againft the 
weight of a thoufand folid argumenta, 
The iflue of the conférence is well known, 
but no better than it was before it took 
place. Such caufe hâve the advocates 
for epifeopacy to boaft of their triumph ! 

The hiftory of this Hampton-Court 
controverfy, fo admirably exemplifies 
the reafoning of the Bilhop of Gloucef- 
ter, thati wonder it was not adducedby 
him, in aid of his argument, to prove, 
that the civil magiftxate is more likely 
to décide according to truth in matters 
of religion than churchmen. Let us 
hear the great champion himfelf on this 
fubjeél, as this part of his argument 
feems to be the great hingc on which 
the moft important part of the contro- 
verfy concerning eftablifhments, turns.* 

* Alliance, p. 51, 

" Church 



ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY. 169 

** Church fancElity being acquired by fe- 
" ceiSon, and retircment from human 
" aâPakSy and that feceffion rendering 
" men ignorant of civil fôciety, its rights 
" and interefts (in the place of which 
" will fucceed ail the folUcs of fuperfti- 
" tion and fanaticifm) we muft needs 
" conclude that religion, under fuch di- 
^* reélors and reformers, will deviate 
" from truth, and confequently a capa- 
" city, in proportion, of ferving fociety. 
" Chi the other hand, when religion 
^^ cornes nnder the magiftrate's diredli- 
" ons, its purity muft needs be well fup- 
*^ ported and preferved. For truth and 
" public utility coincîding, the civil ma- 
" giftrate, as fuch, will fee it for his in- 
" tereft to feek after and promote truth 
" in religion, and by means of public 
" utility, which his office enables him fo 
" well to underftand, he will never be at 
" a lofs to know where fuch truth is to 
" be found,* fo that it is impoffible, un- 
" der this civil influence, for religion 
" ever to deviate far from truth/' , Rifum 
teneatis amicif 

I flxall 



170 THE EXTENT OF 

I fhall only obferve, in anfwer to this 
curious pièce of reafoning, that in an ad^ 
H/ertifement prefixed to this very work, he 
fays, " It is a trite obfervation, that di- 
** vines make bad politicians. I believe 
" it is more generally truc, that politicians 
" are but bad divines;' A confeflion 
which, I own, I fliould not hâve expeâ- 
ed from a man who, in the very famé 
book, pleads for the propriety of mak- 
ing thefe famé politicians^ alias bad di-^ 
'uinesj the final judges in ail ecclefiaftical 
caufes, and for giving them a power of 
cnadling articles of faith and ecclefiafti- 
cal canons. 




Tliis author, indeed, thinks there is 
a neceflity for churchmen making part 
the legiflativc body, left, inftead of be- 
ing fubje^Sy they Ihould be the Jlaves of 
the ftate, p. 78. But fo long as the bi- 

Ihops in parliament hâve no négative up- 
on the refolutions of the houfe (a pri- 
vilège which this bilhop himfelf would 
not allow them) I do not fee what their 
feat there would avail them, if ail the 
laity fhould differ from them in their o- 

pinion 



ECCLESIAStICAL AUTHORITY. 171 

pinion concerning relîgious matters. In 
this café, ecclefiaftical canons wonld be 
made, and articles of faith enaéled, as 
contrary to their inclinations, as if they 
ihad not been confulted at ail. So that, 
in café of an oppofition between the two 
powers, the clergy are ftill entirely at 
the mercy of the laity, and therefore 
their flaves. 



Upon the whole, confidering every 
thing relating to this new bufinefs of a 
temporal head over chriftians, who are 
exprefsly commanded to callno man majier 
upon earth ; and confidering how averfe 
the clergy always were to fuch a catas- 
trophe in their afFairs, and how little 
they were prepared for it j I cannot help 
thinking, that they hâve given very 
ftriking proofs of their acutenefs, and 
prefence of mind, in defending it fo 
plaufibly as they hâve done. 

To make this café of a temporal head 
to a fpiritual church the more intelligible, 
let us fuppofe there are, in any country, 
a number of perfons, who hâve formed 

them- 



172 THE EXTENT OF 

tkemfelves into a fociety for promoting 
natural philofophy j tkat the civil magi- 
ftrate hears of it, and, having a tafte 
for the ftudy, becoœes a member. If, 
upoix this, be fhould take upon Mm to 
raaJce laws for the focietyj and to enforce 
them with civil pe^akies j or if he fliould 
ciHn>pel the mérabers to fubfcribe t<? par- 
ticular propofitions, and hypothefès, 
fliould we not pronounce that the philo- 
fophical fociety was, to ail intents and 
pnrpofes, diflblvedMn lîke nianner a 
chriftian n^bagiftràte, pretending to make 
laws to tlifc chriftian church, is to be 
confidered as doing every thing in his 
power to abolifh chriftianity, and fetting 
up fomething elfe in its place, that may 
be naore or lefs like it, juft as it fhall 
happen. 

It may be faid that an union of civil 
and ecclefîaftical power may take place 
in another manner, namely by a nation 
of chxiftians voluntarily chnjQng the 
civil magiflxate to be their proteâor or 
head, and to make laws for them. So 
alfo a fociety of philofophers may chnfe 

the 



ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY 173 

the civil magiftrate for their protcélor 
and head ; but if, in this café, he fhould 
compel their affent to bis own opinions, 
would ît not be thought that, notwith- 
ftanding their choice of the civil magi- 
ftrate for their head, if they fubmittcd 
to his impoGtions, they ceafed to bc what 
they were before, and the fociety chang- 
ed its nature and charadter ! In like man- 
ner, chriftians a(îl altogether out of cha- 
radler in chufing a temporal head ; and 
no perfon who has a juft regard to his 
religion, and the Uberty nvhereivith Chrtfi 
has made hïmfrce^ will ever acknowledgc 
^ fuch a dependence on the civil power. 

Whenever, flierefore, the civil magi- 
ftrate, either in confequence of becom- 
ing a member of the chriftian church, 
by incorporating chriftianity into his 
fyftem of civil policy, or by bcing cho- 
fen fupreme head of the church in a 
chriftian nation, introduces into the gos- 
pel fuch laws and fanâions as afe evi- 
dently unfuitable to the nature of it ; 
as, for inftance, when, inftead of vo- 
luntary contstibutions to the church 

ftock, 



174 THE EXTENT OF 

ftock, he appoints the compulfory pay- 
ment of dues 5 and when, for exhorta- 
tion and reproof, he fubftitutes fines and 
confifcations, torture and death, this 
new modelled fcheme cannot be called 
chriftianity. Thus \t^hen the poor ia 
England became intitled to a légal niain- 
tenance, charity, on which they before 
fubfifted, was fo far precluded ; for a 
man who now pays a poor rate is not to 
be ranked with him who gives alms of 
that nvhîch he pojfejfes. In ail cafés a 
change in the fundamental maxims of 
government, efpecially a change both in 
the laws themfelves, and in the fandlions 
of them, cannot be deemed lefs than a 
change in the conftitution. 

For my own part, I can conceive no 
method whatever, in which the civil 
magiftrate can be invefted with ecclefî- 
aftical power, or ecclefiaftics with civil 
power, fo that a confcientious chriftian 
fliall confider himfelf as under any ob- 
ligation to yield them obédience in their 
-new charaéter. ) In civil matters he will 
obey the civil magiftrate, and where re- 
ligion 



ï:CCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY. 175 

ligion is concerned, he will liftcn to no- 
thing but the didates of his own con- 
fcience, or the admonitions of his cho- 
fen fpiritual guide ; and to him no far- 
ther than he is fatisfied he has a better 
authority than his own for what he fays* 
However thjey agrée to change or mix 
their powers, their alliance and ftipnla- 
tions will hâve no weight with him. He 
will ftill give to Cafar the things that are 
Gefars^ and unto God the things that are 
God's ; and he will judge for himfelf, 
what are the things that are due to the 
one or the other. If he Ihould make 
any miftake in this café, it will be fome 
apology for him, that his fuperiors Jiad 
confounded his underftanding, by thç 
unnatural mixture they had made of 
things of fuch différent natures. 

Had there been fuch a conneélion be- 
tween ecclelîaftical and civil matters, as 
the advocates for church power contend 
for ; had it been the proper office of the 
civil magiftrate to luperintend the afiairs 
of religion, and had it been unlawfiil, 
as fome affert, for private perfons to at- 

tempt 



176 THE EXTENT OF 

tempt any altération in it, exccpt by ap- 
plication to the civil govcrnor ; is it not 
unaccountable, that our Lord, and his 
apoftles, did not make their firft propo- 
fals to the fupreme magiflrates among 
the Jçws or Romans ? They certainly had 
no idea of the peculiar obligation of ma- 
giftrates to attend ^to this bufinefs, and 
to chufe a religion for the people, finee we ' 
never hear of their making application 
to them on any fuch account. It was 
their confiant cuftom to preach the gof^ 
pel wherever they came, in ail coitipa- 
nies, and to ail perfons promifcuoufly ; 
and almoft ail the intercoiu-fe they had 
with magiftrates, feems to havC been on 
occafion of their being brought before 
them as criminals. 

Our Lord fent ont, both his twelve 
apoftles, and alfo feventy difciples, a- 
mong ail the cities of Ifrael, but we do 
not read of his fending any deputation 
to the rulers of the Jews. John the Bap- 
tift feems to hâve confined his preaching 
to the wildernefs of Judea, and the terri- 
tory in the neighbourhood of the river 

Jordan y 



ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY. 177 

Jordan ; where he gave his exhortations 
to ail that came jto hear him, without 
diftindlion of perfons. St. Paul, indeed, 
made an appeal to Caefar, but it was in 
order to obtain his liberty in an unjuft 
profecution. We are not informed that 
he, or any of the apoftlcs, ever took any 
meafures to lay the évidences of the 
chriftian religion before the Roman em- 
peror, or the Roman fenate, in order to 
convince them of the truth and excel- 
lency of it, and induce them to abolifh 
heathenifm, in favour of it, throughout 
the Roman empire ; which many perfons 
would now think to hâve béen the readi- 
eft, the moft proper, and the beft method 
of chriftianizing the world. On the 
contrary, thcir whole coiidu6l fhows, that 
they confidered religion as the proper 
and immédiate concern of évery fingle 
perfon, and that there was no occafîon 
whatever to confult, or advife with any 
earthly fuperior in a café of this nature. 

If magiftrates had a right to chufe 
a mode of religion for theirpeople, much 
more, one would think, had tnajiers a, 

N right 



178 THE EXTENT OF 

çght to chufe for xktiv Jlaves in this café ; 
yet we find great numbers of couverts 
\trere made amongft this moft dépendent 
part of mankind, without any acconnt 
of their mafters being confulted, or ap- 
plied to about it. The contrary is clear- 
ly inferred, from the firft view of things^ 
in primitive times. 

Though it be true, that we muft not 
expeél to find in the fcriptures an ac- 
curate account of every thing belonging 
to a chriftian church, including a minute 
defcription of the rank and power of its 
officers, it does not therefore follow, that 
it is not worth our while to confult them 
on this fubjeél ; for we fhall find fuch a 
gênerai view of the mutual relations, 
and reciprocal duties of chriflians, a& 
may prevent our making any confider- 
able miftake, with refpedl to the autho- 
rity of fome, or the fubjedion of others. 

It cannot be inferred from any thing 
that our Saviour has delivered, that any 
one chriftian has a right authoritatively 
to diélate or prefcribe to another, but I 

think 



ECCLESIASTICAL AUTHORITY. 179 

think the very contrary, if it be in the 
ppwer of words to convey fucha mean- 
ing. 

If we confider the plan of the primi- 
tive chuTch, we fliall fee that it was evi- 
dently fonned upon that of the Jewifli 
fynagogue ; in which the elders (ail of 
whom promifcuoufly inftruéled the rcft) 
were perfons of the greatefl: âge and ex- 
périence, and he that is called the ruler 
of the fynagogue (to which the office of 
the chriftian bifhop correfponds) was on- 
ly one of them, diftinguifhed, indeed, 
by fomé titles of hononr, but with no 
fuperior power worth mentioning. This 
is the reafbn why both the rulers of the 
fynagogues among the Jews, and bifhops 
in chrifkian churchcs, are generally cal- 
led elders, in conimon with the reft. 
The office of deacon was alfo the famé 
in both, and needs no defcription in this 
place. 

The apofties al^yays reprefent them- 
felves as appointed witneffes of the life, 
ftifFçrings, and refurredion of Chrift ; 

N 2 but, 



i8o THE EXTENT OF 

but, feem not to hâve arrogated any do- 
minion over the faith of their fellow 
chriftians. 

So far were they from afluming any 
authority over their bréthren, or per- 
emptorily enjoining any thing of them- 
felves, except they were authorized to 
do it by the immédiate diredlion of the 
Holy Ghoft, that they virtually difclaim^- 
ed ail fuch j>ower ; and when their ad- 
vice was not taken, and their defigns 
obftruéled, they wrote as perfons who 
had notliing but reafon on their fide, 
without diâating, or giving themfelves 
fuch airs as modem dignitaries . in the 
church would affume, in cafeof fuch 
oppofition. 



SECTION 



SECTION VIII. 

Of the neceffîtyy or utilityy of ecckr- 
Jiaftical ejiablijhments. 



THE friends and advocates for church 
power, generally found their fy- 
ftem on the necefîity of eftablifliing fome 
religion or other, agreeably, they fay, to 
the cuftom of ail wife nations. This 
being admitted, it is évident, they think, 
that the fupreme civil magiflxate muft 
hâve the choice of this religion, and be- 
ing thus lodged in the hands of the chief 
magiflxate, it is eafily and eflPedlually 
guarded. Thus the propriety of a mofl: 
rigid intolérance^ and the mofl; abjedl pa/- 
fîve obédience are prefently, and clearly 
inferredj'fo that the people hâve no 
right to relieve themfelves from ecclefi- 

N 3 aflical 



i82 UTILITY OF 

aftical oppreflions, except by pétition to 
their temporal and fpiritual govemors, 
whofe intereft it generally is to continue 
every abufe that the people can complain 
of. 

But before this admirably conncéicd 
fyftem can be ' admitted, a few things 
Ihould be previouûy confidered. And I 
aijqi aware that, if they had been duly 
attended to, the fyftem either would ne- 
ver hâve taken place, or it would hâve 
been fo moderated, when put into exé- 
cution, as that it would never hâve been 
worth the while of its advocates to con- 
tend fo zealoufly for it. 

!• Ail the rational plea for ecclefîafti- 
cal eftablifhments, is founded on the ne- 
ceffity of them, in order to enforce obé- 
dience to civil laws ; but though religi- 
ons confiderations be allowed to be an 
excellent aid to civil fanétions, it will 
not, therefore, follow, as fome would 
gladly hâve it underftood, that, there- 
fore, the bufinefs of civil government 
çould not hâve been carried on at ail 

withr 



ESTABLISHMENTS. iSs 

without them. I do not know how it is, 
that this pofîtion feems, in gênerai, to 
hâve paûed without difpute or examina- 
tion ; but, for my. own part, I fee no 
reafbn to think that civil fociety çould 
not hâve fubfifted, and even hâve fub- 
fifted very well, without the aid of any 
foreign fanâions. I am even fatisfied 
that, in many countries, the junélion o£ 
civil and ecclefiaftical powers hath done 
much mifchief, and that it would hâve 
been a great blefîing to the bulk of the 
people, if their magiftrates had never 
interfered in matters of religion at ail, 
but had left them to provide for them- 
felves in that refpecSl, as they generaïly 
do, with regard to medicine. 

" There are," fays the bifhop of Glou- 
cefter,* " a numerous fet of dutîes of 
" imperfeêi obligation, which human laws 
" could not reach. This can only be 
" done by an ecclefiaftical jurifdidlion, 
" intrufted by the ftate with coercive 
" power. And indecd the fupplying that 

* Alliance, p. 8i. 

" defed 



i84 



UTILITY OF 



" defcél, which thefe courts do fupply, 
** was the original and fundamental mo- 
" tive of the ftate feeking thîs alliance." 
But I would alk, Are not ecclefîaftical 
officers tnen^ mère human beings, pof- 
fefTed of only a limited power of difcern- 
ment, as well as civil officers ? Will 
they not, therefore, find themfelves un- 
der the famé difficulty in enforcing the 
duties of imperfeél obligation, that the 
civil officers would hâve donc, notwith- 
llanding the coercive power they Feceive 
from the ftate for that purpofe ? In fhort, 
I do not fee what an ecclefîaftical court 
can do in this café, more than a civil 
court of equity. Is not this, in fadl, 
i confefled by this author, when he allows, 
p. 87, that " there muft be an appeal 
" from thefe courts to the civil, in ail 
" cafés." For, if the civil courts be qua- 
lified to judge of thefe things, by appeal, 
why could they not hâve done it in the 
firft inftance ? 



2. If the expediency of ecclefîaftical 
eftablifliments be allowed, it is allowed 
on account of their utility only; and 

there- 



ESTABLISHMENTS. 185 

therefore, as there are infinité différences 
in the coercive power of thefe eftablifh- 
ments, this reafon will not juftify their 
being carried to a greater extent than the 
good of fociety requires. And though 
it may be produélive of, or, at leaft, con- 
fi lient with the good of fociety, that the 
civil magiftrate fhould give fome degree 
of countenance to the profeffors of one 
ihiEi of religion (which, with me, how- 
ever, is extremely problematical) it were 
a grofs perverfion of ail reafoning and 
common fenfe, to infer from thence, that 
the people fliould not hâve free liberty to 
diffent from this religion of their civil 
governor, or even to ufe any honeft and 
fair method of gaining converts to what 
they fliould think to be the truth. Be- 
caufe whatever utility there may be in 
ecclejtqftical eftablifhmentSy there is certain- 
ly utility in truth ^ efpecially moral and 
religions truth ; and truth can never 
hâve a fair chance of being difcovered, 
or propagated, without the mofl perfedl 
freedom of inquiry and debate. 



Thougli 



iS6 UTILITY. OF 

Though it may be true, that there ne- 
ver was any country without fome na- 
tional religion, it is not true that thefe 
religions were always adopted with a 
view to aid the civil governinent. It ap- 
pears to me that, with refpeél to the dates 
of Greece, and other barbarous nations 
(for the Greeks were no better than their 
neighbours in this refpedl) motives of a 
very différent nature from thefe ; motives 
derived from nothing but the moft blind 
and abjecfl fuperftition, and the moft 
groundlefs apprehenfions, were thofe 
that really induced them to make fuch ri- 
gid provifion for the perpetuity of their fe- 
veral religions. Their laws hâve not, în 
fadl, any fuch intermixture of civil and 
religions matters, as is now found in the 
fyftems of European ftates. We do not 
find in them, that duties properly reli - 
gious are enforced by civil fandlions, nor 
duties properly civil enforced by religi- 
ons ones, in the fenfes in which we now 
ufe thofe terms, as if thefe things had, 
naturally, fo neccffary a connedlion. But 
in thefe ignorant and fuperftitious âges, 
men fancied there was what we fliould 

call 



ESTABLISHMENTS. 187 

call an arbitrary connexion between the 
obfervance of certain religious rites, and 
the continuance of certain fiâtes ; and 
that the gods, who were particularly at- 
tentive to their prefervation, would with- 
draw their proteâion, npon the difuie 
of thofé cérémonies. 

The Bifhop of Gloncefter feems to a- 
grée with me in this, for he fays,* 
*^ The unity of the objeél of faith, and 
" conformity to a formulary of dogma- 
" tick theology, as the terms of com- 
" munion, is the great foundation and 
" bond of religious fociety. Now this 
" the feveral focieties of pagan religion 
" wanted, in which there was only a 
" conformity in national cérémonies/' 

* 

Had the antient heathens entertained 
any fuch notion of the dire âl lubfervien- 
cy of religion to civil policy (i. e. in a 
moral vieivj as the advocates for church 
power endeavour to avail themfelves of 
at this day, they would hâve made a 

* Alliance p, 99, 

diftindion 



i88 UTILITY OF 

diftindlion among religions. Whereas, 
it is plain they had no idea of the excel- 
lence of one mode of religion above a- 
nother, as more conducive to the hap- 
pincfs of mankind (unlefs tliere was 
fomethiQg peculiarly fïiocking in fbme 
of their rites, as that of facrificing hu- 
man viélims) but they imagined that 
différent rites, rites diflFering not in mo- 
ral excellence, but in mère form, were 
neceflary for différent ftates ; and that 
it was wrong, and hazardous, for two 
nations to interchange their religions. 

Indeed, after thefe eftablifhments had 
taken place, it is probable that fome of 
the defenders of them, in ranfacking their 
imaginations for arguments, might hit 
upon fome fuch reafons as modem hîgh 
cliurchmen hâve urg'ed ; but it no more 
follows from thence, that the eftablifh- 
ments were originally foui^ded on thofe 
principles, than that becaufe plaufiblc 
reafons may (for any thing I know) be 
alledged for the ufe of a ivhite furplice 
in reading the prayers of the church, 
and for bifhops wearing mitres and lazvn 

Jleeves 



ESTABLISHMENTS. 189 

JleeveSy that, therefore, Jefus Chrifl and 
his apoftles ufed them. 

4. Though there may be no chriftian 
country in which fome fpecies of chri- 
ftianity is not, more or lefs, eftablifhed, 
i. e. more or lefs favoured by the govem- 
ment ; yet there are countries in which 
lefs favour is fhown to the prevailing 
mode than in others, and in which much 
lefs care is takcn to guard it, as m Hol- 
land, Ruflia, Penfilvania, and I belîeve 
others of our American colonies. Now, 
let an enquiry be made into the ftate of 
thefe countries, and fee whether the re- 
fult of it will bç favom-ablc, or unfa- 
vourable to eftablifhments. What ten-- 
dency to htconvenience has there been ob- 
ferved in thofe dates in which church 
government is moft relaxed, and what 
fuperior advantages^ in point of real hap- 
pinefs, are enjoyed in thofe countries in 
which it is ftrained to the higheft pitch. 
I hâve no doubt of the refult of fuch an 
inquiry turning out greatly in fa vont of 
the relaxation of religions eftablifhments, 
if not of their total fupprcflion. A juft 

view 



190 



UTILITY OF 



view of ail the real evils that attend the 
ecclefiaftical eftablilhment in England, 
with refpeél to knoivledgey virtue^ corn-' 
mer ce, and many other things with which 
the iappinefs of ftates is conneéled, but 
more efpecially with refpedl to lihertyj 
would be fufficient to deter any legifla- 
tor from introducing any thing like it 
into a new flate ; unlefs, without think- 
ing at ail, he took it for granted that 
there was no doing without one, or was 
fo weak as to be frighted by the mère 
clamour of bigots. 

5. Though it may be tnie, that incon- 
venience would arife from the immédiate 
fuppreflion of religions eftabliflunents, 
it doth not therefore follow, that they 
were either neceflary or expédient ; that 
the nation would hâve been in a worfe 
ftate if they had never exifted ; and that 
no meafures ought to be taken to relax 
or diffolve them. Were the religion of 
Mahomet abolifhed every where at once, 
no doubt much confufion would be oc- 
cafîoned ; yet what chriftian would, for 
that reafon, wifh for the perpetuity of 

that 



ESTABLISHMENTS. 191 

that fuperftition ? The famé may be faid 
of popery, and many other kinds of cor- 
rupt religion. Cuftoms, of whatever 
kind, that hâve prevailed fo long as to 
hâve influenced the genius and mai^iers 
of a whole nation, cannot be changed 
without trouble. Such a fhock to men's 
préjudices would neceffarily give them 
pain, and unhinge them for à time. It 
is the famé with vicions habits of the 
body, which terminate in difeafes and 
death ; but muft they be indulged, and 
the fatal confequences calmly expeéled, 
becaufe the patient would find it pain- 
ful and difficult to alter his method of 
living? Ecclefîaftical eftablifliments, there- 
fore, may be a real evil, and a difeafe in 
civil fociety, and a dangerous one too, 
notwithftanding ail the arguments for the 
ftipport of them, derived from the con- 
fufion and inconvenience attending their 
difFolution ; fo far is this confideration 
from proving them to be things excel- 
lent or ufeful in themfelves. 

Even the mifchiefs that might be 
apprehended from attempts to amend or 

diffolve 



192 UTILITY OF 

diflblve eftablifhments, are mnch aggra- 
va ted by writers. Much lefs oppofition, 
I am perfuaded, would arife froiH the 
fource of real higotry^ than from the 
quarter of interejl, and the bigotry that 
was fet in motion by perfons who were 
not themfelves bigots. 

It is imagined by fome, that chriftia- 
nity could not hâve fubfifled without the 
aid of the civil powers, and that the dif- 
folution of its eftablifhment would en- 
danger its very being. The Bifhop of 
Gloucefter, fays, that " the ftate was în- 
" duced to feek an alliance with the 
" church, as the neceflary means of pre- 
ferving the being of religion \' * and 
that " ail the advantage the church ex- 
" pe6ls from the alliance with the ftate, 
" can be no other than fecurity from ail 
" outward violence ;" § " it being imper- 
" tinent," as he juftly obferves, % " in the 
" church to aim at riches, honours, and 
" power ; becaufe thefe are things which, 
" as a church, flie can neither ufe, nor 

* Alliance, p. 59. § Ib. p. 67. % Ib. p. 69. 

" receive 



ESTABLISHMENTS- 193 

" receive profit from,'* He alfo fays, f 
" that religion could aot operate for 
** want of a common arbiter, who had 
** iippartiality to apply the nile of right, 
" and power to enforce its opérations." 
But thefe perlons £eem not to be ac- 
quainted with its proper internai Jirengt h ^ 
ortliey would not lay fo much ftrefs on 
fUch poor and heterogeneous fupports. 
They ihould conjQder how the chriflian 
religion was fupported, without the help 
of any eftablifhment, before the time of 
Conftantine. Is it not tnie, in fadl, that 
it not gnly fubfifled, but ^mazingly in- 
creafed in ail that period ; when it was 
fo far from being protefl;ed by civil au- 
thority, that ail human powers were 
çombined againft it ? 

If they fay it was fupported by mi- 
racles ii;i ail that interval, it béhoves 
them to make gpod the affertion. On 
the contrary, it appears from church 
hiftory, that when chriftianity was once 
eftablilhed, (if I may ufe that term) by 

f Alliance, p. 5* 

O the 



r94 UTILITY OF 

the preaching and miraclcâ of the a- 
poftles, it was able aftcrwards to fup- 
port itfelf by its own évidence. And 
this évidence is ftill fufficient to fupport 
it, though ail the powers on earth, and 
the gâtes of hell, were combined againft 
it. Certainly thofe who make ufe o£ 
this plea forchriftianeftablifhments feem 
to infînuate, that chriftianity is deftitute 
of fufficient évidence ; and coukî not ad- 
vance any thing more favourable to the 
purpofe of its moft inveterate enemies. 

One circumftance in favour of my 
argument is very évident. If the fupport 
of chriftianity had not been pioufly un- 
dertaken by Conftantine, and the fuc- 
ceeding Roman emperors, the Popiflik 
hierarchy, that great myjiery of iniquity^ 
and abomination^ could never hâve exift- 
ed. And I think, ail the advocates for 
church power, will not be able to men- 
tion any evil attending the want of eo 
clefiaftical eftablifhments, equal to this, 
which flowed from one. 



Ail 



ESTABLISHMENTS. ^95 

AU other ecclefiaftical eftablifhments 
among chriftians, partake more or lefs 
of tlie nature of this, the firft and great- 
eft of them, being nothing more than 
corredlionsandemendations of it. Many 
of the abufes in it hâve been reélified, 
but many of them, alfo, are retained 
in them ail. That there are fome things 
good and ufeful in them ail is true, but 
it Is no difficult matter to point out many 
things that are good (that is, which hâve 
been attended with confequences bénéfi- 
ciai to mankind) in the grofleft abufes 
of popery. Thofe who ftudy hiftory 
cannot fail to be acquainted with them, 
and there is no occafîon to point them 
out in this place, 

Thanks to the excellent conftitution of 
things, that there is no acknowledged 
evil in the v^hole courfe of nature, or 
providence, that is w^ithout a bénéficiai 
opération, fufficient to juftify the ap- 
pointment or permifïion of it, by that 
great and good Being who made, and 
who fuperintends ail things. But be- 
caufe tempefts by land and fea, poifon- 

O 2 ous 



196. UTILITY OF 

ous plants and animais, &c. do gobd, 
confidered as parts of the whole fyftem ; 
and becaufe it certainly feems better in 
the fight of God, that they fliould exift 
than not, muft we not, therefore, gnard 
againft their pernicious eflFedls to our- 
felves ? 

Let this be applied to the café of cîyil 
and ecclefiaftical tyranny in every form. 
The Divine Being, for wife and good 
ends, permits them ; but he has given 
us a power to oppofe them, and to guard 
ourfelves againft them. And we need 
not donbt, but that things will be fo 
guided by his unfeen hand, that the 
good they were intended to anfwer will 
be anfwered, notwithftanding our juft 
oppofition ; or will appear to hâve been 
, y anfwered, if wé fucceed in putting a 
final end to them. He makes ufe of 
men, as his iriftruments, both in efta- 
blifhing, and removing ail thefe abufes, 
in civil and ecclefiaftical govemment. 

Ecclefiaftical authority may hâve been 
neceffary in the infant ftate of fociety ; 

and 



ESTABLISHMENTS. 197 

and, for thc famé reafon, it may, per- 
haps, continue to be, in fome degree, 
neceflarjr a§ long as fociety is imper- 
feél ; and therefore may not be entirely 
abolifhed, till civil govermnent hâve ar- 
rived at a much greater degree of per- 
fedlion. 

If, therefore, I wçre alked, whc- 
ther I fhould approve of the immé- 
diate diflblution of ail the ecclefiaftical 
eftablifhments in Europe, I fliould an- 
fwer, no. This might, poffibly, efpe- 
cially in fome countries, for reafons that 
cannot be forefeen, be too hazardous an 
experiment. To begin with due cau- 
tion, let experiments be firfl made of 
altérations ; or, which is the famé thing, 
of better ejiahlijhments than the prefent. -, 
Let them be reformed in many effcntial 
articles, and then not thrown afîde en^ 
tirely, till it be found by expérience, that 
no good can be made of them. If I be 
afked in what partîculats I imagine them 
to be moft déficient, and what kind of 
reformation I could wiflx to hâve made 
in them ; I anfwer, I could wifh they 

were 



1)8 UT I LIT Y OF 

were reformed in the four following re- 
fpecSls, which Te ail of a capital nature, 
and in which almoft ail our prefent efta- 
bliflunents are fundamentally wrong ; 
as I make no doubt will appear to every 
man, of common fenfe, who fliall give 
the leaft attention to this fubjedl. 

I . Let the articles of faith, to be fub- 
fcribed by candidates for the miniftry, 
be greatly reduced. In the formulary 
of the church of England, might not 
thirty-eight out of the thirty-nine be 
v(fry well fpared ? It is a reproach to any 
c^iriftian eftablifhment, if every man 
cannot claiini the benefit of it, who can 
fay, that he believes in the religion of 
"Je/us Chrijl^ as it is fet forth in the Neijo 
Tejlament. You fay the terms are fo 
gênerai, that even deifts would quibble, 
and infinuate themfel ves. I anfwer, that 
ail the articles which are fubfcribed at 
prefent, by no means exclude deifts who 
will prevaricate ; and upon this fcheme 
you would at leaft exclude fewer honeft 
men. But ail temptation to prevaricate 
will be taken away if the next article of 
reformation be attended to. 2. Let 



ESTABLISHMENTS. 199 

2. Let the livings of the clergy be 
jnade more equal, in proportion to tbe 
duty required of each: and when the 
ftipend is fettled, let not the importance 
of the ofEce be eftimated above its real 
value. Let nothing be confidered but 
the work, and the neceflary expences of 
a libéral éducation- 

Fs. Let the clergy be confined to their 
ecclefîaflical duty, and hâve nothing to 
do in condudling aflFairs of ftate. Is not 
their prefence in the cabinet rather dan- 
gerous ^ The feat bf our bifhops in par- 
liament is a relick of the popifïi ul«ir- 
pations over the temporal rights of he 
fovereigns of Europe ; and is not every 
thing of this nature juftly confidered as 
a great abfurdity in modem go vernment ? 
The queftion, by what right they fit, 
need not be difculïed. As teachers of 
the religion of Chrift, whofe kingdom 
was not of this world, can they hâve any 
bufinefs to meddle with civil govern- 
ment ? However, if they be allowed to 
fit in the great council of the nation, as 
memberS of the community at large; 

fuppofc 



200 UTILITY OF 

fuppofe they were fairly elefted like 
other members ; but let not fuch a civil 
power as they now hâve de volve upon 
them, as a matter of courfe, on any pre- 
tence whatever. 

. 4. Let the fyftem of tokration be com- 
pletely camed into exécution: and let 
every member of the communlty en- 
joy every right of a citizen^ whether 
he chufe to conform to the eftablifhed 
religion or not. Let every man, w^ho 
has fufficient abilities, be deemed qua- 
lified to ferve his country in any civil 
capacity. Becaufe a man cannot be a 
hijhop^ muft he there fore be uothing in 
the ftate, and his country dérive no b%- 
nefit from his talents ? Befides, let it be 
confidered, that thofe wrho départ the 
fartheft fronl eftablilhed opinions w^ill 
hâve more at ftake in a country wrhere 
they ehjoy thefe fingular privilèges ; and, 

confequently, w^ill be more attached to 

• 

The toleration in England, notwith- 
flanding our boafted liberty, is far from 

being 



ESTABLISHMENTS. 201 

beîng complète. Our prefent laws do 
not tolerate thofe more rational diflen- 
ters, ve^hom the bifhop of ' Gloucefter 
looks upon as brethren. It is known to 
every body, that if the toleration adl was 
flridlly put in exécution, it would filence 
ail thofe difTenting minifters who are held 
in any degree of efteem by the church ; 
în the famé manner as a truly confcien- 
tious fubfcription to the thirty nine ar- 
ticles would filence almoft ail that are 
rational, and free from enthufîafm, among 
themfelves. It is not the law, but the 
mildnefs of the adminiftration, and the 
fpirit of the times, to which we are in- 
debted for our prefent liberties. But the 
man who fliould attempt to abufe the 
letter of the law, contrary to the fpirit 
of the times, and in order to trample 
upon the facred rights of humanity, will 
ever be infamous. 

9 

The moft unexceptionable eftablifh- 
ment of religion that I hâve yet heard 
of is that of fome of our North- Ame- 
rican colonies, in which ail the inhabi- 
tants are obliged to pay a tax for the 

fupport 



W4 ^ UTILITY OF 

lupport of fome form of the chriftian 
religion, but every man's contribution is 
faithfuUy applied to the ufe of what- 
ever church, or fociety, he himfelf fhali 
chufe. To fuch an ecclefiaftical efta- 
blifhment as this, few perfons, I believe, 
in the prefent ftate of things would hâve 
much objedlion, It would not ind^ed be 
perfeâ and unbounded liberty in mat- 
ters of religion ; but it would be pretty 
near it, and mîght make way for it, 

I do not mean, therefore, to plead a- 
gainft religions eftablifliments in aîl 
cafés j but only argue againft fixing e- 
very thing fo unalterably, that if a 
change, in any particular, Ihould be de- 
fired by a great majority of the cler^y^ 
or laity themfelves^ they fhould not be 
able to accomplifh it, without the dan- 
ger of throwing every thing into confufî- 
on. Such rigid eftablifliments imply the 
authors of them to hâve been well perfuad- 
ed of their own infallibility ; or rather 
that they were determined to enforce e- 
very meafure once adopted, notwithftand- 
îng the fulleft convidion of its being a 

bad 



ESTABLISHMENTS., 203 

bad one. For no man, who could fup- 
pofeit polîible for himfelf to be miftaken, 
would think of fetting up Lis opinions 
as the invariable ftandard for pofterity ; 
and none but the founder of a Médian 
or Perfian eftablifliment would think it was 
reafonable, that, after a miftake was dif- 
covered in his fyftem, and univerfally 
acknowledgéd to be fuch, ail perfons (if 
they would enjoy any advantage under 
it) fhould be obliged to affirm, that they 
believed it to be no miflake^ but perfeét- 
ly agreeable to truth. 

How far this is the café with the 
church of England, let thofe of her 
clergy fay, who may underftand the 
fubjedl of religion a little better thanirhe 
firft reformers, juft çmerging from the 
darknefs of popery ; who may hâve 
fome reluélance to fubfcribe what they 
do not believe, and who may feel, not- 
withftanding every evafion to which 
they can hâve recourfe, that a church 
preferment is deariy bought at the ex- 
pence of a folemn falfehood. I do not 
appeal to thofe who may really believe 

^ ail 

9 



204 UTILIT Y OF 

ail they fubfcribe, or to thofe who may 
fubfcribe without thinking at ail, or ta 
thofe who would waît upon any minifter 
of ftate in the world with a carte blanche 
jready figned. In faying this, I çven 
hint no more than what many of thç 
greateft ornaments of the church hâve 
faid again and again ; that fome things, 
in our prefent eftablilhment, are wrong, 
and want reformation ; and that there 
are thinking and unthinking, honefl and 
diflioneft men in this, as well as in every 
other profeffion. 

I doubt not, the wifeft and the moft 
worthy of the Englifh prelates would ra- 
ther fee the privilèges of the diflenters en- 
larged than abridged, in any important 
article ; for, allowing their diflent to be 
ever fo unreafonable, there is no man who 
has the leaft knowledge of hiftory or of 
human nature, but muft be fenfible, that 
the very diftinguilhed réputation which 
the body of the Englilh clergy enjoy at 
prefent is, not à little, owing to the 
exiftence and refpedlable figure of the 
proteftant diflenters. Several of the moft 

dif- 





ESTABLISHMENTS. 105 

difcerning of thc Enjglifli bifhops hâve 
given their teftimony, direâly or in- 
diredly, to this truth; particularly, if 
I remember right, bi&op Gibfbn, in his 
charges to the ckrgy of his diocefe. The 
prefent ftate of the diflenting intercft can 
give no alann to the eftabliflied clergy 
with refpecS to their temporalities ; and, 
certainly, the intereftsof religious know- 
ledge, which ail wife and good men of 
every dénomination hâve moft at heart, 
cannot faii to be promoted by that fpirit 
of émulation, which will always fubfift 
betwixt fcholars and writers in two op- 
pofite perfuafîons. 

There is no power on earth, but has 
grown exorbitant when it has met with 
no control. What was the charaélcr of 
the Romifh clergy before the reforma- 
tion ? how fhamefully ignorant^ imperi- 
ous, lazy, and debauched were the bulk 
of them ! whereas very great nnmbers 
of them are now fenfible, moderate, and 
virtuous ; and lit^e, in comparifon, of 
the old leaven remains, except in Spain 
and Portugal, where the clergy hâve no 

inter- 

# 



2o6 UTILITY OF 

intercourfe with proteftants, whichmight 
call forth an exertion of their faculties, 
and checkthe extravagance of their ap- 
petites and paflions. To fay that the 
Ënglifh clergy, in future time, would 
not run into the vices, and fink into the 
coiitempt, into which the Romifh clergy 
were funk before the reformation, when 
they were in the famé circumftances, 
would be to fay they were not men. 

It is PuflPendorf, I think, who accounts 
for the great fiiperiority of the Englifh 
clergy over the Swedifh upon this princi- 
ple. In S weden, though it be a proteftant 
country, no diffenters are allowed; and 
their clergy hâve never produced any 
thing, in ethics or divinity, that de- 
ferves notice. Whoever made the ob- 
fervation, there is no doubt of the fadl. 

A few among the inferior clergy may 
wifh the extinction of the diffenting in- 
tereft, and might be ready to gratify 
their zeal, by perfecuting thofe of their 
brethren whofe confcicnces are, more 
tender thajci their ownj but, certainly, 

there 



ESTABLISHMENTS. 207 

there would not be wanting, in this âge, 
men enow of more humanity, of jufter 
fentiments, and of more enlarged views, 
among the higher ranks in the church, 
who would, with indignation, fhatch the 
torch from their mifguided hands. The 
îndelible infamy which would, to the 
lateft pofterity, purfue the man, who 
fhould form, countenance, or even con- 
nive at, perfecuting meafures, in this 
âge of modération and good fenfe, will 
effedlually deter men of underftanding, 
and of a juft knowledge of the world 
from thefe meafures ; and it is hoped, 
that men of zeal without knowledge 
will want abilities and influence to car- 
ry fuch fchemes into exécution. 



SECTION 



£:.t . [. i \ .... ' • , . . 



,,"*"■? 



SECTION IX. 

A review of f orne part icular pojîtions 
of Dr. Balguy'j on thefubjeEi of 
. church-authority. 



SEVERAL of the confîderatiôns men- 
tioned in thc preceding fedlion were 
fuggefted by the perufal of Dr, Balguy s 
fermon ; and, I flatter myfelf, are fuflici- 
ent to réfute any arguments tKat he has 
produced in • favour of church-authority. 
I Ihall, however, juft defcant upon a few 
pafTages in his performance, where we 
difcover the great hinges on which his 
whole fcheme tums. 

" Not only," fays he, p, 8. " muft per- 
** fons be appointed for the performance 
" of religions duties, but the manjier al- 
" fo is to be prefcribed. The aflembly 

" may 



POSITIONS. 209 

^' may not unfrequently be deceived in 
" their choicé, and the minifters, if fub-^ 
" jeél to no reftraint, may introduce 
^Vprinciples andpraélices which the peo- 
" pic condemn. Or it may hàppen that 
" one minifter fliall purfue a diflFerent 
" plan from another, perhaps a contrary 
^' plan } which muft evidently tend to 
" confound the minds of the people, and 
" weaken the imprefïions of religion. If 
^* the différence be not in form only, but 
" in doâxine, the café will ftill be worfe ; 
" for hothing is fo apt to root out ail re- 
** ligion, both from men's heads and 
" hearts, as religions controverfy. Hère 
" then," fays he, " we hâve the firft 
" fketch of what may be called, not im- 
" properly, church-authority T 

As the inconveniences arifîng from the 
want of church-authority are hère refer- 
red to, as the reafon for ecclefiaftical e- 
ftablifliments, let us briefly examine whe- 
ther they are r\px, much exaggerated by 
this author j and, on the other hand, 
juft point out a few of the inconveniences 
attending eftabliihments, which he has 

P not 



210 Dr. B a L g U Y's 

not fo much as hinted at, that the one 
may be fairly weighed agaînft the other* 
In this I fliall not content myfelf with 
mère theory, as Dr. Balguy does, fince 
there are kno'wn faâls to refcr to, as ex- 
amples in both cafés. 

Among the Diflenters, if a minifter 
introduôc principles and praftices which 
the people condemn, they difmîfs him 
from their fervice, and chufe another 
more agreeable to them. If his diffé- 
rence of fentiment occafion any debate, 
the fubjedt of the debate is thereby more 
thoroughly underftoodT; and the worft 

that can happen is, that fome of them 
feparate, and form themfelves into a new 
fociety, or join another in their neigh- 
bourhood, that is moré to their liking. 
In this, as in ail other contefts, fome 
ill blood is produced, the efFedls of which 
may remain for fome time; but the 
minds of the people in gênerai are not 
fo much confounded, nor the imprefllons 
of religion, as a principle of moral cpn- 
dudl, fo much weakened as this writer 
imagines. 

Among 



POSITIONS. 2n 

Among DifTenters, church émoluments 
are not worth contending for, and there* 
fore thofe fierce contefts about places, or 
in places, but feldom happen, A mini- 
fter feldom chufes to be connedled with 
a fociety whofe gênerai fentiments are 
much différent from his own, nor do fo- 
cieties often invite a perfon to officiate 
among them without having previoufly 
fuîKcient reafon to dépend upon his be- 
ing agreeable to them. Upon the whole, 
I am willing to appeal to any perfon who 
is well acquainted^ith the ftate of Dif- 
fenters in Englaq^ whether difagreeable 
events happy fo often, or whether the 
worft effedls are of fo much confequence, 
as to bear being put in the balance with 
the capital advantages of their fituation, 
for improving in religions knowledge 
and virtue. 

Something of the fpirit of controverfy 
feems neceffary to keep up men's atten- 
tion to religion in gênerai, as well as to 
other things ; and, notwithftandihg a 
fondnefs for debate may be of fome dif- 
fervice to pradlical religion, it is far lefs 

P 2 fo 



2t2 Dr. B a L g U Y's 

fo than a total inattention to tlie fubje<5l. 
In theological and fcriptural inquiries, 
the pratlical truths of chriftianîty muft 
neceflarily prefent themfelves to the 
mind; Befides there is hardly any 
branch of chriftian knowledge but is 
more or lefs'of a praélical nature, and 
fuggefts confîderations that are of ufe to 
mend the heart and reform the life. 
Religions knowledge is, however, itfelf, 
as valuable an acquifîtion as knowledge 
of any other kind. 

Some may think it an unhappinefs 
that the conunon people fhould be fo 
knowing in matters of religion. But 
this complaint is to be confidered in the 
famé light with the complaint of ftatef- 
men, in free countries, of the commoa 
people troubling themfelves fo much a- 
bout -pollues ; while thefriend of his coun- 
try and of mankind will not, upon the 
whole, be difpleafed with either of thefe 
circumftances ; being fenfible, that the 
one is fome guard againft the incroach- 
ments of civil, and the other of ecclefi- 
aftical tyranny. 

As 



POSITIONS. 213 

As to the confufion that is occafîoned 
in congrégations, when they happen to 
be diflatisfied with their minifters, it is 
not to be compared, for its pernicious 
effedls, to thealmoft perpétuai fquabbles, 
between the eflablifhed clergy and their 
pariihioners, about tythes. Few pariflies 
in the country are without difputes upon 
this fubjedl, which create a ftanding op- 
jpofition of intereft between the people 
and their fpiritual guides. 

Laftly, What inconvenience can be 
pointed out, as having aélually taken place 
among DifTenters for want of a ftanding 
corifejfton offaith, that can be named with 
the dreadful mifchiefs that hâve arifen 
from enforcing fubfcription in thechurch 
of England. This precludes ail free in- 
quiry upon fubjeéls of religion, and eîx- 
tails every error and abufe from généra- 
tion to génération, fo that a reformation 
can hardly take place without violence 
and blood. 

I 

If the émoluments of church livings 
be confiderable, the temptation to pre- 

P 3 varicate 



214 Dr. B a L g U Y's 

varicate with confcience is, by this 
means, made too ftrong for the genera- 
lity of thofe who hâve been educated for 
thc church, and who are now incapable 
of getting their bread, at leaft, of mak- 
ing their fortune, in any other way. 
Alfo, what muft the people think, to fee 
thofe who are appointed to inftni6l them 
in the principles of religion and morar- 
lity, folemnly fubfcribing to articles of 
faith which they are known to difbelieve 
and abhor ; *and who among the clergy, 
that read and think at ail, are fuppofed 
to believe * one-third of the thirty-nine 
articles of the church of England ? I 
hâve fo good an opinion of Dr. Balguy's 
good fenfe, notwithftanding the fatility 
of his reafoning in this performance, as 
to think it is a thoufand to one, but that 
he himfelf is an unbeliever in many of 
them. 

One tvould hâve thought that the 
fliocking abufes of the church of Rome 
might havé ferved as a ftanding monu- 
ment of the danger of church eftablifli- 
ments; whcnthsit my/lerj^o/iniquity flands 

upon 



POSITIONS. 215 

upon record, as having thereby got fo 
fixm a footing, as, for fo many âges, to 
hâve fèt ail the civil powers of Europe, 
and ail the powerà of reafon too, at dé- 
fiance. 

Having feen what this author has been 
able to advance in favour of the necefli- 
ty of ecclcfiaftical eftablifhments, and 
church-authority, I fliall folio w him a 
little farther ; and obferve what he has 
to alledge for bringing a* nnmber of 
chriflian focieties into one common fyf- 
tem, in order to lay a broader and firmer 
foundation for the power of the church. 
From this combination he expedls, p. 1 1, 
12, more nvijdom^ and unïformity^ a great- 
er variety of candidates for church offi- 
cers, and a bett-er choice of them. " Thefe 
" focieties," he well obferves, " muft ne- 
" ceflarily aél by deputics, fo that, at 
" leaft, either fingle men, or fmall bo- 
** dies of men, muft be authorized to 
" govem the church. There is no ne- 
" ceffity,"^ fays he, " that the mînîfters 
" of religion fhould be appointed by 
" the people, and much expedience in a 
" diflferent method of appointment." To 



2i6 Dr. B al g U Y's 

To me, ail this appears merc iiûagî- 
nation, and the fuppofed advantages of 
this elaborate fcheme Ko be altogether 
contrary to fadl. I fhould much Iboner 
hâve imagined there might be mnch ex- 
pçdience in town ofEcers not being cho- 
fen by their townfmen, than in the mi- 
nifters of a chriftian church not being 
chofen by the congrégation. 

The nomination to church li vings, ex- 
cept by the members of the church them- 
felves, is a thing fo abfurd, that the idea 
of it ne ver occurred for many centuries 
in the chriftian world ; and v^e may 
venture to fay, that it never could hâve 
entered into the head of any man, had 
not the revenues of the church grown 
fo confîderable, as to become worth the 
notice of the civil magiftrate, who took 
advantage of them to oblige his créa- 
tures and dependents. The fruits of 
this methpd of proceeding are fuch as 
might hâve been expeéled from the man- 
ner of its introduélion, The people be- 
longing to the eftablifhed church, are 
like the vajfah of the Polifli «obility, 

or 



POSITIONS. 217 

or the mère livejlock of a farm, delivered 
over, as panel of the eJtatCj to every fuc- 
ceffive incumbent. 

As to the wiftiom of choice among 
candidates for the miniftry, we fee, in 
faél, that the intereft of the people is 
not at ail confidered in it. The famé in- 
tereft is openly made for church livings 
as for places, or émoluments of any o- 
ther kind ; and being procured by the 
famé means, they are enjoyed in the famé 
manner, without any idea of obligation 
to the people from whom their revenue 
arifes. 

What reafori there is, or would be, to 
boaft of the happy efFedls of uniformity 
in a great number offocietiesj comprehend-* 
ing a whole kingdom, or the whole chri- 
ftian world, we may judge from the hor- 
rible evils, before recited, that attend 
the neceffary methods of enforcing this 
uniformity in a fingle fociety ; for thefe 
muft be multiplied in proportion to the 
number, We fee, in fa(5l, much more 
good than harm is found to refult from 

the 



2i8 Dr. BALGUY's 

the diverfîties in diflenting congrégati- 
ons. They are extremely favourable to 
the advancement of religious knowledge, 
and they aflFord a fine opportunity for 
the exercife of chriftian candour and 
charity ; the very poflibility of which 
would be excluded in, what Dr. Balguy 
would call, a complète and perfedl efta- 
blilhment* Some inconveniences can- 
not fail to arife from the moft favour- 
able fituation of things ; but in this 
ftate of trial, the Divine Being has not 
provided for the prévention of vice by 
cutting oflF ail occafions of virtuc. 

Befides, fo wife is the conftitution of 
human nature, that différences of opi- 
nion cannot be prevented by any human 
means. It is labour in vain to attempt 
it. It is our vsrifdom, therefore, not to 
irritate one another by oppofition, but 
to dérive every advantage we poflibly 
can from a circumftance that will necef- 
farily take place. There is as much di- 
verfity of fentiment, and confequent a- 
nimofity in the church of England (as 
far as the members of it think for them- 

fclves 



POSITIONS. ,219 

felves at ail) and even in the church of 
Rome, (notwithftanding the infallibility 
they prétend to in the decifion of contro- 
verfies) as among DifTenters, but with- 
out the advantage which they dérive 
from their ûtuation, of unconfined free- 
dom of debate, and not having their in- 
quiries reftriéled within certain limits 
only. 

" We hâve now feen/' fays this au- 
thor, p, 13, " on what principles the au- 
" thority of a religions community, both 
" over the minifters, and members of 
" particular congrégations, may be fe- 
" curely maintained, ^whether refiding 
" in the community at large, or delegat-^ 
" ed to fome certain perfons." We fhall 
now examine in what manner he would 
join the authority of the civil magiftrate 
to this fyftem of church authority. Hère, 
as he is wandering ftill farther from the 
fimplicity of the gofpel, we may natural- 
ly expeél more wildnefs in his fuppofiti- 
ons, and greater confufion in his rea- 
foning. 



Be- 



210 



Dr. B a L g U Y*s 



Becaufe we fee/' fays he, p. 14. " bj 
** the hiftory of ail âges, that religion, 
" in thehands of felfifliand faélious men, 
" is a very dangerous inftrument ; it, 
" thercfore, greatly concerns the public 
" peace and fafety, that ail church au- 
" thority Ihôuld be under the control of 
" the civil governor ; that religions afleni- 
" blies, as well as others, fliould be fub- 
" jedl to his infpedlion, and bound by 
" fuch rules as he fliall fee fit to impofe. 
" The mofl eflfedlual method of obtain- 
" ing this fecurity, is to inveft the fu- 
" preme power, civil and ecclefiaftical, 
^^ in the famé perfon, There are, indeed, 
" good reafons why the offices of reli- 
" gion onght not to be adminiftered by 
*' the magiftrate. Both the éducation 
" of his youth, and the attention of his 
" riper years, hâve been employed on 
" very difièrent objedsj and amidft the 
^' numberlefs toils and cares of goveni- 
** ment, it is impoflîble he fliould find 
" leifure for any inferior prpfeflîon.'' 

P. 12, " To obtain completely the be- 
" nefits propofed from this union of ci- 

"vil 



POSITIONS. aat 

" vil and ecclefiaftical authority, ail the 
*^ members of the famé community 
" fhould be members alfo of the famé 
" church ; variety of feéls having a na- 
" tural tendency both to weaken the in- 
" fluence of public religion, and to give 
" difturbance to the public peace. Where 
" this.is impraticable, not the hefi^ but 
*^ the hrgefi feél will naturally demand 
" the protedlion of the magiftrate. 

P, ip. " As minifters, while employed 
" by public authority, are not at liberty 
" to départ from eftablifhed forms, or to 
" afTemble feparate congrégations ; fo 
" neither are the people at liberty, while 
" they remain in fociety, to defert at plea- 
" fure, their lawful paftors, and flock in 
" crowds to receive înftruélion from 
" thofe who hâve no authority to give it, 
" If they cannot lawfuUy comply with 
" the terms of communion, let them 
" make an open feparation. In vain dq 
" men unité in civil or religtous com- 
" munîties, if each individual is to re- 
" tain intire liberty of judging and a(3:- 
^* ing for himfelf/' 

Con • 



222 



Dr. B a L GUY'» 



Concerning the impropriety and ab- 
furdity of making a civil magiftrate the 
fupreme head of a chriftian church, I 
think enough has been advanced above. 
1 Ihould, indeed, hâve thought that the 
famé reafons which this author gives, 
why the civil magiftrate fliould not be 
concerned in the offices of religion, might 
bave made him, at leaft, fufpedl his qua- 
lifications for fiaper-intending the whole 
bufinefs of religion, and diredlihg ail 
the officers in it. According to this 
maxim, a perfon might be very fit for 
the oflice of a bifhop, and efpecially an 
archbifliop, who was by no means qua- 
lified to be a common curate. But to 
prevent difturbances, the civil magiftrate 
inuft hâve fecurity for the good behavi- 
our of ail his fubjeéls, whatev^r be thcir 
religions perfuafion ; and, as he obferves, 
the moji effe éîual method (he does not fay 
the only Jufficient çiethod, though it be 
precifely the thing that his argument re*- 
quires) of obtaining this fecurity is to 
inveft the fupreme power, civil and eccle- 
fîaftical, in the famé perfon, be they 
ever fo incompatible, and the famé per- 
fon 



POSITIONS. i23 

fon ever fo ill qualified to coûdudl them 
both. 

But is not thîs, as I hâve hlnted (in 
the parenthefîs in the laft paragraph) 
giving the civil magiftrate much more 
power than, upon his own premifes, is 
neceffary ? Is it not poflible that ail 
church-authority Ihould be fuffictently 
under the control pf the civil govem- 
ment, and that religions aflemblies, as 
well as others, fliould be fubjeâ: to his 
infpeâion, and even be bound by many 
of his rules, fo for as was neceflary to 
prevent any breach of the publick peace, 
withôut iQvefting him with fupreme ec- 
clefiaftical power. For my own part, I 
Ihould hâve no objedlion to the prefence 
of an infnedlor from the civil magiftrate 
in a religions afTembly, or the attendance 
of as many conftables, ,or even foldiers, 
as might be judged neceflary to keep the 
peace, upon ail occafions in which reli- 
gion is concerned ; and, if the civil 
magiftrate be no more concerned in this 
buflnefs than the public peace and fafety 
is concerAed (and this writtr himfelf does 

not 



224 Dit. B A L G U Y ' s 

not fo much as hint at any thing more) 

I fliould think this might fatisfy him, 

But both he, and the civil magiftrate 

want much more tlian this, when the lat- 

tcr muft needs pafs out of hîs proper cha-^ 

radier, and infift upon beîng the fupreme 

head of the church, The avowed ob* 

je6l and end of the union of civil and 

ecclefiaftical power v^ill not juftify this 

claim, for it may be compafTed at a 

much lefs expence. If I want a houfe 

that will not be blown down by the 

wind, and two feet of thicknefs in the wall 

will fufficiently* anfwer my purpofe, 

ihould 1 make it twenty feet thick, be- 

caufe this would be a more effeêiual^ or 

the moft effectuai fecurity ? Afufficient fè- 

curity is enough for me. 

The Doélor's reafonipg in this café, is 
of a pièce with the obligation which he 
lays upon the magiftrate to countenance 
the largeft ièél of his difcordant fubjeéb, 
in préférence to the beft. This, indeed, 
might tend to reconcile the DilTenters in 
his dominions to théir fîtuation, by con- 
fidering that their magiftrate himfelf, the 

fupreme 



POSITIONS. 225 

jTupreme head of the eftablifhed church, 
could not command the religion of his 
choice any more thân thcy could ; for 
though he prefcribed to one part of his 
fubjeds, the other part of them didlated 
to him ; and that he was under the- dif- 
agreeable necefïity of enaâing the ar- 
ticles of a religion which he himfelf did 
notbelieve. 

The Bifhop of Gloncefter too, Dr. 
Balguy's mafter in the fcience of defence, 
fays, that " the ftate muft make an al- 
" liance with the largeji of the religions 
" focieties." I wifli that either of thefè 
gentlemen, or any perfbn for them, 
wbuld tell us what ought to be the efta-^ 
bliftied religion of Ireland on thefè prin- 
ciples. Gertainly, not that of the church 
of England ; for, if I be rightly inform- 
ed, there are many pariflies in that king- 
dom, in which the clergy of the efta- 
bliflied church do no duty at ail, be- 
catife they can find none of their parifhi- 
oners who would attend their miniftra- 
t'ions. Had Conftantine the Great been 
aware of the force of this reafoning, 

(^ though 



226 Dr. B a L g U Y^s 

though a chriftian himfelf, he would 
hâve thought himfelf obliged to ftreng- 
then the eftablifhment of the heathen 
worlhip, and to difcountenance the pro- 
feffion of chriftianity in the Roman em- 
pire. For the famé reafon, alfo, a Pro- 
teftant king of France would be obliged 
to continue the revocation of the edidl 
of Nantz. It is really very difficult to 
animadvert upon fuch pofitions as thefe, 
and retain one's gravity at the famé 
time. 

There is fomething one cannot help 
fnxiling at in the reafons which Dr. Balguy 
gives for the légal maintenance of chriftian 
minifters. " This provifion," he fays, p. 
i6. " is of great importance to them and 
" the public, as wre may eafîly judge 
" from the w^retched and precarious con- 
" dition of thofe w^ho w^ant it ; a condi- 
" tion vsrhich feldom fails to produce a 
" flaviih dependence, highly unbecom- 
** ing a public teacher, and in fome mea- 
" fure difqualifying him for the dit- 
" charge of his office." 



If 



POSITIONS. 227 

If our Lord had imagined that any 
real advantage would hâve accrued to 
the minifters of his gofpel from a légal 
provifîon, I dô not fee why we might 
not (either in his difcourfes or parables) 
hâve expedled fome hint of it, and fome 
recommendation of an alliance of his 
kingdom with thofe of this world, in 
order to fecure it to them. But no idea 
of fuch policy as this can be colledled 
from the New Teftament. For my part, 
I wonder how any man can read it, and 
retain the idea of any fuch worldly po- 
licy ; fo far am I from thinking it could 
hâve been colleéled from it. 

Upon the whole, when I confider my 
fituationas a minifter of the gofpel, or a 
member of a chriftian fociety, I do not 
fee what either the ftate, or myfelf, could 
get by an alliance, admitting there w'as 
nothing unnatural, and abfurd in the 
idea of fuch a connection- I want no- 
thing that the ftate can give me (except 
to be unmolefted by it) for I want nei- 
ther a légal maintenance, nor poiver to en^ 
force my admonitions. I look upon both 

Q^ 2 thefe 



228 Dr- B a L g U Y's 

thefe thîngs as unfuitable to, and de- 
ftrudtive of, the proper ends of my mi- 
niftry. And, without any hire from the 
civil powers, I fhall think it my duty to 
do ail I can towards making my hearers 
good fubjedls, by making them good 
men, and good chriftians. I fhall, there- 
fore, never court any alliance with the 
•fia te ; and fhould the flate be fo abfurd 
as to make any propofals of alliance 
with me, I hope I fhould hâve virtue 
enough to rejeél them with indignation, 
as Peter did the not very diflimilar oflFer 
of Simon Magus. Let the men of this 
world, and the powers of this world 
know, that there are fome things that 
cannot be pui*chafed with money. 

In the famé fpirit are this writer's reà- 
fons for the différence of ranks among 
the clefgy, and for a provifîon fuitable 
to thofe ranks. " And will not the famé 
" reafons, p. 1 6. ferve peculiarly to re- 
" commend thofe forms of government, 
" in which the clergy, as well as the laity, 
" are diflributed into différent ranks, and 
" enabled to fupport thofe ranks in a be- 

coming 



P O s I T I ON S., 229 

" coming manner ; that both the lower 
" orders may avoid contempt, and the 
" higher obtain diftinélion and regard ? 
" Were ail the minifters placed in low 
" flations of life, it is eafy to fee with 
" whât negleél they would be treated, 
" apd with what préjudice their doélrine 
" would be received. Poverty, aukward- 
" nefs, and ignorance of what is called 
" the world, are difadvaritages, for which 
" the higheft attainments in learning and 
" virtue could never atone/' 

I fliall clofe my remarks on this wri- 
ter s method of defending the eftablilh- 
nicnt, with repeating a trite obfervation, 
that there is, gencrally, both a true^ and 
an ojien/ible realbn for men's cônducSl, and 
that thefe are often very diflFerent from 
one another; becaufe I cannot help 
thinking, t^iat it is verified in the ca,fe 
before us. The oftenfible, and plauGble 
reafons for church eftablifhments, are 
fuch as this writer has reprefented, de- 
rived from the imaginary evils attend- 
ing the want of them ; but the true rea-» 
fon with refpedl to the minifters, may 

Q^ 3 be 



230 Dr. B a L g U Y's 

be tjie fcantinefs and uncertainty of their 
provifion without them ; and, with re- 
fpeél to the civil magiftrate, the vaft ad- 
dition of influence he thereby acqùires, 
in confèquence, both of having fb many 
bénéfices at his difpofal, and likewife, of 
retaining in liis pay the public inftruélors 
of the people ; men, who being kept in 
continuai expedlation, by the exhibition 
of higher preferment and greater émo- 
lument, will not fail to inculcate max- 
ims the moft f^vourable to the eftablilh- 
ment, and increafe of that power on 
which they dépend. 

I5ut firm as the connection feems to be 
between the civil and ecclcfiaftical power, 
a connection cemented by mutual ivorld^ 
ly ad^antagCy this high alliance may yet 
be broken, and interefl divide what in- 
teréft has unit éd. It has often feemed 
good to divine wifdom to take the ivife in 
their own craftine/s, and to bring about 
his ov^n defigns by the very means that 
were ufed to defeat them. Of this we 
hâve a récent example in France, in which 
>ve hâve feen the necefïïties of the ftate 

' com- 



POSITIONS. 231 

compelling its governors to abolifli the 
richeft of the religious orders. Did not 
the Englilh miniftry, who hâve not fo 
large 3,Jlanding army as the French, want 
more dependents of other kinds, fb that 
honours, penfionsy and church preferments^ 
are extremely convenient to them, fomé- 
thing fimilar to this might take place in 
England : and who can tell what may 
be the café, when fome future tyranni- 
cal adminiftration Ihall not be able to 
ride the ftorm they hâve raifed, or to 
ftruggle, without unufual refources, with 
the difficulties in which they fliall hâve 
involved themfelves. 

The remaindtr of the largefl: quotation 
I lately made from this writer, plainly 
refpeéls the Methodijîs^ at whofe condudl 
he feems to hâve taken great offence. I 
agrée with him, that mini/îers^ while they 
are employed by public aùthority, are 
not at liberty to départ from eftabliflaed 
forms ; but I can fee no reafon in the 
world why, in a country that admits of 
toleration, the people may not defert their 
ufual places of public worlhip, and re- 

turn 



232 Dr. B a L g U Y's 

turn to them whep/cver they plcafe. 
Hâve the laity fubfcribed tp any articles 
of faith, or formulary of religions wor- 
ihip ? If not, they are clearly at liberty 
to aél as they fhall think moft conveni- 
ent, and to 'diffent partially or totally, 
fecretly or openly, as they like beft. 
But it is probable, that this author may 
not mean being at liberty with refpeél 
to the làws of this country^ but with re- 
fpedt to confcience ; fo that though the 
law allows a man to quit the worfliip of 
the church of England/ eithçr occafion- 
ally or entirely, his confcience Ihould 
diélate to him to do it intirely and whol- 
ly, if at ail ; which, to me, founds ftrange 
and parado?ical enough. ^ 

The fitùation of confcientious laymen 
in the church pf England, according to 
the cafuiftry of Dr. Balguy, is truly re- 
markable, and fuch as, I dare fay, few, 
or none of them are aware of. If they 
were, eafily as the common people are 
generally led by the priefts, I think the 
Ipirit of an Engli/hjnan would revolt at 
it. For this writer abfolutely déclares, 

that 



POSITIONS. 233 

that " the union of civil and ecclefîafti- 
" cal powers in the eftablifliment is in 
" vain, if each individual is to retain 
" entire libeity of judging and adling 
" for himfelf.'' Certainly a churchman 
ought to infift upon rt ceiving fome very 
great advantage in the eftablifliment, as 
an équivalent for the furrender of this 
great and important natural right, to 
judge and a6l forhtmfelf. Upon the prin- 
ciples of this writer, à profefTed church- 
man is not at liberty fo much as to hear 
a fii>gle fermon by thofe who hâve no 
légal authprity to pfeach, i. e. Dijfenters 
and Methodifis (or, as he chufes to call 
them, feBaries^ and enthuftafts ;) fo that 
he is eut off from the very means of 
judging for himfelf : for certainly this 
v\rriter cannot hâve lefs objedlion to his 
parifliioners reading the difcourfes of 
feélaries and Methodifts, than to their 
hearing them. 

s 

This writer, indeçd, is inconfiftent 
enough to allow the members of the eftar- 
bliflied church to make an open feparati- 
oh from it, if they cannot laivfully com- 

ply 



t234 Dr. B a L g U Y's 

ply with the terms of communion. But 
were the terms ever fo unlawful, what 
chance has any perfon for coming at the 
knowledge of it? Can it be fuppofed 
that a man fhould at once, of himfelf, 
and without any means of information, 
become fo diffatisfied with the fervice of 
the church, that he Ihould think it un- 
lawful to join in it ? I dare fay the Do6lor 
imagined no fuch event. But, in point 
of confcience, why may not a perfon 
think himfelf at liberty to leave the com- 
munion of the church, though he fhould 
not think it unlanvful. May it not be 
fufEcient that he thinks another form of 
religion préférable to it ? 

Take the whole paragraph that I hâve 
quoted, and I really think it a curiofîty 
boih in point of fentiment and reafoli- 
ing ; but, withal, one of the greateft in- 
fults that I hâve yet feen oflFered to the 
undcrflandings and fpirit of men. And 
yet this is from an Englifhman, to Eng- 
liflimen. 



The 



POSITIONS. 235 

The Diflenters are obliged to this wii- 
ter for the good-will he feems to bear 
them, in being an advocate for tokration 
in gênerai ; but I cannot help faying, I 
think him a very aukward, and incon- 
fiftent advocate in the café, and that in- 
tolérance would be much more agreeable 
to his gênerai principles. If it betrue, 

as he fays, p. 17. that " a variety of feéls 
" has a natural tendency both to weaken 
" the influence of public religion, and 
" to give difturbance to the public peace," 
how is the magiftrate " unqualified, or 
" uncommifïioned, to perfecute for con- 
" fcience fake ?" Is he not conftituted the 
guardian of the public peace, and muft 
he not ufe the mofl efFeélual means to 
prevent the difturbance of it: If, " in 
" order to obtain completely the benefits 
" propofed from the union of civil and 
" ecclefiaftical authority, ail themembers 
" of the famé common-wealth fliould be 
*^ members alfo of the famé church," à 
confcientious civil magiftrate might think 
it his duty, and well worth his while, to 
hazard fomething, with a profpeél of in- 
furing fo great an advantage j efpecially 

as. 



2s6 Dr. B a L g U Y's 

as, accorciing to tliis writer, it is only 
when the union of ail the naembers of 
the commonwealth in ojie church is imr 
fraâïicable, that tpler^tion is neceiTary. I 
own I ûipuld \>o very fprry to truft the 
civil majjiftrate with Dr. Balguy's gêne- 
rai m^xims of civil açid ecclefiaftical pç»- 
liçy. I v^rould not even truft pr. Balguy 
himfelf in certain circumftances., wLen 
his prinçiples give me fo uncertain a hold 
of him. But toleration, Yçry fortunate- 
ly, happens to be th^ /q/hionable dodxinc 
at prefent ; and it muft be incorporated 
into eVery fyftem, how ill foever it may 
conueift with it. * 

An example of one of the mifchiefs at- 
tending eftablifliments Dr. Balguy has 
given in himfelf, in the conclufion of 
this fermon, in which he reflecSls very 
feverely upon thç author of the Con/ef- 
JîQnal, and bis frien(;is ; for I think it is 
very ev^dçnt, that his cenfnxçs refpeél 
nobody çKq. " There is," fays this vs^ri- 
ter, p. 20. ^^ one clafs of men, to whom 
" this plea for con^p^flion" (due to Me- 
thodifts, as out of the reach of rational 

con- 



POSITIONS. 237 

conviâion) " will not extend, Thofe I 
" mean who, without aHy pretence to 
^* infpîration, live in open War with the 
" national church ; with thât very church 
*^ of which they profefs themfelves mi- 
" nifters, and whofe wages they continue 
" to take, though in adlual fervice againft 
" her. Whether this conducSt proceed 
" from a diflike to ail eftablifliments, or 
" from a defire of eredting a new one^ on 
" the ruins ôf that which fnbfifts at pre- 
" fent, in either Café, it is contrary to 
" the moft évident principlès of jûftice 
" and honour." 

We fee then, that when religion has 
once been eftabliflied, ail the minifters 
of it are to be corifidered as fervants in 
her pay^ and bound to fight for her and 
fupport her. The very propofal of a re- 
formation by any member of an cfta- 
blilhment, is contrary to the tnoft évi- 
dent principlès of juftice and honour ; ja, 
maxim that fhuts the door againft ail 
reformations that may not be called / 
violent ones, Every diforder, how fla- 
grant foever, muft be winked at, ih long 



238 Dr. B a L g U Y's 

as a perfon continues in the church ; and 
in order to put himfelf into a fituation 
to propofe an amendment, he muft quit 
his preferments, and déclare war as an 
alien. This fufficiently juftifies the com- 
mon complaint againft eftablifliments, 
that they never reform themfelves, but 
that ail reformations hâve ever been 
forced upon them ab extra. This has, 
hitherto, been matter of furprife to many 
perfons, and fome (among whom, I 
think, is the Bilhop of Gloucefter) hâve 
prétended to deny the charge, but now 
it appears to be rather a matter of boaft- . 
ing ; for it would hâve been contrary to 
the moft évident principles of juftice and 
honour, for the clergy to hâve made the 
attempt. 

It is not improbable, but that Dr* 
Balguy and his friends, if they would 
expiain themfelves freely, might carry 
this point of honour a little farther, and 
fay, that no perfon who has ever eaten 
the hread^ or tajled the fait of the church, 
fliould lift up his heel againft her ; nor 
perhaps the man whofe father, or grand- 
-father had eaten of it. I 



POSITIONS. X39 

I 

I fhould think the moft fcrupulous ca- 
fuift might allow a clergyman, who is 
cliflatisfied with the church, to make a 
fair attempt to procure the reformation 
of thofe abufes that are intolérable to 
him ; and, confequently, to wait a pro- 
per time, to fee the efxe€t of Jiis endea- 
vours, before he abfolutely quitted his 
ftatiori in the church. For if his endea- 
vours fucceed, he will hâve no occafion 
to quit it at ail ; and, in the mean time, 
the remonftrances of a perfon who is a 
tnember of the church, may be expeéled 
to hâve a more favourable hearing, than 
thofe of one who has no connexion 
with it. 

So far am I from joining with Dr Balguy, 
in his harfli cenfures of the author of the 
Confejffional^ that I rather think that every 
principle of juftice and honour fliould 
prompt a man to ufe his bejft endeavours 
for the benefit of any community of 
which he is a member, and of whofe pri- 
vilèges he partakes. If, therefore, there 
be any thing wrong in the conftitution 
of it, thofe principles require him to pro- 

mote 



240 Dr. B a L g U Y's 

mote a reformation of the abufe ; and 
it would be nianifeftly contrary to the 
principles of juftice and honour, to be 
an unconcerned fpeâator of fo great a 
miîçfortune to it. I cannot help com- 
paring the àuthot of the ConfeJJional to a 
man who Would endcavour to ftop a leafc 
he perceived in the veflel in which he 
wâs embarked, and Dr. Balguy to a man 
who would run the rifque of its finking 
aJl at once, rathér than infinuate that 
there was any thing amifs with it. 

Stf ange as this author s déclamation 
againft the frîends of the Confejftonal is, 
it foUows diredlly from his avowed prin- 
ciple, that authority once ejlabli/hed mufi 
he obeyed. Speaking of " the founders 
" of our holy religion/' he fa^ys, p. i8. 
" They eftablifhed a form of church go- 
" Vernment ; for the church muji be go- 
" verned ïn fonte form, or there could be 
" no government. But their direélions 
" to us are, for the moft part, very ge- 
" neral. Even their example muft be 
" cautioufly urged, in diflPerent times, 
" and under différent circumftances. In 

" this 



POSITIONS. Î4I 

*' thîs one point they are clear and ex- 
" pliçît, that authority once eftablijhed 
"-mujft be oheyedy 

But was not popery tmce efiahltjhed in 
this ifland ? How thén is it poffible, up- 
on thefè princifles <>f pqffwe obédience and 
nonrrejijlancey to vindicate the reformati- 
on ? Whatevcrit be that is once eftabliflx- 
cd, and in whatevcr manner it is once 
eilablilhed, it muft, it feems, be fub- 
mitted to. If this principle be applied 
without reftiiélion, it will vindicate the 
continuance of every fyftem, the moft 
abfiird and mifchievous in the world ; 
and if it do admit of reftridUon and limi- 
tation, it could fignify nothing to this 

author's purpofe to alledge it, 

* 

It might hâve been expeâed, that a 
writer who is fo extremely fevere upon 
thofe who propofe a reformation in. the 
chtirch, while they continue in it, fhould 
hâve expreffed fome degree of indigna- 
tion againft thofe who intrude themfelyes 
into it hjfalfe oaths and pretences, fub- 
fcribing the articles and canons^ &c. 

R when 



242 Dr. B a L g U ^'% 

when they difbclieve and ridic\ile thein# 
But I fancy that I can put my reader in-' 
to poffeflion of xhcfecret reqfon^ why np- 
thing of this kind occurs in the writings 
of the friends of church authority. Men 
who hâve corne this nvay into the church 
hâve always proved its firmeft friends* 
Having made no bones of their own. 
fcniples, they pay no regard to the 
fcruples of others* A confcientious bi- 
got to the church is not half fo much 
to be dependëd upon, as the man who 
believes not a fingle word of the matter, 
nor is he fo fit to be admitted into the 
cabinet council of church- powen 

Such, my gentle reader, are the max- 
ims, and fuch the reafoning with which 
this writer ftands forth to fupport the 
declining caiafe of church- authority. For 
he iuftly complains, p. 5. that " notwith- 
" ftanding the members of the church 
*' of England hâve, from its foundation, 
" been caféfully inftruéled in thefe points, 
" by its ableft defenders, yet, fo capri- 
" cious is the public tafte, that tKefe 
" great writers hâve gradually fallçn in- 

"to 






POSITIONS. 34^ 

** to ncgleél. Their doélrines are now, 
" in a manner, forgotten, and enthufiafts 
" and feélaries revive the famé foUies, 
and défend them by the famé argu- 
ùients, which were once efFeélually 
" overthrown." In this déplorable fitu* 
ation of things, this great champion 
has judged it " not to be improper to 
" refume the beaten fubjedl, and to ex- 
" plain, on rational principles, the foun- 
" dation of church authority." 

It îs, indeed, tnily déplorable, that 
thefe great authors fhould hâve Malien in- 
to negleél, and that their excellent doc- 
trines fhould bè, in a manner, forgot- 
ten ; but this misfortune has been ow- 
ing, chiefly, to themfelves. The truth 
is, that thefe great writers hâve been 
very inconfiftent with one another, which 
is a very imfavourable and fufpicious 
circumftance for the caufe they are fo 
zealôufly labouring to fupport. While 
cach of them is bufily purfuing his owh 
feparate fcheme, and they are applying 
their very différent methods to gain the 

R 2 famé 



244 Dr- BALGUY's 

famé end, they only obftniâ: and em- 
barrafs one another. 

In reality, the principles of the Dif- 
fenters are not more oppofite, either to 
thofe of Hooker or Warburton, than 
thofe of thefe two grcat champions for 
çhurch-authority are to one another ; 
and other writers hâve propofed other 
fchemes of chm'ch power quite difi&rent 
from them both, Now if three perfons 
be building a houfe, and one of them 
will hâve it of brick, aQother of ftone, 
and the third of wood ; and if each be 
fo obftinate, that he will pull down whatt 
the others build, how can it be expeéled 
that the édifice ihould be completed ? or 
how can thç ipec^atprs refrain frona 
laughmg to £èethem fo laborioufly em-^ 
ployed ? If I may be iiidulged another 
comparifon, I would fay, that whcn the 
fchemes of the différent writers, in de- 
fencè of ecclefiaftical eflabliflunents^ are 
confidered together, they make luch kind 
of harmony, as would refult from a num - 
ber of perfons finging the famé words, 
each to his own favourite tune^ at the 
famé time. In 



POSITIONS. 245 

In thefe circumftances, I cannot help 
tihinking that Dr. Balgny is unreafon- 
ably fevere upon the members of his own 
chuTch, and expedts toomnchfrom them, 
when Le fays, p. 4. ** It might well hâve 
" been expedled, that the members of 
" the Englifh church fliould hâve feen 
" farther^ and judged bettcr (than to con^ 
^,^ fuit the fcriptures for nvbat is not to be 
^^ found in itj with refpeâ: to church go- 
" vemment) becaufe this church, even 
" from its foundation, has been carefully 
" inftruéled on thefe veiy points by fome 
" of its ableft defendérs. But fo capri-^ 
*' cipus is the public tafte," &c. Had 
thefe ablejl defendérs of the church de- 
fended her upon thtfame principles^ and 
upon the famé général maxims of church 
power, this writer s ceiifures might hâve 
l)een juft; for, by a proper degree of at- 
tention and déférence to fuch injlruâiors^ 
they might hâve been long ago well 
grounded in this important branch of 
knowledge. But he only fays that fome 
of the ableji defendérs of the church, not 
ail of them hâve inftnided her fo care- 
fully. And were the members of the 

R 3 church 



zj^6 DsL. B A L G U Y's 

church evcr £o defîrous of receiving in- 
ftruélion, either for their own benefit, 
Qr that of their teachers, what proficien- 
cy could they be expcéled to make, when 
their able/i mafters did not teach the famé 
gênerai docîlrines ? . 

If this hath been the café, even from 
the foundatiou of this church (which, 
in proportion to its occaûons, has been 
bleft with fo many able defenders) how 
inuch more embarraffed muft her mem- 
bers hâve been fince the publication of 
the ConfeJJional^ when (if I be rightly in- 
formed, for \ hâve not yet read any of 
them myfelf ) almoft every oppugncr of 
that excellent work has adopted a diflfe- 
rentfyftem of chiirch-authority ; fo that, 
as the controverfy proceeds, we may ex- 
ped to be entertained with the exhibition 
of as many crude fyftems of church 
power, as there are faid to hâve been m«- 
formed animais in Egypt, after an inun- 
dation of the Nile. I do not know what 
we fhould do after fuch another inunda- 
tion, but that thefe half-formed bçings 
generally perifh as foon as they hâve 
fhewn any figns of lifç, Since^^ 



POSITIONS. 247 

Since, however, the ableft defenders of 
the church wi//, each, go their own way 
to work, fuppofe that, in order to make 
the beft of this unfavourable circum- 
llance, thofe who are to be inftrudled by 
thefe able mafters be diftribtited into 
dijlinâl clajfesy and that care be taken, that 
they do not intermix with one another. 
Provided the famé end be anfwered, and 
the church be fupported, what doth it 
fignify how différent, or inconfiftent arc 
the means by which it is efFedled ? When 
this experiment has been made, that 
mode of inftniélion may be adopted, in 
exclnfion of the reft, which fhall be found 
in fadl, to make themoft zealous church- 
men. In the iffue, I fufped, that though 
the modem improvements in the fcience of 
church government may appear to b^ the 
beft for the politer and more free-think- 
ing part of the nation, nothing will be 
found to anfwer fo well with the com- 
mon people, who do not eafily enter în- 
to refinements, as the old-fafhioned jwr^ 
divino doélrines, I am afiraid Dn War- 
burton has been rather impolitic in de- 
crying thofe old fupports of the caufe, 

rotten 



248 Dr, B a L P U.Y's 

rotten as he thinks them to be. They 
hâve been of excellent fer vice in their day. 

To conclnde this feélion with perfeél 
ferioufnefs. I congratulate my reader, 
and thc âge in which we live, that the 
great writers (as Dr. Balgny calls them) 
in defence of church power, hâve fallen 
into negleét, and that their doélrines are, 
in a manner, forgotten. To account for 
this remarkable faél, in an âge, in which 
knowledge of ail other kinds (and eipeci- 
ally the knowledge of govemmeta and 
/awx, and I think the knowledge ofr^/g*i(Wi 
too) has been fo greatly advanced, may 
furprife the Dodlor and his fiiends, and 
therefore they may refolve it into caprice 
or chance ; but it is no furprife to me, 
or my friends. Magna eft Veritas^ ^c. 
the tranflatipn of which faying I fhall 
give my reader in the words of this au- 
thoi:» p. 9. " Truth can never fuffer 
" from a free inquiry. The combat may 
** be fharp, but fhe is fure to conquer in 
" the end/' And though the perfor- 
tnance I am animadverting upon be an 
gttempt to revive the memory of fome 

of 



POSITIONS. 249 

of the arguments in dcfence of church- 
authority, I truft -it will only ferve to 
hold them forth once mote to the gêne- 
rons contempt and deteflation of men of 
fenfe and refleélion ; and accelerate their 
being finally configned to everlafting 
oblivion, as the difgrace of human rea- 
fon, and human nature. 



SECTION X. 






Of the Progrefs of Civil Societies 

to a State of greater PerfeEUotty 

Jhowing that it is retardedby En-^ 

croachments on Civil and Religi-- 

ous Liberty. 

TH E great argument in favour of 
the perpétuation of ecclefiaftical 
eftablifhments is, that as they fuit tha 
feveral forms of civil govérnment under 
which they hâve taken place, the one 

cannot 



250 THE PRÔGRESS OF 

cannot be touched withôut endangering 
the other. I am not infenfible of tlie 
truth there is in the prîncîple on which 
this apprchenfion is grounded ; but I 
think the connedlion (artfully as thofe 
things hâve been tnterwoven) is riot fo 
ftriâ:, but that they may be feparatéd, at 
leaft, in a courfe of time. But allowing 
that fome change might take place in our 
civil conftitution, in confequence of the 
abolition, or reformation of the ecclefiafti- 
cal partjit is more than an equal chance, 
that the altération will be for the better ; 
and no real friend to his country can 
wifh to perpetuate its prefent conftitu- 
tion in church or ftate, fo far as to inter- 
rupt its progrefs to greater perfedlion 
than it has yet attaiped to. 

I can heartily join with the greateft 
admirers of the Englifh conftitution, in 
their encomiums upon it, when it is 
compared with that of any other country 
in the world. I really think it to bethe 
beft adlual fcheme of civil policy ; but 
if any perfon fliould fay, that it is per- 
feâ, and that no altération can be made 

in 



- CIVIL SOCIETIES. 251 

in it for the better, I beg leave to with- 
hold my affent. Di^ Brown himfelf doth 
not hefitate to acknowledge, that there 
are imperfedlions in it. How then can a 
real f riend to his country wifh to fix its 
imperfeélions upon it, and make them 
perpétuai ? 

It will be fàid, that altérations may, 
indeed, be made, but cannot be made 
with fafety, and without the danger of 
throwing every thing into confufion ; 
fo that, upon the whole, things had bet- 
ter remain as they are : but, allowing 
this, for the prefent, why fhould they 
be perpetuated as they are ? If the pro- 
pofed altérations were violent ones, that 
is, intrçduced by violent meafures, they 
might juftly give alarm to ail gôod citi- 
zens. I would endeavour to ftop the 
ableft hand that fliould attempt to re- 
form in this manner ; becaufe it is 
hardly pofîible but that a remedy fo ef- 
fedled muft be worfe than the difeafe. 
But ftill, why Ihould we objedl to any 
ftate's gradually reforming itfelf, or throw 
obftacles in the way of fuch reforma- 
tions ? Ail 



252 THE PROGRESS OF 

Ail civil focieties, and the wholefciencc 
of civil govemment, on which they are 
founded» are yet in thcir infancy. Likc 
other arts and fciences, Jthis is gradually 
împroving ; but it improves more flowly, 
becaufe opportunitiesformaking experi- 
ments are fewer. Indeed, hardly any 
trials in legiflation hâve ever been made 
by perfons wbo had knowliedge and abi- 
lity to colleél from hiftory^ and tp com- 
pare the obfervations which might be 
of ufe for this purpofe, or had leifure to 
digefl; them properly at the time. ^Tak- 
ingitforgranted, therefore, thatonr con- 
ftitution and laws hâve not efcaped the 
imperfections which we fee to be inci- 
dent toevery thinghuman ; by ail meansi 
let the clofefl: attention be given to them, 
let their excellencies and defeéls be tho- 
roughly laid open, and let improvementa 
of every kind be made ; but not fuch as 
would prevent alî farther improvertients ; 
becaufe it is not probable, that any im- 
provements, which the utmoft fagacity 
of man could now fuggeft, would be an 
équivalent for the prévention of ail that 
might be made hereafter. Were the beft 

formed 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. 253 

fotmed ftate in the world to be fixed in 
its prefeht condition, I make no doubt 
but that, in à courfc of time, it would bc 
the worfl; 

Hiftory demonftrates this tnith with 
refped to ail the celebrated ftates of anri* 
quity ; and as allthings (and particularly 
whâtever dépends ujion fcience) hâve of 
kte.years been în a quicker progrefs to- 
wards perfeâionthan ever ; wetnay lafely 
conclude the faincwith refpedl to any po- 
litical ftate now in being. What ?idvan- 
tage did Sparta (the conftitution of whofe 
goveriinicntlvas fo much admired by the 
ancrents, und maiiy modems) reap from 
thofè iiïftîtutioïïs which contributed toits 
longevity, but the longer côntinuance of, 
what I fhouldnot fcruple to call, the worft 
govemment we read of in the world ; a 
governnaent whichfectired to a ihan the 
feweft of his natural rights, and of which 
a man whô had à tàfte for life would leaft 
of ail chnfe to be a meinber. While 
the arts of lifc^wrére improving in ail the 
neighbotîrîng nations, Sparta derived 
this noble pfeirogative from her conftitu- 
tion, 



254 THE PROGRESS OF 

tion, that flie continued the neareft to her 
priftine barbarity ; and in the fpace of 
near a thoufand y ears ( which includes the 
whole period in which letters and the 
arts were the moft cultivated in the reft 
of Greece) produced no one pœt, orator, 

hiftorian, or artift of any kind. The 
convulfions of Athens, where life was in 
fome meàfure enjoyéd, and the faculties 
of body and mind had their proper exer- 
cife and gratification, were, in my opi- 
nion, far préférable to the fayage uni- 
formity of Sparta. 

The conftitution of Egypt was fimilar 
to that of Sparta, and the advantages that 
country received from it were iimilar. 
Egypt was the mother of the arts to the 
ftate& of Greece ; but the rigid inftituti- 
ons of this mother of the arts kept them 
in their infancy ; fo that the liâtes of 
Greece, being more favourably fituated 
for improvements of ail kinds, foon went 
beyond their inftrudlrefs ; and no inx- 
provements of any kind were ever made 
in Egypt, till it was fubdued by a fo- 
reign. power. What would hâve been 

the 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. 255 

theftate of agriculture, fliip-building, or 
war, if thoft arts had bqen fixcd in Eng- 
land two or three centuries ago ? 

. Dr. Brown will urge me with the au- 
thority of Plutarch, who largely éxtols 
the régulations of Egypt and of Sparta, 
and cenfures the Roman legiflators for 
âdopting nothirig fimilar to thcm. But 
I beg leave to appeal from the autljority 
of Plutarch, and of ail the anciénts, as by 
no means compétent judges iri this café. 
Imperfeél as the fciencè of government 
is at prçfent, it ia cértainly much more 
perfeét than it was in their time. Qn 
the authorityof the anciénts,. Dr. Brown 
might as well contend foranother iriftitu- 
tion of the famed Egyptians ; viz. their 
obliging ail perfons to follow the occu- 
pations of their fathers ; and perhaps this 
might be no bad auxiliary,to his pre- 
fcribed mode of éducation, and prevent 
the fpringing up of fadlion in a ftate. It 
woùld likéwiie favbur another objeél, 
which the dodtor has profefledly in 
view, viz. checking the growth of 
commerce. 

Sup- 



?56 THE PROGRESS OF 

: Suppofing this wife fyftem of per]petua-- 
tion had occurred to our anceftors in the 
feudal rimes, and that an afiembly of old 
Englifh barons, with their heads full of 
their feudâl.rights and fervices, had imi- 
tated the wife Spartans, and perpetuated 
the fcvere feudal inftiturions j what would 
England at this day hâve been (with the 
unrivalled repntarion of uniformity and 
conflancy in its laws) but the moft bar- 
barons, theweakeft, and moft diftradled 
date in Europe? It is plain from fsL&, 
that divine providence had greaterthings 
in view in favour of thefe kingdoms ; and 
hâs been conduâing them through a fe^ 
ries of graduai changes (ariiîng from in- 
ternai and ^xtemal caufes) which hâve 
brought us to our preient happy condi- 
tion ; and which, if fuâèred to go on, 
may carry us to a pitch of happinefs 
of whîch we can yet, form no con- 
ception, 

Had the religions fyftem of our oldeft 
forefathers been eftablilhed on thefe wife 
and perpétuai foun4ations, we had iiow 
been pagans, and our priefts dndds. 

Had 



CIVIL SOCIETIES* 257 

Had our Saxon conquerors been endued 
with the famé wifdom and forefight, we 
had béen worfliipping Thor and Woden ; 
ànd had our anceftors, three centuries 
ago, perfevered in this fpirit, we had 
been blind and prieft-ridden papifts. 
The greateft blefling that can befall a 
ftate, which is fo rigid and inflexible 
in its inftitutions, is to be conquered by 
a people, who hâve a better govem- 
ment, and hâve mrade farther advances 
in the arts of life. And it is undoubt^ 
edly a great advantage which the divine 
being has provided for this world, that 
conquefts . and révolutions fhould give 
mankind thofè opportunities of reforming 
their fyftems of government, and of im- 
proving the fcience of it, which they 
would ne ver hâve found themfelves. 

In the excellent conftitution of nature, 
evils of ail kinds, fome way or other, 
find their proper remedy; and when 
government, religion, éducation, and 
every thing that is valuable in fociety 
feems to be in fo fine a progrèfs towards 
a more perfeA flate, is it not our wif- 

S dom 



258 THE PROGRESS OF 

dom to favour this progrefs; and to 
allow the remédies of ail diforders to 
operate gradually and eafily, rather than, 
by a violent fyfkem of perpétuation, to 
retain ail diforders till they force a re- 
medy? In the excellent conftitution of 
the human body, a variety of outlets are 
provided for noxious humours, by means 
of which the fyftem relieves itfelf when 
any flight diforders happen to it. But, 
if thefe outlets be obftrùâed, the whole 
fyftem is endangered by the convulfîons 
which enfue. 

Some things in civil fociety do, in 
their own nature, require to be efta- 
bliflied, or fixed by law for a confider- 
able time ; but that part of the fyftem, 
for the reafons mentioned above, will 
certainly be the moft imperfedt ; and 
therefore it is the wifdom of the legifla- 
ture to make that part as fmall as pofli- 
ble, and to let the eftabliftiments, vsrhich ^ 
are neceffary, be as eafy as is confiftent 
with the tolerable order of fociety. It 
is an univerfal maxim, that the more 
liberty is givcçi to every thing which is 

m 



CIVIL SOCIETÎES. 259 

in a ftate of growth, the more perfecfl it 
will become ; and when it is grown to 
its full fîze, the more amply will it repay 
its wife parent, for the indulgence given 
to it in its infant ftate. A judicious 

father will bear with the frowardnefs of 
his children, and overlook many flights 
of youth ; which can give him no plca- 
fure, but from the profpedl they afford 
of his children becoming ufeful and va- 
luable men, when the fire of youth is 
abated. 

• * * 

I do not prétend to define what degrec 
of eftablifhment is neceffary for many 
things relating to civil fociety : but 
thus much I think is clear, that e- 
very fyftem of policy is too ftriâ: and 
violent, in which any thing that may 
be the inftrument of gênerai happi- 
nefs, is under fo much reftraint, that 
it can never reform itfelf from the dif- 
orders which may be incident to it ; 
when it is focircumftanced, that it can- 
not improve as far as it is capable of im- 
provement, but that every reformation' 
muft neceflarily be introduced from fome 

S 2 other 



26o THE P.ROGRESS OF 

other quarter; in which café it muft 
generally be brought about by force.^ 
Is it not a ftandiiig argument. that reli- 
gion, in particular, has been too much 
confined, in ail countries, that the body 
of the clergy hâve never reformed them- 
felves; and that ail reformations hâve 
ever been forced upon them, and hâve 
generally been attended with the moft 
horrible perfecutions, and dangerous 
convulfions in tlie ftate ? I cannot help 
thinking alfo, that every fyftem of go- 
vernmentis violent and tyrannical, which 
incapacitates men of the beft abilities, 
and of the greateft integrity, from ren- 
dering their country any fervicc in their 
power, while thofe who pay no regard 
to confcience n>ay hâve free accefs to ail 
places of power and profit. 

It feems to be the uniform intention 
of divine providence, to lead mankind 
to happinefs in a progreiîive, which is 
the fureft, though the floweft method. 
Evil always leads to good, and imperfeél 
to perfeét. The divine being might, 
no doubt, hâve adopted a différent plan, 

hâve 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. a6i 

hâve made human nature and human 
governments perfedlfrom the beginning. 
He might hâve formed the hiunan mind 
with an intuitive knowledge of truth, 
without leading men through fo many 
labyrinths of error. He might hâve 
made man perfecflly virtuous, without 
giving fo liiuch exercifè to his pafîions 
in his (Iruggles with the habits of vice. 
He might hâve fent an angel, or hâve 
commiffioned a man to eftablifh a per- 
fe&. form of civil government ; and, 
a priori, this would feem to hâve been 
almoft as effential to human happi- 
nefs as any fyftem of truth ; at leaft, 
that it would hâve been a valuable ad- 
dition to a fyftem of religions truth : 
but though it would be impiety in us 
to prétend to fathom the depths of the 
divine councils,^ I think we may fairly 
conclude, that if this method of pro- 
ceeding had been the beft for us, he, 
whom we cannot conceive to be influ- 
enced by any thing but his délire to pro- 
mote the happinefs of his créatures, 
would hâve purfued it; But a contrary 

S 3 method 



262 THE PROGRESS OF 

method has been adopted in every thing 
relating to us. 

How many falls does a child get be- 
fore it learns to walk fecure. How many 
inarticulate founds précède thofe wbich 
are articulate. How often are we im- 
pofed upon by ail our £ènfes before we 
learn to form a right judgment of the 
proper objedls of them. How often do 
our paflions miflead us, and involve us 
in difficulties, before we reap the ad- 
vantage they were intended to bring us 
in our purfuit of happinefs ; and how 
many falfe judgments do we make, in 
the inveftigation of ail kinds of truth, 
before we corne to a right conclufion. 
How many agesdoerrors and préjudices 
of ail kinds prevaîl, before they are difli- 
pated by the light of truth, and how 
gênerai, and how long was the reign of 
falfe religion before the propagation of 
the true ! How late was chriftianity, 
that great remedy of vice and ignorance, 
introduced ! How flow and how confined 
^ts progrefs ! 



In 



CIVIL SQCIETIES. 263 

In fhort, it feems to hâve been the in- 
tention of divine providence, that man- 
kind fhould be, as far as poflible, felf 
taugbty that we fliould attain to every 
thing excellent and ufeful, as the refult 
of our own expérience and obfervation ; 
that our judgments fhould be formed 
by the appearances which are prefented 
to them, aiid our hearts inftruded by 
their own feelings. But by the unna- 
tural fyftem of rigid unalterable efla- 
blifhments, we put it out of our power 
to inftrud: ourfelv.es, or to dérive any 
advantage from the lights we acqùire 
from expérience and obfervation ; and 
thereby, as far as is in our power^ we 
counteracl the kind intentions of the 
deity in the conftitution of the world, 
and in providing for a ftate of confiant, 
though flow improvement in every 
thing. 

A variety of ufeful leffons may be 
learned from our attention to the con- 
dudl of divine providence refpecfling us. 
When hiflory and expérience demon- 
flrate the uniform method of divine 

pro- 



264 THE PROGRESS OF 

providence to hâve bcen what has been 
above reprefented, let us learn from it 
to be content with the natural, though 
flow progrefs we are in to a more perfeA 
date. But let us always endeavour to 
keep things in this progrefs. Let us, 
however, beware, left by attempting to 
accelerate, we in faél retard our progrefs 
in happinefs. But more efpecially, let 
us take heed, left, by endeavouring to 
fecure and perpetuate thegreat endsof 
fociety, we in fadl defeat thofe ends. 
We fhall hâve a thoufand times more 
enjoyment of a hàppy and perfeâ form 
of government, when we can fee in 
hiftory the long progrefs of our confti- 
tution through barbarous and imperfeél 
fyftems of polie y ; as we are more con- 
firmed in the truth, and hâve more en- 
joyment of it, by reviewing the many 
errors by which we were mifled in our 
purfuit of it. If the divine being faw 
that the beft form of government, that 
even he could hâve prefcribed for us, 
would not hâve anfwered the end of its 
inftitution, if it had been impofed by 
}iimfelf ; much lefs can we imagine it 

could 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. ^ 

could anfwer any valuable purpofe, to 
hâve the crude fyftems (for they can be 
nothing more) of ftiort-fighted men for 
ever impofed upon us. 

Eftabliftiments, be they ever fo ex- 
cellent, ftill fix things fomewhere ; and 
this circumftance, which is ail that is 
pleaded for them amounts to, is with 
me the greateft objedlion to them. I 
wifli to fee things in a progrefs to a better 
ftate, and no obftru<5lions thrown in the 
way of reformation. 

In fpite of ail the fetters we can lay 
upon the human mind, notwithftanding 
ail poflible difcouragements in the way 
of free inquiry, knowledge of ail kinds, 
and religions knowledge among the reft, 
will increafe. The wifdom of one géné- 
ration will ever be foUy in the next. 
And y et, though we hâve {ttn this veri- 
fied in the hiftôry of near two thou- 
fand years, we perfift in the abfiird 
maxim of making a preceding génération 
didlate to a fucceeding one, which is 
, the famé thing as making the foolifh in- 

ftnia 



266 THE PROGRESS OF 

ftrud the wife; for what is a lower 
degree of wifdom but comparative foUy ? 

Had even Locke, Clarke, Hoadley, and 
others, who hâve gained immortal répu- 
tation by their freedom of thinking, but 
about half a century ago, been ap- 
pointed to draw up a creèd, they would 
hâve inferted in it fuch articles of faith, 
as myfelf, and hundreds more, fhould 
now think unfcrîptural, and abfurd : 
nay, articles, which they would hâve 
thought of great importance, we fliould 
think conveyed a reflecflion upon the 
moral government of God, ànd were in- 
jurions to virtue among men. And can we 
think that wifdom will die with us ! No, 
our creeds, could we be fo inconfîftent 
with ourfelves as to draw up any, would, 
I m^ke no doubt, be rejedled with equal 
difdain by our pofterity* 

. That ecclefîaftical eftablifliments hâve 
really retarded the reformatioij from po- 
pery is évident from the face of things in 
Europe. Can it be thought that ail the 
errors and abufes which had been accu- 

mulating 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. 267 

mulating in the fpace of fifteen hundred 
years, fliould be reélified in lefs than fifty, 
by men educated with ftrong préjudices 
in favour of them ait? and yet the Augf- 
burg confefîiori, I believe, ftands unre- 
pealed; the church of England is the 
famé now that it was in the reign of 
Queen Elizabeth ; and the church of 
Scotland is to this day in that iraperfeéî: 
and crude ftate in which "John Knox 
left it, 

Llttle did thofe great reformers, whofe 
memory I révère, thinlç what burdens 
they, who had boldly fliaken ofF the load 
from their own flioulders, were laying 
on thofe of others ; and that the moment 
they had nobly freed themfelves from the 
yoke of fervitude, they were figning an 
a6l to enflave ail that fhould come after 
them ; forgetting the golden rule of the 
gofpel, to do to others as we would that 
they fliould do to us. 

Could religions knowledge hâve re- 
mained in the ftate in which the firft 
reformers left it î could the ftojie they 

^ ' had 



268 THE PROGRESS OF 

had oncemoved from its feat, on the top 
of a précipice, hâve been ftopped in its 
courfe, their provifions for perpétuation 
would hâve been wife and excellent \ 
but their eyes were hardly clofed, bcfore 
their children found that their fathers 
had been too precipitate. They found 
their own hands tied up by their un- 
thinking parents, and the knots too 
many, and too tight for them to un- 
loofe. 

The* great misfortune is, that the 
progrefs of knowledge is chiefly among 
thè thinking few. The bulk of man- 
kind being educated in a révérence for 
eftabliflied modes of thinking and aéling, 
in confequence of their being eftablifhed, 
will not hear of a reformation proceed- 
ing even fo far as they could really wifh, 
left, in time, it fliould go farther than 
they could wifh, and the end be worfe 
than the beginning. And where there 
are great émoluments in a church, it is 
poflefTed of the ftrongeft internai guard 
againft ail innovations whatever. Church 
livings muft not be touched, and they 

may, 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. 269 

may, if any thing elfe be meddled with. 
This makes the fituation of fenfible and 
confcientiôus men, in ail eftablifliments, 
truly déplorable. Before I had read that 
excellent work, intitled the Conjeffional^ 
but much more fince, it bas grieved me 
to fee the miferable fliifts that fuch per- 
fons (whether in the church of England, 
or of Scotland) are obliged to hâve re- 
courfe to, in order to gild the pill, 
which they muft fwallow or ftarve ; and 
to obferve their poor contrivances to 
conceal the chains that gall them. But 
it grieves one no lefs, to fee the reft of 
their brethren, hugging their chains anfl 
proud of them . 

But let thofe gentlemen in the church, 
who appofe evéry ftep towards reforma- 
tion, take care, left they overadl their 
parts, and left fome enterprizing per- 
fons, finding themfelves unable to untie 
the Gordian knpts of authority, fhould^ 
like another^Alexandér the Great, boldly 
eut them ail. Let them take care, left, 
for want of permitting a few repairs in 
their ruinons houfe, it fhould at laft fall 

ail 



270 THE PROGRESS OF 

âll together about their cars. A num- 
ber of fpirited and confcientiotis men, 
openly refufing to enter into the churçh, 
or throwing up the livings which they 
holdupon thofe iniquitous and enfla ving 
terms (and fuch men there hâve been 
in this country) would roufe the atten- 
tion of the temporal heads of the fpiritual 
part of our conftitution, They would 
lèe the neceflîty of an immédiate and 
compleat reformation ; and then the a- 
larm of churçhmen, with their paultry 
expédients and compromifes, would come 
too late, The temper of thefe times 
would not bear another St. Bartholo- 
mew. 

If only one or tivo perfbns, of known 
probity ând' good fenfe, did now and 
then, adl this heroic part, it would ferve 
to keep up an attention to the fubjeél. 
If every man who doth not in his confci- 
ence believe the articles he has fubfcrib- 
ed, would magnanimoufly throw up the 
émoluments he enjoys in confequence of 
his fubfcription, it can hardly be doubt- 
cd, but that a reformation of, at leaft, 

the 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. 271 

the capital abufes in the ecclefiaftical 
fyflem . would take place the very next 
feflion of parliament, This nation would 
ncver fufFer ail her pulp jts to be fiUed 
by fuch clergymen, as would then re- 
main in the church. 

In the mcan time, let the friends of 
liberty by no means give way to impa- 
tience, The longer it may be before this 
reformation takes place, the more effec--' 
tuai it will probably be. The times 
may not yet be ripe for fuch an one as 
you would wifli to acquiefce in, confi- 
dering that, whenever it is made, it 
will probably continue as long as thç 
laft has done. 

It was well for the caùfé of truth and 
liberty, that the Romifh clergy at the 
beginning of the reformation, held out 
with fo mucht. obftinacy agaiaft the 
fmalleft conceffions ; for had they but 
granted the çup to the laity, and been a 
little more décent in the article of in- 
dulgences, the reft of pppery might 
hâve continued 

'' To 



272 THE PROGRESS OF 

•* To fcôurgc mankind fof ten dark âgés more.'* 

And at the reftoration hère in England, 
had a few, a very few trifling altérations 
been complied with, fuch numbers of 
the Prefbyterians would hâve hearti- 
ly united to the eftablifhed church, as 
would hâve enabled it entirely to cnifli 
every otlierfeél, toprevent the growing 
liberty of the prefs, and to hâve main- 
tained for âges the moft rigid unifor- 
mity, This obfervation may, perhaps, 
teach patience to one party, and pru- 
dence to the other, 

Diffenters, even of the prefbyterian 
perfuafion, hâve, by no means, been 
free from the gênerai infatuation of 
other reformers. AU the dénominations 
of diffenters hâve made attempts to fix 
things by their own narrow ftandard; 
and prefcribed confelïions of faith, even 
with fubfcriptions, hâve been intro- 
duced among them. But happily for us, 
there hâve always been men of gênerons 
andenlargedminds, who, having no civil 
power to contend with, hâve had cou- 
rage to ftem the torrent ; and now, 

among 



CIVIL SOGIETIES. 273 

aiAong thofe who are called the more 
rational part of the difTenters, tiiiugs are 
not, upon the whole, to be complained of. 
No fubfcriptions to any articles 6f faith, 
or even to the new teftament, îs ixow 
rcqnired ; and minifters are excufed, if 
they chufe not to give any confefixon of 
their own. To hâve preachcd and be- 
haved like a chriftian, is deemed iuflSi- 
cient to recommend a man to the chrif- 
tian miniftry. Unfettcred by authority, 
they can purfue the moft libéral plans 
of éducation. The whole bufînefs is 
to give the faculties of the mind their 
free play, and to point out proper ob- 
jeéls of attention to ftudents, without 
any concern what may be the refult of 
their inquiries ; the defigh being to nxake 
wife and ufeful men, and not the tools 
and abetters of any particular party. 

If any perfon fhould think that reli- 
gion is not to be put upon the famé foot- 
ing with other branches of knowledge 
(which they allow to require the aid of 
every circumftance favourable to their 
future growth) that fince the whole of 

T chrif- 



274 THE PROGRESS OF 

chriftianity was delivered at once, and is 
contained in the books of the new 
teftamcnt, there is no reafon to expeâ 
more light than we already hâve with 
regard to ît ; and, therefore, that they 
are juftified in fixing the knowledge of 
it where it nonv ftands, I fhall only fay, 
that I fincerely pity their weaknefs and 
préjudice ; as fuch an opinion can only 
proceed from a total ignorance of what 
has paffed in the chriftian world, or from 
a bigotted attâchment to the authorita- 
tive inftitutions of fallible men. 

To recur to Dr. Brown ; he would raife 
the terms on which we are to live in fo- 
ciety ; fo that, under his adminiftration, a 
man could enjoy little more than bare 
fecurity in the pofTeffion of his property, 
and that upon very hard conditions. 
The care he would take to Ihackle men's 
.minds, in the firft formation of their 
thinking powers, and to check their 
exertions when they were formed, would, 
I apprehend, put an effeélual flop to ail 
the noble improvements of which fociety 
is capable. Knowledge, particularly of 

the 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. 275 

the more fublime kinds, in the fciences 
of morals and religion, could expeél no 
encouragement, He would hâve more 
reftridlions*laid upon the publication of 
books, He complains, p. 103, that, in 
the latereign, deiftical publications pro- 
ceeded almofl without cognifance from 
the civil magiftrate ; and aflerts (Ap- 
pendix, p. 29) that there are manx 
opinions or principles tending evidently 
to the deftruclion of fociety or free- 
dom, and which, therefore, ought not 
to be tolerated in a well ordered free 
community. 

The civil magiftrate then, àccording 
to this writer, ought to control the 
prefs, and therefore prevent, by means 
of efFeélual penalties (or elfe he doth 
nothing) the publication of any thing, 
that might direcSlly or indiredlly, thwa^t 
his views of civil policy ; which, in 
England, comprehends the prefent form 
of our eftablilhed religion. But fo ex- 
tenfive is the conneélion of ail kinds of 
truth, that if a man would keep efFec- 
tually clear of the fubjedl of religion, he 

T 2 muft 



276 THE, PROGRESS OF 

muft not indulge a free range of thought 
near the confines of it. The fubjeéts^ 
of metaphyfics, morals, and natural 
religion would be highly Sangerous, 
There might be herefy, or the founda- 
tion of herefy, without coming near 
révélation, or any of the peculiar doc- 
trines of chriftianity. We muft only 
be allowed to think for Onrfelves, with- 
out having the liberty of divulging, or^ 
in any form, publifhing our thoughts 
to others, not even to our children. 
A mighty privilège indeed l and for 
which we might think ourfelves obliged 
to Dr, Brown, if it were in the power of 
man to deprive us of it. This is a pri- 
vilège which the poor wretch enjoys 
who lives under the famé roof with a 
Spanifh inquifitor. Even the fubje<5ls of 
the grand feignior enjoy far greater pri- 
vilèges than thofe which Dr* Brawn would 
indulge to Englifhmen. For the greater 
part of them are allowed to educate 
their children in a religion, which teaches 
them to regard Mohammed as an im- 
poftor. Nay, the pope himfelf pcrmits 
thofe to live unmolefted, and under his 

pco- 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. 27^ 

protediion at Rome, who loôk upon that 
church, of which he calls himfelf the 
head, as founded on fraud and falfehood, 
and to educate their children in the 
famé principles. Nor hath the pope, or 
the grand feignior, ever feen reafbn to 
repent of their indulgence, 

Werc any more laws reftraining the 
liberty of the prefs in force, it is impof- 
fible to fay how far they might be con- 
iîxued to extend. Thofe already in be- 
ing are ffiiore than are reqnifite, and in- 
confiftent with the intercfts of trudi. 
Were they to extend farther, every au- 
thor would lie at the mercy of the mi^ 
ïiifters of ftate, who mijght condemn in- 
difcriminately, upon fbme pretence or 
other^ «very work that gave them um- 
, brage ; under which circumftances might 
fall fbme of the greateft and nobleft pro- 
dudlions of the hmman mind, if fuch 
Works could be produced in thofe cir- 
cumftances. For ' if men of genius 
knew they could îlot publifh the difco- 
veries they made, they could not give 
free fcope to their faculties in making 

T 3 and 



278 THE PROGRESS OF 

and purfuing thofe difcoveries. It is the 
thought of publication, and the pro- 
ipeél of famé which is, gênerai ly, the 
great incentive to men of genius to exert 
their faculties, in attempting the untrod- 
den paths of fpeculation. 

In thofe unhappy circumftances, wri- 
ters would entertain a dread of every new 
fubjeél. No man could fafely indulge 
himfelf in any thing bold, enterprizing, 
and ont of the vulgar road ; and in ail 
publications we fhould fee a timtdity in- 
compatible with the fpirit of difcovery. 
If any towering genius fhould arife in 
thofe unfavourable circumftances, a 
Newton in the natural world, or a Locke, 
a Hutchefon, a Clarke, or a Hartley in the 
moral, the only efFecflual method to pre- 
vent their diflfufing a fpirit of enterprife 
and innovation, which is natural to fuch 
great fouis, could be no other than that 
whirh Tarquin fo fîgnificantly exprefled, 
by taking ofF the heads of ail thofe pop- 
pies which overlooked thereft. Such mèn 
could aot but be dangerous, and give 
Vimbrage in a country where it was the 

maxim 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. 279 

maxim of the government, that every 
thing of importance fliould for ever re- 
main unalterably fixed* 

/ 

The wholéof this fyftem of uniformity 

appears to me to be founded on very nar- 
row and fhort-fighted views of policy. 
A man of extenfive views will overlook 
temporary evils, with a profpedl of the 
greater good which may often refult 
from, or be infeparably connedled with 
them. He will bear with a few tares, 
left, in attempting to root them out, he 
endanger rooting up the wheat with 
them. Unbounded free enquiry npon 
ail kinds of fubjeéls may certainly be at^- 
tended with fome inconvenience, but it 
cannot be rçftrained without infinitely 
greater inconvenience. The deiftical per- 
formances Dr. Brown is fo much of- 
fended at may hâve unfettled the minds 
of fome people, but the minds of many 
hâve been more firmly fettled, and up- 
on better foundations than ever. The 
fcheme of chriftianity ha s been fàr bet- 
ter underftood, fince thofe deiftical wri- 
tings hâve occafioned the fubjeâ; to.bc 

morç 



28o THE PROGRESS OF 

more thoroughly difcufTed thah it had 
been before. 

Befides, if truth ftand upon the falfe 
foundation of préjudice or error, it is an 
advantage to it to be unfettled ; and the 
man who doth no more, and even means 
to do no more, is, in faél, its friend. 
Another perfon feeing its deftitute and 
bafelefs condition, may be induced to fet 
it upon it3 proper foundation. , Far bet- 
ter policy would it be to remove the dif- 
ficulties which ftill lie in the way of 
free enquiry, than to throw frelh ones 
into it. Infidels would then be deprived 
of their moft fuccefsful method of at- 
tackingchriftianity, namely, infinuation ; 
and chriftian divines might, with a more 
manly grâce, engage with the champi- 
ons of deifm, and in fadl engage with 
more advantage, when they both fought 
on the famé equal ground. As thîngs 
are at prefent, I fhould be afliamed to 
fight under the Ihelter of the civil power, 
while I faw my adverfary expofed to ail 
the feverity of it. 



To 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. 281 

To the fa,me purpofe, I cannot help 
quoting the authority of Dr. Warburton, 
" Nor lefs friendly is this liberty to the 
^* generous advocate of religion. For 
^ how could fiich an one, when in earneft 
" convinced of the ftrength of évidence 
" in his caufe, délire an adverfary whom 
" the laws hadbefore difarmed, or value 
" a viélory where the magiftrate muft 
^^triumph with him? éven I, the 
" meaneft in this controverfy , Ihould hâve 
" been afhamed of projeéling the defence 
'^ of the great Jewilh legiflator, did not I 
" know, that his aflailants and defenders 
*^ fkirmilhed under one eqtial law of li^ 
" berty. And if my diffenting, in the 
" courfe of this defence, from fome com- 
" mon opinions needs an apology, I 
" fhould defire it may be thought, that 
" I ventured into this train with greater 
" confidence, thât I might fhew, by not 
" intrenching myfelf |n authorized fpe- 
^* culations, I put myfelf upon the famé 
" footing with you [the deifts] and would 
" claim no privilège that was not enjoy- 
" ed * in common." Divine Légation, 
p. 7. 

But 



zSt THE PROGRESS OF 

But forry I am, that the paragraph 
which immediately follows, how proper 
focver it might be when it was written, 
looks like a tantalizing of his unfortu- 
nate adverfaries. " This liberty, then, 
" may you long pofTefs, know how to 
" ufe, and gratefully to acknowlege it. 
" I fay this, becaufe one cannot, with- 
" ont indignation, obferve, that, amidft 
" the full enjoymeat of it, youftill con- 
" tinue, with the meaneft affecSiation, 
" to fill yoxir préfaces with repeated 
" clamours againft the difficulties and 
^ difcouragements attending the exer- 
" cife of free thinking ; and in a pe- 
" culiar ftrain of modefty and reafon- 
" ing, make ufe of this very liberty to 
*^ perfiiade the world you ftill want it. 
" In extoUing liberty we can join with 
*' you, in the vanity of pretending to 
" hâve contributed moft to its eftablifli- 
" ment we can bear with you, but in the 
*' low cunning of pretending ftill to lie 
under reftraints, we can nèither join 
nor bear with you. There was, indeed, 
a time, and that within our mémo- 
" ries, when fuch complaints were fea- 

" fonable 






CIVIL SOCIETIES. 283 

* 

" fonable, and meritorious ; but, happy 
" for you gentlemen, you hâve outlived 
" it. Ail the reft is merely fir Martin, 
" it is continuing to fumble at the 
" lute though the mufic has been long 
" over/' 

Let Peter Annet * (if he dare) write a 
comment on this paflage, So far are 
deifts from having free liberty to publifh 
their fentiments, that even many chrif- 
tians cannot fpeak out with fafety. In 
prefent circumftances, every chriftian di- 
vine is not at liberty to make ufe of thofe 
arguments which, he may think, would 
fupply the beft defence of chriflianity» 
What are, in the opinion of many, the 
very foundations of our faith, are in a 
ruinons condition, and muft be repaired 
before it will be to any purpofe to beau- 
tify and adorn the fuperftrudlure ; but 
the manwho fhould hâve the true courage 
and judgment, to go near enough to fuch 

rot- 

* Written în 1 765, when that unfortunate man was 
juft corne out of Bridewell, where he had fufFered a 
year's imprifonment and hard labour, for making 
feme free remarks on the bocks of Mofes. 



^84 THE PROGRESS OF 

rotten foundations, would be thought to 
mean nothing lefs than to undermine 
thein, and intirely deftroy the whole fa- 
bric. His very brethren would ftand off 
from him, thinking hiœ in league with 
their adverfaries ; and, by an ill judging 
zeal, might call in the deftruélive aid of 
the civil pawer to ftop his hand. In côn- 
feqûence of which, jiotwithftanding his 
moft lauds^ble zeal in favour of our holy 
religion, he might ftand upon the famé 
pillory, and be thrown into the famé 
prifon with wretched and harmlefs infi- 
V dels, Many undoubted friends of chrif- 
tianity, and mcn of the moft enlarged 
xninds, will know and feel what I mean. 

Hitherto, indeed, few of the friends 
of free inquiry among chriftians hâve 
been more than partial advocates for it. 
If they find themfelves nnder anj difE- 
culty with refpeél to their own fènti- 
ments, they complaîn, and plead ftrong- 
ly for the rights of confcience, of priva te 
judgment, and of free inquiry v but 
when they hâve gotten room enough for 
themfelves, they are quite eafy, aad in 

* no 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. 285 

no pain foF others. The papift niu(t 
hâve liberty to write againft Pagans^ 
Mohammedans, and Jews ; but he can* 
not bear with proteftants. Writers iii 
defence of the churchof England juftify 
their feparation from the church of 
Rome, but, with the moft glaring in- 
confiftency, call'the proteftant diflenters, 
fchifmatics ; and many diflenters, for- 
getting the fundamental principles of 
their diflent, which are the famé that ai*e 
aflerted by ail chriftians and proteftant$ 

in fimilar circumftances, difcourage every 
degree of liberty greater than they them- 
felves hâve taken, and hâve as great an 
averfion to thofe whomthey are pleafed to 
call heretics, as papifts hâve for protes- 
tants, or as Laud had for the old puritans» 

But why fliould we confine our neigh- 
bour, who may want more room, in the 
famé narrow limits with ourfelves. The 
wider we make the common circle of 
liberty, the more of its friends will it re- 
ceive, and the flronger will be the com- 
mon intereft, Whatever be the parti- 
cular views of the numerou^ tribes of 

fearcher^ 



286 THE PROGRESS OF 

fearchers after truth, under whatevcr 
dénomination we may be ranked ; whe- 
ther we becalled, or call ourfelves chrif- 
tians, papifts, proteftants, diflenters, he- 
retics, or even deifts (for ail are equal 
hère, ail are aéluated by the famé fpirit, 
and ail engaged in the famé caufe) we 
ftandih need of the fameliberty of think- 
ing, debating, and publilhing, Let us, 
then, as far as our intereft is the famé, 
with one heart and voice, ftand up for it, 
Not one of us can hurt his neighbour, 
without ufing a weapon which, in the 
hand of power, might as well ferve to 
chaftife himfelf, The prefent ftate of 
the Englifli government (including both 
the laws, and the adminiftration, which 
often corredls the rigour of the law) may, 
perhaps, bear my own opinions without 
taking much umbrage ; but I could wifh 
to congratula te many of my brotherfree- 
thinkers, on the greater indulgence which 
their more heretical fentiments may re- 
quire. 

To the honour of the Quakers be it 
fpoken, that they are the only body of 

chriftians 



CIVIL SOCIETIES- 287 

cliriftians who hâve uniformly main- 
tained the principles of chriftian liberty, 
and toleration. Every other body of men 
hâve turned perfecutors when they had 
power. Papifts hâve perfecuted the pro- 
teftants, thechurch of England has perfe- 
cuted the diflenters, and other diffenters, in 
lofing their name, loft that fpirit of chrif^ 
tian. charity , which feemed to be efTential 
to them. Short was their fun-lhine of 
power, and thankful may Britain, and 
the prefent diffenters be, that it was fo. 
But the Quakers, though eftablifhed in 
Penfy Ivania, hâve perfecuted none. This 
gîorious principle feems fo intimately 
conneéled with the fundamental maxims 
of their fedl, that it may be fairly pre- 
fumed, the modération they hâve hither- 
to Ihown is not to be afcribed to the 
fmallnefs of their party, or to their fear 
of reprifals. For this reafon, if I were 
to pray fbr the gênerai prevalence of any 
one fedl of chriftians (which. I Ihould 
not think it for the intereft of chriftiani- 
ty to take place, even though I Ihould 
fettle the articles of it myfclf ) it Ihould 
be that of the Quakei;*» ; becaufe, diffé- 
rent 



288 THE PROGRESS OF 

rent as my opinions are from theirs, I 
hâve fo much confidence in their mode- 
ration, that I believe they would let me 
live, Write, and publifli what I pleafed 
unmolefted among them. And this I 
own, is more than I could promifè my- 
felf from any other body of chiiftians 
whatever ; the prefby terians by no means 
excepted. 

The objedl of this forced uniformity 
is narrow and illiberal, unworthy of 
human nature. Suppofing it accom- 
plifhed, what is it poflible to gain by it, 
but, perhaps, a more obftinate and blind 
belief in the vulgar ; while men of fenfe, 
feeing themfel ves debarred the very means 
of convicflion, muft of courfe be infidels ? 
In thofe circumftances, it would really be 
an argument of a man's want of fpirit, of 
fenfe, and even of virtue to be a believer, 
becaufe he would believe without fufl5i- 
cient évidence, Who would not, with 
every appearance of juftice, fufpedl any 
caufe, when he was not allowed to exa- 
mine the arguments againft it, and was 
only prefFed with thofe in its favour ? 

What 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. 289 

Whatfenfible andupright judge would 
décide a caufe, where ail the witnefTes on 
one fide were by violence prevented from 
gîving their évidence ? Thofe who con- 
verfe with deills well know, that one of 
their ftrongeft objcdlions to chriflianity 
arifes from hence^ that none of the early 
writings agairift it are preferved. How 
much flronger, and even unanfwerable, 
would that objeétion hâve been, if chrif- 
tianity had been, from the beginning, fo 
efFedlually protedled by the civil magi- 
ftrate, that no perfon had dared to write 
againft it at ail. Such friends to the évi- 
dence and true interefts of chriflianity, 
are ail thpfe who would fupprefs deiftical 
writings at this day ! 

Suppofe any article in a fyftem of 
faith, fo eftablifhed and guarded, to be 
wrong, which is certainly a very modeft 
fuppofition ; let any of the advocates of 
this fcheme fay, how it is poffible it 
Ihould ever be redlified ; or that, if the 
truth fliould infînuate îtfelf, by any ad- 
venue which they had not fufficiently 
guarded, how it- could bring its évidence 

V along 



290 THE PROGRESS OF 

along with ît, £0 as to command the at- 
tention and acceptancewhichit deferved» 

Indeed, it is not fo much from the, 
miftaken friends of tnith that we appre- 
hend thefe meafurcs of rigid uniformity ; 
but rather from thofe who would facrifice 
truth, and every other confideratîon to 
public tranquility ; from thofe mère 
STATES M EN who, looking upon ail 
fyftems of religion to be equally falfè, 
and not able to bear examination, will 
not fuffer that examination to takç place ; 
for fear of deftroying a fyftena, which, 
however falfe, they imagine to be ne- 
cefTary to the peace and well being of 
the ftate. The moft unrelenting perfe- 
cution is to be apprehended, ^lot frojn 
bigots, but from infidels. A bigot, who 
is fo from a principle of confcience, may 
pofTîbly bç moved by a regard to the 
confciences of others ; but the man who 
thinks that confcience ought always to 
be facrificed to political views, ha& no 
principle on which an argument in fa- 
vour of modération Çan lay hold. Was 
not Bolingbroke the greateft promoter of 

the 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. %^x 

the ichifm bill in England, and Richlieu 
of the perfccution of the proteftants in 
France ? 

Bcfîdes, as was, in fome meafure, ob- 
ferved before, ail tfaefe fyftems of uni- 
formity, in political or religions in-? 
ftitutions, are the higheft injuftice to 
pofterity. What natural right hâve we 
to judge for them, any more than 
our anceftors had to judge for us ? 
Our anceftors, from the time of the 
Britons, had, no doubt, as high an opi- 
nion of their political and religions in- 
ftitutions as we can hâve of ours. But 
(hould we' not hâve thought the fate 
of Great-Britain fingularly unhappy, if 
they had been entailed upon us? and 
the very famé reafon of convplaint will 
our pofterity hâve, if we take any me- 
thods to perpetuate what we approve,. 
as beft for ourfelves in our pre£ènt 
circumftanccs ; for farther than this we^ 
ca»not prétend to fee. 

Let us, by ail means, make our own 
cLrcumftances aseafy as poftible; but let 

V % UjB 



1^1 THE PROGRESS OF 

us lay pofterity under no diflîculty in 
improving theirs, if they fee it con- 
venient : rather, let ail plans of policy 
be fuch as will eafily admit of exten- 
fioii, and improvements of ail kinds, 
and that the leaft violence, or difficulty 
of any kind, iriay attend the making 
of them. This is, at leaft, very de- 
firable, and I believe it is far from be- 
ing impraélicable. However, though it 
ftiouldnot be thought proper to unfix any 
thing which is at prefent eftabliflied, 
let us proceed no farther than is ma- 
nif eftly neceflary in thofe eftablifhments. 

Pofterity, ît may be faid, will never 
complain of our inftitutions, when they 
hâve been educated in a ftrong and in vin- 
, cible attachment to them, It is true ; and 
had we been pagans or papifts, through 
â fimilar fyftem of éducation, fixed in 
a more early period, we Ihonld not 
hâve complained. We, like the old 
Spartans, or the fons of bigotry in Spàin 
and Portugal at prefent, might hâve been 
hugging our chains, and even proud of 
them. But other perfons, who could 

hâve 



CIVIL SOCIETIES, 293 

hâve made a comparifon between our 
adtual condition, and what it would hâve 
been, had thofe inftitutions not been 
made, would hâve complained for us. 
They would hâve feen us to be a lefs 
great, wifè, and happy people ; which 
affords the famé argument againft 
thro wing difficulties in the way of fu- 
ture improvements. 

Highly as we think of the wifdom of 
our anceftors, we juftly think ourfelves, 
of the prefent âge, wifer, and, if we be 
not blinded by the mère préjudice of 
éducation, muft fee, that we can, in 
many refpeéls, improve upon the infti- 
tutions they hâve tranfmitted to us. Let 
us not doubt, but that every génération 
in pofterity will be as mtich fuperior to 
us in political, and in ail kinds of knaw- 
ledge, and that they will be able to im- 
prove upon the beft civil and religions in- 
ftitutions that we can prefcribe for 
them. Inftead then of adding to t;he dif- 
ficulties, which we ourfelves find in mak- 
ing the improvements we wifh tô intro- 

3 duce, 



«94 THE PROGRESS OF 

duce, let us make this great and dd&rablc 
work eafier to them titan it has bcen ta us. 

However, iuch is the prbgrefs of 
knowledgCy and the enlargement of the 
human mind, that, in future time, not- 
wîthftanding ail poffible obftruâions 
thrown in the way of human genius, 
men of great and exalted vîews will un- 
doubtedly arife, who will fee through and 
deteft our narrow politics ; when the ill- 
advifers and ill-advifed authors of thefè 
illiberal and contracîled fchemes will be 
remembered with infamy and exécration j 
and when, notwithftanding their talents 
as ftatefmen or writers, and though they 
may hâve purfued the famé mind-enflaT- 
ing fchemes by more artfui, and lefs 
fanguinary methods, they will be rank- 
ed among the Bonners and the Gardi-, 
ners of paft âges, They muft be worfè 
than Bonners and Gardiners, who could 
purfué the famé ends by the famé means, 
in this more humane and more enlight- 
ened âge. 



The 



\ \ 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. 295 

I 

The time may come, when this coun- 
try of Great-Britain fliall lofe her liber- 
ty. There are, who think they perceive 
too many fymptoms of this approach ' 
ing lofs ; but while the precious moments 
of freedom remain, let us, at leaft, in- 
dulge ourfelvesin the gloomy fatisfac- 
tion of predïdling the înfamy, that will 
certainly overwhelm the authors of our 
fervitude ; whether they be future kings, 
and their tools the minifters, or mini- 
fiers, and their tools the kings* 

Indeed, minifters are much more to 
be fufpe(5led of defigns upon the libefties 
of a people tHan kings. For, în ail ar- 
bitrary governments, it is the minifter 
that is, in fadt, poiTefFed of the power of 
the ftate, the prince having nothing but 
the name, and thq burdenfome pagean- 
try of it. Thofe princes, therefore, who 
liften to fueh pernicious advice, are, in 
reality, fubmitting their own necks, and 
thofe of their pofterity, to the yoke of 
their fervants. For, fuch is the condi^ 
tion of human aflairs, that, in ail the 
fucceffions of arbilrary princes, nine hâve 

been 



296 THE PROGRESS O^F 

been weak, and govcrned by others, for 
çne who has been able to govern him- 
felf ; and in defpotic monarchies, the 
chance of having able fovereigns is, on 
many accounts, much lefe than in others. 

This feems to be the time, when the 
minds of men are opening to large and 
gênerons views of things. Politics are 
more extended in praélice, and better 
underftood in theory. Religions know- 
ledge is greatly advanced, and the prin- 
ciple of univerfal toleration is gaining 
ground apace. Schemes of ecclefiaftical 
policy, which, in times of barbarity, 
ignorance, and fuperftition, were inti- 
mately interwoven with fchemes of civil 
policy, and which, in fadl, made the 
greateft part of the old political mixed 
conftitution, hâve been gradnally ex- 
cluded ; till, at prefent, though eccle- 
fiaftical power be looked upon as an nfe- 
fui fupport and auxiliary of civil govern- 
ment, it is pretty much detached from 
it. And the more fenfible part of man- 
kind areevidently in a progrefs to the be- 
|ief, that ecclefiaftical and civil jurifdidi- 

on. 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. ^97 

ODjbeing things of a totally différent na- 
ture, ought, if poflible, tobe wholly difen- 
gaged frotn one another. ) Religions fenti- 
ments, with refpedl to their influence on 
civil fociety, will perhaps be regarded, in 
time, as a theory of niorals, only of a 
higher and more perfeâ kind, excellent 
to enforce a regard to magiftracy, and 
the political duties, but împroperly 
adopted into the famé fyftem and en- 
forced by the famé penalties. • Till we 
know whether this work, which feems 
to be going forward in feveral parts of 
Europe, be of God, or not, let us nbt 
take, at leaft aiîy rigid arid violent me- 
thods to oppofeit, but patiently wait the 
ifTue ; unlefs, in the mean time, the dif- 
orders of the ftate abfolutely force us in- 
to violent meafures. At prefent, not- 
w^ithftanding fome trifling alarm, per- 
haps artfuUy raifed and propagated, 
may feem to give a handle to the friends 
of arbitrary power to make ufe of fome 
degree of coercioxi, more gentle mea- 
fures feem better adapted to enfure tran- 
quility. 

England 



298 



THE PROGRESS OF 



England hath hitherto taken the lead 
in almoft every thing great and good^ 
and hèr citizens ftand foremoft in the 
annals of famé, as having fhaken ofF the 
fetters which hung upon the human 
mind, and called it forth to the exertion 
of its nobleft powers ; and her con- 
ftitution h^s been fo far from receiving 
any înjury from the efforts of thefe her 
free born enterprifîng fons, that ûi^ is, 
in part, indebted. to them for the unri- 
valled réputation flie now enjoys, of hav- 
ing the beft fyftem of policy in Europe. 
After weathering fo many real ftorms, 
let us not quit the helm at the appre- 
henfion of imaginary dangers, but ftea- 
dily hold on in what, I truft, is the moft 
glorious courfè that a human govern- 

,ment can be in. Let ail the friends of 
liberty and human natvire join to free 

' the minds of men from the Ihackles of , 
narrow. and impolitic laws. Let us be 

": free ourfelves, and leave the bleflings of 
freedom to our pofterity. 



No nation ever was, or can be truly 
great, powerful, and happy by purfuing 

oppreflive 



CIVIL SOCIETIES. 199 

opprefiiveandperfecutingmeafures. And 
a fovereign, who has a true fenfe of his 
prefènt and future glory, muft fee it caa 
only arife fjrom his being the head of a 
great, powerf ul, and happy nation, niade, 
or ^ontinued fo, by himfelf. His beft 
friends are thofe who would raiiè his 
greatnefs, by aiigmenting the great- 
nefs of the people over whom he pre- 
fides. He himfelf muft fee the ab- 
furdity of every fcheme which propofes 
to raife his charaéler at the expence of 
that of his country ; as if it were poflîble 
to deprefs the people to the condition of 
flaves, without finking the fovereign 
into a mafter of fuch flaves. Poor pré- 
éminence ! Such maxims may hâve in- 
fluence with Afiatic monarchs, but can 
never impofe on à fovereign of Great- 
Britain, educated in Britifh principles, 
and with a juft regard to the privilèges 
of his fubjeéls, 'with which his own truc 
dignity is infeparably conneâed. 

The nation will execratfe, and fhe dif- 
cerning prince will fee through, and de- 
teft themeannefs of that adulation, which, 

however 



300 THE PROGRESS OF 

however difguifed, would tend to enfla vc 
the kingdom, and debafe the king. The 
meaneft tool of the meanefl: party may 
exclaim againft licentioufnefs andfadlion; 
men of genius, learning, and integrity 
may, through the force of préjudice, be 
induced to join in thecry ; and courtiers 
may think to recommend themfelves to 
a fovereign by any meafures which tend 
to quiet the clamours of the people ; but 
the true enemy of fedition, and he who 
moft efFeélually pays his court to a wife 
and good prince, is theman, who, with- 
out any views of preferment, propofes, 
with a manly freedom, whatever he 
thinks conducive to the greatnefs and 
glory of his country. This condudl 
cannot fail, both to give fatisfaâion to 
his fellow citizens, and enfure him the 
efteem of his prince ; becaufe fuch mea- 
fures will proportionably raife the luftre 
of ail ranks of men in the ftate, will 
make a wife prince the idol of a gratefui 
nation, and endear his memory to the 
lateft poflerity. 

I N I s. 



THE 

CONTENTS. 

gECTION l.^Of the firft principUs of go- 
vernmenf^ and the différent kinds of libertyj 

IL Of political liberty^ — — , n 

III. Of civil libertyy — — 48 

IV. In what manner an authoritative code of édu- 

cation would affeSi political and civil li- 
berty^ — — , — 76 

V. Of religions liberty and toleration ingeneral^ 

VI. Some diJiinSîions that bave been made on the 

fubjeSl of religions liberty and toleration 
conjidered^ — — 137 

VII. Farther obfervations concerning, the extent of 

ecclejiafiical authority^ and the power of 
civil governors in mat ter s of religion^ 152 

VIII. Of the necejjity or utility of ecclejiafiical 
ejiablijhments^ — • — — 181 

IX. Areview of fome particular pofitions of Dr. 

Balguy^s^ on the fubjeSl of church autho- 
rity^ — • *— 208 

X. Of the progrefs of civil focieties^ to a ftate of 

greater perfe£iion^ Jhewing that it is re- 
tardedby encroachments on civil and religions 
liberty^ — • — 249 



.« . k 



B O O K s Writtcj^ 
By JOSEPH PRIESTLEY, L.L. D. F. R. 8, 

And Sold by 

J. JOHNSON, Bookfeller, at No. 72, in St. PauTs 

Cburch-Tardy Lokqon. 

i.^np^HE Hiftory and prefent State of Electricity, 

X with Original Experiments, illuftrated witJi Cop- 

per-Plates, the Second Edition, correâed and enlarged, 4tO. 

il. ÏS. 

2. A FamiliarlntroduéliontotheStudyofELECTRiciTY, 
the Second Edition, 8vo. 3s. 

3. A new Chart of Hiftory, containing a View of the 
principal Révolutions of Empire that hâve taken place in 
the World ; with a Bock defcribing it, containing an Epi- 
tome of Univerfal Hiftory, los. 6d. 

4. A Chart of Biography, . with a Book, contain- 
ing an Explanation of h, and a Catalogue of ail the Name» 
inierted in it, Third Édition, los. 6d. 

» 

5. A Familiar Introdu£lion to the Thepry and Pradlice of 
Perspective, With Copper-Pktes. Price 5s. in Boards 

6. The Rudiments of Englifh Grammar, adapted to the 
Ufe of Schools, is. 6d. 

7. The above Grammar, with Notes and Obfervations, 
for the Ule of thofe who hâve made fomc projciency in the 
Language, the Third^ Edition, 3s. 

8. A Free Addrefs to Proteftant Difîenters, on the Sub- 
jfc6t of the Lord's Supper, the Second Edition, is. 

9. Confiderations on Différences of Opinion amon^ 
Chriftians ; with a Letter to the Révérend Mr. Venn, in 
Anfwer to his Examination of the Addrefs to Proteftant 
Difîenters, is. 6d. 



!•• Ad" 



i 

10. Additions to the Addrefs to Prote^t DiiTenten, on 
the Subjeél of the Lord's Supper, with fome Correâions of 
itr and a Letter to the Author of the Proteflant DiiTenter^s 
Anfwer to it, is. 

11. A Catechifin for Children and Young Perfons, 6d. 

12. A Serious Addrefs to Mafters of FaxnilieSy with Forma 
of Family Prayer, pd. , 

13. A View of the Principles and Conduâ of the Pro- 
teftant Diflenters, with refpeft to the Civil and Ecclefiaftical 
ConfUtution of England, the Second Edition, is. 6d. 

JI/o publijhed^ 

In Numbersy at the Interval of about two or three Months, 

( Under the DiredUon of Dr. PRIESTLEY ) 

The THEOLOGICAL REPOSITORY ; confifting of 
Original EfTays, Hints, Queries, &c. calculated to promote 
Religious Knowledge. 

Likefwi/e jufl puhliflfed, 

I. A Free Addrefs to Proteflant Diflenters, as fuch. By 
a Diflènter, is. 6à. 

N. B. Dr. Priestiey having undertaken tô' whte n^ 
Hijiory and prefent State of ail the Branches ©^Expéri- 
mental Philosqphy, has already made fuch progrefs 
in the hiftory of Difioveries relating to Light and 
CoLOuRS, that he hopes to deliver it to the printer early 

^ în the next fummer. It will be a pretty large volume in 

' quarto» 









/ 



/
